The Study of Man (Alfred Cort Haddon, 1898)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/studyofman0000alfr). Haddon's introduction to anthropology - race, custom and the ethnology of the Torres Straits.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

nee eRe: 
Bialetwe 

m 
Shs ota: 
tes Athen} 

to ete ner 
wy a Ae 

ah eh at 

The Progressive Science Series 

Edited by F. E. BEDDARD, M.A,, F.R.S. 
(eAmerican Editor—Proressor J, McK. Carrer) 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

By Prorressor A. C, HADDON, M.A., D.Sc., M.R.I.A. 

THE PROGRESSIVE SCIENCE SERIES 

Edited by F. E. Bepparp, M.A., F.R.S. 
(eAmerican Editor—Proressor J. McK. Catretr) 

A LIST OF THE VOLUMES 

GROUNDWORK OF SCIENCE: A Srupy or EpisTemMoLocy. 
By Sr. Georcr Miyart, M.D., Pu.D., F.R.S. 

EARTH SCULPTURE. ‘By Proressor Gerke, LL.D., F.R.S. 
VOLCANOES. By Rev. Prorzssor Bonney, D.Sc., F.R.S. 

THE REPRODUCTION OF LIVING BEINGS: A Comparative Stupy 
By Proressor Marcus Hartoc, M.A,, D.Sc., F.L.S. 

THE ANIMAL OVUM. By F.E. Bepparp, M.A., F.R.S. (the Editor) 
MAN AND THE HIGHER APES, By A. Kerru, M.D,, F.R.C.S, 
HEREDITY. By J. Arrnur Tomson, M.A.,, F.R.S,E. 

SCIENCE AND ETHICS, By M. Berruetor 

VERTEBRATE PALAEONTOLOGY. Sy the late Proressor Corr 

New volumes will be announced 
as they approach to }ublication 

THE 

SEUDY OF MAN 

BY 

ALFRED C. HADDON 

LONDON 
JOHN /MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 

NEW YORK 
G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
1898 

ir | : Ae es - id 

b 

i aren 4 a 

‘ Yh Oe Ya 

., be “ ay Fa 

. 7. 
ay 
, ‘arte “ “f, 
bi a ee eee hee “GS 
- gh, wt 8 
: c . mn: 
a er saath ers 
ie Faget ty E - . 

* yigatviaes ae oo ys 
- or ira en > 

PREFACE 

N author is often justly criticised for the manner 

in which he has performed a self-imposed task— 
not unfrequently he is also criticised for what he has 
not done. I do not expect to be free from the former 
line of criticism; but at the outset I would remind the 
reader, as I have elsewhere mentioned, that this does 
not profess to be a treatise on Anthropology, or its 
methods, but merely a collection of samples of the 
way in which parts of the subject are studied. The 
book is not intended for scientific students, nor for 
experts, but for the amateur and for that delightfully 
vague person, the intelligent reader. 

I must confess, too, that my wish is not merely to 
interest my readers, but to induce them to become 
workers. As the learned, wise, and pious John Ray 
wrote nearly two centuries ago, in The Wisdom of 
God Manifested in the Works of the Creation: “ Let 
it not suffice us to be Book-learned, to read what 

others have written, and to take upon Trust more 

vi THE STUDY OF MAN 

Falsehood than Truth; but let us ourselves examine 
things as we have opportunity, and converse with 
Nature as well as Books. Let us endeavour to pro- 
mote and encrease this Knowledge, and make new 
Discoveries, not so much distrusting our own Parts, 
or despairing of our own Abilities, as to think that 
our Industry can add nothing to the Invention of our 
Ancestors, or correct any of their Mistakes. Let us 
not think that the Bounds of Science are fixed like 
FHlercules's Pillars, and inscrib’d with a Ne plus ultra. 
The Treasures of Nature are inexhaustible. Here is 
employment enough for the vastest Parts, the most 
indefatigable Industries, the happiest Opportunities, 
the most prolix and undisturb’d Vacancies. ... . 

“Much might be done, would we but endeavour, 
and nothing is insuperable to Pains and Patience. [| 
know that a new Study at first seems very vast, 
intricate, and difficult; but after a little resolution and 
progress, after a Man becomes a little acquainted, as 
I may so say, with it, his Understanding is wonder- 
fully cleared up and enlarged, the Difficulties vanish, 
and the thing grows easie and familiar.” 

These words of John Ray have many a time stimu- 
lated me; may they encourage others to study 

human-kind. Once more I must insist on the sad 

PREFACE vil 

fact that the old landmarks are being rapidly re- 
moved, and there is a pressing need for immediate 
investigations in Anthropology in this as well as in 
all the other parts of the world. 

It is now my pleasing duty to take this opportunity 
of thanking those who have assisted me in their 
various ways. 

To my colleagues in different departments of 
Anthropology I offer the thanks of a comrade. I 
have everywhere endeavoured to render unto every 
man his dues. The Proprietor and Committee of 
Sceence Progress have kindly permitted me to reprint 
as Chapter V. an article of mine that appeared in the 
January number of that valuable record of recent 
scientific advance. ; 

The Editor of Zhe Dazly Chronicle has courteously 
given me permission to make use of a series of 
articles on “Toys and Games: their History and 
Literature,” I wrote for the Saturday issue of that 
enterprising journal, and which were published in 
August and November, 1896, and in January and 
February, 1897. 

Dr. Paul Topinard, the great French Anthro- 
pologist, generously lent me the blocks of the maps 
he compiled to illustrate the distribution of hair and 

vill THE STUDY OF MAN 

eye colours in France. Amongst other authors to 
whom I am indebted for permission to reproduce 
their illustrations, I would mention Dr. R. Collignon, 
Dr. J. Beddoe, Mr. C. H. Read, of the British 
Museum, Professor Telesforo de Aranzadi, Mr. G. 
Thurston, and others. Finally I would like to record 
my indebtedness to my friend, Mr. Edwin Wilson, 
of Cambridge, the artist who has prepared many 
of the illustrations for this book. 

INISFAIL, CAMBRIDGE, 

CONTENTS 

PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTERS I, 
MEASUREMENTS AND THEIR IMPORTANCE IN ANTHROPOLOGY 

CHAPTER II. 
HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 

CHAPTER III. 
THE VALUE OF HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 

CHAPTER IV. 
THE NOSE 

CHAPTER V, 
THE ETHNOGRAPHY OF THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 

CHAPTER VI. 
THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 

CHAPTER VII. 
THE ORIGIN OF THE IRISH JAUNTING-CAR 

CHAPTER VIII. 
TOYS AND GAMES: CAT’S CRADLE AND KITES 

PAGE 

XV 

59 

87 

133 

161 

200 

219 

x CONTENTS 

CHAPTER IX. 

TOYS AND GAMES: TOPS AND THE TUG-OF-WAR 

CHAPTER X. 
THE BULL-ROARER 

CHAPTER XI. 
THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 

CHAPTER XII. 
“LONDON BRIDGE”: FOUNDATION SACRIFICE 

CHAPTER XIII. 
“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER”: WATER WORSHIP 

CHAPTER XIV. 
COURTING GAMES 

CHAPTER XV. 
FUNERAL GAMES 

CHAPTER XVI. 

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS FOR CONDUCTING ETHNOGRAPHICAL 

INVESTIGATIONS IN THE BRITISH ISLANDS 

PAGE 

255 

277 

347 

393 

412 

434 

Fig. 
Fig. 

Fig. 

- 

Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 

Fig. 

Fig. 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT 

PAGE 
1. Curves of relative Brain capacity of Cambridge University Students ; 

after Galton a é : 4 ‘ oe 

2. Map showing the Distribution of the Index of Nigrescence in 
England, based on Military Schedules; after Beddoe . ash 

3. Map showing the Distribution of Dark (Brown or Hazel) Eyes in 
England, based upon Military Schedules ; after Beddoe . 5 Be 

4. Map showing the Distribution of the Excess of pure Blond over 
pure Dark Type in England, based upon ee Schedules ; 
after Beddoe : 4 oy) 

5. Map showing the Distribution of the Colour of the ve in France ; 
from Topinard 5 6 5 5 . - 54 

6, Map showing the Distribution of the Colour of the Hair in France ; 

from Topinard c : c » 55 
7. Map showing the Distribution of the combined Colours of the 

Eyes and Hair in France; from Topinard : ; 50 
8. Upper and side views of a Kalmuk’s and of a Negro’s skull; after 

Ranke . : : Q Q : . 66 
9. Types of Noses in profile; from Topinard . : . Peeps 
10, Head of Agrippina, Museo di Napoli; from Hovorka : =) 92 

11, A, Head of Zeus Otricoli; &, the same, with all the hair re- 
moved, and with a corrected profile; from Hovorka, after 

Langer » 93 
12. Heads of Japanese Men of the fine and coarse type; from 
Hovorka, after Balz 4 ; ° a . 100 

13. Diagrams of the variations in the height and breadth of the Noses 
of the poorer classes of Brahmans of Madras City, of Tamil 
Pariahs, and of Paniyans, two-thirds natural size; after Thurston 111 

14. Lower border of Apertura pyriformis of Orang-utan; from Hovorka 130 

15. The four types of the lower border of the Apertura pyriformis in 
Man; from Hovorka ¢ c ; 5 = £30 

16, Outline Map of the Dordogne District . . » 134 

Fig. 20, 

Fig. 21. 

Fig, 34. 

EIST OF IZLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

. Map of the Dordogne District, illustrating the Distribution of 

Dolichocephalism and Brachycephalism ; after Collignon of Leys 

. Map of the Dordogne District, illustrating the combined Distribu- 

tion of Light and Dark Eyes and Hair; after Collignon . . 142 
. Map of Dordogne District, illustrating the Distribution of Stature; 
after Collignon 3 5 a é A - 145 
Map of Dordogne, illustrating the Distribution of Length- Height 
Index ; after Collignon 5 : 3 . . 151 
Map of Dordogne, illustrating the Distribution of the Breadth- _ 
Height Index ; after Collignon 6 5 F . 151 
. Slide-car, Inverness (1754); after Burt ; 0 5 - 165 
. -Diagrams illustrating a probable evolution of wheels from a roller. 170 
. Two block-wheel carts, Inverness (1754); after Burt ; 5 By ALS 
. Irish low-back car (1824); after Croker. ; 3 a alyiy/ 
. Celtic Chariot, from the Gottweiger Situla ; after Szombathy . 180 

. Agricultural Scene on a Vase in the Campana Collection, Louvre ; 

after Duruy "| : : C 4 . 182 

. Ancient Greek Carriage on a Vase; after Duruy, from Gerhard . 183 
. Mykenzean War Chariot of the Heroic Age on the Francois. Vase ; 

after Duruy ‘ : é ' : . 184 
. A Series of early Greek Chariot Wheels from various Sources . 185 
. Various Spanish Wheels; after Telesforo de Aranzadi : Suit) 
. Two Carts at Dundonald, Co. Down; from photographs. . 198 
. Irish low-back car (1769) ; after Bush 3 : A . 201 
Early form of jaunting-car (1841); after Hall “ / *. 207 
. The reverse side of a Korean playing-card ; after Culin - . 223 
. Kites from Korea, China, and Japan (after Culin), and from the 
Solomon Islands. 5 2 - 7 « 239 
. Tops from Torres Straits, Timorlaut, Straits Settlements, and 
Stewart Islands; after C. H. Read . 5 5 ZOE 
. Bull-roarers from the British Islands . . + 279 

. Yoruba bull-roarer, W. Africa; from Mrs, R. Braithwaite Batty . 291 
. Bull-roarers from South Africa, North and South America, Malaysia, 

New Zealand, British New Guinea, Torres Straits, and Australia, 
from various sources c ; 3 < + 309 

LIST OF FULL-PAGE PLATES 

Plate I. Upper, front, and side views of Long and Round Barrow Skulls; 
photographed by the Author from specimens in the Cambridge 
Anatomical Museum : “ To face page $2 

Plate II. Fig. 1. Photograph of a Tamil Pariah; after Thurston. Fig. 2. 
Japanese women of the fine and coarse type; after a picture 
by Torii Kiyonaga ; 2 3 : - 100 

Plate III. Fig. 1. Slide-car, Co. Antrim; from a photograph by Welch. 
Fig. 2. Slide-car,Co. Antrim; from a photograph by the Author 166 

Plate IV. Fig. 1. Block-wheel car, Glenshesk ; from a photograph by Welch. 
Fig. 2. Block-wheel car, Carrickfergus ; from a photograph by 
Welch . ; . : : . 176 

Plate V. Fig. 1. Basque Ox-waggon ; after Telesforo de Aranzadi. Fig. 2. 
Irish Outside- or Jaunting-Car ; from a photograph by Welch . 210 

Plate VI. ‘Lords from Spain”; from photographs by Miss Clara M. 
Patterson ; : ; ; ; + 402 

Plates VII., VIII. ‘‘ Jenny Jones”; from photographs by Mr. J. A. Wood 412, 414 

INTRODUCTION 

T seems strange that man should study everything 

in heaven and earth and largely neglect the study 
of himself, yet this 1s what has virtually happened. 
Anthropology, the Study of Man, is the youngest of 
the sciences, but who will say that it is the least 
important ? 

We may, perhaps, find one reason for this neglect 
in the peculiar complexity of the subject and the 
difficulty there is in approaching it from a dispas- 
sionate point of view; there are so many preconceived 
opinions which have to be removed, and this is 
always a thankless task. Even now the scope and 
significance of Anthropology have scarcely been 
recognized. 

Some well-meaning and enthusiastic students have 
been so impressed with the importance of the parti- 
cular department with which they are more especially 
interested that they have neglected others. A dis- 
paragement even has sometimes been more implied 

than actually expressed. Others have been over- 

XVI THE STUDY OF MAN 

whelmed with the details they have accumulated, and 
have not seen the wood on account of the trees. The 
whole subject is so vast that very few have had the 
requisite training, or have, or rather have made, the 
time to compare the results of one branch with those 
of another. We thus have the trained specialist on 
the one hand, and the more or less serious amateur 
on the other, too often not only working independently 
of each other, but even ignorant of the other’s labours, 
and even of his existence. Fortunately this lack of 
co-operation and co-ordination is rapidly decreasing, 
and a living science of Anthropology is emerging 
which will be acknowledged by the sister sciences as 
its methods and objects become more definitive. 

At the risk of being tedious I think it is desirable 
to define our terms at the outset.* On the Continent 
the term Anthropology is restricted to what we in 
England term Physical Anthropology or Somatology, 
to use a term which is now being widely employed 
by our American colleagues, that is, the study of man 
as an animal. This comprises not only the com- 
parative study of the structural differences between 
members of different races of mankind, but also the 

* In the final chapter will be found a classification and international 

nomenclature of the various departments of Anthropology which has 
been proposed by Prof. D. G.. Brinton, of Philadelphia. 

INTRODUCTION Xvi 

comparison of man with the higher apes. We prefer 
to retain the word Anthropology for the study of man 
in its widest aspect. 

Ethnography is the description of a special people, 
whether it be a small tribe, the natives of a restricted 
area, or a large nation; it includes a comparative 
study of human groups, and has for its aim the 
elucidation of the inter-relationships of tribes, races, 
and other bodies of men; thus it deals with the 
classification of peoples, their origin, and their migra- 
tions. 

Ethnology may also be divided into several 
branches, the four more important of which are: 
Sociology, Technology, Religion, and Linguistics. 

Sociology is the study of human communities, both 
simple and complex, and an attempt is now being 
made to trace the rise of simple communities and 
their gradual and diverse evolution to the complex 
civilizations of ancient and modern times. History, 
in the ordinary acceptance of the term, deals more 
especially with the later phases of this metamorphosis, 
but an endeavour is being made to get behind history, 
as it were, and to attempt to account for the data 
upon which historians work. The physical conditions 
of a country, including the climate, the vegetation, 

a 

xvill THE STUDY OF MAN 

and the indigenous animals, affect the life of the 

human inhabitants of that country; in other words, 

the mode of life of a primitive people is conditioned 
by its environment. The method of living affects the 

family life, and so we find that certain types of family 
organization are related to definite habits of life. As 
civilization advances, the State acquires powers and 
regulates families as well as individuals, but the 
characteristics of different forms of government are 
themselves due to the type of family organization 
which obtains among those various peoples. Accord- 
ing to this method of investigation, we start with 
physical geography and find ourselves drawn into 
statecraft and political economy. 

Other fruitful lines of study are to be found in 
tracing the evolution of tools, weapons—in fact, of 
all manufactured objects. As an example of this 
line of inquiry, or technology, I shall take the 
common cart, and while tracing its evolution we 
shall at the same time see that such studies open 
up wider questions than are at first apparent. 

The origin, evolution, and migration of designs 
and patterns is a fascinating subject, and one replete 
with human interest, as being associated with some 

of the deepest and most subtle ideas of mankind. 

INTRODUCTION xix 

I have already published a small book* on this 

subject. 

The anthropological study of religion is at the 

same time fascinating and extremely difficult. It is 
not my intention to tread far along this slippery path 
in the present volume. Those who would like to see 
the trend of recent inquiries should read the masterly 
works of Professor E. B. Tylor, the late Professor 
Kebertcon Simith, Dr J. (G. Frazer, and of E. 
Sydney Hartland. A good deal of what is included 
in that complex of beliefs, sayings, and practices, 
which is known as folk-lore, comes under the 
designation of religion as that term is understood 
by anthropologists. 

Archzeology tries to reconstruct the ancient history 
of man from the remains of the past which are 
brought to light in various ways. Just as a historian 
studies contemporaneous documents in order to re- 
vivify obscure historical periods, so the archeologist 
pores over flint implements, fragments of pottery, 
and other relics, in order to reconstruct the life of 
our remote ancestors. Earthen vessels are com- 

paratively easy to make, and though they are brittle, 

* A. C. HADDON, Evolution in Art, as Illustrated by the Life-histories 
of Designs. Contemporary Science Series, 1895. 

as 

XX THE STUDY OF MAN 

their fragments, when properly baked, are well nigh 
indestructible. The history of man is unconsciously 
largely written on shards, and the elucidation of 
these unwritten records is as interesting and im- 
portant as the deciphering of the cuneiform inscriptions 
on the clay tablets of Assyria. The book of pots has 
yet to be written. 

It is interesting to know what our forefathers did, 
to gauge the rank of their culture, and to trace the 
improvements which gradually took place; but it 
would be still more interesting if we could recover 
what they thought and what they believed. It is 
well to know their tools and their weapons; it is 
better to know how they treated one another, and 
what were their ideas of the non-material aspect 
of their existence. For these, after all, are the 
most important departments of human life. Now 
for this we have two methods of inquiry. 

In a general survey of mankind we find that there 
are peoples in all stages of culture, and we also 
notice that there is an intense conservatism in all 
matters of social or religious importance. When a 
people is isolated, it is believed that changes take 
place with extreme slowness; indeed, it is probable 

that a mingling of peoples, whether by commerce, 

INTRODUCTION Xxl 

migration, or war, is almost a necessary condition 
for change and progress. If, then, we examine a 
people that has for a long time remained isolated 
from contact with other peoples, we shall find that 
in most instances it is a backward people, and often 
what we call a savage one. Although we cannot 
range all peoples into a sequence, and assert that 
one tribe is intermediate in culture between two 
others, or that a more civilized nation has passed 
through a rigorously defined order of evolution, yet 
we may hope to be able in general terms to place 
most of the peoples about whom we have adequate 
knowledge in certain stages of culture, and we may 
in this way attempt to gain some idea as to the 
phases through which our ancestors have passed. 
The comparative study of customs, modes of thought, 
and religion, has yielded results of immense im- 
portance and interest. As a method of inquiry it 
is invaluable; but even it has its dangers, and it 
must be used with circumspection. 

The second psychical probe into the past is folk- 
lore. One is too apt to dismiss this study with a 
smile of derision as being concerned with ghosts, 
fairy-tales, and old wives’ superstitions. What does 
the name imply? The “lore of the folk.” But the 

Xxll THE STUDY OF MAN 

“folk” bear the same relation to educated people 
that savages do to civilized communities. They are 
the backward people among ourselves. The same 
value applies to the study of their actions and modes 
of thought as to the investigation of savages. But 
folk-lore is the investigation of psychical survivals 
within a more or less civilized society, and thus by 
its means we are largely enabled to study the 
practices and beliefs of our forefathers, for in an 
attenuated form many of these actually persist 
amongst us. By appealing to comparative custom 
and religion. we can often form a pretty good idea 
as to what those actions really signified, and so we 
can recover our ancestral religions. 

The materials for the study of anthropology are 
as numerous as the bodily, mental, and moral 
diversities among mankind. What Man is, what he 
thinks, what he aspires after, what he does—all 
this is the field of our inquiry. Our object is to 
record what occurs, and to discover its significance. 
These two aims should not be disassociated. <A 
considerable amount of information that has been 
recorded in the past is comparatively barren because 
the significance of it was not understood at the 

time. Many travellers appear to be quite unaware 

INTRODUCTION Xxill 

that customs and beliefs, the form of an object and 
its decoration, may have a meaning that is by no 
means obvious. Further, it is only on the spot and 
from the people themselves that this significance can 
be discovered; those who read my former book 
on Evolution in Art will clearly see the importance 
of acquiring local information. 

Now is the time to record. An infinitude has 
been irrevocably lost, a very great deal is now 
rapidly disappearing; thanks to colonization, trade, 
and missionary enterprise, the change that has come 
over the uttermost parts of the world during the 
last fifty years is almost incredible. The same can 
also be said of Europe and of our own country. 
Emigration and migration, the railway, the news- 
paper, the Board School—all have contributed to 
destroy the ancient landmarks of backward culture. 
The most interesting materials for study are be- 
coming lost to us, not only by their disappearance, 
but by the apathy of those who should delight in 
recording them before they have become lost to 
sight and memory. 

Fruitful, study results only from those facts of 
observation which have been fertilized by the mind 

that can see behind them, Nothing is easier than 

XXIV THE STUDY OF MAN 

to burrow among details, to be lost among a multi- 
plicity of facts, and to be overwhelmed by a mass 
of material. 

It is my ‘object in this small book to present 
certain aspects only of the Science of Anthropology. 
I do not pretend to give an abstract of Anthropology, 
nor even a general idea of the subject as a whole. 
But we will make, several excursions, as it were, 
into the subject, not with the object of attempting 
to learn something about Anthropology, but in order 
to see what Anthropology can teach us about our- 
selves. For, after all, we are of more interest 
to ourselves than any study can be. We will 
then use the methods of Anthropology not for the 
erection of an academic study, but for the simple 
purpose of explaining ourselves to ourselves. 

Our immediate object, then, is to try and discover 
what the significance is of certain of our bodily 
peculiarities, and of a few of the innumerable objects 
and actions that we see around us. 

The theory of evolution throws a bright and far- 
reaching light on the problems of Anthropology, and 
though we may not be able to explain the processes 
of, or the reasons for evolution, there can be no doubt 

as to the fact of its occurrence, There is no need to 

‘ 

INTRODUCTION XXV 

explain what is usually understood by evolution, but 
I would like to hint at some of the aspects of the 
evolution of man. | 

Speaking in general terms, the structure of man is 
essentially similar to that of the higher apes. The 
differences may be superficially striking, but the 
resemblances are fundamental. The disparity is 
patent when we see what man can do with his 
mechanism as opposed to what an ape does with 
his, but we must not forget that it is these apparently 
slight differences of structure which make possible the 
vast differences of functions; the two are intimately 
bound up together, and so it is not wise to overlook 
the differences between man and apes. 

The akinship then of man and living apes is not 
one of direct relationship, but of common descent. It 
is constantly reiterated in books that the lower races 
of man are more simian than the higher, and the 
anatomical differences between an Australian or a 

Negro and a European are often described as ‘low’ 

) 

or “high,” as the case may be, the “low” character 
being regarded as arrested or atavistic. This gener- 
alization must be accepted with great caution; it is 
only partially true, and some of the characters on 
which reliance is placed may prove to have another 

signification, 

XXV1 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The three great groups of mankind—the white, 
yellow, and black races—are probably all divergencies 
from the same unknown ancestral stock. They 
have severally specialized along different lines of 
evolution, and what is important to note is that 
different traits of their organization have become 
arrested, or have specialized in different degrees and 
in different directions. In some part of their or- 
ganization each of these groups is less specialized 
or more specialized than the other two. While the 
white man may, for example, be nearer the ape in 
the character of his hair than the Mongol or the 
Negro, the usual short body and long legs of the 
latter also remove him farther from the ape, to 
whom, in this respect, the other groups are more 
allied. Of course there can be no doubt that on 
the whole the white race has progressed beyond 
the black race. 

Stress is laid by evolutionists on the resemblances 
to one another of the young of different divisions of 
the same group, and this is an argument for the 
view that these different classes had a common 
ancestry. 

The same holds good for man. The infants of 
white, yellow, brown, red, and black people wonder- 

INTRODUCTION XXVil 

fully resemble one another—both as to form, feature 
colour—and not only so, but they very much more 
resemble the young of the higher apes than do their 
respective adults. 

In fact it could be argued, with some show of 
plausibility, that the newly-born infant is not purely 
human, but that it rapidly passes through a pre- 
human stage. 

An English baby is very unlike an English man; 
apart from evolution there is no reason why their 
bodily proportions should not be similar, or why 
their noses should be so dissimilar. It is a very 
significant fact that among the pigmy peoples, such 
as the Andamanese and Bushmen, we find many 
infantile characters persisting in the adults, and 
among the taller races, the yellow people retain 
several juvenile characteristics. Thus we find that 
a people may retain infantile characteristics in some 
respects and be specialized in others; in employing 
the term characteristics, I do not limit myself merely 
to physical features, but include mental and moral 
traits, 

Anthropology also recognizes the vast importance 
of the study of children. Following the strictly 
scientific method we thus enter the sacred precincts of 

XXViil THE STUDY OF MAN 

the nursery, and inquire of the suckling the answer to 
one of the most momentous questions man can ask, 
““Whence are we?” We seek in the youngest man 
the story of the oldest man, and endeavour to trace in 
the evanescent characteristics of earliest infancy some 
of the steps through which man had climbed above 
the brute. 

From the nursery we pass to the school and the 
playground, endeavouring to discover in the child 
some evidence as to the direction of man’s upward 
progress. As the newly-born babe reveals to us 
the last traces of an arboreal ancestor and then 
speedily passes into human-kind, so the child 
repeats in its growth the savage stage from which 
civilized man has so recently emerged. 

In subsequent chapters I shall refer to primitive 
survivals in child-life. There is not only a parallelism 
to some extent in physical features between children 
and certain savages, but there is in children a per- 
sistence of savage psychological habit, and in the 
singing games of children a persistence of savage 
and barbaric practice. The courting, marriage, and 
funeral ceremonies of our savage forefathers are 
repeated like a faint and degraded echo in village 

green or school playground, 

INTRODUCTION XXIX 

We leave the child and return to the folk whom 
I have already defined as the backward people among 
ourselves, and from their unwritten sagas and stories, 
their customs and beliefs, we can pick up the threads 
that have been dropped by the child. In certain of 
their oral traditions, especially in those which are 
told to the children, we find an unmistakable record 
of the clash of opposing races, but of a time long 
antecedent to history. In some of our fairy-tales we 
can recall the momentous struggle of the men of the 
stone age with those of the age of metals, and in 
addition we can catch glimpses of the culture, habits 
and religion of neolithic man. 

In the customs and beliefs of the folk may still be 
traced many survivals of the pagan observances and 
religion of our ancestors. 

In the life of the cultured European from his 
earliest infancy do we find milestones that mark the 
rate and extent of his progress, and all along this 
weary road, which it has taken mankind tens of 
thousands of years to traverse, do we find the tired 
ones—the laggards in the race of life—who mutely 
indicate, if we have but discrimination enough to read 
it, a record of the painful but glorious ascent from 
the brute to the human. 

XXX THE STUDY OF MAN 

Wherever man is, there can anthropology be 
studied. There is no need to travel to the utter- 
most parts of the earth; we can prosecute researches 
or find food for reflection in our own nurseries, in 
the playground, on the village green, even in our 
cities. 

As Alphonse Karr said to his friend :—‘‘ Make you 
the tour of the world, I will make the tour of my 
garden. 

‘“What are you going to see abroad? How proud 
you will be in your first letter to tell me you have 
seen women tattooed and painted in diverse colours, 
with rings in their noses. 

“And I will answer you: ‘Well, my good friend, 
what occasion was there for going so far? Why 
did you go further than two streets from your own 
house? There was nothing to prevent your looking 
at your sister-in-law, who, after the example of a 
hundred other women you are acquainted with, puts 
pearl white and rouge upon her brow and cheeks, 
black upon her eyelids, blue to increase the apparent 
fulness of her veins, and passes rings through her 
ears in the same manner that savage women pass 
them through their noses. Pray, why is it more 

strange to pierce one cartilage than another? Can 

INTRODUCTION XXX1 

the difference be worth going so far to see?’” So 
writes Alphonse Karr, and this is the true spirit of 
the philosopher.* 

* ALPHONSE Karr, A Tour round my Garden, Edited by Rev. J. G. 
Wood (1865), p. 9. 

Bae 

fe 

pa 

: ere pains ater <2 
a bee “Seat » aera ae 
one — 

eee Orr ey sa 
Se | Pee 
. ” 

“ os 

: —? : 
cs mee We 

7 oe iat 

ad or a 

= ete —. 

? a, Pe i 

ues pe i, wil : 

7 a oS 

» ; 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

CHAPTER “I. 

MEASUREMENTS AND THEIR IMPORTANCE 
IN ANTHROPOLOGY. 

O science can progress or be definite without 

measurements of one sort or another. What, 

then, are those made in anthropological inquiries, 
_and for what purposes are they made? 

Speaking generally we may roughly class anthropo- 
logical measuring into three groups :— 

1. As a means of analysis and classification. 
2. Asa test of efficiency. 
3. For identification of individuals. 

(1) The Identification of Criminals.—Let us com- 
mence with the least important from a scientific point 
.of view—that for the recognition of individuals. 
People whom it is necessary to recognize with such 
precision, are generally those who are wanted by 

the police. 
B 

2 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Few of us, probably, have ever so much as given 
a thought to the subject of the identification of 
criminals, but a little reflection will lead to the conclu- 
sion that this is really an important problem. In this, 
as in so many other matters relating to criminology, 
the British are far behind some foreign nations. 

The methods hitherto adopted by our Government 
have been inadequate, and, consequently, largely 
ineffectual, although a very successful system of 
criminal identification has been in operation in 
France for a dozen years. In 1895, however, a 
fresh departure was made, and Dr. Garson, the 
‘well-known anthropologist, was appointed by the 
Government to take charge of a new department in 
England for the identification of criminals. 

It will be obvious that a precise method of identi- 
fication not only expedites justice and saves expense, 
but at the same time it is a safeguard to the prisoner, 
preventing him from being punished for the crimes 
of others. 

The identification by means of measurements was 
inaugurated in Paris towards the close of 1882, 
according to the methods advocated by M. Alphonse 
Bertillon in 1879. This system has been extended 
to the whole of France by M. Herbette, Director of 
the Penitentiary Department. * 

‘ * Cf English translation of an addréss given by M. Louis Herbette 
at the International Penitentiary Congress at Rome, November, 1885, 

MEASUREMENTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY 3 

The subject we are about to consider is a method 
by which habitual criminals may be recognized 
who give a false name, or who refuse to give one 
at all. 

An old offender, once more in the hands of the 
law for some fresh offence that he has committed, 
has every reason for wishing to conceal his real 
name or the name under which he has been 
previously convicted. He sometimes takes the 
name of a person who has never been accused 
of any offence. He thus escapes the heavier 
punishment which usually follows a second con- 
viction. A large number of these professional 
criminals are wanted for other offences than those 
for which they are actually in custody, or they have 
very sufficient reasons for thinking that they are 
wanted by the police for some previous offence of 
which they have been guilty. Criminals do not 
scruple to interchange names amongst themselves, 
though by preference they assume those of honest 
men; some even assume the names of those whom 
they have at a some previous time robbed. It so 
happens that in France criminals, as a rule, no 
longer give aliases, but are eager to give their own 
Melun, Administrative Printing, 1887; also A. Bertillon, “ Notice sur le 
Fonctionnement du Service d’Identification de la Préfecture de Police,” 
Ann. Stat. de la Ville de Paris, 1887 (1889); and F. J. Mouat, “ Notes 

on M. Bertillon’s Discourse on the Anthropometric Measurement of 
Criminals,” Fourn. Anth. Inst., xx., 1890, p. 182. 

4 THE STUDY OF MAN 

names, as they do not wish to appear to have any- 
thing to hide. Further, owing to the certainty of 
this method of identification, English pickpockets 
left Paris in large numbers, so that in about three 
years the convictions were reduced from sixty-five 
to nineteen. Criminals arrested in foreign countries 
have still greater facilities for deceiving. 

The usual descriptions which generally accompany 
the international exchange of judicial records—‘“ chin 
round, face oval, eyes grey, &c.”—have never led to 
the recognition of criminals, save in the realms of 
romance. 

Photographs are certainly preferable to descriptions 
of any kind, but photography solves only a part of 
our problem. The experiment tried in Paris has 
clearly demonstrated this. In the course of ten 
years the police made a collection of the photo- 
graphs of 100,000 persons. Is it possible to search 
through these 100,000 photographs whenever an 
arrest is made? Clearly not. But, after all, the 
assistance rendered by photography is very small. 
A vast experience in human physiognomy is required 
to recognize in many of these photographs that they 
are the portrait of the same person taken at different 
times and under different conditions. As a matter 
of fact, photography is hardly of any use, and is now 
employed in Paris only as a subsidiary means of 
checking other methods of identification. The photo- — 

MEASUREMENTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY 5 

graphs, which are taken full face and profile, are the 
last methods employed. 

The Bertillon method consists in measuring the 
length of various parts, always at the same spot, and 
taken in a regular order. These are in the order of 
their importance: (1) The length of the head; (2) the 
breadth of the head; (3) the length of the middle 
finger of the left hand; (4) the length of the left foot ; 
(5) the left cubit, z.2., the forearm and extended hand ; 
(6) the length of the little finger of the left hand; (7) 
the length of the right ear; (8) the stature. It will 
be seen that most of the above are practically 
measurements of parts of the skeleton, and these 
remain constant when full growth has once been 
attained. The stature is the least reliable of these 
measurements. Lastly, the colour of the eyes is 
noted, and any individual peculiarities, such as moles, 
scars, tattoo marks, and the like. In England it has 
been decided upon to utilize finger-prints according 
to methods introduced by Francis Galton. 

All the measurements are divided into three 
grades—long, medium, and short. The limits of 
these grades have been arbitrarily chosen, so that an 
approximately equal number of persons will be dis- 
tributed among the three classes. For example, the 
length of the head is divided into those that measure 
less than 183 mm. (millimetres), those between 184 
and 189 mm., and those over 193 mm. 

6 THE STUDY OF MAN 

A few years ago, when in Paris, I was introduced 
to M. Bertillon, who explained his system to me. 
Although the office was officially closed, he very 
kindly ordered up a thief who had just been 
captured, and this unfortunate was made the subject 
of a demonstration. 

First of all the measurements were taken according 
to the prescribed method, the man submitting with a 
half smile of amusement. The length of his head 
was 189 mm., and, therefore, just within the middle 
grade, but being 148 mm. broad it belonged to the 
lowest breadth grade; his left middle finger measured 
92mm.; the left foot 259 mm.; the left cubit 452 mm.; 
and so on. 

The cards of the particulars of the men, women, 
and children are kept in separate presses. The atten- 
dant then went to the press for the male criminals, 
to see if this was an old offender. The press is 
divided horizontally into three sections for head- 
lengths, the uppermost being for the small grades 
and the lowest for the longest heads. Each of 
these is similarly divided vertically, according to the 
breadths of the head. Thus the man was to be 
found in the middle compartment of the left hand 
series. This, like the other compartments, is divided 
horizontally into three series for the length of the — 
left middle finger, and each of these again for that | 

of the foot. Lastly, these last are divided vertically, 

MEASUREMENTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY 7 

for the three grades of the left cubit. By this simple 
system the first five measurements can be rapidly 
classified into 243 divisions, each of which is a 
drawer. When the drawer corresponding to the 
thiefs measurements was opened, I saw that it was 
further subdivided according to other measurements, 
and in less time than it takes to describe it two or 
three cards were taken from one division. The 
actual figures of the thief’s measurements were com- 
pared with those on these cards, and one was picked 
out on which they exactly corresponded. There was 
in no case a difference of more than a millimetre. 
The old card stated that there were certain scars and 
marks, the positions of each being fixed by measure- 
ment from named parts of the body. On examining 
the man these were found to correspond accurately. 
The photographs which were appended to the old 
card were kept carefully covered up. On looking at 
them the likeness was recognizable, and the man was 
told the name he had formerly given as his own, and 
the details of his previous convictions. The demon- 
stration was perfect, and to do our criminal friend 
justice, he could not forbear from smiling at the 
celerity and neatness of the identification. The only 
source of uncertainty is when the figures lie just on 
a borderline, in which case the two series have to be 
examined, 

It takes two minutes to completely measure one 

8 THE STUDY OF MAN 

individual ; the record of the scars, particular marks, 

tattooing, &c., three minutes; the writing of the 

name, age, &c., according to the statement of the 

subject, two minutes—or a total of seven minutes for 

the whole operation. A minute or two suffices for 

actual identification of the criminal supposing he has © 
been measured before. 

The beauty of this system is its absolute certainty, 
for everybody has some particular-marks, such as 
moles, scars, &c. Three or four of these, if actually 
recorded, would be quite enough to enable a man to 
be identified out of a million. The photograph is 
superfluous, and it is immaterial what name the man 
gives. 

This system of identification is one of the practical 
applications of Anthropology and its methods to 
ordinary life, and its utility is beyond question. 

2. Anthropological Measurements as a test of 
Efficiency.—It is often important that the physical 
fitness of people should be tested in order to see 
how they stand in relation to other people, and to 
discover certain physical imperfections. Apart from 
this occasional examination, it is most desirable to 
periodically “take stock” of our bodily efficiency, in 
order to see whether our powers are becoming 
impaired in any way, and, if so, to take precautions ; 
especially important is this in the case of children 
and young people generally. This is one of the 

MEASUREMENTS [IN ANTHROPOLOGY 9 

reasons which induced Dr. Francis Galton to establish 
his well-known anthropometric laboratories. 

‘““As an example of what can easily be done let 
us consider the measurement of eyesight. Measure- 
ment would give an indication of the eyesight 
becoming less good, long before the child would 
find it out for himself, or before its impairment could 
attract the observation of others. It is frightful,” 
writes Dr. Francis Galton,* “to think of the frequent 
mischief to eyesight that has been caused by the 
neglect at schools of the most elementary requisites 
to protect it from unnecessary strain, such as an 
abundance of light coming from the proper direction, 
and desks and chairs so shaped as to discourage a 
lolling or sidelong attitude, by supporting the book 
and paper squarely before the reader. The stupid 
want of care in providing these essentials to eye- 
comfort has gone far towards converting the educated 
classes of Germany and the cultured girls of England 
into short-sighted sections of society. When measure- 
ment shows that the sight is beginning to be slightly 
impaired, there is probably time to hunt out and 
abolish the cause of the mischief before serious harm 
is done, and an occasional small fee would be little 
grudged by most persons to insure so timely a 
warning of danger.” 

* F. GALTON, “ Why do we measure Mankind,” Lzppincott’s Magazine, 
February, 1890. 

10 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The existence of colour-blindness is another 
possibility well worth being inquired into at an 
early age, as it materially limits the choice of 
occupation. “It is curious,” writes Dr. Galton, “how 
late it may be in life before this remarkable defect 
is found out either by the person or his friends; and, 
as it affects about one male in twenty-five, the risk of 
being subject to it is considerable.” 

For the last ten years there has been an anthropo- 
metrical laboratory in Cambridge, during which time 
a very large number of students have been physically 
tested, and as the great bulk of the men belong to 
the same social grade we have a very valuable series 
of statistics concerning what may be called the pro- 
fessional and gentle classes, and who represent as 
good a type physically as any class of Englishmen, 
under existing social circumstances, can be expected 
to show. Some years ago Dr. Venn worked up the 
then available statistics on over 1000 men in an 
interesting paper on ‘Cambridge Anthropometry,’* 
in which he grouped the students into three classes :— 
(A) A first-class man in any tripos examination, or 

one who is a scholar of his college. 
(B) All the remaining “honour men.” 
(C) Candidates for the ordinary degree, or “ poll-men.” 

Owing to the system of examinations in Cambridge 
and the knowledge of the men by their tutors, these 

* Journ, Anth, Inst., xviii., 1889, p. 140. 

MEASUREMENTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY II 

three classes can be determined with great accuracy, 
even in the case of undergraduates. 

What is the difference in the physical characteristics 
of our A, B and C classes? We need not trouble 
ourselves with the statistics themselves, but merely 
note the main results. 

In respect of height, weight, breathing, and 
squeezing power, there is little or no difference 
between any of the-classes. 

In respect of eyesight there is a decided inferiority 
in the A’s, as compared with the B’s and C’s taken 
together. 

In respect of the “pull” a similar inferiority of 
A to B and B to C is manifest. 

In respect of head measurement there is a decided 
superiority of A’s over B’s and B’s over C’s. 

Dr. Galton,* who has gone with more detail into 
the head growth of these students, says :— 

“We find that a ‘high honour’ man possesses at 
the age of nineteen a distinctly larger brain than a 
‘poll’ man (that is, a student who takes an ‘ordinary’ 
degree) in the proportion of 241 to 230°5,+ or one 
that is almost 5 per cent. larger. By the end of his 

* F, Gatton, “On Head Growth in Students at the University of 
Cambridge,” Mature, May 3rd, 1888; Fourn, Anth. Inst., xviil., 1889, 
p- 155. 

+ These figures are arrived at by multiplying together the maximum 
length and breadth of the head and its height, the latter being taken 
from the vertex to a plane at the level of the ear-holes. 

12 THE STUDY OF MAN 

college career the brain of the ‘high honour’ man has 
increased from 241 to 249, that is, by 3 per cent. of 
its size; while the brain of the ‘poll’ man has 
increased from 230°5 to 244°5, or 6 per cent. 

“ Four conclusions follow from all this :— 

“(1) Although it is pretty well ascertained that in 
the masses of the population the brain ceases to 

230 240 250 
AGES|¢ B lA 
19 r 
& 
SY 
20 x 
A 
21 ‘ 
y 
‘ 
22 a 
23 \ 
\ 
‘ 
24 
ix 
25 AND ‘ 
UPWARDS, 
Fic. I. 

Curves of relative brain capacity of Cambridge University Men ; 
after Galton. 
A, High Honour Men; B, Remaining Honour Men; C, Poll 
Men, The numerals along the top of the diagram signify the 
product of the three head measures—length, breadth, and 
height—in inches. 
grow after the age of nineteen, or even earlier, it is 
by no means so with University students. 

“(2) That men who obtain high honours have had 
considerably larger brains than others at the age of 
nineteen. 

(3) That they have larger brains than others, but 

not to the same extent, at the age of twenty-five; in 

MEASUREMENTS IN ANTHROPOLOGY 13 

fact their predominance is by that time diminished to 
the half of what it was. 

“(4) Consequently ‘high honour’ men are presum- 
ably, as a class, both more precocious and more gifted 
throughout than any others. We must, therefore, 
look upon eminent University success as a fortunate 
combination of these two helpful conditions.” 

3. Anthropological Measurements as a Means of 
Analysis and Classification.—It is this last aspect of 
anthropological measurements that will now claim 
our attention. These, combined with observations on 
the colour of the skin, hair and eyes, the form of 
various organs, such as the nose and ears, and other 
comparisons of a similar nature, are invaluable in the 
study of the races of mankind. In this way we 
analyze the components of a mixed people, and 
endeavour, as it were, to dissect out its racial 
elements. At the same time it is always desirable to 
seek for peoples that have remained approximately 
pure, so as to fix their ethic type which will serve as 
a standard when gauging mixtures. For example, in 
a certain area one may find a very uniform people, 
whom we know by history, or infer by other means, 
to have long remained isolated; an ethnographical 
study of this group reveals a certain combination of 
characters, which we will call A. Close by is another 
group which by analysis resolves itself into two com- 
ponents, and contiguous are others somewhat more 

14 THE STUDY OF MAN 

complex. We will assume that the double community 
is composed of B and C. Whether the more com- 
plex groups are composed of A B D, A C D, or 
any other combination of four types, it should be 
possible to determine their composition from the 
experience gained from the first two cases. The 
problem is naturally greatly complicated by the 
occurrence of all intermediate grades and inter- 
mixtures, for it is only exceptionally that individuals 
in a mixed community exhibit even approximately 
pure characters. 

In the following three chapters I take respectively 
the colour of the hair and eyes, the form of the head, 
and the character of the nose, as examples of the 
methods employed; and lastly I present an abstract 
of the brilliant work done by Dr. Collignon in his 
studies of the Anthropology of France, whose 
researches constitute a highly instructive example 
of the modern methods of Anthropological investi- 
gation. 

CHAPTER II. 
HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 

7HEN one looks at a crowd of Englishmen 

one is at once struck with the diversity that 

is apparent in their general appearance ; especially 

noticeable are the differences in the colour of their 

eyes and hair. To a less degree the same holds 

good for an assembly of Scotsmen or Irishmen. 

In some parts of the continent of Europe there is 

a similar variety of colour, but usually a more uniform 
colouration prevails. 

Outside of Europe, and apart from European 
influence, there is a remarkable uniformity in the 
colour of eyes and hair; and whether they be yellow, 
red, brown, or black men, the eyes are dark and the 
hair is almost invariably black. 

Our venerable and venerated English anthropolo- 
gist, Dr. John Beddoe, long ago appreciated the fact 
that by noting the colour of the eyes and hair of 
large numbers of people it might be possible to learn 
something about the origins of a people so mixed 
as the English, and even to trace the streams of 

LS) 

16 THE STUDY OF MAN 

migration to their sources, assuming, of course, that 
originally the main peoples of Europe were charac- 
terized by a predominance of hair and eyes of a 
particular colour. 

It is a vital question in Anthropology whether races 
or considerable groups of men, who may be regarded 
as being related to one another, do possess physical 
characters in common, and whether these characters 
are constant. 

Apart from the monuments of Egypt and Assyria 
there are few pictorial representations of ancient 
peoples which are of sufficient exactitude to serve 
as conclusive evidence on these points. 

In Egypt there is an immense mass of pictorial 
and sculptured material for ethnographical study. 
covering a range of many centuries. Over three 
thousand years ago the artists who decorated the 
royal tombs distinguished between four races :— 
(1) the Egyptians, whom they painted red; (2) the 
Asiatics or Semites were coloured yellow; (3) the 
Southerns or Negroes were naturally painted black ; 
and (4) the Westerns or Northerners white. 

1. Like every other people under the sun the 
Egyptians regarded themselves as ¢he race of men. 
They are distinguishable by their warm complexion, 
their small beard and moustache, and their abundant 
crisp black hair. All Egyptologists agree that this 
ancient type is still represented by the modern 

HAIk AND EVE COLOUR 17 

Fellahin, sometimes with remarkable fidelity. Mas- 
pero* writes, “The profile copied from a Theban 
mummy taken at hazard from a necropolis of the 
XVIIIth Dynasty, and compared with the likeness 
of a modern Luxor peasant, would almost pass for 
a family portrait. Wandering Bisharis have in- 
herited the type of face of a great noble, the 
contemporary of Kheops; and any peasant woman 
of the Delta may bear upon her shoulders the head 
of a XIIth Dynasty king. A citizen of Cairo, 
gazing with wonder at the statues of Khafra or 
of Seti I. in the Ghizeh Museum, is himself, at a 
distance of fifty centuries, the reproduction, feature 
for feature, of those ancient Pharaohs.” 

Dr. R. Stuart Poolet points out that two other 
nations come under the Egyptian type. 

(a4) The old Kushite (that is the East African 
Hamitic) inhabitants of South Arabia and of the 
opposite coast of Africa, who traded with the 
Egyptians, and whose features were less refined 
than those of the Egyptians. Representations of 
these people are shown in the reliefs which com- 
memorate the expedition of Queen Hatshepu, about 
1600 B.c. The voyagers travelled beyond the Red 
Sea as far as the Somali coast. 

* G. MASPERO, The Dawn of Civilization: Egypt and Chaldea. 
Eng. Trans. (1894), p. 48. 
+ REGINALD STUART POOLE, “The Egyptian Classification of the 
Races of Man,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xvi., 1887, pp. 152, 370. 
ic : 

18 THE STUDY OF MAN 

(8) The Phcenicians can only be distinguished 
from the Egyptians by details of costume. 

2. Some of the Eastern types, which may generally 
be classed as Semitic, on the Egyptian monuments 
show a strong likeness to the Assyrians as sculptured 
by themselves. Jews, Amorites, Arabs, and other 
tribes, with characteristic features and costume, are 
also unmistakably portrayed. 

3. The peoples of Africa to the west of Egypt 
were grouped by the Egyptians with those of the 
islands and maritime countries. These include, 
amongst others, the Tahennu, Ha-neb-u, Lebu, 
Mashuash, Tsekuri, Shardana, Shakalsha, Tuirsha 
of the sea Dardani and Pulista. 

A very characteristic representation of one of these 
groups is that of a Tahennu, or Tamehu, a Lybian 
people. This man has two ostrich feathers as a 
head-dress; he wears a short beard and moustache, 
and a curious curled lock of hair which depends 
in front’ of each ear. These fair-haired, blue-eyed 
strangers, with a light complexion, frequently came 
into contact with the Egyptians. Sometimes they 
were enslaved, as shown in the tomb of Rekhmara, 
in the time of Thothmes III.; or others of the same 
race actually conquered and temporarily occupied 
part of Egypt, as evidenced by Flinders Petrie’s 
“New Race.” 

The Shardana or Shardina were the Sardinians; 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 19 

the Shakalsha were the Sikeli or Sicilians; the 
Tuirsha have been identified as the Tyrsenoi or 
Etruscans; and the Pulista are generally regarded 
as the Philistines, though some regard them as 
Pelasgians of Crete, both of which belonged to 
the same race. : 

This northern group of white men coincides to 
a remarkable degree of accuracy with the latest 
anthropological. investigations of Professor Sergi,* 
who recognizes a distinct group of the white race, 
which he appropriately terms the Mediterranean 
stock. Almost the only point of difference between 
the ethnological artists of ancient Egypt and the 
enthusiastic Italian anthropologist, is that the latter 
includes the ancient Egyptians themselves in that 
important group of mankind. 

4. The Egyptians also depicted Negroes of various 
degrees of purity, and which evidently belonged to 
recognized nationalities. 

Other races and peoples were noted by the Egyp- 
tians. Of these mention need only be made of the 
Hyksos or so-called Shepherd Kings.t The best 
representation of this type is in one of the sphinxes, 
discovered at Zoan or Tanis. They had strongly- 
marked features, with large brow-ridges, very high 

* G. SERGI, Origine e Diffustone della Stirpe Mediterranea, 1895. 

+ It would be preferable to adopt Dr. F. Galton’s suggestion, and use 
the word “herdsmen” instead of “shepherds” in connection with the 
Hyksos.—/Journ. Anth. Inst., xix. p. 194. 

20 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and broad cheek bones, and a flat mouth. Their 
face, so full of energy, firmness, and resolution, forms, 
as Poole remarks, the greatest contrast with the air 
of calm repose and placid dignity peculiar to the old 
Egyptian kings. These foreign over-lords conquered 
Egypt before 2000 B.c., and were expelled 400 years 
later. Sir William Flower* has noted Mongolian 
characters in their features, and suggests that the 
invasion and occupation of Egypt by the so-called 
“Shepherds” was one of the numerous instances in 
which some of the nomadic Tatar hordes of Central 
and Northern Asia have poured forth from their 
native lands; and overrun and occupied for a longer 
or shorter period the countries lying to the west and 
south of them. If this view can be maintained, the 
Hyksos invasion and occupation of Egypt would 
have been only one of the series, of which the con- 
quests of Attila, Tchinghis Khan, Timur, and the 
more permanent settlements of the Finns, the 
Magyar, and the Turks in Europe are well-known 
examples. 

As Dr. Poole points out in considering the repre- 
sentations from the monuments, we must remember 
three leading characteristics of Egyptian art :— 

1. That in reliefs and frescoes the eye was repre- 
sented full face, and therefore we have to make 
allowance for this peculiarity in our attempt to define 

* Journ. Anth. Inst., xvi. p. 377. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 21 

types. This done, and the comparison made with 
sculptures in the round, of which we had examples 
of some leading types, we found— 

2. Remarkable naturalness and force of character, 
reminding us of early Italian sculpture, leading to— 

3. Love of caricature in its portrayal of hostile 
nations, for which again allowance must be made. 

But even making full allowance for all these, we 
need not be afraid of trusting the Egyptian artist. 

The sculptures from Assyria and Babylon can also 
be brought into evidence to support the general 
conclusions drawn from those of Egypt. According 
to Bertin,” they are more realistic in many ways than 
the Egyptian pictures, though they are also more 
conventional in some points. As in Egypt, so here, 
the faces are represented in profile with eyes in full 
face. This has given the false notion of oblique 
eyes in the Babylonian race, but the error of this 
notion is easily shown by the faces of the man-headed 
bulls and the few Assyrian statues. The artists 
appear to have given great care to the representations 
of the facial types. 

In Assyria, Bertin finds two types: (1) The aris- 
tocratic and military caste, with a long head, straight 
forehead, slightly curved nose hanging a little over 
the upper lip, and often thin lips; the hair was wavy. 

* G. BERTIN, “The Races of the Babylonian Empire,” Journ. Anth. 
Inst, xviii., 1888, p. 104. 

22 THE STUDY OF MAN 

(2) The lower classes, with a small round head, low 
retreating forehead, high cheek bones, projecting jaws, 
but with a receding chin; the nose is often very large 
and prominent, generally frizzly hair and beard, and of 
short stature. 

The higher Babylonian class was not very dis- 
similar from the Assyrian, but the nose was straight, 
never aquiline, and the general expression of the 
face was quiet and smiling, well in agreement with 
the general moral character of the Babylonians ; it 
has nothing of the stern expression of the Ninevites. 

The Assyrians correctly represented the Arabs 
with a long oval head, high forehead, and a straight 
nose of moderate size. 

The reliefs of the two ambassadors who visited 
Assurbanipal, in Elam, offer all the characteristics 
noticed in the modern Armenians—long curved nose, 
fleshy lips, short stature. The general appearance 
is decidedly Jewish, as in the modern Armenians. 
This fixity of the pre-Aryan Armenian type is fully 
acknowledged by anthropologists. 

Two types of Jews have been distinguished: (1) 
the high type—with the characteristic “Jewish” 
nose, which is sometimes called the Semitic type, 
but erroneously, as the purest Semites, the Arabians 
of the desert, do not exhibit it. The face of this 
type has an intelligent and dignified appearance ; 
(2) the low type as illustrated, according to Bertin, 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 23 

by the Jews captured at Lachish by Sennacherib, 
701 B.c., and by the Phcenician sailors on a bas- 
relief in the British Museum. The head is round, 
the forehead low and retreating, but the nose is 
rarely much developed; in many cases the lips are 
thick, the hair frizzly, and the stature of the medium. 
This type, which may be due to a mixture with 
the same race as that which formed the low type 
of Mesopotamia, still sometimes recurs among the 
Ashkenazim (German-Polish) division of the Jewish 
race. 

The persistency of the Jewish type is admitted on 
all hands, as Goethe stated this well-recognized fact 
in the following words: “Es ist das beharrlichste 
Volk der Erde. Es ist, es war, es wird sein.” Joseph 
Jacobs, who has made an elaborate study of Jewish 
anthropology, states* that the persistency of the 
Jewish type for the last 2600 years is conclusively 
proved by the Assyrian bas-relief of the captive Jews 
of Lachish. 

Without going into further detail or multiplying 
references, it may be accepted that where a people, 
like the Jews, has kept itself fairly pure, and not 
intermarried to any considerable extent with peoples 
of alien blood, the ethnical characters may persist 
for some 3000 years. It is true that Renan, 

* JOSEPH JAcoBs, “On the Racial Characteristics of Modern Jews,” 
Journ. Anth. Inst., xv., 1885, p. 39. 

24 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Neubauer,* and others have argued against the 
purity of the present-day Jews, but Jacobs traverses 
their arguments and arrives at opposite conclusions. 
He draws attention to the comparative infertility of 
mixed marriages, that is, between Jews and Gentiles, 
and to the superior. potency of Jewish blood. Taking 
these facts into consideration along with the very 
small number of mixed marriages in the past, 
especially with non-Semitic peoples, Jacobs sees 
“no reason from history for denying that the Jews 
of the present day were the direct descendants of 
‘the Jews of the Bible.”t 

There are undoubted wide divergencies from the 
Jewish type of skull, nose, eyes, hair, &c.; but the 
Rev. Dr. Hermann Adler, the Chief Rabbi, believes ¢ 
that the dark and blond type are original, dating 
‘from- Bible times, and described respectively : 
“His locks are curling, and black as a raven” 
(Canticles v. 11), and “He was ruddy, and withal 
fair of eyes and goodly to look upon” (1 Samuel 
xvi. 12). That. the existence.of the blond type 
was not due to intermarriage since Biblical times, 
might be proved by the fact that it was to be found 
among the Jews of North Africa, Syria, Arabia, and 
Persia, where, owing to the prevalence of fanaticism, 
mixed marriages had rarely, if ever, taken place. 

* A, NEUBAUER, “Notes on the Race-Types of the Jews,” Journ. 

Anth, Inst., xv., 1885, p. 17. 
t+ Loc. cit., p. 62. t Journ. Anth. Inst., xv. p. 56. 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 25 

Dr. Felix von Luschan,* who has paid considerable 
attention to the problem of the origin of the Jews, 
states that the modern Bedouins must be considered 
as pure descendants of the old Semitic race. They 
have long, narrow heads, dark complexion, and a 
short, narrow and straight nose, which is in every 
respect the direct opposite of what we are accustomed 
to call a “typical Jewish nose.” The earliest 
Pheenician skulls seem identical with old and modern 
Bedouin skulls. Of our modern Jews nearly 50 per 
cent. are broad-headed (brachycephalic), 11 per cent. 
have fair complexion, and not more than 5 per cent. 
correspond to what we now learn to be the real old 
Semitic type. In northern Syria, the land of the old 
Arameeans, nearly all the heads are brachycephalic, 
with indices near to 90, and these same brachycephalic 
elements we find everywhere in western Asia. The 
Armenians are most remarkable for the nearl 
complete uniformity of their types, for their iat 
complexion, their extreme brachycephalism, and for 
their large and hooked “ Jewish” nose. 

These and other investigations lead us to the 
conviction that Syria and Asia Minor were in early 
times inhabited by a homogeneous and extremely 
brachycephalic race, of which the modern Armenians 
are the nearly pure descendants, and which we find 

* FELIX VON LUSCHAN, “Jews and Hittites,” Scéence, xxiii, 1894, 
Dp 21. 

26 THE STUDY OF MAN 

more or less mixed with strange elements in many 
of the other races that now inhabit western Asia. 
This old brachycephalic race, which from its begin- 
ning was utterly distinct from any Semitic tribe, and 
was in its physical aspect the very opposite of the 
Semites, can be identified, according to von Luschan, 
only with the Hittites (the same Hittites mentioned 
as a Syrian tribe in the Bible), which had been a 
strong and formidable enemy to Ramses II., and 
were finally conquered by Assyrian kings in long wars 
and fights, beginning earlier than the times of Assur- 
nassirpal and ending probably only in those of 
Esarhaddon, as we read in the Assyrian annals from 
the ninth century to the seventh century B.c. Exca- 
vations made a few years ago in Sendjirli, the old 
Sammal, known in Assyrian texts as a Hittite resi- 
dence in northern Syria, have brought to light a large 
series of old Hittite sculptures; the Armenian 
character of the men represented on the walls and 
in the royal palaces of this old town is most striking, 
and we cannot err if we regard the inhabitants of 
Sammal as the direct ancestors of the modern Ar- 
menians, who still inhabit the neighbourhood of the 
place, ill-treated in our times by Turks and Kurds, 
and without any knowledge of their glorious history 
in ancient and medizeval times. 

The old Hittite inscriptions were in very curious, 

heavy, and bulky-looking kind of hieroglyphics, but 

HATkR AND EVE COLOUR 27 

about 1000 B.c. the Semitic writing and language was 
introduced, which soon replaced the Hittite language 
and writing. For example, two inscriptions have 
been found, written by native kings, the one in the 
ninth, the other in the eighth century B.c., both in 
good old Semitic alphabetical characters. Thus in 
the ninth century B.c. Semitic influence was great in 
northern Syria, and we can easily understand how 
Semitic writing and language soon became dominant 
among people of western Asia that were originally 
without a drop of Semitic blood; and then we under- 
stand also why most of our modern Jews have the 
Armenian type and not the Semitic. 

The fair element among the modern Jews is best 
explained by an old, as opposed to a post-biblical 
racial mixture. This we may find in the intercourse 
of the old native Syrians with the Amorites and 
other Canaanites (Deut. ix. 2), ‘‘a people great and 
tall,” who were fair and had blue eyes, as the old 
Egyptian painted monuments show us. These are 
the eastern representatives of the great Mediterranean 
race, 

Von Luschan thus sums up his conclusions :—‘ So 
we see in our modern Jews the descendants of three 
different races, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the 
Semitic nomads, who immigrated into Syria only 
about in the times of Abraham.” 

Much has been written upon the prevalence of 

28 THE STUDY OF MAN 

red hair among the Jews. Jacobs* finds that it occurs 
among Sephardim (Spanish Jews) to a greater extent 
than among Ashkenazim (German-Polish Jews), and 
it has never been contended that the Sephardim have 
mixed much with any race markedly rufous, though 
a certain amount of erythrism (or red-hairiness) was 
introduced into Spain by the Goths. Where it does 
occur among Ashkenazim of north Europe it is 
found more among Jews than in the indigenous popu- 
lation, Jacobs points out that red hair seems to 
be only a natural complement to black, and its 
presence among Jews is not due to intermixture, but 
probably to defective nutrition. 

The existence of blue eyes among Jews in rela- 
tively large proportions need not be regarded as 
overwhelming proofs of intermixture. As is well 
known, all. eyes are blue at birth, and if no brown 
pigment is deposited in the front of the iris the eyes 
remain bluish to the end of life. 

Thus blue eyes, as well as red hair, are a kind 
of minor albinism, and may result from defective 
“nutrition, or other physiological causes. Jacobs findst 
confirmation in the view that this is the real cause 
of its occurrence among Jews from the fact that we 
find blue eyes among Asiatic as well as European 
Jews. On the other hand, this would be equally well 
accounted for by an infusion of Amoritic blood. 

* Loc. city p. 46. t Loe. city p. 47 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 29 

We may then accept the conclusion that the Jews 
have remained a persistent type for thousands of 
years, and that though they do now present variations 
in their features, these are due not so much to 
subsequent miscegenation as to a primitive com- 
plexity of origin, as is partly evidenced by the 
Assyrian reliefs. 

As the result of long experience Beddoe* has come 
to estimate very highly the permanence of the colours 
of hair and eyes. ‘“‘It is,” as he justly states, ‘of 
course impossible for an evolutionist to regard them 
as absolutely permanent. But one may readily con- 
ceive, as I do, that whenever a distinct and tolerably 
homogeneous breed has been established, its colour 
may remain very much the same so long as the 
conditions of natural selection remain nearly identical.” 
The material to be worked upon, as he points out, 
lies ready to hand in our streets and market places, 
not hidden in museums and charnel houses. 

An obvious objection to such observations is the 
different way in which people see colours or are 
impressed by them. To take an example adduced 
by Beddoe; almost all French anthropologists say 
that the majority of persons in the north of France 
are blond, whereas almost all Englishmen would 
say they were dark; each group of observers setting 
up as a standard what they are accustomed to see 

* JOHN BEDDOE, The Races of Britain, 1885, p. 2. 

30 THE STUDY OF MAN 

around them when at home. What is darkish brown 
to most Englishmen would be chestnut in the nomen- 
clature of most Parisians, and perhaps even blond in 
that of Auvergne or Provence. Then, again, most 
people exaggerate the relative prevalence of some 
striking feature such as red hair. 

It has been attempted to obviate the discrepancies 
due to national idiosyncrasy or to personal equation 
as to the discrimination of colours by printing tints 
for comparison. These colour-scales are very useful 
for determining the hues of the skin, and also, though 
to a less extent, for the colours of the iris; but they 
are of comparatively little use for recording the 
tints of the hair, as the scales are printed in flat 
tints, so different from the gloss and translucency 
of hair. 

French anthropologists have, however, worked very 
largely with such colour-scales, and a limited number 
are printed in that valuable little book, Mod¢es and 
Queries on Anthropology, published by the Anthro- 
pological Institute (3, Hanover Square, London, W.). 

With that practicality which characterizes his 
methods Dr. Beddoe has devised a very simple 
method of recording the colours of the hair and 
eyes of people. The advantages of his system are 
that it is as accurate as need be, easy and rapid to 
operate, and it can be employed without attracting 
any attention. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR Bw 

Dr. Beddoe* acknowledges three classes of eyes, 
distinguished as much by shade as by colour—light, 
intermediate, and dark. 

1. To the first class are assigned all blue, bluish- 
grey, and light grey eyes. 

2. To the second or medium class belong dark 
grey, brownish grey, very light hazel or yellow, hazel- 
grey, formed by streaks of orange radiating into a 
bluish-grey field, and most shades of green, together 
with all the eyes whose colour is uncertain after an 
ordinarily close inspection. 

3. To the third class are allocated the so-called 
black eyes, and those usually called brown and dark 
hazel. 

The hair colours are classed according to the same 
observer into groups, which he distinguishes by the 
following initials, R. F. B. D. N. 

Class R. (red) includes all shades which approach 
more nearly to red than to brown, yellow, or flaxen. 

Class F. (fair) includes flaxen, yellow, golden, some 
of the lightest shades of our brown and some pale 
auburns, in which the red hue is not very conspicuous. 

Class B. (brown) includes numerous shades of 
brown. 

Class D. (dark) includes the deeper shades of 
brown up to black. 

Class N. (niger) includes not only the jet black, 

el SET EE os ob 

32 THE STUDY OF MAN 

which has retained the same colour from childhood, 
and is generally very coarse and hard, but also that 
very intense brown which occurs to people who in 
childhood have had dark brown (or in some cases 
deep red) hair, but which in the adult cannot be 
distinguished from coal black, except in a good light. 

The card adopted by Beddoe will be found to be 
very practical. It may be made of any size, but 
it is convenient to have it about 34 inches long by 
1% inches broad, so that it may be held in the palm 
of the hand and carried in the waistcoat pocket. 

z|rfe|o{x[efr|efo|xle/r|elp|s 

The card is ruled into three main divisions 
corresponding to the groups of eye-colours, light, 
medium, dark. Each of these is again subdivided 
into columns for the five classes of hair: red, fair, 
brown, dark, and black. Lastly, the card is divided 
horizontally into two equal halves, the upper being 
reserved for statistics of men, and the lower for those 
of women. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 33 

A second card should be similarly used for children. 
Those about the age of eighteen and over may be 
classed as adults. 

The locality, date, name of observer, and other 
details such as the particular occasion, may be written 
on the back, but it is convenient to leave a blank 
space on the face for the insertion of the name of the 
locality. Further suggestions for the employment of 
these cards will be found at the end of the book in 
the chapter devoted to practical observations in the 
field. 

A ready means for comparing the colours of 
different peoples is obtained by the Index of 
Nigrescence,* which Beddoe has introduced. “The 
gross index is gotten by subtracting the number of 
red- and fair-haired persons from that of the dark- 
haired, together with twice the black-haired. The 
black is doubled, in order to give its proper value 
to the greater tendency to melanosity shown thereby ; 
while brown (chestnut) hair is regarded as neutral, 
though in truth most of the persons placed in B are 
fair-skinned, and approach more nearly in aspect to 
the xanthous [light] than to the melanous [dark] 
variety.” The formula is :— 

D+2N—R-F=Index. 

From the gross index the net, or percentage index, 

is of course readily obtained. 

* Races of Britain, p. 5. 
D 

34 THE STUDY OF MAN 

It is evident that the light colours range below and 
the dark above zero, and that the fairer the population 
the greater will be the minus quantity. 

The index for the eyes is obtained by subtracting 
the light from the dark and neglecting the neutral 
shades, thus :— 

Dark — Light = Index. 

Dr. Collignon adopts another plan, he reduces all 
his figures to percentages ; then for any given district 
he adds the light hair and the light eyes together, 
and does the same with the dark hair and eyes, 
dividing each total by two. Lastly, he constructs 
maps to show the relative excess of one total over 
the other. 

In that mine of information Zhe Races of 
Lritain,* Beddoe has published a series of maps, 
which he has constructed from statistics based upon 
about 13,800 entries in the Hue and Cry, relating 
to deserters from the army, and to a much smaller 
extent, deserters from the navy and absentees from 
militia drill, Through the kindness of my friend I 
am able to reproduce three of these maps, which 
set forth the broad features of the distribution of 
the hair and eye-colours of the male population of 
England. Dr. Beddoe has made, in addition, a 
vast number of observations of this class, and he 
finds that his data coincide very fairly well with the 

* p. 143 ef seg. 

HIAIR AND EVE COLOUR 35 

Fic, 2, 

Map showing the distribution of the Index of Nigrescence in England, 
based upon Military Schedules; after Beddoe, 

36 

LHETSLODY (OP MMAN 

Fic, 3. 

Map showing the distribution of Dark (Brown or Hazel) Eyes 
in England, based upon Military Schedules ; after Beddoe. 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 37 

QO ¥ Th ist 

10 +]55 
5+ 
0-5 
5-0 
ae) 

Fic. 4. 
Map showing the distribution of the excess of pure Blond 
over pure dark type in England, based upon Military 
Schedules ; after Beddoe. 

38 THE STUDY OF MAN 

military statistics. The personal investigations of 
Beddoe afford a more accurate and minute means 
of analysis, and they bring out a number of very 
suggestive facts that are lost in the synthetic maps 
based on the military schedules. 

The maps based on the military schedules accord 
with ethnological history in exhibiting a large pro- 
portion of light-coloured hair in the regions most 
subject to invasion and colonization, and of dark- 
coloured hair in the far west. 

Taking the four kingdoms, their order from light 
to dark is as follows :— 

EYES. Per cent. HAIR. Index of Nigrescence. 
Scotland . om 7252 Scotland . . 3 
Ireland . 270-2 England . ~2 5G 
England . . 61-6 Walesa . 16:8 
Wales : . 56-6 Treland . 18-8 

Connaught (with 70°6 per cent.) ranks second to 
Ulster (with 73'4 per cent.) as to lightness of eyes, 
and has more dark hair than any province of Ireland 
or of Great Britain except Argyle. This is in agree- 
ment with the feature that strikes travellers in the 
west of Ireland, the preponderance of dark brown 
hair combined with grey or blue-grey eyes.* 

In England most of the ‘‘mixed brown type,” as it 
is called—that is, brown, hazel, or “black” eyes, with 

* Cf.a paper recently published by DR. BEDDOE “On Complexional 

Differences between the Irish with Indigenous and Exotic Surnames,” 
Journ. Anth, Inst., xxvii., 1897, p. 164. 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 39 

brown (chestnut), dark brown, or black hair—occurs 
in Dorset, Wilts, Cornwall, Gloucestershire, the Welsh 
Marches, South Wales, Bucks, and Herts. 

For the sake of clearness I will take a few counties 
of England only, and give the conclusions to which 
Dr. Beddoe has arrived from his studies of their 
ethnography. 

“Lincolnshire, for example, is supposed to be a particularly 
Teutonic county. Whether Lindum Colonia was destroyed 
by the Angles we do not know; perhaps, as it kept its name 
and situation, it fared better than most Romano-British 
towns, and retained more of its ancient population; but 
certainly Lincolnshire received a large colony of Angles, who 
divided it into a great number of hundreds, and who were 
subsequently overlaid by a heavy stratum of Danes, as the 
place-names testify. The inhabitants have the tall and 
bulky frame which is generally believed to be Anglo-Danish, 
though the nature of the soil and other conditions may have 
to do with it. Lincolnshire stands third in all England 
on the blond scale as tested by the index of nigrescence.”* 

Dr. Beddoe’s personal observations in the county 
indicate a moderate proportion of dark eyes and a great 
deal of light, or lightish brown hair, with a low index 
of nigrescence; these observations are confirmed re- 
spectively by the maps. (Figs. 2 and 3.) The modern 
population of Lincoln are a fair and handsome people, 
with regular features; blue-eyed, says Professor 
Phillips—but Dr. Beddoe calls them blue or light 

* Races of Britain, p. 145. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

40 

9.97| o£ | g | 6e | of | € |—]E.ES]o0g | z| Sx | SE} dz | 1 JoS1|)9.bz | 9.¥b| zy | 9 gt} 9.02} ° 0 [[eMur0d 
g.gf| 46 | €r | €€ | gf | 11 | z | z.19 | €S1| ¥ | z& | gS | ES | 9 JoSz) t.g1 | 9.€£ | g.9h | 9 Ez] g.or | * * — aaysuoaag 
Cb] 6g |b | SE} of | cr | z | S.S9]111|—| 6x | €S | VE | S Jooz|$.61}S.4€| ob |S.61}S.b | ° 3 (uejtjod 
-oNaw viyxe) xessq 
gobbler] > | 6e | of | zr | z]zss|ger|—| 6c | gh | $$ | 9 Jose} zt1|z€|¥.8b| pve] 9.1-|f ~ ~ *HOBMS 
+ + -gfoyzont 
G.dz|11|% |% |S | —|—|S.2d|6z |—|% | 91] 8 | 1 Jor $1} S.lz|$.z9|S.2c| 6.4 | + oxysadpriquirxa 
ailysuopsununyy 
g.zv| +919 | oz | 12 | 11 |—J£.245|9g8 |—| gr | 6€ | de | z JoSr| €.1z| €.SE) £50 | €.61| 9.01 * aaTysploypod 
arrysuo}durey}10 NT 
* * puepny 
or ze )€ |S |erizc |} oglgr | ce) 11 | ze | or | € jog o1 | ¥.2£ | L.€¥)z,.91| 9.8 | ° * dIys19}s9o10'T 
$.S€| 14] 6 | oz | 62 | or | €|S.b9|6z1| x | rz | ZS | gb | zc Jooz|S.b1| 62 |S.€S] Se] 1- | + anysmeqsunjon 
VE ce Od Sealey aie a 991/66 | 2 | Er | 2h | Of) o Jokr) Ger) S08) oS) ge' |Z. a) = + garysujooury 
is) & iS) = z i 
mw lee| FLEE wlEPle orl] 3] 71 818) | E 
& |mr!| 2 (er) & Bior) 2 lola ie] | 2 | & silane 
a) Figo t Boo | = ce) rae bese |rek at heey aka linea! yg a a w ° 
§ | 3 zilee lie g] 3 real celle a) lop we lings | 2 
Qa! 3 - P a] és P 5 Sues 3 os |ao| 4 “SHILNAOD 
ay Pe je) EI, Nee Ss | ee og 
: W1VH ; “WIVH Sal wet) tag ee a ee alee 
| 3 S 3 2/3 
“muy yo ‘NMoNg “Tazv yy *LHOIT NO ‘aug ‘anig | 8 . £ ° = 8 

“SHA 

‘SHAD 

‘o61 ‘d ““aoauag rye) 429 pun anzy BY} WOI—'SOLLSILV.LS AUVLITIN 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 41 

hazel ; the latter hue is very common at Boston. The 
civic population there, though not quite so strikingly 
fair as in the surrounding peasantry, are much more 
so than in most parts of the islands ; they have all the 
characteristics of pure Saxo-Frisians, and are hardly 
distinguishable from the frequenters of Antwerp 
market.* Their index of nigrescence is the lowest 
Dr. Beddoe has met with in any considerable town in 
Britain. 

From Lincoln to Nottingham, along the Vale of the 
Trent, the same breed of men prevails. Mr. D. 
Mackintosh, who has carefully studied the features, 
makes the leading points of his Danish type a long 
face, high cheek-bones, with a sudden sinking in 
above on each side of the forehead, high and long 
nose, head elevated behind, reddish hair. There is a 
traditional attribution of red hair to the old Danish 
invaders in some parts of the country, but Dr. Beddoe 
does not believe “the colour is common in Lincoln- 
shire nowadays. The high, finely-formed nose and 
prominence of the superciliary ridges, yet with fairly 
arched brows, not the straight penthouse of the 
Scotch and Irish, are frequently seen in Denmark; 
and where they are very prevalent among the 
Anglians a Danish cross may be suspected.”t Mr. 
Park Harrison lays great stress upon this feature as 
Danish. It is common to the Borreby race and to the 

* loc, cit. p. 252. T2005 220.5. Pe 253: 

42 THE STUDY OF MAN 

British bronze men, to the Sion type of Switzerland 
and to many Savoyards. 

Leicestershire was largely colonized by the Danes ; 
Rutland was not so. The former differs from the 
other North-Midland counties, apparently, by having 
retained a good proportion of the dark pre-Anglian 
stock. 

In the Triads, and elsewhere in old Welsh litera- 
ture the Coranied are referred to; these have been 
‘identified with the Coritavi, or Coritani, of the 
Romans, from the similarity of the first syllable in 
each word, from a statement that the Coranied settled 
about the Humber, and from the name of Ratis 
Corion having been applied to Leicester, seemingly 
the chief town of the Coritavi. The only grounds 
for making the Coranied and Coritavi (allowing them 
to be the same) Germans are, their siding with the 
Saxons, and having a Latin name ending in av1, like 
the undoubtedly Germanic tribes of the Batavi and 
Chamavi.”* Dr. Beddoe entirely disagrees with this 
view for the following reasons :— 

“They are supposed to have occupied the counties of 
Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, Leicester, Rutland, and part of 
Northamptonshire; in these counties I can find no Roman 
station whose name appears to be Teutonic, while the 
important town of Margidunum, near Southwell in Notting- 

hamshire, bears a name almost certainly Celtic, and Ratis 
Corion does the same ; and Nottingham would seem to have 

* Joc, cit., p. 23. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 43 

remained Celtic long enough for its Welsh name not to have 
been altogether forgotten even in the time of Alfred; for 
Asser says it was called in Welsh Tigguocobauc. Again, if 
the Coritavi were Germans, and were overlaid by successive 
strata of Angles and Danes, one may reasonably expect 
to find the Teutonic physical type prevalent over their whole 
area to a degree not found elsewhere in Britain. Now, in 
the northern part of the Coritanian area it is really very 
prevalent, but in the southern (Leicestershire and North- 
amptonshire) there is, if I may judge by the colours of the 
hair and eyes, a strong non-Teutonic element. The following 
table (page 44) shows a great difference between Lincoln and 
Leicester, Nottingham and Northampton, in these respects, 
there being a much larger proportion of dark hair in the 
two more southern towns.’* 

“Professor Phillips, than whom no ethnologist was a 
keener observer, once visited Leicester with the expectation 
of finding a strongly marked Scandinavian type predominant 
there; but he was surprised to find a dark-haired type, which 
he supposed to be Celtic, equally prevalent.” 

The northern part of Cambridgeshire is also sup- 
posed to retain a large proportion of British blood; 
the fens formed the impenetrable retreat, and we all 
know how the Isle of Ely held out against the 
Normans. In his memoir on “Stature and Bulk of 
Man in the British Isles,” Dr. Beddoe} quotes Dr. L. 
Clapham and Dr. H. Stuckey, as finding rather more 
hazel and brown than blue or grey eyes; out of fifty 
observations twenty-seven eyes were dark and twenty- 
three light. I remember well, on returning to 

* loc. cit. p. 24. + Mem. Anthrop. Soc., iii., 1869, pp. 458, 459. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

44 

Thee Nes eal Geee meee) Wea & |—|G7|)Ge |) 2 Ca Cr iSee Os cagro € |—|oo€ | > uoydureqj10yq 
1.vr | zz | Z.gI Col tak | tat N Ter. Seal O get S.No, WO: redveosd Nive ay — nOOLa ie weysutjoN 
g.oz | 4€ |6.61| 9.2 )€.1 |] % | z | 89 | 9.9 | 9-2 | g | Fe 1.2 9:96 | 6.84 € | — | ofS | ° * Jo}So0IaT. 
Ser rale Sul seg eNerds ll uGamllazen Inti ciGelnceT ley. lca ASe genes ea euase z|—|ooS |° + ujooury, 
By iezites | 2 ing EAE teh if ee a/ole |= |» lao] Qe 

ele |e |e |e ik |e) he |e Pe ie | 2 ele ck lea) ee 

Ha a Be Le ce) 7 ‘ a i 3 * ‘ g ‘i Ej ne 5 - 3 3 ‘SNMOJ, 

Be, = S'5 

° ‘SHAQ NUVC “SHAW IVWALNAN "SHAG. LHOI'T one 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 45 

Cambridge after a long residence in Ireland, expecting 
to find a tall, fair-haired, blue-eyed population pre- 
ponderating in Cambridgeshire, but, on the contrary, 
I was struck with the proportionately large number of 
short, dark-haired, dark-eyed persons. According to 
Dr. Beddoe the southern part of the county is more 
like Norfolk and Suffolk, anthropologically.* 

“These two counties,” continues Dr. Beddoe, “are more 
Anglian than either Danish or British. Mr. Grant Allen, 
whose summary of the Brito-Saxon controversy, in his 
excellent little book on Anglo-Saxon Britain, is about the 
fairest we have, dwells, perhaps, a little too much on the 
British element in East Anglia. It is, perhaps, stronger in 
Suffolk than in Norfolk. In Essex I think that there was 
a considerable survival of the Romano-Britons, and that 
though the invading Saxons preponderate near the coast, 
it is not so in the interior forest country. At Braintree a 
Huguenot colony have left their surnames and complexions.” t 

Mr. Park Harrison has noted that the people of 
Brandon are comparatively dark. This is a particularly 
interesting place, as in Neolithic times pits were sunk 
in the chalk, and flint was quarried for the manufacture 
of implements; there is reason to believe that since 
that date this industry has never ceased, and at the 
present time the flint knappers of Brandon manufacture 
gun-flints for the African market. Quite recently Dr. 
C. S. Myers has published a valuable paper { on the 

* Races of Britain, p. 254. + Joc. cit. p. 284. 
t C. S. Myers, “An Account of some Skulls discovered at Brandon, 
Suffolk,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xxvi., 1896, p. 113. 

46 THE STUDY OF MAN 

large collection of skulls from this locality that are in 
the Cambridge Anatomical Museum. In the vicinity 
are two Roman camps, and near by runs the Icknield 
Way, the great war and trade route of the Iceni in 
pre-Roman times. A few skulls resemble the Neolithic 
or Long Barrow type. The skulls of the brachy- 
cephalic series do not belong to the Round Barrow 
type, which is quite unrepresented, but are to be 
allocated to a fairly widely -spread Romano - British 
type. Among the elongated skulls Mr. Myers has 
proved the occurrence of the old Row Grave type of 
Germany ; it is a significant fact that about 372 A.D., 
the Alemannic Bucinobantes came from Mainz, on 
the right bank of the Rhine, and appear to have 
settled within twenty miles of Brandon, at Buckenham, 
in Norfolk. Allied to these skulls is the long, low- 
crowned Batavian type, which also occurs at Brandon. 
Only one definitely Saxon skull was noted. The 
evidence points to the fact that the burial ground, 
whence these skulls were obtained, was that of a 
people of mixed ethnic character, belonging to a time 
antecedent to the Saxon invasion; but it is probable 
that even then Saxon settlers were arriving in small 
numbers. Mr. R. J. Horton-Smith” also alludes to 
East Anglian Craniology in his paper on the crani- 

* R. J. Horton-SmitH, “The Cranial Characteristics of the South 
Saxons compared with those of the other races of South Britain,” Journ. 
Anth, Inst., xxvi., 1896, p. 82. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 47 

ology of the South Saxons. His main points are 
that the South Saxons were not an absolutely pure 
race, they had a little British blood in them, though 
the amount was probably very small. The Wessex 
Saxons were less pure than the South Saxons, owing 
to their more frequent intermarriage with the British 
population. The East Anglians have a form of skull 
slightly different to that of the South Saxons. It 
is rather broader, less tapeinocephalic (ze. less low 
in the crown), and mesoseme instead of microseme 
(z.2., the orbits are higher and less oblong), the face 
is also relatively longer, and the cranial capacity 
larger. 

We will now pass to the opposite end of England, 
and again I quote from Dr. Beddoe :— 

“The people of Devon are for the most part dark-haired, 
and the Gaelic combination of blue or grey eyes, with dark 
brown or blackish hair, is very frequent among them. When 
the eyes are hazel, on the other hand, the hair is not seldom 
lightish. In the district about Dartmouth, where the Celtic 
language lingered for centuries, the index of nigrescence is at 
its maximum, exceeding fifty. But around the estuaries of. 
the Taw, the Torridge, the Tamar, and perhaps the Exe, 
Frisian or Danish settlements seem to have been effected. 
In these localities there is a large proportion of blonds, which 
in the case of Plymouth affects the neighbouring part of 
Cornwall to some extent. The Devonians are usually 
rather short and strongly made, with heads of good size and 
considerable occipital projection. 

“Cornwall nourishes a stalwart race superior to the 

48 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Devonians in stature and length of limb; the miners, again, 
seem to surpass the agricultural population, though of this 
I have not statistical proof. In each case there may have been 
a process of selection, for Cornwall probably gave the last 
refuge to the free British warriors, who were gradually forced 
back by the West Saxons into the peninsula, while their serfs, 
accustomed to the yoke, may have bowed their necks for the 
most part to that of the strangers. The stature, as deduced 
by Roberts and Rawson from 305 observations, is 5 ft. 7°9 in. 
or 1726 mm., and I do not think this is over the mark. The 
Cornish are generally dark in hair, and often in eye; they 
are decidedly the darkest people in England proper; they 
resemble the Scottish Highlanders in their warmth of 
colouring. The point which comes out most distinctly is the 
prominence of the glabella, and (probably also) of the brow 
ridges. To these may be added, more doubtfully, a receding 
forehead, a head much arched longitudinally, and broad about 
the parietal eminences. All these points, it will be observed, 
are common to the Bronze Race. All the British types, how- 
ever, occur in Cornwall, and the most characteristic is, I 
think, Iberian, with a dash of the Semitic. Barnard Davis was 
struck with the heaviness of the mouth and lower part of 
the nose; this is a common feature among the earlier races 
of Britain, but is certainly not universal in Cornwall.” * 

The map of the nigrescence index shows that the 
majority of dark-haired people occur in our western 
districts. Cornwall, for example, has the highest 
index (20°6), but even there there are 18°6 per cent. of 
the men of the pure blond type (including red hair), 
and but 24°6 per cent. of the pure brown type, the 

* loc. cit., pp. 258, 259. 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 49 

great bulk of the population belonging to the mixed 
blond type or the mixed brown type. 

The following conclusions may be drawn from this 
short sketch of the distribution of hair and eye 
colours in the Eastern Counties, and in the extreme 
South-west of England. 

Spread all over England was a dark-haired, 
brown-eyed people, who, from other evidence, appear 
to have been slight of build, and distinctly dolicho- 
cephalic. These are usually spoken of as Iberians, 
or more correctly as the Iberian branch of the 
Mediterranean race. They are the men of the 
polished stone (Neolithic) age, and they often buried 
their dead in long barrows. We may recognize in 
them the true autocthones of Britain, for we have 
little precise information about Palzolithic man, nor 
can we yet tell how far he persisted into later 
periods. Mr. Gomme* brings evidence to bear in 
support of his view that these non-Aryan people 
were agriculturalists. 

We know that agriculture tends of itself to fix 
men to the soil, and when agriculturalists are 
conquered by peoples of other social organization, 
as practically always occurs, they become still more 
rooted, and for good reason. The conquerors are 
usually turbulent, warlike, mobile communities, 

* G. L. Gomme, The Village Community, 1890, ch. iv.; Ethnology in 

Folk-lore, 1892, p. 70. 
E 

50 THE STUDY OF MAN 

usually either actual nomads or societies which have 
but recently emerged from a pastoral mode of life, 
or they may be a sea-faring folk. In any case, while 
they prey upon the settled population and overlord 
them, they take care not to exterminate them, for the 
descendants of herdsmen despise agriculture, and it 
is only after a long time and due to a powerful con- 
straint that they yield to the force of circumstances 
and till the soil. 

The horse-breeding, chariot-driving, Celtic-speaking 
peoples who invaded the British Islands were pro- 
bably no exception to this general rule. It is certain 
that they tilled the soil, for there are many allusions 
in Roman authors to this practice among allied tribes 
on the mainland of Europe; but the same authors 
are careful to point out how lightly these half-nomad 
tribes were attached to the soil, and how they were 
continually on the move. We may, therefore, take 
it for granted that these men of the Bronze Age 
overlorded, but did not by any means exterminate 
the indigenous population of Britain; the latter by 
becoming the serfs of the conquerors were still more 
firmly settled on the land. 

Later came the tall, fair-haired, blue-eyed doli- 
chocephals. At first pioneers opened up the country 
and showed the way to the Teutonic hordes, who 
arrived in various swarms of Frisians, Angles, Saxons, 
Jutes, Danes, and the kindred Norsemen. The story 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 51 

of the incoming of the Bronze Age was repeated, but 
with this difference. While the fair dolichocephals 
slipped over, as it were, the dark dolichocephalic serfs, 
they largely exterminated or pushed before them the 
Celtic, more or less brachycephalic peoples, so that 
these are at the present day mainly to be found in 
the western portions of the country. The mixed 
race probably shared the fate of the more aboriginal 
population. 

In a recently-published book* on the Formation of 
the French nation, de Mortillet points out that various 
classical authors practically all agree in describing the 
Celts or Gauls and the Germans in the same terms. 
Tall, fair people, with blue eyes, white skin, very 
warlike, and readily undertaking great invasions and 
vast migrations, constructing neither temples nor 
towns, fighting naked, but very proud of their hair. 
Below this military aristocracy there were the common 
people, ignored by the writers, who constituted the 
patient and laborious democracy fixed to the soil, the 
true natives of the country, whom anthropology and 
palethnology have revealed. The Gallo - Germanic 
race is spread over nearly the whole of Europe, and 
extends into Africa and Asia, each band transporting 
its particular name to the different countries that it 
occupied. It is this turbulent, noisy, mobile aris- 
tocracy which alone has filled the pages of history. 

* G. DE MoRTILLET, Formation de la Nation Frangaise, Paris, 1897. 

52 THE STUDY OF MAN 

In France the short, dark, brachycephal of Southern 
Central Europe has fused with, or lived alongside 
of, the dark dolichocephal, and it is this mixture 
which has formed the mass of the French people, 
that sedentary population which may be described as 
the nucleus of the French democracy. 

Although not identically the same, the early history 
of France and that of the British Islands have much 
in common, and it is interesting to find that these 
primitive ethnic movements are still painted, as it 
were, on the hair and in the eyes of the existing 
population. 

On turning to France we find that analogous 
results have there been tabulated. Topinard, the 
distinguished anthropologist, instituted a very ex- 
tensive inquiry relative to the statistical distribution 
of the colours of the hair and eyes of the adult 
population of France. 

In order to obtain unity of method, and to reduce 
the personal equation to a minimum, Topinard issued 
precise instructions with colour scales, which were 
scattered broadcast, but mainly to trained observers, 
preferably to medical men. More than 200,000 
observations were returned; these were abstracted 
one by one, and classified by departments according 
to place of birth. The first operation was to reduce 
the totals of each kind of hair and eyes to the 
percentage of the whole number of the cases 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 53 

observed for each department. The second opera- 
tion was to arrange the most blond to the darkest 
departments for both hair and eyes, in a long list 
from one to eighty-eight. The third operation was to 
combine these lists in various ways, so as to deter- 
mine the relative places occupied by each department 
with regard to the eyes and hair separately. The 
fourth operation was to again combine these results, 
so as to arrive at the main synthetic conclusions. 
These only remained to establish equal groupings, 
and to plot out the maps according to these lists. 
Topinard informs us* that he employed various 
methods till he finally drew up twenty-one maps 
presenting all the main facts, from the simplest, 
giving the distribution of blue eyes, for example, 
to the most synthetic which combined all the 
observations. Five of these maps were originally 
published in his report to the meeting of the 
French Association for the Advancement of Science, 
which was held in Paris in 1889.+ My learned 
colleague has kindly permitted me to borrow the 
three that he has also published in his L’ Homme 
dans la Nature. 

The eighty-eight departments, including Alsace- 
Lorraine, and Corsica, are divided into four groups 

* P. TOPINARD, L’Homme dans la Nature, 1891, p. 83. 

+ P. TOPINARD, “Statistique de la Coleur des Yeux et des Cheveux 
en France,” Assoc. Frangaise pour 1 Avance. des Sct., Paris, 1889 (1890), 
2nde Parte, p. 615. 

54 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of twenty-two departments each. The groups indicate 
the fair, intermediate fair, intermediate dark, and dark, 
whether of eyes, of hair, or of both combined. 

J 22 DEP™ PLUS CLAIRS 
SSS] 22 | INTERMEDIAIRES CLAIRS 
SS 22 as ha FONCES 
GEA 22— i» ~~ PLUS FONCES 

Fic. 5. 

Distribution of the colour of the eyes in France; from Topinard, 
The eighty-eight Departments (Alsace-Lorraine added and 
counted as one) are divided into four equal groups. 

The line of separation between the departments 
where the blonds predominate, and those which have 
a preponderance of darks, extends irregularly from 
the Alps to the Breton peninsula. This line also 
corresponds with a fair degree of accuracy to that 

HAIR AND EVE COLOUR 55 

which separates the people of high stature from those 
of low stature, the former being to the north-east, the 
latter to the south-west. 

Co] 22 DEPT? PLUS BLONDS = 

22» INTERMEDIAIRES BLONDS ee : 

EEE 22 Ci, Per; BRUNS Ss 

MMB 22)—Oi«jS sé PLUS: BRUNS 

Fic. 6. 

Distribution of the colour of the hair in France; from Topinard. 
The eighty-eight Departments are divided into four equal groups. 

The maximum of frequency of blonds is met with 
partly along the shores of the English Channel and 
partly along the north-east frontier. This fact coin- 
cides with history. One knows that the blonds came 
by sea and by land, but always from the north. It 

56 THE STUDY OF MAN 

is also in agreement with the colour-maps constructed 
from statistics of the hair and eye colours of over ten 
million school children in Germany, Austria, Belgium, 
and Switzerland. The fairest children occur in the 

% 
[J] 22 DEP™ PLUS CLAIRS aoe 
228 ox INTERMEDIAIRES CLAIRS =p a 
& ” FONCES ate es 

Gum 222=«w~SOsS*PLUSS FONCES 

Fic. 7. 
Resultant of the two preceding Maps; from Topinard 

north, and, speaking in general terms, they darken 
as one proceeds south and west; thus the darkest 
children are to be found on the confines of Italy 
and France. There are, however, several dark 
“islands” in Central Germany, especially in Bohemia, 

HAIR AND EYE COLOUR 57 

sy 

and numerous light “islands” in the extreme south 
of this large area. 

The maximum of frequency of the darks is seen 
along the Mediterranean coast, in Corsica, along the 
Pyrenees, and also in Auvergne. This conforms 
perfectly to what is known of the primitive location 
of a dark population in the basin and islands of the 
Mediterranean before the Aryan invasion. From 
other sources we know that there was a mixed dark 
population in France before the fair barbarians came 
from the north-east to overlord the earlier inhabitants 
of France; but colour maps alone do not serve to 
distinguish between these earlier peoples. A further 
analysis will be made when dealing with head-form. 

The map of combined hair and eye colours marks 
the descent of the fair invaders down the valley of 
the Rhone, in the direction of Upper Italy. Other 
irregularities of distribution and the various “islands,” 
such as the departments of Vendée (75) and Charente- 
Inférieure (36) in the west, Tarn (54) and Tarn et 
Garonne (59) in the south, and Jura (8) and Dréme 
(22) in the east, can be explained by local historical 
events. Topinard asks whether the fair “island” of 
Charente-Inférieure is due to the English, to the 
Protestants around La Rochelle (the majority of 
whom should be fair), or to the immigration of the 
Alans? The Alans, or Alani, were Scythian people, 
with red hair and grey eyes, who joined themselves 

58 THE STUDY OF MAN 

with the Vandals. They occupied the middle course 
of the Loire in 451 a.p.* Collignon, however, does 
not find Charente-Inférieure particularly fair, and he 
cannot satisfy himself that any trace exists of the 
Alans, about whom we know really very little. 

Topinard fully recognizes that the departments are 
purely administrative divisions which have no ethno- 
logical significance, but it is very convenient to take 
the departments as statistical units, as they are of a 
sufficient size to give the broad features of the 
distribution of hair and eye colouration. The signi- 
ficance of the distribution has, of course, no relation 
whatever to the departments themselves. Here also, 
as in Britain, a more detailed survey in selected 
districts will give most interesting and suggestive 
results, the interpretation of which can best be 
worked out by a careful study of the local history, 
both prehistoric and documental. For France such 
detailed anthropological investigations have been 
carried out by Dr. R. Collignon in a very thorough 
and suggestive manner. His methods are so valu- 
able that a chapter will be devoted to an abstract 
of his studies in the Dordogne district. 

* G. DE MORTILLET, Yormation de la Nation Frangaise, 1897, p. 122. 

CHATTER. ITE 
THE VALUE OF HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 

O much attention has been paid by anthropologists 

to the shape of the head, and particularly to that 
of the skull, that the greater part of the literature 
of physical anthropology is taken up with minutely 
descriptive and statistical accounts of the contours 
and measurements of skulls. 

It is obvious enough why the-skull has been so 
minutely studied. Although most parts of the human 
skeleton exhibit distinctive traits by which they can 
be readily distinguished from the bones of other 
animals, the more characteristic human tendencies 
are, however, so to speak, focussed in the skull. 
For example, the bones of the legs and the pelvis 
have become modified owing to the assumption of 
the erect attitude; but the position of the large hole 
(the foramen magnum) in the base of the skull 
through which the spinal cord passes into the brain 
and the balancing of the head on the vertebral 
column attest to the same fact. 

The acquisition of the erect attitude liberated the 

59 

60 THE STUDY OF MAN 

hand from progression, and this gave it the chance to 
become the delicate and mobile mechanism that we 
now possess, and which is especially marked in the 
case of musicians, artists, and skilled workmen. The 
“handiness” of the hand relieved the jaws from 
much of the work that they were wont to do, and 
as a consequence the human jaw has a marked 
tendency to be reduced in size. 

Thus two very characteristic human traits, the erect 
posture and the hand, have influenced the skull. 

The other essentially human characteristics are 
mainly to be found in the head itself; of these the 
most important is the brain. The absolute and 
relative large size of the brain at once separates the 
brain of man from that of the higher apes. This 
character can be determined from an examination 
of the skull without any special anatomical know- 
ledge. 

It is convenient in considering the skull to dis- 
tinguish between the cranium, or brain case, and the 
face—the latter is composed of the organs of sight 
and hearing, with their protective casings, and the 
jaws. 

The cranium and the face can, to a certain extent, 
be studied independently of each other, though there 
is always a distinct relation between them, and the 
one acts upon the other in various ways. 

Among the lower races of men we find that the 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 61 

jaws are usually of large size, and they often project 
far beyond the level of the forehead. A skull in this 

” ¢¢ 

condition is called ‘‘ prognathous,” “a term which has 
been rendered,” as Huxley points out, ‘with more 
force than elegance, by the Saxon equivalent — 
‘snouty.’”* An example of this prognathism is seen 
in the Negro’s skull. (Fig. 8, No. 4.) 

These great jaws are associated with large teeth 
and powerful muscles. The jaw or masseter muscles 
arise from the side walls of the skull, and are in- 
serted in the lower jaw. The more powerful the 
muscles the higher they creep up the sides of the 
skull, their upward limit being marked by a curved 
line (the temporal crest), and the more they are 
likely to compress the skull, especially immediately 
behind the orbits. This lateral compression of the 
temporal region of the skull would naturally be most 
effective in quite young persons when the skull was 
still pliable. The feeding on coarse food and the 
absence or imperfection of cooking the food would 
give more work for the jaws, and consequently the 
muscles would become more powerful. One effect 
of civilization is to improve the commissariat and 
cuisine, and as a result the jaws become smaller, 
they project less and less beyond the level of the 
forehead, that is, they become “ orthognathous.” 

* T. H. Huxiey, “Man’s Place in Nature: III. On some Fossil 
Remains of Man,” Co/lected Essays, vol. vii., p. 191. 

62 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The teeth are reduced in size and number, and the 
masseter muscles having less work to do become 
smaller and less powerful, and consequently they 
exert less pressure on the side walls of the cranium, 
and so the skulls are not so narrow, especially in 
front. 

That the jaw muscles do affect the skull has been 
shown by Nehring,* who, from his studies on skulls of 
both sexes and of various ages of anthropoid apes and 
of dogs of different breeds, is of the opinion that the 
occurrence of a constriction between the orbital and 
cerebral portions of the skull has direct relation to the 
strength of the facial musculature, and more especially 
of the jaw muscles. If the skull of a muscular 
Eskimo dog be compared with that of a pug or a 
Bolognese lap-dog, it will be found that this con- 
striction is very marked in the Eskimo dog, the 
zygomatic arches of which are widely outstanding, 
and all the muscular attachments strongly developed ; 
but the constriction is scarcely noticeable in the pug, 
and is entirely wanting in the Bolognese lap-dog; the 
two latter exhibit feminine rounded forms of the 
corresponding parts of the skull, with a fully- 
developed musculature. In domesticated dogs, as 
in civilized man, the jaw is relatively fully developed, 

* A. NEHRING, “ Menschenreste aus einem Sambaqui von Santos in 
Brasilien, unter Vergleichung der Fossilreste des Pithecanthropus erectus, 
Dubois,” Verhandl. Berliner anth. Gesellsch, 1895-6. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 63 

and there is a tendency to reduction of the last molar 
tooth. 

It must not be overlooked that the decrease of 
the action of the jaw muscles is concomitant with 
rise in culture, that is to increased mental activity, 
which is usually associated with increase in the 
volume of the brain. We have already seen that 
the statistics collected in the anthropometric laboratory 
in the University of Cambridge, as worked out by 
Venn and by Galton, show that the period of the 
growth of the brain is prolonged in students as 
opposed to those of corresponding ages who cease 
to study. 

It may be accepted as true in the main that the 
increase in the size of the brain, which is due to 
culture, is exhibited proportionately more in the 
breadth and height than in the length. 

Thus culture may act in two ways on the skull, 
directly by enlarging the volume of the brain, and 
therefore increasing the size of the skull ; and indirectly 
by causing a reduction of the jaw, which reacts again 
upon the skull. One is not surprised, then, to find 
that the higher races have, as a rule, a greater 
breadth in the anterior temporal region of the skull 
than the lower races. 

The decrease in the size of the jaws and of the 
strength of their muscles induces a corresponding 
modification in the rest of the face. The action of 

64 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the lower jaw upon the upper may be likened to 
the beating of a hammer on an anvil. When the 
jaw muscles are powerful the lower jaw is brought 
with a considerable force against the upper jaw, and 
consequently the arches which connect the upper 
jaw with the cranium must be proportionately well 
developed. Conversely the weakening of the jaw 
muscles permits, for example, the outer rim of the 
orbit and the zygomatic arch to be of a more delicate 
construction. 

The increase of the brain causes the forehead to 
be at the same time broader and higher. This fact 
was noted by the sculptors of ancient Greece, and 
they increased the vertical height of the forehead of 
some of their gods, so that, as in the case of Zeus, 
this human character was carried by them beyond 
human limits, when they wished to emphasize the 
benevolence and mental superiority of the Father of 
gods and men. 

When at an indoor gathering we see a number of 
men with their hats off we notice that their heads 
vary in form. Some are small, others large; some 
have long heads, others have short ones; the head 
may be high or low, and the contours vary in diverse 
ways. These differences render the study of crani- 
ology peculiarly difficult, as it is almost impossible to 
describe most of them at the same time succinctly 
and intelligibly, and also because innumerable com- 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 65 

binations of variable elements may occur in a 
collection of skulls from a single district. 

Dr. D. G. Brinton, the well-known American 
anthropologist, has been so impressed with the 
latter fact, that he despairs of the study of 
craniology throwing any certain light on the racial 
problems of Anthropology. Undoubtedly an immense 
amount of tedious labour has been expended by 
enthusiastic students on the study and description 
of skulls, but often, one must confess, with very 
meagre results. There certainly is a wonderful 
fascination in skulls; and craniology, which to the 
outside observer appears to be about as_ un- 
interesting a subject as could well be conceived, 
has lured its votaries to more and more persistent 
and painstaking effort. The present writer, who once 
sat in the seat of the scornful, has also yielded to the 
charming of craniology. 

A very strong argument in favour of craniology 
is the assistance that it should render to prehistoric 
archeology and to the history of peoples. We have 
documentary and legendary records of the shifting 
of populations, and our archeological museums are 
full of interesting records of the past. It would 
be a matter of great importance if the skulls that 
are exhumed could also be brought in as evidence. 

We are again face to face with the question that 

confronted us when considering the colour of the 
F 

66 THE STUDY OF MAN 

eyes and hair. Can one particular head-form, or 
a restricted number of head-forms, be regarded as 
characteristic of a race or consanguineous group? 

Upper and side views of a Kalmuk’s and of a Negro’s skull ; after Ranke, 

And are these characters sufficiently constant to be 
of scientific value ? 

Before we can attempt to answer these two 
questions, it will be necessary to give a brief 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 67 

account of the methods and nomenclature of 
craniometry. Fortunately, a very short description 
will serve the present purpose, as we are concerned 
with only one or two aspects of the subject, and 
not with craniology as a whole. ; 

On looking at a number of skulls from above, it 
is seen that they are all longer than broad, though 
some are less so than others, and that the contour 
is very varied. Some may have somewhat flat sides, 
others have gently rounded sides, or the skull may 
appear narrow in front and swollen behind; indeed, 
there may be great variation in this respect even 
'in skulls which have the same relation of breadth 
to length. Skulls must also be looked at from the 
front, side, back, and underneath, and their peculiarities 
noted, 

The character which is most frequently recorded 
is the ratio of the breadth of the skull to its length. 
One speaks loosely of a long or a narrow, or of a 
short or round skull, but such vague descriptions 
are of no scientific value. Anthropologists now 
adopt the plan of calculating indices which accurately 
express this numerical relation. The extreme length 
and breadth of a skull are measured, the breadth is 
multiplied by one hundred, and the total is divided by 
the length, the result is the cranial index, 

Breadth x too 

Sul ; 
Length. pees 

68 THE STUDY OF MAN 

In other words the length is reduced to one 
hundred, and the ratio of the breadth to that is 
the index. 

The altitudinal index is the ratio of the height 
either to the length or to the breadth, | 

Height x 100 _ qydox, n= Inde 

Length Breadth 

Directions for taking these measurements will be 
found in the chapter dealing with practical instructions. 

There are numerous facial measurements from which 
various indices are obtained, but these do not concern 
us at present. 

The cranial index is usually grouped into three 
series ; a skull is said to be dolichocephalic when its 
index does not exceed 75, to be mesaticephalic between 
75 and 80, and to be brachycephalic when over 80. 
Some investigators who aim at great exactness in- 
crease the range in the following manner :— 

Ultra-dolichocephalic ; ; . 60-64'9 
Hyper-dolichocephalic : : . 65-69'9 
Dolichocephalic . : : . 70-749 
Mesaticephalic . : 5 : 751919 
Brachycephalic . : : . 80-849 
Hyper-brachycephalic : : . 85-89'9 
Ultra-brachycephalic . , ; - 90-949 

There is a tendency in some quarters to extend 
dolichocephaly up to 77°9, so as to reduce mesa- 
ticephaly to the narrow range of 78 to 8o. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 

69 

If we take a general survey of the races of 
mankind, we find that they can be arranged in a 
manner by taking the mean cranial index of each of 

the following groups. 

In all cases the numbers vary 

vary about this mean; but where a people is known 
or presumed to be fairly pure the range of variation 
is much less than where mixture is known to have 

occurred, 
DOLICHOCEPHALS. MESATICEPHALS. BRACHYCEPHALS. 
Sardinians Ne Scandinavians 76 | Finns . cu PeKs) 
oS Sicilians }rs gh British 76-77 | French Basques $0 
© | Scandinavians 74 | Span. Basques 76 | S. Germans . 83 
© |S. Italians . 75 | Parisians . 79 | Auvergnats . 84 
Prussians . 79 | Lapps . 105 
Veddahs . 72 | Chinese \ 77-78 Koreans OT 
Ainus 72-76 | Japanese Negritoes 80-82 
.& | Dravidians . 74 | Parsees 78 | Mongols 
a Kirgis sso 
Kalmuks 
Burmese oO 
Soudanese . 71 | Negrilloes 74-77 
? Negroes . . 73 | Copts . 76 
g Kafirs Hausas 77 
Ss eta 73 Bedjas } P 
Arabs . - 74 | Boulous 7 
Bushmen . 75 | Adoumas 80 

70 THE STUDY OF MAN 
DOLICHOCEPHALS. MESATICEPHALS. BRACHYCEPHALS. 

Fijians, interior 66 | Polynesians 75-80 | Javanese 80-82 
= Australians . 70 | Tasmanians . 76 | Polynesians 82-87 
8 AdmiraltyIs. 70-73 | Dyaks . - 77 | Tongans. .. 84 
© | N.W. Papuans 72 

Eskimo . 70-72 | Hurons - 75 | Navajos \82-86 
§ Fuegans . 72-76 | Californians . 77 | Apaches 
5 | Patagonians. 74 | Caribs 75-80] Alaskans . 83 
e Botocudes . 74 Araucanians 83-85 

Aleouts A OS 

At the first glance it appears as if the cranial 
indices were too generally distributed over the world 
to prove of much ethnographical or historical value. 
This is perfectly true if these indices are considered 
by themselves. It is only when taken into con- 
sideration with other physical characters that the 
cranial index is of any value whatever. 

The inhabitants of large areas of Asia are dis- 
tinctly brachycephalic, but among the mixed peoples 
of China and Japan mesaticephalism is prevalent. In 
the northern parts of the latter country one finds the 
remarkable Ainus, or Ainos, who differ in so many 
respects from their Japanese neighbours and con- 
querors. These very interesting people were formerly 
much more numerous than they are at present; they 
probably occupied the whole or the greater part of 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 71 

the Japanese Archipelago, and also considerable tracts 
of the mainland opposite. They are short—the men 
range from about 1545 mm. (5 ft. of in.), to 1600 mm. 
(5 ft. 3 in.); the women are some 75 mm. (3 inches) 
shorter. The colour of their skin, though of various 
shades of brown, has a reddish tinge, and more 
resembles that of a Southern European than an 
Asiatic ; the coarse black hair is long and wavy, and 
is so profusely developed that the Ainus are the 
hairiest of mankind. From a careful consideration of 
all the facts, de Quatrefages* comes to the conclusion 
that ‘‘the Ainus are fundamentally a white and 
dolichocephalic + race, more or less altered by other 
ethnic elements, of which one, at least, is essentially 
Mongolic.” 

In India there are two main groups of people— 
the tall, comparatively fair, dolichocephalic Aryan 
invaders, and the short, dark, also dolichocephalic 
aboriginal population. The latter are usually spoken 
of under the general name of Dravidians. (Plate 2, 
fig. 1.) These dark-skinned people, with abundant 
black wavy hair, are probably distantly allied to the 
Melanochroi or dark group of the Southern European 
(or Mediterranean) stock on the one hand, and to 
the Australians on the other. 

* Histoire Générale des Races Humaines, 1889, p. 467. 
+t The mean cephalic index of ninety-five Ainu men was 77°3, and that 
of seventy-one women was 78'4. 

42 THE SLUDY VO MAN: 

The cousins Sarasin have brought forward evidence 
to prove that the Veddahs of Ceylon are the least 
modified descendants of that ‘‘ Proto-Dravidian” race 
from which the diverse people just mentioned have 
diverged. 

The typical Asiatic race, the yellow-skinned brachy- 
cephals, are scarcely represented in India, and there 
only at the northern and eastern frontiers of Bengal. 
In fact, one would scarcely be wrong in saying that, 
ethnologically speaking, India is more “ European” 
and less “Asiatic” than Lapland. 

Amongst the brachycephalic Asiatics are to be 
found the Negritoes. So far as their cranial index is 
concerned it is practically identical with that of the 
average Japanese, who may be regarded as very 
characteristic Mongoloids; but when one compares 
their other physical traits it is at once apparent that 
we are dealing with two entirely different races. The 
Negritoes comprise the Mincopies, or natives of the 
Andaman Islands, in the Bay of Bengal, certain hill 
tribes of the Malay Peninsula, such as the Sémangs, 
Sakais,* and Senois, and the Aetas of the Philip- 
pines. We will take the Andamanese, as they have 
been most fully studied, and compare them with an 
average Japanese type. T 

* The Sakais were probably of Negrito origin, but they have since 
become greatly modified. 

+ A. DE QUATREFAGES et E. T. HAMy, Crania Ethnica: Les Cranes 
des Races Humaines, 1882, p. 430. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 73 

ANDAMANESE, JAPANESE. 
Ay. stature, males. 1431 mm., 4 ft. 8°3 in. | 1650 mm., 5 ft. 5 in. 
Colour of skin. Sooty black. Yellowish. 
Hair. 5 . Black, short, frizzly. Black, long, straight. 
Cranial capacity . 1281 cc. (male). 1605. 
Cranial index Rico tha 65 | 80%. 

The stature, colour of the skin, nature of the hair, 
and the cranial capacity are all anthropological char- 
acters of the first rank, and therefore it is needless 
to enter more fully into the details of the other 
external or cranial characters. It is sufficient to 
state that the Andamanese has an infantile cast of 
countenance, and though he is related to the African 
Negro on the one hand, and to the Melanesian on 
the other, yet the common features of these people 
are, as it were, blurred and softened in ‘our little 
Andamanese fellow-subjects,” who, in the words of 
Sir William Flower,” are ‘ probably the least modified 
descendants of the primitive members of the great 
branch of the human species characterized by their 
black skins and frizzly hair.” He, however, is careful 
to point out that “some characters, as the brachy- 
cephaly, seem special to the race.” 

The Kalmuk, with his broad face, high cheek 

bones, prominent brow ridges, narrow eye openings, 

* W. H. FLower, “The Pygmy Races of Men,” Proceedings Royal 
Inst. Gt. Brit., 1888; and Journ. Anth. Inst., xviil., 1888, p. 73. Ch 
also W. H. Flower, “On the Osteology and Affinities of the Natives 
of the Andaman Islands,” Journ. Anth. Inst., ix., 1879, p. 108; and 
xiv., 1884, p. II5. 

14 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and well-marked falciform fold in the inner angle of 
the eye, flat sunken nose with circular nostrils, and 
somewhat prominent jaws, combines the distinctive 
characters of a typical Mongolian. — 

Without going into details which would be out 
of place here, we find that the representatives of 
the three main groups of mankind are to be found 
in Asia. These three groups, whose characters have 
been so admirably defined by Sir William Flower 
in his Presidential Address to the Anthropological 
Institute in 1885,* are :— 

1. The Ethiopian, Negroid, or ee or 
“black,” type. 

2, The Mongolian, or Xanthous, or “ elon’ type., 

3. The emer ea: or “white” type. oy 

The American, or “red,” type is regarded by some 
as a distinct group equivalent to the other three. 

If one classifies mankind by the character of the 
hair, it is found that the Negroid peoples all have 
frizzly hair, that which is often called ‘“ woolly.” 
The Caucasians + have curly or wavy hair; and the 
Mongolians and Americans have straight hair. 

* W. H. FLowER, ‘‘ The Classification of the Varieties of the Human 
Species,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xiv., 1885, p. 378. 

+ J. S. STUART- GLENNIE proposes the name of Hypenetian ‘(the 
bearded men”) for the Caucasian: the latter term is open to several 
objections, while.the new name gives expression to the fact that these 
people are characterized by possessing full beards, a feature that is well 
marked in the Ainu, Australian, and Dravidian. It is certainly a mis- 

‘nomer to call the black Australians and Dravidians members of the 
“white” race.—Lucy M. J. GARNETT and J. S. STUART-GLENNIE, 
Greek Folk Poesy, i., 1896, p. 14a. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 75 

According to this grouping the main races of man 
would be classified as follows :— 

ULOTRICHI :—Frizzly black hair, usually a “black” skin, 
essentially :dolichocephalic. 
The Negroes, Bantus, Bushmen, and Negrilloes of 
Africa.* The Negritoes of Asia and the Melanesians 
of the West Pacific. 
CYMOTRICHI :—Wavy hair of all shades, skin colour white 
to black, dolicho-, mesati-, and brachycephalic. 
The Xanthochroi (or fair “whites”) of North 
* Europe, and the Melanochroi (or dark “whites”) of 
South Europe, with the Semites, Hamites, Dravidians, 
Australians, Ainus, and possibly the Polynesians. 
LEIOTRICHI :—Straight black hair, skin colour yellowish to 
' brown, essentially brachycephalic. 
Most of the inhabitants of Asia (excluding India, 
Persia, etc.) and the American Indians. 

Asia thus possesses several very primitive stocks. 
The Andamanese, stated by Flower to be the 
scarcely modified descendants of an extremely ancient 
race, the ancestors of all the negroid tribes. The 
Veddahs are claimed by the Sarasins to be one of the 
primitive types of humanity; during its evolution this 
primitive type was transformed in one direction in 
India into the Dravidian type without the assistance 
of mixture, whilst in the other direction it gave rise 
to the Australian type. The Mongolian type, which 

arose and specialized in the heart of the continent, ” 

is universally regarded as the characteristic Asiatic 

* The Bushmen and Negrilloes are yellowish and not black. 

s 

76 THE STUDY OF MAN 

race. As Mongolic tribes have, at various periods, 
made inroads into Europe, so fair and dark European 
peoples. have, from time to time, invaded and 
colonized Asia. 

A few remarks must be made on the important 
question of racial uniformity. Sir William Flower 
has expressed the opinion that there are few people 
whose physical characters offer a more interesting 
subject of investigation to the anthropologist than 
the native inhabitants of the Andaman Islands. 
Purity of type, due to freedom from mixture with 
all other races for an extremely long period owing 
to their isolated position and their inveterate hostility 
to all intruders on their shores, and exemplified in 
their uniformity of physical characteristics, is to be 
found among them, perhaps in a more complete 
degree than in any other group of mankind. That 
a certain admixture from other races, occasioned by 
intentional visits, or accidental wrecking of vessels 
on their coasts, and absorption of some portion of 
foreign element thus derived into the native popu- 
lation may have taken place from time to time, 
cannot be denied, but it is questionable whether this 
has been sufficient to affect materially the. physical 
characters of the majority. The most recent and 
carefully- made observations, especially when sup- 
ported by osteological and photographic evidence, 
tend to confirm the view that a striking uniformity 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 17 

of type is prevalent among the Andamanese. Some 
travellers and even residents have, however, re- 
marked on differences of type. Flower speaks of 
the “wonderful similarity” of a large series of crania 
that were before him, “the skeleton of the face of 
the Andamanese is even more characteristic and 
uniform in appearance than that of the cranium.” 

The same fact has been noticed in other places, 
and for various peoples where isolation has occurred. 
We may, therefore, take it for granted that there is a 
considerable permanence of type under certain con- 
ditions. On the other hand all biologists admit that 
evolution has and does occur wherever there is life, 
but the process is extremely variable in its rate, nor 
can its direction be predicated. There are numerous 
examples in paleontology and zoology of a persistence 
of type that is simply astounding. 

What applies to lower forms of life must hold good 
for man, but the problem is complicated by the 
presence of other factors. An isolated group of 
organisms in a uniform environment is much less 
liable to modification, that is to evolution, than one 
which is subjected to varying conditions of existence, 

The purer, that is the more uniform, the group the 
less will be the tendency to vary. 

A combination of a pure group, or of a homo- 
geneous mixture, and of an isolated area with uniform 
conditions is certainly conducive to fixity of type. 

78 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The converse is conducive to variability of type and 
therefore to evolution. The Mincopies and the 
Andaman Islands may be taken as a good example 
of the former condition, and the British and the 
British Isles of the latter. 

The cranial indices of a few European peoples have 
been arranged in the following table :— 

TABLE OF AVERAGE CRANIAL INDICES OF EUROPEANS 
(COMPILED FROM SEVERAL SOURCES). 

Neolithic man of S. France . 73 

ee and Sicilians . Shari Dolichoospeale 
candinavians ; : - 74-76 

South Italians : ; 5 Hs 

Spanish Basques. : 5 7O 

Guanches : ‘ : - 75-77 

Slavs of the Danube : 5) HS 

English and Scots . : . 76-77 * Mesaticephals, 

Roumanians . : : 7S 

Prussians ‘ : ‘ x iG 

Modern Parisians . : 279 

French Basques’. : . 80 

Finns. g : : a Gre) 

North Italians 3 : ba aged! 

Bretons . : ‘ : -) OT 

Russians : ; 5 oe Brachycephals. 

South Germans : ‘ S38 

Savoyards and Auvergnats meod: 

Bavarians : : : Pros 

Lapps . - : ° SG 

Even a slight scrutiny will show that the dis- 
tribution of the cranial indices in modern Europe 
is not so casual as it appears at first sight. 

HEADFORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 79 

1. In the extreme north the Lapps and the Finns 
are brachycephalic. 

2. North Europe, including the British Islands, 
Holland, North Germany, and Scandinavia, is 
mesaticephalic, but inclining to dolichocephaly. 

3. Central Europe, stretching from Central France 
through Switzerland and North Italy, Southern 
Germany, and into the Balkan Peninsula, is brachy- 
cephalic. 

4. Southern Europe, including the Iberian Penin- 
sula, Southern Italy, the Western Mediterranean 
Islands, and the northern shores of Africa, is 
dolichocephalic, with a tendency to mesaticephaly. 

We can thus broadly distinguish four zones of 
cranial indices which may also be correlated with 
other physical characters. 

1. The Northern Brachycephals are short and 
dark. 

2. The Northern Dolichocephals and Mesaticephals 
are tall and fair. 

3. The Central Brachycephals are short and dark. 

4. The Southern Dolichocephals are short and dark. 

We may now take a very brief survey of the main 
conclusions, which Dr. Beddoe has arrived at after 
many years of careful study of European craniology, 
concerning the history of the cranial index in the 
British Islands. 

80 THE STUDY OF MAN 

What palzolithic man was like, who roamed in the 
ancient river valleys along with the mammoth and 
other extinct animals, we have no positive informa- 
tion, but a gradually-increasing amount of evidence 
tends to the conclusion that he belonged to the race 
of which the well-known crania of Neanderthal, Spy, 
Galley Hill, &c., are examples. There is no reason 
to believe that he became extinct. Beddoe believes 
that the posterity of these makers of rudely chipped 
flint implements still survive in these islands. 

After considerable changes in the physical geo- 
graphy of our islands, and the disappearance of the 
mammoth, woolly rhinoceros, cave bear, and other 
ancient forms, a new race of men appeared in Britain 
who made finely-chipped implements, many of which 
were beautifully polished; they, too, knew how to 
make pottery and had domestic animals. The men 
of the Neolithic Age had long skulls, and they buried 
their dead in long barrows. This race resembled 
that which is now known under the name of Baumes- 
Chaudes or lHomme- Mort, from the sepulchral 
caverns in the department of Lozére. The average 
cranial index of this race is 72; the average of the 
Long Barrow race is also about 72. Traces of these 
people have been found from the north of Scotland 
to the south of England, but we are not authorized to 
state that this race was spread throughout the whole 
of Great Britain. There are, as a matter of fact, 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 81 

whole counties, such as Northumberland, where there 
are, so far as Beddoe™* is aware, no traces of this race. 

The skulls from the caves of Perth-y-chwaren in 
North Wales, which were disinterred by Boyd- 
Dawkins and figured by him, differ considerably 
from the common British Neolithic type, not merely 
in breadth, but in physiognomy. The cranial index 
of this-type is 76°5, and it may be related to the 
French Mesaticephalic race of Furfooz. 

Britain was next invaded by a race which intro- 
duced bronze implements. It was robust and tall, 
not less than five feet nine inches (1752 mm.) in 
stature, bony, large-brained, harsh-featured, high- 
nosed, with prominent brows, and a breadth index 
of over eighty. The majority probably had light 
hair. They resembled the Borreby race of Denmark, 
and the Swiss or Helvetian race of ancient Switzer- 
land, though with somewhat larger breadth. The 
modern Walloons of Southern Belgium have some 
affinities to this type. Dr. Beddoe further states 
that this race may have come from Denmark, or 
from the north of France, or from Belgium; and 
it may have brought with it the Celtic language. 

The immigrants who introduced bronze into Britain 
usually buried their dead chieftains in round barrows, 
hence they are often termed the Round-Barrow race. 

* J, BEDDOE, “Sur I’Histoire de ?Indice céphalique dans les Iles 

Britanniques,” 7’ Anthropologie, v., 1894, pp. 513, 658. 
G 

82 THE STUDY OF MAN 

In Plate I., Figs. 4-6, we have a good example of a 
skull of this race. It is interesting, however, to note 
that this specimen was actually obtained from a long 
barrow. It did not occur like the skull of the other 
race (Figs. 1-3) on the ground in the centre of a 
barrow, but was excavated from a depth of two feet 
from the surface; that is, it is what is called a 
“secondary interment,” thus proving that the new- 
comers occasionally made use of the barrows of their 
predecessors. 

Dr. Beddoe does not appear to recognize the 
possibility of the presence in the British Islands of 
_the Neolithic brachycephals of France. I have 
recently* expressed myself as follows :— 

“J am inclined to think that the Neolithic brachycephals 
of Central Europe did come over to the British Islands, and 
that traces of them are still to be seen, perhaps more fre- 
quently in Ireland than in Great Britain. If this be so, it is 
probable they came as a mixed people, that mixture of 
brachycephals and southern dolichocephals which Broca 
called “Celts,” for it must be remembered that he regarded 
the Celtee of Casar as a mixed people, but mainly brachy- 
cephals. The Neolithic brachycephalic immigrants into 
Western Europe almost certainly came from Eastern 
Europe, and possibly originally from Asia; it is also 
probable that they were primitively of the same stock as 
the Lapps and Finns, or rather one constituent of the latter 

* A. C, HADDON, “Studies in Irish Craniology III.: A Neolithic | 
Cist Burial at Oldbridge, County Meath,” Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. (3), 
iv., 1898, p. 570. 

PLATE I. 

B A 

Upper, front, and side views of skulls of the Long and Round Barrow 
Races; photographed by the Author from specimens in the Cambridge 
Anatomical Museum. 

A Long Barrow, Dinnington, Rotherham. Length, 204 ; breadth, 143 cran. index, 

7o°x; ht.-length index, 70'1; ht.-br. index, 100; orb. index, 87°2; nas. index, 425 
capacity, 1755; male. 

B Skull of a man of the Round Barrow Race, from a secondary interment, two feet 
below the surface, in a ong barrow, Winterbourne Stoke. Length, 177; breadth, 
156; cran, index, 88°1; orb. index, 87°5 ; nas. index, 49"r. 

[Zo face page 82. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 83 

‘people. It may be that the short, dark, brachycephalic 
element. in the British Islands was largely due to the 
northern brachycephals who came direct from Scandinavia 
in the Neolithic period, or both northern and southern 
brachycephals may have contributed their respective shares.” 

The period of the Roman domination is considered 
by Beddoe to have somewhat diminished the numerical 
proportion of the former dominant caste which was 
brachycephalic, or at least mesaticephalic; it intro- 
duced a certain amount of foreign blood (Italian and 
other), and it favoured amalgamation among the 
different elements of the population. 

“The racial elements imported must have been extremely 
mixed, and probably left scarcely any permanent traces, 
though there may be some ina few ancient towns such as 
Gloucester or Leicester. Among relics from the Romano- 
British villages, our knowledge of which has been so much 
increased by General Pitt-Rivers, there are one or two skulls 
which, in the opinion of Dr. Garson as well as of myself 
[Beddoe], show Roman or Italian characteristics.” * 

The Anglo-Saxon invasions were of different tribes 
which were local varieties of the Germanic type 
of the row graves or Hohberg type. This type is 
best represented on the Continent by the ancient 
skulls of Bremen so well described by Gildemeister. 
In the earliest days of that city the Batavian or 
Frisian variety also occurred; this variety is flatter 
in the crown and somewhat broader than the more 

* J. BEDDOE, The Anthropological History of Europe: Being the 
Rhind Lectures for 1891 (A. Gardner, London), 1893, p. 91. 

84 THE STUDY OF MAN 

typical form, and it has been recognized in Saxon 
England by Beddoe and quite recently by Myers.* 

“John Bull,” says Beddoe,t “is of the Batavian type; the 
Grave-row, that of the barbarian warrior, is perhaps rather 
more aristocratic; but the outlines of the former may be 
connected, as Virchow thinks possible, with the obstinacy 
and love of freedom and individuality of both Frisian and 
Englishman. ‘These men, said an old chronicler of the 
Frisians, ‘been high of body, stern of virtue, strong and fierce 
of heart: they be free, and not subject to lordship of any 
man; and they put their lives in peril by cause of freedom, 
and would liever die than embrace the yoke of thraldom.’” 

The following table is adapted from one in Dr. 
Beddoe’s Hzstotre de l' Index Céphalique :-— 

g 2 z 8 2 g 6. 
¢ lsES| “3 /82.)3.| Bal aa] <2 
g |ga<| go |a2e/ OS | 28] bs | 28 
A |2ed| B= |za-| | a | 3° | gs 

3 (ea) oe =| I SS 

c4 [oa ; 

63-64 2 : 
65-66 5 350 6G 
67-68 I5 one I 3 
69-70 16 I I 6 
71-72 22 2 I 18 
73-74 16 II I 3 22 
75-76 7 12 2 26 
77-78 3 12 6 3 16 
79-80 I 19 2 I 13 
81-82 fae 17 I ate 4 
83-84 ore 17 I I ee 
85-86 sac 8 I I : 
87-88 Abc 3 2 co 
89-90 Roc as ae 

Mean Index| 72 80 eS ac 75-4 

* Journ. Anth. Inst., XxVi., p. 113. + Loc. cit, p. 91. 

HEAD-FORM IN ANTHROPOLOGY 85 

The most ancient race is apparently homogeneous ; 
it is extremely dolichocephalic, with a mean index of 
70 or 71, according to the ordinary data, but Dr. Bed- 
doe is inclined to make it 72. He also points out that it 
is by no means certain that only one race occupied 
Britain at this period. 

The second column, that of the round barrows, or, 
better, the Bronze Age, shows us a brachycephalic 
population, far from being homogeneous, owing prob- 
ably to a greater or less mixture with their pre- 
decessors in the country. The mean index of the 
skull appears to be about 80, but we must admit that 
the cranial index of the pure race, or to speak with 
more exactitude, of the people using bronze, on its 
arrival in England and before its fusion with the 
indigenous population, would be a little over 80 or 81. 
There are indications which permit the conclusion 
to be drawn that with the progress of mixture and 
the arrival of immigrants from Belgic Gaul, the 
mean fell below 80. 

The Romano-British give a mean of about 75°5. 
Later came the Saxons. Before their mixture with 
the conquered British, they possessed the type of 
skull which is called ‘‘Grave-row,” from the manner 
of sepulture of an important ancient Teutonic tribe; 
or occasionally the Batavian type of skull; and their 
cranial index is about 75. 

Nothing positive has been determined concerning 

86 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the skull type of the subsequent Danish or Scandi- 
navian invaders. 

In the Middle Ages we find mesaticephals in 
predominance, and a fresh frequency of brachy- 
cephaly, the mean of the indices being about 78, 
according to Dr. Beddoe’s skull measurements. 

The mean cephalic index of modern Englishmen 
appears to be about 78°5, which, deducting the usual 
two units, would give 76°5 for the cranial index. 

CrayLER LV. 

THE NOSE. 

MONG peoples in whom the more prominent 

types of nose are of usual occurrence—as 
‘among ourselves for example—the snub nose is 
always regarded as an inferior type, and, although 
it may give a certain vivacity to a woman’s face, it 
is usually regarded by her as a trial. Conversely a 
long, high, narrow, Roman nose is considered an 
“aristocratic” nose. It is certain that the shape of 
the nose is generally regarded not only from an 
esthetic point of view, but that to many minds it 
conveys an idea of weakness or strength of character, 
and also of social status. Certain types of nose are 
“better bred” than others, and, other things being 
equal, a man with a “good nose” is more likely to 
gain immediate respect than one with a “ vulgar 
nose.” Martial, in one of those epigrams which 
used to amuse and instruct the emperors of the 
Flavian family, said: “It is not everyone to whom 
it has been given to have a nose.” Popular impres- 
sions may be illogical, and the prejudices of the folk 

87 

88 THE STUDY OF MAN 

may be unreasoning, but they are all materials for 
anthropological and psychological study, and they may 
open up lines of thought that are suggestive and 
fruitful. 

A well-formed nose is a distinctively human feature. 
If you look at pictures of monkeys, from the low 
marmosets to the great tailless apes, you will at once 
notice how flat their nose is at the bridge. The 
proboscis-monkey (JVasalis larvatus) is the only 
member of the group that has a well - projecting 
nose. 

The nose is a very variable feature in mankind. 
We all recognize how a nose will make or mar a 
face, how it gives a countenance distinction or 
renders it insignificant. Much has been written on 
noses by physiognomists, and the appearance of the 
nose is greatly relied on by those who profess to be 
able to read a person’s character by a scrutiny of the 
face. 

Not less is a study of the nose of interest to the 
anthropologist, and it is this point of view solely which 
concerns us at present. 

First of all it is necessary to distinguish between 
the external nose as seen on the living face, and the 
nasal skeleton as it is found on the skull—and we 
must also fix upon a definite terminology. 

In the living nose we recognize the dvcdge, the 77, 
the ale nasi, or wings of the nose, which arise 

THE NOSE 89 

from the cheeks in a rounded curve, and the xzasal 
septum which separates the nostrils. 

The eght of the nose is the line from the 
central point of the root to the corresponding point 
at the angle which the septum makes with the upper 
lip ; this spot is termed the sad-nasal potnt. 

The édveadth of the nose is the greatest breadth of 
the wings. 

The depth of the living nose is the line from the 
sub-nasal point to the tip; this line is termed the dase 
of the nose. 

The /ength is the line from the root to the tip. 

On examining the profile of a nose, two factors 
must be distinguished: (1) the general outline of the 
back or ridge of the nose; and (2) the inclination of 
the base of the nose with regard to the upper lip. 

I. The general contour of the back of the nose 
is expressed by the following five terms: concave, 
straight, convex, high-bridged and sinuous. These 
form five main classes which can be variously sub- 
divided. 

1. Zhe concave nose. The various kinds of concave 
or depressed nose agree in having a low bridge; this, as 
we have already seen, is a simian or ape-like character ; 
it is also an embryonic feature, and it commonly occurs 
among young children. This type of nose is very 
frequently met with among the yellow races, and is 
not infrequent among women of the higher races. 

go THE STUDY OF MAN 

This type may be defined in general terms as 
being short, depressed, broad, with a turned-up 
point. 

2. The straight nose. The ridge of the nose is quite 
straight in the most characteristic forms, but it is often 
slightly sinuous. The nose may be short, low, and 
broad; but in the most developed type it is long, 
prominent, and narrow. 

3. The convex nose. ‘The ridge or back of the nose 
describes a nearly uniform convex curve from the root 
to the point. As in the last instance this type varies 
from short, low, and broad, to long, prominent, and 
narrow. The Jewish nose is the best known variety, 
and the Papuan nose belongs to the broad variety of 
this group. 

4. The high-bridged nose. The upper portion of the 
bony part presents a strong and short convexity, 
below which the remainder of this bony part becomes 
nearly straight, and is continuous with the ridge of 
the gristly portion. The typical example of this type 
is the Roman nose (Fig. 10). It may be considered 
as a variety of the convex nose. 

5. Zhe sinuous nose. The upper part is convex, 
but the profile of the gristly portion, instead of con- 
tinuing this curve as in the convex nose, or of taking 
a rectilinear direction as in the aquiline nose, is in- 
curved, It thus results that the direction of the line 
is convex above, concave below the bony portion, and 

THE NOSE gt 

Fic. 9. 
Types of Noses in profile; from Topinard’s £véments a’ Anthropologie Générale. 

1, Straight, with a horizontal base; 2, convex or aquiline, with a depressed base; 3, Concave or 
retroussé, with a reflected base; 4, high-bridged or busqué; 5, sinuous; 6, Melanesian type, 
broad, with the lower part forming a flattened and depressed hook; 7, short, broad, nearly 
straight type of the African Negroes; 8, straight, flat type of the Yellow Races. 

92 THE STUDY OF MAN 

again convex towards the tip. It is thus sinuous or 
undulating. 

The sinuous nose may be considered as a variety 
of the concave, straight or convex nose, according as 
the totality of the line of the ridge presents a hollow, 
a general rectilinear direction or a protruding curve. 

Fic, 10. 

Head of Agrippa, Museo di Napoli: from Hovorka, 

It is advisable that the description should always 
be so qualified. 

Without going into further detail we may now pass 
on to the second factor :— 

II. The inclination of the base of the nose may 
form a right angle with the line of the upper lip or 
a greater or a less angle with it; thus we have— 

1. A reflected base. 2. A horizontal base. 3. A 
depressed base. 

THE NOSE 93 

Any of these three conditions may occur with any 
variety of contour, but certain combinations are of 
more frequent recurrence than others. For example, 
the concave nose is usually reflected to form the snub 
nose, and the convex nose is either horizontal or 
depressed, the latter being the more typical of the 

Fic, 11. 

A, Head of Zeus Otricoli; 2, the same, with all the hair removed, and 
with a corrected profile : from Hovorka, after Langer. 

Jewish nose. A concave, depressed nose is excep- 
tional. A rectilinear nose with a horizontal base, and 
one in which the root is slightly marked so that the 
line of the forehead passes gently into that of the 
nose, constitutes the classical nose of Greek statues. 
As a matter of fact this feature was seized upon and 
exaggerated by certain Greek sculptors, the contours of 

94 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the nose and forehead being alike falsified so as to give 
increased nobility to the expression. The majesty of 
the brow of Zeus, the wielder of the destinies of men, 
was due to an overstepping of human contours, as 
these in their turn, in the dim ages of the past, had 
passed beyond the low outlines of the brute. 

A reflected base to a straight nose gives it a 
piquancy that was happily expressed by Tennyson 
when he wrote *— 

“ A damsel of high lineage, and a brow 
May-blossom, and a cheek of apple-blossom, 
Hawk eyes ; and lightly was her slender nose 
Tip-tilted like the petal of a flower.” 

Bertillon} has collected numerous statistics on the 
contours of noses, and he finds there is a marked 
transformation of the nose due to the influence of age 
which results in a kind of effacement and depression 
of the tip, as is seen in the following table, in which 
the numbers of subjects examined are reduced to 
1000 :— 

Base oF Nose. 

AGE. 

Reflected. Horizontal. Depressed. 
19-25 418 538 
25-35 254 667 
35-45 146 713 

* Gareth and Lynette. 
+ A. BERTILLON, “De la Morphologie du Nez,” Rev. d’Anthrop. (3), 
ii., 1887, p. 158. 

THE NOSE 95 

It is seen that the reflected noses sink from 418 
in young people to 146 in people in middle-life, while 
the depressed noses correspondingly rise from 44 
to 141. In both instances the proportion is about one 
to three. 

In order to obtain results which can be accurately 
compared with one another, measurements are made 
of the nose and an index is selected. The xasal 
index of the living is obtained by multiplying the 
breadth of the nose by one hundred and dividing the 
product by the height of the nose. The index, as is 
usually done in such cases, is divided into three classes, 
narrow, medium, and broad. In scientific terminology 
these are called— 

Leptorhine : . below 70 
Mesorhine : 7 70) to 85 
Platyrhine ; . above 85 

Speaking in general terms there are, according to 
Topinard,* two extreme types of human nose—the 
low, broad, and flat, and the deep, narrow, and pro- 
minent—but between these every intermediate grade 
is found. Asa rule, the more prominent a nose is 
the narrower it is; the flatter it is the broader it 
becomes. The depth increases with the prominence 
and narrows and diminishes with the flattening and 
broadening. The only exceptions occur among the 

* P, TOPINARD, “Documents sur l’indice nasal du vivant,” /’An¢hro- 
pologie, ii., 1891, p. 273. 

96 THE STUDY OF MAN 

American Indians and the Eskimo. The nose among 
the former is deep and prominent, but broad; among 
the latter it is flat and broad, but at the same time 
deep. 

Collignon* has proposed the following quinary 
classification of the nasal index of the living :— 

Ultra leptorhine 3 : 4o and under 
40 to 44.9 
Hyper leptorhine NM 49.9 
5° 5s 54-9 
55 59:9 
Leptorhine Gon; 64.9 
65 » 69.9 
72 159 74-9 
Mesorhine WS 79.9 
ley A 84.9 
85 5, 89.9 
Platyrhine QOln uss 94.9 
95 1» 99:9 
LOO 4, | LOA 
Hyper platyrhine TOS) 15), -LOgiG 
LiOi~ ss, IAG 
Ultra platyrhine ; , 115 and over 

The subdivisions, ranging in fives, may serve, on 
account of the great extent of each group, to express 
certain differences. It is important, for example, to be 
able to distinguish narrow, medium, or broad meso- 
rhines; thus we may say the Eskimo are narrow or 
low + mesorhines, and the Annamites are medium meso- 

* R. COLLIGNON, Rev. d’Anthrop. (3), iii., 1887, p. 8. 
+ The term “low” refers to the index, and not to the height-measure- 
ment of the nose. 

THE NOSE . 97 

rhines ; or to avoid mistakes one may add the figure 
and say the Eskimo are mesorhine at seventy, and the 
Annamites are mesorhine at seventy-six. 

We have at present an insufficient number of 
measurements to draw up a scheme for nasal indices, 
which would have a decisive value in the classifica- 
tion of races. Collignon has, however, collected the 
following figures, which must serve as a basis for 
future researches* :— 

NASAL INDEX OF THE LIVING. 
(FROM COLLIGNON. *) 

Leptorhines : c . (-70) 
too French (very pure blond Haliehoeephale niyo : . 62°98 
30 French (pure Mediterranean race Pyrénées aogier 65°06 
184 Kabyles . : é 7 ; - 66°5 
19 Finns. 5 : 6 . 665 
200 French (inigerene and pore) : ; : . 66°66 
168 Finns (Mordwines) : 5 : : + GK) 
tooo French . : ; F say O7" 33 
100 French (Savoy ana Rhéne) ; : : . 68°05 
Tatars of the Crimea. : : : o Cen 
68 Parisians ; : : " OTA: 
120 Tunisians (Berber race IL. ) : : : 69°76 
Mesorhines : : : : ; (re — 84) 
1334 Tunisians F 5 ‘ ; : 70°23 
to Eskimo . ; : : ‘ 70.3 
5 North American eats : : : . 706 
4o Tunisians (Berber race IV., of Ellez.) . ; DE 7204 
50 Tunisians (brachycephalic Berber race I.) 3 «WP 
8 Fuegians ; ; : ; : - 74/8 
26 Kalmuks : 2 : : ; a 7TAs82 

* See also the Table on p. 108. + Rev. d’Anth, (3), iii., 1887, p. 16. 
H 

98 THE STUDY OF MAN 

40 Kara-Kirghis of Semiret-chensk . ; : . 74°9 
6 Tziganes (“Gypsies”) . : : : . 754 
9 Red-skins ; : ‘ ; A 7530 
7 Sinhalese : ; ee 7 

113 Tunisians (Berber race Il. of end) : s . 76°62 

52 Annamites : . ; é ois 
5 Chinese . ‘ é . . : 5 ei 
4 Araucans 5 : ‘ » 9 OOO 
3 Northern Moneels : 5 : ‘ ne Ort 
5 South Americans 3 d 4 : wold 

Platyrhines : ; : : sey ee S5s) 
7 Senegal Negroes . - : 2 : . 87°9 
4 Solomon Islanders : . : ; 5 ey 

13 Polynesians : ; 5 : : Be ea)ts) 

24 African Negroes (casts) . 3 ; 5 Gp 

11 New Caledonians and New es : é . 938 

44 Tunisian Negroes : : : F . 96°28 
5 Hottentots and Bushmen . : : 0 Tee 
4 Fijians. : : ; c : > (OEP 
4 Bushmen : 5 : : ; a LORY 

52 Zambesi Negroes é : E : LOLS 
4 Australians : 5 : F 5 Tony 

rr Australians : ; , : : . 107°6 
7 Tasmanians : : 5 : : . 108°9 

A consideration of this table shows that as a whole 
the means of the white races range from 62 to 76, the 
yellow races (including the American races) from 69 
to 81, the African negroes from 87 to 101, and the 
Melanesians (or Oceanic negroes) from 93 to 109. 
In other words the white races are mainly leptorhine, 
the yellow races mainly and American races entirely 
mesorhine, and the black races of Africa, the Western 
Pacific, and of Australasia solely platyrhine. 

THE NOSE 99 

In a previous chapter I have already drawn 
attention to the fact that among certain peoples one 
can distinguish what may be termed a coarse type 
and a fine type. 

Maspero, in his interesting Dawn of Ciwvilization,* 
thus graphically describes these two types among 
the ancient Egyptians :— 

“The highest type of Egyptian was tall and slender, with 
something that was proud and imperious in the carriage of 
his head and in his whole bearing. He had wide and full 
shoulders, muscular arms, a long, fine hand, slightly-developed 
hips, and sinewy legs. The head is rather short, the face 
oval, the forehead somewhat retreating. The eyes are wide 
and fully opened, the cheek-bones not too marked, the nose 
fairly prominent, and either straight or aquiline: The mouth 
is long and the lips full. The hair was inclined to be wavy. 

“The common type was squat, dumpy, and heavy. The 
chest and shoulders seem to be enlarged at the expense of 
the pelvis and hips, to such an extent as to make the want of 
proportion between the upper and lower parts of the body 
startling and ungraceful. The skull is long, somewhat 
retreating, and slightly flattened on the top; the features 
are coarse, and as though carved in flesh by great strokes 
of the roughing-out chisel. Small frenated eyes, a short 
nose, flanked by widely-distended nostrils, round cheeks, 
a square chin, thick but not curling lips—this unattractive 
and ludicrous physiognomy, sometimes animated by an ex- 
pression of cunning which recalls the shrewd face of an old 
French peasant, is often lighted up by gleams of gentleness 
and of melancholy good nature. 

* G, MASPERO, The Dawn of Civilization: Egypt and Chaldea, Eng. 
Trans., 1894, p. 47. 

100 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“The external characteristics of these two principal types, 
whose endless modifications are to be found on the ancient 
monuments, may still be seen among the living.” 

An analogous difference may be noticed among the 
Japanese. Not only has this appealed to the scientific 
mind of Dr. Balz, but it has attracted the, attention 
of native artists; and one may see, as in a picture 
by Torii Kiyonaga, a mother of the fine type, 

Fic. 12. 

Heads of Japanese men of the fine and coarse type; from Hovorka, after Bilz. 

watching a coarse-featured servant feeding the baby, 
who is also depicted with a nose of the type of its 
mother’s. The celebrated school of the Torii, who 
flourished in the eighteenth century, invented colour- 
printing. In a picture by Outmaro,; a Japanese 
nobleman is paying a ceremonial visit, and on the 
verandah is seen his low-visaged bearer, whose 
degraded countenance and squat nose with its broad 
nostrils offers a marked contrast to the oval face and 

PLATE II. 

Fic, 2. Japanese women of the fine and coarse type; 
after_a picture by Torii Kiyonaga, 
[Zo face page 100. 

THE NOSE IOL 

delicate nose of his master. Peeping from behind 
a screen are the faces of three girls, two of the fine 
type belong to daughters of the house, and between 
them is their rounder-faced maid. 

Nowhere has the distinction between the fine and 
coarse type of nose been more fully studied than in 
India, and the results of these investigations are so 
interesting and important that I shall deal with them 
in considerable detail. 

In 1891 and 1892 Mr. H. H. Risley published four 
volumes on The Tribes and Castes of Bengal, 
which embodied an immense mass of anthropometric 
data and ethnographic researches. Mr. Risley finds 
that in India the nasal index “ranks higher as a dis- 
tinctive character than the stature or even than the 
cephalic index itself.” 

“Tf we take a series of castes,” writes Mr. Risley, “in 
Bengal, Behar, or the North-Western Provinces, and arrange 
them in the order of the average nasal index, so that the 
caste with the finest nose shall be at the top, and that with 
the coarsest at the bottom of the list, it will be found that 
this order substantially corresponds with the accepted order 
of social precedence. The casteless tribes—Kols, Korwas, 
Mundas, and the like—who have not yet entered the 
Brahmanical system, occupy the lowest place. Then 
come the vermin-eating Musahars and the leather-dressing 
Chamars. The fisher castes of Bauri, Bind and Kewat are 
a trifle higher in the scale; the pastoral Goala, the cultivat- 
ing Kurmi, and a group of cognate castes from whose hands 
a Brahman may take water, follow in due order, and from 

102 THE STUDY OF MAN 

them we pass to the trading Khatris, the landholding 
Babhans, and the upper crust of Hindu society. Thus, it is 
scarcely a paradox to lay down as a law for the caste 
organization in Eastern India, that a man’s social status 
varies in inverse ratio to the width of his nose. 

“Nor is this the only point in which the two sets of 
observations—the social and the physical—bear out and 
illustrate each other. The character of the curious matri- 
monial groupings for which the late Mr. J. F. McLennan 
devised the happy term exogamous, also varies in a definite 
relation to the gradations of physical type. Within a certain 
range of nasal proportions, these subdivisions are based 
almost exclusively on the totem. Along with a somewhat 
finer form of nose, groups called after villages and larger 
territorial areas, or bearing the name of certain tribal or 
communal officials, begin to appear, and above these again 
we reach the eponymous saints and heroes, who in India, as 
in Greece and Rome, are associated with a certain stage of 
Aryan progress.” * 

It is now generally admitted that some four thou- 
sand years ago the Valley of the Indus was invaded 
vié Kabul and Kashmir by a fair Aryan race that had 
already wandered afar, and which now came in con- 
tact with an aboriginal black race. 

“The sense of differences of colour, which, for all our talk 
of common humanity, still plays a great and, politically, 
often an inconvenient part in the history of the world, finds 
forcible expression in the Vedic descriptions of the people 

whom the Aryans found in possession of the plains of India. 
In a well-known passage the god Indra is praised for having 

* H. H. RISLEY, The Tribes and Castes of Bengal: Ethnographic 
Glossary, i., 1892, p. xxxiii, 

THE NOSE 103 

protected the Aryan colour, and the word meaning colour 
(varna) is used down to the present day as the equivalent of 
caste, more especially with reference to the castes believed to 
be of Aryan descent.” * 

The .word caste is of Portuguese origin. In the 
179th hymn of the first Mandala of the Rig-Veda, as 
Dr. Gerson da Cunha points out,t the word varna is 
used in the dual number, zdhau varnau, “two colours,” 
white of the Aryans, and black of the Dasyus, that 
is of the Dravidian aborigines, who are elsewhere 
called “ black-skinned,” “unholy,” “excommunicated”; 
other texts dwell on their low stature, coarse features, 
and their voracious appetite; but what is of more 
immediate interest, the Rig-Veda employs the word 
anisa, ‘‘noseless,” to the Dasyus and Daityas, which 
designations mean “thieves” or ‘‘demons.” It is 
hardly an exaggeration to say that from these sources 
there might be compiled a fairly accurate anthropo- 
logical definition of the Dravidian tribes of to-day. 

The Aryan type, as we find it in India at the 
present day, is marked by a relatively long (dolicho- 
cephalic) head ; a straight, finely cut (leptorhine) nose ; 
a long, symmetrically narrow face; a well-developed 
forehead, regular features, and a high facial angle. 
The stature is fairly high, ranging from 1716 mm. 

* Loc. cit., p. XXxvili. 
+ “Presidential Address: The Nasal Index in Biological Anthro- 
pology,” Fourn. Anth. Soc. of Bombay, 1892, p. 542. 

104 THE STUDY OF MAN 

(5 ft. 74in.) in the Sikhs of the Panjab, to 1656 mm. 
(5 ft. 54in.) in the Brahmans of Bengal; and the 
general build of the figure is well proportioned and 
slender rather than massive. In the castes which 
exhibit these characteristics the complexion is a very 
light transparent brown—“ wheat - coloured” is the 
common vernacular description—noticeably fairer 
than that of the mass of the population. Colour, 
however, is a character which eludes all attempts 
to record or define its gradations, and even the ex- 
treme varieties can only be described in very general 
terms. 

Their exogamous groups are eponymous, bearing 
the names of their Vedic 7zshzs, saints or heroes. 

In the Dravidian type the form of the head usually 
inclines to be dolichocephalic, but all other characters 
present a marked contrast to the Aryan. The nose 
is thick and broad, and the formula expressing its 
proportionate dimensions is higher than in any known 
race, except the Negro. The facial angle is com- 
paratively low; the lips are thick; the face wide 
and fleshy; the features coarse and irregular. The 
average stature ranges in a long series of tribes 
from 1562 mm. (5 ft. 14 in.) to 1621 (5 ft. 32 in.); 
the figure is squat and the limbs sturdy. The colour 
of the skin varies from very dark brown to a shade 
closely approaching black. 

Their totemistic groups bear the names of 

THE NOSE 105 

animals, plants, and artificial objects, to all of which 
diverse forms of taboo are applied. 

Notwithstanding the repugnance of the noble 
Aryan to mix with the savage Dasyu, as is evidenced 
by the poetical legends of the contests between the 
gods of the Hindu mythology with the demons, or 
spirits of mountain and forest, the indigenous elements 
by their numerical superiority preponderated over the 
foreign ones. 

To avert this menaced absorption, and to sustain 
the ethnic necessity of the caste system, a religious 
communion was introduced, to which there was 
less antipathy. Sir A. Lyall has proved that the 
primitive jungle tribe moved imperceptibly into the 
Hindu system by the gradual blending of the old 
with the new faith, which preceded their admission 
into the castal hierarchy and the breaking up of their 
tribal organization. ‘They pass,” he says, “into 
Brahmanists by a natural upward transition, which 
leads them to adopt the religion of the castes 
immediately above them in the social scale of the 
composite population among which they settle down ; 
and we may reasonably guess that this process has 
been working for centuries.” This religious sanction 
is expounded in Manu’s code, which, although said 
to have been written as late as 500 A.D., relates to 
changes effected as early as 1200 B.c. 

Although absolutely hostile to the strain of aboriginal 

106 THE STUDY OF MAN 

blood, the code divided and subdivided the people, 
leaving out of the system the pariah, which originally 
simply meant a “mountaineer.” These pariahs are, 
probably, the descendants of the “monkey” tribes 
of Ravana, who crossed from India into Ceylon across 
Adam’s Bridge, as narrated in the great Indian Epic, 
the Réméyana, in which the events of invasion, 
war, and migration can be dimly discerned through 
the mass of tradition and legendary lore with which 
they are overlaid. 

In the Madras Census Report of 1891, the Census 
Commissioner, Mr. H. A. Stuart, states that ‘it has 
often been asserted, and is now the general belief, 
that the Brahmans of the south are not pure Aryans, 
but are a mixed Aryan and Dravidian race. In 
the earliest times the caste division was much less 
rigid than now, and a person of another caste could 
become a Brahman by attaining the. Brahmanical 
standard of knowledge, and assuming the Brahmanical 
functions. And when we see the Nambudiri 
Brahmans, even at the present day, contracting 
alliances, informal though they be, with the women 
of the country, it is not difficult to believe that, on 
their first arrival, such unions were even more 
common, and that the children born of them would 
be recognized as Brahmans, though, perhaps, regarded 
as an inferior caste. However, these Brahmans, in 
whose veins mixed blood is supposed to run, are even 

THE NOSE 107 

to this day regarded as lower in the social scale, 
and are not allowed to mix freely with the pure 
Brahman community.” 

According to Mr. Risley*—‘“ The remarkable 
correspondence between the gradations of type as 
brought out by certain indices, and the gradations of 
social precedence, enables us to conclude that com- 
munity of race, and not, as has frequently been 
argued, community of functzon, is the real determining 
principle of the caste system. Everywhere we find 
high social position associated with a certain physical 
type, and conversely low social position with a 
markedly different type.” 

The latest investigations in Indian anthropology 
are those of Mr. Edgar Thurston, the energetic 
Superintendent of the Madras Government Museum. + 
Mr. Thurston has studied the natives of Southern 
India more, especially the tribes of the Nilgiri Hills. 
The accompanying table is an abridgement of his 
Table xi., vol. ii., p. 63. 

* Journ. Anth. Inst., xx., 1891, p. 259. 

+ “Anthropology of the Todas and Kotas of the Nilgiri Hills, and 
of the Brahmans, Pallis, Kammalans, and Pariahs of Madras City,” 
Madras Government Museum Bulletin, vol. i., No. 4, 1896. “ Anthro- 
pology of the Badagas and Irulas of the Nilgiris; Paniyans of Malabar; 

Chinese-Tamil cross ; a Cheruman skull; Kuruba or Kurumba; Summary 
of results” (Zc¢., vol. ii, No. 1, 1897). 

108 THE STUDY OF MAN 

TABLE OF NASAL INDICES OF CASTES AND TRIBES 
OF SOUTHERN INDIA; 

AFTER THURSTON, 

LEPTORHINE—7o. Average. Minimum. Maximum. Range. 
Lambadis . . ~ OO°h 22. 95072) Gn (O247 mera 
Sheik Muhammadans 70 son | (fe) see) ORCT (Renee Bia 

MESORHINE 70—85. 

Kurubas . : . 7352. p20) 10253: 0.5 SO meee 
Todas 5 : ; 94°0. c:; “6X2 5... —8O'T Meee EQ 
Kotas : : a SETA, woe Gye see) (O02 OMe emmeOuCT 
Badagas . ! «0 756 eet (O27 see etc S:4 een 
Kanarese Pariahs 750 non, OTS ea OOcmE ORG 
Pattar Brahmans » FOS5 6 aan, O47 oO b5 3 mee One 
Brahmans (Madras City) 76°77... 60 ... Q5°r ... 35°% 
Cherumans - » 9%S'T %:. (GO1ON T.-C ;OmmermEe ORs 
Tamil Pariahs . a) COMMEnseemEOG Sed HOLS Sos, 9) 

Muppas . : J 1815. 55. SFOS cia 0223 ee 
Trulas ¢ DOA Olea 253 eee LOO asap 25775) 

PLATYRHINE 85+ 

Pal Kurumbas . 4 34] 

Urali Kurumbas . 93°4 

Sholigas . 5 O44 manne acc es 
Paniyans , 6 . -O5'D 2. (83°79 ees EOS OM meth mOAEO 

Of the twenty-four cases in the original table only 
two are leptorhine and four are platyrhine, the great 
majority being mesorhine. 

In the next table we have a comparison of nasal 
indices of 20-25 members of various classes, arranged 
in groups of ten units. This very clearly brings out 

the value of the nasal index in the discrimination 
of races, 

THE NOSE 109 

50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90 90-100 100-110 

Lambadis_ . : MS tears woes) Olen 6 Ay cae 

Sheik Muhammadans . SEES! cue Phe aa Ea 

Kurubas Sikss Meta sear 
Kanarese Pariahs . Guta POs. Boule. 

Todas . Aeterna te 

Kotas : : Aaioc, LIGhC ee’ COumenr T 
Brahmans (Madras City) 4 Tou) Seen LT 
Pattar Brahmans 4 TG henge Aegaaye? 
Badagas 3 EAC. (Os 

Tamil Pariahs I OVA aL mae 
Cherumans : Sees Bae LOM Orth Notes 
Muppas ; : : ss a2 Pie soo RS. Se 
Trulas_. 3 * : sec SSN Tic. eee ae Ole. ae 
Paniyans : ‘ é sie as See Sines tOinase. EO 

It will be seen that the average nasal index of the 
people investigated ranges from 69'1 in the tall, light- 
skinned, and long, narrow-nosed Lambadis, who 
speak an Aryan language, to 95'1 in the short, 
dark-skinned, and short, broad-nosed Paniyans; and 
that the indices recorded range between a minimum 
of 592 in a Lambadi, anda maximum of 108°6 in 
a Paniyan. Mr. Thurston has, however, measured 
a Paniyan woman who possessed a nose 31 mm. in 
height and 37 mm. in breadth, the nasal index being 
119'4. The Sheik Muhammadans of Madras claim 
to be descendants of emigrants from the north, and 
to be distinct from the converted Dravidians. Their 
claim is no doubt justified; but well-marked signs 
of admixture of Dravidian blood are conspicuous in 
some members of their communities, whose dark skin 

110 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and high nasal index betray their non-Aryan descent. 
This miscegenation is clearly brought out by Thurston 
in the accompanying figure, in which we have a series 
of triangles representing in two-thirds natural size the 
minima, average, and maxima nasal indices of in- 
dividuals belonging to the poorer classes of Brahmans 
of Madras city, of Tamil Pariahs, and of Paniyans. 
There is obviously far less connection between the 
Brahman minimum and the Paniyan maximum than 
between the Brahman and Pariah maxima and the 
Paniyan average. The frequent occurrence of high 
nasal indices, resulting from short, broad noses, in 
Brahmans has already been accounted for in the 
quotations I have made from Sir A. Lyall and Mr. 
H. A. Stuart. 

One is accustomed to regard the problem of Indian 
ethnography as of only moderate complexity, as is 
seen in the following abstract of a paper by Mr. Risley.* 

There are three main types in the population of 
India at the present day :— 

1. A leptorhine, pro-opic,* dolichocephalic type, of 
tall stature, light build, long and narrow face, com- 
paratively fair complexion, and high facial angle. 

This type is most marked in the Panjab. 

Their exogamous groups are eponymous, names of 
Vedic saints or heroes. 

* H. H. RISLEY, “The study of Ethnology in India,” Journ. Anth. 
Inst., XX., 1891, p- 235. 

THE NOSE 

[\/\ 

Brahman 

AVAVAN 

Pariah 

Ava 

; Paniyan 
Minimum Average Maximum 

FIG. 13. 
Diagrams of the variations in the height and breadth of the Noses of 

the poorer classes of Brahmans of Madras City, of Tamil Pariahs, 
and of Paniyans, two-thirds natural size; after Thurston. 

112 THE STUDY OF MAN 

2. A platyrhine, mesopic,* or nearly platyopic, 
dolichocephalic type, of low stature, thick-set, very 
dark complexion, relatively broad face, usually low 
facial angle. 

This type is most distinct in Chota Nagpore and 
the Central Provinces. 

Its sections are totemistic, like those of North 
American Indians; that is, they are names of 
animals, plants, or artificial objects, to all of which 
some form of taboo applies. 

3. A mesorhine, platyopic,* brachycephalic type of 
a low or medium stature, sturdy build, yellowish 
complexion, broad face and low facial angle. 

This type is found along the northern and eastern 
frontiers of Bengal. 

Their exogamous groups are very curious, being 
mostly nicknames of the supposed founder of the 
sept, such as “the fat man who broke the stool,” and 
others less fit for publication. 

1. Leptorhine, Pro-opic Dolchocephals. 

If it be accepted that Karl Penka has proved the 
typical Aryan to be dolichocephalic, there would seem 
to be some grounds for believing that in the dolicho- 
cephalic leptorhine type of the Panjab and north- 
western frontier at the present day, we may recognize 

* The terms pro-opic, mesopic, and platyopic have reference to the 
height or prominence of the bridge of the nose; for further details 
see the chapter on measurements. 

THE NOSE 113 

the descendants of the invading Aryans of 3000 years 
ago, changed, no doubt, in hair, eyes, and complexion, 
but retaining the more enduring characteristics of 
their race in the shape of their head, their stature, 
and the finely-cut proportions of their nose, Survivals 
of fair, or rather reddish hair, grey eyes, and reddish 
blond complexion are, moreover, still to be found, as 
Penka has pointed out, and as Risley himself has seen, 
among the Kafirs from beyond the Panjab frontier. 

Anyway, the striking preponderance of dolicho- 
cephaly in the Panjab and the N. W. Provinces, and 
its gradual increase as we travel up the Ganges valley 
towards the traditional Aryan tract, tend both to 
strengthen Penka’s hypothesis and to enhance the 
credibility of early Indian legends. These facts go 
also to show that Penka is mistaken in supposing 
that the Indian branch of the Aryans became 
brachycephalic on their way to India. Had this 
been so, the dolichocephaly which now distinguishes 
them could only have been derived from crosses with 
the black race, and the Aryans could hardly have 
become dolichocephalic in this way without also be- 
coming platyrhine. 

2. Platyrhine, Mesopic Dolchocephats. 

The measurements show the current distinction 
between the Dravidians and Kolarians, on which stress 

has been laid by Dalton and others, to be a purely 
I 

114 THE STUDY OF MAN 

linguistic character, not corresponding to any ap- 
preciable difference of physical type. 

The hypothesis of the north-eastern origin of the 
so-called Kolarians urged by Colonel Dalton, and 
recently advanced by Mr. J. F. Hewitt, must also be 
abandoned as inconsistent with the dolichocephalic 
skull of the typical representatives of the group. 

Whatever the Kolhs may be, they certainly are not 
a Mongoloid race. 

3. Mesorhine, Platyopic Brachycephals. 

All of the groups which come within this category 
are demonstrably of more or less pronounced Mon- 
golian descent; and we may conveniently call them 
Mongolord. 

The type is essentially a frontier type, and its in- 
fluence can in no case be traced far into the interior of 
India. 

The Kochh or Rajbansi, a large tribe of Bengal, 
who now pose as an outlying branch of the Rajputs, 
are, indeed, commonly supposed to have some strain of 
Mongolian blood among them, but Risley doubts if 
this opinion is well founded. A slight degree of 
platyopy is, it is true, met with among them, but 
this may equally well be accounted for on the sup- 
position of their affinity to the platyrhine type. 

The nasal index of the dolichocephalic tribes that 

THE NOSE 115 

are of non-Aryan descent requires a further analysis, 
and it appears to me that Mr. Thurston’s researches 
suggest that the problem is more complex than is 
generally admitted. 

On looking at the table on page 108, we are struck 
with the fact that three tribes, the Badagas, Todas, 
and Kotas, have the least variation of any in the 
range of their nasal indices. They have lived an 
isolated existence on the plateau of the Nilgiri Hills 
until the settlement of the English in recent times, 
and we may with safety regard them as a fairly 
primitive non-Aryan people. The owners of the 
greatest variation (exceeding a range of 30 units) 
constitute a group of Tamil classes made up of 
Brahmans, Pattar Brahmans descended from east- 
coast Tamil Brahmans, and other classes that I have 
not copied out; the greatest range is found among 
the Pariahs of Madras city. Mr. Thurston measured 
one very dark-skinned Tamil Pariah cooly, who was 
5ft. 34in. (1608 mm.) in height, and whose nose was 
40 mm. in height, 42 mm. in breadth, with an index 
oo vos. (Plate ll;) Fig. 1.) 

The least variable, that is the least mixed, of these 
groups have low mesorhine indices (average 75'5), 
the most variable have higher indices. The Paniyans 
with the highest indices of all have a moderate 
amount of range. 

In order to compare among themselves the 

116 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Badagas, Todas, Kotas, and Paniyans, it will be 
necessary to take other data into consideration, so 
I have selected a few from Mr. Thurston’s tables :— 

No, of Av. Length Av. Facial Ratio of 

Men Ceph. of Nas ESE Stature. Span Span to 

Measured. Index. Head. Index. at Stat. =100 
Badagas. 40 ... 71°77 ... 189 ... 756... 71° ... se 5. yy eon 
Todasmery 25cwe/ ogee LOS 74cm Oona pe v1 LBC BOs 2 

ME 55 yy HGR no TO eo VO oe ER ape a SIGSoues tO 373 

Paniyans 2§ ... 74 ... 184 .. Q5'T ... 67° rN oy 1OSZ MBLOS 
The Todas possess exactly the same average 
stature as the 89,000 Germans, whose measurements 
are given by Gould, and just miss being included 
with the English among the very tall races of the 
world. Between the Todas and the next tallest class 
measured by Thurston, the Sheik Muhammadans 
(1645 mm.), there is a well-defined gap of 51 mm. 
(2 inches). The tallest men he came across were a 
Toda (1850 mm. =6ft. 3in.), and a Badaga (1832 mm. 
=6ft. tin.). The Paniyans have the shortest average, 
and also have the relatively longest arms. 
Measurements which are useful in some otner 
places have no diagnostic value in Southern India, 
such for example as the cephalic index and the facial 
angle. It is, however, worthy of note that the Todas, 
Kotas, and Badagas have the longest heads recorded 
by Thurston, and are in this respect separated from 
the Paniyans. The facial angle, though of great 

THE NOSE 117 

importance in separating prognathous from or- 
thognathous races, is of little use as an aid to 
comparison and classification of the different com- 
munities of Southern India, in whom the average 
of the angle of Cuvier (with its vertex at the edge 
of the incisor teeth) ranges in the people examined 
by Thurston between 67° and 71°. Here, again, only 
the Badagas reach 71°, only one other group besides 
the Kotas reach 70°, and only the Sheik Muhammadans 
and the Paniyans fall as low as 67”. 

Existing materials do not enable us to prosecute 
the analysis much further, but among the non-Aryan 
tribes of Southern India it appears as if we could trace 
two groups: (1) a taller, with moderately long arms, 
with long heads, and distinctly dolichocephalic, a 
moderate facial angle, and a mesorhine nose; (2) a 
very short, long-armed group, dolichocephalic, more 
prognathous, and a very platyrhine nose. The Nilgiri 
Hill tribes are typical examples of the former group, 
and the dark-skinned, curly-haired Paniyans of the 
latter group. 

It isa common belief among he European planting 
community that the Paniyans are of African origin, 
and descended from ancestors who were wrecked on 
the Malabar coast. This theory, which is based 
solely on their general appearance, breaks down on 
investigation. Of their origin nothing definite is 
known. An interesting account of these people is 

118 THE STUDY OF MAN 

given by Thurston, and it is evident that we are 
dealing with a very primitive group of mankind, who 
have left traces of their former greater extension in 
the broad noses which occur among the lower Hindu 
castes. 

In his earlier work Dr. Collignon, like other French 
anthropologists, was inclined to place great value on 
the nasal index of the living as a distinguishing 
character of the races of Western Europe. Taking 
the three main constituents of the French nation, he 
found* the nasal indices came out in the following 
order :— 

Kymri ; 3 ; é 5 OR RIO) 
Mediterraneans .. : : . 65°48 
Celtst : : é : 7 67.20 

and he naturally thought this was an excellent means 
of further distinguishing between the tall, dolicho- 
cephalic, fair race that came from the north, the fairly 
short, dolichocephalic, dark race of the south, and the 
short, brachycephalic, dark race of the centre. 

In the same paper (p. 508) Collignon formulates 
the law that “in a given race leptorhiny is in direct 
relation to stature; the more it is raised, the longer 
the nose, the lower it is, the more the nose tends to 
mesorhiny.” 

As a result of his later researches Collignon finds 

* R, COLLIGNON, “Etude anthropométrique ¢lémentaire des prin- 
cipales Races de France,” Budll. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, 1883, p. 502. 
This term is used in Broca’s sense. See p. 152. 

THE NOSE 119 

that the nasal index in the living is of little practical 
value in French anthropology He says :—* 

“Like the stature, the nasal index has received a serious 
blow (from being in the front rank for the classification of 
European races). It is true that this character maintains 
its incomparable value for the separation of the main trunks 
of mankind, but, so far as concerns the: European races, 
properly so-called, it is incontestable that its value is dimin- 
ished. _The ethnic scale, which is naturally of a narrow 
range between races so allied to one another, may be 
neutralised by local variations in height. It thus happens 
that the importance of the index is only relative, and that it 
loses the character of precision which we formerly credited 
it with.” 

We must now pass to a consideration of the nose 
from a craniological point of view. In the skull we 
find that the prominent part of the nose is formed of 
two elements, the zasalZ dones, and the upper jaw or 
maxillary bones ; the former constitute the bridge of 
the nose, the latter bound the lateral and inferior 
margin of the nasal aperture, and they also flank the 
nasal bones so as to separate them from the orbits. 
The nasal bones are bounded above by the frontal 
or bone of the forehead. The mid point of the 
Sronto-nasal suture is termed by anthropologists the 
nasion, the corresponding spot in the living nose is 
the voot, The nasal aperture is technically called 

* R. CoLLiGNoNn “Anthropologie de la France; Dordogne,” etc., 
Mém. Soc. d Anth. de Paris (3), 1., 1894, p. 43. 

120 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the apertura pyriformis, the lower border of which 
has certain characteristics to which reference will 
be made. In the middle line of this lower border 
there is usually a bony projection, the xasal spine, 
which is continuous with the gristly and partly ossified 
nasal septum. There is no need to refer to the 
gristly portions of the external nose, as these are 
macerated away in dried skulls, and, though a de- 
scription of them is here omitted, it must be 
remembered that they support and give the form to 
the nose as seen in the living subject. 

The eight of the nose is the line joining the 
nasion to the corresponding point at the base of the 
nasal spine. 

The éveadth is the greatest diameter of the nasal 
aperture. 

The cranial nasal index is the ratio of the nasal 
breadth to its height; this is obtained by multiplying 
the former by one hundred and dividing the product 
by the latter. The indices are grouped by Broca 
in a three-fold classification into broad, medium, and 
narrow noses, the figures being :— 

French and English. “* Frankfurt agreement.” 
- 48 0 Leptorhine . : . - 47 
48-53 4 Mesorhine . ; ~ 47-51 
53+ : Platyrhine . F * Shas 

The nasal indices to the left are those that were 
first suggested by Broca, and which have been 

THE NOSE 121 

subsequently adopted by French and English anthro- 
pologists; to the right are those in general use in 
Germany, as accepted at the “Frankfurter Ver- 
standigung.” 

In the following table I have collected from Broca, 
Topinard, Flower, and other sources a selection 
of nasal indices. It is evident that we have here 
the same story that is told by the nasal index of the 
living... The black races are platyrhine, whether they 
come from Africa or Oceania. The yellow races, 
including the Indo-Polynesians and Americans, are 
mesorhine, and the European races are leptorhine. 

TABLE OF CRANIAL NASAL INDICES. 

PLATYRHINE RACES. 

AFRICAN. 
Bushmen F . 60°2 | Kordofan 2 Sura! 
Lower Guinea . 58°8 | Upper Guinea . Bene 
Kaffirs 57'°8 | Senegal Ser 
Hottentots 57°3 | Nubians 551 

OCEANIC. 
Tasmanians 57°4 | New Caledonians 52°9 
Fijians 571 | Papuans,S.E . 52°0 
Australians 56°9 

MESORHINE RACES. 

Javanese | 51°4 | Chinese 490 
Malays (various) 50°3 | Polynesians 48°0 
Lapps 50°2 | Japanese 48 
Annamites 5o0'r | Americans 47°2 

122 THE STUDY OF MAN 

LEPTORHINE RACES. 

Berbers of Biskra . 489 | English ; . 46°0 
Italians of Lombardy 48°3 | Syrians ; . 45°83 
Egyptians ; . 471 | Arabs : - 45°5 
Russians ; . 468 | Berbers (Kabyles) . 44°2 
Parisians : . 467 | Eskimo - = A3°0 
Auvergnats . . 46°2 

On or two points call for comment. It will be 
seen that at the limits of each group there are indices 
which should numerically be placed in the next group. 
For example, the New Caledonians and the Papuans 
of the archipelago at the extreme south-east of 
British New Guinea have mesorhine instead of 
platyrhine indices; this is due directly or indirectly 
to a crossing with Polynesians. Of this we have 
direct evidence for the New Caledonians, and I 
have adduced evidence* for a migration from the 
Melanesian Archipelago into the south-east of New 
Guinea; but these Melanesians had already been 
subjected to Polynesian influence. The nasal index 
of the Polynesians is at the extreme lower end of 
mesorhiny. The Berbers of Biskra have doubtless 
had their nose broadened by Nigritic mixture, for 
the pure Berbers are among the most leptorhine 
of men. The Lombardians have an exceptionally 
high index for Europeans. By their exceptionally 
low index the Eskimo are sharply separated from 

A. C. Happon, “The Decorative Art of British New Guinea.” 
Cunningham Memoir X. Roy. Irish Acad., 1894. 

THE NOSE 123 

the Mongolic and American races; this fact is in 
harmony with their very dolichocephalic cranium 
(index about 72) and long face. The exact relation- 
ships of these interesting people is not yet definitely 
established. 

The nasal index of the primitive Andaman 
Islanders (50°9) and that of the nearly equally 
primitive Veddahs (52°5) are smaller than one might 
expect, as these races are very unspecialized groups 
of mankind. The new-born French infant, accord- 
ing to Broca, has an index of 592, and is, conse- 
quently, about as platyrhine as the Bushmen of South 
Africa. 

One word of warning is necessary; although the 
nasal indices in the living and in the skull agree very 
well as a whole, it must be distinctly understood that 
there is no necessary relation between them. It is 
impossible to even approximately calculate the one 
index from the other. 

The learned Broca* has made a comparative study 
of the nasal index in the skull of Egypt and France, 
and in both cases he has proved that the nasal index, 
despite numerous crossings, was perpetuated for 
centuries without important changes. 

We need not enter into a discussion concerning the 
ethnical relationships of the earliest population of 

* P. Broca, “ Recherches sur l’indice nasal,” Rev. d’ Anthropologie, i., 
1572, p. I. 

124 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Egypt; it is generally admitted that they were funda- 
mentally a branch of the great Mediterranean race, 
but there is no doubt that several ethnic elements 
entered into their composition. The two types to 
which I have already referred, and which Pruner-Bey* 
first described as the fine and coarse type, are found 
in the subterranean galleries of Sakkara, which belong 
to the 1Vth Dynasty (about 4000 B.c.), and equally 
occur in the collections of skulls of the ancient empire. 
Whatever may be the origin of the fine type, it is 
only the coarse type that participates in the characters 
of the Nigritic peoples of Nubia. This prehistoric 
mixture must have been already ancient at the begin- 
ning of the Pharaonic period, for the characters of 
the Egyptian race have since been maintained with 
a remarkable stability; whence we may conclude that 
the effects of this crossing had at that early period 
already arrived at this condition of stability, and this 
could only be realized at the end of a great number 
of generations. 
_ The nasal index of the skulls of the 1Vth Dynasty 
had a mean of 47°93, and in this figure one may 
recognize the influence of the platyrhine races of 
Nubia. Let us now see what happened to the nasal 
index in later times. 

It is known that in the Pharaonic times the valley 

* PRUNER-BEY, “Recherches sur Vorigin de TVancienne race 
égyptienne,” Mem. Soc. @’Anth., i., 1861. 

f THE NOSE 125 

of the Nile was invaded in turns from the south, 
the east, and the west, and thus received influences 
from the Nubian or Ethiopian race, from the Syro- 
Arab or Semitic race, and from the Lybian or Berber 
race. 

The Persian, Macedonian, and Roman conquests 
further introduced new Asiatic or European elements, 
and the Semitic element was restored more fully and 
persistently by the Arab conquest. In spite of all 
these mixtures, the nasal index of the existing Kopts 
does not differ perceptibly from that of the ancient 
graves. 

About the IVth Dynasty* (3998-3721 B.c.), 
before all these invasions, the mean nasal index was, 
as we have seen, 47°93; among the Kopts of the 
nineteenth century it is 47'15. Is this because all the 
people who were successively established in Egypt 
had the same nasal index? By no means; for the 
index of the victorious Ethiopians was greater, whilst 
that of the Syro-Arab peoples and of the Berber 
tribes was, on the contrary, very small. MM. Hamy 
and Broca obtained twenty-two skulls from an ancient 
interment in the Island of Elephantine, opposite to 
Assouan, at the foot of the First Cataract, near the 
border of Upper Egypt and Nubia; the nasal index 
was 55°17. 

* The dates of the dynasties are those given by Flinders Petrie in his 
History of Egypt. Second Ed., i., 1895, p. 252. 

126 THE STUDY OF MAN 

It is known that the VIth* Dynasty 3503-3322 
B.c.) had its origin in Elephantine. So much 
for the Ethiopians. As to the Syro-Arabs, there 
is no. doubt they had a very small nasal index, 
since that of recent Arabs is only 45°57, and 
that of Syrians 45°87. There remain the Lybian 
and Berber peoples, who established themselves in 
the Delta during the XI Xth Dynasty, and who later, 
under Psammetik, gave a dynasty to Egypt. It is 
admitted that these peoples have a remarkably low 
nasal index. Broca measured ten Kabyle (Berber) 
skulls that had an index of 44°28, and some Guanches 
who belonged to the same race, had an index of 
44°25. 

At the XIth Dynasty (2821-2778 B.c.), after the 
Dynasty of Elephantine, which was the VIth, and 
which lasted for over 200 years, the index rose to 
48°43. Under the XVIIIth Dynasty (1587-1327 B.c.), 
which followed close the long domination of Syro- 
Arab pastoral kings, it was maintained at 48°77; 
under the dynasties that followed, until the Mace- 
donian period, it descended to 47°28. These are in- 
significant oscillations, and quite as insignificant is 
the change which has followed the Arab conquest of 
the Seventh Century, as the existing Kopts have an 

* Broca says “ VIth Dynasty,” but according to FLINDERS PETRIE 
(History of Egypt, i., p. 69), the Vth Dynasty (3721-3503 B.C.) was of 
Elephantine origin, 

THE NOSE : 127 

index of 47°15. One sees then, if the mixtures of 
races have been able to exercise a slight influence 
on the nasal index of the Egyptians, this influence 
has only been temporary. 

MEAN NASAL INDEX OF EGYPTIANS AT 
VARIOUS PERIODS. 

(FROM BROCA.) 
Nasal Index. Cranial Index. 

Fourth Dynasty : : VA] OSmeEree a OULO 
Eleventh _,, : ; SAS Ase 7 5640 
Eighteenth ,, 4 ; . 4877 ... 76°02 
Later » (up to the Ptolemeys) 47:28 ... 73°38 
Average of Ancient Egypt ; 5 RA Meke ke Ushi) 
Modern Egypt (Kopts) ‘ J LGR an Yi See%e) 

The persistence of the nasal index has not been 
less remarkable among the peoples who, from the 
most remote periods, have occupied the soil of 
France. 

For the Mammoth Period, Broca had only two 
skulls from Eyzies, whose indices were 48'98 and 
45°09. The mean index of these would be 47, but as 
Broca points out, the true average index is the zmdex 
of the means and not the mean of the indices; as the 
nasal height in these cases were 24 and 22 (mean 
23), and the breadth 51 and 49 (mean 50), the index of 
the means is 46. 

The neolithic series is not homogeneous, but we 
may conclude that the peoples of the polished-stone 
age, so far as is known, were leptorhine. 

128 THE STUDY OF MAN 

MEAN NASAL INDEX OF ANCIENT AND MODERN 
POPULATIONS OF FRANCE. 

(FROM BROCA.) 
Nasal Index. Cranial Index. 

Mammoth Period (Eyzies) : + = 46 vache, Gato 
Neolithic Period : : 5 3» 46°93 amyseor 
Bronze Age (Orrony) : : ~ “a 46:89) se aay Oi20 
Gauls of the Iron Age. A568 :.. 970793 
Gallo-Romans (Third and Fourth Coun, 40°74 sO 5 
Merovingians (Seventh Century) =. (48°37 eae 
Parisians (Twelfth Century) ; =) 40525 SeemeORRS 

. (Sixteenth Century) s > 5 4797) Be ORS 0 

ep (Nineteenth Century) . « «40'S L Sree Or! 

The low index remains constant through the Bronze 
Age. The fifteen Gaulish skulls of the Iron Age 
measured by Broca belonged to at least a century 
before the conquest by Czsar. The Roman invasion 
did not modify the index. 

Most of the Merovingian skulls came from a 
cemetery at Chelles. The interment belonged to 
somewhat different dates, but it is probable that most 
of the skulls belong to the second half of the seventh 
century. Eleven more ancient skulls, that were 
found in a lower layer, have a mean index of 51°52, 
the more recent series of 44 skulls average 48°83; 
the total mean of the Chellian skulls being 49°36. 
The nasal index of some Merovingian skulls found at 
Champlieu descend to 47°58. 

Amid all these variations one fact shines clear, 
that in all the Merovingian graves the nasal index 

THE NOSE 129 

is markedly above that of the earlier populations of 
France. The Franks then brought to the country, 
which received its name from them, a new nasal type. 
In any case it is certain that the Franks had a nasal 
index of over 48, consequently they were not lepto- 
rhine like the people of Western Europe, but meso- 
rhine like the Mongolic peoples. They belonged to 
the white-skinned, fair-haired, Teutonic race, but 
must be regarded as a distinct variety of it. There 
is no reason to believe that we have here traces of 
those remnants of the mesorhinic hordes of Attila 
who fled towards Pannonia. 

Wherever they came from, or however they 
acquired their nose, the arrival of the Franks 
augmented in a marked manner the mean nasal 
index of the population of Southern Gaul. 

We will now follow the modifications of the nasal 
index in later periods. Under the three Frankish 
kings Paris became the capital of Neustria; the 
aristocratic class congregated there, and were so 
numerous as to escape better than elsewhere the 
effects of mixture. In the Twelfth Century the 
mean nasal index of the Parisians was still meso- 
rhinic, but it had already descended from 48°87, 
the mean number of the Merovingians, to 48°25— 
an index that is nearly leptorhine. In the succeeding 
centuries it continued to diminish, and at present it 

has returned to the figure (46°81) that it had before 
K 

130 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the Frankish period, and the influence of the foreign 
race has now disappeared from the mean nasal index. 

Concerning the nasal bones it may be noted that 
among the white races they are usually arched and 
prominent ; among the yellow races, the Malays and 
the Negroes, they are flat. They are often, in addition, 
short and very broad among the Negroes, and fre- 

Fic. 14. 

The lower border of the Apertura pyriformis of Orang-utan ; from Hovorka. 

quently long and narrow among the Chinese. The 
bridge of the nose is almost always flat in infants, 
and as we have just seen it usually remains so in 
the lower races, and it frequently also persists in 
this condition in women of higher races. 

Lastly, I must draw attention to the variations that 
occur in the lower margin of the apertura pyriformis. 

In the apes the floor of the nasal cavity passes 
insensibly on to the surface of the upper jaw, and 
there is consequently no definite inferior border to 
the nasal aperture, This condition may obtain 

THE NOSE 131 

among human skulls, and it is known by the name 
of szmzan groove. : 

Of more frequent occurrence than the last is the 
condition which is characteristic of the human infant, 
in which the floor of the nasal chamber passes by 
a variable but distinct angle on to the surface of the 
maxilla. This is termed the forma infantilis. 

The characteristic human condition is that in which 
the lower border of the pyriform aperture is formed 

Fic. 15. 
The four types of the lower border of the Apertura pyriformis in man 3 
from Hovorka. 

@. Forma anthropina (Lower Austrian, 30 years old); 4. Fossz prenasales 
(Bavarian, 49 years old); c. Forma infantilis (child, 33 years old); 
d, Simian groove (Javanese, 28 years old). 

by a distinct thin ridge which sharply cuts off the 
floor of the nasal cavity from the alveolar portion of 
the maxilla. This is the forma anthropina. 

_ In some skulls there is a pair of depressions immedi- 
ately external to the lower border of the apertura pyri- 
formis. These are known as the /oss@ prenasales. 

It frequently happens that a skull with a forma 
infantilts may be transitional between the simian 
groove on the one hand or between a forma prenasalis 
or a forma anthropina on the other. No well-defined 
limits separate these various conditions. 

132 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Hovorka* gives the following statistics concerning 
the distribution of these varieties among various peoples: 

No. examined. Anthrop. Prenasal. Infant. Simian. 
191 Germans . pe ES Fi eee Om oe At 6 
187 Cechs : ) DET eee SL, tet an 4 9 

57 Austrians . . 49 2 4 2 
82 Russians . ale 14 18 4 
34 Magyars . a kL 5 9 4 
16 Gypsies . 3) aii I 2 2 
133) Greeks). a 4 42 4 
yx) Italians pie bS 4c ale 2 eS — 
16 Mummies. : Ce nee a on 6 I 
iy CONES : 5 3 6 I 
22 Malays . : 7 2 8 5 
to Peruvians. é 5 I 4 — 
93 Negroes .. ee 9 25 35 
927 557 74 223 73 

Speaking in general terms one may say that the 
simian groove is most frequent in the negroes, 
Australians, and the black races generally. The 
infantile condition is common among negroes, the 
yellow races, and Southern Europeans. The fossz 
prenasales are also frequent among the yellow races, 
while the forma anthropina is characteristic of the 
Northern Europeans.t 

* O. HovorKA (EDL. VON ZDERAS) Die 4ussere Nase, eine anato- 
misch-anthropologische Studie, Vienna, 1893. (This paper contains an 
extensive bibliography.) 

+ Since the above was in type, Professor A. Macalister has written a 
paper on “The Apertura pyriformis” (Journ. Anat. and Phys., xxxii., 
January, 1898, p. 223), in which he describes these four conditions, to 
which he gives the following names: Orygmocraspedote (simian groove), 
Amblycraspedote (forma infantilis), Bothrocraspedote (fossze prenasales), 
Oxycraspedote (forma anthropina). 

CrAPTER Vi 

THE ETHNOGRAPHY OF THE DORDOGNE 
DISTRICT. 

HAVE previously alluded to the brilliant ethno- 

graphical work done by Dr. Collignon,* and I have 
made an abstract of his researches in the Dordogne 
District of West Central France in order to demon- 
strate the lines upon which such inquiries should be 
conducted, and to illustrate the results that follow 
from a blending of anthropological investigations with 
the records of history. We have here a very happy 
example of an anthropological analysis which supplies 
the data for a subsequent historical synthesis. 

The region under consideration consists partly of 
the calcareous beds, and partly of primitive rocks 
of the Central Plateau of France; the limiting line 
between them is shown on map (Fig. 19); to the east 
it passes into the mountainous mass of Auvergne. 
The five Departments which constitute this region are 
traversed from east to west by the gradually decreas- 

* R. CoLLicNon, “ Anthropologie de la France: Dordogne, Charente, 
Corréze, Creuse, Haute-Vienne,” J/ém. Soc. ad’ Anth. de Paris (3), i., 1894. 

133 

134 THE STUDY OF MAN 

ing elevations of the Limousin Mountains, which 
serve as barriers between the three basins of the 
Dordogne, or rather of its right affluents the Dronne, 
Isle, Vézére, and Corréze; of the Charente and of 

Fic. 16, 
Sketch Map of the Dordogne District. 

the left affluents of the Loire, the Vienne, Gartempe, 
Creuse, and Cher. A line running roughly north and 
south, starting at the junction of Charente and Haute- 
Vienne and passing not far to the east of Périgueux, 
would separate the fertile district to the west from the 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 138 

poor lands to the east. At certain points in the latter, 
as in the Limousin, the valleys are rich, but the 
uplands are infertile, and produce only chestnuts 
and scanty cereals. 

The physical features of the population studied by 
Dr. Collignon are mainly those of the conscripts for 
the xii* Corps d’armée who are recruited from these 
five Departments. 

The characters are given in the order of importance 
that Dr. Collignon allocates to each. 

CEPHALIC INDEX. 

This index is the ratio of the breadth of the head 
to its greatest length, the latter being taken as 100. 
In dealing with skulls, anthropologists usually arrange 
the indices in three groups: (1) Dolichocephals, with 
an index of less than 75; (2) Mesaticephals, with an 
index between 75 and 80; (3) Brachycephals, having 
an index of over 80. It is the practice of some anthro- 
pologists to deduct two units from the corresponding 
index of the living head so as to reduce the cephalic 
to the cranial index. 

There is a tendency at present not to lay too much 
stress upon these purely empirical divisions, and some 
would raise the upper limit of dolichocephaly two 
or three units. 

The following table gives the distribution of the 
cephalic indices in the five Departments; in the case 

136 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of Dordogne a further analysis is made, which proves 
that the southern part of that Department is much 
more brachycephalic than the northern. The mean 
index of this Department, if alone considered, gives 
extremely little information. 

CEPHALIC INDEX—PROPORTION PER CENT. 

North South 

Cha- | Haute- Creuse. | Corraze.| 2° Dor- Dor- 

rente, | Vienne. dogne. | dogne. | dogne. 
67-69 ey ee we #2 
70-74 | 5:60 | 3-78 | _ +58 5-95. | Sag ee 

75-79 | 41-95 | 37-81 | 19-24 | 6-90 | 38-30 | 48-53 | 11-54 
80-34 41-82 | 42-86 | 62-38 | 43-27 | 39-46 | 37-63 | 44-22 
85-89 10:85 | 14-71 16-92 | 41-73 | 13:83 5:00 | 39-92 
90-94 "50 AE | = ES || GROG) | 2 “30 | 6:93 
955971 17 ‘Il a £39 

Mean index | 80:43 | 80-93 | 82-16 | 84-93 | 80-70 — — 

It is evident that this table indicates considerable 
differences in the ethnic constitution of each Depart- 
ment. Taking the extremes, we have, on the one 
hand, North Dordogne with its 8°5 per cent. of indices 
below 75, or Charente with 5°7 and only ‘5 of ultra- 
brachycephals, and Corréze on the other, which has 
no dolichocephal below 75, but has 8'1 per cent. of 
indices over 90. 

Taken as they stand, the great majority of these 
indices fall into the brachycephalic division, while 
very few are dolichocephalic. 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 137 

The mean index of the French population being 
83°57, Dr. Collignon, in order to simplify matters, 
describes as brachycephals those indices above 83. 
The cantons which come under this grouping form 

BS rapa ane 

Fic. 17. 
The Distribution of the Cephalic Index in the Dordogne District ; 
after Collignon. 

Areas with an index of less than 80, shaded ; those between 80 and 83, 
left blank ; those over 83, cross-hatched. 

a compact mass to the south and south-east, as is seen 
in the accompanying map. To the north there are 
two islands in which the index does not exceed 83°8. 

Inversely, and as a matter of convenience, he 
regards as dolichocephalic all the regions in which 

138 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the index is less than 80. Two large groups of 
dolichocephalic cantons are isolated by this means; 
the more important covers two-thirds of the Depart- 
ment of Dordogne (the valleys of the Isle and of 
the Dronne), and about one half of Charente, 
mainly to the south and south-east. The other 
has Limoges for a centre and the seven cantons that 
surround it. 

In the narrow band of country between these two 
groups the index is 81. 

This clearly-defined distribution is of the greatest 
importance, for alone it provides a key to the local 
ethnography. 

Another point not less worthy of attention is the 
clear manner in which these two head types are 
separated: (1) between the two Departments of 
Dordogne and Corréze ; (2) between the two portions 
of Dordogne, which are separated by the rivers 
Vézére and Dordogne. 

As a matter of fact the boundary between the two 
Departments of Dordogne and Corréze was formerly 
precisely that between Périgord and Limousin, and 
in earlier times between the Petrocorii and Lemovices. 
To the right of this entirely conventional frontier the 
indices run from 85:4 to 87°3, while to the left they 
vary from 78°7 to 814, but there is nothing in history 
to explain this discrepancy. The explanation appears 
to be that well before the Conquest the two peoples 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 139 

differed in race, the one being what Cesar called 
Celts, the other probably belonging to the people 
whom he named Aquitainians. 

The southern portion of Dordogne is also brachy- 
cephalic and Celtic, and so Dr. Collignon is inclined 
to think that it did not form part of the territory of 
the Petrocorii, but that it should be divided among 
the Nitiobriges and Cadurci, whose equally brachy- 
cephalic descendants still people Lot-et-Garonne and 
Lot. 

Another line of evidence supports this conclusion. 
It is known that the primitive episcopal dioceses 
corresponded to the territories of the ancient Roman 
civitates, since a bishop was established in each city 
by the emperors. Whilst the northern, eastern, and 
western frontiers of the diocese of Périgueux 
correspond very closely with that of the modern 
Department, the region south of the Vézére belongs 
to the Bishop of Cahors, which tends to show that 
the natives of the south of Dordogne are the de- 
scendants not of the Petrocorii, but of the Cadurci. 

The differences between the two parts of Limousin, 
of which the one forms part of Corréze and the other 
the south of Haute-Vienne, can be explained in an 
analogous jmanner. The former is brown and 
brachycephalic, while the latter is fair and dolicho- 
cephalic. 

One may well believe that the Lemovices, those 

40 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of the neighbourhood of Limoges, were no more 
Petrocorii than Celta, but a fair people of Belgic 
or Germanic origin, established in Celtica, who had 
overlorded the ancient brachycephalic people who 
there preceded them. 

Inversely, Briva-Curetia, another old Gaulish town 
of Limousin, was the centre of gravitation of the 
first inhabitants, if not their capital. 

In Charente there is only one canton in which the 
mean index rises over 83. In this canton of 
Chabanais is the small village of Chassenom on 
the left bank of the Vienne. It is interesting to see 
the old Celtic race here, preserved with a relative 
purity, still grouped around the ruins of its oppidum 
(Cassinodunum), where, compared with the rest of the 
Department, it appears as an island surrounded by the 
combined flood of brown and fair dolichocephals. 

COLOUR OF THE HAIR AND EYES. 

A statistical inquiry concerning the distribution of 
the colours of the eyes and hair leads to the following 
results. The browns predominate markedly over the 
blonds. But for a group of cantons in Creuse all 
the district should be ranged under the brown: or 
moderately brown categories. 

In the following table the numbers are in relation 
to 100, the differences between too and the fairs and 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT T4I 

the darks represent the eyes and hair of intermediate 
tint :— 

Half sum of 

Eyes. Hair. - | Excess 
eyes and hair, A dase 
Dark | Black eee 

Blue. | Dark. | Fair. | and 

Light. | Dark. | light. 
| black. only 

Haute-Vienne | 36-7 | 24-6 | 21-8 | 49:6 | 5-25 || 29:2 | 37-1 79 
Creuse . - | 34:7 | 23-3 | 21-9 | 53-9 | 6-12 |] 28-3] 38-6 | 10-3 
Charente. .| 33:8 | 23-6 | 17:2 | 57-6 | 5-80 |] 25-5 | 40-6 | 15-1 
Corréze . - | 29°5 | 23:3 | 15°4 | 58-4 | 3-80 |] 22-3 | 4o-9 | 18-6 
Dordogne < | 34:2 | 23:6] 15:0 | 66-3 |12-05 || 24:6] 45:0 | 20-4 

On comparing this table with the map, it will be 
seen that although Dordogne has an absolute greater 
number of blonds than Corréze it is relatively darker, 
owing to the fact that the darks are greatly in excess 
in certain cantons; in other words, Dordogne is 
more patchy and Corréze more uniform in the 
distribution of their hair and eye colours. It is 
evident in using the word blond this term is em- 
ployed in only a relative sense. It is with this 
reserve and for the sake of convenience that the 
term blond will be employed. In the most blond 
group, that in the neighbourhood of Aubusson in 
Creuse, the blonds amount to only 33'6 per cent.— 
that is to say, one-third. 

In order to gain a clear conception of the distribu- 
tion of the hair and eye colours, it will be simpler to 
assume the whole region as originally inhabited by a 

142 THE STUDY OF MAN 

brown population, and then to follow the probable 
route of the blonds. 

The most important spot where the blond type is 
best preserved is the east of the Department of 

Fic, 18, 

The Distribution of combined Hair and Eye Colour in the Dordogne District ; 
after Collignon. 

Excess of Browns from o to 10, shaded ; ro to 30, blank; over 30, cross-hatched. 
Creuse, especially the plateau of Gentioux and the 
upper basin of the river Gher and of its left affluents. 

The second relatively blond region has Limoges 
for its centre. In certain spots the type is preserved 
with a remarkable purity, particularly among the 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 143 

women. Dr. Collignon was very much struck with 
the resemblance of these to the women of Cotentin 
in Normandy. It appears that the blonds radiate 
from Limoges in four directions; (1) towards the 
north in the direction of the old Roman road of 
Argentomagus and Avaricum (Argentan and Bourges), 
later the route to Paris, that is to say, along the road 
which united this town with the great blond centres 
of the North of France; (2) towards the east where 
it joins with blonds of the Cher region; (3) to the 
west in the direction of Angouléme; and (4) south- 
wards towards Périgueux. 

The third route of blond immigration would be the 
route from Paris to Bordeaux through Angouléme. 

Limoges formed a centre, and towards the four 
points of the compass lay four very ancient and 
important towns, Avaricum (Bourges), Gergovia 
(Clermont), Vesuna (Périgueux), and Ecolisma 
(Angouléme). 

The latter town was the only one of the four 
that was not united to Limoges either by a 
Roman road of the first order, or later by a postal 
route; and we find in the region between these 
towns the blonds are deficient. The importance of 
the communications between Limoges and Bordeaux 
through Périgueux is affirmed by the long line of 
blonds which occur along that route. To take a 
biological simile, Limoges represents a ganglion 

144 THE STUDY OF MAN 

protruding its nerve fibres in all directions towards 
other similar ganglia, 

The distribution of black hair is worthy of note. 
In Dordogne it is marked in Za Douéd/e, in the valleys 
of the rivers Dordogne, Isle, and Dronne. Secondary 
centres extend towards the north of Charente and 
of Creuse. There is thus a current inverse to that of 
the blonds. The great pressure of blonds came from 
the north-east and from the north; it traversed the 
district obliquely in a north-east to south-west line. 
Inversely the black-haired race appears to be massed 
in the south-west, and to be distributed, with a 
gradually decreasing importance, towards the north- 
east and north, 

STATURE. 

The measurements of the stature are not so 
instructive from a racial point of view as might have 
been expected. 

All the tall statures are massed at the circumference 
of the four Departments of which the statistics are 
available, with the exception of an important centre 
about Limoges. In the map the distribution of the 
heights over 1640 mm. (5 ft. 44 in.) is shown by the 
vertical lines. In mapping the distribution of the 
statures under 1610 (5 ft. 34 in.) it is seen that 
besides several scattered areas towards the south 
of the district under discussion, there is a large central 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 145 

area which, following the example of Broca who found 
a similar area of a dwarfed population in Basse 
Bretagne, Dr. Collignon calls “the Limousin black 
spot” (‘la tache noire Limousin”). 

The Distribution of Stature in the Dordogne District (the Department 
of Creuse is omitted) ; after Collignon. 

Stature less than 161 cm. (sft. 3} ins.), cross-hatched; between 161 and 164 cm., blank ; 
from 164 (5 ft. 44 ins.) to 166 cm. (sft. 54 ins.), shaded. The Jine A B separates the 
granites and crystalline rocks on the east from the calcareous beds on the west. 

In other cantons less than 10 per cent. of the 
statures have under 1600 (5 ft. 3 in.), those in the 

black spot have without exception over 30 per cent. ; 
L 

146 THE STUDY OF MAN 

eight cantons have more than 4o per cent., one has 
54°7 per cent., while that of Saint Mathieu has 67°6 
per cent. less than 1600, four below 1540, and 8°8 per 
cent. below 1500 (4 ft. 11 in.)! True dwarfs, that is 
those with a stature below 1500 mm., are exceptional 
everywhere. 

These figures are not due to an accidental and 
temporary selection, as the following figures of 
Bondin prove, which extended over a period of 
thirty years (1831-1860). These tables show that 
Dordogne, Correze, and Haute-Vienne are among 
the four Departments in the whole of France which 
have the greatest number of exemptions from con- 
scription owing to deficiency of stature. The neigh- 
bouring Department of Puy-de-Déme occupies the 
eighty-fourth rank, with 128 exemptions. 

Exemptions | Rank in Heights of 1732 | Rank in 

per 1000, | France. per 1000, | France. 
Creuse - ye 63 Creuse 4 a ae 74 
Charente . ELTA leoe Corréze . ASN ae 
Dordogne . me 24 alee Charente . ey 19 
Gorreze ee . 168 | 85 Dordogne . 7 § 809%) =80 
Haute-Vienne .175 | 86 Haute-Vienne . 31:6 | 86 

Inversely the high statures are also at a minimum, 
Haute-Vienne having the least proportion of tall 
people and the greatest population of short people 
of any Department of France. 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 147 

Bondin and Broca considered that this remarkable 
shortness was purely a question of race, the normal 
smallness of the brachycephals. This very simple 
explanation will no longer suffice, in the presence 
of the dolichocephaly proved for Dordogne, Charente, 
and Haute-Vienne. If we compare the maps of the 
distribution of the cephalic index with those of colour 
and stature, and mentally superimpose them, we find 
that there is absolutely not a shadow of a relation 
between them. The “black spot” extends alike over 
the brachycephals of Corréze, the brown dolicho- 
cephals of Dordogne, and the fair dolichocephals of 
Haute-Vienne. There is then no relation between 
this demonstrated phenomenon and race. 

Some anthropologists seek a cause in the geological 
character of the soil; but here as in Brittany and 
Cotentin it explains nothing. It is true that the line 
of separation between the granites and crystalline 
rocks on the east and the calcareous beds on the west 
runs pretty closely along the southern border of the 
black spot; but we also find the greatest number of 
high statures on the granites, and the low statures 
flourish equally well on the Liassic and Cretaceous 
calcareous beds of Sarladais and Riberacois. 

The only plausible explanation is the social con- 
dition, and in this case it is summed up in the expres- 
sive French term fa misére. The steep slopes and 
barren soil only produce poor cereals, rye, barley, and 

148 THE STUDY OF MAN 

buckwheat. The natives live on these, and on milk 
and chestnuts. Communication is difficult; no great 
tillage as in the fertile valleys of the Vienne and 
Gartempe, none of the larger industries that enrich 
a people. ‘In the cantons of Vigeois, Uzerche, and 
Treignac in Corréze,” writes M. Vacher, “the popula- 
tion is settled in confined valleys, in deep gorges 
receiving little light and air, with an impermeable sub- 
soil and marshy ground.” Ina poor country the most 
elementary hygiene is unknown, the death-rate is 
raised, and organic defects are more frequent than 
elsewhere. One of the more direct corollaries of 
misery is ignorance. In many other parts of France, 
such as in the Hautes-Alpes and Sologne, poverty 
is allied with ignorance, and results in the degenera- 
tion of the race. 

THE NASAL INDEX. 

The nasal index is the ratio of the breadth of 
the wings of the nose to its length, the latter being 
measured from the root of the nose to where the 
septum passes into the upper lip. The narrow noses 
(leptorhines) are those with an index below 70; the 
mesorhines range from 70 to 85; while the broad 
noses (platyrhines) are those above 85. 

The mean nasal index is 68°8, but the individual 
range is enormous, 49’9 to 96°4, that is more than 46 
units. As a whole the mesorhine indices, z.e., those 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 149 

over 70, are massed in the centre of the five 
Departments. 

This distribution follows in the main that of the 
stature. But why? Simply in accordance with a 
law previously thus formulated by Collignon: “In a 
given race, leptorhiny is in direct relation to stature; 
the higher this is raised the longer the nose, the lower 
the height the more the nose tends to mesorhiny.’* 

A careful consideration of the data tends to show 
that, independent of stature, the brachycephals possess 
a mean nasal index of about 69, that is to say very 
near mesorhiny, which is in agreement with previous 
investigations. The dolichocephalic races are more 
leptorhine. 

One result of this inquiry is that the value of the 
nasal index has received a serious blow. Certainly 
this character is very important for the discrimination 
of the great trunks of mankind, as has been abund- 
antly proved in anthropological investigations in India, 
but so far as the European nations are concerned it 
is incontestable that the nasal index has only a sub- 
sidiary and relative value. ; 

HEIGHT INDICES OF THE CRANIUM. 

The importance of the vertical height of the 
cranium as a racial character has been emphasized 

* “Etude anthropométrique ¢élémentaire des principales Races de 
France,” Bull. Soc. @ Anthrop. de Paris, 1883, p. 508. 

150 THE STUDY OF MAN 

by Virchow, but Collignon was the first to study 
this factor in the living. The two height indices are 
obtained by comparing the total height of the head 
measured from the vertex to the centre of the ear- 
hole with—(1) the length of the head, and (2) its 
greatest breadth, each of these two diameters being 
taken as 100. 
The indices are classified as follows :— 

Height-length | Height-breadth 

Index. Index. 
Platycephals . 3 5 : —67 — 83 
Mesocephals’ . : : : 67-70 83 —85 
Hypsicephals . : ; ; 70+ 85+ 

A really high skull, if it is very broad, may appear 
relatively low, or a low but very narrow head, may 
appear decidedly hypsicephalic. Hence the necessity 
to consider first the cephalic index, and thereby to 
recognize the normal and harmonic fluctuations of the 
inverse variations of these two vertical indices. 

Dr. Collignon has plotted the distribution of these 
indices for the Department of Dordogne alone. We 
have seen that the northern cantons are what he 
termed dolichocephalic, and the southern are brachy- 
cephalic. The length-height index of the former 
varies between 65 to 68, and of the latter from 70 
to 72. Taking the mean at 66 and 7o respectively, 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 15i 

it follows that the dolichocephals are platycephalic 
and the brachycephals hypsicephalic; but this platy- 
cephaly is a true flattening of the skull, and is not 
merely due to a lengthening of the cranium, as it is 
not the most dolichocephalic cantons that are the 
most platycephalic. 

FIG. 20. Fic. 21. 

Distribution of the Height-length Distribution of the Height-breadth 
Index in Dordogne ; after Collignon, Index in Dordogne ; after Collignon. 

7o+ Hypsicephalic (shaded) 85+ 
67 - 70 Mesocephalic (blank) 83 - 85 
- 67 Platycephalic (cross-hatched) 81 — 83 

The obliyue band enclosed with a thick line corresponds to the division between 
the dolichocephals and brachycephals. See Fig. 17. 

On the other hand, all the brachycephalic cantons 
have a height-breadth index of from 81 to 84, that is, 
they are, or appear to be, platycephalic and meso- 
cephalic, but their mean is mesocephalic. 

The mixed race who inhabit the zone between the 

152 THE STUDY OF MAN 

brachycephals and dolichocephals (cephalic index 
80-82) is also intermediate with a height-breadth 
index of 83-85, but the dolichocephals fall into two 
groups; the one with indices from 85 to 87 are 
hypsicephalic, the others, like the brachycephals, are 
mesocephalic and platycephalic. 

Thus the platycephaly of the valley of the Isle is 
established. 

The brachycephals are only false platycephals owing 
to an exaggeration of the transverse diameter. 

Without going into further details, we may now 
make an attempt to unravel the ethnology of these 
five Departments. Taking the three characters of 
cephalic index, colour and stature, we can distinguish : 
short and dark or tall and fair brachycephals ; fair, tall 
dolichocephals and dark dolichocephals. 

The brachycephals occupy all the region south of 
the rivers Dordogne and Vézére, the whole of the 
Department of Corréze and the east of that of Creuse. 
The brown brachycephalic type extends to the 
mountainous region of Auvergne, to the east of 
France and to the south of Germany. This race of 
short, dark brachycephals is a well-marked type which 
has received several names. Dr. Collignon, for want 
of a better term, adopts Broca’s designation of Celts, 
as the founder of French Anthropology considered 
ihat these were essentially the Celtze of Cassar. They 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 153 

are often called Auvergnats. The tall, fair variety 
is due to a crossing of this type with the fair race. 
A similar racial mixture occurs in Lorraine. 

The fair dolichocephals inhabit the upper valley 
of the Cher; the neighbourhood of Limoges, whence 
they spread to the south, following the plateaux that 
separate the valleys of the Isle and of the Dordogne ; 
and also the north of Charente, Angouléme, and in 
general along the very ancient route between Paris 
and Bordeaux. ‘These are the modified descendants 
of the tall, fair, dolichocephalic race of North Europe. 
Dr. Collignon speaks of it as the Hallstadt race. 

The brown dolichocephals require further analysis. 

(1) A type can be distinguished which is character- 
ized by its relative platycephaly, the extreme broaden- 
ing of the face, a prominent chin, low orbits, and by 
the dark colour of the skin and hair. As it is usual 
in Europe to correlate a long, narrow face with a long 
head, and a short broad face with a rounded head, 
the association, as in this case, of a long head with a 
broad face forms what is termed a disharmony. In 
the fair dolichocephals, on the other hand, the head is 
high, the face narrow, the chin moderately prominent, 
the orbits normal, the skin, hair, and eyes fair. It is 
obvious that these two races are entirely distinct. 

(2) A narrow-faced dolichocephal with a high head 
can be distinguished, but Dr. Collignon believes that 
it is a cross between two races, the brown and the fair 

154 THE STUDY OF MAN 

dolichocephals, This is avery favourable combination, 
and gives rise toa beautiful variety of man. 

(3) A rare but recognizable type, with an extra- 
ordinarily narrow and elongated face, a retreating 
forehead, projecting jaws, and retreating chin; the 
concave nose is so broad as to be nearly platyrhine, 
the hair and skin are dark. 

Putting the second of these two varieties out of 
count, there only remain the brown dolichocephal with 
a disharmonic face, and that with a retreating chin. 
They both live in the basin of the Isle and its 
affluents, as much in Charente as in Dordogne. 

From numerous other investigations we know that 
the Neolithic dolichocephals of Western and Southern 
Europe were a slight people with brown hair. They 
constitute the Mediterranean race of Sergi, the western 
branch being generally termed Iberians. The ancient 
cave-men of France belong to the same race; by 
comparing certain indices of these with the first group 
of our brown dolichocephals, we find a remarkable 
correspondence :—* 

Cephalic Height-length | Height-breadth 
Index, Index. Index. 

Caverne de ’homme mort | Dolicho. Platyceph. | Mesoceph. 
Old man of Cro-Magnon F re Platy. 
Recent Dordogne . : 5 = Platy.& Meso, 

* These indices are taken from a subsequent memoir by Dr. 
COLLIGNON, (Mém. Soc. d@’ Anth. de Paris), i. (3° sér.), 1895, pp. 94, 95. 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 155 

Further, the Cro-Magnon man had a disharmonic 
face; this is also characteristic of the Neolithic doli- 
chocephal of Laugerie, and it survives in their descen- 
dants in the valley of the Isle. 

The remaining brown dolichocephalic type, with its 
low-typed, long, narrow, prognathous face, is con- 
sidered by Dr. Collignon to be the far-removed 
descendants of the Quaternary race of Canstadt and 
Spy. The same type has been recognized by him 
in Tunis among the Berbers of Djerid (his vace 
Gétule), as well as in Dordogne and in the south of 
Charente; that is to say, in places still occupied by 
the descendants of the race of Cro-Magnon. It 
might be expected that the very ancient race of Can- 
stadt and the later race of Cro-Magnon were together 
beaten back by the great prehistoric invasions of 
Western Europe. 

A few words will suffice to trace the prehistoric 
settlements and racial movements that have occurred 
in this district. 

The earliest inhabitants were probably the people 
with retreating chins. According to the opinion of 
Dr. Collignon these were kinsmen to Paleolithic man. 
At the present day, as is only to be expected, this type 
is very rarely met with in anything like purity, and it 
is very difficult to isolate it statistically. 

The whole west of Europe was later occupied by 
the brown dolichocephals, the Iberian branch of the 

156 THE STUDY OF MAN 

great Mediterranean race, of which the Cro-Magnon 

man was a variety. They buried their dead in the 

caves of the valleys of the Vézére, Isle, and Dronne. 

Judging from their art they were a skilful people, and 

not devoid of culture :— 

“Later he pictured an aurochs—later he pictured a bear— 
Pictured the sabre-toothed tiger dragging a man to his lair— 

Pictured the mountainous mammoth, hairy, abhorrent, alone— 
Out of the love that he bore them, scribing them clearly on bone.”* 

There, protected in their barren, rocky valleys, 
weathering the storm of race conflict, unsubmerged 
by waves of race migration, still survive the children 
of early Neolithic man. 

Also in Neolithic times a short, dark, brachycephalic 
folk came into France from the east by two routes 
flowing north and south of the Alps. The invasion 
followed the left bank of the Danube, entered the 
valley of the Rhine, and later spread into France 
through the pass of Belfort and by the lower Moselle. 
A second, probably later and less important, invasion 
crossed the river to reach Upper Italy and Switzer- 
land, and thence gained the valley of the Rhone. Thus 
their migration has been from east to west. 

When the invasions came of the tall, fair dolicho- 
cephals,—Kymri, Gauls, Cimbrians, Burgundians, 
Visigoths, Franks, &c.,—they more particularly 

* RUDYARD KIPLING, “The Story of Ung,” Zhe Seven Seas (1896), 
p- 129. 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 157 

followed a course parallel to the North Sea. From 
an ill-determined point to the north-east or north they 
advanced invariably along the plains, probably on 
account of the chariots which they always brought 
with them. After having covered the plains of North 
Germany, where since then their descendants have 
always lived, and which became a second centre for 
emigrations, they passed to the north of the Black 
Forest to scatter upon the Netherlands and Flanders, 
the valley of the Seine and that of the Rhine. Thence 
their swarms were divided by the central plateau of 
France; one stream being diverted into Italy, the 
other into Spain, and thence to North Africa. 

The Roman conquest scarcely, if at all, affected the 
population of these five Departments, and it is more 
than certain that since then no foreign element has 
produced any result that can be traced, for all the 
Barbarians, as well as the English, belonged to the 
fair race. 

In a subsequent memoir on the Anthropology of 
the South-West of France (A/ém. Soc. d@ Anthrop. de 
Parts, i., 3° sér., 4° fascic., 1895), Dr. Collignon sums 
up his conclusions as follows :— 

Such js, after an examination of anatomical 
characters, the distribution of the races in the 
south-west of our country. Is it possible to draw 
therefrom reliable indications of what it was formerly? 
Regarding this we may lay down this rule. When 

158 THES TOD AOLMNLAN: 

a race is well seated in a region, fixed to the soil 
by agriculture, acclimatized by natural selection and 
sufficiently dense, it opposes, for the most precise 
observations confirm it, an enormous resistance to 
absorption by the new comers, whoever they may be. 

The most striking example of this stability of 
seated races, of this force of inertia which renders 
them victorious, is certainly presented to us by 
Egypt. The modern Fellah differs in nowise from 
his ancestors several millenniums ago, who lived at 
the times of Tothmes and Rhameses, although, 
according to the calculations of M. Hamy, slavery 
had introduced: upon the borders of the Nile more 
than twenty millions of negroes. These, in a climate 
which at first sight would be favourable to their 
acclimatization, were not able to perpetuate their 
race, neither directly nor indirectly, that. is to say, 
by crossing. All the more reason, one may say, 
that the same can be said of the historic conquerors 
of this unfortunate country, from the Hyksos and the 
Persians down to the Turks and the latest comers, the 
English. The waves of foreign blood that have spread 
over Egypt have disappeared never to return. 

The reasons are many. If the aboriginal race is 
more numerous than its invaders, and this is nearly 
always the case, it cannot be entirely destroyed; 
whatever be the slaughter which accompanies the 
conquest, the women and the children are preserved, 

THE DORDOGNE DISTRICT 159 

The importance of the subsequent crossings cannot 
then, at the maximum, attain more than one-third. 
The stable condition that follows puts then zpso facto 
the new comer in a minority from the commencement 
of the conquest, the work of selection by acclima- 
tization does the rest. It is a matter of a few 
generations. 

The only case where the occupation can be 
definitive is that of an invasion by a very superior 
race emigrating with women and children to a region 
peopled by nomads or true savages, such as the 
occupation of the United States or of Australia by 
the Europeans. In Canada, despite the political 
occupation and the incessant arrival of emigrants 
of their own blood, the English are absolutely 
balanced by the old French element, who were 
masters of the soil before their arrival. 

But the presence of woman at the time of a 
conquest, if she is indispensable to a real and 
definitive colonization, since alone it ensures the 
perpetuity of pure descendants, is not, however, 
sufficient. Except in a savage country, the women 
of the conquering party would always be in a 
minority. Even in the case where restrictive laws 
would assure to their progeny particular privileges, 
making a kind of aristocracy, it could never happen 
that there would be only two strata of the popula- 
tion, a victorious aristocracy superimposed upon a 

160 THE STUDY OF MAN 

conquered democracy. We know the fate of all 
aristocracies. Their grandeur is their ruin; they 
survive thanks only to foreign relays, and on an 
average disappear in three or four centuries. One 
cannot say “Ve victis,” but “Ve victoribus”: 
everything comes to him who waits. 

The Romans did not systematically depopulate 
Gaul, her submission satisfied them; the distribution 
of races at the time of the Roman peace did not 
undergo other changes than those which could 
operate quite locally, the deporting of a too ob- 
streperous people or colonizing by veterans. The 
Barbarians passed like a torrent; they destroyed 
much, but they have not made in their campaigns 
a true colonization, “enxse et avatro” of Marshall 
Bugeaud. The sword sufficed to assure their 
domination; to the vanquished—work. They have 
disappeared, except perhaps in the towns where they 
crossed with the Gallo-Roman middle class, after 
having preserved the forms or the imperial adminis- 
tration, for want of knowing and of being able to 
do better. The Arabs traversed the country, but 
to immediately disappear. It results, once more let 
it be repeated, that the present distribution of races 
should faithfully represent to us their ancient dis- 
tribution, except in places where special economic 
conditions have been slowly modified, but in a 
constant manner, by foreign influences, 

CHAPTER’ V1; 
THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART. 

T is a truism that the commonest objects, those 

that we see around us every day, usually fail 
to arouse any interest as to their significance or 
origin. One of the great benefits of travel is to 
awaken interest in even the most trivial matters of 
daily life, and this is usually accomplished through 
the diversity in their appearance from that to which 
we are accustomed to see at home. 

We who live in Britain, for example, see carts 
every day, but do we ever wonder what has been 
their history? We accept the finished product and 
there leave it, little thinking that in the sister isle 
there still persist strange survivals from the twilight 
of history which afford suggestive clues of the 
forgotten stages in the evolution of our common 
cart. 

In this case no distant travel is necessary, there is 
no need to go to Asia or Africa, nor even to the 
remote parts of Europe; at our very door, so to 
speak, have we the links in the chain of evidence, 

M 161 

162 THE STUDY OF MAN 

scarce one is missing. Probably such a sequence 
cannot be found in any other country in the world. 

The history of the cart is one chapter of a 
much greater study—that of transport. The civili- 
zation of the world and the spread of culture are 
bound up with facility of transport, including in this 
term the means of conveyance and porterage, and the 
routes traversed. 

Without doubt the most primitive means of trans- 
port was what an American anthropologist has termed 
“the human beast of burden.” This has always been 
an important, but it tends to become a diminishing 
factor, though it can never be entirely replaced by 
other means. The absence of any other method of 
porterage is a sure sign of that low stage of culture 
which is termed savagery. Its extensive employment 
in higher grades of culture is due to slavery. Slave 
raiders load their human chattels with objects of 
merchandise to ultimately sell the whole caravan. 
The great architectural and engineering works of 
pagan antiquity were possible only through slave or 
forced labour. It would appear from this that under 
certain conditions human labour is more economical 
than beast labour, but sooner or later man has been 
in most places largely replaced by the beast, and the 
beast is being replaced by the freight train and other 
mechanical modes of transport. 

A professional carrier can carry continuously 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 163 

greater weight than an ordinary man; and fifty, one 
hundred, two hundred pounds, and even greater 
weights are on record as usual weights for a day’s 
journey. As soon as man learnt to domesticate 
animals he found that more could be carried upon 
their backs than upon his own. So the pack-animal 
marks the next stage of development. 

In some parts of the west of Ireland there are 
no good roads, and everything has to be carried by 
human beings, or on packs by horses and asses. 
Even where the roads are good, as in the islands of 
Inishbofin and Inishshark, off the coast of Galway, 
they may be used for only foot traffic, as there are 
no wheeled vehicles of any description, and all goods 
are carried either in hampers slung on a person’s 
back (the usual method of taking home potatoes and 
peats), or in two wicker panniers or cleaves, slung 
across the back of a pony or donkey. 

With the building of good roads the primitive 
means of transport are being superseded by later 
methods; but these new means of porterage are 
examples of the latest mechanical developments, the 
centuries of slow transition have been skipped, and 
light railways already, and auto-cars may in the 
immediate future, follow closely on the heels of the 
old-time human beast of burden and his dumb 
companions, 

By-and-by it came to be discovered that an animal 

164 THE STUDY OF MAN 

could draw considerably greater weights than it could 
carry. A porter who goes short distances and returns 
unloaded can carry 135 pounds seven miles a day, 
but the same man can carry in a wheelbarrow 150 
pounds ten miles a day, that is, half as much again. 

When the red-skins of America shift camp they 
trail their tent poles behind their horses, pack up all 
their goods and chattels in the skin tent, and tie 
the bundle on to the poles. They are then free to 
move wherever they choose. Even the dogs may be 
employed to carry smaller loads on trailing stakes. 
This is a natural device, but one wonders how these 
nomad hunters managed in the horseless pre- 
Columbian days. 

Captain Burt in his celebrated “Letters from a 
Gentleman in the North of Scotland to his Frrenp in 
London” (1754), gives an illustration of a vehicle 
consisting of two poles drawn by a small ill-kempt 
pony. The body of the cart is formed by two pieces 
of wood bent in a semi-circle, the ends of which are 
fastened to the shafts, the one close behind the pony 
and the other a little distance behind; the arches are 
steadied at the top by a piece of wood running from 
the one to the other. Thin pieces of wood, osiers 
perhaps, pass at intervals across the floor and ends of 
this very primitive contrivance. 

Sir Arthur Mitchell found in Strathglass, Kintail, 
and elsewhere, in the years 1863 and 1864, carts 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 165 

in use without wheels exactly of the kind just 
described ; these are figured by Dr. Mitchell in his 
suggestive book, Zhe Past in the Present. 

If this vehicle has died out in Wales it must have 
done so very recently, at all events it is still in full use 
in certain parts of Ireland, notably in the Glens of 
Antrim. 

On looking at the illustrations it will be seen that 
the Irish slide-car is primitive enough. Two shafts 

Fic. 22. 

Slide-car, Inverness (1754); after Burt. 

are harnessed on to a horse, the ends which drag 
on the ground are shod with short runners or shoes, 
sometimes the runners lie their whole length on the 
ground, or more generally they are tilted up so as 
to have pretty much the same slant as the shafts. 
(Plate III.) These runners, which do not appear 
in the figures given by Sir Arthur Mitchell, are a 
useful addition, as they save the lower ends of the 
shafts from wear and tear. The shafts are kept apart 
by cross-bars. In one car in Plate III., 2, three holes 

166 THE STUDY OF MAN 

are seen in the last cross-bar, in which upright stakes 
can be inserted, as in the car in the background of 
Plate IV., Fig. 1, to retain the corn or the whins (as 
furze is called in Ireland) from slipping down behind. 
The lashing of a wicker basket or creel on to the 
shafts is an obvious step in advance, and these are 
used to bring down potatoes from the fields or turfs 
from the mountain. The straw harness in the upper 
figure of Plate III. is an interesting survival, and 
that, combined with the slide-car, carries us back 
to very primitive times. 

The modern Irish name for this wheelless cart is 
the same as the old Gaelic name, Carr Shunazn. 
Dr. Sullivan* states that there is no reason to 
suppose that the Irish Carr is a loan-word from the 
Latin Carrus, the stem Car being probably common 
to the Latin, the Germanic, and the Celtic languages. 

The Irish warrior of ancient times habitually carried 
a couple of spears, and a native poet, singing of the 
pursuit of a certain warrior, tells us that— 

“The track of his two spears through the marsh 
Was like the ruts of a car over weak grassy stubbles.” 

The phrase ‘weak grassy stubbles” refers to the 
rich after-grass of soft meadows.t This is perhaps 
the first reference to the slide-car. 

* W. K. SULLIVAN, Jntroduction to E. O’Curry, Manners and Customs 

of the Ancient Irish, 1873, i., p. cccclxxvi. 
t Loc. cit., p. ccccxliii. 

PLATE III. 

Fic, 2. Slide-car, Co. Antrim; from a photograph by the Author. 
[Zo face page 166. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 167 

Dr. Mitchell strikes a note of warning that is, 
perhaps, not unneeded. 

“When I saw,” he says, “what these carts were employed 
in doing, namely, transporting peats, ferns, and hay from high 
grounds down very steep hills entirely without roads, I saw 
that the contrivance was admirably adapted for its purpose, 
and that wheeled carts: would have been useless for that 
work. But I saw more than this; I saw that these carts 
were used doing the exact analogue of what is done every 
day in the advanced south. When boulders, for instance, are 
removed on sledges from the fields in which they have been 
turned up; when trees are transported on sledges from the 
high grounds on which they have been cut; when a heavily- 
laden lorry puts on the drag as it comes down hill—what is it 
that we see but carts without wheels—carts without wheels 
preferred to carts with wheels, whenever the circumstances in 
which they are to be used makes the want of the wheels an 
advantage. It is not always an evidence of capacity or skill 
to use elaborate or fine machinery. A rough, rude tool may 
for certain purposes be the most efficient, and may show 
wisdom both in its contriver and employer. It would 
certainly show a want of wisdom in the Kintail Highlanders, 
if they used wheeled carts to do the work they require of 
their wheelless carts. Indeed, they could not so use them, 
except by putting the drag on hard and fast—being first at 
the trouble of getting wheels, and then at the trouble of 
preventing them from turning.” 

The same argument can be applied to Ireland. In 
a very hilly country half the time one'is going up-hill 
and the other half down-hill ; when going up-hill there 
is no load, and consequently the slide-car, being so 

168 THE STUDY OF MAN 

very light, is practically of no weight for a horse. 
Coming down-hill with a load a rigid vehicle has 
to be employed in any case, and so the slide-car is 
equally efficient, the chief drawback being that it can 
carry so little, but this is not of much account in small 
holdings. The slide-car has, further, the great recom- 
mendation of being made easily and cheaply without 
requiring the services of a skilled carpenter or wheel- 
wright. It is also as easily repaired, and all the 
materials are ready to hand. 

It is also interesting to note that these very primi- 
tive carts can be constructed entirely of wood and 
thongs, or ropes, and there is no necessity for any 
metal to be employed. 

We now come to a gap in the evidence of the 
evolutionary history of the cart that is not easy to fill. 
What was the precursor of the wheel? There can 
be little doubt that the wheel was derived by slow 
modifications of an antecedent object, and there is a 
strong presumption that this “missing link” was a 
roller, but there does not appear to be any positive. 
evidence to render this view absolutely certain. 

The mechanical principle of the roller was known 
to remote antiquity, and it is generally accepted that 
the great stones of megalithic monuments, such as 
menhirs, cromlechs, and the like, were transported 
in this manner, as we know were the great statues 

of Assyria and Egypt. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 169 

It is not presupposing too much to surmise that 
a cylindrical tree-trunk might be placed beneath the 
shafts of a slide-car, or of a sledge, in order to reduce 
the friction. A constructional problem arises from 
the difficulty of keeping it in position. This could be 
overcome in the former by placing a short roller 
between the shafts and fixing a pin in the centre of 
each end of the roller, which could then revolve ina 
notch in the shafts, as in the accompanying diagram, 
or between two pegs, as in the Portugese cart, Fig. 31. 

We must imagine a further development, which 
is also missing from Ireland, in the reduction of the 
central portion. This would become the practice as 
soon as man discovered that efficiency was increased 
by reducing the long frictional surface, and that the 
weight was lessened. 

Herr Stephan, the late enlightened Postmaster- 
General of the German Empire, to whom we owe the 
introduction of the post-card, described, according to 
Poesche,* a very primitive cart that he saw in Portu- 
gal. A log is cut from the trunk of a large tree, the 
central portion is hacked away so as to leave a solid 
disc at each end joined by an axle. Poesche also 
mentions an ancient Egyptian battle scene, in which 
a large Aryan woman is depicted carrying off a 
wounded brother, husband, or son, on a waggon with 
similar wheels drawn by oxen. 

* T, POESCHE, Die Arier, 1878, p. 98. 

i70 THE STUDY OF MAN 

This explanation of the origin of wheels has been 
adopted by various writers* who have, however, re- 
garded the sledge as the parent of the cart, as it was 
on sledges that the colossal statues. of Egypt and the 
winged bulls of Assyria were rolled. 

Dr. E. Hahn, however, in his learned and sugges- 

Fic. 23. 

Diagrams illustrating a probable evolution of wheels from a roller. 

tive essay, Demeter und Baubo, argues against this 
view. He thinks that in this case wheeled vehicles 
would have arisen wherever rollers have been em- 
ployed ; but it is not so, the waggon arose only in the 
district from which agriculture originally spread. He 

* REULEAUX, Theoretische Kinematik, Braunschweig, 1875, p. 204; 
Kinematics of Machinery. 

E. B. TyLor, “On the Origin of the Plough and Wheel-carriage,’ 
Journ. Anth. Inst., x., 1880, p. 74. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART i7i 

believes that the waggon was primitively a holy 
implement consecrated to the great goddess of agri- 
culture and fertility, and that it only subsequently 
became a secular farm implement. 

Dr. Hahn* definitely states as his belief that the 
waggon has arisen because the wheel existed. The 
wheel in its most simple form is only a disc pierced 
through the centre. Such discs of stone, clay, &c., 
occurred in the same culture district as that in which 
agriculture arose, and was at the same time an imple- 
ment and a religious object. This is the spinning 
whorl, and the sacred symbols, such as the svastika, 
on numerous whorls from Hissarlik, suggest that 
they were often used as votive offerings. As spin- 
ning was an occupation of the women, these whorls 
were probably dedicated to a female divinity, presum- 
ably to the goddess of Nature and generation. 

It is only necessary to stick two or four of these 
whorls on one or two pieces of stick, and to fasten 
something over the axis, and a waggon would result. 
That these whorls are not large explains also the 
small size of many holy waggons. Later, following 
this model, large waggons were made, and these holy 
waggons were drawn by the sacred animal of the 
great goddess, the ox, and conveyed the image of the 
goddess. 

* E, HAHN, Demeter und Batubo, Versuch einer Theorie der Entste- 
hung unsres Ackerbaus, 1896, Liibeck. 

i72 THE STUDY OF MAN 

There is no need to follow Dr. Hahn in his dis- 
quisition on the curious wheeled objects of the Bronze 
Age, which were probably votive offerings, or at all 
events were religious symbols. His idea is that the 
small objects were symbols of the large real waggon 
in which rode the god or goddess, or the image of the 
deity. 

Most students of. ceremonial institutions will 
probably demur to Hahn’s position, In the first 
place, there is no reason to believe that agriculture 
was discovered only in some area of Eurasia, and 
that the art thence spread over the greater part of 
the habitable world. Then the evolution of spindle 
whorls into cart wheels scarcely appears probable. It 
seems more in consonance with what we know of the 
history of sacred institutions and implements, that the 
waggon had an industrial origin, and it may well be 
that it arose in close connection with agriculture; the 
operations of agriculture have always been closely 
connected with religion, and there is no reason to 
deny that the agricultural cart at its inception may 
have been associated with the cult of agriculture. 
The small size of the votive offerings or wheeled 
symbols is no matter for surprise. On the whole, 
then, we may accept the older view of the origin of 
wheels as being the more probable alternative. 

Dr. Hahn points out that he is dealing solely with 
the four-wheeled ox-waggon which was used for 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 173 

religious purposes. Later two-wheeled horse-chariots 
were invented, and were used from India to Britain 
and North Africa. He adduces the authority of old 
Johann Scheffer, who published a book entitled De re 
vehiculari, in 1671, for the opinion that, contrary to 
what one would expect, the four-wheeled ox-waggon 
was the first vehicle, then the taming of horses led to 
the two-wheeled chariots or carts, and finally the 
horses-were ridden. 

- The earliest history of the cart will perhaps always 
remain in obscurity; it is indeed probable that it 
arose independently in more than one area. The 
ancestral slide-car may have been one source, and it is 
by no means unlikely that a framework on rollers, 
which was used for moving large masses of stone, or 
even the common sledge, may also have given rise to 
a four-wheeled waggon. 

We must now return from this long digression to 
a consideration of certain wheeled vehicles that are 
still in use, or, till recently, were employed in the 
British Islands. The wheels, however, are of small 
diameter, and are solid instead of having spokes. 

In Capt. Burt’s famous Le¢/ers,* we find illustrations 
of two kinds of block-wheel cart that were in use in 
Inverness about 1730. Both of them are simple 
modifications of the slide-car, which, as we have 

* Burt, Letters from a Gentieman in the North of Scotland ¢o his 
FRIEND 77 London, 1754. 

174 THE STUDY OF MAN 

already seen, was in contemporary use with them, 
with the addition of wheels. Concerning the latter 
we read :— 

“THE Wheels, when new, are about a Foot and half high, 
but are soon worn very small: They are made of three pieces 
of Plank, pinned together at the Edges like the Head of a 
Butter Firkin, and the Axeltree goes round with the Wheel, 
which having some Part of the Circumference with the Grain, 
and other Parts not, it wears unequally, and in a little Time 
is rather angular than round, which causes a disagreeable 
Noise, as it moves upon the Stones.” 

One of these carts appears to be nothing more than 
a wheeled slide-car, if the term be allowed, in which a 
round wicker basket is jammed between the shafts just 
behind the pony. 

The other consists of an open framework, the base 
of which is formed by the two shafts; and, as a con- 
sequence, the basket-like body of the cart is tilted up 
at the same angle as the latter. This is ‘that species 
wherein they carry their Peats.”* 

A very similar cart to the last is engraved on the 
map illustrating Twiss’ss A Zour im Ireland in 
1775; but in this there is no front to the cart, and 
the side rails decrease in size from behind forwards: 
and cease by the flanks of the horse, so that when the 

* These are called Ze//achies ; for another account of these and other 
primitive carts, see G. L. GomME, The Village Community (1890), pp. 

278, 286. Isaac TAYLOR, The Origin of the Aryans (1890), p. 179, may 
also be consulted. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 175 

cart is being drawn the tops of the rails are approxi- 
mately horizontal. An illustration (Fig. 25) of the 
same cart is given by Croker.* 

In an engraving by James Malton, published in 
1791, of the College Green, Dublin,+ we find an illus- 
tration of a cart which consists of two shafts which. 

Two block-wheel carts, Inverness (1754); after Burt. 

rest on pivots jutting out from the centre of two solid 

wooden wheels, which are connected together by a 

thick quadrangular axle-tree. In this cart the wheels 

and the axle are solidly joined together, and revolve 
* T. CROFTON CROKER, Researches in the South of Lreland, 1824. 

+ MALTON and Cowen, A Picturesque and Descriptive View of the 
City of Dublin in 1791. 

176 THE SELODV AOL ANAN: 

as one piece. The only difference between the wheels 
of this cart and those of our second “ missing-link,” 
as it may be termed, is that in the latter they are made 
out of a single tree-trunk, as in the Portuguese cart, 
whereas in the former they are built up of several 
pieces of wood. Owing to the small size of the 
wheels the shafts are inclined at a great angle, and in 
order to get it level, the platform of the cart has to be 
propped up behind by a couple of stakes ; or, to put it 
in other words, boards are laid across the side-rails of 
such a cart as that figured in the Zour in Ireland. 
There are contemporary engravings of other carts 
published towards the end of last century, which 
represent very similar carts—in counties Dublin and 
Wicklow for example—but in which the wheels are 
outside of the shafts; as no linch-pin is drawn we must 
assume that in these too the axle revolved along with 
the wheels. 
These carts are described in the following manner 
by Twiss in his anonymously published book, 4 
Tour in Ireland im 1775 :— 
“Goods are conveyed about the city on small two-wheeled 
cars, drawn by a single horse; the wheels are thin round 
blocks, each about twenty inches in diameter. The wheels of 

those cars which are used in the country are placed at a 
greater distance from each other than those of city cars.” 

Quite similar cars may still be seen in use in the 
north of Ireland, from County Donegal to County 

PLATE IV. 

Fic. 2. Block-wheel car, Carrickfergus; from a photograph by Welch. 
[Zo face page 176, 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 177 

Down. The wheels may be within the shafts and 
with a revolving axle; now, however, the latter is 
usually quite slender; or the wheels may be outside the 
shafts and with a linch-pin, showing that the axle 
is fixed and that the wheels alone revolve. Planks 
may be movably attached to the edges of the plat- 

Irish low-back car (1824); after Croker. 

form, or the sides may be permanently fastened, and 
so a cart, as opposed to what is more correctly termed 
a float or a lorry, is evolved. 

The North Irish peasant-farmer, when he wishes to 
crush the clods of earth on his dry fields, will lift 
the cart with its shafts off the wheels, and _ re- 
place them on a wooden roller, resembling the sketch 
on page 170, and to increase its effectiveness he puts 
stones into the cart.. The cart, save for its platform, 
thus reverts to the stage of the first “ missing-link,” 

N 

178 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“In Borrowdale it is on record that wheeled vehicles did 
not make their appearance till about 1770; and when these 
novelties did reach the lakes, they were clumsy and awkward 
in character. Clog-wheels were the first type used on farm 
carts, and there are still old men, of between eighty and 
ninety years, who can remember them in use. The wheels 
are clumsy discs of wood, joined by a great beam or axle, 
which is firmly fastened to them. The wheels are 1 ft, 
104 ins, in diameter, and 3 ins. wide in the tyre, where the 
iron bands or ‘strakes’ are formed by three pieces nailed to 
the wood. The distance between the wheels is 3 ft. 2 ins.” * 

But the cart is, so to speak, only half-fledged, it 
moves along slowly and heavily on its small, solid 
wheels, 

The evolution of the spoke-wheel was probably a 
slow affair, and its stages are missing from Ireland, so 
we must turn elsewhere for evidence. 

The employment of spoke-wheels is, however, of 
great antiquity. Messrs. Perrot and Chipiez note 
that :— 

“Not one of the Assyrian military pictures can be named 
in which war chariots do not appear, and they are by no means 
the heavy and clumsy cars now used in some parts both of 
European and Asiatic Turkey. Their wheels are far from 
being those solid discs of timber that are alone capable 
of resisting the inequalities of a roadless country. They 
have not the lightness of a modern carriage, with its tires 

of beaten steel, but the felloes of their wheels are light and 
graceful enough to prove that the roads of those times were 

* H. SWAINSON COWPER, “Some Old-fashioned Contrivances in 
Lakeland,” The Reliquary and Illustrated Archeologist, iv., 1898, p. 20, 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE: CART 179 

better than anything the Mesopotamia of to-day can show. 
The spokes, which seem to have been fitted with great care 
and nicety, are, as a rule, eight in number.” * 

The chariot probably came into Egypt with the 
horse about the time of the oriental Pastoral Kings 
(2098-1587 B.c.), and it came as a fully-developed 
vehicle. 

In the early Cyprian tombs clay models of chariots 
have been found; these are modelled with solid wheels, 
sometimes spokes are painted on the clay; other 
models, though decorated with structural details, are 
almost certainly intended to represent vehicles with 
block wheels. On the sarcophagi and on some vases 
the chariots have spokes. Messrs. Perrot and 
Chipiez,+ while admitting that all war chariots had 
a strong family likeness to each other, deny the 
artist borrowed from Assyrian sources, and state 
their belief that he went no farther than his native 
city; “even the wheel-spokes are different; they 
are more solid and heavy in the Cypriot example, 
the wheelwright who made them has less skill than 
his Mesopotamian rival.” 

To come nearer home, a beautiful bronze bucket 
was discovered in 1891 on the banks of the Danube, { 

* G. PeERRoT and C. CHIPIEZ, A History of Art in Chaldea and 
Assyria, ii., p. 75. 

+ A History of Art in Phenicia and Cyprus, i., p. 209 ; ii., pp. 181, 
310 ef seg. 

t J. Szompatuy, “Die Géttweiger Situla,” Correspondenz-Blatt 
Deutsch: Anth. Gesell., xxiii., 1892, p. 9. 

180 THE STUDY OF MAN 

about 37 miles to the east of Vienna. It belonged to 
the period of transition between those of Hallstatt 
and La Teéne, that is to say about the commencement 
of the fourth century B.c., or at the time when iron was 
replacing bronze for cutting implements in that part of 
Europe. Amongst other subjects a chariot race is 
engraved on this bucket, or situla; the wheels of the 
chariots are either block-wheels with four nearly 
circular perforations, or spoke-wheels with four very 

Fic, 26. 
Celtic Chariot, from the Gottweiger Situla ; after Szombathy. 

broad spokes. This was evidently the character of the 
wheels of the war chariots of the Celts; we may 
assume that those of their waggons were of yet ruder 
construction. 

The Roman evidence has been conveniently sum- 
marized by J. Yates and G, E. Marindin in their 
article on the “ Plaustrum.”* The body consisted of 
a platform, with or without sides; these were upright 
boards or open-work rails, or a large wicker basket 

* A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, edited by W. SMITH, 

W. WavYTE, and G, E. MARINDIN, 1891. The Alaustrum was a heavy 
two-wheeled cart ; the four-wheeled was the plaustrum majus. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 181 

was fastened on the platform. The wheels ordinarily 
had no spokes,* but were solid of the kind called 
tympana or “drums,” nearly a foot in thickness, and 
made either by sawing them whole from the trunk of 
a tree or by nailing together boards. These wheels 
were fastened to the axle, which revolved within 
wooden rings attached to the underside of the plat- 
form. -Although these wheels were excellent for the 
preservation of the roads, they turned with a long 
circuit, and advanced slowly and with a creaking 
sound.+| They were usually drawn by oxen, but 
sometimes by mules. The Greek duafa corresponded 
both to the plaustrum and the plaustrum majus; 
“the four-wheeled wain” is mentioned in Odyssey, ix. 
241, and Herodotus, i. 188. 

Professor Tylor figures an ox-waggon that is carved 
on the Antonine Column; it appears to have solid 
wheels, and the square end of the axle proves that it and 
its drum-wheels turned round together in one. He 
points out that the ancient Roman farm-carts were 
mostly made with’ wheels built up of several pieces of 
wood nailed together, “as are their successors which 
are used to this day with wonderfully little change, as 
in Greece and Portugal.” The bullock-cart of the 
Azores f is a striking relic from the classic world ; its 

* Non sunt radiate, Prob. ad Verg. Georg., i., 165. 

+ Stridentia plaustra, Verg. Georg., lii., 536. 

t BULLAR, Winter in the Azores, i p. 121; of. TYLOR, Joc, cit., fig. 12, 
p. 80 

182 THE STUDY OF MAN 

wheels are studded with huge iron nails by way of 
tire.’”* Although the block-wheel was still in use in 
the Italy of the Roman Empire, spoke-wheels were also 
employed even for agricultural vehicles, but I have 
been unable to gather any Italian evidence of the 
transition stages. 

My friend Mr. J. L. Myres, of Christ Church, 
Oxford, has very kindly given me several references 
to early Greek chariot wheels which have supplied 
links in the evolution of spokes that I was in search 

Agricultural Scene on a Vase in the Campana Collection, Louvre; after Duruy. 

of. The block-wheel is shown in A, Fig. 30. This 
is evidently a built-up wheel, but there is no rim 
or felloe to it. 

Wheels with three spokes evidently derived from 
this are figured by Duruy} from various sources. 
The spirited little agricultural scene (Fig. 27) depicted 
on a vase in the Campana collection in the Louvre 
gives a clue to the structure of the wheel, which is 
seen on a larger scale on another vase (Fig. 28) 
copied by Duruy from Gerhard.{ The wheel (B, 

* E. B. TyLor, “On the Origin of the Moughe and Wheel-Carriage,” 4 
Journ. Anth. Inst., x , 1880, p. 80. 

+ V. Durvy, Fister des Grecs, 1887, i. pp. 251, 373, 732. 
t Auserlesene Vasenbilder, Taf. ccxvii. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 133 

Fig. 30) figured by Harrison and Verrall* from an 
archaic Greek plate in the British Museum of the 
sixth century B.c., which also consists of three spokes, 
is another example of the same type of wheel. A 
variety with two of the spokes slightly curved is 
admirably rendered on an Etruscan silver coin in the 

i} 

Fic. 28. 

Ancient Greek Carriage on a Vase; after Duruy, from Gerhard. 

British Museumt (C, Fig. 30), the date of which may 
be about the middle of the fifth century, or earlier. 
A wheel of this description was found by Gastaldi} in 
the turbary of Mercurago, near Arona in North Italy; 

* JANE HARRISON and MARGARET VERRALL, Mythology and Monu- 
ments of Ancient Athens, 1890, p. 289, fig. 30. 

+ B. V. HEAD, A Guide to the principal Gold and Silver Coins of the 
Ancients, from circ. B.C. 700 fo AD. 1. British Museum, 3rd Ed., 
1889, pl. 15, fig. 1. 

t B. GasTaLpI, Lake Hadbitations and Prehistoric Remains in the 
Turbaries and Marl-Beds of Northern and Central Italy, London, 1865, 

184 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“it is a wheel of elegant form, in which there is not 
the slightest trace of any metal.” The figure given 
by Gastaldi (p. 112) proves that these wheels could 
be made most skilfully in the Bronze Age. 

The four-spoked wheel is characteristic of Greek 
vehicles, and may be seen on innumerable coins and 
vases. It was in use in the Mykenzan Period. A 

Fic. 29. 
Mykenzan War Chariot of the Heroic Age on the Frangois Vase; after Duruy. 

war chariot of the heroic age is painted upon the 
Francois vase (Fig. 29)* with this kind of wheel: in 
order to give greater support to the felloe, the spokes 
either splay out or are clamped by triangular blocks. 
An interesting feature in this wheel is the indication 
of lashing at the junction of the spokes with the hub; 
it looks as if these were fastened together by means 
of leather thongs. It is impossible to say whether in 

* From Durvuy, Ae, p. 155, after Monum. dell Instit. archeol., iv., 
tav. liv., lv.; and W. HELBIG, Das homerische Epos aus den Denk, 
erldud., fig. 18, p. 101. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 185 

this instance actual lashing is intended, or whether the 
wheels were decorated with a pattern which had its 
origin in an antecedent method of fastening; examples 
of the latter will be found in my little book Evolution 
wn Art. A method of supporting and strengthening 
the rim, analogous to the last device, is found on an 
Euboian coin of the early part of the sixth century 
B.c.,* but in this case (D, Fig. 30) small struts are 
employed. 

FIG. 30. 

A Series of Early Greek Chariot Wheels from various sources. 

The shape of the spokes of Greek wheels and the 
method of their insertion into their respective felloes 
vary considerably; in E, Fig. 30, will be found four 
variants; of these, 1 is from a coin of Tarentum; ft 
2 is from the car of Triptolemus, on a vase, in which 
again there is a chevron ornament on the spokes at 
their insertion in the hub which is suggestive of 
tying. { Nos. 3 and 4 are common forms, especially 

* Brit. Mus. Guide, pl. 5, fig. 21. + Brit. Mus. Guide, pl. 7, fig. 5. 

+f Duruy, /.c.,1., p. 53; see also HARRISON and VERRALL, /.¢., p. cix., 
fiz. 22, p. cxxxix., fig. 36. 

186 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the latter. An odd variant* (F, Fig. 30) may repre- 
sent a twinned four-spoked wheel, it occurs on a 
tetradrachm of Syracuse of about 500 B.c. 

Mr. Myres informs me that Mykenzan and Dipylon 
cars regularly have plain four-spoke wheels ; + and this 
is normal till Roman times. Six spokes occur in the 
seventh to the sixth centuries, however, { and later, 
as on a coin of Chalkis§ of the third to the second 
century B.c.; but most of the apparently six-spoked 
wheels are perspective views of four-spoked wheels, 
in which the axle is shown, and also the projecting 
hub. Eight spokes occur as early as the seventh 
century (probably), in an oriental car on a Cyprian 
vase, || and in the sixth century at Klazomenae, on a 
painted sarcophagus. But they are not common till 
much later, as, for example, on an Athenian coin ** 
of the third to the second century B.c. 

After I had written the foregoing I came across 
a most interesting paper, by Professor de Aranzadi, 
on “The groaning and other waggons of Spain,” +f 
which supplies very valuable evidence as to the real 

* Brit. Mus. Guide, pl. 9, fig. 34. 

te.g., Brunn, Gr. Kunst-geschichte, i., fig. 97, 100. 

teg.,ona Melian vase, Conze, MJelische Thongefasse, and Brunn, Gr. 
Kunst-geschichte, i, p. 109. 

§ Brit. Mus. Guide, p. 43, fig. 32. 

|| Brunn, Gr. Kunst-geschichde, i., fig. 96. 

{ Brunn, Zoc. céz., fig. 135. 
** Brit. Mus. Guide, pl. 65, fig. 14. 
+t TELESFORO DE ARANZADI, “ Der achzende Wagen und Andres aus 
Spanien,” Archiv. fiir Anthropologie, xxiv., 1896, p. 215. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 187 

nature of these early wheels. The built-up solid wheel 
of Ancient Greece (Fig. 30, A) finds its exact counter- 
part among the Basques of to-day. (Fig. 31.) The 
planks of which the wheel is made are kept together 
by a transverse plano-convex bar, on the inner side, 
and by two annular iron bands, which are fastened at 

Fig, 31. 

Various Spanish Wheels; after Telesforo de Aranzadi. 

1. The outer side of a Basque wheel. 2. The inner side of the same wheel. 3. The 
Cantabrian-Asturian wheel. 4. Portuguese wheel. 5. Portuguese cart. 
6. Wheel from Larrasoana. 

the periphery, on the inside and outside of the wheel ; 
but a still simpler kind of wheel (Fig. 31, ¢) also occurs. 
The intermediate stage (Fig. 30, C) is still in use in 
Spain, Aranzadi calls it the Cantabrian - Asturian 
wheel. In this the felloe is formed of six pieces of 
wood; two of the primary planks remain and the 
crossbar is now biconvex in section; the two peri- 
pheral iron bands are also present. In one form 

188 THE STUDY OF MAN 

from Cangas de Tineo, the two planks fill up the 
angles which the crossbar makes with the felloe, 
and the crossbar forms the only spoke. 

In Portugal wheels are made out of a single piece 
of wood (Fig. 31, 4), in which two elliptical holes are 
cut ; the wheel is strengthened by bands of iron. An 
analogous wheel, built up of three boards, occurs 
in Galicia. The latter type is found in the ox-carts 
of the Canary Islands and among the Zufii Indians of 
New Mexico, to which places it was brought by the 
Spaniards. I have been informed that in Mexico, 
where this kind of wheel is also found, it is some- 
times made without any metal parts. A perfectly 
similar wheel is figured by Gastaldi ;* it was made of 
three pieces of walnut-wood, these were clamped by 
_two curved pieces of larch-wood, which were let into 
the wheel; the latter had two semi-circular perfora- 
tions on each side of the axle. The wheel belonged 
to the Bronze Age of Northern Italy, and was found 
in a bog at Mercurago, near Arona. 

It is tempting to regard such perforated block- 
wheels as representing the precursors of spoke-wheels. 
If in a solid wheel, with four perforations, it was 
found that the holes could be enlarged without 
seriously weakening the contrivance, a wheel with 
four broad spokes would result; and it might be 
discovered that it was better to make spokes 

* B. GASTALDI, Joc. cit., p. 111. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 189 

intentionally than to leave them as supports between 
holes. 

I do not, however, think that this was the actual 
process of evolution. Most probably the wheel was 
composed originally of a single piece of wood, later it 
may have been constructed of boards (Fig. 31, 6) which 
were variously strengthened. Yet later it was dis- 
covered that it was not necessary to make the wheel 
solid, and various expedients, some of which have 
been noted above, were devised to lighten the wheel 
and yet retain its strength. 

Groaning through Spain, as if still in the pangs of 
their labour, do we find these various forms of cumber- 
some wheels, essentially the same as they creaked 
three millenniums ago in Ancient Greece.* 

The “ groaning cart,” or as the Spaniards poetically 
term it, the “singing cart,” ““Carro que canta,” may still 
be heard in the picturesque parts of Cantabrian and 
Atlantic coasts; but it is probably doomed to dis- 
appear, as carts of the same shape but with an iron 
hub in the wheels, with felloes, with the axle fastened 
to the floor of the vehicle, and which do not squeak, 
are silently but surely replacing them. The friction 
of the axle against the wedges in the floor of the 
waggon which keep it in its place, produces the 
squeaking or jarring sound which from time to time 

* Block-wheels, which may be mere discs of wood, sometimes 
perforated with holes, occur in China, Korea, and other parts of Asia, 

190. THE STUDY OF MAN 

sounds like a tune or its octave; this is useful as 
a warning to prevent two carts from meeting in a 
narrow street, and also serves for the recognition of 
an approaching waggon. In the towns the creaking 
of carts is forbidden, so the drivers grease the- axles 
with tallow, soap, or bacon, but as soon as they have 
passed the last house of the town they remove the 
tallow and put resin and water on the axle to make 
it groan again, so great is the pleasure they take in 
it. In Galicia there is a folk-song, which runs as 
follows :— 

“ When thou wilt that the waggon sings, 
Moisten the axle in the river, 
For, if thoroughly wetted 
It sings like a pipe.” 

When these carts are driven on natural roads, 
which have been made by repeated use, even the 
steepest hills are not avoided. They are used for 
all kinds of field work, for carrying manure, or 
bringing in the harvest, and also they are very 
important at weddings for carrying the bride’s dowry 
to the house of the bridegroom. 

Professor de Aranzadi gives various details which 
are important for those who would go into further 
details of the construction of primitive carts. Dr. 
Gadow* devotes a chapter to “ Ox-carts and different 
modes of yoking” in his book on Spain; he gives 

* Hans Gapow, Jz Worthern Spain, London, 1897, pp. 272-280, 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART IQI 

five excellent figures of carts, and graphically describes 
“the most awful squeaking, squealing, creaking, 
croaking, howling noise.” He states, the natives 
“either say that the oxen like the music, or that the 
noise drives away the devil.” 

We have already seen that in yet earlier times than 
those of Rome and Greece the spoke-wheeled war 
chariots bore the Assyrian warriors on their paths 
of conquest, so soon did the early and rapidly- 
perfected wheel of the war-chariot outstrip the back- 
ward wheel of the “slow lumbering wains of the 
Eleusinian mother.” ‘ 

As Professor Tylor truly observes :— 

“In looking at these clumsy vehicles we certainly seem to 
have primitive forms before us. There is, however, the 
counter-argument which ought not to be overlooked, and 
which in some measure accounts for the lasting-on of these 
rude carts, namely, that for heavy carting across rough 
ground they are convenient as well as cheap and easily 
repaired. Considering that the railway-carriage builder 
gives up the coach-wheel principle and returns to the 
primitive construction of the pair of wheels fixed to the 
axle turning in bearings, we see that our ordinary carriage- 
wheels turning independently on their axles are best suited 
to comparatively narrow wheels and to smooth ground or 
made roads. Here they give greater lightness and speed, 
and especially have the advantage of easily changing 
direction and turning, which in the old block-wheel cart 
can only be done by gradually slewing round in a wide 

circuit.” 
* Vergil, Georgics, i., 163. 

192 THE STUDY OF MAN 

We must now return to Ireland. 

It is impossible to say how long ago spoke-wheels 
were introduced there; we may, however, feel pretty 
certain that it was during the Bronze Age, and 
we may also assume they probably accompanied the 
war chariot. 

We know that three great branches of the Celtic 
stock, the Gauls, the British, and the Irish, used war- 
chariots. 

With regard to the two first, we have (as 
O’Beirne Crowe* points out) authentic evidence of the 
fact in contemporary Roman writers, and as to the 
latter, the ever-faithful and very ancient Irish docu- 
ments are equally clear on this point. 

In the feast of Bricriu, Loegaire Buadach’s horses 
and chariot are thus described by Find-abair (Bright- 
beam)+ to her mother, Medb, queen of the Con- 
nachta :— 

“T see, indeed,” says Find-abair, “the two horses which 
are under the chariot—two horses ardent, speckled grey: 
of like colour, of like form, of like goodness, of like victory. 
.... A wood-band, withe-y chariot. Two black, adjusted 
wheels: two beautiful entwining reins: steel, sword-straight 
shafts : a splendid body of strong joinings. A ridgy, strong- 
bright yoke.” 

* J. O’BEIRNE CROWE, “ Siabur-Charpat Con Culaind.” Journ. Roy. 
Hist. and Arch. Assoc. Ireland. (Kilkenny Arch. Soc.), vol. i. (4th Ser.), 
1870, p. 413. “The Irish Chariot.” 

¢ Sullivan translates this name “ Fair-browed.” oc. cit., cccclxxxi. 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 193 

The same lady describes Conall Cernach’s chariot 
thus :— 

“A wood-band, withe-y chariot. Two bright, brazen 
wheels: a bright pole of much-silver: a very high, noisy 
body. A ridgy, strong-proud yoke: two wreath-y, strong- 
yellow reins.” 

Again, after describing the horses, as before, Find- 
abair describes the chariot of the hero Cu Chulaind 
thus :— 

“A withe-band chariot of witheing. Two very yellow, 
iron wheels: a pole with a witheing of findruine. AQ tin 

body of slope-joinings. A ridgy, strong-golden yoke: two 
wreath-y, strong-yellow reins.” 

From these and other descriptions it is evident that 
the body (cve¢ our ‘“‘crate”) of the chariot was always 
of wood, that is well-wrought wicker-work on a strong 
timber frame. In our third quotation the body is said 
to be made of tin, elsewhere it is described as “a very 
high, noisy body, and it of tin, of slope-joininglets.” 
Now, decorating chariots with tin was a favourite 
practice among the ancient Celts. Thus Pliny (4d. 
XXxiv. cap. 17) says that the Gauls were in the habit of 
adorning their vehicles with tin. Behind the chariot 
were, according to O’Beirne Crowe, two removable 
shafts, for in the Book of Leinster we read, “ Let the 
shaft of my carriage be reached me, that I may try the 
ford before the horses.” In front was the-pole, most 

probably of wood, and overlaid with silver; but still 
O 

194 THE STUDY OF MAN 

we are told several times it was made of silver, one 
version being, ‘a bright pole of bright-silver, with a 
witheing of jixd-ruine.” To this a single yoke for the 
two horses was attached. It had two wheels only, 
sometimes all of iron or bronze; when of wood, 
which we presume to have been the case where 
the material is not specified, these wheels always 
had an iron tire. There is reason to believe that 
the Celtic chariot-wheel was relatively very small. 

In the Sculptured Stones of Scotland, ii. (1867) 
p. lvi. (Spalding Club), Stuart makes the following 
statement :— 

“Occasionally fragments of chariots have been found in 
British sepulchres. About 1815 a barrow, near Market- 
Weighton, in Yorkshire, was opened, in which was a cist 
containing the skeleton of a man.... On each side had 
been placed a chariot-wheel, of which the iron tire and 
ornaments of the nave have alone remained. The wheels 
had been about two feet eleven inches in diameter.” In a 

neighbouring tumulus the wheels were about two feet eight 
inches in diameter. 

Dr. Sullivan says* the wheels were made of bronze 
or of iron; the former was the older material, and 
seems to have been only traditionally remembered 
when the principal tales took their present form, the 
material then in general use being iron. The chariot 
wheel was not a mere disc, but had spokes. He knew 

* W. K. SurLivaNn and E. O’CuRRY, On the Manners and Customs 
of the Ancient Irish, vol. i., Introduction, pp. cccclxxv-cccclxxxiui, 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 198 

of only one passage from which the number of spokes 
can be inferred. The passage in question is the 
description of Cu Chulaind’s chariot in the very 
ancient Irish manuscript, Szadur Charpat Conchu- 
land: “The Phantom Chariot of Cuchulaind.” 

“A stately Brog after that pair [of horses]; 
two firm black wheels ; 
two symmetrical five-spoked wheels.” 

The ‘chariots (carpats) in the foregoing account 
appear to have been the ordinary war-chariots, as 
well as the vehicles which were used for travelling. 
Cu Chulaind and other warriors had, however, as 
Sullivan points out, a special war-chariot, the Cath 
Carpat serda, or scythed battle-chariot. O’Beirne 
Crowe translates it the serrated war-chariot, ‘‘ because 
when fully furnished, every part of it available for 
attack or defence being closely spiked, presented the 
edge-appearance of a saw (Irish serv, Latin serra).” 

These warriors of the heroic age, whether of Erin 
or Greece it matters not, took a laudable pride in 
their war accoutrements, and not least in the decora- 
tion of their chariots. These descriptions from Irish 
sagas recall to mind one from the great Greek 
saga i— 

“So Hera, the goddess queen, daughter of great Kronos, 
went her way to harness the gold-frontletted steeds ; and Hebe 

quickly put to the car the curved wheels of bronze, eight- 
spoked, upon their axle-tree of iron. Golden is their felloe, 

196 THE STUDY OF MAN 

imperishable, and tires of bronze are fitted thereover, a 
marvel to look upon; and the naves are of silver, to turn 
about on either side. And the car is plaited tight with gold 
and silver thongs, and two rails run round about it. And 
the silver pole stood out therefrom; upon the end bound 
she the fair golden yoke, and set thereon the fair breaststraps 
of gold, and Hera led beneath the yoke the horses fleet of 
foot, and hungered for strife and the battle-cry.” Whad, 

v. 730.) 

From gods and demi-gods we must descend to 
mortals, and from the inspiring times when the world 
was young we must pass to the f-de-szécle. 

Mr. Hamilton* states that in 1823, in the Brown 
Hall estate in Donegal, “carts they had none; most 
of the carrying was done in creels on ponies’ backs. 
Some superior farmers had what were called /ow- 
backed cars—a sort of platform with shafts, and under 
it a pair of solid block-wheels. One rich man had 
spoke - wheels, which were greatly admired... . 
Crowds came to see the first cart that was turned out ; 
_ but though it was voted ‘z//egant, it was declared 
useless. ‘For,’ said a sage among the spectators, 
‘who ever heard of a cart in this country?’ And his 
argument seemed to weigh much with his auditors, 
However, in a few years later the Scotchmen had at 
one time orders on hand for fifty carts.” 

Spoke-wheel vehicles jostled block-wheel cars a 

* J. HAMILTON, Sixty Years’ Experience as an Irish Landlord, [1894], 
P: 47- 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 197 

century ago in Dublin, as they still do in parts of 
Ulster. The country carts with solid wheels are 
laggards from the early Bronze Age—possibly from 
Neolithic times; the spoke-wheel carts are perhaps 
the modified descendants of the war-chariot which 
the Gaelic-speaking Celts introduced into the British 
Islands. We have here, in the evolution of the 
wheel,.another example of the stimulus to invention 
and improvement that war gives to technology, which 
improvements may be later introduced into the peace- 
ful avocations of life. 

Further investigations must decide whether the 
eccentric spokes of the modern Basque and ancient 
Greek wheels were characteristic of the vehicles of 
the agricultural Mediterranean Race, and whether the 
radiating spoke-wheels were invented, or introduced 
into Europe, by the mobile Aryan peoples. 

A most interesting series of spoke-wheels can be 
seen, for example, at Dundonald, near Belfast, in Co. 
Down. The cart itself is of the same type as that 
associated with block-wheels; but there are two 
varieties of spoke-wheels. In that both the wheels 
are small—scarcely larger than the solid wheels; but 
in the one case they are placed within the shafts, and 
in the other case outside of them. Thus we get the 
same two varieties that we find among the block-wheel 
cars. It is obvious that in the first variety the wheel 
must be kept small, otherwise there would not be 

198 THE STUDY OF MAN 

room enough for it beneath the floor of the cart; but 
this necessary limitation does not obtain for the 
second variety. Here the conditioning factor appears 
to be a blind adherence to traditional methods, for the 

Fic. 32. 
Two Carts at Dundonald, Co. Down; from photographs. 

people are accustomed to the old style of cart, with 
its familiar small wheels. 

We have seen that it is more convenient to make 
block-wheels of small size, and this necessitates a 
considerable slant in the shafts, which has to be recti- 

THE EVOLUTION OF THE CART 199 

fied by propping up the hinder part of the floor of the 
cart. If this particular form of cart is persisted in, 
the wheels must be kept small, even when they are 
outside of the shafts, or else they would make the 
floor of the cart slope downwards in front. 

I have a photograph of another cart which shows 
two interesting features: first, a slight reduction in 
the upright back-staves; and second, the shafts 
proper are added on to the lower framework of the 
cart, and are placed at such an angle to it that they 
approximate to the horizontal position of ordinary 
shafts, 

From this last it is but a small step to so increase 
the diameter of the wheel that the shafts can lie ina 
horizontal position, and thus form the foundation of 
the floor of the cart. This is the present condition of 
the ordinary cart. 

CHAPTER VII. 
THE ORIGIN OF THE IRISH JAUNTING-CAR. 

N the last chapter we studied a series of primitive 

vehicles which are either in use at the present 
day in Ireland, or which comparatively recently were 
employed in various parts of the British Islands. 
We have now to investigate the origin of a con- 
veyance which is absolutely confined to Ireland, a 
true insular variety of carriage. 

There is very good evidence that the jaunting car 
was evolved at the end of the last century, or more 
probably within the first few years of this century. 
It is therefore by no means an ancient vehicle, and 
unlike many other implements it has no long ancestry 
of progressive improvements from an early type, but, 
once started, it rapidly passed through its develop- 
mental history. 

We have not far to seek for the parental form; in 
fact, we have already made its acquaintance as a cart. 
In his Yzbernza Curtosa Mr. Bush* gives the following 

* J. Busn, “ Wibernia Curiosa. A Letter from a Gentleman in Dublin 
to his Friend at Dover in Kent. Giving a general View of the Manners, 
Customs, Dispositions, etc. of the Inhabitants of Ireland. . . . Collected 
in a Tour through the Kingdom in the Year 1764.” Dublin, 1769, p. 30. 

200 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 201 

graphic account of the various uses to which the cart 
was put in 1764 :— 

“But the drollest and most diverting kind of conveyance 
for your genteel and ungenteel parties of pleasure is what 
they call here the Chazse-marine, which is nothing less or 
more than any common car with one horse. A simple kind 
of carriage, constructed with a pair of wheels, or thin round 
blocks, of about twenty inches in diameter, an axle, and two 

Fic. 33. 
Irish Low-back Car (1769); after Bush. 

shafts, which, over the axle, are spread out a little wider than 
by the sides of the horse, and framed together with cross 
pieces, in such manner as to be nearly in a level position for 
three or four feet across the axle. These simple construc- 
tions are almost the only kind of carts, in common use, for 
the carrying or moving of goods, merchandise of every kind, 
hay, straw, corn, dung, turf, &c., throughout the kingdom, 
“A sketch of the figure and construction of one of these 
cars I have here given, and, when used for parties of pleasure, 

202 THE STUDY OF MAN 

on the level part LL is laid a mat, for the commonalty, and 
for the genteeler sort of people a bed is put on this ; and half. 
a dozen get on, two behind and two on each side, and away 
they drive, with their feet not above six inches from the 
ground as they sit, on little pleasurable jaunts of three or 
four or half a dozen miles out of town; and are the most 
sociable carriages in use, for ten or a dozen will take one of 
these chaise-marines, and ride it by turns, the rate being 
seldom, in such cases, more than foot pace. I assure you 
they are the drollest, merriest curricles you ever saw. We 
were infinitely diverted at meeting many of these feather-bed 
chaise-marine parties, on the Sunday that we landed, coming 
out of town, as we went up to it from Dunlary.”* 

Twelve years later the author of A Zour through 
lreland+ alludes to the same method of conveyance. 
After describing the ordinary block- wheel car, he 
continues: “They are frequently used as vehicles for 
the common people on their parties of pleasure; a 
bed or a mat is at such times placed on the car, 
and half a dozen people sit on it, with their legs 
hanging a few inches from the ground; they are 
generally dragged a foot-pace.” The author (Twiss) 
was severely criticised after the appearance of this 
book, and subsequently he printed a metrical reply 
to his critics, which, though it gives an amusing 
description of the embryonic jaunting-car, can 

* The accompanying illustration is taken from the Dublin edition; the 
book was reprinted in London in the same year, but the corresponding 
illustration was evidently taken from a very poor sketch, and shows an 
almost impossible sort of vehicle. 

+ Twiss, 4 Tour through Ireland, London, 1776, p. 3. 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 203 

scarcely be credited with mollifying them. His 
“Heroic Answer”* is as follows :— 

“Well might an artist travel from afar 
To view the structure of a low-backed car. 
A downy mattress on the car is laid, 
The rev’rend father mounts, and tender maid ; 
Some back to back, some side by side are plac’d, 

* * * * 

. By dozens thus, full many a Sunday morn, 

With dangling legs the jovial crowd is borne; 
Clontarf they seek, or Howth’s aspiring brow, 

On Lexlip, smiling on the stream below. 

When ease and cheapness would thy Twiss engage, 
Cars be preferr’d to noddies or to stage.” 

Fifty years later the old low-back car was nearly 
completely superseded throughout Ireland by the 
ordinary cart. The Halls} thus describe it in its 
declining days :— 

“The car, or rather cart, used by the peasantry, requires 
some notice. Flat boards are placed across it, and upon 
these straw is laid, and often a feather-bed. The one 
described in the engraving has the old-fashioned wheels 
cut out of a solid piece of wood. These vehicles are now, 
however, nearly obsolete; we met but few of them during 
our latest journey; their unfitness having been understood, 
they have given way before modern improvement.” 

Hone, in his Lvery-day Book (1824), ii, p. 239, 
says that the country car always had the wheels 

* Repository, a Collection of Fugitive Pieces, ed. by J. Reed, 1790. 
+ Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Hau, lveland: its Scenery, Character, etc., 
London, 1841, i., p. 65. 

204 THE STUDY OF MAN 

outside the shafts; ropes were intertwisted across 
the rails (Fig. 25), and on these a ticking stuffed 
with straw, or a quilt, was laid. 

About the beginning of this century it occurred to 
someone in Dublin to protect the legs of passengers 
from getting in the way of the wheels, and from 
being splashed with the mud, by attaching a foot- 
board to the sides of the flat cart. Two boards were 
also placed along the cart in such a way as to support 
the travellers’ backs and to leave a space between 
them in which the luggage could be placed. As in 
the case of many other inventors, the name has not 
been preserved of this benefactor to the riding public 
of Ireland. This obvious improvement at once 
“caught on,” and in 1806 Sir John Carr* makes one 
of the first allusions to the jaunting-car. He says :— 

“Upon the road we saw several carriages peculiar to the 
country ; that which struck me most was the jaunting-car, an 
open carriage, mounted upon two small wheels, drawn by one 
horse, in which the company sit back to back, and hence the 
Irish, in badinage, call it an Irish vzs-d-vzs ; whilst, on the 
other hand, considering the position of the parties and of 
the coachman, who is elevated in front, I have heard it more 
appropriately, though less delicately, nominated the cu/-a-cul, 
This carriage is very convenient and easy, and will carry six 
persons besides the coachman.”t 

* JoHN CARR, The Stranger in Ireland: or a Tour in... etc.,in 
the year 1805, London, 1806, p. 32. 

+ This paragraph was transcribed by E. Dubois in his jew @esprit on 
Sir John’s book: E. Dusots, “My Pocket Book, or Hints for a Ryghte 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 205 

Thirty years later Mr. Inglis* informs us that the 
car had spread all over Ireland :-— 

“ Although there are carriages of all descriptions in Ireland, 
and coaches too on many of the public roads, the jaunting- 
car is the national vehicle, and Ireland would scarcely be 
Ireland without it. It may be said completely to supersede, 
as a private vehicle, the whole of the gig tribe —dennet, 
tilbury, cabriolet, &c.—and to be a formidable rival to the 
coach as a public conveyance.” 

Two years later Barrow} published his Zour round 
Ireland; but he does not give a flattering account 
of the jaunting-car of his date, and this and Maclise’s 
etching of such a car in rainy weather which illus- 
trated Barrows book were severely handled by a 
patriotic reviewer in the Dublin Penny Journal of 
May 21st, 1836. Two woodcuts, which are said to 
be caricatures, are given on p. 371; but they illustrate 
the kind of jaunting-car then in vogue. Barrow thus 
relates his first experience of this vehicle: immediately 
on his arrival at Kingstown he was asked— 

“Would your honour plase to have an inside or an outside 

car?’ ‘My good fellow, let me know what the difference is, 
and I will tell you. ‘The difference, sure, is this: the inside 

Merrie and Conceited Tour in 4to, to be called ‘The Stranger in Ireland 
in 1805, by a Knight Errant, and dedicated to the paper-makers,” 
London, 1807., Neither Carr’s nor Dubois’ figures of the jaunting-car 
are of sufficient interest to be reproduced here. 

* H. D. INGLIS, /reland in 1834. A Journey throughout Lreland, 
London, 1834, i., p. 24. 

+ BaRRow, A Zour round Ireland, through the Sea-coast Counties, in 
the Year 1835, London, 1836. 

206 THE STUDY OF MAN 

car has the wheels outside, and the outside car the wheels 
inside,’ After this luminous exposition, I thought it best to 
see them, and made choice of an outside one. ‘What shall I 
do,’ said I, ‘if it rains?’ ‘Change sides wid me, your honour, 
and if the rain comes in front, go over to the opposite side 
and take it in the rear!’” 

An earlier writer in that famous publication, The 
Dublin Penny Journal, has displayed his patriotism 
by singing the praises of the jaunting-car :— 

“Who that has watched,” writes the anonymous author, 
“the beautiful daughters of the ‘Green Isle’ borne through 
the streets of our extending metropolis on this handsome 
and commodious vehicle” [the author is here referring to 
a private car, as contrasted with the cars that plied for 
hire], “that will not feel curious to know from what humble 
principle it has thus risen to perfection. And in good time 
have I met with Master Bush’s Hzdernia Curiosa; he was 
a careful and observant traveller.” [The quotation is then 
printed which we have just given from Bush.] “Such was 
the jaunting-car of Ireland in 1764, and could the honest 
gentleman to whom we are indebted for this description 
‘revisit the glimpses of the moon, and see the vehicle 
of 1832, how great would be his praises and surprise.” 
(Vol. i., July 14th, 1832, p. 20, with woodcut.) 

In their charming book on Ireland Mr. and Mrs, 
S. C. Hall* refer at length to the various vehicles 
in use in 1841 :-— 

“The outside jaunting-car is that to which especial 
reference is made when speaking of the ‘Irish’ car. It is 
exceedingly light, presses very little upon the horse, and is 

* Loc. cit., p. 64. 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 207 

safe as well as convenient; so easy is it to get on and off, 
that both are frequently done while the machine is in motion. 
It is always driven with a single horse; the driver occupies 
a small seat in front, and the travellers sit back-to-back,* 
the space between them being occupied by ‘the well’—a 
sort of boot for luggage; but when there is only one 
passenger the driver usually places himself on the opposite 
seat ‘to balance the car, the motion of which would be 
awkward if one side was much heavier than the other. The 

7 
cy | 

FIG. 34. 

Early form of Jaunting Car (1841); after Hall. 

foot ‘board’ is generally of iron, and is made to move on 
hinges, so that it may be turned up to protect the cushions 
during rain. This foot-board projects considerably beyond 
the wheels, and would seem to be dangerous; but in cases 
of collision with other vehicles, a matter of no very rare 
occurrence, the feet are raised, and injury is sustained only 
by the machine. The private cars of this description are, 
of course, neatly and carefully made, and have a character 
of much elegance; but those which are hired are, in general, 

* This arrangement has been characterized as unsocial; but con- 
versation is easily carried on by leaning across “the well.” Its 
disadvantage is that the eye can take in but the half of a landscape. 

208 THE STUDY OF MAN 

badly built, dirty, and uncomfortable; yet in nine places out 
of ten the traveller has-no chance of obtaining a vehicle of 
any other description, and will often find, even in a populous 
town, that if ‘the car’ be out, he must wait until its return; 
cars are seldom more numerous than ‘head inns, that is to 
say, one generally suffices for a town.” 

“Clonmel has been rendered ‘famous’ in modern Irish 
history by the successful exertions of a single individual, 
of whom it is not too much to say that he has done more to 
improve the condition of the peasantry and the country than 
any other person of our age. We refer to Mr. Charles 
Bianconi, and the travelling-cars that bear his name. He is 
a native of Milan, and about the year 1800 voyaged to 
Ireland, first visiting Dublin, and subsequently settling in 
Clonmel, where he carried on the trade of a picture dealer 
and cleaner and frame maker, but upon a very limited scale. 
... By habits of industry, prudence, and forethought he 
contrived to save money. ... He conceived the design of run- 
ning a public car, that, by conveying passengers at a much 
less expense than the stage coaches, might answer the pur- 
poses of the comparatively humbler classes. He ran his first 
car—from Clonmel to Cahir—on the 5th of July, 1815. The 
experiment was very discouraging at the commencement ; he 
was frequently for whole weeks without obtaining a passenger ; 
but his energy and perseverance ultimately triumphed, and 
he has succeeded in obtaining a large fortune for himself 
while conferring immense benefit on the community ; having 
preserved an irreproachable character and gained the respect 
of all classes.”* 

The Halls inform us that in 1840 Bianconi’s stud 
consisted of 1300 horses, ‘‘a larger number than her 
Majesty possesses in Ireland,” his cars travelled daily — 

* Loc. cétt., ii, p. 76. | 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 209 

3500 miles, and visited no fewer than 128 cities and 
towns. It is difficult at the present time, with our 
intricate system of traffic, to realize what a boon 
Bianconi’s cars must have been to the residents in 
the more remote country towns and districts. Though 
we may well believe that matters had improved since 
1760, when Derrick wrote that he set out from Cork 
for Killarney “on horseback, the city of Corke not 
affording at this time any sort of carriage for hire.” 

The sympathetic travellers, from whom so much 
has already been quoted, carefully describe the various 
vehicles they came across in Ireland. One more 
extract must be made :— 

“Machines for travelling in Ireland are, some of them at 
least, peculiar to the country. The stage-coaches are 
precisely similar to those in England, and travel at as rapid 
a rate. They, of course, run upon all the great roads, and 
are constructed with due regard to safety and convenience. 
The public cars of M. Bianconi have, however, to a large 
extent, displaced the regular coaches, and are to be 
encountered in every district of the south of Ireland. In 
form they resemble the common outside jaunting-car, but 
are calculated to hold twelve, fourteen, or sixteen persons ; 
they are well horsed, have cautious and experienced drivers, 
are generally driven with three horses, and usually travel at 
the rate of seven Irish miles an hour; the fares averaging 
about twopence per mile. They are open cars, but a huge 
apron of leather affords considerable protection against rain; 
and they may be described as, in all respects, very comfort- 
able and convenient vehicles. It would be difficult for a 
stranger to conceive the immense influence which this 

P 

210 THE STUDY OF MAN 

establishment has had upon the character and condition 
of the country; its introduction, indeed, has been only 
second to that of steam in promoting the improvement of 
Ireland, by facilitating intercourse between remote districts, 
and enabling the farmer to transact his own business at a 
small expense and with little sacrifice of time.” * 

All subsequent travellers in the remoter parts of 
Ireland have profited by the example set by Bianconi, 
for ‘‘long-cars,” as they are usually termed, are still an 
important means of conveyance. 

Like Bianconi, the Right Hon. A. J. Balfour was 
impressed with the fact that a facile and cheap means 
cf conveyance is essential to material progress, and so 
he instituted the system of light railways in Ireland. 
Whether this scheme has succeeded or not, or whether 
a service of auto-cars may not prove to be more 
efficacious, may be open to question; but there can 
be no question as to the desirability, one may safely 
say the necessity, of cheap and rapid means of 
conveyance. 

By comparing the illustrations of the outside car of 
fifty years ago (Fig. 32) with that of the present day 
(Plate V., Fig. 2), one can at a glance see that the 
machine has been greatly improved, the last refinement — 
being the addition of pneumatic tyres to the wheels. 

It is not devoid of interest to consider how far 
the evolution of the cart and outside car can be 

* Lot. Cit, 1, p: 63. 

oats q 

Fic. 2, Irish Outside- or Jaunting-Car ; from a photograph by Welch. 

[To face page 210. 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 2II 

compared with the evolution of animals, and perhaps 
the analogy is not so far fetched as it may appear 
at first sight. 

In both cases the evolution is undirected so far as 
the subjects of it are concerned; but in the case of 
the cart the evolution is determined by a reasoning 
being, instead of by “natural selection.” An ex- 
tended study of the history and evolution of 
manufactured objects leads one, however, to the 
conclusion that the human intelligence does not 
make itself so much felt as one would expect. As 
a general rule the improvements on previous objects 
are slight, and often take a long time to be dis- 
covered ; but when once adopted there is a tendency 
for them to spread with comparative rapidity, and 
to be subject to a number of progressive modifica- 
tions, until another stationary phase is arrived at. 
In other words, the process of evolution of manu- 
factured objects is apt to be spasmodic, periods of 
active metamorphosis are preceded and succeeded by 
periods of stagnation. 

So far as the paleontological evidence goes, while 
one may be convinced that the fossil remains of a 
given period are genetically related to those of the 
beds above and below it, one cannot always be sure 
whether certain fossils are actually related in the 
direct line to other remains in a superposed stratum. 
There may be strong presumptive evidence without 

212 THE STUDY OF MAN 

a positive assurance—the record being too imperfect 
for absolute proof. 

Among living animals we find forms in any one 
group which belong to various stages of specialization. 
In some cases highly-specialized types may live side 
by side with comparatively undifferentiated forms, 
the latter often recalling, though in an imperfect 
degree, some of the stages through which the higher 
type may have previously passed. It is not always 
easy to suggest a reason why some low types should 
persist and others perish. The fact remains that 
such is the case. In almost all groups of animals 
_ we have examples of the persistence of some types 
for periods which, even speaking in a geological 
sense, may be termed vast. 

The persistence of the slide-car and various forms 
of block-wheel car is thus analogous to what we find 
among animals. The reason for this continuance is 
another matter, and requires an explanation, though 
we cannot expect that this will hold good for carts 
and animals alike. 

We may provisionally assume that the solid wheel, 
in all countries, preceded the spoke wheel, wherever 
the latter occurs, except in those cases where the 
spoke wheel was introduced into'a previously wheelless 
district. The spoke wheel could never have been 
invented de novo. As primitive types may persist 
under certain conditions, we may further assume that 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 213 

existing vehicles with solid wooden wheels are the 
direct descendants of more ancient types, and where 
they occur along with spoke wheels they may be 
regarded as laggards in evolution. 

The argument for the slide-car is not so satis- 
factory. There is no proof whatever that the 
slide-car was the first stage in the evolution of the 
cart, either in Ireland or elsewhere. Probably the 
evidence will never be conclusive on this point. 
There is a strong presumption in favour of this theory 
for the British Islands; but as the vast bulk of our 
culture was derived from the mainland of Europe, 
we may have owed our primitive carts to the Celts. 
Classical authorities agree in ascribing the use of 
carts or waggons and chariots to the Gauls and 
other Celtic tribes, and we know that two thousand 
five hundred years ago these peoples had both solid- 
wheeled and spoke-wheeled vehicles, but there is no 
mention made of the slide-car. It is a curious fact 
that block wheels and their variants (ze. those wheels 
that are without radiating spokes) are found in many 
of the least Aryanised parts of Europe, and it is 
tempting to suppose this may be the characteristic 
wheel of the pre-Aryan agriculturalists. 

There are numerous striking examples of the 
persistence of non-specialized animals in the remote 
parts of the earth. For example, the mud-fishes 
are found only in Australia, parts of Central Africa, 

214 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and tropical South America. The great running, 
flightless birds, such as the ostrich, occur only in 
New Zealand, Australia, New Guinea and some 
neighbouring islands, Africa, and South America. 
The lowest of all the mammals, the egg-laying 
duck-mole, is found only in Australia and Tasmania, 
while the spiny ant-eater also extends into New 
Guinea. These examples could be greatly increased, 
but they will suffice to illustrate this point. 

The generally-received explanation of these facts 
is that the ancestors of these forms at one time 
inhabited the northern continents, and as opportunity 
offered they gradually extended southwards, and 
owing to sinking in the earth’s crust, or to other 
geographical changes, they became isolated in the 
more remote spots. For some reason or other, which 
does not concern us now, the great northern con- 
tinents were the seat of the evolution of the higher 
forms of mammalian life, perhaps even of vertebrates 
generally, and in the keenness of the struggle for 
existence the less specialized forms were usually 
at a disadvantage, and if they could not adapt 
themselves to new conditions they had to die out. 
The great southern land areas were only temporarily 
connected with the northern lands at various periods, 
and so they received consignments of low-grade 
animals at various periods, and these lower types 
were able to continue. For example, New Zealand 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 215 

was cut off from the rest of the world before any 
snakes or terrestrial mammals had wandered so far. 
Australia received a contingent of only the two lowest 
groups of mammals. Africa, south of Sahara, for a 
long time was stocked with other mammals of a low 
type, for it is only comparatively recently that the 
higher mammals, such as elephants, antelopes, lions, 
leopards, and the like, have been able to migrate 
from their home in Europe and to swarm across 
or around the Sahara barrier; but being higher 
types they have supplanted and largely exterminated 
the lower forms. 

This is pretty much what we find among the carts 
we have studied. In some of the remote and back- 
ward parts of the mainland of Europe lumbering 
carts with solid wooden wheels still persist. In the 
western parts of the British Islands, where compe- 
tition has not been so keen, earlier types have been 
isolated and continued down to our own day, and 
it may well be that the slide-car is really an ancestral 
form which has been preserved in the islands at the 
fag-end of Europe. 

There are also some points of interest in connec- 
tion with the evolution of the jaunting-car. There 
is contemporary evidence to show that the means 
for the conveyance of passengers in Ireland up to 
the beginning of this century left a great deal to 
be desired. Hackney coaches had been introduced 

216 THE STUDY OF MAN 

from England, but they were expensive to hire. One- 
horse vehicles appear to have been employed in 
Ireland long before the London cab was borrowed 
from Paris, which was virtually in 1823, although 
nine cabriolets were licensed for parts of London 
in 1805. Mr. Hansom did not invent his two- 
wheeled modification till 1834; but the present 
*‘hansom cab” was really the invention of Mr. John 
Chapman, who patented it at the end of 1836. 

Early in the eighteenth century the ‘ Ringsend 
Car” plied between Dublin and Irishtown. It 
consisted, according to the authors* of a Hzstory 
of the City of Dublin, of a seat suspended on a 
strap of leather between two shafts, and without 
springs. The noise made by the creaking of this 
strap, which supported the whole weight of the 
company, peculiarly distinguished this mode of con- 
veyance. This was succeeded by the “ Noddy,” 
a kind of cramped, covered one-horse shay, and 
so called from its oscillating motion backwards 
and forwards; it disappeared about the same time 
as the century. The low-backed car was then in 
process of evolution into the jaunting-car, but 
in 1806 a new vehicle sprung into existence; this 
was the noisy four-wheeled ‘Jingle,’ which had a 
period of popularity for thirty years, and finally 

* J. WARBURTON, J. WHITELAW, and R. WALSH, /Zistory of the City 
of Dublin, London, 1818, ii., p. 1173. 

THE IRISH JAUNTING CAR 217 

gave place to the outside jaunting-car. The inside 
jaunting-car was also in use about this time; it may 
have had its origin from seats being placed along 
the sides of an ordinary cart in such a manner 
that the passengers faced one another, their legs 
being inside the conveyance. A little later a cover 
was added to the latter, and so the “covered car” 
was arrived at, the last of which, it is stated, was 
seen in Dublin some dozen or so years ago. All 
these one-horse vehicles have been beaten in the 
struggle for existence by the outside or jaunting- 
car, which has practically not only vanquished 
coaches in the past, but has prevented the hansom 
cab from establishing itself in Dublin. The ordinary 
cab is too useful in wet weather and for carrying 
luggage to be much affected by the competition of 
the car. 

We have seen how rapidly this vehicle spread 
over Ireland, being adapted in many ways to the 
country. It was elongated by Bianconi, and proved 
in his hands, and in those of his imitators, an im- 
portant factor in the betterment of the condition 
of the small farmer in country districts. 

There was a need in Dublin during the last century 
for light one-horse vehicles ; several writers connect 
this with the fashion at that time for sea-bathing. In 
response to the demand came a supply, the slow 
“Ringsend Car” gave place to the objectionable 

218 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“Noddy,” the rackety “Jingle” supplanted the 
“Noddy,” and had a short but brilliant career. 
When the “Noddy” was in its decline, the pre- 
historic, low-backed car was unostentatiously being 
transformed into the outside-car, and when it was 
perfected the noisy, swift “Jingle” yielded to the 
superior qualities of its rival. All these vehicles 
were of purely local origin, but, so far as the 
available evidence shows, the jaunting-car alone 
belongs to the same sequence as the ordinary 
Irish cart of the last century, 

— 
re 

CHAPTER VIII. 
TOYS AND GAMES: CAT’S CRADLE AND KITES. 

T first sight it does not appear that games played 

by children would afford a very profitable field 

for investigation, but if we wish to learn all we can 

about mankind no branch of inquiry should be 

neglected. I shall endeavour in this and the follow- 

ing chapters to indicate some of the conclusions which 
may be drawn therefrom. 

The games played by children have a very varied 
origin, and a similarly unequal value to the student. 
Before we consider the games played by our children 
it is desirable to glance at those played by savages. 

The children of savages play at the occupations of 
their elders, and the boys will have their toy bows 
and arrows; where the natives spear fish, boys and 
girls will have toy fishing spears, with which they 
attempt to catch fish. They play with toy canoes, 
and so forth, Even when the adults have discarded 
a weapon such as the bow and arrow for a more 
serviceable weapon, the children will continue their 
toy—whether it be in New Guinea or in England. 

219 

220 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Our English boys still delight in the implements of 
warfare of their barbaric ancestors, such as the bow 
‘and arrow, the sling, the sword and shield. The 
memory of these has been preserved from generation 
to generation through the unbroken continuity of 
boyish practice. 

Games of ball have now with us purely a diver- 
sional.character, but it seems probable that even this 
harmless amusement has a somewhat sinister history. 

Mr. Newell, the distinguished American folklorist, 
reminds us that in England country folk speak of the 
’ of ball and of the “camping-ground.” 
Pollux, writing in Greek in the second century, gave 
an account of the “common ball,” or “ball battle,” of 
his day. Almost exactly the same was the ancient 
Norse game, except that the resemblance to warfare 
was closer. Playing the game was called “empzng,” 
from Kemp, a warrior or champion, and the field was 
a “kemping-ground.” The Persians and Turks still 
practise a different sort of game, which is played on 
horseback. The Byzantine court adopted from the 
East the playing on horseback and the racket, but 
introduced these into a game resembling the ancient 
“ball battle.” The historian Cinnamus describes the 
Emperor Manuel, in the twelfth century, as fond of 
this kind of polo. 

From the Eastern custom we get our tennis, whilst, 
according to Newell, most of our games with bat 

“camp-game’ 

TOYS AND GAMES 221 

and ball seem to have come down to us from the 
North. ‘The history of the change from actual to 
imitative warfare, from the latter to a harmless and- 
courtly amusement or to a rustic pastime, from this 
last again in our days to a scientific sport, may supply 
material for serious reflection.”* 

These early games of ball were evidently martial 
exercises, and encouraged for the purpose of keeping 
the young men in good condition for actual warfare. 

Our children also copy the actions of their parents, 
but it is noteworthy that they prefer the more primi- 
tive to the more civilized pursuits, and their games 
retain more of the savage character than is typical 
of nineteenth century culture. The love of playing 
with dolls and of dressing and tending them, and of 
pretending to keep house, of preparing food, and 
other characteristics of girlhood, fall into the same 
category as the hunting and martial games of boys. 

There are other games which may be regarded as 
being more purely diversional in character, as, for 
example, certain of the games of ball and numerous 
other simple amusements. Many of these are played 
equally by adults and children, whether savage or 
civilized. 

Mr. Stewart Culin, who has made the study of 
games a speciality, and who has written a valuable 

* W. W. NEWELL, Games and Songs of American Children. New 
York, 1884, pp. 177, 178. 

222 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and beautifully illustrated work on the subject, from 
which I have made many gleanings, emphasizes the 
fact that while games occur as amusements or 
pastimes among civilized men, among savage and 
barbarous peoples they are largely sacred and divina- 
tory; and this naturally suggests a sacred and _ 
divinatory origin for many modern games. The 
latter have, however, so nearly lost their original 
meaning, that even with the light afforded by history 
it is practically impossible to trace their origin. The 
only other available method of inquiry is the com- 
parative one, and it will be found that I have largely 
availed myself of this in the following essays, though 
I have employed the more strictly historical method 
wherever possible. 

“Games,”* says Culin, “must be regarded, not as 
conscious inventions [here he is speaking in general 
terms], but as survivals from primitive conditions, 
under which they originated in magical rites and 
chiefly as a means of divination. Based upon 
certain fundamental conceptions of the universe, 
they are characterized by a certain sameness, if not 
identity, throughout the world. Without the confir- 
mation of linguistic evidence, they are insufficient to 
establish the connection of races or the transference 
of culture.” 

* STEWART CULIN, Korean Games: with Notes on the Corresponding 
Games of China and Japan. Philadelphia, 1895. Introduction, pp. xvii,- 
xix., XXXIV, 

TOYS AND GAMES 223 

The most important point elucidated by Culin is 
the proof of the early use of arrows for divining 
purposes. For convenience the arrows were flattened, 
and ultimately were replaced by long narrow strips of 
cardboard, on one side of which was painted a distinc- 
tive device, while on the other was a queer design, 
which is evidently the conventional representation of 
the scar of the leaf which primitively marked the shaft 
of the arrow when it was actually a reed. (Fig. 35.) 
These elongated cards were shortened and broadened, 

Fic. 35. 
Back of a Korean Playing Card; after Culin. 
This figure was kindly lent by the proprietors of the Reiguary and Illustrated Archeologist. 

and from them have been derived our modern playing 
cards, which even now retain amongst the credulous 
a divinatory property, and are also still used for 
gambling as well as for more innocent amusement. 
Korean playing cards still bear representations of the 
feathers of the arrows from which they were derived, 
and their Chinese name varies only in tone from that 
of the arrow, ¢séx. 

In the fourth year of Hejira, Mohammed pro- 
hibited wine and (MVezszr; the latter was a gambling 
game of the heathen Arabs, in which seven arrows 
were shaken from a quiver. 

Another remarkable evolution from the employ- 

224 THE STUDY OF MAN 

ment of arrows in divination is that of the Chinese 
dominoes, and Europe has borrowed this game from 
China. Culin calculates that of the ninety-seven 
Korean games described by him twenty-three may 
be referred to the arrow employed as an implement 
of magic or divination. 

Lastly, there are games and toys which are the 
secularized and degenerate survivals of magical 
ptactices other than purely divinatory, and even of 
religious rites, although these two often merge into 
one another. 

I have taken a few games and toys, and have 
endeavoured to work out their history as an illus- 
tration of the methods of modern research. The 
evidence is at present incomplete, but we cannot 
satisfactorily determine the game of cat’s cradle, 
with which I commence, or that of the top, in the 
following chapter, to be other than simple diversions. 
The tug-of-war was probably a magical rite, and 
kite-flying had apparently a religious significance. 
Finally, the bull-roarer at the present day represents 
the three aspects of amusement, magic, and religion. 

CAT’S CRADLE. 

One child holds a piece of string joined at the ends 
on his upheld palms, a single turn being taken over 
each, and by inserting the middle finger of each hand 
under the opposite turn, crosses the string from finger 

CAT’S CRADLE 225 

to finger in a peculiar form. Another child then 
takes off the string on his fingers in a rather differ- 
ent way, and it then assumes a second form. A 
repetition of this manceuvre produces a third form, 
and so on. Each of these forms has a particular 
name, from a fancied resemblance to the object— 
barn-doors, bowling-green, hour-glass, pound, net, 
fiddle, fish-pond, diamonds, and others.* 

The following forms are those known to Mrs. 
Gomme. They are produced seriatem -— 

The cradle. 

The soldier’s bed. 

Candles. 

The cradle inversed, or manger. 
Soldier’s bed again, or diamonds. 
Diamonds, or cat’s eyes. 

Fish in dish. 

Cradle as at first. 

CoS Oe CO ca OS ets 

The different orders or arrangements must be taken 
from the hands of one player by another without 
‘disturbing the arrangement. 

Nares suggests that the proper name is “Cratch 
Cradle,” and is derived from the archaic word cratch,| 
meaning a manger.{ He gives sevéral authorities 

* Notes and Queries, vol. xi., p. 421. 

+ In the Century Dictionary the term cratch has two meanings, “a 
grated manger,” “a rack or open framework.” 

~ Murray, in The New English Dictionary, does not support this 
etymology. 

Q 

226 THE STUDY OF MAN 

for its use. The first-made form is not unlike a 
manger. Moor (Szfolk Words) gives the names 
as cat’s cradle, barn-doors, bowling-green, hour-glass, 
pound, net, diamonds, fish-pond, fiddle. A supposed 
resemblance originated them. Britton (Beautzes of 
Wiltshire, Glossary) says the game in London schools 
is called ‘ Scratch-scratch,” or “ Scratch-cradle,”* 
Amongst other Korean games Mr. Culint has in- 
vestigated that known as Ssz-¢e-kz, or ‘“Woof-taking.” 
It is practically identical with our cat’s cradle, as is 
usually played by girls. The figures, which are the 

same as in our own children’s play, are named as — 

follows: (1) cover for hearse, (2) chess-board, (3) 
chop-sticks, (4) cow’s eyeball, (5) rice-mill pestle. 

“In Japan cat’s cradle is called aya zto torti—‘ woof 
pattern string-taking,’ The figures are identical with 
those in Korea, but receive different names. (1) [?]; 
(2) nekomata, defined as ‘a mountain cat, into which 
a domestic cat is supposed to transform itself’; (3) 
koto, a musical instrument, or geta no ha, the two 
pieces of wood under the soles of clogs; (4) umano 
me, horse-eye ; (5) ¢swzamz, a musical instrument. 

“In South China cat’s cradle is called Lang sok, 

which means literally ‘well-rope.’ It is spoken of as 

* This account of the English game, with the references, is taken from 
Mrs. GomMeE’s “The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and 
Ireland,” i, (Dictionary of British Folk-Lore, Part i.), 1894, p. 61. 

+ STEWART CULIN, Korean Games : with Notes on the Corresponding 
Games of China and Japan, Philadelphia, 1895, p. 30. 

CAT’S CRADLE 227 

an amusement for girls, but is known to all Cantonese 
labourers. They make the same figures as those of 
Korea and Japan, but do not, they tell me, give them 
names. The order of the figures, after the first, is 
not necessarily that here given.” 

Miss Fielde* says that the Chinese of Swatow call 
cat’s cradle ‘sawing wood” in allusion to the final act 
in the performance. 

Dr.. A. R. Wallace, the famous traveller, who 
formulated a theory of natural selection synchronously 
with Darwin, thus describes} his finding this game in 
Borneo :— 

“One wet day in a Dyak house, when a number of boys 
and young men were about me, I thought to amuse them 
with something new, and showed them how to make ‘cat’s 
cradle’ with a piece of string. Greatly to my surprise, they 
knew all about it, and more than I did; for, after I and 
Charles had gone through all the changes we could make, 
one of the boys took it off my hand, and made several new 
figures which quite puzzled me. They then showed me a 

number of other tricks with pieces of string, which seemed 
a favourite amusement with them.” 

Lieut. de Crespigny { writes of the Dusuns of 
Borneo :— 

“Near me were two children playing at ‘cat’s cradle’ exactly 
as I remembered to have played it in my own childhood.” 

* A Corner of Cathay, New York, 1894, p. 87. 

t+ A. R. WALLACE, Zhe Malay Archipelago, 1869, i., p. 183. 

t Proc. R. Geogr. Soc., ii., 1858, p. 344. Quoted from H. LING Rory, 
The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo, i., 1896, p. 366. 

228 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The knowledge of this game was probably common 
to the members of the Polynesian stock before they 
separated off into different groups, as we find it in the 
Eastern Pacific in Mangaia, one of the Hervey Group, 
and again, so far south as New Zealand. 

Dr. W. Wyatt Gill,* the illustrious missionary of 
the Hervey Group, informs us that ‘“‘cat’s cradle (az) 
was a great delight of old and young. Teeth were 
called into play to help the fingers. One complication, 
in which the cord in the centre is twisted into a long 
slender stem, and therefore called ‘the coco-nut tree,’ 
I have never known a European to unravel.” 

Two early travellers give us the following account 
of the game as it is played in New Zealand :— 

“He what or maui.—The ‘cat’s cradle’ is a game very similar 
to our own, but the cord is made to assume many more forms, 
and these are said to be different scenes in their mythology, 
such as Hine-nui-te-po, Mother Night bringing forth her 
progeny, Maru and the gods, and Maui fishing up the land. 
Men, canoes, houses, etc., are also represented. Some state 
that Maui invented this game.’ t 

“Tn the game of JZauz they are great proficients. This is 
a game like that called ‘cat’s cradle’ in Europe, and consists 
of very complicated and perplexing puzzles with a cord tied 
together at the ends. It seems to be intimately connected 
with their ancient traditions, and in the different figures 
which the cord is made to assume; whilst held on both 
* W. WYATT GILL, Life in the Southern Isles, 1876, p. 65. 

+ R. TayLor, Ze Jka a Maui; or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants, 
London, 1855, p. 172. 

CAT’S CRADLE 229 

hands, the outlines of their different varieties of houses, 
canoes, or figures of mén and women are imagined to be 
represented. Maui, the Adam of New Zealand, left this 
amusement to them as an inheritance.”* 

Tregeart also mentions the representation of Zaw- 
hak (lightning) ascending to heaven. 

These statements are very interesting, and suggest 
that we have here to do with some symbolism that 
has in course of time become obscured. On the other 
hand, JZauz may be merely a pastime, and the string 
figures or designs may be nothing more than casual 
illustrations of the mythology of the natives. There 
do not appear to be sufficient data at present to settle 
this point. 

Dr. Codrington{ says, ‘“Cats’-cradle, in Lepers’ 
Island “eéegaro, in Florida honggo, with many 
figures, is common throughout the [Melanesian] 
Islands.” 

The Motu children of Port Moresby, in the 
south-eastern peninsula of New Guinea, are as well 
versed in the intricacies of ‘“‘cat’s cradle” as are 
our own. § 

I remember once going into a native hut in an 

* E, DIEFFENBACH, Travels in New Zealand. London, 1843, 
vol. ii, p. 32. 

+ E. TREGEAR, “The Maoris of New Zealand,” Journ. Anth. Inst. 
xix., 1889, p. 115. 

I The Melanesians, 1891, p. 341. 

§ W. Y. TURNER, “The Ethnology of the Motu,” Journ. Anth. Lust. 
vii., 1878, p. 483. 

230 THE STUDY OF MAN 

island in Torres Straits, and seeing a little black boy 
playing with a piece of string, the two ends of which 
were tied together, in much the same manner as our 
children play at cat’s cradle. The first figure that he 
made with it was precisely the same as our “cradle,” 
but the subsequent ones were different. He was 
greatly surprised when I picked the string off his 
hands to make “the soldier’s bed,’ which I then 
transformed into “the candles,” back into “the 
reversed manger,” and from that into “the diamonds,” 
and so on. I found that a couple of natives did not 
play together as we do, “taking off” from each other, 
but that usually each played separately. They can 
make much more elaborate devices than ours, and the 
process is correspondingly elaborate, and feet and 
teeth are at times pressed into service. On the other 
hand, although many are extremely complicated in 
manipulation the final result may be simple. The 
following are some of the forms I saw the natives 
make :—A mouth; a coco-nut palm; liana, or some 
forest rope-like climber; a fish; a crow; a dog; a 
crayfish, certain movements of the hands represented 
the motions of the living animal; a sea-snake, which, 
when the hands were drawn apart, had an undulating 
movement, such as sea-snakes have in swimming 
through the water; one figure was intended for a 
canoe, without an outrigger, and another for one 
with an outrigger; one, by a stretch of the imagination, 

CAT'S CRADLE 231 

was said to indicate a family of one picaninny (child), 
and yet another a family of two.* 

Among the Australians Eyre} remarks, “ string 
puzzles are another species of amusement with them. 
In these a European would be surprised to see the 
ingenuity they display, and the varied and singular 
figures which they produce. Our juvenile attempts 
in this way are very meagre and uninteresting com- 
pared to them.” 

Professor E. B. Tylor, { who has noted some of 
the references I have just given, says it is evident 
that the Dyaks and Maoris did not learn it from 
Europeans, and though cat’s cradle is now known 
over all Western Europe, we cannot find any record 
of it at all ancient in our part of the world. It is 
known in South-East Asia, and he thinks that ‘the 
most plausible explanation seems to be that this is its 
centre of origin, whence it migrated westward into 
Europe, and eastward and southward through 
Polynesia and into Australia.” It would be interest- 
ing if it could be established that this game has 
travelled in the manner suggested by the great Oxford 
anthropologist. The occurrence of a similar string 
game among the Eskimo requires explanation. 

* A, C. HaDpON, “The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres 
Straits,” Journ. Anth. Inst.,; 1890, xix., p. 361. 

+ Central Australia, ii., p. 229. 

{ E. B. TyLor, “ Remarks on the Geographical Distribution of Games,” 
Journ. Anth. Inst., ix., 1879, p. 26. 

232 THE STUDY OF MAN 

We know that all over the world string, cords, and 
knots enter largely into magic, and there may be some 
forgotten or unrecorded connection between cat's 
cradle and a magical rite. The association of cat’s 
cradle with mythology in New Zealand is also worth 
bearing in mind. 

At present we cannot carry the investigation any 
further until more evidence is to hand. It does 
not appear to me improbable that some of these 
varieties of cat’s cradle may have been independently 
invented, 

USUMN Ssh 

Although now fairly widely distributed in Europe 
and common enough in England, the kite is a com- 
paratively recent plaything in Europe, having been 
introduced in the course of oriental trade from the far 
East during the seventeenth century. Strutt, writing 
in 1801, says he does not find “any reason to conclude 
that it existed here much more than a century back,”* 
and the first record he found was in a French and 
English Dictionary, published by Miege, A.p.. 1690, 
where among other significations cerf volant denoted 
au iste” 

Such being the case it is evident there cannot be 
much to learn from a study of kites in Europe, 

* J. SrruttT, The Sports and Pastimes of the People Mf Pimelarey, 
1801, Book iv., p. 292. 

KITES 233 

nor have we a great variety in forms. The old 
type with a crescentic upper margin is giving place 
to a diamond or lozenge-shaped form. Occasionally 
one sees other shapes, but these are obviously 
importations, or imitations, of Chinese or Japanese 
kites. 

From being a mere toy the kite has recently become 
a scientific instrument. Kites appear to have been 
first applied in meteorology by Alexander Wilson, 
of Glasgow, who, in 1749, raised thermometers 
attached to kites into the clouds.* Three years later, 
Franklin performed in Philadelphia his celebrated 
experiment of collecting the electricity of the thunder- 
cloud by means of a kite.j Although kites have 
served a variety of purposes, their first systematic 
use in meteorology was probably in England, between 
1883 and 1885, when E. D. Archibald made differential 
measurements of wind velocity by anemometers, raised 
by kites fifteen hundred feet (Vature, vol. xxxi.) In 
1885 A. McAdie repeated Franklin’s experiment on 
Blue Hill, using an electrometer. Since then there 
has been a very notable development in scientific kite- 
flying in the United States; in Europe attention 
has chiefly been directed to balloons, though the 
latter have many disadvantages as compared with the 
former. A kite-balloon is now. being tried in the 

* Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, x., p. 284. 
+ SparKS, Works of Benjamin Franklin, v., p. 295- 

234 THE STUDY OF MAN 

German army, but it is inferior to the simple kite 
for meteorological researches.* 

“In Washington the Weather Bureau has, under the 
direction of Prof. Willis L. Moore, chief of the Bureau, been 
carrying on an extended investigation into the best kinds 
of kites for use in sending up meteorological instruments. 
Prof. C. F. Marvin has recently minutely described the kind 
of kite now in use by the Bureau.t This kite is a modifi- 
cation of those used by Hargrave in Australia, and is not at 
all like the ordinary kite. Instead of being flat, and tapering 
at the lower end, as in the usual form, these kites are box- 
shaped, with their ends open and their s:des partly covered 
with cloth or silk. This style of kite, which has also been in 
use at Blue Hill for some months, is found to be admirably 
adapted to the purpose for which it is intended, and when 
fine piano wire is used to hold it, instead of twine, is a 
splendid flyer. 

“Clayton, of the Blue Hill- Gite has for some time 
been using kites to help in determining the altitudes of the 
base of stratus and nimbus. These clouds, which so often 
cover the whole sky with a uniform sheet, can only have their 
heights determined under the most favourable circumstances 
if the ordinary theodolite is used. 

“The work done at Blue Hill Observatory with kites was 
outlined by Clayton before the Boston Scientific Society at 
a recent meeting.{ The kites at present in use are the Eddy, 
or tailless, and the Hargrave, or box kite. Continued experi- 
ments at Blue Hill have resulted in the development of 
scientific kite-flying on a remarkable scale. Recent ascents 

* LAWRENCE ROTCH, “On obtaining Meteorological Records in the 
Upper Air, by means of Kites and Balloons,” Proc. American Acad. 
Arts and Sci., xxxii., 1897 ; reprinted in azure, lvi., 1897, p. 602. 

+ Monthly Weather Rev., Nov., 1895. 

} Boston Commonwealth, May 9th, 1896, 12-13. 

KITES 2358 

have reached altitudes but little short of a mile above sea 
level ; and excellent records have been obtained by means of 
a self-recording instrument which gives automatic readings 
of temperature, pressure, humidity, and wind velocity. The 
meteorological results already obtained are of great value, 
and the full discussion of them is awaited with interest. 
Among the most important matters that have been noted | 
is the presence of cold waves and warm waves at considerable 
elevations some hours before the temperature changes are 
noted at the earth’s surface. The prospect of improving our 
weather forecasts by such soundings of the free air is very 
encouraging, and it is more than likely that before long some 
practical use will be made of these discoveries. 

“The next few years will undoubtedly witness many 
improvements in kites used for meteorological purposes, 
and the United States seems to be distinctly in the lead 
in this work at the present time.’* 

True to the tradition of thousands of years, the 
ingenuity of Europe is concerned in an endeavour 
to increase her machinery for war. It is extremely 
difficult for an expert marksman to hit even a captive 
balloon, and it is doubtful whether our newest field- 
gun would be of much service in this respect, but a 
kite would be much more difficult to hit. Therefore 
it really does become of some interest to know whether 
an enemy can by means of a parcel of kites take 
photographs of our defences, and by the same method 
detonate over our cities several dozen pounds of nitro- 
glycerine. 

Captain Baden-Powell, of the Scots Guards, is our 

* R. DEC. WaRD, Science (N.S.), iii., 1896, p. 801. 

236 THE STUDY OF MAN 

great authority on kites in England. He makes these 
toys of our childhood on such a scale that they can, 
with a good wind, carry up a staff officer. He is 
understood to laugh at balloons as a means of observ- 
ing a foe, and to claim that, whereas balloons must be 
a failure when the wind is strong, kites will do nearly 
all their work in a gale or half a gale. 

The use of kites for scientific purposes is obvious 
enough. By their aid real bird’s-eye views may be 
taken with a camera flying aloft, the shutter being 
actuated by mechanical means or preferably by elec- 
tricity. Mr. Woglom* gives us some specimens of 
views of New York City taken from the neighbour- 
hood of Washington Square. We do not know that 
they show us much more than could be had from the 
roofs of some of the monster buildings which the 
straitness of New York necessitates, and which are 
unhappily not unknown now in London. But they at 
least prove the possibility, which the ordinary man 
might well have doubted, of manipulating a camera 
attached toa kite. If that can be done at 200 ft. from 
the ground while the kite is in the air, it can obviously 
be done at 2,000 ft. 

“ The form of kite from which the ‘ parakite’ is an evolution 

is the general form of the Asiatic kite, substantially a square, 
whereof the two diagonals are respectively horizontal and 

* GILBERT TOTTEN WOGLOM, Parakites: A Treatise on the Making 

and Flying of Tailless Kites for Scientific Purposes and for Recreation. 
1896. (Putnam and Sons.) 

KITES 237 

vertical with a convex windward side, the convexity pro- 
duced by a third transverse member which is curved upward 
as well as to the windward face. The Woglom parakite flies 
without a tail, and will not fly properly with one.’* 

With all our vaunted progress and science we~ 
have not so very much to pride ourselves upon 
even in this latest development of military tactics ; 
for we are, after all, only following in the footsteps 
of the Chinese and Japanese. 

Kites are said to have been invented by the 
Chinese General, Han-Sin, about 200 B.c. He flew 
in the air figures of different forms and colours, and 
thus signalled from a besieged town to the army that 
was coming to his succour. + 

In a war with Japan, some 400 years ago, a 
Korean general encouraged his dispirited soldiers, 
who were discouraged by the appearance of falling 
stars, by secretly making a kite, to which he attached 
a small lantern, and one dark night he sent it up. 
The soldiers accepted this as an auspicious omen, 
and renewed the struggle with increased energy. 

Another general flew a kite across an impassable 
stream; it lodged in a tree on the other side, and 
by its means he pulled a strong cord across and 
ultimately made a bridge. 

Ui Shosetsu, the Japanese who tried to upset 

Pa dslay ts LOL 
+ F. DILLAYE, Les Jeux de la Jeunesse, 1885, p. 34. 

238 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the Tokugawa Government in the seventeenth 
century, made a large kite, to which he fastened 
himself, and, being carried up into the air, he was 
enabled to overlook the castle of Yedo. 

A famous Japanese robber, Ishikawa Goemon, in 
the sixteenth century, attempted by mounting on a 
kite to steal the two celebrated solid golden fish, 
which, as finials, adorned two spires of the great 
castle of Nagoya. The fish were worth the risk, 
as they were valued at from £15,000 to £16,000, 
but the daring thief failed in his purpose. 

It is to the same end of Asia that we must turn 
if we wish to study kites from an anthropological 
point of view, and there we shall find them in 
profusion, of quaint and varied form, brilliant in 
colour, and in addition we find them put to diverse 
uses and imbued with symbolic significance. 

Nor are the times and seasons for kite - flying 
unimportant. With us kites may be flown all the 
year round, provided there is wind enough; but, as 
a matter of fact, spring is the more usual season for 
the sport. In the far East we find that definite times 
are appointed for this exercise. 

In his learned book on Korean Games, Mr. Stewart 
Culin informs us that the time for kite-flying in Korea 
is the first half of the first month; after this time 
anyone would be laughed at who flew a kite, nor 
will anyone touch a lost kite. On the fourteenth day 

KITES 239 

Fic. 36, 

ORIENTAL KITES, 
. A Korean kite, with “ crow’s feet”; 2. A Chinese kite; 3. “Cuttlefish” kite from 
a Japanese drawing (1-3 after Culin); 4, Kite from the Solomon 
Islands (from a specimen in the British Museum), 

240 THE WROD V ROL AACA, 

of the same month it is customary in Korea to write 
on kites a wish to the effect that the year’s mis- 
fortunes may be carried away with them. A mother 
does this for a small boy, adding his name and the 
date of his birth. The inscription is written along 
the bamboo frame, so that it-may not be readily 
seen by anyone who might be tempted to pick up 
the kite. The boys tie a piece of sulphur paper on 
the string of such a kite, which they light before 
sending up, so that when the kite is in the air the 
string will be burnt through and the kite itself blown 
away. 

It is evident that the kite is, in this instance, treated 
as a “‘scape-goat,” the goat of the Hebrews being re: 
placed bya bird. In Japan kites are called ‘“ octopus,” 
“ paper-hawk,” “ paper-owl,” &c.; and in Korea the 
rectangular kites are provided at each of the lower 
angles with triangular pieces of white paper called 
the “crow’s foot,” and near the upper border is a 
disc of coloured paper, which probably is the vestige 
of an antecedent bird's face. (Fig. 36, No. 1.) All 
classes fly kites, from the king downwards. Women 
sometimes fly kites from their yards, but it is said 
that anyone can tell when a kite is flown by a woman. 

In Japan the season for kite-flying greatly varies ; 
in general it appears to depend upon the prevailing 
winds. At Tokyo it begins on the first day of the 
New Year, and kites are never flown at any other 

KITES 241 

season. On the other hand, at Nagasaki, kites are 
not flown in the first month, but the festivals for kite- 
flying are the 3rd, roth, 15th, and 25th of the third 
month, the 3rd being the occasion of a ‘religious 
festival of dolls” (literally of “chickens,” or “ young 
birds”). 

On the 5th of the fifth month is the boys’ festival. 
Streamers and small flags are displayed, and a large 
coloured carp of cloth or paper. This fish is respected, 
as it resolutely overcomes all the difficulties it en- 
counters in its passage up the streams of the country, 
even ascending waterfalls; thus it is emblematic of 
what it is hoped will be the career of the boys. 
Models of helmets and warriors are also exhibited as 
expressions of the hope that boys may become great 
men. There is a distinct association of ideas between 
long flags and kites. The same day in other parts 
of Japan is an especial occasion for kite-flying. In 
the province of Suruga all the boys who can afford it 
have a kite on this day. It is considered very un- 
lucky for a boy to lose his kite; should this happen, it 
is customary for search parties to follow the lost kite 
even for a distance of twenty miles, and those who 
bring it back are rewarded with presents of sake. 
It is recorded that a boy once lost his kite on the 
day of this feast, and a few months later he died. 
Girls never have kites. In this case it appears that 
the kite is regarded as a “‘life-token,” or “external 

R 

242 THE STUDY OF MAN 

soul,” of the boy. But this symbolism is limited to 
certain occasions and places. In Nagasaki, when a 
kite escapes, no special effort is made to recover it. 

The middle and upper classes in China indulge in 
the pastime in a desultory way; it is not with them 
a national sport, as with the Japanese and with the 
natives of the countries south of China.* The 
Koreans say that the Chinese do not know how to 
fly kites, and that when a Chinaman grows tired he 
will tie the string on to a tree and lie down and 
watch it. t 

In Hong Kong the kite-flying season is the end of 
summer ; but in some parts of China the ninth day 
of the ninth month has been from ancient times the 
great kite-flying festival, when paper birds and bizarre 
monsters flit, swoop, and hover in multitudes in the 
bright sunshine. (Fig. 36, No. 2.) 

In the mountains of the province of Canton kites 
are flown in gangs. 

“The flier dismisses a leash of three, united by three lines 
of a few feet in length. At the junction of the three ends 
he attaches a single line, which is dismissed a few feet farther 
in the air. Then raising another separate leash of three— 
similar in arrangement to the first—he ties the joined ends 
of the second leash to his main single line, and dismisses 
the second trio, the first trio being in the air beyond and 
above the second. He repeats the operation as many times 

* G. T. WoGLoM, Parakites, p. 9. 
+ S. CULIN, Korean Games p. 12 

KITES 243 

as his stock of kites and his stock of patience will allow. 
He heedfully chooses kites which have been proven sidewise 
fliers, so that they may not foul each other; if a fresher 
wind attacks his exhibits, his painstaking is ineffective; they 
will swirl into a confusion of entanglement which would 
exasperate any but a Chinaman.”* 

To a very large extent kite-flying in China and 
Japan is now a simple amusement; but this is what 
one constantly finds in the history of ancient cere- 
monial customs. Mr. Woglom informs us that the 
Japanese have their kite-clubs with quite large 
membership rolls. One prominent club, the Shiyen 
Kwai, holds assemblies annually in January for con- 
sultation and to competitively decide upon new 
designs. Prizes for beauty of design and decoration, 
and for perfection in build and accuracy in flight, are 
competed for at the meetings, which are protracted 
for several days. The club meetings are held in 
Tokyo, and the flights are held in the suburbs. 

The “ Festival of the Cherry-Bloom” is a season 
for national sport. Old men, up to eighty years of 
age, after their tiring efforts in raising their pets into 
the heavens, and too feeble to stand continuously, are 
attended by servants with chairs. When travelling 
through a, sparsely inhabited section, the rider will 
see ancient, mummy-like Japanese sitting by the road- 
side, perhaps upon a bamboo-pole support, con- 
tentedly flying and watching his kite hour after hour. 

* G. T. WoGLoM, Parakites, p. 9 

244 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Nowadays in Japan, the kite-flying by both adults and 
children is practised outside the cities; the police 
regulations forbid it in the narrow city streets. 

One exciting form of the sport is known as kite- 
fighting. The strings, for a portion of their length, 
are covered with powdered glass, or sharp-edged, 
curved pieces of glass are fastened to the tails of 
the kites, the object being to cut the string of an 
opponent’s kite by a sawing motion of the string of 
your own kite whilst both are flying. It has been 
stated that kite-cutting did not originate in China, 
but that it was brought from India. A description 
of this skilful pastime is given by Woglom in 
Parakites.* 

In Siam each mandarin has his special form of 
kite with a distinctive colour. The king, also, is 
said to have a magnificently decorated kite, which is 
flown at sunset and kept flying all night by mandarins 
of the first rank. It is withdrawn at sunrise.t Here 
again there must be a symbolic or magical significance 
for this curious custom. 

Not only in Further India, but in India itself, on 
the one hand, and in the Malay region to the south, 
is kite-flying practised. It is very prevalent in Java. 
The several Javanese communities have each their 
peculiar kinds of kites, and they hold contests to 

* Parakites, pp. 6, 8, 9. 
+ F. DILLAYE, Les Jeux de la Jeunesse, 1885, p. 39. 

KITES 248 

prove superiority of manufacture or skill in manipu- 
lation. The old form of English kite was a Javanese 
pattern. Woglom says the Javanese kites are seldom 
decorated, except with dirt. The Javanese, more 
generally than the Japanese, gamble on the results 
of kite competitions and kite battles. They fly them 
to heights of 700 to 1200 feet for display. 

Dr. Codrington* informs us that in Melanesia 
kites are used as toys in the Banks Islands, and 
in the New Hebrides they are made and flown at the 
season when the gardens are being cleared for plant- 
ing. The kite is steadied by a long reed tail, and a 
good one will fly and hover very well. 

In Lepers’ Island the kite is called an “eagle,” and 
the following song is sung when flying one :— 

“Wind! wherever you may abide, 
Wherever you may abide, Wind! come hither ; 
Pray take my eagle away from me afar. 
E-u! E-u! Wind! blow strong and steady, 
Blow and come forth, O Wind!” 

But the kite is put to a more utilitarian use in 
the Solomon Islands and Santa Cruz.t Here it is 
flown from a canoe, and from it hangs a tangle of 
spiders’ web or of fibre, which it drags along the 
surface of the water and in which fish with long 

* R. H. CODRINGTON, Zhe Melanesians: Studies in their Anthropo- 

logy and Folk-Lore, 1891, pp. 342, 330. 
t+ Loc. cit., p. 318. 

246 THE STUDY OF MAN 

slender under jaws become entangled. (Fig. 36, 
No. 4.) 

The Fijians know of the kite by the Polynesian 
name of Manumanu, “bird,” but apparently they 
do not fly it.* 

The use of the kite was widely spread in Polynesia, 
being recorded from the Society Islands and as far 
south as New Zealand. Ellis states, “The boys 
were very fond of the wo, or kite, which they raised 
to a great height. The Tahitian kite was different in 
shape from the kites of the English boys. It was 
made of light native cloth instead of paper, and 
formed in shape according to the fancy of its 
owner.” + 

In New Zealand “the name of the kite is the old 
term for the hawk. Their figure is generally a rough 
imitation of the bird with its great out-spread wings ; 
these kites are frequently made of very large dimen- 
sions of vaupo leaves, a kind of sedge, neatly sewn 
together and kept in shape by a slight framework. 
The string is most expeditiously formed and length- 
ened at pleasure, being merely the split leaves of the 
flax plant [Phormium tenax]. This is a very favourite 
amusement.” { Dieffenbach says, “The kite is of 
triangular form, and is very neatly made of the light 

* SEEMANN, V70z, p. 45. 
+ W. ELLIS, Polynesian Researches, i. (2nd Ed., 1831), p. 228. 
t R. TAyLor, Ze ka a Maui; or, New Zealand and tts Inhabitants, 

1855, p- 172. 

KITES 247 

leaves of a sedge; its ascent is accompanied with 
some saying or song, such as the He karakia pakau. 
It is a sign of peace when it is seen flying near 
a village.”* Dieffenbach gives the words of this 
song, but unfortunately it is not translated. Tregear + 
says the kite kakw (hawk), or Aakau (wing), is made 
from the leaves of the vaufo (Typha angustifolia). 
There were three kinds of kites in the remote 
Hervey Islands, which were either egg-shaped, club- 
shaped, or bird-shaped. As the latter were more 
difficult to make, they were scarce and justly admired 
by the childish old men who delighted to fly them on 
the hill-tops of Mangaia. Besides a terminal bunch 
of feathers, the long tail of these kites was decorated 
respectively with four, six, or three bunches of yellow 
tz leaves. The four bunches of the egg-like kite 
represent a constellation called the ‘Twins and their 
parents” (Pzrzerewa ma), about which an interesting 
myth is given by the Rev. Dr. Wyatt Gill.t The 
only children of Potiki were twins, a girl named 
Piri-ere-ua, or ‘Inseparable,’ and a boy. Their 
mother, Tarakorekore, was a great scold and gave 
them no peace. On one occasion when their mother 
would not give them some fish they ran away and 
leaped up into the sky, where they were followed by 

* E, DIEFFENBACH, 7vavels in New Zealand, ii.. 1843, p. 31- 
+ E. TREGEAR, Journ. Anth. Inst., xix., p. 115. 
i Myths and Songs, p. 49. 

248 THE STUDY OF MAN 

their parents, who continually chase but can never 
overtake them :— 

SONG OF THE TWINS. 

Wherefore fled the children of Tarakorekore? 
Anger at the cooked fish of Potiki. 
They stealthily rose, and ran and fled for ever. 

Alas! that a mother should thus ill-treat her children. 
Such was not zy (the father’s) wish ; and when I intercede, 
She will not relent. 

She thrashes them—is always at it. 
If one sleeps at Karang or elsewhere, 
Still there is no peace—only threats and blows. 

The six bunches denote the Pleiades; this beau- 
tiful constellation was of extreme importance in 
heathenism, as its appearance at sunset on the eastern 
horizon detérmined the commencement of the new 
year, which is about the middle of December. Dr. 
Gill gives* the mythical account of the origin of 
the group. The three bunches represent ‘The 
Three” (Zau-toru), that is, the three bright stars 
forming Orion’s Belt. The tapa of which the kites 
were made was decorated with devices appropriate to 
the tribe of the maker. A tail with six bunches of 
leaves was about twenty fathoms (120 feet) in length. 

The origin of kite-flying is thus accounted for. 
The god Tane, the Giver of food, once challenged his 
eldest brother Rongo, the Resounder, whose home 

* 1o5 Pi 43. 

IGA IRS 249 

is in the shades, to a kite-flying match. But the 
issue of this trial of skill was the utter discomfiture 
of Tane by Rongo, who had secretly provided him- 
self with an enormous quantity of string. This 
contest is the subject of a poem composed by Koroa 
about 1814 A.D.* j 
A KITE SONG. 
Call for the dance to lead off 
The hill-top Atiu is covered with kites, 
Pets of Raka who rules o’er the winds. 
Solo. Dance away ! 
Go on! 

Chorus. See, yon hill-top Atiu covered with kites— 
Pets of Raka, god of the winds. 

Solo, Aye. 
Chorus. 1am a bird T of beautiful plumage. 
Solo. Cleave, then, the dark clouds. 

Chorus. Take care lest Tautiti gain the day. 
Solo. Once Tane and Rongo tried their skill, 
With divine kites in spirit-land. 
Solo. Who was beaten? 
Chorus. 'Tane; for his string fell short. 
Solo. Two thousand fathoms of string ! 
Chorus. Yes; ’twas Rongo’s, 
Whose kite touched the edge of the sky. 

Thus mortals have acquired this agreeable pastime, 
the condition of each game being that the first kite 
that mounts the sky should be sacred to and should 
bear the name of Rongo, the divine patron of the art. 
The names of all subsequent kites were indifferent. 

* Myths and Songs, p. 123. + ze, a kite. 

250 THE STUDY CF MAN 

Children’s kites were, aid still are, extemporized 
out of the leaves of the gigantic chestnut tree. Some- 
times one sees a boy—but it is no longer as in the 
olden time the grandfathers—flying a properly made- 
kite. 

Elsewhere* Dr. Gill gives a Mangaian legend 
about kites which is about 360 years old, and with 
it ‘The song of the Twin Kites.” 

Kites are said, as I have previously mentioned, to 
have been invented by the Chinese general, Han-Sin, 
about 200 8.c. There is no reason to disbelieve that 
Han-Sin employed kites for the purpose stated, but 
the undoubted religious character of kite-flying in so 
many places suggests rather that this is not at all 
likely to have been the origin of the custom. 

Probably we shall never know how the kite first 
originated—it may have been independently invented 
in several places, but this is not by any means certain. 
We Europeans certainly learnt the art of kite-flying 
from South or Eastern Asia.t 

The divine origin of kites in spirit-land, according 
to the ancient Mangaian myth, points to its having been 
an ancestral custom, and as kite-flying, accompanied 
with the singing of mythical chants, appears to be 

* W. WyaTT GILL, from Darkness to Light in Polynesia, with 
illustrative Clan Songs, London, 1894, p. 39; of. also Life in the Southern 
Isles, by the same author, p. 64. 

+ E. B. TyLor, “Remarks on the Geographical Distribution of 
Games,” Journ. Anth. Inst., ix., 1879, p. 23. 

RITES 251 

widely spread in the Pacific, we may safely regard 
the custom as not having various independent centres 
of origin in Oceania, but as having been brought by the 
Oceanic peoples in their wanderings from the Malay 
Archipelago. Dr. Gill believes that the Polynesians 
first arrived in the Hervey Islands some two or three 
hundred years ago, and that their swarming from 
Savai'i took place some five or six centuries ago.* 
How and when their ancestors got to, the Samoan 
group is still very problematical. An additional 
argument in favour of the natives of the Hervey 
Group bringing their kites with them is found in the 
Plan of the Winds as handed down by the ancient 
priests, which, with slight variations, is known from 
many other of the Oceanic groups. The number of 
wind-holes in this plan exactly corresponds with the 
points of the mariner’s compass. In the olden times 
great stress was laid on this knowledge for the purpose 
of fishing, and especially for the long sea voyages 
which these adventurous navigators undertook from 
group to group. The Chinese are credited with 
having invented the mariner’s compass long anterior 
to the Christian era. I should not be surprised if 
ultimately it was found to be the case that the com-- 
pass, with certain other elements of Chinese culture, 
was brought to that country by a maritime people who 
were early merged into the general population of that 

* Myths and Songs, p. 167. 

252 THE STUDY OF MAN 

mixed people, and who have subsequently been for- 
gotten. It was known to the Arabs in medizval 
times, and from them, through the crusaders, the 
knowledge spread over Europe. As Dr. Gill points 
out,* the absence of iron throughout Polynesia would 
easily account for the loss of the magnet, but the plan 
of the card was perpetuated. 

Thus once more our attention is directed towards 
Eastern Asia, not only as the head-quarters, but also 
as the place of origin of the kite. It may yet be 
shown that it actually originated among the Indonesian 
stock before the Polynesians had swarmed off from 
the so-called Malay Archipelago to found new 
homes in Oceania, There are anthropologists who 
claim a southern origin for the fine type of the 
Japanese ; possibly these adventurous and skilful sea- 
men, like the Norsemen of Northern Europe, may 
have formed an aristocracy among the agricultural 
and settled peoples of Japan and Korea, and brought 
with them their social organization and a_ higher 
culture. If this be so, it is not improbable that kite- 
flying was a religious exercise of these people, and 
the kite may have been a symbol of the soul or spirit 
of man. 

If we grant, and there is to my mind very good 
reason for so doing, that the kite was a religious 
symbol of the primitive Indonesian race, we may 

* Myths and Songs, p. 319. 

KITES 253 

fairly go one step further and suggest that the kite 
itself is merely the liberated sail of a canoe. 
Amongst a seafaring folk this accident must often 
arise, and the excitement of hauling down a sail that 
had blown away might very well lead to the process 
being intentionally repeated on a small scale. 

It is tempting to imagine that as the sails of a 
canoe are virtually the life of a canoe—that is, the 
source of its movement, the loss of which leaves 
behind it an inert log at the mercy of the elements, 
so the kite by analogy may have come to be regarded 
as the “external soul” or ‘‘life-token” of the owner. 
For an elucidation of the remarkable belief that the 
soul can be located in an extraneous object far re- 
moved from the body, the reader is referred to the 
concluding part of Dr. Frazer's monumental work, 
The Golden Bough.* Mr. Hartland, in his great 
study of the Legend of Perseus, deals fully with the 
life-token; he is of opinion we are “justified in 
treating the life-token and the external soul as almost 
always one and the same thing in belief and custom” 
(p. 30).+ Granting the truth of the statement that 
the King of Siam’s kite is flown at night by a trusted 
mandarin, the fact would bear the interpretation that 
during the hours of darkness and danger the royal 

*J.G. FRAZER, The Golden Bough, a Study in Comparative Religion, 
1890, ii., p. 296. 

+ E. SIDNEY HARTLAND, The Legend of Perseus, a Study of Tradition 
in Story, Custom, and Belief, 1895, ii., pp. 1-54. 

254 THE STUDY OF MAN 

soul was peacefully soaring in the calm heavens, far 
removed from mundane risks. 

Problems such as these, which are suggested by the 
comparative study of toys, have in themselves those 
very dangers which beset the kites themselves. The 
string which binds them to the solid earth may snap, 
and they may be lost in the clouds, or they may fall, 
as it were, lifeless to the ground, 

CrAPiT ER TX. 
TOYS AND GAMES: TOPS AND THE TUG-OF-WAR. 

TOPS. 

E have seen that the kite has been introduced 

into Europe from Eastern Asia, but Schlegel 
believes the reciprocity has not been all on one side, 
as, according to him, the West has repaid in the 
top its debt to the East for the kite. 

There are many kinds of tops, but they can be 
resolved into a few groups :—the whipping-top; the 
top turned by a string wound round the upper end as 
in the humming-top, in which case there is usually a 
detachable handle, or by the string enwrapping the 
lower end as in the usual peg-tops ; and lastly the top, 
or teetotum, spun by being twisted by the hands or 
fingers. 

Every spring tops appear in our streets with the 
regularity of the seasonal revivals of Dame Nature 
herself, “Tops are in, spin ’em agin ; 

Tops are out, smuggin’ about,” 
cried the ragamuffins in Hone’s time* and so they 
still do. The last phrase has reference to an unwritten 

* W. Hone, The Every-Day Book, i., 1824 (February 15), p. 253. 
255 

256 THE STUDY OF MAN 

code of boy-life, that confiscation (“smugging”) of 
toys is allowable when they are “out.” 

Nares * has collected several references which show 
that tops were at one time owned by the parish or 
town. In Twelfth Night} we read, “ He’s a coward 
and coystril, that will not drink to my niece, till his 
brains turn o’ the toe like the parish top.” 

Beaumont and Fletcher refer more than once to 

this strange civic toy :— 
“Tl hazard 
My life upon it, that a boy of twelve 
Should scourge him hither like a parish top, 
And make him dance before you.” { 

“ And dances like a town-top, and reels and hobbles.” § 

Sir W. Blackstone asserts also, that to “sleep 
like a town-top,” was proverbial. Stevens, in his 
Notes on Shakespeare, states that “this is one 
of the customs now laid aside: a large top was 
formerly kept in every village, to be whipt in frosty 
weather, that the peasants might be kept warm by 
exercise and out of mischief while they could not 
work.” It is very improbable that this is the real 
signification of the curious custom of having a village 
top. Judging from what we know of other instances 
of village recreations, it is probable that there is 

* R, NARES, Glossary, “ Parish Top.” 

+ SHAKESPEARE, Twelfth Night, Act i., Scene 3. 

~ BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER, Thierry and Theod., Act ii., Scene 4. 
§ Lbid., Night Walker, Act i., Scene 4. 

TOPS 257 

something behind this which has not yet been 
elucidated. 

Hone* refers to a top being used in the ritual 
of the burial of Alleluia in one of the churches in 
Paris. ‘‘ According to a story (whether true or false) 
in one of the churches of Paris, a choir boy used to 
whip a top marked with Aeluwa, written in gold 
letters, from one end of the choir to the other.” This 
does not seem to be very likely, but strange customs . 
often persist to an unexpected and almost inexplicable 
extent, and, if it be true, we may find in this and 
analogous customs some clues which may throw light 
upon the town tops. 

The whipping-top has an ancient pedigree in 
Europe. In a work of the thirteenth century, Le 
Miracle de Sainct-Loys, the whipping-top (sadot) is 
mentioned ; + and it is figured in the marginal paint- 
ings of English MSS. of the fourteenth century. { 

Pliny refers to a top identical with the modern one, 
and specimens of such tops have been recovered from 
the ruins of Pompeii, and are still exhibited in the 
museum of Naples. There are, as a matter of fact, 
several allusions in Latin and Greek authors to the 
whipping-top. The whipping-top is mentioned in an 
old MS. dating to about 500 B.c. A stranger of 

* W. HONE, The Every-Day Book, i., 1824 (February 2), p. 199. 
+ F. DILLAYE, Les Feux de la Feunesse, Paris, 1885, p. 191. 
tJ. StRuTT, The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England, 
1801, Book iv., Chap. iv., p. 288, 
Ss 

258 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Atarne consulted Pittacus of Mitylene, one of the 
Seven Sages of Greece (651-569 B.C.), concerning a 
wife. The question was whether he should take a 
certain girl in his own rank of life who had a fortune 
equal to his own, or a damsel of higher status and 
with more money. The sage told him to go to a 
group of boys who were playing at whipping-tops in 
the midst of a wide cross-road. As he approached 
them he heard one of the boys say to his fellow, 
“Whip the nearest one,” and he accepted this as an 
oracle. 

The oldest record is the discovery of Dr. Schlie- 
mann of terra-cotta tops in the so-called Third City 
of Troy, and at the present day the boys of Asia 
Minor still spin tops with whips. 

When the traveller, Palgrave, was at Riadh, the 
capital of Wahabees in Central Arabia, he saw a boy | 
spin a top on his left hand, he then took it on the 
forefinger of his right hand, which he held at full 
length above his head, and repeated the following 
formula :— 

“Not by my strength, nor cleverness, but by the etc 
of God and by the cleverness of God.” 

The whipping-top is known in the far East. 
Stewart Culin* in his beautifully illustrated work 
on Korean Games gives a plate of a couple of boys 

* STEWART CULIN, Korean Games: with Notes on the corresponding 
Games of China and Japan, Philadelphia, 1895. 

LOPS 259 

playing on the ice. The top is made of hard wood 
with an iron point, it is played with in winter and 
usually spun on the frozen ground. The Koreans 
also share the humming-top with the Japanese, who 
call it “thunder top.” 

The learned Chinese scholar, Gustav von Schlegel, 
of Leiden, many years ago* also distinguished 
between the various kinds of tops of Eastern Asia: 
the ordinary small top, driven with the whip 
(Tanzknipfle, te. “dance-button,” is its name on 
the Neckar), the humming-top, the whistling - top 
which is thrown, and the top turned round with the 
fingers, &c. -The first of these, according to Schlegel, 
spread from Europe through Java to Japan and 
Korea. Schlegel never saw it in China, nor is it 
mentioned in the older Chinese works. 

The Japanese, according to Dr. R. Andree in an 
erudite paper on ‘The Game of Tops and its 
Distribution” in a recent number of GdJodus, call 
the different sorts of top fok-dok, This word is not 
snown in China, and in the old Japanese encyclo- 
peedias the name is ¢o/o, which is the Dutch ¢o/ which, 
together with its name, was introduced, says Schlegel, 
into Japan from Java.. The Korean and Japanese 
humming-top corresponds exactly with that used in 
Java, and they are all made of bamboo. Culin 

* Chinesiche Brauche und Spiele in Europa, Dissertation, Jena, 1869. 
+ R. ANDREE, “Das Kreiselspielen und seine Verbreitung,” G/odws, 
Ixix., 1896, p. 371. 

260 THE STUDY OF MAN 

figures a large number of Japanese tops of various 
kinds, many of which are very ingenious. 

From Japan this top passed across to China, where 
in Amoy it is called £ax-lok, which has the same 
signification as the Japanese 7Zo/o. The large 
humming-top is called in Amoy “earth-thunder,” 
and in Canton “noisy goose.” Thus the Bromtol 
of the Netherlands (the ¢oupze bourdonnante of the 
French) has also wandered afar. 

According to Bastian* the game of top is known in — 
Burmah and Siam. Different kinds of tops are 
found in Malasia. The true humming-top and the 
whipping-top occur in the Malay Peninsula and 
Archipelago. A humming-top from the Straits 
Settlements in the British Museum is made of a_ 
section of bamboo, with an oblong opening in the 
side. Mr. C. H. Read also describes a Malay top 
(gas¢ng) made in a lathe, and furnished with an iron 
peg at the base. It differs from the European top in 
haying the string wound round the upper part. It 
was obtained at Sélangor, Straits Settlements. (Fig. — 
37, No. 6.) 

Riedel+ found tops among the Uliassern, Serang, 
Kaisar, and Wetar. A simple wooden top driven 
by a whip was found by Dr. Max Weber} in the | 

* BASTIAN, Reise in Birma, p. 60; Reise in Siam, p. 324. 

+ RIEDEL, Sluiken hroeshaarigé Rassen, pp. 84, 131, 428, 433. 

t Max WEBER, E¢hnographische Notizen iiber Flores und Celebes. 
Leiden, 1890, pl. v., fig. 12. 

Fic. 37. 
EASTERN Tops; after C. H. Read. 

1, 2. Stone teetotum or top from Mer (Murray Island), Torres Straits; 8, Wooden spinning-top 
from Timorlaut, Tenimber Islands; 4. Bamboo humming-teetotum or top, Straits Settle- 
ments ; 5. A similar toy from Sakayana, Stewart Islands, West Pacific 6, Malay peg-top 
from Selangor, Straits Settlements. The scale is between one-third and one-fourth, 

262 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Island of Flores, and a spinning-top was collected by 
Dr. H. O. Forbes in Timorlaut. C. H. Read,* who 
has described this (Fig. 37, No. 6) and other tops, 
points out various Malay influences that are seen in 
this island. 

Ling Roth,t in his very valuable compilation on 
Bornean ethnography, records that the Sea-Dyak 
boys are very fond of playing with tops. He figures 
one on page 104 which is a double cone; the string 
is wound round the upper half, and it is evidently 
spun as a peg-top. The boys play games, but, with 
the exception of the top, the young men look upon 
games as beneath them. 

There are very few recorded instances of tops from 
Oceania. A humming-top (Fig. 37, No. 5) is said to 
come from the Stewart Islands (Sakayana), which lie 
a little to the east of the Solomon Islands in the 
Western Pacific; it is made of bamboo, and is very 
similar to the one from the Straits Settlements, except 
that the lateral opening is small and of irregular 
shape. 

Read confesses to having some doubts about 
the correctness of this locality, though the specimen 
came from the Godeffroy Collection, where they have 
the best means of testing its accuracy. 

* C, H. READ, “Stone Spinning-tops from Torres Straits, New 
Guinea,” Journ. Anth, Inst., xvii., p. 85. 

+ H. Linc RotH, The Natives of Sarawak and British North 
Borneo, 1896, i., pp. 103, 104, 367. 

TOPS 263 

Among the Polynesians I have come across two 
records only. 

Hedley* says, “Spinning tops I found to be a 
popular amusement on Nukulailai (Ellice Group, W. 
Pacific). Their tops were simply cone shells spun 
on their apices. A game was to spin two shells in a 
wooden dish, out of which by rotating and colliding 
the winner would knock the loser. The shells were 
spun either like a teetotum between the finger 
and thumb, or to give greater force one end was 
steadied by the finger and thumb of the left hand, 
while the impetus was ewen by drawing whe right 
forefinger briskly across it.” 

The Rev. R. Taylort informs us that “the 
whipping-top is played in every part of New 
Zealand; the top used is more of a cone, and of 
less diameter than our English one, but in other 
respects it is just the same.” Dr. Dieffenbach} 
merely says, ‘““A top, called kazhora, nicely formed, 
and managed as it is by us, supplies another of their 
amusements.” E. Tregear§ speaks of a whipping- 
top with two points. 

Dr. Codrington || informs us that tops are made in 

* C. HEDLEY, “The Atoll of Funafuti, Ellice Group,” Australian 
Museum, Sydney Memoir, iii., 1897. 

Wadobncie., pe lize 

t loc. ctt., p. 32. 

§ Journ. Anth. Inst., xix. 

|| R. H. CopRINGTON, The Melanesians, 1891, p. 342, 

264 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the Solomon Islands of the nut of a palm and a pin 
of wood, the whole visible length of which, between 
two and three inches long, is below the head. To 
spin the top a doubled string is wound round the 
shaft, and the two ends are pulled smartly asunder. 
A similar top was used in Pitcairn Island by the half- 
breed Tahitian children of the Bounty mutineers. 

Tops are recorded from Netherlands, New Guinea, 
by de Clercq and Schmeltz,* and they also occur in 
Torres Straits at the opposite side of that island. 
(Figs 375-INOs; 1,,2.) 

I have had as many as four men at a time spinning 
tops for me, on the ball of their big toes, on the 
verandah of my house in Murray Island, Torres 
Straits. These tops, or rather teetotums, are made of 
pieces of a fine-grained volcanic ash, of the shape 
of a split pea, some four to six inches in diameter and 
pierced with a hole in which a long piece of palm 
wood is inserted. ‘The top is revolved by rolling the 
stick between the palms of the hands; it may be spun 
on a slightly concave fragment of a shell, or on the ball 
of the big toe, for these Papuans sit like a tailor, but 
bend their feet so that the soles face directly upwards. 

Quite lately Mr. Etheridge +t has described and 
figured a humming-top, or rather teetotum, from the 

* DE CLERCQ en SCHMELTZ, Ethnogr. Beschrijving van Nederl.— 
Nieuw-Guinea, 1893, p. 241. 

+ R. ETHERIDGE, Junr., “The Game of Teetotum practised by certain 
Queensland Aborigines,” Jowrn. Anth. Inst., xxv., 1896, p. 259. 

TOPS 265 

Cairns District, in North Queensland. The toy is 
made of a small gourd about three inches in diameter ; 
besides the holes for the axial stick the gourd is 
pierced by four holes. The top is spun between the 
palms of the hands on a blanket, or on any piece 
of hard ground, and are often used to amuse children. 
The tops were used before the occupation of this part 
of the country by the English. Mr. Etheridge admits 
there is a bare possibility that they may be a remnant 
of Malay or Papuan influence. It is a significant 
fact, he adds, that the further we go north of the 
Australian continent, the more apparent is the resem- 
blance between the weapons and the implements of 
the North Australian Aborigines to those of New 
Guinea. 

In the recently published account of the Horn 
Expedition to Central Australia, Dr. Stirling says :* 
“T also saw them spinning water-worn, round pebbles 
on the bottoms of inverted “billy-cans,” but I saw 
none of the beautifully balanced tops moulded out of 
clay and provided with a peg, which the natives in 
the north-east of South Australia proper (Blanche- 
water) + spin, in competition against one another, on 
some smooth surface such as a piece of tin. At the 
locality mentioned I saw one spun by a lubra (woman) 

*E. C. STIRLING, Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedi- 
tion to Central Australia, Part iv., “ Anthropology,” 1896, p. 86. 
+ Lat. 29° 30’ S.; long. 139° 6’; about. 

266 THE STUDY OF MAN 

remain “asleep” for four minutes.” It is difficult to 
believe that any Malay influence could be felt right 
in the heart of Australia. 

According to Andree there are only two records 
of tops from the whole of America. The German 
traveller Kohl* saw the boys of the Odschibwa 
(Ojibwa) Indians playing with tops made out of 
nuts and acorns; but it is an open question whether 
this game is, as it were, in the process of evolution 
among these Indians, or whether it has been intro- 
duced by European settlers. The second record 
is more extraordinary, as it is a humming-top which 
was brought one hundred years ago by Vancouver 
from Nootka Sound, North-West America, and 
therefore before European influence had penetrated 
so far. This top, which is exhibited in the British 
Museum,t has a handle, through which the string 
passes, just as in those sold in the toy-shops of 
Europe. 

The complication of a separate perforated handle 
is certainly a noteworthy feature, and it evidently 
has some relation to the whirligigs that Murdoch { 
describes and figures (fig. 374) among the Point 
Barrow Eskimo. One should not rashly surmise that 

* J. G. Kou, Kitschi-Gami, i. p. 119. 

+ C. H. Reap, Journ. Anth. Inst., xxi., 1891, p. 108. 

t J. Murpocu, “Ethnological Results of the Point Barrow Expe- 

dition,” Minth Annual Rep. Bureau Ethnol., Washington, 1887-88, 
1892. 

LOBS, 267 

both of these somewhat complicated toys have been 
introduced from a people of higher culture, as we 
find these same Eskimo make mechanical toys. 
There are many other points about these hypo- 
boreans that are of great interest. Murdoch came 
across only one teetotum (p. 376, fig. 375) among 
the Eskimo; it was spun with the fingers. 

Dr. Andree did not recall any top from the negroes 
of Africa; but I find a “sacred humming-top of the 
Massaningas” is figured in p. 358 of the English 
translation of Ratzel’s Zhe Hzstory of Mankind, 
vol. ii., 1897. 

The history of the peg-top is much more scanty. 
Strutt * believed it to be a modern invention, and 
thought it “probably originated from the te-totums 
and whirligigs.... The usage of the te-totum may 
be considered as a kind of petty gambling.” Accord- 
ing to M. Dillaye} it (¢@ ¢oufze) is not mentioned 
in French documents older than the fourteenth 
century ; and M. L. Becq de Fouquiéres argues that 
there is no evidence that it was known to classical 
authors. Godwin Austen{ saw the children of the 

* J. STRUTT, The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England, 
1801, chap. iv., sec. vi, p. 288. Strutt says when he was a boy the 
te-totum had only four sides, marked respectively with T. (take all), 
H, (half of the stake), N. (nothing), and P. (put down ; that is, a stake 
equal to that! you put down at first). 

+ F. DILLAYvE, Les Jeux de la Jeunesse, Paris, 1885, p. 195. 
tt Lreut.-CoL. H. GODWIN AUSTEN, Journ. Anth. Inst., ix., 1879, 

Pp. 3 

268 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Naga Hills spinning peg-tops with string; the top 
was made out of a very hard wood, and was pointed 
below. This top may be allied to some of the tops 
of the Malay Archipelago, which are certainly a kind 
of peg-top. 

The story of the wandering of the kite is much 
more consistent than is that of the migration of the 
top. So far as the far East is concerned Schlegel has 
definitely expressed his opinion as to the top being 
a migrant from Europe. Once established in Java 
it could easily travel down the Malay Archipelago 
and be stranded with other flotsam and jetsam on 
the islands which have been washed with the wave 
of Malay culture. 

If, for example, the use of tobacco has been taught 
to Malays by the white man and by them transferred 
to the Papuans, so that we found it smoked in the 
Torres Straits before it had been brought directly 
by European voyagers, it is not too far-fetched to 
assume that the stone teetotum may have followed 
the same route. On the other hand, the shape of the 
Murray Island top is so similar to the heads of the 
disc-shaped stone clubs, that one is tempted to believe 
that this may have been its origin, especially when 
one remembers that in this island alone, for a district 
extending for some hundreds of miles, is the fine- 
grained, easily-worked stone found of which these 
tops are made. The labour of making stone clubs 

TOPS 269 
is so very great that there would be no inducement 
to make playthings out of a refractory rock; but 
the ash of this volcanic island evidently appealed 
to some native as being a workable material, and 
it is also suggestive that the motion of spinning these 
tops is similar to that employed by these people in 
making fire by their fire-sticks and in drilling holes. 

The sporadic appearance ‘of the humming-top in 
North Queensland is very remarkable. It really 
looks as if this was an independent invention, 
especially as Dr. Stirling has recorded true tops 
from Central Australia; but the fact that it is a 
humming-top is rather against this view, as this is 
a complication which is unlikely to arise de novo. 
A teetotum, or a simple top, may have been invented 
more than once, but it is highly improbable that 
a humming-top would be invented before a simpler 
form of type, and we know that this kind of top 
is found in the neighbouring Archipelago. 

The tops of New Zealand again require an 
explanation, as there is no indication whatever of 
any direct Malay influence. The Maoris may have 
brought it with them when they migrated to New 
Zealand, but then we should expect to find it more 
frequently in Polynesia; on the other hand, they 
may have learnt it from the Melanesians, who 
probably formed the earlier population. 

I must confess that I am by no means satisfied 

270 THE STUDY OF MAN 

that the top has had a single centre of diffusion 
from which it has spread to Africa on the one hand, 
and to N.W. America, to New Zealand, and to 
Australia on the other. The problem is a very 
interesting one, but I do not think the means for 
its solution are yet available. 

THE TUG-OF-WAR. 

Allusion was made, when noticing the mediaeval 
town tops, to the fact that village recreations often 
have a significance which is not apparent at first 
sight. We will see what lies at the back of such 
an apparently simple sport as the tug-of-war. 

At the present time the tug-of-war is merely one 
event in school or other “sports”; but we find that 
it has had a history worth recording. In former days 
at Ludlow the inhabitants of Broad Street and Corve 
Street wards had an annual tug-of-war, employing a 
rope three inches thick and thirty-six yards long, with 
a large knob at each end. The rope, which was paid 
for by the Corporation, was given out at the window 
of the Market Hall by the Mayor at four o'clock on 
the appointed day, when all business was suspended 
and the shops shut. One man stood on another’s 
shoulders, and the chimney-sweep’s wife on his 
shoulders. These represented the Red Knob; three 
others, mounted in the same way, representing the 
Blue Knob, If, during the contest, the rope was 

TUG-OF WAR 271 

pulled down Mill Street, the Red Knob won, and 
the knobs were dipped in the River Teme in token 
of victory; but if the Blue Knobs dragged it through 
the Bull Ring, the dipping took place in the River 
Corve. After the rope was won it was taken back 
to the Market Hall and given out again, and if the 
same side won, the contest was ended; but if the 
opposite side conquered, then the rope was given 
out a third time, and the victory remained with the 
side that won twice. 

The rope was then sold, and the money got for 
it was spent in beer, and then fighting and quarrelling 
commenced. These disorderly scenes, and the dan- 
gerous accidents resulting, caused this custom to be 
discontinued in 185r. 

There are many other examples of contests between 
two wards or two parts of villages or towns, which 
often take the form of a football contest ; nominally 
it is a football match, but in reality it is a faction 
fight. Mr. Gomme, from whom I have largely bor- 
rowed, has collected several instances of such feuds 
in his Village Community,* and points out their signi- 
ficance; for example, the Seneca Indians of North 
America played a ball game by phratries (or clans) 
the one against the other; and the Greek phratries 
developed the same custom. 

* GL. GoMME, The Village Community: with special reference to 
the Origin and Form of its Survivals in Britain, 1890, pp. 240-246. 

272 THE STUDY OF MAN 

In the North-West Provinces of India a very thick 
grass rope is pulled by the villagers among them- 
selves. The party in whose quarter the rope is 
broken, or by whom the rope is pulled out of the 
hands of their antagonists, are the victors, and retain 
the rope for a year. It is well known that the 
quarters of an Indian village are clan quarters. Now, 
there is reason to believe that some at least of the . 
contests in a British village or township are the 
remnants of a really hostile feeling which existed 
between the inhabitants of those districts. 

The reason for this hostility is probably the same 
both in India and in Britain; it is not so much local 
rivalry as racial or tribal animosity. In two parts 
of the same manor, as at Eling, in Hampshire, or 
even in the same town, as at Nottingham, the modes 
of descent of property may vary; on one side of a 
boundary junior right or borough English is the 
custom, while on the other side of the boundary the 
rule of primogeniture is followed. The custom of 
inheritance by the youngest son is a very ancient 
one, and in this country dates from long before the 
practice of making the eldest son the heir. In Indian 
villages we have side by side the Dravidian abori- 
gines, who are low castes, and the various higher 
castes, with their increasing purity of Aryan blood; 
and it may be that in our British villages there is an 
analogous racial or tribal mixture; thus these parish 

TUG-OF WAR 293 

contests, which are recognized and sanctioned by the 
municipal authorities, are the vestigial expression of a 
very real jealousy which had its origin in the very 
roots of the history of our country. 

Side- or faction-fights are common all over the 
world. The city of Seoul, in Korea, is divided into 
five districts, N., S., E., W., and middle, and every 
person is officially enrolled under one of these 
directions. This distribution of space enters into the 
whole philosophy of existence in this part of the 
world. 

Immediately after kite-flying time, that is, after 
the 15th of the first month, these side- or faction- 
fights take place. They are commenced by little 
boys, who make ropes of straw and fight with 
them. Sides are formed which advance and retreat. 
Bigger boys join, and at last the men are drawn into 
the fray. Stones are then the principal weapons 
employed, and many injuries, and even deaths, 
result. 

In Japan faction-fights, called “Gempei,” occur, 
which take their name, like the well-known Guelphs 
and Ghibellines, from the famous rival families, Genji 
and Heiké, ‘‘Gempei” being a ‘“ portmanteau” word 
combined from Gen and Hei. The side that re- 
presents the Genji wear their colour white; and the 
other, which represents the Heiké, take red. The 

rival families were located east and west, and the 
8 

244 THE STUDY OF MAN 

sides in these sports may be regarded as associated 
with these directions.* 

Dr. F. Boas informs us that among the Eskimo the 
boys born in summer fight those born in winter! 

In the first month of the year in South China, 
village fights occur on the open plains; sometimes 
they are very serious affairs. + 

Professor Culin, in his valuable Korean Games, to 
which I have had to refer so often, gives a suggestive 
clue to the origin of the straw rope contest to which 
allusion has just been made. This is played by any 
number of boys about the 15th of the first month. 
In the country the entire population of districts and 
villages engage against other districts or villages at 
this season. It is believed that the village that wins 
will have a good harvest. The rope is of straw, 
two feet in diameter, with its ends divided into 
branches. The men take the main stem, and the 
women the branches. The latter frequently do more 
than the men, as it is customary for them to load 
their skirts with stone on these occasions. The 
Dictionnaire Coréen Frangais defines the rope as a 
“rope which they pull by the two ends to secure 
abundance.” 

The tug-of-war is a common amusement among 

* CULIN, Korean Games, p. 63. 

+ GRAY, China. London, 1878, i., p. 256. 

~ STEWART CULIN, Korean Games: with Notes on the corresponding 
Games of China and Japan. Philadelphia, 1895, p. 35. 

TUG-OF-WAR 275 

schoolboys in Japan under the name of “rope- 
pulling.” According to Zhe /apanese Months, on 
the 15th day of the eighth month in the old calendar 
people turned out to admire the full moon, and made 
offerings to it of dango, a kind of cake made of rice, 
beans, and sugar. The sport known as “ tug-of-war” 
afforded amusement on the same evening to the boys 
of rival villages, or to contending parties belonging 
to the same place, grown-up persons sometimes 
joining in the fun. Each side has its own rope, 
which is of large size, and made of rice-straw. There 
is a loop at each end, and a stick is passed through 
the loop at one end of each rope, so that both are 
pulled at the same time. The contest is concluded 
when one party is pulled over the dividing-line, or 
till the ropes break. This practice is now a thing 
of the past. It is significant that the period from 
the middle of July to the middle of August is an 
anxious period for the farmers, whose rice-plants are 
in danger of perishing from lack of water should no 
rain fall for several consecutive days. 

The tug-of-war thus resolves itself in Korea and 
Japan into a magic ceremony to ensure a good 
harvest. Probably the straw rope typifies the harvest, 
and the pulling it over a boundary would ensure a 
fruitful harvest for the winning side. This is quite 
in accordance with the working of the savage mind, 
as innumerable examples from what is known as 

276 THE STUDY OF MAN 

sympathetic magic will testify. It is interesting to 
note that in Korea itself the ceremony has broken 
down, and is degraded in Seoul into faction-fights ; 
but, true to their origin, they begin with straw ropes ; 
and, further, it is noteworthy that the small boys 
retain the older fashion—they are more true to the 
traditional custom. Further research will show 
whether the contests in our villages and towns are 
merely racial or tribal in origin, or whether there 
may not be some harvest ritual behind them. 

CHAPTER, X 
THE BULL-ROARER. 

N some parts of the British Islands boys occa- 

sionally play with a toy which consists of a thin 
slat of wood tied to the end of a long piece of string, 
the rapid whirling of which results in a noise that 
is expressed in the various names given to this simple 
instrument. Prof. E. B. Tylor informs me that the 
name of “bull-roarer” was first introduced into 
anthropological literature by the Rev. Lorimer 
Fison,* who compares the Australian ‘¢rndain to 
“the wooden toy which I remember to have made 
as a boy, called a ‘bull-roarer,’” and this term has 
since been universally adopted as the technical name 
for the implement. 

For some years past I have collected all the 
specimens and information I could about this interest- 
ing object., I have one specimen made by a boy at 
Balham in Surrey (London, S.W.); it is 72 inches in 

* FISON and Howitt, Kamilarot and Kurnat, 1880, p.267. Prof. E. 

B. Tylor in his review of this book in Zhe Academy (April 9th, 1881, 
p. 265), gives “ whizzer” as an alternative name. 

277 

278 THE STUDY OF MAN 

length and 14 inches in breadth, 187 mm. by 30 mm.* 
The ends are square, and it is serrated along each 
side. I have heard of it in Essex, but have not seen a 
specimen. 

In West Suffolk it is called a “hummer” and 
is slightly notched; I have been told that in East 
Suffolk the edges were sometimes plain. I have 
several specimens from different parts of Norfolk, 
where it is called “humming buzzer,” or simply 
“buzzer” (rodx1d, r1dx1%, 114x138; 257x 38, 
282x47, 292x35). The ends are usually square, but 
the string end is rounded in the last one; the sides 
may be serrated or simpy notched along both surfaces 
of each side, the notches being more or less deep. 
One specimen “buzz” from Mid-Norfolk is rounded 
at the string end and pointed at the other, and with 
only five notches along each side (74x 24, 18454). 
I have been informed that in Cambridgeshire it was 
called a “bull,” and has plain edges. In Bedford- 
shire its name is “buzzer.” The Lincolnshire 
variety, ‘‘swish,” is quadrangular, like the ordinary 
Norfolk form, and notched. I have heard of its 
occurrence in the East Riding of Yorkshire, but have 
no details. In East Derbyshire it is known as a 
“‘bummer” or “buzzer.” My Derbyshire specimen 
is plano-convex, the string end is square and the 

* Subsequently I give, within brackets, the English measurements, 
followed by the same converted into the metric system, 

Fic. 38. 
BuLL-ROARERS FROM THE BRITISH ISLANDS. 

1, Ballycastle, Co. Down; 2. Warwickshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire ; 8. Warwickshire; 
4, Montgomeryshire ; 5. Derbyshire ; 6, 7, 8. Norfolk; 9. Balham (Surrey), 

280 THE STUDY OF MAN 

other rounded. In nearly every specimen the string 
passes through a hole near one end; but in this 
example the string is tied in a nick in each side near 
one end, the opposite half and the free end are alone 
serrated (10hx 1%, 257x 47). A model of a Warwick- 
shire type has the ends practically square, but the 
sides are slightly concave (6x 14 at each end and 14 
in the middle, 152 x44 and 38). Another model, also 
called “bummer,” said to be used in Warwickshire, 
Staffordshire, and Shropshire, has square ends, and 
the sides are concave near the string end, and 
there are four pairs of oblique grooves in the middle 
(74x14 and 1 in the narrow part, 190x 38 and 25). 
I must confess that I am not satisfied about these two 
last implements. I have one or two others that were 
given me by the same friend which vary considerably 
in form, and had no localities given with them. I 
reserve these for the present, as I have my doubts 
about them. . 

The Rev. Elias Owen, of Oswestry, kindly had a 
‘“‘roarer” made for me as they were used sixty years 
ago in Montgomeryshire in Wales. Here again we 
have the East Anglian pattern, but with the ends 
differently finished off. Although there is a large 
hole at one end, strangely enough the string is tied ~ 
through a small hole at the other extremity. (12}x 2}, 
311x64). (Fig. 38, No. 4.) 

I have been told that the bull-roarer was known as 

THE BULL-ROARER 281 

a “thunder-spell”* in some parts of Scotland, and in 
Aberdeen as a “‘thunder-bolt.” Professor Tylor also 
records it from Scotland.+ My friend Mrs. Gomme 
has very kindly allowed me to copy the following from 
the second volume of her Zyvaditional Games of 
England, Scotland, and Ireland (18098, p. 291) :— 

“ Thun'er-Spell—A thin lath of wood, about six inches 
long and three or four inches broad, is taken and rounded at 
one end. A hole is bored in that end, and in the hole is tied 
a piece of cord between two and three yards long. It is then 
rapidly swung round, so as to producea buzzing sound. The 
more rapidly it is swung the louder is the noise. It was 
believed that the use of this instrument during a thunder- 
storm saved one from being struck with ‘the thun’er-bolt.’ 
I [Dr. Gregor] have used it with this intention (Keith). In 
other places it is used merely to make a noise. It is com- 
monly deeply notched all round the edges to increase the 
noise. : 

“Some years ago a herd-boy was observed making one in 
a farm kitchen (Udny). It was discovered that when he was 
sent to bring the cows from the fields to the farmyard to be 
milked, he used it to frighten them, and they ran frantically 
to their stalls. The noise made the animals dread the bot-fly 

* Since the above was in type, Mr. W. S. Laverock, of the Liverpool 
Museum, has informed me that “thunner-spells” are quite common in 
Aberdeenshire and Kincardineshire ; they were made by farm-servants 
and villagers. They are usually flat laths, twelve to fifteen inches in 
length and two and a half to three inches wide; the perforated end was 
rounded, and the notching varied in amount according to the taste and 
patience of the maker. They were used with a short string. Mr. Laverock 
does not know whether the word “spell” means, in this connection, a 
charm, or the Scottish term for a shaving, the English “ spill.” 

+ Journ. Anth, Inst., xix. p. 163. 

282 THE STUDY OF MAN 

or ‘cleg’” This torment makes them throw their tails up, and 
rush with fury through the fields or to the byres to shelter 
themselves from its attacks. A formula to effect the same 
purpose, and which I have many and many a time used when 
herding, was: Cock tail! cock tail! cock tail! Bizz-zz-zz! 
Bizz-zz-zz !—Keith (Rev. W. Gregor). 

“ Dr. Gregor secured one of these that was in use in Pitsligo, 
and sent it to the Pit-Rivers Museum at Oxford, where it 
now lies. 

“They are still occasionally to be met with in country 
districts, but are used simply for the purpose of making 
a noise.” 

In her first volume, under the title of ‘‘ Bummers,” 
Mrs. Gomme writes :— 

“A play of children. ‘Bummers’—a thin piece of wood 
swung round by a cord (Blackwood’s Magazine, Aug., 1821, 
p- 35). Jamieson says the word is evidently denominated 
from the booming sound produced” (p. 51). 

I have only two notices of the bull-roarer from 
Ireland—one from the town and county of Cork, the 
other from Ballycastle, Co. Antrim, where the Rev. 
J. P. Barnes kindly gave me a specimen, which is 
a long, narrow lath, with straight, smooth sides; the 
string end is square, but the opposite end is rudely 
pointed - (1321, 35025). (Fig. 38, No. 1.) Its 
use is very local, but I am informed that the 
schoolboys in Coleraine often make them. Mr. 
Barnes writes :— 

“From enquiry made, I come to the conclusion that the 
‘Bull-roarer’ (its local name) is not indigenous, but an im- 

THE BULL-ROARER 283 

portation. The boy who gave me this says he got the idea 
from his father, who is a coastguard; his father once tied a 
string to a piece of wood lying near the fireside, and began 
to twirl it round for the children’s amusement, saying, ‘ That’s 
what I have seen niggers do in the West Indies.’” 

This last remark is very suggestive. The form 
is not like that which I have collected in England, 
and certainly does more resemble the Ovo-stick of 
West Africa (Fig. 39). It would be a strange 
circumstance—but not more strange than others 
that we have already studied —if the dreaded god 
of vengeance of West Africa should become the 
plaything of a boy in the north of Ireland.* 

Dr. Schmeltz, the Director of the Ethnographical 
Museum at Leiden, has written a laborious mono- 
graph on the bull-roarer. He commences by 
describing a child’s toy well known in Germany 
as the Waldteufel. It is a small cardboard cylinder, 
open at one end and closed at the other; to the 
middle of the drum is fastened a horsehair, the other 
end of which is tied to a piece of wood. When the 
implement is swung round it makes a horrible sound. 

* Since the above was in type I have been informed that “boomers” 
are in common use among boys in Co. Down. They are notched in 
various ways, sometimes on one side only ; they appear, in fact, to be of 
very diverse form. Those given to me were made for me, and may not 
represent the common form of bull-roarer in the north-east corner of 
Ireland. My informant stated that once when, as a boy, he was playing 

with a boomer an old country woman said it was a “sacred” thing. It 
would be worth while to follow up this clue. 

284 THE STUDY OF MAN 

I have a perfectly similar toy that was bought in the 
streets of Cambridge, except that a piece of fibre 
replaces the horsehair; this has a loop at the 
unattached end, which revolves loosely in a notch 
at the end of a short piece of wood. The wood 
at this spot is coated with resin, so as to produce 
a grating sound; this is conducted along the fibre, 
and the cylinder acts as a resonator. I have been 
unable to discover the English name for the “ Devil 
of the woods.” My friend,. Director Schmeltz, 
suggests a connection between this toy and the 
bull-roarer. I quite fail to see how the simple slat 
of wood could develop into the more complicated 
cylinder. All one can say is that they both make 
a disagreeable sound. As to the origin and signifi- 
cance of the Waldteufel, nothing whatever is known, 
and we have no evidence before us to connect this 
toy with any magical or religious rite.* 

An analogous implement to the bull-roarer is that 
which is called in America the “buzz.” It usually 
consists of a small, flat, rectangular piece of wood, 
in which two holes are pierced, and through these 
a long, continuous piece of string is passed. The 
loops of the string are held in the two hands, and 
the wood is swung round so as to twist the string. 
The hands are strongly and steadily drawn apart, 

* J. D. E. ScuMELTz, “Das Schwirrholz,” Verh, des Vereins fiir 
naturw. Unterhaltung zu Hamburg, ix., 1896, p. 92. 

THE BULL-ROARER 285 

which causes the wood to revolve at a rapid rate, 
and to produce a buzzing sound; if properly managed 
the momentum is so great that the string twists itself 
up again, and so on indefinitely. 

Culin* informs us there are two kinds in Korea. 
The first is a simple circular card with two holes 
through which the cords are passed, the other is 
a more complicated arrangement. The first form 
occurs in China and Japan. Murdoch describes and 
figures one from the Point Barrow Eskimo,{ and 
Culin says the buzz is to be found widely distributed 
among the Indians of North America. 

It is an occasional plaything in England, but I 
do not know its history. Mr. Thomas Drew informs 
me that on a summer's evening fifty years ago the 
young weavers of Belfast were fond of playing with 
the “bummer.” It was an oblong piece of wood, 
pierced with two holes, and serrated all round. 

This toy has not yet been connected with any 
ceremonial usage. 

A German friend has informed me that he has seen 
the bull-roarer in the Black Forest, where it is known 
as Schligel; and I have also heard that it is some- 
times seen in fairs at Basel in Switzerland. Tylor 
(Academy, April 9th, 1881, p. 265) says it is called 
Brummer in Germany. In West Prussia, near 

* Korean Games, p. 22. 
+ Ninth Ann. Rep. Bureau of Ethnol., p. 378. 

286 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Marienwerder, the true bull-roarer (Schw7rrholz) has 
been noted by Siedel.* A narrow piece of light wood, 
a span in length, was fastened to a whip, the whirling 
of the whips was called éuvren, and not every boy 
could do this equally well; the success depended also 
partly on the length and weight of the bull-roarer as 
well as on the nature of the whip. The little piece of 
wood had to be cut and smoothed with care before it 
would work properly. After a lapse of thirty years, 
Siedel has forgotten how he fastened the wood on to 
the whip, and also certain other details. The game 
was known in the neighbourhood generally. About 
the years 1869 and 1870 a number of the pure 
Germans of this district emigrated to America, and 
their place has been partly taken by Poles, and it 
would be interesting to find out whether the Polish 
children have adopted this toy, or whether it is 
restricted to the Germans. 

The distribution of the bull-roarer in Europe is 
carried a step further by Figura,t who states it not 
only occurs in Poland, but in and beyond the Car- 
pathians. He was born on the banks of the San in 
Galicia, which separates the Ruter and the Poles, and 
the bull-roarer is used on both sides of the river. He 
says -— 

“As a child of agricultural parents, I often returned in the 
evening to the village on horseback, driving the cattle home. 

* H. SIEDEL, “Das Schwirrholz in Westpreussen,” Globus, 1896, p. 67. 
+ F. Figura, “ Das Schwirrholz in Galizien,” Globus, 1896, p. 226. 

THE BULL-ROARER 287 

Not always, but often, at such times the bull-roarer is used by 
the young herdsmen when in good humour. The bull-roarer 
is a longish, thin piece of wood, notched at one end on both 
sides, and fastened with a simple knot at the end of a whip. 
At the beginning of the revolutions the bull-roarer produces 
a note corresponding to the letter b——s (greatly protracted). 
By swinging some time and more quickly the high note passes 
into a low organ note. This tuning effect is called in Galicia, 
among both Poles and Ruthenians, dz7k. The wooden object 
itself has no name. This buzzing or humming noise excites 
pasturing cattle. As soon as the bull-roarers are started the 
calves stretch out their tails into the air, and kick out their 
hind legs, sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left, as if 
they were dancing. After some minutes the old cattle follow 
the young ones, and there is a general stampede to the 
village. Therefore one says in Galicia that a man whose 
brain is not quite right has a ‘dzzk.’ It is supposed that the 
animals get into an idiotic condition owing to the buzzing of 
the bull-roarer. 

“In what a curious way an idea may change may be seen 
from the following. It is well known that in the year 1831 
thousands of young Poles emigrated to foreign parts, especially 
to France, and there a great number enlisted in the Algerian 
foreign legion. The Poles used to play cards, and their game 
was called dz¢k. The Frenchmen got to like the game; they 
could pronounce the word, but in writing it down according 
to French orthography it became dezzgue / Thus this favourite 
game of the French gaming clubs owes its name to the bull- 
roarer.” 

In one of his charming and suggestive essays 
Andrew Lang* first drew attention to the fact that 

* ANDREW LANG, “The Bull-roarer: A Study of the Mysteries,” 
Custom and Myth (and Edition), 1885, p. 39. 

288 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the bull-roarer was employed in ancient Greece in 
connection with the Dionysiac Mysteries :— 

“Clemens of Alexandria, and Arnobius, an early Christian 
father who follows Clemens, describe certain toys of the child 
Dionysus which were used in the mysteries. Among these 
are turbines, xovor and pou8o. The ordinary dictionaries 
interpret all these as whipping-tops, adding that pou os is 
sometimes ‘a magic wheel. The ancient scholiast on 
Clemens, however, writes: ‘The xévos is a little piece of 
wood to which a string is fastened, and in the mysteries it is 
whirled round to make a roaring noise.’ 

“Tn the part of the Dionysiac mysteries at which the toys 
of the child Dionysus were exhibited, and during which (as it 
seems) the bull-roarer was whirred, the performers daubed 
themselves all over with clay. This we learn from a passage 
in which Demosthenes describes the youth of his hated 
adversary, Aéschines. The mother of A®schines, he says, was- 
a kind of ‘wise woman, and dabbler in mysteries. Aischines 
used to aid her by bedaubing the initiate over with clay 
and bran. The word here used by Demosthenes is explained 
by Harpocration as the ritual term for daubing the initiated. 
A story was told, as usual, to explain this rite. It was 
said that when the Titans attacked Dionysus and tore him 
to pieces, they painted themselves, first with clay, or gypsum, 
that they might not be recognised. Nonnus shows, in several 
places, that down to his time the celebrants of the Bacchic 
mysteries retained this dirty trick. 

“Jn Lucian’s Treatise on Dancing we read, ‘I pass over 
the fact that you cannot find a single ancient mystery in 
which there is not dancing. . .. To prove this I will not 
mention the secret acts of worship, on account of the 
uninitiated. But this much all men know, that most people 
say of those who reveal the mysteries, that they “dance them 

THE BULL-ROARER 289 

9 

out Lucian obviously intends to say that the matter of 
the mysteries was set forth in dallets daction. Now this 
is exactly the case in the surviving mysteries of the Bushmen. 
Mr. Orpen, the chief magistrate in St. John’s Territory, made 
the acquaintance of Qing, one of the last of an all but 
exterminated tribe. He gave a good deal of information 
about the myths of his people, but refused to answer certain 
questions.* ‘You are now asking the secrets that are not 
spoken of’ Mr. Orpen asked, ‘Do you know the secrets ?’ 
Qing replied, ‘ No, only the initiated men of that dance know 
these things. To ‘dance’ this or that means ‘to be 
acquainted with this or that mystery’; the dances were 
originally taught by Cagn, the mantis, or grasshopper god. 
In many mysteries Qing, as a young man, was not initiated. 
He could not ‘dance them out.’” 

This is the whole of the evidence I have been able 
to gather respecting the occurrence of the bull-roarer 
in Europe. 

In Africa it is found in the west and south. Mrs. 
R. Braithwaite Batty+ describes the cult of Ovo 
(“Torment”), a god of terror and vengeance. The 
Oro represents the active embodiment of the civil 
power, the local police, the mysterious head or idol of 
the Civil Government. Under the name of Oro 
the initiates exercise unrestricted and unquestioned 
vengeance on offenders. Any woman getting a sight 
of or finding out the secrets of Oro would be put to 
death. 

* Cape Monthly Magazine, July, 1874. 
+ R. BRAITHWAITE Barty, “Notes on the Yoruba Country,” Journ. 
Anth. Inst., xix., 1890, p. 160. 

U 

290 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“The supposed ‘ voice of Oro’ proceeds from a small piece 
of wood, actually worshipped as a god—narrow and tapering 
at each end—somewhat thinner at the edges than in the 
middle, about an inch wide, and measuring from nearly a 
foot to three feet in length. This Oro stick is attached to 
a string, which is fastened to the thin end of a bamboo, or 
pliable rod, of from six to eight feet or more in length, the 
string being about double the length of the stem or handle, 
which is used something after the fashion of a long carter’s 
whip. The motion is horizontal, rotary, and continuous. 
According to the velocity and the size of the stick is the 
sound produced—sometimes a high, shrill tone, sometimes 
deep and grave. The largest stick requires a man of gigantic 
strength to twirl it.” (Fig. 39.) 

The Bushmen of South Africa have a bull-roarer 
which slightly increases in width towards its free end, 
and then has a pointed termination; the button-like 
attached end has a circular notch round which its 
string is tied, the other end of the string is fastened 
to a stick. It is spoken of as a rain-charm, and is 
said to be also used as a clapper in driving game, 
and again, ‘“‘they try to charm their luck in hunting 
by means of bull-roarers.”* (Fig. 40, No. 1.) 

According to a correspondent of Prof. Tylor’s in 
South Africa, the bull-roarer is employed to call the 
men to the celebration of secret functions. A minute 
description of the instrument and of its magical 
power to raise a wind is given in Theal’s Kafir 
Folklore, p. 209.4 

* RATZEL, The History of Mankind (English Edition), ii., pp. 275, 276; 
i., frontispiece. t+ LANG, /.c., p. 38, and BOURKE, /.c¢., p. 479. 

THE BULL-ROARER 201 

He says: “There is a kind of superstition con- 
nected with the zod:wu that playing with it invites 
a gale of wind. Men will, on this account, often 

a 

ae 

rae 

FIG. 39. 
Yoruba bull-roarers, for producing the “ voice of Oro.” 

} natural size. 
prevent boys from using it when they desire calm 
weather for any purpose.” 

Mrs. Carey-Hobson also records the use of the 
nodiwu among the Amakosa Kaffirs. (Journ. Anth. 
Lnst., xiv., p. 325.) Prof. E. B. Tylor (Academy, April 9, 
1881, p. 265) says it is used among the Kaffirs “for 

202 THE STUDY OF MAN 

rain-making, and in connection with the rites of 
initiation to warn women off.” 

The bull-roarer is found sporadically chvoupitene 
America. ‘The Eskimo on the north-west coast have 
one which ‘is ellipsoidal in form with notched edges 
(Fig. 40, No. 2); it “appears to be purely a child’s 
toy.”* There are several records of its occurrence 
among the North American Indians. Bourket first 
met with the bull-roarer at the snake dance of the 
Tusayan, in the village of Walpi, Arizona, in the 
month of August. ‘The medicine-men twirled it 
rapidly, and with a uniform motion, about the head, 
and from front to rear, and succeeded in faithfully 
imitating the sound of a gust of rain-laden wind. 
As explained by one of the medicine-men, by making 
this sound they compelled the wind and rain to come 
to the aid of the crops.” It is in use among the 
Apache, and for the same purpose. The prehistoric 
“‘cliff-dwellers” of the Verde Valley, in Central 
Arizona, also employed it. Bourke also found it 
among the Rio Grande Pueblo tribes and the Zuii. 
Dr. Washington Matthews has described it as existing 
among the Navajo, and Major J. W. Powell has 
observed it in use among the Utes of Nevada and 
Utah. Captain Bourke describes three forms of bull- 

* J. MurpDocH, “Ethnological Results of the Point Barrow Expe- 
dition,” Winth Ann. Rep. Bureau of Ethnol., 1887-88 (1892), p. 378. 

+ J. G. BouRKE, “The Medicine-men of the Apache.” Vinth Ann 
Rep. Bureau of Ethnal., 1887-88 (1893), p. 477: 

THE BULL-ROARER 293 

roarers, all apparently connected in symbolism with the 
lightning. The first terminates in a triangular point, 
and the general shape is either that of a long, narrow 
parallelogram, capped with an equilateral triangle, or 
else the whole figure is that of a slender isosceles 
triangle. When the former shape was used, as at 
the Tusayan snake dance,* the tracing of a snake 
or lightning in blue or yellow followed down the 
length of the rhombus and terminated in the small 
triangle, which did duty as the snake’s head. The 
second form was serrated on both edges to simulate 
the form of the snake or lightning ; it is found among 
the Navajo and in the old cliff dwellings. The third 
form, in use among the Apache, is an oblong, 7 or 
8 inches in length, and 14 inches in breadth. The 
pierced end is rounded to rudely represent a human 
head. The Apache explained that the lines on the 
front side of the rhombus were the entrails, and those 
on the rear side the hair of their wind god. The 
hair is of several colours, and represents the lightning. 
Bourke was led to believe that the rhombus (as he 
terms it) of the Apache was made by the medicine- 
men from wood, generally pine or fir, which had been 
struck by lightning on the mountain tops. Such 
wood is held in the highest estimation among them, 
and is used for the manufacture of amulets of 

* Cf.also J. G. BOURKE, The Snake Dance of the Moguis of Arizona, 
London, 1884, p. 158-9, pl. xiii. 

204 THE STUDY OF MAN 

especial efficacy. The Apache name for the rhombus 
is ‘sounding wood.” (Fig. 40, No. 3.) 

The sympathetic American anthropologist, Mr. 
Cushing, also found a bull-roarer among the Zufii. 

He says :— 

“T heard one morning a deep, whirring noise. Running 
out, I saw a procession of three priests of the bow, gorgeous 
and solemn with sacred embroideries and war paint . . . each 
distinguished by his badge of degree. The principal priest 
carried in his arms a wooden idol, ferocious in aspect, yet 
beautiful with its decorations of shell, turquoise, and brilliant 
paint. It was nearly hidden by symbolic slats and prayer- 
sticks most elaborately plumed. He was preceded by a guard- 
ian with drawn bow and arrows, while another followed, 
twirling the sounding-slat, which had attracted alike my 
attention and that of hundreds of the Indians. . . . Slowly 
they wound their way down the hill, across the river, and off 
toward the mountain of thunder.” * 

Schmeltz + describes and figures two bull-roarers in 
the Rijks Ethnographisch Museum in Leiden, which 
were obtained by Dr. H. Ten Kate from the Papago 
and the Pima tribes. They are long and narrow, 
being respectively 184 inches and 154 inches in 
length; both are painted with simple devices in red. 
The only information about them is on a label which 

* F, H. CUSHING, “My Adventures in Zuni,” The Century Magazine, 
xxvi. (N.S. iv.), 1883, p. 29. 

+ J. D. E. SCHMELTZ, “ Das Schwirrholz, Versucheiner Monographie,” 

Verh. des Vereins fiir naturw. Unterhaltung zu Hamburg, Bd. ix., 
1896, p. 121. 

THE BULL-ROARER 295 

states they produce a buzzing noise and are used to 
frighten away evil spirits. (Fig. 40, No. 4.) 

The next American locality is Central Brazil, where 
Von den Steinen* met with it in his second Xingu 
Expedition. One, which was straight at one end and 
pointed at the other and 23% inches in length, was 
found in a flute-house of the Mehinaku; it was red in 
the middle and black at each end. Two others, 
which were shaped like a fish, were obtained from 
the Nahuqua; one was decorated with a snake design 
(Fig. 40, No. 5), and the other had a fish or bat 
pattern; they were about 14 inches in length. The 
Nahuqua showed them in public in the middle of 
the village how they were used; the women were 
not driven away. The Bakairi call the bull-roarer 
“thunder and lightning,” or “thunderstorm.” 

While the Bakairi and other tribes use it only at 
mask-dances or also as a plaything, on the river 
St. Lourengo among the Bororo the bull-roarer is em- 
ployed only at funeral festivities.| They swing it first 
when all the things which belonged to the deceased are 
burnt, and while in a pantomime they tell the spirits 
of those previously deceased, and who are there 
present, that nothing has been kept back from their 
dead brother, and that they, the spirits, need not 
look for anything more in the village. The bull- 

* KARL VON DEN STEINEN, Unter den WNaturvolkern Central 
Brasiliens, Berlin, 1894, p. 327. t Zc., p- 497 

206 THE STUDY OF MAN 

roarer is whirled a second time when the bones of 
the deceased are carried out of the village, and his 
spirit accompanies them. The underlying idea of 
all these festivals is the great fear that the dead should 
return to fetch a living person. The women are not 
admitted to the ceremonies which have this intention. 
During these times the women hide themselves in the 
forest or in their houses; if any woman was present 
she would die, even if she only saw the bull-roarer. 
Wallace tells us that among the Uaupés Indians in 
the Amazon district the women flee at the sound of 
the flutes on which are played the Juripari or “devil 
music.” 

“From the moment the music was first heard not a female, 
old or young, was to be seen; for it is one of the strangest 
superstitions of the Uaupés Indians that they consider it 
dangerous for a woman ever to see one of these instruments, 
that having done so is punished with death, generally by 
poison. Even should the view be perfectly accidental, or 

should there be only a suspicion that the proscribed articles 
have been seen, no mercy is shown.”* 

Among the Bororo they fear for the women; among 
other tribes (and each tribe must be investigated 
separately) the women are threatened with death. 
The Bakairi women are threatened if they should enter 
the flute-house of the men. Thus the saying, “The 
women must die,” may have very different meanings. 

* ALFRED R. WALLACE, A Warrative of Travels on the Amazon 
and Rio Negro, 1853, p. 349. 

THE BULL-ROARER 297 

Von den Steinen found it nearly impossible to get 
a bull-roarer from the Bororo tribe. The fear of 
its being misapplied was so great that they prayed 
him not to show even the drawing of one to the 
women. When he spoke about buying one they 
were hidden; when he spoke casually about a bull- 
roarer—as one speaks of bows and arrows—the men 
were frightened and turned away, clearly showing that 
they did not want to hear it mentioned. The senti- 
ment is connected with the fear of death. The illus- 
trious German traveller gives the following interesting 
account of how he obtained some specimens :— 

“We only got the bull-roarers from three young lads in the 
hobble-de-hoy stage, who valued some small red beads as 
much as the bull-roarer. They made and painted them in 
the forest. First one came very secretly on a dark and 
misty night to our room and asked that the door and 
window-shutters might be closed. Then came the second, 
and after him the third. Each had a bull-roarer hidden 
under a cloth. They whispered that we had to hide them 
very carefully, because women and children would die if 
they saw them, and they also wished that the men should 
not hear anything about it (the naughty boy Tobakiu was 
greatly afraid of his father), because they would become 
‘brabo’ and get a beating. We were careful to let them 
see us put the dangerous pieces of wood (Fig. 40, No. 6) 
right at the bottom of our box.” * 

Dr. Paul Ehrenreich mentions} having twice come 
* VON DEN STEINEN, 4c., p. 498. 

+ PauL EHRENREICH, “Beitriger Zur Vélkerkunde Brasiliens,” 
Veriffentl. des Kgl. Mus. fiir Volkerkunde, Berlin, 1891, pp. 38, 71. 

298 THE STUDY OF MAN 

across the bull-roarer on his travels in the interior 
of Brazil. He says it is not used by the Karaya on 
the Araguaya, at least he could learn nothing about it, 
and among the Ipurina of the Rio Purus a little bull- 
roarer of a fish-form was obtained, but nothing could 
be gathered as to its use. 

The Ethnographical Museum at Leiden has, accord- 
ing to Schmeltz,* a bull-roarer from the small island 
of Aruba, off Venezuela. It is oval in form, roughly 
made, and used as a toy. The population of the 
island is a mixture of Indians and negroes. Schmeltz 
reminds us that Von den Steinen regards the Caribs as 
allied to the Nahuquas. 

Of the Peruvians we are informed that “their belief 
was that there was a man in the sky with a sling 
and a stick, and that in his power were the rain, the 
hail, the thunder, and all else that appertains to the 
regions of the air where clouds are formed.” + 

Mr. W. Skeat, of the Federated Malay States Ser- 
vice, has informed me that he has collected a couple of 
bull-roarers (Zembing buluh, “bamboo spear”) from a_ 
Patani boatman, of the Kuala-Langat District in Sélan- 
gor. Patani is an Independent Malay State on the 
East Coast of the Malay Peninsula. The bull-roarers 

* SCHMELTZ, Z¢., p. 119. 

+ CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM, “Note on Garcilasso de la Vega,” in 
Hakluyt Soc. vol. xli., quoting Acosta, lib. v. cap. iv. 

THE BULL-ROARER 299 

(Fig. 40, No. 7)* are used for scaring elephants away 
from the plantations. One informant said “ they make 
a noise like a tiger.” This is the first record of the 
occurrence of the bull-roarer on the mainland of 
Asia, and its use to frighten elephants is analogous 
to the use it is put to by the Bushmen of South 
Africa, as well as by boys in Galicia and Scotland. 

Schmeltz} knows of only one true example of the 
bull-roarer from the Malay Archipelago. It occurs 
among Toba-Batak of Sumatra and is a plano-convex, 
narrow, oblong piece of wood about 44 inches in 
length. (Fig. 40, No. 8). It is only a plaything for 
small children. Another child’s toy from Java, which 
is also in the Royal Ethnographical Museum at 
Leiden, has some resemblances to a bull-roarer, but 
it is so specialized that we can pass it by, as it may 
have quite another origin. 

It is also entirely wanting, so far as we know, 
from Polynesia, with the exception of New Zealand. 
It is worth bearing in mind that these islands were 
almost certainly inhabited by Melanesians before the 
Maori invasion, and the bull-roarer may belong to the 
older population. A highly decorated specimen occurs 
in the British Museum, it was first figured and noted 
by Lang.{. We have no information as to its use. 

* There should have been a tang at the upper end of this figure ; the 
specimen is 11 inches long. 

+ SCHMELTZ, /.c., p. 103. 

t LANG, Zc., p. 35. 

300 THE STUDY OF MAN 

When we turn to the black races of Oceania we 
find a very different state of affairs. Alike among 
the noisy, excitable, frizzly-haired natives of the 
Melanesian Archipelago, or of the great island of 
New Guinea, and the taciturn, apathetic, curly-haired 
black fellows of Australia, do we find it playing a very 
important part in the social life of the people. 

Dr. Codrington, the erudite missionary of Melanesia, 
has recorded a bull-roarer in connection with the 
Matambala mysteries in Florida, one of the Solomon 
Islands.* In admission to these mysteries there was 
no limit of age and no time of life more appropriate 
than another, even sucklings were made J/atamébala; 
for the latter the men would go into the villages and 
beg milk from the women, since the infants could not 
come out of the sacred precincts and the women could 
not goin. During the three months of the ceremony 
the Matambala, under cover of the terror of their 
pretended association with ghosts, were playing tricks 
and robbing all the country round. From time to 
time they sacrificed to Siko. More than once they 
made their appearance in the villages; this they did - 
at night-time, taking with them dro (bull-roarers) and 
seesee (bundles of coco-nut fronds to beat over a 
stick). When they approached a village they beat 
the seesee and whirled the duzo ; all the women in the 

* R. H. CODRINGTON, The Melanesians: Studies in their Anthropology 
and Folk-lore, Oxford, 1891, pp. 98, 342. 

THE BULL-ROARER 301 

village shut fast their houses and were much afraid, 
and gave food to the men through small holes in the 
walls of their houses. The downfall of this superstition 
and imposture, says Dr. Codrington, has been com- 
plete. No Matambala celebration has taken place 
for years; all the young people know how the thing 
was done, the sacred precincts were explored, bull- 
roarers became the playthings of the boys, and the 
old men sat and wept over the profanation and their 
loss of power and privilege. 

It is only in Florida that any superstitious character 
belongs to the bull-roarer. There is no mystery 
about it when it is used in the Banks Islands to 
drive away a ghost, as in Mota, where it is called 
nanamatea, ‘“death-maker”; or to make a moaning 
sound, as in Merlav, where it is called worung-tamod, 
“a wailer,” and used the night after death. It is 
often a common plaything; in Vanua Lava they call 
it mala, ‘‘pig,” from the noise it makes; in Maewo 
it is ¢al-viv, “a whirring string”; in Araga it is 
merely ¢avire bua, “a bit of bamboo.” 

The bull-roarer is too well known in the Banks 
Islands to be used in mysteries, and so another 
apparatus is employed in the cult of the Great 
Tamate (Great “Ghost”), by which the peculiar, and 
certainly very impressive, sound is made, which is 
believed by the outsiders to be the cry or voice of 
the ghosts. This is a flat, smooth stone, on which 

302 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the butt-end of the stalk of a fan of palm is rubbed. | 
The vibration of the fan produces an extraordinary 
sound, which can be modulated in strength and tone 
at the will of the performer.* 

In New Guinea the bull-roarer is known at one 
or two places in Kaiser Wilhelms-Land. Krauset 
obtained one from Finsch Hafen about sixteen inches 
in length, and decorated with an insect,{ and Dr. O. 
Schellong§ says they play a great part in the circum- 
cision feast in the same district. They serve to warn 
off the women, and are not allowed to be seen by 
them. We thus get an explanation of some objects 
collected by Finsch|| from Friedrich-Wilhelmshafen. 
At Bilia they were wrapped up carefully in tapa, 
and kept in the assembly house; the natives seemed 
to regard them with a tabu-like fear, and nobody was 
allowed to look at them. 

We have more information regarding the bull- 
roarer in British New Guinea, where it occurs in 
Torres Straits, and along the northern shore of the 
Papuan Gulf. So far as our present knowledge goes 
it is associated with mask-dances, and is employed © 

* CODRINGTON, Z.c., p. 80. 

+ E. KRAusE, Zettschr. fiir Ethnol. xx., 1888 ; Verhandl., p. 267. 

£ Cf A.C. HaDDON, Decorative Art of British New. Guinea, p. 103. 

§ O. SCHELLONG, “Das Barlum-Fest der Gegend Finschhafens,” 
Internat, Arch. fiir Ethnogr., ii., 1889, p. 145. 

|| O. FinscH, E¢thnologischer Atlas, Leipzig, 1888, taf. v. figs. 5, 6; 

“Ethnologische Erfahrungen,” etc. Avnalen des K.K. Nat. Hofinuseums, 
Wien, 1891, p. 65 [203]. 

THE BULL-ROARER 303 

only by the peoples* whom Mr. Ray and myselft 
term “ Papuans,” as in distinction to the Melanesian 
immigrants of the South-Eastern Peninsula. 

The energetic and enthusiastic pioneer missionary 
of British New Guinea, the Rev. James Chalmers, 
or “Tamate,” as he likes to be called by his black 
and his white friends, has described the initiation cere- 
mony among the Toaripi (Motu-Motu). At about 
the age of seventeen or eighteen the boys enter the 
Eramo (sacred house); they leave off the sporran 
worn by the boys, and adopt the string worn by the 
men; their head is shaved, and they then remain 
many months until the hair has grown long again. 
There is a tabu on certain kinds of food. ‘ Not 
until after they have left the Eramo is the Roaring 
Bull [bull-roarer, ¢zpavu| seen”; nor until then can 
an initiate ‘““wear a mask or join in the dances 
and drum-beatings of the tribe, and only then is 
he considered a man. Not until he has descended 
from the Eramo does he know a woman. All sing- 
ing, dancing, and drum-beating are considered sacred 
and never uselessly done.” { 

Mr. Chalmers has recently given to the museum 

* A. C. HappON, Decor. Art, p. 254; and Evolution in Art, 1895, 

Oz: : 
i +S. H. Ray and A. C. Happon, “A Study of the Languages of 
Torres Straits,” Part i., Proc. Ry. Irish Acad. (3) ii., 1893, p. 463: Part 
ii. vol. iv., 1896, p. 119 (cf p. 370). 

tJ. Cuavtmers, Report Austral. Assoc. Advanc. Sci., ii., 1890, 
Pp: 313; of also Proncering in New Guinea, 1887, p. 86. 

304 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of the London Missionary Society two bull-roarers, 
with the following description :—“ Zzparu, only seen 
by a young man after initiation into manhood, and 
then pigs are killed, and a large feast prepared. All 
women and young people leave the village lest they 
should hear it and die. Had great difficulty in getting 
them.” The larger of these two measures 20 inches 
by 54 inches, and is carved on both sides with scrolls, 
which are, as usual, painted red, black, and white. 
The second one is 114 inches by 12 inch; but 
instead of being ellipsoidal, it is practically an 
elongated isosceles triangle with a pointed base—one 
side has a slightly carved tooth-pattern along the 
margin. (Fig. 40, Nos. 10, 11.) 

In connection with the same ceremonies at which 
the masks are employed, certain flat, or slightly 
biconvex, ellipsoidal wooden objects are used, which 
are generally prolonged at one end into a handle, 
and are perforated at the other. They are often 
adorned at the side with vegetable fibre. Their 
shape bears a close resemblance to that of a bull- 
roarer, and I have ventured to. suggest* that they 
may have arisen from this implement, which we have 
seen is used in this district during the initiation 
ceremonies. An objection to this view might be 
urged from the circumstance that among those people 
who employ the bull-roarer during initiation cere- 

* A. C. HADDON, Dec. Art New Guinea, p. 102. 

THE BULL-ROARER 305 

monies, the implement is so sacred that it may 
not be exhibited to any woman or uninitiate. But 
these objects are not actual bull-roarers, and even 
if they are modelled upon the bull-roarers, their 
relatively large size and their decoration alter their 
character, and it is very improbable that any initiate 
would inform the uninstructed that there was any 
resemblance between the two objects. These cere- 
monial tablets, as I have termed them, vary from 
about 20 inches to 60 inches in length, and, so far as 
I know, without exception they bear delineations of 
the human form or face. 

Very similar to these ceremonial tablets are some 
oval wooden slabs that Mr. Chalmers has recently 
sent to this country from the mouth of the Fly River, 
on which are carved conventionalized human faces, 
associated with simple patterns; some he describes 
as “gope-gope, charms hung in new houses for good 
luck . . . gofe, house charm. . . gofe, figure-head 
of canoe, gives good passage, and is thought a 
wonderful charm.” I suspect these, too, are in reality 
bull-roarer derivatives. 

Mr. Chalmers is also our authority for the existence 
of initiation ceremonies in this district at which the 
bull-roarer, durumamaramu, is exhibited. He says: 
‘‘When used all women and children leave the village 
and go into the bush. The old men swing it and 

show it to the young men when the yams are ready 
x 

306 THE STUDY OF MAN 

for digging (May and June).” The name evidently 
means ‘the mother of yams.’* These bull-roarers 
are decorated with incised or carved designs. At the 
same occasion a wooden female image (wvzo-moguru, 
urumuruburu, &c.) is given to the lads to be worn by 
them, but it must not be seen by women or children. 

I found that in the island of Mabuiag, in Torres 
Straits, the large carved and painted bull-roarers 
(dzgu) (Fig. 40, No. 12) were formerly suspended 
round certain platforms that were. connected with 
the turtle fishery. A small bull-roarer (wazuzs) was 
also associated with this cult, but they were kept in 
the bush, Women were allowed to see it. “It 
was half-play,” they said. When the men went out 
to catch the floating turtle they took a dzgu from 
the platform and swung it over the canoe preparatory 
to starting. On the approach of the successful canoes 
the man who had stationed himself on a hill would 
whirl a waznzs, and the women knew that the fishers 
had been lucky. At Moa a man would raise the 
wind by painting himself black all over and whirling 
a bull-roarer.t 

In the autumn of 1888 I visited Muralug (Prince of 
Wales Island), in Torres Straits. The son of the 

* S. H. Ray and A. C. HADDON, “Languages of Torres Straits,” ii., 
Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. (3), iv., 1897, p. 309. (duruma, a variety of yam ; 
maramu, mother). 

+ A. C. Happon, “ The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres 
Straits,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xix., 1890, pp. 406, 427, 432. 

THE BULL-ROARER 307 

chief of that island was a friend of mine, and when 
I went to his father’s village I determined to see 
whether I could discover if these people, who are 
Papuans, and not Australians, had a knowledge of 
the bull-roarer. 

So I took the old man and his son apart, and was 
careful not only to see that nobody was close by, but 
to speak in a low tone of voice. As I could not 
speak their language, our means of communication was 
the jargon English which is spoken all over the Pacific. 

I said to him, “You make him boy man?” (That 
is, “ Do you have initiation ceremonies in which boys 
are made into men?”) “Yes,” he replied, “we make 
him boy man.” “You got thing, time you make him 
boy man?” At first the old chief would say nothing, 
and looked stolidly ignorant, but I persisted, and 
whirled my arm and made a whirring noise, and said, 
“T savvy that thing. You got him?” This was too 
much for him; his surprise that any white man knew 
anything about it was so evident that he was obliged 
to admit that they had the implement. “What name 
you call him?” The old boy looked cautiously all 
around, and after satisfying himself that no one could 
overhear him, he whispered, “Waness.” After a con- 
siderable amount of coaxing he promised to make one 
for me, evidently being satisfied in his own mind that 
I was an initiate of some kind or other. The next 
morning he took me and his son into the bush, and 

308 THE STUDY OF MAN 

took precautions that he was not followed. When 
some distance off he produced a bull-roarer, and 
showed me how to swing it. Then in a secret and 
confidential manner he gave it to me, making me 
promise not to show it to any woman. I naturally 
took this to mean any native woman, and I did not. 
I have given this specimen (Fig. 40, No. 13) to the 
British Museum. Its form, like that in most countries, 
was a long oval, pointed at both ends, and with 
bevelled edges. One end had a short bar-like pro- 
jection to prevent the string from slipping off; the 
latter was about a yard in length, and its other end 
was attached to a stick. It was whirled round and 
round over the head. I was informed that the 
waness was usually ornamented with a central white 
band, a red band being painted a short distance 
above and below it. 

A few weeks afterwards I was in Christianized Mer 
(Murray Island)—a small island about 120 miles from 
Muralug—and to my great surprise I saw a number 
of small boys playing with similar bull-roarers. 
These boys were scholars in the Mission School, and | 
had been brought from Saibai, a low island near the 
coast of New Guinea, at the other end of the Straits. | 

In one island a bull-roarer was too sacred to be 
shown to a woman; in another it was a plaything! | 

All over Australia the bull-roarer is regarded with 
religious awe, and it is first shown to lads at the 

: 

SS 

‘ 

Fic. 40. COMPARATIVE SERIES OF BULL-ROARERS. 

- Bushman (after Ratzel); 2. Eskimo (after Murdoch), 7X2; 3. Apache, North America (after 
Bourke), 8X1}; 4. Pima, North America (after Schmeltz), 154X1; 5. Nahuqua, Brazil 
(after V. d. Steinen), 13X2; 6. Bororo, Brazil (after V. d. Steinen), 5X34 5 7. Patani Malay, 
E. coast of Malay Peninsula (original, from a description by W. S <eat); 8. Sumatra (after 
Schmeltz), 43x}; 9. New Zealand (original), Pang 10,11, Toaripi, British New Guinea 
(original), 20X54, 114X1$; 12. Mabuiag, Torres Straits, 16X38; 13. Muralug, Torres 
Straits (original), 6} x14; 14. Mer, Torres Straits (original), 5 x ¥; 15. South Australia (after 
Etheridge), 141}, both sides of the same specimen are shown; 16. Wiradthuri Tribes, 
N.S.W. (after Matthews), 1372}; 17. Clarence River Tribe, N.S.W. (after Matthews), 
5X1; 18. S.E. Coast N.S.W. (after Matthews), 13X24; 19, Kamilaroi Tribe, Weir River, 

Queensland (after Matthews), 11414. 

310 THE STUDY OF MAN 

ceremony during which they are initiated into man- 
hood. With us manhood is merely a question of age, 
with these people it is a state of grace; unless a lad 
has been initiated he counts as nobody; he has no 
tribal rights, nor can he perform any ceremony. No 
woman is allowed to see the bull-roarer; if shown by 
a man to a woman or uninitiate the punishment to 
both is death. I was informed that the death penalty 
was similarly inflicted among the eastern tribe of 
Torres Straits if the names were divulged of the 
sacred masks which were worn during the initiation 
ceremonies, and if a woman identified the disguised 
chief performers of one of the ceremonies, ‘‘she died 
that night.”* 

In some parts of Australia a deluge myth is 
associated with the bull-roarer, and the lads are told 
that if ever a woman is allowed to see one the earth 
will open, and water gush forth and submerge it. 
The old men point spears at the boys’ eyes, saying, 
“Tf you tell this to any woman you will die; you will 

see the ground broken up and like the sea; if you 

tell this to any woman or to any child you will be 
killed.” The Rev. Mr. Fison gives the following 
tradition: ‘Some children of the Kurnai, in playing 
about, found a ¢irndiin (bull-roarer), which they took 
home to the camp and showed the women. Im- 

+ 

_* A, C. Happon, “Manners and Customs of the Torres Straits 

Islanders,” Journ. Royal Inst. of Great Britain, 1890. 

a 

THE BULL-ROARER 311 

mediately the earth crumbled away, and it was all 
water, and the Kurnai were drowned.” 

So much has been written of late concerning the 
initiation ceremonies in Australia, that it is impossible 
for me to enter into the subject at any length. 
Mathews,* who has recently published some very 
interesting observations on the Sora, or initiation 
ceremonies of the Kamilaroi tribe, records that at the 
main camp, during the early part of nearly every 
night, one of the masters of the ceremonies would 
go alone into the bush a short distance from the 
camp, and for about two hours would sound a wooden 
instrument which these blacks called mzurrawan, which 
is supposed to represent the voice of Durramoolan, 
their native name for the evil spirit, who rules in the 
night. During the time the instrument referred to 
was being sounded in the adjacent forest, the men 
of the tribes would dance and yell, and make hideous 
noises, and all the gins would sing and beat time, 
those of each tribe singing their own peculiar song. 
Howitt t says :— 

“ Tharamiuliint was not everywhere thought to be a malevo- 
lent being, but he was dreaded as one who could severely 

punish the trespasses committed against those tribal ordin- 
ances and customs whose first institution is ascribed to 

* R. H. MatuHews, “The Bora, or Initiation Ceremonies of the 
Kamilaroi Tribe,’ Journ. Anth. Inst, xxiv., 1895, p. 419. 

+ A. W. Howrrr, “On some Australian Beliefs,” Journ. Anth. Inst., 
xiii., 1883, p. 192. 

{ Also called Thriimuhin or Daramulin, 

312 THE STUDY OF MAN 

him. He, it is said, taught the Murring all the arts they 
knew; he instituted the ceremonies of Initiation of Youth; 
he made the original midji (the ¢arndun, or bull-roarer, of 
the Kurnai); ordered the animal names to be assumed by 
men; and directed what rules should be-observed as to 
the food permitted or forbidden to certain persons. It was 
taught to the Murring youths at their initiation .... that 
Tharamiliin himself watched the youths from the sky, 
prompt to punish, by sickness or death, the breach of his 
ordinances. These prohibitions were only relaxed as the 
youths proved themselves worthy, and in some cases appear 
to have been perpetual. 

“The knowledge of Tharamiilin, and his attributes and 
powers, was only communicated to the youths at their 
initiation, and was regarded as something eminently secret 
and not on any account to be divulged to women or children. 
It is said that the women among the Ngarego and Wolgal 
knew only that a great being lived’ beyond the sky, and that 
he was spoken of by them as Papang (Father). .... The 
old men strenuously maintained that the knowledge of the 
name of Zharamiulin was imparted to themselves only at 
their initiation by the old men. This name is to them so 
sacred that even in speaking to me of it, when no one else 
was present but ourselves, the old men have done so in 
almost whispers, and have used elliptical expressions to 
avoid the word itself, such as ‘ He, ‘the man, or ‘the name 
I told you of.” I believe that the dread of offending an 
unseen, powerful, possibly present, spirit, lies much at the 
root of the disinclination to utter the name of Tharamiilin. 
One old Theddora woman (the last of her tribe) said, when 
I asked her who was Tharamiliin: ‘He lives up there 
(pointing to the sky); I only know that; and also that when 
boys are made young men he comes down to frighten them. 
I once heard him coming with a noise like thunder,’” 

THE BULL-ROARER 313 

In describing in detail the initiation ceremonies 
of the Coast Murring tribe, Howitt says* :— 

“The Mid is held to have been first made and used by 
Daramitliin, when in the beginning of things he instituted 
these ceremonies, and constituted the aboriginal society as 
it exists. The noise made by it is the voice of Daramiilin, 
calling together the initiated; and, moreover, it represents 
the muttering of thunder, which is said to be his voice 
‘calling to the rain to fall and make the grass grow up 
green.’ These are the very words used by Umbara, the 
minstrel and improvisatore of his tribe.” 

In a later paper, Howitt states that ‘‘ Showing the 
Grandfather” is the cryptic phrase used to describe 
the central mystery of the /eraez/,t or initiation 
ceremonies of the Kurnai tribe. In reality it means 
the exhibition of the Zuzdun, and the revelation to 
them of the ancestral beliefs. The Kurnai have two 
bull-roarers, a larger one called the Zundun or “the 
man,” and a smaller one called Rukut Tundun, ‘the 
woman” or “wife of Tundun.” The larger one is 
also called ‘‘Grandfather,” Weentwin or Mik-brogan.} 
In this the Kurnai differ from the Murring, who have 
only one bull-roarer, but they agree with several other 
Australian tribes. Where there is only one the 
women are totally excluded. 

* A, W. Howitt, “On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation, 
Journ. Anth. Inst., xiii., 1884, p. 446. 

+ A. W. Howitt, “ The Jeraeil, or Initiation Ceremonies of the Kurnai 
Tribe,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xiv., 1885, pp. 312, 315. 

t Weintwin=father’s father, or father’s father’s brother. All those 
initiated at the same Jeraeil are Brogan, or “ Comrade” to each other. 
Mik-Brogan is the “ Chief Comrade.” 

d 

” 

314 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The women and the children are always told that, 
at the secret parts of the Jeraeil, Tundun himself 
comes down to “make the boys into men.” The 
hideous sounds which the uninitiated may chance to 
hear from a distance they are told is Tundun’s voice, 
and they are warned not to leave their camp while 
he is about, lest he should kill them with his spears. 
Howitt describes how the newly- initiated youths 
thoroughly enter into the fun of frightening the 
women, and, having got over their awe of the bull- 
roarers, they make an outrageous noise with them. 
It sometimes happens that, during the nocturnal 
perambulation, one of the bull-roarers becomes 
detached from its string, and is thus lost. If, per- 
chance, it is afterwards picked up by a woman or 
a child, their curiosity is satisfied by the statement 
that it is a “paddle belonging to Tundun,” which 
he is supposed to have dropped in returning home. 
The shape of the bull-roarer is much like that of 
the little bark paddle, which the Kurnai use when 
sitting down in their canoes. 

In his second paper on the Bora ceremony,* 
Mathews refers several times to the bull-roarers :— 

“ Towards the close of the rites two men with bull-roarers 
went out into some clear ground in front of the novices, and 
commenced loudly sounding these instruments. The boys 
were now directed to look at the two men, and were told 

* Journ. Anth, Inst., xxv., 1896, p. 336. 

THE BULL-ROARER 315 

that all similar noises that they had ever heard were made in 
this way. Several of the Kooringal then walked in front of 
the boys, with uplifted tomahawks in their hands, and told 
them that if they ever divulged this, or any of the other 
performances which they had seen in the bush to the women 
or the uninitiated, they would be killed. The murruwans 
were then given into the hands of the novices, and they 
were invited to inspect them.” 

The bull-roarer, or yuntha, according to Mr. S. 
Gason,* is one of the most important secrets of the 
Diéri Tribe of Central Australia, and the knowledge 
of it is kept inviolate from the women. The belief 
is, that if the women were to see a yuntha which had 
been used at the ceremonies, and know the secrets 
of it, the Diéri Tribe would ever afterwards be 
without snakes, lizards, and other such food. When 
the yuntha if given to the youth, he is instructed 
that he must twirl it round his head when he is out 
hunting. The Diéri think that when the yuxtha is 
handed to the young Wzlyaru he becomes inspired 
by Muramura. The yuztha is from 6 to 9 inches 
long, zs inch thick, and 2 to 2} inches wide; it has 
notches at each side, near one end. 

Among the Arunta tribe of the McDonnell Ranges, 
in Central Australia, the natives not only employ the 
small bull-roarer, zvw/a, in the usual way, but the 

lad on whom circumcision has been performed ‘“‘is 

* A. W. Howitt, “The Dieri and other kindred Tribes of Central 
Australia,” Journ. Anth, Inst. xx., 1890, p. 83. 

316 THE STUDY OF MAN 

furnished with a bundle of large zvw/a (not used for 
making a humming noise), which he carries with 
him, and which are bestowed in order to promote 
speedy recovery. These sticks belong to the class 
of objects known as Churifia.” ... “The sacred 
stones (churifia) of the tribe are flat stones of various 
sizes, of soft material, such as micaceous rock, and 
generally engraved in various ways. These stones 
are greatly valued by the natives; they are handed 
down from generation to generation, and the women 
are never allowed to see them . . . under penalty of 
death... . The humming-stick (27w/a2) also belongs 
to the churifia class.... The marks on the zrudla 
are evidently copied from the marks on the stone 
churtia. ... The churtia may be described as 
symbolic of the totem.”* 

Other references to bull-roarers and their uses will 
be found in Dr. Stirling’s account of the Anthropo- 
logical portion of the Horn Expedition ;+ in two 
papers by Hardman,{ who says, “ The whirling-sticks, 
mero-mero, used to drown the shrieks of the victim, 

* F, J. GILLEN, “Notes on some Manners and Customs of the 
Aborigines of the McDonnel Ranges, belonging to the Arunta Tribe,” 
Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central 
Australia, Pt. iv., Anthropology, 1896, pp. 172, 179. 

te ean 1 YAS 

t E. T. HarpMAN, “ Notes on a Collection of Native Weapons and 
Implements from tropical Western Australia (Kimberley District), Proc. 
Roy. Irish Acad. (3), i, 1887, p. 68; “Notes on some Habits and 

Customs of the Natives of the Kimberley District, Western Australia,” 
Les, P. 73. 

THE BULL-ROARER 317 

as well as the flint or shell-knives used in the 
operation, are considered sacred, and are not to be 
looked upon by women under pain of death.” Pro- 
bably Hardman was repeating only hearsay evidence. 
Some observers who have witnessed the ceremony 
deny that the lads shriek. A recent paper by Mr. R. 
Etheridge,* the Curator of the Australian Museum 
in Sydney, and papers by E. Palmert and R. H. 
Mathews{ may be consulted with profit; the latter 
states that the large and small bull-roarers (mudthega 
and moonibear) of the Wiradthuri tribe, after they 
are shown and explained to the novices, are destroyed 
by splitting them in pieces, and driving them into the 
ground out of sight, or they are burnt (p. 311). The 
most recently published paper is one by Mathews, § 
which gives a useful synopsis of Australian bull-roarers. 
(Fig. 40, Nos. 16-19.) 

More than one account informs us that a_bull- 
roarer is one of the credentials that a messenger 
carries with him when he is sent to summon the’ 
class or the tribes to an initiation ceremony. 

* R. ETHERIDGE, Junior, “On Circular and Spiral Incised Ornaments 
on Australian Aboriginal Implements and Weapons,” Records of the 
Australian Museum, iii., 1897, p. 1. 

+ E. PALMER, “Notes on some Australian Tribes,” Journ. Anth. Inst., 
xiii., p. 295. 

{ R. H. MatrHews, “The Burbung of the Wiradthuri Tribes,” /owrz. 
Anth. Inst., xxv., 1896, pp. 295 e¢ seg. 

§ R. H. MaTueEws, “Bull-roarers used by Australian Aborigines,” 
Journ. Anth. Inst., xxvii., 1897, p. 52. 

318 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Having briefly surveyed most of the recorded 
‘accounts of the bull-roarer in various parts of the 
world, it is now time to see what may be learnt 
from these facts. 

The distribution of this implement is very wide, 
by no means continuous, to borrow an expression 
from the nomenclature of the study of the geo- 
graphical distribution of animals. 

I have drawn up the following table in order that 
we may see at a glance the various purposes for 
which the bull-roarer is employed, and the different 
places where it is so used. I have marked with a 
x those places where that particular use is an 
universal practice (or very nearly so); the / means 
that some tribes only use it for that purpose, and 
a ? indicates that I believe this to be, or to have 
been, its use. 

The distribution of the bull-roarer seems to 
preclude the view that it has had a single origin 
and been carried by conquest, trade, or migration, 
in the usual way. It is impossible to say whether 
it formed part of the religious equipment of man 
in his first wanderings over the earth. The former 
view does not appear to be at all probable, it is 
impossible to prove the latter supposition. 

The implement itself is so simple that there is 
no reason why it should not have been independently 
invented in many places and at diverse times. On 

THE BULL-ROARER 319 

the other hand, it is usually regarded as very-sacred 
and as being either a god itself, as representing a 
god, or as having been taught to men by a god. 
Where this is the case there is every reason to 
believe that its use is very ancient. So that it is 
probable that in certain areas it was early discovered 
and has since been transmitted to the descendants, 
and perhaps to the neighbours, of the original in- 
ventors. 

For example, in America it may belong to the 
oldest stock, and have accompanied the peoples in 
their extension over that continent, and here and 
there it may have died out. It is conceivable that 
it was employed in Africa originally by the Bushmen, 
and possibly other of the African pigmy folk; its 
spread among the Zulus from the Bushmen is not 
an impossibility, for we often find, as I mention in 
the chapter on well-worship, that a conquering race 
may have recourse to the magical practices of the 
indigenous population, especially in the matters of 
agriculture and for the control of the elements. The 
bull-roarer may have arisen among the negroes of 
the West Coast, or have been adopted by them from 
another race. 

It is, however, very dangerous to generalise from 
such imperfect data as we possess at present, and 
doubtless the bull-roarer will be found to be more 
prevalent than our records show. It is, as Lang 

STUDY OF MAN 

LIEME, 

320 

x 

‘VITVULSAYV | 

~~ 
x 
x 

pod v sv popredox 

syuids Avme uaqy sty 0} 

syaids uouruins 0} 

satuoula199 
0} UuoUWIUINS 0} [eNUapeID & se 

= 
~ 

“UeULIOL) 

*s|eI]G SeLIOL, | 

‘sy syueg 
"ST UOMIOTOS 

‘VANIONX) MAN 

‘VIS 
-NVTDAL 

“GNVIV4Z MUN | 

‘“AVIVIA ‘VaLVWaS 

"V qnog 
‘V WON 
‘ous, 

SaTUOUIIIED UOT}EI}IUT UL 

x 
x 

“aeuysng | 
“IES | 
*JSvOD JSOM\. | 

‘(juetouy) 

“q [eajued | 

209915) 
‘ure, | 

satiayskur 
ay} ut pasn syuowajdur pasoeG 

*VOINaNY 

‘voIudy 

*TdOUN 

‘MHUVOU-ITNG AHL AO AS) 

321 

THE BULL-ROARER 

. ; z * uMouyUn 

z 7 * fo} ese 

* UsIOM 0} ponqe} 

ap}}e9 Surayp 107 

wueyo Surysy 10 Suruny z se 

: * Surujyysiy 
pue sapuny} Suronpoid 07 

: uret Sutonpoad 30y 

pura sutonpoad 107 

i : U01}10} 
-x9 JO} SUvaU B SB pasn 10 
‘stomod Axerorpn{ yj} poyetoosse 

A : pod B jo 2010A ay} 

322 THE STUDY OF MAN 

remarks, an instrument easily invented by savages, 
and easily adopted into the ritual of savage mysteries. 

The peculiar, unearthly noise made by the bull- 
roarer at once marked it out as something mysterious. 
According to the size and form or the celerity of the 
whirling, so does the sound vary. To men who /ee/ 
the world around them, whose nature is permeated 
with the kinship of things animate and inanimate, 
and who perceive no real distinction between life and 
not-life or between different kinds of beings—to such 
men the deep whirring sound, the buzzing, or the 
shriller whizzing of the bull-roarer, awakens strange 
sensations, which they try to express and formulate. 
In harmony with the conceptions of all primitive folk, 
they would argue that as the sounds resemble those 
of a mighty rushing wind, or of wind-driven rain, 
there must be some connection—some heavenly cor- 
respondence, as the mystic Swedenborg expressed it 
—between them. Professor Tylor has termed this 
savage conception “sympathetic magic.” This, I 
believe, is the explanation of the widely-spread con- 
nection between the bull-roarer and the wind and the 
rain, the thunder and the lightning. 

The wind may be raised to enable canoes to go out 
fishing, and so the bull-roarer insensibly may have 
come in some instances to be regarded as a fishing 
charm, and to bring good fortune not to the fishing 
alone, but good luck generally. 

THE BULL-ROARER 323 

The same line of thought is applicable to its 
function of producing the rain, which made the grass 
green, and the yams to grow. 

A time arrives when men argue thus, What power 
is it that brings good fortune and abundant crops but 
that of a divine person? That the bull-roarer should 
then be accredited as a god is by no means to be 
wondered at. Indeed, it would be illogical not to 
do so, starting from our premises; and savages are 
not illogical or irrational beings, though their argu- 
ments may lead them to conclusions that seem strange 
to us. 

In its deification the bull-roarer reaches it apotheo- 
sis, its highest status. Whilst it was being translated 
from a magical instrument to a divine person, or the 
symbol of divinity, we may readily conceive that it 
was removed from the possibility of contamination 
by women. From being tabu it became sacrosanct, 
and it took its place among the mysteries; and well 
it might. The idea of contamination or enervation 
by women has been several times discussed by an- 
thropologists,* and so the holy implements and the 
holy ceremonies are kept out of possible danger by 
rendering it profanation for women to have anything 

* A. E. CRAWLEY, “Sexual Taboo: a Study in the Relations of the 
Sexes,” Journ. Anth. Inst., xxiv., 1894-95, pp. 116, 219, 439. J. G. 
FRAZER, Zhe Golden Bough, i., 1890, pp. 170, 171. W. ROBERTSON 
SmitH, The Religion of the Semites, 1889, pp. 435, 462. E. WESTER- 
MARCK, Zhe History of Human Marriage, 1891, pp. 151-156, 541. 

324 THE STUDY OF MAN 

to do with them. No doubt selfish aims entered into 
this restriction, but selfish aims are not unknown 
among higher forms of religion. 

The initiation ceremonies of the lads are immensely 
important, as they mark the appreciation of the 
greatest facts of true religion as we understand it—the 
brotherhood of man and the communion of man with 
his God. I use this term in its highest significance, 
for the mystical union of the Church with Christ is a 
conception that is taught by so-called savages in their 
initiation ceremonies. Brotherhood has_ reference 
only to those of the same communion, to those who 
have passed through the same ceremonies. Even in 
the nineteenth century many of us find it difficult to 
extend this conception. I cannot now enter into the 
deeper significance of these initiation ceremonies, but 
there is nothing to wonder at in the reverence paid to 
the symbol of the ‘‘ Grandfather.” 

“By symbolism,” writes Count Goblet d’Alviella,* 
“the simplest, the commonest objects are transformed, 
idealized, and acquire a new and, so to say, an illimit- 
able value.” In the Eleusinian mysteries, the author 
of the Phzlosophoumena relates that, at the initiation 
to the higher degree, “there was exhibited as the 
great, the admirable, the most perfect object of 
mystic contemplation, an ear of corn that had been 
reaped in silence; and two crossed lines suffice to 

* GOBLET D’ALVIELLA, The Migration of Symbols, 1894 (Eng. Trans.). 

THE BULL-ROARER B25 

recall to millions of Christians the redemption of the 
world by the voluntary sacrifice of a god.” 

“Tt is sentiment, and above all religious sentiment, 
that resorts largely to symbolism, in order to place 
itself in more intimate communication with the being, 
or abstraction, it desires to approach. To that end 
men are everywhere seen either choosing natural or 
artificial objects to remind them of the Great Hidden 
One, or themselves imitating, in a systematic manner, 
the acts and deeds they attribute to Him—which is 
a way of participating in His life.” 

It is the fate of religious symbols to lose their 
pristine significance, and this has in places over- 
taken the bull-roarer, so that it has in various places 
degenerated into a child’s plaything. Numerous 
analogous degenerations of symbols will be found 
in a study of decorative art. 

Dr. Codrington has revealed among the Melane- 
sians not only sacred secret societies, which doubtless 
had their origin in a clan system similar to that of 
Australia, but various stages in the disintegration of 
those societies, which eventually come to be little 
more than clubs. Some of these secret societies take 
upon themselves judicial or predatory functions, and 
for law and order, or for purely selfish aims, they 
terrorize non-members and especially the women. 
The bull-roarer, as I have already indicated, is used 
for these baser ends. 

326 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The weird sound of the whirling bull-roarer is 
suggestive of unseen forces, and so it naturally 
becomes associated in men’s minds with spirits or 
ghosts. It may thus come to be a means of com- 
munication with the spirits, a use to which it is put 
in West Africa and Melanesia. 

There is one collateral use of the bull-roarer which 
is of interest. I have quoted Mrs. Gomme’s and 
Figura’s descriptions of its effects on cattle. The 
poor animals evidently mistake the noise for the 
buzzing of the gad-fly or bot-fly, and instinctively 
they take to flight. I do not know whether the 
name ‘bull-roarer” has anything to do with this; 
but I suspect that this is the explanation of the 
statements that the Bushmen use it as a clapper for 
driving game and as a charm in hunting. It certainly 
would prove a useful instrument if these little hunters 
could by its means drive their game so crazy that 
they would not know which way to turn, and it would 
also prove very serviceable in their raids on the 
cattle of the Zulus. 

Most likely we shall never know for certain whether 
the early savages of Northern Europe possessed the 
bull-roarer; but there is every probability in favour 
of the view that if such was the case, it had to them 
a magical and mystical significance, as we have seen 
it has amongst other primitive folk. 

The evidence that Andrew Lang has brought for- 

THE BULL-ROARER 327 

ward supports this conclusion. Even in the most cul- 
tured period of Greek civilization there were certain 
sacred mysteries, during the celebration of which 
the initiates danced, probably in a nude condition, 
as we are told their bodies were daubed with clay, 
while they whirled the bull-roarer. The parallelism 
with the initiation ceremonies of the Australians is 
complete. It is obvious these and many other 
elements in the religious practices and beliefs of 
the Greeks were survivals of savagery. The religion 
of the fathers is long conserved as ceremonial practice 
by the piety of the children. 

This insignificant toy is perhaps the most ancient, 
widely-spread, and sacred religious symbol in the 
world. 

CHAP PERT: 
THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN. 

N country places, or even in our towns, groups 

of boys and girls, or more frequently of girls 
only, may be seen dancing in a ring, walking in 
rows, or performing certain actions and singing all 
the while. These singing games are now dying out, 
but in some places they are being replaced by other 
singing games of a purely artificial character, which 
are taught in school. The latter have no interest 
for us, but it will be found that many of the former 
illustrate curious phases in the history of man. 

In the last chapter, when speaking of the cere- 
monies in which the bull-roarer was employed, I 
pointed out that dancing is an important element in 
all the ceremonies of savages. The dancing varies 
much in character; in no case does it resemble the 
modern “round” or “fast” dances, but there is a 
close similarity between the old-fashioned ‘“ square” 
dances and the dances of savages. One may say 
without hesitancy that Sir Roger de Coverley and 
other country dances, as well as the essential figures 

328 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 329. 

of the quadrilles and lancers, are survivals of ancient 
dances, the two latter having been greatly modified 
by professional dancers. 

In a lecture before the Cambridge Antiquarian 
Society in March, 1897, Sir E. Clarke pointed out 
that it has been alleged in various quarters that our 
English country dance is derived from the French 
contredanse. John Wilson Croker wrote, “Our 
country. dances are a corruption in name and a 
simplification of figure of the French contredanse.” 
De Quincey, in his Lzfe and Manners, Dr. Busby, 
in his Dectzonary of Music, and Archbishop Trench, 
in English: Past and Present, adopted the same view. 
On the other hand, Weaver wrote in his Hzstory of 
Dancing (1712), “Country dances are a dancing the 
peculiar growth of this nation, tho’ now transplanted 
into almost all the Courts of Europe.” Feuillet, in a 
little book published in Paris in 1706, entitled Aecuez/ 
de Contredanses, says, ‘‘Les Anglais en sont les 
premiers inventeurs.” Nearly all the dances in the 
volume are English. For instance, the famous “Green 
Sleeves” appears as Les Manches Vertes, and nearly 
all the versions correspond with those in John Play- 
ford’s Dancing Master of 1686 (7th edition). Littré, 
in his classical Dicteonnatre de la Langue Frangaise, 
admits that the contredanse is a kind of old-fashioned 
English dance imported into France under the 
Regency between about 1723 and 1745. 

330 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Clarke says, “the contredanse was, in fact, first 
introduced to Paris in 1745, when it was given in 
a ballet entitled “Des Fétes de Polymnie,” by 
Rameau. Its success was so great that it was after- 
wards employed in all the future advertissements. It 
is clear, therefore, that the French borrowed the 
country dance from us. Eventually they turned it 
into the quadrille, which was imported into England 
about eighty years ago, and made a great sensation 
when first danced at “ Almack’s” by the famous Lady 
Jersey and her extourage in 1815.”* 

The following extract from Heywood’s ‘A Woman 
Kild with Kindness” (1607)t will illustrate the variety 
of the dances that were formerly indulged in :— 

“ Enter NicKE and IENKIN, IACKE SLIME, ROGER BRICKBAT, wth 
Countrey Wenches, and two or three Musitians. 

SLimE. Come, what shall it be? Rogero? f 

Ign. Logero, no; we will dance, Zhe Beginning of the World. 

Sisty. I loue no dance so well as John, come kisse mee now. 

Nic. I that haue ere now deseru’d a cushion, call for the Cushion 
Dance. 

RoceEr. For my part I like nothing so wel as Zom Tyler. 

Tenxk. No, wee’l haue the Hunting of the Fox. 

Sue. The Hay, the Hay, there’s nothing like ‘he Hay. 

Nic. I haue saide, I do say, and I will say againe. 

* Cf. also Mrs. LILLY GROVE (Mrs. J. G. Frazer), Dancing, in 
The Badminton Library, 1895, p. 280. 

+ Thomas Heywooa’s Dramatic Works, vol. ii., pp. 96-98. Ed. 
Pearson, 1874. (I have uniformly put all the names of the dances 
into italics.) 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 331 

Tenxk. Euery man agree to haue it as Nicke says. 

ALL. Content. 

Nic. It hath bene, it now is, and it shall be. 

SisLty. What, Master Nichlas, what? 

Nic. Put on your smocke a Monday. 

Izn. So the dance will come cleanly off: come, for God’s sake 
agree to something ; if you like not that, put it to the Musitians, or 
let me speake for all, and wee’! haue Sedlenger’s Round. 

ALL. That, that, that.” 

In the fine old song, ‘Come, Lassies and Lads,” 
we find the same love of dancing :— 

““ You lasses and lads take leave of your dads, 
And away to the May-pole hie, 
There every he has got him a she, 
And the minstrel ’s standing by : 
For Willy has got his Gill, and Johnny has his Joan, 
To jig it, jig it, jig it, jig it, jig it up and down. 

‘“* Begin,’ says Hal,—‘ Aye, aye,’ says Mall, 
‘We'll lead up Packington’s Pound’; 
‘No, no,’ says Noll, and so says Doll, 
‘We'll first have Sedlenger’s Round,’ 
Then every man began to foot it round about, 
And every girl did jet it, jet it, jet it in and out. 

“Then after an hour they went to a bow’, 
And played for ale and cakes, 
And kisses too, until they were due— 
The lassies held the stakes. 
The girls did then begin to quarrel with the men, 
And bade them take their kisses back, 
And give them their own again. 

332 THE STUDY OF MAN 

““ Now there they did stay the whole of the day, 
And tired the fiddler quite 
With dancing and play, without any pay, 
From morning until night. 
They told the fiddler then, they’d pay him for his play, 
And each a twopence, twopence, twopence, 
Gave him, and went away.” 

One of the most favourite games of young men 
and maidens in the Middle Ages was that known as 

“ Barley Break,” or ‘‘ The Last Couple in Hell.” 

“THe spring clade all in gladness 
Doth laugh at winter’s sadness, 
And to the bagpipes round 
The maids tread out their ground. 

“Fy, then, why are we musing, 
Youth’s sweet delight refusing ? 
Say, dainty nymph, and speak, 
Shall we play Barley Break ?”—O.Lp Sone. 

It appears from Sir Philip Sidney’s description in 
the Arcadia that the game was played by three 
couples, each of a youth and a maid, one couple stand- 
ing at each end of the area and the third remaining 
in the centre. The oblong playing-ground was divided 
transversely into three plots, of which the central 
one was called “hell.” The mating was determined 
by lot, and the last pair mated were obliged to take 
the central plot or “hell,” and saluted each other 
by a kiss. This pair were required to pursue with 
joined hands, while the others were at liberty to 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 333 

separate. Any maid caught replaced the maid and 
any youth, the youth of the central couple. 

“She went abroad, thereby, 
At Barley-brake her sweet, swift foot to try .. . 
A field they goe, where manie lookers be . . 
Then couples three be streight allotted there, 
They of both ends the middle two doe flie, 
The two that in mid-place, Hell called were, 
Must striue with waiting foot, and watching eye 
To catch of them, and them to hell to beare, 
That they, as well as they, Hell may supplye: 
Like some which seek to salue their blotted name 
With others blot, till all doe taste of shame. 

“There may you see, soone as the middle two 
Doe coupled towards either couple make, 
They false and fearfull, doe their hands undoe, 
Brother his brother, friend doth friend forsake, 
Heeding himselfe, cares not how fellow doe, 
But of a stranger mutuall helpe doth take: 
As periur’d cowards in aduersitie 
With sight of feare from friends to fremb’d doe flie.”* 

Whatever may have been the origin of this now 
obsolete game, it was played in the seventeenth cen- 
tury for purely exhilarating amusement for both sexes, 
in the same way as lawn tennis was until very 
recently. 

In looking through a large collection of the singing 
games of children, it will be obvious, as Mr. Newell, 

* StR PHILIP SIDNEY, The Countess of Pembroke’s Arcadia. (Now 

the sixt time pvblished.) London; 1623; “0%. i. p. 87, “Song of 
Lamon,” 

334 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the well-known American folk-lorist, points out, that 
many were not composed by children. “They were 
formerly played, as in many countries they are still 
played, by persons of marriageable age, or even by 
mature men and women. The truth is that in past 
centuries all the world, judged by our present standard, 
seems to have been a little childish, The maids of 
honour of Queen Elizabeth’s day, if we may credit 
the poets, were devoted to the game of tag, and 
conceived it a waste of time to pass in idleness hours 
which might be employed in that pleasure, with which 
Diana and her nymphs were supposed to amuse 
themselves.”* 

Court dames and cottage damsels alike played these 
singing games in the breezy days of Good Queen 
Bess. How the puritanical glacier of a later time 
swept away the richness of life and left bare the 
naked rock-bed of stern reality, we of the present 
generation know only too well. 

Those unconscious keepers of archaic archives—our 
village children—have retained some of the romping 
games of the “grown ups” of “Merrie England” ; 
but also in some of the singing games, played by the 
road-side, can we trace degenerate and fragmentary 
survivals of the social life, ceremonies, and religious 
practices of our savage ancestors. 

*W. W. NEWELL, Games and Songs of American Children, New 
York, 1884, p. 5: 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 335 

This is not the place to enter into a disquisition on 
dancing, much as I should like to, for the subject 
is one of peculiar interest and of deep significance. 
Many valuable contributions to the subject have been 
made by Mrs. J. G. Frazer,* Herbert Spencer,t and 
others, amongst whom I would specially mention 
Grosse,{ who has eloquently argued that dancing has 
been no mere pastime, ‘‘ La joie de vivre, ohé, ohé,” 
not even solely a magical pantomime, but that it has 
had a civilizing effect by making numbers of people 
meet in amity and move rhythmically in accord. On 
this co-ordinating effect of the tribal dance Grosse lays 
great stress, and believes that it has been one of the 
chief factors in the elevation of man. With Herbert 
Spencer, he delves yet deeper and sees in the vigorous 
rhythmical movements the vatzonale of dancing. 

I do not intend making an analysis or a classifica- 
tion of the singing games of children, but will content 
myself with taking a few that have interested me. 
The first two, “The Farmer's Den” and ‘ When I 
was a Naughty Girl,” appear to be simple amuse- 
ments with nothing special at the back of them. 

In a few instances I have given, or merely alluded 
to, games which in some cases are evidently versions 

* Mrs. LILLY GROVE, The Badminton Library : Dancing, 1895. 

+ HERBERT SPENCER, “ Professional Institutions: iii, Dancer and 
Musician,” The Contemporary Review, \xviii., 1895, p. 114. 

{ E. Grosser, Die Anfinge der Kunst, 1894. 

336 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of the same game, while in others they are similar 
games which have apparently had an independent 
origin. We are here brought face to face with a 
crucial question in folk-lore. Broadly speaking, 
students of folk-lore range themselves into two 
camps: the adherents of one school seek to explain 
all similarities of custom or tale by borrowing or 
transmission; the followers of what is sometimes 
called the anthropological school are impressed with 
the essential solidarity of mankind, and argue that 
under similar conditions men of a given plane of 
culture will do, think, and say very much alike. 
There is no need to take either extreme. Every 
instance must be studied independently, and all the 
available evidence must be collected and weighed 
impartially from both points of view before a reliable 
conclusion can be arrived at. The similarity in two 
or more widely-separated districts of a complex 
custom or tale, is very good evidence in favour of 
borrowing, but in a simple case the matter is by no 
means easy to decide. 

As an example of the distribution of two singing 
games which are so similar that they must have had a 
common origin, I will take the following. The first 
version was collected by my elder daughter at 
Auchencairn in Kirkcudbrightshire ; the second was 
given to me as coming from Basel. It is a far cry 
from south-west Scotland to Switzerland, and the 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 337 

explanation appears to be that it is an ancient 
Teutonic game :— 

THE FARMER’S DEN. 

The players dance in a ring, singing, round one 
child, who stands in the centre of the circle. 

“The farmer’s in his den, the farmer’s in his den, 
For it’s oh! my dearie, the farmer’s in his den. 

For the farmer takes a wife, for the farmer takes a wife, 
For it’s oh! my dearie, the farmer takes a wife.” 

(The child then chooses a “wife” from the circle, who then goes 
into the ring along with the “farmer.” The remainder again dance 
round singing) :— 

“ For the wife takes a child, for the wife takes a child, 
For it’s oh! my dearie, the wife takes a child.” 

(The “wife” then chooses a “child” from the circle, and so on, 
as before.) 

‘For the child takes a nurse, for the child takes a nurse, 
For it’s oh! my dearie, the child takes a nurse.” 

(Selection as before.) 

“For the nurse takes a dog, for the nurse takes a dog, 
For it’s oh! my dearie, the nurse takes a dog.” 

(Then they all join in singing) :— 

“For we all clap the dog, for we all clap the dog, 

For it’s oh! my dearie, we all clap the dog.” 
(And while they are singing they pat the “ dog’s” back.) 
Z 

338 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The Swiss game is as follows: 

The children are divided into two parties and 
stand opposite one another. One party, advancing, 
sings :— 

“Once a peasant drove into the forest, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
Once a peasant drove into the forest.” 
(And retreat when singing the last line.) 
(The other side advances singing) :— 

“The peasant took a wife, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The peasant took a wife. 

The woman took a child, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The woman took a child. 

The child took a nurse, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The child took a nurse. 

The nurse took a man-servant, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The nurse took a man-servant. 

The man-servant took a dog, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The man-servant took a dog. 

The dog took a sausage, Hurrah Viktoria ! 
The dog took a sausage. 

The peasant separated from his wife, Hurrah Viktoria ! 

The woman separated from the child, 

The child separated from the nurse.” 
And so on; when saying the word “separated” the 
second party chooses a child for the first one, until only 
one child is left, who is the “sausage.” They all 
form a circle round her, dancing and clapping their 
hands, and singing : 

“The sausage is left alone, Hurrah Viktoria !” 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN — 339 

The Scottish version is evidently an abbreviated 
one. It looks, too, as if the Swiss game should 
commence with one child (the “ peasant”), facing a 
row, and that at each stanza a child should pass 
from the latter to the former, until the break comes in 
the song when the action is reversed; finally the 
“sausage” alone remains. 

What appears to be merely an imitative child’s 
singing .game is the one known as “ When I was 
a Naughty Girl.” 

The following is a version I have collected near 
Cambridge, and as the ring of children marched 
round, following one another in a circle, they imitated 
the actions suggested by the words. It was a pretty 
little comedy to see them walking demurely when 
they were good girls, or shrugging their shoulders 
and wriggling their bodies when they were naughty, 
walking arm in arm when they were courting, and 
later dangling an imaginary baby. 

“When I was a naughty girl, a naughty girl, a naughty girl, 
When I was a naughty girl, and this way went I.” 
(Pantomime: shrugging shoulders.) 
“When I was a good girl, a good girl, a good girl, 
When I was a good girl, and this way went I.” 
(Pantomime: folding arms and walking soberly.) 

“When I was a teacher, a teacher, a teacher, 
When I was a teacher, and this way went I.” 

(Pantomime: beating time or action of whacking.) 

340 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“When I went a courting, a courting, a courting, 
When I went a courting, and this way went I.” 
(Pantomime: walking arm in arm in pairs.) 

‘When I had a baby, a baby, a baby, 
When I had a baby, and this way went I.” 
(Pantomime: doubling up apron and dandling tt.) 

“When my baby died, baby died, baby died, 
When my baby died, how I did ery.” 
(Pantomime: crying.) 

‘‘When my father beat me, father beat me, father beat me, 
When my father beat me, and this way went he.” 
(Pantomime: hitting one another on backs.) 

“ When my father died, father died, father died, 
When my father died, how I did laugh.” 
(Pantomime: laughing.) 

Mr. Newell* says that this game is closely 
parallelled in France and Italy, and even on the 
extreme limits of European Russia; but wherever 
there are children, there will they imitate the doings 
of their elders, and while in some games we may lay 
stress upon their geographical distribution, in others 
this probably is of no moment. 

Probably an analogous singing pantomime is the 
following, which was given to me by a German girl. 
The children form a ring, and as they sing they make 
appropriate gestures. 

“Would you know how the peasant, 
Would you know how the peasant, 
Sows his oats ? 

* Le, pe 86, 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 341 

Look! like this the peasant, 
Look! like this the peasant, 
Sows his oats in the field.” 
The double rhymes are repeated for— 
Reaping oats, 
Threshing oats, 
And winnowing oats. 

At first sight this game appears to be similar to a 
common English rhyming game known as “ Oats, 
Beans, and Barley”; but a further study of the latter 
rather leads one to the supposition that it had 
originally a magical significance. 

I have seen the following game played by the 
children of Girton, a village near Cambridge, and | 
would like to take this opportunity of thanking Mrs. 
Lawrence, of the Rectory, for the help she has given 
me in collecting the games of that village. 

The girls who played it walked round in a circle, 
and they made appropriate gestures while singing the 
second verse in illustration of the words of the song. 
After all had given one stamp of the feet and a clap 
of the hands, and had turned round, they formed a 
ring during the singing of the third verse; two enter 
this and kiss one another kneeling, while the encircling 
chorus sing the last verse. 

“Oats and beans and barley grow, 
You or I or anyone know, 
You or I or anyone know 
Where oats and beans and barley grow.* 

* This verse evidently means that no one knows how the corn grows, 

342 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“First the farmer sows his seed, 
Stands awhile and takes his heed (or ease),* 
Stamps his foot and claps his hand, 
And turns around to view the land. 

‘Waiting for a partner, 
Open the ring, 
And take one in, 
Waiting for a partner. 

“Now you ’re married you must obey, 
You must be true to all you say, 
You must be kind and very good, 
And help your wife to chop the wood.” 

Mr. Newell has collected several examples from the 
United States. 

“In the early part of the century,” he informs us, “the 
essential stanza went thus in New Hampshire :— 

“Thus my father sows his seed, 
Stands erect and takes his ease, 
Stamps his foot, and claps his hands, 
Whirls about, and thus he stands,’ 

“The Swedish quatrain is nearly the same :— 

““*T had a father, he sowed this way, 
And when he had done, he stood this way ; 
He stamped with his foot, he clapped with his hand, 
He turned about, he was so glad.’ 

* The one rhymes and the other does not, but the children incline 
to “ease.” 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 343 

o 

“The French rhyme, by its exact correspondence, proves 
the great antiquity of the formula :— 

*¢Qui veut ouir, qui veut savoir, 
Comment on seme l’aveine? 
Mon pere la sémait ainsi, 

Puis il se reposait 4 demi ; 

Frappe du pied, puis de la main, 

Un petit tour pour ton voisin ; 
Aveine, aveine, aveine, 

Que le Bon Dieu t’amene !’” 

Fauriel, in his history of Provengal literature, 
alludes to this song, and considers it to be derived 
from, and to represent, choral dances of the Greek 
rustics of Massil (Marseilles), He says (I again quote 
from Newell, p. 83) :— 

“The words of the song described an action, a succession 
of different situations, which the dancers reproduced by their 
gestures. The song was divided into many stanzas, and 
terminated by a refrain alike for all. The dancers acted or 
gesticulated only to imitate the action or situation described 
in each stanza; at the refrain they took each other by the 
hand and danced a round, with a movement more or less 
lively. There are everywhere popular dances derived from 
these, which more or less resemble them. . . . I remember to 
have seen in Provence some of these dances, of which the 
theme seems to be very ancient—one, among the rest, imitat- 
ing successively the habitual actions of a poor labourer, 
working in his field, sowing his wheat or oats, mowing, and 
so on to the end. Each of the numerous couplets of the song 
was sung with a slow and dragging motion, as if to imitate 
the fatigue and the sullen air of the poor labourer; and the 
refrain was of a very lively movement, the dancers then 
giving way to all their gaiety.” 

344 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The French, Italian, and Spanish versions of this 
game also represent a series of actions, sowing, reaping, 
&c., of which our rhyme has retained only one stanza. 

We must always keep apart in our minds games which 
have filtered down from adults to children, and those 
which the latter may be supposed to have invented 
themselves. At first sight one would have imagined 
that “Oats, peas, beans, and barley grows,” as played 
on English village greens or by children in the United 
States, was merely an imitative game, analogous to 
“keeping house,” playing with dolls, playing at soldiers, 
and the like; but we find “it is properly a dance rather 
of young people than of children.” We know it was 
an ancient dance, as “it was played by Froissart (born 

337) and by Rabelais (born 1483); while the general 
resemblance of the song in the countries of Sweden, 
Germany, British Islands, France, Spain, Italy, and 
Sicily proves that in the five centuries through which 
we thus trace it, even the words have undergone little 
change.” 

It is not impossible that it was merely a game of 
playing at work indulged in by young people, but 
another explanation has been suggested by Newell* 
which has much to recommend it. -He says :-— 

“The lines of the French refrain, 

‘Oats, oats, oats, 
May the good God prosper you!’ 

* iG Polo 

THE SINGING GAMES OF CHILDREN 345 

and the general form of the dance suggest that the song may 
probably have had a religious symbolic meaning, and formed 
part of rustic festivities designed to promote the fertility of 
the fields, an object which undoubtedly formed the original 
purpose of the May festival... . That such a song, danced 
in sowing time, and representing the progress and abundance 
of the crop, should be supposed to bring a blessing on the 
labours of the year, is quite in conformity with what we know 
of popular belief, ancient and modern.” 

Another game, called “Threading the Needle,” 
affords us, according to Newell, a further illustration 
of this belief. 

It is played in America and England by a chain 
of children passing under the arch formed by the 
uplifted joined hands of two other children, till one 
of the chain is caught by the dropping of the arms. 
The child then makes a choice of some alternative, 
which decides to which of the two children who 
make the arch she is to attach herself. When all 
are caught there is a “ tug-of-war.” 

Mr. Newell informs us that the name “ Threading 
the Needle” is still applied, in a district of Central 
France, to a dance in which many hundred persons 
take part, in which from time to time the pair who 
form the head of the row raise their arms to allow 
the line to pass through, coiling and winding like 
a great serpent. When a French savant asked the 
peasants of La Chatre why they performed this 
dance, the answer was, “ To make the hemp grow.” 

346 THE STUDY OF MAN 

This apparently inconsequent reply of the French 
peasant, who, judging from the locality, may very 
well have belonged to the non-Aryan, dark, round- 
headed race of Central France, is very significant, 
and takes us back to an attitude of mind that is 
difficult for us to realize, but which is still exemplified 
by many living savage peoples. 

I have myself seen,* at the beginning of the rainy 
season in Torres Straits, a dance performed by natives 
whose heads were enveloped in large masks, which 
consisted of imitations of a human face resting on 
a crocodile’s head and surmounted by a large figure 
of a saw-fish. It was called the ‘“‘Saw-fish Dance,” 
and was designed to bring good luck in the approach- 
ing fishing season. I have also seen these natives in 
their dances represent the actions of ordinary life, 
but sometimes in a slightly conventionalized manner, 
such as planting yams, picking up pearl-shell from 
the bottom of the sea, stamping out a fire, &c. 

It is now recognized by anthropologists that cere- 
monies which are performed in connection with 
agriculture, fishing, hunting, and the like, are mainly 
magical rites, or rather magical pantomimes. The 
conventional realism (if the phrase may be permitted) 
of these performances ensures the success of the 
undertaking, mainly by the supposed sympathy 
between the mimetic action and the real operation. 

* A. C. HAppon, “The Secular and Ceremonial Dances of Torres 
Straits,” Jnternat. Arch. fiir Ethnogr., vi., 1893, p. 131. 

CHAPTER XIl. 
“LONDON BRIDGE”: FOUNDATION SACRIFICE. 

ese i) ea BRIDGE is broken down, 
London Bridge is broken down, 
London Bridge is broken down, 
My fair lady. 
“ Build it up with bricks and mortar, 
Build it up with bricks and mortar, 

Build it up with bricks and mortar, 
My fair lady. 

“ Bricks and mortar will mould away, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“ Build it up with penny loaves, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“ Penny loaves will be stolen away, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“ Build it up with gold and silver, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“Gold and silver will be stolen away, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

«Send a man to watch all night, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“ Suppose the man should fall asleep, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

347 

348 DAE SS LOD SOLAN: 
“Set a dog to bark all night, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“Give him nuts to crack all night, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

‘Suppose the nuts should all be bad, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady. 

“Set a horse to gallop all night, (repeat three times) 
My fair lady.” 

These are the words of a singing game, which | 
saw played by a group of girls at the village of 
Barrington, near Cambridge. Variants of this game 
occur all over the country; and in Ireland it is 
recorded from Belfast and Cork. 

A few of these variants only can be noted, and 
these very shortly. In Belfast the rhyme begins :— 
“London Bridge is broken down, 

Grant said little bee ; * 

London Bridge is broken down 
Where I’d be.” 

A common London version runs thus :— 

‘**London Bridge is broken down, 
Dance o’er my lady lee ; 
London Bridge is broken down 
With a gay lady. 

“ How shall we build it up again ? 
Dance o’er my lady lee ; 
How shall we build it up again? 
With a gay lady. 

* Another informant gives the refrain, “ Grand says the little Dee.” 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 349 

“Silver and gold will be stole away, 
Ete., ete, etc., 

“Build it up with iron and steel, 
Ete. ete., Cte, 

‘Tron and steel will bend and bow, 
Etc., etc., etc. 

* Build it up with wood and clay, 
Etc., etc., ete. 

** Wood and clay will wash away, 
Ete: rete. etc: 

“ Build it up with stone so strong, 
Dance o’er my lady lee. 
Huzza! ’t will last for ages long, 
With a gay lady.” 

In some versions the watchman is replaced by a 
prisoner ; after the “penny loaves” verse we find in 
Hampshire— 

“What have this poor prisoner done, 
Prisoner done, prisoner done, 
What have this poor prisoner done ? 
My fair lady. 

“Stole my watch, and lost my key, 
Lost my key, lost my key, 
Stole my watch, and lost my key, 
My fair lady. 

“Off to prison you must go, 
You must go, you must go, 
Off to prison you must go, 

My fair lady.” 

350 THE STUDY OF MAN 

In one Kent variant we find :— 

“What has this poor prisoner done ? 
Stole my watch and broke my chain. 
How many pounds will set him free ? 
Three hundred pounds will set him free. 
The half of that I have not got. 
Then off to prison he must go.” 

The game is variously played. It is now generally 
played like “Oranges and Lemons,” only there is now 
no “tug-of-war” at the end. Often two children join 
hands to form an arch, the remainder form a long line 
by holding to each other’s dresses or waists, and run 
under. Those who are running under sing the first 
verse ; the two who form the arch sing the second and 
alternate verses. At the words, “ What has this poor 
prisoner done?” the girls who form the arch catch one 
of the line (generally the last one). When the last 
verse is sung the prisoner is taken a little distance 
away, and the game begins again. 

At Barrington the children formed two parallel 
advancing and retreating lines, and finished by all 
dancing round in a circle. The same occurs in 
Berkshire. 

Mrs. Gomme in her 7vaditional Games of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland analyses this game in a masterly 
manner, and shows that ‘‘the special feature of the 
rhymes is that considerable difficulty occurs in the 
building of the bridge by ovaznary means, but without 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 351 

exactly suggesting that extraordinary means are to 
be adopted.” The London version alone faithfully 
reflects an actual building episode. The game then 

diverges into two groups, that with a watchman and 
that with a prisoner. 

The watchman incident approaches nearer to 
modern facts, and is therefore probably a compara- 
tively recent modification, since the prisoner, as we 
shall see, is an unexplained factor. A watchman 
children can understand, and then the game is 
occasionally prolonged in the endeavour to keep 
him awake and alive to his duties; this comes out 
clearly in a Berkshire version :— 

‘* We’ll set a man to watch at night. 
Suppose the man should fall asleep ? 
Give him a pipe of’ tobacco to smoke. 
Suppose the pipe should fall and break ? 
We’ll give him a bag of nuts to crack, 
Suppose the nuts were rotten and bad? 
We'll give him a horse to gallop around.” 

And the children dance round in a ring in imitation 
of the horse. 

The prisoner incident is, according to Mrs. Gomme, 
more common than the watchman. In only one case 
(Shropshire) is the prisoner ransomed, in the others 
he is sent to prison. 

What does this sudden appearance of a prisoner 
indicate ? 

352 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The two following modern Greek songs very 
vividly supply the answer :— 

“THE STOICHEION OF THE BRIDGE. 
(Leloponnesos.) 

“A bridge across the Tricha broad, with sixty-two wide arches. 

All day long do they build the bridge: by night it falls to pieces. 

And sadly weep the ’prentices, and sorely grieve the masons. 

A little birdie went and perched upon the arch r th’ middle ; 

She sang not as a birdie sings, nor was her note the swallow’s : 

‘Without a human Stoicheion the bridge can ne’er be founded. 

It neither must an idiot be, a madman, nor a pauper, 

But Ghidrghi’s wife it needs must be, Ghidrghi’s, the master 
mason.’ 

Then hasten all the ’prentices, and off they set to fetch her. 

‘Thine hour be happy, Ghidrghiana!’ ‘My boys, I’m glad to 
see you!’ 

‘Unbind and swaddle fresh thy babe, and of thy milk now give 
him ; 

Thy husband, Ghidrghi, he is sick, and thou with us must hasten.’ 

As they were going on the road, and on the road did journey, 

‘Three sisters once were we [she cried] and Stoicheia we'll all 
be! 

Of Kérphos one’s a Stoicheion ; the other of Zitouni ; 

And I, the third and fairest one, 0’ th’ bridge across the Tricha, 

And as my eyes are streaming now, may wayfarers stream over ! 

7”? 

Here the human sacrifice must be provided by the 
master mason; in the following song the victim is 
selected by a method of casting lots. _In Legrand’s 
New Greek Dictionary, stoicheron is defined, amongst 
other meanings, as the genius or spirit of a place. In 
this instance the idea appears to be that to enable the 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 353 

bridge to last it must be endowed with a living 
spirit. 

“THE BRIDGE OF ADANA. 

(Kappadocia.) 

“All day long did they build the piers ; by night they fell in ruins. 
“Come now and let us branches cut! come now will we chop faggots; 
Let us give up one soul of us that firm the bridge be builded.’ 
They sat them down, and chopped away, the two-and-forty masons, 
Then fell from Yianni’s hand his axe, unfortunate Yianndki! 

*Yiannaki, go, thy goodwife fetch, if thou thy head wouldst keep 
thee!’ 

‘If I should now my goodwife give, I yet can find another ; 
But if I my own head give up, I while I’m young shall leave her !’” 

So they fetch the poor wife, who is “vigilant and 

quick at bath and washing.” The husband drops his 

ring down the excavations and induces his wife to 

fetch it up. 

“Then down goes she, and down goes she, steps forty-two descends 
she, 

And fall upon her as she goes of stones a thousand /itras, 
And throw they down upon her, too, of earth a thousand spadefuls.” 

In her dying lament she exclaims :— 

“Hear thou my words, Yiannaki mine, let not the world rejoice 
thee ; 

Three only sisters once were we, we were three sisters only ; 

The one did build the Danube’s bridge, the second the Euphrates’, 

And I, I too, the murdered one, the bridge build of Adana.’” 

Miss Lucy M. J. Garnett, in her Greek Folk Poesy, 
from which book these two songs are taken, points 

out that numerous stories of foundation-sacrifices are 
2A 

354 THE STUDY OF MAN 

told in Celtic countries. In Adamnan’s Lzfe of 
Columba* we read :— 

“Columkille said, then, to his people, ‘It would be well for 
us that our roots should pass into the earth here.” And he 
said to them, “It is permitted to you that some of you go 
under the earth of this island to consecrate it.’ Odhran arose 
quickly, and thus spake: ‘If you accept me,’ said he, ‘I am 
ready for that. ‘O Odhran,’ said Columkille, ‘you shall 
receive the reward of this: no request shall be granted to 
any one at my tomb unless he first ask of thee. Odhran 
then went to heaven. He (Columkille) founded the church 
of Hy then.” 

What strange methods the missionaries had in 
those days ! 

There are many traditions still current in the High- 
lands regarding such sacrifices. One of these relates 
that when the workmen had assembled to lay the 
foundations of Tigh-an-Torr, in western Ross-shire, 
they caught the first person who chanced to pass and 
buried him under the foundation-stone. On laying 
the foundations of Redcastle, a red-haired girl was 
buried alive under the stone. 

As there is so much evidence of this ghastly custom 
in the British Islands, there is no need for us to seek 
for further confirmation in European practice. One 
instance will suffice. So late as 1843, in Germany, 
when a new bridge was built at Halle, a notion was 

* The Life of St. Columba, Founder of Hy; written by Adamnan, 
ninth Abbot of that Monastery. Ed. by W. REEVES, Dublin, 1857, p. 203. 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 355 

abroad among the people that a child was wanted to be 
built into the foundation. In Africa and the far East 
we find precisely the same custom; but somehow 
we rather expect that sort of thing to be done by 
barbarians and savages, forgetting all the while that 
it was not so very long ago when our own ancestors 
did the very same. 

“So recently as 1872 there was a scare in Calcutta when 
Hooghly Bridge was being constructed. The natives then 
got hold of the idea that the Mother Ganges, indignant at 
being bridged, had at last consented to submit to the insult 
on condition that each pier of the structure was founded on a 
layer of children’s heads. Formerly, in Siam, when a new 
city gate was being erected, it was customary for a number of 
officers to lie in wait and seize the first four or eight persons 
who happened to pass by, and who were then buried alive 
under the gate-posts to serve as guardian angels; and there 
is a tradition about London Bridge itself, that the stones were 
bespattered with the blood of little children. Fitzstephen, in 
his well-known account of London of the twelfth century, 
mentions that when the Tower was built the mortar was 
tempered with the blood of beasts.”* 

The substitution of animal for human sacrifice is 
too well recognized in comparative religion to need 
substantiating ; for example, a chicken sometimes re- 
places a girl as a foundation sacrifice in Borneo. 

It seems that Professor Léon Pineau read a paper 

* A, B. GOMME, Traditional Games, pp. 346-7 ; further illustrations 

of this custom will be found in G. L. GOMME, Zarly Village Life, p. 29, 
and E, B, TyLor, Primdtive Culture, i., pp. 104-108, 

356 THE STUDY OF MAN 

before a Congress in Paris in the spring of 1897 on one 
of the most popular of French “ vondes,” which com- 
mences thus in some localities :— 

“Sur le pont de Nantes, 
Sur le pont de Nantes, 
(Unibalkestiatichelemea-se 

elsewhere it runs :— 

“Sur le pont du Nord, 
Sur le pont du Nord, 
Un bal y est donné.” 
Of this there are many variants, but the theme is the 
same in all. M. Pineau argued that this was related 
to “a ritual dance on the occasion of a human sacrifice 
to the divinities of the water,’ and attributed this 
traditional song to a Celtic origin. A critic * suggests 
that this was more probably a Gothic rather than a 
Celtic song. 

Newellt has also studied this game, and he has 
collected some foreign contemporary and medizval 
games which he thinks are variants. He describes 
the American version of the game as follows :— 

“Two players, by their uplifted hands, form an arch, 
representing the bridge, under which passes the train of 
children, each clinging to the garments of the predecessor, 
and hurrying to get safely by. The last of the train is 
caught by the lowered arms of the guardians of the bridge, 
and asked, ‘Will you have a diamond necklace, or a gold 

* S. B., “A propos dune Ronde enfantine,” La Science Sociale, xxiii., 
1897, p. 109. + Zc. p. 204. 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 357 

pin?’ ‘a rose, or a cabbage?’ or some equivalent question. 
The keepers have already privately agreed which of the 
two each of these objects shall represent, and according to 
the prisoner’s choice he is placed behind one or the other. 
When all are caught, the game ends with a ‘ Tug-of-war, 
the two sides pulling against each other, and the child who 
lets go and breaks the line is pointed at and divided.” 

In Suabia, the two keepers of the “Golden Bridge” 
are called respectively the “ Devil” and the “ Angel,” 
and the object is to decide who shall be devils and 
who angels. 

In France the game is known as ‘‘ Heaven and 
Hell.” The children who have made a good choice 
after the selection is finished pursue the devils, 
making the signs of horns with fingers extended 
from the forehead. 

In Italy the name of the sport is “Open the 
Gates.” The gates are those of the Inferno and 
ot Raradise ;, St, Peter is the! keeper of. one,;St. 
Paul of the other. The children choose between 
wine and water; but when the destiny of the last 
child is decided, the two girls who represent the 
keepers of the bridge break their arch of lifted hands, 
and move in different directions, followed by their 
subjects, “ while the cries and shrieks of the players 
condemned to the Inferno contrast with the pathetic 
songs and sweet cadences of those destined to the 
happiness of Paradise.” 

358 THE STUDY OF MAN 

The game is mentioned by Rabelais (about a.p. 
1533), under the name of the ‘‘ Fallen Bridge.” 

In German versions the keepers are called ‘“ Devil 
and Angel,” “King and Emperor,” or “Sun and 
Moon.” 

In this latter form the game has been one of the 
few kept up by the Germans of Pennsylvania, who 
call it the “Bridge of Holland” (Die Hollandisch 
Briick ”). 

As to the origin of this remarkable game, our 
citations have already made it clear that one of its 
features consists in a representation of the antagonism 
of celestial and infernal powers, and the final decision 
by which each soul is assigned a place on the one 
side or the other. 

It was universally believed in the Middle Ages that 
the soul, separated from the body, had to cross a 
dangerous bridge, and subsequently undergo a literal 
weighing in the balance, according to the result of 
which its destiny was decided. It is in the nature 
of things that children conversant with these ideas 
should have dramatised them in their sports. We 
see no reason with the German writers to go back 
to ancient northern mythology; nor do we find any 
ground for believing that our game is more likely 
to be of Teutonic than Romance descent. 

An Irish domestic from Waterford gives the 
following account of the game. 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 359 

An actual bridge was built up with sticks and 
boards, and surrounded by the ring of players, 
dressed in costume; without stood the devil. Little 
girls in variously coloured dresses represented the 
angels. 

The repeated fall and rebuilding of the bridge was 
acted out, as described in the verses of the song. 
This fall was ascribed to the malice of the devil, 
who ruined it during the night (watching it, said 
’ the narrator, from the top of an ash-tree during the 
day). 

The imprisonment of the child enclosed by the 
arms of the leaders was acted in a noteworthy 
fashion. A chain was taken and wrapped round the 
child in the form of a serpent (for the devil zs a 
serpent, said the reciter); the captive was taken to 
a hut (representing apparently the entrance to the 
Inferno) built by the sea. Meantime, the rest of the 
train called on their leader for help; but he answered, 
“The devil has five feet, and thirteen eyes, and is 

stronger than I!” The performance lasted five 
hours, and the name of the edifice was the Devil’s 
Bridge. 

In this Irish game tests were employed to deter- 
mine whether the captive should belong to the devil 
or not. One of these was the ability to walk on a 
straight line drawn on the ground. 

Newell sums up his conclusions as follows :— 

350 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“We suspect, however, that that part of the sport which 
relates to the warfare of good and evil powers does not be- 
long to the original idea, but that a still more primitive game 
has taken on an ending which was common to many amuse- 
ments in the Middle Ages. The central point of the whole 
is the repeated downfall of the structure. Now there is a 
distinct mythological reason for such a representation. In 
early times no edifice was so important as a bridge, which 
renders intercourse possible between districts heretofore 
separated. Hence the sanctity attributed in medizval times 
to the architects of bridges. The devil, or (in more ancient 
guise) the elemental spirit of the land, who detests any inter- 
ference with the solitude he loves, has an especial antipathy 
to bridges. His repeated and successful attempts to interfere 
with such a structure, until he is bought off with an offering 
like that of Iphigenia, are recorded in legends which attach 
to numerous bridges in Europe. It is on such supernatural 
opposition that the English form of the game appears to 
turn. The structure, which is erected in the daytime, is 
ruined at night; every form of material—wood, stone, and 
gold, is tried in vain; the vigilance of the watchman, or of 
the cock and the dog—guardian animals of the darkness— 
is insufficient to protect the edifice from the attack of the 
offended spirits. 

“The child arrested seems to be originally regarded as the 
price paid for allowing the structure to stand. In times 
when all men’s thoughts were concerned about the final 
judgment, a different turn was given to the sport—namely, 
whether the prisoner should belong to the devils or to the 
angels, who wage perpetual warfare, and dispute with each 
other the possession of departed souls. Finally, in quite 
recent days, religious allusions were excluded, and the cap- 
tive, now accused of mere theft, was sentenced to be locked 
up, not in the Inferno, but in a commonplace jail.” (p. 211.) 

“LONDON BRIDGE” 361 

This mystical explanation of Mr. Newell’s is ex- 
tremely ingenious, but there does not appear to be 
any good evidence to connect the foreign games, 
which look rather like degraded “ miracle plays,” with 
the. English London Bridge game; further, as Mrs. 
Gomme acutely points out, the tug-of-war incident 
does not come into the English game. 

CHATTER XI: 
“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER”: WATER WORSHIP 

HIS game is usually played by eight girls, two 
of whom face one another and stretch out their 
arms towards each other and join hands. Two others 
do the same, the four girls thus make a cross with 
their arms. They see-saw backwards and forwards, 
and sing a song, the following version of which is 
taken from Halliwell’s Mursery Rhymes, Games, 
ccelxxxyu. -— 
“Draw a pail of water 
For my lady’s daughter : 
My father’s a king and my mother’s a queen ; 
My two little sisters are dressed in green, 
Stamping grass and parsley, 
Marigold leaves and daisies. 

One rush, two rush, 
Pray thee, fine lady, come under my bush.” 

One girl gets inside the enclosing arms, and they 
repeat the song until all four have “popped under,” 
when they “jog” up and down till they fall on the 
ground, 

Sometimes only two girls join hands, or the four 

362 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 363 

may form a square with their extended arms, which 
they sway backwards and forwards singing the lines. 
Two arms are then raised, and one girl comes under ; 
this is repeated till all four girls have entered the 
square, then their arms encircle each other's waists, 
and they dance round. 

Halliwell* describes a different action to any of 
these. A string of children, hand in hand, stand in 
a row. A child stands in front of them as leader ; 
two other children form an arch, holding both of the 
hands of the other. The string of children pass 
under the arch, the last of whom is taken captive by 
the two holding hands. The verses are repeated 
until all are taken. 

A Belfast version of the song, collected by Mr. W. 
H. Patterson,t is as follows :-— 

“Sift the lady’s oaten meal, sift it into flour, 

Put it in a chest of drawers and let it lie an hour. 
One of my rush, 
Two of my rush, 

Please, young lady, come under my bush. 

My bush is too high, my bush is too low ; 

Please, young lady, come under my bough. 

Stir up the dumpling, stir up the dumpling.” 

It would be tedious to enumerate the many variants 
of the song, but the following is a plausible restoration 

* Nursery Rhymes, p. 63. 
+ A. B. GOMME, Tradit. Games, i., p. 103. 

364 THE STUDY OF MAN 

compounded out of fifteen versions by Mrs. Gomme 
in her 7vad:tional Games :— 
“Draw a pail of water 
For a lady’s daughter ; 
Her father’s a king, her mother’s a queen, 
Her two little sisters are dressed in green ; 
Stamping grass and parsley, 
Marigold leaves and daisies : 
Sift the lady’s oatmeal, sift it into flour, 
Put it in a chestnut tree, let it lie an hour: 
Give a silver pin and a gold ring. 
One and a hush! two and a rush! 
Pray, young lady, pop under a bush: 
My bush is too high, my bush is too low ; 
Please, young lady, come under my bough. 

A see-sawing movement in the game probably 
represents the raising of water from a well. The 
incidents may be grouped as follows :— 

(1) Drawing water from a well. 

(2) For a devotee at the well. 

(3) Collecting flowers for dressing the well. 

(4) Making a cake for presentation. 

(5) Gifts to the well (according to some versions, a 
silver pin, gold ring, and probably a garter). 

(6) Command of silence. 

(7) The presence of the devotee at the sacred 
bush. 

It can be by no mere chance that all of these are 
incidents of primitive’ well-worship. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 365 

The “dressing” or adorning of wells by means of 
garlands occurred at Bonchurch, in the Isle of Wight, 
where on St. Boniface’s Day the well was decorated 
with chaplets of flowers.* It is, however, rare in 
England, except in the Western Counties, North 
Lancashire, and Westmoreland, and especially on the 
borders.t Derbyshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, 
and Shropshire comprise the main region of garland- 
dressing, and the practice has frequently. been 
described. Mr. Gomme points out that in Wor- 
cestershire and Staffordshire the custom is simple; 
in Derbyshire and Shropshire other practices occur 
in connection with the well-dressing. Garland- 
dressing, though found in the eastern part of the 
latter county, is almost entirely absent from the 
western, where wishing and healing wells are found.{ 
On the hillside at Rorrington Green, in the parish of 
Chirbury, is a Halliwell, or Holy Well, at which a 
wake was celebrated on ‘Ascension Day. The well 
was adorned with a bower of green boughs, rushes, 
and flowers, and a Maypole was set up. The people 
“used to walk round the hill with fife and drum and 
fiddle, dancing and frolicking as they went.” They 
threw pins into the well to bring good luck and to 
preserve them from being bewitched, and they also 

* TOMKINS, History of the Isle of Wight, ii., p. 121. 
+ HENDERSON, Folk-lore of the Northern Counties, p. 2. 
{ Miss C. S, BURNE, Shropshire Folk-lore, p. 414. 

366 THE STUDY OF MAN 

drank some of the water. Cakes were also eaten; 
they were round, flat buns, from three to four inches 
across, sweetened, spiced, and marked with a cross, 
and they were supposed to bring good luck if kept. 
The wake is said to have been discontinued about the 
year 1832 or 1834.* 

At the village of Girton, near Cambridge, a game 
which is evidently the same is called “A Lump of 

Sugar.” 
“Grind your mother’s flour, 
Three sacks an hour, 
One in a rush, 
Two in a crush, 
Pray, old lady, creep under the bush.” 

Mrs. Lawrence describes the game as follows :— 
The girls form into sets of four, those facing one 
another join hands and sway backwards and forwards 
while singing. At “Pray old lady,” &c., the right 
and left arms of one couple are raised over the head 
of one of the opposite couple and dropped behind 
her back, thus enclosing her in a ring. This is 
repeated till all are, so to speak, inside the ring. 
They then jump round shouting, “A lump of sugar,” 
till they are tired. 

The association of sugar with this game puzzled 
me very much, till I came across the following four 
examples of drinking sugar-water at holy wells. The 
use of oatmeal in the first custom coincides with the 

Tic pe as4. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 367 

versions, “Sift the lady’s oaten meal, sift it into flour” 
(Belfast), and “Sieve my lady’s oatmeal, grind my 
lady’s flour” (Halliwell, No. cclxxxviii.) 

Country folk still resort to “Our Lady’s Well,” at 
Belper in Derbyshire, bringing not only vessels from 
which to drink the water, but “noggins” in which to 
carry back a supply for home drinking. Afflicted 
persons have been seen bathing their limbs in the 
cold running water, and heard to say they were bene- 
fited by repeated applications. Belper children used 
to carry—at any time when they thought fit, and could 
get permission from their mothers—a mug or porringer, 
and a paper containing oatmeal and sugar, to the Lady 
Well, and there drink the mixture of meal, sugar, and 
water. This was the chief item of the afternoon’s 
outing. * 

“ Sugar-cupping is another custom which survives here. 
On Easter Day young people and children go to the Drop- 
ping Well, near Tideswell [also in Derbyshire], with a cup 
in one pocket and a quarter of a pound of sugar (? honey) in 
the other, and having caught in their cups as much water as 

they wished from the droppings of the Tor-spring, they dis- 
solved the sugar in it.” + 

The Eas Well at Baschurch, in Shropshire, was 
frequented till a quarter of a century ago by young 

Rae, Hope, The Legendary Lore of the Holy Wells of England, 

1893, P- 53. 
+ GLOVER, History of Derbyshire, i., p. 307, quoted from Hope, Zc., 

p- 60, 

368 THE STUDY OF MAN 

people, who went there on Palm Sunday to drink 
sugar and water and eat cakes. A clergyman who 
was present in 1830, speaks of seeing little boys 
scrambling for the lumps of sugar which escaped from 
the glasses and floated down the brook which flows 
from the spring into the river.* 

It is customary for the younger folk to assemble on 
Sunday evenings and drink the water of St. Helen's 
Well (at Eshton, in Yorkshire) mixed with sugar. 
The ceremony appears now to have died out. It was 
in vogue late in the last century. t 

Great concourses of people from all parts used to 
assemble at “Our Lady’s Wells” or the “Holy 
Wells,” near Long Witton, in Northumberland, on 
Midsummer Sunday and the Sunday following, and 
amuse themselves with leaping, eating gingerbread, 
brought for sale to the spot, and drinking the waters 
of the well. These wells had a high reputation for 
their very virtuous qualities; that furthest to the east 
is called the “Eye Well.” t 

It is possible that drinking sugar-water is a degra- 
dation from drinking a mixture of oatmeal, sugar, and 
water, and this again may be an abbreviated form of 
making a cake. Sugar was not a primitive comestible, 
its place was taken by honey; now honey mixed with 

* Miss C. S. BURNE, Shropshire Folk-lore, p. 432. 
+ R. C. Hope, Legendary Lore of the Holy Wells of England, p. 204. 
t HopE, Zc, p. 108, 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 369 

meal, if flavoured, makes a kind of gingerbread, a 
confection that we find in the last example. Ginger- 
bread is certainly a popular cake with the folk, and it 
is probably a very ancient one. Honey cakes were a 
favourite food with the ancients; Aristophanes, for 
example, in his Bzrds pokes fun at Herakles for being — 
so fond of them. 

There are any number of wells in the British 
Islands-at which offerings are made; the following 
will serve as examples. At Sefton, in Lancashire, it 
was customary for passers-by to drop into St. Helen’s 
Well a new pin “for good luck,” or to secure the 
favourable issue of an expressed wish.* Pin-wells, as 
they are often popularly termed, are found in several 
places in Northumberland, Yorkshire, &c. 

Henderson informs us that the country girls 
imagine that the well is in charge of a fairy or 
g, and 
the pin presents itself as the most ready or con- 

spirit who must be propitiated by some offerin 

venient, besides having a special suitableness as being 
made of metal.t 

In many places in the North of England pieces of 
rag, cloth, or ribbon take the place of the pins, and 
are tied to bushes adjoining the wells. 

The following custom pertained to the “Chapel 

* Baines, Lancashire and Cheshire, Past and Present, iii, 497. Notes 
and Queries, 5th series, x., p. 158. 
+ HENDERSON, Folk-lore of the Northern Counties, p. 230, 

28 

370 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Well” or ‘Rag Well,” near Great Ayton, in York- 
shire :— 

“Tf a shirt or shift taken off a sick person be thrown into 
this well, it will show whether the person so sick will recover 
or not. If the article float, it denotes the recovery of the 
person to whom it belongs; but if it sink there is no hope for 
the life of the sufferer. To reward the patron saint of the 
well for his intelligence, a rag was torn off from the garment 
and left hanging upon the briars there about, ‘where,’ says 
the writer of a MS. in the Cottonian Library, ‘I have seen 
such numbers as might have made a fayre rheme in a paper 
mylls* 

Mr. G. L. Gomme also records} that pin-wells are 
common in Wales. Near the well of St. AZlian, not 
far from Bettws Abergeley in Denbighshire, resided a 
woman who officiated as a kind of priestess. Anyone 
who wished to inflict a curse upon an enemy resorted 
to this priestess, and for a trifling sum she registered 
in a book kept for the purpose the name of the person 
on whom the curse was wished to fall. A pin was 
then dropped into the well in the name of the victim, 
and the curse was complete. 

There are holy wells innumerable in Ireland, most 
of which are still resorted to by peasantry, who firmly 

* Gentleman's Magazine, 1823; and Gentleman's Magazine Library, 
Superstitions, pp. 143, 147. PARKINSON, in his Yorkshire Legends and - 
Traditions, ii., 1889, p. 103, says that this did not happen at St. Oswald’s 
Well, near the foot of Roseberry Topping, as the original writer states, 

but at the Rag Well. 
+ Ethnology in Folk-lore, pp. 86, 87. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 371 

believe in their efficacy. On the northern side of a 
stream that separates counties Dublin and Wicklow 
is St. Kevin’s Well, which was festooned with rags 
when I visited it. Many of these rags bore un- 
mistakable evidence of having been removed from 
sores. I noticed one rag which was torn off from the 
spot where the garment was marked with its owner’s 
name, so that in this case the spirit of the well could 
be in no doubt as to the identity of the patient. 
In Aranmore, the largest of the Aran Islands, in 
Galway Bay, are numerous “blessed places.” St. 
Eany’s Well, which is overhung by a _ bramble 
adorned with rags, is resorted to by women who 
desire to have children. It is beside a small level 
sward (a rare occurrence in the Aran Islands) known 
as the ‘““Angel’s Walk.” ‘“ An’ it’s here the Guardian 
Angels of Aran come, of a summer’s night, to take 
their diversion.”* A mile or two away is the holy 
well attached to the Church of the Four Comely 
Saints. It is here the men come when they want 
children. To the sprays of blackberry and ivy which 
overshadow it are attached pieces of calico, velvet, 
whipcord, &c., and in the well itself are numerous 
buttons, fish-hooks, nails, and pieces of crockery, 
glass, &c. | . . In the parish of Kilmurvy is that 
well known as Tuber Carna, at which prayers for the 
recovery of a sick. person are answered, but the 

* Mary BANIM, Here and There through Ireland, 1892, p. 133. 

372 THE STUDY OF MAN 

water has the further properties of not being boilable 
and of restoring dead fish to life.* 

The processions round the well sunwise are an im- 
portant and nearly universal part of the ceremony 
in Ireland, and, as Gomme? points out, the appar- 
ently unimportant detail occurring in a Shropshire 
example, {| of pouring water over a particular stone, 
receives significant light from the examples in Ireland. 
Thus at Dungiven (in co. Derry), after hanging their 
offerings of rags on the bush adjoining the well, the 
devotees proceed to a large stone in the River Roe 
immediately below the old church, and, having per- 
formed an ablution, they walk round the stone, bowing 
to it and repeating prayers, and then, after performing 
a similar ceremony in the church, they finish the rite 
by a procession and prayer round the upright stone. § 

Out of a large possible selection of Irish holy wells, 
I will conclude with one or two examples from the 
north. There is a lyn, or pool, in the stream just 
a little below Kilgort Bridge, near Claudy, co. 

* A. C. HADDON and C. R. BROWNE, “The Ethnography of the Aran 
Islands, County Galway,” Proc. Roy. Lrish Acad. (3), li., 1893, p. 818. © 

+ Ethnology in Folk-lore, p. 93 

+ St. Oswald’s Well, at Oswestry, is used for wishing and divination. 
One rite, says Miss Burne, is to go to the well at midnight, take some 
water up in the hand and drink part of it, at the same time forming a 
wish in the mind, throw the rest of the water upon a particular stone at 
the back of the well, and if the votary can succeed in throwing all the 
water left in his hand upon this stone without touching any other spot 
his wish will be fulfilled. (Ethnology in Folk-lore, p. 85.) 

§ Mason, Statistical Account of Ireland, i., p. 328. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 373 

Derry, called “Turish Hole,” or “Turish Lyn.” 
Some people still believe that by bathing in this 
pool cures can be obtained for any description of 
disease, and there are traditions that cripples have 
been cured at this place and left their crutches 
behind them there. “ Back-going” children when 
washed in this pool became healthy. In fact, tradi- 
tion says that immersion in the pool was a cure for all 
manner of diseases, sick-headache included. The 
date of the ceremonies is May Eve (last day in April), 
when the persons wanting a cure bathe or wash 
themselves or the diseased part in the water and 
repeat some prayers. The offerings, which are of 
different kinds, are left in a bush beside the lyn. 
Often a piece of cloth is tied to the bush, sometimes a 
lock of hair, and sometimes three white stones picked 
up from the pool. It is not known when or by whom 
the lyn was blessed, but the custom of offering 
prayers there indicates that the people regard the 
place as holy. Tradition says that a very large trout 
was in Turish-o-Lyn, and that all who had the good 
fortune to see it on May Eve were sure to get cured. 
It is said that this trout was caught by some man, and 
when he had it on the coals cooking it for his dinner 
it leaped out of the door and went back to its lyn, but 
it never let itself be seen afterwards.* The tree over 

* W. Gray, “Our Holy Wells: A Folk-lore Chapter,” Proc. Belfast 
Nat. Field Club (2), iv., 1893-94, p- 94. 

374 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Cranfield Well, on the north shore of Lough Neagh, 
as in many other cases, is decorated with old rags, 
and crystals of carbonate of lime are found in the well, 
which are said to be very lucky.* 

Gomme}; gives numerous examples of Scottish 
holy wells. He says :— 

“ About fifty years after the Reformation it was noted that 
the wells of Scotland ‘were all tapestried about with old 
rags. { Only one or two instances need be noted. At 
Toubermore Well, in Gigha Isle, devotees were accustomed 
to leave a piece of money, a needle, pin, or one of the 
prettiest variegated stones they could find.§ In Banffshire, 
at Montblairie, ‘many still alive remember to have seen the 
impending boughs adorned with rags of linen and woollen 
garments, and the well enriched with farthings and bodles, 
the offerings of those who came from afar to the Fountain. || 
At Wick they leave a piece of bread and cheese and a silver. 
coin, which they alleged disappeared in some mysterious 
way.{l... It is scarcely necessary to pursue these details 
with greater minuteness, and it may be stated as a general 
rule that ‘at all these fountains the invalid used the same 
ceremonies, approaching them sunwise, ** or ‘deisil,’ as it was 
called.” 

Particularly prominent in Scotland, as well as in 
Ireland, was this obligation to approach the well sun- 
wise—that is, in the same direction as that taken by 
the hands of a clock. 

* 7.6, p:.95. + Ethnology in Folk-lore, p. 95: 

t The Book of Bon Accord, p. 268. § MartTIn’s Jour, p. 230. 
|| ROBERTSON, Andzguitzes of Aberdeen and Banff, ii., p. 310. 

4] SINCLAIR, Wew Statistical Account of Scotland, xv., p. 161. 

** FORBES LESLIE, Larly Races of Scotland, i., p. 156. 

“DRAW A PALL OF WATER” 375 

The votaries often bathed in holy wells or sacred 
pools, and this could in some cases only be done 
after sunset and before the next sunrise; but, on the 
other hand, at certain wells it was an infallible cure 
for almost any disease to bathe as the sun rose on 
the first Sunday in May. These bathing customs 
are not indicated in any of the recorded versions of 
games, The water that was drawn in the bucket may 
have been for drinking, or for washing an affected 
part, but actual bathing is not implied. 

The injunction of silence must now be referred to. 
“At Penpont, in Dumfriesshire, the emissary of the 
patient has to go through a most careful ceremonial. 
When he reached the well he ‘had to draw water 
in a vessel, which was on no account to touch the 
ground, to turn himself round with the sun, to throw 
his offering to the spirit over his left shoulder, and 
to carry the water, without ever looking back, to the 
sick person. All this was to be done in absolute 
silence, and he was to salute no one by the way.’ * 
The elements of magic ritual preserved here are very 
obvious, and it is to be remarked that silence is 
a condition imposed upon the devotees at many 
wells in Ireland, and also in England.”+ One more 
example must suffice. The Ffynnon Cefn Lleithfan, 
or Well of the Lleithfan Ridge, on the eastern slope 

* MaRTIN, Western Islands, p. 7. 
+ Gomme, E¢hnology in Folk-lore, p. 99. 

376 THE STUDY OF MAN 

of Mynydd y Rhiw, in the west of Caernarvonshire, 
is a resort for the cure of warts. The sacred 
character of the well may be inferred from the silence 
in which it is necessary to go and come, and from 
the prohibition to turn or look back. The wart is 
to be bathed in the well with a rag or clout which 
has grease on it. The clout must then be carefully 
concealed beneath the stone at the mouth of the 
well.* 

The association of a bush or tree with a holy well 
is so common as to be practically universal, and there 
is no need to dwell upon it. 

Mr. Gomme, in his very suggestive little book 
Ethnology in Folk-lore, traces the distribution of holy 
wells in the British Islands. Speaking in general 
terms, the traces of well-worship become more pro- 
nounced and more primitive in character as we pass 
from east to west in the British Islands. 

In the East of England no distinct ritual remains, 
and only a tradition of the healing qualities of a 
particular well or spring, or even its bare name, 
remain; many are now quite nameless. 

In the West and North of England it is very 
different, and here we find examples of garland- 
dressing and pin-offerings. In Cornwall and Wales, 
and towards the northern border, the sacred bush by 

* E. SYDNEY HARTLAND, Zhe Legend of Perseus, ii. 1895, p. 176 
(quoting from Prof. Rhys). 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 377 

the well is decked with rags. These rag-bushes were 
formerly abundant in Scotland, and they still occur 
in great profusion in Ireland. 

To speak in terms of races: this well-cult is least 
observed in Teutonic England, but it is retained in 
Celtic England and in Celtic Scotland, Wales, and 
Ireland. It is less modified among the Goidelic 
Celts of Scotland and Ireland than among the Bry- 
thonic Celts of Wales and South-west England ; the 
latter are regarded by Professor Rhys as belonging 
to a later wave of Celtic migration than the Irish 
and Scots. 

It is, however, very probable that well-worship is 
older than the Celtic migration. The associated 
custom of the offerings of rags or parts of clothing 
upon. bushes sacred to the well, has been investigated 
with regard to its geographical distribution by Mr. 
Walhouse,* and it is certain that it occupies a much 
wider area than that inhabited by Aryan peoples. 
Thus, to quote a summary given by General Pitt- 

Rivers + :— 

«Burton says it extends throughout Northern Africa from 
West tO East, 1...) . Burton found the same custom in Arabia 
during his pilgrimage to Mecca; in Persia Sir William 
Ouseley saw ja tree close to a large monolith covered with 

* M. J. WALHOUSE, “ Rag-bushes and Kindred Observances,” Jour. 
Anth. Inst., ix., 1879, pp. 97-106. 

+ COLONEL A. LANE Fox, “ The Distribution of Megalithic Struc- 
tures,” Journ. Ethnol. Soc. (N.S.), i., 1869, p. 64. 

378 THE STUDY OF MAN 

these rags, and he describes it as a practice appertaining to a 
religion long since proscribed in that country ; in the Deccan 
and Ceylon Colonel Leslie says that the trees in the neigh- 
bourhood of wells may be seen covered with similar scraps of 
cotton; Dr. A. Campbell speaks of it as being practised by 
the Limboos near Darjeeling, in the Himalaya, where it is 
associated, as in Ireland, with large heaps of stones ; and 
Huc in his travels mentions it among the Tartars.” 

“Here,” as Gomme points out, “not only do we get 
evidence of the cult in an Aryan country like Persia being 
proscribed, but, as General Pitt-Rivers observes, ‘it is im- 
possible to believe that so singular a custom as this, in- 
variably associated with cairns, megalithic monuments, holy 
wells, or some such early pagan institutions, could have 
arisen independently in all these countries.’ That the area 
over which it is found is conterminous with the area of the 
megalithic monuments, that these monuments take us back 
to pre-Aryan people and suggest the spread of this people 
over the area covered by their remains, are arguments in 
favour of a megalithic date for well-worship and rag 
offerings,” * 

The persistence of this cult in the more Celtic 
portions of the British Islands is then probably not 
due to this being a religious practice of the Aryans— 
who were more addicted to fire-worship—but to the 
fact that in this part of the empire we have distinct 
traces of that pre-Aryan race to which I have so 
often referred in the earlier portion of this book. 
The Celtic Aryans who invaded the British Islands 
could not uproot the old religion ; indeed the converse 

*'Z.6., p. YO, 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 379 

has usually been the case. It is known that in various 
parts of the world the conquerors of a country have 
been psychically conquered by the people they have 
beaten—thus does the spirit revenge itself on matter. I 
have an example of this in my mind from New Guinea, 
where the immigrant Motu pay tribute to the sorcerers 
of the Koitapu, whose territory they have invaded, in 
order that they may obtain propitious winds.* For, 
after all, only the people of a country can be expected 
to know the local spirits; and new-comers, whether 
as traders or conquerors, are utterly ignorant of the 
correct way to entreat or appease the local divinities. 
We may regard it as pretty certain that the Celt (to 
use this somewhat vague term) absorbed many of the 
features of the religion of his Neolithic neighbours. 
In Ireland and Scotland the Goidels have long been 
in possession of the soil, but, as has previously been 
suggested, the Saxon invasion appears to have pushed 
the Brythons more and more to the west. We, how- 
ever, find unmistakable relics of water-worship all 

* “The Koitapu are much feared by the Motu because of their 
supposed wonderful power over sun, rain, heaven, and earth, north-west 
and south-east monsoons ; specially do the winds belong to them. .... 
They are no doubt the real owners of the soil..... By no conquest do 
the Motuans live here, but simply because the Koitapuans allow them, 
' saying, ‘ Yours is the sea, the canoes, and the nets ; ours is the land and 
the wallaby. Give us fish for our flesh, and pottery for our yams and 
bananas.’” (J. CHALMERS, Pioneering in New Guinea, 1887, p. 13; Cf. 
also A. C. HADDON, “The Decorative Art of British New Guinea: a 
Study in Papuan Ethnography,” Cunningham Memoir, x., Roy. [rish 
Acad., 1894, pp. 156-164, 258-269.) 

380 THE STUDY OF MAN 

over the British Isles; even in the East of England, 
which has, so to speak, been glaciated by the cold 
common sense of the Teutonic invasion. 

Apart from religious disposition or psychological 
idiosyncrasy, there are other reasons why well-worship 
should persist in the “Celtic” parts of the British 
Islands. The early ‘missionaries were obliged,” as 
Mr. Gray points out, “as a matter of policy to adopt 
a compromise, retaining such popular rites and 
customs as were considered innocent amusements, 
and engrafting upon them the introduced formalities 
of the Christian ritual.’* The teachers of the new 
doctrine were not of a very different stage of culture 
from those they sought to convert, they had not those 
material benefits and luxuries of a high civilization 
which gave to the missionaries of last century such 
a tremendous advantage over the savages they 
evangelized. In the one case Christianity had to be 
engrafted craftily and circumspectly, on to paganism, 
as its visible benefits were not sufficiently apparent to 
appeal to the more materially-minded mass of the 
people. In the other case there was no point of 
contact between the two conditions, and, as a rule, 
savages do not realize a_ distinction between secular 
and sacred, between social duties and _ religious 
functions: so when these primitive folk came into 
contact with the missionaries they were ready to 

* Proc. Belfast Nat. Field Club (2), iv., p. 92. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 381 

embrace the religious tenets and the higher culture 
of the white man—and the Protestant evangelists 
insisted only too well thatthe past should be com- 
pletely erased. Thus the old culture (for they had 
culture), the old morality (for they had morality, 
though it may not have been the morality of the 
white man), and the old religion were slipped off like 
old garments, and life had virtually to begin afresh 
clothed in the new garb of an alien civilization and 
inspired by an exotic religion. 

How different was the policy enforced by Pope 
Gregory, as embodied in a letter written about the 
year 601 A.D., and addressed ‘To his most beloved 
son, the Abbot Mellitus,’ who was sent by the Pope 
to Augustine, first Bishop of Canterbury. Under 
the policy thus recommended the feasting and amuse- 
ments that followed the old pagan rites were tolerated, 
“to the end that whilst some gratifications are out- 
wardly permitted them, they may the more easily 
consent to the inward consolations of the grace of 
God.”’* “Unfortunately the ‘gratifications’ thus 
‘permitted’ the early converts became afterwards the 
chief attraction on the day of dedication, and the 
religious observances on the patron’s day degenerated 
into the ‘pattern’ or ‘fair’ that subsequently became 
the fruitful source of riot and disorder down to our 
own day. This pattern or fair originated with the 

* BEDE’S Ecclesiastical History, book 1., chap. xxx, 

382 THE STUDY OF MAN 

trade carried on in former times by those who provided 
refreshments for the people who assembled at the 
wells or places dedicated to some saint who became 
the patron of the place, and this annual gathering on 
the patron’s day was called a ‘pattern’ [in Ireland]. 
The original intention was for worship and religious 
festivities, but the festive soon absorbed the religious 
element, and all forms of abuses followed, and hence 
the gatherings were condemned by the Church. The 
early Christians strongly condemned the old pagan 
rites and ceremonies connected with wells, rivers, 
and fountains, mainly because of the riotous excesses 
in which the votaries indulged. Making offerings to 
wells, trees, and earthfast rocks is denounced in a 
Saxon homily preserved at Cambridge University 
Library.” * 

As Mr. Gray points out, in the early annals of 
Ireland there are many references to wells, and their 
use in the baptism of early converts. In Dr. Reeves’s 
Vita St. Columbe Auctore Adamnano we find St. 
Columba strove against the Magii (Druids) at a well 
in the country of the Picts. He exorcised the 
heathen demon of the well, which thereafter, as a 
holy fountain, cured many diseases.t In the Lzfe of 
St, Columbkille, preserved in the Leabhar Breac in the 

* W. GRAY, Zc., p. 92. 
+ The Life of St. Columba, Founder of Hy; written by Adamnan. 
Ed. by W. REEVES, Dublin, 1857, p. 119. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 383 

library of the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin, it is 

said— 
“He blessed three hundred miraculous crosses : 
He blessed three hundred wells that were constant.” 

We have, therefore, abundant evidence that well or 
fountain-worship was extremely rife in the British 
Islands before Christianity was introduced, and that 
the early missionaries were instructed not to root up 
the old religion before replacing it with the new. We 
know that these good men took up their abode by the 
side of a sacred well, appreciating the fact that as the 
sacred waters would be continually visited, so they 
would always have devotees to instruct. Thus it 
came about that the wells mostly retained their old 
virtue, but the sanctity was annexed by the mission- 
aries, and in later times the waters almost invariably 
bore their names. One point is clear, the holiness 
and efficacy of the wells were in the vast majority, 
if not in all cases, pre-Christian and probably also 
pre-Celtic. 

The question next arises, Why were springs or 
streams considered holy? 

Savages are not fools; their ways may not be as 
our ways, or their thoughts as our thoughts, but there 
is something at the back of their beliefs and customs, 
if we could only get at it. The persistent forms of 
water-cult in the British Islands open up many and 
interesting problems which cannot now be considered, 

384 THE STUDY OF MAN 

By far the majority of the customs are related with 
the reputed healing powers of the well or spring, but 
there are traces of other virtues, such as a connection 
between well-worship and the worship of a rain-god, 
as Mr. Gomme has suggested.* : 

There is common sense in the association of cura- 
tive powers with water. It is well known that the 
wounds of primitive peoples heal with amazing 
rapidity ; wounds that would be of a most serious 
character amongst ourselves heal almost of them- 
selves when the body is in rude health and when the 
air and clothes are practically free from putrefactive 
microbes. All that is necessary is to wash impurities 
out of the wounds. It is most probable that the un- 
cultured mind would attribute the healing of the 
wound to the water, and not to the removal of dirt. 

Many of these sacred springs have distinct me- 
dicinal qualities; their water is impregnated with 
salts of various kinds; there are sulphur and iron 
waters, chalybeate springs, and so forth. Experience 
has shown that these have definite curative proper- 
ties, and there is no doubt that these were early 
recognized. 

A perennial supply of pure water has ever been 
appreciated by man, and it would always be remarked 
ifa spring continued to flow when others ran dry. 

It would naturally be argued there must be some 

* Ethnology in Folk-lore, p. 94, 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 385 

reason for it, and, as always happens, some explana- 
tion would be forthcoming. Such a spring was 
pointed out to me in the island of Mabuiag, in Torres 
Straits, and it arose in this way: One day,-Kwoiam, 
the legendary hero of the island, was thirsty, and he 
thrust his javelin into the rock, and water has gushed 
forth ever since. Before running away as a stream 
the water fills two small rock pools. Any one may 
drink from the lower basin, but only old men or 
“big” men may drink from the upper, the penalty 
being premature greyness. I asked whether | might 
be permitted to drink from the upper pool, and I was 
told that I might, but evidently I was not worthy of 
the honour, as I have paid the penalty! 

There is no need to say more. The advantages 
of a perennial spring, the undoubted healing properties 
of many wells, and the cleansing functions of all, are 
benefits to be devoutly thankful for. An expectant 
attitude of mind, the “suggestion” of modern 
psychology, and those obscure mental conditions 
which all recognize who have impartially considered 
the “miracles” worked at shrines even in our own 
day—these have always been operative in addition 
to the more material benefits of the water, and so 
has inevitably grown up a recognition of. virtue in 
the water. 

Primitive folk do not draw a sharp distinction 

between things animate and inanimate; this is an 
2c 

386 THE STUDY OF MAN 

essential fact to remember when we consider their 
religious beliefs and practices. The bubbling spring, 
the running brook, the waving boughs, the rushing 
wind, the burning sun, the sparkling stars, are all as 
much alive as far as they can tell as are men or animals. 
Man, too, feels himself weak before the forces of 
nature; he by no means has subjugated nature; he 
does not yet possess the earth. As his forceful fellow- 
men have to be appeased, so must the activities 
outside man be appeased or interested in his favour. 
The appreciation of the vast unknown all around him 
gives origin to the feeling that it is essential for his 
welfare that he should be put into friendly or 
harmonious relation with those powers which can 
benefit him and may do him harm, and so Religion 
is born into the world. 

Morality may be regarded as the acknowledgment 
of the claims others have on our conduct. According 
to this view it is the quintessence of etiquette, the 
habit which any particular society has found to work 
well in practical experience. In other words, it is the 
working basis of society. 

Religion, on the other hand, has originally nothing 
to do with morality—of this there is abundant proof 
—but it has for its aim the putting of man into 
harmonious relations with the forces outside him. It 
is how this can be accomplished, and the various con- 
ceptions that have arisen concerning these outside 

SORA ea Ali OL WATER” 387 

forces that constitute the science of Comparative 
Religion. 
We are now beginning to realize that this is the 

? 

true “inwardness”’ of many so-called “savage” con- 
ceptions and rituals. At first there is a vague feeling- 
after if haply something may be found, and it is from 
this nebulous state that systems have been evolved. 

The application of this principle to the subject of 
sacred wells and the offerings made at them has been 
so ably stated by my friend Mr. Hartland in the 
chapter “On Sacred Wells and Trees” in his great 
work on The Legend of Perseus,* that I do not hesitate 
to transcribe his general conclusions :— 

“To sum up:—We find widely spread in Europe the 
practice of throwing pins into sacred wells, or sticking pins 
or nails into sacred images or trees, or into the wall of a 
temple, or floor of a church, and—sometimes accompanying 
this, more usually alone—a practice of tying rags or leaving 
portions of clothing upon a sacred tree or bush, or a tree 
or bush overhanging, or adjacent to, a sacred well, or of 
depositing them in or about the well. 

“The object of this rite is generally the attainment of some 
wish, or the granting of some prayer, as for a husband or for 
recovery from sickness. 

“In Asia we have the corresponding customs of writing 
the name on the walls of a temple, suspending some appar- 
ently trivial article upon the boughs of a sacred tree, flinging 
pellets of chewed paper or stones at sacred images, and 
attaching rags, writings, and other things to the temples, 

* Vol. ii., pp. 175-231. 

388 THE STUDY OF MAN 

and to trees. Trees are adorned in the same way, with rags 
and other useless things, in Africa—a practice not unknown, 
though rare, in America. On the Congo a nail is driven 
into an idol in the Breton manner. It cannot be doubted 
that the purpose and origin of all these customs are identical, 
and that an explanation of one will explain all. 

“The most usual explanations are :—First, that the articles 
left are offerings to the god or presiding spirit ; and, secondly, 
that they contain the disease of which one desires to be rid, 
and transfer it to anyone who touches and removes them. 
Professor Rhys suggests that a distinction is to be drawn 
between the pins and the rags. The pins, he thinks, may 
be offerings; and it is noteworthy that in some cases they 
are replaced by buttons or small coins. The rags, on the 
other hand, may be, in his view, the vehicles of the disease. 
If this opinion were correct, one would expect to find both 
ceremonies performed by the same patient at the same well : 
he would throw in the pin, and also place the rag on the bush, 
or wherever its proper place might be. The performance 
of doth ceremonies is, however, I think, exceptional. Where 
the pin or button is dropped into the well, the patient does 
not trouble about the rag, and vece-versd. 

“Nor can we stop here. From all we know of the process 
of ceremonial decay, we may be tolerably sure that the rags 
represent entire articles of clothing, which at an earlier 
period were deposited. There is no need to discuss here 
the principle of substitution and representation, so familiar 
to all students of folk-lore. It is sufficient to point out that, 
since the rite is almost everywhere in a state of decay, the 
presumption is in favour of entire garments having been 
originally deposited; and that, in fact, we do find this 
original form of the rite in ancient and several modern 
examples. Such was a chalybeate spring in the parish of 
Kennethmont, Aberdeenshire. As its virtue was invoked 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 389 

not only for human beings, but for cattle, the tribute con- 
sisted of ‘part of the clothes of the sick and diseased, and 
harness of the cattle.’ 

“M. Monseur* suggests that in those instances in which 
pins or nails were stuck into the cross, or tree, or figure of 
the saint, the aim was, by causing pain or inconvenience to 
the object of worship, to keep in his memory the worshipper’s 
prayer. M. Gaidozt has another theory. He says :—‘ The 
idol is a god, who always appears somewhat stupid; it 
moves not, it speaks not, and, peradventure, it does not hear 
very well. It must be made to understand by a sign, and 
a sign which will be at the same time a memento. In 
touching the idol, especially in touching the member corre- 
sponding to that which suffers, its attention is directed to the 
prayer. And more than that is done in leaving a nail or a 
pin in its body, for this is a material memento for the idol.’ 
In putting it in this way, the learned professor does not 
desire to exclude the ideas of an offering and a transfer of 
disease, for he expressly adds that both these ideas are 
mingled with that of a memento. 

Mr. Hartland continues, “I believe that a profounder 
thought forms the common ground in which all the customs 
under consideration—or, as I should prefer to say, all the 
variations of a single custom—are rooted. They are simply 
another application of the reasoning that underlies the prac- 
tices of witchcraft and folk-medicine discussed in previous 
chapters [of Zhe Legend of Perseus]. If an article of my 
clothing in a witch’s hands may cause me to suffer, the same 
article in contact with a beneficent power may relieve my 
pain, restore me to health, or promote my general prosperity. 
A pin that has pricked my wart, even if not covered with 

* Bulletin de Folklore, Organe de la Société du Folklore Walton., i., 
1892, p. 250. 

+ Mélusine, vi., 1893, 155. 

390 THE STUDY OF MAN 

my blood, has, by its contact, by the wound it has inflicted, 
acquired a’ peculiar bond with the wart; the rag that has 
rubbed the wart has by that friction acquired a similar bond ; 
so that whatever is done to the pin or the rag, whatever 
influences the pin or the rag may undergo, the same in- 
fluences are by that very act brought to bear upon the wart. 
If, instead of using a rag, I rub my warts with raw meat and 
then bury the meat, the warts will decay and disappear with 
the decay and dissolution of the meat. In like manner my 
shirt or stocking, or a rag to represent it, placed upon a 
sacred bush, or thrust into a sacred well—my name written 
upon the walls of a temple—a stone or pellet from my hand 
cast upon a sacred image or a sacred cairn—a remnant of 
my food cast into a sacred waterfall or bound upon’ a sacred 
tree, or a nail from my hand driven into the trunk of the 
tree—is thenceforth in continual contact with divinity ; and 
the effluence of divinity, reaching and involving it, will reach 
and involve me. In this way I may become permanently 
united with the god. 

“This is an explanation which I think will cover every 
case. Of course, it cannot be denied that there are instances 
where the real object of the rite having been forgotten, the 
practice has become to a slight extent deflected from its 
earlier form. But it is not difficult to trace the steps whereby 
the idea and practice. of divination became substituted for 
that of union with the object of devotion. Still less can it 
be denied that, where the practice has not been deflected, 
the real intention has in most places been obscured. These 
phenomena are familiar to us everywhere, and will mislead 
no one who understands that the real meaning is not what 
the people who practise a rite say about it, but that which 
emerges from a comparison of analogous observances.” * 

* J. SIDNEY HARTLAND, Zhe Legend of Perseus: A Study of 
Tradition in Story, Custom and Belief, 3 vols., 1894-96: D. Nutt, London. 

“DRAW A PAIL OF WATER” 391 

Mr. Hartland, doubtless in order not to complicate 
his argument, refers to the “god” of the fountain, 
but he would be the first to recognize that this is by 
no means the earliest conception. So far as I 
understand the ideas of primitive folk, I should 
imagine the sequence to be somewhat as follows, 

The spring or the stream were entities in the same 
way as human beings, animals, or plants. When the 
conception arose of a dual (or multiple) nature in 
man, when, to put it concisely, man was recognized 
as a body and an indwelling spirit, then the same 
conception would probably be transferred to the other 
entities, and hence would arise the belief in a spirit 
of a fountain or of a tree, which doubtless was as 
much its own innate spirit as is the spirit of man. 
As the spirit of man can, according to savage belief, 
take upon itself various outward and bodily forms,* so 
there is no reason why the equivalent spirit of well 
may not do the same. It was a matter of common 
experience some aquatic animal inhabited a particular 
piece of water: one or more fish, a frog, or whatever 
it may have been. The natural conclusion was that 
the divine life of the waters, as Robertson Smitht 

* There is no need to take up my readers’ time with illustrations of 
this proposition, as they will be found garnered in such works as 
J. G. FRAZER’S Golden Bough, ii., “The External Soul in Folk-tales,” 
p. 296, and E. S. HARTLAND’s The Legend of Perseus, ii., “The Life- 
token in Tale and Custom,” p. 1. 

+ W. ROBERTSON SMITH, Lectures on the Religion of the Semites, 
1889, p. 161. 

392 THE STUDY OF MAN 

says, resided in the sacred fish that inhabits them; of 
this he gives numerous examples analogous to the 
Irish and Scottish. Gomme* quotes from Sinclairt 
a most remarkable example of this, which occurs at 
a well near the church of Kirkmichael in Banffshire. 
The guardian of the well assumed the semblance of a 
fly, who was always present, and whose every move- 
ment was regarded by the votaries at the shrine with 
silent awe, and as he appeared cheerful or dejected the 
anxious votaries drew their presages. This guardian 
of the well of St. Michael was believed to be exempt 
from the laws of mortality. “To the eye of the ignorant,” 
says the local account, “he might sometimes appear 
dead, but it was only a transmigration into a similar 
form, which made little alteration to the real identity.” 

Later beliefs anthropomorphised these spirits, and 
we have water-fairies, nymphs, and the like. Finally 
some missionary or hermit became associated with 
the well, and its therapeutic properties were attributed 
to the blessing of the water by the saint. 

We may trace, then, in this simple game, the attenu- 
ated survival of a religious rite, which was observed 
by our savage forefathers of the polished-stone period. 
In children’s games, or as faithfully performed practices 
by the folk, this cult has survived the waves of migra- 
tion and the floods of race-conflict ; even Christianity 
itself has scarcely prevailed against it. 

* Ethnology in Folk-lore, p. 102. 
t+ Statistical Account of Scotland, xii., p. 465. 

CHAPTER XLV. 
COURTING GAMES. 

ARRIAGE and its preliminaries form such an 
epoch in life that it would be strange if we 

did not find them mimicked in the games of children. 
As a matter of fact courtship and marriage do con- 
stitute a very important element in these hitherto 
unwritten dramas; and it is most interesting to find 
that customs belonging to various strata of culture are 
enshrined in song and game. In other words, our 
children still commemorate methods of courtship 
which presumably belonged to different races and 
which certainly were in vogue during diverse ages. 
One of the singing games most frequently played 
by children is that known as “Nuts in May.” This 
seems at first sight a nonsensical title to a not very 
exciting game, but we shall find that there is plenty 
of interest in the game to adults as well as to children. 

“ Here we come gathering nuts in May, 
Nuts in May, nuts in May, 
Here we come gathering nuts in May, 
May, May, May. 
393 

394 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“Who will you have for nuts in May, 
Nuts in May, nuts in May? 
Who will you have for nuts in May, 
May, May, May? 

oo for nuts in May, 

Nuts in May, nuts in May, 
for nuts in May, 
May, May, May. 

“Very well, very well, so you may, 
So you may, so you may, 
Very well, very well, so you may, 
May, may, may. 

“Whom will you have to take her away, 
Take her away, take her away ? 
Whom will you have to take her away, 

Way, way, way? 

(73 

to take her away, 
Take her away, take her away, 
to take her away, 
Way, way, way.” 

The children form in two lines of equal length, 
facing one another, with sufficient space between the 
lines to admit of their walking in line backwards and 
forwards, towards and away from each other, as each 
line sings the verses allotted to it. The first line 
sings the first, third, and sixth verses, and the opposite 
line the second, fourth, and fifth. At the end of the 
sixth verse a handkerchief or other mark is laid on 
the ground, and the two children (whose names have 
been mentioned, and who are as evenly matched as 

COURTING GAMES 395 

possible) take each other's right hand and endeavour 
to pull each other over the handkerchief to their own 
side. The child who is pulled over the handkerchief 
becomes the “ captured nut,” and joins the side of her 
capturers. Then the game begins again by the 
second line singing the first, third, and sixth verses, 
while advancing to gather or capture the “nuts,” the 
first line responding with the other verses, and with 
the same finish as before. Then the first line begins 
the game, and so on until all the children are in this 
way matched one against the other. 

Almost the only variants in the song are in the 
last line of each verse, which may run—“ On a cold 
and frosty morning” (which I have heard in Cam- 
bridgeshire), “On a fine summer’s morning,” “So 
early in the morning,” &c. 

The game is always played in lines, and the princi- 
pal incidents running through all the versions are 
the same, 2.e., one player is selected by one line of 
players from her opponents’ party. The ‘‘selected” 
one is refused by her party, unless someone from the 
opposite side can effect her capture by a contest of 
strength. In all versions but two or three this contest 
takes place between the two; in one or two all the 
players join in the trial of strength. Sometimes the 
side which is victorious has the right to begin the 
next game first. In one version when one child is 
drawn over the boundary line by one from the 

306 THE STUDY OF MAN 

opposite side she has to be “crowned” immediately. 
This is done by the conqueror putting her hand on 
the captured one’s head. If this is not done at once 
the latter can return to her own side. In some 
versions the player who is selected for “Nuts” is 
always captured by the one sent to fetch her. When 
boys and girls play, the boys are always sent to “ fetch 
away” the girls. 

Mrs. Gomme, from whose monograph* I have 
abstracted the foregoing account, points out that there 
is some analogy in the game to marriage by capture 
and to the marriage customs practised at May Day 
festivals. She attributes the term “ Nuts in May” to 
the gathering by parties of young men of bunches of 
may at the May festivals and dances, to decorate not 
only the May-pole, or the May “kissing-bush,” but 
the doors of houses. Nuts is a misapprehension of 
knots. In Buckinghamshire the children speak of 
“knots of may,” meaning each little bunch of haw- 
thorn blossom. Mrs. Gomme has heard the ‘‘ May 
girls” sing in London on May Day-— 

“Knots of may we’ve brought you, 
Before your door it stands ; 
It is but a sprout, but it’s well budded out 
By the work of the Lord’s hands.” 

The gathering of bunches of may by parties of 

young men and maidens to make the May-bush round 

* A. B. GOMME, Traditional Games, i., p. 431. 

COURTING GAMES 397 

which May Day games were held, and dancing and 
courting, is mentioned by Sir William Wilde. * 

Mrs, Gomme continues :—‘ The association of May 
—whether the month, or the flower, or both—with 
the game is very strong, the refrain, ‘Cold and frosty 
morning, ‘All on a summer's morning,’ ‘Bright 
summer's morning, ‘So early in the morning,’ also 
being characteristic of the early days of May and 
spring, and suggests that the whole day, from early 
hours, is given up to holiday.” + 

For the evidence for marriage by capture in the 
game there is no element of love or courtship, though 
there is the obtaining possession of a member of an 
opposing party. It differs from ordinary contest- 
games in the fact that one party does not wage war 
against another party for possession of a particular 
piece of ground, but individual against individual for 
the possession of an individual. That the player 
sent to fetch the selected girl is expected to conquer 
seems to be implied—first, by a choice of a certain 
player being made to effect the capture; secondly, 
by the one sent to “fetch” being always successful ; . 
and, thirdly, the “crowning” in one version. 

Marriage by capture is still practised in Australia 
and a few other places. In many savage and barbaric 
countries the bride makes a show of resistance, resort- 
ing in some cases to physical force, though all the 

* Trish Popular Superstitions, p. 52. TediGey Pe 432s 

308 THE STUDY OF MAN 

time willing to be married, and there is frequently a 
sham fight between the relatives of the bride and 
bridegroom, and there are actual survivals in English, 
Scottish, Welsh, and Irish customs of marriage by 
capture. 

Marriage by capture is now in the main a thing of 
the past, but there are records and survivals which 
prove it at one time to have been very widely spread. 
“All the Carib tribes used to capture women from 
different peoples and tribes, so that the men and 
women nowhere spake the same tongue, and von 
Martius states that in Brazil ‘some tribes habitually 
steal their neighbours’ daughters.’ Among the tribes 
of Eastern Central Africa, described by Macdonald, 
marriage by capture occurs not as a symbol only.” 

According to a common belief, the Australian 
method of obtaining wives is capture in its most 
brutal form. But contrary to Mr. Howitt, Mr. Curr 
informs us that only on rare occasions is a wife 
captured from another tribe and carried off. The 
possession of a stolen woman would lead to constant 
attacks, hence the tribes set themselves very generally 
against the practice. 

Westermarck,* from whom I have so _ largely 
quoted, gives a list of a good many peoples in 
various parts of the world. In Europe it occurred 

* E. WESTERMARCK, Zhe History of Human Marriage, 1891, p. 
384 ef seg. 

COURTING GAMES 399 

in former days among the Lapps, Finns, and Estho- 
nians. The same practice prevailed among the 
peoples of the Aryan race. ‘The forcible abduction 
of a maiden from her home, while she cries out and 
weeps, after her kinsmen have been slain or wounded, 
and their houses broken open,” was, according to the 
laws of Manu,* one of the eight legal forms of 
marriage. 

According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, marriage 
by capture was at the time customary throughout 
ancient Greece. The ancient Teutons frequently 
captured women for wives. The Slavs, in early 
times, according to Nestor, practised marriage by 
capture; and in the marriage ceremonies of the 
Russians and other Slavonian nations, reminiscences 
of this custom still survive. Indeed, among the 
South Slavonians, capture de facto was in full force 
no longer ago than the beginning of the present 
century. Among the Welsh, on the morning of the 
wedding day, the bridegroom, accompanied by his 
friends on horseback, carried off the bride. 

It will probably be new to many people that there 
are traces of marriage by capture yet remaining in 
country districts in England., It was only in the 
spring of 1896 that at a wedding in the University 
Church at Cambridge, none of the bride’s people 
entered the church, and as the wedding party left the 

* The Laws of Manu, book iii., vv. 33, 26. 

400 THE STUDY OF MAN 

building they were met by the bride’s friends, who 
banged inflated paper bags. The absence of the 
bride’s relations from the church is the remnant of 
a fiction of enmity which is also emphasized by the 
popping of paper bags. These replaced the firing of 
guns of an older period, and these, again, replaced 
the weapons of war which in the dim past of pre- 
historic times were called into active requisition. 

We read in the Folk-lore Journal:* “At Bocking, 
in Essex, the parents of the bride keep studiously out 
of the way at the time of the marriage ceremony. I 
remember the surprise, not to say horror, of an old 
gardener who was asked why he did not attend his 
daughter's wedding. ‘Such a thing was never heered 
of in this here parish,’ said he.” 

The next stage in wife-getting is the giving of com- 
pensation to the father, or the group, for the loss of 
the woman’s services. This is very widely distributed 
even at the present day. The earlier phase which 
we have just considered may, however, persist to a 
greater or less extent. I found this transition phase 
amongst my friends of the Torres Straits. In all of 
the islands a wife could be obtained by an exchange of 
girls; a lad would give his sister in exchange for a 
wife, or an uncle might oblige a nephew and give 
him a cousin to exchange. In all other cases a 
wife had to be paid for according to arrangement, 

* Vol. ii., p. 246. 

COURTING GAMES 401 

but there was usually a recognized rate of exchange. 
In some islands there was also a fight, which I was 
assured was “half-play.” In some islands also the 
young man lived part of the year with his wife’s 
people. 

Westermarck has collected numerous analogous 
cases among the uncivilized races of America, Africa, 
and Asia, and the Indian Archipelago. The custom 
of obtaining a wife by services rendered to her father 
has been familiarized to us by Hebrew tradition. 

The most common compensation for a wife is pro- 
perty paid to her owner. Her price varies indefinitely. 
My friend Maino, the chief of Tud (Warrior Island), 
told me he paid for his wife a camphor-wood chest 
from Singapore, a dozen jerseys, some fathoms of 
calico, a dozen fish-hooks, a pound of tobacco, and he 
finished off the enumeration with the exclamation of, 
‘““By golly, she too dear!” 

There is no need to traverse the globe for examples; 
a few cases from nearer home will suffice. Wester- 
marck says in all branches of the Semitic race men 
had to buy or serve for their_wives, the ‘‘ Mohar” or 
‘“Mahr” being originally the same as a purchase sum.* 
In the Books of Rutht and Hosea,{ the bridegroom 
actually says he has bought his bride; and modern 
Jews, according to Michaelis, have a sham purchase 

* W. ROBERTSON SMITH, Marriage and Kinship in Early Arabia, 

1885, p. 78 ef seg. + Ruth iv. to. t Hosea iii. 2. 
ZH) 

402 THE STUDY OF MAN 

among their marriage ceremonies, which is called 
“Marrying by the penny.”* 

Among the Finns marriage by purchase exists now, 
or did so till quite lately. Among the Aryan nations, 
too, marriage was based on the purchase of the wife. 
Westermarck gives numerous examples, amongst 
which we may note that the ancient Scandinavians 
believed that even the gods had bought their wives. 
In Germany the expression, “to purchase a wife,” 
was in use till the end of the Middle Ages. As late 
as the middle of the sixteenth century the English 
preserved in their marriage ritual traces of this ancient 
legal procedure. } 

This phase also is illustrated in the common singing 
game usually called ‘Knights,’ or ‘Lords from 

Spain.” A version} from the village of Bocking, in ‘ 

Essex, runs as follows :— 

***T am a gentleman come from Spain. 
I’ve come to court your daughter Jane.’ 

“My daughter Jane is yet too young 
To understand your flattering tongue.’ 

«Tet her be young, or let her be old, 
She must be sold for Spanish gold. 

So fare thee well, my lady gay ; 
Ill call upon you another day.’ 

* J. D. MICHAELIS, Commentaries on the Laws of Moses (Trans.) 
1814, 1., p. 451. 

+ E. FRIEDBERG, Das Recht der Eheschliessung in seiner geschicht- 
lichen Entwicklung, Leipzig, 1865, pp. 33, 38. 

} Folk-lore Record, iii., p. 171. 

PLaTe VI. 

FIG: 2, 

“Lords from Spain”; from photographs by Miss Clara M. ‘Patterson. 

[Zo face page 402, 

COURTING GAMES 403 

“¢Turn back, turn back, you saucy boy, 
And choose the fairest you can spy.’ 

“<The fairest one that I can see __ 
Is pretty Miss Come to me!’” 

This game is also played by two alternately advanc- 
ing and receding lines. At first one line consists of 
only a single lord, who sings the first, second, and 
third stanzas. After a pretended reluctance to come 
to terms, the girl is eventually sold to. him. These 
then sing, “We are two lords from out of Spain,” 
according to the local version, and so it goes on till 
the lords have purchased the last girl. 

The following are the words of this game as played 
at Ballymiscaw, co. Down.* (Plate VI.) 

“There was one lord that came from Spain, 
He came to court my daughter Jane. 

My daughter Jane she is too young 
To be controlled by a flattering tongue. 

Saw allyourn: 
«No, 
“Will you?’ 
73 Ves,’ ») 
The one who answers ‘“ Yes” then joins hands with 
the “one lord,” and they dance round, singing :— 

** You dirty wee scut you wouldn’t come out 
To help us with our dancing. 

There were two lords that came from Spain,” &c., &c. 

* CLARA M. PaTTersoN, “A few Children’s Games,” Proc. Belfast 
Nat. Field Club (2), iv., 1893-94, p- 49. 

4o4 THE STUDY OF MAN 

One or two points call for notice in this version as 
they occur elsewhere, (1) the use of the word “con- 
trolled” for ‘‘cajoled”; (2) the abbreviation of the 
dialogue and, in this instance, the omission of the 
mercenary spirit, and finally the inelegant couplet at 
the finish. Ina version from Auchencairn, Kirkcud- 
brightshire, collected by my elder daughter, the 
“lord” has become a “ gypsy,” and when the mother 
tells the gypsy to ‘“‘choose the fairest one you see,” 
the latter chooses a girl and asks her to come. She 
replies “No,” and turns right round away from the 
wooer ; as she is turning the gypsy says :— 

“The naughty girl she would not come out, 
She would not come out, to help me in my dancing.” 
The second time she is asked she must say “ Yes.” 
Then the successful wooer sings :— 

“‘ Now we have got the flower of May, 
The flower of May, to help us in our dancing.” 

The two girls take hold of each other's hands and 
sing :— 

‘Here come two gypsies come from Spain,” &c., &c. 

Though often dropped out, the buying element is 
an essential one; I have an Irish variant which em- 
phasizes this incident :— 

‘“*Let her be young or let her be old, 
It’s for her beauty she must be sold.” 

COURTING GAMES 

405 

A French version, that was presented before the 
Liverpool Teachers’ Guild by Mrs. J. G. Frazer, 

marks a transition to a higher stage of culture. 

LE CHEVALIER DU GUET. 

“ Qu’est-c’qui passe ici si tard, 

“Te Chevalier. 

Se TOUS: 

“ Le Chevalier. 
“ Tous. 
“Te Chevalier. 
“ Tous. 
** Le Chevatter. 
Tous. 

“ Te Chevalier. 

Compagnons de la Marjolaine? 
Qu’est-c’qui passe ici si tard, 
Gai! gai! dessus le quai? 

C’est le chevalier du guet, 
Compagnons de la Marjolaine, 
C’est le chevalier du guet, 
Gai! gai! dessus le quai! 

Que demand, le chevalier, 
Compagnons de la Marjolaine, 
Que demand, le chevalier, 
Gai! gai! dessus le quai? 

Une fille 4 marier, 
Compagnons, &c. 

N’y a pas de fille 4 marier, 
Compagnons, &c. 

On m/’a dit qu’ yous en aviez, 
Compagnons, &c. 

Ceux qu, l’on dit s’sont trompés, 
Compagnons, &c. 

Je veux que vous m’en donniez, 
Compagnons, &c. 

Sur les minuits revenez, 
Compagnons, &c. 

Les minuits sont bien sonnés, 
Compagnons, &c. 

406 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Se Howss Mais nos filles sont couchées, 
Compagnons, &c. 

“ Ze Chevalier. Ein est-il un’ d’éveillée, 
Compagnons, &c. 

“ Tous. Qwest-ce que vous lui donnerez, 
Compagnons, &c. 

“* Le Chevalier. De Vor, des bijoux assez, 
Compagnons, &c. 

Tous. Elle n’est pas intéressée 
Compagnons, &c. 

“ Le Chevalier. Mon cceur je lui donnerait, 
Compagnons, &c. 

“ Tous. En ce cas—la, choisissez, 
Compagnons de la Marjolaine,” &c. 

We have similar games in our own country, in 
which the damsel will no longer permit herself to be 
sold, and only yields to her wooer when he offers her 
his heart. 

The union of husband and wife is indicated in 
various ways by many peoples. In some parts of 
India the contracting parties tie themselves or are 
tied together. Among that very primitive people, 
the Veddahs of Ceylon, who, according to the 
Sarasins, never tell a lie and never steal, the bride 
ties a thin cord of her own twisting round the bride- 
groom’s waist, and they are then husband and wife. 
The man always wears this string, and nothing would 
induce him to part with it, for it is emblematic of the 
marriage tie, and, ‘as he never parts with it, so he 

COURTING GAMES 407 
clings to his wife through life.”* In many parts of 
India bride and bridegroom are for the same reason 
marked with one another's blood, and Colonel Dalton 
believes this to be the origin of the custom now so 
common of marking with red-lead. The former of 
these customs survives in our wedding-ring, but 
unfortunately we have not in the British Islands 
the pretty Continental custom of the exchange of 
rings, and the wearing of his ring by the husband. 
I do not recall a reminiscence of the blood custom in 
folk-practice or folk-song in our own country. 

Among the Australian Narrinyeri a woman is 
supposed to signify her consent to the marriage by 
carrying fire to her husband’s hut and making his 
fire for him. 

In Croatia the bridegroom boxes the bride’s ears, 
_in order to indicate that henceforth he is her master. 
And in ancient Russia, as a part of the marriage 
ceremony, the father took a new whip, and, after 
striking his daughter gently with it, told her that 
he did so for the last time, and then presented 
the whip to the bridegroom. 

Marriage ceremonies arose by degrees and in 
various ways. When the mode of contracting a 
marriage altered, the earlier mode, from having been 
a reality, survived as a ceremony. Thus, as we have 

* j. Battery, “An account of the Wild Tribes of the Veddahs of 
Ceylon,” 7rans. Ethnol. Soc. (N.S.), ii, 1863; p. 293. 

408 THE STUDY OF MAN 

seen, the custom of capture was transformed into 
a mere symbol after purchase was introduced as the 
legal form of contracting a marriage. In other 
instances the custom of purchase has survived as 
a ceremony after it has ceased to be a reality. 

According as marriage was recognized as a matter 
of some importance, the entering into it came, like 
many other significant events in human life, to be 
celebrated with certain ceremonies. Very commonly 
it is accompanied by a wedding feast. 

The marriage ceremony often indicates in some 
way the new relation into which the man and woman 
enter to each other, most frequently the living to- 
gether, or the wife’s subjection to her husband. 
Among the Navajos the ceremony merely consisted 
in eating maize-pudding from the same platter; and 
among the Santals of India, says Colonel Dalton, 
“the social meal that the boy and girl eat together is 
the most important part of the ceremony, as by the 
act the girl ceases to belong to her father’s tribe, and 
becomes a member of her husband’s family.”* Eating 
together is, in the: Malay Archipelago, the chief and 
most wide-spread marriage ceremony. The same 
custom occurs among the Hovas of Madagascar, 
the Hindus, Esthonians, and in Ermland in Prussia. + 

* E, T. DALTON, Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal, Calcutta, 1872, 
p. 216. 

+ The foregoing remarks are abbreviated from WESTERMARCK’S 
History of Human Marriage, p. 148. 

COURTING GAMES 409 

In many parts of the. British Islands children 
dance in a ring, and sing to a rhyme, in which the 
following very frequently occurs :— 

“He courted [Aggie Wilson] before he was a man ; 

He hugged her, he juggled her, he took her on his knee, 
Saying, ‘ My dear [Aggie], won’t you marry me?’ 

“| Aggie] made pudding so nice and so sweet, 
And [Willie] got his knife and cut it round so neat, 
Saying, ‘Taste, love, taste, love, don’t say nay, 
For-next Monday morning is our wedding day.’”* 

Another Irish version runs :— 

“[ Annie] made a pudding, 
She made it very sweet ; 
She daren’t put a knife in it © 
Till [George] came home at neet. 
‘Taste, [George], taste, and don’t say nay ! 
Perhaps to-morrow morning ’ll be our wedding day.’” 

Our bought wedding-cake is an unsentimental 
survival of this pretty custom. 

In this particular group of singing games love- 
making forms an important element; we have thus 
reached a higher level of culture than is exhibited in 
the previous games. 

In these courting games we often find love-lorn 
damsels, who, like poor Mary, sit weeping. 

“Poor Mary sits a-weeping, a-weeping, a-weeping. 
What is Mary weeping for, weeping for, weeping for ? 
She’s weeping for a husband, a husband, a husband.” 

* Proc. Belfast Nat. Field Club (2), iv., p. 52. 

AIO THE STUDY OF MAN 

Or there is the very practical young lady on the 
mountain :— 

“ There stands a lady on a mountain, 
Who she is I do not know ; 
All she wants is gold and silver, 
All she wants is a nice young man. 

“ Now she’s married I wish her joy, 
First a girl and then a boy; 
Seven years after son and daughter : 
Pray, young couple, kiss together. 

“ Kiss her once, kiss her twice, 
Kiss her three times three.” 

The marriage formula of the second verse is a 
very common one, subject, of course, to numerous 
variations. That this enshrines some ancient and 
widely-spread sentiment there can be little doubt. 

Finally, we find a large number of games which 
are merely excuses for kissing, such as Kiss in the 
ring, the Cushion dance, and others, and incidentally 
kissing comes, not unnaturally, into a number of 
courting and marriage games, As it happens England 
has an ancient reputation for kissing, as the celebrated 
scholar Erasmus testified to his friend, Faustus 
Anderlin, at Paris :— 

“Your friend Erasmus gets on well in England... . If 
you are a wise man you will cross the Channel yourself. . . . 
To mention but a single attraction, the English girls are 
divinely pretty. Soft, pleasant, gentle, and charming as the 
Muses. They have one custom which cannot be too much | 

COURTING GAMES AIT 

admired (Est preterea mos nunquam satis laudatus). When 
you go anywhere on a visit the girls all kiss you. They kiss 
you when you arrive. They kiss you when you go away; 
and they kiss you again when you return. Go where you 
will, it is all kisses (Castatur affatim denique, quocunque te 
moveas). My dear Faustus, if you had once tasted how 
soft and fragrant these lips were, you would wish to spend 
your life here.”* 

* “Ex Anglia, anno 1499,” /zs¢. Ixv. (quoted from the Programme 
of Sir Ernest Clarke’s lecture on ‘May Day in Merrie England,” 
delivered to the Cambridge Antiquarian Society, March 8th, 1897). 

GEA Pa E Rea: 

FUNERAL GAMES. 

N the summer of 1896 I saw the following game 
played in the village of Barrington, near Cam- 
bridge. 

A row of girls stand opposite to the ‘‘ mother,” 
behind whom hides the crouching “Jenny.” (Plate 
VIL> Fig: 2) They row advances and retreats, 
singing the first couplet.:— 

“T’ve come to see Jenny Jones, Jenny Jones, 
How does she do?” 
The “ mother” replies :— 
“She is washing, washing, washing, 
You can’t see her now.” 

The row again advance and retreat (this they 

do all through the game) :— 

“¢T’ve come to see Jenny Jones, Jenny Jones, 
How does she do?’ 

“She is scrubbing, scrubbing, scrubbing, 
You can’t see her now.’ 

““*T’ve come to see Jenny Jones, Jenny Jones, 
How does she do?’ 

6 She is ill.’ 
412 

PLATE VII. 

BIG. I. 

FIG, 2: 

“Jenny Jones”; from photographs. 
[To face page 412. 

FUNERAL GAMES 413 
*“««T*ve come to see Jenny Jones, Jenny Jones, 
How does she do?’ 
she Siveryeil? 

“«T ve come to see Jenny Jones, Jenny Jones, 
How does she do?’ 

“6 ¢She’s dead.’” 

The “mother” says this in a mournful voice, and 
at the same time “Jenny” lies on the ground. 
Velates IT.) Pig...) 

The row again advance as before :— 

“Come in blue, blue, blue, 
Will that suit?” 

The “mother” replies :— 

*¢ Blue is for sailors, sailors, sailors, 
That won’t suit.’ 

“¢ Come in red, red, red, 
Will that suit ?’ 

“¢ Red is for soldiers, soldiers, soldiers, 
That won’t suit.’ 

“Come in white, white, white, 
Will that suit ?’ 

«White is for weddings, weddings, weddings, 
That won’t suit.’ 

“Come in black, black, black, 
Will that suit ?’ 

“Black is for mourning, mourning, mourning, 
That will suit.’” 

AT4 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Two of the girls come forward, take up “Jenny” 
and convey her a short distance off (Plate VIIL., 
Fig. 1), the “mother” and other children following 
crying, with handkerchiefs up to their eyes. “Jenny” 
is then placed at full length on the ground as if in 
a grave; all the children stand round crying; the 
girl who stands over the grave picks up a handful of 
earth and sprinkles it over the dead “Jenny” (Plate 
VIII, Fig. 2), saying— 

“Ashes to ashes, dust to dust, 
If God won't have you the Devil must.” 
“Jenny Jones” then jumps up and runs after the other 
children, who flee before her. The one she catches 
is the Jenny Jones of the next game. 

At Auchencairn in Kirkcudbrightshire, I collected 

the following version :— 

GEORGINA. 
First side. “ ‘Tye come to see Georgina, Georgina, Georgina, 
I’ve come to see Georgina, how’s she to-day?’ 
Second side. ‘She’s up-stairs washing, washing, washing, 

She’s up-stairs washing and can’t get away,’ 
First side. ‘Oh! very well ladies, ladies, ladies, 
We'll come another day.’ 

First side. “‘We’ve come to see Georgina, Georgina, Georgina, 
We’ve come to see Georgina, how’s she to-day?’ 
Second side. ‘She ’s up-stairs ironing, ironing, ironing, 
She’s up-stairs ironing and can’t get away.’ 
First side. ‘Oh! very well ladies, ladies, ladies, 

We ’ll come another day,’ 

PLATE VIII. 

Fic, 2. 
“Jenny Jones”; from photographs. 

[Zo face page 

414. 

FUNERAL GAMES 415 

First side. ‘“‘*We’ve come to see Georgina, Georgina, Georgina, 
We’ve come to see Georgina, how’s she to-day ?’ 
Second side. ‘She was coming down-stairs with a basin of water 
And she fell down and broke her toe, and she’s 
dead.’ 

First side. ‘And what shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
And what shall we dress her in, dress her in—red?’ 
Second side. ‘Red for the soldiers, soldiers, soldiers, 
Red for the soldiers, and that shan’t do.’ 

First side. ‘*‘ What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
~ What shall we dress her in, dress her in—blue ?’ 
Second side. ‘Blue for the sailors, sailors, sailors, 
Blue for the sailors, and that shan’t do.’ 

First side. ‘‘‘ What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in ? 
What shall we dress her in, dress her in—black ?’ 
Second side. ‘Black for the mourners, mourners, mourners,’ 
Black for the mourners, and that shan’t do.’ 

First side. ‘‘* What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in ? 
What shall we dress her in, dress her in—white ?’ 
Second side, ‘White for the dead people, dead people, dead 
people, 
White for the dead people, and that will do.’” 
My friend Miss Patterson collected the following 
version at Holywood, co. Down.* Here “ Jenny” sits 
up on her “mother’s” knee, and is not hidden as in 
most of the versions. 
**¢T came to see Jeannie jo, Jeannie jo, Jeannie jo, 
I came to see Jeannie jo, is she within?’ 
**Jeannie'jo’s washing clothes, washing clothes, washing clothes, 

Jeannie jo’s washing clothes, and ye can’t see her to-day.’ 

* CLARA M. PATTERSON, “A Few Children’s Games,” Proc. Belfast 
Nat. Field Club (2), iv., 1893-94, p. 50. 

416 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“Oh, but I’m sorry, I’m sorry, 
Oh, but I’m sorry I can’t see her to-day.’ 

«Farewell ladies, O ladies, O ladies, 
Farewell ladies, and gentlemen, too.’” 
Then the same verses are repeated for— 

Starching clothes, 
smoothing clothes, 
dead, 

including the two final couplets. The verses then 

proceed with— 

“‘¢ What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
What shall we dress her in? Shall it be black?’ 

“Black for the sweeps, the sweeps, the sweeps, 
Black for the sweeps, and that shall not do.’ 

‘“¢* What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
What shall we dress her in? Shall it be blue?’ 

“*¢ Blue for the sailors, sailors, sailors, 
Blue for the sailors, and that shall not do.’ 

““¢ What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
What shall we dress her in? Shall it be red?’ 

“¢ Red for the soldiers, soldiers, soldiers, 
Red for the soldiers, and that shall not do.’ 

“«« What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
What shall we dress her in? Shall it be orange?’ 

“ «Orange for the Orange-men, Orange-men, Orange-men, 
Orange for the Orange-men, and that shall not do.’ 

‘«¢ What shall we dress her in, dress her in, dress her in? 
What shall we dress her in? Shall it be white?’ 

“‘¢ White for the corpse, the corpse, the corpse, 
White for the corpse, and that will just do.’” 

FUNERAL GAMES ALY 

They then make a funeral procession, the two 
biggest making a seat with their hands for “Jenny” 
and carrying her, followed by the rest in pairs, 
singing : 

“We have lost a soldier, soldier, soldier, 

We have lost a soldier, and the Queen has lost a man. 
We will bury him in the bed of glory, glory, glory, 

We will bury him in the bed of glory, and we’ll never see him 
any more.” 

These three examples from England, Scotland, and 
Ireland must suffice; it would have been easy to print 
a large number of versions. There are two chief 
ways in which the game is played, but most of them 
follow the procedure narrated above, usually with 
minor variations. The ‘‘mother” usually holds out 
her skirts with both hands so as to hide “Jenny” 
more. completely. When “Jenny” is dead she is 
sometimes covered up. The resuscitation of “Jenny ” 
is widely spread. At Liphook, in Hampshire, she is 
“swung to life again” by two of the players. In the 
Southampton version she is called ‘The Ghost”; the 
children run away in affected terror, calling out “ The 
Ghost!” 

The second form of playing the game occurs in 
Shropshire. The players are divided into two sides 
of about equal numbers, each side advancing and 
retiring in line when singing their parts. ‘“‘ Jenny” in 
some cases walks with the girls in her line until 

2 E 

418 THE STUDY OF MAN 

the funeral, when she is’ carried to the grave, and 
in others she stands alone behind the line. 

The differences in the words of the various versions 
are comparatively slight. The domestic occupations 
of washing, drying, folding, starching and ironing 
occur more or less in all the variants, except in the 
most degraded forms; brewing and baking are re- 
corded only in one case. The sequence of “ill,” 
“very ill,” “dying” and “dead” may also be abbre- 
viated. 

The choosing of colours is an important element 
alike for the living and the dead. In some versions 
the mourners ask what colour they are to wear when 
they attend the funeral; red, blue, white, and black 
are nearly always mentioned, but interesting additions 
may be made. One version asks “ Pink?” with the 
reply— 

“Pink is for the babies, babies, babies, 
Pink is for the babies, and that won’t do.” 

In Irish versions we have local colour added. 
In the North, in reply to the question, “Shall it be 
orange?” the mourners are told— 

“Orange for the Orange-men,” &c. 

One version adds :— 

“Shall we come in green?” 
“Green is for the good people, good people, good people, 
Green is for the good people. You can’t come in that.” 

FUNERAL GAMES 419 

Calling the fairies “good people,” or ‘“ wee-folk,” 
or similar names, is a common practice in Ireland, 
since these little people individually or collectively 
do not like to be called by their own name. Of this 
there are many instances in fairy-lore, but this is 
by no means confined to fairy-folk. On my first 
landing on Inishmaan, the central of the three Aran 
Islands in Galway Bay, I saw a group of two men 
and two women sitting on the beach. They allowed 
me to take their photographs,* but when I asked 
the women to tell me their names so that I might 
post prints to them, they refused. The women never 
received their photographs, for to this day I do not 
know who they were. About an hour afterwards 
I was measuring some of the men of the island, and 
I asked a young man who was standing by to let 
me measure him, and I asked him his name. He 
would not tell it, but a bystander told it to me. 

This circumstance reminded me that four years 
before that I had asked a precisely similar question 
of a Papuan in one of the islands of Torres Straits, 
who had exhibited the same disinclination to tell his 
name; further illustrations of this superstition could 
be multiplied indefinitely. 

It is interesting to note that the folk credit the 
same repugnance to being called by their own names 
to other living things; for example, a fisherman told 

* Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. (3), ii., pl. xxiii, fig. 7. 

oo 

420 THE STUDY OF MAN 

me that in Aberdeen the salmon is called “the 
red fish,’ and in Sunderland the pig is known by 
fisherfolk as ‘the queer fellow,” it bringing bad luck 
for them to be called by their proper designations, 
since in the case of the salmon the fish would not 
allow themselves to be caught. 

The meaning of it is simple. It is a very wide- 
spread belief among primitive peoples—indeed it is 
universal—that one can gain power over a person by 
possessing some of his hair, nail-parings, spittle, or 
whatever it may be. The same property extends 
to his belongings, and especially to a knowledge of 
his name; how unlikely would such a person be to 
voluntarily give his name to a stranger. 

. To come back to “Jenny jo,” the final answer to 
the mourners is that they must come in black, but 
when the question is asked as to what the dead 
maiden must be dressed in, the reply is invariably 
white, in consonance with the custom of very ancient 
days. The dressing of the dead body of a maiden 
in white by her girl companions, and the carrying 
of the body by them to the grave, are common village 
customs, the whole village being invited to the funeral. 
As Newell says* :— 
“Such imitations of burial ceremonies are not merely 

imaginative. It was once the custom for the girls of a 
village to take an active part in the interment of one of their 

* Games and Songs of American Children, 1884, p. 65. 

FUNERAL GAMES 421 

number. In a Flemish town, a generation since, when a 
young girl died, her body was carried to the church, thence 
to the cemetery, by her former companions. The religious 
ceremony over, and the coffin deposited in the earth, all the 
young girls, holding in one hand the mortuary cloth, returned 
to the church, chanting the Mazden’s Dance with a spirit and 
rhythm scarcely conceivable by one who has not heard it. 
The pall which they carried to the church was of sky-blue 
silk, having in the middle a great cross of white silk, on 
which were set three crowns of silver.” 

The following is a rendering of the MMazden’s 

Dance :— 
“In heaven is a dance ; 
Alleluia ! 
There dance all the maids ; 
Benedicamus Domino— 
Alleluia ! 

“Tt is for Amelia ; 
Alleluia ! 
We dance like the maids ; 
Benedicamus Domino— 
Alleluia !” * 

The common English name of the game is “ Jenny 
Jones,” but it is sometimes called ‘‘ Jenny jo,” as it 
is also in Scotland and North-east Ireland; the latter 
may safely be regarded as the original form, Mrs. 
Gomme says: “The corruption of this into ‘Jenny 
Jones’ is exactly what might be expected from modern 
English ignorance of the pretty meaning of the word 
jo, ‘dear,’ and to what length this corruption may 

* BERNONI, Cant. Pop. Venez., xi. 2, “ Rosetina.” 

422 THE STUDY OF MAN 

proceed under such influences may be seen by such 
forms as ‘Jingy Jog,’ ‘Jilly Jog,’ and ‘ Georgina.’” 

Mrs. Gomme is inclined to believe that the game that 
is played by two lines of children is the older version, 
and suggests that this represents “the wooing by 
a band of suitors of girls surrounded by their fellow- 
villagers ’—a custom which became obsolete in favour 
of ordinary marriage custom. The dropping out of 
this custom would cause the game to change from 
a representation of both wooing and burial to one 
of burial only. As burials only, the mother and one 
line of children action is sufficient, but the presence 
of a wooing incident in the earlier form of the game 
is plainly revealed by the verse which sings, ‘“‘ Fare 
ye well, ladies,” or, as it has become in the English 
variant, “ Very well, ladies.” 

The English versions are usually suggestive of a 
troop of village maidens who call on a companion, but 
they are refused admittance, as the daily tasks have to 
be performed. On the death of their little friend 
they return to discuss the important question of how 
they and the corpse are to be dressed, and finally 
they perform their allotted duty as pall-bearers and 
mourners. 

In some of the Scottish versions the opening inci- 
dent is that of a lover coming to court his sweetheart. 
He is repeatedly prevented from seeing her, owing to 
the fact that her mother keeps her close to her every- 

FUNERAL GAMES 423 

day domestic duties; later the constant swain is 
denied for a more serious reason, and finally, instead 
of his blushing love, he finds a cold corpse. This 
popular game is in reality a pathetic drama. 

There are other funeral games among our children, 
as, for example, the widely-spread ‘‘ Green Gravel.” 

Round Cambridge the village children join hands, 
form a ring, and walk round, singing— 

**Green gravel, green gravel, your grass is so green, 
The fairest young damsel that ever was seen. 

Your true love is dead, 
He sends you a letter to turn round your head.” 

On mentioning one of the players by her christian 
and surname, the girl turns right round, so that she 
now faces outwards. On the repetition of the verse 
the girl next to her is mentioned, and so on, in 
regular order, until all the girls face outwards, when 
the game is finished. 

An Irish version runs* :— 

“Green gravel, green gravel, the grass is so green, 
The prettiest damsel that ever was seen ; 
I washed her with new milk and dressed her in silk, 
And I wrote down her name with a brass pen and ink. 

Dear —, dear —, your true love is dead, 
And I send you a letter to turn round your head.” 

A Belfast version has for the middle lines— 

“We washed her, we dried her, we rolled her in silk, 
And we wrote down her name with a glass pen and ink.” 

* CLARA M, PATTERSON, Proc. Belfast Nat. Field Club, 1893-94, p. 51. 

424 DALE SLD VS OL MAT 

As in all the rhymes of these singing games there 
are variations to the words, but in this case the 
variants are usually of but very minor importance. The 
writing of the name with a pen and ink is doubtless 
quite a modern addition ; it is usually “a gold pen.” 

In some cases the rhyme is mixed up with frag- 
ments of courting games. Mrs. Gomme says: ‘‘ The 
additional ceremony of marriage in four of the games 
is clearly an interpolation, which may have arisen 
from the custom of playing love and marriage games 
at funerals and during the watching of the corpse, or 
may be a mere transition to the more pleasant task 
of love-making as the basis of a game. . . The decay 
that has set in is apparent by the evident attempt to 
alter from ‘“‘green gravel” to “ green grover” and 
“yellow gravel,” and to introduce pen and black ink. 
The addition of incongruous elements from other 
games is a frequent occurrence in modern games, and 
is the natural result of decadence in the original form 
of the game. Altogether this game-rhyme affords 
a very good example of the condition of traditional 
games among the present generation of children.” 
Those who would like to make acquaintance with 
the airs to which the words are sung, or who are 
interested in the various modifications, or who wish 
to study Mrs. Gomme’s analysis of the game, are 
referred to the original monograph, from which I 
have so freely borrowed. 

FUNERAL GAMES 425 

Mrs. Gomme points out that green gravel and 
green grass indicate the locality of the scene. 
“Green,” as applied to gravel, probably means 
freshly-disturbed soil, just as a green grave means 
a freshly-made grave. The tenant of the new grave 
is the well-loved lady of a disconsolate lover. 

The washing and dressing of the corpse, and 
putting an inscription on the place where it is laid, 
are indicated by the third and fourth lines. The 
widely-spread incidents of washing a corpse in milk 
and dressing it in silk occur in the ballad of “ Burd 

Ellen ”* :-— 

“Tak up, tak up my bonny young son, 
Gar wash him wi’ the milk ; 
Tak up, tak up my fair lady, 
Gar row her in the silk.” 

The final couplet of ‘“‘Green Gravel” is a funeral 
dirge, a singing to the dead. In some versions a 
touching wail is added :— 

“Oh, mother! oh, mother! do you think it is true?” 
“Oh, yes, child! oh, yes, child!” 
“Then what shall I do?” 

The possibility of communion with the dead, which 
is indicated by the line, ‘‘He sent you a letter to turn 
round your head,” is not inconsistent with primitive 
thought. To these simple souls the spirits of the 
dead are very real beings, and as Gomme _ has 

* JAMIESON, Ballads, p. 125. 

426 THE STUDY OF MAN 

demonstrated in his Ethnology in Folk-lore, we have 
two strata of belief in this country ; the lower, pre- 
Aryan, belief, which is similar in its general characters 
to that which is of almost universal occurrence, is 
based on the idea that the spirits of the dead are 
inimical to the living. Associated with this are 
numerous customs, such as the curious practice in 
Scotland of turning upside down all the chairs in the 
room from which the corpse has just been taken ;* 
or in England of unhinging the gate and placing it 
across the entrance, and of carrying the corpse to 
the grave by a roundabout way.t ‘There is also the 
practice in Scotland of keeping up a dance all night 
after a funeral,t which by the analogous practice 
among the Nagas, a non-Aryan tribe of Southern 
India, must be attributed to the desire to get rid of 
the spirit of the deceased.§ In the west of Kerry, 
in Ireland, a broad line is whitewashed round the 
windows and door of a house in which there has 
been a death, so that the spirit may not return. 

The later stratum is the Aryan worship of deceased 
ancestors, and this cult of the dead based on the 
love of dead kindred, is found generally prevalent 
over the country, whereas the above mentioned cult, 

* Folk-lore Record, ii., p. 214. 

+ FRAZER, in Journ. Anth. Inst., xV., p. 72. 

t Napier, Folk-lore of West of Scotland, p. 66; Folk-lore Journal, 

iii, p. 281. POCOCKE’S Tour through Scotland, 1760, p. 88. 
§ OweEn’s Wotes on the Naga Tribes, p. 23. 

FUNERAL GAMES 429 

which is based on the fear of dead kindred, is found 
only in isolated patches of the country.* In the 
present instance the relations between the dead and 
the living are of a friendly nature, but in the last 
game we noticed that in several versions the “ghost” 
of the deceased Jenny chased the frightened mourners. 

In confirmation of this being a representation of 
an old funeral ceremony, it may be pointed out that 
the action of turning backwards during the singing 
of the dirge is also represented in the curious funeral 
ceremony called ‘“ Dish-a-loof,’ which is thus de- 
scribed by Henderson: “All the attendants going 
out of the room, return into it backwards, repeating 
this rhyme of ‘saining.’” * 

I cannot now enter into a discussion of this 
ceremony and the chant in question; suffice it to 
say that “Dish-a-loof” is also found in children’s 
games. 

In several versions of these funeral games, love- 
making is added, and it is difficult to determine 
whether this is a degenerate feature which has 
crept into the game, for we often find a mixture 
taking place in these games, or whether it was an 
original element that has been sporadically retained. 

Festivity at a funeral may seem out of place to 
us, but one must remember that different men have 

* G, L. GOMME, Lthnology in Folk-lore, 1892, p. 125. 
+ Folk-lore of the Northern Counties, p. 53. 

428 THE STUDY OF MAN 

different manners, and what may appear incongruous 
to some people passes unnoticed among others. 

The mixture that appears in some of the singing 
games of children of mourning and courting, of death 
and marriage, of solemnity and frivolity, is not due to 
lack of sensibility on the part of the children; it is no 
sign of a natural depravity, but it is probably in many 
cases merely a survival. Children must play the old 
games and repeat the old rhymes, and they do so as 
faithfully as they can. Conscious departure from 
custom is often regarded as a kind of moral delin- 
quency, it is, in fact, a species of sacrilege. This 
conservatism of children and of the folk is the sheet- 
anchor of folk-lore. 

We have only to cross the Irish Sea to find that the 
English children are not singular in this association of 
comedy with tragedy. 

Croker * says :— 

“The wake of a corpse is a scene of merriment rather 
than of mourning. . . . In the evening a general assembly of 
the neighbours takes place, when they are entertained with 
whiskey, tobacco, and snuff. On these occasions songs are 
sung and stories related, while the younger part of the 
company beguile the time with various games and sports, 
such as blind man’s buff or hunt the slipper. Dancing, or 
rather running in a ring round an individual, who performs 
various evolutions, is also a common amusement; and four 

* T. CROFTON CROKER, Researches in the South of Ireland, 1824, 
p- 170. 

FUNERAL GAMES 429 

or five young men will sometimes, for the diversion of the 
party, blacken their faces and go through a regular series of 
gestures with sticks, not unlike those of the English morris 
dancers. Amongst the games played at wakes are two which 
I have never observed out of Ireland, and from their being so 
universal with the peasantry, they are probably of consider- 
able antiquity. One of these is called ‘The Walls of Troy, 
and the other ‘Short Castle.” 

The former game is a very old English game, 
which is generally known as ‘‘ Nine Men’s Morris.”* 

Lady Wilde} gives a somewhat similar account of 
‘Wake Games.” She refers to “Shuffle the Brogue” 
( diunt the Slipper’); “ [he Horse Fair,” and ** The 
Mock Marriage.” Lady Wilde says that nothing 
irreverent is meant, for it is considered that whatever 
keeps up the spirits at a wake is allowable, and harm- 
less in the sight of God. In towns the fun often de- 
generates into licence and drinking, and many games 
have been therefore forbidden by the priesthood, 
particularly the one called “The Mock Marriage,” 
which often gave occasion for much scandal, and 
tumult and fighting amongst the young men ; whereas, 
in the country wake, it would be deemed a disgrace 
for a man to create a disturbance or even to lose his 
temper, and the women and young girls were treated 
with the utmost respect. 

* A. B. GoMME, Traditional Games, p. 414; the diagram on p. 418 is 

the same as that given by Croker on p. 171. 
+ Ancient Cures, Charms, and Usages of Ireland, 1890, p. 129. 

430 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“Wake ceremonies are still held in the Irish cabins, where 
the men drink and smoke, and tell ancient stories, though 
the highly dramatic games of former times have almost 
entirely died out, ‘for, as the peasant narrator added, when 
concluding his account of the scenes he had witnessed in his 
early youth, ‘there is no mirth or laughter to be heard any 
more in the country, the spirit has gone from our people, and 
all the old fun is frozen, and the music is dumb in poor 
Ireland now.” 

We know that in the prehistoric times in Ireland 
famous inter-tribal games were held near some of 
the great tumuli of departed heroes or kings, similar 
to the funeral games of Patroclus that Homer has im- 
mortalised. 

It is a question for future research whether some of 
our games may not have had this origin and have 
subsequently been divorced from the funeral festival. 
If this can be shown to have been the case, then it is 
probable that certain of these games will be found to 
have had a magical or a symbolic significance which 
is at present entirely unsuspected. 

One version of ‘ Jinny Jo” ends with— 

“Poor Jinny Jo is dead and gone, dead and gone, dead and gone, 
Poor Jinny Jo is dead and gone, all the day long. 

We've come to wake Jinny Jo, Jinny Jo, Jinny Jo; 
We've come to wake Jinny Jo, all the day long. 
Jinny Jo has candles round her head,” &c. * 

* “The Wares of Autolycus,” Pall Mall Gazette, Jan. 18th, 1897, 
p. 10. 

FUNERAL GAMES 431 

The wake and candles are probably an Irish 
innovation; at all events, an old Irish nurse remem- 

) 

bered only the following fragment of “ Jenny Jo” :— 

“Jenny jo’s dead and gone, dead and gone, dead and gone, 
Jenny jo’s dead and gone, all the day long. 
Pipes and tobacco for Jenny jo, Jenny jo, Jenny jo, 
Pipes and tobacco for Jenny jo, all the day long. 

Miss M. Hayden, who gave me this and several 
other Irish games, writes: “The ‘pipes and tobacco’ 
seem rather odd.” 

There are two explanations: the obvious one is 
that the tobacco is for the wake. We have seen that 
Croker refers to this custom, and Lady Wilde says: 
“There is always a plateful of tobacco and another 
of snuff placed on a table by the side of the corpse, 
and each man as he enters is expected to fill his pipe 
and pray in silence for a few moments.” * 

The rhyme says that the pipes and tobacco are for 
Jenny jo, that is, for the deceased person. Last year 
my friend Mr. R. Welch, the well-known landscape 
photographer of Belfast, took some photographs of 
an old graveyard at Salruck, Little Killary, West 
Galway, on some graves of which were deposited 
a large number of pipes, some quite new and still 
with the shavings with which they were packed in 
the bowl, others filled with tobacco. Were these 
offerings to the spirits of the deceased? An Irish 

te f. Gey pst l34> 

432 THE STUDY OF MAN 

journal indignantly denied that this occurred, and 
accused Mr. Welch of himself putting the pipes 
there in order to produce a photograph that would 
appeal to the English tourist. Mr. Welch, however, 
was vindicated, and we may charitably assume that 
the writer was ignorant that this custom was fairly 
common in Mayo and North Galway. I mention 
this circumstance, as facts which appear to tell 
against the intelligence of a sensitive people may be 
publicly denied, though they occur all the same. 

The distribution of tobacco and pipes is stated to 
be an act of hospitality to those who attend the 
funeral on the part of the deceased’s relatives, who 
could not entertain such a large number in an 
ordinary way at home. The idea current among the 
people who smoke the pipes in the graveyard at 
the funeral is, that it is unlucky to take them away. 
Why unlucky, if not the survival of a custom older 
than pipes in Ireland? 

The custom of leaving some of the belongings of 
the deceased person, or of placing offerings, sometimes 
of food only, at the grave, is so widely spread among 
backward peoples that it is superfluous to multiply 
examples; I will give merely a single instance that 
came under my own observation at Cape York in 
North Queensland. On the grave of a native was 
the stretcher that had carried him to his last resting 
place, at the head and foot of the grave were two 

FUNERAL GAMES 433 

posts, on to the top of the latter was tied a hand- 
kerchief, and on to the top of the former a second 
handkerchief and the pipe of the deceased, and close 
by was his tin ‘“‘billy,”. It was very pathetic to see 
the belongings of the poor man put by his side ready 
for the use of his spirit, or perhaps it was the spirits 
of the objects which were for the use of the spirit of 
the man. 

And now I must close—not because I have ex- 
hausted the subject—indeed, I have touched on only 
a few of the problems that the toys and games of 
children suggest—but because I have come to an end 
of my space. We are now discovering the fact that 
if only we have the understanding, we can learn much 
of the past history of man from a study of our 
children. Two thousand years ago, as in our own 
days, might be seen “children sitting in the market 
places, which call unto their fellows, and say—‘ We 
piped unto you, and ye did not dance; we wailed, 
and ye did not mourn.’” This lament might well 
have been made to their elders—but at last we are 
beginning to heed their piping and their wailing, 

CHAPTEREXVI: 

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS FOR CONDUCTING 
ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 
IN THE BRITISH ISLANDS. 

N influential committee was appointed by the 
British Association in 1892 to conduct an ETH- 
NOGRAPHICAL SURVEY OF THE UniTED KiInGDom :— 

COPN SORSE URS Ue Clr CUIUAtks 

“ S1r,—The above-named Committee, in pursuance of the 
object for which they have been delegated by the Society of 
Antiquaries of London, the Folk-lore Society, the Dialect 
Society, and the Anthropological Institute, and appointed 
by the British Association, propose to record for certain 
typical villages and the neighbouring districts :— 

“(1) Physical types of the inhabitants. 
(2) Current traditions and beliefs. 
(3) Peculiarities of dialect. 
(4) Monuments and other remains of ancient culture ; 
and 
(5) Historical evidence as to the continuity of race. 

“As a first step the Committee desire to form a list 
of such villages in the United Kingdom as appear especially 
to deserve ethnographic study, out of which a selection 

434 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 435 

might afterwards be made for the survey. The villages 
or districts suitable for entry on the list are such as contain 
not less than a hundred adults, the large majority of whose 
forefathers have lived there so far back as can be traced, and 
of whom the desired physical measurements, with photo- 
graphs, might be obtained. 

“Tt is believed by the Committee that such villages may 
exist in the districts with which you are acquainted, and 
as you are eminently capable of affording help in this 
preliminary search, we have to request that you will do so by 
kindly furnishing the names of any that may occur to you, 
with a brief account of their several characteristics, mention- 
ing at the same time the addresses of such of their residents 
as would be likely to support the Committee in pursuing 
their inquiry. 

“They would also be glad to be favoured with the names 
of any persons known to you in other districts to whom this 
circular letter might with propriety be addressed.” 

In January, 1894, another circular was issued from 
which the following is extracted :— 

“They are sure you will excuse their urging what may at 
first sight appear to be trivial details, but which are in reality 
of great practical importance to those who have. to arrange 
and consult a large collection of communications from 
different persons. These are, that the communications 
should all be written on foolscap paper, and that the 
writing should be on one side only of the page, and should 
never run so near the margin as to be an obstacle to future 
binding, 

“The Committee are satisfied that the value of the returns 
will be much reduced if they do not give information under 
all the several heads. If it should happen, therefore, that 

436 THE STUDY OF MAN 

your own pursuits or means of information do not enable 
you to fill up the whole of the forms desired, they would 
take it as a particular favour if you could induce friends 
to supply the missing details, and thus to render the 
information complete. 

“The Committee, in addressing you individually, wish 
to disclaim any idea of interfering with the action of local 
societies, from many of which, on the contrary, they have 
reason to expect very valuable assistance. If it should suit 
your convenience to present to your local society an even 
fuller account of your observations than may be necessary 
to comply with the requirements of this Committee, such a 
course would be highly desirable, and it is hoped that the 
local societies will, on the other hand, give to the observers 
in their several districts all the encouragement and moral 
assistance that may be found practicable. 

“ All communications should be addressed to ‘THE 
SECRETARY OF THE ETHNOGRAPHIC SURVEY, British 
Association, Burlington House, London, W.’” 

The work done by this Committee will be found 
in the Reports of the Association, but as yet no 
systematic survey of the British Islands has been 
attempted. The Ethnographical Survey of Ireland 
has been undertaken by a Dublin committee, which 
is supported by the Royal Irish Academy, and four 
comprehensive reports* have been published by that 

* “The Ethnography of the Aran Islands, County Galway,” by Prof. 
A. C. HADDON and Dr. C. R. BROWNE, Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. (3rd 
ser.), il., 1893, pp. 768-830, pls. xxii.-xxiv. ; “ The Ethnography of Inish- 
bofin and Inishshark, County Galway,” by Dr. C. R. BROWNE, 22, iii., 
1894, pp. 317-370, pls. viii., ix. ; “The Ethnography of the Mullet, Inishkea 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 437 

body. These reports are drawn up on the following 
lines :-— 

I. Phystography of the district investigated. I. An- 
thropography.—1. Methods; 2. Physical characters 
with lists of measurements; 3. Vital Statistics (gene- 
ral and economic), (A) Population, (8) Acreage and 
Rental, (c) Language and Education, (p) Health ; 
4. Psychology; 5. Folk names. III. Soczology.— 
i Occupations ; 2. Family Life and Customs; 3. 
Food; 4. Clothing; 5. Dwellings; 6. Transport. 
IV. Folk-lore—1. Customs and Beliefs; 2. Legends 
and Traditions; 3. Leechcraft. V. Archeology.— 
i ourvivals, | 2, Antiquities.’ VI, 27zstory. ~ VII. 
Ethnology. VAI. Brbhography. 

It will be evident that this is a somewhat ambitious 
programme, and although in many instances the in- 
formation given on a particular subject is meagre, 
owing to the very limited time available for work in 
the field, it was considered best to keep to the general 
scheme in order to emphasize the fact that in all in- 
vestigations of this kind the widest possible outlook 
must be maintained. 

Islands and Portacloy, County Mayo,” by Dr. C. R. BROWNE, Z.¢., lil. 
1895, pp. 587-649, pls. xv.-xvii.; “The Ethnography of Ballycroy, 
County Mayo,” by Dr. C. R. BROWNE, Zc, iv., 1897, pp. 74-111, pls. 
iii, iv.; “The Ethnography of Clare Island and Inishturk, County 
Mayo,” by Dr. C. R. BROWNE, Z.c., iv., 1898. 

438 THE STUDY OF MAN 

I.—INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING CERTAIN 
SOMATOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS. 

1. Hatr and Eye Colours. 

I have already (pp. 30-34) given an account of Dr. 
Beddoe’s methods of recording the colours of the hair 
and eyes; it only remains to add a few practical hints 
which I also cull from The Races of Britain, p. 4 :— 

“When unable to decide in which of two columns (eg. 
B or D) an individual ought to be inscribed, I divide him 
between the two, by a Solomonian judgment, and set down 
4, or ‘5, in each of them. 

“When engaged in this work, I set down in his proper place 
on my card of observation every person (with the exceptions 
to be mentioned presently) whom I meet, or who passes me 
within a short distance, say from one to three yards. Asa 
rule I take no note of persons who apparently belong to the 
upper classes, as these are more migratory and more often 
mixed in blood. I neglect those whom I suppose to be 
under age—fixing the point roughly at 18 or 20 for men, 
17 or 18 for women—as well as all those whose hair has 
begun to grizzle. Thus I get a fairly uniform material to 
work upon, though doubtless the hair of most people does 
darken considerably between 20 and 40 or 50. In order to 
preserve perfect fairness, I always examine first, out of any 
group of persons, the one who is nearest, rather than the 
one to whom my attention is most drawn. Certain colours 
of the hair, such as red, certain shades of the eye, such as 
light grey, can be discerned at a very considerable distance ; 
but I take no note of anyone who does not approach me so 
nearly that I can recognize the more obscure colours. Much 
allowance needs to be made for the varying effects of light. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 439 

Direct sunlight is better avoided when possible; I always 
choose the shady side of a street on a sunny day. Consider- 
able difficulties are created by the freaks of fashion. I once 
visited Friesland, in order to study the physical type of that 
region. Conceive my disappointment when I found myself 
surrounded by comely damsels and buxom matrons, not one 
of whom suffered a single yellow hair to stray beyond her lace 
cap or silver-gilt head-plate. When I began to work in 
England dark hair was in fashion among women; and light 
and reddish hues were dulled with greasy unguents. In later 
years fair hair has been more in vogue; and golden shades, 
sometimes unknown to nature, are produced by art. Among 
men, on the other hand, the close cropping of the head, 
borrowed from the French, makes comparisons difficult. 
Fortunately, most vagaries of this kind are little prevalent in 
the classes among whom I seek my material. 

“Tt may be objected that there is no security that many of 
the persons observed may not be aliens to the place or neigh- 
bourhood wherein they are encountered. Certainly ; there is 
no such security. But if a sufficient number of observations 
be secured, and the upper and other notoriously migratory 
classes (who are mostly easy of recognition) be excluded, 
the probability is immense that the great majority of the 
remainder have been born within a moderate radius of the 
centre of observation; and the majority will determine 
the position of the community in my chromatic scale.” 

Personally I am rather inclined to think it would 
be a good plan, when marking the “ niger” column, 
to make a slightly different mark for those cases in 
which the hair is known to be absolutely black, ze., 
when it shows black under all conditions of light and 
when quite dry. 

440 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Many opportunities present themselves for collect- 
ing these statistics, such as market-days, village flower 
shows, local festivals and sports, the ‘hinds’ hirings” 
of Northumberland, z.e., those days when the farm 
labourers of both sexes come into the towns to hire out 
themselves for the following year. When groups are 
being photographed, or individuals measured, a small 
crowd generally collects, and one of the party can be 
told off to unobtrusively make notes of the colours of 
the eyes and hair of onlookers. 

The markings on the cards should always consist of 
short, firm strokes. (dots are less satisfactory); it is 
best never to put numbers. Each group of cards © 
should be kept in labelled envelopes. A little method 
and system is a great saving of time in the end, and 
the results are more likely to be trustworthy if system 
is made into habit. 

The following table is an example of one way in 
which the results can be tabulated; a similar table 
should be made for Females, Boys and Girls. These 
can be combined in various ways afterwards. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 441 

ADULTS.—MALES.* 

Eyes. Percentage 
Hair, ee Lotals, of 
Light. | Medium, | Dark. Hair Colours. 

Red). : : 4 I — 5 3°73 
alte eo. 5 4 8 — — 8 5°97 
Brown . ; : 80 3 2 85 63°43 
Dark. : ‘ Di 6 I 34 2537 
Black . : : — I I 2 1°50 

Totals. ee LO) II 4 134 100'00 
Percentage of Eye 

Colours . . | 88:80] 8-21 2:99 |100:00 

Index of Nigrescence, 18-57. 

It is occasionally a matter of local belief—or it may 
come out in the observations—that the inhabitants of 
one village, or of an island, are lighter or darker, as 
the case may be, or vary in some other way from 
the neighbouring locality. All such supposed or real 
variations should be worked out on special tables. It 
is well not to use the recording cards for more than 
one occasion or for more than one village. 

2. Anthropometry for British Ethnography. 
I have kept the instructions for collecting the hair 
and eye colours distinct from the other ethnographical 

_ * A. C. Happon and C, R. Browne, ‘‘The Ethnography of the Aran 
Islands, County Galway” (Proceedings Royal Irish Academy [3], ii., 1893, 

p- 783). 

442 THE STUDY OF MAN 

data, as these can so readily be made anywhere by 
anybody, whereas the following data, for the most 
part, require the employment of instruments and a 
little preparatory training. 

The schedule on pp. 444, 445 is that drawn up by 
the Ethnographical Survey Committee of the British 
Association. Copies of this, for field observation, can 
be obtained from the Secretary of the Committee, 
E. S. Hartland, Esq., Highgarth, Gloucester. 

“ Directions for Measurement. 

“Instrument required for these measurements :—The 
‘Travellers Anthropometer, manufactured by Aston & 
Mander, 61, Old Compton Street, London, W.C.; price, 
43 38. complete; without 2-metre steel measuring tape and 
box footpiece, £2 10s. With this instrument all the measure- 
ments can be taken. In a permanent laboratory it will be found 
convenient to have a fixed graduated standard for measuring 
the height, or a scale affixed to a wall. For field work a 
tape measure may be temporarily suspended to a rigid 
vertical support, with the zero just touching the ground 
or floor. A 2-metre tape, a pair of folding callipers, a 
folding square, all of which are graduated in millimetres, 
and a small set-square can be obtained from Aston & 
Mander for £1 6s.; with this small equipment all the 
necessary measurements can be taken. 

“Height Standing—The subject should stand perfectly 
upright, with his back to the standand or fixed tape, and 
his eyes directed horizontally forwards. Care should be 
taken that the standard or support for the tape is vertical. 
The stature may be measured by placing the person with 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 443 

his back against a wall to which a metre scale has been 
affixed. The height is determined by placing a carpenter’s 
square or a large set-square against the support in such 
a manner that the lower edge is at right angles to the scale ; 
the square should be placed well above the head, and then 
brought down till its lower edge feels the resistance of 
the top of the head. The observer should be careful that 
the height is taken in the middle line of the head. If the 
subject should object to take off his boots, measure the 
thickness of the boot-heel, and deduct it from stature 
indicated in boots, 

“Fleight Sitting.—For this the subject should be seated on 
a low stool or bench, having behind it a graduated rod 
or tape with its zero level with the seat; he should sit 
perfectly erect, with his back well in against the scale. Then 
proceed as in measuring the height standing. The square 
should be employed here also if the tape against a wall 
is used. 

“Length of Crantum.—Measured with callipers from the 
most prominent part of the projection between the eyebrows 
(glabella) to the most distant point at the back of the head 
in the wzddle line. Care should be taken to keep the end 
of the callipers steady on the glabella by holding it there 
with the fingers, while the other extremity is searching for 
the maximum projection of the head behind. 

“Breadth of Crantum.—The maximum breadth of head, 
which is usually about the level of the op of the ears, is 
measured at right angles to the length. Care must be taken 
to hold the instrument so that both its points are exactly 
on the same horizontal level. 

“Face Length—This is measured from the slight furrow 
which marks the root of the nose, and which is about the 
level of a line drawn from the centre of the pupil of one 

THE STODY OF MAN 

444 

“(N) (a) (a) §(a) (a) t auvag a0 ano109 

“Ayano (€) £ Aavm (z) £ yy Bress (1) 

"etd (N) £4ep (qq) f Umoaq (q) £ ares (q) § par (Y) +: AIVH 

(2) pappaut | “yep (§) £Appna (z) fazed (1) : Nag 

(‘aynpayps sty} q7IIM Suoye juas aq prnoys 

parmsvau uosiad 94} jo ydersojoyd ay [—"g‘N) 
‘roquinu ydeisojoyg 

‘urqy (€) £ wmrpeut (z) £yno}s (1) : NOILIGNOD IVAANAD 

‘adoad s,zayjoyy mo 10; OIG 
*AypROO] [eurs110 sy} Jo Mouy nok 

yeqM ajejys jou sy ¢ Buoy 10; A1yUN0d ay}j jo 
‘uoredns99, \ zed yey} patdnoso ajdoad s,zayje,y moh aavzy 
2S,Jay}O[ ino x 2S8,J9q}8,J MOA 2 ‘SANVNUNS 
‘paler sem ays a10jaq | , ‘ 
y raqOW] nod Jo aWwyNuag | WPA MOA jo ANVNUNS 
guoy auioo ajdoad sjusreg ano op JOUNSIp yey AA. 
-Ayunod ae 20 *xaS ‘ady | ‘owen UeNsIIg| ‘suIeUING Sate is *1aquIn NT 

‘SSLNVLIGVHNI AHL 4O SHdAL TVOISAHd 1 
eran Sas. deal Bae AdLAAS GO); JOLDULD ATEN “GE ke ak te eas ee ae oes aan; 

445 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 

"16 ‘d ‘6 “31q jo S-I ‘SON oe 9say]—eI0Y paysesut ore sasou oy} Jo saanSy oy} a[npayos [eulSi10 9y} UT y 
“ypeaig ‘yysuaT 
“unTURID *peryy 
‘ Jorgsiey | jo ys H 
SMUVNAY “ASON 
“qapee “ bE) ‘ys - Z 
wees | aueeont | sppeon | oc | cwsuer | mpm | ater | tums | dopens 
*aOVA ‘WOINVAD ‘LHOIGE 
“‘peyorjap (7) * payouiye (v) £yuasard (z) fquasqe (1) :suvqy 4O SagdO'T 
*peprnow Ayauy (¢) £ astvoo (v) § Surpuysjno (q) f3ey (vy) : suv” 
“yory} (€) { wutpout (z) £ uty} (1) : sary 
*spuodsar109 ATasojd Jsou UOT]ZUIWWexS = 
Jepun 9sou 9Y} YOIYM YUM Jaquinu 9y} 9a1d pue yJooy ye sammsy outyno ym orvdui0D :aSON 4O AION 

‘yuoutmoid sauoq-yaeyo (¢) § snonordsuoout sauoq-yaeyo (7) 
*peoiq puv j1oys (€) £ wnipaw (z) § morreu pue Suo[ (1) : aOVq AO AavHS 

“uMmoiq Yep (9) £uMosq yYySI (S) £ usEA8 (b) 

{horas yrep (€) !Aa18 yysiy (cz) f anyq (1) : saaq 

446 THE STUDY OF MAN 

eye to that of the other, to the under part of the chin. 
Should there be two furrows, as is often the case, measure 
from between them.* 

“Upper Face Length—F¥rom root of nose to the interval 
between the two central front teeth at their roots. 

“Face Breadth—Maximum breadth of face between the 
bony projections in front of the ears. 

“Tnter-ocular Breadth—Width between the internal angles 
of the eyes, While this is being measured the subject should 
shut his eyes. 

“Bigonial Breadth—Breadth of face at the outer surface of 
the angles of the Zower jaw below the ears, 

“Nose Length—From the furrow at root of nose to the 
angle between the nose and the upper lip in the middle ~ 
line.* 

“ Breadth of Nose.—Measured horizontally across the 
nostrils at the widest part, but without compressing the 
nostrils, 

“Fleight of Head—The head should be so held that the 
eyes look straight forward to a point at the same level as 
themselves, ze, the plane of vision should be exactly 
horizontal. The rod of the Anthropometer should be 
held vertically in front of the face of the subject, and 
the upper straight arm should be extended as far as possible 
and placed along the middle line of the head; the shorter 
lower arm should be pushed up to the lower surface of 
the chin. When measured with the square the depending 
bar must be held vertically in front of the face (with the 
assistance of the spirit-level or plumb-line), and the small 
set-square passed up this arm from below in such a manner 
that its horizontal upper edge will come into contact with the 

* See special instructions for taking nasal measurements, pp. 457, 458. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 447 

lower contour of the chin. The distance between the lower 
edge of the horizontal bar of the square and the upper edge 
of the set-square can be read off, and this will be the 
maximum height of the head. 

“Height of Cranium—tThe head being held in precisely the 
same manner as in measuring the height of the head, the 
instrument is rotated to the left side of the head, its upper 
bar still resting on the crown and the recording arm (or 
the set-square) is pointed to the centre of the line of attach- 

ment of the small projecting cartilage in front of the 
ear-hole.” 

NoTE.—It is essential that these rules should be strictly 
followed in order to secure accuracy. All measurements 
must be made in millimetres. If possible, the subject’s 
weight should be obtained, and recorded in the place set 
apart for remarks. The observer is recommended to procure 
‘Notes and Queries on Anthropology, 2nd edition, from the 
Anthropological Institute, 3, Hanover Square, London, W. 
Net price, 35. 6d. 

I have printed the schedule verbatim, with the 
exception of the addition of the line relating to the 
length of time the subject's mother’s people have 
resided in that particular district. 

The vagueness of the question, “What district 
do your father’s (or mother’s) people come from?” 
is better for our purpose than any more precise 
question would be, as it gives us just the information 
we require. For example, if with specious exactitude 
we asked a subject where he was born, and he replied 
“ Cambridge,” then where his parents were born, it 

448 THE STUDY OF MAN 

might be “Cambridge” for both ; whereas his grand- 

parents, on both sides, might have been North-country 

folk, and their forbears for many generations back. 

Now mere residence in Cambridge for two generations 

would not alter a Northumberland and Durham 

ancestry, provided, as we assume in this case, that 
no local intermixture had taken place. People usually 

know, in a general sort of way, where their “people” 

lived some generations ago, and our apparently vague 

question gets directly at this information. 

The “surname of your father” is generally a 
superfluous question, but owing to some local pecu- 
liarities of naming people it is as well to retain it. 

The schedule is printed on paper of foolscap size, 
with the observations on one side and the directions 
on the other. These are cumbersome in the field, 
and as field-work should be undertaken only by those 
who have already had some experience, or, at all 
events, by those who have mastered the technique, 
there is no need to issue the instructions on each 
sheet. I would therefore suggest that cards be em- 
ployed about 6 inches in length and 4 inches in 
breadth, which might be printed as follows :— 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 449 

WES Date, 

Locality, .. se | | County, hi | 
Mame, . .: 50 | 

Occupation, . | | Age, .. iis | 
Birthplace, 

What district do your Father's 
people come from? 

What district do your Mother's 
people come from? .. Ae 

Skin—Pale, Ruddy, Dark; Freckled, .. | 

Red, Fair, Brown, Dark, Jet ees 

Hair Straight, Wavy, Curly, 

Byes Light; Medium; Dark 

{ 
{Bie Blue Bree Hazel; Brown 
Face {¢ 

ong, Narrow; Medium} Short, Broad _.. 5 
Cheek- -bones—(1) i inconspicuous, @) prominent, 

Bars { flat ; B outstanding, . 

Lobes—(t) absent, (2) present, . * 
Nose—Length, | Breadth,.. | | Profile, .. | 
Head—Length, .. | Breadth, .. | Height, .. | 
en i al ee 
Face, 
| | | | 

Avsiculae | Altitudinal | nasal | Alveolar. | 

radii, es a | 2 ? 
mat | ees | | weiets | 
Hand, sd Forearm, .. | Span, Pst | 
Cephalic Index, '.. oF | | Total Facial Index, Be | 
Length—Height Index,.. | | Upper Facial Index, .. | 
Breadth—Height Index, | | Nasal Index, a aa | 

2G 

450 THE STUDY OF MAN 

Similar schedules to these, but with the addition 
of some physical tests and with some minor altera- 
tions, are in use in the Anthropological Laboratory 
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and in that 
of Trinity College, Dublin. 

In Cambridge the head height from the level of 
the ear-hole is alone taken; for field-work it is 
advisable, if possible, to take the total height of the 
head as detailed in the schedule. 

Flead Measurements.—The height of the cranium 
is the same as the altitudinal auricular radius of the 
card used in Ireland. The schedule explains how this 
may be obtained by projection, as it is termed: but 
in Ireland we use a modification of Busk’s craniometer 
that was introduced by Professor Cunningham,* by 
means of which we take the radii from the level 
of the ear-holes to the greatest vertical height of 
the head, to the nasion, and to the insertion of the 
upper front teeth in the gums (alveolus). This in- 
strument is very convenient to use, and gives accurate 
measurements; it is made so as to take to pieces, and 
is therefore quite portable. A further advantage is 
that analogous measurements can be made on skulls 
—the disadvantage is the dislike some people have 
to anything being inserted in their ears. An extended 
experience in Ireland shows that very few refuse 

* C. R. BROWNE, “Some new Anthropometrical Instruments,” Proc. 
Roy. Irish Acad. (3), ii., 1892, p. 397- 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 451 

point blank to the instrument being used, and most 
make no objection whatever. 

There is no need for me to say more about the 
cephalic index or the method of obtaining it; but 
it is desirable that the question should be determined 
of the ratio of the cephalic index (that is the 
index of the living head) to the cranial index (or 
the index of the skull). This matter has received 
the attention of many anthropologists, and has 
recently been discussed by Dr. W. Z. Ripley.* 
Most anthropologists follow Broca, and add two 
units to the cranial index to obtain the cephalic index; 
thus a skull having a length-breadth index of 78 
would correspond to a cephalic index of 80 in the 
living subject. Tappeiner, in the Tyrol, finds differ- 
ences from I to 5 units; Mantegazza allows 3 units; 
Zampa allows 2°5 units; Boas allows 1°4 for American 
Indians; Livi allows 1°3 for Italians; Mies allows 
rrr for men, and ‘85 for women, with a tendency 
to increase among brachycephals ; Topinard allows 4 
of a unit; Weisbach and Zuckerhandl allow only 
vo of a unit; whereas Virchow says no correction 
is needed as the two are practically equal. Ripley 
believes that the difference is nearer 1°5 than 2 units. t 

The German system of craniometry, taken as it 

* WILLIAM Z. RIPLEY, “ Notes et Documents pour la Construction 
dune Carte de l’Indice Céphalique en Europe,” L’ Anthropologie, vii., 
1896, p. 513. 

T Ley ps 519: 

452 THE STUDY OF MAN 

is from an artificial base, does not correspond to the 
maximum length as taken directly by French, 
English, and American anthropologists, and so tends 
to increase the length-breadth index (by diminishing 
the length) as compared with the French. 

To reduce the German ratio to that of the French 
one unit must be added to the German cranial indices 
(as, for example, in the measurements of Frisian 
crania made by Virchow and by Broca). If two 
units be added to the French cranial index to obtain 
the cephalic index, only one unit must be added to 
the German cranial index to make it correspond with 
the French cephalic index; but owing to his special 
methods Welcker’s indices average, as Ripley* points 
out, two units below other German indices. 

About the same time that Ripley had come to the 
foregoing conclusion Dr. Ammont published a paper 
on the same subject, as the result of a very careful 
inquiry. As this is an important matter, I give 
Ammon’s conclusions for the convenience of those 
who may wish to correlate the cranial measurements 
made by the two chief Continental schools. 

“ Length—To obtain the French length from German 
measurements add 1 mm. to the brachycephals (80-84'9) and 

hyperbrachycephals (85-899); 1'1 mm. to the mesaticephals 
(75-79'9) and ultra-brachycephals (90-94'9); 1°5 mm. to 
FT-C.5 Pe'b 20: 

+ Orro AmMMON, “La Corrélation entre lindice céphalométrique de 
Broca et celui d’Ihéring,” L’ Anthropologie, vii., 1896, p. 676. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 453 

the dolichocephals (70-74'9), and 1°4 mm. to the extreme 
brachycephals (95-100). ; 

“ Breadth—Identical in both methods. 

“ [ndex.—The French index is obtained by deducting half 
a unit from the German index; or to be more exact, deduct 
‘6 from the dolichocephals and .7 from the extreme brachy- 
cephals instead of -5. 

“Inversely to transform the numbers obtained according to 
the French method into those of the German method, one must 
deduct 1 mm. from the length, &c, and add -5 to the index.” 

Collignon points out* that one is too apt to attach 
to the terms dolichocephaly and brachycephaly a 
concrete sense which they should not have. 

Thus a human variety may by the proportions of 
the body and its members and by the characters of 
the face and the length of the skull, manifestly 
resemble a dolichocephalic race and yet have a 
cephalic index of 81 or 82. Or another variety may 
have a long and broad body, short legs, a low flat 
face and short head, and other characters of a brachy- 
cephalic people and yet have a narrow head, giving 
an index of 78 or 79. Collignon would respectively 
allocate these aberrant varieties to the dolichocephals 
and to the brachycephals respectively. 

One knows that in a race as pure as possible there 
may be a range in the cephalic index of 13 units, that 
is to say a pure race having a mean index of 84 may 
normally vary between 78 and go, and inversely a race 

* Mém. Soc. ad’ Anth, de Paris (3), i., 1895, p. 23- 

454 THE STUDY OF MAN 

having a mean index of 77 may oscillate between 
71 and 83. 
There are thus normally, and without any foreign 

influences, some individuals of a brachycephalic race 
who may be relatively dolichocephals, and conversely 
there may be brachycephalic individuals in a dolicho- 
cephalic race. 

When the mean antero-posterior diameter of the 
cranium exceeds 190 millim. in the living, the head 
should be considered as long, and the race to which it 
belongs is ranged as a whole in the great dolicho- 
cephalic group, rather than in the group of brachy- 
cephalic races. It will be noted that Collignon, for the 
sake of brevity of description, ignores a mesaticephalic 
group. 

Collignon gives*™ the following examples :— 

Dolichocephalic Populations. 

Head Cephalic 

length, index. 
80 Tunisians (Race of Djerid) . f cO ALAS Neem yc 
41 Negroes of the Soudan : 2 LOS Gee tte 7485 
too Coast Tunisians . : A Besicy ow gag) for 
zo Pure Arabs . : ; ; OMAR cue i 
30 Mediterraneans . 2 ; 3 LQS{S ame aes 
too Kymri (of France) . ; 2) L035 eee On 

Brachycephalic Populations. 

50 Tunisians of Djerbah . ; s 18775 eee SO 4 
1045 Manche (N. France) . ; <p 1883 cpeoaio 
960 Cétes-du-Nord (,,) . ; RR cos, VERNE 
too Celts (of France) . ‘ : . T87iG) eeerosco 

Bibby Pe 2A. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 455 

On page 77 of the same Memoir he suggests the 
index of 82 for the limit of dolichocephaly and 
brachycephaly in the living subject. 

As these practical instructions are intended for 
ethnographical survey work in the field and not for 
craniological purposes, I will not give instructions 
for skull measurements, but will refer the reader to 
such works as Flowers Osteological Catalogue 
(Part I., “Man”) of the Royal College of Surgeons 
(1879); Garson, in Motes and Queries on Anthro- 
pology (1892); Topinard’s Eléments d Anthropologie 
générale (1885); Broca’s Lustructions craniometriques 
(1876); De Quatrefages et Hamy’s Cranza Ethnica 
(1882) ; Garson, “The Frankfort Craniometric Agree- 
ment, with Critical Remarks thereon,” /ourn. Anth. 
Inst., xiv., 1884, p. 64; Schmidts Axthropologische 
Methoden (Leipzig, 1888), and Macalister’s Anatomy ; 
Quain’s Anatomy, &c. Professor Macalister is writing 
a book which will thoroughly cover this ground. 

The only skull measurements | have referred to are 
the length, breadth, and height, and the two measure- 
ments required for the nasal index; the latter have 
been sufficiently described on p. 120. The length of 
the skull is taken by the French, English, and 
American anthropologists from the glabella (the 
middle-line between the brow-ridges), to the greatest 
diameter obtainable behind in the middle line; this 
gives the greatest obtainable mesial length. All 

456 THE STUDY OF MAN 

anthropologists take the greatest breadth wherever 
found above the levels of the ear-holes; care must be 
taken that the callipers are held at right angles to 
the median longitudinal (sagittal) line, and that the 
two ends of the callipers are at the same level. The 
height of the skull is the diameter between the basion 
(the middle point of the anterior edge of the foramen 
magnum) and the bregma (the point on the vertex 
where the frontal and interparietal sutures meet). 

Nasal Measurements.—Dr. R. Collignon, who has 
paid more attention than any other anthropologist 
to the nasal index in the living, draws attention®* to 
the great care that is required in taking the measure- 
ments, as, owing to the low units of the dimensions, 
even small differences in the method employed will 
lead to considerable differences in the results. The 
nasal index is an extremely delicate measurement, and 
it is only on account of its exceptional ethnological 
importance that it claims so much attention and 
trouble. 

We have already seen that the index is the ratio 
of the maximum breadth of the base of the nose, 
that is of the wings of the nose, to its height, the 
latter being taken from the root to the point of 
insertion of the septum. 

There is no difficulty about the first measurement, 

* “La Nomenclature quinaire de l’indice nasal du vivant.’—Revue 
d Anthropologie (3), ii., 1887, p. 8, 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 457 

except that care must be taken not to squeeze the 
wings and to guard against laughter, which often 
happens, and which gives a false platyrhiny by the 
distension of the nostrils. Distension is also caused 
by breathing through the nostrils ; this can be stopped 
by the subject keeping his mouth open. 

The second measurement is less easy, and in certain 
cases is of extreme difficulty owing to an uncertainty 
in selecting the upper point of measurement. 

Among the great majority of Europeans the con- 
dition does not exist; the origin of the root of the 
nose is generally seen at a glance with the greatest 
ease. It suffices to look at the face in profile, and 
to place one arm of the compass at the deepest point 
seen. But among the yellow or black races and 
among some Europeans it is by no means the same ; 
the line of the forehead very often passes on to the 
nose in a regular curve, which does not present any 
change of direction. In this case, Topinard recom- 
mends that the subject should be looked at full face ; 
usually one can distinguish a slight horizontal fold 
which is the desired spot; or by stroking vertically 
from above downwards upon the skin of the lower 
part of the forehead the fold is indicated in the great 
majority of cases with great clearness. This should 
be lightly marked with a pencil. 

To recapitulate. In order to determine the height 
of the nose, stand to the right of the subject and look 

458 THE STUDY OF MAN 

at his profile; if the exact spot where the root begins 
is clear, place the lower arm of the sliding compass 
against the angle which the septum makes with the 
upper lip, without pressing it too much, and gently 
bring down the upper arm to the upper spot. If there 
is any doubt about the latter, press down the skin of 
the forehead with the left hand, always looking at 
the profile, so as to appreciate the change of direction 
which is produced, mark it, and proceed as above. 

Instead of the ordinary sliding compass which may 
have sharp points, and which is usually difficult to use 
with precision for these measurements, Collignon for 
many years has employed a small, light, boxwood 
sliding compass, which can be obtained from any 
French shoemaker, and which costs only rfr. 25¢. 

It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that the 
subject must be measured in profile, as a measurement 
taken in full face is nearly always erroneous. 

One further detail must be added: It is necessary 
to hold the compass in the right hand, to apply first 
the lower arm against the septum and to hold it there, 
and to gently make the other arm descend to the 
upper point of measurement. _If one proceeds in the 
inverse manner, starting from above and drawing the 
sliding arm towards the septum, one draws down the 
skin, and so a lower figure is obtained for the nasal 
height. 

When possible, and always in those cases where 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 459 

there is no doubt, the measurement should be read to 
half a millimetre. 

The naso-malar index, which was introduced by 
Oldfield —Thomas,* is a very important addition to 
facial measurements, as it indicates the amount of the 
projection of the bridge of the nose. The basal line 
(bi-malar line) is measured from the outer edge of 
each orbit, at a point on each side about 2 or 4mm. 
below the fronto-malar suture in the skull, or from a 
corresponding point in the living. From these points 
another measurement is taken, this time with the 
tape, across the bridge of the nose—this is the naso- 
malar line. The difference in length between these 
two lines is due to the prominence of the bridge of 
the nose, the formula being :— 

Naso-malar line x 100 

Bi-malar line. anes: 

The actual position of the two malar points is not 
very important, but great care must be taken that the 
two measurements are from exactly the same points, 
so it is well to mark them in the first instance. 

This index is proving one of great importance, and 
it has the great advantage of being fairly comparable 
in the living and on skulls. Sir William Flower 
suggested to Mr. Risley that he should employ it in 

* OLDFIELD THomas, “Account of a Collection of Human Skulls 
from Torres Straits,” Journ, Anth. Inst,, xiv., 1885, p. 332. 

460 THE STUDY OF MAN 

India, and the former’s prognostications as to its 
usefulness have been abundantly verified. 

Risley * has proposed a modification of the classifi- 
cation adopted provisionally by Oldfield Thomas, I 
subjoin both of these :— 

OLDFIELD THOMAS. RISLEY. 

=O Webi enn SeLALYODIC Namen — 109'9 

LO7*5—119'o .. =. . Mesopic: . ... . 110 meu 
1190 + che ts GtO-OpiC: smecens 113+ 

The size of the schedules issued by the Ethno- 
graphical Committee of the British Association and 
the numerous observations required have, it is feared, 
deterred many from undertaking this branch of the 
inquiry who might otherwise have been so disposed. 
The Committee, while urging that the full comple- 
ment of observations should be taken whenever 
possible, would be pleased if the short list on the 
opposite page was filled up by Begg all over 
the British Islands. 

The circumference of the head is taken with a steel 
or linen tape graduated in millimetres (the latter can 
be obtained for 6d. each). The measurement is 
taken immediately above the eyebrows, beneath the 
ears, and round the greatest protuberance behind; the 
tape should be drawn as tightly as possible, care 
being taken to include as little hair as possible. This 

* H. H. Ristey, “The Study of Ethnology in India,” Journ. Anth. 
Lnst., XX., 1891, p. 255, 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 461 

ENE no 

District from which Father’s 
people come 

District from which Mother’s 
people come 

Hair... 

Eyes... 

Shape of Nose 

Length 
Head ~ Breadth ... 

Index 

Height 

Nose Breadth .., 

Index 

Circumference of Head 

Stature roe a ie | | 

Weight .. ... 2 | 

* This space can be utilized for the name of the locality where the observations 
are made, 

+ These spaces are for the names of the subjects. 

Any additional information can be added underneath the “weight.” The 
observer’s name and address and the date should be written on the back or 
elsewhere. 

462 THE STUDY OF MAN 

is a difficult measurement to take on women’s heads, 
but with care it can usually be done. 

Most people have an idea of their weight, and it is 
generally possible for people to get themselves 
weighed without much difficulty. The weight should 
be reduced to pounds, and if not accurately made 
should be qualified by ‘ about.” 

The following few hints for field-work may, 
perhaps, prove useful. Dr. Beddoe* writes :— 

“T have spoken of the necessity and frequent difficulty of 
obtaining the consent of the owner of the head to be 
examined. His reluctance may sometimes be overcome by 
means of money, without going to the extent of the new hat 
always jocularly demanded in such cases. Sometimes other 
means have proved successful. I cannot resist detailing 
those by which I succeeded in obtaining a valuable series of 
head-measurements in Kerry. Our travelling party con- 
sisted of Dr. Barnard Davis, Dr. T. Wise, Mr. Windele, 
and myself. Whenever a likely little squad of natives was 
encountered the two archeologists got up a dispute about 
the relative size and shape of their own heads, which I 
was called in to settle with the callipers. The unsuspecting 
Irishmen usually entered keenly into the debate, and before 
the little drama had been finished were eagerly betting on 
the sizes of their own heads, and begging to have their 
wagers determined in the same manner.” 

Following the suggestion of Dr. Beddoe, when also 
in the West of Ireland, I told the natives that we had 
measured a number of people in Dublin, and we 

* The Races of Britain, p. 8. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 463 

wanted to see who were the taller and who had the 
larger heads. Generally it is best to commence with 
the stature, as if it were wanted merely to find out 
who were the tallest men. Most people take a pride 
in having large heads, and so vanity paves the way 
for the cephalic measurements. The subject then 
becomes interested and amused, and the onlookers 
indulge in mild chaff, so that by one means or another 
not only can the above-mentioned measurements be 
taken, but others may be added. When the eye and 
hair colours and other physical features are noted, 
a very fair documental description of the individual 
has been secured. The subject is generally ready 
enough to be photographed, both full-face and side 
view, and a promise of a copy of his photograph 
will usually induce a recalcitrant person to submit 
to the entire operation. 

Sometimes it will be found advantageous to explain 
why the measurements are wanted, on other occasions 
this would be useless. One old man who had never 
been photographed, and who had refused the earnest 
entreaties of his family to have his portrait taken, sat 
in a chair to be measured, and I took a front and 
side view of his face before he realized what had 
happened, and when he found out he was very pleased, 
Many are the devices that have to be adopted and 
varied the arguments employed to induce country 
folk to allow themselves to be nieasured. 

464 THE STUDY OF MAN 

PHOTOGRAPHY. 

The following are the instructions issued by the 
Ethnographical Survey Committee with regard to 
photographing the typical inhabitants of a district :— 

“Facial characteristics are conveniently recorded by means 
of photographs, taken in the three ways explained below. 
Amateurs in photography are now so numerous that it is 
hoped the desired materials may be abundantly supplied. 
At least twelve more or less beardless male adults and 
twelve female adults should be photographed. It will add 
much to the value of the portrait if these same persons have 
also been measured. The photographs should be mounted 
on cards, each card bearing the name of the district, and a 
letter or number to distinguish the individual portraits ; the 
cards to be secured together by a thread passing loosely 
through a hole in each of their upper left-hand corners. 
Three sorts of portrait are wanted, as follows :— 

“(a) A few portraits of such persons as may, in the opinion 
of the person who sends them, best convey the peculiar 
characteristics of the race. These may be taken in what- 
ever aspect shall best display those characteristics, and should 
be accompanied by a note directing attention to them. 

“(6) At least twelve portraits of the /e/t side of the face of 
as many different adults of the same sex. These must show 
in each case the evact profile, and the hair should be so 
arranged so as to show the ear. All the persons should 
occupy in turn the same chair (with movable blocks on the 
seat, to raise the sitters’ heads to a uniform height), the 
camera being fixed throughout in the same place. The 
portraits to be on such a scale that the distance between the 
top of the head and the bottom of the chin shall in no case 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 405 

be less than 1} inch. Smaller portraits can hardly be utilized 
in any way. If the incidence of the light be not the same 
in all cases they cannot be used to make composite portraits. 
By attending to the following hints the successive sitters may 
be made to occupy so nearly the same position that the 
camera need hardly be refocussed. In regulating the height 
of the head it is tedious and clumsy to arrange the proper 
blocks on the seat by trial. The simpler plan is to 
make the sitter first take his place on a separate seat with 
its back to the wall, having previously marked on the wall, 
at heights corresponding to those of the various heights of 
head, the numbers of the blocks that should be used in each 
case. The appropriate number of the sitter is noted, and 
the proper blocks are placed on the chair with the assurance 
that what was wanted has been correctly done. The distance 
of the sitter from the camera can be adjusted with much 
precision by fixing a looking-glass in the wall (say five feet 
from his chair), so that he can see the reflection of his face in 
it. The backward or forward position of the sitter is easily 
controlled by the operator, if he looks at the sitter’s head 
over the middle of the camera, against a mark on the wall 
beyond. It would be a considerable aid in making measure- 
ments of the features of the portrait, and preventing the 
possibility of mistaking the district of which the sitter is 
a representative, if a board be fixed above his head zw the 
place of his profile, on which a scale of inches is very legibly 
marked, and the name of the district written. This board 
should be so placed as just to fall within the photographic 
plate. The background should be of a medium tint (say a 
sheet of light brown paper pinned against the wall beyond), 
very dark and very light tints being both unsuitable for 
composite photography. 
“(c) The same persons who were taken in side face should 
_be subsequently photographed in sérictly full face. They 
2 H 

466 THE STUDY OF MAN 

should occupy a different chair, the place of the camera 
being changed in accordance. Time will be greatly saved if 
all the side faces are taken first, and then all the full faces ; 
unless, indeed, there happen to be two operators, each with 
his own camera, ready to take the same persons in turn. 
The remarks just made in respect to (A) are, in principle, more 
or less applicable to the present case; but the previous 
method of insuring a uniform distance between the sitter 
and the camera ceases to be appropriate. 

“Tt is proposed that composites of some of these groups 
shall be taken by Mr. Galton, so far as his time allows.” 

Although it is advisable to adopt Dr. Francis 
Galton’s suggestions, useful photographs can be 
obtained by having the lens of the camera on a 
line with the centre of the head, and by taking 
care that the sitter sits squarely in front or presents 
a true profile. It is important to provide oneself 
with a soft, neutral-coloured background which can 
be rolled up for transport. 

In order to get reliable data it is necessary to 
have a large number of workers in every part of the 
country. This is work which might well be under- 
taken by field clubs and other local societies; and I 
would also like to suggest that the local photographic 
societies should encourage the photographic record 
by their members of all local objects and customs 
that have any anthropological or ethnographical 
interest, not omitting field portraits of typical 
inhabitants. There is so much to do, and so much 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 467 

is fast disappearing, that we require the assistance 
of as many societies and isolated workers as 
possible. 

In order that the work done may be known to 
the Committee and a record of it filed for the use 
of students, all the completed schedules, or the 
published papers based thereon, and a copy of the 
photographs should be sent to the secretary, who will 
eventually deposit them in an institution where they 
will be accessible to all students. 

Il.—INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE COLLECTION OF 
FOLK-LORE. 

Folk-lore is now a well-defined study, but there 
is still considerable ignorance in many minds con- 
cerning the subjects which are investigated, the 
methods of study, and the objects of these researches. 

Everywhere, and at all times, man has “attempted 
to explain the natural phenomena surrounding and 
affecting him. When such explanations are univer- 
sally or generally accepted by any tribe or people 
they constitute the mythology and to some extent 
the religious beliefs of such tribe or people.”* 

Man is naturally profoundly affected and even 
modified by his environment; the physical conditions 
of his country and climate, the nature of the vegeta- 
tion and of the animal life around him all leave 

* G. L. GOMME, Zhe Handbook of Folk-lore, 1890, p. 1. 

468 THE STUDY OF MAN 

an impress on his character. The friendly as well 
as the inimical relations between man and man have 
given rise to rules to govern conduct and intercourse, 
and these have crystallized into custom. - 

When man changes from one condition to another 
he still clings to his old beliefs and customs, and 
should these in process of time cease to be as binding 
to him or as sacred as they were in the olden time, 
the memories of them will be preserved and related 
to the rising generation, to be again narrated to 
future generations. But in all civilized races there 
are less cultured people who have lagged behind in 
the march of civilization and who still retain a greater 
or less amount of belief in the ancient traditions, and 
who practise old customs though it be but in an 
attenuated manner; these are the “folk,” and it is 
their “lore” which is the subject of inquiry. In 
other words, it is a study of “survivals” or “relics 
of an unrecorded past.” ‘Folk-lore contains the 
survivals of the oldest and rudest culture of man.”* 

The method of the study is the careful collection, 
“comparison and identification of the survivals of 
archaic beliefs, customs, and traditions in modern 
ages.” 

The object of the study of folk-lore is to increase 
our knowledge about ourselves. The vast bulk of the 
materials of folk-lore date from the prehistoric period 

* G. L. GOMME, “ Presidential Address,” Fo/k-/ore, ii., 1891, p. 9. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 469 

before knowledge was committed to writing, and 
when it could only be perpetuated orally. As Mr. 
Hartland has said,* “To this mode of preservation 
and communication, as well as to the things thus pre- 
served and communicated, the name of tradition is 
given, and folk-lore is the science of tradition.” 

The study of folk-lore is not unlike that of verte- 
brate paleontology. The paleontologist comes 
across remains which are usually very imperfect ; by 
careful comparison with other fossils and with recent 
animals he can approximately, and sometimes almost 
perfectly, recover the form of the extinct animal. In 
some cases it will be found to exactly resemble a 
living animal; in others it will be different. This 
also is the method of the folk-lorist; he checks his 
survivals by comparisons with the living beliefs and 
customs of savages, and the resemblances far out- 
number the discrepancies. One might almost define 
folk-lore as “psychical palzeontology.” 

The range of subjects comprised under folk-lore 
is very considerable; superstitions connected with 
natural objects, goblindom, witchcraft, leechcraft, 
magic and divination, beliefs relating to a future life, 
and superstitions generally, may be classed under 
Superstitious belief and practice. Festival customs, 
ceremonial customs, games, and local customs are 

* Report of a lecture in the Gloucestershire Chronicle, March 27th, 
1897. 

oe 

470 THE STUDY OF MAN 

grouped as Traditional customs. Traditional narra- 
tives include hero-tales or sagas, which sometimes 
degrade into nursery tales or Méarchen; drolls, 
fables, and the like; myths of creation, deluge, fire, 
and doom; ballads and songs; place legends and 
traditions. Lastly, /Folk-sayings comprise jingles, 
nursery rhymes, riddles, proverbs, nicknames, and 
place-names. 

A general idea of the scope of folk-lore will be 
found in an excellent little book by Miss Marian 
Roalfe Cox, entitled Ax Lntroduction to Folk-lore. 

The following is the schedule that is issued by the 
Ethnographical Survey Committee :— 

“PTA Ce ae soa am ecorernnsleen Name 0f ObServern....accusietesaeeeeeee 
“CURRENT TRADITIONS AND BELIEFS, 

“Folk-lore. 

“Every item of Folk-lore should be collected, consisting of 
customs, traditions, superstitions, sayings of the people, games, 
and any superstitions connected with special days, marriages, 
births, deaths, cultivation of the land, election of local officers, 
or other events. Each item should be written legibly on a 
separate piece of paper, and the name, occupation, and age 
of the person from whom the information is obtained should 
in all cases be carefully recorded. If a custom or tradition 
relates to a particular place or object, especially if it relates 
to a curious natural feature of the district, or to an ancient 
monument or camp, some information should be given about 
such place or monument. Sometimes a custom, tradition, or 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 471 

superstition may relate to a particular family or group of 
persons, and not generally to the whole population ; and, in 
this case, care should be exercised in giving necessary par- 
ticulars. Any objects which are used for local ceremonies, 
such as masks, ribbons, coloured dresses, &c., should be 
described accurately, and, if possible, photographed; or might 
be forwarded to London, either for permanent location, or 
to be drawn or photographed. Any superstitions that are 
believed at one place and professedly disbelieved at another, 
or the exact opposite believed, should be most carefully noted. 

“The following questions are examples of the kind and 
direction of the inquiries to be made, and are not intended 
to confine the inquirer to the special subjects referred to in 
them, nor to limit the replies to categorical answers. The 
numbers within brackets refer to the corresponding articles 
in the Handbook of Folk-lore (published by Nutt, 270, Strand, 
London). 

(4) Relate any tradition as to the origin of mountains or 
as to giants being entombed therein. 
Are there any traditions about giants or dwarfs in the 
district? Relate them. 
Is there a story about a Blinded Giant like that of 
Polyphemus? 
(13) Describe any ceremonies performed at certain times 
in connection with mountains. 
(16) Relate any traditions or beliefs about caves. 
(19) Are any customs performed on islands not usually 
inhabited? Are they used as burial places? 
(25) Describe any practices of leaving small objects, articles 
of dress, &c., at wells. 
(29) Are there spirits of rivers or streams? Give their names. 
(32) Describe any practices of casting small objects, articles 
of dress, &c., in the rivers, 

472 THE STUDY OF MAN 

(33) Are running waters supposed not to allow criminals or 
evil spirits to cross them ? 

(39) Describe any customs at the choosing of a site for 
building, and relate any traditions as to the site or 
erection of any building. 

(42) Is there a practice of sprinkling foundations with the 
blood of animals, a bull, or a cock ? 

(43) Does the building of a house cause the death of the 
builder ? 

(48, 49, 50) Relate any traditions of the sun, moon, stars. 

(62) Describe the customs of fishermen at launching their 
boats. 

(63) Give any omens believed in by fishermen. 

(66) Is it unlucky to assist a drowning person? 

(84) What ceremonies are performed when trees are felled ? 

(85) Describe any custom of placing rags and other small 

objects upon bushes or trees. 

(86) Describe any maypole customs and dances. 

(87) Describe any customs of wassailing of fruit trees. 

(90) Are split trees used in divination or for the cure of 

disease ? 

(98) Describe any ceremonies used for love divination with 

plants or trees. 

(105) Describe the garlands made and used at ceremonies. 

(110) What animals are considered lucky and what unlucky 

to meet, come in contact with, or kill ? 

(132) Describe any customs in which animals are sacrificed, 

or driven away from house or village. 

(133) Describe customs in which men dress up as animals. 

(137) Give the names of the local demons, fairies, pixies, 

ghosts, &c. Have any of them personal proper 
names ? 

(139) Their habits, whether gregarious or solitary. Do they 

use special implements ? 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL [INVESTIGATIONS 473 

(140) Form and appearance, if beautiful or hideous, small in 
stature, different at different times. 

(144) Character, if merry, mischievous, sulky, spiteful, in- 
dustrious, stupid, easily outwitted. 

(145) Occupations, music, dancing, helping mankind, carrying 
on mining, agricultural work. 

(146) Haunts or habitations, if human dwellings, mounds, 
burrows, mines, forests, boggy moorlands, waters, the 
underworld, dolmens, stone circles. 

(190) Give the details of any practices connected with the 
-worshipof the local saint. 

(191) Are sacrifices or offerings made to the local saint, on 
what days, and when? 

(192) What is the shrine of the local saint? 

(210) Witchcraft. Describe minutely the ceremonies per- 
formed by the witch. What preliminary ceremony 
took place to protect the witch ? 

(294) Are charms used to find evil spirits and prevent their 
moving away? 

(295) Are amulets, talismans, written bits of paper, gestures, 
&c., used to avert evil or to ensure good? If so, how, 
when, where ? 

(297) Are skulls of animals, or horses, or other objects hung 
up in trees, to avert the evil eye and other malign 
influences ? 

(298) What methods are employed for divining future events? 
What omens are believed in? 

(353) What superstitions are attached te women’s work as such? 

(356) Are women ever excluded from any occupations, cere- 
monies, or places? 

(358) What superstitions are attached to the status of widow- 
hood ? 

(366) Are particular parts of any town or village, or particular 
sections of any community, entirely occupied in one 
trade or occupation ? 

474 THE STUDY OF MAN 

(368) Have they customs and superstitions peculiar to their 
occupation ? 

(369) Do they intermarry among themselves, and keep aloof 
from other people? 

(373) Have they any processions or festivals? 

(422) What parts of the body are superstitiously regarded ? 

(432) Are bones, nails, hair, the subject of particular customs 
or superstitions; and is anything done with bones 
when accidentally discovered ? 

(436) Is dressing ever considered as a special ceremonial; are 
omens drawn from accidents in dressing ? 

(452) Are any parts of the house considered sacred ? 

(453) Is the threshold the object of any ceremony; is it 
adorned with garlands; is it guarded by a horseshoe 
or other object ? 

(454) Are any ceremonies performed at the hearth; are the 
ashes used for divination; is the fire ever kept burning 
for any continuous period ? 

(456) Is it unlucky to give fire from the hearth to strangers 
always, or when? 

(467) Is there any ceremony on leaving a house, or on first 
occupying a house? 

(509) What are the chief festivals, and what the lesser festivals 
observed ? 

(515) Explain the popular belief in the object of each festival. 

(516) Describe the customs and observances appertaining to 
each festival. 

(540) When does the new year popularly begin? 

“State the superstitions or legends known to attach to— 
(a) Halloween (both old and new styles). 
(6) May Eve. 
(c) Midsummer Day, and St. John’s Eve. 
(d) Lammas, or August I. 
(e) New Year’s Day. 
(7) Christmas. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 475 

“Ts there any superstition as to the first person who enters 
a house in the New Year? Is stress laid upon the colour of 
complexion and hair? 

(567) What are the customs observed at the birth of children? 

(588) Describe the ceremonies practised at courtship and 
marriage. 

(623) Describe the ceremonies at death and burial. 

(669) Describe any games of ball or any games with string, 
or other games. 

(674) Describe all nursery games of children. 

(686) Is there any special rule of succession to property? 

(703) Is any stone or group of stones, or any ancient monu- 
ment or ancient tree connected with local customs? 

(706) Are any special parts of the village or town the subject 
of particular rights, privileges, or disabilities; do these 
parts bear any particular names? 

(711) Describe special local modes of punishment or of lynch 
law. 

(719) Describe special customs observed at ploughing, harrow- 
ing, sowing, manuring, haymaking, apple gathering, 
corn harvest, hemp harvest, flax harvest, potato 
gathering, threshing, flax picking, and hemp picking, 

“The collections under this head will be digested by 

Professor Rhys and the representatives of the Folk-lore 

Society.” 

Miss Burne* has such an honourable reputation as 
a collector of folk-lore that I cannot do better than 
reprint some of her valuable advice -— 

“To begin with, we need a careful geographical examina- 
tion of the habitats and boundaries of the various items of 
English folk-lore, such as the English Dialect Society has 

* CHARLOTTE S, BURNE, “The Collection of English Folk-lore,” 
Folk-lore, i., 1890; p. 313: 

476 THE STUDY OF MAN 

made and is making of dialectal boundaries. The results 
which may be expected from the comparison of such a 
record of English folk-lore, with evidence obtained from 
other lines of study, seem to open a vista of possible dis- 
covery. There is nothing like speaking from experience, so 
I will illustrate my meaning from personal knowledge. 

“Tt is generally customary in England to hire farm servants 
by the year, but the hiring-time varies in different places. 
In North-east Shropshire the hiring-time is Christmas; in 
South-west Shropshire it is May. I took great pains to pick 
out the boundary line between these two customs, market- 
town by market-town, and almost village by village, and I 
found it coincide almost exactly with the boundary line of 
the change of dialect between North-east and South-west, 
which is very marked ; and very fairly also with the boundary 
between the diocese of Lichfield (the ancient Bishopric of 
the Mercians) on the North-east, and the Welsh diocese of 
St. Asaph and the diocese of Hereford (the old kingdom 
of the Hecanas or Magesztas) on the South-west.* More- 
over, the South-western custom of hiring prevails over a 
considerable part of North Wales, while hiring at Christmas 
prevails in Cheshire and North Staffordshire. 

“ Again, ‘souling, or begging for apples, on the eve of All 
Souls’ Day (November Ist), is a common custom in that part 
of Shropshire where Christmas hirings occur, and in North 
Staffordshire ; but in South Staffordshire I believe the same 
custom is, or was, observed not on All Souls’ but on St. 
Clement’s Eve (November 2Ist). Once more: in South 
Staffordshire and in South Shropshire, as far north as 
Shrewsbury, Mothering Sunday is known, if not observed ; 
but I have never met with anyone in the north of either 
county who had heard of it. If such boundaries were 

* For a similar case of diocesan boundaries coinciding with tribal 
frontiers, see p. 139 anze. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 477 

mapped out over the whole of England, and compared with 
other evidence, they would almost certainly yield valuable 
historical and ethnological results. 

“Tt is comparatively easy to pick out the boundaries of a 
custom, but very difficult to discover those of a superstitious 

opinion. Curious bits of superstition and ‘luck’ may be 
carried about the country in so many ways, to so many 
unexpected places, in a manner that would be impossible to 
a popular custom. You perhaps come across some old 
woman who strongly objects to your bringing, it may be, 
snowdrops, or catkins, or perhaps hawthorn, into her house, 
while her neighbours are not in the least offended by it. 
Now she may be the sole surviving depositary of a genuine 
piece of local folk-lore, or she may be following the instruc- 
tions of a grandmother who came from the other end of 
England, and she may be quite unable to tell you how she 
acquired her views on the subject. In many cases, I think, 
the collector can do no more than set down the name of the 
place where, or the informant from whom, he obtained the 
several items, without committing himself to any statement 
as to how far they are universal or not. 

“Negative evidence, again, is most difficult to obtain, 
but valuable in proportion to the difficulty of proving the 
negative. In fact, it can only be proved (as it has been 
remarked to me) if a collector gets hold of a thorough 
believer in the superstitions of his locality, and can find out 
if there are any other superstitions of other localities which 
he decidedly does zo¢ believe in, any that he laughs at, any 
that he looks upon as stupid or ‘ superstitious, while his own 
belief, of course, is not ‘superstitious’ ! 

“For myself,’ continues Miss Burne, “I have not found 
the English poor /augh at superstitions they are not ac- 
quainted with, unless they are, as many are, superior to 
superstition in general. They do not get farther than a slow, 

478 THE STUDY OF MAN 

grave remark, ‘No, I niver heered ¢Za¢. I shouldna think 
as there can be anything in ¢Zaz. Now, as to (so and so), 
that’s true, that is. For my gronfayther knowed a mon 

> et cetera! But it is beyond question that to ascer- 
tain what a superstitious man does mot, is quite as valuable 
for our purpose as to learn what he does know. Even then 
the collectors should not be too hasty in drawing conclu- 
sions. The information he fails again and again to obtain 
may some day crop up quite unexpectedly at his very 
doors. 

“The ideal of geographical collection would be reached 
if a number of collectors would undertake definite areas 
adjoining each other—say, for instance, the several hundreds 
of a county—would set down what is known, and what, 
after every possible inquiry, is zo¢ known there, and would 
then compare results.” 

Miss Burne next discusses the question of the 
relations between folk-lore and history. ‘“ The early 
history of every nation is dependent on oral tradition, 
not on written records, and so is open to doubt. But 
the questions, Yow much dependence may be placed 
upon tradition? and How dong the remembrance of an 
event may be preserved among unlettered people? 
are by no means unimportant.” She gives several 
examples, and comes to the conclusion that the folk, 
even in England, do preserve some memory of 
historical events for three or even four centuries. 

The consideration of the influence of folk-lore on 
history naturally leads to the subject of the influence 
of history on folk-lore. Miss Burne instances the 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 479 

common Mummers’ Play, which ‘‘comes to us like 
a traveller from a journey, laden with curiosities 
collected by the way.” 

A custom may die out in one parish and take a 
new lease of life in another owing to purely local and 
temporary causes. 

Miss Burne gives very valuable advice in the 
personal collecting of English folk-lore. 

“Tf you wish to understand folk-lore you must learn to 
understand the folk. You must know what the folk think, 
and how they act on subjects such as folk-lore touches, and 
observe how their minds form the natural background to the 
superstitions they act on, the customs they practise, the tales 
they tell.” 

She gives numerous interesting examples of the 
mental attitude of the folk. 

Lastly, Miss Burne gives some very useful hints 
about the actual work of collecting. 

“The best collecting is that which is done by accident, by 
living among the people and garnering up the sayings and 
stories they let fall from time to time. But one can hardly 
make a complete collection, even within a limited area, in 
this way, and deliberate search is therefore necessary. One 
needs first to know where to look, and the educated people 
of the neighbourhood cannot always help one. Too often 
the collector is met with the dignified repulse, ‘Our people 
are not superstitious, I am glad to say’; and it is not given 
to everyone to be able to confute the assertion, as the 
Rev. Elias Owen, in a paper on ‘Montgomeryshire Super- 

480 THE STUDY OF MAN 

stitions, * relates that he once did. His errand in the parish 
where it was made was to inspect the schools, and at the 
close of his examination he asked the first class, ‘Now, 
children, can you tell me of any place where there is a 
buggan’ (a ghost or bogey) ‘to be seen, or of anyone who 
has ever seen one?’ Instantly every hand in the class was 
stretched out, and every child had a story to tell. He then 
asked, ‘Which of you can tell me of a cure for warts?’ with 
like results, greatly to the discomfiture of his friend the 
clergyman, who had fondly imagined there was no super- 
stition in his parish! The clergy are very liable to this 
illusion, because the people are apt to keep superstition out 
of their way, which in itself is a not uninstructive folk-loric 
item. Lawyers, doctors, and especially land agents and 
gentlemen-farmers are often much better able to help than 
are the clergy. 

“When visiting a strange place with the set purpose of 
personal collecting, the best way of beginning is, perhaps, 
to get the parish clerk or sexton to show the church, and 
then to draw him out on bell-ringing and burying customs, 
and to obtain from him the names of the ‘oldest inhabitants’ 
for further inquiry. Failing the sexton, the village inn- 
keeper might be a good starting-point. Then a visit may 
be paid to the school in the mid-day ‘recess,’ and the 
children may be bribed to play all the games they know. 
Possibly some bits of local legend may be gleaned from 
them as a foundation for future inquiries. 

“Old household or family customs are best preserved in 
solitary farmhouses, especially if tenanted by the same 
family for several generations. But it is a mistake to think 
that a very remote and thinly populated parish will neces- 
sarily yield more folk-lore of all kinds than another, A 
scanty stay-at-home population does not preserve legends 

* Montgomeryshire Collections, xv., part i., p. 135. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 481 

well, and has not esprzt de corps sufficient for the celebration 
of public customs. A large village, or a market-town quite 
in the country, is generally the best place to find these; and 
the ‘lowest of the people’—the chimney-sweepers, brick- 
makers, besom-makers, hawkers, tinkers, and other trades in 
which work is irregular—are those who keep up old games, 
songs, dances, and dramatic performances. Most villages 
have their doctress, generally an intelligent old woman, who, 
nevertheless, mixes something of superstition with her 
remedies. 

“Superstitious opinions, though they flourish most, of 
course, among the lower classes, cannot well be collected 
direct from them, because they really do not understand 
what superstition is, and cannot, as they say, ‘make out what 
the gentleman is driving at. They must be inquired for 
among the class of small employers, who have a little more 
cultivation than their workpeople, but yet live on terms of 
sufficient familiarity with them to know their ideas thoroughly 
and to share a good many of them! A little patient effort 
will in all probability enable the collector to make the 
acquaintance of some old grandfather or grandmother of 
this class, who, sitting in the chimney-corner of some old- 
fashioned kitchen, loves nothing better than to pour out tales 
of ‘old times. Here is the collector's opportunity! . 
They are excellent company, these old people! if one can 
but get them to talk of their past lives, and not of their 
present ailments; and they are dying around us every day, 
and their traditions are dying with them, for they have left off 
transmitting them to their children. If the folk-lore of 
England is not recorded soon it will never be recorded at 
all, for these‘ foot-prints in the sands of time’ are fast being 
trampled out by the hurrying feet of the busy multitudes of 
Ee eteseDt.a 

*LC.5 Pe 330 

482 THE SEODY OF MAN 

The need for recording all local folk-lore is very 
pressing. In some districts, as in the Lincolnshire 
Cars, much still remains, as has been sympathetically 

recorded by Mrs. M. C. Balfour.* 

“With the barren Cars of the older times is connected 
a peasantry that is changing as the soil itself has changed, 
only more gradually, for the sluggish current of their life and 
habit is but slowly beaten back by the impetus of modern 
innovations. .. . It seems as if it were off the high-road, so 
to speak, of busy modern English life; in these days of de- 
pression amongst farmers, and of absentee landlords, it is 
visited by few strangers ; and the only resident upper class is 
represented by the clergy and a very mixed set of tenant- 
farmers, who, in trouble themselves, generally care little for 
the people under them, except as regards their work and pay. 

“This is, I dare say, unavoidable ; but it throws the people 
back on themselves, and accounts, no doubt, for the survival 
of much amongst them which has decayed elsewhere. Even 
their speech sounds strange to a modern English ear, for it is 
almost pure Saxon, and keeps many of the original inflexions 
which we have lost. 

“The people themselves are not easy to make friends with, 
for they are strongly suspicious of strangers; but once won 
over, are said to be staunch and faithful . ... and intensely 
averse to change or innovation of any sort; many of them 
live and die within the limits of a narrow parish, outside of 
which they never set foot. The younger generations are 
changing; but they show less disbelief in the old legends 
than indifference to them; they seem growing, not so much 
less superstitious, as less impressionable. But in some of the 
old people there is still a simple serious faith that is delight- 

* “Legends of the Cars,” Fo/k-/ore, ii., 1891, p. 147. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 483 

ful, and I do not think that elsewhere in England one could 
nowadays find such a childlike certainty of unseen things or 
such an unquestioning belief in supernatural powers... . 
It is not easy, in so short a notice, to present vividly the 
curious mixture of rusticity and savagery, of superstition and 
indifference, of ignorance and shrewdness, which is found in 
these peasants. . . . The old and simple heathendom still lay 
untouched, though hidden, below successive varnishes of 
superstition, religion, and civilization.” * 

Dr. Douglas Hyde,t the poet who has the love of 
the old Ireland within him, writes :— 

“Such myth stories as these ought to be preserved, since 
they are about the last visible link connecting civilized with 
prehistoric man, for, of all the traces that man in his earliest 
period has left behind him, there is nothing except a few 
drilled stones or flint arrow-heads that approaches the 
antiquity of these tales, as told to-day by a half-starving 
peasant in a smoky Connacht cabin. 

“Tt is time to say a word about the narrators of these 
stories. The people who can recite them are, as far as 
my researches have gone, to be found only among the oldest, 
most neglected, and poorest of the Irish-speaking population. 
English-speaking people either do not know them at all, 
or else tell them in so bald and condensed a form as to 
be useless. Almost all the men from whom I used to hear 
stories, in the county Roscommon, are dead. Ten or fifteen 
years ago I used to hear a great many stories, but I did not 
understand their value. Now, when I go back for them, I 
cannot find them. They have died out, and will never again 

"5 20d., p., 257: 

+ DouGcLas Hyp8, Beside the Fire, a collection of Trish Gaelic Folk 
Stories, 1890, p. xli. 

484 THE STUDY OF MAN 

be heard on the hillsides, where they probably existed for 
a couple of thousand years; they will never be repeated 
there again, to use the Irish phrase, ‘while grass grows or 
water runs.’ One old man ‘had at one time,’ as he expressed 
it, ‘the full of a sack of stories, but he had forgotten them. 
His grandchildren stood by his knee while he told me one 
or two, but it was evident they did not understand a word 
(as he was telling the stories in Irish). His son and daughter 
laughed at them as nonsense. Even in Achill, where, if 
anywhere, one ought to find folk-stories in their purity, a 
fine-looking dark man of about forty-five, who told me a 
number of them, and could repeat Ossian’s poems, assured 
me that now-a-days when he went into a house in the 
evening, and the old people got him to recite, the boys 
would go out; ‘they wouldn’t understand me, said he, 
‘and when they wouldn’t, they’d sooner be listening to the 
lowing of the cows.’ This, too, is an island where many 
people cannot speak English.” 

Hyde reminds us that at the time of the famine 
in ’47, this pure Aryan language (Irish) was spoken 
by at least four million souls (more than the whole 
population of Switzerland), and it promises in a few 
years to become as extinct as Cornish. 

Hyde* gives the following valuable advice as to 
collecting folk-tales in Ireland :— 

“JT may mention here that it is not as easy a thing as 
might be imagined-to collect Irish stories. One hears that 
tales are to be had from such and such a man, generally, 

alas! a very old one. With difficulty one manages to find 
him out, only to discover, probably, that he has some work 

ML.Ciy Ps XLV. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 485 

on hand. If it happens to be harvest time it is nearly useless 
going to him at all, unless one is prepared to sit up with 
him all night, for his mind is sure to be so distraught with 
harvest operations that he can tell you nothing. If it is 
winter time, however, and you fortunately find him un- 
occupied, nevertheless, it requires some management to 
get him to tell his stories. Half a glass of zshkka-baha, 
a pipe of tobacco, and a story of one’s own are the best 
things to begin with. If, however, you start to take down 
the story verbatim, with pencil and paper, as an unwary 
collector might do, you destroy all, or your shanachie 
becomes irritable. He will not wait for you to write down 
your sentence, and if you call out, ‘stop, stop, wait till I 
get this down, he will forget what he was going to tell 
you, and you will not get a third of his story, though you 
may think you have it all. What you must generally do 
is to sit quietly smoking your pipe, without the slightest 
interruption, not even when he comes to words and phrases 
which you do not understand. He must be allowed his 
own way to the end, and then, after judiciously praising him 
and discussing the story, you remark, as if the thought 
had suddenly struck you, ‘I’d like to have that on paper, 
Then you can get it from him easily enough, and when 
he leaves out whole incidents, as he is sure to do, you, 
who have just heard the story, can put him right, and so 
get it from him nearly in its entirety. Still it is not always 
easy to write down these stories, for they are full of old or 
corrupted words, which neither you nor your narrator under- 
stand, and if you press him too much over the meaning of 
these he gets confused and irritable.” 

486 THE STUDY OF MAN 

This and the two following schedules complete the 
set issued by the Ethnographical Survey Committee. 

OPEC wcate sh datas Sater ee Name of Obserder, cane 

“PECULIARITIES OF DIALECT. 

“ Directions to Collectors of Dialect Tests. 

“1. Do not, if it can be helped, let your informant know 
the nature of your observations. The true dialect speaker 
will not speak his dialect freely or truly unless he is unaware 
that his utterance is watched. In some cases persons 
of the middle class can afford correct information, and there 
is less risk in allowing them to know your purpose. 

“2. Observe the use of consonants. Note, for example, if 
v and z are used where the standard pronunciation has fand 
s. This is common in the south. 

“3. Observe very carefully the nature of the vowels. This 
requires practice in uttering and appreciating vowel sounds, 
some knowledge of phonetics, and a good ear. 
~ “4, Record all observations in zhe same standard phonetic 
alphabet, viz., that given in Sweet’s Primer of Phonetics. A 
few modifications in this may be made, viz. xg for Sweet’s 
symbol for the sound of zg in thing; sh for his symbol for 
the sh in she; ch for his symbol for the ch in choose, th for 
the #2 in thin; dh for the th in then. If these modifications 
are used, say so, But the symbol 7 must only be used for 
the y in you, viz. as in German. If the sound of 7 in jus¢ is 
meant, Sweet’s symbol should be used. On the whole it is 
far better to use no modifications at all. Sweet’s symbols 
are no more difficult to use than any others after a very brief 
practice, such as every observer of phonetics must necessarily 
go through. 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 487 

“5. If you find that you are unable to record sounds 
according to the above scheme it is better to make xo return 
at all, Incorrect returns are misleading in the highest 
degree, most of all such as are recorded in the ordinary 
spelling of literary English. 

“6, The chief vowel-sounds to be tested are those which 
occur in the following words of English origin, viz. man, 
hard, name, help, meat (spelt with ea), green (spelt with ee), 
hill, wine, fire, soft, hole, oak (spelt with oa), cool, sun, house, 
day, law, or words involving similar sounds. Also words of 
French origin, such as just, master (a before s), grant (a before 
n), try, value, measure, bacon, pay, chair, journey, pity, beef, 
clear, profit, boil, roast, pork, false, butcher, fruit, blue, pure, 
poor, or words involving similar sounds. 

“The best account of these sounds, as tested for a York- 
shire dialect, is to be found in Wright’s Dialect of Windhill 
(English Dialect Society, 1892), published by Kegan Paul at 
125. 6a. Sweet’s symbols are here employed throughout. 

“Sweet's Primer of Phonetics is published by the Oxford 
Press at 35. 6d. 

“ A list of text-words (of English origin) is given at p. 42 
of Skeat’s Primer of English Etymology, published by the 
Oxford Press at Is. 6d. 

“7. The task of collecting words which seem to be pecu- 
liarly dialectal (as to form or meaning, or both) has been 
performed so thoroughly that it is useless to record what has 
been often already recorded. See, for example, Halliwell’s 
(or Wright's) Provincial Glossary, and the publications of the 
English Dialect Society. In many cases, however, the pro- 
nunctation of such words has not been noted, and may be 
carefully set down with great advantage. - 

“The Rev. Professor Skeat has been kind enough to draw 
up the foregoing directions, and the collections under this 
head will be submitted to him,” 

488 THE STUDY OF MAN 

OPT at ers cameras Naine of OOSCr0crs ...12 eee 

“MONUMENTS AND OTHER REMAINS OF ANCIENT 
CULTURE. 

“Plot on a map, describe, furnish photographs or sketches, 
and state the measurements and names (if any) of these, 
according to the following classification :— 

Drift implements. Caves and their contents. 

Stone circles’ Monoliths. Lake dwellings 

Camps. Enclosures. Collections of hut circles. 

Cromlechs. Cairns. Sepulchral chambers, 

Barrows, describing the form. and distinguishing those 
which have not been opened. 

Inscribed stones. 

Figured stones. Stone crosses. 

Castra (walled), Earthen camps. 

Foundations of Roman buildings. 

Cemeteries (what modes of sepulture). 

Burials, inhumation or cremation. 

Detailed contents of graves. 

Types of fibulz and other ornaments. 

Coins. Implements and weapons, stone, bronze, or iron. 

Other antiquities. 

A list of place-names within .e area. No modern 
names required. 

“Special note should be made of British, Roman, and 
Saxon interments occurring in the same field, and other signs 
of successive occupation. 

“ Reference should be made to the article ‘ Archeology’ in 
Notes and Queries on Anthropology, p. 176. 

“These relate to England only. The sub-committees for 
other parts of the United Kingdom will prepare modified lists. 

“The collections under this head will be digested by Mr. 
Payne.” 

ETHNOGRAPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 489 

SUDA CE rec ediic ater Nate of ObSCVUCK....cccccrecsneees 

“HISTORICAL EVIDENCE AS TO THE CONTINUITY 
OF RACE, 

“Mention any historical events connected with the place, 
especially such as relate to early settlements in it, or more 
recent incursions of alien immigrants. 

“State the nature of the pursuits and occupations of the 
inhabitants. 

“State if any precautions have been taken by the people 
to keep themselves to themselves; if the old village tenures 
of land have been preserved. 

“Has any particular form of religious belief been main- 
tained ? 

“ Are the people constitutionally averse to change? 

“What are the dates of the churches and monastic or 
other ancient buildings or existing remains of former 
buildings? 

“Do existing buildings stand on the sites of older ones? 

“How far back can particular families or family names be 
traced ? 

“Can any evidence of this be obtained from the manor 
rolls; from the parish),registers; from the tythingmen’s 
returns ; from guild or corporation records? 

“ Are particular family names common? 

“Tn what county or local history is the best description of 
the place to be found ? 

“Evidences of historical continuity of customs, dress, 
dwellings, implements, &c., should be noted. 

“The collections under this head will be digested by 
Mr. Brabrook.” 

APPENDIX. A 

HE following is the classification of anthro- 
pology which has been proposed by Dr. 
Brinton :— 

STHEe ANTHROPOLOGIC, SCIENCES. 
“ Proposed Classification and International Nomenclature. 

“ ANTHROPOLOGY. 
“T, SOMATOLOGY.—Physical and Experimental Anthro- 
pology. 
“TJ, ETHNOLOGY.—Historic and Analytic Anthropology. 
“II, ETHNOGRAPHY.—Geographic and Descriptive An- 
thropology. 

“TV. ARCHAOLOGY.—Prehistoric and Reconstructive An- 
thropology. 

“J, SOMATOLOGY. 
“1. Internal Somatology.—Osteology, craniology, prosopo- 
logy, myology, splanchnology. 
“2. External Somatology—aAnthropometry, colour, hair, 
canons of proportion, physical beauty. 
“3. Psychology.—Experimental and practical, sensation, 
rates of nervous impulse, brain and nerve action. 
491 

492 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“4. Developmental and Comparative Somatology—Em- 
bryology, heredity, teratology, human biology, 
evolution, anatomy of anthropoids, ethnic anatomy 
and physiology, comparative nosology and medical 
geography, fertility and sterility, racial pathology, 
criminal anthropology, vital statistics, anatomical 
classification of races. 

“TI, ETHNOLOGY. 

“1, Sociology—Systems of government and the social 
contract, laws and ethical standards, the marriage 
relation and rules of consanguinity and descent, 
social classes and institutions, international rela- 
tions (war, commerce, colonization). 

“2. Technology—The utilitarian arts, as tool making, 
ceramics, architecture, agriculture, means of trans- 
portation, clothing, weights and measures, media 
of exchange; the esthetic arts—music, drawing, 
painting, sculpture, decoration, games, cookery, 
perfumery. 

“3, Religion—Psychological origin and development; per- 
sonal, family, tribal, and world religions ; animism, 
fetichism, polytheism, monotheism, atheism ; myth- 
ology and mythogeny; symbolism and religious 
art; sacred places and objects; rites, ceremonies, 
and mortuary customs; religious teachers, classes, 
and doctrines; theocracies; analyses of special 
religions; philosophy and natural history of 
religions, 

“a, Linguistics—Gesture and sign language; spoken 
language, parts of speech, logic of grammar, origin, 
growth, and classification of languages, relation 

APPENDIX 493 

to ethnography; written language, pictographic, 
symbolic, ideographic, and phonetic writing, evolu- 
tion of alphabets, phonetic systems; forms of 
expression, poetic (metrical, rhythmical), dramatic, 
prosaic. 

“5. Folk-lore—Traditional customs and narratives, folk- 
sayings, superstitious beliefs and practices. 

“TIT. ETHNOGRAPHY. 

“1. General Ethnography.— Origin, characteristics, and 
subdivisions of races and peoples. The ‘geogra- 
phical provinces’ or ‘areas of characterization.’ 
Anthropo- geography. Lines of migrations and 
national intercourse. 

“2. Special Ethnography—The Eurafrican or white race 
(North Mediterranean and South Mediterranean 
branches); the Austafrican or black race; the Asian 
race (Sinitic and Sibiric branches); the American 
race; Insular and Littoral peoples (Nigritic, Malayic, 
and Australic stocks). 

“TV. ARCHAOLOGY. 

“1, General Archeology—Geology of the epoch of man, 
Glacial phenomena. Diluvial and alluvial deposits. 
Physical geography of the quaternary. Prehistoric 
botany and zoology. Prehistoric Ages—the Age 
of Stone (palzolithic period, neolithic period) ; 
the Age of Bronze; the Age of Iron; prehistoric 
commerce ; palethnology ; proto-historic epoch, 

“2. Special Archeology—Egyptian, Assyrian, Phenician, 
classical, medieval, and American archeology. 

494 THE STUDY OF MAN 

“The urgent need of a uniform classification and nomen- 
clature for the various sciences connected with the study 
of man must be apparent to all who are familiar with 
the current literature of anthropology. 

“The plan proposed above is based upon the works and 
suggestions of well-known English, French, German, Italian, 
and American writers. The proposer claims no other credit 
than that of selection. He offers no neologisms. The 
leading terms, those printed in italics and capitals, are 
substantially the same in all the languages named; they are 
already domesticated in the anthropological writings of every 
country, and all that is needed is a general agreement as 
to their connotation. 

“In order that this may be brought about, the writer 
respectfully submits the above to those interested in the 
study of this science. 

“Dr iG- se bRINTON Mal ssl beD ss 

Professor of Ethnology at the Academy of Natural Sciences, 
PHILADELPHIA, Pa., U.S.A.” 

mm. 

13 

19 

25 

38 

51 

64 

76 

89 
IOI 
114 
127 
140 
152 
165 
178 
190 
203 
216 
228 
241 
254 
267 
279 
292 
305 
318 
330 
343 
356 
368 
381 
394 
406 
419 
432 
444 
457 
47° 
482 

AND THEIR EQUIVALENTS IN INCHES 

inch 

Ae EINDEXS B 

METRICAL MEASUREMENTS 

mm. 
495 
508 
521 
534 
546 
559 
57t 
584 
597 
610 
622 
635 
648 
661 
673 
686 
699 
711 
724 
737 
750 
762 
775 
788 
800 
813 

838 
851 
864 
877 
889 
go2 
915 
927 
940 
953 
966 
978 
991 

820) = 

ll 

nou ww 

ll 

inch 
193 
20 

mm. 

1004 
1016 
1029 
1042 
1055 
1067 
1080 
1093 
1105 
1118 
I131 
1144 
1156 
1169 
1181 
1194 
1207 
1220 
1232 
1245 
1258 
1270 
1283 
1296 
1309 
1321 
1334 
1347 
1359 
1372 
1385 
1397 
1410 
1423 
1430 
1448 
1461 
1474 
1486 
1499 

AND HALF-INCHES. 

IW 

DET SN AH an 

Wl 

now Wl 

ll 

inch 
301 
40 

| 

mm. 

1512 
1524 
1537 
1550 
1562 
1575 
1588 
1601 
1613 
1626 
1639 
1651 
1664 
1677 
1690 
1702 
1715 
1728 
1740 
1753 
1766 
1778 
1791 

1804 = 

1817 
1829 
1842 
1855 
1867 
1880 
1893 
1905 
1918 
1931 
1943 
1956 
1969 
1981 
1994 
2000 

EN DEX 

Aberdeen, 281, 420. 

Aberdeenshire, 281, 388. 

Adamnan, 354. 

Adler, Dr. Hermann, 24. 

Africa, 267, 289, 319, 320, 388, 4or. 

— Central, 398. 

-= ae index of various peoples, 

9: 

— West, 283. 

Ainus, 70, 71, 75. 

Alans or Alani, 57, 58. 

Alleluia, 257. 

Allen, Mr. Grant, 45. 

Altitudinal index, 68. 

Amazon, 296. 

America, 266, 292, 319, 320, 401. 

— cranial index of various peoples, 
70. 

— North, 271, 285, 292. 

— North-West, 266. 

American Indians, 75. 

— Indian race, 96. 

— races, 98. 

Americans, 121. 

Ammon, Dr. Otto, 452. 

Amorites, 18, 27, 28. 

Analysis — anthropological 
measurements as a means of, 
EBs 

Ancient Egyptians—coarse type, 
124. 

— fine type, 124. 

— nasal index of, 124. 

PINS 

Andamanese, 73, 75, 76, 77, 123. 
Andree, Dr. R., 259, 266, 267. 
Angle of Cuvier, 117. 

Angles, 43. 

Anglians, 41, 45, 50. 
Anglo-Saxon invasion, 83. 

Anthropology, 491. 
Anthropometry, 441-448. 
Anthropometrical Laboratory in 

Cambridge, to. 
Antrim, Co., 282. 
Apache, 292-294. 
Apertura pyriformis, 120, 130-132. 
Apes, 130. 
Aquitainians, 139. 
Arab conquest, 125. 
Arabia, 258. 
Arabs, 18, 22, 160, 223. 
Aramezeans, 25. 
Aran, 419. 
Aranzadi, Prof. Telesforo de, 186, 
187, 190. 
Archeology, 491, 493, 494. 
Archibald, E. D., 233. 
Argyle, 38. 
Arizona, 292, 293. 
Armenians, 22, 25, 26, 27. 
Arrows, 219, 220, 223. 
Aryan race, 102, 103, 105, 106. 
Aryans, 112, 113, 197, 272, 399. 
— in India, 71. 
Asia, 387, 401. 

497 

498 

Asia, cranial index of various peo- 
ples, 69. 

— Minor, 258. 

Assyria, 170. 

Assyrians, 26. 

— high type, 21 ; low type, 22. 

— pictures, 178. 

Auchencairn, 336, 414. 

Austen, H. Godwin, 267. 

Australia, 300, 308, 320, 397, 398, 
407. 

— Central, 265, 269, 315. 

Australians, 71, 75, 132, 231. 

Austria—hair and eye colour of 
children in, 56. 

Auvergnats, 153. 

Auvergne, 30, 57. 

Azores, 181. 

Babylonian type, 22. 
Badagas, 108, 109, 116. 
Baden-Powell, Captain, 235. 
Bailey, J., 407. 

Bakairi, 295, 296. 
Balfour, Mrs. M. C., 482. 
— Right Hon. A. J., 210. 
Balham, 277. 

Ball games, 220, 221. 
Balz, Dr., 100. 
Banffshire, 392. 

Banim, Miss Mary, 371. 
Banks Islands, 245, 301, 320. 
Barley Break, 332. 
Barnes, Rey. J. P., 282. 
Barrington, 348, 412. 
Barrow, Mr., 205. 

Basel, 285, 336. 

Basque, 197. 

— wheel, 187. 

Bastian, Dr. A., 260. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Batavi, 42. 

Batavians, 83-85. 

Batty, Mrs. R. Braithwaite, 289. 

Baumes-Chaudes, 80. 

Beaumont and Fletcher, 256. 

Becq de Fouquiéres, M. L., 267. 

Beddoe, Dr. John, 15, 38, 79, 81-86, 
438, 462. 

Bede, 381. : 

Bedfordshire, 278. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o, 

Bedouins, 25. 

Belfast, 285, 348, 363, 367, 423. 

Belgium—hair and eye colour of 
children in, 56. 

Belper, 367. 

Bengal, 101, 112, 114. 

Berbers, 122, 125, 126, 155. 

Berkshire, 350, 351. 

Bernoni, Sig., 421. 

Bertillon, M. A., 2, 3, 6, 94. 

Bertin, G., 21, 22. 

Bianconi, Mr. Charles, 208-210, 
217. 

Bilia, 302. 

Black races, 74, 98, 102, 121, 132. 

Black spot, the Limousin, 145, 147. 

Blackstone, Sir W., 256. 

Block-wheel car, 212. 

Blue eyes, 28. 

Blue Hill Observatory, 234. 

Boas, Dr. F., 274, 451. 

Bocking, 400, 402. 

Bondin, M., 146, 147. 

Boomers, 283. 

Bora, 311, 314. 

Borneo, 227, 262, 355. 

Bororo, 295-297. 

Borreby, 81. 

Borreby race, 41. 

Borrowdale, 178. 

INDEX 

Boston—hair and eye colour, 41. 

Bourke, J. G., 290, 292, 293. 

Box-kite, 234. 

Boyd-Dawkins, Prof., 81. 

Brabrook, E., 489. 

Brachycephalic skull, 68. 

Brachycephals, 25, 26. 

— neolithic, 82. 

Brahmans, IOI, 104, III. 

Braintree, 45. 

Brandon, 45, 46. 

Brazil, 295, 298, 398. 

Bremen, $3. 

Bridge of Adana, 353. 

Bridge, Stoicheion of the, 352. 

Brinton, Dr. D. G., 65, 494. 

British, 48. 

— Islands, 277. 

— types, 48. 

Britton, Mr., 226. 

Broca,, Prof. P., 118, 121, 123, 125, 
126, 127, 128, 145, 147, 452. 

Bronze Age, 50, 85, 184, 192, 197. 

— cranial index, 84. 

— men, 42. 

— nasal and cranial index of, 128. 

Browne, Dr. C. R., 372, 436, 437, 
441. 

Brunn, Dr., 186. 

Buckinghamshire, 39, 396. 
Bugeaud, Marshall, 160. 
Bullar, Mr., 181. 
Bull-Roarer, 277-327. 
Bummer, 278, 280, 282, 285. 
Burmah, 260. 

Burne, Miss C, S., 365, 368, 475- 
481. 

Burt, Capt., 173, 175. 

Bush, J., 200, 201, 206. 

Bushmen, 123, 289, 290, 319, 320, 
326. 

499 

Buzz, 284. 
Buzzer, 278. 
Bzik, 287. 

Cab, 216, 217. 

Cadurci, 139. 

Caernarvonshire, 376. 

Ceesar, 139. 

Calcutta, 355. 

Cambridge, 63, 284, 339, 341, 348, 
366, 399, 412, 423. 

— Anthropometry, Io. 

Cambridgeshire, 43, 278, 395. 

— hair and eye colour, 40. 

Camping ground, 220, 

Canstadt, 155. 

Cantabrian-Asturian wheel, 187. 

Car, 163. 

— block-wheel, 212. 

— low-back, 177, 201. 

— Ringsend, 216, 217. 

— slide, 167. 

Card, for hair and eye statistics, 
32. 

Cards, playing, 223. 

Caribs, 298, 398. 

Carr, Sir John, 204. 

Cart, evolution of, 161. 

— Portuguese, 169. 

Caste, 103, 107. 

— significance of, 107. 

Cat’s cradle, 224-232. 

Celtz, 140. 

— of Czesar, 152. 

Celtic chariot, 180, 194. 

— language, 47. 

Celts, 42, 43, 50, 51, 139, 140, 152, 
180, 192, 193, 197, 213, 377- 
379; 454- 

— nasal index, 118. 

Central Provinces, 112. 

500 

Cephalic index in Dordogne dis- 
trict, 135-140. 

Ceremonial tablets, 305. 

Chalmers, Rev. J., 303, 305, 379. 

Charente, 133, 134, 136. 

Charente-Inférieure, 57, 58. 

Chariot wheels, Greek, 185. 

Chariots, two-wheeled, 173. 

Children, 219. 

China, 70, 223, 224, 226, 227, 237, 
242-244, 259, 260, 274, 285. 

Chinese, 251. 

Chipiez, M., 178, 179. 

Clapham, Dr. L., 43. 

Clarke, Sir E., 329, 330, 411. 

Classification—A nthropological 
measurements as a means of, 

13. 
Classification of anthropology, 491. 
Clayton, Mr., 234. 

Clercq, F. S. A. de, 264. 
Clog-wheels, 178. 

Clonmell, 208. 

Codrington, Dr. R. H., 229, 245, 

263, 300-302. 

Collignon, Dr. R., 58, 96, 97, 118, 

119, 133-160, 453, 454, 456. 

— colour-index, 34. 
Colour blindness, ro. 
Colour of hair and eyes in Dor- 

dogne district, 140-144. 
Colour-scales, 30. 

Columkille, 354, 382. 
Concave nose, 89. 
Connaught, 38. 

Continuity of race, 489. 
Contredanse, 329, 330. 
Convex nose, 90. 

Conze, Prof., 186. 
Coranied, 42. 

Coritavi or Coritani, 42, 43. 
Cork, 209, 282. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Cornwall, 39. 

— hair and eye colour, 40, 47, 48. 

Corréze, 133-160. 

Courting games, 393-411. 

Cowen, Mr., 175. 

Cowper, H. S., 178. 

Cox, Miss Marian R., 470. 

Cranial index, 67, 68. 

— indices, 84. 

— indices of Europeans, 78. 

— nasal index, 120. 

— — table of, 121. 

Cranium, 60-64. 

Cratch cradle, 225. 

Crawley, A. E., 323. 

Crespigny, Lieut. de, 227. 

Creuse, 133-160. 

Criminals, identification of, I. 

Croatia, 407. 

Croker, T. Crofton, 175-177, 428. 

Cro-Magnon, 155, 156. 

Crowe, J. O’Beirne, 192, 193, 195. 

Cu Chulaind, 193-195. 

Culin, Mr. Stewart, 221-224, 226, 
238, 239, 242, 258, 274, 285. 

Curr, Mr., 398. 

Curves of relative brain capacity 
of Cambridge University, 12. 

Cushing, F. H., 294. 
Cuvier, angle of, 117. 
Cymotrichi, 75. 

Cyprian wheels, 179. 

Dalton, Colonel E. T., 113, 114, 
407, 408. 

D’Alviella, Count Goblet, 324. 

Dancing, 328. 

Danes, 43, 50. 

Danish invaders, 86. 

— type, 41. 

— settlements, 47. 

INDEX 

Dartmouth, 47. 

Dasyus, 103, 105. 

Davis, Barnard, 48. 

Denbighshire, 370. 

Derby, 42. 

Derbyshire, 278, 279, 365, 367- 

Derrick, Mr., 209. 

Derry, Co., 372, 373: 

Devonshire, 47. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o. 

Dialect, 486. 

Dieffenbach, Dr. E., 229, 246, 247, 
263. 

Dillaye, F., 237, 244, 257, 267. 

Dionysiac mysteries, 288, 

“ Dish-a-loof,” 427. 

Dolichocephalic skull, 68. 

Dominoes, 224. * 

Donegal, Co., 176, 196. 

Dordogne, 133-160. 

Dorset, 39. 

Down, Co., 176, 197, 198, 279, 283, 
415. 

Dravidians, 103, 104, 106, 109, 113, 
a7: 

“ Draw a pail of water,” 362-392. 

Drew, Thos., 285. 

Dublin, 176, 197, 202, 204, 371. 

Dubois, E., 204. 

Dumfriesshire, 375. 

Dundonald, 197, 198. 

Duruy, Prof., 184. 

Dyak, 227, 262. 

East Anglia, 45. 

East Anglians, 47, 280. 

— craniology, 46. 

Effect of jaw muscles on skull, 61, 62. 

Efficiency, anthropological mea- 
surements as a test of, 8. 

Egypt, 158, 170. 

501 

Egypt, representations of, 16. 

Egyptian, 169. 

— art, leading characteristics of, 20. 

— complexion, 16. 

— hair, 16. 

— high type, 99; low type, 99. 

— type, 17. 

Egyptians, ancient, 99. 

— nasal and cranial index of, 127. 

Ehrenreich, Dr. Paul, 298. 

Eleusinian mysteries, 324. 

Ellice Group, 263. 

Ellis, Rev. W., 246. 

England, 220, 399. 

— hair colour, 38; eye colour, 38. 

English, 116, 157, 402. 

Englishmen, mean cephalic index 
of, 86. 

Eramo, 303. 

Erasmus, 410, 

Erect attitude, 59. 

Erythrism, 28. 

Eskimo, 122, 231, 266, 267, 274, 
285, 292, 320. 

— nose, 96, 97. 

Essex, 45, 278, 400, 402. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o, 

Etheridge, R., 264, 265, 317. 

Ethnography, 491, 493. 

— of Dordogne District, 133-160. 

Ethnology, 491. 

Europe, 320, 387. 

— ear index of various peoples, 

9. 

Europeans, 132. 

External soul, 242, 253, 391. 

Eye colours, 15, 31, 438-441. 

Eyre; He Jst23u- 

Face, 60. 
Faction fights, 273. 

502 

Fairies, 419. 

Falciform fold, 74. 

“Farmer’s Den,” 335, 337-339: 

Fauriel, M., 343. 

Fellah, 158. 

Fellahin, 17. 

Fielde, Miss, 227. 

Figura, F., 286, 326. 

Fiji, 246. 

Find-abair, 192, 193. 

Finns, 20, 399, 402. 

Finsch, Dr. O., 302. 

Fison, Rev. Lorimer, 277, 310. 

Fitzstephen, 355. 

Flinders Petrie—new race, 18. 

Flores, 262, 

Florida, 229, 300, 301. 

Flower, Sir William, 20, 73-77, 121, 
455, 459. 

Fly River, 305. 

Folk-Lore, 467-485, 493. 

Forbes, Dr. H. O., 262. 

Forma anthropina, 131, 132. 

— infantilis, 131. 

Fosse prenasales, 131, 132. 

Foundation sacrifice, 347-361. 

Four races, representation of, in 
ancient Egypt, 16. 

France, 287, 357. 
— Central, 346. 

—nasal and cranial index of ancient 
and modern, 128. 

Franklin, 233. 

Franks, 156. 

Frazer, Dr. J. G., 253, 323, 391, 426. 
— Mrs. J. G., 330, 335. 

French, 51. 

— nasal indices, 118. 

Friedberg, E., 402. 

Friesland, 439. 

Frisian, 83, 84. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Frisian settlements, 47. 
Frisians, 41, 50. 
Funeral games, 412. 
Furfooz, 81. 

Gadow, Dr. Hans, 190. 
Gaelic, 47. 

Gaidoz, M., 389. 
Galicia, 190, 286, 287. 
Galley Hill, 80. 

Galton, Dr. Francis, 5, 9-12, 63, 
466. 

Galway, north, 432. 

— west, 431. 

Games, 219. 

— courting, 393-411. 

— kissing, 410, 411. 

— wake, 428. 6 

Garland-dressing, 365, 376. 

Garnett, Miss Lucy M. J., 74, 353- 

Garson, Dr., 2, 83, 455. 

Gason, S., 315. 

Gastaldi, B., 183, 184. 

Gauls, 51, 156, 160, 213. 

— nasal and cranial index of, 128. 

Gempei, 273. 

Georgina, 414, 415. 

Gerhard, Dr., 182. 

Germans, 42, 51, 116. 

Germany, 283, 354, 402. 

— hair and eye colour of children 
in, 56. 

Gerson da Cunha, Dr., 103. 

Gildemeister, 83. 

Gill, Rev. Dr. W. Wyatt, 228, 247, 
250-252. 

Girton, 341, 366. 

Gloucester, 83. 

Gloucestershire, 39. 

Glover, Mr., 367. 

Goethe, 23. 

INDEX 

Gomme, Mrs. A, B., 225, 226, 281, 
282, 326, 350, 355, 361, 363, 
a 397, 421, 422, 424, 425, 

— G. L., 49, 174, 271, 355, 365, 370, 
372, 374-376, 378, 384, 392, 
425-427, 467, 468. 

Gope, 305. 

Goths, 28. 

Gottweiger Situla, 180. 

Grave-row, 84, 85. 

Gray, W., 373, 380, 382. 

Greece, 288. 

—- ancient, 320, 399. 

Greek mysteries, 327. 

— songs, 352. 

— or classical nose, 93. 

Greeks, 197, 327. 

“Green Gravel,” 423-426. 

Gregor, Rev. Dr. W., 281, 282. 

Gregory, Pope, 381. 

Grosse, 335. 

Grove, Mrs. Lily, 330, 335. 

Guanches, 126. 

Haddon, A. C., 122, 231, 302-304, 
306, 310, 372, 379, 436, 437, 
441. 

Hahn, Dr. E., 170-172. 

Hair, 74. 

Hair colour, 15, 31, 438, 441. 

Hair and eye colours of children 
in Austria, 56. 

— Belgium, 56. 

— Germany, 56. 

— Switzerland, 56. 

Hair of Americans, 74. 

— Caucasians, 74. 

— Mongolians, 74. 

— Negroid peoples, 74. 

Hall, es and Mrs. S. C., 203, 206- 
208. 

593 

Halliwell, 362, 363, 367. 

Hallstadt race, 153. 

Hallstatt, 180. 

Hamilton, J., 196. 

Hampshire, 272, 349, 417. 

Hamy, E. T., 125, 158, 455. 

Hardman, E. T., 316, 317. 

Hargrave, 234. 

Harrison, Miss Jane, 183. 

— Mr. Park, 41, 45. 

Hartland, E. Sydney, 253, 376, 
387, 389, 390 391; 442, 469. 

Hatshepu, Queen, 17. 

Haute-Vienne, 133-160. 

Hayden, Miss M., 431. 

Head form in anthropology, 59. 

Head measurements, 450-456. 

Head, B. V., 183. 

Head of Zeus, 93. 

“ Heaven and Hell,” 357. 

Hedley, C., 263. 

Height indices of the cranium in 
Dordogne district, 149-152. 

“ Hell,” 332; 333- 

Henderson, W., 365, 369, 427. 

Hera, 196. 

Herbette, M., 2. 

Hereford, 476. 

Herts, 39. 

Hervey islands, 228, 247, 251. 

Hewitt, J. F., 114. 

Heywood, Thos., 330. 

High-bridged nose, go. 

Highlands, 354. 

Hissarlik, 171. 

Historical evidence, 489. 

Hittites, 26, 27. 

Hobson, Mrs. Carey-, 291. 

Hohberg, 83. 

Holy well, 365. 

Holywood, 415. 

504 

?Homme-mort, 80. 

Hone, W., 203, 255, 257. 

Hope, R. C., 367, 368. 

Horton-Smith, R. J., 46. 

Hovorka, Dr., 92, 93, 130-132. 

Howitt, A. W., 311, 313, 314, 398. 

Human beast of burden, 162. 

Hummer, 278. 

Humming-top, 255, 259, 262, 266, 
267, 269. 

Huntingdonshire—hair and eye 
colour, 40. 

Huxley, Prof. T. H., 61. 

Hyde, Dr. Douglas, 483, 484. 

Hyksos, 19, 20, 158. 

Hypenetian, 74. 

Iberian, 48, 49, 155. 

Iceni, 46. 

Index of Nigrescence, 33. 

India, 71, 72, 244, 407, 408. 

— nasal index, Io1. 

— Southern, 116, 426. 

Indo-Polynesians, 121. 

Inglis, H. D., 205. 

Inishbofin, 163. 

Inishshark, 163. 

Initiation ceremonies in Australia, 
311-317. 

Inverness, 173, 175. 

Ireland, 163, 166, 167, 169, 192, 200, 
203, 204, 283, 370, 426, 428, 430, 
432, 483. 

— eye colour, 38. 

— hair colour, 38. 

Irish, 41, 409. 

Isle of Wight, 365. 

Jacobs, Joseph, 23, 24, 28. 
Jamieson, 282, 425. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Japan, 70, 226, 227, 237, 243, 252, 
259, 260, 275, 285. 

Japanese, 72, 73, 100. 

— coarse type, 100. 

— fine type, 100. 

Jaunting-car, 200-218, 

Java, 244, 245, 259, 268, 299. 

Jaw, human, 60, 61. 

— muscles, 63, 64. 

“Jenny Jones,” 412-423. 

Jewish nose, 25, 90, 93. 

— type, persistency of, 23. 

Jews, 18, 22, 27, 401. 

— Ashkenazim, 23, 28. 

— blond type, 24. 

— comparative infertility of mixed 
marriages, 24. 

— dark type, 24. 

— German-Polish, 23, 28. 

— high type, 22. 

— low type, 22, 23. 

— red hair, 28. 

— Sephardim, 28. 

— Spanish, 28. 

Jingle, 216, 218. 

Jutes, 50. 

Kaffir, 290, 291, 320. 

Kafirs, 113. 

Kalmuk, 73. 

Kalmuk’s skull, after Ranke, 66. 
Kemping, 220. 

Kent, 350. 

Kerry, 426. 

Kevin’s, St., Well, 371. 
Kincardineshire, 281, 
Kintail, 167. 

Kipling, Rudyard, 156. 
Kirkcudbrightshire, 336, 414. 
Kirkmichael, 392. 

INDEX 

Kissing games, 410, 411. 

Kites, 232-254. 

— Chinese, 239. 

— fighting, 244. 

— in meteorology, 233. 

— Japan, 240. 

— Korean, 239, 240. 

— Solomon Islands, 239. 

“ Knights from Spain,” 402-406. 

Kohl, J. G., 266. 

Koitapu, 379. 

Kolarians, 113, 114. 

Kolhs, 114. 

Konos, 288. 

Kopts, 126. 

Korea, 223, 224, 226, 227, 238, 239, 
252, 259, 273-276. 

Kotas, 108, 109, 115, 116. S 

Krause, E., 302. 

Kurnai, 313. 

Kymri, 156, 454. 

— nasal index, 118. 

“ Lady on a Mountain,” 410. 

Lancashire, 365, 369. 

Lang, Andrew, 287, 290, 299, 319, 
326. 

Lapland, 72. 

Lapps, 399. 

Late Celtic, cranial index, 84. 

La Téne, 180. 

Laverock, W. S., 281. 

Lawrence, Mrs., 341, 366. 

Leicester, 42, 43, 83. 

— hair and eye colour, 44. 

Leicestershire—hair and eye colour, 
40. 

Leiotrichi, 75. 

Lemovices, 138, 139. 

Lepers’ Island, 229, 245. 

Leptorhine, 95, 96, 120. 

325 

Life-token, 241, 253, 391. 
Lincoln, 41, 42. 

— hair and eye colour, 44. 
Lincolnshire, 39, 41, 278, 482. 
— hair and eye colour, 4o. 
Linguistics, 492. 

Livi, Dr., 451. 

London, 396. 

“London Bridge,” 347-361. 
Long Barrow type, 46. 
Long-barrows, 80. 

“Lords from Spain,” 402-408. 
Low-back car, 201, 203. 
Lucian, 288, 289. 

Ludlow, 270. 

“Lump of sugar,” 366. 
Luschan, Dr. Felix von, 25, 27. 
Lyall, Sir A., 105, 110. 

Macalister, Prof. A., 132, 455. 

Macdonald, Rev., 398. 

Mackintosh, Mr. D., 41. 

Madras, 107, 115. 

Mahr, 401. 

“ Maiden’s dance,” 421. 

Malasia, 260. 

Malay, 260-262, 269, 320. 

— Archipelago, 268, 299, 408. 

— States, 298. 

Malays, 130, 244. 

Malton, J., 175. 

Mangaia, 247, 250. 

Mantegazza, Prof. P., 451. 

Maories, 269, 299. 

Map, distribution of colour of eyes 
in France (Topinard), 54. 

— distribution of colour of hair in 
France (Topinard), 55. 

— distribution of dark eyes in 
England (Beddoe), 36. 

506 

Map, distribution of excess of pure 
blond over pure dark type in 
England (Beddoe), 37. 

— distribution of hair and eye 
colours in England, 34-37. 

— index of nigrescence in England 
(Beddoe), 35, 38, 39. 

Marindin, G. E., 180. 

Mariner’s compass, 251. 

Markham, C. R., 298. 

Marriage by capture, 397, 398. 

— by purchase, 400-404. 

Martial, 87. 

Martin, Mr., 375. 

Martius, Dr. von, 398. 

Marvin, Prof. C. F., 234. 

Maspero, G., 17, 99. 

Masseter muscles, 61, 62. 

Mathews, R. H., 311, 314, 317. 

Matthews, Dr. Washington, 292. 

May-day, 396, 397- 

Mayo, 432. 

McAdie, A., 233. 

McLennan, J. F., 102. 

Mean cephalic index of English- 
men, 86. 

Measurement of eyesight, 9. 

Measurements, metrical, 495. 

— nasal, 456-460. 

Mediterranean, 71. 

— nasal index, 118. 

— race, 19, 27, 49, 154, 156, 197, 
454. 

Melanesians, 98, 269, 299, 300. 

Melanochroi, 71, 75. 

Mer, Murray Island, 261, 264. 
Merovingian skulls, 129. 
Mesaticephalic skull, 68. 
Mesopic, 112. 

Mesorhine, 95, 96, 120. 
Meteorology, kites in, 233. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Metrical measurements, 495. 

Michaelis, J. D., 401, 402. 

Middle Ages, 86. 

— cranial index, 84. 

Mies, Dr., 451. 

Mincopies, 72. 

Mitchell, Sir A., 165, 167. 

Mohar, 4o1. 

Mongolian, 74. 

— type, 74, 75. 

Mongoloid race, 114. 

Monkeys, noses of, 88. 

Monseur, M., 389. 

Montgomeryshire, 279, 280, 479, 
480. 

Monuments, 488. 

Moor, 226. 

Moore, Prof. Willis L., 234. 

Morality, 386. 

Mortillet, Prof. G. de, 51. 

Mota, 301. 

Mothering Sunday, 476. 

Motu, 229, 379. 

Motu-Motu, 303. 

Muhammadans, 108, 109, 116, 117. 

Murdoch, J., 266, 267, 285. 

Murray Island, 261, 264, 268. 

Mykenzean cars, 186. 

— period, 184. 

Myers, Dr. C. S., 45, 84. 

Myres, J. L., 182. 

Mysteries, 324. 

— Dionysiac, 288. 

— Greek, 327. 

Mystery, 288, 289. 

Naga Hills, 268. 
Nagas, 426. 
Nahuquas, 298. 
Napier, 426. 

INDEX 

Nares, R., 225, 256. 

Nasal bones, 119, 130. 

— and cranial index of ancient and 
modern France, 128. 

— and cranial index of Egyptians, 
127. 

— ae ean index of Parisians, 
128. 

— index of ancient Egyptians, 124. 

— index in Dordogne district, 148, 
149. 

— index of the living, 95, 97. 

— index, India, 1o1. 

— indices, French, 118. 

— indices of Southern India, 108. 

— measurements, 456-460. 

Nasalis larvatus, 88. 

Naso-malar index, 459. 

Nature, goddess of, 171. 

Neanderthal, 80. 

Negritoes, 72, 75. 

Negrilloes, 75. 

Negroes, 16, 19, 61, 75, 98, 130, 132, 
454. 

Nehring, Dr. A., 62. 

Neolithic, 45, 46, 49, 155, 156. 

— brachycephals, 82. 

— cranial index, 84. 

— nasal index, 127, 128. 

— type, 81. 

Neolithic Age, 80. 

Neubauer, Dr. A., 24. 

New Guinea, 122, 219, 229, 300, 
302, 303, 320, 379. 

New Hebrides, 245. 

New Race—Flinders Petrie, 18. 

New Zealand, 228, 229, 232, 246, 
263, 269, 299, 320. 

Newell, W. W., 220, 333, 334, 
340-345, 356, 359-301, 420. 

Nilgiri Hills, 107, 115, 117. 

Noddy, 216, 218, 

5°7, 

Norfolk, 45, 278, 279. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o. 

Norseman, 50. 

North Wales, 81. 

North Western Provinces, 101, 113, 
DP 

Northampton—hair and eye colour, 
44. 

Northamptonshire, 42, 43. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o. 

Northumberland, 81, 368, 369. 

Nose, 87-132. 

— concave, 89. 

— convex, 9o. 

— high-bridged, 90. 

— Jewish, 9o. 

— Papuan, 9o. 

— Roman, 87. 

— sinuous, 90. 

— snub, 37. 

— straight, go. 

Noses of monkeys, 88. 

Nottingham, 41-43, 272. 

— hair and eye colour, 44. 

Nottinghamshire — hair and eye 
colour, 40. 

Nubia, 124, 125. 

“Nuts in May,” 393-397. 

“Oats, beans, and barley,” 
344. 

Oceania, 251, 252, 262, 300. 

— cranial index of various peoples, 
70. 

O’Curry, E., 166, 194. 

Orang-utan, 130. 

Orion’s Belt, 248. 

Oro-stick, 283, 290. 

Orpen, Mr., 289. 

Orthognathous, 61, 

Owen, Rev. Elias, 280, 426, 479. 

341- 

508 

Ox-carts, 190. 
Ox-waggon, 172, 173. 

Pack-animal, 163. 

Paleolithic man, 49, 80, 155. 

— nasal index, 127, 128. 

Palgrave, 258. 

Palmers iss i7. 

Paniyans, 108, 109-111, 115, 116. 

Panjab, 110, 112, 113. 

Papuan nose, go. 

Papuans, 122, 264, 268. 

Parakite, 236. 

Pariahs, 106, 108, 109-111, 115. 

Paris, 257. 

Parisians, 30. 

— nasal and cranial index of, 128. 

Parish-top, 256. 

Pastoral Kings, 179. 

Pattern, 382. 

Patterson, Miss Clara M., 403, 415, 
423. 

— W. H., 363. 

Payne, 488. 

Peg-top, 255, 262, 267, 268. 

Penka, Karl, 112, 113. 

Penpont, 375. 

Perrot, M., 178, 179. 

Persistence of type, 77. 

Peruvians, 298. 

Petrie, Flinders, 125, 126. 

Petrocorii, 138, 139, 140. 

Phillips, Prof., 39, 43. 

Phoenicians, 18, 23, 25. 

Photography, 464-467. 

Physical characters, 16. 

Pima, 294. 

Pineau, Prof. L., 355, 356. 

Pin-offerings, 365, 376. 

Pin-wells, 369. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Pipes, 432. 

Pitcairn Island, 264. 

Pitt-Rivers, General, 83, 377. 

Platyopic, 112. 

Platyrhine, 95, 96, 120. 

Plaustrum, 180. 

Playing cards, 223. 

Pleiades, 248. 

Pliny, 257. 

Pneumatic tyres, 210. 

Pococke, 426. 

Poesche, T., 169. 

Poland, 286. 

Poles, 287. 

Polo, 220. 

Polynesia, 
299. 

Polynesians, 75, 122, 263. 

Poole, Dr. R. Stuart, 17, 20. 

“Poor Mary sits a-weeping,” 409- 
4Il. 

Portugal, 181. 

Portuguese cart, 169, 176, 187. 

Powell, Major J. W., 292. 

Proboscis-monkey, 88. 

Prognathous, 61. 

Pro-opic, 112. 

Proto-Dravidian, 72. 

Prussia, 285, 408. 

Psychology, 491. 

Purity of type, 76. 

246.) 251 e252 eos 

Quatrefages, Prof. A. de, 71, 455. 
Queensland, 265, 269. 
— North, 269, 432. 

Rag-well, 370. 
Rain-charm, 290. 

Ratzel, Prof. F., 267, 290. 
Rawson, Sir R., 48. 

INDEX 

Ray, S. H., 303, 306. 

Read, C. H., 260, 261, 262. 

Red races, 74. 

Reeves, W., 354, 382. 

Religion, 386, 492. 

Renan, 23. 

Reuleaux, Dr., 170. 

Rhombus, 288, 294. 

Rhys, Prof., 376, 377, 388. 

Riedel, Dr., 260. 

Ringsend Car, 216, 217. 

Ripley, Dr. W. Z., 451, 452. 

Risley, Ht. H., 102, 107, 110, 113, 
114, 459, 460. 

Roberts, C., 48. 

Roller, 168-170, 177. 
Roman conquest, 157. 
— domination, 83. 

— nose, 87. 
Romano-Britons, 45, 46. 
— British, 85. 

— cranial index, $4. 
Rongo, 248, 249. 
Rorrington Green, 365. 
Rotch, Lawrence, 234. 
Roth, H. Ling, 227, 262. 
Round-Barrow, 46. 

— cranial index, 84. 

— race, 81. 

Row-grave type, 46. 
Row graves, 83. 

Russia, 407. 
Ruthenians, 287. 
Rutland—hair and eye colour, 4o. 
Rutland, 42. 

Sacred trees, 387. 

— wells, 387. 

Sacrifices, foundation, 347-356. 
Salruck, 431. 

Santa Cruz, 245. 

399 

Sarasin, 72, 75, 406. 

Savoyards, 42. 

Saxons, 50. 

Saxon, cranial index, 84. 

— skull, 46. 

“ Saw-fish dance,” 346. 

Scandinavian invaders, 86. 

— type, 43. 

Scandinavians, 402. 

Scape-goat, 240. 

Scheffer, Johann, 173. 

Schellong, O., 302. 

Schlegel, Gustav von, 255, 259, 
268. 

Schliemann, Dr., 258. 

Schmeltz, Dr., 264, 283, 284, 294, 
298. ; 

Schmidt, 455. 

Schwirrholz, 286. 

Scotch, 41. 

Scotland, 281, 336, 374, 426. 

— eye colour, 38 ; hair colour, 38. 

Scottish Highlanders, 48. 

Sculptors of ancient Greece, 64. 

Secret societies, Melanesian, 325. 

Seemann, 246. 

Sélangor, 260, 261, 298. 

Sellenger’s Round, 331. 

Semites, 16, 18, 22, 25, 26, 48. 

Semitic race, 125. 

— writing, 27. 

Sephardim, 28. 

Sergi, Prof., 19, 154. 

Shakespeare, 256, 

Shepherd kings, I¢, 20. 

Shropshire, 279, 280, 351, 367, 417, 
476. 

Siam, 244, 253, 260, 355. 

Sidney, Sir Philip, 332, 333. 

Siedel, H., 286. 

Simian groove, 131, 132. 

510 

_ Sinclair, 392. 

Sinuous nose, 90. 

Sion type of Switzerland, 42. 

Skeat, Rev. Prof., 487. 

_ Skeat, W., 298. 

Skull of Bolognese lap-dog, 62. 

— Eskimo dog, 62. 

Slavs, 399. 

Slide car, 165-168. 

Smith, W. Robertson, 323, 391, 401. 

Snub nose, 87. 

Society Islands, 246. 

Sociology, 492. 

Solomon Islands, 264, 300, 320. 

Somatology, 491. 

Soul, external, 242, 253, 391. 

Souling, 476. 

South Saxons, 47. 

Southampton, 417. 

Southern India, 116. 

Spain, 28, 190. 

Spanish waggons, 186. 

Spencer, Herbert, 335. 

Spinning-wheels, 171. 

Spoke-wheel, 178. 

Spy, 80, 155. 

Staffordshire, 279, 280, 365, 476. 

Stature in Dordogne district, 144- 
148. 

Steinen, Karl von den, 295, 297, 
2098. : 

Stephan, Herr, 169. 

Stevens, 256. 

Stewart Islands, 261, 262. 

Stirling, Dr. E. C., 265, 269, 316. 

Straight nose, go. : 

Straits Settlements, 260-262. 

Straw harness, 166, 2° 

Strutt, J.,.232, 257, 267. 

Stuart, Mr. H. A., 106, 110, 194. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Stuart-Glennie, J. S., 74. 

Stuckey, Dr. H., 43. 

Suabia, 357. 

Suffolk, 45, 278. 

— hair and eye colour, 4o. 

Sullivan, W. K., 166, 192, 194. 

Sumatra, 299. 

Sunderland, 420. 

Surrey, 277, 279. 

Sweet, 486, 487. 

Switzerland, 81, 336. 

— hair and eye colour of children 
in, 56. 

Symbolism, 324, 325. 

Syrians, 126. 

Syro-Arabs, 125, 126. 

Szombathy, J., 179, 180. 

Table of cranial nasal indices, 121. 

Table of races—nasal index of the 
living, 97. 

Tahennu or Tamehu, 18. 

Tahiti, 246. 

Tamate, 301, 303. 

Tane, 248, 249. 

Tappeiner, 451. 

Tatars, 20. 

Taylor, Canon Isaac, 174. 

Taylor, Rev. R., 228, 246, 263. 

Technology, 492. 

Teetotum, 255, 263, 264, 267-269. 

Temporal crest, 61. 

Ten Kate, Dr. H., 294. 

Tennis, 220. 

Tennyson, 94. 

~Teutonic names, 42. 
|. — hordes, 50. 

Teutons, 399. 
Theal, G. M’Call, 290. - 
“Threading the Needle,” 345. 

~ Ulotrichi, 75. 

INDEX 

Thomas, Oldfield, 459, 460. 

Thunder spell, 28r. 

Thurston, Mr. Edgar, 107-111, 115, 
116, 118. 

Timorlaut, 262. 

Tiparu, 303. 

Toaripi, 303. 

Tobacco, 431, 432. 

Todas, 108, 109, 115, 116. 

Tol, 259. 

Tomkins, -365. 

Topinard, Dr. P., 54, 55, 57, 58; 95; 
121, 451, 455, 457. 

Tops, 255-270. 

— humming, 255, 259, 262, 266, 
267, 269. 

— peg, 255, 262, 267, 268. 

— parish, 256. 

— town, 256. 

— whipping, 255, 257, 258, 263. 

Torres Straits, 230, 261, 264, 268, 
302, 306, 310, 320, 346, 385, 
400, 419. 

Trees, sacred, 387. 

Tregear, E., 229, 247, 263. 

Troy, 258. 

Tug of war, 270-276. 

Tunisians, 454. 

Turish-o-Lyn, 373. 

Turks, 20, 158. 

Turndin, 277. 

Turner, W. Y., 229. 

Twiss, J., 174, 176. , 

Tylor, Professor E. B., 181, 182, 
LO%s) 235 250 27751 2ole 2o5 
290, 291, 322, 355. 

Ulster, 38. 
Uniformity -of physical character- 
istics, 76. 

= 

51I 

Vacher, M., 148. 
Vancouver, 266. | 
Veddahs, 72, 75, 123, 406. 
Venn, Dr., 10, 63. 
Verrall, Margaret, 183. 

Virchow, Prof. R., 84, 150, 451, 452. © 

Waggons, of Spain, 186. 
Wake games, 429. 
Waldteufel, 283, 284. 
Wales, 39, 280. 

— eye colour, 38. 

— hair colour, 38. 

— North, 81. 

Wallace, Dr. A. R., 227, 296. 
Walloons, 81. 

War chariot, 184, 191, 192. 
Ward, R. De C., 235, 
Warwickshire, 279, 280. 
Waterford, 358. 

Water worship, 362-392. 
Weber, Dr. Max, 260. 
Weisbach, 451. 

Welch, R., 431, 432. 
Welcker, 452. 
Well-dressing, 365. 

Well, rag, 370. 

Wells, pin, 369. 

Wells, sacred, 387. 

Welsh literature, 42. 
Wessex Saxons, 47. 

West Coast, 319, 320. 
West Saxons, 48. 
Westermarck, E., 323, 398, 401, 402. 
Westmoreland, 365. 
Wheel, Basque, 187. 

— solid, Ancient Greece, 187. 
— solid, Basque, 187. 
Wheels, 168, ‘74. 

— clog, 178. 

512 

Wheels on coins, 185, 186. 

— spoke, 178. 

“When I was a naughty girl,” 335, 
339. 

Whipping-top, 255, 257, 258, 263. 

White races, 74, 98, 130. 

Wicklow, 176, 371. 

Wilde, Lady, 429, 431. 

— Sir W., 397. 

. Wilson, Alexander, 233. 

Wilts, 39. 

Woglom, G. T., 236, 242, 243, 245. 

Worcestershire, 365. 

THE STUDY OF MAN 

Xanthochroi, 75. 

Yates, J., 180. 

Yellow races, 72, 74, 89, 98, 121, 
130, 0325 

York, Cape, 432. ‘ 

Yorkshire, 194, 278, 368, 369, 370. 

Yoruba, 289, 291. ‘ 

Zampa, 451. 
Zeus, 64, 94. 
Zuckerhandl, 451. 
Zulus, 319. 

Zuni, 292, 294. 

PLYMOUTH } 

WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, PRINTERS. 

GY03-G.- 
1B 

ie 

LG 

| 3 1210 00453 5 

naan, 

ee
