================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Divan, Vol. 2
Creator: Hafez (H. Wilberforce Clarke, trans.)
Edition: 1891 (Calcutta: Government of India Central Printing Office)
Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/thedivan02hafiuoft)
Public domain: First published 1891; public domain.
Artifact ID: hafez-divan-clarke-1891-vol-2
================================================================================

THE  DIVAN,
WRITTEN  IN  THE  FOURTEENTH  CENTURY,

BY

Khwaja

8hamsu-tl-lMn  Muhammad-i-Hafiz-i-Shlrazl

otherivise  7mown  as
IAsanu-l-Ghaib  and  Tarjumanu-l-Asr&r.

TRANSLATED FOR  THE FIRST  TIME  OUT OF  THE  PERSIAN INTO ENGLISH PROSE,

WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY REMARKS, WITH AN INTRODUCTORY

PREFACE, WITH A NOTE  ON SUFl.ISM, AND  WITH  A  LIFE  OF

THE AUTHOR,

BY

LiEUT.-COL.  H.  WILBERFORCE  CLARKE,

ROYAL  (late  Bengal)  ENGINEERS,
LIFE-MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND;  AND  MEMBER  OF  THE

ASIATIC  SOCIETY  OF  BENGAL,

AUTHOR  OF  "THE  PERSIAN  MANUAL71;  FIRST  TRANSLATOR  (OUT  OF  THE  PERSIAN)  OF  "THE  BUSTXN-I-SA'Df  "

AND  OF  "THE  SIKANDAR  NAMA.-I-NIZAMI." AUTHOR  OF  "NOTES  ON  ELEPHANTS";

OP  "THE  SEXTANT";  OF  "LONGITUDE  BY  LUNAR  DISTANCES";  AND  OF

"THE  TRANSVERSE  STRENGTH  OF  A  RAILWAY-RAIL."

VOL.  II.

1891.

All  rif/ht*  reserved.

9  i?  M  8 1 9

CALCUTTA :

GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA  CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE,
8, HASTINGS  STREET.

THE  LETTER  ZAD  \jP

The  Letter  Zad.

•

340,  (340-

I.  The  whole  world,  length  and  breadth,  Thy  beauty  took :

Ashamed  of  the  lovely  face  of  earth's  moon  (the  beloved),  the  (resplendent)  sun
became.

Necessary  to  all  creation  is  the  beholding  of  Thy  beauty  and  beauteousness,
Nay,  an  enjoined  duty  to  all  angels  is  the  viewing  of  Thy  face.

The  sun  from  the  fourth  heaven  is  the  light-borrower  from  Thy  face,
Like  the  seventh  earth  left  beneath  the  load  of  death.

Ever  remained  dead,  the  soul  that  a  sacrifice  for  Him  became  not :

Cutting  and  shearing  is  worthy  of  the  body  that,  captive  to  Him,  became  not.

5.  If  a  piece  of  rose-conserve  (a  kiss),  Thy  lip,  soul-cherishing,  give  me  not,
When,  from  this  sickness  (of  love  for  Thee),  escapeth  my  sorrowful  body  ?

On  the  dust  of  His  foot,  thy  kiss  appeareth  where  ?

O  Hafiz !  to  representation  (to  the  true  Beloved),  the  wind  conveyeth  thy  tale
of  desire.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

341,  (340).

i.  Come  :  for,  the  perfume  of  my  soul,  I  perceive  from that  cheek,

For,  the  trace  of  my  own  heart,  I  gained  from that  cheek.

The  spirituality  (and  goodness)  of  the  Hur  which  they  explain,

The  explanation,  tjiou  mayst  ask  of  the  beauty  and  grace  from  that  cheek.

.  In  the  clay  (of  astonishment)  left,  the  stature  of  the  dainty  cypress  by  that

stature  (of  my  true  Beloved) :
Ashamed  (is)  left,  the  rose  of  the  rose-garden  by that  cheek.

In  shame  (is)  left,  the  (delicate)  body  of  the  jessamine  at  these  (pure  and  tender)

limbs  (of  the  true  Beloved) :
In  blood  (of  envy)  seated,  the  heart  of  the  ruddy  Arghavanat that  cheek.

5.  The  perfume  of  musk,  the  musk-pod  of  Chin  took  from  that  tress :

Perfume  of  the  (true)  Beloved,  rose-water  found  from that  cheek.

Immersed  in  the  sweat  (of  envy)  became  the  (resplendent)  sun  at  the  sun  of  Thy

face :
Slender  and  wan,  remained  the  (effulgent)  moon  of  the  sky  at— that  cheek.

Trickled  the  water  of  life  from  that  heart-alluring  verse  of  Hafiz:

Even  as  the  sweat  of  souls  went  trickling  from that  cheek.

THE  LETTER  TA I  587

The  Letter  Ta.

342,  (342).

I.  Since,  around  the  (true)  Beloved's  cheek,  time  wrote  the  line  (of  down),
Truly,  by  His  face,  fell  the  moon  of  the  sky  into  error.

From  desire  of  His  lip,  which,  more  pleasant  than  the  water  of  life,  is,—-
Went  flowing  from  my  eye  a  fountain  of  water,  like  the  (mighty)  Euphrates.

On  that  cheek  of  silver  hue,  behold  the  dark  mole,

Verily,  this  dot  of  musk,  left  on  the  moon's  face,  (is)  that  (mole).

(0  true  Beloved !)  hair  loosed ;  and  sweat  (through  passion's  heat)  expressed,

since  Thou  hast  come  to  the  sward  :
(Yellow)  like  saffron  (through  shame  of  Thy  resplendent  face)  became  the  face

of  the  (red)  rose ;  and  musk  (through  shame  of  Thy  dark,  musky  tress),  and

rose-water  (through  shame  of  Thy  perfumed  sweat) fell  asunder  and  as

naught  became.

5.  In  desire  of  Thee,  sometimes  I  give,  like  the  (contemptible)  dust,  my  soul  and

heart :

Sometimes,  like  the  (amorous)  duck,  with  water  (of  tears),  I  quench  the  fire  of
love.

•

If  me,  as  a  slave  of  his,  the  King  accept,
Ever  as  a  welcome,  I,  the  slave,  the  bond  for  his  service,  give.

O  Hafiz !  ashamed  of  thy  (lustrous)  verse  hath  become  the  (gleaming)  water  of

life  :"
In  desire  of  His  love,  in  this  way,  (thrilling)  verse  hath  uttered  none.

i.  On  seeing  the  beauty  of  His  face,  the  moon  fell  into  error ;  and  thought : —
"  Perchance  this  also  is  a  moon  !  "
This  ta  (Jo) i  s  called  ukht-uzza,  which  signifies  the  sister  of  za  (t)

5.  J*J  (duck)  signifies  :  —

a  water-bird  whose  ardour  in  love  is  great.

Like  the  (amorous)  duck  that  quenches  its  own  fire  of  love  by  swimming  in  the  stream,  I  weep
so  much  that,  in  the  water  of  tears,  I  swim.

4F2

THE  LETTER  ZA  £  589

The  Letter  Za.

343,  (343).

I.  From  the  evil  eye,  for  thy  good  face  God,  (be)-^—  Hafiz !

For  unto  us,  all  goodness,  it  (thy  face)  hath  done O  Hafiz  I

Come. For  of  peace,  of  friendship,  and  of  fidelity,  'tis  the  time  :

For,  with  thee,  mine  no  quarrel  is,  nor  dispute  O  Hafiz  !

Though,  thy  heart's  blood,  my  ruby  (lip)  hath  drunk, — take  (to  thy  heart's  desire)

From  my  lip,  in  lieu  of  it  (thy  heart's  blood),  the  kiss,  (as)  the  blood-price,

O  Hafiz !

Thou,  whence  ? Hope  of  union  with  Him,  whence  ?

To  this  skirt,  reacheth  not  the  hand  of  every  beggar — —  0  Hafiz !

5.  From  union  with  that  (illusory)  beloved,  gained  my  heart  what  delight?

Mine  is  the  gift,  life-giving, O  grief-stricken  Hafiz !

To  the  tress,  or  to  the  mole,  of  idols,  (beloved  ones),  again  attach  not  thy  heart :
If,  from  this  snare  and  from  this  calamity,  thou  escape  O  Hafiz !

Zahid  !  the  darvish  garment  of  juggling,  thou  hast  put  on  :  go  !

The  dregs  of  pain,  thou  hast  drunk  ;  come  O  Hafiz !

At  the  time  of  morn,  with  heart  and  soul,  bewail  like  profligates  ;

That  moment,  one  single  prayer  for  my  work,  make  O  Hafiz !

Come  !  sing  the  ghazal  beautiful,  delightful,  full  of  burning  (passion)  :

For  joy-giving  is  thy  verse,  and  life-increasing O  Hafiz !

i.  In  the  first  line  Hafiz  means  guardian.

THE  LETTER  'AiN P  59 l

The  Letter  'Aln.

344,  (344)-

i.  By  the  pomp  of  glory  and  of  dignity  of  Shah  Shuja'  I  swear,
That,  for  the  sake  of  wealth  and  of  rank,  strife  is  mine  with  none.

On  lovers,  cast  a  glance  in  thanks  for  this  favour,
That  of  thee,  the  obeyed  king,  an  obedient  slaVe  I  am.  .

Thirsty  for  the  bounty  of  the  draught  of  the  cup,  we  are. But,
Boldness,  we  display  not  (of  ourselves  we  take  not  the  cup) ;  thee  (through  our
vexing)  pain  of  head,  we  give  not.

My  house  (secret)  wine,  enough  ;  the  magian  wine,  bring  not :
0  companion  !  arrived  hath  the  companion  of  the  cup :  to  repentance  (of  wine)
farewell !

5.  For  God's  sake  ;  with  wine,  cleansing  and  cleansing  of  the  khirka,  make  ye  :
For,  from  this  way  (of  khirka-wearing),  the  perfume  of  good,  I  perceive  not.

To  the  harp's  twang,  behold  how  dancing  goeth, —

That  one,  who  for  the  hearing  of  sama',  permission  gave  not.

O  God  !  separate  make  not  the  brow  and  the  face  of  Hafiz
From  the  dust  of  the  court  of  grandeur  of  Shah  Shuja'.

i.  '1  he  second  line  of  couplets  i,  2,  and  4  are  similar  to  the  second  line  of  couplets  I,  4,  and  5,  of
Ode  345.  (

5.  Khirka.  See  Ode  124.

6.  Sama'.  „ „ 46>  c.  6.

7.  Shah  Shuja'. „ „  326,  c.  i.

592  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

345,  (345)-
i.  By  the  pomp  of  the  world-kindling  fortune  of  Shah  Shuja1,

I  swear  that,  for  the  sake  of  wealth  and  of  rank,  strife  was  mine  with  none.

Bring  wine. For,  when  the  (resplendent)  sun  enkindleth  his  torch,
Even  to  the  (lowly)  hut  of  the  darvish,  reacheth  the  bounty  of  its  (the  wine's
splendour-)  rays.

Of  (all  of)  the  world,  a  flagon  (of  wine)  is  enough  for  me,  and  a  lovely  com-
panion ;
For,  without  these,  the  cause  of  perturbation  and  pain  of  head,  all  is.

Adviser  !  go  ;  for  a  cup  (of  wine),  change  this  condoling,
For  I  am  the  obeying  slave ;  the  obeyed  king,  not.

5.  Me,  from  the  masjid  to  the  tavern,  love  sendeth  :

O  friend  !  arrived  hath  the  companion  of  the  cup  :  to  repentance  (of  wine)
farewell !

No  skill,  purchaseth  time. Save  this,  mine  is  naught :

With  these  goods  (of  skill),  dull  of  market,  for  traffic,  go  I where  ?

With  Hafiz's  austerity  and  his  idle  talk,  vexed  I  am  :

The  stringed  instrument,  play ;  with  song  and  sama',  the  love-song  sing.

i.  The  second  line  of  couplets  I,  4,  and  5  are  si  milar  to  the  second  line  of  couplets  i,  2,  and  4  of

Ode  344.
5.  See  Ode  179,  c.  6.

7.  oUlt>(idle  talk)  signifies  :  —

(a)  The  confused  circumstances,  and  words,  baseless  and  perturbed,  that,  for  the  sake  of

the  briskness  of  their  own  market,  Sufis  utter.

(b)  The  idle  boast  and  vaunt  of  Sufis  in  respect  of  their  manifestations,  revelations,  and

miracles.

the  word  is  :—

in  Arabic tammat.

in  Persian tamat.
Sama. See  Ode  46,  c.  6.

THE  LETTER  'AlN C  593

346,  (346).

i.  In  the  dawn,  when,  from  the  private  chamber  of  the  palace  of  wonders,
On  all  sides,  the  candle  of  the  east  (the  sun)  casteth  splendour-rays  ;

(When)  from  the  pocket  of  the  horizon,  the  juggler  (or  the  dancer) draweth

forth  the  mirror  ;
(And),  in  a  thousand  ways,  displayeth  the  world's  face,

In  the  recesses  of  the  joy-house  of  the  Jamshid  of  the  sky,
The  organ,  to  the  melody  of  sama',  Zuhra  tuneth.

Into  twang,  cometh  the  harp,  saying: — "The  denier  (of  love)  is  where  ?"
Into  juggling  (laughing)  cometh  the  cup,  saying  :—  "The  forbidder  (of wine)

is  where  ?  "

5.  The  way  of  revolution  (of  the  sphere),  behold  ;  pleasure's  goblet,  take  ;  (with

God's  lot,  be  content)  :
For,  in  every  state,  the  best  of  ways  is  this.

All  snare  and  deceit,  is  the  tress  of  the  mistress  of  the  world  :
As  to  the  end  of  this  thread,  no  strife  (of  opinion)  do  Arifs  seek.

The  king's  (long)  life,  seek,  if  the  world's  profit  thou  seek  :

For,  it  is  an  existence,  gift-giver  and  a  generous  one,  favour-conferring.

The  place  of  evidence  of  the  grace  of  eternity  without  beginning,  the  lumi-
nosity of  hope's  eye :
The  summation  of  science  and  action,  (and)  the  world's  soul,  (are)  Shah  Shuja'.

O  Hafiz  J  with  the  usage  of  the  slave,  dweller  at  his  door,  be  :
For  he  (Shah  Shuja') is  an obedient  king,  and  Shahinshah  of  those  who  are
obeyed  (all  other  kings).

3.  Sama'. See  Ode  46,  c.  6.

5,  Time's  action,  behold;  with  ease  of  heart  sit  not,  for  it  passeth  not  with  one  colour;  the  cup  of
pleasure,  take ;  with  God's  apportionment  be  content  :  in  what  issueth  from  thy  hand,  no
deficiency  make;  to-day's  work,  cast  not  to  to-morrow.  This,  indeed,  consider  the  best  of
ways.

3.  Shah  Shuja'. See  Ode  326,  c.  i.

40

594  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

347,  (347)-

I.  In  constancy  of  love  for  Thee,  renowned  of  the  lovely  ones  I  am—-
like the  candle  ;

Night-sitter  in  the  street  of  head  (life-)  players  and  of  profligates,  I  am

like  the  candle.

Day  and  night,  to  my  eye,  grief-worshipping,  sleep  cometh  not :

Since,  in  sickness  of  separation  from  Thee,  weeping,  I  am

like  the  candle.

With  the  shears  of  grief  for  Thee,  severed  became  the  thread  of  my  patience  ;

So,  in  fire's  separation  from  Thee,  laughing  (consuming)  1  am

like  the  candle.

In  separation's  night,  me  a  letter  of  union,  send  :

If  not,  in  grief  for  Thee,  a  great  world  I  will  cause  to  consume-

like  the  candle.

5.  If  hot  moving  (impetuous)  had  not  been  the  steed  of  my  rose-hued  (bloody)  tear,

In  the  world,  when  would  my  hidden  mystery (love  for  Thee) have  become

luminous like  the  candle.

In  the  midst  of  water  and  of  fire,  even  so  ardent  of  desire  for  Thee  is

This  my  heart,  poor,  feeble,  tear-raining  (guttering) like  the  candle.

From  the  power  of  grief  for  Thee,  soft  like  wax  became  the  mountain of  my
patience,

Since,  in  the  water  and  the  fire  of  love  for  Thee,  melting  I  am

like  the  candle.

Night  is  my  day  without  Thy  beauty  world-adorning  ;

With  the  perfection  of  love  for  Thee,  in  the  very  essence  of  loss,  (consuming)  I
am, like  the  candle.

I.  ^jJiiJk--^  (night-sitter)  signifies  :—

(a)  to  sit  nights  in  the  assembly  (  l_rV°  )•

(b)  a  sitter-up  at  night  ;  nights,  to  be  awake.
"  Lovely  ones." Oode  209,  c.  5.

"  Like  the  candle." „ 445.  c.  7-

7.  In  boiling  water,  they  melt  the  wax  candle,  so  that  the  dross  separatcth  and  to  the_boltom  of
the  water  falleth ;  while,  on  the  surface,  the  pure  wax  floateth.

THE  LETTER  'AIN £  595

O  neck-extender  (in  grandeur) !  head-exalting  make  me,  one  night,  by  union

with  Thee :
That,  by  the  sight  of  Thee,  luminous  may  become  my  hall like  the  candle  ?

10.  Like  the  morning,  without  a  sight  of  Thee,  is  left  (only)  a  breath  of  life  ;

O  heart-ravisher  ! Thy  face,  display  ;  so  that,  on  Thee,  my  life  I  may  scatter  (in
love's  consuming) like  the  candle-

Wonderful  !  in  his  head,  Hafiz  caught  love's  fire  for  Thee  :
With  the  water  (tear)  of  the  eye,  how  may  1  quench  the  heart's  fire

like  the  candle.

4  a  2

THE  LETTER  GHAiN 9-  597

t

The  Letter  GhaFn.

348,  (348).

I.  In  the  morning  for  the  perfume  of  the  rose,  I  kept  going  into  the  rose-garden;
So  that,  like  the  bulbul  heart-bereft,  remedy  for  my  brain,  I  might  make.

At  the  face  of  a  rose,  red  of  hue,  I  gazed,

That,  in  the  night  of  darkness,  shone  with  a  luminosity  like  the  lamp:

Of  her  beauty  and  youth,  so  proud,

That,  from  the  heart  of  the  bulbul  of  a  thousand  notes,  repose  she  kept :

In  envy,  the  beautiful  narcissus  let  loose  water  (night-dew)  from  her  eye :
In  passion,  the  tulip  planted  a  hundred  streaks  (stains)  in  her  soul  and  heart:

5.  In  reproof,  the  lily  extended  her  tongue  like  a  sword  ;

Like  the  man  of  two  women,  the  anemone  opened  her  mouth.

Sometimes,  like  the  wine-worshipper, in  the  hand,  a  goblet:

Sometimes,  like  the  Saki  of  the  intoxicated,  taken  in  the  hand,  a  glass.

The  joy  of  youthful  pleasure,  plunder  like  the  rose,  reckon  :

For,  O  Hafiz!  to  the  envoy  is  naught  save  what  is  brought  (the  message).

5. £^*jl  signifies  : —

(a)  £^y  two  women  connected  with  one  man.
%  . >»  »  »i  »»

£'*i'  any  woman  connected  with  a  man,  who  has  more  than  one  wife.

7.  Thee,  I  have  counselled  : — "  Enjoy  thyself."
Delivered  is  my  message;  ended  my  business.

THE  LETTER  FA '— *  599

The  Letter  Fa.

349,  (349)-

I.  If  fortune  give  aid,  to  my  hand  I  will  bring  His  skirt :

If  (the  skirt)  I  draw — O  great  the  joy  !  If,  me,  He  slay 0  great  the  honour !

How  more  derived  this  heart  full  of  hope  the  advantage  of  mercy :
Though  to  every  quarter,  the  talk  of  the  day  kept  taking  my  tale.

Awhile,  the  love  of  idols,  stone  of  heart,  I  cherish  ;

No  recollection  of  the  father  make  these  unfavoured  sons.

Mine  became  no  opening  from  the  curve  of  Thy  eye-bro.v  :
Alas  !  in  this  crooked  fancy,  became  the  destruction  of  dear  life.

iJ  (idols,  stone  of  heart;  and  wicked  sons  not  heirs)  signifies  :  —
(a)  illusory  beloved  ones,  whose  way  is  void  of  solicitude  and  void  of  dependence.
(4) lust  and  desire,  that,  in  man's  body,  obtain  nurture.

According'to  (a) —

Hafiz  called  them  sons  (  lyl^—J  )  since  the  manifestation'of  the  loveliness  of  lovely  ones,  and

of  the  briskness  of  their  market  of  beauty  is  through  the  number  of  their  lovers.
Thus,  the  crowd  of  lovers  is  the  Lord  of  their  loveliness.
Some  love  for  illusory  lovely  ones,  I  will  cherish  ;  and.  in  their  net,  place  myself. After  that,

cutting  off  hope  of  these  degenerate  ones,  I  will  incline  my  heart  to  the  true  Beloved  ;

and,  in  my  heart,  sow  for  Him  the  seed  of  love.
See  Ode  349,  c.  I.
According  to  (b) —
To  itself,  in  the  state  of  knowledge  and  of  divine  favour,  the  soul  saith  :—

"  Lust  and  desire  (who,  by  God's  decree,  had  entered  man)  have  become  a  garden."

Now  that  divine  victory  hath  become  the  associate  of  my  state,  and,  into  my  heart,  the  fear

of  consequences  hath  gone,  how  long  shall  I  cherish  them,  and  put  aside  the  fear  of  the

end.
For  these  degenerate  sons  and  these  unworthy  followers  recollect  neither  their  own  father  nor

their  guide ;  and,  from  their  iniquitous  conduct,  depart  not.
They  know  not  that,  from  their  iniquities,  calamity  is  in  my  nature;  and  that  their  conduct  is

the  calamity  of  soul  and  of  body.

.U  signifies : —
(a)  an  unfavoured  son.
(6)  a  wicked  son,  disinherited  for  disobedience.

6oo

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

5.  Leader  of  me,  miserable,  when  becometh  the  Friend's  eye-brow  ?
From  this  bow,  none  hath  struck  the  arrow  of  desire  on  the  target.

In  the  fancy  of  being  a  zahid,  corner-sitting  (I  became);  and  strange (it  is)

that,
From  every  side,  me,  with  the  (sound  of  the)  harp  and  the  drum,  the  young

magian  proclaimeth.

Void  of  knowledge  are  the  zahids ;  the  charm,  utter ;  and  speak  not :
Intoxicated  is  the  muhtasib;  the  cup,  drink;  and  fear  not.

Behold  the  city-Sufi,  how  a  doubtful  morsel,  he  eateth  !
Long  be  his  crupper, — this  animal  of  good  fodder !

10.  Hafiz !  if,  in  the  path  of  love's  household,  thou  plant  thy  foot :

The  guide  of  thy  path  shall  be  the  blessing  of  the  watchman  of  Najaf  (Ali).

8.  A  morsel  of  doubtful  legality.

The  couplet  means  :—

May  the  zealot,  who  eateth  food  of  doubtful  legality,  become  more  and  more  like  a  beast.
10.  At  Najaf  Ashraf  in  Kufa,  Ali  (first  of  the  twelve  Imams)  is  buried. He  died  in  661  A.D.

In  this,  as  in  Ode  311,  Hafiz  showeth  his  sympathy  with  the  Shias  (the  followers  of  Ali).

THE  LETTER  KAF  Jj

ww

O

The  letter  Kaf.

350,  (352).

i.  The  abode  of  peace,  unalloyed  wine,  and  the  kind  companion,
If  ever  attainable  these  be  to  thee,  O  excellent  the  grace  of  God  !

The  world  and  the  world's  work,  all  naught  in  naught  is  :
The  verifying  of  this  matter,  a  thousand  times,  I  have  made.

To  a  place  of  safety,  go  ;  opportunity,  reckon  the  plunder  of  time  :
For,  in  the  ambuscades  of  life,  are  the  highwaymen  of  the  Path.

Regret  and  sorrow  that,  up  to  this  time,  I  knew  not,

That  the  alchemy  of  happiness  is^— the  Friend,  the  Friend !

5.  (0  Saki!)  come. For  .penitence  for  the  ruby  lip  (of  the  true  Beloved),  and  for

the  laughter  (the  sparkling)  of  the  cup,
Is  an  imagination,  verification  whereof  reason  maketh  not.

That  (darkish)  beauty  that  is  in  the  chin-pit  of  thine,

To  its  (profound)  depth,  reach  not  many  a  thought  profound.

One  of  heart  (and  an  Arif)  to  guide  (me)  to  good  (the  true  Beloved), is  where?
For,  to  the  Friend,  in  no  way  have  we  taken  the  path.

Although,  to  one  contemptible  like  me,  the  (slender)  hair  of  thy  (small)  waist

reacheth  not,
From  the  thought  of  this  subtle  matter,  happy  is  my  heart.

A  thousand  lives,  the  ransom  for  the  Saki's  glance  that  moment,
When,  with  (ruddy)  wine  like  (red)  cornelian,  the  ruby-lip,  he  moisteneth.

4  H

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

10.  If,  with  the  colour  of  red  cornelian,  my  tear  be, — what  wonder?
For  like  (red)  cornelian,  is  the  seal  of  the  seal-ring  of  my  eye.

With  laughter,  he  (the  Saki)  spake,  saying  : — "  Hafiz  !  the  servant  of  thy  nature,

I  am  -. "
Behold  to  what  degree,  me  a  fool,  he  (the  Saki)  maketh.

10.  "  J'U.^*  (the  seal  of  the  seal-ring)  signifies  : —

the  red  eye  of  the  Beloved,  the  fancy  whereof  in  the  lover's  eye  becometh  like  the  seal  of  the

seal-ring.

They  call  the  eye  a  seal-ring  (  J'U. ) ;  because,  within  it,  is  concealed  a  head.
The  eye-lashes  resemble  the  ring ;  and  the  eye  resembleth  the  seal-stone.
As  the  seal-ring  hath  honour,  so  hath  the  seal-stone  of  the  eye.
As,  in  the  seal-ring,  they  depict  great  names ;  so,  in  the  lover's  eye,  they  image  the  beloved.

THE  LETTER  KAF

603

351,  (350)-

t.  The  reed's  tongue  hath  no  desire  for  the  explanation of  separation  :

If  not,  to  thee,  I  give  the  explanation  of  the  tale of  separation.

(O  true  Beloved  !)  comrades  of  the  troop  of  Thy  fancy  ;  and  fellow-riders  with
patience,  are  we  (lovers  of  Thee),

The  associate  of  labour,  and  of'distress  ;  and  the  companion

of  separation.

Alas!  life's  span,  in  hope  of  union,

Hath  reached  to  an  end  ;  and  to  an  end,  hath  not  come  the  time  — —

of  separation.

That  head  that,  in  glory,  1  rubbed  on  the  head  of  the  sphere,
(I  swear)  by  the  true  ones  that  I  (compelled  by  Fate  and  Destiny)  placed  it  on
the  threshold of  separation.

5.  In  desire  of  union,  how  may  I  unfold  the  wing,

For  its  feathers,  the  bird  of  my  heart  hath  shed  on  the  nest—— of  separation.

Union  with  Thee,  how  may  I  claim  ?  By  my  soul  (I  swear)  that  hath  become, —
My  heart,  the  secretary  of  fate  ;  and  my  body,  the  pledge of  separation.

Roast-flesh  became  my  heart  from  the  burning  of  desire  ;  and  far  (in  separa-
tion) from  the  (true)  Beloved,
Ever,  the  blood  of  the  liver,  I  drink  from  the  tray——  of  separation.

Now,  what  remedy,  when,  into  the  great  whirlpool  of  grief's  ocean,

The  bark  of  my  patience  hath  fallen  on  account  of  the  sail  of  separation.

Not  much  it  wanted  that  the  bark  of  my  life  should  be  overwhelmed,

With  love's  wave  from  the  limitless  ocean •  of  separation.

10.  When,  captive  to  love's  circle,  the  sky  beheld  my  head,

The  neck  of  my  patience,  it  bound  with  the  cord  of  separation.

4  H  2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

O  Lord  !  into  the  world,  who  brought  disjunction  and  separation  :

Dark  be  the  day  of  disjunction,  and  the  house of  separation.

Hafiz !  if,  with  the foot  of  desire,  this  Path  (of  love)  to  the  end  thou  h'adst

gone,
To  the  hand  of  disjunction,  none  would  have  given  the  rein  of  separation.

THE  LETTER  KAF Jj  605

352, (350-

I.  Like  me  shattered,  be  none  afflicted  with  separation  :

For  my  life,  all,  hath  passed  in  the  calamity  of  separation.

•

The  stranger,  and  the  lover,  and  the  heart-bereft  fakir,  and  he  whose  head

revolveth,  —
(All)  have  endured  the  trouble  of  time  ;  and  the  pains  -  of  separation.

If  into  my  hand  he  fall,  I  will  slay  separation

With  water  (tears)  of  my  eye,  I  will  give  the  blood-price  of  separation.

I  go  where? I  do  what? The  state  of  my  heart,  I  utter  to  whom  ?

Who  taketh  justice  for  me  ? Who  giveth  the  requital——  of  separation  ?

5.  From  the  pain  of  separation  and  of  absence,  not  a  moment  of  freedom  is  mine,
(0  Beloved  !)  for  God's  sake,  take  justice  and  give  the  requital  -

of  separation.

By  separation  from  thee,  afflicted  I  make  separation  :

Even  so,  I  will  cause  blood  to  drop  from  the  eyes  of  separation.

I,  whence?  separation,  whence?  grief,  whence?

Perchance,  me,  my  mother  brought  forth  for  the  sake-  of  separation.

Hence,  night  and  day,  with  love's  stain,  like  Hafiz,

To  the  bulbul  of  the  morning,  I  utter  the  lament——  of  separation.

3.  V?  wj^-  (blood-price)  signifies  :—

what  in  exchange  for  blood  they  take  from  the  slayer.

4,  5.  "  Take  my  justice  "  signifies  :  —

"  give  me  justice."
See  Ode  330,  c.  5.
Give  the  requital  to  separation  (for  his  wrong  done  to  me).

THE  LETTER  KAF

607

The  Letter  Kaf.

353,  (354)-

1  .  0  (beloved)  !  salt  rights  with  thy  lip,  hath  my  wounded  heart  :
The  (salt)  right,  preserve  ;  for  I  depart,  and  thee  to  God  entrust.

(0  true  Beloved!)  that  pure  jewel  Thou  art  that,  in  the  holy  world,
The  mention  of  Thee  for  good  is  the  outcome  of  the  angel's  praise.

(0  beloved  !)  if  as  to  my  sincerity  doubt  be  thine,  trial  make  :
Like  the  touch-stone,  none  recogniseth  the  proof  of  pure  gold.

(O  true  Beloved  !) Thou  spakest  saying  :  —  "  Intoxicated,  I  become  ;  and  will

give  thee  two  kisses  :"
Beyond  limit,  passed  the  covenant  ;  but  neither  two  (kisses),  nor  one  (kiss),

have  we  seen.

5.  Thy  (small)  laughing  pistachio  (mouth),  open,  sugar-scattering  (speech),  make  :
In  doubt  of  Thy  (having  a)  mouth,  cast  not  the  people.

The  sphere,  I  will  dash  together  (and  destroy)  ;  unless  to  my  desire  it  come  :
Not  that  one  am  I,  to  endure  contempt  from  the  sky's  sphere.

(tne  Pure  jewel)  signifies  :  —
the  jewel  (pearl)  that  cometh  forth  alone  (not  with  others)  from  the  (oyster)  shell.

3.  In  all  truth,  I  am  thy  lover.

4.  (_rjJ  (kiss)  signifies  :  —

a  special  delight.

To  the  Eternal,  Hafiz  saith  :—

"  At  the  time  of  sending  us  to  this  world  Thou  saidest,—  '  I  will  meet  the  lover  twice  ;  once  in

the  house  of  this  world,  and  lastly  in  the  house  of  the  last  (next)  world.'
"  Beyond  limit,  hath  passed  the  covenant  ;  life's  time  hath  ended.
"  Neither  twice  nor  once,  have  we  beheld  Thee  ;  and  in  excess,  desire  hath  ended."

5.  From  its  exceeding  smallness,  thy  mouth  is  not  evident;  and,  from  thy  talking,  the  idea  cometh

to  men  that  thou  hast  no  mouth.  «

6.  The  second  line  —

Not  that  one  am  I,  that  from  the  sky's  sphere,  I  will  endure  contempt.

608  DiVftN-l-HAFIZ.

Since,  access  to  Hafiz  thou  allowest  him  not,

O  watcher  (Shaitan)  ! from  him,  one  or  two  paces  farther  (go ;  and  his  society,
abandon).

7.  "  Him  "  refers  to  the  true  Beloved  (God).

0  Iblis  !  since  thou  allowest  not  the  true  Beloved  (God)  to  pass  to  Hafiz ;  and,  ever,  by  philo-
sophy and  by  trick,  bringest  a  barrier  in  His  path, — thou  thyself  hast  not  found  the  path  to
God  ;  and  further  from  H  im,  hast  hastened.

THE  LETTER  KAF

O  609

354,  (353).

I.  (0  murshid  !)  if  wine  them  drink,  pour  a  draught  on  the  dust  (the  sons  of  dusty

Adam):
The  sin,  wherein  an  advantage  to  the  stranger  reacheth, •  what  fear.

Now,  on  the  sky's  summit,  dash  love's  door-curtain  :

For,  thee  to  the  dark  pit  (of  the  grave),  death  itself  suddenly  taketh.

With  whatever  thou  hast,  go ;  drink ;  and  regret,  suffer  not.

For  (on  thy  head),  the  sword  of  destruction  time  pitilessly  striketh.

O  graceful  cypress,  my  cherisher !  by  the  dust  of  Thy  foot,
(I  conjure  Thee)  on  the  day  of  events  (the  day  of  death),  take  not  off  Thy  foot
from  the  head  of  my  dust,

5.  What  dweller  of  hell,  what  dweller  of  paradise,  what  man,  what  angel,

In  the  religion  of  all,  infidelity  to  the  path  (tarikat)  is  baseness.

The  path  of  the  house  of  six  sides  (this  world),  the  geometrician  of  the  sky

(rea'son)
Established  so  that,  beneath  the  snare  of  the  pit  (this  world),  is  no  path  (of

flight  from  it).

•

I.  O  murshid  !  when  manifestations  of  the  true  Beloved  chance  to  thee,  thou  shouldest  give  a  taste
thereof  to  thy  disciples  and  the  seekers  of  God.  Thou  shouldest  instruct  them  that  they  may
acquire  this  degree  ;  and  may,  with  delight  and  desire,  become  the  traveller  of  the  path —
although,  in  the  travelling  of  the  path,  it  is  far  from  union  with,  and  is  verily  separation  from,
God  for  the  Srif  to  be  engaged  in  instruction ;  and  to  the  crowd  of  Xrifs  is  the  source  of
loss  and  of  disaster.

In  this  sense,  Hafiz  saith  : —

"The  sin,  wherefrom  profit  reached  another,  —what  fear?  For  this  deed  is  the  following  of

Muhammad."
Although  in  the  instruction  of  disciples,  there  is  langour  in  the  manifestations  (of  the  true

Beloved).
Yet,  since  instruction  is  the  guidance  of  others  and  is  the  law  of  Muhammad,  there  is  no  fear.

Nay,  it  is  the  cause  of  dignity.

6.  iJSij  i^^Jy*  (the  geometrician  of  the  sky)  signifies  : —

Reason  who  displayeth  the  sky's  revolution,  and  measureth  it.
vi-y?.  uij;^j.j  (the  cloister  of  six  sides)  signifies : —
The  world,  the  field  of  the  first,  and  the  last,  world, It  hath  six  sides  :—
The  front. I the  superior  (zenith).  I the  south.
„ back. | „ inferior  (nadir).  | „ north.

DiVAN-I-HAFIZ.

The path of reason, the deceit of the  daughter  of  the vine wonderfully

attacketh :
Till  the  judgment-day,  ruined  be  not  the  vine-trellis !

Hafiz  !  by  the  path  of  the  wine-house,  happily  thou  wentest,
The  prayer  of  one  of  heart,  the  consoler  of  thy  pure  heart  be !

dut  Jo  (the  snare  of  the  pit)  signifies  :—

The  world  whose  worshippers  have  the  lofty  head.
O  Seeker ! Be  not  deceived  by  reason's  talk  ;  desist  not  from  thy  search.

Reason  saith  :—

Thou  art  the  captive  of  six  sides ;  and  the  pure  Lord  is  outside  of  the  six  sides.
Then  thy  finding  Him  is  beyond  the  circle  of  possibility,  and  outside  the  limit  of  excess.

The  second  line  means  :—

In  the  last  breath  (the  agonies  of  death),  appear  to  me;  and  cause  me  to  taste  the  wine  of
seeing  Thee — which  wine  is  the  source  of  lasting  life ;  and  by  drinking  which,  I  will  break
my  fast.  My  life,  which  is  a  deposit,  I  will  deposit  with  the  Depositor  (God).

THE  LETTER  KAF

355,  (356).
i

I.  If  design  for  my  destruction,  thousands  of  enemies  (Shaitans,  intent  upon  lead-
ing one  astray)  make,

If  thou  (O  perfect  murshid  !)  be  my  friend  (and  aider), — of  enemies,  I  have  no
fear.

Me,  hope  of  union  with  Thee  keepeth  alive :

If  not,  from  separation  from  Thee  a  hundred  ways,  fear  of  destruction  is  mine.

Breath  (by)  breath,  if,  from  the  breeze,  Thy  perfume,  I  perceive  not,
Time  (after)  time,  rent  like  the  rose  my  collar  I  make.

On  account  of  Thy  image,  go  to  sleep  my  two  eyes •  never !
In  separation  from  Thee,  patient  was  my  heart, 'God  forbid  !

5.  If  a  wound,  Thou  strike,  ('tis)  better  than  the  plaister  of  another :
If  poison  Thou  give,  better  than  the  antidote  of  another.

My  slaughter,  by  the  blow  of  Thy  sword  is  everlasting  life  :

For,  verily  happy  is  my  soul  in  this  that  it  is  a  sacrifice  for  Thee.

The  rein,  turn  not. For  if  me,  Thou  strike  with  the  sword,

My  head,  the  shield  I  make ;  from  the  saddle-strap  (to  bind  me  as  game),  Thy
hand  I  keep  not  back.

Thee,  as  Thou  art,  how  may  every  vision  see  ?

To  the  extent  of  his  vision,  every  one  understandeth.

4.  The  couplet  is  a  negative  interrogation. Never  went  to  sleep  my  two  eyes  j God  forbid  that  my

heart  was  ever  patient  in  separation  from  thee.

5.  Otherwise —

If  a  wound,  Thou  strike,  well. For  another  (giveth)  the  plaister  :
If  poison,  Thou  give,  well. For  another  (giveth)  the  antidote.

41  2

6l2  DiVAN-I-HAFIZ.

356,  (357).

I.  If,  to  Thy  street,  the  power  of  arriving  be  mine,

By  the  fortune  of  union  with  Thee,  to  foundation  arriveth  my  work.

...  .  j

From  me,  took  rest, — those  two  beauteous  hyacinth  tresses  :
From  me,  took  tranquillity, — those  two  narcissi  (eyes)  tricked  with  kuhl.

Since  from  the  jewel  of  Thy  love,  a  great  polish  hath  my  heart,—
Verily,  from  the  rust  of  vicissitude,  polished  it  was.

Battered  with  ill-fortune,  life,  I  obtain

At  that  moment  when,  with  the  sword  of  grief  for  Thee,  slain  I  become.

5.  0  soul  and  heart  (the  true  Beloved)  !  in  Thy  presence,  what  sin  have  commit-
ted,
That,  accepted,  becometh  not  the  devotion  of  me,  heart-bereft  ?

When,  at  Thy  door,  without  resource,  without  gold  or  force,  I
Have,  in  no  way,  the  path  of  egress  or  of  ingress.

•

I  go — where  ? I  do — what  ? I  am — how  ? Remedy,  I  make— what  ?
For,  from  grief  of  time's  violence,  sorely  vexed  I  am  become.

Worse  than  my  heart,  grief  for  Thee  found  no  place,
When,  in  my  straitened  heart,  it  made  its  place  of  alighting.

Hafiz !  with  love's  pain,  be  content ;  and  be  silent :
Love's  mysteries,  reveal  not  before  people  of  reason.

THE  LETTER  KAF

o  613

357,  (360).

I.  (Even  as)  in  the  rose-season  (the  time  of  manifestations  ;  of  glories  of  mysteries)

of  repentance  of  wine  (love),  I  became ashamed,

(So)  of  un-upright  conduct  (abandoning  wine-drinking),  let  none  be

ashamed.

My  counsel  (the  circulation  of  the  cup)  is  all  the  snare  of  the  Path  :  and,  of  the

argument,
On  account  of  the -lovely  one,  or  of  the  Saki,  in  no  way  am  I— ashamed.

Of  the  blood,  that,  last  night,  went  (flowing)  from  the  pavilion  of  the  eye,
In  the  sight  of  the  night-prowlers  of  sleep  (that  come  upon  the  path  of  the  eye)
we  were ashamed.

Than  the  (resplendent)  sun,  more  beauteous  of  face,  thou  art. Thanks  to  God  !
That,  in  the  sun's  face,  of  thee  (O  murshid)  I  am  not  ashamed.

5.  It  may  be  that,  through  His  compassionate  nature,  the  (true)  Beloved  asketh

not  my  sin ;
For,  of  question  I  am  vexed  ;  and  of  answer,  ashamed.

From  thy  presence,  'tis  a  life-time  since  I  turned  not  away  my  face  :

By  the  aid  of  God's  grace,  of  this  threshold,  I  am  not  ashamed.

I.  When,  through  the  murshid's  guidance,  I  reached  to  the  manifestation  of  glories,  in  the  time  of
austerity  and  of  chastity  (which  was  fixed  by  love),  of  that  way,  1  suffered  shame  say-
ing :—

That  time,  why  made  I  not  increase  of  love  1 That  time,  why  spent  I  in  vanities  ?
To  such  a  degree,  reached  my  shame  that,  of  his  un-upright  conduct,  so  ashamed  as  I,  none
becometh.

3.  To  the  second  line  add  :—

"  For,  we  have  ruined  their  path."

From  the  many  bloody  waves  that,  to  that  pavilion  (the  eye-lashes)  flowed  ;  and,  to  sleep,  gave
no  admittance the  wayfarer,  who  at  night  alighted,  was  ashamed.

4.  To  the  second  line  add  : —

For,  to  the  sun's  beauty,  I  prefer  thy  beauty.

5.  In  the  first  line,  he  confesseth  to  sin;  in  the  second,  he  revealeth  his  vexation  of  question  ,3nd

answer,  and  his  shame  thereof. Thus,  doth  the  sinner  feel.

6 '4  DiVAN.I-HAFI?.

Beneath  the  lip,  poison-laughter,  why  expresseth  the  cup,

If,  of  Thy  ruby  lip,  the  (ruddy)  wine  became  not ashamed  ?

Lawful  it  is,  if  the  intoxicated  narcissus  cast  down  its  head  ;

For,  of  that  (Beloved's)  eye  full  of  wrath,  it  became ashamed.

Its  face  in  the  veil  of  the  shell,  it  (the  pure  pearl)  concealed  on  that  account,

That,  of  the  pearls  of  my  (lustrous)  verse,  the  pearl  of  pure  water  became

ashamed.

10.  The veil  of  the Zulmat (darkness),  the  (gleaming)  water (of  life) of  Khizr
established  for  the  reason  that  it  became,

Of  the  (pure)  nature  of  Hafiz  and  of  this  (his)  poetry  (lustrous)  like  water,

ashamed.

7.  Zuhr-lsbanda  (poison-laughter)  signifies: —
The  laugh  of  wrath,  of  anger,  of  shame.

lo. Zulmat. See  Ode  35.
Khizr. „ „ 89.

THE  LETTER  KAF <-  615

358,  (359).

I.  O  Thou,  whose  face  (is)  like  paradise,  and  ruby  lip  (like)  the  limpid water  of

paradise !
Soul  and  heart,  Thy  translucent  water  hath  endowed.

Around  Thy  lip,  Thy  fresh-wearing  (black)  down,

Is  like  the  (collection  of  black)  ants  around  the  limpid  water  (Thy  resplendent
face).

O  Lord  !  this  fire  (of  separation)  that  within  my  soul  is,

Make  cool (to  give  me  escape  from  separation  ;  and  to  cause  me  to  attain
union  with  Thee)  in  that  way  that  to  Khalil  Thou  didst.

O  friends !  power  (of  union  with  Him),  I  gain  not,

For  the  reason  that  exceedingly  beauteous  beauty,  He  hath.

5.  Lame  is  our  foot; and  (far  distant,  is)  the  stage  like  Paradise  :

Short,  is  our  hand  ;  and  on  the  (lofty  inaccessible)  date-tree,  the  date.

In  every  corner,  the  arrow  of  Thy  eye

Hath  a  hundred  slain  ones,  (lovers)  fallen  like  me.

Independent  of  explanation,  is  the  beauty  of  this  verse  :
Argument  respecting  the  sun's  splendour,  none  seeketh.

Afarin  !  on  the  reed  of  such  a  Painter  who  gave,
To  the  virgin  of  meaning,  such  a  beauteous  beauty.

1.  J>JJ~  (way)  signifies  :—

wakf  endowment ;  sabil  kardan,  to  prepare ;  wakf  kardan,  to  dedicate.
3.  JjJLk  (Khalil)  signifies  :—

"  The  friend  of  God,  a  title  of  Ibrahim's.
When,  by  Nimrud's  order,  they  cast  Ibrahim  into  ihe  fire,  that  fire  became,  by  God  s  grace

bounty,  a  rose-garden  for  him.
In  the  midst  of  the  fire,  Ibrahim  recited  the  Usta  (Avasta  abasta).

NtaSd  (S'ubar). See  history  of  Babylonia  by  A.  H.  Sayce,  pp.  55-62  ;  the  Bible,  Genesis,  x.
8-12 Ezekiel,  viii.  14.  B.C.  600 ;  and  the  five  ancient  monarchies  of  the  east,  by  G.  Rawlmson.

5.  Diffipult  is  union  with  the  true  Beloved.

6)6  DlVAN-l-HAFI?.

This  verse  (either)  a  miracle,  or  lawful  magic,  is ;

This  verse,  (either)  the  invisible  messenger,  or  Jibra,il,  brought.

10.  To  the  King  of  the  world, — permanency  and  grandeur;
And  everything  of  this  sort  that  he  desireth be  !

.  JJU.  j=*~  (lawful  magic)  signifies  :—
lustrous  verse.

Spiritual  magic  is  of  two  kinds  :—

(a)  'ulvi  (high) ;  rahmani  (divine).

(b)  sifli  (low) ;  shaitani  (satanic).
Divine  magic.

Perfection  consists  in  the  knowledge  of  "  the  most  great  name  "  of  God— al  ism-ul-a'?arn,  which

is  imparted  only  to  Heaven's  favourites.
By  virtue  of  this  name,

(a)  Sulaiman  and  his  Vazir,  Asaf,  derived  their  power  (KLuran,  xxvii.  40).

(b)  a  man  may  raise  the  dead.
Uttered,  or  written,  are  efficacious  : —

(c)  other  names  of  God.

(d)  the  name  of  Muhammad.

(e)  „  names  of  good  jinn.
Written  charms  are  composed  of  :—

(/)  names  c.  d.  e.

(g)  passages  from  the  Kuran.

(h)  mysterious  combination  of  numbers.

(«')  peculiar  diagrams  and  figures.
Satanic  magic.
This  magic  depends  on  the  agency  of  Shaitan  and  of  evil  jinn;  and  is  condemned  by  Muhammad

and  by  all  good  muslims.

This  magic  is  taught  by  Harut  and  Marut  (Ode  14).

j3?~J\  (as  sihr)  enchantment  is  a  branch  of  satanic  magic ;  but  as  it  has  been  studied  and  prac-
tised, with  good  intentions,  by  the  aid  of  good  jinn,  there  is  a  science  of  good  enchantment

(which  may  be  regarded  as  a  branch  of  divine,  or  lawful,  magic).
Metamorphoses  are  effected  by  spells,  or  invocations,  to  the  jinn, — with  the  sprinkling  of  dust  or

of  water  on  the  object  to  be  transformed.
The  effect  of  enchantment  on  the  enchanted  one  is  :—
(i)  to  deprive  of  life.

(ii)  to  paralyse.

(iii)  to  affect  with  irresistible  passion.

(iv)  to  render  demoniacal.

(v)  to  transform  into  a  brute,  a  bird  .  .  .
Talisman  (tilism,  tilsam,  talsam)  is  a  term  applied  to  mystical  characters  (astrological  or  other.

wise  magical) :  and  to  seals,  or  to  images,  whereon  such  characters  are  inscribed.

It  preserveth  from  : —

enchantment. I  evil.

accident.  the  despoiling  of  treasure.

On  being  rubbed,  it  calleth  up  the  presence  of  its  servant  (a  jinni).
Divination  (al  kihana).
The  diviner  obtains  the  services  of  Shaitan  : —

(a)  by  magic  art.

(b)  „  invoked  names.

(c)  „  the  burning  of  perfumes.

THE  LETTER  KAF <— $  617

In  this  fashion  a  verse  how  to  utter,  none  (other)  knoweth  ;
A  pearl  (verse)  of  this  sort,  none  (other)  can  pierce  (utter).

From  the  grasp  of  the  love  for  the  idol,  Hafiz,

Like  the  (feeble)  ant,  at  the  foot  of  the  (great)  elephant,  hath  fallen.

Before  the  mission  of  Muhammad,  the  shayatin  used  to  ascend  to  heaven  ;  and  to  hear  words  by

stealth.
All  muslims  believe  that  the  evil  jinn  ascend  to  the  lowest  heaven  ;  hear  the  angels ; and  so

assist  magicians.

The  forms  are  : —

•zarb-ul-mandal,  the  inscribing  of  the  enchanter's  circle.

„  -ur-raml,  the  moving  of  sand,
'ilm-un-najun,  the  science  of  stars.
az  zijr,  augury  from  the  motions  of  birds,  or  of  beasts.

In  every  lunar  month,  are  seven  evil  days  : —

the  3rd  whereon  Kabil  (Cain)  slew  Habil  (Abel).
„ 5th „ God cast Adam down from Paradise ; afflicted the  people  of  Yunas

(Jonah) ;  and  whereon  Yusuf  (Joseph)  was  cast  into  the  pit.
„  I3th „ God  took  away  wealth  from  Aiyub  (Job) ;  and  the  kingdom  from  Sulaiman  ;

and  whereon  the  Jews  killed  the  prophets,
„  i6th „ God  exterminated  the  people  of  Lut  (Lot) ;  transformed  300  Christians  into

swine, and  Jews  into  apes ;  and whereon  the Jews sawed asunder

Zakariyya  (Zachariah).

„  2lst „ Fir'aun  (Pharaoh)  was  drowned;  and  his  nation  afflicted  with  plagues.
„  24th „ Nimrud  slew  70  women;  and  cast  Al  Khalil  (Ibrahim)  into  the  fire;  and

whereon  was  slaughtered  the  camel  of  Salih.
,,  25th „ God  sent  the  suffocating  wind  upon  the  people  of  Hud.

See:—

Mishkat-ul-Masabit,  ii.  374,  384,  385,  388.

Mir  at-uz-zaman  i.  i.
Couplet  9  (first  line)  occurs  in  Ode  591,  c.  4.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

359,  (363)-
i.  To the way-farer (the holy traveller), sufficient guide (to tarikat and to

ma'rifat)  is,  love :

In  His  (the  true  Beloved's)  path  (of  union  and  of  love),  my  tears  I  prepared  (to
shed).

Into  account,  when  bringeth  the  wave  of  our  tear,

That  one,  who,  over  the  blood  of  the  slain,  urgeth  his  bark?

Not  my  choice  is  my  ill-fame  :

Me,  road-lost  in  love,  He  (God)  made  who  guided.

On  thyself,  dash  not  the  fire  of  the  face  of  idols  :
Or,  over  the  fire,  happily  pass  like  Khalil  (Ibrahim).

5.  On  thyself, either  establish (the  treading  of  the  path  of  love, and  of  divine

knowledge)  so  that  thou  mayst  lose  thy  desire  (and  become  road-lost)  :
Or,  without  the  guide  (the  holy  shara"  ;  or  the  murshid),  in  this  path,  plant  not
thy  foot  (for  thou  wilt  not  attain  thy  object).

I.  In  the  second  line,  the  path  may  be  the  path  —

(a)  of  the  true  Beloved.

(b)  „ „ murshid.

(c)  „  love.

3.  The  guide  signifies :  —
(a)  God  Most  High.
(4)  the  beloved.
(c) „ murshid.

When  the  murshid — who  taught  me  the  ordinances  of  outward  worshipping;  and  kindled  in  my
path  the  lamp  of  guidance— recognised  me  to  be  worthy  of  love,  he  cast  me  into  love's
path ;  and  with  love's  fire  made  luminous  my  heart.

In  thy  opinion,  this  is  being  road-lost  in  error ;  in  mine,  the  perfection  of  knowledge.
See  Ode  179,  c.  6 ;  359,  c.  3 ;  37 1,  c.  I ;  374,  c.  5.
5.  To  thy  heart,  pass  not  the  thought. God  forbid  that,  in  this  friendlessness,  thou  shouldst  lose

•  thy  object.

Thou  art  a  man  of  the  Path;  such  a  one  thinketh  not  of  the  acclivity  or  the  declivity. In  this

Path,  without  a  road-guide,  thy  foot  plant  not. Prudence  and  foresight  (the  goal  of  the

shari'at)  to  a  hair's  breadth  thou  followest ;  in  thy  heart — "  First  the  Friend,  then  the  Path"—

thou  placest;  and,  in  speaking  and  doing,  the  following  of  predecessors  thou  abandonest  not.

In  love's  path,  thy  own  existence  to  heart  bring  notj  with  the  ear  of  sense,  this  subtlety

hear  that,  although  thou  art  a  person  of  His  persons,  thy  object  (through  the  prohibitor),

thou  lose  not.

If  this  state  thou  have  not  and  something  for  thyself  fashion,  thy  foot  in  love's  path  plant  not.
From  the  highway  of  shari'at,  show  not  a  hair's  breadth  of  transgression,  which  transgression
would  be  wholly  calamitous,  and  the  source  of  disaster, of  iniquity, and  of  error. See
Ode  298,  c.  5  ;  299,  c.  2  ;  302,  c.  10 ;  303,  c.  6.

THE  LETTER  KAF

O  619

Years,  I  was  in  thought  of  that  couplet  that  uttered
An  elephant-driver  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Nil : —

"  Either  remember  the  customs  of  an  elephant-driver  (a  lover  of  God),
"Or,  to  Hindustan  (the  holy  traveller's  heart),  go  not  with  the  thought  of  the
elephant  (love  for  God).

"  Either  draw  not  on  the  face  the  dark  line  of  being  a  lover  ;

"  Or,  to  the  river  Nil  (of  mourning),  take  down  thy  garment  of  piety.

*

"  Either  friendship  with  elephant-drivers  (lovers  of  God),  make  not :
"  Or,  fit  for  the  elephant  (love  for  God),  establish  the  house."

7.  Hindustan  signifies  :—

(a)  the  native-land  of  the  elephant.

(b)  a  holy  traveller's  heart,  whence  love  springeth. Then,  on  his  body,  it  falleth  ;  and,  on

all  its  parts,  poureth  out  its  mysteries.

A  poet  saith  : —

"A  hidden  subtle  thing1  it  is  whence  love  ariseth."
If  thou  practise  love,  the  customs  andj  habits  of  lovers  (of  God)  remember  ;  the  path  of  lovers,

take;  with  it,  all  thy  spirit  reckon ;  to  it,  thyself  consign  ;  of  danger  have  no  fear.
Otherwise,  about  love-play,  wander  not;  and  to  thy  heart  the  idea  of  being  a  lover,  bring  not.

When  the  elephant  goeth  to  sleep,  in  sleep  he  seeth  his  native  land. In  wakefulness,  madness

(of  desire  for  his  native  land)  seizeth  him  so  that  he  dieth.
Not  a  moment,  are  elephant-masters  careless  of  the  elephant  ;  they  do  not  allow  him  to  sleep  at

his  desire.

If  he  go  to  sleep,  quickly,  they  apply  a  remedy.
When  access  to  thyself  thou  gavest  love  ;  and  on  the  plain  of  existence,  thy  pace  extcndedest—  not

a  moment  be  careless  of  love  ;  for  it,  all  spirit  summon  ;  and  in  adversities,  be  patient.
God  forbid—  love  remembering  its  native  land,  should  (in  thy  immature  heart)  become  possessed

of  discernment.

8.  Ojj  Jjj  jj  &»U.(to  cast  the  garment  in  the  Nile)  signifies  :—

to  have  mourning.
Either  be  not  a  lover  ;  or  abandon  outward  piety. One  of  these  two,  choose.

g.  Every  work  that  thou  choosest,  capacity  for  that  work,  reveal.

To  encourage  the  elephant,  they  cast  on  his  feet  a  leathern  bag  filled  with  pebbles. Thus,

is  he  taught  to  kill  a  man  by  trampling  on  him.
gee  .  _

(a)  Histoire Militaire  des  elephants  depuis les temps  les  plus  recules,  par  le  Chev.  P.

Armande  ancien  Colonel  d'Artillerie,  1843.
(6)  Official  notes  (three)  on  Elephants  by  Captain  H.  Wilberforce  Clarke,  R.E.  (dated  the

3rd  April,  the  l6th  April,  and  the  2nd  December  1879)  which  may  be  seen  :—
i.  at  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Calcutta.
ii. „ „ Office  of  the  Consulting  Engineer  to  the  Government  of  India  for  Railways,

Calcutta.

iii.  „ „  Royal  United  Service  Institution,  London.
iv. „ „ Institution  of  Civil  Engineers.

4K  z

620

DIVAN-I-H&FIZ.

10.  Without  wine  and  the  minstrel,  to  paradise  call  me  not,

In  the  cup  of  wine  (of  love  and  of  divine  knowledge)  is  my  ease,  not  in  the
limpid  water  (of  paradise).

O  Hafiz  !  if  thou  have  the  meaning  (of  mystery), — it,  bring;
If  not,  naught  is  the  claim  save  question  and  answer.

Elephants  are  said  to  have  been  used  in  battle  for  the  first  time :  —
(a)  558  B.C.  by  Derbices  in  his  war  against  Cyrus  the  Great.
(*)  331 » » Darius  at  the  battle  of  Arbela.

Probably,  the  latter  date  is  the  correct  date.

THE  LETTER  KAF O  621

360,  (36i).

I.  O  (cool)  breeze  of  the  north!  the  breeze  of  good  news,  thou  art,
That,  us,  at  union's  time,  reacheth.

O  messenger  of  the  bird-place  ! God  protect  thee  :
Welcome  !  welcome  ! Come  !  come  !

Salma  is  where  ? In  Zu  Salam,  is  who  ?

Our  neighbours  are  where  ? Their  state  is  how  ?

Void  remaineth  the  space  of  the  banquet-hall ;
Of  the  companions,  and  of  the  brimful  ritl.

.  5.  After  safety  (from  calamity),  invisible  became  the  dwelling  (of  Salma)  :
Of  its  former  state,  the  ruins  ask.

Now,  hath  the  night  of  absence  cast  its  shade  :

Let  us  see,  what  (pastime)  the  night-prowlers  (the  dreams)  of  fancy play.

2.  ,iy«-=^l  signifies: —

a  protected  bird-place,  a  cote.
U^.x  signifies:  —

(j'.vf  c^r^-  we"«  'hou  hast  come ;  welcome.
From  straitedness,  thou  hast  come ;  and  to  spaciousness,  arrived  :  after  labour,  in  ease  thou  hast

rested.

O  messenger  of  the  bird-place  of  friends  I O  news-bringer  !  thee,  may  God  preserve  from  cala-
mities.

Welcome!  purity,  thou  hast  brought. Come!  come!
Couplets  i,  6,  8,  10  excepted,  this  Ode  is  in  Arabic.

3.  JL»  ji  (Zu  Salam,  mimosa-owning)  is  the  name  of  a  place  (district  or  village)  between  glorious

Makka  and  luminous  Madina.
JL»  (gum  arable  tree)  signifies  :  —

(a)  a  thorny  tree  which  is  in  the  abode  of  Salro?;  and  with  the  bark  whereof  they  tan
leather.

(ft)  a  kind  of  vegetation.
What  state  hath  Salm^?  what  doth  she? Before  her,  what  state  doth  Time  bring  ? In  that

dwelling  of  Salm?  (which  is  the  tree  Salam),  who  is  the  dweller ;  and  who  layeth  the  couch

of  sleep  ?
Our  neighbours,  where  are  they  T  what  state  have  they  ?  what  do  they  ?

4.  Ritl  (i  quart). See  Ode  315,  c.  2.

5.  After  that  time  when  SalmS's  dwelling  was  inhabited  ; and  into  it,  calamity and adversity

entered  not,— the  traces  of  the  dwelling  became  invisible.
From  its  vestiges  that  are  left  after  its  ruin,  ask  ye  the  state  of  that  dwelling.

DlVAN-l-HAR?.

Love's  tale, — no  break  is  it's  :
Here,  speech's  tongue  is  broken.

At  none,  looketh  our  saucy  one  :

Alas  this  pride,  haughtiness,  and  disdain  !

In  thy  beauty  of  perfection,  thou  acquiredest  hope
Far  from  thee,  God  keep  the  eye-wound  (of  calamity) !

O  Hafiz  !  love  and  patience,  how  long  ?
Sweet,  is  the  wail  of  lovers. Bewail  !

9.  JU/  ^jxc  j  -£**.  ^ic  (the  essence  of  the  eye  ;  and  the  essence  of  perfection)  signifies : —

Eye-wound. .For  save  to  that  which  is  perfect,  the  eye-wound  cometh  not.
In  beauty  of  perfection,  I  beheld  thee  :  at  my  desire,  1  arrived.

God  Most  High  may  cause  to  turn  the  eye  of  perfection  (the  eye-wound,  and  the  source  of  dis-
aster).

That  is—

To  whatever  attaineth  perfection,  the  eye-wound  (disaster)  cometh  ;  and  draweth  it  to  decline.
Thee,  from  the  eye-wound,  in  His  own  safety,  God  will  ke.'p ;  and  thus  us,  to  the  Nil  of  (de-
sire) will  bring.

THE  LETTER  KAF ^  623

361,  (358)-

1.  O  Thou  that  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  this  Thy  form  and  grace  !
(Thine)  solicitude,  for  none;  to  Thee,  inclined  (in  love)  a  whole  world  !

O  soul(O  Beloved,  in  separation  from  Thee)  !  from  my  heart,  sometimes  I  heave

the  sigh  ;  and,  sometimes  draw  out  the  arrow  :
Before  Thee  (that  hast  no  solicitude  for  me),  how  shall  I  say  what  things  through

my  heart  I  endure  ?

To  the  watchers,  how  shall  I  utter  the  description  of  Thy  ruby  lip !
To  the  ignorant,  good  is  not  the  coloured  (vivid)  meaning.

When,  every  day  Thy  beauty  is  greater  than  (Thy  beauty  of)  the  other  (preced-
ing; day,
To  Thy  glorious  face,  one  cannot  compare  (even)  the  (effulgent)  moon.

5. My  heart,  Thou  hast  ravished  ;  my  soul,  I  give  Thee. Grief,  why  sendest  thou?
Since  wholly  grieved  we  are,  of  the  (tax-)  collector  what  need  ?

Hafiz  when  in  love's  fold,  thou  plantedest  thy  foot,

On  His  (the  true  Beloved's)  skirt,  fix  thy  hand  ;  and  of  all  (attachments  to  the
world,  thy  hand)  let  go.

2.  .*i/  (I  draw)  signifies  : —

I  heave ;  I  draw  out ;  I  endure.

3.  cUla.  (ignorant)  signifies  : —

a  worldly  one,  not  occupied  with  spiritual  matters.

4.  The  moon  is  sometimes  waning  (in  glory)  and  sometimes  waxing  (therein),

5.  Grief  is  supposed  to  be  a  (tax-)  collector. See  Ode  426,  c.  8.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

362,  (366).

i.  By  the  magic  of  the  doll  (pupil)  of  thy  eye,  O  one  of  happy  qualities  !
By  the  mystery  of  thy  down,  O  verse  of  happy  omen  !

By  the  (sweet)  draught  of  thy  ruby  (lip),  0  water  of  my  life  !

By  thy  colour  and  perfume,  O  fresh  spring  of  beauty  and  of  grace !

By  the  dust  of  thy  path,  that  is  hope's  canopy  ;

By  the  dust  of  thy  foot,  that  is  the  envy  of  limpid  water :

By  thy  cypress  (stature)  of  moon-appearance  :  by  the  lofty  sun  ;
By  thy  exalted  threshold  ;  by  the  sky  of  glory  :

5.  By  thy  graceful  gait,  like  the  ways  of  strutting  of  the  partridge  :
By  thy  glances  like  the  ways  of  the  eye  of  the  gazelle  :

By  thy  sweet  nature ;  and  (by  thy)  breath,  the  morning's  perfumed  pastile  ;
By  the  perfume  of  thy  tress ;  and  (by  the)  odour  of  the  gently  breathing  (cool)
north  wind :

By  that  red  cornelian  that,  for  us,  is  the  seal  of  the  eye's  seal  ring  ;
By  that  jewel  (the  pearl  of  eloquence)  that,  for  you,  is  the  door  of  the  casket  of
speech :

By  that  page  (surface)  of  thy  cheek  that  became  the  rose-bed  of  the  eye :
By  that  enclosed  garden  (the  eye.)  of  vision  that  became  the  place  of  fancy,

(I  swear)  that,  in  contentment  with  Thee,  if  (him)  Thou  will  regard,  Hafiz
Will  not  remain  (even)  with  life. What  room  (to  say  that)  goods  and  property
(will  not  remain).

4.  The  cypress. See  Odes  108,  145.

7.  -i^.  JU.  jf*  (the  seal  of  the  eye's  seal-ring). See  Ode  350,  c.  9.

g.  The  first  line  may  be  : —

(a)  "(I  swear),  O  Hafiz,  if  thou  look  at  thy  pleasure,

"  Thou  will  not  remain  with  life  *  * "

This  is  an  instance  of  sun'at-i-iltifat  (change  of  person).

(b)  "(I  swear)  that  if  Hafiz,  not  satisfied  with  thee,  regard  (another),
"  He  will  not  remain  with  life  *  * "

In  this  case —

j  is  read

THE  LETTER  KAF  <*S  ^25

363,  (362).

t.  The  world-possessor,  defender  of  the  faith)  perfect  sovereign :
Yahyatin  Muzaffar,  king,  just-doer:

O  thou  !  thy  court,  the  shelter  of  Islam,  hath  opened
.On  the  face  of  the  world,  the  window  of  the  soul,  and  the  door  and  the  heart.

Necessary  and  proper  to  the  soul  and  to  wisdom,  is  reverence  to  thee  :
To  existence  and  dwelling  (the  universe),  thy  reward  is  abounding  and  compre-
hending.

On  the  day  of  eternity  without  beginning,  from  thy  reed,  a  drop  of  blackness

(ink)
That  became  the  solver  of  questions,  fell  on  the  face  of  the  moon.

5.  When  (on  thy  face;  or  on  the  moon's)  the  sun  beheld  that  dark  mole,  to  his

heart,  he  said  :—
"Would  to  heaven  that  I  had  been  the  fortunate  slave  (the  dark  mole)."

O  king !  on  account  of  thy  banquet,  the  sky  is  in  dancing  and  in  sama'
From  the  skirt  of  this  zamzama,  thy  hand  let  not  go.

Drink  wine  ;  and  give  the  world  (be  joyous). For,  of  the  tress  of  thy  noose,
Captive  to  chains  became  the  neck  of  thy  ill-wisher.

(Now,)  altogether,  in  the  way  of  justice,  is  the  sky's  revolution  :

Be  happy  that  the  tyrant  taketh  not  the  path  to  the  stage  (of  his  object).

Hafiz  !  when  in  the  (power  of  the)  king  of  the  world  is  the  partition  of  subsist-
ence,
For  thy  livelihood,  make  no  useless  thought.

1.  Yahya  was  the  sixth  of  the  Muzaffar  dynasty  (1353 — 1430,) See  Ode  505,  c.  n  ;  506,  c.  8.

2.  The  first  line  may  be : —

O  thou  whose  court,  the  shelter  of  Islam,  hath  opened.

4.  On  the  day  of  eternity  without  beginning  from  thy  reed  fell,  on  the  moon's  face,  a  drop  to  which

Fate  and  Destiny  gave  this  nobility  that  it  became  the  date  of  all  the  important  affairs  of  the
world  ;  and  the  loosener  of  many  theological  questions,  such  as —

(a)  the  time  of  probation  of  the  divorced  woman.

(b)  „  „  „ woman  (widow)  of  a  dead  man.

(c)  the  pilgrimage  to  Makka.

(d)  legal  alms.

5.  The  word  "Hindu"  (the  black  man  of  Hindustan)  signifies:  —

a  black  slave.
„  dark  mole.

6.  sama'. See  Ode  45.
zamzama. „ „ 299,  c.  7.

4L

626  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

364,  (367)-

I.  The  breeze  of  love's  perfume,  I  perceived  ;  and,  expectant  of  the  flashing  of  the

lightning  of  union,  became  :
O  (cool)  breeze  of  the  north  !  come  :  for,  for  the  perfume  of  thy  body,  I  die  !

O  song-uttering  driver  of  the  camels  of  the  Beloved  !  stand,  and  alight  :
For,  in  desire  of  the  Beloved's  beauty,  no  patience  is  mine.

O  heart  !  the  complaint  of  the  night  of  separation,  let  go  :
In  thanks  that  the  day  of  union  hath  up-cast  the  screen  (of  the  night  of  separa-
tion).

When  the  Beloved  is  in  desire  of  peace;  and  excuse  asketh,

In  every  state,  one  can  pass  by  (and  pardon)  the  violence  of  the  watcher.

5.  (O  Friend  !)  come. For  the  seven-fold-rose  (-tear)-shedding  screen  of  the  eye,
On  the  writing  of  the  workshop  of  (Thy  tender)  fancy,  I  have  drawn.

1.  Jk*_j  (Jjl  (the  lightning  of  union)  signifies  :  —

the  manifestations  of  glories  :  and  the  beholding  face  to  face.

JUJi  vuJ  (the  breeze  of  the  north)  signifies  :  —
(a)  the  perfect  murshid.
(6)  the  cool  breeze  that,  from  the  land  of  the  Beloved,  cometh.

The  explanations  are  :  —

(a)  the  sweet  fragrance  of  the  true  Beloved,  I  perceived;  and  by  the  lightnings  of  union,

overpowered  became,

O  north  breeze!  O  perfect  murshid  1  come;  for,  in  desire  for  thee,  I  die.  Thy  seeker
and  searcher,  I  am—  'tis  the  time  of  aid.

(b)  the  sweet  fragrance  of  the  true  Beloved,  I  perceived  ;  and  stared  became.

By  the  lightnings  of  union,  and  by  the  splendours  of  the  rising  of  the  sun  void  of  decli-
nation, the  marks  of  union  took  dwelling  in  my  heart;  and,  there,  the  manifestations
of  glories  made  their  abode.

O  north  breeze  !  . *  *

The  first  lines  of  couplets  I,  2  are  in  Arabic.

2.  ,joU.  (Guide)  signifies  :  —

the  song-utterer,  who,  by  the  singing  of  Arab  songs,  urgeth  the  camels.
O  driver  of  the  camels  of  the  Beloved  ;  and  urger  of  the  litters  wherein  are  my  beloved  !  stand,

and  alight  :

For  *  *  *  *

5  .  The  eye  hath  seven  screens,  called  :  —

'he  natural  screen  growing  out  of  the  skull,  which  protecteth  the  eye  from  injury.
'ie  membrane-screen.

c)  JXi^,  isuJo  the  latticed  screen. It  is  like  a  net.

AF  O  627

THE  LETTER  KAF

In  my  straitened  heart,  is  naught  save  the  fancy  of  Thy  (small)  mouth  :
Like  me,  in  pursuit  of  vain  fancy,  be  none  !

Vexation  with  a  piece  of  counsel  from  the  Beloved  (who  is  as  my  soul),  I  show  not ;
For  vexation  with  his  own  soul,  (even)  with  effort,  none  sheweth.

Trodden  by  the  foot  of  grief,  perturbed,  is  my  heart :
Even  as  acquainted  with  its  state  is  none.

Slain  by  love  for  Thee,  became  the  stranger,  Hafiz,  but,
By  our  dust,  pass ;  for  lawful  to  Thee  is  our  blood.

(d)  tPjV-"  ***k  the  spidered  screen.  It  is  very  thin  and  delicate,  springeth  hard  from  mois-
ture, like  the  spider's  thread-

(<0  i_y*"  ***'•  the  grape- screen.  This  hath  two  skins(folds)black  in  colour,  in  the  centre  a  hole
like  the  hole  at  the  extremity  of  the  grape,  wherefrom  momently  light  falleth  on  the  eye.

(f)  ^j>  t^°  the  horned  screen.  Its  advantage  is  that  it  covereth  the  hardened  moisture  so
"that  it  may  do  its  work;  and  keepeth  off  outward  dangers.  It  is  so  named  because,
like  the  tusk  of  the  boar,  it  is  a  horn  outwardly  black,  inwardly  resplendently  white  like
the  sun.  Whatever  is  placed  beneath  it,  appeareth  through  it.

(§•)  f*^°  ^°  the  meat  (flesh),  or  the  rose-shedding  screen.  It  springeth  from  the  back  of  the
brain;  and,  joined  to  the  other  parts  of  the  eye,  to  them  giveth  fleshiness  and  coherence,
whereby  the  eye  openeth  its  feathers  and  wings.

It  is  called  rose  shedding ;  because,  from  it,  the  eye's  light  cometh  into  manifestation ;  and  be-
cause it  is  fit  for  tear-shedding  if,  in  partnership  for  tear-shedding,  all  the  layers  are.

The  explanations  are: —

(a)  O  friend !  come ;  for  the  rose-shedding  screen  (which  is  one  of  the  seven  screens  of  the

eye),  I  have  drawn  on  the  writing  of  the  workshop  of  fancy ;  and,  ever,  (until  thee  I  have
seen),  into  imagination  thy  fancy  I  take.

(b)  Come  !  for  on  the  face  of  the  workshop  of  (thy  tender)  fancy,  I  have  drawn  the  rose-shed-

ding screen,  so  that,  from  the  eye  or  from  its  tears,  injury  befall  thee  not.

4L2

628

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

365,  (364).

i.  In  praise  of  those  good  qualities  (of  the  Beloved  ;  or  of  the  murshid),  every  sub-
tlety that  I  uttered,

Every  one  who  heard,  said  :— ''The  sayer  of  this,  what  an  excellent  speaker  is
he!"

I  spake  saying: — "The  powerless  soul,  Thou  pitiest  when  ?"
He  said: — "At  that  time  when,  between  (the  lover  and  the  Beloved)  life  is  not
the  intervener.'

At  first  (on  the  day  of  Alast),  easy  appeared  the  acquisition  of  love  and  of
profligacy  :

In  the  end,  in  (attempting)  the  acquisition  of  these  excellences,  the  soul  con-
sumed.

On  the  head  of  the  gibbet,  this  subtlety,  sweetly  singeth  Hallaj  Mansur : —
"Questions  (of  love)  like  these,  of  the  Shafi'i  (order),  ask  ye  not."

I

5.  I  have  given  my  heart  to  a  Friend,  bold,  decorated,  arrayed,
Agreeable  of  nature,  laudable  of  disposition.

Like  Thy  intoxicated  (obliquely-looking)  eye,  I  was  at  the  time  of  corner-tak-
ing (retiring  to  solitude)  :
Now,  like  Thy  (inclined)  eye-brow,  I  became  an  incliner  to  the  intoxicated.

2.  At  that  time  when,  passing  out  from  thy  own  soul,  with  the  true  Beloved  thou  mixest ;  aught  save
Him,  forgettest;  and  for  Him  not  existent  becomest.

4.  Hallaj. See  Odes  66,  123,  138,  139.

Ask  ye  not  questions  :  —
(a)  of  love, —

"  I  am  God ;  holy  and  great  is  my  state  "  which  are  words  of  shakriya  (partnership)

and  of  wujudiya  (existence).
(4)  of  dragging  to  the  gibbet.

Because,  he  who  is  a  man  of  the  outward  (a  hypocrite)  hath  no  knowledge  of  inward  questions  ;
and  if  he  hath  knowledge,  no  permission  is  his  to  reveal  them.

The  Shafi'i  (order)  is  mentioned  : —

(a)  because,  by  the  order  of  the  mufti  of  the  Shafi'i  order,  they  dragged  to  the  gibbet  Mansur

Hallaj.

(6)  not  because,  Shafi'i  is  not  lord  of  the  inward  (and  of  the  outward).
Imam  Shafi'i  was  born  at Ghaza  (in  Palestine),  767;  and  died  in  Egypt  820  A.D.
The  second  line  is  in  Arabic.

AF  O  629

THE  LETTER  KAF

From  my  tears,  a  hundred-fold  Nuh's  deluge,  I  beheld  ;
Yet,  from  the  heart's  tablet,  Thy  picture  ever  declined  not.

O  grief  that  me,  no  entrance  at  His  door,  the  Heart-ravisher  gave :
Notwithstanding  that  from  (all)  sides,  mediators,  I  evoked.

O  Beloved ! Hafiz's  hand  is  the  amulet  of  (against)  the  (evil)  eye-wound :
O  Lord  !  (grant)  that  suspended  to  (circled  around)  thy  neck,  it  (the  hand)  I
may  see  !

THE LETTER  MiM f*  ^3l

r

The  Letter  Mfm.

366,  (442).

I.  If,  from  my  hand,  there  arise  (the  chance)  that  with  my  heart-possessor  I  may

sit,

From  the  cup  of  fortune  (of  His  face),  I  drink  wine  ;  and,  from  the  garden  of  union
(with  Him),  pluck  the  rose  (of  profit).

Not  my  foundation  (of  life),  will  the  bitter  (strong)  wine  (real  love)  sufi-con-

suming  take  ;
0  Saki  (perfect  murshid) !  on  my  lip,  thy  lip,  place ;  and  my  sweet  life,  take.

(In  this  vain  desire)  perchance,  distraught  I  shall  become. For, from  love  of

thee,  night  to  day,
To  the  moon,  (like  one  distraught)  I  utter  speech ;  in  sleep,  the  Pari,  I  see.

To  the  intoxicated,  thy  (sweet)  lip  gave  sugar  ;  and  to  the  wine-drinkers,  thy  (in-
toxicated) eye,  wine  :

Through  exceeding  disappointment,  neither  am  I  with  that  (the  sugar) ;  nor
am  I  with  this  (the  wine).  (Such  a  one)  am  I !

5.  (On)  the  night  of  departure,  I  go  from  the  couch  to  the  palace  of  the  huru-l-'in

(the  hur  with  large  black  eyes),
If,  at  the  time  of  life-surrendering,  thou  be  the  candle  at  my  pillow.

Since  every  particle  of  dust  that  the  wind  brought  was  a  bounty  from  Thy  grace,
Thy  slave's  state  remember ;  for  an  old  servant  am  I.

5.  See  the  Kuran,  lii.  20.

Sing. <.?;>»•  plur. v^jf*-  (Persian),
>• .. » Jy*- (Arabic).

i  '

" SJ*- " S£>J^ "

See  dde  25,  c.  2;  416,  c.  4;  475,  c.  8.

632  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Not  pleasing  appeared  the  writing  of  every  one,  who  a  versified  picture,  ex-
pressed :

A  rare  partridge  (lustrous  verse),  I  take  ;  for  swift  is  my  royal  falcon  (the  poet's
high  genius).

If  belief  thou  have  not,  go;  ask  the  painter  of  Chin  (Mani)  ;
For,  the  usage  (of  word-painting  even),  the  (illustrious  painter)  Mani  desireth
from  the  nib  of  my  reed.

Sabahu-1-khair !  shouted  the  bulbul. O  Saki !  where  art  thou  ?  arise  !

For,  in  my  head,  tumult  maketh  the  twanging  clamour  of  the  harp  of  last  night.

10.  Not  every  one's  work  is  fidelity  and  truth-speaking,

The  slave,  I  am,  of  the  Asaf  of  the  age, — Jalalu-1-Hakk  va-d-Dln.

From  me,  not  from  Hafiz,  hear  the  mysteries  of  love  and  of  intoxication  ;
For,  with  the  cup  and  the  goblet,  every  night,  the  companion  of  the  moon  and
of  the  Pleiades,  am  I.

7.  Otherwise  —

Not  pleasing  appeared  his  writing  —  every  one  who  expressed  a  versified  picture.

(good  morning)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  salutation  that  the  companions  utter,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  to  the  Saki  when,  from

him,  they  seek  the  morning  cup.

(b)  the  wailing  of  love.

&a.  u^/^  (the  twanging  clamour  of  the  harp  of  last  night)  signifies  :  —
The  covenant  of  alast  ;  for,  by  the  faithful  duty  to  that  covenant,  all  are  bound.

From  the  distraught  lover  (of  God),  love's  wailing  struck  up  ;  struck  in,  from  within  me,  the
covenant  of  alast.

O  murshid  of  the  time  !  where  art  thou  ? Arise  ;  and  into  my  cup,  pour  the  rosy  wine.

For,  before  my  vision  the  talk  of  counsel,  the  slumber  of  carelessness,  and  wine-drinking  arose
and  the  covenant  (which,  on  the  day  of  misak  I  had  made  with  God)  adorned  the  tumult.

This  couplet  occurs  in  Ode  372,  c.  6.

10.  The  true  name  is—

Jalalu-d-Din.

Because  he  was  faithful  and  truthful,  the  Poet  adds  -
Jalalu-1-Hakk.

11.  This  couplet  occurs  in  Ode  372,  c.  8.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f  633

367,  (376).

j.  Permit  us  to  pass  by  the  highway  of  the  tavern  ;

For,  for  a  draught,  in  need  of  this  (tavern-)  door,  we  are  all.

On  the  first  day  (of  eternity  without  beginning)  when,  of  profligacy  and  of  love,

we  boasted,
Its  condition  was  that,  (no  path)  save  the  Path  of  this  way  (of  love),  we  tread.

The  place  (this  world)  where  the  masnad  of  Sulaiman  goeth  to  the  wind  (of

destruction),
Pleasant,  it  is  not  if  we  suffer  grief. Best,  that  we  drink  wine.

Let  us  see,  it  may  be  that,  in  his  girdle,  one's  hand  one  can  fix ;
Seated  in  the  heart's  blood,  like  the  red  ruby,  are  we.

5.  Admonisher!  (to  us)  make  not  the  counsel  of  the  distraught. For  we,

With  (possessing)  the  (glorious)  dust  of  the  Friend's  street,  look  not  at  Paradise.

Since  (by  sama'),  the  Sufis  are  in  the  mystic  state  of  the  dance,
We  also  by  the  sorcery  (of  love-play),  a  hand  uplift  (in  rapture).

From  thy  draught  (-sprinkling),  earth  gained  the  rank  of  the  (mighty)  ruby  :
Before  Thee,  less  than  the  dust  are  we  helpless  (lovers ;  because,  to  us  Thou
inclinest  not).

Before  that  dear  life  passeth,
Permit  us  to  pass  before  Thy  face.

Hafiz !  when  there  is  no  path  to  the  turret  of  the  palace  of  union,
Our  head,  with  the  dust  of  the  threshold  of  this  door,  let  us  take.

5.  In  my  opinion  to  have  the  dust  of  the  Beloved's  street  is  better  than  to  go  to  paradise.
Then  counselling  is  profitless  ;  for,  of  love's  path,  never  will  I  repent.

6.  Sama'.  See  Ode  45.

7.  The  "  mighty  ruby."  See  Ode  179,  c.  2.

9.  Since  our  desire  issueth  not,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  not  turn  from  our  purpose.
"  Who  sought,  found."

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

368.

I.  Hath  not  the  time  arrived — for  friends  to  pity ;
For  covenant-breakers,  to  repent?

To  them,  hath  no  news  arrived  of  him  who  was  left  behind,
With  the  fire  of  grief  in  his  chest?

Had  the  tribe  known  what  passed

On  the  wounded  one,  him  they  would  have  drawn  near  to  ;  and  pitied.

Arrived  hath  the  season  of  Nau-riiz ;  green  have  become  the  sand-hills :
What  of  the  young  minstrels  that  they  sing  not?

5.  What  of  me,  the  heart  concealed,  the  tears  revealed,
How  wonderful  it  is — the  dumb  speaking!

These  are  the  months  in  which,  by  the  wind's  blowing,  objects  (the  blossoming  of

flowers)  are  gained  :
Unlawful  to  us,  is  spring's  pleasure.

1.  This  Ode  (all  in  Arabic),  Hafiz  wrote  at  the  beginning  of  the  mystic  state  before  he  had  arrived

at  the  stage  of  decoration.
The  brothers  (c.  7)  and  the  friends  (c.  9)  signify  :—

Holy  travellers  and  Krifs,  at  whose  stage  Hafiz  had  arrived;  and  in  search  of  whom,  he  was

like  one  distraught. From  every  traveller,  aid  he  sought.
To  defective  ones  and  covenant-breakers,  is  not  the  time  arrived  that  they  should  be  penitent

of  covenant-breaking  1

2.  To  them  hath  no  news  arrived  of  that  one  who  broke  the  covenant ;  and  broke  the  pledge,  not-

withstanding that,  in  his  chest,  the  fire  of  grief  and  of  penitence  flameth  up.
To  them,  from  the  Kuran  and  the  Hadis,  hath  not  the  tale  of  covenant-breakers  come  ?

3.  Of  what  hath  passed  from  them  on  this  wounded  one,  void  of  oppression, — would  that  my  tribe

knew  !

After  knowing  the  extent  of  their  tyranny,  this  wounded  one  pardoneth  them,  and  forgiveth  what
is  fit  to  be  forgiven.

4.  The  spring-season  hath  come  ;  green,  the  highland  hath  become  ;  and  distilled  and  pure,  is  the

wine ;  full  and  abundant,  are  the  grapes ;  and  friends  of  fellow-cup  sing ;

5.  My  tear  revealed  my  mysteries;  and  though  my  limbs  had  held  the  mysteries  concealed,  my

tear  became  the  informer.
O  wonderful  deed  !  if  silence  uttereth  speech ;  and  seeketh  the  mystery  of  his  master  (the  body).

6.  For  these  are  months,  by  the  effects  whereof,  the  heart  demandeth  joy,  independence,  and  power-

fulness, — the  result  whereof  is  pleasure.

To  us,  poor,  centreless,  resourceless,  the  pleasure  of  spring  is  unlawful, Our  heart  is  at  the  foot
of  the  snare.

THE  LETTER  MIM  j-  635

Sons  of  our  uncle  !  to  us  with  a  draught  extend  your  generosity  :

For  generosity  and  greatness  are  means  whereby  known  is  the  generous  one.

O  thou  that  hast  acquired  sway  over  all  kings  !

Pity. God  recompense  thee  : Fortune  are  deeds  of  charity.

For  every  one  of  the  friends  (of  Hafiz)  are  a  store  (of  victuals)  and  the  hope

(of  wealth)  :
But  for  wretched  Hafiz,  are  indigence  and  exigence.

7.  O uncle  born  (cousin)  !  practise  liberality  and  pity  us  notwithstanding  that  greatness  hath  causes

whereby  excellence  may  be  seen  and  riches  marked  out.

O  brethren,  Lords  of  excellence  !  exercise  liberality  towards  fakirs ;  and  enter  upon  pity. For
excellence  is  the  mark  of  liberality,  not  the  collecting  of  dirams  and  dinars.

8.  Thou  that,  in  the  way  of  attacking,  hast  become  powerful  over  all  the  Sultans  of  the  human

race! Pity,  that  God  may  give  thee  recompense. In  respect  of  friends,  goodness  is  oppor-
tune.

Otherwise —

Thou  that,  in  the  way  of  dominion,  hast  become  lofty  of  all  Sultans !

9.  Every  one  of  the  friends  hath  treasure,  which,  at  the  time  of  distress,  is  of  use;  and  the  power  of

giving  alms  (khairat  va  sadkat)  which,  in  the  next  world,  increase  joy.
To  wretched  Hafiz,  poverty  (fakr)  is  the  cause  of  perturbation.

That  is—

It  is  the  poverty  of  perturbation ;  not  the  poverty  of  choice.

The  poverty  of 'choice  hath  delights;  and  is  the  cause  of  thank-offering  ;  the  poverty  of  per
turbation  is  altogether  a  mulct,  and  the  cause  of  contempt.

4  M  2

636  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

369,  (374).

i.  Iii  the  morning,  with  the  desire  of  repentance  (to  my  heart),  I  said  : — "  I  seek

the  counsel  of  God,"
Spring,  repentance-shatterer,  arriveth  :  what  remedy  may—  I  make  ?

True  speech,  I  utter: — I  cannot  see  (that  this  state  is  very  difficult);

For  the  companions  drink  wine  ;  and  lookiug  on^—  I  make.

By  the  cup's  circulation,  remedy  ye  my  brain :

If,  from  the  midst  of  the  banquet  of  joy,  retirement  I  make.

If,  one  night,  to  my  tongue,  passeth  the  tale  of  Thee,

From  want  of  purity,  it  (the  tongue)  with  wine,  rinsing, I  make.

5.  On  the  throne  of  the  rose,  I  place  a  (beauteous)  idol  like  a  Sultan  :

With  the  hyacinth,  and  the  lily,  the  glory  of  collar  and  of  bracelet I  make.

Through  the  Friend's  face,  blossomed  my  purpose  like  the  rose :
To  the  hard  stone,  consignment  of  the  enemy's  head  (that  separation  recur
not)  I  make.

The  tavern-beggar  am  I ;  but  (at)  the  time  of  intoxication,  behold  : —

Against  the  (lofty)  sky,  loftiness;  and  against  the  (ordering)  star,  order,

I  make  ?

Not  mine,  is  the  way  and  usage  of  morsel-abstaining. For,

The  reprobation  of  the  profligate,  the  wine-drinker,  why  do . I  make  ?

To  the  memory  of  the  King's  assembly,  like  the  rose-bud  with  laughing  lip,
The  cup,  I  take  :  and,  through  desire,  my  raiment,  rent I  make.

jo.  If,  from  the  ruby  lip  of  the  Beloved,  a  kiss  I  take,

Young  again,  I  become ;  and  life,  twice •  I  make.

4.  On  account  of  its  want  of  purity,  with  wine,  it  (the  tongue)  I  rinse.

5.  cl>  ei-i"'  (the  throne  of  the  rose)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  place  where  they  make  the  marriage  of  brides  and  adorn  them  with  garlands  of  roses-

(b)  the  heart  of  the  holy  traveller,  the  place  of  blossoming  of  roses.

THE  LETTER  MiM  j-  637

Not  the  ka'zi,  nor  the  mudarris,  nor  the  muhtasib,  nor  the  fakih  are  we  :

Mine,  what  profit  that  forbidding  of  the  wine-drinker I  should  make.

Through  wine-drinking,  distressed  became  Hafiz;

With  the  sound  of  the  harp  and  with  wine,  his  mystery  (of  distress),  evident——

I  make.

II.  Kazi  the  judge.

Mudarris „ school  master.
Muhtasib „ city  censor  (of  morals).

Fakih  „ theologian.

638  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

370, (379)-

I.  (O  murshid  !)  come  ;  sq  that  the  rose  (of  ease  and  of  pleasure)  we  may  scatter,
and,  into  the  cup  (of  existence  ;  or  of  the  heart),  the  wine  (of  love  and  of

divine  knowledge) cast,

(By  our  inward  strength)  the  roof  of  the  sky  we  rend ;  and  (to  the  height  of
another  heaven)  a  new  way,  •  cast.

If  an  army,  that  sheddeth  the  blood  of  lovers,  grief  raise —

Content  together  are  I  and  the  Saki ;  and  up  its  foundation,  we cast.

Into  the  cup  of  ruddy  wine,  rose-water,  I  pour  :

Into  the  censer  of  the  wind,  'itr-revolving,  sugar,  I——  cast.

Minstrel !  since  in  thy  hand  is  a  sweet  instrument,  a  sweet  song  sing  :
So  that,  hand-waving,  we  may  sing  the  love-song,  and  dancing,  our  head  down
may cast.

5.  O  breeze !  to  that  lofty  quarter  of  the  Beloved,  the  dust  of  our  existence  cast ;
It  may  be  that  on  the  spectacle-place  of  that  king  of  lovely  ones  ('arifs),  our
glance,  we  may  cast.

Of  reason,  one  boasteth ;  another  idle  talk  weaveth  :

Come  :  before  the  just  Ruler  (God)  these  disputes,  let  us  cast.

If  the  paradise  of  Adn,  thou  desire,  come  with  us  to  the  tavern  (of  love  and  of

profligacy) ;
So  that,  from  the  foot  of  the  wine-jar  (the  murshid  of  love),  thee,  at  once  into

the  pool  of  Kausar,  we  may cast.

I.  This  may  be  addressed  :—

(a)  to  the  beloved.

(b)  „ holy  traveller.

3.  Into  bitter,  strong  wine  (of  real  love)  rose  water  is  poured  to  reduce  its  strength.

4.  <J"j*-  fU—  signifies  :—

Sama'  (  jU-  ) joined  with  the  condition  of  sama'-i-sami'  (  £^~  f*~  )  the  hearing  of  the  hearer.
Sama'. See  Ode  45.

5.  w^j^-  (lovely  ones). See  Ode  209,  c.  5.
7.  "  The  paradise  of  Adn  "  signifies  :—

(a)  paradise.

(b)  the  manifestations  of  God  Most  High.
See  Ode  407,  c.  4.

THE  LETTER MiM  r*

O  (true)  Beloved  !  with  Thy  face,  Illumine  our  assembly,

That,  before  Thee,  the  love-song  I  may  ohaunt ;  and  at  Thy  feet,  my  head,  may
cast.

In  Shiraz,  the  understanding  of  verse,  and  the  speaking  well,  they  practise

not :
Hafiz !  come  ;  that,  into  another  land,  ourselves  we  may  cast.

64°  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

371,  (37o).
i.  Times  I  have  said  ;  and  again  I  say, —

That,  heart  bereft,  not  of  myself,  have  I  gone  this  Path  (of  love).

Behind  the  (pure)  mirror  (of  the  holy  traveller's  heart)  me,  they  have  kept  like

the  parrot :
What  the  Teacher  of  eternity  without  beginning  said  : — "  Say  ";  I  say.

Whether  I  be  the  thorn,  or  whether  the  rose,  there  is  a  sward-adorner  (God),
By  whose  hand,  as  (it)  cherished  me,  I  grew.

O  friends  !  me,  heart-bereft,  astonied,  censure  not :

A  great  jewel  I  have  ;  and  the  master  of  vision  (the  jeweller God),  I  seek.

5.  Although  to  (the  wearer  of)  the  patched  (darvish)  garment,  (the  drinking  of)  wine,

rose  of  hue,  is  a  sin, —

Me,  censure  not ;  for  with  it  (from  off  the  darvish  garment),  the  colour  of  hy-
pocrisy, I  wash.

1.  See  Ode  179,  c.  6.

2.  Before  a  mirror,  they  place  a  parrot ;  and  behind  the  mirror,  the  teacher.

The  parrot,  seeing  his  own  reflection  in  the  mirror,  maketh  "  chachchaha  ;"  and  thinking  that  the
parrot  behind  the  mirror  maketh  speech,  entereth  on  speech.

Whatever  he  heareth,  cometh  from  his  tongue.

From  behind  the  mirror,  the  teacher  saith  : —
"  Allah  ! God,  the  Merciful,  the  Merciful  !"

or  whatever  he  wisheth  to  teach. Thus,  quickly,  by  this  sorcery,  doth  the  parrot  learn  :  and  be-
come a  speaker  and  an  orator.

Here  the  parrot  is  behind  the  mirror. The  explanations  are  : —

(a)  That  the  f  (  f***9  )  is  not  maf'ul  bih  (nominative)  but  maf'ulun  lahu  (the  accusative).
Behind  the  mirror  they  have  kept  for  me  one  parrot-like.

(b)  That  in  place  of  ^j~>  one  should  read  u*^  (contracted  from  cAu  for  verse— sake).
Before  the  mirror,  they  have  kept  me  parrot-like.

(c)  That  in  place  of  ij~>  one  should  read_^

On  the  bosom  of  the  mirror,  they  have  kept  me  parrot-like.
This  couplet,  Hafiz  (who  was  a  murshid)  wrote  in  praise  of  himself.
In  the  opinion  of  disciples,  the  murshid's  praise  of  his  own  soul  is  laudable ;  for  such  praise  is  the

source  of  firmness  of  good  faith,  and  the  repeller  of  tumult.
Whatever  I  say,  I  say  from  the  Teacher  (God) :  His  nature,  I  seek.
Of  myself,  naught  I  say. Whatever  the  master  of  eternity  without  beginning  saith,  and to  my

heart  revealeth,  that  I  say.
"  Neither  doth  he  (Muhammad)  speak  of  his  own  will. It  is  no  other  than  a  revelation,  what  unto

him  hath  been  revealed." The  Kuran,  liii.  3,  4.
Not  like  the  poets,  mysterious  utterers,  do  I  speak.  Whatever  they  say,  they  say  through  lust  and

Shaitanjand,  distraught  from  the  producing  of  their  own  imagination,  strive  to  reveal  their

vain  imaginings.
The  second  line,  see  Ode  407,  c.  3.

3.  See  Ode  408,  c.  4.

THE  LETTER  MlM *  64!

From  another  place  (cause),  is  the  laughing  and  the weeping  of  lovers (of

God)  :
In  the  night  (through  union  with  the  Beloved),  I  sing; in  the  morning-time

(through  separation),  I  moan.

To  me,  Hafiz  spake  saying  : — "  The  dust  of  the  tavern-door  smell  not :"
Say : — "  Censure  not ;  for  the  (fragrant)  musk  of  Khutan,  I  smell."

DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

372,  (378).

I.  A  thousand  breaches  in  my  faith,  with  Thy  dark  eye-lashes,  Thou  hast  made:
Come,  so  that,  out  (of  my  heart)  on  account  of  Thy  sick  (languishing)  eye,  a
thousand  pains,  (of  mine)  I  may  pluck.

Ho,  O  fellow-sitter,  of  my  heart  (the  true  Beloved !)  from  Whose  memory,
friends  (who,  in  this  world  of  non-existence  are  Thy  companions  ;  and  slum-
ber in  Thy  unity)  have  passed  :

Not  a  day  be  mine,  the  moment  when,  void  of  recollection  of  Thee,  I  sit.

I.  Jfy*  (eye-lashes)  signifies  : —

(a)  the  darkness  of  sins  that,  in  matter,  have  become  established.

(b)  illusory  love.

jl*jj  -S^a.  (the  sick  eye)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  seeing  God  and  His  manifestations.

For  varied  are  the  circumstances  of  holy  travellers,  whose  goal  is  God. When  heattain-
eth  perfection,  to  him,  this  quality  appeareth  evident.

(b)  real  love. Love,  whether  real  or  illusory,  dependeth  on  God,  to  whom  every  one  in-

clineth.

The  explanations  are  :—
(According  to  a)—

(i)  O  Lord  !  for  those  sins  that  from  me  have  issued,  hath  arrived  Thy  order  for  my  destruction.
Come :  for,  in  respect  of  those  sins,  is  a  breach  in  my  faith  through  the  beholding  of

Thee.
From  my  path,  I  up-pluck  the  thorn  of  sorrow ;  from  it,  withdraw  my  inclination ;  and

from  the  foot  out-pluck  the  thorn.

(ii)  O  my  slave  !  through  sins  in  moments,  thou  hast  made  in  thy  faith,  thousands  of  breaches  ;
and  to  Me  hast  not  shown  obedience.
Come ;  repent ;  upon  the  true  path,  go  straight ;  say—

"  I  am  penitent  for  those  (evil)  deeds."

So  that,  on  account  of  thy  sick  eye  (deficient  vision,  that  became  a  thousand  sins)  I  may-
pardon  thee !

Since,  by  lust's  invitation,  thou  committest  sins,  imperfect  (not  far-seeing)  vision  thou  hast.
Those  sins  that  thou  hast  intentionally  committed,  I  will,  after  thy  repenting  and  weeping,

pardon ;  and,  their  rust  from  thy  heart's  mirror,  wipe,
(iii)  (According  to  b) —

O  true  Beloved!  with  Thy  dark  eyelashes  (illusory  love),  Thou  broughtest  thousands  of
breaches  in  my  way  and  faith ;  and  (through  illusory  love)  Thou  rentest  the  garment
of  faith  that  was  on  my  body  :
Come,  so  that,  through  true  love  for  Thee,  I  may  choose  numberless  pains ;  and,  from

the  stage  of  the  illusory  to  the  stage  of  hakikat,  take  the  Path.
In  the  Fawa,id-ul-Fawaid,  is  the  following  tale  : —

Once  upon  a  time,  was  a  Barhaman,  possessed  of  wealth  and  goods  and  of  all  worldly  effects.
Him,  with  a  fault,  the  king  of  that  time  charged  ;  into  his  own  grasp,  all  his  wealth  took ;  and,
expelled  him  from  the  land— though  he  deserved  no  punishment.

THE  LETTER  MiM  j*  643

Old  and  foundationless,  is  the  world  :  of  this  Farhad-slayer,— — justice !
Me,  vexed  with  sweet  life,  its  craft  and  sorcery  made.

The  world,  transitory  and  permanent,  a  ransom  for  the  true  Beloved  and  the

Saki  (I  make) :
For,  the  world's  sovereignty,  love's  humble  companion,  I  deem.

5.  If,  in  my  place,  the  Friend  (God)  choose  a  stranger, He  is  judge  :

If,  in  place  of  the  Friend,  I  choose  my  life, it,  unlawful  be !

Sabahu-1-khair ! shouted  the  bulbul. 0  Saki (murshid) ! where  art thou  ?

Arise  (bring  wine)  :
For,  in  my  head,  tumult  maketh  the  intoxication  of  the  wine  of  last  night  (the

day  of  A  last).

Drowned  in  sweat  like  the  rose,  I  became  through  the  torment  of  the  fire  of  sepa-
ration :

0  breeze,  night-seizing  (the  perfect  murshid) !  a  breeze,  from  the  sweat-seizer
of  mine  (the  true  Beloved), bring.

Setting  his  face  to  the  desert,  he  went  his  way. On  the  way,  a  friend  met  him ;  and  in  friendship's
name  asked  him,  saying  : —
"  What  is  this  state  that  is  the  cause  of  such  sorrow  ?  "

The  Barhaman  replied  :—

God  be  praised  that  they  left  with  me  the  zunnar  (the  mystic  cord). Although  they  took  from
me  all  else,  since  the  zunnar  is  my  safety  it  will  come  back.

When  faith  is  safety ;  and,  in  my  heart,  is  memory  of  God,— no  fear  is  mine  of  my  sins.

See  the  Kuran,  ix.  5  ;  xiii.  7;  iv.  30;  viii.  29.
jlj  jl  u^-JjJ  (went  from  Thy  memory) —

Although  the  imputation  of  forgetfulness  is  improper ;  yet,  in  this  place,  it  is  allowable.

Only  through  the  perfection  of  conciliation,  hath  Hafiz  made  God  descend  to  the  mansion  of  forget-
fulness ;  and  brought  the  speech  into  utterance.

6.  This  couplet  occurs  in  Ode  366,  c.  9 ;  and  is  there  fully  explained.

7.  iK  (rose)  signifies  : —

The  (red)  rose  which  (see  Ode  40,  c.  5)  was  formed  of  the  sweat  of  Muhammad. From  him,

who  taketh  sweat  is  acceptable.
(_yjjijli  ^b  (the  night-taking  breeze)  signifies  : —

(a)  The  morning  breeze  whereto  they  assign  the  coming  of  fragrant  odours ;  and  the  blos-
soming of  flowers.
(6)  The  murshid.

jf  (sweat-taker)  signifies  : —

(a)  a  mixture  of  perfumes  which,  like  ambergris,  through  various  compoundings,  they  pre-

pare. Its  essential  quality  is  the  taking  (away)  of  sweat.
When  sweat  prevaileth  over  the  limbs  ;  by  the  use  of  the  e^J-  3j*,  it  is  relieved.

(b)  the  true  Beloved,  and  real  Desired  one.

4  N  2

644

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

From  me,  not  from  the  admonisher,  hear  the  mysteries  of  love  and  of  intoxica-
tion :

For,  with  the  cup  and  the  goblet  every  night,  the  companion  of  the  moon  and
of  the  Pleiades,  I  am.

The  tale  of  longing  that,  in  this  volume,  is  become  verified,
Verily  is  void  of  error ;  for  me,  the  dictation  Hafiz  gave.

From  the  heat  of  the  fire  of  separation  and  disjunction  drowned  in  sweat  like  the  rose  ;  and  the

withered  leaf  I  am  become.
O  murshid  of  tarikat ! O  guide  of  hakikat ! From  that  true  Beloved,  a  fragrant  breeze  bring  ;

and  from  this  whirl-pool,  this  sweat-drowned  one  bring  forth.

That  is—

Display  virtues  and  truths,  and  the  path  of  manifestations.
Possibly  this  couplet  is  in  reply  to  couplet  2.
8.  This  couplet  occurs  in  Ode  366,  c.  n.
"the  moon  "  may  signify : —
the  Beloved.

.U.  (cup)  signifies  : —
wine ;  the  moon.

-vW  (goblet)  signifies : —
wine-drops,  the  Pleiades.

THE  LETTER  MiM

r

645

373,  (375)-

I.  Beyond  limit — this  that  from  my  hand,  went  religion  and  knowledge,
Come,  say — what  joy  from  love  for  Thee,  I  established  ?

Although  grief  for  Thee  gave  to  the  wind  the  harvest  of  my  life,
(Falling)  in  the  dust of Thy precious  foot, (I  displayed  fidelity)  ; for the '
covenant  (that  I  had  made),  I  broke  not.

Contemptible  like  the  atom  though  I  am,  Love's  wealth,  behold !
How,  in  desire  of  Thy  face,  joined  to  love  I  am.

Bring  wine ;  for  'tis  a  life-time,  since,  through  desire  of  safety,  I
Sate,  in  the  corner  of  safety  for  the  sake  of  ease.

5.  0  counsel-utterer  !  if  of  (the  crowd  of)  men  of  sense,  thou  be,

To  the  dust,  cast  not  thy  speech  (of  counsel)  ;  for  (counsel  is  useless),  intoxi-
cated I  am.

Before  the  Friend  (God),  my  head  forth  from  shame  how  may  I  bring,
When,  from  my  hand,  a  worthy  service  issueth  not?

•

Hafiz  consumed;  and  that  Beloved,  heart-cherishing,  spake  not,
Saying  : — "  When  his  heart,  I  wounded,  a  plaister,  I  sent."

2.  The  second  line  may  be  :  —

By  the  dust  of  Thy  precious  foot  (I  swear)  that  the  covenant  I  broke  not.

646  DiVAN.I-HAFIZ.

374, (370.

i.  0  Saki  (true  Beloved) !  come  back;  for  of  Thy  service,  desirous  I  am:
Of  Thy  service,  and  of  prayer-uttering  for  Thy  fortune,  desirous  I  am.

(O  perfect  murshid !)  from  that  place,  where  is  the  (common)  bounty  of  the

cup  of  happiness  of  thy  splendour.
From  the  zulmat  of  astonishment,  me  the  path  of  going  out, show.

Drowned  in  the  sea  of  sin  from  a  hundred  sides,  though  I  be  ;
Since  I  became  love's  friend,  of  the  people  of  mercy  am  P.

O  Fakih  !  me,  for  profligacy  or  for  ill-fame,  censure  not :
For,  from  the  Court  of  Fate,  pre-ordained  was  this.

5.  Drink  wine. For,  neither  by  acquisition,  nor  by  choice,  is  the  being  a  lover  :
Me,  this  gift  reached  from  the  heritage  of  creation*..

I,  who,  in  my  life,  chose  not  travelling  from  my  native  land,
In  the  love  of  seeing  Thee,  desirous  of  travelling  am.

Far  from  the  door  of  fortune  of  Thy  shelter,  apparently  am  I :

But,  with  soul  and  heart,  of  the  (crowd  of)  dwellers  of  Thy  presence,  am  I.

In  (love's)  path,  the  (mighty)  river  and  the  (lofty)  mountain ;  and  I,  shattered

and  battered —
0  Khizr.  auspicious  of  foot !  by  thy  prayer,  aid  give  me.

If  thou  boast  of  the  musky  (dark  fragrant)  tress  of  that  idol,
O  breeze !  of  the  revenge  of  my  jealousy,  bethink  thee  !

10.  In  Thy  eye-brow  (bow),  vision's  arrow  up  to  the  ear  of  sense

(Is)  brought  and  drawn  ;  for  an  opportunity  (for  Thee  to  shoot  an  arrow),  delay-
ing, I  am.

Before  Thy  eye,  Hafiz  will  sacrifice  his  life :
In  this  fancy,  I  am,  if  respite  me  life  will  give.

2.  Zulmat. See  Ode  35,  c.  10.

4.  Fakih  signifies  a  theologian.

5.  See  Ode  179,  c.  6;  359,  c.  3;  371,  c.  I.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f  647

375,  (373)-

i.  Glad  tidings! to  (the  abode  of)  Zu-Salam,  suddenly  descended  safety  (from

calamity)  :
To  God  praise,  (the  praise  of)  the  confessor  of  the  greatest  blessing !

That  bringer  of  happy  news,  who  brought  the  glad  tidings  of  victory,  is  where  ?
So  that  (in  joy),  my  soul  (which  is  dearer  than  gold  and  silver)  I  may  scatter  on
his  foot  like  gold  and  silver.

Verily,  shattered  of  heart  becometh  the  covenant-breaker :

In  the  opinion  of  the  Lords  of  wisdom,  sacred  charges  are  covenants.

From  the  King's  turning  back,  what  a  rare  picture  established
His  enemy's  resolution  in  the  mansion  of  non-existence  !

5.  From  hope's  cloudlet,  he  sought  a  blessing. But,
To  his  seeing  eye,  it  gave  naught  save  moisture.

Into  the  (dark)  Nil  of  grief,  he  (the  covenant-breaker)  fell ;  to  him,  in  reproach

the  sky  said  : —
"Verily,  now,  repentant,  thou  hast  become;  and  profit  from  repentance,  thou

gainest  not."

1.  JUji. See  Ode  360,  c.  3.

Glad  tidings  !  suddenly  safety  (from  calamity)  descended  upon  the  abode  of  Zu-Salam  (which  is  a

thornless  tree  in  the  Beloved's  abode).

To  God  is  praise  for  the  favour  of  a  praise  that  is,  in  excess,  from  the  confessor  (of  praise).
Favours  for  being  guided  aright,  and  the  praise  of  the  confessor,  are  not  save  in  sincerity  of  faith.
Then,  with  sincerity  of  faith,  HSfiz  praiseth  the  descending  of  safety  on  the  abode ;  and,  for  that

abode,  seeketh  an  increase  of  favour.

2.  Who  bringeth  glad  tidings,  on  his  foot  they  scatter  some  silver.

3.  In  the  opinion  of  the  Lords  of  reason,  the  covenant  verily  is  the  Lord  of  respect  and  of  honour  (is

sacred  and  honourable).

Who  breaketh  a  covenant  becometh  heart-shattered.
In  trueness  of  covenant,  is  surety ;  the  coming  out  from  that  covenant,  is  his  charge. Whoever  for

something  established  a  covenant,  its  surety  he  became ;  and,  from  it,  he  must  come  out.

648  DlVAN-1-HAFIZ.

Saki!  come,  for  it  is  the  season  of  the  rose,  and  the  time  of  pleasure:
The  cup,  bring ;  and  suffer  no  grief,  more  or  less.

From  the  cup  of  wine,  hear. For  this  old  woman,  newly  married  (the  world)
Many  a  husband,  like  Kay  Kubad  and  Jamshid,  sle*w.

O  heart !  seek  not  thou  the  kingdom  of  Jamshid  ;  seek  the  cup  of  wine  :
For  this  was  the  song  of  the  bulbul,  garden-singer,  of  Jamshid.

10.  When,  like  the  (red)  flagon,  the  enemy's  (red)  blood,  thou  spilledest,
With  friends,  in  ease  and  joy,  take  the  cup  of  Jamshid.

In  the  tavern-corner,  hath  Hafiz  his  place  of  ease,

Like  the  bird  in  the  garden  ;  and  like  the  lion  in  the  forest.

g.  In  the  time  of  joy,  the  cup  of  wine  is  better  than  the  kingdom  of  Jamshid,
Jamshid. See  Odes  144,  176,  199.

In  Arabic,  are  : —

Couplet  i ;  and  the  second  lines  of  couplets  3,  6,  and  n.

THE  LETTER  M1M f  649

376,  (380).

I.  0  morning  cypress  !  without  thee,  with  the  rose  and  the  rose-bud,

• what  may  I  do  ?

The  tress  of  the  hyacinth,  how  may  I  draw;  (with)  the  cheek  of  the  lily

what  may  1  do?

From  the  reproach  of  the  ill-wisher,  alas  ! I  beheld  not  Thy  face :

When  not  mine  is  the  (gleaming)  mirror,  with  (dull)  iron— what  may  I  do?

O  admonisher!  go;  and  at  the  dreg-drinkers,  carp  not:

This,  the  work-orderer  of  Fate  doeth  : what  may  I  do  ?

When,  like  this,  from  the  hidden  ambush,  leapeth  the  lightning  of  jealousy,
Do  thou  order  :  for  I  of  consumed  harvest, what  may  I  do  ?

5.  When  the  King  of  the  Turans  (Afrasiyab)  approved  ;  and  cast  me  into  the  pit,

If  the  grace  of  Tahamtan  (Rustam)  be  not  hand-seizer  (to  help)

what  may  I  do  ?

If  with  a  lamp  (on  the  path  of  travellers)  Tur's  fire  (the  perfect  murshid)  make

not  a  little  assistance,
(For)  the  remedy  of  the  dark  night  of  the  Wadl-i-Aiman what  may  I  do?

With  the  heart-stitching  arrow  of  separation,  thou  sheddest  my  blood  :

Do  thou  thyself  say  to  thyself: — "  O  luminous  eye! what  may  I  do?"

Hafiz !  highest  paradise  is  the  house  of  my  heritage  :

In  this  desolate  stage  (this  world),  my  dwelling, why  do  I  make  ?

5.  Afrasiyab. See  History  of Persia  by  Malcolm  and  by  Clements Markham; and the  Shah

Nama,  by  Firdausi.

6.  Wadi-i-Aiman. See  Ode  202.

40

650  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

377,  (377)-

i.  If,  with  the  sword  (of  tyranny),  He  (the  true  Beloved)  slay  me,  His  hand,  I  seize

not :
If,  upon  me,  this  arrow  He  strike,  obliged  I  am.

(To  the  true  Beloved)  say : — "  At  that  our  eyebrow,  Thy  arrow  strike,
"  That,  before  Thy  hand  and  arm,  I  may  die."

If,  me  from  off  my  feet,  the  world's  grief  bring,
Save  the  cup,  my  hand-seizer  (helper)  is  who?

O  Sun  of  the  morning  of  hope  (the  true  Beloved)  !  come  forth  :
For,  in  the  hand  of  the  (dark)  night  of  separation,  captive  am  I.

5.  O  Fir  of  the  tavern  (the  murshid  excellent  and  perfect)  !  come  to  my  cry  (for

justice) :
By  a  draught,  me  young  make  ;  for  old  am  I.

Last  night,  by  thy  tress,  I  ate  an  oath,

That,  my  head,  from  off  thy  foot,  I  will  not  take.

O  admonisher!  how  long,  like  children,  deceivest  thou,

Me,  with  the  apple  of  the  garden,  and  the  stream  of  milk  ? (For,  not  to  these
paltry  things,  do  I  incline ;  such  are  for  common  folk).

I.  I  seize  not  his  hand  ;  because  his  slaying  me  is  the  comprehension  of  the  advantages  of  faith  and
of  the  world.  In  the  end,  He  is  wiser  than  I:  whatever  He  doeth  is  the  essence  of  good  and
of  good  counsel.

Otherwise —

If  He  slay  me  with  the  arrow  of  separation  and  disunion,  I  am  obliged  ;  because  the  glory  of

the  Beloved  is  Union ;  and  His  arrow  is  the  arrow  of  mercy.
The  address  may  be  to  the  murshid.

4.  "  The  sun  of  the  morning  of  hope  "  may  signify  :—

(a)  the  murshid.

(b)  » light  of  morn.

(c)  „  essence  of  hope.

5.  >— -~>[p-j^  (the  Pir  of  the  tavern)  signifies:—

(a)  the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent,  who  keepeth  the  disciple  in  the  abandonment  of  self ;

and  showeth  the  way  of  poverty  and  of  effacement.

(b)  the  lover,  who  considereth  deeds  and  qualities  of  all  things  effaced  in  the  divine  qualities  ;

but,  to  himself  or  to  another,  imputeth  no  quality.
7.  See  Ode  429.  c-  8.

THE  LETTER  MiM  /*  651

(For  fearful  contemplation  and manifestation,  I soar). Every evening  and

morning,  that  (glorious)  bird,  am  I,
The  sound  of  whose  (mighty)  cry  (in  remembrance  of  God)  to  the  (lofty)  Sidra

tree  reacheth.

Hafiz! this,  thy  khirka  of  piety,  (hard  as  iron,  void  of  tenderness)  consume

(with  fire)  :
For  (even)  if  a  (consuming)  fire  I  became,  I  should  kindle  it  not.

Sidra. See  Ode  88;  "  Bird"  see  410,  c.  2  ;  4.29,  c.  2;  439,  c.  I  ;  558,  c'.  8.
Khirka. See  Ode  124,

402

652  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

378,  (383)-

i.  Like  the  morning  (of  laughing  forehead)  Thou  art;  and  the  candle  of  the  cham-
ber of  the  morning,  I  am  :
Smile ;  and  behold  how  (for  Thee)  my  soul,  I  surrender.

In  my  heart,  the  stain  of  love  for  Thy  heart-alluring  tress  is  so  (in  dwelling)
that,

When  (from  this  vanishing  world)  I  pass,  my  tomb  becometh  the  (dark)  violet-
bed.

On  the  threshold  of  hope  of  Thee,  I  have  opened  my  eye,

That  Thou  mayest  cast  one  glance  ;  from  Thy  glance,  me  Thou  Thyself  casted-
est.

O  crowd  of  griefs  !  to  thee,  how  may  I  utter  thanks  ? God  forgive  thee  !  •
On  the  day  of  friendlessness,  at  last,  from  my  bosom  thou  goest  not.

5.  I  am  the  slave  of  the  man  of  vision,  who,  notwithstanding  his  black-hearted-
ness,
Raineth  a  thousand  drops  (tears),  when  my  heart's  pain,  I  recount.

•

On  every  side,  our  idol  (divine  bounty)  displayeth  splendour ;  but,
This  glance  that  I  keep  glancing,  none  seeth.

If  the  Beloved  like  the  (fragrant)  breeze  pass  to  the  tomb  of  Hafiz
From  desire  (of  that  Beloved),  in  the  heart  of  that  narrow  place  (the  grave),
the  shroud,  I  rend.

2.  Out  of  respect  of  the  dark  tress,  it  is  said  that  the  tomb  becometh  the  dark  violet  bed.

4.  The  word  "  thee"  refereth  to  "the  crowd  of  griefs."

5.  The  first  line  may  be  :—

I  am  the  slave  of  the  man  (the  black  pupil)  of  my  eye/who,  notwithstanding  his  black-hearted-
ness, —

THE  LETTER  MiM

653

379,  (381).

I.  Since  on  my  head,  fell  thy  auspicious  shadow,

Fortune  became  my  slave  ;  and  prosperity,  my  servant.

Years  passed,  since,  by  me,  fortune  had  passed  away  ;

In  the  fortune  of  union  with  Thee,  by  my  door,  it  (fortune)  returned.

In  time  (the  world),  vigilant,  none  had  seen  me,
If,  in  sleep,  thy  form  had  been  imagined  by  me.

In  grief  for  thee,  to  an  end  I  take  (I  pass)  my  life  ;  but,

Believe  not  that  without  (memory  of)  thee,  to  an  end)  a  moment  I  take  (I  pass).

5.  From  that  night  when,  into  my  straitened  heart,  thou  returnedest,
My  beperfumed  brain,  a  hundred  candles  kindled.

The  remedy  for  my  pain,  the  Physician  knoweth  not :

Without  the  Friend,  I  am  shattered  of  heart ;  with  the  Friend,  most  happy.

Thou  saidest: —  "To  my  street,  the  chattels  of  halting  (while  journeying)  bring

not:"
By  Thy  soul,  (I  swear)  that  out  from  this  street,  I  myself  pass  not.

The  slave  of  a  king  and  the  purchased  slave  of  an  Asaf,  every  one  is  :
Hafiz !  the  mean  slave  of  the  Sultan  of  the  country  (All  Murtaza),  I  am.

i.  This  Ode  is  in  praise  of  All. See  the  Ruba'iyat  617.
8.  Asaf. See  Ode  43.

654  DJVAN-I-HAFI?

38O.

i.  In  the  morning,  Jauza  (Gemini)  placed  before  me  the  preservation  (the  small

Kuran)  :
That  is : — The  King's  slave,  I  am ;  and  the  oath,  I  ate.

Saki !  come  ;  for,  from  effective  fortune's  aid,

The  desire  that  I  desired  became  to  me,  through  God  attainable.

A  cup,  give  ;  for  again  in  joy  of  the  King's  face,
Elderly  of  head,  in  my  head,  is  desire  for  a  youthful  one.

Waylay  me  not  with  the  description  of  the  limpid  water  of  Khizr  ;
From  the  King's  cup,  a  draught-drinker  of  Kausar's  fountain,  am  I.

5.  O  King !  if  to  the  ninth  heaven  (God's  throne),  I  cause  the  throne  of  excellence

to  reach,
Of  this  majesty,  the  purchased  slave,  am  I ;  and  of  this  door,  the  wretched  one.

A  thousand  years,  draught-drinker  of  Thy  banquet,  I  was  :

My  disposition,  ardent  of  temperament, — water-drinking,  how  may  it  abandon  ?

If,  of  the  slave  of  this  tale,  belief  be  not  thine  :
Of  perfect  speech,  a  proof  I  will  bring.

If,  from  thee,  I  up-pluck  my  heart ;  and,  from  thee,  up-lift  my  love,
On  whom,  may  I  cast  this  love;  where,  may  I  take  that  heart?

All  in  love  for  the  King,  was  my  covenant  of  Alast :
From  life's  highway  to  this  covenant,  I  pass.

10.  Mansur  bin  Muhamad  Ghazi  is  my  guard  :

From  this  auspicious  name,  victorious  over  my  enemies  am  I.

I.  This  Ode  is  in  praise  of  Sli. See  Ode  396,  c.  3.
"  The  king  "  is  Ali,  the  founder  of  the  Sufis.

Jauza  signifies  : —
Ali  Murtaza.

3.  The  second  line  occurs  in  Ode  232,  c.  I.

4.  Khizr. See  Ode  89. Kansar. See  the  Kuran  cviii.
9.  Alast. See  p.  5.

THE  LETTER  MiM  j*  655

Since,  in  the  King's  name,  the  sphere  framed  the  Pleiades,
Verse  of  pearl,  wherefore  make  I  not  ?  Less  than  who,  am  I  ?

When,  from  the  King's  hand,  I  tasted  the  victuals  like  the  (mighty)  falcon,
For  the  capture  of  the  (mean)  pigeon,  care  how  is  mine  ?

O  King,  lion-seizer !  less,  how  becometh,  if  becometh
Attainable  by  me,  in  thy  shadow,  the  country  of  ease  ?

Wing  and  feather,  I  have  not;  and  this  (is)  most  rare. For  there  is  naught,
In  my  head,  save  the  desire  of  (flight  to)  the  (lofty)  dwelling  of  the  Simurgh.

15.  In  the  felicity  of  praise  of  thee,  my  verse  subdued  a  hundred  countries  of

the  heart :
Thou  mayst  say  that  my  speaking  tongue  is  thy  (cleaving)  sword.

If,  like  the  morning  breeze,  by  a  rose-bed,  I  passed,

Mine,  was  neither  love  for  the  cypress ;  nor  desire  for  the  cone-tree.

Thy  perfume,  I  perceived ;  and  to  the  memory  of  thy  face,
The  Sakis  of  joy  gave  me  one  or  two  cups.

Not  the  slave's  custom  is  intoxication  with  the  juice  of  one  or  two  grapes  ;
Years  endured,  the  Pir,  tavern-cherisher,  am  I.

With  the  revolution  of  the  star  and  of  the  sky,  many  a  strife  is  mine  ;
In  this  tale,  be  the  King's  justice,  my  ruler  !

20.  Thanks  to  God,  that,  again,  in  this  height  of  court,

The  sound  of  my  long  wing-feather  (of  flight),  the  peacock  of  the  ninth  heaven
— — heareth !

For  the  capture  of  my  heart,  the  lion's  whelp  attacked  ;
Lean,  if  I  be,  or  if  not, — the  lion's  prey  I  am.

Effaced  be  my  name  from  the  work-shop  of  the  lovers  (of  God),
If  mine  be  other  employment  save  love  for  Thee.

O  Thou,  the  lovers  of  whose  face  (are  in  number)  more  than  the  atoms  (in  the

sun-beam)  !
To  union  with  Thee,  how  may  reach  I  who  (in  capacity),  less  than  an  atom,  am?

656  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Show  to  me, — the  denier  of  the  beauty  of  Thy  face,  who  is  he?
So  that,  with  the  dagger  of  jealousy,  his  eye  I  may  bring  forth.

2~. On  me,  fell  the  shadow  of  the  (symbolic)  sun  of  empire  :

Now,  as  to  the  (material)  sun  of  the  east,  rest  (independence)  is  mine.

Not brisk  is  the  market  of  purpose  of  these  deeds:
Neither  splendour,  do  I  boast ;  nor  ease,  do  I  purchase.

With  soul,  the  friend  of  the  prophet  and  of  his  offspring,  (is)  Hafiz  !
By  God,  witness  to  this  is  the  Lord,  my  ruler.

THE  LETTER  MIM  (*  ^57

381, (384).
I.  In  the  pursuit  of  the  desire  of  visiting  my  own  (native)  Land,-

why  should  I not  be  ?
The  dust  of  the  head  of  my  (true)  Beloved's  street,  why  should  I  not  be  ?

When  the  load  of  grief  of  being  a  stranger  and  the  trouble,  I  bear  not, —

To  my  own  city,  I  go  ;  and,  my  own  monarch,^^  I  shall  be.

Of  the  confidential  ones  of  the  veil  of  union  I  shall  be  :

Of  the  slaves  of  my  own  Lord, — —  I  shall  be.

Since  life's  work  (how  it  will  pass  ;  how  long  it  will  show  fidelity)  is  unknown,

at  least  that  is  best
That,  on  the  day  of  events  (the  day  of  death)  before  (God)  my  idol  (engaged  in

zikr  and  fikr;  and,  from  that  exterior  to  God,  turned  away),—— I  shall  be.

5.  The  being  a  lover  and  a  profligate  was  ever  my  way  ;

Again,  I  will  strive ;  and  engaged  in  my  own  work  I  shall  be.

Of  the  hand  of  fortune,  heavy  with  sleep  ;  and  of  resourceless  work,

If  complaint  be  mine,  my  own  secret-keeper,  I  shall  be.

Hafiz !  perchance,  the  grace  of  eternity  without  beginning  may  be  thy  guide,
If  not,  to  eternity  without  end,  ashamed  of  self, I  shall  be.

1.  At  Yazd,  Hafiz,  yearning  for  Shiraz,  wrote  this  Ode.
Couplets  i  and  2  ;  and  5,  6,  and  7  form  kitabands.

2.  That  is—

I  go  from  this  vanishing  world  to  the  lasting  world,  where  sovereignty  with  the  true  Beloved  I
shall  enjoy ;  and  in  ease,  remain.

6.  Against  fortune,  I  will  never  complain  ;  to  myself,  I  will  keep  my  grief.

7.  The  change  of  person  (here  from  the  second  to  the  first)  is  the —

oUuJI  U-~«J*P,  the  figure  of  courtesy.

658  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

382,  (445).

I.  From  us,  wherefore  seeketh  thou  peace,  when,  to  the  intoxicated,  an  invitation

we  uttered  :

At  the  revolution  of  thy  intoxicated  eye,  farewell  to  safety we  uttered.

Open  me  the  door  of  the  wine-house  (of  love ;  and  drink  wine  that  divine  mys-
teries may  be  revealed  to  thee);  for,  from  the  monastery,  naught  is  revealed  :
If  thine  be  belief  (of  my  word);  if  not,  this  was  the  speech, we  uttered.

O  Saki !  by  thy  eye,  ruined  (intoxicated)  I  have  fallen. But,

A  calamity  that  cometh  from  the  friend,  to  it,  a  thousand  welcomes^—

we  uttered.

We  said  : — "  Thy  stature  is  the  (lofty)  box-tree ;  much  shame  it  bringeth  to

fruit :  "
(To  the  box-tree),  this  similarity  why  made  we ;  and  this  calumny  why  (is  it

that) we  uttered  ?

5.  If  me  thou  forgive  not,  thou  wilt  at  last  suffer  regret,

In  thy  heart,  keep  this  matter,  where  (a  complaint)  in  thy  service

we  uttered  ?

Like  a  (bloody)  musk-pod,  blood  became  my  liver ;  and  (for  me)  was  fit  not  less

than  this,
Its  requital ;  because,  in  comparison  with  His  (glorious,  beperfumed)  tress  the

word  (of  the  mean  musk)  of  Chin  (by)  mistake, we  uttered.

O  Hafiz !  fire  (through  grief  of  separation)  thou  hast  become ;  but,  with  the

(true)  Beloved,  it  took  no  effect :
From  infidelity  to  the  covenant  of  the  rose,  thou  mayst  say  the  tale  to  the  wind

•  we  uttered.

I.  ^yiftlo  !j  ui-^«5Li  signifies:—

(a)  to  ask  for  safety.

(6)  to  bid  farewell  to  safety.
6.  In  mistake,  his  tress  I  called  the  musk  of  Chin  and  the  musk-pod  of  Chin.

THE  LETTER  MIM  f"  659

383,  (385).

i.  Passed  have  forty  years  and  more  since  I  expressed  this  boast:—

"  Of  the  servants  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  the  least—  am  I."

Ever  by  the  felicity  of  the  favour  of  the  Pir,  the  wine-seller,

Empty  of  wine,  pure  and  luminous,  became  not  the  cup  of  mine.

In  the  majesty  of  love,  and  in  the  fortune  of  profligates,  pure-players,

Ever  the  chief  seat  of  the  wine-houses  was  the  abode' .  of  mine.

For  dreg-drinking,  bear  not  an  ill  opinion  of  me  (Hafiz),

For,  (with  wine)  the  khirka  is  stained  ;  but  pure  of  skirt am  I.

5.  The  (mighty)  falcon  of  the  King's  hand  am  I. O  Lord  !  in  what  way,

From  my  recollection,  have  they  taken  the  desire  of  the  dwelling of  mine  ?

A  great  bulbul  like  me,  in  such  a  sward,  pity  'tis,

That,  with  this  sweet  tongue  (verse),  silent  like  the  (ten-tongued)  lily am  I.

A  wonderful  cherisher  of  the  mean  is  the  water  and  the  air  of  Persia:
A  fellow  way-farer,  where,  that,  from  this  land,  my  tent,  up-pluck  I  may  ?

The  auspicious  Turan  King,  who,  towards  me,  increased  his  favour ;

The  favour  of  his  gifts  became  the  collar  of  the  neck. of  mine.

Haflz  1  beneath  (the  guise  of)  the  khirka,  how  long  drinketh  thou  the  goblet?
(God  willing!)  at  the  Khwaja's  banquet,  the  veil  from  thy  work  (of  drinking),
upcast '  will  I.

4.  Khirka. See  Ode  124.

5.  From  the  world  of  order  and  of  holiness,  and  from  the  order  of  God,  I  have  for  a  few  days  come

into  this  transitory  world. How  have  I  forgotten  my  original  (heavenly)  abode  ?

66o

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

384,  (386).

i.  God  forbid  that,  in  the  rose-season,  wine,  I  should  abandon  :

Of  reason,  I  boast;  this  work  how  should  I  do?

The  minstrel  is  where  ? So  that  all  the  in-gathering  of  austerity  and  of  know-
ledge,

In  the  work  of  the  harp,  of  the  lyre,  and  of  the  voice  of  the  reed,

I  may  make.

Now,  weariness  of  the  (useless)  disputation  of  the (outward)  college,  hath  my

heart  taken :
Once,  awhile,  (only)  the  service  of  the  beloved  (the  perfect  murshid)  and  of  wine

(of  love) I  will  do.

In  time,  fidelity  was  where  ? The  cup  of  wine,  bring,

That  the  tale  of  Jam,  and  of  Ka,us,  and  of  Kay, I  may  make.

5.  The  black  book  (of  sins),  I  fear  not. For,  in  the  day  of  assembling,

By  the  bounty  of  His  grace,  a  hundred  books  of  this  kind, I  would  close.

The foot-messenger  of  morn (the breeze from  the east), where  ? So that

plaints  of  the  night  of  separation,
To  that  one,  auspicious  of  fortune,  and  happy  of  foot  (the  murshid),— —I  may

make.

Since,  in  eternity  without  beginning,  they  (Fate  and  Destiny)  mixed  my  dust

with  wine,
To  the  adversary,  speak,  saying  : — "  Wine,  wherefore should  I  abandon  ?"

This  borrowed  life,  that,  to  Hafiz,  the  Friend  (God)  entrusted;

His  face,  one  day,  I  shall  see  ;  and  (to  Him)  its  surrender—^  will  make.

4.  Kay  signifies— Kay  Kubad,

See  Clements  Markham's  History  of  Persia.

THE  LETTER  MIM

66 1

385,  (388).

i.  The  dust  of  my  body  is  the  veil  of  the  (true)  Beloved's  face  ;
O  happy  that  moment  when  from  off  this  face,  the  veil  I  cast!

Not  fit  for  a  sweet  singer  like  me,  is  the  cage  (of  the  world)  like  this :
To  Rizvan's  rose-bed,  I  go ;  for  the  bird  of  that  sward  am  I.

Manifest,  it  is  not — wherefore,  I  have  come  (into  this  world) ;  where,  I  had  been  :
Regret  and  sorrow  that,  of  my  own  work,  careless  I  am.

In  the  expanse  of  the  holy  world,  my  circuit  how  may  I  make  ?
When,  in the  mixed abode (this dusty world), plank-bound  (confined)  to  a
(dusty)  body, I  am.

5.  I whose  dwelling  and  abode  is  the  spectacle-place  of  the  Hur,
In  the  street  of  tavern-haunters,  why  is  my  native  land  ?

If,  from  my  heart's  blood,  the  perfume  of  musk  issue,

Have  no  wonder ;  for  fellow-sufferer  with  the  musk-pod  of  Khutan  (the  musk-
deer),  I  am.

(Outwardly),  regard  not  the  embroidery  of  my  gold-thread  tunic  (resplendent)  like

the  candle, (saying  : — "  He  is  happy  ")  :
For,  within  the  tunic,  hidden  consumings  ate.

Come  ;  and  from  before  him,  the  existence  of  Hafiz  take  up :
For,  with  Thy  existence,  none  heareth  from  me  that  I  am  (living).

1.  The  human  body  is  verily  the  veil  of  my  hakikat. Happy,  that  time  when  (in  death)  I  quit  this

dusty  body,  and  become  joined  with  God,  the  essence  of  myself.

2.  Rizvan,  the  gardener  of  paradise. See  Ode  439,  c.  I.

4.  (__^JL^J  (mixed)  signifies  : —

composed  of  earth,  air,  fire,  and  water.
"  Plank-bound.  " See  the  Saki-nama,  c.  26.

7.  The  gold-thread  tunic  of  a  taper  may  mean  :—

(a)  its  wax  crossed  with  streams  of  guttering  wax.

(b)  a  taper  gilded.

(c)  the  flame.

8.  This  is—

In  glory,  Ha£z  (by  beholding  God  in  his  heart)  eclipseth  all  other  men.

662  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

386,  (422).

i .  If  the  dust  of  the  sole  of  my  idol's  foot  give  aid  ;

(With  it) on  the  tablet  of  vision,  a  dusty  line (whereby my  vision may  be
increased),  I  will  draw  :

If  in  desire  of  my  life,  His  order  reach  me,—

That  very  moment,  like  the  candle,  in  a  moment,  my  life  (a  sacrifice  for  Him)  I
surrender.

If  the  Friend  establish  not  the  proof  of  the  base-coin  of  my  heart,
From  my  eye,  in  His  path,  current  coin  (tears)  I  reckon.

From  me,  dusty,  shake  not  (in  pride)  thy  skirt. For,  after  death,
From  this  door,  it  is  not  possible  that  my  dust  (even)  the  (whirling)  wind  can
take.

5.  Overwhelmed  in  desire  of  Thy  embrace  I  became  ;  and  my  hope  is

That,  through  (the  violence  of)  the  wave  of  my  tear,  me  to  reach  to  the  shore,  it
(the  wave)  may  cause.

For  the  consolation  of  lovers,  Thy  two  tresses,
A  great  covenant,  gave;  and  my  rest,  took.

To-day,  from  fidelity  to  me,  turn  not  away  Thy  head  ;  and  think
Of  that  night,  when,  through  grief,  my  hand  in  prayer,  I  uplift.

O  breeze  (murshid) !  me,  a  fragrant  waft  from  that  cup  (of  wine  of  divine  love),
bring:

For,  from  the  grief  of  wine-sickness  (temptations  of  the  world),  me  convales-
cence, that  perfume  giveth.

With  the  description  of  Thy  tress-tip,  used  to  go  my  (lustrous)  verse  ;
Hence,  even  the  associate  of  the  musk  of  Tatar,  I  am.

4.  From  such  a  one,  it  is  not  proper  to  shake  {in  pride)  the  skirt.

6.  The  second  line  may  be  : —

They  (Fate  and  Destiny)  confirmed;  and  they  (the  two  tresses)  my  rest  took.

7.  Great  effects  hath  the  night  of  sorrowful  ones.

THE  LETTER  MiM

to-  Hafiz !  since  His  ruby  lip  is  (as)  the  dear  soul  to  me,

That  moment  when  to  the  lip  (of  the  true  Beloved)  I  bring  my  soul,  a  (lasting)
life  (mine)  will  be.

10.  The  second  line  may  be : —

That  moment  when  to  the  lip  (in  agonies  of  death)  the  soul  I  bring,  a  (lasting)  life  (mine)  will
be.

664  DiVAN-l-HARZ.

387.

i.  Now,  the  good  counsel  of  the  time  I  see  in  that,
That,  to  the  wine-house,  my  chattels  I  betake  ;  and  happy  sit.

Save  the  goglet  and  the  book  (the  Kuran),  no  companion  nor  friend  may  be

mine  :
So  that  the  traitor- watchers  of  the  world,  seldom,  I  may  see.

The  cup  of  wine,  I  take  ;  and,  from  the  hypocrite,  far  I  go  :

That  is,— of  the  world's  creation,  (only)  pureness  of  heart,  I  choose.

Since,  in  the  stained  khirka,  rectitude  I  boasted ;

Ashamed  of  the  Saki's  face  and  of  the  coloured  wine,  am  I.

i

5.  Above  the  people,  my  head  in  freedom,  like  the  (lofty)  cypress,  I  uplift,
If  it  be  possible  that,  away  from  the  world,  my  skirt,  I  may  pluck.

On  my  heart  is  the  dust  of  tyranny. O  God  !  approve  not
That  dulled  should  be  my  love-filled  mirror  (the  heart)  !

My  straitened  chest  and  its  load  of  grief. Alas  !

Not  the  man  (porter)  for  this  heavy  load,  is  my  grieved  heart.

In  fancy  for  the  tip  of  Thy  (musky)  tress,  my  heart  and  soul  consumed  :
If  for  Thee  credence  be  necessary,  behold  my  musky  (fragrant)  breath  !

The  slave  of  the  Asaf  of  the  age  am  I ;  my  heart  afflicted,  keep  not :
For,  if  I  boast  of  the  sphere,  revenge  it  seeketh.

10.  If  I  be  the  tavern.profligate ;  or  if  the  city-guardian,

These,  that  Thou  seest,  I  am ; and  than  these,  less  I  am.

4.  Khirka. See  Ode  124.
9.  Asaf. See  Ode  43.

10.  j&*  (goods)  signifies  :  —

The  tavern-profligate  and  the  city-guardian.

In  the  text,  this  word  (in  the  second  line)  is  not  translated.

THE  LETTER  MiM I  665

388,  (393).

i.  Arise  !  so  that  to  the  tavern,  the  sufi-khirka, we  may  take  ;

(So  that)  to  the  bazar  of  idle  tales,  the  ragged  religious  garment  and  idle  talk,'

we  may  take.

The  ear,  we  closed  ;  and,  from  the  nonsense  of  the  admonisher,  escaped  :

Like  those  void  of  information,  the  reputation  of  idle  tales,  how  long  do

we  take  ?

Since  the  morning  cup,  all  the  khilvatis  take,
At  the  door  of  the  Pir  of  the  tavern,  the  harp  of  the  morning, we  take.

To  the  path  towards  the  kalandar-profligates,  journeying  brought  (us)  ;

The  ragged,  religious,  garment  of  wool,  and  the  prayer-mat  of  idle  tales,

we  take.
5.  If,  in  our  path,  the  thorn  of  reproach,  the  Zahid  plant,

Into  the  prison  of  retribution,  him  from  the  rose-garden, we  take.

Of  our  stained,  woollen,  garment,  shame  be  ours,

If,  with  this  excellence  and  skill,  the  reputation  of  miracles, we  take  !

If  the  value  of  time,  the  heart  establish  not ;  and  a  work  do  not,

Great  the  shame  that,  from  this  produce  of  times,——  we  take.

From  this  vaulted  roof,  calamity  raineth. Arise  !

That,  from  all  calamities,  shelter  in  the  wine-house,-^—  we  may  take.

In  desire's  desert  (this  ravishing  world),  to  be  lost  at  last how  long?

(From  the  murshid)  the  path  (of  escape),  we  ask;  perchance,  the  foot  (of  ap-
proach) to  great  deeds we  may  take.

i.  Khirka. See  Ode  124.
4.  Kalandar.  „ „ 58.

g.  The  murshid,  we  ask  so  that,  from  that  fleeting  state  (  Ui  i^Jta.  ),  we  may  go  to  the  lasting
state  (  lib  c^J^-  ).

lii  (effacement)  signifies  :—

a  state  that,  in  the  path  of  travel,  appeareth  to  the  holy  traveller.
\sj  (permanency)  signifies : —

a  state  that,  after  Ui,  the  holy  traveller  entereth.

4«

666  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

t

10.  (O true Beloved !) that covenant that  with Thee, in the  Wadi-i-Aima'n,

(eternity  without  beginning),  I  established,

Like  Musa,  sayer  of  "  Let  me  see,"  to  the  appointed  place  (for  inducing  the
ihram) we  take.

From  the  turret  of  the  ninth  heaven  (God's  throne),  the  drum  of  thy  fame,  we

beat:
To  the  roof  (vault)  of  the  heavens,  the  guidons  of  love  from  Thee,'

we  take.

To-morrow  (resurrection-day),  in  the  plain  of  up-standing  (the  resurrection-
place),  the  (glorious)  dust  of  Thy  street,
For  glorifying,  all,  on  the  pate  of  our  head,  we  take.

Secretly,  to  drink  wine  is  not  the  mark  of  the  generous  one ;

To  the  Lords  of  generosities,  this  mediator  (wine), we  take.

Hafiz ! at  the  door  of  every  mean  one,  thy face-lustre  (reputation), — spill

not :
To  the  Kazi  of  needs  (God),  best  that  that  need, we  take.

10.  oULo«.  (appointed  time  of  work  ;  appointed  place  of  covenant)  may  signify  : —
The  appointed  time  (or  the  place)  of  assembling  (the  resurrection).
Ihram. See  Ode  19,  c.  9 ;  303,  c.  6.
Wadi-i-Aiman. See  Ode  202.
12.  The  dust  of  Thy  street,  for  glorifying,  on  our  head  we  take.

THE  LETTER  MiM

("  667

389,  (392)-

i.  Arise  !  so  that  by  the  wine-house  door,  an  opening  (of  the  heart)  we  may

seek.;
In  the  path  of  the  Friend,  may  sit;  and  our  purpose seek.

Road-provisions  (for  the  path  of  travel)  to  the Friend's  fold,  we  have  not,

Perchance,
By  begging,  from  the  wine-house  door,  road-provisions,  we  may seek.

Though  running,  are  our  (blood)-stained  tears,  yet,

For  despatching  (them)  to  Him,  one  of  pure  nature,  we  seek.

To  our  heart,  forbidden  be  the  taste  of  the  stain  of  grief  for  Thee,

If,  for  the  violence  of  the  grief  of  love  for  Thee,  justice  we  seek.

5.  On  vision's  tablet,  the  point  of  Thy  (dark)  mole,  one  cannot  cast,

Unless,  from  the  (dark)  pupil  of  the  eye,  ink  we seek.

From  Thy  sweet  lip,  my  heart  with  soul  sought  the  way :

With  sweet  smile,  Thy  lip  said  : — "  A  purpose,  let  us seek."

As  long  as  the  beperfumed  prescription  shall  be  for  the  distraught  stricken

heart,
From  Thy  perfume-diffusing  hair,  a  passion  we seek-

Since,  save  in  the  joyous  heart,  one  cannot  gain  grief  for  Thee,

In  hope  of  grief  for  Thee,  a  joyous  heart,  we seek.

Hafiz  !  at  the  college-doer,  how  long  sittest  thou  ?

Arise ;  so  that  by  the  wine-house  door,  an  opening  (of  the  heart)  we  may

seek.

I.  The  first  line  occurs  in  c.  9.

668  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

390,  (39')-

I.  When  to  the  rose-bed  of  the  eye,  passeth  the  fancy  of  Thy  face,
For  the  sake  of  beholding  Thee,  cometh  the  heart  to  the  window-. —

of  the  eye.

(0  Beloved !) come ;  for  in  scattering  for  Thy  (auspicious)  arrival,  the  ruby
(bloody  tears)  and  the  jewel  (lustrous  tears),

From  the  treasure  of  the  house  of  the  heart,  I  draw  to  the  treasury

of  the  eye.

Fit  for  Thy  resting-place,  no  place  I  see.

Of  the  world,  am  I ;  and  this  established  corner of  the  eye.

On  the  first  day  when  I  beheld  Thy  face,  my  heart  said  : —
"  If  (me)  an  injury  reach,  (the  wrong  of  shedding)  my  blood  (will  be)  on  the
neck of  the  eye."

5.  In  the  morning,  my  flowing  tears,  the  thought  of  my  ruin  had  :

If  the  blood  of  my  liver  had  not  caught  the  skirt of  the  eye.

In  the  hope  of  the  glad  tidings  of  union  with  Thee,  till  morning,  last  night,
On  the  wind's  path,  I  placed  the  luminous  lamp *  of  the  eye.

On  one's  expectation,  show  pity. For  night,  all  night,

The  heart's  blood  travelleth  to  the  face  from  the  window of  the  eye.

In  manliness,  (I  conjure  thee)  Hafiz's  sorrowful  heart,

Strike  not  with  the  arrow-point,  heart-stitching,  man-overthrowing

of  the  eye.

6.  In  the  wind's  path,  a  lamp  is  easily  extinguished.  For  union  with  the  true  Beloved,  HSfiz  was
ready  to  go  into  effacement.

8.  By  the  manliness  that  is  in  friends,  and  by  the  perpetrating  of  a  sin  that  cometh  from  one  and
scratcheth  another's  heart,  I  conjure  thee — strike  not  HSfiz's  sorrowful  heart  with  the  arrow-
point,  heart-stitching,  man-overthrowing  (the  eye).

That  is—

By  informing  him  of  a  sin  that,  by  the  exigencies  of  humanity,  hath  become  manifest,  cast  not
his  heart  into  reprehension;  show  mercy;  and  in  this  cruel  way,  the  arrow-point  of  the
eye  display  not.

THE  LETTER

f  669

391,  (389).

I.  Joyous  that  day  when  from  this  desolate  abode  (this  world),  I  go  :

The  ease  of  soul  (the  true  Beloved),  I  seek  :  and  for  the  sake  of  the  Beloved  -

I  go.

Though  I  know  that  to  such  a  place  the  stranger  findeth  not  the  path,

To  the  sweet  perfume  of  that  dishevelled  tress,  -  I  go.

With  the  sick  heart,  and  powerless  body,  like  the  (swift)  breeze,

For  the  love  of  that  moving  cypress,  I  go.

From  dread  of  the  prison  of  Sikandar (this  fleeting  world),  my  heart  took

(contraction)  :
I  bind  up  my  chattels  ;  and  to  the  Land  of  Sulaiman  (the  lasting  world)

I  go.

5.  Since,  to  the  Arabs  (those  gone  before,  who  rest  in  proximity  to  God  ;  and  who

have  escaped  from  time's  tumult),  grief  for  (us)  of  heavy  loads  is  none,
0  Persians  (murshids  of  the  faith  ;  guides  of  the  Path  of  certainty)  ! A  little
help,  that  happy  and  easy  (of  heart  in  that  Path),  -  I  may  go.

liVJ  (Sikandar's  prison)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  city  of  Shiraz  which,  in  Sikandar's  time,  was  void  and  waste.

(b)  the  world.

•  (c)  the  illusory. In  the  illusory,  is  God-worshipping;  yet  is  there  shackling  of  purpose,  and

restricting  of  stages,  like  unto  a  prison.

Although  Sikandar  was  a  world-seizer,  many  regard  him  as  a  prophet.
In  comparison  with  Sulaiman,  Sikandar  is  as  naught  ;  in  comparison  with  the  real  (hakikat),  the

illusory  (majaz)  is  as  naught.
jjiC,  (Sikandar)  may  signify:  —

(a)  a  ruler  of  Hafiz's  land,  whose  people  distressed  him.

(b)  reason. For  Sikandar  was  chief  of  the  wise.
yUjJL-  i-iX«  (Sulaiman's  land)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  city  of  Yazd,  most  prosperous  in  Hafiz's  time,  whose  people  wished  HSfiz  well,  and

among  whom  he  wished  to  dwell  ;  whose  ruler  Hafiz  ever  praised.

(b)  the  next,  permanent,  world.

(c)  Mashhad  in  Khurasan  (where  is  the  tomb  of  Imam  Musi  Ri?a)  ;  or  Najaf  in  'Irak-i-Arab,

where  is  the  tomb  of  All  Murtaza.

wloL»  (Sulaiman  may)  signify  :  —

(a)  the  ruler  of  a  Land,  glorious  of  description,  who  opened  the  hand  of  liberality;  and

showed  sincerity  of  faith  to  men  of  God. See  Ode  370,  c.  9.

(b)  love.

?°  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

In  His  path,  like  the  pen,  if  on  my  head  it  is  necessary  to  go,

With  the  heart,  wound-enduring ;  and  weeping  eye,—  I  go.

If  of  this  grief  one  day  come  to  an  end,  I  have  vowed  (that)

To  the  wine-house  door,  joyous  and  song-singing,——  I  will  go  ;

(That)  like  a  mote,  in  love  for  Him,

To  the  lip  of  the  fountain  of  the  resplendent  sun, I  will  go.

And  if,  out  from  the  desert,  I  take  not  the  path  like  Hafiz

Along  with  the  constellations  of  the  Asaf  of  the  age I  go.

6.  The  pen's  head  is  the  nib,  whereon  (in  writing)  it  moveth.

THE  LETTER  MINI  I  671

392,  (395).

i.  In  the  tavern  of  the  Magians,  God's  light I  see  :

. This  wonder,  behold  !  what  the  light  is  ;  and  where  it, I  see.

O  Lord!  the  dreg-drinker  of  this  wine-house  is  who?  For,  his  door,

The  kibla  of  need,  and  the  prayer-arch  of  prayer I  see.

The  dignity  of  being  a  lover,  a  profligate,  and  one  who  toyeth  with  a  mistress  :
By  the  instruction  of  Thy  grace,  all I  see.

O  King  (commander)  of  the  Hajj  !  to  me,  boast  not  of  dignity. For,  thou
Seest  the  house  (the  Ka'ba) ;  and  God's  house, I  see.

5.  Of  the  musk  of  Khutan  and  of  the  musk-pod  of  Chin,  none  hath  seen

What,  from  the  fragrant  morning  breeze  (of  the  east),  every  morning 1  see.

In  the  circle  (of  creation),  save  the  point  of  unity,  is  (naught)  less  or  more  :
For,  without  how  and  why,  this  question  I  see.

From  the  tress  of  idols,  musk-loosening  (perfuming)  I  will  make,

Far,  is  thought  (from  realisation) ;  verily,  Khata  (Cathay,  a  mistake) 1  see.

(0  true  Beloved !)  the  heart's  consuming,  the  streaming  tears,  the  night-weeping,

the  morning-sigh

All  this  (calemity  of  grief),  from  the  sight  of  Thy  grace, I  see.

Momently,  my  fancy  a  picture  of  Thy  face  way-Iayeth  :

To  whom,  shall  I  utter  what  things  within  this  veil  (of  thought) I  see.

10.  Friends  !  at  Hafiz's  glancing,  carp  not

For,  him  of  (the  crowd  of)  the  lovers  of  God-^—  I  see.

2.  The  Kibla  is  the  Ka'ba  of  Makka;  and,  in  every  Masjid,  is  represented  by  the  mihrab  (arched
recess).

5.  Here  Hafijt  revealeth  the  manifestations  of  God  that  he  hath ;  and  his  divine  knowledge.

672  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

393,  (399)-

I.  Friends  !  in  the  rose-season,  that  best  that  "  for  pleasure  we  strive  :  "

(This)  the  word  of  the  Plr  of  the  Magians  (the  murshid)  is. With  soul,  let  us
listen.

In  none,  is  liberality  (that  we  may  have  even  a  groat  wherewith  to  drink  wine)  ;

passeth  joy's  time  :
Its  remedy  is  this,  for  wine,  the  prayer-mat,  we  sell.

'lis  a  pleasant  air,  joy-giving. O  God  !  send

One  of  gracious  form,  to  whose  face,  wine,  rose  of  hue,  we  may  drink.

One  of  skill  (Zuhra)  is  the  organ-player  of  the  sky,  highway-robber  :
Of  this  grief,  bewail  we  not — how  ?  and  clamour  we  not, why?

5.  Into  tumult  (of  blossom),  came  the  rose  ;  and  its  lustre,  we  dashed  not  with  wine,
Therefore,  with  the  fire  of  regret  and  of  desire, we  clamour.

From  the  tulip's  cup,  illusory  wine  we  draw ;

Far,  the  evil  eye  ! For  without  the  minstrel  and  wine,  distraught  are  we.

Hafiz!  to  whom  can  one  utter  this  wonderful  state? For,  we
Are  bulbuls  that,  in  the  rose-season,  silent  are.

I.  When  the  muslims  carried  Islam  into  Persia,  they  used  the  term  "  Pir-i-  mughan"  for  :  —
(a)  the  heads  of  Christian  churches  (as  an  expression  of  contempt).
(6) „ masters  of  taverns,  of  baths  and  of  karvan  sarais.
(c) „  priests  of  the  fire-worshippers  (Gabrs).

JS&*>.  £*  (young  magians)  signifies  :—

(a)  noviciates  at  the  old  Persian  monasteries.

(b)  the  waiting  boys  at  houses  of  entertainment.

7.  In  the  rose-season,  the  bulbul  maketh  chahchaha  (chattering).

THE  LETTER  MiM  f*  673

394,  (403).

I.  Last  night,  with  a  torrent  of  tears,  sleep's  path, I  dashed  :

In  mernory  of  Thy  down,  a  (vanishing)  picture  on  water, I  dashed.

In  my  view,  the  Friend's  eye-brow;  and  the  consumed  khirka :

To  the  memory  of  the  corner  of  Thy  prayer-arch  (eye-brow),  a  cup

I  dashed.

In  my  sight,  the  form  of  the  idol  (the  true  Beloved)  displayed  grandeur  ;

From  afar,  on  the  cheek  of  the  moon,  a  kiss, 1  dashed.

On  the  Saki's  face,  my  eye ;  on  the  harp's  wail,  my  ear;

In  this  matter,  with  eye  and  ear,  an  omen  (of  what  will  be  revealed),

I  dashed.

5.  Till  morning-dawn,  the  picture  of  the  fancy  of  Thy  face,

On  the  workshop  of  my  sleepless  eye, I  dashed.

To  the  words  of  this  ghazal,  the  cup  uptoook  my  Saki :

This  song,  I  uttered  ;  and  pure  wine, I  dashed.

Every  bird  of  thought,  that,  from  the  tip  of  joy's  branch,  flew, —

Again,  to  the  snare  of  Thy  curl,  it, I  dashed.

Happy,  was  the  time  of  Hafiz ;  and  an  omen  of  object  and  of  desire,

In  respect  of  (long)  life,  and  of  (great)  fortune  of  friends, I  dashed.

2.  Khirka. See  Ode  124.

7.  Whenever  the  fancy  of  joyousness  cometh,  it,  with  the  fancy  of  Thy  tress,  penurbed,  I  make.
In  the  Persian  Text,  each  couplet  endeth  with  zadam,  I  dashed.

I .  yJJ  «j  to  way-lay ;  to  obstruct.

1.  „  i_>l  jJ  (jiaj „  paint  a  picture  on  water.;  to  think  of  achieving  the  impossible.

2.  „  -U.  „  drain  the  cup.

3.  „  iv,jj  „  kiss.

4.  .,  ijti  „  cast  an  omen.

5.  ,,  (jtai  „  paint.

6.  „  ^*  „  drink  wine.
7-i)  — •  „  dash,  to  cast.

8.  ...  Jti  fl  to  cast  an  omen,

4R

674  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

395,  (401)..

i.  Last  night,  I  said  : — "  Out  from  my  head,  the  passion  for  His  face I  will  put."
He  (the  true  Beloved)  said  : — "  The  chain  where,  that  the  arrangement  (of  bind-
ing) this  distraught  one,  I  may  make  ?"

His  stature,  I  called  the  (straight,  free)  cypress. In  anger,  his  head  from  me,

He  drew  back :
0  friends  !  with  the  truth,  my  idol  grieveth. What shall  I  do  ?

O  heart-ravisher !  an  un-weighed  subtlety,  I  uttered  :  excuse  me  ;
Graciousness  show  that  my  thought  weighed  in  verse I  may  make.

For  that  nature,  tender,  sinless,  I  endure  yellow  (shame-)  facedness,

O  Sakl!  a  cup  give,  that  my  face  rose  of  hue •  I  may  make.

5.  O  breeze  of  Laila's  dwelling!  for  God's  sake,  how  long—

The  fourth  (inhabited)  part  of  the  world  shall  I  over- turn;  (and)  the  palace-
ruins  (the  waste-places),  the  river  Jaihun  shall I  make?

I,  who  took  the  path  to  the  treasure  (of  mysteries)  of  boundless  beauty  of  the
Friend,

After  this,  a  hundred  beggars  like  myself,  (rich  as)  KarQn  (with  divine  know-
ledge) I  make.

O  moon,  Lady  of  felicity !  thy  slave  Hafiz,  remember,

So  that,  for  the  fortune  of  that  beauty  daily  increasing,  prayer, 1  may  make.

i-  }•*+*•  (excessive  desire)  signifies  : —

The  four  humours  of  the  body—
sauda,  atrabilis.

balgham,  phlegm.

safra,  bile.

Idiun,  blood. '

5.  With  my  tears,  a  river  will  flow  like  the  mighty  Jaihun.

"  The  fourth  part "  signifies  : — The  four  elements.

The  palace-ruins  „ : — The  mould,  wherein  was  cast  the  clay  body  of  Adam.

7.  The  term,  Hafiz,  is  applied  to : —

(a)  one  who  knoweth  (by  heart)  the  whole  of  the  Kuran,  and  who  (in  the  masjid)  uttereth  prayers

and  chapters  of  the  Kuran.

(b)  to  this  Poet  as  a  takhallus  (poetical  title).

(c)  a  guardian,  watchman.

THE  LETTER  MIM

396,  (402).

I.  My  eye,  an  ocean  (of  weeping)  I  make  ;  to  the  desert,  patience,  I  cast :

And,  in  this  wprk,  my  heart  into  the  ocean  I  cast.

From  the  straitened  heart  the  sinner,  I  heave  such  a  sigh

That,  into  the  sin  of  Adam  and  of  Havva,  fire I  cast.

•

The  sky's  arrow  (of  affliction),  I  have  endured ;  wine  (of  love)  give,  so  that,
intoxicated  of  head,

Into  the  girdle  of  the  waist  of  the  quiver  of  Jauza  (Gemini),  a  knot

I  may  cast.

On  this  moving  throne  (the  revolving  sky),  a  draught  of  wine,  I  pour  :

Into  this  azure  vault  (the  sky),  the  resounding  shout  of  strife, I  cast.

5.  There,  where  is  the  heart-possessor,  is  the  source  of  happy-heartedness  ;

I  strive  that,  perchance  there,  myself, 1  may  cast.

O  moon,  sun  of  cap  (in  effulgence) !  the  fastening  of  thy  coat,  loose  :

So  that  like  thy  (long,  trailing)  tress  at  thy  feet,  my  passion-stricken  head

I  may  cast.

O  Hafiz !  since  reliance  on  time  is  error  and  defect,

Then,  to  to-morrow,  the  pleasure  of  to-day  why do  I  cast  ?

3.  They  call—

a  planet — Mutah  ayyira ;  Kaukab-i-siyara.

a  fixed  star— Kaukab-i-sabita.

the  Zodiac— Mantikatu-1-buruj.

a  mansion — burj.
<_£li  .ju (the  sky's  arrow)  signifies  : —

'Utarid  (mercury),  whose  mansion  is  in  Jauza  (Gemini),  and from  whose  effects  are  the

world's  disasters. For  he  is  the  kazi  and  the  dabir  (secretary)  of  the  sky.

Ijj^  (Jauza)  signifies  :—

A  mansion  (Gemini)  of  the  twelve  mansions,  wherein  are  the  seven  planets.
O  murshid  !  of  the  sphere's  revolution,  and  crooked  way,  I  am  wearied. Love's  cup  give,  so *

that  completely  intoxicated,  on  the  girdle  of  Jauza's  quiver,  a  knot  I  may  cast  (tie) ;  and

from  practising  injury  his  master  ('  Utarid)  prevent.
With  Jauza,  'Utarid  keepeth  his  quiver.
The  hair  of  Jauza's  face  is  called  arrows.

4  R  2

676  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

397,  (400).

i.  Last  night,  me,  from  power  took  (and  ruined)  the  (languishing)  sickness  of  Thy

eye;
But,  from  the  bounty  of  Thy  lip,  the  form  of  (new)  life,  I  established.

Not  of  to-day,  is  my  love  for  Thy  musky  tress  ;

Long  time  'tis,  since  that  with  this  cup,  like  the  new  moon,  intoxicated  1  was.

From  my  own  constancy,  happily  came  this  subtlety:  —  "  With  violence,
"  At  the  head  of  Thy  street,  (down)  from  the  foot  of  search,  I  sate  not."

From  me,  wine-house-sitter,  ease  expect  not :

For,  since  I  was — of  the  service  of  profligates,  boasted  have  I.

5.  In  love's  path,  from  that  quarter  of  effacement,  are  a  hundred  dangers  :

Take  care  thou  sayest  not  that,  when  to  an  end  (in  effacement),  hath  come  my
life,  (from  these  calamities)  I  have  escaped  (Nay ;  before  the  heart,  after
death,  are  a  hundred  thoughts  of  danger).

After  this,  of  the  arrow  of  torment  of  the  envious,  mine  what  care,
When,  to  my  Beloved  of  bow-eyebrow,  joined  I  am  ?

Lawful  to  me,  is  the  kiss  on  the  casket  of  Thy  cornelian  (lip);

For,  despite  Thy  tyranny  and  oppression,  love  and  fidelity,  I  shattered  not.

7 A«JJ  (kiss)  signifies:—

(a)  taking  delight  in  the  way  of  desire.

(6)  readiness  of  acceptance  of  the  words  of  sufficiency,  outwardly  and  inwardly.

See  Ode  169,  c.  3;  299,0.  5.
jJi*  -)*  (the  cornelian  casket)  signifies  :—

(a)  the  mouth,  the  place  of  revealing the  mysteries  of  the  Merciful ;  and  the  boundless

bounties  of  splendour.

(b)  the  lip,  which  is  the  quality  of  the  speech  of  the  Beloved,  desired  by  all.

The  explanations  are : —  .

(a)  Lawful  to  me,  is  taking  delight  with  exceeding  desire  from  the  mysteries  of  that  corne-
lian casket ;  it  is  not  the  cause  of  sin  and  the  fruit-producer  of  sadness.
I  am  fit. For,  through  the  sorcery  of  the  creatures  of  the  world  (lovely  ones),  I  have  not
shattered  my  faithful  love  for  Thee ;  on  the  covenant  that  I  established,  firm  of  foot  I

(6)  Lawful  to  me  is  the  discovery  of  the  holy  spirit  from  lips. For,  through  the  sorcery  of
~  kind  ones  (lovely  ones,  ftrifs).  I  have  not  shattered  my  love  for  Thee.

THE  LETTER  MIM f"  677

My  heart,  a  warrior-idol  plundered  and  departed  :

Pity,  if  the  grace  of  the  king  (the  murshid) take  not  my  hand  (and  justice  give
me).

To  the  (lofty)  sky,  had  ascended  the  grandeur  of  Hafiz's  knowledge  :
Me,  grieving  for  Thy  lofty  box-tree  (the  true  Beloved's  stature)  made  low.

8,  The  Beloved  is  called  the  warrior-idol,  because  beloved  ones  practise  tyranny  ;  as  do  warriors.
When  the  beloved  is  warrior  as  well  as  beloved, — calamity  on  calamity  cometh.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

398,  (396).

i.  From  the  (true)  Beloved,  is  my  pain  ;  and  my  remedy, also:

A  sacrifice  for  Him,  became  my  heart,  and  my  life, also.

Those  that  say  :— "  That  (elegance)  is  better  than  beauty  :" (To  them,  say  : — )
"This  (beauty),  hath  our  Beloved  ;  and  that  (elegance), also."

(Only)  one  splendour  of  His  face  is  (the  glory  of)  both  worlds, '

To  thee,  I  uttered  (this  matter),  evident  and  hidden, also.

Friends  !  within  the  veil,  we  utter  speech  :

It  will  be  uttered  with  tales, also.

5.  Our  blood,  that  intoxicated  narcissus  sh'ed ;

And  that  tip  of  the  dishevelled  tress, also.

Not,  on  the  world's  work,  is  reliance  ;

Nor,  on  the  revolving  sphere  (whereto  is  attributed  the  world's  work), also.

Be  memory  of  that  one,  who,  with  desire  for  our  blood,

Shattered  the  covenant,  and  the  oath, also.

When,  to  an  end,  have  come  the  nights  of  union,

Passeth  away  the  time  of  separation also.

Many  times,  the  blood  (tears)  of  my  eye,  the  picture  of  His  mole

Spilled  openly  and  secretly also.

10.  Not  the  judge,  doth  the  lover  fear, — wine,  bring

Nor  the  punishment  of  the  Sultan, also.

Knoweth  that  Hafiz  is  a  lover  (of  God),  the  muhtasib  ;

And  the  Asaf  of  Sulaiman's  court,  also.

ii.  Asaf. See  Ode  43.

THE  LETTER  MiM

r

399,  (398)-

I.  In  the  secret  house  of  my  ease  (the  heart),  a  sweet  idol  (the  true  Beloved),

I  have  :

From  Whose  tress-tip  and cheek, the horse-shoe  (of agitation) in the.  fire

I  have.

With  loud  shout,  me  (they  call) — lover,  profligate,  wine-drinker  !

From  that  Hur,  like  the  Pari,  all  I  have.

If,  in  this  way,  me,  resourceless  Thou  keep,
•With  a  morning-sigh,  dishevelled,  Thy  tress, I  keep.

If  to  the  abode  of  profligates,  a  pace  Thou  wilt  take,

The  sweetmeat  of  sweet  verse,  and  unalloyed  wine, I  have.

5.  If  the  ruddish  beard  of  the  Friend  display  like  this  its  face  (of  splendour),

With  bloody  water,  my  yellow  (grief-stricken)  face painted  (ruddy) 1  have.

From  the  path  of  the  tress,  bring  the  arrow  of  the  glance. For,

With  my  wounded  heart,  calamity-enduring,  contests I  have.

One  hair-tip  in  my  hand ;  and  the  other  tip  with  the  Friend  :
Regarding  this  hair-tip,  years,  contentions  (pulling  different  ways),

I  have.

O  Hafiz !  when  avanishing  are  the  world's  grief  and  joy,

That  is  best  that,  my  own  heart,  happy I  have.

a.  Pari. Ode  25,  c.  2  ;  366,  c.  5  ;  416,  c.  4 ;  475,  c.  8.

68o

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

400,  (444).
i.  Obtained  was  the  sight  (of  the  true  Beloved)  and  the  kiss,  and  the  embrace-

also  :
To  fortune,  thanks  I  owe  ;  and  to  time,  -  also.

Zahid  !  go  (about  thy  own  work  ;  and  forbid  not  wine  and  the  lovely  one). For

if  ascendant  be  my  fortune,
Will  be  in  my  hand,  —  the  cup  and  the  Beloved's  tress  -  also.

For  profligacy  and  intoxication,  we  ascribe  to  none  defect  :

Sweet  is  the  ruby  (lip)  of  idols,  and  pleasant-tasting  wine  -  also.

O  heart!  thee,  glad  tidings,  I  give. The  muhtasib  is  no  more!

Full,  is  the  world  of  wine,  and  of  the  wine-drinking  idol  -  also.

5. Passed  hath  that  time,  when  from  ambush  was  lurking  the  evil-eye  :

Departed  from  the  midst,  hath  the  enemy  (thezahid  ;  or  the  watcher);  and,  from
the  bosom,  the  tear  -  also-

Not  wise,  is  it  to  give  the  heart  to  the  power  of  separation:

Tranquillity  (of  heart)  seek;  and  a  flagon,  bring  -  a|sO>

On  the  dusty  ones  (lovers)  of  love,  pour  a  draught  of  his  (Muhammad's)  lip,
So  that  ruby-hue  may  become  the  dust;  and  musk-  (diffusing)——  also.

(O  perfect  murshid  !  )  since  by  thy  perfume  (of  hope),  all  created  beings  are

living,
0  (resplendent)  sun  (the  true  Beloved)  !  from  us,  Thy  shade  (of  bounty)  keep

not  -  also.

6.  yob  AJji>  (to  give  separation)  signifies  :  —

to  be  confused  and  perturbed  of  heart.

To  be  foot-bound  to  perturbation  and  separation  is  not  the  part  of  a  wise  man.
Tranquillity  of  heart  seek  ;  from  separation  incline  to  unity  ;  and  acquire  love  also.
The  second  line  may  be  :  —

The  tray  (of  fruits)  ask  for  ;  and  a  flagon  bring  -  also.
8.  The  second  line  may  be  :—

Me,  in  thy  shade  (of  shelter)  keep  ;  off  from  my  head,  take  not  the  shade  of  thy  favour.

THE  LETTER  MlM

68 1

Since  the  honour  (decoration)  of  the  tulip  and  of  the  rose  is  the  bounty  of  thy

beauty,
O  cloud  of  grace  (Muhammad)!  on  me,  dusty  (humble,  grace)  rain also.

10.  Captive  to  thee,  became  people  of  vision. God  fear !

And  the  obtaining  of  justice  from  fi.saf,  powerful  as  Sulaiman, also.

Burhan-i-Mulk  va  Din,  from  whose  hand  of  vazlrship,

The  happy,  time  of  the  mine  became  his  right  hand ;  and  of  the  ocean,  his  left
,  also.

To  the  memory  of  his  most  illumined  judgment,  in  the  morning,  the  sky
Maketh  sacrifice  of  (surrendered!)  its  own  life;  and  the  constellation,  scatter-
ing—^— also.

Snatched  by  thy  chaugan  of  justice,  is  the  ball  of  earth's  (sovereignty);

And  this  up-lifted  blue  dome  of  the  fortress also.

Into  motion,  thy  intention,  light  of  rein,  bringeth

This  world,  firm,  lofty  of  centre,  also.

15.  Until  that  time  when,  from  the  effects  of  the  sky;  and  the  way  of  its  revolu-
tion, there  be,—
Change  of  years,  and  of  month,  and  of  autumn,  and  of  spring also.

Void  of  chiefs,  be  not  thy  palace  of  dignity ;

And  of  Sakis,  cypress  of  stature,  rose  of  cheek also.

Hafiz,  who,  in  thy  praise,  scattereth  such  jewels,

Before  thy  hand  was  embarrassed  and  ashamed also.

10.  Since  Jam  is  here  connected  with  Asaf  it  signifies  not  Jamshid  but  Sulaiman.
n.  The  second  line  signifies  :—

To  his  right  hand,  came  the  quarry  of  the  mine  of  gold  and  of  silver;  and  to  his  left  hand,

the  ocean  (the  mine  of  pearls).

With  both  hands,  do  the  people  of  his  time  practise  liberality ;  and  the  issue,  fear  not.
This  is  the  effect  upon  them  of  his  generosity.
Burhan-i-Mulk  va  Din  signifies : —

The  foundation  of  country  and  of  religion.

682  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

401,  (405)-

i.  For  a  long  time  past,  in  the  tavern  (of  love,  of  manifestations,  of  glories),  service

(in  {rue  love  to  God,  in  manifestations,  and  in  fearful  contemplation),

I  have  been  doing  :

In  the  garment  of  poverty  (as  a  fakir),  the  work  of  people  of  fortune  (those
joined  to  God), I  keep  doing.

Perceived  not  truth's  perfume,  our  admonisher. Hear  thou ;  for  this  word  (of

truth),
In  his  presence,  do  I  also  utter :  no  calumny,  do I  make.

Until  that,  into  union's  snare,  I  bring  the  partridge  (the  true  Beloved),  sweet  of

gait,
In  my  ambush,  expectation  of  time's  opportunity,——  I  make.

To  the  Friend's  street,  I  go  like  the  (swift)  breeze,  falling  and  rising,

And  from  the  basil  and  the  rose,  prayer  for  assistance, I  make.

5.  The  snare  of  the  Path  (tarlkat)  is  the  tress  of  the  Heart-ravisher ;  and  the  arrow

of  calamity,  His  glance  :
O  heart !  remember  the  many  precepts  of  counsel  that,  for  thee, I  make.

More  than  this,  our  trouble,  the  dust  of  Thy  street  endureth  not :
O  Idol!  kindnesses,  Thou  didst:  (by  going  into  effacement)  the  lessening  of  our
trouble  (to  Thee) I  make.

4.  Basil. See  Ode  200.

6.  t_yj/  (JLi.  (the  dust  of  the  street)  signifies : —

(o)  the  world.

(b)  man's  existence  made  of  moist  earth.
"  I  created  man  weak."
Then,  his  nature  is  weak.

o^oj  (trouble)  may  signify : —

The  twist  and  the  turn  of  love,  so  that  from  its  glories,  every  one  becometh  different  hued.

For,  at  the  time  of  love's  clamour,  he  cleaveth  to  his  Creator.
The  explanations  are : —

(a)  More  than  this,  the  world  endureth  not  our  trouble;  and  more  than  this,  delay  in  it  befit-

teth  me  not.

Thou  hast  showed  kindnesses,  in  that  out  of  this  dust-heap,  me,  for  the  sake  of  acquisi-
tion of  divine  knowledge,  existing  Thou  hast  made  5  and,  into  this  dust-heap,  me  like
seed  hast  cast.

THE  LETTER  MlM  f  683

O  Merciful  One,  defect-concealing !  cover  the  eye  of  the  ill-see-er,

From  these  bold  deeds,  that,  in  the  corner  of  khilvat,—  I  do.

God  forbid  that  of  the  reckoning  of  the  day  of  assembling  no  fear  be  mine,
To-morrow's  omen,  I  cast ;  to-day's  pleasure,  I  do.

From  the  right  of  God's  throne,  the  faithful  spirit  (Jibra,il)  uttereth  Amin  ! —
When,  the  prayer  for  the  Lord  of  the  country  and  of  religion,  I  make.

10.  O  Khusrau !  from  this  account,  hope  of  the  height  of  dignity,  I  have :

Entreaty  for  threshold-kissing  of  thy  majesty.  I  make.

In  a  religious  assembly,  Hafiz,  I  am ;  in  a  convivial  assembly,  dreg-drinker,

I  am :
This  boldness  (and  expertness)  behold  how,  with  (different)  people, (different)

profession, I  make.

Now  fruitful,  I  have  become ;  and,  with  the  mysteries  of  sea  and  of  land,  acquainted.

From  this  stage,  full  of  sorrow,  my  heart  hath  risen  ;  and  arrayed  itself  for  the  country
of  permanency. This  stage,  I  relieve  of  the  trouble  of  my  existence ;  and  to  that  stage,
incline.
(6)  Thou  hast  showed  me  kindnesses  in  that  again  me,  towards  Thyself  Thou  hast  called.

Thy  order,  I  accept :  and  this  stage,  relieve  of  the  trouble  of  my  existence.
(c)  0  Creator  of  man,  of  jann  ! O  Merciful  Protector  of  my  existence  that,  through  age,  hath
become  feeble  and  lean  !  the  trouble  of  love's  clamour  and  its  hardships,  I  cannot  en-
dure. Thou  hast  showed  me  kindness  in  that  into  this  cage  me,  like  a  parrot,  Thou  hast
brought,  so  that  I  may  gain  lofty  stages  and  precious  dignities.

Now,  it,  I  relieve  of  the  trouble  of  my  existence,  *  *  *  *

7.  To  none,  reveal  my  defects.

II.  In  the  path  of  shari'at,  I  am  excellent  (  cUli  )  ;  in  the  path  of  tarikat,  Sufi.
Hafiz. See  Ode  395,  c.  7.

4  s  2

684  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

4O2,  (406).

i.  Through  my  short  (feeble)  arm,  beneath  grief's  load,  am  I :
For,  of  those  of  lofty  stature  ashamed,  am  I.

Perchance,  my  hand,  the  chain  of  the  hair  (of  Thy  tress)  will  take  ;
If  not,  in  distraughtness,  my  head  I  bring  forth.

Of  my  (sleepless)  eye,  ask  the  plane  of  the  spheres,
For,  night  to  day,  the  stars,  I  count.

Thankfully,  the  cup  of  the  lip,  I  kiss  for  this,
That,  me,  it  acquainted  with  time's  mystery.

5.  Thanks  many,  I  owe  to  my  (feeble)  arm ;

In  that  the  strength  of  the  man-in jurer,  I  have  not.

If,  for  the  wine-sellers,  a  prayer  I  uttered,
What  is  it  ?  the  duty  of  favour,  I  offer.

Up  from  the  dust,  me  thou  wilt  not  take,
(Even)  if  the  jewel  instead  of  the  tear,  I  rain.

At  me,  for  drinking  my  own  blood  (through  affliction)  in  this  plain, — carp  not
For,  the  pupil  of  the  deer  (the  lovely  one)  of  the  Tatar,  I  am.

From  love's  wine-house,  what  (strong,  bitter,)  wine  I  drank,
That,  neither  sensibleness  nor  wakefulness,  have  I.

10.  A  head  like  intoxicated  Hafiz,  I  have  : But,
Hope,  in  the  grace  of  that  chief  I  have.

3.  They  who,  in  sleep,  pass  the  night,  what  know  they  of  the  positions  of  the  sphere  ?

THE  LETTER  MiM

685

403,  (394)-

i.  If  again  befall  me  passing  into  the  tavern  of  the  Magians  (the  perfect  murshid),
The  produce  of  the  khirka  and  of  the  prayer-mat,  running  (recklessly)  I  will  play
away  (and  lose).

If  to-day,  like  the  zahids,  I  beat  the  ring  of  penitence,

To-morrow,  open  to  me  the  door,  the  wine-house-guardian  maketh  not.

If  like  the  moth,  freedom  from  care  aid  me,

Save  to  that  candle-like  (luminous)  cheek,  no  flight  is  mine.

If  like  the  (cord-slackened)  harp,  me  by  reason  of  the  slackness  (of  its  cords)  the

heart's  desire  thou  give  not,
At  last,  with  Thy  lips,  with  a  breath,  me,  like  the  reed  (flute),  cherish.

5.  The  society  of  the  Hur,  I  desire  not. For,  the  essence  of  defect  it  is
If,  despite  the  fancy  for  Thee,  with  another,  I  disport.

To  none,  I  utter  the  circumstances  of  my  heart,  blood  become :

Since  that,  save  the  sword  of  grief  for  Thee,  my  fellow-consoler  is  none.

Hidden  in  my  chest  would  have  remained  passion's  desire  for  Thee,
If  my  eye,  wet  of  skirt,  the  secret  had  not  revealed.

Like  the  bird  from  the  cage  of  dust  (the  dusty  body),  I  became  of  the  air  (flying

here  and  there,  and  searching),
In  the  desire  that,  perchance,  me  the  falcon  (the  perfect  murshid  ;  or  the  Aril)  a

prey — may  make.

If,  on  Hafiz's  body,  be  a  head  for  every  hair.

Like  Thy  (long  trailing)  tress,  all  at  Thy  feet,  I  cast.

I.  If  to  the  perfect  murshid,  I  go  fleeing,— these  goods  of  hypocrisy  I  will  scatter.
4.  Me,  cherish  either  by  union  or  with  a  kiss.
9.  The  second  line. See  Ode  396,  c.  6.

686  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

4O4,  (407).

i.  So  that  me,  to  the  wind of  destruction thou  give  not, — to  the  dishevelling

breeze,  thy  tress  give  not:

So  that  my  foundation  of  life,  thou  take  not, — the  foundation  of  disdain,  estab-
lish not.

So  that  me,  independent  of the  rose-leaf  (perfume)  thou  mayst  make, — thy

face  illumine  :
So  that  me,  free  of  the  (lofty)  cypress,  thou  mayst  make, — thy  stature  exalt.

So  that  my  head  (in  perturbation)  in  desire  for  (the  solitude  of)  the  mountain

thou  put  not, — the  notoriety  of  the  city  be  not:
So  that  me,  Farhad,  thou  make  not, —  the  disdain  of  Shirin  display  not.

So  that  (in  affliction)  the  blood  of  my  liver,  I  drink  not, — with  others,  wine

drink  not :
So  that  from  my  remembrance,  thou  pass  not, — every  tribe  remember  not.

5.  So  that  me,  in  bonds,  thou  put  not — thy  tress  becurl  not :

So  that  me,  to  the  wind  (of  destruction)  thou  give  not, — lustre  to  thy  face  give
not.

So  that  me,  from  thyself  thou  take  not — the  friend  of  the  stranger  be  not :
So  that  me,  unhappy  thou  make  not — grief  for  strangers  suffer  not.

So  that  me,  thou  mayst  not  consume, — the  candle  of  every  assembly  be  not :
So  that  its  head  to  the  sky,  my  plaint  draw  not, — thy  head  withdraw  not.

On  me,  miserable,  show  pity ;  and  to  my  plaint,  arrive  :
So  that,  to  the  dust  of  the  door  of  Asaf,  my  plaint  reach  not.

3.  Shirin. See  Ode  199.

7.  In  the  text, —

"  If  not,  me,  thou  wilt  consume  "
The  line  seems  to  be  spurious.

8.  Asaf. See  Ode  43.

Asaf,  son  of  Barkhiya,  vazir  to  Sulaiman,  knew  the  great  name  of  God  (ism-i-a'zam),  by  virtue
of  which  he  did  great  things.  See  Kuran,  xxvii.  386.  Ode  189,  c.  2;  193,  c.  3;  350,  c.  10;
435.  c.  10.

THE  LETTER  MiM

687

From  the  hand  (of  reason),  went  my  head ;  union  with  Thee  showed  no  beauty :
My  hand,  seize ;  for  from  separation  from  Thee,  fallen  from  my  feet,  I  have.

10.  Of  thy  tyranny,  God  forbid  that  Hafiz  should,  one  day,  complain  :
From  this  day  when,  in  thy  bond,  I  am, — free  I  am.

So  that  Hafiz  thou  slay  not, — like  the  sky,  violence  do  not :
So  that  me,  justice,  auspicious  fortune  may  give, — gentle  be.

688  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

4O5,  (410).

I.  0  idol!  with  grief  of  love  for  thee  what  plaint,  shall  I  make?

In  grief  for  thee,  till  when  the  night-seizing  wail^—  shall  I  make  ?

Passed  (to  the  true  Beloved),  my  distraught  heart  on  that  account  that  a  remedy

it  might  accept :
Perchance,  with  Thy  tress-tip,  its  chain I  may  make.

With  (on  account  of)  Thy  own  tress-tip  (is)  all  my  perturbation  ;

Where  the  power  that,  all  at  once,  all  the  narrative,  I  should  make  ?

In  the  time  of  separation  from  Thee,  what  I  endured — alas !

'Tis  impossible  that,  in  one  letter,  writing  thereof  I  should  make,

5.  That  time  when  the  desire  of  beholding  the  beloved  is  mine,

In  the  vision,  the  picturing  of  Thy  lovely  face,  imagining—  I  make.

If  I  know  that,  in  this  way,  union  with  Thee,  aid,

Heart  and  faith,  all  I  will  play  away  (and  lose);  and  (yet)  increase  (thereof)

I  will  make.

0  admonisher!  far  from  me  go  ;  foolishness,  utter  not :

Not  that  one  am  I  who,  again,  the  ear  (of  attention)  to  thy  hypocrisy

will  put.

Profligate,  one  of  colour;  and  associate  with  the  Beloved  and  wine,. am  I :

1  cannot  (consent)  that  again,  deceit  and  hypocrisy, I  should  practise.

O  Hafiz!  hope  of  freedom  from  iniquity  is  none:

Since  fate  is  like  this,  what  plan  (is  it  that) I  should  make  ?

1.  From  grief  of  love  for  Thee,  I  am  ready  to  die. Pity  exercise;  from  this  grief,  salvation  give

either  by  union  with  Thee,  or  by  a  kiss,  or  in  some  other  way.

2.  No  profit  hath  Thy  counsel. Perchance,  for  repelling  its  bewilderedness,  with  the  chain  of  Thy

tress, — it,  I  will  fasten.

6.  If  it  be  known  to  me  that,  as  reward,  union  with  Thee  is  gained,  I  will  give  heart  and  faith ;  and
increase  make.  Notwithstanding  that  heart  and  faith  are  priceless  and  peerless, — in  compari-
son with  union  with  the  Friend,  they  are  worthless.

THE  LETTER  MiM  (*  689

406,  (423).

I.  IF  into  the  curl  of  Thy  two  tresses,  my  hand  again  should  reach,

With  Thy  chaugan,  what  heads  (there  are)  that  like  a  ball,  I  shall  play.

Long  life  to  me  is  Thy  (long)  tress ;  but  there  is  not
In  my  hand,  a  hair-tip  of  this  long  life.

0  candle  (Beloved)  !  give  the  order  for  rest. For,  to-night,

From  the  heart's  fire,  before  Thee,  like  the  consuming  candle  I  melt.

That  moment  when,  with  a  laugh,  life  I  give  up  like  the  flagon,

1  would  that  a  prayer  for  me  Thy  intoxicated  ones  should  offer.

5.  Since  the  prayer  of  me  stained  is  not  an  (acceptable)  prayer ;

In  the  wine-house,  on  that  account  less  are  not  my  burning  and  consuming.

In  the  masjid  and  in  the  wine-house,  if  Thy  image  come,

Of  Thy two eye-brows,  I  make  the  prayer-arch  of  praying  and  the  lute  (of
wailing).

If,  one  night  with  Thy  face,  my  khilvat,  Thou  illumine,

Like  the  morning  in  the  horizons  of  the  world,  my  head,  I  exalt.

In  this  path  (of  love),  laudable  is  the  end  of  (love's)  work,

If,  in  desire  of  passion  for  Ayaz  (the  true  Beloved),— — my  head  goeth.

Hafiz  !  the  heart's  grief,  to  whom  shall  I  utter  ?

Not  fit  is  it  that,  save  the  cup,  the  confidant  of  mystery  be  mine.

3.  Worthy  of  pity  is  he  that  hath  a  state  like  this.

4.  Its  life,  a  flagon  giveth  when  its  wine,  it  giveth.
8.  In  love's  path,  to  give  one's  life  is  good.

690  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

407,  (408).

I.  Years,  the  pursuit  of  the  service  of  profligates I  made  :

Until,  by  wisdom's  decree,  greed  into  prison, I  put.

Not  of  myself,  took  I  the  path  to  the  abode  of  the  (inaccessible)  'Anka  (the  true

Beloved)
With  the  bird  of  Sulaiman  (the  lapwing),  the  travelling  of  the  stage,

I  made.

Not  in  my  hand,  nor  in  thine,  is  the  picture  of  abstinence  and  of  intoxication ;
What  the  Lord  of  eternity  without  beginning  said  :— "  Do  "  ;  that,  I  did.

From  (through)  the  grace  of  eternity  without  beginning,  paradise,  I  greedily  de-

sire :

Although,  door-keeping  of  the  wine-house,  much—  I  did.

5.  This  that — the  society  of  Yusuf  (divine  grace)  cherisheth  my  elderly  head,
Is  the  reward  of  that  patience  that,  in  the  sorrowful  cell, I  made.

0  treasure  of  desire  !  on  my  heart-wound,  thy  shade  cast :

For,  by  exceeding  desire  for  thee,  this  house  (the  heart)  desolate,-  I  made.

1.  "Wisdom  "  signifies:—

(a)  the  wisdom  communicated  by  the  murshid.

(4) „ murshid  who  showed  the  path  to  the  true  Beloved.

2.  Lapwing. See  Ode  82.
'Anka.  „ „ 5°-

3.  See  Ode  371,  c.  2.

4.  Jjl eternity  without  beginning.
OJl „  ii end.

±*j~ „  „ beginning  or  end.

From  the  divine  grace  and  boundless  mercy,  my  hope  is  that  paradise  may  be  at  this  our  stage,

although  door-keeping  of  this  tavern  long  I  have  made.
He  is  the  Pardoner;  my  sin,  He  will  pardon.

Paradise  is : —

In  Arabic  jannat.
„  Persian  bihisht,  minu.
jannatu-l-'adn the  garden  of  Eden.
„ fardans  „  Paradise.

„ mawa  „  Abode.

„ na'  im  „  Felicity.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f*  691

I  repented,  saying: — "The  Saki's  lip  J  will  not  kiss." And,  now,

My  lip,  I  bite  ;  because  my  ear  to  the  (counsel  of  the)  foolish, I  placed.

Contrary  to  usage,  seek  desire. As,

From  that  dishevelled  tress  (of  Thine)  the  acquisition  of  tranquillity  (which  is
contrary  to  usage) I  made.

If  in  the  Divan  of  ghazals  (the  assembly,  whereat  songs  they  sing),  on  the  chief

seat,  I  sat, — what  wonder  ?
Years,  the  service  of  the  master  of  the  Divan, I  made.

10.  Morning-rising  (open-heartedness)  and  salvation-seeking,  like  Hafiz  :

Whatever  I  did,  all  from  the  fortune  of  the  Kuran, I  did.

In  the  curve  of  the  sky's  prayer-arch,  no  Hafiz  effecteth,

That  grace  that,  from  the  fortune  of  the  Kuran, I  effected.

9.  Divan  signifies  : —

(a)  a  collection  of  odes.

(6)  „  council.

sadr-t-divan,  the  author  of  a  collection  of  odes,
sahib-i-divan,  the  grand  vazir,  the  patron  of  Hafiz.

10.  In  couplets  10  and  1 1,  the  word  Hafiz  signifies  : —

one  who  knows  by  heart  the  Kuran. See  Ode  395,  c.  7.

4T2

DlVAN-l-HARZ.

4O8,  (409).

i.  Happy  is  my  head  :  and  with  loud  shout,  I  speak ;

Saying :— "  Life's  breeze  from  the  cup  (of  the  wine  of  unity)  I  seek."

On  the  face  of  wine  sickness,  sitteth  not  the  sullenness  of  austerity  :
The  disciple  of  the  khirka,  dreg-drinker,  pleasant  of  disposition, (murshid of
the  age,  who  hath  drunk  the  pure  love  of  past  ones)  I  am.

If.,  to  us,  the  Pir  of  the  Magians  (the  perfect  murshid)  open  not  the  door,
What  door,  shall  I  beat  ? What  remedy,  shall  I  make  ?

In  this  sward  (the  world),  rebuke  me  not  for  self-growing  :
As  me,  nurture  they  (Fate  and  Destiny)  give,  so  I  grow.

5.  In  the  midst,  behold  not  thou  the  monastery  and  the  tavern  :
God  is  witness,  wherever  He  is  with  Him,  am  I.

The  dust  of  the  path  of  search  is  the  alchemy  of  well  being :
The  slave  of  the  fortune  of  that  dust  of  ambergris-perfume  am  I.

From  desire  for  one  of  intoxicated  narcissus  and  of  lofty  stature,
With  the  goblet,  like  the  tulip  fallen,  by  the  marge  of  the  stream,  am  I.

2.  "Ubus  signifies  : —

(a)  sullenness  of  face,  a  sullenness  that  appeareth  on  the  face  of  zahids.
(ft)  a  disease,  whereby  wrinkle  (frown)  cometh  on  the  face.

(the  face  of  wine-sickness)  signifies  something,  for  which  they  drink  a  little  wine  to  repel
wine-sickness. That  is  something  concealed,  which  people  of  spirit  credit  not.
By  reason  of  his  austerity,  pride  and  arrogance  appear  in  the  zahid's  brain,  so  that  to  his  sight,
another  appeareth  not ;  and  to  all,  he  is  sullen  of  face. The  sullen  face,  the  wrinkled  fore-
head, from  self-admiration  and  self-seeing,  which  from  austerity  cometh  to  the  zahid,  befit
him  not.

Whatever  is  the  zahid's  property,  appeareth  by  the  resolution  of  the  profligates  not  concealed.
I  am  the  disciple  of  the  khirka  of  those  murshids,  who  are  labour-endurers  of  Love's  Path  ;

and  are  pleasant  of  disposition  like  the  people  of  Damascus.
4.  Rebuke  not  Hafiz ;  for,  to  no  murshid,  hath  he  given  his  hand.

The  second  line —

As  in  eternity  without  beginning,  the  Partitioner  (God)  decreed,  even  so  I do. Room  for  my
rebuke  is  none.
See  Ode  371,  c.  3.

THE  LETTER  MiM

f  693

For  head-bewilderedness, notorious  I  became ;  and  the  Friend's  eye-brow
Me,  like  a  ball,  into  the  curve  of  its  chaugan,  drew.

O  counsellor  !  me,  what  counsel  maketh  thou,  since  thou  knowest
That  not  a  believer  of  the  man,  ease-seeking, am  I.

10.  Wine,  bring  that,  by  Hafiz's  decision,  down  from  the  pure  heart,
Hypocrisy's  dust,  with  the'  goblet's  grace,  I  may  wash.

9.  To  the  second  line,  add  : —

Of  what  use  is  thy  counsel  to  me. For  the  effects  of  counsel  and  the  effects  of  prayer  are
based  on  the  heart's  belief.

694  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

409,  (4").

f .  Sufi !  come  ;  the  khirka  of  hypocrisy,  off we  will  draw  :

On  (across)  the  head  of  this  picture  of  hypocrisy,  the  cancelling  line, we  will

draw

The  offering  and  the  alms  of  the  towered  building  (the  monastery),  as  the  price
of  wine,  we  place  :

In  the  water  of  the  tavern  (of  love,  from  the  pollution  of  self-beholding  and
of  man-displaying,  we  will  wash ;  and)  the  garment  of  hypocrisy  drawing,
—  we  will  draw.

Happy  of  head,  forth  (from  the  world)  we  (lovers  of  God)  will  leap :  and
from  the  banquet  of  the  rival  (the  outward  worshipper;  or  the  denier  of  love),

(On  the  last  day),  the  cup,  we  plunder;  and,  to  the  door,  the  lovely  one

we  draw.

The  mystery  of  fate  that,  in  the  veil  of  the  hidden,  is  hidden,

Intoxicatedly,  from  off  its  face,  the  veil we  draw.

5.  A  work,  let  us  do ;  if  not,  shame  it  will  bring,

One  day,  when  to  the  other  world,  life's  chattels,—  we  draw.

To-morrow  (the  resurrection  day),  if  to  us  the  garden  of  Rizvan  they  give  not,
Youths  from  the  seventh  heaven  (ghurfa) ;  and  Hur  from  the  garden  (jannat),
out "  we  draw.

From  His  eye-brow,  the  glance  where,  so  that,  like  the  new  (crescent)  moon,
In  the  chaugan  of  gold,  the  ball  of  the  sphere,  we  may  draw.

Hafiz  !  not  our  limit  is  it  like  this  to  boast :

From  beyond  my  blanket,  my  foot  farther  why  should we  draw.

3.  To  the  punishment  for  their  outward  worship  they  will  become  captive;  and,  the  pleasure  of
paradise,  we  shall  gain.

6.  Jannat. See  Ode  407,  c.  4.
8.  The  second  line —

In  excess  of  limit  and  of  resources,  work  why  should  I  do  ?
See  Ode  48 1,  c.  9.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f  695

410,  (446).

I.  Tis  a  life-time  since,  in  search  (of  good  fame),  everyday,  a  pace I  cast:

Every  moment,  the  hand  of  entreaty  on  good  fame I  cast.

Without my  moon  (the  Beloved),  love-kindling,  let  me  see  how my  day I

pass:
On  a  path,  a  net  I  lay ;  a  fowl  in  the  snare, I  cast.

Since  it  may  be  that,  of  that  shade  of  the  straight  cypress  (the  Beloved),  news

I  may  gain,
From  every  side,  love's  clamour  in  respect  of  a  pleasant  strutter  (possessed  of

beauty) I  cast.

I  know — grief  to  an  end,  it  bringeth ;  colour  to  wine,  it  bringeth,

This  sigh,  blood-shedding,  that  every  morning  and  evening,—  I  cast.

5.  Aurang  (the  lover),  where? Gulchihra  (the  beloved),  where? The  picture  of

fidelity  and  of  love,  where  ?
Now,  in  being  a  lover,  complete  justice——  I  cast.

Although  I  know  that  that  heart's  ease  giveth  not  the  heart's  desire,

An  ideal  picture,  I  draw  ;  an  omen  of  immortality, I  cast.

Notwithstanding  that,  hidden  from  myself  (selfless)  I  am;  and  of  wine  repenting

like  Hafiz  I  am,
In  the  assembly  of  souls,  sometimes  a  cup—  I  cast.

I.  The  final  word  of  each  couplet  is  za.da.rn,  I  cast.

I.  wjj f$  to  take  a  pace.

1.  „ u^~«>J  „  dash  the  hand.

2.  „ ,,cast.

3- »  »•

4. „ »l  „  heave  a  sigh.

5- >, •*'•*  ».  give  justice.

6. „ J'J  „  cast  an  omen.

?. »» f^?-  »  drain  the  cup.

696  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

411,  (404)-

I.  The  day  of  the  'id  it  is  ;  and,  in  that  device,  I  am

How  the  result  of  thirty  days'  fast  (the  Ramazan)  I  may  give  (up)  ;  and  instead
the  cup  may  take.

Two  or  three  days,  it  is  that,  far  from  wine  and  the  wine-cup  I  have  been  ;
Mine,  much  shame  that,  from  this,  fault  appeared.

In  khilvat,  after  this,  I  sit  not ;  even  if,  as  an  example,
The  chain  on  my  leg,  the  zahid  of  the  cloister  place.

Saintly  counsel,  the  city-ad monisher  giveth  me  ;  but,
I  know  not  that  I  will,  again,  any  one's  counsel  accept.

5.  That  one,  who,  on  the  dust  of  the  wine-house  door,  gave  his  life, — he  is  where?
That  (in  adoration)  my  head  on  his  foot,  I  may  place ;  and,  before  him,  die.

Wine,  I  drink ;  on  my  shoulder  is  the  prayer-mat  of  piety  :

Alas  !  if  acquainted  with  this  imposture  of  mine,  the  people  become.

The  people  speak  saying : — "  Hafiz  !  the  speech  of  the  Pir,  hear :  "
To-day,  better  for  me — wine,  years  endured  (old),  than  a  hundred  Pirs.

i.  The  explanations  are  : —

(a)  Whatever  troubles,  in  separation  from,  and  in  search  of  union  with,  the  true  Beloved  I
have  endured, — them  (now  that  it  is  the  day  of  union)  I  give  up;  and  take  up  the
writing  of  union.

(ft)  Whatever  trouble,  in  search  of  the  perfect  murshid,  I have  taken, — that  trouble  (now
that,  to  the  murshid's  society,  I have  attained) I  abandon  ;  and  from  his  society,
bounties  gain.
This  'id  is  the  'idu-1-fitr,  the  'id  of  breaking  the  fast,  the  first  day  of  Shavval,  immediately  after

the  Ramazan,  called  jashn  (in  Persian),  bairam  (in  Turkish).
See  Odes  35,  c.  8 ;  113,  c.  i.

THE  LETTER  MiM

697

412,  (413)-

i.  Love-playing  and  youthfulness  ;  and  wine  of  ruby  hue  (love) ;

The  assembly  (of  love)  kindly,  and  the  companion  concordant,  and  ever  the
drinking  of  wine  (love's  bounties) :

The  Saki  sweet  of  mouth, and the minstrel sweet  of  speech (the  perfect

murshid)  ;
Fellow-sitters  (friends)  of  good  repute ;  and  companions  of  good  fame  :

The  lovely  one  (the  true  Beloved  who  is  peerless),  with  grace  and  with  puri-
ty,— the  envy  of  the  water  of  life  ;
A  heart-ravisher,  in  beauty  and  goodness,  the  envy  of  the  full  moon  :

Abanquet-place  (the  assembly  of  the  circle  of  zikr),  heart-alluring,  like  the

palace  of  loftiest  paradise,
Arose-bed, — its  borders  like  the  garden  of  the  mansion  of  peace :

5.  he  Tranks  of  sitters  (the  assembly  of  the  circle  of  zikr),  well  wishing  (to  each

other) ;  and  the  attendants,  with  respect :

Friends  possessed  of  mysteries (and  of  divine  knowledge),  and  companions
friendly  of  desire  :

The  cup  of  rose-hue  (true  love,  that,  at  first  is)  very  bitter  (and  strong ;  and

afterwards),  pleasant  tasting,  light ;
Its  sweetmeat,  (the  kiss  of)  the  ruby  (lip)  of  the  idol ;  its  tale,  (wine  of)  the

ruby  cup :

i.  This  Ode,  the  last  couplet  excepted,  is  a  kita'band.

6.  Prepared  for  us,  is  sometimes  union  with  the  true  Beloved  and  the  splendour  of  the  idol,  life-
cherishing  ;  and,  sometimes,  love's  tumult.

Note  the  use  of  : —
Jiftj  (nukl)  sweatmeat.
Jjij  (nakl)  imitation.

la'l  signifies : —

the  spinelle  ruby,  the  garnet,  the  amethyst,  the  (ruby)  lip.

yakut  signifies : —

the  ruby,  the  sapphire,  a  precious  stone.
Coupled  with  words,  it  has  many  cognate  significations.
The  Romans,  who  derived  their  refinements  in  the  vinous  art  from  the  Greeks  and  the  Asiatics,

lined  their  Amphorce  with  resin,  mastic,  and  other  odorous  gums  to  give  the  wine  a  warm,

bitter  flavour.

4  u

698  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

The  Saki's  glance  (the  glory,  and  the  splendour,  of  the  true  Beloved,  that
from  all  things,  is  manifest)  for  the  plunder  of  wisdom,— sword-drawn  ;

The  (true)  Beloved's  tress  (the  world's  strange  forms  that,  from  all  things  make
manifest  the  true  Beloved,  splendour-kindling)  for  the  capture  of  the  heart
(of  Arifs),  snare  spread  :

Who,  this  society  desireth  not,  to  him  be  heart-happiness,  ruined  :
Who,  this  pleasure  seeketh  not,  to  him  (be)  life  unlawful !

(None  is)  a  subtlety-understander,  jest-utterer,  like  Hafiz  sweet  of  speech  ;
(None  is)  a  liberality-teacher,  world-kindling,  like  Haji  Kivam.

7.  The  Saki's  glance  may  signify  :  —

the  bounties  of  the  perfect  murshid  wholly  ready  for  plundering  reason.
Only  the  past  tense  and  the  past  participle  of  akhtan  (to  draw  a  sword)  are  used.

g.  Haji  Kivam. See  Ode  3,  c.  9. Kasida  692.

THE  LETTER  MiM  (*  699

413,  (414)-

i.  A  hundred  times,  before  the  dust  of  Thy  foot,  our  face we  have  placed,

Hypocrisy  and  dissimulation,  aside we  have  placed.

To  those  two  narcissi  of  the  sorcerer,  our  life  we  have  entrusted  ;

In  those  two  Hindu  hyacinths  (black  tresses),  also  our  heart we  have  placed.

Not  with  the  army,  have  we  taken  the  country  of  ease  :

Not  with  the  (powerful)  arm,  the  throne  of  sovereignty  (is  it  that)

we  have  placed.

In  hope's  corner,  like  (eager)  spectators  of  the  (new)  moon,

On  that  curve  of  the  eye-brow,  hope's  eye we  have  placed.

5.  Without  the  grace  of  His  narcissus,  our  head  of  distraughtness  from  wine  (of  love)
Like  the  (dark,  mourning)  violet,  on  the  knee we  have  placed.

On  our  feeble  heart,  the  heavy  burden  (of  love)——  we  have  placed :

And  this  business  (worldly  and  outward  affairs)  bound  with  a  single  hair  (easily

snapped) we  have  placed.

Let  us  see  what  sport  the  sorcery  of  the  Friend's  eye  maketh,  for,  again,

On  the  glance  of  sorcery,  our  foundation  (of  life),'  we  have  placed.

The  arch  and  the  corridor  of  the  College,  and  the  disputation  of  excellence,
(So  that  they  may  go  to  the  wind  of  destruction),  in  the  path  of  ease  and  of
the  (true)  Beloved,  rose  of  face,  we  have  placed.

Passed  hath  a  long  life,  and  in  hopefulness  of  a  glance,

On  those  two  narcissi  of  sorcery,  an  eye  (of  hope), we  have  placed.

10.  The  fame  of  so  many  years  (generations)  of  ancestors,  good  of  name,

(So  that  they  may  go  to  the  wind  of  destruction),  in'  the  path  of  the  cup  and  of
the  Saki  of  love, we  have  placed.

I.  In  the  Calcutta  text,  the  first  couplet  occurs  not.
4.  "  New  moon  of  Shavval." See  Ode  113.

4  u  2

7°°  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Sensible  and  learned,  are  we ;  for,  with  heart,  on  the  hand  and  the  foot,

The  chain  and  the  bond  of  that  tress-curl, we  have  placed.

Hafiz  !  for  love,  strive. For  the  cash  of  wisdom  and  of  sense  (outward  know-
ledge),
For  the  sake  of  the  (true)  Beloved  of  chain-tress,  (aside) we  have  placed.

A  glance,  make. For  our  two  expectant  eyes,

Ever  on  the  two  corners  of  Thy  eye-brow, we  have  placed.

Thou  spakest  saying  : — "  O  Hafiz  !  thy  distraught  heart  is  where?  "

In  the  meshes  of  that  curl  of  the  tress,  (it) we  have  placed.

THE  LETTER  MINI  I  7O1

414,

i.  Lover  of  the  face — youthful,  joyous,  newly  blossomed  (tender  of  age) am  I :

And,  from  God  the  joy  of  this  grief  (of  love)  with  prayer sought  have  I.

Lover,  profligate,  glance-player,  I  am  ;  and  it  openly,  I  say  :

That  thou  mayest  know  that,  with  so  many  excellences, adorned  am  I.

Cometh  shame  to  me,  of  the  wine-stained  khirka,

Whereon,  the  patch  with  a  hundred  arts  of  hypocrisy,— decorated  have  I-.

O  candle  !  for  grief  for  Him,  happily  consume. For,  behold,  also,

In  this  very  work,  loin-girt  and  upstanding  am  I !

5.  In  astonishment  like  this,  went  from  my  hand,  my  work's  gain  :
In  grief,  increased  have  I  that  which,  in  respect  of  heart  and  of  soul

decreased  have  I.

Night,  all  night,  keeper  of  my  heart's  sacred  fold,  I  have  become,
It may  be  that  the  undiminished  (full) moon  (the  true  Beloved, displaying
effulgence  on  my  state)  towards  me,  may  saunter.

To  the  tavern,  I  go  like  Hafiz  (clad  in)  the  garment  of  the  kaba ;
It  may  be  that  into  His  bosom,  me,  that  Heart-ravisher,  newly  blossomed  (youth-
ful) may  draw.

702  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

415,  (417).

i.  Time's  grief  whereof  limit none,  I  see,

The  remedy  whereof,  save  wine  like  this, none,  I  see.

This  society  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  I  will  not  abandon  :

For  in  (abandoning)  it  my  own  counsel  (conducing  to  welfare) none,  I  see.

In  this  wine-sickness,  me  none  giveth  a  draught  (of  favour)  :

Behold  !  in  the  world  one  of  heart,  none,  I  see.

From  the  sun  (cup)  of  the  bowl,  the  height  of  pleasure,  take  :

For  the  fortune  of  time  like  that,  none,  I  see.

5.  The  mark  of  one  of  heart  (a  sufi)  is  the  being  a  lover. To  thyself,  keep  :

For  this  mark  among  the  city-shaikhs,  none,  I  see.

The  trace  of  the  (slender)  hair  of  His  (the  true  Beloved's)  waist,  wherein  I

have  fixed  my  heart,
Of  me,  ask  not ;  for,  in  the  midst  (waist),  none,  I  see.

For  these  weeping  (blinded)  eyes  of  mine — a  thousand  regrets,

That  His  face,  with  the  two  mirrors  (my  weeping, blinded,  eyes)

none,  I  see.

Since  Thy  stature  went  from  the  stream  of  my  (weeping)  eye,

In  place  of  the  cypress  (of  Thy  stature),  save  running  water  (tears),

naught,  I  see.

(Together  are)  I  and  the  bark  (Divan)  of  Hafiz. For,  save  in  this  ocean  (of

eloquence),
The  capital  of  speech,  heart-placing  (comforting)——  naught,  I  see.

7.  When,  before  the  lover's  eye,  the  beloved  cometh,— through  modesty,  no  glance  is  her's.

THE  LETTER  MiM  I  7°3

416,  (416).

1.  Openly,  I  speak;  and  of  my  own  utterance,  heart-happy — am  I  :
Love's  slave,  I  am  ;  and  of  both  worlds,  free — am  I.

The  bird  of  the  holy  rose-bed (paradise),  am  I. Explanation  of  separation

(from  paradise),  what  shall  I  give,
(And)  into  this  disaster's  snare-place,  how  I  fell?

The  angel,  t  was ;  and  loftiest  paradise  was  my  abode :
Into  this  ruined  cloister  (this  world),  me,  Adam  brought,

The  shade  of  the  Tuba  tree,  and  the  heart-seekingness  of  the  Hur,  and  the

marge  of  the  pool  (Kausar), —
(All),  in  desire  of  the  head  of  Thy  street,  passed  from  my  mind.

5.  Recognised  the  star  of  my  fortune,  astrologer  none  ;

0  Lord  !  of  mother-earth,  beneath  what  natal  star,  born  was  I !

Since,  in  love's  wine-house,  beringed  (enslaved),  I  became,
Momently,  cometh  anew  a  great  grief  (saying  : — )  "  Welcome."

The  little  man  (pupil)  of  my  eye  drinketh  the  heart's  blood  (in  grief). Tis  fit ;
For,  to  the  liver  lobe  (the  darling)  of  man,  why  gave  I  my  heart  ?

On  my  heart's  tablet  is  naught  save  the  (straight)  alif  ( | j  of  the  Friend's

stature  :

What  may  I  do? Me,  recollection  of  other  letter  the  teacher  (the  murshid)
gave  not.

With  the  tress-tip,  pure  of  tear,  make  the  face  of  Hafiz  :

If  not,  my  foundation,  this  torrent  momently  flowing  will  take.

2.  The  bird  of  paradise. See  Ode  377,  c.  8  ;  429,  c.  2  ;  439,  c.  I ;  465,  c.  I ;  558,  c.  8.
4.  Tuba. See  Ode  19. See  Sale's  P.  Discourse  to  the  Kuran.

If  a  drop  of  the  Huri's  ambrosial  saliva  were  to  fall  upon  earth,  the  fragrance  of  its  perfume
none  could  bear. The  Kuran,  Hi.  20.

7°4  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

417,  (417)-

i.  The  decision  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  I  have;  and  an  old  saying,  it  is,
That  unlawful  is  wine  there,  where  is  neither  the  friend  nor  the  companion.

This  ragged  religious  garment  of  hypocrisy  I  will  rend  :  what  shall  I  do  ?
The  society  of  the  uncongenial  nature  is  excruciating  torment  to  the  soul.

So  that,  perchance,  on  me,  the  (true)  Beloved's  lip  may  scatter  a  draught :
For  that  reason,  years  dweller  I  have  become  at  the  door  of  the  wine-house
(of  love).

Perchance,  passed  from  His  memory  hath  my  ancient  service:

0  morning  breeze !  Him,  recollection  of  the  ancient  covenant,  give.

5.  If,  after  a  hundred  years,  Thy  perfume  blow  over  my  dust,

Forth  from  the  clay  (of  the  grave),  its  head  the  rotten  bone  dancing  bringeth.

First,  from  us,  with  a  hundred  hopes,  the  Heart- Ravisher  took  our  heart :
Apparently,  the  covenant,  His  merciful  nature  forgetteth  not.

To  the  rose-bud  (the  seeker  who,  by  not  attaining  the  object  of  his  heart,  is
strait  of  heart)  speak,  saying: — "Of  thy  entangled  work,  strait  of  heart
"  be  not :

"  For,  from  morn's  breath,  and  from  the  spirits  of  the  breeze  ( the  perfect  mur-
"shid),  aid  thou  wilt  gain."

O  heart !  thought  of  thy  own  welfare  make  by  another  door  (the  door  of  the

true  Beloved)  ;
By  the  physician's  treatment,  better  becometh  not  the  lover's  pain.

The  jewel  of  divine  knowledge,  amass,  that,  it  with  thyself,  (to  the  next  world,)

thou  mayst  take ;
For  (after  thy  death)  the  portion  of  others  is  the  wealth  of  gold  and  of  silver.

2.  See  Ruba'iyat  No.  668.

3.  eA^  (beloved)  may  signify  : —

the  murshid.

THE  LETTER

MJM  f*  7°5

10.  Strong  is  the  (world's)  snare  (from  it,  escape  is  impossible)  unless  God's  grace

become  thy  friend  (ally) ;
If  not,  over  Shaitan  whelmed  with  stones,  Adam  (man)  prevailed  not.

Hafiz !  if  silver  and  gold  thine  be  not,  what  matter  ? Be  grateful.

Than  the  fortune  of  thy  grace  of  speech,  and  of  thy  gentle  thought, what

better  (fortune)  ?

10.  Shaitan,  the  pelted  one. See  the  Kuran,  iii.  30.

7°6  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

418,  (421).

i.  Although,  apparently,  the  slaves  of  the  King are  we,

(By  weeping  and  wailing),  Kings  of  the  country  of  the  morning (when prayers
are  answered) are  we.

Treasure  in  the  sleeve  ;  and  empty,  the  purse, —

The  cup,  world-displaying,  and  the  dust  of  the  Path  (of  tarikat) are  we.

Sensible  of  the  presence  (of  God)  ;  and  intoxicated  with  pride,—

The  ocean  of  unity  ;  and  (yet  like  the)  drowned  one  of  sin are  we.

The  mistress  of  fortune,  when  she  glanceth,

The  mirror  of  her  moon-like  face, are  we.

5.  .Every  night,  of  the  King  of  vigilant  Fortune,

The  care-taker  of  the  diadem  and  of  the  crown are  we.

Say  : — "  Our  blessing  reckon  plunder  ;  "

For  in  sleep  thou  (art)  ;  and,  in  the  eye  (sentry-place), are  we.

The  King,  Mansur,  is  acquainted  with  this,  that  we
Wherever  the  face  of  resolution,  we  place

Make  for  enemies  the  shroud  of  blood ;  (and)
Give  to  friends  the  kaba  of  victory.

Not  before  us,  may  be  the  hue  of  deceit;

Either,  the  ruddy  (tawny)  lion; or  the  black  (deadly)  snake, are  we.

10.  The  debt  of  (due  to)  Hafiz  say  that  they  should  give  back  (to  him)  ;

(The  debt)  thou  hast  confessed  ;  witnesses, are  we.

10.  Accusing  pretenders  to  vers  e  of  plagiarism,  H5fiz  asketh  Mansur  to  do  him  justice.
See  Ode  167,  c.  I. ;  438,  c.  18.

THE  LETTER  MiM  I  7°7

419,  (369).

I.  That  one  (the  true  Beloved,  or  the  murshid)  who,  like  the  (trodden)  dust  of

the  path,  made  me  trampled  of  tyranny, —

The  dust  (of  the  path  of  His  foot)  I  kiss;  and  for  (the  trouble  of)  His  approach,
pardon  beg.

Not  that  one  am  I,  who  bewail  of  violence  from  Thee. God  forbid  !
The  faithful  servant;  and  slave,  well-wishing,  I  am.

In  the  curl  of  Thy  (long)  tress,  my  long  hope,  have  I  bound  ;

Be  it  not  that  my  hand  of  search,  short  it  (the  tress)  should  make  (cut) !

An  atom  of  dust,  I  am ;  and,  in  Thy  street,  pleasant,  is  my  time :

0  Friend  ! I  fear  that  suddenly,  me,  a  great  wind  (of  calamity),  may  take.

5.  The  Sufi  of  the  (lofty)  cloister  of  the  holy  world  am  I. But,
Now,  the  (lowly)  cloister  of  the  Magians  is  the  charge  of  mine.

In  the  morning,  the  Pir  of  the  wine-house  (the  perfect  murshid)  me,  the  cup
world-viewing  (the  heart  pure  of  impurity  of  beholding  other  than  God),
gave  ;

And  in  that  (world-viewing  cup  like  a)  mirror,  me,  informed  of  Thy  beauty,  made.

With  me,  the  road. sitter,  arise ;  and  to  the  wine-house  (of  love)  come  :

So  that  thou  mayst  see  how  in  that  circle  (of  zikr  va  fikr)  master  of  rank,  am  I.

Intoxicated,  Thou  passedest ;  and  of  Hafiz,  no  thought  was  Thine  :

Alas!  if  the  skirt  of  Thy  beauty,  my  (morning)  sigh  should  catch  (consume).

At  the  head  of  the  (luminous)  candle  of  Thy  stature,  like  the  flame  (of  a  candle)

I  quiver  (sacrifice  myself,  and  die)  :
Although  I  know  that  suddenly  me,  the  desire  for  Thee,  will  slay.

10.  Happy  to  me  it  came  when,  in  the  morning,  the  Khusrau  of  the  east  (the

resplendent  sun)  spake  : —
"  Notwithstanding  all  my  sovereignty,  the  slave  of  the  Turan  King  am  I."

7.  zikr. See  Ode  172.

10.  This  is  the  first  Ode  in  which  "the  royal  couplet"  is  not  placed  at  the  end  ef  the  ghazal.

4x2

DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

420,  (419)-

r.  Although  from  the  heart's  fire,  like  a (foaming)  jar  of  wine, in tumult  I  am,
The  seal  (of  silence)  on  my  lip  pressed,  the  blood  (of  grief)  I  drink  ;  and  silent,
I  am.

To  show  desire  for  the  lip  of  the  (true)  Beloved  is  (to  make)  an  attempt  upon

(one's  own)  life :
Behold  thou  me  who,  in  this  matter,  with  soul  (strenuously)  strive !

Free  from  the  heart's  grief,  how  may  I  become,  when,  momently,
The  Hindu  of  the  tress  of  the  idol  (the  true  Beloved) me,  beringed  (as  His
slave)  maketh  ?

Not  from  exceeding  religiousness,  is  my  inducing  of  the  khirka  ;
Over  the  head  of  a  hundred  secret  sins,  a  veil  (the  khirka)  I  place.

5.  I  who  desire  not  to  drink  save  of  the  purest  wine  ;

What  shall  I  do,  if  the  speech  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  I  hear  not  ?

God  forbid  !  not  trusting  to  my  own  devotion,  am  I  :

(Only)  this  is  the  extent— that,  sometimes,  a  goblet  (of  the  wine  of  love  to
God),  I  drink  (and  in  it  strive).

Hope  is  mine  that  despite  the  enemy  (shaitan),  on  the  day  of  requital  (resurrec-
tion-day),
Not,  on  my  back,  will  the  bounty  of  His  pardon  place  the  load  of  sin.

For  two  wheat-grains,  my  Father,  Adam,  sold  the  garden  of  Rizvan  (paradise)  ;
If,  for  a  barley-grain,  I  sell  it  not,  unworthy  son  I  shall  be.

If  with  this  hand  (way),  the  minstrel  of  the  assembly  (the  perfect  murshid)
waylayeth,  love  (rendering  lovers  selfless  ;  and  drawing  them  into  his  net),

(Even  so),  at  the  time  of  sama',  me,  from  sense,  the  (lustrous)  verse  of  Hafiz
taketh.

T-  «**! signifies  abhorrence.  9.  Sama'. See  Ode  45.

if  I  tJJJLc „ despite.  Khirka „ „ 124.

8.  The  value  of  two  wheat-grains  is  very  paltry ;  the  value  of  one  barley-grain  is  still  more  paltry.
If  the  father  sold  paradise  for  a  paltry  sum,  well  is  it  for  the  son  to  sell  it  for  a  sum  still  more
paltry.

THE  LETTER  MiM  |  7°9

421,

i.  For  the  reproof  of  the  adversaries  if  I  care,

Lustre,  taketh  not  my  way  of  profligacy  and  of  intoxication.

The  austerity  of  profligates  (disciples  and  seekers  of  God),  path  newly  learned,

is  fruitless  :
I,  who  am  the  ill  name  of  the  world,  what  remedy  (for  it)  may  I  devise  ?

Me,  resourceless  (of  wisdom),  king  of  those  distraught  of  head,  call —
On  that  account  that,  in  being  one  of  little  wisdom,  greater  than  all  the  world
I  am.

(O  true  Beloved !)  on  Thy  forehead  with  my  heart's  blood,  a  great  mole  depict :
So  that  they  (men)  may  know  that,  sacrifice  for  Thee,  kafir  of  religion,  I  am.

5.  Trust,  display ;  and  for  God's  sake,  pass  on :

So  that  thou  mayst  know,  in  this  khirka  what  a  no-darvish  I  am.

O  breeze  !  my  blood-raining  verse  utter  to  the  Friend,

Who,  me,  on  life's  great  vein,  with  His  black  eye-lash,  lanced.

Away  from  the  drops  of  my  heart's  blood,  together  gather  thy  skirt :
For  if  my  wound  thou  scratch,  to  thee  the  effect  reacheth.

Whether  I  be  profligate  or  whether  shaikh  (Pir),  to  any  one  my  work  is  what?
Of  my  own  mystery  Hafiz ;  and  of  my  time,  the  Arif,  I  am.

2.  »«w  (badah)  signifies  : —

a  fruitless  tree.

Useless  is  the  austerity  of  those  who — not  having  gone  in  the  path  of  perfection,— exercised
austerity ;  and  became  travellers  of  the  path  of  tarikat.

4.  Oriental  poets  call  the  beloved  "  kafir.kish  "  (kafir  of  religion,  one  void  of  religion,  one  unre-
strained by  religion).

5.  Khirka. See  Ode  124.

8.  Hafiz. See  Ode  395,  c.  7.

710  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

422,  (418).

I.  If,  from  this  stage  (this  world)  of  travel  towards  the  house  (my  native  land,

the  next  world), I  go  :

When  there  again  I  go,  wise  and  learned,  I  go.

If,  from  this  journey,  in  safety  to  my  native  land,  I  return,

I  vow  that,  by  the  way  to  the  wine-house  (of  love), I  go.

To  utter  what  became  revealed  to  me,  from  this  travelling  and  journeying,
With  the  harp  and  the  wine-cup,  to  the  door  of  the  wine-house—  I  go.

If  friends  of  the  Path  of  love  drink  my  blood,

Mean  one,  am  I  if,  in  complaint,  to  the  stranger, I  gO.

5.  After  this  (together  are)  my  hand,  and  the  chain-like  tress  of  the  idol  (the
true  Beloved)  ;

In  pursuit  of  the  desire  of  my  distraught  heart,  how  long,  how  long  do

I  go?

If,  again,  the  curve  of  His  eye-brow  like  the  prayer-arch  I  see  ;

Bending  (  so^r-  )  in  thanks,  I  make  ;  and  for  the  sake  of  thanks-giving,

I  go.

•

Happy  that  moment,  when,  like  Hafiz,  in  attachment  to  the  vazir,
From  the  wine-house  to  my  own  house  (my  native  land,  the  next  world),  happy
of  head,  with  the  Friend 1  go-

4.  In  love's  path,  life  itself  I  reckon  as  naught.

6.  !iX^"  signifies: —

Sitting  on  two  knees ;  and  then  bending  till  the  forehead  toucheth  the  ground. This  is  a  part
of  the  daily  prayer.

THE  LETTER  MIM  f*  7  I  I

423,  (420).

I.  Although,  from  His  tress,  a  knot  (of  difficulty)  hath  fallen  upon  my  work  :
Even  so,  from  His  liberality,  the  solution  (of  it)  I  expect.

To  joy,  the  ruddiness  of  my  face  attribute  not  ? For,  like  the  cup,
Forth  from  my  cheek,  the  (ruddy)  reflection,  the  heart's  blood  giveth.

Me,  forth  from  power  will  take  the  melody  of  the  minstrel  :
Alas,  if  on  that  account,  within  this  screen  (of  the  melody)  mine,  access be
none.

Night,  all  night,  the  guardian  of  my  heart's  fold  have  I  been  :

So  that,  into  this  screen  (of  dark  night),  save  thought  of  Him,  naught  I  pass.

5. By  His  tale,  to  sleep  went  fortune's  eye  ;

Where,  a  breeze  of  favour,  that,  me,  awake  may  make  ?

That  poet-magician  am  I,  who,  with  the  sorcery  of  speech,
From  the  reed-pen,  all  candy  and  sugar, rain.

In  this  desert  (of  love),  with  a  hundred  hopes,  the  foot  I  planted  :
O  guide  of  my  bereft  heart! (so  that  I  may  attain  my  object),  behind  leave  me
not.

When,  in  the  wind's  thoroughfare,  Him,  my  Friend,  I  see  not :
To  whom,  may  I  speak  saying : —  "  A  word  to  my  Friend,  utter."

Last  night,  he  kept  saying  : — "  All  (double)  face  and  hyprocisy  is  Hafiz  :"
(Hafiz  replied : — )"  Save  with  the  dust  of  Thy  door, — say  in  work  with  whom,
'  am  I  ?  "

712  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

424,  (437)-

I.  The  friend  I  am  of  the  sweet  face;  and  of  the  heart-alluring  hair:

Distraught  with  the  intoxicated  eye,  I  am ;  and  with  pure  unalloyed  wine.

Thou  askedest : —  "Of  the  mystery  of  the  covenant  of  eternity  without  beginning,

say  one  word,"
(I  reply  : — )"That  moment  when  two  cups  of  wine,  I  drink, — I  will  tell  thee."

In  being  a  lover  (of  God),  is  no  escape  from  consuming  and  (yet)  being  content  ;
Like  the  candle,  standing  I  am  :  me  of  the  fire  (of  love),  affright  not.

Adam  of  paradise,  I  am  ;  but  in  this  journey  (through  this  world),
Now,  captive  to  the  love  of  youthful  ones,  I  am.

5.  If  fortune  aid  so  that,  to  the  Friend,  my  chattels,  I  draw  (such  my  dignity  will

be  that)

The  (fragrant)  dust  from  my  couch,  (even)  the  (beperfumed)  tress  of  the  Hur
will  wipe.

The  mine  of  the  ruby  lip  and  the  quarry  of  beauty  is  Shiraz ;
On  that  account,  harassed  am  I,  the  poor  jeweller.

From  the  many  intoxicated  eyes  that  in  this  city  (of  Shiraz)  I  have  beheld,
O  God  ! (I  swear)  that,  now,  no  wine,  I  drink  ;  and  (yet)  merry  of  head  I  am.

From  six  directions,  'tis  a  city  full  of  the  glance  of  lovely  ones  :
Not  a  thing  is  mine  ;  if  not  of  all  six,  purchaser  I  be.

Hafiz !  the  bride  of  my  nature  desireth  splendour  :

No  mirror  have  I,  on  that  account  (being  mirrorless)  sigh,  I  heave.

10.  From  the  heat  of  fruitless  thought,  Hafiz  consumed  :
The  Saki  is  where  that,  on  my  fire,  water  he  may  dash  ?

9.  He  who  hath  the  mirror  cannot  (for  fear  of  defacing  it)  heave  a  sigh.

THE  LETTER

MiM  (*  7*3

425,  (427).

i.  One  night,  our  hand  we  shall  uplift ;  and  a  prayer we  shall  make.

For  the  grief  of  separation  from  Thee,  a  remedy  from  some  place

we  shall  make.

Went  from  the  hand,  the  sick  heart. O  friends  !  a  little  help,

So  that  to  its  head,  the  physician  we  may  bring  ;  and  a  little  remedy

we  may  make.

He  who,  without offence (on my  part), grieved;  and, me,  with  the  sword

struck ;  and  departed  :
For  God's  sake,  him  bring  back,  that  purity  of  heart  (reconciliation)——

we  may  make.

O  heart !  aid  from  the  heart  of  profligates  seek ;  if  not,

Difficult  is  the  work. God  forbid  that  a  fault  we  should  make.

5.  In  lust's  path,  through  which  an  idol-temple  became  our  heart,

An  arrow  of  a  sigh  (prayer  for  freedom  to  God)  we  shall  loose ;  and  a  great
strife  (against  lust) we  shall  make.

Withered,  became  the  root  of  my  joy. The  Path  to  the  tavern  is  where  ?

So  that  in  that  water  and  air,  springing  and  growing,  we  may  make.

But  a  little  work  effecteth  the  shade  of  the  bud  of  little  resolution  (the  imper-
fect murshid) :

Search  for  the  auspicious  shade  of  the  Huma  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excel,
lent), we  shall  make.

From  the  note  (of  melody)  went  my  heart. Hafiz,  sweet  of  tone,  is  where  ?

So  that,  with  his  words  and  ghazals,  harmony  and  melody,

we  may  make.

7 '4  DIVAN-i-HAFIZ.

426,  (429).

i.  The  eye  (of  expectation)  of  friendship  from  friends we  had  :

Verily,  'twas  mistake  that  which we  thought.

Let  us  see,  when  fruit,  the  tree  of  friendship  will  give  ;

Now,  we  have  departed  ;  and  a  seed  (zikr  va  fikr)  we  have  sown.

Subtleties  passed  ;  and  complaint,  none  made  :

Aside,  dignity we  put  not.

Not  the  way  (usage)  of  the  darvish is discussion (of complaint  of  the true

Beloved,  or  of  the  murshid)  :
If  not,  (to  narrate)  passed  circumstances  to  thee we  had.

5.  The  way  of  thy  eye,  battle's  deceit  had,

(This),  we  knew  not ; and  peace, we  sowed.

Not  of  itself,  heart-fascinating  became  the  rose-bush  of  thy  beauty  :

On  it,  the  breath  of  blessing, we  established.

When,  in  love  for  others,  thou  establishedest  thy  heart,

Hope  of  union  with  thee,  up we  plucked.

(The  true  Beloved)  said  :— "  0  Hafiz  !  to  Us,  thou  thyself  gavest  thy  heart :
"To  none,  the  (tax-)  collector,  we  sent."

1.  Probably  friends  of  this  age  follow  their  own  desire,  not  the  desire  of  others.
Many  are  tyrannous,  not  friendly.

The  friendship  of  friends  of  this  age  is  like  the  faluda  (starch,  honey,  water)  of  the  bazar,  plea-
sant in  colour,  unpleasant  in  taste.

2.  "  The  seed  "  signifies  : —

The  repeating,  and  the  thinking  of,  God's  name;  and  reflecting  on  Him  or  on  the  murshid.
See  Ode  172.

4.  The  second  line —

Passed  circumstances  we  had  to  discuss  with  Thee ;  but,  them  we  discussed  not,  such  dis-
cussion being  contrary  to  usage.

5,  6,  7.  These  couplets  speak  of  the  murshid.
8.  "  Collector." See  Ode  361,  c.  5.

THE  LETTER  MJM

7'5

427,  (432)-

I.  Bird,  auspicious  of  foot,  gracious  of  message,  welcome  !

Happy  thy  arrival ! What  news  of  the  Friend  ? He  (is)  where  ? (His)  path
(is)  what  ?

O  Lord  !  be  the  grace  of  eternity  without  beginning  the  guide  of  this  kafila,
By  (means  of)  which,  to  the  snare  the  enemy  hath  come ;  and  to  His  desire,  the
Beloved.

No  limit  hath  tale  of  me  and  of  my  Beloved  :
Whatever  no  beginning  hath,  no  ending  taketh.

Since  the  heart-possessing  tress  keepeth  ordering  me  the  zunnar  (the  mystic  cord

which  is  contrary  to  the  khirka),
O  kjiwaja  !  go  :  for,  on  our  body,  unlawful  is  the  khirka.

5.  The  bird  of  my  soul  that,  from  the  summit  of  the  Sidra  tree,  crieth  out :
It,  at  last,  into  the  snare  (of  Thy  beauty),  the  grain  of  Thy  mole  cast.

Grace  beyond  limit,  bringeth  the  rose  (the  true  Beloved)  :  with  generosity,  Thy

face  display ;
Elegance,  the  cypress  displayeth ;  and  (in  its  pride)  pleasant  is  not. For  God's

sake  (so  that  it  may  be  ashamed)  forth  gracefully  move  !

For  my  blood-raining  eye,  how  is  sleep  fit?

He  who  hath  a  grievous  malady  that  slayeth — how  sleepeth  he  ?

To  me,  heart-bereft,  Thou  showest  no  pity  :  I  said  :—

This  is  my  claim  (that  Thou  pity  me) ;  and  this,  Thou  art ;  and  this  (is)  the
(opportune)  time.

If  inclination  for  Thy  eye-brow,  Hafiz  have,  it  is  fit ;

In  the  corner  of  the  prayer-arch,  their  dwelling,  men  of  eloquence  (or  men  of
the  Kuran)  will  make.

5.  See  Ode  416,  c.  2.

The  Sidra  is  a  tree  of  paradise ;  the  mansion  of  Jibra,il.
7.  The  second  lines  of  couplets  7  and  8  are  in  Arabic.

4*2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

428,  (426).
i.  Heart given  from  the  hand, — lovers,  void of  grief,  intoxicated,  (selfless  and

powerless), we  are  :

Fellow-associate  of  love,  boon-companions  of  the  cup  of  wine,^—  we  are.

On  us,  the  bow  of  reproach,  many  have  drawn  :

Since,  from  the  eye-brow  of  the  (true)  Beloved,  our  work  we  have  loosed.

O  rose  !  last  night,  the  morning  cup  thou  drankest :

That  anemone,  that  (from  eternity  without  beginning)  with  the  stain  (of  love),
(was)  born, we  are.

If  vexed  with  our  repentance  became  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,

Say  : — "  Pure,  make  the  wine ;  for  with  apology  (for  our  conduct)  standing,

we  are."

5.  0  guide  of  the  path  (the  perfect  murshid)  !  from  thee,  goeth  the  work. A

glance  (make),

That,  me,  justice  thou  mayst  give  ;  for  fallen  (away)  from  the  Path,

we  are.

In  the  midst  of  work,  behold  not  (ruddy)  wine  like  the  red-streaked  tulip  and

the  goblet :
Behold  this  stain  (of  love)  that,  on  our  bloody  heart,'  we  have  placed.

Thou  spakest,  saying: — "Hafiz!  all  this  colour  of  fancy  (imaginary  pictures)

—is  what  ?  "
(Hafiz  replied  : — )  "  Say  not  a  false  picture  ;  for,  verily,  the  tablet  smooth  (like

"  a  mirror,  void  of  picture)—  we  are."

6.  The  tulip  is  red-streaked,  and  black  marked.

7.  JUi*  i_£jj  (the  colour  of  fancy)  signifies  : —

The  portrait  (taswir)  that  from  fancy  cometh  into  splendour.

Hafiz !  all  these  colours  of  fancies,  that  from  thy  fancy,  come  into  manifestation  ;  and  snatch
thee  from  one  mystic  state  (hal)  to  another,  are  what?

Hafiz  replied  :—

Call  not  my  fancies  a  mistaken  picture  (naksh). For  my  heart  is  a  tablet,  smooth,  void  ol

picture;  whatever  in  it  becometh  hidden — like  the  mirror  displayeth  splendour.
As  the  mirror  is  void  of  portrait  (taswir),  so  my  heart  is  void  of  picture  (naksh).
Whatever,  thou  displayest,  that  picture  (naksh),  it  displayeth. See  Ode  371,  c.  2.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f  7'7

429, (434).

I.  With  the  point  of  Thy  arrow-glance,  at  my  heart,  strike  not  ;
For,  before  Thy  sick  (languishing)  eye,  I  die.

Within  the  limit  of  excellence,  is  the  (lawful)  portion  of  beauty  .
Me,  alms  give  ;  for  miserable  and  fakir,  I  am.

I  am  that  bird  such  that,  every  evening  and  morning,
From  the  roof,  the  ninth  heaven,  cometh  the  cry  of  mine.

Full,  make  the  goblet  ;  for  from  love's  fortune,  I
Will  make  youthful  fortune  to  leap,  though  old  I  am.

5.  With  the  Friend,  my  heart's  space  became  full  to  such  a  degree,
That,  lost  from  my  mind,  became  the  thought  of  self.

Be  naught  save  the  account  of  the  minstrel  and  of  wine  :
If  a  word  the  reed  of  my  secretary  write.

In  that  tumult  (of  the  resurrection),  when  another's  (state),  none  asketh,
From  the  Pir  of  the  Magians  (Muhammad),  the  favour  (of  acceptance  before
God),  I  accept.

O  Zahid  !  like  boys,  how  long  (practisest  thou  towards  me)  deceitfulness,
With  the  apple  of  the  garden  (of  paradise),  and  the  honey,  and  the  milk  (of  the
garden)  ?

With  the  wine-sellers,  an  arrangement  I  have  made,
That,  on  grief's  day,  naught  save  the  cup  (of  love),  I  take.

3.  Otherwise  —

1  am  that  bird,  whose  cry,  every  evening  and  morning,  from  the  ninth  heaven  issueth. See
Ode  416,  c.  2.

8.  ^jf  Jutlj  (Zahid  deceit)  signifies  :  —

The  deceit  attributed  to  the  Zahid  in  conciliating  boys.
How  long,  by  hidden  measures,  deceivest  thou  me  out  of  myself  ?
How  long  like  the  Zahids,  boy-deceiving,  me,  from  myself  to  the  stranger  easiest  thou  ;  and

before  my  sight,  the  illusory  displayest  ?
See  Ode  377,  c,  7.

DFVAN-I-HAFIZ.

10.  O  happy  that  moment  when  independence  of  intoxication,

Me,  freedom  from  (dependence  on)  the  king  and  the  vazir,  giveth  !

In  the  heart,  great  treasures  I  have

Although  me,  poor  (and  indigent),  the  adversary  regardeth.

Off  from  Hafiz,  my  heart  I  took  at  that  time
When  the  Saki  my  necessary  friend  became.

THE  LETTER  MiM  |  7 '9

430,  (436).
i .  Love  for  the  lovely  one  and  for  the  cup,  I  abandon  not.

A  hundred  times,  repentance,  I  made,  (and  broke  it) ;  again  (repentance)

I  make  not.

The  garden  of  paradise,  the  shade  of  the  Taba  tree,  and  the  palace  of  the  Hur,
Equal  (even)  to  the  dust  of  the  Friend's  street,'  I  make  not.

The  teaching  of  the  lesson  of  men  of  vision  is  a  single  hint :

A  hint,  I  uttered  :  repetition  I  make  not.

In  wrath  the  Shaikh  (the  Zahid)  said  to  me  :  — "  Go  ;  love,  abandon."

0  Brother !  wrangling  is  not  necessary  ;  (abandoning  of  love)  • I  make  not.

5.  This  piety  is  complete  (enough)  for  me. For,  with  the  lovely  ones  (Zahids)  of

the  city,
At  the  head  of  the  pulpit,  air  and  glance^—  I  make  not.

Mine,  never  becometh  news  of  my  head  (self),

So  long  as  uplifted  in  the  tavern,  my  head  I  make  not.

In  reprehension,  the  admonisher  said  : — "  Wine  is  forbidden  ;  drink  not :  "

1  said : — "  On  my  eye  (be  it) ;  but  to  every  ass,  the  ear  (of  attention)

I  make  not.

"The  Plr  of  the  Magians  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent)  a  story,  sensible,

and  acceptable,  relateth :
"  Excuse,  mine,  if,  (in)  thy  absurdity  (about  wine)  belief I  make  not."

Hafiz !  the  court  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent)

is  fortune's  place :
The  dust-kissing  of  this  door,  I  abandon  not.

2.  The  Tuba  tree. See  Sale's  P.  Discourse;  Odes  19,  88.

3.  In  the  way  of  outward  people,  who  pass  years  in  instruction  and  in  being  taught,  people  of

vision  teach  not.

Nay,  for  men  of  vision,  a  hint  is  enough. That  hint,  I  uttered  to  you ;  and  again  I  will  not  utter.
7.  See  Ode  4.34,  c.  8.

720  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

431,  (427).

I.  At  the  head  of  the  wine-house,  the  morning-lesson  (prayer),  aside——

we  have  laid
In  the  path  of  the  true  Beloved,  the  in-gathering  of  prayer, we  have  placed.

To  the  harvest  (of  existence)  of  ahundred  learned  wise  ones  (Zahids),settethfire

This  mark  (of  branding)  that,  (from  love)  on  our  distraught  heart,

we  have  placed.

To  us,  the  treasure  of  love's  grief,  the  Sultan  of  eternity  without  beginning  (the

true  Beloved)  gave,
Since,  towards  this  desolate  stage  (this  world),  our  face we  have  placed.

More  than  this,  in  the  khirka  (the  garment  of  austerity), one cannot  be  a
hypocrite :

On  account  of  this,  profligately,  its  (the  khirka's)  foundation

we  have  placed.

5.  After  this  to  the  love  of  idols,  the  path  into  our  heart,  we  give  not :

On  the  door  of  this  house  (the  heart),  the  seal  of  His  lip we  have  placed.

That,  for  the  sake  of  which,  the  Zahid  gave  us  his  hand,

Out  of  purity  on  the  cup's  lip, we  have  placed.

Thanks  to  God  that  like  us,  without  heart  and  religion,  was

That  one,  whom  (as)  wisdom-cherisher  and  learned,——  we  have  placed.

At  last,  how  goeth  this  battered  bark  (the  body),

In  desire  of  which  peerless  jewel,  our  life we  have  placed.

With  (only)  an  image  of  Thee,  contented  we  were  like  Hafiz,

O  Lord!  whether  beggar  or  friendless  one,  reliance  (on  Thee)

we  have  placed.

2.  Whatever  in  love,  we  have  revealed,  Zahids  never  gained  by  piety  and  austerity.
4.  Outwardly,  to  array  ourselves  in  the  garment  of  austerity  ;  and  inwardly,  to  be  opposed  to  it,  is
the  way  of  hypocrites.

9.  The  second  line  may  be  : —

O  Lord  !  although  the  beggar,  kingly  spirit,— we  have  placed  (established).

THE  LETTER  MJM  I  ?2I

432,  (390).

i.  (O  true  Beloved !)  on  the  workshop  of  the  eye,  the  form  of  Thy  face,

I  drew  :
An  idol  in  Thy  form,  not  I  saw ;  not  I  heard.

(Formerly),  mine  was  the  hope  of  lordship  ;  (now),  Thy  (high)  slavery,  I  sought :
(Formerly),  mine  was  desire  for  empire  ;  (now),  Thy  (high)  service, 1  chose  :

Although  in  search  of  Thee,  equal  in  rein  (speed)  with  the  (swift)  north  breeze

I  am

Not  (even)  the  dust  of  the  (swiftly)  moving  cypress  of  Thy  stature,

I  reached.

Hope  in  the  (dark)  night  of  Thy  (dark)  tress  for  the  bright  day  of  life,  I  estab-
lished not :
From  the  heart's  desire,  desire  for  Thy  mouth's  round  form, I  severed,

5.  The  sin  (fault)  of  Thy  dark  eye,  and  of  Thy  heart-alluring  neck,  it  was,

That,  like  the  wild  deer,  from  man I  fled.

From  desire  for  Thy  sweet  fountain,  what  drops  (tears  they  were)  that  I  scat-
tered ;
From  Thy  ruby  (lip)  wine-selling,  what  graces I  purchased.

On  my  wounded  heart,  what  arrows  of  glances,  Thou  loosedest :

At  the  head  of  Thy  street,  what  loads  of  grief I  endured.

O  breeze  of  the  morning  ! from  the  (true)  Beloved's  street,  a  little  dust  bring;
For,  from  that  moist  land,  the  perfume  of  the  blood  of  the  wounded  heart

I  perceived.

Over  my  head,  from  His  street,  a  (fragrant)  breeze  like  the  (perfumed)  rose-bud

passed,
For  (obtaining)  the  perfume  of  which,  the  screen  over  my  poor  heart, 1  rent.

g.  The  second  line  may  be  : —

Which  for  the  sake  of  (diffusing)  its  perfume,  the  screen  over  my  poor  heart——  rent.

722  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

10.  The  oath— by  the  dust  of  Thy  foot ;  and  by  the  light  of  the  eye  of  Hafiz,

(I  swear)  that,  without  Thy  face,
No  splendour  from  the  lamp  of  the  eye,  I  saw.

THE  LETTER  MiM  I  723

433, (420).

I.  Not  in  pursuit  of  pomp  and  of  pageant,  to  this  door  (of  the  murshid) •  .•

we  have  come  :
For  shelter  from  ill-fortune,  here—  we  have  come.

Way-farers  of  love's  stage  are  we  :  and  from  the  limits  of  non-existence,

Up  to  the  climes  of  existence,  all  this  way  we  have  come.

The  freshness  of  Thy  down,  we  saw  ;  and,  from  the  garden  of  paradise,

In  search  of  this  love-grass, we  have  come.

With  such  treasure,  whose  treasurer  is  the  faithful  spirit  (Jibra,il),

In  beggary  to  the  door  of  the  King's  house  we  have  come.

5.  O  bark  of  grace  (the  family  of  Muhammad) !  thy  anchor  of  patience  ('Ali  Mur-

taza)  is  where  ?
For,  in  this  ocean  of  liberality,  immersed  in  sin  we  have  come.

O  cloud,  sin-cleansing !  honour  goeth ;  (mercy)  rain  :

For  in  the  court  of  action  (as  opposed  to  theory)  black  of  book,—

we  have  come,

Hafiz !  this  woollen  khirka  (of  outward  worship)  cast. For  (with  love's  con-
suming and  melting),
From  behind  the  kafila  with  the  fire  of  sighing  (and  wailing)  —

we  have  come.

3.  '^Or*  (love-grass)  signifies  : —

(a)  a  plant  such  that  whoever  hath  it  near  him  is  kindly  treated  by  all.

(b)  the  mandrake.

5.  Muhammad's  family  consisted  of  :—
Fatima,  his  daughter.

Ali  „  cousin  and  son-in-law.

Hasan  and  Husain „  grand-sons.
Zainab  and  Kulsum  „ grand-daughters.
Muhammad  and  the  next  four  are  called  Sl-i-Iba,  "the  offspring  of  the  cloak  (of  protection)."

7.  In  this  path  is  no  entrance  for  the  khirka  (of  hypocrisy).

5A2

724  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

434,  (430).

i.  Evil  (of  any)  we  utter  not ;  inclination  to  the  injustice  (of  any)

we  make  not :

Black,  the  face  of  any  one ;  and  blue,  our  own  religious  garment,

we  make  not,

Evil,  it  is  (to  show)  in  deficiency  or  in  excess  the  defect  of  the  poor  man,  or  of

the  rich  man  :
The  counsel  is  that  evil  work  at  all,— —  we  do  not.

In  the  sight  of  way-farers,  we  happily  urge  the  world  (of  our  time)  :
Thought  of  the  (precious)  black  steed,  or  of  the  golden  saddle,-

we  make  not,

On  the  book  of  knowledge,  fallacious  writing  (like  worldly  sages)  we  write  not :
Confounded  with  the  page  of  magic,  God's  mystery,— —  we  make  not.

5.  If  of  the  cup,  my  prohibition,  the  zahid  make, —  that  is  best,

That  to  his  wine,  pure  and  refined,  attention, —  •  we  make  not.

t

If.  with  dignity,  the  draught  of  profligates,  the  king  drink  not.
By  way  of  truth  with  splendour,  work  of  his  we  do  not.

The  sky  shattereth  the  bark  of  the  Lords  of  skill :

Best,  that,  on  this  suspended  ocean  (the  sky),  reliance  we  make  not.

If  an  envious  one  spake  evilness ;  and  thereon  a  friend  grieved,

(To  the  friend)  say  : —  "  Happy,  be  :  for  to  the  fool,  the  ear  (of  attention)

we  make  not.

Hafiz  !  if  the  enemy  utter  falsehood  as  regards  him,  (exception)  we  take  not ;
If,  with  truth,  he  spake — contention  with  the  speech  of  truth, we  make  not.

i.  The  second  line  signifies  :—

We  dishonour  neither  any  one  nor  the  religious  garment.
8.  See  Ode  430,  c.  7.

THE  LETTER  MIM  f  725

435,  (431)-
i.  With  the  true  Beloved,  a  covenant  is  mine  that : — "  As  long  as  in  body,  life-

I  have :
"  The  well-wishers  of  His  street,  (dear)  like  my  own  (precious)  life 1  hold."

By  that  candle  of  Chigil  (the  true  Beloved),  the  purity  of  the  khilvat  of  my

heart,  I  behold ;
From  that  moon  of  Khutan,  the  splendour  of  my  eye  and  the  luminosity  of

heart, I  have.

When  to  the  desire  and  wish  of  my  heart,  a  khilvat,  I  have  gained,

Of  the  malice  of  evil-speakers  in  the  assembly,  what  care  (is  it  that) 1  have?

If  in  design  upon  my  heart,  a  hundred  armies  of  lovely  ones  ambush  make,

"  Ba  hamd-i-llahu  va-1-minnat,"  an  idol,  army-shatterer  (the  true  Beloved)

I  have.

5.  O  watcher !  for  God's  sake,  to-night,  a  while,  thy  eyes  close ;

For,  with  His  silent  ruby  lip,  a  hundred  secret  words, I  have.

When  in  the  rose-bed  of  his  favour,  I  proudly  move Praise  be  to  God  ! —

Inclination  neither  for  the  tulip  and  the  wild  white  rose  ;  nor  for  the  narcissus,
I  have.

O  learned  Pir ! Ho  !  the  wine-house,  forbid  me  not :

For,  in  abandoning  the  wine-cup,  a  heart,  promise-shattering I  have.

Mine,  is  the  pleasant  tasting  wine ;  and  mine,  is  the  Friend  like  the  picture  :
None  hath  a  beloved  like  this  Beloved  that I  have.

In  the  house,  mine  is  a  cypress  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent)  in  the  shade

of  whose  (lofty)  stature,
Independence  of  the  cypress  of  the  garden,  and  of  the  boxtree  of  the  sward

— —  I  have.

2.  Chigil  (in  Turkistan)  is  renowned  for  the  beauty  of  its  women.
Khutan  in  Tatari.

4.  Praise  (be)  to  God  and  thanks !

9.  From  that  time  when  the  lover  of  the  true  Beloved  I  became.

DlVAN-l-HAFlZ.

10.  Of  the  seal-ring  of  His  ruby  lip,  it  is  fit  that  a  Sulaiman-like  boast  I  should

express  :

When  mine is  the  ism-i-a'zam  (the  great  name),  of  Ahriman,  what  fear (is
it  that) I  have.

After  abstinence  like  this,  notorious  for  profligacy  Hafiz  became,

What  grief  have  I,  when  (as  patron),  in  the  world  Aminu-d-Dm  Hasan,

I  have.

10.  Sulaiman's  seal-ring  was  inscribed  with  the  ism-i-a'zam,  the  great  name  of  God;  by  it,  div,

jinn,  man,  wild  beast,  and  bird  were  subdued  and  controlled. See  Ode  189,  c.  2;  443,  c.  3.

11.  Aminu-d-Din  was  the  secretary  and  keeper  of  the  seals  to  Sultan  Uvais  (See  Ode  204).

THE  LETTER  MiM I  727

436,  (438).

i.  Who  am  I  that,  over  that  fragrant  (noble)  mind,  I  should  pass:

Thou  doest  me  favours. O  dust  of  Thy  door  !  the  crown  of  my  head,  be  !

O  heart-ravish er !  slave-cherishing,  taught  Thee  who  ? Say,
For  to  Thy  watchers,  this  idea  never  will  I  impute.

O  holy  bird  (the  perfect  murshid)  !  thy  blessing  the  guide  of  my  path,  make  ;
For,  to  our  goal,  long  is  the  Path  ;  new  to  journeying,  am  I.

0  morning  breeze  !  my  service  cause  to  reach  (the  murshid),
Saying: — "Me,  at  the  time  of  the  prayer  of  morn,  forget  not."

5.  Happy  that  day,  when,  from  this  stage  (this  world),  my  chattels  (of  existence)

I  bind  up  ;

And,  from  the  head  of  Thy  street,  news  of  me,  the  companions  ask  (saying  :  —
Where  went  he  ?)

Me,  the  path  to  the  special  place  of  khilvat,  show,  so  that,  after  this,
Wine  with  Thee  I  may  drink ;  and  again  the  world's  grief  suffer  not.

Lofty,  is  the  rank  of  verse  and  world-captivating. Speak  ;
So  that,  full  of  pearls,  thy  mouth  the  ocean-king  may  make.

O  Hafiz!  it  is  fit  if,  in  thy  search  for  the  jewel  of  union,
With  tears,  my  eye  I  make  an  ocean ;  and,  in  it,  dive.

1.  The  first  line  signifies :—  •

Who  am  I  that  he  of  fragrant  mind  should  recollect  me  ?

2.  HSfiz  expresseth  his  surprise  at  the  generous  treatment  that  he  received  from  the  chief  of  the  time

who,  till  then,  had  neglected  him.

3.  Kudus  (holy)  signifies  : —

ruhu-1-kudus,  the  holy  spirit.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

437,  (382).

i.  Me,  Thou  beholdest ;  and,  in  a  moment,  my  pain,  greater  Thou  makest ;
Thee,  I  behold ;  and  momently  my  inclination  for  Thee  greater  becometh.

As  to  my  state,  Thou  askest  not ;  what  mystery  Thou  hast,  I  know  not :
For  my  remedy,  Thou  strivest  not ;  perchance,  my  pain,  Thou  knowest  not.

Not  the  way  is  this  that  me,  on  the  dust,  Thou  shouldst  cast ;  and  pass  on  :
Pass  by  (me) ;  and  again  my  state  ask,  so  that  the  dust  of  Thy  Path,  I  may
become.

From  off  Thy  skirt,  I  keep  not  my  hand,  save  in  the  dust  (of  the  grave) ;  and,

that  very  moment,
When,  over  my  dust  (in  the  grave),  Thou  passest, — Thy  skirt,  my  dust  will

seize.

5.  From  grief  of  love  for  Thee,  my  breath  (of  life)  descended. Breath,  Thou

givest  till  when  ?

Forth  from  me,  destruction,  Thou  takest:  Thou  sayest  not: — " Breath,  bring
forth."

One  night,  in  the  darkness,  from  Thy  (dark)  tress,  my  heart  I  sought :
Thy  face,  I  beheld ;  and  a  cup  of  Thy  ruby  lip,  again  I  drank.

Suddenly,  Thee,  into  my  bosom,  I  drew ;  and,  into  the  curl  of  Thy  tress,  it  (my

heart)  went :
On  Thy  lip,  my  lip  I  placed ;  and,  soul  and  heart,  made  sacrifice.

When,  without  us,  in  the  desire  of  verdure  and  of  the  plain,  moving  Thou

wentest,
Flowing,  on  my  yellow  (grief-stricken)  cheek,  becometh  the  red  (bloody)  tear.

To  Hafiz,  kind  be  Thou. To  the  enemy  say  : — "Thy  life  surrender:"
When  on  Thy  part,  warmth  I  see,  of  the  enemy  cold  of  breath,  mine,  what

fear?

7.  The  first  line  may  better  be  rendered  : —

Suddenly  Thee  into  my  bosom  I  drew ;  and  into  curl  went  Thy  tress ;

THE  LETTER  MiM  (*  729

438,  (439).

I.  Not  that  profligate  am  I  that  abandoning  of  the  (true)  Beloved  and  of  the  cup

I  make :

An  act  like  this,  the  muhtasib  knoweth  seldom  do I  make.

•

I  who,  years,  censured  the  repenters  (of  wine-drinking),

Repentance  of  (drinking)  wine  in  the  rose-season — mad  shall  I  be, — if

I  make.

The  (precious)  pearl-grain  is  love  ;  I  (am)  the  diver ;  the  wine-house  (is)  the

sea  :
There,  my  head,  I  plunged ;  (it)  up-lifted,  let  us  see,  where  shall I  make  ?

I,  who  have  treasures  of  the  ruby  and  of  the  pearl  of  tears,

Desire  for  the  bounty  of  the  sun,  lofty  of  star,  how  may  I  make  ?

5.  I  who,  in  beggary,  have  in  hand  the  imperial  treasure,

Greed  for  the  revolution  of  the  sphere,  mean-cherishing,  how  may I  make  ?

Cup-taker  is  the  tulip ;  intoxicated,  is  the  narcissus ;  the  name  of  impiety,  on

me ;
Many  a  complaint,  I  have. O  Lord !  whom,  judge  shall I  make  ?

In  the  rose-season,  thou  speakest  saying:—"  Zahid  be  I"  With  eye  and  head

(thy  order,  I  accept)  ;  but,
I  am  going  so  that,  counsel  with  the  lovely  one  and  with  the  cup,——

I  may  make.

If  the  Friend's  grace  approve  of  (casting)  lovers  into  the  fire  (of  hell),

Closed  of  eye,  I  am  (even)  if,  on  the  fountain  of  Kausar,  glance I  make.

If,  like  the  fruitless  willow,  pure  like  this  I  become :

After  this,  from shame  of the face of  the rose, my head uplifted when
shall  I  make  ?

I.  The  muhtasib  (censor  of  morals)  signifies : —

Muhammad  Muzaffar,  Governor  of  Shiraz.
In  contempt  for  his  oppression  and  hypocrisy,  the  title  is  given.

73°  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  When  with  the  water  of  grace,  the  breeze  washed  the  bud  of  the  rose,

Me,  crooked  of  heart,  call,  if  at  the  page  of  the  book  (the  world),  glance,

I  make.

Dust-stained  with  poverty  though  I  be, — of  my  spirit,  be  shame,

If,  with  the  water  (of  liberality)  of  the  sun's  fountain,  my  skirt  wet -I  make.

The  credit  of  the  sky's  compact  and  agreement  is  not  so  great :

Compact  with  the  goblet,  I  establish ;  condition  (covenant)  with  the  cup

I  make.

O  my  bold  one,  city-upsetter  (the  true  Beloved) !  a  moment,  the rein  draw

back,
So  that,  with  my  (pearly)  tears  and (ruddy)  face, full  of  (red)  gold  and  of

pearls,  Thy  path  I  may  make.

Not  worthy  of  my  conduct  is  the  way  of  profligacy. Now,

Since  (into  it)  I  have  fallen,  thought  of  other  (work)  wherefore  do 1  make  ?

15.  Last  night,  they  said  : — "  Candy  Thy  ruby  lip  giveth." But,

So  long  as  in  my  own  mouth,  it,  I  see  not,  credence  how  shall-^— • I  make  ?

From  fortune,  the  corner  of  the  prayer-arch  of  Thy  eye-brow,  I  desire :

So  that,  in  it,  morning  and  evening,  love's  lesson  by  heart,—— I  may  make.

I,  by  whom,  to-day,  the  paradise  of  the  cash  (of  union  with  the  true  Beloved)  is

gained,
On  the  promise  of  to-morrow  (the  day  of  resurrection)  of  the  admonisher  (the

Zahid),  reliance,  wherefore  shall  I  make  ?

The  slave  of  Shah  Mansur,  I  am. Far,  it  is  not  if,

With  the  desire  of  dignity,  over  the  (resplendent)  king  of  the  East  (who  is
the  sun),  boasting,^—  I  make.

Last  night,  to  Hafiz  Thy  ruby  (lip)  kept  giving  false  vows ;

Not  that  one  am  I  that  belief  in  these  its  idle  tales, I  make.

II.  The  second  line  occurs  in  couplet  20.

14.  To  the  second  line,  add — •
What  was  fit  to  be  was.
The  second  line  (in  part)  occurs  in  c.  21.
1 8.  Shah  Mansur. See  Ode  167,  c.  I.

THE  LETTER  MiM  (*  73 [

20.  Resourcelessness  notwithstanding,  black  like  the  moon  be  my  face,

If,  of  the  bounty  of  the  sun,  lofty  of  star,  acceptance, I  make.

What  madness  is  austerity  in  the  rose-season  !  Hafiz  keep  sense  !
So  that  I  may  utter  an  a'uz  (God  defend  me) ; and  thought  of  other  (profli-
gacy) I  may  make.

20.  The  moon  is  black  from  the  spots  otr  her  face.

5*2

732

DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

439,  (435).

i.  Where,  the  glad  tidings  of  union  with  Thee,  so  that,  from  desire  of  life,

I  may  rise?
The  holy  bird  (of  paradise)  am  I ;  from  the  world's  snare, I  rise.

By  Thy  love  (I  swear)  that,  if  me,  Thy  slave,  Thou  call,

Out  from  desire  of  lordship  of  existence  and  dwelling  (both  worlds), I' rise.

O  Lord  !  from  the  cloud  of  guidance,  the  rain  (of  mercy)  cause  to  arrive  :
Before  that,  from  the  midst,  like  a  (handful  of)  dust, I  rise.

i.  On  the  face  of  the  slab  of  the  tomb  of  Hafiz  at  Shiraz,  are  inscribed  the  lines  stated  below :—

Ode.

Couplets.

Where?

REMARKS.

439
4193

all

It  2

centre ....
left side.

c.  6  excepted.

On  the  face  of  the  slab,  above
the  lines,  are  these  words  :  —

»>

4,  6
9

right „
top „

O  Thou
who  abidest

5

bottom  „

although

439*

i

left  bottom  corner . .

second  line.

all  things  perish  !

2

right „ „ . •

» it

175

2

right  top „

first „

>i

2

left „ „ . .

second „

On  the  slab,  the  Persian  text  of  Ode  439  is  not  as  it  is  given  in  Sudi's  text,  which  has  been  copied
by  Major  H.  S.  Jarrett  in  his  Persian  text,  brought  out  (in  1881)  under  the  auspices  of  the  Gov-
ernment of  India.

Reading  of —

the  slab.

ode  439.

Couplet  2

.. 3

„ 4

,, 4

6

*"*

u

omitted.

inserted.

2.  To  the  second  line  add : —

Thy  slave,  I  will  be. For  being  Thy  slave,  I  shall  be  possessed  of  such  dignity  that  all  other
dignities  will  be  as  naught.

THE  LETTER  MiM  f  733

(0  holy  traveller!)  at  the  head  of  my  tomb,  without  wine  and  the  minstrel,

sit  not :

So  that  by  thy  perfume,  dancing,-^—  I  may  rise.

5.  Though  I  am  old,  one  night  me,  close  in  Thy  embrace  take,

So  that,  in  the  morning,  from  Thy  embrace,  young— —  I  may  rise.

439a.  (314).

I.  O  heart!  the  slave  of  the  King  of  the  world  (All)  be;  and  (thus)  King be;

Ever  in  the  protection  of  the  grace  of  Ilah  (Allah)  be.

Not  a  thousand  of  the  Kljariji-order,  do  they  purchase  for  a  barley-corn  :

Say  : — "  Mountain  to  mountain  (Kaf  to  Kaf)  the  shelter  of  the  hypocrite be."

Since,  on  the  day  of  upspringing  (the  resurrection)  Ahmad  (Muhammad)  is  my  intercessor,
Say  :— "  This  my  body,  calamity-stricken,  full  of  sin be  !  "

He  who  hath  not  All's  friendship,  kafir  is ;

Say :— "  Zahid  of  the  time,  be ;  or  say  Shaikh  of  the  Path be ! "

5.  O  Ali!  to-day  by  love  for  thee  alive  I  am  :

To-morrow  (the  day  of  resurrection),  by  the  pure  soul  of  the  Imams,  (I  conjure  thee)  my  witness
be.

The  tomb  of  the  eighth  Imam,  the  Sultan  of  religion, — Riza,

With  soul,  kiss ;  and  at  the  door  of  that  court, be.

The  power  to  pluck  a  rose  from  the  rose-branch,  (ancestors  of  Riza),  reacheth  thee  (O  Hafiz  I)  not ;
At  least,  at  the  foot  of  their  rose-bush,  (Riza)  grass  (worthless) be.

1.  This  Ode  is  not  found  in  Major  Jarrett's  Persian  text  of  Hafiz ;  but  is  No.  314  in  the  Calcutta-text. See  Ode

439. It  is  in  praise  of  Ali  Ibn  Abu  Talib,  the  fourth  Khalifa;  and  of  his  descendants  the  Imams,  revered
by  the  Shiahs.
Ilah  is  used  for  Allah  (God).

2.  The  hypocrite  is  the  sunni.

Khariji  signifies : —

an  order  of  darvishes.

5.  The  Imams  are  the  twelve  Imams  of  the  family  of  AH.

6.  The  tomb  of  Imam  AH  Must  Riia  (6.  769,  d.  818)  is  at  Mashhad  in  Khurasan.

734  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

(0  true  Beloved  !)  think  not  that,  from  the  dust  of  the  head  of  Thy  street,
By  the  sky's  tyranny  or  by  time's  violence,  (to  choose  employment) I  rise.

O  Idol,  sweet  of  motion  !  arise  ;  and  Thy  (lofty,  cypress-like)  stature  display  :
That,  like  Hafiz,  from  desire  of  life  and  of  the  world I  may  rise.

The  man  of  God,  who  is  the  Zahid,  piety-seeking,

Whether  the  garment  (be)  white,  or  whether  the  garment  (be)  black  -

HSfiz  1  the  path  of  service  of  the  king  Ali,  follow  :
Then  in  the  Path  like  men  of  the  Path

be.

be.

4393.

The  date  of  Hafiz's  death  is  obtained  from  the  following  quatrain  :  —
The  lamp  of  men  of  spirituality  is  Khwaja  Hafiz,
Who,  from  the  light  of  glory,  was  a  (luminous)  candle.
When,  in  the  dust  of  Musalla,  his  abode  (in  death)  he  made,
His  date,  from  the  dust  of  Musalla,  seek.

See  Ode  439.

The  date  of  death  is  given  by  the  words  in  the  last  couplet.

From  the  abjad  we  have  :—

2o

621

r

j

Hence  the  date  is  A.H.  791.

To  convert  this  Hijra  date  into  Christian  date,  see  Ode  35,  c.  8.

170

THE  LETTER

MIM  |*  735

44O,  (440).

I.  At  the  time  of  the  evening-prayer  of  strangers  when  weeping— I  begin,
With  moans  like  a  stranger,  my  tale, — I  compose.

To  the  memory  of  the  Friend  and  of  my  (native)  land  so  bitterly  I'weep,
That,  up  from  the  world,  the  way  and  usage  of  journeying, — I  cast.

From  the  country  of  my (true) Beloved I  am ; not  from  the  cities  of the

stranger :
0  divine  Protector ! Me,  back  to  my  companions,  cause  to  reach.

0  guide  of  the  Path ! for  God's  sake,  a  little  aid  (give),  so  that,
In  the  street  of  the  wine-house,  my  banner,  again — I  may  exalt.

5.  Of  my  being  a  Pir,  reckoning  how  may  wisdom  take,
When,  again,  with  a  child-idol  at  love — I  play.

Save  the  east  morning  breeze  and  the  (cool)  north  wind,  me  recogniseth  none :
O  my  friend  !  for,  save  the  (fleeting)  wind,  my  companion  is  none.

The  air  of  the  Friend's  dwelling  is  our  water  of  life,

O  breeze  !  from  the  dust  of  Shiraz,  me,  a  fragrant  perfume  bring.

1.  While  absent  from  Shiraz,  Hafiz  composed  this  Ode,

2.  Full  of  water  and  of  rapine,  the  world  becometh  with  my  tears ;  and  the  boisterousness  of  its

waters,  a  preventer  of  travel.

3.  uj*^*  (Muhaiman)  signifies  : —

One  who  saveth  another;  God.

5-  cr^r./?  <->'—•»-  (to  take  up  the  account)  signifies  : —

to  make  inquiry  of  something,  since  the  work  of  Pirs  (or  of  old  men),
I  do  not,  my  being  a  Pir  (or  an  old  man),  how  will  wisdom  regard  ?
Here,  Pir  signifies : —

(a)  Pir,  Shaikh,  Murshid.

(b)  an  old  man.

6.  saba,  the  east  (morning)  breeze.

dabur,  „  west „  „

bad-i-shumal,  the  north  wind.

„ janub „ south „

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Forth  came  my  tear ;  and  told  my  crime  face  to  face  (publicly)  :
Complaint  may  I  make  of  whom  ? — of  my  household,  the  informer  is.

From  the  harp  of  Zuhra,  I  heard  that,  at  dawn,  it  said : —

"  The  disciple  of  Hafiz,  sweet  of  note,  sweet  of  voice — I  am."

THE  LETTER  MiM

f  737

441, (441).

I.  Although  old,  shattered  of  heart,  powerless, ^  I  have  become,

Whenever  I  recollected  Thy  face,  made,  young I  became.

Thanks  to  God  that  whatever,  from  God,  I  sought,

To  the  limit  of  my  spirit,  prosperous I  became.

•

In  eternal  fortune's  highway  to  fortune's  throne,

With  the  cup  of  wine,  to  the  desire  of  the  heart  of  friends •  I  went.

O  young  rose-bush  !  the  fruit  of  fortune  enjoy  ;  for,

Beneath  Thy  shade,  the  bulbul  of  the  world's  garden I  became.

5.  At  first  (in  eternity  without  beginning)  of  the  word  and  the  cry  of  the  world  no
news  was  mine  :

In  the  school  of  grief  for  thee  (O  murshid  ! )  a  subtlety-knower  like  this

I  became.

From  that  time  when  the  calamity  (wound)  of  Thy  eye  reached  me,
From  the  terrible  calamity  of  the  end  of  Time  (the  last  age  of  this  world)  safe
.  I  became.

_To  my  heart,  the  door  of  reality  became  opened  that  day
When,  of  the  dwellers  of  Thy  court,  the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  I  became.

5.  The  first  line  signifies  : —

In  eternity  without  beginning,  non-existent  I  was ;  and  of  this  illusory  existence,  had  no  know-
ledge.

O  murshid  !  not  from  non-existence,  did  I  bring  every  perfection  that  I  have. By  thy  favour
alone,  it  I  acquired.

6.  akhir-i-zaman  (akhiru-I-zaman)  signifies  :—

The  end  of  time.

daur-i-kamar  signifies  :  —

The  age  of  the  moon,  the  last  age,  the  end  of  time,  the  last  of  the  seven  ages  of  the  world.
Each  of  the  following  seven  planets  hath  (in  order)  had  (or  will  have)  an  age  of  7,000  years  :—

Mercury.  3.  Mars.

2.  Venus.

4.  Jupiter.

5.  Saturn.

6.  The  Sun.

7.  The  Moon.

The  present  age  is  daur-i-kamar,  the  age  of  the  moon,  the  end  of  time.
7.  In  the  cloister  of  the  Magians,  the  door  of  reality  opened  to  me ;  in  the  monastery,  no  profit  was

738  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

To  the  tavern  (the  stage  of  divine  knowledge),  me,  fate  consigneth  (so  that,

thence,  profit  and  advantage  I  may  reap)  :
As  much  as  like  this  (a  sage)  I  go  ;  and  like  that  (a  -zahid) I  became.

Not  old  in  years  and  months,  am  I ;  the  faithless  friend,  it  was,

(Who,  swiftly,)  like  (swift)  life,  passeth  by  me— from  (grief  of)  that,  old, .

I  became.

10.  Last  night,  me,  glad  tidings,  he  (the  Pir  of  the  Magians,  the  perfect  murshid)

gave,  saying : — "  0  Hafiz !
"  Come  back;  for  the  pardon  of  thy  sins,  surety  I  became."

8.  iJl^a.  (consignment)  signifies  : —

to  write  an  order  regarding  any  one.

THE  LETTER  MlM I  739

442,  (443)-

i.  This  tumult  is  what  that,  in  the  age  of  the  moon  (the  end  of  time),  I  see?

Full  of  strife  and  iniquity,  all  the  horizons, 1  see.

From  time  the  day  of  prosperousness  every  one  seeketh :

Difficult  this  is — that  daily,  worse^— •  I  see.

All  in  strife  and  struggle  with  the  mother,  the  daughters  :

All  ill-wishers  of  the  father,  the  sons I  see.

Neither  hath  brother  any  pity  for  brother  ;

Nor  for  the  son,  the  father's  compassion  do I  see.

5.  For  fools,  all  is  sharbat  of  rose-water  and  sugar;

All  of  blood  (of  grief)  of  the  liver,  the  subsistence  of  the  sage I  see.

The  Arab  steed,  galled  beneath  the  pack-saddle  ;

All  on  the  neck  of  the  ass,  the  golden  collar I  see.

The  counsel  of  Hafiz,  hear ;  Khwaja,  go ;  goodness,  do  :

For,  better  than  the  treasure  of  jewels  this  counsel, I  see.

1.  "  The  age  of  the  moon."  See  Ode  441,  c.  6.

The  second  line  describeth  the  marks  of  the  resurrection-day.

2.  jjj  (worse)  is  contracted  from  Jjj
5.  See  Ode  549,  c.  2.

7.  When  Persia  was  invaded  by  Timur  Lang  Sahib  Kiran  in  1387,  Hafiz  composed  this  Ode.

5C2

THE  LETTER NUN  CJ  74'

o

The  Letter  Nun.

443,  (449).

I.  Displayed  from  the  garden  border  hath  become  the  diadem  of  the  Sultan,  the  rose

.  (the  true  Beloved)  :

O  Lord  !  to  the  cypress  and  the  jessamine  (disciples  and  lovers  of  the  Path),  its
arrival  happy  be !

In  his  own  (proper)  place,  happy  was  this  imperial  sitting  (the  Sultan,  rose)
Since  now  in  his  own  (proper)  place,  every  one  sitteth.

To  Sulaiman's  seal-ring,  news  of  the  happy  conclusion  give,
Whereby,  short  the  hand  (of  power)  of  ahriman (the  enemy),  the  ism-i-a'zam
made.

Be  prosperous  to  eternity  without  end, — this  house  (the  world),  from  the  door

of  which,
Every  moment,  with  the  perfume  of  mercy,  the  breeze  of  felicity  (the  words  of

the  perfect  murshid)  bloweth  !

I.  "The  rose"  may  signify  :  —

(a)  the  murshid.

(b)  „ praised  one.

To  the  second  line,  add—

So  that  by  His  arrival,  they  may  attain  their  desire.

3.  See  Ode  189,  c.  2;  435,  c.  10.

4.  ,_p)0  iJU.  (the  dust  of  whose  door)  signifies  : —

the  perfect  man.
cr>j  ol^(the  breeze  of  Yaman)  signifies  :—

speech  that,  from  the  perfect  man  ariseth ; and  into  the hearer's  heart, the  recollection  of  God

poureth.

It  is  fit  to  compare  the  words  of  the  murshid  with  the  breeze  of  Yaman.
This  couplet  referreth  to  the  Hadis;  and  to  Uvais  Karani  (d.  657).

742  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

5.  The  majesty  of  Pashang's  son,  Afrasiyab,  (king  of  Turan)  and  his  world-seizing

sword,
In  all  king-chronicles,  the  tale  of  the  assembly  is.

Obedient  to  thee,  became  beneath  the  saddle,  the  chaugan-steed  of  the  sphere,
O  royal  horseman  !  since  to  the  field  (of  sport)  thou  hast  come, the  ball  strike.

The  stream  of  the  country  is  the  water  (lustre)  of  thy  sword  :
The  tree  of  justice,  plant  thou:  the  root  of  ill-wishers,  tip-pluck.

After  this  if,  despite  the  perfume  of  thy  sweet  nature,  it  (Iran)  blossometh  not,
From  Iran's  plain,  the  musk-pod  of  the  musk  of  Khutan  (the  well-being  and
welfare  of  Iran)  ariseth  (and  departeth).

Expectation  of  sweet  splendour,  the  corner-takers  (recluses)  make,
Aslant  (in  pride)  place  the  cap  ;  and,  from  thy  face,  the  veil  up-pluck.

10.  O  breeze!  to  the  Saki  of  the  banquet  of  Atabak  (the  praised  one),  prefer  the

request,
That,  from  that  cup,  gold  scattering,  me,  a  draught  he  may  give.

Ever  be  prosperous  this  house  of  the  world  ;

For  from  men  of  God,  whose  creation  is  of  dust,  words  of  divine  knowledge  and truths  that  give

recollection  of  God  are  momently  heard.
This  couplet  is  in  praise  of  the  world,  which,  from  men  of  God,  is  apparently  improper.

For  its  joy,  all  grief  is  :

"  The  world  is  a  carcass ;  its  seeker,  a  (filthy)  dog.  "

Verily,  this  mean  world  is  for  him,  who  recognised  its  truth, — the  field  for  the  next  world.

To  men  of  God,  this  world  is  the  descending  place  of  divine  favours,  and  of  endless  manifestations.

To  men  of  the  world,  contrary  to  this  and  wholly  calamity,  it  appeareth,— just  as  the  Nil  was  de-
struction to  the  Egyptians  and  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  of  lords  to  the  Israelites.

Abdu-1-lah  Ansari  saith

"  O  Ansari !  the  world  is  a  dust-heap  wherein  the  wise  sow  :
"  Not  a  place  is  it  wherein  the  foolish  wander. "

Abu-1-Ma'ani  saith  :  —

"  O  distraught  one  !  the  world  is  what  ?

"  'Tis  the  illusory,  truth-showing ;  it  is  not  the  truth,  illusory.showing.  "

10.  t-WJ'l  is  derived  from  W  (father)  and  *-&  (lord);  was  a  title  of  the  Governors  of  the  Province  of
Shiraz.

THE  LETTER  NUN  li)  743

(In  love-playing) with  (my  own)  reason,  I  consulted. He  said  :  —  "  Hafiz  !

drink  wine  !  "
O  Saki !  according  to  the  word  of  the  trusty  adviser  (reason),  wine  give.

II.  O  murshid!  in  the  explanation  of  truths,  strive  so  that, with the  permission of  the trusty
adviser,  I  may  from  thee  this  sense  demand. So  hath  my  perfect  reason  ordered.

Although,  from  love's  descent,  reason  knoweth  its  own  destruction,  it  denieth  not  love;  and,
in  it,  planteth  its  heart.  For,  verily,  it  knoweth  that,  though  in  the  beginning  it  is  ruin,  in
the  end  it  is  thirst-quenching.

Seest  thou  not  that  the  lofty  companions  of  Muhammad,  and  the  great  tab'in  gave  to  destruc-
tion their  body  in  the  contest  with  the  Kafirs  and  wicked  ones ;  and,  yet,  into  the  prosperi-
ty of  the  last  world,  their  pace  extended  ?

.  That  trusty  adviser  giveth  no  advice  save  in  the  true  Path,  though  in  that  Path,  injury
be  his.

Perfect  reason  is  that  which  to  its  own  ruin  consenteth ;  and  the  answer  of  the  crier  (the
murshid)  accepteth.

744  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

444,  (448).

1.  O  light  of  my  eye  (the  holy  traveller) !  a  matter  there  is, hear  :

"Since  thy  cup  (of  love for  God)  is  full ;  cause others  to  drink;  and thyself

drink.

With  experience,  old  men  utter  words :  to  thee,  I  said  :

Ho  !  O  son  !  that  old  thou  mayst  become,  counsel hear.

On  the  sensible  one  (the  philosopher  and  the  man  of  reason),  the  chain,  love's
hand  placeth  not :

Thou  wishest  to  draw  (through  thy  hand)  the  tress  of  the  Friend,  sense<

abandon.

Thee,  intoxication's  delight,  the  rosary  and  the  khirka  (men  of  outward  forms ;

hypocrites)  give  not ;
In  this  matter,  of  the  wine-seller  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent)  blessing

demand.

5.  In  respect  to  life  and  property,  for  friends  (lovers  of  God),  need  is  none :

A  hundred  lives,  the  ransom  for  the  (true)  Beloved  (make), — counsel hear.

In  love's  path,  Ahriman's  temptations  are  many :

Sense  keep ;  and  to  Surush's  message  the  ear  of  the  heart put.

Ruined  became  subsistence  ;  remaineth  not  the  means  of  joy ;

O  harp  !  the  wail  (of  grief)  draw  out ;  O  drum  ! exult.

O  Saki  (perfect  murshid) ! — void  of  pure  wine,  be  not  thy  cup  ! —

On  me,  dreg-drinker,  an  eye  (glance)  of  favour make.

!•  (•"*?•  jy  (the  light  of  the  eye)  signifies  : —

(a)  the  Beloved  (true  or  illusory),

(b)  „  murshid.

(c)  „  disciple.

As  long  as  youth  remaineth,  do  thou,  by  devotion  and  worship,  take  up  the  advantages  of  youth  ;

and  to  others  cause  advantage  to  reach.
"  The  cup  "  may  signify  :  —

the  cup  of  discipleship.

2.  By  accepting  counsel,  thou  wilt  by  way  of  wisdom  become  old. Like  the  old,  sensible  thou  wilt

become.

7.  Youth's  season  remaineth  not. O  harp  and  drum  (O  old  man,  bent of  stature,  back without
backbone,  to  the  wind  youth  given,  hand  and  foot  useless  become), — bewail !

THE  LETTER  NUN  U  745

When,  in  the  gold  scattering  kaba,  thou,  intoxicated,  passest,

To  Hafiz,  wool-wearer,  (Safi)  one  kiss,——  present.

9.  i,  2,  6.  ii/  u"j*  listen.

i,  8. o»y  'drink.

3.  *Jf>  abandon.

4.  v_^ile  demand.

5.  u^  listen.
7.  ^M**'  exult.
9.  1^3  present.

OiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

445,  (452)-

i.  One  lofty  of  stature,  bold,  picture-player of  mine

Made  short  the  tale  (of  renown)  of  the  long  austerity——  of  mine.

O  heart !  thou  sawest  at  the  end  of  old  age,  of  austerity,  and  of  knowledge,
What,  with  me,  it  did, — the  eye  of  the  beloved of  mine?

On  account  of  the  water  (tears)  of  the  eye,  seated  on  the  top  of  the  fire  (of

distress),  I  am ;
Because,  in  all  horizons  (climes),  it  (the  water  of  my  eye)  made revealed  the

mystery of  mine.

(To  myself) I  said : — "  With  the  garment  of  hypocrisy, love's  trace,  I  con-
cealed;"
The  informer  was  the  tear  ;  and  made  manifest  the  mystery of  mine.

5.  Intoxicated,  is  the  Friend ;  and  recollection  of  rivals  (lovers),  maketh  not :
His  mention  (be)  for  good,  the  Saki,  the  wretched-cherisher of  mine.

The  destruction  of  my  faith,  I  fear. For  taketh,

The  prayer-arch  of  Thy  eyebrow  the  presence  (essence)  of  prayer of  mine.

On  myself,  like  the  laughing  candle  (consuming  and  melting)  I  weep,

Till  I  see  what  with  thee,  O  heart  of  stone,  maketh  (worketh)  the  consuming

of  mine.

With  weeping,  a  picture  on  water  I  depict. Now,

How  long  associated  becometh  the  truth  with  the  illusory .  of  mine  ?

That  moment  when  to  an  end  reached  Mahmud's  life,

Bitterly,  he  kept  surrendering  his  soul,  and  saying  : — ("  Where  art  thou)  Ayaz

of  mine?"

5.  See  Ode  249.

6.  The  prayer-arch  of  Thy  eyebrow  taketh  my  faith.

7.  The  laughing  of  the  candle  is  its  light.

„ weeping  ,,  » melting.

From  the  lover's  heart,  departeth  not,  even  in  death,  the  recollection  of  the  beloved.

THE  LETTER  NUN  (•)  747

10.  O  Lord  !  when  bloweth  that  breeze,  from  whose  fragrant  breath

A  perfume  of  His  mercy  becometh  the  work-doer of  mine  ?

Zahid  !  (equal  are  we)  when  a  work  (favourably)  proceedeth  neither  by  prayer

of  thine;
Nor  also,  (by)  the  nightly  intoxication  and  consuming  and  supplicating

of  mine.

With  grief  Hafiz  burned. O  breeze  !  his  state,  say
To  the  King,  friend-cherisher,  enemy-destroyer,——  Of  mine.

502

7+8  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

446,  (454)-

1.  As  much  as  my  grief  (of  love)  to  the  physicians,  I  uttered,
(Me)  the  wretched  stranger  they  remedied  not.

Not  with  its  own  seal  is  love's  casket ;

O  Lord  ! the  desire  of  the  watchers,  be  not !

That  (haughty)  rose  that,  momently,  is  in  the  power  of  a  thorn,
Say  :— "  Thine  be  shame  of  the  (poor)  nightingale  !"

O  Lord  !  safety,  give ;  so  that  again  may  see
The  eye  of  lovers,  the  face  of  the  beloved  ones.

5.  To  the  Friend,  (love's)  secret  pain,  we  told;

Pain  from  the  physicians  (beloved  ones),  (love's)  pain,  one  cannot  conceal.

O  Benefactor  (beloved)  !  at  the  tray  of  union  with  Thee,  at  last,
Of  those  portionless,  how  long  shall  we  be  ?

The  disgrace  of  the  world,  Hafiz  would  not  have  been,
If,  the  counsels  of  admonishers,  he  had  heard.

2.  According  to  their  desire,  exclude  me  not  from  union  with  the  Beloved.

3.  Because,  without  thee,  thy  lover  is  restless  and  powerless;  and  thou, into  the  thorn's  power,

art  fallen !

4.  t_~sr* signifies : — the  lover.
t_-^;-  „ : —  „ beloved.

6.  O  Beloved  !  excluded  from  union  with  Thee,  and  satisfied  with  separation,— shall  I  be  1
Sometimes  to  my  desire  cause  me  to  reach.

THE  LETTER  NUN  U  749

447,  (450-

i.  O  Thou,  whose  face,  moon  in  appearance,  (is)  the  fresh  spring— of  beauty;
Whose  mole  and  down  (are),  the  centre  of  grace,  and  the  circle

of  beauty !

Hidden  in  Thy  eye  full  of  intoxication  the  fascination  of  sorcery  ;

Revealed  on  Thy  restless  (floating)  tress,  the  (calm)  rest of  beauty.

Not  a  moon  shone  like  Thee  from  the  mansion  of  goodness  ;

Not  a  cypress  arose  like  Thy  stature  from  the  stream of  beauty.

By  Thy  darkish  beauty,  joyous  became  the  age  of  heart-ravishingness;

By  Thy  grace,  expanded  became  the  season——  of  beauty.

5.  From  the  snare  of  Thy  tress,  and  the  grain  of  Thy  mole,  in  the  world,

Not  a  bird  of  the  heart  remaineth,  not  become  the  prey of  beauty.

Ever,  with  grace,  from  the  midst  of  life  nature's  nurse,

Thee,  cherisheth  with  care  in  the  bosom—  of  beauty.

Fresh  and  fresh  is  the  (dark)  violet  (hair)  about  Thy  lip,  for  that  reason,

That  it  keepeth  drinking  the  water  of  life  from  the  fountain- source

of  beauty.

Hafiz  severed  desire  when  he  seeth  Thy  equal ;

There  is  none  save  Thy  face  in  the  land  of  beauty.

8.  j^  (dayyar)  signifies  : — any  one.
jUj  (diyar) „ :— the  land.

75°  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

448,  (451).

i.  Joy-exciting  and  repentance-shattering  became  the  spring  and  the  rose  :
With  the  joy  of  the  face  of  the  rose,  grief's  root  from  the  heart  up-pluck.

Arrived  the  morning-breeze  ;  from  passion-possessing  (love),  the  rose-bud,
Out  from  itself,  went ;  and  on  itself  the  shirt  rent  (blossomed).

Heart !  from  water-pureness,  the  path  of  truth  learn  ;

In  uprightness,  from  the  (free)  cypress  of  the  sward,  freedom  seek.

With  this  jewel  and  sweet  smile,  the  bride,  the  rose-bud
Exactly,  in  an  excellent  way,  my  heart  and  faith  ravished.

5.  The  shriek  of  the  distraught  bulbul,  and  the  scream  of  the  hazar,

For  the  sake  of  union  with  the  rose,  forth  from  the  sad  house  (of  mourning)
came.

Through  the  breeze's  violence,  the  tresses  around  the  rose,  behold:

On  the  face  of  the  jessamine,  the  curl  of  the  tress  of  the  hyacinth,  behold.

Hafiz  !  from  the  cup,  the  tale  of  time's  story  seek  ;

According  to  the  word  of  the  minstrel  and  to  the  decision  of  the  Pir,  possessed
of  knowledge.

3.  As  in  pure  water,  whatever  is  appeareth  and  is  not  hidden  from  the  eye,  even  so,  inwardly  and
outwardly,  myself,  make.

5.  For  his  own  beloved,  every  one  was  weeping.
Hazar  is  a  nightingale  with  a  thousand  notes.

THE  LETTER  NUN  «J  75 1

449, (455)-

i.  Like  the  rose,  momently,  by  thy  fragrance,  the  garment  of  my  body,
Rent,  I  make  from  collar  to  skirt.

Thou  mayst  say :— The  rose  in  the  garden,  beheld  thy  body  ;
(Since)  like  the  intoxicated,,  the  garment  on  its  body,  it  rent.

From  the  power  of  grief  for  thee,  with  difficulty,  I  bear  life  :
But,  from  me,  the  heart  easily  thou  tookest.

At  the  word  of  enemies  (watchers),  away  from  the  friends  (lovers),  thou  turned-

est;
With  the  friend,  enemy  none  becometh.

5.  Do  not,  so  that,  from  my  breast,  the  sigh  liver-consuming
May  ascend  like  smoke  by  way  of  the  window.

Thy  body  in  the  garment,  like  (sparkling)  wine  in  the  cup:
Thy  head  in  the  chest,  like  (hard,  red)  iron  in  (pure  white)  silver.

O  candle !  from  thy  eye,  rain  tears  like  the  cloud  ;

For,  manifest  to  the  people,  hath  become  the  consuming  of  thy  heart.

My  heart,  shatter  not;  it,  under  foot,  cast  not;
For  in  thy  tress-tip,  its  dwelling  it  hath.

Since  to  thy  tress,  Hafiz  hath  bound  his  heart,
In  this  way,  his  work  under  foot,  cast  not.

752  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

450,  (456).

I.  When  (to  reach  His  skirt)  the  dust  of  His  path,  I  become,  His  skirt  He  shaketh

—  from  me :

If  I  say: — "(In  love),  my  heart,  return,"  His  face,  He  turneth^— from  me,

To  every  one,  He  displayeth  His  hued  cheek  like  the  red  rose,
If  I  say: — "  (Thy  face  from  others),  conceal:"  (In  grief  at  that),  His  face,  He
concealeth from  me-

If  before  Him,  like  the  candle,  I  die, — at  my  grief,  He  laughcth  like  the  morning :
If  I  grieve,  His  tender  heart  is  grieved against  me.

To  my  eye,  I  spake  saying :  — "  At  last,  Him  once  fully  behold  :"
It  (the  eye)  said  : — "  Perchance  thou  wishestthat  a  stream  of  blood  should  pour
from  me."

5.  Thirsty  for  my  blood, — He  ;  and  for  His  blood, — I. So  that  when  it  happeneth,
My  desire  I  will  take  from  Him;  or  justice  (revenge),  He  will  take from  me.

Friends !  for  His  mouth,  behold  ye  my  life,  I  gave  :

Say: — How  for  a  trifling  matter,  He  keepeth  back—  from  me.

If,  like  Farhad,  my  life  in  bitterness  issueth, — there  is  no  fear  ;

Many  sweet  tales  remain  behind of  me.

Hafiz  !  conclude. For,  if  in  this  way,  love's  lesson  thou  read,

In  every  corner,  love  uttereth  tales—  of  me.

8.  In  the  second  line,  "  me  "  refers  to  Hafiz.

THE  LETTER  NON  U  753

451, (457)-

j.  (0  true  Beloved!)  for  God's  sake,  with  khirka-wearers (hypocrites),  little  sit ;
From  resourceless  profligates  (inwardly  pure  and  clean)  Thy  face,  conceal  not.

In  this  khirka  (of  the  austere  zahids),  is  many  a  stain  :

O  happy  the  time  of  the  kaba  of  the  wine-drinkers  (void  of  stain)  !

Thou  art  of  delicate  nature  ;  and  power  hast  not  (to  endure)
The  hardship  of  the  handful  of  ragged  garment-wearers.

Among  these  Sufi-like  ones,  a  pain  (of  love)  I  see  not,
Pure  be  the  pleasure  of  the  dreg-drinkers!

5.  Come  ;  and  the  deceit  of  these  hypocrites,  behold  :

(Like)  the  flagon,  (they  have  the)  heart  of  blood  (ruddy  wine) ;  (like) the  harp,
(they  are  a-)  twanging.

When  (by  shewing  Thyself)  me,  intoxicated  Thou  hast  made, — veiled,  sit  not :
When  me,  the  sweet  draught  Thou  hast  given,— me,  poison  cause  not  to  drink.

The  lip  of  wine-hue  and  the  intoxicated  eye,  open  :
For,  from  desire  of  Thee,  foaming  is  the  ruby  wine.

Of  the  heart-ardency  of  Hafiz  full  of  caution  be  :
For  a  heart  like  the  seething  caldron,  he  hath.

2.  Than  devotion,  the  deceit  and  treachery  of  profligacy  is  better.

5.  In  private,  they  are  engaged  with  the  delight  of  love  of  sensual  pleasures ;  which  is  the  cause  of
the  bloody  heart ;  and,  in  public,  they  make  tumult  and  uproar  and  woe  is  me !

754  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

452,  (473).

i.  Than  the  thought  of  wine  and  of  the  cup,  more  pleasant-^— what  will  be  ?
Let  us  see  the  end^— -  what  will  be.

The  heart's  grief  how  can  one  suffer,  when  time  remaineth  not,

Say  : — "  Be  neither  heart  nor  time, what  will  be  ?  "

Wine,  drink  ;  grief,  suffer  not ;  the  counsel  of  the  imitator  (the  adviser  of  the

people),  hear  not :
To  the  speech  of  the  (common)  people  (of  this  world),  credit— what  will  be  ?

To  the  bird  of  little  spirit,  say :— "  Thy  own  grief,  suffer." For,  on  it  (the

bird),
The  pity  of  that  one  who  planteth  the  snare what  will  be  ?

5.  Verily  ('tis)  best  that  thy  hand-toil  be  expended  according  to  desire ;

Thou  knowest  that,  at  last,  to  one  desire  un-attained what  will  be.

Last  night,  the  Pir  of  the  tavern  (the  murshid)  kept  uttering  an  enigma

Of  the  line  of  the  cup  (of  love). "('Tis  necessary  to  see)  the  end,

what  will  be."

From  the  Path,  Hafiz's  heart  I  took  (seduced)  with  the  drum,  the  harp,  and  the

ghazal :
Let  us  see,  the  requital  of  me  of  ill-name^—  what  will  be.

4.  "The  bird  of  little  spirit"  signifies  :  —
(a)  an  outward  man.
(J)  one  who  feareth  the  violence  of  the  beloved.

,.b  (snare)  signifies  : —

sensual  desire  and  worldly  delights.

To  the  seeker  of  God,  who,  in  respect  of  himself,  searcheth  ;  and,  to  the  mercy  of  God,  cometh

not,  say : —

In  our  path  (which  is  a  highway)  God  hath,  for  the  sake  of  temptation  and  trial,  laid  the
snare  of  sensual  desire  and  worldly  delights. That  one,  who  planteth  the  snare, — for  the
prey  what  pity  hath  he  ?
God  Most  High,  made  us,  with  the  perfection  of  meaning,  lofty  of  head. Then,  for  the  sake  of

our  trial,  He  cast  us  into  lowness.
In  whomever  is  the  search  for  God  and,  in  his  heart,  is  passion  for  the  Absolute  Existence —

engageth  not  in  delights,  and  casteth  not  the  work  of  to-day  to  to-morrow.
In  whomsoever,  the  search  for  God  is  not,  becometh  centered  on  worldly  delights  and  lusts.

THE  LETTER  NUN  U  755

453  .(158).

i.  Knowest  thou  what  fortune  is? 'Tis  beholding  the  sight  of  the  (true) Be-
loved :
In  His  street,  beggary  to  royalty  preferring.

Easy  it  is  to  sever  desire  for  life. But,

(Only with)  difficulty, (friendship) for  friends  dear as  one's  soul,  can  one
sever.

Like  the  (folded)  bud,  with  a  straitened  heart,  to  the  rose-garden,  I  will  go  ;
And,  there,  my  garment  of  good  fame,  will  rend  :

Sometimes,  like  the  breeze,  hidden  mystery  with  the  rose  will  utter  ;
Sometimes,  from  the  bulbuls,  the  mystery  of  love-playing  will  hear.

5.  First  (in  this  world),  from  the  hand,  the  kissing  of  the  lip  of  the  (true)  Beloved

give  not  up  ;

For,  at  last  (in  the  next  world),  thou  mayst be  distressed (wearied)  with  the
gnawing  (in  regret)  of  thy  own  hand  and  lip.

3.  The  rending  of  the  garment  of  good  fame  is  for  lovers  the  source  of  good  fame,  especially  there,
where  is  the  assembly  of  lovers  (bulbuls).

4..  From  love's  fire,  my  state  is  changed,  therefore  will  I  do  *  *

5.  w*i*"^  (to  kiss)  signifies  :—

acquiring  the  rapture  of  love. For,  in  sufi.ism,  the  kiss  signifieth  love.

Jjl  (first)  signifies  : —

(a)  this  world.

(b)  the  beginning  (of  the  mystic  state).

ji-l  (the  end)  signifies  : —

(a)  the  next  world.

(b)  „  end  (of  the  mystic  state).

Like  the  Zahids,  outward-worshipping,  be  not ;  like  the  illusory  Sbids,  thyself,  scratch  not.
For,  in  outward  service,  they  are  happy ;  and  into the  inward  plunge  not ;  and  no  portion  of

divine  knowledge  take,  wherewith  in  that  (the  next)  world  they  may  array  themselves.
Then,  in  the  next  world,  on  seeing  the  lofty  degrees  of  the ftrifs,  theirs is  regret-suffering,

lip-biting,  finger-gnawing.

Otherwise —

In  the  beginning  of  the  mystic  state,  the  acquisition  of  love's  allurement  from  the  hand,  give

not ;  it  ever  before  thy  resolution  place,  so  that  the  travelling  of  the  Path  may  be  easy  ;  and

thy  passing  to  the  next  world  not  difficult.
If,  without  love's  allurement,  the  Path  thou  enter,  the  road  guidance  of  travellers  becometh

difficult. At  the  end  of  work,  thou  wilt  (in  regret)  bite  the  lip,  and  gnaw  the  finger.

5K2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

(0  heart !)  the  society  of  friends,  opportunity  reckon. For,  from  this  two-path-

ed  stage  (the  world),
When  (from  it)  away  we  pass,  (this  society)  again  one  cannot  reach.

Thou  mayst  say  : — "  From  (the  memory  of)  King  Mansur  passed  Hafiz;"
O  Lord  !  to his (Mansur's) memory  the (thought  of) cherishing  the  darvish
(Hafiz)  bring.

6.  If  the  society  of  the  perfect  Murshid  and  of  ftrifs  be,  in  this  world,  gained,  reckon  it  gain.
The  world  hath  two  doors  (paths) :  —

(a)  the  door  of  birth.

(b)  „ „ death.

Although  the  world  hath  many  parties  (paths)  and  turneth  to  the  paths  the  face  of  every  party,  yet,
that  which  is  the  search  of  men  of  God;  and  in  which  is  the  talk  of  men  of  direction,  is  either
the  shari'at  or  the  tarikat,  which  is  acceptable  to  God  and  is  the  travelling  of  both  parties.
The  other  path,  which  is  the  highway  to  infidelity,  they  avoid ;  and  about  it  come  not  into
speech,  for  the  connection  of  that  Path  is  towards  Shaitan ;  and  ours  towards  the  Merciful.

7.  See  Ode  167,  c.  i.

THE  LETTER  NUN  (l)  757

454,  (460).

I.  (O  true  Beloved!)  by  the  door  enter;  and  our  chamber  luminous > make  :
The  air  of  the  assembly  of  souls  perfumed  -  make.

(O  true  Beloved  !)  to  the  eye  and  the  eye-brow  of  the  (illusory)  beloved,  heart

and  soul,  I  have  entrusted  :
Come,  come  !  and  (with  the  glance  of  blessing)  viewing  of  the  arch  (the  eye-

brow) and  of  the  spectacle-place  (the  eye)  -  make.

O  breeze  of  the  garden  of  paradise  !  from  the  dust  of  our  assembly,

To  paradise,  a  perfume  take  ;  and  (it)  the  aloe-fuel  of  the  censer  make.

The  splendour-rays  of  beauty  (of  illusory  love),  the  veil  of  the  eye  of  understand-

ing, became  :
Come  ;  the  sun's  pavilion  (the  elemental  body)  effulgent——  make.

5.  Light  scattereth  not  the  star  of  the  (dark)  night  of  separation  (the  illusory  be-

loved);

To  the  palace-roof  (the  existence  of  Hafiz)  come  ;  and  the  lamp  of  the  moon
(the  beauty  of  the  true  Beloved),  uplifted^—  make.

2.  yj-H the  eye-brow, ~\

C7 "  f  each  signifies  :  —  illusory  love.

<jU° „ arch,  I

j&i*  „ spectacle-place,-'

O  true  Beloved  1  since  "  illusory  love  (for  the  creature)  is  the  bridge  to  true  love  (for  the  Creator)"
I  have  arranged  illusory  love;  and  it  adorned.

4.  "j^-  (palace)  signifies  :—
the  existence  of  Hafiz.

yj-^  (sun)  signifies  :  —

the  true  Beloved  (God). That  is,  the  sun  of  unity  that,  on  moon-faced  illusory  ones,  verily

scattereth  light.
Illusory  love  having  become  a  veil  to  the  eye  of  discovery,  I  cannot  see  Thee  :  my  existence

(which  is  a  royal  palace,  and  the  sun's  mansion),  adorn  ;  and,  with  the  qualities  of  perfec-

tion of  God's  unity,  illumine.

(uplift)  signifies:  —

(a)  put  out.

(6)  enkindle.
The  illusory  beloved,  that,  star-like,  in  separation's  night,  shineth,—  now,  that,  to'  my  perfume-place,

truth's  perfume  hath  reached,  —  scattereth  not  light;  and  towards  herself  openeth  not  my  heart.
To  the  palace-roof  of  my  existence,  come  ;  the  lamp  of  the  cloister,  kindle  ;  and  Thy  face  display.

75^  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Since  beneath  Thy  hand  are  the  lovely  ones  (the  flowers)  of  the  sward,

At  the  jessamine,  the  glance  ;  and  towards  the  cone-tree,  grace make.

To  the  treasurer  of  Jannat,  speak,  saying: — "The  dust  of  this  assembly,

"  As  a  present  to  Firdaus  take ;  (and  it)  the  aloe-fuel  of  the  censer make."

O  Saki  (Murshid) !  excess  of  many  a  tale,  the  spirit  maketh ;

From  the  hand,  thy  own  work  (the  explanation  of  truths  to  holy  travellers)  give
not;  wine  (the  delight  that  surgeth  in  the  traveller's  heart)  into  the  cup
, put.

•

Not  our  limit,  is  desire  for  the  cash  of  union  with  Thee ;

With  that  ruby  (lip),  like  sugar,  me  (a  kiss)——  give.

10.  The  lip  of  the  cup,  kiss  (subtleties  of  divine  knowledge,  acquire);  then  to  the

intoxicated  (holy  travellers)  give  :
With  this  subtlety,  wisdom's  train,  beperfumed make.

If  a  Faklh  advise  saying : — "  Love  practise  not,"

Him,  the  cup  (of  the  wine  of  unity)  give  ;  say: — "Thy  brain,  fresh——  make."

7.  "Jannat." See  Ode  407,  c.  4.

8.  ^/*  (wine)  signifies  :  —

"  a  delight  that  from  the  traveller's  heart  surgeth ;  and  inclineth  him  to  a  joyous  tune.

(cup)  signifies  :  —

(a)  cup ;  or,  in  sQfiistic  language,  something  wherein  they  seek  the  manifestations  of  hidden

splendours^

(b)  the  heart  of  the  Srif,  filled  with  divine  knowledge.

O  Murshid  !  many  a  story,  the  breath  of  excess  and  of  nonsensical  talk,  maketh,

To  it,  attentive  be  not ;  from  thy  skirt,  thy  own  purpose  scatter  not ;  to  travellers,  the  explanation

of  truths  cast;  and  to  the  disciples,  a  line  of  that  subtlety  that  riseth  from  the  heart,  write.
By  this  subtlety,  the  beperfuming  of  the  brain  seek ;  and  the  brain  of  the  holy  travellers  beper-

fume. For  the  murshid,  wise  in  speech,  thou  art.

0,  yjjju^J  <(JUj  v_J  (to  kiss  the  cup's  lip)  signifies  : —
to  acquire  the  subtleties  of  meaning  by  enigma.

<"»£>J  (subtleties)  signifies  : —

(a)  something  very  fine.

(6)  the  description  of  subtleties  of  divine  knowledge  of  enigma  that  rise  from  the  j\rif's  heart ;

and  spill  him  in  agitation  j  so  that  into  him  another  seeker  poureth  his  own  portion,
For,  in  the  assembly  of  wine-worshippers,  the  custom  is  to  fill  the  cup,  to  kiss  it,  and  to  give  it  'to

the  intoxicated  ones.

THE  LETTER  NUN  CJ  759

(O  Beloved  !)  on  account  of  those  excellences  and  graces  of  sweet  disposition

that  are  Thine,
In  the  midst  of  the  banquet  of  companions,  like  the  candle,  Thy  head  uplifted

—  make.

From  this  one  associated  with  me  (the  wife)  and  the  khirka  much  in  strait  I  am  :
With  a  glance  Sufi-slaying,  me  Kalandar make.

After  the  service  of  pleasure  and  of  love,  of  those  moon  of  face,

Of  deeds  that  thou  doest,  the  verse  of  Hafiz  exalted make.

13.  Kalandar. See  Odes  36,  c.  I.;  58,  c.  8.
The  word  is  derived  from  :  —

Shaikh  Faridu-d-Din  Attar  saith  :—

An  Arab  passing  by  a  monastery  of  darvishes  in  Persia  was  called  in. On  learning  their  doo
trines,  he  renounced  the  world  ;  and  became  a  darvish.

His  family  asked  him  to  account  for  the  change. He  said  :—

jjiJjjj  (darvishu  kala  :  —  "  Andar  a  ")  the  darvish  said  :  —  "  Come  in  ";

I  went  in;  and  I  know  not  what  hath  become  of  my  property  :

To  all  the  Persian  Sufis,  the  Arabs  thenceforth  applied  the  term  Kalandar.

760  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

455,  (462).

I.  Ruby  wine (love  for  the  true  Beloved)  drink;  and  the  face  of  those  moon  of

forehead  (Arifs  of  God)  -  behold  :

Contrary  to  the  religious  order  of  those  (Abids,  and  Zahids,  outward  worship.

pers),  the  beauty  of  these  (the  Arifs  of  God)—  behold.

Beneath  the  gilded  garment,  nooses  (of  prayer)  they  (the  Arifs  and  the  recognis-

ers  of  God)  have  :
(Notwithstanding  their  poverty),  the  long-handedness  (loftiness  of  spirit) of

these  short  of  sleeve  (the  Arifs  poor  of  resource)  -  behold.

For  the  harvest  of  both  worlds,  their  head,  they  lower  not  :

The  brain  and  pride  of  beggars,  (corn-)  gleaners,  -  behold.

The  frown  from  the  eye-brow  full  of  frown,  the  Friend  looseneth  not  :
The  need  of  people  of  heart,  and  the  grace  of  the  dainty  (beloved)  ones,  -

behold  !

5.  From  none,  the  tale  of  the  covenant  of  love,  I  hear:

The  (non-)  fidelity  of  the  society  of  friends  and  of  fellow-sitters  - behold.

The  means  of  release  (from  imperious  lust)  is  to  become  captive  to  love  ;

The  fore-seeing  mind  of  the  fore-seers  -  behold.

Love's  polish,  the  dust  of  Hafiz's  heart  taketh.

The  purity  of  the  pure  mirror  of  those  pure  of  faith  -  behold.

1.  (jUa^a-i*  (those  moon  of  forehead)  signifies  :  —

(a)  true  Arifs  who,  from  the  splendour-rays  of  the  sun  of  unity,  have  borrowed  a  light  like
unto  the  moon;  and  in  the  dark  night,  have  brought  their  own  existence  to  luminosity.
(4)  Arifs,  who,  beneath  the  patched  garment,  have  nooses.

2.  ^ioJ—l  iij!  (short-sleevedness)  signifies  :  —

Poverty  'and  powerlessness  in  the  discovery  of  the  purposes  of  knowledge.
From  exceeding  poverty  and  powerlessness,  in  naught  they  have  engaged;  and  to poverty,

the  girdle  of  spirit  have  cast.
The  long-handedness  of  these  short  of  sleeve,  behold  ;  the  following  of  this  party,  choose,  that  thy

object  thou  mayst  reach  ;  a»d,  from  being  no  one  may  be  some  one.
Outwardly,  the  Arifs  are  contemptible  to  men  ;  inwardly,  precious  to  God.
Couplets  2  and  3  describe  the  qualities  of  those  moon  of  forehead.
See  Ode  492,  c.  3;  511,  c.  7.

THE  LETTER  NUN  (J

456,  (475)-

i.  A  heart-alluring  subtlety,  I  utter, — "The  mole  of  that  one  moon  of  face,

behold.
"  Bound  with  the  chain  of  that  tress,  my  reason  and  soul behold,"

My  heart,  I  censured,  saying:— "One  of  bestial,  or  one  of  desert,  nature,  be

not;"

It said : — "  The  eye  half  intoxicated  of  the  bold  one of  that  deer  (the  true

Beloved) . behold.!"

The  ring  of  His  tress  is  the  spectacle-place  of  the  morning  breeze :
There,  bound  by  every  hair  (of  His),  the  soul  of  a  hundred  persons  possessed
of  heart,  (Sufis) behold.

Careless  of  our  heart-ravisher,  are  the  Abids  (worshippers)  of  the  sun  :
0  reproach-utterer !  for  God's  sake,  the  face  (of  my  true  Beloved)  behold ;  and
not  the  face  (of  the  sun) behold.

5.  Over  the  limbs  of  the  sun  in  envy  of  that  one  moon  of  face  (the  true  Beloved),

the  trembling  behold ;

On  account  of  that  tress  of  ambergris  perfume,  blood  (of  envy)  in  the  liver  of
the  musk-pod behold.

The  ligature  on  the  wind's  neck,  His  tress,  heart-stealing,  placed  ;

Against  the  desirers  of  the  Path,  the  Hindu's  snare  (the  dark  tress) behold.

That  one,  in  whose  search,  I  of  myself  went  astray,

Like  Him,  none  hath  seen,  nor  will  see ;  every  quarter  behold.

O  sky!  away  from  the  purpose  of  king  Mansur,  thy  face  turn  not ;

The  keenness  of  his  sword,  behold  ;  the  power  of  his  arm,  behold.

If,  in  the  corner  of  the  prayer-arch  (of  the  Beloved's  eye-brow),  Hafiz  rub  his

face, it  is  lawful;

0  reproach-utterer !  for  God's  sake,  that  curve  of  the  eye-brow  behold.

5.  "  Moon  of  face." See  Ode  455,  c.  I.
8.  See  Ode  167,  c.  i.

5*

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

457,  (461).

i.  The  Shah  of  those  box-tree  of  stature,  Khusrau  of  those  sweet  of  mouth,

Who,  with  His  eye-lash,  the  centre  (of  an  army)  all  rank-shatterers,  shattereth,

Passed  intoxicated  ;  and,  on  me,  the  darvfsh,  a  glance  cast ;
(And)  said  :— "0  eye  and  lamp  of  those  all  sweet  of  speech  !

"  Void  of  silver  and  of  gold,  thy  purse  how  long  will  be  ?

"My  slave,  be  ;  and,  of  those  all  silver  of  body,  the  fruit  enjoy  :

"Not  less  than  an  atom  (a  mote),  art  thou  ;  low,  be  not ;  love,  practise  ;
"So  that,  to  the  sun's  chamber  of  privacy,  whirling,  thou  mayst  reach  :

5.  "On  the  world,  rely  not ;  in  that  goblet,  wine  thou  hast ;

"The  pleasure  of  those  Venus  of  forehead,  and  tender  of  body  enjoy."

Our  Pir,  the  wine-measurer — whose  soul  be  happy-

Said: — "The  society  of  covenant-breakers,  shun."

In  the  morning,  in  the  parterre  of  (the  red  streaked)  tulips,  to  the  breeze,  I

spake,
Saying : — "Martyrs  for  whom  are  these,  all  of  bloody  shrouds  ?"

1.  The  Shah  signifies  :—

(a)  the  true  Beloved ;

(b)  „ Pir(c.  6).

2.  Couplets  2  and  3  form  a  kit'aband.

The  second  line  may  mean  : —

Be  my  slave ;  from  love  for  those  all  silver  of  body,  break  away,  since,  from  friendship  for
these,  naught  is  acquired.

4.  Only  in  the  sun-beam  is  the  whirling  atom  (mote)  seen.
7.  Couplets  7  and  8  form  a  kit'aband.

>^(-i  (witness)  signifies  :•—

one  whose  death  bears  witness  to  the  truth  of  his  religion,— a  martyr.

THE  LETTER  NUN  U

Into  the  hand,  the  Friend's  skirt  bring;  from  the  enemy  break  away :
The  man  oi  God,  be ;  by  Ahriman,  safely  pass.

He  (the  breeze)  said  : — "Not  informed  of  this  mystery  are  we, — I  and  thou,
"The  tale  of  the  ruby  wine,  and  of  those  silver  of  chin,  mention."

8.  ->ji)  (benevolent  angel)  signifies  : —

(a)  J_yjjl  Ormuzd  (the  good  spirit)  opposed  to  ^/tr*'  Ahriman  (the  evil  spirit).
(6)  God.
Safe  from  the  passing  of  Ahriman,  are  men  of  God.

5F2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

458,  (466).

i.  (0  Beloved  !)  for  Thy  rose-leaf  (ruddy  face),— of  the  musky  (fragrant)  hyacinth

(the  tress),  the  veil make ;

That  is — Thy  face  conceal ;  and  a  world  ruined  make.

The  sweat  from  Tby  face,  scatter  on  the  borders  of  the  garden  ;
As  (from  seeing  Thee)  the  flagons  of  our  eyes  (are  full  of  rose-water,  tears),  so
full  of  rose-water  (the  garden) make.

Thy  narcissus,  full  of  sleep,  intoxicated,  gracefully  open ;

And,  in  envy  (of  Thy  eye),  to  sleep  the  eye  of  the  lovely  narcissus— put.

\

Haste  for  departing,  like  (swift)  life,  the  rose-season  maketh:

Saki!  in  the  circulation  of  the  cup  of  roseate  hue,  haste make.

5.  The  (dark)  violet's  perfume,  perceive  ;  and  the  (dark)  tress  of  the  idol  (the  true

Beloved)  take  :

At  the  (want  of)  colour  of  the  (white)  lily,  gaze  ;  resolution  for  (the  ruddy)  wine
— —  make:

On  the  face  of  the  goblet  (the  murshid),  like  (vanishing)  bubbles,  open  thy  eye;
The  foundation  of  this  house  (this  world), — from  that  of  (vanishing)  bubbles,  esti-
mation make.

Since  the  way  and  usage  of  lover-slaying  is  thine,

With  enemies,  the  goblet  drain  ;  with  us,  reproach •  make.

2.  In  the  garden  saunter  j  and,  the  sweat  that  in  the  saunter  cometh  on  thy  face  scatter  on  the
garden.

To  the  second  line  add :  —
Thus,  in  envy  of  thyself,  cause  the  garden  to  weep  and  to  exhale  sweet  perfume.

6.  To  bubbles,  they  compare  this  vanishing  world.

On  the  murshid's  face  open  thy  eye ;  delay  not. For  the  eye  resembleth  the  vanishing  bubble.
This  world,  regard  as  a  bubble ;  what  is  necessary,  quickly  do  :  to  another  moment,  the  work  of
this  moment  entrust  not.

7.  The  second  line  may  be  :  —

With  the  heart's  blood,  the  sword  of  malice,  stained make.

THE  LETTER  NjN  U)

Our  fortune  and  thy  disposition,  essayed  have  we  :

With  enemies,  the  goblet  drain ;  with  us,  reproach  make.

By  the  path  of  prayer,  union,  Hafiz  seeketh  ;

O  Lord  !  the  prayer  of  those  heart-broken  accepted  make.

8,  The  second  line  occurs  in  c.  7.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

459,  (463).

i.  0  Saki !  'tis  the  morn  (of  youth)  ;  full  of  wine  (of  divine  knowledge),  a  goblet

-  make:
The  sky's  revolution  delayeth  not ;  haste make.

Before  that  ruined  this  vanishing  world  becometh,

With  the  cup  of  ruddy  wine  (true  love),  us,  ruined  (intoxicated) make.

From  the  east,  the  cup  (the  heart  of  'Arifs), — the  sun  of  wine  (divine  knowledge)

made  appear  ;
If  (true)  pleasure  thou  seek,  abandoning  of  the  sleep  (of  carelessness) make.

One  day,  when  out  of  our  clay,  pitchers  the  sky  maketh,

Take  care,  the  cup  (skull-pan)  of  our  head  full  of  wine  (true  love  for  God),

make.

5.  Not  the  man  of  austerity,  nor  of  penitence,  nor  of  foolish  talk  are  we,

To  us,  with  a  cup  of  pure  wine  (truth),  address make.

Hafiz  !  wine-worshipping (love-playing;  divine  knowledge-gathering)  is  the

good  work :
Arise  ;  to  the  good  work,  the  face  of  resolution turn.

I.  O  Murshid  !  'tis  the  morning  of  youth,  to  us  words  of  divine  knowledge  impart;  and  us  full  of
truths  make.

THE  LETTER  NUN

460,  (464).

i.  To  the  shattered  one,  when  thou  comest,  the  Fatiha  recite  :
Thy  lip,  open  :  for  life  to  the  dead,  the  ruby  of  thy  lip  giveth.

That  one  (the  holy  traveller)  who,  for  inquiry  (after  my  state)  came ;  the  Fatiha

readeth  and  departeth, —
A  breath  where  that  my  soul  after  him,  I  may  move  (sacrifice)  ?

O  thou  that  art  the  physician  of  the  shattered  !  my  face  and  tongue,  behold  :
For,  on  the  tongue,  this  breath  and  sigh  of  my  chest  is  the  heart's  load.

Though  hot  with  love,  fever  made  my  bone,  and  departed, —
From  my  bone,  like  the  fever,  love's  fire  departeth  not.

5.  Like  (the  state  of)  thy  (dark)  mole  on  the  ruddy  fire  of  its  native  land  (thy

luminous,  ruddy,  cheek),  is  the  state  of  my  heart :

On  account  of  those  two  eyes  of  thine  (that  against  me  consider  tyranny  law-
ful), shattered  and  powerless  my  body  hath  become.

With  the  water  of  my  two  eyes,  quench  my  heat  (of  love's  fever) ;  and  feel
My  pulse  whether  any  trace  of  life  it  giveth.

That  one  (the  holy  traveller)  who,  for  the  sake  of  rest,  me,  the  wine  of  the  bottle

(the  heart)  had  given,
Momently,  to  the  physician,  my  bottle  (the  heart),  wherefore  taketh  he  ?

Hafiz !  the  draught  of  the  water  of  life,  me,  thy  verse  gave  :
The  physician,  forsake ;  come ;  the  prescription  of  my  draught  (sweet  verse)
read.

3.  In  couplets  3,  7,  and  8,  the  physician  is  the  murshid.
5.  The  murshid  is  addressed.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

461,  (469).

i.  That  one,  am  I  who  am  renowned  for  love-playing;

Not  that  one,  am  I  who  have  stained  my  eye  with  ill——  seeing.

Fidelity,  we  practise  ;  reproach,  endure ;  and  happy  are  ;

For,  in  our  shari'at,  infidelity  is grieving.

To  the  Pir  of  the  wine-house,  I  spake  saying  : — "  Salvation's  path  is  what  ?"

The  cup  of  wine,  he  demanded  ;  and  said  : — "'Tis  mystery  (of  love)

concealing."

From  the  spectacle  of  the  garden  of  the  (illusory)  world,  our  object  is  what  ?
(He  said  : — )  "  From  thy  (ruddy)  face,  by  means  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  rose-
— —  plucking."

5.  For  wine-worshipping,  the  picture  of  self  (self-worshipping  and  self-seeing),  on

the  water  I  dashed,  for  the  reason,
That  I  might  destroy  the  picture  of  self  -worshipping.

To  the  mercy  of  thy  tress-tip,  trusting  I  am. If  not,

When  from  that  side  is  no  attraction,  what  profit  striving.

From  the  down  of  the  friend,  love  for  the  lovely  cheek  (of  the  Beloved)  learn  ;
For,  about  the  cheek  of  lovely  ones,  pleasant  is—  wandering.

From  this  assembly  (of  those  without  work)  to  the  wine-house  (love's  stage)

the  rein  will  we  turn  :
For  the  counsel  of  those  without  work,  improper  is  the  hearing.

Hafiz  !  save  the  lip  of  the  Beloved  and  the  cup  of  wine,  naught  kiss;

For,  the  hand  of  austerity-boasters,  sin  is  kisshig.

4.  The  second  line  means  : —

So  that  I  might  behold  and  enjoy  thy  beauty.

5.  "  To  dash  on  the  water  "  is  to  destroy.

9.  'Tis  sin  to  kiss  the  hand  of  austerity-boasters.

THE  LETTER  NdN  (•)  769

462, (47')'

i.  On  the  rank  of  profligates  keep  casting  a  glance—  better  than  this  ;

To  the  door  of  the  wine-house  establish  a  thorough-fare—— better  than  this.

This  grace  that  in  respect  of  me,  thy  lip  displayeth

Is  very  good  :  but  (make  it)  a  little better  than  this.

To  that  one,  whose  thought  looseneth  the  knot  (of  difficulty)  of  the  world's  work,
Say  :— "In  this  subtlety  (of  love),  make  reflection better  than  this."

If  to  that  beautiful  youth,  my  heart  I  give  not,  what  shall  I  do  ?

Time's  mother  hath  not  a  youth  better  than  this.

5.  To  me,  the  admonisher  spoke,  saying: — "Save  grief, what speciality hath

love  ?"
I  said : — "  O  wise  Khwaja !  it  hath  a  skill better  than  this."

Me,  who  speak,  saying: — "The  goblet,  take;  and  (in  drinking)  the  cup's  lip

kiss"—
Hear,  O  beloved ;  for,  another  speaketh  not——*  better  than  this.

The  sweetest  branch  of  the  sugar-cane  is  Hafiz's  reed. Pluck ;

For,  in  this  garden,  thou  beholdest  not  a  fruit better  than  this.

77°  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ

463,  (470).

I.  (0  beloved  !)  from  separation  from  thee,  I  consume :

Separation  (from  the  beloved)  our  (soul-)calamity  became. O  Lord  !  the  cala-
mity, turn.

On  the  bay  courser  of  the  sky,  the  moon  displayeth  splendour:

So  that,  to  an  end,  it  may  come,— to  (mighty)  Rakhsh,  thy  foot turn.

Forth  for  the  plunder  of  reason  and  of  faith,  intoxicated  gracefully  move :

On  thy  head,  aslant  (in  pride)  place  the  cap ;  and,  on  the  body,  the  kaba

beturn.

Thy  love-lock,  dishevel — that  is,  against  the  (tress-like)  hyacinth,

About  the  sward,  fragrance  like  the  morning  breeze beturn.

5.  O  light  of  the  eye  of  the  intoxicated  !  in  the  essence  of  expectation,  I  am  :
The  wailing  harp  and  the  cup, — (that  one,  the  harp)  play ;  and  (this  one,  the
cup),  beturn.

When,  on  thy  cheek,  time  writeth  the  happy  line,

O  Lord  !  from  our  friend,  the  ill-decree, turn.

Hafiz  !  from  lovely  ones,  (thy)  lot,  save  that  portion  (that  thou  hast),  is  naught :
If  (as  to  it)  contentment  be  not  thine,  fate's  decree,——  turn.

2.  Rakhsh  is  the  name  of  Rustam's  war-horse.
See  the  Shahnama  by  Firdausi.

3.  "The  cap  aslant."  See  Ode  464,  c.  2.

4.  erj^  signifies:—

incense  (aloe-wood,  frankincense)  burnt  in  censer.

THE  LETTER  NUN  U  77 l

464,  (465).

i. (O  beloved  !)  glance  make  ;  and  the  market  of  enchantment——  shatter ;

With  the  glance  of  splendour,  the  face  of  the  (enchanter)  Samiri, shatter,

To  the  wind  (of  destruction),  the  head  (of  pride)  and  the  turban  (of  pomp)  of  a

whole  world  give. That  is — >
In  the  way  of  heart-ravishingness,  the  cap  (aslant)  over  thy  ear——  place.

To  the  tress,  say  :— "  The  way  of  arrogance,  abandon :  "

To  the  glance,  say : — "  Oppression's  army, shatter."

(0  beloved !)  forth  (from  thy  abode)  gracefully  move ;  and  from  every  one,  the

ball  of  beauty  take ;
Punishment  to  the  (lovely)  Hur,  give  ;  the  splendour  (of  beauty)  of  the  Pan,

. shatter.

5.  With  thy  deer-eyes,  take  the  glance  of  (captivate)  the  lion  of  the  sun  (the  man-
sion of  Leo) ;

With  thy  curved  eye-brows,  the  bow  of  Jupiter  (the mansion  of  Sagittarius)
shatter.

When,  from  the  breath  of  the  breeze,  'itr-exhaling,  becometh  the  hyacinth,

Its  worth,  with  the  tip  of  thy  beperfumed  tress, shatter.

O  Hafiz !  when  the  bulbul  boasteth  of  eloquence,

Its  worth,  by  uttering  (the  courtly)  Darl,  do  thou shatter.

1.  Samiri. See  Ode  158,  c.  8.

2.  ^yL^Ci  dij/  sW  signifies  : —

to  place  the  cap  (aslant)  over  the  ear.

j-^-^Ci j~*jJ  <*K  signifies:  —

to  place  the  cap  (aslant)  on  the  head. See  Odes  318,  c.  9 ;  463,  c.  3 ;  472,  c.  3.

6.  'Itr. See  Ode 34.

7.  Dari. „ „ 211,  c.  7.

50-2

772  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

465,  (468).

i The  bird  of  (the  soul  of)  my  heart  is  a  holy  bird  ;  the  ninth  heaven,  its  dwelling  ;
Of  the  cage  of  the  body,  vexed;  of  the  world,  sated.

From  the  head  of  this  dust-heap  (the  world),  the  bird  of  the  soul  how  flieth  ?
At  the  door  of  that  threshold,  its  nest,  the  (mighty)  falcon  (worldly  attachments)
maketh.

When  the  bird  of  the  heart  fleeth,  its  abode  is  the  (lofty)  Sidrah  tree  ;
The  resting-place  of  our  falcon  (soul),  know  (to  be)  the  pinnacle  of  the  ninth
heaven  (God's  throne).

On  the  head  of  all  the  world,  falleth  fortune's  shadow,

If,  over  the  world,  its  wings  and  feathers,  our  bird  (the  soul)  expandeth.

5.  Not  in  both  worlds,  its  dwelling  save  above  the  sphere  (God's  throne)  ;
From  the  (material)  mine  is  the  body ;  from  no-place,  its  soul.

The  splendour-place  of  our  bird  (the  soul)  is  the  highest  world  ;
Its  watering  and  feeding  place,  the  rose-bed  of  the  garden  of  the  (true)  Beloved
(God).

Hafiz,  distraught  of  state  !  the  unity  (of  God),  since  thou  boastest,
On  the  page  of  man  and  of  jinn,  thy  pen  of  unity,  draw.

1.  See  Ode  416,  c.  2.

2.  When  the  falcon  is  seated,  near  the  nests, — from  those  nests  the  birds  issue  not.

3.  ''  Sidrah  tree." See  Ode  88.
5.  tul£*  D  (no-place)  signifies  : —

(a)  having  no  place ;  non-existent.

(b)  the  future,  boundless  world.

(c)  &j*  being.

7.  Sudi  doubts  whether  Hafiz  wrote'  this  Ode.

THE  LETTER NUN  (l)  773

466,  (472).

i.  O  Lord  !  that  musky  (fragrant)  deer  (my  beloved),  back  to  Khutan  (safely), .

cause  to  reach  ;
And  back  to  the  sward  that  straight,  moving,  cypress, cause  to  reach.

With  a  breeze  (of  kindness),  our  withered  fortune,  cherish ;

That  is — that  soul  (the  beloved)  gone  from  the  body,  back  to  the  body

cause  to  reach.

Since,  by  Thy  order,  the  moon  and  the  sun  reach  to  their  stage,

Back  to  me  also,  my  beloved,  moon  of  face, cause  to  reach.

In  search  of  the  ruby  of  Yaman,  blood  became  our  eyes;

O  Lord  !  back  to  Yaman,  that  gleaming  constellation cause  to  reach.

5.  The  word  (message  to  the  beloved)  is  this — "  Without  thee,  life  we  desire  not; "
O  foot-messenger,  news-taker!  back  the  word  (the  message) cause  to  reach.

O  auspicious  bird,  auspicious  of  mien  (the  murshid)!  go  ;

Before  the  (inaccessible)  Anka (the  true  Beloved),  the  word  (message)  of  the
crow  and  of  the  kite  (disciples),  back cause  to  reach.

O  Lord !  that  one  (the  beloved)  whose  native  land  had  been  the  eye  of  Hafiz,

Her,  with  desire  (fulfilled)  back  from  wandering  to  her  native  land

cause  to  reach.

i.  This  Ode  was  written  when  Hafiz' s  beloved  was  absent. He  entreateth  God  to  send  her  back  in
safety.

5.  j^j^-  (news-taker)  signifies  :—
one  who  receives  a  message.

774  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

467.

i.  If  from  the  rock  in  Badakhshan,  the  ruby cometh  forth,

From  the  (mountain-)  gorge,  (sweet)  like  sugar  the  water  of  the  Rukni,

cometh  forth.

Within  the  city  of  Shiraz,  from  the  door  of  every  house,

Ajheart-ravisher,  lovely,  saucy,  graceful cometh  forth-

From  the  dwelling  of  the  ka?i,  of  the  mufti,  of  the  shaik£,  and  of  the  muhtasib,
Unalloyed  wine,  rose  of  hue,  cometh  forth.

On  the  pulpit,  at  the  time  of  ecstasy,  and  of  the  manifestation  of  hypocrisy,
From  the  top  of  the  admonisher's  turban,  "bang"——  cometh  forth.

5.  Within  the  gardens,  morn  and  eve,  with  the  voice  of  the  minstrel,

The  lament  of  the  bulbul  with  the  twang  of  the  harp—  cometh  forth.

In  such  a  city  (of  love's  tumult),  in  separation  from  the  beloved,  and  in  grief  for

separation,
From  his  dwelling,  (O  wonder!)  Hafiz,  so  strait  of  heart, cometh  forth.

i.  The  ruby  of  Badakhshan  is  often  of  a  lilac  colour;  it  is  known  as  the  Balais  ruby.

3.  See  Ode  326,  c.  23.

Bang  is  known  as  hashish,  Indian  hemp,  Cannabis  Indica ;  is  very  intoxicating ;  and  is  either  eaten

as  a  sweetmeat  or  smoked  with  tobacco.

At  6  P.M.,  one  may  take  a  pill  of  two,  or  of  three,  grains  of  the  extract  of  the  British  Pharma-
copoeia.
The  best  antidotes  are— sweating  in  the  Turkish  bath  ;  and  copious  draughts  of  tartaric  acid  or

of  lemon  juice.

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  775

The  Letter  Waw.

468,  (480).

i.  O  thou  (that  hast)  the  kaba  of  sovereignty,  true  to  the  stature-—— of  thine;
Decoration  (hath)  the  crown  and  the  seal-ring  from  the  lofty  jewel of  thiue.

Momently,  to  the  sun  of  victory,  giveth  rise,

From  out  of  the  imperial  cap,  the  cheek  of  moon  form——  of  thine.

Although  the  sun  of  the  sky  is  the  eye  and  the  lamp  of  the  world,

The  light-giving  of  its  eye  is  (only)  the  dust  of  the  foot — —  of  thine-

The  splendour-place  of  the  bird  of  fortune  is  wherever,

Its  shadow  casteth  the  Huma  of  the  canopy,  sphere-scraping of  thine.

5.  (O  perfect  murshid !)  notwithstanding  a  thousand  diversities  of  the  ways  of  the

shara',  and  of  philosophy  (divine  knowledge),

Never  a  point  (of  the  lofty  shara')  passed  unexplained  from  the  wise  heart  of
thine.

From  its  beak  of  eloquence  droppeth  the  water  of  life,—

The  parrot  sweet  of  note — that  is,  (O  king!) — the  sugar-devouring  reed

of  thine.

What  Sikandar  desired ;  and  him,  time  gave  not

Was  a  draught  of  pure  water  of  the  cup,  life-refreshing, of  thine.

1.  Seal-ring. See  Ode  189,  c.  2 ;  350,  c.  10  ;  435,  c.  10.

The  first  line  may  be  : —

O  thou,  on  whose  form,  the  kaba  of  sovereignty  is  true  (befitting) !

2.  Momently,  from  out  of  the  imperial  cap,  the  cheek  of  moon-form  of  thine  giveth  rise  to  the  sun

of  victory.

7.  See  Wilberforce  Clarke's  translation  (out  of  the  Persian)  of  the  Sikandar  Nama-i-Nizami,  pp.
785—818.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Not  in  the  fold  of  thy  majesty  is  need  of  the  representation  of  need  ;
Concealed  is  the  secret  of  none  to  the  splendour  of  the  judgment  - of  thine.

O  Khusrau  ! Youthfulness  putteth  the  elderly  head  of  Hafiz

In  hope  of  the  pardon,  life-giving,  sin-forgiving  of  thine.

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  777

469,  (479).

I.  O  thou  (that  hast)  the  blood-price  of  the  (precious)  musk-pod  of  Chin,  the  dust

of  the  path  . '  of  thine  ;

(And)  the  sun,  cherished  in  the  shade  of  the  border  of  the  cap— of  thine  !

(O  beloved !)  forth  beyond  limit,  the  narcissus  carrieth  her  (amorous)  glance ;

move  forth  (and  display  thy  glance  that  the  narcissus  may  know  thy  worth)  :

O  soul !  (be)  a  sacrifice  for  the  glance  of  the  dark  eye of  thine  •'

My  blood,  drink. For,  with  beauty  like  this,  (even)  any  angel, —

From  his  heart,  it  cometh  not  to record  the  sin— —  of  thine.

(O  beloved !)  the  cause  thou  art  of  the  people's  ease  and  the  world's  slumber  ;
On  that  account,  the  border  of  my  eye  and  of  my  heart  became  the  repose-
place of  thine.

5.  Mine,  every  night  (in  recollection  of  thy  effulgent  face)  with  every  (gleaming)

star  is  the  work  (of  weeping  and  wailing),
In  envious  regret  for  the  splendour  of  the  moon-like  (effulgent)  face^—

of  thine.

From  each  other  separated  all  are  friends,  fellow-sitters  ;

(But)  together  are — I  and  the  threshold  of  the  empire-shelter  of  thine.

The  friend  of  the  bad  be  not. For,  like  good  fortune,

Thy  friend  be  whoever  may  be  the  well-wisher of  thine  !

To-morrow,  the  day  of  assembly  (the  resurrection),  when  is  the  presenting  of

the  people,
In  the  midst,  possibly,  may  fall  on  me  the  (kind)  glance of  thine  !

Hafiz  !  favour,  desire  not. For,  in  the  end,

To  grief's  harvest,  setteth  fire  the  smoke  of  the  sigh  of  thine.

DiVAN-l-tfAFlZ.

470,  (477)-

i.  O  Thou  (that  hast)  the  (resplendent)  sun,  the  mirror-holder  of  the  beauty

of  Thine;

(And)  the  musk  (dark  fragrant)  tress,  the  censer-circulator  of  the  (dark)  mole
of  Thine !

The  court-yard  of  the  palace  of  the  eye,  I  washed. But  what  profit  ?

Not  fit  is  this  retired  corner  for  the  troop  of  the  fancy  (of  love) of  Thine.

This  dark  spot,  that  became  the  centre  of  luminosity,

Is  in  the  fold  of  vision,  (only)  a  reflection  of  the  (dark)  mole of  Thine.

So  that  offering  congratulation,  I  may  go  back  to  fortune,

Where,  the  glad  tidings  of  the  approach  of  the  'idd  of  the  union- of  Thine?

5.  So  that  (of  the  crowd)  of  our  beringed  ones  (slaves),  the  sky  may  be,

Where,  the  charm  of  an  eye-brow  like  the  new  (crescent)  moon of  Thine  ?

O  sun  of  beauty  !  in  the  height  of  grace  and  graciousness,  thou  art ;

O  Lord!  till  the  up-standing  (the  resurrection)  be  no  decline of  Thine  ?

O  poor  heart !  in  the  curl  of  His  tress,  how  art  thou?

For  perturbed,  the  morning  breeze  uttered  the  circumstances of  thine  ?

More  agreeable  than  Thy  picture,  no  picture,  delineated,
The  Tughra-scribe  (God,  great  and  glorious), — the  musky  (dark  beperfumed)
eye-brow  like  (the  eye-brow) of  Thine.

(0  beloved !) hath  risen  the  perfume,  of  the  rose ;  by  the  door  of  friendship

come  ;  (and  union  choose)  ;
O  fresh  spring  of  ours  !  the  auspicious  face  (is)  the  omen of  Thine.

5.  The  sky  with  the  crescent  moon  is  likened  to  an  ear  beringed  slave.

8.  ,j~ijJ  J/*J°  (the  tughra-scribe)  signifies  :—

the  elegant  writer. Tughra  signifies  the  royal  titles  (written  in  a  fine  ornamental  hand)  pre-
fixed to  letters.

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  779

lo.  Before  the  Khwaja,  which  hardship  shall  I  represent

The  explanation  of  my  own  need  ;  was  the  displeasure of  Thine.

Hafiz!  in  this  noose  (the  beloved's  tress) is  the  head  of  many  a  headstrong

one;
Crude  passion,  indulge  not;  for  it  is  not  the  power of  thine.

II.  The  second  line  : —

Imagine  neither  freedom  ;  nor  the  acquisition  of  thy  object.

5  H  2

780

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

471,  (481).

i.  By  the  soul  of  the  Pir  of  the  tavern  ;  and  by  (my)  gratitude  for  the  favour—

of  his,
(I  swear)  that,  in  my  head,  is  naught  save  desire  of  service  of  his

Not  the  place  of  sinners,  though  paradise  be,

(Saki!)  wine,  bring  ;  for  I  am  one  who  imploreth  the  mercy  — i  of  His.

Luminous  be  the  lamp  of  lightning  of  that  cloud,

That,  to  our  harvest  (of  existence),  dashed  the  fire  of  love  of  His !

(Saki !)  wine  bring. For  me,  last  night,  Surush  of  the  invisible  world

Gave  news  :— "  Universal,  is  the  bounty  of  mercy  of  His  !"

5.  If,  on  the  threshold  of  the  wine-house,  a  head  thou  see,

With  the  foot,  kick  not. Not  known,  is  the  purpose of  His.

(O  Zahid,  self-beholding  !)  at  me  intoxicated  look  not  with  the  eye  of  contempt :
Neither  is  iniquity  nor  austerity  without  the  will of  His.

No  inclination  to  austerity  and  penitence,  maketh  my  heart. But,

For  the  Khwaja's  name,  I  will  strive ;  and  for  the  glory  of  the  fortune of  his.

O  heart!  for  the  boundless  grace  of  the  Friend,  have  no  greed  ;

For,  to  all,  reacheth  the  boundless  bounty of  His.

Ever  in  pawn  for  wine  is  Hafiz's  khirka

Perchance  of  the  tavern-dust,  may  be  the  nature of  his.

2.  Of  God,  I  implore  help  ;  of  none,  I  am  afraid.

4.  Universal  is  the  bounty  of  God's  mercy,  for  none  hath  it  specially. Then,  what

6.  From  God,  are  :  —

zuhd  austerity,

takwa  piety,

rindi  profligacy,

ma'siyat iniquity  ^sinfulness).

THE  LETTER  WAWJ

472,  (482).

I.  Torment  (of  envy)  to  the  violet,  giveth  the  musk-exhaling  tress-^— of  thine;
The  fold  of  the  rose-bud,  rendeth  the  heart-alluring  laughter of  thine.

O  my  rose,  sweet  of  perfume  (the  beloved) !  thy  bulbul  (thy  lover,  in  separa-
tion), consume  not;

For,  night,  all  night,  with  the  essence  of  sincerity,  it  makfth -prayer  for  (the
welfare) of  thine.

Love's  fortune  behold,  how,  for  the  desire  of  pomp  and  glory,

The  corner  of  the  crown  of  sovereignty  aslant  placeth,  the  beggar of  Thine.

Say — the  enemy  and  the  friend  ;  say  every  (ill-) intention  that  is  possible, — •
The  violence  of  all  the  people  of  the  world,  I  endure  for  the  sake of  Thee.

5. I  who,  with  the  breathing  (murmuring)  of  angels  used  to  be  vexed (so  delicate

was  my  nature) ,

(Now)  the  disputation  of  a  whole  world  (high  and  low),  I  endure  for  the  sake

of  Thee.

Love  for  Thee  (is)  my  destiny;  the  dust  of  Thy  door,  my  paradise  :

Love  for  Thy  cheek  (is)  my  nature  ;  my  pleasure  the  will of  Thine.

Though  not  fitted  (matched)  together  are  the  khirka  of  austerity,  and  the  cup  of

wine,
All  this  picture,  I  paint  (trick  I  play)  for  the  sake  of  the  will of  Thine.

The  ragged  garment  of  the  beggar  of  love  hath  treasure  in  the  sleeve  :

To  sovereignty,  quickly  reacheth  whoever  was  the  beggar of  Thine.

3.  ^ji-JCi  t£ji  plj  signifies  :  —

to  place  aslant  the  crown.
See  Odes  318,  c.  9;  463,  c.  3;  464,  c.  2.

5.  I  who,  in  the  world  of  non-existence,  at  the  threshold  of  Thy  abode,  was  anointed  with  the  col-
lyrium  of  love  for  God ;  and  who,  through  exceeding  jealousy,  was  vexed  with  the  breathings
(mutterings)  of  angels, — have,  by  Thy  decree,  fallen  into  this  up-springing  place  (this  world) ;
and  I  hear  the  chatter  of  illusory  ones.

Without  taking  up  the  illusory  (majaz),  one  cannot  reach  to  the  true  (hakikat);  without  endur-
ing the  torment  of  the  thorn,  one  cannot  gain  the  rose.

2  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

My  eye's  king-seat  is  the  resting-place  of  Thy  image ;

A  place  of  prayer  it  is. O  my  sovereign,  without  thee,  be  not  the  place

of  Thine!

10.  Goeth  from  my  head,  wine's  clamouring  and  love's  consuming  at  that  moment,

When  this  head  full  of  passion  becometh  the  dust  of  the  door  of  the  abode

of  Thine.

A  pleasant  sward  is  Thy  cheek,  especially  when  in  the  spring  of  beauty,
Hafiz,  sweet  of  speech,  became  the  bird,  song-singing,'  of  Thine,

9.  My  eye  is  the  king's  sitting-place;  and  the  stage-place  of  fancy  of  the  moon.
In  it,  is  seated  Thy  fancied  form ;  and  its  door  is  closed  to  others.
There,  fro.m  perfection  of  purity,  that  eye  hath  power  by  invitation  to  bring  Thee,  or  'tis  the  place

of  prayer.
In  prayer,  I  enter  ;  and  from  Thee  ask,  saying : —

Void  of  Thee,  ever  be  not  Thy  place  (my  eye)  ! In  that  stage  of  Thine,  standing  for  another,
what  room  ?

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  783

473,  (483)-

i.  The  down  (the  world's  up-springing)  of  the  true  Beloved's  cheek, — eclipsed  is  the

moon—  by  which,

Is  a  joyous  ring;  but  path  is  none  out  from  it.

The  eye-brow  (the  world,  the  stage  of  acquisition  of  love)  of  the  Friend  (God)

is  the  corner  (-stone)  of  the  prayer-arch  of  fortune  :

There,  thy  face  rub ;  thy  need  (the  degrees  of  the  first  and  the  last  world  ;  and
the  ladders  of  loftiest  stages)  ask from  Him.

O  thou  (that  art)  the  draught-drinker  (the  holy  traveller)  of  the  assembly  of
Jamshid  (the  murshid,  perfect  and  excellent)!  thy  heart  keep  pure  ;

For  a  mirror  this  is  the  cup  world-viewing  (the  heart  of  the  murshid). Alas

for  it.

The  (hypocritical)  conduct  of  the  men  of  the  monastery  ('abids  and  the -austere
ones,  who  for  deceiving  men,  made  wailing)  me,  a  wine- worshipper,  made.

Behold  this  smoke  (of  their  hypocritical  wailing  and  sighing) — black  (with  wine-
worshipping)  became  my  book by  which  !

(moon)  signifies  :  —

the  light  of  the  qualities  of  the  unity  (of  God).

(to  take  the  moon)  signifies  :  —

to  conceal  (to  eclipse)  the  moon.
This  world  (which  is  the  bargain  of  mean  folk;  and  to  which  inclination  is  forbidden)  conceal-

ing the  light  of  the  unity  of  God,  bringeth,  over  the  vision  of  all,  a  veil.
'Tis  a  pleasant  circle;  but,  for  going  without,  hath  no  path.
As  in  the  whirl-pool,  forth  from  it,  none  bringeth  his  head  ;  nor,  from  it,  without  the  favour  of  the

eternal,  issueth,  and  entereth  the  crowd  of  the  Arifs  of  God.

2.  Since  the  world  is  the  stage  for  the  acquisition  of  love,  it  is  the  corner  (-stone)  of  the  prayer-arch

of  fortune.

Into  that  prayer-arch,  enter;  the  desire  for  prayer,  bring  forth;  in  it  every  need  that  thou  hast,
ask  of  Him.

4.  On  seeing  their  hypocritical  austerity,  disgusted  I  became  ;  and,  from  the  cloister,  fled.
(lamp)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  holy  traveller's  existence.

(b)  „ explanation  of  divine  knowledge.

LjUi!  (the  sun)  signifies  :  —
(a)  the  true  Beloved.
(6) „ heart  of  the  ftrif  who  is  a  holy  traveller.

784

DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

5.  To  the  Shaitan  of  grief,  whatever  is  possible  say ;  (and)  do  :

With  the  wine-sellers  (to  whom  no  access  is  his)  I  have  taken  shelter •

from  him.

Saki !  the  (luminous)  lamp  of  wine  on  the  sun's  path  keep  ;

Say: — the  torch  of  the  morning  enkindle •  from  it.

(O  murshid  !)  on  the  day-record  of  our  deeds,  a  (little)  water  (of  thy  kindness)
scatter  ;

Perchance,  the  letters  of  sin,  one  can  efface with  it.

c

In  this  fancy,  that  a  city-beggar  hath, —

May  it  be  that,  one  day,  the  king  may  make  recollection of  him.

Hafiz,  who,  the  arrangement  of  the  assembly  of  the  lovers  straight  made,
The  space  of  this  banquet-place  be  not  void of  him  !

6.  jK^-H"  dJbii^p  (the  torch  of  the  morning  time)  signifies  : —
(a)  the  traveller's  heart,  the  illuminator  of  the  Path.
For  «Hs-y  is  the  morning  of  the  rising  of  that  one,  whose  heart  in  this  uprising-place,  hath

become  illumined  like  a  torch.
He,  on  whose  heart,  love's  fire  hath  not  burned;  and  who  a  torch  from  that  fire  hath  not

found, — distraught,  will  be.
(b)  the  heart  of  the  'Arif,  the  holy  traveller  according  to  (a).

O  murshid  !  that  holy  traveller,  firm  in  illusory  love,  bring  out;  him,  with  that  inflamed  fire,
enkindle;  him,  into  love's  fire  of  hakikat,  bring,— so  that  inflamed  he  may  be;  and  from
the  lowest  to  the  highest,  reach.

He  hath  kindled  his  heart  like  a  torch  ;  and,  thee  and  others  near  him,  consumed.
Then  from  that  sun  (the  true  Beloved)  he  gathereth  light  ;  for  the  morning  of  rising  before  him

like  a  torch  kindleth.
According  to  (b) —

The  explanation  of  divine  knowledge  make  before  the  'Arif  who  is  capable  of  enduring  this

matter;  and  say  :— kindle.

That  is— with  that  lamp,  worthy  of  that  fog,  enkindle  the  'Arif's  heart.
The  illusory  meaning  (as  in  the  text)  is  :  —

the  luminosity  of  wine  is  greater  than  the  luminosity  of  the  sun.

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  7^5

474,  (485).

i.  Pleasure's  rose-bush  blossometh  :  the  Saki,  rose  of  cheek,  where  ?

Bloweth  the  spring  breeze  ;  the  pleasant  tasting  wine,  — —  where?

Recollection  of  one  rose  of  cheek  (the  beloved),  keepeth  giving  every  fresh  rose.

But,
The  ear,  speech  (of  counsel)  hearing— where  ? The  eye  of  caution  (to  see),

— —  where  ?

For  the  assembly  of  pleasure's  banquet,  is  no  perfumed  ball  of  desire  ;

O  breath  of  morn,  sweet  of  soul !  the  musk-pod  of  the  Friend's  tress where  ?

O  breeze  !  not  mine  is  endurance  of  the  beauty-boasting  of  the  rose  ;

In  the  heart's  blood,  my  hand  I  dashed. For  God's  sake,  the  beauteous  one

where  ?

5.  With  malevolence,  the  candle  of  the  morn  boasted  of  (having) thy (ruddy)

cheek  ;
Long  of  tongue  became  the  enemy  ;  the  dagger,  lustre-possessing where  ?

He  (the  Beloved)  said  : — "  Perchance,  the  kiss  of  My  ruby  (lip)  thou  desireth
not."

Through  this  desire  (fora  kiss)  I  died;  but,  (mine)  the  power  and  the  will

where  ?

Though  in  speech,  the  treasurer  of  the  treasure  of  wisdom  is  Hafiz,

Of  the  grief  of  time,  mean  of  nature,  the  speech-utterer— —  where  ?

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

475,  (486).

i.  Mine  is  an  eye,  blood-shedding  on  account  of  the  eye  of  that  bow eyebrow  ;

Full  of  tumult  will  become  the  world  on  account  of  that  eye,  and  of  that

eyebrow.

The  slave  of  the  eye  I  am  of  that  saucy  one  (such)  that,  in  the  sweet  sleep  of

intoxication,
The  adorned  rose-bed  is  her  face ;  and  the  musky  canopy,  her  eyebrow.

Through  this  grief,  my  body  became  (lean  and  slender  like)  a  crescent  moon.

For,  notwithstanding  her  musky  (dark  fragrant)  writing  (the  decorated  eye-

brow) , —
Where  is  the  moon  that,  from  the  arch  of  sky  will  (dare)  show  its eyebrow  ?

Thou,  Kafir  of  heart,  bindest  not  the  veil  of  thy  tress. I  fear

That  my  prayer-arch  will  turn,  the  curve  of  that  heart-ravishing—— eyebrow.

5.  To  the  soul  of  the  corner-sitters,  the  beauty  of  the  rose-bed  is  (only  a  little)  of

his  beauty :
On  the  border  of  whose  sward,  a  saunterer  becometh  the eyebrow.

Ever,  be  in  string  (strung)  the  bow  of  beauty  of  thy  intoxicated  eye,
Whose  arrow,  through  thy  aim  draweth  upon  the  moon  the  bow  of  the—

eyebrow.

The  watchers  careless  (unacquainted  with  my  secrets) ;  and,  momently,  from

that  eye  and  forehead,  ours

Are  a  thousand  kinds  of  message  ;  and,  the  curtain  between  (them),  is  the—-
eyebrow.

Notwithstanding  such  beauty,  again  none  speaketh  of  the  Hur  and  the  Par!,
Saying:— "Of  this  (the  Hur)  is  like  this,  the  eye;  and  of  that  (the  Pari),  like
that,  the  eyebrow.

Although,  in  possessing  fidelity,  Hafiz  is  the  wise  bird ; (yet),

Him,  with  the  arrow  of  the  glance,  prey  made,  the  eye  of  that  bow— —eyebrow.

7.  The  eye-brow  lieth  between  the  eye  and  the  forehead ;  and  is  therefore  the  mediator,  or  the  cur-

tain.

8.  Hur. See  the  Kuran,  xxxvii.  47 ;  lii.  20.
Pari. See  Ode  25,  c.  2.

THE  LETTER  WAWJ  787

476,  (478).

i.  0  messenger  of  the  true  ones  (sincere  lovers) !  news  of  our  Beloved—  utter:

To  the  bulbul,  song-singing  (the  lover),  the  state  of  the  rose  (the  Beloved),

utter.

Confidants  (lovers)  of  the  chamber  of  affection,  are  we ;  grief,  suffer  not ;

To  the  kind  friend,  mention  of  the  Friend  (the  Beloved),——  make.

To  this  fakir,  the  letter  of  that  great  one,  read  ;

To  this  beggar,  the  tale  of  that  King, utter.

When,  from  the  snare  of  His  tress,  He  scattered  hearts  on  the  dust,

To  that  our  miserable  (heart),  what  chanced,  out  (by  way)  of  love,—— utter.

5. If,  again,  by  that  door  of  fortune,  passing  be  thine,

After  the  service  of  attendance,  and  the  presentation  of  prayer, say,

In  love's  path,  separation  of  the  rich  and  of  the  poor  is  none  :

O  Sovereign  of  beauty  !  to  the  beggar,  speech •  utter.

Every  one  who  said  : — "  The  dust  of  the  Friend's  door  is  kuhl,"—

(To  him)  say ; — "  Exhibited  in  our  eye,  this  matter  (was  ;  this,  to  another),

say."

The  Sufi,  who  prohibiteth  us  the  tavern,

Say  : — "  In  the  presence  of  my  Plr,  this  matter,  utter."

That  wine  that,  in  the  jar,  ravished  by  (its)  sparkle,  the  Sufi's  heart,

"  0  Sakl!  when,  in  the  goblet,  sparkle  it  maketh say."

10.  When  those  two  tress-tips  dashed  together,

O  breeze  !  come,  what  mystery  those  (two  tress-tips)  had, utter.

Last  night,  at  my  bewailngi,  the  bird  of  the  sward  wept ;

O  breeze !  at  last  knowest  thou  what  passed  ? say.

5.  The  second  line  of  c.  5  is  connected  with  the  first  line  of  c.  6.

788  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Soul-cherishing,  is  the  tale  of  the  Lords  of  ma'rifat :

In  respect  of  it,  a  mystery  ask  ;  and  a  tale,  come  (and)— —  utter.

Though  we  be  bad,  us,  bad  regard  not ;

Sovereign-like,  the  tale  of  the  beggar's  sin utter.

Hafiz !  if  to  His  assembly  thee,  the  path  (of  access)  they  give,

Wine,  drink  ;  and,  for  God's  sake,  the  abandoning  of  hypocrisy"  utter.

13.  Nay,  like  kings,  who  with  beggars  negotiate,  with  me  negotiate.

14.  Hypocrisy  and  self-display  abandon ;  love  practise ;  and,  the  external  and  the  internal  of  thyself,

one  make.

THE  LETTER  WAW  7^9

477, (487).

I.  The  green  expanse  of  sky,  I  beheld  ;  and  the  sickle  (the  crescent)  of  the  new

moon ;

To  me,  recollection  came  of  my  own  sown-field ;  and  of  the  time  of  reaping
(the  judgment-day).

I  said  : — "  0  fortune  !  thou  hast  slept  ;  and  appeared  hath  the  sun  :"
He  said  : — "  Despite  all  this,  hopeless  of  the  past,  be  not."

If,  like  the  Masiha  (the  anointed  one),  to  the  sky  (heaven)  thou  go  pure  and

free  (of  the  body),
To  the  sun,  will  reach  many  a  ray  of  thy  splendour.

On  the  star,  the  (wandering)  thief  of  night, — rely  not. For  this  knave
Took  the  crown  of  Kay  Ka,us  ;  and  the  girdle  of  Kay  Khusrau.

5.  Tell  the  sky  : — "  Boast  not  of  this  pomp. For,  in  love,

"  (They  sell)  the  moon's  harvest  (the  halo)  for  a  barley-corn  ;  and  the  cluster
"  of  the  Pleiades  for  two  barley-corns."

Although  the  ear  be  heavy  with  (dull  to)  the  ear-ring  of  gold  and  of  ruby  (pro-
fitable counsel),
The  season  of  beauteousness  (youthfulness)  is  passing  ;  counsel,  hear.

From  thy  mole,  far  the  evil  eye  !  For,  on  the  chess-board  of  beauty,
It  (thy  mole)  moved  a  pawn  that,  from  the  moon  and  the  sun  (the  moles  of  the
sky),  the  bet  won.

Whoever,  in  the  field  of  the  heart,  green  made  not  the  seed  of  fidelity,
At  the  time  of  reaping,  out  of  his  own  produce,  reapeth  (only)  yellow  (shame.)
facedness.

Be-ringed  like  the  tambourine,  in  this  circle  be  :

(Even)  though  beating  thou  suffer ;  out  from  thy  own  circle,  go  not.

The  fire  of  hyprocrisy  and  deceit  will  consume  the  harvest  of  religion,
Hafiz  !  this  woollen  khirka,  cast  away  ;  and  go.

4.  "  The  star,  the  thief  of  night "  signifies  :—
the  moon.

9.  I**  signifies : —

(a)  the  beating  of  the  tambourine.
(J) „ punishment.

79°  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

478,  (484)-

I.  The  beloved  said  :— "  Forth,  thou  wentest  for  the  spectacle  of  the  new  (crescent)

moon  :

"  Thine,  be  shame  of  my  (crescent)  moon  eye-brows  (that  are  more  glorious)  ;
go!

"  'Tis  a  life  (-time)  since,  (of  the  crowd)  of  captives  of  our  tress,  thy  heart  was
"Of  keeping  the  side  of  thy  friends,  careless  be  not."

For  the  blackness  of  the  friend's  tress,  sell  not  the  'itr  of  reason  ;

For,  there,  (they  sell)  a  thousand  musk-pods  of  musk  for  half  a  barley-corn.

In  this  old  sown-place  (this  world),  the  seed  of  fidelity  and  of  love,
At  that  time  becometh  manifest  when  arriveth  the  time  of  reaping.

5.  Saki !  wine  bring  ;  for  to  thee,  a  mystery,  I  will  tell,

Of  the  mystery  of  the  old  star;  and  of  the  wandering  of  the  new  moon.

The  end  of  every  month,  the  (waning)  form  of  the  moon  giveth  trace,
Of  the  (end  of)  the  diadem  of  Siyamak,  and  of  the  abandoning  of  the  crown  of
Zhu.

Hafiz !  the  threshold  of  the  Pir  of  the  magians  is  the  fortress  of  fidelity  :
To  him,  read  the  lesson  of  love's  tale  ;  and  from  him  (counsel)  hear.

3.  The  first  line  may  be  : —

Against  the  blackness  of  the  friend's  tress,  boast  not  the  'itr  of  reason.
Against  love,  reason  prevaileth  not.

6.  jj  (2hu)  signifies  : —

a  descendant  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Persia  whom  Zal  (father  of  Rustam)  raised  to  the  throne

of  Persia.

2hu's  son,  Karshasp,  is  considered  to  be  the  last  of  the  first  (Peshdadian)  dynasty  who  gov-
erned Persia  2,400  years.
Siyamak  was  the  son  of  Kayumars  and  the  father  of  Hoshang,  the  second  king  of  the

Peshdadian  dynasty.
See  History  of  Persia  by  Malcolm  and  by  Markham.

THE  LETTER  WAW  J  791

478*.  (489).

I.  Sweet  minstrel !  the  sweet  lay  utter—  afresh,  anew.

The  wine,  heart-expanding,  seek  afresh,  anew.

With  an  idol  like  an  adorned  doll,  sit  apart  in  privacy ;

To  thy  desire,  from  her  take  the  kiss,  afresh,  anew.

Not  (present)  is  my  Saki  of  silver  (white  and  gleaming)  leg  :  me,  wine  bring  :
For,  quickly,  the  pitcher  I  fill afresh,  anew.

The  fruit  of  life  when  enjoyest  thou,  if  wine  thou  drink  not  ?

To  her  memory,  wine  drink,  afresh,  anew.

For  me,  the  heart-ravishing  mistress  displayeth

Decoration,  and  adornment,  and  colour,  and  perfume  afresh,  anew.

O  breeze  of  the  morn  !  when,  over  the  head  of  the  street  of  that  Pan,  thou

passest,
To  her,  Hafiz's  tale  utter——  afresh,  anew.

i.  This  Ode  is  not  Jn  Sudi's  text;  is  No.  XL  of  the  Mulhakat  (appendix)  of  Major  Jarreit's  text

(1881);  and  is  No.  4890!  the  texts  of  Calcutta,  Lucknow,  Delhi,  and  Kahnpur.
It  is  well  known  at  Shiraz,  in  Kashmir,  and  in  India.

Each  line  ends  with : —

taza  bataza  nau  banau,  fresh  to  fresh,  new  to  new ;  afresh,  anew.

THE  LETTER  HA 3  793

The  Letter  Ha.

479,  (493)-

i.  O  thou  that,  with  the  long  trailing  tress, hast  come  !

Thine  be  leisure  ;  for,  (with  love)  pitying  the  distraught, thou  hast  come.

One  moment,  disdain  display  not ;  thy  custom  (so  that  by  thee,  they  may  be

prosperous)  alter ;
For,  for  inquiring  (after  the  state)  of  the  Lords  of  need thou  hast  come.

Before  thy  (cypress)  stature,  I  boast  whether  (thou  be)  in  peace. or  in  war;

Because,  in  every  state,  (as)  the  uplifter  (the  taker  away)  of  disdain

thou  hast  come.

(O  beloved  !)  out  of  that  lip  of  ruby,  thou  hast  evoked  water  and  fire  ;
Far  (be)  the  evil  eye  !  for  the  sweet  magic-player  (strangely  mixing  water  and
fire) thou  hast  come.

5.  Afarin  !  on  thy  tender  heart ;  for,  for  the  sake  of  good,

To  him  slain  by  thy  glance,  in  prayer, . thou  hast  come.

With  thee,  what  weigheth  my  austerity? For  the  plundering-  of  my  heart,
Intoxicated  and  perturbed,  to  the  khilvat-place  of  mystery, thou  hast  come.

Although  with  every  glance,  thy  eye  ravisheth  my  heart,

Yet,  a  hundred  regrets  that,  stranger-cherishing, thou  hast  come.

Hafiz  said  : — "  Again,  wine-stained  is  thy  khirka  :

"  Perchance, back  from  this  religious  order  of  this  band  (zahids  and  sufis)
thou  hast  come."

4.  "  The  ruby." See  Ode  1 79,  c.  2.

5*

794

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

48O,  (490).

i.  With  my  heart's  blood,  a  letter  to  the  friend,  I  wrote :

"  Verily, through separation from thee, I experience the torment of the
resurrection."

A  hundred  signs  of  separation  from  thee,  in  my  (weeping)  eye,  I  have  :
Not  alone,  (are)  our  signs,  these  tears  of  our  eye.

Though  I  tried,  no  boon  from  him  was  mine  :
Whoever  tried  the  tried,  will  repent  having  tried.

Of  a  physician,  I  asked  the  friend's  state. He  said : —

"  In  being  near  the  beloved,  is  torture  ;  in  being  far,  safety."

5.  Suddenly,  the  veil  from  off  my  moon  (the  friend)  the  morning-breeze  uplifted,
Like  the  (resplendent)  sun  appearing  in  the  fore-noon  from  behind  the  cloud.

I  said: — "If,  about  thy  street,  I  wander,  reproach  it  bringeth :"
By  God (I  swear)  that  love,  without  reproach  (to  the  lover  coming  from  his  be-
loved), never  have  we  seen.

Not  requiring  explanation  is  the  state  of  my  wounded  heart :
Confirmed  itself  it  is  by  the  eye-water  (the  ink)  of  the  reed.

Since  Hafiz  hath  become  the  seeker  (of  thee),  him,  {give)  a  cup  (in  exchange)

for  his  sweet  life,
So  that,  thereof,  a  cup  of  honour  he  may  taste.

i.  This  Ode,  wherein  every  alternate  line  is  Arabic,  is  called  mulamma'  (mixed).

THE  LETTER  HA  8  795

481,  (492).

i.  O  beloved !  separate  from  me,  be  not ;  for,  the  light  of  my  eye  thou  art :
The  ease  of  soul  and  the  friend  of  the  heart-distraught  one.

From  the  (evil)  eye-wound  of  the  people,  no  injury  be  thine. (For,)

To  exceeding  beauty  in  heart-ravishingness,— —  thou  hast  attained.

Off  from  thy  skirt,  (restless)  lovers  keep  not  their  hand ;

Their  garment  of  patience, thou  hast  rent.

The  evil-heart  keep  not. Ho !  for  thou  also  reachest  to  the  day  of  union,
Since,  night,  the  poison  of  separation  from  the  beloved -thou  hast  tasted.

5.  0  Mufti  of  the  time  !  love  for  her,  forbid  me  not ;

I  hold  thee  excused ;  for  her thou  hast  not  seen.

Far  from  thee,  the  evil  eye  !  for,  in  the  decoration  of  heart-ravishingness,

On  the  beauty  of  (handsome)  YQsuf  of  Kin'3n,  the  line  of  (effacement)

thou  hast  drawn.

Again,  through  joy,  to  the  ground  my  foot  reacheth  not;

Since,  towards  me,  with  grace  and  favour——  thou  hast  looked.

The  fancy  of  asking  after  (the  state  of)  resourceless  lovers,  thou  hast, —

As  though,  from  them,  the  perfume  of  fidelity—  thou  hast  perceived.

Hafiz !  this  reproach  that  the  friend  made  thee,

Perchance,  out  from  the  blanket,  thy  foot——  thou  hast  drawn.

g.  The  secondline  signifies : —

A  work  beyond  thy  capacity,  thou  hast  done.
See  Ode  409,  c.  8.

5*2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

482,  (490-

i.  0  thou  from  the  splendour  of  whose  face,  luminous  (is)  the  lamp  of  the  eye  ;
(And),  like  whose  intoxicated  eye,  (aught)  the  world's  eye  saw  not !

(0  beloved  !)  a  dainty  one  like  thee,  head  to  foot,  grace,

Thy  trace,  the  world  beheld  not ;  God created  not.

Every  zahid  who  thy  ruby  wine-selling  (the  ruddy  lip)  beheld,

The  prayer-mat  abandoned ;  the  wine  cup took  up.

In  intent  upon  the  lover's  blood,  thy  eye-brow  and  intoxicated  eye  ;
Sometimes  ambush  this  (the  eye)  made  ;  sometimes  the  bow  that  (the  eye-brow)
— —  drew.

5.  (O  beloved  !)  the  pigeon  of  my  heart,  like  the  half-slain  fowl,  how  long,
From  the  arrow-wound  of  thy  cross-bow,  in  dust  and  blood, fluttered.

Momently  from  my  heart's  consuming,  smoke  ascendeth  ;

Like  aloe  (-fuel), — on  the  fire  how  long  shall  I  be  placed  ?

If  on  that  account  that,  with  me,  affrighted  fortune  becometh  tame,

From  that  mouth  (of  the  beloved),  I  will  bring  forth  the  desire  of  my  heart,

affrighted.

If  for  thy  cheek  no  inclination  hath  the  eye-brow,

Wherefore  is  it  ever  (curved)  like  my  stature bowed  ?

If,  on  my  lip,  thou  place  thy  lip, — immortal  life,  I  gain,

That  moment  when  (in  death),  at  the  lip,  my  sweet  life  shall  have arrived.

10.  Like  thy  own  tress,  how  long  puttest  thou  off  my  heart,

Bewildered  and  distraught,  0  light  of  both eyes  !

5.  cL-J  is  a  contraction  of  :  —

.^yi  y^^ayJI  idJ!  .»~J  In  the  name  of  God,  the  merciful,  the  compassionate.
Uttered  by  one  who  slayeth  an  animal.

THE  LETTER  HA »  797

At  thy  foot,  the  thorn  of  separation  (is)  fallen  in  confusion  ;

And,  from  the  rose-bed  of  union  with  thee,  ever  a  rose not  plucked

Ours  is  this  stock  in  trade,  if  to  thy  taste  it  chance,

The  pearls  of  Hafiz's  write  in a  book

If  my  hand  thou  take,  not,  to  the  Khwaja,  I  will  unfold

That,  the  heart  of  poor  lovers,  thou  hast  ravished  by the  eye.

798

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

483,  (495)-

i.  Happy  (is)  the  breeze,  ambergris  be-perfumed,  a  perfumed  pastile,  desired  of

heart,
That,  in  desire  of  thee,  arose  early  the  morning !

O  bird  of  auspicious  face  (the  murshid,  perfect,  excellent) !  the  road-guide  be  :
For,  from  desire  of  the  dust  of  that  court  (of  God),  water  hath  become  my  eye.

In  recollection  of  my  slender  person,  that  is  immersed  in  the  blood  (of  grief)  of

the  heart,
The  new  (slender  crescent)  moon,  from  the  quarter  of  the  (ruddy)  crepuscule,

they  regard.

In  love  for  thy  (roseate)  face,  one  day  when,  from  this  world,  I  depart,
From  my  tomb,  the  red  rose  in  place  of  green  herbage,  shall  blossom.

5.  That  one  am  I  who,  without  thee,  breathe. What  shame  !

Perchance,  thou  mayst  pardon. If  not,  the  excuse  for  sin  is  what  ?

In  love's  path,  from  thy  friends,  learned

The  dawn,  that  desire  rent  the  black  under-garment.

For  me  (Hafiz),  give  not  grief  (access)  to  thy  tender  heart ;

For,  this  moment,  thy  Hafiz  himself  uttered  bismi-llah  (and  in  death  departed).

4,  The  first  line  means : —

Since,  in  love  for  thee,  I  have  shed  blood,  and  drunk  the  heart's  blood,  one  day  when,  in  love
for  thee,  I  die * * *

6.  jliu.  signifies  : —

the  under-garment  touching  the  hair  of  the  body.
The  word  is  derived  from  JL£  (hair).
The  agent  to  "learned  "  is  "the  dawn."

THE  LETTER  HA  $  799

484,  (497)-

I.  The  door  (threshold)  of  the  magians'  house  was  swept  and  water-sprinkled :

(At  the  door)  the  Pir  sat,  and  to  old  and  to  young,  salutation gave.

•

In  his  service,  the  cup-lifters  (topers)  all  loin-girt ;
But,  with  the  cap-crown,  the  canopy  above  the  cloud  was fixed.

The  splendour  of  the  cup  and  the  goblet  (holy  travellers,  possessed  of  ex-
cellence) concealed  the  light  of  the  moon  (the  qualities  of  the  young  magi-
ans, Sakis  of  the  tavern)  ;

The  path  of  the  young  magians  to  the  sun  (the  splendour  of  the  glory  of  unity)
the  cheeks  (of  the  holy  travellers,  possessed  of  excellence,  joined  with  the
qualities  of  God), waylaid.

From  the  grace  and  the  strife  (in  state  of  restlessness)  of  the  Sakis  (the  seekers
possessed  of  excellence)  sweet  of  work,

Sugar  broke  asunder;  (its  petals),  the  lily  shed  ;  (its  cords),  the  harp

snapped.

5.  In  that  chamber  of  privacy,  notwithstanding  all  her  graces,  the  bride  of  for-
tune
Placed  indigo ;  and,  on  the  tress  of  (dark,  fragrant)  musk,  musk shed.

The  angel  of  mercy  (the  perfect  murshid)  took  the  cup  of  delight  (ma'rifat) ;
(And)  from  the  dregs,  on  the  face  of  Hur  and  of  Pari  {seekers  of  God),  rose-
water,—  dashed.

(To the  bride  of  fortune),  salutation,  I  made  ;  and,  with  laughing  face,  she

spake :
Saying : — "  O  sufferer  of  wine-sickness,  poor,  wine stricken  !

3.  »U  jy  (the  moon's  light)  may  signify  : —

(a)  the  holy  travellers  possessed  of  perfection.
(4)  the  light  of  the  qualities  of  unity.

w8Li4i-/0  (young  magians)  may  signify  : —

Holy  travellers  possessed  of  perfection.
3.  The  agent  to  "  waylaid  "  is  "  cheeks."
5.  In  the  magians'  splendid  dwelling,  even  the  radiant  bride  of  fortune  renewed  the  dark  indigo  on

her  eye-brow  ;  and  the  fragrant  musk  on  her  hair. She  renewed  her  graces.
7.  Saying  :-O  certain  one,  who  art  possessed  of  such  qualities!  who  hath  made  thee  so  miserable

and  despicable,  that,  out  from  the  corner  of  the  house,  thou  hast  gone ;  and  on  ruin  pitched  thy

tent?

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

"  Who  doeth  this  that  thou,  with  weak  judgment  and  reason,  hast  done?
"  From  the  treasure  (wine-)  house,  thou  hast  gone  ;  and  thy  tent  on  the  waste  hast
— —  pitched.

"  Thee,  union  with  wakeful  fortune,  I  fear  that  they  (fate  and  destiny)  will  not

give;
"  For  thou  art  asleep  in  the  embrace  of  fortune,  sleep stricken/'

10.  The  sky  is  the  led-horse  leader  of  king  Nasratu-d-Din  ;

Come;  his  hand  in  his  stirrup,  behold  the  angel  hath fixed.

So  that,  perchance,  the  shoe  of  his  steed  it  may  be,  the  new  (slender,  crescent)

moon,
From  the  vault  of  the  ninth  heaven,  a  hundred  kisses  on  his  ground cast.

For  the  sake  of  gaining  honour,  wisdom,  that  is  inspired  of  the  Hidden,

From  the  vault  of  the  ninth  heaven,  a  hundred  kisses  on  his  majesty cast.

Hafiz  !  to  the  wine- house,  come  that  to  thee,  I  may  present

Of  those  whose  prayers  are  answered  a  hundred  ranks arrayed

THE  LETTER  HA  S  8OI

485,  (498).

I.  Last  night,  to  the  door  of  the  wine-house,  I  went,  sleep—  stained-

The  khirka  wet  of  skirt,  and  the  prayer-mat,  wine  stained-

The  magian  boy  of  the  wine-seller,  cry-making,  came  ;

He  said  : — "  Awake,  O  wayfarer,  sleep—  stained.

"Washing  and  washing,  do ;  then,  to  the  tavern,  proudly  move  ;

"So  that,  by  thee,  this  ruined  cloister  become  not'  stained

"In  purity,  pass  the  stage  of  old  age  ;  and  make  not,

"The  honour-robe  of  old  age,  with  the  splendid  dress  of  youth, stained.

5.  "In  desire  for  those  sweet  of  mouth  (beloved  ones),  how  long  makest  thou
"The  jewel  of  thy  soul  with  the  melted  ruby  (the  bloody  tear)—— stained?"

In  this  deep  sea  (of  love)  those  acquainted  with  love's  path,

Were  drowned  ;  and  were  not  with  water  stained.

Pure  and  clean,  be ;  and,  from  nature's  well,  come  forth ;

Giveth  not  purity  water,  earth  stained.

I  said : — "0  soul  of  the  world !  not  a  defect  is  it,  the  rose-book

"If,  in  the  spring  season,  it  become  with  pure  (ruddy)  wine— bestained."

He  said: — "Hafiz!  to  friends,  thy  jest  and  subtlety  boast  not;

"  Alas  for  this  (thy)  grace,  with  varied  forms  of  reproach bestained."

1.  The  "  wet  skirt"  and  the  "stained  prayer-mat"  signify  the  sins  of  Hafiz.

2.  The  rtiagian  boy  is  mentioned  for  the  sake  of  the  inculcation  of  spiritual  truths.
The  sanctuary  of  celestial  love  must  be  approached  with  purity.

3.  The  second  line  may  be : —

So  that  by  thee,  this  cloister  become  not  stained  (kharab  aluda).

4.  In  old  age,  the  deeds  of  youthfulness  do  not.

6.  The  water  (or  the  lustrous,  water-like,  honour)  of  the  world  may  bestain  us;  not  so  the  water  of

love's  ocean.

7.  "Water  earth  bestained"  signifies  :—

the  human  body  (clay  and  water;  unregenerated  by  God's  grace.

802  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

486,  (496).

I.  The  skirt-trailer  (damsel)  kept  moving  in  cloth,  gold-embroidered,

In  envy  of  her,  a  hundred  moon-of-face,  the  collar  of  hempen  cloth— rent

From  the  heat  of  the  fire  of  wine,  round  about  her  cheek,  sweat,

Like  drops  of  night-dew  on  the  rose-leaf  dropped.

A  pronunciation,  eloquent  and  sweet ;  a  stature,  tall  and  beautiful ;

A  face,  gracious  and  heart-alluring;  the  eye  (in  a  bow)  sweetly drawn.

Her  soul  refreshing  ruby  (lip)  of  the  water  of  grace  born  ;

The  boxtree  (stature),  sweetly  moving,  in  daintiness  cherished.

5.  That  heart-alluring  ruby  (lip)  of  hers,  behold ;  and  that  laughter  full  of  ripple  ;
That  sweet  moving  of  hers,  behold ;  and  that  gait  reposed.

Forth  from  our  snare,  that  mistress,  dark  of  eye,  hath  gone ;

Friends  !  what  remedy  may  I  make  with  this  heart——  affrighted  ?

Take  care  !  so  far  as  thou  canst,  injure  not  people  of  vision  -t

No  fidelity,  hath  the  world. O  light  of  both eyes  !

On  account  of  that  heart-fascinating  eye,  reproach  how  long  shall  I  endure  ?
One  day,  glance,  O  friend  well—"  chosen  !

On  account  of  the  Khwaja's  service,  many  the  thanks  that  I  shall  utter,

If  to  my  hand  fall  that  fruit matured.

I.  t_~ai  (kusb  or  katan  linen)  signifies  :—
(a)  with  i_>UAU  «U  hempen  cloth .
(i) „ JLJTjj silken „

7.  In  one  state,  the  world  leaveth  none.

THE  LETTER  HA  8  803

10.  Every  evil  that,  in  respect  of  us,  the  enemy  uttered  thou  heardest  ;

O  Lord  !  the  adversary's  tongue  be——  severed  !

If,  on  account  of  Hafiz  !  thy  noble  heart  be  grieved,

Come  back. For,  repentance,  we  have  made  of  that  uttered  and^— heard.

804  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

487,  (499)-

I.  In  the  early  morn,  when  intoxicated  with  the  night's  wine,
The  cup,  I  took,  with  the  harp  and  the  flute.

For  (the  sake  of)  wisdom,  I  placed  road-provisions  with  wine ;
Him  (wisdom),  to  the  city  of  intoxication,  I  sent  travelling.

Me,  the  form  of  the  wine-seller  (the  murshid)  gave  a  look,
That  safe,  from  time's  deceit,  I  became.

From  the  Saki  of  bow  eye-brow,  I  heard  :—
"  O  butt  of  the  arrow  of  reproach  !

5.  "  Like  the  girdle,  profit  from  that  waist  thou  gainest  not,
"  If  within,  (only)  thyself  thou  seest.

"  Go  (about  thy  own  work);  over  another  bird,  this  net  place  ;
"  For  lofty  (inaccessible)  is  the  Anka's  nest."

All  He  is — the  companion,  the  minstrel,  and  the  Saki :

As  pretence  (is)  the  fancy  (the  illusory  form)  of  water  and  clay  (the  form  of
man).

(0  perfect  murshid  !)  the  bark  of  the  wine  (of  ma'rifat),give,  that  happily  I  may

come  out
From  this  stream  (the  world  of  bodies),  shore  unseen.

Who  gaineth  good  profit  from  union  with  a  lovely  one,
Who,  at  love  with  herself  ever  playeth?

3.  As  with  wine  the  wine-seller  maketh  senseless ;  so,  with  ma'rifat,  doth  the  murshid.

6.  To  thee,  the  mysteries  of  ma'rifat  will  not  be  divulged. 'Anka.  See  Ode  4,  c.  2.

7.  In  itself,  nature  hath  no  existence  ;  it  revealeth  only  God.

9.  Whoever  is  a  lover  of  himself, — from  him  to  another'no  profit  reacheth.

It  is  a  rule  that,  to  the  limit  of  his  power,  the  lover  alloweth  not  others  to  enjoy  his  beloved.

THE  LETTER  HA  8  805

10.  Void  of  the  stranger,  is  the  house  ;  wine,  drink;
For,  0  peerless  man  !  save  thou  is  none.

Hafiz !  our  existence  is  an  enigma  :

The  investigating  whereof  is  fable  and  enchantment.

806  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

488,  (494);

I.  The  moth  of  the  lamp  of  thy  (resplendent)  face  became  the  candle  ;
On  account  of  thy  mole,  care  for  my  own  state, — mine  none.

Wisdom,  who  bound  those  love-distraught;

By  the  perfume  of  the  curl  of  thy  tress,  became  distraught.

At  the  glad  tidings,  in  a  moment,  its  life  to  the  breeze,  the  candle  gave,
When,  a  message  to  it,  from  the  candle  of  thy  face,  it  (the  breeze)  conveyed.

If,  by  the  perfume  of  thy  tress,  my  soul  went  to  the  wind  (of  destruction),

what  matter  ?
The  ransom  for  the  beloved  is  a  thousand  precious  souls.

•

5.  On  the  fire  (ruddy  radiance)  of  her  adorned  (flushed)  cheek,  in  place  of  me,
The  grain  better  than  her  dark  mole, — who  saw  ?

Last  night,  through  jealousy,  affrighted,  I  fell  from  my  feet,
When,  in  the  stranger's  hand,  my  idol  I  beheld.

What  plans  we  evoked  and  (none)  had  profit,

On  her,  our  sorcery  (of  words)  a  (mere)  tale  became.

By  the  round  form  of  the  friend's  lip,  a  covenant  is  mine,
That,  on  the  tongue,  I  take  naught  save  the  tale  of  the  cup.

The  tale  of  the  college  and  the  cloister  utter  not. For,  again,
Into  Hafiz's  head,  fell  the  desire  for  the  wine-house.

i.  "  The  candle  and  the  moth." See  Wilberforce  Clarke's  translation  (out  of  the  Persian)  of  the
Bustan  of  Sa'di,  iii.  pp.  207-212.

THE  LETTER  HA  8  807

489, (501).

i.  From  the  heart-desiring  ruby  (lip  of  the  true  Beloved)  ever  is  my  ease  ;
(And)  my  work  to  desire,  al  hamdu-1-illah !

O  obstinate  fortune  !  Him,  to  thy  bosom,  tightly  draw ;

Drink,  sometimes,  the  cup  of  gold  ;  sometimes,  the  heart-desiring  ruby  (lip).

Us,  in  intoxication,  tales  told,

The  ignorant  Pirs  and  road-lost  Shaikhs.

Of  the  zahid's  word,  we  repented  ;

And  of  the  'abid's  deed,  we  seek  the  pardon  of  God.

5.  O  soul !  the  explanation  of  separation,  how  shall  I  utter?

(Together  are  : — ) An  eye  and  a  hundred  humidities  (tears);  a  (stricken)  soul
and  a  hundred  sighs.

Let  not  the  Kafir  see  (experience)  this  grief  that  hath  seen  (experienced),
The  cypress  from  thy  (lofty)  stature ;  and  the  moon  from  thy  (luminous)  cheek.

Than  the lover's  patience,  naught  is  more  pleasant ;
From  God,  ask  patience ;  patience  ask  from  God.

The  patched  garment  is  the  zunnar  (the  mystic  cord)  of  the  path  (of  tankat),
Sufi !  this  way  and  usage,  cast  down.

4

Once,  by  His  face,  pleasant  was  my  time  ;

On  account  of  union  with  the  Beloved,  a  hundred  lauhash  allah  !

9.  idJI  jjla-J  (lauhash  allah)  signifies  : —

the  contracted  form  of  dJUl  (ji^j!  $  (la  lauhash  allah),  an  expression  used  in  times  of  wonder,  of
respect,  of  perturbation,  and  of  prayer.

808  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  Away  from  the  path  of  His  service,  I  turn  not  my  face
Up  from  the  dust  of  His  court,  I  lift  not  my  head.

From  Hafiz's  memory,  the  desire  of  Thy  face  took  (made  forgotten)
The  prayer  of  the  night-time ;  and  the  lesson  of  the  morning-time.

THE  LETTER  HA  8  809

49O,  (502).

I.  If,  in  the  street  of  that  moon  (the  true  Beloved)  the  sword  (of  calamity)  rain,
(Beneath  it),  the  neck,  we  have  placed. The  order  is  of  God.

The  regulation  of  piety,  we  also  know ;

But,  with  (our)  road-lost  fortune,  remedy  (is)  what  ?

The  shaikh  and  the  admonisher,  we  seldom  recognise  ;
Either  (give)  the  cup  of  wine ;  or  (make)  the  tale  short.

I  profligate  and  lover ;  then  repentance  ;

[  seek  pardon  from  God  !  from  God,  I  seek  pardon !

5.  Upon  us,  not  a  reflection  (the  glory  of  manifestations)  from  the  sun  of  Thy  face

fell:
O  mirror  of  face ! Alas  ! Thy  (hard)  heart,  alas !

Bitter,  is  patience  ;  fleeting  (is)  life  ;

This  (being  doomed  to  live),  how  long  shall  I  experience?

In  this  way,  heart  bereft  Hafiz  would  not  have  been,
If,  to  the  advice  of  the 'well-wisher,  he  had  listened.

Hafiz  !  why  complaineth  thou,  if  union  thou  desirest  ?

In  season  and  out  of  season,  it  is  necessary  forthee  to  drink  the  blood  (of  grief).

5.  Upon  us,  the  sun  of  Thy  face  (the  sun  of  truth)  shone  not;  and  no  splendour  of  manifesta-

tions this  distraught  one  obtained.
O  Beloved  of  mirror face  ! O  desired  one  of  every  friendless  one !  Alas,  to  none  Thou  in-

clinest.
Both  the  mirror  and  the  heart  are  defaced  by  the  sigh. Hence,  the  mention  of  them  is  elegant.

In  the  word  t]  the  letter  I  agreeth  with  |  in  CM  (a  staff),  and  the  letter  5  with  the  &*.£  in

(a  bowl).

6.  The  second  line  :—

Would  that  knowledge  were  mine  when,  in  soul  and  body,  I  may  meet  Him.
Increasing  beyond  limit,  is  the  desire  of  beholding  in  this  world  the  Friend  (God).
Would  that  it  were  known  when  death  shall  arrive;  and  the  interview  with  the  Friend  appear.
The  rendering  (in  the  text)  is  by  Professor  R.  Azu  of  Baghdad,  Board  of  Examiners,  Calcutta.

5  M

8io

DfVAN-l-HAFIZ.

491,  (500).

I.  The  'fd,  it  is ;  and  the  season  of  the  rose. Saki !  wine,  bring :

In  rose-season,  the  cup  without  wine,  who  hath  seen-—  placed  ?

Of  this  (hypocritical)  austerity  and  (dry)  piety,  contracted  is  my  heart :

Saki !  a  little  wine  give,  so  that  my  heart  may  be expanded.

The  Sufi,  who,  yesterday,  counselled  the  prayer  of  lovers  ;

To-day,  him,  intoxicated  I  saw,  to  the  wind,  piety given.

These  one,  or  two,  days,  more,  the  (season  of  the)  rose  regard  a  gain :

If  a  lover  thou  be,  joy  seek  with  Sakis,  face—  smoothed.

5.  O  companions  !  departed  hath  the  rose,  why  sit  ye  careless  ?

Without  the  sound  of  the  stringed  instrument,  and  the  harp  ;  and  without  the
Beloved  and  the  cup  of  wine.

Thou  knowest — in  the  assembly  of  the  morning  cup  how  happy  appeareth,
The  reflection  of  the  Saki's  cheek  in  the  cup  (of  wine) fallen.

When  the  minstrel  maketh  the  note,  if  it  be  possible  he  will  sing

Of  the  elegance  of  Hafiz's  verse  at  the  banquet  of  pne  prince born.

4.  "  Smoothed  "  signifies  :—
void  of  hair.

THE  LETTER  HA  8  8ll

492,  (504).

I.  Since  the  tavern,  my  fate,  Ilah  hath  made
O  Zahid  !  in  this  matter,  say  mine,  what  sin  ?

That  one,  whose  portion  in  eternity  without  beginning,  fell  the  cup  of  wine,
On  the  resurrection  day,  against  him,  this  sin,  why  charge  they  ?

To  the  Sufi,  hypocrite,  khirka-wearer,  double  of  face,  say: —
"  Long-handedness  and  short-sleevedness, — who  hath  practised  ?"

For  hypocrisy,  thou  keepest  wearing  the  (blue)  kjjirka ;

That,  by  the  blue  garment,  the  slaves  of  God  thou  mayst  take  from  the  path.

5.  I  am  the  slave  of  the  spirit  of  profligates,  headless,  footless  :
Before  whom,  a  straw  both  worlds  are  not  worth.

Since  that,  from  the  tavern,  gained  became  my  purpose,
With  the  college  and  the  cloister,  black  became  my  face.

Hafiz  !  go  ;  a  beggar  of  the  door  of  every  beggar,  be  not :
Save  by  "the  will  of  God,"  thy  own  desire  thou  gainest  not.

3.  "Long-handedness." See  Ode  455,  c.  2.

6.  The  second  line : —

Because,  in  these  places,  save  deceit  I  saw  naught.

7.  The  second  line  : —

Thy  desire,  thou  obtainest  not  until  before  the  beggars  of  God  (holy  men)  thou  contest ;  and
askest  for  something — "  in  the  name  of  God."

That  is,  until  thou  sayest : —

"  In  the  name  of  God,  (give  me)  something."

5  M  3

8l2  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

493,  (503).

i.  (0  beloved  !)  suddenly,  thy  veil  thou  up-castedest.  -  This  is  what  ?

Intoxicated,  forth  from  the  house,  thou  hastenedest.  -  This  is  what?

In  the  power  of  the  breeze,  thy  tress  (thou  hast  given)  ;  to  the  order  of  the

watcher,  thy  ear  (thou  hast  placed)  ;
Thus,  with  all  thou  hast  contented  thyself.  -  This  is  what  ?

The  king  of  the  lovely  ones,  thou  art  ;  and  the  accepted  of  beggars,  thou  hast

become  :
The  degree  of  this  rank,  thou  hast  not  recognised.  -  This  is  what

Fresh,  to  my  hand,  thy  tress-tip,  gavest  thou  not?

Then,  down  from  my  foot  (powerless),  me  thou  castedest.  This  is  what?

5.  The  mystery  of  thy  mouth, thy  speech  told  ;  the  mystery  of  thy  waist,  thy

girdle  :
Yet,  from  the  girdle,  against  me,  the  sword  thou  hast  drawn.  -  This  is  what?

Intently  engaged  with  the  die  of  love,  every  one  :

In  the  end,  with  all,  crookedly,  thou  hast  played.  -  This  is  what?

Hafiz  !  when,  in  thy  straitened  heart,  the  beloved  alighted,

The  house  void  of  the  stranger,  why  madest  thou  not  ?—  This  is  what  ?

i.  <L=-  ,_yi*i  (this  is  what  ?)  signifies  :  —

(a)  this  that  thou  didst  is  unworthy  of  thee.

(b)  „ deed  is  what  ?

(c)  „ hath  what  meaning  ?

4.  To  make  one  hopeful  by  kindness  ;  and  then  heart-shattered  by  hopelessness—  is  what  ?

5.  What  meaning  hath  this—  that  sin  cometh  from  this  (the  speech  and  the  girdle)  ;  and  revenge  is

taken  upon  that  (me)  ?

THE  LETTER  HA  8  813

494,  (505).

i.  Union  with  the  Beloved  than  everlasting  life,  better;

0  Lord  !  me  that  (union)  give  ;  for  that  (is)—  best.

Me,  with  the  sword,  He  struck ;  and  to  none,  I  spake ;

For,  concealed  from  the  enemy,  the  Beloved's  mystery——  best.

O  heart !  be  ever  a  beggar  of  His  street,

By  the  decree : — "  Perpetual  fortune  best."

O  Zahid  !  me,  to  paradise  invite  not ;

For  this  apple  of  the  chin  (dimple  of  the  Beloved)  than  that  garden  (of  para-
dise) better.

5.  With  the  mark  of  service,  at  this  door  (of  the  Beloved)  to  die, —

By  His  soul (I  swear) that,  than  the  region of  the (whole) world, (it is)
— —  better.

That  rose,  that  foot-trodden  of  our  cypress  (the  Beloved)  becometh  ;

Its  dust  (trampled  leaf)  than  the  blood  of  the  ruddy  arghavan, better.

For  God's  sake,  ask  my  physician,  (the  Beloved)

Saying: — "At  last,  when  (by  the  remedy  of  union),  becometh  this  powerless
"  one  (through  separation) better."

0  youth !  from  the  counsel  of  old  men,  turn  not  thy  head  ;

For,  the  old  man's  counsel  than  youthful  fortune,  better.

Although  the  Zinda  river  (of  Isfahan)  is  the  water  of  life  ;

Yet  our  Shlraz  than  Isfahan, better.

10.  One  night  He  said : — My  eye  hath  seen  none

In  the  world,  than  the  pearl  of  my  ear better.

In  the  Beloved's  mouth,  speech  (is)  the  jewel ;

But,  Hafiz's  utterance  than  that, better.

THE  LETTER  YA  (S  815

The  Letter  Ya.

495,  (514)-

I.  0  heart !  in  the  Beloved's  street,  passing thou  makest  not ;

The  chattels  of  conjunction,  thou  hast ;  and  a  work thou  doest  not.

In  the  hand,  the  chaugan  of  desire ;  yet  the  ball  thou  strikest  not ;

In  the  hand,  a  game  like  this ;  and  a  prey thou  makest  not.

This  (red)  blood  that,  into  thy  liver,  waveth, —

For  the  work  (use)  of  thy  face-colour,  a  point  (why  is  it  that)

thou  makest  not  ?

Musky  (fragrant)  becometh  not  creation's  breath;  because  (swiftly)  like  the

wind,
On  the  dust  of  the  Beloved's  street,  passing,  thou  makest  not.

5.  If,  with  the  soul  of  grief,  others  have  purchased  the  Beloved,

0  heart !  this  deed,  once, thou  doest  not.

From  this  sward  (the  world),  I  fear  that  thou  takest  not  the  sleeve  of  the  rose

(ma'rifat)  ;
For,  the  endurance  of  a  thorn  from  its  rose-bed,——  thou  sufferest  not.

To  the  dust  thou  castest,  the  cup  joyous  and  full  of  wine  ;  and  wine :

And  of  the  calamity  of  wine-sickness,  thought  thou  makest  not.

•

Enclosed  in  the  sleeve  of  thy  soul,  are  a  hundred  musk-pods ;

Them,  a  sacrifice  for  the  Beloved's  tress, thou  makest  not.

Hafiz  !  go. For  the  service  of  the  Friend's  court,

If  all  do,  once thou  doest  not.

6.  Not  lawful  to  thyself  considerest  thou  the  troubles  of  this  world  ;  ever  the  seeker  of  rest  thou  art.

7.  Despite  thy  power,  no  work  thou  completest ;  thy  time  thou  wastest ;  and  the  calamity  of  wine-

sickness,  regardest  not.

8l6  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

496,  (573).

i.  O  heart!  that  moment  when,  intoxicated  with  wine  rose  of  hue, • thou  art
Without  gold  and  treasure,  with  a  hundred  pomps  of  Karun thou  art.

In  the  stage  where  to  fakirs  the  seat  of  wazlrship,  they  give,

I  expect  that  above  all  in  rank thou  art.

In  the  path  to  the  abode  of  Laila  (the  true  Beloved),  wherein  are  dangers,
The  first  condition  of  its  step  is,  that  Majnun  (the  perfect  lover) thou  be.

Thee,  love's  centre  I  showed. Ho  !  mistake  make  not ;

If  not,  when  thou  lookest  outside  of  the  circle  of  lovers thou  art.

5.  Departed,  the  karvan  (of  thy  fellow-travellers)  ;  and,  in  sleep,  thou  (art),  and

the  desert  (is)  in  front :
(O  heart !  I  know  not) how  thou  goest ; from whom,  the  path  thou  askest ;

what  thou  doest ;  how  (in  this  desert,  ignorant  of  the  path,  alone)

thou  art.

A  cup,  drink ;  and  on  the  skies,  a  draught,  cast ;

On.  account  of  time's  grief,  the  liver  of  blood  (of  grief)  how  long,  how  long

art  thou  ?

The  kingly  crown,  thou  seekest ;  the  essence  (perfection)  of  thy  own  nature,

display :
If,  indeed,  of  the  essence  (the  race)  of  Jamshid  and  of  Firidun thou  be.

Hafiz  !  of  poverty,  bewail  not. For,  if  this  be  thy  poetry,

Appeareth  no  one  happy  of  heart,  that  sorrowful thou  shouldst  be.

THE  LETTER  YA  L£  817

497,  (581).

I.  God,  I  praise  for  the  justice  of  the  great  Sultan

Ahmad  bin  Shaikh  Uvais  bin  Hasan  Ilkhani.

Khan  bin  Khan,  Shahinshah  of  Shahin-shah-descent ;

That  one,  whom,  if  thou  call  the  soul  of  the  world .'tis  well.

Confidence  in  thy  fortune  bringeth  he  who  hath  seen  and  he  who  hath  not  seen  ;
Excellent !  O  thou  (that  art)  worthy  of  such  grace  of  God.

If,  without  thee,  the  moon  ascend,  it  in  two  halves  they  dash  —

The  fortune  of  Ahmad  (Muhammad),  and  the  miracle  of  a  Holy  one  (God),

5.  Heart  from  king  and  beggar,  the  splendour  of  thy  fortune  ravisheth  ;
Far  be  the  evil-eye,  for  both  soul  thou  art,  and  also  the  beloved  thou  art.

Turk-like,  the  forelock  arrange. For,  in  thy  fortune,  is

The  liberality  of  a  Khakan ;  and  the  energy  of  a  Chingiz  Khan.

Though  (apparently)  far,  we  are,  to  thy  recollection  the  goblet,  we  drink  ;
For,  in  the  spiritual  journey,  distance  of  stage  is  none.

Not  a  rose-bud  of  ease  blossomed  from  my  Persian  clay ;
Excellent !  the  Tigris  of  Baghdad  ;  and  the  fragrant  wine.

The  lover's  head  that  was  not  the  dust  of  the  Beloved's  door,
From  the  labour  of  head-revolvingness,  when  is  freedom  his  ?

10.  O  morning  breeze !  the  dust  of  the  Beloved's  path,  bring  ;
That,  luminous  with  it,  the  eye  of  his  heart,  Hafiz  may  make.

I.  Ahmad  Ilkhani  (or  Ahmad  Jalayir)  was  grandson  of  Hasan  Buzurg,  who  died  1356,  ruler  of

the  territory  of  Baghdad.
Ahmad  Ilkhani  died  1410.

6  .  In  1206  Chingiz  Khan  (J.HS4,  ^.1227)  received  the  title  of  Khakan  ;  and  was  declared  emperor

of  Tatari,  his  capital  being  Karakurm.
His  dominions  extended  1,800  leagues  east  to  west;  and  1,000  north  to  south,

5N

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

498,  (511).

i.  0  king  of  the  lovely  (the  beloved)  ones  of  the  world  !  for  grief  of  being  alone,

justice !

Without  Thee,  to  the  soul, my  heart  hath  come. Tis  the  time  when  thou
shouldst  come  back;  (and  me  safety,  give).

»

Me,  so  far  from  Thee  desirousness  and  farness  made,
That,  from  the  hand,  will  depart  the  power  of  patience.

O  (Beloved  !)  the  pain  (of  love)  for  Thee  (is)  my  remedy  on  the  couch  of  unful-
filled desire :
And  O  (Beloved  !) Thy  memory,  my  consoler  in  the  corner  of  solitude.

In  the  compass  of  our  fate,  the  point  of  the  compass,  are  we  :

The  favour  (is)  whatever  Thou  thinkest :  the  order,  whatever  Thou  orderest.

5.  In  the  world  of  profligacy  (of  being  a  lover  of  God),  is  neither  thought  of  self,

nor  opinion  of  self:
In  this  religious  order,  Kufr  is  self-seeing  and  self-opinioning.

0  Lord !  to  whom  is  it  fit  to  utter  this  subtlety  that,  in  the  world,

That  lovely  one  of  every  place  (the  true  Beloved)  His  face  displayed  not.

Last  night,  to  the  morning  breeze,  complaint  of  His  tress,  I  uttered  :
The  breeze  said  : — "  A  mistake  ! This  thy  distraught  thought,  abandon  (of  Him
"complain  not;  whatever  He  wisheth,  He  doeth)."

Here  with  the  chain  (of  His  tress)  a  hundred  morning  breezes  keep  dancing :
O  heart !  so  long  as  thou  measurest  not  the  wind  (a  thing  impossible  to  do),  this
is  thy  companion.

Saki!  not  a  colour  (of  decoration)  hath  the  sward  of  the  rose  without  thy  face;
Moving  make  thy  box-tree  (stature)  so  that  the  garden  thou  mayst  adorn.

5.  Kufr,  infidelity.
Kafir,  infidel.

THE  LETTER  YA

819

10.  (O  Beloved  !)  ever  joyous,  remaineth  not  the  rose  of  this  garden  of  the  world.
At  the  time  of  powerfulness  (perfection  of  beauty),  the  feeble  ones  aid  (and  their
state,  pity).

On  account  of  this  blue  circle  (the  sky),  bloody  of  liver  I  am  ;  give  wine  :
So  that,  in  the  enamel-cup,  this  difficulty  I  may  solve.

Hafiz  !  departed  hath  the  night  of  separation  ;  come  hath  the  sweet  fragrance  of

morn  :
O  lover  of  distraughtness  !  auspicious  be  thy  gladness.

820  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

499,  (507).

I.  Came  the  breeze  giving  fragrance  of  Hima  (the  abode  of  the  beloved) ;  and

my  desire  increased  :
From  me  to  Su'ad  (the  beloved),  greeting,  who  will  convey?

The  hearing  of  the  Friend's  message  is  felicity  and  safety ;
Be  my  precious  life  a  ransom  for  the  dust  of  the  Friend's  door.

To  the  evening  (-  shelter)  of  strangers,  come ;  and  the  (bloody)  water  of  our

eye,  behold,
Like  pure  (red)  w'ne  in  Damascus  glass.

If,  to  paradise,  I  inclined  and  became  a  covenant-breaker,—
Be  neither  my  sleep  agreeable,  nor  my  sleeping  place  tranquil.

I.  There  came  the  sweet  odours  of  the  torrent,  that  from  the  mountain  reacheth  the  plain  ;  and
filling  the  torrent-beds,  becometh  the  prohibitor  of  travellers.

When  this  happened,  my  desire  for  union  with  the  Beloved  leaped  forth  from  within  :  —

"  Desirous  of  what  is  prohibited  is  man." At  this  time,  who  will  convey  my  greeting  to
Su'ad  (the  Beloved)  ?

4.  The  explanations  are  :  —

(a)  O  Su'ad  !  if,  from  Hima  to  Najd,  thou  Incline,  and  be  a  covenant-shatterer — thee  sleep

maketh  not  happy ;  and  also  pleasantly  cometh  not.

O  master  of  knowledge !  when  Najd,  thou  enterest ;  and  thy  face  to  the  seekers,  showest ;
and  the  covenants,  that  with  me  thou  hast,  performest  not — know  well  that,  into  my
nature,  the  fire  of  love's  jealousy  falleth;  and  off  from  me  ease  becometh  cut  in  such  a
way  that  there  will  be  fitness  neither  of  sleep  for  me,  nor  of  me  for  sleep.  At  that  time,
all  wailing  will  be  my  work.

(4)  O  murshid  !  if  to  Najd,  thou  incline ;  and  in  propinquity  to  the  Lord,  upon  prayer
enterest ;  and  me,  according  to  thy  promise  recollectest  not ;  and  me,  hand  seized,  to  God
consignest  not, — I  shall  become  without  sleep  and  ease ;  and  shall  give  myself  to  the
wind.

(c)  0  true  Beloved  1  when  Thou  enterest  Najd  (paradise) ;  and  showest  Thy  face  to  the  faith-
ful ;  and  (in  the  fulfilling  of  Thy  promise)  exercisest  delay,  and  makest  me  enter  among
the  crowd  of  the  faithful — then  to  me  come  not  pleasant  the  delights  of  paradise.

(dj  0  true  Beloved  1  when,  in  Najd  (my  existence),  Thou  enterest  upon  splendour  ;  and  openest
to  me  the  doors  of  manifestations ;  and,  in  the  fulfilling  of  these  covenants  that,  in  eternity
without  beginning  Thou  establishedest  with  me,  makest  delay, — I  shall  become  restless
and  heart-shattered  in  such  a  way  that  there  will  be  fitness  neither  of  sleep  for  me
nor  of  me  for  sleep.

THE  LETTER  YA

5.  If,  in praise of  the  dweller  of  Arak  (the  beloved), the bird of happiness

warbleth,

From  its  gardens,  the  moaning  of  my  pigeons  (in  desire  of  the  possessor  of  Arak)
will  not  be  separated.

Not  much  remaineth  when  to  an  end  cometh  the  day  of  separation  from  the

beloved ;
From  the  hills  of  Hima  (the  beloved's  abode)  I  almost  beheld  the  removing  of

tents.

O  happy  that  moment  when  thou  enterest,  and  to  thee  I  say: —  In  safety,
Happy  arrival !  in  the  best  of  abodes,  thou  hast  alighted.

5.  *-£'jl  (Arak)  signifies  : —

a  tree  of  the  desert,  whereon  camels  feed,  and  wherewith  they  make  tooth-picks.
^M!  (_yj  (the  dweller  of  Arak)  signifies  : —

the  illusory  beloved  who  hath  her  dwelling  in  Arak ;  and  thus  exalteth  the  standard  of  her
loveliness.

&?*  (Najd)  signifies  : —

the  name  of  a  mountain,  of  a  city  wherein  is  a  mountain,  and  wherein  men  are  crowded.  There
is  the  lover's  dwelling ;  and  thence  he  hath  opened  the  eye  of  inclination  for  the  possessor
of  Arak.

When  near  the  time  becometh  for  the  returning  of  the  Najd  birds  to  Najd  from  the  valley
(wherein  is  the  tree  Arak  and  wherein  the  beloved  dwelleth) — the  gardeus  of  Najd  become
not  void  of  the  pigeon's  plaint  that  giveth  me  news  of  the  returning  of  the  birds.

From  the  meadow  where  they  roost,  birds  go  in  the  morning  to  another  place  to  feed ;  and  the
birds  of  another  meadow  alight  there  (the  roosting-place).

Hafiz  saith—

At  night,  when  the  birds  of  Najd  return  from  that  valley  (wherein  is  the  tree  Arak,  and
wherein  my  beloved  dwelleth)  to  Najd, — my  pigeons,  in  the  gardens  of  Najd,  enter  upon
complaining.  Towards  them  I  look  with  intense  desire  j  and  of  them,  with  love's  tongue,
ask  of  my  beloved's  state.

Although  Hafiz  uttereth  the  tale  of  Majnun  and  Laila,  yet  verily  he  referreth  to  the  state  of  him-
self and  of  his  beloved.

Majnun's  abode  was  in  Najd  ;  and,  there,  in  the  beginning  of  the  distraught  state,  he  dwelt ;
Laila's  tribe  was  desert-dwelling  and  sojourned  in  every  grassy  place  for  the  grazing  of  their
cattle.

6.  For, from  the  whitenesses  of Hima  (the white  salt  barren  places  that  occur  in  valleys), I
have  seen  the  tents  standing.

Rulers  in  the  desert  preserve  the  valleys  ;  and  when  the  grass  arriveth  at  maturity,  lease  them

to  the  desert-dwellers.
There,  they  bring  their  cattle;  and  tend  them. When  the  grass  is  devoured,  outside  they  pitch

their  rents.

7.  Happy  that moment when from Hima  to  Najd  thou  comest;  and,  to  the  seekers,  thy  face
showest.

822  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

Hope  is  that,  by  good  fortune,  thee  I  may  quickly  see, —
Thou  being  joyous — in  order-giving;  and  I,  in  slavery.

Though,  worthy  of  the  society  of  kings,  I  have  naught,
For  charity  sake,  me,  in  slavery,  accept.

10.  Being  far  from  thee,  I  have  become slender (lean) as the new (crescent)

moon ;
Although  thy  face  like  the  moon,  in  its  fulness,  I  have  not  seen.

Hafiz !  like  the  string  of  pearls  of  good  water  is  thy  pure  lustrous  verse ;
For  in  the  place  of  grace  it  surpasseth  the  verse  of  Ni'zami.

Greeting,  I  say  to  thee  : —

"  O  Su'ad  !  from  the  journey,  thou  hast  come  back ;  best,  thy  coming  back  and  alighting ;  in
the  best,  thy  coming  back."

10.  The  meanings  are  : —  ,

(a)  O  Su'ad  !  verily  far  and  separate  from  thee,  I  became. Though  thy  face  like  the  moon

I  have  not  seen.

(b)  O  Su'ad  !  verily  far  and  separate  from  thee  I  became. In  that  state  I  am  that  I  am  a

waner  like  the  waning  (crescent)  moon.  From  waning,  I  gradually  became  effaced,
and,  in  the  world,  became  like  the  new  moon,  so  that,  save  a  phantom,  was  no  example
of  my  existence;  and  save  existence,  no  appearance.

THE  LETTER  YA  ^  823

500,  (515).

i.  0  heart!  if,  from  that  pit  of  the  chin  (of  the  true  Beloved),

thou  comest  forth,

Everywhere  that  thou  goest,  quickly  regretful, thou  comest  forth.

It  is  possible  that  (even)  with  a  little  water  thee,  the  sky  may  not  aid

If,  thirsty  of  lip,  (and  hopeless)  from  the  fountain  of  life thou  comest  forth.

Sense  keep ;  for  if  lust's  temptation  thou  heed,

From  the  garden  of  Rizvan,  like  Adam, thou  comest  forth.

In  desire  of  seeing  thee,  like  the  (radiant)  morning,  my  soul  I  surrender;
Possibly,  like  the  gleaming  sun, thou  mayest  come  forth.

5.  Like  the  breeze,  on  thee,  the  breath  of  blessing  I  send  to  such  a  degree

That,  from  the  rose-bud,  like  the  rose,  joyous  and  laughing

thou  comest  forth.

In  the  dark  night  of  separation  from  thee,  to the  lip  (ready  to  depart)  came

my  soul ;
'Tis  the  time  when  like  the  shining  moon,  thou  comest  forth.

4

From  my  two  eyes,  on  the  dust  of  thy door,  I  have  established  a  hundred

streams :
It  may  be  that,  like  the  moving  cypress  thou  mayest  come  forth.

In  the  house  of  grief  and  of  reproach,  how  long  sittest  thou  ?

'Tis  time  that,  by  the  Sultan's  fortune,——  thou  shouldst  come  forth.

Hafiz !  think  not  that  that  Yusuf,  moon  of  face  (the  Beloved)

Again  cometh  (to  thee) ;  and  that,  from  the  hut  of  sorrow, thou  comest  forth.

824  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

501,  (506).

I.  If  to  us  a  letter,  that  perfumed  hair  (the  beloved) — had  written,
The  leaf  of  our  existence,  the  sphere — would  not  have  folded  up.

Although  separation  bringeth  forth  the  fruit  of  union,

Would  to  God  that  this  seed,  the  villager  of  the  world  (God) — had  not  sown.

Forgiveness  is  the  cash  of  that  one  to  whom,  here,
Is  a  Friend  like  a  hurl ;  and  an  abode  like  a  paradise.

Thy  reed — let  not  its  sweet  tongue  be  shed  I—-
Experienced not  love  far  from  Thee ;  if  not,  an  answer  (to  me)  it — would  have
written.

5.  If,  on  love,  thy  picture  the  architect  of  existence  had  not  painted, —
The  atoms  of  love  with  the  clay  of  Adam,  He — would  not  have  mixed.

Zahid !  not  with  delay,  the  story  relate,  that,  in  my  cash  (hand),
Is  a  Friend  like  a  hur,  and  an  abode  like  a  paradise.

For  the  garden  of  Iram,  and  the  power  of  Shudad,  sell  not ;
A  bottle  of  wine  (of  love),  and  a  sweet  lip  (of  the  murshid),  and  the  border  of  a
field.

To  the  sky,— my  ignorance  and  thy  knowledge,  what  difference  ?
There where  vision  is  none, — whether beauteousness or  hideousness  (what
matter)?

Not  alone  the  Ka'ba  of  the  heart  have  I  made  the  idol-house, —
At  every  step^is — a  cloister  or  a  church.

10.  In  love's  inn,  one  cannot  make  happiness ;

When  the  pillow  is  golden,  with  a  brick,  I  am  content.

3 The  second  line  occurs  in  couplet  6.
6.  Hur. See  Ode  25,  c.  2 ;  366,  c.  5.

THE  LETTER  YA  L5"  825

•

O  wise  heart !  grief  for  a  mean  world,  how  long  ?

Alas  it  is  that  with  beauteousness,  it  (the  heart)  became  the  lover  of  hideous-
ness  !

The  stain  of  the  khirka  is  the  ruin  of  the  world  ;

A  way-farer,  one  of  heart,  one  pure  of  nature where  ?

From  his  hand,  Thy  tress-tip  why  did  Hafiz  let  go  ?

Thus,  was  fate. What  would  he  have  done,  if  he  had  not  let  go  ?

1 1.  The  second  line  may  be  : —

Alas  it  is  that  one  of  beauteousness  should  be  the  lover  of  one  of  hideousness.

13.  Note  the  use  of  tS  i  n  the  second  line.

826  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

5O2,  (522).

i.  O  thou  that  lawful,  the  separation  of  lovers holdest;

(And)  apart  from  thy  bosom,  lovers holdest !

With  a  little  water,  the  thirsty  one  of  the  desert,  aid  ;

By  reason  of  that  hope  that,  in  this  Path  to  God,  thou holdest.

O  soul !  my  heart,  thou  ravishedest ;  and  thee,  I  forgave. But

Guard  of  it,  keep  better  than  this  (guard)  that  of  me  thou —  keepest.

Our  cup  that  the  other  adversaries  drink, —

(It)  we  endure,  if,  lawful,  thou holdest.

5.  0 (contemptible)  fly!  the  presence  of  the  (mighty)  Simurgh  is  not  thy  place

of  display ;
Thy  own  honour,  thou  takest ;  and,  our  trouble,  thou——  causest.

Excluded  from  this  door  (of  the  true  Beloved),  by  thy  own  fault,  thou  fellest,
Of  whom,  bewailest  thou  ?  complaint,  wherefore  (is  it  that)  thou hast  ?

O  Hafiz ! All  violence  and  tyranny  is  the  way  of  lovely  ones ;

From  this  crowd  (of  lovely  ones),  thou  art  that  one  who,  hope  of  fidelity,

holdest.

Hafiz !  from  kings,  shelter  in  service  they  seek  ;

Work  not  done,  hope  of  gift  what  (is  it  that)  thou  holdest  ?

5.  Love-play,  like  true  lovers,  is  not  thy  work.
To  us,  thou  givest  trouble.

THE  LETTER  Y&  ^  827

503,  (519)-

I.  O  thou  that  art  ever  proud  of  thyself  f

If  love  be  not  thine,  excused — —  thou  art.

Around  those  distraught  of  love,  wander  not ;

For,  for  the  best  wisdom,  renowned thou  art.

(0  father  of  lust !)  not  in  thy  head  is  love's  intoxication  ;

Go  (no  access  to  me  is  thine) ;  for,  with  the  wine  of  the  grape,  intoxicated

thou  art.

The  yellow  (grief-stricken)  face,  and  the  grief-stained  sigh  are
For  lovers,  the  evidence  of  affliction.

5.  No  beauty  hath  the  garden  of  paradise,

Without  the  pure  wine,  and  the  lip  of  the  hurl.

For  thee,  it  is  necessary  to  practise  love  for  that  moon,

Though,  like  the  sun,  famous thou  art.

Hafiz !  thy  own  name  and  fame,  abandon  ;

The  cup  of  wine,  seek ;  for  wine-sick, thou  art.

I.  This  is  addressed  to  zahids,  proud  of  their  own  piety.
7.  Without  wine,  wine-sickness  departeth  not.

828  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

5O4,  (521).

i.  O  thou  that,  in  the  tavern-street,  thy  dwelling  hast !

The  Jamshid  of  thy  own  time,  thou  art,  if,  on  the  cup,  thy  hand  thou  hast.

O  thou  that,  night  and  day,  with  the  tress  and  the  face  of  the  Beloved,  passest !
Be  opportunity  thine,  so  that  a  happy  morning  and  evening — thou  mayst  have.

O  thou  who,  in  union  with  the  heart's  ease,  privacy  chosest !

As  gain,  regard  this  moment  when  thy  great  desire thou  hast.

0  morning  breeze  !  at  the  head  of  thy  path,  those  consumed  with  love,  are
expectant,

Whether,  from  that  (true)  Beloved  (many  a)  journey  made,  a  message

thou  hast.

5. (0  true  Beloved !)  though,  at  the  time  of  fidelity,  stability  (constancy)  is  not

thine  ;
Thanks,  I  offer  that,  against  violence,  stability thou  hast.

Thy  (dark)  mole,  fresh  of  head,  is  a  pleasant  grain  of  pleasure. But,

On  the  border  of  its  sward  (face),  alas  what  a  snare  (the  tress) thou  hast.

From  the  laughing  lip  of  the  goblet,  the  soul's  perfume,  I  perceive ;

O  Khwaja !  smell  if,  for  that,  a  perfume-place thou  hast.

If,  from  thee,  a  name  a  stranger  seek,  what  (a  wonder)  it  will  be,

To-day,  in  this  city,  thou  art  one,  who  a  great  name  hast.

Kind  became (even) the  (cruel)  sky,  since,  abandoning  of  violence-doing  it

made ;
O  soul !  thou  art  one  who,  in  this  way  (of  violence),  a  great  moving hast.

10.  The  guardian  of  thy  soul  will  be  many  a  prayer  of  dawn  ;

For,  like  Hafiz,  night-rising,  a  slave——  thou  hast.

g.  O  soul !  from  violence,  back  thou  comest  not.

THE  LETTER  YA

505,  (518).
I.  0  thou  that,  on  the  moon  (of  thy  radiant  face),  the  veil  of  musky  hair

829

castest,

Kindness,  thou  didst ;  on  the  sun  (thy  effulgent  face,  so  that  from  love's  fire,
lovers  should  not  consume)  a  shade thou  castest.

With  us,  the  water  (lustre)  of  colour  of  thy  cheek,  what  will  it  do?

Now,  on  water,  the  picture  of  thy  own  sorcery, thou  castest.

From  the  lovely  ones  of  the  world,  the  ball  of  loveliness  thou  tookest. Be
joyful !

The  (world-viewing)  cup  of  Kay  Khusrau,  seek ;  for  Afrasiyab,  down

thou  castest.

In  our  desolate  heart,  the  treasure  of  thy  own  love,  thou  placedest

On  this  ruined  treasure,  mercy's  shadow thou  castest-

5.  In  a  different  way,  with  the  (luminous)  candle  of  thy  face,  love  every  one

played ;
Out  from  the  midst,  into  trepidation,  the  moth,  (the  lover), thou  castest.

Though,  through  intoxication,  ruined  I  am — my  devotion,  reject  not :

For,  in  this  employment,  me,  in  the  hope  of  reward, thou  castest.

(For  the  sake  of)  one  glance,  thy  veil  thou  up-castest  in  the  place-of-splen-

dour ;
And  into  the  veil,  through  shame,  Hur  and  Pari  thou  castest.

The  sleep  of  the  wakeful,  thou  boundest  (preventedest) ;  then  from  the  picture

of  fancy,
On  the  night-prowlers  of  the  troop  of  sleep,  a  suspicion,  thou  castest.

1.  This  is  addressed  : —

(a)  to  the  true  Beloved.
(4)  „ „ murshid.

2.  Thy  sorcery  resembleth  this  that  on  water  it  casteth  a  picture. With  me,  I  know  not  what  thy

cheek  will  do.
On  thy  own  cheek,  a  line  (of  down)  thou  broughtest  forth, — thou  mayst  say  that  on  water  the

picture  of  sorcery,  thou  castedest.
7.  Hur. See  Ode  25,  c.  2 ;  366,  c.  5.

§30  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ

From  the  desire  for  the  intoxicated  narcissus  (eye),  and  for  the  ruby  (lip),wine-

' worshipping,
Into  wine,  Hafiz  sitting  in  khilvat,— —  thou  easiest.

10.  For  the  sake  of  capturing  the  heart,  on  his  neck,  the  chain  of  thy  tress,

Like  the  (mighty)  noose  of  Khusrau,  the  master  of  necks, thou  castest.

Nusratu-d-Din  Shah  Yahiya, — O  thou  who,  the  enemy's  land,

Into  water,  with  the  foam  of  thy  (flashing)  sword,  like  fire, thou  castest !

The  Ruler,  Dara  of  pomp, — O  thou,  who,  the  sun's  crown,

From  the  height  of  mightiness,  on  the  dust  of  the  door-post, thou  castest !

From  the  cup,  world-viewing,  wine  drink ;  for,  on  Jamshid's  throne,

From  the  face  of  the  desired  Beloved,  the  veil  (down) thou  castest.

Shelter  from  the  water  (lustre)  of  thy  (flashing)  sword,  by  which  lions,
Thirsty  (with  wounds),  thou  madest ;  and  heroes  into  water(of  shame)-

thou  castest !

13.  The  first  line  may  be :  —

From  the  world's  r.up,  wine  drink  ;  on  Jamshid's  throne,  behold  that

14.  This  is  the  first  concluding  couplet  of  an  Ode  in  which  the  word  Hafiz  is  omitted.
In  the  ninth  couplet,  the  word  Hafiz  appeareth.

THE  LETTER  YA

83I

506,  (512).

i.  O  them,  in  whose  face  (are)  revealed  the  splendours  of  sovereignty;
And,  in  whose  thought,  (are)  concealed  divine  philosophies  !

In  the  country  of  faith,  thy  reed — it,  may  God  bless ! —

A hundred fountains  of  the (limpid)  water of life from  a small  ink -drop
opened.

On  Ahriman,  shine  not  the  splendours  of  the  ism-i-a'zam,

Thine,  is  the  country  and  the  seal-ring. What  thou  wishest, — order.

Doubt  in  Sulaiman's  pomp,  whoever  displayeth, —

On  his  wisdom  and  knowledge,  (even)  the  bird  and  the  fish  will  (in  mockery)
laugh.

5.  Though,  sometimes,  on  his  head,  the  cap  of  sovereignty,  the  hawk  putteth, —
The  usage  of  sovereignty,  the  birds  of  (the  mountain  of)  Kaf  (well)  know.

That  sword,  to  which,  out  of  its  own  bounty,  the  sky  giveth  lustre, —
Alone,  without  the  aid  of  an  army,  will  sever  the  world.

In  respect  of  the  friend  and  of  the  enemy,  pleasantly  writeth  (in  the  magic

figure)  thy  reed  :-—
"  The  amulet,  life-increasing  (for  the  friend) ;  sorcery,  life-decreasing  (for  the

enemy)."

i.  This  is  addressed  to  Nusratu-d-Din  Shah  Yahiya. See  Ode  506,  c.  n.
3.  "  Ism-i-a'zam."  See  Ode  189,  c.  2.

5.  In  the  mountains  of  Kaf,  only  the  Simurgh  is  sovereign. See  Ode  4,  c.  2.
7.  They  write  the  names  of  the  two  persons  whose  lot  is  to  be  determined ;  and,  beneath  those

names,  the  numbers  of  the  Abjad.
After  dividing  the  numbers  by  nine,  victory  will  be  as  follows  : —

Both  odd.
The  less  (in  number)  conquers.

Both  even.
The  less  (in  number)  conquers.

Both  equal.
The  less  (in  age)  conquers.

One  even,  one  odd.
The  greater  (in  number)  conquers.

See  Sitraju-r-raml  by  Maulavi  Raushan  'AH.
Misdaku-r-raml"  by  Muhammad  'Attar  Mai  Lahuri  which  can  be  obtained  from  the  Press  of  Mun-
shi  Nuwul  Kishur,  C.S.I.,  Lukhnau.

832  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

O  them,  whose  elements  (are)  created  of  the  alchemy  of  honour ;
And  0  thou,  whose  fortune  (is)  safe  from  the  disaster  of  ruin  !

If,  on  quarry  and  mine,  a  flash  of  thy  sword  fall,

To  the  ruby,  red  of  face,  it  giveth  the  hue  of  withered  (yellow)  grass.

10.  O  King !  tis  a  life  (-time)  since  void  of  wine  was  my  cup  :

Behold  (thereof)  from  the  slave,  a  claim;  and,  from  the  muhtasib,  testimony?

The  weakness  of  the  night-sitters,  I  know,  thy  heart  will  pity ;
If,  of  the  breeze  of  the  morning-time,  my  state  thou  ask.

Saki  (Murshid) !  from  the  fountain  of  the  tavern  (of  ma'rifat),  a  little  water

bring,
So  that,  from  the  wonder  of  the  monastery  (pride  of  our  own  devotion),  the

khirkas,  we  may  wash (and,  in supplication and in  submission to  God,

engage).

In  Adam's  household,  as  long  as  the  way  of  sovereignty  was,
Like  thee,  none  hath  known  this  science  (of  sovereignty)  as  it  is.

Cometh  not  violence  from  the  (cruel)  sky  so  long  as  angel  of  quality  thou  art  ;
Oppression  on  me  departed  from  the  world,  (sinee)  world-shelter  thou  art.

15.  When,  on  the  sin  of  pure  Adam,  lightning  flashed,
Us,  the  claim  to  sinlessness  how  adorneth  (befitteth)  ?

O  asylum  of  created  beings  ! O  bestower  of  gifts  !

On  poor  me  (whom  calamities  have  visited),  mercy  show!

Hafiz!  since,  sometimes,  thy  name  the  King  taketh  (mentioneth),

To  him,  grief  on  account  of  fortune  display  not ;  in  pardon-seeking,  come  back.

8.  Nusratu-d-Din  Shah  Yahiya !  who  art  described  with  such  qualities  ;  consider.  For  Adam,  the
father  of  mankind,  gained  freedom  from  sin.  Claim  to  purity,  how  may  we  make;  and  from
sin,  desist  ?

«.  Apparently,  these  persons  are  the  profligates  of  the  drink  ing-place.
15.  Adam's  title  is  : —

iJJI^yue  ...if  Adam,  pure  of  God,

,,  ,, the  father  of  mankind.

See  c.  8.

16.  This  couplet  is  in  Arabic.

THE  LETTER  YA  VJ

507,  (516).

i 0  thou,  of  whose  street,  (only)  a  tale  is  the  tale  of  paradise  ;

And  of  whose  face,  (only)  a  sign  is  the  description  of  the  beauty  of  the  Hur.

From  thy  ruby  lip,  (only)  a  jest  is  (the  life-giving)  breathing  of  'Isa  ;
And,  from,  thy  sweet  mouth,  only  a  sign  (is)  the  water  of  life.

(Together  are) — every  fragment  of  my  heart  and  a  tale  of  grief ;
(Together  are) — every  line  of  thy  qualities,  and  a  verse  of  mercy.

'Itr-diffuser  of  the  assembly  of  souls,  when  would  it  (the  rose)  have  been,
If,  to  the  rose,  thy  perfume,  thou  hadst  not  entrusted?

5.  In  desire  of  the  dust  of  the  Friend's  path,  I  consumed,

O  morning  breeze !  bring  to  mind  that  even  a  little  protection  thou  gavest  not.

If,  in  the  fire,  appear  the  form  of  thy  (lovely)  face—

Saki!  come  (and  give  wine);  for  (even)  of  hell,  no  complaint  (then)  is  mine.

Took  the  horizons  (of  the  world),  the  perfume  of  my  roasted (grief-stricken)

heart ;
This  consuming  of  my  heart,  (into  the  beloved's  heart)  may  penetrate.

0  heart !  in  absurd  knowledge  (thou  wast) ;  and  from  the  hand,  life  passed  ;
A  hundred  sources  (of  capital)  thou  hadst ;  and  a  sufficiency,  thou  madest  not.

From  this  lesson  of  grief,  Hafiz's  desire,  what  it  is, — thou  knowest ;
From  thee  (O  murshid  !)  a  glance  (of  kindness)  ;  and  from  the  Khusrau  (God) —
the  bounty  (of  pardon).

I.  "  Hur." See  Ode  25,  c.  2  ;  366,  c.  5.

4.  From  Muhammad's  sweat,  sprang  the  red  rose. See  Ode  34,  c.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

508,  (523).

I.  This  khirka  that  I  have  in  pledge  for  wine—  best  ;

This  meaningless  book  immersed  in  pure  wine  (of  ma'rifat)—  best.

My  life,  how  I  ruined !  as  much  as  I  gazed,

In  the  tavern-corner,  fallen  intoxicated, best.

Since,  from  poverty,  far  is  counsel-considering,

Both  my  heart  full  of  fire — best;  and  my  eye  full  of  water, best.

To  the  people,  the  state  of  the  zahid,  I  will  not  utter,

For  this  state,  if  I  utter, — with  the  harp  and  the  ribab— —  best.

5.  Since,  in  this  way,  headless  and  footless  (fickle)  are  the  sky's  motions,—

In  the  head,— desire  for  the  Sakl;  in  the  hand, — wine best.

From  a  heart-possessor  like  thee,  the  heart  up  I  pluck  not. Yes,

If  I  endure  torment, — at  least  in  the  curl  of  that  tress, best.

Hafiz  !  since  old  thou  hast  become,  forth  from  the  tavern,  come  ;

In  youth's  season,  profligacy  and  desire best.

I.  "  The  meaningless  book  "  may  signify  : —
(a)  Hafiz's  verse.
(6)  a  book  wherein  is  no  mention  of  truths  and  of  divine  knowledge.

THE  LETTER  YA

835

5O9,  (520).

i.  O  thou  who,  in  our  slaughter,  mercy exercisest  not

Profit  and  capital,  thou  consumest ;  manliness, thou  showest  not.

Deadly  poison,  the  sorrowful  ones  of  calamity  (lovers,  sorrowful  through  sepa-
ration from  thee)  drink ;

The  design  of  (slaying)  this  tribe  (of  lovers)  is  dangerous.  Take  care  that  it,
thou  doest  not.

Since,  with  a  corner  of  thy  eye,  our  grief  it  is  possible  to  take,

The  part  of  justice  it  is  not,  that  our  remedy  (for  freedom  from  grief)

thou  makest  not.

Since,  in  hope  of  thee,  our  eye  is  the  ocean  (through  weeping)

why  (is  it  that)
On  the  ocean-shore,  in  recreation,  passing—  thou  makest  not?

5.  The  tale  of  every  violence  that,  of  thy  gentle  nature,  they  made,

Is  the  word  of  the  interested  (and  is  therefore  discredited).  Those  deeds  (of
violence) thou  doest  not.

0  Zahid  !  if  our  beloved  display  splendour  to  thee  (by  visiting  thee),

From  God,  save  wine  and  the  beloved,  a  wish thou  makest  not.

O  Hafiz !  adoration  of  his  eye-brow  (curved)  like  the  prayer-arch, make  ;

For  save  here,  a  prayer  from  sincerity's  source thou  makest  not.

5.  Because  of  thy  good  qualities,  good  of  action,  and  of  thy  ways  merciful  in  effect,— the  flatterers,

and  the  seekers  of  the  path  of  sweet  speech, described  to  thee  the  deeds  of  former  beloved  ones.

Associated  with  design  (for  the  acquisition  of  reward)  is  this  talk. Whatever  he  saith,  do  not ;

for  in  error's  path,  he  striveth.
In  the  state  of  illusory  love,  Hafiz  wrote  this  Ode ;  and  the  illusory  beloved,  thus  counselled.

5  p  2

836  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

510,  (510).

i.  0  thou  void  of  news  (of  love)  !  strive  that  the  master  of  news,

thou  mayst  be  :

So  long  as  way-farer  thou  art  not,  road-guide  how  (is  it  that)

thou  mayst  be  ?

In  the  school  of  truths  (and  of  ma'rifat),  before  love's  master  (the  murshid,  per-
fect and  excellent)  ;

Ho !  O  son  !  strive  that,  one  day  (worthy  to  be)  father  (old)

thou  mayst  be.

Far  from  love's  degree,  thee,  sleeping  and  eating  put ;

To  love,  thou  attainest  at  that  time  when  sleepless  and  foodless

thou  shalt  be.

When,  on  thy  heart  and  soul,  the  light  of  God's  love  falleth,

By  God  (I  swear)  that  fairer  than  the  sky's  (resplendent)  sun—

thou  shalt  be.

5.  From  the  copper  of  thy  existence,  like  men  of  the  Path  (tarikat),  thy  hand

wash,
So  that  love's  alchemy,  thou  mayst  obtain  ;  and  gold — —

thou  mayst  be.

From  head  to  foot,  thine  all  God's  light  shall  be,

When  footless  and  headless  (the  world's  chattels  and  ease  abandoned),  in  the
Path  of  Him  possessed  of  majesty,  thou  shalt  be.

A  moment,  immersed  in  God's  sea,  be ;  think  not,

That,  to  the  extent  of  a  single  hair,  with  the  water  of  seven  (all  the)  seas  (of
the  world),  wet, thou  shalt  be.

If  the  face  of  God  be  the  spectacle-place  of  thy  vision

After  this,  not  a  doubt  remaineth  that  the  possessor  of  vision, -

thou  shalt  be.

5.  The  (base)  copper  of  thy  existence,  abandon  ;  and  of  it,  without  news  be.

THE  LETTER  YA  V-f  837

It,  below  and  above  (ruined),  the  foundation  of  thy  existence  be,

Think  not  in  thy  heart  that,  below  and  above, thou  mayst  be.

Hafiz !  if  in  thy  head  be  desire  of  union  (with  the  true  Beloved),

It  is  necessary  that  the  dust  of  the  court  of  Him  possessed  of  vision,

thou  shouldest  be.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

511,  (524).

I.  To  the  adversary,  utter  not  the  mysteries  of  love  and  of  intoxication,

So  that,  without  knowledge  (of  love),  in  pain  of  self-worshipping,  he  may  die.

Notwithstanding  weakness  and  powerlessness,  like  the  pleasant  breeze  be  ;
In  this  Path  (of  love),  more  pleasant  than  body-soundness  is  sickness  (in  grief
of  love).

Veiled  in  the  corner  of  safety,  how  can  one  be,

As  long  as,  to  me,  the  mysteries  of  intoxication  thy  narcissus  (eye)  uttereth  ?

(O  Zahid  !)  the  lover  (of  the  true  Beloved)  be  ;  if  not,  one  day,  the  world's  work

endeth ;
(And),  from  the  workshop  of  existence  (the  world),  the  picture  of  thy  purpose

unread  (unattained,  thou  shall  die).

5.  At  the  threshold  (where  humbleness  is  greatness)  of  the  (true)  Beloved,  of  the

lofty  sky  (loftiness  of  rank)  think  not :

(God  foroid)  that,  from  the  summit  of  loftiness  to  the  dust  of  lowliness,  thou
shouldest  fall !

Although  the  thorn  diminisheth  life,  pardon  for  it  the  rose  seeketh,
By  the  side  of  intoxication's  delight,  easy  is  the  bitterness  of  wine.

Sufi !  the  cup,  drink  ;  Hafiz !  the  great  flagon  prepare  ;

O  ye  short  of  sleeve,  how  long  (practise  ye)  long-handedness  ?

i.  Odes  511  and  512  of  this  text  form  Ode  524  of  the  text  of  Calcutta,  Delhi,  Lukbnau,  and  Kahn-
pur.

7.  *jjji  signifies:  —

a  two-handled,  spouted,  glass  flagon,  wherein  to  refine,  wine  resteth  four  days.

"  Long-handedness." See  Ode  455,  c.  2.

THE  LETTER YA  <£  839

512, (524).

I.  O  heart !  a  moment,  void  of  love  and  of  intoxication,  be  not ;

At  that  time,  go  when,  from  non-existence  to  existence,  thou  escapedest.

If  the  khirka-wearer,  thou  see,  engaged  in  thy  own  work  be  ;
Every  kibla  that  is better  than  self-worshiping  is.

In  the  religious  order  of  tarikat  (love)  immatureness  is  kufr  ;
Yes,  the  path  of  profligacy  is expertness  and  quickness,

As  long  as  (in  thyself)  the  wisdom  of  excellence  thou  seest  (and,  of  that  wisdom,

art  proud),  thou  sittest  void  of  divine  knowledge  ;
To  thec,  one  word  I  say: — "Thyself,  behold  not,  so  that  (in  safety)  thou  mayst

escape."

5.  These  calamities  that  have  arisen  I  had  (fore-)  seen  that  day,
When,  awhile  with  us,  through  perverseness,  thou  satest  not.

O  my  Sultan  !  for  God's  sake,  (exercise  pity) ;  us,  thy  (black)  tress  hath  shattered  ;
Long-handedness  like  this,  how  long  maketh  the  black  ?

Last  night,  in  the  assembly  of  the  magians,  to  me  how  well  said  that  idol  : —
"If  the  idol,  thou  worship  not,  with  the  kafirs,  what  work  (is)  thine  ?"

O  soul !  to  the  power  of  the  deluge,  thee,  love  will  consign  ;
(Swiftly)  like  lightning,  thou  thoughtest  that  from  this  tumult,  thou  wouldst
escape.

From  the  Path,  Hafiz  gazed  till  he  beheld  thy  lovely  tress;

Notwithstanding  his  loftiness,  trodden  in  lowliness  (truly  humble),  he  became.

I.  See  Ode  511,  c.  I.

6.  "  Long-handedness." See  Ode  455,  c.  2.

840  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

513,  (529).

i.  This  my  subtlety,  hear  that,  free  from  grief,  thyself thou  mayst  make;

"Blood  (of  grief)  thou  drinkest,  if  search  for  victuals,  not  placed  (intended  for
thee), thou  makest."

In  the  end,  the  clay  of  the  goglet-maker  (potters)  thou  wilt  become;
Now,  think  of  the  pitcher  (of  thy  heart)  that,  it,  full  of  wine  (of  ma'rifat  and  of
love),-^—  thou  mayst  make.

If,  of  those  men  thou  be,  whose  desire  is  paradise,

O  Pari-born!  ease  with  man,  how  long  (is  it  that)—  thou  makest?

On  the  (sitting-)  place  of  the  great,  boastingly  it  is  impossible  to  lean,
Unless,  the  chattels  of  greatness,  all  prepared, thou  makest.

5.  The  writing  of  (God's)  bounty,  how  taketh  away  thy  heart  (stuffed  with  sensual

claims  and  ideas  of  impurity?)
Unless  pure  of  the  stuffed  picture,  the  leaf  (of  thy  heart) thou  makest  ?

0  Khusrau  of  those  sweet  of  mouth  (Hafiz) !  rewards  are  thine,

If,  to  Farhad,  heart-fallen,  a  glance——  thou  makest.

Hafiz!  if  back  to  the  Merciful,  thy  own  work  thou  pass,

O  great  the  pleasure  that  with  fortune  God-given, thou  makest.

j
O  breeze!  the  service  of  Khwaja  Jallalu-d-Din  do,

Till,  full  of  the  lily  of  the  valley  and  of  the  noble  lily,  the  world

thou  makest.

1.  What  fate  hath  given,  with  it  be  content.

2.  Thy  body,  in  whose  preservation  thou  art  engaged,  will  become  dust  (in  the  grave).

3.  Otherwise —

If  of  those  men  thou  be  that  thy  desire  is  paradise,
Ease  with  man,  how  long  makest  thou  (who  art)  Pari-born  ?
8.  Jallalu-d-Din. See  Ode  517,  c.  I.

THE  LETTER  YA

514, (530).

i.  If  to  the  voice  of  the  bulbul  and  of  the  turtle-dove,  wine  thou  drink  not;
Thee,  how  may  I  cure? The  last  remedy  is  the  cautery.

When  (in  spring-time),  her  veil  the  rose  up-lifted;  and  the  bird  shouted  "hu,  hu"!

From  the  hand,  the  cup  put  not. Wherefore  makest  thou  (the  reproachful  cry)

"  hai,  hai "?

When,  in  thy  hand,  is  the  water  of  life, thirsty  die  not;

"  Die  not;  living  is  every  thing  from  water."

Of  the  colour  and  perfume  of  the  spring  season,  lay  up  treasure  ;
For  keep  arriving  in  pursuit  the  highwaymen,  autumn  and  winter.

5.  Time  giveth  naught  that,  back  again,  it  taketh  not ;

From  the  mean,  generosity  seek  not;  for  his  existence  is  no  thing  (worthless).

•

The  pomp  of  sovereignty  and  of  command, how  hath  it  stability  ?

Of  the  throne  of  Jamshid  and  of  the  diadem  of  Kay, — only  a  word  hath  remained.

Treasure-possessing,  by  the  inheritors  is  kufr,

According  to  the  word  of  the  minstrel,  and  of  the  Saki ;  and  to  the  decision  of
the  drum  and  of  the  pipe.

I.  When  naught  is  of  avail,  they  apply  burning.  }

This  is  from  the  Hadis.

a.  If,  from  the  hand,  the  cup  thou  put,  then  is  sorrow,
j*  signifies:—

(a)  in  Persian,  hu,  "  the  cry  of  the  owl  Glaucidium  Brodaeri.''
(6) „  Arabic,  huva,  "  he  is ; "  in  a  religious  sense,  "  He  (God)  is."
ij*  signifies : —

(a)  in  Persian,  hai,  "  alas !  "

(b)  „  Arabic,  hiya,  "  she  is."
See  Ode  562,  c.  o.

3.  The  second  line  of  c.  3  is  in  Arabic ;  and  is  often  inscribed  over  fountains.
7.  Those  who,  without  trouble,  have  obtained  wealth  by  heritage,—  their  wealth  thou  hast.
That  is—

The  preserving  of  wealth,  the  amassing  of  it,  the  practising  of  avarice  with  it,  the  expendin of
it  on  the  cup  and  the  minstrel  is  kufr.

842

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

On  the  hall  of  the  garden  of  the  Abode  (the  threshold  of  the  perfect  murshid),

they  have  written  :—
"Who  purchased  the  world's  favour,  to  him,  woe !"

Generosity  remained  not;  my  word  (of  counsel),  I  close;  wine  is  where  ?
To  the  joy  of  the  soul  and  the  spirit  of  Hatim  Tai,  (it) — give.

10.  God's  perfume  (of  liberality),  the  miser  perceiveth  not. Hafiz  !  come:

The  cup  take ;  liberality,  practise  ;  on  me,  the  responsibility  (that  saved  thou
shall  be).

9. Hatim  Tai  was  an  Arabian,  chief  of  the  tribe  of  Tai,  celebrated  for  his  liberality,  his  wisdom,  and
his  valour. His  tomb  is  at  Anwarz  in  Arabia.

See  a  translation  (out  of  the  Persian)  :—
(a)  of  Hatim  Tai  by  Duncan  Forbes.
(A)  of  the  Bustan  of  Sa'di  by  H.  Wilberforce  Clarke.

THE  LETTER  YA  \>£  843

515, (530-

I.  (If)  awhile,  in  tranquillity  of  heart,  at  one  moon  of  face  (the  illusory  beloved)  a

glance  (thou  shouldest  make),

('  Tis)  better  than  that  the  kingly  crown  thou  shouldest  have  ;  and,  (in  perturba-
tion and  agitation)  a  whole  life  of  hai  and  hai !

By  God  (I  swear)  that  mine  is  envy  of  my  own  eye  (falling)  on  thy  cheek,
For  pity  (full  of  disaster)  is  the  glance  on  one  of  tender-face  like  this.

Went  my  heart ;  and,  to  the  stranger  (from  the  other  world),  I  know  not  what

chanced;
For,  went  life ;  and,  from  no  quarter,  hath  come  a  particle  of  news.

To  an  end,  came  my  breath ;  Thee,  fully  my  glance  saw  not ;
Save  this  (to  see  Thee),  to  us  remaineth  not  a  desire,  nor  a  wish.

5.  O  breeze  !  dishevel  not  the  tress-tip  of  that  Pari-like  one  (the  true  Beloved),
As ransom  for  the  thread  of  one  single  hair  of  whom,  Hafiz  (would  give)  a
thousand  lives.

i.  Otherwise:—

Awhile  in  tranquillity  of  heart,  at  one  moon  of  face,  a  glance  (to  make), —
Better  than  the  kingly  crown  (to  have),  and  a  whole  life  of  hai  and  hui.

<_yk»  (hai)  signifies  : — behold !
eyj*  (hui) „ :— a  cry.
See  Ode  514,  c.  2.

^44  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

516,  (532).

i.  As  my  love  (so)  the  work  of  Thy  beauty  took  a  great  perfection  ;

Happy  be  on  this  account  that,  this  beauty  (of  love  and  of  form)  hath  not
(even)  a  little  decline.

In  my  imagination,  it  cometh  not  that  in  the  (vain)  imaginings  of  wisdom,
In  any  way,  should  come  more  beautiful  than  this a  form.

That  moment  when,  with  Thee,  I  may  be,  the  space  of  one  (long)  year  is  (only)
a  short  day  ;

That  moment  when,  without  Thee,  I  may  be  the  (momentary)  twinkling  of  the
eye  is——  a  long  year.

Life's  delight  would  have  been  gained,  if,  with  Thee,  for  us,

Ever  in  life  (only)  one  day  had  been  the  lot  of a  great  union.

5.  O  beloved !  in  sleep,  the  image  of  thy  face  how  may  I  behold,
Because,  out  of  sleep,  my  eye  seeth  naught  save an  image?

On  my  heart,  bestow  pity. For,  from  love  for  the  lovely  face,

My  powerless  body  became  slender  (and_,wan)  like anew  (crescent)  moon.

Hafiz !  if  thou  desire  union  with  the  Beloved,  make  no  complaint ;

For  thee,  on  account  of  separation,  is  necessary  greater  than  this

a  load.

4..  &*>  (it  became ;  it  went)  signifies  :—

(a)  .3-iJwi  it  would  have  been.

(j)  A<i  jbfj  it  went  to  the  wind.
Observe  that  ^^  signifies  :  —

"  One  day,"  and  also  "  lot."

When  J-i  (in  the  first  line)  has  meaning  (V)  J-*^-  j+£  is  a  qualifying  adjunct  to  *"-
In  some  copies,  iu  the  second  line,  ^  occurs  in  place  of  -^

In  this  case,  the  explanations  are  : —

(a)  i.  If  union  with  Thee  had  been  ours,  life's  delight  would  have  been  gained,  notwithstanding

that  ever,  one  day,  in  a  whole  life,  union  with  Thee  was  not  gained,
ii.  Although  in  a  whole  life,  union  with  Thee  had  not  been  gained,  notwithstanding  that,  in

expectation,  life's  delight  would  have  been  gained.
(6)  By  reason  of  want  of  union  with  Thee,  the  delight  of  life-acquisition  went  to  the  wind.

Add  to  the  first  line,—

If  union  with  Thee  had  been.

5.  In  my  eye,  is  no  sleep.

THE  LETTER  YA  V-5

517,  (533)-

i.  From  the  cypress-hough,  in  Pahlavi  shout,  the  bulbul,

Last  night,  the  lesson  of  the  stages  of  spirituality  (the  Masnavl  of  Jalalu-d-Din
Rumi)  kept  saying  : —

"  Come,  for  the  rose  hath  displayed  the  fire  of  Musa,

"  So  that,  from  the  (fiery)  bush,  the  subtlety  of  the  unity  (of  God),  thou  mayst
hear."

Melody-measuring  and  jest-uttering,  are  the  birds  of  the  garden,
So  that,  to Pahlavi  ghazals  (and  Persian  subtleties),  wine  the  khwaja  may
drink.

Happy  the  time — the  (quiet)  mat  of  beggary;  and  the  sleep  (thereon)  of  tran-
quillity,
For,  not  befitting  the  khusravl  crown  is  this  ease.

^

5.  Naught  from  the  world  took  Jamshld,  save  the  (world-viewing)  cup;
Ho  !  on  worldly  chattels,  bind  not  thy  heart.

«

Darvish  and  beggar,  I  am ;  yet,  equal,  I  make  not—

The  ragged  felt  (darvish)  cap  to  a  hundred  (splendid)  khusravl  crowns.

To  his  son,  the  years  endured  (old)  villager  spake  how  well,
Saying: — "  O  light  of  my  eye!  save  that  sown,  thou  reapest  naught."

Man's  house  with  the  glance,  thy  eye  hath  darkened  ;

Thine,  be  no  wine-sickness ! For,  intoxicated,  happy  thou  goest.

I.  jlfj  signifies  :  —

a  city,  the  region  of  Isfahan,  Rai  and  Dinwar.

t£j*ti  signifies  :—

One  of  the  seven  ancient  languages  of  Persia ;  a  language  of  the  city. See  Ode  21 1,  c.  6.
Maulana  Jalalu-d-Din  Rumi  (b.  1207,  d.  1273)  founded  an  order  of  darvishes,  sufis,  in  Iconium

(Asiatic  Turkey),  where  he  is  buried. His  works  are  regarded  as  the  effect  of  inspiration.

onlyiinferior  to  the  Kuran.

*.  The  second  line  refers  to  the  burning  olive  bush  wherein  to  M  usa  God  revealed  himself,  saying  -.
Ana  Allahu  "  I  am  God."

This  tale  of  wonder  of  inverted  fortune,  hear  ;

Us,  the  beloved,  with  the  (revivifying)  breath  of  '!sa,  slew.

10.  To  the  slave's  verse,  wine  drink. Thine,  be  no  heart-straitedness !
On  the  head  of  worldly  chattels,  (be)  dust  after  thee.

Perchance,  more  (than  his  due),  Hafiz's  allowance  (of  wine)  the  Saki  gave,
That  disarranged  became  the  Maulavi's  turban-tassel.

1 1 .  Hafiz  is  here  represented  as  a  Maulavi.

The  couplet  means  that  the  Saki  gave  Hafiz  more  than  his  (due)  allowance.

THE  LETTER  YA  (*£  847

518, (534).

I.  (O  beloved ! )  come  ;  towards  us  this  hatred  exercise  not ;

For  the  light  of  ancient  society, thou  hast.

My  counsel  hear ;  for  this  pearl  (of  counsel)  much  better  (is)

Than  that  jewel  that,  in  the  treasury, thou  hast.

(0  Saki ! )  to  the  cry  of  the  poor  wine-drinkers  come. (Them,  give  wine)  ; —
For  God's  sake, — if  the  wine  of  last  night  thou  hast.

But,  to  the  profligates,  thy  face  how  mayst  thou  show,

Thou  who, — the  mirror  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon,-—  thou  hast  ?

5.  O  Shaikh  !  sense,  keep  ;  against  the  profligates  speak  not  \

Lest  that  with  God's  love  hate thou  have.

(O  Zahid  ! )  fearest  thou  not  my  fiery  (burning)  sigh  ?

Thou  knowest,  the  woollen  khirka,  (easily  consumed)—  thou  hast.

Hafiz !  I  have  not  seen  (verse)  more  beautiful  than  thy  verse,

Which,  in  thy  heart,— by  the  great  Kuran  (I  swear),——  thou  hast.

5.  O  Shaikh  !  of  the  profligates,  complain  not ;  their  defect,  reveal  not ;  for  whatever  they  do,  God

doeth.

Then,  thou  mayst  say  that  hate  thou  hast  with  the  decree  of  God,  to  whom evil thou
imputest.

6.  From  iiju-So  (wool)  they  make  tinder. Upon  the  woollen  khirka,  fire  quickly  seizeth.

848  DiVAN-l-HAFJ£

519, (526).

I.  In  my  eye,  the  eye-brow  of  one  moon  of  form,  I  have  made  ;
The  fancy  of  one  fresh  of  down,  I  have  pictured  a  place.

The  hope  is  that  the  order  of  my  love-play

May  reach  from  that  bow-eyebrow  to  the  rank  of—— a  (beautiful)  Tughra.

From  the  hand,  went  my  head  ;  from  expectation,  my  eye  consumed  ;—

In  desire  of  the  head  and  of  the  eye  of  an  assembly-adorner.

In  that  place  where,  with  a  glance,  the  lovely  ones  strike  the  sword, —
Wonder  not,  at  a  head  which,  hath  fallen  (severed)  at a  foot.

5. (From  separation),  perturbed is  my  heart;  fire  to  the  khirka,  I  will  set  (and,

from  this,  escape)  :
Come,  come ;  for,  glorious,  it  will  make  a  spectacle.

Since,  from  His (the  true  Beloved's)  face  the  (effulgent)  moon  in  the  bed-
chamber is  mine,

For  the  twinkling  of  the  star  (the  illusory  beloved)  where  is  (even)

a  little  solicitude?

My  heart's  rein  I,  the  darvlsh,  have  given  to  that  one  (God),

To  whom,  for  any  one's  crown,  or  throne,  is  not  (even) a  little  solicitude.

Separation  or  union — what  martereth  it  ? The  Friend's  will,  seek  :
For,  from  Him,  (aught)  beside  (union  with)  Him,  vain  is a  wish.

4.  The  second  line  may  be  :  —

At  a  head  which  at  the  foot  hath  fallen  (in  obeisance),  wonder  not.

8.  Separation,  or  union. Both  are  equal.

If  He  appiove  of  separation,  separation,  seek ;  if  He  approve  of  union,  union,  seek.

THE  LETTER  YA  849

In  the  day  of  events  (of  death)  make  ye  our  coffin  of  the  (lofty)  cypress,

For,  we  go  with  the  mark  of a  lofty  one.

10.  For  scattering  (on  Hafiz),  through  exceeding  desire  the  fishers bring forth

pearls,
If  Hafiz's  bark  should  reach a  sea.

850  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

520, (525) •

i.  By  His  (the  true  Beloved's)  soul  I  swear  that  if  power  of  (sacrificing)  my  life

-  had  been,

The  humble  offering  of  His  slave,  it would  have  been.

If  foot-bound  to  His  tress,  my  heart  had  not  been,

In  this  dark  dust-heap  (this  world),  rest  mine,  how would  have  been  ?

Would  to  God  by  my  door,  like  a  flash  of  light,  he  had  entered,

(So)  that,  on  my  two  eyes  his  order  current had  been  !

In  face,  like  the  (resplendent)  sun  of  the  sky,  peerless  of  climes  is  He :

In  heart,  alas,  that  (only)  a  little  kind  He should  have  been.

5.  Him,  even  in  sleep,  I  see  not. What  room  for  (speaking  of)  union?

When  this  (union)  might  not  be,  (Him),  we  saw  not. Would  to  God  that  (the
beholding  of  Him  in  sleep) had  been.

Confessor,  in  service  to  His  stature,  the  (tongueless)  cypress

would  have  been,
If,  to  it,  like  the  noble  (ten-tongued)  lily,  tongue- had  been.

Forth  from  the  screen,  when  would  have  fallen  Hafiz's  wail  (of  lustrous  verse),
If  not  fellow-companion  of  the  birds,  morning-singing,  he——  had  been  ?

THE  LETTER  YA  ^S  85 1

521, (542)-

i.  If,  kind  (on  our  state),  the  heart  of  that  Beloved  had  been,  how  well  it

would  have  been  ;
For,  if  (kind)  like  that,  He  had  been,  not  like  this  our  state would  have  been.

If,  me,  head  exalting  and  dear,  time  had  kept,

That  dust  of  His  threshold,  my  throne  of  honour——  would  have  been.

The  dust  of  His  foot,  what  its  price  is,  manifest would  have  been

If  perpetual,  precious  life had  been.

I  would  have  said  : — "The  breeze  of  the  Friend's  tress,  what  is  it  worth?"
If,  for  every  hair-tip,  mine  a  thousand  lives had  been.

5.  O  Lord  !  the  order  of  our  heart-happiness,  less  how  would  it  have  been,
If,  from  the  evil  of  time,  its  the  mark  of  safety had  been  ?

If,  not  the  barrier  of  the  water  of  my  eye,  the  fancy  of  Thee  had  been,
Flowing  in  every  corner,  a  thousand  fountains  would  have  been.

Would  to  God !  me,  the  trace  to  His  street,  some  one  had  given,
So that,  of  the  garden  and  the  rose-garden  (illusory  delights),  independence
—  would  have  been.

Would  to  God  !  forth  from  the  screen,  like  a  tear-drop,  He  had  come,

So  that,  on  my  two  eyes,  His  order  current would  have  been.

If  the  Path,  love's  circle  had  not  closed,

Not  like  a  point,  in  the  midst,  heart-bereft  Hafiz would  have  been.

8.  The  second  line  occurs  in  Ode  520,  c.  3.

5R2

852  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

522,  (537)-

I.  Perchance,  with  desire  (of  khilvat)  by  the  marge  of  a  pool,  thou  sittest  not,
If  not,  every  calamity,  that  thou  experiencest,  all  thou  experiences!  from  self-
seeingness.

(I  conjure  thee)  by  God,  Whose  chosen  slave,  thou  art,
That,  to  this  ancient  slave,  none  thou  choose  (prefer).

After  this  (together  are) — we  and  beggary. For,  at  the  head  of  love's  stage,
To  (wretched)  way-farers  (lovers)  is  no  remedy  save  wretchedness.

Thee,  the  Khusrau  of  those  moon  of  face,  respect  and  shame  did  ;
Afarin  on  thee  !  for,  worthy  of  a  hundred  such  thou  art.

5.  If,  in  safety,  love's  deposit  I  take,  there  is  no  fear ;

Easy  is  the  state  of  being  void  of  heart  (heart-bereft)  if  be  not  the  state  of  being
void  of  faith  (infidelity).

If,  as  to  the  watcher's  tyranny  patience  I  exercise  not,  what  may  I  do?
To  (wretched)  lovers,  is  no  remedy  save  wretchedness.

From  thy  sincere  slave,  a  disinterested  word,  hear,

O  thou  that,  the  cynosure  of  great  ones,  truth  beholding,  art !

A  dainty  one  like  thee, — pure  of  heart,  pure  of  nature, —
That  is  best  that,  with  evil  men,  thou  sit  not.

I.  O  Heart-ravisher,  Who,  from  exceeding  independence,  displayest  not  Thy  face  in  the  mirror,  per-
chance, through  desire  Thou  sittest  by  the  bank  of  a  (flashing)  stream;  and  (for  the  injustice  that,
from  the  power  of  Thy  beauty,  heart-distracting,  passeth  over  lovers)— giveth  justice.

If  not,  the  unjust  blood  becometh  thy  skirt-seizer ;  and  every  calamity  that  ariseth,  ariseth  from
thee.

When  from  the  place  of  kjjilvat  into  splendour  Thou  comest;  and  to  the  seekers,  Thy  face
showest,— the  lovers  all  begin  "  Oh  woe  is  me;"  and,  like  the  half-slain  bird,  trepidation, dis-
play.

The  second  line  may  be : —

If  not,  every  calamity  that  thou  seest,  thou  seest,  all  from  thyself.
3.  The  second  couplet  occurs  in  c.  6.
8.  ^JJJjlJ  may  bfi  written  with  : —

" (a)  the  ya,e  nisbat  (the  ya  of  affinity),  in  which  case,  there  is  no  difficulty.
(6)  the  ya,e  tankir  (the  indefinite  ya),  „  „ difficulty.

THE  LETTER  YA  S^  853

Pity  cometh  mine  that,  to  the  spectacle  of  the  sward,  thou  movest ;

For,  more  pleasant  than  the  red  rose  ;  and  more  fresh  than  the  wild  white  rose,

—  thou  art.

10.  O  rose  (beloved) !  wonderful,— with  (all)  thy  grace  thou  sittest  with  the  thorn
(the  watcher);

Apparently,  in  it,  the  (good)  counsel  (of  thy  welfare),  thou  seest.

From  the  rose-garden,  arose  a  morning  breeze  in  desire  of  thee  ;

For,  like  the  beautiful,  red,  beperfumed  rose;  and,  like  the  wild  white  rose,
fragrant thou  art.

From  left  and  right,  the  bottle-play  of  my  (bloody)  tears  thou  seest:
If  a  moment,  on  this  spectacle-place  of  (my)  vision,  thou  sittest.

O  candle  of  Chigil !  with  this  delicacy,  and  heart-alluringness thou  art ;

Worthy  of  the  banquet-place  of  Khwaja  Jalalu-d-Din,  thou  art.

y$-  signifies  in  case : —

(a)  "  when ;"  and  the  second  line  is  the  consequence.

(b)  "  like ;" „  „  „ predicate ;  and  "  a  daintv  one  "  is  the  agent  to  "  sit

not."
According  to  (a) : —

Since  thou  art  dainty,  pure  of  heart,  pure  of  nature,
That  is  best *  *  *

9.  To  the  second  line  add  :—

No  need  of  the  rose  garden  hast  thou.

10.  Otherwise —

O  rose  !  wonderful, — through  courtesy,  thou  sittest  with  the  thorn  (whence,  save  injury,  naught
Cometh);
Apparently,  in  that  (courtesy)  the  good  counsel  of  time,  thou  seest.

12.  tyj^*ijyi  (bottle-playing)  signifies :—

(a)  a  dance,  in  which,  supporting  on  the  head  bottles  full  of  rose-water,  they  dance ;  and

allow  none  of  the  bottles  to  get  out  of  place.

(b)  sport,  pastime.

(c)  On  the  day  of  'ids  (a'yad),  glass-makers  put  red  water  into  bottles ;  and  sell  them  to  boys,

who  therewith  sport.

(d)  bloody  tears,  which,  into  his  own  bosom,  the  lover  sheddeth.

13.  Maulana  Jalalu-d-Din-i-Rumi  (b.  1207,  d.  1273).

854  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

Taketh  the  patience  of  the  heart  of  Hafiz,  the  torrent  of  these  streaming  tears,
O  pupil  of  my  eye !  come  to  my  aid.

14.  diUx*  (the  black  of  the  eye)  signifies  : —
the  pupil  of  the  eye.
(a)  It  LJ#  be  Persian—

Powerfulness  hath  reached  perfection ;  and  brought  powerlessness  of  disaster.
O  pupil  of  my  eye!  if  thou  approach  and  discover  my  powerlessness,  thou  wilt  not  turn
thy  face,  from  me.

(j)  If  |_5Jjo  be  Arabic—

O  "pupil  of  my  eye !  my  readiness  behold ;  and  me,  discover. For  what  taketh  perfec-
tion, also  taketh  declination.

THE  LETTER  YA  ^  855

523,  (545).

I.  On  the  day  of  judgment,  thee  the  sky  happily  aided ;

Let  us  see— thanks,  how  thou  mayst  offer;  in  thanks,  what  thou  mayst  bring.

In  love's  street,  kingly  rank  they  purchase  not

(Here)  make  confession  of  service  ;  and  claim  of  attendance.

That  one  who  fell ;  and  whose  hand,  God  seized,

Say : — "(So  that  thy  hand,  God  may  seize)  on  thee,  be  it  that  the  grief  of  the
"  fallen  thou  mayst  suffer."

Saki !  with  the  reward  for  tidings  of  joy  enter  by  my  door,

So  that,  one  moment,  forth  from  my  heart,  grief  thou  mayst  take.

5.  In  the  highway  of  rank  and  of  lordship  is  many  a  danger,
That  (is)  best  that  by  this  acclivity,  light  of  burden,  thou  pass.

(Together  are)— the  Sultan  and  the  thought  of  the  army,  and  the  passion  for

treasure,  and  (the  pomp  of  the)  crown  :
(Together  are) — the darvish, and tranquillity of  heart,  and the corner of

kalandardom.

t

To  the  limit  of  thought  and  spirit  is  the  success  of  desire  ;
From  the  king, — the  liberal  gift ;  from  the  grace  of  God,— aid.

One  sufi-istic  word,  I  will  utter ;  permission  is  there  ?

"  0  light  of  the  eye !  peace  (is)  better  than  war  and  dominion."

Hafiz !  from  thy  face,  -the  dust  of  poverty  and  ot  contentment  wash  not ;
For,  better  (is)  this  dust  than  the  work  of  alchemy.

3.  Unless  one  falleth,  one  cannot  be  raised.
Fall ;  and,  thee,  God  will  raise.

6.  Kalandar. See  Ode  58.

856  DiVAN-l-HAFIg,

524,  (547).

I.  Two  friends  (holy  travellers)  good  of  understanding,  and  of  old  wine

a  quantity,  two  "  mans,'
A  little  leisure,  and  a  book,  and—  a  sward-corner.

For  this,  and  the  next,  world  I  give  not  this  state ;
Though,  (of  carpers)  momently,  fall  upon  me

I, VVUllU 1 KIW MW» L1110 Olall* ,

momently,  fall  upon  me a  crowd.

b  (wine/  signifies  :—

Love  which  is  the  deposit  (without  charge)  in  the  nature  of  holy  travellers  from  the  great  Lord
God,  whereof  their  deeds  give  proof.

(two  mans)  signifies  : —
one  man  (i  gallon)  for  each  of  the  two  friends,
(man)  signifies : —
(a)  forty  sirs  ( jtff  )
(t>) „ travellers.
The  value  of  the  man  is  : —
&

man-i-Tanris = 6^34
„ Tabriz = 6*50  (Tahran).
„ Bushahr  = 7'8o
„ Shiraz = 12*68
„ Shah = 13-00  (Isfahan,  Yazd).
„ Hind = 82-13

»  (leisure)  signifies  : —

(a)  being  free  from  the  world's  vicissitudes.

(b)  being  void  of  attachment  to  property,  to  offspring,  to  relations,  and  to  family.
Calamities  breed  calamities,  whereof  each  one  is  a  barrier  to  the  Path.

<*J3S  (book)  signifies  : —

the  book  of  God,  wherein  are  written  accounts  of  those  gone  before.

^^  (the  sward)  signifies  : —
the  world.

Since  I  know  the  decree "  First  the  Friend,  then  the  Path," — I  desire  a  wise  friend,  so  that

we  may  be  two  wise  friends  together ;  and  may,  through  the  recollection  ol  that  ancient  love
(which  is  a  deposit  in  the  holy  traveller's  nature),  scatter  a  great  fire  in  our  own  nature ;
may,  with  delight  and  desire,  pass  life ;  may  turn  aside  our  perturbed  heart  from  attachment
to  property  or  to  person ;  and  may  with  the  book,  which  is  the  guide  to  the  comprehending  of
the  ancients  and  the  moderns  f,^,^.**!*  ;  ^j-JS*)  >  sit  in  a  corner  together.

Thus,  may  the  doors  of  manifestations  be  opened ;  and  the  splendours  of  viewing  face  to  face  be
gleaming.

THE  LETTER  YA  V

Every  one  who,  for  the  world's  treasure,  gave  the  treasure  of  contentment,
Sold,  the  (precious)  Yusuf  of  Egypt  for—  a  very  paltry  sum.

Come;  for  not  less  becometh  the  amplitude  of  this  workshop  (the  world),
By  the  austerity  of  one  like  thee  ;  or,  by  the  profligacy  of—-
one like  me.

5.  On  the  day  of  events  (of  death),  with  (cheering)  wine,  'tis  necessary  to  tell  one's

grief ;
For,  on  none,  is  reliance  at a  time  like  this.

Happy  of  heart,  in  a  corner  sit ;  and  behold

That  none  keepeth  in  mind  so  strange a  calamity.

In  the  hand  of  the  mean  (the  watcher),  I  keep  seeing  my  idol  (the  beloved) ;

Thus,  the  (vengeful)  sky  recognised  the  right  of  service  of

one  like  me.

In  the  mirror  of  the  Picture-establisher  (God),  the  hidden  form,  behold :

If,  for  thee  out  of  the  country  of  contentment,  desire  maketh

a  native  land.

O  heart !  strive  thou  for  patience. For  God  delivereth  not

A  seal-ring  so  precious  (as  patience)  to  the  hand  of an  evil  one.

10.  From  the  fierce  wind  of  vicissitude,  one  cannot  see,

That,  in  this  sward,  hath  been  (even)  a  red  rose,  or  a  wild  white  rose.

From  this  simum  (blast  of  lust)  that,  by  the  garden-borders,  passed,
Wonder !  that  (from  the  heart  of  love's  lust)  the  colour  of  a  rose  remaineth,  or
the  perfume  of a  jessamine.

3.  "  The  paltriest  price." See  the  Kuran,  xii.  20.

4.  "  The  world's  workshop." See  John.  v.  17.
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto;  and  I  work."

6.  This  Ode  was  written  when  the  Turkamans  had  taken  Shiraz.

10. The  wild  white  rose  "  signifies  :—
the  fair  ore  of  Shiraz.

858  DIVAN-I-HARZ.

I  have  heard  that,  for  dogs,  thou  appointest  a  collar ;

On  Hafiz's  neck,  why  placest  thou  not a  rope?

Hafiz !  in  this  calamity,  ruined  became  time's  temper ;

Where  is  the  thought  of  a  physician  ;  or  the  judgment  of a  Barhaman  ?

12.  The  Hadis  saith  :—

The  world  is  carrion  ;  they  that  seek  it  are  dogs.

13.  Barhaman  signifies : —

(a)  a  "brahmin."

(b)  an  ardent  lover.

(c)  a  very  learned  man.
See  Ode  556,  c.  5.

THE  LETTER  YA  S:

525,  (546).

I.  Not,  in  all  the  cloisters  of  the  magians,  is  like  me

a  distraught  one

(In)  one  place,  the  khirka  (my  existence  is)  the  pledge  for  wine ;  the  book  (the
heart  in)  another  place.

The  heart,  which  is  a  royal  mirror,  hath  (by  worldly  affairs  and  by  the  dross  of

sin)  a  great  dust,  (the  prohibitor  of  divine  bounty) ;
From  God,  I  seek  the  society  of one,  luminous  of  opinion.

From  my  eye  to  the  skirt,  I  have  established  streams  (of  tears),  so  that,  per.

chance,
In  my  bosom,  they  may  place  one,  straight  of  stature.

The  bark  (-shaped)  cup,  bring ;  for,  without  the  Beloved's  face,

From  the  heart's  grief,  every  corner  of  the  eye  hath  become

a  great  ocean  (of  tears).

5.  By  the  hand  of  an  idol,  wine-selling,  repentance  I  have  made  ;

That  again,  wine  I  drink  not  without  the  face  of

a  banquet-adorner.

The  mystery  of  this  subtlety,  perchance,  the  candle  will  bring  to  its  tongue  ;

If  not,  for  speech,  the  moth  hath  not  (even)

a  little  solicitude.

To  me,  mistress-worshipping,  speak  not  of  aught  beside  ;

For,  beyond  her  and  the  cup  of  wine,  for  none  is  mine,  (even)

a  little  solicitude.

t.  c/**  J*.1*  signifies  : —

This  world,  the  place  of  discovering  the  absolute  existence.
dSji.  (mantle)  signifies  :—

The  existence  of  the  holy  traveller,  the  end  of  whose  travelling  of  the  stages  of  tarikat  is  the
beginning  of  entrance  into  love's  mansion.

Ji,}  (book)  signifies  :—

the  traveller's  heart,  darkened  with  thought  and  deliberation.
2.  The  "  one  luminous  of  opinion  "  signifies  :  —
the  murshid.

5sz

860  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

If  of  the  way  of  its  (beauteous)  eye,  the  narcissus  boasted, — grieve  not  (for,

vision,  it  hath  not)  ;
The  man  of  vision  goeth  not  in  pursuit  of a  non-see-er.

How  pleasantly  to  me  came  this  tale  when  in  the  morning  time,  said,

At  the  door  of  the  wine-house,  with  drum  and  reed,  a  Christian  :—

10.  "  If  the  being  a  musulman  be  of  this  sort  that  Hafiz  is,-^

"Alas,  if,  after  to-day,  be——  a  to-morrow."

10.  In  the  second  line,  is  denial  of  the  resurrection. Therefore,  Hafiz  put  the  words  in  the  mouth

of  a  tarsa  (c.  9),  which  signifies  a  Christian,  an  infidel,  a  fire-worshipper.
In  Sir  Gore  Onsley's  notices  of  Persian  poets,  1846  (p.  32)  this  couplet  is  quoted. See  Ode
556.  c.  7.

THE  LETTER  YA

526,  (548).

I.  Last  night,  in  sleep,  I  saw  that  forth,  a  great  moon——  had  come,

From  the  reflection  of  the  face  whereof,  to  an  end,  the  night  of  separation

had  come.

The  explanation is what?  The  much  journeyed Friend (the true Beloved)

arriveth  ;
O  would  that  by  my  door,  He,  splendour-giving  and  adorned, had  come !

My  Saki,  auspicious  of  omen  ! — whose  mention  be  for  good •

Ever,  by  my  door,  with  the  goblet  and  the  cup,  he used  to  come.

Happy,  had  it  been  if,  in  sleep,  his  native  land  he  had  seen  ;

So  that  the  guide  to  us,  the  recollection  of  its  association

would  have  come.

5.  That  one  who,  thee,  road-guide  to  stone-heartedness,  made,

O  would  that  against  a  stone  (so  that  he  might  fall),  his  foot^— had  come.

If,  with  force  and  gold,  to  our  hand,  the  bounty  of  eternity  without  beginning

(union  with  the  true  Beloved)  had  come,
The  water  (of  life)  of  Khizr.  Sikandar's  portion——  would  have  come.

My  soul,  I  would  have  scattered  for  Him,  that  Heart-cherisher,  if,

Like  the  pure  soul,  splendour-displaying,  into  my  bosom,  He  had  come.

(0  true  Beloved  !  wherefore  fleest  Thou  ?) Be  memory  of  that  time,  when,  from

roof  and  door,  to  me,
The  message  of  the  Beloved  and  the  letter  of  the  Heart-ravisher,  — —

used  to  come.

2.  Couplets  I  and  2  form  a  kita'band.

3.  See  Ode  249.

6.  Not  by  man's  choice  or  power,  is  union  with  the  true  Beloved. Whatever  in  eternity  without

beginning  is  decreed,  the  portion  becometh.

"  Honour,  Thou  givest  to  whom  Thou  wishest;  whom  Thou  wishest,  Thou  degradest."
Kuran,  P.  Discourse,  Section  viii  "  Opinions  of  the  A'shariyyin,"  clause  i.

7.  Beyond  limit,  is  my  desire  of  union.

862  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Such  power  of  tyranny,  Thy  watcher  where  would  have  obtained,

If,  one  night,  to  the  Ruler's  door,  an  oppressed  one had  come?

10.  Love's  desire,  how  know  the  immature  ones  of  the  Path?

One  of  ocean-heart  (generous)  seek  ;  and  a  bold  one  (who  is) a  chief.

If,  in  Hafiz's  way,  another  had  written,

Agreeably  to  the  nature  of  the  king,  skill-cherishing,  it would  have  come.

THE  LETTER  YA  S?  863

527,  (550).

I.  Tis  a  time  when  expectant,  us thou  keepest;  ,

Not  in  the  way  of  others,  thy  slaves, thou  keepest.

Not  opened  towards  me  became  the  corner  of  the  eye  of  thy  satisfaction  ;
Like  this,  the  honour  of  those  possessed  of  vision thou  keepest.

(O  true  Beloved !)  from  the  stain  of  grief  (of  separation)  from  Thee,  escaped

neither  the  rose  nor  the  bulbul  in  the  garden ;
All  clamouring,  garment-rending, Thou  keepest.

Best  that  Thou  cover  up  that  arm  when,  for  the  sake  of  colouring,

In  the  heart's  blood  of  those  full  of  skill,  Thy  hand Thou  keepest.

5.  O  heart !  the  father  of  experience  of  the  end,  thou  art. Wherefore  (is  it  that),
Desire  for  the  love  and  the  fidelity  of  these  youths thou  keepest?

Departed  heart  and  faith  ;  but  truly  I  cannot  speak,

For  in  respect  of  them  (heart  and  faith),  me,  consumed  of  heart,

Thou  keepest.

Though,  profligacy  and  depravity  are  our  sin,  yet,

A  lover  spake,  saying: — "  On  them  (profligacy  and  depravity),  the  slave

Thou  keepest."

0  thou  that,  in  the  coloured  tattered  garment  (of  the  Sufi),  seekest  the  delight

of  the  presence  (of  God)! — (it,  how  mayst  thou  obtain?)
Wonderful !  by  those  void  of  knowledge,  hope  of  satiation thou  keepest.

10.  O  eye  and  lamp  !  since  the  narcissus  of  the  garden  of  vision  thou  art,

With  me,  heart  shattered,  the  head  heavy  wherefore  (is  it  that)

thou  keepest  ?

Since,  to  the  rose  and  to  the  bulbul,  the  breeze  breathed  the  page  of  Thy  beauty

(and  therewith  made  them  acquainted),
Distraught  of  state  and  expectant,  all Thou  keepest.

5,  O  heart,  much  experience,  thou  hast.

864  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

From  the  mine  of  the  other  world,  is  the  jewel  of  the  (world-viewing)  cup  of

Jamshid  (the  Arif  acquainted  with  m'arifat);
From  the  clay  of  the  pitcher-makers  (dry  zahids),  desire  (for  this  jewel  vainly)

— —  Thou  keepest.

Hafiz !  in  reproach,  abandon  not  the  day  of  safety  ;

From  the  passing  world,  what  expectation  (is  it  that) thou  keepest?

THE  LETTER  YA  ^  865

528,  (549).

I.  One  morning  to  the  garden  I  went  a  rose  to  pluck,

Suddenly,  came  to  my  ear  the  clamour  of  a  bulbul.

Like  me,  wretched,  in  love  for  a  rose,  entangled  he  was  ;

And  into  the  sward,  by  hi*  plaint,  cast  •  a  clamour.

Momently,  in  that  garden-sward,  I  sauntered  ;

On  that  rose  and  bulbul,  I  kept—  a-musing.

The  rose  became  the  lover  of  the  thorn ;  and  the  bulbul,  the  associate  of  love
(and  its  pain)  ;

Not  a  change  to  this  (the  rose)  ;  nor  to  that  (the  bulbul),

a  change.

5.  When,  in  my  heart,  the  bulbul's  voice  impression  made,

I  so  became  that  mine  remained  not  a  particle  of  patience.

Of  this  garden,  many  a  rose  keepeth  blossoming. But,
From  it,  without  the  calamity  of  the  thorn,  none  plucked

a  rose.

Hafiz !  of  this  centre-place  of  existence,  have  no  hope  ;

A  thousand  defects,  it  hath  ;  it  hath  not  a  single  excellence.

866  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

529,  (553).

i.  With  this  beauteous  writing  that  on  the  rose  of  thy  cheek

thou  drawest,

On  the  page  (leaf)  of  the  rose,  and  of  the  rose-bed,  the  line  (of  effacement)
.,  thou  drawest.

My  tear,  sitting  in  the  fold  of  the  hidden  house,*
From  within  the  seven  screens  to  the  market  (of  renown) Thou  drawest.

By  the  perfume  of  thy  tress,  the  sluggish  mover  like  the  (soft)  morning  breeze,
Momently,  in  bond  and  chain  into  (swift)  action, Thou  drawest.

Momently,  in  recollection  of  that  lip,  wine  of  hue  ;  and  of  that  intoxicated  eye,
Me,  from  khilvat  to  the  vintner's  house, •  Thou  drawest.

5. (0  true  Beloved  !)  Thou  saidest : — "Thy  head  bound  to  our  saddle-strap  is  fit :"
'Tis  easy  (here  is  my  head),  if  the  trouble  of  this  load, Thou  endurest.

With  (against)  Thy  eye  and  eye-brow,  what  deliberation  of  heart  may  I  make  ?
Alas  this  bow  that,  against  me  miserable, Thou  drawest.

Come  back !  so  that,  with  Thy  cheek,  far  I  may  put  the  evil-eye,
O  fresh  rose,  that,  from  this  thorn  (Hafiz,  possessed  of  imperious  lust),  Thy
skirt Thou  drawest.

Hafiz  !  from  the  favour  of  time,  what  more  seekest  thou  ?

Wine  thou  tastest ;  and  (through  the  hand)  the  heart-possessor's  tress

thou  drawest.

1.  Thy  beauty  effaceth  the  beauty  of  the  rose.

2.  "  The  seven  screens." See  Ode  364.,  c.  5.

THE  LETTER  YA  ^  867

530, (553)-

i.  To  me,  from  the  heart-ravisher  who  will  convey  the  kindness  (of  a  letter)  of

a  pen?
The  foot-man  of  the  wind  is  where,— if  he  still  doeth a  kindness?

No  complaint  (only  mention),  I  make. But,  the  cloud  of  mercy  of  the  Friend,
To  the  field  of  liver-thirsty  ones,  gave  not  (even) a  little  dew.

In  love's  path,  I  considered  that  the  deliberation  of  wisdom

Is  like  a  little  night-dew,  that,  on  the  sea,  draweth  a  mark  (wrinkle).

Come  ;  for,  though  my  khirka  is  the  endowment  of  the  wine-house,

Of  the  property  of  endowment,  thou  seest  not  to  my  name  (even),

a  diram.

5.  For  one  reed  of  his  candy,  why  purchase  they  not  that  one  (Hafiz)

Who,  a  hundred  sugar-scatterings,  made  from  the  reed  of

a  single  pen  ?

From  hypocrisy,  my  heart  took  (flight)  ;  and  the  drum  (was)  beneath  the  blanket  ;

Come,  so  that  at  the  wine-house  door,  I  may  up-lift

a  great  standard.

Love's  pain  knoweth  not  the  road-sitting  physician  (the  dry  zahid;  the  sufi,

void  of  wisdom) :
O  one  dead  of  heart !  go  ;  to  hand  get—  a  Masih-breath.

O  heart  (Saki) !  head-pain  giveth  the  tale  of  how  and  why  ;

The  cup  (of  pure  wine)  take ;  and,  from  (the  care  of)  thy  own  life,  rest

a  moment.

Come  (and  drink  wine). For  the  time-recogniser  selleth  two  worlds  (this  and

the  next),
For  one  cup  of  pure  wine;  and  for  the  society  of  a  lovely  idol.

6.  |*jl/jij  Jik  (the  drum,  beneath  the  blanket)  signifies  :  —

remaining  concealed  from  some  one.

7.  "One  of  Masih-breath  "  signifies  :  —

the  murshid.

5T2

868

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

10.  Not  love's  way  is  ever  pleasure  and  ease ;

If,  our  companion,  thou  be,  drink  the  poison  of a  great  grief.

O  king  !  in  Hafiz's  hand  is  naught  worthy  of  thy  value

Save  the  supplication  of  a  night ;  and  the  prayer  of a  morning.

ii.  See  Ode  544,  c.  3,  »5-

THE  LETTER  YA  S>  86p

531,  (582).

I.  From  the  street  of  the  friend  (the  perfect  murshid),  came  the  fragrant  breeze  of
the  nau-ruz  (guidance  in  the  Path  to  God) ;

From  this  breeze,  if  them  desire  aid,  the  lamp  of  the  heart,

thou  mayest  kindle.

If,  like  the  red  rose,  a  particle  of  (red  gold)  thou  hast,  for  God's  sake,  expend  it

in  pleasure ;
For  caused  Karun's  errors,  the  passion  for  gold-gathering.

A  wine  like  the  pure  soul,  I  have  ;  yet  its  detraction,  the  Sufi  maketh  :

O  God !  let  not  ill  fortune  be  the  sage's  portion-^—  (even  one  day) !

Seeking  the  path  of  (the  true  Beloved's)  desire  is  what? 'Tis  the  abandoning

of  our  own  desire  ;
The  crown  of  sovereignty  is  that  which  from  this  abandoning,——

thou  stitchest.

5,  The  lament  of  the  turtle-dove  by  the  marge  of  the  stream, I  know  not  where-
fore it  is :
Perchance,  like  me,  a  grief  it  hath night  and  day.

Separated  became  thy  sweet  friend (the  murshid). 0  candle  !  now,  sit  alone

For  this  the  sky's  decree  is  whether  thou  be  content;  or  whether

thou  consume.

I.  The  nau-ruz,  the  first  of  the  month  Ferwardin(  March),  when  the  sun  is  in  Aries,  and  is  a  festival
instituted  by  Gabrs,  lasting  from  three  to  six  days.

It  is  said  that  on  this  day  t —

(a)  Jamshid  (B.C.  800)  entered  the  palace  of  Persepolis  (TakJjt-i-Jamshid,  or Istakhar)

which  he  had  built }  and  that  he  ordered  the  day  to  be  kept  as  a  feast.
(4)  God  began  the  creation,  and  ordered  the  planets  to  move  in  their  orbits.
On  this  day,  the  king  attended  by  his  nobles  and  by  the  army  marcheth  out  of  his  capital ;

revieweth  the  army ;  receiveth  tribute  and  presents ;  and  giveth  dresses  of  honour  to  the

chief  nobles.

The  nau-ruz  is  known  as  t —

nau-ruz-i-Jamshid  'id-i-bahaf

'id-i-sultani
„  „  kadim

„  „  nau  ruz
„  „  JamshFd.

The  day  of  the  new  year  (observed  by  Muslims,  Parsis,  Armenians)  is  the  day  on  which  the  sun
entereth  Aries  (the  first  mansion). The  Jews  observe  the  festival  ten  days  later.

§7°  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Within  the  screen,  speech  I  utter;  forth  from  thyself,  like  the  rose-bud  (from

the  bud)  come ;
For,  not  more  than  a  space  of  five  days,  is  the  order  of  the  chief  of — a  nau-ruz.

Excluded  from  the  means  of  joy,  in  wonder  of  knowledge,  one  cannot  be  ;
Saki !  come;  to  the  fool  arriveth  the  largest -  victual-portion.

O  heart !  go  ;  wine  drink ;  and  profligacy  and the  abandoning  of hypocrisy

practise :
For  a  Path  better  than  this,  I  wonder  whether—  thou  mayst  learn.

10.  To  the  garden,  go  that,  from  the  bulbul,  love's  mysteries  thou  mayst  take  to

mind;
To  the  assembly,  come;  so  that  from  Hafiz,  ghazal-singing,

thou  mayst  learn.

The  Burhan-i-kati',  the  Farhang-i-Jahangiri,  the  Anjuman  Ara,  and  others,  are  of  opinion  that
the  new  year  began  on  Urmuzd-ruz,  the  first  day  of  Farwardin  (March).

From  the  first  to  the  sixth  day  was  called— nau-ruz-i-kuchak;  from  the  seventh  to  the  twelfth, —
nau-ruz-i-buzurg.

When  the  sun  entereth  the  vernal  equinox  is  the  nau-ruz.
8.  "  The  fool." See  Ode  549,  c.  4.

THE  LETTER  YA  S

532,  (550.

I.  (O Saki!)  of  that  (pure)  wine  of  love  (for  God)  whereby  matured  becometh

every  immature  one,

Although  it  is  the  month  of  Ramazan  (so  that  I  may  escape-from  this  immature-
ness  and  to  matureness,  attain)  bring  a  great  cup.

Passed  days,  since  the  hand  of  me  miserable  clasped  not,

The  leg  of  one  box-tree  of  stature ;  the  arm  of one  silver  of  limb.

O  heart!  though  the  fast  (of  Ramazan)  be  the  dear  guest,

Regard  its  society  a  gift;  its  going a  favour.

Now  (in  the  Ramazan),  to  the  cloister-door  fleeth  not  the  wise  bird,
For,  at  every  assembly  of  exhortation,  is  placed a  snare.

5.  No  complaint,  do  I  make  of  the  zahids,  ill  of  nature. The  way  is  this : —

That,  when  a  (bright)  morning  dawneth,  in  its  pursuit  falleth

a  (dark)  evening.

I.  Drawing  the  raw  juice  from  the  grape,  they  put  it  into  jars  which  awhile  they  bury.
When  the  fermenting  juice  gathers  foam,  they  consider  it  mature.

On  the  wine  in  the  jars,  they  sprinkle  willow-ashes ;  and  wait  for  the  dregs  to  settle  and  for  the
pure  wine  to  rise.

They  call  :—

(a)  {&•  Lf*  "  the  pure  (raw)  wine :  "  this,  they  sell  to  the  rich.

(b)  (3^)  "  ravak,"  the  liquor  produced  by  distillation  of  the  dregs. This  has  neither  the

strength,  nor  the  flavour,  of  ^  ,_/•

t/Lirfj  si*  (the  month  Ramazan)  signifies  :  —

austerity  and  piety,  whereby  purifying  and  the  power  of  seeing  clearly  are  gained. See

Ode  113,  c.  i.
That  love,  that  descendeth  the  palate  of  the  immature  one,  freeth  him  from  immatureness ;  and

by  its  own  matureness,  maketh  him  mature.
Though  it  is  the  time  of  austerities;  and  love's  burden,  I  am  not  fit  to  bear,  bring  a  cup,  that

may  make  mature  our  immatureness;  and  may  quench  the  bitterness  of  the  palate.
This  is  from  exceeding  desire,  and  exceeding  bitterness  of  palate.

5.  The  enemy  in  pursuit  of  the  zahid,  is  his  own  ill-nature. Doubtless,  he  will  receive  the  requital

of  his  ill  work. Of  the  zahid,  intent  on  my  injury,  I  complain  not.
The  (bright)  morning  I  am ;  he  is  the  (dark)  evening.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

When,  to  the  spectacle  of  the  sward,  my  Friend  movetb,

O  footman  of  the  breeze  !  from  me  to  him,  convey a  message.

A  companion,  who  night  and  day  drinketh  pure  wine, — where?

Is  it  that  he  maketh  recollection  of a  dreg-drinker?

O  Hafiz !  if  the  justice  of  the  heart,  thee  the  Asaf  of  the  age  give  not,

With  difficulty,  thou  bringest  to  hand  thy  desire  through a  great  selfishness.

7.  "  The  dreg-drinker"  is  Hafiz.

871

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr7

533,  (557).

I.  In  the  morning  time,  a  way-farer,  on  the  confines  of a  land,

Kept  saying  this  enigma  to  a  companion  :—

"O  Sufi!  pure,  becometh  wine  at  that  time,

"When,  in  bottle,  itbringeth  forth  (accomplisheth) a  forty  days'  space."

If  the  finger  of  a  Sulaiman  be  not  (to  wear  it),

What  special  excellence  giveth  the  engraving  of  a  seal  stone  ?

A  hundred  times,  vexed  is  God  with  that  khirka,

Whereof,  a  hundred  idols  (of  hypocrisy)  are  in—— a  sleeve.

5.  Dark  became  the  inward  parts. It  may  be  that,  from  the  hidden,

A  lamp,  may  uplift a  khilvat-sitter.

Though  (only)  a  name,  without  trace  (of  reality),  is  generosity,
(Yet),  thy  need  present  to  a  noble  one?

O  Lord  of  the  harvest !  recompense  shall  be  thine,

If,  a  little  pity,  thou  show  to—  a  (poor)  corn-gleaner.

In  none,  I  see  pleasure  and  ease ;

Neither,  the  remedy  for  a  heart ;  nor,  the  pain  of  (working  for)  — -

a  faith.

Neither  hope  of  loftiness  to  the  (lofty)  spirit ;

Nor  love's  picture  on  the  tablet  of  a  fore-head.

2.  Without  labour,  ma'rifat  and  divine  mysteries  cannot  be  acquired.

5.  Kliilvat. See  Ode  67.
Jthirka. „ „ 124.

6.  ^JoJjU  (a  noble  one)  signifies : — one  daintily  reared  in  luxury.
"  Perchance,  he  may  pity  thee.

§74  DiVAN-l-HAFIJ.

10.  Neither  for  Hafiz,  present — reading  (the  Kuran)  and  khilvat;

Nor  for  the  sage, a  knowledge  of  certainty.

The  wine-house-door  (the  threshold  of  the  perfect  murshid),  show  ;  so  that  I  may

inquire,
My  own  end  from a  fore-see-er.

Although  the  way  of  lovely  ones  is  cruel  (haughty)  of  nature,

What  will  it  be  if  thou  be  content  with a  sad  (humble)  one  ?

11.  "  The  fore-see-er  "  signifies  :—

the  murshid.

12.  This  is  the  second  Ode  in  which  the  name  of  Hafiz  is  omitted  in  the  last  couplet.
See  Ode  505,  c.  14.

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr>  ^

534,  (561).

I.  Since  my  Sulaima  went  to  'Irak.

Through  love  for  her,  I  meet  with  what  I  meet  with, —  (the  pain  of  separation).

Ho!  0  camel-driver  of  the  friend's  litter  !

Towards  your  riders (of  the  camels  of  the  karvan),  great  hath  become  my
longing.

From  not  seeing  the  beloved,  blood  became  my  heart ;
Now  evil  befall  the  days  of  separation  !

Into  the  Zinda  stream  (of  Isfahan),  cast  thy  wisdom  ;  wine,  drink,
To  the  shout  of  youths  of  'Irak.

5.  O  minstrel,  sweet  singer,  sweet  speaker !  prepare
An  'Irak  note  in  Persian  verse.

Back  to  my  recollection,  youthfulness  bring —

The  sound  of  the  harp  and  the  hand-waiving  of  the  Saki.

The  remaining  wine,  give,  so  that,  intoxicated  and  happy  of  heart,
My  remaining  life,  I  may  scatter  (as  a  sacrifice)  on  friends.

Saki !  come ;  me,  the  heavy  ritl  give  ;
God  give  thee  to  drink  from  a  full  cup.

A  moment,  with  well-wishers,  be  concordant ;
Affairs  of  concord,  plunder  reckon.

10.  The  spring  of  life  is  passed  in  the  sward  of  thy  care  :
O  time  of  union  ! God  protect  thee.

I.  In  Arabic,  are  I—-
couplets i,  10,  ii,  14,  and  15 ;  and  the  second  lines  of  couplets  2,  3,  8.
Sulaima  signifies:— little  Salma.
8.  "  Ritl." See  Ode  557,  c.  I.

5  u  2

876  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Opportunities  of  union  passed  without  our  being  aware ;
Behold !  now,  in  the  essence  of  separation,  I  am.

O  daughter  of  the  vine !  the  pleasant  bride,  thou  art ;
But,  sometimes,  worthy  of  divorce,  thou  art.

The  lonely  (un-married)  Masiha,  it  suiteth
That,  fellowship  with  the  sun,  he  should  make.

Me,  from  union  with  chaste  damsels,  old  age  forbideth.

Save  the  kissing  of  the  cheek,  and  the  embracing  (of  the  person).

15.  My  (scanty)  tears  after  (separation  from)  you,  regard  not  mean;
For,  from  (small)  streams,  many  a  (great)  sea  is  collected.

Not  our  lot,  is  the  union  of  friends ;
Hafiz!  ghazals  of  'Irak,  utter.

THE  LETTER  YA

877

535,  (556).

i In  the  morning,  to  the  breeze,  I  uttered  the  tale of  my  longing ;

The  address  (of  reply)  came  saying: — "A  relier  be  on  the  favours

of  Lordship."

Not  that  tongue  is  the  reed's  that  love's  (great)  mystery  it  may  unfold,
Beyond  the  limit  of  narration,  is  the  explanation of  longing.

To  Laila's  tress,  bind  thy  heart;  with (distraught)  Majnun's  reason,  do  thy

work  (of  love) ;
For,  for  lovers,  injury  hath  the  words  of  wisdom.

Ho! O  Yusuf  of  Egypt (the  beloved), whom  sovereignty  (of  Egypt)  kept

engaged !
Ask  the  father  (Yfckub), — where  went  at  last——  filial  love  ?

5.  In  the  sorcery  of  the  tempting  glance,  (is)  a  remedy-giver,  and  a  pain-exciter,
In  the  coil  of  the  musk-diffusing  tress,  (is)  a  heart-easer  and^—

a  heart-enslaver.

In  the  nature  of  the  beautiful,  old  world,  compassion  is  none ;

From  its  love,  what  seekest  thou? In  it,  what  desire attachest  thou?

In  this  market  (of  the  world),  if  a  profit  there  be.  'tis  with  the  happy  darvish:
O  God  !  me,  happy  make  with  darvlshness,  and •  with  happiness.

(O  darvish  !)  the  key  of  the  treasure  of  purpose  is  the  prayer  of  the  morning,

and  the  sigh  of  the  evening ;
By  this  path  and  way,  go;  so  that,  with  the  Heart-possessor  (God),— —

thou  mayst  join.

3. When  Kais  became  distraught  through  love  for  Laila,  he  was  called  Majnun.
Majnun  signifies  : —

one  distraught  with  love true,  or  divine.
illusory,  or  profane.

7.  darvishi  signifies  : —

the  state  of  being  a  darvish,— contentedness  *  *  *

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

A  Huma  like  thee,  lofty  of  rank,  and  greed  for  the  (rotten)  bone  how  long  ?
Alas  that  shadow  of  fortune,  that,  on  the  mean,  thou  castest.

10.  Hafiz!  to  the  lovely  ones,  give  not  thy  heart. Behold  those deeds of  un-
faithfulness,
That,  to  the  men  of  KJiwarazm,  did  the  saucy  ones of  Samarkand !

To  the  verse  of  Hafiz  of  Shlraz,  dance  and  whirl

Those  dark  of  eye  of  Kashmir,  and  the  saucy  ones——  of  Samarkand.

9.  JLkl  U  (the  mean)  signifies  :—
(a)  the  watcher.
(6)  love  of  the  world.

U*  (the  Huma)  signifies  : —
(a)  the  beloved.
(6)  the  rank  of  man.
See  Ode  50.

THE  LETTER  YA  S

536,  (554).

i O  Saki !  'tis  the  shade  of  the  cloud,  and  spring,  and  the  stream-bank ;

I  say  not,  do  what. Of  the  men  of  heart  (Sufis),  thou  art. Dothou  thyself

say.

From  this  picture  (of  outward  Sufis),  cometh  not  the  perfume  of  one  coloured-
ness  (constancy). Arise,

With  pure  wine,  the  (deceit-)  stained  and  tattered  garment  of  the  Sufi,

wash.

Mean  of  nature,  is  the  world ;  on  its  generosity,  rely  not ;
O  world-experienced  one!  from  the  mean,  stability  of  foot  do  not  thou-^—

seek.

Thy  ear  open. For,  this  lament,  the  bulbul  saith  :—

"Khwaja!  deficiency  commit  not;  the  rose  of  the  grace  (of  God) .

smell."

5.  Thee,  two  counsels  I  make, Hear;  and  a  hundred  treasures  bear  away:
"  By  the  door  of  pleasure,  enter  ;  in  the  path  of  defect,  do  not  strive."

The  true  Beloved's  face,  th'ou  seekest? Fit,  the  mirror  (of  the  heart)  make;
If  not,  ever  blossometh  not  the  (red)  rose  and  the  wild  (white)  rose  from  (hard)

iron  and  from——  (base)  brass.

.

Before  that,  dust  in  the  wine-house  thou  becomest

In  the  pavilion  of  the  wine-house,  a  space  of  one  or  two  days,  strive.

For  thanks  for  that,  that  again  to  spring  thou  hast  reached,

The  root  of  goodness,  plant;  the  rose  of  the  grace  (of  God)  smell.

Thou  saidest : — "  From  our  Hafiz,  cometh  the  perfume  of  hypocrisy  :"
Afarin  be  on  the  breath  for  well  thou  broughtest— —  a  great  perfume.

The  second  line  may  be  :—

I  say  not  do  what. If  a  man  of  heart  thou  be,  do  thou  thyself  say.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

537,  (559)-

I.  The  salutation  of  God — as  long  as  nights  recur  (till  the  judgment  day) ;

And  as  long  as  the  lutes  of  two,  or  three,  strings  respond  (to  each  other ;  or  to
the  singer)-—

On  the  valley  of  Arak,  and  on  him  who  is  therein ;

(On)  my  dwelling  on  the  bend  of  the  hill  above  the  sands !

The  prayer-utterer  for  travellers  of  the  world,  I  am ;
Constantly  and  perpetually,  I  pray.

O  God !  in  every  stage  whereto  he  turneth  his  face
Him,  in  Thy  eternal  protection,  keep.

5.  O  heart !  bewail  not. For,  in  the  chain  of  His  tress,
The  distraught  state  is  all  collectedness  (tranquillity).

Of  ardent  love,  I  die. 0  if  information  were  mine  !

O  when  will  the  bringer  of  happy  news  speak  of  union  ?

•

1.  In  Arabic,  are —

couplets  I,  2,  6,  and  7  ;  and  the  last  lines  of  couplets  3  and  13.

As  long  as  nights  are  established  ;  as  long  as  the  suras  and  the  precepts  of  the  Kuran  are  the
support  to  the  lips  of  Muslims ;  as  long  as  the  Kuran  is  the  support  of  the  world  whose  goal
is  eternity.

If  *-^j^  (meaning  cr^/J^  to  choose)  be  read  for  <-^-~^  —

The  salutation  of  God  as  long  as  nights  recur;  as  long  as  I  choose  the  Kuran  and  its  precepts.

Since  Hafiz  was  a  rememberer  (Hafiz)  of  the  Kuran  for  whom  is  ever  the  reading  (with  a  view
to  a  remembering)  of  the  Kuran,  he  said  :  —
As  long  as  I  read  the  Kuran,  salutation *  *

2.  Arak. See  Ode  499,  c.  5.

If  jy^U  be  taken  as  a  proper  noun,  the  second  line  will  be  :—
On  my  dwelling  on  the  sands  of  the  Liwa.

Couplets  i  and  2  form  a  kita'band.

5.  Since  by  the  exigency  of  the  revolution  of  the  sphere,  traitor,  crab  of  gait,  the  perturbed  state  is

the  source  of  tranquillity, — love  for  Thee  is  doubtless  my  ease ;  and  the  mention  of  Thee,  my
grief-consoler.

6.  Would  to  God  news  were  mine  when  the  messenger  would  give  news  of  union  ! Though  the  ad-

dress of  the  angel  of  death  is  certain — for,  daily,  he  crieth  out ;  yet,  through  the  defect  of
humanity,  he  is  not  heard. Nay,  the  thought  of  death  entereth  not  the  mind.

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr  88 1

For,  at  all  times,  love  for  Thee  is  my  rest ;

In  every  state,  remembrance  of  Thee  is  my  consoler.

•

Till  the  judgment-day,  the  black  point  of  my  heart —

Be  it  not  void  of  consuming  and  of  distraughtness  for  Thee  !

Union  with  a  King  like  Thee,  how  may  gain,
I,  bad  of  name,  profligate,  careless  ?

10.  From  Thy  down,  a  hundred  other  beauties  increase  :
Be  Thy  life  a  hundred  illustrious  years  !

Afarin  be  on  that  Painter  of  power,

Who,  around  the  (full)  moon,  draweth  the  line  of  a  crescent  (a  new  moon) !

That  thou  be  is  necessary. If  not,  easy  is
The  loss  of  capital,  of  rank,  and  of  wealth.

God  knoweth  Hafiz's  intention  ;

God's  knowledge  (of  my  wants)  is  sufficient  for  me  (without  my  asking).

Ever  the  angel  of  death  pursueth  man,  crying  (J^»yJI  Ji^-jJI  depart !  depart !

From  exceeding  carelessness,  this  call  (of  death),  we  hear  not. Death  is  he  who  causeth  the

seeker  to  reach  the  Sought.
When  shall  I  obtain  news  that,  from  the  world's  assembly,  I  may  turn  my  face ;  and,  in  union

with  the  true  Beloved,  join;  and  ever  in  Him  bind  myself.

10.  ^J)L?-  signifies  : —

the  name  of  a  Persian  era  taken  from  Jala!u-d-DIn,  a  King  of  Persia.

1 1.  ^JU  signifies  :—

resembling  (belonging  to)  the  new  moon.

882

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

538,  (560).

i.  A  salutation,  like  the  pleasant  perfume  of  friendship,
To  that  man  of the  eye  of  light :

A  salutation,  like  the  light  of  the  heart  of  the  pious
To  that  candle  of  the  khilvat-place  of piety.

None  of  my  fellow-companions  in  his  place,  I  see  ;

With  grief,  my  heart  is  become  blood. Saki  (the  murshid) !  where  art  thou  ?

The  wine,  sufl-overthrowing,  they  sell where  ?

For,  in  torment,  I  am  from  the  hand  of  austerity  of— —hypocrisy.

5.  The  covenant  of  society,  the  companions  have  so  shattered,
That  thou  mayst  say  : — "  Verily,  hath  not  been friendship."

Thy  face,  away  from  the  street  of  the  magians,  turn  not. For,  there,
They  sell  the  key  of  the  opening  of  difficulty.

Although  within  limit,  the  bride  of  the  world  hath  beauty,
Beyond  limit,  she  taketh  the  way  of unfaithfulness.

My  shattered  heart if  it's  be  a  desire,

Desireth  not,  from  those  stone  of  heart, a  mumiya.i.

Thee,  the  chemistry  of  happiness,  I  will  teach  ;
From  bad  fellowship,— —separation,  separation  !

10.  O  lust  of  greed  !  if  thou  leave  me,—

Great  sovereignty  (contentment)  I  will  make  in— —beggary.

Hafiz !  of  time's  violence,  complain  not ;

O  slave  !  what  knowest  thou divine  work  ?

3.  To  the  second  line,  add  : —

That,  from  thee,  my  desire  I  may  gain.
8.  Mumiya,i  signifies  : — a  preserving  substance  wherewith  mummies  are  preserved.

THF  LETTER  YA  "8

539,  (558).

i.  In  the  morning,  the  invisible  speaker  of  the  wine-house  with  fortune-wishing,
Said  : — "  (O  Hafiz!)  come  back  ;  for  an  old  friend  of  this  court  thou  art."

Like  Jamshld,  a  draught  of  wine,  drink,  so  that,  of  the  mystery  of  the  angels,
Thee,  the  ray  of  the  cup,  world-viewing,  may  give  news.

At  the  wine-house  door,  are  Kalandar-profligates,
Who  take  (away)  ;  and  give  the  imperial  diadem.

Beneath  the  head,  the  brick ;  and  the  foot  on  the  summit  of  the  seven  stars

(Pleiades)  :
Behold  the  hand  of  power  ;  and  the  dignity  of one  possessed  of  dignity  !

5.  (Together  are) — our  head  and  the  door  of  the  wine-house,  the  side  of  the  vault

whereof
(Is)  uplifted  to  the  sky,  (though)  the  wall  be  of  this  lowliness.

O  traveller  of  the  Path  !  to  the  beggars  of  the  wine-house  door,
Courteous  be  if,  acquainted  with  the  mysteries  of  God,  thou  be.

O  heart !  if  thee,  the  kingdom  of  poverty,  they  give,

Thy  least  territory  will  be  from  the  moon  (above)  to  the  fish  (beneath  support-
ing the  earth).

Without  the  road-fellowship  of  Khizr,  this  path  travel  not ;
'Tis  the  zulmat ;  fear  the  danger  of  road-losing.

The  door  of  poverty,  thou  knowest  not  (how)  to  beat. From  the  hand,  let  not

go,—
The  seat  of  Lordship,  and  the  royal  assembly  of  TQran.

9.  Thou  knowest  not  how  they  acquire  poverty.

Muhammad  said  :— Al  fakhru  fakhri,  poverty  is  my  glory.

.  5X2

884  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  O  Sikandar !  (patiently)  sit ;  useless  grief,  suffer  not ;

For,  thee,  the  water  of  life,  they  give  not  (even)  on  account  of  sovereignty.

Hafiz,  crude  of  greed  !  of  this  tale,  have  shame  :

What  is  thy  work,  reward  for  which  two  worlds  thou  desirest  ?

10.  By  his  own  work,  every  one  reacheth  to  his  desire.

THE  LETTER  YA  V"  885

540,  (563).

I.  Alas !  full,  full  of  pain  is  my  heart, a  plaister  !

0  God  !  through  loneliness,  to  (giving  up)  life  my  heart  hath  come; — —

a  companion !

From  the  swift  moving  sky,  hope  of  ease,  hath  who  ?

O  Saki !  a  cup  bring,  so  that  I  may  rest  a  while.

Arise. To  the  saucy  ones  of  Samarkand,  let  us  give  our  heart ;

For,  from  its  breeze,  the  fragrance  of  the  river  Mulian  (the  Oxus)  cometh •

anon.

To  a  wit,  I  said  : — "  Behold  these  circumstances." He  laughed  and  said  : —

"A  work,  difficult ;  a  state,  the  father  of  wonders  ;  perturbed,

a  world."

5.  In  the  pit  of  patience,  for  that  candle  of  Chigil,  I  consumed  ;

Of  our  state,  the  King  of  the  Turkans  (Turans)  is  careless. Where——

a  Rustam?

In  the  Path  of  love-play,  calamity  is  safety  and  ease  ;

Wounded  be  that  heart  that  with  (on  account  of)  pain  desireth

a  plaister!

No  path,  into  the  street  of  profligates,  is  for  the  man  of  desire  and  indulgence
A  wayfarer  is  necessary, — a  world-consumer ;  not  a  raw  one,  without—

a  grief.

In  this  dusty  world,  to  hand  cometh  not  a  man  ;

It  is  necessary  to  make  another  world,  and  anew  a  man.

Hafiz!  before  (in  comparison  with) love's  independence  what  weigheth  thy
weeping  ?

For,  in  this  deluge,  the  seven  (all  the)  seas  (of  the  world)  appear  (only)

a  little  night-dew.

3.  Samarkand. See  Ode  535,0.  10,  n.

5.  Chigil  (Turkistan)  is  famed  for  its  lovely  women.

Reference  is  made  to  Rustam's  liberating  his  nephew  Pishin  (son  of  Kay  KJjusrau)  frora  a
into  which  Afrasiyab  had  cast  him,  because  he  had  secretly  married  his  daughter.

886

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

541,  (555)-

i.  -  Saki !  come  ;  for  the  goblet  of  the  tulip  hath  become  full  of  wine  :
Mutterings, — how  long?  raving  words till  when  ?

Pride  and  disdain,  abandon. For  Time  hath  seen

The  wrinkling  (in  decay)  of  the  robe  of  the  Kaisar ;  and  the  abandoning  (in
death)  of  the  crown  of  Kay.

Sensible  be  ;  (drink  wine). For  the  bird  of  the  sward  became  intoxicated  (with

love  for  the  rose). Ho  !
Vigilant  be ;  for  the  sleep  of  non-existence  is  in  pursuit. Alas  !

O  branch  of  fresh  spring!  gracefully  thou  wavest;

Be  it  not  that  distress  (be)  thine  from  the  torment  of  the  wind  of  December.

5.  On  the  kindness  of  the  sphere,  and  its  way,  reliance  is  none  ;
O  woe  to  that  one  who  became  safe  (careless)  of  its  deceit !

(O  Zahids !) to-morrow  (after  death),  the  wine  of  Kausar  is  for  us  ;  and  the

•  har;

To-day  (before  death),  the  Saki  (the  murshid)  moon  of  face  ;  and  the  cup  of  wine
(of  love).

Recollection  of  the  covenant  of  youth,  the  morning  breeze  giveth  ;
O  kind  youth  !  me,  the  life-elixir  that  pain  taketh,  give.

The  pomp  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  rose,  regard  not. For,  scattereth
The  chamberlain  of  the  breeze  every  leaf  of  it  beneath  the  foot.

To  the  memory  of  Hatim  Tai  (the  perfect  murshid),  give  the  cup  of  one  '  man '

(two  gallons),
So  that  we  may  fold  up  the  black  book  of  the  misers  (void  of  God's  bounty,

ignorant  of  His  love).

10.  That  wine  that,  to  the  ruddy  Arghavan,  gave  colour  and  grace,
Casteth  out  in  sweat  from  His  face  the  grace  of  His  nature.

6.  "  Hur."  See  Ode  566,  c.  5.

9.  "  Man."  See  Ode  25,  c.  2 ;  524,  c.  i.

THE  LETTER  YA  ^  887

To  the  garden,  take  the  cushion. For,  in  service,  like  attendants,
The  cypress  is  standing ;  and  loin-girt  is  the  reed.

Listen  how  the  minstrels  of  the  sward  have  made  true  (in  accord)

The  note  of  the  lyre  and  of  the  harp  ;  and  the  voice  of  the  lute  and  the  reed.

For  wine  (of  love  for  God),  pledge  the  things  of  time  ;
For,  of  the  man  of  the  Path,  hath  remained  naught.

Hafiz  !  the  tale  of  magic  of  thy  sweet  deceit  (thy  lustrous  verse)  hath  reached,
To  the  limits  of  Egypt  and  of  Chin,  and  to  the  boundaries  of  Rum  and  of  Rai.

II.  The  girdle  of  the  reed  is  its  mass  of  tuft-like  flowers.
See  Ode  564,  c.  2.

14.  Rum  is  that  part  of  Turkey  included  in  the  old  Roman  Empire.

Rai  (Rhages)  is  a  ruined  city  near  Tahran  :  in  Khurasan  is  another  Rai.
This  Ode  is  considered  a  genuine  example  of  the  dialect  of  Shiraz.

Kay  was  the  third  King  of  the  Kayan  race. In  550  B.C.,  amid  the  mountains  of  Media,  he
defeated  Afrasiyab,  King  of  the  Turans.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

542,  (565).

i.  'Tis  a  city  full  of  graceful  ones  ;  and,  on  every  side,-
O  friends  !  'tis  love's  salutation,  if  ye  make

an  idol ,
a  bargain.

More  fresh  than  this,  the  sky's  eye  seetli  not  a  youth ;
In  the  hand,  none  beheld  more  beautiful  than  this

Created  of  soul,  who  shall  have  seen  a  body  ?
On  this  skirt,  of  these  dusty  ones  be  not

an  idol.

a  particle  of  dust !

The  shattered  one  like  me,  from  before  thyself  wherefore  drivest  thou  ?
For  great  expectation  is  mine,  of  a  kiss,  or  of  an  embrace.

5.  Know  the  wine  is  without  alloy  ;  haste ;  the  time  is  opportune  ;

Another  year,  who  hath  hope  of a  new  spring?

In  the  garden,  companions  like  the  tulip  and  the  rose,
Each  a  cup  taken  to  the  memory  of  the  face  of

a  friend.

This  knot,  how  may  I  loose  ? This  mystery,  how  may  I  unfold  ?

A  pain,  and  a  severe  pain ;  a  work,  and  a  difficult  work.

O  lovely  face  !  than  the  rose,  a  hundred-fold  more  lovely  thou  art,

O  Lord  !  path  to  Thy  skirt,  gain  not  a  thorn  !

In  the  hand  of  the  tress,  of  a  saucy  one,  is  every  thread  of  Hafiz's  hair ;
'Tis  difficult  to  dwell  in a  land  like  this.

THE  LETTER  YA  V

543,  (566).

r.  O  breeze  !  the  perfume  of  that  musk-scented  tress thou  hast ;

As  the  token,  thou  stayest ;  for  its  perfume thou  hast.

My  heart,  wherein  is  the  jewel  of  the  mysteries  of  beauty  and  of  love,

To  thy  hand,  one  can  give,  if  it,  well thou  keepest.

(0  beloved  !)  befitteth  thee  a  kaba,  beauty-boasting ;  and  that  only,

For,  like  the  rose,  all  the  way  of  colour  and  of  perfume, thou  hast.

Of  kingdoms  of  beauteousness  like  the  sun,  to  boast

Reacheth  (befitteth)  thee  ;  for  slaves,  moon  of  face, thou  hast.

5.  In  respect  of  those  pleasant  innate  qualities  (of  thine),  one  cannot  speak  at  all,
Save  this,  that  watchers,  austere  of  nature, thou  hast.

O  rose  (the  beloved)  !  agreeable  to  thee  how  falleth  the  melody  of  the  bulbul
(the  lover),

When,  to  the  birds  (the  watchers),  nonsense-uttering,  thy  ear

thou  hast  ?

Distraught,  became  my  head  by  thy  draught. Sweet  be  it  to  thee  !

Of  what  wine  is  this  indeed  that  in  the  pitcher, thou  hast  ?

O  cypress  of  the  rivulet !  of  thy  arrogance,  boast  not ;

For,  if  to  him  thou  reach,  low  with  shame  thy  head, thou  wilt  have.

For  Him  (the  true  Beloved),  I  prayed. Laughing  beneath  His  lip  (covertly)

He  spake,
Saying  :— "  Who  art  thou  ? With  Us,  what  talk  (is  it  that) thou  hast  ?

10.  If,  to  the  wind,  time  give  all  the  musk  of  Khutan,

A  sacrifice  for  thee,  who,  the  line  of  down  and  the  musky  (black)  mole

hast.

Hafiz  !  from  the  cloister-corner,  seek  not  love's  jewel ;
Outside  (the  cloister),  plant  thy  foot,  if  inclination  for  search, thou  hast.

4.  "  Reacheth." See  Ode  249,  c.  i.

5*

890  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

544,  (568).

i.  For  the  sake  of  love's  existence  are  man  and  Pari,

A  little  (pure)  desire,  show,  so  that  a  great  happiness  (in  attaining  to  true  love)
thou  mayst  achieve.

Since,  prepared  of  vision,  thou  art  not, — union,  seek  not,

For,  no  good  doeth  the  (world-viewing)  cup  of  Jamshid  at  the  time  of  being  with-
out vision.

The  wine  of  the  morning  draught,  and  the  sweet  sleep  of  dawn,  how  long?
(For  pardon),  strive — by  the  supplication  of  mid-night;  and,  with  the  weeping
of  the  morning.

(0  beloved !)  come ;  and,  from  us,  with  the  capital  of  thy  beauty,  sovereignty

purchase ;
Careless  of  this  matter,  be  not,  lest  sorrow  thou  suffer.

5.  Khwaja !  strive  ;  portionless  of.love  be  not ;

For  none  buyeth  the  slave  with  the  defect  of  being  void  of  skill.

When  a  door  to  astonishment  had  every  news  that  I  heard,
After  this  (together  are) — I  and  intoxication,  and  the  way  of  being  void  of
news.

O  dainty  one,  sorcery-player !  what  doll  art  thou  thyself  ?

Neither  in  front  of  the  eye  art  thou  ;  nor  hidden  from  vision  art  thou.

A  thousand  holy  souls  consumed  on  account  of  this  jealousy,

For,  every  morning  and  evening,  the  candle  of  another  assembly  thou  art.

Turneth  calamity  the  prayer  of  the  corner-sitters  ;

With  a  corner  of  thy  eye,  at  us  (corner-sitters),  wherefore  lookest  thou  not  ?

10.  The  message  from  me  to  His  Highness  Asaf,  who  taketh,

Saying  : — "  Recollect  two  hemistiches  of  mine  in  Dan  verse?"

i.  In  Arabic,  is  the  last  line  of  this  Ode.
3.  See  Ode  530,  c.  n.
10.  Dari. See  Ode  211,  c.  7.

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr

Come,  so  that,  even  so,  the  world's  way  I  may  behold  ;

If,  examination,  thou  wilt  make, — wine,  thou  drinkest ;  and  grief,  sufferest  not.

On  thy  head  of  beauty,  aslant  (in  pride)  be  not  the  crown  of  sovereignty  !
For,  the  beauty  of  fortune,  and  worthy  of  throne  and  of  the  crown  of  gold,-

thou  art.

Love's  Path  is  a  path  wonderfully  dangerous,

— We  seek  refuge  in  God  !— If  to  a  place  of  safety,  the  path  thou  take  not.

By  the  perfume  of  Thy  tress  and  Thy  cheek,  go  and  come,
The  morning  breeze  for  (acquiring  from  Thy  tress  the  power  of) perfume-
diffusing,  and  the  rose  for  (acquiring  from  Thy  cheek)  splendour.

15.  That  one,  who,  from  this  zulmat  (of  the  world),  made  my  guidance,

(In  thanks  were  His)  my  prayer  of  midnight,  and  my  weeping  of  the  morning.

By  the  blessing  of  the  prayer  of  Hafiz,  is  hope  that  again
I  may  see  the  traces  (of  glories)  of  my  Laila  (the  true  Beloved)  in  the  path  of  the
night,  luminous  with  the  moon.

12.  "  Aslant." See  Ode  318,  c.  9.

16.  cr^  signifies  : —

the  auspiciousness  of  prayer.
None  hath  seen  the  true  Beloved  and  the  real  Desired  One.

5Y2

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ

545.

I.  O  Thou  in  grief  for  whom,  eternal  union  is  ours !
In  love  for  Thee,  spent  is  my  life ;  but,  I  care  not.

The  dogs  of  thy  street,  each  one  what  ease  knoweth  ?
Oh  that  I  had  room  to  wander  in  that  vicinity !

O  (true)  Beloved  !  from  the  tear,  revealed  became  my  mystery ;
O  Thou  that  hast  known  my  state !  pity  my  tear.

O  crowd  of  pure  players  (lovers) !  fidelity,  lovely  ones  know  not ;
From  one  possessed  of  beauty,  fidelity  expect  not.

5.  Thirsty  of  lip,  by  the  water  of  life,  we  passed  ;

O  Saki !  with  a  draught  of  limpid  water,  succour  me.

From  desire  for  Thee,  faith  and  the  world,  I  abandoned  ;

In  desire  for  Thee,  my  love  of  rank  and  of  wealth,  I  passed  (abandoned).

If,  on  the  dust  of  Thy  threshold,  Hafiz  die,

Verily,  he  will  become  the  possessor  of  life  that  is  without  end.

i.  In  Arabic,  are  all  the  second  lines.

THE  LETTER  YA

546,  (517)-

j.  0  them  from  shame  of  whose (ruddy)  cheek,  the  (red)  rose  is immersed in

sweat :

(And)  before  whose  cornelian  (lip),  full  of  the  sweat  (of  envy}  is  the  cup  of
(ruddy)  wine  !

Tis — hail  on  the  tulip  ;  or  rose-water  on  the  rose  ;
Or  water  on  the  fire ;  or  on  thy  face,  sweat.

That  bow  eye-brow  went  from  the  eye ;  and  the  heart

Departed  from  its  foot  (foundation) ;  and  (through  exceeding  attachment  to  the
Beloved)  made  lost  the  trace.

To-night,  back  from  His  tress,  my  hand  I  will  not  keep  :
O  mu  azzin  !  go ;  shout ;  say : — "  Come  to  prayer."

5.  A  moment,  in  the  minstrel's  hand,  place  the  harp ;

Say  : — "  Its  cord,  scratch  ;  and  after  it  (the  scratched  cord),  exult."

On  the  fire,  aloe-wood  put ;  the  stove  enkindle  ;
Grief  have  not  for  the  severity  of  December's  cold.

After  this,  if  to  thee,  the  sky  display  contempt,

Speak  out  in  the  presence  of  the  Dara  of  Rai  (Rhages),

The  Khusrau,  horizons  (climes) -giving, — that  one,  by  whose  (exceeding)  libera-
lity,
Became  closed  (even)  the  record  of  (generous)  Hatim ;  and  his  (noble)  fame, —

i.  When  perspiration  cometh  on  the  Beloved's  face,  thou  mayst  say :— 'Tis  hail  on  "  the  tulip *
* * ,»

4.  When  it  becometh  morning,  the  lover  is  deprived  of  union  with  the  Beloved.
Here  the  lover  saith  : —

"  O  mu  azzin  1  to-night,  I  never  will  be  separated  from  Him,  although  thou  utter  the  call  to

prayer  (azan)."

Before  morning,  in  the  streets  of  the  city,  the  mu  ajzin  of  the  masjid  crieth  with  a  lofty  voice.
oj*J  $  (.^iJJI^ja.  wl*^™  Praise  to  the  Living  One  who  never  dieth  !
Sometimes  from  themimbar  (pulpit)  of  the  masjid,  the  mu  azzjn  uttereth  this  cry,  so  that  sleepers

awake  and  hear  that  glorious  prayer  of  grace.

7.  Rai. See  Ode  541,  c.  14.

§94  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

(O  Saki !)  that  one  who,  for  a  draught,  surrendereth  his  life, —
His  life,  take ;  and  to  him,  a  cup  give.

10.  Distraught  became  many  like  the  (tribe  of)  Bani  Amir,
If  forth  from  (the  tribe  of)  Hayy  come  a  (lovely)  Laila.

On  the  minstrel's  lip,  their  lip  put,  the  reed  and  the  wine-cup  ;
Beneath  the  nail,  the  harp  (-cord)  is  fit  to  be  placed.

Forth  bring  the  ©up  of  wine  ;  and,  like  Hafiz,  suffer  not
Grief,  saying  : — Jamshid  was  when  ?  or  Ka,us,  when  ?

10.  Bani  ftmir  was  a  tribe,  the  son  of  whose  chief  was  Majnun,  Lail|'s  lover.

THE  LETTER  YA  >r

547,  (535)-

i.  (O  Said !)  wine,  bring  ;  and  me  again  release  from  wine-sickness  ;
For,  with  wine,  one  can  repel  the  distress  of  wine-drinking.

In  no  way,  shineth  the  lamp  of  the  assembly  of  affection,

Save  the  (ruddy)  face  of  the  idol  (the  Beloved)  and  the  wine  of  the  grape.

(O  Beloved  !)  proud,  of  the  sorcery  of  thy  seducing  glance,  be  not  at  all  ;
For,  I  have  tried  (and  know)  that  no  profit  hath  haughtiness.

Preceptor !  counsel  much,  thou  makest,  saying : — "  At  love,  play  not ;  "
(I  reply: — )  "None,  is  preceptor  in  the  usage  of  this  matter  (of  love)."

5.  Alive,  by  love  is  the  soul  of  the  man  possessed  of  heart  (the  sufi)  ;
If  love  thou  have  not,  go ;  for  excused  thou  art.

»•

By  one  deceit,  probity  from  the  hand,  I  put ;

Alas  !  (for  naught,)  all  that  austerity,  and  probity,  and  chastity.

Arrived the  fortune  of  union (with  the  Beloved) ;  and  passed  the  pain of

separation  ;
Again  turned  the  country  of  the  heart  its  face  to  prosperousness.

Hafiz  !  to  every  one,  the  heart's  mystery  one  cannot  utter  ;

To  that  one,  utter,  who  hath  endured  the  affliction  of  farness  from  the  Beloved.

2.  By  its  form  and  hue,  the  idol's  face  is  the  wine  of  the  grape.

Without  the  Beloved,  perfect becometh not pleasure,  though  the assembly  of  pleasure and
of  love  may  have  delights.

5.  Thou,  who  hast  not  love;  and  makest  reproach,— 'tis  no  wonder  that  thou  art  excused.  For,
with  the  circumtances  and  the  goodness  of  love,  thou  art  not  acquainted  ;  and,  like  the  dead,
thou  art.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

548,  (509).

I.  0  breeze!  the  Beloved's  fragrance,^—  thou  hast ;

From  Him,  musk-laden  perfume, thou  hast.

Ho!  long-handedness  (to  pluck  His  tress),  display  not;

With  His  tress,  what  business hast  thou  ?

/

O  rose !  thou  and  His  adorned  face,  where  ?
Fragrant  musk,  He  ;  and,  the  load  of  the  thorn, thou  hast.

Sweet  basil !  thou  and  His  fresh  down,  where  ?

Fresh,  He ;  and  dust  (of  grief), thou  hast.

5.  Narcissus!  thou  and  His  intoxicated  eye,  where?

Merry  of  head,  He;  wine-sickness  (drowsiness), thou  hast.

O  (lofty  and  strait)  cypress !  in  comparison  with  His  lofty  stature,

In  the  garden,  what  credit hast  thou  ?

O  wisdom !  in  comparison  with  the  existence  of  His  love,

In  the  hand,  what  power  (of  will)— —  hast  thou?.

Hafiz  I  one  day,  to  union,  thou  wilt  reach,

If  the  power  of  waiting,  thou  hast.

2.  In  couplets  3, 4,  and  5 —

f  adorned  face -\
In  comparison  with  His  <  fresh  down >thy  rank  is  where  7

*•  intoxicated  eye  *
"  Long-handedness." See  Ode  455,  c.  2-

4.  Basil. See  Ode  200.

THE  LETTER  YA

549,  (527).

l.  Appeared  the  ways  of  unfaithfulness;

With  none,  remained  the  mark  of  faithfulness.

To  the  mean  one,  through  poverty,  take  (present)
The  people  of  skill — now,  the  hand  of  beggary.

To-day,  in  the  age,  that  one  who  is  excellent,
Experienceth  not,  from  grief,  a  moment  of  escape.

But,  in  affluence,  is  the  fool ;

Since,  at  this  moment,  his  chattels  are  of  price.

5.  If  the  poet  utter  poetry  (pure,  smooth,  and  soft)  like  water, —
Whereby  to  the  heart  increaseth  luminosity,—

Him,  (even)  a  barley-corn,  through  avarice  and  greed,  they  give  not,
(Even)  if  he  be  wholly  like  Sana.i.

Yesterday,  in  the  ear  of  my  sense,  wisdom  kept  saying  :—
"  Go  ;  patience  exercise  in  resourcelessness."

Make  contentment  thy  stock-in-trade  ;  and  consume ;
Since,  in  this  pain  and  affliction,  thou  art  one  resourceless.

Hafiz  !  come  ;  this  counsel  hear  with  soul —

"  If,  from  thy  foot,  thou  fall, — on  thy  head  thou  comest  (fallest)."

2.  See  Ode  442,  c.  5.
4.  See  Ode  531,  c.  8.
6.  Shaikh  (or  Hakim)  Sana.i  (b.  1069,  d.  1131)  was  a  celebrated  poet,  native  of  Ghazm,  who  lived

in  the  reign  of  Bahrain  Shah  of  Gh.azni  to  whom  he  dedicated  a  poem  (30,000  verses  on  the

unity  of  God)  called  Hadikatu-l-Haka.H;.

898  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

550,  (528).

i.  0  Zahid  !  (since  naught  will  be  thine),  go  in  the  hope  that  thou  hast;
For,  like  thee,  I  have  that  hopefulness.

Save  the  cup,  in  its  hand  the  tulip  hath  what?
Saki !  come ;  bring  whatever  thou  hast.

(O  perfect  murshid  !)  me,  into  the  thread  of  the  distraught  (for  the  love  of  God,)

draw ;
For  the  intoxication  (of  senselessness)  is  more  pleasant  than  sensibleness.

O  Sufi !  me,  shun  ;  shun  !

For  repentance  I  have  made  of  abstinence.

Come  ;  on  the  curve  of  His  tress,  fix  thy  heart ;

If  (from  worldly  attachments)  thou  desire  freedom  and  escape.

For  God's  sake,  in  the  rose-season,  shatter  penitence  ;
For  the  rose-season  hath  no  permanency.

O  friends  !  the  fresh  spring  of  life  hath  departed,
Even  as  from  the  sward-border,  the  breeze  of  spring.

Hafiz  !  come ;  ruby  wine,  drink ;

Thy  life  in  carelessness,  why  passest  thou  ?

THE  LETTER  YA

551,  (536).

I.  (O  Beloved!) Thou  whose  purpose  in  the  world  whatever  it  be, Thou  hast;

Of  the  state  of  the  feeble  and  of  the  powerless,  what  grief  (is  it  that)

Thou  hast  ?

From  (Thy)  slave,  life  and  heart,  demand ;  the  soul,  take ;

For  over  the  free,  the  current  order Thou  hast.

No  waist,  hast  Thou  ;  and  momently  I  wonder  how,

In  the  midst  of  the  assembly  of  lovely  ones,  thou  displayest  exaltation.

Fit,  is  no  picture  for  the  whiteness  of  Thy  face ;  because,

From  the  musky  (dark)  line  (of  down),  blackness,  upon  the  ruddy  arghavan (the
ruddy  cheek), Thou  hast.

5.  O  graceful  one  !  ever  drink  wine,  for  light  of  soul  thou  art ;

Especially,  at  this  moment,  when  the  heavy  head  (through  wine) thou  hast.

More  than  this,  against  my  heart,  make  neither  reproach,  nor  violence  ;

Do  whatever  thou  canst,  when  room  (occasion)  for  it,—-  thou  hast.

If,  in  thy  power,  be  a  hundred  thousand  arrows  of  violence,

(Them)  with  the  intention  of  (taking)  the  life  of  me,  shattered,  thou  hast.

The  tyranny  of  the  watchers,  ever  endure;  happy  of  heart,  be;

For  'tis  easy,  if  the  kind  Beloved thou  hast.

If,  one  moment,  to  thy  hand,  union  with  the  Friend  reacheth,

Go ;  (do  thy  work) . For,  whatever  desire  is  in  the  world,  thou  hast.

4..  It  13  impossible  that  the  picture  of  thy  face  should  be  drawn ;  because  thou  hast  the  blackness
of  musky  (black)  writing  that  prevaileth  over  the  ruddy  arghavan.  Over  all  colours,  black
prevaileth.

S« Cir^"1  O'ght  of  soul)  signifies : —

one  whose  body  is  in  grace  like  the  luminous  soul.

52  a

9°°  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

10.  When  the  ruby  of  His  lip  thou  recollectest ;  and  hearest

1  he  (sweet)  tale,  besugared  is  whatever  in  thy  mouth, thou  hast.

Hafiz!  when,  in  the  border  of  this  garden,  thou  takest  the  rose,

Of  the  weeping  and  the  lamenting  of  the  gardener,  what  grief — — hast  thou  ?

THE  LETTER  YA  901

552,  (540).

I.  If,  like  the  (lofty)  cypress,  a  moment  thou  move  in-^—  a  rose-garden,

In  envy  of  thy  face,  every  rose  suffereth a  thorn.

On  account  of  the  infidelity  of  thy  tress,  (together  are)  every  assembly  and  a

great  tumult ;

On  account  of  the  sorcery  of  thy  eye,  (together  are)  every  corner  and

a  sick  one.

O  intoxicated  eye  of  the  beloved  !  to  sleep,  like  my  fortune,  go  not;

For,  in  pursuit,  from  every  direction,  is  the  sigh  of^—  a  wakeful  one.

The  scattering  of  Thy  Path's  dust  is  my  soul's  cash,  although

On  Thy  part  the  soul's  cash  hath  not  (even)  — •  a  little  value.

5.  0  heart !  ever,  a  (malignant)  opinion  of  the  tress  of  heart-enslavers,  express
not ;

When  malignant  of  opinion  thou  becomest,  how  openeth  to  thee

a  work  ?

(Separate  from  the  body)  went  my  head  ;  and,  awhile,  this  work  ended  not;
My  hearf  caught  (grief  of  love) ;  and  Thine,  was  no  grief  for a  captive.

To  him,  I  said :— "  Like  the  (centre-)  point  enter  into  the  midst  of  the  circle

(of  desirous  ones) ; "
With  laughter,  he  spake,  saying :— "  Hafiz  1  in  what  compass,— art  thou  ?  "

5.  How  mayest  thou  succeed  ?

902  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

553,  (538).

i.  My  soul, — a  sacrifice  for  Thee,  who  art  both  the  soul  and  the  Beloved  1

My  head, — a  sacrifice  for  Thee !  If  not,  (together  are)  I  and

a  revolving  head.

Easily  from  the  head  of  Thy  street,  I  cannot  rise ;

Difficult  work,  they  take  (accomplish)  not  with  this

easiness.

Not  the  power  of  the  wing-scorched  moth  is  the  immature  one's  ;

To  dainty  ones,  reacheth  not  the  way  of soul-scattering  (sacrificing).

Without  Thee,  to  take  ease  may  be  immatureness ;

With  Thee,  to  sit  saucily  may  be  from  a  great  astonishment.

5.  Thy  heart's  mystery,  Thy  watchers  revealed  ;

Concealed,  how  remaineth  the  matter  of——  a  great  secret.

So  that,  fresh  and  moist,  the  plant  of  Thy  stature  may  remain,
It  is  necessary  that  in  my  (weeping)  eye,  it, thou  plant.

One  day,  in  the  curl  of  Thy  tress,  I  beheld  my  heart :
To  it,  I  said  : — "  How  art  thou  ? How  livest  thou  ? O  (thou  who  art)  —

a  prisoner."

My  heart  said  : — "  Yes ;  what  doest  thou,  if  towards  me  envy  thou  bearest  not ;
"  Not  every  beggar's,  is  the  rank  of  a  great  Sultan."

Hafiz  !  verily,  not  thy  limit  is  our  society;

Tis  enough,  if  at  the  head  of  this  street,  thou  make  —

dog-watching.

3.  "  Reacheth  not."  See  Odes  249,  c.  i ;  262,  c.  5.

4.  Both  are  difficult  to  do.

8.  Couplets  7  and  8  form  a  kitaband.

The  heart  said  : —

Captive,  I  am  not ;  nay,  lofty  rank,  I  have. 'Tis  from  envy  that  me,  captive  thou  callest.

9.  The  first  line  : —

Hafiz !  if  truly  thou  ask  —no  worthy  of  our  society  art  thou ;

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr  9°3

554,  (540-

I.  Since,  to-day,  in  the  world  of  beauty  Thou  art  sovereign,

Perchance  the  desire  of  lovers  by  Thy  lip,  Thou  mayst  bring  forth.

With  (thy)  lovers,  heart  bereft,  pride  and  disdain  how  long?

On  the  wretched  bereft  ones,  violence  and  contempt  till  when  ?

Like  Thy  eye,  in  the  source  of  powerlessness,  how  long?

Like  Thy  tress,  in  twist  and  restlessness  how  long  ?

That  pain  that  through  Thee,  I  have  ;  that  violence  that  from  Thee,  I  experience,
If  a  little  (of  them)  Thou  knowest,  I  know  that  (notwithstanding  thy  stone-
heartedness)  mercy  to  me,  thou  wilt 'show.

5.  Necessary,  is  much  capital  for  the  chattels  of  being  a  lover,
Hearts,  like  fire  ;  eyes,  like  a  great  ocean.

Left  in  (the  torment  of)  separation,  I  was. O  morning  breeze  !  convey,
From  the  garden  of  union  with  thee,  the  perfume  of  hopefulness.

Although,  in  hope  of  union  with  Thee,  alive  I  become  at  the  resurrection,
(Yet,  in  penitence  for  my  own  self-seeking)  forth  from  the  dust,  my  head  through
shamedness  I  bring  not.

If,  of  the  wine  of  union  with  Thee,  a  draught,  I  drink,

So  long  as  living  I  am,  I  practise  not  the  way  of  sensibleness.

Slave,  we  are,  and  powerless ;  Ruler,  Thou  art  and  powerful,
If  me,  by  force,  Thou  draw ;  or  if,  with  contempt,  Thou  slay.

10.  At  last,  on  Hafiz's  bitter  state,  show  a  little  pity?

Hopelessness, — how  long? Distress  (of  contempt)  how  long?

8.  To  the  last  line,  add  :—
But  senseless  become.

9°4  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

555.

I.  Saki!  if  desire  be  thine  for  wine,

Before  us  save  wine  naught  bring. Ho !

In  the  tavern,  the  prayer-mat  and  the  khirka,

Sell;  and,  bring  the  draught  of  wine  (of  love  for  God).

If  alive  of  heart  (sufl)  thou  be,  from  thee  intoxicated  (with  love  for  God),  hear,
In  the  rose-bed  of  the  soul,  the  cry  :— "  Ya  Hayy  !"

Possessed  of  sorrow,— to  the  remedy  come  ;
Possessed  of  iniquity,— both  worlds  regard  naught.

5.  In  love's  Path,  the  heart's  mysteries  are  : —

The  sound  of  the  stringed  instrument ;  and  the  wail  of  the  reed.

In  love's  Path,  a  pure  poor  one,

Better  than  a  thousand  (generous)  Hatim  Tais.

That  idol,  Par!  of  face,  Sultan-like,
Cometh ;  and,  behind,  the  people  of  the  city.

Men,  on-looker  at  her  beauteous  face  ;

And  at  her  cheek,  sweat-stricken,  through  shame  (of  modesty).

Of  the  grief  (of  separation)  from  Thee,  complaineth  Hafiz — how  long  ?
The  end  of  my  shattered  heart, — till  when  ?

3.  Ya  Hayyu  ya  Kayyumu,  0  Living  and  Immortal  one!

THE  LETTER  YA  Sr"  9°5

556,  (544).

i.  Than  the  tavern-street,  more  pleasant  is  not •  a  place,

(Even)  if,  for  my  elderly  head,  attainable  be—  a  sumptuous  dwelling.

I  desire, — concealed  from  thee  (who  are  the  confidant  of  lover's  mysteries)

wherefore  should  I  keep  ?

The  flagon  of  wine  ;  the  place  of  pleasure  ;  and  a  beauteous  one.

My  place  is  the  cloister  of  the  magians,  and  the  meads  of  my  native  land  ;

My  pleasure — the  face  of  idols  (lovely  ones) ;  and  (it  is  indeed)

an  auspicious  judgment.

(To  my  word),  why  listenest  thou,  for  in  the  age,  distraught,  like  me,  is  none  ?

This  is  naught  save  the  word,  (inwardly)  the  father  of  lust,  (outwardly)

a  lovely  one.

5.  With  respect,  be;  the  state  of  the  cloister,  (ask  not), For,  every  one  cannot

mention
The  affairs  of  the  cloister, — only  an  ardent  Barhaman,  or—

a  great  Rai.

O  idol !  in  our  heart,  how  can  be  contained  aught  save  thee  ?

For,  save  for  thee,  for  none,  is  mine a  single  care.

(O  true  Beloved  !)  on  the  wounded  and  ruined  heart  of  Hafiz  show  pity  ;
For  the  reason  that,  after  to-day,  is  certain  a  terrible  to-morrow.

2.  ...jjJa-jjjf  signifies:—
fK^^T  "I  desire."

4.  The  word,  sweet  and  useless.

5.  The  Barhaman  signifies  one  who  hath  connection  with  those  of  the  cloister. See  Ode  524,  c.  13.
7.  See  Ode  525,  c.  10.

6A

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

557,  (567).

I.  Tis  morning;  and,  droppeth  hail  from  the  cloud  of  (the  winter-month) — Bah-
man  :

The  requisites  of  the  morning  cup,  prepare  ;  and  give  a  cup  of  one  '  man.'

•

The  blood  (red  wine)  of  the  cup,  drink ;  for  lawful  is  its  blood  :

In  the  work  of  the  cup,  (engaged)  be;  for  'tis  a  work — fit  to  be  done.

If,  at  dawn,  thee,  wine-sickness  give  headache,

Verily,  best,  that  the  forehead  of  the  vintner,  thou  shatter.

Saki !  at  hand  (to  give  the  cup)  be  ;  for,  in  ambush  for  us,  is  grief :
Minstrel !  (so  that  grief  may  not  reach  us)  keep  this  very  path  (of  song)  that
thou  singest.

5.  Give  wine  ;  for,  the  secret  to  my  ear,  the  harp  hath  brought  and  said  : —
"  Happily  pass  (life)  ;  and,  hear  this  bowed  Pir  (the  harp)."

Hafiz  !  by  the  independence  of  profligates,  (I  conjure  thee)  drink  wine,
So  that,  thou  mayst  hear  the  song  of  the  Singer,  God  the  Independent  One.

Into  the  sea  of  self  and  self-praise,  I  am  fallen. Bring

Wine,  so  that  freedom  from  self  and  self-praise  me,  it  may  give.

Hafiz !  in  the  rivulet  of  the  eye,  the  plant  of  thy  stature

Drank  blood,  and  established  fruit.— (It),  thou  wishest  to  up-pluck.

I.  "Man." See  Odes  144,0.  10;  315,0.  2;  524,0.  I.

i  man  =  2  ritls  =  I  gallon.
"  Bahman"  signifies  :— January. See  Ode  35,  c.  8.

3-  jUi-  Khamar,  wine-sickness.
JChammar,  a  vintner.

THE  LETTER  YA  V*  9°7

558,  (569).

I.  In  fruitlessness  and  lustfulness,  passed  my  life  :

O  son  !  me,  the  cup  of  wine,  give,  so  that  to  old  age  thou  mayst  reach.

From  the  direction  of  Tar,  lightning  flashed;  to  it,  I  inclined  (in  love)  :  —
"  Perchance,  thee,  a  brand  of  bright  flame,  I  may  bring."

In  this  city,  what  sugars  —  that  became  contented,

The  (mighty)  falcons  of  tarlkat  with  the  stage  of  a  pitiful  fly  !

Last  night,  in  the  crowd  of  slaves  of  His  door,  I  went,

He  spake  saying  :—  "  O  friendless, remediless,  one  ! the  load  of  what  person
art  thou  ?"

5.  So  that,  like  the  censer,  a  moment,  we  may  take  the  skirt  of  the  beloved,
We  placed  our  heart  on  the  fire,  for  the  sake  of  a  pleasant  breath.

}  (son)  signifies  :  —

Lust  ;  for,  to  lust,  the  soul  speaketh.

In  Arabic,  are  couplet  2  j  and  the  second  line  of  couplet  9.
The  second  line  is  from  the  Kuran,  xx.  9.
jjJo  (Tur,  mount  Sinai)  signifies  the  mountain,  whereto  Musa,  in  search  of  fire,  turned  his  face;

and  whereon,  he  talked  with  God.
Wherever  lovers  (of  God)  speak  with  the  Beloved,  they  call  the  place  Tur.

signifies  :  —

a  portion  of  fire  which  -  to  the  cold-stricken,  is  better  than  fruits.
From  the  direction  of  Tur,  the  lightning  flashed.  To  Tur,  I  turned  ;  possibly,  I  may  be  the  bri  nger

to  thee  of  a  piece  of  wood,  half-burned,  enkindled;  or  the  star  (living  ember)  inflamed  in  its

own  burning  (the  word  of  the  soul  to  the  body,  at  the  time  of  its  being  obedient  by  God's

grace).
By  his  own  capacity,  at  the  time  of  union  with  the  Eternal,  Hafiz  borrowed  (from  Musa)  these

holy  words.
By  following  Muhammad,  and  by  God's  grace,  this  time  of  union  appeareth  to  the  Lords  of  the

Path  ;  and  thereby  they  attain  to  eternal  ease.
The  men  of  this  Path,  of  this  blessed  Faith  (Islam),  the  spiritual  sages  of  Muhammad,  reach

the  stage  of  the  prophets  of  Ban!  Isra.il  ;  and,  in  the  Path,  reach  a  place  where  to  them  as  to

Musa,  lust  (in  the  stage  of  woman)  becometh  obedient. After  that,  in  the  Path,  they  gradu-

ally reach  a  place  where  from  lust  they  draw  back  ;  and,  like  Musa,  go  to  the  Tur  of  prayer.
He  to  whom,  by  God's  grace,  lust  becometh  obedient,  offereth  thanks;  establisheth  himself  in

lofty  stages;  and,  by  prayer,  seeketh  from  the  Kazi  of  need  (God)  union  with  Him.
Thus,  at  that  stage,  he  arriveth.
4.  "The  load  of  what  person"  signifies  :  —
On  whom,  art  thou  dependent  ?

6  A  2

908

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Despite  the  heart  become  blood  (in  grief),  to  be  like  the  pleasant  (fragrant)

musk-pod,  is  necessary  for  him,
Who  became  world-renowned  for  a  fragrant  breath  (of  excellence).

Departed  (in  death)  hath  the  Karvan  (of  friends)  ;  and,  in  the  ambush-place,

thou  in  sleep !
(Arise  ;  prepare  the  requisites  of  the  end.) Alas  ! of  so  many  crashes  of  the

great  bell  (of  death),  wholly  void  of  knowledge,  thou  art.

(0  bird  of  my  soul !)  thy  pinion,  spread  ;  and,  from  the  (lofty)  Tuba  tree,  the
shout  (of  praise  in  recollection  of  Thy  Creator)  raise :

Woe  is  it  that  a  (glorious)  bird  like  thee — captive  of  the  cage  (of  worldly  de-
lights that  befit  thee  not)  thou  art !

In  desire  of  Thee,  in  every  direction,  Hafiz  runneth — how  much  !
O  object  of  desire !  to  thee,  easy  the  path,  may  God  make.

6.  Every  one,  who,  for  an  excellence,  became  celebrated,  must,  in  that  excellence,  strive.
If,  in  the  strife,  his  heart  become  blood, — no  matter.

9.  Awhile,  in  search  of  Thee,  hecometh  captive  to  illusory  love;  and,  in  this  whirlpool  (this  world)
for  every  (worthless)  straw  and  thorn,  attachment  displayeth.  For  him,  God  Most  High  make
easy  a  path,  whereby  He  may  cause  him  to  reach  thee.

THE  LETTER  YA

909

559,  (570).

i.  The  tale  of  my  desire,  I  wrote ;  and  weeping  was  my  eye:

Come ;  for,  through  sorrowfulness  without  thee,  I  am  ready  to  die.

Through  desire,  to  my  two  eyes,  much  I  have  said  :
"  0  dwellings  of  Salma !  thy  Salma  is  where  ?  "

'Tis  a  strange  event  and  a  wonderful  occurrence this,

Afflicted,  was  I  ;  and  in  the  (palpitating,  quivering,  fluttering)  state  of  one
slain. (Yet,  against  me),  the  slayer  was  complainer.

Reacheth  to  whom  (the  power)  that,  at  thy  pure  skirt,  he  should  carp  ?
For,  like  the  (dew-)  drop  that,  on  the  rose-leaf  droppeth,  pure  thou  art.

5.  From  the  dust  of  thy  foot,  it  gave  honour  to  the  tulip  and  to  the  rose,
When  creation's  reed  wrote  the  decree  on  the  watery  and  the  dusty.

O  Saki !  arise ;  ambergris-scattering,  hath  become  the  breeze  ;
Bring  the  juice  of  the  grape,  (wine)  perfumed  and  pure  (the  antidote  of  the
lover's  poison).

Without  (seeing)  thy  praised  qualities,  trace  of  me  remaineth  not. Yes  ;
From  thy  face  (O  Salma ! ),  I  behold  the  traces  of  life  !

1.  In  Arabic  are  couplet  I  ;  the  second  lines  of  couplets  2,  3,  6,  7 ;  and  the  first  line  of  couplet  9.

2.  Through  phrenzy  of  love,  is  this  address. When  in  exceeding  perturbation,  they  address  the

dwellings,  the  ruins  and  the  houses  of  the  beloved.
Salma. See  Odes  310,  360,  534,  572.

3.  Kalandar  Shaikh  Shah  Sharafu-d-Din  Abu  Ali  (d.  1379)  saith  : —

"  Wounded  with  grief's  sword  is  my  heart;  (yet)  at  its  (feeble)  power,  the  adversary  (is)  be-
wailing:

"Against  the  poor  grain,  the  violence  (of  consumption) ;  (yet)  from  the  birds  of  the  nest,  the
cry  (of  hunger).

4.  "  Reacheth."  See  Odes  249,  c.  I ;  262,  c.  5.
7.  The  explanations  are : —

(<i)  By  reason  of  separation  from  thee  no  trace  of  me  remaineth * * * .

(b)  Voidofthypraisedqualities.no  trace  of  me  remaineth. Defective  human  qualities  have

vanished  ;  and  by  the  decree — "  Be  qualified  with  the  qualities  of  God  " — perfect  divine

qualities  have  in  me  taken  root.

910  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

By  the  honour  of  the  rose  and  by  the  dust-foot  of  the  cypress  (I  swear)  that

there  is  not
One  of  rare  beauty  like  this of  the  watery  or  of  the  dusty.

Idleness,  abandon  ;  successful,  thou  shalt  be. For  the  proverb  is  : —
"The  road-provision  of  way-farers  is  alertness  and  expertness."

10.  Of  the  description  of  thy  beauty,  how  may  Hafiz  speak?

For,  like  the  divine  qualities,  beyond  comprehension,  thou  art.

(c)  When  my  own  existence,  I  knew  to  be  effacement ;  and  joined  to  the  manifestation  of  perma-
nency  with  God,  I  clearly  saw  that  my  own  existence  was  the  trace  of  glories  and  the
reflection  of  the  Absolute  Existence  (God).

THE  LETTER  YA  L£  911

560,  (572).

I.  From  me,  the  beggar,  to  kings,  who  taketh  a  message,

Saying:— "In  the  street  of  the  wine-sellers,  (they  sell)  two  thousand  (mighty)
Jamshids  for  a  single  cup  of  wine."

Ruined  and  ill  of  fame,  I  have  become  ;  yet,  hope  I  have-
That,  by  the  blessing  of  dear  ones  (those  of  good  name)  I  may  (escape  from  ill-
fame  ;  and)  reach  to  good-fame.

Thou  that  sellest  alchemy, — at  our  impure  gold  (heart)  cast  a  glance  (of  alche-
my)!

For,  a  great  capital  (in  trade),  we  have  not ;  and  a  snare  (to  captivate  the  true
murshid)  we  have  cast.

O  Shaikh !  by  the  beads  of  the  rosary,  (I  beseech  thee)  cast  me  not  from  the

Path;
For,  when  (once)  the  wise  bird  falleth,  he  falleth  not  (again)  into  any  snare.

5.  O  pious  ones  !  go  ye. For  (us)  piety  hath  left :

Pure  wine,  we  have  drunk  ;  and  there  hath  remained  neither  honour  nor  good
fame.

At  the  fidelity  of  the  Beloved,  wonder  that  He  made  not  an  inquiry,
Neither  by  the  reed, — a  salutation  ;  nor  by  letter,  a  message.

Desire  for  Thy  service,  I  have;  in  kindness,  me,  purchase  and  sell  not;
For,  into  good  fortune,  seldom  falleth,  like  (me)  the  slave

a  slave.

My  plaint,  I  take  to — where  ? This  tale,  I  utter  to — whom  ? —

"  For  thy  lip  was  our  life  ;  and,  Thou  hadst  not  (even) a  little  permanency."

If  this  wine  be  immature,  and  this  companion  matured,

By  a  thousand  times,  than  a  thousand  matured  ones  better  (is)

an  immature  one.

10.  (0  true  Beloved !)  the  arrow  of  Thy  eye-lash,  loose  ;  and  the  blood  of  Hafiz,

spill ;
For,  in  respect  of  such  a  slayer,  none  maketh  (even)  a  little  revenge.

4.  Rosary. See  Odes  132,  178.

9' 2  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ

561,  (570-

i.  People  spake,  saying  : — "  (In  beauty)  a  second  Yusuf  thou  art ;"

When,  well,  I  looked,  verily  better  than  that  (I  had  heard) thou  art.

Sweeter  than  that  which,  with  sweet  smile,  they  say  thou  art,

0  Khusrau  of  the  lovely  ones  !  for,  the  Shirin  of  the  age, thou  art.

To  the  (folded)  rose-bud,  thy  mouth,  one  cannot  compare  :
Never  is  the  rose-bud  with  this  narrow-mouthness.

If,  on  account  of  thy  stature  and  gait,  the  (moving)  cypress  remained  behind  in

its  place,
Move  thou. For  thou  hast  surpassed  the  (moving)  cypress  in — movingness.

5.  A  hundred  times  Thou  saidest:  "From  this  mouth,  thy  desire  I  give ;"
Like  the  noble  (ten-tongued)  lily,  why  art  Thou  all — a  tongue?

Thou  saidest : — "  Thy  desire,  I  will  give ;  thy  life,  I  wilt  take ;"

1  fear  my  desire,  Thou  givest  not ;  and  my  life — Thou  wilt  take.

Through  the  shield  of  my  life,  Thy  (sick,  languishing)  eye  causeth  to  pass  the

poplar  (-arrow);
(The  eye)  sick,  who  hath  seen  with  so  strong a  bow  ?

(0  true  Beloved !)  like  the  (worthless)  tear  from  the  eye  of  man,  him  Thou

easiest,
Him,  whom  a  moment,  away  from  Thy  sight, — Thou  drivest.

Away  from  before  Thyself,  Thy  own  grief-stricken  Hafiz,  drive  not ;

For,  through  love  for  Thy  face,  he  gave  (sacrificed)  heart,  faith,  and  youth.

10.  In  the  path  (of  love)  to  Thee,  like  the  pen,  a  foot  (out)  of  his  head  Hafiz  made,
It,  one  moment,  like  a  letter  out  of  kindness,  why  readest  Thou  not  ?

4.  "The  cypress."  See  Odes  108,  145.

5.  The  lily  is  said  to  have  ten  tongues. Here,  Hafiz  accuseth  the  Beloved  of  not  fulfilling  His  promise.
10.  The  nib  of  the  pen  is  the  head ;  but,  in  writing,  it  becometh  the  foot.

^jS  Jj  signifies : — (a)  to  write ;  (b)  to  cut —

(a)  In  the  path,  (his  state)  from  head  to  foot  (fully)  Hafiz  wrote;  like  a  letter,  out  of  kind-

ness, a  moment — it,  why  readest  Thou  not  ?

(b)  In  the  path,  his  foot  (right)  from  the  end  Hafiz  cutj  like  a  letter,  out  of  kindness,  a

moment,  him  why  readest  (callest)  Thou  not?

THE  LETTER

562,  (564)-

I.  His  lip,  I  kiss  ;  and  down  drink  its — wine  ;
To  the  water  of  life  I  have  taken  my — foot.

Neither  His  mystery  can  I  utter  to  any  •

Nor  any  one  can  I  see  (in  comparison)  with — Him.

The  cup  keepeth  kissing  his  (ruby)  lip  and  drinking  blood ;

The  (red)  rose  keepeth  seeing  his-  (ruddy)  face,  and  m-aketh—  sweat.

From  retirement  to  the  garden,  the  rose  brought  its  throne  ;

(0  Zahid!)  like  the  (folded)  rose-bud,  the  carpet  of  austerity,  make— folded1,

5. (O  Saki!)  the  cup  of  wine,  give  ;  and  recollection  of  Jamshid,  make  not :
Who  knoweth  when  Jams-hid  was  ?  or  when — Kay?

O  moon-minstrel !  on  the  harp,  thy  hand  extend  ;

Its  veins  (cords),  touch,  so  that  with  them  I  may  exult.

Like  his  (intoxicated)  eye,  let  not  the  intoxicated  be  intoxicated  :
0  Saki  !  to  the  memory  of  his  ruby  (lip),  give — wine.

*

Separation,  the  soul  seeketh  not  from  that  body,
In  whose  veins  and  body,  the  blood  of  the  cup  is-.

When  the  bird  of  the  morning  uttereth  H&wa  ! Huwa  ! (He  is ! He  is  !>
Away  from  the  hand,  put  not  the  cup  of  wine  of — Hai!  Hai!

10.  Like  Majnan,  in  pursuit  of  the  sight  of  Laila,—

O  heart ! — it  is  necessary  to  move  about  every  (member  of  the  tribe)  Hayy.

9.  The  darvfshes  ejaculate  Hu  f  HS  for  Huwa! Huwa! (He  is  ! He  is  !

The  hinderer  of  the  morning  is  said  to  be  the  owl,  Glaucidium  BrodaeH. See  Ode  514,  c.  2.
10.  In  search  of  the  true  Beloved,  effort  is  necessary.

6a

9H  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

With  the  Sultan  of  the  rose,  be  happy ;  and  wine,  drink  ;

Reckon  it  gain,  the  freedom  of  (the  month)  Rahman  from  (the  month)  Dai.

Hafiz  !  thy  tongue  indraw  a  while  ;

The  tongue  (language)  of  the  tongueless,  hear  from— the  (tongueless)  reed
(pipe).

n.  In  Dai  (December), the  sun  is  in  Capricorn.
In  Bahman  (January) „ „ „  „  Aquarius.

THE  LETTER

563,  (573).

I.  O  Saki !  intoxicated  with  love's  cup,  I  am  ;  give a  little  wine.

Full,  make  the  goblet ;  for,  without  wine,  the  assembly  hath  not  (even)

a  little  lustre.

Love  for  his  face  like  the  moon,  cometh  not  truly  within  the  screen  ;

Minstrel  !  a  melody,  strike  up. Saki  !  give a  little  wine.

(At  Thy  door,  curved  like) the  ring,  became  my  stature ;  so  that,  after  this,

the  watcher
May  not  drive  us  again  from  this  door  to another  door.

(Together  are)  in  expectation  of  Thy  face,  we  and  hopefulness :
(Together  are)  in  the  deceit  (vain  hope)  of  union,  we  and  (vain)  fancy,  and

a  vain  dream.

5.  Intoxicated  with  those  two  eyes  (of  Thine)  I  am  ; in  the  end,  less than —

an  (empty)  question ;

Languishing  for  those  two  ruby  (lips  of  Thine)  I  am  ;  in  the  end,  less  than—

a  vain  dream.

Since  not  contained  in  the  eye  is  (the  effulgence  of)  the  sun  of  His  face,

O  heart !  in  the  eye,  what  profit  hath an  agitation  ?

Thy  hand,  stain  not  with  intention,  in  respect  of  a  cup  wherefrotn  thou  knowest
(That)  at  the  end  of  work,  will  not  be  the  hope  of  (even) a  little  water.

Hafiz !  in  the  fancy  for  lovely  ones,  thy  heart  wherefore  placest  thou  ?
When  becometh  sated  the  thirsty  one,  from  the  flashing  of a  mirage.

4..  J^j  (union)  signifies : —

manifestations  of  glories  that,  in  love's  Path,  appear  to  the  holy  traveller ;  and  that  snatch  him

from  the  Path.
Essential  glories  are  the  essence  of  His  qualities,  which  are  the  screen  of  His  nature,  whereby  He

is  independent  of  the  world.

"  Distraught  with  love  is  a  whole  world ;  and  enough  :
"  Union  with  the  true  Beloved,  whence  hath  any  one  gained  ?"

6.  Since,  in  this  world,  not  fit  to  be  gained  is  the  sight  of  God,— from  this  agitation  and  clamour  what

profit?

7.  That  wherefrom  profit  reacheth  thee  not,  desire  not.

6B2

9  '6  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

564,  (574).

I.  "Wine,  demand  ;  rose-scattering,  make  ;  from  time,  what  seekest  thou  ?"
Thus,  at  morn,  to  the  bulbul  spake  the  rose. What  sayest  thou  ?

To  the  rose-garden,  the  cushion  take ;  so  that  of  the  lovely  one  and  of  the  Saki,
The  lip,  thou  mayst  take,  and  the  cheek,  kiss  ;  (so  that)  wine  thou  mayst  drink
and  the  rose, — smell.

Let  us  see,  in  whose  fortune  will  be  thy  laughing  rose-bud :
O  bough  of  the  rose  ra'na !  for  whose  sake,  growest  thou  ?

(O  beloved  !)  the  box-tree  (of  thy  stature)  proudly  move;  and,  the  resolution  of

(sauntering  in)  the  garden,  make  ;
So  that,  from  thy  stature,  the  (lofty,  straight)  cypress  may  learn  — heart-seeking.

5.  To-day,  when  full  of  tumult  of  the  purchaser  is  thy  market,

Get,  and  establish  a  little  road-provision  out  of  the  capital  of  goodness.

As,  in  the  thoroughfare  of  the  breeze,  is  the  (flaming)  candle,  (so  is)  thy  good

going  (—'tis  profitless)  ;
A  little  profit  of  skill,  derive  out  of  the  capital  of  goodness.

That  tress,  every  ringlet  whereof  is  worth  a  hundred  musk-pods  of  Chin,
Happy  had  it  been  if  had  been  its  perfume  from  happy  disposition  !

In  the  king's  rose-bed,  cometh  every  bird  singing  :

The  bulbul— to  melody-making;  Hafiz— to  prayer-uttering.

2.  See  Ode  541,  c.  II.

3.  U«j  (ra'na)  signifies : —

(a)  a  rose  red  within,  yellow  without.
(6)  of  two  colours ;  beautiful.

6.  Quickly,  to  the  place  of  effacement,  will  go  thy  good-going.
Choose  the  tarikat  of  goodness,  so  that  profit  may  be  thine.

THE  LETTER  YA

565, (576).

j.  'Tis  the  fresh  spring. In  this  strive  that  joyous  of  heart

thou  mayst  be :

For,  again,  blossometh  many  a  rose  when  in  the  clay  (of  the  grave)

thou  shall  be.

Within  the  veil,  thee,  the  harp  keepeth  giving  counsel. But,

Thee,  counsel  profiteth  at  that  time  when  worthy  thou  mayst  be.

I  say  not  now,  with  whom,  sit ;  what  drink ;

For  thou  knowest,  if  wise  and  learned thou  be.

In  the  sward,  every  leaf  is  a  book  of  a  different  state  ;

Woe  is  it  if,  careless  of  the  state  of  all, thou  be.

5.  Though,  from  us  to  the  Friend,  is  a  Path  (the  path  of  ma'rifat)  full  of  fear,
Easy  is  the  going,  if  acquainted  with  the  stage  (the  Shaikh)  — —

thou  be.

In  excess,  the  world's  anguish  taketh  life's  cash,

If,  night  and  day,  in  this  difficult  tale,  (of  journeying  to  the  Friend)

thou  be.

O  Hafiz  !  if,  from  lofty  fortune,  aid  be  thine,

The  prey  of  that  (true)  Beloved,  impressed  with  excellences,

thou  shalt  be.

a. »jjj  signifies  :—

(a)  a  note  of  music.
(6)  „  screen.
Out  of  respect  to  the  harp,  this  word  is  used.

DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

566,  (575)-

i.  Breeze  of  the  morning  of  happiness  !  for  that  trace  that  thou  knowest,

To  a  certain  one's  street,  pass  at  that  time that  thou  knowest.

The  footman  of  the  chamber  of  mystery,  thou  art ;  and  on  the  head  of  the  Path,

is  my  eye ;
By  manliness,  hot  by  order,  urge  in  that  way,——  that  thou  knowest.

1

Say: — From  my  hand  passed  my  feeble  soul. For  God's  sake,
From  Thy  ruby  (lip),  soul-refreshing,  give  that that  Thou  knowest.

(0  true  Beloved!)  these  (few)  words  I  wrote,  in  such  a  way  that  the  stranger
hath  not  known  ;

(Them)  by  way  of  kindness,  do  Thou  also  read  in  such  a  way

that  Thou  knowest.

5.  On  Thy  girdle,  gold-woven,  hope  how  may  I  not  establish  ?

O  idol !  in  that  waist,  is  a  subtlety that  Thou  knowest.

With  us,  the  image  of  Thy  (slaying)  sword  is  the  tale  of  the  thirsty  one  and  of

water  (whereto  he  desireth  to  reach)  ;
Thy  own  captive,  Thou  seizest. Slay  in  such  a  way that  Thou  knowest.

Hafiz  !  in  this  matter,  one  are  Turki  and  Tazi  (Arabian) ;

Love's  tale,  relate  in  every  tongue  (language) that  thou  knowest.

4.  The  second  line —

Them  also  read  in  such  a  way  that  to  none  save  Thee  shall  information  be.

THE  LETTER  YA  {£

567,  (578).

I.  Drink  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  unity  of  a  "  man  ;"

So  that,  by  it  grief's  root,  up  from  the  heart,

thou  mayst  pluck.

Expanded,  keep  the  heart,  like  the  cup  of  wine  ;

Head  closed  how  long  like a  large  jar?

When,  from  the  jar  of  selflessness,  a  ritl  thou  drinkest,

Less  of  thyself  (voluntarily),  thou  boastest  of

"self."

Like  the  (humble  and  worthless)  stone  at  thy  foot  be,— not  like  the  water  (of  the

cloud  glorying  in  sublimity) ;
All  colour  of  deceit,  thou  mixest ;  and wet  of  skirt  (lust-stained)  thou  art.

5.  To  wine,  bind  the  heart,  so  that,  like  a  man,

The  neck  of  hypocrisy  and  of  piety— — thou  mayst  shatter.

Arise,  and,  like  Hafiz,  an  effort  (in  the  service  of  the  Pir  of  tarikat)  make ;  so

that,  perchance,
Thyself,  at  the  true  Beloved's  foot,  thou  mayest  cast.

I.  "  Man." See  Odes  144,  c.  10 ;  524,  c.  I ;  557,  c.  I.
a.  ^  signifies: —

a  very  large  oblong  wine-vessel.
3.  Ritl. See  "  Man." Odes  315,  c.  2  j  524,  c.  i.

DiVAN-l-HAFfr.

568,  (579)-

i.  Time  consider  plunder  to  that  degree  that  thou  canst ;

O  soul !  the  out-come  of  life  is  (only)  this  moment  if  thou  knowesfr.

The  desire-giving  of  the  sphere  hath  life  in  barter,

Strive  that,  from  fortune,  the  justice  of  ease  thou  mayst  take.

The  counsel  of  lovers,  hear  and  out  from  the  door  of  joy  come ;
For  all  this  is  not  worth  the  occupation  of a  transitory  world.

Before  the  zahid,  boast  not  of  profligacy. For  one  cannot  utter
To  the  physician,  not  the  confidant,  the  state  of a  hidden  pain.

5,  Gardener!  when  hence  I  pass,  be  it  unlawful  to  thee,

If,  in  my  place,  a  cypress  other  than  the  beloved  thou  plant !

The  jar-shatterer  knoweth  not  this  value  that  to  the  sufi,
Is  a  household  chattel  like a  pomegranate  ruby.

Thou  goest ;  and,  the  people's  blood,  thy  eye-lashes  shed :

O  soul !  fiercely  (impetuously)  thou  goest ;  fear  is,  behind, — thou  wilt  remaim.

O  sweet  mouth  !  with  the  prayer  of  the  night-risers,  strive  not ;
In  the  shelter  of  the  one  (ineffable)  name  (of  God)  is  the  seal  having  the  quality
of— a  Sulaiman.

Aside  from  the  glance  of  Thy  eye,  my  heart,  I  kept. But,
Thy  eyebrow,  bow-possessor,  taketh  (the  heart)  by  its  forehead.

10.  O  brothers  !  compassion. Went  my  precious  Yusuf,

For  grief  for  whom,  wonderful  (in  wretchedness)  I  beheld  thestate  of  the  old  man
(Y'akub)  of  Kin'an.

The  wine's  delight  will  slay  the  penitent  zahid  ;
O  sage  !  do  not  a  deed,  that  bringeth — penitence.

8.  "  The  great  name  of  God," See  Odes  189,  c.  2  ;,  193,  c.  3;  435,  c.  10..

THE  LETTER  YA  92  '

One  day,  by  my  door,  enter,  so  that,  with  joy,  the  hand  I  may  clap;
(Saying:  —  )  "Verily,  joined  to  me  is  luminosity  as  -  a  guest."

With  kindness,  tranquillise  Hafiz's  heart,

O  Thou,  whose  (beauteous)  tress-coil  (is)  the  assembly-place  (perfection)  of  dis-
persion !

O  idol,  stony  of  heart  !  if  of  me  careless  thou  be,
My  own  state,  I  will  utter  before  Asaf  the  second.

6c

I

922  DJVAN-I-HAFIZ.

569,  (581).

i. (0  true  Beloved  !) Thy  well-wisher,  I  am,  and  (this)  I  know  that

Thou  knowest ;

For,  both  the  un-seen,  Thou  seest;  and  also  the  un-written  (by  fate),

Thou  readest.

In  the  adoration  of  Adam,  the  angel  made  resolve  of  thy  ground-kiss,
For,  in  Thy  beauty,  something  he  found  more  than  the  way,.

human.

Thy  tress's  curl  is  now,  in  God's  name,  the  collectedness  of  hearts  :
Be  safety  thine,  from  that  breeze  that  exciteth dispersion  !

From  fortune,  I  have  the  hope  that  his  girdle  I  may  loose  ;

O  sky  !  for  God's  sake,  for  me  loose  the  knot  (frown)  from  the-

forehead.

5.  (0  true  Beloved !)  dishevel  Thy  tress ;  and,  to  sport  and  to  dancing,  bring  the

Sufi  (people  of  the  world),

That,  from  every  patch  of  his  ragged  garment,  thousands  of  idols  (of  hypocrisy),
— —  Thou  mayst  scatter.

The  lamp-kindler  of  our  eye  is  the  breeze  of  the  tress  of  lovely  ones ;
0 Lord !  to  this  gathering  (smoo.th  state  of  the  tress),  be  not  grief  for  the
breeze of  dispersion  !

Of  the  mystery  of  the  lover  and  of  the  Beloved,  what  gaineth  the  reproacher  ?
The  non-seeing  eye  especially  seeth  not a  secret  mystery.

To  be  vexed  with  fellow  way-farers,  is  not  the  action  of  a  work-knower ;
The  difficulty  of  the  stage,  endure  in  memory  of a  time  of  ease.

Alas !  that  pleasure  of  night-sitting  up  that  passed  (swiftly)  like  the  morning

breeze  ;
0  heart !  the  value  of  union,  thou  knowest,  (only)  when  behind  in  separation

— —  thou  remainest.

2.  See  the  Kuran,  ii.  34 ;  vii.  2.

4.  The  second  line  is  repeated  in  couplet  10.

THE  LETTER  YA  923

10.  The  solving  of  the  work  of  desirous  ones  is  in  that  heart-binding  eye-brow  ;
For  God's  sake,  a  moment  with  (towards)  us  unloose  the  knot  (frown)  from  -

thy  forehead.

Hafiz  !  thee,  the  fancy  of  the  yoke  of  His  tress  fascinates  ;

See,  so  that  the  ring  of  impossible  fortune, •  thou  shake  not.

6  c  2

924  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ

570,  (580).

i.  Efforts,  a  thousand,  I  made  that,  my  (true)  Beloved, Thou  shouldst  be;

(That)  the  desire-giver  of  my  sorrowful  heart,  Thou  shouldst  be.

(That)  a  moment  into  the  hut  of  sorrowful  lovers,  Thou  shouldst  come  ;

And,  a  night,  the  consoling  friend  of  my  sorrowful  heart,

Thou  shouldst  be.

(O  true  Beloved !)  since  the  lamp  of  my  eye,  Thou  madest  night  alive  keeper

(watchful),
The  consoler  of  my  hopeful  heart,  Thou  shalt  be.

In  sleep  of  midnight,  this  desire  I  see  ;

In  place  of  streaming  tears,  in  my  embrace, thou  shalt  be.

5.  By  that  cornelian  (mouth),  by  the  way  whereof,  bloody  of  heart,  I  am,
If  complaint,  I  make,  my  mystery-keeper,——  thou  shalt  be.

When  to  slaves,  Khusraus  of  darkish  beauty  behave  kindly,

In  the  midst,  the  Lord  of  my  work thou  shouldst  be.

My  slender  prey  becometh  the  rays  of  the  sun,

If,  a  moment,  a  deer  like  thee,  my  prey  thou  be.

The  three  kisses  that  of  Thy  two  lips,  my  portion  Thou  hast  made,

If  Thou  give  not,  my  debtor, Thou  shalt  be.

2.  To  the  second  line,  add  :—

But,  it  was  not.

3.  The  first  line  :—

In  recollection  of  Thee,  all  night  I  remain  awake.

6.  When  other  prophets  recommend  their  own  religious  order, — me,  do  thou  recommend.

When  other  beloveds  cherish  their  lovers, — Lord  of  our  work,  be  thou.
8.  4U..J  (kiss)  signifies : —

the  acquisiton  of  readiness  of  acceptance  of  the  sufficiency,  outwardly  and inwardly,  of
God's  word.

Forth  from  the  common  folk,  me,  Thou  drewest ;  and  me  capacity  gavest,  so  that — from  out-
ward speech;  from  the  word  (the  glorious  Kuran  and  great  Furkan);  from  inward  speech;
and  from  manifestation  (the  word,  holy  and  divine) — a  pleasure  I  snatch.

Having  lent  me  this  capacity,  and  upon  it  brought  my  goal,  if  Thou  pay  me  not,  Thou  art  my
debtor  ;  and  (by  the  decree  of  the  liberal)  beneath  my  burden.

THE  LETTER  YA Sr  925

In  that  sward  where  idols  (beloved  ones)  the  hand  of  lovers  take,

If,  from  thy  hand,  this  (hand-taking)  take  place,  my  idol,— — thou  shall  be.

10.  Though  I  am  the  Hafiz  (the  guardian)  of  the  city,  not  worth  a  barley-corn  I

am  :
Perchance,  out  of  thy  own  liberality,  my  beloved,  thou  shalt  be.

10.  HSfiz. See  Ode  395,  c.  7.

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

571.

I.  0  mouth,  thou  resembleth  a  casket  of  pearls !

0  Lord  !  around  thy  face,  how  fit  became  the  line  of  a  new  moon  ?

Now,  me,  the  (vain)  fancy  of  union  with  Thee  pleasantly  deceiveth  ;
Let  us  see  what  picture,  sporteth  this  form  of  a  (vain)  fancy.

Departed  the  heart,  became  blood  the  eye; became  the  body  shattered,  and

the  soul  fluttered :
In  love,  are  wonderful  things  that  successively  come.

Blood  became  my  heart  by  His  hand ;  and  by  the  memory  of  His  intoxicated

eye;
With  injury,  I  have  been  injured. With  me,  what  has  love  to  do  ?

signifies:—

^jj  (smile),  ta  being  cut  off  for  verse-sake.
„„)  and  J~»xi|  are  one  and  the  same.

)li  signifies  :—
to  smile.

!  signifies: —

to  make  white  (to  display)  the  teeth  ;  to  laugh.
O  revealer  of  the  teeth  ! O  displayer  of  the  casket  of  pearls  of  the  box  of  the  mouth  at  my  dis-
persed state  and  withered  form  !
Fie,  fie !  worthy  of  thee  hath  fallen  around  the  face  the  line  of  the  new  (crescent)  moon.

JU.  (state)  signifies  :—

love.
^jj))  ^  Uj,>  (the  casket  of)  signifies  :—

the  manifestations  of  glories.
JJU  (the  new  moon)  signifies : —

the  shari'at,  the  religious  law.
JJU  ki.  (the  line  of  the  new  moon)  signifies  :—

the  following  of  the  shari'at ;  the  manifestations  of  glories  that  become  necessary  to  one

possessed  of  the  perfection  of  following  the  sharp  at.

In  Arabic,  are  couplets  6,  8,'  and  9;  the  first  lines  of  couplets  I,  3,  4,  and  15;  and  the  second
line  of  couplet  14.

4.  The  second  line  :—

Love  hath  no  sin.

When  the  seeker  reacheth  the  Sought,  love  (the  road-guide,  furnished  with  road-provisions)
draweth  aside, — the  lover  from  the  Beloved ;  the  seeker  from  the  Sought, — whether  he  expe-
rience the  injury  of  the  thorn ;  or  whether  he  pluck  the  rose  of  his  purpose.

THE  LETTER  YA  |  927

5.  If  thy  disposition  turn  not,  ever  again  it  turneth  not  ;

(Either)  the  lover  on  this  side,  (or)  the  Arif  on  this  quarter.

O  rider  of  camels  that  left  my  dwelling  !

If,  the  men  of  Najd,  thou  meet,  to  them  of  my  state,  speak.

In  love-playing,  lawful  the  Heart-Ravisher  regarded  my  blood  ;
O  crowd  of  Lords  !  love's  decision  is  what  ?

On  account  of  desire  for  the  men  of  Najd,  the  eye  slept  not  ;
With  its  severe  pain,  the  heart  through  rapture  melted.

For  God's  sake,  in  the  Zat-i-Raml,  my  heloved  was  where  ?
Altogether  fled  wisdom  through  beholding  the  fawn.

8.  u^olu  signifies  :  —

^^ut(j  the  ta  is  prefixed  for  verse-sake.

o^>  (Najd)  signifies  :  —

The  higher  regions  of  Arabia,  where  Laila  dwelt,  and  Majniin  became  distraught.
In  Najd,  poets  assign  the  dwelling-place  of  every  beloved.

4j|o  signifies  :  —

(a)  anything  that  creepeth.

(b)  the  beloved  of  Hafijz.

^'f  signifies  :—
"  (a)  a  deer.

(b)  the  name  of  an  Arab  of  the  tribe  of  Bani  Ghazal.

(c)  beloved.

Through  desire  of  seeing  the  beloved  (possessed  of  perfection)  of  the  tribe  of  Bani  Gha^al,  the  eye

slept  not.
O  horseman  ! O  murshid  of  the  pious  ! At  the  appointed  time,  to  the  adored  Lord,  represent

the  state  of  this  separated  stranger;  and,  out  from  the  foot  of  my  heart,  the  thorn  pluck,  say-

ing:—

"  A  certain  one  desireth  a  manifestation  of  Thee."

"On him,  the  blessing  of  beholding  Thee,  bestow;  and,  him  from  the  tumult  of
glories.,  release."

9.  JKi  (fawn)  signifies:  —

(a)  the  beloved,  whose  manifestation  is  desired  of  all.

(b)  the  name  of  an  Arab  tribe  renowned  for  beauty  and  goodness.

For  God's  sake,  on  beholding  the  beauty  and  goodness  of  that  sand  (desert),  whereon  my

beloved  is  dweller,  reason  fled.
In  the  splendour  of  her  beauty  I  became  distraught  even  as  travellers,  who,  in  the  state  of  mani-

festations of  glories,  become  selfless  and  effaced. So  long  as  they  become  not  effaced,  they

gain  not  a  portion  of  His  beauty,
In  lover's  Path,  are  rivers  and  deserts  from  the  traversing  -vhereof  the  holy  traveller's  heart  be-

cometh  rent.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  If  learned  and  wise  thou  be,  let  not  go  four  things : —

Safety,  wine  void  of  alloy,  the  Beloved,  and  the  void  place  (the  desert  of  solitude).

Wine,  give. For,  though  black  of  book  of  the  world,  I  became ;
Hopeless  of  the  grace  of  the  Eternal,  when  can  one  be  ?

Saki !  a  cup  bring ;  and,  me,  forth  from  khilvat  put ;

So  that,  crafty  and  nothing-earning,  door  to  door,  I  may  wander.

Since  time's  picture  is  in  no  way  fixed,

Hafiz  !  complaint,  make  not ;  wine,  let  us  drink.

Pure  is  the  cup  of  the  heart  in  the  time  of  the  Asaf  of  the  age,

Arise  ;  and  cause  me  to  drink  of  a  cup  of  wine  purer  than  limpid  water.

15.  Verily,  the  country  boasteth  of  him  and  of  his  efforts ;
0  Lord  !  ever  be  this  rank  and  this  sublimity  !

The  seat-kindler  of  the  fortune  of  the  mine  of  pomp  and  of  grandeur,
The  proof  of  the  country  and  of  religion,  (is)  Abu  Nasr  Abu-1-Mu'ali.

Khwaja  Mas'ud  (who  lived  about  1480,  A.D.)  saith  :  —
"  A  river,  the  waves  whereof  were  man-devouring,  I  reached  ;
"  On  that  river,  neither  a  boat  nor  a  boat-man. Wonderful  is  the  matter  !
"  That  river,  the  waters  whereof  all  blood  I  saw,  I  feared  :

"  To  my  heart,  I  said  :— Why  fearest  thou? Since  to  cross  is  necessary,  remedy  is  none."
12.  Khilvat. See  Ode  67.

16.  Abu-1-Mu'ali  (whose  proper  name  is  Muhammad  Sadru-d-Din)  is  claimed  by  the  Turks  as
the  first  of  their  poets.  He  wrote  in  Turkish,  in  Arabic,  and  in  Persian. He  died  1270,  A.D.

THE  LETTER  YA  V"  929

572,  (562).

i.  By  her  two  tresses,  Salma  bound  my  heart ;

Yet,  every  day,  my  soul  crieth  to  me  : — "Come  and  die  !  "

For  God's  sake  !  on  me,  heart-bereft,  bestow  pity  ;

Me,  despite  the  hate  of  enemies,  cause  to  reach  to  the  beloved.

O  thou  who  despisedest  me  for  my  love  for  Salma  !
Her  face,  thou  shouldst  at  first  have  clearly  seen.

To the (true) Beloved, wholly and completely, surrender, like me, thy

heart, —
O  drowned  in  love  in  the  sea  of  friendship !

1.  In  Arabic,  are  couplet  I ;  the  second  lines  of  couplets  2,  4,  7,  and  8 ;  and  the  first  line  of

couplet  3.

In  Loris,  are  couplets  5  and  6;  the  first  line  of  couplet  4  ;  and  the  second  line  of  couplet  3.
Salma. See  Odes  310,  360,  534  559. This  name,  poets  assign  to  all  beloved  ones.

The  second  line  :  —

Yet,  daily  the  heart,  my  soul  addresseth,  saying : —

"  Behold  not  the  (illusory)  lovely  one;  thy  self  in  love  for  her,  surrender  not."

2.  The  second  line  : —

Me,  despite  the  hate  of  enemies,  cause  to  reach  to  my  desired  one.

That  is—

Cause  me  to  reach  to  my  object ;  and  to  subdue  my  lust  and  body.

3.  0  thou,  who,  in  respect  of  love  for  Salma,  deniest  me !  at  first,  her  face  thou  sawest  not,  therefore

thou  art  excused.

4.  To  the  true  Beloved,  thy  heart  wholly  and  completely  surrender  ;
O  drowned  in  love,  bring  the  pearl  of  friendship  for  Him.

Having  reached  the  sea  of  friendship ;  and  therefrom  to  love  drawn  thyself,  surrender  like  me  thy
heart  to  the  true  Beloved,  that,  to  thy  hand,  thou  mayst  bring  the  jewel  of  purpose.

60

93°  DIVAN-I-HAFI?.

5.  Subsequently,  to  thee,  our  soul,  we  shall  have  to  advance  ;

For,  stubbornly,  hast  thou  fought  with  lovers  ;  and  their  heart  taken.

Grief  for  Thee  wholly  devoured  this  heart,  helpless  ;
Me,  the  news  of  the  good  fortune  of  my  verse  deceiveth.

O  idol  !  in  grief  of  love's  passion  for  Thee,
On  the  Lord  (God)  of  slaves,  is  our  reliance.

5.  In  Shiraz,  men  often  use  only  the  dominant  (the  initial,  or  the  final)  letters  of  a  word.
may  signify  (*~-f-

Whether  Thou  desirest,  or  desirest  not,  my  life,  1  surrender.  Thou,  sincere  with  lovers
broughtest  their  heart  into  bonds  ;  and  again,  from  the  insolence  of  the  insolent,  Thou
escapedest.

No  need,  that  thou  shouldst  display  superiority.  Obedient  to  the  heart,  is  the  soul.  When
Thou  taketh  the  heart,  in  its  pursuit,  is  the  soul.

6.  Grief  for  Thee  wholly  devoured  my  heart,  helpless  (whether  Thou  desirest,  or  desirest  not)  ;
Yet,  the  news  of  the  fortune  of  my  verse  hath  made  proud  my  heart,  which  is  the  'cause  of

iniquity  and  of  error.

7.  When,  to  this  world,  God  sent  his  slaves  (the  human  race),  an  invisible  messenger  spake  saying  :  —

You,  I  send  to  a  place  where  the  steed  of  the  sweetness  of  understanding  of  witnesses  and

of  rapture  will  reveal  the  mystery  of  existence. See  p.  5.
Of  the  crowd  of  worshippers  of  God,  was  Hafiz. For,  with  the  world  and  with  aught  therein,

he  engaged  not  ;  but  on  reliance  on  God,  all  his  spirit,  cast.

8.  In  a  dark  night,  into  the  twists  of  Thy  tress  (the  world),  went  Hafiz's  heart  ;  and  the  Lord  was

his  guide. For,  on  a  dark  night,  without  the  guide,  it  is  difficult  to  find  the  Path,  especially
a  path  fold  within  fold.

In  confidence  of  God's  favours  and  by  God's  decree,  men  of  God  have  paid  attention  to  this
world,  full  of  vicissitude,  and  thence,  on  account  of  the  tumult  of  its  vicissitudes,  have  not
rested.
Thus,  the  world  is  a  dark  night  whose  light  is  accidental,  in  need  of  the  splendour  of  the  sun,  of

the  effulgence  of  the  moon  and  of  the  planets  ;  and  of  the  illumination  of  fire.
There  are  five  explanations  :  —

i.  To  his  praised  one,  Hafiz  saith  :  —

He,  who  turned  from  his  own  perfection  to  imperfection  ;  exchanged  his  own  faith  for  the
world  ;  established,  for  the  acquisition  of  the  world's  goods,  tyranny  ;  and  gave  for  this
his  faith  —  made  no  profit,  even  though  in  his  own  estimation  a  profit  it  was  that  all  his
energy  was  in  the  arranging  of  his  own  existence  (the  goal  of  worship,  the  field  of
culture).

Thee,  may  God  give  opportunity  and  blessing  so  that  thou  mayst  ever  move  from  descen-
sion  to  ascension  ;  mayst  quit  the  world  in  quest  of-  faith;  mayst  strive  in  the  will  of
God  ;  and  mayst  wear  the  painted  garment  of  the  paintings  of  God.
ii.  He  who,  having  reached  the  stage  of  perfection,  turned  to  the  guidance  of  the  imperfect,  and

for  the  perfecting  of  them,  made  all  resolution  -  made  no  profit.

Though,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Lords  of  the  shariat,  the  guidance  of  the  imperfect  is  a  great
work,  —  yet  since  he  scattered  his  own  skirt  for  the  perfecting  of  his  own  desire  he  made
no  profit.

THE  LETTER  YA  *»->  931

Within  the  curl  of  Thy  tress,  went  Hafiz
In  the  dark  night ;  and  God  is  the  guide.

Thine,  be  opportunity  I Thee,  may  God  bless,  so  that  ever  thou  mayst  endeavour  in  the  per.

fecting  of  the  faculty  of  speech.
Thus,  in  truth,  were  ancient  kings  engaged,  though,  through  the  exigency  of  affairs,  they

practised  tyranny.
Not  agreeable  to  the  praiser  is  reproach.

Sa'di  saith  :  —

"  One  skill,  if  thou  have  and  seventy  defects,

"  Naught  seeth  the  friend  save  the  skill."
iii.  At  that  time  when  an  enemy  with  a  countless  army  had  appeared  to  invade  the  country ;  and

when  a  great  terror  prevailed,  such  that  by  report  his  army  exceeded  in  length  and

breadth,— the  Khalifa  of  the  age  turned  to  Hafiz  and  asked  his  blessing.
From  fresh  vision,  Hafiz  perceived  that  the  enemy's  army  exceeded  not  10,000 ;  and  that  the

Praised  One  (the  KJialifa)'s  army  amounted  to  7,500.
Then,  this  subtlety  he  devised;  and  for  his  consolation  sent  his  blessing. Despite  this

often  do  they  prepare  the  fixed  number  j  and,  save  in  the  little  (7^)  and  in  the  great  (10),

engage  in  naught.
iv When  I  multiply  10  by  7^,  it  becometh  75. From  this,  I  take  'ujb  that  also  is  75.

He  who,  in  the  height  of  worldly  wealth,  displayed  'ujb  (pride)  to  his  dependants,  made  no

profit.
Thine  be  opportunity;  and  thee  may  God  bless  that,  despite  the  existence  of  scarcity  of

wing  and  of  moderation  of  stature,  thou  mayst  fashion  the  garment  of  pride  over  thy

superiors ;  and  make  the  disobedient  obedient.
This  is  a  good  quality  of  praised  good  qualities.
Whoever  multiplied  10  by  ;J  (reckoned  as  75)  brought  to  his  hand  the  word  'ujb  in  that

he  hath  75.
In  the  affairs  of  the  world,  having  attained  the  degree  of  10  (which  is  the  total  of  the  num.

her  of  units),  and,  having  rested  with  7!  (whose  market  is  less),  he  acquireth  pride.
Then  he  made  no  profit,  even  though,  in  his  own  estimation,  a  profit  it  was.
Thine,  be  opportunity;  and  thee  may  God  aid,  so  that,  having  multiplied  10  by  -]\t  thou

mayst  reckon  75;  and,  on  account  of  it,  acquire  the  word  'ujb  for  the  sake  of  the  triumph

of  thy  dependants,  which  result  bringeth  the  pleasure  of  God.

That  is—

In  worldly  affairs,  having  reached  the  stage  of 7! (which hath moderation of  state
and  from  which  wanteth  something  of  completion,  to)  thou  displayest  pride  with  those,
who  are  at  the  stage  of  10  (which  is  the  completion  of  units ;  and,  in  their  estima-
tion, the  stage  of  goodness  and  straightness).
See  Ode  455,  c.  2,  3 ;  589,  c.  4..
v.  Former  kings  brought  the  minted  coins  of  weight  10  to  the  weight  -]\\  and  thus  filled

the  treasuries.

When  the  time  of  coining  fell  to  the  praised  one  of  lofty  spirit,  he  brought  back  to lo
the  coin  of  7!  ;  and  thus  to  ease  brought  the  people.

Amir  KJmsrau  saith  : —

"  If,  for  liberality,  his  great  ancestors
"  Made  two  alloyed  dirhams  out  of  one  unalloyed,
"  See  what  happened  to  his  alloyed  dirhams  !
"  Of  three,  one  was ;  of  one,  three  became."

6  D  a

932  DIVAN-l-HAFIZ.

573,  (577)-

i.  To  thee,  the  mirror  of  solitude  displayeth  the  light  of  God,

By  the  door  of  us  (the  darvishes),  enter  if  the  seeker  of  eternal  love,  thou  be.

Wine  give. For,  if  hell  take  the  name  of  our  sin

On  its  fire,  water  dasheth  Muhammad's  miracle  (and  guardeth  it).

Momently,  an  act  of  sorcery  thou  practisest. Lawful,  this  is  not ;
Said  the  messenger  of  our  Lord  : — "Never  are  we  trick-players."

If,  with  this  grace  and  grandeur,  to  the  sward  thou  pass,

The  lily,  and  the  cypress,  and  the  rose  following  with  thee  all  go.

5.  Intentionally,  in  malice  against  me,  wherefore  drawest  thou  the  sword  of  vio-
lence?
Perchance  thou  thinkest  not  of— —"On  extended  (lofty)  columns  (of  fire)."

In  time,  from  the  heart's  tablet,  make  clean  the  picture  of  self;
If,  with  soul  and  heart,  to  the  street  of  wisdom  the  path  thou  take.

O  Hafiz !  entangled  in  the  net  of  desire  is  the  bird  of  thy  heart ;

O  thou  attached  to  shame  !  boast  not  of  the  solitude  (of  the  holy  traveller).

2.  See  the  Kuran,  xix.  72.

3.  (J^>^  signifies  : —

a  thing  of  uselessness  and  of  idleness. Momently,  deceit  thou  practisest ;  and  me  into  error
leadest. Lawful  this  is  not. By  thy  own  word  and  deed,  stand. For  me,  for  sport  and
folly,  they  have  not  Created ;  nay,  for  work,  me  into  the  world,  they  have  brought. Not
am  I  of  those  useless  things  that  they  reckon  not.
God  saith  :—

"  Reckon  ye  that  we  have  created  you  in  vain  ? To  Me,  will  ye  not  return  ?  "
5.  See  the  Kuran,  c.  iv.  9.
j_^j^«x  is  properly  : —

wo**- For  verse  sake,  the  final  ta  is  rejected  ;  ya  added.

In  opposition,  wherefore  drawest  thou  the  sword  of  violence  ? Slay  and  slay,  for  God's  sake  !
For,  to  offer  pity  to  the  half-slain  one,  is  naught  save  tyranny.
Perchance,  thou  thinkest  not  of  what,  in  respect  of  world-possessors  and  of  man-injurers,  God  hath

said ;  nor,  of  the  path  that,  to  men  of  happiness,  He  hath  shown  ?
Verily,  on  them,  hell's  fire  is  heaped  up  equally  around.

Hell's  fire  is  a  cover;  and,  them,  like  a  cover,  surroundeth  on  all sides — in  that  state,  wherein,
with  long  fiery  chains  (whereby  the  pillars  of  fire  leaped),  they  are  made  fast.

KITA'AT.  933

Kita'at.*

• •  •

•(Fragments.)

574.

i On  the  world  and  its  goods,  plant  not  thy  heart ;

For  the  reason  that,  .from  it,  fidelity,  none  experienced.

From  this  shop,  honey  without  the  sting,  none  ate ;

From  this  garden,  the  (sweet)  date  without  the  (bitter)  thorn,  none  plucked.

Whoever  a  lamp  enkindled,

When  it  wholly  kindled,  it,  the  wind  (of  death)  blew  out.

Whoever  on  it  (the  world),  void  of  care,  placed  his  heart,
When  I  looked — his  own  enemy,  he  cherished.

5.  The  warrior-king,  the  Khusrau  world-seizer  (Muhammad  Muzaffar),
From  whose  sword,  blood  dropped.

Sometimes  with  a  single  assault,  an  army,  he  shattered  ;
Sometimes,  with  a  Hu !  the  centre  of  an  army,  rent :

Without  reason,  imprisoned  chiefs;
Severed  the  heads  of  heroes  void  of  crime  ;

*  The  final  word  of  the  Persian  lines  is  kept  the  final  word  in  the  translation.

3,  Who,  with  a  hundred  efforts,  gained  his  purpose,  from  that  purpose  gained  no  profit,  which,  from
his  hand,  time  snatched  not.

5.  Mubarizu-d-Din  Muhammad  Muzaffar  (d.  1364  A.D.)  was  the  founder  of  the  Muzaffar  dynasty

in  Pars.
In  1353,  he  took  Shiraz  from  Amir  Shaikh  Abu  Ishak.

6.  "  Hu."  See  Ode  514,  c.  2  ;  515,  c.  I.

934  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

From  fear  of  his  grasp,  the  lioness  cast  (her  young)
In  the  desert,  when  his  earne,  she  heard.

At  length  Shiraz,  Tabriz,  and  'Irak,

(Them,)  when  he  subdued ;  and  his  time  (of  death)  arrived,

10.  He (Shah  Shuja'), whose  world's  sight  was  luminous  by  him (Muhammad

Muzaffar),
Into  his  (Muhammad  Mugaffar's)  eye  world-seeing,  a  nail  drew.

575.

i.  Saki !  the  wine  that  is  life's  elixir,  bring ;

So  that,  my  dusty  body,  the  fountain  of  immortality  thou  mayst  make.

On  the  cup's  circulation,  my  eye  I  have;  and  on  the  hand's  palm  (ready  to

surrender),  my  soul ;
By  the  ^hwaja's  head,  (I  swear)  that  so  long  as  that  (the  cup)  thou  givest  not,

this  (my  life),  thou  takest  not.

Like  the  (ruddy)  rose  in  the  sward,  off  from  wine, — thy  skirt  shake  not ;
For  the  reason  that,  at  thy  foot,  a  soul-scattering  (surrendering),  head  I  keep.

O  Minstrel !  on  the  second  and  the  third  cord  of  the  lute,  chaunt

The  praise  of  that  moon  (the  lovely  one),  who,  in  beauty,  an  equal,  hath  not.

576.

i.  Into  the  ear  of  sense  of  the  slave  (Hafiz),  the  announcer  of  news  shouted,
From  the  Lord  of  Unity, — "  No  god,  save  God,"

8.  The  couplet  may  be  : —

From  fear  of  him,  his  grasp  off  cast  the  (ravening)  lion,
When,  in  the  desert,  his  name  he  heard.

574 ,o.  Shah  Shuja'  (d.  1384  A.D.). In  1359,  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  his  father  Muhammad  Muzaffar  and
assumed  the  government  of  Pars.

KIT  A' AT.  935

Saying: — "O  dear  one,  whose  lot  is  despicability, —

"  Its  truth  (is)  that,  by  force,  he  gaineth  not  rank  and  pomp :

"  With  the  water  of  Zam-zam  and  of  Kausar,  white  one  cannot  make

"The  blanket  of  fortune  of  that  one  which  black,  they (Fate  and  Destiny)

577.

O  man  of  wisdom  !  on  the  liberality  of  'Amr,  or  of  Zaid,  fix  not  thy  heart ;
Whence  his  work  will  open  (succeed), — none  knoweth.

•

Go ;  (on  God),  reliance  make ;  knowest  thou  not  that  the  nib  of  my  pen—
Every  form  that  it  depicted,  a  different  colour  out  (from  that  intended)  fell.

The  King  of  Hurmuz  saw  (me)  not; (and)  without  a  word  (of  praise  from  me)f

a  hundred  (deeds  of)  kindness  did  ;
Me,  the  King  of  Yazd  saw ;  and  his  praise,  I  made. Me,  naught  he  gave.

O  Hafiz!  this,  like  this,  is  the  work  of  kings;  grieve  not :

Them,  grace  and  aid,  may  give  the  Ruler,  the  Conveyer  of  daily  victuals  (God)!

578.

The  holy  spirit  that  happy  Surush  (Jibra,il),
On  Heaven's  emerald  vault,

In  the  morning,  shouted  saying: — "  0  Lord  !
"In  fortune  and  power,  eternal  be:

"  On  the  imperial  throne,  remain,

"  Mansur,  son  of  Muzaffar  Muhammad!"

3.  Zam-zam. See  Ode,  91,  c.  7.  576

The well za.m-za.rn  is  7-6  feet  in  diameter  and  56  feet  in  depth. The  water  is  abundant  and
wholesome,  though  brackish.

3.  Muhammad  Muzaffar. See  Ode  574,  c.  5.  578

Shah  Mansur  (d.  1393  A.D.)  was  ruler  of  'Irak  and  Pars. See  No.  686,  c.  122.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

579.

i.  In  the  time  of  rule  of  Shah  Shaikh  Abu  Ishak,

By  five  wonderful  persons,  prosperous  was  the  country  of  Pars.

The  first,  like  him,  a  monarch,  territory-bestower,

Who,  his  own  soul,  cherished ;  and,  (to  his  subjects,)  justice  of  ease  gave.

The  next,  the  Protector  of  Islam,  Shaikh  Majdu-d-Din
A  Kazi  better  than  whom,  the  sky  recollecteth  not.

Trfe  next,  the  descendant  of  Abdal  Shaikh  Aminu-d-Din
Whose  auspicious  blessing,  closed  deeds,  loosed.

5.  The  next,  the  King  of  learning,  'Azd  who,  in  composition,

In  the  name of  the King  (Shah  Abu  Ishak),  laid  the  foundation  of  the  work
of  "  stations."

The  next,  the  merciful  one  like  Haji  Kivam,  the  ocean  of  the  (generous)  heart ;
Who,  for  generosity  and  justice,  took  from  the  world  the  good  name.

Equal  to  themselves,  they  left  none  ;  and  departed  (in  death)  ;
May  God,  great  and  glorious,  causd  all  to  be  forgiven  !

58O.

i.  If,  in  reality,  the  beggar  had  the  pure  essence

On  water,  the  circle  of  the  centre  of  his  shame's  point would  have  stood.

57'  i.  Abu  Ishak  (d.  1357  A.D.)  was  governor  of  Shiraz.

3.  Majdu-d-Din  Isma'il  (d.  1355  A.D.)  was  Kazi  of  Shiraz  in  the  time  of  Abu  Ishak.  See  Ode  604.

4.  Abdal. See  Brown's  Darvishes,  p.  83-

5.  'Azdu-d-Din  (d.  1355)  wrote  the  Mawakif-i-'Azdia,  a  work  (in  Arabic)  on  jurisprudence.
"  Stations  "  refer  to  mystic  states  in  tarikat.

6.  Haji  Kivamu-d-Din. See  Ode  3,  c.  9  and  Nos.  610,  692.

7.  The  second  line  may  be  : —

On  the  fluid  (ink)  of  the  diacritical)  dot  of  ^ (sharm,  shame),  his  centre  (of  contentment)
would  have  stood.

580  I.  The  beggar's  shame  (a  fixed  small  point)  would  in  water  (the  lustre  of  the  jewel  of  merit)  have

• expanded  into  a  widening  circle  such  as  is  formed  when  a  stone  is  casl  into  water.

. KITA'AT.  937

If,  the  sun  had  not  mocked, — his  cup  of  gold,

Void  of  the  pleasant  tasting  wine,  wherefore—  should  have  stood  ?

If,  for  the  mansion  of  the  world,  the  intention  of  ruin  had  not  been,

Better  than  this,  its  foundation  (firm)  would  have  stood.

If,  the  desire  of  alloy,  time  had  not  had,  its  work,

By  the  hand  of  Asaf,  master  of  assay,  would  have  stood.

5.  Since,  save  this  one  liberal  one,  time  had  not  more,

From  time  a  respite  in  life would  have  stood

581.

I,  O  friend,  time-chooser!  to  the  Khwaja's  hearing,  convey  (my  request),

In  a  private  chamber,  wherein  (only)  the  breeze,  as  a  stranger, shall  be.

Present  a  pleasantry  ;  him,  happily,  make  laugh,

With  a  subtlety,  wherein  his  heart's  pleasure shall  be.

Then,  of  his  kindness,  with  courtesy,  ask  to  this  extent

Saying : — "  If  I  ask  for  an  allowance,  lawful  it shall  be  ?"

582.

1.  From  thyself,  ask  thou  thyself  both  the  good  and  the  bad;
Another  watchman  for  thee,  why  is  necessary  ?

From  bad  be  far  ;  for  goodness,  strive  ;
In  playing  and  toying,  life  ruin  not.

Since  thou  knowest  that  thy  victual-giver  is  God,
Through  greed,  the  heart  perverted  keep  not.

2.  At  the  stars,  the  sun  with  his  superior  splendour  laughed. Therefore,  his  golden  disk  (or  cup)  580

is  empty.

i.  The  Khwaja  Kivamu-d-Din  who  had  founded  a  school  for  Hafiz. See  No.  605  -gj

The  request  (an  allowance)  is  stated  in  the  last  hemistich.

61

938

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Whoso  feareth  God,  unto  him  will  He  grant  a  (happy)  issue  (out  of  all  his  afflic-
tions;)
On  him,  He  will  bestow  an  ample  provision  whence  he  expecteth  (it)  not.

583.

i.  From  the  book  of  manners,  to  thee,  I  read

A  verse  on  fidelity  and  on gift.

"Who  with  violence  scratcheth  thy  liver,

"  To  him,  like  the  liberal  mine,  gold give.

"  Less  than  the  shade-casting  tree  be  not ;

"  Who  at  thee  dasheth  the  stone,  to  him  fruit give.

"  From  the  (oyster-)  shell,  recollect  the  subtlety  of  humility.

''  Who  taketh  thy  head,  to  him  the  jewel  (of  the  pearl) give."

584.

I.  The  hall,  and  the  college,  and  the  argument  of  knowledge ;  and  the  arch,  and  the

corridor —
(Are)  what  profit,  when  the  heart  of  the  sage  and  the  eye  of  the  see-er— —

is  none.

Though  the  hall  of  the  kazi  of  Yazd  is  the  fountain  of  excellence,

Not  untrue  is  it  that,  there,  the  knowledge  of  vision is  none.

585.

i.  To  the  envious  ones  of  our  Khwaja  speak,  saying:—"  Evil,  approve  not

"If not,  save  evil,  thee,  (other)  requital  time'  giveth  not."

582 4.  The  Kuran,  Ixv.  3.

KITA'AT.  939

Strife,  make  not. For,  ever,  by  reason  or  by  exceeding  thought ,

To  our  hand,  the  rein  of  sway,  the  sky giveth  not.

Notwithstanding  that  in  Jamshid's  sight,  they  array  the  (whole)  earth;
(In  exchange  for  it,  permission)  for  the  surrender  of  the  jewel,  the  cup  world-
displayer,  he  (Jamshld) giveth  not.

Let  us  fly  to  God  !  if,  from  the  sky,  the  arrow  (of  calamity)  rain  ;
For  to  us,  the  power  of  access  into  the  sacred  enclosure  (of  the  palace),  it  (the
raining  of  calamity) giveth  not.

By  the  right  due  to  the  favour  of  our  Haji  Kivam  (I  swear)  that,  from  fate,
For  the  sake  of  his  own  welfare,  consent  to  this  (refusal  of  access),  he  (Haji
Kivam) giveth  not.

586.

I.  0  Shah !  from  paradise,  an  envoy  (Hafiz's  muse)  hath  arrived  ;
Rizvan  of  throne,  like  the  Hur,  salsabil  (soft  and  bright)  of  hair;

Language  sweet,  pure  of  meaning,  weighed,  and  heart-accepting ;
Possessed  of  beauty,  and  graceful,  and  pleasant  and  jest-utterer.

I  said  : — "To  this  small  abode,  wherefore  earnest  thou?"

He  said  : — "  For  the  assembly  of  the  Shah,  angel  of  nature."

•

Now,  of  the  society  of  poor  me,  to  distress  he  (the  envoy)  hath  reached,
Him,  to  thyself  call ;  and  his  heart's,  desire,  seek.

I.  in  this  Ode,  H5fiz  seeketh  royal  patronage.  586

3-  *^)j~  signifies  : —

a  small  house  or  cage,  wherein  they  keep  domestic  fowls.

6  E  2

94°  DiVAN-l-HAFlZ.

587.

i.  In  this  darkness-palace  (this  world)  in  the  hope  of  the  Friend  till  when  shall  I

sit?

Sometimes,  in  the  teeth,  the  finger  (of  regret)  ;  sometimes  on  the  head  of  the
knee,  the  head  (of  grief).

To  an  end  hath  reached  my  patience,  since  the  wolf  entered  the  abode  of  the

lion  ;
When  the  (filthy)  crow  sang  a  song  in  the  cooing-place  of  pigeons,  reason  fled.

O  auspicious  bird!  come  :  glad  tidings  of  fortune,  bring :
Perchance,  as  once  it  was,  to  the  race  again  time  may  turn.

588.

i.  0  Saki!,  full,  the  cup  make. For  the  master  of  thy  assembly
(Thee,  thy)  desire  giveth  ;  and  (thy)  mysteries,  preserveth.

Here,  Paradise  is  cash  (present)  ;  ease  and  pleasure,  make  afresh,

For  the  reason  that,  in  paradise,  the  sin  against  the  slave,  God  recordeth  not.

The  melody  of  the  harp  (is)  the  sound  of  pleasure ;  the  court  of  the  assembly

the  place  of  dancing,
The  mole  of  the  (true)  Beloved,  the  grain  of  the  heart ;  the  tress  of  the  Saki,  the

snare  of  the  Path.

Friendly  of  desire,  are  friends;  and  respectful  (are)  companions:
Attendants  are  good  of  name,  the  ranks  of  sitters,  well-wishing.

O  Saki !  better  than  this,  time  revolveth  not ;  ease,  choose :
O  Hafiz !  pleasanter  than  this,  state  is  not ;  the  cup,  demand.

587 2. In  Arabic,  are  couplet  2,  and  the  second  line  of  couplet  3.

Couplet  2  is  quoted  from  the  poet  Abu-l-'Ala  Tanuki,  a  celebrated  Arabian  poet.
The  last  line  is  in  imitation  of  Shaikh  Faridu-d-Din-i-'Attar  (b.  1119,  d.  1230.)

KITA'AT.  94'

589.

i.  O  King!  fellow-traveller  with  thee,  is  the  army  of  God's  grace  ;

Arise,  if,  in  the  design  of  world-seizing,  well  thou  doest.

With  such  a  height  of  glory,  of  the  fore-place  of  thy  abode

Informed  thou  art ;  and  the  service  of  informed  hearts, thou  doest.

Notwithstanding  the  sorcery  of  colour  of  this  bluish  vault,  rust  of  hue  (the  sky),
According  to  the  desire  of  God's  law,  work, thou  doest.

He,  who  brought  10  to  7^,  no  great  profit  made;

Thine,  be  opportunity,  that  7^,  10— —  thou  mayest  make.

59O.

i.  O  one  lofty  of  descent !  thy  essence  pure  of  hate  and  of  greed  ;
O  one  happy  of  star!  thy  nature  free  from  hypocrisy  and  deceit.

In  greatness,  lawful  when  is  it  that  honours,

Back  from  the  angel,  thou  shouldst  take ;  and,  them,  to  the  dlv,  give  ?

I.  v^jS  »j  signifies:—  w^/  ^yi-

3.  "  God's  law."  See  the  Kuran  !!

4.  See  Ode  572,  c.  8  (note).

Numbers  have  degrees. The  perfection  of  units  is  ten ;  less  than  ten  is  imperfection.

The  explanations  are  : —

i.  Whoever  from  perfection  to  imperfection ;  from  ascending  to  descending  inclined,  and  for

the  world,  gave  religion, — gained  no  profit.
ii.  An  enemy  with  a  numerous  army  assaulted  Hafiz's  patron,  the  king.

On  account  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy's  army  the  king  greatly  feared.

Hafiz,  by  his  inward  light,  perceived  the  truth  and  consoled  the  king,  saying : — The

enemy's  army  is  not  more  than  10,000  and  thy  army  is  7,500.
By  the  decree,—
"  Often  an  army,  small  of  number,  overcometh  an  army,  great  of  number ;  hold  stout  thy

"  heart ;  for  victory  is  thine."
iii.  Possibly,  the  greatest  and  the  least  weight  of  a  coin  may  be  10  and  7$.

Other  kings  have  decreased  the  coin  of  the  weight  of  loto  the  weight  of  73,  thus  render.

ing  miserable  their  subjects. They  gained  no  profit :

Thou  hast  increased  the  coin  of  the  (reduced)  weight  75  to  the  weight  of  10,  and  thus
rendered  happy  thy  subjects.

942  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

591.

I.  The  beauty  of  this  verse  is  independent  of  explanation  ;
Guide  to  the  sun's  splendour,  seeketh  a  person  ?

Afarin  on  the  reed  of  a  painter,  who  gave
Beauteous  beauty  like  this  to  virgin  meaning  !

In  respect  of  its  beauty,  reason  gaineth  no  substitute,
In  respect  of  its  grace,  nature  seeth  no  substitute.

This  verse  is  either  a  miracle,  or  lawful  magic ;

This  language  either  the  invisible  messenger  brought,  or  Jibra,  II

In  this  way,  a  great  mystery,  none  can  utter  ;

None  knoweth  how  to  pierce  a  pearl  (of  verse)  in  this  way.

592.

I.  0  Khusrau  ! 0  just  one  ! 0  one  of  ocean-hand  (in  liberality) ! O  lion  of  heart  !
O  thou  whose  glory,  with  varied  forms  of  arts,  is  adorned!

Seized  all  horizons  ;  subdued  all  quarters,

The  clamour  of  happiness  and  the  fame  of  a  Sultan-king.

Perchance  the  invisible  inspirer  may  have  told  thee  my  state,
This  that  my  resplendent  day  (of  ease)  hath  become  like  the  night  of  darkness
(of  calamity).

Whatever,  in  three  years,  from  the  Shah  and  from  the  Vazfr  I  amassed,
All,  in  a  moment,  snatched  the  bat-sky.

5. Last  night,  in  sleep,  so  my  fancy  saw  that,  in  the  morning,
To  my  Shah's  stable,  chanced  my  passing  secretly.

591  4. Magic. See  Ode  358,  c.  g.

592  5.  Hafiz  believed  that  the  thief  had  taken  his  mule;  and,  placed  it,  as  a  present,  in  the  Shah's  stable.

KITA'AT.  943

Bound  in  his  stall,  barley,  my  mule  kept  eating,

The  nose-bag,  off  he  threw ;  and  to  me  said  : — "  Me,  knowest  thou  ?"

This  dream,  its  explanation  at  all  I  know  not  what  it  is ;

(It),  do  thou  make;  for,  in  comprehension,  no  second  hast  thou!

593.

I.  In  the  morning,  from  exceeding  sorrow,  my  power  of  verse-making,

Shunning  the  slave  (Hafiz),  fleeing, kept  going.

The  picture  of  Khwarazm  (Khiva),  and  the  fancy  for  the  bank  of  the  Jihun  it
kept  establishing ;

With  thousands  of  complaints,  from  the  land  of  Sulaiman  (Shiraz),  it

kept  going.

Kept  going  that  one,  save  who  none  recognised  the  soul  of  language  ;

I  kept  looking;  and,  from  my  body,  the  soul kept  going.

When  to  him,  I  said  : — "  O  my  old  consoling  friend  !"

He  harshly  spake ;  and,  heart-distressed  and  weeping, kept  going.

5. I  said  : — "  Now,  to  me,  who  will  utter  sweet  speech  ?"

For  that  sweet  tongue,  sweet  singer,  speech-knower, kept  goin°-.

Much  entreaty,  I  made,  saying; — "Go  not." Profit,  it  had  not:

On  that  account  that,  from  the  mercy  glance  of  the  Sultan,  his  work

kept  going.

O  King!  by  way  of  grace  and  of  kindness,  him  call  back  ;

What  doeth  the  consumed  one,  who,  from  exceeding  disappointment,

kept  going?

a,  Hafiz  soliciteth  patronage ;  and  intimateth  that  if  the  king  neglect  him,  he  must  quit  Shiraz  (called  593
in  compliment  to  the  king)  the  land  of  Sulaiman.

944  DiVAN-l-HARZ.

594.

i.  The  sky's  malice,  they  see  not;  and  hear  not ;
For  eyes,  all  blind  are ;  and  ears,  all  deaf.

O  many  a  one,  whose  pillow,  the  moon  and  the  sun  (now)  may  be,
Whose  couch  of  the  clay  and  the  dust  (of  the  grave)  at  last  shall  be.

From  armour,  against  the  loosening  of  the  arrow  of  destiny — what  profit?
From  the  shield,  against  the  penetrating  of  the  decree  of  Fate — what  advan-
tage ?

If  of  iron  and  of  steel,  the  rampart  of  the  citadel,— thou  make;
When  the  warrant  arriveth,  quickly  death  beateth  the  door.

5.  Of  the  pleasant  light,  and  ease  and  drink,  proud  be  not ;

For  in  pursuit  of  light,  is  darkness,  and  poison  beneath  the  sugar.

That  door,  that  to  thee  they  (Fate  and  Destiny)  open,  in  (vain)  desire  open  not ;
That  path,  that  to  thee  they  show,  through  lust,  surrender  not.

In  thy  Path,  all  is  (digged  a)  pit, — head  bowed,  go  not ;

In  thy  cup,  all  is  deadly  poison, — untasted,  purchase  (choose)  not.

The  sphere's  dust,  behold  ;  time's  nature,  behold  :
The  carpet  of  desire,  fold  ;  the  garment  of  greed,  rend

595.

i.  Yesterday,  me  a  message  a  friend  sent,

Saying  : — "  O  thou  the  outcome  of  whose  reed  (is  precious  as)  the  black  (pupil)
of  the  eye !

595 i.  After  two  years'  absence,  Hafiz  returned  to  Shiraz; and  (to  escape  his  creditors)  dwelt  with  Haji
Kivamu-d-Din. See  Ode  3.

KITA'AT.  945

"When,  after  two  years,  back  to  my  house,  thee  fortune  brought,
"Forth  from  the  Khwaja's  house,  wherefore  comest  thou  not?"

Answer,  I  gave  and  said :— "  Hold  me  excused  ;

"  For,  this  is  a  path  neither  of  self-desire  nor  of  self-opinion.

"  Ambush,  in  my  path  the  Kazi's  vakil  hath  made,

"  In  his  hand,  the  writ  of  a  decree  like  the  snake  of  destruction.

5.  "If,  forth  from  the  Khwaja's  threshold,  my  foot  I  place,

"  Me,  he  will  seize  ;  (and)  towards  the  prison  in  disgrace  will  take.

"  The  Khwaja's  quarter  is  my  fortress. If,  there,
"A  person  speak  of  the  dunning  man,

"  By  the  aid  of  the  power  of  arm  of  the  vazir's  slaves,

"  With  blows,  I  will  break  the  brain  (the  head)  of  his  madness.

"What  room  (for  jest)  this?  Since  from  the  bond  of  Kaf  and  Nun  (Kun),  ours,
"  Save  his  service,  is  no  final  cause.

"  Ever  be — open  to  desire,  his  door;  and,  with  affection,
"  In  his  service,  loin-girt,  the  blue  enamelled  sphere  !

8.  When  God  said  :—

"  Kun  (be)." Fa  yakunu  (Then it  was). See  p.  1001.  595

He  decreed  that— from  attachment,  not  from  a  wish  to  elude  his  creditors— Hafiz  should  dwell

with  Haji  Kivam.
There  are  four  causes  <^~k  ('illat)

J^li  v^~Lc 'illat-i-fa'iliy  the  efficient  cause ;  the  cause  of  the  doer.
<^..>U „  „ -i-maddiy  „ material „  lM  „ matter.

»  „  ->-suri „ formal „  „  „ form.

„  „  -i-gha,  I „  final  „  „  „ end.

6F

946

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

596.

i.  Sugar  from  the  violet,  the  rose-conserve  of  my  verse  hath  snatched  ;
Therefore,  the  envy  of  sugar-candy  and  of  fawn-heel,  it  became.

Be  bitter  the  mouth  of  him,  who  the  candy  (my  sweet  verse)  aspersed  !
(Be)  dust  on  the  head  of  him,  who  the  denier  of  the  limpid water  (my  lustrous
verse)  became !

Every  one,  who,  blind,  from  his  mother  was  born, — in  his  life,

The  purchaser  of  the  lovely  one,  possessed  of  beauty, when  became  he  ?

597.

i.  O  brother!  in  passing  away,  opportunity

Is,  in  swift  passing,  like  the  (swiftly  moving)  cloud.

Learn  that  life  is  very  precious  ;
If  it  become  effaced, — alas  !

598.

i.  The  morning  of  Friday,  it  was ;  and  the  sixth  of  the  Rabi'u-1-awwal

When,  from  my  heart,  fleeting  (in  death)  went  the  face  of  that  one  moon  of
face.

S96 i.  ojjjJs  (Arabian  candy)

When  it  becometh  hard,  one  may  say  that  it  is  fit  to  be  broken  with  the  axe.
jjj'  axe;
oj  (the  past  of  zadam)  strike

-«f  (fawn-heel)  signifies:  —

a  sweatmeat,  now  unknown  at  Shiraz,  like  Pate  de  Guimauve.
In  Hindi,  it  is  called  "batasa."

i.  See  Ode  35,  c.  8;  and  Nos.  599,  606.

This  commemorates  the  death  of  Hafiz's  son.

KITA'AT.

947

In  the  year  764  of  the  Hijra,

On  me,  the  hard  tale  (of  his  death)  descended  like  water.

Sigh  and  pain  and  regret  give  profit — where  ?

When  as  sport  and  without  profit,  passed  away  my  life  ?

599.

I.  O  Soul !  that  paradise-fruit  that  came  to  thy  hand

In  thy  heart,  why  didst  thou  not  sow? From  thy  hand,  why  didst  thou  let  go?

If  the  date  of  this  event  of  thee  they  ask,
Say  its  total  (is)  from  the  paradise-fruit.

6OO.

I.  Brother,  Khwaja  Adil — unvexed  be  his  rest,
After  fifty-nine  years  of  life

2.  This  giveth  the  date  of  death  of  a  friend. See  Nos.  598,  606.

i/^"^

•*  (paradise  fruit)  signifies  :  —  Hafiz's  son.

f

• • . i 4^

V .... 2

V

. . • . lo

* • • 5

I

6

A

CM* . . • . 300

1

5

0 .... 400

61

c? . . .10

The  year

is  778  A.H. See  page  95.

3.  Jjtr  JjkL

*•  (friend  S.dil)  gives  the  date  :—

s

.... 600

.... 30

£ . . . .70
1 .... i

t?

. . 10

•> .... 4

J

.... 30

vj . . . . 30

670

105

The  year  is  775  A.H. See  p.  95.

399

6  F?

94-8  DiVAN-UHAFIZ.

Departed  to  the  garden  of  paradise  ;

With  his  deeds  and  his  nature,  God  be  satisfied  !

Ever  say—"  Friend  Adil " ;

Thence,  the  year  of  his  death,  understand.

601.

i.  When  the  Merciful  One,  who  dieth  not,  this  King,
Of  whom  deeds  of  good  perish  not, — beheld.

His  (the  King's)  soul,  associate  of  His  own  mercy  He  made,  so  that,  became
The  date  of  this  matter—"  The  Merciful  One  dieth  not."

601

6O2.

i.  (Vazir)  Turan  Shah,  the  world's  Khan,  the  Asaf  of  time's  revolution,

Who,  in  this  meadow  (this  world),  save  the  grain  of  good  deeds  sowed  naught.

2.  oj*j3l  uUa-j  (Rahmanu  la  Yamutu)  signifies  :  —

The  Merciful  One,  dieth  not.

j . 200

J ...» 30

8

. • . . i

C

,. .... 40

L? . > > .IO

1 .... i

/. ...» 40

w .... 50

j • • . * 6

299

O t . . , 400

487

The  year  is  786  A.H. See  p.  95.
Rosenzweig  rightly  omits  the  (alif)  in  Rahman.

KITA'AT.

949

The  middle  of  the  week  it  was ;  and  the,  2ist  of  the  month  Rajab,

When,  to  the  rose-bed,  he  went ;  and,  this  stove  (the  world),  full  of  smoke,  let  go.

That  one  whose  inclination  towards  truth  and  truth-uttering  may  be,
The  year  of  the  date  of  his  death,  seek  from — "  Inclination  for  paradise."

i

6O3.

i.  Baha,u-l-Hakk  va  Din — happy,  be  his  resting-place  ! —

Imam  of  the  Sunnat  (traditional  law)  and  Shaikh,  of  the  assembly.

When,  from  this  world,  he  departed,  this  couplet  he  read
To  men  of  excellence,  and  to  the  Lords  o£  pre-eminence  : —

"  Association  with  God,  by  devotion  cne  can  gain ;
'•  If  power  be  thine,  (in  this  path)  plant  thy  foot."

In  this  way,  the  date  of  his  death

Bring  forth  from  the  letters— "  Association  (with  God)  by  devotion."

2.  Turan  Shah  was  Hafiz's  patron.

fJ  d±*  (inclination  for  paradise)  gives  the  date  of  death.
I*  »  •  •  • 40

e? . • . . 10  s

u  .... 30  i_>"

40

The  year  is  787  A.M. See  p.  95.
4.  ei^Ue  i_>y>  (association  of  devotion)  gives  :

(J  •  •  .  • IOO

j  .... 200

V •  •  • i . 2

302

2

5
300

400
707

9

I

70
400

480

602

The  year  is  782  A. H. See  p.  95.

950

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

604.

I.  The  glory  of  religion,  chief  of  the  Sultan-Kazis, — Isma'il,
Whose  reed  of  eloquence  spake  of  the  shara'.

The  middle  of  the  week  it  was  ;  and  the  eighth  day  of  Rajab,
When  forth  from  this  house,  void  of  way  and  order,  he  departed.

The  corner  of  God's  mercy,  his  abode  know  ;  then

The  year  of  the  date  of  his  death  seek  from  "  the  mercy  of  God."

605.

I.  The  great  pillar  of  state  and  of  faith,  he  (Kivamu-d-Din)  at  whose  door,
For  dust-kissing,  (even)  the  (lofty)  sky  made  homage.

Despite  that  pomp  and  that  grandeur  (of  his)  beneath  the  dust  (of  the  grave)

he  went ;
From  the  place  of  existence,  in  the  middle  of  the  month  Zu-1-Ka'dat.

*>4 3-

(God's  mercy)  giveth  :—

108

200
8

40
400

648

The  year  is  756  A.H. See  p.  95.

The  title  of  Isma'il  is  :—

Majdu-d-Din,  Sarwar-i-Sultan-i-Kuzat  (See  Ode  579,  c.  3.)
which,  in  the  first  line,  is  translated.

i.  KJjwaja  Kivamu-d-Din  was  the  predecessor  of  Haji  Kivamu-d-Din  Hasan. See  Ode  3,  c,  9,  and
Nos.  581,  610,  692.

KITA'AT.  95 !

So  that,  from  any  one,  hope  of  liberality  again  hath  none  ;

The  letters  of  the  year  of  his  death  became "  The  hope  of  liberality."

6O6.

I.  Spring-season  it  is  ;  and  the  rose,  and  tulip  and  the  wild  white  rose,
Up  from  the  dust  have  come ;  in  the  dust,  wherefore  art  thou  ?

Like  the  (weeping)  cloud  of  spring,  I  go,  and  bitterly  weep,

On  thy  dust  to  such  a  degree  that,  forth  from  the  dust,  thou  wilt  come.

6O7.

I.  That  one  is  who — who  will  represent  to  His  Highness,  the  Sultan,
That,  from  time's  violence,  cat-camels  have  appeared  ?

Seated  on  the  prayer-mat  of  the  Kazi,  a  profligate  ;
Again  to  the  rank  of  a  chief,  arrived  a  filthy  one.

3.  ^j^-  «H*'  (the  hope  of  liberality)  gives  : —  605

«... i

f  .... 40

(_y . . . .10

3
6

4

&  .... 700

13

—

The  year  is  764  A.H. See  p.  95.
Note  that  umid  is  spelled  umiz.

I.  This  is  in  memory  of  a  son  of  Hafiz. See  Nos.  598,  599.  606

1 .  4jy  jii  (cat-camel)  refers  to  the  following  tale :—  607

At  a  very  low  price,  an  old  man  offered  a  camel ;  but  it  no  one  was  allowed  to  purchase  with-
out purchasing  with  it  a  cat,  the  price  whereof  exceeded  the  value  of  the  camel.

2.  AJj  (profligate)  signifies : —

(a)  zirak  a  clever  one.

(b)  mutil  „  knave.

(c)  be-pak „  fearless  one.

(d)  a  denier  of  men  of  outward  rectitude.

(e)  one  outwardly bad,  inwardly  good  -j**- (filthy one)  signifies : — an hermaphrodite,

catamite.

952  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ,

Said,  that  profligate :— "The  eye  and  the  lamp  of  the  world,  I  am : "
Said,  that  filthy  one  : — "The  seed  of  Dara  and  of  Firidun,  I  am."

608.

I.  Eat  that  green  grain  (of  the  grape),  of  which,  easy  of  digestion,

Whoever  eateth  one  grain,  on  the  spit  (to  roast),  putteth  the  slmurgh  (thirty
birds).

Of  that  morsel,  that,  into  ma'rifat,  casteth  the  sufi, —

(Together  are) — one  drop  (of  wine),  and  an  hundred  intoxications;  one  grain
(of  grape),  and  an  hundred  simurghs.

6O9.

I.  Years,  omen,  state,  wealth;  and  source  and  race  (lineage),  throne and for-
tune,—
Thine,  be  in  monarchy,  in  perpetuity,  in  permanency!

(Thine  be — )  the  year,  joyous ;  the  omen,  auspicious  ; the  state,  tranquil ;  the

property,  ample ;
Source,  firm  ;  race,  permanent ;  throne,  lofty ;  fortune,  obedient.

6o8 i.  ]?**•  ***•  (the  green  grain)  may  signify  :  —

hashish  (Cannabis  Indica). See  Ode  467.
2.  The  sufis  acknowledge  four  stages  :—

>j>  material  observance,
tank,  the  Path,
ma'rifat,  divine  knowledge
hakikat,  truth,
wasl,  union.

}

KITA'AT.  953

61O.

i.  The  chief  of  men  of  turbans,  the  candle  of  the  union  of  the  assembly,
The  master  of  the  Lord-ofrconjunction,  Haji  Kivamu-d-Din  Hasan.

From  the  flight  (Hijra)  of  "the  best  of  men  "  (Muhammad),  754  years,
The  sun's  mansion  was  Gemini ;  the  moon's  birth-place,  Virgo.

Sixth  of  the  month  Rabfa-1-Akhir,  in  mid-day,

The  day,  Friday,  by  the  decree  of  the  Creator  possessed  of  grace —

The  bird  of  his  soul  that  was  the  Huma  of  the  holy  sky,

From  the  snare  of  this  house  of  calamities  to  the  garden  of  paradise,  went.

611.

I.  When  (shall  be)  a  little  leisure,  that  the  service  of  the  Pir  of  the  Magians  I

may  do  ;
And,  by  the  counsel  of  the  Pir,  young  (prosperous)  my  fortune may  make?

Care-taker  of  the  wine-house,  years  I  have  been,

The  rest  of  my  life,  the  service  of  that  threshold, I  shall  do.

Yesterday,  with  me,  the  muhtasib  beheld  the  flagon  ;  and  broke  it ;

After  this,  it,  beneath  the  tattered  religious  garment, I  shall  put,

612.

I.  Last  night,  of  reason,  the  sage  of  my  thought  asked,

Saying : — "  O  peerless  one  of  the  graces  of  the  merciful  Creator  !

l.  "  Men  of  turbans"  signifies  : — Men  wearing  large  turbans.

a.  The  Hijra  dates  from  the  isth  July  622  A.D. See  Nos.  605,  692  and  ode  3.

3.  See  p.  95.

60

954  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

"In  the  world,  what  is  the  jewel  of  verse,  whereby,

"  (Is)  disaster  to  the  price  of  the  market  of  the  pearl  (of  the  sea)  of  Uman  ?  "

Reply,  he  (reason)  gave,  saying: — "  From  me,  hear;  but,  hear  not
"(Him),  who  said— this  (is)  the  elegy  of  this  one;  and  this  (is)  the  ghazal  of
that  one."

"The  chief  of  the  accomplished  ones  of  the  time, — knowest  thou  who  he  is?
——"By  way  of  sincerity  and  of  certainty;  not  by  way  of  falsehood  and  of
suspicion — (He  is)  : —

5.  "  The  Shah-in-Shah  of  accomplished  ones,  king  of  the  country  of  speech,
"The  beauty  of  religion  and  faith,  Khwaja  of  the  world, — Salman."

613.

i.  Alas  !  the  bright  robe  of  the  day  of  youth, —
If  its  had  been  the  decoration  of  permanency.

Alas!  O  grief!  O  pain  !  that,  from  this  stream,
Will  pass  (away)  the  water  of  (our)  life.

From  relation  and  connection,  it  is  continually  necessary  to  sever;
Thus,  hath  passed  the  sky's  decree.

Every  brother, — brother  quitteth,

By  thy  father's  life ! — save  the  Farkads  twain.

612  5-  Salman  Savaji  Jalalu-d-Din  Muhammad  (d.  1377  A.D.)  was  a  celebrated  Persian  poet,  native

of  Sava,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Amir  Shaikh  Hasan  Jalayar  Hasan  Buzurg,  and  of  his  son
Sultan  Uvais  Jalayar,  rulers  of  Baghdad. See  the  Life  of  Hafiz.

613  4.  Farkad  major  and  minor  are  two  stars  in  Ursa  Minor.

KITA'AT.  955

614.

I.  O  spring-breeze!  if  thou  canst,
By  way  of  fidelity  and  kindness,

From  me  to  my  Friend,  thou  mayst  take  news,
Saying : — "  That  consumed  one,  in  secret,

"  Is  dying  ;  and  from  desire  keepeth  saying, —
"  O  Thou !  without  Thee,  unlawful  is  life."

615.

I.  In  knowledge,  the  race  of  Adam  (man)  is  man  complete
When  his  is  not  knowledge,  he  became  the  brute  complete.

Practice  without  theory  is  ignorance  complete  ;
O  soul !  in  ignorance,  impossible  it  is  to  find  God.

6  G  2

RUBA'IYAT.  957

Ruba'iyat*

(Tetrastics.)

616.

The  out-come  of  my  life, — naught  have  I  save  grief
In  love,  of  good  and  of  bad, — naught  have  I  save  grief.

Not  a  moment  have  I  a  fellow-breather,  one  concordant ;
One  named  consoler, — not  have  I  save  grief.

617. ,

From  the  door-plucker  of  Khaibar,  (All  Murtaza)  manliness ask:

From  Kumbar's  Khwaja,  the  mysteries  of  liberality, ask.

Hafiz  !  if,  in  sincerity,  thirsty  for  God's  grace,  thou  be,

From  the  Saki  (All  Murtaza)  of  Kausar,  its  fountain ask.

*  The  final  word  of  the  Persian  lines  is  kept  the  final  word  in  the  translation.

,_y*tj)  (ruba'i) signifies— the  tetrastich,  always  in  metre  ^j*  (hazaj).

<J>+>  j-3  (dubaiti) „ „ quatrain  in  any  metre  not  hazaj.

In  rhyme  and  in  the  number  of  verses,  the  dubaiti  is  like  to  the  ruba'i  and  unlike  to  it  in  metre.

Khaibar  was  a  stronghold  of  the  Jews near  Madina.

In  630,  Muhammad  took  the  place,  the  gates  being  up-plucked  by  Ali  Murtaza  (the  fourth

Khalifa)

Kumbar  was  Ali's  slave.

For  an  interesting  account  of  Ali  (b.  599,  d.  661)  see  Brown's  Darvishes,  pp.  371 — 415.
In  mentioning  him  : —

(a)  the  Shi'a  saith  "  'alaihi-s-salam,"  to  him  be  salutation.

(b)  „ Sunni „ "karrama  allahu  wajhahu  "  his  face  may  God  honour.
Kausar  is  a  spring  of  paradise. See  the  Kuran,  P.  D.  153,  154,  cviii.  l.

95?

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

618.

If,  like  me,  a  fallen  one  of  this  snare  thou  become,

0  often  intoxicated  of  wine  and  of  the  cup, thou  wilt  be.

Intoxicated,  ruined,  and  profligate,  world-consuming,  we  are  ;

With  us,  sit  not ;  if  not,  ill  of  name thou  wilt  be.

619.

By  way  of  supplication,  to  that  hyacinth  (tress  of  the  true  Beloved),  I  clung  ;
I  said  : — "  For  me  distraught,  remedy  make  :"

He  spake  saying: — "My  (sweet)  lip  take;  my  (long)  tress,  let  go;
"To  sweet  ease  (the  lip),  cling;  not  to  life  long."

620.

As  flagon-emptier,  the  bud  of  the  rose

In  desire  of  wine,  goblet-preparer,  the  narcissus

Free  (happy)  of  heart  is  that  one,  who,  like  the  bubble,
Possessed  of  desire  for  wine,  house-down  caster,

becometh,
becometh.

becometh.

621.

Of  that  old  wine,  villager-prepared,

Give ;  for,  life's  decoration,  anew  I  will  make.

Me,  intoxicated ;  and  void  of  news  of  the  world's  state, — make ;
So  that  the  world's  mystery,  I  may  utter — O  faultless  man  !

620

When  spring  arriveth,  to  the  face  of  the  rose,  men  drink.

RUBA'IYAT.  959

622.

0  Thou,  on  account  of  whose  majesty,  the  sun  and  the  moon  lay
Their  forehead  (in  homage),  night  and  day,  on  the  dust  of  Thy  garden  !

Me,  possessed  of  hand,  of  tongue,  and  of  heart,  strait  (by  Thy  shunning,  and
want  of  kindness)  plant  not ;

1  on  the  fire  of  expectation  ;  and,  thou  careless  (of  me) — sit  not.

623.

With  the  friend,  sit ;  the  cup  of  wine seek

From  the  lip  of  that  cypress,  rose  of  limb,  the  kiss  seek.

When  the  ease  of  his  wound,  the  wounded  one  seeketh, ,
Say : — "  From  the  point  of  the  son  of  the  barber  (the  lancet,  or  the  razor)  ease
seek."

624.

As  long  as  the  decree  of  celestial  destiny shall  be.

Ever  joyous,  thy  work shall  be.

The  cup  that  from  Taktamun's  hand  thou  drinkest,

The  source  of  lasting  life shall  be.

By  thy  shunning  and  want  of  kindness,— my  heart  will  become  grieved,  saddened,  and  scorched;  623
and  my  eye,  weeping.

Otherwise  the  second  line  may  be  : —

On  account  of  my  strait  tongue  and  heart,  my  heart,  on  the  fire  of  expectation,  plant  not ;  and,
thou  thyself  careless  (of  me),  sit  not.

Taktamun  was  Saki  (cup-bearer)  to  Shah  Shuja'  (d.  1384).  See  Nos.  574,  691.  624

960

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

625.

With  tyranny,  not  the  fortune  of  the  world

With  grief,  not  the  delight  of  existence

Not  seven  thousand  years  of  the  joy  of  the  world,
With  affliction  of  five  days,

hath  worth  ;
hath  worth.

hath  worth.

626.

To-night,  through  grief  (of  love)  for  thee,  in  the  midst  of  blood  (weltering

I  shall  sleep  ;

Out  from  the  couch  of  ease, I  shall  sleep.

Thou  believest  not:  thy  own  image,  send  ;
So  that  it  may  see  how  without  thee,

I  shall  sleep.

627.

In  desire  for  thy  kiss  and  embrace,

In  grief  for  thy  glistening  ruby  (lip), •

Long,  the  tale,  wherefore  do  I  make  ?  Short,  (it)  I  will  make ;
Come  back !  for  again  in  expectation  (longing)  for  thee,

Idle.
I  die.

I  die.

628.

O  soul  !  since,  with  thee,  a  night  to  day

If,  without  thee,  I  heave  a  breath  not  man

After  this,  death  I  fear  not. For  of  the  water  of  life,
From  thy  sweet  glistening  fountain  (the  ruby  lip)

brought  I,
am  I ;

drank  I.

625  From  the  descent  of  Adam  to  the  annihilation  of  the  world  is  7,000  years  according  to  the  Hadis

of  the  great  ones.

RUBA'IYAT.  961

629.

How  long  shall  be  this  violence  and  tyranny-practising of  thine?

All  people  vexing,— foolish  (is  this  act)  of  thine.

In  the  hand  of  one  of  heart,  is  the  sword  blood-stained  (the  morning  sigh) ;

If,  to  thee  it  (the  sword)  reach,  thy  (life-)  blood  (will  be)  on  the  neck

of  thine.

63O.

A  moment  take  not  thy  lip  back from  the  lip  of  the  cup  ;

So  that  the  world's  desire  thou  mayst  take from  the  lip  of  the  cup.

Since,  in  the  world's  cup,  together  are  the  bitter  and  the  sweet,

Desire  this  (the  sweet)  from  the  lip  of  the  Beloved  ;  that  (the  bitter)

from  the  lip  of  the  cup.

631.

Thou  spakest  saying : — "  Thine,  I  am  ;  have  no  care  ;

The  heart,  joyous  make ;  to  patience,  consign  thy care.

Patience,  where  ? The  heart,  what  ? That  which  heart,  thou  callest

Is  a  drop  of  blood,  and  many  a— —  care.

632.

Against  me,  love  for  the  beloved's  face  plaint  take  not

Against  those  shattered  of  heart,  censure  altogether,——  take  not.

Sufi !  since  the  way  of  the  way-farers,  thou  knowest,

Against  the  man-profligate,  much  carping—  take  not.

6a

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

633.

Neither  the  tale  of  that  candle  of  Chigil can  one  utter,

Nor  the  state  of  the  consumed  heart can  one  utter.

In  my  straitened  heart,  is  grief  on  that  account,  that  there  is  not

A  friend  to  whom  the  heart's  grief one  can  utter.

634.

Prey  of  the  world's  lovely  ones,  one  can  make with  gold  ;

On  account  of  them,  happily,  happily,  one  cannot  enjoy  (life,  only)

with  gold.

The  narcissus,  that  is  crown-possessor  (king)  of  the  world,  behold, —
How  it  also  lowereth  its  head with  gold.

635.

A  moon,  whose  stature  like  to  the  cypress  (was)  straight,

Mirror  in  the  hand,  her  face  made straight  (decked).

When  the  kerchief  (of  love)  I  offered,  she  said : —

"Union  with  me,  thou  seekest? Excellent,  that  (vain)  fancy  that  is  thine  !"

636.

The  awarder  of  paradise  and  of  hell;  and  knot-looser
Us,  abandoneth  not  lest  from  our  feet  we  fall.

This  wolf-snatching,  how  long  proceedeth  ? Display
Thy  grasp,  enemy-overthrowing O  lion  of  God  !

^33  Chigil  signifies  the  name  of  : —

(a)  a  district  of  Tatari,  famous  for  the  beauty  of  its  inhabitants.

(b)  a  fire-temple,  wherein  the  attendants  were  called  "  lamps  of  Chigil."

634  In  the  centre  of  its  flower,  the  narcissus  hath  a  golden  cup.

636 The  Lion  of  God  is  All. See  617.

RUBA'IYAT.

963

637.

Save  Thy  picture,  naught  cometh  into  the  vision——
Save  Thy  street,  other  cometh  not  the  path

Though  to  all,  sweet  cometh  sleep,  in  thy  time,

O  God  !  (I  swear)  that  it  (sleep)  cometh  not  into  the  eye-

of  ours
of  ours.

of  ours.

638.

(O  thou,)  whose  eye  ! — sorcery  and  deceit  keep  raining-
Ho  !  the  sword  of  battle  keepeth  raining

Vexed  with  friends,  too  quickly  thou  becamest ;
Alas  thy  heart !  for  stone  keepeth  raining

from  it ;
from  it.

from  it.

639.

Every  friend  who  boasted  of  fidelity  an  enemy  became ;

Pure  of  face,  every  one  who  was,  wet  of  skirt  (impure) became.

They  say : — "  Pregnant  with  the  hidden  is  night." Wonder !

Since  man  she  saw  (knew)  not,  pregnant  by  whom  (is  it  that)  she became?

640.

O  breeze  !  my  tale  secretly

The  burning  of  my  heart,  with  a  hundred  tongues,

In  that  way  speak  not  that  reproach  should  seize  her ;
A  word  say ;  and  in  the  midst

Thy  eye,  wherefrom  sorcery  and  deceit  keepeth  raining  I

tell  her;
tell  her.

tell  her.

638

6  H  2

9^4  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

641.

I  spake,  saying  : — "  Thy  lip  ?  "  She  said  : — "  My  lip  (is)  the  water  of  life  : "
I  said  :— "Thy  mouth  ?"  She  said  :— "  Excellent,  ('tis)  the  ball  of  candy. '

I  said  :— "  Thy  speech  ?  "  She  said  :— "  Hafiz  said  ;
'Tis  the  joy  of  all  subtlety-speakers  of  prayer."

642.

My  moon  whose  (resplendent)  face  the  sun's  luminosity  ; took,

Around  her  down,  the  skirt  of  Kausar  took.

In  the  chin-pit  (dimple),  hearts  all  (she)  cast;

And,  then,  with  amber  (down),  the  pit-mouth took  (closeu).

643.

(0  God  !)  when  the  garment  off  from  the  body  that  musky  (fragrant)  mole  (the

beloved)  draweth,
A  moon  that,  in  beauty,  hath  not  her  equal, —

In  the  chest,  by  reason  of  its  transparency  one  can  see  the  heart,
Like  the  hard  stone  in  limpid  water.

644.

Took  the  torrent  'of  death)  the  ruined  house of  life

(And)  established  the  beginning  of  the  fulness  of  the  cup ot  life.

0  Khwaja !  watchful  be. For,  soon,  soon,  (to  the  grave)  draweth

Time's  porter  the  chattels  from  the  house^—  of  life.

RUBA'IYAT.

965

645.

In  every  way,  hope  (of  the  propitiousness)  of  the  sky  keep  holding ;
Of  time's  revolution,  tremble  like  the  willow ;

Thou  spakest,  saying: — "  After  black,  is  no  colour  :  "
Then,  my  black  hair  wherefore  white  became  ?

646.

^S I \—r  *

Thy  eye,  whose  teacher  is  the  sorcery  of  Babil ;

O  God !  (I  swear)  that,  from  its  (the  eye's)  mind,  the  sorcery  departeth

That  tress,  that  be-ringed  (enslaved)  beauty,
Of  the  pearl  of  Hafiz's  verse,  its  attachment  be  !

not.

647.

With  wine  on  the  stream-bank,

And  from  the  grief  of  the  corner-seeker  (the  recluse),-

Since  our  precious  life  is  (only)  ten  days,
Smiling  of  lip,  fresh  of  face,

'tis  proper  to  be;
'tis  proper  to  be.

'tis  proper  to  be.

648.

0  thou  !  the  veiled  rose-bud,  shame-stricken^—
The  intoxicated  narcissus,  astonied  and  abashed

Equality  with  thee,  the  rose  how  can  make  ?

For,  it  hath  light  from  the  moon  ;  and  the  mouth,  light-

by  thee  ;
by  thee-

by  thee.

"Babil." See  Ode  14.

O  thou  by  whom  the  veiled  rose-bud  is  shame-stricken  ;

And  by  whom,  the  intoxicated  narcissus  is  astonied  and  abashed  !

646

966

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

649.

At  first,  with  fidelity  the  cup  of  union  me,  she  gave
When  intoxicated  (with  union)  I  became,  to  me  the  cup  of  tyranny  (of  separa-
tion) she  gave.

(When)  with  the  weeping  of  both  eyes,  and  with  the  heart  full  of  fire,

The  dust  of  her  path,  I  became,  me  to  the  wind  (of  destruction) she  gave.

65O.

Evil  to  the  good  man

In  the  desert  of  the  Div  and  of  the  rapacious  beast,

Enamoured  of  one's  own  living,

Proud  of  one's  own  excellence,

'tis  improper  to  be  ;
'tis  improper  to  be.

'tis  improper  to  be  ;
'tis  improper  to  be.

651.

0  thou,  the  shadow  of  whose  hyacinth-tress  the  jessamine,-
The  ruby  of  whose  lip  'Adn's  pearl,

As  thy  lip  (is  wine-cherished,  so),  ever  the  soul,  wine

With  that  wine,  which  is  spiritual,  thy  body

cherished  !
cherished  !

-cherished
cherished.

652.

Daily,  my  heart  beneath

On  account  of  separation,  in  my  eye

Striving,  I  kept ;  Fate  keepeth  crying  out ;
"  Beyond  thy  sufficiency  (of  work)

another  load  is ;
another  thorn  is.

another  work  is.

651  The  "  jessamine  "  signifies  :—  the  beloved's  face.

„ "  'Adn's  pearl  "  signifies :—  the  beloved's  teeth.
The  hyacinth  cherished  the  jessamine.

„ lip  „  'Adn's  pearl.

The  wine-cherished  soul  cherished  thy  body  with  that  wine  which  is  spiritual,

RUBA'IYAT.  967

653.

Like  (foaming)  wine,  on  account  of  grief,  — why  is  it  necessary  to  foam  ?

With  grief's  army  (wherewith  thou  canst  not  strive)

why  is  it  necessary  to  strive  ?

Fresh,  is  thy  lip  ;  from  it,  the  goblet  keep  not  far;

On  the  fresh  lip  (of  the  rivulet),  pleasant  is  wine  to  drink.

654.

'Tis  the  season  of  youth,  wine, best;

Every  grief-stricken  one  completely  intoxicated, best.

All,  end  to  end,  ruined  and  waste,  is  the  world  ;

In  the  place  of  ruin,  ruined  (intoxicated),——  best.

655.

Come  back  !  for  an  account  of  thy  beauty,  my  soul  is  expectant ;

Come  back  !  for,  in  grief  of  separation  from  thee,  my  heart  is  in  torment.

Come  back !  for,  without  thy  face,  O  sweet  beloved  !

From  the  eye  of  me,  head  bewildered,  flowing  is  the  torrent  (of  tears).

656.

Take  wine,  joy-exciting  ;  and  come,

Secretly. With  thy  mean  watcher,  strive  not ; and  come.

The  adversary's  speech  (of  counsel),  hear  not — "  Sit  down  ;  go  not."

O  idol !  me,  hear;  arise,——  and  come.

968

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

657.

The  (bitter)  separation  that,  on  the  soul  of  poor  me, —

Thou  mayst  say, — "  On  the  wounded  liver,  a  piece  of  (bitter)  salt

I  feared  that  one  day,  far  from  thee,  I  should  go,

Thou  sawest  that,  verily,  the  evil  day  (of  separation)  before  me

came,
came."

came.

658.

The  covenant  to  the  end,  those  sweet  of  mouth take  not ;

The  soul  from  the  state  of  being  a  lover,  those  possessed  of  vision  (lovers  of
God) take  not.

When  to  thy  wish  and  desire,  the  mistress  is,
Among  lovers,  thy  name  they

take  not.

659.

Twist  and  turn  and  curl  thy  two  locks
Sleep,  those  two  intoxicated  eyes  of  thine,

wherefore  took  they?
wherefore  took  they  ?

Since,  on  thee,  the  leaf  of  a  single  rose  none  scattered,

Head  to  foot,  the  rose-perfume,  (thy  body)—  wherefore  took  it?

660.

(0  true  Beloved  !)  the  thorn  of  griefs,  the  path  to  (union  with)  Thee hath ;

Where,  a  way-farer  (who,  on  this  grief,  reflecteth  not ;  and)  these  feet  (in  love's
path) hath  ?

(0  true  Beloved !)  thou  knowest  who  is  the  recogniser  of  love? That  one  who,
On  the  soul's  face,  the  lamp  of  breathings  (blessings  of  true  lovers) hath.

RUBA'IYAT.  969

661.

O  son !  from  the  mother  of  time  (the  world),  thy  heart  up-pluck  ;
To  the  latter  half  of  her  husband  (faith), cling.

O  heart !  like  this,  a  person  thou  knowest  not :

If,  like  Hafiz,  on  her  face  (the  face  of  the  mother  time),  joyous  thou  be.

662.

My  hand,  I  put  within  thy  girdle,
Within  which, I  thought  something  was.

From  that  waist,  what  (profit)  the  girdle  gained  is  clear  ;
From  the  girdle,  let  us  see  what  profit  I  shall  gain.

663.

Acceptable  to  the  heart  of  the  high,  and  well  known  to  the  low  ;
Sweet  of  note,  weighed  of  motion,  the  full  moon  complete  :

In  the  limits  of  Shiraz,  by  name  and  lineage,  is
The  instrument-player,  Hajl  Ahmad  by  name.

"  The  husband  of  the  mother  of  time  "  is  din  (faith).

Din  hath  two  aspects:—

(a)  zahir  shar',  external  religion,  which  is  the  law  of  the  Kuran.

(b)  batin „ internal „  „ „ sufi.ism,  or  shari'at  va  tarikat.
The  explanation  is  : —

From  the  world,  thy  heart  up-pluck;  and  to  internal  religion  (batin  shar')  cling.

6  i

97°  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

664.

The  beating  of  the  pinion  of  the  bird  of  joy,  I  hear  ;
Or,  the  perfume  of  the  rose-bed  of  wish,  I  perceive :

Or,  the  tale  from  his  lips,  the  breeze  uttereth ;
In  short,  a  wonderful  tale,  I  hear.

665.

With  the  mistress,  saucy  and  amorous;  and  with  the  minstrel  and  the  reed,
A.  quiet  corner,  a  little  leisure,  and  a  bottle  of  wine.

When  warm  with  wine  became  our  vein  and  tendon,

(Even)  to  a  barley-corn,  favour  I  take  not  from  (the  generous)  Hatim  Tai.

666.

In  separation  from  thee,  more  than  the  (guttering)  candle, I  weep:

Even  like  a  wine-flagon,  tears,  rose  of  hue  (bloo'dy) I  weep.

Like  the  cup  of  wine,  I  am. For,  from  heart-straitedness,

When  the  harp's  wail,  I  hear, — blood, I  weep.

667.

Tis  a  great  sin to  uplift  one's  self  ;

And,  out  from  all  creation, to  choose  one's  self.

From  the  eye's  pupil,  it  is  proper  to  learn  : —

Every  one,  to  see  ;  and,  not to  see  one's  self.

At  the  time  of  playing  the  harp,  the  cup  weepeth  bloody  tears. For,  at  the  time  of  playing  the
harp,  the  revellers  drink  ruddy  wine.

RUBA'IYAT.

97I

668.

My  soul,  in  sacrifice  for  that  one  who  a  man  (of  worth), -
If,  my  head  at  his  feet,  thou  place,  easy,  it

Thou  wishest  to  know  verily  of  hell  ;
Verily,  hell  the  society  of  the  worthless

may  be,
may  be.

shall  be.

669.

In  a  mortar,  end  to  end,  the  climes

With  the  heart's  blood,  the  nine  arches  of  the  sky-

A  hundred  years  more,  the  prison-captive

Better  than,  a  moment,  the  associate  of  the  fool —

to  pound  ;
to  smear;

to  be,
to  be.

67O.

Till,  to  the  desire  of  my  wounded  heart,  its  work

Till,  without  the  King,  the  soul,  the  country  of  my  body-

From  God's  court,  my  hope  is  this

That,  all  opened,  the  gates  of  happiness

shall  be  ;
shall  be ;

may  be.

671.

O  friend  !  from  violence  to  the  enemy,  thy  heart

With  good  mien,  the  luminous  wine,

To  the  man  of  skill,  the  button  of  thy  collar,  loose;
And,  wholly,  from  those  of  no  worth,  thy  skirt,——

withdraw  ;
indraw.

withdraw.

See  Ode  417,  c.  2.

668

612

972

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

672.

0  would  that  concordance,  fortune had  made

Or  (that)  again,  aid,  time's  revolution had  made.

When  from  the  hand,  the  rein  of  my  youth,  it  (time)  snatched,

(Would  that)  footedness  like  the  stirrup,  old  age had  made.

673.

A  long  life  in  pursuit  of  desire,  lost

And  from  the  sky's  revolution,  what  is  it  that  profitable-

To  whomsoever,  I  spake  saying  : — "Thy  friend,  I  was  :  "
Became  my  enemy. Alas!  what  (ill-)  star,

I  have  ;
I  have  ?

I  have.

674.

Friends  !  when  hand  together  (ye  are)

(In  friendship),  this  revolution  of  the  sphere

embrace  ye
forget  ye.

When,  to  me,  the  turn  (of  death)  reacheth  ; (and),  in  my  place,  I  remain  not,
In  recollection  of  me,  (during)  that  remaining  time, drink  ye.

675.

To-day,  at  this  time  of  covenant-breaking,

Where,  the  friend  who,  in  the  end,  becometh  not

Solitude's  skirt,  I  took  on  that  account,

That,  me,  the  friend  should  not  see  with  the  desire  of  the-

enemy.

enemy.

672 Youth  being  passed,  I  wish  old  age  to  stay. Old,  I  fear  death,
675 That  the  friend  should  not  see  me,  unhappy  of  face.

RUBA'IYAT.  973

676.

O  friend  !  me  to  the  enemy's  desire, •  thou  madest  ;

When  I  was  (fresh)  spring,  me,  like  (sere)  autumn, thou  madest.

In  thy  quiver,  straight  (of  body),  like  the  arrow,  I  was  ;

Sacrifice  for  thee,  I  am  ;  me  (bent  like),  the  bow,  why  (is  it  that)

thou  madest  ?

677.

From  feebleness,  humbleness,  and  wretchedness,
From  haughtiness,  greatness,  and  self-sufficingness,

If,  me,  on  the  fire,  thou  place,  (quietly)  I  sit ;
If  thee,  on  the  steed,  I  place,  thou  sittest  not.

678.

O  friend  !  careless  sit  not  of  the  fierceness of  the  sigh,

For,  thee,  fire  may  reach  from  the  fire -kindling of  the  sigh.

Beware  that,  in  thy  own  street,  thou  think  not  easy

The  night-wandering  of  weeping;  and  the  morning-rising of  the  sigh.

679.

On  the  heart,  grief  for  time  how  long  thou  .hast  ?

The  world,  abandon  ;  and  whatever  in  it thou  hast.

Desire  a  friend,  a  little  wine,  and  the  foot  of propinquity  to  the  rose,

Now,  that,  in  the  hand,  a  draft  of  wine, thou  hast.

Connected  together,  are  the  first  lines  of  the  two  couplets ;  and  the  second  lines.

974  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

680.

:f  for  t

my  rent  liver, I  make.

68O.

In  my  own  heart,  the  place  of  grief  for  thee,  I  make

The  pain  for  thee,  the  remedy  for  my  rent  li

Even  as  violence  against  my  heart,  the  more  thou  makest,

Intent  on  that  I  am  that  fidelity,  the  more, I  make.

681.

I  spake  saying : — "  Thy  (dark)  mole  is  what  with  this  sweetness  ?  "
She  said  : — "Simple,  foolish,  and  pitiful  thou  art.

"  Not  a  mole  is  in  our  beauty's  mirror,

"  In  it  (the  mirror),  thy  own  (dark)  pupil  (of  the  eye)  thou  seest."

682.

Like  the  (ruddy)  face  of  my  idol,  my  tears  rose  of  hue  (bloody) became

From  the  heart's  blood,  the  house  (socket)  of  my  eye  blood became.

With  grace,  thus  to  me  my  beloved  spake

Saying  : — "  O  dear  friend  !  the  state  of  thy  eye,  how became  ?  "

683.

If,  in  wandering,  a  person  remain a  month,

If  the  mountain  (in  strength)  he  be,  of  him  shall  remain  (only)  a  straw.

Though  (in  a  foreign  place)  dweller  be  the  poor  stranger,

When  his  native  land,  he  remembereth,  heaveth  he— —  a  sigh.

RUBA'IYAT.

975

684.

O  Lord  !  since  the  accomplisher  of  needs

Both  KazI  (of  our  need)  and  all  sufficient

Thou  art ;
Thou  art.

To  Thee,  my  own  heart's  secret  how  shall  I  utter  ?
Since  the  knower  of  hidden  mysteries

Thou  art.

MASNAVi.  977

••

Masnavi.*

685.

i.  Ho !  O  desert  deer !  where  art  thou  ?
For  thee,  mine  is  a  great  affection.

Two  solitary  travellers,  two  heads  revolving  (in  perplexity),  two  friendless  ones  ;
The  rapacious,  and  the  non-rapacious,  beast,  in  ambush  before  and  behind.

Come,  so  that  each  other's  state,  we  may  know ;
Our  desire  (for  each  other),  we  will  seek,  if  we  can.

For  I  see  that  this  confused  desert  (of  love),
Hath  not  a  pastime  place,  joyous  and  happy.

5.  O  companions  !  say  ye  who  will  be  the  companion  of  friendless  ones  ?
The  friend  of  strangers?

Perchance  Khizr,  auspicious  of  foot,  may  enter ;

From  the-blessing  of  his  spirit,  a  great  work  may  issue.

Perchance  the  time  of  favour-cherishing  hath  come  ;
For  my  omen —  "  Leave  me  not  alone  "  hath  come.

At  a  time,  a  way-farer  in  the  land,

To  him,  with  courtesy,  spake  a  profligate,  path-sitter.

*  Masnavi  signifies  : —

Poetry,  composed  of  distichs,  corresponding  in  measure,  each  consisting  of  a  pair  of  rhymes.
This  poetry  is  called  (muzdawaj)  wedded ;  the  number  of  its  distichs  is  limitless.
The  final  word  of  the  Persian  lines  is  kept  the  final  word  in  the  translation.

6.  This  difficult  path,  wherein  the  travelling  is  dangerous,  may  come  to  an  end.

7.  See  the  Kuran,  xxi.

8.  The  profligate  spake  to  the  way-farer.

6  K

97^  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Saying: — "O  holy  traveller  !  in  thy  store,  what  hast  thou?
"Come  ;  a  great  snare,  establish,  if  the  grain  thou  hast."

10.  To  him,  he  (the  way-farer)  gave  answer  and  said  : — "Grain,  I  have;
"  But  necessary  for  me  is  the  (mighty)  Simurgh, — the  prey."

He  (the  profligate)  said  : — "  To  thy  hand  trace  (of  the  Simurglj),  how  bringest

thou ;
"  For  to  us,  traceless  is  his  abode?  "

From  the  hand,  give  not  the  cup  of  wine  or  the  foot  of  the  rose  ;
But  be  not  careless  of  time  greatly  intoxicated.

When  that  straight  cypress  (the  beloved)  hath  become  one  of  the  Karvan,
With  the  cypress-branch,  guarding  (of  the  Path)  keep  making.

He  departed  ;  and  my  happy  disposition  sad  made  ;
Brother  to  brother,  thus  when  did?

15.  Mercilessly,  the  sword  of  separation,  he  so  struck,

That  thou  mayst  say,  "  Has  been  not  (even)  acquaintanceship."

My  scattering  what  weight  beareth  it,  in  this  way,
When  (even)  the  wealthy  sun  became  purse-emptier?

The  marge  of  the  water-pool,  and  a  bank  of  the  stream  ;
A  dew-drop  (a  tear),  and  talk  with  one's  self — a  talk.

In  memory  of  those  gone,  and  of  friends,

Concordance  (weeping),  he  made  with  the  (weeping)  April-cloud.

When  before  thee,  the  running  water  cometh  weeping,
It,  aid  from  the  water  of  the  eye  of  thine.

20.  Not  courtesy  did  that  old  friend  ;

Musalmans  !  Musalmans  ! (help  me)  for  God's  sake  !

By  my  head,  passed  the  water  of  separation,
In  this  state,  courtesy  is  unfit.

12.  Sit  near  the  rose.

MASNAVF.  979

Perchance,  Khi?r>  auspicious  of  foot,  can  so  do

That,  to  those  bodies  (of  those  gone),  these  bodies  (of  ours)  he  may  convey.

With  my  own  fortune,  so  much  why  do  I  (vainly)  strive?
From  my  own  natal  star,  why  do  I  (vainly)  flee  ?

Now,  even  the  path  of  the  Friend's  street  I  take  ;
If  I  die — even,  in  the  Path  I  die.

25.  Those  strangers  who,  my  state,  behold,
Awhile,  at  the  head  of  my  dust,  sit.

Strangers,  strangers  remember ;

For,  of  one  another,  the  tokens  they  are.

O  God  !  the  remedy  of  the  remediless,  Thou  art,

For  me  and  others  beside  me,  the  remedy,  thou  knowest.

Even  as  from  the  dark  night,  Thou  bringest  forth  bright  day
(So)  from  this  grief,  Thou  bringest  forth  the  joy  of  mine.

On  account  of  separation  from  Him,  complaint  much  I  have;
In  this  place,  not  contained  is  this  tale.

30.  The  (precious)  jewel,  behold  ;  by  the  (worthless)  shell,  pass  by;
That  way,  that  becometh  not  famous,  abandon.

When,  in  narration,  I  bring  forth  the  fish  of  the  reed,
From  the  fish  and  the  reed,  ask  the  explanation.

•

Companions !  the  value  of  each  other,  know  ye  ?
When  'tis  known,  out  the  explanation  read  ye.

Verily,  the  words  of  the  counsel-utterer  is —

That  the  order-caster  of  separation  (who  is  union)  in  ambush  is.

With  wisdom,  the  soul  we  mixed  ;

And  the  seed,  that  from  it  was  produced,  we  planted.

31.  See  the  Kuran,  Ixviii.

6  K.  2

10°  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

35.  Evident  in  this  composition,  is  joy-givingness,

Which  the  essence  of  verse,  the  essence  of  soul  and  of  limbs,  is.

Come ;  and  from  the  perfume  of  this  good  hope,

The  perfume-place  of  the  soul  perfume-making,  seek  ye.

For  this  musk-pod  is  from  the  pocket-fold  of  the  Hur,—
Not  from  that  (musk-)  deer  that  at  man  is  affrighted.

In  this  valley  (of  death)  listen  to  the  sound  of  the  torrent,  »

Wherein  at  hundred  "  mans  "  of  the  blood  of  guiltless  ones  (are)  as  a  barley-
corn.

Here,  Jibra.il's  pinion  they  scorch  ;
So  that  therewith,  a  fire  boys  kindle.

40.  Who  hath  power  to  utter  speech  here —
God  Most  High  !  what  independence  is  here.

Hafiz  !  go ;  in  this  space,  boast  not ;
Speech  make  short;  God  is  the  Knower.

38.  "The  valley"  may  signify  :—  the  valley — ,
(a)  of  love.
(6) „  the  world.
(c) „  „ present  time.
"  Man." See  Odes  144,  c.  10 ;  524,  c.  I ;  557,  c.  I ;  567,  c.  I.

SAKi-NAMA.

981

SakT-Nama.*

•  •

(The  Saki-rhyme).

686.

i.  Saki!  come. That  wine,  that  rapture,  bringeth  ;
Blessing,  increaseth  ;  perfection,  bringeth,

Give  me. For  I,  much  heart-bereft,  have  fallen  ;

From  these  both  (blessing  and  perfection),  without  profit,  I  have  fallen.

Saki !  come. That  alchemy  of  openings,

That,  with  the  (great)  treasure  of  Karun,  giveth  the  (great)  age  of  Nuh,

Give,  so  that,  wide  to  thy  face,  they  may  open
The  door  of  prosperity,  and  long  life.

5.  Saki !  come. That  shining  fire,

That  Zardusht  keepeth  seeking  beneath  the  dust,

Give  me. For,  in  the  (religious)  order  of  intoxicated  profligates,
Whether  fire-worshipper,  or  world-worshipper, (what  matter?)

Saki !  come. That  wine,  wherefrom  the  cup  of  Jamshid,
Boasteth  of  seeing  into  non-existence,

Give  me,  so  that  by  the  aid  of  the  cup,  I  may  be,

Like  Jamshid,  ever  acquainted  with  the  world's  mystery.

Saki !  come. Me,  that  cup  of  Jamshid  give,
Make  no  delay  ;  instantly,  me  give.

*  The  Persian  text  is  corrupt  throughout.
5.  "  Zardusht." See  page  992  (foot-note).

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  Possessed  of  crown  and  of  treasure,  well  spake  Jamshld,

Saying  :— "  Not  worth  a  barley  (-corn)  is  this  transitory  house  (the  world)."

Saki !  come. That  cup,  like  salsabil,
That,  to  Paradise,  is  the  heart's  guide,

Give  me. For,  well  spake  the  (six-stringed)  lute  and  the  reed,
Saying; — "A  draught  of  wine  (is)  better  than  the  diadem  of  Kay."

Saki !  come. That  intoxicated,  veiled  virgin  (wine  secreted  in  jars)
That,  within  the  tavern,  sitteth,

Give  me. For,  ill  of  fame,  I  wish  to  be  ;
Ruined  with  wine  and  the  wine-cup,  I  wish  to  be.

15.  Saki!  come. That  water,  thought-consuming,

Which,  if  the  lion  drink,  forest-consumer,  he  becometh,

Give,  so  that  to  the  sky,  lion-seizer,  I  may  go  ;

(So  that)  the  snare  of  this  old  world,  I  may  together  dash.

Saki !  come. That  wine,  in  which  the  Hur  of  Paradise,
The  ambergris  of  the  angels,  keep  kneading.

Give,  so  that,  on  the  fire,  it,  as  a  perfume,  I  may  place  ;

(So  that),  happy,  till  eternity  without  end,  wisdom's  brain  I  may  make.

Saki !  come. That  wine,  the  reflection  whereof  from  the  cup,
To  Kay  Khusrau  and  to  Jamshid,  message,  sendeth,

20.  Give,  so  that,  with  the  note  of  the  reed,  I  may  speak,

Saying: — "  (Mighty)  Jamshid  was  when  ? (Great)  Ka.us,  when  ?  "

Of  the  revolving  of  this  old  monastery — boast ;
To  former  kings,  salutation,  give.

Saki !  come. That  wine  that  giveth  royalty ;
To  whose  purity  evidence,  the  heart  giveth,

SAKJ-NAMA.

Give  me,  for  Sultan  of  my  heart,  (once)  I  was  ;
Now,  far  from  Him,  I  am ;  for  stained,  I  am.

Me,  wine  give  ;  perchance,  pure  of  defect,  I  may  become  ;
Safe  from  fearful  thought  (in  love's  path),  become.

25.  Me,  wine  give  ;  and  fortune's  face,  behold ;

Me,  ruined  make  ;  and  philosophy's  treasure  see.

When  the  garden  of  souls  (the  world  of  non-existence)  became  my  abode,
In  this  place  (the  world],  plank-bound  of  body,  wherefore  am  I?

That  one  am  I  who, — when,  in  the  hand,  the  cup  I  take,—
Behold  in  that  mirror  whatever  is.

In  intoxication,  the  door  of  austerity  I  beat ;
In  beggary,  of  sovereignty  I  boast.

For,  when  fit  for  song  is  intoxicated  Hafiz,
Him,  blessing  from  the  sky,  Zuhra's  lyre  giveth.

30.  Saki !  the  unfaithfulness  of  life,

Fear;  and,  of  wine,  petition  (long)  life.

For  thy  life,  wine  will  increase,

Momently,  to  thee,  a  door  of  the  hidden,  it  will  open.

Saki !  come. With  wine,  an  assembly  arrange  ;
For  faithfulness  with  none,  hath  the  world.

Thee,  the  (frail)  bubble  of  wine  gave  recollection  of  this  matter,

As,  when  the  diadem  of  Kay-Kubad,  the  (swift)  wind  (of  death)  took.

Saki!  come. From  wine,  the  heart's  desire  seek;
For,  without  wine,  no  ease  of  heart,  I  saw.

35.  If,  as  to  union  with  the  soul,  the  body  show  patience  (care  not], —

It  is  possible  that,  as  to  wine,  the  heart  may  show  alienation  (may  care  not).

26.  "  Plank-bound." See  Ode  385,  c.  4.

35.  Otherwise  :—

If  (apart)  from  union  with  the  soul,  the  body  show  patience  (live),

It  is  possible  that  (apart)  from  wine  the  heart  may  show  farness  (may  live).

983

9^4  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Saki !  come. This  cup  with  wine,  make  full,

That  thee,  the  state  of  Kisra  and  of  Kay,  I  may  tell.

Saki !  come. Safe  from  time,  how  mayst  thou  be  ?

On  that  intent  it  is  that,  in  wrath,  thy  blood  it  may  spill.

Saki !  come. To  us,  arrogance  display  not ;

For,  in  the  end,  of  (perishable)  dust  thou  art ;  not  of  (eternal)  fire  art  thou.

The  goblet  with  wine,  make  full ;  for  pleasant  is  wine  ;
Especially,  when  pure  and  un-alloyed  it  be.

40.  Saki!  come. That  wine  of  the  fragrant  breeze  of  sweet  basil,
Give  me:  for  remaineth  neither  gold  nor  silver.

Saki !  come. That  pure  ruby  wine

Give. This  cunning,  design,  and  boast, — how  long?

Disgusted  with  the  rosary  and  the  khirka,  I  am  ;
For  wine,  both  pledge  :  and  farewell !

Saki !  come. From  the  corner  of  the  cloister  of  the  magiahs,
Far,  be  not;  for  here  is  the  "  Ganj-ravan."

If,  to  thee,  any  should  say : — "  Towards  the  cloister,  go  not ;"
Him,  what  answer  sayest  thou  ? Say  : — "  Good  night !  "

45.  Saki !  come. That  ruddy  goblet,

Whereby,  gaineth  the  heart,  joy ;  and  the  soul,  pleasure

Give  me,  that,  me,  release  from  grief,  it  may  give ;

Me,  the  trace  of  the  path  to  the  special  banquet,  may  give.

42.  The  rosary. See  Odes  132,  178,  c.  8.
„ khirka „ Ode  124.

43-  vfij) (fleeting  treasure)  signifies  :  —

(a)  the  treasure  of  Karun.
(6)  wine. ,

SAKi-NAMA.  985

Saki !  come. That  wine,  that  is  the  soul-cherisher,
Like  life,  is  fit  for  the  shattered  heart,

Give,  that,  out  from  the  world,  my  tent  I  may  pitch ;
Above  the  sphere,  my  pavilion,  may  pitch.

Saki !  come. That  (resplendent)  cup,  like  the  sun  and  the  moon,
Give,  so  that,  on  the  (lofty)  sky,  my  court  I  may  pitch.

50.  Saki !  come. With  old  wines,

In  my  cup,  me,  continuously  intoxicated  make.

When,  with  thy  un-alloyed  wine,  me,  intoxicated,  thou  makest,
In  intoxication,  to  thee  the  pleasant  song,  I  will  sing.

Saki !  come. Now  that,  like  paradise,  became,

By  thy  (resplendent)  face,  this  banquet,  ambergris  of  nature,

The  cup,  take  ;  fear  not ;  in  it,  is  happiness.
For,  in  the  garden  of  paradise,  lawful  is  wine.

Saki !  come  . Of  wine,  I  have  no  help  :
Me,  with  one  remaining  (last)  cup,  aid.

55.  For,  from  the  sphere's  revolution,  I  am  ready  to  die  ;
Towards  the  cloister  of  the  magians,  running,  I  am  come.

Saki!  come. That  wine,  the  delight-giver,
Give,  so  that  on  Rakhsh's  back,  I  may  sit.

To  the  field  (of  battle),  like  Tahamtan  (Rustam)  the  face  we  will  turn  ;
To  our  heart's  desire,  the  design  of  galloping  in  the  fight,  we  will  make.

Saki !  that  ruby-like  cup,

That,  to  the  heart,  the  door  of  pleasant  time  openeth.

Give,  so  that  wisdom,  I  may  efface  ;

Through  intoxication,  in  the  world,  my  standard,  may  exalt.

53.  In  Arabic,  is  the  first  line.

56.  Rakhsh  is  the  name  of  Rustam's  war-horse.

6L

986

DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

60.  A  moment,  momently,  of  the  cup  we  boast ;
With  wine,  water  on  grief's  dash,  we  dash.

For,  to-day,  with  one  another,  wine  we  drink  ;
When  leisure  is  none,  again  when  may  we  drink  ?

For  those,  who  joy's  feast  prepared  ; '
(Who)  at  joy's  feast,  also  engaged, —

From  this  snare-place  (the  world)  div-inhabited,  low-lying,—
Departed  ;  and  to  the  dust  (of  the  grave)  regret  took.

Over  this  turquoise  throne  (the  sky),  victorious  is  who?
On  this  palace  of  ten  days,  prosperous  is  who  ?

65.  Alas!  youthfulness  that  on  the  (swift)  wind  departed  ;
He  who,  with  knowledge  and  justice,  departed, — happy.

Saki !  Give  that  wine. As  long  as  breath,  I  express,
•  At  the  head  of  both  worlds,  my  foot  I  dash.

Quick,  be  ;  and,  me,  the  heavy  ritl  give  ;

If  openly  (be)  not  possible,  to  me,  secretly  give.

»

That  one  who,  on  the  elephant's  back,  used  to  fix  the  drum,
For  him,  against  his  desire,  they  (fate  and  destiny)  beat  the  drum  of  departure
(in  death).

From  the  zones  of  light,  at  the  glad  tidings  (the  prelude)  of  dawn,
Momently,  come  -to  my  ear,  from  the  word  of  the  Hur.

70.  Saying  : — "  O  bird,  sweet  of  note,  sweet  of  speech  !

"  Thy  plumes  and  pinions,  open  wide  ;  and  burst  thy  cage.

"  On  the  azure  palace  of  six  vaults  (the  lofty  seventh  heaven),  sit ;
"  In  the  stage  of  the  soul-abode,  sit."

67.  Ritl. See  Ode  315,  c.  2.
Hur „ „ 416.

68.  Before  beginning  an  expedition,  they  bind  the  elephant-drum  or  the  elephant.
He,  who  goeth  to  the  field  of  battle,  will  at  last  unwillingly  depart  from  this  world.

SAKi-NAMA.

For  victorious  of  time,  thou  art,  Manu-chihr  of  face  ;
Thou  knowest  that,  in  the  time  of  Buzurj  mihr.

On  the  cup  of  Naushiravan,  they  wrote  : —
"  Before  that  no  traces  of  us,  thou  findest,

"  From  us,  this  counsel  hear;  and  work,  learn-
"  A  subtlety  from  time's  revolution.

987

75.  "That  the  stage  of  pain  and  of  grief,  this  is  ;

'•'In  this  snare-place  (this  world),  seldom  is  joyousness."

(Still),  with  this  joyousness,  we  are. For,  of  pain  and  grief,
No  grief,  have  we If  (them),  we  have  not,  'tis  the  same.

The  cup  of  Jamshid  is  what  ? Jamshid  is  where  ?
Sulaiman  went  where  ? The  seal-ring  is  where  ?

Of  living  philosophers  who  knoweth
When  Jamshid  was  and  Ka,us  Kay?

When  to  non-existence,  the  step  (of  travel)  they  took  .up,
In  this  land,  save  name  naught  they  left.

80.  On  this  fleeting  abode,  the  heart  why  bindest  thou  ?

For,  when  thou  passest  away,  again  back  to  this  place  thou  comest  not.

'Tis  (the  part)  of  madness,  in  it  to  bind  thy  heart ;
'Tis  of  non-acquaintance,  in  it  acquaintance.

72.  Manu-chihr  (paradise-face)  was  a  king  of  the  Pishdadian  dynasty. He  succeeded  Firidun.

The  prosperity  of  his  reign  was  due  to  his  vazir,  Sam,  son  of  Nariman,  whose  descendants

Zal  and  Rustam  were  heroes. See  Clements  Markham's  History  of  Persia.
Buzurj-mihr  (d.  580-590  A.D.)  was  vazir  to  Naushiravan,  the  Just.  From  India,  he  imported  the

game  of  chess  and  the  fables  of  Pilpai.

Him  Christians  claim  as  a  believer;  and  Muslims  as  a  muslim.

Naushiravan,  the  Just,  the  son  of  Kubad,  ascended  the  throne  531,  and  died  579  A.D.
In  571  A.D.  (in  the  time  of  Naushiravan),  was  born  Muhammad,  who  used  to  boast  of  his  good

fortune  in  being  born  in  the  reign  of  a  king  so  just.

77.  "  The  seal-ring." See  Odes  189,  c.  2  ;  350,  c.  10;  435,  c.  10.

Jamshid. See  History  of  Persia  by  Malcolm  and  by  Clements  Markham.

6  L  2

988  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ,

To  (thy)  desire,  in  this  house  of  six  doors  (the  world),  thou  findest  not,
The  place  of  joy,  or  the  stage  of  desire.

Saki!  give  that  water,  the  fire  of  qualities  (wine),
Wherewith,  freedom  from  the  fire  (of  hell)  I  gain.

For,  within  the  fire,  is  this  my  luminous  heart ;

Verily,  on  the  fire,  a  great  quantity  of  water  I  will  dash.

85.  Saki!  give  that  water  ruby  of  hue,

That,  from  the  ruby  and  the  sapphire,  colour  taketh.

Quickly,  give  that  water  (wine),  the  running  fountain  ;
Running  water,  nay;  'tis  the  (conspicuous)  moving  sun.

On  this  five-fold  sky  of  nine  degrees  (the  ninth  heaven),
With  one  cup  of  wine,  the  four-cornered  tent,  one  can  pitch.

So  that,  above  the  pillarless  roof  of  nine  vaults,

One  can  go,  if,  (only)  from  out  of  one's  self,  one  can  go.

If  thou  be  wise,  arise  ;  distraught,  be  ;

Thy  own  honour,  spill  not ;  the  dust  of  the  wine-house,  be.

90.  Bound  to  this  dusty  cloister,  be  not. Be  it  not,

That,  suddenly,  like  the  dust,  thee,  to  the  wind  (of  destruction),  it  give.

Saki !  give  that  Khusravf  goblet,

That  increaseth  the  joy  of  the  heart  and  of  the  soul.

87.  Heaven  hath  nine  (some  say  seven)  steps  or  degrees:  —

1.  the  welkin.

2.  , circle  of  the  sun.

3-

4-8.

» » »  moon.

». »> »  five  planets.

g. , empyrean,  the  ninth  heaven,  the  abode  of  God.
,j(Se  jU.  signifies  :—

a  tent  of  four  corners  ("  rauti  ").
In  some  copies,  in  the  first  line,  is  the  phrase —

Jlj)  (j*^»  s'x  screens  let  down  from  (and  pulled  up  to)  the  roof.

SAKi-NAMA.  989

The  meaning  of  the  goblet  is  : — "  The  wine  of  perpetuality :  "
Our  meaning  of  this  wine  is — "Selflessness."

Departed  youth,  like  the  (swift)  lightning  of  Yaman  ;
Departed  life,  like  the  (swift)  morning  breeze.

Go ;  abandon  this  house  of  six  doors  (the  world). Say  : —
"Come;  of  this  (deadly)  snake  of  nine  heads,  wash  the  hand."

95.  In  this  Path  (of  love),  thy  head  (life)  and  gold  quickly  scatter;
If  thou  be  of  the  way-farers,  thy  soul  scatter  (in  sacrifice).

Running  (quickly)  go;  running  towards  the  house  of  permanency  ;
Vanishing,  everything  regard  except  God.

Saki !  that  jewel,  soul-bestowing,  give  ;

The  remedy  of  the  wounded  heart  of  the  wounded  one,  give.

Since,  from  Jamshid's  hand,  time  snatched  the  cup,
If  his  were  a  whole  world  profit  from  it — what  ?

Saki !  give  that  expressed  water  (of  the  grape) ;
With  wine,  this  dead  heart,  living  make.

100.  For,  every  brick-tile,  that  upon  a  terrace  is,
Is  the  head  of  a  Kay-Kubad,  or  of  a  Sikandar.

In  this  platter,  save  the  blood  of  kings  is  naught;
In  this  desert,  save  the  dust  of  lovely  ones  is  naught.

X

I  have  heard  that  one  distraught,  wine-worshipping,
In  the  wine-house,  a  cup  in  his  hand,  kept  saying : —

"  The  revolving  sphere  that  is  the  mean-cherisher,
"  From  it,  more  joyous  who  is  more  un-wise  is."

Saki !  give  that  bitter,  sweet-tasting  wine  (of  love  for  God) ;
For,  from  the  Beloved's  hand,  sweet  is  wine.

104.  "  Bitter  wine." See  Ode  328,  c.  I.

99°  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

105.  For  Dara,  who  was  the  possessor  of  the  horizons  (of  the  world),
In  possessorship,  in  the  world  was  peerless-

Him,  by  death's  hand,  this  sky  snatched  ;

So  that  thou  mightest  think — never,  in  this  place,  was  he  !

Saki.!  come. From  me  to  the  king,  go;

This  speech  utter,  saying  : — "  0  King,  Jamshid  of  crown

"  The  heart  of  the  wretched  resourceless  ones,  seek  ;
"Then,  the  cup  world-viewing,  seek.  "

This  world's  grief,  wherefrom  is  no  profit,
From  one's  self,  with  wine,  one  can  repell.

1 10.  In  fortune,  the  possessor  of  diadem  and  of  throne  ;
The  best  fruit  of  a  Khusrauvi  tree  :

Khidiv  of  the  Land,  king  of  time  ;

Moon  of  the  mansion  of  fortune,  king  prosperous:

By  whom,  is  the majesty  of  the  kingly  crown  ;
By  whom,  is  body-easiness  of  fowl  and  of  fish :

The  splendour  of  the  heart ;  and  the  eye  of  the  prosperous
The  Lord  of  favour  of  all  heart-possessors  :

World-possessor,  Faith-cherisher,  Just  Ruler,

By  whom,  possessed  of  majesty  and  pomp  became  Kay's  throne  :

115.  What  may  I  say? Shall  I  give  the  description  of  his  traces,
At  whose  ways,  reason  is  astonied  ?

When,  beyond  the  limit  of  description,  is  his  rank, •

Through  feebleness  and  shamefulness,  down  in  front,  I  cast  my  head.

In  sincerity,  the  hand  of  prayer,  I  uplift ;
My  face  to  the  Mighty  One  (God),  I  turn.

no.  Couplets  1 10—114  enumerate  the  titles  of  Shah  Mansur.

SAKi-NAMA.

Saying  : — "  O  Lord !  by  Thy  favour  and  kindnesses  ;
"  By  the  mysteries  of  the  beauteous  names,

"  By  the  truth  of  Thy  word,  which  anciently  came  ;

"  By  the  truth  of  the  prophet,  and  by  the  greatest  creation  (Muhammad),—

120.  "  (I  conjure  thee)  saying — The  world-king  be,  victorious  of  fortune,
"  By  whose  fortune,  arrayed  are  crown  and  throne."

As  long  as  earth  may  be  the  arena  of  justice  and  of  violence  ;
As  long  as  the sky  may  be  the  pasture-place  of  Jadi  (Capricornus) and of
Sawr  (Taurus), —

"  Be  Khidiv  of  the  world, — Shah-MansQr  !
"  Be  far  from  his  heart,  the  dust  of  grief !  "

0  Khusrau,  with  the  signet-ring  of  Jamshld  ! Hamd-i-llah  !
In  the  field  of  the  world  and  of  faith,  intrepid  thou  art.

In  the  horizons  (of  the  world),  went  thy  name  for  victoriousness,
For,  over  enemies,  ever  wast  thou  victorious.

125.  In  the  palace  of  the  banquet,  of  Firldun-pomp,  thou  art  ;
In  the  field  of  contest,  Tahamtan  of  contest,  thou  art.

Not  the  sky's,  jewel  (pearl)  within  the  shell  is  like  thee.;
Not  Firidun  nor  Jamshid's  descendant  is  like  thee,

Not  alone  from  Europe,  thee,  tribute,  did  they  bring ;
For,  from  Zang/thee  tribute  the  Mahraj  sent.

Whether  Turkistan  and  Hind,  it  be  ;  or  whether  Rum  and  Chin,—
Like  Jamshid,  all  thou  hast  beneath  thy  seal-ring.

Within  the  screen,  (lofty)  Saturn  is  thy  meanest  slave  ;
The  sphere  (is)  a  slave  of  thine,  gilded  of  girdle.

118.  The  beauteous  names  are  the  seven  first  attributes  of  God. See  Introduction  to  Sufi.ism,  art:

"The  ceremonies  of  darvishes."

122.  Shah  Mansur. See  Ode  167,  c.  I ;  Fragment,  578.
125.  Tahamtan  (strong  of  body)  was  one  of  Rustam's  titles.

127.  Zang. See  Ode  303.

128.  "  Rum  "  comprises  Greece  and  Turkey,  once  the  seat  of  the  Roman  empire.

992  DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

130.  The  canopy,  auspicious  of  effect,  is  a  (mighty)  Huma,

That,  beneath  his  (wide-spread)  pinions,  earth's  (broad)  surface,  hath.

Sikandar-like,  Rum  to  Chin,  is  thine  ;

If  the  mirror  he  (Sikandar)  had,  thou  hast  administration.

In  Sikandar's  place,  years  remain  ;

By  wise-heartedness,  states  (of  affairs)  reveal.

Since  the  ocean  of  thy  praise  hath  no  shore,
Thy  praise,  I  make,  limited  to  prayer.

From  the  verse  of  Nizami, — like  whom,  the  old  sphere,
Speech-adorner  hath  none, —

135.  To  insertion  (herein),  I  bring  three  powerful  couplets,

That,  in  the  opinion  of  wisdom,  are  better  than  the  precious  pearl : —

"  More  than  that  thou  mayst  conceive,
"Territory-taker, 'be  ;  and  horizon-seizer  ;

"  Time  to  time,  through  the  lofty  sky,
"  Be  victorious  for  further  victory.

"  Of  that  wine  that  gave  the  soul  the  remedy  of  sense,

"  Be  the  draught  for  me  ;  and  for  the  king,  the  water  of  immortality  !"

130.  "  Huma." See  Ode  50.

131.  "Sikandar's  mirror." See  Canto  23,  translation  (out  of  the  Persian)  of  the  Sikandar  Nama.i

Nizami  by  Wilberforce  Clarke.

135.  Couplets  136-138  are  from  Nizami.

In  Ode  499,  c.  n,  Hafiz  praiseth  Nizami.

For  a  life  of  Nizami,  see  Wilberforce  Clarke's  translation  (out  of  the  Persian)  of  the  Sikandar

Nama,i-Nizami.

5.  Zardusht"  (zardust,  zartusht,  zartusht,  zaradusht)  is  the  sage  Zoroaster  (1500  B.C.),  Balk}].
•  See  Essays  by  Dr.  Haug,  Bombay,  1862;  the  Acad.  des  Inscript.  torn  37,  an  extract  from  which
is  given  (p.  274)  in  Shea's  translation  of  Mirkhond's  Hist,  of  Persia;  Malcolm's  Hist,  of
Persia,  Vol.  I,  p.  494;  the  list  of  Zand  and  Pahlavi  books  by  Triibner  &  Co.;  two  articles  by
Monier  Williams  in  "The  Nineteenth  Century,"  January  and  March  1881 ;  Monier  Wil-
liams' Modern  India,  p.  56,  169,  202 ;  Markham's  Hist,  of  Persia,  iii,  p.  387,  492,  496,  745 ;
Von  Hammer's  Hist,  of  Persian  Literature  and  his  Encyclopedic  view  of  the  sciences  of  the
East.

MUGHANNF NAMA.  993

Mughanni  Nama.*

(The  Minstrel  rhyme.)

687.

I.  Mughanni!  thou  art — where? By  the  sound  of  the  stringed  instrument,
Bring  to  mind  that  Khusravi  song.

To  the  intoxicated  ones,  the  glad  tidings  of  a  song,  send ;
To  beloved  ones  departed  (in  death),  a  blessing  send.

Mughanni !  a  melody  of  joy  prepare  ;

With  kaul  (song)  and  ghazal  (ode),  the  tale,  begin.

For,  to  the  earth  my  foot,  grief's  load  hath  stitched,
Forth  from  place,  me,  by  the  force  of  union,  bring.

5.  Mughanni !  from  that  screen,  a  beautiful  picture,  bring  ;
Behold  what,  from  within  the  haram,  the  screen-holder  said.

In  such  a  way,  the  voice  of  minstrelsy,  prolong,

That,  to  dancing,  Nahid  (Venus)  the  harper,  thou  mayst  bring.

Mughanni !  the  tambour  and  the  harp,  accord :
To  the  lovers  of  sweet  melody,  give  voice.

Strike  a  path,  whereby,  into  the  mystic  state  (hal),  the  Sufi  may  go;
Whereby,  to  him ;  by  intoxication,  union  may  be  given.

Mughanni !  on  the  organ,  strike  thy  hand ;
From  my  heart,  thought  of  this  mean  world,  take.

*  The  Persian  text  is  corrupt  throughout.

6n

994  DlVAN-l-HAFIZ.

10.  Perchance,  a  great  ease  my  heart  may  gain  ;
When,  with  it,  a  stain  from  grief  is  none.

Mughanni!  come. No  strife  with  me  is  thine,

On  a  tambour,  place  thy  hand,  if  no  harp  thou  have.

I  have  heard  that  when  wine  causeth  injury,
Fit,  is  the  drum's  throbbing,

Mughanni!  where  art  thou  ? For 'tis  the  rose-season
Full  of  clamour  of  the  bulbul  are  the  swards.

Verily,  best  that  to  tumult  my  blood,  thou  bring ;
That,  into  throb,  the  harp's  breath,  thou  bring.

15.  Mughanni !  come  ;  tune  up  the  lyre  ;
A  melody  of  new  order,  begin.

With  one  melody,  my  pain  remedy  ;

Like,  the  khirka  of  a  hundred  patches,  also,  my  heart  make  (rent).

Mughanni !  what  may  it  be,  if  a  favour  thou  do  me  ;
(if),  with  thy  reed,  again  fire  into  my  heart  thou  cast;

(If)  forth  from  my  own  thought,  me,  thou  bring ;
(If)  the  house-hold  of  my  grief  thou  upset  ?

Mughanni !  where  art  thou  ?  a  sweet  melody  sweep  ;
To  us,  resourceless  ones,  a  kind  salutation,  express.

20.  Since,  void  of  us,  the  world  wisheth  to  be,

The  being  a  beggar  (is)  much  better  than  being  a  king.

Mughanni!  the  kaul,  sing;  the  melody,  uplift;
For  the  remedier  of  the  helpless,  thou  art.

On  the  stringed  instrument,  me,  the  way  of  'Irak,  show,

That,  from  my  eye,  the  Zinda  stream  (of  tears), 1  may  show.

22.  The  'Irak  (Chaldean)  mode  is  a  melancholy  one. In  our  modern  music,  are  only  two  modes

(moods,  keys) ;  the  Greeks  had  six.
See  History  of  Music  by  Novelloj  General  History  of  the  Science  and  the  Practice  of  Music  by

Sir  ].  Hawkins,  1853.
On  Persian  music,  see  : —

(a)  the  Durratu-1-Taj  by  A'na  Kalama-i-Shirazi,  wherein  is  explained  the  whole  system.

(4) „  Shamsu-1-Aswat.
The  Persians  have  eighty-four  modes, — distributed  in  twelve  makams  (pardahs),  twenty-four

shu'bahs,  and  forty-eight  gushahs.
The  twelve  pardas  and  their  shu'bahs  are  enumerated by  Amin  of  Hindustan. Hijar,  'Irak,

Isfahan  dominate  among  the  pardahs;  Zabul,  Nishapur,  among  the  shu'bahs  (secondary
modes).

MUGHANNF NAMA.  995

Mughanni !  come  ;  hear ;  the  work  establish :
This  counsel  of  my  speech,  wise  regard.

Since  an  army,  grief  bringeth, — a  serried  rank  bring  thou,
With  the  harp,  and  the  great  stringed  instrument,  and  the  shrieking  reed,  and
the  great  throbbing  tambour.

25.  Mughanni!  the  confidant  of  my  mystery,  thou  art ;

Awhile, with  the reed  breathe  the  breath  of  a  fellow-breather  (a  consoling
friend).

If  there  be  a  grief,  with  wine,  put  it  far  from  thy  heart,
Into  a  reed,  a  breath  blow ;  for  the  world  is  (only)  a  breath.

Mughanni !  where  art  thou  ?  on  a  lyre  play ;

Saki!  come;  a  duck-shaped  flagon,  with  wine  make  full.

For,  together,  let  us  sit ;  and  a  great  pleasure  make  ;
A  moment,  pleasantly  let  us  rest ;  and  folly  make.

Mughanni !  of  my  verses,  a  ghazal,
To  the  harp's  twang,  bring  into  song,

30.  So  that,  rapture  (wajd)  I  may  practise,

To  dancing,  may  come ;  and,  the  khirka,  may  stake.

By  intoxication,  one  can  pierce  the  pearl  of  mysteries
For,  in  selflessness,  the  mystery  one  cannot  conceal.

Mughanni !  vexed,  I  am  ;  a  two-stringed  instrument  play ;

To  His  one-stringedness  (God's  unity),  the  three-stringed  instrument,  play.

Mughanni!  this  new  order  of  song,  prepare;

To  the  companions,  with  the  sound  of  music,  speak.

The  musical  instruments  used  before  the  reign  of  Parviz  (d.  628)  are  magnificently  described  by

the  poet  Nizami  (d.  1200).
Persian  music  much  resembles  Hindu  music;  and  has  its  own  notation,  the  reduction  of  which

to  the  European  scale  is  difficult.
See:-

(a)  The  Musical  Modes  of  the  Hindus  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  1784.

(b)  Hindu  Music  by  Raja  Comm.  Surindra  Muhun  Tagur,  printed  at  the  Stanhope  Press;

Bow-Bazar,  Calcutta,  1882.

6  M  2

DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

On  thy  part,  the  soul  of  the  great  ones,  joyous  make  ;
Of  Parviz  and  of  Barbud,  recollection  make.

35.  Yet,  desire  of  calamity  hath  time,

(Together  are) — I  and  intoxication  and  the  calamity  of  the  beloved's  eye.

In  this  blood-splashing  of  the  plain  of  the  resurrection,
The  blood  (ruddy  wine)  of  a  flagon  and  of  a  cup,  spill  thou.

At  the  sphere's  revolution,  I  keep  wondering,

Whom  the  dust  (of  the  grave)  will  (next)  take, — I  know  not.

The  world's  deceit  is  a  luminous  (manifest)  tale  ;

Behold  what  it  will  bring  forth. "  Pregnant  is  the  night."

Come. Ho !  on  the  world,  plant  not  thy  heart  ;

On  the  (sloping)  crown  of  the  bridge,  permanency  hath  none.

40.  Verily,  the  stage  is  this  ruined  world,
That  the  halls  of  Afrasiyab  hath  seen.

Verily,  the  stage  is  this  desert  far,

Wherein  lost  became  the  army  of  Salm  and  Tur.

The  judgment  of  Piran,  his  army-leader, where  ?

Shaida  of  Turkistan,  his  dagger-drawer, where  ?

Not  alone  to  the  wind  (of  destruction),  went  the  hall  and  palace  of  him,
Whose  tomb,  even,  in  recollection  none  hath.

This  one,  time  maketh  the  pen-striker  (the  scribe)  ;
That  one,  time  giveth  to  the  sword.

34.  Barbud  was  minstrel  to  Khusrau  Parviz. He  invented  "  the  barbud,"  a  stringed  instrument.
Khusrau  Parviz,  a  king  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty,  ascended  the  throne  of  Persia,  591 ;  and  died

628  A.D.
See  History  of  Persia.

40.  Afrasiyab  was  King  of  Turan,  enemy  of  Iran.

Salm  and  Tur  were  sons  of  Firidun. Piran  was  a  great  General  of  Iran. Shaida  (surnamed

the  Turk)  was  the  fourth  son  of  Afrasiyab.

For  a  full  account  of  these  personages,  see  the  Shah-Nama  by  Firdausi,  translated  (out  of  the
Persian)  into  French  by  Jules  Mohl.

BINO RHYME.  997

Bino  rhyme.
688.

i.  Honour  hath  the  dog  above  that  man,
Who,  the  heart  of  friends,  afflicteth.

Necessary  for  this  speech  is  a  great  truth,

So  that,  into  the  heart,  the  meanings  may  sink  :—

With  thee,  hand  in  the  victuals  (eating  together) — a  man  ;
Outside,  on  the  threshold,  excluded, — the  dog.

Pity  it  is,— that  the  dog  hath  fidelity  ;
And  that  man  lawful  holdeth  enmity.

689.

i.  O  breeze  of  the  morning!  sorrowful  is  my  heart ;

Happy  with  thy  perfume,  becometh  my  sense  of  perfume.

In  the  morning,  by  the  rose-bed  border,  a  saunter  make  ;
From  us  to  the  cypress  and  to  the  rose,  a  message  take.

O  rose  !  in  comparison  with  his  (ruddy)  face,  boast  not  of  beauty ;
For  the  rush-weaver  knoweth  not  gold-embroidery.

O  cypress  !  in  comparison  with  his  stature,  boast  not  of  thy  stature  ;
For,  in  comparison  with  his  stature,  verily,  beyond  limit,  thou  fallest.

5.  Saki !  come  ;  for  'tis  the  spring-season,
In  abhorrence  of  him  who  is  abstinent.

5.  Couplets  5  and  6  form  a  kita'band.

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

With  songs,  ruddy  wine,

Keep  drinking,  as  long  as  thou  canst  without  delay.

Path  to  thy  ear,  give  not  the  counsel  of  preceptors  ;

Whether  (it  be)  the  counsel  of  them,  or  the  voice  of  the  preachers.

In  the  garden,  to  thee  the  bulbul  keepeth  saying  : —
"  In  the  rose-season,  from  the  hand  the  cup,  put  not."

Union  with  the  rose  of  thy  enemy,  reckon  plunder ;
For  wine-drinking,  firm  thy  purpose  make.

10.  Careless  be  not. For  (life's)  opportunity  vanisheth  ;
Time  to  time,  pleasure's  season  vanisheth.

One  moment,  from  Hafiz,  this  counsel  hear;

"The  cup  of  wine,  keep  draining;  and  God  is  the  knower."

69O.

Into  the  world  full  of  tumult,  whoever  came,

For  him,  in  the  end,  'tis  necessary  to  go  to  the  tomb.

In  the  path  to  the  next  (last)  world,  like  a  (high  uptilted)  bridge  is  this  world ;
A  place,  void  of  permanency ;  and,  a  stage,  desolate.

On  this  bridge,  full  of  fear  and  terror,  thy  heart  put  not :
Poad-provision  (for  the  next  world),  prepare;  here,  dweller  be  not.

In  the  opinion  of  men  of  meaning,  this  transitory  mansion
Is  like  a  waste  place,  void  of  treasure.

5,  Truly,  the  pearl  of  truth,  have  pierced.

The  Arifs,  who  this  house  (the  world)  called — "  The  inn."

Not  fit  is  it  for  the  inn  of  staying. Abandon  it ;
With  none,  remaineth  this  world. Abandon  it !

689 n.  See  No.  685,0.41.

BINO  RHYME.  999

Far  from  friendship  for  wealth  and  for  rank,  be  ;

For,  thy  property  is  the  snake  (of  destruction)  and  thy  rank  is  the  pit  (of  degra-
dation).

I  grant  (that  great)  Bahram  Gur  thou  art.

In  the  end,  into  the  snare  of  the  grave  thou  wilt  fall.

I  said  to  thee  : — "If  not  blind  thou  be,  the  grave  behold  :  "
I  said  to  thee : — "  A  moment,  without  work,  sit  not."

10.  To  none,  is  help  of  this  stage  (of  death), —

On  the  part  of  the  beggar,  of  the  king,  of  the  young,  of  the  old.

O  thou,  that,  skirt  withdrawing  (in  pride),  passest  over  us  (our  tomb)  !
Hafiz  keepeth  wishing  (this) : — Read  the  Al  hamd.

1 1 .  The  Al  hamd  is  : —

the  Suratu-1-Ikhlas,  chapter  cxii.  of  the  Kuran.
This  is  read  by  the  side  of  the  grave.

KASA.ID.  I001

Kasa.id.

• • *

(Elegies).

691.

IN  PRAISE  OF  SHAH  SHUJA'.

I.  Youthful,  like  Iram's  garden,  became  earth's  surface;
From  the  ray  of  happiness  of  the  Shah,  world-seizing  :

TheKhakan  of  sun-rise  (east)  and  of  sun-set  (west);  for,  in  east  and  in  west  he

is  :
The  Lord  of  conjunction,  Khusrau,  and  Shah  of  Princes  :

The  sun,  land-cherisher  ;  the  Sultan,  justice-dispenser;
Dara,  justice-shedder;  Khusrau  Kay-sitter:

The  Sultan  planter  of  the  world's  surface  of  dominion,

Lofty  sitter  of  the  masnad  of  the  palace  of  -  "  Be  and  it  was."

5.  The  great  joy  of  the  world  and  of  faith,  —  that  one  whose  exaltation
Hath  ever,  the  steed  of  time  beneath  his  thigh.

The  Dara  of  time,  Shah  Shuja',  the  sun  of  the  land  ;
Khakan,  prosperous  ;  Shahinshah,  fresh  of  youth.

A  great  moon,  by  whose  appearance,  enkindled  became  earth  ;
A  great  king,  by  whose  spirit,  exalted  became  time.

i.  Shah  Shuja'. See  Ode  113,  and  No.  574.

The  second  lines  of  this  elegy  (40  couplets)  end  in  nun vj

The  final  word  of  the  Persian  lines  is  kept  the  final  word  in  the  translation.

4.  See  Note  8,  p.  945.

IO02  DIVAN-I-HAFIZ.

Not  the  Simurgh's  is  the  power  of  ascent,

There,  where  the  (bold)  hawk  of  his  spirit  maketh  his  nest.

In  the  borders  of  land  and  sea,  his  order  current  like  the  (swift)  wind ;

In  the  limbs  of  man  and  of  jinm  his  love  concealed  like  the  (invisible)  soul.

10.  O  thou,  whose  form  is  the  country  of  beauty,  and  the  beauty  of  the  country ;
O  thou,  whose  aspect  is  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  the  world  of  the  soul !

Thy  throne  (is)  the  envy  of  the  masnad  of  Jamshid  and  of  Kay  Kubad  ;
Thy  crown, — the  cheating  of  the  diadem  of  Dara  (Darius)  and  of  Ardvan.

If,  into  the  sphere's  imagination,  fall  thy  sword's  reflection,

Separate  from  each  other,  fall  (even)  the  limbs  of  (closely  joined)  twins.

The  sun  of  the  land,  thou  art ;  and  every  where  that  thou  goest,
Like  the  (following)  shadow,  behind  thee  fortune  is  running.

If  the  jewel  like  thee,  the  mine  cherish  not  in  any  age,

Yet,  the  star  like  thee,  the  sphere  bringeth  not  forth  in  a  hundred  ages.

15.  Without  thy  appearance,  to  the  body,  the  soul  inclineth  not :

Without  thy  favour,  the  marrow  establisheth  itself  not  in  the  (hollow)  bone.

Every  particle  of  knowledge  that,  into  the  heart  of  the  book,  hath  not  come,
The  answer  hath  thy  reed  on  the  tip  of  its  tongue.

Thy  hand  to  the  (generous)  cloud,  who  can  compare  ?

Since  the  drop,  the  drop,  giveth  this  (the  cloud) ;  the  bag  of  money,  the  bag  of
money,  that  (thy  hand).

Compared  with  the  degree  of  thy  glory, — the  (lofty)  skies  (are)  foot-trodden  ;
Compared  with  the  sea  of  liberality,  thy  hand  of  generosity  is  of  time  the  fable.

On  the  sphere  of  knowledge,  the  sun  thou  art ;  on  the  head  of  reason,  the  crown
In  the  eye  of  jexcellence,  the  light  thou  art;  and  in  the  body  of  the  country,
the  soul.

20.  From  thee,  knowledge  (is)  possessed  of  blessing ;  from  thee,  reason  (is)  possess-
ed of  splendour ;
From  thee,  the  shar'  (is)  in  protection ;  from  thee,  faith  (is)  in  protection.

16.  The  line  first  signifies  : —

Knowledge  that,  in  books,  is  not  comprised.

KASA.ID.  '003

O  Khusrau  ! O  one  inaccessible  of  presence  ! O  one  exalted  of  dignity  !
O  Ruler/  without  peers !  0  one  great  of  dignity  !

O  sun  of  the  country !  in  whose  spirit,

Like  the  contemptible  atom,  is  the  treasure  shaygan.

In  whose  sea  of  liberality,  less  than  the  drop  is —

A  hundred  shaygan  treasures,  that  for  nothing,  thou  givest.

Innocence,  face-veiled  (is)  dweller  in  thy  abode :

Its  chattels  of  permanency,  fortune  placed  beneath  thy  tent.

25.  For  the  tent  of  the  sun  of  thy  great  sky,  the  sphere,

Hath  made  of  mountain  and  of  cloud — the  supporting  (pillars)  and  the  canopy.

This  painted  satin,  nine  of  fold,  gold-painted, —
The  lofty  canopy  over  thy  royal  pavilion— know.

After  the  Kayan  kings,  in  the  country  of  Sulaiman,  none  found
This  resource,  this  treasury,  this  army  weighty.

The  heart  of  the  rose-bed,  thou  wast ; and,  on  account  of  thy  full-hearted

(courageous)  ones,
In  Hind,  was  tumult  ;  in  Zang,  was  clamour.

In  the  plain  of  Rum,  thy  tent  thou  pitchedest;  and,  the  drum's  throb,
To  the  (far  distant)  plain  of  Hind  went ;  and  to  the  desert  of  Slstan.

30.  Since  the  yellow  palace,  he  assailed,  fell  trembling,

On  the  palaces  of  the  palace-dweller  and  on  the  houses  of  the  Khan.

Equality  with  him  in  (extent  of)  territory,  maketh — who  ?
From  Egypt  to  Rum;  and,  from  Chin  to  Kayrawan  (Cyrene).

Another  year,  from  the  Kaysar,  thee  they  bring  the  crown  of  his  head  ;
From  Chin  to  the  court,  thee  they  bring  the  tribute  of  the  Khan.

22.  Shaygan  signifies  : —

The  name  of  one  of  Khusrau's  treasures  ;  an  immense  treasure.

28.  "  Zang." See  Ode  303.

29.  Rum. See  No.  686,  c.  128.

6  N  2

I004  DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

The  thanker  of  the  Creator,  art  thou  ;  and  the  thanker  of  thee  is  creation •;
In  fortune,  thou  joyous  ;  through  thee,  the  people  joyous.

Behold  towards  the  rose-bed  and  the  rose-garden  thou  keepest  going,
With  slaves,— the  steed  of  happiness  beneath  thy  thigh.

35.  O  thou  inspired  one  from  the  ranks  of  the  holy  cherubim,
To  whose  pure  heart,  a  bounty  arriveth  time  to  time !

O  thou,  before  whose  heart  (is)  manifest  whatever  the  Omnipotent,
Keepeth  hidden  in  the  screen  of  the  hidden  !

To  thy  hand,  the  rain  of  desire,  the  sky  hath  given,
That  is :— "  Who  am  I  ? Me,  to  thy  desire  urge :

"  If  thy  endeavour  (mis)  chance,  to  thy  arrow  I  have  given  my  body :
"  If  gift  be  necessary,  thee,  I  have  given  the  gold  in  the  mine :

"  Thy  enemy  is  where  ? Him,  to  the  sole  of  thy  foot  cast ;
"Thy  beloved  is  where? Him,  on  my  head  and  eye,  place.

40.  "  By  service  for  thee,  became  expectant  my  desire ;
"  By  praise  of  thee,  became  my  name  eternal."

37.  Couplets  37-40  are  uttered  by  the  sky.

KASA.ID.  I0°5

692.

IN  PRAISE  OF  HAJI  KivAMU-o-DlN  HASAN.

I.  Easily  of  heart-ravishingness,  one  cannot  boast ;

In  these  deeds  (of  ravishingness),  are  a  thousand  subtleties,  behold — thou  kaovv-
est.

Besides  a  sweet  mouth  are  (other)  resources  of  loveliness  ;

With  (only)  a  seal-ring,  one  cannot  boast  of  being  a  (great)  Sulaiman.

A  thousand  realms  of  heart-ravishingness  reach  not  that  degree,
That,  by  skill,  thyself  in  a  single  heart  thou  mayest  contain.

What  dust  (it  was)  that  thou  excitedest  out  of  my  existence,

Be  it  not  that  wearied  should  be  thy  steed ;  for  him,  thou  sharply  urgest.

5.  A  sitter  together  with  profligates,  thou  art. Down  bring  thy  head.
For,  treasures  are  in  this  state  of  being  headless  and  resourceless.

The  many-hued  cup,  bring  that,  a  hundred  special  stories,

I  may  utter;  and  (yet)  make  not  a  breach  in  being  a  Musulman.

Since,  in  the  dust  of  the  foot  of  the  morning-drinker,  intoxicated,
I  have  stood,  in  the  wine-house  street,  door-keeping.

By  no  Zahid,  outward-worshipper,  I  passed,

Who,  secretly  beneath  the  khirka,  the  zunnar  (the  mystic  cord)  had  not.

In  the  name  of  thy  own  heart-binding  tress,  a  goodness  do  ;
So  that,  thee,  God  may  preserve  from  confusion.

10.  Back,  from  Hafiz's  state,  take  not  the  eye  of  favour :
If  not,  his  state  I  will  utter  to  the  Asaf,  the  second.

1.  The  second  lines  of  this  elegy  (40  couplets)  end  in  y5  Lf

The  final  word  of  the  Persian  text  is  kept  the  final  word  in  the  translation.
Haji  Kivamu-d-Din. See  Ode  3,  c.  9,  and  Nos.  605,  610, See  note  p.  1008.

2.  The  seal-ring. See  Ode  189,  c.  2 ;  350,  c.  10.
7.  Couplets  7  and  8  form  a  kita'band.

10.  Asaf. See  Ode  43. Asaf  here  signifies  : — The  praised  one.

DiVAN-l-HAFI?.

The  vazir  of  King  rank,  Khwaja  of  earth  and  time,

By  whom  joyous,  is  the  state  of  mankind  and  of  jinn-kind.

Kivam  (u-d-Din),  the  fortune  of  the  world,  Muhammad  son  of  Ali,
From  whose  face,  gleameth  the  splendour-ray  of  God.

Excellent  laudable  quality,  thou  art,  since  at  the  time  of  true  thought,
It  reacheth  (occurreth)  to  thee  that  thou  shouldst  claim  world-mastery.

It  befitteth  the  decoration  of  thy  remaining  (lasting)  fortune,
That  thy  (lofty)  spirit  mentioneth  not  the  effacing  world.

15.  If  helper  be  not  the  treasure  of  thy  gift,

All  earth's  surface  turneth  its  face  to  desolateness.

Thou  art  that  one,  for  whose  form  of  body  a  particle  of  corporal  matter  is  none  •
Of  the  essence  of  the  angel,  thou  art  in  the  garb  of  humanity.

What  degree  of  honour  is  it  proper  to  arrange,

Than  which,  in  the  paths  of  thought,  higher  thou  art  not?

Within  the  chamber  of  the  cherubim  of  the  holy  world,
The  scratching  of  thy  reed  is  the  sama'  of  the  soul.

To  thee,  the  sweet-clinging  (the  delight) of khwajagi  reacheth. For,  from

liberality,
On  the  liberal  ones  of  the  world,  both (thy)  sleeves (of  generosity) — thou

scatterest.

20.  Thy  former  liberality,  how  shall  I  explain?
Blessed  be  God  for  that  work-doer  merciful !

Thy  hard  thunder-bolts,  how  shall  I  explain?

To  God,  let  us  flee  from  those  calamities,  deluge-like  !

Now,  since,  to  the  private-place  of  the  sward,  departed  the  mistress,  rose,—
Save  the  morning-breeze  is  not  a  fellow-breather  of  the  soul.

For  the  sake  of  the  Sultan  of  the  rose,  the  tulips  open,
By  the  hand  of  the  breeze,  the  canopies  of  anemone.

12.  The  first  line  may  be  : — The  column,  the  fortune  of  the  world,  Muhammad  bin  'Ali. See  note
p.  1008.

KASA.ID.  IOO7

By  the  effort  of  the  fragrance  of  the  spring-breeze,  it  reached  to  that  degree,
That  of  grace  boasteth  the  soul  of  a  brute.

25.  In  the  morning-time,  to  me  how  sweetly  it  came  when  a  bulbul,  rose  clamour,
Against  a  rose-bud,  raised  ;  and,  kept  saying,  in  eloquence,

"  Strait  of  heart,  why  sittest  thou  ? Forth  from  the  screen,  come  ;
"  For,  in  the  great  jar,  is  a  quantity  of  ruddy  wine  like  the  red  ruby."

That,  one  month,  to  the  beauty  of  the  rose  thou  shouldst  not  drink, — permit  not ;
Lest  that,  another  month,  thou  drink  the  wine  of  penitence.

In  thanks  for  the  reproach  of  infidelity  that,  from  the  midst,  arose —
Strive  ;  so  that  from  rose  and  wine,  justice  of  ease,  thou  mayst  take.'

Not  the  way  of  Faith-cherishers  is  tyranny. God  forbid  !
All  blessing  and  grace  is  the  shara'  of  God.

30.  The  mysteries  of  the  secret  "  I  am  the  truth (God)  !" what knoweth that

careless  one,
Who  attracted  became  not  with  the  attractions  of  God  ?

Within  the  veil  of  the  rose,  behold  the  rose-bud  that  keepeth  preparing
For  thy  enemy's  eye  a  ruby-arrow.

O  Saki !  'tis  the  joy-house  of  the  vazlr. Permit  not  (that),
Without  the  cup  of  wine,  there  he  should  display  heavy-souledness.

0  breath  of  morn  !  hope  thou  wast. For,  by  way  of  love,
Thou  dawnedest ;  and  came  to  amend,  the  nights  of  darkness.

1  have  heard  that,  sometimes,  me,  thou  recollectest ;
But,  to  thy  special  assembly,  me,  thou  callest  not.

35.  Not  speech  from  me,  thou  desirest. Tyranny  this  is  !
If  not,  withthee  what  is  the  argument  in  eloquence  ?

30.  JM  (I  am  the  truth,  God).
See  Odes  66,  123,  138,  179.

DiVAN-l-HAFIZ.

Of  the  Hafizes  of  the  world,  none  like  thy  slave  put  together
Graces  philosophic,  with  mysteries  Kuranic.

Thee,  my  praises  give  a  thousand  years  of  permanency,

A  precious  capital  (of  praise)  like  this,  for  one  like  thee,— cheap.

Long,  the  speech  I  have  drawn ;  but  hope  is  mine

That,  over  this  matter,  the  trail  of  pardon  thou  wilt  cause  to  cover.

Ever,  till  spring,  on  the  surface  of  the  garden,  the  morning-breeze
Painteth  a  thousand  pictures  with  the  line  of  holy  basil.

40.  In  the  King's  garden,  from  the  bough  of  hope,  with  a  long  life,
Blossomed  be  the  rose  of  fortune  with  joyousness.

36.  Hlfiz  signifies  : —

One  who  knoweth  by  heart  the  Kuran, See  Ode  395,  c.  7.

39.  Basil. See  Ode  200.
Here  basil  signifies  : —

The  basil,  or  kufic,  character,  resembling  foliage,  used  for  monumental  inscriptions.

40.  In  his  "  Selections  "  (p.  357),  Bicknell  states  that  this  Kasida  is  in  praise  of  Haji  Kivamu-d-Din

(See  Ode  3).

His  authority  for  this  must  be  derived  :—
(a)  from  Brockhaus'  German  verse-translation.
(6) „ couplet  12  of  this  Kasida,  where  the  word  "  Kivam  "  is  mentioned.

The  value  of  authority  (a)  is  unknown.  The  value  of  authority  (b)  is  naught,  since  the  name
"  Muhammad  bin  'AH  "  is  in  couplet  12  itself  given  ;  and  in  c.  19  the  word  "  Khwajagi."
a  word  that  would  refer  to  "  KJiwaja  Kivamu-d-Din  "  rather  than  to  "  Haji  Kivamu-d-
Din."

:

SEP  8 1988


