The Haft Paikar (The Seven Beauties), Vol. 2: Commentary (Nizami Ganjavi (trans. C. E. Wilson), 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1924 Probsthain's Oriental Series edition (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.529282). Companion commentary volume to Wilson's first complete English Haft Paikar.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

GO\ ERNMENT OF INDIA


DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY

C ENTRAL ARCH/EOLOG I CAL
LIBRARY


jc... No ft9t- 55f / Wi t

I Acc. No. '

D.G.A. 79

GIPX— S4— 2D. G. .V'cli.X. D. 57— 2 :-2.58— 1,00,000


Li brsryReit Jio


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES.
VOL. XIII.


NIZAMI : THE HAFT PAIKAR.

(COMMENTARY.)


I


9


THE HAFT PAIKAR

(THE SEVEN BEAUTIES).

CONTAINING THE LIFE AND ADVENTUEES
OF KING BAHEAM GUE, AND THE SEVEN
STOEIES TOLD HIM BY HIS SEVEN QUEJENS.


NIZAAli OF GANJA.


TEANSLATED FEOM THE PEESIAN,

WITH A COMMENTAEY,

BY

C. E. WILSON, B.A. (Lond.)

{For Fourteen Years Professor of Persian, University College, London).
AUTHOR OF A TRANSLATION, WITH COMMENTARY, OF JALALU
’D-DIn RUMI’S MASNAVf (BOOK II) ; OF A TREATISE ON GOG
and MAGOG; ETC., ETC.

VOL. II: COmiENTABY.

. ' ' Z ' A (•/ fls?

' lOJO ^ jO tA .«?

^ C. E. w.


ARTHUR PBOBSTHAIN


LATE PROBSTHAIN & CO.,

41 Great Russell Street, London, W.O.
1924.


y* ^ 6 ^
<U ^.?1J.'J> ^ I j


t'Kiroub

IHl.

- ..-.-i


STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS. LIMITED
PRINTERS, HERTFORD


COMMENTARY.

1. One of the ninety-nine Names of God is Al-Haiy, “ The
Living.”

2. Or, “ is by Thee and to Thee.”

3. “ Are air ” ; i.e., are nothing.

4. Taking the succeeding distich into consideration, the
meaning is apparently that if a person is worthy of praying to
God, and prays, he will be granted some thought, or shown
some fine point, by which his difficulty will be solved.

.5. Murgh-i ruz, “ the bird of day,” is a name applied to the
sun, so that the sense is presumably that God gives to the day
the sun and maintains him. Murgh-i ruz might possibly, however,
, be equivalent to murgh-i sahar, or murgh-i mbh,-hhvdn, “ the bird
: of dawn,” or “ the bird which sings at dawn ”, i.e., the nightingale,

or the cock. This, liowever, is less probable, since it is only
< by restricting the day to a particular part of it that it would

' apply to the nightingale or the cock, whereas it applies in its

entirety to the sun. “ Day ” too is generally opposed to “ night ”,
and murgh-i ruz (the bird of day), ” the sun,” to murgh-i shab
(the bird of night), “ the moon.” Cf. also the next distich.

6. The “ white tent ” is the light of day, the “ black tent ”
the darkness of night.

7. i.e., day and night proceed as God commands. The “ring
of bondage ” of the sun and moon respectively is the sun itself
in the day, and the moon itself at night. A ring worn in the ear

; was a badge of slavery.

: 8. This is simply the belief of all orthodox Muslims. Many

I believe in the influence of the skies, or rather, of the planets,

‘ upon human destinies, but would take them to be only agents of
! God.

B


-]


2


THE HAFT PAIKAR


9. The Sufi or mystic does not believe that any appreciation
of God can be obtained by the intellect, but that it is obtained
through the discipline of the Sufi life. (See C. E. Wilson’s
Translation of Rumi's Masnavi, Book II.)

10. “ Breaks down ” ; lit., “ is hamstrung.”

11. “ In efforts to approach ” ; i.e., in the study by the
philosopher of God by means of the intellect.

12. God is said to be everywhere, since no part of the whole
universe is independent of or apart from His being. He is also
nowhere, since He, as absolute and universal existence, camiot
be assigned to any definite place. From another point of view.
He must be both everywhere and also nowhere, since otherwise
there would be something wanting to His universality.

1.3. By being “ a part of the seven heavens ” the Author
possibly means that our intellect is, as it were, more immediately
derived from the intellects attributed to the planets of the seven
heavens. This belongs to the doctrine of the intellects of the
ten spheres, which are as follows : the empyrean, the sphere
of the fixed stars, those of the .«even planets, and the sublunary
sphere. (Cf. also Note 30.) When, however, we are in Com-
munion with God we are above intellect, and, therefore, outside
of the seven heavens.

Tl. The “ Universal Intellect ”, of which individual intellects
are phases, was the first entitv created by God : Aiiicalu md
khalaqa 'lluhu ’h‘Aql : “ The first thing which God created was
the Intellect.” This teaching of ortliodox Sufiism is of course
opposed to that of Neo-Platonism, which makes the Universal
Intellect the first emanation from the Deity and a phase of the
Divine Being.

1-5. i.e., God is the Alterer or Changer of states of every kind,

mental, moral, and phy.sical.

16. The “ ruby's fire ” is the red rose, or, perhaps, any red
flowers. The real ruby was supposed to be produced and
developed in stone by the action of the sun.

17. “■ Hold off,” hard-d-bard, a word used by guards, ushers,
etc., in clearing the way. The meaning of the distich is that
the world and the sky serve as veils to conceal the Deity and
His Names and Attributes from the commonalty.


COMMENTARY


3


18. “ A paintor on Tliy canvas every one ” ; or, “ an
embroiderer of Thy curtain ; i.e., everyone is an apparent
mover of events in the visible world ; but God is the real Mover
of events.

19. See Note 8.

20. “ Kai-Qubad would have been born of an astrologer ” ;
for if he had been, his father by his knowledge of the science
would have been able to en.sure him felicity or prosperity, but
since he was prosperous without his father’s having been an
astrologer the Author argues that prosperity or felicity does not
come from a knowledge of astrology. Kai-Quhad was the first
of the Kayauian or second dynasty of Persian kings, and reigned,
according to Oriental accounts, 100 or 126 years. (See Albii’unI’s
CJii’onologij of Ancient Nations.)

21. See the last Note.

22. i.e., I had no need of them, since the knowledge of God
entailed in the first place the knowledge of everything, and in
the second place made everything as naught.

23. The Author means possibly poverty amongst other things,
for cf. the next distich.

24. The Author implies that God knows his secret thoughts
and that they can be addressed to Him with confidence. Cf. the
next dktich and Note.

25. The Author's " object ’’ is, I think, success in the accom-
plishment of his work, the poem.

! 26. i.e., the secrets of the mystic are not to be divulged to

the commonaltv, who would not understand them, and would
contemn the divulgcr.

27. “ In lordship ’ ; or possibly, “ away from,” or without

i; lordship ”, az khudCimndl .

I 28. i.e., give him contentment and patience until he has

t' finished the work and presented it, and then he will find honour.

29. “ The centre of the fir.st encircling line ” ; i.e., the Universal

J; Spirit itself, the First Circle being the first entity created by God,
I’l namely, the Universal Spirit, which embraces the Universal
4 Intellect and the Universal Soul.


4


THE HAFT PAIKAR


“ The seal of all creation at the end ” ; i.e., the final cause
of creation, the universe having been created in order that
Muhammad should be manifested. Cf. Lau la-k la-inci khalaqtu
’l-afldk ; “ Had it not been for you I should not have created
the spheres.”

30. i.e., again, Muhammad was the fruit or final cause of
the creation of the gardens, the seven spheres or heavens, as real
fruit is the final cause of forming gardens and planting and sov.'ing
in them. See the last Note.

Altogether there are supposed to be nine spheres above the
sublunary sphere, of which seven are those of the planets, the
eighth that of the fixed stars, and the ninth the empyrean or
the crystalline sphere. The last two, according to the SufLs,
are the thrones of God, the ninth being called 'A'sh, the higher
throne of God, the Universal Intellect, and the eighth Kursi, the
lower throne, the Universal Soul.

Both ‘Arsh and Kursi are used iiidistinctively in the Qur'an
for the throne of God, but they are not restricted to it.

31. “ Central pearl,” lit., “ crown pearl," is the largest pearl
in the middle of a necklace. Muhammad, though it is supposed
that he could not read or write, was famed for bis eloquence.

_ 32. Ahmad, “ the most praised or praiseworthy,” is a name
given to Muhammad.

33. i.e., as beautiful in spirituality as Joseph was in physical
qualities.

34. “ The Ascent ” ; i.e., the Ascension of Muhammad
through and above the nine heavens into the presence of God.
(See the next Section.)

35. “ Untaught.” Muhammad called himself “ the
Untaught ” or “ the Illiterate Umml, because he could not
read or write. This seems to be the sense here, but other inter-
pretations of the term have been given.

36. ■“ The first causes ” (i.e., of nature) ; lit., ” the mothers,”
umrnahdt, i.e., the four elements, which were created in order
that Muhammad might be manifested. (See Note 29.)

37. “ The shadow of God’s Throne ’’ ; i.e., the protection of
the ninth heaven, the higher throne of God, the ‘Arsh. (See
Note 30.)


COMMENTARY


5


38. i.e., “ the sovereign of the earth.” CMr-ftaZisA, translated
‘ throne ”, means literally “ four cushions ”, and is the name of a

large cushion on which kings or great men reclined. It also
means “ the four elements ”, and is thus applicable to the earth.

39. See Note 29.

40. Lit., “he (is) ‘Muhammad'”; i.e., “the much praised”
or “the very praiseworthy”.

41. This rather enigmatical distich is possibly a reference
to the Ruz-i ‘Alasf, “ the Day of ‘ Am I not (your Lord) ? ’ ”
i.e., the day of the original covenant between God and man, when
God said to the incorporeal souls of all Adam’s descendants
who wore drawn from him on that day, “ Am I not your Lord ? ”
Alastu hi-Rahhi-hum 1 and they answered, “ Yes,” Rala.
Muhammad, of course, would be in this assembly, and it is
implied that he was as the rose-water pressed from this rose,
and that all the rest compared with him were only as the residue
of it. This explanation harmonizes fairly well with the succeeding
distich, since Muhammad, though not present in the body at
the Beginning, was present in the spirit, and as Universal Spirit
was first of all.

Another explanation might suggest itself : that, in the first
hemistich, “ rose ” means the gift of prophecy, which Adam first
possessed, and that, in the second, Muhammad is asserted in
an exaggerated sense lo have po.ssessed this gift to a super-
eminent degree ; but this scarcely harmonizes with the succeeding
distich.

42. “ The conclusion ’’ ; i.e., the end of everything of the
phenomenal universe.

Khdtimnl means also the epilogue of a book.

43. Muhammad used the expression Al-faqrufakhrA, “ Poverty
is my pride.” Fnqr, “ poverty,” in the Svifx sense is the state of
the faqlr. or darvlsh, who is destitute of all attachments to the
phenomenal w'orld and immersed in God.

In the second hemistich, by “ treasure ” is meant spiritual
treasure.

44. i.e., he outshone the day as the sun outshines all other
hghts.


6


THE HAFT PAIKAR


45. i.e., it is strange that the sun should result in shade.

46. “ His sword ” ; lit., “ his iron.” “ To punish ” ; lit.,
“ (was) the joint-striker,” hand-suy.

47. “ All lay the thong upon his drum ” ; i.e., “ beat his
drum ” or “ fight on his side.”

48. See Note 29.

49. “ (His eye) turned not aside,” ma zdgha (l-hasar).

This is part of verse 17 of chapter liii. of the Qur'an.
Verses 16-18 are,

“ When the sidra-tree was covered with what covered it,

“ His eye turned not aside, nor did it wander ;

“ For he saw the greatest of the signs of his Lord.’’

The verses refer to the Ascension of lluhamrnad through
the nine heavens into the presence of God (see the next section).
The sidra-tree, “ which marks the boundary ” beyond which
neither men nor angels can pass, is said to be on the right hand
of the throne of God, the ‘Arsh, in the ninth heaven. It is
supposed to be the abode of Gabriel and the angels, and allusion
is made to this in the first verse above quoted. Muhammad’s
destination being the presence of God, “ his eye turned not aside ”
when he passed this tree.

50. “ This Garden ” means the earth and the heavens. The
object of Muhammad’s contemplation is God Himself.

51. “The blue- clothed sphere’s ring-holders” are the sun,
moon, and stars, which, in respect of their apparent form, wear
rings, as it were. To wear a ring in the ear was a mark of slavery.

52. “ For servitude ” ; lit., “ on the road of servitude.”

53. “ His four friends ” are the first four Khalifs, Abu Bakr,
‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and ‘Ali.

54. i.e., Muhammad, as the Universal Spirit, the finst creation
of God, was the Universal Intellect and the Universal Soul, so
that the whole universe was as his body.

55. i.e., his .soul is to the universe as Solomon to his throne.

56. The “ dry spines ” are the sharp spines on the stem of
the date-palm. They are often contrasted with the dates as
evil attendant upon good. The sense of the second hemistich
is that his miracles are as spines or thorns to his enemies.


COMMENTARY


7


57. An allusion to Muliammad’s supposed miracle of cleaving
the moon by dravsing his finger down.

There is little doubt that the passage in the Qur’an, on which
this supposition is based, refers to one of the signs of the coming
Resurrection, the past tense being used, as it is elsewhere, as a
prophetic future ; but some of the greatest writers, such as
the present Author and Jalalu’d-Din Rumi, interpret it as
the account of a miracle performed by Muhammad. (See the
Qur’an, liv., 1.)

58. i.e., Muhammad brought his enemies to confusion by the
miracle.

59. “ Could not hold (or contain) his crown ” ; i.e., because
of its exaltitude.

60. i.e., he ascended above the ‘Arsh into the presence of God.
(For ‘Arsh, see Note 30.)

61. Buruq is described as a white animal intermediate in
size between a mule and an ass.

62. i.e., in order that you may now tread the heavens as
you did the earth.

63. “ The most sacred house ” ; i.e., the spiritual world, or
the presence of God.

64. “ Guardian of the purest, best ” ; i.e., of the most holy and
spiritual state.

65. The sense of this distich is concealed in the various
meanings of tir and Buraq. Tir means “ the best and choicest
of its kind ”, and also an “ arrow ”. The former sense refers to
the guardianship in question, the latter to Buruq, a steed of
arrow-like rapidity. Then also Buraq, as meaning “ the flashing
steed ”, would be a suitable animal to carry him to the dazzling
heights of the most holy and spiritual state.

66. i.e., to enable you to have such guardianship as has been
mentioned. (See Note 64.)

67. “ The king ” ; i.e., of the stars.

68. “ The six directions ” are those of space, namely, north,
south, east, west, above, and below. “ The seven roots ” are the
earths, of which there are supposed to be seven. “ (Their)
supports ” ; ht., “ (their) supporting tight-rope poles,” or, it
may be, “ (their) gibbets.” These are only, of course, imaginary


8


THE HAFT PAIKAE


supports on which the spheres may be supposed to he suspended.
For “ the nine spheres ”, see Note 30.

The sense of the distich is ” Clear the obstacles of space and
the nine spheres out of your way, and mount above the latter ”.

69. There are two stars of the first magnitude named Simak :
one Simdk-i A‘zal (« Virginis), the other Simak-i Rdrnih (« Bootis).

70. i.e., have sway over the angels in your ascension to and
above the sidra-tree of the ‘Arsh or ninth heaven, the abode of
the angels. (See Note 49.)

71. The sky is poetically supposed to have locks on account
of its curves, and its darkness too at the time of the xlscension.

72. “ Saints ” ; lit., “ the fragrant ones of night,” ‘itr sdydn-i
shah. There is no dictionary authority for this interpretation,
but I think it may be assumed on the analogy of shab-ravdn,
“ night-devotees, holy men who pray at night,” lit., “ those
who move at night,” especially considering that the angels
are mentioned in the second hemistich.

73. “ Angels ” ; lit., “ those clothed in green.”

74. “ The beauties of the Egypt of this tract ” are the huris
of paradise.

The story of Joseph’s relations with the wife of the Egyptian
who had bought him, and of how the women, who spoke in blame
of her, on seeing him cut their hands instead of, or in addition to,
the food in surprise at his beauty, is told in the Qur’an, ch. xii.

In the next distich it is implied that the food was oranges.

75. See the last Note.

76. “ The Night of Power,” Shab-i Qadr or Lailatu ’l-Qadr,
is “ a mysterious night in the month of Eamazan, the precise
date of which is said to have been known only to the Prophet
and a few of the Companions The following is the allusion
to it in the Qur’an, ch. xcvii : —

“ Verily we have caused it ” (i.e., the Qur’an) “ to descend on
the Lailatu ’l-Qadr.

“ Who shall teach thee what the Lailatu 'l-Qadr is ?

“ The Lailatu ’l-Qadr excelleth a thousand months :

‘‘ Therein descend the angels, and the spirit by permission

‘‘ Of their Lord in every matter ;

“ And all is peace until the breaking of the dawn.”


COMMENTARY


9


“ The excellences of the Lailatu ’l-Qadr are said to be innumer-
able, and it is believed that during its solemn hours the whole
animal and vegetable creation bow down in humble adoration
to the Almighty.’’ (Hughes, A Diclionary of Islam.)

On the Night of Power the Qur'an is said to have been
brought down by the angels to the lowest heaven, and thence
dehvered portion by portion at different times by Gabriel to
Muhammad.

77. i.e., recreate the abode of the angels by your presence.

78. See Note 30.

79. “ Give lamp-like blooms ” ; i.e., “ show yourself in your
transcendent brightness.’’ It is to be noted that by blossoms
are generally meant the white blossoms of Spring. “ Those
who move at night,” i.e.. to pray, are the saints. (See Note 72.)

80. “ Be fresh of visage ; i.e., be bright, smiling and cheerful.

81. See Note 30.

82. It is possible to translate, “ remove the pain of the carpet
from afar ” ; i.e., “ rejoice the abode of the angels by your
presence.”

83. “ The two worlds " ; i.e., this world and the spiritual
world.

84. i.e.. Rise to regions above the dust of the world ; or, free
yourself from all things earthly,

85. i.e., you may get control over the two worlds, earthly
and spiritual.

86. i.e., be prepared to obey. (See the last part of Note 7.)

87. i.e., Muhammad used his perfect intellect in setting forth
the revelations and guiding the people in them.

88. i.e., he gained his wish.

89. Burdq ; lit., ” the partridge.’’

90. Lit., “ a moon like the Ka’usian throne.’’ There was
possibly something special in the throne of King Ka’us, since
it had a special name, chahdr kargas, “ the lour vultures.”

According to other authorities, however, this name was apphed
to the throne of Shaddad. Kai-Ka’us was the second king of


10


THE HAFT PAIKAR


the Kayanian or second Persian dynasty, and reigned, according
to Alblruni, 150 years. Shaddad was the name of a king of the
‘Adites in the south of Arabia (A'aman) who built the garden of
Iram to rival the gardens of paradise. On its completion it was
made to disappear and the king was struck dead. (See the
Qur’an, bcxxix., 5, 6, 7. See also Notes 1,203 and 1.605.)

Chahdr karcjas means also the four elements. Cf. the following
Note and the distich to which it is appended.

91. i.e., it flew so swiftly that the four elements were exhausted
in their efforts to follow.

92. Lit., “ it drew under its foot.”

93. “ The moon drew in (her) reins,” hopele.ss, notwithstanding
her rapid course, of keeping pace with it.

94. The spheres were supposed to move swiftly round the
earth.

95. An allusion to the supposed whirling movement of the
spheres.

96. i.e., the movements of imagination and lightning seemed
slow in comparison.

97. Lit., “ before such wide-stepping were but narrow.”

98. I translate this obscure di.stich from the reading of the
Bombay edition of 1328. All the other editions I have consulted
offer only unintelligible readings : —

Bd tak-ask sair-i qutb khdll shud : gah janubl-u gah shimdll shud.

99. The word for “ fish ” used here, namely simdk (Arabic
broken plural of samak), means here in the first place “ stars ”,
and in the second two particular stars, one called Simdk-i
Edmih, “ Simak the Lancer or Lance-bearer,” i.e. a Booti-s,
and the other Sundk-i A'zal, “8imak the Unarmed,” i.e., a
Virginis. Jadval, “stream or rivulet,” moans also an
“ astronomical table,” but here it signifies the “ sky.”

100. Lit., “ engaged in going throuuh the leaves of this
volume.” The “ expanse ” or “ volume ” is the earth and the

sky-

101. i.e., he passed through the world's gate.

102. i.e., he overcame the distance between the earth and the
heavens.


COMMENTARY


11


103. Sar-sabzi, which moans primarily “ verdure and fresh-
ness”, has also the sense of “prosperity”. The word is used
here in allusion to the fact that the colour attributed to the
moon’s sphere is green.

104. Niiqra-l'on, which is not in the dictionaries, means
literally “ silver-working ”. As silver is white, and Muhammad's
hand is alluded to, I infer that reference is made to the “ white
hand of Moses”, yad~i baizd.

But shn-Jcdri, which also means literally “ silver -working ”,
signifies “ blandishments, fascination ”, and this may possibly be
the sense here. It is not impossible, however, that niiqra-kdrl
may signify sajid-kdn, “ white-working,"’ one of the senses of
which is “ good, virtuous action ”,

The “ lead-furnace ” means the furnace by which the leaden
glazing for pottery is prepared. This glazing is of a bluish colour,
the colour attributed to the sphere of Mercury.

“ From a lead-furnace ” means probably “ such as might
come from a lead-furnace ”.

105. The colour attributed to the sphere of Venus is white.

106. Yellow is the colour attributed to the sun's sphere.

107. “ The Khalif of the West ” means the sun when setting,
at which time much of the sky is often green.

108. i.e., the effulgence of his face cast a crimson glow upon
Mars. The allusion is to the crimson hue which the sun often
has when setting. Red is the colour attributed to the sphere of
Mars.

109. The author possibly attributes headache to Jupiter on
account of the size and weight of the jJanet conceived poeticallj^
as a head. Jupiter, as a fact, is the largest planet in the solar
system. A perfumed embrocation for headache and fever is
obtained by rubbing a piece of sandal-wood with water on a
stone. The colour of it also is that which is attributed to the
sphere of Jupiter.

110. “ Saturn’s crown ” is probably his rings.

Savdd, “ blackness,” means also “environs, city”. Blackness
is the colour attributed to Saturn’s sphere.


12


THE HAFT PAIKAR


111. Lit., “ as regarded wliicli Gabriel from (its) distance
had permission ” ; i.e., they had reached a stage bevond which
Gabriel and Buraq could not go.

112. Lit., “ had left him back from the road.”

113. Israfil is to blow the last trump to summon all at the
Resurrection.

Basad-gdh, “ a place of observation, observatory, watch-tower,”
is used perhaps to signify that Israfil is on the watch for the time.

114. ‘Azrail, the name of the angel of death.

115. “ Behind ” ; lit., “ in (their) places.” The Rnfraj
is the abode of Israfil, the Sidra that of Gabriel. (See Note 49.)

116. i.e., unconsciousness of his own existence.

117. i.e., he passed through the ocean of unconsciousness,
and left every atom of everything which connected him with
existence. But the distich is possibly misplaced, as it is seen
from distichs which follow that he has not yet reached the sea
of unconsciousness. He is not yet above the ‘Arsk, the “ Universal
Intellect”. As a matter of fact, this distich in the B. ed. of 1328
occurs after the distich, “ He took the road to the world’s gate,
(and then) removed (all) distance from the heavens' sphere,”
and in this connexion “ocean’’ would mean “the heavens”.

118. It may be noticed that the second hemistich is a repetition
of that of the last distich but five. The latter is omitted by the
B. ed. of 1.328.

119. i.e., to the Deity Himself, the Absolute E.xistence, the
One.

120. Lit., “ When his stupefaction accepted risks, or peril.”

The Vadl-yi Hairat, the “ Yale of Stupefaction ”, is the sixth

stage towards Sufi perfection.

121. i.e., guided and took him under its charge.

122. The expressions “he drew near”, “ two how-lengths ”,

and “ or nearer ”, are spoken of Oabriel in the Qur’an, liii., 8, 9,
but here, as often, they are applied to Muhammad.

Verses 4-10 are as follows :

“And it” (i.e., the Qur’an) “is no other than a revelation
revealed (to him) ;


COMMENTARY


13


“ (Gabriel) the mighty in power taught (it) him,

“ One of sound judgment. He came towards him.

Being on the highest horizon.

“Then ‘he drew near’ and came down,

“ And was (at the distance of) ‘two bow-lengths ‘ or nearer

“ And he revealed to his servant what he revealed.”

The words au adna. “ or nearer,” as applied to Muhammad,
express his close proximity to God.

123. i.e., he became extinct as to his own existence, which is
the only means of seeing God. “ ‘ The seeing of the eyes is
coincident with a change in the essence.’ In order to see God
the Bufi must have reached the ‘ station ’ of complete extinction,
and annihilation as to everything other than God.

“ After reaching the ‘ station ’ in which the Qualities of God are
substituted for his own, which is the end of the second journey,
as-safaru ’th-thdnl, he reaches at the end of the third journey,
m-safaru ’th-tkdlith, the ‘ station ’ of Adh-Dhdlu ’1-Ahad>ya,
‘ the Unity Essence,’ in which duality no longer exists : he is
completely immersed in God. This is the ’ station ’ of the
perfect saint. In seeing God his own imaginary and accidental
essence and individuality are annihilated, he becomes fanin
fi-lldh, ‘extinct in God,' and he is identified with God. In this
way only can he see God. since, as the Sufis say, Ld yara 'lldha ilia
’Udh, ‘ No one sees God except God.’ ” (C. E. Wilson’s
Translation of Rumi’s Masnavi, Book II.)

124. One of the Traditions relating to Muhammad speaks
of these veils as 70, another as 700, and another as 70,000. Each
of these expresses only an indefinite number, since it is of course
impossible to attach any definite number to the veils which
intervene between the creature and God.

“ It is by ‘ the Light ’ (one of the ninety-nine divine Names)
that the darkness of the non-cxistcnce of contingent beings is. as
it were, covered, .so that they come into relative existence. They
are, however, only as shadows whose apparent existence is due
to the Light. If the Ijight be withdrawn they cease to exist.
Thus the veils which conceal God are ‘ light ’ in so far as it is
His Light which gives them a quasi existence, and they are
‘ darkness ’ in so far as they are inexistent in themsels'es and
have only a shadow-like existence.


14


THE HAFT PAIKAE


“ Xow according to the higlier or lower degree of the saint he
has a less or greater number of veils between him and the
Light in which the Quth dwells, that is the Light of God.

“ The Qvth is the highest in rank in the Sufi hierarchy.”
(C. E. Wilson's Translation of Euml’s Maxnavl, Book IT.)

For another explanation of the 70.0(X) veils see Gairdner's
The Il ff/y of a Mohammedan Mystic.

125. See Note 123.

126. i.e., being in the infinite, he was no longer subject to
space relations.

127. i.e., he had no more any existence in space.

128. i.e., when the truth of the infinite makes itself felt the
phenomenal world and direction or space are no longer considered
as real.

129. i.e., as long as a person is subject to the world of space
his heart is liable to be disturbed by anxiety at its vicissitude.s.

130. i.e., he was completely absorbed in the Deity, and had
only the breath or life which the Sufi has mfanCi, “ extinction
of himself in God.”

131. i.e., the infinite cannot be felt until all .sense of space
relations is lost.

132. He being infinite.

133. It is an open question “ whether tlie AVords of God
can be heard as words, or whether God communicates only by
inspiration, from behind a veil, or by the mouth of a prophet
whom He has inspired. Those who support the latter view say
that since the Attribute represented by MutaJeaUim, ‘ the Speaker,’
is one of the eternal Attributes of God, the AVords of God in Hi.s
quality of the Speaker cannot be heard by mortal ears. They
interpret the text (Qur'an, ii., 70), Yasma‘u,ia I'alama ’Huh,

‘ They hear the AA^ords of God,’ as meaning Yasma‘una mCi
dalla ‘aid kaldmi ’Huh, ‘ They hear that which indicates the
AA’^ords of God.’

“On the text (Qur’an, iv., 162), Wa-kallama ’llnhu Musa
takUind, ‘ God spoke to Alo.ses in speech,’ they say that God
created such words as w'ould give indication of His eternal
AA’ords (as ‘ the Speaker ’), and let them fall upon the ears of
Moses.


COMMENTAEY


15


“ They also quote the verses (Qur’an, xlii., 50, 51) 'And it is not
for man that God should speak with him except by inspiration,
or from behind a veil ; or He sends a prophet and reveals to
his hearing what He will.’ ‘ From behind a veil ’ is explained as
meaning that God may make (men) hear in or from certain
bodies words which He creates. Thus He spoke to Moses
from the tree.

“ The Turkish Commentator on Rumi's Masnavi seems to
come to the conclusion that God makes His servant hear His
eternal IVords, though since they are from an eternal Attribute
they are unlike those of His creatures. God's servant will
understand also that those words are from God.”

I have added to this, “ Would it not be simpler and clearer
to say that Words coming from the Attribute expressed by the
name Mi(faf;aUim, ‘the Speaker,’ may be manifested as a
levelation to the elect ? ” (C. E. Wilson’s Translation of

Rumi's Masnad, Book II.)

13-1. i.e., the special drink and robe of honour of the perfect
Sufi, which would be his ecstatic state and condition of freedom
from all ties. (See the ne.xt distich.)

135. IqhdL ■' bliss, beatitude, felicity, prosperity,” means here
the state of him who is the object of God’s grace. It is the
opposite of idbar or shaqdvat.

Ma‘rifat, “ knowledge,” is the possession of the ‘Arif, “ the
Knower, the Sufi.”

136. Lit., ” With the humility or conciliation of a hundred
thousand prayers.'’

137. “ That Goal,” or “ Centre ” ; i.e., God.

138. “ That which he brought '’ ; i.e., the spiritual knowledge
which he brought.

139. i.e,, from the court of the king to whom this work is
dedicated.

140. '■ A crescent moon” ; i.e., a poem.

“ On festive night. ’ The allusion is to the night of the
termination of the month of fast, Ramazan, when the new moon,
the appearance of which betokens the end of the fast, is
eagerly watched for.


16


THE HAFT PAIKAR


141. i.e., the poem is to be extremely subtle and shrouded in
obscurity.

142. Lit., “ may make magicians the prey of your magic.”

143. Filjil bar iltish rllhtan, “ to scatter pepper upon the
fire,” is to make the beloved restless until she sees her lover.
This is effected by the lover’s reciting a charm over some pepper,
which he then throws into the fire.

In this case the beloved is presumably the poet’s tab‘,
“ poetic vein or muse,” which he is urged to rouse.

The second hemistich seems only to emphasize the first, thus,
“ make the fierce fire crackle by throwing plenty of pepper
upon it.”

144. Lit., “ for the sake of gcntle-heartedness.’’ “ The cold
and hardened wax ” represents the poet's tab', " poetic vein or
muse,” which has lain inactive for six years. He is urged to
make his muse gentle-hearted and propitious by using the lover’s
charm.

145. “ This narrow way ” is presumably a reference to the
poet's quiet, ascetic life and to his inactmty as to his poetical
gifts. “ To dance on stones ” is not given in the dictionaries,
but to sit on a stone or stones ” means “ to be unhonoured,
unesteemed ”, so that if the former be equivalent to this the
sense of the second hemistich would be : " You have been hving
long enough without the esteem which the exercise of your genius
would give you.” But some 3ISS. give in the second hemistich
bar or dar rah-i jang (jang probably for chanq), and kvash
instead of has. if this were adopted the translation would
be : ” dancing is pleasant to the music of the harp,” and the
meaning, I think, “ engaging in writing an entertaining poem.’’
But this is scarcely acceptable. As some lithographed editions
have jang, “ battle,” the editors have possibly thought that
reference is made to the Sikandar-ndma of Nizami, in which
many battles occur, but as this had been finished six years before,
as the Author also made a new recension of it not long after
writing the Haft Paikar, and as there are also battles in the latter
poem, such interpretation does not seem very plausible. But,
to conclude, ” dancing on stones " may be simply a metaphor
for “ living the retired, austere hfe of an ascetic ”, which the king
engages him to leave for awhile.


COMMENTARY


17


146. Lit., “ Let the musky reed sneeze.” Musk being
blackish and fragrant, the reed is poetically called musky because
it offers in the black ink words which on account of their beauty
are considered fragrant. ” May be perfumed ” ; lit., “ may rub
galia moschata,’’ a perfume composed of musk, ambergris,
camphor, and oil of ben-nuts.

147. i.e., to pass over the inky words which are likened here
to ambergris, as they were before to musk.

148. i.e., let them convey fragrance to the verdure of the
world; as people scent silk garments with musk.

149. “ Leaves ” mean the “ leaves ” of the poem to be
written, and in a secondary sense “stamped coin”.

150. i.e., until the juice of the grape is pressed out it does
not smile in the form of wine.

151. i.e., one has the trouble of cracking the bone to get at
the marrow ; and one must risk the sting of the bee to get the
honey.

152. i.e., raise the curtain which conceals the beauty, your
thoughts.

153. i.e., joy settled in my heart, and grief rose up and
departed from it.

154. The “ one work ” is the Shdh-numa of Firdausi.

155. The poet was Firdausi.

156. I read la‘l-i suda with India Office 3IS. 1168, not
lad-i riza of the other editions.

157. “ The contents of it ” ; lit., “ its coin.”

158. “ Alien or foreign,” I think, is a more likely sense here
of ghanb than “ wondrous ”, especially if naqd, " coin,” be the
right reading, and not naqsh, “ design.”

159. i.e., which were not to be found collected together.

160. Dari, “ the older Persian,” is the name given to the
older pure Persian spoken before the admixture of Arabic, due
to the Arab occupation. Firdausi professes to have written in
Dari, though his work contains a considerable number of Arabic
words. It is said to have received its name from its having
been the court language, but this etymology, as well as others

c


18


THE HAFT PAIKAK


given, is doubtful. It is also said to have prevailed chiefly in
Bukhara. Balkh. Badakhshan, and Marv.

“ In (such) cities (as those) of Bukhara and Tabaristan ” is
one sense of dar savud-i Buhlnri-y-u Talari.

Another sense is in works (found) in Bukhara and
Tabaristan Bukhara, it may he added, is said to have
derived its name from the learned men who inhabit d it.

The rendering, “ in the works of Bukhari and Tabari,” must,
I think, be rejected, first, because Bukhari was a Traditionist,
and the Author does not quote Traditions, and secondly, because
both Bukhari and Tabari wrote in Arabic, whereas the Author
says he consulted both Arabic and also Persian works. Tabari,
it is true, was a historian, and therefore a likely source, but it
seems curious that the poet should restrict his mention to that
single authority.

161. The Author means presumably that he sought out each
beauty of a recondite character which had been overlooked
by other poets.

162. i.e., IlTien I had written out a choice selection.

163. One of the meanings given to Zand is the Book of
Ibrahim Zardusht, i.e., the Zend Avesta of Zoroaster. If the
reading Zand be correct we must infer that that book was
adorned with pictures of the planets, as we know the temples
were. Or, reference may be made simply to the mention of the
planets as an adornment. The B. ed. of 1328, however, reads
dair-i Majus, “ the Magian temples.”

164. “ The Brides, (adorners) of the sky,” are the seven
planets.

16-5. By “affairs” or offices are meant possibly the arts of
fascination.

166. i.e., when seven lines converge together, as, e.g., radii of
a circle, the result is a single point in the object aimed at in
our enterprise ; i.e., though the subjects be manjq the result
is unity.

167. i.e., he keejis them all in due control so that they may all
subserve the main design.

168. i.e., if any part be not sub.sidiary to the whole it throws
out all the other parts, which brought together in due subservience


COiDIENTAEY


19


■would ha^-e formed a cousonant and unified whole. The
illustration here is a cord composed of a number of strands.

169. i.e,, though no one appreciate the unity of the design,
it is still there.

170. i.e., I measure correctly so as to produce a consonant,
harmonious and unified -whole.

171. i.e., presumably. If I had composed a -work of one
thread only it could not have borne so many pearls of rhetoric
without fear of snapping.

172. The Author seems to imply (cf. the next two distichs)
that the value of the -water depends upon the nature of the
recipient. If the water come to places -which are not adapted
to keep it perfectly pure, it may be fit for bathing, but not for
drinking. It is also, of course, implied that for certain uses
the water must be pure in itself before it reach the recipient.
Similarly (see the nest distich but one), if a drop of rain-water
fall into an oyster-shell which is adapted to turn it into a pearl
it becomes a pearl, but if not it is lost.

The real meaning implied by the next distich but one is that
the Author being a proper recipient of such material as may
come to him he is able to turn it into work of literary and
poetical excellence. Cf. the lines of Sa'di :

Bdrdn, ki dnr latdfat-i tah'-ash khildf nlst, d<ir bdgh Idla
ruyad-u dar shdra bum khas: "Rain, in the fineness of whose
nature there is no contrariety, makes tulips grow in the garden
and weeds in brackish ground.’’

It should be explained that it was believed that the pearl in
the oyster-shell was formed from a drop of rain-water which fell
into it.

173. See Note 172.

171. See Note 172.

175. The Author is hinting that he expects a reward from the
king.

176. Firdausi’s bounty ” consisted in his offering to King
Mahmud of Ghazni the historical, romantic poem the “ Shah-
nama ’ of 60,000 distichs. Mahmud’s "stinginess” lay in his
giving the poet a very inadequate reward.


20


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The distich is literally : “ Mahmud’s stinginess and Firdausi’s
lavishness were (as) the relationship of one under the ascendant
Scorpio to one under the ascendant Sagittarius'’

This does not mean that Firdausi and Mahmud were
born respectively with the ascendants Sagittarius and Scorpio.
The Author implies only either, tliat in the presentation
of the “ Shah-nama ” by Firdausi and the thought of reward
on the part of Mahmud the two were influenced by the ascendants
of the particular times — Firdausi by Sagittarius, and Mahmud by
Scorpio ; or rather perhaps, more generally, that there was
something in the horoscope of each that induced their resjjective
acts at the respective times. It is clear from the context that
the Author means that their respective conduct was due in some
way to the influence of the stars.

According to Alan Leo those -nith the ascendant Scorpio
are “ reserved, determined and tenacious ”, and those with
the ascendant Sagittarius are *' frank and hone.st, generous and
sincere ”. One may add that Scorpio being a “ watery ” sign,
and Sagittarius a “ fieyy ’’ sign, the two are aiitagonistic.

Pierre de Bresche in his Trade des Talismans (1671) says ;
“ On attribue a Salomon un livre intitule ‘ des Sceaux des
pierreries ’, ou il dit que la figure . . . du Scorpion et du
Sagittaire se combattans, giavee en quelques pierres, et enchassee
dans un anneau de fer, cause les divisions parmi ceux qui en
sont touchez.”

Such figures, though included by De Bresche amongst
talismans, are, more strictly speaking, spells or charms. (See also
Note 1,490.)

177. Of Asadi of Tus the Enryclopccdia of I.ddm says
little except that he was “ one of the oldest of the Neo-Persian
poets, who died during the reign of the Ghaznavide Mas'ud
(1030-41). Specially is he known for his Strife-poems
(Munazarat) ”.

The Encyclopredia adds, “ Little that is certain is known
of his circumstances, for what Daulat-Shah tells of his
relations with Firdau.sl appears to be of a Icgendarv nature.”

This fact, I would suggest, is no reason for not repeating the
account of those relations, since such legciid.s are often of great
importance to the Orientalist on account of the frequent reference


COMMENTARY


21


made to them by Petfian Authors. Of course discretion must
be usedj since some illustrative stories arc of no importance,
and are really too absurd to be repeated. One might add,
however, with regard to the Encyclopedia, that it is far too
succinct and condensed in many of its articles, and gives much
too frequently references to other works when it ought to give
the information itself. In its scientific articles also it is too
technical : many of them are intellioible only to one who already
knows the subject, and an Orientalist can scarcely be expected
to have an acquaintance with all Oriental sciences.

liYe see, however, from the present distich that Asadi was
better treated by ilahmud than Firdausi, of whom, it is
related, he was the master.

It is said that Firdausi on his departure from Ghazni in
A.D. 1010 requested him to finish the “ Shah-nama which
was yet incomplete, and that Asadi composed that part
of the poem between the Arabian conquest of eastern Persia
under the Khalif ‘Umar to the end, consisting of 4,000 distichs.
In the “ Rose Garden of Persia ” there is a verse translation
by Miss Costello of Asadi’s poem, the “ Dispute between Day and
Night ”.

The meaning of the hemistich (if the reading be correct)
is obscure. It may be translated, “ He favoured Asadi who was
aUf.’’ Alif is the first letter of the alphabet, and is in form like
an upright stroke. It hence has the derived senses, “ first,”
“■ alone,” ‘‘ bare or destitute,” and “ recluse ”, but no one of these
seems applicable. He was certainly “ first ” in the sense of
having been Firdausi's master, but there seems to be no point
in asserting this.

The B. ed. of 1328 reads, Asadl-rd hi hiid-i u bi-navdkht :
“ For Asadi, whose being he cares.sed,” the sense being
concluded in the second hemistich. Such a reading, however,
strikes one as being only an evasion of the difficulty.

178. i.e., were friends together, or ‘‘ the man subject to the
ascendant ”, tuU'i, was favoured by “ the ascendant ”, tali‘.

179. The -Vuthor again urges the fact that he makes great
improvements in the material collected. He does not sacrifice
his independence by taking water from the cloud, because he
far more than pays his debt by converting it through his poetical


22


THE HAFT PAIKAR


genius into pearls. He may also be intimating that he is not
one of the mere imitators or plagiarists of whom he sometimes
complains — cf. e.g. the Sihandar-numn.

180. i.e., honour for the poem itself.

181. “ At the monarch's court support ’’ ; i.e.. from the king
himself. “ Four into four are sixteen ; i.e., mv calculations
will be found correct, or things will be as I thought they would,
and as they should bo.

182. The Author probably means that he has so pure and
bountiful a source of inspiration, and produco.s results so excellent
that he need not fear for the reception of the v.'ork at the king's
court. This harmonizes with the preceding distich. Or the
“ cloud ” may signify the king in his bountiful and generous
nature, and the “ water ”, not the material from which the pearls
are made, but rather the cause or instrument of the poet's
inspiration. Or possibly, after expres.sing his desire for the
king’.s support and favour (fa>z, ‘‘ favour,'’ by tlie way, means
also “ generosity ”), the Author may be poetically asserting
his independence in the concluding distich of the Section. Ab,
“ water,” means also ‘‘ favour, generosity, honour, success,
splendour ”, and all this he can get from the ” cloud ”, i.e., from
the material collected whence he jdeases, and which by his genius
he turns into the finest of pearls, — those of Aden, — which also
enrich him.

183. I load, Jabra’U-am na, jituii-ifl qalam-am. Some of the
I.O. MSS. have, Chini-yl qalam-am, '“ the Chinese (art) of my
pen.” The B. ed. of 1328 has, Jalrail-am ba-junhish-i qalam-am,
where junbish, I think, evidently indicates jinni. Jinnl I take
to be preferable on account of the coming reference to fusiin,
“ incantation,” and to the dtvs, ” evil genii," and Solomon. By
“ the genius, my pen ” he means sinijdy his poetical genius.

The genii Ijinji) are supj)o.sed to have been created of fire, whilst
the angels were created of light. There are good and evil genii,
the latter corresponding generally with the Persian div/t. Satan
and his assistant-demons are of thejuiu. The pari or fairy is
of the good jinn.

184. It was the custom to put on new dre.ss at the beginning
of the New Year. In this and the following distich the poet’s
genius is addressing him.


COMMENTARY


23


185. “ Evil genii,” divs, mean here common and unspiritual
people. “ No man, it is said, ever obtained sucb absolute
power over the Jinn as Sulaimaim 'bnu D.l'ud (Solomon the son
of David). This he did by virtue of a most wonderful talisman,
which is said to have come down to him from heaven. It was a
sealing-ring upon which was engraved ' the most creat name ’
of God (al-ismu l-a‘:am), and was partly composed of br.iss
and partly of iron. With the brass he stamped his written
commands to the good Jinn ; with the iron those to the evil
Jinn or devils. (The Jinn are suppo.^ed to have a great dread
of that metal. 1 Over both orders he had unlimited power, as
well as over the birds and the winds, and. as is generally said,
the wild beasts.” (Hughes ; ‘‘ A Dictionary of Islam.”)

The legend of “ the great name " is very ancient, dating from the
time of the Accadians, the people of the yellow race who inhabited
Chaldsea before the Semite immigrations.

Lenormant in his Chahkan Magic .says ; “ But the highest
and most irresistible of all the powers dwells in the
divine and mysterious name, ‘ the supreme name,’ with
which Hea alone is acquainted. Before this name every-
thing bows in heaven and in earth, and in Hades, and
it alone can conquer the Maskim and stop their ravages.
The gods themselves are enthralled by this name, and render
it obedience. . . The great name remains the secret of Hea ;
if any man succeeded in divining it, that alone would invest
him with a power superior to that of the gods. Sometimes also
in that part of the incantation (quoted by Lenormant) which
takes a dramatic character, it is supposed that Hea is teaching
it to his son Silik-mulu-khi. But even then it is not uttered,
it is not wTitten in the formula, and they think that the mention
of it alone is sufficient to produce a decisive effect when the
incantation is recited. Every one knows to what a pitch the
belief in the all-powerful and hidden name of God has grown
amongst the talmudical and cabalistic Jews, and how general
it still is amongst the Arabs.”

It should be explained that Hea was the supreme god of the
Accadians, and that the Maskim, of whom there were seven,
were an order of demons.

186. The Author is now apparently addressing the king.


24


THE HAFT PAIKAR


187. i.e., as regards the mere body.

188. i.e., my -work has no character, good or bad, until it
bear the king's stamp of approval or disapproval. It has neither
the sweetness of the honey nor the bitterness of (the sting of)
the bee. It is neutral : pure and simple wax.

189. To be “ red-faced ” is to be “ honoured ”, and to be
“ black-faced ” the contrary.

190. “ The monarch's scribe ” means the king through
his scribe or amanuensis.

191. i.e., if no one care for my written words, my silky paper
will be enriched by them. They must be left simply to the paper,
and I must be resigned. Or, for silky paper ” might perhaps
be substituted “ silk garments '’, which are sometimes perfumed,
the sense being that he must keep the poem for his consolation
and be contented with it.

192. “ The eloquent ” ; i.e., former writers, especially poets.

193. “ I, looper of these knots ” ; i.e., the tyer of knots of
subtleties in the poem. The alchemy and bond of travellers
to the village ” ; i.e., the transmuter into gold of (the material
left by) those who had reached the domain of composition,
and the fastener together of their material.

194. i.e., no one has written more originally than I.

195. i.e., I have nothing new to offer in the way of words,
but I am an adept at expressing my meaning in the words which
exist. Ma‘dm, lit., “ meanings,” is used here in the sense of
‘ilmu ’l-ma‘d>u, “ the science whereby is known the manner of
adapting language to the requirements of the case ; ability to
express clearly one’s meauing in various ways ; rhetoric, and
theory of literary style.”

196. i.e., I consider form, literary style, without good matter
to be phantom-like and to have no real existence, like a dream ;
and I consider matter, i.e., the meaning, the thoughts of the poet,
without form to be. undetermined and vague, like water.

197. The Author probably is alluding especially to Firdausi.

198. In this and the following three distichs the Author seems
to show some feeling of discouragement, real or affected, at not


COMMENTARY


25


having in his poetry attained to perfection, on the mental, moral,
or spiritual side.

199. i.e., “ what is there in the domain of poetry that I have
not written ? ”

200. Kliilds, “ that which is absolutely pure, anything select
or exquisite, gold refined in the fire, genuine monev, the best
and purest of anything,” is evidently the correct reading here,
not Maids, “ deliverance, liberty.” (See Note 198.)

201. At the dawn the angels are supposed to hover on the
verge of the first heaven, the lunar sphere, that nearest to the
earth, and the Author here implies that they send down to him
dainties of poetry.

“ In deprecation ” ; lit., “ in (saying) ‘ I ask pardon of God.’ ”

202. “ A"our breath ” means “ your words, your poetry ”,
revivifying as the breath of the Messiah.

The “ tree of ilary ” was a withered date-palm under which
Jesus is said to have come into the world, for which reason it
became green, and always when shaken let fall dates.

203. i.e., you have become fortunate in scattering the in-
exhaustible dates of your learning.

204. In the heading to this section Qizil Arslan is given as the
name, or rather an additional agnomen, of the king to whom
the poem was dedicated, and in Beale and Keene's Oriental
Biographical Dictionary the same name is given. The king,
however, who is generally understood by the name of Qizil
Arslan (Red Lion), King of Azarbaijan, died in a.h. 587
(a.d. 1191), and the poem was not finished till A.n. 593 (.\.d. 1197).
That it was not begun even in the life-time of Qizil Arslan is
fairly probable from the fact that the author had not finished
his " Sikandar-nam.i ” till .shortly after the death of that prince,
and that he dedicated it to his successor, Nusratu 'd-Din, King of
Azarbaijan.

In Sachau and Ethe’s Catalogue of the Persian MSS. in the
Bodleian Library we read, the poem was ” dedicated probably
to the Atabeg Niir-aldin Arsliin (who ascended the throne of
Mausil in a.h. 589).”

Dr. Bacher, in his Nizami's Lcben und Werke, gives the name as


26


THE HAET PAIKAR


Nusratu ’d-Din, the king of Azarbaijan mentioned above. He
says : “ Es ist schon erwahnt worden, das der Fiirst von

At/erbeigan abnlich wie einst jener von ScbirwanNirrmii zu neuer
poetischer Thiitigkeit aufmunterte ; jedoch wabrend Letzterer
ihm den Stofi angezeigt hatte, Hess ihm Xasrat-addin {sic)
die Wahl frei.”

It is, however, evident from what Nizami himself says in this
section and the next that the prince to whom the poem was
dedicated was the Kbyarazm-Shah, ‘Ala'u 'd-Din Tekish Khan,
the ruler of Khvarazm (Chorasmia), the modern Khanate of
Khiva. This country which lay along both banks of the lower
Oxus extended to the Sea of Aral. In the time of this ruler, how-
ever, Khvarazm was by no means the limit of the territory of the
Khyarazm-Shahs, for before the end of the twelfth century they
were masters not only of all Transoxiana, part of the Fifth
Clime, according to the Dictionarie.s, but also, to the west, of the
country which extended to the provinces then still subject to
the Abbaside Khalifs,

In the next section, “ A humble address,'’ Nizami .speaks of
the dedicatee as the ruler of Persia, and, as a matter of fact,
Tekish Khan became supreme master of that country after
having in a.h. 591 defeated Toghrul III., the last Seljuqide
ruler of it.

We read in The Caliphate of Sir William Muir : At last, the
Kharizm Shah, Takash, at his instigation (i.e., the instigation of
the Khalif Nasir) attacked the Seljiik forces, and defeated them,
leaving Toghril, last of his race, upon the field , , , Takash,
recognized now as supreme ruler of the East, conferred on the
Caliph certain provinces of Persia hitherto held by the Seljuks.”

Schefer, in his translation of the Relation de I'Ambassade au
Kharezm, Introduction, pp. ix., x., says: '’Telle etait au com-
mencement du XIIP siecle, la situation du Kharezm, auquel
les princes de la djTiastie des Kharezm Chah avaient annexe les
Etats voisiiis. Ils avaient donne a leur empire une telle extension
que les frontiercs en touchaient, a I’est, a la Mongolie, au sud,
a rinde, et, a I'oue.st, aux provinces qui restaient encore sous
I'autorite chancelante des Khalifes Abbassides. Le Khanat de
Khiva est aujourd'hui tout ce qui subsiste d’un si puissant
Etat.”


COMMENTAEY


27


Before coining under the rule of the Khyarazm-Shahs
Khyarazm was subject to the Seljuqides and before them to the
Ghazna\udes. Of the rise and fall of the Khyarazm-Shahs, who
succeeded the former, Schefer speaks (Introduction, pp. xi., xii.)
as follows ; “ Le Kharezm passa, en 432 (1040) sous la

domination dcs Seljouqides. Alp Arslan en confia le gouverne-
ment a son fils Arslan Chah. Sous le regne de Malik Chah, Abou
Thahir, gouverneur de Samarqand, fut charge de I'administratiou
de la province qui. apres lui, fut confiee a Izz oul Moulk, le fils
du celebre ministre Nizham oul Moulk. Le Kharezm fut en-uite
donne par le meme prince a Anouchtekin, esclave de TEmir
Melkatekin qui I'avait achete a un homme du Ghardjistan. II
etait devenu Ibriqdar ou charge de I’aiguiere de Melik Chah, et il
percevait, a ce litre, les revenus du Kharezm.

“ Barkiarouk, successeur de Melik Chah, designa Aqindjv
pour succeder a Anouchtekin. Aqindjv fut assassine a Merv
par les emirs Qoudan et Yaraqtach, qui essayerent de s'emparer
du Kharezm. Mats ils furent mis en deroute par les troupes
envoyees contre eux. et le fils d' Anouchtekin, Mohammed, fut
investi du gouvernemeiit avec le litre de Kharezm Chah, 490
(1096).

“ A la chute de I'empire des Seljouqides, le Kharezm Chah
proclama son independance. La dynastie qu'il fonda compte
sept princes, qui ri'gnerent de 490 (1096) a 62? (1230).

“ La conduite altiere et imprudente de Mohammed Chah (the
last king but one) provoqua I'invasion de Djenguiz Khan, qui
couvrit I'Asie de ruines et porta au Kharezm un coup dont il ne
s’est jamais releve.

“ Mohammed Chah, abandonne des siens, alia se refugier dans
Tile d'Abiskoun (in the Caspian) ou il mourut. Son fils, le vaillant
Djelal oud Din Mangouberty, essaya de ressai.sir le royaume de
ses ancetres ; mais il p(Yit assassine par un Kurde dans les
montagnes d’Amid ou il s'etait refugie 628 (1230). En lui
s’etcignit la race des souverains qui avaient range sous leurs lois
toute I’Asie centrale, et manace I’existence du Khalifat des
Abbassides.”

Thus Muhammad, the son of Anushtegin, the ibrlq-ddr, or
ewer-bearer, to Malik Shah, was the first king of Khyarazm, but


28


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Tokish Khan was the first independent king. The rulers of the
Khvarazm-Shahi dynasty are as follows : —

1. Muhammad Qutbu’d-Din.

2. Atsiz, the son of Muhammad.

3. Il Arslan, the son of Atsiz.

4. Sultan Shah, the son of II Arslan.

5. ‘Ala’u ’d-Din Tekish Khan, the elder brother of Sultan

Shah.

6. Sultan Muhammad, the son of Tekish.

7. Jalalu ’d-Din, the son of Sultan Muhammad.

From the following considerations, added to the above, it is
quite clear that the person to whom the poem was dedicated was
‘Ala’u ’d-Din Tekish Khan, the Khyarazm-Shah :

Nizami in this section addresses a person named ‘Ala’u ’d-Din,
and not Nuru ’d-Din, or Nusratu ’d-Din.

In addition to this he plays upon the meaning of the name
‘Ala, which means sublimity, exaltitude, height ”.

Later he speaks of two sons of the above king, one named
Muhammad, the other, Ahmad. The latter he praises as a scholar,
the former as one full of princely ambition. As a matter of fact,
Muhammad, who succeeded Tekish Khan in the empire, became
a famous warrior. His agnomen, as given by Nizami, was
Nusratu ’d-Din, whereas that of Nuru ’d-Din's son was ‘Izzu
’d-Din.

Mirkyand gives Qutbu ’d-Din as the honorific title of
Muhammad, but it was a common thing for a distinguished man
to have more than one.

In the next section Nizami says, “ Through you the Fifth
Clime is in prosperous state.” Now a part of the Fifth Clime
is Transoxiana, of which Tekish Khan was ruler ; Nuru ’d-Din
being ruler of Mausil, and Nustatu ’d-Din of Azarbiiijan.

From the fact that ‘Ala'u 'd-Din Tekish Khan, the son of II
Arslan, was undoubtedly the person to whom the poem was
dedicated it does not seem improbable that the distichs in which
the name Qizil Arslan is given or alluded to may be spurious.
It is not impossible, however, that ‘Ala'u ’d-Din may have had
the honorific title or additional agnomen of Qizil Arslan (Red
Lion), or that he may have been called so as bin Arslan, “ the son
or grandson of Arslan.’’ Arslan in fact was a title of honour


COMMENTARY


29


commonlv given to a king of Turkish race, -whether it -was his name
or not.

It is true, though unlikely, that the poem may have been begun
in the life-time of Qizil Arslan, and the lines ■\^'hich early in the
poem refer to him have been retained ; but nearlv at the end of
the poem there is also a line referring to the dedicatee as “ Lion ”,
and since Qizil Arslan died in 1191 and the poem -was not finished
till 1197, "we should have to conclude that it was dedicated when
finished to a dead Lion, which is highly improbable, the more so
that the poet evidently expected a reward from the dedicatee.

The original of the distich in which the name Qizil Arslan
occurs explicitly is as follows : —

“ Shah Qizil Arslan-i kisln"ar-glr ; bih zi Alj) Arslan ba-taj-u
sarir.” (See also Notes 213 and 2,086.)

205. By “ range ” is meant the poem.

“ The division, Spring ” ; i.e., Spring as a division of the year.

The Author by saying that his real aim in -iN'riting the book
is to praise God, the Prophet, and the king, and to give the latter
advice, means probably to pay a compliment to the king.

Or, it is quite possible that he includes under “ advice to the
king ” the whole of the work after the first three divisions or
sections mentioned.

206. “ This ancient coinage ” is possibly “ the world ”, which
Muhammad’s advent made young.

Or, the Author may be referring to Judaism and Christianity,
and be implying that Mluhammad superseded them by Islam.

207. “ The Seven Climes ” are the seven divisions or zones into
which Oriental geographers divided the whole earth as known to
them.

According to the Persian geographer, Jurjanl (about a.d. 1460).
they are as follows : —

1st. From latitude 12° 45' to 20° 30' N. The lord of this Chme
is Saturn.

2nd. From latitude 20° 30' to 27° 30' N. Assigned to Jupiter.

3rd. From latitude 27° 30' to 33° 40' N. Assigned to Mlars.

4th. From latitude 33° 40' to 39° N. Assigned to the sun.

5th. From latitude 39° to 43° 30' N. Assigned to Venus.

6th. From latitude 43° 30' to 47° 15' N. Assigned to Mercury.

7th. From latitude 47° 15' to 50° 30' N. Assigned to the moon.


THE HAFT PAIKAE


30

There is a discrepancy in my MS. of Jurjanl, which gives 43° 30'
to 47° 13' , and then 47° 30' to 50° 30' .

The Climes of Idrisi (about a.d. 1153) extend farther north
than Jurjam's, but he does not explicitly define them.

The dictionary Biirhan-i Qdti\ taking a more popular view,
enumerates the Seven Cbmes as follows : —

1st. Hindustan. Assigned to Saturn.

2nd. China and Khata,. To Jupiter.

3rd. Turkistan. To Mars.

4th. ‘Iraq and Khurasan. To the sun.

5th. Transoxiana. To Venus.

6th. Eum (the Eastern Empire). To Mercury.

7th. The hyperborean regions. To the moon.

But other popular divisions are also found, no one of which
agrees with that of Nizami, who makes an arbitrary division of
hts own. (See also Notes 1,146 and 1,147.) By the distich it is
implied that the king is monarch of the whole world.

208. i.e., generous to the rulers subject to him.

209. Aq Sunqur, according to Vullers, who takes his account
from the BurMn-i Qdti, is "‘cognomen regum 'lurcarum”, by
which is presumably meant a cognomen of the rulers not only of
Turkistan but also of all the countries of centjal Asia inhabited
by people of Turkish race. So the race of the Aq Suncjurs would,
of course, include the family of the Khyarazm-Shah himself.
In the Encyclopadia of Islam three persons with the special
cognomen (perhaps rather agnomen) of Aq Sunqur, “ White
Falcon ” ijalco gyrfalco), are mentioned, but I do not think
that the family or race of any one of these is meant by Nizami.

210. “ This resting place ” ; i.e., the earth.

211. i.e., the dynasty or sovereignty has reached perfection
in him.

212. Rustam, the most famous of tlie legendary heroes of
Persia, was lord of Sistan or Nimruz, and Zfibulistan, the highlands
in the north of it. kVe gather from Lieut. -Colonel Yate’s
Khufdsdn and Slsldn that names and legends relating to
Rustam are found in that country at the present day.

Part of Sistan is on the east frontier of Persia, and part of it
in Afghanistan.


COilMENTARY


31


A long account, of P.ustam's life and exploits is found in
Firdausi's Shah-nama. (See also Notes 1,035 and 2,078.)

213. Unless this distich he spurious or corrupted, we must,
I think, take it that he is called “ lion in name ’’ either as having
the honorific title or additional agnomen Arslan, or as being
bin Arslan, “the son or grandson of Arslan”; arslan, a Turkish
word, meaning " lion ”, (See also Notes 201 and 2,036,) The B,
edition of 1328 has, however : —

Ham-’patj-l sJitr-u Jiam-payam-i hizJiabr :

“ The companion of the lion and the bringer of the same message
as the lion.”

211. i.e., simply, when the world came into existence.

215. “ A Gem,” or “ an Essence ”, i.e., the Universal Spirit,
the first creation, or the first emanation from the Deity ; though
considering it in its two-fold aspect of Universal Intellect and
Universal Soul, the former is the first emanation, and the, latter
the second. Anicaln ma khalaqa ’Unhu ’l-‘Aql: “The first thing
which God created was the Intellect.”

The Universal Soul by its formative faculty fashioned the
phenomenal world upon “ matter ” taken in the philosophical
sense, and is the Soul of that world. At the same time, the
individual phases of the Universal Soul inclined to particular
forms and became the individual souls of them.

216. An allusion to the king's generosity.

217. Since this verse is applicable only to one whose name is
Qizil (Arslan), Red (Lion), and the person addressed here was not
at all events the Qizil Arslan, it may possibly be spurious. (But
see Notes 204, 213, and 2,086.)

Surkh-ru (lit., “ red-faced ”) means “ honourable, glorious ”,
and since the sultan is “ surkh-ru ”, his face is supposed poetically
to cast a red tint upon the sign-manual, which the latter is pre-
disposed to take from its including the word “ Qizil ”, which in
Turkish means “ red ”, and is part of the name Qizil Arslan.

218. Lit., “ is red-faced.” (See the preceding Note.)

It must be concluded that if the preceding distich be spurious,
this one is so, too. (But see Notes 204, 213, and 2,086.)

219. An allusion to the martial valour of the king.


32


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Another translation may be : “ The surface or book of the
sky is full of leaves from his expositions.” This would be an
allusion to the king’s learning.

220. In this hemistich it is implied that the sea cannot
compete with him in bounty ; that before his bounty it perspires
with shame.

221. i.e., the mind fails to compass it.

222. An allusion to the king’s name, ‘Ala’u ’d-Din, which
signifies “ Sublimity of the Faith ”.

223. A pun upon the name, “ Sublimity of the Faith.”

“ In this last,” i.e., in subbmity (Sublimity).

224. Means presumably that his enemies are as women com-
pared with him.

225. Ab, “ water,” has also the senses “ brilliancy, lustre,
splendour

226. “ Excites fire in the mind ” : i.e., arouses admiration.

In the distich the four elements are introduced ; thus the

■word meaning “brilliancy”, db, has also the sense of “water”,
and that meaning “ body ”, khdh, signifies also “ earth ”.

227. Lit., “ where the lion scratches its tail.”

228. Ba-aar dmadan, lit., “ to come to (its) head,” means
also “to come to an end, to be finished”.

229. “ Fire ” is the “ wine ” ; “ frozen water ” is the “ crystal
cup ”.

230. A common expression in Persian for a great disturbance.

231. See Note on the next distich.

232. i.e., whatever he gains with effort he gives away freely
and carelessly. Cf. the idiom ba-sar-i tdziydna giriftan, “ to
take a thing, or gain a victory, by the whip alone, without using
the sword.” For the second hemistich of the preceding distich
contrast the effort and the impetuosity of the flow of the sea
■with the ease and gentleness of its ebb.

233. i.e., possibly, by his prosperity and 'vdetorious power
he overcomes all malign influences as Jupiter may those of
tSaturn.


COMMENTARY


33


234. This and the preceding distich do not balance ^'ery well,
since in the first, “ lion ” is apparently an allusion to “ the
king ”, and in the second to his “ horse The metaphorical
sense of “dragon” in the second is “warrior”, and “burning
the dragon” is “vanquishing that warrior”. He also kills
real dragons in the chase.

“ Mounted on a lion ” in this second distich is to a certain
extent in harmony with “ sun ” in the first, since one of its
meanings is “ sun ” in his quahty of being the ruler of the zodiacal
sign Leo.

In this second distich the king is certainly, as it were, “ upon
a dragon ” as vanquishing it, but his horse is alluded to as the
“ lion ” and not he.

In the same distich by “ dragon ” there may be a sub-allusion
to the constellation Draco which is extinguished, as it were, by
the sun.

235. “ Dragon ” means here both the constellation Draco and
also “ warrior ”.

“ As a snake ; i.e., as if it were only a simple snake.

236. Tangi, rendered “closeness”, means aiso “narrowness,
nearness ”, and the word is contrasted with the word “ widens ',
which follows. MatralK rendered “aim”, means literally “the
place to which a thing is thrown”.

The absolutely literal sense is “ his nearness (of aim) to the
thing aimed at”.

237. i.e., he has beaten the sword in roughness.

238. Shlr-giri, “ lion-takinsr.” is the third degree of
drunkenness. “ A lion-taker “ means metaphorically “ a strong,
brave man ”.

239. Lit., “ By the circle of (his) lasso.” I.O. MS. 402 has
ba-kuh-i .‘^amand. “ by the mountain, (his) steed.”

I.O. MS. 1168 has ha-ginl-i samand, “by the circle of (his)
steed.”

I.O. i\IS. 1491, and the I.O. Bombay edition have ha-gurz-u
kamand, “ by (his) mace and lasso.”

From these I think we may plausibly conjecture ba-gird-i
kama)td, “ by the circle or loop of (his) lasso.”

240. i.e., through awe at the king's prowess.

D


34


THE HAFT PAIKAE


241. i.e., his arrows have killed so many wolves and leopards
that the onager has scaroely room to move over the plain.

242. The meaning is that the king kills so many wolves
and leopards that the hunting-ground becomes a fuming, raging
sea composed of their blood, and completely covered sometimes
by the floating bodies of the wolves, and sometimes by those
of the leopards. Thus the hunting-ground, in a way, at times
puts on a wolf’s skin, at times a leopard’s skin.

243. i.e., the stag is shot dead and is buried, as it were, in its
hide.

244. Lit., “ as though the sky brought up smoke from the
earth.”

245. i.e., as the reed has the musky (in this case black) ink,
and the beauties flit., rubies) which it forms, so the king’s
character has its musky fragrance and the precious and brilliant
qualities which are di.splayed by that character.

246. See the last Note.

247. An allusion to the king's greatness and to his protection
of all.

248. “ The Nine-handled Bow ” is the sky in its quality of
having nine divisions. (See Note .30.) The meaning is that
the nine-fold sky is only as the smallest bolt for the king's bow.

249. “ (The) four stars,” char fia'ihar. The term chiir gauhar
usually means the four elements ”, but here it must signify the
four large stars in Ursa Major that stand in the form of a square.
Ursa Major as a whole is called Haft Aurang, ” The Seven
Thrones.”

250. i.e., his enemies are eradicated and destroyed before him.

251. “ To have a bright, white, or red face ’ is “ to enjoy
honour ” ; “ to have a black face ” is ” to be disgraced ”.

i.e., the king's friends derive lu.stre from his glory as the moon
from the sun ; but his enemies are scorched black by it.

252. “ A gold-shod sun '' means “ the king

Sang means ‘‘rock or stone*, but it signifies also “weight,
authority, dignity, splendour so that the sense is that as the
sun lends grandeur to the mountain by gilding it, and fuithers
the giowth of the rubies (as he is supposed to do) in the rock of


COMMENTARY


35


the mine, so the king's shining qualities produce brilliant results,
and give brightness and prosperity to all his subjects.

The rhetorical merit lies, however, in the idea of the giving
of rock to the mountain, so I have translated literally. One
might almost combine the two meanings bv saving “ has given
‘ weight ’ to the mount, and rubies to the mine

253. i.e., the jewels of the mine are excelled by his brilliant
qualities, and he is far superior to the mine in showing forth
qualities so brilliant.

254. His “ onyx ” is his “ eye ", which apparently means
here his watchfulness and his all-pervadiug influence and power,
which make all things flourishing. This sense is conveyed by
the image that his onyx ’’ gives pearls to the sea, the strewer
of pearls, and rubies to the mount, the strewer of rubies.

255. “ Both Abodes " ; i.e., heaven and earth.

He receives God's Law and administers it to his people.

256. i.e., his two sons.

257. i.e., devoted to the study of theology.

258. Far'idun, the name of the sixth king of the first dynasty
of Persian kings, the Plshdddian. He was famous for his wisdom
and learning.

259. Kai-Khusrau was the third of the second or Kaydnian
dynasty of Persian kings. He was celebrated as a warrior.

The second hemistich is, literally, " opening the stirrup in Kai-
Khusrau-ishness . ' ’

260. “ Power or authority,’’ naqsh, which here is equivalent
to istiqrar-i liuhn va-tainkJn-i hnihal dar dilhd, “ the fixing of
one’s authority and the establishing of reverence in the hearts
(of people).’’

261. i.e., he having devoted himself to the study of rebgious
and spiritual matters.

262. Ahmad means “most praised’’, and by praising his
pursuits the Author introduces his name in poetical style. His
name Ahmad (twice), because it is his real name, and may also
on account of his pursuits be attributed to him in its sense of
“ most praised


36


THE HAFT PAIKAE


263. The words Ahmad and Muhammad both come from the
Arabic root hamd, “ praising,” so that the two forms which are
of common origin differ only specifically from each other without
being generically or essentially diiierent. The genus is one,
the species are two.

The distich is, however, susceptible of another interpretation,
namely, “ In two copies, the original of which is the same,
there is the writing of Ahmad and that of Muhammad.” Or,
again, “ there is the stamp of each ” ; Ahmad and Muhammad
being in the first case the copyists, and in the second case the
two names.

In the latter case the sense would be that two copyists making
a copy each from the same original would differ in minor particulars
as the two names differ, though their sense i.s essentially the same ;
i.e., “ most praised.”

264. i.e., they do not differ.

265. i.e., for his mastery of theological and spiritual subjects.

266. i.e., religion and spirituality strengthen him.

267. “ The azure throne ” ; i.e., “ the sky.”

268. i.e.. May he be furthered and supported in his sovereignty
by these two sons.

269. i.e., brighter than the day.

270. This would depend, I suppose, upon the way in which
he spends the night. Cf. the succeeding distich.

271. By “ that one of Ahmad's race (who is) veiled bv the
curtain of his night ” is meant the king's wife.

272. BilqJs is the name given to the Queen of Sheba supposed
to be one of Solomon's wives. It means here the wife of the
king, as Solomon means the king. (See also Xotcs 1,270 and
1,407.)

273. “ The celestial sires " are “ the seven or nine heavens ”.
“ Existence' mothers are “ the four elements ”.

By “ her being tlie seal of the mothers of existence ”, i.e.,
of the four elements, is meant “ her reaeiiing the perfection or
acme of existence which is composed of the four elements ”.


COMMENTARY


37


274. Khizr is tlie name of a prophet who found and drank
of the Water of Life. He has been confused with the vazir
of Alexander, with Elias, and also with St. George.

The Water of Life was supposed to be in the darkness, zuhnat or
(plural) zulumcit.

The origin of the legend may probably be traced back to the
Chaldean epic of the progress of the sun through the seasons.
In the winter he dies, as it were, in the darkness of storms and
rains, from which he emerges to life again in the Spring. (See
also Notes 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.)

275. i.e.. May the king’s protection abide by that Rose and
Rose-garden, his wife !

“ Rose-garden ” is a name given to a slave-girl, kantz.

276. i.e., he had that quahty as a pre-existent, immaterial
soul in the spiritual world. The doctrine of the pre-existence of
souls is taught both by the Qur’an and also by the Traditions.

277. Jalajil, rendered here “drum”, means primarily “ small
bells”, and is the Arabic broken plural of juljul. Such hells
were fastened by couriers to their waists. But the word signifies
also “ a small round drum or tambourine with bells set round
the rim ”, and such, before the invention of fire-arms, were most
probably carried at the waist by sentinels to give the alarm.

278. By “ sword-belt ” is meant the white streak of the dawn.

279. “ Beside your stirrup gently breathes ” ; i.e., attends
you as a servant attends his master at his stirrup.

280. Dllam was formerly an independent province of Persia
forming part of the modern Glliin. Its capital was also called
Dllam. As it was a westerly district, the sense of “ the wearer
of Dilam’s crown ” mav possibly be “ the lord of the western sun ”,
which would be “ the evening ”.

1.0. MS. 1168 reads Skdm-i Dllam-kiilah, “ The evening with
the crown of Dllam,” instead of Shiih-i Dllam-kulah. (See also
Note 1,884.)

Many plants have a stronger scent in the evening.

281. Sarhang, the most usual sense of which is “a general,
a military leader ” (in modern Persian, “ a Lieut. -Colonel ),
means here either “ a prefect ” or “ a censor-inspector ,


38


THE HAFT PAIKAR


muhtasib. The muhtasib was a police official who was charged with
the inspection of weights, measures, and provisions, and was
empowered to punish gambling, drinking, etc. Since the day on
account of its brightness may be said, in a way, to be a searcher
out of oSences, the Author likens it to a sarliang, i.e., here, a
muhtasib.

The Author implies that the king is so great that the white-
faced (in another sense honourable) day is his sarhang, and that if
dismissed from that office it would become black-faced (in
another sense dishonoured) night.

282. The sky is supposed to spread itself for the king’s benefit
as a cloth, and to receive as its pay from the king two loaves,
namel)^ the sun and the moon.

283. Lit., “ To the signet -ring of the divine aid there is a
sealing of sovereignty (more lit., to sovereignty) upon you.” i.e.
by the divine aid you have become the highest exponent of
sovereignty.

284. An allusion to the greatness of the king, enhanced by the
previous allusion to the greatness of the sky.

285. i.e., has fashioned it upon the model of your throne. The
sky is thus a throne imitated from the king's throne. It is a golden
throne presumably by reason of the stars. The king in his
brilliance is as the moon.

286. “ Turbid ” ; lit., “ earthy.”

287. The Author is alluding to the scintillations of the kincr’s
sword, which are, he implies, more brilliant than rubies.

288. i.e., the king’s long-suffering is more steady and
immovable than the mountain.

289. The “ cloud ” is often taken as an image of generosity.
Here it probably means that which is to foster the plant of the
poet’s genius.

290. The April cloud fosters all the beautiful plants of Spring.
The cold, wintry clouds produce no good effect.

291. i.e., the encouragement given by those other kings is
absolutely inadequate : they give much pain and almost deprive
of life before they give even a slight reward.

292. “ (Your) shadow ” ; i.e., “ (your) protection.”


COMMENTARY


39


293. “ Your existence ” ; lit., “ your creation.”

294. i.e., your fortune always exists as a guard or custodian
of the realm of generosity. Or, your fortune looks after the realm
of generosity.

295. The sense is apparently, “ since Persia is the heart of the
earth, Persia is the best part of the earth, because it is certain
that the heart is better than the body.”

296. The Author means presumably that as the king’s
dominion i.s the heart, i.e., the best of dominions, and the best
ruler has the best place, therefore the king is the heart (of rulers),
i.e., the best of rulers.

The difficulty of fixing the exact sense is that mamlakat and
vildyat both mean “ realm ” and also “ rule ”, being equivalent
in fact to the word " dominion ”. But in the preceding distich
vildynt has evidently the concrete sense of ” realm ”, and if in the
present distich we give it the abstract sense of ‘‘ rule ”, I cannot
see the raison d'etre of the preceding distich. Or, if there be one, the
Autlior proves only that the king rules Persia because, his rule
being the best, he is the best ruler, and therefore rules the best
place. But the logic seems peculiar.

297. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

298. “ The mirror of Alexander,” Ayinn-yi Sikandarl, was
said to have been constructed by Aristotle and placed in the light-
house at Alexandria to give knowledge of occidental affairs.

But under the word jdm we have jdin-i Jam (Jamshid), “ the
cup or mirror of Jam, Solomon, or Alexander,” which, according
to the Eastern fabulists, represented the whole world, (whence it
is also called jdm-i jahdn-nnmd, or jdm-i giti-namd, “ a mirror
showing the universe ’’).

299. ‘‘ A mirror of intellect.” This I take to be the sense of
gauhar-dyina, lit., “ a pearl- or gem-mirror,” but also '' an intellect-
mirror ", since gauliar means also “ intellect, wisdom ”.

300. “ Which you have ” ; lit., “ which is in your head.”

301. “ The Seven Climes ” ; i.e., the whole inhabited world
as divided by Oriental geographers. (See Notes 207, 1,146, and
1,147.)

302. See Notes 204, 207, 1,146, and 1,147.


40


THE HAFT PAIKAE


303. Aristotle is spoken of by Persian writers as a minister or
adviser of Alexander.

304. Niishirvan the Just, in whose reign Muhammad was
born, was (according to different authorities) the eighteenth,
nineteenth, twentieth, or twenty-first king of the Sasanian dynasty
of Persia. He was a great patron of literature, had a number of
works translated from the Greek, and was visited, it is said, by
some Neo-Platonic philosophers. He reigned from a.d. 531
to 579.

305. Buzurjmihr, the vazir of Niishirvan the Just, was
celebrated for his wisdom and virtues. He is said to have imported
from India the game of chess and also the Fable.s of Bldpay
(Pilpay). It was under his superintendence also that Greek works
were translated into Per.sian.

306. Khusrau Parviz, the grandson of Niishirvan, reigned from
A.D. 591 to 628. He was married to Shirln (Sira), who is said to
have been a Christian. One of Nizami’s Five Poems is called
“ Khusrau-u Shirin ”.

307. Barbad or Barbud was the most famous of Per.sian
musicians and composers. The ntimber of modulations usually
ascribed to him is thirty. Cf. si lahn, “ the thirty modulations.”
These are said to have been composed in honour of Khusrau
Parviz, but a number of them would seem from their names to
have been composed in honour of his wife Sh'rin.

Nizami in his Khusrau-u Shirln excludes three from the usual
list, and introduces four which are not in it. One of the latter
is called Khusravl, “ Roynl,” and was a eulogistic song in rhymed
prose written and composed in honour of the king.

308. Jalalu "d-Din Malik Shah was the third sultan of the
first dynasty of the Seljuqides. He succeeded his father Alp
Arslan in a.d. 1072, and died in a.d. 1092, aged 38. The
Jaliilian Era, Tarikh-i Jalali, was established in his reign by
‘Umar-i Khaiyam and the other astronomers royal. This era,
according to Dr. Hyde, begins on the 15th of March, a.d. 1079.

309. To Nizamu ’1-Mulk, the vazir of Alp Arslan and after-
wards of his son Malik Shah, was mainly due the prosperity of
the Sejuqide empire. He was a great patron of learning, and
founded in Baghdad the famous college, the Ni.zamiya, in which


COMMENTARY


41


the poet Sa‘dl had, as he relates in the Bustan, an Assistant-
Professorship or office of Repetiteur. (See Graf’s Bustan, p. 341.)
He was the author of the political treatise Siyasat-nama. He
died in a.d. 1092, assassinated by a follower of Hasan Sabbah,
“ the Old Man of the Mountain.” Nizamu '1-Mulk and Hasan
Sabbah had been friends, but in later life Nizamu '1-Mulk had
become at variance with Hasan Sabbah.

310. The word translated “ orderly estate ” is nvzdm, and
that rendered “ in orderly estate ” nizdmi. Thus the Author
makes out by a poetical conceit that his name (or fame) is
Nizami, i.e., in orderly estate, or in a satisfactory condition,
through the king’s favour.

311. I read kam-i gizdf with I.O. MS. 1491.

312. “ The cupbearer ’’ is here the eminent poet, or his
poetical genius, tab', which infuses superexcellence and richness
into his work. “ The peasant ” is the inferior poet, or his genius,
which produces only inferior work. The former, as it were,
gives wine to the earth, the latter only water. (Cf. Note 437.)

313. i.e., other kings are not generous towards themselves
in the matter of justice and learning.

314. i.e., presumably, because the king is learned himself.

315. This is probably an allusion to the influence which
Hasan Maimandi, the vazTr of Mahmud of Ghazni, is said to
have brought to bear upon him in order that Firdausi should
not be adequately rewarded for his great poem the “ Shah-naina .

316. By the king's name being attached to the poem under
the ascendant of Leo the Author implies that the king in his
judgment of it will be influenced by the qualities possessed by
those who are born under that ascendant. Alan Leo in his work
The Horoscope says : “ When the ascendant is Leo . . . they
will be as noble as their prototype, the lion, and being possessed
of one of the strongest forms bestowed by the twelve signs of
the zodiac, they should be able to resist all external conditions,
and maintain their own free and independent spirit. In dis-
position they are open, frank and fearless, magnanimous, sincere,
honourable, and affectionate. . - . (They) are ever ready to
help when help is needed. They can be very determined,
self-reliant and strong-willed.”


42


THE HAFT PAIKAR


By the distich the Author hints that the king will exercise
his independent judgment and not be influenced as Mahmud
by others. (See Note 315.)

317. i.e., fortunate is he who oilers so fine a result of your
favour — the result being the poem.

318. Lit., “ may draw a pen through.’'

319. “ The cycle of seven thousand.” This is what is called
“ the lunar cycle of which the Persian lexicographers, quoted by
Vullers, speak as follows, Giiyand daur-i har kaukabi haft hazar
sal mi-bdskad : hazar siil ha-khmdi-yi khrad sdhib-i ‘anial ast,
va-shash hazar sftl-i dlyar ha-nmshdrakat-i shash kaukah-i dlgar ;
va-Adam — ‘ Alai-hi^ s-saldm ! — dar avval-i daur-i qamarl ba-zuhur
amad ; va-dn daura ba-fdyan rasid :

“ They say that the cycle of every planet is of seven thousand
years’ duration. A thousand years it acts by itself, and the six
thousand other years in partnership with the six other planets ”
(i.e., with each one a thousand years). ‘‘ Adam — On him be peace !
— came into being at the beginning of the lunar cycle. That
cycle has come to an end.”

The Haft Qulzum adds, Az-dn jihat In ‘dlam-rd daur-i qamarl
guyand ; va-ba'zl bar-dn-and ki qiydmat ham dar daur-i qamarl
khydhad shud :

“ For this reason they call this world (that of) the lunar cycle ;
and some assert that the Resurrection will be in the lunar cycle.”
According to this assertion the lunar cycle has not come to an
end, and this is the general belief ; but according to the relation
in the first of these quotations this cycle has come to an end,
and if so Nizami would be perhaps referring to the ?'!artian cycle
which would follow it ; but it is evident that .Jahalu ’d-Din Rumi
believed that Muhammad, at all events, hved in the lunar cycle,
since he writes,

“ What indeed, 0 Muhammad, is the army of the earth (to
you) ? See the moon in the sky, and split its foreliead ;

“ In order that the ignorant astronomers may know that this
cycle is yours, (and) not that of the moon.” (vSee 0. E. Wilson’s
Translation of Rumi's Masnavl, Book II. Cf. also Note 871.)

320. By “ this sugar-reed ” is meant the Author’s pen.

“ Earth’s blackness ” most probably means the ink in the ink-


COMMENTARY


43


stand ; and “ verdure ” signifies the charming results of his
dipping the pen into the ink and writing.

321. i.e., my eyes are w'atery from trying to look at him.

322. i.e., though the king, like the sun, is too dazzling in
himself to be looked at, he can be considered in his virtues and
deeds, which are, as it were, reflections of him.

323. i.e., this poem newly composed.

324. The poem is likened to coin which is to receive its power
and value from the impression of the hoofs of the king’s horse ;
i.e., through the king's notice and approval.

325. By '■ the cloud is meant an exalted patron like the king.

326. i.e., the poet who cannot secure an exalted patron must
put up with one less high.

327. i.e., from the king’s hand.

328. Zuhra is Venus, the musician of the sky.

People look out for the new moon to take omens from it,
especially for the new moon which ushers in the beginning of
the month which succeeds Ramazan, the month of Fast. (See
the First Story in C. E. Wilson's Translation of Rumi's Masnavl,
Book II.)

329. i.e., the .kuthor would be resigned though the king
judged the poem to be insignificant.

330. i.e., that which you do not favour.

331. By the word Kun, “ Be,” God is said to have given
existence to all things.

Muslims have a special reverence for speech, as they suppose
it to be God-created and to be co-e.xtensive with thought.

3.32. i.e., when you speak of any one of them, you think
of his work, and he himself emerges, as it were, and is seen from
that work,

333. “ The unknown,” or the hidden ; that which is still
wrapped in mystery or concealed in the mind. (See Note 331.)

334. i.e., speech as existing in the abstract. (See Notes
331 and 333.)

335. i.e., save speech, which may be handed down by writing,
no individual thing subsists permanently.


44


THE HAFT PAIKAK


336. i.e., nothing remains to display the mind of men except
speech handed down by writing. Architecture is certainly an
exponent of the minds of men, and archfeological remains may
to a considerable extent show the state of advancement of
civilization and taste of an age, but they do not reveal the mind
to the extent that speech does, nor are they so lasting.

337. Namely, the “human mind” or “rational soul”,
nafs-i nutiqa, which is immortal if not debased and merged,
as it were, in the “animal soul”, nafs-i haivdni.

3.38. Cf. the dictum ae ai’-roir, “ Know thj'self,” and

the doctrine of the Gnostics that the soul is immortal only for
those who know the nature of it.

339. See the preceding Note.

340. That which has this knowledge is of course the rational
soul.

341. See Note 338.

342. i.e., you will not really perish though you leave this life.

343. See Notes 337 and 338.

344. i.e., it is useless to cultivate the body unless by the
cultivation of it one is helped in the cultivation of the mind and
heart.

345. “ Their clay ” ; i.e., their bodies.

346. “ Pleas and vain excuse,” namely, for cultivating the
body and not the mind, and alleging that it is best for them.

347. “ Not any one will say ‘ My curds are sour ’ ” ; i.e., no
one will confess that his action does him harm, or that he is the
worse for it. Or, he will not acknowledge that he is not in a
satisfactory condition.

348. i.e., they incline to contentment alone, and do not seek
wealth in order to cherish the body.

349. The Author is speaking of the evils of possessions which
are transitory. The mind, which is eternal, should be cultivated.

350. i.e., he who has tran.sitory possessions has much anxiety
and trouble in safeguarding them.

351. The hoopoo is here likened to the capitalist, since, like
him, it has transitory possessions which are coveted. Those


COMMENTARY


45

who have such possessions find them exposed to peril, and
they are consequently stimulated to great exertions to preserve
them.

352. Because they have something of which others are
envious.

353. i.e., the bird is stimulated by its cleverness to try To
gratify its greed, and so it falls into the net. The Author is
pursuing the same idea, but he now dwells more particularly
upon the element of greed which leads people to covet transitory
possessions.

354. i.e., with all his gluttony he can get from the earth only a
stomachful.

355. “ This store ’’ is the world, i.e., all transitory possessions
are lost in the end.

356. “ The crown of the candle is of course the flame,
which makes it weep, as it were, tears of wax or tallow.

357. Another illustration of the same idea. 1 have translated
from a supposed reading, lith-u dari/u, " the hills and the sea.”
but the 1 .( 3 . MSS. and printed editions alternate between db-i
darya, and an unifari-ah. the water of the sea," and that
exhilarated person ”, The former seems nonsensical, since the
sea has no rubies. The latter is pointless and involves an
inconsistenev. Kuh. “ hill, mountain,” seems a plausible
conjecture, since the hill or mountain has rubies, and may
be said to weep in the streams which flow from it. The sea
has pearls, and the water of it may poetically be called tears.

358. See the next distich.

359. i.e., those who are entitled men are as angels if they have
the wisdom which constitutes them " men " and distinguishes
them from the lower animals. If, in fine, they have the ruh-i
insdni, " the human spirit,” and have under their control the
riik-i haivdnh the animal spirit.

360. “ Did they prepare.” I read with I.O. MS. 1491,
karda, which is an indefinite way of saying ” he or they prepared
the sense being here "God prepared”.

I.O. MS. 1168 has lard, which I should render “ God prepared ”.


46


THE HAFT PAIKAR


361. i.e., work is good in itself, though it avails not against
the preordinances of God, 'which are from past eternity.

362. i.e., if his -work is only lor himself and he does not care
for others’ interests.

363. Khyishl at the end of the first hemistich seems used in
an adjectival sense.

364. i.e., so govern your life that you make not enemies, but
friends.

365. i.e., weeping hypocritically.

366. “ Take your hand ’’ ; i.e., actively help you.

367. Ydd has two principal meanings. mcmorv ” and
“heart, or mind”. In this distich the meaning seems to be
“ heart ”.

368. Concealed or buried treasure was supposed to be guarded
by a snake or dragon.

369. The Author seems to imply that by exposing advantages
the possessor will sufier, although those who may see them be
good.

It should be remembered that New Year's Day in Persia is
the 21st of March.

370. The ass is considered a type of sensuality.

371. i.e., happiness depends upon a good, happy nature.

372. An assertion of the Muhammadan idea that the nature
never changes. The pre-existent soul in the spiritual world
has a certain nature, and when incarnate in this world it keeps
the same nature.

373. Lit., with ugliness of aspect.

374. Advice apparently given to princes and governors
against ill-treating the peasant.

375. i.e., he does not require an additional burden of
oppression.

376. Muh/'a, a stone found in the head of a snake and supposed
to be_ an antidote against the poison of its bite. The full name
is 7nar-muhra, “ snake-stone."

377. _ I translate from the reading, du'a na-zain. If dnghd

be correct we should render, " Strive that a’ou strike


COMMENTAEY


47


not false coin (in partnership) with the world.’’ or. “ employ not
deception (in company) with the world.”

378. By “ dragon ’’ is meant “ the world ”.

379. i.e., the world is not really friendly to men,, and ultimately
it consumes them.

380. Lit.. “ his dog-heartedness.’’ The allusion is to the
wicked, malignant hypocrites of the world.

381 The Author means presumably that they increase the
disagreement by misrepresentation, making black seem white
and white black.

The literal sense as regards the fly is that it gets into different
foods and trails one over another where it walks, mixing them
up together.

382. “ These highwaymen ” are wicked enemies who rob
people of good and set them astray. Cf. the definitions of rah
zadan (lit., to strike the road) : " to plunder travellers,’’ and
also “ to set astray ’’, tardj 7tamudan-i anivdl-u usbdb-i musdfirdn ;
va-gumrdh kardan.

383. “ This wallet of four ties ” means “ the world ”. The
wallet referred to is one in which travellers carry their food.
It has four flaps which fold over and are tied together. It is
used opened and spread out as a tray or cloth. This wallet
is likened to the world on account of its having four sides as the
earth has the four cardinal points ; of its forming an expanse ;
and of its containing provisions.

384. i.e., when even the pious and good are led away by the
wickedness of the age.

_ Past, rendered “ base “, seems to have here, the Sufi sense,
A7il'i na-tuvdnad ha-bfd-i himmal parvdz-i 'urfij ha-maddnj-i
kamaldt-i haqijdiu i/Ci marlaba-i az manltib-i dinar kunad
“ He who cannot on the wings of resolution fly up to the
stages of spiritual perfections, or to any other grade.”

” Josephs, (fierce) wolves.” An allusion to the wolf which
was reported to have devoured Joseph. (See the Qur’an, xii.,
17, 18.)

385. The fire of hell is supposed to be made of men's evil deeds.


48


THE HAFT PAIKAR


386. “ Pour talc away,” talg-ra rlzand. TaL- being an allayer
or quencher of fire, the sense of rizand here must be “ pour away ”,
not “ pour on

387. “ Subjection ” ; i.e., subjection to God.

388. Lit., “ How long is sevcn-lockedness and four-tiedness
to last ? ” The “ seven locks ” are the seven skies ; the " four-
tie (thing) ” is the earth. (Sec Note 383.)

389. By the “ false blood-stained gold ” are meant the
stamens of the anemone.

The Author is again warning people against seeking riches.

390. i.e., the stamens of the wormwood do not resemble
money in colour.

Note the Persian word for “ wormwood ", which,

divided as diram-na, moans ‘‘ not money ”.

391. “ The white cloud ” is apparently taken as an emblem
of purity and renunciation, in contradistinction to the black
cloud, which has, as it were, a treasure on its head in its bright
lining. If the Author means that one is not to be like the white
cloud, the '■ treasure " must be the golden ajjpearance which
the sun often gives to the white cloud, but this is not necessarily
on its head.

392. This may mean that the earth, which becomes only
mud through the wetting of the rain from the cloud (see the next
distich), becomes golden when the sun shines upon it thus wetted,
and this golden reflection is the treasure alluded to. Or, since
it is believed that the sun makes gold grow and develop in the
stone of the mine, as it is supposed to do rubies, the reference
would probably be to such gold, I have not seen, it is true, any
explicit assertion in Persian writers of such a belief as regards
the gold, but passages occur which seem to allude to it, and in
Le Tresor de Vunivers, attributed to Raymond Lulle, we read :

“ Chaque etode du ciel a son influence particuliere : I’etoile du
Pole sur I'aimant et sur le fer ; . ... le Holeil, sur For ; la Lune,
sur I’argent ; les images des homnies du ciel, sur les corps
humains; la similitude duBeliercelc.ste, surle.s beliers terrestre.sV’

393. Tar shidan, “ to become moistened or wet,” means
also metaphorically to be vexed or troubled ”.


COMMENTARY


49


394. See Note 392.

The meaning is that bv contemning treasure, behaving with
wisdom, and practising self-denial and beneficence people become
a blessing to the earth.

395. i.e., show your contempt for the gold and rubies which
the sun is supposed to develop.

396. The word zar, “ gold,” is formed by two consonants
which are disconnected from each other in Persian writing.
I have been obliged to render paraganda by two words, worthless,
scattered,” since there is no single word in English that conveys
these senses of pamganda, which is equivalent here to hl-rdbita.
Cf. the Turkish rdbita-syz.

397. In this second hemistich paruganda means “ scattered ”
in connection with the gold, and disturbed ” with reference to
the possessor of it.

398. i.e., on account of their wearing gold they are put into
mourning, blue being a mourning colour. This is in allusion
to the co mm only used gold and blue ornamentation of Persian

MSS.

399. i.e., if gold is put into one scale, stone weights are put
into the other to weigh it. This the Author calls " stoning

“ At a thousand doors ” ; i.e., at the doors of the bankers.

400. A dd?ig was the sixth part of a diram, and weighed
about six grains. A diram was a silver coin worth, by various
accounts, sixpence, or from three-halfpence to twopence.

401. “ Bears them off ’ ; i.e., inherits them.

“ The waster ” ; lit., ” the money-killer,’ slrn-kush.

“ The collector ” ; lit., “ the money-collector,” sim-kash.

Such an assumption as is conveyed in this and the preceding
distich is tantamount in Persian to an assertion of the uselessness
of the act alluded to in the assumption.

402. I translate from the reading Anki, “ that that_” or
“ this that ”, which is preferable to the alternative reading Anchi,
‘‘ that which ”, in so far as the act is spoken of in the second
hemistich, not the object of the act.

Both zar, “ gold,” and sim, “ silver,” mean also simply
“ money ”.


50


THE HAFT PAIKAR


403. i.e., the person who spends not for his wants has no
pleasure in life : the digger of the well instead of enjoying the
water is injured by it.

404. Lit., “ is the cnlivcner of joy."

405. By “ a stone ” is meant “ gold

406. “ That ruin ’’ means “ the world ".

407. Blvs, i.e., demons, are said to inhabit ruins and wastes.

408. Jalian, “ the world,” means also the world's goods ”,
so that the sense of the distich is, “ How long would you bear
the world's goods merely as a porter might, and make them serve
no useful purpose ? ”

409. “The four porters” are “the four elements”. Hence
“ the four porters’ house ” is either “ the world ” or “ the human
body ”. Hero the latter sense only is applicable, and the meaning
is that however much a man may collect he will bear away (to
the tomb) only his own body.

410. “ The air without (the letter) alif” is bad without the
long “ a ” (a), reducing thus to “ bad ”, which means “ bad. evil,
wickedness The meaning is that the two kinds of elements
opposed to you are the earth, which is devoid of “ friendliness ”
(tf/), i.e., “ the world,’’ and the air without alif, i.e., “ evil.”

411. Some editions read laj. “ crown,’’ but others bah,
which has no moaning. Hence I think that we may readily
surmise baj. “ tribute.” to be the correct reading, one dot in bah
in the original doing the office of two.

412. Slhh is presumably used here in the sense of fir, a “ rolling-
pin fir-i tutmaj being a rolling-pin to prepare tutmuj.

Slhh in the sense of " spit ’’ is quite inappropriate here, since
tutmaj, translated paste ", is not a dish which could be prepared
by or cooked on a spit, being “ fresh made pastry cut into strips
and stewed with meat ".

413. Lit.. ■“ in whose stomach there is a drum ’’ ; i.e., whose
stomach grumbles through emptiness.

i.e., necessaries are preferable to lu.vuries ; or everything
should have its appropriate place. (For tutmaj, see Note 412.)

414. Ddna-yi dur is here equivalent to dur-ddna.


COJIMENTARY


51


415. i.e., greediness and covetousness lead to vexatious
interference and strife with others.

416. Sa’di saj's in the Bustan :

“ Na-tj-arzad "asal, jan-i mav, zal'hni-i msh" : “The honey,
dear friend, is not worth the wound of the sting.’’

417. Jif/ar, “ liver, heart,” means also ‘‘ pain, grief, trouble ”.
“ The butcher's shop ” is, of course, the world.”

418. i.e., thousands fail for one that succeeds. Life is only
a lottery.

“The sky” means “fortune” or “the malice of fortune”.

419. i.e., the world or fortune is quite uncertain and untrust-
worthy.

420. The meaning is apparently that if the gratification of
a person's wish should be destined to have contrary results it
is better that the wish should not be gratified. In the frustiation
of his wish he would be happier than in the gratification of it.
Cf. the Anvdr-i Suhaill, Book III., Story 1 :

Basd murdd ki dnr zimn-i na-miirddlhd-' st ! “How many
a gratification is involved in frustration of one’s wishes ! ”

The best MSS. I have consulted read nd-nmrddl, “ frustration.”
but some MSS. and printed editions have bl-murddl, “ not
wishing,” which is simpler, but makes the sense rather pointless.

421. The Author apparently implies that success gained late
in life is likely to be of a more solid, self-sustaining, durable,
and complete nature than that gained early in life ; for cf. the
next distich. In this success, which, from its implied nature,
should endure to the end of life, the business of life may be said
to be perfected.

422. i.e., How long would you waste all your energies in seeking
to shine and to make all you can of yourself before the people of
the world ?

423. “This bestial den’’ is “the world”.

“ This jar of crockery ’’ is “ the sky”. Both mean fortune .

424. By “ this seven-rooted tree ” is meant the sky, of which
the roots are. as it were, the seven earths. The sky means
fortune, and the sense is " do not let yourself be dependent upon
fortune : have nothing to do with it ’.


52


THE HAFT PAIKAR


“ This four-nailed shoe ” is the world as consisting of the
four elements, and the meaning is, “ have nothing to do with
the world or fortune.”

425. “ The mat-covered well ” is “ the world covered by the
sky”. The word “ stone ” is used with reference to the stones
employed in the construction of the well. “ Dead as a stone or
a mat ” may possibly apply to the person admonished, and
would then signify “ dead or insensible to the attractions of
the world or the allurements of fortune ”, but I think the applica-
tion to the world or fortune is preferable.

426. i.e., sacrifice your life for intellectual and spiritual
perfection, and think not of cultivating or indulging the body.

427. Pir ; i.e., 8ufi chief. This distich is omitted by I.O.
MS. 1168.

428. i.e., “ have full and entire faith in God.”

After this distich, I.O. MS. 1168, only, has a distich of which
the following is a translation :

“ If you are a disciple, behold, you are in bad estate ; rise from
the midst, that you be isolated (from all ties).” The only sense
of this can be, “ you are only on the road to improvement,”
but this is far from being good sense.

429. The Author is possibly alluding to his life of retirement,
upon which JamI in the NafaMtu ’l-U ns lays much stress.

430. The village-chief entertains stranger guests.

It should be remembered that the king has, in a way, called
Nizami from his retirement by asking him to write a poem.
Ni^ml seems to hint here that if he does not write no one can
do so in a worthy manner.

431. The Author possibly means that he is aiming at the poet
who is a pretender.

432. i.e., possibly, destitute of taste, judgment and appre-
ciation of real merit.

433. The Author means possibly that where he is the people
prefer bad poetry to good. Turk amongst its various meanings
has that of “a beauty”. Hence Tnrkl (here a noun, not an
adjective) means “ something of a beautiful or delightful nature ”.
The Author in the second hemistich likens this to dugh-ha,


COMMENTAEY


53


which is here equivalent to mast, or the Turkish yoghurt, “ specially
prepared thick curds of milk,” a favourite dish of the Turks.

“ This Ethiopia,” or ‘‘ these Ethiopians ” ; i.e., these uncivilized
people.

434. “ This furnace ” means “ the world ”.

Lit., “ I had any rawness ” ; i.e., probably, I was still somewhat
inexperienced in the affairs of the world. The only other sense
could be that his early worh was somewhat immature, but this
I think is inadmissible.

435. i.e., fortune, or rather plagiarists, took advantage of
my inexperience and made use of the works of my genius.

TuUyuhd-yi hisrimi is equivalent to tuiiyd-yi ghura, “ tutty
dissolved in the juice of sour grapes and applied as a remedy
to strengthen the sight.”

436. The Author again alludes to plagiarists, of whom he
complains too in the Sihandar-ndma. He seems to imply not
only that they have robbed him but also that they have depre-
ciated him.

The idea in this and the two preceding distichs, taken all
together, seems to be that he has always, even from the time
when he first began to write, suffered from plagiarists.

437. I.O. MS. 1168 and the B. ed. of 1328 read:

Mai hi juz jur‘a-yt zamln na-buvad
qadr-i ajigur btsh az-hi na-bmad.

The sense seems to be that he, as a spiritual teacher,
deserves better treatment than he implies he has received. In
Sufi phraseology “ wine ” means “ the knowledge and love of
God”. The Author has previously alluded to its superiority
to water as a fertilizer. (Sec Note 312.)

438. The Author means possibly the quiet, retired life of
the Sufi recluse.

439. “ Frozen water or ice ” refers possibly to the Author, as
living a quiet, retired life of contemplation, bound up, as it were,
in himself.

There may possibly be some reference to him as a writer of
recondite Sufi poetry in his retirement — poetry which is bound
up, as it were, and closed to the comprehension of the com-
monalty.


54


THE HAFT PAIKAR


440. The reference is possibly to the reflection of the sun upon
snow or ice.

441. i.e., ice in itself is like silver anti not gold.

442. It seems probable from the three preceding distichs
that by “ silver ” the Author means himself, and by “ gold ”
the Deity, of Whom he is only a reflection, as the moon is of the
sun. Cf. too the next distich.

443. Sun, “silver,” without the middle letter yd is “sim”,
which is like mis, “ copper,” and it is identical with it when
reversed.

The sense intended is probably that the creature, a reflection
of the Creator, loses value by not invoking Him, yd being a
vocative particle. By using the word “ reversed ” the Author
may be pointing to the suppo.sition of the creature’s being
depraved, as well as wanting in prayer.

444. By “ iron ” the Author means probably his tab’ or
” poetical genius ”.

By “ with gold inlaid ” he refers either to the dedication to the
king or the latter’s patronage.

By “ its silvery work ” are meant the sweetness and beauty
of the verse.

Or perhaps it would be more in accordance with the next distich
to interpret “ iron ” as his “ poetry ”. Then " in composition ”
would mean “ when he composes ” ; but this seems a little
strained.

445. The meaning is that the Author is enriched by his poetical
genius (or possibly his poetry), because, though he calls it “ iron ",
it has the value of “ silver ", and can bo sold for silver. (See the
preceding distich.)

Host of the T.O. MSS. read :

Mard-i dhan-firush zar pushad k'dhaninl ba-mupa hi-fi) ushad :

“ The dealer in iron who sells a rpiantity of iron for silver
can dress in gold or, “The dealer in iron can dress in gold
because he sells, etc.” I have taken the reading of I.O. MS.
1168, but conjectured bi-firuskani for nu-firuslauti in the second
hemistich.

446. i.e., “ {)ny iron is silver) ; alas for him whose gold is
less than silver ! ”


COMMENTARY


55


447. Asmdn and rismdn; i.e., “the sky” and “cord”. The
words are brought together from a certain resemblance in sound,
as in several English proverbial expressions.

44S. Lit., “ gold in boxfuls, and silk in ass-loads.”

449. i.e., since riches distribute themselves so unworthily,
why should one fear their not distributing themselves at all ?
Fardghat is exactly the opposite of kdr.

450. “ Such a ruin ” is “ the world ”. “ Into a ewer (or cup)

draw a sun,” or perhaps. “ confine a sun in a ewer (or cup).”
means probably " have the mind or soul in its greatness and
splendour trammelled by the visible world, which is in reality
so small and insignificant ”.

451. Cf. sid'handn-i dihUzJ, “ idle talk, hearsay.” The
“ vestibule dUdiz, is a passage extending from the door to
the court of the house, either roofed or not. Here people would
collect and gossip.

The Author apparently means here that everyone discusses
the mystery of existence, and, pos.sibly, complains of the injustice
of fortune, dihllz meaning also, as Quatremere says, “la partie
anterieure des tentes, ou la premiere tente, celle oil le sultan se
tenait d’ordiiiairc pour dormer >.es audiences.”

452. i.e.. presumably, they have tried to explain the mystery
of existence and the spiritual world, but have died before
succeeding.

453. i.e., if I have a long enough life.

454. i.e.. to penetrate into the mysteries of the spiritual life
and to avoid all the pitfalls of the phenomenal world.

455. i.e., the warning and summons have not yet come, and
I, like others, can scarcely believe I am to take the journey.

456. i.e., when I am dead, and the veil of the spiritual W'orld
is raised.

457. i.e., how long shall I try to teach the mystery of existence,
of the spiritual world, and of God, being ignorant myself ? How
long shall I be eloquent upon a subject through which I do not
see ?

458. i.e., you caimot attain to a knowledge of the divine
by means of the eyes (of intellect), therefore forget your eyes ;


56


THE HAFT PAIKAR


nor can you teach the divine mysteries, therefore keep silence.
It is only by following out the Sufi Path that one can commune
with God.

459. i.e., when you attain to a knowledge of the divine by
living the Sufi life you will know that your intellectual
strivings were vain.

460. i.e., abandon all your puny efforts, for the spiritual
world has shaped all things on the earth, and nothing can be
achieved without its preordained concurrence. (Cf. the next
distich.)

461. Instead of du tang-i ndvardi, “ two passes of dispute,”
some MSS. have dukan-i ndvardi, “ shop of dispute.” By “ two
passes of dispute ” is meant the world as a place of entrance
and exit where contention prevails.

462. i.e., while pearls, rubies, and precious metals trammel
your free action, how can you hope to make rapid progress in
the domain of spirituality ? The heavens were supposed to
move rapidly round the earth.

463. The “ bare-backed steed ” refers to the carnal or animal
soul purified and denuded of all earthly ties and desires. Such
a steed will bear one safely through the world. (See also Note
2,036.)

464. The best comment upon this is the last distich of some
lines in the third chapter of the Gulistdn :

Mard-l Khudd ba-maghrib-u mashriq gharib nlst ;
har jd ki mi-ravad hama mulk-i Khuddy-i u’st :

“ The man of God in west or east’s at home ;
for his God’s realm is all where'er he roam.”

“ The man of God ” is “ the darvish ”.

465. i.e., before you are dispossessed by death. It was the
custom to suspend the crown above the throne.

466. i.e., the blossoms of virtue may fall through the dust
blown by the wind of envy of others’ riches.

467. The “ arms ” of the rose are the “ petals ”, which are
scattered by the wind.

The Author means probably that he does not want arms
because he does not wish to fight for worldly possessions, and
by voluntary renunciation he escapes the thorn of envy.


COMMENTAEY


57


468. “ The wearing of the darvish's robe by his envy ” is
presumably “ the mortification of his envy ", by which the fire
of the passions of his body or carnal soul may be allayed, talc
being a resistant of fire.

But some of the I.O. MSS. and the B. ed. of 1328 reverse the
order of hasad and jasml, offering the sense, " In order that,
perchance, the wearing of the darvish's robe by my body may
scatter talc over the fire of my envy ’’ ; i.e., “ may allay the fire
of my envy.” This, however, is more prosaic, and less in harmony
with the preceding distich than the former reading.

469. i.e., through the world, by giving up envy and covetous-
ness and renouncing all possessions.

470. “ This ancient inn ” is " the world It is implied that
all earthly possessions are transitory, and had better be renounced
before one leaves the world.

471. The Author means probably, escape from the bonds of
the world and from all other ties, in which there is multiplicity,
and boldly assert your freedom. (Cf. the next distich.)

472. i.e., those who have studied existence and become
skilful in speech, who have learnt how to guide practice by theory,
and taught what thev could of existence, have died. Each one
has had his day and opportunity, has performed his part, and
has then disappeared.

473. i.e., my life is nearly at an end ; you be careful in your
life, which has not long begun.

474. A rose of the Eternal Garden ; i.e., the soul.

475. “ By the name Muhammad you are sealed ’ ; i.e.,
you are well sealed, as it were, with the name Muhammad,
which means " much praised or praiseworthy ’.

476. i.e., strive to obtain conspicuous praiseworthiness.

477. An attack of robbers on the pilgrims to Mecca is
apparently supposed, during which some needy pilgrim swallows
the little gold he has in order to save it. The robbers are supposed
to see this and to cut open a hundred pilgrims, suspecting them
of a like act. Or it may be that the richer pilgrims, seeing the
needy man committing this act, imitate him and burst.


58


THE HAFT PAIKAR


478. i.e., give them no hold upon you by carelessness.

479. “ This malignly moving hall ” is the sl:y, i.e., fortune.

480. A warning against over confidence on the road of life.

481. A similar thought to that in the preceding distich.
Though you think you are making fine and rapid progress through
the world, you must beware of its pitfalls.

Bdz-i safld, “ white falcon ” (falco gyrfalco). is also a term
applied to the sun. {Cf. the next hemistich.)

482. i.e., keep a bright look out in the world.

483. Kamdn means a bow ”, and also Sagittarius.

Tir is an arrow ", and also the Persian name of the planet
“ Mercury

The sense is that the world is a road where people are hunted by
the skits of the planets and zodiacal signs, i.e., fortune.

484. i.e.. thoush vour cliaracter mav be naturallv strong,
you have the difficulties and attractions of life to contend with,
which may neutralize your efforts.

485. ■“ This beast " is “ the carnal oi' animal soul ", nnfs, and
the sense is that you should not so indulge it that you may not
engage in laudable pursuits and pass with ciedit through life.
(See also Note 2,036.)

486. Daur, " Time," also means ‘‘ Fortune ". “ Two-hued "

refers to the whiteness of day and tlie blackness of night. “ Let
the road, etc. " ; i.e., keep up a cheerful heart.

487. Lit., ■■ the root of it is gladness in the interpretation.”

But I.O. 3IS. 402 has, hdsil-i Cut Uirashi ’.«< dar ta'bir, " the

result of it is gladness, or, it amounts to gladness, in the inter-
pretation."

488. i.e., either from all ties, or from all griefs.

I.O. MS. 402 has :

■ahd bar man hi az halu rasfi, " I take it upon myself (to
promise) that you escape calamity.”

489. Gauhar-l nil:, “ the good pearl,” means also “ the good
nature or temperament ” ; and here, " the man of good nature
or temperament.”

The sense is, Do not separate from such a man.


COMMENTAEY


59


490. “ An evil nature ” ; lit., “ the evil origin,” meaning
“ the man of evil nature ”.

“■ Nature does not err ” is in Arabic, and reads, ad la yulihfi,
but as the Arabic is not strictly correct, and the distich is very
similar to the next one, I should be inclined to take it as an
interpolation.

491. “ The evil nature ” ; lit., “ the evil origin ” meaning
“ the man of evil nature ”.

492. i.e.. you ■will be able to bring affairs to a happy conclusion,
to solve difficulties, etc.

493. i.e.. he 'who is not predestined to be learned is prevented
from becoming so by being ashamed of acquiring knowledge.

494. '■ The Seven Climes " into which Oriental geographers
divided the whole inhabited 'world as known to them. (See
Notes 207, 1,146, and 1,147.)

495. The Author is evidently alluding to verses 4 and 5 of
chapter v. of the Qur'an :

‘ . . . . and that which beasts of prey have (partly) eaten
.... is forbidden you. . . .

.... But ho who is constrained by severe hunger, and has
no inclination to tran.sgress, — truly God is forgiving, merciful.”
By " ha-< no inclination to transgrc.ss is meant, doe.s not wilfully
incline to the sin of uidawful food, and to eating more of it than
is necessary to sustain life.

The sense of the distich is that bv a knowledge of the holy
Law one may know that even unlawful food is sometimes lawful,
and by such knovAalge be justified in eating it.

490. The reference is to the d'-g of the .Seven Sleepers, which
became a man by following them. Cf. Sa'di's GiiUt<irni, :

Saij-i adidh-ihihf riizl ch<tnd pay-i tilkijn (/irift-u ninrdmn shnd :
“ The dog of the Companions of the Cave fora few days followed
the good, and became a man.'’

497. For KJnzr, see Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1.69S.

498. Cf. again the aphorism Fi'il-Oi nl av-rdv, “ Know thyself.’’
(See Note 338.) It is said Man 'anifa najsa-h 'arafa Eabba-h,

“ He who knows himself knows his Lord."


60


THE HAFT PAIKAR


499. “Life’s Water” or “the Water of Life’’, Ab-i Haydt,
is also called Ab-i haivfin, “ the Water of the living animal.”

The meaning of the distich is that the Water of Life is not
the mere animal life, but has to do with the rational soul which
is immortal for him who knows its nature.

500. “ The soul with reason ” ; i.e., the spirit of the ‘Arif,
the mystic “ who knows

501. i.e., “ the soul ” and “ the reason ”, nafs and ‘aql, are
one in “ the spirit ”, ruh, which comes from God.

“ In which (i.e., in the one) you have these two,” observes
the Author ; but he has implied that it is only if you cultivate
the rational soul and learn to know its nature, and so know God,
that you live eternally. (Cf. the last three distichs.)

502. i.e., the soul and reason must be in you only one, the
spirit, which comes from God as absolutely one in the Universal
Spirit. The soul in its formative faculty inclines to special
incarnation, and the result is separation. By renouncing
everything belonging to the phenomenal world, the body, and
the carnal soul, and by giving up all desires, you become again
one in the unity of the spirit, and, in fine, attain to the position
of the Universal Spirit, and to ultimate union with, or rather
immersion in, God.

503. “ Lo.«e the two ’’ ; lit., “ throw low for the two (as it
were in dice).”

504. In the position of Universal Spirit you will be above
earth and heaven.

505. Before the last distich I.O. MS. 1168 has on the margin :

As si bi-gfar hi mazmum ast
va'z du Jiain dar guzar ki an shunt ast :

“ Abandon three, for it is a hlamable act (to retain them) ;
abandon also two, for it is inauspicious (to keep them).” This
is evidently a variant of the present distich.

“ Three ” generally would signify a trinity, and more especially
the Christian Trinity, but here it possibly means the trinity of
percipiens, percepturn, and perceptio, the perceiving subject,
the perceived object, and the act of perception.

The Sufi recognizes these three as an ab,solute unity.


COMMENTARY


61


“ Two ” generally would mean the Duality of Zoroastrianism,
but it seems unlikely that the Author is warning his son against
this ; hence the meaning here is probably that explained in Notes
501 and 502.

The Author, however, may be making a tran.=:ition to the
subject of revealed religiocis, and warning his son against all
those which do not teach the absolute unity inculcated by the
teaching of Islam, and, in a deeper sense, by that of Sufiism.
(See the next distich but one.)

506. See the last Note.

507. Sdlis salasa is from the Arabic fhdIitJiu thaldthatin, “ a
third one of three,” i.e., " a Person of the Trinity ” ; but it is used
to express one who acknowledges a Trinity of three Persons,
i.e., a Christian. Here, however, it seems used in the sense
of Trinitarianism. (See the last distich but one.)

“ You’ll not bear o'er the sky the ball of Unity ’’ ; i.e., you will
not rise above the heavens in your appreciation of the Unity.

508. The Author seems to be hinting at revealed religions
here by the words ” fables ” and “ medium ”. When you have
found the unity of all things in God you have all, you are saved.
No words of religion are required, no medium is wanted for your
possession of that unity, or rather your existence in and as it.

509. I.O. MS. 1168, and the B. ed. of 1328 for mdyn. “ capital,
origin, root of a thing,"’ have fdya. " rank, grade, dignity.”

510. A person of graceful and straight figure is often likened
to a cypress.

“ Remedy ” ; lit., “ mummy,’’ which was supposed to be
efficacious in many maladies, including fractures.

511. “ My tulips ” ; i.e., ” my cheeks.” “ My violets ” ; i.e.,
“ my hair.”

512. i.e., powerless to act either as lord or servant.

513. I.O. MS. 1168 has ahmarak, a little ruddy man,”
but most MSS. read Ahmadak. ” little Ahmad,” which I presume
would mean here a little man below the normal size.

Ahmadak is absurdly explained by Steingass as “ a handsome
youth who has become pock-marked’’. This looks hke a mis-
conception of the distich in question.


62


THE HAFT PAIKAR


514. i.e., the protecting shadow of the king.

515. i.e., my accomplishments, my merit, and sincerity
are my shield in the world, (Cf. the next distich,)

516. I am making the best of I.O. MS. 777,

Hlch has pish na-ngaram ha man. 1168 has,

HlcJi ka-'^ na-n'garam zi man bd man. 402 does not include the
distich. 1491 has,

Hich kas mst na-ngarad hd man. The B. ed. of 1328 has,

Hich kas mst hi-)i'garnm Id man.

This last may be rendered,

“ There is no person I see up to myself, " where “ up to myself ”
would probably mean excluding myself ”,

517. “ This stigma ” ; lit,, “ this calamity or e-vil ” ; i.e., “ the
calamity of this impression.”

I.O. MS. 1168 seems to offer the only probable reading in the
first hemistich. It has,

Na-ki hi sikka naqd-i md ddrad, reading, however, na-ki in
one word, naki.

518. Lit,, “ give mo the mummy,” a remedy used in many
maladies, including fractures.

519. This may be a reference to the Qur'an, xx., 27,

Wa-ijnssir U amr-7. *’ and make my work easy for me.”

Or it is possibly a reference to the prayer. Rabh-'i. yassir, wa-ld
tuassir, '■ 0 my Lord, make (it) easy, and not difficult.”

520. Halva. (See Note 1,459.)

521. The “ sharp dagger ’’ is “ the white streak of the dawn ”,

522. i.e., write the poem.

523. i.e.. the author of the poem.

524. “ Two-coloured,"’ in respect of day and night.

525. Et rubinus ct Jlavi coloris lapis hie forlasse membrum virile
significant.

“ An amber-coloured (stone) ; ” lit., “ an amber-coloured
thing.”

526. Vazdijard I., surnamed Al-Atldm. The Sinner,” has
been generally represented by Oriental historians as a cruel and
intolerant prince. M'estern historians on the other hand generally


COJDIENTARY


63


speak well of liim. That he was not tolerant is evident from the
fact that he first persecuted the Zoroastrians in favour of
Christianity, to which he had leanings, and later the Christians,
through fear of their excessive zeal and of rebellion amongst
his Zoroastrian subjects.

In the Siydsat-nilma of Xizamu TAIulk (see Note 309) a detailed
account of his death by the kick of a mysterious horse is given.
He had reigned from a.d. 399 to 420. and was succeeded by his
son Bahram V.

For accounts of him consult Firdausi's Shnh-namd, Mlrlhvdnd,
Tabari. Sir John Malcolm's of Persia, and Canon

Rawlinson's Seventh OiiettUd Mouarthij.

527. “ One struck ” ; i.e.. Yazdijard ojipressed his subjects.

“ The other cherished ” ; i.e.. Bahram cherished his subjects.

“ Rock with ruby." An allusion to the ruby's supposed
growing in the rock or stone.

“■ Spines with dates.'’ The " spines ", J:hdr, often spoken of
in connexion with dates, are those on the stem of the date-palm.

528. ‘‘ A remedy " ; lit.. " mummy," used in various maladies,
including fractures.

529. Lit.. ■■ the first day the dawn, etc." : i.e.. when Bahram
was born, and the dark nidit of tyranny was changed to the
dawn of justice bv his birth and promising horoscope.

530. i.e., the alchemists of the sky, the astrologers.

531. i.e., they scarcelv expected to find a good horoscope for
Yazdijard's son.

532. i.e., the son promised to be a great contrast to his father.

533. In this and the following four distichs the horoscope of
Bahrfim is very lightly and imperfectly sketched.

It is of course sujiposed to be entirely favourable, but as
regards the " aspects ” of the planets to one another nothing
definite can be deduced owing to the fact that the Author, though
assigning certain planets to certain zodiacal " houses does not
state in degrees the position of each planet. Since, however,
the horoscope is supposed to be entirely favourable, we should
conclude that the " aspects " are good, and as a matter of fact
thev can, I think, be so placed in the " houses of the signs in
which they are situated as to be so.


64


THE HAFT PAIKAR


W'itli regard to the fosition of the planets the following remarks
may be made :

The sun is in “ strength ” or “ exaltation ” in Aries. This
indicates that the higher spirit has full force, and inclines to all
that is lofty and aspiring. Aries implies impulse, assertiveness,
generosity, and intuition. The moon is in exaltation in Taurus.
She represents generally receptivity. She is,” says Alan Leo,
“ the collector of aspects and influences, and acts only in
accordance with the sign that she is in, having no definite nature
of her own ; she is in fact coloured, as it were, bv the si^n through
which she passes. . . . Her office and mission is to reflect the light.
As she passes out from the sun she gathers up the influences on
her way until she reaches the full ; thence she returns later with
the fruits of experience to the sun.” She will thus, being in
exaltation in Taurus, give full effect to the influences of that
sign, which are fearlessness, strong will, constancy, and deter-
mination.

“ Mercury,” says the same author, “ depends chiefly upon
aspects to other planets and to position, but in the main is
imaginative, sharp, witty, logical, oratorical, and studious.”
He. in fact, governs imagination, thought, wisdom, and eloquence.

Being in exaltation in Gemini, all these qualities are confirmed
by the nature of that sign, which is dualistic, restless, and
intellectual.

Venus, representing love, refinement, fondness for pleasure
and art, has also full force, being in exaltation in Pi.sces, which is
emotional, kind, and generous. She and Jupiter together are the
“ ruling planets ”, being in the house of the ascendant ” Pisces.

“ Venus is considered,” saj's Alan Leo, “ the most fortunate
planet under which to be born. It will awaken the love and
emotional side of the nature of those under its influence. ... It
w'ill also give them a keen apjucciation of art and beauty, and
stimulate all the pleasure-loving inclinations. They will be
attended by fortune, more or less, throughout the w'hole life'.s
journey, and, even when under some adverse fate, their star will
be shining behind the blackest cloud.”

The ascendant Pisce.s, in which Venus is in exaltation, would
enhance the emotional tendency. With Venus is conjoined
Jupiter as joint ruler in his own sign Pisces.


COMMENTAEY


65


This, savs Alan Leo, “ will give an abundance of life and
vitalitv. Those born under its influence are cheery and hopeful
in disposition, possessing a noble and generous spirit. . . . They
are faithful, prudent, just, and honourable.”

Since .Jupiter, being in Pisces, is in his own house ", the
influence of the sign would be to increase the tendency to kindness
and generosity. With regard to Mars and Saturn nothing can,
I think, be said, except that if in opposition, as one may possibly
deduce from the description, they might tend to correct each
other to some extent. Those subject to Mars are bold, impulsive,
aggressive, contentious, sensual and lavish, whilst those subject
to Saturn are cautious, reflective, constant, patient, chaste,
and economical. Saturn being in its own house, Aquarius,
would be strengthened by that sign’s qualities, which are
intellectual and retentive, studious and thoughtful. I do not
know what is meant by the statement that the tail of Draco is
turned towards Saturn. Amongst the planetary symbols, Alan Leo
in his Practical Asiroloij)j includes the head and the tail of Draco,
but he does not say anything about their respective influences.

534. In the first hemistich in the words “ that region ” the
stress is, I think, rather laid on “ that ”. Then in the second
hemistich the Arabic proverb would mean wherever there are
“ regions or cities ”, biqn'. there are '* states ”, duval, and that no
particular region is required to give state. Wa-llahu a'lam !

535. 1.0. MS. 402 oSers, I think, the best reading :

Pidar az mihr-i zindagdni-yi u dur sJiud ru zi-mihrbdni-yi u,

but z-u should of course be read for ric in the second hemistich.
In the first hemistich too I should suggest bahr for mihr, but
this is not absolutely necessary. With rnihr one would render,

“ His father through love of his life.’’ The other I.O. MSS.
I have consulted read in the second hemistich,
durtar shud zi-rnihrhdni-yi u,

“ became at some distance from the love of him.”

This would mean “ became at some distance, so that he could
not indulge in his love for him ”.

536. “ Canopus," a star of the first magnitude in the rudder of
the constellation Aryo, a Argus. It is often associated with
Yaman. Arabia Felix, over which it is said to shine with peculiar
brightness.

F


66


THE HAFT PAIKAR


“ Canopus-like ” ; i.e., associated with Yaman as Canopus,
or bright and exalted as Canopus ; or both.

537. Nu'man was the ruler of the small kingdom of Hira
in ‘Iraq ‘Arab! (Babylonia), which was subject to Persia until
conquered by Khalid under Abu Bakr, the first Khalif, in a.d. 633.
The chief town, Hira, according to Canon G. Rawlinson, lay
almost due south of the town of Kufa, in about latitude 31° 50' N.
and longitude 44° 20' E.

Istakhrl, the geographer (about a.d. 950), however, places
it about four miles north-west of Kufa and the western branch
of the Euphrates. It is a mistake of Nizami’s to say that Nu‘man
was king of Yaman in South Arabia.

538. Lala-yi la‘I, “ the anemone of ruby,” i.e., “ the ruby
anemone,” is called Idla-yi Xu‘mdn, and shaqd’iq-i Nu‘mdn,
“ the anemone of Nu‘man.” It is said to have received the last
two names on account of its having been a favourite flower of
one of the kings of Hira named Nu‘man.

Nu'man is here likened to “ the garden ” as the destined
guardian of Bahram, “ the ruby anemone.”

539. i.e., strewed or scattered the flowers of education and
care in bringing him up.

“ A Nu'manian anemone ” ; i.e., one cultivated, fostered,
and developed, as it were, by Nu'man.

540. The first “ litter ” means a room in the king’s palace,
or the palace itself.

“ The moon ” ; i.e., Bahram.

541. i.e., Munzir, the son of Nu'man.

The kings of Hira were named in regular alternate succession
Nu'man and Munzir, Munzir and Nu‘man.

542. i.e., grow up, gaining strength.

543. Lit., “ in such a search.”

544. It seems from the following distich that they sought
not only a high place but also a suitable fort or castle upon it.
I think therefore that sdz in this distich may be conveniently
rendered “ fort or castle ”, though it really signifies ‘‘ suitable
means or apphances, or anything fitted for a business ”.


COMMENTAEY


67


545. I.O. MS. 1168, and the B. ed. of 1328 have, anchundn jd,
“ such a place,” but the other I.O. editions which I have con-
sulted read, anchundn diz, “ such a castle or fort.”

546. Rum is a name which was formerly applied to the
whole territories of the lower or eastern Roman empire and Asia
Minor. The name has in modern times been given by the
Persians to the Ottoman empire.

It may also be often conveniently rendered Greece. (See also
Note 700.)

547. i.e., could fashion stone as he pleased.

548. Sam, the grandfather of Rustam, the Persian champion.
(For Rustam see Notes 212, 1,035, and 2,078.)

549. “ Ornamentists.” The word so rendered is naqqdsh,
“ a sculptor, an engraver, a painter.”

550. “ The Hindus ” ; i.e., the slaves.

551. “ The astrolabian spider,” i.e., “ the spider of the
astrolabe,” is the centre of the plate of the astrolabe called the
rele, which latter is similar to a spider’s web. On it are given
the positions of the fixed stars and of the signs of the zodiac.
The distich signifies that by means of the astrolabe he had
mapped out the sky. (See Chaucer’s Treatise on the Astrolabe.)

552. Pbny ; in Persian, Balinas.

553. A talisman is a magic image which is supposed to have
the power to hinder people from approaching places near which
it is put, and also to prevent people from finding buried treasures.
The belief in them may no doubt be traced to the Accadians
who preceded the Semites in Chaldaea. (See also Note 1,490.)

554. “ The veiled ones of the sky ” ; i.e., “ the stars.”

“ The moon’s night-raids, the sun’s hostihty ” ; i.e., the evil
influences of the moon and the sun.

555. i.e., when Nu‘man, moved by the reputation of Simnar,
became eager for his presence.

556. Lit., “ he made his business right.”

557. “ Iron-like.” Ahan-band means literally “ iron-jointed,
iron-plated ”, and also ” iron-binding ”.

The term may apply both to the resolution with which he
conducted the work, and also to the hard labour he expended upon


6S


THE HAFT PAIKAR


it, as well as perhaps to some of the material, “ iron,'’ which he
used in the work.

558. “ Clay,” gil ; presumably, gil-i hihnnt, “ mud-cement.”

559. The palace is likened to one ol the skies on account, no
doubt, of having a dome. It is a sky in repose whilst the skies
are circling round it in constant movement.

560. i.e., one round which the universe revolves ; the centre
or pivot of the universe.

561. The Zeuxian work of countless fantasies ” :

tangalushd-yi sad hazdr Miyid.

AH the I.O. MSS. and printed editions are very corrupt in
the beginning of this second hemistich, but the word tangalushd
may undoubtedly be evolved from them. Tangalusha means the
paintings, school, or work of Zeuxis, the Grecian painter, who
flourished from 425 to 400 b.c.

Under the corrupted name Losha (modern Lusha) he enjoyed
amongst the Persians as great celebrity as the famous painter
ManI (Manes), the founder of Manicheeism,

Tang, it should be added, means “ paintings, school, or work ”,
but Artang (the fuller form of the word) meant originally the book
of the religious teachings of ManI adorned by his paintings.

562. Imba, rendered “ head dress ”, is “ a band, fillet, or
kerchief bound round the head ”.

563. i.e., its roof was highly varnished.

564. “ For more or less time.”

This, I think, is the most probable sense of az shitdh-u dirang,
lit., ” of hastiness or slowness.” It can scarcely have a subjective
signification.

565. A bride, presumably, in the course of the day appeared
in dress of three different colours, each assumed at a different
time.

566. “ The three-coloured silk which circles round ” is “ the
sky ”, which was supposed to move rapidly round the earth.

567. i.e., it took its colour from the atmosphere. The Author
means probably that in the day time it was mostly white, and at
night black. But the distich as a lesumi of those which precede
it is impossible, and it is equally impossible taken in any other


COMMENTAEY


69


way. It appears to want before it a distich, though I have
not found any except in I.O. MS. 1168, which gives,

Chunhi khvarshid dar ghuruh shudl dsmdn-vdr bl ‘uyuh shudl.

This, however, does not offer much sense, and simply suggests
that some distich was at least felt to be required here.

568. i.e., the artist must be encouraged and stimulated by
generosity.

“ The meat,” kabdb, which is, generally, roast, baked,
or broiled meat. More particularly, as here, it means pieces
of meat roasted on a spit or skewer. (See also Note 1,340.)

569. i.e., no one can have nobihty and greatness of character
who is not generous.

A diram was a silver coin worth about twopence. At an earlier
time in history it was worth about sixpence. The word is
used in a general sense for “ money

570. “ In these bounds ” ; i.e., “ within these limits of the
castle.” Or it might be, “ in this district or region.”

“ Chinese work.” The Chinese artists, as well as the Grecian,
were held in high estimation by the Persians. Here, however,
“ Chinese work ” means probably work as beautiful as that of
Chinese artists.

571. “ When I designed,” or possibly, “ when I set to work,”
or “ when I determined ”, the expression ba-vaqt-i baslch being
ambiguous.

572. Ydqiit means ruby, sapphire, or topaz, according as it
is qualified by the adjective red, blue, or yellow, but when without
such qualifying adjective it signifies ruby.

573. Lit., “ shows its face in one-domedness.”

574. “ The sky ” ; i.e., the seven different skies of the seven
planets.

575. i.e., the danger comes from close connexion.

576. “ Root and branch,” blkh-u bar ; lit., ‘‘ root and fruit,”
or “ root and blossoms ”. Or bar might be taken as a synonym
and corroborative of bikh.

577. “ The object of his work,” nishdna-yi kdr-ash, means
first, “ the castle,” and secondly, “ the reward expected.”

578. Gaz, an eU of 42 inches, or a cubit of about 26 inches.


70


THE HAET PAIKAR


579. i.e., that death would come from falling from the roof
of the building if it were high.

580. Lit., “ became a garden or grove with such (power of)
giving repose to the heart.”

581. A reference to the old star-worship.

582. Iram. See Notes 90, 1,203, and 1,605.

583. The sign Aries is, as it were, an adorner of the world
with the flowers of Spring when the sun enters it at the beginning
of that season.

584. A metaphor implying that he was sure to find joy.

Venus, the minstrel of the sky, is mentioned appositely with

Bahram, which besides being a name of men means Mars.

585. The sun is in the fourth sky, and therefore “ within ” ;
the moon is in the first sky, and hence ” without ”.

586. By “ the sun within ” are meant the brilliant decorations
inside of the palace ; and by “ the moon without ”, the resplendent
reflection cast by its domed roof.

587. Furdt, “ sweet (water),” is also the name of the Euphratesj

“ The Stream of Life.” (See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.)

588. “ The Sidra-throne ” is the heavenly lotus tree in which
Gabriel is supposed to rest. Here the village is likened to it on
account of its verdure.

589. Lit., “ on that Kayanian roof.” The Kayanian was
the second dynasty of Persian kings.

590. Shushtar, or Shushtar, is the modern capital of the
province of Khuzistan (Susiana), otherwise called ‘Arabistan
on account of its numerous Arab inhabitants. Shushtar is on
the Liver Karun, and between it and the town of Bihbahan is
one of the most beautiful and fertile valleys of Persia. Hence
the Author’s expression, “ All the plain was (as) the expanse
of Shushtar.”

About 36 miles west of Shushtar are the ruins of Susa, the
ancient capital, and the favourite winter residence of the
Akhsemenian kings of Persia.

Its modern Arab name Sus now generally prevails in the
province, though the Persian name is Shush.


COMMENTAEY


71


Tustar is said to be an older name of the modern Shushtar or
Shiisbtar. (See also Note 1,067.)

591. Kabg-i darl is explained by the Farhang-i Shu‘ur'i as a
more elegant and beautiful species of partridge, i.e., presumably,
than the kabg-i gJiair-i darl. Some authorities, however, explain
it as “ the mountain partridge ”. It is said to be larger than
the other species mentioned.

592. Lit., “ from this colour and scent.”

593. “Firm and forceful,” sakkt-kusJi ; lit., “striving,
contending bard ” ; perhaps, “ strenuous, energetic in worldly
afiairs.”

The reading sakht-gush, “ deaf,” is not, I think, admissible
here.

594. “ Seven fortresses ” ; i.e., “ the seven skies.”

The Author likens the words of the vazir in their power to
move to a crane fancied poetically by him to have served to
raise and move the seven skies into their places.

595. This and the preceding distich occur only in I.O. MS. 1168.
The present distich reads in 1168 as follows :

Mail-i dill kard-u dil zi-khvad bar tdft
ha-yaki laJtza kdr-i khvad dar ydft.

Dih, “ village,” would mean “ the spiritual world ”, but it is
possible that the correct reading may be either rail, “ path,”
i.e., here, “ the spiritual path,” or dil, “ heart.”

Adopting either of these words one would render,

“ He sought the path (or his heart) and turned his heart from
self, (and) understood his business in a trice.”

The heart, in Sufi teaching, is when purified the place of
manifestation of the glory and beauty of the Deity. He who
finds the heart finds God. Cf. the term sdkib-dil, “ a master of
heart, a Sufi.”

596. Lit., “ he packed up his effects from that office of (King)
Solomon.” Solomon is a type of very powerful kings, and was
said to have also control over the jinn or genii, including the
fairies.

597. Munzir, the son of Nu'man.

598. Dud, “ smoke,” means also “ affliction ”.


72


THE HAFT PAIKAE


599. Lit., “ lie brought the dominion to its own proper
arrangement, settlement, or stability ” ; i.e., he consolidated
the government.

600. “ Scattered pearls " ; i.e., spoke with eloquence.

601. Lit., a scholastic Magian.

602. I.O. MS. 1168, only, reads.

Bud ustud-i hd maMbat-u mihr,

“ A master he majestic and benign.”

603. i.e.. lay open before him like caskets of jewels.

604. “ Lines geometrical ” ; i.e., “ geometrical figures,

geometry.”

“ The MijastI ” ; i.e., Ptolemy's work on astronomy
/jc'/fCTT)/, from the adjective of which the Arabs by prefixing
al have formed the term Al-Mijasft, “ the Almagest.”

605. Ab-gun, “ water-coloured,” means “ blue ”, and also

“ lustrous ”. C£. dbi, watery, blue.”

606. i.e., he had studied the sky in full detail.

607. The “ store-houses ” are the “ stars ” — “ far-seeing ”
as knowing future events.

608. i.e., by the guidance of the astrolabe and astronomical
tables he would obtain a clear view of the mysteries of the
heavens.

609. Lit., “ the polo-stick=playing sky.” The polo-stick of
the sky is its curve.

“ To bear oft the ball ” means “ to excel and the sense of the
hemistich is that he exceeded the sky in rapidity.

610. i.e., by skill in arms and horsemanship.

611. “ Dawn’s sword ” ; i.e., the white streak of the dawn.
“Despaired”; lit., “threw away (its) shield,” “its shield”
being presumably “ the sun

612. Ja‘b, an Arabic verbal noun, means “ throwing prostrate,
knocking down”. Ja‘ba would therefore signify “one act of
knocking down ”. The ordinary meaning of jaba is “ quiver ”,
so that the apparent sense is, “ he planted a quiver upon the
mark.”

613. i.e., it turned into a stream of fiery sparks.


COMMENTARY


73


614. i.e., curls from the manes.

615. The “ lock ” is supposed to be a padlock with a ring,
which is cut through by his sword.

616. i.e., presumably, would split a hair.

617. “ From him ” ; i.e., as if he were the hon, and they
boasted of being like him.

618. “ Yaman's star ” ; i.e., Canopus. (See Note 536.)

619. Adlm, “ goats’ leather,” for which Yaman was famous,
means also a tract, a surface, an expanse”, so that it may be
rendered “ tracts, land, or regions ”.

“ (all) rawness took away ” ; i.e., “ brightened.”

In connexion with the other sense of adim, namely, “ leather,”
it should be explained that the rays of Canopus were supposed
to have a brightening eflect upon raw leather.

620. Nu'mln, the son of Munzir, and the grandson of the
Nu'man to whom Bahram was entrusted.

621. i.e., to give eclat to society.

622. Lit., '■ gave him the delight of riding.” This might
mean “ taught him riding if it had not previously been stated
that he had acquired perfection in that art. (But see the next
distich.)

623. All the I.O. MSS. and printed copies I have consulted
read,

Murda-yl gur biid dar nahhchir murda-rd kai buvad zi-gur
guz'ir.

" He was the dead one of the onager in the chase — how can
the dead avoid the tomb ? ’’

Seeing no sense in this, I have translated from the reading of
the B. ed. of 1328, except in substituting mard for rnurda in
the second hemistich :

Mard-i dah gur bud dar nakhcJur mard-rd kai buvad zi-gur
guzlr.

The sense and rhetorical merit of the distich depend upon the
two meanings of gur, namely, “ onager ” and “ tomb ”.

624. i.e., the arrow was entombed in the eye of an onager,
the first gur meaning " onager ", and the second, “ tomb.” (See
the last Note.)


74


THE HAFT PAIKAK


625. i.e., the fairy was hopeless of her beauty before its
superior beauty and symmetry, and the hurricane was powerless
to compete with it in swiftness ; its occupation was gone.

626. i.e., surpassed the sun and moon in rapidity.

627. i.e., it was related to the sky in fleetness, and could afford
to give the wind a stage's start, lit., precedence.

628. Lit., “ It's tail had produced the writhings of a hundred
snakes.”

In this hemistich the double meaning is fairly well
represented. The sense is that the twistings of its tail surpassed
the writhings of the snake, and so produced writhings in the snake,
namely, those of envy.

In the second hemistich allusion is made to the strenuous
galloping and hard trampling of the horse, which dug graves
{gur), as it were, for the onagers (gur).

Another sense may be that its hoofs were so supeiior to those
of the onager that they killed it with envy. (See Note 623.)

629. An expression of its swiftness, the onager being one of
the fleetest of animals.

630. Lit., “ from weariness of things.”

631. i.e., from its galloping all over the hunting-ground the
latter became filled with designs made by its shoes.

632. The word gard has here apparently the senses of gardldan,
“ revolving,” of ravuj, “ passing current, currency, briskness
of market,” and of raunag, “ glory, splendour,” the last two
senses deriving from the first. It may also have, fourthly, the
sense of gJiubdr, “ dust.’’

First, compared with the swiftness of the horse the sky did
not (seem even to) revolve.

Secondly, on account of that swiftness the sky had no market.

Thirdly, compared with that swiftness it had no glory or
splendour.

Fourthly, it did not see the dust raised by it (in its swift
galloping), much less could the dust overtake it.

For the first three senses cf. dar gard budan ; silsila-yi fuldn
chlz ba-gard drnadan ; and nz gard uftddan. For the fourth.
ba-gard rasidan.


COMMENTARY


75


633. Az sar afgandan means “ to throw down forcibly
Az sar-u puslit afgandan would be a stronger expression of the
same.

G34. Lit., “ the officenship of the plain.”

635. I.O. MS. 402, and the B. ed. of 1328, have banda-i-ra
zi-band hi-g’shddl, “ he would loosen a captive from (its) bonds.”

636. “ King,” Gurhhdn ; a title assumed (though not in
that form) by Yelui Tashi, the founder of the Qara-Khitay
dynasty in Chinese Turkistan. After the defeat of King Sanjar,
the Seljuqide, in 1141 by the then Qara-Khitay ruler, the latter
took possession of Transoxiana, which was held by the dynasty
till their downfall in 1210. The title Gurl-licin, which is said on
Muslim authority to mean Khdn-i Khdnan, " King of Kings,”
is applied here to the dedicatee as a compliment. (See also
supplementary Note at end of Commentary, and Note 2,002.)

637. “ A place of tombs,” gur-'khdna (lit., ” house of tombs ”),
means here the world ”.

Ants and snakes are supposed to abound in cemeteries.

638. “ That land " ; lit., '• that country and the house-
surroundings,” if diydr-u diman be the correct reading. Or since
diydr is a plural of ddr, " house,” and dima)i moans ” rubbish or
debris lying about houses ”, — one might say ” surroundings ”, —
we may render, “ the houses and their surroundings,” but the
idea is “ the land or country ” generally.

The B. ed. of 1328 has, however, an diydr-u zanian, “ that
country and time.”

639. i.e., who himself, Bahram, surpassed the sky in swiftness
and exaltitude, in contradistinction to Bahram (Mars), who is
not supposed to do so.

640. i.e., was enjoying the pleasure of the chase.

641. Lit., “ the sky became completely one with the earth.”

642. “ Like flowing water ” ; i.e., “ swiftly.”

643. Panja is “ the open hand ; the hand of man, or the foot
of beasts and birds viewed as an instrument of prehension ”.
That it also means “ claws ” is evident from the terms panja
tiz kardan and panja zadan.


76


THE HAFT PAIKAR


644. “ From above ” ; i.e., from the onager’s back.

645. I take the reading of I.O. MS. 1168, and point as follows :

Safta bar suft-i shir-u gur nishast ;
siifta, az liar dii svft birun jast,

reading sfta as safia in the first hemistich, and as sufta in the
second, and rendering suft in the first hemistich “ shoulder ”,
and in the second “ hole

646. Lit., “ the story of the lion and onager became long.”

647. “ The picture ” ; lit., “ that embroidery.”

648. I read,

Ruzi-y-az rauza-yl bihishti-yi hhvish
hard bar mai ravdna kasJiti-yi khylsh.

Kashtl means “ a ship ” and also “ a wine-bowl of that shape

Rauza means “■ a garden ” or ‘‘ a grove ”, but here, as in a
previous passage, it apparently means “ the palace ”.

The preposition az before rauza seems to point to the action’s
beginning.

649. i.e., jirepared to kill them.

650. i.e., by her beauty.

651. “A musky line”; i.e., “a black line.” “Streak on
streak ” ; lit., “ spot upon spot.”

652. Lit., “ from its fellow-runners.”

653. The first hemistich describes the russet verging upon
yellow colour of the onager. The second speaks of the white
or cream-coloured parts of the body. The face is perhaps the
ruddiest part.

654. The Arabs made their arrows of reeds. The onager’s
leg is peculiarly straight, with joints like those of the reed.

655. “ A diamond dagger ” ; i.e., “ a bright dagger.” The
onager’s ears are very white and bright, particularly in summer.

656. The breast stands out free from the shoulder which
is peculiarly flat.

657. I read katdra, “ dagger,” with I.O. MS. 777.

The ear stands upright away from the neck.


COMMENTARY


77


658. I read for the second hemistich with the B. ed. of 1328 :

mdnda zin-huha-rd miyun-i du rah.

Most of the I.O. MSS. and printed editions have,
mdnda zin-kdh-rd miydna du rah.

By “ the strap ” is meant the dark line along the back.

“ The saddle-pommel ” is the ridge on the back near the neck.

The “ two roads ” are two white lines on each side of the
central dark line.

Kiiha, “ pommel,” means also “ hill ”, so that, in a secondary-
sense, it is as if a hiU were standing between two roads.

659. The secondary meaning of the first hemistich is,

“ The deviation of its crupper (in colour) from the dark part
of the skin.”

The meaning is that it gained by the contrast of colour, as
the brightness of silver is enhanced when it is set against some-
thing dark. Kullun ya'izzu min diddi-h, “ Everything is
enhanced by its opposite.”

660. There is a suggestion of a secondary sense in pih, “ fat,”
and khun, “ blood,” which both mean pride ”.

661. One species of marvel of Peru, the sahrd-yi or “ wild”,
is, says Vullers, alba et rubra. I have omitted in translation
the distich which follows the present one, as it seems to me to
have no sense. It does not occur in I.O. MS, 1168.

The least unintelligible reading is, I think, that of I.O. MS.
1491 :

Rangi-y-az khun bar-u duvdl-anddz rdst cJiun Zangi-yi duvalak-
bdz.

662. The tail is closely joined to the hind-quarters.

By’ the second hemistich the Author means probably that it
was proud and contumacious. The onager is certainly a deter-
mined biter and kicker.

663. “ The lion ” ; i.e., Bahram.

664. Gur in the first hemistich means “ onager ”, and in the
second “ grave ”.

665. Gurkhdn. (See Note 636.)

Here, however, the terra, which may bear the sense of wild-
ass = King, is applied to Baliram as an ardent hunter of the
onager. (See also Note 2,002.)


78


THE HAFT PAIKAR


666. Some I.O. MSS. and the B. ed. of 1328 have kas, “ a
person,” instead of has, but the latter word seems to have here
the sense of qat‘ kun, i.e., “ cut off, omit (the idea of).”

667. By “ plain ” is meant presumably the ordinary hunting-
ground.

668. I read with I.O. MS. 402,

kuh az-cin kith-para Inch shiida.

Most I.O. MSS. read.

ba-shikar-afganl hasich shitda. but I do not think we can
have hasich shvda for hasich karda. It might possibly, however,
be used in an impersonal way.

669. The “ fire ” is that which comes from the dragon’s
mouth ; the “ smoke ” is its long black body.

670. Azhdaha, “ a dragon.” means also “ a brave man ”.

671. Lit., “ I, and justice to the onager, and giving redress.”

672. “ Two-headed shafts.” The word used is iniqrdza,
which means “ an instrument like a pair of scissors ”, and signifies
here a double-headed arrow formed to cut as well as pierce.
(See Note 1,885.) The Persians made their arrows of wood —
commonly of the white poplar. The Arabs made theirs of
reeds. (Cf. Note 654.)

673. Tiiz or titzh (archaic tdz or tdzh) is the bark of a tree
used for covering saddles, bows, etc.

674. Lit., “ when the plain became narrow to the dragon.”

675. Ndchakh seems to be used by Nizami in the sense of
“ a short javelin ”. The dictionaries give also the senses of
“battle-axe”, “halbert”, and “two-headed spear”. For the
length of the ndchakh, cf, the distich ;

Chiindn zad bar-ii ndchakhi nuh girih
ki ham kalhiid sufta shud ham zirih :

“ He gave him such a stroke of the twenty-two inch javebn
that both (his) coat of mail and also (his) body were pierced.”
The girih is “ three finger-breadths ”, so that nuh girih, “ nine
girih,” would be about twenty-two inches.

676. All the I.O. MSS. and printed copies I have consulted,
except 1168, read hashl-musht. 1168 has hasht-pusht. The
B. ed. of 1328 has hashl-hakhsh. The first means “ eight-fisted ” ;


COMMENTAEY


79


the second “ eight-backed ” ; the third “ eight-giving ”, or “ eight-
portioned Only the first two need, I think, be considered.

The literal sense of the first can be only “ having eight handles ”,
or “ having the length of eight fists “ Having eight handles,”
taken literally, would be a perfectly useless qualification, since a
javelin could be brandished only by holding it in a particular part.

“ Having the length of eight fists ” is, however, quite probable,
since “ fist ” is used as a measure of length.

The second epithet, shash-paklu, six-sided,” is also, I think,
to be taken literally, since it is not improbable that the javelin
was sometimes made sexagonal. If pusht be the correct reading,
it cannot, I think, be taken literally, since the meaning, “ blade
(of a sword),” the only one applicable, though given by Vullers,
is undoubtedly a misinterpretation, the word push in his
illustrative quotation having the sense of “ back (of a sword)
Now a javelin has no back, and therefore pusht must be taken
metaphorically. Hasht-pusht would therefore presumably mean
“ giving strenuous support ”, one sense of pusht being “ support

In this case the second epithet, shash-pahiu, would mean,
I think, khaill pahlu-ddr, i.e., “ most beneficial or helpful,” one
sense of pahlu being “ benefit ”, or “ utility ”.

677. All except I.O. MS. 1491 have sutiin-i dirakhl, “ the
column of a tree,” i.e., “ a column-like tree.”

678. i.e., it can soar above it.

679. Ahrinian, the principle of evil, opposed to Hurmuzd
(Hormuzd), the principle of good.

It also means “ a fiend, a demon ”.

680. I am reading, with I.O. MS. 1168, na-did qarar. Some
editions have, bi-dld qarar. If this be taken, the translation
should be, “ When the onager saw that the king was at rest ” ;
i.e., that he was at liberty from all he had been doing.

681. Gurlchan. (See Notes 636, 665, and 2,002.)

Gur-khdna, lit., “ a tomb-house,” means “ a grave-yard, a

tomb ”, and also “ a cavern ”.

Dar khum kardan, “ to put into a jar,” has the appearance of
an idiom, but the dictionaries do not give it.

Darfuqai kardan, " to put into a beer-jar or jug,” means “ to
try to delude ”. (See C. E. Wilson's Translation of Eumi’s
Masnavi, Book II.)


80


THE HAFT PAIKAR


682. Ravdn. “ lawful, licit,” means primarily “ moving
It might here be also rendered “ immediately

683. Hisab-i liasl bd Ihvad Icardan is not explained in the
dictionaries, but the sense is obvious.

684. The ant is a tvpe of lowliness and weakness, so that the
second hemistich would express the king's great power and
courage, as the first does his clemency.

685. i.e., to the king of Persia.

686. Mushrij, an officer in a treasury who authenticates
accounts and writings.

687. I read with the B. ed. of 1328, Y-inchunin ganj-khdna-i
ki gushdd.

The nearest to this are I.O. MSS. 402 and 1168 ; 402 has,

Inchmun ganj-i ganj-khdiia gushdd.

1168 has,

V-inchunln ganj-u ganj-khdna gushdd.

688. Ba-azizl sitad ba-khvdrl ddd.

I.O. MS. 402, only, has,

Jumla bakhshld-u ddda ddd bi-ddd, ddda being of course a
mistake for ddd-i.

689. Lit., “ the king ” ; i.e., Bahram. Bahram has generally
been called king ” m compliment, but I have rendered generally
“ prince ” for the sake of clearness.

Besides this, the title sMh is often applied to a prince. (Cf.
especially the Shdh-ndma.)

690. i.e., the room was so beautifully adorned with paintings
that it was like a store-house of treasure.

691. It is evident from this and a former passage (see the
distich before that to which Note 559 is appended) that kdr-gdh
is used in the sense of a work of art, or a place containing works
of art, as well as in that of a place where work is done, i.e., a
factory, ofifice, or studio.

692. It is clear from this and a former distich (see that to
which Note 540 is appended) that the word ‘amdrl, " an elephant-
litter,” is used in the sense of “ room ”, or “ house ”.


COMMENTARY


81


693. “ India’s raja ” ; i.e., the raja of Qinnauj. Albiruni
gives rdbl as the special title of the rajas of Qinnauj, which was,
according to Istakhri, the geographer (about a.d. 950), the capital
of India.

Albiruni (quoted by R. C. Dutt) says that in the 11th century
“ the whole of northern India was divided into small Rajput
kingdoms and principalities which formed a strong confederation
of Hindu nations. Rajyapala, king of Qinnauj, was the central
ruler, and his vast dominions included Bengal in the east ”.

As a matter of fact, however, Qinnauj was not in the First
Chme, as defined by Jurjani, the geographer (about A.d. 1460),
but lay considerably to the north of it.

The Burhdn-i Qdti‘ assigns India to the First Chme, in depen-
dence upon Saturn.

Taking Jurjani's definitions of the Climes, the greater part of
India would be situated within the First, Second, Third, and
Fourth Climes, which extended from latitude 12° 45' to 20° 30' N.,
from 20° 30' to 27° 30' N., from 27° 30' to 33° 40' N., and from
33° 40' to 39° N. To the south of Jurjani’s First Chme it reaches
to latitude 8° 6' N.

694. By kkdqdn, in the Persian poets, is always to be under-
stood kMqdn-i Chin, which means literally the emperor of China.

The Burhdn-i Qdti‘ says the title is that of any king of China,
Cathay, or Turkistan ; and the Farhang-i Shu‘url adds that by
frequent usage it has become the designation of any king.

By khdqdn or khdqdn-i Chin, however, the poets generally mean
the predominant ruler of Turkistan, whom, rightly or wrongly,
they apparently think to have had control also over Chinese
Turkistan, from which, possibly, arises the confusion. The title,
however, was also ascribed to the emperor of Mongolia, The
ruler of China proper they generally designate by his distinctive
title faghfur. Here, however, by khdqdn is possibly really meant
the emperor of China, though in a later Section it means the
ruler of the Hayatila, a nation of Turkish stock, who frequently
made war against Persia, and at several times brought it under
subjection. (See Notes 991, 995, and 1,892.)

At the same time it should be remembered that however great
the power of the predominant ruler of Turkistan might at any
period have been, the influence of the emperor of China, owing


82


THE HAFT PAIKAR


partly to a community of religion, was very considerable over
that country. In fact, theoretically at least, he was supposed to
be sovereign lord over aU the Turkish peoples who inhabited the
regions north of the Sea of Aral and the province Farghana.
For this reason the predominant ruler of Turkistan might have
been supposed to have been merely a governor on behalf of the
emperor of China. How great the influence of China was is
apparent from the fact that in later times the Hayatila, when
threatened by the Muslims, requested that their territory should
be brought directly under the control of China as Chinese
provinces.

China, including Mongolia, would come into all the Seven
Cbmes as defined by JurjanI, but the Burhdn-i Qdti‘ assigns it
together with Khata to the Second Clime, in dependence upon
Jupiter. (See Note 207.)

Khata (Cathay) sometimes means North China, and sometimes
Chinese Turkistan. It cannot therefore be properly assigned
to the Second Clime.

It may be added in conclusion that when the fair ones of China
are spoken of by the Persian poets those of Chinese Turkistan,
or of Turkistan are nearly always meant, since most of the towns
mentioned in connexion with them are, or were, in those countries.

695. China ; i.e., most probably here, either Chinese Turkistan,
or Turkistan.

Taraz, an ancient town in Turkistan famous for the beauty of
its inhabitants. It was probably in about latitude 42^ 36' N.,
and longitude 71° 15' E. (See the Map to Yule’s Cathay, where
it appears under the name Talas.)

696. Khyarazm (Chorasmia), the modern Khanate of Khiva.
Khyarazm would come into Jurjani's Fifth Clime which, according
to him, extended from latitude 39° to 43° 30' N.

697. Saqlab, generally translated Slavonia, would come into
Jurjani’s Sixth and Seventh or most northerly Climes, which,
according to him, extended from latitude 43° 30' to 47° 15' N.,
and from 47° 15' to 50° 30' N.

Sadiq I.sfahanl, the geographer (about a.d. 1635), in his Tahqlqu
’l-Frab says of the Saqlab territory ;

“ After Saqlab (the son of Japhet) is named the most northern
region of the Seven Climes ; and in that region such is the coldness


COMMENTAEY


83


of the air, that the people construct their dwelling-places under-
ground.”

In this account the geographer is evidently including territory
in European Eussia considerably north of Jurjani’s Seventh
Clime.

By Baqlab are generally designated the regions of modern
Eussia in Europe inhabited by Slavonic nations, exclusively
of the Eussians, who in Nizami’s time inhabited only the western
parts of Eussia, and were considered Turanians by the Oriental
writers.

Nizami, however, uses the term Eus as an alternative of
Saqlab, from which it must, I think, be inferred that his knowledge
of geography was rather imperfect.

The word Turk used in the second hemistich means simply
“ a beauty ”, and might be used of a person of any nation.

698. Lit., “ a Turk of Greek dress with Chinese adornment ” ;
Turk-i Chlnl-taraz-i RuinTpush. Tardz, however, means not
only “ adornment ” but also “ the border of a dress ”, and
this, I think, is its primary sense here. Rumt, also, besides
“ Greek ”, means “ red ”, so that we may have as a secondary
sense that she had rosy cheeks bordered, as it wore, with white —
a red and white complexion.

In taraz too there may be an allusion to Taraz, the town in
Turkistan famous for the beauty of its inhabitants.

Ruml also means a particular kind of dress so that Rumi-piish
may mean simply “ dressed in a Euml ”.

699. Maghrib, Jlauritania, designates generally north-western
Africa from Tripoli to Morocco, and more particularly Morocco.
It would come into Jurjrinl's Third Clime which, according
to him, extended from latitude 27° 30' to 33° 10' N. That it
extended farther north than 33° 40' is evident from the latitudes
of some of the towns he himself includes in it, one of which,
Kairwan, in Tunis, is in latitude 35° N.

The Burlidn-i Qdti' does not include Maghrib among the Climes.

700. The Qaisar or Caesar (of Eum) is the ruler of the Eastern
Empire. (See Note 546.)

Eum, with Asia Minor, would be included in Jurjam's Fourth
and Fifth Climes, which, according to him, extended from latitude
33° 40' to 39° N., and from 39° to 43° 30' N.


84


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Although Constantinople comes within these hmits, its latitude
being 41° 1' N., Jurjanl includes it in the Sixth Chme.

The term Rum has been also applied by Oriental geographers
to Europe generally.

Istakhrl (about a.d. 950) says :

“ The Franks, in general, we speak of as belonging to Rum,
because they have the same religion and king, though speaking
various dialects.”

The king of whom Istakhrl speaks was the ruler of the Eastern
Empire, whose capital, Constantinople, he took to be the chief
place of Europe.

The BurMn-i Qati assigns Rum to the Sixth Clime, in depen-
dence upon Mercury.

701. Kisra was the generic name of the Persian kings of the
Sasanian dynasty. It is said to be the Arabic form of the
Persian Khusrau (Chosroes). The princess in question was
of course not the daughter of the king then living, but was of the
royal House.

Kai-Ka'us was the second king of the second dynasty, the
Kayanian.

Persia would come within Jurjani’s Second, Third, Fourth,
and Fifth Climes, for the definitions of which see Note
207.

The Burhan-i Qnti‘ in its enumeration of the Seven Climes
does not mention Persia generally, but only ‘Iraq and Khurasan,
which it assigns to the Fourth Clime, in dependence upon the sun.

702. Bast in the first hemistich is used apparently in the
sense of hasta. Az yak dost, “ all together ” ; but the expression
means possibly “ by one hand ”.

703. The eyes were supposed to see by a light of their own.

704. A young man with an incipient moustache is called
tutl-kiiat, i.e., ‘‘ with a moustache like a parrot's feathers.” The
comparison has possibly reference to the colour, since dark green
is apparently confu.scd with black, the word sahz meaning both.
“ Sugar ” means the “ lips

Hence the meaning is simply “ He had an incipient moustache ”.

705. Galia, i.e., yalia mosekata (.see Note 146), being of dark
colour is compared here with incipient whiskers and beard.


COMMENTARY


85


“ His moon ” means “ his face The sense is that he had
incipient whiskers and beard.

706. Dabir means “ a writer ”, but the same word is sometimes
used to describe either writing or painting. Cf., e.g., nigdshtan.

707. Lit., “ hair by hair,” muij ba-muy.

708. i.e., he is both brave and strong, and also cunning.

709. “ Diamond ” in the first hemistich and “ iron ” in the
second mean “ sword ”.

710. “ His sight ” ; lit., “ his place of sight,” nazar-gah.
The word means also “ a hall of public audience ”. The “ light ”
means here also Bahram ; but see Note 703.

711. See Note 536.

712. Az sar-i danish-u kifayat-i khylsh. The translation
seems a little strained, but it is rather unsatisfactory to refer
“ the knowledge and competence ” to Munzir when the object
seems to be to compliment Bahram. Besides this, kifayat, in
addition to its other senses, has that of “ being one’s equal in
position ”.

713. i.e., he grew weary of it perforce, having reached his
appointed time.

714. The city as opposed to the troops means the civilians.

715. “ Valour ” ; ht., “ sword.”

716. i.e., he had no claim to being near the direct line of
descent, and was only a distant relative. This, of course, is a
historical fact. See Canon Rawlinson’s Seventh Oriental Monarch y.

717. A belt, says the Bahdr-i ‘Ajam, set with seven jewels
in connexion with the seven planets, and peculiar to the Kayanian
dynasty. The jewels, presumably, would be each one of the
colour attributed to the sphere of the corresponding planet.

718. i.e., he substituted mourning for festive garments.

Nil, “ indigo, dark blue, black,” and sabz, “ green, blue, black,”

are both mourning colours.

Firuza, “ turquoise,” the word used here, means light blue,
but that colour was also used as mourning as is evident from this
distich and from the termination of the story told in the Blue
Dome. Red i.s a festive colour. Qi. jdma-yi 'Id, “ a red dress,”
lit., “ a festive garment.”


86


THE HAFT PAIKAR


719. The sword is likened to a lion’s claws.

720. i.e., whatever natural advantages they have, they are
all dependent upon, and look for my bounty.

721. i.e., if I do anything but try gently to convinre them of
their ill-conduct, leaving them then to their conscience, it will
be a species of oppression.

722. An allusion to the poetry of Firdausi.

723. The “ other bard ” is Firdausi.

724. i.e., I am still inspired by the poetic spirit, but be has
been withdrawn from it by death.

725. i.e., by appropriating his thought.

726. Lit., “ the New Year’s breeze ” ; but the New Year
in Persia begins on March the 21st, when the vernal breezes and
showers bring out the blossoms and verdure which are all fresh
and new, not old things patched up.

727. The Author is alluding here to the mode of treating a
subject.

The first hemistich should refer more to the unity of the
treasure than to that of the road, because the number of roads
would not affect the position, which is the possession of the
treasure, however reached.

723. i.e., of compo.sing eloquent pootrv.

729. Lit., “it is not my stipulation to repeat.”

730. i.e., I know how to treat the subject in a superior manner.

731. “Two workers”; lit., “two embroiderers, lace- or
fringe-workers, ornamentists, or painters,” du mutarriz. But
the sense here is practically “ two workers in fine diction ”, or
more particularly, “ two "historians, ” i.e., historians of the
achievements of kings, the earlier being Firdausi, and the later,
Nizami.

732. Lit., “ have made old coins new.”

733. i.e., Firdausi improved upon his predecessors, and
Nizami improved upon Firdausi.

734. Lit., “ silver in the assaying, or according to the
standard.”


COMMENTARY


87


735. Lit., '■ The joiner of the set (of parts) of this high throne
thus gives a part to the set.”

“ The set.” The word is ‘aqd, which means in Persian “ a
cluster, series, row, or set (of things) ” which go to form a whole.
Cf. the line of Hafiz :

Jci bar nazm-l tu afshdnad falak ‘aqd-l suraiyd-rd :

“ that on thy verse the sky may pour the cluster of the
pleiades.”

736. “ He actively prepared ” ; lit., “ he opened his wings,
and bound his waist.”

All the editions I have consulted e.xcept I.O. MS. 1168 read,
dar gushdd, “ opened the door (to hospitality),” but this does not
contrast so well with bast miydn, “ bound up (his) waist.”

1168 has bar gushdd, which I have interpreted as far gushdd.
Bar gushdd, with the sense of " opened his breast ”, may, however,
very probably be correct, and employed in the sense of bdzu
gushdd, opened his arms,” which, pace the dictionaries, sometimes
means “prepared for action”. (Cf. the Shdh-ndma.)

The Kayanian kings were those of the second Persian djuasty.

737. “ Down to Aden in Yaman ” : Az Yaman td ‘Adan.

“ In ” is probably the sense here of az, which, as a preposition,
generally means “ from ” or “ of ”, and occasionally “ for ”,
or “ in the way of ”. (See also Note 1068.) Unless the Author
by Yaman means its capital San‘a, which is scarcely probable.

In any case the Author is mistaken, since the Munzir-Nu‘man
dyna.stv, as before mentioned, did not rule over T^aman. (See
Note 537.)

738. “ Iron-strong ” ; lit., “ iron-chewing,” an epithet usually
applied to a spirited, powerful horse.

739. i.e., the perspiration of the troops from their exertions
and rapid course was so copious that it reached the legendary
Fish which was supposed to support the Ox on which the earth was
imagined to rest ; whilst the dust raised by them reached the
moon.

Gard, “ dust,” as applied to the moon, has also the sense
of “ beams ”. (For the “ Fish ”, see also Notes 1,060 and 1,416.)

740. Lit., “ the drummer had a plectrum (applied) to (his
ears.”


88


THE HAFT PAIKAR


741. The plain and mountain are likened to pots boiling up
against the seven skies, which are likened by the Author to
their covers or lids.

742. “ The monarch of the world ” ; i.e., the usurper.

“ A young dragon ” ; i.e., Bahram.

743. “ The heavens,” and “ Canopus ” mean Bahram.

744. i.e., as an onager into the grave.

745. “ Lay the dust ” ; i.e., calm disturbances.

746. i.e., to the court of the king whom they had elected.

747. “ Expressed their views ” ; lit., “ offered opinions.”

748. “ They spurned (all) arrogance away ” ; i.e., they were
influenced only by motives of prudence and expediency.

749. Lit., “ Their deliberations ended in this (resolution).”

750. I.O. MS. 1491,

fust vd Jcard ddna-rd hishtand,

vd hard probably a mistake for vd-karda.

The B. ed, of 1328 has,

fust bar kanda ddna-rd kisktand.

If these be correct, the sense would presumably be, “ they
wrote in a way calculated to produce a quick and satisfactory
result ” ; or possibly, “ they wrote with extreme foresight and
care.”

But I.O. MS. 1168 reads,

fust nd-kanda ddna-rd kishtand,
which might give the sense, “ they wrote in a natural, plain,
and straightforward manner.” But the first might possibly
signify, “ they wrote without disguise,” (cf. fust bdz kardan),
and the second the opposite of this.

751. “The rightful king”; lit., “the new king.”

752. “ The superscription.” Sar-i ndma means literally
“ the outside of the letter ” where the superscription would be.
Sar-ndma is “ the superscription ”.

Or possibly, sar-i ndma means here simply “the superscription ”,
the izdfat being restored met. cans.

753. i.e., it had a cover of brocade-work, and was bright
inside with words of wisdom.


COMMENTARY


89


754. “ The picture-room of (His) good gifts ” ; i.e., the
universe, the scene of His generosity.

755. i.e., the creating of the universe was a difficulty which
He alone had power to overcome.

756. i.e.. He has sealed the universe by the duty of the praise
of Him.

757. Zamln-u ZMnan, “ the earth and time,” signify, according
to Meninsky, “ the universe,” but the separation of the two
in the second hemistich prevents such a rendering. One might
translate, “ space and time.”

753. i.e., Bahram.

759. “ Ill-advised contention ” ; lit., “ raw contention.”

The usurper means that he is not likely to suffer loss or damage
from what he calls the raw or crude contention of an inexperienced
person like Bahram. (For Kisra, see Note 701.)

760. i.e., I was always to be considered fortunate.

761. Lit., “ But the Persians by force and shame aroused my
zeal by their zealous kindness.”

762. i.e., only the jierson who is a foe to selfish desires can be
a friend to the people of the world.

763. i.e., a world to be governed by unselfish care is not your
world.

764. Lit., “with the headache of the world.”

765. Lit., “ that the business, perchance, might have been
my business ” ; i.e., that my business might have been simply
attending to my own business, and not to that of others.

I.O. MS. 1168, and the B. ed. of 1328 read, without rhyme,
in both hemistichs, har, “ occupation, business.”

Most of the I.O. editions have, in the first hemistich, ydr,
“ friend.”

One might suggest kdr in the first hemistich, and ydr in the
second, but this is not really necessary.

766. See Note 526.

767. i.e., it would be useless to seek to cultivate ground so
barren and worthless.

768. “ To strike cold iron ” means to do something useless.


90


THE HAFT PAIKAR


769. He means probably that he does not approve of the
tone of the letter, but appreciates the good advice in it.

Or the sense may be that whilst he approves the good advice
generally there are reasons why it does not fit his particular case.

Instead of 'pand-giiyanda-m, “ the speaker of advice, ’ we
might read, pand-i guyanda-nl, “ the advice of the speaker.”

770. i.e., I would not condescend to seek possession even of
the whole world.

771. “ Throughout ” ; lit., “ in vein and skin ”

772. Lit., “ I am excusable for sin not committed.”

773. Lit., “ after the dead ” ; i.e., after a person is dead. A
well-known proverb.

774. The argument in this and the preceding distich seems to
be that intelligence shows that the mischief of calumny arises
from the readiness with which it is heard, and that when the
hearer is essentially bad he exaggerates the calumny when
reporting it. The moral is apparently that it is an evil thing
to listen at all to calumny. I am taking the reading of I.O.
MS. 402 and the I.O. B. ed. The B. ed. of 1323 varies a little
from these, but has the same sense.

The other I.O. editions read,

Giiftan-asJi had, shanulnn-a^h had-lar a-<t :

“ His speaking is evil, his hearing is worse,” but the sense,
I think, is not so good.

775. Lit., “ is up to the time of action.”

776. This I take to be the most probable moaning of the
rather enigmatical hemistich,

“ az namuddr-i vagi hdsham shad,”

The only other sen.se I can see is,

“ I will rejoice in what the (present) time may (now) offer,”
but this, I think, is less satisfactory.

777. An knnnni k’-az kkudCiy ddram shnrm.

77S. Gu7iak, “ offence, sin,” is used here in the sense of
qi‘db, “ acts deserving punishment,” the opposite of savdb,
“ acts worthy of reward.”

779. Lit., “ opinions were taken, given, or compared ” ;
rdy-hd shod rust.


CO:\DIENTAEY


91


780. The Zoroastrian inuhids or priests in earlier times
formed an ecclesiastical council consulted by the king in religious
questions. In later times they were also vaz'irs or ministers,
as we gather generally from Persian writers and also from the
dictionaries. (See also Note 1,930.)

781. i.e., “ you are really king.”

782. The name of Gusht.lsp (Yistaspa, Hystaspes) is
associated with Zoroaster in the Zend Avesta, and Western
authorities generally make them contemporaneous. The
difficulty is to find even approximately the date of Gushtasp.
According to Oriental accounts this king was the fifth of the
second or Kayanian dynasty of Persia, but it is useless to seek
his date from Oriental sources of information.

Professor Duncker concludes that Yistaspa and Zoroaster
lived in about 1000 b.c., but from the evidence ho puts forward
one might be induced to agree with those authorities who make
the date some hundreds of years earlier. Professor Jackson,
of Columbia University, an eminent authority, thinks Zoroaster
flourished during the Median supremacy and died about 583 b.c.

783. The Kais ; i.e., the kings of the Kayanian dynasty.

784. Bahman, the grandson and successor of Gushtasp*
He is supposed to have been Artaxerxes Longimanus, Ardashlr-i
Daraz-dast.

783. Dara, i.e., Darius ; presumably the opponent of
Alexander.

786. Siyamak was the son of Kayumara the first king of the
first or Pishdadian dynasty of Persia.

787. Ardashir, the grandson of Babak, generally called
Ardashlr-i Babakiin, was the first king of the Sasanian dynasty
of Persia.

788. Kayumars, the first king of the first or Pishdadian
dynasty of Persia.

789. Lit., “ which may suffer that covenant to be discharged.”

790. He means that they owed allegiance to him, and not
to the usurper, and should therefore not have pledged them-
selves to the latter.


92


THE HAFT PAIKAR


791. Jamshld or Jam, the fourth king of the first or Plsdadian
dynasty of Persia. (See Note 1,377.)

792. Lit., “ my dominion of inheritance is (both) the black
and the white ” ; i.e., my inherited dominion is all things and
all people ; or, more particularly, Arabs and Persians,

793. i.e., he has given up his crown and throne ; his spirit
is in heaven, and his body is in the earth.

This simply adds to the assertion in the preceding distich —
that the crown and throne are merely symbols — the assertion
that they are also only transitory possessions. (Cf, the next
distich.)

It is possible, however, to explain the second hemistich as
meaning that he who is essentially a king is exalted to the sky
and governs the whole earth ; he has no need of the ordinary,
visible insignia, the crown and throne. This, however, does not
harmonize so well with the next distich, though it may do so
with the succeeding one.

794. Afridun, the sixth king of the first or Pishdadian
dynasty of Persia.

795. i.e., the mere symbols have not remained.

796. i.e., an insidious usurper has made puny eiiorts to hold
me off.

797. i.e., Bahrain, a formidable opponent.

798. The terms “ ant ” and “ gnat ” are used in depreciation
of the usurper.

799. i.e., the comparatively weak usurper can make himself
prominent only until a formidable opponent like Bahrfim appears.

“ Trumpet ” ; lit., “ white shell,” sapld-muJim, a shell which
was sounded as a trumpet.

800. i.e., so long as the usurper has only puny opponents
he, not much more powerful himself, may think he is achieving
great deeds.

801. This distich has practically the same sense as the
preceding.

802. i.e., at the opening of Spring, which in Persia commences
on the 21st of March. Bahram likens himself to the light of
the sun, and the usurper to a mere lamp.


COMMENTARY


93


803. “ To eat one’s heart or liver ” is “ to suffer affliction.”

804. i.e., it is better to combat my enemies than to suffer
such affliction.

805. Lit., “ sacrifices a life,” fida kunad jam ; but cf. the
use of jm-fisMni, and jdn-nisari, which signify rather “ making
great sacrifices or endeavours in behalf of a person ” than really
sacrificing one’s life for him.

806. i.e., although I am really the king of Persia, the Arabs
support me.

807. i.e., the Persians grasp and are supported by what
belongs to me.

808. “ The Kai ” ; i.e., the King descended from the

Kayanian or second dynasty of Persia.

809. i.e., I have substantial value, whilst those others are
vain and empty. By others he means pretenders and usurpers,
including especially the then occupant of the throne.

810. The Author possibly means that a king should have
sufficient authority in himself and in his descent to be able
to raise an army. A mere retinue anyone might have ; it is
only a symbol of greatness like the throne and crown before
mentioned.

“ What dust ” has also the sense, “ what advantage.”

811. i.e., the legitimate chief alone should succeed.

812. i.e., I seek to do only what I have a right to do.

813. i.e., without infringing covenants.

814. Lit., “ by which the compact that has been tied may
be loosened.”

815. i.e., the envoys from the usurper.

816. ‘‘ By race ” ; Gauhar, “ race,” or “ origin ”, means
also “ essence, nature, intellect ”.

“ By name.” His name was Bahram ; he would be as king
Bahram V.

817. “ To smear a sun or the sun with clay ” means to try
to hide virtues which are manifest.

818. “ The lion ” ; i.e., Bahram. “ The wolf ” ; i.e., the
usurper.


94


THE HAFT PAIKAR


819. Tlgh-u jam, “ sword and cup,” are, no doubt, equivalent
to bazm-u razm, “ feast and figbt,” “ court and camp.”

820. In contradistinction to Babram's stipulation or condition
as to the two lions.

821. i.e., it may turn out that Bahram will not succeed,
or that he will be killed.

822. Lit., “ should not pass from a state of repose or
settlement.”

823. i.e., should engage with the two lions in question.

824. The “ chair of gold ” is the “ sun ”. The “ ivory
throne ” is “ the white streak of the dawn ”.

825. i.e., let them engage in the business in hand. One might
translate, “ fly at the target of battle ”, since kdr, “ business,”
means also “ battle ”, but this is not necessary, as “ business ”,
the more ordinary equivalent of kdr, gives good sense.

826. i.e., the grave of Bahram Gur.

827. The reading of I.O. MS. 1491, (with the substitution
of zi-mlgh, “ from the cloud,” for va-nugh, “ and the cloud,”
which I should suggest), is as follows :

An ba-dvdz-i tasht rasta zi-mlgh : In ba-tasht-i tahl na-bud, Jci
ba-tlgh. I think, however, that (substituting tasht for lakht),
the reading of the I.O. B. ed., from which I translate, is preferable :

Mah ba-dvdz-i tasht rast az mlgh ; na(h) ba tashl-l tahl, ba-
tashi-u ba-tlgh ;

“ The moon escaped from the cloud with the noise of a basin ;
presenting not a simple basin (only), but a basin and a sword.”

The “ moon ” refers to the “ crown ” ; the “ basin ”, as regards
the “ moon ”, to its “ disk ”, and as regards the “ crown ” to
the “ circular main part of it ” ; the “ sword”, as regards the
“ moon ”, means the “ rays ”, and as regards the “ crown ”
may possibly refer to the crescent within the mural crown worn
by Bahram, if we might suppose that the Author knew of its
form. Otherwise we must conjecture that some conical or
other rise in the centre is meant. Cf. the term, mll-i tdj, a pointed
ornament applied to a regal crown.

In the reading of 1.6. MS. 1491 dm, “ the latter,” refers to
the “ crown ” as likened to a “ moon ” ; in the second hemistich


COMMENTARY


95


In, “ the former,” refers to the “ crown ” as mentioned in the
first hemistich. The “ basin ” of the crown is the “ crown
without its crescent, or central conical rise ”, the latter
representing the “ sword ”, tigh, which, as regards the “ moon ”,
means the rays ”.

The “■ basin and sword ” are the common emblems of execution,
and the words are introduced here in allusion to the danger of
the enterprise.

828. Lit., “ Through terror no one went round those two
great lions within the range.”

829. “ First ” ; i.e., before his rival.

830. “ The gold cup ” is a symbol of the royal carousing.

831. i.e., the ground where he would lie dead would be his
place, not the throne, of which he would have no need.

832. I.O. MSS. 777 and 1491, the I.O. B. ed., and the B. ed.
of 1328 for hand-i qabd have ‘atf-i qabd, “ the end of the skirt
of (his) tunic.”

833. “ The foxes ” ; i.e., his rival.

834. In this and the following four distichs the horoscope
of the king’s throne or sovereignty is described.

It should perhaps rather be taken as the horoscope of the
nature of his rule.

For the same reason as that given in Note 533 it is impossible
to calculate the aspects.

With regard to the ascendant and the positions of the planets
in the signs we may, I think, gather the following :

The ascendant is Leo ; hence the king’s rule would be attended
by firmness and self-control, perseverance and ambition, faith-
fulness, nobility and generosity, and intuition in regard to
spiritual matters. The sun in conjunction with Mercury would
imply that in his rule he would display nobility, generosity,
faithfulness, sincerity, ambition, pride, and will and ability
to govern, combined* with imagination, reason, sharpness, wit,
and persuasive power. These two planets being in Cancer would
be modified by reserve, sensitiveness, impressionableness,
reflectiveness, sympathy, and kindness.

The moon being in “ exaltation ” in Taunts will give full efiect
to the influences of that sign, which are fearlessness, strength of


96


THE HAET PAIKAE


will, constancy, and determination. The moon’s being in
conjunction with Venus would imply :that much of this energy
would be directed towards love, the pursuit of pleasure, art, and
all that refines. Venus being in her own house in Taurus wiU
have considerable power to effect this.

Mars being in “ exaltation ” in Capricorn the natural tendency
would be to boldness, impulsiveness, aggression, contention,
sensuality, and lavishness ; but Saturn being also in “ exaltation ”
in Libra might be supposed to modify this, those subject to
Saturn being cautious, reflective, constant, patient, chaste, and
economical. The sign Capricorn gives ambition, persistency,
steadiness, and political incbnation.

Libra gives sensitiveness, compassion, yieldingness, prudence,
thoughtfulness, justice, and generosity.

Jupiter is in his own “ house ” in Sagittarius. Those subject
to his influence are noble and .sincere, just and generous, courteous
and compassionate, faithful and honourable. Sagittarius would
confirm all this, and add acti\'ity, enterprise, and demonstra-
tiveness. (See also Note 533.)

835. An allusion to the offerings of the rich.

836. “ Pearls ” ; i.e., “ eloquent words.” ‘‘ Balas rubies ” ;
i.e., “ (his) lips.”

8-37. i.e., by imitation, or in retaliation.

838. i.e., I can only bless the dead, but I can give security
and happiness to the living. See the next distich.

839. “ Black and white,” i.e., “ all things ” ; or “ night and
day ”, i.e., “ time.”

840. I have taken this heading from I.O. MS. 1491. Other
editions differ.

841. A belt worn by the Kayanian kings set with seven jewels
having reference to the seven planets. (See Note 717.)

842. The Chlni would thus be white, and possibly of silk.

A Riimi (from Rum, the Eastern Empire) was a species of

dress, but not a head-dress, and I have therefore rendered bar
sar-ash by “ over it ”, and not “ upon his head ”, though one
might suspect an antithesis in the use of the words tan, ‘‘ body,”
and sar, “ head.”


COMMENTARY


97


Since Runii means also “ red ”, this may have been the colour
of the upper garment.

Rumi, however, may mean anything connected with Rum,
and therefore not impossibly a Rumian or Byzantine crown.

Tardz too, being the name of a town, is introduced rhetorically
with Rfiml and the preceding Chhii.

843. i.e., he excelled in beauty the handsome people of Rum
and Chinese Turkistan.

844. Lit., “ he had conveyed the five turns (of music) above
the sun.” An allusion to the old practice of playing music
five times a day before the palace of a king, prince, or governor.

845. i.e., the justice distributed at his court or gate dissolved
grief and trouble.

846. Lit., “ to breaths.”

847. “ The coining-dies took rest upon the coins ” ; i.e.,
presumably, ” much money was coined,” an evidence of prosperity.

848. i.e., the people were undivided in their afiection for the
king; or, they had no desire different from the king's desire.

849. i.e., entered upon a prosperous life and the observance
of perfect integrity.

850. i.e., yielded implicit obedience to the king, whose
rescripts were all in favour of justice and integrity.

851. “ Correction.” Parvardan seems used here in the sense
of tarbiyat.

852. “ Earthy camp ” i.e., “ the world.”

853. i.e., “ the world.”

854. i.e., he was raised above the sky by the loftiness of his
designs.

855. See the Note on the next distich.

856. i.e., he would give them lightly away. Cf. ba-sar-i
taziydna yiriftan, ” to conquer or take at once by striking with
the whip without using the sword.”

857. i.e., he was generous and prodigal.

858. i.e., they became self-indulgent and without any kind
feeling for the needy.


98


THE HAFT PAIKAE


859. “ From stone and iron ” ; i.e., of a very meagre descrip-
tion, or with great difficulty.

860. “ So fierce an onslaught made on food ” ; i.e., made the
food-supply so short.

861. “ Weight ” ; i.e., “ esteem.”

“ From its lightness ” ; i.e., from there being so fight a weight
of it.

I have slightly strained the meaning of ‘izzat by translating
it “ weight ”, in order to retain something of the antithesis in
the original.

Of course, sahuk-sangl, “ lightness,” may have the ordinary
sense of the quality for which bread is esteetiied.

‘Izzat means also “ rarene.ss ”, so that another sense is, “ bread
gained rareness from there being so fight a weight of it.”

862. “ The comptrollers of the town,” am'inan-i shafir. An
amin is the chief of any special department.

863. Bardt amongst its difierent meanings has that of “ an
order on the treasury ”.

864. Khana, “ house, room,” means also “ a division between
two joints of a reed ”, so that the sense is that the houses from
Isfahan to Eai were nearly contiguous as are the divisions in
the reed.

865. Lit., “ if this statement is not clear to you.”

866. i.e., the original authority for the statement is responsible.

867. i.e., the more populous the country the greater its
prosperity and riches. Quite a socialistic doctrine.

868. i.e., through his sharing the king’s bounty with others,
or through his not coveting others’ wealth.

869. “ The distress of seventy years,” the cause of which had
been the misrule of his predecessors.

870. Before “ every town ” there is the word savdd, which
means the precincts or outskirts of a city, town, or village, and
also the place itself ; but it .seems to be almost expletive here,
or to mean simply the “ extent or expanse ” (of the town).

871. Each planet is supposed to rule alone for one thousand
years, and then for a period of a thousand years with each one


COJBIENTARY


99


of the other six planets in turn, making a total of seven thousand
years for the “ cycle ”, daur.

It is generally believed that the cycle from the time of Adam
till the present time has been that of the moon. The Author
probably means therefore by the cycle of Venus that part of the
cycle in which Venus is associated in rule with the moon.

The fact that Venus, one of the two most auspicious planets,
is the spiritual principle (see the next distich) of this newly
commencing (part of the) cycle is apparently made to account
for the opening of a new era of prosperity and happiness on the
conclusion of the famine.

A “ cycle ”, dnur, is said also to be a period of 360 solar years,
but I think this does not concern the present inquiry.

Under the heading " The death of Yazdijard ” the Author
speaks of a cycle " as of some indefinite period of time which
may be signalized by certain occurrences. (See also Note 319.)

872. Amongst astrologers kadlhudd is the vital and spiritual
principle, as kadbdnu is the bodily or material principle.

873. “ (rur-hoofed ” (onager-hoofed) ; i.e., swift.

“ He dug up gfirs ” ; i.e.. by his horse’s hard trampling he
dug up “ g aves " (for the onagers). “ Threw giirs to the ground ” ;
i.e., overthrew " onagers ”.

874. “ The Bow ” ; i.e., Sa/jillarius. Jupiter is the ruler of
Sagittarius, that sign being his own “ house ”. It gives him
great activity and enterprise. Sagittarius being a “ fiery ”
sign, its nature is in harmony with that of Jupiter, who is electric,
hot, and sanguine.

875. i.e., the king shot above and beyond Jupiter.

876. “Spot.” Mairnh is “a place of throwing or shooting,
a hunting-ground", and also simply “a place, a spot”.

877. TFr, here ” the jilain ", means commonly “ an arrow ”,
hence a species of rhetorical hiccough is produced by the con-
junction of the word with shast, “ a thumbstall.”

I.O. MSS. 402 and 1491 read, bakr khull-u dasht pur ml-kard,
“ he enqitied the sea and filled the plain.” A.s the arrows, or
perhaps rather the bolts or balls (cf. muhra) are called “ pearls ”


100


THE HAFT PAIKAE


in the first hemistich, “ sea ” in the second hemistich would be
the source of them, i.e., in this case “ the bow-string

878. The Author fancifully conceives that the fire which the
king’s weapon strikes out of any stone it may hit is a desirable
acquisition for roasting the onagers he kills. (For Icabdh, see
Notes 368 and 1,340.)

879. Lit., “ (who was) quick and active in keeping stirrup
by stirrup with the king.”

880. Fitna means “ sedition, disturbance ”, and, applied to a
woman, “ seduction, fascination,” with the conjoined idea of
“ a causer of disturbance to people or among her lovers ”.

881. Lit., “ as the breeze (passing) over the corn-field.”

882. Pallida, (See Note 1,634.)

883. Lit., “ With all beauty.”

884. By nakhat, “ breath,” is meant here also “ voice ”.

885. “ Whatever she had killed ” ; i.e.. by her beauty.

886. In the second hemistich rah zadan means “ to play
according to the modes of music ”, and also “ to make an attack
on the road as a highwayman ”, so that the literal sense is, “ the
former struck the road, and the latter struck the game.”

887. Lit., “ loosened the thumbstall.”

888. Lit., “ used self-restraint iu praise.”

889. Lit., “ you do not bring my game into your eyes,” which
means “ you do not think it of any account

890. Lit., “ from the nature which is habit ” (i.e., to women,
or, perhaps, to beautiful women).

891. Lit., “you must illumine (vour) face.”

892. “Pin”; lit., “sew.”

893. “ Like the wind ” ; i.e., which should give the bolt the
velocity of the wind.

894. Lit., “ Its brain came into ebullition at the pain of it.”

895. “ Stumbled and fell headlong down.” This, I think,
is the sense of ba-sar-u sum dar dmad, which does not occur in
the dictionaries.

896. “ Chinese girl ” ; i.e., girl of Chinese Turkistan.


COMMENTARY


101


897. Lit., “ This reply came hard to the king.”

898. i.e., the reply gave him a hard stroke.

899. Lit., “ he made hisheart without kindness for that moon.”

900. i.e., they should not be precipitate, but wait until the
proper time to do things.

901. The Persian dlv corresponds sometimes with the Arab
“ evil jinn ” or genius, but often has the sense of “ demon ”,
‘‘ assistant-devil to Satan ”, or “ Satan ” himself. In fact,
Satan and the demons are of the evil “ jinn

902. “ A cypress free ” ; i.e., the girl herself. (For the “ free
cypress”, see Note 1,246.)

90.3. I have written ‘Umman on the supposition that the
Author writes the name so wet. caus. for ‘Uman, the country in
the south-east of Arabia, not far from which are pearl-fisheries.
The geographer Sadi<[ Isfahan! (about a.d. 1635) too gives the
spelling 'Umman, not ‘Uman. Firdausi also spells it in the
same way. Irrespective of this, however, there is, so far as I
can a.scertain. no such place as ‘Umman, and the only ‘Amman
of which I find mention is that described in the Enojclojjadia of
Islam as follows :

“ ‘Amman, the old capital of the Ammonites, in the Old
Testament Rabbat Bene ‘Ammon or Rabba, later Rabbatamana,
Amman, Ammana, or called by the Hellenistic name Philadelphia.
This citv, which at the time of the Romans was of great importance,
was taken by Yazidu 'bnu Abi Sufyan after the capture of
Damascus (.\.h. 14-a.d. 6.35). It became the capital of the
fruitful region of al-Bahp'i' with a trade in corn, sheep, and honey.
.... The magnificent ruins date back to Roman times, with
the exception of an Arab building on the castle hill (the castle
of Jalut with the tomb of Uriah).”

If this town be meant, it is probably taken, as towns often
are, as repre.senting the region, a fruitful one, but one cannot
explain why the Author should select it in particular.

Both Ibn Khurdadbih (about a.d. 846), and Istakhri (about
A.D. 950) mention ‘Amman as a town in Syria.

904. Lit., “ do not carry (your) head (away) from occupation ” ;
i.e., employ vour.^clf in the house as a plausible reason for being
in it.


102


THE HAFT PAIKAE


905. As though the moon were in, or given to, Draco.

Auger Ferrier in his Jugenients Astrotioiniques sur les Xalirites
(1592), says ;

“ La queue du Dragon : horrible mort, petit douaire, et nul
bien appartenant a la signification de ceste maison.’’ The allusion
has probably some connexion with the superstition that the
moon when eclipsed is swallowed by the Dragon.

Cf., the expression, zindan-i naiyirain, “ the prison of the
two lights ” (i.e., the sun and the moon), which is applied to
AzMahd, “ the Dragon.”

In the other sense azhdahd, “ the dragon,"’ means “ sword ”,
and “ the moon ”, of course, “ the girl.”

900. Lit., “ a village,”

907. “ To the apogee ” ; i.e., “ to the apogee of the moon,”
which means simply “ to a lofty height ”.

908. i.e., the palace was so lofty that the heavens were as
waves around it.

909. “ A terrace-belvedere,” rivnq-i rnamar.

Rivdq amongst its various meanings has tliat of “ a terrace, a
gallery, an upper toom ”.

Mamar is “ a place of seeing, a place in which to enjoy sights,
a belvedere The two words are in apposition.

Cf. Hafiz:

Rivuq-i manzar-i chashm-i man dshyuna-yi tu-’st ;
kararn namn-ii farud it hi khuna khuna-yi tu-’st :

“ The terrace-belvedere my eye's your nest ; be kind, descend,
for the room is your room.”

On this d'stich SudI, the Turkish commentator, quoting
authorities, says, “ rivuq is an aivdn, and a large churdaq is an
aivdn ; hence it is seen that rimq is a large churdaq.”

A chdrddq (from the Persian chdr-tdq) is ” a terrace on a house-
top ”.

The reading of the genitive between the two nouns is confirmed
by SudI, who says, rivaq-yn manzar-a izdjd-l buydiuye dir, “ the
genitive between rivuq and manzar is that of apposition.”

910. “ An honoured place ” ; or, “ a commanding place.”

911. i.e., the sun is in Taurus in Spring.


COMMENTARY


103


912. Kar-gar, “ efficient,” means also “ a pack-horse which
goes well and bears its load briskly

913. Like paradise; lit., “like the garden of the Hurls.”

Kabdhs. (See Notes 568 and 1,340.)

914. i.e., he will consent to exalt you (by becoming your
guest).

915. Shir, “ milk,” means also “ wine ”, so that the sense of
the hemistich may be that they will ply him assiduously with wine.
The sense, however, may be simply “ milk ” ; for see the distich
to which Note 924 is appended.

916. “ Fragrant wine,” rdh-i raihdn ; lit., “ wine of sweet
basil.” The adjective raihdnl is generally used.

917. “ Sweet drinks.” Nush means also anything sweet and
of pleasant taste.

918. Or, “ betook himself to the chase upon the plain.”

919. “ Lofty ” ; lit., “ of lofty aim,” buland-dhang.

920. “ An estate ” ; lit., '* a village.”

921. i.e., its charm is from its having been one of your delightful
possessions bestowed by you on me.

I have adopted the reading of 1.0. MSS. 777, and 1168, namely,
lutf-ash, “its charm.”

I.O. MS. 1491 reads bazm-ash, “ its banquet,” which might
almost be rendered “(the wine of) its banquet”.

922. “ The Garden ” ; i.e., “ the garden of paradise.”

923. i.e., it will be greatly e.xalted.

924. “ Will perfume ” ; lit., “ will give ‘ablr.” ‘Ahir is
described by Redhouse as “ a perfume and unguent made of
saffron, musk, ambergris, and perfumed oils.”

925. Lit., “ from the hunting-place.”

926. i.e., he had things put into good order.

927. i.e., he axipeared in all his pomp and glory.

928. “ Khatlian steed.” Khatlan (Kotlan) is a district and
town in Badakhshau. It was famous for horses. KhatU-khirdm
means literally “ one moving like a horse of Khatlan ”. The
Arab form of the name is Khuttal.


104


THE HAFT PAIKAB


929. The words rimq and taq, as used in connexion with this
palace, mean the same part. Rivdq has reference to it as a species
of gallery, terrace, or upper room, and tdq as a species of arched
or domed balcony or verandah. The word manzar, previously
used, has relation to the same upper room as a place from which
to enjoy the view. (Cf. Note 909.)

930. i.e., it abased Khavarnaq by its loftiness, and made it
seem to be flat on the ground.

931. i.e., its domed roof coincided with the dome of the sky.

932. Lit., “ from the rose, his forehead.”

933. “ Good ” ; lit., “ wide, extensive.”

934. i.e., whose head is on a level with the sky.

The “ lasso ” is the sky itself.

935. Lit., “ fold it up under your feet.”

936. Kausar, one of the supposed rivers of paradise. Hurl,
a virgin of paradise.

937. The reading of 1.0. MS. 1168 is bnr-u “ to her ”. With
this reading the sense of yak-dast will be yak-sdn : i.e., “ equal,
indifferent.” (Cf. the Bahdr-i 'Ajam.)

The other editions, however, from which I have translated,
have barad, which in this connexion must mean “ she carries off ” ;
i.e., “ traverses.” In this case yak-dast would signify “ evenly,
without a break, sans desemparer ”.

938. To bite the fingers is a sign of astonishment or of
perturbation.

939. “ The lion’s case ” ; i.e., what the king had said.

940. Lit., “ had known the time.”

941. i.e., she had a languishing look in her narcissus-like eyes.

The ‘‘ rose ” means her ‘‘ face ”.

942. “ Musk ” signifies here artificial, black beauty spots or
patches.

The “ moon ” means here “ face ”.

Bar taqvhn rdndan serms to b" uted in the scn^e of a causal
of taqi:hn kardan with the meaning, “ to make rectify, to make
improve, to make set off.”


COMMENTARY


105


943. ‘Itih (archaic ‘iteh) is the iniala of ‘itub, and is used
apparently in the sense of amatory x^etulance and feigned reproach.
(Cf. also the distich to which Note 1,821 is appended.)'

944. A rosy hue ” ; lit., “ the colour of the Judas’ tree
flower,” which means “ her rosy cheeks ”.

The “ cj'press ” repiresents her “ stature ” ; the “ tulip ”
her “ lips ”.

The meaning is that she united beauty of complexion with
grace and straightness of form, and the latter with redness of
lips.

945. “ Pearls ” are here real pearls ; the “ cypress ” is her

“ stature ” ; the “ moon ”, her “ face ”. *’ The pleiads’ cluster ”

represents here real pearls.

946. The “ lovers’ apple ” is “ a divided chin ” ; “a ruby
casket ” is “ the mouth ” ; “ pearls ” are “ teeth ”.

The lips are here supposed to be a little parted at the two front
teeth.

947. “ Crowned with ambergris ” ; i.e., “ with black hair.”

948. I have included this distich as it is in all the editions I
have consulted except I.O. MS. 402, but I think it is probably
spurious. It seems spoilt by the word “ throne ” in the second
hemistich. The distich refers apparently to the girl, though
the word “ king ” is used.

The “ ivory plates ” mean presumably her haunches ”.

949. i.e., they united in war against her lovers.

950. “ Her dates ” ; i.e., “ her lips.”

Beauty spots (here, lit., ” agate spots ”), sometimes put upon
the edge of the lips.

951. Her face with a veil of pearls is likened to the moon
environed by stars.

952. i.e., either brought her many lovers or made them ardent.

953. “ The moon ” ; i.e., “ her face.” “ A camphor veil ” ;
i.e., “ a white veil.”

954. “ The fortnight's moon ’’ ; i.e., “ the full moon,” to
which her face is likened.

“ The seven things ” ; lit., “ all the seven,” har haft, are the
seven kinds of embellishment which were used by women.


106


THE HAFT PAIKAK


They are :

henna (hinna) ;

indigo {vasma) ;

rouge (surMl) ;

white powder (safld-ab) ;

colljTium (surma) ;

talc (zaraJc) ;

galia moschata [gJialiya).

Instead of the last some give, as the seventh, beauty spots
(khdl) which were made with collyrium. Henna is used to dye
the hands and feet ; indigo to dye the eyebrows ; talc is poured
over the face to improve its lustre. Ghfilii/a, galia moschata, is
a scent composed of musk, ambergris, camphor, and oil of ben-
nuts, but it often means “ perfume ” generally.

955. The moon is ruler of the sign Cancer which is her “ house ’
but she is in “ strength ” or “ e.xaltation ” in the sign 1 aurus.
This means that she takes in full force the character of that
sign, which gives patience, endurance, determination, stubborn-
ness, and strength of will. (See also Note 533.)

“ The moon ” in the other sense means “ the girl ”, and Taurus
“ the ox ” which she carries.

956. Gdv bln td chigiuia qauhar ddsht ! The ostensible sense,
“ See how an ox had wisdom ” ! offers a rhetorical paradox,
the ox being a type of stupidity, but the explanation is in the real
sense, “ See how an ox had lustre or honour (from being raised
and carried by the girl who has been likened to the moon) ” !
Then since gdv (ox) means also ‘‘an ox-shaped drinkins- vessel ”,
an attendant sense may be, “ See how a drinking-vessel shaped
like an ox had gems (i.e., was adorned with gems) ” !

957. “ The lion ” ; i.e., the king.

958. Lit., “ from (this) gallery or terrace could carry to the
bottom of the palace.”

959. Sdz kardan is used here apparently in an intransitive
sense.


960.

961


“ In your scales ” ; i.e., “ on yourself.”

WifK 1 n X'AnO +/-» r. < .-V


COMMENTARY


107


962. Lit., “ and the wild ass is without practice.”

963. Lit., “ I do not get a name, or fame, except for practice.”

964. Hindu amongst its meanings has that of “ robber ”,
so that the sense is, he rushed impetuously towards her as a
robber who makes an attack. Hindu means also “ slave ”,
but that sense is hardly applicable here.

965. “ The moon ” in the first hemistich means the girl’s
face ; in the second, the king’s.

966. “ That rose ” means the girl ; “ narcissi,” her eyes ;
and “ rose-water ”, tears.

967. i.e., he caused all who were present to retire.

968. He means probably that his regret is greater than her
sufiering has been.

969. Lit., “ you are in statu quo,” tu bar jdy-l.

970. “Disturbance,” Fitna, the girl’s name, means “dis-
turbance, a disturber, a fascinator ”, so that the hemistich is
susceptible of two senses. Fitna nishdndan, “ to make
‘ Disturbance ’, i.e., the girl Fitna, sit down,” means also “ to
allay disturbance, to make things quiet ”.

971. “ Who set disturbance down ” ; lit., “ making disturbance
(Disturbance), fitna (Fitna), sit down.”

972. She means that in depreciating the king she did so
at the risk of her life in his interest. See the following distichs.

973. Lit., “ when he loosened the thumbstall.”

974. Excessive admiration of a thing is supposed to subject
it to the influence of the evil eye.

975. Lit., “ a fault, or cause of shame came to me.”

976. i.e., through Draco, the Dragon’s making the effects of
my love appear like hate (to the king). Draco, from this, would
appear to have generally a malefic inllueuce, but Auger Ferrier,
quoted in Note 905, attributes a good influence to the head of
Draco. For the influence of the tail of Draco see Note 905.

977. Lit., “ made his arm a shoulder-belt upon his neck.”

978. “ The usual offerings ” ; lit., “ sugar-pouring,” by which
is meant a bridegroom’s bestowing gifts upon the bride.


108


THE HAFT PAIKAE


It means also the distribution of confectionery at a betrothal.
(Cf. the modern shirliii-khvaran.)

Other meanings are “ speaking eloquently ”, and “ singing

979. The legendary Fish that supports the Ox on which the
earth was supposed to rest. (See Note 1,060.)

980. Lit., “ Yellow-eared ones (zard-gushdn) died in corners
(dar gusJia-M tnurdand).”

981. i.e., the black water or blackness of death.

982. i.e., his surname was NarsI (Narses), which is said to
mean “ he who reaches the truth ”. Narsi wa.s the name both
of Bahram's vazir, the person here .spoken of, and also of Bahriim’s
brother.

983. i.e., he had great foresight.

984. Lit., “ the king had found his fineness one in a hundred ” ;
i.e.j one of alloy in a hundred of pure metal, or 99°-'o of true metal.
I suppose it is implied that there must be a trifling alloy in every
one.

Or, if gal’I ba-sad is for yald dar rad, it would mean that he
had found his finone.ss a hundred times one, i.e., a hundred
parts of true metal in a hundred.

Or, the sense may be that in standard quality he was one in a
hundred.

985. “ Imposts,” bdj ; i.e., the imposts due from merchants.

980. “ Control or administration ” ; lit., “ pen.”

987. Lit., “ had made him (absolutely) influential in command
in all Persia.”

988. “ In the business of the town and army ” ; i.e., in civil
and military administration. He was apparently both Home
and War minister.

989. i.e., he kept practically in the same position, did nothing
really useful to himself, but idled away his time, and like a
mill threw away whatever he received.

990. i.e., other princes prepared to take advantage of the
situation.

991. “ The khan of khans from China (then) set out.”


COMMENTARY


109


Though some Persian historians ascribe the invasion to the
emperor of China, the invaders were really a people of Turkish
stock called Hayiitila. The Ilayatila (the name is said to be
the broken jdural of Haital) were called by the Greeks Ephthalites,
and by some Orientalis*'s, (notably St. Martinh have been identified
with the White Huns.

Canon Eawlinson says, however, that they were quite distinct
from the Huns of Attila in physical characteristics, advancement,
and pursuits, being fair of comple.vion, civilized, and agricultural,
whilst the Huns of Attila were dark, uncivilized, and nomadic.

So far as I can gather from the Oriental geographers the country
of the Hayatila was bounded on the north by the Qizil Qum
(Kizil Kum) desert and tlie Qara Dagh (Kara Tau) and Alexander
Ranges ; on the east, by Chinese Turkistan and the Hindu Kush ;
on the south, by the Kuh-i Baba (Kuh-i Baba) Range. On the
west, starting from the Kuh-i Hi.sar (Kuh-i Hissar) Range, the
boundary extended in a north-westerly direction to Andkhud
(Andkhui), and then north to the Oxus in about longitude
64° 40' E., and from north of the O.xus, inclining a little to the
north-we.st, to about longitude 04° 10' E.. and along that line
to its northern boundary. This would include nearly the whole
of the north of modern Afghanistan down to latitude 35° N.,
probably the whole of the province of Farghana, and the central
Asian khanates except Khiva.

tiadiq Isfahan! includes in the Hayatila country : Tukharistan,
with Badakhshan : Bamiyan (Bamiau), Shuburghan (Shibergan),
Andkhud (Andkhui), Tfdiqan. Balkh, Khatlan (Kotlan), Baqlan.

Riza QulJ Khan in his “ Safdrat-nama-yi Khvdrazm ” includes
the district and town of Usrushana, which he places in Farghana,
and Schefer in a note to his translation says ;

“ Ousroushineh. situe par 101° do longitude et 41° 30' de
latitude, est un di't ict cun-;i,.eiable des pays des Hiathileh qui
s'etend entre le Sihoun et Samarqand, sur un espace que I on
estime etre de vingt-si.x fer.sengs.”

In a sub-note upon Hiathileh (Hayatila) Schefer says:

“ Le pavs des Hiathileh est le nom sous lequel on designe la
contrdo oil se trouvent Ics villes de Boukhara, de Samarqand et
de Khodjend, et (jui d’apres les Orientaux, aurait dte peuple
par les descendants de Heithel (Haitall, fils d’Alim, fils de Sam,


no THE HAFT PAIKAR

fils de Noe, qui s’y serait retire apres la dispersion des peuples,
a la suite de la confusion des langues de Babel.”

I do not know what Schefer’s authority is for including Bukhara
and Samarqand in the Hayatila country. The early history of
Bukhara is very imperfectly known. I have, however, ventured,
in reliance upon his statement, to include those cities and
territories in my attempted definition of the limits of the Hayatila
country. (See also Notes 694, 995, and 1,892.)

992. Lit., “ at his stirrup.”

993. “ A resurrection ” ; i.e., a great disturbance.

994. Lit., “ in the concealed things of rolls of paper.”

995. Khaqiin, a title which in Persian poetry, and sometimes
in prose, is apparently attributed to the emperor of China,
is properly the title of any Turkish or Mongol emperor. Here it
should be referred to the ruler of the Hayatila. The word, says
Eedhouse, is said to be originally the Chinese word hu-hang.
(See also Notes G94, 991, and 1,892.)

996. “ WeTc dust upon your road ” ; i.e., we are your humble
slaves.

997. Lit., “ removed his desire from the Persians.”

998. “ It flashed throughout the world ” ; lit., “ it became
warm in the world.”

999. i.e., no ruling authority remains in the country.

1.000. i.e., the Turkish general.

1.001. The first hemistich is literally, “ the king played with
cups ” (as a juggler) ; and the second, “ he juggled with balls
(used by jugglers), whilst the balls themselves were concealed.”
I read with the B. ed. of 1328 miihra j)inhun, and not with the
I.O. editions muJir pinJuirt.

The latter, however, would mean, “ whilst his signet-ring was
concealed ” ; i.e., “ whilst his authority was in abeyance.”

1.002. i.e., he did not at present practise open hostility,
but deception. Dud, “ smoke,” means also “ affliction ”.

1.003. Lit., “ he gave him the hare’s sleep,” khvdh-i khargush
dad, i.e., the sleep of negligence.

“ The hare’s sleep ” means also sometimes “ pretended
neghgence, sleeping with one eye open ”.


COMMENTAEY


111


1.004. Lit., “ he directed (his) shaft or arrow,” tir khvash hard.
(Cf. ‘inan khvash kardan.)

1.005. i.e., drank up the founts of light, namely the moon and
stars, as a snake would drink u]> founts of water. The meaning
is sim|)ly that it was a pitch-dark night without moon or stars.

1.006. This and the next distich mean that the night was so
dark that it was calculated to give rise to countless vain fears.

1.007. “ The bright-hearted sky.” The bright heart of the
sky is the moon, which on this night was under a black veil,
as the gold in a jar may be under a covering or seal of pitch.

1.008. Ambergris ; i.e., “ blackness,” ambergris being dark in
colour.

1.009. Bahrdminn ; i.e., “ martial, valorous,” Bahram being
the Persian name of Mars.

1.010. i.e., the arrow passed right through the mark in a
moment.

1.011. i.e., his enemies could not use caution, so rapid and
effectual were his arrow's.

1.012. i.e., the arrow came and pierced and passed beyond
the mark so rapidly that though the wound was seen the arrow
was not, it having passed right through. On the other hand,
where the arrow’ was visible there was no wound because the
arrow had passed right through and gone beyond.

1.013. i.e., he made a mount of slain enemies on the plain,
and wore down the mount to the level of the plain by the trampling
of his horse.

1.014. “ The falchion ” is “the rays (of the sun)”.

“ A bowl of blood ” means “ the round, blood-hke disk of the
sun ”. The meaning of the distich i.s, “ lYhen the sun rose ” ;
but there is also a sub-allusion to the sword and bowl used in
executions.

1.015. I am reading zahra, “gall-bladder,” but one might
read Zuhra, “ Venus," as a planet appearing in the early morning.
(Cf. the last distich but one.)

1.016. Lit., “ wagered its tongue.”

1.017. “ Dragons ” ; i.e., “ brave wrarriors.”


112


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.018. “ As hairs ” ; i.e., as hairs naturally split at the ends.

1.019. Lit., “ on his path ” ; i.e., where his path lay.

1.020. “Inclined to flight”; lit., “in the middle-place of
flight,” dar miydna-gah-i gur'tz. So I.O. MS. 1168.

Other I.O. MSS. read,

dar bahdna-rjah-i guriz, “ in the pretest-place of flight.” which,
I think, would signify “ finding reasons for flight ”.

1.021. Lit., “when the king’s iron was in violent ebullition,
or commotion.”

1.022. i.e., that we may throw the centre into confusion and
rout it.

1,02.3. “ Lions ” ; i.e., horses. “ Dragons ” ; i.e., swords.

1.024. “ The swarthy lions ” ; i.e., the brave warriors,
possibly called “ swarthy ” as being Arabs,

1.025. “ Those whose swords were soft ” ; i.e., their foes
who did not u«e much energy.

1.026. i.e., they fled, raising the dust in their flight, as far
as the Oxus.

1.027. Lit., “ he made fresh over the world New Year’s
festivities ” ; i.e., ho made, as it were, a second New Year’s
festival for the world.

1.028. Pahlavi, the older Persian spoken in Sasanian times.

“ With Persian tunes,” Pdrsi-dhang ; i.e., with tunes composed
according to the Persian modes of music. So I.O. MS. 1168.

Other I.O. MSS. read,

Pdrsl-farhang, “of Persian talent,’’ which has some support
in the next distich but one.

M’ith regard to Pahlavi, Hamza-yi I.sfahani in the Tanbih
says Pahlavi was one of the five dialects of Persia, which were
Pahlavi, Dari, Pars!, Hauzl, and Shlrazi.

1.029. Lit., “ One day with a blessed-fortuned ascendant
Bahram Gur ascended his throne.’’

^ There are two ascendants, one “the ascendant of birth”,
tdh‘-i viladat, the other “ the a.scendant of question ’’, tdli-i
mas ala, the latter being the sign of the zodiac which appears on
the horizon when the astrologer is consulted upon some question.


COMMENTARY


113


or which will appear at the time when it is proposed to carry out
some design.

1.030. “ Commander,” mlr (for amir) ; i.e., mir-laslikar.

1.031. “ In times of injury ” ; i.e., at the times when injury
should he inflicted on the foe in battle.

1.032. Iraj, the name of the youngest son of Farldun, the
sixth king of the first or Pishdadian dynasty of Persia. He was
killed by Tur, his half-brother, the second son of Faridun.

1.033. Arash, the name of two persons, one a hero in the army
of Minuchihr, the grandson of Farldun ; the other the second
son of Kai-Qubad the first of the second or Kayanian dynasty of
Persian kings.

1.034. Giv, the name of a Persian hero the son of Gudarz
and the son-in-law of Rustam (see the next Note). He lived
in the time of Kai-Khusran, the third king of the second or
Kayanian dynasty of Persia.

1.035. Rustam, prince of Slstiin (Seistan), and Zabulistan,
the greatest of the Persian heroes, was the leader of the army of
Kai-Ka'us the second king of the second or Kayanian dynasty
of Persia. (See also Notes 212 and 2,078.)

1.036. Ilizahr and Zirghlm both mean “ lion ", but as the
distinction of name cannot be retained in English I have shghtly
paraphrased the hemistich.

1.037. As regards the “ cloud ”, the “ wine " represents the
‘‘rain”, and the “sword” the “lightning”.

1.038. First hemistich, lit., “ my hare's sleep is concealed ” ;
i.e., the fact that it is hare's sleep is not apparent to people, but
there is real vigilance under seeming negligence.

Second hemistich, lit., “ it sees the enemy though it be asleep,”
the “ it ” referring apparently to hare in the first hemistich.

1.039. i.e., the drunkenness is that of the elephant “ in heat ”,
“ mast ” (lit., “ drunken ”).

“ The laughter ” is compared with the lion's roaring.

1.040. See the last Note.

1.041. The Qaisar (the Ca-sar) ; i.e., the ruler of the Eastern
Empire.


114


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.042. This means possibly that he makes a kind of table of
his enemy's head.

1.043. i.e., I give into the possession of my friends. (Cf.
dar dslhi kardan.)

Qarun, the name of the son of Moses's paternal uncle, the
Korah of the Old Testament.

1.044. Kabdbs. (See Notes 568 and 1,340.)

1.045. Ba-chunin pai gJialat ki afshurdam seems to be an
ellipsis for ba-chiaiin pai ki dar ghalat afshurdam.

1.046. i.e., the possessions of that robber, the khaqan, Hindu
having the sense here of robber.

1.047. i.e., we are the slaves of it.

1.048. Hama dar sar shudand-u sar na-shudand ; i.e., all
came to ruin, and did not become exalted.

1.049. “From white or black"; i.e., from any one in the
world. It is possible to translate, “ no one has witnessed, whether
white or black,” but this does not accord so well with the first
hemistich.

1.050. i.e., being only ordinary game they are marks for
ordinary simple weapons.

1.051. Lit., “ (who) can draw aside the neck of the rhinoceros.”
(Cf. gardan kaj, or kham, kardan, “ to bend the neck,” i.e., “ to
humble,” or “to humble oneself”.)

The use of the lasso is presumably implied.

1.052. A play upon the words chin, “ wrinkle,” and Chin,
“ China.”

1.053. It is probable that Hindu has here the sense of Hindu-yi
shah, “ the Hindu night,” since Bahram's victory was gained
by a night attack. It may, however, mean Hindi, “ an Indian
(sword).” (The I.O. B. cd. reads Hindi.)

Again, Hindu signifies also “ slave ”, “ watchman ”, which are
also possible meanings here, the sense being presumably “ a
few slaves, or watchmen ”.

1.054. Faghfiir, says AlbirunI, was the special title of the
emperor of China. It is a later Arabicized form of haghpur ; cf.
the Akhaemenian Persian laga-putra, “ the son of God.”


COMMENTARY


115


1.055. A very doubtful hemistich. I have translated from
the I.O. B. ed.,

khud dar tdrak-ash du-lakht kutiad. I.O. MSS. 777, 1168,
and 1491 read,

chun dar-l tdrarn-ash du-lakht kunad, “ he splits it like the
door of his round tent.”

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

chun dar-l dsmdii du-lakht kunad, ‘‘ he splits it like the milky
way in two.”

This, as seen from the following description of the milky way,
is not an unreasonable reading :

“ A dimly luminous zone encompassing the heavens as a great
circle, which intersects the celestial equator at an angle of 63°,
and has its northern pole in R.A. 12 h. 47 m., D. + 27°. It
bifurcates in Cygnus, and the two galactic streams run side by side
over an area of 120°, reuniting near the Southern Cross. . . It
is interrupted by a wide gap in Argo, where it forms a fan-shaped
expansion 20° across.” Besides these, other rifts and vacuities
are described as abounding, one measuring 8° by 5°.

Dar-i dsman might possibly however mean simply, “ the door
of the sky,” which is said to be opened sometimes by the angels,
by which it is implied that the time has come when prayers
are heard or granted. Such an interpretation, however, would
seem rather far-fetched. The dar in dar-i dsman, “ the milky way,”
is for dara, valley.

1.056. i.e., he gives an antidote to his friends against the
poison of their enemies.

For the “ snake-stone ”, see Note 1,693.

1.057. i.e., wherever he rides he checks his enemies.

His bridle is likened to a dragon or serpent.

1.058. Cf. the expressions gul bar tdrak zadan, and gul ba-
dastdr zadan, “ to fasten a rose upon the head, or turban.”

1.059. “ To bore pearls ” is ‘‘ to speak eloquently ”.

1.060. The Fish; i.e., the legendary Fish that supports the
Ox on which the earth was imagined to rest ; and hence, “ the
lowest place or depth.”

“ The moon,” which is in the first sky, the sky immediately


116


THE HAFT PAIKAR


over the earth, is opposed, as the highest, to “ the Fish ”, the
lowest. (See also Notes 739 and 1,416.)

1.061. “The relations”; lit., “the accounts.” i.e., What
man should say whether the crown is rightly or wrongly on the
king’s head ?

1.062. “ Protection ” ; lit., “ shadow,” saya. I.O. MS. 1168,
only, has shuqqa, which might mean here “ royal order ”.

1.063. Lit., “ you have power over our wet and dry.”

1.064. ‘Ummanian. (See Note 903.)

1.065. David is celebrated amongst Muslims as an armourer.
(See the Qur’an, xxi., 80, and xxxiv., 10.)

1.066. i.e., he was generous in a high degree.

Mount Ararat, called in Persian Judi, is the mountain on
which Noah’s Ark was supposed to have rested.

1.067. Shushtar or Shushtar, the modern capital of Khuzistan
(Susiana). The town was famous for its dress-stuft’s and brocades,
but probably the reference is to the wealtli derived from the
fertility of the district in which it is situated.

Tustar is said to be an old name of the town. (See also
Note 590.)

1.068. I have reversed the order of the two hemistichs for
the sake of clearness. They read literally,

“ He gave (him all this), so that liis face lighted up like the
moon ; and he bestowed upon him in (or, out of) Yaman as far as
Aden.” (See Note 737.)

Instead of the pronoun I have introduced Nu'man’s name
into the translation for clearness. He was mentioned some
distichs back as making a speech to Bahram, but it may perhaps
be remembered that before this Munzir had been mentioned as
king, and that no death has subsequently been spoken of. We
must therefore assume inadvertence on the part of the Author
or carelessness on that of the copyists.

1.069. “ That master ” ; i.e., Simnar.

1.070. “The Seven Climes”; i.e., the whole inhabited
world as known to Oriental geographers. (See Note 207.)

1.071. The term hafl-jush, “the seven fusions,” is described
by the Burhan-i Qdti as a mixture of the seven metals, gold.


COMMENTARY


117


silver, copper, iron, lead, tin, and antimony ; and by the Bahar-i
‘Ajam as a bronze composed of all the metals. One would
gather from the second hemistich, however, that the meaning
here is the fusing of metals for the purpose of trying to make
gold. If this be correct the sense of the distich would be that
he could desist from trying to make the gold of happiness when
he had the alchemy of the seven portraits to make it for him.

1.072. “ A pearl ” ; i.e., the princess.

“ Virtues.” A play upon the word gauhar, which means “ pearl,
jewel ”, and also “ nature, qualities, virtues ”.

1.073. A dinar was an ancient gold coin worth about ten
shillings.

1.074. i.e., he created a disturbance by his demands and
threats.

1.075. “ Gold of Barbary ” ; i.e., pure gold.

1.076. “ The Ray ” ; i.e., the Raja.

1.077. For an account of the Seven Climes, see Note 207.

1.078. “ E.vclusively ” ; lit., “ out of (all) the world’s goods.”

1.079. “ The garden’s lamps and candles ” ; i.e., “ the flowers.”

1.080. Lit., “ had removed his baggage and effects.” By
“ the gardener ” is possibly meant the warmer season before the
winter.

1.081. As the nightingale is not heard in the winter and the
crow is, the author fancifully conceives that the latter has stolen
the former’s notes.

1.082. “Hindu” means “black” and also “thief”.

1.083. “ Robbed the fire of light ” ; i.e., was brighter in its
effects than fire. “ Made swords from water ” ; i.e., made sharp
ice or icicles. “ AVater, too, from swords ” ; i.e., deprived them of
eclat or honour, brought them into disrepute, db kardan, having
those senses. (Cf. ah shudan, “ to melt ; to become ashamed,
or divested of honour ; to grow obsolete.”)

1.084. Lit., “ icy coldness,” zamharir.

1.085. “ Egg-plant robes ” ; i.e., white robes.

1.086. “ Two-hued ” in respect of day and night.


118


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.087. Means presumably that the fire which may be struck
from stone (flint) kept within the stone because of the cold.

At the same time, the heat of the sun was supposed to be
required to develop the ruby in the stone.

1.088. i.e., the roses when made into rose-water or otto of
roses and put into bottles had stoppers for these bottles of a species
of cement, with which they are fancifully supposed to have
covered themselves to keep out the cold.

1.089. i.e., the quicksilver-like globules in the glass of water
by being frozen became like pure silver.

1.090. “ Winter-house,” tub-lJiuna, which appears to be a
room with a species of oven sunk into the floor for the purpose of
warming.

1.091. Lit., “ maintained the nature of the four seasons” ;
i.e., kept the mean between them.

1.092. i.e., by the burning of such perfumes as sandal and
aloes-wood the wintry air was tempered. " Wintry,” lit., ” snow-
raising,” barf-anglz, the reading of I.O. MSS. 777 and 1491,
and of the B. ed. of 1328.

I.O. MS. 1168 reads less satisfactorily ‘ambar-biz, “ ambergris-
sifting ” ; i.e., “ scented.”

The readings of the other I.O. MSS. I have consulted are
worthless.

1.093. i.e., soothed the brain and gave lively fancies to the
heart.

1.094. It is implied that the Hindus are black as smoke and
their devotions as well.

1.095. “ Zoroastrian sulphur red of hue.” “ Zoroastrian ”
because of the fire associated with the religion.

1.096. Both hernistichs are descriptive of the fire.

1.097. i.e., the fire after giving forth darting, unsteady flames,
settled into a steady glow'.

1.098. Descriptive of the red glow of the fire.

1.099. “ Gardener ” ; lit., “ labourer.”

“ The juice of grapes ” means here red wine,

1.100. An allusion to the yellow of the fire and the blackness
of the smoke.


COmiENTAKY


119


1.101. “ A veil of musk ” ; i.e., a black veil (of smoke). With
regard to the sun the veil of musk means, of course, a black
cloud.

1.102. An allusion to the appearance of the fire through the
smoke.

1.103. “ A Turk ” ; i.e., a beauty of brilliant complexion.

“ Related to the race of Greeks ” ; lit., “ whose lineage

originated in Greeks ” ; an allusion to the inconstancy and
volatileness of the fire, which on account of those qualities is
hkened to Greeks. Cf. sabuk Riiim, “ the inconstant Greek,” as
a term for “ fire ”.

1.104. Qurratu ’Wain, ‘‘lustre and brightness (lit., coolness)
of the eyes,” is a name of women. ‘‘ Lustre of the Eyes of
Hindus ” is a reference to the lustrous fire in proximity to the
black smoke.

1.105. I have never seen any allusion to “ the torch of Jonah ”,
mash‘al-i Yitnus.

Kallm, “ The Speaker ” (with God), is the special title of
Moses.

“ The Speaker’s lamp ” means probably “ the burning bush ”.

“ The feast of Jesus ” refers possibly either to the Marriage
Feast or to the Last Supper, in which wine is mentioned, which
on account of the colour generally associated with it is likened
to fire. Ci.atish-i pur db ; dlish-i tar , dtish-i rac, etc., which are
names given to red wine.

“ Garden of Abraham ” is a reference to the rose-garden into
which the fire turned when he was cast into it, according to the
Persian legend, by order of Nimrod.

1.106. “ Of a musky hue ” ; i.e., black.

Mirrors were made of metal.

1.107. Ydqut is a generic name for “ ruby ”, “ topaz ”, and
“ amethyst or sapphire ”, according as it is qualified by the
adjectives surkh (" red ”), zard (‘‘ yellow ’’), or kabud (“ blue ”).
If used alone it means ” ruby ”.

1.108. ” Ambergris-perfumed ” refers to the perfumes burnt
in the fire. “ Embracing coal ’’ ; lit., “ (with) charcoal in her
bosom,” means, with regard to the young bride, ” with long,
black hair.”


120


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.109. “ At goldsmiths’ work ” ; i.e., giving out yellow flames
from the burning perfumes.

1.110. i.e., yellow and red.

1.111. “Fuel”; lit., “plants.”

1.112. A snake or dragon was supposed to guard every hidden
treasure.

1.113. Lit., “ the hell of the people of the caravan to the
fire-temple.”

1.114. “ The heaven ” of those ; lit., “ the Garden ” of those ;
i.e., the garden of paradise.

1.115. This apparently refers to Bahram's Magian guests,
and to their gathering close round the fire as devotees.

1.116. The regret is possibly because Satan and hell are called
“ fire ”.

1.117. i.e., beautiful dancing girls were waving their arms in
the dance.

1.118. i.e., graceful cupbearers and attendants were circling
round.

1.119. The ring-doves are possibly the cup-bearers represented
on account of their beauty to have descended from the heavens.

By “ blood ” is meant the red wine. Or, possibly, it was in
the banquet-room as if the sky did this, the “ ring-doves ”
representing glass ve.ssels, and the “ blood ”, as in the former
supposition, standing for the red wine.

Or, again, the first “ ring-doves ” may mean snow-flakes, and
the second, glass vessels, the sense of the distich being that
the wintry weather induced them to drink wine.

1.120. I have reversed the order of the two terms of com-
parison in the second hemistich for the sake of clearness.

The wine is likened to wet fire, and the crystal cup to dry water.

1.121. Kabdbs. (See Rotes 568 and 1,340.)

1.122. A very special feature is made of wine-drinking among
the older Persian kings. (Cf. the Shdh-ndma.)

1.123. “ A ripe thing ” ; i.e., the grape. “ Crushed to

death.” (Cf. sirndb-i kushta, “ quicksilver reduced to powder.”)

1.124. i.e., they made the path of amusement open, clear,
and bright.


COMMENT AKY


121


1.125. In the two hemistichs the contrast is between the
grandeur of the kinw and the minute farticularity of his know-
ledge, i.e., the subtlety of his intellect in grasping the most
minute points.

In the second hemistich daqiqa is, I think, used in the sense of
khurda-bini .

1.126. i.e., no one has seen either in the outer state or in
the hidden mind of any other king.

1.127. “ By the glory of (the monarch’s) head ” ; i.e., through
his exaltation and auspicious fortune.

Or, by the glory of his head ” might possibly be an adjura-
tion, but not necessarily so, since the second hemistich may
simply supplement the reason for their having everything, and
not give another reason when the first has been sufficient.

1.128. “ Through his auspicious steps ” ; i.e., through his
coming amongst us and being our king.

1.129. i.e.. Would that as regards that enjoyment and pros-
perity of the king's there were some means by which the evil
eye might be averted. Enjoyment and prosperity are supposed
to attract the ill-eficcts of the evil eye.

The drift of the orator's words is that all the enjoyment,
happiness, and prosperity of the people depend upon those of
the king, and that they are so great that the evil eye is to be
feared, and a means of averting it is desirable. If the effil eye
is averted from the king it will be averted from the people.

1.130. i.e., so that (cf. also the two preceding distichs) the
king might ever have as much enjoyment, happiness, and
prosperity as at the present time.

1.131. “Fixed (their) hearts upon the speech”; i.e., were
pleased with, and acquiesced in it.

1.132. Dama means literally “ wind and snow ; icicle ;
asthma ” ; but it seems here equivalent to the Arabic word ziq,
“ anxiety, contraction, oppression.” Cf. ziqu ’n-nafas, “ oppres-
sion, difficulty of breath, asthma.”

1.133. (S/iida, the name of the man. a name of the sun.

1.134. i.e., of anything he wished.


122


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.135. ManI (Manes), the famous Persian syncretist and
painter, the founder of the sect of the Manichceans.

Farhad, who cut through the rocky mountain BJstun for the
sake of his beloved Shirin. (See Nizami's poem Khiisrau-n Shinn.
See also Notes 1,163, 1,165, 1,234, and 1.535.)

1.136. Simnar, the architect who built the palace of Khavarnaq.

1.137. Nciq.sh means painting, sculpture, and also engraving,
and embroidery.

1.138. Lit., “ when he saw water in his tongue and fire in
his heart.”

1.139. “ Form a likeness to ; or “ proceed by analogy with ” ;
lit., “ take a relation from.” Cf. the following distichs to the
end of the speech.

1.140. “ He'll be as the sky,” huhn-i asrndn darad.

1.141. Or, '■ from my sketches or plans of the business.”

But az, “ from,” sometimes has the sense of “ for ”, so that

the meaning may be “ for the accomplishment of the business ”.

1.142. “■ Skies ” ; lit., “ fortresses.”

1.143. “ Idols ” ; i.e., “ wives.”

1.144. “ Signalized ” ; lit., ” having the distinguishing
ornament ” ; or, more literally, “ having ‘ the shoulder-band of
rich stufi worn by kings and grandees ', ” 'dam.

1.145. “ In ground-work and in columns ” ; i.e., absolutely
and entirely.

1.146. The Burhun-i Qdli' and other authorities make each
one of certain definite countries dependent upon one particular
planet ; and certain geographers, e.g., JurjanI, assert that the
nature of the people is influenced by the nature of the planet
which governs their country.

The authorities, however, do not agree, except in a few cases,
as to which planet governs which country.

The statement of the Bitrlinu-i Qdli' has been given in Note 207.
Authorities generally agree as to the First, Fifth, and Seventh,
but not as to the otliers, and, as a matter of fact, according
to the limits of the Climes assigned by geographers, Turkistan,
which clashes with Transoxiana, is not in the Third Clime, nor
Rum in the Sixth, but in the Fourth, Part of India is in the


COMMENTARY


123


First ; part of China, but not Khata, in the Second ; (Maghrib
is in the Third) ; part of ‘Iraq and Khurasan in the Fourth ;
(but Rum is also in the Fourth) ; part of Transoxiana in the
Fifth ; part of the hyperborean regions, the far north, Slavonia,
etc., in the Sixth and Seventh.

Maghrib, by the way, i.e., north-west Africa or Barbary, from
Tripoh to Morocco, (often Morocco alone), is included by some
in the Chmes, though not by the Burlidn-i Quti . (See also
Notes 207 and 1,147.)

1.147. i.e., each of the days, as in the Classical and Scandi-
navian mythology, is under the influence of one particular
planet : —

Saturday is subject to Saturn ;

Sunday, to the sun ;

Monday, to the moon ;

Tuesday, to Mars ;

Wednesday, to Mercury ;

Thursday, to Jupiter;

Frida}’, to Venus.

But it will be observed that except with regard to Saturn
the order of the planets as associated with the days is difierent
from their order as associated with the Climes. Thus, (beginning
with Saturday), Wednesday, the fifth day, is subject to Mercury,
but Transoxiana, the Fifth Clime, is subject to Venus.

It is evident, therefore, that the Author, when associating in
the Stories which follow any particular day with the Clime
corresponding with it in number, is not adhering either to any
given order of Climes or to the statements of the geographers.
In fact, although he takes the days in order, he is quite arbitrary
as to the Climes, giving, e.g., Saqliib, i.e., Slavonia, as the Fourth
Clime, whereas it is in the Sixth and Seventh and still farther
north. According to the Biirhdn-i Qdti, as mentioned in Note
207, it is in the Seventh. (See also Notes 207 and 1,146.)

1.148. Lit., “ as long as life is on the target of affairs,” td
buvad ‘umr bar nishdna-yi Mr.

1.149. “ Applause,” ufarin ; “ Creator,” Afarhianda.

1.150. “ Simnar’s formula.” See the Section, “ Bahram finds
the picture of the Seven (Fair) Faces in Khavarnaq.”


124


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.151. Lit., “ he had knowledge of a concealed calculation ” ;
i.e., he already had knowledge through Simnar’s formula or
communication of what fate had in store for him, so that the
words of Shida had an eSect upon him as harmonizing with
and confirming that communication.

1.152. “ He gave no answer for a few short days.”

The B. ed. of 1328

riizakl chayid-ra na-ddd javdb.

I.O. MS. 402 has

ruzaki chand az-dn na-ddd javdb.

I.O. MS. 1168 reads : —

■pai bar anddkhtan na-dld .mvdb, “ he did not think it advisable
to throw away the tracks ” : i.e., I suppose, to wander at random
without proper consideration of the way.”

1.153. Bahram is the Persian name of Mars as well as that
of the king.

1.154. It is not clearly stated, but it seems that this astrologer
was not Shida.

1,1.55. i.e., had made them as he had promised a kind of
parallel to the seven skies.

1.156. Seven skies ” ; i.e., the seven domed houses of the
palace.

1.157. “ That wondrous man ” ; lit., “ that skilful or

dexterous one of creation,” dii sin‘-i (or dfarinish.

1.158. Amul, a town in Mazandaran. There is also a town
of the same name on the Oxus.

1.159. i.e., my action is no more from lavishness than
Nu'man’s was from greed. The action of each was fated.

1.160. i.e., is roasted or parched with thirst. (For kabdb see
Notes 568 and 1,340.)

1.161. “ Submission,” ‘djizi, the reading of 1,0. MS. 1491.

I.O. MSS. 777 and 1163; the I.O. B. ed. and the B. ed. of

1328 read khdniushl, “ silence.”

1.162. “ The crown of Kai-Qubad ” ; i.e., the royal crown of
Persia. Kai-Qubad was the first king of the second or Kayanian
dynasty of Persia.


COMMENTARY


125


“ Kai-Khusrau’s crown ” ; i.e., again, simply, the royal crown
of Persia.

Kai-Khusrau was the third of the same dynasty.

1.163. Blstiin (Behistun), the name of the moimtain which
Farhad cut through at the command of Shirln.

“ The whole of the sculpture at Bistun,” says Sir John Malcolm,
“ is ascribed to the chisel of Farhad. He was promised, we are
told in Persian romance, that if he cut through the rock, and
brought a stream that flowed on the other side of the hill to the
valley, the lovely Shirln should be his reward. The same story
adds that he was on the point of completing his labour when
Khusrau (the king), fearing to lose his mistress, sent an old woman
to inform Farhad that the fair object of his desire was dead.
He was at work on one of the highest parts of the rock when he
heard the mournful intelligence. He immediately cast himself
headlong, and was dashed in pieces.”

By Bistun is meant here apparently the seven-domed building,
constructed, presumably, of stone or marble, and adorned with
sculptured work. (See also Notes 1.165, 1.234, and 1,555.)

1.164. “ Fled ” ; i.e., the work of Farhad could not compete
with this sculpture-adorned stone-palace.

1.165. The popular etymology of Bistun is “ columnless ”, as
if from hi-sutun.

The old Persian form was Bagastana, i.e.. “ Place of the gods.”
Baga is said by the Enctjclop(rdia of Islam to have been particu-
larly Mithras. (See also Notes l,l63, 1,234, and 1,555.)

1.166. “ In those walls ” ; i.e., presumably, in the walls
which surrounded the seven-domed building.

1.167. i.e.. the walls were so high that they were as a rampart
round the heavens.

1.168. i.e., the domes were not only made of the same colour
as the spheres of the planets, but presumably by astrological
arts they had in their natures something analogous to the natures
of the planets.

1.169. Lit., “ of Saturn's kind.”

1.170. Maya, “ essence,” is used here in the sense of gauhar.

1.171. Lit., “And that to which Mars attached a circuit, or
a collar, or possessions.”


126


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.172. “ Turquoise,” firuza ; “ felicity,” Jiruzi.

1.173. Lit., “ towards or to whose tower.”

1.174. “ Through the moon's aspect throve in verdancy.”

The sphere of the moon was supposed to be green. The word

sar-sabzT means both “ greenness, verdancy ” and “ thriving,
prosperity ”, and it has these two senses here.

In this and the preceding six distichs the colour of each dome
is described as being the same as that of the sphere of the planet
upon the temperament of which it is said to have been fashioned.

From the third, fourth, and seventh of these distichs it would
seem to be implied that each planet revolved round the particular
dome under whose auspices it was.

1.175. “ Had covenants from them ” ; i.e., were protected
by and dependent upon them.

1.176. Lit., “ (were) on their bridal seats.”

1.177. Lit,, “ a different palace.”

1.178. “ Her sweetness ” ; lit., “ her halva.’’ (For l}alva, see
Note 1,459.)

1.179. The “ rose-garden ”, so qualified, is the world.

1.180. “ This two days’ abiding-place ” ; i.e., the world.

1.181. According to the Burhan-i Qati‘ Shammas was the
name of the man who first instituted fire-worship. Hence, the
Shammasian temjfie is the fire-temple, and the reference is either
to its brightness, or to the white robes of the priests.

1.182. ‘Abbdsian means “ black ”, that being the colour
affected by the Abbaside Khalifs of Baghdad, who reigned from
A.H. 132 to A.H. 656 (a.d. 749 to a.d. 1258).

1.183. Galia ; i.e., galia mosekata, a composition of musk,
ambergris, camphor, and oil of ben-nuts. Dark or black
things are often compared with it on account of its dark
colour.

1.184. “ Scattering scent ” ; lit., “ making scent.”

1.185. “ Black musk ” means the darkness of the sky at
night, which envelops the moon, here likened to white silk (robes).


COMMENTAEY


127


1.186. “ That Cashmerian early Spring ” ; i.e., the Indian
princess.

1.187. “ Perfume ” ; i.e., utterance as sweet as the perfume
of the morning breeze.

1.188. “ A case of pearls ” ; i.e., her mouth.

1.189. “ The five turns of music.” It was the custom to
play music or beat a drum five times a day before the palace of
a king, prince, or governor.

1.190. “ The moon’s throne ” ; bt., “ the four-cushioned seat
of the moon,” which probably means simply a cushioned seat or
throne fit for a king. It might have reference to the four phases
of the moon.

1.191. “Sugar” means her lips, and “ aloes-wood ” her
words ; but sugar and aloes-wood are sometimes mixed together
and burnt as a perfume.

1.192. Simply a compliment to the lady, by which she is, by
implication, likened to the kuris. (Cf. Note 1,795.)

1.193. Lit., “ become an associate or friend to us with the
story.”

1.194. Lit., “ and become a whitewasher or a whitesmith for
this black.”

1.195. It is implied that the king behaved so well to the slave-
girl that though he is dead, and she is in a position to express
a true opinion, she has nothing but good to say of him.

1.196. i.e., it was a very lofty room.

1.197. Lit., “ Whoever came he held (his) reins, and received
him as a visitor to him.sclf.”

1.198. Shnnr'ih is the name of a fabulous bird whose abode
was supposed to be Jlount Alburz. It is celebrated in the Shdh-
ndma as the foster-father and teacher of Zal, the father of Rustam,
the great Persian hero.

In Sufi terminologv (cf. especially the Mantiqu t-Tair of
‘Attar) it represents the Divine Essence. (See also Notes 1,208
and 1,558.)

1.199. ‘Anqd, the name of a fabu'ous bird said by the
dictionaries to be the Simurgh (see the last Note), but in Sufi
phraseology it signifies “ matter ” in the philosophical sense of


128


THE HAET PAIKAR


the word; i.e., the substratum of all material objects. lu the
Sufi sense, therefore, it is the direct opposite to Simurgli. (Cf.
‘Abdu ’r-Razzaq’s Dictionary of the Technical Terms of the Sufis,
and the Enneads of Plotinus.)

1.200. The “tunic”, qabd, either long or short, is an outer
garment open in front.

The “ gown ”, pirdhan, is an inner long garment which covers
the whole body.

1.201. “ The Stream or Water of Life ” was supposed to be
in a dark place at the extremity of the world, Zalmat or (plural)
Zulumdt. The prophet Khizr (sometimes confused with Elias or
with St. George) was said to have been the only person who found
it and drank of its water. Alexander the Great sought but did
not find it.

It is probable that the legend of the Water of Life, so commonly
referred to by Persian poets, has descended from the Babylonian
Epic of the progress of the sun through the seasons, which nai rates
how the sun after his youth, manhood, and decline in Spring,
Summer, and Autumn respectively, perishes in the storms and
“ darkness ” of Winter, but is restored to life by the Water of
Life in that darkness, and appears again in his youth in the Spring.
(See also Xotes 1,562 and 1,698.)

1.202. The qibla is the direction to which people turn in
prayer. With Muslims it is the ka^ba or cubical house in the
temple of Mecca.

1,20.3. Irarn, the name of thc fabulous gardens said to have
been devised by Shaddadu ’bnu ‘Ad, a king of Yaman, in emula-
tion of the gardens of paradise. (See the Qur'an, Ixxxix., 5-7.
See also Notes 90 and 1,605.)

1,204. The meaning of this second hemistich is “ it has brought
me under the ban of misfortune ”. The literal sense seems to
be “it has drawn the black ink of the pen through me : it has
erased me, or smothered me in black ”, Cf, the idiom, dar qalam
drnadan (lit., “ to come into the pen ”), which means bulil va-
khdrij az mabhai shudan, “ to become null and void, futile and
beside the question,” (so as to be, as it were, subject to erasure).

Another idiom is worthy of notice, qnhm dar siynhl nihudan,
“ to dip the pen into black ink,” which signifies umdda-yi bad-


co:nbientary


129


hakhtl nuvishtan shudan, “ to prepare to write ill-fortune (against
a person).”

1.205. i.e., my white body.

1.206. i.e., may attempt an audacious and impossible thing.

1.207. i.e., he opened his lips and spoke words, hkened in
their sweetness to the scent of musk.

1.208. i.e., it is a mystery which cannot be disclosed. The
Simurgh is said to be “ existent in name, but not found in body ”,
maujudu ’l-ism, madumu l-jism. (See also Notes 1,198 and 1,558.)

1.209. Natives of both ‘Iraq and Khurasan were famed for
cunning.

1.210. “ China’s realm.” This may be China proper, or
possibly either Chinese Turkistan, or Turkistan. (See Note 694.)

1.211. “ Black silk ” ; i.e., as regards the moon, the dark sky
at night.

1.212. i.e., whoever engages in the intoxicating mystery which
that city can ofier him.

1.213. An savad, *' that city,” means also “ that blackness”.

1.214. Lit., “ fastened (his) baggage on to (his) ass.”

1.215. “ Check to king and castle.” The term used here is
farzln-band, " fixed by the queen,” and means, according to
Dr. Forbes, check to the adversary's king by the queen, the
latter at the same time attacking the castle.

It should be remembered that in the Oriental game the castle
was the most valuable piece on the board.

1.216. i.e., to let me get the better of him by guessing tbe
secret.

1.217. “ Iram's Garden.” (See Notes 90, 1,203. and 1,605.)

1.218. i.e., was dressed in black, musk being of a dark colour.

1.219. Takht or takJita is a parcel of silk goods laid between
two boards and fastened at the ends.

1.220. The text adds “ a butcher ”, but I have omitted this
in the translation, the familiar association of a kinw with a butcher
being somewhat incongruous with Western ideas.

1.221. “ A piece of iron " means the butcher, probably as a
plain man, but one of sterling worth.

K


130


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.222. i.e., speak more like a person of mature judgment.

1.223. “ When night o’er camphor scattered ambergris ” ;
i.e., when the blackness of night came upon the whiteness of
day, ambergris being of a dark colour.

1.224. The ruin was probably an enchanted place, in which
they would become actually invisible as fairies are. (Cf. the
next distich.)

1.225. i.e., “ rise up into the air in the basket.”

1.226. The sphere or sky is called a juggler with rings because
it is circular, or because it was supposed to revolve ; or again,
because it may be said to juggle with the planets in its govern-
ment of the fortunes of men.

1.227. i.e., I was engaged in a hazardous enterprise connected
with the rope.

1.228. i.e., I was helplessly bound by the rope.

1.229. A captive whom good fortune leaves, etc., i.e., one
who must remain in prison, and whose neck is bound by a rope.

1.230. i.e., a rope which restrained my body.

1.231. i.e., it saved my life by preventing me from falling out.

1.232. i.e., the rope which had coiled round his neck and
kept him fixed in the basket was loosened, so that he fell out on
to the tower.

1.233. i.e., piety towards God and invocation of Him.

1.234. Bislun, the mountain through which Farhad cut
at the request of his beloved Shlrln. The Author uses the name
in connexion with the word “ column ” because of its supposed
meaning, “ columnless,” as if from bi-sutun. (See also Notes
1,135, 1,163, 1,165, and 1,555.)

1.235. i.e., he has reduced me to so helpless and desperate
a plight.

1.236. “ Earth ” ; more literally, “ a piece of earth,” i.e.,
the man himself.

1.237. Man is here likened to dust, and it is implied that the
beauty of the garden had never been impaired by the presence
of man.


C05IME1SITAEY


131


1.238. i.e., the verdure was full of fresh life, and the water
was, presumably, lake-water.

1.239. i.e., the hyacinth and the pink grew there close together.

1.240. The “ lips ” are the “ petals ”. (See the last Note.)

1.241. i.e., the blossoms or leaves of the Judas’ tree grew down
to the ground in their luxuriance, and those which reached it
were cut ofi, as it were, by the blades of grass of the meadow.

1.242. “ This turquoise fort ” ; i.e., the sky.

1.243. See Note 569.

1.244. i.e., the breeze was fragrant with the scent of them.

1.245. Iram. (See Notes 90, 1,203, and 1,605.)

1.246. One species of cj’press is called the “ free cypress ”,
because it grows up straight and free from crookedness, and does
not interlace with other trees. Others say, because it is free
from change and always green. Others again, because it bears
no fruit.

Azddl, “ freedom,” means also “ thanksgiving ”, and “ praise ”.

1.247. “ I had not gone though endless work had called.” I
think this is the sense of na-shudam gar hazdr Jcdr-am bud, and
that the Author for the sake of the metre uses skudam for shudaml
or mi-shudam, and hud for budl or rni-bud. The sense seems to
require the above interpretation, and the word gar, “ if,” has no
meaning if the hemistich be rendered with due regard to the
exact sense of the tenses employed here.

1.248. Collyrium being dark in colour is made an image of
the darkness of night.

“ Crimson spurned ” is an allusion to the setting of the sun.

1.249. “ The eastern sky.” This seems to be the sense here
of suhh, which means literally the “ dawn ”. It refers possibly
to the paler streaks in the eastern sky after sunset, since the
prevalent meaning of shigufa, “ blossom,” is “ ‘ white ’ blossom
Shii/iifa or shikufa itself comes from shukfijtdan, “ to open or
split,” and is allied to shikdflan, “ to split.”

The hemistich reads slightly more literally, “ the flower of
dawn was cleft like a flower,” zahra-yl subh chun shigufa shikdft.

In my interpretation I have taken zahra as the Arabic word for
“ flower ”, but it may also be used as the Persian word meaning


132


THE HAFT PAIKAR


“ gall-bladder ”, in which case the hemistich would mean “ the
gall-bladder of dawn was split like a flower ”, the sense being
that dawn (by which here “ day ” must be meant) was scared
away.

1,250. “ Idols ” ; i.e., beautiful girls.

1,231. ” Pictures ” ; i.e., beauties.

1.252. Every picture ; i.e., every beauty.

1.253. Khuzistan (Susiana), is, or was, famous for its sugar-
canes, the sweetness of which is here compared to its disadvantage
with the sweetness of the ruby lips of the beauties. The sense
of the hemistich is that their sugary lips would compensate for
the destruction of all Khuzistan with its sugar-canes.

1.254. i.e., the queen of the beauties approached.

1.255. “ The sky was lost to view ” ; i.e., all the heavenly
bodies at night were eclipsed by its light.

The “ sun ”, of course, means the queen of the beauties.
1,250. i.e., the attendant beauties.

1.257. “ Each honeyed one ” ; lit., “ every piece of sugar,”
i.e., every beauty.

1.258. “ Straight cypresses ” ; i.e., girls of tall and slender
form.

1.259. i.e., as a beautiful bride with all her adornments sits
on the bridal throne to await the bridegroom.

1.260. “ A resurrection rose ” ; i.e., “ a great commotion
arose ” on account of the beauty she displayed.

1.261. “ With Ethiop troops behind and Greek before.” The
Ethiop troops are an allusion to her black hair, and the Greek to
her complexion.

1.262. “ Two-hued dawn.” An allusion to the appearance
of the sky at early dawn when dark streaks are set, as it were,
against light. The sense of the distich is that the white and pink
of her face were antagonistic to and set off the black of her hair.

1.263. ” Narrow of eyes.” an epithet often applied to a beauty,
especially to one of Chinese Turkistan.

1.264. “Each cypress”; i.e., each beauty, who was as an
earth-born human being compared with her, who was of light,
the constitution of the angels.


COMJIENTAEY


133


1.265. i.e., inflaming the world with her beauty as a red rose
does.

1.266. “ Bird of paradise ” ; lit., “ peacock.”

1.267. “ The throne where sat the bride,” jilva-gdh-i ‘arm ;
i.e., the throne on which the bride dressed in all her finery awaits
the bridegroom.

1.268. i.e., should be in the best and nearest place, not in the
outer places. The guest should be muqarrab, a close intimate.

1.269. “ The moon’s in concord with the Pleiades.”

By this is presumably meant that the moon is in or with the
Pleiades, the third of the 28 lunar “ mansions ”. If Parvln,
“ the Pleiades,” has the same meanings as its Arabic equivalent
Suraiyd, I should assume the real sense to be that she, “ the
moon,” is in concord with her lover, “ a lustrous gem,” gaiihar-i
dhddr.

But since the Pleiades are a part of the sign Taurus, the sense
might be that the moon is in Taurus. The efiect of this is that
the moon, which is receptive, would take the qualities attributed
to that sign, and that those subject to this influence would be
fearless and strong of will, firm and determined, and also
affectionate, loving and of keen desire. The former qualities
would help such persons in the pursuit of the object of the latter.

If the hemistich has any sense in this connexion, it must be
from the fairy-queen’s ascribing this astrological influence to
herself with regard to her lover. (See also Note 533.)

1.270. Bilqis is the name given to the Queen of Sheba, who
was supposed to be a wife of Solomon’s. The mention of divs
or demons is from the fact that they were supposed to have been
in subjection to Solomon. (See also Notes 272 and 1,407.)

1.271. This must mean either that he put his arm round her,
or that being seated near her he had her, in a way, in his possession.

1.272. “ Gaiety was left without a plea ” ; lit., “ excuses
came into a remainder for gaiety.” The meaning is that gaiety
had no excuses to offer for absence when the music began after
the banquet. In other words, gaiety had to be present. (See
also for the same idiom the distich to which Note 1,970 is
appended.)


134


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.273. “A pearl was bored by every unbored Pearl ” ; i.e.,
every virgin chanted verse.

1.274. “The dance a square oped, and a circle closed”;
i.e., a square was cleared for the dance, and the dancers circled
round with hands joined. (Cf. dast-hand.) Another sense of
“ setting open a square ” would be “ giving rise to enjoyment
and hilarity ” (cf. maiddn guskdda ydftan) ; but the first sense
is more in harmony with the second clause of the hemistich.

1.275. “ They fashioned tapers ” ; i.e., they were in their
slender, upright figures themselves as tapers.

1.276. “ Name ” ; i.e., fame.

1.277. “ Turk ” ; i.e., a beauty.

1.278. Turk-tdz, “ predatory raid,” deriving its name from
the raids of the Turks, means also amorous blandishments,
which are a species of predatory raid upon the lover.

1.279. i.e., he is as a Turkish raid in assailing her with his
love.

1.280. i.e., let us drink wine and make love, and throw aloes-
wood (which is dark like Hindus) upon the fire for perfume.

1.281. “ The Magian wine.” Mngh-lcada, “ a Magian temple,”
means also “ a tavern ”, a sense attached to the term possibly
through Muslim contempt.

May-i Mughdna means therefore Magian wine ”, or “ wine of
the tavern ”.

1.282. i.e., let them both be properly served and enjoyed.
Khrcin, a tray for food, means also a smaller tray upon which
dessert fruit and sweets are taken round to the guests to change
the taste and be partaken of with wine.

1.283. i.e., do not attempt impo.ssibilitios.

1.284. Hindu has also the sense of “ slave ”, and since it
means ” black ” too, it is used appropriately in connexion with
“ moles ”, which are black.

1.285. The scent of the candles is likened to ambergris,
the fire of them to rubies.

1.286. “ With rose-decked willow white ” ; lit., “ roses in
the willow,” is an allusion to her pink and white skin.


COMMENT AEY


135


1.287. “ Vested ” ; lit., “ in a tunic.” For the “ tunic ”,
qabd, see Note 1,200. The “crown”, as referred to the rose,
means most probably its stamens.

1.288. Farz-i Izid means the dhdne ordinances, the ordinances
enjoined by God Himself, in contradistinction to those based
upon the precepts or practice of Muhammad, namely the Sunna.

1.289. Sardy, the old Mongol capital on the banks of the Volga.
Sadiq Isfahan! says, “ the capital of the Qipchaq Plain.” TMs
was north of the Caspian.

1.290. “ Like a yellow rose ” ; i.e., pallid with regret at the
absence of the beauties and from the effects of the wine-drinking.

1.291. i.e., presumably, on rose-petab blown down and
scattered about.

1.292. “ Its musk-pod opened out ” ; i.e., either “ displayed
darkness ” or “ diffused perfume

1.293. “Bringing galia” ; lit., “rubbing galia moschata” \
i.e., “ scattering scent.” (For galia moschata see Note 1,183.)

1.294. “ Scattered pearls ” ; lit., “ became possessed of a
pearl-shell ” ; i.e., displayed those pearls, the moon and stars.

1.295. “ That jasmine sowed, this planted violets ” ; i.e., the
breeze diffused such fragrance as that of the jasmine, and the
water brought out such perfume as that of violets.

1.296. “ Laid down its head ” ; i.e., was hopeless of competing
with the fragrance of that evening.

1.297. Lit., “ The puppets full of gaiety returned, the sky
again became a puppet-player.” The sky is called a puppet-
player because by means of the puppets, the planets, which it
exhibits, it plays with the fortunes of men. Here, however, the
immediate sense is that the sky or fortune played upon men
through the puppets, the beauties.

1.298. Yaghma is said to be the name of a city in Turkistan
which was famous for the beauty of its inhabitants.

1.299. Lit., “ came into the head” ; but the idiom may also
be rendered, “ reached the liighest pitch.”

1.300. “ Love was associated with the wine ” ; lit., “ love
joined hands with the wine ” ; i.e., love went on pari passu with
the wine.


136


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.301. “ Turk ” ; i.e., “ beauty.”

1.302. “ Hindu ” ; i.e., “ slave.”

1.303. Lit., “ sugar triply refined,” qand.

1.304. “ Put a chain upon your door.” The chain here
meant is “ the chain of justice or redress of grievances ”,

‘adl, which was attached to the door of the king’s palace, so that
anyone suffering from injustice might by shaking it at any time
call attention to his wrong, and obtain redress. This chain
was also called “ the chain of Hushirvan ”, a Sasanian king who
reigned from a.d. 531 to 579, because it was instituted by him. It
is spoken of in the Siydsat-ndma of Nizamu ’1-Mulk, the vazir
of Mabk Shah.

1.305. Versus ad coitum special.

1.306. See the last Note.

1.307. See Note 1,305.

1.308. i.e., may you live, but I shall die.

1.309. See Note 1,305.

1.310. See Note 1,305.

1.311. See Note 1,305.

1.312. i.e., the matter he delicately hints at would not entail
serious consequences.

1.313. “ To put a horse-shoe into the fire ” means to make
a person impatient to see you and subservient to your will.
This was supposed to be effected by cutting the person’s name
upon a horse-shoe, reciting some magic words over it, and casting
it into the fire. The use here of the word shabdlz, “ black horse,”
is in reference to the night which is to pass before he gains his
desire. The meaning then of the second hemistich is “ Never
mind the fact that the black horse’s shoe is in the fire ” ; i.e.,
“ disregard any feeling of impatience you have for me to-night.”

1.314. “ An everlasting lamp ” ; i.e., one whoso brightness
never changes with time. The allusion is either to herself, or
to unvarying happiness.

1.315. Nard is the Persian backgammon.

1.316. Ham durust dyam archi dir dyam. This hemistich is
most probably taken from the proverb. Dir dyad durust dyad.


COJBIENTAEY


137


“ Who comes late comes at the best,” or “ One comes the better
for coming late ”, which is in affinity with the Latin, Festina
lente, “ Hasten, but do not be precipitate ” : do not endanger
the issue by undue haste.

1.317. Mahl means “ fish ”, and mah moon ”.

1.318. The term “ sweet basil ” is an allusion to herself.

The word used is qaranfuli, which is from its form specific,

not generic. It is possibly used for Jiabaq-i qaranfuli, which,
according to Steingass, is sweet basil Redhouse, however,
renders it “ calamint and Vullers conjectures melissa', i.e.,
“ balm.” All these plants, however, are of the mint kind, and
belong to the natural order labiaUv.

It may possibly be “ basil royal Steingass renders the
Persian word shah-siparam both ” sweet basil ” and also “ basil
royal ”. In fact, as regards botanical nomenclature there is
often in Persian great confusion, and it is very difficult to
identify.

1.319. “ Constrained to patience I renounced (my wish),”
Bar sar-i sabr tauba mi-Jcardam.

Bar sar-i sabr is, I think, probably used in the sense of the
Arabic sabran, “ perforce ” ; e.g., fa^ala-hu sabra, “ he did it
perforce ” ; lit., “ he did it as one in a bound condition.” The
only other senses could be, “ I made a vow of renunciation (of
my wish) in the presence or name of patience ” ; or, ‘‘I made a
vow of renunciation in the matter, or on the subject, of patience ” ;
i.e., “ I repented of, or renounced impatience." The sense of
I.O. MS. 1491 is, “ I perambulated about or towards renunciation
(of my wish),” Ba-sar-i tauba sair ml-Jcardam.

‘Ishva in the second hemistich seems to be used in the sense of
firih.

1.320. i.e., such as the girl who had now been selected.

1.321. i.e., when the day dawned and made the world white
and luminous.

Night is called a dj’er because it darkens and blackens the
white of day.

1.322. i.e., they had ceased to be seen and to adorn. But
I.O. MSS. 402, 777, and 1168, and the I.O. B. ed. have for
bisdt, ‘‘ carpet,” nashal, ” gladness ” ; 402, and the B. ed. have


138


THE HAFT PAIKAR


M, “ and,” after nashdt, and the latter has “ that,” instead of
az, “ from,” before nashdt.

1.323. Taraz, a town in Turkistan famous for the beauty of

its inhabitants. (See Note 695.) “ Turkistan ” ; lit., “ China,”

but no doubt, as generally in such cases, meaning Chinese Turkistan
or Turkistan.

1.324. i.e., I was honoured, and enjoyed great good fortune.

1.325. “ The earth, of musk ” ; i.e., the earth of the garden.

“ The house, of golden bricks ” ; i.e., the house where he spent

the night.

1.326. i.e., he had bright, sunny days, and at night enjoyed
the society of a bright, moon-faced beauty.

1.327. “ The moon’s term.” The moon means both the real
moon, or rather month, here, and also the queen of the beauties,
va'da, “ term,” signifying also, as applied to the latter, “ promise.”

1.328. Lit., “ the night made the world black upon the stars ” ;
i.e., it totally obscured or obliterated all traces of them. The
idiom means also " to destroy or devastate ”, but here it is
equivalent to rdh-ra bar kasl yd chizi siydh hanlai) ; lit., “ to
make the road black upon a person or thing ” ; i.e., “ to obliterate
all traces of him or it.”

1.329. “ The palace of the sky's black coping ” ; lit., “ the
ambergris-like forelocks.” The sense of the distich is that the
sky was dark and the moon invisible.

1,3.30. Lit., “ made fresh their fresh-facedness ” ; or more
freely, “ renewed their cheerfulness of aspect.”

1.331. i.e., with plump hands and full, rounded breasts.

1.332. The meaning is that the idea of candles’ being behind
must be discarded when all the candles which, in their brightness,
are worthy of the name, namely, the girls’ faces, arc in front ;
i.e., in front of them themselves.

1.333. “ Rosy wine " ; lit., “ wine of the colour of (the flowers
of) the Judas’ tree.”

1.334. i.e., by making the wine flow the cupbearers did some-
thing in harmony with the mu.sic. ” Drinking in harmony with
the music ” is an expression used.


COMJIENTAEY


139


1.335. A crystal bowl or cup is likened to a pearl-shell ; cf.
sadaf-giin sdghar, “ a pearl-sheU=coloured cup.”

“ Pearls ” ; i.e., “ drops of wine.”

1.336. “ Demons ” ; i.e., “ tormenting passions.”

1.337. “ With ropes ” ; i.e., “ with the ropes, her locks.”

1.338. i.e., I played with her locks.

1.339. “ The long hand ” ; i.e., “ the rapacious hand.”

1.340. Kahub, meat cut in small pieces, flavoured with onions
and eggs, and roasted on skewers. But more generally, roast,
baked, or broiled meat. (Cf. Note 568.)

1.341. i.e., your face is so bright that, like a lamp before the
sun, I must die before it.

1.342. The person who sees a fairy, fan, or a demon, dlv,
is supposed to become possessed, fari-ddr, or div-ddr (cf. div-dld),
but the mode of possession is not the same in each case, since the
fari is of the good j'bui or genii, and the div is of the evil. The
parl-dur is ” possessed ” and “ fascinated ” in so high a degree
that the intellect is, as it were, beclouded, as it might be, in a
lower degree, by the sight of any extraordinarily beautiful
object. (Cf. Note 1,525.)

The dlv-dur or div-dld, on the other hand, is possessed of a
demoniacal spirit, and is insane and helpless.

(Cf. Notes 1,525, and 1,620.)

1.343. Lit., “ you have again cast the horse-shoe into the fire
for me.” (See Note 1,313.)

1.344. The “ moon ” means figuratively the fairy-queen.

1.345. i.e., I am absolutely overpowered by your brightness
and effulgence as a mote in the sun’s rays. By my own being
which, like that of a mote is as nothing, I cannot conceal from
myself or be oblivious of your overpowering effulgence, in which
I am immersed.

1.346. The sense of this second hemistich is analogous to
that explained in the last Note.

1.347. Lab ba-danddn gazldan (or Idiuyldnn), “ to bite or
chew the lips,” means ” to suffer shame or regret ”.

Ab-i danddn mahldan, " to suck the water of the teeth,” means


140


THE HAET PAIKAK


“to have desire or longing”. Another meaning of the distich
is, “ How long am I merely to taste your beauty 1 ”

1.348. “ Warm kisses,” hiisa-yi garni ; but I.O. MS. 1168
has, tusha-yi garm, “ warm food.” which perhaps in the light of
preceding distichs is more apposite.

1.349. i.e., although you are formed for love.

1,3.50. A “ hare’s sleep ”, IJiydb-i khargush, is the sleep either
of feigned negligence, or of carelessness and fancied security.
Here it signifies the latter, the sense of the hemistich being,
“ how long will you lull me into fancied security, beguiling me
with promises ? ”

1.351. “ This ancient wolf of vulpine craft ” is “ the world
or fortune ”.

1.352. “ In wolfish, vulpine dealings will engage ” ; i.e.,
“ will deal savagely and cunningly with me.”

1.353. Or, “ like one who is drunk enough to feel equal to
taking lions.”

1.354. “ You from Khallukh ” ; i.e., “ you are handsome,”
Khallukh being the name of a town in Turkistan famous for the
beauty of its inhabitants.

1.355. “ From Ethiopia I ” ; i.e., “ I am your slave.” In the
next distich she expresses her un worthiness of him.

1.356. Lit., “like the full moon.”

1.357. “ Beyond ‘Abbadan there is ne'er a town,” Laisa
qaryata ivard'a ‘Abbadan. The words of this hemistich, which
are in Arabic, are evidently an Arabic proverb. They are
incorrectly written in all the copies I have consulted. The best
is that of I.O. MS. 1491, Laisa qarya(h) varuyi ‘Abbadan, rather
a curious mixture of Arabic and Persian.

“ ‘Abbadan, the most southern town of Babylonia (Traq ‘ArabI).
Originally it was on an island on the Persian Gulf and was stiU
there in the tenth century ; but now it is more than twenty miles
from the coast.” (EncyclopaJia of Islam.)

Jurjanl (about a.d. 1460) describes it as a town at the mouth
of the Tigris on the Persian Gulf, but he must mean the mouth
of the Shattu ’l-‘Arab.


COMMENTAEY


141


Redhouse says, “ The island at the mouth of the Euphrates
on the Persian Gulf.”

Steingass says, “ Name of an island in the Tigris.”

These are both similar errors to that of Jurjanl. Besides
this, it is not an island, but a town.

The meaning of the hemistich is that the fairy-queen is the
ne plus ultra of desire, and that now that he has her near he
must not neglect his opportunit}' in the hope of finding any one
more beautiful beyond.

1.358. “ Demand a mat and pour out sand.”

“ A mat ” ; i.e.. the mat on which executions were carried out,
“ Sand ” ; i.e., the sand put down to absorb the blood shed.

1.359. i.e., “ either let me share your throne and be your
partner, or fix me on a gibbet as a throne may be fixed on a high
framework.”

The word cJidr-mihh means both a gibbet and also a framework
on which a throne might be erected.

1.360. By “bee”, and “thorn” he means himself.

1.361. “ Rose-honey sweets ” ; i.e., a confection of rose and
honey.

1.362. In the case of the dead, i.e., extinguished lamp, the
brand would be the blackness of the wick. If murda, “ dead,”
be taken as murda-dil, " dead in heart,” i.e., “ ignorant, wicked,”
as zinda. “ alive,” is used for zimla-dil, “ alive in heart,” i.e.,
“ enlightened, pious, a Sufi,” the brand would be ‘aih, i.e.,
“ disgrace.”

1.363. The I.O. B. ed. and that of 1328 read, hi-gardad
instead of na-gardad. If this reading be adopted the hemistich
should be rendered, “ If the sun turn away from thought of
burning.”

1.364. He means presumably (see the preceding distich) that
he has been asleep and dreaming up to the present, and that
such dreaming is not the desire he had with regard to her. Such
dreams, however, come from his having seen her face. (See
the next distich.)

1.365. He seems to im[)ly that his nights have been passed
only in dreams inspired by her face.


142


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.366. “ Rubini ” ad sanguinem in virginis stupratione effusum
spectant.

“ Sardachates ” ad penem spectat.

1.367. The dagger may be said to clutch the waist in so far
as it is attached to it.

1.368. The lady who relates the story is speaking here on her
own part.

1.369. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698. The meaning
is that she dressed in black.

1.370. “ The king’s umbrella ” ; one of the insignia of
royalty.

1.371. The back of the fish is darker than its head.

1.372. “ Black ” ; i.e., the black of the pupil.

1.373. “ The seven thrones ” means generally Ursa Major.
Here, however, it denotes the seven planetary heavens, to the
sphere of each one of which a special colour is attributed, all of
them making up the seven colours mentioned here.

1.374. “ Higher than black there is not any hue.” The sense
is that black, as the colour attributed to the sphere of Saturn,
who is in the seventh, farthest, and highest planetary heaven, is
necessarily the highest colour.

1.375. “ Dawn’s scales ” ; i.e., the sun.

1.376. i.e., he clothed himself in gold-worked garments.

1.377. JamshTd, the name of a mythical king of Persia, the
fourth of the first or Pishdadian dynasty. He is said by Firdausi
to have reigned 700 years, and to have been killed by order of
Zahhaq, an Arab invader (Albiruni quotes, “ of the Amalekites ”),
who then became king of Persia, and reigned 1,000 years.

The name is composed of “ Jam ” from the Avestic Yima,
“ a king,” and “ .“hid,” Avestic khshaeta, “ radiant.”

1.378. An allusion to “ the Cup of Jamshid ”, “ Jam-i
Jamshid ”, or “ Jam-i Jam ”, which, according to the Persian
fabulists, represented the whole world, and hence is also called
“ Jam-i jahan-nama ”. It was marked with seven lines, each
of which had a name.


COMMENTARY


143


1.379. “ Fine or exuberant display ” is no doubt, I tbink, tbe
sense here of ra'nciyi.

“ Amber upon a golden ring ’’ means with respect to the yellow
rose the yellow stamens with the petals. With regard to Bahram
it signifies that in his dress he added yellow to yellow in the way
of yellow stones, golden ornaments, and gold-worked garments.

1.380. “ That sweet-spoken bride ” ; lit., “ that sugar-
scattering taper.”

1.381. Lit., that she should associate rubies with sugar-candy.

1.382. Lit., “ He desired her to engage in flute-playing,”
but the author means, “ to speak in flute-like tones.”

Arghanun, generally rendered “ organ ”, means, according to
the Burhdn-i Qdti\ any wind-instrument of music. Other
meanings given by that dictionary are not applicable here.

1.383. “ Adorned and lovely.” I have translated Chlni-baz
so on the analogy of ‘arus-baz ; but Chini-tdz, “of Chinese beauty,”
or Chinl-ndz, “ of Chinese coquetry,” may be the correct reading.

1.384. Taraz, a town in Turkistan famous for the beauty of
its inhabitants. (See Note 695.)

1.385. i.e., loses his head.

1.386. New Year's Day in the Persian Calendar is the 21st
of March, the beginning of Spring.

1.387. Lit., “ she would raise her head in lady-consortship.”

1.388. See Note 695.

1.389. This and the preceding distich are remarks of the
Author's. The meaning is that flattering is as mischievous in
a meddlesome fool as adornment in a balista. The flattery of the
one is as misleading as the adornment of the other.

1.390. i.e., each one disdained the affection he showed her.

1.391. “ The picture-house of China’s realm ” ; i.e., probably,
either of Chinese Turkistan or of Turkistan, both famous for
their “ pictures ” of beauty. The Author speaks later of the
slave-dealer himself as the merchant from Cathay, but Khata
(Cathay) may be either North China or Chinese Turkistan. (See
the end of Note 694.)

1.392. Khallukh, a town in Turkistan famous for the beauty
of its inhabitants.


144:


THE HAFT PAIKAE


1.393. To have the ear bored for a ear-ring and to wear one
■was a token of slavery.

1.394. Lit., “ although her tray is given over to sugar, there
is (only) a dish of liver from it for the people.”

By the first hemistich is meant that she is all sugary sweetness.
In the second the word jigar “ liver, heart ”, means also “ afflic-
tion ” ; i.e., here, affliction through love of her.

1.395. The slave-dealer is speaking here on his own part.

1.396. i.e., as surely as you do the one the other will follow.
This peculiar mode of expression in Persian is always indicative
of the uselessness of some act supposed.

1.397. The second hemistich is not a metaphor of particular
application, but must be taken more generally as an adverbial
amplification of the first, and it might be freely rendered, “ in
these abnormal and disconcerting circumstances.”

Nard is the Persian backgammon.

1.398. Lit., “ his heart was not becoming satiated with the
girl.”

1.399. Lit., “ except the door of intercourse, which she
closed.”

1.400. See the distich to which Note 1,388 is appended.

1.401. This I take to be the nearest approach to the sense of
the hemistich, Garchi z’-an Turk did ‘aiyiirl. “ Turk,” in addition
to its primary sense of “ Turk ”, means a “ marauder ” and also
a “ charmer ”. The renderings of ‘aiydrl given by Yullers,
Steingass, and Redhouse are quite inapplicable here, but the
proper sense can be fairly well gathered from the quotations
ofiered by ^ ullers as well as from passages in other writers.

1.402. The moon is here likened to a basin, and the Author
implies that it is so inferior in beauty to the girl’s face that it is
only worthy of bearing a jug to her as a slave to her mistress.
The image is taken from the fact that the basin bears the jug.

1.403. Lit., ” of just standard or measure.”

1.404. “ To stimulate her heart and soul.” This, I think, is
the right sense of nz bahr-i un dil-augizl. Dd-anglzl is not in the
dictionaries, but the compound, dil-anglzun, is given as a form of
music, and evidently means music of a stimulating, rousing


COMMENTARY


145


nature. (Cf. Note 1,506.) An in the hemistich means “ a
certain ”, and an dil-angizl, consequently, “ a certain (amount of)
stimulation.”

1.405. Lit., “ he sprinkled sugar over morello cherries,”
hard bar ndrvan shahar-rlzi .

“■ Sprinkling sugar ” means speaking eloquently and sweetly,
and “ cherries ” mean here lips or mouth, so that the sense is
“ he poured forth from his mouth eloquent and sweet words ”.

By the word tiarvan, “ morello or sour cherries,” the Author
may intend to convey also that the king in order to excite the
girl's interest sweetened his adjuration by an eloquently spoken
narrative.

But all authorities do not give “ morello cherry ” as an
equivalent of ndrvan, though all give “ pomegranate ”. If the
latter be preferred the additional sense suggested cannot be
entertained, and “ pomegranate ” would mean the lips or mouth
simply with regard to colour, and not to taste.

1.406. “ Sextile aspect ” denotes the aspect or position of two
planets when distant from each other 60 degrees or two signs.
This position is marked thus : *. A sextile aspect, it should
be added, is an auspicious one.

1.407. The name given by the Commentators to the Queen
of Sheba. An account of her visit to Solomon is given in the
Qur’an, xxvii., 22-45. (See also Notes 272 and 1,270.)

1,40S. Lit., “ loose at the joints,” gushdda az paivand.

1.409. “ The Guarded or Preserved Tablet,” Lauh-i Mahfuz.
“ In the Hadl^ (the Traditions), and in theological works, it is
used to denote the tablet on which the decrees of God were
recorded with reference to mankind.” (Hughes's Dictionary of
Islam.) In Sufi phraseology it is used to denote the Qur’an, or
the Universal Soul.

Al-Lauh. Hiiwa 'l-Kitdhu ’I-MubJn, ica-’n-Nafsu ’l-Kulliya
(‘Abdu ’r-Razzaq’s Dictionary of the Technical Terms of the
Sufis).

1.410. i.e., in order to see your beauty eyes were created.

1.411. “ The fount of light” ; i.e., the sun. The evil eye is
supposed to have special influence over a thing of beauty.

1.412. The gardener or porter of paradise is called Rizvan.


148


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.413. Mulir, “ seal,” means here, presumably, “ control.”
Mihr, “ aliection,” is scarcely applicable.

1.414. Hoses escape from the hands of people because of
their thorns ; the child, because he no longer requires their
hands to do for him what his own can now do.

1.415. The Persian div means sometimes the same as the
Arab evil genius, the evil jinn. It has often the sense of an
assistant-demon to Satan, or of Satan himself, all these being of
the evil^ibiM. The pari or “ fairy ”, on the other hand, is of the
good genii, a good spirit.

1.416. The legendary Fish that was supposed to support the
Ox which was imagined to bear the world, and hence the lowest
place or depth. (See also Notes 739 and 1,060.)

1.417. Lit., “ to see what gift he has brought me from the
road.”

1.418. “ God's sanctum ” ; i.e., the territory, city, mosque,
or precincts of the cubical house in the temple of Mecca.

1.419. The king of ‘Iraq resumes his address to the slave-girl.

1.420. The connexion between the preceding distich and this
one is that though the king on his part consents to make no
demonstration of love, it is surprising that the slave-girl, being
so beautiful and formed for love, should on her part make no
demonstration. “ Abandoned thought of love ” ; Ut., “ accus-
tomed yourself to not loving.”

1.421. “The limpid spring” is taken metaphorically as the
king’s mind, in which the straightness of truth or the crookedness
of falsehood would be discovered, as the form of the cypress would
be reflected in the spring.

1.422. i.e., since my secret has been disclosed.

1.423. i.e., every person should step according to his stature,
or, in other words, adapt himself to his circumstances.

1.424. “ A handful of corn,” khvarish. Khmrisli-i dast-ds is
described as “ a handful of corn thrown preliminarily by the miller
into the mill-hopper

1.425. i.e., she tries to attract the attention of any man of
open countenance who might be assumed to be liberal.


COMMENTARY


147


1.426. The literal sense of “ rubies ” is the pulp of the pome-
granate ; and of “ pearls ” the seeds. The “ pomegranate replete
with seeds ” expresses metaphorically the breasts of a woman
who has become fully developed ; and the sense of the distich
is that when so developed she has become experienced too in the
knowledge and appreciation of the value of rubies and pearls,
and, as the Author seems to imply, she covets them.

1.427. Sar-sabz, “ verdant,” signifies also, as regards the
immature girl, “ happy and fortunate.” Ru-siydh, “ black of
face,” means also, with respect to the adult woman, “ sinful,
disgraced, unhappy, and unfortunate.”

1.428. “ Raw ” means here metaphorically “ inexperienced
or unpractised as regards women”, and “ripe” the reverse of
this. Both terms are used in connexion with “ gourd ”, which
here signifies metaphorically niembrum virile. The Author
intimates that it is wise to abstain from women, and unwise
to have intercourse with them.

1.429. i.e., even the black night is made beautiful when it has
the moon in her lustrous purity.

1.430. i.e., she accomplished her business of excuse making,
and did not trouble about the result.

1.431. Lit., “ that kinglv Moon.”

1.432. “ One of mighty frame,” or, in the alternative, “ a
Rustam,” the Persian hero, who was entitled “ Tahamtan ”,
“ the strong-bodied one ”. (For Rustam, see Notes 212, 1,035,
and 2,078.)

1.433. “Had lost his might,” az tani uftuda, which means
“ had lost flesh and strength ”. Neither this expression nor its
equivalent, az buiiya (binyn) ufldda, occurs in any dictionary
I know. I have seen the latter idiom, however, in newspapers.
The expression might be taken also in a moral sense.

1.434. In this distich “ a fay” means the slave-girl, and in
the next “ Sun ” and “ Moon ” mean the same.

1.435. “ The bow of an old woman ” ; i.e., the curved back
of this particular old woman.

1.436. It is possible that this “ spell-casting ” means simply
“ deceit ”. Afxun (ox fusun), the word used here, signifies both.

“ The world-illuming Sun ” is the slave-girl.


148


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.437. i.e., the scheme seemed to him to shape well.

1.438. “ One knowing haram life.” This I take to be the sense
here of parda-parvar, which is not found in the dictionaries. It
might also, however, mean “ a skilled musician ”, and it is
possibly in connexion with this sense that the xVuthor uses the
word “ narm ”, “ soft, gentle, submissive, lowly, docile ”, since
this word signifies also “ the bass or low ” in music.

1.439. It is only by the consideration of a few words in this
and the preceding two distichs that it is seen that the Author by
his art, whilst apparently describing the girl as a juggler, a con-
jurer, a musician, and a tumbler, is speaking of something quite
diSerent.

1.440. This may also be rendered “ against the grain a miser
gave away ”.

1.441. The B. ed. of 1328 reads : — Gdh gdhl dar an figandi
dast ; vn'jt-i hdjat ha-dn kashidi dast, with no proper rhyme.

I would venture to suggest that the correct reading in the second
hemistich may be gushddl shasl ; lit., “ would open the
thumbstall,” i.e., “ would aim at.”

1.442. Lit., “ hie suum cor, margaritam perforavit illic ” ;
i.e., quod ad hanc puellam attineret muerorom passus est, cum
ilia puella coiit.

1.443. “ Non perforata margarita ” ; i.e., virgo Intacta.

1.444. “ Concupiit perforata esset margarita ” ; i.e., con-
cupiit ut rex secum coirct.

1,44.5. “ The dust,” yard. Gard-i mdh means also “ moon-

beams

1.446. “ The Moon’s face ” ; i.e., the slave-girl's face.

1.447. Tanur i.s a circular, open oven of earthenware.

“ Storm ” i.s used here, of course, in a metaphorical sense,
and refers to the mental disturbance excited by the old woman's
machinations, whether enchantment was used by her or simply
deceit. It has been intimated, however, that she was an
enchantress or species of witch, and .sucli, it is known, were
supposed to bo able to raise real storms by means of their
cauldrons or ovens and magic arts. (f'f. also Note 1,454.)

1.448. Taken in connexion with the last distich but one, the


COMMENTARY


149


meaning is possibly that though the day has no choice, but must
begin with brightness and end with darkness, the king has free
will and should not change from one course to the opposite without
some sufficient reason.

1.449. i.e., “ why do you make me suffer the sharpness of
grief ? ” Vinegar is likened to eve because of its dark colour.

1.450. i.e., “ Non repugnabo quin rex me vitiet.”

1.451. The Author means possibly, “ in order that I may not
become moved out of myself and absolutely distraught, for I
am now in a mood for it.”

1.452. “ Of every kind ” ; lit., “ both fit and unfit to be
spoken.”

1.453. The “ water ” and “ iron ” are apparently allusions
to the coldness and hardness of heart of the slave-girl. The sense
is presumably that the fire in the king’s heart should warm and
soften that of the girl, but that even if it did not (see the next
distich), his mind is so set on her that the pain of the love for her
is preferable to him to his remedy of intimacy with the other girl.

1.454. Lit., “ the old woman was a smoke-raiser in the
midst.” Dud-afgan, lit., “ a caster or raiser of smoke,” means
“ a sorcerer or sorceress who by burning aloes-wood, frankin-
cense, wild rue-seed, and a species of bdellium raises incense and
smoke, and by this and an incantation summons genii to do his or
her bidding ” (Burhan-i Qati').

Dud, “ smoke,” means also “ affliction ”, a sense which is
applicable also in the hemistich.

1.455. “ The old dame's cold,” bardti %'ajuz, is the name given
to a period of cold weather lasting from about the 7th to the
14th of March, so that the sun enters Aries, and the New Year
and Spring in Persia begin about a week after the cessation of this
cold. By the sun's entering Aries it is meant that the Spring of
happy days is beginning for the king.

1.456. “ Delight.” This sense of ndz is not given in the
dictionaries, but it is established by many passages in this poem
and other Persian -writings.

1.457. “ The lily-finder.” An allusion to the slave-girl
as having a lily-white bosom.

“ Unto the lily-scented cypress-tree ” ; i.e., to herself.


150


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.458. As usual, “ the Chinese form, figure, or beauty,” naqsh-i
Chin, moans a beauty of Chinese Turkistaii. It is often, like
“ Turk ”, applied as a compliment to any beauty.

1.459. “ Halva, a certain sweet dish prepared in many varieties
with sesame oil, various cereals, and syrup or honey ” (Redliouse).

Saffron is sometimes added, principally because it is supposed
to possess stimulant, exhilarating, cordial, and antispasmodic
properties.

The Author by saying that the pleasure of Inh-a dressed with
saffron comes from yellowness means of course that it comes
from the yellow ingredient saffron, but it may be noticed that
most of the ingredients of the dish are yellow.

1.460. “Its ycUow veil”; i.e., the material of which it is
made.

1.461. A reference to the golden calf. See the Qur'an, ii.,
48, 88 ; iv., 152 ; vii., 146, and x.v., 90. The meaning is that
the real value of the calf was in its gold.

1.462. “ Yellow ochre,” fin-i asfar, or giUi zard, is hydrated
oxide of iron more or less mixed with clay, in which state it
occurs naturally. Having when taken blood-enriching properties,
it is stimulant and exhilarating. It is consequently, as the
Author says, precious like gold because it is a source of joy.

1.463. i.e., he prepared to set out with great pomp.

Sar-sabz, translated “ fortune-favoured ”, means in the first

place “ verdant, green ”, the colour on this occasion of the
royal canopy or umbrella.

1.464. Lit., “ The king was lighted up like a green candle ” ;
but bar-afrukhta means also “ bright, rejoicing ”.

1.465. The angels are supposed to be clothed in green.

1.466. “ The garden of the stars ” means the sky.

“ This verdure emerald-hued ” is also the sky, part of which
near sunset inclines to green. By “ vernal blooms ” are meant,
as generally, “ white blossoms.” The sense of the distich is,
“ When the stars studded the sky with their white or silvery
orbs ” ; i.e., when the stars came out (and it was night).

1.467. “Green-throned”; i.e., possibly, “seated in the
heavens ” (see Note 1,466), but may be either a compliment to


CO-^IMENTARY


151


the lady as one fit to be in the heavens with the hurls (cf. Notes
1,192, and 1,795), or a reference to her being on a green throne
in the Green Dome.

1,168. More literally, “ to open the sack and disclose the
sugar.”

1.469. i.e., began to disclose what was in her mind to the
wise and powerful king.

1.470. Kings lived much in tents both for war and also for the
chase.

1.471. “ Gate ” means the king's court, since the king sat
at the gate to administer justice. The crown and throne may
be said to be the threshold of the king’s Gate or court, since they
are symbols of his power, and it is through that power that the
people may expect justice at his Gate or court.

The meaning of the second hemistich of the next distich
is that the king’s sovereign power is upheld by his justice,
symbolized here by his Gate or court.

1.472. Lit., “ she let flow a spring of sugar from cornelian ” ;
but 'aqlq, “ cornelian,” means also a channel, watercourse,
or ravine ’’.

1.473. Rum, a name formerly applied to the lower Roman
empire and Asia Minor. It is now apphed by the Persians
to the Ottoman empire.

1.474. Lit., “ in a wrapper of raw, undressed (stuff).”

1.475. Cf. the third and fourth distichs of this story.

1.476. i.e., she was like a rose in face. With the rose is
contrasted the cypress to which her stature is likened.

1.477. “ One of fair face washed with the pheasant’s blood.”
This, I think, is as near as one can get to the Persian Shusta-
ruy-l, vail ba-khun-i ta^rv, which rendered literally is “ One
of washed face, but (washed) with the pheasant’s blood ”.

“ The pheasant’s blood ” is of course an allusion to the rosiness
of her face.

1.478. i.e., disturbance of heart and trouble amongst her
lovers.

1.479. Lit., “ the showing through (of her face),” ‘aks having
that sense here.


152


THE HAET PAIKAE


‘Aks means “ reflection ” as in a mirror, and also “ the
appearance of a thing through a transparent or translucent
substance

1.480. “ More dusky ” ; lit., “ more ambergris-diffusing ” ;
but this perfume, though greyish, is generally used as an equivalent
of musk, and referred as often to blackness of colour as to sweetness
of scent.

1.481. “More dusky”; lit., “more infidel or impious,”
nd-musulmdntar. Nd-musulmdn is equivalent to kafir, which
besides its literal meaning has also the sense of “ black ”.

1.482. “ A lonely wanderer ” is a term applied to the moon
as moving in solitary, unequalled grandeur among the stars.
It is applied here in a similar way to the girl as one unequalled
among others.

1.483. Expresses his mental condition after awaking from his
stupefaction.

1.484. Lit., “ and if I become patient, cold, — where are
patience, coldness ? ”

1.485. Lit., “ may make this business easy for me.”

1.486. Lit., “ if any (thing) more or less should come to any
grain.” Kani-u blsh, “ less or more,” generally used adverbially,
occurs sometimes as a noun. (See quotations in Yullers.)

1.487. Lit., “ the bottle in which urine is tested.”

1.488. The allusion in the first hemistich is to the sorcerer’s
practice of writing or cutting on a horse-shoe the name of a
person he wishes to bring under his control, putting the shoe into
the fire, and reciting the appropriate spell. By this means
the person is perturbed and drawn under the sorcerer's influence.

In the second hemistich the “ amber's power ” is its electrical
or attracting power, and “ pearl and ruby ” are allusions to
the teeth and lips of a beauty. Thus the sense of the distich
is that Mallkha can by his magic power draw people under bis
influence as well as a beauty can by her charms.

It is possible that there may be a sub-allusion to the pale
yellow colour of amber, so that we might have the secondary
sense, thai his magic power can make people perturbed and pale
as well as the charms of a beauty can her lovers.


COMMENTARY


153


1.489. In the second hemistich there is & jeu de mots which
is lost in translation. A “ pied snake " is mdr-i plsa{h), and
“ palm-fibre rope ” is pts-rasan. The Persian word pis, besides
its more usual senses ol leprous, white, pied ”, means also “ the
dwarf palm-tree ”, Ihiirmd-yi Abu Jahl, of the fibrous bark of
which ropes are made. From this last meaning of pis, taken
in its literal sense of “ the palm-tree of Abu Jahl ”, it may be
assumed that its fibrous bark is taken to be the masad mentioned
in the Qur’an as the fibrous bark from which the rope for the
neck of Abu Jahl's wife was made.

Abu Jahl was Muhammad’s uncle and enemy, and he and his
wife Umm Jamil are bitterly cursed in the Qur’an, sura cxi.

1.490. The sense of talisman here is an image prepared with
magic arts attached to a buried treasure to prevent any
unauthorized person from finding and taking it. This is a
particular application of its general sense of such an image fixed
in the ground for the purpose of preventing people from going
beyond a certain limit.

The word talisman sometimes also signifies an amulet against
enchantment or fascination, and sometimes a spell or charm to
effect some purpose.

Finally any m' chanism that appears mysterious or is not
understood may be called a talisman. (See Nizami's Sikandar-
ndma-yi Balirl ; see also Note 553.)

1.491. “Skilled master,"’ /oW . . usladi. Falil is sometimes
prefixed to a noun adjectivally in the sense of “ unusually fine
of its kind ”. So, we might say,fahl basal, “ a fine, large onion.”

1.492. “ Frigid ” ; lit., “ raw, unburnt,’’ as opposed to
“ burning ” applied to “ smoke ” in the preceding distich.

1.493. i.e., one should not live in the state of abject ignorance
of the ox or ass.

1.494. More literally, “how long will you fashion things to
the Pen ? ” By “ the Pen ” is probably meant “ the Pen with
which God is sa d to have pre-recorded the actions of men

“ The Prophet (has) said (that) the first thing which God created
was the Pen (Qalam), and that it wrote down the quantity of
every individual thing to be created, all that was and all that
will be to all eternity (see the Mishkdt).” (Hughes's Dictionary


154


THE HAFT PAIKAR


of Islam.) In Sufi phraseology ‘‘ the Pen ” signifies the Universal
Intellect, and the expression quoted from Hughes is tantamount
to that in another Tradition : Anicalu md khnJaqa ’IhVtu ’l-Aql,
“ The first thing which God created was the Intellect."’

The ‘Aql corresponds with the " \<j-iov " of St, John.

The “■ Pen might also mean simply what is written or recorded
in theological books, naql, “ relation,” as opposed to reason,
intellect”. (Cf. the word "argument, reason, proof,” in

the first hemistich.)

1.495. Lit., “ I am not without knowledge of the secrets of
afiairs.”

1.496. I have translated on the supposition that »a-bdyad
raft, '■ one should not go,"’ is the reading intended, though raft
is not a perfect rhyme to guft in the first hem'stich.

The perfect rhyme ntft does not make so good sense, but if it
were adopted, the second hemistich would signify, “ one shou'd
not sweep the path of one’s own fancy and conceit ; i.e., one
should not allow a clean and clear path for one"s own fancy and
conceit.

1.497. “ Yon side of the Veil "’ is the spiritual world, the
Universal Spirit, which embraces the prototypes of all things
of the phenomenal world and their relations of cause and effect
to one another.

The distich means that, as we cannot reach the spiritual world
and understand its prototypes and their relation.s, we cannot
understand the pictures or reflexions of those prototypes and
their relations in this phenomenal world.

This must be taken with limitations, since the Sufi saint is
supposed to have reached the position of Universal Spirit, and
to grasp all things and relations by intuition, and not by discursive
reasoning.

1.498. i.e., though we may strive to get at the meaning of
things and their relations in this world, our conclusions will not
be unattended by some error. Therefore no trust can be placed
in our reading of these pictures of the phenomenal world. (See
the previous distich.)

1.499. i.e., at the Resurrection the truth will be known.

In the second hemistich gkalaf bdzand is used, I think, in the

sense of taghllt kunand, “ they will lead into error,” or “ accuse


COMIIENTAEY


155


of error It should be added that bdkhtan, “ to play,’’ means
also to give ”, so that ghalat bdkhtan may signify ghalat dddan,
“ to lead into error,” and, if my conjecture have support, “ to
accuse of error.”

1.500. ‘Azlmnt, “ a sacred incantation, spell, or amulet ”

■ — often composed of verses of the Qur'an — which compels
demons (dtvs) to attend on and obey the person who recites or
writes it.

1.501. Kabdbs. (See Notes 568 and 1,340.)

1.502. This distich is the peroration of Malikha’s speech.
The first hemistich means “ Solve difficulties in such a manner

1.503. In this and the preceding two distichs Bashr is alluding
to the way in which he and Malikha respectively interpret the
jar and water.

In the first hemistich of this distich I have rendered fishi
by “ at first ”, which is most probably its meaning here, though
the dictionaries explain it only as a noun. But there is no
reason why it should not have an adjectival signification, and
hence an adverbial. Its adverbial use might be explained too
on the analogy of 'dqibat for ba-dqibat or dar ‘dqibat.

1.504. “ Wallets ” ; i.e., travellers’ food-wallets, which can
be spread out as cloths.

“ Drank water (from the jar) ” ; lit., “ gave out water,” db dar
dddand ; i.e., presumably, ladled it out with their hands.

1.505. Lit., “ Do not be a mixer of colours in such a jar ” ;
i.e., do not mix the colours of your dirt in its water. But rayig-
dniiz, “ a mixer of colours,” means also deceitful, full of strata-
gems, crafty ”, so that we might also translate “ Do not play
tricks upon, or be treacherous to this jar ” (which has given
you water).

1.506. “ With stimulated heart,” bd dil-angizi. (See Note
1,404.)

1.507. It should be remembered that mirrors were made of
metal.

1.508. “ Tried,” jitna, here used as rnafiun.

1.509. i.e., henceforth we must be strangers.


156


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.510. “That sample of the base,” an namuna-yi ni‘dl;
lit., “ that sample of shoes.”

Saff-i ni‘dl, “ the line or rank of shoes,” is the place near the
door where the shoes of those who enter the house are left and
where people of the lowest class sit. Hence I am assuming that
these people are taken as the shoes among which they sit. Cf.
the term sijta, “ a low, mean, or ignoble person," applied by Bashr
to Malikha in the third distich after this.

1.511. This second hemistich is very elliptically and obscurely
expressed. It means that Malikha spoke contemptuously of
people as no better than dead, and so neither men nor women.

1.512. If sar-gushdda be for the comparative, sar-gnshdda-tar,
the sense would be. “ A well more open than a road before (you).”

1.513. i.e., the decision of neither was founded upon the
real nature of the water, although one of the two might have
been so, since they were contrary or most widely opposed to one
another, one being good, the other bad.

With respect to the literal meaning, the property of water
which corresponds best with “ clashing ” is its forcefulness,
especially when we keep in mind the other senses of ah, “ water,”
namely, “ lake, river, sea, ocean.” Then db itself too means
“ power, forcefulness ”, as well as “ lustre, radiance, effulgence ” ;
and, as it signifies also the Universal Spirit, we may perhaps
assume that this is the real meaning of the jar and water ; for
though the jar would seem to circumscribe, it will be noticed
that when Bashr examines it more closely it appears to expand
indefinitely.

1.514. i.e., taking the jar and water as the Universal Spirit
(see the last Note) — aU our philosophical disquisitions and formal
inquiries into its nature result only in trouble and affliction
to our individual, partial spirits. It can only be appreciated by
the Sufi saint who has attained to its position by following out
the Path. (See C. E. Wilson’s Translation of Eumi's Masnavl,
Book II.)

1.515. “ The work ” ; more literally, “ the picture or form
(made) ” ; i.e., the result in this phenomenal world of God’s
idea in the spiritual world was not what we thought it.

This seems to refer more to Bashr’s previous words regarding


COMMENTARY


157


God’s pre-recordings, but with respect to the Universal Spirit
it would mean that, though it may be appreciated by the Sufi
saint, the idea which the philosopher by formal inquiry conceives
of it is not in accordance with its real nature.

1.516. i.e., no one can find a clue to the mysteries of the
universe, because there is a veil between us and the spiritual
world. The Author conceives the sky or sphere as a circular
thread, of which the two ends are knotted together, so that no
one can find the clue.

1.517. A durust is said in the Commentary to Graf’s Bustan
to have been a dinar or ashraji. A dinar was worth about
ten shillings. The modern Persian ashrafi is worth about
eight shillings, but the Indian ashrafi or miihr (mohur) is worth
about £1 16s.

1.518. “ The person of the house,” ahl-i sard, probably means
Mallkha’s wife, the word ahl being used to avoid the use of a
word which actually means “ wife ”.

1.519. Lit., “ at last the water remaining in his mouth ” ; i.e.,
remaining to stay, so that he was suffocated.

1.520. Where many bodies are, so to say, stored ; but jlfa-
gdh, “ a place of carrion carcasses,” is a name given to the world
itself.

1.521. I read this second hemistich, bi-purad h’dn khvad dyad
az magasl, where bi-purad means “ he should be filled, or fill
himself ”. The verb is perhaps not commonly found, but it is
used by Sa‘dl in the following line : —

Ind-l hi pur shud digar chun purad ? “ How can a vessel

filled be filled again ? ”

Paridan means ” to fly ”, and this would naturally be associated
with a fly, but it would make no sense here, and I think the
Author is using the rhetorical device of seeming to say one thing
whilst moaning another. It is possible he may intend by magas,
“ fly,” magas-i angubin, “ the honey-fly,” i.e., “ the bee.”

1.522. Especially the last, I should think.

1.523. In the first hemistich “pearl” presumably means
“ face ”. In tbe second “ moist cornelian ” means “ dewy bps ”,
and the “ dry impression ” means the “ veil The metaphor


158


THE HAFT PAIKAR


is drawn from the fact that the stone (here cornelian) of the seal-
ring is moistened before the impression is taken.

1.524. The second hemistich could also be rendered, “ She
got a fair inkling (of the truth), and read his soul.”

1.525. i.e., he has seen a fairy, not a demon, and therefore
he is not a demoniac, as one is supposed to become after seeing
a demon. He is, however, in a way fascinated, possessed, or even
crazed, that is, with love. (See Note 1,342.)

1.526. “The marriage-gift” or portion, Ixibin. the Arabic
tnaJir, which the bridegroom engages to pay the bride, part of it
generally at once, 7na}ir-i mH‘ajjaI, and the rest, rnakr-i ynuajjal,
by instalments or on a divorce.

1.527. The evil eye is supposed to affect particularly one who
is especially fortunate.

1.528. i.e., he restored her from a wretched to a happy con-
dition : he made her Autumn, as it were, a Spring.

1.529. i.e., green dress, which suggests the Spring, is more
suitable than yellow, which suggests the Autumn.

A contrast may also be intended between green, the sacred
colour of Muslims, and the yellow cloth-badge, yahiiduna, para-yi
zard, or girda, which the Jews were formerly obliged to wear in
the East.

1.530. A tall, graceful person is often likened to a cypress.

1.531. Called here the best day of the week as being the day
of “ Bahram ”, the name of the king as well as of Mars.

1.532. i.e., Bahram was the namesake of Mars, and of every-
thing of martial hue.

1.533. “Pearls from cornelian”; i.e., sweet and eloquent
words from her mouth or lips.

1.534. “ To bore pearls ” is to speak sweetly and eloquently.

1.535. i.e., too blind to see your grandeur.

1.5.36. “ The ruby mine ’’ means her mouth or lips. “ Purest

rubies ’ ; i.e., sweet and eloquent words.

1,537. i.e., compared with her the sugar had no sweetness,

and the taper neither brightness, nor slenderness and upright-
ness of form.


C03IMENTAEY


159


1.538. Hair is compared with musk in respect of its darkness
of colour.

1.539. Mercury, the god of wisdom. The sense is that she had
all the beauty of Venus and the wisdom of Mercury.

1.540. Sard is the Persian game of backgammon.

1.541. The “Brazen Fort”, the celebrated fortress in
Turkistan described in the Shah-ndma (Turner Macan’s edition,
vol. iii., pp. 1142-3). It is there said to have been three leagues
high and forty long ; to have been defended by 100,000 men, and
provisioned for ten years. It had one gate towards China, and
one towards Persia. It was taken by Isfandiyar, the Persian king,
from Arjasp, who was kiUed.

The great extent ascribed to it might lead one to suspect that
the idea of it arose from some vague accounts of the Great Wall of
China, if the position of the latter were not opposed to this
supposition.

1.542. “ The fragrant wine,” rdh-i raihdni ; lit., “ the wine
scented with sweet basil.” The word raihanl is possibly an
allusion to Abu Eaihan Alblrunl, who was as famous an astrologer
as a historian and chronologist. The meaning would be that she
had studied works as Earned as those on astrology by Abu
Eaihan. the author of the famous work the Kitdbu ’t-tafhim
fi sand‘ali 'l-tanjhn. It should be added that it is evident from
several of Nizami's works that he had considerable knowledge
of astrology.

1.543. Chinese painting was much esteemed in Persia.

1.544. “ She tied knots on the water ” ; i.e., she accomplished
marvels. “ Like a shell ” : i.e., like any oyster shell, which was
supposed to form the pearl from a drop of water which had fallen
into it, so that, in a manner, it tied knots (i.e., pearls) on the
water admitted.

1.545. Her black paint on the white ground is compared with
the huris’ locks upon their bright faces.

1.546. The connexions of the talismans would be those fixed
between themselves, the object to be guarded, and the person
to be guarded against.

1.547. i.e., reveal this secret.


160


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.548. “ Poison-flasks ” ; i.e., the heads of those killed, which
seemed as poison to any aspirant. Zahr, poison, is contrasted with
nush-nama, “ honeyed letter, page ” ; nush meaning, besides
“ honey, treacle ”, “ an antidote against poison”.

1.549. “ Rings,” halqa ; possibly ring-cakes, so common a
cake as to give the term halqa-ji, “ a maker or seller of rings,
i.e., ring-cakes.” (Cf. the Turkish sutlu halqa, “ a milk-cake in the
shape of a ring.”)

“ Spines among the dates ” ; see Rotes 56 and 527.

1.550. “ Dwell not on the small ” ; i.e., do not be distracted
from the main business by petty details.

1.551. i.e., do as the world does.

1.552. i.e., take plenty of time to deliberate, and then act
forcibly and quickly.

1.553. Although the words dil, “ heart,” and jigar. “ liver,”
together with the compounds into which they enter, are most
commonly used in the same sense, they are not by any means
synonymous. The heart is defined as an immaterial luminous
essence by which man is distinguished from the lower animals.
It may incline to the higher spirit, ruh, or to the carnal soul,
nafs, and takes the position of the one to which it inclines.
Though called by the philosopher vafs-i nutiqn, “ the reasoning
soul,” it is also the seat of affections. The liver, on the other
hand, is nothing but the seat of affections, perhaps, when con-
sidered with reference to “ heart ”, of a grosser and more
instinctive nature. It might have to do with organic sensations.
It belongs naturally to the nafs, “ the carnal soul,” but the latter
may be raised to the po.sition of “ heart ” when the passions are
entirely subdued ; i.e., when the nafs-i ammdra, the “ domineering
soul ”, has passed through the position of nafs-i lavidma, the
“ reproaching soul ”, to that of nafs-i mutma' inna, the ” subdued
or tranquillized soul ”.

1.554. An allusion to the leather cloth on which a criminal
sat when about to be beheaded, and to the basin also used. At
these executions sand was also scattered to absorb the blood.

1.555. Farhad, the name of the lover of Shlrin who became
the wife of Khusrau Parviz, a king of Persia.


COIVniENTARY


161


“ Tomb of Farbad ” is an allusion to tbe skuUs and the danger
of tbe enterprise.

“ Palace of Shirin ” is an allusion to the portrait and the beauty
and grandeur of the princess of the castle.

(For Farhad and Shirin, see also Notes 1,135, 1,163, 1,165, and
1,234.)

1.556. Dar-basta is explained by Redhouse as “ with entire
possession of a house and right to close its door ”, but here it
must be used as an attribute of the house regarding which a
person has such right.

1.557. Lit., “ world of learning.”

1.558. Shnurgh, the name of a fabulous bird supposed to
have inhabited the Alburz Mountains. It was said to have
miraculous power, and is celebrated in the SliaJi-ncima as the
foster-father of Zal, Rustam’s father. In Sufi phraseology (see
especially ‘Audr’s Mantiqu ’t-Tair) it means the Divine Essence.
(See also Notes 1,198 and 1,208.)

1.559. i.e., with all the tokens of perfection.

1.560. i.e., he approached him to do obeisance.

“ As lily might ” ; in allusion to the finger-like petals of that
flower.

1.561. “ Like the rose ” ; in allusion probably to the outer
circle of petals of the rose ; or. if the wild rose be intended, to its
circular form. In cither case the calyx might be meant.

1.562. Khizr, “ the surname of an ancient prophet reputed
to have found and drunk of the lYater of Life, and therefore to be
immortal. He performs miracles, but disappears if suspected. He
is confused with Elias and with St. George.” (Redhouse.) (See
also Notes 274, 1,201, and 1,698.)

1.563. “ A spiritual relationship ” ; i.e., most probably, he had
recourse to astrology, which may be called spiritual in so far as
the planets are called the sjjirits of the zodiacal signs. This
spiritual relationship is explained by the following passage from
the Encyclopccdia of Islam : —

“ The influence of the stars depends on their individual nature,
and also on their position relatively to the earth or to the other
stars ; the events of the sublunary world and human vicissitudes
are therefore subject always to the extremely complex and

M


162


THE HAFT PAIKAE


variable combinations of very numerous, very varied and very
contradictory celestial influences. To know and to combine
these influences is the astrologer's very arduous task.”

One branch of magic indeed is also called “ spiritual ”, but I
do not see that there is anything in it which can be called
“ relationship ”, except that in some written charms mysterious
combinations of numbers, together with figures, names, and words
are used.

Astrology itself, however, was pronounced by Muhammad
to be a branch of magic.

1,561. i.e., there were necessarily crevices between the door

and the wall, but these must be supposed to have been hidden by
some outer covering.

1.565. This refers to the gap he made (see the last distich
but seven), and to his finding the door.

1.566. i.e., as soon as dark night came on, as it were, to the
moon considered as a litter.

1.567. i.e., she proceeded as rapidly as the wind.

1.568. i.e., found the castle-door.

1.569. i.e., when the sun rose.

1.570. i.e., when in the seven heavens, in which are six
directions, Virgo disappeared and the sun rose.

The six directions are north, south, east, west, above, and
below.

Nani is the Persian backgammon.

1.571. “ The Great Kings,” Kagan ; i.e., the kings of the
Kayanian or second Persian dynasty.

1.572. As the pronoun shin in the text refers most probably
to the princess, the sense must be that the king prepared to further
her business.

1.573. May be taken literally, but possibly means, spoke to
him in flattering, eloquent terms.

1.574. The sense is that the hall could scarcely contain the
foods provided.

1.575. i.e., they should test the prince.

1.576. “ Tarazian puppets”; i.e., beauties of Taraz, that
city being famous for the beauty of its inhabitants. (See


COMMENTAEY


163


Note 695.) The sense is that she might teach beauties of Taraz
grace and fascination.

1.577. Weights were made of stone.

1.578. i.e., to the princess, who was as a ruby in respect of
her resplendent rosy cheeks.

1.579. The “ sea ” and the “ sun ” both mean “ the prince ”.

1.580. i.e., in a thousand hopes on the part of her relatives
and those connected with her.

1.581. “A drop of milk” means metaphorically perhaps
spiritual guidance.

1.582. A blue glass-bead being superstitiously thought to
counteract the influence of the evil eye, which would be supposed
to be particularly efficacious in the case of two perfect beings
like the prince and princess.

1.583. “ The sweetmeats of her marriage-feast.” The word
used here is shakar-rlzl, “ sugar-scattering,” and may possibly
mean the same as the modern shlrlnl-khiardn, the distribution
of sweetmeats at a betrothal. Considerable sums are spent upon
these, and the distribution of them is regarded as an important
part of the ceremony.

1,584:. Canopus, which here means the prince, is a particularly
bright star of the first magnitude in the constellation Argo,
a Argus. (See also Note 536.)

1.585. i.e., the prince with the princess.

1.586. “ Pomegranates ” ; i.e., her breasts. “ Dates ” ; i.e.,
her lips.

1.587. “ Black ” ; i.e., misfortune.

1.588. Lit., “ since they drove his steed with redness,” “ they ”
referring to the governing powers, or Fortune.

1.589. “The vital spirit”; i.e., the ruh-i Jiaivuni, the
animal spirit, by which is understood the life, the scat of which is
in the heart, and which moves in the veins with the pulsations of
the body. (Hughes: A Dictionary of Ishlm.)

1.590. Lit., “ the brain of the air was filled with perfume
of red roses,” the perfume of red roses meaning the sweetness of
her eloquent words.


164


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.591. “ A musky veil ” ; i.e., a black veil.

1.592. “ A rose-bud ” ; i.e., her mouth.

1.593. Lit., “ sweet pastilles ” ; i.e., sweet and eloquent
words. “ The rose’s petals ” ; i.e., her lips.

1.594. i.e., to be reluctant to obey.

1.595. i.e., bear the trouble of Usteniug.

1.596. Freely translated.

1.597. i.e., Mahan.

1.598. “ Musky ” ; i.e., black.

1.599. i.e., the blackness of night succeeded the silvery
whiteness of day.

1.600. A compliment to Mahan upon his importance.

1.601. A dissociative-associative simile simply expressing that
they had passed the house.

1.602. The garden was presumably near the Nile.

1.603. “The bird of early morning"; i.e. early morning
itself.

1.604. “Tripod” as referred to “night” is “the moon”;
as referred to “ monarch ” it probably means “ a seat or throne ”
set down on a halt. (Cf. the distich which follows that to which
Note 266 is appended.)

1.605. “ Iram’s gardens ” ; a fabulous earthly paradise
somewhere in the deserts of southern Arabia ( Yaman), constructed
by the genii for Shaddad the son of ‘Ad. (Redhouse.) (See the
Qur’an, Ixxxix., 5-7. See also Notes 90 and 1,203.)

1.606. “ Beat the tattoo,” dulml bar haalnd ; lit., “ raised
the drum,” which is taken generally to moan “ prepared to
depart”, but is here equivalent to duhnl ba-htllu-yi barn bard,
“ carried the drum to the top of the roof,” i.e., “ beat the drum,”
naubat navdkht. This is an allusion to the practice of beating a
large drum five times a day at the gate of a king, prince, or
governor, the first beat being at dawn.

1.607. “ The camel ” here means the sky. “ A gold drum ”
mean.s the sun.

1.608. i.e., an unsolvablc mystery, or, a thing from which
no good resulted.


COAIMENTAEY


165


1.609. The red glow of early morning is considered here as
the blood of night which is killed, as it were, by the coming day.

1.610. Freely translated.

1.611. Ld haul, '' There is no power,” is an exclamation used
to ward off the ill-effects of any e\dl encountered. The full
phrase is La lunda iva-Id qCncala ilia hi-lldh : “ There is no power
or strength except in God.” lluslims often use this exclamation
on meeting a Christian, esjiecially a Christian missionary.

1.612. Ghuls are a species of inferior evil jinn or demons,
who mislead people, esjtecially in deserts, and draw them to
destruction, or kill and eat them. For this purpose they assume
the form of any human being they please, sometimes taking
that of an acquaintance of the person to be misled. Thej’ are
said also to haunt graveyards and eat dead bodies.

1.613. This means that from the trampling of the ghiils the
plain rose in the form of dust to the mountain, and from their
trampling and shouting the mountain was levelled with the plain.
Cf. the Shdh-ndmn (Turner ilacan's edition, vol. i., p. 243) :

Az avdz-i tu kuh humun shavad, " The mountain from your
voice becomes a plain.”

1.614. “ The horn and blade,” shukh-sliuna ; i.e., a ram's
horn and a shoulder-blade used by mendicants to extort alms.
Owing to the threats also emjiloycd if their requests were not
granted, the term comes to mean also ” threatening, terrorizing ”.

1.615. I have included this distich, but have enclosed it in
brackets as probably spurious. It is weak and not consistent
with the preceding distich.

1.616. The wearing of a belt is a token of servitude.

The sky by means of the planets governs from an astrological
point of view our destinies, and is hence our master. It is a
seven-headed dragon in respect of the seven planets, and it
is no wonder that it is around us as a belt, since it is a dragon
which writhes and coils round its victims like any other serpent.

1.617. i.e., when the dawn appeared, preceding the sun,
which is here compared with a lion.

1.618. i.e., all the black r/huls had ceased making a noise,
and had disappeared.


166


THE HAFT PAIKAE


1.619. Lit., “ the demon-rider,” but this is ambiguous.

1.620. One who sees a demon is supposed to become
demoniacal, crazy, and heljdess. (See also Notes 1,342 and
1,52.5.)

1.621. See Note 1,5.54.

1.622. One of the names of “ desert ” is mafaza, “ a place
where people perish.”

The “ cloth ” as regards the desert is its expanse.

1.623. “ A gain to the distressed ” ; lit., “ towards the

troubled ” ; but cf. siiy-i kan giriftan, “ to take the side or part

of a person ; to protect, to guard anyone.”

1.624. Presumably stones.

1.625. i.c., he found nothing but darkness.

1.626. See Note 569.

1.627. See Notes 90, 1,203, and 1,605.

1.628. “ Thirsty wights ” ; lit., dry-lipped people.

1.629. i.e., they were so much in demand and so much used
that they were troubled, and, as it were, called for help and
deli%'erance. For halvd see Note 1,459.

1,6.30. Lit., “ three kisses used its dates.” The mention of
“three” is so peculiar that one might conjecture “kisses”
are not intended, but some kind of “ sweetmeat ”, though there
is no dictionary authority for this.

1.631. “Guavas”; or possibly “pears”, amrud.

1.632. “Fashioners of gems”; i.e., being themselves as
gems.

1.633. “ To its bowl ” ; i.e., to the place itself considered
as a bowl.

1.634. Pdlfida. Described in Steingass's Dictionary as
“ a kind of sweet beverage made of water, flour, and honey ”.
Some say, “ a kind of jelly made of water, starch, and honey.”
According to others it is “ a mixture of grated apples with sugar
and cardamoms ”.

1,6.35. “ White and black ” refer in the first place to the

colours of the grapes, but the expre.ssion means also “good


COMMENTARY


167


and bad ” ; “ Persians and Arabs ” ; “ all creatures ” ; “ day and
night.”

1.636. These are all, presumably, names of species of grapes,
but they are not identified by the dictionaries, and onlv the
first two are mentioned at all as grapes, the ruziql, and the
mulcihi. The rdziql is not described. The muluhl is given as
a species of oblong and whitish grape.

1.637. Ab-i angur-ii nur-i ulisli-gun ham bar angiir hasta
mahzar-i khun. A rather unsatisfactory distich.

1.638. An apparent contrast in colour, but by “ sugar ”
reference is made simply to the sweetness of the fruits.

1.639. “ That auspicious lamp ” ; i.e., the hole in the cavern
through which the light came.

1.640. See Notes 1,342, 1,525, and 1,620.

1.641. “A single spark"; or perhaps “a single sin”, yak
sharara. This refers possibly to Mahan's getting drunk with his
friends. Or it may possibly refer to the simple fact of his getting
lost at first. (See the next distich but twenty-five.)

1.642. i.e., vile qualities.

1.643. A contrast between complaining of his eyes for what
they saw, and stroking (i.e., rubbing) them to wipe his tears.

1.644. See Note 1,011.

1.645. Bi-’smillah, In the name of God,” is a general
invocation preliminary to any act or undertaking.

1.646. For “ the Stream or Water of Life ”, see Notes 274,
1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

1.647. See Notes 90, 1,203, and 1,605.

1.648. “ A prelude ” ; lit., “ a guide.”

1.649. i.e., they blame others for faults which they themselves
have.

1,050. Lit., “they drink a poison”; i.e., they pervert in
their own minds everything good and true which they come
across into something bad and false.

1,651. i.e., lies are soon exploded, but truth has something

in it that makes it permanent, and this permanence establishes
the fact that it is truth. (Cf. the next distich.)


168


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.652. i.e., a simple person may sometimes entertain idle
fancies as truth ; it is only the astute who can always distinguish
truth from such fancies.

1.653. For ghiils, see Note 1,612.

1.654. i.e., clear your mind of all disagreeable and unhappy
ideas and fancies — make it a tabula rasa.

1.655. i.e., though I should be in an authoritative position by
being as your son, I should consider myself your slave.

1.656. The flowers of the sandal-tree are red.

1.657. Buried treasure was supposed to be always guarded
by a snake or dragon.

1.658. i.e., the exhilaration of enjoyment cannot be yours
till the morning. (For halva, and “ saffron ”, see Note 1,459.)

1.659. i.e., the pleasant fruits of enjoyment will be yours at
the dawn. The pomegranate, on account of the colour of its
pulp, is likened here to the glow of dawn.

1.660. Lit., '■ possessed of ambergris-scented garments.”
This is an allusion to the odour of the sandal-tree, and is not to
be taken literally, though ‘amhar may have the general sense of
“ perfume ”.

1.661. The north wind renounces the world, as it were, by
casting away everything before it.

1.662. Both Grecian and Chinese art-workmanship were much
admired by the Persians.

1.663. The “ pastilles of camphor scent ” refer most probably
to the flowers and blossoms of the garden.

1.664. “ The king enthroned ” ; i.e., Mahan on his couch,
the word takht meaning both “ couch ” and “ throne ”.

1.665. This refers to the personal charms of the beauties.

1.666. i.e., the candles rested in their hands as they do in
lanterns.

1.667. Lit., “they opened out a foremost place of carpet,
or a chief seat of carpet.”

1.668. “ The moon.” named possibly as the most conspicuous
object at night, and also perhaps because nmh. the name of it in
Persian, is similar in form to the name Mahan.


COMMENTARY


169


1.669. This refers probably to the beauties’ bosoms.

1.670. Sandal-wood was bruised with water on a stone and
used as a remedy in fever and headache. In a literal sense,
Mahan was resting against the sandal-tree.

1.671. Bulgaria, BulgMr ; i.e., probably the old territory of
the Eastern Bulgarians on the west of the Ural ^Mountains to
the north and north-east of the Burtas people, (identified with
the Finnish Mordwa), whose land extended from about Saratof
to Nizhni Novgorod.

The word Bulghar means also the inhabitants of Bulgaria.

1.672. Halva. (See Note 1,459.)

1.673. i.e., I shall shortly have a companion.

1.674. Implies that mere scent is not sufficient to content
or please her mind.

But the correct reading may be ha fib, “ with perfume,” not
yd tib, “ or perfume.” In this case one would render,

“ Content of mind and scent are good conjoined ” : Tlbat-l
nafs kJiyash huvad hd tib.

The sense would be that content or pleasure of mind is well
added to the enjoyment of scent.

1.675. As regards the rose, the sense is that the latter attracts
the nightingale from the tree on which it may be perching.

1.676. “A ruby seal on red cornelian”; i.e., “his lips on
her lips,” with the secondary sense of a red seal put upon a
jar of red wine.

1.677. An ‘{frit is the most powerful of the hideous evil genii
except the marid.

1.678. The reading of the last word in the second hemistich
is doubtful. It should probably be tuz or tOz. This might
possibly represent the town of Tuz or Toz, which, according to
the Burhdn-i Qdli', was a flourishing place in the reign of Qubad,
a king of the Sasan'an dynasty, and was situated near Ahvaz in
Khuzistan (Susiana).

Ahvaz, which is now a deserted town, is in latitude 31° 33' N.,
and longitude 48° 45' E.

According to other authorities Tuz or Toz was a town near
Kufa in ‘Iraq ‘ArabI, to the west of Khuzistan.


170


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The town is mentioned in Firdausi's SMh-nama. I am not
aware, however, that the town was notable for a particular kind
of bow, and if the correct pronunciation of the name be Toz,
as given by Yullers, and the rhyming word be pronounced luz,
as giyen by Steingass, we cannot properly read Toz in the second
hemistich.

I do not know, however, of any other rhyming word that would
give sense here.

1.679. i.e., the effects of sensual love are pernicious, but they
are not appreciated as such till after satiety.

1.680. This and the next distich are most probably remarks
of the Author's.

The moaning of the first is, “ Do not give way to lusts and
passions, since doing so is detrimental to the intellect and the
higher spirit."’

The sense of the second is that as you should not dwell in a
street whore the police-director is a thief, since the result would
be the loss of material possessions, so you should not yield to lusts
and passions, the result of doing so being the loss of intellectual
and spiritual possessions.

1.681. Lit., this-like (act) and that-like (act) are befitting.

1.682. i.e., if the pursuit of objects which are apparently
beautiful, but are radically and essentially ugly, did not lead to
evil and unpleasant consequences, then they 'would be really
beautiful, but it is implied here that the consequences are evil
and the objects, therefore, really ugly, though at first apparently
beautiful.

1.683. “ The White Div,” i.e., “ the White Demon,” Dlv-i
Safld, is described in the Shuh-ndma as the general in chief of
the army of Mazandaran (Hyrcania), and as a being of gigantic
stature, hhick in face and bodv, but with uhite hair. From this
last quality ho probably derived his agnomen. He was killed
by the Persian champion Rustam, who came to Mazandaran
to deliver King Kai-Ka'us and his army who were held captive
there.

1.684. “■ The willow ” ; probably an allusion to Mahan in
respect of his trembling, the willow apparently being confused


COmiEXTARY


171


with, the aspen. (Cf. hid-irtsh larzan, trembling like a willow.”
Cf. also Note 1,759.)

1.685. This, of course, refers to those who appeared at first
beautiful, but were ultimately found to be hideous.

1.686. “ The sweet basil of the shining day ” means “ the
sun ” or “ the sun’s rays ”. (Cf. raihdn-i zard, " yellow basil ” ;
“ the sun’s rays.’’)

1.687. “ The flag,” ruyat. The correct reading may, however,
be dyat, “ the miracle or wonder.”

But “ a flag ”, however, is a thing set tip, and since it flutters
may be called fickle.

In the second hemistich I venture to conjecture tirf, “ fickle,
changeable,” for the tarfa or tiufa of the editions I have consulted,
none of which make good sense.

1.688. Ants and snakes were associated with graves and
desolate places.

1.689. In the Turkish book of stories edited by Major Eifat
Bey it is said that dogs' dung is used in tanning leather.

1.690. Lit., “ He said to himself.’’

1.691. “ A skin drawn over blood ” ; i.e., the human body ;
but there is a sub-allusion to a skin of wine.

1.692. “ Wine outside ” ; i.e., the beauty of colouring of the
human face.

1.693. Lit., “ Many a keen man who buys a snake-stone thinks
it a snake-stone, (but) sees a snake in the basket.’’

The “ snake-stone ”, mdr-muhra, is a stone found in the head
of a snake and supposed to be an antidote against its poison.

1.694. “ This dry bag,” in IharJta-yi khiishk . i.e., the world
in respect of the earth, which in the East, at all events, is
often dry.

1.695. i.e., find things which they thought most charming and
valuable comparatively worthless.

1.696. The lady who tells the story to Bahram is speaking here
on her own part.

1.697. i.e., suffered distress.

1.698. Khizr. “ The prophet Khizr, who discovered and drank
of the Water of Life, figures in Oriental tradition as the vazir


172


THE HAFT PAIKAR


of Iskandar (Alexander), and also as Elias and St. George, on
the supposition that the same soul animated them by trans-
migration.'’ (Steingass.) (See also Notes 274, 1,201, and 1,562.)

1.699. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

1.700. “ The colour of the world ” ; i.e., presumably “ green ” ;
but blue and green are commonly confused in Persian, and we
must bear in mind too that the sky is frequently alluded to as
green.

1.701. i.e., brilhant prosperity attends him, as the sun attends
the sky.

1.702. The flower is probably the heliotrope, which is esteemed
for its fragrant odour. Its “ round loaf ” is its yellow stamens,
which by a poetical fancy the Author conceives as coming from
the sun, to which the flower constantly turns.


1.703. The epithet is applied in consideration of the similarity
in colour between the earth and some sandal-wood. (See the next
distich and the end of this story.)

1.704. A reference to the odours of early morning.

1.705. By “Chinese doll” is meant a beauty of Chinese
Turkistan.

1.706. Kausar is supposed to be a river in Paradise.

1.707. By “shells”, i.e., oyster shells, are meant different
parts of the sky. By “ collyrium-colourod ocean ”, i.e., black-
coloured ocean, is meant the sky at night.

By “ pearls ” are meant stars.

By the “ water-dragon is meant darkness.

The sense of the distich is simply, “ When the stars appeared
in the dark sky.”

1.708. i.e., sweet and eloquent words from her bps.

1.709. i.e., the king.

1.710. See Note 1,4-59. “ Saffron ” means here an enbvening
story.

1.711. “ The Sun ” ; i.e., the king.

1.712. The word chnh means both “ well ” and “ pit ”. By
“ pit ” is meant here danger.


COJDIENTAEY


173


1.713. Lit., “ he drank the water of his mouth from (the water
of) his heart ” ; i.e., he wept tears of blood and suffered affliction
in his painful longing.

His longing was “ affliction ”, uh-i jigar, lit., “ water of the
hver or heart.”

1.714. i.e., he wept tears of blood from his heart until it was
dried up.

1.715. A play upon the word dh, “ water ; lustre.” The word,
however, in these two senses comes from two different roots.

“ Stones ” is an approximation to the double sense of “ sang ”,
i.e., “■ precious stones,” and ” rocks ”, in both of which “ water ”
may be said to be, in a way, prisoned.

1.716. i.e., the water or lustre of the rubies was no con-
solation in the absence of real water. Their uselessness in these
circumstances would cause “ water of the eyes ”, i.e., “ tears,”
to flow.

1.717. i.e., as the stone or rock may prison the water, so that
stony-hearted man kept to himself the water he had.

1.718. i.e.. Bad behaved to him in accordance with the
import of his name.

1.719. i.e., do not think you are clever enough to get water
from stone or rocks ; or, more particularly, real water from these
precious stones.

1.720. “■ Asperse my name ” ; lit., “ bear away the water
or lustre of my face.”

1.721. “Hot fire”; i.e., “eyes,” in respect of their fiery
glances and light. It should be remarked that the eyes were
supposed to see by a light of their own.

1.722. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

1.723. He means probably that by depriving him of eyes he
will be able to take all his property with safety to himself.

1.724. The rhetorical merit of the hemistich consists in
bringing together khuk, “ earth ” (translated for clearness
“ clay ”), and held, “ air ” or “ wind ”.

1.725. Eyes are compared with narcissi.

1.726. The “ crown ” ; presumably, the “ head ”. The
“ gems ” ; i.e., the “ eyes ”.


174


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.727. “ Desert king ” ; lit., “ lion.”

1.728. “Whose moles with Hindus vied”; i.e., “whose
moles were black.”

1.729. An allusion to the clearness and beauty of her skin.

1.730. i.e., she reduced the moon to a desperate condition
by excelling it so much in beauty. At the same time, the “ moon ”
may refer to her own “ face

1.731. “ Babylonian spells.” Babylon was famous for its
magic. The term means here “ her fascinating arts ”.

1.732. “ Life's Stream ” ; i.e.. “ the Stream or Water of Life.”
(See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.)

1.733. “ That lamp of his eyes ” ; i.e., the Kurd’s daughter.

1.734. Lit., “ to break his bile.” (Sec the next distich.)

1.735. The eyes are compared with the onyx.

1.736. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

1.737. Lit., “ till she left no juice or essence in them,” i.e.,
in the leaves ; but the mode of expression seems to denote the
contrary of what is intended.

1.738. It was the custom to bind the eyes of the ox which
threshed the corn.

1.739. i.e., when Good opened his e3’es.

1.740. “The pearl-casket” means Good’s mouth, which he
opened in eloquent speech.

1.741. i.e., he prostrated himself in devotion and thanks-
giving to God.

1.742. i.e., the fire of love.

1.743. i.e., simply, “ he wept,” his tears being likened to
white blossoms.

1.744. Lit., “ you have borne airs much from strangers.”

1.745. “Your brand”; i.e., the fact of my being in your
service.

1.746. i.e., I ought not to suffer additional pain by incurring
further obligations.

1.747. i.e., they were insane (with grief).


COMMENTAKY


175


1.748. This is somewhat similar to the expression explained in
Note 1,396.

1.749. The Kurd is referring to what he himself should not do.

1.750. i.e., the goodness of the Kurd's daughter is too manifest
to be concealed.

1.751. i.e., either the nightingale or the dove.

1.752. “ The eastern sultan ” ; i.e., the sun.

1.753. Mercury, the god of wisdom. Venus, the goddess of
beauty and music.

1.754. “ Shigitfa'’ et florem et vulvam significat.

For “ the Fount of Life ”, see Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

1.755. Kausar, supposed to be a river in paradise.

1.756. An epileptic was supposed to be possessed by a demon.

1.757. i.e., his attendance on her led only to his bewilderment
and distress.

1.758. “ An intimate,” mahraml ; i.e., one who has the right
of admittance to the haram.

1.759. “A willow”; most probably an aspen. (See Note
1,684.)

1.760. We should say, “ with the eyes of a fawn or a gazelle.”

1.761. See Note 1,741.

1.762. See Note 1,758.

1.763. “ The register of acts.” Jarlda-yi jahd (lit., “ the
account-book of efforts ”) seems equivalent here simply to jarida-
yi kdr, “ the account-book of acts or transactions ” ; i.e., the book
in which one might be supposed to register one’s transactions
or undertakings with a view to what is due to oneself and to
others.

1.764. Galia ; i.e., galia moschata, a perfume composed of
musk, ambergris, camphor, and oil of ben-nuts. Most of the
ingredients of the perfume being dark in colour, down or hair
on the face is compared with it. “ Musky hair ” ; i.e., black
hair.

1.765. In despite of bad, or Bad, the proper name of the man
being taken from the appellative.

1.766. i.e., fuellam stupravit.


176


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.767. By Kisra (Chosroes) is often understood Nushirvan
the Just, a Sasanian king in whose reign Muhammad was born ;
but it is a title applied to any one of the Sasanian kings of Persia.
It is said to be the Arabic form of the Persian Khusrau, but it is
used by Firdausi as the name given by King Qubad to his son
Nushirvan on the birth of the latter.

Kai-Ka'iis was the name of a king of Persia of the Kayanian
or second dynasty. Kai, king, is a title apphed to any king
of that dynasty.

1.768. Nard, the Persian backgammon.

1.769. “ His good and bad ” ; i.e., his good and evil fortune.

1.770. Or, “ with no thought of good,” both senses being
admissible.

1.771. i.e., “ 0 you, who will be beheaded.”

1.772. Mubashskir means “ a bringer of good tidings ”. It is
slightly similar to Shan (or Shar), " Bad,” his real name.

1.773. Lit., *■ he laboured to do nothing but buying (i.e.,
thinking of, or looking for) sandal-wood.”

1.774. The sandal-wood intended in this story is presumably
the species santalain Freycinetiamim, which is of a light yellow
colour. By calling it free from colour, az rang khdli, the Author
means possibly that it is of a semi-neutral tint.

In the second hemistich rang, '■ colour,” has probably any or
all of the meanings ” beauty, clearness, brilliancy, splendour,
grandeur, power, advantage, capital ”, the absence of which may
be predicated of earth or dust, as mere earth or dust, without
consideration of the productive power of the earth.

1.775. Gard, ” dust,” means also “ distress, trouble, affliction,
worry ”.

1.776. i.e., he kept her always in absolute retirement.

1.777. i.e., when the sky whitened itself, or dawn appeared,
through the sun which was soon to rise.

1.778. The sign of the Fifth Clime is the sign ruled by Venus,
i.e., Libra. In fact, Venus is assigned to the Fifth Clime, and not
to the Seventh.

1.779. i.e., Venus, the minstrel of the sky, gave him honour.


COIVIIVIENTAEY


177


“ The five turns,” i.e., of music, is a reference to the music
which was played five times a day before the palace of a king,
prince, or governor.

1.780. “The Greeks” are the day. “The Ethiop van” is
the night. The meaning is, “ Until day and night, meeting in
conflict, night conquered and succeeded day.”

1.781. “Sky-prepared collyrium” means “darkness in the
sky ”, collyrium being of a dark colour.

1.782. Halva. (See Note 1,459.)

1.783. “ A honey-fount from comefian ” ; i.e., sweet and
eloquent words from her mouth.

1.784. Expresses her distracting fascination, without regard
to the presence of lovers.

1.785. Joseph, the type of manly beauty.

1.786. Iram. (See Notes 90, 1,203, and 1,605.)

1.787. “ Kausar’s stream,” one of the supposed rivers of
Paradise.

1.788. “ Life’s Water ” ; i.e., “ the IVater or Stream of Life.”
(See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, 1,698.)

1.789. Beauty without flaw is supposed to be particularly
subject to the influence of the evil eye.

1.790. i.e., its four walls served, as it were, as glass beads,
supposed to ward off the effects of magic and the evil eye.

They were also as “ an encompassing protecting line ”, here
called khatt-i pargar, but presumably equivalent to klmtt-i hisdr,
“ a circle drawn by a conjurer round himself or others for
protection.”

It is possible to translate, “ were raised on its four walls four
beads of glass,” but I think the sense is not to be taken as literal.

1.791. It is implied in the first hemistich that the man by
entering the garden brands it, i.e., impairs its beauty.

The sense of the second hemistich is that the man must expect
to see a keeper in so fine a garden, and should therefore not
break into it.

1.792. i.e., what I have suffered is through my own fault.

1.793. i.e., enjoy the sight of the festivities in the garden.

N


178


THE HAFT PAIKAK


1.794. '■ lEs human nature ; i.e., his nature as a man endowed
with a rational soul which distinguishes him from the lower
animals.

1.795. A compliment to the beauties, by which they are
hkened to the hurls. (Cf. Note 1,192.)

1.796. i.e., the narrow beam of light at the aperture was as
the source of a stream which widened out into the spacious
waters composed, as it were, by the garden and by the beauties
disporting themselves in it.

1.797. i.e., crowded with beauties of cypress-hke form.

1.798. This and the preceding distich are apparently remarks
of the Author's.

1.799. “ Other apples ” ; i.e., the apples of the garden.

1.800. i.e., they went under the water.

1.801. By “ moon ”, malt, is meant each beauty. “ Fish ”
in Persian is main.

1.802. The diram. (See Note 569.) Birams mean here
moonbeams.

1.803. i.e., fuellarum pulchritiidine visa ejus membrum virile
se erexit.

1.804. i.e., their fair and bright skins scintillated, as it were,
with pearls.

1.805. An allusion to their bosoms and chins.

1.806. B'istun, which is taken popularly to mean “columnless”,
as though from bl-sutun, is a mountain which Farhad, the lover
of Shirin, cut through at her command. The story is told in
Nizami’s poem Khusraii-u Shirin.

The real meaning of the hemistich is that their beauty would
have, even upon those sexually deficient, the effect alluded to
in Note 1,803. (See also Notes"' 1,163, 1,165, 1,234, and 1,555.)

1.807. For Farhad, see Notes 1,16.3, 1,165, 1,234, and 1,555.

1.808. “ The milky stream which Shlrin’s Palace had.”

There is no allusion to this that I have seen in Nizami’s poem,

Khusrau-n Shirin.

Qa.sr-i Shirin, “ Shirin’s Palace,” was and is, however, the
name of a town in Kermanshah, Persia, situated on the Holvan


COMMENTARY


179


Chai (Stream), and the fact that Holvan (Hulwan) means “ being
sweet ”, or “ sweetness ”, and that shlrl, “ milky,” might also,
as shirln, be rendered “ sweet ”, may, I think, olTer us an
explanation of the Author’s allusion. Qasr-i Shlrin is in about
latitude 34° 28' N., and longitude 45° 34' E. Istakhrl (about
A.D. 950) places it in ‘Iraq ‘ArabI, five stations (i.e., about 100
miles) east of Baghdad. As a matter of fact, however, it is about
105 miles north-east of Baghdad, and nine or ten miles within
the present-day Persian border. The Holvan Chai flows into
the Diyala, a tributary of the Tigris.

It might be added that although, in accordance with the
dictionaries, I have translated shirt as “ milky ”, such attribute
can scarcely be applied to a stream except in respect of the
quality “ sweetness ”, which is connoted by ‘‘ milk ”. There
is no reason either why shlrl should not amongst its senses have
that of shirln, i.e., *' sweet.”

As an alternative, however, it may be suggested that the stream
in question might be that which Shirln wished to flow through
the rock of Bistun when Farhad, at her request, had cut through
that rock. (See also Notes 1,163, 1,165, 1,234, and 1,555.)

1.809. Qamat and Qiydmat, “stature” and “Resurrection”,
are used together rhetorically because of their similarity in
sound; but qiydmat, besides “Resurrection”, means “a great
disturbance ” or “ the cause of one ”, such as a beautiful woman
who causes disturbance amongst her lovers.

1.810. See Note 1,803.

1.811. Aperture and hole in one sense mean the aperture or
hole through which he was looking ; sed sensu altero vulvam
significant. Et avis et anguis membrum virile significant.

1.812. “Grecian face” means fair face. “ Ethiop locks”
mean black locks.

1.813. The “laden cypress”, perhaps better here, “cedar,”
means literally the tree so laden by branches and foliage as to
droop over any water that might be near. Metaphorically the
“ cypress ” means the form of the beauty, and “ pomegranates ”
her breasts.

By their being “ dipped in water ” is meant tlieir being on
her white, resplendent bosom or body. Ab means both “ water ”


180


THE HAFT PAIKAR


and “ lustre ”, but in each respective sense is from a different
root.

“ Water dipped in pomegranates ” signifies literally tbeir
juiciness ; metaphorically it means that there was lustre, whiteness
and resplendency in her breasts.

1,814. Lit., “ love would become sober, and intellect drunk.”

1,81.0. From this and several of the following distichs it
would appear that the word khyaja, “ master,” means in this
story a learned religious man of an ascetic character.

1.816. “ The musk-deer ” means here the beauties, and “ the
cheeta ” the master.

1.817. i.e., as ushers.

1.818. Ghurfa, “ an upper room,” means also “ paradise,
the seventh heaven ”.

The meaning is that when they took her into the room and
closed the door upon her, she being as that which made the
beauty of heaven, they closed the door of heaven.

1.819. i.e., had made his business well-ordered or concordant,
as a harp is “ harmonious ”, hd-ahang. Chang, rendered “ harp ”,
means also “ Mani's book ” ; i.e., the collection of paintings by
Mini or Manes, the founder of the sect of Manichseans, so that
the hemistich might be rendered, “ had ordered his affairs bke
Mani's book.”

In this case the sense would be, “ had arranged his affairs in
fine style,”

1.820. “ Drew, from her, iron from silver ” ; i.e., robbed her
silvery bosom of its iron-hard heart. “ Silver which was gold ” ;
i.e., of course, in value, not colour.

1.821. For an explanation of the expression “ in chiding
tones ”, see Note 943.

1.822. Parda, “curtain,” means also “music”. The sense
is presumably, “ Where and how do you live ? ”

1.823. i.e., illam vitiare voluit.

1.824. “ The pi ace ” ; i.e., the room in which they were.

1.825. See Note 1,784.

1.826. “ The gardener ” ; i.e., the master.

1.827. “ A cup of wine” ; i.e., the beauty.


COMMENTARY


181


1.828. This refers to the accident that had happened.

1.829. i.e., of my heart and peace.

1.830. “ The yellow wall-flower ” {cheiranthus cheiri). This is
probably the equivalent here of the word khlrl. Redhouse, how-
ever, gives also “the stock-giUiflower ” {wiaiiAiofo odoratissima).

1.831. i.e., his fair face became yellow through vexation.

1.832. i.e., they made aU clear and easy, and showed the way.

1.833. “ The rose ” means the master, and “ the rose-water ”
the lady.

1.834. “ The C 3 rpress ” means the lady. (For the “ free
cypress ”, see Note 1,246.)

The “ jasmine and Samanian rug ” refer to her fairness and
colouring.

The Samanians reigned in Eastern Persia for 128 years, the
last king dying in a.d. 999. It is to be presumed that Samanian
carpets were still existent and famous in the Author’s time.

1.835. In this distich “ the cypress ” means apparently the
master, and “ the rose ” the lady.

1.836. Khdna-gir, “ house-securing,” or “ taking a house ”,
is explained as “ the fourth of the seven rounds of the game of
nard (the Persian backgammon) ”. For an account of this game
reference may be made to Dr. Hyde’s work. Be Nerdiludio.

The sense intended by the metaphor may, I think, be understood
without explanation.

1.837. The “ panther ” means the master ; the “ deer ” the
lady.

1.838. “ The inspector (or superintendent) of police of a town,”
shahna.

1.839. “ The censor,” or “ censor-inspector ”, muhtasib, who
inspects weights and measures, and corrects immorality.

1.840. Vd rasidand-ash az chundn khvdrl. The B. ed. of
1328 reads.

Bar kashidand-ash az chundn khvdri : “ from such dejection
did they raise him up.”

1.841. See Note 1,815.


182


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.842. “ Raised its standard to a ■wall ” ; i.e., I think, “ rose
as a wall.” I do not think a real wall is meant, though it may
possibly be so.

1.843. I have translated from the B. ed. of 1328, with which
several of the I.O. MSS. agree :

Bar sar-ash hislia-u ba-bun ghdri, suggesting, however, blsha-l
for hisha-u.

I.O. MS. 1168 has,

Bar iah-ash bisha-l, ba-bar ghdri : “ At the bottom of it (was)
a wood, at the breast a cave.”

The literal rendering of the reading of the B. ed. is, “ On
its head a wood, at the root a cave,” and the sense is, I think,
that the branches and foliage of the jasmine-trees formed, as it
were, a wood, and that near or behind the lower parts of the
trunks there was a cave.

1.844. “ No better place ” ; lit., “ no better court, place of
congress or meeting.”

1.845. “ A pleasant couch ” ; lit., “ a place of business.”

1.846. “The curved dome”; i.e., the sky in the sense of
fortune.

1.847. “The master’s court.” (See Note 1,844.)

1.848. “Pomegranates, narcissi”; i.e., breasts and eyes.

1.849. “ The dawn ” means both the lady and the real dawn.

“ A pair of shears ” means both the two girls who are ill-using

her, and also streaks of the dawn, 'which the Author likens to
shears.

1.850. He implies that he himself is to blame.

1.851. i.e., the pure should receive good treatment from all
sensible people.

1.852. The argument in this and the two preceding distichs
is that since God had hitherto saved him from misfortune, he
should take the misfortunes which had just befallen him as
a token that he was about to commit a sin, and as a warning
against it.

1.853. i.e., the covetous eyes of lustful passion looked upon
their love.

1.854. “Beasts of prey”; i.e., illicit passions.


COMMENTARY


183


1.855. “ The puppet-playing sphere ” is the sky, which acts
through the planets as a showman plays puppets.

1.856. The “ world’s pole ’’ : “ one of the two points in which
the axis of the earth is supposed to meet the sphere of the heavens ;
the fixed point about which the stars appear to revolve. These
two extremities or fixed points are called ‘ the poles of the world
The pole star is the nearest star to the northern of these two
poles.

The meaning of the distich is that the streaks of dawn
(gossamer) appeared above the horizon to the north pole.

“ The spider of the astrolabe ” is the centre of the rete which
looks like a spider in the middle of its web. This web-like
part of the astrolabe is compared here to the white hnes of
dawn.

But this and the preceding distich might be rendered :

“ When from the mountain rose the fount of light, (and)
banished from the world the evil eye :

“ the spider of the astrolabe at dawn when to the world’s pole
it spun gossamer,”

and in this rendering the “ spider ” would represent the “ sun ”,
the “ astrolabe ” the “ sky ”, and “ gossamer ” “ the sun’s rays ”,

The astrolabe may be said to represent the skj', since it is an
arrangement of rings representing, besides the equator, the
prime meridian, the ecliptic, etc. (See Chaucer’s Treatise on the
Astrolabe.)

1.857. “ A lamp ” ; i.e., the sun.

1.858. i.e., subjection to illicit passion.

1.859. “ The portion ” ; i.e., the marriage portion which the
bridegroom engages to pay the bride. (See Note 1,526.)

1.860. Et gallus et piscis memhrum virile significant.

1.861. i.e., amongst all living creatures.

1.862. Zoroastrians were called sapid-push or sapid-jdma,
“ clad in white.”

1.863. “ Domes ” ; i.e., the domes, the seven skies.

1.864. “ Saturn and Jupiter in aspect trine.” Two planets
are in trine aspect when they are 120 degrees, i.e., four zodiacal
signs, apart from one another. The symbol for this aspect,
which is favourable, is A.


184


THE HAFT PAIKAE


1.865. The sun passes from Pisces into Aries on the 21st of
March, which is in Persia the beginning of the New Year and of
Spring.

1.866. “ Khizr-like.” (See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.)

1.867. “ A Nile ” ; i.e., the celestial Nile, one of the supposed
rivers of paradise.

Salsabil is also the name of a supposed stream in paradise.

1.868. “ Aloes ” ; i.e., aloes-wood, likened in respect of its
colour to the earth.

1.869. i.e., caused the flowers to grow.

1.870. i.e., devoted itself to making them grow and flourish.

1.871. i.e., the sun shone brightly without clouds or mist.
Mirrors were made of metal.

1.872. This hemistich might also be rendered :

“ The plants increased the lustre of the eyes ” : Sdbza gauhar
fuzuda blnish-rd.

1.873. i.e., the snow was melted by the heat of the sun and
flowed down into the river.

1.874. Galia ; i.e., galia moschata, a mixture of perfumes
containing musk. (See the latter part of Note 146.)

1.875. A reference both to the colour of the red lotus and also
to the fiery heat of the sun.

1.876. The (white) blossoms of Spring are likened to pearls,
which pearls by their number are made “ wide-spread ” (i.e.,
abundant), farakh, as the tulips’ petals are fardkh, though in
another sense, i.e., that of “ wide ”. I have attempted to convey
the double meaning by the term “ wide-spread ”.

1.877. i.e., the cypress and box-tree intermingled their
foliage.

Allusion is made to the comb-like leaves of the cypress, and the
curliness of the foliage of the box-tree.

1.878. The “ gold ingots ” are the yellow stamens.

1.879. Both “ pastils ” and “ stars ” mean flowers ; i.e.,
the flowers were scattering themselves or were scattered.

By the use of the word “ stars ” for “ flowers ” it may be said,
too, that the former were scattered or dispersed before the
Resurrection. (See the Qur’an, Ixxxii., 1, 2.)


COMMENTAEY


185


1.880. “ Saffron.” (See Note 1,459.)

The distich implies that the fenugreek and the saffron grew
close together.

By “ tears ” may be meant the stamens, or, perhaps, dew-drops.

By “ smiling ” may be meant displaying its clusters of red
flowers.

1.881. i.e., simply, the anemone had been created red.

1.882. i.e., appearing in their whiteness as pearls.

1.883. The stem of the hyacinth is hkened to the style used
for applying collyrium.

The dark blue blossom of a species of hyacinth is compared
with tutty or colljTium.

The sense of the hemistich is that the hyacinth showed itself
in its beautiful colouring.

1.884. Dllam, a region and town in Gllan on the Caspian, the
inhabitants of which had curly hair. (See also Note 280.)

1.885. The forked or double-headed arrow is not adequately
described in the dictionaries, but it is mentioned by them as a
cutting weapon. This, taken with the sin.ile in the hemistich,
would tend to show that the head of it had the shape of a crescent
moon, the inner curve being sharp like a knife. The scalloped
edge of many leaves, especially that of the holly, gives examples of
this shape.

The grass is Hkened to shears on account of its bifurcations.

1.886. The jessamine blossoms later than the yellow wall-
flower.

1.887. In connexion with the rose the “ gold ” refers to its
stamens, and the silver to its petals. As regards the loved one
the “ gold and silver ” mean her ear-rings.

1.888. Lit., “■ From the bane of the ‘ arrows ’ {hid-barg,
which means literally ‘ willow-leaves ’) of Autumn’s winds the
branches (of the willow) were biting (their) hands on account
of their lost ‘ willow-leaves ’ {barg-i bid).”

The hands or fingers of the willow are of course its leaves,
and if the sense is not purely metaphorical, these leaves must
be the early buds, which on account of their short and stunted
appearance might suggest the idea of their having been bitten,
Wa-’lldhu a‘la?n.


186


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.889. i.e., played them for itself. (See Note 1,779.)

1.890. i.e., pierced them by its shrillness.

1.891. The Zand ; i.e., the Zend Avesta. the Zoroastrian
Scriptures. “ The Zand-intoner ” is the nightingale.

1.892. For an account of the expression Mdqdn-i Chin, see
Note 694.

With regard to the people now spoken of. and their irruption,
the following account by Canon Rawlinson {The Seventh Oriental
Mmiarchij) may be quoted ; —

“ Various names are given to the people with whom Persia
waged her wars during this period. They are called Turks,
Huns, sometimes even Chinese ; but these terms seem to be used
in a vague way, as Scythian was by the ancients, and the special
ethnic designation of the people appears to be c^uite a difierent
name from any of them. It is a name the Persian form of which
is Haithal or Hatatheleh, the Armenian Hephthagh, and the
Greek Ephthalites. or sometimes Nephthalites.

“ Difierent conjectures have been formed as to its origin ;
but none of them can be regarded as more than an ingenious
theory. All that we know of the Ephthalites is that they were
established in force, during the fifth and sixth centuries of our
era, in the regions east of the Caspian, especially in those beyond
the Oxus River, and that they were generally regarded as belonging
to the Scythic or Fiuno-Turkic population, which, at any rate
from 20(1 b.c., had become powerful in that region. ... It is
probable that they belonged to the Thibetic or Turkish stock,
which has always been in advance of the Finnic.

“ We are told that the war of Varahran Y. (Bahram V.) with
this people commenced with an invasion of his kingdom by their
Khacan or Khan, who crossed the Oxus with an army of 25,000
(or according to others of 2d0f)00) men, and carried fire and sword
into some of the most fertile ])rovitices of Persia. The rich
oasis, known as Worn or Merv, the ancient ilargiana, is especially
mentioned as overrun by his troops, which are said by some to
have crossed the Elburz range into Khorassan and to have
proceeded westward as far as Rei. or Rhages. When news of
the invasion reached the Persian court, the alarm felt was great ;
A'arahran was pressed to assemble his forces at once and encounter
the unknown enemy; ho, however, professed complete indifierence,


COMMENTAEY


187


said tliat tlie Almighty would preserve the empire, and that,
for his own part, he was going to hunt in Azerbijan, or Media
Atropatene. During his absence the government could be con-
ducted by Narses, his brother.”

Bahram, however, started from Azerbijan with a small force,
and, marching by night and carefully masking his movements,
reached the vicinity of Merv, and by a night attack completely
defeated the invaders and drove them back across the Oxus.
The Khaqiin was killed, and no further hostilities occurred in
this quarter during the rest of Bahram’s reign.

In a footnote Rawlinson says, “ Mirkhond calls the invader
‘ the Khacan of China ’, though he speaks of the army as composed
of Turks.” (See also Notes 691, 991, and 995.)

1.893. “ Each dragon ” ; i.e., each warrior.

1.894. Rdst-rushan means Straight -bright.

1.895. NarsI (Narses) had been previously the king’s vazlr.
Bahram had also a brother of the same name. (See Note 1,892.)

1.896. An allusion to the wolf which was reported to have
devoured Joseph. (See the Qur'an, xii., 17, 18.)

1.897. Siyavash was the son of King Kai-Ka'us. He was
falsely accused of making love to his step-mother, but when cast
into fire escaped from it unscathed. He was ultimately killed
by Afrasiyab, king of Turan.

1.898. For an account of JamshTd, see Note 1,377.

1.899. Darius. Firdausi mentions only Dariib and Dara as
the Darii, the second the son of the first. Diirab, he recounts,
died a natural death, and Dara. was stabbed by his vazlr Janusiyiir,
with whom and another vazlr, Muhiyar, ho had fled from the
victorious Alexander. Alexander afterwards had both vazirs
put alive upon the cross, where they were stoned to death by
soldiers. Nizami must therefore be speaking metaphorically
of the sufferings of Darius at the hands of his servants.

1.900. i.e., they have so much wealth that they are sated
before being able to use it all, aud it consequently goes to waste,
and, if perishable, is .spoilt.

1.901. The Author apparently means here by “ earth ” the
particular mode of treatment applied. If earth is put into water
it makes it turbid and spoils it, but, if it is used to filter it, it makes


188


THE HAFT PAIKAK


it clear and useful. So wealth, if treated improperly, is useless,
but if treated properly it is valuable.

1.902. The sense of sJiavad here is apparently not “ should
come ”, but “ should go ” ; i.e., “ should not come ” (rendered
here “ be used not ”), for cf. the next distich but two.

1.903. I have translated from the reading :

Hama-ru rdst-kdrl az karn-u bish
rdst ritshan shu(la{Ji) ba-rishva-yi khv'isJi.

The meaning is that the probity of no man was accounted perfect
unless he bribed with the whole of his possessions. The
implication that he was thus obliged to surrender his all makes
this reading practically equivalent to that of the B. ed. of 1328,
which is as follows ;

Hama-rd Rdst-rushan az kam-u hish
bi-s’tad an az barayi risJiva-yi kkvisk.

“ All, whether more or less, East-rushan took as bribes (the
people had) to (oSer) him.” The sense, however, of the adverbial
locution az kam-u bish is quite different in the two readings.

1.904. A rhetorical paradox. The meaning is that the richer
a man was the more likely he was to be noticed and utterly
stripped.

1.905. “ In others’ hands ” ; i.e., in the hands of the house-
thieves, who were of course the vazlr and his agents.

1.906. “ No one could strike a balance to the good ” ; lit.,
“ no one wrote a sum-total for income ” : dakhl-rd kas fazdlikl
na-nuvisht.

1.907. i.e., no one would clear up the darkness of the secret.

1.908. i.e., the sky or fortune.

1.909. Lit., “ the more he sought water the less he found it.”

1.910. i.e., firmly, tightly, as a stone is bound up, as it were,
in itself.

1.911. “A sun-stirred dawn” means the white light of the
dawn which is stirred up, as it were, by the sun, with perhaps
some reference to the ruddy light of the sun about to rise.

The sense is here that the old man’s hair was white, and possibly
too that he had a ruddy face.

1.912. i.e., he no longer attended to his business.


COMMENTAKY


189


1.913. Chand naubat qivdm dashtam-ash. Qivam is here
apparently equivalent to qiydm, which means “ forbearing (with),
making no change (as regards)

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

Chand naubat mu‘af ddshtam-ash : “ I pardoned him on

several occasions.”

1.914. i.e., of course, from the present owners of the sheep
and dog.

1.915. i.e., the course or pohcy pursued by the shepherd,
which served as a model for the king.

1.916. Dar namiiddr-i in qaziyat-i man.

The B. ed. of 1328 and some of the I.O. MSS. read,

Dar namuddr-i aimaniqat-i man : “ Within the purview of my
trust.”

1.917. i.e., there must surely be some traces left.

1.918. Ruz or ruzgdr siydh shndan {bar kasl), “ for the day
or time to become black (to a person),” means “ his becoming
distressed ”. With regard to the list ”, the sense is that it was
written with black ink, but there is also some allusion to the
wickedness of the vazlr as shown in the list.

1.919. “ He said, Where grief and joy must bear their part,”
the king may kill, the vazlr intercede : Guft, Dar sharh-hd-yi
mdtam-u sur,” kushtan az shah, shifd‘at az dastiir.

The first hemistich rendered more literally is,

“ He said. In the proportions, or assessings of mourning and
feasting.”

The sense of the distich is that in life grief and joy bear certain
proportions to each other. The king who is all powerful may
be sometimes severe, but it is the duty of the vazir to seek to
mitigate this severity if it seem to transgress the bounds of
justice. In the next distich, however, the king intimates that
the vazir instead of trying to mitigate severity, which it is his
duty to do, has used nothing but severity and oppression, and
by doing so has blackened the name of the king who, being aU
powerful, is considered the real and responsible author of the
oppression.

The B. ed. of 1328 reads.


190


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Guft, Dar shahr-hd-yi mdtam-ii sur : “ He said, In towns

where people mourn or feast.’’

1.920. This seems opposed to the general idea that Chien
qui aboie ne inord pas, but all the editions I have consulted read,
bi-lihurushand, and not na-lhurushand. It forms a parallel,
however, to the conduct of the vazir, who does make an outcry
in accusation when he lacerates by robbing.

1.921. Kas ha-raf -ash qalnm naijarad pish ; lit., “ no one will
advance the pen for his dismissal ” ; i.e., probably, write and
petition for his dismissal ; but qalam pish dvardan is not given by
the dictionaries, the nearest to it being qalam dvardan, “ to
write.” One might suggest ‘alani pish dvardan, “ to advance the
standard,” which would be, I think, practically equivalent to
‘alam hurdan or bastan, “ to set up the standard ” ; i.e., “ to prepare
to contend.”

1.922. i.e., in the sombreness of his disgrace the light of truth
will best appear.

Another sense may be that the light of the king's angry
reproaches striking suddenly upon the darkness of the vazir’s
wickedness will show it up more distinctly.

1.923. “ Two-sworded ” refers to the white streaks of dawn
which extend from the east to the north and south.

“ By its single stroke ” means by the simultaneous appearance
of these streaks.

The second hemistich signifies “ deprived the moon of its more
ruddy colour ”.

1.924. This distich may also be rendered, “ 'Tis clear to me as
truth that through your means truth has departed, clearness
passed away ” ; Az in bar man chu rdst rushan gasht rdstl raft-u
rushanl bi-guzasht.

1.925. i.e., of the threatenings or strokes of the sky or fortune
which may affect me and my people,

1.926. Theologians and other learned and distinguished men
wore a special kind of turban.

1.927. I have translated from the reading of the B. ed. of
1328:

Inchunln kas chunln barad tauqlr.


COMMENTAEY


191


I.O. MS. 1168 reads,

Inchunin bih vazTr, u na vazir.

I think the second vazir in this has the sense of “ helper ”,
and should translate,

“ well (used) thus the vazir, he (was) no help.”

1.928. i.e., they used their wits against him who had used his
against them ; or they injured the injurious. Or, possibly, they
used words as bitter as his deeds had been.

1.929. Lit., “ burnt at the fraud on his life ” : sukht bar
ghabn-i zindagani-yi ii. This is the reading of the B. ed. of 1328.

Another reading is,

sukht bar ‘ain-i zindagani-yi ii : “ burnt at the source or spring
of his hfe.” The only sense of this, I think, is, “ suffered affliction
at (his death in) the flower of his age.”

1.930. “ The price of blood ” ; i.e., on account of his brother’s
death.

1.931. “ The service due ” ; i.e., to a man in his position.

1.932. “ Through love of it he wished to take the field ” ;
i.e., he wished to dispute the possession of it with me, the word
dasht being used here apparently in the sense of dasht-i dvard-gdh.

A rhetorical image is also conveyed by the apparent paradox
of the vazir’s wishing to take “ the field ” (or, rather, in this
connexion, “ the plain or wilderness,” dasht) through love of
“ the garden ”, bdgh.

1.933. Lit., “ that I may give light to your lamp.” Cf.
the expression Chirdgh riishan ! “ (May your) lamp (be) bright ” !
used in wishing success.

1.934. i.e., every person has love and desire of something.

1.935. “ Fields,” kisht-ahud. This term does not occur in
the dictionaries, but I take it to be equivalent to kisht-zdr, “a
place of seed, a sown field.”

“ Like Baghdad ” ; i.e., fine and flourishing. Baghdad is also
called Ddru ’s-Saldm. which means both “ the mansion of peace ”,
and also “ paradise ”.

1.936. “ Places on the sea,” daryd-bnr ; i.e., probably places
near pearl-fisheries — possibly by the Persian Gulf. (Cf. the next
distich.)


192


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.937. “ Like dawn's lamp ” ; i.e., like the sun.

1.938. “ I in appraising was most moderate,” dar hahd
dasktam basi dzarm. “ Moderation ” as an equivalent of dzarm
is not found in the dictionaries; but it is, I think, sufficiently
indicated here by the context. The nearest equivalents given
are “ modesty, bashfulness ”, or, perhaps, “ easiness.” “ Equity,
justice ” are also given, so that the sense may be that the merchant
was most equitable in the price demanded.

1.939. “ A few days, good or evil, (passed away),” Ruzahl
chand az siydh-u snjid.

In translating, I have taken az siydh-u safid, ht., “ of black
and white,” with ruzakl chand. In this the expression would
portray the merchant’s varying states of mind, whilst ofiering
also a rhetorical embellishment in the reference of “ black and
white ” to the day of twenty-four hours.

If the expression be taken with “ wile on wile ” of the second
hemistich it would refer to the more or less plausible nature of
the wiles employed. Cf. in the last distich but one, “ all kinds
of vain excuses,” guna-guna{h) bahdna.

1.940. The rhetorical antithesis is between the pearls taken
by the vazlr and the stones which he bestows. The expression
munda ha-sang. left upon stones,” may be taken both literally
and figuratively, referring in tlie former case to the stone of
the jail, and in the latter to the abject state to which the prisoner
is reduced. (Cf. the idio:u ba-sar-i sang nishdndan, or nishastan,
” to seat, or sit on stone or stones,” which means figuratively
“ to render, or become abject ”.)

The reading of the B. cd. of 1328, mdnda ba-tang, “ left in
affliction,” is probably incorrect.

1.941. As regards the shell the pit would, of course, be the sea.

1.942. i.e., her mouth was so small that it and nothing might
be considered synonymous.

The second hemistich means that her mouth n.ight be called
“ honey in smiles ” by reason of its sugary smiling. It is possible,
however, that the sense may be, “ (she had named ‘ nothing ’)
‘ honey in smiles,’ because her mouth (which was as nothing)
gave sugary smiles.”


COMMENTARY


193


1.943. i.e., even as the night perishes before the sun, so the
day perished before the brightnes.<» of her face.

1.944. The musician has called himself “ foreign ” in the
second distich.

1.945. i.e., the Spring was deprived of all its beauty before
her beautiful face.

1.946. I.e., her face was bright as a luminous candle.

1.947. i.e., she burnt her lover’s heart.

1.948. Lit., “ A bright and straight one.” The words “ bright,
straight ” are a play upon the vazlr’s name, Rdst-rushan.

1.949. i.e., the world is attached to your court and belongs
to it.

1.950. The complainant who speaks of himself as ra’is-i
fuldn rasad-gdh, “ the chief or superintendent of a certain revenue-
office ” (or it may be “ observatory ”), was probably one of the
Magi or priests, to whom, says Canon Rawlinson, Chosroes the
First allowed a certain admini.strative power in civil matters,
and the supervision of the collection of the revenue.

Canon Rawlinson says too that besides the offerings which
were lavished upon them by the faithful, they were allowed to
claim tithes of their possessions, and possessed considerable
endowments in land, which furnished the n with an assured
subsistence. He adds that, “ Besides the sacerdotal, the Magi
claimed to exercise the prophetical office. From a very early
date they had made themselves conspicuous as omen-readers
and dream-expounders ; but not content with such occasional
exhibitions of prophetic power, they ultimately reduced divination
to a system, and by the help of the barsom, or bundle of divining
rods, undertook to return a true answer on all points connected
with the future upon which they might be consulted.”

This makes it probable that to these functions they added those
of astrologer. This conjecture, if the man was a priest, is, at
least, slightly supported by his applying the title star-king to
Bahrain in the preceding distich, and also by the fact that rasad-
gdh means not only a ‘‘ revenue-office ” but also an “ observatory”.

That this was a prevailing opinion is, I think, probably
supported by the following lines in the Shdh-nnma relating to
Yazdijard's wish to know when and where he should die :


o


194


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Zi-shdhl pur andlsJia shud Yazdagird zi-har kishvarl muhiddn
hard gird

Ba-akhtar-sMnasdn hi~farmud shah ki td kard har yak ba-akhtar
nigdh

Ki td kai huvad dar jahdn marg-i u kujd lira gardad sar-u
targ-i u :

“ (Then) T’azdagird, concerned about his reign, from every
part assembled (all) the priests.

“ The king commanded the astrologers to observe, each one,
(the aspect of) the stars :

“ To find when in the world his death should be, (and) where
his head and helm should be obscured.”

The king’s object was evidently only to have the stars con-
sulted, so that if the priests were not the astrologers there seems
to be no reason for his ha\dng assembled them. (See also
Note 780.)

1.951. i.e., I made it flourishing and kept it in good order.

1.952. Shah-i Sharq, “ the Eastern King,” means the sun.
The title is applied to the king on account of his splendour.

The second hemistich is hterally, “ I plunged the world into

joy.”

1.953. “ Provision for the road ” ; i.e., for the road to the
future state.

1.954. Lit., “ I gave to every person an order {bardt) for his
subsistence.”

1.955. The B. ed. of 1328 has,

bivagdn sir-u blva-ddrdn ham, “ whereof comes absurdity.”

The correct reading is, no doubt, blva-zdddn, “ the children of
widows.”

1.956. See Note 1,950.

1.957. An ass-load is described as a weight of a hundred
Tabriz maunds. The Tabriz maund weighed about eleven
pounds.

1.958. i.e., he found his fortune restored by the prospect of
the king’s help.

1.959. “ Some time ago,” ba-muddat pish. The B. ed. of
1328 has, zi-daulat-i khvish, “ out of his wealth.”


COMMENTARY


195


1.960. “ A piece of land ” ; Hi., “ a piece of bread,” but tbe
former rendering is justified by subsequent distichs.

1.961. Chu itlafiydn (lit., “ as spendthrifts ”), the reading of
the B. ed. of 1328.

Another reading is chu itlaqiydn, which might be rendered,

“ as a free and easy or careless person.”

1.962. i.e., dissociate yourself from your arrow-heads ; i.e.,
arms generally. At the same time the vazlr implies that the man
is rusting in idleness.

1.963. The pen was the symbolof the vazir’s control and power.

1.964. i.e., I will appeal to him.

1.965. i.e., as one having absolute power he spoke harshly
to me who was powerless ; or, more generally, he as vazir made
me feel his power.

1.966. The sense is apparently, “ you would try by tears to
afiect me as if I were a dolt.”

The literal meaning has referenee probably to the watering
by agriculturists of clods or dry earth. I scarcely think the
expression has any connexion with the idiom kuluhh dar db
afgandan, “ to throw clods into the water,” which means “ to be
litigious, to wish to contend ”, but I am not sure, as the origin
of that idiom is not explained or clear.

1.967. See Note 1,965.

1.968. i.e., a robe of honour, khiVat.

1.969. The attitudes assumed in prayer form an important
part of Muhammadan worship. The mental attitude, however,
of the holy man is supposed to have a powerful effect upon
the person to whom it is directed, as it is indicated in the second
hemistich. (Cf. also the three distichs which follow the next three.)

1.970. See, for the same idiom. Note 1,272.

1.971. i.e., they cannot by binding the ascetic prevent his
mental attitude from having effect upon the person to whom it is
directed. He is not like robbers who would not have this power,
and who when bound would be quite helpless to affect people.


196


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.972. i.e., the mental attitude of the ascetic — here one of
distress and vexation — towards the vazir would bring down
curses upon the latter. (Cf. the last Note.)

1.973. See Note 1,926.

1.974. “ (But) the ascetic would not take such ease ” :

Zahid an farsh-i ddda-rd bi-navasht ; lit., “ The ascetic folded

up the carpet which had been giv^en,” i.e., he refused to stay
and enjoy the comfort offered.

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

Zahid an farsh-i rah-rd bi-navasht : “ (But) the ascetic went upon
his way ” ; Ut., “ The ascetic folded up that carpet, the road.”

1.975. Charkh-vdr bi-gasht : “ he became like the (whirling)
wheel ” ; i.e., either, “ he departed rapidly,” or, “ he appeared
exalted as the wheel, the sky.” Or, it may mean simply, “ he
departed rapidly like a whirling wheel.”

1.976. “ Those travellers on the Path ” are ascetic holy men
or Sufi saints whose spirits are exalted as the heavens, although
their bodies are of earth.

After this distich the Author inveighs against worldly and
corrupt people, of whom, as he implies, the world is mainly
composed.

1.977. i.e., for one holy man you may find whose soul has
been disciplined and matured you will see thousands of
undisciplined and immature people.

1.978. i.e., however great the worldly undisciplined, immature
people may become, their real nature is shown in their origin,
which is as a sink. By a sink is meant apparently their bodily
nature and carnal soul.

The sink means literally the small pool of water which is often
formed near the source of a spring. In the B. ed. of 1328 the
present distich occurs after the one beginning,

“ (But) ere you find matured wine in the cup,” and after this
latter, which reads differently in the B. ed., is found the following,

Shah dar-ln khisht-khdna-gi khaki
khisht-i namndk shud zi-ghamndki :

“ The monarch in this brick-kiln of the earth became a damp
brick from his sorrowing.”


COMMENTARY


197


If this be not spurious the subsequent distich should be
rendered a little differently.

It will be necessary to give translations of the readings of
the B. ed. from “ Those travellers on the Path, etc.” They
are as follows ;• —

“ Those travellers on the Path who have been so, whose heads
from earth have touched upon the heavens,

“ Before they found matured wine in the cup, suffered much
trouble from the unripe grape.

“ The water of the stream, so vehement, is from the riU which
rises from a sink, —

“ The monarch from this brick-kiln of the earth became a damp
brick from his sorrowing.

“ (He thought). This set, although of human stock, are all
(but) demons, though entitled men.”

The second of these distichs, referring to “ the travellers on
the Path ”, necessitates the explanation that the Sufi before
reaching the knowledge of God suffered all the preliminary
hard discipline of the Sufi training. The meaning of the next
distich would be that by the Sufi discipline one may rise from the
lowest condition of humanity to the highest spiritual state — that
of the Universal Spirit — and to union with God.

In the subsequent distich reference is made to the monareh’s
tears in his sorrowing state.

The world is called “ a brick-kiln ” because of the bricks,
the human bodies, which are moulded in it.

1.979. i.e., the carnal soul obscures the higher or human
soul and the higher spirit.

1.980. This distich and the following three refer to Bahram.

1.981. i.e., when the sun rose and adorned and illumined the
world.

1.982. i.e., as the rain refreshes the plants, so the king’s
presence by the certainty it afforded of justice refreshed the
people.

1.983. “ The car of justice ” ; bt., “ the camel of justice.”

1.984. This will recall the line,

Gumbad-i gardanda zi-ruy-i qiyds hast ha-mJci-u badl haq-shinds
{haq, metr. cans., for liaqq).


198


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.985. The B. ed. of 1328 has for mi'kli-i Jana, “ the nails of
malice,” tuJchm-i Jcina, “ the seed of malice.”

1,936. i.e., here, the ruler of the Hayatila. (See Notes 694,
991, 995, and 1,892.)

1.987. The B. ed. of 1328 has in the second hemistich,

Jcdbi'j az dast bar ruJch nnddzad : “ in throwing a little water

on (his) face.” The sense is, figuratively, “ in doing any deed
■which would bring him honour.” (Cf. the expression cib-i ruJch or
db-i nil/. honour,” lit., “ water or lustre of the face.”) I.O.
MS. 1168 reads,

Jc'asp az dast bar ruldi anddzad : “ in bringing, on a favourable
opportunity, the knight (lit., horse) against the castle ” ; i.e.,
presumably, “ in urging his horse against the enemy’s forces,”
But as this seems rather strained, I am inclined to doubt the
correctness of this reading.

1.988. i.e., I am as an Ethiopian slave to the king.

Another reading is,

yd Jehyad az Chin, va-yd Ihyad az Habash-am.

“■ I am either of China or of Ethiopia ” ; i.e., I am as you would
make me, either ruler of China, or your slave as from Ethiopia.

But I think the reading of the Bombay edition, from which
I have translated, is preferable.

1.989. i.e,, the seven beauties of the Seven Domes.

1.990. The sense is probably, “ He who embellishes his
teaching by rhetorical beauties.” Or possibly “ the rubies ”
may imply the name of the king to whom the poem is dedicated.
(See Note 2,087.)

1.991. i.e., by the festivities, discourses, and stories told in
the Domes.

1.992. i.e., his intellect acquainted him with the destruction
effected by the moving dome, the sky, by which is meant fortune.
(See the next distich but two.) The sky was supposed to move
round the earth.

1.993. i.e., his brain was excited by the thought, but I have
rendered “ was heated ”, as excitement does not apply to a
dome.


COMMENTARY


199


1.994. This joy-efiacing dome ” ; i.e., the sky as fortune.

1.995. Lit., “ He left the Seven Domes on the heavens ” ;
i.e., he took no further account of them, or rather, perhaps,
he devoted them to religious purposes. (Cf. the next distich.)

A secondary meaning may be, “ He left the Seven Domes
towering to the heavens.”

A third, “ He left the seven domes, the seven heavens, to the
heavens,” (and betook himself to a loftier dome, that of religious
worship and spirituality).

1.996. i.e., he devoted himself to religion, spirituality, and
the worship and love of God.

1.997. i.e.. When the king of cypress form had reached the
age of sixty, and his black hair had turned white.

1.998. “ The tomb of solitude ” ; i.e., presumably, a solitary
tomb. One would surmise it meant isolation from all things
of earth but for the next distich. The rhetorical merit of the
distich is in the use of the word gur, which means both “ wild ass ”
and also “ tomb ”.

1.999. In this and the following distich the Author is still
playing on the word giir, which means “ wild ass ” and “ tomb ”,
and also on the word dku, which signifies “ gazelle ” and “ vice ”.

2.000. “ This salt plain ” ; i.e., “ the world,” called “ salt ”
in respect of its barren worthlessness.

2.001. See Note 1,999.

2.002. GurJchan, which may bear the sense of wild-ass=king,
is applied here as a title to Bahram on account of his devotion
to the chase of the wild-ass.

For the original meaning of Gurlchdn, see Note 636.

2.003. Bar girifta ha-qasd chdra-gar-ash. “ His helper ” ;
i.e., the onager, a heavenly messenger.

The B. ed. of 1328 has.

Bar girifta ba-puya chdr-par-ash ; “ His four-winged (steed)
he pressed on at a gallop ” ; or, “ His four-winged (steed) bore
him on at a gallop.”

Or, if bar is a MS. error for par, we should translate,

“ His four-winged (steed) took wings on in (its) gallop,” or,
“ for (its) gallop.”


200


THE HAFT PAIKAE


2.004. Lit., “ no person (had) any road to its gate ” ; i.e.,
to the gate of the chasm in the cave.

As the slave-boys stand at the mouth of the cave, and the
guards afterwards search inside of it, there is apparently an
inconsistency, unless the Author means that there was no outlet
to it. Or it may be that poetical exaggeration is expressing
as impossible that which was, perhaps, only difficult and dangerous.

The sense might possibly be that no one had previously found
the way to its mouth, but this seems somewhat strained.

The following account from Canon Rawlinson’s “ Seventh
Oriental Monarchy ” is of interest in this connexion :

“ After a reign which is variously estimated at nineteen,
twenty, twenty-one, and twenty-three years Bahrain died by a
death which would have been thought incredible, had not a
repetition of the disaster, on the traditional site, been witnessed
by an English traveller in comparatively recent times.

“ The Persian writers state that Bahram was engaged in the
hunt of the wild ass, when his horse came suddenly upon a deep
pool or spring of water, and either plunged into it, or threw his
rider into it, with the result that Bahram sank and never
reappeared.

“ The supposed scene of the incident is a valley between Ispahan
and Shiraz. Here, in 1810, an English soldier lost his life through
bathing in the spring traditionallydeclared to be that which proved
fatal to Bahram. The coincidence has caused the general
acceptance of a tale which would probably have been otherwise
regarded as altogether romantic and mythical.”

The Encyclopcedia of Islam says Bahram reigned from
A.D. 430 to 438, and that he died after a fall while hunting.

It also says that “ his strength and skill in bodily exercises
earned him the name of Gor, ‘ wild ass,’ not given, as the legend
has it, because he transfixed a lion and a wild ass with one
arrow ”.

2.005. “ The Loved One ” presumably means the Deity,
with whom he is united and in communion. The term is ydr-i
ghdr, “ the cave-friend,” a term which was applied originally
to Abu Bakr, the first Khalif, who hid with Muhammad in a
cave on the flight from Mecca.

2.006. Lit., “ they saw the snake-stone in the snake’s brain.”


COMMENTARY


201


The king is likened to the jewel or snake-stone in the snake’s
head, which was supposed to be an antidote against its poison.

By its being in the serpent’s brain (i.e., in the cavern) is implied
that it is difficult or impossible to attain to it. (See also Note
1,693.)

2.007. The elephant is supposed to dream of its native India.

The sense, as regards the king, is that he had returned to his

native place, the spiritual world, and to union with the Deity.

2.008. “ Check to king and castle ” by “ the bishop ”, called
in Oriental chess “ the elephant ”. The term is pil-band, “ bound
by the bishop,” and is explained as above by Dr. Forbes in his
History of Chess. It should be added that the castle was the
most valuable piece in Oriental chess.

The meaning of the distich is that the king had escaped the
trammels of the world and the body, and attained to the spiritual
state and to union with God.

2.009. The king being as a buried treasure, which is supposed
to be always guarded by a snake or dragon.

2.010. Lit., “ the more she sought the less she found.”

2.011. Sdz-i hi hlch chdra-sdz na-ddd.

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

sdz-i chdrafh) ha-chdra-sdz na-ddd : “ no means of help on
helpers she bestowed.”

2.012. Lit., “ in farewell to the deposit of others ” ; i.e.,
the deposit belonging to others and confided to you only for a
time.

2.013. i.e., which she had pledged to Bahram.

2.014. i.e., all the kings his descendants have lived in fame.

2.015. i.e., think how Bahram with all his glory came to the
tomb.

2.016. In this and the preceding four distichs there is a
play upon the two senses of the word gur, “ wild-ass,” and
“ tomb ”.

2.017. i.e., man is, on an average, three ells high and one ell
broad. The “ four jars ” are the four humours, the sanguine,
phlegmatic, bilious, and splenetic, associated with the blood.


202


THE HAFT PAIKAR


the phlegm, the liver, and the spleen, the first red, the second
white, the third yellow, and the fourth black.

“ The dyer ” is the body.

2.018. More literally, “ the inspector or superintendent of
police of a town,” shalum.

2.019. i.e., those who from their sordid nature are prone to
grovel for worldly advantages meet with nothing but humiliation.

2.020. i.e.. Why do you worry yourself in your relations with
others ? Why do you trouble as to what they may eSect ?

2.021. “ Your field,” and your canvas ” both mean “ your
mind ”, which contains and encompasses all things. The mind
or spirit in its fullest extent, as with the prophet or saint, is as
the Universal Spirit, in which all ideas e.xist. From these ideas,
by incarnation, all things in the phenomenal world arise. (See
the next distich.)

2.022. i.e., in your mind or spirit.

2.023. That “ one line ” is alif, the first letter of the Arabic
alphabet, which, as a straight line to which nothing is attached,
is taken as a symbol of the Deity. Man is called here “ central
dot ” because his heart or rational soul, wliicli constitutes him
as man, is considered as the centre of all, occupying a middle
place between the necessary existence of God, vujub, and the
contingent existence of all else, imlvn.

2.024. “ Those otlier letters ” are all things other than God,
which follow, as it were, upon alif, the first letter. (See the last
Note.)

2.025. It is apparently implied that one may judge of good
and ill by a kind of intuition. It is certainly believed by the
Sufi that one cannot attain to spirituality and union wuth the
Deity by reason, but only by becoming the disciple of a Sufi
saint, and by following out the Sufi Path. The orthodox belief
too is that reason has nothing to do with the usCd of Dogma.
(See Note 2,076.)

2.026. i.e., seek spiritual wisdom and discernment where they
may be found, or be (if you can) a being who can discern without
having found discernment, which no one can be.

2.027. “ The eyes ” mean here probably “ the eyes of reason ”,


COMMENTAEY


203


and reason, as explained in Note 2,025, is powerless to estimate
the Light of spirituahty which is the abode or heaven of the
angels.

2.028. i.e., the earth takes sample-tastes, as it were, to
distinguish what is of heaven or spiritual. It is a place where
what is of heaven may be sought.

2.029. i.e., one may attain on earth to the heavenly or
spiritual.

2.030. i.e., turn from this world and the things of it.

2.031. “ A chamber with four flues ” ; i.e., the world, in
respect of its four quarters.

Bud, “ smoke,” which is implied in the first hemistich, means
also “ distress, affliction, anguish, sadness ”.

2.032. “ A thing of two doors ” ; i.e., the world, in respect of
birth and death.

2.033. The world in respect of its having four quarters is
likened to a species of wallet or bag with four flaps or sides
which may be closed and tied with four fastenings. (See also
Note 383.)

2.034. “ The village ” ; i.e., the world.

2.035. i.e., make proper preparation for your journey.

2.036. “ The horse ” is the carnal or animal soul. By loading
it lightly is meant not engaging with it any more than is absolutely
necessary.

There is a parallel passage to this in Euml's Mamavl :

“ Eide the ass bare-backed, 0 seeker of superfluities ; did not
the prophet ride an ass bare-backed ? ” The Note (392) which
I appended to this is as follows :

“ By ‘ riding the ass bare-backed ’ is meant pursuing one’s
course with a soul free from sensual desires and evil passions,
the soul having by discipline become ‘ vaf-i-i mutma'inna’ i.e.,
‘ a tranquillized soul ’ which no longer seeks sensual gratification.”
(C. E. Wilson’s Translation of Euml’s Mapiavl, Book II.)

2.037. In agreement with the Gnostic belief that he who knows
the nature of the higher soul is immortal.

2.038. In this and the next three distichs the Author is
alluding to the Universal Spirit, Rith-i Kidl, the first Creation,


204


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(or Emanation), and to the aydn-i sSbita, “ fixed essences,
prototypes, or ideas in it of all things which by incarnation
appear in the phenomenal world.

2.039. i.e., though the spiritual world is limitless and beautiful,
we have nothing in view but things of the material world, which
are as thorns in the eyes.

2.040. i.e., the spiritual world has nothing of the darkness
or bght of the material world.

2.041. “These seven tablets”; i.e., the seven earths.

“ With their four-fold make ’’ ; i.e., consisting of the four
elements.

2.042. I have adopted the reading of the B. ed. of 1328 :

Dar vai dhasla rau hi tiz-hush ast.

Another reading is,

Daur-i dhasta-mu hi dud-hnsh (or, dud-hash) ast: “Slow-
moving time or fortune which is a smoke-killer.”

Dud, “ smoke,” moans also “ vapour, sighs, affliction ”, but
the compound dud-husk, “ a smoke-killer,” can have no meaning
here whichever of these senses be applied.

Dud-hash, “ a smoke-drawer,” i.e., “ a chimney,” would give
sense, but we can scarcely take it as a rhyme to zud-hush in
the second hemistich. It is possible that the correct reading
may be,

Daur-i dhasta-rau hi tlz-hush ast : “ Slow-moving fortune
which is keen of sense,”

but the antithesis is scarcely better than in the reading of the
Bombay edition.

The meaning is that the world or fortune revenges any infringe-
ment of its laws.

2.043. i.e., the world or fortune is not a wanton tyrant, but
deals with everyone, weak or powerful, in the manner appointed
by God’s preordinances. As the next distich indicates, it gives
each one his allotted portion. Notwithstanding this, it is a
common practice, even with the greatest writers, to complain
of the capriciousness and tyranny of the world or fortune.

2.044. This means that the sky is as an ice-bound tank ;
i.e., it is likened to frozen water.


COMMENTAEY


205


2.045. Lit., “ how long would you make beer of this ice 1
how long? ” Fuqd' gushddan or gushudan, “to make beer,”
is explained as “ to boast of, to glory in ”, but here, as in some
passages of Khaqanl, it apparently means “ to seek profit from ”.
The sense is that the sky or fortune is intractable, and that it
is vain to try to force profit from it. It treats men in accordance
with God's preordinances.

In addition to this, it is implied in this and the next distich
that the sky or fortune has a freezing or deadening efiect upon
the heart, which must be resisted in order that spiritual life may
be gained.

The next distich, mentioned above, does not occur in the B. ed.
of 1328. In place of it are two which I render as follows :

“ And he who, like the sky, goes round the world, at last
gives up all (he has gained) and goes.

“ The vile and worthless world is lost to him ; the whirling
wheel as vortex whirls for him.” i.e., when the wheel, the sky,
decrees him death, it is, as it were, a vortex for him in which
he is engulfed.

I should render the next distich of the same edition :

“ By reason of his worldly, selfish aims, he has derived no
profit from his life.”

2.046. “ That World of yours ” is the world of spirituality.

2.047. This distich is not in the B. ed. of 1328.

2.048. Or, simply, “ from death,” since the soul is considered
alive only by abandoning the world and becoming endued with
spirituality.

Before this distich a distich occurs in the B. ed. of 1328 which,
though somewhat incorrectly printed, I take to mean,

“ Beware the sword ! from all that you have gained of gems
and stores by effort and by toil.”

“ The sword ” signifies presumably that of fate or death.

If this distich be not spurious the next one must be rendered,
in continuation of it.

“ Withdraw your soul before you leave the world, that you
may save your soul from (fear of) death.”

2.049. I have followed the B. ed. of 1328 for the position of
this distich. It is less well placed in the I.O. MSS. I have
consulted.


206


THE HAFT PAIKAR


2.050. Paya, “ rank,” is the reading of the B. ed. of 1328.
The I.O. MSS. have, generally, muya, “ wealth.”

2.051. i.e., on villagers who cheat in selling curds and whey by
giving too much whey and too little curds.

2.052. i.e., in the village, the world.

2.053. “ He is graced,” bihd darad. “ (High) price,” baha.
“ Integrity,” lit., “ goodness,” bihi.

2.054. i.e., whether you be noble or plebeian there are many
like you in the world who share in the possessions of the world.
These possessions are not special to any particular person, and
they pass too from one to another, so that, as intimated in the
next distich, it is foolish to fix one’s heart upon any of them.

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

Bar jahdn khair-i khdss-u ‘dm (for ‘umm) basl-’st ; “ In the
world the good things of noble and plebeian are many ” ; or, “ In
the world special and common good things are many.” But the
sense of neither is so satisfactory.

2.055. “ This place of snares ” ; i.e., the world. “ Its high
seats ” ; lit., “ its pulpits.”

2.056. i.e., in aiming at high places you aim at the cross of
sufiering and death.

Another, an I.O. MS. reading of the first hemistich, is,
Zinda raftan ba-ddr bar havas ast.

If this be not interrogative and practically equivalent to the
other, the sense would be,

“ It is ambition to go li^ung to the cross.”

2.057. i.e., if a human being should reach the height of his
ambition, death would ultimately claim him. “ One of earth ”
is, I think, the most probable sense of zamint, which may be taken
as analogous to khaki in the line.

Hast khdkl ki ba-dhi na-kharad lufdn-rd ; “ There is a bit of
earth (i.e., Noah) which does not reckon the Deluge (even) as
a drop of water.”

2.058. Another, an I.O. MS. reading, gives “ If a head should
raise (its) crown up to the heavens ”.

2.059. “ The Seven Climes ” ; i.e., the whole inhabited

world. (See Note 207.)


COmiENTAEY


207


2.060. Lit., “ with lowered head carrying away a headache.”

2.061. “ Eude oppressive acts,” haif-i Id-uhdli.

The B. ed. of 1328 has khisht-i Id-ubdli, “ darts of oppression.”
(See the last paragraph of Note 2,043.)

2.062. “ Without a spine.” (See Notes 56 and 527.)

2.063. See Note 1,693.

2.064. “ A draught of honej'-wine,” or mead, nush-bada-l.

The B. ed. of 1328 has niish-pdra-J, “ a piece of honey.”

With this reading one would render, “ Who is there eats a piece
of honeycomb.”

2.065. The B. ed. of 1328 reads,

du dam-u dar dami yakl nafas ast : “ are but two moments,
each one but a breath.”

2.066. “ The veil of dark and light ” ; i.e., the world, in which
things of dark and light of every description are found.

The “ cowries of the ass ” are an allusion to the cowries used
as ornaments on the trappings of asses.

The ass on which Jesus rode is frequently alluded to by Muslim
writers.

The distich occurs in this place in the B. ed. of 1328, and is
better placed than in the I.O. MSS. I have consulted.

2.067. This and the following two distichs may be a prayer
for the general welfare of the Author, or possibly a prayer for
the success in every way of his poem.

2.068. The Author means possibly' that the coin was as a
reflected image of good coin, and showed all its biilhance ; that,
in fine, it exactly corre-sponded with it.

2.069. Speaking of his work as coin, the Author intimates
that it passes successfully all tests.

The word “ Grecian ” is used to imply that his work has the
merit attached to that of Grecian artists.

2.070. i.e., I have dedicated it to the king.

2.071. “ The inscription ” ; i.e., the inscription on the coin,
by which latter is meant the poem.

2.072. The Author must, I think, be alluding to his work as
consisting mainly of seven stories under which deep, religious,
mystical thoughts are concealed.


208


THE HAFT PAIKAR


If even there were seven internal senses, instead of five, such
meaning would scarcely be applicable, since they could scarcely
all be called treasuries or storehouses of secret thought.

2.073. i.e., the key is veiled in darkness.

2.074. i.e., “ I praise the king’s qualities,” the king being
likened here to a date-palm-tree.

2.075. Compliments to the king on implied victories.

2.076. “ The Law ” ; i.e., the holy Law. “ Dogma is divided
into two portions, iisiil and furiV — (i.e., roots and branches.) The
former include the doctrine about God ; the latter, as the name
implies, consist of truths which result from the acceptance of
the former. The orthodox belief is that reason has only to do
with the furu\ for the being founded on the Qur’an and
Sunnat, have an objective basis.” (Sell : The Faith of Islam.)

2.077. An allusion to the curve of the sky.

2.078. “ The Seven Feasts ” or “ Seven Trays ”, Haft Khydn.

The Burhdn-i Qdli‘ says that when the king Kai-Ka’us had

become a captive in JIazandaran, Rustam, the Persian champion,
set out to deliver him. He traversed the distance in seven stages,
making each stage a day’s journey. On the way he encountered
demons and magicians, whom he slew ; and in thanksgiving for
his success in surmounting all the dangers and difficulties of each
stage he held a grand feast or entertainment at the end of it.
He concluded his expedition by delivering the king from captivity.
(See also Notes 212 and 1,0-35.)

2.079. The elements were supposed to lie in four strata, the
lowest being earth, the next water, the third air, and the
fourth fire.

2.080. Lit., “ which gives moist pearls from dry earth ” ;
i.e., which brightens and beautifies the earth.

2.081. An allusion to its glittering.

2.082. “ Mail-clad moon.” The surface of the moon some-
what resembles ring-armour.

“ The ring ” ; i.e., either the lunar halo or the moon itself.

2.083. i.e., is protected by him.

2.084. An address to the king.


COMIVIENTARY


209


2.085. i.e., keen of intellect, and steady and deliberate in
judgment.

2.086. “ Your steadfast namesake ” ; i.e., the lion.

This distich, if not spurious, seems to indicate that the king
had the honorific title of Arslan, Lion ; or that he was called
Arslan as being bin Arslan, the son or grandson of Arslan. He
might possibly, however, have been called a second Qizil Arslan
(Red Lion), but that he was not the Qizil Arslan has, I venture to
say, been suflficiently shown in Note 204. (See also Notes 204
and 213.)

2.087. i.e., since I conclude it with praises of the king, which
are as rubies.

2.088. This is, I think, the most probable sense of the second
hemistich, dar ‘ibdrat kilid-i pur ddrad.

2.089. The real meaning of this highly metaphorical distich
is that as the pearl is released or unlocked, as it were, by the
loosening or untying of knots on the string, so the occult meaning
presented by the Author is free to that person only who has
perspicuity enough to solve the diflficulties of it.

2.090. In this and the following two distichs the Author
alludes obscurely to his having borrowed material for his work.
This is more fully dwelt upon in the Section entitled “ On the
cause of writing the Book ”. The principal source was, of course,
the Shdh-ndrna of Firdausi.

2.091. Mercury is “ the Scribe of the Sky ” and the god of
wisdom.

By “ ears of corn ” are meant the Author’s thoughts and
contributions to learning.

2.092. When Virgo is the ascendant in a person’s nativity
his ruling planet is Mercury, the ruler over Virgo. Such a person,
says Alan Leo, “ can criticize and analyse all that comes under
his notice, as he is inclined to look on the world from an intel-
lectual standpoint. He is also very ingenious, systematic,
thoughtful, and inventive. He generally takes a philosophical
view of things and knows how to discriminate.”

It should be added that the planet is as the spirit in connexion
with the zodiacal sign over which it rules, and the sign is as the
soul, the zodiacal mansion being as the body.

p


210


THE HAFT PAIKAR


2.093. Al-qassu Id yukibbu ’l-qdss, an Arabic saying. But
I do not remember seeing that story-telling is attributed to
Virgo.

2.094. Tbe use of the expression qand‘at, “ contented state,”
or contentment, seems a hint from the Author that he will be
content with whatever the king may bestow. He is entrenched,
as it were, in contentment.

2.095. The term the “ Brazen Fort ”, Ruyln Diz, is probably
applied to the king’s court for a reason given in the next distich
but five. (For an account of the Brazen Fort, see Note 1,541.)

2.096. I have translated from the reading —

Vdm-ddrl na az tahi-karaml ; diz-i ruyln buvad zi-bl-diraml.

But another reading is —

Vdm-ddrl bih az tahl-karami : “ Debt better is than want of
will to give.”

And another —

Vdm-ddrl bih az tahl-shikaml : “Debt’s better than to have
an empty stomach.”

I suppose the Author is affecting to take his image of the
Brazen Fort as a reality, and implying that since it is of brass
it cannot pay him in silver or gold. The only sense, I think, is
that the king’s generosity to others has been so excessive that
he must remain in debt to the Author.

2.097. The term “ Rocky Mount ” is possibly applied to the
king’s dominions.

“ The rubies and diamonds ” are the scintillations of the king’s
sword ; but they are taken in the next distich as a symbol of
his generosity to friends and severity to enemies.

Another reading is girlva-yi tang, “ narrow pass,” a term which
might be applied to the king’s dominions in respect of their
inaccessibility to enemies.

2.098. The Ka‘ba is the cubical house in the temple of Mecca.

2.099. Qdf, the name of the fabulous mountain range which
was supposed to encompass the earth.

2.100. I translate from the reading, dar digar ham zi-rdh-i
dlda-yi u.


COMMENTAEY


211


The B. ed. of 1328 gives,

zar hama{h) zarra-yi darida-yi u (or, durida-yi u), which seems
to ofier no good sense.

One might suggest,

zar }iama{h) zarra-i ba-dida-yi u : “ gold is nothing but a mote
in its view,” but there is no authority for this.

2.101. “ Mercy’s Mount ” is the hill ‘Arafat situated about
12 miles from Mecca.

“ Abu Qubais ” is a hiU to the east of Mecca.

2.102. The “ circle ” is possibly still the Brazen Fort, i.e.,
the king’s court, by which may be symbolized the king’s
dominions, which by a poetical compliment would include the
whole world.

Or, the “ circle ” may directly mean the whole world and sky.
The sense of the distich is. May the world and sky be eternal
through the king ! By this prayer the eternal existence of the
king is prayed for.

“ That high sun ” means, of course, the king.

2.103. Kings worn in the ears were a badge of slavery.
The allusion here is to the circle of the sky.

2.104. A compliment to the king, implying his sway over
North China and Turkistan.

2.105. This would correspond with a.d. 1197.

2.106. “ This, my composition ” ; i.e., this poem.

2.107. See Notes 274, 1,201, 1,562, and 1,698.

2.108. Ai dar-ln mulk javiddn bddi, mulk bd ‘amr-u ‘amr bd
sliddi !

The B. ed. of 1328 has,

Andar-in ‘amr jdviddn bddl, mulk bd 'amr[w) zaid bd shddl !

Zaid in this reading would mean “ increase ”.

The artistic symmetry of this, however, is much inferior, and
it has only the rather doubtful rhetorical merit of bringing
together the names ‘Amrw and Zaid, which are used in law books
for plaintiff or defendant, and in Arabic grammar to illustrate the
case-endings.


212


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Supplement to Note 636.

The title Gurkhan is probably a Persian corruption of the
Mongol or Turkish title assumed by Yelui Tashi, the foimder
of the Qara-Khitay dynasty in Chinese Turkistan.

The word, according to Grigoryev, (quoted by Barthold in the
Encyclopceiia of Islam), is most probably taken from the
Mongolian Gurgen, (no doubt the Turkish Giirgyan), which latter
Eedhouse renders, “ Allied to the royal house by marriage with
a princess ” ; and Barbier de Meynard, Titre de tout prince
de la famille de Timour-lenk, qui epouse une princesse de la
bgnee de Djenguiz-Khan.”

The principal reason for equating Gurkhan to Giirgen or
Giirgyan, on which Barthold comments rather unfavourably,
is, I think, the fact that Mlrkhyand {History of the Khvarazrn-
Shdhs) ascribes the title Gurkhan to the Qiira-Khitayan kings
ultimately conquered by Muhammad the Khvarazm-Shah,
whilst at the same time we may gather from Eedhouse and Barbier
de Meynard’s Turkish Dictionaries that any prince who married
a princess of the imperial house of Chingiz Khan had the title
Giirgyan, a title which evidently descended, since Timur
(see Eedhouse) was also called Giirgyan.

Without assuming that the founder of the Qara-Khitayan
dynasty did marry into the house of Chingiz, we have as facts
that the Persian historians entitle the king of that race Gurkhan,
that this form is impossible in Turkish, and that phonologically
the Turkish “ ii ” would become in Persian “ u ”, whilst “ gy ”
would quite possibly become “ kh ”, especially when we consider
that the Persian would naturally incline to the idea of a title,
khan, “ lord or prince,” in so exalted a title as Giirgyan.


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES

(VOLS. Ml and IV)


THE MASNAVi

By JALALU ’D-DIN RUMI.

Book II :

Translated for the first time into English Prose by Professor C. E. WILSON.
TWO VOLUMES.

Vol. 1.— TRANSLATION FROM THE PERSIAN.

Vol. n.-COMMENTARY.

8vo. 1910. Net 30$.

Wihon’s transliition of the Second Book of the Majiiavi is an imjiortant
addition to our knowledye of ttie greatest of all Suti poets. The notes,
though very full, are no more ehthorate than the veiled sentences of the
original require in order to make them intelligible to one who is not versed
in the conventionalities of Persian and especially of Sufi diction. It is to
be hoped th.it Wilson will tr.inslate the last four books of the poem in the
same thorough w.iy . — Anicricun Tourn-il of Thonloijy.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR :

The Wall of Alexander against Gog and Magog,

and the Expedition sent out to find it hy the Khalif
Wathiq in a.d. 842. Reprint from the Ilirtli Anniversary
Volume, 1923, 4s.


THE GREAT LOVE STORY OF THE EAST.


Laili and Majnun, a Poem, from the Persian of Nizami,
hy ,T. Atkinson. New edition by L. C. r>YNG. 8vo.
pp. xiii + 122. Cloth. 1894. os.


The Balochi Language. A Grammar and Manual by
IMa.jou G. W. Gilbertson. 8vo. pp. 312. 1923. IGs-.


PROBSTHAIN’S LIST OF ORIENTAL PUBLICATIONS


THE

Philosophy of Human Nature

(HSING LI)

BV

CHU HSL


TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE. WITH NOTES

BV

J. PERCY BRUCE. M.A.

Crown Svo, pp. xvi, 444. 1922. 36/


afui — The iwt) \oIiunc'. Uansl.ilion and intH)-

eannni ])ui h'lin one ot tlie most \aluahle coiuiilaiiions to Smulogy
of recent jeai^.

'i'uiu's J iUniry Suppltincut. — Mt. IhiiceN lian'.lation is the fust .s^iious
and e\rensivo allempt to introduce Suno ]‘lulosophy to Lmcjie. Ills
tianslation is careful and e\art, and lie has earned the oraiUude oi all whu
study tile hisloiy of Chinese thought.

Chifit'-c Kt’iOidtr. — Foi those wli*) keenly (lesiie to know liellei the
C'hinese mind, and to gauge the \alue of China's spiritual inheritance, it will
he of deep interest and great Usefulness.

Dr. I.ioinl (iiiiG — The' hooks se'lecteal for tianslation ronstitute' an
independent liealise in iheiiisehes. and may he said to lepreseiu the finest
riower ol Chinese philosopliv. All the dilficulties ha\e been tnuinphanllv
suiniounted hv Mr. Ilruce, who must now lie re'cogni/ed .is taking a \er\‘
high place indeed among h\mg Sinologues.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS

41 GREAT RUSSELL STREET. LONDON, W.C


1


THE I-LI

OR

BOOK OF . ETIQUETTE AND
CEF^EMONIAL

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE, WITH
INTRODUCTION. NOTES. ILLUSTRATIONS. AND PLANS

By JOHN STEELE, M.A., D.Lit.

2 I'ols. Crown 8vo. 1917. 30 ~

/ritn:"! cf the XiVni (7//;;./ Hran-h A’. .IX. BuiFstluinN (hiuila!

I-' .1 atnl iJ''Ulull> '‘ctic- ('( BoT" 'Flio

tn\Li. j’.iDci. piiininL;. aiul ^'uJK'jal i7 c\i\ llont. '1 he pui'lislifi''

(l-'-'CiNi. e\ery piai^e. The ‘>1 ihe I-I.i iii 2 ^^'!^llle' .ui esenl iii

-iiinldMy. 'I'he sCiuient ■>! ( hine^e Jira^l e\ei he ^tateful i>> 1>1. vSieele Cni
iIk |)i')(hii.liMii of ihi' lahntii.U" v.ork, wIucIj uill he of i^ie.iL help Ic tlio-^c
w 111 ) fi )lli j\\ him.


Hirth Anniversary Volume. PiivLiiicil to Fru'drioh
Hirtli, Pi'of( ot ('liiiit -o, Pohimhia I'nivriMtv, Now
York, in Honour of hi^ Scvi, ntx’-fifili Pirthd.u', by His
Fri' nds and Admio-i i I'.io.'t. Net £3 15s.

'1 lie \\i>ik c-aitams 2S niiijin.il aiul >(-hnkiil) 0'»m 1 1 hu t it *II^ (kalmg with ihe
pjriiPular sp< ( lahlic'., ami will evei !.)e a \\.»ik nf ilie (ii''l (mlei
i)| ( hiiiL'e aii'l {.'eiitial Asian sUulk'. 'Fh* v.ilitnie i-' j'io\i(ie<l wilh a
pciiuu, a lai^e hi>l<-iieal nia)) «•! ( Inna at liie lime of ihe Hsia Dynasty,
ami a it piMtliu turn >>1 tlie fldesi kieasn sampk ot ('Imiese I’it'lmial ail.
( < 'll! iitiiii!' Ills hy T'>hn ( ', !'tiL;usiin, Allies Ik .Me\ei, Ik Sehindiei, Sir Aurel
.sn iii. /. \ J'akacs. M, WalL^ei. C'. Ik \ViL<m. etc.

liurt ! it /line, /'’Oh -- ^knlll•^ hd' lieeii ina'le tlial no h wci
than t w t. nl> -s^. i .11 wiiter' I'niitiilmle to llie paL^cs •>! liie numshc ht-ok uinlei
leMew, aiui U iiia.\ he "aul li li1\ that maiiv nt the aiUeles aie d siiftirient
iii'i)' d laiKN laeh to meiit a ie\ie\\ in itstif. But space dni.^ nnt allow nt
in-ire. (.Mtpl In adsise t\«r\ scilnUs sludelit nf As). Ill' suh|ecls tn le.ld
a nipi i>:nni nl sehnlaislnp wnith\ nf llie tiislinj.;uislR<l --iiinlnnue tn wIphh
II Is de(lii .Ued.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


A Brief History of Early
Chinese Philosophy

}:V

Dr. D. T. SUZUKI.

CROWN 800 . 1914. 8 6 .

Jwpi'Olivy 'Jtutrs . — Tlir nntln>ritu‘s on the philosophy or rclii^ion of the
('liinesc aie so feu that *»nc of'leis a v\elcoinc <U <>iu c !“ a sHn >lat 1>
Japanese who has m.wh a leai stmly <»l ihc "iihjcol. "llie title is too
nlolIe^l. and the work is all idcar and loinficteiit.


In Preparation.

The World - Conception of the Chinese. I heir
■Astronomical, ( 'osmoloo'ical, and Pin sico I’liilo^opln'cal
.Speculations. r>\- I’rof. .Am kkI) FoKKI;.


In Preparation.

Kanshin’s (Chien - chen’s) Voyage to the East,

A. I). 742-754. l>y ,\oMi xo M.miiio ('iI.xkm

I>. 779 '. rraiislated l)y Prof. J. 1 .\K.\Kl'.sL'.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


111


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES


Vol. I, The Indian Craftsman, by A. K Coomaraswann', Out r,f print
Vol II, Buddhism as a Religion: it^ Historical De\eiopmext

• iH'l It' PKF^rvr w ('oN.’i*iTioN. II Ha« kmaim, Lit Tlunl L'n l.’is.

(osiiM' Pri'la'f I. 'I 111 iJuddha and his D«Ktrifit- II. Skttth uI tin- Hi^lorv of
P.uddhi-'tii III, S'liitli. r'l liiiddlusiti lt.t>loii, liurtna, Siam)-- IV. Lamaism — \'. l a-'ttni
Jhid(iiii''in ((Inna, Kuri-i, J.iii.tiii Coiidusioii Ihblio^raphy —Index 1 lie oid\ <nmplete
Work on Hiiddliisni


Vols. Ill and IV, The Masnavi, by Jalalii ’cl-Din Riimi Hook II.

traii-'l itfd lor tile JiTst time into Lii!<h''h Prose by IVoIessor C I-. \\ iPop 2 VaU
\'oi I i r.ui-'iation trnin the Persian . V'ol II, ComriK*nt irv Nxo. I'llo mt ins

' Wii'oti', nu< lU'. rm la-^t worilnhe I’t l>er'set7un;i in \ert'in nut srineii F.rl iiiteriiii^'i u
lis't K' laen aln.r auch K'» mm Wuiis'.h unl-ptrieiliu ” — Pir Plim. \'i.l II, pp j'l^

Vo!. V, Essays : Indian and Islamic, by S Khuda Dukhsh, M.A ,

0\nn S\o pp J'l", I'Hl. m.t S^ (ki

■ . 'I Iv .A,iitiioi !i I arri.d on Ills with >criipid<'iH hdflitv to -si iciue and truth

TI- i' .1 1 lUiihit hi'ton in, ami a lii'torian ol I'l.mi unp iralh-led in this coiuitrv, lor ha\in^t
adoj'ted tlie true I nil- .d tn< tiiml Mm h lias he'-n lirou^ht to In^ht to add t'.> the sum total
ot hislorti d ex[)‘ n ‘lu < . . ’■ Mohrii R, u.t-. ( ■•hnlli

Vol. VI, Bactria, the FIi''t<>rv of a I'ori^ottcn Empire, by H. (r

Kaw liiison. M A , I i- S S\ o, pp win, w itli 2 m ip^ ami jilali s, 1 '»12 m t P K dil

Vol. VII, A Brief History of Early Chinese Philosophy, by D. T.

Sii7iiki. 'lol yo ('iu\trsit> Svo. p]-> 2<«k I'd-l net Ss lid.

Vols. VIII and IX, The I Li, or liook of Kti-iiic-tte and CVremonial

I raiislated troin the t lnm.se. with IiitnHluciion. Xote-s. Illustrations, and Plans, bv
Jolin Si'll*'. MA. Df.it 2 \oIs (.rown svo, l'*I7. net 2ii.

joiiru.d ol till- .\orth Chm.i Uraiii h K A S Probsth.im's ( Irieiital Sern < is a well-< oin 1 1 \ ed
Uii I ta-U'liiIly pr'idiK '’d s<-ri« s ot l></oks. 'I he < over. [»ap« r, prm tiiikf, arel y m-r.il arranyment
js ( ( 11. nt I In publi?ii''rs (k>erv<- every praise. 'I hr i^sne ot th.- I-I.i in two volnnn s is

.111 I \ . nt of Siimlokiv 'I hi stmh nt of Chinese must e' er be Kr.it>-tn[ to Dr Steele for the
pr-i.lm lion o| ttii- Iib-mous work, whi- h will b.‘ o( Croat h Ip to tho'i* who follow hun

Vol. X, Chu Hsi : Philosophy f>f Human Nature Ei) translated

trom the ( him ~e with full Coniineiit.iry, bv J. P P.rme, M A., I) Lit. Svo. pp xvi.
144 P'22 net •Ji)-'

(ill H'l (VO n 5‘i 120<M 1 ' the mo't eminent .imoncst the later Chinese Plulosophir-,
.and tin cri' it intn .utd i xixi^itor ot th<‘ • thn <:l wriuncs of Corilmius. A Biocrafiiiv and
t oiniii' n tarv* on the t. .n hiiics and sp. r nl.itioiis of tin- mo'.t n tiuirkaiije and aiithont.itiv e
( oiiini' iifator .Hid thinker h.i-' bi i ome iniin r.itive Chu IDi’s Notes oil the i l.issics aie
ri< ' epti d . 1 ' orthod- A. .iiid tin \ werr , till re. ent i h.iiice, printed with the Text ,i"d t omnutted
to m- III .IV l.y ,i!l ( li II 10^0 stiidf nts

J lo.u the lorey.inii .Vote the v.dm* of the work will re.adilv be .n kiiowhdced Mr Priio'.
luui'. li .1 creat s. hol.ir, h.o a. < oinpli'.hc'd hi-, task m a unique lu.uiner, and offers to the
C line 'i . to I’hilo'-opln rs. .ind i he<il«» 4 i ui-', the fruit of his v a'^t 1 dioiiO'


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


Vol. XI, Introduction to Chu Hsi and the Sung School of

Philosophy, by j 1*. Bruce, AI A, D.Bit. Svo, pp. xii, 1923


Armstrong {R- C . M A , Ph /) ) Light from the
J.il. N\c), pp ,iJ4, VMtIi I'l.itfs r*14


Studies in

IK t lliv


Ball (J Dyer) Kliyllims and Rhymes in rhiiu-se Climes

on Clmle^«. P(){ try and I'oLts. !<\o, pp. 4.'» pNi7.


A Lf-cture

ds IbcI IU t


— Five Thousand Years of John Chinaman

lOu’..


Svo. up 33, V


Banerjee (J ). Hellenism in Ancient India Svo, pp 344 1920

n.-t r.-


Bergen (Rev. P I) ) The Sages of Shantung :

Morn ui' (Roprint ) pp :i4. lUl >


Confucius and
net


Brunnert and Hagelstrom. Prosont-day Political CVgnnizatinu <4

Chm.i K'lV S\M {ip Kw, ‘>7^ P'lj ni t ,p

Burgess (Jas ). The Ancient Monuments, Tem|>les and Sculptures,
with ilounptiN c -\mtt*.-. Kclirciii's '(,1 11.MciIm<\ d Moutimmi-. \otli ITo tnu*
plalo 111 f.uiiDU'. Hindu m<)imiiKiii> l‘Ml ml

Thf Wi.rk illusti.iti liiih.ut \rl. Ili'-t^rx. .uid ^Ivth<^l.*^v l>< tiuiniMi’ uilii I’ikUi Tias i ami
.Vrn.ir.uati. It forum a ic( nrd "Mh- \ anoim >t>l' <>1 Indian \r< hii< ■ tura


Burma Research Society Journal. Vots I -XII. Svo. and 4to

K.uii^ooii Pdl-Jl. h part - ild it 7- ed.

The Journal to\ors a whIr held on a thorough '< Iiol irlv l).is.i» Arrluo lo^v. I'liilolo.:\ .
Kpi-iMphv, Art, Hmtory, Hndtlhmni, I olklon-. .A-troii.-mv. LiUTaiun m lUirim ajul I’.di.
with 'ir,iuslation>, nuiiu'rou* liiit* IMatc’i .ind lll"^tratioim


Bushell fS W ) Tmcriptioiis in the juchen and Allied Si'rpds

\\ !th plate S\o. jip 1. .{-t ( -d

Chinese Architecture Reprint, with plates 3vo 199S 3s

Chalfant (Rev. F H ) .Xncu'nt ('hmesc Coinage. Illustrated

(Reprint) pp 21 rUd net

Charpentier (J ) Fttaradhyavana Sutra • being the I'lrxt Mulasutra

ot till' S\ eland). ir.i Jaum Prakrit 'H \l m S.iiKkrit «l»ara<ttr'- 1 ditid, witli Intro-
du( lioii, C ritu il Xoti and a r oinnu nt.ir\ S\i». pp I'lu P'JJ net 27'-.

Collins (W. 1’ ) Mineral Icnteii>nsu in China Svo, pp 419 With

ma]) and -skt t< he=; Sooiid I'dition onl.triiei! P«J2 net

Edkins (J )• Opium, TTistoric il Xote, or the Pi^ppy in China, in
Clmiest' and I'lmlisli .s\o. j)p \!i, »»‘C .lu. bo.inlv is'ls net

Fletcher (W. J. P) ) (iems of Cliinese Wrsc Translated into

l.ruilmh vors.!' iso\ s\o. pp 242 Pipi


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


v


Fletcher {W I. Ij ) More ol CliiiK''L iVx trv. Cliiiic-t‘ Text

v.illi TiMusl itioii ami Not' 5 Ki»\ S\«», pp 2 os ll.'^

Foster i^^r^ A ) Engli^h-Chiiic-^e Pocket T'^u tionnry. in ilie Mandaiin

Di ilu t. Tliird I'-aitiMii, liiUi''. pp Mil, l''l hill‘a!‘. I'li;. n, t Itb.

Giles (H A ). (iems of Chine''e Literature. Second K<htion, revised

,\'nl fiiiar-i'-d lt>', pp \i' , 2 '< 7 . (1

Goodrich (Ch ). Pocket Dictionary, Chincse-Eiij^lish and Pekinges'-
S>Ud>uy ItitiM pp \ n, J 17 , “fi, hall ( lit, PoHrtli l‘i )4 ii>t IJ-.

Hirth (Pr). Scraps from a Collector’s Xote-book : lieing X'otes on
s'lriit' Chitu««; Paint'Ts of ih*-’ Pn<;*-iit Dxna'^tv, Apiit-mh* ‘■pii sorne (Md .Ma^t!r~ and
Art lli'ii.irians I'l.it*-', s\.». pp 1 I'M") n^t Is-^

Native Sources for the Tti'-tory of Chinese Pictorial Art. Kngli-'h

Vcrsip.n liv .\ F.. with Iiuh'\ of AriNK Authors, ami IlooK^ sv,,. ]>p gs. p.ilT

ill t .X ilil

Hosie (Sir .Mexander). (.)n th(‘ Trail ol the 1 >pium Poppy . a Xarnitivc

ot 'lra\< 1 in tlic Clued Ojuuiu-priMlui luit Fro\ i ti > ot Lhma J \‘iU . S\n, with i’lati -s
.aid Map- l’) 14 . md l’“'«

Thf* w ' >rK m ni(h tlm oPm r\ ll'oI^^ of an < )ri( ni-il travi It i of \s idc <'\p< ra m c iipon tin
poiphc prixl'Kls mdu-tri« ami tradi--


Hsa Shih'Chang (Pre-ulent of China) China after the War. 8 v(>,

1 p. I'l-L, Iii't 111- nd

Jouveau Dubreuil (('■ ) P.illavn .\ntii[mtios I, Svo, pp. 7 (t

Witir’.L' Pl.it' ; I'lp'.. II, t 7^ I'll

Kashmir Sanskrit Series. 'IV.xt iitid Stinlic^, Xo'^. 1-24 net /(■!
Kern (II ) Manual nf Tmli.an T’lKlillii^m L:ir;,’c Svn, pp 149 .

lirt Pis I.d

Kliene (Ch ) .\n£;lo-Chint"ie Cnlnmlar for 2 .an vear-. ( 17 .^ 1 - 2000 ) 4 tn,

tialti.ilt. PlnC ■ net f'J P'^

Laffitte (M Pierre) Cenir.al View of Chinese Cr, ili/ation and of the
R< hit ic di- Ol till' W’l -t wilJi C Inna svo. pp \n. |J7 l^sr 7 -, nd

Fanning (D ) Did I'on e-. m New ('hina an Kfiort to < xliihit th<'
I niid.iiio i.t.d Iv I itii iii-h’p 111 ( hm i md iIk \\ i lu tlnir truf I.inht S\ ' j ip \, 41 1' i
Hith i in ip -iiowMii: tin u.iinr d n'-oun • - '>t ( lini ■» I'dJ ih C 1J-. ad

Macdonell (\ A) Vedic Cirriiumir Large Svo, pp 45 (i 1910 .

md dll-

Vedie .Mythology fairge Svo, pp 190 1897 net


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


Macgowaii fj i Tniixrnl ry ('hina Hi-t'-rv oi the Kmpir<‘

cl? ('-uipil-'l l'> Uj<' (. 'iiiH n.iii' SkoiuI I.cUtidP j’l’ m, iTpI li.iit i :lr

I'MHi. u<‘t <■_’ li '

Mateer fUcv C. \V ) A Coiii.e <.f Mandarin J.cs-on^, bci'«cd un

klluPl Ri > ilm. '!> -Jli,. pp 1\ , belli l‘.l Ml ij Id:

A shnrt I'our^c.- ot J‘nni.av T.csM)rs in ;Man«!atin (miuiuleil as an

Iiitrixliiction to the cil.o\» work' U«', pp R, 7‘h h ib * .lit I'.HiT. I'l" ad

Mayers (Fr M'ni }. Tivatins betwcuu the Fnipirc of China and the

l uri-uii Powtr? Nrw tdn>on. « 1 :kM) lu t

The Chinese (.h)\ ernnieiit ; a Manual <tf Chinese Tales,

e.itt-^'ori' .illy .irrciniti'd cind «xpl.uiHd. with au Appendix iliiid edition ro\ s\..,
r-.‘\ :?cd by O. M ii. Pin 1 my li dt « <dl m t J"'?

Morgan (Kvan). A Ciinde to Wenli Styles and Cluuese Idt'als I'Asavs,

I <li< ts, Frol l.iniatK'i.s, Munon.ds L* l)«'rujiu iit>, hisi nption-*, Coiiniiori i.d

i'apoi- eiiiruo' lext. \\itb I iiub-h Tr.iii-l.UMu .uid Notts, svo, ]']>. 414, .i
\o‘ .ibul.irv ut 4" pp , and Index, < loth. I'dJ. net Jo-.

Owen (Prof G ) The Fvolution «>i CluncR' Writing Svo, pp 32.

i-d

Perimann {S M.). Ha-smiin (the* Chinese) : Chinese File, .Maniuis,

ciinl Cu-toms, CnUnr. nnd tn'd-. ‘ io\ernin> nt S\ -ttru and Trade, with an .•\p['t ndu.
The Jews in China. In Hebrew. .s\o, il-.th. lull net 4-

The Jews in China, pp 2-F lh09. net 2s Sd.


Playfair {CF M H ). 'I'lie Cities aiul Towns ot (diina : a Cieographieal
Init-oiiary. betonl tilition, ltrit<-S\i», pi’ •,>,_> piio m.l

Poletti (P.). A Chinr-c an<l F'nglisli l>Kii«)nary. <irrdnged aecording
to 1 lu K idii .iR .md Subi .idi' -d- \i w .uul I id.n-t* d I ditioti ei.n t uni'ii; 1 J ii'id l iniu
I )i.U 'I ii f >, with llie I’l ohii’u i.iti- 'li 111 till- IV'kin <ll lie- I .u n rtliiii* to Sir 1 li \\ .ule «
s\-t m ai.'l the' i’roiiniu i.ition in th. -inuTd I .ii.-niaee oi t hina in I'r Wilii.im-


Si'i llui-: S\i,, I 'oih, pp «\i. )')7, md i Lm ot R t<h« .lU I'loi lut Is-.

Railways of China, The. Svo, jip 23, with map IF.

Reminiscences of a Chinese Official. Kexelatu'iis of (dtitial life
uiid' r the -Maiu lui? Ko\. s\o. p|' l.'»s I'lj-j i,il.

Richard. Coinpiehtiisive Oecgiapliy td the (Tiinese Finpire Svd,

w ilh M.ij', I loth RiiiR II, t J1-.


Ridge (\N . Shi'ldon). tdiin.i, U)!l-I2 Cru\-ennneiil Clumges aiitl

N Uioiial Mo\i'nieiit^ Witli I'r in-l.Ui'ni nl the St.Ue Docurniit- rel.itiii^ tiuuto.
,s\o, ])p. SII-J 7 '

Saussure (f. de). Originc-. de I’Astnununie ('hinoi-e. Hoy. Svo,

P[i. 4 5s Il!n?u-,ui.d I'OJ net .’.u-


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


Vil


Saussure(I- THoiometrit* ct k- Sy-stcnie Cosmologique ck-^

Cljiiu'i;. 4li>, I'p- 1“^ uuh Illu^tratKin? net J.' ♦)<.!

Ll Svitcmu A>ir(>n()inique dub CluiiDir) 8vu Illubtrdted, 1922.

net 1:^5 Oil

Silacara. 1 )i-^coiirse'^ ol (ir)t«dmo the Thiddha, tran->Iatcd from the

F’.ili 'if th'" M.uiiiiin.i Xil'w.i\o 2\ol^.ro> n\u, iluth net

Smith hV. 11 ) Prover]>s and Common Sayin>{s from tiie Chinese,
with Ulibei \ cl til 111= on etim«‘=o I hniy-? ni (leneral. Xevv and KeMsed Ldition, S\ d, pp vn.
.J74, Ji'iJl l'"4 ' net J(K.

Soothiil (^^ h- ) I'he Student’s Four Thousand Chinese Charaeters
and (jeiural Pu'ki.t Dn iioii.ir\ . Third Tditiuii, .S\u. Pl> d'l, ijs. il..th iLNih

net iLh'.

Sowerby CV De G • The Xaturali-jt in Manchuna. With photo-
yiaplo and iketelie;. Wd I. 'lra\el and Lxpldratiuii 4t'.-. pp m\, d47. lh:^2


Sumangala (S ). A (iraiiuated Fall Cour^c, with a Pali-Knglish
\'uLal'ulary. s\i., i luth, I'dd net

Visser ( Gr .M ^V.) The Diayon in China and Japan. Roy. Svo,
I'i> .Ml, JIJ, Ihl J. 14s.

Vitale diarou G) Chine'-e I'olklore : Fol\inj^h*se Kliyrnes, First

I'llifeted and edited wiili X■•)te^ and rran>laiion. .b\n, pp .\vn, reKiin,'

Is'n; net J")5.

Chinese Merry Tale-^. tolktteil and eihled in Chinese, a I'libt

I-ie.idiii,.: !■ ink for Sindtul? ol toll«i(jiiial Ciimesc. Isceund l_Liiliun, bvo, I'p \ni. 1
F’l knij.'. inns net l-’is

Werner (lA T. C.). Ciitnese l>itties. 4to. pp 5(C 1922. 5s.

Wieger (Hr 1.) ClniK-e Cliaratlers iheir f)rif(in, Ftyniolo^^y,

H'-tory, ( la"ilii .ni'iJi, Sii;inli'.atioii. .\ ihoi.jUi'Ii Stnd> Iroiu CInnese Do« unients
ssii. L' vuIt pil" net .50?.

- - Moial Ti nets and Customs ii Clima : Te.\ts in Chinese, with

hiuln-li 1 r.in=lal:on. ll!ii-'lrat« d, S\o, pp, f,i>h net :jnc.

Williams (C. .\ S). A M.inu.d of Clmiese Meta])hor Chinese Te.\t.
with f.i)c,'l)rh I r.iii'l.iiioii S'. », pp {Jii r.L’n. ln>.

Wylie (A.) Xote-> on Chinese Literature. (Ke])nnt.) Roy. 8\ o,
Pli. In ,ju7 I'L'J. dns

Zimmer (G. ]•' ) Idkoineerin" ot Antiquity and Technical IVogress
in Arts and t raft'. S\o. pp so \\ ith "id Illu~lr Ui"n^. I'.'l )• nit 7'- *>d.


PROBSTHAIN & CO.,


Vlll


**A book that is shut is but a


GOVT. OF INDIA

Department of Archaeology tji

k NEW DELHI.

3

Plea43e help tis to keep the book
clean and moving.


8. 8.. 148. N. DELHI.
