The Haft Paikar (The Seven Beauties), Vol. 1: Translation (Nizami Ganjavi (trans. C. E. Wilson), 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1924 Probsthain's Oriental Series edition (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.103466). First complete English translation of Nizami's romance of Bahram Gur and the seven princesses.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

GOA ERNMENT OF INDIA


DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL ARCH/EOLOG I CAL
LIBRARY


Cali No. %S /L 53//Nt^/ Wt^

Acc. No. JL167_ *'


D.G.A. 79

GIPN— S4— 2D. G. .-\-ch.N. D,/57— 23-2-58— 1,00,000


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES.


VOL. XII.


NIZAMI : THE HAFT PAIKAR.

(TRANSLATION.)


THE HAFT PAIKAR

(THE SEAMEN BEAUTIES).

CONTAINING THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES
OF KING BAHRAM GtJR, AND THE SEVEN
STORIES TOLD HIM BY HIS SEVEN QUEENS.

BY

NIZAMI OF GANJA.


TRANSLATED FROM THE PERSIAN.
WITH A COMMENTARY,


C. E. WILSON, B.A. (Lond.)

{For Fourteen Years Professor of Persian^ University College, London).
-WTHOK OF A TK.^NSLATION, WITH COMMENTARY, OF JALALU

’d-dIn rDmI’s masn.AVI (book ii) ; or a tee.atise on gog
AND MAGOG; ETC., ETC.

VOL. I: TBANSLATION.


J (.jT o-.AJ

^ C. E.


‘AJ^


Da.


. \x ^ - ,

Sl)-5


STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, LIMITED


PRINTERS. HERTFORD


PREFACE


rilHE text for tlie following translation has been prepared mainly
from the IMSS. and lithographed texts of the India Office
Library, both of which, by the liberahty of the Indian Government,
can be borrowed by the student for use at home. Among.st those
MSS. there is one espcciallj' remarkal'le both for its correctness and
good writing — two qualities which arc often not found together.

The Commentary is entirely my own, since I have found no notes
of any importance either in the MSS. or the lithographed texts used.
As a matter of fact, separate MSS., which miglit contain notes, I
have not seen ; whilst MSS. and lithographs of the collected works
seldom, if ever, contain any. Of separate lithograplicil texts I have
seen only a few, and in these the sparse notes are of the mo.st trifling
description. In fact, such notes are seldom of any value, unless
written as a regular commentary by scholars of established
reputation.

The system of transliteration adopted is as follows ; —


t =
s =

j =

ch =

t =

kh =


1 when a consonant.


. - • the soft dental.

I '• ' (in Arabic quotations as “ th in thin ”).

„ as in “ jar

_ as in '■ church

_ a deeply sounded h ”.

• the German “ ch

e


VI


PREFACE


d

==

0

the soft dental.

z

=

j

(in Arabic quotations transliterated “ dh ” for “ th ” in
“ this ”).

z

=

j


zh


j

the “ s ” in “ pleasure

s


a hard palatal “ s ”.

z

=


(in Arabic “ d ”, a hard palatal “ d ”).

t

==


a hard palatal “ t ”.

%

=

li

(in Arabic generally pronounced “ z ”, but sometimes
“ d ”, or “ th ” as in “ this ”).


=

c

a guttural not found in European languages.


=

i

something like “ r, grasseyee

<1

=

i_5

a guttural “ k ”, but now pronounced as “ gh ”.

g

=

(__r always hard.

111


U

when pronounced as “ m ”.

V

=

«

in Arabic and Urdu “ w ”.

V

—

J

unpronounced, as in “ khyastan ”, pronounced
“ khastan ”.

Ty

==

3

when unpronounced in Arabic, as in “ ‘Amrw ”,


pronounced “ ‘Amr

h = ,

a generally a sound between “ a ” in “ can ” and “ u ”

in “jug”.

i — ^ generally sounded as “ e ” in “ ten

u == '' as “ u ” in “ bull


PEEFACE


vii


a = \ when a long vowel, and is sounded as in “ ball

a = at the end of Arabic words, and sometimes, in the

o ^ j ’

middle.

u = j when a long vowel, as “ u ” in “ rule

i = when a long vowel, as “ i ” in “ machine

an = j'' as “ an ” in German “ auch ”, but now pronounced as

“ o ” in “ no ”, and sometimes even as “ u ”.
ai = “ ai ” in “ gait ” (in Urdu ; and in Arabic and Turkish

after a hard consonant, as “ i ” in “ fire ”).

In addition to the above vowel sounds, Turkish has the French
“ u ”, and “ eu ”, and a sound like “ i ” in “ fir These may be
represented by “ ii ”, “ d ” or “ eu ”, and “ y ” respectively.

In conclusion, I have pleasure in oSering a tribute of gratitude to
my friend the Publisher, whose exceptional enterprise, energy, and
enlightened appreciation afiord a hopeful guarantee for the success
of the work.

I have also to thank Messrs. Austin for the care they have taken
in the printing of a work requiring great and particular exactitude.


■ A‘,


CONTEXTS


PAGE

Preface ......... v

Introduction ........ xiii

(Invocation to God) ....... 1

In praise of the Lord of Envoys the seal of the Prophets 4

In description of the Ascension of his highnes.s the chief of

created beings ....... 6

On the cause of writing the book . . . . .11

An apology for the writing of the book . . . .14

In praise of the king ‘Ala'u'd-Din ..... 15

A humble address ....... 20

On the excellence of speech. Counsel to the people . 24

Counsel to his son Muhammad ..... 33

Treats of the birth of Bahram. The building of Khavarnaq 37

(Some) description of Khavarnaa. Nidman gives up the

sovereignty ........ 44

The practice of hunting of Bahram ..... 48

Bahram Gur goes to the chase and kills a lion and an onager 50

Bahram goes to the chase and kills a dragon ... 51

Bahram finds the picture of the Seven (Fair) Faces in

Khavarnaq ........ 55

Yazdijard becomes acquainted with Bahram’s state . . 58


s:


CONTENTS


PAGE

The death of Yazdijard ....... 59

(The Author) complains of himself and alludes to Firdausi 60

Bahram Gur goes to Persia and (finds) another occupying

the throne ........ 61

Bahram Gur's answer to the letter of the Persians . . 66

The priest's answer to King Bahram .... 68

The answer of King Bahram to the priest ... 69

How Bahram seizes the crown from between two lions . 73

Bahram sits on the throne in his father's place . . 75

Describes Bahram Gur in his sovereignty and the manner

of his life ........ 77

A famine in the world from drought .... 79

The story of Bahram and the girl named Fitna of Chinese

Turklstan ........ 82

Bahram goes to the chase, and the officer entertains him . 88
The Khan of Khans comes to fight against Bahram Gur . 94
Bahram Gur rebukes the Persians ..... 99

Description of Bahram’s banquet in winter. The building

of the Seven Domes . . . . . .106

Description of the seven-domed palace of Bahram Gur and

of the manner of Ids stay in each dome . . . 113

Bahram sits on Saturday in the Black Dome, and the
daughter of the king of the First Clime tells him a

story 114

Bahram on Sunday sits in the Yellow Dome, and the
daughter of the king of the Second Clime tells him a
story


CONTENTS


XI


PAGE

Bahram on Monday sits in the Green Dome, and the

daughter of the king of the Third Clime tells him a story 157

Bahram sits on Tuesday in the Red Dome, and the
daughter of the king of the Fourth Clime tells him
a story ......... 171

Bahram sits on Wednesday in the Blue Dome, and the
daughter of the king of the Fifth Clime tells him
a story ......... 188

Bahriim on Thursday sits in the Sandal-coloured Dome, and
the daughter of the king of the Sixth Clime tells him
a story ......... 213

Bahram sits on Friday in the White Dome, and the
daughter of the king of the Seventh Clime tells him
a story ......... 234

Bahram finds out about the tyrannical vazir . . . 251

The first victim complains of the tyrannical vazir . . 263

The second victim makes (his) complaint . . . 264

The third victim makes (his) complaint .... 266

The fourth victim makes (his) complaint .... 267

The fifth victim makes (his) complaint .... 268

The sixth victim makes (his) complaint .... 269

The seventh victim makes (his) complaint . . . 271

The king punishes the tyrannical vazir . . . .273

The passing of Bahram from the transitory temple by the

decree of the All-wise King ..... 275


Words in Conclusion


284


INTRODUCTION


'^IZAMI -was born about 1141 at Gauja (Elizabetlipol) in the
old province of Arran (now part of Paissian Transcaucasia).
To this place bis father, a Sunul. had como to live from the
district of Tafrish, a dependency of Qum in Jibal, led probably
by the feuds which jwovailed between the Shi‘ahs and Sunnis
in that district. Ganja was famous for the piety and learning
of its inhabitants, who were rigid Sunnis, and would not permit
anyone to settle among them who differed from them in religious
views. To this influence, no doubt, Nizami owed his early
tendency towards asceticism and learning. The former he
retained all his life ; the latter he deprecates in his later works
as of little account to the Sufi before the knowledge of God,
which is gained, not by learning, but by following the Sufi path
under the guidance of a spiritual chief.

His rigid asceticism is attested by, at least, all Persian writers,
and by his own words, notably, in the Silmidar Nanta and
the Haft Paikar. In the former he says that by wine, to
which he repeatedly alludes, he means the rapture of the
knowledge and love of God, and protests vehemently that he
never tasted wine in his life.

He never, as other poets, frequented the courts of kings, but
was sought out by them, and wrote some of his poems at their
invitation. Dr. William Bacher's assumption that at the age
of 40 he adopted quite a tolerant attitude towards human nature
and a moderate indulgence of the senses is based upon a complete
misapprehension of a passage in Nizami's first work, the
Makhzanu ’l-Asrdr, “the Treasure-house of Secrets,” in which he
conceives the word diJ, “ heart,” to be used by the poet in the


XIV


INTRODUCTION


sense of a generous expansion of heart and a jovial outlook
upon things mundane, whereas it should undoubtedly be taken
in the usual Sufi and Neo-Platonic sense of the place, when
purified, of the manifestation of the Deity, the perfect Sufi
being called suhih-dil, “the master of heart.” We have only
to turn to the admirably lucid expositions of Jam! in the Tuh-
fatu 1-Ahrdr for any light which the more subtle language
of Nizami may seem to some to require in such particulars.
The misconception alluded to is due in part to a misapprehension
of the expression rdh-zandn-i havas, which means “ those bandits,
the senses ”, and not SinneJitoter, ' killers of the senses” ; i.e.,
enemies to moderate sensual indulgence ! That ho was by no
means, however, a man of morose temperament is evident
from the touches of humour we find in the Haft Paikar. And
d propos of this, Jam! in the Bahdristdn remarks that the Believer
is cheerful ; the Infidel it is who is gloomy and morose.

The uninitiated may perhaps wonder why an accomplished
Sufi poet should appear to be lamenting the darkness of doubt,
and urging himself to give up negligence and the senses, and
to strive after the attainment of the “ heart ”, in order to attain
to haqqu ’Uyaqin, the absolute /cc/f/ir/ of the Truth and identifica-
tion with It ; but the poet is really instructing the neophyte
by detailing his own past experiences.

By another misapprehension of the sense Dr. Bacher, in common
with some others, assume.s thar the Makh'.anu ’l-Asrdr was
written when the poet was 40 years old. Nizrimi really implies
that the genius in collaboration with the intellect of one of 40
years' experience should not be trusted, but that the Siifi aspirant
should at once seek a real friend, i.e.. the heart, dit, in the Sufi
sense. Nizami, too, him.self state.s that his .scemef work, Khuxrau
and Slilrln, was composed in 1175; i.e . when he was 34 years
of ago. He wrote the Mnklr.nnn l-Asnlr probably in about
1171 or 1172. when he was a little over .30. According to
Nizami himself Laill and Majniai was written in 1188; the


INTRODUCTION


XV


Sikandar Kama in 1191 ; the Haft Paikar in 1198. A second
recension of the Sikandar Ndma was made, probably, in
about 1200.

After an ascetic life, uniformly maintained, and in the later
part of which he went into complete retirement from the world,
he died in about 1202 at Ganja.

From the statements of the biographers and his own assertions
in the Haft Paikar, he appears to have made an extensive
study of the sciences then known, but an examination of that
work will show that his knowledge of geography, at least, was
far from accurate. Astronomy (astrology) seems to have been
his favourite study, and of this he appears to have had a consider-
able knowledge. He apparently believed, too. in the influence
of the stars, but only as the agents of the pre-ordinances of the
Deity.

It may seem strange on the surface that the Author of the
Makhzanu "l-Asrdr should afterwards have composed only poems
apparently exoteric, but closer observation of these poems will
show that a sub-current of the mystic doctrine runs through
them all. In addition also to our own observations we have
the testimony of JamT, who in the XafaJidtn 'l-Uns asserts
that all Nizami's poems are purely Sufi, though ostensibly only
exoteric stories. Then, too, what arc the Odes of Hafiz ? On
the surface nothing but songs in praise of love, wine, and nature ;
but in reality expositions, or rather .symbolical images of Sufiism.
A close and deep study of the Haft Paikar, especially, amongst
his other works, will reveal such glints of Sufi teaching as will
convince us that Jami’s estimate is a true one.

At the same time, it should be added that the subjects of
most of Nizami’s poems were suggested by the prevalent taste
of the times, and that though he complied with this so far as
the exoteric sense was concerned, he, at the same time, admitted
an under-current of Sufiism, in order to comply with his own
predilections and those of the select few.


XVI


INTEODUCTIOX


In excuse for giving an exoteric form to the first poem he 'wrote
after the 31al:h:anu 'l-Asrur, namely Khisrau and Shinn, he
says in that poem : —

Mara cliun “ 3Ialhzanu 'l-Asrdr ” ganjt,

Chi huyad dar hams hi-n'mud ranjl ?

Va-lihn dar jahCtn imruz has nlst
Ki lira bar havas-ndmuih) haras nlst.

A treasure like the “ Mahhzan " being mine,

"Why to a work on passion’s sway incline ?

Yet still there's no one in the world to-day
Who lusts not for a work on passion’s sway.

The treatment of the Mahh-.ann d-Asrdr is absolutely
original, for though Nizami was well acquainted with the
Hadlqa of Sana'!, as we see by his allusion to it in a passage
in the colophon to his own work — strangely misunderstood,
by the way, by Dr. Bacher — the style he uses is quite different.
Sana’! is perhap.- more obscure and subtle even than Kumi,
but Nizami uses a mode of expression which is rare, though not
unique, among Persian poets, who, though often obscure, are
generally what may be called conventionally obscure. Nizami,
on the other hand, like many European poets, is unconventionally
obscure. He employs images and metaphors to which there is
no key save in the possession of the poetic sense and of sound
judgment. In a poet like Jami, a great admirer and imitator
of Nizami, the style, in spite of its frequent quaint conceits,
is so lucid that we can almost anticipate the sense. In Nizami
we cannot do so, but have to u.se our best judgment and
imagination.

In his later works Nizami follows the path of Firdausi, of
whom he was a great admirer ; but he by no means follows him
servilely ; in all he wrote we see the imprint of his own genius,
and a striking originality of thought and expression. In
Nizami we see Nizami and not Firdausi. His thoughts are
deeper, his expression is more trenchant, crisp, and epigrammatic.


INTRODUCTION


xvii


though perhaps often more studied and artificial, and generally
more obscure and subtle. In plain narrative he is equally
flowing and perspicuous, whilst in situations requiring exalted
imagination and dramatic force he is superior. In fine, he may
be considered a greater creator than his predecessor.

His nearer adherence to Firdausi’s style in the Sikandar
Ndma may be accounted for by the close similarity of the
subjects of that poem to those of the Shdk Ndma.

His defects are those common to all Persian poets, who have
little skill in delineating character, or in inspiring a sense of the
spirit of nature. Each different character is cast in its own
conventional mould, and has no individuality, whilst the
depicting of nature is also conventional and artificial. Emotional,
especially pathetic situations, it is true, are often drawn with
great artistic power, but the expression to which they lead in
those affected is not convincing. To enter a little more into
detail upon these three topics, there is in the delineation of
character an almost total absence of the real, whilst the ideal
is represented only by a set, conventional form which is far
from being a type. The depicting of nature reveals, it is true,
the most close and accurate observation, but the images offered
are fantastic : they are neither poetic nor scientific, and convey
nothing of the spirit of nature such as we see it in Shelley and
Wordsworth. Contrast, for example, Nizami's description
of a garden with Shelley’s exquisite lines in the Sensitive
Plant.

Then, in the expression of the rapture, yearning, and sorrow
of the lover, taken at least in an exoteric sense, there is nothing
convincing, such as we find it in the impassioned lines of a
Shakespeare or a Petrarch. But then, of course, we must
remember that the real sense is esoteric, and that a mere symbolic
suggestion may be sufficient for the mystic.

The Haft Paikar is more immediately connected with
Suflism than any work of the Punj Ganj except the Makh-


xviii INTRODUCTION

zanu 'l-Asrdr. It depicts, so far as the esoteric sense is concerned,
the progress of the Sufi through the seven Stages, symbolized
by the seven colours which were supposed to belong to the spheres
of the seven planets. Nizami, however, uses a more natural
and satisfactory succession than that ofiered in the Rev. W. H. T.
Gairdner's The Wa>j of a Mohammedan Mystic, in which
the Stages are divided as follows : — •

1st Nafs-i Atnmdra, the Soul Depraved.

2nd Nafs-i Lawdma, the Soul Accusatory.

The two summarized under Shan ah, the Law.

3rd Nafs-i Mulhama, the Soul Inspired.

4th Nafs-i Mutma’inna, the Soul Tranquil.

Summarized under Tariqa, the Way.

5th Nafs-i Rd^ya, the Soul God-satisfied.

6th Nafs-i Marziya, the Soul God-satisfying.

Summarized under Ma‘rifa, the Gnosis.

7th Nafs-i Sdfiya va Kamila, the Soul Clarified and Perfect ;
which embodies Haqlqa, the Truth.

The 1st Stage is referred to the Moon and the First Day ;
The 2nd Stage, to Mercury and the Second Day ;

The 3rd Stage, to Venus and the Third Day ;

The 4th Stage, to the Sun and the Fourth Day ;

The 5th Stage, to Mars and the Fifth Day ;

The 6th Stage, to Jupiter and the Day of Assembly (Friday) ;
The 7th Stage, to Saturn and the Day of Rest (Sabt).

Nizami, with more attention to Sufi thought and the old
mythology, enumerates the Stages as follows : —

The 1st, as referable to Saturn and Saturday ;

The 2nd, to the Sun and Sunday ;

The 3rd, to the Moon and Monday ;

The 4th, to Mars and Tuesday ;

The 5th, to Mercury and Wednesday ;

The 6th, to Jupiter and Thursday ;

The 7th, to Venus and Friday.


INTRODUCTION


XIX


The sphere of Saturn is black ; that of the Sun, yellow ;
of the Moon, silvery-green ; of Mars, red ; of Mercury, blue ;
of Jupiter, sandal-wood coloured ; of Venus, white.

Black is naturally associated with the dark veil between
the Deity and man in his undisciplined state ; white, with
the absolute colourlessness of the Deity and his dissociation
from all but Himself.

The Stories if closely studied show these and the intermediate
Stages of the Sufi aspirant in his progress from the natural
state of humanity, NCisiit, to that of Ldhiit, in which he is merged
in the Deity and is of Him.

It should be observed that as regards the reference of the
planets to the Climes, Nizami follows an arrangement of his
own, and that in this particular authorities differ.

On account of the ostensibly exoteric nature of the work, I have
found it possible to translate it into blank verse without departing
in any way from the literal sense of the original.

With regard to the Notes, I have endeavoured to elucidate
all the linguistic difficulties, and have explained all the historical,
geographical, astrological, and other references to the best of
my ability.

The press-marks of the India Office MSS. used by me towards
the fixing of a text have probably been altered since, but identifica-
tion should, I think, be easy.

The lithographed texts used are indicated by initials.

The system of transliteration is the same as that employed
in my translation of the Mamavl.


THE HAFT PAIKAE


(Iitvocalio)) to God.)

0 Thou from whom the universe exists, before whom naught
that being has has been !

Beginning of all things when things began, and at the end
the End of everything !

0 Kaiser of the lofty sphere, of stars Illumer, of their meetings
Orderer !

Author of (all) the stores of bounteous gifts, of all existent
things Creative Power !

Through Thee are well disposed the aSairs of all, 0 All Thyself
and Author (too) of all !

Thou art ; and there is nothing like to Thee — those who are
wise regard Thee only thus.

To men of insight Thou art manifest, (though) not in form
but by Thy giving form.

All beings by (the principle of) life have hfe, but this Thy
Being gives alone (1).

0 Maker of the universe from naught. Giver of sustenance
and Cherisher !

Thy name, of all names the Beginning, is the first Beginning
and the latest End.

First of the First Thou if we reckon back ; Last of the Last, too,
at the end of things.

By Thee the being of all (things) is formed ; to Thee is the
return of all, to Thee (2).

To Thy sublimity thought has no path, decadence dust can
never touch Thy door.


2


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Thou wast not born, (all) others have been born ; Thou, Thou
art God, (all) others are (but) air (3).

The wav Thou showest by a single thought ; and dost by one
fine point facilitate (4).

But he whose head's unfit to bow in prayer, his door is fastened
up by lock on lock.

Thou makest dawn illuminer of night, bird to the day, and
food to bird Thou giv’st (5).

Unto the sun and moon Thou hast consigned two (lofty)
tents (in colour) white and black (6).

Both day and night are travellers on Thy path, they wear
the ring of bondage at Thy court (7).

They do nor good nor ill till Thou command ; no act perform
on their authority (8).

Thou hast enkindled in the brain (the light of) intellect, more
shining than a lamp.

But yet with all its keenness ’tis (confined) to its own place,
’tis senseless as to Thee (9).

The intellect breaks down (10) upon Thy path ; life passes oS in
efiorts to approach (11).

The soul's a substance, and ’tis in our frame, (but yet) no
person knows where is its place ;

Thou art no substance, and Thou hast no place ; how can
distraught conjecture reach to Thee ?

Thou art a Guide, there is no guide to Thee ; in every place
art Thou, but hast no place (12).

We who are of the seven heavens a part, with Thee are
outside, outside of the seven (13).

The Universal Intellect attains to Thee, yet still through
awe looks not at Thee (14).

0 Thou, whose helpful favour is required (in turn) by shining
day and dusky night,

Thou (only) art the Alterer of states in every mode (15), save
Thee none alter states.

Until Thou wiliest, good or ill is not ; by his own essence no
one’s being is.


TRANSLATION


3


Thou bringest from and giv'st to stone and clay the fire-hued
ruby, and the ruby's fire (16).

The world, the sky which round the world revolves, before
Thy door cry out (to men). Hold ofi (17) !

A painter on Thy canvas every one, but aU are naught, (all)
deeds are done by Thee (18).

How from the stars should good and ill arise, when they are
helpless before good and ill (19) ?

If the stars gave good fortune Kai-Qubad would have been
born of an astrologer (20).

What man who in the stars is learned finds the way by reckoning
to a treasure hid (21) ?

Without an intermediary Thou giv'st treasure to him who
knows not seven from five.

All fine particulars which touch the stars, with every subtle
point of science known

I’ve read, and sought the secret of each page ; when Thee
I found I washed the pages clean (22).

I saw the faces of all turned to God ; I saw Thee as that God
above all (else).

Thou by Whom lives each (soul) where soul there be, Whose
oven gives each (loaf) where loaf there be.

Make me by being at Thy door ujiraised, make me dependent
not on people's doors.

Without the means of others give mo bread, 0 Thou Who
givest food to all who live.

Since in my youth from Thee and from Thy door I went not
to the door of any one.

All to my door did st Thou (vouchsafe to) send — I did not ask,
(but) Thou didst (always) give.

Since I have (now) become old at Thy Court, give me Thy
help from that which one should fear (23).

What words (are these) ? these words are ill-conceived ; if
Thou art mine the world entire is mine.

Thou canst deliver from the world’s affairs bewildered me ;
deliver me (I pray).


4


THE HAFT PAIKAR


To whom should I complain ? the Helper, Thou. Accept me,
for Thou art He who accepts.

Though many hidden secrets there may be, the secret of no
one from Thee is hid (24).

’Tis best that I from Thee my object seek (25) ; ’tis best
that I to Thee address my words.

E’en if through Thee this aim I gain not, still with no self-
interest I’ll accord with Thee.

If I discourse of secrets to the world I meet with scorn, but
honour, if to Thee (26).

Since at Thy door Nizami has arrived, drive him to no one’s
door away from Thee.

In lordship give his mind exaltitude by giving him the diadem,
content (27) ;

Till at the time the work is brought to light, he be the wearer
of a crown though poor (28).


In praise of the Lord of Enrons, the seal of the Prophets — May
God bless and jneserve him !

The centre of the first encircling line ; the seal of all creation
at the end (29) ;

Fresh fruit of garden of the seven old spheres (30) ; of eloquence’
pearl-necklace central pearl (31) —

Who is save him of God-assisted mind, Ahmad the Envoy,
Prophet of the Lord (32) ?

Sun of the Sphere Divine, and minister of a pure Spiritual
Egypt, he (33).

The leader of all leaders he, in truth ; truly deservedly the
leader, he.

King of the prophets he by sword and crown— his sword
the Law, his crown was the Ascent (34).

Untaught (35), but cause of the first causes, he (36) ; light of
the earth, the shadow of God’s Throne (37).

King of the holy Law, establisher of the (high) throne of
lordship o’er the earth (38).


TRANSLATION


5


All beings were a means, the aim was be (39) ; “ the Praised ”
his name (40), his envoyship is praised.

Of the first rose which Adam pressed was he the purest part,
but residue the rest (41) ;

And (at) the last revolving of the sky the address of the
conclusion he will read (42).

His orders and his interdicts are just, since wrong he interdicts
and orders right.

And then his pride, not pain, in poverty, — note “ poverty ”
with treasure such as his (43) !

And then that through him brightest day was shade (44), —
but shade, what means it with the sun conjoined (45) ?

By right divine in kingly power confirmed the strong maintainer
of (his) rule was he.

Who rose (in pride), him did he ca.st down low, but took the
hand of him who (lowly) fell.

To those of kindly nature he was kind, but harshly treated
evil-natured men.

Here, sword (engaged) with sanguinary rage, there, kindliness
on mixing salves (intent).

These were (employed) to comfort the distressed ; his sword
to punish stoney-hearted men (46).

There where they closed the roadway of the Faith, and tied
the thong of hatred round their waists.

Behold ! to-day, after so many years, all, (willing), lay the thong
upon his drum (47).

Although God chose him out of (all) the world, and made
the heavens existent for his sake (48),

His eyes, bright with the salve, “ Turned not aside ” (49), a
garden alien to this garden own (50).

The blue-clothed sphere’s ring-holders in their ears wear
rings as slaves (51) for servitude to him (52).

Select in root and branch his four friends formed the four
walls of the true Faith’s treasure-house (53).

The pure light of his sight, a grace from God — On the creation
of him blessings be !


6


THE HAFT PAIKAR


When his (pure) breath poured musk upon the air, fresh dates
it scattered from the dry palm-tree.

With soul such that its increase never ends, a body reaching
to the sky from earth (54).

This body from that soul possesses life : all are (but) throne,
and that is Solomon (55).

His miracles fresh dates to the dry spines ; to foes his fresh
dates spines — a wondrous thing (56) !

His nails split for his fingers in two halves the apple of the
(full) moon in his fist (57).

Though cutting to the apple danger bring, it splits in two the
nails of enemies (58).

(His) blessing the Creator gave to him, for he the chosen was,
the Chooser, God.

On Chooser and on chosen blessings more than the rotations
of the azure sphere '


In description of the Ascension of his hijhness the chief of created

beinijs.


When the world could not hold his crown (59) his throne was
placed upon the ‘Arsh by his Ascent (60).

To raise him from a lowly stage on high came Gabriel to him
with (swift) Buraq (61).

He said. Place on the air your earthy feet, in order that the
heavens may be your earth (62).

Be for the night of the most sacred house (63), you, to-night
guardian of the purest, best (64).

Since I have brought you choicest guardianship, I’ve brought
Buraq to you to bo your steed (65).

Mount this Buraq which has the lightning's speed, to-night
it is to serve your guardianship (66).

Bring your couch o’er the sphere, you are the moon ; let it
pass o’er the stars, you are the king (67).

The six directions from (their) seven roots tear, and the nine
spheres take down from (their) supports (68).


TRANSLATION


7


Make your steed pass “ Simak ” upon the sphere (69), and
throw your lasso round the angels’ heads (70).

By the locks of your shadow form anew beneath your lofty
stage the heavens’ locks (71).

Saints (72) are preoccupied with your affairs ; angels (73)
expectant of your advent too.

The beauties of the Egypt of this tract, as e’en with Joseph
erst, have fallen in love (74).

Arise, that they may glance at you, and cut their palms
together with the oranges (75).

This is the night of power, the time of prayer : whatever
you demand you will obtain (76).

Renew the angels’ carpet (77), pitch your tent upon the
platform of the Throne, the “ ‘Arsh ” (78).

To those who move at night give lamp-like blooms (79) ; be
fresh of visage bke the garden-flowers (80).

Give to the “ ‘Arsh’s ” eyes light by your light (81) ; pass o’er
and leave afar the carpet’s tracts (82).

Assume the crown for you’ve become the king ; rise above all
for you’ve become the head.

Raise up your head to an exalted state, and by an inroad make
the two worlds yours (83).

Deliver from the dust (of earth) your path (84), and to the
court of Him, Eternal, speed ;

So that as meed to you for your approach your standard over
both worlds may be borne (85).

After Muhammad had in secret heard from Gabriel these
soul-caressing words,

His intellect made perfect by the words, he put the rings of
bondage in his ears (86).

The one, God’s agent in revealing truth ; the other, intellect’s
in word.s and lead (87).

Two agents true custodians of one charge : that, far from
demons, this, from demon-men.

That one brought faithfully the message given ; this one
conceived the secret of the words ;


8


THE HAET PAIKAR


And in the darkest night through that bright lamp was sealed
with the impression of his wish (88).

That honeyed message heard, he gave his eyes a promise through
the medium of his ears.

With eagerness of heart, with soul which craved, that one
unique in beauty briskly rose.

He turned not from obedience to those words, so that he gained
proximity to God.

Buraq he mounted like a lightning flash : beneath him Arab
steed, in hand a whip.

Into the stirrups when he put his feet, Buraq (89), parader
o’er the heights, sprang up.

The wings of peacocks from its feet arose ; above its head a
(radiant) throne-like moon (90).

It flew so (quick) that from that heated flight the vultures
four behind it shed their plumes (91).

It passed (straight) over whatso’er it saw (92) : the night was
spurned, the moon drew in (her) reins (93).

Bewildered at that movement was the sphere (94) ; through
such bewilderment (its head) went round (95).

Imagination pondered how to step ; flghtning, how from the
sheath to draw the sword (96).

The swiftness of the movent intellect, the impulse of the soul to
generous deed,

Were lamene.ss when compared with its swift pace ; before
such breadth of stride they were constrained (97).

Its course reduced the Pole's career to naught : one moment
south, the next ’twas at the north (98).

The fish of that (broad) stream one moment showed the Lancer,
at another the Unarmed (99).

When Ahmad by the dancing of Buraq engaged in crossing
this expanse’s tracts (100),

He took the road to the world’s gate (101), (and then) removed
(all) distance from the heavens’ sphere (102).

He flew across the stages of the sky, a royal falcon with angelic
wings.


TKANSLATION


9


He gave the moon in her elliptic course through his endowments
verdancy afresh (103h

His hand through silver -working gave a hue (as) from a
lead-furnace to Mercury (104).

And from his moon-light brilliancy he drew a veil of mercury
o’er Venus fair (105).

Ascending to the throne-room of the sky, he crowned the
sun’s head with a golden crown (106).

Like to the Khalif of the West in green (107), he left a
glowing countenance to Mars (108).

Finding the head of Jupiter in pain from crown to base, he
rubbed on sandal-wood (109).

His foot by Saturn's crown kissed, Saturn's flag was planted
in the black of ambergris (110).

When (thus) proceeding like the wind of dawn upon a steed,
a raging lion (swift),

His comrade from the inroad fell away, Buraq, as well, desisted
from its course.

The stage had brought him to a place to which from its (fit)
distance Gabriel could go (111).

When Gabriel gave up guidance (112) Ahmad made a ladder
of the lasso, humble prayer.

Beyond the couch of Jlichael he arose to the watch-tower and
trump of Israfll (113).

From Michael, Gabriel, (and Israfll). flew to the shoulder of
‘Azra’il, (swift) (114).

Though to the “ Sidra ” his swift course inclined, he left
behind both “ Sidra ” and ‘‘ Rafraf ’’ (115).

He left his comrades half-way on the road, and went on towards
the sea, unconsciousness (116).

All through that ocean drop by drop he passed ; passed over,
mote by mote, whate'er he saw (117).

The “ ‘Arsh's ’’ pillars having reached, he made a ladder of
the lasso, humble prayer (118).

He raised his head above the radiant “ ‘Arsh ” to the divine
Arcana's awful stage (119).


10


THE HAFT PAIKAR


When in the risks of stupefaction (120) lost, God’s mercy came
and took the reins in hand (121).

His distance of tuo hoic-leitgths ” at that time passed to '■ or
nearer ” (then) from “ he dreiv near" (122).

Beyond his own existence did he step, so that his seeing God
was possible (123).

When thousands he had torn of veils of light, his eyes obtained
the Light devoid of veil (124).

The Object of his worship seen with truth, he washed his
eyes from everj-thing besides (125).

His eyes in no direction rested there whence salutation, left
or right, he heard.

Below, above, before, behind, left, right, were one direction
and the six were gone (126).

“ Direction’s ” unknown to “ directionless ” : he left
“ direction ” for “ Directionless ” (127).

When the “ Directionless ” with fierceness flames, “ direction ”
and the world both take to flight (128).

Until the eyes inveil “ direction’s ” face, the heart’s perturbed
by anxious thought and care (129).

Nought of the Prophet there save breath was left : there was
no person left there, all was God (130).

When from the eyes “ direction ” is concealed, “ that which
has no direction ” ’s clearly seen (131).

How can “ direction ” compass sight of Him ? How can it
hold in His encompassing (132) ?

Without “ direction ” when the Prophet saw the One, he
heard words from no lips or mouth (133).

He took the special drink and special robe ; gained pure
dev'otion through proximity (134).

His cupbearer was knowledge, bliss, his cup (135) ; nothing of
all the rest was left to him.

With humble tribute (then) of countless prayers (136) he came
down from the summit of that Goal (137).

That which he brought (138) he lavished on his friends :
for sinners’ interests made a pious gift.


TRANSLATION


11


How long, Nizami, worship of the world 1 Ascend on high,
how long this low estate ?

Strive you to gain the everlasting realm, which by the Law of
Islam you will gain.

On the cause of icriting the hooh.

When from the court of Solomon (to me) an intimation secretly
arrived (139),

I took to wings, as bird which spreads its wings, to take my
place at Solomon’s (high; gate.

The courier in his intimation signed, On festive night let rise a
crescent-moon (110),

Such that by no one, from its slenderness, it through its veil
of darkness be discerned (111) ;

So that the play of thought and fantasy may captivate
magicians by its spells (142).

Pour out a lot of pepper on the fire, and make the fierce fire
crackle (as it burns) (143) ;

The cold and hardened wax (then) in this heat make soft,
that it become of gentle heart (144).

Move your couch quickly from this narrow way ; there's been
enough of dancing upon stones (145).

Allow the musky reed to sprinkle drops, so that the breeze
of dawn may be perfumed (146).

Command the breeze to dance on ambergris (147) ; to scent
with (fragrant) musk the verdure’s silk (148).

Bear toil, the time for bearing it is now — the leaves you count
out form the royal stores (149).

Your bearing toil will to a treasure lead ; he bears a treasure
off who suffers toil.

Until the grape has find wept bitterly it does not finally
display sweet smiles (1.50).

No one has marrow .S”en without a bone ; without a bee can
honey e’er be found (151) ?

How long a cloud be which no water gives % You have the
oven heated, bake the bread.


12


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Be active, draw the curtain back ; comply, and let the curtained
beauty be displayed (152).

When the (king's) envoy sought this aim of me, joy settled
down, and grief (at once) arose (153).

I sought out (then) from works both rare and choice whatever
might give gladness to the heart.

Whate'er concerned the history of kings — in one work there
was choice (of it for me) (154).

(A poet) of keen thought had come before, and versified it
all in perfect style (155).

Some ruby dust was left from those cut stones (156), of which
each (poet) gleaned some particles.

I, as a jeweller, with those still left shaped such a store (of
jewelry) as this ;

So that the wise who can distinguish things might make their
choice from the contents of it (157).

That which had been half-said I said (in full) ; I bored the
pearl (through) which had been half-bored.

But that which I perceived was just and right — I left it even
as it was at first.

In such a composition did I strive to add adornment too from
alien art (158).

I sought out from the works of famous men — works scattered
(here and there) about the world (159) —

From Arabic and older Persian themes in Tabaristan and
Bukhara’s towns (160) ;

From other scattered treasures too (I sought) each pearl in
each concealed receptacle (161).

All of the leaves which fell into my hands I fastened all
(together) in a bag.

When from that whole selection had been made united ’neath
the blackness of (my) reed (162),

A poem I composed should be approved ; not one to be derided
by the keen.

As in the Magian Zand, with seven Brides I’ve graced the work
composed, on this account (163)


TRANSLATION


13


That, if the Brides, (adorners) of the sky (164), should once
bestow a glance upon my Brides,

Through sharing like adornments and afiairs (165) one each
of them one each of these should aid.

If seven lines converge, a single point at last falls on the
target of the affair (166).

The painter who has ten subservient parts holds to the end of
every single thread (167) ;

(For) if one thread should stray from the (main cord), all the
subservient threads would faulty be (168).

If one should not trace out these threads aright, correctness
is with me, and leaves me not (169).

I measure all these threads in faultless mode ; I ever keep in
mind the main design (170).

The thread if single. I should dread its risk, the more so that
I’ve brought unmeasured pearls (171).

You may indeed in countless waters bathe before you come to
waters you might drink (172).

A little water cast, a man is born, but water's often cast away
and lost (173).

I, shell-like, make pearls with the water (174) ; sure, a little
water I deserve and food (175).

A work more sweet than plates of honey-comb — should not
munificence attend to me ?

But why think of munificence and work ? The thing depends
on Fortune, I am naught.

Firdausi’s bounty, Mahmud’s stinginess, on Sagittarius and
Scorpio lay (176).

He favoured Asadi who had “ Alif ” (177), the ascendant and
its subject were at one (178).

If from the cloud the shell receives a gift, the cloud finds also
in the shell good faith ;

For what the cloud disperses through the air the shell constructs
into a royal pearl (179).

For this discourse to which I’d honour give (180) I crave support,
thus wishing, from the king.


14


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Of standard quality and quantity, so far as ’tis, the cause is such
support.

If at the monarch’s Court support be (given) — four into four
are sixteen, sooth to say (181).

What say I 1 What these words ? when from the cloud my
water is, my pearls from Aden are (182).

An apologj for the icriting of the hook.

Not Gabriel, but the genius my pen (183), inscribes upon my
page the words which come :

For such a spell which is by genius taught put on new dress, for
’tis the New Year’s time (184).

From evil genii keep it so concealed that it be seen by none
but Solomon (185).

Seek me from it, for ‘tis my essence, know (186). What (else)
am 1 1 A piece of skin (still) left (187).

Without the ring's inscription I'm but wax, (wax) free from
both the honey and the bee (188),

Till with his ring’s inscription Solomon make such form of
impression as he will.

Whether the face be red or whether black (189), the monarch’s
scribe'.s the painter (of the face) (190).

If no one seek my perfume (still) my musk is store good and
sufficient for my silk (191).

In poetry on me it has devolved to give pure gold, not gold
with half alloy.

The eloquent (192) who spoke that which was fit became
fatigued and fell asleep at last.

I, looper of the knots, the alchemy and bond of travellers
to the village am (193).

Of those species of verse in vogue before no one fresh fruit
has given more than I (194).

Though wanting in new words I have full skill to express my
sense in clear and various terms (195).

The skin without the fruit I think a dream ; the fruit without
the skin as water take (196).


TRANSLATION


15


With all my rare and novel mode of speech, I turn not from
the older excellence (197). —

From thus arranging pearls there’s no result save with a
measure measuring the wind (198).

What is there touching gems of treasured store that I, of
gems a weigher, have not weighed (199) 1

Though many a special treasure I have oped, to the supremely
pure I've found no key (200).

With all the dainties which at dawn descend, in deprecation
I am still engaged (201).

Nizami, your Messiah is your breath ; your Tree of Mary is
your learning gained (202).

Since you’ve become disperser of its dates, you’ve gained
good fortune, be it well with you (203) !

In praise of the Hng ‘ Aid' u' d-Dln (204).

0 heart, how long this play of fantasy ? This fancy of dis-
playing fantasies ?

The fancy of this fancy I will quit : ‘tis best my eyes seek not
these fantasies.

My aim is four divisions in this range, each one excelling the
division. Spring (205) :

The first division being praise of God, by whose grace the
creation is set up.

The second, on the Prophet a discourse, through whom became
this ancient coinage new (20C).

The third, prayers for the monarch of the world, (such) prayers
as to the mouth being (precious) pearls.

The fourth division, counsel to the king in view of (his) success
and victory.

A king to whom the Seven Climes’ domains (207) give revenue
that's due to sovereign state.

By might and power a shining light of rule, in lordship of the
world a miracle.

A king, crown-giver, "stablisher on thrones, pourer of treasure
over crown and throne (208).


16


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Support of sovereignty, ‘Ala’u’d-Din, guardian and helper
of the time and world.

[Taker of regions, King Qizil Arslan ; better than Alp Arslan
in crown and throne.]

Strengthened by him the Aq Sunqurs’ high race (209) ; his
sire and grandsire glorified through him.

A leader he, this resting-place’s sun (210) ; his rule the
sealing of the latest age (211).

A Rustam (212), great, of greatness giver too by the power of
his steed to mount the sky.

[The heavens’ compeer, lavish as the cloud, in body Uon,
hon too in name (213).]

When that the lock of being found the key (214), the world
came into being from a Gem (215).

He is a world which from its hand gives out at each and every
moment countless gems (216).

Through kinship of identity in words his face gives redness
to the signature (217).

[Without the warning of his entering in, the world gains
honour through his signature (218).]

In shreds the heavens’ surface by his strokes (219), the sea's
salt ground perspires before his gifts (220).

Both land and sea are under his command ; the denizens of
both recite his praise.

A king exalted, of so high a throne, that from its loftiness
the mind’s made small (221).

In greatness equal to the angels, he ; in loftiness the equal of
the sky.

His name’s embellished by “ Sublimity ” (222), if o’er the sky
he rise ’tis only fit.

Though low the sky without sublimity, in this last there is
height without the sky (223).

The lightning of his sword burns up the veils upon the bodies
of his foes inveiled (224).

His arrow’s point in places where it speeds pierces a heart at
times, at times a hair.


TRANSLATION


17


Conquest has laid its head upon his foot ; the water of his sword
sedition’s drowned (225).

His brilliancy excites fire in the mind ; his body scents the air
with ambergris (226).

In strife with him, where bons e’en lose hope (227), his foe’s
steed is upon its head, not hoofs (228).

When in his morning draught he spills the blood of grapes,
from frozen water fire he brings (229).

When lance he sharpens for the shock of war, he makes the
day the Resurrection Day (230).

When he to bounty’s mine the entrance opes, he gives out
treasure, (and) forgives misdeeds.

Sea-like the king nor grudging is nor false ; his ebb and flow
are in his whip and sword (231).

All that the efforts of his sword draw in he gives," (as some
obtain), by crack of whip (232).

Like Jupiter upon the lofty sky with his steed's hoofs he digs
out Saturn’s grave (233).

A lion on a dragon’s seldom seen, and a sun which has drawn a
scimitar.

But see the king who in the fight and chase riding a lion burns
the dragon fell (234).

His axe beneath the dragon of his flag splits at a stroke the
dragon as a snake (235).

The closeness of his aim by arrow forked for raging bons widens
out the grave (236).

He wins the game of roughness from the sword (237) ; roughness
like that of bears does he subdue.

A lion-taker, not in drunkenness (238) ; bons he takes by
having dragons’ might.

The fore and hind legs of the tearing wolf by loop of lasso
he has pilloried (239).

When fore and hind legs from the wolf he tears the bon’s
palsied in forelegs and hind (240).

His bolts, through wolves’ fore legs and leopards’ hind, restrict
the plain for the wild ass’s hoofs (241).

c


18


THE HAFT PAIKAR


His hunting-ground, through blood which sea-like fumes,
the wolf’s skin now puts on, and now the pard’s (242).

The boar at which he sharply drives his sword flies (quickly)
from the wound that he inflicts.

Exerting strength upon the leathern string, to stag he makes
the leathern hide a grave (243).

When to the battle-field he goes the heart of rock he breaks
as though it were (but) shell.

With poisoned sword he offers such effect as might the sky’s
destruction of the earth (244).

He at the feast and in the fight is famed : by cup and sword
he gives Hfe and he takes.

By reason of his sheen the dusky earth is full of lustre by his
sovereign sway.

His inner character as artist’s reed has musk in bosom, rubies
in its skirt (245).

The realm in every part forms necklaces and perfume from
his rubies and his musk (246).

Such wearer of the kingly cap’s attire, suffices for a cap from
heaven to earth (247).

The bow of such a holder of the earth has the Xine-handled
Bow as smallest bolt (248).

Such greatness is involved in his designs that the Great Bear’s
four stars are (as) his throne (249).

His enemies are like uprooted trees to crucifixes fastened at
his door (250).

Our faces, from the sun of his renown, bright as the moon ; his
foemen’s faces black (251).

What wonder that a gold-shod sun has given rock to the mount
and rubies to the mine (252) ?

Subdued by him the jewels of the mine ; the mine of jewels (too)
his (humble) slave (253).

His onyx food to mount and sea has given — this, named pearl-
strewer, ruby-strewer, that (254).

He guards the law in both Abodes : the law of those of God’s
Law he administers (255).


TRANSLATION


19


God’s favour gives him that which is required ; (and) he conveys
it to his slaves again.

(Then) since through him the world is prosperous, his portion
from the world he happiness !

Of happy omen be each day for him ! and may his rule ne’er
suffer from decline !

For ever, pearl by pearl, be ranged a line of sons with favouring
aspect of the stars !

Through the bright splendour of two fair-faced dawns (256)
like the celestial sun may he be bright !

Of lofty throne two princes, seeking, one, the world, and one,
the realm of piety (257).

Farldun’s learning, intellect, has one (258), the other takes
the way of Kai-Khusrau (259).

Adorning crown and throne the power of one (260), Nusratu
’d-Din Malik Muhammad Shah.

The other’s name by observation raised unto the sky (261),
his name is Ahmad (twice) (262).

In two forms from a common source there are the species
Ahmad and Muhammad too (263).

When at these blessed names you look (’tis seen that) in one
circle they both make their place (264).

When out of one two things arise, then how between them
can one make a difference ?

The one e'er has the key of victory ; the other’s famed for
conquest of the sky (265).

Conquest's (engaged) in cherishing the one ; the other one is
strengthened by the sky (266),

The tripod throne of conquest one has pitched ; the other has as
fortune’s steed the sky.

Beneath the azure throne (267) by these two (sons) may the
eyes of the king be (ever) bright !

Be the course of his rule o’er South and North by these Poles
of perfection ordered well (268) !

Good fortune be his prey, his prey be fat ! Better than day
his day (269), his night than night (270) !


20


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Veiled by the curtain of his night that one of Ahmad’s race
be light of dawn to him (271) !

May the life of Bilqis be luminous under the shade of Solomon’s
control (272) !

As the celestial sires be lavish, he ' She, of existence’ mothers
be the seal (273) !

His name be Khizr of immortality ! Be her equivalence the
Stream of Life (274) !

The shadow of the king, the fount of light, be from that Rose
and Rose-garden not far (275) !

“ Asylum of the world ” has always been his quality ; his
sway endure for aye (276) !

A humble address.

0 you, whose crown has Fortune as its slave, and by whose
crown and throne the world’s alive, —

To guard you, night is a black sentinel, having the drum,
the moon, attached to him (277).

Like a free-lance, with sword-belt fastened on (278), the dawn
beside your stirrup gently breathes (279).

Of Dilam’s crown the wearer, slave to you, from plants beside
your gate has musky scent (280).

The Grecian, day, would Ethiop be like night, if from the
office of “ sarhang ” dismissed (281).

In every cloth which the sky spreads it has from (the king’s)
government two loaves as pay (282).

He whom you pay the least has for his food the planets as a
mouthful on his plate.

The signet-ring of heavenly furtherance upon you puts the
seal of sovereignty (283).

The (lofty) sky, of which the sun’s a work, is as the smallest
belt around your waist (284).

The moon, which of the heavenly sphere has made a golden
throne, has made it like your throne (285).

The water of the spring, which is (so) pure, is, like tears,
turbid when compared with you (286).


TRANSLATION


21


The ruby ’s as a potsherd next your sword (287) ; the mount
before your patience, light of weight (288).

The kings who (now) are (rulers) of the world have (truly)
fashioned in their hands a cloud (289) ;

Except your cloud, which is an April cloud, those other clouds
are clouds of winter time (290).

They give much pain before they lay a cloth ; they take a life
before they give a loaf (291).

You summon late (’tis true), but cherish quick the man on
whom (your) shadow you may cast (292).

The worth of men of talent he may know who many works
of talent has perused.

(But) he who knows not talent from defect, — how should the
talented have gain from bun ?

From your existence (293) sovereignty has rank ; on all sides
there are writings in your praise.

Your fortune lives for ever in the work of scout to generosity's
domains (29-1).

The splendour which you've given to State and Faith — not
such from April has the garden gained.

The world entire is body, Persia, heart, — the writer shames
not at this parallel ;

For since that land's the heart of (all) the earth — the heart is
better than the body, sure (295).

Of these dominions which the rulers have — the best of places
to the best accrue.

This parable applies to you, the heart, for your dominion is
the heart of realms (296).

You, famed as like Sikandar, king, and Khizr (297), you, whose
control through knowledge, justice, shines, — •

An iron mirror if Sikandar made, and if by Khizr the Stream of
Life was found (298),

Your breast a mirror is of intellect (299) ; the Stream of Life
is (found) within your heart.

Every domain which has a king like you — may God from every
evil keep it safe !


22


THE HAFT PAIKAR


From the good fortune which you have (300) you’re called the
fortune-favoured of the Seven Climes (301).

Through you the Fifth Clime is in prosperous state ; through
you the other Six are joyful (coo) (302).

By reason of your kindness every land is wishful to be subject
to your rule.

Four (previous) kings have had four ornaments ; in this you
are a fifth — Be you long-lived !

In Aristotle Alexander had one from whom precious sciences
he learnt (303).

The court of Nushirvan (301) was heaven, since he had

Buzurjmihr, of the world best gift (305).

Parviz (306) a Barbad had, a minstrel famed, (307) who’d
play not hundred but a myriad airs.

(And fourth), that king whose name was Malik Shah (308) had
in Nizam (309) a pious (minister).

(But) you, who have a better crown than they, have a Nizami,
great in eloquence.

0 you, through whom Nizami has a name, though whom his
name’s in orderly estate (310),—

Though other rulers, through a vain desire (311), make boast
of giving of their treasured store.

They (only) scatter seed in brackish ground, and into blind
eyes put collyrium.

To scatter seed in salt and brackish ground no fruit produces
saving penitence.

A tree should be implanted in such ground as will bring fruit
like that of paradise.

When the cupbearer to the earth gives wine, how can the
peasant’s name remain (in mind) (312) ?

Save you, who have in justice, learning, too, a sacred shrine,
who's generous towards himself (313) ?

Since I’ve, in truth, been able to infer that those possessed of
learning you protect (314) ;

That wily men’s deceit you favour not, reject the imposture
of satiric rogues (315),


TRANSLATION


23


This picture from the eternal studio, Leo ascendant, I’ve
attached to you (316).

How fortunate that person who may bring such produce to your
house from grain you give (317) !

(Such produce) as, so long as it subsist, may ever open with
your name its leaves.

Not (produce) such as in an age or two the lofty sphere may
cancel wnth a pen (318).

Now, in the cycle of seven thousand, work so perfect in Seven
Pictures I've prepared (319) :

Its sweetness is to brighten up your soul — may it agree !
enjoy it, ’tis your food.

To fashion it I’ve cared with endless zeal, and made it then
devote itself to you.

Upraised the skies by kinship to the king, akin to angels as
the sky his mind !

How can I reach the sky ? I’m of the earth. How can I
reach the angels ? I’m a man.

By using this (sweet) sugar-reed I wished out of earth’s blackness
to make verdure grow (320) ;

To make sweetmeats (to take) upon the road, that I might ofier
sweetmeats to your feast.

If to strew sugar I'm not privileged, I’m by my vigils the
king’s guard (at least).

The king’s a sun illumining the world ; my eyes like founts of
water have become (321).

Although the sun on water may be cast, water cannot be cast
upon the sun.

If eyes agree not with the fount (of light), (still) with its image
they may fancies raise (322).

What does not in the monarch’s store exist except this coin,
fresh comer from the road (323) ?

Give it some power by your horse’s hoofs, that by your means
its rank may be upraised (324).

The mountain-field whose cupbearer’s the cloud, cares not
the water of the well to drink (325).


24


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The field (high) o’er whose head the cloud shall pass — how
should it not drink water from the well (326) ?

I, who require the water from that hand (327), have to (all)
other waters closed my mouth.

’Tis injuring the pearl if I appraise ; I’ll let it e’en be put before
the king.

If you, as “ Zuhra ”, hear my newest song, as the new moon
you’ll make me pointed out (328).

But if you think the picture’s very small — the wind has borne
oil many such a flower (329).

(Long) life be yours, for justice and the Faith are yours ;
God give you that, for you have these.

Whate’er is to your state agreeable — may that thing (ever)
keep good faith with you !

And all that from your favour falls afar (330) — from you and
your dominion be it far !

As long as in the sky the sun may shine, your friend be
prosperous, your foe be blind !

Your foes so (placed), that, with afflicted heart, they beat their
heads with stone, stone with their heads !

(Of all) you have precedence, may you have than all more
learning (too), and longer life !

In every circumstance decadence’ hand be distant from the
frontiers of your state !

On the excelloice of speech. Counsel to the people.

That which is new and also old is speech, and on this speech
some speech is (to be used).

In all creation the creatress “ Be ” no child has brought forth
lovelier than speech (331).

Beware ! say not the eloquent are dead ; they’ve sunk their
heads beneath the stream of words ;

Speak but the name of anyone you will ; hke fish he raises from
the stream his head (332).

Speech, faultless like the spirit, is the guard of the (rich) treasure-
house of the unknown (333).


TRANSLATION


25


It knows the story which has not been heard ; it reads the book
which has not (yet) been writ (334).

Of everything which God has made exist — consider what
remains of it save speech (335).

The lasting monument of man is speech ; those other (things)
are all (but empty) air (336).

To mineral and vegetable (look), to animal and intellectual,

Consider what that is existent here that may to all eternity
exist (337).

Whoever knows his being as it is, exalted by existence is
for aye (338).

He who knows not the fashion of his make must pass, (but) he
is permanent who does (339).

See what it is that has this knowledge (then) (340), (for) that
which has it is the permanent (341).

When you know well yourself you will not die, though (seem-
ingly) at first you pass away (342).

But those who of existence nothing know, come in at this
door, and pass out at that (343).

The window kept from dust, the door from smoke, — what
gain, if no one look upon the sun (344) ?

All people with their clay (345) are satisfied, (and) no one
(seeks to) cultivate his heart.

All are astute in pleas and vain excuse (346), not anyone will
say. My curds are sour (347).

With but a pittance the mature (in mind) to naught except
contentment bow their heads (348).

The man of riches should be provident— so should he be,
since riches may decrease (349).

The man of substance is exposed to risk — the guard is wanted,
thieves are on the road.

The China merchant, who has loaded musk, stores in a guarded
place his musk and gum (350).

The hoopoo’s wings beneath the eagle's wings excel in swiftness
(those of other) birds (351).


26


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The famous from mishap are not secure (352), the business of
the ignorant is safe.

The sharp, sagacious bird in search of food finds both its feet
entangled in the net (353).

Where’er there’s one as gluttonous as earth, he from the
earth eats (but) a stomachful (354).

With all this grasp and eating, in this store one grain is not
diminished at the end (355).

From it whate’er you take out grain by grain, even do you
successively restore.

When like the candle you must have a crown, more tears than
laughter you must have (from it) (356).

The hills and sea, which rubies have and pearls, have little
laughter, but abundant tears (357).

All have a helper hidden (from their view) : it is a friend, and
one who is attached (358) :

(And) that from which help comes is intellect — if intellect you
have you have all (else).

He who to intellect can not be just, has a fiend’s nature with a
human form.

The wise are angels though entitled men (359), and wisdom
is indeed a wondrous thing.

In past eternity did they prepare that which should be (360),
our toil to-day is vain.

Still work, since by its nature work in hell is better (far)
than idleness in heaven (361).

Yet he who is engrossed in his own work, is bad if he to others
be not good (362).

Malevolence towards other men brings ill upon the man who is
malevolent (363).

That lofty mind which is benevolent— to it benevolence brings
nought but good.

Live so that should you suffer a mishap, you may at least
not suffer taunts from foes (364) : —

One, weeping as at ills which have prevailed (365) ; one, laughing
as at merited return.


TRANSLATION


27


Although no one indeed may take your hand (366) ; though
no one at your tomb (with grief) may die,

’Tis better pity in his heart should be than that he should
be joyful at your grief (367).

Do not eat bread before (the poor) who fast ; (but) if you eat,
let all sit at your tray.

Weigh not much gold before the destitute, that like a snake
they writhe not near the hoard (368).

Though the wind be a breeze of New Year's day, ’tis best you
light no lamp before the breeze (369).

Man for the sake of eating has not life, for intellect and reason is
it given.

(Even) a dog is nobler than the man who keeps his eyes fixed
like an ass on food (370).

Strive earnestly to be of use to all, that you by service may
adorn the world.

’Tis best to have good nature like the rose, that one may be
sweet-scented in the world.

Perchance you’ve heard what once a wise man said : Who goes
to sleep good-humoured has good dreams (371).

If good one’s nature at the time of birth, so is one’s nature
at the time of death (372).

But he who is with evil nature born, (e’en) with (a nature of)
ill aspect dies (373).

Practise not harshness, the harsh earth has killed like you a
hundred for a loaf of bread (374).

(See) what a work it is to till the ground ! Abject (enough)
the worker of the ground (375) !

If any ask, (How is it) knowledge pure from man arises, and
from earth the man ?

Say, Roses give rose-water, thorns the rose ; the snake-stone
antidote, the snake the .stone (376).

E.xchange not salutations with the world (377) : pitch not your
tent within a dragon’s mouth (378).

Friendship you should not from a dragon seek ; a man-devourer
is the dragon, sure (379).


28


THE HAFT PAIKAR


A dog if lie assume the darvTsh robe will ne'er forget his native
savag'ry (380).

A disagreement happens amongst friends ; (their) enemies
together then agree.

They crawl all over black and white like flies, and dye each
colour with the other’s hue (331).

From all these highwaj-men best keep aloof (3S2), (and) tear
away this wallet of four tics (333).

In such an age when pious men are base ; Josephs, (fierce)
wolves, ascetics, drunkards too (384),

Life cannot be preserved save by two things ; ill deeds and the
approval of ill deeds.

May God permit not that the slaves of God should put such
fetters on their legs as these !

That they should thus stir up a fire for hell (385), should seek
for naphtha, and pour talc away (386) !

Rise, let us cast sedition under foot, and the conditions of
subjection meet (387) !

How long (this) begging for a grain of gold ? How long
dependence on the skies and earth (-388) ?

See the wind tear from the anemone its dress for granules
of false, blood-stained gold (389) !

Whereas the wormwood, being moneyless, retains its form
untortured by the wind (390).

As white clouds, bear no treasure on your head (391), place on
the treasure, as the sun, your foot (392) ;

So that the earth, all moistened by the cloud (393), may by
your kisses turn to (burnished) gold (394).

Pour out upon the sun a purse of gold, and in the fiery ruby
plant a stone (395).

Your eyes by gold are bright, and (this) is bad, (since) the
world’s eyes by wisdom are made bright.

Gold is two letters, unconnected each ; how long boast of this
worthless, scattered thing (396) ?

Let not your heart, like earth, be filled with gold, so that you
be not scattered e’en like gold (397).


TRANSLATION


29


All pictures which have breast-plates made of gold have tunics
made of Japis lazuli (398).

Each balance which devotes itself to gold suffers from stoning
at a thousand doors (399).

Assume that you’ve collected with some pain of lawful or
unlawful gain some “ dangs ” (400) ;

(That then) one reckless comes (and) bears them off — the
waster living, the collector dead (401).

Collecting (thus) with pain and fear is not collecting silver,
but adoring gold (402).

How can the thirsty pleasure in the road ? ’Tis digging welLi
to fall into the same (403).

Gold, if it be enjoyed, enhances joy (404) ; when hoarded it
induces pain and fear.

The folly see, that for a (worthless) stone (405) in strife and
battle friend opposes friend !

’Tis best that from that ruin you withdraw from which you've
pain and terror for your life (406).

The world's the house of divs, (then) hasten you, that you
be not of ruined house like dIvs (407).

The house of demons is a demon’s house, although it be a
palace fit for kings.

How long would you, as porter, bear the world, (and) hide your
load of gold within the earth (408) ?

Though what you gather might three porters load, you’ll
bear away but the four porters’ house (409).

The earth and air which are your foes are these : the unfriendly
earth, the air without “ alif ’’ (410).

The branch which to the date-palm pays no toll (411) ’tis best
to make a rolling-pin for paste (412).

To cure the pain of liiin whose stomach’s leer some “ tutmaj ”-
strips excel rose-petals far (413).

Better extract your teeth than over-eat, that as a pearl of
price (414) you be esteemed.

(See how) the comb which has a thousand teeth has thence a
hand in every person’s beard (415).


30


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Before the antidote the world may give, a thousand draughts
of poison must be drunk (416).

Beside the doorway of this butcher’s shop you will not find
a portion without heart (417).

A hundred hearts are torn on every side ere any good condition
may accrue.

The necks of many thousand chiefs are broke before the neck
of one escape the sky (418).

The foot of one upon a treasure hits, another gains a scrap
(of gold) with toil (419).

Affairs when not to any person's wish — frustration’s better
than obtaining it (420).

Every desire which late in life (you’ve) gained fehcitates (you)
on a life prolonged.

’Tis best the long-lived gain their wishes late ; life’s business
in perfection's perfected (421).

The ruby which takes long to come lasts long ; the anemone
soon comes, and quickly goes.

How long Light up the assembly like a lamp ; make all you
can of self, and burn yourself (422) ?

Flee from this bestial den away, and take your head out of this
jar of crockery (423).

Cut from above this seven-rooted tree ; and draw off from
your foot this four-nailed shoe (424).

From such a well, mat-covered, which is dead as any stone or
mat (come) pass away (425).

As lightning, living die, that you may smile : life sacrificed
is better than good health (426).

If you’re an aspirant such as you’re thought, pursue the road
will bring you name of “ pir ” (427).

Be no disciple aspirationless ; do not be weak of faith in trust
in God (428).

I, solver of a hundred knotty points, am village-chief, but in
the village not (429).

If from the road a guest should chance to come, who will
there be to set a tray for him (430) ?


TRANSLATION


31


Intelligence discerns what I now say, and what I aim at in
this hint thrown out (431).

At destitution I am little vexed ; of him who’s destitute is
my complaint (432).

This Ethiopia likes not Turkish wares ; hence it will have not
palatable curds (433).

Whilst in this furnace which one’s nature ripes as grape unripe
I still was somewhat raw (434),

Fortune made use of me as grape unripe, made of me verjuice-
tutty for the sight (435).

Since I have reached the state of the ripe grape, I’ve sufiered
often from the stings of wasps (436).

The wine which is a spiritual draught for earth — is not the
grape worth more than this (437) ?

I follow up the path they know of me (438) ; hence frozen water
I am called by them (439).

Water when it is frozen, as they say, is not a fount of water,
but of gold (440).

They err, the frozen water's silver, sure, (for) ice indeed bears
witness (to this fact) (441).

(Say) how can silver have the rank of gold ? There is a difier-
ence ’twixt moon and sun (442).

Take “ ya ” away and silver’s copper-like, and still more
(like it) when it is reversed (443).

My iron which is (all) with gold inlaid in composition — see its
silvery work (444) !

I’m like an iron-seller dressed in gold, because for silver I
(can) iron sell (445).

Woe to the goldsmith when the reckoning comes whose
gold is not worth silver when assayed (446).

This fraud that's practised by the world seems hard, that
fortune comes from luck and not from worth.

That keen (assayer) who is skilled in coin has, as a rule, not
half a grain (of gold).

Whilst he who cotton cannot tell from flax, and thinks “ asman ”
and “ risman ” are the same (447) —


32


THE HAFT PAIKAR


His store-house with fine linen is replete, boxfuls of gold, and
many maunds of silk (448).

Since such the work of jewels and of coin, why should one fear
if they refrain from work (449) ?

How long through such a ruin shall I vex ? How long into
a ewer draw a sun (450) ?

All voices rise up from the vestibule ; some day, may be, my
voice too will arise (451).

Some others too, as I, have told this tale ; have gone to sleep
while still engaged in it (452).

’Tis due from me that I should grasp the affair, if sleep come
not upon me like the rest (453).

The traveller should for the road prepare, and be not slow
to keep from peril's tracts (454).

I'm going, but the ass does not arrive : I scarce can think I'm
really soon to go (455).

Of my departing I shall be aware when my retreat is outside of
the door (456).

How long devoid of knowledge should I speak ? How long
(essay to) string pearls with closed eyes (457) ?

Be utterly forgetful of your eyes ; commune with the divine,
and silence keep (458) ;

That you may know that (in) whate’er you know you are in
error quite, or you mis-read (459).

Throw spade away, a torrent’s dug the road : how many are
the diggings of the sky (400) 1

The sky’s spade of the earth has made a pit ; the earth regards
not such a spade (as yours).

Consider when you first came (to the world) what you possessed
of that which now you have —

You’ll take from these two passes of dispute that which you
brought with you on (that) first day (461).

With debts around your neck to sea and mount, how can you
with the heavens hope to dance (462) 1

Strive hard to pay back all the debts you owe, that with a
bare-backed steed you may remain (463).


TRANSLATION


33


When of the world's store not a grain you have, go to what
place you please in (all) the world (464).

All your possessions you must first throw down before your
crown is lowered from your throne (465).

It soon may be that many beauteous flowers fall through the
dust of envy to the earth (466).

I who have like the rose cast arms away, have al~o from the
thorn of envy fled (467),

That when my em-y wears the darvish-robe, talc may be
scattered on my body’s fire (46S).

Thus can one (only) till the time of death complete the journey
through this place of risk (469).

When I've departed from this ancient inn (470), say to the
sky (then), Do whate’er you wish.

How long Nizami will you be in bonds ? Arise and speak out
with uplifted voice (471).

Give to the Unity Di\'ine your soul, that you may gain eternal
happiness.

The students of the college of God’s work, when they have
learnt the lesson of discourse ;

Made theory the guard of practice too. and soh^ed the secret
of existing things —

Each to a sleeping-place has swept the path, and when the
time of sleep has come has slept (472).

Counsel to his son Mnhaynmad.

My son, I bid you earne.5tly take care that you be wakeful —
I have gone to sleep (473).

Since of the Eternal (iarden you've a rose (474), and by the
name Muhammad you are sealed (475) —

Since you're Muhammad through a happy fate, sound loud the
drum of lauded qualities (476).

Let your coin bear the impression of good fame — by loftiness
you reach the lofty sky —

So that I in the place where I’m confined may be upraised by
your exaltitude.

D


34


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Seek company which from its good repute may give you (at
the last) a happy end.

A friend whose breath is bad is better far than one who,
speaking, (only) nonsense talks.

The vice of one associate is enough to give a bad name to a
hundred men.

When one crude beast of prey into the snare falls, after it a
hundred others fall.

The swallowing of coin by one who's poor tears many stomachs
on the pilgrims' road (477).

On such a road (then) sleep not like the old ; withdraw your
skirt from those who seize the weak (478) ;

So that in this malignly-moving hall you be not gulled like
women, you a man (479).

See not the horse's dancing with the thought, How good its
paces ! See how hard the road (480).

If o'er this road you fly like falcon white (481), keep like the
sun your eyes upon the road (482).

The more so that a road 'tis for the chase — the sky has bow
and arrow (for the prey) (483).

Although your iron be of temper fine, the road is stone, and
lodestone is that stone (484).

Bind not upon this beast a load so great that it may fail to
mount this steep ascent (485).

When in a strait induced by two-hued time, let for your heart
the road be wide, not strait (480).

Many a knot is key to what is hid ; in many a hardship there is
ease contained.

How many a dream which fills the heart with gloom is really
gladness when interpreted (487).

Although the shaft of sorrow pierce the heart, for such day
patience is a coat of mail.

Maintain your promises and faith with God, and keep your
heart by other ties unve.xed.

When you break not your promises to God, I promise you’ll
escape from this and that (488).


TRANSLATION


35


Take not apart the good pearl from the string (489) ; from him
who is of evil nature flee.

An evil nature acts consistently : have you not heard that
Nature does not err (490) ?

The evil-natured man keeps faith with none ; the erring nature
does not fail to err (491).

The scorpion since it is by nature bad — to let it live’s a fault,
to kill it, good.

Seek knowledge, for through knowledge you efiect that doors
to you be opened and not closed (492).

He who shames not at learning can draw forth pearls from the
water, rubies from the rock.

Whilst he to whom no knowledge is assigned — that person
(you will find) ashamed to learn (493).

How many, keen of mind, in effort slack, sell pottery from lack
of pearls (to sell) !

How many a dullard, through his being taught, becomes the
chief judge of the Seven Climes (494) !

The (prey) half-eaten of the hunting dogs is but through know-
ledge taught (us) lawful food (495).

By knowledge since a dog may grow upright (496), ’tis like a
man an angel may become.

Like Khizr (497) know yourself, that you may, too, drink as
(that prophet) of the Stream of Life (498).

Life's Water is not that of living things ; ’tis soul with reason,
reason ’tis with soul (499).

The reason with the soul's a single gift ; the soul with reason’s
that which lives for aye (500).

The product of the two is only one, in which, there is no doubt,
you have these two (501).

Until from these two one be reached say not to any one that
he is any one (502).

When you have found that one (then) lose the two (503) ; place
your foot on the head of the two worlds (504).

Abandon three, this sums up piety ; two also leave, the jurist’s
judgment this (505).


36


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(Come) grasp the end of one thread like a man ; abandon
two, and make three be (but) one (506).

Till from belief in three you’re safe you'll not bear o’er the sky
the ball of Unity (507).

When to these two you’re lost no fables tell ; and seek no
medium when you’ve found that One (508).

So long as we may have this capital, whate'er's outside of this
is (vain) desire (509).

Whilst youth and healthful state (to us) remain, the means are
found of gaining every wish.

When the straight cypress falls oft in decay, where (then) can
any remedy be gained (510) ?

A’ou, with youth’s freshness, who possess the world, pursue the
path now which you can (pursue).

Rose-like, gird on religion’s path your loins, that like the lofty
cypress you may rise,

I who, rattan-like, have no freshness left — my tulips yellow
grown, my violets white (511) — •

Through lack of strength no longer have the power to wear a
crown or gird my loins to serve (512).

I used to do some service men might do, (but) truly I’m not
now the man I was.

Fortune has seized and bound me in this mode ; such (rule and)
custom are in Fortune (seen).

My wings were broken e’en before I fell ; how is my state
(then now) that I have fallen !

If in the little man of ugly face pock-marks break out, how
will it be (with him) (513) ?

Though from a shadow gains my genius power (514), my
canopy’s in my accomplLshments (515).

That person has no shadow in the world who before (men’s)
a lamb, a wolf behind.

I see no one before me who is not a friend before me, (and) a
foe behind (516).

A few crude persons being (my sole) aids, to whom with safety
can I turn my face ?


TRANSLATION


37


Though my youth has departed from the world, what can I
do. still youthful is my greed ?

The more in 3’ear3 an aged man becomes, the greedier becomes
his greediness.

lly coin has this impression not alone — this stigma's on the coin
of every one (517).

0 You. my heart's Phj-sician, keep my clay from bowing low
at any person's feet.

How long (shall) darkness (last still) ? Give me light ! Since
You have broken, give the remedy (518).

(And) that through which my heart is in distress make easy,
for this easy is to 5'ou (519).

My neck is freed from cords ; I will not bear that it he galled
'neath any person's load.

I. who've become contented with my grain, am, like the oj'ster,
lord in m_v own house.

'Tis best that lordship, too, my comrade be ; what business,
(pray), of mine is servitude ?

The lion gains an honourable grade, since he disdains the yoke
of servitude.

From your own traj’ 'tis better to give bread than to eat
“ halva ” from the mean man's tray (520).

Since a sharp dagger has been drawn by dawn (521), how long,
Ni-rami, will jmu sleep ? Arise !

Do miners' work, and vex not at your toil : open to men the
door of hidden stores (522).

Treats of the birth of Bahrdm.

He who the pearls strings of the treasury of secrets (523) thus
displays the store of pearls :

The heavens have a balance with two scales — in one are stones,
and in the other pearls.

(And) from this balance the two-coloured world (524) at times
obtains the pearls, at times the stones.

The loins of kings produce the same effect : they give as
offspring either stones or pearls.


38


THE HAFT PAIKAR


At times a stone comes from a pearl, at times a ruby from an
amber-coloured (stone) (525).

As stone and pearl in their respective fame, so were (King)
Yazdijard (52G) and King Bahrain.

One struck, the other cherished — strange indeed It is as
rock with ruby, spines with dates (527).

To him whom one had wounded and distressed the other gave
a remedy and gifts (528).

When first the dawn of Bahram, (luminous), carried ill-fame off
from the gloomy night (529),

The heaters of the kiln of alchemy sublime (530), those learned
in the moon and sun,

Expected that the scales in which they weighed the sky would
give but .silver half-alloyed (.531).

They found indeed in them the purest gold : pearls from the
sea came, jewels from the rock (532).

They found, indeed, with promise of success in greatness and
in world-illumining :

Pisces ascendant, Jupiter in it, Venus, like ruby joined with
ruby, too (533).

The moon with Taurus, Mercury conjoined with Gemini,
Mars’ apogee in Leo.

Saturn in strength (too) through Aquarius, giving to foes the
measuring of the wind.

The tail of Draco (too) towards Saturn turned, and the sun
fallen into Aries.

As Jupiter each star (too) witnessing in favour of its own
auspiciousness.

When Bahram (most) auspiciously was born with such a
horoscope as I’ve described,

His father, Yazdijaid, whose thoughts were crude, used riper
thought, and studying his own.

Saw all matured by him as immature — seed of injustice, work
of evil end.

In twenty years before that circumstance some children he had
had, but none had lived.


TRANSLATION


39


The close observers of the sky ordained that that fair-faced
successor (of the king)

Should be from Persia to the Arabs borne, that he amongst
the Arabs should be reared ;

In hope that from that place he’d fortune gain — From some
place every one to honour comes — ■

In hope that region might bring state to him — although, indeed,
■'tis said, “ Regions are states ” (534).

His sire loved rather to preserve his life than keep him as the
object of his love (535).

Par from his lands he pitched a tent for him in Yaman's
(broad) domains Canopus-like (536).

He summoned Nu‘man (537), and the anemone of ruby on the
garden he bestowed (538) ;

That when Nu man strewed flowers, and that shoot grew a
Nu‘manian anemone (539),

(Nu'man) might clothe it with the kingly traits, and inculcate
the rules of sovereignty.

He took him from the litter of the king, and made his breast a
litter for the moon (540).

He held in greater honour than his eyes a fount (of light) more
famous than the sun.

When four years passed away Bahram became a crafty
onager, a lion bold.

King Nu'man represented to his son (541) : 0 son, my mind is
anxious and disturbed ;

Because this air is dry, the land is hot, whilst delicate and
tender is the prince.

His place of nurture should be one whose head (towering) from
earth may touch upon the sky ;

That, fostered bv the north breeze, on that height he may
develop (then) his wings and plumes (542) ;

That he may have his dwelling in fine air, and (thus) get life-
prolonging sleep and rest ;

His constitution’s leaven unimpaired by vapours and the
dryness of the land.


40


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Then Munzir went together with his sire, girding his loins to
seek for such (a place) (543).

He sought a spacious place, a lofty fort (544), exempt from heat,
and free from noxiousness.

Such castle (545) in those regions was not found ; and those
which were did not (quite) suit their aim.

They sought for masters of the (building) art, prepared the
ground too for the work in hand.

Whoe'er proposed to carry out that aim — the plan that he
proposed was not approved.

Until at last true tidings reached Nu man that such an artist
as would meet his views

Was one most famous from the land of Rum (546), a cunning
man who’d turn stone into wax (547).

One quick and dexterous, skilled in finest work ; one of the race
of Sam (548), his name Simnar.

All lands had witnessed his supremacy, and by all eyes (too)
it had been approved.

In Egypt and in Syria he had built buildings not few, each
perfect of its kind.

Although a builder, as all knew, he was of thousand ornamentists
master too (549).

The Grecians were the Hindus (550) of his art ; the Chinese
chippings of his chisel gleaned.

With judgment and discernment joined to this the stars he’d
studied, taken altitudes.

His glance had spun a web across the sky from out the astro-
labian spider's mouth (551).

Like Roman Pliny (552) he had judgment keen, formed tables,
and solved talismans as well (553).

Acquainted with the veiled ones of the sky, the moon's night
raids, the sun’s hostility (554).

The ordering of this bu.siness might be found in him, he (only)
such a robe could weave.

With clay so (grand) a dome would he construct that it would
snatch lamps from the stars away.


TRANSLATION


41


When Nu'man’s heart in that desire and quest grew ardent
from the fire of (famed) Simnar (553),

He sent, and from that country summoned him : enticed him
e’en by Grecian wiles from Greece.

When Simnar came to Nu'man, Nu'man’s wish for the aSair
increased from one to seven.

He asked him to accomplish the design, and then prepared all
needed for his work (556).

All instruments and gear that were required for such a dome
were fittingly prepared.

The worker's hands then iron-like became (557) ; for years he
worked upon the edifice ;

Till finally with golden-fingered hand he made of clay (558) and
stone a silver house.

A citadel whose towers reached the moon ; the cynosure of
all, both white and black.

A house in ornament and gilding rieh ; fire-hued, adorned
as Simnar could adorn.

A sphere with legs drawn under restfully whilst the nine
spheres flew round it (in their course) (559).

A pole formed after those of south and north (560) ; the Zeuxian
work of countless fantasies (561).

The sight of it as sleep to the fatigued ; its deckings water to
the thirsty soul.

If on it light was scattered by the sun, the huri with her head-
dress hid her eyes (562).

In comfort ’twas like paradise, within ; and outside, in adorn-
ment like the sky.

Its roof from glue and milk rubbed on had gained the power
of reflection mirror-like (563).

For more or less time (564) in a day and night it took (in turn)
three colours like a bride (565).

From the three-coloured silk which circles round (566) it
gained three hues : blue, yellow, white (in turn).

At dawn (first) from the blue-robed sky it dressed in robes
blue-coloured hke the atmosphere.


42


THE HAFT PAIKAR


When from obscurity the sun came forth, its countenance
turned yellow like the sun.

When clouds inveiled the sun it (then) became in subtile beautv
like a silver cloud.

(Wrapped) in the veil of concord with the air, it showed by turns
the Greek's and Ethiop's look (567).

When Simnar to an end had brought the work ; more beautiful
had made it than was asked.

Its splendour rose above the lofty sky ; the sun from his
Khavarnaq splendour stole.

Nu'man gave him good tidings of reward so great that for its
half he had not hoped :

Of which were camel-loads of purest gold, and precious stores
of jewels and of musk :

More than could be computed, so that he might be of use, too.
at another time —

If you withhold the firewood from the fire, the meat remains
uncooked upon the spit (568).

The giving hand, to dirams ” a distress, is usher of the
court of noble traits (569). —

The builder (then) who found such kindness (shown) and hope-
fully heard promises of (wealth),

Said, If before this business I had known of (all) that which the
king has promised me.

The adornments of this dome of Chinese work I had made
somewhat better in these bounds (570) ;

I should have taken still more trouble here, so that the king
more treasure might bestow :

I should have built a house whose brilliancy would, whilst it
lasted, day to day increase.

Xu‘man replied, iShould you receive more pay, could you here-
after build a better (house) ?

He answered. At your wish when I designed (571), I'd make
such that this by it would be naught.

Twould have a hundred hues, this has (but) three ; ’twould
be of rubies (572), this is (but) of stone.


TRANSLATION


This shows itself possessor of one dome (573), but that would,
like the sky (574), have seven domes.

The face of Nu‘man fired up at these words ; he burnt the
store of kind and human thought. —

The monarch is a fire from whose (fierce) light that one is
safe who sees it from afar ;

In nature rose-bush, which is, when it blooms, roses before you,
in your bosom thorns (575).

The king too, (one may say), is like the vine, which does not
twist round that which is afar.

But that round which it twists with (seeming) love it tears up
root and branch and brings to naught (576), —

Said Nu‘man, If he's left with gold and power, he'll (no doubt)
elsewhere build a better house.

(Thus thinking), he gave orders to his slaves to throw him
from the roof with no delay.

So that they tore that cypress from the root ; they blinded him,
and threw him from the fort. —

The worker see — how earth, which blood devours, parted him
from the object of his work (577) !

He raised a castle in some years aloft, and fortune threw him
from it in a trice.

Ho made a fire and fell into the smoke ; he went late on the
roof, and fell down soon.

His falling he foresaw not when he raised that building higher
than a liunclred <dls (578).

If he had been aware of his own tomb (579), three ells he d
not exceeded by a span.

’Tis well to raise the throne-steps not so high that you d be
fractured if you fell from them. —

By that exalted building Nu'man’s name through highness
flung (its) lasso round the moon.

The people called him sorcerer supreme ; the earth entitled
him “ Khavarnaq’s Lord ”.


44


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(Some) description of Kkavarnaq.

Nu‘man gives up the sovereigntg.

Khavarnaq through the glory of Bahrain — when it became so
solacing a place (580)

That by the sky 'twas called “ earth's cynosure ", and “ Spring
of China ” by creation named, —

From hearing news about it, countless men to gaze (upon its
splendour) (thither) went.

Whoever saw it uttered (words of) praise, and humbly swept
its threshold with his sleeves.

One or another would in flowing verse each point (of beauty)
of Khavarnaq show.

O’er Yaman since Canopus bright had shone, nor moon nor
sun such worship had received (581).

It was an Aden in pearl-scattering ; a Yaman bathed in bright
Canopus’ rays.

Yaman from its adornments which were famed, became as
Iram (582) honoured in the world.

A world-adorner ’twas like Aries (5S3), still more, that Bahram
made it (his) abode.

When Bahram mounted to the roof of it, Venus to (wish him)
joy took up the cup (584).

He saw a palace fashioned like the sky : its sun within it, and
its moon without (585).

The sun, within, refulgent beauty showed ; the moon, without,
a lamp to travellers (586).

The wind was always blowing o’er its head ; from cold autumnal
breezes (it was) free.

On all sides of the palace looking down, he saw a plain as
spacious as the sky.

Sweet water on one side was flowing past ; in wholesome
purity the Stream of Life (587).

And on another, like the “ Sidra-throne ” (588), a village lay
replete with oil and milk.


TEAXSLATION


45


The desert (lay) in front, and at the back was meadow-land
o’er which the air breathed musk.

(One day) Xu’miin was seated with Bahram viewing (the
prospect) on that royal roof (589).

All round that house of paradise he saw the anemone's red hue,
the meadow’s green.

The plain entire as Shushtar's tracts (590). a place of mountain
partridges (591) and pheasants (too).

He said. What can be lovelier than this 1 In such a place
one cannot but be gay.

At that time his vazir was close at hand, a just man and a
worshipper of Christ.

He said; In truth, to know God's lovelier than anything there
is in your domains.

Of that deep knowledge should you be possessed, you would
withdraw your heart from (all) this show (.59’2).

(Then) through the kindler of that burning spark was softened
Nu'man’s firm and forceful (593) heart.

Since the sky raised its seven (high) fortresses, so strong a
crane had never been at work (594).

Nu'man sprang from his place and rent his robes ; he ran down
(from the roof) like one distraught.

He sought the village, turned his heart from self, (and) under-
stood his business in a trice (595).

Descended from the palace Nu'man turned like any lion
towards the desert waste.

He gave up thoughts of treasure and of rule : — religion and
the world cannot accord.

He took himself away from sovereignty, and vanished from
the people bke a fay (596).

Xo person saw him more in his own house — how excellent the
great king of his age !

Though Wmizir (597) used all promptitude the voice of happy
fortune gave him no reply.

He mourned as it was fitting he should mourn, devoting to
his sorrow sundry days.


46


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Much grief he felt, had reason too for grief, his house becoming
blackened through this smoke (598).

He seeing no escape from throne and crown, assumed the
duties of the crown and throne.

Forced back oppression, justice forwarded, and fixed dominion
on a solid base (599).

The monarch to the troops and country gave the robe, con-
tentment, with his leadership.

Bahram he cherished as (his) precious life ; e'en as a father
would — nay, better still.

He had a handsome son, by name Xu'man, who with Bahram
had drunk one nurse's milk.

Through friendship and equabty of age (Xu'man) would not a
moment part from him.

They studied from one tablet both as one, and in the same
assembly scattered pearls (600).

E'en like the sun and light, they'd never be from one another
any day apart.

In that high citadel the prince (Bahram with every care)
was fostered several years.

Except for study he had no desire ; his intellect to knowledge
was his guide.

A learned man. a Magian (601), taught (the prince) Persian
and Arabic and also Greek.

Munzir. that king majestic and benign (602), as reckoner of
the sky had skill unmatched.

The Zodiac’s twelve signs, the jdanets seven, casket by casket,
lay disclosed to him (60.3).

He'd worked, too. at lines geometrical, and countless books like
the MijastI solved (604).

Observer of the water-coloured sky was he (605), the drops
he’d measured drop by drop (606).

(Then) he had given his mind the knowledge (too) of the
far-seeing secret store-houses (607).

Finding the prince had intellect and sense in learning and in
solving mysteries.


TRANSLATION


47


He kindly put before him tablet, stile, (and) taught him (then)
the secrets of the sky.

All the ideas which (from most) were hid, whether pertaining
to the earth or heavens —

He gathered all together one by one. (and) when all had been
gathered, taught him (them).

Till Bahram so improved he knew in full the principles of
every science known.

With tables and the astrolabe to guide he would unveil the
face of the unknown (608).

When setting up the tablet and the stile he'd loose the knots
from secrets of the sky.

When he was skilled in controversial arts he (next) elected to
get skilled in arms.

In riding, racing, and in arms, he bore the ball oil from the
polo-playing sky (609).

When by that grade distinguished (610). he could tear claws
from the lion, from the wolf the neck.

Before his skill in piercing with the lance dawn’s sword despaired
at his pre-excellence (611).

He with his arrow pierced the hardest stone in such wise as
(the softest) silks are pierced.

Whene'er he shot his arrow at a mark, upon the mark he scored
a felling stroke (612).

When from the thumbstall he discharged the shaft, the
bird (in flight) he brought down from the air.

If with his sword he struck at any stone, it turned to water, but
of fiery hue (613).

A grain of millet if before]^ his lance, — he d bear it ring-like
by the point away.

His arrows bore o2 rings from lions’ throats (614) ; his sword
the ring loosed from the treasure’s lock (615).

And there where skilful archery was shown, (he with) his
arrow with a hair would play (616).

He struck, though far away, whate er he saw, whether en-
shadowed, whether in the light.


48


THE HAFT PAIKAR


That which in shooting too he could not see — his luck hit that
which it judged well (to hit).

The elephant and lion, hunting flocks, from him, Bahram, of
lions’ courage bragged (617).

At times he would attack the elephant, at times play with
the raging lion fierce.

In Yaman wheresoever they conversed, they ga\ e to him
the name of Yaman's Star " (618).

The practice of hunting of Bulirciii-.

When Bahram’s beauty as Canopus bright (all) rawness took
away from Yaman’s tracts (619),

Through joy and satisfaction Nu‘man‘s face gained what
from bright Canopus leather gains (G'lO).

Nu'man and Jlunzir from his merits were in kindness as a
brother and a sire.

Speak not of fatherhood and brotherhood — a servant that,
in all things, this, a slave.

The sire to him in giving knowledge kind, the son with him,
to grace assemblies, joined (621).

One by imparting knowledge strengthened him, the other took
him for delightful rides (622).

Until the riding of Bahram was such that to the sky from earth
his name arose.

His business only drinking and the chase — no other business
occupied (his time).

A man to cope with ten gur ” in the chase — how can a man
(indeed) avoid the “ gur " (623) ?

Whene’er his arrow fleeted from the bow, a “ gur’s ” eye gave
it. as a “ gur ’’, an eye (624).

He had a chestnut like the wind in speed, in paces faultless,
in its gallop, smooth.

The fairy’s foot through its proportions weak ; its gallop broke
the hands of hurricanes (625).

A courser fleet, which traversing the road, bore o2 the ball
from sun and lunar disk (626).


TEANSLATION


40


’Twas in alliance with the sky’s swift course, (and) to the wind
it gave a stage’s start (627).

Its tail produced the writhings of the snake ; its hoofs had
dug the “ gur " of many a “ gur (628).

The prince would ride it on a hunting day ; with any other
steed he'd naught to do.

"When he the onager-hoofed chestnut rode, the onagers around
him cried applause.

In galloping it left all steeds behind ; it pierced wild asses’
haunches with its hoofs (629).

At times when from the tedium of affairs (630) (Bahram),
that mounted lion, saddled it,

The field became (soon) from its shoes a place of pictures,
picture upon picture seen (631).

More than the rocks have weight did he spread out hillocks
(around) of onagers and deer.

The plain beneath his horse's hoofs became a tomb through
all the heaps of onagers.

Upon his chestnut, courser of the hills, through whose swift
flight the sky lost currency (632).

The hunting lasso when he took in hand, he captured countless
living onagers.

Most of the onagers which (Bahram) took, by (strength of)
arm or lasso did he throw.

If ho dashed down a hundred onagers (633), not any less than
four years old he killed.

He had forbidden (all) to thed the blood of any one not fully
four years old.

He branded (first) its name upon its thigh, and gave it then
the freedom of the plain (634).

Out of these branded onagers whoe er took one alive out of
a thousand one —

When he perceived the monarch’s brand on it, he did not seek
to do it any harm.

He kissed the ])lace on which it had been marked, and loosened
(then) the fastening of its bonds (635). —

^ T7


50


THE HAFT PAIKAR


I who am branded with the sultan’s name, somewhat more
joyfully should offer thanks.

By such a king (636) on mountain or on plain the onager
when branded brands escapes. —

In such a place of tombs there is no ant not branded by the
hand of some harsh act (637).

Bahdm Giir goes to the chase and hills a lion and an onager.

Upon a day, on Yaman’s hunting-ground, in company with
brave men of that land (638),

The prince whose name had Bahram Gur become, whose
Bahram bore the ball oS from the sky (639),

Was breathing in the pleasure of the chase (640) — Munzir
preceding, and Nu'man behind.

Lost in amazement at the majesty his form from head to foot
displayed were all.

A cloud of dust rose suddenly afar, such that the sky united
with the earth (641).

The monarch of the world urged on his steed, like flowing water
towards that dust he rode (642).

A lion, with aggressive claws (643) stretched out, on a wild
ass’s back and neck he saw.

(So) from above (644) to bring it to the ground the prince
took out (his) bow and lay in wait.

Sought from the quiver a sharp-pointed shaft, then put it
to the string and drew it back.

The sharp point struck the shoulders of the two, (and) having
pierced (them) passed through both the holes (645) ;

Then to (its) notch ’twas buried in the ground — What profits
mail or shield before such shaft ?

When from the thumbstall he had sent the shaft, the prince
stood holding in (his) hand the bow.

The onager and lion fell and died ; the shaft lay in the ground's
heart to its plumes.

The Arabs seeing such a shot approved the ruler of the Persians
he should be.


TRANSLATION


51


Whoever cast his eyes upon that prey kissed (with all reverence)
the prince's hand.

From that time forth they called him Lion-strong ; (thenceforth)
entitled him King Bahriim Gur.

When they had reached the town they told the tale in full
of onager and hon slain (646).

Munzir gave orders to his ministers that painters should with
their materials come,

That they should in Khavarnaq paint in gold the hon crouching
on the onager ;

The prince in pose, the arrow to its notch in the earth when
he'd shot and pierced the two.

The picture (647) by the painter painted, all who saw it
thought the animals were real.

They praised the Almighty Maker of the world upon the hand
so mighty of its king.

Bahrain goes to the chase and kills a dragon.

In his celestial dwelling on a day he set his vessel floating over
wine (648).

He drank off rapidly some (bowls of) wine, and in (his) drunken-
ness went towards the plain ;

Prepared his lasso, to bring down the prey, (and) dug out many
graves for onagers (649).

From all the onagers he took by force the plain became all
covered with their bones.

At last a female onager appeared, and cast disturbance all
throughout the world (650).

Its form a spiritual vision seemed, a being bright of face, of
forehead wide.

Polished as golden ingot was its back ; its stomach (as)
with milk and sugar smeared.

A musky line was drawn from head to tail, and streak on streak
was seen from haunch to hoof (651).

In place of horse's housing it was clothed as with a veil of
silk of rusty hue.


52


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Its frame bore off the ball from all its kind (652) ; its haunches
bore it off from all its frame.

A fire which made the hay its relative : a ruddy -faced one
clad in darvish robe (653).

Its leg the Arab’s arrow brought to mind (654) ; its ear had
drawn a diamond-dagger forth (6-55).

It had a breast free from the shoulder-mound (656) ; a neck
safe from the dagger of the ear (657).

Upon its back the dusky leather strap had left the saddle-
pommel ’twixt two roads (658).

Its crupper-slope from the skiu's darker part gained that which
silver gains from black (opposed) (6-59).

Its side was full of fat, its neck, of blood (660), in hue this like
cornelian, that like pearl.

The blood within its neck had drawn a hide like marvel of
Peru upon its frame (661).

Haunches in close companionship wnth tail ; a neck displaying
boldness with its hoofs (662).

Bahram dashed forward when he saw the “ gur ” ; after the
“ gur ” went (swiftly) Bahram Gur.

The onager, young, swift of foot, in truth ; the hunter swift as
lion in pursuit.

From day’s beginning till the (sun’s) decline the wild ass ran,
the lion at its heels (663).

The king turned not his courser from the “ gur ” — how from
the “ gur ” can reins (indeed) be turned (664) ?

The “gur” before, the “ gurkhan ” (665) on us track.s : the
“ gur ” and Bahram Gur, and naught besides (666).

Until it reached a cave far from the plain (667), by which the
foot of man had never passed.

When near upon (his) prey, the hunter saw a dragon hung at
the cavern’s mouth.

A pitchy mountain full of twists and turns — the mountain
naught before that mountain-mass (668).

A fire, in blackness issuing, like smoke which through a chimney
raises up its head (669).


TRANSLATION


53


Or like a tree devoid of fruit and leaves ; hell’s keeper, and a
go-between of death.

A cavern’s mouth its mouth, (and) in the world with naught
but havoc was it occupied.

Sated with the wild ass’s foal just ate, ’twas in bold mood
to overthrow (its) prey.

When the prince saw the affliction on his road, a dragon (670)
he became on seeing one.

Grief for the “ gur ” annulled his joy in “ gurs ” ; with hand on
hip he firmly stood his ground.

He wondered what wild animal it was, in fighting it what
plan (he) should (adopt).

The afflicted onager, he had no doubt, had suffered from the
dragon grievous wrong ;

And knowing he was just had summoned him to do it justice
on the cruel (beast).

He said. To call it dragon and not ant, — such fault would shame
me with the onager.

’Tis mine to act with justice, give redress (671) ; for life I have
no fear, let be what may '

From his two-headed shafts of poplar white he sought an arrow
of the broadest make (672).

He put it to the white-bark = covered bow (673), and for the
swarthy dragon lay in wait.

Whilst with wide-opened eyes the dragon (stood), the shaft,
two-headed, left the prince’s hand.

Its heads were planted on the (dragon’s) eyes, and stopped
their (power to) look upon the world.

The two heads of the arrow of the prince, sharp-pointed,
pierced the swarthy dragon’s eyes.

When to such straits the dragon was reduced (674), the prince
approached it like a crocodile.

He boldly drove a javehn (675) at its throat, as lion’s claws are
into wild ass (driven).

The javelin, six-sided, eight fists long (676), the throat and
palate of the dragon tore.


51


THE HAFT PAIKAR


A mighty clamour from the dragon rose ; like tree or column
on its head it crashed (ti77).

That awfulness and writhing scared him not — how shou'.! the
cloud e’er fear the mountain's height (678) ?

Ahriman’s (679) head he cut off with his sword — 'Tis best one's
foe should lose his head, be killed —

He split it open (then) from mouth to tail, (and) in its stomach
saw the ass’s foal.

He (then) was sure the vengeful onager had summoned him
for vengeance (on its foe).

He bent his back (in thanksl to God that he had killed the
dragon, not the dragon him.

“When he desired to mount his steed and ride back to the plain
where onagers were chased, — •

Seeing the prince was going, the wild ass (680) came from afar
and crept into the cave.

The prince again, to take the onager, found his way through
the cavern’s narrow mouth.

hen he got in with toil and pain, he found a treasure, and
grew, as a treasure, bright.

Many large, splendid jars had (there) been placed, which
fairy-like their faces veiled from man.

When it had brought the “ gurkhan '’ to the jars, leaving no
trace, the “ giir ” (then) left the vault (681).

Since to the treasure-lock he d found a key. and cut the dragon
from the treasure-house.

He came out through the cavern s narrow mouth, and sought
the road, and to the road a guide.

After a little while the royal guards came up in troops upon
the prince’s tracks.

When one and all of them had joined the prince, they (all)
drew up in (serried) ranks around.

The prince commanded that the servants (there)— (all) those
who were both bold and also strong —

Should get into the treasure-house, the cave ; should bear the
treasure out and load it up.


TRANSLATION


55


Three hundred camels, (all) young Bactrians, (then) moved ofi
loaded with the lawful hoards (682). —

When the prince rates an onager as self (683), and makes a
dragon captive to an ant (684),

It follows that at last as his reward they give him safety and a
treasure too. —

Then at the castle of Khavarnaq back, drinking and festive,
he disposed the hoards.

Ten camel-loads he sent oS on the road, a present to his majesty
the king (685).

Ten did he give to Munzir and his son, with certain other rare
and precious things.

The rest he spent with fearless unconcern, free from examiners
(686) and auditor.

So such a treasure as he'd brought to light (687), he dearly got,
(and) cheaply did dispose (688).

(Then) Munjir ordered, Let a painter come and once more
paint a picture (as before).

The painter came, and took his brush and limned the picture
of the dragon and the prince (689).

(And) whatsoe'er Bahram did of this kind was in Khavarnaq
by the painter limned.

Bahrain finJs the picture of the Seven (Fair) Faces in Khavarnaq.

The prince one day arriving from the plain, was walking
through Khavarnaq gay of mood.

He saw a secret room with fastened door, which by the keeper
had been overlooked.

The pirince had not set foot within that room, nor had the
courtiers or custodians.

He said. Why is this room locked up, and where the keeper
of it ; where too is the key ?

The keeper came (and) gave the prince the key. The prince
unlocked the door and saw the room.

A room saw ? Nay, a treasure-house (690), through which
the gazer's eyes would dealers be in gems.


56


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The pictures of that fine abode of art (691) excelled a hundred
Chinese picture-rooms.

They on the walls of that apartment (692) showed all that the
finest workmanship could show.

In it were finely painted seven forms, each one connected with a
certain Clime :

Furak, of India's Raja (693) daughter, first, in face more
lovely than the moon when full.

(Then) Yaghma-Naz.the Khaqan's (694) daughter fair, disturber
of Taraz and China's belles (695).

The king of Khvarazm’s daughter Naz-Pari (69G), graceful as
mountain-partridge in her gait.

The king of Saqlab's daughter Nasrlu-Nush (697), a Turk of
Greek dress docked by Chinese art (698).

The king of Maghrib’s (699) daughter Azar-Gun, a sun like
to the daily waxing moon.

The wisdom-gifted Qaisar’s (700) daughter, next, august,
and named Humay, Bird August.

The Kisra’s (701) daughter of Ka’us's race, named Dursitl,
and hurl-like in grace.

Within one circle by a cord hung up these seven had been all
together limned (702).

In each of them were countless beauties (seen) to light the
essence of the light of sight (703).

A face was limned so handsome in the midst that ’twas as
kernel, whilst the rest were shell.

A parrot on his sugar plumes had dropped (704), and “ galin ”
o'er his moon had drawn a line (705).

His head e.xaltcd like a cypress's ; his crown was (formed) of
silver, gold, and gems.

Towards him were turned these seven beauties’ eves ; each one
had given her heart to love of him.

He giving to those beauties pleasant smiles ; they all before
him (as) devoted slaves.

The painter (706) of his face and form had writ above his head
the name of Bahram Gur ;


TRANSLATION


57

(Adding), Such is the Seven Planets’ rule that this world-
conqueror, when he appears.

Shall take like precious pearls unto his breast seven monarchs’
daughters from the Seven Climes.

We have not sown this seed (know) of ourselves ; we've written
what the planets have declared.

’Twas writ, I've spoken, that he might observe the formula,
but God it is who acts.

Prince Bahram having read this strange account, remained
in wonder at the heavens’ spells.

The love of those fair girls (in picture seen) completely and
entirely (707) filled his heart.

Libidine percitis equahus et equo vehementia rapto ; a lion-
hke young man and seven brides —

Should not desire to gain one's wish be great ? Should not
the heart cry out to gain its aim ?

Although that formula made fierce attack, his joy (at once)
increased a hundredfold.

Since it ensured a long and happy life, and gave him hope
of gaining his desire. —

For the conciliation of a man all that which makes him hopeful
has eSect.—

When the prince left the room he locked it up, and gave the
key to its custodian.

He said, If I should hear that anyone (dare) for a moment
(to) unlock this door,

1 11 have his blood shed even in this room : 1 11 have his head
suspended from his neck.

In all the household, man or woman, none (dared ever) give
a glance towards that room.

From time to time when overcome with love, the prince went
towards that door (with) key in hand.

The door he opened, entered paradise, and on those finely
painted pictures gazed.

Before the water there bke one athirst, in longing for it he
would fall asleep.


58


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Whilst he was out his wish was for the chase, that room, on
his return, his solacer.

Yazi^ijard heconies acquainted with Bahrain's state.

When everyone, concerning Bahram Gur, brought tidings
to his sire (to this effect)

That he can take the lion with his hands, a youthful lion he,
an aged wolf (708) —

What dog (indeed) the lion in the fight to him, for (e'en)
the dragon he destroys ! —

He binds up demons with (his) lasso's noose ; he wears down
mountains 'neath (his) horse’s hoofs ;

His diamond turns iron into silk ; and of hard stone his iron
makes a paste (709) ; —

The father from the fire of Bahram’s youth saw, (as he thought),
his own death in his life.

As fearful of that fiery lion (then) was (Yazdijard) as lions
are of fire.

Far from his sight he let him (still) remain, although sight is
deficient wanting light (710).

Bahram both day and night went to the chase ; sometimes
he rode his steed, sometimes drank wine.

He hastened to the chase, and to the cup. He shone in 'i'aman
like Canopus (bright) (711).

The king of YYman from excess of love made his commands
effective as the sky's.

From Bahram's skill and competence, which matched his
own (712), he made him ruler of his realm.

He gave him gems and swords of several kinds — if for his life
he'd asked he'd not refused.

Whatever gems and treasure he required were his, and his
no particle of pain.

(So) from the favour he received abroad he did not bring
to mind his father’s land.


TRANSLATION


59


The death of Yazdijard.

When time had passed along through several turns, the lofty
sky displayed a novel game.

(King) Yazdijard grew weary of the throne (713), and after
high success in life came down.

The crown and throne which from his sires he had to him did
as to others it had done.

When from the king the throne's high seat was free, the city
and the troops together met (714) ;

(And said) they'd let no person of his race (bear sway), no
snake or dragon would they serve.

Although (the prince). Bahram, had eminence ; though he had
strength and valour (715), learning too.

(Still) owing to his father's perfidy, the eyes of none would
look upon his worth.

Said everyone, We will not look at him, nor give him tidings
of his father's death ;

Since that wild man. amongst the Arabs bred, could not
administer the Persians’ realm.

Land, treasure to the Arabs he would give, (whilst) those in
Persia born would suffer pain.

No one desired him to ascend the throne, (but) since God wished
it he assumed the crown.

An aged man of wisdom (then) they chose, and called him the
Just Ruler of the Earth.

Though not of those entitled to the crown, still by his race
he was of princely rank (TIG).

They placed the royal crown upon his head, (and) gave to him
the belt of seven gems (717).

As soon as Bahram Gur heard that the sky had brought one
of its cycles to an end.

Had started a fresh cycle once again ; that things u ere contrary
to what had been ;

That when his sire the thought of crown gave up, and none was
there entitled to the crown.


60


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The foot of one, a stranger, had stepped in, a new disturbance
on the world had come, —

He first performed the rites of mourning used, and painted
turquoise on cornelian (718).

Then after this resolved that lion-like he'd draw (his) sword
upon (his) enemies (719) :

That he would use (his) sword against (his) foes, open the
door of strife and enmity.

Again he said, Why use ferocity ? ’Tis best that I at first
use wisdom's aid.

Although the Persians erred in this that they withdrew their
hearts from reverence for me,

I will not look into their hardened hearts, (but) mildness use,
for mildness is the key.

With all their currishness they are my game ; they (all) are
(still) the sheep of my own mead.

Although they he and sleep in their own wool, all he and sleep
still in my cotton fields (720).

’Tis be-t they should be faithless, hard of heart, that they at
last before me may be shamed.

From perfidy shame overtakes a man, and from that shame
regret and pain ensue.

All ignominious treatment which I see beyond this is a form
of tyranny (721).

With want of wisdom if thev've gone astray, again by wisdom
I will make them true.

The man who is impatient with the game will (find) his arrow
fall wide of the mark.

{The Author) comjdnins of hitnsclf, and alludes to Firdausi.

0 word-conjoining sorcerer have done ! How long, how long
will you speak bygone words (722) ?

L'ke to the rose breathe out from your own mouth ; enough
that your own mouth perfume your work.

E en at the first my covenant was made — with whom ? — with
Him whose covenants are true


TRANSLATION


61


That what a certain other bard had said (723) — I still drink
wine, but he has gone to sleep (724) —

I would not make (such) thought of his my own : ill-doing I’d
not make my attribute (725).

So far as may be, like the vernal breeze, my claim shall not be
patching up old things (726).

Still, to the treasury when one the road — the target one,
although the arrows two (727) —

Though in the art of boring pearls (728) I’ve bound myself
not to repeat what has been said (729),

When repetition I can not avoid, I can produce fine silk from
woollen stufi (730).

Two workers (731) by the alchemy of speech have turned old
metal into something new (732) :

That one has made from copper silver pure, and from the silver
this one makes pure gold (733).

Since you’ve seen copper to fine silver turned (734), be not
surprised if silver turns to gold.


Bahrdm Gur goes to Persia, and {finds) another occupying
the throne.

The joiner of the parts of this high throne thus adds to it a
part correctly joined (735) ; —

As soon as Bahram Gur became aware that one. a stranger,
had usurped the crown,

He actively prepared for enmity, to seek the crown of the
Kayanian kings (736).

In (this his) quest of universal sway Nu'man and Munzir gave
him (every) help :

Treasure more plentiful than could be named ; jewels more
numerous than one could bore.

He raised up countless troops, the hostile man was full of fire,
hostility had force.

’Twas reckoned, down to Aden, in Taman (t37), a hundred
thousand troopers mustered were :


62


THE HAFT PAIKAR


All clad in steel and iron-strong (738), to avenge, to bind up
demons, and to capture forts.

In heart a lion, each of them, and fit to hold a country by a
single sword.

The army of the king set off with speed— the moisture reached
the fish, the dust the moon (739).

The trumpet’s blare, the roll of brazen drum would take all
trace of courage from the heart.

The brazen kettle-drum cried out aloud, the drummer (by the
noise of it) was stunned (740).

The plain and mountain from the blare and noise in ferment
rose against their hds, the skies (741).

Troops more than ants and locusts in their count, as hot in
rancour as the fire of hell.

They sought the station of the throne (for him), and went
from Yaman towards the capital.

The monarch of the world received the news that a young
dragon had unclosed its jaws (742).

That to the earth the heavens had inclined, Canopus had
from Yaman raised its head (74-3).

A lion had stretched out his claws with misht to put his foe as
“ gur ” into the “ gur ” (744).

That he would take the throne and seize the crown — would
settle down himself, and lay the dust (745).

The nohles and the ministers and guards all came together to
the royal court (746).

They met in congress and e.xpressed their views (747) ; they
spurned all arrogance away (from them) (748).

After reflection they decided thus (749), that they would write
a letter to Bahram.

All that good sense dictated, that, they wrote, they sowed seed
which had (previously) been peeled (750).

The letter written out they folded it, and made their
preparations to depart.

They (all) alighted when they reached (their goal) ; Fortune
asked blessings on the rightful king (751).


TEANSLATION


63


They sought an audience, which was granted them ; the
chamberlains gave heed to their concerns.

Bahram, the king, allowed them to approach from the (more)
distant place (at which they stood).

They went before him with a thousand fears ; they bowed
down to the ground, and ofiered thanks.

He who the ball of wisdom bore away, kissing the super-
scription, gave the note (752).

After unsealing it the monarch's scribe (then) read it to the
kingdom-taking king.

[From shell to kernel of that beauteous note — the shell was
silk, the kernel almond was.

Its outside was adornment of brocade ; its inside was an
oil-containing lamp] (753).

The letter opened with the name of God, who by His grace
guides those who go astray.

Of heaven and earth Creator Absolute, through whom non-
being being has obtained.

Of mankind down to all the animals, of the exalted sky and
ponderous mount —

His power the painter of all being is within the picture-room
of (His) good gifts (754).

There is no lord, save Him, who has not need of some relation-
ship, or thing conjoined.

Creation is a knot by Him unloosed (755) ; praise is the seal
He has affixed (to it) (756).

He is the keeper of the earth and time (757) ; both this and that
obey as He commands.

When he who read had read the praise of (God), Maker (of all),
exalted (over all).

He read praise of the king, a king's son (758), thus, You who
have raised your head to the blue sky.

You, with the wisdom of a king, king’s son, who're just to
manliness and generous thought.

How should I who by race am Kisra called, by ill-advised
contention suffer loss (759) ?


64


THE HAFT PAIKAR


I’ve merit and experience of the world ; I’m in the eyes of
(all) the world approved.

And for my merit Fortune fosters me — How can the meritless
get crown and throne ?

My eminence has given me crown and throne — the base man
never can be eminent.

Though the dominion of the earth is mine ; the leadership of
fairies and of men.

Still with this sovereignty I’m not content, for ’tis a piece of
honey poison-mixed.

So much I had of power and needful means that through the
same my star was always young (760).

Better if I with this had been content, for a high place is not
devoid of risk.

The Persians' zealous kindness, spite of me, so roused my zeal
that (to refuse) I shamed (761).

They (thus) induced me to become the king — the exalted holder
of the crown and throne,

To keep deterioration from the realm — such (ofiBce) is not rule,
but guardianship.

This proverb comes in story apposite : The foe to greed’s a
friend to all the world (762).

(But) you no knowledge have of such a world (763) ; you of
another world are sovereign lord.

You’d rather find an onager than meet out of a thousand
troubles even one.

A draught of wine, the while the lute is played, more than
aught ’neath the azure sky you love.

You have no business but the chase and wine ; you’ve naught
to do with troubles of the world (764).

(If) truth you wish, you, only, have the world, for you have
not the pain of ruling men.

At night and dawn you’re at the chase or cup ; you joy in
eating, now, and now, in sleep.

Not like me day and night remote from joy, and heart-sick with
(the care of) men's affairs.


TRANSLATION


65


At times my business troubling for (my) friends, at times I’m
apprehensive of (my) foes.

(My) least affliction this that for the crown I must contend
against a prince like 3 'ou.

How happy is your pleasure-loving soul that your head is
remote from such distress !

Would that this business had attached to me ; perchance
my business then had been my own (765).

I should have lived in pleasure, sport, and play ; caressed my
soul with music and with wine.

I do not say you're alien to command, (for) you have knowledge
both of Church and State.

You are, in truth, the heir to (these) domains ; the kingdom
by inheritance is yours.

But owing to your father's foolish acts, the shadow of the
crown’s not near your head ;

For to his subjects he behaved not so that none (had reason to)
set forth complaint.

They were astounded at his wickedness ; they called him
“Sinner” for such sinfulness (766).

After such tyranny as showed itself now fierce, now swift,
in shedding people’s blood.

No one could utter praises of that line ; no one could in that
ground sow (anj’) seed (767).

Since no one (here) desires you as (his) king, 'tis better (far)
that you should (hence) retire.

You’ll meet hot fire if you get hot and rage ; you’ll (only)
strike cold iron if you strive (768).

I, in the time of (your) necessity, will from (my) secret treasure
scatter gold.

All that maj’ best supply your requisites, and may with useful-
ness be spent on you —

I’ll sufier not, bj’ anv reason led, shortcoming as regards your
maintenance.

I'll be your lieutenant in sovereignty ; the orderer of every-
thing jmu wish.

F


€G


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(And) when the people’s minds get tired of me, the rule is yours
without (appeal to) arms.

Bahniiii Giu's answer to the letter of the Persians.

The reader having read the letter through, an angry fire
blazed up in Bahram’s breast.

Again, by great exertion, like the wise, to patience he
constrained himself forthwith.

Such heat (of anger) led him not to haste ; he first reflected,
then gave answer thus :

Now that the letter has been read I’ve heard that which the
writers in the letter wrote.

Although the writer was not dexterous, the counsel is not void
of standard worth (769).

That which has been expressed by noble sense I (must) applaud,
’tis worthy of applause. —

I, to whom earth and silver are the same, would not stoop down
to (take) the Seven Climes (770).

But the domains which from my sire I have ’twould be a sin
to leave in others’ hands.

Although my sire claimed Godship, I myself, in virtue trained,
claim only love for God.

There is a difference throughout (771) between him who loves
God and him who Godship loves.

For sins I’ve not committed blame me not (772) : I’m alien to
my father’s wickedness.

My father is not I, I am not he ; if he was stone, I am (not stone,
but) gem.

The lustrous dawn arises from the night ; the clear and lucent
ruby’s born of stone.

’Tis ill to testify against my sire, for God has now delivered you
from him.

If he did ill, since he is well asleep — one must not (ever) speak
dl of the dead (773).

Let reason guide — the evils that ensue on evil speech proceed
from hearing it.


TBANSLATION


67


(For) everyone whose nature is corrupt says something worse
than that which he has heard (774).

(So) think no more aljout my father’s sin, and dwell no longer on
my want of care.

(For) if the evil eye close not my road, for by-gone faults of
mine I’ll pardon seek.

If hitherto I’ve, like the careless, slept, behold ! I now have
bid adieu to that.

The fortunate whom luck befriends— their sleep is not beyond
the proper time for acts (775).

’Tis better that (their) eyes strive not with sleep — they (well)
may sleep, but let them rise in time.

Although my sleep has been a heavy sleep, fortune has not
been absent from my side.

Fortune has, in its kindness, wakened me ; I’m (now) awakened
from my heavy sleep.

Henceforth (my) face is turned to good (alone) ; (my) heart is
void (now) of all negligence.

I'll use no (more) self-will and want of thought ; since I’m
matured, how rawness should I show ?

I'll favour those whose acts are for the best, and go to meet
the most e.vpedient plans.

I’ll look not at the faults of any one ; (his) wealth not covet,
aim not at (his) head.

Bygone offences I'll not call to mind ; I will not vex at what
the times set forth (776).

Towards you I'll act as it is meet I should ; and what is meet
from you will I receive.

In no one’s treasure will I make a breach ; I’ll make (my)
treasure of my foemen's wealth.

The prudent from my court shall not be far ; ill, and the ill-
advised I'll alienate.

I'll show my favour to the good alone ; 1 11 not learn evil
from the guide to it.

I'll have no harshness in my government ; I'll act as one
not void of shame towards God (777).


68


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The wives and children, land and wealth of all (shall be) more
safe with me than flock with herd.

The loaf of no one will I take by force, but rather by a loaf
increase his loaf.

The demon, greed, shall lead me not astray I'll count greed as
a punishable sin (778).

I will not show to the .spectator’s eyes what the Creator would
not hold approved.

The priest's answer to Bnhiam .

The king thus spoke ; opinions were compared (779) ; the
oldest priest (780) then stood up from the midst.

He said, You in your lordliness are wire and giver, too. of
wisdom (to us all).

All you have said in your well-ordered sense reason has
graven on the ring, the heart.

The highest place befits you, for of all you're chief, the shepherd,
guardian of the flock.

To wear the crown befits your nature (too) : the crown’s with
us, but it is on your head (781).

Save you, who’s read the A\ esta of Gushtasp (7S2) ? Save you,
who’s left to keep the Kais alive (783) ?

The (royal) line of Bahman (784) and Dura (78.5), (Kayanian
kings), declares itself in you.

Fresh fruit are you from (King) Siyamak (too) (786) ; a living
record, you, of Babak’s son (787).

Allied to throne and crown your lineage goes back to (King)
Kayumars (788), king by king.

Dominion has no option as to you, (for) save you there's no
monarch in the world.

The priests all, whether they be young or old, agree in this
(as) with a single tongue.

But we who are (but) slaves are chained bv this that we’re
engaged by covenant and oath.

A heavy hand is laid upon us (all) by this strict pledge to him
who holds the throne.


TRANSLATION


69


That by our will no one should have the crown save him ;
that from his court we would not turn.

We must now have some strong and valid plea to save us from
the infringement of that pledge (789) ;

So that in this affair we be not shamed ; the compact be not
broken, we not grieved.

The answer of King Bahrum to the priest.

King Bahram when he heard this (last) reply, gave to them such
an answer as was meet.

He said. Your plea is not admissible ; ’tis best the man of wisdom
keep good ‘faith (790).

This foe (of mine), your king, who’s seized the throne, is
child to me, though an old man to you.

So will I take the crown off from his head that not a hair of
it shall be disturbed ;

Although my sovereignty does not depend on (showing)
mildness and adopting pleas.

A king, a son of kings to Jamshid (791) back am I, and I
inherit all control (792).

The crown and throne arc symbols, not control — what matters
whether symbols be or not 1

Whoe'er has worn the crown, sat on the throne — his crown's
the heavens, and his throne’s the earth (793).

Afridun’s (794) crown and Jamshid’s (lofty) throne have,
neither, lasted till the present time (795).

Whoe’er has had (intrinsic) rank has risen, and for himself
has made a crown and throne.

I who (though) crownless, throneless, know the way, possess
a sword. I’ll take them by the sword.

Although a traitor has usuiped my place ; a spider o’er a
cave has spun (a wob) (796),

A dragon (797) (now) has reached the cavern’s mouth, and
entrance from the spider will demand.

How should an ant belong to Gabriel’s kind, or gnat resist
the foot of elephant (798) ?


70


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The wild ass boldly lets its bray be hoard only until the lion’s
trumpet blares (799).

A contest with an ant would to the worm, which has no force,
appear a dragon’s act (SOO).

The ass, which is submissive with adults, with children is
unruly and perverse (801).

The sun, especially in ^Ines , — its light would ouench a hundred
lamps like this (802).

I live in hardship in another’s house, the while my house is in
the hands of thieves.

My foe on honev or on sugar feeds ; my eating’s of mv liver or mv
heart (803).

Better, sword, dagger than to eat one’s heart . dagger to heart,
and to the neck the sword (804).

The Persian realm entire my troasure-hou'e, my camp remains
(still) in the Arabs’ land.

Now Munzir sends to me a tray of food ; now Xu‘man sacrifices
makes for me (805).

"With all (my) royalty they give me bread (806), whilst (there)
they eat my bread so wickedly (807).

I, a young lion, taker of domains — how should my place come
to an aged fo.v 1

(From) me, the Kai (808), should foeman take the crown ?
Save to Kayanian how should tnbute come ?

The Kais’ position fits the Kais (alone) ; let none but Kais
the Kais’ position have.

I am the king, and oth,ers arc (my) slaves ; those other i.mes
are empty, I am full (809).

A king (who is a king) should muster troops ; what dust can
from a single horseman rise (810) ?

The wine the Magian elder has put down be only to the llagian
elder given (811).

(From) what Pm saying, you (may) k';ow full well, I seek
to act with rectitude and truth (812) ;

Put through fidelity to covenants (813), (and) not through
arrogance and kingly weight.


TRANSLATION


:i


(Then) if I act, I’ll act as you may will : to seek your satisfaction
is my will.

As to your words, that you must have a plea by which the
knot your compact ties be loosed (814) —

Be this the pretext that the crown be his who from between
two Rons seizes it.

(So) let two roaring lions at the dawn, which have not filled
their stomachs (yet) with food,

Wild, sharp of claws, and full of raging wrath, and from their
fiery breath emitting smoke,

Be by the keeper taken to the field, the while the troops form
round about in lines.

The royal crown loe put down from (his) head, and placed
between the sturdy lions grim.

The one who from the lions takes the crown, — that day let
(all) the people call him king. —

(So) after many pleasant courteous words spoken in kindness
and in confidence,

The letter, sealed, and supplemented, too, by ample e.xposition
and detail

To his devoted servants (815) he consigned, that they should
bear it as it should be borne.

(Those) loyal men who’d from the king received (all) kindness
and had heard those precious words,

(Set off on the) return to their abode, the new king’s image
placed before (their eyes).

And through (the monarch’s) kindness each of them a lover
of his kingly majesty.

They all said Bahram is (in truth) the king, for he is king by
race and by (his) name (816).

To him (in truth) we cannot be opposed ; one cannot smear and
hide a sun with clay (817).

That mounted hero is a lion bold and fierce ; he hunts the
dragon with a shaft.

When the fierce lion stretches out his claws, to stand against
him none wiU have the power.


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He forcibly will seize the throne and crown ; he’ll drag the
leaders at his horse's feet.

’Tis best that we arouse him not to warmth ; (’tis best) we
light not an extinguished fire.

As for the lion, and the crown to be borne oS — no such
condition does he need.

But the condition is a weighty proof which indicates the lion
and the wolf (818).

They all came oS the journey to the court, and told the king's
condition to the king.

They read the letter and set forth the case ; no word they added
on to what they’d heard.

The old (king) who’d the throne ei;i?ayed and loved, put
down the crown, and sat helow the throne.

He said, I’m weary of this crown and throne, through which
life to a lion must be given.

’Tis better that I live below the throne than that between
two Hons I be killed.

How should the man of intellect dare eat food to be taken from
a lion's mouth ?

In sword and cup (819), the master of the realm can be no
other than the king Bahram.

Give to the heir of these domains the throne ; a young man,
not an old, should wear the crown.

From this affair I (now) withhold my hand : I’m not the
king, but the king's loyal (slave).

The nobles gave him answer, speaking thus, 0 chief of kings
and wearers of the crown.

Our stipulation with you as to rule is simply of this wise and
prudent kind (820) :

Since you ascended at our will the throne, at our wiU (only)
give up your effects.

Since his condition touches lions, sure, much daring will be
want to accomplish it.

To seize a crown from lions is no play : — (let’s see) what
tricks the dark night will show forth (821).


TRANSLATION


73


To his condition we will give effect ; secure the lions, put the
crown by (them).

If he should fear, the ivory throne is yours, and if he’s killed,
again the crown is yours.

(But) if he kiU them and bear off the crown, let him take
tribute (then) from these domains.

He will be worthy of the throne and praise ; but stiff remote
(the chance) it so should be.

The matter ended finally in this that the agreement should not
be disturbed (822) ;

(That) when the morrow should be born the king (Bahram)
in lion-hunting should engage (823).

How Bahrd)ii seizes the crown from between two lions.

(So) in the morning when the gold-crowned dawn set up a
chair of gold, an ivory-throne (824),

The officers and the authorities — those strong of arm and
strong of judgment too —

Persian and also Arab took to horse, and towards the lions
of the conflict rode.

The keepers, at the target of the affair let fly two lions, raveners
of men (825).

They threw them (on the ground) together (quick), and dug,
(’twas thought), the “ gur ” of Bahram Gur (82G).

The lion-keeper who was bold enough (then) threw the crown
between the lions twain.

The golden crown in two black lions’ jaws as in two dragons’
jaws a (lustrous) moon —

A moon escaping with a basin’s noise the cloud, but with the
hasin eke a sword (827).

The two vindictive lions lashed their tails upon the ground
like dragons twain (in wrath) ;

To say, Who'll seize from us this golden crown ? Who’ll
dare a lion or a dragon rob ?

They knew not of that man of iron heart, who captured lions,
dragons hunted too.


74


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Through terror no one ventured to approach in range of
those two lions vast (and strong) (828).

'Tvvas settled that Bahram of lion heart should take the field
and meet the lions first (829).

The crown, if from them taken, should be his ; the gold cup
(830) and the ivory throne be his.

If fate against him had an ill design, behold I he had his place
upon the ground (831).

Bahram from this arrangement did not swerve ; he came
upon the lions from the plain. — ■

In valley and in plain there was no height on which there
were not lions (he had) killed.

The heads of hundred lions from their manes he’d cut ; — his
age was yet (but) twenty-two.

He who can hundred lions overcome, how should he (e’er)
be overcome by two f —

He fastened on his waist the tunic-band (832), and towards
the lions’ jaws sped like the wind.

He shouted quickly at the savage beasts, (and) snatched the
crown up from between the two.

When the (two) lions saw his hardihood, his lion-taking power
and fearlessness,

They made an onslaught like the strong and stout, with daggers
in their claws, swords in their teeth.

To seize the head of him the crown adorned, reduce the taker
of the world to straits.

When King (Bahram) resolved to punish them, he threw the
heads of both beneath his feet.

He tore their claws and broke their teeth, and saved from
’twixt the lions both his head and crown.

He crowned himself and .sat upon the throne. — Does fortune
show such favour (oft to man) ?

His seizing of the crown from lions twain brought down (at
once) the foxes (833) from the throne.

The horoscope of (Bahram’s) throne and rule came out auspicious
in goodwill to him.


TRANSLATION


I D

Ere this the observer learned in the stars had taken observations
for the throne.

Leo ascendant of the throne he’d found : stable ascendant
of confirmed good luck (831).

A sun exalted to its apogee with Mercury in (its) conjunction
joined.

Venus in Taurus was, and .Jupiter was in tlie Bow, the house
heaven-like from both.

The moon was in the tenth. Mars in the sixth adorned the
assembly with (his) sword and cup.

Saturn’s hand holding Libra weighing hoards which reached
to highest Saturn from the earth.

BaJtram sits on the throne in his father s place.

When with this happy-omened horoscope the king endowed
with virtues took the throne,

Through all the rubies and the pearls poured out the ship, the
throne, was filled up like the sea (835).

Treasure on treasure those who treasure had beyond all bounds
and reckoning scattered it.

He who first had 1 he throne of sovereignty ; to whom paid
homage citizens and troops.

Seeing the majesty of King Bahram, through whom the crown
and throne had gained renown,

He first of all the people, great and small, called him the king
and sovereign of the earth.

The priests called him the ruler of the world, and kings entitled
him lord paramount.

And so each one according to his power in public or in private
offered praise.

When o'er the world the king became upraised — his exaltation
higher than the sky's —

He spoke upon the justice he designed ; he strewed fresh pearls
from balas rubies fresh (S3C).

He (thus) spoke, God has given me the crown — in me may
(then) this gift of God he blest !


7G


THE HAFT PAIKAE


I offer praise and thanksgiving to God — He who confesses
God — to him be praise !

I do not turn my back to God’s good gifts ; I give thanks for
his gifts — why should I not ?

To bear the crown off from two lions’ jaws — I take this as
from God, not from (my) sword.

Since I have reached the crown and lofty throne, I will do works
of which God may approve.

ni act in such wise, if God (so) permit, that no one shall by me
be vexed or harmed ;

Except the man who evil practises : the highway robber,
thief, or murderer.

0 nobles of my court, be straight with me in conduct, even
as ray path is straight.

’Tis best you turn not to obliquity, (for) safety you will find
in rectitude.

If you right action do not take in hand, how much wrong
action will (from others) come (837) !

When I have rested some few days the door of equity and justice
I will open.

A fixed religious duty ’tis to me : (to give) for justice justice,
wrong for wrong.

Of no man have I any fear or awe, except of that man who
confesses God.

On no one do I make myself depend ; (in all) do I depend on
God alone.

1 care for no one’s service saving such as is the service (too)
of Him, (the Lord).

Whilst in its place the azure sky remains, may those who sleep
beneath the ground be blest (838) !

Let those who live have .safety and good news from me beyond
the bounds of black and white (839) !

Bo naught but praise and justice my affair ! Be he not pleased
who is not pleased with this !

When thus his (sense of) justice he had shown, whoever heard
bowed down in thanks (to God).


TRANSLATION


He sat upon the throne an hour or two, and then withdrew
thence into privacy.

Justice and equity his practice made ; all men were pleased
with him, and God content.

He held assemblies of men honoured most, and in the trusty
did he place (his) trust.


Describes Bahrdm Gur in his sovercijntij, and the mariner of h s

hje (810).


When through Bahram the crown and throne became in good
estate and power and honour gained.

He fastened on the belt of seven gems (841), and sat upon the
throne of seven steps.

Dressed in a Chini like a falcon's breast, a RumI as adorn-
ment over it (842) ;

He by his beauty took the crown from Rum ; from China
tribute by his comeliness (843).

He had established like Jamshid a throne ; his turns of music
rose above the sun (844).

He gave the world the rule of equity ; he raised the head of
justice o'er the sky.

Befriending those who fostered equity, (all) those v.ho used
oppression he oppressed.

His court was to the lock of grief the key (845), for when he
came good fortune (also) came.

Through him the world's affairs were prosperous ; the
atmosphere serene to breathing souls (846).

The barren cow brought forth abundantly ; the water in the
rivers fuller flowed.

The trees abounded (all) with ripened fruits ; the coining-dies
took rest upon the coins (847).

Through him the world was well administered ; dhuded
inclination left the realm (848).

In every quarter princes royal-born gained rank and honour
through his majesty.


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The officers of all (the king’s) domains poured out (full) loads
(of treasure) at his gate.

The governors of forts brought treasures too ; they offered him
the keys of (all) the forts.

Each one new journals of transactions made (849) ; pledged
to the king's sign-manual his life (8-30).

The king engaging in the realm's affairs, honoured each one
according to his rank.

(All) hapless people’s business ordered well ; and brought back
people who had left the land.

He freed the sheep from the wolf's tyranny ; he made the falcon
the dove's relative.

He cleared sedition’s head from drunkenness ; he held back
(too) the hand of tj’xanny.

He broke the basis of his foes' afiairs, and gave his friends
control of all the world.

He practised in his rale humanity ; sure, that is better than
oppressive rule.

When also he corrected enemies, he might kill ten, but would
not harass one.

For better, when correction (851) is required, to execute a
man than to torment.

He saw (with clearness) that this earthy camp (852) produces
nothing but the dust of grief.

In love he made his happiness consist ; and in enjoyment
passed a happy time.

He had full knowledge of the unstable realm (853), (so) on the
kingdom of enjoyment leant.

One day a week in business he engaged, to love devoting the
remaining six.

Who is there who has not a trace of love ? Whoever has no
love — he has no life.

His essence from the state of love was formed, and lovers
(too) became his special friends.

He had exalted business o'er the sky (854), (whilst) all the world
was under his command.


TRANSLATION


79


He cheerfullv enjoyed tlie world's good gifts ; lie rendered
justice and was (ever) gay.

Before him treasure bowed (in endless streams), the booty of
the sword and of the whip (S.35).

Great riches by the sword he would acquire ; as one might
crack a whip he'd give away (856).

Although the realm was flourishing through him, — for sun-like
at a rapid pace he went (857), —

His people, led away by bounteous gifts, relied (too much)
upon a plenteous year.

They cast off from their hearts (all) thanks to God ; and kindli-
ness discarded from their breasts (S5S).

Whenever God's created beings fail to oSer thanks for bounties
He bestows,

For them is that abundance changed to dearth, from stone
and iron ’tis if food they get (859).

A famine in the world from drought.

One year the blades produced so little grain that for the wide
world narrowed was the stock.

The dearth so fierce an onslaught made on food (860) that people
bke the beasts ate grass and herbs.

The world became afflicted through that dearth ; and bread
gained (even) from its lightness weight (861).

They spoke of this condition to Bahram, saying. There is
complete dearth in the world.

Men like unto the worms (are) eating men ; now they eat men,
now carrion they devour.

When the king saw the price of grain was high, the doors he
unlocked of his granaries.

He sent a letter (then) to every town in which there (happened
to) be any store.

That the comptrollers of the town (862) should meet, to unlock
the doors of the closed granaries ;

To arrange with rich men at the market rate, give (gratis)
to the poor, and treat them well.


so THE HAFT PAIKAR

That what remained in store-houses should be before the
birds put in the time of need.

That in his time no one from want of food should die — How
fine such generosity !

Whatever grain there was (then) in his stores, whoe'er (had
need) drew from his granaries.

His camels ever and again (were used) to bring from foreign
lands (supplies of) grain.

Efforts he used, his treasures he consumed, and formed plans
to (preserve) the life of all.

Four years whilst seed and produce failed did he support the
people by the treasury.

When he had gained the rule thus did he act ; and from such
practice he had gained the rule.

The people all escaped the dearth with life, except a single
one who died from it.

The king's heart through his dying destitute like frozen water
was with grief compressed.

(And) through that grief he turned his face to God ; and for
his failure made excuses (thus) :

Giver of sustenance to those who live, — Your giving of it not
like (that of) men. —

By one exertion of \ our power divine You make more little,
and (make) little more.

I cannot stay the hunger of one de'-r upon the desert plain,
though long I strive.

A"ou are He whose compelling order (863) gives to each one of
the people sustenance.

If through the dearth one single being died, guiltless was I
in that of any fault ;

For I'd no knowledge of his life, and when he'd died of what
use (then) was it to know ?

When humble supplication thus he made, a hidden monitor
said in his heart :

By reason of your well-intentioned thought from your dominions
God has taken death.


TRANSLATION


81


Since during four years’ resignation you approve not even one
should die from want,

An order, four years valid, has been writ that from your country
death should keep away.

Of (all) the great and small of his domains no person, I have
heard, for four years died.

Happy the king who by his generous gifts has kept death
from his subjects far away !

Whoever in the world was born survived — what better than
receipts without expense ?

So from the people's increase (in that time) neither the plains
nor mounts remained untilled.

From Isfahan to Eai, (so) have I heard, house followed upon
house as in the reed (864) ;

(And) if he (so) desired a man could go from roof to roof to
Isfahan from Rai.

If this narration seems improbable (865), the author is
responsible, not I (866).

Those who enjoyed good gifts were numerous, but more than
the enjoyers were the gifts.

Join palm with palm — the branches are increased, and more
abundantly are dates supplied (867).

When scarce the people, food is (also) scarce ; the more the
men the greater the returns.

The people trooped from town to plain and hills, to lightsome
sport and pleasure gave their hearts.

Guitar and rebeck-players, harpers too, forming a line extend-
ing two leagues long.

There was a tank of wine near every stream ; a joyous party
met in every street.

Each one (of them) bought wine, and sold (his) sword ; tore
up (his) iron-mail, sewed gold-brocade.

The people altogether laid aside (their) arms, (and) none of
swords and arrows thought.

To rich or poor, no matter whom, the king gave money from
his own (abundant) stores.


82


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Whoe'er the means of pleasant living had with luxury and
feasting gaily lived.

And him devoid of means the monarch made content with
fortune, and the world with him (868).

He found some work for every one to do, gave him a certain
share of pleasure too.

He had the day dhdded into two — one half for work, and one
for play and sport.

From taxes for seven years he freed the world ; uprooted the
distress of seventy years (869).

Six thousand persons skilled (in various arts) — singers,
musicians, dancers, players too — ■

He brought together out of every town (870), and made each
district (in the pleasure) share ;

So that where’er they should betake themselves, they might
amuse, and they be happy too.

The ascendant of earth's cycle being Taurus, its ruler, 'V'enus,
in conjunction too (871) —

In such a cycle how should grief appear — one in which "Venus
as the spirit rules (872) ?


The story of Balirdm and the girl named Fitna of Chinese
Turkistan.

One day the king thought well to (go and) hunt on the low
plain and on the lofty hills.

He rode his “ gur-hoofed ” chestnut to the plain ; he dug
up “ gfirs ”, and threw “ gurs ” to the ground (873).

(Though) Jupiter may in the Bow (874) be placed, the monarch’s
bow passed over Jupiter (87-3).

Away from those who'd ridden to the plain a troop of onagers
passed towards the king.

The king stood as a lion on the spot (876), the chestnut ’neatli
him prancing (restively).

(Then) from the string the (king’s) hand scattered pearls ;
the thumbstall emptying, he filled the plain (877).


TRANSLATION


83


With his ■well-tempered s'word and arro'ws’ steel he hurled
upon the ground no’w fire, now game.

A haunch of onager, pure ■wine to hand, — a fire is ■wanted to
(prepare) “ kababs ” (87S).

With such intent, one might suppose, his lance, which shed
the blood of onagers, struck fire.

A lion he in thro^wing onagers ; his awfulness struck blind the
evil eye.

Those which (at first) slipped off he let not go ; he hamstrung
them, or followed in their track.

With him a girl of moon-like fairness rode, whose quickness
kept her always at his side (879).

Fitna (880) her name, a thousand were her lures ; seductive
she to him seduced by her.

Fresh-faced as early Spring in paradise ; with graceful gait as
corn that breezes stir (881).

Apiece of (sweetest) honeysmeared with oil; a dish of “paluda”
(882) both fat and sweet.

Not only beautiful (883), but skilled in song, lutist, and
nimble-footed dancer too.

When to the music of the lute she joined her voice she brought
the birds down from the air.

The king in festive parties drinking wine, or at the hunt would
ask for dance and song.

The softness of her breath (884) upon hard wounds restored
to life whatever she had killed (88-5).

Her instrument, the harp, the arrow his ; one hit the modes,
the other hit the game (886). —

Some onagers appeared upon the plain, on which the monarch
(quickly) pressed his steed.

When he came up with the swift onagers, a furious lion with
a bow in hand,

He put the arrow to the semicirque, the thumbstall, drew the
bow, the arrow loosed (887).

His arrow lighted on the onager's hind-quarters, and his
quarry kissed the earth.


84


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(And) in a moment, of that wondrous game he killed a number,
and he captured some.

The girl through coquetry and roguishness restrained herself
from (giving him due) praise (8S8).

The king stood for a moment patiently, until an onager passed
on afar.

He said, 0 narrow-eyed Tartarian (girl), your eyes are never
open to my game (889).

(And) how (indeed) should game which (in its bulk) exceeds
description enter eyes so strait ?

A wild ass comes, say how shall I attack ? From head to tail
at what (part) shall I aim ?

The sweet-lipped (girl), by natural habit stirred (890), — (she
was a woman, so would idly speak), —

Said, You must do a deed to honour you (891) : pin to its hoof
the ear of this wild ass (892).

When the king saw the girl’s perversity, he formed a plan
against her ill design.

He asked first for a cross-bow like the wind (893), then (to the
cross-bow) he affixed a bolt.

He shot the bolt (then) at the quarry’s ear, which, irritated
at the pain of it (894),—

Poor hapless brute, raised to (its) ear a hoof to take out from
its ear the irritant.

An arrow of the king, a lightning-flash, illumed the world,
and fastened ear to hoof.

When with the shaft he’d fastened hoof to head, the quarry
stumbled and fell headlong down (895).

The monarch said (then) to the Chinese girl (89C), I’ve gained
success ; what think (you of the feat) ?

She said. The king has often practised this ; how can a thing
be hard when practised oft ?

Whatever thing a man has studied (long), though it be hard
(at first), it can be done.

That the king’s arrow pierced the a.':s’s hoof is (but from) habit,
not excess of strength.


TRANSLATION


85


The monarch was displeased at this reply (897) ; the sharp-
edged axe came (down) upon the tree (898).

His heart (no more) felt kindness for that moon (899) ; he
plainly showed the anger that he felt. — ■

Kings when on vengeance bent should execute only (when)
they’re again in better mood.

Of young gazelles they should not saddles make, nor a fur
garment of a little bear (900). —

He said, If I should spare her — she’s perverse ; (and) if I kill —
this course is worse than that.

Brave heroes cannot slaughter women-folk, since women
are not classed with combatants.

There was an officer of noble race, as bon fierce, as wolf
inspiring fear.

The monarch summoned him in secret near, (and) said. Go,
put this girl out of the way.

She’s a disturber of my house of state — to kill disturbers is in
reason right.

The brave man took that girl of fairy face bound from before
that monarch to his house.

He thought to end her business and to strike her head off from
her body candle-like.

With tearful eyes that captivator said. Do not approve so
odious an act.

If you are not a foe to self take not the blood of guiltless me
upon your head.

I am the monarch's special intimate, the one most chosen
out of (all) his slaves.

So much so that at wine or at the chase no other’s been his
intimate and friend.

If through an act of boldness which I did, a (wicked) “ div ”
(901) has played a trick on me ;

And the king, wrathful, orders punishment, do not in kilbng
me be over quick.

Wait (but) a few short days, be patient (stbl), and teU the
king you’ve killed me ; use deceit.


86


THE HAFT PAIKAE


If at your words tlie king should be rejoiced, (then) kill me ;
to you lawful be my blood !

But if he be afflicted at my death, you will be quite secure in
life and limb.

You will escape enquiry, and I, deatli ; a cy 2 :)rcss free will
fall not to tlie ground (902).

A day may come when, though I'm naught, I may in something
serve you still for what you've done.

She spoke these words, and took her necklace off, and ofiered
him seven rubies (as a gift) ;

Each one of them the tribute of a Clime : the revenue of
‘Umman (903) half its worth.

The officer because of those true words cave up the thought
of killing that fair girl.

He said, Beware of being idle (then) (904), of mentioning the
king to anyone.

Say that you are a servant of this house ; do work, and say
for this work you’re (engaged) ;

(And) I rvill use such means as should be used, (a remedy),
if fortune favour you.

They took an oath to (seal) such covenant — he from a crime
escaped, and she from harm.

'When in a week he came before the king, the king from him
sought news of that (fair) moon.

He said, to Diaco have I given the moon (OO-j) : I've killed her,
given with tears the price of blood.

(At this) tears started to the monarch's eyes ; the officer's
(uneasy) heart was cased. —

He had a fine and flourishing i state (90G), a dwelling distant
from the eyes of men.

A palace too raised to the apogee (907), with waves around it
from the heavenly sea (908).

A terrace-belvedere (909), raised sixty steps, was built as
sitting-place upon the top.

The girl’s abode was always that (high jilace) : to honoured
ones they give an honoured place (910).


TRANSLATION


87


la tliat short space of time a cow brought forth : she gave birth
to a gentle-natured calf.

That fairy-faced illumer of the world would take it every clay
upon her back.

She’d firmly ’neath it stand, and step by step would bear
it to the summit of the house. —

The sun's a carrier of the calf in Spring (911) ; — who's seen
a moon do this ? Produce (the same). —

Each day that silver-limbed gazelle would bear the calf from
(near) the palace to the roof.

Day after day did she adhere to this ; she grew efficient keeping
to the work (912).

Until the calf advanced so far that it had grown into an ox
six years of age.

(And) still that rose-limbed idol carried it from near the palace
to the palace-roof.

Nor did she suffer trouble from the load, since she'd become
accustomed to the work.

(For) in the same proportion as the ox increased in flesh did
she increase in strength.

One day that narrow-eyed one, grieved in heart, was sitting
with the officer alone.

That fair one, (lovely) as a hurl, took four jewels from her
jewel-bearing ears.

This ready value take and sell, said she ; the price of it when
given in silver bring.

Buy sheep, rose-water, incense, and such fruit and wine and
candles as may be required.

Prepare a banquet-hall like paradise, with wine, dessert-fruits,
incense and “ kabfibs " (913).

When to these parts the king comes to the chase, hold to his
stirrup as does victory.

Pour out your heart and study how to please, (and) for a time
hold in your hand his reins.

King Bahrdm has a gentle temperament ; he has a noble
and indulgent mind.


88


THE HAFT PAIKAR


When he perceives your humble, earnest prayer, he’ll bow
his head to your becoming raised (914).

On such a star-throned belvedere as this we'll give him some-
times wine and sometimes milk (915).

If such a business should be well arranged, the state of both
of us will be upraised.

The officer left (all) the rubies there, for God had given him a
thousand such.

He went and with some hidden treasures bought all things
required to entertain (his guest).

Food excellent and fitted for a king ; with fowls and fish,
with mutton and with lamb.

To brighten the assembly fragrant wine (916) ; sweet drinks
(917), dessert-fruits suited to the feast.

All needful preparations did he make, till Bahram to the
hunting-field should come.

Bahram goes to the chase and the officer entertains him.

One day Bahram descending from the throne, went off to
hunt the quarry on the plain (918).

When near the village where the officer possessed that lofty
(919) belvedere he passed.

He saw an excellent, delightful place, with verdure upon
verdure, shade on shade.

He asked and said. To whom belongs this land, (and) where
(too) is the owner of tb s place ?

The officer was by his stirrup then ; when from the king he
heard such-like address.

He kissed the ground, and showed (him) reverence ; he said,
0 king, who cherish (all your) slaves.

Your slave has an estate (920) which is your gift ; its charm
is from the vase whence flows your wine (921).

(So) if the monarch should approve the place, and will exalt
his lowly, humble slave,

(If) waiving forms, according to his mode, the practice of
his blest and happy mind.


TRANSLATION


89


He’ll bow bis head to this small, narrow door, (bis) officer
will be o’er all upraised.

I have — ’twas given me by the monarch’s grace — a house
whose head arises to the moon.

Around it garden upon garden lies — the Garden their apprentice,
heaven their slave (922).

If on its sumnait you will drink of wine, the stars will kiss
the earth before its door (923).

The monarcJis fragrance will perfume (924) the house ; my
bees, my cows, will honey give and milh.

When the king saw that in sincerity he spoke such words as
might an officer.

He said, Command is yours, do (what's required) by such
time as I come back from the chase (925).

The oflacer (then humbly) kissed the ground, (and) went and
cleaned the mirrors (all) from rust (926) ;

With carpets made the belvedere like heaven, (and) well
disposed all ornaments required.

The monarch’s canopy, when from the chase he came, again
reached the moon’s apogee (927).

The host then (came and) from his choicest rolls, — both stuSs
of Rum and China’s finest goods, —

Layer on layer of (these) gorgeous stuffs, in whose resplendence
heart and brain rejoiced,—

He threw beneath the monarch's Khatlian steed (928), with
sundry other tasteful things as well.

Ascending to the terrace, sixty steps, the king saw an arched
room unique in height (929).

It threw Khavarnaq’s face upon the ground (930) ; it spread
a carpet on the azure sphere (931).

The host (then) came and gave what was required of incense,
sherbet, rose-water, and food.

When with the palatable food he’d done, the king sought
wine, began a joyous bout.

When sundry cups of wine the king had drunk, the perspiration
started from liis brow (932).


90


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He said, 0 host, who own (this) golden house, your place is
pleasant, and your means are good (9.33).

But this high jialace (here) of sixty steps, around whose head
the sky its lasso whirls (934), —

When sixty years have now passed over you, how can you
walk up to the top of it (9.3.3) ?

The officer replied. The King live aye I His wine be Kausar,
huris give the cup (936) !

This is in me no wonder. I'm a man ; how should I (then)
be wearied by such stops 1

The wonder this, that there's a moon-like girl, soft, dainty
as the king's ermine and silk,

"Who puts a mount-like ox upon her back, and brings it hither
at the feeding-time.

She bears it sixty steps up at a stretch (937), not resting
(on the way) at any step.

An ox ! What ox ? An elephant, a load which ne'er an
elephant would boar a mile.

God witness ! in this land no one could (lift and) poise it
for a moment from the ground.

Then (if) a woman bears it to a height of sixty steps, is it not
marvellous ?

After the officer had told this tale, the king bit with his teeth
his finger-tips (938).

He said. How can a thing of this kind be ? It cannot ; if it
be, 'tis sorcery.

This business I, in truth, shall not believe, until with my own
eyes I see it (done).

Then of (his) host, (the officer), he asked that he should prove
the claim his words set forth.

The host heard this ; he went below and told to her who bore
the ox the lion’s case (939).

She, silver-limbed, wlio'd reckoned on the time (940), ere that
she’d for the aSair assigned a term.

With Chinese girls' adornments decked herself, gave drunk
narcissus’ languor to the rose (941).


TRANSLATION


91


Site set off fittingly the moon with miiA: (942), and taught
her irguish glances magic arts.

She put seduction s stibium to her eyes ; •'he covered petulance
with coquetry (943) ;

Gave to the cypress-tree a rosy hue ; and to the tulip gave the
reed's (straight) form (944) ;

The silver cypress she adorned with pearls ; attached the
pleiads’ cluster to the moon (945) ;

Like lovers' apple into halves she cut a ruby casket by the
finest pearls (946) ;

Crowned, head and neck, with ambergris was she (947) ; a
double chin as collar reached her lobes.

(A king whose throne is made of ivory plates cannot dispense
with either throne or crown) (948).

The Ethiops, her locks, her Hindu moles, both stood upon one
side (prepared) for war (949).

Her beauty spots upon cornelian lips affi.ved an Ethiop seal
unto her dates (950).

Her face had fastened with most lustrous pearls a veil of
(radiant) stars around the moon (951).

The pearls, her ears, to which (fine) pearls were hung, rendered
the market of her lovers brisk (952).

The moon she fastened in a camphor veil (953), like to the
Syrian rose in jasmine (placed).

When, led by coquetry, this fortnight's moon had well disposed
the seven needful things (951),

Like a full moon she went up to the ox — the moon when she'.-;
in Taurus is in strength (955).

Her head she lowered and raised up the ox — See how an o.x
had honour (from her act) (956) !

When step by stop she'd run up to the roof, she went (then)
to the foot of Bahram's throne.

She stood on foot, the ox upon her neck ; the lion (957), when
he saw the ox, was moved.

In wonder lost, he thought what may this be ? Interest of
his ? What interest he knew not.


92


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The moon (then) put the ox down from (her) neck ; with
coquetry the lion she addressed.

She said, The present which I (now) submit, (unaided) all
alone, by (my own) strength —

Who in the world by strength and cleverness from (this) high
room could carry to the ground (958) ?

The king replied. This is not (from) your strength, but from
your having practised from the first.

Little by little, during many years, you have prepared (959)
(for it) by exercise ;

So that without (the slightest) toil or pain you can at present
weigh it in your scales (960).

The beauty, silver-formed, bowed low to him, with invocation
true to what was due (961).

She said, The king owes much (for having said), The ox is
practice, the wild ass is not (962).

I who (can) carry to the roof an ox — for “ practice ” only
credit has been given (963).

Why when you hit a little onager, should no one use the
expression “ practice ” too ?

The monarch understood his Turk's reproach ; like Hindu
acting, he rushed up to her (964).

The moon he (then) unveiled, and when he saw, with tears he
scattered pearls upon the moon (965).

Embracing her, forgiveness he besought ; that rose rose-water
from narcissi poured (966).

He emptied (then) the house of bad and good (967), designing
with the girl to have some speech.

Then said he, If the house became your jail, I ask your pardon
thousand times as much (968).

If I did light a fire through self-conceit, 'twas I was burnt,
whilst you’ve remained intact (969).

When from disturbers, all, the place was freed, he made
“ Disturbance ” near him settle down (970).

Fitna sat down, and (then) began to speak, saying, 0 King,
who set disturbance down (971),


TRANSLATION


93


You who destroyed rU'' by disunion erst, and by your love
renewed have made me live,

You have from me no further cause of grief — grief would cast
down a mountain from its base.

My life was willing from the love I had to fall a sacrifice to
love (for you) (972).

When in the chase the monarch with a shaft pinned the wild
ass’s hoof and ear as one,

Not earth (indeed), but heaven kissed his hand when (from)
the thumbstall he let loose (the shaft) (973).

(But) I (by being) tardy in applause, drove from the king the
evil eye away.

Whene’er the eye approves of anyone, that one is injured by
the evil eye (974).

I (seemed) in fault (975). for Draco of the sky efiected that
my love appeared as hate (976).

These words impressed the monarch so that they afiected
through his heart his inmost soul.

(The king) replied. In truth you speak the truth, (for) sundry
things attest your loyalty :

Such love and kindness (as you showed) at first, and such
excuses (as you make) at last.

A thousand blessings on that jewel be, which in its nature
manifests such worth I

Without the officer's protecting care, this jewel had been
fractured by a stone.

(The king then) called the officer (to him), embraced him
(977), and brought gladness to his heart.

He gave to him most rare and splendid gifts ; he gave a thousand
in return for one.

After (bestowing) numerous fine things, he gave him Rai,
with other honours too.

He went (then) to the town, rejoicings made, he made the
usual offerings at his feast (978).

The priests he summoned as the laws prescribed, and had the
moon united to himself.


91


THE HAFT PAIKAR


In sport and pleasure and luxurious ease for long from this
time forth he lived with her.

The khan of khans conics to fi'jht njainst Bahrain Gur.

When the renown of Bahram (Our) as king had risen from the
Fish (979) up to the moon.

The hearts of the distinguished gained new strength ; the
fame of (all) the famous lived again.

Malignants perished in obscurity (980), the heads of all beneath
black water plunged (981).

There was a good old man. Nar^I by name — (the same name had
the brother of Bahrim) (982) — ■

His judgment strong, his reason perfect too, he knew of things
before (they had occurred) (983).

His lineage was that of King Dara — this was no secret, but a
well-known thing.

The king would never be apart from him ; he was both his
companion and vazir.

He had three sons, each one of whom possessed a certain branch
of knowledge to himself.

(Th''n) he who was the eldest of the sons Zaravand by his
father had been named.

The monarch had discerned his standard worth (984), and he
had made him chief of all his priests.

He thought as gnostics do, he knew the Way, and measureless
was his asceticism.

The second was collector-general, impost-receiver (985) upon
all the roads.

Through the integrity of his control (980) the king had given
him power throughout the land (987).

The third was in the business of the town and army the king's
special deputy (988).

The monarch left the government to them ; the governors
were faithful to their trust.

Each night he brightened up the feast with wine ; each day his
governors were at their work.


TRANSLATION


95


Revolving like a mill around himself, whatever he acquired
he threw away (989).

This story was divulged throughout the world ; axes were
sharpened with a view to cut (990).

All said, Bahram is drunk, and has exchanged religion for the
world, and sword for cup.

With boon companions he is lost in wine ; (all) he enjoys
(is) wine, his gain's the wind.

The mind of each was stirred with the desire that the realm’s
business should be ruled by him.

The khan of khans from China (then) set out (991) to take the
monarch of the world's abode.

With him (992), like formidable dragons, were three hundred
thousand archers strong and skilled.

He crossed the Oxus and advanced with speed ; a resurrection
in Khurasan raised (993).

(And) from the king's viceroys he seized by force of Transoxiana
all the (broad) domains.

The king got information of the raid, but in his army had no
confidence.

He saw that all by pleasure's hand were nuised, (and) from
war's ways that they withheld their hands.

(That) those who were the leaders of the troops were (nowise)
single-hearted towards the king.

Each one sent out an envoy in advance with letters (994) to
the khaqan on their views (995).

(Each one) conceived ill-feeling for his king ; thought (but)
of saving his own wealth and land.

They said (unto the khan). We're all your friends ; pursue the
road, we’re dust upon your road (996).

A'ou are the monarch of the world, advance, come on, for
Bahram cannot act as king.

If you desire we'll use the sword to him ; and if not, we will
bind and give him up.

A scribe, as one who’s competent to read the letters (that he
writes), informed the king.


96


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The king abandoned hope of Persian faith (997), (and) left
the kingdom to (his) lieutenants.

He went himself and hid his face (from view), (for) with such
instruments one cannot fight.

The world’s king — so it flashed throughout the world (993) —
had hid his face from kingdom and from troops.

Unable with the khaqan and his troops to cope, he'd fled
disordered from (the scene).

The messenger brought greeting to the khan (advising him)
the king had left the throne ;

Adding, You’re favoured with the crown and belt ; advance,
(for) neither crown nor throne remains (999).

After the khan had heard the message brought, that Bahram
(Gur) had vanished from the world ;

That he from sword and sword-play held his hand, (and) sat
down carelessly to lute and wine ;

That, troubled not for foe, he drank of wine, and did such
things as should not have been done.

He did what in his foe he’d not approved, so that his foe
(thereafter) laughed at him.

King Bahram day and night was at the chase, whilst couriers
in (his) business were engaged.

About the Chinese loader (1,000) news he sought, until his
courier brought him truthful news :

That he felt safe, at ease about the king — this was of happiest
omen to the king.

When he prepared, of all those troops of his there were three
hundred horsemen, none besides.

Each one had seen, (each one) was tried in war ; dragons on
land, on water, crocodiles.

Of one heart all as pomegranate with grains : though hundred-
grained, of one receptacle.

The king used stratagem against his foe, (against him) plotted
all in secrecy (1,001).

His enemy sought fire, he gave him smoke (1,002) ; inspired
him with false confidence (1,003). and soon


TRANSLATION


97


He aimed (his) shaft well (1,004) at the mark, his (foe), for he
knew well how he was circumstanced.

He made a sudden night-attack on him ; he raised the dust
above the seven skies.

On a dark night, which, in its black control, proceeded as a
black snake with the founts (1,005) —

A night which had removed (all) lamps away, (when) mount
and plain were blacker than crows’ plumes ;

(When) countless drunken Ethiops, as it were, were running
sword in hand from side to side (1,006) ;

(And) fearing those Ethiops who ran about, men opened wide
their eyes, though naught they saw ;

(When) the bright-hearted sky in black silk dressed was like
a jar of gold closed up with pitch (1,007) —

On such a night of ambergris (1,008) so pure Bahram (went
out and) waged Bahramian war (1,009).

(And) so he rushed upon the valorous, attacking now with
sword and now with shaft.

The arrow which he shot at any place became free in a moment
from the mark (1,010).

The eye of caution of his foemen slept before his arrow, which
could pierce hard stone (1,011).

They saw the wound, the arrow was not seen ; the arrow seen,
the wound was not there (near) (1,012).

They all said. What contrivance should this be ? — The shafts
remote from wounds, the wounds from shafts !

Until it came to this that no one (dared) within a league of
his arena come.

He rushed on all sides like a cloud ; through him the plain
became a mount, the mount a plain (1,013).

He killed so many of those troops with shafts that with the
blood the earth grew soft as paste.

The frame of whomsoe’er his arrow hit — the soul at once
departed from that frame.

When dawn drew forth the falchion of the sun, and on the sky
a bowl of blood appeared (1,014),


H


98


THE HAFT PAIKAE


From all the blood shed by the hero-king a stream of blood
flowed, bore down heads as balls.

And through the numbers slaughtered by the sword the gall-
bladder was stirred to vomit bile (1,015).

The lance (there) wagered with the sword its head (1,016) that
dragons (1,017) it would reap like ears of corn.

The shaft was in the fight a darting snake — when darts the
snake ’tis bad (for all who're near).

King Bahram fighting in the battle ranks, his arrow-point.^,
as hairs (1,018), were splitting hairs.

If with his sword he struck a horseman's head, down to the
waist he clove him like a gourd.

And if with stroke oblique he terrified, he cleft the man asunder
at the waist.

Of this kind was (his) sword, of that, (his) shaft — 'tis likely
that the foe would be dismayed.

The Turks from this his sudden Turk-like raid, and wounds so
deadly on the path he took (1,019),

Inclined to flight (1,020) ; the swords of all of them became
(all) blunted, and their racing keen.

When the king’s sword was brandished (1,021) on all sides,
the Turkish troops relaxed in (their) attempts.

The king discerning signs of victory, drove (at the foe his)
sword, and shot (his) shafts.

By the shock of (his) sword he broke their ranks : he was the
wind, you'd say, and they were clouds.

In triumph to his troops he called (aloud). Behold (our) fortune,
see (our happy) lot !

That we may strike a head off strive again, that we may tear
the centre from its place (1,022).

Supporting one another (then) they charged, lions beneath
them, dragons in their hands (1,023).

The right retired, the left wing fled away, the centre poured
into the vanguard’s rear.

The king obtained a hold on victory : he routed all who at the
centre (fought).


TRANSLATION


99


An army more in number than the grains of sand and earth
he ruined by his raids.

The hardness of the swarthy lions’ claws (1,024) jiounded the
brains cf those whose swords were soft (1,025).

Rapid in action as the snake (their) shafts ; from their effects
the horsemen fell and lay.

Through the sharp dagger’s (work) the dust of flight reached
the Turks’ army to the Oxus stream (1,026).

The king such store of gems and treasure took that treasurers
were troubled in the count.

Returning from that conquest to his realm, he showed for
(all his) people kindly care.

In triumph then ascending to the throne, he garbed the world
afresh in New Year’s joys (1,027).

All swept the ground before him (with their brows) and, suited
to (his) conquest, gave him praise.

Singers in Pahlavl. with Persian tunes sang to the harp's
sweet sounds in Pahlavi (1,028).

The Arab poets to the rebeck’s tones recited verses like
pellucid pearls.

The king, a judge of skill, a connoisseur in poetry, gave
them unmeasured wealth.

From that great spoil and treasure he endowed the temples
with a thousand camel (loads).

In skirtfuls gold, and pearls in hatfuls too, he to the priesthood
of the temples gave.

8o much gold from his treasury he gave that no one poor
remained in (all) the world.

Bahram Gur rebukes the Persians.

One day with an ascendant auguring good (King) Bahram
took his place upon the throne (1,029).

Where’er there was a king or emperor, a giver or a holder of
the crown —

All (there), beneath the foot of the king’s throne, were drawn
up like the stars before the moon.


100


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The king the sabre’s keenness gave his tongue ; he said, 0 brave
commander (1,030), leaders all.

The army is required for peace and war ; without it man and
beast would be alike.

Which of you is it that in any fight has shown such manliness
as man should show ?

I who have chosen you from (all) the world — in what engage-
ment have I seen you (fight) ?

Has such work been achieved by any one as is achieved by
brave and cunning men ?

In times of injury (1,031) upon what foe has come affliction
from your sabres’ point ?

Whom have I seen that has advanced, or bound a foe, or
subjugated any land ?

One boasts he has the nature of Iraj (1,032), another claims
Arash’s excellence (1,033).

This man’s (forsooth) a Giv (1,034), that a Rustam (1,035) ;
this one and that from “ lion ” (1,036) take a name.

I saw no one (of you) make any fight, or any work do at the
time for work.

This army which from battle sought escape — I name no person
in particular —

’Twas more agreeable for each to say in secret, Oh, alas !
our king’s asleep.

He drinks of wine, and calls no one to mind — no one with
such a king would be content. —

Though I drink wine, I drink not so that I, through drunkenness,
have no care for the world.

If from a hurl’s hand I drink a draught, my sword's not distant
from a stream of blood.

I’m like the lightning when the cloud pours forth — one hand
holds wine, the other holds the sword (1,(J37).

By wine I grace the business of the feast, (but) business to
the sword I give as well.

My sleep’s deceptive even as a hare's, it lets me see the foe
although I sleep (1,038).


TEANSLATION


101


My drunkenness and laughter when explained are, that, the
elephant's, the lion’s, this (1,039).

The lion when he laughs sheds blood, (and) who would not
flee from a drunken elephant (1,040) ?

Fools when in drink arc unaware (of things) ; the sensible
are not so in (their) cups.

The man who is not low in intellect may drink of wine, but
he would not be drunk.

Whenever I incline my thoughts to wine, I bring the Qaisar's
crown beneath my feet (1,041).

When upon wine my mind becomes keen-set, I put the wine-jar
on my foeman's head (1,042).

When I engage in (drinking) wine I pour into friend’s sleeves
the treasures of Qarun (1,043).

The liver of (my) foes, whose hearts I pierce, (e’en) as “ kababs ”
(1,044) I put upon a spit.

What do my (faithful friends), well-wishers, think ? (Think
they) the heavenly planets do not work ?

Though I be drunk and sleep, fortune, awake, is (busied)
with some work (in my behalf).

Despite the sleep (in) which I was (immersed), behold how I
disturbed the khaqan's sleep !

In spite of .^uch persistence in (my) faults (1,045), see how I
carried off the Hindu’s things (1,046) !

The man who through his weakness does not sleep at night
upon his watch is (but) a dog.

The lion though he’s bold can enter not the dragon’s door
though in his cave he sleep.

When (thus) the king had spoken out his thoughts, the nobles’
laces brightened like a rose.

They laid (their) heads before him on the ground, (and) humbly
gave him answer in this wise :

That which the king has to his servants said may serve as an
adornment to the wise.

We've made it all for body and for soul an amulet, a ring too
for our ears (1,047).


102


THE HAFT PAIKAE


God placed the crown upon the monarch's head ; the efEorts
of the people are (but) wind.

The princes who have reigned have striven much to make
themselves as equals to the king.

With you (there) none became kings, they all fell upon (their)
heads, but none came to the head (1,048).

That which we slaves have witnessed from the king no one
from white or black has witnessed (e’er) (1.049).

He has bound demons, and burnt dragons too, killed elephants,
transfixed rhinoceri.

Pass lions by, what game indeed are they ? (such and) all
usual game are marks for shafts (1.050).

But when we reckon, there is none save him to turn the neck of
the rhinoceros (1,051).

Now does he make the leopard's spots his mark : now from the
mouth of crocodile draws teeth.

At times brings wrinkles on to India’s brow (1.052) ; at times
by a Hindu routs China's troops (1,053).

Now from the faghfiir (1,054) does he snatch the crown ; now
does he from the Qaisar tribute take.

Though lion-quellers have been numerous, who through the
mouth have strained the lion’s brains — ■

See how a lion with three hundred men subdued three hundred
thousand enemies !

Before us lies the story of past kings — their enmity and con-
quests (in the world) —

If each of them acquired some fame it was through a whole
army in a length of time.

In such a fight, against so many men, no one could do what
(King Bahram) has done.

Whene’er they make out an account of kings, they as a thousand
count a King Bahram.

Each one of them has his own special stamp, (but) Bahram
is the whole world in himself.

When he brings down his mace on any head, he splits the
helmet on the head in two (1,05.5).


TEANSLATION


103


If (the king’s) sabre strike upon hard stone, the stone is shivered
into bits like sand.

The snake-stone, his lance-head, of poison cures (1,056) ;
the dragon, too, his bridle, stops the way (1,057).

(Lo) ! every body which opposes him, e’en as a candle is
consumed by Fate.

The head which sallies forth against his sword — from that
head surely comes the scent of blood.

His drunkenness points to sobriety, his sleep is not sleep, it is
wakefulness.

And at the time when he partakes of wine, he drinks of wine,
his enemy gets drunk.

He is more full of learning than all men ; nay, both more learned
and more powerful.

He in the world alone is versed in things ; he needs not anyone’s
experience.

As long as earth has place beneath the sky, over the sky may
his command have power!

May equity be centred in his court ! The rose, prosperity, be
on his crown (1,058) !

The earth a refuge in his shadow find ! The sky be ’neath the
foot of his (high) throne !

When the vazirs had spoken (their) address — bored pearls
(1,059) before his ruby-brilliant face —

King Nu‘man from amongst those present rose, adorned the
banquet of the king with praise.

He said. Wherever the king's throne arrives, be it the Fish, it
reaches to the moon (1,060).

Who should make the relations of the crown to the king's head
(to be) or true or false (1,061) ?

’Tis God who put upon your head the crown— may it thrive
through your fortune-favoured head !

We who are (humble) servants of your court, are chiefs through
the protection (1,062) of your crown.

Whatever we possess we have from you ; you have control
of all that we possess (1,063).


104


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Arab or Persian, if ’tis your command, we will devote our
heads as humble slaves.

A long time now it is that I have served at the king’s court
with (all the) art (I have).

Since Pve become exalted at his court ; found in his path
the path of sustenance,

If he will deign to hold me (now) excused, with (his) permission
I will go back home.

I'll rest a little from the journey's toil, and when the king
commands, I will return.

But truly whilst I live I’ll not renounce the monarch’s
service, worship of (his) throne.

The king commanded that the treasurer should weigh out
gems and treasure (from his store) ;

Should bring out presents suited to a king : Egyptian, Moorish,
and ‘Ummanian (1,064).

The men engaged upon the business set (before him) load on
load of treasured store ;

Ass-loads of gold, in bushels pods of musk, with several troops
of slave-boys and of girls ;

Precious dress-stufis of highest quality, so many one could
not how many say ;

Horses of Arab race in Persia bred, swimmers of streams,
and coursers of the hills :

Both Indian sabres and Davidian mail (1,065) ; his lavishness
sailed over Ararat (1,066);

More pearls and rubies than could pearl-sellers or ruby-experts
estimate or think.

From his own head a jewelled crown (he gave), with dress
worth more than Shushtar’s revenue (1,067).

In Yaman down to Aden, land he gave ; such gifts made
(Nu'man’s) face bright as the moon (1,068).

Nu'man and Munzir with such bounteous gifts departed from
the king in pomp and state.

The king indulged in pleasure and delights, for he was wearied
with the march and fight.


TRANSLATION


105


He ordered each one's business, such as ’twas ; then he engaged
in managing his own.

To his heart's wish he settled it at ease, wine in his hand,
his foes beneath his feet.

The story of that master he recalled (1,069) who formerly had
left him that account.

That inner room of the Seven Portraits too, the envy rather
of the Seven Climes (1,070).

The love those girls of hurl form displayed sowed in his heart
the seed of love (for them).

His furnace, those seven alchemics at hand, no longer with the
seven fusings worked (1,071).

The first girl (there) was of Kayanian race ; her father had
departed from the world.

He asked for her with more than thousand gifts, and e’en
through (shining) virtues gained a pearl (1,072).

Sending a courier to the khaqiin then — partly in amity, in
part with threats —

He asked him for his daughter with the crown and treasure,
tribute for seven years besides.

The khaqan give his daughter, tribute too, a load of “ dinars ”
(1.073) and a store of gems.

And then he made an inroad into Rum, and poured into that
land and country fire (1,074).

Through fear the Qaisar acquiesced at once ; with deprecation
gave his daughter too.

Then sending to the king of Barbary — with gold of Barbary
(1,075), the crown, and throne.

He gained possession of his daughter (fair) — see how he used
astuteness (in his quest) \

Then the straight cypress from that garden borne, he went
thence to the realm of Hindustan.

With sense and judgment he demanded (there) the daughter
of the Ray (1,076), and gained his wish.

His courier went and asked from Khyarazm a lovely girl
fit to adorn a feast.


106


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He wrote to Saqlab, and demanded there a beautv as a drop
of water bright.

When from the rulers of the Seven Climes (1,077) he had received
seven girls like precious pearls.

He gave his heart exclusively (1,078) to joy ; did justice to
gay living and to youth.

Description of Bahrdm' s banquet in winter.

The httilding of the Seven Doinei.

One day that with the light of lustrous dawn the heavens
showed a clear and open brow :

Auspicious day, bright, world-illumining — happy that day !
remembered be that day ! —

The king with sages an assembly held as lovely as the charmer's
lovely face.

A day for house and not for garden ’twas, being the first day
of the winter-time.

The garden’s lamps and candles were extinct (1,079) ; the
gardener had removed and gone away (l.OSO).

The crow had robbed the nightingale of notes, and in the
garden gave forth stolen notes (1,081).

The crow's (in truth) of none but Hindu race — in Hindus
theft is not a wondrous (act) (1,082).

That artist (skilled), the early morning wind, had drawn upon
the water chain-like rings.

The winter's gleam, which robbed the fire of light, made swords
from water, water too from swords (1,083).

The snow-storm bearing in its hand a file, keen, glancing,
pierced the eyes, and closed the springs.

The milk in fermentation grew like cheese ; the blood (too) in
the body icy cold (1,084).

The ground had egg-plant robes (1,035), ermine the mount ;
the sky put on (a robe of) minever.

The wild beasts lay in wait for animals ; tore off their skins,
and made of them skm-robes.


TEANSLATIOX


107


The plants kept down (their) heads beneath the earth ; (all)
things that grow were as recluses hid.

The alchemist's work of the two-hued world (1.036) had in
the stone's heart hid the ruby, fire (1,087).

The roses through the furnace strained by art had plastered
(too) cement abov'e (their) heads (1,088).

The drops mercurial in the water-glass were, layer upon layer,
silver pure (1,089).

In such a season the king's winter-house (1,090) of (all) four
seasons kept the temperature (1,091).

Through all the many fragrant perfumes (burnt) (well)-
tempered had the wintry air become (1,092).

The fruits and wines, (which were) as honey (sweet), gave sleep
unto the brain, and waked the heart (1,093).

A fire, of sandal and of aloes lit, had round it smoke hke
Hindus at their prayers (1,094).

A fire, a furtherance to cheer, a mine of Zoroastrian sulphur,
red of hue (1,095).

Blood that had curdled by fermenting Twas ; a piece of silk
(that had been) steeped in blood (1,096).

Its juiubes gave the hue of hazel-nuts ; its mercury became
bruised cinnabar (1,097).

A ruddy apple with the core scooped out, with pomegranate-
seeds stuffed within the hole (1,098).

A garden ('twas) whose gardener had awaked, (and then)
had bathed it in the juice of grapes (1,099).

Some amber which had stained itself with pitch (1,100) ; a
sun which had assumed a veil of musk (1,101).

Darkness, become a messmate of the light ; a tulip growing
from a hull's locks (1.102).

A Turk related to the race of Greeks (1,103) ; the Lustre of the
Eyes of Hindus called (1,104).

The torch of Jonah, or the Speaker's lamp ; the feast of Jesus,
garden of Abraham (1,105).

Small bricks of charcoal of a musky hue around the fire as,
round a mirror, rust (1,106).


108


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Those, agate-hued, this, with cornelians’ worth ; it was a mine
of rubies in the dark.

Its gems, (which) to the eyes gave sustenance, (were), like
the “ yaqut ”, yellow, red, and blue (1,107).

A young bride ('twas) whose ornaments were sparks ; one
ambergris-perfumed, embracing coal (1.108).

A draped bower and some nooks at goldsmiths" work (1,109) —
an aloes-wood bower, and pomegranate-nooks (1,110).

The yellow flame within the fuel's (1.111) smoke a store of
gold was ’neath a swarthy snake (1,112).

Its hellishness and hcavenliness well known : hell by (its)
heat, and heaven by (its) light.

The hell of those who to the temple go (1,113) ; the heaven
(1.114) of those who take the road to heaven.

Zardusht's Avesta tuneful round the fire; the Hagians pledged
their robes to it like moths (1,115).

It opened pores of water which had frozen. Alas ! why should
it have the name of fire (1,116) ?

Around the fire with special native grace ring-doves were
flapping in the dance (their) wings (1,117).

(And) in that banquet-room (all) draped with silk, pheasants
and partridges were circling round (1,118).

The room more pleasant than the cypress shade ; the wine
more rosy than the pheasant’s blood.

The ring-dovezcoloured sky poured from the air ring-doves,
(and) poured out from the ring-doves blood (1,119).

The wine within the cup of crystal-make was like wet fire in
arid water placed (1,120).

The onager-eyed (beauties) drank the wine ; of haunch of
onager they made “ kababs ’’ (1,121).

King Bahram Gur drank wine (there) with his friends after
the mode of world-possessing kings (1,122).

Wine and dessert-fruits, music and some friends — some
intimates, partakers of the wine.

The rosy wine, sweet smiler like the rose : a ripe thing crushed
to death, a living fire (1,12.3).


TRANSLATION


109


By music braius were heated, and the heart through warmth
of feeling grew as soft as wax.

The sensible swept (clean) the path of cheer (1,121) ; gave
utterance to fine and witty words.

Whoe’er had any store, said from that store something within
the bounds of his degree.

When speech became enchained with speech (these words)
came from the tongue of one of eloquence :

The lofty steps which on the sky the king has mounted, and
the subtlety he has (1,12-3) —

No one, in what is manifest or hid, has seen in any of the kings
of earth (1,126).

We by the glory of the (monarch's) head (1,127) have everything
through his auspicious steps (1,128).

Safety and health (for us) ; distress for foes ; abundance of
advantages (for us).

Health, safety, and subsistence — these three (things) are the
essentials, other (things) but vain.

When clothed the body and the stomach full, say, Be not
pearls or rubies in the world !

(Then) we who have (with us) a king like you, in having you
have everything (we can).

Would that in that there were some means by which the evil
eye might e'er from us be turned (1,129)!

That the stars’ motion and the heavens’ march an aspect so
auspicious (e'er) might show !

That the good luck of joy might never stray, pleasure not
ruined be for those who joy !

So that the king might be for ever glad, the wind not snatch
the grain of his delight (1,130).

Tis urgent that the monarch's life be gay, if (e’en) our lives
be sacrificed 'tis fit.

When to an end the speaker brought (his) speech, all present
fixed (their) hearts upon the speech (1,131).

The words took from the heart anxiety (1,132) ; the speech
was by the hearts of all approved.


no THE HAFT PAIKAE

A man of noble mind was there with them, a lordly man of
honourable birth.

Shida by name, sun-bright (1,133), adorner, he, with (his)
designs of all (both) hlack and white (1,134).

A master in the work of drawing too, and in surveying famed
geometer.

Physics, geometry, astronomy — all in his hands was like a
ball of wax.

A finished worker in the building-art ; in painting and in
sculpture artist skilled ;

Who, using brush and chisel, by his work took Manfs soul
and Farhad’s heart away (1,135).

Simnar was his first master, and, in truth, to learning an
apprenticeship he'd served (1,136).

He'd helped his master in Khavarnaq erst in painting and in
sculptured work as well (1,137).

"When at that feast he saw the monarch gay ; fluent of tongue,
with fer\'idness of heart (1,138),

He kissed the earth, paid homage to the king, sat down again
when he had kissed the earth.

He said. If by the king I'm given leave. I'll keep the evil
eye far from his lands ;

For I can weigh the sky, I know the stars, by reason know the
business of the stars.

In painting and in building you may think I have the inspiration
of (true) art.

I'll form a likeness to the lofty spheres (1,139), by means of
which they will not harm the king.

Whilst he is in the picture-room, the world, he'll have no fear
of the celestial stars.

Placed in the place of safety as to life, on earth he’ll be, (in
power), as the sky (1,140).

I mean, from my ideas of the aSair (1,141) like the Seven Skies
(1,142) I'll make a seven-domed house.

The hue of every dome distinct, more fine than hue of any
idol-temide known.


TRANSLATION


111


Seven rare and charming idols has the king (1,143), each
signalized as of a different Clime (L144),

In ground-work and in columns every Clime (1,145) is with
a certain planet in accord (1,146).

(And) for the seven days of every week the seven planets,
it is plain, appear (1,147).

On such days, days to light a festive scene, let him take pleasure
in a dome each day ;

Put on attire in colour as the house, and with the charmer of
the house drink wine.

If with these words (of mine) the king conform, he'll magnify
himself, be glorious.

So long as life exists and may be used (1,148), (the king) will
have enjoyment of his life.

The king said. Granting that I do (all) this, the house of gold,
the doors of iron make,

Since at the end of things I needs must die, why should I
all this pain and trouble bear ?

As to your words, that I should raise a house of domes, and
in such wise adorn the domes —

Houses of fancy and desire all these — where is the house of
servitude to God ?

Although in all of them I may express applause, where shall
I the Creator seek (1,149) ?

Again he said, These words are ill-conceived— why spoke I
of the place-Creator's place ?

He who cannot in (any) place be seen may be adored and served
in every place.

The monarch spoke these words, was silent (then) — his brain
full of excitement from the theme.

For he had seen in Simnar's formula (1,150) what served as
comment on the seven forms ;

Those fairy forms too of the Seven Climes like pearls of price
he in his casket had.

These words upon the world-king had effect, for he had know-
ledge of a secret scheme (1,151).


112


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He used not haste in answering the words ; he gave no answer
for a few short days (1,152).

When after these expressions several days had passed, the
brilliant king for Shida sent ;

Asked him to do what he had erst proposed, (and) settled all
things wanted for his work.

He made a treasure ready, gave him means, that he might
take the trouble if he could.

(Then) for the work of marking out the site a day by Bahram’s
aspect blest was chosen (1,153)

Under a good ascendant by a man observant of ascendants,
skilled in stars (1,154).

Shida with an ascendant auguring good laid the foundation
of the house of domes.

He’d made it in two years so heavenly that no one could
distinguish it from heaven.

When one in dome-constructing so expert had built so fine a
bouse of seven domes ;

Had, as to the ascendant of each one, fulfilled (aU) the conditions
made at first (1,155),

The monarch came, and seeing seven skies (1,156) in friendship
hand in hand together joined,

He thought how the act of Nu‘man towards Simnar throughout
all countries had become well-known ;

(And how) the killing of that wondrous man (1,157) was dis-
approved by all who could discern.

The town of Amul (1,158) he to Shida gave, that Shida
might through Bahram be content.

He said. If (King) Nu'raan (once) did a wrong by treatment
so severe of one, a friend.

My justice will amend that act of wrong — from lavishness
not that, nor this from greed (1,159).

The action of the world can be like this — it gives one loss, and
gives another gain.

(Like) a “ kabab ” one friend becomes through thirst (1,160) ;
another friend immersed in water drowns.


TRANSLATION


113


All are bewildered at their own affairs ; except submission
know no remedy (1,161).

No one the secret of this knows but God, He, only, knowledge
of all secrets has.

Description of the seven-domed palace of Bahrain Gur, and of the
manner of his slap in each dome.

When he who wore the crown of Kai-Qubad exalted to the
moon Kai-Khusrau’s crown (1,162),

He from the centre of the realm upraised a Bistun (1,163)
from which that of Faihad fled (1,164).

In such a Bistun, which seven columns had (1,165), he raised
up to the heavens seven domes.

And in those walls (1,166), which touched upon the sky, he
saw a rampart round the lofty spheres (1,167) ;

(He saw) seven domes within those walls built up after the
nature of the planets seven (1,168).

The astrologer had made each dome in hue like to the planet
after which ’twas formed.

The dome which was of Saturn’s temperament (1,169) was
hidden (all) in blackness like the musk.

And that whose essence (1,170) was of Jupiter was with the hue
of sandal-wood adorned.

The one encompassed by (the planet) Mars (1,171) — a red
complexion was attached to it.

That which imparted knowledge of the sun (in hue) was yellow
like a golden belt.

That which of Venus’ grace had happy news— its hue was
like the face of Venus white.

The one which had from Mercury its lot was turquoise-hued
from its felicity (1,172).

And that one by whose tower (1,173) the moon went forth
through the moon’s aspect throve in verdancy (1,174).

(So) with the nature of the planets seven the seven domes
in this mode raised their forms.


lU THE HAFT PAIKAR

The Seven Climes had covenants from them (1,175) ; the seven
kings’ daughters there remained as brides (1,176).

With (all her) grace and wisdom each of them in one of these
seven domes had her abode.

After the house's pattern she’d made all, even to seats, the
colour of the dome.

Day after day the happy king would take his place each day
within a different dome (1,177).

On Saturday the place prescribed for it, and on the other days
as it was meet.

When using his distinguished will he held a festive meeting in
a certain dome ; —

\Wiere'er he drank of wine he was attired in dress of the same
colour as the dome.

The lady of the dome would drink of wine ; each moment show
her charm in some new light ;

(Seeking) how she should ravish the king's heart, (and) how
the king should in her sweetness (1,17^) joy.

(So) she would tell him love-exciting tales, should sharpen
those in whom desire was blunt. —

Although Bahram raised castles in this mode, he did not save
his life from death at last. —

Nizami flee the rose-garden whose rose is only as the thorn,
whose thorn is sharp (1,179) !

See to what came Bahram, with all his power, through this
two days’ abiding-jdace at last (1,180) !

Bahram sits on Saturday in the Black Dome, and the daughter of
the king of the First Clime tells him a story.

Bahram when bent on pleasure fixed his eyes upon the portraits
of the seven brides.

From the Shammasian temple (1,181), Saturday, he pitched
his tent on the ‘Abbasian rug (1,182).

To the domed-edifice of galia hue (1,183) to (see) the Indian
princess went Bahram.


TRANSLATION


115


Till night-time he indulged in mirth and play, burning the
aloes-wood and scattering scent (1,184).

When night (came on and) in the moon's behalf sprinkled
(its) black musk over white silk (robes) (1,185),

The king from that Cashmerian early Spring (1,186) asked for
some perfume like the mornbig breeze (1,187).

He asked her to unlock a case of pearls (1,188), and daintily
address some words to him.

In story which should fill with keen desire, and make those
drunk with love desire to sleep.

The musk-deer, Turk-eyed, and of Indian birth, loosened the
(fragrant) musk-pod (of her speech).

May the five turns of music (1,189), first she said, above the
moon’s throne (1,190) for the king be (played) !

As long as lasts the world may he have life, (and) on his
threshold may all heads be (laid).

In everything he wishes to obtain, may tardiness be absent
from his fate I

Her prayer concluded, she bowed down her head ; from sugar
brought the sweets of aloes-wood (1,191).


Story.

With eyes cast on the ground in modesty, she told (her story) — •
finer never hoard :

In childhood I've been told by relatives — quick-witted people
of keen intellect —

That of the ladies of the heavenly fort (1,192) one (most)
ascetic, gentle, and refined,

Used every month to visit at our house, her dress composed
entirely of black silk.

They asked her. Through what fear or fantasy, ingot of silver,
are you (dressed) in black ?

Tis well that you impart to us the tale (1,193), the blackness
whiten of this (mystery) (1,194) ;

That in your friendly' feeling you explain what means the
marvel of your (robes of) black.


IIG THE HAFT PAIKAE

The woman, powerless to avoid the truth, told (them) the story
of the black silk (robes).

Said she, Since you will leave it not untold. I'll tell you (of it)
if you’ll credit me.

I was the slave-girl of a certain king, with whom, though he is
dead, I am content (1,195).

He was a fortunate and mighty king ; to sheep from wolf he
gave security.

He had seen troubles, but had bravely striven, and through
injustice (suffered) dressed in black.

The people through his lamentable fate called him the king
of those who dressed in black.

As (his) adornment in past times he had things red and yellow
of (most) wondrous worth.

As roses in the garden kind to guests, like to the red rose in its
sheath he smiled.

For guests he had a room prepared which turned its face from
earth unto the pleiades (1,196).

He had a tray laid, and had carpets spread, servants he kindly
entertained (to serve).

IVhoever came, he made him stop (awhile), and bade him
welcome as his visitor (1,197).

When they had laid the tray in fitting style, supplied provisions
suited to his rank,

The king would ask his story, (and enquire) about his stay
abroad and his own land.

Then whilst the king gave ear the traveller would tell each
wondrous thing that he had seen.

After this method all his life was passed ; whilst life endured
this rule adhered to it.

(Then) for a time he disappeared from us ; like to the Simurgh

(1.198) he withdrew from us.

When after this a long time passed, and none, as of the ‘Anql

(1.199) , could give news of him.

Through fortune's grace the wearer of the crown one day
ascended suddenly (his) throne.


TRANSLATION


117


His body head to foot was (clothed in) black : (his) tunic,
head-dress, and (his) gown (1,200) (were black).

Keen-witted all the time he ruled the world, he dressed in
black though sufiering no loss.

In blackness like the Stream of Life (1,201) he lived ; (but)
none the reason of this blackness asked.

One night I was. in kindness and in love, waiting upon that
“■ qibla ” (1,202) (of the world).

Resting his foot upon my lap in love, he was complaining of
the stars of heaven.

Said he. See what a raid the sky has made : what games it's
practised on a king like me !

From Iram’s region (1.20.3) it has cut me ofi, and brought me
'neath the blackness of the (1,204).

No one has asked me where that region is, nor why this blackness
on my silver lies (1.203).

I thought upon an answer to the king ; I gently rubbed my
face upon his foot.

I said (to him). 0 aid to the distressed, best one of all the rulers
of the earth,

Who on the earth has such an arm that he may graze (the face
of) heaven with an axe (1,206) ?

Into a hidden story to enquire (is not for us) ; you know (it)
and can tell.

Hy master finding me (fit) confidant, bored rubies (red) and
split the musk-pod open (1,207).

He said, When in this sovereignty of mine I formed a habit
of receiving guests,

I made enquiries of whome'er I saw into (his) past adventures,
bad or good.

One day a stranger came from oS the road, (whose) turban,
shoes, and dress were all of black.

When I had ordered food, as was my mode, I summoned him
and honoured him (as guest).

I said, 0 you, whose book I have not read, (tell me) on what
account your dress is black.


118


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He said, Desist ! abstain from words (like) these, for of the
Simurgh none have given news (1,208).

I said. Disclose (the matter), seek no pleas ; inform me of the
pitch-pot and the pitch.

He said, you must excuse, for ’tis a wish (about a thing)
which cannot be revealed.

No one has knowledge of this blackness, know, save only him
who has this black (attire).

Secret cajoleries I used with him, — I an ‘Iranian, he of Khurasan
(1,209).

Cajolery had no efiect on him, he lifted not the veil from the
aSair.

But when my entreaties had exceeded bounds, he grew ashamed
at my uneasiness.

He said. There is in China’s realm (1,210) a town, pleasant,
adorned like highest paradise.

“ The City of the Stupefied ” its name ; the house of mourning
’tis of tho.se in black.

(Fair) as the moon is every person's face, (and) all (are dressed)
in black silk like the moon (1,211).

Whoever from that city drinks of wine (1,212), that city (1,213)
makes him put on black (attire).

Its cause is that it’s in one's written fate, although it is a
wondrous unread tale.

Though with throat-piercing stroke you shed my blood,
more than these words I will not speak (to you).

He spoke these words, and (then) prepared to go (1,214) ;
on my desire (for knowledge) closed the door.

Jly head (still) at that story stupefied, the story-teller had
gone far from me.

The story-teller went, the tale untold ; the danger was that
I should go distraught.

On such a chess-board though I pondered long, (and) brought
down (many) pawns from every side.

His check to king and castle (1,215) was too strong to let me
scale (his) castle by a noose (1,216).


TRANSLATION


119


I tried to lure to patience thoughts and care, — (such luiing)
gave no patience to my heart.

Though openly and secretly I asked, none could explain the
matter as it was.

At last I quit the realm, and left to rule a relative of mine,
of my own house.

I took of dress, of treasure, and of gems that which should keep
the mind devoid of stress.

The town I sought, — inquiring oft its name, — I went and saw
(then) that which I desired.

I saw a town like Iram’s garden (1,217) decked, (where) every-
one had raised a flag of musk (1,218).

The face of everyone was white as milk, (and) all were dressed
in dresses black as pitch.

(Then) in a certain house I settled down, and piled up dresses (iu
it), hale on bale (1,219).

A year I sought to know about the town ; but none informed
me of the state of things.

M’hen I'd examined into everything, I met a man of frank,
ingenuous mind (1,220).

Handsome, benign, refined, of judgment calm, speaking no
evil thing of anyone.

By reason of his goodness and good sense, I sought to make
acquaintance with the man.

(iknd) when his friendship had been gained by me, I girded
up my loins to honour him.

I made him gifts of money freshly coined, and beyond measure
(other) things (besides).

Day after day I added to his wealth, with gold did I a piece of
iron gild (1,221).

I made him utterly my game and prey, at times by silk, at times
by silk-faced girls.

(So) the man by that scattering of gold became my prey like
sacrificial ox.

My gifts of treasure thus aSected him that he was troubled
by the load of it.


120


THE HAFT PAIKAE


One day he took me to his house (as guest) ; gave entertainment
more than was his wont.

He set the tray before me and brought food, good service to
his entertainment joined.

Upon his tray was all that was required — except the object of
his guest’s desire.

When we had eaten every kind of food, we talked on every
topic (that occurred).

When he had done his duty as my host, he ofiered me im-
measurable gifts ;

My gifts, together joined, before me put, and then sat down with
deprecating words.

He said. So many gifts of gems and wealth no jeweller has
(surely ever) weighed.

I who was satisfied with trivial gains, — wherefore the giving
of all this to me ?

What the return for (all) this lordly wealth ? Command,
that I may serve you (as you will).

I have one life, (but) if it thousand were, e'en (then) ’twould
be of short weight in these scales.

I said, Why make this (show of) service, pray 1 Come to me
more mature, what crudeness (this) (1,222) 1

In the scales of the man of sense what weight or value have
things so contemptible ?

(Then) to my slaves, those reared with kindly care, I gave
an intimation by a sign.

That they should run and from my private store bring money
of the purest metal coined.

Of that pure precious coin I gave to him more than had been
(bestowed on him) at first.

The man, who knew not (yet) of my design, was through my
kindness overcome with shame.

He said. Already, through your nobleness, I’ve fallen short
of giving you your due.

Once more (your) bounty you’ve bestowed on me, there’s
room for shame, what can I find to do ?


TEAKSLATION


121


I did not put before you (all) your gifts that restitution should
be made to you ;

I put them thinking such a store should not without return
be or some toil of mine.

Since you have treasure to the treasure joined, I am ashamed,
though you may be content.

If you need anything from me, pray ask ; if not take back
these things which you have given.

Encouraged by his friendship (now assured), (and) conscious
of his kindly sentiments,

I told him (then) the story of myself, the story of my kingship
and my rule.

The reason why I‘d hastened to this tract, and given up my
sovereignty (awhile).

The cause, to -wit. my wish to know why all the people of this
town were void of joy.

IThy without loss they gave themselves to grief, and garbed
themselves in black (as those who mourn).

The man when he had heard these words from me, was startled
by the words, as lamb by wolf.

Awhile he stood like those whose hearts are scared, and closed
his eyes like those who are ashamed.

He said. You ask an inexpedient thing, (but) ITl give answer
such as meets the case. —

* * * ♦ ♦

When night o'er camphor scattered ambergris (1,223), and men
abandoned paths by men pursued.

He said, (Now) is the time that you should see what you
desire, and know it (as it is).

Arise, that I the secret may reveal, and show to you the aspect
of the case.

He spoke these words, and went out of the house ; he made
himself my guide upon the road.

He went in front, I (following) behind, of people there was not
a soul with us.


122


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He cut me oS from men as tliough I were fay-born, and towards
a ruin led me on (1,224).

When we had gone into that ruined place, we fed like fairies,
both, beneath a veil.

There was a basket fastened by a rope ; he wont and brought
it quietly to me.

A rope was round the basket tied, ('twas like) a serpent round
a serpent-basket coiled.

He said, A moment in this basket sit, and o'er the heavens
and earth display yourself (1,225),

That you may know why all who silence keep are in this manner
dressed in black attire.

Except the basket nothing will display that which from you
is hidden, good or bad.

Since I considered (it) some harmless charm, I sat down in
the basket (there) at once.

(Then) when my body took (its) place in it, my basket, bird-like,
rose into the air.

By some ring-working magic mechanism to the ring-juggling
sphere (1,226) it drew me up.

The rope betook itself to magic work, (whiFt) in rope-dancing
hapless I engaged (1,227).

The rope stuck to my neck as (wick to) lamp ; the rope was
tight and firm, my neck was lithe (1.22S).

As (with) a captive whom good fortune leaves, (so) did the
rope remove not from my neck (1,229).

Though the rope was a tent-rope to my frame (1,230), it, only,
was the thread which held my soul (1,231).

A tower came (to view) that reached the moon, from looking
up at which one's hat fell oil.

'When to that lofty tower the basket came, the knots (then)
of my rope played tricks (on me) (1,232).

It did its business with me, and went oil ; I raised much outcry,
’twas of no avail.

When I looked high and low upon the world, I saw myself
bestowed upon the heavens.


TRANSLATION


123

The (lofty) sky had o'er me cast a spell ; I found myself
suspended like the sky.

Through anguish such as nearly caused my death, my eyes
from terror could not do their work.

Upwards my heart could not with boldness look, (and) who
would have the courage to look down ?

With terror overcome I closed my eyes, to utter helplessness
resigned myself ;

Regretful, and repenting my emprise, (and) yearning for
my relatives and house.

There was no profit in that penitence, save piety, and in-
vocation's aid (1,233).

When after this a short time had elapsed.— upon the top of
that long, lofty tower

A bird came up and perched as might a mount, (such) that from
it my heart some trouble felt.

The branches of a tree its wings and plumes, its feet were like
the bases of a throne.

And from the size it had from head to foot, the tower was,
one might say, reduced to naught.

As long as any column was its beak, a Bistun (1,234) with a
cavern in the midst.

(The bird) would every moment scratch itself, and plume and
clean itself unceasingly.

Each feather which it scratched out from the root scattered
(abroad) a shell replete with pearls.

It went to slei'j) above my head, whilst I despaired as drowning
man at water does.

I said. If I take hold of the bird's foot, 'twill clutch me in its
talons as a prey.

And if I wait, the place is full of risk, calamity's below me
and above.

A faithless man has through (his) baseness done an act so
heartless of deceit to me.

What object had he in tormenting me, that in this manner
he has crushed my hands (1,235) ?


1-21


THE HAFT PAIKAE


]My property, perchance, led him astray, for that he’s brought
destruction on (a friend).

To clutch the bird's foot will be best for me, and thus may
I escape this place of risk.

'When came the time of cock-crow, (and) the birds and every
wild thing which existed stirred.

That bird's heart too by restlessness disturbed, — it flapped
its pinions and bestirred itself.

Trusting in God, I lifted up my bauds, (and) seized the foot
of that strong-pinioned (bird).

It brought its feet together, spread its wings, and to the
heights, like air, it carried earth (1,2.36).

From early dawn to mid-day travelled I, a traveller-disquieter
(the bird).

'V\Tien the sun had become intensely hot, (and) o'er our heads
the sky had passed (so far),

The bird (then) sought the shade, and, by degrees, it gained
the pleasure of the lower tracts.

Until it reached a point from which to earth was (no more than)
the measure of a lance.

Verdure like silk there was upon the ground, giving the scent
of rose and ambergris.

I called down hundred blessings on the bird, and (quickly)
from its foot I loosed my hand.

I fell like lightning, with an anxious heart, upon the soft
grass, and the dainty flowers.

A good time I remained (there) lying down, my heart devoted
to unpleasant thoughts.

When I was rested after (my) fatigue, a little better (then),
I offered thanks.

In normal state I opened (then) my eyes, and gazed around
the place on every side.

A garden I beheld whose ground was heaven ; on it the dust of
man had never lain (1,237).

A hundred thousand flowers were blooming there ; the verdure
wakeful, whilst the water slept (1,238).


TRAXSLATIOX


125


Of different kind in colour every flower, the scent of each
extended to a league.

The hyacinth's (dark) locks with lasso loops took captive
there the ringlets of the pink (1.239).

The jasmine in its teeth took roses’ lips (1,240), the meadow
bit the tongues of Judas’ trees (1,241).

The dust was camphor, ambergris the earth, the sand was
gold, (and all) the stones were gems.

The running springs, rose-water to the sense, in them cornelians
(shone) and lustrous pearls.

(Bright) rivulets from which this turquoise fort (1,242) for
bmpidness and colour had to beg.

The fish amidst the rivulets were like to silver “ dirams ”
(1,243) in quicksilver placed.

Around the garden, hills of emerald hue, the wood on them
of cypress, poplar, pine.

The stones were all red rubies to the ■view, and from their hue
the poplar pale turned red.

Sandal and aloes stood on every side, the breeze rubbed sandal
and burned aloes-wood (1,244).

H'uris had turned their minds to forming it, and Gabriel
had brought it from the heavens.

“ Rest to the Heart ” its name by Iram (1,245) given, and by
the azure sphere called “ Paradise

I, who had found so (fair) a place as that, was full of joy
as one who counts up hoards.

By reason of (its) beauty all amazed, I spoke (in thanks) the
words, “ Praise be to God ! ”

I wandered round about it, up and down, and viewed those
gardens soothing to the eyes.

I ate some choice fruits from (the trees), and spoke thanksgiving
for the bounty with my eyes.

Then ’neath a cypress went at last with joy ; -schat cypress ?
(that of) freedom from concern (1,246).

Till night-time I reposed in that retreat ; I had not gone though
endless work had called (1,247).


126


THE HAFT PAIKAR


I ate a little, slept a little (too) : thanksgiving oSered up for
every state.

When night adorned (the world) in different mode, gathered
collyrium up and crimson spurned (1,248) ;

When o'er the hills the moon wove linen threads, and like a
flower was cleft the eastern sky (1,249),

A wind arose and swept away the dust, — a wind more gentle
than the vernal breeze.

A cloud appeared like clouds of April-time, and o'er the verdure
scattered lustrous pearls.

The road when swept and sprinkled by the shower became
with idols (1,250) like a temple decked.

I saw afar unnumbered hurls fair, through whom repose and
self-control were lost.

A world of brightest pictures (1.251) that possessed the daintiness
of wine of fragrant scent.

Like a fresh spring was every picture (1,252) (there), (and) all
had henna in their hands (as flowers).

(Their) ruby lips like tulips in the garth ; their rubies blood-
wite (too) of Khuzistan (1,253).

Their heads and arms were covered with gold chains ; their
necks and ears adorned with lustrous pearls.

Candles for monarchs fit were in their hands, (candles) devoid
of snuffers, smoke and moth.^.

In lively, graceful manner they approached, displaying thousand
beauties to the view.

Those girls of hurl-kind bore on their heads a throne and rugs
like those of paradise.

They spread the rugs and (then) set up the throne, with fierce
attack assailed my self-control.

When after this a time, not long, had passed, the moon, you'd
say, descended from the sky (1,254) :

A sun (so brilliant) from afar appeared that through (its)
light the sky was lost to view (1,2.55).

(And), like the hurls and the fairies, came around it hundred
thousand morning stars (1,256).


TRANSLATION


127


The cypress, she, the girls to her (as) field ; the red rose, she,
the jasmine, they to her.

Each honeyed one (1.257) a waxen-taper bore — the honey-bee
and wax are well-conjoined.

Straight cypresses (1.258) the garden filled in full ; all were
light-bearing night-illuming gems.

That queen august in fortune (then) approached, and like a
bride sat down upon the throne (1,259).

The world entirely tranquil, left and right, — when she sat
down a resurrection rose (1,2G0).

'When she had sat a moment she unveiled her face and from
her feet she drew the shoes.

(Then) from her palace-dome a queen came forth, with Ethiop
troops behind, and Greek before (1,261).

Her Greek and Ethiop modes like two-hued dawn set Ethiop
troops against the troops of Greece (1,262).

Narrow of eyes (1,263), but not of heart (was she) ; each cypress
(there), of earth, but she, of light (1,264).

A moment like a rose with head inclined she rested, casting
fire into the world (1,265).

A short time having passed she raised her head, and to a
confidant she had close by

She said. It seems to me some one is here, an earth-born one
who has no right to come.

Rise, and go round the circuit (of this place), (and) bring
before me whomsoe'er _vou meet.

That one of fairy birth rose from the ground, and like a fairy
flew to right and left.

When she beheld me she was much amazed ; she took my
hand (then) in a kindly way.

She said. Arise, that like the wind we go ; she who is chief of
ladies thus commands.

I added nothing to the words (she spoke), for they were words
which pleased me (much to hear).

I flew like crow with bird of paradise (1,266), and came up
to the throne where sat the bride (1,267).


THE HAFT PAIKAR


r2s

I went before her with alacrity ; I kissed the earth before her,
I earth-born.

She said, Arise, (that) place is not your place ; the rank of
servitude befits you not.

With one like me, of hospitable kin.l, the guest should in the
kernel be, not shell (1,‘26S).

Still more, since you are handsome, pleasant -faced, and have
been trained (too) by the trainer, worth.

(Come then), ascend the throne and sit by me ; the moon's
in concord with the Pleiades (1,269).

I said, 0 lady of angelic kind, such words address not to a
slave like me.

Bilqis's throne is not a place for divs ; no one but Solomon
(1,270) is fit for it.

I, (now), become a demon of the wilds,— how can I claim to
be a Solomon ?

She said. Ascend the throne, put forth no (pleas) ; use not
such spells with one who charms can speak.

The place is all your own, command is yours, but you must be
in harmony with me,

That you may be acquainted with my soul, that by my love
you may gain happiness.

I said. Your shadow only is your mate ; at the foot of your
throne my crown’s the dust.

She answered. By my life and head I swear that for a time
you shall come to my side.

You are my guest, 0 estimable man, and honour must
be (always) shown to guests.

Since I could see no course but servitude, I stood as (humble)
slave upon my feet.

(Then) an attendant gently took my hand, (and) seating me
upon the throne retired.

When I was seated on that lofty throne, I saw a Moon, (and)
seized it with a noose (1.271).

That lovely idol (then) with pleasant speech gave token of
much kindness and regard.


! TEANSLATION


129


She ordered them to bring a tray with food, exceeding (all
one’s power to) describe.

(Then) the celestial servants placed a tray, fragrant as ambergris
(were) all the foods.

Turquoise the tray, of ruby were the bowls, the eye rejoiced
in them, the soul was fed.

Whatever (food) the mind could bring to thought — the cook
would bring before (us) in a trice.

As soon as we had finished (our) repast, (our banquet) of hot
viands and cold drink.

The minstrel came, the cupbearer went ofi, (and) gaiety was
left without a plea (1,272).

A pearl was bored by every unbored Pearl (1,273), verses were
sung by every lovely one.

The dance a square oped, and a circle closed (1,274) ; wings
came to feet of those who would abjure.

Standing upright as tapers in the dance, they fashioned tapers
on the open space (1,275).

When they took rest, desisting from the dance, they made a
bold attack upon the wine.

The cupbearers made zealous haste to give ; it took away the
guardianship of shame.

I, moved by love, wine holding me excused, behaved as those
who’re drunken with the cup.

And that sweet-lipped one in (her) complaisance to dalliance
of mine made some return.

Seeing her (thus) inclined to love for me, I fell down like her
ringlets at her feet.

I planted kisses on my loved one’s feet ; the more she said.
Refrain ! the more I kissed.

The bird of hope flew high upon a branch, the field of con-
versation widened out.

In wine and kisses I rejoiced with her, with single heart and
thousand (ardent) souls.

I said, 0 heart’s debght, what is your wish ? You who can
boast of name (1,276), what is your name 1


130


THE HAFT PAIKAE


She said, I, Turk (1,277) of charming form, am known as
“ Charming Turkish Predatory Raid ” (1,278).

Through sympathy, community of mode , said I, there is
relationship in names.

Your name is “ Turkish Raid ”, (and) this is strange, another
kind of “Turkish Raid ” ’s my name (1,279).

Arise, that we may make a raid like Turks, and throw the
dark Hindus upon the fire (1,280) ;

Make of the Magian wine (1,281) food for our souls ; make
lovers’ sweets the sweet fruits for (our) wine.

Let us, since bitter wine, sweet fruits are here, put on a tray
the fruits, take wine in hand (1,282).

I found from (all her) blandishments such leave as took away
the distance which had been.

Her twinkling eye said, ’Tis your time to toy ; be ready, fortune’s
with you in accord.

Her smile gave heart, (and said). The time consents ; snatch
kisses, your beloved (now) concedes.

Admitting to a store of kisses sweet, giving me thousand
when I asked for one, —

I grew warm as the drunken man becomes — the loved one,
found, I, lost to self-control.

My heart’s blood heated was to ferment stirred, (and) when
its beating reached (that) beauty’s ears.

She said. To-night with kisses be content, no more scrape
ofi the colour of the sky (1,283).

Whatever passes this is not allowed — ’tis best the lover ingrate
should not be.

As long as calmness may abide in you, play with (my) locks,
snatch kisses, taste my lips.

(But) when you come to this that you no more can turn away
the reins from nature's call.

Of (all) these girls, each one of whom's a Moon, and a
(resplendent) dawn to lovers’ night.

The one you find most lovely in (your) eyes, on whom you
find desire fix its regard, —


TRANSLATION


131


Command, and I will let her go from me, and bring her under
your control at once ;

That in your service she may (then) engage, and to a special
chamber be attached ;

That she may charm your heart and show you love ; be as
your bride and also as your slave ;

Ut aqua e rivulo suo emissa vim flammse tuae opprimat.

Another night if a new bride you wish, I’H give you one,
you’re lord of all you want.

From these I’ll give you every night a pearl ; another should
you wish, her too I’ll give.

She spoke these words, (and) when she’d closed her speech,
she treated me with kindness and regard.

She looked at her attendants secretly, and her whom she
deemed worthy of (my) love

She summoned, gave her courteously to me, saying. Arise,
(and) do whate’er you will.

The Moon bestowed upon me took my hand, — I, lost in wonder
at that moon-faced one.

For in her grace, her beauty, and her charm she was a friend
whose airs might well be borne.

She went (before), I (followed) after her, her ringlets’ slave,
the Hindu of her moles (1,284);

Until I reached a house of beauty rare ; — she entered not till
she had let me in.

When we had gone into that wondrous house, we were like
bass and treble in accord.

Spread on a high-placed rug I saw a bed (made) of the finest
rarest painted silks :

The brightly burning candles on the rug burnt ambergris
and fashioned rubies red (1,285).

I laid my head upon the pillow (then) ; and clasped that beauty
tightly to my breast.

A harvest mine, with rose-decked willow white (1,286), soft,
dehcate and lovely, white and pink.


132


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Concham margaritiferam cui sigillum superimpositum erat
(inveni) ; illius conchae margaritis sigillum abstuli.

Till day-time in my bosom she remained : my bed was full
of camphor and of musk.

With day, she rose and like my fortune (went), and the require-
ments of a bath prepared.

She made a spacious tank my bathing-place, yellow with gold,
and red with (lustrous) gems.

When with rose-water I had bathed in it, I came forth crowned
and vested like the rose (1,287).

(Then) from that treasure-house I came away ; the stars
were each and all upon the heavens.

I crept into a lonely nook, (and there) performed at once
the duties God ordains (1,288).

And all those brides and beauties of Saray (1,289) had gone
away, and no one there remained.

I, in that verdure, like a yellow rose (1,290), remained in
meadows by a rivulet.

I laid my head, (still) heavy with the wine, on dry rose-petals
(1,291) and fresh blooming flowers.

I slept from dawn until the evening time, fortune awake, I
happily asleep.

When night, musk-deer, its musk-pod opened out (1,292),
and the sphere, bringing galia (1,293), scattered pearls (1,294),

I raised (my) head up from (my) sleeping place, (and) like
the verdure sat beside the stream.

As on the night before came cloud and breeze, one scattering
pearls, the other offering scent.

The breeze swept (clean), the cloud (too) sprinkled rain ;
that, jasmine sowed, this, planted violets (1,295).

When the meads were with ambergris perfumed, rose-water,
stream on stream, laid down its head (1,296),

The beauties full of gaiety returned, the sky again became a
conjurer (1,297).

They brought a throne (constructed) of gold planks, (and)
for it brought a cover (set) with gems.


TRANSLATION


133


When the exalted throne was well arranged, and a silk cover
fastened over it,

They then prepared a regal banquet (there), the ornaments
of which were all of light.

Noise and disturbance in the world arose, when from the left
and right that troop arrived.

That lovely bride of Yaghma (1,298) in the midst who took
from (all her) lovers self-restraint.

The throne she then ascended (and) sat down ; the throne
received from her the hue of Spring.

She ordered them to seek me, and erase my name (thus)
from the roll of absentees.

I went ; they called me to the throne again, and seated me
according to their wont.

Again, according to (their) previous plan, they set a tray with
(rare) provisions decked.

(Thus) every food which suited (such a) cloth, and to the
feaster’s heart would bring delight.

As it should be prepared had they prepared, and each one ate,
and then had done with food.

They put on wine, the (tuneful) harp was played, and the
lutes were caressed by being struck.

So the cup-bearer's sweetness and the cup, sweet, wholesome,
made the mart of love more brisk.

Intoxication’s gladness filled the head (1,299), love was
associated with the wine (1,300).

My Turk (1,301) displayed (her) kindly thoughts (again), and
treated her Hindu (1,.302) with gentleness.

She showed extreme desire to treat me well, and acted in my
interests as a friend.

With coquetry gave glances to her love, so that her handmaids
left her presence (soon).

Retirement favouring, with a friend (so) fair, — fire from my
heart flew (quickly) to my head.

Her waist I compassed, vying with her locks, (and) drew her
as a lover to my hreast.


134


THE HAFT PAIKAR


She said, Beware, impatience now’s misplaced, (this) night
is not the night for breaking faith.

With sugar, and the finest (1,303), if content, still give me
(many) kisses, taste my lips.

The person who takes pleasure in content is one of noble nature
whilst he lives.

But he who to desire becomes akin, will, in the end, fall into
penury.

I said. Devise some means, pray, for the stream is o’er my
head, the thorn is through my foot.

Your pitch-black ringlets are a chain, and I, e’en as a madman,
by your chain am bound.

I pray you put a chain upon (your) door (1,304), that I, like
one in chains, be not distressed.

The night has ended and the morn has dawned, but our aSair
has reached no (proper) end.

If you would kill, I grudge you not my life : behold, here
(is my) head, (and) here the sword !

To what end this resistance so perverse ? The rose smiles
not until the cloud has wept (1,305).

A rill of water, you ; I water seek ; earth, you, I, scented water
for your hands (1,306).

To one who thirsts and dies upon your road give water, for
there’s water in your well (1,307).

But if you give not water, — live for aye (1,308) ! My lustre
be the dust beneath your feet !

Do not with thirst a humble atom burn ; with one drop gratifv
a thirsty one (1,309).

A piece of earth by water borne away, a water-seeker in the
stream immersed (1,310)

Take it to be, or dates dropped into milk, or needle stuck
into the midst of silk (1,311).

I take it as a bird which perched, then flew, not an ass fallen,
water-bag torn open (1,312).

If it be aught but this let me arise, and scatter dust upon my
ardent wish.


TRANSLATION


135


She answered me, Be on this night content ; say, Let the black
steed’s shoe be in the fire (1,313) !

This fancy if you put off for a night, you’ll gain light from
an everlasting lamp (1,314).

Sell not a whole stream for a single drop ; for this has only
stings, but honey, that.

Close on yourself the door of one desire, (and) ever (after)
smile with joyousness.

Take kisses still and with my ringlets toy, and with the girls
here keep on playing “ nard ” (1,315).

You have the garden, seek not mountain slopes ; you have
the bird, look not for milk of birds.

You have enjoyment and your heart's desire, why do you
put your hand to perfidy ?

Restrain yourself this night and do not strive ; content yourself
with what last night bestowed.

When from this lofty height I do descend. I’ll come the better
for my coming late (1,316).

From a tank you may bring fish to your hook ; later youTl
gain possession of the Moon (1,317).

The flowers of any mead are trampled down ; sweet basil
(1,318) makes another (kind of mead).

Since in that game I found her slow (at play), I calmed myself
and tried to suit (her mood).

Constrained to patience I renounced (my wish) (1,319), and
went on drinking wine to cheat (my heart) ;

Upon her honeyed kisses set my heart, resigned myself to
fast from other things.

Again heat came upon (me), fevered one : by wine and kisses
longing was renewed.

When once again my charming Turk perceived the fierceness
of the fire within my heart.

With one of those fair beauties she arranged that she should
come and quench my burning fire.

A friend in truth such as the heart desires : the heart desires
aU things symmetrical.


136


THE HAFT PAIEjIR


Joyful is he who has a friend he loves ! If there be (one)
may she at least be such (1,320) !

I went that night, the custom (now confirmed) ; that night the
longing of my heart increased.

Of finest sugar I partook till day, and with a fairy hand in hand
I danced.

When, as a bleacher, day washed bnen-cloth, and the jar of
the dyer, night, was broken (1,321),

All those (bright) colours which beguiled the eyes had left
the carpet of adornment far (1,322).

(There) was I seated ’neath a cypress-tree, free from associate
and concordant friend.

Longing, when night returned, to drink of wine with beauties
of Taraz and Turkistan (1,323) ;

Put round my waist the ringlets of a Turk, take to my heart
a heart-caresser fair ;

With one of honeyed lips now drink a cup ; now gain my wish
with one of roseate cheeks.

All was made ready when the night returned ; my throne was
higher than the Pleiades (1,324).

For some time thus I had with lute and wine enjoyment
every night without a break.

For nine and twenty nights my mart thus brisk with (times)
heart-stirring such (as I’ve described).

Light was my prospect early in the night ; later at night a
hurl shared my nest.

The garden mine by day, and heaven at night, the earth of
musk, the house of golden bricks (1,325).

King of good luck and joyousness was I, — a sun with me by
day, a moon at night (1,326).

No wish there was which I had not attained save that in which
I thought my fortune lay.

Since I was thankless for the favours shown, the claims on
gratitude exceeded bounds.

I washed my page of words of joyousness, for I from (having)
more (still) sought for more.


TRANSLATION


137


When the moon’s term (1,327) had stretched to thirty nights,
the night effaced all traces of the stars (1,328).

The palace of the sky’s black coping (then) drew in with love
the moon’s embroidery (1.329).

The cloud and breeze which came on previous (nights) made
their fresh, cheerful presence felt afresh (1,330).

Again disturbance came upon the world ; the cbnk of trinkets
mounted to the sky.

The girls according to their previous use— apples in hand,
and pomegranates in breast (1,331) —

Ajjproached, set up the throne, and circled round, and lifted
up their voices (tunefully).

That Moon of sun-like brilliance (also) came, (her) musk-
diSusing ringlets o'er her breast.

The wonted lights before her and behind — say not “ behind ”
when candles are “ before ” (1,332).

With graces and adornments numberless she went up to her
banquet-hall again.

The minstrels framed their notes upon the modes ; they, skilled
in modes, relaxed not in their work.

The cupbearers poured out the rosy wine (1,333) to the sweet
modulations of the harp (1,334).

(Then) said the queen of those of honeyed lips, Bring that
associate of mine at once.

Again those beauties led me courteously, and brought me
(forward) to their charming (queen).

When (my) kind friend beheld me she arose, (and) at (her)
right appointed (me) a place.

Doing her homage, I sat down with joy, and of (my) former
longing thought again.

Again in order they set up the tray, with rare provisions which
exceeded bounds.

When from the trays we’d eaten of the food, (then) wine
began its cheering offices.

From the cupbearers’ hands which, like the sea, were prodigal,
the bowls as shells cast pearls (1,335).


138


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Again I grew distraught and drunk with love, (and) seized
upon her (long and) snake-like locks.

Again my demons (1,336) from their cords escaped, and
fastened me, (with love) distraught, with ropes (1,337).

A spider I became in dalliance, and in the night-time learnt to
dance on ropes (1,338).

I grew insane like asses seeing corn, or epileptics seeing the
new moon.

Trembling, as does a thief before a hoard, I put my hand
upon her slender waist ;

Over pure silver did I pass my hand ; restraint was hard, and
I was soft and weak.

When (that bright) iMoon of lovely face saw this, with kindliness
she put (her) hand on mine.

She, envied of the huris, kissed my hand, that I might keep
it from the treasury.

Said, To a treasure closed stretch not your hand, for the
long hand (1,339) attains not to its aim.

The mine is sealed, the seal cannot be broken ; how can it be ?
Be sure it cannot be.

Be patient, for the date-tree is your own ; (then) do not be
in haste to reach the dates.

Drink you the wine still, the “ kabab ” will come (1,340) ;
look at the Moon still, for the Sun will come.

I said, 0 Sun, by whom my garden lives, fountain of light,
and source of (all) my joy.

The dawn, your face, has risen like the rose — how should I
die not, near you, like a lamp (1,341) ?

You show sweet water to a thirsty one, (and) then say. Close
your lips, (and) drink (it) not.

When your resplendant face displayed itself, a fairy seen,
the intellect was crazed (1,342).

When pearl-like ears you offer to (my) view, once more, my
heart perturbed, I am your slave (1,343).

How can I strive against the moon’s (1,344) attack ? How
can I with a mote conceal a sun (1,345) ?


TRANSLATION


139


When you are in my hands how hold them oS ? How non-
existent I, when you exist (1,346) !

You are of earth, I also am of earth ; a fairy if you are, a
man am I.

How long the biting of (my) lips to last 1 the tasting of
the water of (my) mouth (1,347) ?

Devise some means, — I'm one by grief o’ertaken, — by which
to-night I gain my heart’s desire.

Because my soul has reached my lips through grief, give me
warm kisses (1,34S), give me not cold words.

If fortune make your love my helpful friend, (then) fortune’s
help will make me fortunate.

You say (to me). Grieve not, I am your friend ; pursue your
business, I’m engaged in it.

To whom has happened harder case than this ? Deliver
me, for I have sufiered this.

Though you have haunches like a (young) gazelle’s (1,349),
how long into a hare’s sleep will you lull (1,350) ?

I fear this ancient wolf of vulpine craft (1,351) in wolfish,
vulpine dealings will engage (1,352) ;

That like a lion-taker (1,353) it will charge, and, as a leopard
might, wiU cast me down.

Consumed am I by my desire for you, (then) suSer me to attain
to my desire.

(But) if you close the door to my desire, in (my) desire to-night
shall I be burnt.

(Then) sufier my exactions, (even) kings and sultans bear
the exactions of (their) guests.

When once again I had no patience left, she said. It wiU be so,
withhold your hand.

Though life they touch, I’ll sufier your demands — you from
Khallukh (1.354), from Ethiopia I (1,355).

(Yet) is it fitting such a life (as mine) to ofier to a guest like
you as gift ?

But this de.sire (of yours) of which you speak, — late you
will gain it, and you seek it soon.


140


THE HAFT PAIKAR


If from a thorn a paradise can spring, such an affair will come
from one like me.

And if from willow aloes’ scent can rise, from me this business
will to being come.

Take whatsoever you desire of me, save one desire which is a
vain one (now).

My cheeks and lips and bosom, all, are yours — except one pearl
the treasure all is yours.

With this if you’re content, there’s more at night, and of such
nights a thousand wait you still.

When your heart is inflamed by the pure wine, I’ll give you a
cupbearer like the moon (1,356) ;

That from her you may gain your heart's desire, and leave
my skirt in freedom from your hand.

When the beguiling of her tongue I saw, I gave ear to her,
but I did not hear.

Although I strove for calm and modesty, my sword was keen,
and fervid was my fire.

(Then) from afar said Fortune, Foolish man. Beyond ‘Abbadan
there is ne'er a town (1,357).

I immature, through too much diffidence, after (the chance
of) much had little gain.

I said, 0 you through whom my case is hard, you who have
taken from me all repose,

A hundred thousand men (ere this) have died in eager longing
to discover hoards.

(Then) I whose foot has struck upon a hoard, — though pain
befall, — how should I hold my hand ?

As long as I have still a single breath I cannot let your ringlets
leave my hands.

Either arise and dance upon this mat, or else demand a mat
and pour out sand (1,358).

Either light up my candle on this throne, or fix me on a gibbet
like a throne (1,359).

With heart and soul and intellect and sight, how can I do
without you patiently ?


TRANSLATION


141


Honey your lips, your cheeks the rose, then think the honey
has its bee, the rose its thorn (1,360).

Where is he who’d not eat rose-honey sweets (1,361) ? May
he who would not eat them never eat !

The aim I’d gain from you, enslaving (queen), I’d gain for
nothing though my life were given.

Who would not gain a treasure (then) for naught, and at the
cost of life a wish like this ?

I shall give light for this night like a lamp, for, as a lamp,
from love of you I burn.

My burning keeps me bright with life as lamps : the living
burns, hut branded is the dead (1,362).

Should the sun not revolve in burning state (1,363), ’twould
be in woeful state through dearth of light.

My brain has been asleep ; what doubt of this ? — the sleeping
and the dead are reckoned one.

This not the wish I seek (to gain) from you ; a dream I call
it for myself (alone) (1,364).

(But) if my eyes had not beheld your face, how could they
(e’er) have seen such dreams as these (1,365) 1

(Now) if you are resolved to shed my blood, be prompt, lest
towards you promptness be employed.

Then in the ferment of my blood and brain I threw myself
towards that lovely flower.

Again I put my arm around her (waist) ; — her eyes (were)
languorous, and I was drunk.

Thesauri portam repente arripui, ut rubinis sardachatem
insererem (1,366).

Moram aSectavit dum peteret ut quod ad illud mel attineret
patiens essem ; ego vero non audivi.

She vowed. This treasure’s yours, (but) for to-night there’s
hope, your heart's desire to-morrow comes.

In wish for me, a world-illuming sun, you’ve passed from
night to night and day to day.

Do with the hope to-night of treasured store, and seize the
treasure on the ensuing night.


142


THE HAFT PAIKAR


One night of patience, sure, is possible ; to-night is but a night,
’tis not a rear.

(But) this desire which for herself she showed increased my
own desire a hundred-fold.

(Whilst) she was speaking (in these terms to me), like a keen
dagger did I clutch her waist (1,367).

Postremo ad id pervenerunt res ut manu soUerti zonam affixam
solvere possem.

My obstinate persistence when she saw, (all) my impatience
and disquietude,

She said (to me), A moment close your eyes, ut sacchari
receptaculi portam aperiam.

Quum id quod petis nudaverim, open your eyes and take me
to your breast.

(Deluded) by the sweetness of her plea, ab ejus thesauro
oculos meos clausi.

A moment's respite when I’d given her ; Open your eyes !
said she, I opened them.

In hope of (longed for) prey I set myself to take a lovely bride
unto my breast.

Turning to her with eager glance, I saw — that I was in the
basket as at first !

No man or woman near me, I alone, my sole companion only
bitter sighs.

Far from the brightness of the light like shade ; a raider far
from predatory raids.

Whilst full of fears, beneath the column soon a movement
took the place of quietude.

My friend approached, and from the column high loosed the
rope of my basket from (its) tie.

When Fortune was full tired of her pretence, my basket from
the column glided down.

Then it retired from me and fled away. My friend embraced
me, offering excuse.

He said, If I’d explained a hundred years, you never would
have credited the truth.


TEANSLATION


143


You went and saw (yourself) that which was hid. To whom
could such a tale as this be told ?

Since from such tyranny we hotly chafed, in our complaint
of it we dressed in black.

I said, 0 you who are oppressed like me, you whose good
judgment I approve (in this), —

I who have been oppressed have no resource save, with a
silent tongue, to dress in black.

Go (then) and bring to me black silk (attire). He went and
brought it on that same dark night.

In black silk (garments) I attired myself, and that same
night prepared to take the road.

I reached my city with contracted heart, coloured, (as one
might say), with (deepest) black.

I who am king of those who dress in black in grief cry out,
as does a (thunder) cloud.

That I whilst longing eagerly fell far from such a Moon with
wish ungratified.

When my lord made no secret of the case, (but thus) recounted
(all) the tale to me (1,368),

I by his money purchased, (humble slave), chose the same
thing as he himself had done :

Like Alexander, for the Stream of Life I went into the blackness
of (its) Shades (1,369).

The moon in blackness gains (her) majesty ; hence do they
make the king’s umbrella (1,370) black.

There is no hue more excellent than black : the fish’s head’s
not equal to its back (1,371).

To have black hair comes from one’s being young : such
blackness gives a youthful look to men.

The eyes by means of black (1,372) can see the world ; no
dirt is seen upon (a thing that’s) black.

(And) if the night’s fine silk were not black-hued, how should
it merit the moon’s love (of it) ?


144


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Seven hues are there beneath the seven thrones (1,373) ;
higher than black there is not any hue (1,374).

After the Indian princess for Bahram had fully brought this
story to an end.

The king bestowed praise on the narrative, embraced (the
princess then) and happy slept.

Bahram on Sunday sits in the Yellow Dome, and the daughter of
the king of the Second Clime tells him a story.

On Sunday from dawn’s scales (1,375) when filled with gold
the mountain’s belt, the borders of the plain,

(Bahram), a lamp illuming all the world, like the sun, under
gold became concealed (1,376).

He took up like Jamshid (1,377) a golden cup (1,378) ; he put
on like the sun a golden crown.

And like the yellow rose in fine display, amber he set upon a
golden ring (1,379).

He went, gold scattering, to the Yellow Dome, his cheerfulness
increasing hundredfold.

He set himself to joyousness therein through the delights of
wine, the sound of song.

When came the night,— not night, but bridal bower of joys,
the quiet-seeking lover's veil, —

The king required from that sweet-spoken bride (1,380) that she
should mate her lips with honeyed tones (1,381).

He called on her for fluted utterance (1,382) in dome so resonant
to dulcet sound.

Since from the king’s command was no escape, — excuses
are not pleasing to the proud, —

The Grecian bride, adorned and lovely (1,383), said, 0 lord of
Greece, of China, and Taraz (1,384) ;

’Tis you who vivify the souls of kings, the glory you of conquest,
lord of kings.

Whoe’er resolves to be aught but your slave, casts his head
underfoot like scattered coin (1,385).


TRANSLATION


145


When she had paid the dues of homage (thus), as incense of
the censer, made her breath, —

Story.

She said, A certain city in ‘Iraq had (once) a king unique among
(aU) kings.

A sun (was he) in world-illumining, (and) beautiful as Spring
on New Year's Day (1,386).

All that we count as learning and as worth, all such as may
avail the accomplished man

He had, and notwithstanding all such worth was fain to be
content without a wife.

For from the reckoning of his horoscope he’d read that strife
would come on him through wives.

Because of such a risk he did not wed, that he might feel
not trouble and distress.

(And) thus he put up for a while alone with singleness of state
and sohtude.

The only plan (then), for he had no choice, was to take, worthy
of him, some fair friend.

He bought some lovely slaves of various cbmes, not one of
whom could serve as he thought fit.

Each (of them) by a week’s time, more or less, would step
beyond her (just and proper) bounds.

The rank of lady-consort she would claim (1,387), (and) treasures
such as Korah’s would demand.

An aged hunchback in the palace lived : a foobsh woman
who would fools delude.

She fancied gain at once in lying words (to) every slave-girl
whom the king would buy.

With wheedling art she’d call the new-bought slave princess
of Greece, and beauty of Taraz (1,388).

When the girl often heard deceit (like) this, the duties of her
service she’d neglect.

Of meddling fools how many (do we see) who, (though their)
friends, lead servants into pride !

L


146


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Such are balistas, beautified, adorned, they ruin houses,
families (1,389) delude.

However much the king would strive (to please), no girl
assumed her just and proper place.

Each one for whom he sewed a robe of love, would sell it, since
she had no love for him (1,390).

By dint of parting with the young slave-girls the title, “ Seller
of slave-girls,” he gained.

Each one by outer (tokens) only judged, no one the inner
bearings could compute.

Through seeking much the king became distressed, (and)
no desire (of his) was gratified.

Nor through ill fate could he to marriage haste, nor could he
find such slave-girl as he wished.

Of all who were impure he washed his hands ; he sought one
who was beautiful and pure.

Until one day a man who dealt in slaves brought information
to a royal slave

That from the picture-house of China’s realm (1,391) a
merchant had with thousand hurls come.

Virgin slave-girls of countries difierent : some of Khallukh
(1,392), some also of Cathay.

Each one, in face, a world-illuming sun ; a love-compeUer,
one who lovers burnt.

Among them a young slave-girl like a fay, who from the morning
star had borne off light.

A ear-bored (1,393) (slave-girl), (but) an unbored pearl;
appraised by the pearl-seller at a life.

Her lips like coral — (coral) clasped with pearls ; bitter in
answer she, but sweet in .smile.

One who bestowing sugar-sprinkling smiles, makes all eat
(only) sugar many years.

(Yet) one whose tray, with naught but sugar charged, affords
but bitterness as food of men (1,394).

(E’en) I, who in this traffic am engaged, at such lips, moles,
and ringlets have been dazed (1,395).


TRANSLATION


147


I am assured if you should also see that beauty and attraction
you’d approve.

The king commanded, Let the dealer bring the slaves to me,
a connoisseur of slaves.

He went and brought them, the king looked at all, (then)
with the dealer he engaged in talk.

Although each was in face a Moon, that one (erst) mentioned
by the dealer was a queen.

The eyes approved her as more beautiful than, by the speaker,
she had been described.

The king said to the dealer. Tell me (now) what kind of
disposition has this girl ?

If in my mind I feel a wish for her, whatever price you ask,
I’ll add to it.

The merchant from Cathay thus loosed his tongue. This
maiden, honey-giver, honey-bpped.

Save one bad fault, and that is truly bad, — that she displays
no love for him who woos, —

Has, as you see now, all the qualities of beauty and attraction
which are sought.

Whoever buys her with delight of me, next morning gives her
back to me again.

For at the time when longing most prevails, she brings despair
on him who longs (for her).

And he who woos her with most earnestness, aims soonest at
the ruin of himself.

In disposition she’s one hard to please ; you also, I have heard,
are hard to please.

Thus, she, and you (too) thus — give up (the thought), (for)
how should harmony be feasible ?

Think (only) that with pleasure you have bought, and (then)
like others sent her back to me (1,396) ;

(And) any other who may please your heart at once send to
your haram without pay.

From dealing for her you had best abstain. Look out some
other who is suitable.


148


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The king felt no such wish as buyers should for any of those
fairies whom he saw.

No love rose in his heart for any one except that fairy-faced
girl erst (described).

The king was puzzled to know how to act : how with a simple
novice “ nard ” to play (1,397).

His heart could tire not of its love for her (1,398) ; nor could
he rashly buy with such defect.

At last, (in spite of all), love turned his head, threw dust into
the eye of kingly power.

Silver he poured before the silvery-limbed ; he bought with
silver one of silvery form.

The door of one wish on himself he shut, and passed a pleasant
life with that fair maid.

That fairy-faced one in the king’s haram performed the service
from indwellers due ;

As rose-bud, tender in the calyx, she ; outwardly stubborn,
inwardly a friend.

Save with regard to intercourse withheld (1,399), no service
(due) did she withhold (from him).

The household-ordering, the seraglio trust — each (duty) she
accomplished like a friend.

Though as the cypress he exalted her, she hke the shadow
fell beneath (his) feet.

(Then) the old dame engaged in (her) deceit, and in attempts
to make a straight house bent.

The girl exclaimed against that crude old dame for changing
(thus) her name from that of slave (1,400).

(So) from this circumspection which she used he knew about
the other slave-girls’ fault.

He drove away the old dame from the house — see to a charmeress
what charm he used !—

Till the girl grew so precious in his eyes that he became through
love the slave-girl’s slave.

Although that raiding Turk’s insidiousness he felt (1,401),
yet still he practised self-restraint.


TRANSLATION


149


Until one night it happened in this wise, a fire was kindled
in those lovers twain.

The monarch’s feet (lay) in the charmer’s lap — the gold bought
slave (was dressed) in painted silks.

Aqua munita hujus arx ; illius balistaa ignis fervidus.

The king when heated by a flaming fire, said to that rose, of
rose-water the fount,

0 (tasteful) date of mine, matured and ripe, eyes of my soul
and soul (too) of my eyes.

The cypress to your form, as grass ; to you, a jug-bearer the
basin of the moon (1,402), —

I’ll ask of you a thing of import hid ; answer me truly as I
question you ;

(For) if the answer (that you give) be straight (1,403), things
will be straight for me, (straight) as your form.

And then, to stimulate her heart and soul (1,404), in eloquent
narration thus he spoke (1,40.5) :

In sestile aspect Venus (1,406), on a time, Bilqis (1,407) was
seated with (King) Solomon.

They had in all the world one only child, who had disjointed,
(helpless) hands and feet (1,408).

Prophet of God, — (thus) spoke (to him) Bilqis, — both I
and you are healthy, head to foot.

Why is our child so ailing, (tell me then), with hands and feet
so far from healthy state ?

A cure for (this) his ailment must be found, and when you find
it it must be applied.

When Gabriel (from God) a message brings, convey to him
a full account of this ;

So that, returning from your presence, he the secret from
“ the Guarded Tablet ” (1,409) seek ;

And show, best user, you, of remedies, the remedy essential
for the cure ;

(So that), perchance, the child may (thus) be saved, (and)
may be hopeful of (regaining) health.


150


THE HAFT PAIKAR


With these expressions Solomon was pleased, and sundry days
expectant he remained.

When Gabriel communed with him (again), (the monarch)
told him that which he desired.

Gabriel went, then mercy brought — from whom ? From the
All-Powerful of the azure sphere.

He said, The cure for this is (in) two things, and those two
(things) are rare (things) in the world.

These are that with your wife when face to face, each,
(questioned by the other), speak the truth.

If both give truthfully your narratives, (then) from the child
the trouble can depart.

When Solomon reported to Bilqis in (all due) haste the words
of Gabriel,

Bilqis, rejoicing at those words, exclaimed. May our house
flourish by a worthy heir !

She (then) continued. Say what truth you seek, that I may
tell it as good faith requires.

That bright lamp of existence asked, 0 you, whose beauty
was the final cause of eyes (1,410),

Have you in concupiscence in the world ever had wish for any
one but me ?

She said. The evil eye be far from you ! for you are brighter
than the fount of light (1,411), —

As in the youth and beauty which are yours, so to all ranks
you rise superior.

Fine nature, beauty, kindliness are yours ; your banquet
paradise, as Rizvan you (1,412).

The seal of the prophetic office yours, the seal too of the world
(1,413), this fact’s not hid.

Yet spite of all your beauty and your youtJi, yotir sovereign
power and absolute success.

Whene’er I see a young man from afar, from wicked inclination
I’m not free.

After the child with useless hands had heard this secret (told)
he stretched his hands to her.


TRANSLATION


151


He said, 0 mother, (see), my hands are cured ; like roses I’ve
escaped from others’ hands (1,414).

When she of fairy face by speaking truth had given hands to
one of fairy birth.

She said, 0 lord of demons and of fays (1,415), bke goodness
comely, and like wisdom good.

Disclose a secret in the child’s behalf, that he gain feet from
you, as hands from me.

I’]] ask a question if it pain you not : to-wit, you have much
treasure, many a store —

(Now say) does greed attack your heart at all, so that it covet
what another owns ?

The godly prophet said (in his reply), I have (indeed) what no
one (ever) had :

(All) sovereign power, and wealth, and kingly hoards — all
have I from the moon down to the Fish (1,416).

With affluence so copious and complete, — whoever comes to
me to pay me court,

I give a glance in secret towards his hand to see what gift the
wayfarer has brought (1,417).

After the child had heard this he was cured : he moved his
feet and rose up from the ground.

Father, said he, my feet have power to walk : your wise resolve
has let me grace the world.

As in God’s sanctum (1,418) you have spoken truth ; the
trouble’s left my hands, the pain my feet.

’Tis best we also strictly keep to truth, and at the quarry
shoot the arrow straight (1,419).

(Then) tell (me, pray), 0 you who are unique among the kind,
why love is dead in you ?

Granted that I continue (thus) in pain, and (only) from a
distance glance at you,

(Still) why have you, so fairy-bke in face, so beautiful,
abandoned thought of love (1,420) ?


152


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The graceful cypress, near the limpid spring, could see no
better answer than the truth (1,421).

She said. There is in our unworthy race a property which by
us has been proved.

Whoever of (our) women trusts her heart to (any) man dies
when a child is horn.

Since every woman of us dies who bears, how should we give
our heart to (any) man ?

One should not yield one’s life for a desire ; should not take
poison (though) in honey (dipped).

To me my life’s too dear to be consigned to that in which much
danger is involved.

(So) I, who love no lover and love life, have (now) disclosed
the mystery to you.

(Now) since the cover from my tray has fallen (1,422), leave
me alone or sell me, as you will.

But since I’ve not concealed my mind (from you), but let
you know the state of my afiairs,

I hope the monarch of the world will not conceal the state of
his aSairs (from me) ;

(But tell) why he gets always tired (so) soon of slave-girls
who are lovely as the sun ;

To none the heart should covet gives his heart, spends not a
single month with any one ;

Whomever like a lamp he treats with care, he puts out like a
candle (soon) again ;

He raises her in comfort to the sky, (then) casts her in abase-
ment to the earth.

The king replied : Because no one of them displayed a particle
of love for me ;

In their own business they were all engrossed ; at first they
seemed good, but were (really) bad ;

When they had used their hearts to ease, they all gave up the
toil of service due from them.

Each has a step adapted to his length (1,423) : not fit for every
stomach bread and beans.


TRANSLATION


153


A stomacli must be stone-like that its mill by a handful of
corn (1,424) may not be vexed.

A woman seeing one of open face, looks both at him and also
at herself (1,425).

Trust not in any woman, she’s a straw ; the wind whirls off
a straw in any place.

A woman who sees gold upon the scales, will bow her head
for one grain to an ass.

The pomegranate which is replete with seeds, has ripened
both in rubies and in pearls (1,426).

Grape-like, a woman’s innocent as child : when raw she’s
verdant, full-grown, black of face (1,427).

The thing which in the country they call “ gourd ” — those
which are raw are ripe, the ripe are raw (1,423).

A woman’s chasteness is (her) husband’s grace ; the night
is moon-faced when it finds a moon (1,429).

Of my attendant slave-girls every one thinks not of anything
but decking self.

But in you I have noticed this that oft you to the duties of
your service add.

So though from you I’ve not obtained my wish, I cannot
rest a moment far from you.

Of such deep, rare expressions did the king employ a number,
but without effect.

The froward girl would not give up her plea ; she shot an arrow
at the mark and went (1,430).

And as before beneath a load of grief he traversed (stiff) that
steep and stony pass.

Patient with thirst upon the water’s brink, whilst time (im-
patient) speeded (on its way).

(But) the old dame, whom he of kingly grace (1,431) had driven
from the palace once before.

Gained knowledge of the patience of the king, and of his not
obtaining his desire.

How foiled by one just come to woman’s age, he, one of mighty
frame (1,432), had lost his might (1,433).


154


THE HAET PAIKAR


She said, Now is the time if by some trick I am to lead a fay
a demon’s dance (1,434) ;

In the Sun’s throne if I’m to make a breach, and the Moon’s
fort in ruins I'm to lay ;

So that no further any archer's shaft may on the bow of an
old woman come (1,435).

As sorceress, she saw the king alone, (then) went, prepared
the necessary spell ;

(And) cast on him a spell experience-taught, for vengeance
on the world-illuming Sun (1,436).

She said. If you desire the unbroken colt soon to your saddle
to be broken in.

Then saddle twice or thrice before that colt a colt which has
been tamed, and gently stroke.

By bridling thus the tame colt then contrive under control
to bring the unbroken one.

The king was pleased with these insidious words ; the bricks
of this (her) mould seemed whole and sound (1,437).

He bought a spritely girl of honeyed lips, versed in insidious
and in cunning arts.

One knowing haram life (1,438) had trained her well ; from
birth was she too of a docile mind.

In witty speech and fellowship she showed at every pass all
graces with the king (1,439).

The king dissembliugly put up with her ; against the grain
one sad, dejected, played (1,440).

Sometimes engaged in converse with the one, he made love
to the other when impelled (1,441).

With one he dallied, with the other slept ; here was his heart
pierced, there a pearl was pierced (1,442).

Illius concubitus invidia mota ilia non perforata margarita
(1,443) concupiit perforata esset margarita (1,444).

Though through his letting jealousy encroach the dust of
pique (1,445) fell on the Moon’s bright face (1,446),

The road and rule of service still she kept ; she passed not a
hair’s breadth from what had been.


TRANSLATION


155


She tried to fancy what the trick might be — from the old
woman’s oven rose the storm (1,447).

She still kept quiet, practised patience stiU, (but) in love patience
is of no avail.

One night in private she, of blessed face, found an occasion,
and inspired by love.

Thus spoke, 0 monarch of angelic kind, ruling the realm by
justice and the Faith,

Since you are truthful and right-judging (too), keep to the
road of truth and right with me.

Each day that steps forth sees at first a dawn, and at the last
(it sees) an eventide (1,448).

Since you, — whose day let no decline affect, whose night
be naught but night of union’s joy ! —

At first gave honey to me white as dawn, why do you (now)
sell vinegar like eve (1,449) ?

Grant you are tired of me, untasted, still why have you given
me to the lion’s jaws 1

Why have you shown a dragon to my sight so (terrible) that I
must die through pain 1

If death befit me, yes ! but if you kill, (do so) at least with your
own sword alone.

I swear by God, and by your life (I swear) that if you will
unlock this (mystery),

I will throw off the lock which guards the pearls, and henceforth
acquiesce in the king’s wish (1,450).

Who (then) has been your guide to such a road ? Who has
suggested to you such a game ?

Inform me, for I know it not a whit, that I fly not, for I am
swift of wing (1,451).

Seeing that in her oath he could confide, the king, since he was
much in love with her.

Hid not the state of things from that fair girl, but told (her)
everything of every kind (1,452).


156


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(He said), Tlie love of you inflamed (my heart), kindled a fire
(in me) and burnt me up.

Only by fire does water become hot ; only by fire does iron
become soft (1,453).

Still, come what may, my mind’s so set on you that love’s
pain's better than my remedy.

Through you a fire was (kindled) in my heart ; (then) the
old woman in the midst raised smoke (1,454).

When you became with me as candle straight, the smoke of
her who raised it was dispelled ;

For since my sun has entered Aries, why should I call to mind
the old dame’s cold (1,455) ?

Many such soothing words he spoke, and she, delightful fair
one, heard them with delight (1,456).

Thus taught, the lily-finder access gave unto the lily-scented
cypress-tree (1,457).

Luscinia rosae calycis solio superincubuit ; evolvit se rosae
calyx, et luscinia cupidine factus est ebrius.

Stagno injecit pisceni ; lacti dactylum injecit.

Mira dulcedine pinguitudineque erat ; ejus dactyli dulcedinem
auxit.

Rex formae sinensi (1,458) sericum sinense pictum et subti-
lissimum detraxit ; portul® seram auream excussit.

Dignis auro magaritis refertum thesaurum vidit ; ornamentis
additis aureis efiecit ut (illse margaritae) flavae fierent.

Yellow is that from which comes cheerfulness ; from it the
joy of saffron-" halva, ” comes (1,459).

Why notice this that saffron’s yellow-hued ? Notice the
laughter of the man who eats.

The candle from its yellow veil takes light (1,460) ; through
yellow Mo.ses’ calf its value gained (1,461).

Gold which is yellow is the source of joy, and yellow ochre’s
precious too for this (1,462).

When to an end the king had heard this tale, he took her to
his arms and happy slept.


TRANSLATION


157


Bahram on Monday sits in the Green Dome, and the daughter
of the king of the Third Clime tells kirn a story.

When Monday came the king unto the moon upraised his
fortune-favoured canopy (1,463).

In green resplendent he was bright and gay (1,464), like
heavenly angels (all in) green (attired) (1,465).

He set off on his way to the Green Dome, giving his heart to
gladness and to joy.

After the garden of the stars had spread this %'erdure, emerald-
hued, with vernal blooms (1,466),

The king desired the wisdom-gifted (bride), that green-throned
cypress (1,467), honeyed words to speak (1,468).

The fairy having shown him reverence, unveiled the mysteries
to Solomon (1,469).

She said. You by whose life my life is glad, — May all lives
be a sacrifice for yours ! —

Your tent (1,470) is the abode of power and state ; the crown
and throne the threshold of your Gate (1,471).

The crown has exaltation from your head ; the throne has
sovereign power from your Gate.

(Your) crown’s the very keystone of the realm ; all heads
must seek your Gate to gain their wants.

When she had honoured (thus) the lofty throne, her lips poured
forth sweet eloquent discourse (1,472).

Story.

She said, There was a worthy man in Rum (1,473), like honey
in the wax, good, blessed in heart.

Of art and knowledge all required in man he had, all goodness
(too) with it as crown.

His goodness, wisdom, such, he was disposed to pure and
chaste relations (in his life).

The people all had great respect for him ; they called him
Bashr, the abstinent (and pure).

One day for pleasure by a road he went, a road devoid of
incline and decline.


158


THE HAFT PAIKAE


When, sudden, love attacked him by the way, trial, temptation
played a trick on sense.

A face in silken wrapper came to view (1,474) : the moon
at full beneath a murky cloud.

Of Bashr thoughtless as she passed along, the Moon’s veil
suddenly was blown aside.

The wind to trial and temptation guide ; the Moon came forth
from ’neath a murky cloud.

When Bashr saw, his legs grew weak, and he, pierced by the
arrow of a glance, stood still.

He sawa face which by coquettish lures hundred such abjurations
would annul (1,475).

A heap of roses, but with cypress form (1,476) ; one of fair
face, washed with the pheasant’s blood (1,477).

Her languorous drowsy glances by their spells banished from
more than thousand lovers sleep.

Her lips like roses’ petals moist (with dew) ; rose-petals they
in (sweetest) nectar rich.

Her eyes narcissi in their languorous drowse — disturbance
(1,478) in their drowsiness concealed.

Her face appearing under curly locks (1,479), like to the eagle’s
breast beneath its plumes.

A mole she had more dusky (1,480) than (her) locks ; an eye
more dusky (1,481) than her (dusky) mole.

Such eye-beguiling locks and mole she had, no heart could
rest indifferent and calm.

A cry involuntary rose from Bashr ; his reason took to wings
and left his frame.

The Moon, a lonely wanderer (1,482), at the cry fastened (at
once) her veil around (her) face.

In haste precipitate she went her way, the blood of such
a murder on her head.

When Bashr unclosed his eyes from sleep he saw a place of
tumult (and) a ruined house (1,48.3).

He said, If I pursue, it is not right ; yet to rest patient, cold, —
how can it be (1,484) ?


TRANSLATION


159


A’et patience is the sole resource I have ; whatever passes this
is infamy.

Though led astray by passion, after all I am a man, I shall not
die from grief.

To give up lust’s a token of the Faith ; sobriety (too) stipulates
the same.

’Tis best that from this city I remove, and turn my face towards
Jerusalem ;

That He, the God who knows both good and ill, may in this
matter give me some relief (1,485).

He made provision for the road and went, he hastened towards
the shrine, Jerusalem.

When at that holy place he had arrived, God to this lock vouch-
safed to him the key.

He sought to make excuses, pardon asked, and rose superior
to his (late) desire.

He fled away from danger to his God, to abstinence and patience
gave his heart ;

That (God) might so preserve him by His Grace that mischief
should not find a way to him.

Many prostrations on that ground he made, then from that
holy sanctuary turned.

He had a comrade on the road, with whom one would be hostile
though by nature kind.

A caviller when subtleties were broached : on any theme he’d
cavil endlessly.

In this way it must be, he’d say, or that ; let no one wag his
tongue in senseless words.

(Thus) Bashr, (now led to) talking, he had made forgetful
(quite) of taciturnity.

When Bashr on any theme would speak, he roused at all that
would admit of subtle glose.

He asked. What is your name, that I may know, and henceforth
call you by your proper name.

Bashr answered him and said. Your servant's name is Bashr ;
now (tell me), prythee, what is yours.


160


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He said, (Then) you are Bashr, pride of men, (and) I, Malikha,
leader of mankind.

Whate’er is in the sky or on the earth ; whate’er by sense and
judgment may be judged —

All this I by my knowledge know in full ; I know what’s
lawful, what forbidden too.

I’m one, but more expert than (any) twelve ; one art of mine
exceeds the arts of twelve.

The mountain see, the hill, the plain, the stream, — all things
which are beneath the azure sphere, — ■

The principle of each exactly found, (I know) whence this
gained being, whence that grew.

And of the sky too, — whatsoe’er’s in it, — I am informed,
though my hand touch it not.

If any news affect (too) any tract, with truest estimation it
I know.

If any realm should fall into decay, I know it many years
before the time.

Whatever thing may reach maturity (1,486), I can give news
of it a year before.

I know so well the pulse and testing glass (1,487) that fever
from the body I can turn.

When I bring fire and horse-shoe ’neath a spell, bke pearl and
ruby amber’s power I use (1,488).

Stones by my alchemy are turned to gems, (and) earth (too)
in my hands becomes as gold.

By breath of sorcery breathed from my mouth I make a
pied-snake of palm-fibre rope (1,489).

And every treasure (too) which God has made, — I am the
breaker of its talisman (1,490).

All one may ask about the sky and earth, — I can give knowledge
both of this and that.

In no abode of learning can be found skilled master (1,491)
having learning more than mine.

When he had boasted thus to some extent, Bashr at his senseless
words was much amazed.


TRANSLATION


161


A black cloud (then) arose from o’er the mount, and when
Malikha cast a glance at it,

He said, Why is one cloud as black as pitch ; another cloud as
white in hue as milk ?

Bashr answered, God’s command effects such things ; you
know yourself (that it is even so).

He said. No more of this, ’tis (but) a shift, the arrow shot
should hit the target (fair).

The dusky cloud is (naught but) burning smoke ; on such
a point intelligence agrees.

Whilst the milk-coloured cloud of pearly hue has in its native
state a frigid damp (1,492).

(Then) he discussed with him the hidden winds. Again see
how the idle gabbler spoke.

He said. Say (now) what is the moving wind ? — grovelling
one should not live like os or ass (1,493).

Bashr answered, This too is from God’s decree ; nothing is
ordered save by God’s command.

He said, Let science take in hand the reins. How long old
women’s stories will you tell ?

The wind, no doubt, arises from the air, to movement stirred
by vapour from the earth.

He saw a lofty mount, and said. This mount — why is it more
majestic than the rest ?

Bashr answered. This relation is of God that one of them is
low, another high.

He said, You throw me still on argument ; how long will you
ascribe things to the Pen (1,494) ?

Terrific torrents brought on by the clouds incline the mountains
to the lower ground.

But when the summit tends to lofty heights, ’tis farther off
from where the torrents rush.

By reason guided Bashr exclaimed at him, and said, (Seek)
not (to) strive with God’s decrees.

The secrets of (such) things are known to me (1,495) ; in every
learning greater I than you.

u


162


THE HAFT PAIKAR


But, self-inspired, to deal in wisdom's ill, or take the path of
fancy and conceit (1,496).

^Ye cannot reach to yon side of the Veil, then how review the
pictures on this side (1,497) ?

No eSort void of error can be made ; no trust in faulty reading
can be placed (1,493).

When cast aside this Veil I fear they’ll tax the faulty readers
with their faulty view (1,499).

(So) with the tree whose branches tower so high the hand of
everyone should not make free.

The sacred spell recited (thus) by Bashr was powerless with
that idle gabbler div (1,-500).

For sundry days together they remained ; in naught abated
he that idle talk.

Their road a burning waste with water none, their brains (too)
all on fire with sleeplessness.

They rushed along with cries and clamour loud, until, from it
excited, they arrived

Before a tree with branches towering high, wide-spreading,
verdant, beautiful and tall.

Verdure (there was) beneath it like green silk, the eye was
cheered and gladdened at the sight.

Embedded in it was an earthen jar, in which was water
truly sweet and pure.

The gabbler saw the limpid water there like fresh sweet basil
in (dry) earthen sherds.

He said. Felicitous companion mine, I ask (of you), pray say
on what account

This earthen jar (here) with (its) open mouth is hidden to
the brim beneath the ground ?

Say, how far does the water in it reach ? No mountain tract
(here), desert all around.

Bashr answered (thus). Someone for heavenly meed has set
it up, as they have often done ;

And fearing by some shock it might be broke (deep) in the
ground they have embedded it.


TRANSLATION


163


He said, If in this mode your answer be, pure error is what
you have said and say.

Yes, yes, indeed, one person for his like will bear each moment
water on his back :

That, through a desert too, wliere from the heat you’d find
no water if you sought an age.

Of trappers this must be the abiding place, the place of those
whose business is the chase.

Truly, this jar, fixed in the ground by them, — they’ve made
it as a snare to take the game :

That when ox, deer, gazelle, or onager, eats in the desert of
the brackish food,

(Then) thirsty makes for water (for its need), it may speed
Quickly to this watering-place.

The hunter (then) will have waylaid (the game) ; have lain
(for it) in ambush with a bow.

He’ll shoot the game (there) as it (stands to) drink, and of the
wounded game will make “ kababs ” (1,501).

So loosen you the knots of bonds and ties that the investigator
cry, Well done (1,502) !

Bashr answered. Happy speaker of the world, each one at heart
has his own mode of thought.

That which is hidden in your heart and mine we think is in
the heart of everyone.

Do not have evil in your heart at first, for evil thought at last
makes evil deed (1,503).

Spreading their wallets by the water-side, they ate of bread,
drank water (from the jar) (1,504) ;

Water, in truth, for thirsty people fib— sparkling and whole-
some, bmpid too and cold.

Malikha (then) to Bashr in haste cried out. Get up and sit a
little farther o3,

That I may get into this wholesome fount, may wash my body
and be free from dust.

For dirt has settled on me head to foot from perspiration
troublesome and salt.


164


THE HAFT PAIKAR


With water I will wash away my dirt, and get upon the road
quite clean and fine.

Then with a stone I’ll break the jar to bits, and save the
quarry (thus) from injury.

(Then) Bashr exclaimed, Stop, simple-minded man ! Hake
not a dyeing-jar of such as this (1,505).

With stimulated heart (1,506) you’ve water drunk ; why pour
on it the foulness of your limbs ?

He who drinks water which shall comfort him, would never
think of spitting on the same.

On mirrors vinegar should not be rubbed (1,507), nor should a
pure thing be defiled with dregs.

So when another, tried (as we) (1,508), shall come, he may get
comfort from the pleasant fount.

The ill-advised man would not hear his words ; he made his
evil nature manifest.

He stripped, and (then) together tied his clothes, drew himself
in, and sprang into the jar.

When he was in, no jar ’twas, but a well, (and) to the bottom a
long distance down.

(His) smartness against death availed (him) not ; he struggled
much, but he could not e.scape.

The water which he swallowed stopped his breath ; at last
he drowned and ’neath the water sank.

On that side Bashr sat with troubled heart, (and) shed some
tears (of sorrow) for his friend.

Again he said. He with consummate schemes has in his smartness
bidden me farewell (1,509).

I fear with dirt that sample of the base (1,510) will bring
pollution on the limpid fount ;

Cast through the water foulness of two kinds, and then will
use a stone upon the jar.

Malevolence like this comes from the base ; not from the pure
and the intelligent.

May no one have a comrade such as tins ! May one so low
and mean be only drowned !


TEANSLATION


165


After he'd spoken in these terms awhile, the man came not,
and (so) a long time passed.

He (then) went towards the jar to seek his friend, (having)
no knowledge that the man was drowned.

When o’er the jar he had inclined his head, he saw a marvel,
and bereft of sense

Felt strangely helpless, thought what can this be ? (then)
from the (lofty) tree he broke a branch.

With hands and nails he made it as a fork, in length about
the measure of a spear.

Then, like unto surveyors of the sea, thrust it into the jar
to gauge the fount.

Speak not of jar ! What saw he ? A deep well, rising to rare
and marvellous extent.

The surface bore a species of short weed, so that the swimmer
would be lost in it.

Bashr, estimable man of worthy deeds, could swim, and God
was aid to him and friend.

Much strength exerted he, much effort used, till he had brought
to light a sign of him.

With urgent haste he drew the drowned man out, bore him to
pit of earth from watery pit.

When he had filled (the grave) with earth and stones, sad,
grieved in heart, he sat beside its head.

He said. Where (now) your judgment, c unnin g arts ? Where
is that awl with which you loosened knots ?

(Where too is) all your claim to artful schemes towards beasts
of prey and demons, men and fays ?

And (aU) your boast that you would lasso, you, the secrets of
the seven lofty spheres ?

Where now your claim to (knowledge of) twelve arts ? (your
words). Nor man nor woman one thus dead (1,511) ?

And your declaring that you could foresee by your devices
all things (which should come) ?

An open well before (you) on the road (1,512) how with your
eyes of knowledge saw you not ?


166


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Then the inquiries (too) of every kind which have been made
by us on such a fount, —

Though our decisions with each other clashed, I say not (either)
had a watery base (1,513).

We cast a fire upon our jar by all we cast into the water of
that jar (1,514).

Other the work of that Artificer (1,515) ; outside my reckoning,
out of your’s it stood.

The Sphere has tied the thread together, so that none have
come upon the end of it (1,516).

Though all that we have uttered of that kind was only (based)
upon erroneous thought,

You through those (thoughts) were drowned, and I was saved,
because you were not grateful, and I was.

You who described it as a snare for beasts, stuck in a snare
yourself, e’en as the beasts.

But I about it entertained good thoughts, — my good was
fortunate, I saved my life.

He spoke these words, and (then) rose from the ground, and
sought (Malikha’s) goods to right and left.

He went and took up one by one his things : Egyptian stuSs,
turban of linen fine.

When from his roll of goods he took the seal, a purse of gold
fell out upon the ground.

A thousand “ durusts ” (1,517) of Egyptian gold, those ancient
coins which were in early times.

He sealed (it) up, detached his heart from it, and left it as
before sealed at the mouth.

(Said he), Since he received no help from me. I’ll serve the
office of custodianship.

All I will fasten up and keep secure, and give to him who
has a claim to it.

1 11 seek his house with closest scrutiny, and give it to the
person of the house (1,518).

If I indeed should do as he has done, I too should eat from the
same place as he.


TRANSLATION


167


(So) lie tied up the roll as it had been, and when ’twas tied he
took it in his hand.

He set out on his way and travelled on ; by hill and plain he
came towards a town.

After a few days’ rest within the town, partaking of (the needful)
food and sleep.

He showed the turban to each person there, asking who might
the owner of it he.

A worthy man who recognized it said. You must from here a
httle distance walk.

Within a street, the houses it contains so many, stands a
mansion fine and high.

Knock at the door, the threshold of his house ; do not have
any doubt, the house is his.

(Then) Bashr, garments, turban, gold, in hand, went to the
house of which he’d been informed.

He knocked, (and soon) a sweet-lipped beauty came, and oped
the portal of the lofty house.

She said. Tell (me your) business or (your) need, that I may
further it as may seem best.

He (thus) replied, I have some property ; inform your lady,
I would give it up.

If I’m allowed to go into the house, when I go in I wiU with
truthful words

Tell her what fraud and perfidy from fate Malikha, he of
heaven-born wisdom, saw.

The woman led him (then) within the house, and on a cushioned
seat gave him a place.

(The dame) herself, with face inveiled (from view), said. Speak,
a meritable act ’twill be.

To her of moon-bright face and silvery limbs Bashr told fully
every incident.

His coming into fellowship with him, his hearing him hold
forth on arts (he claimed).

Then his rude rousing up to argument, his claiming (know-
ledge) on all themes (that rose).


]6S THE HAFT PAIKAR

His thinking evil too of everything, putting on every good the
stain of ill.

How too he dug a well for other men, and how he went himself
into the well.

How then it rose in billows like the deep, and how at last the
water stopped his breath (1,519).

When he had told of all that he had seen, what he had heard
too from that faithless man.

He said, Though he is dead, may you live long ! His place
the earth, the mansion be your place !

The carrion which the water had washed clean I put into the
store-house of the earth (1,.520).

I fastened up whatever things he had, and see, behold ; I
have them in my hand.

Clothes, gold he laid at once before (the dame), approving his
integrity to her.

She was experienced and possessed rare gifts ; she read the
page (before her) word by word.

Awhile she was afflicted by the words ; she shed some tears
at that which had occurred.

She then gave answer, Man of noble sense, beneficent you are,
a slave of God.

On your integrity may blessings rest, and on your courteous
grace and candidness.

Who would show ever generosity such as you have towards
a friendless one ?

Beneficence is not to fill oneself, for that is what a fly is flt to
do (1,521).

Beneficent is he whom, in his acts, Satan leads not astray
by coins of gold.

Mallkha, dead, consigned to earth his frame, has borne his
soul to an appropriate place.

You spoke of him as hard to please, ’twas so ; ’tis true, increased
a thousandfold your count.

His occupation naught but tyranny, but faithlessness and
torture of mankind.


TRANSLATION


169


He did much wronc; to women and to men ; for such a one
such (fate) is fit and meet.

A Jew of rancorous nature in his faith, subtle as snake, a
dragon in Ids acts.

For years from him I suffered much distress, no fruit I’ve
eaten from him saving ill.

I, sleeping on the couch of his harlm ; he, forging falsehoods
to discredit me.

Through loads imposed my head like clouds depressed ; he,
like the lightning, drawing sword at me.

(But now ) since God has driven him from my side, disturbance
and distress have left me (too).

But good or ill his acts, his face is hid ; evil must not be spoken
of the dead.

He has departed from the midst of us ; relations (now) are
otherwise disposed.

(And) you, since you are one who meets my views, I choose
to be the partner (of my life).

Wealth, land, and beauty, modesty, are mine (1,522) ; better
where should you meet with lawful spouse ?

(For union) order soon all needful things, a union God Himself
has, (sure), ordained.

I have approved of you to be my mate, for I have seen your
noble, generous mind.

If you have any inclination (too, tell me), that I may claim to
be your slave.

My words are done, this is the state of things ; much wealth
is mine, and this, my beauty, (see) !

Then from the pearl she lifted up the veil, from moist cornelian
took the impression dry (1,523).

When Bashr saw her loveliness and grace, her eyes’ seductive-
ness, her witching moles, —

He saw the fairy-faced one whom before as world-iUuminator
he had seen.

He raised a cry and fell bereft of sense, a slave to her who
was a slave (to him).


170


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The honey-lipped one seeing this made speed, she sprinkled
scent, and brought him back to life (1,524).

The unconscious man to consciousness restored, his head
was heated with the heat of shame.

He said, 1 hough through a fairy I’m distraught, think not that
I am a demoniac (1,525).

Though he is lost who has beheld a div, a fairy I have seen,

0 fairy-born.

And what you see is no love of to-day’s ; long time it is that

1 have felt this pain.

For in a certain narrow street one day the wind blew from your
hand your veil aside.

I saw you (then), and (to myself) was lost ; was dr unk ere
I had drunk of union’s wine.

I burnt (then) in the hidden grief of love ; my life departed
in my love for you.

Though for a moment you've not left my mind, to none have
I my secret ever told.

But patience, resignation failing me, I went and fled (for
refuge) unto God.

And by His favour and compassion God brought to me all
that is before (me now).

Unlike the sensual I avoided lust for haram fair ones, wealth
of other men.

If He now give one fair as you and wealth, if He has made
them lawful (now), ’tis well.

\\ hen she became acquainted with his love, her own from
erstwhile grew from one to ten.

So fair entreated by that hurl Bashr went out on festive
preparations bent.

Pledged to the marriage-gift (1,526), he married her ; a boon
he gained, and for the boon gave thanks.

"VVath her so fair he gained his heart’s desire, and used a spell
against the evil eye (1,527).

He saved a queenly being from a Jew ; he rescued from eclipse
a (brilliant) moon ;


TRANSLATION


171


Washed from her mead the dust of yellowness ; petals of hly
grew and hyacinth (1,528).

He judged her to the heavenly ones akin, so dressed her like
the hurls (aU) in green.

Green dress is better far than yellow badge (1,529) ; green is
becoming to the cypress-tree (1,530).

Green shows the welfare of the seed that’s sown ; green is the
adornment of the angels (too).

More than to ought the soul inclines to green ; the eye is
brightened too by verdant meads.

In green the plants (too) have their norm and law ; through
green comes every flourishing, fresh state.

When that assembly-gracing Moon had told the tale, the
monarch took her to his arms.

Bahrain sits on Tuesday in the Red Dome, and the daughter of
the king of the Fourth Clime tells him a story.

When came December’s month, upon a day short as a night
is in the month of June, —

The best of all the (seven) days of the week, Tuesday its
happy and auspicious name (1,531),

The day of Mars, and martial (too) its hue ; — (on such a
day) Bahram, namesake of both (1,532),

Adornment, red with red together, leagued, and to the Red
Dome hastened at the dawn.

The fair Slavonian rosy-red of cheek, in hue like fire, like water
all benign.

Ran up to meet the king, and homage paid, and with her sleeve
swept from his cheek the dust.

For service worshipful she then prepared, — ’tis sweet to see
a moon adore the sun.

When night had raised its gilded globe on high, and dimmed
the lustre of the solar cup.

She, honeyed apple, sweet and rosy-hued, was asked by him to
tell a cheerful tale.


172


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The charming one resisted not hia will ; she cast pearls from
cornelian at his feet (1,533) :

You, to whose Gate the sky as threshold serves ; orb of the
sun and of the moon your tent ;

Higher than every pearl that one can bore (1,534), better than
every word that one can speak !

No one so bold as to approach you near ; — blind be the man
who is too bhnd to see (1,535) !

She, having ended this, her prayerful speech, gave purest
rubies to the ruby mine (1,536).

Story.

She said, In Russia’s (broad) domains there was a town in
beauty like a (beauteous) bride.

A king in it, a fosterer of good, who had a daughter bred in
luxury.

A heart-beguiler, witching by her glance, of roseate cheeks,
and cypress-slender form.

Face lovelier than the moon in beauty bright, in sweetness
lips more sweet than sugar is.

All strength of heart she took from those who sued ; sugar and
taper near her were put out (1,537).

Sugar, before her small and sugary mouth, in heart was more
contracted than her waist.

The musk afflicted at her curling locks (1,53S) ; on thorns the
rose and basil at her face.

High-statured like the cypress in the grove ; like lamp and taper
radiant of face.

The freshness of her face more fresh than Spring ; than picture
lovelier her lovely tints.

The drowsy jonquil languorous for her; the grace of eglantine
her (humble) slave.

AU men the dust beneath her servants’ feet ; the rose prepared
to serve her slaves as slave.

Besides her beauty and her smiling grace, she had the ornament
of learning (too).


TRANSLATION


173


Knowledge of every order she had gained ; and had perused
a leaf on every art ;

Had read the world's (famed) books on magic lore, on sorcery
and (other) secret things.

Over her face she’d drawn a veil of locks ; and was averse to
(all) command to wed.

(For) she who in her time’s unmatched, unique, how can it
fit that she be mated, paired ?

When that the rumour spread throughout the world that from
the heavens a huri had appeared,

And that the moon and sun had born a child, Venus had given
it milk through Mercury (1,539) ;

An eager longing for her rose in each ; each one with deprecation
urged his suit.

One backed his claim with gold and one with strength ; she
on the instant hid her gold from view.

The father from the suit of men so famed, to which he saw
that idol did not yield,

Was helpless, knowing not what means to adopt, — how,
with opponents hundred, “ nard ” to play (1,510),

The lovely girl to strict seclusion vowed, seeing the urgency
of those W'ho sued,

Sought out a lofty mountain in those lands, far from (the
fear of) damage as the sky.

She had a castle built, so strong and fit that from the mount’s
pith a new mount seemed born.

She made excuses, a.sked her father’s leave to make her
preparations for the road.

(Her) loving father, though he was distressed at parting
(from her), gave her leave to go.

So that when far his honey from the hive, the bees might not
swarm in by roof and door ;

Also, that with the treasure in a fort, the watchman might
not be disturbed by thieves.

(Then) that incastelled beauty, for (her) ease, saw to the proper
ordering of the fort.


174


THE HAFT PAIKAE


When she had built a castle of such strength, she went and
treasure-like remained in it.

Her treasure (thus) secured, to her was given the name of
“ Lady of the Castle-keep

Her castle thwarted treasure-pillagers, for, iron-built, ’twas
as the “Brazen Fort” (1,541).

She a Slavonian princess in that fort — of princesses naught
(like it) had been dreamt.

She’d closed the road to those who took the road ; she’d foiled
the wish of those whose wish was law.

The accomplished princess was on every theme (most) fertile
in device and quick in thought.

She knew the constitutions of the stars, (their) temperaments
together she’d compared.

She'd fully mastered (all) the temperaments ; she'd taken in
her hand the fragrant wine (1,542).

So that the treatment of all dry and moist, how water is made
hot and fire made cold.

How men behave towards their fellow-men, how to community
community,

All that may help and further culture (too), all that may add
adornment to mankind, —

(Of) all this she had gathered (knowledge true), — she, who in
form was woman, man in mind.

As she became content within those walls, she cast all thought
of mankind from her heart.

Upon the road to that high-towering fort she set with cunning
skill some talismans.

Each talisman a form of iron and stone ; each bearing in its
hand a glittering (sword).

(So that) whoever reached that dangerous pass, by the swords’
strokes (at once) was cut in two.

Except the watchman of the fort, each one who went that
way was foiled and overthrown.

The watchman too, though an initiate, took not the road
except with reckoned steps.


TRANSLATION


175


i


7

i


I

I

I


For if he happened to take one wrong step, his head would
from his body severed fall.

A talisman would strike him with a sword ; the moon, his
life, would hide behind a cloud.

The fortress-gate, which towered to the sky, was hidden like
the portal of the sky.

Though a surveyor searched it for a month, he’d find it no
more than the heavens’ gate.

That fairy-faced one, dweller in the fort, of China’s studios
(1,543) was a painter skilled.

When she engaged in painting with the brush, she tied knots
on the water like a shell (1,544).

With the black paint, as ’tis with hurls’ locks, she painted
(darkest) shadow upon light (1,545).

When she was high-established in that house, (and) the house
shone by that high-’stablished Moon,

She took the brush, and on a piece of silk painted a full-length
portrait of herself.

And then above the silken portrait wrote in finest characters
(the ensuing words) :

Whoever in the world may wish for me, with such a castle
as is my abode.

Let him, not speaking from afar, come in, moth-like no simple
gazer at the light.

A brave man may gain access to such fort ; no coward can have
any business here.

Whoever wishes for the beauteous one, must have not only
one but thousand lives ;

Must boldly set his mind upon the road, and four conditions
(strictly) must observe.

The first condition of this wedlock (then) is (that he have)
fair fame and beauty (too).

The second, that by knowledge he has gained, he loosen
on this road the talismans.

The third condition is that having loosed from their connections
all the talismans (1,546),


176


THE HAFT PAIKAK


He show where is the portal of this fort, that he become
my mate by door, not roof.

If he the fourth condition would fulfil, (then) let him take
the pathway to the town.

That I may come unto my father’s court, and question him
upon some learned themes.

If he should answer me in fitting mode, (then) I will wed him
as good faith requires.

That honoured man shall be my husband (then), for that
which I have promised must be done.

And whosoe’er in these conditions fails, false to the terms,
his blood be on his head 1

Who holds this admonition in esteem , — he has the alchemy
of happiness.

But he who cannot penetrate my words, — though he be great,
he shortly shall be small.

When she had done preparing (thus) her page, she gave it
to a fitting messenger.

She said. Arise, and take this page with you ; (go) and take
ofi the cover from this plate (1,547).

Go to the city-gate, in some high place upon the toll-house
fasten this my note ;

That anyone, of army or of town, whose wish may fall upon
so fair a one,

May take the road on the conditions named, and either be
the castellan or die.

The servant (then) departing with the note, followed an
intricate and winding road.

He fixed the beauty’s portrait on the gate, so that her lovers
(there) might look on it ;

That whoso should desire her might arise, and (rashly) with
his own hand shed his blood.

When by each reigning prince and sovereign crowned was
gathered of this story some account.

Led by desire (inspired) by that wild news, people appeared
from all the parts around.


TRANSLATION


177


Each one (urged) by the fervour of his youth abandoned to
the winds his (precious) life.

Whoever for the sake of her set out incurred destruction
through the falchion's strokes.

Not one who strove by judgment and by schemes could loose
those tahsmans, the castle’s guards.

And he who had some slight success in this, — even his spells
reached not the remedy.

Though sundry of the talismans he loosed, he had not any power
with the rest.

From want of proper judgment and of sense, disgraced, as
but a warning did he serve.

(Thus) many handsome youths were brought to death without
at all attaining to their wish.

No one had found deliverance from that road ; no road was
there but that of loss of head.

Each head cut off of those exalted ones, — they hung it up
upon the city gate ;

Till heads so many sternly were cut ofi, that in the city, eaves
on eaves were formed.

When round the world you look in every place, (you find)
the towns adorned by festive scenes ;

That troubler of the hurls, fairy-faced, with heads, not festive
scenes, adorned the town.

Upon her head how many heads there were which had not
reached the shadow of her door !

Among the great in rank, the monarchs' sons, there was a
handsome youth of noble mind.

Astute and powerful, beautiful and brave ; the wolf and lion
victims of his sword.

One day he left the city for the chase, to gain such joy as
early spring invites.

On the town-gate he saw a honeyed page ; around it hundred
thousand poison-flasks (1,548).

A portrait painted on a silken ground, one which should please
the eyes, beguile the heart.

N


173


THE HAFT PAIKAR


A face wliich from its loveliness and grace, took in a moment
from him self -re straint.

He uttered fervent blessings on a reed from whose point came
such characters (as those).

Around the portrait, which adorned the world, (round), head
to foot, a hundred heads were hung.

He said. How from this shark-infested pearl can I escape ?
No place as refuge serves.

If from this love-affair I hold my hand, (such) self-restraint
will bring on me distress.

And if my heart renounce not this desire, I lose my head,
my wish still unfulfilled.

Although a lovely form is on the silk, snakes in the rings are,
spines among the dates (1,549).

Forsooth, so many heads have been cut off ; would that some
business too had been achieved !

Take it that I too lose my head, — what gain ? A harmless being
killed and blood-defiled.

If from this cord I do not hold my hand, my head must be
(and will be) bound by it.

Though I be bold enough to encounter death, how can I ever
bid adieu to life ?

Again he said. This silk is fairies’ work, painted in order
suitors to attract.

Before the spells of fairy such as this one must not go without
some magic power.

Until by magic I annul her spells, I should not take up lightly
this affair.

I must procure a means from small and great that from the
wolf's jaws may escape my sheep.

He who would grasp a business (hastily), — the order of his
business gets confused.

(But) in (your) action dwell not on the small (1,550), in order
that great loss be not incurred.

Perform this mode of music with the world (1,551) i take
slowly, give out forcibly and quick (1,552).


TRANSLATION


179


My heart is more unbalanced than my mind ; my liver much
more blighted than my heart (1,553).

How (then) with such a heart can I be gay ? What can I
bring to thought from such a mind ?

He spoke these words and for a time was sad, and from his
bosom heaved a bitter sigh.

He shed tears as he gazed ; he saw cloth, sword, and on the
basin (1,551) saw, as ’twere, his head.

This love, as "twas, he hid (within his heart), the thought and
care he had he told to none.

(Thus) he was night and day with anguished heart ; nor night
was night to him, nor day was day.

With utter longing he at every dawn would wend his way
unto the city-gate ;

Would see that wondrous portrait (on the gate) : tomb of
Farhad, and palace of Shirin (1,555).

Though for the lock a hundred thousand keys he sought, he
(still) could not find any clue.

He saw a thread with thousand thousand ends, but the right
end, the clue, remained unknown.

Then he discarded pride from the afiair, and turned himself
to search and scrutiny.

He sought in every land expedients by means of which the
tight knot might be loosed.

Although he sped about on every side, he could not loose it
from its tangled state.

Until (at last) he heard news of a sage, a demon-binder of
angelic kind.

One who could bridle every untamed horse ; who to all learning
had attained in full.

Subservient to him every fellow-sage ; opened by him all doors
just claim might close (1,556).

When of that learned man (1,557) the noble youth heard news
from men experienced and wise.

To that Simurgh (1,558) of snn-hke majesty he sped like bird
which flies from mount to mount.


180


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He found him like a garden in full bloom (1,539). Where ?
In a cave most desolate and drear.

He touched his saddle-straps as lily might (1,560) ; he girt
himself for service like the rose (1,561).

Through his good fortune and most happy state (much)
knowledge did he gather from that Khizr (1,562).

When from that spring he’d drunk full many a draught, he
spoke a word upon his fixed resolve.

And of the fay-like girl, the lofty fort, the people's fate caused
by her sorcery.

The talismans she’d set upon her road ; her casting down before
her thousand heads —

All he related there before the sage ; in naught did he the
matter hide (from him).

The sage informed him then of what was fit, in secret calculations
for the aSair.

(The prince thus) found the remedy he sought, then full of
anxious care retraced his steps.

In a few days regaining steadiness, he set himself to think
about the aSair.

He gathered every needful instrument fit for the business in
that narrow pass.

He sought a spiritual relationship (1,563) which should relieve
in this his hard emprise.

According as his estimate came out he formed his plan for
every talisman.

And first, to further his pursuit he sought favour from those
of spiritual power.

He dressed in red, for blood’s involved, said he ; this plaint
is from the sky’s oppressive act.

Since he was soon to enter seas of blood, he made his garments,
as his eyes, blood-stained.

All care for his own .safety he resigned. — (Then) cries of
disapproval rose from all.

He said, I take not for myself this pain ; nay, rather, I avenge
unnumbered heads.


TRANSLATION


181


Either I’U loose this yoke from people’s necks, or sacrifice
my life (in the attempt).

When for this work he’d dipped his clothes in blood, he took
his sword, and pitched his tent without.

All who became acquainted with the affair, — that one of lion
heart had come to avenge, —

Sent fervent aspirations forth with him, that he should soon
succeed in that emprise.

Their aspirations and his pure, calm mind, were as steel armour
to encase his frame.

Then afterwards, with plea to be excused, he asked the king’s
permission to depart.

Then set out on the road towards the fort, keeping in mind the
plans for his affair.

When he arrived quite near a talisman, he made a stroke
and (then) a gap appeared.

And by the magic of that charm sublime the talisman’s
connection he dissolved.

Each talisman he saw upon the road, — he cast it headlong
down into the pit.

When he had (thus) removed them from the mount, he put
their swords upon the mountain-peak.

Then he went quickly to the castle wall, and beat a drum
(there) with a leathern strap.

He studied eagerly the sound (it made), having (in this) prepared
a keen device.

(For) since to crevices the sound was clue, the door by means
of crevices was found (1,564).

When she became aware of these events, the moon-faced
beauty sent someone to say :

You who make breaches and who open roads (1,565), you
whom good fortune guides to his desire.

Since you have loosened first the talismans, and (then) correctly
found the treasure-door.

Turn to the city (now) like running stream, and two days
wait with patience if you can.


THE HAFT PAIKAR


1.S2

Till to the city to my sire I come, and (there) subject you to a
searching test.

About four secret things I'll question you ; give answer to
these questions if you can.

My love will (then) be yours, no plea will be admissible against
relationship.

When the man saw that he had found success, he turned back
and went forward on the road.

From the high fort when to the town he came, he took the
silken portrait off the gate.

He folded it and gave it to a slave ; — blessings and praise
gained life, and trouble died.

Then all the heads upon the city-gate indignantly he took
down from their cords.

The people of the town applauded him, and with the slain
men’s bodies buried them.

Followed by thousand blessings he went home, (while) minstrels
raised their voices high in song.

The townsmen in his honour scattered coins ; (from) all the
roofs and doors they scattered them.

All of them swore an oath that should the king consent not
to the union (of the twain),

They would at once bring down the king, and make that (prince)
their ruler and their sovereign.

For one was cruel and cut ofi their heads ; the other, brave
and kindly, saved their heads.

And on her side the lovely princess (too) joyed in the suit
of (her prospective) mate.

(And) soon as night, from pods of blackest musk, rubbed
perfume on the litter of the moon (1,566),

She, sitting in her litter gay in heart,— the wind the driver
of her cavalcade (1,567), —

From mountain pass unto the palace came ; which gained
the mountain’s majesty from her.

(Her) father seeing her grew bright and gay ; nor did she hide
from him the state of things.


TRANSLATION


1S3


AU that had happened to her, good and bad, — she told him all
her story (end to end) ;

About those cavaliers through her cast down ; who dug a
pit, fell into it themselves.

Until (the story) came to where the prince had of a sudden
lost his heart to her.

How to the mount he came, and firmness showed ; how he
broke, one by one, the talismans.

How he became successful with the fort (1,568), (and) failed
not in the stipulations made.

Having fulfilled of four conditions three, let us now see how
’twill be with the fourth.

The king enquired of her. What is the fourth ? That of the
fair should one, not twenty be.

The honey-hpped one said. With fortune's lead, I mean to set
four problems hard to solve.

(And) if by him my problems should be solved, the crown will
(then) be placed upon his head.

But if he should break down upon this road, (then) he will
pitch his tent where he (well) knows.

’Twere fitting that to-morrow at the dawn, the king should
take his place upon the throne ;

Should then invite (the prince) to be his guest ; whilst I behind
the curtain should be hid.

Then I some mystic questions would prepare, for him to answer
with maturest thought.

The king said, we will do so, it is well ; whate’er is done by
you by me is done.

To these their words they added not a word, but sought their
rooms and (then) retired to rest.

Next morn at dawn when that the azure sphere over the rocks
the ruby's lustre shed (1,569) ;

When in these seven “ nard ’’-boards of six squares, a wheat-
ear sown came up a single grain (1,570),

Like the Great Kings (1,571), the king arranged a Court,
and girded tight his waist in servitude (1,572).


1S4


THE HAFT PAIKAE


He gathered an assembly of the famed, of those (esteemed
for) piety and truth.

(Then) when the royal guard was formed in ranks, he made
his Court a hospitable hall.

The prince he (then) invited as his guest, and scattered precious
pearls upon his head (1,573).

Then golden trays were set down in the hall ; the hall in straits
through store of food profuse (1,574).

Since all one wished was on the tray, it was, rather than tray,
supplier of desires.

The foods which were to right and left of them, — each person
ate of that which he desired.

The food partaken of in measure due, and nature (thus) refreshed
with nutriment,

The king ordained that in a private hall they should assay
the gold refined by fire (1,575).

When he went in he gave up his own seat, and made his guest
be seated in his place.

He sat before his daughter (then) to see what further play
she’d with her suitor make.

She who might teach Tarazian puppets play (1,576), behind
the curtain gave a puppet-show.

She took oS from her ears two cryptic pearls, and gave them
to a treasurer and said.

Convey these to our guest without delay, and when they’ve
been conveyed, (his) answer bring.

The messenger at once went to the guest, and that which she
had brought she showed to him.

When the man (carefully) had weighed the pearls, the secret
of them found place in his mind.

Three other (pearls) he added to those (two), pearls which were
worthy (to consort with) them.

(Then) he consigned them to the messenger, and sent her back
to that exalted (dame).

When she whose heart was stone saw those fine pearls, she took
a stone up (then) and weighed the pearls (1,577).


TEANSLATIOX


185


On seeing that their weight was quite correct, with the same
stone she pounded them to dust ;

A little sugar added to the (pearls), (so that) the pearls and
sugar were commixed.

The envoy took them and rejoined the guest ; the guest again
divined the subtlety.

He asked the servant for a glass of milk ; he poured both into
it and said, (here), take.

The servant to her lady (then) returned, and near her placed
the present she had brought.

The lady took the milk and drank it up, and made a paste
then of the residue.

She weighed it with the weights in use before ; the weight was
not diminished by a hair.

(Then) from her hand at once she took a ring, and gave it for
the trusty girl to take.

The wise man took it from the servant's hand, then on his
finger placed it with respect.

He gave a world-illuming pearl most rare, for night a lamp,
in brightness like the day.

The girl of huri race (then) speeded back, and gave to rarest
ruby (1,578) rarest pearl.

The lady put the pearl upon her hand, and from her necklace
took apart the pearls.

Until she found a pearl a mate for his, for night a lamp, of
the same kind as his.

She threaded them together on one string, this one and that
as one, exactly like.

The servant went, gave pearls unto the sea, — rather she gave
the pleiads to the sun (1,579).

When the wise man had seen them, in those two united he
could find no difference.

’Twixt those bright pearls no difference there was in light
and sheen — none save duality.

He asked the servants for a blue glass-bead, for to those two
no (pearl) could be a third.


186


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He placed tlie little bead among the pearls ; he gave, that she
who brought might take them back.

The lady, seeing bead and pearls conjoined, propitious, sealed
her lips and sweetly smiled.

She, comjirehending, took the pearls and bead, fixed bead on
wrist, and in her ears the pearls ;

(Then) to her sire said, Rise, arrange the aflair, for I have
played with fortune now enough.

Behold, (now), how my fortune favours me, when I (can)
choose a lover such as this.

(Now) have I found a match in one whose match no other
person is in his own land.

I who have ■nisdom and approve the wise, in wisdom am
inferior to him.

Her father, when he heard those pleasant words, said to the
fay, 0 you of angel kind.

The converse which I’ve witnessed (at this time), — its face
behind a veil has been concealed.

All that in secret converse has occurred, you must successively
narrate to mo.

She, nurtured in a thousand hopes (1,.530), (then) raised the
cryptic curtain of the mystery.

She said. When first I set my wits to work, the two pearls
I unloosened from my ears.

Under the symbol of those lustrous pearls I said, Life’s but
two days, these wisely use.

He, who three others added to the two, said, Though ’twere
five ’twould also quickly pass.

(Then) I, who added sugar to (the five), and ground in one
the sugar and the pearls,

Meant that this life, polluted by desire, is like the pearls and
sugar ground in one.

By incantation and by alchemy, who can each from the other
set apart ?

He, who poured milk upon the (mixture then), so that
melted and the other stayed,


one


TRANSLATION


187


Meant that the sugar mixed up with the pearls would (from
them) with a drop of mdk divide (1,581).

I, who drank up the sugar from his cup, was but a suckling
(when) compared with him.

My sending (him) a ring (was meant to show) that in Ids
wedding me I acquiesced.

The pearl bestowed by him occultly showed that, like the
pearl, his match could not be found.

I from my necklace added (then) a pearl to point out that I
was myself his match.

Examining, he saw not in the world a third one that resembled
those two pearls.

(Thereafter) he obtained a blue glass-bead ; and added it
against the evil eye (1,582).

I, who disposed the bead upon myself, thus showed myself
devoted to his will.

His (blue glass) bead, as seal upon my heart, is on my treasury
the treasure-seal.

For (solving thus) the five close mysteries I honour and acknow-
ledge him as king.

When the king (thus) beheld the wild colt tamed, the whip
no longer in a state undressed,

In method excellent he set himself all (rites) prescribed by
wedlock to perform ;

Saw to the sweetmeats of her marriage-feast (1,58-3) ; and
portioned Venus, to Canopus (1,584) (wed).

He made a banquet like the field of heaven ; perfumed the
hall with aloes-wood and musk.

He had all done to adorn the marriage-feast ; with rose he
seated cypress (1,585), and went forth.

He joined together two of joyous heart, and then departed,
(leaving them alone).

When the prince saw his captivating bride, saw that a heavenly
huri was his mate.

Sometimes he kissed her cheek, at times her Ups ; at times
pomegranates tasted, sometimes dates (1,586).


1S8


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Postremo adamas margaritas superavit ; falco avis phasianae
pectori superincubuit.

He saw bis blue glass-bead upon her wrist, (and) love for him
in her two languorous eyes

Ejus margaritas cum sigillo non reliquit ; margaritarum
sigdlum thesauro detraxit.

He lived with her, enjoying his desires. He dressed in red, a
symbol of her cheeks.

For he had taken on that previous day redness of clothes as
omen of success.

Since by that red he had escaped from black (1,587), he ever
with red gems adorned himself.

Since (then) in red his fortune had been cast (1,588), the name
was giv'n to him of “ King in Red

Red’s an adornment which delights (the eyes) ; the value of
red gems is (due to) this.

Gold, which the name, red sulphur, has received, has its best
title in the title, “ red

The vital spirit is difiused in blood, and this is with the grace
of life bright red (1,589).

Those persons in whom beauty may be found, — the source
of this, their beauty, is of red.

When this delightful story reached its end, (and) roses red
had filled the air with scent (1,590),

By reason of the roses strewed about Bahram's face brightened
red like fragrant wine.

Extending then his hand to the red rose, he took her to his
arms, in comfort slept.

Baltrdm sits on Wednesday in the Blue Dome, and the daughter
of the king of the Fifth Clime tells him a story.

On Wednesday, from the blossom of the sun when turquoise-
hued the blackness of the sphere.

The king, (sun-like) in world-illuming power, in triumph
sphere-hke, dressed in turquoise-blue.


TEANSLATIOISr


189


He went for pleasure to the Turquoise Dome ; the day was
short, the theme in view was long.

When evening’s locks put on a musky veil (1,591), the watching
of officials he escaped.

He asked the fair narrator of romance to do, as such, the office
due from her.

To tell, accordant with his gallantry, a tale to soothe and gratify
his heart.

A rosebud opening (1,592), the cypress tall joined to the rose’s
petals sweet pastilles (1,593).

She said, To your command the sky submits ; you whom
auspicious planets praise and bless.

I and a thousand slaves above me far are honoured by submissive
lowliness.

It would be ill before a honey-spring to open shop to deal in
vinegar (1,594).

Since (too) the king's command must be obeyed, I will narrate
if be will bear the pain (1,595).

Story.

There was a man in Egypt named Mahan, more handsome
than the moon when at the full.

In beauty like Egyptian Joseph he, his graces (1,596) thousand
ravishers (of hearts).

A number of companions of his age were (always) charmed,
each one, to (see) his face.

Would sundry days beneath the azure sphere devote their
hearts to music and to song.

Each one for that felicitous bright lamp (1,597) prepared a
feast in garden and in house.

One day there came a worthy man of rank, who led him to
a garden as his guest.

A garden sweet and pleasant (to the view), — the friends a
hundred times more pleasant (still).

Till night thov gave themselves to pleasure (there), they
never tired of eating of the fruits.


THE HAFT PAIKAR


¥jO

Each moment sometliinar (new) to nurture joy ; each instant
food (too) of another kind.

When night a musky (1,598) standard raised aloft, and pitch
athwart the silver drew a pen (1,599),

Sweet pleasure in the garden they enjoyed ; wine in their hands
and in their converse song.

They pledged to that (fair) garden heart (and soul), renewing
joy and pleasure (con.stantly).

The moon shone bright and lighted up the sky, a night
hke day in brightness 'twas in truth.

When Mahan’s brain was heated with the wine, he saw the
shining of the moon, and swift

W ent round the garden like a drunken man, till from the garden
a palm-grove he reached.

Afar he saw a man, who (then) approached, and told him
he was one who knew him well.

(He saw) on recognition 'twas a friend, (he saw) it was a
partner in his trade.

He said (to him). Why come you at this time ? vou (who are)
not companion, servant, slave.

To-night, said he, I have arrived from far ; my heart impatient
of not seeing you.

Inestimable profit have I brought ; reason for thanks there is
for such a gain.

When I approached the town it was too late, the gate was closed,
I could not reach the house.

So to the caravansera without I took the sealed up load of
merchandise.

On hearing you were on a visit (here), I came, (but) it is easy
to return.

(Still) it is best that you come to the town ; the welfare of the
village is its chief (l.GOU).

On a dark night ’tis also possible that from taxation we
secure our goods.

MalAn, heart-gladdened at (the thought of) wealth, set out
to follow in his partner's steps.


TEAXSLATIOX


191


The garden-gate they opened covertly, (but) since no person
saw them naught was said.

Both, in their running, rushed on like the wind, till watches
one or two of night had passed.

The road-devouring partner ran in front, (Mahan) ran after
him like flying dust.

When they had passed by where the house should be — the
arrow, thought, had overshot the mark (1,601) —

Mahan said. From the Kile to my abode the distance of the
way is but a mile (1,602).

(But) we have traversed leagues exceeding four, beyond the
limits of the circle gone.

^gain he said, But I perchance am drunk, erroneous pictures
on my eyes I’ve drawn.

He who is acting as my friendly guide knows (weU) the road
and is intelligent.

So in their heat and hurry on they went, slower the one behind,
the leader swift.

Though from fatigue the former lagged behind, the leader,
calling to the laggard, ran.

(Still) in their flight the two (men) slackened not, until the
(morning) bird began to crow.

The partner vanished (then) from JIahan’s sight ; Mahan was
(almost) crazy left astray.

The bird of early morning (1,603) spread its wings, the brain
of night from fantasies was free.

Then the man's eyes by fantasy enchained, escaped from the
deceit of fancy’s play.

Fatigue and drunkenness disturbed his brain ; fatigued and
drunk, he lay down on the spot.

He shed tears Like a candle half burnt out, he lay till midday
sleeping (on the ground).

When from the hotness of the sun his head grew hotter than
the fire within his heart.

He opened eyes to gaze upon the road, he gave a glance around
on every side.


192


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Eose-garden sought he, but he saw no rose, saw nothing but
a trouble-branded heart.

Cave upon cave he saw as his abode, than dragon larger was
the snake in each.

Although no strength was (left him) in his legs, his will
acceded to the thought of flight.

He ran along with no strength in his legs ; he travelled on with
no one (there) to guide.

Till night, that monarch, set his tripod down (1,604), his heart
(e’en) of his shadow was in fear.

When night had drawn designs of blackest work, whilst from
white work the world entire was freed,

Insensible he fell at a cave’s mouth, — each blade of grass a
serpent to his eyes.

He in that demons’ tract bereft of sense, when human voices
fell upon his ear.

Opening his eyes he saw two persons (near), a woman one,
the other one a man.

Each had a bundle fastened on their backs, slowly they walked
by reason of the weight.

The man, who saw (Mahan) upon his way, there left the
woman, and himself came close.

He shouted at him, Say, what man are you ? With whom and
what are you most near allied ?

He said, A stranger I, in evil plight, my name Mahan, a man of
intellect.

Said he. How happened you to reach this place, for this drear
waste is void of husbandry ?

This land and region are the abode of divs, the lion clamours
from the dread of them.

He answered, You are welcome, worthy man ; show such
humanity as one should show.

Of my own will indeed I have not come, — of demons speak
not, I am human-born.

Last night I was in luxury, at ease, in Iram's (heavenly) gardens
(1,605) as a guest.


TEANSLATION


193


(Then) came a man who said, I am your friend ; I am a partner
in your land and coin.

He cast me from that heaven upon this waste, and when the
sun rose vanished from my sight.

That friend devoid of friendship was himself deceived, or else
deceitful (in his lead).

Do me a kindness for the sake of God, point out to me the road
which I have lost.

The man said, Handsome youth, you have escaped by a hair’s
breadth (and) by a single hair.

He was a demon whom you call a man, his name (is) Ha’il
of the wilderness.

He who appeared a partner in your wealth, ^ — his aim was the
destruction of your life.

Many a one like you has he misled, and each of them has died
in a ravine.

I and this woman are your friends and mates ; we both will
be your guardians on this night.

Be stout of heart and walk between us two ; go with us foot
for foot and step for step.

Mahan proceeded (then) between those guides, and traversed
mile by mile the road (with them).

Till early dawn they uttered not a word, save after one
another took no step.

When the cock’s crow beat the tattoo (1,606) (at dawn), and
dawn tied on the camel a gold drum (1,607),

Those two became a lock without a key (1,608) ; they vanished
both (at once) from (Mahan’s) sight.

Again Mahan fell down (upon the ground), sat where he was,
dejected and fatigued.

When day diffused its light (throughout the earth), and earth
inclined to shed the blood of night (1,609),

AH through a narrow gorge 3Iahan went on, mount upon
mount he saw, a narrow pass.

His strength departed, for there was no food, — no food there
was except regret and pain.


o


194


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(So) lie made search for roots and seeds of herbs, and ate them
few by few in place of bread.

He could not think of staying from the road ; his travel he
pursued and went along.

(Then) crept into a cave and slept awhile, concealed his face
from those who were concealed.

That day he went till night from mount to mount, impatient
of (his) life and of the world.

When the white world took on (the shade of) black, the traveller
gave up his travelling.

He heard (then) suddenly a horse’s hoofs ; went to the road
and saw a rider (there) ;

The rider urging to full speed his horse, holding in hand another
rapid steed.

When he came close to Mahan he beheld a figure lurking in
amongst the rocks.

His horse, which he was riding with such speed, he reined in
for a moment from (its) course.

He said, 0 wanderer of skulking mien, who are you, and what
place for you is this ?

If you apprise me of the secret, (well) ! — if not, I will at once
strike off your head.

Mahan through terror at the rider shook ; perspired in drops
like seed by farmers strewn (1,610).

He said, 0 graceful rider, traveller, hear, end to end, the
adventures of your slave.

All that he knew, occult, or manifest, — all to the rider he at
once disclosed.

When from Mahan the rider heard the tale, in wonder he was
lost and showed regret.

Repeating often to himself “La ^ul ” (1,611), (he said).
You’re saved from horror and from death.

Female and male two crafty “ ghfds ” were those (1,612),
who lead (all) men (they come across) astray ;

They cast them into pits, and shed their blood; when the
cock’s crow is (heard) they flee away.


TEANSLATION


195


Haila the female’s called, Ghaila the male ; their business
to (bring) trouble and do ill.

Give thanks you have escaped the death (they give) ; come,
brisk, and speed if you have any worth !

Mount the led horse and take the reins (in hand), and keep
your tongue from speech of ever}^ kind.

Urge on the rapid courser on my road, and (fail not) in your
heart (to) call on God.

Worn out, afSicted by the vales and caves, he mounted,
(as enjoined), the swift-paced steed.

From a low mountain-tract there came to view a level waste, —
of what kind ? — like one’s palm.

He rode his steed so (swiftly) in his wake that (soon) the wind,
(outstripped), was left behind.

When they had gone some portion of the way, and passed
beyond the middle of the hills,

From all sides came the sound of the guitar, the plaint of lute,
the dulcet tones of song.

On that side rose the cry, come hither, come ! on this, the cry,
May the cup give you life !

On all the plain, instead of verdure, flowers, innumerable
“ ghuls ” and ceaseless noise.

Mountain and plain were worn out by the divs : the mountain
took the plain, the plain the mount (1,613).

Innumerable demons seated there, exchanging shouts through
valley and through plain.

All of them, like the wind, were scattering dust ; rather, they
were like leeches black and long.

Till it got so, that from the left and right the mirthful clamour
rose up to the sky.

A tumult rose from clapping and the dance ; it made the brain
ferment in (every) head.

At every instant did the noise increase, moment by moment
greater it became.

When a short time had gone by, from afar a thousand torches
(all) aflame appeared ;


196


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(And) suddenly some persons came to view, forms cast in tall
and formidable mould.

All of them “ gbuls ” like blackest Ethiops ; pitchlike the dress
of all, like tar their caps.

All with the trunks of elephants and horned, combining ox
and elephant in one.

Each of them bearing fire upon his hand, (each) ugly, evil
one like drunken fiend.

Fire (also) from their throats was casting flames ; reciting
verse, they clashed the horn and blade (1,614).

By playing tambourines with tinkling bells they set the whole
world dancing (to the rhythm).

And through the plectrums which those Ethiops used the horse
which Mahan rode began to dance.

(Then) at his courser Mahan cast a glance, to see why from his
legs his head bulged out.

A sore disaster under him he saw ; upon a dragon found
himself astride.

A four-legged dragon with two wings (it was), and, stranger
still, it had (too) seven heads.

(A four-legged beast with four wings who has seen 1 I err,
a seven-headed dragon, sure) (1,615).

The sky which is around us as a belt, — why strange ? A
seven-headed dragon ’tis (1,616).

On that destructive-looking dragon he, with legs drawn to
his armpits on its neck ;

Whilst that tyrannic demon, frolicsome, engaged in some
new frolic ceaselessly.

It went on dancing with a thousand twists, coiling and writhing
more than twisted rope.

Him, — like the straws and leaves, erstwhile at rest, which
torrents drive along down hill and wild, —

It cast from side to side and bore away ; it bruised and crushed
(all over) utterly.

(As if) in drunken sport it made him run ; it cast him on the
hills and on the plains.


TKANSLATION


197


Sometimes it tossed him like a ball away ; sometimes it put
its foot upon his neck.

It played a thousand kind of tricks on him, until the cock’s
crow and the time of dawn.

(Then) when the dawn breathed from the lion’s mouth (1,617),
it cast him quickly from (its) neck away.

The noise and clamour (all) had left the world ; (all) the black
cauldrons (then) had ceased to boil (1,618).

When from the div the man who rode it fell (1,619), he lost all
power like those who see a dIv (1,620).

Beside himself upon that road he lay, like one asleep, or, rather,
one who’s dead.

Until his head was heated with the sun, his consciousness of
self and world was gone.

With brain excited by the heat his sense which had departed
came to him again.

Eubbing his eyes he rose up from the ground ; awhile he looked
intently left and right.

He saw himself in that drear wUdemess, which from (its)
length (appeared) to have no end.

It was as red as blood, as hot as heU, the coloured sand in
endless carpets spread.—

When they would draw the sword upon a head, they spread
a cloth and scatter sand about (1,621).

That desert took the field on blood intent, (and) hence it
scattered sand and spread a cloth (1,622). —

The man, (so) troubled on the night before, when he had gathered
strength in mind and frame,

Away from those wild beasts’ abode a road found out for
flight, a gain to the distressed (1,623).

He took the road, (and) speeded like the wind, in terror at
that poisoned atmosphere.

It got so, that an arrow in its flight could not keep pace with
him however swift.

As soon as evening darkened into night, he’d traversed aU
the desert end to end.


198


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He said, ’Tis best that I should rest at night, for through
the night my mind becomes disturbed.

I (now) indeed in atrabilious mood, an air (so) dry, a road of
solitude, —

How should oppressive fancies not prevail ? my mind’s (already)
crushed with fancy’s play.

When he saw verdant ground and flowing stream, his old heart
like (his) fortune became young.

He drank some water of the stream, and bathed, (and then)
he sought a place wherein to sleep.

To-night I rest, (said he), my comrade sleep, that I may
see not fancies of night’s play.

Then out of all the sheltered spots around he sought one
where he might in safety rest.

Until he came upon a hollow place, in which he saw a deep
shaft had been sunk.

A pit with thousand steps (down to its depths), into which
naught save shadow found descent.

Like Joseph he went down into the pit ; his legs (then) slackened
like the rope (disused).

When he awakened from a pleasant sleep, and had arranged
the pillows of his room (1,624),

He looked on his surroundings in the pit ; he drew a picture
upon blackest silk (1,625).

A white light (then), in size a “diram” (1,626), saw, like
jasmine on the black of willow’s shade.

He looked around the light to right and loft, that (he might
find) from where it had (its) rise.

He saw a breach through which the lofty sphere let the moon’s
rays gain entrance (to the pit).

When he discovered that the spring of light shone from the
moon — the moon so far away —

He put his hands and nails into the hole, and widened out its
narrowness by force.

Till so it got, that he could put his head, from crown to neck,
entirely through (the hole).


TRANSLATION


199


He put it through, saw gardens and parterres : he saw a lovely
and resplendent place.

The breach he dug at, till by toil and skill, he managed to
get all his body through.

He saw a garden, — nay, a paradise, finer than Iram in its
form and make (1,627).

Like hundred painted idols, too, its park, where countless
cypresses and box-trees grew.

Its fruit-trees, for their happy increase there, bowed to the
ground in adoration bent.

Beyond all measure were the fruits in it ; renewed by them
was life, they fresh as life.

Apples, like ruby garments of the wine; like caskets of cornelians,
pomegranates.

Quinces like balls stuffed full of (fragrant) musk ; pistachios
smiling more than thirsty wights (1,623).

The colours of the peach from twig and branch made the red
ruby and the topaz cheap.

Its nuts conjoined with “ halva ” were distressed (1,629) ;
and kisses used its dates (to make them sweet) (1,630).

Its honeyed guavas (1,631) wreathed in honeyed smiles ;
its clustered jujubes fashioners of gems (1,632).

The honey of its ’ figs, its alraond-nuts, were to its bowl as
(1,633) cups of paludah (1,631).

Its grape-vines (with their) hats set (all) awry saw under their
control both white and black (1,635) :

The raziql, mulahl, jazarl, the budarl, gulabi, shakarl (1,636).

A garden, a magician in the spells of (its) abundant buds of
varied hue.

The branches and fresh leaves of orange-trees had planted a
plantation in the grove.

The juice of grape and pomegranate fire-hued bore witness
of blood-shedding for the grape (1,637).

When such a paradise Mahiin had found, he turned his heart
from last night’s hell-abode.


200


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Pomegranates, jujubes, apples, fruit on fruit, — like sappan
red, like pure white sugar too (1,638).

From the delight such honeyed draughts conferred, the smacking
of his lips came to (his) ears.

He ate the fruits in honeyed sweetness rich ; he ate of those
provisions choice as gold.

Whilst he remained in wonder at the fruits, — eating of some,
and casting some away, —

On one side suddenly a cry arose. Seize, hold the robber, to
the left or right !

With rage and rancour chafing, an old man, bearing a staS
upon his shoulder, came.

He said (to him). Who are you, fruit-thief fiend ? Why to
the garden have you come by night ?

I have been in this garden many years, untroubled by the night-
attack of thieves.

What person are you ; of what lineage known ? who are you,
what are you, what are you called ?

When the old man used such words to Mahan, the poor man
(nearly) perished at the words.

He said, I am a stranger, and have strayed far from my home
into an unknown place.

Put up with strangers who have suffered pain, that heaven
may call you cherisher of such.

When the old man heard his apologies, he felt disposed to treat
him graciously.

He threw the stick down from (his) hand at once ; he put him
at (his) ease, and sat down near.

He said. Pray tell me your adventures (now) : what you have
seen, what has occurred to you.

What wrongs from foolish people you’ve endured, what evil,
wicked men have done to you.

Mhen from the ancient man Mahan received soft words of
kindness and of sympathy.

With his adventures he acquainted him : with what he’d seen
and that which had occurred.


TEANSLATION


201


His falling out of comfort into pain, each night his heart
subjected to some grief.

And (then) of his despair at what might come, as sometimes
he was troubled, sometimes joyed.

Until the pit and that auspicious lamp (1,639), which led him
to the garden from its gloom.

In detail he narrated (all) the tale : the hidden matter he
disclosed to him.

Hearing his words the ancient man was dazed at (aU) the
wondrous trials he had borne.

He said, Thanksgiving now is strictly due, that (so) you have
been saved from pain and fear.

For all the old man’s kindness and support Mahan felt gratitude
within (his heart).

Then he enquired (and said). That vile abode, what region is it,
in what land its seat 1

Last night the Resurrection it appeared, with (all) its infidels
intent on me.

Demons I saw, and to myself was lost ; such is the state of
him who demons sees (1,640).

A fire raised smoke, (diSused it) through my brain ; that evil
all seemed from a single spark (1,641).

Against me came a thousand, demon-faced, in each were
countless demons and wild beasts (1,642).

One dragged me, this one threw me, that one struck ; demons,
wild beasts, and both as bad could be.

Darkness has in the light an antidote ; in blackness (also)
whiteness may be seen ;

But I saw black on black so much that I grew frightened of
the pupils of my eyes.

I was bewildered, (knew not) what to do, quite innocent,
yet weeping with distress.

Sometimes my eyes would lead me to complain, sometimes
I stroked my eyes (to wipe the tears) (1,643).

(Then) I went forth and hastened on the way, — this with
“ La haul ” (1,644), and that with “ BismiUah ” (1,645).


202


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Until (at last) God saved me from my woes, and changed my
darkness to the Stream of Life (1,646).

I found a garden sweeter than Iram (1,647) ; a gard’ner still
more charming than the same.

My terror of last night has left me now ; to-night my wish
tends towards security.

The old man said, 0 you who’ve care escaped, and paradise’s
sanctuary reached,

That (dreary) desert which surrounds these tracts, fearful
and sterile, is the abode of fiends.

From those base-natured beings you are saved, and such a
treasure-house you (now) have reached.

Those Ethiop-like dwellers in the waste are fiends who ape
men’s form, and men devour.

They first of all deceive men (by their wiles), then (with)
no stinted torture torture them.

Of truth they make professions, but play false ; they take
men’s hands, (then) cast them into pits.

Their love is (but) a prelude (1,648) to (their) hate ; such
(always) is the habit of the fiend.

He who (by nature) to deceit is given is] even of the demons
of those depths.

And such-like fiends are many in the world, who laugh at
fools whilst they are fools themselves (1,649).

Sometimes they hide a lie beneath the truth ; sometimes find
poison in an antidote (1,650).

No lying fancy can be long sustained ; truth is a warrant of
eternity (1,651) :

Duration is an index (sure) of truth ; from truth is found a
wonder-working spell.

Your nature's radically void of guile, that all these fancies
came into your head (1.652).

Such tricks as these by wicked beings played, thev show not
save to simple-minded men.

( Twas) terror made a fierce attack on you, and gave the play
of fancy to your mind.


TRANSLATION


203


All this oppression practised upon you came from alarm at
straying from the road.

If your heart then had kept its normal state, your mind would
not have harboured fantasies.

(But) since you’ve saved your life from that “ ghuls' ” haunt
(1,653), drink of the clear and pure ; — no more of dregs !

Think that your mother bore you but last night ; that God
just now has given you to me (1,654).

This precious garden, emerald in hue, which by my heart’s
blood has been brought to hand,

Is my possession incontestably ; no flower but makes avowal
(of the fact).

Fruits nurtured by affection here there are ; from diSerent
gardens all the trees were brought.

The income of it, even at its worst, — with it a city would be
rich and great.

Besides (all) this I have a thousand stores ; (pure) gold in
stacks, and jewels in ass-loads.

All this I have, but still no child, no son, on whom to fix
the affection of my heart.

When I saw you, by reason of your worth, I fixed my heart
on you to be my son.

If this should please you, you to whom I’m slave, all this
(at once) I will devote to you ;

That you in this fresh garden may rejoice, enjoy (its) blessings,
wander (at your will).

I will demand for you, as you may wish, a youthful bride,
a ravisher of hearts.

On you I’ll fix my heart and be well pleased ; in all you wi.sh
I’ll be subservient.

If kindly to this offer you respond, as pledge to this convention
give your hand.

Mahan replied, How can such words be used ? The bramble
worthy of the cypress-tree !

(But) since you (deign to) accept me as your son, in this
authority I am (your) slave (1,655).


204


THE HAET PAIKAR


May you be joyous, for you’ve given me joy, 0 you through
whom my house is flourishing.

He kissed (the old man’s) hand, rejoiced by him, and upon that
he gave his hand to him.

The old man took his hand (then) in his own, engaged himself
by oath, a compact made.

He said (to him). Arise ! His guest arose. He took him from the
left hand towards the right.

He pointed out a lofty edifice, (where) carpets of rich painted
silk were spread.

A hall (there was which) towered to the sky ; its arch arising
up to Saturn’s (sphere).

Its walls and court were all of purest gold, and like the fuU
moon in (their) radiance.

He saw some rooms (in it) of varied hue of many branches,
cypress, poplar, formed.

Curtains were fixed up by the door-jambs (there), the waists
of which the (lofty) heavens kissed.

Before that hall for a king’s palace fit, there grew a sandal-tree
(both) tall and broad.

It threw out from its many branches gems, which blushing
hung their heads down towards the earth (1,656).

On it was fixed a strong well-fitting seat, — a couch made out
of strong and solid boards.

Cushions and mats were laid upon the couch, pleasant and
soft hke branches of a tree.

The old man said to him. Climb up the tree. If need you have
of water and of food,

A wallet and a bottle hang (from it), full of blue water this,
of white bread that.

I go, in order to prepare for you in full abundance all your heart
may wish.

Until I come be patient in (your) place ; descend not from
your sleeping-place at all.

Whoever questions you, lend not your ear ; keep silence, and
no word in answer speak.


TRANSLATION


205


By no one’s courtesy be you beguiled, to anyone’s attention
give no heed.

If I should come, for some assurance ask, and then admit
me to your safe retreat.

Since in all earnestness between us two a close and lively
friendship has been fixed,

The garden is your own, the house your house, my resting
place is resting place of yours.

(But) you must fear the evil eye to-night, and then all other
nights you’ll be at ease.

He gave him these injunctions one by one, and swore him
also to (observe) the same.

There was a leather scaling-ladder there for (the ascent to)
that auspicious couch.

(The old man) said. Come, grasp the leather, mount : to-night
be just a little limber-legged.

Then draw up this long leather from the ground, in order
that no person may play tricks.

To-night be girded ready for the snake ; and in the morning
with the treasure play (1,657).

Although my “ halva ” has arrived at night, its saffron in
the day-time must be seen (1,658).

Though like a choke-pear is the pear of night, the smiling
pomegranate is in dawn’s hands (1,659).

The old man spoke, then to the palace went, to put a place
in order for (his) guest.

Mahan ascended (then) the lofty tree, drew up the leathern
(ladder) from the ground.

He (then) sat down upon the high-placed couch ; beneath his
feet all heights (seemed) low (to him).

He opened out the wallet and consumed a portion of the
yellow cakes and white.

He drank some of the water cool and clear, on which the
north wind had bestowed its care.

In such a house perfumed with ambergris (1,660) hke the north
wind he had renounced the world (1,661).


THE HAFT PAII^A.R


As on that couch adorned as by the Greeks he from the Chinese
cushions gained rejjose (1.662)

Pastilles of camphor sweet and sandal-tree from atrabilious
trouble cleared his heart (1,663).

(Soon) he leaned over, towards the garden looked, saw many
candles suddenly afar :

The candles borne by sundry beauteous girls ; — the king
enthroned (1,664) (there) beauties’ slave became.

Seven queens together came along one road, (who) from the
moon had snatched seven qualities.

Adorned was each one in a different way ; roses and sugar
(1,665) they in linen fine.

When they before the garden-palace came, with candles, as
in lanterns, in their hands (1,666),

They made arrangements for a royal feast ; they spread a
carpet as the foremost seat (1,667).

The carpet was illumed by light on light, varied in mode
became the song and glee.

That (beauty) fairy-faced who was their chief, who of that
necklace was the crowning pearl.

Sat in her own place in the banquet hall, giving the others
place on either side.

They raised their voices, hke the birds, in song, luring the birds
down by it from the air.

Their voices in their all-beguiling power took peace of
heart from Mahan and the moon (1,668).

Their playing made the feet incline to dance ; their verses
chanted made the hands beat time.

A wind arose and played some roguish tricks, it opened fragrant
groves of oranges (1,669).

In love-pangs at these pleasing oranges (1,670) Mahan from
suffering pounded sandal-wood.

Since (too) his nature was refined and keen, — when the sweet
music and the songs he heard.

He wished to find some excellent device to get down quickly
from his airy (perch) :


TEANSLATION


207


And with such beauties, hurl-like in make, to be in heaven
without the Judgment Day.

Again, he brought to mind the old man's words, he held in
check the struggling of his heart.

And still those idols in their sport and play showed all deluding
and beguiling art.

When they had spent some time in merriment, they placed
a tray, on feasting set their minds :

A tray inset with rubies and with pearls, the rubies joined
together with the pearls.

Foods which had neither fire nor water seen, perfumed with
musk, rose-water, aloes-wood.

Fat lambs from (far) Bulgaria (1,671) (were there), fresh
fish (besides), and (also) fatted birds.

Birds, fish, lamb, “ halva ” (1,672), pulse with cumin stewed, —
and thousand dishes made with pulse (were there).

When they had brought a tray of such a kind, — a tray ! — no
tray, but rather a whole world.

The queen of beauties in her pleasing way, said, Soon my odd
to even will be changed (1,673).

From sandal, scent as aloes (sweet) I smell ; (now) go you to
the sandal=aloes-wood.

A share of perfume it has given my brain, — but is content
of mind, or perfume, good (1,674) ?

It seems (to me) that one of friendly mind is on the tree,
and harbours some desire.

(Go), call him down for fellowship (with me), that I may play
his fancies (at my will).

If he come not, (then) say the tray’s prepared, (but that)
love for the guest is (far) too great

To let (the queen) put hand upon the tray save at the moment
when the guest has come.

(Say), rise, enjoy companionship with her ; the tray is set,
expectant keep her not.

The charmer went up to the sandal-tree, with mouth so small,
so great in coaxing speech.


208


THE HAFT PAIKAR


She made a bulbul long for festive song, and like the rose
she brought him from the tree (1,675).

From youthfulness, the force of which prevailed, the old man’s
admonitions he forgot.

Since love removed the shame (of broken faith), Mahan went
as the guest of that (bright) Moon.

When the (resplendent) Moon saw Mahan’s face, she bowed
down low to him, as throne to king.

She seated him with her upon the rug ; on both sides pearls
(of eloquence) were strewn.

At the same tray she sat with him at food, for such does
hospitality require.

And every moment in her kindly care she gave him of the
choicest morsels (there).

When they had finished with the banqueting, the ruby-raining
bowl began to flow.

When they had drunk some measures of the wine, all bash-
fulness between them was dispelled.

When wine had rent the veil of bashfulness, his love for that
bright Moon more fervent grew.

He saw a beauty like a flowering Spring ; more charming
than a picture in her grace.

With bosom soft and delicate as silk ; more dainty, sweeter
she than milk and sweets.

Her face an apple pleasing to the heart, with liquid candy
and (pure) honey filled.

Her body quicksilver one tries to grasp, but which from
fineness through the fingers shps.

Her bosom rivalled the white garden-rose, her waist with
taper and with candle vied.

On her was shed the beauty of the moon ; the love of Mahan
soon grew thousandfold.

Now bit he as the crop-sick sugar bite ; now did he taste
as bees the honey taste.

When Mahan to that moon made ardent love, the moon-
faced beauty turned away through shame.


TRANSLATION


209


He took that Chinese idol to his breast, those sweet white
petals of the Chinese rose.

He put his lips upon that fount of wine : on red cornelian
put a ruby seal (1,676).

When his approving eyes looked well on her, that lustre of
his eyes, a candied fount, —

He saw an Tfrit (1,677) who from mouth to foot had her
existence from the wrath of God.

A bulialo with boar’s teeth such that none would think
a dragon could so (monstrous) be.

A hunch-back,- — God defend us (all) ! — a hump like that
of bow, a bow that's drawn in Tuz (1,678).

Her back a bow, her face was like a crab ; her stinking odour
reached a thousand leagues.

A nose (she had) like a brick-maker’s kiln ; (she had) a mouth
(too) like a dyer’s trough.

Her lips apart like jaws of crocodile ; — she closely held Mahan
in her embrace.

Upon his head and face, no matter how, she showered kisses,
and thus spoke (to him) ;

0 you whose head has come into my hands ; 0 you whose
lips are bitten by my teeth.

You put your hands on me, your teeth as well, to kiss my
lips, and (kiss) my chin as well.

(Now) look at hands and teeth, — nay, sword and lance !
like this are hands and teeth, (and) not like that (1.679).

What was all this desire of yours at first ? and why has your
desire so weakened now ?

The same lips are these lips, for kisses ask ; the face the same,
shut eyes not to the Moon. —

Do not take wine from such a cupbearer as tempts to sense-
deluding drunkenness (1,680).

(And) do not hire a house (too) in a street where the police-
director is a thief. —

All these, my acts, are such as they should be (1,681), if
I would treat you as is requisite.

p


210


THE HAFT PAIKAR


If I should act not as befits you, then I am the same one that
you saw at first (1.682).

She caused (him) thus affliction ceaselessly, inflicted fiery
acts of violence.

When Mahan, helpless and ill-fated, saw a Moon resplendent
to a dragon changed ;

One, silver-legged, (now) showing wild boar's hoofs ; an
ox-eyed (beauty), (now) with ox’s tail ;

Beneath that pitch-like dragon he became— (without descrip-
tion) you must take the sense.

He shrieked aloud like any child in fright, or woman in the
pain of giving birth.

And that black monster hke the (famed) White Div (1,6S3) the
willow with her kisses would have fired (1.681).

Until the (first) light of the dawn appeared, the cock crowed,
and the demon fled away.

The veil of darkness hfted from the world, and (all) those
visions were (at once) dispelled.

Those potsherd natures, which as rubies showed (1,685), all
went, and no one in the place remained.

Mahan, (left) lying at the palace-gate, remained until the
sun began to shine.

When he had gained his senses once again from the sweet
basil of the shining day (1.686),

His eyes he opened, saw an ugly place ; he found a hell in
place of paradise.

The wealth had gone, naught save laments remained ; dust
filled the eyes of \-ision, fantasy.

The flag, whose source was (but) in fantasy, was fickle, since
it was of fickle state (1,687).

He found the garden all a place of thorns, the hall a place
where mist and vapour rose.

The box and cypress naught but weeds and thorns, the fruits
(all) ants, the keepers of them snakes (1.688).

The breasts of birds and backs of (tender) kids were all but
carrion (now) of ten years’ date.


TRANSLATION


211


The player’s instruments, harps, rebecks (all) were (nothing
but) the bones of animals.

Those (costly) tissues (all) adorned with gems (were now all)
leather skins, with tanning, foul (1,689).

The sandal-tree and carpets honeycombed had camphor-
like evaporated (all).

Tanks (clear) as eyes reflecting honour’s soul had turned to
sinks of putrid, stinking lymph.

And that which had been left of (all) the food ; that which
remained in the cupbearers’ jugs.

Was refuse, in its nature ordurous ; was percolation, all, of
(oozing) sores.

That which was wholly basil-scented wine had all become
a cesspool's filthy flow.

Again Mahan despaired of his affairs ; God’s pardon and
protection he invoked.

To set out on the way he had no power, nor had he daring
(in the place) to stay.

He pondered thus (1,690), It is a wondrous thing; what
tie is this ? what collar (round my neck) ?

To see a flowering garden yesternight ; to see a place of misery
to-day !

What meant a show of roses and (then) thorns ? What
gain is in the produce of earth's fields ?

And he knew not that all that we possess is a (fell) dragon
hid beneath a moon.

If they cast down the veil you (then) will see to what things
foolish men devote their love.

These Grecian and these Chinese figures, all, are ugly Ethiopians
when you look.

A skin drawn over blood (1,691) (presents to view) wine out-
side (1,692), but a cesspool ’tis within.

If they took off from us these veins and skin, (all love would
cease), a dust-heap no one loves.

Many keen men who pay for snake-stones think they have
them, but find in th^ basket snakes (1,693).


212


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Many deluded men in this dry bag (1,694) find a musk-pod
a knur of aloes-wood (1,695).

When Mahan from wrong-doers’ hands escaped, — as I (now)
from the story of Mahan (1,696), — ■

He formed the resolution to act well ; sin (thenceforth) he
abjured, made vows to God.

With a heart purified he fled to God ; he went upon his way,
his heart’s blood shed (1,697).

Until he reached some water clear and pure ; he bathed, and
laid his face upon the ground.

In lowly self-abasement worshipped God ; and weeping
prayed the Friend of friendless men :

0 Helper, help me in my troubled state ! 0 Shewer (of the
way), shew (me) my way !

His sorrows he poured out awhile to God, laid in His temple
(in the dust) his face.

He said. Not only are You guide to me ; who is there whom
You do not shew the road ?

You alone help me in my troubled state ; You, and no other,
shew the road to me.

When with (more) constant mind he raised his head, he saw a
person standing at his side.

Like the (Spring) month of April, dressed in green ; like the
bright, (glowing) dawn, of ruddy face.

He said. In truth, who are you, worthy sir ? Essential worth,
sure, in your essence shares.

He said, I’m Khizr (1,698), 0 worshipper of God, (and) I have
come to help you (in your pain).

It is your good intention which has come, in order to convey
you home again.

(So) give to me your hand without delay, (then) close your
eyes, and open them again.

As soon as Mahan heard the words of Khizr, — a thirsty man,
he saw the Fount of Life (1,699).

He quickly gave his hand into his hand ; he closed his eyes,
and opened them at once.


TRANSLATION


213


He saw himself in that secure retreat from where the demon
led him first astray.

The garden-gate he opened, and sped on ; to Cairo from a dreary
waste returned.

(And there) he saw his friends (in) silent (grief), all dressed
in blue as mourning (for a friend).

Whatever he had seen from first to last, (all) he narrated to
his friends in full.

All of his friends who were his intimates ; whose eyes were
blinded (with their tears) for him, —

He strove to (act) in unison with all, blue (garments) he
prepared and put them on.

Blue came to be inseparate from him ; sky-like he took the
colour of the world (1,700).

Than blue the lofty sky has found no silk more beautiful in
hue (to serve as dress).

Whoever takes the colour of the sk}', — the sun becomes as
loaf upon his tray (1,701).

That azure flower which they (so much) esteem receives a
round loaf from the sun’s (round) loaf (1,702).

To whatsoever side the sun inclines, — the azure flower still
keeps its glance on him.

Hence every other flower which is blue is called by the Hindu
sun-worshipper.

When the fair radiant Moon had told her tale, with love the
monarch drew her to his breast.

BaJirdm on Thursday sits in the Sandal-coloured Dome, and the

daughter of the king of the Sixth Clime tells him a story.

A happy day is Thursday, and ascribed to Jupiter in its
auspiciousness.

When early dawn diffused the scent of musk, (and) sandal-
braying earth (1,703) burnt aloes-wood (1,704),

In concord with the sandal-coloured earth, the king used
dress and wine-cup sandal-hued.


214


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(Then) from the Azure Dome he issued forth, and to the Sandal-
coloured Dome he went.

Wine he received not from a Chinese doll (1,705), but Kausar’s
nectar (1,706) from a hurl’s hand.

In happiness he spent the day till night, and drinking wine
he drank of joyousness.

When this collyrium-coloured ocean’s shells poured pearls
into the water-dragon’s jaws (1,707),

Of her in China nurtured, narrow-eyed, he asked (a tale) to
free his heart from care.

The Chinese princess, with a brow composed, let flow a stream
of honey from (sweet) dates (1,708).

She said, Life of the world alive through you ! King most
exalted of the kings (of earth) !

Greater (are you) than (all) the desert-sands, rocks of the
mountains, water of the seas.

(As) Fortune is your friend, (so) live you long ! May you
be happy in your life and fate !

Giver of light like the resplendent sun ! sovereign, bestower
too of sovereignty !

She (then) said, I am apprehensive e'er of this (so) halting,
stammering a tongue ;

Then too before the basil-scented wine (1,709) should now be
scattered pearls (of eloquence).

Still as the king a story-teller seeks, — safiron requests for his
enlivenment (1,710),

A bag of babble I will open (now), and (by it) add a smile to
cheerfulness.

The radiant Moon, the adorer of the Sun (1,711), this homage
oSered, kissed the monarch's hand.

Story.

She said. Once on a time from their own town two youths
departed for another town.

Each one into a corner of his bag had put his food, provision
for the road.


TRANSLATION


215


The name of one was Good, the other’s Bad ; the acts of each
accorded with (his) name.

When they had travelled two or three short days, the food
which they had with them (for the road) —

Good had consumed (his), Bad kept (his intact) : the former
reaped the corn, the latter sowed.

Until, proceeding side by side, they reached a desert waste
that seethed with fever-heat.

A furnace hot as oven-pit of fire, where iron would be (melted)
soft as wax.

A hot and arid tract from water far, which made the north
wind like the (hot) simoom.

Good, confident of water on the way, knew not there was
no water, but a pit (1,712).

But Bad, aware that that waste desert tract, extending far,
no water had (in it).

Had secretly with water filled a skin, and kept it in his bag
like (costly) pearls.

In the hot desert and the drawn-out road in utmost haste and
hurry ran the two.

When the sun reached full heat, grew scorching hot, Bad had
his water, that of Good was gone.

Bad, who the water had concealed from Good, spoke not a
word to him of bad or good.

When Good saw that by evil nature led (the other), having
water in his glass, —

From time to time that comrade secretly was drinking it
like basil-scented wine ;

Though he was burning in the heat of thirst, no word of supph-
cation did he speak.

Thirsty he gazed on water, whilst his mouth was watering
with water from his heart (1,713).

So much so that his heart became all dry (1,714), his eyes
incapable of opening.

’Twixt prayers of morn and even he remained thirsty, without
endurance, power to bear.


216


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He tad with him two rubies fiery-hued ; water they had,
their water in the stones (1,715).

From those two hidden rubies water flowed, — but water of
the eyes, not of the mouth (1,716).

Those rubies of pure water he took out, and laid before that
water-prisoning rock (1,717).

He said, With thirst I perish, help me, (pray), and with a drop
of water quench my fire.

A draught from that pure limpid fount of life give as a favour,
or sell (at a price).

(Come), freely these two jewels put away ; my being with
your water gratify.

(Then) Bad — upon him be the wrath of God ! — opened the
pages of his name to him (1,718).

He said. Hew not a fountain out of stone (1,719) ; I’m proof
against this trick, (so) give it up.

You give me jewels in a desert place, to take them (from
me) in a peopled land.

What man am I that I should so be gulled ? Jlore (craftily)
than demon I gull men.

When in devices I display my skill, your stratagems will fall
far short of mine.

Countless such wiles and frauds as this I’ve used ; (so) hope
not to excel me in this art.

I will not let you drink my water (here), and when you reach
the town asperse my name (1,720).

How can I take with pleasure gems from you, which you
at last will take again from me ?

Those jewels I must have that in no way you will be able
to take back from me.

Good said. Tell (me) what jewels those (you) seek, that to
the jewel-seeker them I hand.

Bad said, (I mean) those jewels twain (your) eyes, — each
one more precious than the other one.

For water sell (your) eyes to me, or else, from this (pure)
fountain turn your face away.


TRANSLATION


217


Good said, Have you no shame (then) before God, that you
would sell cold water for hot fire (1,721).

I speak of fountain, which is wholesome, sweet ; what kind
of business this, to pluck out eyes ?

When I become deprived of eyes, what gain that founts though
hundred, be in front of me ?

How for the Fount of Life (1.722) could one exchange one’s
(precious) eyes ? The water sell for gold.

The rubies take, and everything I have ; I’ll also sign a deed
for what I have.

By the God of the world I’U take an oath, that with such
settlement I’ll rest content.

Leave me my eyes, 0 worthy man ; be not, as to a trifle of
cold water, cold.

Bad said. An idle fiction are these words, many such pretexts
do the thirsty show.

I want the eyes, the gems are of no use ; th':)se gems may
(far) exceed these (gems in worth) (1.723).

Good, dazed and helpless, knew not what to do ; for the pure
water of the fount he wept.

He saw that he would (shortly) die from thirst ; that he could
not escape that place with life.

His anxious heart was by cold water lured : when from cold
water have the thirsty kept ?

He said. Arise, a sword or dagger take ; a draught of water
to the thirsty bring.

Put out my eyes, (my eyes, a fount) of fire, and with some
pleasant water quench my fire.

He thought that such concession being made, he would have
hope after so great a dread.

Bad, who saw this, drew out (his) dagger keen, and like the
wind went to that thirsty clay (1,724).

He struck the lamp, his two eyes, with the point ; compunc-
tionless in putting out the lamp.

He made narcissi (1,725) rose-hued with the blade, (and)
from the crown plucked out the (precious) gems (1,726).


218


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The thirsty man's eyes having ruined (thus), giving no water,
he resolved to go.

He took away (Good's) baggage, clothes, and gems, (and)
left the sightless man (quite) destitute.

When Good perceived that Bad had left his side, he had no
knowledge (more) of good and bad.

He rolled about among the dust and blood ; — best that he had
no eyes to see himself.

If with his eyes he had perceived his state, he had so feared
that he had died with grief. —

There was a Kurd, a great and mighty chief ; he had a flock
free from the plague of wolves.

He also had fine herds, (full) many (a head), such herds as no
one (ever) had beheld.

Seven or eight tents of kinsmen were with him ; he had (much)
wealth, the others (all) were poor.

The Kurd in deserts dwelling, crossing mounts, scouring,
as do their denizens, the wastes.

Traversed the desert wastes in search of grass, to pasture
led his flocks from plain to plain.

Whatever grass and water might be found, there for two
weeks his dwelling he would fiz.

When the grass was consumed he’d leave the place, and to
another region drive his flocks.

By chance, no longer than two days before, hke desert-king
(1,727) he’d seized upon that spot.

He had a daughter fair of face, whose eyes with those of Turks,
whose moles with Hindus vied (1,728).

A cypress watered with the blood of hearts, a charmer bred
in love (bestowed by all).

Honey, hke silver in its purity, enclosed in most transparent
Syrian glass (1,729).

(Her) ropes of locks (hung) lower than (her) skirt ; she bound
ropes round the neck of the (bright) moon (1,730).


TRANSLATION


219


Lock upon lock like garden violets, in blackness blacker than
the raven’s wing.

The magic of her glances, drunk with guile, excelled the power
of Fortune to delude.

The smallness of her sugar-dealing lips had closed the road
of kisses ’gainst her mouth.

The night had gained (its) blackness from her moles ; the
moon was radiant through her radiancy.

By reason of her Babylonian (1,731) spells each one resigned
his heart to loss of heart.

With graceful, airy gait that radiant Moon for water went,
like fish, (intent on it).

Far from the track was water on a side : a part with which
she was acquainted well.

She filled (her) jug with water pure and sweet, to carry it
unnoticed to the tent.

(When) suddenly she heard a groan far oS, which came from
the afiiicted, wounded man.

She followed up the sound on hearing it, and saw a youth
who lay in dust and blood ;

Who threw his arms and feet about in pain, with humble
supplication God invoked.

The charmer thought no more of charming arts ; she went up
to the wounded man (at once).

She said, Alas for you ! Who can you be, so abject in the
dust, and stained with blood ?

W’ho has been so unjust to one so young ? Who has betrayed,
conspired against you so ?

Good said, 0 envoy (of) celestial (mien), whether an angel,
whether angel-born.

My case involves some wondrous play (of Fate) ; the story
(I might tell) is somewhat long.

(But) I from thirst and want of water die ; try (if you can)
to help a thirsty man.

Go, if there is no water, I must die ; but if there is a drop I
save my life.


220


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The sweet-lipped cupbearer, to safety key, gave him some
water fine as Life's (pure) Stream (1,732).

Of the cold lymph the anguished, thirsty man drank as much
as was fitting (then) to drink.

His fainting soul became alive again ; and that lamp of his
eyes (1,733) was full of joy.

The eyes (half) torn out which she saw misplaced, — calling on
God, — she put again in place.

Although the outer membrane had been scratched, the
humours in the eyeballs still remained.

Sufficient strength was left stiU in his legs to let him be raised
up from where he lay.

His eyeballs, put in place, she bound (with care), and with
humanity she took his hand.

She used great efiort (then) to raise him up, and guiding, led
him straight along the way.

Until the place wherein lay her abode, the sightless man went
on the way with her.

A servant, one of those about the house, — into his hand she
gave the (patient's) hand.

She said. Conduct him to (my) mother now slowly and
gently, that he be not hurt.

She quickly to (her) mother went herself, and set forth the
event which had occurred.

(Her) mother said. Why did you leave (him there), coming
(yourself), not bringing (him) with you ?

For then perhaps some means might have been found, by which
a little ease would have accrued.

She said, I brought him, though in desperate plight ; I hope
that he directly will be here.

The servant who had (then) come to the house, to a bed-
chamber took the wounded man.

They made a place for him, and set a tray ; they gave him
broth and roasted meat cut small.

The anguished man ate, with a bitter sigh, a morsel, and in
pain laid down his head.


TRANSLATION


221


The Kurd, who came at night-time from the plain, to take some
food with which to break his fast (1,734),

Saw something of a kind not usual, (and at the sight) his bile
was further stirred.

He saw a man unconscious lying down, like one who, wounded,
has resigned his life.

He said, From what place is this feeble man ? How weak and
wounded thus comes he to be 1

As to what happened to the man at first, none could with
truth an explanation give.

They told the tale of how his eyes were torn : how onyx (1,735)
had been bored by adamant.

When the Kurd saw that the afSicted man was sightless
(there), and with his eyes bound up.

He spoke thus, A few leaves should have been plucked from
branches of a certain lofty tree ;

The leaves (well) pounded, till the juice exude, (then) steeped,
and taken to the man (at once).

If such a salve as this had been prepared, (his) eyes would
once again have gained (their) light.

A wound to eyes, although severe, is cured by juice from a few
leaves of that (high) tree.

Then he told where the tree was (found), and said, (There)
in that watering-place, our oasis.

There grows a noble, excellent old tree, the scent of which
gives comfort to the brain.

Its trunk, two branches rising from its root, the separation
’twixt those branches wide.

The leaves of one branch, like the hurls’ robes, would bring back
light again to sightless eyes.

The leaves of the other, like the Fount of Life (1,736), would
epileptics cure of their complaint.

When from the Kurd his daughter heard those (words), she
gave her mind to seeing to the cure.

She coaxingly petitioned, begged her sire to make provision
for a man in need.


222


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The Kurd on hearing this (her) earnest prayer, departing took
the road towards the tree.

(Then) from the (lofty) tree he plucked some leaves, — an
antidote to (save) the sick from death.

The charmer took them on her sire’s return, and pounding
them extracted all the juice (1,737).

She strained (the essence) till no dregs remained, and poured
it then into the sick man’s eyes.

She hound the medicine on the patient’s eyes, who when he
knew sat up a moment's space.

Upon propitious fortune fixed his eyes, (then) on the pillow
laid (his) head again.

His head was (kept) bound up till five days (passed), and
placed upon his eyes the liniment.

(When) the fifth day (had come) they set him free ; they took
ofi from his eyes the remedy.

The eyes (which had been) lost were sound (again), and were
exactly as they were at first.

The sightless man unclosed his eyes again like two narcissi
blossoming at dawn.

Good, who received this good, gave grateful thanks that his
eyes, like a mill-ox, had been bound (1,738).

The household (then) were free from care of him ; their hearts
rejoiced, affection they conceived.

From all the trouble she had borne for him, the daughter of
the Kurd had fallen in love.

When the tall cypress ope'd narcissi twain (1,739) ; (when)
the pearl casket (too) became unlocked (1,740),

That one of fairy-birth grew more in love with all the beauty
of the noble youth.

Good, from the acts of kindness she conferred, became in love
too from her love (thus shown).

Although he had not fully seen her face, still he had seen her
when (with grace) she moved.

Her honeyed accents he had often heard, her delicate, soft
hand had touched him oft.


TRANSLATION


223


That lovely one had fixed her heart on him, he his on her —
wondrous relationship ! —

Good every dawn in the old Kurd’s behalf would gird himself
to do him service (leal).

In (his) charge of the camels and the flocks he used great
gentleness and kindness e'er.

He kept the plague of wolves far from the flocks ; with care
he guarded all, both small and great.

The desert wanderer, the nomad Kurd, gaining such ease
of body through his care.

Gave power to him, by taking him as friend ; made him
controller of his house and wealth.

When Good had grown familiar in the house, the Kurd asked
many questions (on the past).

They sought intelligence about his eyes, (and asked) from
whom the wrong which he had borne.

Good did not keep the history concealed ; all that had
happened, good and bad, he told.

The story of the gems, (his) wish to buy water when tortured
by the plague of thirst.

And Bad’s demanding eyes to pluck them out ; the base
man’s injuring these (noble) gems.

He sought these gems, and carried oil those gems, (then)
left the thirsty man, no water given.

The Kurd when he had heard the tale laid down his face upon
the ground like convent-monk (1.741).

For he was so rejoiced that a base man had not done (real)
harm to one of worth.

When they heard what that angel-natured man had
borne of evil from that vile hell-fiend.

Good became still more famous than (his) name ; became
to them more precious than (their) lives.

They treated and maintained him as they should ; the charmer
let no other wait on him.

With face inveiled she tended him herself, she gave him water
whilst she suSered fire (1,742).


224


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Good gave entirely (all) his heart to her, to her gave up the
life from her received.

In honour of that dear and precious pearl he ministered to
cattle, camels, flocks.

(But) said, That fair one — is it possible she be united with so
poor a man ?

One cannot marry without land and wealth a girl so perfect
and so beautiful.

I who in poverty eat from their hands, — bow fix my eyes upon
relationship ?

"Tis be.st that I, such peril to escape, astutely feign a journey
to be made.

When after this a week had passed away, he wended home
one even from the plain ;

By thoughts of (his) beloved pained in heart, like to a beggar
seated near a hoard ;

A thirsty man, with limpid water close, more thirsty still
than in the former case.

On that night from the wound which rent his heart his clay
with tears (of pearly whiteness) bloomed (1.743).

He thus addressed the Kurd, 0 strangers’ friend, much trouble
from a stranger you have borne (1.744). —

Through you my eyes have gained again their light, my heart
and soul by you have been restored.

My life I have sustained (but) by your bread, good things
in plenty eaten from your tray.

A"our bland (1,745) is as a light upon my brow ; thanks (due)
my (power to) bless you far exceed.

If you look to my mind or to my frame, the odour of your
tray comes from my blood.

If you cut off my head ITl hinder not ; desire it laid upon
(your) tray, — it's (there).

No longer (truly) should I be your guest ; my (wounded)
heart should not be rubbed with salt (1,746).

Not as your hospitality demands can fitting thanks to you be
given by me,


TEANSLATION


225


Unless God by His grace afford the means to acquit myself
of what is due to you.

Although by parting I am seeking grief, for leave to quit
your service I must ask.

Long time I’ve been away from my own land, my business
and such work as I may do.

I’ve now resolved to-morrow at the dawn to set out on the
way to (my) abode.

Though I in body separate from you, in mind I shall be near
your threshold's dust.

My hope in one like you, a fount of light, is that you will not
drive me from your heart.

That you will (too) encourage my design, and make as lawful
all I have received.

The speaker hardng finished (thus his) words, the household
of the Kurd was fired (by grief).

Loud weeping from among the Kurds arose, tumultuous
cries arose on left and right.

The Kurd was weeping and his daughter more ; (their)
brains (were) dry, (their) eyes (were) all bedewed.

(Depressed), they after weeping hung their heads, (immovable)
as water turned to ice (1,717).

(Then) the clear-sighted Kurd upraised his head, and sending
all the servants from the place,

He spoke to Good (as follows). Modest youth, smart, hand-
some, friendly, and intelligent.

Think of yourself as gone to your own town, some new distress
endured from some (new) friend (1,748),

When comfort, wealth, good fortune, here are yours, and over
all, both good and bad, full power.

Good, worthy men do not incline to ill, they do not give up
friends for enemies (1,749).

I have in my possession ample wealth, besides the one dear
daughter whom I have :

A daughter amiable, disposed to serve, — ’twere bad were I to
say she is not good :

Q


226


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Although the musk is hidden in the pod, the scent of it is
patent to the world (1,750).

If on my daughter and on me your heart should fix — you're
dearer than (my) life to me.

For such a daughter I, with thankfulness, would choose you
as my son-in-law (from all).

Whate’er I have of camels and of flocks I’d give, that you
might have abundant wealth.

(Whilst) I with you in ease and affluence would live until the
time that I depart.

Good hearing from the Kurd this joyous news, did (him) such
homage as was meet he should.

Having these words of happy import spoken, they went to
sleep m ease and cheerfulness.

The true dawn fastened on its (silver) zone, the bird (of dawn)
(1,751) complained like golden hells.

Auspiciously as fits the kingly lot, the eastern sultan sat upon
(his) throne (1,752).

The joyous Kurd (then) rising from (his) place, made fit
arrangements for the wedding rites.

With such a wedding as the union bade, whose ofispring should
be fortunate and blest.

He gave his daughter to the care of Good, joined Mercury and
Venus in one course (1,753).

Dying of thirst (Good) found the Fount of Life ; the solar light
upon a blossom shone (1,754).

The honey-lipped cupbearer gave a draught from Kausar’s
(1,755) water to the thirsty man.

First she had life-sustaining water given, lastly she gave him
of the Fount of Life.

They both together lived in happiness ; nothing was wanting
of the things required.

Bearing in mind the times had gone before, that which they
had they cheerfully enjoyed.

All ui the riches which the Kurd possessed, all he relinquished
to his precious ones.


TRANSLATION


2’^7

So thus it fell that house, eSects, and herds devolved in (their)
entirety to Good.

When from the meadows, water, and the trees they set oS on
their journey for the plain,

Good (went) up to the sandal-scented tree, from which the
people sought for remedies.

Not from one branch, but from the two-fold wood, he gathered
full abundance of the leaves.

He filled two bags full of those (precious) leaves, and placed
them in the load a camel bore :

One to cure colds and epilepsy too ; one for the eyes a perfect
remedy.

No person did he tell about the leaves ; he hid these remedies
from (people’s) eyes.

Until they journeyed to a town whose king had a (fair) daughter
epilepsy-stricken.

Though they had many remedies employed, she got no better ;
they were full of grief.

Each one possessed of knowledge and of skill from one town or
another came in hope ;

Thinking by means of remedies applied to free a fairy from
demoniac plagues (1,756).

All in their efiorts and attempts lost hope ; the torments of
the demon (but) increased.

The king had made a stipulation first that whosoever should
restore her health, —

On him he would bestow her thankfully, and make him
honoured as his son-in-law.

But that whoe'er his daughter’s beauty saw, (and) did not
use a fitting remedy, —

He would attack him with the scimitar and with the scimitar
strike oS his head.

Whoever saw the face of that sick girl through (his) attendance
was distressed and dazed (1,757).

Thousand physicians had their heads cut off, both people of
the town and strangers too.


228


THE HAFT PAIKAR


This matter spread abroad throughout the land, but everyone
in hope of the reward

(Still) to the wind (of death) would give his head, pursue the
path that led to loss of life.

(Then) Good, who from the people heard this news, seeing he had
the special remedy.

Sent someone to the king, and (through him) said, I from the
path can sweep away this thorn.

I will remove her trouble by God’s grace, and thus fulfil
my compact with the king.

But, with your leave, it must be understood that I am free
of all desire of gain.

This treatment that I purpose to employ, I shall employ
it for the sake of God ;

That God may, in a blest and favoured time, grant me the
means to carry out this aim.

When his communication reached the king, the king allowed
him access to kiss hands.

Good went, and paid (the monarch) homage meet ; the latter
asked him, saying, Worthy man.

What is your name ? He said, My name is Good, because
my star displayed auspiciousness.

The monarch found his name of omen blest ; he said, Good man,
devising remedies.

Of such a work of happy aim as this may the result be good as
is your name !

Then he consigned him to an intimate (1,758), to take him to
(his) daughter’s private room.

He saw a sun-like face, a cypress tree, to a wiUow turned from
epilepsy’s blasts (1,759).

With eyes of ox (1,760), like lion all perturbed, by night not
resting, sleeping not by day.

Some leaves of that (most blest), auspicious tree he had with
him, tightly, securely tied.

He brayed them, from the essence made a draught, a comfort
to the thirsty, cool and sweet.


TRANSLATION


229


He caused the princess (then) to drink the draught ; and from
her brain the trouble was dispelled ;

That tumult, which was madness, she escaped ; as soon as she
had drunk the draught she slept.

When Good perceived that she, a flowery Spring, slept quietly,
from trouble’s onslaughts saved.

He came from that celestial haram forth, and towards his
house returned with joyous heart.

And she of fairy face slept on three days, her fatherunacquainted
with her state.

On the third day when she upraised her head, she ate such
food as she found suitable.

The king who on his couch heard the good news, v/ith feet
unshod into the haram sped.

His daughter in her senses he beheld within the haram (seated)
on her couch.

The king fell prone (1,761), (then) to his daughter said, 0 you
whom no one can in marriage mate,

(Say) in (your) malady how fare you (now) ? — May all sore
trials from your door be far !

At the king’s majesty she, full of awe, observed the duty of
thanksgiving too.

When the king from the haram’s precincts went, his grief was
lessened, and his joy increased.

Then to an intimate (1,762) his daughter gave a message,
saying to the illustrious king,

I’ve heard that in the register of acts (1,763) the king’s
(recorded) compact is upheld.

Since at the time when heads should be struck ofi the king
fulfilled the compact (he had made).

Towards such a head as would become a crown his compact he
should (also) carry out ;

Since as regards the sword his faith was kept, it should not
slacken as regards the crown.

By the sharp sword a hundred heads have fallen, when not one
by the crown has been upraised.


230


THE HAFT PAIKAR


That one by whom my cure has been achieved, through whom
this fastened lock has found a key, —

His business should not be neglected now, none in the world
should be my mate but him.

’Tis best that in the compact we behave frankly and such an
obligation meet.

The monarch also felt the will arise to carry out the compact
(he had made).

By the king’s leave the noble-minded Good they sought around,
and found him on the road.

They counted him a pearl which has been found, and brought
him (then) at once before the king.

The king said. You, so noble in the world, — why from your
fortune do you hide your face ?

He doffed his royal robe and gave it him, in value greater
than a province ’twas.

Some other ornaments he gave besides ; a belt of gold, a
baldrick of (fine) gems.

Round town and palace were pavilions raised ; the townsmen
decked (the town) in festive guise.

The girl came from (her) arched room on the roof ; she saw the
bridegroom like a (bright) full moon :

Active, of cypress stature, handsome face, comely, with galia
down and musky hair (1,764).

The bride consenting, willing too (her) sire, Good became
bridegroom in despite of Bad (1,765).

A king was ma.ster of the treasure-door, he broke the seal of
that which was intact (1,766).

Thenceforth he happy lived as he could wish, viewing designs
of beauty and delight.

The monarch had a powerful vazir, a good protector of the
people he ;

Who had a daughter of alluring grace, (whose) face was like
a lamp upon the snow.

The plague of small-pox to the Moon had come ; (and) by (the
effects of) it her eyes were blind.


TRANSLATION


231


(Then) of the monarch the vazir asked leave to let Good to
her eyes restore the light.

On those conditions which the king had made at first, Good’s
remedy restored the Moon.

That idol was united with him too ; ecce margaritam quae
nonnullas margaritas perforavit !

Good found from the delight of those three brides both Kisra’s
crown, and Kai-Ka’us’s throne (1,767).

Sometimes he with the vazir ’s daughter sat, and over every
wish he gained full sway.

Sometimes the princess fair illumed his eyes : a (bright)
Sun he, a (lustrous) Moon was she.

In the Kurd’s daughter he rejoiced at times : from the world
at three games of “ nard ” he won (1,768).

Good nature, graciousness and wisdom too gained him a place
in all the people’s hearts.

Till so it happened that through fortune's grace (his gifts)
brought him to empire and the throne.

To rule the city he was reckoned fit ; on him was settled the
supreme control.

One day by chance he towards the garden went, a king and
an illumer of the world.

Bad who had been companion on his road, and been acquainted
with his good and bad (1,769),

Traded with Jewish craft and stinginess ; Good saw that Jew,
and recognized him (soon).

He said. Bring to the garden after me that person with (all)
harshness and contempt.

Good to the garden went, and sat at ease ; the Kurd sat (there)
before him, sword in hand.

Bad (then) came up with open brow assumed, and kissed the
ground (there) with no thought of Good (1,770).

Good said to him, Tell (me) what is your name, 0 you, whose
head must (soon) weep over you (1,771).

He said, Mubashshir (1,772), a passed master I in all the finest
work of skill and art.


232


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Good said (again), Tell me your proper name ; (beware) !
wash not your face with your own blood !

He said, I have no other name than this ; show me the sword,
or cup, just as you will.

Good said to him. Vile robber that you are, the law forbids
no man to shed your blood.

You are the worst of men, your name is Bad ; worse than your
name (too) is your temperament.

Are you not he whose torturing hand tore out for water once
a thirsty person’s eyes ?

The gems, his eyes, the gems (too) in his belt, — you took out
both, and burnt his heart (with grief).

And what was worse, in such a (desert) place you took the
water o2 and gave him none.

I am that thirsty man whose gems were taken ; (yet) is my
fortune good, your fortune bad.

You (wished to) kill me, but God let me live : happy is he
who has support from God !

Since God’s support good fortune gave to me, see, it has given
me kingly crown and throne !

Woe to the life of a base man hke you ! You sought to take
life, yours you shall not save.

Bad looked at Good’s face, which he recognized ; he cast
himself (before him) on the ground.

He said, Have mercy, though I have done ill ; ’tis I who did
it, therefore see it not.

To this look, that the swiftly-rolling sky gave Bad as name
to me, and Good to you.

If on that former day I did to you that which the name of one
like me entails,

In such a state of peril do to me what fits the name of one
renowned like you.

Good, by that point reduced to helplessness, from execution
freed the man at once.

When Bad had gained deliverance from the sword, he went
away and ran through joyousness.


TRANSLATION


233


The Kurd, bloodthirsty, followed, and behind with the sword
struck hina and cut off his head.

He said, Though Good has good and kindly thought, to you
who’re Bad may happen naught but bad.

On searching him he found those two (fine) gems, placed (for
security) inside his belt.

He (then) returned, and brought the gems to Good ; he said
(to him). Gem has returned to Gem.

Good kissed (them), and returned (them) to the Kurd : a Jewel
with a jewel gratified.

He put his hand upon his eyes and said. It is from you I have
these two twin gems.

Those jewels are conferred on you for these ; those jewels
are your own you know full well.

When Good's affairs were settled as he wished, (his) people
from him naught but good received.

Since (his) good fortune gave to him the throne, and iron
became gold, his sackcloth silk.

He settled justice on a basis firm, and (so) secured the empire
to himself.

(And since) those leaves which from the tree he brought had
given him from his grievous pains relief.

From time to time, to ward off injury, he used to ride off to
that lofty tree.

He used (then) to dismount beneath the tree, and greet and
bless the land (in which it grew).

In his love of the sandal-scented tree he (always) dressed
in sandal-coloured clothes.

He thought of nothing else but sandal-wood (1,773) ; he put
on naught but sandal-coloured dress.

Headache by powdered sandal-wood is cured, and palpitation,
hepatitis, too.

The mind is quieted by sandal-wood, the spirits are enlivened
by its scent.


234


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Sandal is (almost) free from colour, — strange ! on this account
the earth is sandal-hued (1,774).

After the Chinese Turk had told the tale, with stammering
tongue had swept the dust away (1,775),

The king gave her a place within his soul ; that is, he hid
her from the evil eye.

Both night and day he held her for his soul, and from all good
and bad kept her concealed (1,776).

BaJiram sits on Friday in the White Dome, and the daughter of the
king of the Seventh Clime tells him a story.

On Friday when this willow arched and high whitened (its)
mansion through the (rising) sun (1,777),

The king adorned with ornaments of white, went forth in
pride and joy to the AVhite Dome.

Venus upon the Sign of the Fifth Clime (1.778) played the five
turns in honour of the king (1,779).

Until the Greeks attacked the Ethiop van (1.780), the king
indulged in pleasure without stint.

When night with sky-prepared collyrium (1,731) gave bright-
ness to the eyes of moon and stars,

He, from that loving soul-caressing bride, associate of the
night, born of the dawn.

Requested that with dulcet fluted tones she would evoke
the echoes of her Dome.

V hen she, that fair one, blessings had invoked both on the
king and on his lofty throne, —

Such blessings as increase prosperity, and may become so
great a throne and crown, —

She said, Since you demand a pleasing tale, this one occurs
to me of those I know.

Story of the Master.

Thus said my mother, a true, worthy dame, — old women may
be wolves, a lamb was she, —


TRANSLATION


235


Once an acquaintance, one of my own age, took me as guest, —
her tray be ever filled !

A well-replenished tray for us she set ; — the foods ! what
shall I say, when limitless ?

Lamb, birds, ‘Iraqian cumin-flavoured meat, round bread-
cakes, and thin flour and butter cakes.

Some species of “ halva ” (1,782) which have no name : some
with pistachios, some with almonds dressed.

Fruits, fine and delicate, to charm the taste ; apples from
Isfahan, and grapes from Rai.

Speak not of jjomegranate, the drinker's fruit ; pomegranate-
bosoms filled the house entire.

When in a measure we had eaten food, we set out to regale
ourselves with wine.

With constant laughter sociably we mixed ; I and some
story-tellers of my kind.

Each one told some event about herself, of something singular
or paralleled.

Till came the turn to one of silvery breast, honey in milk,
and milk on sugar poured ;

A heart-beguiler such that when she spoke the birds and fish
were by her accents lulled.

She from cornelian loosed a honey -fount (1,783), she made her
lovers cry out and lament (1,781).

She said. There was a youth of honeyed speech, who scattered
sugar through his grace of thought.

A Jesus when his knowledge he displayed ; a Joseph when
assemblies he illumed (1.783).

Able in knowledge and accomplishments, his lively appre-
hension best of all.

He had a pleasant garden like Iram (1.786), of equal beauty
were the gardens round.

The earth with scent of roses (was) perfumed ; its fruits were
like the fruits of paradise.

The cypress like an emerald palace (rose) ; a dove (was) on
the throne of every branch.


236


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Therein, not Kausar's stream but that in which

was life, a fountain of Life's Water (1,788) (flowed).

All hearts were centred in its pomegranates ; its roses had
no mediating thorns.

If in the garden there were any thorn, it was to guard it from
the evil eye (1.789).

Water beneath the (fresh) young cypresses ; around the
flowing waters verdant growth.

L’nnumbered birds upraising voices (sweet) in choral symphony
throughout the air

In cr'press-trees fixed (raptured) to the spot, moved everyone
endued with heart to song.

As an encompassing protecting line were raised by its four
walls four heads of glass (1,790) ;

And by (these) structures, towering to the moon, the evil
eye to it no access gained.

It ranged its cy presses, sowed jessamine ; it pounded musk,
steeped (all) in ambergris.

On every rich man's heart (there was) a brand from wish to
have such garden for his own.

The young man every week by way of rest for recreation to
the garden went.

One day at time of mid-day prayer he went to view the garden
and its (leafy) groves.

He found the garden shut, stones at the gate; the gard’ner
soothed to slumber by the harp.

Sweet singers giving voice to dulcet song — may praise and
blessing on such voices rest !

The garden tuneful with melodious tones, the charmers striving
for their best effects.

(Swaying) in dancing movements every tree ; bereft of heart
the fruits, of life the leaves.

The master when he heard the songs of love, losing all self-
possession tore his robes.

He had no self-control to turn away, nor anv key with which
to unlock the gate.


TEANSLATION


237


He knocked much at the gate, no answer came ; — the cypress
dancing, and the rose asleep.

The garden he encompassed all around ; in all the garden he
could find no way.

When he could gain no access by his gate, he tore some stone
out from the garden-wall.

He went inside to have a look around ; with earnest observation
to inspect ;

To hear the melody of song, and make (his wish) to see the
garden his excuse ;

To see how stood the garden, whence the sounds, and what
had happened to the gardener.

Of all those roses who illumed the place, who in the garden
present were that day,

Two jasmine-bosomed ones of silvery limbs were keeping
order at the garden-gate ;

So that no alien's eyes should (dare to) gaze upon those (radiant)
Moons of hurl face.

(Then) when the master entered by the hole, the girls found
him devoid of shame and rude.

They raised (their) plectrums up and wounded him ; they took
him for a thief and bound him (tight).

The man this ignominy suffered : — why ? through (fear of)
being charged with an offence.

After ill-treating him with nails and fists, they roughly (then)
exclaimed against him (thus) ;

You through whose brand the garden (is) displeased, were there
no guard what gain could gardens show (1,791) I

A thief who into others’ garden goes,— in beating him the
gardener does well.

We, who have somewhat wounded you with sticks, — 'tis well
that we have tied you hand and foot.

Then too, perverse and stupid-minded man. you leave the gate
and enter through the wall !

The man replied. The garden is my own ; (but) of my branding
is this brand on me (1,792).


23S


THE HAFT PAIKAR


A gate at hand, wide as a lion’s mouth, I leave the gate, and
enter by a hole.

Whoever comes into his land like thi^, his land will too fall
surely to the ground.

When the girls saw his nature they inquired into the features
of the garden (claimed).

They found him in (his) evidence correct ; anger subsided,
litigation fled.

The master of the garden (better) known. — the heart of each
was drawn to love of him.

For he was handsome, young, and elocfuent ; — a woman's
lost who sees such (qualities).

They judged it well to be at peace with him, because they
found him of congenial kind.

They were rejoiced to have him as a friend, and set to work
to free him (from his bonds).

They loosened from his hands and feet the bonds, and planted
kisses on his hands and feet.

Many apologies they made to him, and in attention to his
business joined.

Then with excuse might turn a foe to friend, — repair the breach
(too) in the garden-wall, —

They brought some brambles and closed up the breach, and
(thus) escaped the night-attack of thieves.

With blandishments they sat before the youth, and offering
explanations (of the ease).

Said. In this garden (green), a flowery Spring, — may the
proprietor enjoy its fruits ! —

A feast there is by heart -ensnarers given, beauties of moon-
like face, in nature kind.

All the (most) lovely women in the town, whose beauty (seen)
gives light unto the eyes.

Have in the garden all together joined, tapers and pictures
void of smoke and flaw.

As an excuse for having used you ill, (and) having (thus) cast
dust upon our lot, —


TEANSLATION


239


Rise and stej) out a little while with us, that you may gain
your wish from which j’ou please.

Go to some nook (well) out of sight, and from the strewing of
the roses gain some joy (1,793).

Any fair one on whom you fix your heart, to whom you give
your love, whom you approve.

We will (at once) bring to your secret nook, that on your
threshold she may place her head.

Those accents falling on the master's ears, his dormant passions
(woke and) cried aloud.

Though in his nature he had continence, passion was to his
nature not unknown.

A man, his human nature was beguiled (1,794) : a man, he
could not women’s wiles resist.

With those of jasmine bosom, silver form, he went, (indulging)
in the highest hope. —

Before those beauties of the heavenly fort (1,795) there was a
lofty upper room of bricks.

The master entered it and closed the door, and the (two)
guides retired (then) from his side.

In the front centre of the room there was a hole, and through
it shone a beam of light ;

And owing to this hole the master's eye beheld a narrow source
and spacious stream (1,796).

In the plantation of the garden was a lawn fuU of the forms
of cypress-grove (1,797).

Each beauty there, enlivening the heart, upraised her voice
in sweet commingled sound.

In gardens pomegranates and apples too fail not, still less
when gard'ners use them well.

(But when) a dragon in their treasure lurks, their oranges
are shrivelled, hard and dry (1,798).

Beauties of silver limb, pomegranate breast, were strewing
roses upon every side.

Light to the eyes were all the honey-lipped, sweeter than (all)
the ripe fruits (of the place).


240


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Pomegranate breasts and chins like apples there he saw, and
other apples held as naught (1,799).

A stream flowed over it like (sparkling) tears ; in it were fish
untouched by injury.

And by that stream of surface fresh and bright the jasmine,
lily, and narcissus grew.

Those beauties, velvet-cheeked, came (towards the stream) ;
they saw a spacious basin towering high.

The heat of the sun's (rays) had heated them ; the sun-like
water had been found by them.

They came with mien seductive to the stream, untying as they
came their wrapper bands.

Their robes they took oS and unveiled themselves, and showed
like pearls in water by their grace.

They cast the water on their silvery necks, (sometimes) in
blackness silver they concealed (1,800).

Together in the water moon and fish ; confused with one another
moon and fish (1,801).

When the moon into water “dirams” pours (1,802), where
there is any fish it darts (below) ;

(But) those Moons in their heart-entrancing grace made the
fish rise for (him), the master (1,80.3), (there).

With hands joined in a ring they danced awhile, mocking the
jasmine (in their loveliness).

Awhile in ranks opposed they scattered pearls (1,804) ; made
pomegranate and orange valued high (1,80-5).

One came and made another fear a snake : A snake ! she cried,
whilst throwing out a curl.

Una dum alter! crurem natesque ostenderet dixit, Montem
vide, et fissum terra; motu solum.

Columns in Bistun (columnless) they raised (1,806) ; kilhng
Farhad with the sharp axe (of love) (1,807).

The milky stream which Shirins’s palace had (1,808), in that
delightful, pleasant basin rose.

The master saw ; no self-control remained ; but what avail ?
he had no friend or help.


TRANSLATION


211


He was as thirsty man to reason lost who water sees he has
no power to reach ;

Or epileptic who the new moon sees, and now jumps up and
now sits down again.

He looked towards every cypress statured (belle) ; a Resurrection,
ne’er a stature saw (1,S09).

His veins, full-blooded, through their ferment drew from his
whole being cries and clamour loud.

Standing (there) like a thief concealed (from sight) ; — that
which you know in such state as you know (1,810), —

His bird through aperture, his snake through hole (1,811),
wished among (them) audaciously to dart.

The fair-faced washed the roses’ faces clear, and looked like
jasmine in silk rosy vests.

They put on silken robes of azure hue, and (in their brightness)
(seemed to) upbraid the moon.

With them, the loveliest player of the harp, was one of Grecian
face and Ethiop locks (1.812).

A sun with full chin like a crescent moon, her lips by none
e’er tasted (honeyed) dates.

Her glances sharper than an arrow’s point, than sugar-candy
sweeter still her smiles.

Like laden cypress pomegranates were dipped in water, water
dipped in pomegranates (1,813).

With one lure she would capture thousand hearts ; whoever
saw her died before her (face).

, Whenever she began to touch the strings, love woke alert,
and intellect was dimmed (1,814:).

The master with that charmer of the world more charmed
afar than watchmen are with light.

Although each one was (like) a (radiant) moon, in that assembly
she was like a queen.

The ascetic in his heart strayed from the path ; the laxness
see ! fine moral usages (1,815) !

After a time those two musk-deer-eyed belles, who (when)
in anger had the lightning’s fire, —


242


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Who roused the musk-deer in that (new) Khoten, and showed
the musk-deer to the ehceta swift (1,816),

Advanced to speak (with him) in honeyed tones, their muslin
veiling crowns of majesty.

They saw the master in the curtained place ; as keepers of
the curtain questioned him (1,817).

Said they, To which of all these lovely ones of huri race does
(most) incline your heart (

The beauty there who pleased the master most, he pointed
out to those two lovely ones.

Ere he had spoken out (they both) sprang up ; as deer, nay
rather raging lions, sped.

That beauty, fairy-born, with many a wile, with words sung
to the harp they led away.

In manner such, that no one might suspect, that might not
peril, but advance the afiair.

When they had brought the marvel to the room, — the marvel
see ! they closed the door of heaven (1,818).

Although he knew not he was mate for her, she mate for him,
and easy his emprise,

('Twas so), for those fair harpers who had sped, had harmonized
his business like a harp (1.819).

Those stores of grace and beauty had (before) told her in
detail all the master's case.

That charming one, endowed with fairy face, had fixed her
heart on him (as yet) unseen.

His beauty when she saw him, drew from her iron from silver, —
silver which was gold (1,820).

The master, lost to self-control through love, addressed the
cypress straight in chiding tones (1,821).

He asked. What is your name ? Fortune, she said. Said he,
Where is your place 1 She said. The throne.

What is your curtain (1.822) ? Music, answered she. And
what your business ? Coquetry, she said.

He said, AVhat is your source ? She answered. Light. He
said. The evil eye be far from you 1


TRANSLATION


243


A kiss you'll give, said lie ? Sixty, she said. He said, Come,
is it time ? She said, It is.

Said he. Shall you be gained ? She answered. Soon. He
said, Was this in view ? She said. It was.

The master’s heart with strong emotion stirred, he lost (all)
bashfulness and diffidence.

He seized the lovely charmer's harp-like locks, embraced her
tightly, strained as his heart-strings.

He kissed and tasted (lips as) sugar (sweet), (gave kisses) one
to ten, tiU ten times ten.

The kisses were as fire to stir (his) heart ; the (fervent) heat
gave keenness to his aim.

He wished to taste the sweetness of the spring, and from the
fount of life to take the seal (1,823).

When at the onager the lion sprang, and drew it forcibly
beneath its claws, —

The place was weak (1,824), and, suficring violence, breaches
were opened in its (loosening) bricks.

The chamber was an old one and came down, — let not the
business of the good end ill !

Both this and that one by a hair escaped ; this to one side,
that to another sprang.

That they should not be seen upon that road, they went
some distance from that fruitful tract.

The man retired from it, and in (his) pain went to a quiet
place and suffered grief.

The girl went (then) and with her comrades sat, with wrinkled
brow like those who suffer pain.

She set before (her mind her) past distress ; (took up her)
harp (and) put (it) on her lap.

When she brought out the sweet plaint of the harp, with
plaints she drove her lovers (all) distraught (1,825).

She said. Be salutation from my harp by the strings’ dulcet
plaint to lovers given.

She touched the strings and thus began to sing : The Judas’
tree had come, the flowers bloomed ;


24:4


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The cypress had drawn out its lofty form, the rose’s smile
displayed a box of sweets.

The nightingale arrived, sat on (its) branch ; the day of
making love bad (brightly) dawned.

The gard’ner (1,826) to the garden fragrance gave ; joyous
he came and on its beauties gazed.

He saw a cup of wine (1,827) and took it up, (but then) there
fell a stone which broke the cup (1,828).

You who have pillaged me of all I had (1.829), — only by you
can my afiairs come right.

Although I am ashamed of what I’ve done, my heart to
separation is averse.

Her mode of music gave her confidants full information of
her secret thought.

They went away oppressed with anxious care ; they (went
and) sought the master (who had gone).

The master, like a slave who butter steals, bad naught but
shame to follow on the feast.

He crept behind a narrow river’s bank, ’neath cypress, willow,
box, and poplar-tree.

Confounded at his injudicious plans, — the yellow wall-flow'r
(1,830) from his lilies sprang (1,831).

They sought to know that which he had in mind ; and he
told all to those two confidants.

Those secret agents felt it due from them to bring the loved
one to the lover (there).

(Thence) they returned, and opened out the way (1,832) ;
(so) the rose-water to the rose they sent (1,833).

That friendly one, sweet songstress, came (to him), renewing
for (her) lover love once more.

The master took her hand and (then) advanced unto a certain
place that he thought fit.

Branch upon branch the branches of the trees, forming
aloft innumerable thrones.

He sped beneath the branch of a high tree ; with joy of heart
he made a pleasant seat.


TEANSLATION


245


With love he drew the heart-eiisnarer close : close to his bosom
as the heart it held :

A cypress free with graceful, swaying gait, one like the jasmine
on Samanian rug (1,^34).

He took her to his bosom and rejoiced ; the cypress made
a compact with the rose (1,835).

The moon-faced beauty on the master’s breast, he well inclined,
all self-restraint deposed.

His piece on house-securing all intent, his partner prompt
to carry off the stakes (1,836),

He was all eagerness to take the fort, and quench with water
all the fire of love. —

It chanced a field-mouse (near) had seen some gourds suspended
from the lofty branch (above).

It flew up to the string like any bird, and cut the string which
held them with its teeth.

Such a calamity fell on the ground ! — each gourd in figure
like a kettle-drum.

The noise of such a drum went many miles ; — a drum, — what
drum ? the drum to sound retreat.

The noise, disturbing, with continued clash, tore from the
panther’s claws the deer away (1,837).

The master thought the inspector (1,838) with a stick, the
censor (1,839) with a stone had come to attack.

Leaving his shoes behind, he ran away ; he went about his
business once again.

That idol also went with thousand fears back to her intimates
in music skilled.

A short time after she unveiled her heart, joining the music
of the harp to song.

She (thus) sang, Lovers on a time have said, A lover went to
visit her he loved.

He wished to the extent of (his) desire by union with her
happiness to gain.

To take her to his arms as love dictates : — sweet in the arms
of cypress the red rose !


246


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Then through her (swelling) bosom and her chin, an apple
eat, pomegranate from her breast.

Ad locum ubi thesaurus asservatur manus protendere voliiit,
ut thesauri porta m aperiret ;

Saccharum cum saccharo indurato miscere voluit, et salice
rubra tulipse sanguinem effundere —

(When) suddenly a tumult brought distress, so that so fine
an entertainment failed.

It is not well you offer me false tones ; I will not cease to
play true tones lor you.

0 you whose every throw has been unfair, as one who throws
with fairness make a throw.

A moth is left (here) anxious for the light ; a thirsty one far
from the fount of life.

(When) this ode had been sung her confidants, as sympathizers,
understood (its aim).

They went with deprecation to the youth, and found him
stretched at full length (on the ground).

They found him lying, resting on the ground, (greatly) abashed
and (much) distressed in heart.

With kindly treatment (then) and friendliness the cause
of such dejection they inquired (1,840).

Questioned about his state, he told the tale : (even) in hell
’twould raise a bitter sigh.

(Then) those devisers by device, their own, gave him deliverance
from his gloomy thoughts.

From his contracted heart they loosed the bonds, heartened
one out of heart by promises.

Be in this business more expert, (.said they) ; you love, ’tis
true, (but) be more loving still.

At the due time make such a place your nest that (no) calamity
may fly to it.

We surely from afar will hold the place, (and) we will guard
the road like sentinels.

Then for the business they returned again to her of cypress
form and rose-like cheeks.


TEANSLATION


247


So that once more she went with charming gait ; she found
the master (soon), and soothed his heart.

She came, relieved him of his load of grief ; the master, seeing
this, lost mastership (1,841).

He seized her ringlets like a drunken man ; and in the garden
sought a quiet nook.

There was a distant corner of the place, a heap of jasmine
(there) a dome of light.

(The jasmine) raised its standard to a wall (1 .842) ; above there
was a wood, below, a cave (1,843).

The master found no better place (1,844) than that, (so) in it
he prepared a pleasant couch (1,845).

He plucked the jasmine and arranged it well, (then) brought
his love in comfort to the place.

Pudore omisso ejus strophii ligamentun, pariterque vestimenti
alterius de quo mentionem facere non licet ligamentum solvit.

He drew a heap of roses to his breast, blanched almonds
sugar-coated (sweet to taste).

Specillo pixi qua collyrium conditur uondum immisso, — the
curved dome (1,846) played (them) still another trick.

Some foxes in recesses of the cave had come together in pursuit
of game.

A wolf had followed close and barred their road, to separate
each from the other one.

The foxes knowing that he fed on all, — a terrible and great
calamity, —

(With terror) took to flight, the wolf behind, their only road
across the master's bed.

They started up to do as best they could, — in front the foxes,
and the wolf behind.

The master’s court (1,847) had fallen all away, he saw a (hostile)
camp, and bounded off.

Truly he knew not what had happened there ; covered with
dust he ran from side to side ;

His heart in sore anxiety and pain to know how (best) to quit
the garden soon.


218


THE HAFT PAIKAE


(Then) met him (there) those two of cypress form, who pome-
granates, narcissi, had bestowed (1,848), — •

They grasping his beloved by her skirt, — she pearl-Hke ’twist
two water-dragons placed.

They shouted at her. What deceit is this ? What demon this
among your qualities ?

How long will you disturb and vex the youth, killing with
rancour him who loves you (so) ?

Xo person on a stranger, (sure), would play, with show of
sympathy, a trick like this !

This night how often have you left him (thus) ! How much
deceit and fraud have you employed !

She offered pleas and swore (that they were true) ; they would
not listen to the truth from her.

Till in distress the master came to them ; he saw the dawn
between a pair of shears (1,849) ;

Covered with shame at their severe reproofs, receiving blows
from this one, slaps from that.

He said. Beware (now) ! Take your hands from her ! Do
not distress (my) friend who is distressed.

Since from a (radiant) Moon no sin has come, (so) must you
sing a better air to her.

If in such want of faith be any sin, hands should be laid on
those ashamed (of it) (1,850).

Her nature is quite pure of any sin ; any offence committed
is from me.

The clever and sharp-witted of the world are all devoted servants
of the pure (1,851).

The grace of God had given my affairs immunity from harm
and from mischance.

And all those harms which broke my spirit (so), (which came
and) heaped mischance upon mischance, —

Since (my good) fate had given me continence, — they gave me
freedom from so ill an act (1,852).

He whom the demon brings not to his aims is good in grain,
naught that is good does ill.


TEANSLATION


249


(But) lie who puts Jiis heart on action base, — saving your
presence, — base of birth is he.

A beauty with so fairy-bke a face, — no person can refrain
from loving her :

(No man), especially, who has some youth, the feelings of a
man, some love in him.

But still when chastity protects the road, one cannot (think
of) going to meet sin.

No one can eat fruit from the fruitful tree on which a single
evil eye may look (1,853) :

The eyes of hundred kinds of beasts of prey (1,854) (were) on
us, hence our business turned out ill.

What’s gone has gone, of that I will not speak ; thus will I
spoil not that which (still) I have.

I now repent of (all) both hid and clear, and from the Ruler
of the world accept

That if He grant me still a time to live, — since she of sugar
lips receives her slave, —

As lawful wife I'll take her as my bride, treat her with more
devotion than before.

The agents seeing how it was with him, were awed at his
God-fearing piety.

They put their heads before him on the ground ; they said.
Be blessings on a faith so pure :

(Faith) in which seeds of goodness have been sown, and which
from evil disposition ’s kept.

How many are the griefs which seemed as griefs ! they were
thought griefs, but comforts were in fact.

How many too the pains which come on man, and still a remedy
is in the pain.

The lovely ones put coquetry aside, confounded at the puppet-
playing sphere (1,855).

When from the mountain rose the fount of bght, it banished
from the world the evil eye.

Dawn, hke the spider of the astrolabe, unto the world’s pole
spun (its) gossamer (1,856).


250


THE HAFT PAIKAK


Bearing a lamp (1,857) a breeze arose and bore the gard’ner
from the garden to the town.

The master raised (his) standard in control, released from that
subjection and those bonds (1,858).

From last night's fire of love-essays his heart was cauldron-
like to ebullition brought.

When to the town he came, he sought (at once to carry out)
in faithfulness his aim.

The Moon of last night he induced to come, assigned the portion
(1.859) as the law commands.

3Iargaritam imperforatam coralio perfora\-it ; experrectus est
gallus, pixels requievit (1,860). —

If (in the world) you look from bird to fish (1,861), — this same
afiection will be (found) in all.

Good fortune his to find a limpid stream I he drank of (water)
lawful then to him.

Pure as the (radiant) sun he found a spring, bright, clear as
jasmine, and, as silver, white.


In whiteness is the (bright) light of the day ; by whiteness
too the moon illumes the world.

In colour is an artificial taint, except in whiteness, which is
pure, unstained.

Man when bestained is in a hopeless state ; whiteness, the sign
is of his purity.

(Then) when in adoration men engage, it is the m:)de that they
should dress in white (1,862).


She, jasmine-bosomed, ending thus her words, the monarch
gave her place upon his breast.

Thus many a night in comfort and in joy he went and tarried
in the Domes (in turn).

The sky, constructor of the (lofty) domes (1,863), opened the
doors of the Seven Domes to him.


TRANSLATION


251


Bahram finds out about the tyrannical vazlr.

Saturn and Jupiter in aspect trine (1,864), the sun from. Pisces
then in ^4rics (1,865) ;

The verdure, Khizr-like (1,866), found youth again, the springs
of water (too) renewed their life.

The heart of every spring became a Nile, and every fount
became a Salsabil (1,867).

The earth in aloes dressed took musky scent, the breeze, musk-
seller, steeped itself in musk (l.tbS).

The New A'ear’s equable and temperate air made its way
straight to world-illumining (1,869).

From the air’s skirt was dew deposited ; the heat broke up the
form of winter's cold.

By a new mortgage-deed the New A’oar s breeze mortgaged
its life to (all) the fragrant herbs (1,870).

From the earth's heart the plants put out their heads ; the
mirror of the sun was cleared of rust (1,871).

The plants gave many jewels to the sight (1,872) ; they made
creation fresh and flourishing.

Down from the mountain gorge the pure white snow ga've
grandeur to the river by (its) tears (1,873).

The morning breezes bv their musky breath rubbed galia
(1,874) on the violet's dark dress.

The fresh narcissus with (its) sleepy eyes deprived of sleep the
eyes of all it saw.

The lotus from the torture of the fire (1,875) found in the
fortress, water, a retreat.

The fresh buds of the blossoms of the trees made pearls wide-
spread as tulips’ petals are (1,876).

The cypress which by shade gave canopies, combed the locks
of the box-tree (with its leaves) (1,877).

For the corona of narcissi drunk, the lilies put gold ingots
on their palms (1,878).

Through the north breeze the pastils of the Spring were
scattering stars without the Judgment Day (1,879).


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Having tears in its eyes the fenugreek by eating of the safiron
smiled again (1,880).

The writer of God’s will in life’s whole book sanctioned the
bloodshed of the anemone (1,881).

The petals of the white rose, stringing pearls (1,882) ; applying
tutty, stems of hyacinths (1,883).

The mouse-ear curled its hair in many a loc’ir ; tossing it
cn it3 back like DllamI (1,884).

The leaves and grass were both content to be, those, as forked
arrow-heads, and this, as shears (1,885).

And with their musky clusters hyacinths diffused their pungent
odour o’er the pinks.

The yellow wall-flower, still to live a while, had made the
jessamine its special heir (1.8$G).

The odour of the wild mint with its heat melted the sting
of Scorpio of the sky.

The rose-buds dallied with the anthemis ; the grass to the
iris whispered secrets low.

The camphor-scented rose of musky breath, in gold and
silver, like the loved one’s ear (1,887).

The willow scent of aloes-wood diffused ; sometimes it scattered
camphor, sometimes musk.

The Judas’ tree and jasmine raised their flags, a black and
white, before the willow-tree.

The willow gnawed its hands, regretting leaves lost through
the bane of autumn’s piercing winds (1,888).

The rose assumed its place as sovereign chief ; the earth,
e'en as the breeze, its loyal friend.

The nightingale upraised its voice (in song) all night until the
crowing of the cock.

The redness of the rose on the green field played the five turns
of music as the chief (1,889).

The notes of the ring-doves on cypress-trees like cheerful
song of those whose hearts are pleased.

The flute of turtle-doves with morning plaint had made the
mountain partridge cease its laugh.


TEANSLATION


253


The cry of francolins around the field cut up the utmost
heights of paiaJise (1,830).

The nightingale in sad and plaintive tones had grown as slender
as the harp’s silk string.

From the celestial writings of the Zand the Zand-intoner
sang at night some words (1,891).

The garden had become like painters’ scenes ; joyous had
(all) the birds and fish become. —

King Bahram held on such a day as this a festive meeting
in the mode of kings

(In) a domed chamber, raised above the sky, after the fashion
of the Seven Domes.

A messenger of noble form arrived, who sought the palace
of the seven brides.

That heavenly palace entering, his heart expanded like the
(spacious) heavenly gates.

He praised and blessed the king in lengthy speech, and after
that, respectful homage paid.

He said. Once more from China, picture-land, a rush of troops
has occupied the earth (1.892).

The khaqan with the king has broken faith, and from good
faith departed once again.

The Chinese have no faith, conventions spurn : poison at
heart, and honey outwardly.

An army (vast) with swords uplifted high has reached in
countless troops the Oxus stream.

Over a wide expanse the torrents rush, (in size) each dragon
(1,893) in them like a sea.

Should the king have no thought for this afiair, the Chinamen
will drink our blood in bowls.

The king, who heard of this calamity, for safety from the
sore affliction sought.

(So) ere the net were cast about (his) head, he drew (his)
skirt from wine, (his) hand from cup.

He studied how he might with fitting deed and judgment
crush the power of the foe.


254


THE HAFT PAIKAR


He saw no refuge save in troops and hoards, for such the
means of conquest are alone.

He found the royal treasury was void, that arms and army
too were scattered wide.

(Thus), helpless like a toothless lion, he, a chain his collar was,
his realm a jail.

The monarch, I have heard, had a vazir, an impious man,
one far removed from God ;

Who'd named himself, from a self-chosen roll, Hast-rushan,
(1,894), but he was not bright (or) straight.

His brightness and his straightness most minute ; his straight-
ness crooked, and his brightness dark.

He made the king assured of good repute, whilst good repute
attached not to his name.

IVhen the vazlrate was in Xarsi's hands (1,895), in the vazirate
there was fear of God ;

But when Rast-rushan seized the vazlrate, all perished that
was either just or true.

The king in drinking and in pleasure sunk, (Rast-riishan)
gave a loose to tjTanny,

He raised up trouble, and abolished good, he sought for land,
and heaped up property.

The king’s vice-gerent (too) by gold and gems he gained
as partner m (his) hurtful acts.

He said. The people have grown covetous ; they have become
rude, bold, and mannerless.

Creatures of earth, (’tis true), born of the earth, (but) wild
beasts they, (and only) men in form.

If wo with sense and judgment punish not, the evil eye will
punish (soon) the realm.

In their satiety they boldly use our^wealth to further interests
of their own.

M e must subject and overpower these wolves : how long
appear to heed not and ignore ?

-den, they are evil and of evil stock ; appearing Josephs,
they are worse than wolves (1,896).


TEANSLATION


255


Wild beasts (like them) pay no heed to good faith, and till
the sword compel, spurn all commands.

A^ou may have read, concerning the distressed, of what
Siyavash (1,897) suffered from wild beasts.

How King Jamshid (1,898) was humbled to the dust, and how
Darius, king, was crucified (1,899).

Their riches are a tank, and sated, they: water left long in
tanks must putrify (1,900).

The water, which by earth gets turbid, dark, also by means of
earth gets clear and good (1,901).

If drunk the monarch, sober is the foe ; asleep the watch, the
robber is awake.

If harsh control be used not by the king, his royal power and
state will (soon) be marred (1,902).

Let chastisement be yours, and counsel mine : seize anyone
I say is to be seized.

Bold and presuming subjects are as fiends ; let them alone
and they exceed all bounds.

The king who (fitting) chastisement inflicts, — from him both
enemies and demons flee.

By no one's show of friendship be seduced ; consider only
as your friend the sword.

(So) do your best by (fitting) chastisement not to impair
the splendour of your rule.

The king, with trust in us, is given to wine : I have the pen,
and you the sword in hand.

Chastise the rich by (seizing on their) wealth ; and circumvent
the poor by killing (them).

The good and bad are both (your) legal (prey) : deprive the
bad of life, the good, of wealth.

Lower the people in their rank and wealth, that you may be
exalted in their eyes.

Whene'er the subjects are depressed and weak, the realm is
always on a solid base.

The king’s vice-gerent, as one void of sense, joined with him in
his acts of tyranny.


25G


THE HAFT PAIKAR


With such ill-treatment as was pointed out he would oppress
the subjects of the king.

Until the degradation passed all bounds, he treated aU men as
of no account.

Perdstent in oppression (both) remained : (men) they
imprisoned, and bore off their aU.

In town and village outcry ruled alone ; no other words than
“ Seize and fine ” were heard.

Till in the kingdom, ere a year had passed, no land or wealth
remained to anyone.

The probity of each man was (1,903) approved according to
the measure of his bribe.

Of gold and jewels, male and female slaves, to no one aught
remained in (all) the realm.

The richer than the poorer more in want, not from deficiency,
but ha^ing more (1,904).

House-holders through the theft of the house-thieves had left
their houses all in others’ hands (1,905).

The city and the army, wearied out, as outcasts wandered
all from hill to hiU.

No ox or seed remained in any tract ; no one could strike a
balance to the good (1,906).

When desolate the realm, the treasurv was all at once deprived
of revenue.

Save the vazir, who had (both) house and hoard, no person’s
gain was aught but grief and pain.

Since to prepare for war the monarch had no treasure and no
army, and was sad,

He sought at once from all the chiefs in turn their several
reasons for his ruined state.

Through fear of the vazir whose fires rose high, no one would
tell by day what passed at night (1,907).

Each one gave some false reason, speaking thus : This needy
man has gone, and that one fled.

The ground gives no returns, no grain remains, so in the
treasury no treasure's left.


TEANSLATION


257


(The peasant) gone from lack of means and cash, our monarch’s
lands now feel the bad effects.

With favour and indulgence from the king, he will (no doubt)
return to his affairs.

Those pleas did not suffice the king, yet still he made not on
the hon ill-timed war.

Of the ill turns of the tyrannic dome (1,908) he thought as
much as seemed to him required.

He took no measures to arrange affairs, nor struggled further
(at the time) with fate.

When saddened by the trouble of the affair, the king would
ride out to the chase alone.

In hunting he recovered cheerfulness, (and) when thus cheered
he came back home again.

When sadness held him captive, on a day, he felt an eager
longing for the chase.

He went out all alone to hunt the prey, with blood to wash
ofi from (his) heart the blood.

So far he hunted as his will inclined ; he conquered sadness
and defeated care.

When from the chase of leopard, lion, boar, he had resolved
to go back home again, —

In all the heat and hurry of his course his brain had melted
through the fire of thirst.

He hastened all around the tracts about, but found no water
there, though much he sought (1,909).

He saw some smoke (then) like a dragon black, raising its head
high to echpse the moon ;

Coiling and writhing, roU involved in roU, designing, (as it
seemed), to mount the sky.

He said. Although that smoke has risen from fire, yet from
the kindler water I must seek.

When he had gone some steps towards the smoke, he saw a
tent (there) rising to a height ;

A flock of sheep (too) seething in the sun, from hoofs to ears
hke to a stew of meat ;


25S


THE HAFT PAIKAE


A dog suspended from a branch he saw, with fore and hind legs
bound tight like a stone (1,910).

He swiftly urged (his) horse towards the tent ; he saw an old
man like a sun-stirred dawn (1,911).

The old man when he saw (his) guest sprang up, and girded up
(his) loins to wait on him.

Like the earth (humble) he received (his) guest, and held
the reins of (one like) heaven (high).

First praise and blessing did he ofier him, and afterwards
he helped him to dismount.

Whatever he had ready in the house he brought with soft and
deprecating words.

He said. There is no doubt that such a tray is quite unsuited
to a guest like you ;

But in these parts is little husbandry, (so) if the tray is poor
there’s some excuse.

When the king saw the shepherd’s piece of bread, he drank a
draught of water, and abstained.

He said. I’ll then, and not before, eat bread, when you shall
truly tell me what I ask :

To-wit, why this poor dog is (thus) tied up ; why he, the hon
of the house, is bound ?

The old man answered (him), 0 handsome youth, I will exactly
tell you what has passed.

This was a dog the guardian of the flock ; to him I had
entrusted my affairs ;

Through his fidelity and trustiness I was rejoiced by his
companionship.

He from the flock would always keep afar the robber’s hands,
the claws (too) of the wolf.

To him I loft the guarding of my house, and him I called my
(faithful) guardian dog.

He with foe-lacerating teeth and claws was to me night and
day (as) iron arms.

If from the country to the town I went, the flock was happy
in his watchful care.


TRANSLATION


259


And if my business in the town was long, he would take home
the flock again himself.

(Thus) he kept watch for me for several years, was true, and
saved me from (all) fear and toil.

Till one day in the book of (my) affairs I noted down the
number of my flock.

I saw that it was short by seven head, (then) thought there
was an error in my count.

When in a week I counted (them), again I found them short,
but kept the secret close.

(Then) with good judgment and good sense kept watch ;
trespass on no one’s part did I observe.

Although for several nights I (thus) kept watch, no night did
I discern the cunning rogue.

Whilst in the business more alert than I, than I by far more
watchful was the dog.

All night my heart was full of grief and pain, finding the flock
diminishing in sheep.

And when again I verified the count, they still fell short as
on the former day.

By twos and fives they were diminishing, bke ice which had
been melted by the sun.

So far that the collector for the poor took what remained
from me as legal alms.

And I, a dweller in the wilderness, became a shepherd after
owning flocks.

That sore and heavy trouble humbled me ; it took efiect
on (my) discouraged heart.

I said, This stroke, given by the evil eye, — of what wild beasts
is it the handiwork ?

With such a dog, whose acts were bon-hke, who has this insolent
presumption used ?

Till one day on the border of a stream I slept (awhile), and
(then) awoke from sleep.

Then with my head bent down upon my staff, making no noise,
I walked along with it.


260


THE HAFT PAIKAR


A female wolf I saw spring up afar, which came and sat down
near before the dog.

In her dog-language (then) she called the dog ; the dog ran
up to her with friendly mien.

He ran around her, scattered dust about, now wagged his tail,
and now pricked up his ears.

Postremo lupee dunes conscendit, fulfilled his wish, and
business came to nought (1,912).

(Then) he returned, lay down and took his rest, the seal of claims
to silence on his mouth.

The wolf, since she had given now (her) bribe, sought the
reward due to the service done.

A stout, fat sheep, the leader of the flock, whose legs were
weighed down by its heavy tail,

She carried off, and in a trice devoured, and many such a
bribe had she consumed.

The cursed dog, to gratify his lust, left to the wolf’s control
my flock of sheep.

That flock of sheep, he had to serve and tend, — he sacrificed it
to his love-affairs.

(Though) often (this occurred) I made no change (1,913) ; I
let him off though guilty of offence.

Until at last I took him with the wolf, and bound him for so
serious a crime.

I put him to the torture of a jail, that he might be again
subservient slave.

No dog of mine, a robber on my road ; or else a butcher of my
sheep is he.

He has betrayed the trust (reposed in him), and trustiness
exchanged for treachery.

Even should death result I have full leave (1,914) to see that
he shall not escape such bonds.

No person whosoever would applaud the man who towards
the guilty acts not so.

Bahram, the king, (then) from the (shepherd s) words took
secretly a warning (to himself).


TRANSLATION


261


These words a hint were when he understood ; something
he ate, then hastened towards the town.

He said within himself, From this old herd I’ve learnt to rule —
how good the course (pursued) (1,915) !

As in the case I’ve witnessed (1,916) I, (in truth), the shepherd
am, my subjects are the flock.

The basis of affairs not resting sound, the trusted must be
asked about the breach.

Then he who’s my vazlr, sharp-sighted man, my trusted agent
to protect the flock, —

From him must I enquire where are the troops ; though lost
the learned, where the pulpit is (1,917).

That he may tell me what this ruin means ; who the real basis
of this havocked state.

He asked his agents when he reached the town, to give a clear
account of those in jail.

When he had looked into the list, the day, like to the list,
grew black before his eyes (1,918).

Perplexed, amazed, he saw a whole world smit, and clearly
noted every person’s name.

He said. Where grief and joy must bear their part, the king
may kill, the vazlr intercede (1,919).

By tyranny he’s blackened the king’s name, for his own name
securing good repute.

The king knew what the (man’s) devices were : the thief within
the house would pillage it.

Like the dog which abandoned flock to woK, and craft employed
against the valiant herd.

Dogs are like this in their rapacity, they make an outcry when
they lacerate (1,920).

He thought it prudent leaving him awhile (in freedom, suddenly)
to check the man.

Said he. If him in power I (seem to) keep, for his removal none
will (dare) contend (1,921).

But if I strip him of his pomp and state, — light best shows
in the dark and sombre night (1,922).


262


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(Then) in the morning when the day grew light, and the dark
night had folded up its pack.

The dawn, two-sworded, by its single stroke had made the
moon tired, weary of its blood (1,923),

Bahrain set up (his) court upon the sky, granted the people
public audience.

The grandees from all parts assembled (there), and ranged
themselves according to their rank.

Rast-rushan entered by the palace door, and boldly went to
his exalted place.

With stern and angry gaze the monarch looked, and shouted
in a way to strike him dead :

You, who have ruin brought on all my realm, have stripped
my realm of splendour and renown ;

Have heaped up jewels in your treasury, scattering my jewels
and my treasured store ;

Have taken from my troops all arms and stores, so that no
arms or stores are left to them ;

Deprived my (loyal) subjects of their all, planted your feet
in every person’s blood ;

Required from subjects not the taxes due, but all their means
at times, at times their rank ;

The claims my bounty gives me cast aside, having no shame
before me, — shame on you !

His Faith would own ’tis worse in every one to overlook a
favour than his Faith,

To meet the claims of favours by one's acts brings favours
still to him who has received.

When that Rast-rushan came to me in you, justice departed,
brightness was dispelled (1,924).

Both troops and treasure you have injured so that neither
troops nor treasure now remains.

What did you think, that in my drinking bouts the sleep of
negligence would seize me so

That you’d deprive of use a drunkard's hands, and break the
subjects’ and dependents’ legs ?


TEANSLATION


263


On me may dust be (scattered) if Babram forgets the sword
when taking up the cup !

If I forget myseK in wine and song, I’m not forgetful of the
azure sphere (1,925).

By such words countless iron rings he forged, (and) cast them
all around the vazir’s neck.

He ordered then that a repulsive guard should drive him off
from paradise to hell.

A halter of (his) turban (1,926) (then) they made ; they drew
him in and put him into bonds :

His legs in fetters and his arms in chains, — such reverence
so vile a one receives (1,927).

When might was brought against that mighty one, the king
dispatched a crier round the town.

That the oppressed in this (cause of) complaint should ask for
justice, which the king would grant.

When all the multitude and soldiers heard, they turned their
faces towards the monarch’s court.

The evil of that evil-natured man they told, and pierced a
dragon with a snake (1,923).

The king commanded that the prisoners, out of their bleeding
and afflicted hearts.

Should each make known of what he was accused, so might he
for the fetters forge a key.

The captives, from captivity released, approached the king,
more than a thousand men.

The king selected seven from them aU, and questioned each
of them upon his case.

He said to every one. What is your crime ? Whence come
you ? To what tribe do you belong ?

The first victim complains of the tyrannical vazlr.

The first of them then said to (King) Bahram, 0 you whose foe
is as his foe could wish,

Kast-rushan, the vazir, with grievous hurts upon the rack my
brother put to death.


264


THE HAFT PAIKAE


Goods, horses, (other) things, whate’er there was, he seized
on all : both life and also wealth.

By reason of his youth and beauty all were much afflicted at
his loss of life (1,929).

And since I raised an outcry at the deed, the vazir took me
prisoner for that crime ;

Calling me an adherent of (his) foe, and so (inclined) when he
was such (a man).

He made out cases of incitement then, to plunder also all my
house and goods.

He forcibly put fetters on my legs, and turned for me my house
into a tomb.

That brother done to death by tyranny, this one, with loss
of all, escaping death.

"Tis now a year since he imprisoned me ; — my happiest omen
is the monarch’s face.

When from the victim’s words the king had learned that
which the minister had done to him.

All that from him the minister had stolen, all, with the price
of blood, he granted him (1,930).

He set him free (from jail) and cheered his heart, (and) let
him (then) return to his affairs.


The second victim makes {his) complaint.

The second person went before the king, and in an audience
sought a (safe) retreat.

In audience with the king, protector kind, he called down
many blessings (from above).

He said, I had a garden fresh with grass, to know which was
as brightness (to the heart).

Like heaven’s plains ’twas verdant and wide-spread, its fruits
formed on the branches screen on screen.

It gave me in the Autumn early Spring ; ’twas left me a reminder
of my sire.


TRANSLATION


265


One day, to my heart-felt and burning grief, that enemy unto
my garden came.

I treated him as guest to fruit and wine, (with) treatment
fitted to the service due (1,931).

All that there was in garden and in house, to thank him (for
his visit), I bestowed.

He ate and laughed, lay down and took his rest, and of the
wine drank all that he desired.

When round the garden he had walked awhile, through love
of it he wished to take the field (1,932).

He said, (Come) (now), your garden sell to me, that I may make
you prosperous in life (1,933).

I said, This garden which is (as) my soul, — how should I sell
it, for it has my love ?

Branded is every person from some fire (1,934) : — I, hapless,
have, except this garden, naught.

Consider that the garden’s always yours, that I to you am
gardener, nay, slave.

Whenever you feel urged to visit it, eat fruit and drink wine
by the water's side.

And what may come from kitchen such as mine I’ll send
by one with limbs hke silver fair.

He said. Desist from this, urge no vain pleas ; sell me the
garden, and clear out (at once).

He strove much with contention, fuss, and noise ; for force
or gold I would not sell the place.

At last when he grew drunk with hate and spite, he brought
against (your slave) a lying charge.

So that, as fine to him for that offence, he took away the
garden from poor me.

And (then), that in the court where wrongs are heard I might
not bring this wrong before the king,

With pain and suffering he imprisoned me : two years your
humble (slave) has suffered this.

The king gave him a garden, fields as well ; he gave a house
and garden hke Baghdad (1,935).


266


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Tie third victim makes {his) coviflaint.

(Then) the third prisoner said to King (Bahram), A’ou who
have over all entire control,

I was a merchant (travelling) by sea, and gained my living by
sea-joumeyings.

Sometimes I went to places on the sea (1,936), and found
great profit in such (enterprise).

When by (acquiring) knowledge I could tell wherein good
sea-pearls differed from the had,

I gained possession of some (precious) pearls, in lustre and in
colour like dawn’s lamp (1,937).

Full of expectance to the town I came, with eyes the brighter
for that string of pearls.

I had a mind to sell the string of pearls, and with the price
buy food and also dress.

When the king’s minister had heard the news, — that a fine
string of pearls belonged to me,

He summoned (me) and bought (them), and through awe,
I in appraising was most moderate (1,938).

(Then) when the time arrived to pay the price, all kinds of
vain excuses he began.

With trouble and distress I sought the price ; he offered naught
but vain and idle pleas.

A few days, good or evil, (passed away (1,9-39), whilst) he
heaped wile on wile, I still in ho2)e.

(Then) finally he hid me out of sight, putting me into jail
with murderers.

He made a pretext of some (fancied) crime, and by the pretext
kept, himself, the price.

(So) for my string of pearls which he had taken, he bound
my hands and feet (in jail) with bonds.

He getting hold of (lustrous) pearls from me ; I at his hands
in torture left to stones (1,940).

He putting -pearls into his turban-folds ; I, shell-like, at the
bottom of a pit (1,941).


TRANSLATION


267


From the bad-natured vazir’s store the king gave him some
pearlS; with gold and ornaments.

The fourth victim makes (his) comjilaint.

(Then) fnll of deepest awe the fourth man said, 0 you who’re
worthy of a thousand thanks,

A foreign young musician I, in love ; sweetly as flowing
stream I play the lute.

I had a loving friend, of beauty rare, a Chinese girl, a comforter
in grief.

She'd given a name to “ nothing ” by her mouth, “ honey
in smiles ” (called) for its sugared smiles (1,942).

Her sun-like visage robbed the moon of light ; the day, before
it, perished e’en as night (1,943).

Bought in (our) country with my money, she (1,944), and of
the greatest blessings of my eyes.

Confronted with the Spring, so fair to view, her beauty took
both house and garden too (1,945).

Singing and music she had learnt from me : her playing
soothed the heart, caressed the spirit.

Both of us with each other in one house, in close communion
like the light and moth.

Life to my heart she gave, as lamp to night, by me she was
as garden-verdure gay.

She lighted up a candle where she dwelt (1,946), (and) burnt
the moth’s heart with the fire of it (1,947).

As lighted taper bright and straight in form (1,943), — Rast-
rushan took her from (your) slave away.

When I, through losing her, disturbed and mad, sought to
regain companionship with her,

(Rast-rushan) had me bound with many bonds, as who should
say, a madman must be bound.

He, at (his) ease, with my bride whom he’d stolen ; with
countless needs and longings I, in jail.

’Tis (now) four years since, in (his) tyranny, he's kept me,
guiltless, in this abject state.


268


THE HAFT PAIKAR


The king at once gave up the girl to him, not her alone, but
thousand things as 'well.

He gave for her a portion when he wed, and set him free from
durance with his bride.

The fifth victim makes (his) complaint.

(Then) the fifth person to the star-king said, You with whose
sky-like tent the world is joined (1,949),

I, a submissive servant of the king, am a chief officer of
revenue (1,950).

In the king’s business I, a (humble) slave, by (my) authority
adorned the realm (1,951).

Under the king’s good fortune God had given blessings and
state to me in wealth and rank.

In view of long life for the Eastern king (1,952) I gave the
world to happiness and joy.

Provision for the road I made of prayers (1,953), some good
accomplished for the monarch’s sake.

Through me were town and village glad and fresh ; the learned
(often) had recourse to me.

In aiming to add brightness to the realm I gave each one
a pledge of maintenance (1,9-54).

The poor from me had plenteous store of coin, widows had
plenty, and their children too (1,955).

He who asked gold, — I answered the demand ; who fell, —
I took his hand to raise him up.

No helpless one remained confined in bonds whom I delivered
not from injury.

All that from farmers’ incomes came (to me) was used for the
expenses of (my) guests (1,956).

Returns, expenditure, as they should be : the people pleased
with me, and God content.

When these proceedings reached the vazir’s ears, he made the
cauldron of injustice boil.

He took from me my stewardship and power, and laid his hand
upon my wealth and lands.


TRANSLATION


269


He said, This -wealth is gained not by your work ; your gifts
suit not such store as you should have.

You’ve made a furnace hot for alchemy, or else in ass-loads
(1,957) treasure you have found.

Give me, as should be given, my share of it, or I will give your
head unto the winds.

(Then), altogether, all the means I had he took away from me
by this vain plea.

To end the business, he afflicted me : made me his slave and put
me into jail.

’Tis now five years that, in the prison kept, I’ve been removed
from children, house, and home.

The king commanded he should be restored in comfort and
in ease to what he’d owned.

The sixth victim makes {his) complaint.

When came the turn of the sixth man (to speak), crop-sickness
from his fortune he dispelled (1,95>>).

He blessed the king's successful rule and said. The people by
your goodness are sustained.

I am a soldier, ofispring of a Kurd, and, through my ancestors,
of noble birth.

(The king’s) slave I, a soldier of (his) troops, my father also was
the monarch’s slave.

I serve the king with (faithfulness and) truth ; my father also
did (the same) before.

I ever march against the monarch's foes, with hfe and scimitar
upon my palm.

Some time ago (1,959) the king had given his slave, in his
beneficence, a piece of land (1,960).

In peace and safety I enjoyed the same, with (feelings of)
devotion to the king.

The tyrant vazir took it to himself ; no one can stand against
(such) tyranny.

Your slave had wife and children, but no wealth : except that
land he had no property.


270


THE HAFT PAIKAE


I went repeatedly with loud complaint, and said, Assist me
for the sake of God ;

That he might try (the case) by justice' norm, and have
compassion on my family ;

Or (treating me) as spendthrift, destitute (1,961), from the
exchequer new provision give.

He shouted out at me. Be silent, you ! Scrape from your
arrow-heads the rust, yourself (1,962).

Whilst the king, duU and sour, keeps idle so, "twixt him and
none does any trouble rise.

No enemy has come close to his gate, that troops and combating
should be required.

Do not take up the trade of idleness ; make bricks and build,
for you have health for it.

Provisions failing, trouble not too much, go sell (your) horse
and saddle and (your) arms.

I said, A fierce and cruel nature shun ; behold my wretchedness,
have fear of God.

Do not inflict by loss and poverty hardship on one who hardship
has endured.

(Whilst) you stretched out your legs all night at ease, I to the
sword stretched out my hand (to fight).

If you in the dominion use the pen (1,963), I, with the sword,
march on (to meet the foe).

A’ou use the pen, (and dip it) in black blood ; I on the king’s
opponents use the sword.

Take not from me that which the monarch gave, or else I'll
shortly seize his saddle-straps (1,964).

W hen he heard this address he was enraged ; at me devoid
of pen the ink-stand hurled (1,965).

He said. With ignorance and folly (crass) with water as a clod
you'd threaten me (1,966).

With food-dispensing now you'd saddle me ; and now you’d
threaten with the monarch's (ire).

The king I seated on the throne myself ; all people on my
mandates bow their heads.


TRANSLATION


271


The heads of kings are underneath my feet ; they all have
life (too) by my will (alone).

(And) if they did not take me as a friend, the vultures (surely)
would devour their brains.

Striking me with his inkstand thus he spoke (1,967), he took
my horse, accoutrements and arms.

Then after that gave me to murderers : (to be with such)
he sent me to his jail.

For now about six years, nay, rather more, my heart has been
distressed, my soul in pain.

The king with kindness gave him robe (1,968) and arms. —
Long live the king who kindly treats his slaves !

When by (his) kindness he had made him smile, he gave him
land of double the returns.

The seventh victim makes (his) complaint.

When the seventh person came before (the king), he beautified
his lips with praise, and said,

I’m an ascetic who has spurned the world, a pious traveller
on the road of God.

Poor, but with care for naught, and, candle-like, before the
people burning self away.

I gave up (all) the business of (this) world, studied the volume
of the future state.

I have no share in any food or sleep : I stand at night (to pray),
and always fast.

By day I eat not, for I have no food ; at night I sleep not,
for I have no home.

Within a place of worship I abide, with naught but worship am
I occupied.

Whomever I may see I seek to please ; for him I call to mind
I say a prayer.

The vazir sent a man to summon me ; I went, and sat a little
distance ofi.

I am suspicious of you, thus he spoke, and if I objurgate you
it is meet.


272


THE HAFT PAIKAR


I said, My lord, tell me what you surmise, in order that I live
as you dispose.

He said. Your imprecations much I fear : that you may to
your God pray for my death ;

That you through evil-nature and ill-will may call down impre-
cations on my head.

And from those niirht-prayers of a sleepless one I fear an arrow
on this mark may fall.

Ere from the fire of your malevolence the sparks of imprecations
fall on me.

I’ll bind 3 ’our hands and so prevent your prayers — not only
hands, but hands and also neck.

By scruples unrestrained, he had me bound ; he had no feeling
for this soul distressed.

He kept me in this anguish seven j-ears : a lock upon my tongue,
my feet in chains.

He bound my hands down to prevent my prayers ; (but) I
have bound his hands from using power (1,900).

When God the king's compassion granted me, no more had
joj’ (for absence) any plea (1,970).

The king embraced the ascetic combatant, the lion, slayer
of the infidel.

He said. Save on the point of fear of prayer East-rushan
uttered not a word of truth.

But prayers they cannot in this waj’ repel ; nor can they make
the ascetic like a thief (1,971).

He who inflicted on his soul such ill invoked (effective) curses
on himself (1,972).

So that at last those curses should deprive his head of turban
(1,97.3) and himself of head.

All that the vazir had of everj’ kind, — he said to the ascetic.
Take, it’s yours.

But the ascetic would not take such ease (1,971) ; he whirled,
and like the (whirling) wheel became (1,975).

He said, Than wealth, from which lam divorced, give something
better, for I've better given.


TRANSLATION


273


He danced, (but) not through minstrel or to song ; he so became
that no one saw him more.

Those travellers on the Path who so have been, — their heads
from earth have on the heavens touched (1,976).

(But) ere you find matured wine in the cup, thousands of
unripe sour grapes you must see (1,977).

This set, although they are of human stock, are all (but)
demons, though entitled men.

The water of the stream, so vehement, is from the rill which
rises from a sink (1,978).

Matured is he who from a set so crude holds oQ his collar and
draws in his skirt.

We, like the earth, with mud are all bestained ; the shadow
of the mud infolds the sun (1,979). —

With eyes cast on the world’s oppressive acts, aiming by
justice to restore affairs (1,980),

He sought to find out what was best to do, from the thorn’s
harshness how to free the rose.

When the vazir’s affair he called to mind, he leant his head
upon his hand in thought.

Till dawn he slept not from the shame he felt ; (his) eyes he
closed not from distress of heart.

The king -punishes the tyran-nical vazir.

When in this vase of earthenware the sun sweet basil planted
by its radiance (1,981),

The king arrived like basil-scented rain, and scattered on the
thirsty pearly drops (1,982).

He caused the throne of audience to be raised ; and at the
hall-gate had a cross set up.

Seated, he gave the people audience, the nobles standing
(there) with sword in hand.

(Then) seating the exalted of (his) realm, the car of justice
to the heights he drove (1,983).

He brought together multitudes of men, a mountain of
spectators he upraised.


274


THE HAFT FAIKAR


(Then) that consistent tyrant, the vazir, he had with fetters
loaded, head to foot.

And had him huns up without scruple ahve, so that in shame
he perished like a thief.

He said, Who in that wise exalts his head, his head will Fortune
in this wise hurl down.

Dishonesty will lead to ill-repute ; an evil end will wait on
evil deeds.

The tyrant who brings trouble in that way, thus to the tomb
the just will bring him down.

Beware of saying justice has no aid ; the heavens and earth
are in this work engaged (1,984).

W'hoe'er the nails of malice seeks (to strew), puts chains and
fetters on his arms and legs (1,985).

After (this business of) the judgment-hall, the king thought
of the herd’s dog and the wolf.

The herd he summoned, gave him lofty rank, bestowed on him
good fortune and good will.

He banished evils from the government ; let none use violence
to other men.

After a season, from such policy his iron became gold, his
sackcloth, silk.

Both troops and treasure crowded on him (soon) : those more
than waves, this higher than the hills.

When to the khaqan (1,986) came such news of him, he made
good his retreat, no trouble gave.

He sent an envoy with apologies, and spoke no word that
would not pleasure him.

He said, He who deserved the death you gave was an affliction
and to discord aid.

He sent a letter asking me to come, and wrote some heart-
aUuring passages.

So that by heart-beguiling arts he made me, simple of heart,
unable to abstain.

He said. The mine is rich, the road is free ; hasten immediately
if you desire.


TEANSLATION


275


The king through drunkenness can not engage (even) in
throwing water on (his) face (1,987).

I am prepared to join you as a friend ; yours the sword,
promptness and submission mine.

But when I had gained tidings of the king, I found affairs were
contrary to that.

The king in times of warfare and of peace employs such action
as befits them best.

I, the king’s slave, am (only) to myself Chinese, I’m Ethiopian
to him (1,988).

My daughter is the slave-girl of your house ; my crown’s the
dust that on your threshold rests. —

And that which the destructive traitor sent in writing to
complain about the king, —

He rolled up aU the writings and enjoined his envoy to submit
them to the king.

When the king read the notes of the vazir, his wrath was
sharpened as a writer's reed.

(Then) thankful for his death thenceforth he kept afiaiis upon
a safe and solid base.

When justice’ face before the monarch’s eyes raised up a
warning as to all affairs.

He from its beauty and (engaging) look, gave up the seven
faces for that face (i,989).

Uprooting (from his mind) all other thoughts, on that he fixed
his heart, with that content.


The passing of Bahrdm from the transitory temple by the decree
of the All-wise King.

He who joins rubies to this string of pearls (1,990), who’s filled
with gems the ears of (all) the world.

Says, When the Seven Domes, by wine and cup (1,991), had
given forth their echoes to Bahriim,

His intellect within the dome, his brain, thus gave him know-
ledge of this moving dome (1,992) :


276


THE HAFT PAIKAK


From idol-temples of that dome, the world, move far — May
far perdition be from you!

The dome, his brain, was heated (by the thought) (1.993) ; he
turned from fiction and deceitful tales.

Perceiving that this joy-effacing dome (1,994) destroys (in
season) every dome (on earth).

The Seven Domes he gave up to the heavens (1,995), and by
that other dome he took his way (1,996).

A dome which does not fall through transientness ; on which
the raptured till the Last Day rest.

He summoned seven priests, the sons of j^riests, (and) to the
priests resigned the Seven Domes.

Soon every one of them he set on fire ; that is, he made a
fire-temple of each.

When sixty years the cypress-tree had reached, and jasmine
after violets sprang up (1,997),

He took to worship with sincerity, and from the worship of
himself refrained.

One day, retiring from (his) throne and crown, he went
off with his nobles to the chase.

Amongst such prey, the hunting of the king was swift pursuit
(there) of the prey, himself.

(His) guards dispersed about on every side, each one brought
down the wild-ass and gazelle.

Each wishing for the wild-ass of the plains ; he seeking for the
tomb of solitude (1,998).

He sought a tomb, to be his dwelling-place ; as game he
brought down vices — from himself (1,999).

M ild-ass, gazelle seek not from this salt plain (2,000) ; vice its
gazelle, its wild-ass is the tomb (2,001).

At last a wild-ass from the desert side came and passed on
before the wild-ass king (2.002).

The king knew well that one of angel-kind was (come) to guide
him on the road to heaven.

He spurred his horse against the onager, and roused the mettle
of his fiery steed.


TKANSLATION


277


After the game he took his rapid course across the plain and
through the desert tracts.

His helper, of set purpose, drew him on (2,003) ; two slave-boys,
only, followed in his tracks.

In that drear waste a cave (with water) lay sweet as an ice-well
in the summer-time.

(And) like a well it had (too) a deep chasm, unto the mouth
of which no one could gain (2,004).

The ass sprang quick and boldly through the cave, the monarch
like a lion at its heels.

Into the cave so deep the horseman rode : consigned the
kingly treasure to the cave.

Behind the curtain which the cavern formed the king became
the Loved One’s confidant (2,005).

The two young slaves, to wait upon the king, took up their
post beside the cavern’s mouth.

No way for them to creep into the cave, no power or will to
go back to the chase.

With bitter sighs expectant they remained, looking all round
for traces of the guards.

When after that a good time had elapsed, from every side the
(royal) guards arrived.

They sought the monarch, and beheld a cave ; the jewel
(hidden) in the serpent’s brain (2,006).

The (two) young slaves related (to the guards) all that these
knew not of the monarch’s case.

How, when (the king) was making for (his) prey, he spurred
(his) horse into that narrow pass.

To this assertion no one would assent, no one gave credit to
such words as these.

They all said. This is (but) an evil dream ; the speech of those
below the age of sense.

King Bahram with (his) calmness and good sense, — how
should he enter into this defile ?

The elephant, they knew not, dead asleep, had had a dream
and gone to Hindustan (2,007).


278


THE HAFT PAIKAR


(Though) Fate had chained the king of mighty frame, Fate’s
check to king and castle he’d o’ercome (2,008).

To make them show (where was) the ruling prince, with heavy
strokes they beat the poor young slaves.

And from the sighs of those pain-stricken boys a smoke-bke
vapour issued from the cave.

A cry arose, The king is in the cave ; go back again, the king
is occupied.

The noble guards as toilers (then) became, the cave they entered
seeking for the king.

The cavern bad no outlet, none was seen ; many the spiders,
but no fly appeared.

They washed it with their tears a hundred times ; more than
a hundred times they sought for him.

When in the cave they could not see the king, like snakes they
drew up at the mouth of it (2,009).

The eyes (of all) with (bitter) tears bedewed, they told the
mother of the king the news.

His mother came as one consumed with grief, as one to whom
a son like that was lost.

She sought the king, like other people not, for she sought with
(her) soul, and they with eyes.

She sought the rose, found thorns her bosom-friend ; the more
she sought, the less her hopes became (2,010).

In heaps she poured out money mountain-high for multitudes
of men to dig the ground.

She dug a pit, but found the treasure not ; she did not find
her Joseph in the pit.

Through the ground dug up by the mother-queen that land
abounds in fissures till this day.

Those who are learned and who know the place call it the
sepulchre of Bahram 6ur.

They dug the ground up (there) for forty days ; — how many
such grave-diggers in the world !

The ground though to the water-level dug, that treasure none
saw (even) in a dream.


TRANSLATION


279


He who has all that’s worth upon the heavens, — 'tis (a) hard
(task) to seek him out on earth.

The body and the bones are (found) on earth ; the heavenly
part is found upon the heavens.

Each body ’neath the sky has mothers (twain) : one, of the
blood, the other one, the earth.

The first one fosters it with tender care ; the second takes it
back again from her.

Yet of these mothers of (the king) Bahram, his mother, earth,
was kinder of the two ;

For taking him, she gave him back no more ; in this no helper
could afford (them) help (2,011).

Through grief at mother earth’s oppressive act, the mother,
by blood-ties, was well-nigh lost.

Fevered and chafing through her (troubled) brain, she heard
this utterance of a voice from heaven :

You, thoughtless, raging like a beast of prey, seeking to find a
saint of the unseen,

God to your custody consigned a charge, (and) when the term
arrived required it back.

Kill not yourself as one devoid of sense in (your) farewell to
any trust consigned (2,012).

Go back again, and do the work you have ; indulge no longer
in protracted grief.

When from the heavenly voice she heard the address, she tore
the love of Bahram from her (heart).

She went, and on the interests of his son employed the heart
which she had pledged to him (2,013).

She gave his heir his diadem and throne ; — none who has been
an heir of his has died (2,014). —

You who have given news of Bahram Gur, desist from this,
(and) look to Bahram’s tomb (2,015).

Not only lost to us is Bahram Gur ; his sepulchre can also not
be seen.

Why look to this that masterfully once he named the onager
“ the branded one ” ?


280


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Think not how first the onager was marked ; think rather how
at last the tomb marked him.

Though thousand asses’ legs he broke, at last he was not saved
the trampling of the tomb (2,016).

This house of dust, (the world), two doors contains : by one
it brings, and by the other takes.

(0 you), three ells of dust, one ell your breadth, four jars
within a dyer's workshop, you (2,017) —

Whatever food your stomach may digest the humours to
their own complexion bring.

(Your body) is from toes to neck and ears, from these four
humours clothed with borrowed things.

On such complexions offering transient things why fix your
heart, for you must give (them) back ?

Those absent ones, whose faces are concealed, are saved from
such-like aptitudes and means.

Until the Day of Judgment shall arrive to unveil those hidden
faces to the \fiew.

The way is one of fear, the night, of risks, the guard asleep
(2,018), the robber on the road.

The earthy abject ones get earth enough ; the yielding are
kept down by (many) hands (2,019).

Since you, at least, above (these) hands arise, why let your
heart bleed under every hand (2,020) ?

Rise, if you wish the sky to be subdued, step to the heights and
flee from earth away.

Ever advance, and in no way look back, that to the earth you
fall not from the sky.

The stars celestial are your shoulder-belt ; (these stars) what
are they all ? They are your means.

Your field surrounds the narrow bounds of all ; (all) these
designs are on your canvas limned (2,021).

Each one from you (its) picture has derived ; why take you
(then) an omen by each one ?

That which they do, — you are yourself that light ; that which
they suffer, — you are far from it (2,022).


TRANSLATION


281


Save one line whicli supports you, central dot (2,023), those
other letters, aU, are of your book (2,024).

You are the guardian angel of God’s praise ; the signs which
to the Maker lead you know.

Contemplate goodness, that you be not bad ; with beasts
consort not, that you be not one.

To judge of good and ill belongs to you ; to get the aid of
reason is your wish (2,025).

Knock at a door where is no want of bread, or, (if you can),
become as no one is (2,026).

The eyes when they would estimate the Light, far from the
heavens and the angels fall (2,027).

This (nether) earth is taster of the heavens (2,028) ; man is
a guest by angels (entertained) (2,029).

Turn from this market-place of grief your face ; how long
with earth, air, fire, and water deal (2,030) 1

A chamber with four flues (emitting smoke), how should it
not distress the heart and eyes (2,031) ?

A thing of two doors (2,032) like the robbers’ street ; a bag
like that of tricksters’ instruments (2,033).

Before without the village you are put (2,034), load with your
goods and chattels ox and ass (2,035).

By the soul travel, valueless the frame ; load lightly (too),
for restive is the horse (2,036).

The dead (in heart) who is in evil phght, — his soul has towards
the body been inclined.

But he who knows what is the soul’s first source, — ^his soul
without (his) body can exist (2,037).

Take care you do not think, 0 caviller, this world is (aU), those
other things are naught (2,038).

The length and breadth of being are wide-spread ; but we have
nothing in our view but thorns (2,039).

There are created things remote from these, not cognizant
of darkness or of light (2,040) :

Created beings numerous, no doubt, but the Creator is no more
than One.


282


THE HAFT PAIKAR


One Pen alone designed when things began these seven tablets
with their fourfold make (2,041).

A hundred though they were, not seven and four, they (still)
would be from one controlling hand.

(From) the first point (to) the last circle, all from One has come,
and all to One returns.

Dualities and their di'vision spurn ; look to the One, and see
their source in One.

From One has come first each duality, and when the latter
goes the One remains.

Whoever comes into this transient house, must v^ery soon go
back (from it again).

Move warily in it, for it is keen ; 'tis slow to take, but (can be)
quick to kill (2,042).

Though in (its) rule it does not persecute the weak, in its
account no one’s forgot (2,043).

If you work out no end of clever schemes, more than your
destined lot you’ll not enjoy.

The sky (above us) has an ice-bound tank (2.044) ; how long
seek profit from this ice ? how long (2.045) ?

(Exposed) to air through which you may be frozen, seek you
to be alive before you die.

Take joyously advantage of your life to (gain) the objects
of That World of yours (2,046) ;

So that you grieve not from whate’er you be cut off by the
sharp sword which aims at life (2.047).

From this world, ere you die, withdraw your soul, that you
may save your soul from (fear of) death (2,048).

Despise possessions, (and) think not of food ; so, you may be
in safety from the world.

Man’s safety (in the world) lies in two things ; to give abundantly
and sparely eat.

Whoe er to powder and greatness makes his tvav, has been
through these two fame-bestowers famed (2,049).

No greedy eater has attained to rank (2,050) ; position none
have gained who little give.


TRANSLATION


283


The ins])ector-ceiisor’s scourge, which shames, is used ou
villagers who give too little curds (2,051).

lu such a village (2,052) he (alone) is graced who to (high)
price prefers integrity (2,053).

Special or mean, here many are hke you ; this world’s to no
one specially confined (2,034).

How on that office should you fix (your) heart which bears
in it the seeds of your discharge ?

Beneath the heavens every structure (built), — cast dust upon
it, for it is but dust.

Pass from (this) place of snares and be not slow ; its high seats
are your cross, (so) be not bold (2,055).

If you’d go Uving to the cross (2,056), — enough that a Messiah
living went to it.

If one of earth should reach the highest sky, the earth again
would draw him down to earth (2,057).

If one should raise (his) crown up to the heavens (2,058),
(and make) the Seven Climes (2,059) pay tribute (too),

One night you suddenly shall see him dead, humbled, and
bearing (naught but) pain away (2,060).

The earth’s not free from rude oppressive acts (2,061) ; not
free from serpents are its treasuries.

Where is a date that is without a spine (2,062) 1 Or snake-
stone antidote without a snake (2,063) ?

Each good and ill on earth has as its law, that balm with
poison mix, with poison balm.

Who is there drinks a draught of honey-wine (2,064) that
for it has not suffered from the sting ?

The world’s (sweet) honey and precedent sting are in one
insect’s mouth and tail contained (2,065).

Within the veils of dark and light not far from Jesus’ sun
the cowries of the ass (2,066).

Who is it raises on the earth (his) throne that is not pressed
down by the earth at last ?


284


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Words in Conclusion.

0 Lord grant that which will aSord repose, and will not finally
bring penitence (2,067).

The door of kindness to Nizami open, place him within the
shelter of Your door.

(As) at the first AYu gave him good repute, ghe him a happy
issue at the last.

Since in reflection and the test (of gold) (2,068) the coin of
this fine Grecian treasure shines (2,069),

1 have attached to it a royal name (2,070), that the iascription
may exalt my hand (2,071).

Some stories, these, no hand has writ before, 'neath silken
petals virgin rose-bud's face.

A hemistich of gold and one of pearl, void of pretension and
of meaning full,

That they may know that of my valued thoughts I can reduce
to two words what I will.

And when adorning with adornment full the seven treasuries
of secret thought (2,072),

(My) aim is that by (such) adornment given the eyes may by
its fullness he regaled.

4Vhy look to this that freedom I have given to ears and eyes
to range a broad expanse ?

I have some narrow-eyed fair ones of art, who veil themselves
from those of narrow sight :

Each beauty like a closed-up treasury, — the treasure-door-key
fastened ’neath her locks (2,073).

He will find gold who opens back the door ; he who can find
the door will gather pearls.

I, writer with a reed of sugar-cane, strew from the palm-tree
of this writing, dates (2,074) :

A king of Grecian raiment, Chinese crown, to whom Greece
land-tax, China tribute pays (2,075) ;

The fortune of the Law, in root and branch (2,076), has gained
the beauty of accord through him.


TRANSLATION


285


The sky’s on foot to bow before the king (2,077) ; before bis
grandeur all creation's prone.

Adorned and ordered as the (starry) sky, his banquets are as
(Rustam’s) Seven Feasts (2,078).

From earth to fiery sphere (2,079) are dregs and scum : he
pure, since he is eminence itself.

In that beneficence of musky scent which turns the dusky
earth to lustrous pearls (2,080),

The Egyptian gold he gives to him who asks outnumbers
(all the grains of) ileccan sands.

His sabre treats the hardness of the rock as fierce impetuous
fire (treats) poplar chips.

His arrow with (its) hair-dividing point has from the (musk-
deer’s) navel shot the gland.

His coat of mail has lances snatched from dawn (2,081) ; his
lance from mail-clad moon bears ofi the ring (2,082).

The world entire is through his armour armed (2,083) ; the
seven skies are by his lasso noosed.

0 you, in whom Nizami places hope, who have the ordering
of the turns of fate (2,084),

The earth regards you from (your) power as sky ; the sky
its threshold as your threshold high.

You, as the sky in water, far and near, keen, steady as the sun
in mirror seen (2,085) ;

You, steadfast in your charge of all the world, (your) steadfast
namesake prostrate at your (2,086) hands ;

O’er all men like the sky conspicuous, excelling all men as the
angels do ; —

’Tis fitting I address this book to you, for through you one
may reach to high renown.

Since rubies have been set into its crown (2,087), to you
through fear of pillage ’tis addressed.

If hearing it (you find) it please your heart, ’twill be exalted
(even) as your throne.

I’ve given you from the garden of my brain fruit rich and sweet
hke honey (mixed) witli milk.


2S6


THE HAFT PAIKAE


The seeds of it afford the taste of figs ; the almond-kernels
are contained inside.

It's outside will the superficial please ; within it is the kernel
for the deep.

(The work) presents a locked up case of pearls, the key to
which is (wrapped) in metaphor (2.088).

The pearl glides (freely) on a string to which the loosening
of knots has served as key (2,089).

All that is in its verse of good or bad, — all is allusion, hints, and
subtle thought ;

Each single separate storey has become a house of treasures
through (my) magic art (2,090).

That one whose body was in stature short, — I added to its
stature by my verse.

(And) that whose length exceeded limits due, — by my artistic
skill I shortened it.

I set forth this choice work in happy style, — how sweet the
marrow in so choice a bone !

With every art I have adorned (the work), that to its beauty
you may give a glance.

The reed, my pen, has from the field of art conveyed to Mercury
fresh ears of corn (2,091).

Virgo has taken to herself these ears (2,092), though “ Story-
teller story-teller hates ” (2,093).

Since from the fort of my contented state (2,094) I’ve ofiered to
the king a store of pearls, —

Regarding pay (for these) in current gold, the Brazen Fort
(2,095) my debtor (still) remains.

(Such) debt is not from want of will to give ; a fort from want
of silver may be brass (2,096).

The sword has scattered from that Rocky Mount rubies and
diamonds o’er a hundred leagues (2,097) ;

The rubies, as is fit, for hands of friends, the diam.onds for
the feet of enemies.

A fort ! nay, 'tis the Ka‘ba of Islam ; the shrine of spiritual
travellers (2,098).


TRANSLATION


287


It compasses the earth from *' Qaf ’’ to “ Qaf ” (2,099) ; nay, in
its vision penetrates beyond (2,100).

It is the gold nails of the steed, the world ; its name of Brazen
Fort (but) from its strength.

Sacred, secure through it is Mercy’s Mount ; and strengthened
by its crown Abu Qubais (2,101).

May the line of this circle last for aye through that high sun
which holds (its) central point (2,102) ! —

When they besiege a fortress, the besieged will tie a missive to
a pigeon (soon).

In order that the bird on joyous wing may bear it to the person
who can help.

(So) I, confined in my own town and land, and barred around
from all ways of escape.

Have tied a missive to a pigeon too, which if it to the king
convey I’m saved. —

You, at whose gate the sky’s an ear-ringed slave (2,103), ofience-
condoner of Cathayan dress (2,104),

Since your exalted state has favoured me, behold the sorcery
that I’ve displayed.

Five himdred ninety-three of years conjoined, this missive I,
as one of fame, composed (2,105) ;

The day, the fourteenth of the Month of Fast, when four hours
of the day had passed in full.

As long as on this lofty throne you sit, through this my com-
position be you blest (2,106) !

Drink from these verses of the Stream of Life : live ever through
the Stream of Life like Khizr (2,107) !

0 you, whose rule I pray may last for aye, (your) rule with life,
glad , joyous too that life (2,108) —

If it offend not, in humility, a nicety, with leave, I would
submit :

Though gorgeous are the banquets which you hold, this is a
banquet which for ever lasts.

All things which gems and treasure have been called give
naught but pain, and this alone brings ease.


288


THE HAFT PAIKAR


Those things though they should last five hundred years —
May you live long ! — will not escape decay.

But this rare store, which really makes (your) Court, to all
eternity 'will be with 3'ou. —

And now these words by wisdom entertained, with prayer
(lor your well-being) I will end ;

May } ou be prosperous where'er you be ! attendant at your
stirrup be the sky !

By the (true) Faith be increase to your State, and by felicity
affairs be sealed !

To this prayer every moment an “ Amen I ” from angels to
the highest heavens attain-.


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES

(VOLS. Ill and IV)


THE MASNAVi

By JALALU ’D-DIN RUMI.

Book II ;

Translated for the first time into English Prose by Professor C. E. WILSON.
TWO VOLUMES.

Vol. I.— TRANSLATION FROM THE PERSIAN.

Vol. IL— COMMENTARY.

8vo. 1910. Net 30s.

Wilson’s translation of the Second Book of the Ma;tia\I .in inniortant
addition to our knowledge of the greatest of all Sufi poets. The notes,
though very full, are no more ei.rborate than the veiled sentences of the
original require in order to m.ike them intelligible to one who is not \ersed
in the conventionalities of Persian and especially of Sfifl diction. It is to
be hoped that Wilson will tr.iiislate the last tour hooks of the poem in the
same thorough way . — .liuericait Joi/in il of 'I'heoloijii.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR:

The Wall of Alexander against Gog and Magog,

and the Expedition sent out to find it liy the Khalif
Witthiq in A.n. 842. Pieprint from the Hirth Anniver.sary
Volume, 1923. l.v.


THE GREAT LOVE STORY OF THE EAST.


Laili and Majnun, a Poem, from the Persian of Nizami,
by J. Atkinson. Now edition hy Ii. C. P>YNn. Svo.
pp. xiii + 122. Cloth. 1891. Ti.s-.


The Balochi Language. A Crrammar and Mannal hy
jMa.iok G. W. Gilbertson. 8vo. jip. 312. 1923. 16?.


PROBSTHAIN’S LIST OF ORIENTAL PUBLICATIONS


THE

Philosophy of Human Nature

(HSING LI)

KY

CHU HSI.


TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE, WITH NOTES

BY

J. PERCY BRUCE, M.A.

Crown Svo, pp. xvi, 444. 1922. 36/


and 'fun/sm I'lf/us.—TW two volumes, translation and iniro-
(luclion, cannot but form one of the most valual^le coiuriluuion^ to Sinology
of recent years.

'finit's l.ilerary Supplement. — Mr. Urucc’s lianslation is the first serious
and e\tensi\c attempt to introduce Sung riiilosophy to Europe. Ilis
translation is careful and exact, and he has earned the gratitude of all who
study the history of Chinese thought.

Chinese RttorJer . — For tliose who keenly desire to know bctlei llie
Chinese mind, and to gauge the value <»f China’s spiritual inheiitance, it will
be of deep interest and great usefulness.

Dr. Lionel Giles . — The UkiUs selected for translation constitute an
independent treatise in theniseKes. and may be said to represent the finest
flower of Chinese philosophy. All tlie difficulties ha\e been triumphal. tly
surmounted by Mr. Bruce, who must now be recogm/.ed as taking a \ery
high place indeed among living Sinologues.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS

41 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON. W.C.


THE I-LI

OR

BOOK OF ETIQUETTE AND
CEREMONIAL

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE, WITH
INTRODUCTION, NOTES, ILLUSTRATIONS, AND PLANS

By JOHN STEELE, M.A., D.Lit.

2 [ 'oh. Crown 800 . 1917. 30 ,—

fou) ii"' cf the XoitJi Chma HrunJi R.A.S. — Pmlislhain
SciR-'- i> a w ell-conccivcd and tastclully produced xcric-s ot book'*. ilic
paper, pruning, and gcncial ari.ingcnu-nt i" excellent. Tlie puMislKi-
(k'>rr\e e\ery praise. The I'^Mie ot the TLi in 1 volume" is an event in
sinolog}. The student of Cliinese must ever be grateful to Dr. Steele toi
the pioduciion of this lal>ori«>us work, whicli vmII be of great lielj) to ihosr.
who follow him.


Hirth Anniversary Volume. Presentt'd to f-ru-dneh
Hirth, Profc's.'Or ot Chinese, Columbia University. New
York, in Honour of his Sevorty-fifth Birthdat', by His
Prieiids and Admirers. 102:5. Net £3 15s.

The woik Contains 2S original .ind scliolarlv C'»nlTibutions dealing with tin.
i’iof{.-".-.oi-\ partu'ulai sj)ecialuies, and will ever be a work of the th>r onlei
oI Cliine"e and Ceiitial Asian studies. The volume is pioMtled with i
poiuait, a large iii'toncal maj> of ( hina at llie tune of the llsia I>yna''t).
and a rejuixlurtion «)f the oldest-known s.nnple of Chinese I'lcioiial ait.
Coiili i! luiioiis liv b’hn ('. berguson. Agnes L. Meyer. !>. Schindler, Sir Aurcl
^Uin, /. \. 'rakacs. M, W.dksui, (’. Ik Wilson, etc.

Hityh}i 2 ;/o)i Miic^a'.nu. Juui , V72A. — Mention has l»een made that no fewci
than twenty-seven wilier" contribute to the pages of the massive Imok uiuki
lev lew, and it mav he s.ml tnilv that in.iny of the articles aie of sutticicnt
importance each to merit a levicvv to itself. But space docs not allow of
mole. e\i ept to advise everv' seiious sludent of Asiatic subjects to le.id
a s\ nip, ,•,111111 ol schoLirsiiip wortlivof the <listinginslicd sinologue to whom
It Is dedicated.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


11


A Brief History of Early
Chinese Philosophy


Dr. D. T. SUZUKI.

CROWN 8 VO. 1914. 8 / 6 .

/i\/'o^ih-rv Times . — The authorities on tlie philoMiphy (^r relit^inn of the
( hmesc aio v) tc\N that one »)frers a welcome at once to a ''du'laily
Japanese who has nia<le a leal study ot the suhjccl. 'I'hc tiile is too
modest, and the woik i'* all cleat and ciunpetent.


In Preparation.

The World - Conception of the Chinese. Their
Astronomical, (.'osmological, anci J'ln-sico- l’llilo^ophical
Speculations. Tv Prof. .Ai.FRi;ii F(jkki:.


In Preparation.

Kanshin’s (Chien - chen’s) Voyage to the East,

A. I). 742-754. ]?y Aomi-xo Maiuto (7i;xkai

'Al>. 779;. Tran.slated by I’rof. J. Tak.VKL st'.


PROBSTHAIN & CO.. ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


111


PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES.


Vol. I, The Indian Craftsman, by A. K. Coomarasvvamy. Out of print
Vol II, Buddhism as a Religion : its Historical Deveiopment

.Hill it-^ I'ia.-'i N I - 1 ) v\ CoM)iiiON,l>\ H Harkm.iiiii, Lu'. Tliffil. Svu.pp 1')-'.

CosTEN’T-. Prf-f.H e- - 1, Tho Rmldha and Ins E)<H'trine — II, Sketch of the Historv of
IhukhiiMti ill. Soiitiurn Rudilliwii (Ceylnti, lUirin.i, Sum) I\', Laiiuifm \', lui^tcrti
liiifldhi^iii (Ciiiii.T, Korea, Japan) Conrlu^^ion — Bii>Iioi<raphy — Index The only complete
Work on Ha'ldhi-'iii

Vols. Ill and IV, The Masnavi, by Jalalu ’d-Diii Riimi. Book II,

Irui'lated lor tile rtr''l time into l-'nttli''h Pro>e by Professor C E Wilson 2 \’ok
\’ol I, Tr.t’i'lation trom the Persian . \'<.l II, Commentary Svo, I'Jlii. netdds

“ W’li-'OiiC nil' htern* t worth* he reber'-et/.iiuK in \ertm nut meii I'rl luternmien
lis;t aber .unh Keinen Wnnsch uiibetriedi tt Der I shin, \’ol. II, pp 2**2

Vol. Vj Essays : Indian and Islamic, by S. Khuda Bukhsh, M A ,

Oxon. S\o, pp. JT,, 1*111 net Ss »kl

“ . The AuChoi lu< « .\rri< (1 on hi> '.tudies with scnipulons fidelity to scieme imd tnilli

He ii i tiithlul lu^itorian, and a historian of Islam unpiralleled m this country, for ha\iuti
.nlopttd the true (ritu.d m* tho<l Mm h has U'en bnnii^ht to li^ht to add to the sum tot.i!
ot historn il -"xpen me , . ” — MoJtrn Rt't'tU’, Calcii/hi

Vol. VI. Bactria, the History of a Forgotten Empire, by H G.

Raw liii'-oii. .^l . I I. S Svo, pp .win. Ids, with 2 in ips tin*! 5 pl.ites, ]'I12 net Ids tkl

Voi. VII, A Brief History of Early Chinese Philosophy, by D. 1 .

Sii/itki. I'ol \o I ’iii\( r-'iU S\o, [)p. 2««k P*14 lift Ss tid

Vols. VIII and IX, The I-Li, or Tkiok of Etuiiicttc and Ceremonial

Translated from th* Chinese, with Intn>diif tion. Notts, Illustrations, and Plans, bv
John Steele, M A . 1) Lit 2 v<*ls (.rovMi s\o, l'tJ7. net dn

Joiirn.d ot thi North China Uraiic h K .A S Ih'obst ham's Orh'Htal Series is a well-rom eued

and t i-*tetullv produ* < <1 s« ries of l>ookb The t ovt r, p.ii>er. pnntiint, and fteiieral arranuemeiit
!•« I \< < III lit The piibh-.h< r« <le'a-r\e e\ery pr.iis, 'fhe is..ue of the I-Li in two \olnmes is
an *\'nt ot Sini.lo,i\ Ihe student ot Lhinest mii-'t ecer be },;rateful to Dr. Steele lor the
prodm tioii ol this 1 ibori"’i-, \v..rk, whb h \mII b- ot it help to tho^e who follow him

Vol. X, Chu Hsi : PluloMiphy i>f Human Xaturo (IBing Li) translatrd

troin tlie Lliinest* with full Commentarv, bv J P. Bruee MA D Lit. Svo. pp x\i,
111 l‘*22 net . lib

Cur H''! (ad. IH'i 12* Nil is the most eminent amoiifjst the later Chinese Philosophers,
and til' iireat < niie .irnl evpoMlor ot th* ethu.d wntmi:>. «>f Lonfuciu'. A Bio;?raphv and
C oinmeiitarv '>n the teafhms(s .ind sp* f illations 'if thi'^ most rem.irkable iuul authontatne
coininenfator and tlnnku' h.l>^ b«(..iu«* luiperalu** Chu H-i’s N'ote^ on tin- dassus ar*'
M < epted a- nrtliodox, and the\ were, till re* eiit fhan:;e, printed with the Text .u'd t oinmitt* d
Im ni' lii'irv b\ all t luu* se stiuhnits

I rom the torej^oiui' X*»tp th** c.diie <}f the w«irk will readilv be a* knowlrdtjed. Mr. Bnue,
him-'' If a ureat '•■hnlar, h.i'- a< < oinplishe<l Ins t.isk in a niuque in. inner, and offiTs to the
Lhini-s'-, to Pndosophers. and Fht olo.ji,uis, thi* fruit t»l his \.ist l.tbours.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


Vol. XI, Introduction to Chu Hsi and the Sung School of
Philosophy, by J. P. Bruce, M.A , D.Lit. 8vo, pp xii, 1923


Armstrong (R C., M.A., PhD). Light from the East. Studies in
J.ip.int-sf* CnfUurl lllism N\(>, pp ail. with I’titi'S l'il4 ms 111-

Ball (J- Dyer). Rhytluns and Rhymes in ('hincse Chines. A Lecture

on Chinese Pdc-try and Potts. Svo. pp C”). 1'H17. lid net


lOiJiD


Five Thnu.sand Years of John Chinam.nn Svo, pp 33, v


Banerjee (J ). Hellenism in .\neient India Svo, pp 344 1920.


Bergen (Rev. P D ) The Sages of Shantung •

Men« lus (Reprint) pp 24. I'd i


and

lit t -


Brunnert and Hagelstrom. Present-dav (.Vganization nf

China. Roy S\ o pp Ixxx, ">72 l!'d2. net Cd

Burgess (Ja.s ) The Ancient Monument''. Tcjnples and Scnl)diircs,
with Dcscniitn'c Notes, and Rtiercin es. \ oI II. M'-duieN al ^{onllnlents, with 17n hue
plates of famous Hindu motniiiKtit'-. I'Ul net /II

The work illustrates Indian Art, Hf'torv, and .Mytholo-jv, t)e;iinning with Itixlh (>a>a and
.'\mara\aTi. It hirms a rotord ot the \arroU'' sivl«*s ot Indian .-Xn Ime* ture


Burma Research Society Journal. VoK. I XI 1, Svo and 4to.

Rangoon rarh p irt ^old at 7^ nd.

Tiie Jouriuil to\tTs a sside fn-hl on a thorough -< liol irK .Xf ha oloi^y. Idiilolo^N-.

rpnrraphy, Art, History, Diuldhism. Kolklore. .Xstroit.,rnv. Liti-raturf in flurnii>'t' ami }^d^,
uith Transl.ttiotis, numerous hat' Pl.itts arnl III-Ktr.uion-.

Btishell fS W ). Iii'Criptton^ i\\ the [uclien and Allied Scripts

With plate S\o, pp .’4, .N nd

Chinese Architcctnro Ri'print, with plates 8vi) 19IKS 'M

Chalfant (Rev. F. H ). Ancient Cliine..c Coinat^e Illustrated

(Reprint ) i>p 21. I'dd n< I .4

Charpentier (J )- T'ttaradhvavana Sutra . hcinj? the First Mulasulra

of the .S\etambara Jams Prakrit J‘e\t in San-skrit « hara« ter- lahtefl. \Mth Intrfj-
fliic tioii, ( riTK 11X011“- uid a C'oinm'Tit.ir\ ''!\o, pp I'L'J net 27-.

Collins (\V. P) Mineral Enterprise in China Svo, pp 410 With

map and -Kt t< lies. Setu'id I'llilntn eidarged l'>22 net .L'-

Edkins (J )• opium, Hi''t<>ricril Xote, or the Pojipy in China, in

Chinese and Englisli S\o. pi> mi. i»!l. hi boards iS'lS. nt t

Fletcher (W J F). Oems of Chinese Verse Translated into
I'higlish \er-c kf>y .S\ o. pp 2l2 I'll'* 12-


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


Fletcher • .!• B ) More Cems of Chinese Poetry. Chinese Text
With I'.iiLilHh Tr.tii^Lilhm Aii-1 Xott*'; R«>\ S\t», j>p. JnS. 12^

Foster (Ml'’ A.). I'lnghsh-Chinese Pocket Dictionary, in the Mandaiin

Diih-fi, Ihiril r.flitum, Ibmo, pp \in, l'<4. half calf I'M!. net li)s.

Giles (H .\ ). Gems of Chinese T.iteratiire Second Edition, revised
,ind iTil.iryf d. 4to, pp. xn', j?.s7. llld.C £1 Ids

Goodrich \Ch ) Pocket Pictionary, Chmese-EnRlish and Pekingese
Uab,ir\ Ininn ])j) \ ii, J !7, 7n, lialf • all. I'oiirth ftlitioii lliet. net 12s

Hirth (Pr) Scraps from a Collector’s Xote-book : being Xotes on

'Giup ( liuu'c I’amltT' «>i the Pr« lit l)\nasty, Appcinli'-t> on some Old M. inters and
.-\rt Hi'-turian? Plates, .S\.i. pp ISb net iSs

N’titive Source's for the History of Chinese Pictorial Art. English

\’er?ion In A L .Me\er, with Indev ot Arti'-ts, Author>, ami Dut.’k« <Svo. pp 2S. l!d7

net inl

Hosie (Sir .\lexander) < )n the Trail of the Opium Popjiy ; a Xairative

of 'liMM 1 III th>- Chn 1 (.)pimn-produ< inji Provincts ot China 2 \ol^ , S\ o. with Plates
and .M ip^ P'U net 2'>'

The Work r'i<iid' tlie olMTxations .,t an Oriental traveller of wide e\pen(‘nre upon tin.
pin pMjple. pr'K.lii« l", imUi'-lries, and trades


Hsu Shih-Chang (President of China) China after the War 8vo,

1 p p' h I'fJJ Mf’t P ts hd

Jouveau Dubreuil {(t }. Pallava Antiquities Vol I, 8vo, pp 78
\\ ah 12 Pi.a< ' i' 'Id net 7s ad

Kashmir Sanskrit Series. Text and Studios, X'os. 1-24. net /8

Kern (H.) Manual of Indian Biuldhism. Large 8vo, pp. 149.

lift pi'? i>tl

Kliene (Ch ] Anglo-Chinoe Calendar for 250 years (1751-2000). 4to,

halt ( .lit. pfiM. net f2 lH'

Laffitte AI. Piorn') (General View of Chmo'^e Civilization and of the
1\< l.itio’i- lit the \\'e'l with t Inna .S\i». pp \n, 127 1 ns 7 7-' ild

Canning (C. ) Old I'orce's in N'evv Cliina . an Effort to (‘xliibit the

l 'iiiil.un- iit.il K- l.ition-sliip iM t liiii.i ami the \Vr',t in tlieir true LiL-ht s\o, pp. x, 4e‘)

’Mill a 111 iji "howMi-: til' ii.iliir d ri'-i'iin i-x ot (. hill i PdJ. u< t 12 '' ed

Macdoneil (A A ) Vcdic Grammar. Largo 8vo, pp. 456. 1910

net i’lO-

■ ^<‘dlc Mythology Large Svo, pp 100 1897. net 16s


PROBSTHAlN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


VI


Macgowan H ) Imperial Histc^ry of China : Hisluiy the Empiirc
conipiiL'd bv tilt Llniitst IhsloriaJis. Sfcuiul Ltlitioii S\o. pp \!, fi)l halt i.ilt.
lytjt,). ■ net £_> 1(1=

Mateer (Rev. C. AV). A Coiir'=;e of ^Mandarin Les^()n^,, on

IdiMiii. Ke\ibed edition. 4t«j, pp U, #S*;, halt calf. £'J li(=

A iihort course ol Primary LesbOiib in IMandann (intended a-^ an

Introdiiclion to the ab()\e \t«>rk). -ito, pp. 1\, Tb. hall i.dt. ll'n? bd.

Mayers (I'r. \Vm.). Treaties between the Empire oi China and tlie
Foreign Powers New edition, cloth. !!•(_»». lif t

Jhe Chinese Govenmient : a Manual of Chinese Titles,

categorjcally ai ranged and explained, with au Appendix. Third edition, ruv S\o,
re\i=ed by G. M. H. Playfair, half < alf. net

Morgan (Evan). A Guide to Wenh Styles and Ciiinese Itleals : b.'^'^ays,
Edicts, Pro( lamations, Mcm<)rials, Letters. Documents, In'<cnption«, ComnieD lal
Papers Chinese Text, \Mth Ihiglish Tran''laU(m .md Notis. Sso, pp 411. a
vocabulary of 40 pp . and Index, cloth. Idl'J. net 2>.

Owen (Prof G.). The Evolution of Chinese Writing 8 vo, pp. 32

.JS I’ll.

Perlmann (S. JI). nasbiium (the Clnnehe) : Chine'-e Lite, tManni.i>,
and Customs, Culture and Cretds, (‘.o\eninicnt Ssstem and Tr.uU', with au Aiipcinhx,
Thu Jews in China. In Hebrew. .^\o, tioth, lull. nut 4s.

The Jews in China, pp. 24. 19(’9. net 2s. Gd.

Playfair (G. yi. H ). The Cities and Town.s of Clniia : a Geographical
Dictionary. Second edition, large S\o, pp. S'*, T>S-. P-'li.i. net j_’s.

Poletti (P.). A Chinese and English Dietioiiary, arranged according
to the Ra<lii <ds vin<l Snbradi* ab Xt \\ .uid 1- iil.trgetl rdition. t fiitauuiiL: 1 - t (. him -t'
cliar.icter», uith the Pronum jation m the Pekin diaIo< t a<<.*'rding to Mr 'lii W.ulc ^
S\st- m and the ProiuiiK laiion m tin- guural L.uiguagt. t.t Lhina in Dr Wilhains’
Spelling Sso, cloth, pp. c\i, dUf, and a List of Raduals. llHd. net IS-'.

Railways of China, The. Svo, pp. 23, with map. 3s.

Reminiscences of a Chinese Official. Revelations of Olhcial life
under the Manchus. Roy. S\o. pp. loS. PJ2J. >^5 i>d.

Richard. Comprehensive ticography of the Ciiinese Empire 8 vo,
vMtli Map, cloth, lljnl. iiet 2E.

Ridge (W. Sheldon). Clima, 1911-12. Cioverninent Change^ and

National -Mosenieiits With Traii''l.ition of the Stale Dotuinenls relating llureto
s\o, pp. 05.

Saussure (E. de). Origincb do TAstnmomie Chinui>e. Roy. Svo,

I’p. 4‘jS. Illustrated. net -Jijs.


PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS


VII


Saussure (T. (U‘) rHonmietne ct le Sy^tcme Ct)bmol()gi(jut* des

Lbuiois. pp is. With lllu'-tratioui!. net 2^ »kl.

Lc Sy^ttine Astronomique deb Chuioib 8vo. Illubtrated, 1922.

net 12i, Od.

Silacara. Di^eourses ol Gotamo the l>iiddlia, translated from the

Pall of the Majihiina Xikayo 2 \ols, roy IS\<>, cloth. ll*12-ld net las

Smith ( A H ) Proverbs and Common Savings from the Chinese,
with e)|jscr\ atioiis on (.hiiiebe Thuigb in General. New and KcMsed Edition, iSvo, pp. vu,
371, XK, hall call. I'«i2. lu t 2i)b

Soothill {^V E ). The Student's Four Thousand Chinese Characters
and General Pocket Dictionary. Third Edition, t>\o. pp do, 42'S, ilotli.

net 12-

Sowerby 'A Dc G ' The Naturalist in Manchuria. With photo-
graph- and sketches. Vol I, Trace! and Exploration. 4tu, pp, xu, :i47. l!»22


Sumangala iS ). A Graduated Pah Course, with a Pali-English

\’ocabidary. .sco, cloth, I'dJ net l"»s

Visser (Hr M \V ) The Dragon iu China and Japan. Roy Sen,
PP .Ml, UIJ, I'Jl.t. 14s.

Vitale \Baron G.) Chinese Folklore: Pekinjj;cse Rhymes, First
‘ illected and etliled uilh Notes and English rran-latioii Sen, pp. xvii, 22<i JVking
IM.'d. net 2ob,

Chinese Merry Talcs, collected and edited in Chinese : a First

Rt adiiig ImhjK lor btiuleiits of Collotpiial Chiiicbc'. Second Edition, S\ci, J'i’ mh, llS
Peking, net Ids.


Werner (E. T. C.). Chinese Ditties 4t<>, pp. 58. 1922. 5b

Wieger (Dr I. ). (Tune-c Cliaraclers ; their ( )rigin, Etymology,
ll!-tory. Cla— ih< ation. Sigiuhcatiou. A thorough Study from Chinese Documents
s\<i. 2 \ul- I'd", net J'l-.

— - Moial 'lenel'' and Ciistoni-- ii China: Texts in Chinese, with
l.inili-h '1 r.ul^lat!on, lUii-tratcd. s\«>, pp. Ml! net .jH-.

Williams (C AS) A ’Manual of Chinese Metaphor. Chinese Ti'xt.
with Liigh-h Iran-latiori. .S\ pp .ijo. P.rjil. 1''^


Wylie (A.). Notes on Chinese Literature. (Reprint.) Roy f^'O,
PP 111 .;m 7. I'.o.i. .i'll.


PROBSTHAIN &


N c


**A hook thcU is shut is hut a hlocl^*.^^

^ GOVT. OF INDIA
Ay .Depattment of Archaeolof^

NEW DELHI.

U ^


Please help us to keep tho-kook
clean «id moving. ^


.8.B^I4a.ll*0£LAk


9
