BEASTS AND MEN
By Carl Hagenbeck — London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910 (English edition)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1910 English edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier cu31924029937020). The 1910 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the index entry on the reputed Congo dinosaur.

========================================================================

oh ned 
i " pint i " 
he aile valtatiee! 
iy bs ordeal whe rss? je 
bs seal Eel eres 


Racers et 
dst aan 


es pea 
ree 


migrate 

cin fant hr ge 
Feat peated: ate) 
t mt aaa Henna 


<rherhortehe 
ekae ae dede 
ight es 
Be ag take jot biol 
Tet een Tia 
Ppt 
wt 


iter ein er 
Ser ene s 
opt 


See aire ree 
eek ee oe ee 
Rede e ur Tene 

* 


Bigeye ara 
tds Mea 


pee 
est 


Mer is 


raat eit a teab 
Sacral heppeg dren tiag ys 


Asia 
8 ied ath pattie 


ries 
spies 


bh Jans, 


CV 

Ps a 
aA 
;9/O0 


CORNELL 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


BILE EE Agden gree dent 
ee 


“iA 


DATE DUE 


wits 


b> 8 


GAYLORD 


Cornell University 


Library 


The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029937020 


SIXTH IMPRESSION—TWENTY-FOURTH 
THOUSAND. 


Large Crown 8v0. Price 6/= net. 


With 23 Plates (one of which is coloured), and numerous 
Illustrations in the text by E. CALDWELL. 


JOCK OF THE BUSHVELD. 


BY 
Str PERCY FITZPATRICK. 


MORNING POST.—‘ A series of tales which resemble the 
‘ Arabian Nights’ in the circumstances of their origin, and the 
‘ Just So’ stories in their subject and fascination.” 


FIELD.—" The enjoyment that this book will give to old and 
young is pleasant to think about. . . . We know of no more 
splendid present for a lad than this unique book, and of no 
work on South African life that is more likely to delight readers 
of all ages. There are spirited descriptions of perilous hunting 
for lions, leopards, rhinoceroses, crocodiles, buffaloes, and all 
manner of antelope and deer, and Jock is always there sharing 
the danger, and game to the very end.” 


SPECTATOR.—“‘‘ Jock of the Bushveld’ seems to the pre- 
sent writer to be the most considerable contribution that has 
yet been made to the dawning literature of South Africa. The 
very scent and atmosphere of the wilds is in its pages, and the 
author must take high rank among those who have sought to 
interpret elemental Nature. We have read few better books 
for children of all ages—which is to say, few books more worthy 
of a grown man's attention.” 


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CoO,, 
39 PATERNOSTER Row, LONDON, 
New York, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA. 


WORKS BY 
JOHN GUILLE MILLAIS, F.Z.S. 


THE MAMMALS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRE. 
LAND. Inthreevolumes. Quarto (13 in. by 12 in.), 
cloth, gilt top, price £18 18s. net. 

*,* Only 1,025 copies printed for England and America. 


THE WILDFOWLER IN SCOTLAND. With a 
Frontispiece in Photogravure after a Drawing by Sir 
J. E. Mivvais, Bart., P.R.A. 8 Photogravure Plates, 
2 Coloured Plates, and 50 Illustrations from the 
Author’s Drawings and from Photographs. Royal 4to, 
gilt top, 30s. net. 


THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BRITISH 
SURFACE-FEEDING DUCKS. With 6 Photo- 
gravures and 66 Plates (4 in Colours), from Drawings 
by the Author, ARCHIBALD THORBURN, and from 
Photographs. Royal 4to, cloth, gilt top, £6 6s, net. 


NEWFOUNDLAND AND ITS UNTRODDEN WAYS. 
With 2 Maps, 6 Coloured Plates, 6 Photogravure 
Plates, and 115 other Illustrations by the Author and 
from Photographs. Royal 8vo, 21s. net. 


BEASTS AND MEN 


BEASTS AND MEN 


BEING CARL HAGENBECK’S EXPERIENCES 
FOR HALF A CENTURY AMONG 
WILD ANIMALS 


AN ABRIDGED TRANSLATION 


BY 


HUGH S. R. ELLIOT 


AND 


A. G. THACKER, A.R.C.S. (Lonp.) 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY 


P. CHALMERS MITCHELL, M.A., DSc. LL.D., F.R.S. 


SECRETARY OF THE ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON 


WITH PHOTOGRAVURE PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR 
AND NINETY-NINE OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS 


SECOND IMPRESSION 


LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO, 
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 
NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA 
Igi0 
Fe 


K2s3sav\ 


INTRODUCTION. 


Soon after I became Secretary of the Zoological Society of 
London, there called on me a tall, lean man, with a bony 
weather-beaten face, shaven lips and a short, grizzled beard 
of the kind known as a “chin-fringe”. His shrewd and 
kindly face, slow speech with nasal intonations and general 
air of confident but watchful friendliness made the impression 
of an individuality very unlike the composite photograph I 
have in my mind of the Germans I know. But for the 
presence of a German accent and the absence of the tobacco 
habit, Carl Hagenbeck might pass for a New England ship 
captain. He is in the first place a business man with a 
strong spirit of adventure that must have led him into many 
losses, and as he has none the less built up a great and 
successful business, it must be supposed that he also knows 
how to make profits. But those who deal with him soon 
learn that they may rely implicitly on his directness and 
candour in arranging a purchase or sale, and on his scrupulous 
carefulness in carrying out his share of the bargain. On one 
occasion, for instance, I had to arrange with him for the 
purchase of a pair of hippopotamus which neither of us had 
seen. The price was to depend partly on the age of the 
animals, but as that could not be proved, we agreed on a 
standard of size. When the animals arrived, although in 
every other respect equally suitable, they were a little 
smaller than Hagenbeck had been led to expect by his 


Vv 


vi INTRODUCTION 


agents, but without demur he at once agreed to the corre- 
sponding reduction in price. Mr. Hagenbeck, however, 
takes much more than a business interest in his business, and 
I am glad to have the opportunity of acknowledging with all 
gratitude his readiness to place the results of his long ex- 
perience at the service of the Zoological Society of London. 
Again and again he has given me information of great value 
on questions relating to the transport and housing of animals 
and on their feeding and treatment. It is a pleasure to me 
to introduce to English readers a book in which is displayed 
so many of the strange experiences and so much of the 
remarkable personality of this most interesting man. 

Every one has seen something of the business of a dealer 
in animals in its primitive form. Near the London Docks, 
and on the quays of great shipping ports like Havre and 
Marseilles, there are to be found untidy and generally evil 
smelling little shops crowded with parrots and monkeys, and 
similar casual acquisitions from sailors. The proprietors tend 
to become importers in a small way. They find out what 
creatures they can sell most readily, and give orders to sailors 
or petty officers, sometimes on speculation and sometimes at 
the request of customers. With a few notable exceptions, 
however, such small dealers never learn their trade. The 
birds and mammals they obtain have in many cases been 
improperly fed and very badly packed, with the result that 
the mortality is great and the stamina of the survivors is at a 
low ebb. There can be no doubt but that in many cases the 
reputation for delicacy acquired by many exotic birds and 
mammals is due merely to the senseless fashion in which they 
are brought home. They are captured in some tropical 
forest and rushed down to the coast with a minimum supply 
of what is supposed to be their natural food. The transition 


INTRODUCTION vii 


to strange food is made under the worst conditions, on board 
ship or in the dealer’s shop, or in the unfamiliar surroundings 
of anew home. A golden rule in the purchase of animals 
with which one is not fully acquainted, is to refuse them 
unless they feed readily on a kind of food which the pur- 
chaser can supply in future. Such a condition may be ful- 
filled most easily when the animals, immediately after they 
are caught, are accustomed gradually to a new diet and to 
take their food from human beings. In the vast majority of 
cases it is change of food and not change of climate that is 
the difficulty in what is called acclimatisation. Walruses 
are brought to a European city with an appetite for nothing 
but whales’ blubber, or monkeys who refuse everything ex- 
cept fresh sugar-cane, and the usual tragedies result. 

Carl Hagenbeck’s business is conducted on very differ- 
ent lines, and the animals he imports and distributes have 
been treated so as to have the best chance of surviving. 
He has been a notable pioneer in the proper handling of 
wild animals. He is an able man, and sees that the 
crude methods do not pay; he is a naturalist with a 
genuine affection and sympathy for animals, and in all his 
handling of them he sees to it that their health and general 
condition is the first care. In the many expeditions he has 
organised to Africa and Asia for the capture of wild animals, 
the highest qualities of a naturalist have been necessary. It 
is the fashion to claim that the big game sportsman and col- 
lector of trophies must be a naturalist of a high order ; I have 
heard defenders of these forms of sport speak as if the poet 
Coleridge had written :— 

He killeth best who loveth best, 
All things both great and small. 


There was perhaps the beginning of a defence for such a 


viii INTRODUCTION 


point of view before rifles were so perfect and deadly as they 
are now and when the hunter had to wage his own life against 
that of his quarry, and could have small hope of success without 
the most intimate knowledge of the habits of wild animals. 
The modern hunters who must be genuine naturalists are 
those who attempt to photograph big game in their native 
resorts and those who wish to catch them alive and uninjured. 

English readers interested in Zoological Gardens will turn 
with avidity to the account Carl Hagenbeck gives of the 
Zoological Park at Stellingen. The fundamental conception 
which for long dominated the minds of those who had to do 
with the exhibition of living animals was a compromise be- 
tween the idea of a travelling menagerie and the idea of a 
museum. The: specimens were ranged in narrow and small 
cages so that they might be easily seen and compared. Iron 
bars and wire-work were everywhere in evidence, and so far 
as possible all draught and fresh air were excluded, and 
elaborate heating-systems were provided. In Hagenbeck’s 
Park, which is the result of his long experience, these old ideas 
are discarded. The animals are given shelters to which they 
can retreat,-and in these some amount of artificial heat is 
supplied in severe weather, but in every case room for exer- 
cise, abundant fresh air, and free exposure to rain and sun are 
provided for. Ido not think that there is any doubt as to 
these being the right lines, and all the more progressive 
Zoological Gardens have been trying to act on them. No 
doubt the ideal condition is the right temperature as well as 
relative freedom and exposure to fresh air, but if the choice 
has to be made, and it must be made in the cities of Europe 
and North America, then fresh air is enormously more im- 
portant than temperature, and animals that we are accustomed 
to think of as tropical thrive well and freely disport them- 


INTRODUCTION ix 


selves in snow and rain. I am not so certain that I agree 
with some of the other characteristic features of the Park at 
Stellingen, but they are at the least extremely interesting. 
The grouping of incongruous animals in “happy families” is 
perhaps more the work of the showman than of the naturalist. 
It is always subject to very serious risks, and success can 
be obtained only in the case of young animals specially 
trained to disregard their natural instincts. It is a curious 
and interesting spectacle, but not one that I should like to see 
repeated in ordinary menageries and Zoological Gardens. 
On the other hand, the devices by which bars and railings 
are replaced by ditches and undercut ledges of rockwork are 
extremely attractive, and to my mind pleasing, although I do 
not much care for the more exuberant forms of such artificial 
scenery with painted backgrounds. Where the necessary 
space can be obtained, it is delightful to see animals across 
ditches instead of through bars. But there is another side to 
the question. If visitors are to be protected, the arrange- 
ments must be such that the animals are seen from a con- 
siderably greater distance, and it is doubtful, especially in the 
case of the larger Carnivora, if the arrangement is practicable 
except with trained animals. Diversifying the ground with 
artificial rockwork on which the animals may climb certainly 
adds very much to the beauty of the display, and the ad- 
ditional exercise given to the animals must be a great advan- 
tage. But here again there is another side to the question. 
Rockwork, natural or artificial, is extremely difficult to keep 
in the state of sanitary cleanliness which is essential in a 
menagerie, and it provides a cover most attractive to rats and 
from which it is almost impossible to dislodge them. The 
abundant supplies of food always attract rats to Zoological 
Gardens, of which they are the most troublesome pest, and 


x INTRODUCTION 


the only way of keeping them down is to afford them the least 
opportunity of finding cover. The various difficulties and 
objections that I suggest, however, although they may pre- 
vent other gardens from following the example set by Carl 
Hagenbeck, do not detract from the extreme interest of his 
description of Stellingen. 

For many years Hagenbeck has been the greatest 
trainer of animals, and his own troupes or those which he 
has supplied have appeared in every part of the world. 
Lovers of animals will follow with a close attention his 
method ofselecting and training them. For my own part, 
‘and I know of many who share my views, I seldom lose an 
opportunity of seeing exhibitions of performing animals, and 
equally seldom do I enjoy the performance for long except 
perhaps in the case of sea-lions, who appear to me to enjoy 
what they are doing. In all other cases I gradually become 
convinced that abject terror of the trainer lies behind the 
tricks, a conviction that is not disturbed by the rewards of 
food that are given. This, however, is not Mr. Hagen- 
beck’s opinion, and his love of animals, ability and experience 
entitle him to the fullest consideration. He begins with the 
proposition, long ago set out by Darwin, that the first busi- 
ness of the trainer is to select his animals. Individuals have 
very different dispositions, and it is only one or two out of 
many that have the power of attention, ability and docility 
required by the trainer. Thereafter the method is little more 
than constant patience, firmness and kindness on the part of 
the trainer. I accept readily Mr. Hagenbeck’s statements 
as to his personal control over wild animals, and I have 
myself seen many instances of their friendly recognition of 
their old master. But with regard to public performances, 
when the animals have to go through their tricks at stated 


INTRODUCTION xi 


times, I continue to doubt ; in all those that I have seen the 
trainer displays some kind of whip, and the animals seem to 
have a very full appreciation that it is more than a symbol of 
authority. 

Although I can take no credit, and have no responsibility 
for the form in which this edition is presented to English 
readers, I have had some opportunity of comparing it with the 
German text, and believe it to be a very accurate rendering 
of the substance of a remarkable book. 


P. CHALMERS MITCHELL. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. , PAGE 
I. My Life in the Animal Trade ‘ ; ‘ : ; F I 

II. My Park at Stellingen . 4 : : ; ‘ F . 38 
III. How Wild Animals are Caught . ; F F : . 46 
IV. Carnivores in Captivity é ; ‘ é : ; . 98 
V. Training Wild Animals 4 : i ; ; : . 118 
VI. The Great Herbivores . : . . : : : . 147 
VII. Reptiles in Captivity . ; : : ; i : 77 
VIII. Acclimatisation and Breeding ‘ ‘ ; ; . 202 
TX. Animals in Sickness. ; : ; ‘ : ; . 220 
X. Life at Stellingen ; , ; : : : f . 230 
XI. The Ostrich-Farm at Stellingen . : i ‘ : - 255 


XII. Anthropoid Apes ‘ : ‘ ‘ P : : s 273 


xiii 


CHAPTER I. 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE. 


THE great zoological park at Stellingen, and the huge trade 
in living animals of which that park is the headquarters, had 
a very humble and almost accidental origin. My father was 
a fishmonger trading in St. Pauli, a suburb of Hamburg, and 
one day in March, 1848, it happened that some of the fisher- 
men, whom my father employed, and who were under con- 
tract to deliver over to him their entire haul, captured in 
their nets no fewer than six seals. My father was very fond 
of animals and greatly interested in natural history, and 
thus it occurred to him that the curiosity with which he him- 
self examined the animals might, perhaps, be shared by his 
fellow-citizens of Hamburg, and that the interest which the 
seals would probably arouse could be made profitable to 
their owner. He therefore exhibited the creatures in two 
huge wooden tubs at our house in Spielbudenplatz, St. 
Pauli, charging an entrance fee of one Hamburg shilling 
(= about a penny) per head. A considerable number of 
people came to inspect the beasts, and my father was so 
delighted at the success of his idea that he decided to follow 
up this new line of business and take the seals to Berlin. To 
those who know the twentieth-century Berlin the idea of 
taking a few common seals to be exhibited in that city will 
no doubt appear extremely ludicrous; but the Berliners of 
those days were very much less sophisticated than their 
modern representatives, and flocked with great interest to see 
my father’s show. Owing to the revolutionary movement 
which was at that time daily growing in force, my father did — 
I 


2 BEASTS AND MEN 


not remain for long in the Prussian capital, but sold his seals 
and returned home to Hamburg. Unfortunately the 
animals were not sold for hard cash, but were handed over 
on the strength of a promise of future payment—a promise 

which completely slipped the memory of the purchaser—but 
in spite of this there was, owing to the great success of the 
exhibitions both in Hamburg and in Berlin, a considerable 
profit on the whole transaction, and my father was far from 
dissatisfied with his new venture. 

From the time of this seal incident onwards my father 
commenced to carry on a trade in living animals, in addi- 
tion to his work asa purveyor of food-fish. Indeed, although 
he had never before thought of making any money out of 
it, he already possessed a small menagerie, including goats, 
a cow, a monkey, a talking parrot, fowls, geese, etc., to 
which ‘some more common seals, a polar bear, hyzenas, and 
other mammals and birds were presently added. The little 
menagerie was set up in Spielbudenplatz, and visitors 
were charged an entrance fee of four Hamburg’ shillings. 
My father did not again travel about exhibiting his seals, but 
sold them to the owners of itinerant circuses and menageries, 
by whom they used to be shown to a credulous and unscien- 
tific public as walruses, or even as mermaids! 

Thus from my earliest childhood I was accustomed to 
dealing with living animals. I was born on the roth of June, 
1844, and had two brothers and three sisters. My mother 
died in 1865, and, my father marrying a second time, I sub- 
sequently had two half-brothers, John Hagenbeck of Col-. 
ombo, Ceylon, and Gustav Hagenbeck, who still resides in 
Hamburg. My early education was somewhat meagre, for I 
only went to school when I could spare the time from my work 
with the fish and live beasts, and this did not amount to more’ 
than three months in the year. It was not that my father 
failed to appreciate the benefits of a good education; on the 
contrary, he deemed a great part of the customary instruction 
thoroughly necessary. But he was an eminently practical 


‘yjeq & dulavy s[eag 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 5 


man, and whilst he impressed upon us the urgency of learn- 
ing well the “Three R’s,” he used to tell us that we “were 
not expected to become parsons”. Later on, too, when our 
business began to extend to France and England, he saw 
that it would be desirable for me to acquire the languages of 
those countries. Thus, although my elementary education 
may have left something to be desired, from my twelfth 
year onwards I attended school with greater regularity, and 
in my later boyhood gained a considerable knowledge of lan- 
guages and other more advanced subjects. 

As the business gradually developed, it became necessary 
to undertake journeys for the purpose of buying and selling 
our living wares, and I soon discovered that the transport 
of wild beasts is apt to be rich in incident. I well remember 
my first expedition of the kind. One day when I was eleven 
years old we heard that there was a small collection of animals 
to be sold at Bremerhaven. At that time a journey to Bre- 
merhaven was quite an undertaking, for there was then no 
direct railway connection between that town and Hamburg, 
and it was therefore necessary either to go a long journey 
round by Hanover, or else to drive across country to Bre- 
men, a distance of about fifty miles. Notwithstanding this 
difficulty, however, my father, being anxious to acquire the 
animals, decided to go to Bremerhaven, and he took me with 
him. We found that the little menagerie consisted of a large 
racoon, two American opossums, and a varied assortment of 
monkeys and parrots. My father purchased the lot, and 
after they had been brought up to Bremen by steamer 
they were duly ensconced upon the roof of the diligence 
which was to convey us back to Hamburg. 

We drove all through the night, our route lying across the 
Liineburger Heath, a wild stretch of country in the north of 
Hanover, and daybreak found us in Harburg, a place not 
far from Hamburg. Naturally, our first thought was to 
inspect our property and see that all was safe. Great was 
our dismay when we found the racoon’s cage broken open 


6 BEASTS AND MEN 


and its erstwhile occupant completely vanished! During the 
night the racoon must have made his way out through the 
bars, and have jumped off the top of the coach. 

We dared not give the alarm, for, unless the fugitive had 
been speedily recaptured, we should have had the authorities 
down on us for letting loose wild beasts in the heart of 
Germany. So we all kept our own counsel, and nobody 
knew of the occurrence save my father, the driver of the 
diligence, and myself. Two years later, however, it was 
noised abroad that a racoon had been killed on Liineburger 
Heath, and there was great excitement in the newspapers 
and much speculation as to how that carnivore came to be 
living wild in Germany. We might have been able to 
suggest a not improbable solution of the mystery, but we 
judged it more discreet to hold our tongues. 

In our early days we had many similar mishaps, most of 
them taking place at home, however. On one occasion we 
were aroused in the middle of the night by a terrified night- 
watchman, who informed us that an enormous seal was 
perambulating the streets of Hamburg. We rushed out 
with nets, and just succeeded in securing the creature as it 
was about to return to its native element. On another 
occasion a hyzna escaped from its cage, and was only 
recaptured after a long, and decidedly dangerous, nocturnal 
hunt. 

Such episodes as these, however, only formed occasional 
diversions. My chief recollection of the first ten years of the 
business is that it was a ceaseless round of very hard, and 
not over-profitable, work. We had to buy our experience 
dearly, and almost every mistake that we made in the treat- 
ment of the beasts, or in the methods of transporting them, 
would cost us the lives of some of the creatures. Indeed, for 
part of the time, my father ran the business at a loss, and 
if his success as a fishmonger had not enabled him to pass 
through this black period, it is highly probable that he would 
have given up the animal trade altogether. This, however, 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 7 


together with his fondness of the animals for their own sake, 
induced him to persevere; and as by our repeated failures we 
gradually came to understand better the requirements of our 
pets, the death rate in the menagerie steadily diminished, and 
the profits on the business rose accordingly. 

It was not until nine years after the foundation of the 
business, in 1857 that is, that my father purchased his 
first large collection of animals. This consisted of five 
lions, a number of panthers and cheetahs, several: hyzenas 
and various antelopes, gazelles and monkeys, all of which 
the African explorer, Dr. Natterer, had brought back to 
Vienna from the Egyptian Sudan, a region which was at that 
time extraordinarily rich in animal life. In the following 
year my father one day asked me seriously, whether I would 
choose as my future calling to be a fishmonger or an animal 
dealer, and, after placing all the pros and cons before me, he 
finally advised me to take up fishmongering as being the 
less speculative trade. I am sure, however, that he did this 
with a heavy heart, for we all loved our menagerie; and 
when I decided in favour of the animal business he showed 
no displeasure, but immediately gave his consent to this 
course of action. It was arranged, therefore, that I should 
take over responsibility for the business, and that my father’s 
liability in the event of any future loss should not exceed 
' £100. I left school in March, 1859—before I turned 
fifteen—and from that day to this I have devoted all my 
energies to the care and development of the business which 
my father founded. The latter, however, remained until his 
death my most trusted adviser, and if in my life's work I 
have attained to some measure of success, it is to him that 
much of the credit is due. From our earliest years he taught 
us to love animals and helped us to understand their needs 
and their instincts. This has assuredly been the corner- 
stone of all our success, for without a genuine love for 
animals a business such as ours must have inevitably 


failed. 


8 BEASTS AND MEN 


During the latter half of the nineteenth century Africa 
was being vigorously explored, and large consignments of 
animals—especially elephants, giraffes and rhinoceroses— 
began to arrive in Europe from that continent. In the 
early sixties we began to deal on a larger scale, and I 
frequently had to undertake journeys for business purposes, 
my first visit to England being in 1864. The trade became 
more flourishing, necessitating an extension of our premises 
in Spielbudenplatz, and in this same year of 1864 an important 
development occurred. Late one evening we received a 
telegram from a friend in Vienna, saying that the African 
traveller, Lorenzo Cassanova, had arrived in the Austrian 
capital ex voute for Dresden, whither he was taking a number 
of animals which he had collected in Nubia. About a year 
and a half earlier Cassanova had brought home an enormous 
consignment of wild beasts from the Egyptian Sudan, includ- 
ing the first African elephant which had ever been seen in 
Europe, several giraffes, and numerous smaller creatures. 
On that occasion we could not afford 
to buy his collection, and the animals 
were eventually acquired by the 
famous old menagerie owner, Gottlieb 
Kreutzberg ; but this time the collec- 

tion was much smaller, and on the 
| morning after the receipt of the tele- 
gram I set out for Dresden. I found 
Cassanova in the Zoological Gardens, 
where he had housed his animals, and 
before long the whole collection had 
come into my possession. This, how- 
ever, was not the only or the most important result of my 
meeting with the Italian; for after some discussion we con- 
cluded an agreement to the effect that all the animals which 
Cassanova succeeded in bringing to Europe from his future 
expeditions should be sold to us at definite prices named in 
the contract. Cassanova was thus the first of that long list 


Gottlieb Kreutzberg. 


Phineas T. Barnum. 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE II 


of travellers who have explored the wilder portions of every 
continent in the interests of my firm. 

The first lot of animals which Cassanova brought us from 
Nubia arrived in the July of the following year, and consisted 
of two elephants, several young lions, and a number of hyznas, 
panthers, antelopes, gazelles and ostriches. It will be seen 
from this that during the decade which had elapsed since the 
purchase of the little menagerie at Bremerhaven—quite an 
important event to us in its time—the scope of our business 
had considerably enlarged. The demand for wild beasts was 
continually growing, Zoological Gardens were springing up 
on all sides, and public interest in exotic animals was stimu- 
lated by the circuses and travelling menageries, which were 
now becoming numerous both in Europe and in America. 
Although we now began to send out travellers to all parts of 
the world—adventurous men who frequently explored regions 
where no European had ever been before—it was sometimes 
impossible for me to satisfy all the demands which I received. 
For instance, one of my chief customers was Phineas T. 
Barnum, the famous American circus owner. Barnum paid 
us his first visit in November, 1872, and on that. occasion 
purchased animals from us to the value of about 4 3,000. 
He was touring Europe, he told me, in search of new ideas, 
and as I was able to supply him with some such (among 
other things I told him about the racing elephants of 

(India, and of the use of ostriches as saddle animals) he paid 
_me the compliment of inviting me to join him in his enterprise, 
with a one-third share of the profits. I preferred, however, 
to remain in Hamburg and develop my own business. After 
this, Barnum obtained his animals exclusively from me, and 
his successor, Mr. Bailey, continued this arrangement until 
1907, when he disposed of his business. 

The largest consignment of African animals which I ever 
received arrived in 1870. On Whit-Monday of that year I 
heard from Cassanova and from another of my travellers, by 
name Migoletti, that they were both making their way out of 
the interior of Nubia with huge caravans of captured animals, 


12 BEASTS AND MEN 


and expected to arrive together at Suez. Cassanova stated 
that he was dangerously ill, and that it was therefore imperative 
that I should come to Suez, in order to take charge of the 
animals on the journey to Europe. Under the circumstances 
this appeared to be unavoidable ; and so, the next day, ac- 
companied by my youngest brother, I departed for Egypt. 
We travelled vza Trieste, and arrived at our destination after 
an uneventful journey lasting eight days. On entering the 
station at Suez we were greeted by some of our prospective 
pets, for in another train opposite we saw several elephants 
and giraffes, who pushed out their heads to welcome us. 
This, however, scarcely prepared us for what met our gaze 
when we reached the Suez Hotel. I shall never forget the 
sight which the courtyard presented. Elephants, giraffes, 
_antelopes and buffalo were tethered to the palms; sixteen 
great ostriches were strolling about loose; and in addition © 
there were no fewer than sixty large cages containing a 
rhinoceros, lions, panthers, cheetahs, hyzenas, jackals, civets, 
caracals, monkeys, and many kinds of birds. 

It was naturally no easy matter to transport this immense 
collection of wild beasts to Europe. The amount of food 
required was enormous. Besides the hay, bread, and sundry 
other vegetable foods which were needed for the elephants 
and other herbivores, we also took along with us about a 
hundred nanny-goats in order to provide the young giraffes 
and other baby animals with milk. When these goats were 
no longer able to supply us with milk they were slaughtered 
and given to the young carnivores to devour. 

The journey to Alexandria, where we were to embark 
for Trieste, was by no means uneventful. On the way to 
the station the ostriches escaped, and were only recovered 
after considerable delay. Then one of the railway trucks 
caught fire, endangering the entire menagerie; and finally 
we were furnished for the last part of the journey with a 
drunken engine-driver who nearly burst his boiler. More- 
over, the poor creatures were so closely packed together that 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 13 


it was impossible to feed them. We travelled all through 
the night, and arrived in Alexandria at 6 am. Here 
we joined forces with Migoletti’s caravan. The whole of 
the next day was occupied in feeding and in general attend- 
ance upon my unfortunate beasts, which had suffered con- 
siderably from their long train journey. Thus it was not 
until the evening that I was able to visit Cassanova, who 


Embarking an elephant. 


had preceded me to Alexandria. Much to my regret [| 
found him sinking rapidly, and during the following night the 
poor man died. There was no time to mourn, however, for 
on the next day the steamer was to be loaded with the living 
cargo. It will be readily believed that I suffered no little 
anxiety when I saw my valuable animals, cumbrous elephants 
and long-legged giraffes, hanging from the crane betwixt sky 
and sea. However, at last they were all safely deposited on 
deck, and the passage to Trieste was accomplished without 


14 BEASTS AND MEN 


serious mishap. Our arrival at that port caused great 
excitement among the townsfolk. And small wonder! No 
such collection of wild beasts had ever before been seen in 
Europe. The united caravans of Cassanova and Migoletti 
included, apart from the smaller creatures, five elephants, 
fourteen giraffes, four Nubian buffaloes, a rhinoceros, twelve 
antelopes and gazelles, two wart-hogs, four aard-varks, and no 
fewer than sixty carnivores. Among the latter there were 
seven young lions, eight panthers and cheetahs, thirty 
hyzenas, and many smaller representatives of the cat tribe. 
There were also twenty-six ostriches, of which sixteen were 
full-grown birds. One of these, a female, was the largest 
specimen I have ever seen. This hen could easily reach a 
cabbage which I placed eleven feet from the ground. 

Pretty nearly the whole population of Trieste must have 
turned out to watch us unload. And whenever an elephant or 
a giraffe came sprawling across in the crane a roar of delight 
would go up from the multitude on shore. It was truly 
marvellous that we ever reached the railway station without 
an accident, for the crowd in the streets was enormous, and 
we had the greatest possible difficulty in making our way 
through. We travelled to Hamburg wa Vienna, Dresden 
and Berlin, and as some of our possessions found new homes 
in the Zoological Gardens in each of those cities, our numbers 
were greatly reduced by the time we finally arrived at our 
destination. This, as I have said, was the largest collection 
of the African fauna that I have ever received. It had been 
preceded, however, by several other successful expeditions 
(under the command of Cassanova and others) to the same 
region, and in a later chapter I shall describe the methods 
adopted for capturing the animals, and the difficulties which 
the expeditions had to overcome during the arduous marches 
out of the interior of Nubia. 

At this time I was doing a roaring trade in African wild 
beasts, and splendid prices were paid for my wares, especially 
for elephants. I recollect one occasion when I sold three 
young elephants to an American animal dealer for the sum 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 15 


of £1,000. The reader may think that I had made a good 
bargain in this, and at the time I was under a like impres- 
sion. But it seems I was wrong. For my American friend 
took the animals across to his own country and sold them for 
41,700, £1,600 and £1,500 respectively. 

I was married in March, 1871, and am blessed with five 
children and thirteen grandchildren, my two sons now being 
partners with me in the business. With the growth of the 
trade during the sixties and early seventies it became im- 
perative to find a larger site for my menagerie; in spite of 
extensions, we had completely outgrown our old quarters in 
Spielbudenplatz. After a long search I found a suitable 


Reindeer. 


spot at Neuer Pferdemarkt, in Hamburg. This consisted of 
a dwelling-house, having a large garden behind—nearly two 
acres in extent—in which it would be possible to erect the 
necessary buildings, stables, etc. I therefore bought the place, 
and in April, 1874, we took up our abode in our new home. 
The transference of the menagerie to Neuer Pferdemarkt 
brings us to the end of the first period in the history of the 
business. Hitherto we had been merely animal dealers ; 
henceforth we were to initiate and develop other, though 
related, branches of trade. About the middle of the seven- 
ties the supply of wild beasts began to exceed the demand, 


16 BEASTS AND MEN 


and the profits on my business somewhat decreased. Some 
remedy for this state of affairs had to be found, and the said 
remedy eventually came through the chance suggestion of a 
friend. In 1874 I happened to be importing some reindeer, 
and my friend, Heinrich Leutemann, the animal painter, 
remarked that it would be most picturesque if I could import 
a family of Lapps along with them. This seemed to me a 
brilliant idea, and I therefore at once gave orders that my 
reindeer were to be accompanied by their native masters. 

The Lapps, conducted by a Norwegian, arrived at Ham- 
burg in the middle of September, and Leutemann and myself 
went on board to welcome the little expedition. The first 
glance sufficed to convince me that the experiment would 
prove a success. Here was a truly interesting sight. On 
deck three little men dressed in skins were walking about 
among the deer, and down below we found to our great 
delight a mother with a tiny infant in her arms and a dainty 
little maiden about four years old, standing shyly by her 
side. Our guests, it is true, would not have shone in a 
beauty show, but they were so wholly unsophisticated and 
so totally unspoiled by civilisation that they seemed like 
beings from another world. I felt sure that the little 
strangers would arouse great interest in Germany. 

The reindeer and the Lapps were safely disembarked, 
but on the way up to Neuer Pferdemarkt a rather fortunate 
accident occurred. The deer were, of course, unaccustomed 
to crowds, and two of them took fright and galloped away 
through the town, finally taking refuge—not inappropriately 
—in the Zoological Gardens. My Lappic exhibition could 
scarcely have had a better advertisement than was afforded 

~_by this escapade. 

My optimistic expectations were fully realised; this first 
of my ethnographic exhibitions was from every point of view 
a huge success. I attribute this mainly to the simplicity 
with which the whole thing was organised, and to the com- 
plete absence of all vulgar accessories. There was nothing 
in the way of a performance. The Laplanders themselves 


‘sropue[de] 


EF RG ES : Serena] 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 19 


had no conception of the commercial side of the venture, and 
knew nothing of exhibitions. They were merely paying a 
short visit to the hustling civilisation which they saw around 
them, and it never occurred to them to alter their own primi- 
tive habits of life. The result was that they behaved just as 
though they were in their native land, and the interest and 
value of the exhibition were therefore greatly enhanced. 
They took up their abode in the grounds behind my house 
at Neuer Pferdemarkt, and lived entirely out of doors. All 
Hamburg came to see this genuine “ Lapland in miniature”, 

The Lapps, as is well known, inhabit the north of Nor- 
way, Sweden and Russia, and, in accordance with their 
occupations, are divided into the Fishing-, Forest-, and Up- 
land-Lapps. The latter are the least civilised of the three 
divisions, and it was to them that my little party belonged. 
They consist of tribes of primitive nomads, almost wholly 
dependent upon the reindeer for their subsistence. As I 
have already mentioned, they could not be described as 
beautiful. Their skin was a dirty yellow colour, their heads 
very round, their hair black, nose small and flat, and their 
eyes set somewhat obliquely. On the other hand their 
limbs were very finely moulded, and only Eskimos have 
smaller hands and feet than the Lapps. They reached a 
height of from four and a quarter to five and a quarter feet. It 
was most interesting to see the little people at work. They 
would set up and strike their tents as in their own country. 
No great labour is involved in this performance ; their tents 
consist of poles covered over in summer with canvas and in 
winter with tanned hides, a hole being left at the top for the 
smoke to pass through. The Fishing- and the Forest- 
Lapps have become to a great extent Europeanised, for in- 
stance, in the matter of dress. But not so our little friends. 
They supply all their own needs, and by means of sinews 
they sew together the tanned hides of deer in a most dexter- 
ous manner. They make all their own snowshoes, sledges, 


etc. Men and women were dressed much alike, both sexes 
2 * 


20 BEASTS AND MEN 


wearing long skin coats, pointed fur caps and leather shoes. 
It was most interesting to watch them catching the deer with 
lassoes, and to see the wonderful skill with which they drove 
their sledges. The reindeer is verily their all in all, and takes 
the place of cattle, sheep, horse and dogs. The milking of the 
deer was one of the chief attractions in this Lappic exhibition. 
Our visitors were unspoiled children of Nature, and they no 
doubt wondered what we could see in their simple household 
goods, and in themselves, to arouse so much curiosity. 

My experience with the Laplanders taught me that 
ethnographic exhibitions would prove lucrative; and no 
sooner had my little friends departed than I followed up 
their visit by.that of other wild men. Our next guests came 
from the Sudan—as was only natural, having regard to the 
extensive intercourse I then had with that region. The 
attractions of this Nubian caravan were greatly increased by 
the number of domestic animals which the people brought 
with them, their great black dromedaries, for instance, arous- 
ing much interest among the visitors to my Gardens. 

_ Being desirous of carrying on my new anthropological 
enterprise al] the year round—in winter, as well as in summer 
—I bethought me of the Eskimos, those dwellers in the 
Arctic of whom we had all heard so much in connection 
with polar expeditions, but who had never yet been seen in 
the heart of Europe. It might be possible, I thought, to 
bring a small party of these people to Hamburg, where they 
would indubitably cause a great sensation. In the spring of 
1877, therefore, I engaged a young Norwegian, by name 
Adrian Jacobsen, and despatched him to Greenland for the 
purpose of inducing a few Eskimos to accompany him back 
to Europe. The Danish Government were most obliging, 
and not only at once gave their permission, but also conveyed 
Jacobsen to their Arctic colony in a State steamer. They 
voyaged up the west coast of Greenland for a considerable 
distance to a bay known as Jacobshavn, in lat. 69. Here 
my traveller succeeded in persuading half a dozen natives to 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 21 


pay a visit to the land of white men. The party was com- 
posed of a family of four persons, and two young bachelors. 
The paterfamilias, a gentleman of about thirty, rejoicing in 
the name of Ukubak, not 
only brought with him his 
obedient spouse and his 
two little daughters, but 
also the totality of his 
worldly goods. These 
consisted of dogs, sledges, 
tents, weapons, household 
implements, two canoes, 
and so forth. The Green- 
land Eskimos, who have 
been well described by 
Nansen, are more ad- 
vanced in civilisation than 
their kindred of the Far 
North, these latter being 
in an extremely primitive 
stage of evolution, being 
unacquainted even with 
the “ Kayaks,” or canoes, 
which play such a promi- 
nent part in the life of the South Greenland natives. The 
Greenlanders are, of course, under the protection of the Danish 
Government, and they have adopted the Christian religion. 
Nevertheless, their mode of life is not really very different 
from that of their ancestors when Greenland was first recolon- 
ised by the Scandinavians in the eighteenth century. They 
have not been greatly altered through contact with Europeans. 
They are still expert and enthusiastic hunters, pursuing with 
great zest the numerous species of seals which inhabit the 
Arctic regions. For this purpose they make use of curious 
and highly characteristic boats, which they term ‘‘ Kayaks”. 
The kayak is a canoe constructed of skins, and is completely 


Ukubak and his family. 


22 BEASTS AND MEN 


decked over except for a small hole amidships. The canoe- 
man, who propels his little vessel with a double-bladed 
paddle, sits himself in this hole, which he exactly fits and 
completely fills up, his legs being hidden beneath the foreward 
decking. In this position the Eskimos are able to execute 
a most remarkable manceuvre. If the canoe be upset, the — 
man is, of course, still firmly fixed in his hole, and is then 
hanging head downwards from the upturned boat. But so 
skilful are they that, when this accident occurs and they find 
themselves immersed, they are able by means of the paddle to 
right the canoe and in this way save. themselves from drown- 
ing. As may be well imagined, the ability to perform this feat 
‘is an absolute necessity to 
the Greenlanders in their 
native haunts, for in rough 
weather the small kayaks 
are naturally very liable 
to capsize, and any one 
who is less adept than his 
fellows will pay the penalty 
with his: life. Ukubak 
was a wonderfully expert 
canoeman, and used fre- 
quently ‘to upset and then 
right his kayak for the 
‘edification of the visitors 
~ tomy Gardens. He re- 
- garded it as a joke, and 
“never grew tired of re- 
peating. the performance. 
The proceeding did not 
even cause him any. dis- 
comfort; ‘for; like all his 
. - race, he was dressed in 
waterproof clothing which, as I have said, completely filled 


, Ukubak’s wife. 


‘uoAay Woy ,, SIQDULP-]IANC] 5, 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 25 


the hole and thereby prevented the water from leaking into 
the boat. 

_Ukubak was a man of moderate stature and prepossessing 
countenance. His better-half, too, was far from ugly, even 
from the European’s standpoint. She was above the middle 
height, her figure was slim and elegant, and she dressed her 
hair most tastefully in a tower on the crown of her head. The 
Greenlanders made themselves at home on the spot where 
the Lapps had sojourned three years earlier, and built them- 
selves a hut after the true Eskimo fashion, namely, half under- 
ground. I should perhaps mention incidentally that the Lapps 
are not, as might be supposed, close relatives of the Eskimos. 

After the little party had been exhibited in Hamburg 
I took them to Paris, Berlin and Dresden. In Berlin the 
Emperor William I. came to see them and was greatly 
interested in Ukubak’s aquatic tricks. On that occasion 
Ukubak remained so long under the water that the Emperor 
became quite alarmed for his safety, until I told His Majesty 
the facility with which the Eskimo could always recover him- 
self when he so desired. In April of the following year, 1878, 
the Eskimos returned to their native land, greatly enriched 
by their travels. 

From this time onwards | organised frequent ethnographic 
exhibitions, and I now have some show of this kind every 
year in my Zoological Park at Stellingen. Lapps, Nubians, 
and Eskimos have been followed by Somalis, Indians, 
Kalmucks, Cingalese, Patagonians, Hottentots and so forth. 
Towards the end of the seventies, especially in 1879, the 
animal trade itself was in an exceedingly bad way, so that the 
anthropological side of my business became more and more 
important. The outbreak of the war with the Mahdi, which 
occurred at about this time, closed what had hitherto been our 
chief source of supply, vzz., the Sudan ; for it was now death 
to any European who was intrepid enough to enter that 
country. Even when the war was over, and the co-operating 
British and Egyptian Governments reopened the country, the 


26 BEASTS AND MEN 


Sudan was found to have lost its glory, for the destruction of 


A king and his two wives. 


very fortunate for me. 
enough of the quadrupeds. 


Joseph Menges, 


animal life in the interval had 
been terrible. . But more of 
this anon. The end of the 
year 1880 brought me some 
relief from my financial 
anxiety. My faithful friend 
Barnum sent me huge orders 
for elephants. Barnum and 
another American named 
Forepaugh were at this time 
strenuous competitors in the 
circus world, and the Ameri- 
can public seem to have had 
an especial predilection for 
elephants. At all events, 
elephants were the chief at- 
traction, and the fact was 
The only difficulty was to find 

I therefore sent one of my most 
famous travellers, Joseph Menges, 
to Ceylon in order to ascertain 
the prices of elephants in that 
island, and to find out whether 
large numbers of the creatures 
could be obtained there. Menges’ 
reports were most satisfactory, and 
before long both he and certain 
other of my travellers were hard 
at work exporting a continuous 
stream of elephants from Ceylon. 
I was perpetually receiving fresh 


orders not only from Barnum but 


also from Forepaugh, for the 


rivals were continually endeavouring to overtrump each other 


‘spd Sulouep uvipuy 


os ee 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 29. 


in this matter, and in the year 1883 I exported from Ceylon 
no fewer than sixty-seven elephants. 

In this place I ought to say a few words about Joseph 
Menges. He assuredly deserves a short biographical notice 
in this history of my business, for of all the fellow-workers 
with whom it has been my fate to labour, none has been 
more able and efficient. When this traveller joined my 
firm in 1876 he had already had considerable experience 
as an explorer. In the early seventies he had gone up the 
White Nile with Gordon, and few, if any, Europeans knew 
the Sudan better than he. He had become intimately ac- 
quainted with the peoples, the geography, the fauna and the 
flora of Nubia. He was, moreover, thoroughly accustomed 
to the climate. In those regions Europeans almost invariably 
suffer severely from fever, but Menges seems to have been 
immune—at all events, by the time he began to travel in 
my interests. On one occasion he brought to Europe for one 
of my ethnographic exhibitions some representatives of the 
famous Nubian tribe, the Hamran hunters, of whose man- 
ners and customs I shall have much to relate in Chapter III. 
Then he paid a visit to Somaliland, where he explored a 
district where no white man had hitherto been, and dis- 
covered a new race of wild ass. He succeeded in trans- 
porting to Europe a living specimen of this quadruped. 
Menges continued to lead hunting expeditions on my behalf 
until quite recently, and at the moment of writing there are 
still animals in my menagerie which have come into my pos- 
session through the energy of this trusty friend. 

One of the largest of all my ethnographic exhibitions was. 
the great Cingalese exhibition of 1884. This great caravan, 
which consisted of sixty-seven persons with twenty-five 
elephants and a multitude of cattle of various breeds, caused 
a great sensation in Europe. I travelled about with this 
show all over Germany and Austria, and made a very good 
thing out of it. 

When this Cingalese exhibition had come to an end 


30 BEASTS AND MEN 


I thought the public might, perhaps, have had enough of 
ethnology for the time being, and I therefore set to work to 
devise some new form of entertainment. The result of 
my meditations was a revolution in the methods of training 
wild beasts for the circus. For many years, indeed ever 
since I could remem- 
ber, I had been greatly 
distressed at. the cruel 
methods of teaching ani- 
mals to perform, which 
were then in vogue. My 
enthusiasm for my own 
calling originated more, 
if I may say so, in a love 
for all living creatures 
than in any mere com- 
mercial instincts. I had 
no doubt inherited this 
passion from my father, 
and under the circum- 
stances in which I found 
, myself there was, of 
Patagomati course, every opportun- 
ity of cultivating the taste. I do not intend toimply that I have 
not also had an eye to the main chance; but I can, I think, 
say with perfect truth that I am, and always have been, a 
naturalist first and a trader afterwards. This being the case, 
it was only natural that I, in common | am sure with all 
other lovers of animals, should be greatly distressed at the 
wicked ill-treatment to which “tamed” beasts were in those 
days subjected. In a later chapter I shall relate some tales 
about this barbarous method of training—now happily a thing 
of the past—and I will only say here that the poor brutes were 
driven to perform their “tricks” by being thrashed with 
whips and burned with red-hot irons. 
For many years I had been pondering over this subject, 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 31 


and I had come to the conclusion that the prevalent mode of 
procedure was not only cruel, but also stupid and ineffectual. 


Brutes, after all, are beings akin to ourselves. Their minds 


are formed on the same plan as our minds; the differences 
are differences of degree only, not of kind. They will repay 
cruelty with hatred, and kindness with trust. What, there- 
fore, could be more foolish than the senseless manner in 
which every spark of intelligence was driven out of the 
hapless pupils? I knew full well from long and intimate 
association with the lower animals that their understanding 
develops wonderfully by close friendship with man, and | 
was convinced that far more could be achieved by gentleness 
and sympathy than was ever accomplished by tyrannical 
cruelty. This, however, was not my only discovery. I had 
also found from experience that animals of the same species 
differed most remarkably in character, and from this I inferred 
that if the talents of each animal were to be fully developed, 
individual tuition during training would be absolutely essential. 
Here again we have a point of similarity to ourselves. These, 
then, were my ideas upon this not unimportant subject, and 
about twenty years ago I proceeded to put them into practice. 

I established a circus in Hamburg in 1887, and before 
long I found a trainer whom 
I induced to adopt my new 
methods of educating the 
animals. I met this man 
(whose name was Deyer- 
ling) in England, and as he 
happened to be unemployed 
I engaged him on the un- 
derstanding that he should 
work on my system only. 
I at first showed him what 
I proposed to do by training dogs and cats to perform tricks 
without ever resorting to force (except in cases of gross 
disobedience), and I then expressed to him my opinion that if 


Hagenbeck’s first circus. 


32 BEASTS AND MEN 


this could be done with these small carnivores, a like result 
could be achieved with lions and tigers. 

The first experiment in this ‘ ‘gentle” dining as as 1 will 
call it, was made with lions during the years 1887-89. For 
my purpose I used no fewer than twenty-one lions, but so 
variable are the characters of animals, that only four turned 
out to have the necessary talent for the work. I will not go 
into details of the training in this place, but will only say that 
the success with the remaining four lions was nothing short of 
astounding. They carried out all manner of tricks, the 
climax of the performance coming when the trainer harnessed 
three of the mighty carnivores to a chariot and drove triumph- 
antly around the cage. This troupe first appeared in the 
Nouveau Cirque in Paris in 1889, and during the next 
few years they were exhibited in many other towns, bringing 
me, I may mention incidentally, a very large profit. 

At that time all the world was looking forward to the 
great exhibition at Chicago, which was to take place in 1893, 
and it occurred to me that it would be a grand thing if I could 
exhibit there a huge troupe of performing animals, trained on 
my new humane system. I therefore commenced to get 
together a large collection of. wild beasts for this purpose. 
My troupe consisted of twelve lions, two tigers, several 
cheetahs and three bears. These performers were first 
exhibited in 1891, at the Crystal Palace, in London, where 
they were in charge of my brother-in-law, Heinrich Mehrmann, 
who in the meantime had become my most distinguished 
animal tamer. At the Crystal Palace they were an immense 
success, and two Americans offered me 50,000 dollars for the 
troupe—a handsome sum. This offer I refused, little knowing rh 
that I was thereby throwing £10,000 into the gutter. ae 

I was now in for a bad time. One day in September I 
heard from Mehrmann that the animals were sick, and that 
he was unable to diagnose the ailment. As the beasts were 
to be brought back to Hamburg in October, and as the trouble 
did not sound serious, I thought it unnecessary to take any 


Somalis, 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 35 


steps until after I had been able to inspect them on their 
return home. So nothing was done. When, however, a few 
weeks later, the animals arrived in Germany, we discovered 
to our dismay that they were all suffering from glanders. In 
spite of our care, the disease proved fatal in every case; all 
the creatures either died or had to be put out of their misery. 
The cause of the illness seems to have been the bad meat 
which was supplied by the unscrupulous contractor in England. 

Here was a pretty mess! All the hopes I had founded 
upon the now famous achievements of my magnificent troupe 


Fuegian family. 


were in the space of a few days dashed to the ground. Yet 
I was only at the beginning of my troubles. I set to work to 
make up new troupes, but death, though in a different form, 
overtook these also. During the first part of 1892 numberless 
inmates of my menagerie were seized with an extraordinary 
illness. They began by being afflicted with vomiting and 
diarrhcea, and later fell into convulsions, usually dying within 
afew days. Both young animals and adults were attacked 
by this inexplicable ailment, though the latter for the most 
part recovered. The most expert veterinary authorities were 
as completely mystified as myself. Only later did the correct 
explanation of this grievous pestilence become clear. In 
3 


36 BEASTS AND MEN 


August the cholera broke out in Hamburg. Now my pets 
had perished with all the symptoms of cholera, and if the 
correct diagnosis had occurred to us, it is conceivable that the 
dire disaster which overtook Hamburg that autumn might 
have been prevented. It would seem that the delicate con- 
stitutions of the exotic animals were very susceptible to this 
plague, for, as I have explained, the cholera attacked the 
beasts for some months before any human beings suffered 
from its ravages. How true it is that cholera is spread 
through the agency of foul drinking water, was clearly de- 
monstrated by the fact that after the veterinary surgeon had 
ordered the animals to be given boiled water only, no more 
of them were attacked by the disease. 

In spite of these great losses I still had a few animals left 
which I hoped to exhibit at Chicago. Then a further diffi- 
culty arose. One day towards the end of 1892 I suddenly 
received a cablegram from a gentleman who was my partner 
in this American enterprise, in which I was informed that 
I must send my animals over to England immediately, for if 
I failed to do this the United States Government would not 
permit me to bring them to Chicago in the following year. 
The American authorities feared that the beasts might 
spread the cholera in the United States, and they insisted 
upon this period of quarantine in England. To England 
therefore the whole collection went, regardless of expense, 
and there the creatures sojourned for the whole of that winter. 
Luckily for me, the British Government did not meddle in 
the affair, and raised no objection to England being utilised 
as an asylum for the beasts. Next year the menagerie 
was shipped across the Atlantic and duly established in 
Chicago, Just before the opening of the exhibition, Mehr- 
mann fell ill, and I was compelled to put the chief troupe of 
performing animals through their tricks myself, although I 
had had nothing to do with them for five months previously. 
However, the show went off quite well. . 

Since that time I have sent out many troupes of perform- 


MY LIFE IN THE ANIMAL TRADE 37 


ing animals into all parts of the world, notably to the great 
exhibition of St. Louis in 1904, and all these are trained on 
my own humane system, which is, indeed, now adopted by 
all respectable animal tamers. In my park at Stellingen, the 
establishment of which I am about to describe in the next 
chapter, an excellent troupe of lions and polar bears is to be 
seen. These are in charge of the expert trainer Fritz 
Schilling, who appears in the accompanying photograph. 


Schilling with lion-tiger hybrids. 


CHAPTER. IL 
MY PARK AT STELLINGEN. 


In the previous chapter I have related the earlier history of 
my business. I still have to give a record of its subsequent 
development into the great animal park now existing at 
Stellingen. 

As the years rolled by, my business gradually increased 
until its branches extended to all parts of the world. To its 
original purpose, v2z., the buying and selling of live animals, 
many new purposes came to be added. I had ethnographic 
exhibitions ; I was interested in the propaganda of the new 
humane method of training wild animals; I had breeding 
experiments ; and there were many other ideas which I was 
only awaiting an opportunity to carry out. For the execution 
of all these projects the space now at my disposal was wholly 
insufficient. It became therefore a matter of the first im- 
portance to acquire an extensive tract of country, where I 
should be free from the handicap: of a confined space. - 
Especially was this necessary for my experiments in acclima- 
tisation. These it had now become essential for me to 
undertake, seeing that a large portion of my business was in 
the importation of game from foreign countries for sporting 
purposes, and trading in the many kinds of domesticated © 
animals. I was, moreover, receiving orders to supply animals 
for the new Zoological Gardens which were springing up in 
Morocco, China, Japan, Argentina and elsewhere. This 
alone required a good deal of room, and a removal had 
clearly become a necessity. 


I found, much to my regret, that my additional require- 
38 


MY PARK AT STELLINGEN 39 


ments could not be met in my native town of Hamburg. I 
had indeed acquired in 1888 an additional piece of ground in 
that city larger than my grounds at Neuer Pferdemarkt, but 
it was not large enough ; and the neighbouring lands, which all 
belonged to the State, were withheld from me in the most 
rigid manner by the authorities. I was thus driven to look 
elsewhere. It so happened that I was one day recounting 
my troubles to a friend living at Stellingen, a place in 
Prussia not very far from Hamburg. Scarcely had I finished 
speaking, than my friend took me by the arm and led me to 
a hedge opposite his house over which he showed me a piece 
of land having an area of about four and a half acres, which 
he said was to be had very cheap. I lost no time in settling 
the matter. Within two days the land was my property. 
Immediately afterwards I found that two neighbouring 
estates were to be sold, and within twenty-four hours these 
also had passed into my possession. 

Thus it was that I became the owner, after years of 
searching, of a splendid estate on elevated ground, admirably 
suited to the foundation of a park for wild animals. Plans 
were drawn, and men set to work without delay, and in five 
months’ time twelve large enclosures and five animal houses 
were ready to receive their inmates. 

Although the locality which I had selected was in itself 
admirably suited to the purpose that I had in view, it had 
the defect of being somewhat distant from the remainder of 
my establishment in Hamburg. The communication be- 
tween Hamburg and Stellingen also was bad; and I set to 
work to consider the possibility of buying up more country 
between the two places, and of establishing a direct means of 
communication between them. In this way the area of my 
animal park would have scope for unlimited expansion as the 
business grew, and I should be in no danger of being shut in, 
as I was at Hamburg. The undertaking was a large one, 
and I had to find other capitalists to co-operate with me. 
This, after some delay, I succeeded in doing. Two brothers 


40 ~ BEASTS AND MEN 


contributed each £5,000. I myself put in 47,500 and gave 
an undertaking to transfer my establishment completely to 
Stellingen. 

Now at last I was in a position to carry out my long- 
nursed project of founding a Zoological Park of a totally 
different kind from anything that had been before attempted. 
I need not here go into the details of my plan: they will 
appear in subsequent chapters. I will content myself with 
stating the fundamental principle. I desired, above all things, 
to give the animals the maximum of liberty. I wished to 


Framework of artificial mountains. 


exhibit them not as captives, confined within narrow spaces, 
and looked at between bars, but as free to wander from place 
to place within as large limits as possible, and with no bars to 
obstruct the view and serve as a reminder of the captivity. 
I wished also to show what could be accomplished in the way 
of acclimatisation. I desired to refute the prevailing notion 
that luxurious and expensive houses with complicated heating 
apparatus were necessary for keeping wild animals alive and 
healthy. I hoped to show that far better results could be 
obtained when they were kept in the fresh air and allowed to 
grow accustomed to the climate. I wished my new park to 
be a great and enduring example of the benefits that can be 
wrought by giving the animals as much freedom and placing 


MY PARK AT STELLINGEN 4I 


them in as natural an environment as possible. A certain 
point must be fixed in the garden from which might be seen 
every kind of animal moving about in apparent freedom and 
in an environment which bore a close resemblance to its own 
native haunts. 

For the chamois, the wild sheep, and the ibex, artificial 
mountains had to be thrown up; for animals of the plains, 
wide commons had to be set apart. For the carnivores, 
glens had to be established, not confined within railings, but 
separated from the public only by deep trenches, large enough 
to prevent the animals from getting out, but not in any way 
interfering with the view. In the midst there must be a 
central building with a large arena for performing purposes ; 
while, close by, it was necessary to establish large areas for 
accommodating animals who were not permanent residents 
but only there in transit. Of these I now have a very large 
number. Whereas ten years ago I scarcely sold twenty head 
of game for sporting purposes, I now sell many hundreds yearly. 
In old days I considered that I had done well if I sold six or 
eight camels in a year. I now think little of selling one 
hundred. In zebras, also, my trade has grown from three or 
four specimens a year to fifty specimens. All these animals 
have to be housed while in transit. Seeing that the trade in 
many other kinds of animals has increased in a similar pro- 
portion, it is obvious that a very large area is needed for this 
purpose. Even among elephants, which I used to keep up to 
the number of twenty in my old establishment at Neuer 
Pferdemarkt, the numbers are now greatly 
increased, and in 1904 | had no less than 
forty-three of these great creatures at the 
same time. 

The work of transforming this virgin 
land into a pleasure park was immense. 
From its original waste condition it had to 
be altered in a great variety of ways. Moun- 
tains had to be thrown up, and valleys and streams had to 


42 BEASTS AND MEN 


be dug out. Stables and luxurious buildings also had to be 
erected. Moreover, as opportunity afforded, I was continually 
adding to the extent of my territory ; and by watching for 
occasions of picking up neighbouring estates at a cheap price, 
I gradually increased the area of my park. I succeeded after 

considerable difficulty in selling my land in Hamburg, some of 
it to the Hamburger Vereinsbank, and the remainder to the 
State, after having overcome every difficulty put in my way 
by the worthy Town Councillors of Hamburg. Thus at last 
we were finally planted at Stellingen. ; 

The acquisition of the land and the remainder of the 
preliminary preparations were completed in October, 1902, 
and in that month we were able to commence operations in 
transforming the land and building the houses, etc. The 
estate itself consisted at first of nothing but wide fields upon 
which grew half a dozen trees. To carry out my plans no 
less than 40,000 cubic metres of earth had 
to be shifted, before the surface of the land 

_ alone was prepared. A large army of work- 
men were turned on to the job, and day by 
day I saw the work develop, as one after 
another of the ideas, which I had so long 
dreamt of, were realised before my eyes. At 
last on 7th May, 1907, the opening ceremony 
took place—the crowning triumph of many 
years of strenuous labour. 

Since the establishment of this great 
park my business has continued to increase 
without intermission. As an instance of the 
large scale on which my trading transactions 

are conducted I may mention that in 1906 I supplied no 

fewer than 2,000 dromedaries to South West Africa for the 

German Government. In the variety as well as in the 

magnitude of my business development has taken place. 

Many experiments have been carried out in housing animals 

and acclimatisation ; in breeding and the crossing of different 


suasurais ye yed-jeuue ay} 0} 9dueIWUq 


MY PARK AT STELLINGEN 45 


races with one another; and finally, in the course of the last 
year I succeeded in the final achievement of establishing an 
ostrich farm. Since my park is a wholly new kind of 
menagerie it has, of course, attracted much attention, and I 
have received visits from various distinguished persons, in- 
cluding one or two from the German Emperor himself. 


CHAPTER TIL 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT. 


I must now proceed to describe the manner in which the 
various denizens of my animal park are captured in their 
native haunts, and must relate, in particular, the interesting 
experiences which my travellers have had in the Sudan, in 
Rhodesia, and elsewhere. 

There is no business or profession in existence in which 
the science of travel, and all the difficulties connected there- 
with, play such a prominent part as in the animal trade. In 
the exercise of his business the animal trader has to search 
the uttermost parts of the earth. In the primeval forests of 
Africa, in the deep jungles of India and Ceylon, on the vast 
steppes of Mongolia and Siberia, the traveller wanders for 
weeks, nay for months at a time, in search of the strange 
dwellers in the wild. 

Unlike the hunter, who is attracted only by the love of 
sport, the animal trader goes to work. He goes, not to 
destroy his game, but to take it alive; and consequently not 
the least of the difficulties with which he is beset is the 
discovery of some practicable way of bringing back his booty 
to civilisation. As a rule, every foot of the arduous journey 
is attained only at the expense of some loss to the caravan. 

Books and maps dealing with the countries where we carry 
on our work are few and far between, for naturally the 
localities where wild animals are to be caught are very remote 
from all the more civilised parts of the world. Nor are these 
the only obstacles; for uncivilised peoples, no less wild than 
the beasts, have to be secured and made friends with—a 

46 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 47 


matter of no small difficulty. Moreover, travellers’ tales 
about wonderful animals which are to be caught—but which 
never yet have been caught—send many expeditions upon 
fruitless errands. 

The Egyptian Sudan is one of the richest and most 
inexhaustible sources of animal life. This region is of enor- 
mous extent. One of those best acquainted with it, my old 
friend and faithful fellow-worker, Joseph Menges, the world- 
wide traveller, speaking of it, says: “Speaking widely, one 
can include in this area the whole of the North Abyssinian 
plain, which stretches from Massowah to the upper Blue Nile. 
The main hunting region consists, however, of the district of 
Taka, beginning in the east with the upper Chor Baraka, 
and ending in the west with the upper courses of the Rahad, 
a tributary of the Blue Nile.” 
This country consists largely of 
steppes, interspersed with bush, 
from which rise picturesque rocky 
hills, which in Abyssinia begin to 
assume the character of wild high- 
lands. The fauna of the country 
is wonderfully rich: the African 
elephant, the black rhinoceros, the 
hippopotamus, the giraffe, the 
lion, the panther, the hyzna, the 
hyzna-dog, the aard-wolf, the jackal, wild-asses, the Kaffr- 
buffalo, and many kinds of antelopes; also the wart-hog, the 
aard-vark, the porcupine, baboons, and other monkeys. The 
avifauna is also very rich: the swift-footed ostrich, the mara- 
bou, the secretary-bird, various kinds of vultures, the rhino- 
ceros-hornbill, francolins and others. Crocodiles, snakes, etc., 
make up the list of animals which can be hunted in this fruit- 
ful district. 

It is only natural that this wealth of fine animals, including 
most of the giants of the animal kingdom, should for a long 
time have attracted the attention of Europeans; and the 


At work. 


48 BEASTS AND MEN 


region may be described as one of the classical countries for 
capturing animals. 

For many years this animal paradise was closed, and the 
angel with the flaming sword who guarded the gate was Ab- 
dullahi Kalifat el Mahdi, the false follower of a false prophet. 
None of the animals inhabiting the country could be brought to 
Europe ; and for this reason, that to meet with the Mahdi meant 
both for Europeans and for Egyptians almost certain death, 
or at the very least long captivity. Nevertheless it would be 
a mistake to suppose that these regions are inhabited by a 
fanatical, bloodthirsty population; for the savage barbarity 
which prevailed was entirely confined to the rulers. Although 
the country is so rich in game, the inhabitants are for the 
most part not hunters; much more often they are either resi- 
dent peasants, eking out their livelihood by the additional pur- 
suit of some trade in the country villages near by; or else 
nomads, leading their herds from pasture to pasture and carry- 
ing their tents and household goods upon the backs of their 
camels. 

In spite of their peaceable disposition, such of the Nubians 
who do adopt the pursuit make bold huntsmen. For people 
born in a land so richly stocked with game, hunting is the 


most natural of callings. On the banks of the rivers, inthe ~ ~ ~ 


almost impenetrable forests, and on the plains, which in the 

rainy season are covered by grass ten to fifteen feet high, 
the elephant wanders in herds of from fifty to a hundred 

head, the black double-horned rhinoceros feeds in pairs, and 

gentle giraffes, wild Kaffir-buffaloes, and fleet antelopes are 

to be found in hundreds. And the great carnivores follow 

in their tracks. The native hunter knows the favourite 

resorts of his quarry, and follows their trail with those remark- 

able powers of tracking which characterise savages. He 

pits his cunning against the timidity of the animals. Entire 

families and villages devote themselves to the dangerous but © 
attractive occupation of hunting, and in this way regular 

hunting castes have been built up. 


*suziqnyy jo dnoin 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 51 


The most eminent of these castes is that of the sword- 
hunters or ‘ Agaghir,” who consider themselves the aristo- 
cracy of their profession; and not without reason, for the 
method of hunting adopted by them, and which is almost 
peculiar to Taka, needs courage, activity and skill. 

The method of the sword-hunter is peculiar, and, with 
certain kinds of game, dangerous. In all cases the object of 
the huntsman is to sever the Achilles tendon of his quarry. 
Where giraffes, antelopes, ostriches or similar harmless 
creatures are concerned, the sport calls for no greater skill 
than is required to ride over uneven and treacherous ground. 
But where rhinoceros, lions or elephants are being pursued, 
the case is different; and it then often happens that the 
positions of hunter and hunted are reversed. The ponies 
used for this purpose are of Abyssinian breed ; and, like their 
riders, they are small, strong and fiery. 

On the whole, the most dangerous game to hunt with the 
sword are elephants. The chase is usually carried out by a 
band of four or five experienced men, united by so strong 
a bond of fellow-feeling that, when the life of any one is in 
danger, each of the others will unhesitatingly risk his own 
in attempting a rescue. Menges, who is an old hand at this 
work, describes the course of events somewhat as follows: 
The streams and drinking-places are first searched for signs 
of elephant-trails. When once these are hit upon, they are 
followed up till the great beast is reached. This is no easy 
matter, for the African elephant is a great wanderer, travelling 
often for a whole day and night without a halt. More fre- 
quently, however, the herd wanders during the cooler part of 
the day through the forest and steppes, and stops to rest during 
the hotter hours of noon. At this time the herd is usually 
very compact, and almost invisible in the thick foliage; so 
that the chances of a successful assault are small. The most 
suitable moment for attack is when the herd is much scattered ; 
it is then comparatively easy to select a bull with good tusks 
and isolate him from the rest. Once isolated, his first impulse 

4° 


52 BEASTS AND MEN 


is flight; but the huntsmen surround. him, and no loophole of 
escape remains. Then with a loud trumpeting, which strikes 
terror into the breasts of the unfortunate ponies, he launches 
himself furiously against the nearest of his enemies. 

Now it is generally arranged that all the huntsmen should 
be mounted on dark-coloured ponies, with the exception of 
one, who rides a grey. The attention of the elephant, whose 
sight is not good, is attracted by the colour. Upon the grey 
pony, therefore, the mighty creature usually directs his attack. 
It is the business of the rider, at the first onset, to turn and 
flee. The elephant promptly gives chase ; and the flying hunts- 
man, ignoring the fact that the slightest slip means death, en- 
deavours to keep just out of reach, though near enough to 
hold the animal’s attention concentrated upon him. In the 
meantime his comrades follow the elephant from behind, and 
whoever reaches him first springs from his pony, and delivers 
a dexterous blow with his sword on the left hind leg of the 
animal, which cuts the Achilles tendon, and lames him on one 
side. As the elephant hastily turns to avenge himself upon 
this new enemy, it becomes the turn of the rider who was 
formerly being chased to stop, dismount, and with a similar 
blow on the right hind leg to lame the animal on the other 
side, so that he is totally disabled. If the blows have been 
delivered with sufficient skill and force, the arteries of the 
hind legs have been cut, and the elephant bleeds slowly but 
almost painlessly to death. If there is a gun at hand, his 
sufferings are more quickly terminated. Once he is dead, 
hours of arduous labour commence. The tusks are broken 
off; the hide also is removed, to be used for shields or sword- 
scabbards, or for harness for ploughs. The flesh is left for 
vultures and wild beasts, unless, indeed, there should happen 
to be in the vicinity a camp of the nomads. In that case the 
Carcase is appropriated by them. They cut the meat into 
strips and dry it in the sun (like the South American chargut) ; 
it is then put aside for use in the rainy season. 

For the European, armed with weapons both accurate 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 53 


and deadly, big-game hunting is attended with little danger. 
In the Arctic Regions the polar bear, once so formidable, 
now excites scarcely more fear than the musk-ox ; while in 
Africa the sportsman approaches to within a few paces of 
lions or elephants, to photograph them before he despatches 
them. But for the natives big-game hunting is a very differ- 
ent matter. Then the fray is far from one-sided ; the weapons 
of the man are little, if at all, superior to those of the brute ; 
and the ‘‘hunting” is more of the nature of a hand-to-hand 
encounter, requiring the utmost skill and courage on the part 
of the human combatant. Should a horse stumble—an 
accident which, on that uneven ground, intersected by under- 
ground streams, is only too likely to happen—death either to 
the animal or its rider is the probable result. We need not 
be surprised that the Sudanese assert that the professional 
elephant-hunter never dies at home, but ends sooner or later 
under the tusks and feet of a hunted elephant. 

The rhinoceros, buffalo and lion are also killed by swords- 
men in the same way as elephants. The giraffe, antelope 
and ostrich are chased until fatigue overcomes them. In their 
case, although there is no danger, the strain both upon man 
and horse is severe, on account of the length and swiftness of 
the pursuit. We might go at much greater length into the 
mode of killing wild animals in this interesting country, from 
the skilful ostrich-hunting of the Bedouins, to the wholesale 
slaughter of the European ‘“‘sportsman”. Our special con- 
cern, however, is not with the killing of animals, but with 
the methods of catching them alive; let us therefore follow 
the career of one of my hunters, who has been sent on this 
errand. 


Daybreak at Atbara. A gentle breeze stirs the grassy 
steppes; the trees are suffused with the bright glare of a ris- 
ing African sun. In the thick woods on either side of the 
river there is the twittering of countless swarms of birds, from 
the gigantic marabou to the little swallow which flits over the 


54 BEASTS AND MEN 


water. Away in the distance there rises from the glassy 
water the uncouth head of a crocodile—or is it only a sand- 
bank? It is already becoming hot, and the air is humming 
with myriads of insects. In our station, situated not far from 
the river-bank, life is beginning to stir. 

The enclosure or seriba in which our station is settled is 
surrounded by a large fence made of branches of trees, and 
has only one entrance, which is carefully stopped by thorn 
branches. Within the enclosure are huts, built of straw, for 
the Europeans and their black servants, as also stalls for the 
animals that are captured, and some stores of food-supply. 
The fires which were lighted in various parts of the seriba to 
frighten away wild animals have long ago gone out, and now 
the working-day is about to begin in earnest. 

My hunters had arrived only the day before, and every- 
thing was pleasure and excitement. The whites, who knew 
the language, greeted their black friends with heartfelt 
warmth ; and on both sides presents were liberally exchanged. 
Those given by the blacks consisted of fatted sheep, fowls, 
eggs, honey and other forms of delicacies, which the whites 
amply repaid by goods dear to the black man’s heart. Soa 
great feast had to take place, at which such of the presents as 
were edible were eaten—for the most part by the donors 
themselves. This was followed by war-dances and sham- 
fights with lances, swords and shields, accompanied by drums 
and shrieks; while the women indulged in graceful group- 
dances, amid much clapping of hands and beating of drums. 
Camel- and horse-racing were the most important items of the 
entertainment ; and conviviality was carried far into the night, 
by the light of the laager fire. 

By the next morning everything has settled down, and 
business commences in earnest. Crowds of curious natives 
collect around the camp, many of them in search of employ- 
ment as hunters. . Hunting cavalcades are engaged, receive 
their directions, are equipped with arms and ammunition, and 
sent off in various directions. 


*(oLIFY 38944 -tNOG) y0dsueTy poureg 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 57 


The method which these cavalcades generally pursue in 
the capture of young animals is to chase the herd, until the 
young, lagging behind, can be isolated from their parents. 
They are then easily seized and made secure. Among 
giraffes and antelopes this procedure is attended with but 
little danger; and even among buffaloes, which have no 
qualms about deserting their young, the work is compara- 
tively safe. But in the case of rhinoceros and elephants, for 
which the demand is much greater, the capture is not so simple. 
These great creatures turn vigorously to defend their young ; 
and the latter cannot as a rule be secured without first killing 
the old ones. This is done by the swordsmen of Taka in the 
manner already described. The catching of young giraffes 
by the expedient of chasing the herds until the young can 
no longer keep up was first practised in Kordofan during the 
thirties of last century. I need hardly mention that the 
utmost care has to be taken of the captured animals. A herd 
of goats is taken along, in order to keep up a constant supply 
of fresh milk; but even with this precaution a large number 
of the captives die soon after they have been made prisoners, 
and scarcely half of them arrive safely in Europe. 

The Takruris—M ohammedan negroes who have emigrated 
from Darfur—are especially skilful in hunting and trapping. 
They are equally adept in catching hyenas, panthers and 
baboons in carefully constructed traps, or in digging out porcu- 
pines, or in securing birds, such as secretary-birds, francolins, 
etc., in snares and nets of ingenious patterns. This versatility 
renders them invaluable to us as assistants. 

The Havati, or water-hunters, carry on a very special- 
ised trade. Their particular quarry is crocodiles and hippo- 
potami; and, being very expert swimmers, they actually 
attack these creatures in their own element. The weapon 
employed is the harpoon. A long cord is attached to it, so 
_ that the harpoon, after it has been cast, can be drawn back 
again by the thrower. The time usually selected for this sport 
is the hot hours of noon, when the crocodiles are lazily sunning 


58 BEASTS AND MEN 


themselves on the sand-banks, and the hippopotamiare floating 
dreamily at the surface of the water. Once the animal has 
been harpooned, it is surrounded by swimmers and pushed 
ashore, where it is quickly despatched by lances. When it is 
desired to take the beasts alive a slight variation on this 
procedure is adopted. The young, of course, are alone 
selected ; and the harpoons are hurled so as to inflict as small 
a wound as possible. With constant attention this will prob- 
ably soon heal up. Although this mode of harpooning calls 
for much skill and experience, no less than three-quarters of 
the hippopotami formerly brought to Europe used to be caught 
in this fashion. 


If one is to believe the comic journals, all that has to be 
done to catch a lion is to throw a bag of pepper in his face, 
and then proceed to chain him up in safety. To catch a 
monkey they suggest that one need only leave a pair of 
boots, well smeared with lime, in the grass, when the creature 
will come of his own accord and pull them on, and remain 
stuck fast till the hunter arrives to take him home. Very 
different from these facile methods is the reality. 

In one of our regular hunting-grounds, in the neighbour- 
hood of the Mareb or Gash, lives the great brown baboon, 
known as the Atbara baboon (Cynocephalus doguera). The 
rugged and barren rocks of this picturesque region resound 
with the cries and grunts of these baboons, who wander about 
in herds of a hundred or more. They often come down for 
food to the palm-woods which border the banks of the river, 
or pay a highly unwelcome visit to the natives’ doura’ 
plantations. Our station here was situated on the Gash, a 
rain-stream which contains water during the rainy season, 
while during the rest of the year its course is marked by a 
streak of glistening sand. Our camp lay just beneath the 
Sahanei mountains, and close to a great cluster of rocks which 
swarmed with baboons. Here and there pools of water were 


1A kind of corn, Sorghum vulgare. 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 59 


left in the dry river-bed, in places where the subsoil prevented 
the water from trickling away ; and close to our station were 
several such pools which the baboons used as drinking-places. 
All day long we used to hear them fighting and chattering as 
they came to drink, and even by night there was little quiet. 
On the narrow ledge of rock above the pools whole families 
—or perhaps I should say harems—used to collect. We 
could hear plainly the low grunts and squeaks with which the 
mother lulls her baby to rest; we could hear the grumbling of 
the father, who has been disturbed by the noise. Suddenly 
there would be a yell; and thereupon the whole herd would 
break into frantic screaming. The baboon’s arch-enemy, the 
slinking panther, has tried to make an assault. It was im- 
possible to help admiring the fine old males, full of courage 
and self-reliance. It was to make their nearer acquaint- 
ance that we had come here; and since they were not suffi- 
ciently versed in European politeness to accept an invitation, 
more active measures must be taken to secure their attend- 
ance. 

In the success of these more active measures we were 
greatly aided by the arrival at our station of our old friend 
Abdulla Okutt—a member of the half-savage tribe of Basas 
and a well-known ostrich-hunter. All the apparatus required 
consisted of cords and a few axes, together with a number 
of assistants, who of course expected to be liberally re- 
warded with “backsheesh” for each animal captured. Ah! 
poor monkeys, look out for yourselves now; the mighty 
Abdulla is on your tracks! 

The first thing to be done was to stop up all the drinking- 
pools, save one, with thorn-bushes. The baboons were thus 
all compelled to use this one. They took to it the more 
readily, in that, the whole time we were there, we had been 
careful not to interfere with or frighten them in any way, so that 
they were quite unsuspicious of any trap. We encouraged 
them still further by scattering doura about the pool—a pro- 
ceeding which was so much appreciated that the older 


60 BEASTS AND MEN 


animals would often keep away the young until they had 
devoured it. 

When, by these treacherous means, thorough confidence 
had been established with the baboons, the time came for set- 
ting the traps, which were to make them still more our guests, 
and eventually also emigrants. The trap is a fairly simple 
contrivance. The base is circular, about two and a half yards 
in diameter, and is composed of tough rods twisted together. 
Round the outer edge of this base, at intervals of about a 
foot, are fixed stout stakes, leaning inwards so as to meet 
together at the top. The framework thus constructed is inter- 
laced with branches of trees, tied together with cord; and 
the whole structure then makes a solid cage, of considerable 
weight, and somewhat resembling a native’s hut in appear- 
ance. When it has been completed it has to be conveyed to 
its proper situation in the neighbourhood of the drinking-pool. 
Here one side of it is left open, being propped up with a strong 
stick, and the baboons are gradually inveigled into it by 
leaving doura inside. When they have become thoroughly 
accustomed to the trap, the final stage in the proceedings 
commences. In the darkness of night a long cord is at- 
tached to the pole which holds the trap open. It is 
carried along, buried loosely in the sand, until the other end 
reaches a hiding-place, whence a good view of the cage can 
be obtained. Then comes the tragedy. A blazing noonday 
sun drives the thirsty baboons chattering down to their drink- 
ing-hole. Some of the biggest males, who have already 
secured a monopoly of the doura, enter the trap, and com- 
mence their feast. The hunter awaits his opportunity: it 
soon comes ; a tug on the cord, the trap closes with a bang, 
and three great baboons are fairly caught. 

Then there follows a scene, both comical and painful, 
which baffles description. For a moment the astounded 
prisoners sit benumbed with terror and unable to move; then 
they anxiously begin to seek an exit. The herd outside, no 
less surprised, flee at the first alarm; but they soon return 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 61 


and congregate round the trap, urging the captives with ear- 
splitting yells and grunts to find their way out. Some of the 
boldest jump right on to the top of the trap, and appear to carry 
on an excited conversation with their friends inside. At least 
that is what the American Professor Garner would say, who, 
by dint of much imagination and little science, has for years 
past been laboriously constructing a monkey-language. 

The hunters, however, cannot afford to wait while this 
scene is going on, for baboons are endowed with great 
strength, and would soon break through the walls of their 
cage. On the approach of their captors they show all the 
signs of extreme terror, and endeavour to force their heads 
through the walls. And now, as may easily be imagined, 
comes the really critical and dangerous part of the performance, 
namely, to take the animals out of the cage and secure them. 
The hunters are provided with long stakes, forked at the 
end, which they push through the branches forming the cage- 
wall. With the forked ends they catch the baboon’s neck, 
and pin him to the ground. When all the baboons have been 
‘thus secured the upper part of the cage is removed, and the 
creatures are firmly bound. First their jaws are muzzled with 
strong cord, made of palm-strips; then hands and feet are 
tied ; and lastly, to make assurance doubly sure, the animal’s 
whole body is wrapped up in cloth, so that the captive has the 
appearance of a great smoked sausage! The parcel is then 
suspended from a pole carried by two persons, and conveyed 
triumphantly to the station. 

These great baboons have strong nerves—no wonder, 
they neither smoke, drink, nor do any work, and always live 
in the fresh summer air! So, after a brief period of exhaustion, 
followed by a day or two of quiet, they recover their normal 
spirits. The large males must, however, be carefully watched. 
They are very angry and jealous, and will probably kill any 
other of their kind put in to keep them company. Even 
females are likely to have a poor time of it; for the males 
keep all the food to themselves, and allow their women to go 


62 BEASTS AND MEN 


hungry. It is on account of the selfishness of the males that 
females and young baboons are so rarely caught in the cages 
by means of bait. When by chance one does get in, it is 
usually allowed to escape again. 

Menges, who has worked much on these baboon-stations, 
and whose account I here follow, has a low opinion of the 
intelligence of the animals. This he has derived from the 
circumstance that the same individual, when allowed to 
escape, is so often caught again inthe same trap. There is no 
doubt that this is the case ; and, since the traps are large and 
easily recognisable, it seems to argue no great intelligence on the 
part ofthecreatures. Abdulla relates how he caught one young 
female, which he could recognise by a scar on the mouth, no 
less than three times—each time, I regret to say, with a differ- 
ent husband. On the third occasion he gave her a good 
hiding with his sjambok, and sent her about her business. 
But another explanation of their falling so frequently into the 
same trap is possible. For, among baboons, domestic dis- 
cipline is very severe; a female has to do exactly what her 
husband wants, or else there is arow. In the case mentioned 
above it is very probable that the female, having been twice 
widowed and then appropriated by a third husband, was 
compelled to follow him, however unwillingly, into the trap. 

However entertaining baboon-catching may be to read 
about, it is a very serious business for the actors. The 
beasts have very powerful teeth and prodigious muscular 
strength; and if one of them should happen to escape, he 
might inflict severe injury upon his captors. 

Our station soon fills up with our four-handed guests. In 
eight days we have caught no less than twenty-two of them, 
all from the rocky wastes lying near the camp. They take 
kindly to their captivity, however; and, from the very first 
day, have taken the food provided for them. Their com- 
rades, still at large, do not forget them; and often after the 
midday drink will come close up to the seriba, and, climbing 
up the tall palm-trees, howl out unintelligible words, which 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 63 


are answered with mournful voices by the prisoners within. 
What a real tragedy for these poor baboons! The conversa- 
tion finally degenerates into an ear-splitting chorus. On one 
occasion a baboon, bolder than the rest, jumped the thorn 
barrier of the seriba and dashed up to one of the cages, in 
which, maybe, he saw his brother, or father, or uncle sitting. 
But he was speedily driven away by the attendants, amidst 
the most appalling yells from the herd watching outside. 

Sometimes baboon-catching is a much more sanguinary 
business than this, especially in the case of the large silver-grey 
“Tartarin” or “ Arabian baboon” (Cynocephalus hamadryas). 
This is a very pugnacious species, and, moving as it always 
does in large herds, very dangerous to encounter. One of 
my younger travellers tells a story of a baboon-fight in 
Abyssinia, in which nearly three thousand baboons took part. 
They are certainly very savage animals to look at. When 
fighting they erect their manes and show their teeth and 
strike the ground furiously with their hands, as they advance 
to within a few feet of their enemy. 

The capture of these ‘Arabian baboons” differs very 
little from that already described. A trap is put out at the 
drinking-pool in the same way as before; but, instead of 
having one trap-door, it has two, one on each side. The use 
of this second door is as follows: On arriving at the trap 
one baboon chief stands at the door to guard it, while only a 
few are admitted within. But those that are excluded slink 
round to the back; and, finding another entrance there, the 
cage soon fills. Then, as before, the cord is pulled, the trap 
closes, and a terrified cry breaks from a thousand throats. It 
was on such an occasion as this that the fight, already 
alluded to, and in which 3,000 baboons joined, took place. 
The whole army hurled themselves savagely upon the 
hunters, who defended themselves as best they could with 
firearms and cudgels. They were driven back, however, by 
sheer force of numbers; and the victorious baboons made 
short work of the cage and released their imprisoned friends. 


64 BEASTS AND MEN 


Many touching scenes were witnessed in this battle. One 
little baboon, who had been injured by a blow from a cudgel, 


3S 
NG 


(OS | Nhs 
ON 


Hagenbeck coming ! 


was picked up and safely carried off by a great male from 
the very midst of the enemy. In another instance, a female, 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 65 


who already had one infant on her back, picked up and went 
off with another whose mother had been shot. 

It is not often, however, that the hunters fail in their task, 
as on this occasion. When once the animals are enclosed in 
the trap their fate is sealed. The method of removing them 
from the trap is somewhat different from that already de- 
scribed. The old ones are shot; a small hole is then cut in 
the side of the trap, and to this is applied the mouth of a 
small cage. However they may clamber about the walls of 
the trap, the baboons inside are at last compelled to enter 
these small cages, in which they are safely carried oft. 

The natives catch baboons in the same way as other 
animals, namely, by pursuing them, when they come down 
into the plains to rob the doura fields, until they are 
thoroughly worn out. The young ones, and the mothers 
carrying babies, lag behind the rest, and are then easily 
isolated and secured. 

To return to the seriba at Atbara. The day of our de- 
parture is drawing near. The stalls and yard are filled with 
captive animals—young elephants, giraffes, hippopotami, and 
buffalo. Our primitive wooden cages are also well stocked. 
with panthers, pigs, and baboons ; so that the first part of our 
work—that of catching the animals—is completed. But now 
comes the second patt, which is attended with even greater 
difficulty than the first, namely, the transport of the animals 
across the desert to the port of embarkation on the Red Sea. 
In order that the transport may be successful it has to be 
organised with the most detailed thoroughness and foresight. 
The work before us is that of conveying across the waterless 
desert a party consisting of 150 head of cattle and over 100 
heavily-laden camels, together with the whole menagerie of 
captured animals. Ours, however, is a very orderly caravan, 
as it creeps along in the silence of the night, like a great 
snake, across the wide expanse of glistening sands. The 
moonlight throws long shadows behind the dunes; and the 
solitude is only broken now and again by the wild laugh of a 

5 


66 BEASTS AND MEN . 


hyena. The night is usually chosen for travelling, on ac- 
count of the comparative coolness which is then enjoyed. In 
the daytime all the countries surrounding the Red Sea are 
scorched with heat, the thermometer often rising nearly to 45° 
C. (113° F.) in the shade. At night, although the temperature 
does not fall so very much, yet one does at least enjoy im- 
munity from the fierce glare of the sunlight. Of the two 
fundamental difficulties of travelling, the great heat and the 
scarcity of water, the former is overcome by journeying only 
at night, and the latter by careful preparations. 

The caravan commences its march shortly before sunset ; 
each man falling into his proper position at the appointed 
time. The larger animals are driven along by one or more 
attendants—a giraffe taking three persons, an elephant from 
two to four, an antelope two, and an ostrich, if large, also two. 
The smaller animals, such as young lions, panthers, baboons, 
pigs or birds, are carried in cages roughly constructed on the 
spot; and these cages are placed on the backs of camels. 
Right in the midst of our procession there marches a group of 
camels harnessed in pairs. Over the pack-saddles of each 
pair are laid two stout poles, and from these poles, between 
the two animals, hangs a large cage, made of strong rods 
bound together with strips of hide. Each cage contains a 
young hippopotamus, who, in spite of his youth, weighs with 
his cage well over.a quarter of a ton. Each of these dis- 
tinguished travellers requires a large party to wait upon him ; 
for, in addition to the two camels which convey him along, 
six or eight others are required for carrying the water which 
he demands continuously throughout the journey, as also 
for the bath— made of tanned ox-hide—which he enjoys 
every day during the long halt. Hundreds of head of 
sheep and goats are driven along with the procession ; the 
nanny-goats providing a constant supply of milk for the 
young animals, and the remainder being used as food for 
the carnivores. 

The speed of the caravan, being the speed of the slow- 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 67 


est animal, is not great. We march during the earlier part 
of the night; then there is a halt to feed and water the 
animals ; after which we push on again till about an hour 
after sunrise. During the day we get what protection we can 
from the fierce rays of the sun, by sheltering under mimosas 
and acacias, or by making a rough covering of mats. The 
drinking-places in the desert are few and far between; and, 
when we come upon one of these welcome oases, a special 
day of rest is granted. But even then it is not always easy 
to take possession of them. For they are often occupied by 
nomad tribes, who are only too ready to resort to arms in de- 
fence of them, and can only be appeased by a liberal use of 
“‘backsheesh”. The drinking-places are often as much as 
sixty miles apart; and since this means a three- or four-day 
journey for our slow-moving caravan, it may easily be im- 
agined how great a quantity of water has to be carried with 
us. It is kept in leather bottles made of goat- or ox-hide ; 
and so precious is this fluid, upon which hang all our lives, 
that it is difficult to think that it is nothing more remarkable 
than plain water. 

However carefully we organise our expedition, it is 
inevitable that many of our captives should succumb before 
we reach our journey’s end. The terrible heat kills even 
those animals whose natural home is in the country. The 
powerful male baboons are very liable to sunstroke, which 
kills them in half an hour; and any weak point in their con- 
stitution is sure to become aggravated during the journey. 
Whether this is due to the terror and strain which they under- 
went at their capture, or to being confined in cramped cages, 
I cannot say. But the fact remains that not more than half 
of them arrive safely at their destination, despite our utmost 
care. 

The long anxiety of these weary journeys is seldom wholly 
unrelieved by amusing incidents. One such incident occurred 
one day as we were passing through a valley in Northern 


Abyssinia. As the caravan was drawing up at a well, 
ce 


68 BEASTS AND MEN 


it fell in with an immense herd of ‘‘ Arabian” baboons, whose 
grunting and yelling drew answering cries from our captive 
baboons.. We were soon surrounded by these great monkeys ; 
and even when we resumed our march they refused to leave 
us, running along on either side of us, keeping up an incessant 
conversation with their imprisoned relatives. Now and again 
one would advance to within twenty paces of the cages, and 


Disembarking a camel. 


Disembarking an elephant. 


with violent gesticulation and screaming would seem to be 
adjuring the captives to break loose and come to join them. 
But these brave champions of liberty soon had to retire be- 
fore the volleys of stones hurled at them by our camel-drivers ; 
and after a time they disappeared in the darkness of the 
night. 

At last the laborious journey, which has lasted from five 
to six weeks, comes to an end; and the caravan, or such of it 
as still remains, reaches the port of embarkation on the Red 
Sea. The motley crew take up a camping-ground close to the 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 69 


town, to await the arrival of one of the steamers, which 
periodically call there, to take them to Suez. At Suez they 
are either transhipped to a steamer coming from India or the 
Far East; or preferably they are sent by train to Alexandria, 
and shipped from there to one of the Mediterranean ports— 
Trieste, Genoa, or Marseilles. When they arrive there 
another railway journey still lies before them, and it is usually 
another ten days before the animals and their keepers are 
safely lodged at Hamburg. The entire journey from the 
camp at Atbara or on the Gash occupies nearly three months. 


During the long period of the Mahdi’s régime, when the 
whole country was closed, many changes were wrought in 
this paradise of animals. Under the joint government of 
Egypt and Great Britain order has been slowly restored, but 
alas! the country is not what it was. There is scarcely a 
tenth of the game now that there was thirty years ago. 
The elephants, formerly so abundant, are only found in small 
herds ; the rhinoceros is almost extinct; the giraffe is rare; 
antelopes have altogether vanished from many localities ; 
while thousands of buffalo have fallen victims to the rinder- 

est. 
. The war against the Mahdi is both the direct and indirect 
cause of this sad destruction of animal life. When the 
Egyptian Government was overthrown, the natives came into 
possession of large stores of modern breech-loaders ; which, 
in the intervals between killing each other, they used for 
killing animals of all kinds. It must be admitted that they 
had a strong incentive to this slaughter. For, while the 
treasury of the Mahdi was filled to bursting, the people of his 
kingdom were being decimated by starvation. When the 
Sudan had been utterly ravaged, and nothing was left to 
plunder, the wild game was the only means of sustenance 
that remained to them; and a fierce rush for meat took 
place. Whole armies set up their camps in the midst of our 
hunting-ground and slaughtered game ex masse, especially 


70 BEASTS AND MEN 


the Baggara-Arabs of the White Nile, hunters no less famous 
than the swordsmen of the Taka district. The Abyssinians, 
too, who suffered under the same fate as their Sudanese 
neighbours, were driven to the same extremes. Their 
favourite quarry was the elephant ; and they not only took the 
tusks, but devoured the flesh, not even rejecting the tough 
meat of the legs. On one occasion a border prince organised 
a regular elephant drive, at which no less than fifty-six of the 
animals were slain in a single day. On this occasion the 
scene of action resembled a pitched battle, for twenty Abys- 
sinians were left dead on the field; most of them, it is true, 
killed, not by the elephants, but by aberrant bullets from the 
rifles of their own friends. 

In Abyssinia driving is a favourite method of attacking 
game. The number of men available is unlimited, and all 
living creatures are regarded as imperial property; so that 
there are no obstacles in the way of this pursuit. A zebra- 
hunt, in which one of my travellers took part, may be de- 
scribed as an example of the way in which these drives 
are carried out. An army of as many as 2,000 soldiers 
form a circle enclosing a very large tract of country, where 
the zebras are known to be. The locality is selected so that 
near the centre of the circle there passes one of the dried-up 
river-beds, so common in that country. These sandy river- 
beds are flanked on either side by high rocky banks. The 
large circle of men begins to contract, driving the zebras into 
the centre. The animals spring lightly into the river-bed, 
from which they are unable to escape, by reason of the steep 
sides. A guard is set in the river-bed on either side of them, 
so as to prevent their moving up or down. When they 
are thus securely penned in, a barbarous spectacle takes place. 
A thousand soldiers attack the zebras with long whips, and 
thrash them for hours, until they are thoroughly exhausted, 
and their spirit tamed. This manceuvre is attended with 
much danger, and on the occasion in question thirty-three 
men were either killed or severely wounded during the fray. 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 71 


The animals are then fettered, and driven oft to the huts of 
the natives. There they are fastened up, by ropes attached 
to each of the 
four legs, and 
tied to pegs. In 
a few days’ time 
they become 
quiet and can 
soon be driven 
about, without 
any necessity for 
taking — precau- 
tionary mea- 
sures. Grévy’s 
zebra, the species 
of which I am Captured zebras in the kraal. 

here writing, is (German East Africa). 

easily domesticated. It has, moreover, a strong constitution 
which would fit it well for the service of man in more civilised 
countries. The Kilimanjaro zebra, on the other hand, is 
a difficult animal to tame ; in its stubbornness it is very like 
a donkey. 

In the Sudan, at the end of the Mahdi’s régime, we found 
the country changed, not only in respect of the game, but 
also in respect of the people who used to be our friends and 
assistants. Misfortunes had so overwhelmed them that the 
famous tribe of Hamran, from which all the best sword- 
hunters were derived, was reduced to twenty men. Sword- 
hunting itself was no longer practised, and was known to the 
younger generation only through the tales of their parents. 
The Havati or water-hunters also were no more. Both 
these methods of killing game had been superseded by the 
more effective, if less exciting, rifle of modern times. 

The capture of young animals is effected in other ways 
besides that of chasing them until they are overcome with 
fatigue. Traps of various kinds are used ; and in the case of 


72 ' BEASTS AND MEN 


young hippopotami pitfalls are very commonly employed. 
The success of this method is due to the habit of the hippo- 
potamus of allowing its young to trot along in front of it, in- 
stead of behind, so that it can keep a look-out for any danger 
which may threaten its young one. The pitfall is made in a 
track which the animal is in the habit of using, and is covered 
over with branches to conceal it. As the hippopotamus goes 
along with its young one in front, the latter suddenly seems 
to vanish into the earth ; and the terrified mother, though not 
wanting in maternal affection, is so taken aback that she turns 
and flies, leaving her offspring to its fate. Then, if all goes 
well, the hunter secures his booty without further trouble. 
On one occasion, after a young hippopotamus had been caught 
in this fashion, the natives came rushing into our camp beam- 
ing with joy, shouting to us “ Bana kiboko makufa!” (The 
hippopotamus is dead). Nothing was left to us but to reply 
“Nakula kiboko!” (Eat it up); for it was their anticipation 
of this permission that had caused all the rejoicing and tumult. 
It often happens, when the animal is left a night in the pit, that 
it is found by a lion; and in the morning nothing is left of it 
but skin and bones. But when no mishap has occurred it is 
still a matter of some little difficulty to extract the hippopota- 
mus from the pit. A  palisade is first erected round the mouth 
of the pit; and over this palisade a noose is thrown round 
the neck of the animal. When these creatures are agitated 
they break into profuse perspiration, which causes them to 
become so slimy and slippery that it is difficult to make the 
noose hold. For this reason, it is passed not over the neck 
only, but over the forelegs as well. As soon as the noose 
is fixed in position the animal is hoisted a few inches off the 
ground, by the combined efforts of about twenty men pulling 
on the rope. Half a dozen others jump into the pit, and 
bind together the forelegs and the hindlegs, as also the jaws ; 
for the animals are obstinate and malicious, and it does not do 
to run any risks with them. Unlike the rhinoceros, which soon 
learns to know its keeper and will follow the caravan like a 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 73 


dog, the hippopotamus is an animal to be treated with caution, 
When the captive has been made fast the palisade is broken 
away, and a sloping path is dug out of the pit to the surface of 
the ground. A 
litter is made of 
stout poles and 
branches, the hip- 
popotamus is laid 
upon the litter and 
secured there with 
more _ branches 
twisted together ; 
and he is then 
hauled out. The 
most laborious 
part of the work 
now commences, 
namely, the trans- 
port through 
swamp or forest 
to the nearest 
river. A road 
has to be hewn 
the whole way 
through the bush. 
Arrived at the 
river, he is placed 
upon a native 
barge ; but before 
being embarked 

for Europe he is accustomed to captivity and to the food 
supplied him. The difficulty of carrying him may be inferred 
from the fact that the young animal may weigh as much as 
half a ton. 


Kalmuck priest. 


Some of the most arduous, as well as the most expensive, 


74 BEASTS AND MEN 


of the expeditions which I equipped and sent out, were those 
to Mongolia and Siberia. Especially interesting was one 
despatched at the instigation of the Duke of Bedford for the 
purpose of catching and bringing home to Europe some 
specimens of the wild horse (Equus prjwalsky). Attempts 
had often been made before to secure this animal, but, with 
one exception, they had all miscarried. This exception was 
in the case of the famous naturalist Falz-Fein, who had 
brought some individuals of this rare species from the steppes 
of Asia to his estate in the Crimea. Little, therefore, was 
known about the wild horse; its distribution, its habits, the 
best mode of capturing it were still unstudied. The conduct 
of the expedition was entrusted to Wilhelm Grieger, one of 
my most reliable travellers. On him fell the responsibility 
of making the preparations for the journey, and afterwards of 
leading the expedition into Mongolia. He was provided with 
plenty of money, and also letters of introduction and safe- 
conduct from the Russian Government, the Chinese Am- 
bassador in Berlin, and Prince Alexander of Oldenburg. 
This latter one was of particular value in procuring a warm 
welcome from the eminent Buddhist Lama, Dr. Radmai, 
then resident in St. Petersburg, who placed at the disposal 
of the expedition his great knowledge both of the people and 
the country of Mongolia. 

The first thing to be done, however, was to pay a visit 
to Falz-Fein in South Russia, in order to ascertain from 
him where these wild horses were to be found. This Grieger 
did ; but he found Falz-Fein reluctant to divulge the informa- 
tion he required. By indirect means, however, Grieger suc- 
ceeded in ascertaining that the horses were to be found in the 
neighbourhood of Kobdo, a town situated under the northern 
slopes of the Altai Mountains—a very long journey right 
through Russia, and Western Siberia, into Mongolia. 

Having procured this information, Grieger returned in 
high spirits to St. Petersburg, whence the expedition was 
to set out. But at the last moment another obstacle was 


. 


‘URAEIED YONWIeYy y 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 77 


encountered, which delayed the start several weeks. Dr. 
Radmai pointed out that the current coin of Europe was 
quite useless on such a journey. The medium of exchange 
in most request consists of large flat silver pieces weighing 
about 12 lbs. each; and it was necessary to have a large 
quantity of these manufactured at Hamburg before starting 
off. The metal is much lighter in colour than ordinary Eng- 
lish silver ; and for small purchases it was the habit to break 
off portions of the coin of whatever size might be required. 
Tea and coloured woollen bands were also of use as money in 
Mongolia. 

Soon after the arrival of the money in St. Petersburg, 
Grieger set forth upon his journey, full of hope for a success- 
ful issue to his adventure. The time selected was winter— 
a typical Russian winter, with town and country covered deep 
in snow. This inclement season was chosen, in order that 
the arrival in Mongolia might take place in the spring, when 
the young foals had just been born ; and also that the severity 
of a Mongolian winter might be avoided. It is true that 
Mongolian summers bring their troubles, as well as the 
winters. The climate there is typically continental ; that is to 
say, the temperature fluctuates with great rapidity and through 
extreme variations. Thus it may not infrequently happen 
that 80° F. (27° C.) is registered during the daytime, while 
there is a frost at night. The cold nights, however, do little 
to destroy the insect pests which afflict the traveller in the 
warmer season. The banks of the Kobdo River swarm with 
myriads of tiny gnats which settle in clouds upon the horses 
when they go to drink. They attack in particular the tender 
underparts of the animal; and exposure to their bites for half 
an hour is sufficient to ruin them effectually: death ensuing 
from loss of blood and from inflammation. 

Grieger, who took with him only one assistant, travelled 
by the Siberian Railway through Moscow as far as Ob, where 
the line is crossed by the river of that name. From there he 
journeyed southwards by sledge about 170 miles to Biisk, a 


78 BEASTS AND MEN 


place some fifty miles from Altai. Up to this point the 
journey had been performed with comparative ease. Scanty 
provisions could be obtained at the widely separated stations 
which they passed on their way; but from Biisk the real 
difficulties of the expedition commenced. Native drivers and 
riders were hired for transporting into the interior the tents, 
provisions, money, and other baggage belonging to the 


Mongolian village. 


travellers. Riding on horses or camels, through deep snow 
and in intense cold, 600 miles had to be traversed to reach 
Kobdo by way of Kaschagatsch. On one occasion when 
the thermometer fell to 50° below zero (F.) the fifty cases 
of sterilised milk which had been taken as food for the 
captured animals froze hard. 

Although Kobdo had been selected as the headquarters 
of the various expeditions, there was little in that distant 
town that could be of any use to the travellers. The town 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 79 


itself has about 1,500 inhabitants, three-quarters of whom are 
Mohammedan Tartars belonging to a Turkestan tribe, while 
the rest are Chinese merchants, trading in the products of 
Mongolia. Besides the town itself, there is a fortress and a 
prison; and also the governor’s palace, for it is a Govern- 
ment centre. Kobdo is the terminus of the great caravan 
route from Peking, which for camel caravans is distant a two 
and a half months’ journey. 


A Kalmuck national dance. 


The country north of the Altai Range is not wholly un- 
inhabited. Along the banks of the river Zedzik-Noor there 
dwell various Mongolian tribes of nomadic habits, each 
governed by a chief or prince; and in his excursions from 
Kobdo, Grieger usually found them very friendly. He ar- 
rived at his destination some time before the foaling period 
had commenced, and filled up his time by studying the 
aborigines, enlisting assistants, and hunting. The hardships 
which he had to undergo at this time were often severe. He 
had nothing but a tent to live in; and with the temperature 


80 BEASTS AND MEN 


at 50° below zero it was impossible to keep warm even with 
blankets and furs. Often he had to go without a fire, owing 
to the difficulty of collecting fuel. The fuel generally used 
in the country is dried cattle- or horse-dung, which, when 
rubbed into powder in the hands, can easily be ignited with 
steel and tinder. The wind soon fans the spark into a flame ; 
or, if there is no wind, the Mongolian will sit on his haunches 
and blow patiently away until there is a good fire. But the 
amount of dung available was often insufficient to meet the 
demands of the travellers. 

Of food, on the other hand, they had no lack, though little 
variety could be obtained. For four months mutton was almost 
the only food ; and with this they drank ‘“‘ Tsamba,” a mixture 
of tea, butter and salt, which is universally esteemed through- 
out Mongolia and Tibet. Tsamba is made as follows: Tea 
is powdered in a wooden mortar, and is then poured with salt 
and butter into boiling water. The butter is obtained from 
the milk of sheep or goats. This is well mixed, boiled milk 
and salt are added; and the whole is then boiled once more. 
The beverage thus prepared is not so nasty but that one may 
soon become accustomed to it. Not so easy is it, however, to. 
become accustomed to the Mongolian method of cleaning the 
drinking bow] before the liquid is poured into it. All he 
does is to spit into it, and then rub the bowl carefully round 
with a greasy corner of his coat. Another native drink is 
called Arka, and is prepared from the residue of milk that has. 
been évaporated. 

The Mongolians, as may well be surmised, are not fastidious 
in their choice of food. Indeed, they are prepared to eat any- 
thing whatever that comes in their way, except what is for- 
bidden by their religion.. They consider it wasteful to 
slaughter healthy cattle, when there are any weak or diseased 
to be had; and they have no qualms about eating an animal 
which has died a natural death. The intestines, even, after . 
being drawn through the fingers to eject the contents, are 
thrown into the cooking-pot with the rest. 


‘sasioy p[lM uvljosuo,] Jo yoivas ur uonpodxy| 


oS ae 
esa 
eS 98| 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 83 


The customs of the Mongolians are often curious and in- 
teresting. They have no system of burial, but merely throw 
out their dead on the steppes to be preyed upon by vultures, 
crows, and dogs. They are still in the pastoral condition, no 
agriculture being attempted. They are all mounted, and 
carry old-fashioned guns. Both men and women wear trousers 
of blue linen, and high boots, the soles of which are made of 
many layers of linen cloth, reaching a thickness of almost an 
inch. Tobacco is always in great demand among these 
people ; and their rank may be approximately judged by the 
quality of the pipe which they smoke. The tube of the pipe 
is made of wood, and is quite straight, a foot or more in length. 
The mouthpiece is adorned with an agate stone, the size and 
value of which is an index of the wealth and prominence of 
the possessor. 

The district between Kobdo and Kara-Ussu is volcanic in 
origin, and is a plateau covered by short grass, and dotted 
with conical peaks. The valleys are often thickly wooded, 
and give rise to very pleasant scenery. 

The Mongolian is hospitable but not communicative. A 
characteristic of their conversation is the constant repetition of 
the phrases which they use. The following is the sort of con- 
versation we used to carry on with them :— 

Mongolian. “ Mendi” (God be with you). 

Traveller. ‘‘Mendi.” 

Mongolian. “Malzuruk mendi baina?” (Are all your 
household well ?). 

Traveller. ‘‘Mendi baina.” 

Mongolian. “Tana del chabana?” (What are you doing 
here ?). 

Traveller. ‘Manna chuduludu gores” (I have come to 
buy wild animals). 

The tents of the Mongolians are surrounded by very 
fierce jackal-like dogs; but as soon as the owner sees a 
stranger approaching, he drives them off, and makes the 


visitor welcome. The traveller's horse he secures by knee- 
6 * 


84 BEASTS AND MEN 


haltering, and then drives out to pasture. At whatever 
hour of day or night he may arrive, the housewife (or should 
we say tentwife?) does all that can be done, in the preparation 
of food and a couch, to make him comfortable. 

At last.spring came upon the land; the snow melted, 
and the rivers ran free once more. Grieger soon discovered 
that the Zedzik-Noor was simply full of trout, of a large and 
palatable kind. So thick were they in the stream that they 
could be taken out by pulling a large vessel through the 
water; and one afternoon’s catch exceeded a hundred fish. 
These Grieger tried to cook by smoking over a fire ; but the 
first attempt was a failure, for the bodies fell into the fire, only 
the heads remaining suspended from the hooks. But neces- 
sity is the mother of invention ; and Grieger soon hit upon a 
method of cooking them. 

These operations were watched by the natives with horror 
and disgust ; for they class fish with snakes, and regard it as 
an unclean food. This, no doubt, was the cause of the ex- 
traordinary abundance of trout in the river when Grieger 
arrived. If the Mongolians shunned fish, they made up for 
it by their eagerness to obtain meat, and Grieger’s tent was 
surrounded by idlers and beggars on the look-out for pickings. 
To disperse these, who constituted a considerable nuisance, 
Grieger hit upon a very original plan. He took a piece of 
meat, and covered it thickly with pepper, an article of food 
unknown to the nomads. He then handed it out to them ; 
and as soon as they began to eat it, such a spluttering and 
sneezing took place that they hastily fled and did not trouble 
him again. Sausages he made of lungs and livers, but these, 
for some reason, the natives would not touch. Occasionally 
hunting brought in supplies. The great wild sheep, the argali, 
were an especial delicacy, the ten-year-old rams in particular. 
Now and again onions were found. In the Kobdo valleys, 
Grieger obtained a large collection of birds, including one 
species of pheasant, hitherto unknown. Birds, known to the 
natives as mountain- or rock-hens, were chased by the native 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 85 


sportsmen, who ascertained their whereabouts by watching 
for the ravens which would soar above them in the sky. 
Grieger’s shooting-parties sometimes disclosed an unexpected 
spirit of compassion in the natives. On one occasion, for 
instance, as he was passing some Mongolian huts, with his 
gun over his shoulder, one of the occupants came out, and 
besought him not to shoot hen-birds, as it was the breeding 
season. This anxiety arose, not from the sportsman’s motive 


The river Kobdo. 


of keeping up the stock (for the Mongols themselves do not 
eat these game birds), but from a genuine pity for the hen- 
bird with her young. 

During these minor diversions the main object of the 
expedition was kept constantly in mind. Grieger carefully 
cultivated the friendship of the chiefs; and through their 
means a hunting-party was gradually got together. The 
aborigines were wholly new to the idea of hunting animals 
for the purpose of capturing them alive. Their expeditions 


86 BEASTS AND MEN 


were undertaken solely in order to kill game for food; and in 
all the proceedings which were taken they had to be instructed 
beforehand by the leader. Since only young animals were 
wanted, watch had to be kept to ascertain when they had 
become fairly independent of their dams ; and it was found 
that the proper time for starting the hunt was during the 
first half of May. : 

Observation showed that there were no less than three 
varieties of the wild horse in the neighbourhood, closely 
resembling one another in form but showing differences of 
colour. They all have wavy hair over the body and legs, and 
blackish eyes, while in the foals the colour is variable. The 
wild horse wanders about in herds of twelve to fifteen; but 
even in this district it is not very numerous. 

As compared with the prolonged preparations which 
were necessary, the actual catching presented but little 
difficulty. The method employed was that which has al- 
ready been mentioned as being the usual method, when 
young animals only are to be caught. It is a habit of the 
creatures to rest for some hours during the daytime in the 
vicinity of the drinking-place. The Mongolians were in- 
structed to séize this opportunity of stalking them with their 
own horses. Then at a given signal the whole company break 
into shouts and yells; and mounting their horses dash upon 
the herd. The latter spring up in alarm and gallop off into the 
steppes, leaving behind them nothing but a cloud of dust. 
The Mongolians give chase, and after a time brown specks 
are seen at intervals in the dust-cloud. As the chase con- 
tinues the specks become larger and turn out to be the foals, 
which are unable to keep up with the older members of the 
herd. When at last the foals are quite worn out, they stand 
still, their nostrils swelling and their flanks heaving with 
exhaustion and terror. All the pursuers have then to do 
is to slip over their necks a noose attached to the end of a 
long pole, and conduct them back to camp. Here there 
are in readiness :a number of tame mares with sucking 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 87 


foals, which are requisitioned as wet-nurses for the new 
arrivals. In three or four days the foster-parents and their 
young become quite friendly. 

So easy did the Mongolians find this horse-hunting, when 
once they had been shown the way, that they went out to do 
some catching on their own account; and before long no less 
than thirty foals were secured in the camp. This placed 
Grieger in some difficulty. The order, which he had come 
to execute, was only for six. Ought he, then, to incur the 
additional expense of bringing home thirty? There was 
nothing for it but to telegraph home to find out. His journey 
to the nearest telegraph office and back took him over more 
than a thousand miles of country, and involved him in an 
absence of three weeks from the camp. When he arrived 
back, armed with permission 
to bring the lot, he found that 
the industrious Mongolians 
had increased the number to 
fifty-two. With these the 
long journey home was com- 
menced, the party consisting 
not only of the wild foals, but 
also of their foster-parents, 
the animals carrying the tra- 
vellers and their baggage, 
and thirty native recruits. 
Slowly the caravan wound its 
way over hill and dale, in 
rain and sunshine, in heat 
and cold. Anxiety for the 
safety of the captives was 
never absent. Many of them, 
as was inevitable, died on the 
journey, in spite of all the 
care that could be exercised. And in other ways the journey 
was decidedly eventful. 


Wild horses. 


88 BEASTS AND MEN 


Before many days were passed the first incident occurred, 
namely, the escape of the camels, owing to the carelessness 
of the attendants; and it was only with great trouble that 
their recapture could be effected. The attendants turned 
out to be a bad set; for after a few weeks Grieger noticed 
that they were becoming discontented. At last a deputation 
approached him and announced the intention of the entire 
company to throw up the work and abandon the caravan, 
saying that the way was too long, the journey too difficult, 


A herd of yaks. 


and making many other similar excuses. The money, paid 
them in advance, they would as conscientious men return. 
In vain did the traveller use all the arts of persuasion to in- 
duce the people to remain. In vain did he point out to them 
that the caravan would be totally lost if they were to desert 
him at this moment. At last the leaders of the mutiny pro- 
fessed themselves ready to remain, if a rise in salary were 
granted them. As soon as Grieger discovered that the whole 
affair was merely a vulgar attempt at extortion, he changed 
his tactics. Seizing his Kirghise whip, he promptly proceeded 
to distribute the augmentation of salary asked for, but in 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 89 


heavy blows instead of coin! This treatment was immedi- 
ately successful, the mutiny calmed down, the ringleaders 
begged for pardon ; and before long the caravan was jogging 
merrily along again, without the desertion of a single man. 
In all, the transportation to Hamburg took eleven months. 
Out of the fifty-two wild horses which had started, twenty- 
eight arrived safely at their journey’s end, where they were 
henceforth placed upon a diet of hulled oats, warm bran and 
carrots. Thus ends the story of how wild horses first came 
to Northern Europe. 

Of all the countries traversed by the animal dealer, none 
present such great difficulties as the vast plains and forests 
of Siberia. The problem has still to be solved as to the 
proper way of transporting wild sheep, ibex, roe, pheasants, 
tigers, wild asses and other dwellers in this region to civil- 
ised countries. The distances which have to be traversed 
are immense; and as a rule there are no roads at all to travel 
on. Food for men and animals has to be carried by the party, 
for it often cannot be obtained by the way; and half the 
animals usually die in transit. A few years ago I equipped 
another expedition, and sent it out to this Kobdo country, to 
obtain some young specimens of the argali or giant wild 
sheep. This I hoped to cross with the larger kinds of our 
domesticated sheep, so as to obtain a breed of giant domestic 
sheep which might be serviceable to farmers. The expedition 
was unsuccessful ; and another which I sent out soon after fared 
no better. More than sixty of the animals were captured, but 
lived only a short time. In the course of the journey home 
every one of them died from diarrhoea. These two fruitless 
expeditions cost no less than £5,000. 


Of all the animals which the dealer endeavours to catch, 
perhaps none are so easy or less dangerous than snakes. In 
fact, snake-hunting might be better described as collecting 
than hunting. In the great marshes of India, the so-called 
Sundarbans, snakes are sought out during the cool season in the 


90 BEASTS AND MEN 


early mornings by the natives, who are well acquainted with the 
haunts of the reptiles. Before dawn they are so benumbed 
with cold that they can easily be caught. This is done either 
by means of a net at the end of a long pole, or by a long forked 
stick, by which they can be fixed round the neck and pressed 
to the ground. In this position it is not difficult to make them 
secure. During the dry season another method is employed. 


WEA 


Argali (wild sheep). 


Nets are laid out round a selected spot, which is then set on 
fire. The snakes, in their hurry to escape, become entangled 
in the nets; but this method can only be used for the large 
reptiles, as the smaller kinds would easily pass through the 
mesh. In snakes supplied to me from Calcutta I have often 
noticed marks of burning. But on these animals wounds 
soon heal up. 

The great python of Borneo (Python reticulatus) is caught 
by the natives when it is torpid from the effects of a heavy 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT gt 


meal. It is then entangled in a large net thrown over it, 
and safely lodged in a bamboo basket. For longer journeys, 
they are placed in large four-cornered boxes with holes bored 
for the admission of air. 

The most remarkable way of finding snakes is that re- 
sorted to by the snake-finders of India, who discover them by 
the smell. They go in the early morning, when the creatures 
are torpid, taking with them their baskets and ropes, and 
proceed to smell out their quarry, which are thereupon dug 
out of their holes and secured. Many large species, including 
the python, are caught in this fashion. 

In old times snake-charmers went everywhere, showing 
off in every circus or menagerie in Europe and America. 
At that time the snake trade was very lucrative, and I used 
to import them by the gross. Once I received as many as 
276 specimens in a single day, all belonging to the one 
species Python bwvitatus, which sold largely in America. 
Snake-charmers now belong to the past, and there is little 
money to be made in the trade. : 

It is a far cry 
from the sweltering 
plains of India to the 
cold northern seas, 
but I hope I may be 
allowed to take this 
jump and describe the 
methods of capturing 
the common seal and 
other kinds of pinni- 
peds. The work is 
comparatively simple. 
Advantage is taken 
of the fact that seals 
come out of the water 
by night to sleep on 
the sand-banks. Under cover of darkness the hunters creep 


Sea-lions in Peru. 


92 _BEASTS AND MEN. 


cautiously up to the sleeping-ground, and set long nets along 
one side of it. While this is being done a second party of men 
go round in boats to. the other side of the sand-bank, and there 
await the signal that all is ready. As soon as the signal is 
given, this second party make for the sleeping seals with loud 
shouts and gesticulations. The terrified animals rush precipi- 
tately towards the sea and soon become entangled in the nets. 
Without delay net bags are thrown over the young individuals 
to prevent their escaping. These creatures have very sharp 
teeth, and it is advisable for the hunters to wear stout 
Wellington boots when engaged in this occupation. I have 
known as many as thirty caught in this way in a single drive. 
Twenty of these were adults and soon died, but the rest were 
young and thrived well in captivity. 

Not the easiest part of the business is the transport of the 
animals to Europe in the sealing ships. The young seals are 
kept in great water tanks, and it is sometimes difficult to get 
them out when they have to be disembarked. Seals have to 
come to the surface of the water every few minutes for the 
purpose of breathing, and one of these intervals is chosen as 
an opportune moment to catch it either in a large landing net 
or with a noose. As so often happens among wild animals, 
the older individuals are very morose and unmanageable. 
They think of nothing but regaining their liberty, and cannot 
be persuaded to take any food. The young, on the contrary, 
seem quite happy in their new surroundings and soon learn 
all kinds of tricks. 


To my mind there is no nobler kind of game than the 
eland antelope. Specimens of this animal first came into my 
possession in a very curious manner, through the agency of 
Dr. Carl Peters, the famous traveller.. After a long day’s 
march under a burning African sun he arrived at the farm of 
a Boer in Rhodesia. In the course of the evening they fell 
to talking about the ravages which the tsetse-fly and the 
rinderpest wrought among the cattle. Dr. Peters had often 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 93 


before been struck by the great difficulties to which the lack 
of draught animals subjected the farmers. His present host 
had adopted a novel method of making good the deficiency. 
Seeing that domestic animals were impracticable, he proposed 
to catch the indigenous wild animals of the veldt and convert 
them into beasts of burden. Now the wild game of Rhodesia, 
though sadly diminished in numbers in the last fifty years, is 
stil] fairly abundant. If the herds are no longer to be num- 
bered in thousands, they may still be numbered in hundreds. 
Kudu, hartebeest, wildebeest, ostriches and eland antelopes 
are all plentifully distributed throughout the country ; and the 
Boer had selected the antelopes for breaking in as draught- 
animals. As Dr. Peters showed interest in his scheme, he 
took him to a neighbouring enclosure where half a dozen fine 
elands were confined. He explained to Dr. Peters that he 
hoped to be able to use them not only for ploughing, but also 
as carriage horses. The traveller asked him at what price he 
would value these antelopes when their training had been con- 
cluded. The Boer named a figure which, though certainly 
none too small, appeared to afford Peters some amusement. 
The latter produced from his pocket an English illustrated 
magazine with which he had beguiled the weary evenings for 
some days previously, and showed the Boer a number of pic- 
tures of Carl Hagenbeck’s Institute at Hamburg. “This 
man,” said he, “will give more for the animals than they 
are worth to you; why not sell them to him? ” The Boer 
adopted the suggestion on the spot and | suddenly received 
a telegram: “ Have sixteen eland antelopes. Offer them you 
so many thousand marks. Wire decision and take over in 
Rhodesia within six weeks.” I closed with the offer at once, 
and sent my traveller Johannsen to Rhodesia to fetch them 
home. Long delays often occur before animals can be trans- 
ported to their destination, but in the course of nine months 
he brought home not only the sixteen eland antelopes which 
I purchased from the Boer, but a number of others which he 
succeeded in catching by a device which he learnt from the 


94 BEASTS AND MEN 


Boers and negroes in the neighbourhood. This device is, I 
think, sufficiently interesting to be worth recording. The pre- 
liminary operations are similar to those by which the Mongolian 
wild horses are captured. When a herd of elands has been 
found, about thirty mounted hunters surround them, and, steal- 
ing cautiously up, suddenly burst upon them from all sides. It 
would be a hopeless task to try to catch the adults, for an eland 
bull weighs over a ton and is much more powerful and fleet 
than any horse. They break into a furious gallop and soon 
vanish out of sight. But the young, with their ungainly stilt- 
like legs, are soon overtaken ; the hunter rides up to them and 
secures them by catching hold of their tails—a manceuvre 
which is often not very easy to carry out while on the gallop. 

In order that the animal may be kept alive, when caught, 
various precautions have to be taken. The hindlegs are 
tethered, and the body is carefully wrapt up in a warm rug. 
In the complete exhaustion which follows its flight for life, it 
is particularly necessary to guard it from the dangerous effects 
of a change of temperature. But another precaution has to 
be taken, much more remarkable. When the eland is com- 
fortably wrapt up in the rug it receives a subcutaneous in- 
jection of some liquid the constitution of which my travellers 
have unfortunately not been able to discover. Probably it is 
morphia or something of the sort, for a few minutes after the 
injection a stupefied condition supervenes and the antelope 
quickly falls into a deep sleep. Without this injection the 
creature would scarcely live a quarter of an hour; before 
this method of treating them was hit upon, they used to die 
from heart strain. When it has gone to sleep, it is carried 
back to the camp and laid in a secluded place, where it re- 
mains in a deep sleep for nearly twenty-four hours. On its 
awakening it is led to a milch-cow which has been previously 
secured, and it is trained to regard the cow as its foster- 
mother. The cow's legs have first to be tied, for she soon real- 
ises that it is not her own calf but a new arrival from the veldt. 
After a few days the foster-parent and child come to know 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 95 


each other. In the present instance a delay of some months 
was necessary before my traveller considered the young ante- 
lopes strong enough to undergo the arduous journey to the 
coast. Johannsen occupied himself in the meanwhile in carry- 
ing out hunting expeditions in all directions and thus securing 
some valuable additions to my collection. In the accompany- 
ing photograph the elands may be seen on their way down 


Transport from the interior of Africa with eland antelopes. 


to the coast harnessed to a buggy with a team of oxen, mules, 
and zebras. 


I may suitably terminate this chapter by stating my 
opinion that science is in all probability still incompletely 
acquainted even with the larger members of the world’s 
fauna. My travellers explore the most remote parts of every 
continent, and it is therefore natural that they should often 
bring back information which is of great interest to zoologists. 
They often hear stories from the natives concerning strange 
animals which, from the descriptions given, would appear to 
be unknown to Europeans. It might be supposed that these 
are mere cock-and-bull stories, either exaggerated descriptions 


96 BEASTS AND MEN 


of well-known animals, or else intentional fabrications. But 
such is not usually the case. Much more often, the informa- 
tion given by the natives will lead to the discovery of new 
species, if the instructions of the savages be properly carried 
out. For instance, the case of the discovery of the remains 
of the giant sloth in South America is famous, and all my 
readers will remember the excitement which was caused when 
the existence of the okapi was made known. Native reports 
are more reliable than is commonly supposed. 

Some years ago I received reports from two quite distinct 
sources of the existence of an immense and wholly unknown 
animal, said to inhabit the interior of Rhodesia. Almost iden- 
tical stories reached me, firstly, through one of my own 
travellers, and, secondly, through an English gentleman, who 
had been shooting big-game in Central Africa. The reports 
were thus quite independent of each other, and, as a matter 
of fact, the Englishman and my traveller had made their way 
into Rhodesia from opposite directions, the one from the north- 
east and the other from the south-west. The natives, it 
seemed, had told both my informants that in the depth of the 
great swamps there dwelt a huge monster, half elephant, half 
dragon. This, however, is not the only evidence for the ex- 
istence of the animal. It is now several decades ago since 
Menges, who is of course perfectly reliable, heard a precisely 
similar story from the negroes ; and, still more remarkable, on 
the walls of certain caverns in Central Africa there are to be 
found actual drawings of this strange creature. From what 
I have heard of the animal, it seems to me that it can only 
be some kind of dinosaur, seemingly akin to the brontosaurus. 
As the stories come from so many different sources, and all 
tend to substantiate each other, I am almost convinced that 
some such reptile must be still in existence. At great ex- 
pense, therefore, I sent out an expedition to find the monster, 
but unfortunately they were compelled to return home with- 
out having proved anything, either one way or the other. In 
the part of Africa where the animal is said to exist, there are 


HOW WILD ANIMALS ARE CAUGHT 97 


enormous swamps, hundreds of square miles in extent, and 
my travellers were laid low with very severe attacks of fever. 
Moreover, that region is infested by bloodthirsty savages who 
repeatedly attacked the expedition and hindered its advance. 
Notwithstanding this failure, I have not relinquished the hope 
of being able to present science with indisputable evidence of 
the existence of the monster. And perhaps if I succeed in 
this enterprise naturalists all the world over will be roused to 
hunt vigorously for other unknown animals; for if this pro- 
digious dinosaur, which is supposed to have been extinct for 
hundreds of thousands of years, be still in existence, what 
other wonders may not be brought to light? 


CHAPTER IV. 
CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY. 


SreE1nc how intimately I have always been associated. with 
wild animals, it is a remarkable circumstance that I should 
never have met with any severe accident. That I have 


escaped the jaws of the tiger, the crushing feet of the elephant, i 


the horns of the buffalo, “the cruel coils of the serpent, is no 


doubt partly due to the prudence and care which I always... 


observe in dealing with these creatures ; but I am bound to 


add that wild animals are not nearly so savage as is commonly 3 
imagined. On the contrary they are often most affectionate, ~ 


and I have had many friends among lions, tigers and pan- 


thers, which were no harder to handle than pet dogs. More- 


over their affection is very enduring, and survives ane after 
they have found another home. 

The following is a remarkable instance of the memory of _ 
carnivores for people who have won their confidence. Forty 
years ago or more I| bought a pair of young tigers, one of | 


which caught a bad cold, which produced in him an affection ~ 


of the eyes from which he became blind. For months | 


nursed him with the utmost care, going every day to his cage 


to make him as comfortable as possible, so that a very in- 


timate relationship between us grew up. At length my de- | 


votion was rewarded and he completely recovered. Later on, 
he and his mate were sold to Professor Peters of the Berlin 
Zoological Gardens, and here the pair lived for many years ; 
but to the day of his death the tiger whom I cured retained 
a most faithful attachment to me. Often I did not see him 


for long periods together, but, notwithstanding this, he would 
98 


‘U9[Z DIOAIUIED OY, 


Net 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY IOI 


always fall into the most violent excitement on hearing my 
voice in the distance ; and when | came up he would purr 
like a cat, and was never satisfied till I had gone into the cage 
and spent some little time with him. Often on these occasions 
have the public stood round in astonishment at the spectacle 
of this strange meeting. In memory of this tiger I had a 
water-colour painted for me by the animal painter Leutemann, 
which is still in my possession. 

My animal friends are scattered about in many parts of the 
world, carefully guarded behind bolts and bars. Their life 
is not so long as ours; old age and death come very quickly 
upon them ; and hence most of my friendships are things of 
the past. One of my oldest friends is a lion now resident in 
the Zoological Gardens at Cologne. This lion came from 
North Africa, and was one of a pair purchased by me when 
five years old from a Belgium menagerie in 1890. They 
were exceedingly handsome and perfectly tame, so that, 
although I only had them for two months, that period was 
sufficient for a lifelong friendship to grow up. I spent a con- 
siderable time with the animals every day and was very 
sorry when at last they had to go. One went to the Zoologi- 
cal Gardens at Hamburg and the other to Cologne. The 
one that stayed in Hamburg died several years ago, but the 
other is still alive, and, though now old and infirm, he still re- 
members me. Once when I was travelling in a train to 
Cologne I made a bet that he would recognise me without 
seeing me, if I merely shouted to him from some distance off. 
And I proved to be right ; for as soon as he heard the sound 
of my voice, the old lion came up to the bars and would not 
rest until I had greeted and stroked him. 

I once madeasimilar experiment in the Zoological Gardens 
at Bronx Park in New York. There lived there two lions 
and a tiger with whom I had once been well acquainted but 
whom I had not seen for a long time past. The director, Dr. 
Hornaday, did not believe that the animals would recognise me ; 
but he was wrong. No sooner had I entered the door and 


102 BEASTS AND MEN 


approached the den, than the creatures became attentive and 
stared at me like a human being who saw a familiar face but 
could not put a name toit. But the moment that I called out 
the names by which I uscd to address them in Hamburg 
they sprang up and ran to the bars, purring loudly while I 
stroked and caressed them. There could scarcely be more 
convincing evidence of the excellent memories which carni- 
vores possess or of the fidelity which they show to 
friends. 

It is not necessary to go as far as New York to find evi- 
dence of this fidelity, as it can be seen any day in my animal 
park at Stellingen. Here any sceptic may convince himself 
that the wild beasts know and love their master. They 
crouch down by the bars, lick my hands, and are delighted 
when I stroke them. I am fond of all animals, but carnivores 
are my special favourites. So attached to them do I become 
that, in spite of their costly upkeep, I often keep them with me 
for a longer time than is desirable from the strictly business 
point of view. 

In the open carnivore gorge at Stellingen there is on 
view an old lion who has been in my possession for eighteen 
years. His name of “Trieste” was given him many years 
ago when he was imported through the port of that name. 
Trieste is a great Somali lion, very handsome when he was 
young, and even now thoroughly majestic in his carriage. 
Being by trade a performer, he has covered in his pro- 
fessional travels a considerable portion of the earth’s surface. 
The exhibition at Chicago in 1893 and that at St. Louis 
in 1904 were both honoured by the presence of Trieste as a 
guest. Now that his life’s work is over, he is in much better 
circumstances than many human performers who have grown 
old in their profession. And Trieste is worthy of his good 
fortune. He is as tame, true and faithful as a dog ; indeed 
I often treat him as if he were a dog. One day last summer 
I noticed with sorrow that my old friend was lame, and upon 
further | observation I found that he was suffering pain. 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY 103 


After a close examination I found that on each of the 
animal's hind feet two claws had grown into the flesh. Now 
it may well be supposed that the necessary operation would 
be a matter of great difficulty—the animal firmly bound and 
the operators going in danger of their lives. But nothing 
can be farther from the truth. In such matters Trieste can 
be treated as though he were a sensible human being. Hav- 
ing been ordered to lie down, his claws were clipped with 
large sharp clippers, and the points were drawn out. During 


Having a bath. 


the whole procedure, which was by no means painless, the 
lion kept perfectly still. For several days the wounds were 
well washed out; they soon healed, and he is now once 
again well and happy. 

As a corresponding instance of tameness among tigers, I 
may mention a great Siberian tiger, which in the summer 
of 1893 was sold from Vladivostock to the Zoological Gardens 
in Hamburg, and thence came into my possession. This 
animal was really as tame as any household pet. I could do 
anything with him, and used even to take him with me into my 


104 BEASTS AND MEN 


sitting-room. He was, moreover. a beautiful creature, and as 
I was very loth to part with him, he remained over a year 
in my care. As I ascertained later, the animal had been 
brought up quite young at Vladivostock, and I have it on 
certain authority that he ran about free for more than a year, 
without ever causing any mischief. Every morning, when I 
went my rounds, I visited my favourite and caressed him. If 
I happened to pass his cage in haste without noticing him, 
he would attract. my attention with a mewing sound, to re- 
mind me that I had not spoken to him. . 

I fear that much of what I now write will be received by 
many with incredulity, for in the popular estimation carni-. 
vores conjure up a vision of all that is faithless, savage, and 
cruel. But it is certainly a mistake to call them cruel. It is, 
their nature in the wild state to hunt living prey, and they 
have to kill in order to live. We are too prone to forget 
how many millions of animals are hunted and slaughtered, 
both by land and sea, to provide food for human beings ; 
and it is as reasonable to accuse mankind of cruelty on this 
score, as it is to accuse carnivores. Carnivores love their 
young just as we do, and can also be affectionate and faithful. 
Of course one often comes across black sheep, but that is due 
either to their having been caught when adult, or to their 
being the victims of bad rearing. 

All carnivores without exception, when they are caught 
young and are properly treated, are capable of being brought 
up as domestic pets. Their so-called wild nature does not 
break out unless something happens to put the animals in a 
rage ; and this, after all, is just the same with domestic 
animals. As to what can be achieved in the way of taming 
wild animals, I have certainly had more experience than any 
other human being. Both intelligence and love of animals 
are essential to success in taming. Then it is quickly dis- 
covered that among animals, as among men, good and bad 
are mixed, and that, while the good will develop of itself, the 
bad can be suppressed. I shall shortly give some evidence, 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY 105 


too, of the intensity of feeling which prevails among wild 
animals. 

The management of carnivores which have been captured 
in the adult condition is, of course, very difficult, and it is quite 
impossible to train such animals to the extent that is now con- 
sidered quite ordinary in the case of young animals. To deny 
this is simply nonsense. Nothing more than a superficial 
polish can be imparted to animals which are grown up when 
caught. 

About fifteen years ago I obtained from Calcutta the most 
savage, as also the largest and heaviest, Bengal tiger that I 
have ever come across. I received him from the Zoological 
Gardens in Calcutta, only a few months after he had been 
captured. During his first few days in Hamburg he was ina 
furious rage; whenever I approached his cage he would fly 
to the bars and stretch his paws through in his savage 
attempts to seize me. I naturally did not relish this sort 
of thing, and kept at a respectful distance. However, I paid 
the animal a visit every day and showed him that his efforts 
to harm me were quite fruitless ; as soon as I approached him 
I made a purring noise, addressing him, as it were, in his own 
language. As time wore on the animal became quieter. To 
be sure, as soon as I appeared he still sprang angrily against 
the bars of his cage, but he no longer struck at me with his 
paws. After a week I began to take him a piece of meat 
every day, for the way to the heart lies through the stomach 
—a proverb which applies not only among the lower ani- 
mals. After four weeks I could just venture to touch the great 
beast ; I had to keep my eyes open, however, for now and 
again during these experiments he would lash out at me with 
his claws. I kept this tiger for about three months, by the 
end of which time he had realised that nobody wished to 
hurt him. When he saw me he would come quietly to the 
bars and allow me to stroke him. I had succeeded in curing 
him of his ferocity, and moreover, after he left me, he does not 
seem to have relapsed, for in the Dresden Zoological Gardens 


106 BEASTS AND MEN 


—whither he went—he allowed both the director of the 
Gardens and his own attendant to stroke him. 

I remember, however, an even more remarkable case. In 
the summer of 1905 my brother, John Hagenbeck of Colombo, 
sent me a panther which had been in captivity only a short 
time. I gave this panther to the Swiss sculptor, Urs Eggen- 
schwyler, who designed the beautiful rocky cliffs in the 
Stellingen Gardens. Eggenschwyler, who is unusually fond 
of animals, and who keeps for his pleasure a number of lions 
and panthers, was delighted with my present, and commenced 
at once to train the animal. In less than a fortnight, he had 
so far succeeded that it would turn round and round in ‘its 
cage when he commanded it to do so. The artist had pre- 
viously taught this trick in Zurich to a number of other ani- 
mals which had been captured adult, and on the present 
occasion he was so successful that in less than four weeks the 
panther could be made to revolve as many as eight times in 
succession. The animal’s obedience was, of course, rewarded 
with a piece of meat. 

Perhaps after what I have said my readers may think that 
after all there is nothing very alarming about the great carni- 
vores—that they are, in fact, not much more than a kind of 
meat-eating lamb. In my chapter on the training of wild 
animals I shall show that the training is by no means so 
simple as it sounds. Of its danger there can be no question, 
but nevertheless it is the case that many of those who deal 
with the carnivores professionally owe their lives to the good 
temper of the animals. 

In this connection J remember an extraordinary nocturnal 
adventure, which would, I imagine, have alarmed the bravest 
ofus. In the beginning of the sixties I was bringing from 
Cologne to Hamburg a huge collection of animals, which I 
had obtained in France and Belgium. Among the animals 
there was a four-year-old lion, which I had obtained from the 
Zoological Gardens in Cologne, then quite recently established. 
The lion was placed in a great kennel and, along with all the 


Stellingen babies, 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY 109 


other animals, was installed in the railway van. A man 
named Druard, who was inspector of the Zoological Gardens, 
and had previously held the position of head-keeper in 
Christian Berg’s menagerie, was in charge of the animals 
during the journey. Everything having been satisfactorily 
arranged, Druard closed the door of the van, and made him- 
self thoroughly comfortable. 

The train rumbled on through the night and the un- 
suspecting keeper dosed peacefully, perchance enjoying some 
sweet dream. Suddenly, in the midst of his slumbers, he felt 
a great weight upon his chest, and awoke with a start. In 
the darkness, not a yard from him, there shone two greenish 
lights, and he felt hot fetid breath on his face. Overcome 
with terror he peered into the gloom and could just discern 
the shaggy outline of a lion’s mane. For a second he lay 
quite still, hoping that it was only a nightmare—vain hope, 
however ; the lion had escaped from his cage, and was amus- 
ing himself by paying a visit to the solitary sleeper. Druard 
was accustomed to dealing with animals, and he knew that 
this lion was a good-tempered one. So he decided at once 
that the best thing to do was somehow or other to tie the 
animal up. For the rest, he must share the place with the 
lion until the next station, and make the best of his awkward 
situation. Luckily no trouble broke out between the lion and 
the other animals. Had it done so, the man would never have 
lived to tell the tale. Druard quietly untied a sash which he 
wore round his body, and placed it like a cord round the lion’s 
neck. Then, groping his way through the dark and jolting 
van, he succeeded in fastening the other end of the sash to 
the handle of the door. At the next station he sounded the 
alarm, lights were brought, and the lion was led back to his 
cage—a stronger box being provided for him before the 
journey was continued. Thus ended a bloodless adventure, 
which nearly cost a careless man his life. 

The occasions on which human beings are attacked by 
captive carnivores are fortunately rare. But quarrels be- 


110 BEASTS AND MEN 


tween the beasts themselves are more frequent, unless they 
are carefully watched and separated from each other when 
necessary. And among the lower animals, as with ourselves, 
the trouble usually arises over the gentler sex. In a troupe 
which Heinrich Mehrmann exhibited in Chicago, Berlin, and 
elsewhere, there was a fine lion called ‘“‘ Leo” and a great 
Bengal tiger called “Castor”. The lion was a bachelor, 
while the tiger was mated to a beautiful Bengal tigress. As ill- 
luck would have it, when the breeding time arrived the tigress 
proved an irresistible attraction to the lion. The tiger, natur- 
ally irritable, and perhaps not unreasonably jealous, regarded 
the lion’s proceedings with disapproval, and the relations be- 
tween the two rivals became strained. The tiger was as 
jealous as a Turk ; the lion as determined as the consciousness 
of his own strength could make him ; the tigress was prepared 
impartially to receive the attentions of either. One morning, 
as I was walking in my Zoological Garden at Neuer Pferde- 
markt, I heard a terrific roaring which proceeded from the 
direction of the great open-air cage. I immediately hurried 
to the spot. Sure enough, a bloody duel was taking place 
between the lion and the tiger. Both were standing on their 
hindlegs and were giving each other such mighty boxes on 
the ears that their hair was already scattered about. The 
sight of the two great animals standing in battle array, and on 
the point of rushing into a life-and-death struggle, I shall never 
forget. They were, however, much too valuable for this love 
intrigue to be allowed to end with the death of either of them. 
The keeper of this division, who happened to be near, sprang 
into the little front cage and from thence into the big cage 
where the animals were, and succeeded in separating the com- 
batants by shouting and cracking his whip. Many tufts of 
hair and pools of blood were left to show where the fight had 
been. 

All carnivores, but especially lions and tigers, are ex- 
tremely ill-tempered at breeding times. In trained troupes, 
where both lions and lionesses are necessary, it is frequently — 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY II! 


essential to remove the males from the troupe altogether dur- 
ing certain periods. Where the trainer omits to do this, he 
runs great risk of trouble, and he himself may be mauled. 
Even with my best four-footed friends, I have found that 
during these periods they are apt to be surly and quite in- 
tractable. The ardour of these animals is boiling hot, and 
their jealousy of any possible rival is even greater than their 
tenderness towards the object of their affection. It is very 
remarkable, too, that a love-sick lion is not only jealous of his 
own kind, but also of any human being—the keeper not ex- 
cepted—who may happen to approach his cage. 

It is my experience that lions, if they are well taken care 
of, will frequently live for more than thirty years. It happens 
sometimes that animals come into my possession, which I 
have previously known well, perhaps years before. For in- 
stance, in a menagerie which I purchased a few years ago 
there was a lioness that I had already possessed twenty 
years earlier. It was of course difficult to find a purchaser 
for her. At that time I had just supplied a lioness for breed- 
ing purposes to the Zoological Gardens at Cologne, but 
Director Funk, who at that time had the management of the 
institution, was not quite satisfied with the specimen. I 
therefore invited him to come to Hamburg to choose another, 
and in this way it came about that the old lioness was paid 
a great compliment. She was very well preserved, was of 
unusual beauty, and still possessed her full set of teeth. 
Moreover, when I came up to her cage, accompanied by Mr. 
Funk, she sprang to and fro vigorously in her delight at see- 
ing me. Thus it happened that of all the lionesses, Mr. 
Funk decided to choose this one. When I told him the 
true state of affairs—which was, perhaps, ungallant to the 
old lioness, but was honourable to the would-be purchaser— 
he refused to believe me, and supposed that I was unwilling 
to sell such a beautiful specimen. If I had allowed him to 
take her, however, he would not have derived much satis- 
faction from this brood-lioness, for according to my experience 


112 BEASTS AND MEN 


in the matter these animals are thoroughly fertile up to the 
age of sixteen, but not after that time. The director, whose 
error was very naturally caused by the youthful appearance 
of the lioness, eventually took another specimen which has 
proved highly satisfactory. 

Lions may be considered sexually mature at the age of 
two and a half years, but to obtain really strong offspring, it 
is desirable to wait for another year. In the case of tigers, 
according to my observations, sexual maturity arrives in cap- 
tivity a year later than with lions. The capacity to reproduce 
their kind endures with all the cat-tribe for about twelve 
years, and expires therefore during the sixteenth or seven- 
teenth year. 

I had an experience in the breeding of jaguars about the 
year 1870, when a Hungarian traveller brought from Para- 
guay two pairs of large, full-grown jaguars. The jaguars, 
which the Hungarian had captured himself, were already 
well on in years. I should have much liked to possess these 
animals, but I was compelled to refrain from the purchase, 
as the price asked was too high for me; they were bought 
by the menagerie owner, Manders, who in those days had 
the largest menagerie in England, and he succeeded in ob- 
taining several litters from the two pairs, the young cubs 
being excellently brought up by their mothers. 

Among many fortunate experiments, I succeeded in breed- 
ing two beautiful little cubs from a pair of captured ounces 
during the year 1906. The parents were cripples, each of 
them lacking a hind foot, and it was in consequence difficult 
to find a purchaser for them. I therefore arranged a nice 
secret recess in their cage, and placed the cage so that the ani- 
mals could not be disturbed. Barely two months later, signs of 
mutual affection between the two animals were to be observed, 
and in the middle of May my keeper informed me that a 
couple of young ones had been born. Naturally, after this 
occurrence great care was taken to avoid disturbing the ounces 
in any way ; they were fed and watered, and the cage was 


“sqno JaSry, 


ee 


aoe 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY 115 


cleaned in the afternoons, but with this exception the animals 
were left absolutely in peace. After four days I removed for 
a moment the lid, which closed the secret recess, and I then 
saw the two pretty little cubs lying in a nest which the parents 
had lined with hair from their winter fur. Four weeks later 
the father of this litter was found dead in his cage, but the 
mother and young are still living. 

The lions and tigers in my animal-park are kept in the 
carnivore glen, which is not surrounded by a barrier, but is 
separated from the public by a deep trench only. They are 
allowed out into the open air every day without exception dur- 
ing bothsummer and winter. The weather troubles them very 
little, and they range about in the open much more during 
the winter than they do during the summer when it is hot. 
Every morning the sliding door between the cage and the 
glen is opened, so that the animals can go out; they can, 
however, always return to the inner den if they please. 
Nature comes to the help of the animals and makes it possible 
for them to adapt themselves to the climate. We have ob- 
served that the exotic animals, which are not confined in 
winter, grow a thick fur that protects them from the cold. I 
am quite convinced that it is possible to transplant lions to 
any climate whatever, provided they are allowed out into the 
open during spring when they are young. I take it, that such 
lions would eventually grow in winter a woolly covering 
beneath their hair, exactly as is found to be the case with 
Siberian tigers and panthers. : 

Interbreeding occurs between lions, tigers, and other 
kinds of cats, even without the intervention of man, and it is 
therefore not very difficult to carry out experiments in cross- 
breeding. I have bred many young from lions and tigers ; of 
such hybrids, I possess at the present time a male five and a 
half years old, and another male and a female of three and a 
half. The father was a small Somali lion and the mother a 
small tigress, the offspring of the cross being, curiously enough, 
considerably larger than their oe The one male hybrid 


116 BEASTS AND MEN 


weighs as much alone as the two parents together. They are 
powerful animals with strong heads, and are faintly striped. 
When people see them for the first time they wonder whether 
they are looking at lions or tigers. These queer creatures are 
unusually tame, and of a very mild disposition. According 
to our experiments thus far, they have unfortunately never 
been found to be fertile. 


The youngest of the Hagenbeck tamily. 


A cross between a panther and a puma was undertaken 
at my suggestion in a certain small English menagerie. A 
number of young ones were born, but they all died except 
one, and there was nothing very noteworthy about the sur- 
vivor. I have also heard of a cross between a tiger 
and a female panther, but the young one was born pre- 
maturely and had no vitality. I know of another similar case. 
In a small German menagerie there was quite a happy 
marriage between a lion and a female panther. The panther 


CARNIVORES IN CAPTIVITY 117 


gave birth three times, but unfortunately she proved herself a 
monster wholly lacking in maternal feelings, for she proceeded 
to devour her own cubs. On one occasion the owner of the 
menagerie succeeded in taking away the young from their 
mother, but they did not live long, and he foolishly threw 
them away instead of preserving them in spirit for scientific 
purposes. 

In the Zoological Gardens at Stuttgart, which are now 
unfortunately closed, some very interesting hybrids were 
bred by Herr Nill.) These were a cross between the brown 
bear and the polar bear. A short time ago I saw some 
more of these animals, which are in the Zoological Gardens 
in London. They are large heavy creatures, but not larger 
than their parents. One of them is a very curious fellow, a 
piebald, his fur being half greyish-brown and half white. 

The real difficulty in the treatment of captive carnivores 
begins, as we shall see in the next chapter, when one attempts 
to train them to perform; for here one is endeavouring to 
make the animals do what is contrary to all their natural 
instincts. All the difficulties, however, can be overcome by 
patience, by a careful study of the brute mind, and by a 
recognition of the good qualities which are to be found in 
every creature. 


CHAPTER V. 
TRAINING WILD ANIMALS. 


Tuers is probably no sphere in which the growth of humani- 
tarian sentiment has been more striking than in the treat- 
ment and training of performing animals. Obedience which 
in former days was due to fear is now willingly paid by the 
animal from motives of affection. The period when un- 
fortunate animals were driven to jump over a bar from dread 
of a whip or a red-hot iron—a disgrace to the humanity of 
man!—is gone by. Sympathy with the animal, patience 
with its deficiencies, has brought about a perfection of educa- 
tion which cruelty altogether failed to secure. And at the 
same time relations between trainer and beast have improved 
too. The trainer is no longer a taskmaster, or the beast 
a slave. There subsists between them the wholesome and 
happy relation of teacher and pupil. The old crude method 
of training—if these stupid barbarities deserved to be called 
training ; torturing would have been a more appropriate 
expression—consisted in terrifying the animals with whips 
and red-hot irons, so that at the very sight of these imple- 
ments they would fly through the cage, and in doing so would 
leap over whatever obstacle was placed in their path. 

Many years ago I saw at an auction in England four 
“trained” lions, whose whiskers had been scorched off and 
who were frightfully burned about their mouths. Naturally, 
when the animals were treated in this way, it was no un- 
common thing for the trainers to be attacked and torn to 
pieces ; nor can one blame the lions and tigers which at last 


turned round upon their tormentors, for their better natures 
t18 


by 
Mp 


J 


one 
= 


Indian juggler with dancing bear. 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 121 


had been completely destroyed. Their lives were rendered 
insupportable, and they acted only in self-defence. 

It is a complete mistake to suppose that carnivores are 
vicious by nature; they are susceptible to kindness and good 
treatment, and will repay trust with trust. 

In my younger days I had plenty of opportunities of ob- 
serving these barbarous shows, not only in Germany but also 
in England; and from the beginning I felt a desire to institute 
amore rational and humane method oftraining. Performances 
with carnivores were first shown in Hamburg many years ago 
by the trainer Batty. This daring man—for the trainer of 
those days certainly carried on his profession in the face of 
very real danger—worked, if I remember rightly, with six 
lions. The exhibition consisted in terrifying the animals, and 
then driving them around the cage so that they were com- 
pelled from sheer fright to leap over barriers that were pushed 
in from the outside. Finally Batty would stand near the exit, 
fire several shots from a carbine, and then retire from the 
scene. The surprising part of such a performance was that 
the animals did not attack the trainer. 

There were, of course, individuals among the trainers who 
treated their animals as well as was possible under the brute- 
force system then prevailing. One of these was a man named 
Cooper. Cooper worked with a large troupe of lions, and 
with such success, that the American circus-owner Myers 
took over both the trainer and the lion troupe, into the 
tent-circus, with which he made a tour through Germany and 
Austria-Hungary. Cooper, an intelligent and experienced 
man, was well aware of the fact that for the successful train- 
ing of performing animals it is essential to discard at an early 
stage from the troupe any animal which evinced lack of intel- 
ligence, or ill-temper—a necessary step if an element of danger 
and uncertainty is not to attach itself to the exhibition. 

Whilst he was working with Myers, this animal-trainer 
had a serious adventure with some lions which he had 
procured from me. I received one day from Myers, an 


122 BEASTS AND MEN 


inquiry whether I could supply him with some lions. It 
happened that I had just purchased a whole collection of 
animals, among which were some lions that had always been 
used for performing purposes. Cooper came himself to 
Hamburg, inspected the animals, and, having completed the 
purchase, took them with him immediately to Brussels. At 
Brussels he made the grave mistake of putting all the lions, 
old and new, together, instead of slowly and gradually allow- 
ing the animals to become acquainted with each other. The 
new lions had never worked with other specimens and were 
strange to their surroundings. They became irritable and 
nervous, and when Cooper tried to drive them with a whip 
to the performance of the tricks, a catastrophe occurred. One 
of the new lions, and that the best-tempered of them, fell upon 
Cooper and mauled him savagely. Thus by a mutual mis- 
understanding, a humane trainer was wounded by a perfectly 
good-tempered lion, and the unfortunate man had to spend 
some time in bed before his wounds were healed. 

This event gave rise to a somewhat ludicrous incident. 
On the day after the accident I received a telegram from 
Myers from Brussels, saying that he wished me to take back 
one of my lions, as it was ill. When the telegram arrived, 
although I still knew nothing about the accident, I did not 
take the statement very seriously. I knew that the lion had 
been in perfect health at the time of delivery, so if anything 
had gone wrong since it must be due to an accident. __I wired, 
therefore, my refusal to take back a lion which had been de- 
livered in good health and for which I had received payment. 
Next day another telegram arrived which ran as follows: 
‘Your lion is dead: what shall I do with him?” To this | 
promptly replied: ‘ Pickle him if you like”. 

A few weeks later, when I had nearly forgotten the whole 
affair, a cask of pickled lion actually arrived in Hamburg for 
me! Probably the stupid fellow thought that by carrying out 
the advice tendered to him in my ironical answer, he would be 
putting himself in the right. Of course I immediately returned 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 123 


the official invoice to the station and refused to take delivery 
of the cask. Myers next tried to bring an action against me, 
but here too he failed, for when the lion’s remains were ex- 
amined it was proved that he died from ill usage. The skin 
around the vital parts was covered with extravasated blood, and 
all over the body there were marks of the terrible blows which 
the animal had received at the hands of the people who had 
rescued Cooper at the time of the accident. 

The treatment which the animals received from the old 
German animal trainers—such as Kreutzberg, Martin, Kallen- 
berg, Preuscher, Schmidt, Dagersell, and Kaufmann, all of 
whom travelled mainly in Germany and Austria—was on the 
whole less cruel than that I have just been describing, for 
they used to exhibit only such animals as had been tamed 
from their earliest days and which were therefore much less 
difficult to train. Some of these men used to give quite 
interesting performances, although, as they exhibited in small 
waggon-cages (contrasts indeed to the great arenas which are 
now used) it was not really possible for them to accomplish 
much. 

A son of the old Kreutzberg introduced a new branch of 
animal performance, which in barbarity it would be difficult 
to surpass. When Karl Kreutzberg was travelling through 
Spain with a troupe of seven lions, obtained from me, the 
people wished him to show them a fight between a lion and 
a bull. Kreutzberg was an enterprising fellow. He foresaw 
the popularity of the proposed exhibition, and, immediately 
falling in with the idea, set to work in an ingenious manner 
to make the performance, brutal as it was, a success. Kreutz- 
berg had hitherto been giving his performances in the oval 
waggon-cages, which were then general, and are still some- 
times to be seen. For the lion and bull fight, however, he 
had an especially large cage constructed, and devised a 
clever plan for bringing the two beasts into collision. The 
bull was led round and round the lion’s cage. The lion, 
maddened with hunger—he had received no food—made 


124 BEASTS AND MEN 


furious attempts to seize his prey. Then the performance 
itself commenced ; the bull was first led into the big cage, and 
then, after a pause—during which the excitement of the 
audience reached fever-heat—the lion was let loose. With 
a roar the great cat hurled himself upon the bull and dragged 
it to the ground; for as a rule the bull makes but a poor de- 
fence. The Spaniards and the Portuguese were delighted with 
this bloody scene, the fame of which spread far aad wide. 
Kreutzberg made a great deal of money out of the show. 

Other animal trainers have attempted, both in Spain and 
in the south of France, to imitate this performance of Kreutz- 
berg’s, but without success. They did not go to work with 
the same ingenuity as Kreutzberg. Instead of exhibiting the 
fight in a cage, they usually employed a large arena for the 
purpose. Now when a lion or tiger is let out of his small 
cage into a large arena, he becomes nervous and embarrassed, 
and in his bewilderment quite forgets his hunger. On three 
occasions I have supplied lions for. these fights. In two cases 
the lion paid no attention to the bull, and the bull took no 
notice of the lion ; neither wished to come to closer quarters 
with the other. On the third occasion, however, the upshot 
of the performance was more exciting. The bull charged 
the lion and wounded him so severely that the king of beasts, 
after lingering miserably for several weeks, passed away to 
the shadowy hunting grounds of his fathers. 

But these barbarous methods of training animals are now 
no longer in vogue; they have become obsolete for this 
reason if for no other : that it is impossible to achieve by ill- 
treatment one-hundredth part of what can be done by 
humane and intelligent methods. With the lower animals, 
as with human beings, real insight into their character can 
only be obtained by treating them sympathetically. This 
essential fact, which is now understood by all successful 
animal trainers, ought in no way to surprise us, for the 
brute intelligence differs from the human in degree only, not 
in kind. Animals soon perceive whether they are being 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 125 


treated sympathetically or otherwise, and quickly attach 
themselves to those who use them with kindness and con- 
sideration. Their memories, too, are usually very retentive, 
a fact highly important to the trainer’s art. I have already 
explained to the reader in my chapter on carnivores in 
captivity that these animals are not so dangerous as people 
who know nothing about them suppose ; indeed the majority 
of them, as I have already said, are by nature of a peaceful 
and even affectionate disposition. Strange as this may 
seem, it is nevertheless true. 

It is now universally recognised that each animal has its 
own peculiar characteristics, its own idiosyncrasies over and 
above the general psychological character which it shares 
with all other members of its species. This is a discovery I 
had to make for myself, and a most important one it is for 
the trainer, for, I say without fear of contradiction, that no 
trainer is fit for his vocation who is unable to read the char- 
acter of the individual animals which he has to train. And 
so it came about that when | introduced the humane system 
of training, as I may call it, I not only substituted for the 
whip and the red-hot iron a kindly method of educating the 
creatures (based upon an intelligent system of rewards and 
punishments) but I also instituted the practice of studying the 
character of each individual animal before including it in a 
troupe. At the present day all trainers worthy of the name 
follow this course. From the first moment that the animals 
come into possession of their teachers, they are carefully ob- 
served and have all their peculiarities noted with the view of 
applying to each the treatment best adapted to its tempera- 
ment. Some animals require more encouragement than 
others ; many, on the contrary, have to be treated sternly owing 
to their obstinate dispositions. Such differences as these 
must be known and acted upon by the trainer. It must be 
remembered that the trainer’s task is beset with difficulties, 
for he is demanding from his pupils something which is alto- 
gether foreign to their nature. It is not natural for a lion 


126 BEASTS AND MEN 


roaming the primeval forests of Africa to ride like a man on 
the back of a horse, or for a tiger prowling through an Indian 
jungle to amuse itself by jumping through a hoop. Moreover, 
not every lion or tiger can learn to perform tricks, however 
much trouble may be taken with his tuition. Some are hope- 
lessly clumsy in their movements, many never learn the duty 
of obedience, and others again are nervous and forget from 
day to day what they are taught. 

As I have already observed, it is a cardinal principle of 
the new school to expel from the troupe any animals which 
do not possess sufficient intelligence, or are too clumsy, to 
become successful performers. To recruit beasts indiscrimin-: 
ately is to court failure. Each beast must be carefully 
selected in. accordance with its aptitude for the work it is 
wanted to perform ; otherwise the success of an entire troupe 
may be marred by the misbehaviour of a single ill-chosen 
animal. It is absolutely essential to discard at once any 
animals which are unadapted to the work. I have previously 
related that on the occasion of my first attempt to introduce 
the humane system of training, out of twenty-one lions only 
four proved to be of any use for my purpose. Nor is the 
selection of the most likely performers always a very easy 
matter. There are animals which behave quite well at first, 
and only show a dislike for the work later, when they are set 
to perform with a large number of comrades; at such times 
they are apt to become very dangerous to the trainer if he 
fails to notice the change which has come over them. 

Let us consider the first stages in the training of a troupe 
of performing animals. We see lions, tigers, panthers, polar 
bears, and dogs, all young and unsophisticated, which have 
been selected because of their beauty, and because they 
appear to possess characters which will fit them to become 
performers. The first thing is to accustom the creatures to 
one another, for it would of course be. very dangerous, and 
probably disastrous, to let the whole medley of animals into 
a common cage without preparing them in any way for meet- 


j Apeays ‘Xoq ‘Apeaig 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 129 


ing each other. The cubs are therefore lodged in a row of 
single cages which are separated from each other by bars 
only ; the young animals can all see each other and converse 
together in their own language. The teacher gives individual 
attention to each of his pupils, visiting and petting each one 
in turn so that they all come to know and love their master. 
After a considerable time the animals are brought out for 
their first joint lesson, which takes place in a large arena, 
under the superintendence of the trainer to whom they have 
been accustomed. As in a kindergarten school, there is no 
real work done in the first lesson; the animals only learn to 
know one another more intimately, play about with each other 
and with their master, and make themselves familiar with 
their new surroundings. 

From the first moment that the creatures are let loose in 
the arena, the trainer keeps a watchful eye upon every 
member of the incipient troupe, and has frequently to interfere 
to prevent a quarrel. All young animals (and for the matter 
of that, all old animals too) are very fond of play, but they are 
exceedingly apt to lose their tempers during the game, and to 
misunderstand each other’s actions. Here, perhaps, a polar 
bear lumbers towards a lion and playfully tugs the latter’s 
mane; but the king of beasts misses the point of the joke, and 
gives his Arctic comrade a heavy box on the ears. This 
might be the beginning of serious trouble, but the trainer is 
quickly on the spot, and by a kindly blow on the ribs intimates 
to the lion that civility is expected during lessons. Or, again, 
it occurs to a tiger, who is perhaps by nature somewhat of 
a hooligan, to deal a blow with his paw at a panther which 
is peacefully trotting by him; the panther spits furiously and 
crouches to spring, but the trainer is again instantly on the 
spot, and soon separates the two combatants. Even during 
this first lesson it is possible for the trainer to get some idea of 
the character of his animals, to distinguish which of them are 
peaceable and which pugnacious, which are obedient and 
which obstinate and self-willed. In the second lesson all the 

9 


130 BEASTS AND MEN 


apparatus necessary for more advanced training is placed in 
the arena, for of course the programme of the proposed per- 
formance is thoroughly worked out before any beginning’ is 
made with the actual training of the animals. A number of 
blocks are piled up in the form of a staircase; and there is 
a barrel upon which a tiger has to learn to balance himself. 
The trainer carries a whip, but far more important than this 
is the leather pocket, attached to his belt, for it is here that 
he keeps the little pieces of meat- which are to reward the 
young carnivores for their obedience. The animals are let 
loose in the arena, and stare with astonishment at the imposing 
erection which they see before them. They are not allowed 
long, however, to satisfy their curiosity ; the lesson is begun 
forthwith, for the trainer knows well that it is only when they 
really get to work that he can form a sound judgment upon - 
the characters and abilities of the various members of his 
troupe. ; 

On the top step of the pyramid of wooden blocks a lion 
is to stand; on the second highest step two tigers, then two 
panthers, and in front, upon two blocks, the polar bears are 
_ to learn to sit, whilst the dogs are to be trained to jump over 
the backs of the panthers. The work of making the animals _ 
understand what is required of them needs infinite patience ; 
they have to be taught to take their own places on the pyra- 
mid, and it is long indeed before they realise that they must 
stay there quietly and not jump down before they receive the 
order to do so. And no less patience is required in making 
the tiger grasp the fact that he is intended to maintain his 
grotesque position upon the rolling barrel, for the great beast, ~ 
naturally enough, does not readily comprehend the object of 
this performance. | 

From the very commencement every step in the proceed- 
ings has to be carefully thought out and pre-arranged, and 
their respective parts in the performance have to be so 
thoroughly drilled into all the animals that they acquire an 
absolutely inveterate habit of doing the right thing at the 


a 
i) 
} 

= 

wa 
wo 

a 

| 
c 
io) 
rat 

AC) 

a) 


9* 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 133 


right moment. Thus when the stage of rehearsals is over, 
and the performance is given before an audience, the pro- 
gramme is worked through almost mechanically. As soon as 
the animals which are to compose a troupe have been chosen, 
each one is given a name of its own by which it is always 
called, and as they hear their names shouted whenever any- 
thing is required of them, they soon grow accustomed to the 
sound. The first thing to be done is to give each animal a 
definite place of its own, and with this object in view small 
blocks are placed round the arena by the wall, and each four- 
footed performer must be taught to sit upon his own special 
block, and, after each trick which he has performed or after each - 
scene in which he has taken part, to trot back to this block as 
a matter of course. This is the first thing for the animals to 
learn. The trainer therefore walks up to a lion and holds a 
piece of meat in front of him, trying in this way to lead the 
brute to a block. Or perhaps he uses rougher methods, and 
pulls the creature along by its hair. When the spot is 
reached, the reward is not yet earned; the lion has to climb 
upon the block, and only when he has done this does he re- 
ceive his prize. It never occurs to the lion, however, that he 
is supposed to remain upon the block ; and having eaten the 
meat he immediately leaps off and proceeds to enjoy himself 
in the arena. The trainer must then lead him back to the 
block, and make him stand upon it once more. This has to be 
repeated over and over again until at last the lion begins to 
understand what his master wishes him to do. The same 
process has to be gone through with every member of the 
troupe. When in this way they have all been taught to take 
up their correct positions round the arena, they are then 
ready to learn the more advanced parts of the training. 
After a considerable period has elapsed and all the move- 
ments have been repeated many times over with each animal, 
the troupe at last reaches the stage at which they answer to 
their names like pet dogs, and will stand or sit patiently upon 
their blocks around the arena until they are called by their 


134 _ BEASTS AND MEN 


master. This is of course the first and easiest stage of their 
education ; but even as early as this, many turn out to be 
unfit for the work through viciousness or other fault. Punish- 
ment in these cases would be of no use. It would only make 
the animals more stubborn than before ; and if they were kept 
in the troupe their fellow-pupils would soon be spoilt by the 
bad example. There is nothing for it but to replace them by 
more promising animals. The next thing to be done is to 
teach the tricks with which the public is to be astonished. 
The living pyramid has to be constructed over and over 
again. The tiger needs many lessons before he can stand 
upon his rolling barrel. The reader may easily perceive how 
great is the strain on the temper of the animal trainer, when 
he understands how many hundreds of times each small move- 
ment has to be gone through, and that the slightest loss of 
self-control on his part would ruin the whole of the proceedings. 
But while he is careful to keep his temper, he must at the same 
time maintain the strictest discipline. As he leads them up- 
ward step by step in their difficult task, he must imbue them 
with the feeling that disobedience is an impossibility. I need 
hardly say that the arduous labour involved in training wild 
animals can only be successfully carried out by one who is 
really fond of them. A genuine affection is needful for the 
establishment of mutual confidence between teacher and pupils. 
Courage too is most essential, for it must never be forgotten 
that however domesticated they may appear to be, they are yet 
at heart wild animals, and in all wild beasts there remains— 
deep down, perhaps, but there all the same—some remnant 
of their primitive ferocity. There is therefore always a chance 
of some savage outburst of temper, and the teacher has to 
watch with a never-tiring eye for the smallest indication of 
any change in behaviour of any of his fearsome pupils. And 
this liability to outbreaks of temper increases with advancing 
age. e 

If the few cardinal principles which I have mentioned be 
carefully followed out, the danger ought to be very slight. 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 135 


In looking on at a performing troupe the spectators often 
think that the animals are in a very dangerous temper, and 
are ready at the first opportunity to seize their master and 
tear him to pieces. But this appearance of ferocity is merely 
show, put on for the purpose of making the entertainment 
more piquant. The ominous snarling and savage growling 
do not really mean anger; and that the trainer very well 
knows. How seldom accidents happen my own experience 
testifies. Enormous numbers of performing animals and very 
many performing troupes have at. one time or another passed 
through my course of instruction, and gone forth into the 
world to earn their living. Of all these hundreds, or rather 
thousands, of animals, accidents have occurred in only two 
cases. In one, at least, of these cases, the fault must be 
ascribed rather to the man than to the animal. The acci- 
dent happened at the Chicago Exhibition in 1893 when a 
foolish young Englishman managed to make his way from 
among the sight-seers into the carnivores’ den without my 
knowledge and contrary to my strict orders. He paid for his 
folly by being severely mauled by a lion, but the trainer suc- 
ceeded in extricating him in time to save his life. 

The other accident was more directly traceable to care- 
lessness on our part. Jt occurred during the Industrial Exhi- 
bition in Berlin in 1896, and the victim in this case was my 
brother-in-law Heinrich Mehrmann. He was exhibiting a 
large troupe of mixed carnivores, among which was a black 
bear which I knew to be dangerous and had specially warned 
him against. Nevertheless, he continued the performances 
with this animal, and received two severe wounds, which kept 
him in hospital fora month. I take some credit to myself 
for the fact that these two are the only accidents which have 
occurred under the immediate management of my firm. I 
account for it by the extreme care with which I eliminate 
from the troupe all animals that do not seem thoroughly 
reliable. 

I think I ought to say something about my brother 


136 BEASTS AND MEN 


Wilhelm Hagenbeck, who was one of the early pioneers of 
modern methods and has by his long experience become ‘a 
past-master in the art of training wild beasts. Nearly all the 
troupes which he now exhibits have been collected and broken 
in by himself, though of late years he has received some as- 
sistance from his son. One of his most remarkable achieve- 
ments was the training of a young lion to ride on the back of 
a horse and in that position to perform a variety of equestrian 
tricks. ee 

Wilhelm Hagenbeck also was the first to introduce troupes 
of polar bears into the circus. Before his time it was held 
that polar bears were untrainable ; and to him belongs the 


Te 


q 


Polar bears in the arena. 


credit of showing the error of this view. With great patience 
and care their education is quite practicable, though at certain 
periods of the year they become extraordinarily restless and 
intractable. At this season it requires all the tact and ability 
that the trainer possesses to keep the creatures under control. 
The other species of bears—Russian, American and Indian— 
all take kindly to performing exhibitions during the first few 
years of their lives. But even they; when they have reached 
the age of three or four, are apt to become peevish and danger- 
ous. Bears, although some of the most amusing of all perform- 
ers, are responsible for more accidents than any other animals. 

In the same way that many of the performing troupes 
throughout the world have been trained in my establishment, 
so too their masters have in many cases received their early 


suol] 94} Ul yOoqueseyT 


‘uop 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 139 


lessons in the very same place. There they have learnt to 
distinguish the peculiarities and characters of different animals. 
They have learnt also the great lessons of tact and patience, 
which are perhaps the most essential of all the traits which go 
to make up the animal trainer. I myself have advanced 
greatly in knowledge and skill since my début at Chicago. 
I make a rule of almost always going into the animals’ cages 
to make myself acquainted with their peculiarities. 

I well remember the astonishment on one occasion of a 
party of officers and ladies who had come one Sunday after- 
noon to visit my Zoological Garden. I took them to look 
at a dozen young lions which were shortly to be sent to the 
Chicago Exhibition, but which had not yet completed their 
training. As I stroked them through the bars, one of the 
officers laughingly remarked that that was all very well with 
bars in between, but would be a very different matter if I 
were inside the cage. I thereupon walked into the cage, to 
his great surprise, and was soon surrounded by them. As 
they were moulting at the time I got so covered with their 
hairs that I very soon looked like a lion myself. Without 
any whip or other protection I put them through the element- 
ary tricks which they had already learnt. By the time I had 
come out, the incredulity of the party had vanished and 
I was bombarded with hundreds of questions as to how 
I taught them to be so tame. 

My first experience as an animal trainer was in the 
seventies. About this time I had sold to the negro Del- 
monico three lion cubs and three tiger cubs, which he pro- 
ceeded to train for three months in my establishment in a 
sort of waggon-cage. Just before he left he dared me to 
go into this cage and say good-bye to my animals. Although 
at that time I had nothing like the experience which I now 
have, I took him at his word. Going into the cage I suc- 
ceeded in taking the animals through all the tricks which 
Delmonico taught them, to the very considerable discom- 
fiture of that individual. 


140 BEASTS AND MEN 


Hazardous experiments like this do not always end so 
well. Of this I have from time to time seen not a few ins- 
tances, though I myself have survived whole and sound. 

About the time of the incident with Delmonico which | 
have just related, I had offered a number of young bears, | 
hyzenas, and lions to a French animal trainer. These he — 
had accepted on the condition that I first made the animals 
thoroughly accustomed to one another's society. It was 
in my efforts to carry out this provision that the trouble arose. 
The first thing to do was to place the animals in contiguous — 
cages, separated from one another, not by a solid partition, 
but merely by bars through which they could see one another. . 
When they had thus become accustomed to one another’s 
proximity, I removed the bars between the bears and hyznas, 
and was glad to find that they took very kindly to one 
‘another. After a little time longer, I took the final step of 
removing the bars which separated the lions on the one hand | 
from the bears and hyznas on the other hand. At first all 
was peace and happiness: but, alas! it was only the calm 
before the storm. To the present day I cannot, for the life 
of me, conceive what it was that suddenly brought about 
a violent misunderstanding. The bears trotted up to the 
lions, whether with the intention of provoking a quarrel or . 
merely in playful greeting I cannot say. But if they intended 
it to be playful, the fun fell flat. The lions failed to perceive 
— it in that light, and in a moment the whole collection, lions, | 
bears and hyenas, degenerated into a savage throng of snarl- » 
ing beasts. My position now was anything but pleasant. I 
could not venture personally among the infuriated animals, 
as I should almost certainly have been severely injured ; so 
I made a hasty exit from the cage and with considerable . 
difficulty we managed to separate the ill-tempered creatures 
before much harm was done. 

My first troupe of heterogeneous animals was organised 
in the seventies. It consisted of two striped hyzenas, two 
dogs, two brown bears and a young Indian sloth-bear. These 


‘sreoq 1ejod Bunrodsuriy, 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 143 


seven animals had been placed together at so early an age that 
they knew nothing of life apart from each other’s society. By 
this early and intimate association, the animals which live in 
nature in the most extreme hostility may be bred up as bosom 
friends. The lion and the lamb lying down together is no 
mere fable, though it can only be achieved by long and careful 
training. In the wild state, the lion looks upon the ox as his 
normal food, and his whole nature has to be changed if he is to 
be taught to treat it as a friend. The peace-loving goat which 
feeds on vegetables has to be profoundly altered in constitu- 
tion before he can be persuaded to make friends with the blood- 
thirsty tiger, whose very odour is ordinarily sufficient to terrify 
him. The panther and the sheep may be brought up as play- 
fellows, the one forgetting its savage instincts and the other 
its fears. It is entirely due to the humane system of training 
that this triumph is due. My first experiment in this line was 
made in the summer of 1889. I had then already succeeded 
in accustoming to one another two tigers, two lions, two black 
and two ordinary panthers, three Angora goats, two black- 
headed Somali sheep, an Indian dwarf zebu, a Shetland pony 
and two poodles. Of course, the training began when they 
were all quite young, mostly at about six or eight months. 
This troupe was almost ready to be exhibited, when a mis- 
fortune very nearly brought the whole work to nothing. The 
carnivores were attacked by the cholera epidemic, previously 
described, and most of them died. The few that I was able 
to send to the Chicago Exhibition were not sufficient for 
producing any of these greater effects. 

- I have, however, not lost sight of these experiments, and 
am confident that the most jarring elements of the animal 
kingdom may be united to a degree not yet dreamt of by the 
general public. I should not begin to boast before I have 
succeeded; but I may say that I hope very shortly to place 
before the public some exhibitions of this kind which will throw 
all previous ventures into the shade. 

There is practically no animal which by the exercise of 


144 BEASTS AND MEN 


patience and intelligence may not be tamed to some degree. 
Even alligators have been broken in and exhibited. Various 
kinds of seals have been used for performing with great suc- 
cess; and they are undoubtedly well adapted to the circus. 
Who has not marvelled at the way in which they can balance 
any kind of object on the tip of their snout, or toss up balls 
and catch them again with mathematical accuracy as they 
fall? A quarter of a century ago the American, Woodward, 
performed real wonders in the way of training seals. Just 
as in well-trained troupes a genuine friendship exists between 
the trainer and his animals, so it often happens that a close 
friendship grows up between the animals themselves. When 
this happens the trainer will do well to take full advantage of 
it by working the animals together. As long as these friend- 
ships are between animals of allied species they seem natural 
enough. I remember an instance of a crowned crane and an 
ostrich from West Africa which had become inseparable while 
still in the enclosure and before training began. On another 
occasion a similar friendship was formed between a crane and 
a goose. But when the animals are of totally different species 
the alliance between them is more remarkable. Thus I re- 
member a case in which an elephant contracted a friendship 
with a pony. So indispensable to the great monster did the 
society of this pony become, that he became melancholy and 
refused his food when he was separated from his little comrade. 

The first mixed troupe which my father established con- 
sisted of a great Bengal tiger, an Indian panther and a fox- 
terrier. These three creatures were knit together in a firm 
bond of friendship. The fox-terrier gnawed the same bone 
as the tiger, and the latter never thought of injuring his little 
friend. It is, as I have said, more impressive when the 
animals which work together are in their natural environment 
grim enemies. Nothing but the fundamental principle of 
kindness and studying the animals’ habits can crown these 
efforts with success. Take, for instance, the case of a lion and 
a horse which are to be taught to perform together. First 


TRAINING WILD ANIMALS 145 


they are fastened up within sight but out of reach of each 
other. When they have become accustomed to each other’s 
smell and appearance they can then by gradual means be 
brought to eat and sleep in each other's presence. In fact, 
they become so used to one another that neither notices the 
other’s presence. When this stage has been reached the 
greatest obstacle has of course been surmounted. 

A few years ago aman came to me and asked for em- 
ployment as a seal trainer. I happened at the time to possess 
five fine young seals, and, having a lively recollection of 
Woodward's delightful performances, I engaged the man at 
a wage of 25s. per week with the promise that for each 
animal he succeeded in training he should receive a bonus of 
45. My man soon showed that he knew what he was about. 
After four months the seals had become such adept performers 
that they beat the tambourine, twanged the guitar, fired off 
pistols, fetched articles that were thrown into the water and 
did various other tricks. My trainer received his bonus, 
and we sold the seals to Barnum for the large sum of £500. 

Yet more clever and adroit than seals are the Cali- 
fornian sea-lions. This is the species which performs those 
wonderful tricks so common in the circus. The sea-lion is 
the most lively of all pinnipeds and quickly becomes ac- 
customed to our climate. They have been bred in various 
Zoological Gardens, at Cologne, Paris, Amsterdam, and Ant- 
werp. The American, Woodward, was the first to attempt 
the training of these animals, but later on he had rivals in two 
young Englishmen, Willie and Charlie Judge, who worked for 
several years in my Garden. These two brothers were the 
first to show what might really be done with sea-lions. 

The largest sea-lion which I have ever seen was one that 
I received in the year 1880 from my old friend Barnum. 
Although this great animal weighed well over a quarter of a 
ton it was so tame that it used to follow my father like a dog, 
and he took a special pride in looking after it entirely by 


himself. An amusing incident once occurred when he was 
10 


146 BEASTS AND MEN 


engaged in feeding this creature. It was one Sunday when 
several hundred spectators had come to watch the animals 
being fed. My father carried over his arm a basket in which 
were contained the fish which he threw as food to his pet. 
When the basket had been half emptied, my father, thinking 
that the sea-lion had had enough, turned round to walk away. 
But the sea-lion was of a very different opinion. No sooner 
had my father shown his intention of leaving, than the great 
beast glided up with lightning speed behind him, and with 
a sudden movement tore off all the clothes from his back. It 
then collared the basket and with great apparent good nature 
proceeded to devour the remainder of the fish. My father 
beat a hasty retirement into the nearest corner, where he stood 
in the only position that was decorous—namely with his back 
to the wall. I had to hurry to fetch some more clothes for 
my father ; and when he reappeared, arrayed in these, he 
was received with loud cheers by the public. This occurrence 
must not be attributed to any uncertainty of temper in the sea- 
lion, but to my father’s error in taking into the enclosure more 
fish than he intended to give the animal. It felt that it was 
being unjustly treated, and adopted its own method of remedy- 
ing its grievance. So far from showing ill temper, the inci- 
dent shows intelligence in the animal—an intelligence which, 
whether they be lions or tigers, elephants or seals, is the most 
essential quality for a performing animal to possess. 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE GREAT HERBIVORES, 


THERE is a widespread belief among the public that the ele- 
phant is one of the most intelligent of animals, and I certainly 
think that this opinion is well founded. Individual peculiar- 
ities are very noticeable in these animals : they are wonderfully 
quick of apprehension, have remarkably retentive memories, 
and in their likes, as in their aversions, they display great in- 
tensity and depth of feeling. The elephant is a much cleverer 
creature than the horse, and his power of differentiation is 
almost human. 

On the emotional side too, the psychology of these 
gigantic quadrupeds is most interesting. Darwin was sur- 
prised to find that a bull elephant did not accept all the cows 
which were brought to him, but showed favour to some 
and rejected others. Now this is a subject which I have 
had frequent opportunities of studying, and I have found that 
these beasts ‘‘fall in love” in the true sense of the word ; 
that is, they conceive a truly monogamous affection for one 
particular cow, and are not merely actuated by a general 
predilection for the opposite sex. I remember a striking case 
in point. Some years ago I had in my Zoological Garden a 
young bull elephant that had just arrived at maturity. This 
animal became enamoured of a young cow, and, his affection 
being returned, it was an interesting and touching sight to see 
them tenderly caressing one another. I decided to test the 
genuineness of the bull’s marital affection by the introduction 
of a third party—a somewhat cynical proceeding, perhaps, but 


it was all in the cause of science. One day, whilst the bull 
147 10 * 


148 BEASTS AND MEN 


was enjoying a doze, his loved one was led away and another, 
somewhat older, but to all appearances thoroughly lovable, 
cow introduced in her stead. When the elephant awoke he 
immediately discovered his loss, and paying not the least 
attention to the blandishments of the new cow, he raged 
about the yard in a pitiful state of agitation until his sweet- 
heart was restored to him. 

Elephants are in all ways models of domestic virtue, for 
the parents’ devotion to their children is as great as their 
love for each other. I have frequently had opportunities 
of observing this, but to me it has always been even more 
interesting to see the kindness with which other elephants 
—not belonging to the family at all—treat the young 
calves. The patience of the old elephants is, too, very often 
severely tried, for the calves are astonishingly skittish for such 
heavily built little animals. They are up to all sorts of mis- 
chief, and are especially fond of running under the legs of 
their elders and nudging them from below. The calves 
used to have regular wrestling matches with my Indian ele- 
phant drivers, and when a man was knocked down by his 
opponent the little brute would trample upon him in the 
greatest delight. 

A great number of elephants have passed through my 
hands, and in my long experience of the creatures I have 
naturally grown to know their racial character, as well as the 
peculiar traits of particular individuals. Indeed on more than 
one occasion an elephant has come uncomfortably near put- 
ting an end to my career. Clever animals are liable to 
moods, with which it is not always possible to reckon, and at 
certain seasons the bulls are not to be depended upon and 
become very dangerous. One of my worst accidents hap- 
pened at the end of the sixties. About that time I purchased 
a menagerie in Trieste, which included among the other 
beasts a female elephant which stood about eight feet high. 
She seemed to be a thoroughly good-tempered animal, her 
only fault being that she occasionally had the sulks—a not 


‘uasuly]aIg ye Sunod oy} YAN syueydaya-Mog 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES I51 


uncommon characteristic in all feminine creatures. I soon 
made friends with the cow, who was given the name of Lissy, 
and I never passed her stall without giving her a handful of food. 
I was therefore justified in supposing that I had quite won her 
heart, and, as she never showed any signs of violence, it did not 
occur tome that I might be dealing here with a grossly deceit- 
ful creature. The elephant was being taught a trick, in which 
she had to lift her keeper high into the air with her trunk, 
and then slowly set him upon the ground again. The word 
of command which was given her when she had to perform 
this simple exhibition of her tameness was, “ Lissy, apport!” 
One day about noon I found Lissy alone in her stable, the 
keeper being absent. There must have been a devil in me, 
for I felt a desire to be embraced and raised on high by the 
cow, after the manner of her affectionate treatment of her 
keeper. I therefore went up to the elephant, stroked and fed 
her, and taking hold of her trunk I called out the word of 
command, ‘‘ Lissy, apport!” Then followed one of the most 
vilely treacherous acts of which I have ever heard. Lissy 
began to obey the order, but I soon felt that she was bent on 
mischief, for the embrace of her trunk was unpleasantly vigor- 
ous, and I soared high into the air. But I was not quietly 
deposited once more upon my feet. Instead of this, Lissy 
dashed me violently against the wooden barrier in front of 
her stall, and I went flying over into the menagerie. I lay 
almost senseless upon the ground until the old keeper, Philipp, 
appeared and helped me home. Fortunately neither my 
head nor my side had hit the barrier, and no bones were 
broken, but I was terribly bruised and for weeks I could only 
hobble about with great pain. Whether the elephant was 
secretly amused at my plight I cannot say, but I know that 
after this incident I entirely lost my love for her. 

On another occasion I had an adventure which was, if 
possible, even more dangerous. At the time of which I speak 
I was busy sending off a large collection of animals to 
America, among which there was a male elephant that stood 


152 BEASTS AND MEN 


six feet at the shoulder and possessed tusks eighteen inches 
long. At that time the animals had to be shipped from 
Bremen, and so I went down to the railway station in Ham- 
burg to see all the beasts properly entrained, leaving the 
keeper to bring along the elephant. Whilst I was in a van 
stowing away boxes, the elephant, which was very restive, 
was brought in and fastened up in acorner. The people who 
had brought him then departed, leaving me alone with the 
great quadruped and one other man, who was also at work in 


Dwarf elephant from the Congo. ~ 


the van. Suspecting no danger I paid no attention to the 
animal, but went on with my work. Suddenly I received a 
terrific blow from behind and saw two tusks gleaming on 
either side of me. I realised in a flash that the elephant was 
trying to impale me against the wall. The tusks squeezed 
me on either side, and the brute was pressing me against the 
wall, but by vigorous wriggling I managed to slip down be- 
tween the tusks and fall beneath the giant’s body. There I lay 
groaning on the ground, but the other man, whose attention 
had by this time been attracted, rushed to the rescue and 
hauled me into safety. The pain in my back was terrible, but 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 153 


once more I had escaped without serious injury. Luckily for 
me the bull had made a bad shot; his tusks had gone through 
both coat and waistcoat on either side of my body; had they 
been a couple of inches either to the right or the left he would 
have pierced me through and through, and there would have 
been an end of Carl Hagenbeck. 

On another occasion—it was in the eighties—-one of my 
elephants proved so dangerous that I was reluctantly com- 
pelled to sign his death warrant. The beast in question was 
a large working elephant, a male standing about seven and 
a half feet high. He had more than once given proof of his 
vicious temper, and one day he brought the matter to a climax 
by attacking and nearly killing one of the keepers. The man 
was only saved by the promptitude and courage with which 
another keeper, who had the power of influencing and soothing 
the elephant, came to the rescue. The animal was out of the 
stables at the time of this occurrence, and naturally he had 
to be conducted back to his stall with the greatest caution. 
Rapes and bread were given him in the hope of appeasing his 
wrath, but some stout ropes were brought along too. One of 
these was fastened to a hindleg, and another to a foreleg. 
I then went ahead with the rope attached to the foreleg, and 
on reaching the stable I wound it round an iron post, so that, 
in the event of the brute breaking loose from his drivers, his 
range of action would at least be limited to the neighbourhood 
‘of the stable. At last the elephant reached his stall and the 
rope on the hindleg was quickly passed through a ring attached 
to the wall. At this moment the fury of the giant broke out 
afresh. By the side of him stood two other elephants, and 
being securely bound, both before and behind, he launched his 
mighty weight sideways against the nearer of these with such 
energy that this other elephant—who was as large as the 
great hooligan himself—fell flat upon her side, and nearly upset 
the further one as well. I had seen some proofs of elephant 
prowess before, but never anything quite equal to this. 

One naturally dislikes putting an end toa valuable animal, 


154 BEASTS AND MEN 


but in this case I saw it would not do to hesitate any longer. 
At any moment a fatal accident might occur ; there was no 
help for it, the monster must be executed. It happened, how- 
ever, that I had to depart for England on the next day, and it 
was therefore necessary to postpone the unpleasant ceremony 
until my return. In England I met Mr. Rowland Ward, 
the naturalist. I happened to tell him about the elephant, 
which I proposed to 
have killed on my 
return, and to my 
surprise he made a 
most original propo- 
sal. If the elephant 
were to be had cheap, 
he said he would 
willingly buy him 
from me, for he be- 
lieved he could easily 
find a “sportsman” 
to whom it would be 
worth fifty pounds to 
be able to say that 
he had once shot an 
elephant! I naturally 
jumped at the idea 
of saving some of 
my loss, and through 
Rowland Ward it was soon arranged that a certain Mr. W. 
should come to Hamburg within a week for the purpose of 
shooting big game in my Zoological Garden. Sure enough, 
the two gentlemen arrived in Hamburg provided with a whole 
arsenal of different sorts of rifles, and it was duly arranged that 
the elephant hunt should take place the next day at Neuer 
Pferdemarkt. J made all the needful preparations, and took 
care to notify the police, who decided to send representatives 
to see that there was no danger to the public. The hunt 


12° below zero. 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 155 


was to begin at ten o'clock, and in order to make the scene 
as dramatic as possible I had the bull driven out into the yard 
at the back of the elephant house, and there firmly tethered 
to a wall, so that he could not possibly break loose. The wall 
itself was overlaid with planks two and a half inches thick in 
order to prevent the bullets rebounding. 

Ten o'clock struck, and all the preparations were com- 
plete. All was in readiness, but the hero of the story did not 
appear. What could have happened? We waited for an 
hour, and then, as the sportsman still did not arrive, I hastened 
into the town to remind him of his engagement. I found him 
and brought him back to the hunting-ground, and at twelve 
o'clock we gathered round to see the hunter slay his game. 
The gentleman had brought along his arsenal, but now that 
he was in sight of the victim his sporting ardour seemed to 
have unaccountably left him. He fingered his murderous 
weapons, but did not fire the fatal shot. Presently one of my 
travellers, who happened to be present, offered to fire the shot, 
but this the owner of the elephant refused to allow. After 
further delay, I at last proposed to the embarrassed hero that 
the animal should be hanged, and to this he gave his consent. 

The condemned giant was therefore driven back into the 
stable, and a noose was placed round his neck. The rope 
was wound round a pulley, attached toa cross-beam under 
the roof, and six of my men played the part of executioners. 
“One, two, three” I called out, and at the third shout they all 
hauled on the end of the rope. The bull almost immedi- 
ately lost the ground under his feet, his head fell sideways, 
and in less than a minute he was dead. We found afterwards 
that his neck had been broken. Thus ended one of the 

strangest tragi-comedies which I have ever seen. 

Elephants in captivity do not always die such a painless 
death as that which I have just described. The fate of the 
first elephant which we ever possessed was far less happy. 
My father purchased this beast from an English animal 
dealer in 1860; the price was only £80, for the creature 


156 BEASTS AND MEN 


was afflicted with a serious lameness in his right hindleg. 
We hoped the brute would recover from this malady, but 
instead of getting better his lameness grew worse, and eventu- 
ally he became so weak that he could only with the greatest 
difficulty stand up again in his stall after he had once lain 


x 
AS 
Rens 


60° below zero. 


down. At last he grew so bad that he lay tor two whole days 
groaning in his stall, and my father seeing that nothing 
could be done for him, sold the unfortunate animal to the 
Hamburg Museum. The authorities of this institution took 
him over with the intention of killing him themselves. But 
this was not such an easy matter as they had supposed. They 
first attempted to put an end to the poor beast by injecting 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 157 


poison, but although the quantity used would have pretty well 
sufficed to finish off the entire population of Hamburg, the 
wretched elephant survived the ordeal. At last, in despera- 
tion at the pertinacity with which the animal clung to life, the 
people fastened him up by the trunk, and stuck him like a pig. 

The reader may be inclined to infer from all these stories 
of accidents and other misfortunes that I have had ill-luck 
with elephants, and that they are very difficult creatures to 
manage in captivity. There is no doubt that they are apt 
to be awkward customers on occasion, and to the dangerous 
incidents which I have related I could add others of a similar 
character. Some of my elephants, for instance, once ran 
amok in Munich. Nevertheless, the vicious elephants are 
the exceptions. Most of my trunked friends live in my 
memory not because of their objectionable propensities but 
because of their intelligence, their good nature, and their 
wonderful fidelity. One of the most docile and affectionate 
beasts which I have ever known was a bull which I obtained 
some twenty years ago from a Hamburg trader. He stood 
seven feet high, and had tusks measuring two feet. When 
this animal was first offered to me he was still on the high seas, 
on the passage to Europe, but from the accounts of him which 
I received I gathered that he was unusually tame. As a 
rule, I am loath to buy male elephants, because, as I have 
previously explained, after they arrive at a certain age they 
are subject to periodic moods, during which their tempers 
are exceedingly uncertain. When the ship arrived in port 
I went on board to inspect the bull, and I speedily discovered 
that the stories | had heard of his tameness were in no way 
exaggerated. The poor beast was in a pitiful plight, however. 
It was already late in the autumn, and he was standing on 
the deck, in the open air, literally shaking and trembling with 
cold. Various other symptoms made it obvious that he 
was in ill-health. I thereupon agreed with the owner to take 
the animal to Neuer Pferdemarkt to see if a short residence 
there would improve his condition. A good warm stable, a nice 


158 BEASTS AND MEN 


straw bed, and careful nursing under my personal supervision, 
soon worked wonders, and in a week’s time I was able to 
ratify my purchase. 

The intelligence and affectionate disposition of this ele- 
phant were quite remarkable. After I had taken care of him 
for afew days he would call to me with trumpeting tones when- 
ever he heard my voice or my step, and would beg for an extra 
morsel of food, with which I used always to indulge him. I 
baptised him ‘ Bosco,” and under this name he afterwards 
became famous in the circus world. 

It was not long, only four weeks in fact, before a would- 
be purchaser of Bosco appeared upon the scene in the shape 
of an American menagerie owner, who possessed a circus in 
Buenos Ayres. Before buying Bosco, however, the Ameri- 
can desired that he should learn various tricks, and for this 
purpose it was arranged that the elephant should remain 
another six weeks in my possession. In the meanwhile I sold 
the American a troupe of performing lions, and these he sent 
off to Buenos Ayres, he himself remaining behind in order to 
take personal charge of Bosco on the passage across the 
Atlantic. I applied myself forthwith to the education of 
Bosco, and found him a marvellously apt pupil. All elephants 
are intelligent, but the quickness with which my present pupil 
understood what was required of him was simply astounding. 
The simple, old-fashioned tricks, such as used to be exhibited 
in all circuses, he learnt in a few days. He learnt in one 
day to lie down, and to sit down, at the word of command. 
In less than four weeks he would sit himself at a table, pull 
the bell, allow himself to be served by a monkey, drink out 
of a bottle, eat off a plate, and in short would dine in the most 
orthodox human fashion. He had in fact become an accom- 
plished performer. After about six weeks my friend the 
American departed, highly delighted with Bosco. Over 
in South America he was very successful, constantly hav- 
ing a full house, and making large profits. Four months 
later he was once more in Europe, wishing to make further 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 159 


purchases, and I was again able to satisfy him in this 
direction. 

My acquaintance with Bosco, however, was destined to be 
renewed, and that inan unexpected manner. One day, about 
two years later, I returned from a journey and was greeted 
with the joyful news that my favourite had returned from 
America, and was even now lodged in my own stables. It 
was already pretty late in the evening, but to me it was as 
though I was receiving a visit from an old friend, and, seizing 
some sandwiches as a welcome for my great pet, I hurried to 
the stables. In the menagerie it was nearly dark, and on 
reaching the door I shouted ‘‘ Hallo, Bosco,” and immediately 
a joyful cry rang out from the distance. As I came nearer 
Bosco began gurgling in his throat, after the manner of all his 
kind when anything pleases them very much. As soon as he 
could reach me he seized me by the arm, drew me close up to 
him, and licked me all over my face, all the time gurgling 
loudly. It was most touching to see the delight of the great 
quadruped at meeting his old master once more, and when it 
is remembered that the animal was only a few weeks in my 
possession—though, it is true, we were close friends during 
that time—this episode constitutes a convincing proof, I think, 
of the excellent memories possessed by these huge beings. 

The rapidity with which elephants can be trained is very 
remarkable. Once, many years ago now, I was asked by 
the director of a theatre in Breslau to supply him with a 
young elephant which had been trained for riding. The 
animal was to take part in an exhibition, and was to be de- 
livered in about a fortnight. Unfortunately I was just about 
to start upon a journey, which, of course, prevented me from 
beginning to train the young elephant; and as in those early 
days I was still proprietor, traveller, correspondent, and 
trainer all in one, the education of the beast could not be 
commenced until my return. 1 arrived home only two days 
before the expiry of my time limit. The first two hours of 
the training were exceedingly arduous, but after that time 


160 BEASTS AND MEN 


I had obtained some control of my pupil. After four hours he 
had so far grasped what was required of him that he would 
lie down when commanded to do so, would allow me to 
clamber on to his back, and would, again at the word of com- 
mand, stand up once more. That was the first day’s lesson. 
On the second day I trained him to allow me to ride him to 
and fro in the menagerie, and the same evening he was duly 


African and Indian elephant. 


packed off to Breslau in charge of a keeper who had assisted 
in his education. I heard that my pupil in no way disgraced 
me at the show, but performed his part to the satisfaction of 
all concerned. 

When during the seventies of last century I was exhibiting 
my great Nubian caravan in the Zoological Gardens at Berlin, 
there were, among the other visitors from the Dark Conti- 
nent, five newly imported young African elephants. These 
youthful monsters stood about five to five and a half feet in 
height. One day Professor Virchow came to see me, and re- 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 161 


marked that it would be a great triumph if I could succeed in 
training these animals, for at that time it was still erroneously 
supposed that the African, unlike the Indian, species of ele- 
phant was unfit either for a beast of burden or for a play-actor. 
Great was Virchow’s astonishment, not to say incredulity, 
when I replied that if he cared to come again the following 
afternoon he should find the young elephants properly broken 
in, notwithstanding the fact that as yet no attempt had been 
made to train them. .I said that I would teach the brutes to 
allow the Nubians to ride them, and also to carry loads. The 
professor shook his head sceptically, but promised to come 
with some friends the next day at 5 P.M. 
There was no time to be lost, for I wished to keep my 

word at all costs. No sooner had Virchow departed than 
the training was begun. I had the elephants brought out, 
and, selecting some of the most agile Nubians, I promised 
them rewards if they would clamber on to the elephants’ backs 
and maintain themselves in that precarious position. The 
natives were quite game, but the elephants by no means 
relished the part they were expected to play. They found 
the loads on their backs uncomfortable, and rushing around 
with loud trumpeting, they shook themselves with such 
vigour that all the riders except one were sent flying into the. 
sand. After the animals had been fed with bread and 
turnips they became somewhat quieter, and then the 
Nubians essayed their task once more, this time with greater 
success. This procedure was continued until nightfall, by 
which time three of the creatures had been so far broken in 
that they would quite good-naturedly allow their native 
keepers to ride them about the menagerie. The next morn- 
ing their good example was followed by their two comrades, 
and it now only remained to teach them to carry loads in- 
stead of men. I ordered some sacks to be filled and bound 
together in pairs with straps, and these were then hung over 
the backs of the elephants. The beasts at first disliked the 


feeling of the loads resting against their flanks, but they soon 
II 


162 BEASTS AND MEN 


became accustomed to this sensation also. By exhorting, 
caressing and constantly feeding them with dainties | 
achieved my object by midday. The African elephants 
would carry loads, and would allow themselves to be ridden. 
Professor Virchow arrived at five o'clock with some friends 
from the Geographical Society and was not a little astonished 
to see the wild elephants changed into domestic animals after 
a few hours’ schooling. 
In 1868 some of my elephants were overtaken by a sad 


African elephants. 


fate. I had just arrived home from Trieste with a very large 
collection of animals hailing from Africa. The journey, in- 
cluding a two days’ halt in Vienna, had lasted nine days, and 
both men and beasts were thoroughly exhausted. By the time 
I had seen all my creatures safely lodged in their respective 
abodes it was already late in the evening, and I was glad to 
be able to take myself off to bed without further delay. 
Among the other animals there were several young elephants, 
and although these, like all the rest, were very fatigued, they 
seemed to be quite well, and after taking their food they im- 
mediately lay down to sleep. The poor brutes had stood in 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 163 


a very confined space in the railway van, and had had 
scarcely any rest on the journey. 

In the middle of the night, perhaps about two o'clock, my 
old keeper awoke me with the news that one of the elephants 
was making a rattling noise in its throat and seemed to be 
ill. I was somewhat alarmed and intended to go and in- 
vestigate the matter ; but my fatigue overcame me and | went 
to sleep again. An hour later another keeper knocked and 
brought a similar piece of information ; this time I roused 
myself and was in the stables in a few minutes. But I was 
too late. One elephant was dead and two others lay dying. 
An examination showed that the soles of the feet of the dead 
animal were gnawed through in several places, blood still 
flowing from the wounds. “Rats,” said my old keeper, and 
so it proved to be, for the marks of their sharp teeth could be 
plainly recognised in the horny hide, and the dying elephants 
had similar injuries. Whocould have foreseen such a danger ? 
One can only learn these things from experience. There was 
wooden flooring in the stable, and under these planks the rats 
had made their nests. The next morning we slew nearly 
sixty of the assassins, and, I need hardly say, the wooden 
flooring was promptly removed. 

Many large animals are killed by rats. In the Zoological 
Gardens at Cologne two ostriches were killed by rats during 
the night. Once, too, fourteen rare Australian parrots belong- 
ing to my father were killed by rats at Spielbudenplatz in a 
single night. 

There is no universal rule for the treatment of wild animals. 
Even individuals of the same species, so great is their vari- 
ability of temperament, have to be managed according to the 
particular circumstances of each case. This peculiarity is 
found, as my narrative has already shown, among elephants. 
It exists, in a greater or less degree, among all animals, and 
is a feature in his profession which no successful trainer can 
overlook. 


Moreover, it is difficult to foresee how animals will behave 
11* 


164 BEASTS AND MEN 


under any given circumstances, for they are swayed almost 
completely by the impulses of the moment, and it frequently 
happens that an occurrence, to us apparently trifling, will 
cause a perfectly quiet and well-behaved animal to become 
almost mad with terror. It is for this reason that presence of 
mind is an essential quality for the animal trainer to possess ; 
for he must be ready at all times to grapple with any danger- 
ous whim which, without the slightest apparent cause, may be 
hatched out in the half-developed intellect of his formidable 
charge. Nor is it ever easy to convey to the creature’s intel- 
ligence what is required of him, or to make him understand 
that what to him appears terrifying, is in reality perfectly 
harmless. 

Suppose, for instance, that one wishes to induce a rhinoceros 
to walk across a gangway from a ship to the quay, it is not 
enough to say, “ Please, dear Mr. Rhinoceros, will you be so 
kind as to walk across these planks,” for the great herbivore 
will fail to understand such language, and the most exaggerated 
politeness will leave him totally unmoved. Even if one places 
a cord round his neck, and tries to haul him across the bridge, 
a friend meanwhile prodding him from behind with a stick, 
the great beast will in all probability refuse to do what is re- 
quired (for the language of physical force is a dead language 
to him, be it shouted never so loudly), preferring as an alter- 
native to charge his puny tormentors, and trample them under 
his feet. But there is one weak spot in the pachyderm’s com- 
position, of which his crafty keeper is not slow to make use. 
He obeys, if not his master, the cravings of his own stomach. 
The indulgence of appetite establishes a cosmopolitan lan- 
guage, if I may be allowed to call it so, which every animal 
comprehends. Hold a handful of food to his nose and he will 
follow wherever you lead him. So it is, at least, with the 
rhinoceros. Only do this, and all other forms of polite persua- 
sion become superfluous and unnecessary. 

These observations recall to my mind a somewhat danger- 
ous adventure which I had in the year 1871, at which time 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 165 


I possessed no great experience in managing these animals. 
William Jamrach had arrived in London from India, with a 
number of elephants, rhino- 
ceroses and other animals, 
which J was to take over. I 
went to London to receive 
them. Among the other 
animals there was a large 
female rhinoceros, full-grown, 
being seven or eight years 
of age. The animal was 
housed in an immense cage 
built upon the deck. As this 
could not be removed, it 
was necessary to find some SA aa 

method of transferring the rhinoceros from the ship to the van 
provided to convey her to the stable where she was to be 
temporarily lodged. The difficulty to be overcome lay in the 
distance which separated the ship from the van, a space of about 
500 yards. Jamrach suggested that, as the animal was well 
behaved, it would be safe to lead her along the docks; and 
without sufficiently realising the great danger of this foolhardy 
mode of procedure, I acquiesced in the proposal. Moreover, 
I believed that we were really dealing with an unusually quiet 
animal. 

The preparations were soon complete. Two ropes were 
firmly bound round the rhinoceros, one being used as a halter 
round her neck and the other being attached to one of the 
creature's forelegs, whilst a number of other ropes were kept 
in reserve in case of accidents. Then we addressed her in 
the cosmopolitan language common to man and _ beasts. 
Jamrach’s keeper, offering her food from his hand, backed 
slowly, while feeding her, across the gangway. Therhinoceros 
followed and the whole party moved in the desired direction. 
I gave the long rope attached to the halter to six keepers, 
and instructed them to pass this through the bars forming the 


166 BEASTS AND MEN 


side of the van as soon as that vehicle was reached, and to 
fasten the end to the axle, thus preventing the possibility of 
the rhinoceros beating a sudden retreat. I myself took the 
other rope, that attached to the foreleg, and straightway com- 
menced the march through the docks, the rhinoceros following 
quite quietly. The whole affair appeared to be child's play. 
All went well until our strange company had nearly 
reached the van. Then a most untoward event occurred. To 
my horror I noticed that a locomotive with a goods train was 
approaching, and it immediately occurred to me that now, at 
the very last moment, the rhinoceros might take fright at a 
spectacle no less novel than terrifying. With a speed which 
only the fear of danger can explain, I sprang to the van, 
drew the rhinoceros after me, and, the keepers becoming in- 
fected with my energy, we had the animal firmly fastened up 
before the locomotive reached us. The sequel soon showed 
how fortunate this was. The engine-driver, who had noticed 
the uncommon rapidity with which we had completed the last 
part of our journey, played an idiotic practical joke by blowing 
his steam-whistle to frighten the rhinoceros. This threw the 
animal into a terrible state of agitation and she commenced 
to snort with terror. I had just time to secure her other fore- 
leg with the reserve cords, when her excitement at the con- 
tinuance of the shrill whistle and at the uproar around us upon 
the quay turned into furious rage, accompanied by desperate 
attempts to break away out of the van. The first obstacle 
she encountered was the coachman’s box, which was situated 
high up in front of the van. In a second the brute had her 
head under this box and sent it flying into the air. It fell with 
a crash into the road—luckily missing the horses, or the re- 
sults would have been disastrous. The infuriated rhinoceros 
next tried to charge through the front of the van. I was now, 
however, prepared for the emergency, and swinging myself 
on to the pole of the cart I seized a thick rope and began to 
thrash the beast between the ears with all my might and main. 
Surely even a rhinoceros must feel this, I thought! Eventu- 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 167 


ally both I and my unruly friend the rhinoceros got tired, and 
gradually the formidable creature recovered her senses and 
became quiet. But our troubles were not yet at an end; there 
remained the still more difficult task of getting the animal out 
of the van. The stable opened on to the street, so that we 
were able to back the van up to the door. The animal had to 
come out of the cart backwards, but this was a proceeding it 
highly objected to, and the obstinate brute refused to budge an 
inch. Eventually we fastened cords round each of her hind- 
legs, and then drew the cords through a ring fastened to the 
wall of the stable, the same thing being done with the halter- 
rope and with the ropes attached to the forelegs, so that we 
now had the animal to some extent in our power. As we 
were hauling the brute out of the van, however, she fell once 
more into a furious rage, and hurled herself against its sides. 
She was, moreover, further maddened by the excitement of 
the crowd which had collected around the stable to witness 
so unusual a scene. Then J went round to the front of the 
van and vigorously belaboured the rhinoceros with a cudgel ; 
this had the desired effect, and we were at last able to get the 
rebellious monster into the stable. This was the last time I 
ever transported a rhinoceros in such a manner. I had had 
enough of the experiment. For the journey to Hamburg | 
caused an immense cage to be constructed, in which the 
animal was not nearly so troublesome. This incident will 
show the reader what sort of difficulties we have to encounter 
when transporting wild beasts. The adventure might have 
had a very serious termination. 

Besides the common Indian rhinoceros and the African 
rhinoceros, Ahinoceros bicornis, | received towards the end 
of the seventies the genuine Javan rhinoceros, Ahznoceros 
sondaticus. In addition, on four different occasions the black 
Sumatran rhinoceros came into my possession, although with 
this latter animal I have always had very bad luck, for all 
the five specimens which I purchased died of enteritis. Un- 
like the Indian rhinoceros, which is always captured young— 


168 . BEASTS AND MEN 


after the mother has been driven off or killed—and brought 
upon milk, the Sumatran rhinoceros is taken in pitfalls. This 
species is often captured, but in captivity the animals are very 
liable to die of the same complaint that killed off all my speci- 
mens. There is a representative of this kind of rhinoceros 
living in the Imperial Zoological Gardens at Schénbrunn, near 
Vienna, and this one is, as far as I know, the only example 
which has survived for any length of time in captivity. Another 
rarity is the form Ahznxoceros lastotzs, of which there was about 
thirty years ago an example housed in the London Zoological 
Gardens, where it lived for more than twenty years. The 
common Indian rhinoceros and also the African rhinoceros 
thrive excellently in captivity and in our climate; I know 
several of these animals which have lived for more than thirty 
years in Zoological Gardens. They are also possessed of 
great vitality. On several occasions I have known rhino- 
ceroses break off their horns, without being in any way in- 
jured ; the horn soon grows again, and in the course of a year 
reaches quite a considerable size. 

When they are young, rhinoceroses are very easy to tame. 
The young animals which I formerly received from the 
Egyptian Sudan were led loose through the desert, it being 
found unnecessary to fasten them up in any way. After their 
arrival in the laager they became speedily accustomed to 
their black keeper, and would follow him about like dogs. 
In the Nubian collection which I brought to the Berlin Zoo- 
logical Gardens in the seventies there were three of these 
young rhinoceroses, and I used to allow them to run about 
loose, much to the amusement of the public. Great was the 
delight of the visitors when the keeper hid himself for a 
joke, and the animals, uttering plaintive cries, began to search 
for him. 

It was some forty years ago that the first rhinoceros 
was brought to Europe by my traveller, Cassanova. I 
went to Trieste to take it over. I paid £800 down for it, 
being under the impression that I had thereby made a very 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES — | 169 


good bargain. My hopes proved to be illusory, however, for 
after much discussion the Zoo- 
logical Society of London, from 
whom I had expected to obtain 
a very high price, refused to give 
me more than £1,000, and even 
this sum they only offered me 
under the condition that I should 
deliver the animal in their Gar- 
dens in a good state of health. I 
did not even receive the purchase- 
money in hard cash, but to the 
extent of half the sum had to ac- 
cept other animals in exchange for Sounwy ‘Gamesctos on beanl 
my rhinoceros, so that altogether _ Ship. 

I cleared very little profit out of the transaction. . 

I remember this rhinoceros well, for he came near to doing 
me a nasty injury. He was quite a young animal and stood 
only about thirty-two inches at the shoulder, but nevertheless 
he blossomed out one day into a veritable athlete, a fact which 
I remember the more because he challenged me to a match, 
in which no doubt I should have come off second best had I 
not thought discretion the better part of valour. On the 
journey from Trieste to Vienna I travelled in the same com- 
partment with the young rhinoceros, for, thinking him to be a 
very especial treasure, I wished to take charge of him person- 
ally. 1 was dozing comfortably in a corner, when I was 
suddenly awakened by a pull, and saw that the young 
rhinoceros had the tail of my coat in his mouth and was cheer- 
fully sucking away at it. The animal appeared to find the 
flavour pleasant, but the operation not being precisely bene- 
ficial to my garment, I endeavoured, with all due politeness, 
to free the coat from the young herbivore’s jaws. The brute, 
however, was not disposed to submit to this privation; he 
flew suddenly into a terrific rage, gave a shrill cry of anger, 
and assaulted me with fury. I fully admit that I was not 


170 BEASTS AND MEN 


over-anxious for a duel with the little monster, and indeed I 
found the situation far from pleasant. With quite remarkable 
agility I leaped over boxes and sacks to escape from the 
formidable onset, and in so doing I upset a sack weighing 
about 150 lb., which rolled into the rhinoceros’s stall ; and 
the animal, possibly mistaking the harmless sack for his 
enemy, hurled it into the air.as though it had been an india- 
rubber ball. Not wishing to give our African guest any 
opportunity of playing catch-ball with me, after the manner of 
his game with the sack, I hastily changed my quarters and 
completed the journey in safety. Later, when I was taking 
this young rhinoceros to London, I had further proof of his 
violent disposition. Being annoyed by the movements of his 
cage while it was being taken ashore, he charged the wall and 
split the thick planks as though they had. been no stronger 
than the wood of a cigar box. I then, however, covered the 
entire cage in a cloth, which put the animal in darkness and 
thus quieted him, and he eventually arrived safely at his 
destination. 

The hippopotamus is an even more bulky animal than its 
relative the rhinoceros; but nevertheless one of my travellers 
on one occasion actually transported a specimen in an ordin- 
ary travelling trunk. The story no doubt sounds slightly im- 
probable and may perhaps remind the reader of the American 
commercial traveller who journeyed with his trunk full—so he 
asserted—of telegraph poles! Yet on this occasion I am not 
trying to presume upon the credulity of the public. Curiously 
enough there occurred a considerable time ago an illustration 
in a German comic journal—which is here reproduced—re- 
presenting a traveller for my firm exhibiting samples of various 
animals, all packed in this very fashion. The artist might 
well be alluding to the incident of which I am here speaking, 
for I did really receive a hippopotamus packed up as ordinary 
luggage. The keeper whom I sent to Bordeaux to receive 
the animal transported it simply in a large travelling trunk, 
which he registered to Hamburg as luggage! The beast 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 171 


was a female hailing from the west coast of Africa, and 
weighed, it is true, only eighty pounds. The trunk, with its 
unusual contents, was delivered safely in Hamburg, and the 
hippopotamus is now to be seen in the Zoological Gardens at 
Hanover. 

It does not do to play with these great animals, for, like 
rhinoceroses, they are liable to violent fits of ill temper and 
are then extremely dangerous. Indeed, they are (as I have 
previously remarked when describing the methods of captur- 
ing the beasts) much less tractable than rhinoceroses, and do not 


“My name is Schmidt. I am travelling tor the firm of Hagenbeck. Permit me to 
show you my samples.” 


usually conceive that strong affection for their keepers which 
is so commonly to be observed in the case of the latter 
animals. The transport of these creatures is often a most 
difficult, not to say dangerous, operation. I once had an 
adventure with a female hippopotamus, much resembling the 
little incident with the rhinoceros at the London docks. It 
occurred about twenty-five years ago. I had just purchased 
the hippopotamus in question in South Germany, and on the 
animal’s arrival at Hamburg it was, of course, necessary to 
transfer it from the waggon to the stable which was to be its 
home. The usual method of procedure—the cosmopolitan 


172 BEASTS AND MEN 


language—was first tried, but the lady, having not only a 
thick hide but also a thick head, obstinately refused to come 
out. She merely approached the door, and snapped at the 
delicacies offered her, then retired once more into the . 
waggon. This sort of foolery continued for several hours, 

until at last I lost all patience with the brute and ordered two 

of my people, whilst I once more enticed her to the door with 

a handful of food, to belabour her from the rear. Seeing the 

food, the cow once again came to the door, but on being hit 

from behind, instead of coming right out, she turned round in 

a fury, and charged the barrier dividing her from her assail- 
ants with such force that this gave way and fell with a crash, 

burying the two keepers beneath it. The hippopotamus was 

about to follow up her advantage, when I sprang to the 

rescue and gave her a tremendous kick with my right foot. 

The result of this was to turn her attention to myself, and 

with a snort of rage she came at me with arush. I ran—ran- 
as I had never run before—and fled into the stable prepared 

for the hippopotamus, the infuriated beast following with wide- 

open jaws. Springing across the bath, I made my escape 

through the bars, which were very wide apart—but only just 

in time! Outside, I rushed round to the door of the stall and 

quickly closed it—the hippopotamus was secured! I have 

always regretted that there was no photographic—or better, 

cinematographic—camera on the spot to preserve the doubt- 

less highly comical sight of my panic-stricken flight from the 
hippopotamus cow. 

Hippopotami thrive excellently in captivity and have bred 
in many Zoological Gardens, among others in London, 
Amsterdam, Antwerp and St. Petersburg. The act of 
mating takes place in the water, the animals becoming 
sexually mature in the fifth year. It is a pretty sight to see 
the mother playing in the water with her baby, or, when the 
little one is tired, giving it a ride upon her back. As I have 
said, the animals are usually somewhat bad tempered through- 
out their lives and are apt to be irritable, but of course the 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 173 


characters of different individuals vary. They sometimes be- 
come quite tame. I remember a pair of full-grown hippo- 
potami which I saw in a circus in America, and which were 
as gentle and well behaved as could possibly be desired. 
The American circuses are in the habit of carrying out great 
parades through the streets, and on such occasions these two 
hippopotami used to walk quite loose by the side of their 
keeper, nor did any accident ever occur. 

The other species of the genus Hzppopotamus is the dwarf 
hippopotamus, which inhabits Liberia. In the sixties a young 
specimen of this animal, which weighed not quite thirty pounds, 
was taken to Dublin, but it survived only a few weeks. This 
was the only representative of the dwarf hippopotamus which 
has ever been brought to Europe. 

The last of the giant herbivores whose ways in captivity 
I have to describe is the giraffe. There is probably no 
animal which created such a stir when first brought to Europe 
as did the giraffe. Now that the beast is such a common 
inmate of Zoological Gardens that many town-bred lads are 
more familiar with it than they are with cows or pigs, it 
is difficult to realise the astonishment of the public when 
they first saw this grotesque creature, looking like Gulliver 
among the Lilliputians. It may readily be imagined that 
_ when these ungulates first arrived in Europe they caused no 
little embarrassment to their owners; for instance, if they 
-were not to be left out of doors at night some stable must 
be found in which to house them—but where and how it 
was difficult to see, for all the stables available were too small 
and too low. Even when this obstacle has been overcome, 
and stables high enough have been provided, the animals are 
still liable to a peculiar and painful kind of accident. The 
giraffe’s long neck is no doubt highly advantageous to the 
creature in the wild state—for, as is well known, it is thereby 
enabled to reach a plentiful supply of the leaves of trees upon 
which it feeds—but in captivity it is apt to prove a very 
awkward possession. One morning in the summer of 1876 


174 BEASTS AND MEN 


three of my giraffes were found lying helpless on the ground, 
still living it is true, but all with broken necks. The stable 
was high and wide enough, yet evidently the animals must 
have driven their heads against the walls, perhaps during a 
rumpus, and in that way broken the fragile cervical vertebre. 
On two other occasions I experienced similar misfortunes, 


Giraffes. 


and of course in all cases there was nothing to be done but 
at once to put an end to the poor beasts. 

Young giraffes are liable to be attacked by a peculiar dis- 
ease, which is in all probability connected with the change of 
food that they undergo during their period of acclimatisation. 
The knees become swollen, and the animals eventually become 
bandy-legged and lame in their forelegs, and as a rule die 
within a year. Occasionally, however, they do recover ; for 


THE GREAT HERBIVORES 175 


example, there is now living in one of the Duke of Bedford's 
English parks a giraffe which three years ago was affected 
with the disease. Although the precise cause of this ailment 
has not as yet been definitely ascertained, the trouble has now 
been overcome, for we have adopted a new method of feeding 
which appears to keep the animals immune from its attacks. 
At all events, since then, we have lost no more specimens from 
this cause. 

Giraffes in general are certainly not delicate animals. 
Various menageries, among others that of the elder Kreutz- 
berg, have travelled about for years with giraffes, the beasts 
apparently suffering in no way from their wandering life. A 
specimen, which I sold to Barnum, withstood the hardships 
of travelling in a tent circus for as long as eight years, and 
would undoubtedly have lived much longer still, if it had not 
been killed in an accident. Furthermore, these long-legged 
mammals will breed very readily in captivity ; to my know- 
ledge, they have done so in the Zoological Gardens in Lon- 
don, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Amsterdam, and Hamburg, the 
most recent births being in London, Berlin and Cologne. 

The first giraffes that were ever seen in Europe were 
sent over by the Viceroy of Egypt in the summer of 1827 as 
gifts to the British and French Governments, and were lodged 
in the London Zoological Gardens and in the Jardin des 
Plantes at Paris. For some years after this there were not 
very many giraffes imported, only an occasional example 
arriving in Europe, but later on, especially during the decade 
1867-1877, the number brought from the Sudan was very 
large. In the year 1876 I myself received no fewer than 
thirty-five specimens, and I, of course, was not the only im- 
porter. There was, for instance, another firm which exported 
from Africa twenty-six specimens. The result of this was 
that the price for these “goods” sunk deplorably, and 
it became necessary to decrease the importation. A year 
later I sold the last three young giraffes in my stock to an 
Englishman for the ridiculous price of £150. Not long after 


176 BEASTS AND MEN 


this, the excessive importation of these creatures was put a 
stop to by the outbreak of the war against the Mahdi, but 
unfortunately, as the reader already knows, it became at the 
same time almost impossible to capture any other animals 
whatsoever in that part of Africa. 


CHAPTER VII. 
REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY. 


THERE is no class of animal that excites such general dislike 
as snakes. Rudyard Kipling has well expressed the universal 
abhorrence of these creatures in the story of Mogli in the 
subterranean vaults of the rattle-snake, when he wished to 
have nothing to do with the “poison people”. They are a 
friendless and isolated group; and in all parts of the world 
every man’s hand is turned against them. 

On one occasion—it was the summer of 1874—I well 
remember the commotion that ensued in my menagerie when 
a gigantic snake escaped from its cage. The reptile was a 
somewhat feeble specimen of python, which had recently 
arrived from Africa in poor condition. It had been ordered 
a warm bath, and for this purpose had been conveyed to a 
tub which stood in the carnivore house. The tub had a 
lid, over which was a cloth cover, so that when once the 
animal had been inserted there seemed little danger of its 
escaping. Butescapeit did. After I had seen it comfortably 
stowed away in the tub I went to my office to do some writ- 
ing. About a couple of hours later I was startled by the 
alarming news that the snake had escaped and was at that 
very moment crawling about among the cages of the apes and 
parrots, which in those early days found their abode in the 
carnivore house. I ran quickly to the spot, and the confusion 
which I found there would be difficult to describe. Every 
animal in the carnivore house without exception was in a state 
of abject terror. They could see nothing and think of nothing 


but the escaped reptile. The lions, panthers, and other great 
177 12 


178 BEASTS AND MEN 


beasts were springing about their cages as though they had 
suddenly gone mad, dashing themselves against the bars with 
loud roaring or mewing. The apes and parrots were shriek- 
ing, so that the din was hideous. 

To catch the snake was no easy matter. Its warm bath 
had given it so much vitality that for a long time it eluded 
all our efforts to capture it. In vain did we throw a cloth 
over it; each time it quickly wriggled out from underneath and 
we had to pursue it again. At last we got a net which | 
often used for taking monkeys or small carnivores out of their 
cages, and-this we threw over the serpent’s head. He bit 
savagely at it and soon made large holes in it; but the 
manceuvre gave me time to grip him by the back of the neck, 
and very shortly, with the help of several keepers, and by 
exerting our utmost strength, we got him safely packed into 
the net and transferred to a secure cage. The excitement in 
the carnivore house gradually subsided, and peace reigned 
there once more. 

.., The apprehension excited among the animals by the 
escape of this reptile points to an instinct which is very valu- 
able to them in wild nature. For no animal is more danger- 
ous, none requires to be treated with greater caution, than a 
snake. With the poisonous kinds, this is readily understood ; 
but even the non-poisonous kinds, especially when large, 
are very dangerous, for they possess prodigious muscular 
strength and bite fiercely whenever they are irritated. They 
are exceedingly ferocious. Of the many animals which at one 
time or another have endangered my life, snakes have been 
the sinners much the most frequently. Often as I have been 
bitten or scratched by various animals, I have suffered far more - 
from snakes than from anything else. I have known many 
thousands of them and acquired an intimate knowledge of their 
habits and disposition. I have even had to fight with them 
almost as in a wrestling match. It is said that in Borneo the 
natives are frequently attacked and devoured by giant 
serpents, and from what I have seen of their capacity for 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 179 


dealing with large prey I have no doubt that a full-grown 
Borneo python could easily swallow a man. Any snake of 
from eighteen to twenty feet long is strong enough to squeeze 
a man to death if only it can get him properly encircled in its 
coils. 

Some years ago a controversy was started in the English 
newspapers as to what length snakes might run to. It was 
alleged that there were kinds which reached thirty or forty 
feet, and one traveller offered to produce one in support of his 
statement if anybody would pay 4500 for it. As I happened 
to know that the largest snake ever seen was only twenty- 
six feet long, I thought I was justified in entering into 
this controversy; and through the agency of my English 
friends I offered not £500 but £1,000 to any one who should 
bring to Hamburg a live and healthy snake thirty feet long. 
Up to the present time no such snake has arrived. 

The voracity of snakes is quite extraordinary. Until 
lately I had been accustomed to feed these creatures on fairly 
small animals, but a short time ago I gave to one of my 
Borneo giants a Chinese dwarf hog weighing fully fifty 
pounds, and this was demolished by the serpent in three- 


quarters of an . 
hour. Soon after 
I had a further 
exhibition of the 
gastronomic ca- 
pacity of snakes. 
On this occasion 
the creature was 
an extremely 
large one, about 
twenty-five feet 
long. I gavehim 
a goat weigh- 
ing thirty - one ae 
pounds which I thought would provide him with a pretty hearty 
12 


After dinner. 


180 BEASTS AND MEN 


meal, but he made nothing of it. A few hours later he 
swallowed a buck of forty-three pounds which had been 
refused by three other snakes, the swallowing process being 
completed in half an hour. But even this did not satisfy 
his appetite. About a week later I had to destroy a Siberian 
goat weighing fifty-two pounds, and after cutting off the 
horns, I threw the carcase into the reptile’s den. Neither | 
nor the keeper imagined that the snake would be able to 
swallow so large an animal; but when | returned an hour 
later I found that it had already been partially swallowed, the 
head being half-way down the monster’s throat. I quickly 
sent for a photographer, and by the time he arrived half the 
goat had already disappeared. The effort of swallowing was 
evidently very great. From time to time the snake emitted 
deep groans such as I had never heard before; but slowly 
the prey continued to vanish. When only a small part of the 
hind quarters was left projecting from the serpent’s jaws I 
had the photograph taken. A minute after, the snake, which 
had been swallowing its victim for two hours, brought it all up 
again. Whether it had been frightened by the process of 
photographing, or whether it had taxed its powers too severely, 
I cannot say. 

With a view to discovering the effects upon the animal 
which had been swallowed and then brought up again, I had 
it dissected on the following day. It was found that the 
goat's neck had been twisted completely out of its articula- 
tions. The ribs had been so pressed that they had all 
brdken off from the vertebre. From this, some idea can be 
obtained of the immense strength of these great creatures. 

Snakes do not begin to swallow their prey until they have 
killed it, which usually takes them a very short time. They 
always make for the head, and with lightning rapidity coil 
round the body of their prey. They then seize the head in 
their jaws and wring the animal’s neck. They keep firm 
hold upon the animal until the absence of any movement 
shows that it is quite dead. The feast then commences. In 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 181 


the case of large animals the snake first of all covers the head 
with saliva so as to make it easy to swallow. It then en- 
circles the animal with its tail-end and gradually presses it 
downwards into its mouth, at the same time moving its jaws 
to and fro. In swallowing, the snake’s jaws distend like an 
india-rubber bag, and to an extent which, unless seen, ap- 
pears incredible. Now and then the snake will pause for 
as long as ten or twelve minutes for a rest. These pauses 
I particularly noticed in the case of the reptile swallowing 
the Siberian goat as above recorded. Since this incident I 
have seen a case even more remarkable, in which another 
snake devoured a goat weighing ninety-three pounds in 
about an hour and a half. 

When one looks through the glass fronts of their cages 
and sees them apparently so lazy and devoid of vitality, it is 
difficult to imagine the great strength and swiftness which all. 
these animals possess. In spite of the great precautions 
which one always has to take in dealing with snakes, 
there still remains a considerable element of danger when 
anything has to be done with them. I have had many 
hundreds of giant snakes through my hands, in the most 
literal sense, in the course of my life, and have often been 
bitten by them. It is, however, not the bite of these large 
creatures that is most to be feared, but their powerful mus- 
cular coils. 

A very serious adventure, in which the reptiles appeared 
in all their native savagery, occurred at Stellingen in the early 
summer of 1904. We were preparing to pack up four great 
specimens of the species Python reteculatus, varying in length 
from twenty to twenty-six feet, to be sent to the St. Louis 
Exhibition. Myson Heinrich, having made all the necessary 
preparations, went to open the door of the cage, but no sooner 
had he opened it than the four reptiles, as though by a pre- 
arranged plan, flew at him with wide-open jaws. One of them 
very nearly succeeded in coiling itself round him in spite of 
his efforts, and if it had succeeded his death would have been 


182 BEASTS AND MEN 


acertainty. But he defended himself vigorously, and I my- 
self and a keeper running to his aid, helped him with all our 
strength in his struggle against the monster. But it was some 
minutes before we finally succeeded in freeing him. The others 
we secured with some little difficulty by the aid of the usual 
woollen coverings and sacks ; but even this was accomplished 
only at the cost of much time and some danger. The largest 
of them, a savage monster weighing quite 200 Ib., took up his 
position on a rafter at the top of the cage and fixed himself 
there firmly with his tail-end, while with his head-end he made 
savage bites at his opponents. When once we had thrown 
the sack over his head our next proceeding was to unloosen 
the tail-end which was tightly fixed to the rafter. We had to 
secure further assistance to muster the strength necessary for 
this purpose. But even then the fight was not over. No 
sooner had we, with great effort, got the tail-end loose than 
the monster got it twisted round Heinrich’s right leg, and with 
irresistible force began to twine itself higher and higher up his 
body. It was indeed a life-and-death struggle which then en- 
sued, but by exerting all our might we at last succeeded in 
tearing away the reptile and forcing it into a sack. The work 
of overpowering these four monsters was one that I shall not 
easily forget. 

Skill in dealing with these dangerous animals can only be 
obtained by dint of many experiments, some of which are 
successful and others not. I remember one episode which 
helped me to acquire some experience of my own. In the 
early seventies a ship coming from Brazil brought to Ham- 
burg a couple of boa-constrictors. When I went on board 
for the purpose of looking at them, the steward told me that 
they were lying inanimate in their cage and were certainly 
dead. On inspecting the animals it appeared that the 
steward’s estimate was correct. They had been kept all night 
in an open cage in the captain’s cabin; and, although it was 
the middle of December, no sort of heating or shelter from 
the cold had been attempted. The snakes had in fact been 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 183 


frozen. The captain, who arrived at the moment and saw 
the lifeless condition of the creatures, ordered them to be 
thrown overboard. I requested, however, to be allowed to 
make an attempt to revive them, and, having received the 
captain's permission, wrapt them in a rug and carried them 
off. I took them home to our house in Spielbudenplatz, and 
there shook them out on the floor; but my father was as in- 
credulous as the captain with regard to the possibility of bring- 
ing them to life. Nevertheless I thought I would make the 
experiment, so I laid the two snakes in front of the stove 
which was situated in our aviary and went upstairs to my own 
rooms. After about an hour a violent commotion took place 
among the birds, and on running downstairs I found the 
spot before the stove deserted and the two reptiles taking a 
constitutional round the room. As I was trying to secure 
them a strange coincidence occurred. The door opened and 
in walked old Kreutzberg, who had just arrived from Russia, 
and wished to purchase some snakes for his menagerie. With 
his help the animals were quickly secured, and, ten minutes 
later, they had passed into the possession of Kreutzberg for a 
sum of eighty Prussian thalers (£12). Thus there came an 
unexpected windfall to two persons—to my father, who in 
the afternoon heard that the dead snakes had come to life 
again and were sold for a good price, and to the captain, who 
received next day an unexpected forty thalers as his share in 
the transaction. 

In the course of further experience I have learnt that it is 
no uncommon thing for snakes to come to life again in this 
remarkable manner, but there is a limit beyond which their 
endurance cannot be taxed. I remember a case in point, 
which occurred in March 1883, when I had purchased in 
England 165 giant serpents for a figure exceeding £1,000. 
The snakes were shipped from London to Hamburg, but, 
as ill-luck would have it, a severe north-easterly gale was 
encountered during the crossing, and the vessel had to put 
back to Gravesend for the purpose of recoaling. At last she 


184 BEASTS AND MEN 


started again, but it was seven days before the snakes arrived 
in Hamburg; and at that time of year seven days on the 
North Sea is naturally a great strain upon animals accustomed 
to tropical climates. I had a premonition that the affair would 
turn out badly, and so it happened ; for on their arrival at 
Hamburg the whole collection were dead, I hastened with 
them to my establishment and applied all known means of 
revivifying them, but in vain. It was too late. Not one was 
saved. When I mention that I lost over this transaction not 
only the £1,000 paid for the snakes, but a great deal more 
fot which J had already sold them in advance to America, it 
will be readily understood that my sorrow at the affair was 
genuine. 

If the non-poisonous snakes are dangerous, the poisonous 
snakes are, of course, much more so. In handling these I am 
always uncommonly careful, and whenever any of them reach 
my establishment among a collection of animals, I always 
pass them on to their next destination as quickly as circum- 
stances will permit. The first adventure which I had with 
the ‘‘poison people” was in the sixties, when a case of puff- 
adders arrived for us and was brought to the house. The 
case was a large flat one, made of wire netting covered round 
with wooden boards. It was impossible to keep them in this 
case, and I was therefore confronted with the problem of 
changing them into a new one. I thought I should be able 
simply to shake them out from the old cage into the new; 
and with this intent I tore away a portion of the side of the 
old cage. But they were not to be transferred so easily. 
They darted to the opening, but instead of passing over into 
the other cage they endeavoured to get away sideways. 
Nothing could persuade them to go into the new cage, and 
at one moment two of the reptiles very nearly escaped. I 
was so horrified at this possibility that I gingerly shook them 
back into the old cage and pressed the new one against 
the opening so as to block it up. I then with some little 
difficulty managed to fasten up again the hole which I had 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 185 


made. I had by this time had enough of the job for one day, 
and the next day when I applied myself to the task once 
more I devised a new plan for effecting the change. I tore 
off the boards which surrounded the wire netting in the old 
cage, and in the wire netting itself I bored a small four- 
cornered hole, against which I placed the opening of the new 
cage—an opening which was capable of being closed by 
means of a sliding door. The new cage was in darkness; 
and the old cage, now that the boards had been removed from 
it, was flooded with light. Now it is a peculiarity of snakes 
that they all like to crawl away into the darkest corners they 
can find ; and after an hour all the puff-adders, eight in number, 
had gone across into the new cage. I then merely closed 
the sliding door and the transference had been effected. 
Since that time, when they so nearly escaped, I have always 
had a holy horror of poisonous snakes. 

The bite of a rattle-snake is exceedingly poisonous ; and 
I have observed that white rats given them for food usually 
die within half a minute of being bitten. This is, however, by 
no means invariable. Under natural conditions out of doors 
it sometimes happens that the weak and unprotected creature 
will overcome one much more powerful and better armed. I 
have known a case in which a rattle-snake was killed by a 
rat given it for food. The rat was put in the cage one even- 
ing, and when we came round next morning we found the 
-rattle-snake lying dead, and the rat sitting triumphantly in a 
corner of the cage. He had even commenced to make a 
meal off the body of the formidable reptile. An examination 
of the marks upon the dead snake’s body showed that the rat 
must have sprung suddenly upon the nape of its neck and, 
having planted its teeth firmly there, held on tightly until the 
rattle-snake died. A large piece had been taken out of the 
animal’s neck which the rat had devoured. After this experi- 
ence we never again used wild rats as food for snakes. 

Fights between snakes for food are not uncommon, and 
in the course of these fights it very often happens that the 


186 BEASTS AND MEN 


larger snake will swallow not only the food but the smaller 
snake also at the same time. Snakes are guilty of a senseless, 
one might almost say mechanical, gluttony. Of this I had 
interesting evidence in an episode which occurred near the be- 
ginning of the seventies, when we were still at Spielbuden- 
platz. At that place we kept our snakes in large dark cages 
heated from below by hot-water pipes. We used, moreover, 
to keep the animals wrapt up in rugs, which were only removed 
when they were being fed. One day we received a boa-con- 
strictor about eleven feet long—a very large size for this 
species, of which (contrary to the popular idea) I have never 
seen a specimen of more than thirteen feet. Immediately on 
his arrival I gave him a large rabbit, which he ate during the 
night. Thinking that he had had enough for the present I 
gave him nothing the next night, but left him as usual wrapt up 
in the rug. He apparently mistook the rug for food, for he 
attempted to swallow it. When I came next morning I found 
half the rug down the animal’s throat. The animal itself was 
suffocated and quite dead. 

I have never again come across an instance of so strange 
a death, but I have often lost snakes through their savage 
fights for prey. About ten years ago I gavea rabbit toa 
couple of yellow pythons, one nine feet and the other seven 
feet long. The next morning I found that the nine-foot 
python had swallowed not only the rabbit but the seven-foot 
python as well. From later observation I infer that both 
snakes must have attacked the rabbit at the same time, one 
at the head and the other at the tail. Both then proceeded 
to swallow the rabbit from opposite ends, and in this way the 
smaller snake was swallowed as a sort of continuation of the 
rabbit by the larger one. I could easily see on the following 
morning the outline of the smaller, in the body of the larger 
snake. 

The power of digestion possessed by snakes is perfectly 
extraordinary. The most remarkable case of heavy feeding 
which has come under my observation occurred about ten 


Snake gnawed by a rat. 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 189 


years ago at Neuer Pferdemarkt, when an Indian python, only 
fourteen feet long, swallowed four lambs within twenty-four 
hours, each weighing from twelve to nineteen pounds and 
possessing horns several inches long. After this performance 
the snake was so swollen by the gas evolved in its interior 
by the semi-digested lambs that it burst open for a length of 
about a foot, the two edges yawning apart to a width of a 
couple of inches. This meal took about ten days to digest, 
and on the eleventh day the snake took another lamb. The 
woollen parts were thrown out in compact balls; whilst the 
horns and hoofs passed through the snake’s body unchanged. 

Ten days is a comparatively brief period for the digestion 
of its food by a snake. I remember the case of a giant 
serpent which had eaten a hog ; the signs of digestion actually 
did not commence for four weeks and were not completed 
until ten weeks later. That pigs are found by snakes rather 
hard to digest I have other evidence. Some time ago two 
very large Borneo snakes arrived at my garden, having ac- 
complished safely a long voyage direct from Singapore. 
One of them was twenty-five feet long and weighed 248 lbs. 
I concluded from their savageness that they had not been in 
captivity very long, and in this belief I was justified a week 
later by finding among their excrement the tusks and hoofs 
of a wild boar. This must have been food which they had 
caught when still in a state of freedom. 

Correlated with the capacity for consuming enormous 
quantities of food is the capacity for going for long periods 
without any food at all. In the wild state it must often 
happen that snakes for many weeks together are unable to 
catch any prey that is suitable to them, and hence it is neces- 
sary for their preservation that when they do catch food they 
shall be able to consume it in large quantities. Animals in 
captivity, which have taken their food regularly week by 
week, will suddenly cease to take it and fast for more than 
six months. In the Zoological Gardens at Amsterdam the 
former director, Dr. Westermann, who has now been dead 


190 BEASTS AND MEN 


for a long time, recorded the case of a snake which ate no- 
thing for two whole years, but then began to take food quite 
cheerfully again and lived for many years afterwards in the 
Gardens. This animal was a Brazilian water-snake, Funectes 
MuUrInUs. 

I myself have had a very similar experience. On this 
occasion the animal was a dark Indian python about sixteen — 
feet long, which was in very good condition when it came 
into my hands, but would eat nothing and fasted for a period 
of two years anda month. During this time it drank large 
quantities of water, but the effects of starvation soon became 
apparent. The creature shrank until it was little more than 
a skeleton of skin and bones. After this long period | 
thought it time to intervene. So J took a pigeon and moist- 
ened it in warm water; and then, seizing the python by the 
nape of the neck, I opened its jaws and forced the pigeon 
down its throat for a distance of about a foot. The rest the 
snake managed for itself, and one could see the pigeon 
gradually slipping down the reptile’s body. With eating the 
creature showed signs of returning appetite. That same even- 
ing I placed a live pigeon in the cage, and the snake after a 
short time killed and began to devour it. But its strength was 
so exhausted that it was unable to swallow the bird unaided ; 
and I had to assist by using a sort of ramrod, with which I 
slowly pushed the pigeon down the python’s throat. We 
then left another pigeon in the cage, but the remedy had been 
applied too late, and the next morning we found the snake 
lying dead with the pigeon in its jaws. It had expired in 
attempting to swallow its prey. : 

Snakes eat most readily in bright weather and will seldom 
touch anything when the air is oppressive. The most import- 
ant point in their management is to secure proper warmth and 
ventilation in their cages. The temperature should not be 
permitted to fall below 72° F. and may well be a few degrees 
higher. Ifa proper temperature is not provided, the snakes 
refuse to eat and they catch colds, which take the form of a 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 191 


scurvy of the mouth. All that it is necessary to do under 
these circumstances is to place them in a warm cage with a 
large water bath, in which they will lie for weeks with only the 
tips of their noses above the surface. The water has a cura- 
tive effect upon the mouth, the purulent parts becoming 
loosened so that the reptiles can shake them off, and in this 
way snakes have been cured in which large pieces of the jaws 
had already been eaten away. 

A good deal is yet to be learnt with regard to the breed- 
ing of snakes ; but I am looking forward to making some ex- 
periments in this line during the next few years at my animal 
park at Stellingen. Young snakes come into the world in 
two different ways. The boa-constrictors and other Indian 
snakes lay eggs and hatch them out. The water-snakes, on the 
other hand, do not lay eggs but bear living young. About 
fifteen years ago I had an opportunity of observing the course 
of events in one of these latter cases. The mothef was an 
Eunectes murinus, which is one of the largest species of 
Brazilian snakes, and is said to attain to as much as twenty 
feet in length. The one that I possessed was fifteen feet 
long, and after I had had her a few months she was delivered 
of a family of forty-eight children. I was unable to take the 
news to the lucky father, for he had been left behind in the 
forests of Brazil. But the story had a tragic termination, 
for they all died on being born. I have also had some ex- 
perience of the oviparous kinds, especially in the case of a 
certain dark python which had laid an enormous number of 
eggs. She used to lie coiled around these, and whenever I 
approached the nest three or four young ones would shoot 
out their heads angrily at me from among the eggs. Out of 
a total of about fifty eggs the snake succeeded in hatching 
twenty-one while the rest became dried up. The young 
snakes were fond of returning to their egg-shells after they 
had been born. They used them as nests, and if they came 
out at all, only did so to crawl round for a few minutes and 
then return. The feeding was a matter of some difficulty. 


192 BEASTS AND MEN 


They would not touch frogs, but when I put some young 
white mice into their cage they seized, killed and swallowed 
them in the same way as the adults do. Eventually I sold 
the whole family to the Jardin d’Acclimatisation in Paris, 
where, however, proper care was not taken of them and they 
soon died. They were then stuffed and mounted with their 
egg-shells; and are still on view for any one who likes to go 
and see them. 

I made another attempt at breeding snakes in the year 
1904, when I received indirectly from Singapore a very large 
Python reticulatus which in the course of its journey had laid 
no fewer than 103 eggs. Of these eighty-eight were hatched, 
and I purchased the entire family; but only thirty-three 
reached me alive, measuring about eighteen inches each. 
Some I gave away, others refused their food and died, until 
at last I had only sixteen individuals left. These I treated 
with the utmost possible care, feeding them on sparrows and 
mice. At first they seemed to do well, but eventually every 
one of them died from convulsions. I think the cause of their 
illness must have been an insufficient supply of fresh air; for 
among all living beings fresh air is one of the most essential 
conditions for the maintenance of good health. They all died 
within a few days of each other, and the catastrophe was the 
more regrettable in that up till that time they had thriven 
excellently, three already measuring over four feet, and one of 
these over five feet, in length. 

The intelligence of snakes has been in my opinion greatly 
exaggerated. It is true that the frequency with which snake- 
charmers are to be met would seem to indicate a certain de- 
gree of educability in the animals; but I should be very 
sceptical as to the possibility of snakes approaching in this 
respect any of the higher animals. I do not think that the 
snake-charmer can enter into the same friendly relation with 
his pupils that trainers can do among the apes, ungulates, and 
carnivores. Of course they have some capacity for learning 
tricks, but their main characteristics seem to be gluttony, lazi- 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 193 


ness and an exceedingly bad temper. In this respect I draw 
no distinction between the different species of snakes ; they 
all seem to me pretty much alike. 

Snake-charmers cannot do nearly as much as they pretend 
and are popularly supposed to do. The common belief that 
they work with the cobra or Indian spectacled snake is en- 
tirely erroneous. It may be true in the case of some of the 
native Indian snake-charmers, but their European confréres 
work almost exclusively with the young of the giant serpents, 
sometirnes the Indian python and sometimes the South 
American boa. The 
public are so little 
acquainted with the 
differences between 
different kinds of 
snakes, that they often 
think that the snake- 
charmer is handling a 
very poisonous crea- 
ture, when in reality 
the animal belongs to 
a perfectly harmless 
species. The charmer 
does all that he can 
to encourage this idea, 
but at the same time 
he takes very good 
care never to have 
anything to do with 
any poisonous snake, 
unless or until its Indian snake-charmer. 
poison fangs have been removed. But even then he has 
to be pretty careful, for the poison fangs grow again, and 
unless he watches them closely he will run considerable risk. 
A poison snake from which the fangs have been removed 
is much more harmless than an ordinary giant snake, even 

13 


194 BEASTS AND MEN 


though quite young; for, the poison fangs being the only 
weapons which these creatures possess in nature, they are 
wholly disabled by their removal, whereas the non-poisonous 
snakes are endowed with other weapons of defence, with 
which they can at any time give'a good account of themselves. 
Their bite is much more severe than that of the poisonous 
kinds, and by their habit of coiling round their enemy, a snake 
eighteen feet long can squeeze a strong man sufficiently to 
put his life in danger from suffocation. 

So-called snake tricks are very easily contrived. As a 
rule they consist of nothing more than letting the animal 
suddenly out of darkness into a strong light, when it will fly 
up in anger and appear to threaten its master. The display 
is then concluded by playing music, with which the snake 
seems to be calmed; for snakes, in common with all other 
animals, are very sensitive to the effects of music. I do not 
suggest that they would appreciate the Moonlight Sonata as 
much as they would a rabbit, but nevertheless it is undeni- 
able that they derive real pleasure from listening to music. 

As we are now on the subject of venomous snakes I may 
take the opportunity of relating a method by which the poison 
may be extracted from these animals. I learnt the method 
from a learned Indian, by name Mr. Docton, who was em- 
ployed at the time in the Zoological Gardens at Bombay. 
From a cage of venomous snakes he took out the animals 
one by one with the aid of an iron bar twisted at the end into 
a hook. When this hook was placed round the snake’s body 
the animal could be lifted up by means of it; for the cobra, 
which is the common venomous snake of India, and of which 
I am here writing, does not possess the power which other 
snakes possess of twisting round a smooth rod, but just hangs 
loosely from the hook. Having lifted it out of the cage, Mr. 
Docton laid it on the ground, at the same time pinning it 
down with a forked stick by the nape of the neck. The 
poison is now extracted by the following method: An as- 
sistant brings a mussel shell, of which the concave side is 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 195 


covered with a green leaf, and places this green leaf immedi- 
ately in front of the serpent’s mouth. By pressing the back 
of the animal's neck with the fingers it can be made to open 
its jaws and bite deeply into the leaf. When killing their 
prey snakes use only a small portion of the poison which 
their fangs contain, but when subjected to pressure in the 
manner above described, they eject their whole supply, which, 
passing through the holes in the leaf made by the bite, collects 
in the hollow of the mussel shell beneath. By the employment 
of this method it has been found that the collected poison of 
_ a hundred cobras in the dried state amounts to no more than 
four grammes. This would be sufficient to kill several hundred 
large mammals or several thousand men—so concentrated 
and so virulent is the poison. A reptile which has been 
deprived of its poison in this manner takes about a week 
to renew its supply. 

Mr. Docton also made experiments as to the practicability 
of conferring immunity from the effects of snake poison by 
administering small but gradually increasing injections of the 
liquid. On this point he completely established his case. 
It was found possible to render monkeys immune within a 
period of six months ; and, taking into consideration the well- 

known similarity between the reactions of monkeys and men, 
there seems no reason to doubt that a similar immunity might 
easily be conferred upon human beings. It has not yet been 
ascertained whether immunity from the poison of one species 
of snake would carry with it immunity from the poisons of all 
other species; but any such general immunity appears im- 
probable, and for the following reason. When two snakes 
of the same species attack one another they remain unaffected 
by each other’s poison, but when the reptiles are of different 
species they rapidly succumb to each other's bites. This 
statement, which I make on the authority of Mr. Docton 
and which I firmly believe to be true, seems to indicate a 
great difference in the quality of the poisons of the different 


species. The dried snake poison is of a yellowish-green 
13* 


196 BEASTS AND MEN 


colour and is composed of crystalline bodies. It has been 
bought chiefly by Dr. Fraser of Edinburgh and Dr. Moeller 
of Australia, and I hope before long that the results of their 
experiments will be published. 

All this that I have related with regard to snakes gives 
some colour of truth to many of those Oriental snake stories 
which date back several thousand years. There seems no 


Indian jugglers. 


inherent improbability in the tale of Mithridates the king, 
who made himself gradually immune against all the poisons 
known in his day by taking slowly increasing quantities of 
them. For the same reason I am not inclined to disbelieve 
the stories about Indian jugglers who work with venomous 
snakes in which the fangs have not been removed. From 
their youngest childhood they have been made immune by 
the use of snake poison, so that when they have grown up 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 197 


they suffer no danger even from the bite of an adult cobra 
with all its poison apparatus in full working order. The saliva 
of such immune persons is said to act almost like an antitoxin ; 
and it is related that lives have been saved by rubbing it into 
the wounds caused by bites. But for the truth of this story 
I cannot be responsible. | merely set it down for what it 
may be worth. 

Let us pass now from snakes to another kind of reptile no 
less formidable or repulsive—I mean the crocodile. Since in 
my youth I was bitten by one of these animals I have always 
stood in a wholesome fear of them. On this occasion the 
bite nearly ended in a very serious manner. It did not at 
first appear to be serious. The crocodile, which was about 
two feet long, nipped my right hand and [ foolishly took no 
notice of it ; but about three hours afterwards my hand began 
to swell and the swelling spread up the arm, attended with 
great pain. I sat up all night washing the wound with ice- 
cold water and bathing the arm, and on the next morning 
when I sent for a physician I learned that this treatment alone 
had probably been instrumental in saving my arm. The 
swelling slowly disappeared, but the memory of it has remained. 

Since that time more than two thousand crocodiles have 
passed through my hands at one time or another, but I have 
carefully avoided running the risk of any further accident. 
On one occasion, however, in spite of my precautions, an in- 
cident occurred which nearly cost me my life. I was engaged 
in packing up twenty alligators to be exhibited at Dusseldorf, 
among a large collection of other reptiles, in the Zoological 
Gardens at that place. The alligators were from six to ten 
feet long, and I was removing them one by one from the 
basin for the purpose of packing them. As I was taking out 
the seventh, it suddenly gave me such a terrific blow with its 
tail that I was precipitated into the water into the very midst 
of the savage reptiles. The thing happened so quickly that 
it took the alligators some moments to recover from their sur- 
prise, and I took advantage of this brief interval to clamber 


198 BEASTS AND MEN 


with lightning speed out of the basin. If one of the animals 
had attacked me the rest would have followed suit and | 
should have been done for. I know from personal experience 
that when these creatures have secured prey, they all seize it 
in their jaws and try to tear it away from each other. My 
fate would, indeed, have been unenviable. 

Though I myself have never fallen into the clutches of these 
animals, | have witnessed them engaging in fights among 
themselves of the most savage and merciless description. 
When once an alligator has seized an enemy it will not leave 
go, even though its head be broken to pieces. I saw sucha 
fight in the eighties when we had received a consignment of 
nearly 300 alligators, mostly from one to four feet in length, but 
including half a dozen which measured from ten to twelve feet. 
All these animals, having been kept ever since their capture 
in small cages, had become extremely ill tempered, and it was 
necessary to observe the utmost caution in dealing with them. 
I took the boxes and placed them one by one in the en- 
closure destined for the reptiles. When each box had been 
' placed in the enclosure J tore off the boards at the head-end 
of it, and by prodding the animal’s tail with a stick induced it 
to walk out. The first alligator walked quietly out of his box 
and into the pond; so did the next three, and all seemed to 
be going smoothly. But as the fifth and sixth were released 
they rushed upon one another without any apparent reason 
and engaged in a desperate encounter. In a few minutes the 
whole basin was a compact knot of snarling animals biting 
savagely at each other and lashing the water wildly with their 
tails. Seizing each other with their powerful jaws, the 
stronger would dash about in the water, dragging the weaker 
one with him, the jaws of the latter snapping impotently at 
his foe. The water was splashed high into the air and gradu- 
ally became red with the blood from many frightful wounds. 
We could do nothing but look on, except, indeed, to fill the 
basin with water, so that the weaker animals might find refuge 
underneath. 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 199 


The next morning we allowed the water to run off and 
were then able to see the extent of the damage. All the 
warriors lay prostrate on the battlefield, every one of them 
shockingly mutilated and two of them quite dead. These two 
had had the whole of their under jaws and a great part of 
their upper jaws split in pieces. Of the other four, two had 
had their forelegs nearly torn off and hanging only by a shred 
of skin. The fifth had had its eye torn out, and the sixth had 
had the end of its tail bitten off. With the exception of the 
last they all died within a week, but he of the shortened tail 
slowly recovered and I was able subsequently to sell him. 

After this incident I took careful precautions against any 
recurrence of these fights. Whenever a new alligator arrived 
I muzzled him by tying a cord tightly round his jaws before 
letting him out. This was rather a ticklish business, for when 
one had inserted one’s hand in the box there were consider- 
able odds that it might not come out again. .When several 
animals which had arrived together were muzzled and turned 
out loose into a basin they would fall savagely upon one 
another, but could do each other no harm, and in about a 
week they would have quieted down sufficiently to make it 
safe to remove the muzzles. This I did by means of a knife 
fixed at the end of a long stick, which enabled me to cut the 
cord while standing at a safe distance. I then with a long 
hook pulled off the cords from the animal's snout. I never 
freed them all at the same time, but usually left several days 
before allowing all to enjoy their liberty: They had by that 
time become accustomed to one another, and no more fights 
of the kind above described occurred again. 

After the alligators have been some little time in the basin 
and have become quite quiet, the question of feeding them 
arises. There is no hurry about taking any immediate steps, 
for these creatures, like snakes, can go without food for 
months together. The first food that I gave them consisted 
of the lungs of horses and cattle, which I cut into small pieces 
and threw into the water. I fed them only on the hottest 


200 BEASTS AND MEN 


days and usually in the evening. After they had learnt to 
know this method of feeding I was able to carry them ona 
step further. A large piece of meat was fixed to the end of 
a wooden pole and the water stirred about with it until the 
alligators seized it. I approached ever nearer the basin, and 
after from four to six weeks some of the animals had become 
so far tamed that they would take food from my hand. But 
I always felt that they would gladly have taken the hand as 
well if they had been given the chance. No real friendship 
can be established between these savage reptiles and human 
beings. 

The smaller alligators, of three or four feet in length, 
which used to be kept in cages with glass fronts, can be tamed 
somewhat more quickly. It took me only about a week to 
teach these animals to come forward whenever I tapped on 
their glass windows, and take food out of my hand. The 
larger alligators are very voracious, and I have seen one nine 
feet long eat forty-eight pounds of meat at one meal. 

Young alligators grow well in captivity if they are pro- 
perly looked after. 1 should say that they reached their full 
development at the age of eighteen or twenty years. They 
are then about twelve feet long. I have never at any time 
seen one longer than this, though fourteen-feet specimens 
have been reported to have been shot. In the London 
Zoological Gardens a few years ago there was an animal 
eleven feet in length which had been bought eighteen years 
previously when only three feet long. 

The animals referred to above belong to the species of 
alligator known as Adiigator mussissipprensis, coming from 
the Southern States of America. I well remember the first 
consignment of these which we ever received. This was in 
1856. On hearing that the boat containing the animals had 
arrived, my father and I went on board to inspect them, and 
found there a miscellaneous collection of cages containing 
animals of all kinds. The owner demanded 4120 for the 
whole collection, but we finally beat him down to £90 and 


REPTILES IN CAPTIVITY 201 


carried away the lot. The dealer was so much pleased with 
this transaction that he made me a present of a young alligator 
three and a half feet long. It is true that it turned out to be 
blind in one eye, but it does not do to look a gift horse in the 
mouth, nor a gift alligator in the eye! 

At this time alligators were very rare in Europe, and we 
made a very good business out of them. Even I, who was 
then only twelve years old, succeeded in selling my one-eyed 
alligator for eighteen shillings, which was to me a large for- 
tune. 

As compared with the great Indian crocodiles (or gavials) 
of the Ganges and the Brahmapootra, the American alligators 
are mere dwarfs. About fifteen years ago two skins of these 
crocodiles came into my possession, one fourteen and the other 
sixteen feet long. These J exhibited at Vienna, and they 
may still be seen in the Imperial Museum at that city. That 
they are not unusually large specimens, I have the evidence 
of my traveller Johansen, who states that three years ago, 
when navigating the Brahmapootra, he shot two gavials 
measuring fully twenty-five feet. He was, however, unable 
to secure their carcases, for the stream ran so strongly that it 
was impossible to stop the vessel. He says, moreover, that 
he has seen specimens of these animals quite thirty feet long ; 
and now that he is again making a journey to India I have 
given him orders to bring home, if not the animal itself, at 
least some skins of it. I have several times tried to import 
the young of this species, but without success; they all died 
on the journey. I believe that these Ganges gavials are the 
largest crocodiles in existence, though my travellers have told 
me that those inhabiting the White Nile and the great African 
lakes reach enormous dimensions. Will it ever be possible 
to exhibit one of these gigantic creatures in captivity? 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING. 


No fallacy is more widespread than that wild animals have 
to be kept throughout the winter carefully guarded from the 
effects of the low temperature. In Stellingen we keep lions, 
tigers, giraffes, ostriches, and other tropical animals wandering 
freely about in the open, though they always have access to 
cover if they should wish for it. The first thing that put this 
idea into my head was seeing a chimpanzee in England ina 
cold winter in the sixties disporting himself in the snow on 
the roof of a large tent. When he became cold he went in 
and took up a position by the stove. Later on I came across 
a menagerie in Westphalia where the monkeys were also al- 
lowed out of doors in the winter. Here there was an arrange- 
ment for connecting the outer enclosure with the inner cages 
by flaps, so that the creatures could pass at will from one to 
the other. The inner cages were kept at a temperature of 55° 
to 65° F., but the monkeys used to come out even when the 
thermometer was below zero. 

It thus came about that very early in my career I pon- 
dered the question as to how far it was advisable to expose 
to our winter climate animals which came from tropical 
countries. The conclusion at which I arrived was attained 
by careful observation of the animals in my possession. My 
first experiment on the subject, however, was due to an acci- 
dent rather than to any set purpose, and this occurred soon 
after I had been established at Neuer Pferdemarkt. I re- 
ceived one day in September a very beautiful Indian Cyrus 


crane. This we placed in an open enclosure where it re- 
202 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 203 


mained until nearly the beginning of winter. About that 

time I was, as so often happens to me, called away un-_ 
expectedly and did not get back till about a week later. 
During this week cold weather suddenly set in. I arrived 
back very late at night, but was awakened early next morn- 
ing by the characteristic cry of my crane, which I had for- 
gotten all about, and which I had intended to transfer to a 
warm building. I hastened out to find the hoar frost lying 
on the ground, and expecting to see the crane frozen through 
with the cold. But to my astonishment I found him in the 
most boisterous health; and when I came up, expecting to 
see him on the point of death, he came dancing and flutter- 
ing round to greet me, filling the air with his loud cries. 
Seeing that he did not appear to have suffered in any way 
from the cold, I arranged in one corner of the enclosure a 
sort of recess with plenty of straw where he could obtain 
shelter from the cold. But never once during the snow- 
storms, wind, and rain of that long winter did he make any 
use of this recess. He maintained his health in as perfect 
condition as though he were in his own tropical climate. I 
date from this occurrence the inauguration of my settled cus- 
tom of giving wild animals access to the open air to the 
greatest possible extent. From this time commenced those 
experiments on acclimatisation which, since the founding of 
my animal park at Stellingen, have occupied a very large 
share of my attention. 

The art of acclimatisation is as old as the animal trade it- 
self, for it has always been necessary, in order to keep in 
captivity animals from foreign countries, to acclimatise them 
to some extent to their new country, as well as to changed 
habits of life and artificially prepared food. Captivity, indeed, 
involves an enormous change in all the animal's ordinary 
modes of life. From being free to roam on the deserts or the 
steppes, and compelled to exercise cunning or swiftness to 
secure its food, it is now confined in a comparatively cramped 
space and not called upon to exercise any of its normal 


204 BEASTS AND MEN 


activities whatever. The giraffes, elephants, and gazelles, 
which are accustomed to wander in large herds through the 
plains or forests, find themselves suddenly isolated and con- 
demned to drag out their existence in solitary confinement. 
It is not to be wondered. at that weakness and enervation 
should ensue asa result. Among all animals a sort of mental 
depression seems to take place when they have been only re- 
cently captured ; and in the case of the more highly evolved 
and nervous animals, such as’ the anthropoids and especially 
the gorillas, this mental depression’ often terminates in death. 

The power of adaptation to new climates varies greatly with 
different animals. It is most developed in the case of those 
animals which are accustomed to wander about on large con- 
tinental plains, for there is there a considerable difference in 
the temperatures of day and night, and they are accustomed, 
in consequence, to suffer extremes. As long ago as the 
seventies I began acclimatisation experiments at Neuer 
Pferdemarkt with giraffes and elephants. One winter about 
that time was so severe that I was unable to raise the tem- 
perature of the stables in which the giraffes were kept to 
more than a few degrees above freezing-point, but I found 
that the cold did the creatures no harm. They grew a thick 
crop of winter hair, thus reacting to their new environment, 
and by the end of the winter their hair was about two and 
a half times as long as giraffe hair usually is. 

In founding my animal park at Stellingen the chief 
principle which I kept in view was that each animal should be 
kept in an environment which differed as little as possible from 
its own natural environment. For this purpose one of the 
first requisites was to give them plenty of space to wander 
about in, so that their diminished freedom should be felt as 
little as possible. The next thing was to endeavour to har- 
den them against the influence of the cold and wet, for which 
European climates are so remarkable. The case of African 
ostriches may be cited as a model of what can be done in 
this respect. 


“MOUS 9} Ul S9YSII}SO 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 207 


Three years ago at the beginning of October there arrived 
at my animal park a number of young ostriches from Africa. 
Instead of being placed as usual in closed and heated build- 
ings they were left out in a large yard in which a wooden hut 
had been set up asa shelter. During the whole winter the 
birds were kept in this yard and did very well, although the 
temperature several times reached 20° of frost. On the rst 
January, 1906, when they were out at about 30° of frost, I 
noticed that some of them actually took the opportunity to 
give themselves baths in the snow. A cassowary, which was 
kept close by, likewise passed through the winter without harm. 
In 1907, six young ostriches about three and a half feet high 
arrived, and they also stood the winter very well. Inthe autumn 
we happened to receive half a dozen adult ostriches which had 
become so weak on the journey that they had to be carried 
out of their cages by their keepers. Nevertheless they were 
placed in the yard with the rest, and after a few hours in the 
open they had recovered sufficiently to be driven into th 
shelter hut with their comrades. 

The hut is, of course, so arranged that the birds can go into 
it at any moment, should they be so inclined. For purposes 
of ventilation the windows of the hut are kept open day and 
night, so that there is little relief from the outer cold. The 
only furniture provided is a layer of turf and a plentiful supply 
of straw. Only for one week during the winter were the birds 
kept shut up in this hut, and that was simply on account of the 
ice on which they are so liable to slip that it brings them into 
great danger. During this period it is true that several acci- 
dents occurred. One ostrich had its leg broken while running 
about in the hut. Another died from the effects of a kick by 
one of its comrades. A third belied the common proverb 
about the digestion of ostriches. It swallowed eleven copper 
nails about one and a half inches long and also one of about 
four inches long, but instead of surviving and flourishing, as it 
ought to have done, it died through the nails piercing the wall 
of the stomach. But at no time did any accident occur on 


208 BEASTS AND MEN 


account of the severe weather. None of the creatures ever 
caught cold, and the six young ones, which in June weighed 
from 60 to 70 lbs. apiece, had by the following February 
reached an average weight of 340 lbs. 

Successful acclimatisation experiments have been carried 
out with a variety of other animals besides ostriches. Re- 
markable results have been obtained with nearly all the dif- 
ferent kinds of antelopes, with elands, gnus, beisas, etc. 

Last winter we had, among other kinds, six specimens of 
‘the Dorcas gazelle which gam- 
bolled about at a temperature 
several degrees below freezing- 
point just as cheerfully as if it had 
been summer. There is no doubt 
=~ | Mts! that all the species of antelope can 
: i) be left out of doors throughout 
the winter so long as they have 
access to a covered shed where 
they can obtain shelter if necessary. 
When they are confined in close 
quarters they are much more liable 
to contract disease. The great 
antelope houses which most Zoo- 
logical Gardens possess are al- 
together a mistake, as also is the system of keeping the 
animals apart in separate stalls. They thrive much better 
when they are allowed to herd together, and any additional 
cost of tending or feeding the animals can be covered by 
breeding, for which the closer companionship naturally gives 
greater opportunities. In my garden, which has been specially 
laid out for the purpose of facilitating my acclimatisation experi- 
ments, I have hit upon several minor devices for giving shelter 
from rain and wind. ‘The gables of the roofs project far out 
so as to afford shelter and a dry resting-place beneath, free 
from rain and snow. Some of the houses are so constructed 
that the outer door, instead of leading directly into the main 


Dorcas gazelles in the snow. 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 209 


building, opens into a passage which turns abruptly and so ex- 
cludes the possibility of draughts. The doors can then be 
left wide open day and night, summer and winter, nor is any 
artificial heating arrangement required. The animals obtain 
the benefit, however, of what I may call a natural heating 


Lions in the snow. 


arrangement. This is effected by allowing their dung to 

accumulate on the floor to the depth of about a foot. It is 

covered daily with fresh straw; but the warmth given out by 

the process of decomposition keeps the building at a tempera- 

ture considerably higher than that which prevails outside. 
With the carnivores also, similar experiments have 

been undertaken ; and they have been attended with similar 

14 


210 BEASTS AND MEN 


results. Both lions and tigers, even Indian tigers, withstood 
the cold admirably so long as they were free to wander in 
the open. It is true that I have at the back of my carnivore 
glen a shelter into which the animals can retreat at pleasure, 
and it is also true that this shelter was heated during some 
of the coldest days in the year. But the heating was merely 
intended to keep it free from ice, and the animals were at all 
times at liberty to wander, and in fact did wander, outside, 
every day, even in the rain and snow. One Indian panther 
which I had, became so much accustomed to the cold that it 
would not take advantage of the shelter, but lay out in the 
open all day on the branch of a tree. 

The most remarkable case that I have observed of the 
beneficial effects of fresh air was in the case of two young lions 
which on their first arrival I kept confined within doors ; but 
here they fell into a pitiable condition and I thought they 
were going to die. I then placed them out in the open, the 
only shelter provided being an ordinary box. Forthwith 
they began to improve, and they are now perfectly recovered 
and have developed into fine animals. 

Little has yet been done towards attempting the acclima- 
tisation of monkeys, but I have now under construction 
several large monkey houses designed specially for this pur- 
pose. In the case of the anthropoids, I have a couple 
of orangs already to a great extent acclimatised. They had 
been kept in captivity in Borneo for six years before they 
reached me, and on their arrival I placed them in a large 
waggon cage, whence they have been in the habit of coming 
out daily and walking round the gardens with their keepers. 
Their health has remained uniformly good—a clear proof 
that creatures even from the tropical climate of Borneo can 
be acclimatised in this country. 

There are, of course, many other animals that have been 
acclimatised besides those that I have mentioned. In the 
winter my animal park shows scarcely less life and activity 
than in the summer. Cyrus and crowned cranes, many exotic 


_ ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 211 


pheasants, and Australian black swans are all left out of doors 
throughout the entire winter. The marabou and the ibis 
can stand 10° of frost, and Australian cockatoos, aras, 
etc., do not have to take shelter even when the temper- 
ature sinks to 15° F. It is obvious, however, that there are 
many small tropical birds and mammals which it will never 
be possible to acclimatise. Reptiles and amphibians also 
are difficult subjects, though one never knows what may 
not be done until one has tried. 

As I have already observed, the fundamental law of ac- 
climatisation is to provide as large spaces as possible for the 
animals to roam about in. In Stellingen, moreover, I always 
try to supply an environment which resembles as far as 
possible the natural environment of the animals. I endeavour 
to consider the psychic as well as the physical condition of the 
animal, so that they should forget, if it be possible, that they 
are prisoners at all. The gregarious animals I always keep 
together in large enclosures. This goes a long way towards 
combating the tediousness which is one of the greatest 
difficulties to be overcome in keeping wild animals in captivity. 
Constant association enables them to play about together, 
keeps up the appetite, and maintains the body in a healthy 
condition. There are, therefore, in Stellingen wide tracts of 
meadow-land in which wander animals of many different 
species, though all are provided with shelters in case of un- 
favourable weather. Rocky ranges rise high into the air 
dotted with mountain animals from various parts of the world, 
and ona high plateaua herd of reindeer may be seen. A rock is 
provided, in as exact an imitation as possible of an iceberg, so 
that the polar bears may think that they are still in the Arctic 
regions; and there are great ponds with numerous. shelter 
corners in which seals, penguins, and water birds may feel that 
they are in their own home. . 

Certain other Zoological Gardens have been carrying out 
experiments of the same kind. In the acclimatisation of 
various exotic mammals and birds, Dr. Brandis in Halle has 

ids? 


212 BEASTS AND MEN 


achieved the best results, while Professor Heck of the Berlin 
Zoological Gardens has been very successful in imitating the 
natural surroundings of the animals. At the Zoological Gar- 
dens at Copenhagen I was glad to find that many recom- 
mendations which I had made five years previously had been 
put into practice by Director Schiott with excellent results. In 
particular, the monkeys had been provided with an outer en- 
closure, to which they had access at all times. Under this 
treatment they had flourished so well that I endeavoured to 
purchase some, but the director was not to be persuaded to 
part with any. 

One result of the acclimatisation of animals is that the erec- 
tion of Zoological Gardens is no longer the expensive matter 
that it used to be. The massive houses with costly heating 
arrangements can all be dispensed with, and there is no reason 
at all why every town of 100,000 inhabitants should not have 
its Zoological Gardens. The planning required is both simple 
and economical, and there would be little risk of loss. 

Besides myself, various private persons in different parts ot 
the world have achieved considerable success in acclimatisa- 
tion. ‘The famous Falz-Fein keeps all the animals on his 
estate in the Crimea out in the open. The Duke of Bedford 
similarly keeps his fine collection roaming at large about the 
great park at Woburn. Mr. Walter Rothschild also has in 
his parks very fine collections. What greater pleasure can 
there be to a private gentleman than that of maintaining and 
establishing personal friendships with a large collection of 
foreign animals! 

I now have to touch upon one of the most serious prob- 
lems with which the animal lover is confronted—I mean the 
approaching extermination of many of the finest kinds of wild 
beasts. Antelopes, giraffes, and many other species become 
scarcer year by year, and the difficulties of procuring 
them are constantly increasing. In order that they 
may be saved, large reserves should without delay be estab- 
lished. If it is not done soon, it will be too late. The finest 


‘MOUS 9Y]} UL SOOIRS UL YL 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 215 


country in the world for the establishment of such reserves 
would be Florida; and, if any wealthy American could be 
persuaded to set aside even so small an area as 1,000 acres in 
that wonderful country, he would be performing a service, the 
importance of which can scarcely be exaggerated. Giraffes, 
zebras, all the large species of antelopes, as well as the most 
beautiful cranes, ostriches, emus, etc., would live peaceably to- 
gether in such a park. Indeed it would almost be possible to 
transfer a complete portion of the African fauna to Florida if 
this were done. The site selected for such a park would 
have to include woods and thickets, large meadows as well as 
hilly ground, and should be traversed by a river where the 
animals could go to drink. If they were properly protected 
they would undoubtedly breed well and remain healthy. 

There would be very little difficulty in carrying out this 
project. If such a reserve on a small scale can be maintained 
in Southern Russia, where the temperature often falls many 
degrees below freezing-point, how much more easily could it 
be accomplished in the magnificent climate of the Southern 
States of America! Nor would the expense be so very great ; 
$200,000 to $250,000 would be amply sufficient to cover 
the cost of all the animals that would be required. Among 
the other animals that I have mentioned kangaroos could be 
easily included, for experience in my animal park has shown that 
they thrive admirably in such large spaces. 

Closely connected with the subject of acclimatisation is 
the art of breeding, including the crossing of animals of 
different races. This has always been one of the special 
points of interest in my garden at Stellingen. It is very 
important from the commercial point of view on account of 
the prospect which it affords of improving some of our 
domestic races of animals. From this standpoint careful 
attention ought to be paid to the indigenous cattle of uncivil- 
ised lands. The acclimatisation of these is usually attended 
with but little difficulty, and a careful selection of them 
for breeding purposes might be attended with results very 


216 BEASTS AND MEN 


valuable to the farmer. We have at Stellingen done much 
business in importing Indian zebus for crossing purposes ; 
and we export many of the animals to Argentina and Brazil. 
The draught capacity of cattle is very often immensely improved 
by the infusion of the zebu blood. The possibility of making 
such crosses is of the first importance in all the colonies, 
where a correct selection of 
suitable races of domestic 
animals is one of the most 
urgent problems that the 
people are called upon to 
solve. 

I have already related the 
failure of my attempts at 
bringing home some of the 
giant wild sheep of Central 
Asia. It was suggested to 
me by Professor Kiihn of 
Halle that I should endeavour 
to cross these with domestic 
sheep; but unfortunately the 
experiment has not yet proved 
practicable. I succeeded in 
bringing home some of the 
animals and also representa- 
tives of smaller races for the 
Royal Agricultural Institute, but it was only in the case of 
the smaller varieties that the crossing experiments were suc- 
cessful, for the giant sheep died very soon. 

I do not despair, however, of succeeding ultimately in 
bringing home some of these giant wild sheep. I had the 
same difficulty at first with wild horses, stags, roes, ibexes, 
etc., but in all these cases experience showed me how I could 
overcome the obstacles and carry out the importation success- 
fully. The Siberian stag crossed with the ordinary red deer 
gives very good results, and before long deer-stalkers may ex- 


Fic. 70,—Young argali. 


‘seIqoZ 


\ 


a: 
ANA lig y 14a 
ONT a 


ACCLIMATISATION AND BREEDING 219 


pect a great improvement in their stock from the result of 
such breeding. Falz-Fein was the first to produce this cross. 
Siberian roe-deer have also been crossed satisfactorily with 
our native roes. 

The importation of Mongolian pheasants is also very profit- 
able for breeding purposes. My first orders for this bird were 
from the Duke of Bedford and from Mr. Walter Rothschild. 
The hybrids produced by crossing these pheasants with the 
ordinary English species are 30 per cent. heavier in weight 
than any which have hitherto been bred. The example of these 
two gentlemen has been followed by many others, especially in 
England, where pheasant shooting is a very popular pastime. 
I myself have gained little advantage from the importation of 
these birds, for they have to be brought from very distant and 
inaccessable countries at great expense and with many risks to 
be run by the way. If only 300r 4o per cent. of the birds that 
are caught ultimately arrive at Hamburg I am fully satis- 
fied. 

An interesting cross which has hitherto attracted little at- 
tention is that between the horse and the zebra. Professor 
Ewart of Edinburgh made some very successful experiments 
in this direction, and I bought from him all the hybrids which 
he obtained. Two of these ‘“zebroids” were acquired by the 
British Government for use in the Mountain Artillery in 
India, and are said to have proved very satisfactory for this 
purpose. Two others, a stallion and a gelding, I have 
myself used for several years. They are excellent draught 
animals and as steadfast as ordinary mules. The latter, I may 
observe, deserve more attention than they receive in Germany. 
The Americans seem to understand the value of these hybrids 
better than we do, for according to some statistics which | 
saw some time ago, over a quarter of a million mules are 
bred in the United States every year. 


CHAPTER: TA. 
ANIMALS IN SICKNESS. 


In a collection consisting of thousands of animals, it is, of 
course, impossible to prevent the occurrence of various kinds 
of diseases. Sometimes these are very serious: as, for in- 
stance, when, just before the exhibition at Chicago, the 
epidemic of cholera invaded my menagerie and almost 
annihilated the inmates, while I and my skilled veterinary 
surgeons could do nothing but stand idly by and look on. 
But it is not often that we have to deal with scourges so 
terrible as this. Of the minor indispositions, those which 
affect animals on their first arrival, as a result of the long and 
trying journeys from the interior of distant continents and 
across the seas, are the most frequent. As I pointed out in 
the case of the elands and young baboons, their first ac- 
quaintance with captivity brings a heavy strain upon their 
constitutions, and the effects are very apt to appear later on 
in a disturbed state of health. Great care, therefore, has to be 
taken when one of these creatures arrives at its destination. 
It is fed on concentrated food in carefully regulated quantities. 
Every effort is made to soothe its disordered nerves, and to 
restore the creature to a normal condition before the process 
of acclimatisation is commenced. I lay great stress upon 
the rule that animals which have newly arrived should be 
treated very differently from those that have already been 
acclimatised and grown accustomed to their food. I feed 
new arrivals at frequent intervals during the day, giving 


them each time only small portions. Among the carnivores 
220 


ANIMALS IN SICKNESS 221 


my rule is to feed them twice a day; and not until they are 
thoroughly acclimatised can this rule be safely relaxed. 
An adult lion when he has been acclimatised ought to 
receive from 13 to 17 lbs. of meat per day, with one fast 
day in the week. I usually give them alternately horse- 
flesh and beef; and in the latter case I include both the head 
and the heart of the prey. This I do, not only from con- 
siderations of economy, but because I think it agrees well 
with the animals. Food which contains plenty of bone 
strengthens them and should always be given ; for there is no 
doubt of the truth of the proverb “bone makes bone”. It is 
also very good for them to have to use their teeth. It pre- 
serves the teeth in a proper condition, and, by aiding the 
processes of mastication and digestion, gives the animals a 
cheerful temperament and keeps them in good health. It is 
quite astonishing what a large amount of bone a carnivore 
will succeed in devouring. Of the head of an ox or horse 
weighing 30 lbs. it will eat quite two-thirds. The strong 
bony feeding is also found to be beneficial in many illnesses, 
and when young animals are teething trainers like to feed 
them upon bony food in order to accelerate the development 
of the teeth. Even in adult animals I have found that a 
bone diet acts as a cure in cases of trouble with the teeth. 
I once had a fine specimen of a North African lion which 
suffered from severe fistula of the gums both around the 
canines and all along the upper jaw. In all such cases, where 
the disease can be diagnosed with comparative ease, | usually 
dispense with the services of a veterinary surgeon and attend 
to the matter myself. The first thing I did was to place the 
animal on a diet which would lead to no further inflammation 
of the sore parts. I gave him milk, eggs, and minced-up 
meat ; and the freedom from further irritation soon reduced 
the swelling of the gums and brought the animal into a more 
healthy condition. As soon as the inflammation had sub- 
sided I commenced to put him gradually on to a strong diet 
with a special liberality of bone. By thus compelling him to 


222 BEASTS AND MEN 


use his teeth, the injured ones soon broke out of their own 
accord, and it was unnecessary to resort to the operation of 
removing them artificially—an operation always attended with 
considerable danger on account of the use of anesthetics which 
it involves. : 
One of the most interesting cures which I have succeeded 
in effecting was in the case of a small elephant which I 
received on gth March, 1904. He was at that. time in a 
very badly nourished condition, little more than skin and 
bone, and on the point of collapsing. His height was only 
four feet six inches at the shoulder. The care which I ex- 


Strangling a sick elephant. 


pended upon him was so well requited that in the course of 
five weeks during July and August his weight increased from 
nearly 7 cwt. to about 94 cwt. Unfortunately he afterwards 
contracted colic, which brought down his weight by about 1 
cwt. within two days. He soon got over it, however, and 
from the middle of September to the end of December put 
on very nearly another 7 cwt. This remarkable cure was 
effected without any resort to medicine. I may here take 
the opportunity of observing that in dealing with wild animals 
medicine should be avoided to the greatest possible extent. 
Iam wholly convinced that medicines often do more harm 
than good ; and that the proper way of doctoring an animal 


ANIMALS IN SICKNESS 223 


is to place it in such wholesome conditions that nature brings 
her own remedy without artificial assistance. 

I had occasion not long ago to apply this doctrine in the 
case of a rhinoceros which had been wounded when it was 
being captured, and had been improperly treated while in 
transport. When it arrived it had in its back holes of the 
size of a man’s hand, and a tendon of the hindleg was half 
cut through. The only medicinal treatment that I ad- 
ministered was to supply it with a hygienic bed—if that 
can be called medicinal. The bed in question is nothing 
more than dry earth covered over with hay or straw. I fed 
it on concentrated food such as eggs, milk, and water-gruel ; 
and by the end of five weeks the rhinoceros had completely re- 
covered its normal condition and looked strong and healthy. 

One of the most remarkable cures that have been effected 
among the animals in my possession was in the case of an 
Indian buffalo-cow which had fallen ill before being shipped 
from India. The disease took the form of an inflammation 
on the snout and was accompanied by a heightened tempera- 
ture and considerable pain, especially when the creature was 
feeding. An examination disclosed the fact that the abscess 
on the snout was crammed with parasitic worms. An at- 
tempt at a scientific cure, although it caused much suffer- 
ing to the animal, was entirely unsuccessful, and after a time 
we had practically given up hope of being able to save its 
life. At this juncture an old Hindoo came upon the scene, 
and when we informed him of the various unsuccessful 
attempts to cure the buffalo he smiled knowingly and under- 
took to do the job himself in a single day. We attached 
little credence to the Hindoo’s professions, but, since every- 
thing had failed and all hope been abandoned, there seemed 
no objection to letting him try what he could do. On re- 
ceiving our permission, he went away and returned a few 
hours later with a bundle of blossoming branches of some 
shrub with which I was then, and am still, quite unacquainted. 
All I can say is that the blossom gave forth a somewhat 


224 BEASTS AND MEN 


penetrating odour. We imagined that the Hindoo was about 
to make a decoction from these plants to wash out the sores 
—but no such thing. He merely tied the branches securely to 
the buffalo’s tail. This so irritated the animal that it lashed 
its tail about, hitting itself over the snout in its endeavours 
to tear off the branches. The constant contact of the snout 
with the shrub very quickly produced a remarkable effect. | 
cannot say whether the worms in the abscess were stupefied by 
the odour, or whether they merely disliked it and endeavoured 
to escape from it. But certain it is, that without further 
trouble they all fell out of their own accord, so that we were 
immediately able to wash out the abscess, and the creature 
was soon completely healed. This affords an interesting 
illustration of the variety of experience which I have collected 
in the course of my business. 

Although this method of healing seems pretty simple, it is 
not more simple than many of the methods which I regularly 
adopt. Except in cases of infectious diseases, I have all my 
lite confined myself to old-established and well-known 
remedies. I rarely call in a veterinary surgeon, and, indeed, 
it would be impracticable for me to do so whenever any of 
my thousands of animals happens to get a cold in the head 
or a pain in the toe. Common-sense is the most necessary 
qualification for dealing with these minor ailments. A 
careful examination has to be made of the sick animal, and 
then one has to take the best means available for getting 
it right again. 

As an instance of my method of procedure in such matters, 
I may recount the story of a polar bear which I purchased 
about forty years ago from the Zoological Garden at Copen- 
hagen. He was an unusually fine and large specimen and 
had been there several years, being probably about twelve 
years old. Owing, however, to the inadequate arrangements 
of the space allotted to him he was suffering from a complaint 
which is very common among polar bears. If any one will 
watch these creatures in a Zoological Garden he will observe 


ANIMALS IN SICKNESS 225 


that, when they turn round, they twist round shortly on their 
hind-quarters. In these turns and in all their other move- 
ments the hind-paws are scarcely moved at all, so that the 
claws growing upon them have nothing to keep them short 
and grow to an immoderate length, while those on the fore- 
paws are worn out with constant use. The hind-claws thus 
grow right into the flesh, and, in the case above alluded to, 
they had not only grown into the flesh, but gone right through 
it and come out on the other side. When | bought this bear, 
the authorities at the Zoological Garden at Copenhagen had 
given up hope of being able to cure it; but after considerable 
thought I determined to attempt the following experiment. 
I had a large transport cage built about four feet six inches 
high and seven feet long and only one foot six inches wide. 
The front of the cage consisted simply of a grating made of 
parallel bars. Into this cage I drove the bear from out of his 
ordinary den. My purpose was to get at his hind-paws with- 
out either putting him under anesthetics or tying him down ; 
so, when once he was in the cage, I secured the services of 
the two assistants, who were all I then possessed, and tilted 
the cage over until the grating was at the bottom with the 
bear standing upon it. We next hoisted up the cage, which, 
with the bear in it, was not far short of half a ton, and rested 
it upon strong blocks, leaving room, however, for me to crawl 
underneath it. When I did this I could without difficulty 
tie down the bear’s paw to the grating, and it was then a very 
simple matter to cut the long claws with a pair of strong 
clippers. I pulled out the stumps of the claws from the in- 
flamed and mortified flesh, and hoped that after this operation 
he would soon become healthy again. In this hope I was 
completely justified. I transferred him immediately to another 
small cage, the lower half of which was lined with zinc, and, 
as soon as I had got him into this, I filled the lined portion 
of the cage with ice-cold water. The creature was thus 
kept continuously with his hind-paws immersed in the cold 
water. J kept a constant stream running, so that it was 
15 


226 BEASTS AND MEN 


always clear and fresh, and I devised means for keeping it 
thoroughly cool at the same time. In a fortnight the cure 
had entirely succeeded, and the bear once more became an 
almost perfect specimen of his kind. Some time after, I 
sold him to a menagerie for a very good price. 

Every one who has had anything to do with animals is 
well acquainted with the fact that they often have a strong 
predilection for alcohol and sugar. Thus it is well known 
that race-horses are given sack to drink, or have their 
nostrils washed out with it, before they start in a race. 
Monkeys, too, are fond of wine, or of alcohol in any other 
form. Once when I was transporting seven elephants and 
a number of other animals through Germany the elephants 
were seized with colic. In order to cure them of this I gave 
them doses of rum. One of them, however, appeared to 
have had rather too much, for he became exceedingly 
hilarious and challenged his more sober neighbour to a duel. 
The jovial monster was disturbing the entire menagerie, so 
I saw that there was nothing for it but to repeat the dose, 
for the purpose of reversing the effect. I therefore supplied 
him with a large extra quantity of grog. He then became 
completely drunk, and soon fell into a quiet sleep. 

I have heard of a case of alcohol being administered also 
to bears in a very cruel, indeed a revolting, manner. This 
occurred some time ago when I had sold several large Euro- 
pean bears to a menagerie owner of the name of Malferteiner. 
This man used to wander about the country with an itinerant 
exhibition, and his cages were of a somewhat light make, 
scarcely strong enough to keep securely the exceptionally 
fine animals which I had sold him. There seemed consider- 
able danger that, by gnawing, scratching, or breaking, they 
would soon succeed in gaining their liberty. He was there- 
fore rather pleased when, soon afterwards, he fell in with a 
tribe of gypsies, who were much interested in the bears and 
offered to purchase them. As they had some ready money 
he completed the transaction; and waited with curiosity to 


ANIMALS IN SICKNESS 227 


see how the gypsies were going to take over the captives, for 
they had no luggage and no cages in which they could keep 
the bears. When Malferteiner asked them how they were 
going to manage it, they replied that he need not worry 
about that, they would look after it. He could not see, how- 
ever, how they were going to avoid running into considerable 
danger; for no attempt had ever been made to tame the 
bears or break them in in any way. The first thing that 
the gypsies did was to leave the creatures for a couple of days 
without food. They then brought a cask of salted herrings, 
which they put in the cages. The bears did not like this 
food at all, but their dislike availed them nothing, for no 
other was offered them; and on the third day their hunger 
became so acute that they devoured the herrings. Forthwith 
they became, of course, exceedingly thirsty, but no water was 
given them. Instead of water, bowls of sweetened spirit 
were placed before them, and this they greedily lapped up. 
They were then thoroughly intoxicated and sank into a very 
deep sleep. The gypsies were now in a position to carry 
out their evil purpose without fear. They walked into the 
cages where the formidable animals lay as harmless and 
motionless as sacks of flour; they extracted their large canine 
teeth with pliers, and cut away the claws from their paws. 
Even the deep wounds in the flesh which they made in this 
operation did not arouse the bears, and the gypsies knew no 
pity. Rings were drawn through their noses, and to each 
animal two chains were attached, one round the neck and 
another to the ring in the nose. The creatures had now 
been altogether deprived of their weapons of offence and 
defence. They were placed upon a cart, and the gypsies 
drove off with them. After many hours the unfortunate 
animals awoke and fell out of the cart; but, held as they 
were by the chains, they were compelled to run behind. 
The gypsies had taken the additional precaution of muzzling 
them, but this was entirely unnecessary, for the poor brutes, 


stupefied and weakened by pain, had no spirit left for attacking 
15 * 


228 BEASTS AND MEN 


their persecutors. Let us hope that in these civilised days 
such barbarous and cruel treatment would be impossible. 
Under enlightened laws the punishment would indeed be 
swift and severe for offenders of this detestable description. 

One of the most remarkable diseases which afflict animals 
in captivity takes the form of the infliction by the creatures 
themselves of dangerous wounds upon their own bodies. 
This peculiar complaint only occurs among the carnivores, 
but it is liable to break out in any species belonging to that 
order. I have had two cases of this self-mutilation in the 
case of spotted hyzenas, which up to that moment had ap- 
peared to be in thoroughly good health and very well 
behaved. In both cases these creatures all of a sudden broke 
forth into loud yells and literally fell upon themselves, tearing 
great pieces out of their own bodies. So quickly and so 
unexpectedly did this happen that there was no time to do 
anything to save them, and in each case the wounds inflicted 
were so shocking that the animals soon expired. Some 
years ago also a large jaguar became afflicted in the same 
way. He attacked one of his own paws, and so severely 
did he injure it that he had to be kept on a sick bed for four 
months and was not completely recovered for six months. 
Although I have never known male lions to be taken in this 
way, I have on two separate occasions observed it in lion- 
esses. These two animals both ate their own tails as far as 
they could reach, and as a result so much blood was lost that 
they both had to be killed. A tiger in my possession once 
did the same thing. He ate away half his tail, and it was 
only with great care and difficulty that we succeeded in heal- 
ing him. Although I have watched with ‘great care, I have 
not succeeded in finding any cause for these horrible habits. 
All the animals which I have here mentioned had been up 
to the moment of their seizure in thoroughly good health. 
They had not refused to take their food, nor betrayed any 
other symptom of approaching illness. The common reason 
given for these attacks is that the animal is suddenly pos- 


ANIMALS IN SICKNESS 229 


sessed with an inordinate desire for blood, but it seems to me 
much more probable that it is due to some disease of the 
brain. Whatever may be its cause, it is certainly of the 
greatest interest; and it is much to be wished that some 
authoritative man of science would undertake a research into 
its origin. 


CHAPTER X. 
LIFE AT STELLINGEN. 


I HAVE already described the process whereby, in the course 
of a few years, wide flat plains, fit for nothing but potato 
fields, and uncultivated land, interspersed by a few bushes, 
have been converted into a magnificent park. It is true that 
the hills and dales of this area do not accord well with the 
flat expanse of Northern Germany, but they are admirably 
suited to the purpose for which they were created. Under 
the precipitous cliffs and through the green meadows run 
small rivulets, spanned here and there by bridges so as to 
give a very picturesque effect. 

In each portion of this animal park there are kept the 
kinds of animals most suited to that special part; so that, 
within the limits of the park itself, there are contained speci- 
mens representing the fauna of every part of the globe. The 
stranger should direct his steps towards the group of build- 
ings in the centre of the park ; for when he stands there and 
looks outwards, he can obtain a fine view over every part of 
this veritable animal paradise. 

In the foreground is a large lake for the water birds, on 
which may be seen many varieties of swans, geese, and ducks. 
Beyond this there rises a rocky cliff, and on either side of it 
there stretch wide meadows, in which may be seen flamin- 
goes, cranes, pelicans, and ibises disporting themselves in the 
sun. This great expanse of lowland stretches far away to 
the foot of those rocky hills seen in the distance, and across 
the plain there roam so many different kinds of herbivores 
that one might fancy oneself in the Garden of Eden. Sheep, 


230 


‘udSUT]I[AIS 3B SPIiq-19}e AA 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 233 


goats, and antelopes stand out prominently on the hillsides ; 
whilst below in the green valley may be seen brahma-zebus 
from India, grazing side by side with shaggy yaks from 
Mongolia, guanacoes from South America, and woolly lamas 
from Peru. Here also is to be found the great dromedary 
and the conspicuously marked zebra. Various kinds of deer 
which have come from distant lands mingle with their Ger- 
man congeners. Mighty buffaloes and tiny dwarf goats 
graze peaceably together ; and although all is peace and har- 
mony, the scene presented is one of incessant movement, 
the animals appearing to enjoy complete liberty. 

As one looks beyond this large prairie the spectacle pre- 
- sented becomes still more remarkable ; for, only a few steps 
from where the herbivores are enclosed, a number of lions 
may be observed wandering about in a rocky gorge, not shut 
in by any fence ; while beyond these again a high mountain 
fills the horizon, on which may be seen all manner of Alpine 
creatures. Outlined against the sky beyond a markhor-buck 
stands on a lofty ridge; and, even as we watch, it gallops 
off and takes a 
flying leap overa fe 
deep chasmlying > 
in its path. Just 
as on the plain § 
below many dif- 
ferent animals 
are collected to- 
gether, so also 
on this rocky mountain. Maned sheep from North Africa, 
the famous wild sheep of Siberia, large families of Hima- 
layan wild goats and many other species find here plenty 
of scope for the exercise of their rock-climbing proclivities. 

The liberty which is accorded to the animals, and which 
goes so far to relieve the distress that a life in captivity must 
mean, is not only apparent but real. In the case of the lions 
in particular there is amply sufficient space for them to exercise 


Flamingoes. 


234 BEASTS AND MEN 


their powerful muscles; and visitors as a rule cannot con- 
ceive at first what barrier there is to keep them in. The 
broad trench which serves this purpose is so carefully con- 
cealed with thick brushwood and plants that the illusion is 
almost complete. 

It is only in comparatively recent years that I have 
ventured to exhibit animals in this fashion. The first occa~ 
sion was at the Berlin Exhibition in 1896, and later on | 
tried it at Leipsic and several other places, but my greatest 


The “ Japanese” island. 


success was at the St. Louis Exhibition in 1904. Before 
substituting a trench for railings, I had, of course, to carry 
out a series of experiments to discover how far the animals 
could jump. Any underestimate of their saltatory powers 
might, indeed, be attended with terrible consequences. | 
therefore investigated carefully their capacity both at the high 
jump and the long jump. In the case of the feline carnivores 
my experiments were made some time ago when I was still 
at Neuer Pferdemarkt. For the high jump my method was 
to take a stuffed pigeon and fix it to a projecting branch of a 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 235 


tree about ten feet above the ground. I then let loose in turn 
lions, tigers, and panthers into the enclosure where the tree was 
growing, and, as soon as they spied the pigeon, they exerted 
themselves to the utmost to bring it to the ground. They 
were, however, unable to do so. The lions and tigers could 
only jump about six feet six inches. The panthers were more 
athletic and could just reach the branch, but even they were 
unable to bring down the pigeon, for the latter was fixed to 
the highest point. 

The long jump I used to test in a similar manner, using 
for the most part animals which had already received some 
training and were therefore more adept than ordinary un- 
practised carnivores. The panthers could just cover ten feet 
without a run; but, if they had been able to take a run, I 
feel sure that they could have increased it to thirteen or 
fourteen feet. Tigers I found could also just cover ten feet 
from a standstill, but I doubt not that they also could have 
put on several feet if they had been allowed a run. 

On the strength of these experiments I considered it safe 
to surround the carnivore gorge at Stellingen with a trench 
twenty-eight feet wide. Although they could easily take a 
ten-yard run at it, it is certain that, if they endeavoured to 
leap so wide a chasm, they would inevitably fall into the 
depths of the abyss. I had, however, to devise an arrange- 
ment to safeguard the animals from falling into the trench 
inadvertently while playing about. For this purpose I caused 
to be constructed a ledge some five feet wide, running round 
the trench on the inner side a little distance below the top. 
It is true that this somewhat diminished the distance from the 
outer side of the trench; but it has to be remembered that an 
animal taking off from this ledge would not have the advan- 
tage of a run, and would therefore find in it no facility for 
getting out. When thus confined by a trench, the animals 
are indeed much more securely locked up than if they were 
kept behind bars. For bars may be, and often have been, 
broken through, but it is a physical impossibility that the 


236 BEASTS AND MEN 


animals should take so wide a leap as that which would be 
necessary to escape. 

The large park constitutes a community resembling in 
many ways a community of human beings. The passing 
visitor has but little idea of the varying incidents and occu- 
pations which fill the lives of the captive animals. As ina 
community of human beings, they make friends and enemies 
among one another ; they fall in love, and fall out of it again. 
There are births, deaths, and marriages, and a constant 
supply of news for the men whose duty it is to look after the 
creatures. Indeed there would be sufficient material to fill 
the columns of a small daily newspaper. Careful observa- 
tion is constantly kept on all the animals, and treatment is 
meted out to each according to its individual requirements. | 

Here, for instance, is a piece of news which comes in one 
morning from the Arctic Panorama, the rocks and waters of 
which are inhabited by polar bears, by reindeer, by various 
aquatic birds, and by walruses and other pinnipeds. The news 
isnot, perhaps, of fundamental importance; yet it is interest- 
ing in our little township. One of the seals, known as a sea- 
bear (a species of pinniped, by the way, which has never before 
been seen in Europe), has discovered a new way of amusing 
himself. His plan is to conceal himself beneath the surface 
of the water, and there narrowly observe the sparrows flutter- 
ing about on the brink. Then he would suddenly with 
lightning speed flash out of the water and seize a sparrow, 
with which he would slide back gently into the pond. There 
he would callously drown it, and, when it was no longer able 
to fly away, he would play about with it for an hour or more. 
This animal was much given to sport of this kind, and a few 
days later he succeeded in catching a rat which he maltreated 
after the same fashion. 

In the case of this sea-bear it was, of course, the love of 
play and not mere wanton cruelty which caused it to worry 
the sparrow and the rat. Love of play is, indeed, strongly 
developed in all animals, and contrivances should be invented 


‘euleIOUe II}DIY 9Y} UT 


uaSury]aig ye suindued pue suol[-vag 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN _ 241 


to give them every opportunity of indulging the faculty. I 
have already at Stellingen séveral contrivances of this kind, 
and intend shortly to introduce a great many more. To each 
creature should be given whatever seems to suit him best. 
Sea-lions, for instance, have a natural talent for: balancing ; 
and they will derive much amusement from so simple a thing 
as a rod thrown into the water. The rhinoceros, on the other 
hand, is not qualified for performances in which delicacy and 
precision are required. Brute strength is his forte, and some 
means must be devised for providing him with an opportunity 
to exercise it. In the stable of one of our rhinoceroses, called 
Max, we have tried a contrivance which has proved very 
successful. A long pole has been inserted horizontally across 
the stable at a considerable height from the ground ; and from 
it is suspended a heavy sack of hay somewhat resembling on 
a large scale those appliances upon which American boxers are 
wont to exercise themselves. Max at once took to the idea 
of this sport. He commenced boxing furiously with the sack, 
and has never since become bored with the pastime. For 
wild cattle, too, which are more cut out for feats of strength 
than for anything requiring subtlety or precision, we provide 
a barrel which they can roll to and fro or send hurtling 
into the air with their horns. ‘“Panem et Circenses” is the 
motto to be observed, if the population is to be kept ina 
wholesome frame of mind. 

Besides feeding and amusements, there is another factor 
of great importance in the lives of the animals, vzz., the loves 
and friendships which they form among one another. If they 
could talk, what endless gossip there would be in our little 
community! It would doubtless turn to a great extent upon 
the mésalliances which take place. For among beasts, as 
among men, mésalliances frequently occur. What can be 
more grotesque, what can form a more appropriate subject 
for gossip, than an affection between a great cow-elephant and 
a male kangaroo? Yet this actually did take place. Every 


day the two animals would play together, the elephant caress- 
16 


242 BEASTS AND MEN 


ing the marsupial with her trunk; and they hated to be 
separated from one another. Other cases I have already re- 
ferred to in preceding chapters: as when a male elephant 
made friends with a little pony mare, or when a crowned 
crane became intimately associated with an American ostrich. 
I also had an instance of friendship between a drake and a 
gull. The life has its shady side too, for there is no end of 
jealousy accompanying the various demonstrations of affection. 
Among the most interesting inhabitants of the park are 
the walruses, who live in the Arctic Panorama. Arctic 
travellers are un- 
animous in recor- 
ding that these 
animals in a wild 
state are very un- 
pleasant to meet, 
and occasionally 
extremely pugna- 
cious. If they 
are irritated, they 
will often attack 
a boat and. en- 
deavour to cap- - 
size it with their 
mighty tusks. 
For modern 
sportsmen, armed 
with weapons of 
unfailing accuracy, the walrus has, however, lost most of his 
terrors. His powerful weapons of defence avail him little. 
Even the primitive Eskimos succeed in slaying these aquatic 
monsters. They first harpoon them, and then, as soon as 
they can come to close quarters, attack them mercilessly 
with lances, the animals soon succumbing from the countless 
wounds inflicted upon them. The walrus has very rarely 
been exhibited in captivity ; and I may therefore consider 


Walruses. 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 243 


myself fortunate in that I have received during recent years 
several separate consignments of the creatures. Of course, 
it is only possible to capture them alive when they are quite 
young. I understand that mine were secured by surprising 
them on the ice and seizing them after their parents had been 
slain. 
The first two walruses which I received both died within 
a few weeks; two others which I had later on lived for 
nearly two years. They are very sensitive, and require 
careful looking after, being especially liable to catch cold. 
The last of these first four walruses caught a cold when 
winter was coming on, but we succeeded in curing the 
animal by the agency of a steam bath. It lived till it was 
about three years old, and, when it died, it weighed fully 
8 cwt. I believe that a walrus is full-grown at about ten 
years of age, and it then weighs about a ton and a quarter. 
I need hardly say that such large animals. require a prodigi- 
ous quantity of food. To the first two which I had, in spite 
of their youth, I gave over 20 lbs. a day. Cod, halibut, and 
various kinds of fish were the staple food. I cut it up into 
small pieces, and took out the bone, so that the animals 
could easily consume the pieces in the water. The second 
-two walruses that I received used to devour between them 
no less than 180 lbs. of fish daily, though they were at that 
time not three years old. From this it may easily be inferred 
how great must be the appetite of a full-grown walrus and 
how prodigious the quantity of food which he has to catch. 
It was only after much trouble and many disappointments 
that I succeeded, in October, 1907, in obtaining more walruses 
for my garden. In that month, however, I secured three 
individuals which had been captured in the Kara Straits near 
~Waigatz Island, and were sent me by Dr. Breitfuss, the 
leader of a scientific expedition to those parts. Their captor 
fed them exclusively on the blubber of the common seal, and 
when they first arrived at Stellingen the same diet was con- 


tinued. But, after a time, all the available blubber came to 
16 * 


244 BEASTS AND MEN 


an end, and it became necessary to give the animals some 
other food. I therefore offered them codfish, but this, although 
it was readily accepted by the two females, was persistently 
refused by the male. I thought I should see him perish of 
starvation before my very eyes, until I tried the experiment 
of offering him some shark. This he devoured with seeming 
satisfaction, thus breaking a fast of no less than a fortnight. 
Later.on he consented to eat codfish like the females, but the 
bones always had to be carefully extracted before it was given 
to him. Feeding walruses is in fact rather like feeding chil- 
dren. The food is held out invitingly before them and they 
take it piece by piece. But their appetites are very far from 
childish. Last month the three young walruses devoured no 
less than 24 tons of fish costing me over £30. Ss 

In September, 1908, my collection was enriched by the 
addition of five more walrus cubs, two males and three females. 
Thus I am now able to exhibit eight of these animals —a fact 
of which I think I am justified’ in being proud, seeing that 
there are none in any other Zoological Garden in the world, 
except that at Copenhagen, and there only one. These five 
were brought me from Hammerfest by a certain Captain 
Hansen, who gave me much interesting information about 
their habits in the wild state, as well as about the mode of 
catching them. Captain Hansen, who is a Norwegian by 
birth, has had considerable experience of hunting walruses, 
which he has carried on in the Arctic. Seas ever since 1886. 
For the last sixteen years he has been captain of a ship of his 
own which he calls Zhe Seventh of June after the date of his 
own baptism. 

~The walruses are killed by harpooning ; a for this 
purpose a peculiar kind of boat is built, about twenty feet 
long and seven feet wide. The boat is not clinker-built like 
ordinary boats, for the planks of which it is made, instead. 
of overlapping, fit exactly into one another, leaving the 
outer surface of the boat quite smooth. The floor of the 
boat is lined with metal, and there is in the forepart a 


‘SOSNI[EM 9} SUIPID 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 247 


platform carrying an upright post firmly fixed at the bottom. 
To this post is attached the end of the very long line 
fastened to the harpoon. When a walrus is to be har- 
pooned, a man stands upon the platform, with the line lying 
loosely upon it ready for use. After the animal has been 
harpooned, the line is drawn through a notch at the side 
of the boat, for it would, of course, be very dangerous 
if the walrus, in swimming backwards and forwards, were 
able to pull the line freely over the boat. Eight of these 
notches are provided, as it often takes several harpoons to 
kill one walrus. A boat’s crew consists of four men, of 
whom three row, while the fourth stands on the platform 
and hurls the harpoon. The distance at which it is usually 
thrown is about twenty-five yards; and I am told that the 
record is thirty-seven yards. As soon as it is harpooned 
the walrus dives, and the harpooner knows by the slackening 
or tightening of the line whether the animal is coming 
towards him or going in the opposite direction. In the 
latter case, which usually happens when females have been 
struck, there is not much danger ; but in the former case the 
crew have to be very sharply on the look-out, for the 
wounded animal will rise quite close to the boat and attempt 
to attack his enemies. But even when the line becomes 
taut and the creature swims rapidly away, the line often has 
to be cut to avoid being capsized. This-is especially frequent 
when the harpooned walrus has been lying on an ice-floe, 
and makes for the water on the opposite side of the floe from 
the boat. Similarly, when a walrus herd has been surprised 
whilst lying on the coast, it is usual first to kill the animals 
nearest the water, in order to block the way of escape for 
those which happened to be farther inland. When they 
have been harpooned the walruses are despatched as quickly 
as possible with guns, especially constructed by the Nor- 
wegians for the purpose. The capture of some of my last 
walruses nearly cost the hunters their lives ; for the young 
cubs which had been brought on board gave out such 


248 BEASTS AND MEN 


appealing cries for help, that a gigantic male was attracted 
and delivered a furious attack upon the boat, driving three 
great holes through it with his tusks. 

The commonest way of catching young walruses is to kill 
the mother ; indeed this is usually necessary before the cap- 
ture can be carried out. One of the animals I now have at 
Stellingen was caught in a very ingenious though pathetic 
manner. The mother was first killed and drawn into close 
proximity with the boat, which was then allowed to remain 
still. Before very long the cub came looking for his mother, 
and having found her, climbed up on her back, where he was 
easily caught and secured. On the voyage when the hunters 
captured the five walruses which I have mentioned as being 
recently added to my collection, no fewer than sixty-eight 
others were killed. The captors were able to sell their hides 
for £3 19s. percwt. Captain Hansen says that the largest 
walruses are to be found in Franz-Josef Land. During last 
year's catch an animal was found there with tusks two feet 
six inches long and weighing 53 lbs. each. ‘They were sold 
for about 3s. 2d. per Ib. 

Except during the pairing season, in September and Octo- 
ber, the sexes among the walruses live separately, the young 
going about with the females. Thus in the year 1886 Cap- 
tain Hansen found on the north coast of North-East Land a 
herd of 370 individuals, all females. Every one of them was 
slaughtered by five ships’ crews. The females also frequent 
the north coast of Spitzbergen at about 81° N. latitude. The 
males, on the other hand, may be found in Storefiord, 
the straits between Spitzbergen and Edge Island. The 
largest male seen by the hunters on their last voyage 
weighed nearly 3 tons. This animal they were fortunate 
enough to kill, and its hide alone weighed nearly half a ton. 
The young were caught near Cape Flora in Northbrook 
Island, but the richest hunting-ground is now the north coast 
of Siberia. 

According to Captain Hansen, the food of walruses con- 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 249 


sists mainly of minute marine animals, which swim or float 
near the surface of the ocean, and in particular they consume 
a large number of tiny crustaceans. In addition to these they 
devour a large number of sand-worms, which are found in 
great quantities in the stomachs of the captured animals. On 
one occasion Hansen sawa walrus attacking a dead seal. He 
had already made large holes with his tusks in the carcase 
and was sucking away at the blubber. Unfortunately Han- 
sen was unable to ascertain whether the walrus had killed the 
seal, or merely found it dead. 

The tusks of the females are about one-third shorter than 
those of the males, and are also thinner and not so heavy. 

Walruses roar with such a terrific sound that it can be 
heard for two and a half miles down wind; indeed so pene- 
trating is it, that, when there are fogs, the hunters often lay 
their ship’s course by the sound of the roaring. 

The danger of hunting these animals may be illustrated 
by the following incident. In the year 1897, near King 
Charles Land, in the course of a walrus hunt, a careless 
harpooner omitted to place the line in its notch, foolishly 
leaving it loose on the side of the boat, after he had speared 
a walrus. His carelessness resulted in the boat being cap- 
sized, and all its four occupants killed. It happened that 
the animal which they had attacked was a powerful male 
who immediately made for his antagonists. The first one he 
came to he instantly pierced through the back with both 
tusks. Four times did he come to the surface of the water, 
and each time he picked off one of the four men until they 
had all been annihilated. Two of them endeavoured to 
escape by swimming away, but the infuriated animal speedily 
overtook them. The fourth clambered on to the top of the 
overturned boat, but that availed him nothing. The walrus 
attacked the boat with such violence that the man was un- 
able to keep his hold, and shortly fell a victim to the animal's 


flerce vengeance. 
I was extremely interested to watch the behaviour of my 


250 BEASTS AND MEN 


three older walruses when the five new arrivals were first 
introduced to them at Stellingen. These five were brought 
along to their new home in cages placed in a cart. Before 
ever the cart arrived in sight of the old walruses, the latter 
appeared to know that some of their kind were near at hand. 
Whether they smelt them or heard them I cannot say ; but 
the fact remains that they fell into a state of extraordinary 
excitement. The male came out 
of the water, followed by the two 
females, and they all three set up 
a terrific bellowing. It was curi- 
ous to note how they foamed at 
the mouth and how their eyes be- 
came bloodshot with excitement. 
When the young ones were re- 
leased from their cages the older 
residents received them with 
every sign of a warm welcome, 
coming up all round them and 
sniffing at them. Indeed the 
high intelligence and sense of 
fellowship which has been sup- 
posed to characterise these ani- 
mals was fully borne out on the 
present occasion. I called to the 
keeper to bring some fish and we 
then straightway commenced to 
feed the creatures. 

Feeding walruses when they 
are first caught is not a very 
easy matter. 1 am told that in the case of the last 
consignment, the first two cubs to be captured refused 
to eat for nine days. The third, however, only fasted 
for two days, and it was through his good example that 
the others also commenced to eat. When the whole party 
arrived at Stellingen there was no difficulty, for they quickly 


Penguin. 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 251 


perceived the anxiety of the older walruses to secure the 
food, and proceeded to emulate their example with the most 
vigorous appetites. Before long they were as tame and 
confiding as if they had been in the park all their lives. 

I may now give some statistics as to the population of 
my animal community and their necessaries of life. In 
August, 1908, I took a census of all my animals, which 


worked out as follows :— 


15 orangs, chimpanzees and gib- 

bons. 
109 monkeys of 22 different species. 

gt feline carnivores, including 49 
lions, 26 tigers, and 3 lion- 
tiger hybrids. 

18 polar bears. 

12 bears of other species. 

40 hyzenas and canine carnivores 
of 15 different species. 

13 elephants. 


3 giraffes. 
21 camels, 
lamas. 

57 deer. : 

43 head of cattle, including 12 
bison and 17 buffalo. 

84 wild sheep, domestic: sheep, 
ibexes, and goats, of 18 dif- 
ferent species. 

43 antelopes, including  elands, 
water-bucks, kudus, etc. 


dromedaries, and 


3 hippopotami. 1 wart-hog. 
2 African rhinoceroses. 73 equine herbivores, including 21 
4 tapirs. zebras. 


In the Arctic Panorama :— 


3 walruses. 3 smaller seals of different 
4 sea-lions. species. 
1 sea-bear. 


96 rodents of 8 different species. 12 kangaroos. 
8 armadillos. 

There were 1,072 birds, including 48 African ostriches, 
18 South American ostriches, 11 Australian ostriches, 13 
cassowaries, 295 swimming birds, 273 waders, of which 
90 were flamingoes and 82 cranes, 16 birds of prey, 187 
fowls, 116 song birds, 69 parrots, and 21 toucans. 

Among reptiles I had 36 turtles, 11 crocodiles and alli- 
gators, and 68 snakes. 

The community consisted, therefore, of nearly 2,000 in- 


habitants, worth over 450,000. 


252 BEASTS AND MEN 


It may easily be imagined that the commissariat of this 
community is no easy matter to manage. A full-grown 
lion or tiger consumes every day from 10 to 15 lbs. of meat, 
while an elephant, even when not working, receives Io lbs. 
of oats, 5 lbs. of bran, 40 Ibs. of rapes and 60 lbs. of hay—an 
allowance which has to be increased when it is made to do 
work. A hippopotamus cannot do with less than 1o Ib. of 
crushed oats, 6 lb. of bran, 16 Ib. of rye bread, 20 lb. of 
rapes, and 20 lb. of hay per diem. The animals are not 
accustomed to dainties ; yet from the following list may be 
seen the great variety of food which they receive. The list 
is taken from the records of the kitchen department, show- 
ing the amount consumed in one year :— 


85,980 kilogms. } of horseflesh. 6,350 kilogms. of cabbage. 
26,093 is beef. 250 - lettuce. 
84 score pigeons. 200 i John’s bread. 
250 ~,, rabbits. 800 5 oil cake. 
120 ,,_ ~~ fowls. 3,500 6 acorns and 
48,184 kilogms. of fish. chestnuts. 
9,602 +3 white bread. 300 Fe dates. 
14,931 rye bread. 1,200 5 bananas. 
8,342 i horse cakes. 5,000 score eggs. 
6,360 a dog biscuits. 19,039 litres? of milk. 
15,800 5 maize. _ 1,380 kilogms. of oatmeal. 
16,200 crushed maize. 43,260 43 straw. 
9,600 wheat. 89,249 * hay. 
28,130 5 oats. 150,600 3 Timothy hay. 
44,684 “i crushed oats. 15,900 i clover. 
11,886 45 maslin. 1,100 * hemp. 
5,200 Y barley. 1,300 7" buck wheat. 
46,000 i bran. 850 +3 millet. 
goo - peas. 3,300 rice. 
5,500 i potatoes. 75500 ii alpine hay and 
goo ‘ horse molasses. reindeer moss. 
5,920 ie carrots, 105,000 fw grass. 
120,000 rapes. 6,450 - chopped straw. 


‘ There are slightly more than 1,000 kilogrammes to a ton. 
> There are about 13 pints to a litre. 


LIFE AT STELLINGEN 253 


To this list I should add meat soups, milk and fruit soups, 
whortleberry wine, meal, cherries, grapes, and other fruits 
for the apes ; further, nearly 50,000 kilos of rye and oat straw, 
as also (though it hardly comes into this reckoning) 20,000 
kilos turf-litter for the beds, and about 200,000 kilos coke 
and charcoal. The cost of all this amounts, in round figures, 
to £7,500. 

The animal park is far from being yet completed. Only 
this year a second portion of it was opened, in which the 
ethnographic exhibitions are to be held and which is to con- 
tain a new performing theatre. In the coming year a third 


Newly-arrived penguins being fed. 


large portion is to be opened, including a miniature railway 
running round a pond. On the banks of the pond there will be 
scattered artistic life-size representations of various prehistoric 
animals, so that the visitor may fancy that he has been trans- 
ported back thousands of centuries in time. The cerato- 
saurus, fifty feet high, and the stegosaurus will both be there ; 


264 BEASTS AND MEN 


while among the tree-tops the thunder-lizard, the monstrous 
brontosaurus of one hundred and fifty feet long, will raise its 
head. The remaining part is to contain an ape house, a large 
monkey house, the ostrich farm, and other enclosures. 

Besides these various undertakings, I have recently pur- 
chased a new piece of ground to the north-east of the present 
portion of my park. Here another farm is being made, where 
new experiments in breeding cattle and equine animals are to 
be carried out. These experiments have already begun, but 
it will take several years before the arrangements are com- 
plete. Money is the first necessity for the execution of these 
projects, and I have therefore to exercise careful supervision 
in order to ensure that the business should be economically 
conducted. 

Let me take this opportunity of correcting an erroneous 
impression which has received widespread currency. It is 
not the case that any Bank or Financial Syndicate has any 
interest in the multifarious business situated at Stellingen. 
Both the park and the business itself are my own private 
property. The neighbouring land, on the other hand, be- 
longs, as I have already explained, to a limited Company in 
which | possess a certain interest. 


CHAPTER XI? 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN. 


Nor very long ago it would have been considered a wild 
dream if anybody had suggested that it were possible in the 
latitude of Hamburg to allow ostriches out of doors in the 
winter ; and it would have appeared still more incredible that 
an ostrich-farm should be established in that locality. Yet 
this has now become a fazt accompl. Since the early months 
of 1909, when the ostrich-farm at Stellingen was first in- 
augurated, the many doubters have been convinced of its 
practical success. While this marks an era in the progress of 
the art of managing wild animals, it holds out at the same 
time promise of a valuable trade in ostrich feathers. 

The idea of attempting to acclimatise ostriches did not 
occur to me all of a sudden. During the first three winters 
of the present century, when I used to keep ostriches in the 
ordinary manner in heated stables, I lost no fewer than twenty 
of these birds. I thought that their death might be attribut- 
able to the fact of their confinement in close stables, without 
opportunity for movement; and I determined to test the 
accuracy of this opinion by an experiment. So in the winter 
of 1903-4 I allowed my African ostriches, as also a two- 
spotted cassowary, to have access to the open air—except 
when there was slippery ice which would make it dangerous. 
All the birds survived and thrived excellently. Ever since, 
I have kept them during the winter in unheated stables, from 
which they could walk out at any time into the fresh air. So 


1This chapter was written by Carl Hagenbeck especially for the pre- 


sent translation. 
255 


256 BEASTS AND MEN 


far from having been injured by exposure to the cold, they 
appear rather to have improved with the treatment. A thicker 
growth of feathers than normal appeared in response to the 
new environment. 

It is some years ago now since I paid my third visit to 
the ostrich-farm at Nizza; and it was after inspecting the 
contrivances kept there for rearing the chicks that I took 
the decision to establish an ostrich-farm at Stellingen. It 
so happened that an assistant, who was engaged at Nizza, 
asked me in the course of my visit if I could do anything to 
help him towards attaining a position of greater independ- 
ence. Great was his surprise when I replied that I had de- 
termined to establish for myself an ostrich-farm at Stellingen, 
and should be happy to engage him as manager. He was 
at first so doubtful as to the possibility of the success of such 
an experiment, that he hesitated to accept the proffered post. 
The climate of Stellingen was bad; ostriches could only 
flourish in climates that were dry and sunny ; if bad weather 
were suddenly to supervene, he knew from experience that 
the ostriches would quickly be killed. I was well aware, 
however, that Mr. Millen, for that was his name, had “been 
very successful in hatching out chickens in incubators, and | 
soon dispelled his apprehensions and engaged him as man- 
ager of my prospective ostrich-farm. : 

A suitable stretch of land (covering an area of more than 
six acres) lay at my disposal for the purpose; and in the 
summer of 1908 we commenced the work of laying it out in 
accordance with the plans which I proceeded to devise with 
the help of my son and Mr. Millen. On the 21st June, 
1909, the scheme had so far advanced that we were able 
to take round the German Empress: showing her the first 
ostrich-farm ever established in the north, as also a young 
chick just emerged from the egg. Between 20th June and 
6th September, 1909, on which date these lines are. being 
written, we have been successful in hatching out no fewer 
than thirteen African and one American ostriches. These 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 257 


birds are so strong and vigorous that I think there is every 
hope that we shall be able to bring them up to maturity. 
From the fourth to the fifth week they actually gained 
1 |b. in weight every day. Although we only have three 
pairs of breeding birds, we have twenty-two eggs at present 
in the incubator, most of which apparently have been fertil- 
ised ; so we have every reason to be satisfied with the re- 
sults which we have obtained. Among the many ostriches 


Mr. Millen and the German Emperor with a four-week-old chicken. 


which I have recently imported I think there are certain to 
be ten or twelve good breeding pairs for the coming year, 
and the prospects for the future appear in consequence very 
bright. Let me take the reader on a tour of inspection 
round the various divisions of the ostrich-farm. 


Tue Main ENCLOSURE. 


We first come to the main building, forty-five yards long by 
nine yards wide. On every side of it windows have been 
17 


258 BEASTS AND MEN 


inserted, so that, from whichever direction the wind is blowing, 
ventilation may be secured without the evil of a draught. It 
has also three exits which can be closed by wooden doors. In 
connection with this building there is an extensive meadow, 
serving as an exercise ground and of sufficient size to hold 
120 ostriches without undue crowding. In the centre of this 
meadow we have erected a sheltering roof for the purpose of 
protecting the food, which is placed under it, from the in- 
fluence of the weather. There is also supplied a small pond 
for bathing purposes, which is greatly appreciated by the 
birds. Various separate enclosures are fenced off at one end 
of the main enclosure, while, at another end of it, the visitor 
may see the stalls which are used for breeding purposes. 
These consist of five small houses with a porch and separate 
yard attached to each. Each house is further divided into 
two compartments, so that there are in all ten compartments 
with a corresponding number of yards, providing comfortable 
abodes for ten pairs of breeding animals. 

Our breeding animals are of course the finest birds that 
we possess, and are selected with very particular care. Some 
of those which we have selected, although only two years old, 
have already attained a height at the top of the back of nearly five 
feet, and may truly be described as giant birds : but of course 
I have a few weaklings on my farm, just as other people have. 
There is, for instance, a hen, coming from an ostrich-farm in 
South Africa, which has failed to develop properly and shows 
all the signs of physical degeneration. The ostriches in the 
farm belong to five geographical varieties—Somali, East 
African, West African, Cape ostriches, and ostriches from 
the Abubaama, a tributary of the Blue Nile, these latter in- 
cluding two specially fine cocks. . 


Tue HospirTat. 


After passing the separate houses just described, the path 
leads to another building furnished with projecting eaves, to 
serve as shelter for sickly or convalescent birds. Here also 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 259 


are placed the animals which have just arrived from foreign 
parts, so that they may have time to get over the effects of 
their sea voyage and become used to their new environment, 
before going loose among the rest. This is a very necessary 
precaution ; for if they were placed at once among the other 
ostriches before becoming accustomed either to the climate 
or to the food, they would die in a very short time. 


THE CHICKEN-HOUSE. 


At the conclusion of his round, the visitor arrives at the 
chicken-house, where the young ostriches are born and pass 
the first few weeks of their lives. Part of this chicken-house 
is separated off from the rest by a glass door, and is devoted 
to the housing of the incubator. Here the eggs are kept 
day and night at an even temperature, and, if the visitor is 
lucky, he may, perchance, see eggs which are half pecked 
open by the chickens inside trying to get out. On the other 
side of the building there is a long compartment in which 
the chicks are placed soon after they have been hatched. It 
is separated from the visitor by a glass wall, and is partly 
overgrown with the lucern which acts as food for the chicks. 
The floor of the chicken-room is covered with sand, and 
there is an arrangement of hot-water pipes for warming 
not only the air of the room but also the sand itself. After 
they are hatched, the chickens are left for a short time in the 
incubator and they are then transferred to this chamber. 
It is very important that the young animals should not be 
allowed out in the wet, and the chicken-house serves the 
purpose of a shelter for them in rainy weather. It is, how- 
ever, provided with glass doors leading into a clover field, 
so that they may have opportunities of running about out- 
side when the weather is sunny. 

Many causes concurred in moving me to establish the 
ostrich-farm at Stellingen. In the first place there has 
always been a continuous demand for ostriches from per- 
sons wishing to establish ostrich-farms abroad. Previously 

17 


260 BEASTS AND MEN 


I used to find considerable difficulty in meeting this demand. 
Importation is not only difficult but extremely expensive 
on account of the large mortality among the birds during 
transit. The demand has been especially keen during the 
last four years, in the course of which time I have sold 
more birds than during the whole previous existence of my 
frm. I felt therefore under great pressure to set up an 
establishment at which I could breed the animals myself. 
Furthermore, I found that many of the ostriches bred in 
foreign ostrich-farms were very poorly developed and in a 
degenerate condition; and I was convinced that this arose 
from inadequate care in the selection of breeding animals. 
The point which is especially apt to be neglected is the neces- 
sity for the infusion of fresh blood from time to time, thus 
securing, not only a stronger offspring but a better quality 
of feathers. Keeping this requirement in mind, I have 
stocked my farm with over 100 individuals belonging to 
the five finest varieties of African ostriches in existence. 
From among these I select only the best for breeding 
purposes. Besides breeding the pure races, I hope to 
cross the different varieties with each other so as to secure 
as wide a range of variation as possible in the progeny. 
My example has inspired many people, both in Germany and 
Austria, to make inquiries respecting the management of 
ostrich-farms. But it will take at least three years before 
one can tell with certainty the practical outcome of the experi- 
ments now being conducted ; and, until that time has expired, 
I should not encourage any one to enter upon ostrich-farming 
in our climate from a purely business point of view. If my 
own enterprise has already turned out to be profitable for me, 
it does not follow that it would be found profitable also by 
others; and I am not yet ina position to say what amount 
of risk attaches to such undertakings. My chances, however, 
are certainly better than those of anybody else. In the first 
place, I am able to take as much as £1,200 year in entrance 
fees for the inspection of the ostrich-farm. In the second 


The interior of the chicken-house 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 263 


place, I sell the feathers direct to the purchasers, without the 
disadvantage of having to pay a commission to English 
middlemen. In the third place, the sale of the birds which 
have been bred brings in an annual sum which is not to be 
despised. ‘These advantages would for the most part not be 
available in any ordinary farm. 

Ostriches begin to breed in their fourth year and the 
nesting and hatching of the young present many peculiarities. 
“Nest” indeed is a somewhat euphemistic term to apply to 


Lee ee 
ax ee] 
i ede 


Just hatched. 


the little hollows in the ground where the eggs are laid. 
This hollow is scraped out by the cock bird with his feet, 
but not infrequently the hen disregards the preparations of 
her consort and deposits the eggs without method anywhere 
on the ground. The cock will then collect the scattered 
eggs, and roll them all together into the hollow which he has 
dug out. When three or four have in this way been brought 
together in the hollow, the hen will of her own accord lay 
the rest of the clutch in the same place. In the wild state, 


264 BEASTS AND MEN 


after the eggs have been laid, they are sat upon by the hen 
during the day and by the cock at night. They are very 
large relative to the size of the bird, and contain as much food 
material as two and a half to three dozen fowls’ eggs. The 
ordinary size of a clutch is from twelve to fifteen eggs. Since, 
however, we take the eggs as soon as they are laid and put 
them in the incubator, the hen, relieved by these artificial 
means of the duty of sitting upon them, will lay as many as 
thirty good eggs a year. 


Incubator with the first chick born at Stellingen, 20th June, 1909. 


After the eggs have been placed in the incubator, a 
period of about six weeks elapses before they are hatched. 
For the first twenty-four hours after they have been hatched 
the chicks are allowed to remain in the incubator in order 
that they may become thoroughly dry. They are then 
brought into the chamber specially provided for infant 
ostriches. For the first two days their only food consists of 
the egg-shells from which they have been hatched, broken 
up into small pieces. They are then placed upon a diet of 
lucern, which, as I have already said, is kept in abundant 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 265 


quantities in the chicken-house. For nearly two months they 
continue to feed on this green food. They are allowed to 
run out of the house on fine days only, and, when the weather 
is cold or damp, are kept carefully in their house. In the 
seventh week after their birth the process of acclimatisation 
is commenced. The young birds are taken into a house 
which has not been artificially heated, and they are allowed 
to run out even on days when it is cold or damp. The last 
four weeks before the moment of writing these lines have 
been both very cold and wet, and have provided a very se- 
vere test of the validity of the method of inuring the young 
chicks to theclimate. They have, however, passed through 
it admirably, showing by their gaiety and sprightliness that 
they are in the best of health. In the seventh week also 
they begin to be weaned from their infantine food... They 
are given for the first time the same kind of food that:is pro- 
vided for the adults. This consists of hay chopped up with 
maize, bran, and barley, mixed together. Every bird re- 
ceives in addition 1 lb. of bone daily, broken up in small 
pieces. Experience shows that they thrive excellently when 
treated in this manner. 

After six months one is able to gather the first harvest of 
feathers, and thereafter every nine months a new crop can be 
taken. The feathers are cut and not pulled out, so that the 
process itself is painless to the birds. The mode of procedure 
is as follows: The ostrich whose feathers are to be taken is 
brought out of the farm and has his head enveloped in some 
kind of a hood, usually a stocking, so that he is unable to 
watch the operations. He then generally surrenders himself 
to his fate. He is next placed in a wooden vice, which holds 
him perfectly still, and enables the cutting to be performed 
without danger to the operator. The tail and wing feathers 
are of course the most valuable from the commercial point of 
view. They are cut down so that only about two inches of 
the ends of the quills are left. The ends ripen in about three 
months, and are then either plucked out by the birds themselves 


266 BEASTS AND MEN 


or removed for them by their keepers. The feathers are sorted 
immediately they have been cut, those coming from the cocks 
being kept separate from those coming from the hens. 
They are all sent off to London, where they are sold by 
auction and despatched to every part of the world. 

It is much to be hoped that, before long, ostrich feathers 
will come to be considered the most ornamental and useful 
feathers for ladies’ hats. If such a fashion could be intro- 
duced, the massacre of many millions of very beautiful and 
valuable birds would be put an end to. It is high time that 
this should be done, for the slaughter is rapidly leading to 
the extinction of some of the most handsome species in the — 
world. This abominable trade is still carried on vigorously 
in Germany, but I am glad to say that in England the 
fashions are not quite so barbarous, and ostrich feathers are 
used to a far greater extent than they arein Germany. The 
most recent statistics show that South African farmers make 
from their ostriches a profit of from 42 10s. to £3 each per 
annum, and in the year 1907 there were exported from 
Cape Colony alone no less than 598,267 Ibs. of ostrich 
feathers valued at 41,819,668. 

There seems no reason why the German colonists in 
East and South-West Africa should not do as well in this 
trade as the people of Cape Colony, but it certainly is the 
case that they do not. There is no sort of reason, moreover, 
why any of the countries of South America should not do 
equally well. I have always found that ostriches may be 
safely kept in large fields in company with quadrupeds, and 
on the immense prairies of South America, carrying hundreds 
of thousands of cattle, it would be little extra trouble to the 
persons in charge of them to maintain large numbers of 
ostriches at the same time. I am convinced that by this 
expedient the owners of large herds of cattle could make a 
considerable increase in their annual profits. 

In October, 1903, I received an order from a Rajah in 
Nepal to send him two pairs of African ostriches. They 


¢ 
© 
a0 
& 
= 
o 
2 
wn 
o 
ef 
fe 
S 
is) 
ra) 
n 
a 
2 
a 
1o) 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 269 


arrived safely at their destination, and were then turned loose 
by the Rajah in his garden. So quickly did they become 
accustomed to their new surroundings that they at once be- 
gan to breed, and there was soon a large family of young 
chickens. In fact they multiplied so fast that the Rajah, 


i 
| 


Riding an ostrich. 


some time afterwards, wanted to sell some of them to one of 
my agents who was travelling in Nepal last year. I did not 
take them, however. What with the long journey and high 
freight the transaction could not have been profitable, even if 
he had presented them to me free of charge. I only now 
narrate the story in order to show how, in a favourable 


270 BEASTS AND MEN 


climate, the birds will thrive and multiply abundantly, with 
scarcely any care or observation. 

The natives of the Sudan and of Somaliland are 
thoroughly acquainted with the art of hatching out the eggs 
of wild ostriches. This they do by a sort of natural system 
of incubation, in place of the artificial system prevailing 
among Europeans. They make a shallow hollow in the 
ground, and after having collected the eggs, they place them 
in this hollow, taking care that they do not come into con- 
tact with one another. The intervening spaces are then 
filled up with loose sand or with doura, so that the eggs are 
entirely covered up. As shelter from the fierce rays of the 
sun, a few branches are thrown together over the hollow. 
From time to time the eggs are turned round, so that they 
are warmed equally on every side. By this method several 
of my travellers, and especially Menges, have hatched out 
eggs inthe Sudan. The young have usually thriven well, 
and in most cases have been successfully transported to 
Europe. 

Some years ago a number of ostrich eggs were brought 
to a friend of mine, who was living in Somaliland. He 
happened to be busy at the time, and, putting them into 
his desk, went away and forgot all about them. About 
a fortnight later he had occasion to go again to his desk, 
but, on opening it, he started back in terror, crying out 
for some one to bring him a stick, for that there was a snake 
in his desk and he wanted to kill it. A stick was brought, 
and the desk again very cautiously opened; upon which 
there emerged instead of the terrible reptile, which he had 
anticipated, the head and neck of an ostrich chick just escaped 
from its egg-shell. Nothing more need be said to show how 
little care or trouble is needed to hatch out these animals in 
suitable climates. In such countries the natives give them 
for food large quantities of meat and also some bone. They 
feed on green vegetable food as well; and in Somaliland in 
particular upon a creeping plant called armo. 


THE OSTRICH-FARM AT STELLINGEN 271 


Ostriches are hunted in several different ways. In So- 
maliland the common method is to use a female bird as a 
decoy. A cord several hundred yards long is tied to the 
decoy bird, and she is then taken out to the districts which 
the wild ostriches are known to frequent. On reaching the 
scene of action, the huntsman conceals himself behind a bush, 
and, holding the end of the cord in his hand, lets the female 
ostrich go free. The wild cock birds are soon attracted 


Driving an ostrich. 


towards her, and when they are together the huntsman 
gradually hauls in the cord so that the wild birds, unwitting 
of their danger, are slowly brought nearer to their mortal foe. 
Thirty or forty yards is near enough for the huntsman’s pur- 
pose. At that distance they are well within arrow range, and 
he proceeds to shoot them with a poisoned dart. The arrow 
is perfectly noiseless in its flight through the air, and the 
bird which has been struck makes little disturbance ; but after 
a short time the poison takes effect upon him and he quietly 


272 BEASTS AND MEN . 


succumbs. In this way nothing happens to alarm the other 
birds in the neighbourhood, and half a dozen are often slain 
one after the other. If a gun had been used, the whole flock 
would of course have been scared away at the first discharge. 

The Bushmen in South Africa hunt ostriches somewhat 
differently. ‘They cover their heads and bodies with the skins 
of dead ostriches, so that when walking along they much re- 
semble real ostriches. They can thus approach to within 
close distance of a flock and shoot the birds with their poisoned 
arrows. The Bedouins hunt ostriches by riding them down 
with swift horses—a sport of which they are very fond. One 
of my huntsmen on a journey to the interior once rode down 
and killed with a sword no fewer than three male ostriches in 
succession, without changing his horse. 

To persons considering the possibility of establishing 
ostrich-farms, my advice would be to begin with only a few 
breeding pairs, so that, if their inexperience should lead to 
failure, the loss will not be on too largea scale. This, I may 
mention, is the course recommended by the Government of 
Cape Colony to the farmers in that country. Although by 
this method success can only come slowly, it is likely to be 
much more sure, for an ambitious beginning usually results in 
a premature end. It will perhaps be objected to my proposal 
for the establishment of so many ostrich-farms, that the supply 
of feathers would soon outrun the demand, and that therefore 
their value would sink so as to render the business unprofit- 
able. To this my reply is that I have little doubt that be- 

fore long laws will be passed in civilised countries for pro- 
hibiting the importation of feathers from ornamental birds 
for ladies’ hats. An immediate result of such legislation 
would be that the demand for and consequently the value of 
ostrich feathers would rapidly increase ; so that there is little 
danger that this commodity will ever become a drug on the 
market. 


~CHAPTER XII. 
ANTHROPOID APES. 


THE anthropoid apes have always been particular favourites 
of mine; and I have at all times endeavoured to secure as 
large a number of these interesting animals as possible. This 
foible of mine has in fact cost me considerable sums: for the 
apes, in their natural state, live in moist tropical regions and 
suffer very much from the severity of our northern latitudes. 
But in spite of this, I have been very successful with these 
creatures, and am especially proud of a fine pair of orang- 
outangs called Jacob and Rosa, and also of a clever chim- 
panzee called Moritz, who have by this time become quite 
well-known personages in the town of Hamburg. The two 
orangs I purchased from a farmer, who got them in Borneo 
when they were quite young, and brought them up on the 
bottle. For seven years they were kept in captivity in 
Borneo. Captivity, however, is perhaps hardly the word, 
for they had complete liberty, and were treated as though 
they were members of the family. They used always to 
have their mid-day meal at table with their master, eating 
precisely the same food as he did himself. They were in 
short treated just like children, and very polite and well- 
behaved children too. On their voyage to Europe they were 
treated more like passengers than apes. At all times they 
were free to wander about on board, and they speedily be- 
came the pets of all the ship’s crew. Since they had so long 
been accustomed to freedom I realised the danger of placing 
them, when they came to my animal park, in undue restraint 


or in a cramped and badly ventilated cage. I ee 
273 I 


274 BEASTS AND MEN 


procured a special waggon-cage, the walls of which were on 
every side formed only by bars. On the north and east 
sides canvas was stretched to provide protection from the 


Such is life. : 
weather. In the waggon-cage a large closed-in wooden box 
was placed, which the animals could go into at night. In 
this way I was able to keep them all through the summer of 


[euonnyysuos & Zurye} sSues0 OMT, 


ANTHROPOID APES 277 


1907. I feared, however, that the creatures would suffer from 
the loss of the society to which they had been accustomed ; 
so I told off one of my keepers to the sole duty of minding 
them and remaining constantly with them. I hoped thus 
to ward off the ill effects of the tediousness of their life, and 
my hope was amply justified. The animals not only con- 
tinued to thrive on the physical side, but showed great de- 
velopment on the mental side as well. When the cold 
season arrived, I thought it inadvisable to keep them any 
longer in the open waggon-cage and I therefore had a com- 
partment erected in the giraffe house for them to pass the 
winter in. 

Some time after the acquisition of these two orangs, Moritz 
made his appearance. He isa male chimpanzee, about seven 
years old, and he quickly made friends with the orangs. The 
three anthropoids passed the winter together most satisfactorily 
in the giraffe house. We took care to ventilate the building 
thoroughly by means of windows placed high up near the 
roof, so that the temperature there was never tropical. On 
the return of summer, I devised a cage for them from which 
they could emerge at any time into the open air. I still kept 
them in the giraffe house, but I set.aside a portion of the open 
enclosure of the giraffes for their use. The cages in which 
they were confined communicated with the enclosure by 
means of doors, which opened by being merely pushed, 
and then closed again by their own weight. The apes soon 
learnt to push open the doors when they wanted to get out. 
In both the inner cage and the outer enclosure gymnastic ap- 
pliances were set up, so that the creatures should have plenty 
of opportunity for amusing themselves. They are very fond of 
fun, and in their sports I have seen much that is interesting 
and amusing. I ought to say at once that the naturally high 
capacities of anthropoids are greatly enhanced by constant 
association with human beings, and never fully develop except 
in such association. The chimpanzee is far the most vivacious 
and mischievous of the three. He is always the ringleader 


278 BEASTS AND MEN 


in the various pranks and tricks which they play, the orangs 
merely following him out of friendship. One of his favourite 
tricks is to snatch hats from ladies and gentlemen who have 
come to look at him, and then retire with his booty to a gym- 


Diogenes. 


nastic pole fixed in his cage. In order to carry out this 
knavish trick he has to exercise a remarkable degree of cun- 
ning. He takes advantage of a habit, which the orangs have 
acquired, of holding out their hands to greet visitors when 
they come up. Sitting quietly near the front of the cage he 


ANTHROPOID APES 279 


appears to be taking no notice of anything, but when a visitor 
reaches forward to shake. hands with the orang, he dashes 
with lightning speed at his hat, and seizing it with a dexterous 
grasp whisks it off to the gymnastic bar. The sequel to these 
performances was not so pleasant, for me at least, as the per- 


formances themselves. I got tired after a time of having to . ~ 


pay for new hats every day, and I was reduced to the neces- 
sity of putting up a barrier between the apes and the public. 


Somali child with orang-outang. 


Even that, however, I found insufficient.. The public were 
in the habit of giving the creatures food, which was very un- 
wholesome, and on two occasions brought them in danger of 
their lives. To prevent this I finally had a glass wall set Bp 
to shut them off completely from visitors. mo dhe 
Moritz very easily becomes bored when the keeper: goes 
away ; and in order to relieve his feelings is much addicted to 
practical jokes. He is very fond of singling out the orang 
Jacob as a butt for his humour. When the latter: is off his 


280 BEASTS AND MEN 


guard, he will jump suddenly upon his head in an endeavour 
to knock him over. A hand-to-hand scuffle immediately 
ensues, in which Moritz always comes off best, on account 
of his superior agility. He quickly escapes from the clutches 
of the orang, and a few leaps take him to the other end of 
the cage. He is followed clumsily and deliberately by the 
larger animal, but is never caught. As the orang does not 
leap, he is never able to catch his tormentor, who keeps just 
out of reach. 

In his many attempts to escape from captivity, Moritz is 
most ingenious and amusing. When we shut off a corner of 
the giraffe house for the use of the apes, we did not think it 
necessary to carry the partition right up to the roof. The 
house, having been built to accommodate giraffes, was of 
course very high, and it never occurred to us as possible that 
the apes might succeed in scaling the wooden partition which 
we erected. Nevertheless Moritz did succeed in doing so. 
When the keeper came along one day, he found the chim- 
panzee among the giraffes, and could not imagine how he 
had got there. He afterwards found that he had employed 
the following device: Up against the wooden partition stood 
a wooden box which served as a sleeping place for the apes. 
There was also kept in the cage a large tin globe. Moritz 
had acquired a considerable influence over the lady orang, 
Rosa, and he persuaded her to assist him in his efforts to 
escape. By their united strength, they were able to push the 
tin globe over to the sleeping box and set it on the top. 
When this had been done Rosa stood upon the globe, up 
against the wall, while Moritz climbed up on her shoulders. 
From there he was just able by a vigorous bound to reach 
the top of the partition with his hands. It was then scarcely 
the work of a moment to draw himself up, and drop gently 
among the giraffes. These animals paid little attention to the 
chimpanzee, but if they came near him he would throw some- 
thing at them asa hint to mind their own business. When we 
had discovered the method of the ape’s escape, we thought we 


ANTHROPOID APES 281 


would effectually prevent it occurring again, by carrying the 
partition some way higher. Moritz, however, was not to be 
outwitted ; and his ingenuity was sufficient to overcome this 
further obstacle. Among the gymnastic arrangements set up 
for his use, was a long rope hanging from the ceiling. By 
climbing some way up it, and giving it a swing backwards 


Learning to kiss. 


and forwards, he was able to bring himself within measurable 
distance of the top of the partition; and by an adroit leap, at 
exactly the right moment, to secure a footing on the top. 
Finally, we were obliged to carry the partition the whole way 
up to the roof, in order to keep the animal securely con- 
fined. He still, however, had his thoughts set on escaping. 
He used to watch the keeper with interest when the latter 


282 BEASTS AND MEN 


inserted his key in the lock, in order to open the cage. The 
keeper would often give him the keys to play about with, 
and on one occasion he took advantage of this to try them 
one-after another in the lock of the door, to find out which 
one it was that fitted it. After a time the right key was hit 
upon, and the ape succeeded after several efforts in turning 
the latch and opening the door. When I happened to come 
along and was told what had occurred, I went to see the ape 
in his cage, and asked him half jokingly, ‘how did you 
manage to do this?” He had all the appearance of under- 
standing the tenor of my question, for he smiled slyly and 
held up the key as if to say that that was what he did it with. 

The intelligence of my anthropoids is by no means con- 
fined to Moritz, for Jacob on one. occasion was equally 
successful in finding an exit from the cage. It so happened 
that one day a piece of an iron rod had accidentally been 
broken off by the creatures from one of the gymnastic appli- 
ances inserted in their cage. Jacob took this piece of iron, 
and proceeded to utilise it for bursting the lock. By insert- 
ing it into the ring of the padlock, with their united strength 
they were able to exercise so much leverage that the padlock 
gave way. The cage door was opened and all three gained 
their liberty. What further evidence could be required of 
the high intelligence which these animals possess? Rosa, 
too, was not behindhand in devising means of escape. The 
outer cage of the apes was constructed of wire, and her 
method was to loosen the wire from its fastening, and so 
break away an opening large enough for her to pass through. 
She had, often before, been taken out of the cage by the 
keeper, and led round to the main entrance into the animal 
park to be given some bananas, which used to be sold there ; 
and now when she had escaped she made rapidly for the 
main entrance of her own accord without hesitating for a 
/ moment as to the correct route, hoping no doubt to secure 
there some of her coveted bananas. 

To a lover of animals nothing can be more interesting 


ANTHROPOID APES 283 


than watching these great apes while at their food. For 
breakfast they are given not only succulent fruits such as 
bananas, but also bread and milk. For their mid-day meal 
they have precisely the same food as is served to me in my 
own house. They are not very dainty in their appetites, but 
like solid homely food, and devour it with great relish. At 


Having dinner. 


times they are given good red wine mixed with water, a 
"beverage of which Jacob is decidedly fond, though Rosa with 
her more ladylike instincts cares little for it. Their manners 
at table are now perfectly refined and proper. Moritz acts as 
the waiter. He has to bring in the food, which he does with 
great pomp and ceremony, and he has to clear away the 
things again after the meal is over. During the repast the 
apes sit patiently on chairs drawn up to the table, and await 


284 BEASTS AND MEN 


the various courses which are served to them. They eat 
after the manner of human beings with spoons and forks, and 
they are very clever at ladling up their soup with the spoon. 
It is true that if they thought no one was looking, they would 
quickly revert to more expeditious methods, dispensing with 
the spoon and using their lips instead ; but a word from the 


Two orangs drinking soup. 


keeper immediately recalls them to the manners of civilisation, 
and the spoon is hastily seized once more. 
All the apes are of course thoroughly amenable to the 
control of the keeper. He knows how to make himself under- 
stood by them, and they on their part watch him attentively 
and carry out intelligently whatever instructions he delivers to 
them. Jacob and Rosa are especially amenable in this re- 
spect. They are very sensitive to verbal censure, and of 


ANTHROPOID APES 285 


course still more sensitive to corporal punishment. Moritz, 
on the other hand, is a more thick-skinned and robust animal : 
not so easily controlled by either mode of reproof. The keeper 
finds it necessary, therefore, when he has to be made to do 
something, to keep at hand a stick on which the ape’s atten- 
tion may constantly fall. 
When, for instance, he has 
to be photographed, he is 
seized with an_ irresistible 
inclination to walk up to the 
camera and gaze into it from 
a distance which makes it 
impossible to take his like- 
ness. He requires a good 
deal of cajoling before he 
can be persuaded to take 
up a proper pose. The 
chimpanzee in these re- 
spects is just the opposite 
of the phlegmatic orang. 
Unlike the orang, he is a 
sanguine sort of individual, 
and very mercurial in tem- 
perament, changing in a 
moment from the brightest 
gaiety to the deepest de- Bilpleasc, walter! 
spondency, and vice versé. He can never keep his atten- 
tion fixed on one thing for more than a moment or two, but 
is constantly flying off at a tangent to some new idea which 
has taken his fancy. His latest craze has been learning how 
to ride a bicycle. It took him only a few weeks to perform 
this feat, and he now rides astonishingly well. He appears to 
find it great fun, moreover, and pedals about with such vigour 
in my animal park that the trainer is hard put to it to keep up 
with him. 

For looking after these anthropoids I have secured a 


286 BEASTS AND MEN 


young Englishman, very efficient at his work ; and it is his 
business to carry forward the education of the animals to 
the highest possible extent. The conviction has gradually 


An egg, please, uncle dear! 


strengthened within me that anthropoid apes may, by a 
systematic education from their earliest youth, be accustomed 
to live just like human beings. And I intend to proceed with 
my experiments aiming at the realisation of this idea.  Inti- 
mate association with human beings is the proper method of 


ANTHROPOID APES 287 


going to work. It would of course be fatal with such highly 
organised creatures to endeavour to educate them by general 
principles alone. One ape differs very much from another, 
and the peculiarities of each have to be carefully watched and 
made the most of. It is no less necessary for a trainer to bear 
in mind the idiosyncrasies of the animals which he has to deal 
with, than it is for a human teacher to take note of the idiosyn- 


Gorillas suffering from home-sickness. 


crasies of his pupils. Above all things, tact and patience are 
necessary in a high degree. I am hoping. before long to be 
able to exhibit such educational results in my apes as have 
never been achieved or even thought possible before. 

In order to keep the great apes in sound health, it is ne- 
cessary to provide them with plenty of society, either of their 
own species or of some other. In the case of all animals in 
captivity, it is of the first importance to take measures for 
combating the tedium from which they would otherwise suffer. 


288 BEASTS AND MEN. 


_ But it is more than ever necessary in the case of such highly 
_ organised animals as anthropoid apes. When they are con- 
stantly playing about together, with plenty of stimulus to keep 
them always on the move, their digestion is kept in good 
order, their appetite maintained, and a high tone. preserved 
throughout the system. They are especially subject .to psy- 
chical influences ; and, the more they are kept in. contact with 
human beings, the more likely are they. to thrive and. forget 
their captivity. 

I feel pretty confident that it is mental depression, and 
not any physical ailment, which makes it so difficult to: keep 
gorillas for any length of time in captivity. . None of those 
which have come to me have ever survived for long their 
arrival i in Europe. They show every day a gradually dim- 
inishing interest in their surroundings, until at last they. refuse 
food altogether and are found dead one morning in their cage 
It is true that there have been instances now and again of 
gorillas being kept for a considerable period in captivity, but 
such cases are only exceptions. Perhaps in the course of 
time I shall succeed in discovering the proper method of 
treating these great apes. At present I have learnt little 
of them except the conviction that their trouble is psychical 
and not physical. It has hitherto been the almost universal 
habit to credit gorillas, and for the matter of that chimpanzees 
and orangs too, with much less intensity: of feeling than they 
actually possess. 

Their memories at least ‘are undeniably excellent. After 
the two orangs had been in my. possession for. a period: ‘of 
twelve months, their former owner came to’ the park to see 
them... They instantly recognised him and showed their 
pleasure in the most unmistakable manner. Qne may. ob- 
serve in these creatures the. origin of the capacity: for laughter. 
When they are amused the corners of. the mouth move out- 
wards, showing the teeth between. their lips. . In Moritz 
particularly, the play of the expressions on the countenance 
is very noticeable. The ‘keeper can tell at a glance, 


‘spuatyy 9914) OUT, 


ANTHROPOID APES 291 


from the expression in his eye, what sort of a mood he is 
in. His memory, like that of the orang, is excellent. Some 
time ago, after I had been travelling for some time and had 
just returned, I went to see him in his cage. The moment 
I set foot in the ape-house he welcomed me with loud shouts, 
and would not be pacified until I had gone into his cage, and 
taken him in my arms and fondled him. 

In June, 1908, Lieutenant Heinicke of the German army 
brought over with him from Kamerun a young gorilla which 
was taken round to be introduced to my three anthropoids. 
Their meeting was very interesting and unique. The gorilla 
displayed only a moderate interest in his three cousins, taking, 
in plain words, very little notice of them. They, on the other 
hand, were immensely interested and excited. The chim- 
panzee gave vent to his feelings in loud yells ; and thrusting 
his arms through the bars tried to draw the gorilla towards 
him. When he failed in this attempt, he became indignant, 
and proceeded to pelt the stranger with sand and stones. 
The orangs likewise endeavoured to reach the gorilla through 
the bars; and, when they failed, expressed their emotions, 
each according to his kind. Jacob followed the example of 
the chimpanzee and began throwing stones; while Rosa’s 
excitement brought on a fit of vomiting, so that the whole 
scene was indescribably droll. The scene was in other ways 
almost unique. For here there were gathered together in 
one spot representatives of the three species of animals most 
nearly akin to man. 

Lieutenant Heinicke, who had brought the young gorilla 
to Europe in the society of two negro boys, hoped to be able 
to keep this rare animal alive for a long time. Over in 
Kamerun he had kept it for more than a year, during which 
time it had enjoyed unbroken health and become a general pet 
of the station. He hoped to be able to overcome the diffi- 
culty of lack of society by providing the two negroes as con- 
stant associates for the animal. When the ape first arrived 
at my animal park he was much weakened with his long sea 

: 19 


292 BEASTS AND MEN 


voyage and took little interest in anything that was going on 
round about, but he soon picked up, and after a time would 
sit and walk about on the lawn in company with his two play- 
fellows, apparently in the best of health and spirits. He had 
a strong predilection for the petals of roses, and would consume 
large quantities of them. When he had to be taken from one 
place to another one of the negroes used to carry him on his 
back, presenting a very droll appearance. 


Here, then, I must conclude my account of the many 
animal friendships that I have formed in the course of my 
life. I am continuing to develop my park on the lines already 
followed ; and trust that, both in the exhibits of wild beasts 
and in those of wild men, I shall ever succeed more com- 
pletely in rendering it, not a place of captivity, but a happy 
and contented home. With the help of an able staff of 
assistants, whose experience now extends over several de- 
cades, I hope to make my institution unique in all the world 
as a centre for the friendly intercourse of great gatherings of 
BEASTS AND MEN. 


INDEX. 


ABDULLAHI Kalifat, el Mahdi, 48, 69, 71. 

Abdulla Okutt, a hunter, 59, 62. 

Abyssinia, a zebra-hunt in, 70. 

Acclimatisation of exotic animals, 115, 202-12. 

“ Agaghir,” the, their method of hunting, 51. 

Alcohol, predilection of animals for, and its effect on them, 226, 227, 283. 

Alexander, Prince, of Oldenburg, 74. 

Alligators. See wader Crocodiles. 

Amsterdam, Zoological Gardens at, referred to, 145, 172, 175, 189. 

Animal training, cruel methods of, 30, 118-24; humane methods of, 31, 32, 
37, 124, 125; first stages of, 126-29; further developments of, 
130-34 ef Sgq. 

Antelopes, acclimatisation of, 208, 209; eland—used as draught animals, 
93; method of capturing, 94; scarcity of, 212. 

Anthropoid apes, high natural capacities of, 277, 282, 288; adaptability of, 
to education, 286, 287; subject to psychical influences, 288. See 
also Gorillas. 

Antwerp, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 145, 172. 

Argali (giant wild sheep), expeditions after, 89; proposed experiment in 
crossing with domestic animals, 216. 

Atbara, camp at, 53, 54; departure from, 65, 66. 


Basoons— 

Arabian, methods of capturing and battle with, 63-65 ; amusing inci- 
dents relative to, 67, 68. 

Atbara, methods of capturing, 58, 59-61 ; characteristics and habits 
of, 61-63. 

Baggara-Arabs, the, 70. 

Bailey, Mr., successor to Barnum, 11. 

Barnum, Phineas T., relations of, with Hagenbeck, 11, 26, 145, 175. 

Batty, an animal trainer, 121. 

Bears, difficulty of training polar, 136; operation onasick, 224-26; cruelty 
to, 227, 228. 

Bedford, Herbrand, 11th Duke of, suggests expedition in search of Mongolian 
wild horses, 74 recovery of his sick giraffe, 175 ; successful in accli- 
matisation of exotic animals, 212 ; imports Mongolian pheasants, 219. 

Bedouins, their methods of hunting ostriches, 53, 272. 

Berg, Christian, 109. 

293 


204 INDEX 


Berlin, Hagenbeck Senior exhibits in, 1, 2 ; Exhibition of 1896 in, 234 ; refer- 
ence to animals in the Zoological Gardens at, 98, 160, 168, 175, 212. 

Bombay, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 194. 

Borneo, giant serpents in, 178; apes from, 273. 

“Bosco,” a trained elephant, 157-59. 

Brandis, Dr., his experiments in acclimatisation, 211, 212. 

Breeding and cross-breeding, matters relating to, 42, 89, 110, 111, 112-17, 
147, 172, 175, 191, 192, 215-19, 263-65, 269, 270. 

Breitfuss, Dr., his consignment of walruses, 243. 

Bremerhaven, purchase of a menagerie at, 5, 11. 

Buffalo-cow, cure of a sick, 223, 224. 

Bushmen (South African), their method of hunting ostriches, 272. 


Caxcutta, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 105. 

Cape Colony, successful ostrich farms in, 266, 272. 

Carnivores, instances of affectionate récollection in, 98-105 ; habitual good 
temper of, 106, 109; except at breeding times, 110, 111; period 
of fertility of, 112; acclimatisation of, 115, 209, 210; interbreeding 
among, 115-17; susceptibility of, to kindness, 118, 121, 125 ; feeding 
of, 220, 221. 

Cassanova, Lorenzo, his contract with Hagenbeck, 8, 11, 12, 14, 168; 
death of, 13. 

Cassowary (two-spotted), 255. 

“ Castor,” a Bengal tiger, 110. 

Ceylon, elephants exported from, 26, 29. 

Chicago, Exhibition of 1893 at, Hagenbeck proposes to exhibit at, 32 
his preliminary difficulties, 36; ‘“‘Trieste”’ at, 102. 

Cholera, animals attacked by, 35, 36, 220. 

Cingalese Exhibition of 1884, 29. 

Cologne, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 101, 106, 111, 145, 163, 175. 

Cooper, an animal trainer, adventure of, with lions, 121-23. 

Copenhagen, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 224, 225, 244. 

Crocodiles, a method of capturing, 57, 58; bite of, dangerous, 197 ; ferocity 
of American alligator species, 198, 199; feeding of, 199, 200; 
growth of, zé¢d. ; Indian species, 201. 

Crystal Palace, Hagenbeck exhibits at, 32. 


DaGERSELL, an animal trainer, 123. 

Darwin, Charles, and habits of elephants, 147. 

Delmonico, a menagerie owner, 139, 140. 

Deyerling, an animal trainer, employed by Hagenbeck, 31. 

Dinosaur, reputed existence of a, in Rhodesia, 96, 97. 

Docton, Mr., experiments of, with snake venom, 194, 195. 

Dorcas gazelle, the, 208. 

Dresden, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 105. 

Druard, Inspector of the Cologne Zoological Gardens, his adventure with a 
lion, 109. 

Dusseldorf, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 197. 


INDEX 295 


EGGENSCHWVLER, Urs, 106. 

Eland antelopes. See under Antelopes. 

Elephants, hunting of, in the Sudan, 51-53; in Abyssinia, 70; intelli- 
gence and individual peculiarities of, 147-53; a dangerous indi- 
vidual, 154, 155; vitality of a sick, 156, 157; adaptability of, to 
training, 159; successful training of African species, 160-62 ; cure 
of a sick, 222. 

Eskimo, visit of, to Germany, 20, 25 ; description of, 21, 22. 

Ewart, James Cossar, his experiments in the crossing of zebras and horses, 


219. 
Extermination (of wild species), approaching problem of, 212; a project to 
avoid, 215. 


Fauz-Fein, M. (naturalist), his specimens of the Mongolian wild horse, 
74; success of, in acclimatisation, 212; experiments of, in cross- 
breeding, 219. 

Feathers, ostrich, cutting of, 265, 266. 

Florida, ideal site for an animal reserve, 215. 

Forepaugh, a menagerie owner and rival of Barnum, 26. 

Fraser, Sir Thomas R., interest of, in serpent’s venom, 196. 

Funk, M., director of Cologne Zoological Gardens, 111, 112. 


Garner, Professor, his monkey-language, 61. 

Gipsies, cruelty of, to bears, 226-28. 

Giraffes, difficulty in stabling, 173 ; subject to a peculiar disease, 174, 175 ; 
first appearance of, in Europe, 175; acclimatisation of, 204; refer- 
ence to, 212, 216. 

Glanders, appearance of, among Hagenbeck’s animals, 35. 

Gorillas, subject to mental depression, 204, 288. 

Grieger, Wilhelm, account of his expedition in search of Mongolian wild 
horse, 74-89. 


HaGENBECK, Carl, birth and early education of, 2-5; he decides to be an 
animal dealer, 7; contract of, with Cassanova, and transport of his 
collection, 8, 11-14; marriage of, and removal to Neuer Pferde- 
markt, 15; origin of his ethnographic exhibitions, 16; the Lapps, 
16-20; the Eskimo and others, 20-25; the Cingalese exhibition, 
29; his humane method of animal training, 30-32, 37, 121; ex- 
pansion of his business, 38, 41, 42; purchase and development of 
land at Stellingen, 39-45; relations of, with pet carnivores, 98-106 ; 
incident of the pickled lion, 122, 123; on study of the individual 
animal, 125; and careful selection of performers, 126; details of 
his method of training, 126-34; first experiences of, in training, 139, 
140; experiments of, in association of naturally hostile animals, 143, 
144; adventure of, with cow-elephant, 148-51; and with bull- 
elephant, 151-53; “Bosco,” 158, 159; adventure of, with a rhino- 
ceros, 165-67; and witha hippopotamus, 171, 172; experiences of, 


296 INDEX 


with snakes, 177-90; breeding of snakes and experiments with 
their poisons, 191-97; adventure of, with alligators, 197, 198; 
methods of, with alligators, 199, 200; his experiments in acclimatisa- 
tion, 202-11; and in breeding and cross-breeding, 215, 216, 219 
(see also under Breeding); on care of newly arrived animals, 220; 
on feeding, 221; his animal cures, 222, 223; operation ona polar 
bear, 224-26; he tests the jumping powers of carnivores, 234, 2353 
develops his “ostrich farm, 255-66; interest of, in anthropoid apes 
273; his monkey friends, 273-85; ideas of, on education of apes 
286, 287. 

Hagenbeck, Gustav, 2 

Hagenbeck, Heinrich (the son), struggle of, with pythons, 181, 182. 

Hagenbeck, Herr (father of Carl), exhibits six seals, 1; ideas of, on educa- 
tion, 2, 3; purchases the Bremerhaven menagerie, 5; passes over 
the animal business to Carl, 7; adventure of, with a sea-lion, 145, 
146. 

Hagenbeck, John (of Colombo), 2, 106. 

Hagenbeck, Wilhelm, his success as a trainer, 136. 

Hamburg, cholera in, 36 ; Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 101, 103, 175. 

Hamran hunters, the, brought to Europe, 29; reduced in numbers, 71. 

Hanover, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 171. 

Hansen, Captain, his account of the habits and capture of walruses, 244, 
248, 249. 

Hawati, the, their methods of hunting, 57, 58; extinction of, 71. 

Heck, Professor (of Berlin Zoological Gardens), experiments of, in animal 
environment, 212. 

Heinicke, Lieutenant, 291. 

Herbivores, the great, 147 e¢ sgg. See under separate headings. 

Hippopotami, a method of capturing, 57, 58; trapping, 72, 73; facts and 
stories relating to, 170-73; dwarf, zdid. 

Hornaday, Dr., director of the Bronx Park Zoological Gardens at New 
York, ror. 

Horses, Mongolian wild, expedition in search of, 74 e¢ sgg.; method of 
capturing, 86; difficulty of transporting, 87-89. 

Hottentots, 25. 


INDIANS, 25. 


“JACOB,” an orang-outang, 273-77, 279, 282-84, 291. 

Jacobsen, Adrian, 20. 

Jamrach, William, 165. 

Jealousy among carnivores, 110, 111. 

Johannsen, a traveller, and the eland antelopes, 93-95; cited on Indian 
gavials, 201. 

Judge, Charlie, 145. 

Judge, Willie, 145. 


KALLENBERG, an animal trainer, 123. 
Kalmucks, 25. 


INDEX 207 


Kaufmann, an animal trainer, 12 cc 

“ Kayaks,” description of, 21, 22. 

Kipling, Rudyard, on snakes, 177. 

Kobdo (in Mongolia), expedition to, 74; insect pests in, 77; description 
of, 78, 79) 83, 84. , 

Kreutzberg, Gottlieb, 8, 123, 175, 183. 

Kreutzberg, Karl, introduces novelties in animal performance, 123, 124. 

Kuhn, Professor (of Halle), 216. 


Lapps, the, visit of, to Germany, 16, 25; description of, 19, 20. 

“‘Leo,” a lion, r10. 

Leutemann, Heinrich, suggests the ethnographic exhibitions, 16; his water- 
colour of a tiger, ror. 

Lions. See Carnivores. 

“Lissy,” a cow-elephant, adventure of Hagenbeck with, 148-51. 

London, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 117, 168, 169, 172, 17 5, 200. 

Liineburger Heath, racoon escapes on, 5, 6. 


MALFERTEINER, a menagerie owner, 226. 

Manders, a menagerie owner, 112. 

Martin, an animal trainer, 123. 

“Max,” a rhinoceros, 241. 

Mehrmann, Heinrich, an animal trainer, 32, 36, 110; accident of, with a 
bear, 135. 

Menges, Joseph, conducts animal trade in Ceylon, 26; biographical notice 
of, 29; quoted on the Egyptian Sudan, 47; and on elephant hunt- 
ing, 51, 52; on the Atbara baboon, 62; his method of hatching 
ostriches’ eggs in the Sudan, 270. 

Migoletti, a traveller, 11, 13, 14. 

Millen, Mr., engaged by Hagenbeck for his ostrich farm, 256. 

Mithridates, legends of, 196. 

Moeller, Dr. (of Australia), 196. 

Mongolia, the quest after wild horse in, 74; climate of, 77; manners and 
customs of the natives in, 80-85; method of hunting wild horse in, 
86, 87. 

“ Moritz,” a chimpanzee, 273; character and escapades of, 277-85; his 
apparent capacity for laughter, 288; memory of, 291; his greeting 
of the gorilla, 291. 

Myers, Mr., American circus owner, 121; dealings of, with Hagenbeck, 
122, 123. 


NansEN, Fridtjof, 21. 

Natterer, Dr. (African explorer), 7. 

Neuer Pferdemarkt, removal of the Hagenbecks to, 15 ; Lapps in, 16-19; 
animal duel in, 110; pseudo-elephant hunt in, 154, 155; ‘“ Bosco” 
at, 157-59; exploits of an Indian python at, 189; experiments in 
acclimatisation in, 202-04. 

New York, Bronx Park Zoological Gardens in, reference to, ror, 102. 


298 INDEX 


Nizza, ostrich farm at, 256. 
Nubians, 20, 25, 48, 160, 161. 


OxapPl, discovery of the, 96. 

Ostriches, acclimatisation of, 45, 204, 207, 208; rearing and treatment of, 
255-66; breeding of, 263, 264; cutting the feathers, 265, 266; 
South America a likely country for rearing, 266; introduction of, 
into Nepal, 269; native methods of hatching eggs, 270; methods 
of hunting, 271, 272. 

Ounces, breeding of, in captivity, 112-15. 


Paris, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 145, 175, 192. 
Patagonians, 25. 

Peters, Dr. Carl, and the eland antelopes, 92, 93. 

Peters, Professor (of the Berlin Zoological Gardens), 98. 
Pheasants, Mongolian, importation of, 219. 

Philipp, a keeper, 151. 

Preuscher, an animal trainer, 123. 


Racoon, escape of a, 5, 6. 

Radmai, Dr. (eminent Buddhist Lama), 74, 77. 

Rats, destructiveness of, 163 ; and snakes, 185. 

Rhinoceroses, facts and stories relative to, 164-70; different species of, 
167, 168. 

Rhodesia, wild game in, 93 ; reputed dinosaur in, 96, 97. 

“ Rosa,” an orang-outang, 273-77, 280, 282-84, 291. 

Rothschild, Walter, successful in acclimatisation, 212; imports Mongolian 
pheasants, 219. 


St. Louis, Exhibition of 1904 in, Hagenbeck exhibits at, 37, 181, 234; 
“Trieste” at, 102. 

St. Petersburg, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 172. 

Schilling, Fritz, animal trainer, 37. 

Schiott, Director (of Copenhagen Zoological Gardens), experiments of, in 
acclimatisation, 212. 

Schmidt, animal trainer, 123. 

Schonbrunn, Imperial Zoological Gardens at, 168. 

Sea-bear, a, 236. 

Sea-lions, Californian, intelligence of, 145, 146. 

Seals, methods of capturing, 91, 92 ; difficulties of transporting, 92 ; adapta- 
bility of, to training, 144, 145. 

Self-mutilation, instances of, in animals, 228, 229. 

Siberia, difficulty of transporting animals from, 89. 

Sloth, giant, discovery of, 96. 

Snake-charmers, 91, 193, 194. 

Snakes, methods of capturing, 89-91 ; relations of, with other animals, 177, 
178; extraordinary voracity of, 179-81; savagery of certain species, 
181, 182; frozen boa-constrictors, 182, 183; puff-adders, 184, 185 ; 
rattle-snakes and rats, 185 ; quarrels of, over food, 185, 186; extra- 


INDEX 299 


ordinary digestive power of, 186-89; and capacity of, for fasting, 
189, 190; breeding of, 191, 192 ; low intelligence of, 192, 193; ex- 
traction of poison from, 194; experiments in inoculation with their 
venom, 195, 196. 

Somaliland, method of hunting ostriches in, 271, 272. 

Somalis, 25. 

Spielbudenplatz, earliest Hagenbeck menagerie in, 1, 2; extension of 
premises in, 8; removal from, 15; ravages of rats in, 163; boa- 
constrictors escape in, 183. 

Stellingen Zoological Park, origin of, 1; trained troupes in, 37; pur- 
chase and development of, 38, 39-45; ostrich farm at, 45, 255- 
66; pet carnivores in, 102-6; experiments in acclimatisation in, 
115, 202-11; and in natural environment, 2113 breeding and cross- 
breeding in, 215, 216; description of, 230 e¢ sgg. ; animal amuse- 
ments in, 236-41 ; loves and friendships in, 241, 242; walruses in, 
242-44, 250, 251; Statistics of population in and commissariat of, 
251-53; improvements in process of being made in, 253, 254. 

Stuttgart, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 117. 

Sudan, the Egyptian, rich in animal life, 7, 8, 47, 48; closed to Europeans, 
25, 48, 176; hunters and hunted in, 48-53; destruction of game 
in, during and after the war, 69, 70; reduction and extinction of 
native tribes in, 71. , 


Taka, swordsmen of, 51, 57, 70. 

Takruris, the, their methods of hunting, 57. 

Tigers. See Carnivores. 

Transport of wild animals, difficulties of, in the Sudan, 65-67 ; from Siberia, 
87-89. 

Trieste, disembarkation of animals at, 13, 14. 

“ Trieste,” a Somali lion, history of, 102, 103. 

“ Tsamba,” composition of, 80. 


Uxupak, an Eskimo, visit of, to Germany, 21-25. 


Vienna, Zoological Gardens at, reference to, 175. 
Virchow, Professor, and the African elephants, 160-62. 


WALRUSES, pugnacity of, 242; feeding of, 243, 244; method of capturing, 
244-48; habits of, 248, 249; treatment of newly arrived, 250, 251. 

Ward, Rowland, 154. 

Westermann, Dr., director of Amsterdam Zoological Gardens, his account 
of a fasting snake, 189, 190. 

William I., German Emperor, 25, 45. 

Woodward, an American animal trainer, his hinge seals and sea-lions, 144, 
145. 


Zepras, hunting of, 70; different species and qualities of, 71. 


Zebroids, 219. 
Zebus, Indian, imported for crossing purposes, 216. 


ABERDEEN : THE, UNIVERSITY PRESS 


ee rae ea i 
ease See Rianne : y +f 
serait te State = =a S sadatcteial : ns ee Tahlia ye aan 
eel Moa coe 4 in eatery rp Grn fe se ian 

: fete’ tac 


Cia 
ciate ites ‘ 
2 Reith peiricipte eeitte ea pierre Fabshs 

ies seth ie rg te repel isan dat riety Tomer ee a 


iat! oe See <4 $ rae a 

hen a ae Supe u peak seated cateasts 
samen ae Rat ghee = Ie poh feteie oe Sate Lert ehletiteayinty 

: ee nash rernbaeinli act x prea eE Ca Gad a ee 


Spies je 
te " a Neen hst i 
Sener tet ete neta te oe ud re es 


Sete 


aA 
ahatelye 
aeiete 
punta 
Daaidendl aah 


aah allies, arent tos 
pce me: 


he eee oe: age + eH FY 
Siccnee alae ny ete nies ee eel 

igi soi : eis wea a os re oe 
a eee eS ei rp ete ape oe one aes ite s3 
ae is ete ieee = y 


Pen Seeley 


= pubes = 


ae ‘ 
; 
seats 


Spee 


ee 
ee nA ah 
Pereatean te 


ae 
= ihe 
— 
ae 


a 
4" roe rote 
ht ta rat eee
