Materia Medica Pura, Vol. II (Ledum–Verbascum)
Samuel Hahnemann (translated by R. E. Dudgeon, with annotations by Richard Hughes), 1881
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vol. II of Dudgeon's English translation of Hahnemann's Materia Medica Pura (Ledum through Verbascum), completing the two-volume English edition. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b28121612_0001). This 1881 Dudgeon translation, vol. 2 (London: Hahnemann Publishing Society, 1881) is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

MATERIA  MEDICA

PURA

BY

SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  LATEST  GERMAN  EDITIONS  BY

R.  E.  DUDGEON,  M.D.

WITH  ANNOTATIONS  BY

RICHARD  HUGHES,  L.R.C.P.E.


VOL.  II.

LEDUM-YERBASCUM.


HAHNEMANN  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY.

LIVERPOOL :

THE  HON.  SECRETARY,  117,  GROVE  STREET,  E.

LONDON  : E.  GOULD  AND  SON,  59,  MOORGATE  STREET,  E.C.

NEW  YORK:  BOERICKE  AND  TAFEL,  145,  GRAND  STREET.


l88l.

Jjriu  2og.  HUmkrs,  ijg.


PRINTED  BY  J.  E.  ADI.ARD,  BARTHOLOMEW  CLOSE.


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  II


PAGE

Nota  bene  for  my  Reviewers i

Examination  of  the  Sources  of  the  Common  Materia  Medica  ...  5

A Reminiscence 30

The  Medical  Observer.  A Fragment  40

How  can  Small  Doses  of  such  very  Attenuated  Medicine  as

Homoeopathy  employs  still  possess  great  power?  43

Ledum  47

Magnes 60

Magnetis  polus  Arcticus  83

Magnetis  folus  Australis 100

Manganum  aceticum 114

Menyanthes  trifoliata  130

Mercurius  144

Moschus  2.00

Muriaticum  acidum  209

Nux  VOMICA  223

Oleander 270

Opium  284

Phosphoricum  acidum  319

Pulsatilla 345

Rheum  391

Rhus 400

Ruta 439

Sambucus  452

Sarsaparilla 459

Scilla  466

Spigelia  479

Spongia 509

Stannum  526

Staphisagria  555

Stramonium  586

Sulphur  610

Taraxacum 638

Thuja  649

Veratrum  673

Verbascum  702


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2016


https://archive.org/details/b28121612_0001


NOTA  BENE  FOR  MY  REVIEWERS.1


. (To  show  how  much  enmity  the  better  healing  art  had  to  endure  from  the
allopathic  doctors  up  to  the  year  1817,  the  following  lines  may  be  allowed  to  remain
in  this  second  edition,  all  the  more  because  during  the  last  seven  years  until  now
there  has  been  no  lack  of  public  calumniators  of  the  truth  and  of  its  founder.)


I have  read  several  unfair  criticisms  on  the  second  part  of  my  Materia
Medica  Pura , especially  on  the  essay  at  the  beginning  of  it,  entitled
cc  Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic*  Medical  Doctrine. ”

Now,  I could  easily  settle  them  here  after  the  traditional  manner  ot
writers,  and  expose  them  in  all  their  nakedness.  But  I shall  not  do  so.
I do  not  wish  to  burden  myself  with  the  sin  of  immortalizing  these
follies  and  their  perpetrators,  and  prefer  not  to  reveal  the  weaknesses  of
my  contemporaries  to  an  assuredly  more  discerning  posterity.

I shall  only  say  this  much  in  a general  way.

Perversions  of  words  and  sense,  incomprehensible  palaver,  which  is
meant  to  appear  learned,  abuse  and  theoretical  sceptical  shakings  of  the
head,  instead  of  practical  demonstrations  of  the  contrary,  seem  to  me  to
be  weapons  of  too  absurd  a character  to  use  against  a fact  such  as

* What  an  immense  amount  of  learning  do  not  my  critics  display ! I shall  only
allude  here  to  those  who  write  and  get  printed  homopathic  and  komopathy  in  place  of
homoeopathic  and  homoeopathy , thereby  betraying  that  they  are  not  aware  of  the
immense  difference  betwixt  ofxov  and  o/xoiov , but  consider  the  two  to  be  syno-
nymous. Did  they  then  never  hear  a word  about  what  the  whole  world  knows,  how
the  infinite  difference  betwixt  bfioovaiog  and  bfjioiovcriog  once  split  the  whole  Christian
Church  into  two  irreconcilable  parts  ? Do  they  not  understand  enough  Greek  to
know  that  (alone  and  in  combination)  bfxbv  means  common , identical , the  same  (eg.
sig  ofxov  \ex°G  ri<rava(3aivoi,  Iliad,  3\)  but  that  bfxoiov  means  only  similar , resembling
the  object , but  never  reaching  it  in  regard  to  nature  and  bind , never  becoming  identical
« with  it  ?

The  homoeopathic  system  of  medicine  never  pretended  to  cure  a disease  by  the
same , the  identical  agent  by  which  the  disease  was  produced — this  has  been  inculcated
on  the  unintelligent  opponents  often  enough,  but,  as  it  seems,  in  vain  ; — no  ! it  only
cures  by  means  of  an  agent  never  exactly  corresponding  to,  never  identical  with  the
cause  of  the  disease,  but  by  means  of  a medicine  that  possesses  the  peculiar  power  of
being  able  to  produce  only  a similar  morbid  state  (ofioiov  ttclOoq),  and  this  is  the
mode  most  in  conformity  with  nature.

Cannot  these  persons  feel  the  difference  betwixt  “ identical ” (the  same)  and
similar  P"  Are  they  all  homopathically  labouring  under  the  same  malady  ot
stupidity  ? Should  not  any  one  vjho  ventures  to  step  forvjard  as  a critic  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Doctrine  ” have , to  begin  vuith,  at  least  some
idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  vuord  “ Homoeopathy.'"


VOL.  II.


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


I


2


NOTA  BENE  FOR  MY  REVIEWERS.


homoeopathy  is ; they  remind  me  of  the  little  figures  which  mis-
chievous boys  make  with  gunpowder  and  set  on  fire  in  order  to  tease
people- — the  things  can  only  fizz  and  splutter,  but  are  not  very  effective,
are  on  the  whole  very  miserable  affairs.

By  such  tricks,  the  pitiful  character  of  which  recoils  on  their
authors,  homoeopathy  cannot  be  blown  up.

My  respected  brethren  on  the  opposition  benches,  I can  give  you
better  advice  as  to  how  you  should  set  about  overthrowing,  if  possible,
this  doctrine,  which  threatens  to  stifle  your  art,  that  is  founded  on  mere
assumption,  and  to  bring  ruin  upon  all  your  therapeutic  lumber.  Listen
to  me !

Your  attempts  against  the  systematic  exposition  of  the  doctrine,
entitled  the  “ Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Doctrine, ” have,  as
you  perceive,  proved  unsuccessful.  You  had  better  leave  it  alone  !
Spirits  such  as  this  is  are  no  subjects  for  joking  with.  It  is  said  there
are  spirits  whose  appearance  has  left  behind  a life-long  disquiet  in  the
conscience  of  the  wicked  and  of  those  who  act  contrary  to  their  know-
ledge of  what  is  right,  and  which  nightly  torment  them  for  their
neglect  of  recognised  and  yet  neglected  duties  ! Mark  this,  else  you
may  not  be  able  to  silence  the  judge  within  you,  which  has  wakened  to
speak  to  you  in  unmistakeable  accents  !

No ! there  is  another  and  an  infallible  method  of  overthrowing  this
doctrine,  if  that  is  possible  to  be  done.

This  doctrine  appeals  not  only  chiefly,  but  solely  to  the  verdict  of
experience — <c  repeat  the  experiments,”  it  cries  aloud,  cc  repeat  them
carefully  and  accurately,  and  you  will  find  the  doctrine  confirmed  at
every  step 5J— and  it  does  what  no  medical  doctrine,  no  system  of
physic,  no  so-called  therapeutics  ever  did  or  could  do,  it  insists  upon
being  “judged  by  the  result.”

Here,  then,  we  have  homoeopathy  just  where  we  wished  to  have
it ; here  we  can  (come  on,  dear  gentlemen,  all  will  go  on  nicely)  give
it  the  death  blow  from  this  side.

Take  one  case  of  disease  after  another,  note  it  down  according  to
the  directions  given  in  the  Organon , especially  in  respect  of  all  its  dis-
coverable symptoms,  in  so  exact  a manner  that  the  founder  of  homoeo-
pathy himself  shall  be  unable  to  find  fault  with  the  accuracy  of  the
report  (of  course  any  case  selected  must  be  one  for  which  a homoeo-
pathic medicine  is  to  be  found  amongst  those  medicines  whose  peculiar
symptoms  are  known),  and  administer,  pure  and  unmixed,  the  most
appropriate  homoeopathic  medicinal  substance  that  can  be  discovered  for
the  case  of  disease  in  question,  in  a dose  as  small  as  this  doctrine  directs,
but,  as  is  expressly  insisted  on,  taking  care  to  remove  all  other  kinds  of
medicinal  influences  from  the  patient , and  if  it  do  not  give  relief,  speedy,
mild,  and  permanent  relief,  then,  by  a publication  of  the  duly  attested
history  of  the  treatment  according  to  the  principles  of  the  homoeopathic
system  strictly  followed  out , you  will  be  able  to  give  a public  refutation  of
this  doctrine  which  so  seriously  threatens  the  old  darkness.

But  I pray  you  to  beware  of  playing  false  in  the  matter  ! — all  roguery
comes  to  light  and  leaves  an  indelible  stigma  behind  it  as  a warning .*

* As  a warning  example  in  point  I would  refer  to  the  notorious  (exquisitely


NOTA  BENE  FOR  MY  REVIEWERS.


3


If  then,  following  your  conscientious  example,  every  other  equally
conscientious  and  careful  medical  experimentalist  meets  with  the  same
result — if  all  that  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  promises  from  being  faithfully
followed  out  does  not  take  place — then  homoeopathy  is  as  good  as  lost ; it
is  all  up  with  homoeopathy  if  it  does  not  show  itself  efficacious,  remark-
ably efficacious.

Or,  gentlemen  on  the  opposition  corporation  benches,  do  you  know
any  other  and  more  potent  method  for  suppressing  this  accursed  doc-
trine, with  its  truths*  that  cut  into  the  very  soul  of  the  dogmatists  of
ancient  and  modern  times,  well  armed  though  they  be — ignea  inest  Hits
vis  et  coelestis  origo — which,  as  it  is  asserted  for  certain,  only  needs  to
appeal  to  impartiality  and  sound  human  reason  in  order  to  find  an
entrance  into  the  uncorrupted  understanding,  and  can  point  to  the
infallibly  beneficial  effects  that  result  from  a faithful  following  out  of
its  precepts,  and  is  thus  enabled  to  triumph  certainly  over  all  obduracy  j
— do  you,  gentlemen,  I repeat,  know  any  more  effectual  mode  of
suppressing  this  doctrine  ?

Yes  ! apparently  you  think  you  do.

recorded)  history  of  a disease  which  Kotzebue  was  said  to  have  had,  and  of  which  he
was  said  to  have  been  miraculously  cured  by  means  of  the  excitement-theory  method.
It  was,  however,  as  was  soon  shown,  a pure  invention,  invented  in  order  to  serve  the
purposes  of  the  excitement-theory  of  that  time,  and  the  disgrace  of  the  deception  is
still  and  will  ever  be  attached  to  the  name  of  its  author.

* The  truth  of  this,  the  only  rational  doctrine  of  medicine,  must  seize  upon  the
convictions  of  these  gentlemen  if  they  possessed  but  a spark  of  common  sense,  and  it
did  so  to  a certain  extent,  as  we  may  observe  here  and  there  in  their  writings,  from
the  piteous  lamentations  caused  by  their  apprehension  of  the  speedy  overthrow  of  the
antiquated  edifice  of  their  corporation.

But,  see,  they  feel  their  brains  so  stuffed  full  of  the  hundred  thousand  fanciful
ideas,  insane  maxims,  systems  and  dogmas,  and  the  load  of  everlasting  practical  trash,
that  they  are  no  longer  capable  of  laying  aside  this  useless  furniture,  in  order  then,
with  freedom  of  mind  to  practise  impartially  a system  so  simple  as  homoeopathy  is,
for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  They  feel  themselves,  I say,  so  incapable  of  doing  this,
that  the  ill-humour  this  causes  distorts  not  only  their  mind,  but  also  their  features,
and  can  only  find  vent  in  impotent  abuse  of  the  better  way  that  they  can  never
attain.

I am  almost  sorry  for  them  $ for  the  old  falsehoods,  so  often  paraded  before  them  as
truths,  hover  incessantly  before  their  memory  as  though  they  were  actual  truths  ; the
fictions  presented  to  them  as  articles  of  faith,  and  testified  to  by  illustrious  and  great
names,  have  been  so  often  dinned  as  important  ajid  proper  things  into  their  ears,
that  they  continue  still  to  resound  there ; the  illusory  doctrinal  maxims  and  the  sup-
positions, a priori  explanations,  definitions  and  distinctions  of  the  schools,  offered  to
them  as  axioms,  have  been  so  often  read  by  them  again  and  again  in  print,  and
custom  has  habituated  their  whole  mode  of  operations  to  such  a facile  routine  dex-
terity, that  they  are  now  unable  to  resist  the  influence  of  those  facile  things  that
have,  become  by  habit,  their  second,  nature,  and  they  must,  in  spite  of  themselves,
continue  to  think  and  act  in  the  same  way — (at  the  very  first  view  of  the  patient
some  particular  anatomical  seat  in  the  body  occurs  to  them  as  the  undoubted  seat  of
the  disease,  some  nosological  name  for  the  disease  presses  itself  upon  them,  they
already  feel  at  their  finger  ends  the  elegant  compound  prescription,  which  they  will
dash  off  upon  the  nearest  piece  of  paper)— so  that  even  if  they  wished  seriously  to
reform  and  lead  a new  medical  life  in  simplicity  and  in  truth,  worthy  of  the  All-
seeing  Maker  of  our  mind  that  He  has  created  to  enable  us  to  administer  to  the  relief
of  sick  and  suffering  humanity,  they  are  no<vo  incapable  of  doing  so.

Such. is  the  character  of  the  self-styled  critics  of  the  reformed  system  of  medicine
and  their  aiders  and  abettors  ; how  can  their  criticisms  be  other  than  they  are  ? God
have  mercy  on  their  poor  souls !


4


NOTA  BENE  FOR  MY  REVIEWERS.


Continue  then,  in  reviews  and  books,  to  extol  with  fulsome  lauda-
tions the  common-place  twaddle  of  your  school  as  though  it  were  the
perfection  of  sagacity,  and  to  pervert  and  ridicule  with  your  evil  mind
what  your  ignorance  does  not  distort;  continue  to  calumniate,  to  abuse,
to  revile: — and  the  unprejudiced  will  be  able  plainly  to  comprehend  on
whose  side  truth  lies.

The  improved  (homoeopathic)  medical  doctrine  will  stand  out  in
more  prominent  relief  and  appear  to  greater  advantage  against  the  foil
of  this  nonsense,  and  ( — for  who  can  entertain  a doubt  respecting  the
feeling  for  truth  inherent  in  the  better  part  of  mankind  ? — ) will  dispel
the  nocturnal  darkness  of  antiquated  stupidities,  for  it  teaches  how  to
afford  certain  benefit  in  diseases,  where  hitherto  mere  incomprehensible
learned  palaver,  at  the  bedside  of  the  late  lamented,  sought  in  vain  to
hide  the  damage  done  by  pint  and  quart  bottlefuls  of  unsuitable  mix-
tures of  unknown,  life-destroying  drugs.

And  what  do  you  say  when  you  see  the  author  and  first  teacher
of  homoeopathy,  together  with  his  genuine  disciples,  cure  without
suffering,  and  permanently,  a much  greater  proportion  of  patients,  and
such  as  are  suffering  from  the  worst,  the  most  tedious  complaints,
with  minute  doses  of  mild,  tasteless  medicines  ? Can  your  so-called
art  do  the  like  ? Does  not  such  a result  laugh  to  scorn  your  miserable
theoretical  scepticism,  and  the  impotent  routine  of  your  traditional
practice  ?

If  you  really  wish  to  do  as  well,  imitate  the  homoeopathic  method
rationally  and  honestly  !

If  you  do  not  wish  this — well  then,  grope  away — we  will  not
prevent  you — grope  away  on  your  comfortless  path  of  blind  and  servile
routine  in  the  dark  midnight  of  fanciful  systems,  seduced  hither  and
thither  by  the  will-oJ-the-wisps  of  your  venerated  authorities,  who,
when  you  really  stand  in  need  of  aid,  leave  you  in  the  lurch — dazzle
your  sight  and  disappear.

And  if  your  unfortunate  practice,  from  which  that  which  you
intended,  wished,  and  promised  usually  does  not  occur,  accumulates
within  you  a store  of  spiteful  bile,  which  seeks  to  dissipate  itself  in
calumniating  the  better  method — well  then,  continue  to  call  the  grapes
up  yonder,  which  party  pride,  confusion  of  intellect,  weakness  or  indo-
lence prevents  you  reaching,  sour,  and  leave  them  to  be  gathered  by
more  worthy  persons.

Continue,  if  it  so  pleases  you,  enviously  to  slander  the  sublime  art ;
but  know  that  envy  gnaws  in  vain  at  adamantine  truth,  and  only
consumes  the  marrow  of  the  bones  of  its  victim.*

DR.  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.

Leipzig  5 February , 1817.


* Alova  /3porot£,  Aeschyl.,  Eumen 3 29.


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF  THE


COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA,1


Next  to  a knowledge  of  what  there  is  to  cure  in  each  particular
case  which  presents  itself  for  treatment  there  can  be  no  more  necessary
knowledge  for  a practical  physician  than  an  acquaintance  with  the
curative  implements , to  know,  namely,  what  each  of  the  remedies  can
certainly  cure.

Twenty- three  centuries  have  been  spent  in  fruitless  labour  to
discover  the  way  by  which  the  end  of  this  knowledge  may  be  certainly
reached  ; and  not  a step  has  been  gained  by  all  these  efforts.

Had  the  millions  of  physicians  who  during  this  long  space  of  time
occupied  themselves  with  the  subject,  only  discovered  the  way  to  the
knowledge  of  how  this  end  (the  discovery  of  the  healing  properties  of
each  medicine)  was  to  he  attained , then  had  much,  almost  everything,
been  accomplished  for  then  would  this  way  have  been  capable  of  being
pursued,  and  the  zeal  and  exertions  of  the  better  class  of  physicians
must  have  soon  won  a considerable  territory  of  knowledge,  so  that  what
still  remained  to  be  Investigated  would  also  soon  have  been  within  our
grasp.

But  observe,  that  not  one , as  yet,  ever  trod  the  path  that  surely  and
certainly  leads  to  this  end.  All  the  paths  hitherto  trodden  were,  con-
sequently, as  one  century  was  forced  to  say  of  those  of  another,  mere
ways  of  error.  These  we  shall  examine  somewhat  more  closely.

* *

*

The  first  source  of  the  Materia  Medica  hitherto  extant  is  mere  guess
work  and  fiction , which  attempts  to  set  forth  the  general  therapeutic
virtues  of  drugs.

Exactly  as  the  text  ran  in  Dioscorides  seventeen  centuries  ago  :
this  or  that  substance  is  resolvent , deobstruent , diuretic , diaphoretic ,
emmenagogue , sedative , antispasmodic , cathartic , &c. — so  runs  it  now  in
the  most  recent  works  on  Materia  Medica.  The  same  descriptions  of
the  general  virtues  of  particular  drugs,  which  do  not  turn  out  true ; the
same  general  assertions,  which  do  not  hold  good  when  put  to  the  trial  at
the  sick-bed.  Experience  declares  that  such  a medicine  very  seldom


I From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


6


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


performs,  in  the  human  body,  what  these  books  allege  respecting  its
general  therapeutic  virtues  ; and  that  when  it  does,  this  happens  either
from  other  causes,  or  it  is  a merely  palliative  passing  efFect  (primary
action),  which  is  certainly  followed  by  the  opposite,  to  the  greater
detriment  of  the  patient.

If  a medicine  prized  for  its  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  or  emmenagogue
qualities,  when  given  by  itself  alone,  had,  in  special  circumstances , and  in
one  out  of  many  cases , seemed  to  have  had  this  efFect,  should  it,  on  this
account,  be  pronounced  as  absolutely  possessing  these  qualities,  that  is,
would  it  deserve  the  title  of  an  unconditional  diaphoretic,  emmena-
gogue or  diuretic  ? In  that  case  we  should  dignify  with  the  name  of
an  honest  man  one  who  occasionally  acted  honestly ; and  on  one  who
only  refrained  from  lying  on  rare  occasions  we  should  bestow  the
honourable  name  of  a truthful  man,  a man  of  his  word  !

Are  our  conceptions  to  be  thus  perverted  and  reversed  ?

But  these  rare  instances  do  not  prove  that  a certain  efFect  will  take
place  even  in  rare  cases  ; for  not  in  one  case  out  of  a hundred  was  the
substance  given  alone,  but  almost  always  in  combination  with  other
medicines.

How  few  physicians  are  there  who  have  given  a patient  but  one
single  simple  substance  at  a time,  and  waited  for  its  sole  operation,
avoiding  altogether  the  concomitant  use  of  all  other  medicinal  sub-
stances ! It  is  invariably  a mixture  of  various  medicines  that  ordinary
practitioners  prescribe  ! And  if  they  ever  give  a simple  substance,  for
example,  in  powder,  they  are  sure  to  order  also  some  herbal  infusion
(another  kind  of  medicine),  or  heterogeneous  medicated  clyster,  or
embrocation,  or  fomentation  of  some  other  kind  of  herbs,  to  be  used
along  with  it.  They  never  act  otherwise.  This  inherent  vice  clings
like  pitch  to  the  ordinary  practitioner , so  that  he  can  never  rid  himself  of
it.  He  is  in  straits  before  and  behind,  and  he  cannot  rest,  and  is  not
at  ease,  if  this  and  that,  and  a lot  of  other  drugs,  are  not  prescribed
into  the  bargain.

And  for  this  they  have  plenty  of  excuses.

They  maintain  that  this  or  that  medicine  (of  the  peculiar  and  pure
efFects  of  which,  however,  they  know  nothing)  is  the  principal  ingre-
dient of  their  compound  prescription,  and  that  all  the  efFects  must  be
attributed  to  it.  The  other  substances  were  added  for  difFerent  objects,
some  to  aid  their  principal  ingredient,  some  to  correct  it,  others  to
direct  it  to  this  or  that  part  of  the  body,  or  whatever  other  instructions
as  to  their  conduct  they  may  give  to  the  accessory  medicines  (their  pure
efFects  being  all  the  time  unknown)  ; as  if  the  drugs  were  intelligent
beings,  endowed  with  well-disposed  wills  and  complaisant  obedience,  so
that  they  must  produce  just  that  efFect  in  the  interior  of  the  ailing
body  which  the  doctor  ordered  them,  and  not  a particle  more  !

But  do  these  accessory  substances  cease,  on  your  command,  to
confuse  and  to  counteract,  with  their  own  peculiar  and  unknown
medicinal  influence,  the  action  of  your  principal,  and  to  produce,  in
accordance  with  the  eternal  laws  of  their  own  inherent  nature,  efFects
which  cannot  be  surmised  or  predicted,  and  can  only  be  discovered  and
brought  to  our  knowledge  by  pure  experiment  ?


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


7


Is  it  not  foolish  to  estimate  the  effect  of  one  force  while  other
forces  of  another  kind  were  in  action,  which  often  contributed  mainly,
though  in  common  with  the  rest,  to  produce  the  result  ?

It  would  not  be  more  absurd  if  some  one  were  to  try  to  persuade  us
that  he  had  discovered  a good  article  of  nutriment  in  kitchen  salt ; that
he  had  ordered  it  to  a man  half  starved,  and  that  he  had  no  sooner  eaten
of  it  than  he  was  invigorated,  satiated,  and  strengthened,  as  if  by
miracle  ; that  the  half  ounce  of  common  salt  was  the  basis  and  chief  in-
gredient of  the  nutritious  receipt  prescribed  by  him,  which  he  had  caused
to  be  dissolved,  lege  artis , in  quantum  satis  of  boiling  water  as  the
excipient  and  vehicle,  then  he  had  added  as  a corrective  a good  lump  of
butter,  and,  as  an  adjuvant,  a pound  of  fine  cut  rye-bread.  This
mixture  (soup),  after  being  properly  stirred,  he  caused  to  be  taken  at
once  by  the  famished  patient,  and  by  it  his  hunger  was  completely
appeased  ; — all  the  latter  ingredients  were  merely  accessaries  in  the
prescription,  the  chief  ingredient  was  the  half  ounce  of  salt.  This  was
prescribed  by  him  as  the  basis  of  the  whole  receipt ; and  see  ! — in  his
hands  it  had,  when  prepared  accurately  according  to  these  directions,
always  produced  the  most  beneficial  results.

If,  in  the  kitchen  Materia  Medica,  the  virtues  of  saturans , analep -
ticum , restaurans , reficiens , nutriens  should,  from  these  circumstances,  be
ascribed  to  the  article  sal  culinare , it  would  not  be  more  childish  and
absurd  than  the  conduct  of  the  physician  who  should  arbitrarily  ordain
one  substance  to  be  the  basis  of  his  diuretic,  then  add  two,  three,  or
four  other  powerful  (unknown)  medicinal  substances  (with  the  sage
object,  forsooth,  of  serving  as  corrigens , dirigens , adjuvans , excipiens ),
and  order  the  patient  to  walk  about  the  cold  room  while  taking  the
mixture,  drinking  in  the  meantime  largely  of  warm  sack-whey,  made
of  Rhine-wine  well  sweetened  with  sugar,  and  then  publish  triumph-
antly the  extraordinary  success  of  the  basis  he  had  prescribed  : cc  The
patient  has  passed  more  urine  than  usual.”  In  his  eyes  the  added
substances  and  the  regimen  during  their  use  are  mere  unimportant
accessaries,  and  innocent  of  the  result,  in  order  that  he  may  be  able  to
ascribe  to  the  substance  which  he  has  constituted  the  chief  ingredient
in  the  receipt,  and  in  which  (he  knows  not  why)  he  takes  the  deepest
interest,  and  whose  fame  he  wishes  to  extend,  the  sole  honour  of  the
effect  produced.  Thus  it  naturally  happens,  when,  by  such  arbitrary
and  wilful  praise  of  a medicine  which  the  doctor  has  taken  a fancy  to,
and  to  which  he  was  determined  to  attribute  some  definite  curative
property,  the  undeserved  and  surreptitious  attributes  of  diuretic , emmena -
gogue , resolvent}  sudorific , expectorant , antispasmodic , are  inscribed  in  the
accommodating  Materia  Medica,  where  they  afterwards  figure  as  truths,
deluding  those  that  trust  to  it.

Thus  this  rare  effect  must  be  attributed  to  the  action  of  all  these
medicines  which  were  used  at  once  ! How  small  a part  of  the  uncer-
tain credit  of  being  a diuretic,  diaphoretic,  or  emmenagogue,  or  an
excitant  or  sedative  of  this  or  that,  is  attributable  to  that  one  medicine  !

Consequently,  the  general  therapeutic  virtues  of  drugs  ascribed  to
them  by  Dioscorides,  and  re-echoed  by  his  succesors,  which  occupy  the
greatest  space  in  the  Materia  Medicas  even  of  our  own  day,  are  purely


8


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


fictitious,  when,  for  instance,  it  is  stated  that  this  or  that  medicine  is
diuretic,  diaphoretic,  purgative,  expectorant,  or  a purifier  of  the  blood
and  humours,  &c.*

The  assertion  that  this  or  that  medicine  is  resolvent,  discutient,  an
exalter  or  depresser  of  sensibility,  irritability,  or  the  reproductive  func-
tion, rests  upon  baseless  hypothetical  assumptions  alone.  It  was  in
itself  a false  and  hypothetical  assumption,  destitute  of  proof  and  of
reality,  that  it  was  necessary  directly  to  perform  these  operations  in
diseases  at  all.  How  then,  in  the  name  of  reason,  could  it  be  ventured
to  ascribe  these,  in  themselves  nugatory  virtues,  to  individual  medicines,
without  proof,  irrespective  altogether  of  the  fact  they  were  almost
never  prescribed  singly,  but  almost  always  only  in  combination  with
others  ? Every  such  assertion  is  a palpable  lie.

What  was  ever  seen  dissolved  or  resolved  in  the  interior  of  the
human  body  by  medicines  ? By  what  facts  was  such  a power  of
dissolving  living  parts  of  the  organism  proved  to  be  possible  by  drugs  ?
Why  is  irrefragable  evidence  of  the  manifestation  of  this  power  by
some  substance  not  brought  forward  ? Or  why,  since  it  is  impossible
to  observe  such  mechanical  and  chemical  effects  of  a drug  on  living  parts
in  the  undiscovered  and  undiscoverable  penetralia  of  the  organism,  has
not  a sense  of  shame  restrained  men  from  publishing  such  inventions  as
truths  and  dogmas,  and,  with  unblushing  brow,  falsely  ascribing  such
actions  to  medicines,  since  error  in  the  most  serious  and  important  of
all  earthly  vocations,  the  healing  of  the  sick,  must  have  the  most
grievous  consequences  ; and  falsehood  here  is  the  greatest  crime,  being
nothing  less  than  high  treason  against  humanity  ?

And  what  is  there  in  the  hidden  internal  parts  of  the  living  body
to  dissolve  or  dissipate  which  the  human  organism,  when  acted  on  by
medicine  proper  for  its  recovery,  cannot  itself,  when  necessary,  dissolve?

Is  there  anything  actually  present  in  the  body  to  be  dissolved  from
without,  as  the  opinion  implies  ? Has  not  our  Sommering  proved
that  the  swollen  glands,  which  had  hitherto  always  been  considered  to
be  obstructed,  were,  on  the  contrary,  found  to  have  their  vessels  greatly
over-dilated.  Has  it  not  been  established  by  careful  experiment  on
healthy  peasants  that  by  the  persevering  use  of  Kampf’s  clysters  there
may  be  produced  in  and  discharged  from  their  bowels  those  same  abomi-
nable evacuations  which  Kampf,  on  hypothetical  grounds,  assumed  to
exist  in  the  bodies  of  almost  all  patients  affected  by  chronic  disease,  in
the  form  of  stoppage,  infarctus,  and  accumulations  ; although  he  had

* When  no  other  virtue  could  be  attributed  to  a medicine,  it  must  be  at  least  an
evacuant : evacuant  in  some  way  or  other  $ for,  without  an  evacuation — without  an
evacuation  of  the  morbific  matter  which  their  grossly  material  conceptions  of  disease
led  them  to  seek  in  all  diseases,  they  could  not  imagine  that  a medicine  could  effect
a cure.  Since,  then,  the  generation  and  existence  of  a disease  was,  according  to  them,
due  to  this  hypothetical  morbific  matter,  they  bethought  themselves  of  all  the
conceivable  excretory  passages  from  the  body  by  which  this  lethal  matter  could
be  driven  out  by  medicines ; and  the  medicines  had  to  do  them  the  favour  to
take  upon  themselves  the  office  of  picking  out  and  searching  for  this  imaginary
morbid  matter  from  the  numerous  vessels  and  fluids,  and  of  clearing  it  away  by
means  of  the  urine,  sweat,  expectoration,  or  alvine  discharge.  These  were  the  prin-
cipal effects  they  desired  and  hoped  from  their  remedies  : this  was  the  part  all  the
medicines  in  the  Materia  Medica  had  to  play.


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


9


first  by  his  compound  herbal  decoctions,  administered  in  the  form  of
several  hundred  clysters,  brought  on,  secundum  artem , the  unnatural
condition  of  the  bowels  which  produced  these  secretions,  and  then  got
them  evacuated,  to  the  horror  of  all  beholders  ; and,  unfortunately,  the
rest  of  the  profession  were  almost  without  exception  his  followers,  and
in  their  mind’s  eye  they  now  saw  in  almost  all  patients  nothing  but
obstructions  of  the  smallest  vessels  of  the  abdomen,  infarctus  and  accu-
mulations, regarded  the  senseless  herb-mixtures  of  Kampf  as  really
dissolvent  and  deobstruent,  and  clystered  the  poor  patients,  for  the  sake
of  an  hypothesis,  with  the  greatest  vigour  and  perseverance,  almost  to
death,  so  much  so  that  it  was  a sin  and  a shame.

Now,  supposing  that  these  imaginary  cases  were  indeed  real,  and
that  there  could  be  something  to  dissolve  and  dissipate  in  the  diseased
human  body,  who  has  ever  seen  this  dissolution  or  dissipation  effected
by  the  direct  action  of  the  medicine  on  the  interior  when  the  patient
recovers,  so  that  the  vital  force,  which  before  presided  over  all  the
operations  of  the  organism,  had  remained,  in  this  instance,  a passive
spectator,  and  had  allowed  the  medicine  to  work,  unaided,  upon  the
supposed  obstructed  and  indurated  parts,  as  a tanner  operates  on  his
hides  ?

By  means  of  calomel,  according  to  the  history  of  a case,*  a chronic
vomiting  that  occurred  after  meals  was  removed.  The  cause  of  this
vomiting  was  represented  as  nothing  less  than  an  induration  of  the
stomach  and  pylorus  \ this  the  narrator  of  the  case  avers  with  the
greatest  effrontery,  without  adducing  the  slightest  evidence  in  support
of  his  position,  only  that  he  might  attribute  in  this  manner  an  uncon-
ditional resolvent  power  to  calomel,  and  assume  the  honour  to  himself
of  curing  a disease  which  is  as  rare  as  it  is  incurable.  Another
writerj-  rants  in  the  same  imaginative  strain  about  stomachache,  and
spasms  in  the  stomach,  eructation  and  vomiting  in  his  patient  being
due  to  some  organic  disease  of  the  stomach,  scirrhus,  indurations  and
tumours,  and  believes  that  as  these  were  removed  after  drinking  for  a
length  of  time  docoction  of  triticum  repens  (and  at  the  same  time
preserving  a well-regulated  diet  and  regimen  ?),  that  he  has  fully
established  that  this  herb  can  cure  scirrhus  of  the  stomach,  of  the
existence  of  which  in  his  case  there  was  not  the  slightest  proof.
But  stomachache,  eructation  and  vomiting  after  meals,  even  when
of  long  standing,  are  by  no  means  rare  maladies,  and  are  often  easily
curable  by  an  improved  diet  and  regimen,  and,  alone,  afford  no  proof
of  induration  or  scirrhus  of  the  stomach  or  pylorus.  This  disease
is  accompanied  by  much  more  serious  symptoms  than  pain,  eructation
and  mere  vomiting  are.

This  is,  however,  the  highly  commendable  way  in  which  a medicine
is  raised  to  the  undeserved  honour  of  being  a resolvent,  deobstruent,  Sc c.,
remedy,  namely,  by  blind  conjecture  and  bold  assumption  of  the  pre-
sence of  an  important  internal  malady,  never  seen  or  capable  of  being
proved  to  be  there.

* •$£

*

* Huf eland's  Journal,  1815,  Dec.,  p.  121

if  In  Hut 'eland's  Journal , 1813,  p.  63.


10


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


The  second  source  of  the  virtues  of  drugs,  as  ascribed  to  them  in  the
Materia  Medica,  has,  it  is  alleged,  a sure  foundation,  viz.  their  sensible
properties , from  which  their  action  may  be  inferred.  We  shall  see,
however,  what  a turbid  source  this  is.

I shall  spare  the  ordinary  medical  school  the  humiliation  of  re-
minding it  of  the  folly  of  those  ancient  physicians  who,  determining
the  medicinal  powers  of  crude  drugs  from  their  signature , that  is,  from
their  colour  and  form,  gave  the  testicle-shaped  orchis-root  in  order  to
restore  manly  vigour  ; the  phallus  impudicus , to  strengthen  weak  erec-
tions ; ascribed  to  the  yellow  turmeric  the  power  of  curing  jaundice,
and  considered  hypericum  perforatum , whose  yellow  flowers  on  being
crushed  yield  a red  juice  ( St . John's  blood) , useful  in  haemorrhages  and
wounds,  &c.  ; but  I shall  refrain  from  taunting  the  physicians  of  the
present  day  with  this  absurdity,  although  traces  of  it  are  to  be  met  with
in  the  most  modern  treatises  on  Materia  Medica.

I shall  only  allude  to  what  is  scarcely  less  foolish,  to  wit,  the
attempts,  even  of  those  of  our  own  times,  to  guess  the  powers  of
medicines  from  their  smell  and  taste.

They  pretended,  by  dint  of  tasting  and  smelling  at  drugs,  to  find
out  what  effect  they  would  have  on  the  human  body ; and  for  this  they
invented  some  general  therapeutical  expressions.

All  plants  that  had  a bitter  taste  should  and  must  (so  they  decreed)
have  one  and  the  same  action,  solely  because  they  tasted  bitter .

But  what  a variety  even  of  bitter  tastes  there  are  ! Does  this
variety  not  indicate  a corresponding  variety  of  action  ?

But  how  does  the  bitter  taste  obtain  the  honour  awarded  to  it  by
the  Materia  Medica  and  practical  physicians,  that  it  is  a proof  of  the  so-
called  stomachic  and  tonic  powers  of  drugs , and  an  evidence  of  their  similar
and  identical  action , so  that,  according  to  this  arbitrary  axiom,  all  the
amara  possess  no  other  medicinal  action  but  this  alone  ?

Although  some  of  them  have  besides  the  peculiar  power  of  pro-
ducing nausea,  disgust,  pain  in  the  stomach  and  eructations  in  healthy
individuals,  and  consequently  of  curing,  homoeopathically,  an  affection
of  a similar  nature ; yet  each  of  them  possesses  peculiar  medicinal
powers  quite  different  from  these,  which  have  hitherto  been  unnoticed,
but  which  are  often  more  important  than  those  ascribed  to  them,  and
whereby  they  differ  extremely  from  each  other.  Hence,  to  prescribe
bitter-tasted  things  without  any  distinction,  the  one  in  place  of
the  other,  as  if  they  all  acted  in  the  same  manner;  or  thoughtlessly
to  mix  them  together  in  one  prescription,  and  under  the  name  of
bitters  ( extracta  amara)  to  administer  them,  as  if  they  were  in-
dubitably identical  medicines,  having  only  the  power  of  strengthen-
ing and  improving  the  stomach,  betrays  the  most  wretched,  rudest,
routinism  !

And  if,  as  this  dictatorial  maxim  of  the  authorities  in  materia
medica  and  therapeutics  would  have  us  believe,  the  bitterness  alone
is  sufficient  to  prove  that  everything  that  tastes  bitter  {amara!)  is
absolutely  and  solely  strengthening,  and  improves  the  digestion,  then
must  colocynth , squills , boletus  lands , the  thick-barked,  much-abused
angustura , eupatorium , saponaria , myrica  gale , lupina , lactuca  virosa ,


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


ii


prussic  acid , and  upas-poison , all  be  equally  entitled,  as  bitters , to  rank
among  the  tonic,  stomachic  medicines.

From  this  any  one  may  easily  see  how  irrational  and  arbitrary  the
maxims  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica  are,  how  near  they  are  to  down-
right falsehoods  ! And  to  make  falsehoods  the  basis  of  our  system  of
treating  the  sick — what  a crime  !

Cinchona  bark  was  found  to  have  a bitter  and  astringent  taste.
This  was  quite  enough  for  them  in  order  to  judge  of  its  inward  powers.
But  now  all  bitter  and  astringent  tasting  substances  and  barks  must
possess  the  same  medicinal  powers  as  cinchona  bark.  Thus  was  the
action  of  medicines  on  the  human  frame  determined,  in  the  materia
medica,  in  the  most  unthinking  and  hasty  manner  from  their  taste
alone  ! And  yet  it  must  and  eyer  will  be  false,  that  willow  bark,  or  a
mixture  of  aloes  and  gall-nuts,  have  the  same  medicinal  properties  as
cinchona  bark.  How  many  such  china  factitia , which  were  to
answer  all  the  purposes  of  the  true  cinchona  bark,  have  been  publicly
recommended,  manufactured  and  sold  by  celebrated  physicians,  and
administered  with  the  greatest  confidence  to  their  patients  by  other
physicians  !

Thus,  the  life  and  health  of  human  beings  were  made  dependent  on
the  opinion  of  a few  blockheads,  and  whatever  entered  their  precious
brains  went  to  swell  the  materia  medica.

In  the  same  manner  a number  of  inconceivably  dissimilar  smells
were  jumbled  together  in  one  category,  and  all  christened  aromatics , in
order  that  under  this  name  a similar  medicinal  action  might  conveniently
be  attributed  to  them.  They  were,  without  the  slightest  hesitation
or  consideration,  one  and  all  pronounced  to  be  exalters  of  the  forces
(excitants),  strengtheners  of  the  nerves,  deobstruents,  &c.

Thus  the  most  imperfect,  the  most  deceptive  of  all  the  senses  of
civilized  man,  that  of  smell  ,*  which  admits  of  the  expression  by  words
of  so  few  perceptions  of  sensible  differences — this  should  suffice  to
determine  the  dynamic  properties  of  a medicine  in  the  human  organism  ;
whilst  all  our  senses  together,  employed  with  the  utmost  care,  in  the
examination  of  a medicinal  substance  with  regard  to  its  external  proper-
ties, do  not  give  us  any,  not  even  the  slightest  information  respecting
this  most  important  of  all  secrets,  the  internal,  spiritual  power
possessed  by  natural  substances  to  alter  the  health  of  human  beings  ;
in  other  words,  respecting  their  true  medicinal  and  healing  power,
which  is  so  extremely  different  in  every  active  substance  from  that  of
every  other,  and  which  can  only  be  revealed  when  it  is  taken  inter-
nally, and  acts  directly  upon  the  vital  functions  of  the  organism  !

Must  mayflower,  mint,  angelica,  arnica,  sassafras,  serpentaria,
sandal,  coriander,  camomile,  lovage,  rosemary,  necessarily  have  the
same  medicinal  action,  because,  forsooth,  the  nose  of  the  respectable
teachers  of  materia  medica  is  pleased  to  discover  that  they  all  have  an
aromatic  smell  ?

Can  a materia  medica  composed  of  such  a jumble  of  dissimilar
medicines,  all  highly  important  from  the  very  variety  of  their  action,

* Precisely  the  most  powerful  medicines,  belladonna,  digitalis,  tartar  emetic,
arsenic,  &c.,  have  little  or  no  smell.


12


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


show  aught  else  than  intemperate  presumption,  and  dishonest,  ignorant,
self-complacency  ?

No  handicraft,  be  it  ever  so  mean,  has  been  guilty  of  such  wanton
fictions  with  respect  to  the  uses  and  powers  of  its  materials  and  tools.
The  agent  to  be  employed  was,  at  all  events,  always  tried  upon
smaller  parts  of  the  object  it  was  intended  to  work  upon,  in  order  to
ascertain  what  alterations  it  was  capable  of  effecting  on  it  before  it  was
employed  on  a large  scale  in  the  precious  work,  where  an  error  might
be  productive  of  serious  injury.  The  calico  bleacher  tried  the  effects
of  chlorine,  which  is  so  destructive  to  vegetable  matters,  in  the  first
instance  on  a small  portion  of  cloth,  and  thereby  avoided  exposing  all
his  stock  of  goods  to  danger.  The  shoemaker  had  previously  convinced
himself  of  the  properties  of  the  hempen  thread,  that  it  was  stronger  in
the  fibre,  that,  when  exposed  to  damp,  it  filled  the  holes  in  the  leather
by  its  expansion  more  completely,  and  resisted  putrefaction  more
powerfully  than  flax,  before  he  preferred  it  to  the  latter  for  stitching  all
his  shoes  ; and  that,  after  all,  was  but  cobbler’s  work  !

But  in  the  arrogant  medicine  of  the  common  stamp,  the  medicines
— the  tools  of  the  healing  art — are  employed  without  the  least  hesitation
in  the  most  important  work  which  one  man  can  perform  for  his  brother
man — a work  whereon  life  and  death,  nay,  sometimes  the  weal  or  woe
of  whole  families  and  their  descendants  depends,  namely,  the  treatment
of  disease ; and  the  acquaintance  with  these  remedies  being  derived
solely  from  their  deceptive  outward  appearance,  and  from  the  pre-
conceived notions  and  desultory  classifications  of  teachers  of  materia
medica,  there  is  the  greatest  danger  of  deception,  of  error,  and  of  false-
hood. But  even  then,  as  if  to  conceal  the  effect  of  each  individual  one,
several  remedies  are  given  mixed  together  in  one  prescription,  with  no
anxiety  as  to  the  inevitable  result  !

So  much  for  the  unfounded  allegations  respecting  the  general
therapeutic  virtues  of  the  several  medicines  in  the  materia  medica,
which  are  all  elevated  to  dogmas,  on  a foundation  of  blind  guesswork,
preconceived  ideas,  extraordinary  notions  and  presumptuous  fiction.
So  much  for  this  second  impure  source  of  the  materia  medica,  as  it  is
called,  hitherto  in  use  !

* „ *

Chemistry , also,  has  taken  upon  itself  to  disclose  a source  at  which  the
general  therapeutic  properties  of  drugs  are  to  be  ascertained.  But  we
shall  soon  see  the  impurity  of  this  third  source  of  the  ordinary  materia
medica.

Attempts  were  made  a century  ago  by  Geoffroy,  but  still  more
frequent  have  such  attempts  been  since  medicine  became  an  art,  to
discover,  by  means  of  chemistry,  the  properties  of  remedies  which
could  not  be  ascertained  in  any  other  way.

I shall  say  nothing  about  the  merely  theoretical  fallacies  of  Baume,
Steffens  and  Burdach,  whereby  the  medicinal  properties  of  medi-
cines were  arbitrarily  declared  to  reside  in  their  gaseous  and  certain
other  chemical  constituents  alone,  and  at  the  same  time  it  was  assumed
in  an  equally  arbitrary  manner,  on  mere  conjecture , that  these  hypothe-
tical elementary  constituents  possessed  certain  medicinal  powers,  so


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


*3

that  it  was  really  amusing  to  see  the  facility  and  rapidity  with  which
those  gentlemen  could  create  the  medicinal  properties  of  every  remedy
out  of  nothing.  As  nature,  trials  on  the  living  human  organism,
observations  and  experience  were  never  appealed  to,  and  mere  fancy,
expert  fingers  and  overweening  confidence  were  alone  employed,  it  is
easy  to  conceive  that  the  whole  affair  was  very  soon  settled.

No  ! I allude  to  the  earnest  aspirations,  and  the  honest  exertions  of
those  of  the  present  day,  to  arrive,  by  means  of  vegetable  and  animal
chemistry,  at  a knowledge  of  the  real  pure  action  of  medicines  on  the
human  frame,  in  which,  as  was  deeply  felt,  the  materia  medica  up  to
that  period  was  miserably  deficient.

True  it  is  that  chemistry — that  art  which  reveals  to  us  such
astonishing  miracles,  appeared  to  be  a much  more  likely  source  for
obtaining  information  with  respect  to  the  properties  of  drugs  than  all
the  idle  dreams  and  learned  salti  mortali  of  ancient  and  modern  times,
which  we  have  just  been  considering  ; and  many  were  infatuated  with
this  expectation,  yet,  chiefly  such  as  either  did  not  understand  che-
mistry (and  sought  much  more  from  it  than  it  could  give  or  possessed),
or  knew  nothing  about  medicine  and  its  requirements,  or  were  ignorant
of  both  the  one  and  the  other.

Animal  chemistry  can  merely  separate  from  animal  substances  such
inanimate  matters  as  show  a different  chemical  action  with  chemical
reagents.  But  it  is  not  these  component  parts  of  animal  tissues,
separated  by  animal  chemistry,  on  which  the  medicines  act,  when  they
derange  the  health  or  cure  the  diseases  of  the  living  organism,  either
through  their  elementary  parts,  as  the  chemist  would  have  us  believe,
or  directly  upon  them.  The  fibrine,  coagulable  lymph,  gelatine,
organic  acids,  salts  and  earths,  separated  from  muscular  substance  by
chemical  operations,  differ  toto  ccelo  from  the  living  muscle,  endowed
with  irritability  in  its  perfect  organised  state  in  the  healthy  and
diseased  individual ; the  matters  separated  from  it  have  not  the  most
distant  resemblance  to  the  living  muscle.  What  information  respecting
the  nature  of  the  living  organism,  or  the  changes  which  the  different
medicines  are  capable  of  effecting  on  it  when  alive,  can  be  derived
from  these  separated  inanimate  portions  ? Or  is  the  process  of  diges-
tion (that  wonderful  transmutation  of  the  most  dissimilar  kinds  of  food
for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  perfect  development  of  the  living
individual  in  all  the  variety  of  his  organs  and  humours)  rendered  in  the
slightest  degree  comprehensible  from  the  discovery  of  a little  soda  and
phosphatic  salt  in  the  gastric  juice?  Can  even  the  material,  not  to
speak  of  the  dynamic,  cause  of  a morbid  digestion  or  nutrition  be
understood  by  what  chemistry  finds  in  the  gastric  juice,  so  that  a sure
method  of  treatment  could  be  founded  thereon  ? Nothing  could  be
more  futile  than  any  expectation  of  this  kind.

In  like  manner,  in  the  chemical  constituents  shown  by  vegetable
chemistry  to  exist  in  plants,  even  in  such  as  possess  the  most  powerful
medicinal  properties,  there  is  nothing  either  to  smell  or  taste  which  can
express  or  reveal  those  so  varied  actions,  which,  experience  shows  us,
each  of  these  medicinal  substances  is  capable  of  performing,  in  altering
the  state  of  an  individual,  whether  in  health  or  disease.


14-


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


The  water  or  oil  distilled  from  the  plant,  or  the  resin  obtained
from  it,  is  certainly  not  its  active  principle;  this  only  resided,  invisible
to  the  eye,  in  those  parts  now  extracted  from  it — the  resin,  the  oil,  the
distilled  water,  and  is  in  itself  perfectly  imperceptible  to  our  senses.
Its  effects  are  manifested  to  our  senses  only  when  this  distilled  water,
this  oil,  this  resin,  or,  still  better,  the  plant  itself,  is  taken  by  the  living
individual,  and  when  they  act  dynamically  on  the  susceptible  spiritual-
animal  organism  in  a spiritual  manner.

Moreover,  what  medicinal  action  do  the  other  parts  which  che-
mistry extracts  from  plants  indicate,  the  vegetable  fibrine,  the  earths,
the  salts,  the  gums,  the  albumen,  &c.,  which,  with  few  exceptions,  are
found  almost  uniformly  in  all  plants,  even  those  most  opposite  in  their
medicinal  effects  ? Will  the  small  quantity  of  oxalate  of  lime  which
chemistry  extracts  from  rhubarb-root  account  for  this  medicine  pro-
ducing in  healthy  individuals  such  a morbidly  altered  sleep,  and  such  a
curious  heat  of  the  body  without  thirst,  and  for  its  curing  similar
morbid  states  ?

What  information  can  all  these  parts,  though  analysed  ever  so
carefully  by  chemistry,  give  us,  relative  to  the  power  of  each  individual
plant  virtually  to  alter  the  health  of  the  living  human  organism  in  the
most  peculiar  and  various  manners  ?

The  chemist  Gren,  who  knew  nothing  about  medicine,  in  his
Pharmacology , which  is  full  of  the  most  reckless  assertions,  thus  holds
forth  to  physicians  : u The  knowledge  of  the  principles  contained  in
medicines,  which  chemistry  gives  us,  can  alone  determine  the  efficacy
of  remedies/’

Knowledge  indeed ! And  what  knowledge  does  chemistry  give  us
with  respect  to  the  inanimate,  speechless,  component  parts  of  medi-
cines ? Answer : It  merely  teaches  their  chemical  signification  ; it
teaches  us  that  they  act  so  and  so  with  chemical  reagents,  and  hence
are  called  gum,  resin,  albumen,  mucus,  earths  and  salts  of  one  kind  or
another  ; matters  of  vastly  little  importance  to  the  physician.  These
appellations  tell  us  nothing  of  the  changes  in  the  health  of  the  living
man  which  may  be  effected  by  the  plant  or  mineral,  each  differing  from
the  other  in  its  peculiar  invisible,  internal,  essential  nature ; and  yet,
forsooth,  the  whole  healing  art  depends  on  this  alone  ! The  manifesta-
tions of  the  active  spirit  of  each  individual  remedial  agent  during  its  medi-
cinal employment  on  human  beings  can  alone  inform  the  physician  of
the  sphere  of  action  of  the  medicine  as  regards  its  curative  power.
The  name  of  each  of  its  chemical  constituents,  which  in  most  plants
are  almost  identical,  teaches  him  nothing  on  this  point.

That  calomel,  for  example,  consists  of  from  six  to  eight  parts  of
mercury,  united  by  sublimation  with  one  of  muriatic  acid — that  when
rubbed  up  with  lime-water  it  becomes  black,  chemistry  can  teach  us  ;
but  that  this  preparation  can  cause  in  the  human  being  the  well-known
salivation  with  its  peculiar  odour ; of  this  chemistry,  as  chemistry,
knows  nothing  ; this  no  chemistry  can  teach  us.  This  dynamic  rela-
tion of  calomel  to  the  human  organism  can  only  be  learned  from
experience,  derived  from  its  medicinal  employment,  and  from  its
internal  administration,  when  it  acts  dynamically  and  specifically  on


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


i5


the  living  organism;  and  thus  it  is  only  actual  experiment  and  observa-
tion relative  to  the  action  of  medicinal  substances  on  the  living  human
subject  that  can  determine  their  dynamical  relations  to  the  organism,  in
other  words,  their  medicinal  properties  ; but  this  chemistry,  in  whose
operations  merely  inorganic  substances  are  brought  to  act  upon  one
another,  can  never  do.

Chemistry  can,  indeed,  give  us  the  useless  information  that  the
leaves  of  belladonna  are  very  similar  in  their  chemical  composition  to
cabbage  and  to  a great  many  other  vegetables,  as  they*contain  albumen,
gelatine,  extractive  matter,  green  resin,  vegetable  acid,  potash,  calca-
reous and  siliceous  earths,  & c.  ; but  if,  as  Gren  asserts,  the  knowledge
of  the  principal  constituents,  so  far  as  they  are  known  to  chemistry  by
means  of  its  reagents,  that  is,  chemically,  suffices  to  determine  the
medicinal  properties  of  substances,  it  follows  that  a dish  of  belladonna
must  be  just  as  wholesome  and  innocent  an  article  of  food  as  one  of
cabbage.  Is  that  what  the  chemist  means  ? And  yet  the  chemistry
which  presumes  to  determine  the  medicinal  properties  of  natural
substances  from  their  chemical  composition  cannot  avoid  asserting  that
the  same  medicinal  powers  are  possessed  by  substances  which  are
proved  by  analysis  to  consist  of  the  same  constituents ; it  cannot
consequently  help  declaring  cabbage  and  belladonna  to  be  equally
innocent  vegetables  or  equally  poisonous  plants,  thereby  showing,  as
clear  as  day,  the  absurdity  of  its  presumption,  and  its  incompetence  to
judge  of  the  medicinal  powers  of  natural  substances.

Do  Gren  and  his  followers  not  perceive  that  chemistry  can  only
give  chemical  information  with  respect  to  the  presence  of  this  or  that
material  component  part  of  any  physical  body,  and  that  these  are
consequently  to  chemistry  merely  chemical  substances  ? Chemical
analysis  can  tell  us  their  action  with  chemical  reagents,  and  this  alone
is  its  proper  domain;  but  it  can  show  us  neither  in  its  dissolving  nor
digesting  alembics,  neither  in  its  retorts  nor  yet  in  its  receivers,  what
dynamical  changes  any  single  medicine,  when  brought  in  contact  with
the  living  organism,  can  produce.

Each  science  can  only  judge  and  throw  light  on  subjects  within  its
own  department ; it  is  folly  to  expect  from  one  science  information
upon  matters  belonging  to  other  sciences.

The  science  of  hydrostatics  enables  us  to  determine  with  precision
the  specific  gravity  of  fine  silver  in  comparison  with  that  of  fine  gold  ;
but  it  presumes  not  to  fix  the  different  commercial  value  of  the  one  in
comparison  with  that  of  the  other.  Whether  gold  have  twelve,  thir-
teen, or  fourteen  times  the  value  of  its  weight  of  silver  in  Europe  or  in
China  hydrostatics  can  never  tell  ; it  is  only  the  scarcity  of,  and  the
demand  for,  the  one  or  the  other  that  can  determine  their  relative
mercantile  value.

In  like  manner,  indispensable  as  a knowledge  of  the  particular  form
of  plant Sj  and  the  power  of  distinguishing  them  by  their  external  appear -
ance , which  constitutes  botany , is  to  the  true  farmer,  yet  botany  will
never  teach  him  whether  a given  plant  is  suitable  or  the  reverse  as  food
for  his  sheep  or  swine,  nor  will  it  inform  him  what  grain  or  what  root
ia~best  for  making  his  horse  strong  or  for  fattening  his  ox  ; the  botanical


16  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF

systems  of  neither  Tournefort,  nor  Haller,  nor  LiMNiEUS,  nor
Jussieu,  can  tell  him  this  ; pure,  careful,  comparative  trials  and  experi-
ments on  the  different  animals  themselves  can  alone  give  him  the
requisite  information.

Each  science  can  decide  on  such  matters  only  as  are  within  its  own
province.

What  does  chemistry  find  in  the  native  magnet  and  the  artificia.
magnetic  rod  ? In  the  former  it  discovers  nothing  but  a rich  iron  ore,
intimately  combined  with  silica  and  a small  quantity  of  manganese  ; in
the  latter,  nothing  but  pure  iron.  No  chemical  reagent  can  discover,
by  the  most  minute  chemical  analysis,  the  slightest  trace  of  the  mighty
magnetic  power  in  either  the  one  or  the  other.

But  another  science,  natural  philosophy,  shows  in  its  experiments
the  presence  of  this  wonderful  power  in  the  native  magnet  and  magne-
tized steel,  as  also  its  physical  relation  to  the  external  world,  its  power
of  attracting  iron  (nickel,  cobalt),  the  direction  of  one  end  of  the
magnetic  needle  towards  the  north,  its  deviation  from  the  north  pole  in
different  decenniums  and  in  different  regions  of  the  globe,  at  one  time
towards  the  west,  at  another  towards  the  east,  and  the  variety  in  its  dip
in  different  degrees  of  latitude.

The  science  of  natural  philosophy  then  is  capable  of  telling  some-
thing more  respecting  the  magnet,  and  of  discovering  more  of  its
powers,  than  chemistry  can,  namely,  its  magnetic  power  in  a natural
philosophical  point  of  view.

But  the  knowledge  of  what  is  worth  knowing  about  the  magnet  is
not  exhausted  by  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy ; neither  of  these
two  sciences  can  detect  anything  in  it  beyond  what  belongs  to  their
own  province.  Neither  the  range  of  the  chemical  nor  that  of  the
physical  sciences  can  inform  us  what  mighty,  what  peculiar,  what
characteristic  effects  the  magnetic  power  is  capable  of  producing  on  the
health  of  the  human  body  when  brought  into  contact  with  it,  and  what
curative  powers  peculiar  to  itself  it  possesses  in  diseases  in  which  it  is
suitable  ; of  this  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy  are  equally  ignorant ;
this  subject  they  must  both  abandon  to  the  experiments  and  observa-
tions of  the  physician.

Now,  as  no  science  can  pretend  to  that  which  can  only  be
explained  by  another  science  without  rendering  itself  ridiculous,  I
hope  that  medical  men  will  gradually  have  the  sense  to  see  that  the
proper  province  of  chemistry  is  merely  to  separate  the  chemical  consti-
tuents of  substances  from  each  other,  and  to  combine  them  together
again  ( thus  affording  technical  aid  to  pharmacy)  ; I hope  that  they  will
commence  to  see  that  medicines  do  not  exist  for  chemistry  as  medi-
cines (i.  e.  agents  capable  of  dynamically  altering  the  health  of  an
individual),  but  merely  in  so  far  as  they  are  chemical  substances  (/.  e.
in  so  far  as  their  component  parts  are  to  be  regarded  in  a chemical
light)  ; that  chemistry  consequently  can  only  give  chemical  informa-
tion with  respect  to  medicinal  substances,  but  cannot  tell  what  spiritual,
dynamical  changes  they  are  capable  of  effecting  in  the  health  of  the
human  being,  nor  what  medicinal  and  curative  powers  each  particular
drug  possesses  and  is  capable  of  exercising  in  the  living  organism.


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


i7


Finally,  from  the  fourth  impure  source  flowed  the  clinical  and  special
therapeutic  indications  for  employment  ( ab  usu  in  morhis)  into  the
ordinary  materia  medica.

This,  the  most  common  of  all  the  sources  of  the  materia  medica
whence  a knowledge  of  the  curative  powers  of  medicines  was  sought  to
be  obtained,  is  what  is  termed  the  practice  of  physic,  namely,  the
employment  of  medicines  in  actual  diseases , whereby  it  was  imagined  that
information  would  be  obtained  with  respect  to  the  diseases  in  which
the  different  medicines  were  useful.

This  source  has  been  resorted  to  from  the  very  beginning  of  the
medical  art,  but  has  from  time  to  time  been  relinquished  in  order  to
try  and  hit  upon  some  more  profitable  mine  for  the  knowledge
required ; but  it  was  always  had  recourse  to  again,  as  it  appeared  the
most  natural  method  of  learning  the  powers  of  medicines,  and  their
exact  uses.

Let  us  grant,  for  a moment,  that  this  were  the  true  way  to  dis-
cover their  curative  virtues  ; one  would,  at  least,  have  expected  that
these  experiments  at  the  sick-bed  would  have  been  made  with  single,
simple  drugs  only ; because,  by  mixing  several  together,  it  would
never  be  known  to  which  among  them  the  result  was  to  be  ascribed.
But  in  the  records  of  medicine  we  meet  with  few  or  no  cases  in  which
this  so  natural  idea  was  ever  carried  into  execution,  viz.  to  give  only
one  medicine  at  once  in  a disease  in  order  to  be  certain  whether  it
could  produce  a perfect  cure  in  that  disease.

It  accordingly  happened  that,  in  almost  every  instance,  a mixture  of
medicines  was  employed  in  diseases ; and  thus  it  was  not  and  could
never  be  ascertained  for  certain , when  the  treatment  was  successful,  to
which  ingredient  of  the  mixture  the  favourable  result  was  due  \ in  a
word,  nothing  at  all  was  learned  from  this  method.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  medicinal  mixture  proved  of  no  avail,  or,  as  usually
happened,  did  harm,  just  as  little  could  it  be  learned  from  this  result
to  which  of  all  the  medicines  the  bad  issue  was  attributable.

I know  not  whether  it  was  an  affectation  of  learning  which  induced
physicians  always  to  administer  medicines  mixed  together  in  prescrip-
tions as  they  are  called,  or  whether  it  was  their  anxiety  which  made
them  fancy  that  a single  remedy  was  too  powerless  and  was  not
sufficient  to  cure  the  disease.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  folly  of  prescribing
several  remedies  together  has  prevailed  from  the  remotest  antiquity  ;
and  immediately  after  Hippocrates’  time  diseases  were  treated  with  a
mixture  of  medicines  instead  of  with  one  single  medicine.  Among  the
many  writings  falsely  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  of  which  the  greater
part  were  written  under  his  name,  shortly  after  his  death,  principally  by
his  two  sons,  Draco  and  Thessalus,  as  also  by  their  sons,  Hippo-
crates the  third  and  fourth,  and  among  those  works  fabricated  by  the
Alexandrians  Artemidorus  Capiton  and  his  kinsman  Dioscorides,
in  the  name  of  Hippocrates,  there  is  not  one  practical  treatise  in
which  the  prescriptions  for  diseases  do  not  consist  of  several  medicines,
just  as  in  the  prescriptions  of  their  immediate  followers,  those  of  more
modern  times,  and  those  of  the  physicians  of  the  present  day.

VOL.  11.  2


i8


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


But  that  from  the  employment  of  mixed  prescriptions  it  cannot  be
at  all  ascertained  what  each  individual  remedy  is  capable  of  effecting  in
diseases,  consequently,  that  no  materia  medica  can  be  founded  thereon,
was  first  commenced  to  be  perceived  by  physicians  of  later  times ;
whereupon  several  zealously  set  about  prescribing  in  a simple  manner  in
order  to  ascertain  experimentally  in  what  diseases  this  or  that  medicine
was  efficacious.  They  also  published  cures  which  were  said  to  have
been  effected  by  a single  simple  remedy.

But  how  was  the  execution  of  this  apparently  rational  idea  carried
out  ? We  shall  see.

In  order  to  do  so  I shall  just  run  over  what  is  to  be  found  on  this
subject  in  the  three  volumes  of  Huf eland' s ’Journal  for  1813,  1814,
and  1815,  and  shall  show  that  the  power  of  curing  such  and  such
diseases  has  merely  been  attributed  to  single  drugs,  without  their  having
been  employed  simply  and  alone.*  Consequently,  this  is  a new  piece
of  fallacy  in  the  place  of  the  old  one  with  its  acknowledged  composite
prescriptions.

That  ulceration  of  the  lungs  has  been  cured  by  phellandrium
aquaticum  is  pretended  to  be  shown  in  the  history  of  a case  (Huf eland' s
Journal , August,  1813),  whereby  it  appears  (p.  no)  that  tussilago ,
senega , and  Iceland  moss  were  used  at  the  same  time.  With  what  right
can  the  advocate  for  this  mode  of  treatment  (which  was  so  complex)
exclaim,  in  conclusion  : — cc  I am  convinced  that  the  man  owes  the
recovery  of  his  health  to  this  remedy  alone  ?”

Such  was  the  sort  of  convictions  that  were  produced  by  the  impure
source  of  ascribing  virtues  to  simple  medicinal  substances  in  the
materia  medica  !

In  like  manner  (ibid,,  February,  1813),  a case  of  inveterate  syphilis,

* It  is  true  one  single  individual  in  all  these  three  volumes,  Ebers,  instituted
experiments  with  one  single  remedy  only,  in  various  diseases  (Huf eland' s Journal ,
September  and  October,  1813) — with  arsenic  alone.  But  what  sort  of  experiments?
Such  as  could  throw  no  light  on  the  curative  powers  of  this  substance.  In  the  first
place,  the  cases  of  intermittent  fever  in  which  he  employed  arsenic  were  not  minutely
described,  and  then  the  dose  was  such  that  it  must  have  done  much  more  harm  than
good.  However,  his  candid  acknowledgment  of  the  harm  it  did  is  infinitely  more
praiseworthy  than  the  many  alleged  cases  of  cure  recorded  by  others,  in  which
arsenic  in  the  largest  doses  is  said  to  have  done  nothing  but  good,  and  never  the
least  harm.  Ebers  affirms  that  the  doses  he  administered  were  so  small,  that,  in
most  cases,  they  did  not  amount  to  one  grain.  To  one  patient  he  only  gave  -|ths  of
a grain  within  the  twenty-four  hours  (p.  55),  and  her  life  was  put  in  danger,  whereby
it  may  be  perceived  that  even  this  minute  dose  is  capable  of  producing  the  most
fearful  effects.  Honestly- observing  physicians  have  long  known  this  ; but  Ebers,  led
astray  by  the  materia  medica,  fancied  that  |ths  of  a grain  in  twenty-four  hours  was  a
very  small  dose  of  arsenic.  Pure  experience  tells  us  that  it  is  a monstrous , a most
unjustifiable  dose  in  diseases!  When  was  it  ever  shown  that  arsenic  should  be
employed  in  doses  of  a grain,  or  even  of  a tenth  of  a grain,  in  diseases  ? Many
experiments  with  small  and  still  smaller  doses  (more  and  more  diluted  solutions)
have  shown  that  one  drop  which  contains  the  decillionth  of  a grain  of  arsenic  in  solu-
tion, is,  in  many  cases,  much  too  strong  a dose,  even  when  arsenic  is  exactly  suited  for
the  case  of  disease.  Had  he  known  this  he  \Vould  not  have  been  astonished  that  his
•|ths  of  a grain  put  his  patient’s  life  in  peril.  Thus,  from  these  trials,  which  are
otherwise  evidently  very  honest,  nothing  can  be  learnt,  not  even  what  arsenic  cannot
cure ; for  the  enormous  doses  effectually  prevented  any  good  effect  from  taking
place.


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


which  would  not  yield  to  various  mercurial  preparations  (it  was,  in  fact,
a mercurial  disease  !),  was  cured  in  four  weeks  by  ammonia , along  with
which  nothing,  actually  nothing,  was  employed — except  camphor  and
opium / — Is  that  nothing?

An  epilepsy  ( ibid .,  1813,  March)  was  cured  in  fourteen  months  by
valerian  alone,  nothing  else  being  used  at  the  same  time — but  oleum
tartari  per  deliquium , tinctura  colocynthidis , and  baths  of  acorus  calamus ,
mint,  and  other  aromatic  substances  (pp.  52,  53).  Is  that  nothing  f

In  another  case  of  epilepsy  (ibid.,  p.  57)  valerian  alone  effected  a
cure,  but  there  were  employed,  besides,  an  ounce  and  a half  of  pome-
granate leaves.  Is  that  nothing  P

Madness  with  nymphomania  is  said  to  have  been  cured  by  drinking
cold  water  alone  (ibid.,  1814,  January).  But  infusion  of  valerian  and
tinctura  china  Whyttii  (p.  12)  were  very  prudently  administered  along
with  it  in  order  that  the  action  of  the  cold  water  should  be  so  com-
pletely masked  as  to  be  unrecognisable;  and  the  same  happened  in  the
case  of  another  patient,  who  used  these  powerful  adjuvants  only  less
frequently  (p.  16).

Tymon  (ibid.,  1814,  August,  p.  38)  professes  to  have  found  bleeding
to  syncope  a specific  in  hydrophobia.  But,  see  ! he  gave  at  the  same
time  300  drops  of  laudanum,  in  clysters,  every  two  hours,  and  rubbed  in  a
drachm  of  mercurial  ointment  every  three  hours.  Does  this  prove  vene-
section to  be  the  only  true  remedy  for  hydrophobia  ?

In  like  manner  (ibid.,  1814,  April)  a venesection,  followed  by  an
hour  of  syncope,  is  said  to  have  cured,  solely  and  specifically,  a case  of
hydrophobia;  at  the  same  time  (p.  102),  however,  there  were  only
administered  strong  doses  of  opium , James’s  powder,  and  calomel  till
salivation  was  produced.  Is  that  nothing  ?

If  the  case  (ibid.,  1815,  July,  pp.  8 — 16)  is  to  be  a proof  of  the
efficacy  of  bleeding  to  syncope  in  already  developed  hydrophobia,  as  the
author  would  have  it,  cantharides  should  not  have  been  applied,  and
still  less  should  mercurial  ointment  have  been  rubbed  in  every  two  hours,
and  large  doses  of  calomel  and  opium  given  until  violent  salivation  super-
vened. It  is  ludicrous  when  the  author  adds  (p.  20)  that  u the  calomel
was  scarcely  necessary/’

This  art  of  surreptitiously  obtaining  for  a favourite  remedy  the
merit  of  a cure,  when  the  other  equally  powerful  drugs  employed
might  at  all  events  claim  a share,  is  an  established  custom  with  ordi-
nary physicians,  it  being  particularly  requested  that  the  courteous
reader  will  shut  his  eyes  and  allow  the  author  to  designate  all  the
secondary  means  employed  inactive .

A case  of  tetanus  is  reported  (ibid.,  1814,  September,  p.  119)  to
have  been  cured  by  cold  water  affusion  alone.  It  is  true  opium  was  at  the
same  time  employed  ; a as,  however,  the  patient  himself  attributed  the
amendment  to  the  affusion  alone,  to  the  affusion  should  the  cure  be  ascribed
This  is  what  I call  a pure  source  at  which  to  learn  the  virtues  of
drugs !

In  a similar  manner  {ibid.,  1815,  September,  p.  128)  the  healing
power  of  potash  in  croup  is  established  ;*  but  along  with  it  were  used

* One  case,  in  which  potash  is  said  to  have  been  efficacious  when  administered


26  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OP

other  very  powerful  substances  ; for  example,  at  the  commencement  of
the  (supposed?)  disease  two  children  were  relieved  by  salt  of  tartar  in
an  infusion  of  senega  root.  Is  what  properly  pertains  to  two  substances
to  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  but  one,  the  potash  ? According  to
what  hitherto  unheard-of  system  of  logic  ?

In  like  manner  graphites  ( ibid .,  1815,  November,  p.  40)  is  said  to
have  cured  a large  number  of  old  fistulous  ulcers , and  yet  corrosive
sublimate  was  in  the  mixture ! The  explanation  in  the  note,  that
sublimate  had  already  been  tried  in  vain,  is  of  no  avail  here  : it  was  not
given  alone , but  in  combination  with  opium,  a quantity  of  decoctions  of
various  woods , and  the  favourite  china  factitia ; it  was  consequently
greatly  or  completely  destroyed  by  the  astringent  parts  of  these  acces-
sory medicines,  just  as  other  metallic  salts  are  thereby  destroyed  and
decomposed,  and  consequently  it  could  not  demonstrate  its  curative
powers  in  such  a mixture.  Still  less  can  the  apology,  in  the  same
note,  for  the  addition  of  the  mercurial  to  the  graphites  be  received,
u that  the  sublimate  was  merely  to  serve  as  an  adjuvant  here.”  Were
this  the  fact,  then  must  medicines  act  agreeably  to  the  commands  of
the  prescribing  physician,  not  according  to  their  natural  powers  ; no !
they  must  do  exactly  neither  more  nor  less  than  what  the  physician
commanded  and  permitted  them  to  do.  Can  arrogance  and  presump-
tion be  carried  farther  than  this  ? What  man  of  sound  intellect  can
attribute  such  slavish  obedience  to  medicinal  substances,  which  act
according  to  eternal  laws  ? Did  the  author  wish  to  see  whether
graphites  could  prove  efficacious  by  itself,  and  to  convince  his  readers
of  this,  he  ought  to  have  given  it  alone  : but  if  he  add  to  the  graphites
corrosive  sublimate  this  must  perform  what  corrosive  sublimate  can  and
from  its  very  nature  must , not  what  the  prescribing  physician  pleases
that  it  shall  or  shall  not  do.  Here  again  we  have  a case  from  which
nothing  can  be  learnt.  Graphites  is  represented  as  having  alone
proved  serviceable,  and  yet  that  tremendously  powerful  medicinal
substance,  corrosive  sublimate,  was  used  along  with  it.

The  cure  of  a case  of  florid  pulmonary  consumption  by  means  of  charcoal
powder  is,  if  possible,  still  more  unfounded.  Here  the  limewood  char-
coal was  never  employed  alone,  but  always  in  conjunction  with  foxglove.
So  then  the  foxglove  in  the  mixture  has  no  action  ? None  at  all  ? and
yet  a medicine  of  such  mighty  power ! Do  the  authors  of  such
observations  deceive  themselves,  or  do  they  mean  to  make  game  of  us  ?

Angelica  root  is  said  (ibid.,  1815,  April,  p.  19)  to  have  cured  a
dropsy,  properly  speaking  an  unknown  case  of  disease  with  swelling
(The  quid-pro- quo- giving  pathology  collects  together  all  diseases  having
the  most  distant  resemblance  in  this  respect  under  the  name  of
“dropsy.”) . But,  no!  tincture  of  opium,  cether,  and,  finally,  calamus,
were  used  in  addition  to  the  tincture  of  angelica.  Can  any  rational
man  lay  to  the  account  of  the  angelica  alone  the  issue  of  this  case  ?

No  one  will  deny  that  the  mineral  water  of  Driburg  has  great
medicinal  powers,  but  when  the  cures  related  in  Hufeland’s  Journal,
1815,  April,  pp.  75,  80,  82,  are  ascribed  to  it  alone,  we  must  declare

alone  was  that  of  a child  in  the  country }<which  the  author  did  not  see,  and  which,  from
the  description  alone,  he  suspected  to  be  this  disease.


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


21


these  statements  to  be  false,  as  so  many  other  strong  medicines  were  used
along  with  it ; nor  can  the  pretended  cure  of  a case  of  spasms  in  the
stomach  with  frequent  vomiting  by  this  water  (pp.  85  to  93),  nor  that
of  hypochondriasis  and  hysteria  (pp.  94  to  97),  prove  anything  in
favour  of  the  curative  virtue  of  Driburg  water,  partly  on  account  of  the
ambiguity  and  vagueness  of  these  two  names  of  diseases,  but  princi-
pally on  account  of  the  constant  employment  of  other  medicines  at  the
same  time.  Were  we  to  receive  these  cases  as  proofs  of  the  efficacy  of
the  mineral  water,  we  might,  with  equal  justice,  give  to  a single  man
the  credit  of  having  alone  lifted  a large  rock,  without  reckoning  his
many  active  co-operators  and  the  helpful  machines  employed.  It
would  be  ridiculous  to  ascribe  to  one  only  that  which  was  done  by  all
in  conjunction.

These  are  a few  samples  from  among  the  multitude  I might  adduce
from  the  writings  of  the  more  modern  physicians,  samples  of  nomi-
nally simple  treatment  of  diseases,  each  of  which  was  said  to  have  been
cured  with  one  single  remedy — in  order  to  obtain  at  last  a knowledge
of  its  true  powers, — but  along  with  which  there  was  always  employed
some  medicine  or  other  often  more  powerful  than  itself ; and  although
the  physician  should  protest  ever  so  vehemently  that  “ that  one  medi-
cine ” to  which  he  would  fain  attach  all  the  glory  of  the  cure,  u alone
did  it , he  firmly  believes ,”  cc  the  patient  himself  ascribed  the  good  effects
to  this  remedy  alone,”  cc  to  it  alone  he  entrusted  the  cure”  “ he  only
employed  the  second  medicine  as  an  adjuvant,”  or,  u it  had  once  before
been  employed  without  effect  \ 3 yet  all  these  shufflings  will  not  avail
to  persuade  a rational  man  that  the  cure  was  owing  to  that  medicine
alone  to  which  the  partiality  of  the  physician  would  award  the  honour
of  the  cure,  if  other  remedies,  or  even  one  single  other  remedy,  have
been  used  in  the  treatment.  It  must  ever  remain  untrue  that  the  cure
is  due  to  this  remedy  alone  5 and  the  materia  medica  which  shall
ascribe  such  a curative  power  to  this  remedy,  on  the  authority  of  such
an  impure  observer  as  this,  propagates  sheer  falsehoods  which  must
inevitably  be  fraught  with  the  most  unhappy  consequences  to
humanity.

I will  not  deny  that  the  cures  of  which  I have  just  adduced
examples  did  approach  towards  simplicity.  They  certainly  came  nearer ,
much  nearer  to  the  treatment  of  a disease  with  one  single  remedy
(without  which  mode  of  proceeding  we  can  never  be  sure  that  the
medicine  was  the  real  instrument  in  effecting  the  cure),  than  those  of
ordinary  routine  practitioners,  who  make  it  a glory  to  administer  to
their  patients  several  complex  prescriptions,  one  after  the  other,  or  even
to  prescribe  daily  one  or  two  fresh  mixtures.

But  to  have  approached  merely  nearer  to  the  administration  of  single
remedies  implies  that  the  true  mark  has  been  actually  and  completely
missed . Were  it  not  so,  then  might  we  congratulate  a person  on  his
good  fortune  whose  number  in  the  lottery  differed  by  a single  cipher
from  that  which  won  the  highest  prize  ; or  a sportsman  whose  shot
has  gone  within  a hair’s  breadth  of  his  game ; or  a shipwrecked
mariner  who  would  have  escaped  shipwreck  had  he  been  a single
finger’s  breadth  farther  from  the  fatal  rock*


22


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


What  credence  do  the  assertions  in  the  ordinary  materia  medica
with  respect  to  the  virtues  of  drugs  ab  usu  in  morbis  deserve  ? What
shall  we  say  to  its  recommendation  of  drugs  in  this  or  that  disease  when
we  know  that  the  materia  medica  has  obtained  its  information  there-
upon from  such  observations  ; sometimes  indeed  merely  from  the  titles
of  the  recorded  observations  of  physicians  who  scarcely  ever  treated  with
one  single  remedy,  but  generally  with  a mixture  of  drugs,  whereby  as
much  uncertainty  existed  as  to  which  among  them  the  result  was  to  be
ascribed  to,  as  if,  like  the  routine  practitioner,  they  had  prescribed  a
great  hotch-potch  of  medicines  ? What  shall  we  say  to  the  curative
powers  ascribed  with  so  much  confidence  by  the  materia  medica  to
simple  medicinal  substances,  seeing  that  these  were  almost  never
employed  singly?  We  can  say  naught  but  this  : among  a thousand
such  allegations  and  commendations  scarcely  one  deserves  credence,
whether  they  refer  to  general  therapeutical  or  to  clinical  or  special
therapeutical  matters.  Hence  it  is  undeniable  that  to  ascribe  any
powers  to  a medicinal  substance  which  was  never  tested  purely , that  A,
unless  along  with  others , consequently  was  as  good  as  never  tested  at  all , is
to  be  guilty  of  deception  and  falsehood.

# *

*

cc  What  if  all  physicians  were  to  agree  from  this  time  henceforth  to
turn  over  a new  leaf,  and  to  prescribe  in  every  disease  only  one  single
simple  medicine  ? Would  we  not,  by  this  means,  ascertain  what  each
medicine  is  capable  of  curing  ?”

This  will  never  happen  as  long  as  a Hufeland  lives,  who  con-
siders the  statements  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica,  though  derived
from  the  impurest  sources,  to  be  truths,  and  seriously  defends  the
employment  of  a mixture  of  many  medicines  in  diseases,  imagining
that  “ one  medicine  cannot  suffice  for  all  the  indications  in  a disease  ;
several  must  be  given  at  once  in  order  to  meet  the  several  indications.”
This  statement,  as  pernicious  as  it  is  well  meant,  rests  upon  two
perfectly  erroneous  premisses,  the  first , whereby  it  is  taken  for  granted
iC  that  the  baseless  declarations  with  respect  to  the  virtues  of  simple
drugs  in  practical  works,  and  in  the  materia  medica  compiled  from
them,  were  well  founded  ; and  consequently,  that  they  were  really
capable  of  meeting  the  indications  presented  by  the  case  in  which  they
were  prescribed  ” (which,  as  we  have  shown,  and  shall  again  show,  is
false)  ; the  second , cf  that  several  medicines  should  be  prescribed  at  once
in  order  to  satisfy  the  several  indications  in  a disease,  for  this  reason,
because  a single  medicine  can  do  little  more  than  respond  to  a single
indication,  but  not  to  several  or  many.”

But  what  does  the  ordinary  materia  medica  know  about  the  vast
sphere  of  action  of  a simple  medicinal  substance,  that  materia  medica
which,  from  impure  observations  of  the  result  of  the  employment  of
several  medicines  in  one  disease,  attributes  to  a drug  whatever  powers  it
has  pleased  the  physician  arbitrarily  to  ascribe  to  a single  ingredient  of
the  mixture  ; which  never  subjected  the  powers  of  a simple  medicinal
substance  to  a pure  trial,  that  is,  on  a healthy  individual  not  affected
with  any  symptoms  of  disease  ? Does  that  mixture  of  falsehoods  and  half
truths  which  the  materia  medica  has  scraped  together  from  prescribers


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


23


of  compound  medicines,  in  diseases  of  which  merely  the  pathological
name  but  no  accurate  description  is  given, — does  this  comprise  the
whole  extent  of  the  sphere  of  action  which  the  Almighty  has  bestowed
on  His  instruments  of  cure  ? No  ! He  has  implanted  in  His  healing
instruments  undiscovered  (but  certainly  discoverable)  miracles  of  His
wisdom  and  goodness,  in  order  that  they  may  prove  beneficial  and
helpful  to  His  beloved  children  of  mankind,  in  a far  greater  measure
than  was  ever  dreamt  of  by  the  short-sighted  materia  medica  of  the  old
school.

*

But  though  it  is  certain  that  a single  medicine  at  once  is  always
sufficient  for  the  rational  and  appropriate  treatment  of  a disease,  I am
far  from  advising  the  medical  world,  on  that  account , to  prescribe
simply,  that  is,  a single  medicine  in  each  disease,  in  order  to  ascertain
what  medicine  is  useful  in  this , what  in  that , disease , so  that  thereupon  a
materia  medica,  or  treatise  on  the  virtues  of  drugs  ah  usu  in  morbis ,
should  be  formed.

Far  be  it  from  me  to  advise  anything  of  the  kind,  notwithstanding
that  this  idea  might  seem,  and  has  seemed,  to  ordinary  physicians  to
promise  the  best  results.

No ! not  the  slightest  useful  addition  can  be  either  now  or  ever
made  to  our  knowledge  of  the  powers  of  drugs,  with  regard  to  their
usus  in  morbis , from  observations  on  cases  of  disease  even  with  single
medicines.

This  were  just  as  foul  a source  as  all  the  others  above  mentioned
hitherto  employed.  No  useful  truth,  with  respect  to  the  curative
powers  of  each  individual  medicine,  could  flow  from  it.

I shall  explain  myself.

Such  a mode  of  testing  medicines  in  diseases  were  only  possible  in
two  ways.  Either  a single  drug  must  be  tried  in  all  diseases  in  order
to  ascertain  in  which  of  them  it  is  efficacious,  or  all  drugs  must  be  tried
in  a particular  disease  in  order  to  ascertain  which  remedy  can  cure  it
most  certainly  and  most  perfectly.

And,  first,  with  regard  to  the  latter  of  these  ways  and  from  it
may  be  inferred  what  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  former.

By  an  infinite  number  of  trials  of  all  imaginable  simple  substances
used  in  domestic  practice,  in  a well-defined  disease  which  shall  constantly
present  the  same  characters , a true,  certainly  efficacious,  specific  remedy
for  the  greater  number  of  individuals  and  their  friends  suffering  from  the
same  disease  might  certainly  be  discovered,  though  only  casu  fortuito.

But  who  knows  how  many  centuries  the  inhabitants  of  deep  valleys
were  forced  to  suffer  from  their  goitres  before  accident,  after  thousands
of  drugs  and  domestic  nostrums  had  been  tried  in  vain,  put  it  into  the
head  of  an  individual,  that  roasted  sponge  was  the  best  thing  for  it ; at
all  events  it  was  not  until  the  thirteenth  century  that  Arnault  of
Villeneuve  noticed  its  power  of  curing  goitre.

It  is  well  known  that  for  many  years  after  its  first  invasion  the
venereal  disease  was  treated  in  the  most  unsuccessful  manner  by  the
physicians  of  the  schools,  by  starvation,  by  purgatives,  and  other  useless


24


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


remedies  which  had  been  employed  to  combat  the  Arabian  leprosy,
until  at  last,  after  many  attempts  and  repeated  trials  of  an  innumerable
multitude  of  things  by  empirical  physicians  on  many  thousands  of
patients  who  sought  their  aid,  mercury  was  hit  upon,  and  proved  itself
specific  in  this  dreadful  scourge,  in  spite  of  all  the  violent  theoretical
opposition  of  the  pedantic  physicians  of  the  Arabian  school.

The  intermittent  fever  endemic  in  the  marshy  regions  of  South
America,  which  has  a great  resemblance  to  our  own  marsh  ague , had
long  been  treated  by  the  Peruvians,  probably  after  innumerable  trials  of
other  drugs,  with  cinchona  bark , which  they  found  to  be  the  most
efficacious  remedy,  and  which  was  first  made  known  by  them  as  a
febrifuge  to  Europeans  in  the  year  1638.

The  bad  consequences  resulting  from  blows,  falls,  bruises  and
strains  were  long  endured  ere  chance  revealed  to  the  labouring  classes,
who  principally  suffered  from  such  accidents,  the  specific  virtues  of
arnica  in  such  cases  ; at  least  Franz  Joel  was  the  first  who,  in  the
sixteenth  century,  makes  mention  of  its  virtues,  and,  in  the  eighteenth
century,  they  were  more  particularly  described  by  J.  M.  Fehr  and
J.  D.  Gohl  after  they  had  become  generally  recognised.

Thus,  after  thousands  upon  thousands  of  blind  trials  with  innu-
merable substances  upon,  perhaps,  millions  of  individuals,  the  suitable,
the  specific  remedy  is  at  last  discovered  by  accident.  In  order  to
discover  the  remedies  for  the  few  maladies  mentioned  above  there  was
no  necessity  for  the  employment  on  the  part  of  indolent  man  of  that
reason  and  mature  knowledge  which  the  Almighty  has  given  to  him  in
order  to  enable  him  to  free  himself  from  those  inevitable  natural  and
other  evils  involving  his  health — the  vast  multitude  of  diseases  ; — in
fact,  no  true  medical  knowledge  at  all  was  required.  Mere  experi-
menting with  all  imaginable  substances  which  might  come  into  the  head
or  hands  was  undoubtedly  sufficient  (to  be  sure  after  the  lapse  of
perhaps  hundreds  of  years)  to  enable  him  to  discover,  by  accident,  a
suitable  remedy,  which  never  afterwards  belied  its  specific  power.

These  few  specifics  for  these  few  diseases  constitute  all  the  truth  which
is  contained  in  the  voluminous  materia  medica  in  common  use ; and  these
are,  for  the  most  part,  I may  say,  almost  entirely,  derived  from  domestic
practice.

<c  But  if  specific  remedies,  which  were  always  serviceable  in  the
above  diseases,  were  discovered  in  this  way,  why  could  not  some
remedies  against  all  the  remaining  innumerable  diseases  be  discovered
by  similar  experiments  ?”

Because  all  other  diseases  only  present  themselves  as  individual
cases  of  disease  differing  from  each  other,  or  as  epidemics  which  have
never  been  seen  before,  and  will  never  be  seen  again  in  exactly  the
same  form.  The  constant  specific  remedies  in  those  few  diseases  we
have  mentioned  were  capable  of  being  discovered  by  means  of  trying
every  imaginable  medicinal  substance,  only  because  the  thing  to  be
cured,  the  disease , was  of  a constant  character ; — they  are  diseases  which
always  remain  the  same  ; some  are  produced  by  a miasm  which  continues
the  same  through  all  generations,  such  as  the  venereal  chancre  disease  5
others  have  the  same  exciting  causes , as  the  ague  from  marshy  exhala-


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


25

tions,  the  goitre  of  the  inhabitants  of  deep  valleys  and  their  outlets,
and  the  bruises  caused  by  falls  and  blows.

Had  it  been  possible,  by  blind  trials  of  all  imaginable  substances,  to
discover  accidentally  the  suitable  (specific)  remedy  for  each  of  the
innumerable  other  diseases,  then  must  they  all  have  been  as  constant  in
their  nature,  have  appeared  always  in  the  same  manner  and  in  the
same  form,  have  presented  themselves  always  as  maladies  of  unvarying
character,  like  those  few  diseases  we  have  mentioned.

Only  for  a want  of  a constant  character  can  we  suppose  a supply  of  a
constant  character.

That  it  was  requisite,  in  order  to  find  out  empirically  the  proper
remedy,  that  all  diseases  for  which  the  specific  was  sought  should  be
identical  and  preserve  an  invariable  fixed  character,  appears  not  only  to
have  been  surmised,  but  to  have  been  deeply  felt  by  the  medical
community  of  all  practical  schools.  They  imagined  that  they  must
represent  to  themselves  the  various  diseases  of  humanity  in  certain
fixed  forms  before  they  could  hope  to  discover  for  each  a suitable,
trustworthy  remedy,  and  this  (as  they  knew  no  other  better — scientific
— way  of  finding  the  fitting  medicine  in  diseases)  by  means  of  experi-
menting on  them  with  all  known  drugs, — a method  which  had
succeeded  so  well  in  the  few  fixed  diseases  above  alluded  to.

This  undertaking,  to  arrange  all  other  diseases  in  a certain  fixed
classification,  appeared  to  them  at  first  certainly  very  plausible  and
practicable.

In  order  to  set  about  it,  they  conceived  the  idea  of  considering  all
those  from  among  the  vast  array  of  diseases,  which  bore  any  resemblance
to  each  other,  as  one  and  the  same  disease ; and  having  provided  them
with  a name,  and  given  them  a place  in  their  nosological  works,  they
were  not  deterred  by  the  constantly  occurring  differences  in  their
appearance  from  declaring  them  to  be  definite  forms  of  disease,  which
they  must  always  have  before  them,  in  order  thereby  to  be  able  to
discover,  as  they  flattered  themselves,  a particular  remedy  for  each
disease.

Thus  they  collected  the  innumerable  cases  of  disease  into  a few
arbitrarily  formed  classes  of  diseases,  without  reflecting  that  nature  is
immutable,  whatever  false  notions  men  may  form  of  her.  In  like
manner,  the  polyhedrical  kaleidoscope  held  before  the  eye  arranges  in
one  illusory  picture  a number  of  external  very  different  objects,  but  if
we  look  behind  it  into  nature  we  discover  a great  variety  of  dissimilar
elements.

It  is  no  excuse  to  say  that  this  arbitrary  and  unnatural  amalgama-
tion of  diseases  of  nominally  constant  character  was  framed  with  the
good  intention  of  thus  discovering  for  each  separately  a sure  remedy,
by  means  of  trying  on  them  the  large  number  of  known  drugs,  or  by
accident.  As  was  to  have  been  expected , there  were  found  in  this  way
no  sure  remedial  agents  for  these  artificially  classified  diseases ; for  we
cannot  imagine  any  real  weapons  to  combat  figments  and  phantoms  of
the  imagination  !

* *

All  the  uses  and  virtues , therefore , which  the  materia  medica  ascribes


26


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


to  different  medicines , in  these  surreptitious  and  fictitious  kinds  of  diseases ,
cannot  make  the  slightest  pretence  to  certainty.

What  advantage  has  been  gained  in  so  many  centuries,  with  all  the
host  of  new  and  old  medicines,  over  the  artificial  nosological  classes  of
diseases,  and  names  of  diseases  ? What  remedies  have  been  found  that
can  be  relied  on  ? Is  it  not  now  as  it  was  long  ago, — 2300  years  ago,
-—that  by  the  employment  of  all  the  various  drugs  in  the  innumerable
cases  of  disease  which  occur  in  nature,  some  are,  it  is  true,  much
altered,  generally,  however,  for  the  worse,  and  but  few  are  cured  by
them  ? And  was  it  possible,  even  in  this  enormous  space  of  time,
that  it  could  be  otherwise,  that  it  could  be  improved,  as  long  as  the
old  system  remained  as  it  was,  with  its  imaginary  thing  to  be  cured , and
imaginary  virtues  of  the  instruments  for  effecting  the  cure , and  its  ignorance
of  their  true , pure  action  ? How  could  real Jy  useful  truths  spring  from
the  employment  of  the  latter  against  the  former  ?

Let  it  not  be  alleged,  w that  not  unfrequently  many  a severe
disease — which  some  called  by  one,  others  by  a different  pathological
name — was  cured  as  if  by  a miracle,  by  a simple  domestic  remedy,  or  by
some  medicine  or  prescription  which  accidentally  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  physician. ”

No  doubt  this  sometimes  happened  \ no  well-informed  man  would
deny  it.  But  from  this  we  can  learn  nothing  but  what  we  all  know
already,  cc  that  medicines  can  cure  diseases  f but  from  these  casus
fortuiti  nothing  is  to  be  learnt  ; as  yet  they  occupy  an  isolated  position
in  history,  altogether  useless  for  practice.

Our  congratulations  must  only  be  bestowed  on  the  sufferer  who
reaped  advantage  from  this  rare  godsend,  and  was  cured  quickly  (and
lastingly  ?)  by  this  accidental  remedy.  But  from  this  wonderful  cure
nothing  at  all  is  learned  ; not  the  slightest  addition  has  thereby  been
made  to  the  resources  of  the  healing  art.

On  the  contrary , these  very  chance  cases  of  accidental  cures , when  they
have  occurred  to  physicians , have  done  most  to  fill  the  materia  medica  with
false  seductive  declarations  respecting  the  curative  actions  of  particular
medicines  ab  usu  in  morbis.

For,  as  the  ordinary  physician  seldom  or  never  describes  the  case
of  disease  correctly,  and,  indeed,  considers  the  circumstantial  descrip-
tion of  a case  of  disease  in  all  its  symptoms  as  useless,  if  he  cannot  bestow
on  it  a pathological  name  (the  illusory  representation  of  a disease  above
alluded  to),  so  he  does  not  fail  to  apply  some  illusory  pathological  name
to  his  chance  case,  which,  together  with  his  prescription,  or  the  single
remedy  in  the  mixture  to  which  alone  he  ascribes  the  cure,  straight-
way finds  its  way  into  the  materia  medica,  which,  moreover,  is
incapable  of  making  use  of  anything  but  mere  pathological  names  of
diseases  in  its  account  of  the  uses  of  medicines.

He  who,  thereafter,  is  inclined  to  regard  a case  occurring  to  him-
self as  the  same  pathological  species  of  disease  (and  why  should  he
not?  the  schools  teach  him  to  do  so),  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  resort
immediately  to  this  magnificent  receipt,  this  splendid  specific,  at  the
bidding  of  its  first  recommender,  or  by  the  advice  of  the  materia
medica.  But  he  certainly  has,  under  the  same  illusory  pathological


THE  COMMON  MATERIA  MEDICA.


27


name,  a case  before  him  vastly  different  in  the  detail  of  its  symptoms,
and  hence  happens  what  was  inevitable,  the  medicine  does  no  good  ;
it  does  harm,  as  might  have  been  anticipated.

This  is  the  impure , this  is  the  unhallowed  source  of  all  the  declarations
respecting  the  curative  virtues  of  medicines  ah  usu  in  morbis  in  the  ordinary
materia  medica , whereby  every  imitator  is  led  astray.

Had  the  so-called  observers  communicated  to  the  world  those  cases
of  lucky  chance  cures,  only  describing  minutely  the  case  of  disease,  with
all  its  symptoms , and  mentioning  the  remedy  employed — which  they
almost  never  did — they  had  at  least  written  truth  ; and  the  materia
medica  (finding  no  pathological  name  attached)  had  not  been  able  to
glean  any  lies  from  them.  They  had,  I say,  written  truth,  which,
however,  would  only  have  been  useful  in  one  single  way,  namely,  to
teach  every  future  physician  the  exact  case  of  disease  beyond  which
the  remedy,  in  order  to  prove  useful,  should  not  be  employed  ; and
thus  no  false,  and  consequently  unsuccessful,  imitation  would  have
occurred.  From  such  an  accurate  description  it  would  have  been
evident  to  all  future  physicians  that  the  same,  the  exact  same , case  of
disease  never  recurs  in  nature,  consequently  could  never  again  be  cured
miraculously.

Thus  we  would  have  been  spared  all  the  many  hundred  delusive
accounts  of  the  curative  actions  of  particular  drugs  in  the  ordinary
materia  medica,  whose  truthfulness  and  honesty  has  hitherto  consisted , and
still  consists , in  this , that  it  has  faithfully  re-echoed  whatever  authors  have
chosen  to  invent  with  respect  to  the  general  therapeutical  virtues  of  drugs ,
and  has  accepted , as  genuine  coin , their  alleged  special  therapeutic  powers
ab  usu  in  morbis , ascertained  from  accidental  cases  of  cure , by  associating
the  specific  pathological  name  of  a disease  bestowed  on  his  case  by  the
so-called  observer,  with,  as  the  curative  agent,  the  presumed  single
medicine  to  which,  among  all  the  drugs  employed  in  the  compound
prescription,  the  physician  chose  principally,  if  not  entirely,  to  entrust
and  ascribe  the  successful  result.

So  turbid  and  impure  are  the  sources  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica ,
and  so  null  and  void  its  contents  !

What  a healing  art , with  such  ill-understood  medicines  !

From  the  circumstance  that  constant  remedies  have  already  been
discovered  for  those  diseases,  few  though  they  be,*  which  have  a con-
stant character,  one  might  infer,  that  for  all  diseases  of  a constant
character,  constant  (specific)  remedies  might  be  found.

And  indeed,  since  the  only  trustworthy  way,  the  homoeopathic,
has  been  pursued  with  honesty  and  zeal,  the  specific  remedies  for
several  of  the  other  constant  diseases  have  already  been  discovered. f

In  order  to  treat  successfully  the  other  cases  of  disease  occurring  in

# To  be  sure  this  was  only  effected  by  blind  trials  of  all  imaginable  drugs  ; for
hitherto  a scientific  mode  of  making  such  discoveries  has  been  entirely  wanting  in
medicine.

f In  this  homoeopathic  way,  from  a consideration  of  the  symptoms  of  the  smooth
scarlet  fewer , with  bright  erysipelatous  redness  of  the  skin,  which  formerly  prevailed  in
Europe  from  time  to  time,  as  a contagious  epidemic  (but  which  has  been,  since  1800,
almost  totally  supplanted  by  the  purpura  miliaris , which  came  from  the  Netherlands
into  our  country,  and  has  been  improperly  confounded  with  scarlet  fewer  by  physicians


28


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF


man,  and  which,  be  they  acute  or  chronic,  differ  so  vastly  among  each
other,  if  they  cannot  be  referred  for  curative  purposes  to  some  primary
disease  which  is  constant  in  its  character,  they  must  each  be  regarded
as  a peculiar  disease,  and  a medicine  which  in  its  pure  effects  on  the
healthy  body  shows  symptoms  similar  to  the  totality  of  the  symptoms
of  the  case  before  us  must  be  administered  in  order  to  effect  a cure.

This  improved  healing  art,  i.  e.  the  homoeopathic,  draws  not  its
knowledge  from  those  impure  sources  of  the  materia  medica  hitherto  in
use , pursues  not  that  antiquated,  dreamy,  false  path  we  have  just
pointed  out,  but  follows  the  way  consonant  with  nature.  It  administers
no  medicines  to  combat  the  diseases  of  mankind  before  testing  experi-
mentally their  pure  effects  ; that  is,  observing  what  changes  each  can
produce  in  the  health  of  a healthy  man — this  is  pure  materia  medica.

Thus  alone  can  the  power  of  medicines  on  the  human  health  be
known  ; thus  alone  can  their  true  importance,  the  peculiar  action  of
each  drug,  be  exhibited  clearly  and  manifestly,  without  any  fallacy,
any  deception,  independent  of  all  speculation  ; in  their  ascertained
symptoms  all  their  curative  elements  lie  disclosed  ; and  among  them
may  be  found  a signalisation  of  all  the  cases  of  disease  which  each
fitting  (specific)  remedy  is  capable  of  curing.

According  to  this  improved  system  of  medicine,  cases  of  disease,  in
all  their  endless  variety  of  appearance  (if  they  cannot  be  traced  back  to
some  more  profoundly  rooted  primary  disease  of  constant  character),

who  knew  not  the  latter  disease),  I found  the  specific  curative  and  prophylactic  remedy
for  this  true,  smooth  scarlet  fever  in  the  smallest  doses  of  belladonna , which  has  the
power  of  producing  a very  similar  fever,  with  a similar  lobster-red  colour  of  the  skin.

So,  also,  from  a thorough  consideration  of  the  symptoms  presented  by  the  purpura
miliaris  just  mentioned,  in  the  particular  character  of  its  purely  inflammatory  fever,
with  agonising  anxiety  and  restlessness,  I found  that  aconite  must  be  the  specific
remedy  (occasionally  alternated  with  raw  coffee)  j and  experience  has  confirmed
the  truth  of  the  remark.

The  symptoms  of  croup  are  to  be  found  in  the  pure  materia  medica,  among  the
symptoms  produced  by  burnt  sponge  and  hepar  sulphuris ; and,  see ! these  two
alternately,  and  in  the  smallest  dose,  cure  this  frightful  disease  of  children,  as  I
first  discovered.

No  known  medicine  is  so  capable  of  producing  a state  similar  to  that  of  the
epidemic  'whooping-cough  as  the  sunde'w  ; and  this  disease,  which,  notwithstanding  all
the  exertions  of  allopathic  physicians,  either  becomes  chronic  or  terminates  fatally,
is  cured  in  a few  days  in  a certain  and  safe  manner,  as  I first  showed,  by  the  smallest
portion  of  a drop  of  the  decillion-fold  dilution  of  the  juice  of  drosera  rotundifolia.

What  physician  before  me,  and  before  the  publication  of  the  “ Materia  Medica
Pura ,”  was  able  to  cure  radically  the  constitutional  and  local  sycosic  condyloma-
tous  disease  ? They  were  content  with  removing  the  morbid  growths  by  the  cautery,
the  knife,  or  the  ligature,  as  often  as  they  appeared  externally,  but  none  succeeded
in  curing  the  disease.  The  symptoms  of  thuja  occidentalis  taught  me,  however,  that
it  must  cure  this  disease  ; and,  behold ! a very  small  dose  of  its  highly  diluted  juice
actually  cures  the  internal  disease,  so  that  the  external  growths  vanish  also,  showing
the  cure  to  be  radical.

With  an  infinity  of  empirically  chosen  drugs  the  allopathist  attacks  the  autumnal
dysentery,  but  with  what  miserable  success!  The  symptoms  of  corrosive  sublimate ,
however  (vide  the  “ Materia  Medica  Pura  ”),  resemble  so  closely  those  of  this  disease,
that  this  medicine  must  be  its  specific  remedy  $ and  experience  convinced  me,  many
years  since,  that  a single  dose,  consisting  of  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the
trillion-fold  dilution  of  mercurius  sublimatus  corrosivus  is  sufficient  to  produce  a rapid
and  complete  cure;


The  common  materia  medica.  ^

must  be  regarded  in  every  instance  as  new,  and  never  before  seen  ;
they  must  be  noted  exactly  as  they  present  themselves,  with  all  the
symptoms,  accidents,  and  altered  sensations  discoverable  in  them  by  all
the  senses  ; and  a remedy  must  be  selected  which,  as  has  been  shown
by  previous  experiments  of  its  action  on  the  perfectly  healthy,  is
capable  of  producing  symptoms,  accidents,  and  altered  sensations  most
similar  to  those  of  the  case  under  treatment  ; and  such  a medicine,
given  in  a very  small  dose,  cures,  as  experience  teaches,  much  better
and  more  perfectly  than  any  other  method  of  treatment.

This  doctrine  of  the  pure  effects  of  medicines  promises  no  delusive,
fabulous  remedies  for  names  of  diseases,  imagines  no  general  therapeutic
virtues  of  drugs,  but  unostentatiously  possesses  the  elements  of  cure  for
diseases  accurately  known  (that  is,  investigated  in  all  their  symptoms)  ;
and  he  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  select  the  remedy  for  a disease  by
the  rule  of  the  most  perfect  similarity  will  ever  find  in  it  a pure
inexhaustible  source  whence  he  may  derive  the  means  for  saving  the
lives  of  his  fellow-men.

SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.

Leipzig,  April,  18175  and

Cothen,  January,  1825.


A REMINISCENCE.1


As  long  as  accurate  observation,  unwearied  research,  and  careful
comparison  have  failed  to  demonstrate  really  constant  primary  maladies
for  the  amazing  number  of  morbid  phenomena  and  cases  of  disease
occurring  in  the  human  subject,  which  nature  appears  to  produce  in
endless  variety  and  very  dissimilar  to  one  another,  so  long  evidently
must  every  single  disease  as  it  occurs  be  homoeopathically  treated
according  to  the  array  of  symptoms  that  show  themselves  in  each  case,
whereby,  however,  they  will  all  be  infinitely  better  removed  than  by
all  the  routine  treatment  that  has  hitherto  prevailed  in  ordinary
practice.

The  adherents  of  the  dominant  school  of  medicine  imagined  that
they  would  best  succeed  with  the  treatment  of  that  great  variety  of
morbid  phenomena,  if  they  arbitrarily  drew  up  upon  paper  a list  of
types  of  disease,  which  should  represent  and  include  within  them  all
the  cases  of  disease  that  were  met  with  at  the  sick-bed.  They  gave
the  name  of  pathology  to  this  performance  of  theirs.

Seeing  the  impossibility  of  efficaciously  treating  every  case  of  dis-
ease according  to  its  individuality,  they  imagined  that  their  business
was  to  select  from  the  apparently  infinite  variety  of  different  diseases
which  nature  displays,  a number  of  diseased  states,  all  resembling  each
other  in  having  some  particular  prominent  symptom  in  common,  as
fundamental  forms,  and,  having  assigned  to  them  general  symptoms
that  were  of  not  unfrequent  occurrence  in  diseases  and  bestowed  on
them  special  names,  to  give  them  out  for  constant,  distinct  diseases,
that  always  remained  the  same.  These  forms  of  disease,  manufactured
by  themselves,  they  asserted  to  constitute  the  whole  range  of  the  world
of  disease,  in  other  words,  pathology , in  order  that  they  might  be  able  to
lay  down  special  modes  of  treatment  for  these  their  artificial  morbid  pictures ,
and  this  constituted  the  science  of  therapeutics .

Thus  they  made  a virtue  of  necessity,  but  they  did  not  consider  the
evil  that  must  arise  from  this  perversion  of  nature,  they  did  not  reflect
that  this  arbitrary  procedure  that  did  violence  to  nature,  after  having


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


A REMINISCENCE.


31

grown  old  by  being  propagated  through  thousands  of  years,  would  at
length  come  to  be  regarded  as  a symbolical,  unimprovable  work.*

The  physician  who  was  called  in  to  a case,  to  determine,  as  the
rules  of  his  art  enjoined,  the  nosological  name  of  the  disease  his  patient
laboured  under,  must  take  for  granted,  in  reference  to  some  symptoms
that  the  pathological  works  describe  as  belonging  to  this  form  of
disease,  that  they  are  merely  accidentally  absent  in  his  patient,  that
might  very  well  have  been  there,  although  they  were  not — the  remaining
often  very  numerous  and  serious  sufferings  and  symptoms  which  the
patient  was  really  affected  with,  but  which  do  not  occur  in  the  defini-
tion of  the  nosological  name  in  the  pathological  work,  he  must,  so  the
rules  of  his  art  required,  regard  as  unessential,  as  accidental,  as  unim-
portant, as  wild,  exuberant  offshoots,  so  to  speak — symptoms  of
symptoms — which  he  need  not  pay  attention  to.

It  was  only  by  such  extraordinary  capricious  adding  to  the  actual
morbid  state,  and  equally  capricious  paring  down  of  it,  that  the
adherent  of  the  arbitrary  old  school  succeeded  in  concocting  the  list  of
diseases  recorded  in  nosological  works,  and  in  practice  demonstrating
that  his  patient  laboured  under  one  of  the  diseases  in  this  nosological
system,  of  which  nature  never  thought  when  she  made  him  ill.

tc  What  do  we  care,”  say  the  medical  teachers  and  their  books,
“ what  do  we  care  about  the  presence  of  many  other  diverse  symptoms
that  are  observable  in  the  case  of  disease  before  us,  or  the  absence  of
those  that  are  awanting  ? The  physician  should  pay  no  attention  to
such  empirical  trifles  \ his  practical  tact,  the  penetrating  glance  of  his
mental  eyef  into  the  hidden  nature  of  the  malady,  enables  him  to
determine  at  the  very  first  sight  of  the  patient  what  is  the  matter  with
him,  what  pathological  form  of  disease  he  has  to  do  with,  and  what
name  he  has  to  give  it,  and  his  therapeutic  knowledge  teaches  him
what  prescription  he  must  order  for  itT

Thus  then  were  prepared  by  that  human  piece  of  manufacture
termed  pathology  those  illusory  pictures  of  disease  which  were  trans-
ferred lege  artis  to  the  patient,  and  falsely  attributed  to  him,  and  this  it
was  that  rendered  it  so  easy  for  the  physician  to  recall  to  his  memory
without  hesitation  a couple  of  prescriptions  which  the  clinical  thera-
peutics (of  the  prescription  manual)  had  in  readiness  for  this  name.

But  how  did  the  prescriptions  for  these  names  of  diseases  originate  ?
Were  they  communicated  by  some  divine  revelation  ?

My  dear  sir,  they  are  either  formulas  prescribed  by  some  cele-

# It  is  only  a pity  that  this  fond  dream  is  dispelled  when  we  look  at  the  various
systems  of  pathology  with  their  different  names  and  dissimilar  descriptions  of  disease,
when  we  look  at  the  hundred  and  fifty  definitions  of  fever,  and  the  very  various
modes  of  treatment  in  the  many  works  on  therapeutics,  which  all  lay  equal  claim
to  infallibility.  Which  of  all  of  them  is  right  ? Is  not  the  unnatural,  unreal,
apocryphal  character  of  all  apparent  ?

+ What  honest  man  not  endowed  with  clairvoyance  could  boast  of  possessing  a
mental  eye  which  should  enable  him  to  penetrate  through  flesh  and  bone  into  that
hidden  essential  nature  of  things  that  the  Creator  of  mankind  alone  understands,  of
which  mortal  man  would  have  no  conception,  for  which  he  would  have  no  words,  if
it  were  laid  open  to  him  ? Does  not  such  pretension  reach  the  climax  of  boastful
charlatanry  and  mendacious  delusion  ?


A REMINISCENCE.


brated  practitioner  for  some  case  or  other  of  disease  to  which  he  has
arbitrarily  given  this  nosological  name,  which  formulas  consist  of  a
variety  of  ingredients,  known  to  him  no  doubt  by  name , that  came  into
his  head  and  were  put  by  him  into  an  elegant  form  by  the  aid  of  that
important  art  which  is  called  the  art  of  prescribing  ( ars  formulas
concinnandi  recteque  concipiendi ),  whereby  the  requirements  of  chemical
skill  and  pharmaceutical  rules  were  attended  to,  if  not  the  welfare
of  the  patient  ; — one  or  several  receipts  of  this  kind  for  the  given  case,
under  the  use  of  which  the  patient  at  least  did  not  die,  but — thanks  to
heaven  and  his  good  constitution  ! — gradually  recovered.  These  are
therefore  receipts  taken  from  the  writings  of  illustrious  practitioners  ;
or  they  are  formulas  which,  at  the  request  of  some  publisher  who  well
knew  how  capitally  prescription  manuals  sell,  were  fabricated  in  a
garret,  off-hand,  for  the  pathological  names,  by  some  willing  soul  in
his  pay,  who  was  well  skilled  in  the  ars  formulas  concinnandi , and  who
was  guided  in  his  labour  by  the  account  of  the  virtues  that  the  lying
works  on  Materia  Medica  have  liberally  attributed  to  the  several
medicinal  substances.

But  if  the  physician  found  the  disease  in  his  patient  too  unlike  any
of  the  pathological  forms  of  disease  to  permit  him  to  give  it  a definite
name  of  this  sort,  it  was  admissible  for  him,  according  to  his  books,  to
assume  for  the  malady  a more  remote  and  concealed  origin,  in  order  to
establish  a treatment  thereupon  (on  this  assumption).  Thus,  supposing
the  patient  at  some  former  period  had  suffered  from  pain  (no  matter
what  kind)  in  the  back,  his  disease  was  unhesitatingly  ascribed  to
concealed  or  suppressed  haemorrhoids — if  he  had  had  a tense  abdomen,
mucous  excrements,  anorexia  alternating  with  bulimia,  or  even  only
itching  in  the  nose,  his  disease  was  called  a worm  disease  ; or  if  he  had
occasionally  had  pains  (no  matter  what  kind)  in  the  limbs,  his  disease
was  pronounced  to  be  concealed  or  immature  gout,  and  against  this
fancied  internal  morbific  cause  the  treatment  was  directed.  If  there
were  attacks  of  pain  in  the  abdomen,  spasm  must  be  to  blame  for
them  ; if  there  was  frequent  determination  of  blood  to  the  face,  or  if
the  nose  bled,  the  patient  was  decidedly  too  full-blooded  ; if  the  patient
grew  very  thin  during  the  treatment,  as  he  naturally  would,  marasmus
had  to  be  combated  ; if  he  was  at  the  same  time  of  a very  sensitive
disposition,  nervous  weakness  was  the  enemy  to  be  attacked  ; if  he
suffered  from  cough,  then  concealed  catarrh  or  a tendency  to  phthisis
was  in  the  background ; if  the  patient  sometimes  felt  pains  in  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen,  or  even  only  in  the  right  scapula,  it  was  un-
doubtedly concealed  inflammation  or  hidden  induration  of  the  liver
that  was  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  An  old  cutaneous  disease  or
an  ulcer  on  the  leg  must,  in  order  that  the  treatment  should  be  directed
against  it,  be  attributed  either  to  some  herpetic  humour  or  to  some
scrofulous  virus,  and  a chronic  prosopalgia  must  of  course  be  ascribed
to  the  cancerous  virus.  After  having  in  vain  treated  first  this  then  the
other  fancied  hidden  morbid  state  according  to  the  directions  of  the
clinical  books,  and  after  all  the  mineral  waters,  which  are  said  to  be
useful  in  some  indefinite  manner  for  everything , had  been  visited,  nothing
else  remained  but  to  view  the  case  as  one  of  infarctus  of  the  abdomen


A REMINISCENCE.


3.3

and  obstruction  of  the  minute  vessels  of  that  part  according  to  the  idea
of  the  formerly  celebrated  Kampf,  and  to  torture  the  patient,  in
Kampf’s  fashion,  with  injections  into  the  colon  of  hundreds  of  his
absurd  mixtures  of  vegetable  decoctions,  until  he  had  got  enough  of
them.

In  consequence  of  the  ease  with  which  conclusions  relative  to  the
essential  nature  of  diseases  were  come  to,  there  could,  thank  heaven  !
never  be  any  lack  of  plans  of  treatment  whereby  the  days  of  suffering
of  the  patient  might  be  fully  occupied  (for  there  are  prescriptions  in
plenty  for  all  names  of  diseases),  as  long  as  his  purse,  his  patience,  or
his  life  lasted.

“ But  no  ! we  can  go  to  work  in  a more  learned  and  sagacious
manner,  and  investigate  and  conjecture  upon  the  maladies  that  afflict
mankind  in  the  profundity  and  concealment  of  abstract  views  of  life,  as
to  whether,  in  the  case  before  us,  the  arterial,  the  venous  or  the  nervous
system,  the  sensibility,  the  irritability  or  the  reproductive  function
suffer  quantitively  more  or  less  (for  we  purposely  avoid  considering  the
infinite  number  of  qualitative  varieties  from  which  these  three  mani-
festations of  the  vitality  may  suffer,  in  order  not  to  burthen  ourselves
to  a still  greater  extent  with  the  labour  of  research  and  conjecture) ;
we  merely  make  a guess  as  to  whether  these  three  dimensions  of
vitality  are  in  a state  either  of  excessive  depression  or  excessive  exalta-
tion. If  we  are  of  opinion  that  the  first,  second,  or  third  of  them  is
suffering  from  one  or  other  of  these  states  of  too  high  or  too  low , we
may  boldly  proceed  to  manoeuvre  against  it,  according  to  the  plan  of
the  new  iatro-chemical  sect,  which  imagined  c that  nitrogen,  hydrogen,
and  carbon  alone  constituted  the  souls  of  medicines,  that  is,  the  only
active  and  curative  thing  in  them;  that,  moreover,  carbon,  nitrogen,
and  hydrogen  could  at  pleasure  regulate  and  screw  up  or  screw  down
(potentize  and  depotentize)  the  irritability,  the  sensibility,  and  the
reproductive  function,  consequently  (if  the  premisses  are  correct)  the
whole  vitality,  and  therefore  they  were  capable  of  curing  all  diseases/
— ’Tis  only  a pity  that  they  are  not  yet  agreed  as  to  whether  external
agents  act  by  means  of  their  identity  with  or  their  contrariety  to  the
component  parts  of  our  organism  !”

But  in  order  that  medicines  should  really  contain  these  elementary
principles,  which,  as  far  as  was  known,  they  did  not  hitherto  possess,
they  were  one  holiday  evening  formally  ascribed  to  them  at  the  desk,
and,  in  a system  of  materia  medica  specially  created  for  this  purpose,  it
was  decreed  how  much  carbon,  nitrogen,  and  hydrogen  each  medicinal
substance  should  henceforth  contain.

Could  medical  caprice  go  farther,  or  trifle  more  sinfully  with
human  life  ?

But  how  long  shall  this  irresponsible  playing  with  human  life  still
last  ?

After  three  and  twenty  centuries  of  such  a criminal  mode  of
procedure,  now  that  the  whole  human  race  seems  to  be  awaking  in
order  powerfully  to  vindicate  its  rights,  shall  not  the  day  begin  to  dawn
for  the  deliverance  of  suffering  humanity  which  has  hitherto  been
racked  with  diseases,  and  in  addition  tortured  with  medicines  admini-
VOL.  II.  3


34


A REMINISCENCE.


stered  without  rhyme  or  reason,  and  without  limit  as  to  number  and
quantity,  for  imaginary  diseases,  in  conformity  with  the  wildest  notions
of  physicians  proud  of  the  antiquity  of  their  sect  ?

Shall  the  pernicious  jugglery  of  routine  treatment  still  continue  to
exist  ?

Shall  the  entreaty  of  the  patient,  to  listen  to  the  account  of  his
sufferings,  vainly  resound  through  the  air  unheard  by  his  brethren  of
mankind,  without  exciting  the  helpful  attention  of  any  human  heart  ?

Or  can  the  so  remarkably  different  complaints  and  sufferings  of
each  single  patient  indicate  anything  else  than  the  peculiarity  of  his
disease  ? If  not,  what  can  this  distinct  voice  of  nature,  which
expresses  itself  in  terms  so  appropriate  to  the  various  symptoms  of  the
patient,  what  can  it  mean  if  not  to  render  his  morbid  state  as  cogni-
zable as  possible  to  the  sympathising  and  attentive  physician,  in  order
to  enable  him  to  distinguish  the  very  minutest  shades  of  difference  of
this  case  from  every  other  ?

Would  beneficent  nature,  that  makes  such  mighty  efforts  for  our
preservation,  by  her  extremely  wise,  simple,  and  wonderful  arrange-
ment for  putting  the  patient  in  a position  to  reveal  to  the  observer,  by
words  and  signs,  the  great  variety  of  his  altered  sensations  and  morbid
actions,  have  enabled  him  to  do  this  all  in  vain  and  without  object,
and  not  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  a clear  and  accurate  description
of  his  morbid  state  in  the  only  conceivable  manner  so  as  not  to  lead
the  practitioner  astray  ? The  disease,  being  but  a peculiar  condition,
cannot  speak,  cannot  tell  its  own  story  ; the  patient  suffering  from  it
can  alone  render  an  account  of  his  disease  by  the  various  signs  of  his
disordered  health,  the  sufferings  he  feels,  the  symptoms  he  can  complain
of,  and  by  the  alterations  in  him  that  are  perceptible  to  the  senses.
But  the  pseudo-wisdom  of  the  ordinary  physicians  thinks  all  this
scarcely  worth  listening  to  ; and  even  if  they  listen  to  it,  they  allege
that  it  is  of  no  importance,  that  it  is  empirical  and  expressed  in  a very
unlearned  manner  by  nature,  that  it  does  not  coincide  with  what  their
pathological  books  teach  them,  and  is,  therefore,  not  available  for  their
purpose,  but  in  place  thereof  they  put  forward  a figment  of  their
learned  reveries  as  the  picture  of  the  internal  (never  ascertainable)  state
of  the  disease,  in  their  folly  substitute  this  delusive  pathological  picture
for  the  individual  state  of  each  case  of  disease  as  nature  faithfully
delineates  it,  and  direct  their  medicinal  weapons  against  this  trumped-
up  phantom  of  their  imagination,  the  inferences  of  what  they  call  their
practical  tact.

And  what  are  these  weapons  of  theirs?  Large  doses  of  medi-
cines ; that  is,  be  it  observed,  powerful  substances,  which,  where  they
do  no  good,  must  and  really  do  injure  the  patient  (seeing  that  the
peculiar  and  sole  nature  of  all  medicines  in  the  world  consists  in  their
capability,  when  brought  in  contact  with  the  living  sensitive  body,  of
morbidly  deranging  it,  each  in  its  own  peculiar  way),  which  must
accordingly  make  the  patient  worse,  if  they  have  not  been  selected  for
remedial  purposes  with  the  utmost  care  that  their  peculiar  properties
shall  be  adapted  to  the  morbid  state  ! These  medicinal  substances,
which  in  themselves  are  injurious , often  very  injurious  (and  only  useful  in


A REMINISCENCE.


35


the  cases  for  which  they  are  suitable),  and  which  are  unknown  in
regard  to  their  peculiar,  true  action,  were  so  blindly  resorted  to,  or,  in
obedience  to  the  mandates  of  the  mendacious  book  called  materia
medica,  mingled  together  (if  the  mixture  was  not  taken  ready  made
from  the  receipt-book)  as  though  they  were  drawn  at  hap-hazard  from
the  wheel  of  fortune  or  rather  misfortune,  with  no  correct  knowledge  or
rather  no  knowledge  at  all  of  their  true , peculiar  effects,  and  they  served
but  to  increase  the  tortures  of  the  patient  already  suffering  from  his
disease,  with  this  barbarous  olla  podrida  full  of  disgusting  smells  and
tastes  (one  spoonful  to  be  taken  every  hour  !).  Was  such  a procedure
beneficial  to  him  ? Oh,  God  ! no,  prejudicial  to  him.  The  usual  result
of  such  an  unnatural  and  false  mode  of  treatment  pursued  during
every  hour  of  the  day,  must  be  palpable  aggravation  of  his  state,  aggrava-
tion which  the  ignorant  patient  is  made  to  believe  is  owing  to  the
malignant  nature  of  his  disease.  Poor,  unhappy  wretch  ! what  else
than  to  make  bad  worse  can  be  done  by  such  powerful  noxious  sub-
stances raked  together  according  to  the  whims  of  the  dominant  medical
school,  taken  at  blind  hazard  and  administered  in  an  inappropriate
place  ?

And  in  this  homicidal  manner  have  practitioners  gone  on  acting  in
despite  of  the  truth  that  speaks  trumpet-tongued  for  our  information,
because,  since  the  remotest  times,  it  has  been  the  habit  with  their
profession  to  torture  methodically  suffering  humanity  in  this  unnatural
manner  for  their  money — to  their  injury  !

What  human  heart  in  whom  the  smallest  spark  of  the  God-
implanted  monitor,  conscience,  still  exists,  but  must  shudder  at  such
.abominable  behaviour  ?

In  vain,  in  vain  dost  thou  seek  to  silence  the  audible,  terrible  voice
of  the  incorruptible  judge  in  thy  conscience,  of  that  sacred  tribunal  of
God^s  justice  that  holds  its  seat  in  thy  bosom,  by  the  miserable  excuse
that  others  do  so  likewise,  and  that  such  has  been  the  practice  since  the
most  remote  ages  ; in  vain  dost  thou  seek  to  stifle  its  still  small  voice
by  atheistical  ridicule,  wild  pleasures,  and  goblets  of  reason-obscuring,
intoxicating  drinks.  The  Holy  One,  the  Almighty  lives,  and  eternal

unchangeable  justice  lives  with  Him.

* *

Now,  as  the  internal  operations  and  processes  of  the  living  human
organism  cannot  be  inspected,  and,  as  long  as  we  are  merely  men  and
not  God,  cannot  be  perfectly  known  to  us,  either  in  the  healthy  or  yet
in  the  diseased  state,  and  on  that  very  account  all  deductions  from  the
exterior  respecting  the  interior  are  deceptive,  and  as  the  knowledge  of
disease  can  be  neither  a metaphysical  problem  nor  the  product  of
fantastic  speculation,  but  is  an  affair  of  pure  experience  by  the  senses,
because  disease,  as  a manifestation,  can  only  be  apprehended  by  observa-
tion ; therefore  every  unprejudiced  person  must  at  once  perceive  that,
as  careful  observation  finds  every  individual  case  of  disease  in  nature  to
differ  from  every  other,*  no  name  borrowed  from  a pathological  system
of  man’s  fabrication  which  falsely  alleges  diseases  to  possess  constant

# With  the  exception  of  such  diseases  as  are  caused  by  a miasm  of  constant
character,  or  by  an  always  identical  cause,


36


A REMINISCENCE.


unvarying  characters,  should  be  attached  to  morbid  states,  which  in
reality  differ  so  much  among  themselves,  and  that  there  can  scarcely
be  any  hypothetical  representation  which  we  may  form  to  ourselves
respecting  any  one  disease,  that  shall  not  be  imaginary,  delusive,  and
untrue.

Diseases  are  nothing  more  than  alterations  of  the  sound,  normal
state  of  health,  and  as  an  alteration  of  this  sort  consists  merely  in  the
occurrence  of  many  accidents,  morbid  sufferings,  and  perceptible
divergences  from  the  former  healthy  state,  seeing  that  after  the  removal
of  all  these  accidents  and  sufferings  nothing  but  health  can  remain  ;
so  there  can  be  for  the  physician  no  other  true  view  of  diseases  which
shall  enable  him  to  discover  what  should  be  the  aim  of  his  treatment
and  what  there  is  to  be  cured,  save  and  except  what  is  perceived  by  the
senses  of  the  observable  alterations  of  health  in  the  patient.

The  honest  physician,  therefore,  whose  conscience  forbids  him
with  superficial  haste  to  invent  a delusive  picture  of  the  malady  to  be
cured,  or  to  consider  it  as  one  of  the  forms  of  disease  already  existing
in  pathological  works  ; whose  earnest  desire  it  is,  in  one  word,  to
investigate  the  peculiar  character  of  the  disease  before  him,  in  order  to
be  able  to  restore  the  patient  with  certainty, — the  honest  physician,  I
say,  will  observe  his  patient  minutely,  with  all  his  senses,  will  make
the  patient  and  his  attendants  detail  all  his  sufferings  and  symptoms,
and  will  carefully  note  them  down  without  adding  anything  to  or
taking  anything  from  them ; he  will  thus  have  a faithful  genuine
picture  of  the  disease,  and  along  with  that  an  accurate  knowledge  of  all
there  is  in  it  to  be  cured  and  removed  ; he  will  then  have  a true  know-
ledge of  the  disease.

Now,  as  diseases  can  be  nothing  more  than  alterations  of  the
sound,  normal  state  of  health,  and  as  every  alteration  of  the  health
of  a healthy  person  is  disease,  so  cure  can  be  nothing  but  transfor-
mation of  the  abnormal  state  of  health  into  the  normal  and  healthy
state.

If,  then,  as  cannot  be  denied,  medicines  are  the  agents  for  curing
diseases,  they  must  possess  the  power  of  effecting  an  alteration  in  the
state  of  health.

Now,  as  there  can  be  no  other  alteration  of  the  sound  state  of
health  than  this,  that  the  healthy  person  shall  become  sick,  therefore
medicines,  inasmuch  as  they  possess  the  power  of  healing,  consequently
of  altering  the  health  of  man,  the  healthy  as  well  as  the  sick,  must,  in
their  action  upon  the  healthy,  produce  many  symptoms,  morbid  suffer-
ings, and  divergences  from  the  healthy  state.

Now  admitting,  what  likewise  cannot  be  denied,  that,  in  order  to
cure,  the  main  business  of  the  physician  consists  in  knowing  before-
hand the  medicine  from  which  a cure  is  most  certainly  to  be  expected,
he  must,  seeing  that  a cure  by  medicines  takes  place  only  by  reason  of
an  alteration  effected  in  the  state  of  the  health,  above  all  things  know
beforehand,  what  alterations  in  man’s  health  the  several  medicines  can
effect,  before  he  selects  one  of  them  for  administration,  if  he  do  not
wish  to  be  guilty  of  a criminal  inconsiderateness  and  of  an  unpardonable
attack  upon  human  life  \ — for  if  every  powerful  medicine  can  make


A REMINISCENCE.


37

the  healthy  sick,  an  ignorantly  selected,  consequently  an  unsuitable,
medicine  must  necessarily  render  the  patient  worse  than  he  was.

The  most  zealous  efforts  of  one  who  devotes  himself  to  the  cure  of
diseases  (a  physician),  must  hence,  before  all  things,  be  directed  to
obtain  a foreknowledge  of  those  properties  and  actions  of  medicines  by
means  of  which  he  may  effect  the  cure  or  amelioration  of  every
individual  case  of  disease  with  the  greatest  certainty ; that  is  to  say,  he
must,  before  commencing  the  practice  of  physic,  have  previously
obtained  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  alterations  in  the  health
of  man  the  several  medicines  are  capable  of  effecting,  in  order  to  be
able  to  select,  in  every  case  of  disease,  the  health-altering  medicine
most  suitable  for  effecting  a cure.

Now,  it  is  impossible  that  the  alterations  in  man’s  health  which
medicines  are  capable  of  producing,  can  be  ascertained  and  observed
more  purely,  certainly,  and  completely,  by  any  other  method  in  the
world,  than  by  the  action  of  medicines  upon  healthy  individuals  ;
indeed,  there  is  no  other  way  besides  this  conceivable,  in  which  it  were
possible  to  obtain  experience  that  shall  be  at  all  of  an  accurate
character  respecting  the  real  alterations  they  are  capable  of  effecting  in
man’s  health.  For  the  action  they  show  with  chemical  reagents
reveals  only  chemical  properties,  which  are  no  clue  to  their  power
over  the  living  human  organism.  The  alterations  they  produce  when
given  to  animals  only  teach  what  they  can  do  to  them  each  according
to  its  nature,  but  not  what  they  would  effect  on  man,  endowed  as  he
is  with  an  organisation  of  a perfectly  different  character,  and  with  very
different  powers  both  of  mind  and  body.  Even  when  given  in  human
diseases  in  order  to  ascertain  their  effects,  the  peculiar  symptoms  which
were  solely  due  to  the  medicine  can  never  be  distinctly  recognised,
never  accurately  distinguished,  amid  the  turmoil  of  the  morbid  symptoms
already  present,  so  as  to  admit  of  our  ascertaining  which  of  the  changes
effected  were  owing  to  the  medicine,  which  to  the  disease.  Hence
not  the  slightest  claim  to  a knowledge  of  the  true,  pure  action  of  the
various  medicines  can  be  made  by  the  ordinary  materia  medica,  which
has  scraped  together  its  fables  respecting  the  virtues  of  drugs  from  the
confused  use  of  mixed  medicaments  in  diseases,  its  descriptions  of  which
are  often  not  more  lucid  than  the  pathological  names  bestowed  upon
them.

The  simple  natural  way  alone  remains  for  us,  in  order  to  ascertain
clearly,  purely,  and  with  certainty,  the  powers  of  medicines  upon  man,
that  is,  the  alterations  they  are  capable  of  effecting  on  his  health — the
only  genuine  and  simple  natural  way,  viz.  to  administer  the  medicines
to  healthy  individuals  who  are  attentive  enough  to  notice  upon  them-
selves what  each  individual  medicine  is  capable  of  producing  in  and  on
them  of  a peculiar  morbid  and  abnormal  character,  and  to  make  a
careful  record  of  the  sufferings,  symptoms,  and  alterations  in  their
corporeal  and  mental  state  produced  by  its  administration,  as  the
peculiar  alterations  of  man’s  health  this  medicine  may  henceforth  be
expected  to  produce  ; for  whilst  the  action  of  a medicine  lasts  (provided
violent  moral  emotions  and  other  injurious  influences  from  without  do
not  intervene)  all  the  symptoms  that  occur  in  a healthy  individual


38


A REMINISCENCE.


must  be  the  effects  of  the  medicine,  seeing  that  its  influence  alone
dominates  over  his  state  of  health  at  that  period.

The  physician  must  possess  the  most  perfect  knowledge  possible  of
the  pure  alterations  in  the  health  produced  on  the  healthy  human  body
by  the  greatest  possible  number  of  single  medicines,  before  he  ventures
to  undertake  the  most  important  of  all  vocations,  namely,  the  admini-
stration of  medicines  to  a sick  person  for  his  disease,  to  a suffering
fellow  creature  who  appeals  to  our  most  sacred  sense  of  duty  to  relieve
him,  who  demands  all  our  compassion  and  all  our  zeal,  to  enable  us  to
relieve  him ; for  these  medicines  if  given  improperly  are  frightful
substances,  and  are  attended  with  injurious  effects,  and  not  unfre-
quently  with  danger  to  life.

In  this  way  alone  will  the  upright  physician  act  in  the  most  impor-
tant matter  of  conscience  that  can  be,  in  gaining  a knowledge  of  the
pure  effects  of  medicines,  and  in  investigating  the  case  of  disease
committed  to  his  care,  according  to  the  distinct  indication  and  obvious
requirements  of  nature,  and  in  this  way  alone  will  he  act  in  accordance
with  the  dictates  of  nature  and  conscience,  even  though  he  know  not
as  yet  what  morbid  symptoms,  artificially  produced  by  medicines  on  the
healthy  individual,  nature  has  destined  for  the  eradication  of  any  given
symptoms  in  natural  diseases.

This  problem  he  cannot  solve  by  any  speculative  a priori  research,
nor  by  any  fantastic  reveries — no  ! he  can  only  solve  this  problem  also
by  experiment,  observation,  and  experience.

Now,  it  is  not  merely  one  single  observation,  but  all  experiments
and  observations  carefully  conducted  demonstrate  in  the  most  con-
vincing manner  (to  every  sensible  individual  who  will  take  the  trouble
to  convince  himself)  that  among  medicines  tested  as  to  their  pure
effects,  that  one  alone,  which  can  produce  in  the  healthy  individual  a
similar  morbid  state,  is  capable  of  transforming  a given  case  of  disease,
rapidly,  easily,  and  permanently  into  health,  indeed , that  such  a medicine
will  never  fail  to  cure  the  disease.  The  place  of  the  natural  disease  in
the  organism  is  occupied  by  the  artificial  somewhat  stronger  medicinal
disease,  which  now  alone  occupies  the  vitality,  and  in  consequence  of
the  minuteness  of  the  dose  of  the  medicine  which  produced  it,  runs
but  a brief  course  before  being  extinguished,  and  the  body  is  then  left
without  disease,  that  is,  quite  well  and  (homoeopathically)  cured.

If,  then,  beneficent  nature  shows  us,  in  the  homoeopathic  method
of  treatment,  the  only  sure  and  infallible  way  by  which  we  can  remove
easily  and  permanently  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  in  a patient,  that
is,  his  whole  morbid  state,*  and  by  which  we  are  able  to  make  him
well  at  will  ; if  every  instance  of  treatment  conducted  on  this  plan
shows  us  the  most  unfailing  cure  ; who  could  remain  so  perverse,  and
neglect  to  such  a degree  the  good  of  himself  and  of  humanity,  as  to
refuse  to  tread  in  this  path  of  truth  and  nature,  but  stick  to  the
indefensible,  antiquated,  purely  imaginary  phantoms  of  diseases  and
modes  of  treatment,  to  the  destruction  of  the  sick  ?

I know  full  well  that  it  requires  heroic  courage  in  order  to  cure

* After  the  removal  of  all  his  sufferings,  symptoms  and  the  morbid  changes  in  his
feelings,  can  anything  besides  health  remain  ?


A REMINISCENCE,


39


ourselves  of  prejudices  grown  almost  into  mental  infirmities,  which
have  become  sacred  to  us  on  account  of  their  hoary  age,  and  that  it
demands  a very  uncommon  strength  of  mind  to  eradicate  from  our
memory  all  the  absurdities  that  have  been  imprinted  upon  our  youthful
susceptibilities  as  oracular  deliverances,  and  to  exchange  them  for  new
truths.

But  the  oak-garland  with  which  a consciousness  of  acting  right  crowns
us , rewards  these  victories  over  ourselves  a thousandfold  !

Do  old,  antiquated  untruths  become  anything  better — do  they
become  truths — by  reason  of  their  hoary  antiquity  ? Is  not  truth
eternal,  though  it  may  have  been  discovered  only  an  hour  ago  ? Does
the  novelty  of  its  discovery  render  it  an  untruth  ? Was  there  ever  a
discovery  or  a truth  that  was  not  at  first  novel  ?


THE  MEDICAL  OBSERVER.1


A FRAGMENT.


In  order  to  be  able  to  observe  well,  the  medical  practitioner  requires
to  possess,  what  is  not  to  be  met  with  among  ordinary  physicians  even
in  a moderate  degree,  the  capacity  and  habit  of  noticing  carefully  and
correctly  the  phenomena  that  take  place  in  natural  diseases,  as  well  as
those  that  occur  in  the  morbid  states  artificially  excited  by  medicines
when  they  are  tested  upon  the  healthy  body,  and  the  ability  to
describe  them  in  the  most  appropriate  and  natural  expressions.

In  order  accurately  to  perceive  what  is  to  be  observed  in  patients,
we  should  direct  all  our  thoughts  upon  the  matter  we  have  in  hand,
come  out  of  ourselves,  as  it  were,  and  fasten  ourselves,  so  to  speak,
with  all  our  powers  of  concentration  upon  it,  in  order  that  nothing  that
is  actually  present,  that  has  to  do  with  the  subject,  and  that  can  be
ascertained  by  all  the  senses,  may  escape  us.

Poetic  fancy,  fantastic  wit  and  speculation,  must  for  the  time  be
suspended,  and  all  over-strained  reasoning,  forced  interpretation  and
tendency  to  explain  away  things  must  be  suppressed.  The  duty  of
the  observer  is  only  to  take  notice  of  the  phenomena  and  their  course  ;
his  attention  should  be  on  the  watch,  not  only  that  nothing  actually
present  escape  his  observation,  but  that  also  what  he  observes  be  under-
stood exactly  as  it  is.

This  capability  of  observing  accurately  is  never  quite  an  innate
faculty  ; it  must  be  chiefly  acquired  by  practice,  by  refining  and  regu-
lating the  perceptions  of  the  senses,  that  is  to  say,  by  exercising  a severe
criticism  in  regard  to  the  rapid  impressions  we  obtain  of  external
objects,  and  at  the  same  time  the  necessary  coolness,  calmness,  and
firmness  of  judgment  must  be  preserved,  together  with  a constant
distrust  of  our  own  powers  of  apprehension.

The  vast  importance  of  our  subject  should  make  us  bestow  the
energies  of  our  body  and  mind  upon  the  observation  ; and  great
patience,  supported  by  the  power  of  the  will,  must  sustain  us  in  this
direction  until  the  completion  of  the  observation.

To  educate  us  for  the  acquirement  of  this  faculty,  an  acquaintance
with  the  best  writings  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  is  useful,  in  order  to


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825,


THE  MEDICAL  OBSERVER.


4i


enable  us  to  attain  directness  in  thinking  and  in  feeling,  as  also  appro-
priateness and  simplicity  in  expressing  our  sensations ; the  art  of
drawing  from  nature  is  also  useful,  as  it  sharpens  and  practises  our  eye,
and  thereby  also  our  other  senses,  teaching  us  to  form  a true  concep-
tion of  objects,  and  to  represent  what  we  observe,  truly  and  purely,
without  any  addition  from  the  fancy.  A knowledge  of  mathematics
also  gives  us  the  requisite  severity  in  forming  a judgment.

Thus  equipped,  the  medical  observer  cannot  fail  to  accomplish  his
object,  especially  if  he  has  at  the  same  time  constantly  before  his  eyes
the  exalted  dignity  of  his  calling — as  the  representative  of  the  all-
bountiful  Father  and  Preserver,  to  minister  to  His  beloved  human
creatures  by  renovating  their  systems  when  ravaged  by  disease.  He
knows  that  observations  of  medical  subjects  must  be  made  in  a sincere
and  holy  spirit,  as  if  under  the  eye  of  the  all-seeing  God,  the  Judge  of
our  secret  thoughts,  and  must  be  recorded  so  as  to  satisfy  an  upright
conscience,  in  order  that  they  may  be  communicated  to  the  world,  in
the  consciousness  that  no  earthly  good  is  more  worthy  of  our  zealous
exertions  than  the  preservation  of  the  life  and  health  of  our  fellow-
creatures.

The  best  opportunity  for  exercising  and  perfecting  our  observing
faculty  is  afforded  by  instituting  experiments  with  medicines  upon  our-
selves. Whilst  avoiding  all  foreign  medicinal  influences  and  disturbing
mental  impressions  in  this  important  operation,  the  experimenter,  after
he  has  taken  the  medicine,  has  all  his  attention  strained  towards  all  the
alterations  of  health  that  take  place  on  and  within  him,  in  order  to
observe  and  correctly  to  record  them,  with  ever-wakeful  feelings,  and
- his  senses  ever  on  the  watch.

By  persevering  in  this  careful  investigation  of  all  the  changes  that
occur  within  and  upon  himself,  the  experimenter  attains  the  capability
of  observing  all  the  sensations,  be  they  ever  so  complex,  that  he  expe-
riences from  the  medicine  he  is  testing,  and  all,  even  the  finest  shades
of  alteration  of  his  health,  and  of  recording  in  suitable  and  adequate
expressions  his  distinct  conception  of  them.

Thus  only  is  it  possible  for  the  beginner  to  make  pure,  correct,
and  undisturbed  observations,  for  he  knows  that  he  will  not  deceive
himself,  there  is  no  one  to  tell  him  aught  that  is  untrue,  and  he
himself  feels,  sees,  and  notices  what  takes  place  in  and  upon  him.  He
will  thus  acquire  practice  to  enable  him  to  make  equally  accurate
observations  on  others  also.

By  means  of  these  pure  and  accurate  investigations  we  shall  be
made  aware  that  all  the  symptomatology  hitherto  existing  in  the
ordinary  system  of  medicine  was  only  a very  superficial  affair,  and  that
nature  is  wont  to  disorder  man  in  his  health  and  in  all  his  sensations
and  functions  by  disease  or  medicine  in  such  infinitely  various  and
dissimilar  manners,  that  a single  word  or  a general  expression  is  totally
inadequate  to  describe  the  morbid  sensations  and  symptoms  which  are
often  of  such  a complex  character,  if  we  wish  to  portray  really,  truly,
and  perfectly  the  alterations  in  the  health  we  meet  with.

No  portrait  painter  was  ever  so  careless  as  to  pay  no  attention  to
the  marked  peculiarities  in  the  features  of  the  person  he  wished  to  make


42


THE  MEDICAL  OBSERVER


a likeness  of,  or  to  consider  it  sufficient  to  make  any  sort  of  a pair  of
round  holes  below  the  forehead  by  way  of  eyes,  between  them  to  draw
a long-shaped  thing  directed  downwards,  always  of  the  same  shape,  by
way  of  a nose,  and  beneath  this  to  put  a slit  going  across  the  face,  that
should  stand  for  the  mouth  of  this  or  of  any  other  person  ; no  painter,
I say,  ever  went  about  delineating  human  faces  in  such  a rude  and
slovenly  manner  ; no  naturalist  ever  went  to  work  in  this  fashion  in
describing  any  natural  production ; such  was  never  the  way  in  which
any  zoologist,  botanist,  or  mineralogist  acted.

It  was  only  the  semeiology  of  ordinary  medicine  that  went  to  work
in  such  a manner,  when  describing  morbid  phenomena.  The  sensa-
tions that  differ  so  vastly  among  each  other,  and  the  innumerable
varieties  of  the  sufferings  of  the  many  different  kinds  of  patients,  were
so  far  from  being  described  by  word  or  writing  according  to  their
divergences  and  varieties,  according  to  their  peculiarities ; the  com-
plexity of  the  pains  composed  of  various  kinds  of  sensations,  their
degrees  and  shades,  was  so  far  from  being  accurately  or  completely
described,  that  we  find  all  these  infinite  varieties  of  sufferings  huddled
together  under  a few  bare,  unmeaning,  general  terms,  such  as  perspira -
tion , heat , fever , headache , sore  throaty  croups  asthma , cough , chest  com-
plaints, stitch  in  the  side , bellyache , want  of  appetite , indigestion , dyspepsia ,
backache , coxalgia , hemorrhoidal  sufferings , urinary  disorders , pains  in  the
limbs  (called  according  to  fancy  gouty  or  rheumatic ),  skin  diseases , spasms ,
convulsions , &c.  With  such  superficial  expressions,  the  innumerable
varieties  of  sufferings  of  patients  were  disposed  of  in  the  so-called
observations,  so  that — with  the  exception  of  some  one  or  other  severe,
striking  symptom  in  this  or  that  case  of  disease — almost  every  disease
pretended  to  be  described  is  as  like  another  as  the  spots  on  a die,  or  as
the  various  pictures  of  the  dauber  resemble  one  another  in  flatness  and
want  of  character.

The  most  important  of  all  human  vocations,  I mean  the  observation
of  the  sick , and  of  the  infinite  varieties  of  their  disordered  state  of  healthy
can  only  be  pursued  in  such  a superficial  and  careless  manner  by  those
who  despise  mankind , for  in  this  way  there  is  no  question  either  of
distinguishing  the  peculiarities  of  the  morbid  states,  or  of  selecting  the
only  appropriate  remedy  for  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case.

The  conscientious  physician  who  earnestly  endeavours  to  apprehend
in  its  peculiarity  the  disease  to  be  cured,  in  order  to  be  able  to  oppose
to  it  the  appropriate  remedy,  will  go  much  more  carefully  to  work  in
his  endeavour  to  distinguish  what  there  is  to  be  observed  ; language
will  scarcely  suffice  to  enable  him  to  express  by  appropriate  words  the
innumerable  varieties  of  the  symptoms  in  the  morbid  state  ; no  sensa-
tion, be  it  ever  so  peculiar,  will  escape  him,  which  was  occasioned  in
his  feelings  by  the  medicine  he  tested  on  himself ; he  will  endeavour
to  convey  an  idea  of  it  in  language  by  the  most  appropriate  expression,
in  order  to  be  able  in  his  practice  to  match  the  accurate  delineation  of
the  morbid  picture  with  the  similarly  acting  medicine,  whereby  alone,
as  he  knows,  can  a cure  be  effected.

So  true  it  is  that  the  careful  observer  alone  can  become  a true
healer  of  diseases.


HOW  CAN  SMALL  DOSES  OF  SUCH  VERY
ATTENUATED  MEDICINE  AS  HOMOEOPATHY  EMPLOYS
STILL  POSSESS  GREAT  POWER?1


This  question  is  asked  not  only  by  the  ordinary  allopathic  physi-
cian, who  thinks  he  cannot  go  far  enough  with  the  huge  quantities  of
medicine  he  prescribes,  but  the  beginner  in  homoeopathy  also  ignorantly
puts  the  same  question.

To  doubt  the  possibility  of  their  possessing  the  requisite  power
seems  to  be  of  itself  very  foolish,  because  they  are  actually  daily  seen
acting  in  this  powerful  manner,  and  manifestly  effecting  the  curative
object  intended.

And  what  actually  takes  place  must  at  least  be  possible  !

But  even  when  the  hostile  scoffers  can  no  longer  deny  the  effect
that  lies  before  their  very  eyes,  they  seek,  by  means  of  false  analogies,
to  represent  what  is  actually  occurring,  if  not  as  impossible,  still  as
ridiculous.

u If  a drop  of  such  highly  attenuated  medicine, ’’  so  they  talk,  cc  can
still  act,  then  the  water  of  the  lake  of  Geneva,  into  which  a drop  of
some  strong  medicine  has  fallen,  must  display  as  much  curative  power
in  each  of  its  separate  drops,  indeed  much  more,  seeing  that  in  the
homoeopathic  attenuations  a much  greater  proportion  of  attenuating
fluid  is  used.”

The  answer  to  this  is,  that  in  the  preparation  of  the  homoeopathic
medicinal  attenuations,  a small  portion  of  medicine  is  not  merely  added
to  an  enormous  quantity  of  non-medicinal  fluid,  or  only  slightly
mingled  with  it,  as  in  the  above  comparison,  which  has  been  devised
in  order  to  pour  ridicule  upon  the  affair,  but,  by  the  prolonged
succussion  or  trituration , there  ensues  not  only  the  most  intimate
mixture,  but  at  the  same  time — and  this  is  the  most  important  circum-
stance— there  ensues  such  a great,  and  hitherto  unknown  and  undreamt
of  change,  by  the  development  and  liberation  of  the  dynamic  powers  of
the  medicinal  substance  so  treated,  as  to  excite  astonishment.

In  the  above  thoughtlessly  adduced  comparison,  however,  by  the
dropping  of  one  drop  of  medicine  into  such  a great  lake,  there  can  be
no  question  of  even  its  superficial  admixture  with  all  parts  of  a mass  of


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827,


44


POWER  OF  SMALL  DOSES.


water  of  such  extent,  so  as  that  every  part  shall  contain  an  equal
portion  of  the  drop  of  medicine.

There  is  not  the  slightest  question  of  an  intimate  mixture  in  such
a case.

Were  we  to  attempt  to  impregnate  only  a moderate  quantity  ( e.g .
a hogshead)  of  water  with  one  drop  of  medicine,  no  conceivable
stirring,  were  it  ever  so  prolonged,  would  succeed  in  distributing  this
drop  uniformly  through  the  whole  mass — not  to  mention  that  the  con-
stant internal  change  and  chemical  decomposition  of  the  component
parts  of  the  water  continually  going  on,  would  destroy  and  annihilate
the  medicinal  power  of  a drop  of  vegetable  tincture  in  the  course  of  a
few  hours.

In  like  manner,  a hundred  weight  of  flour  taken  as  one  whole  mass ,
can  by  no  mechanical  contrivance  be  mixed  so  equally  with  a grain  of
medicine  in  powder  as  that  every  grain  of  flour  shall  obtain  the  same
quantity  of  the  medicinal  powder.

In  the  homoeopathic  pharmaceutical  operations  on  the  contrary
(admitting  they  were  merely  a common  mixture,  which  they  are  not),
as  only  a small  quantity  of  the  attenuating  fluid  is  taken  at  a time  (one
drop  of  medicinal  tincture  shaken  up  with  only  ioo  drops  of  alcohol),
there  ensues  a union  and  equal  distribution  in  a few  seconds.

But  the  mode  of  attenuating  medicines  for  homoeopathic  use  effects
not  only  an  equal  distribution  of  the  medicinal  drop  throughout  a great
proportional  quantity  of  unmedicinal  fluid  (which  is  out  of  the  question
in  the  above  absurd  comparison),  but  it  also  happens — and  this  is  of
infinitely  greater  importance — that  by  the  succussion  or  trituration
employed,  a change  is  effected  in  the  mixture,  which  is  so  incredibly
great  and  so  inconceivably  curative,  that  this  development  of  the
spiritual  power  of  medicines  to  such  a height  by  means  of  the  multi-
plied and  continued  trituration  and  succussion  of  a small  portion  of
medicinal  substance  with  ever  more  and  more  dry  or  fluid  unmedicinal
substances,  deserves  incontestably  to  be  reckoned  among  the  greatest
discoveries  of  this  age.

The  physical  change  and  development  of  power  that  may  be
effected  by  trituration  in  natural  substances,  which  we  call  matter,  have
hitherto  only  been  surmised  from  some  circumstances — but  the  extra-
ordinary effects  it  can  produce  in  the  way  of  developing  and  intensi-
fying the  dynamic  forces  of  medicines,  have  never  been  dreamt  of.

Now,  with  respect  to  the  development  of  physical  forces  from
material  substances  by  trituration , this  is  a very  wonderful  subject.

It  is  only  the  ignorant  vulgar  that  still  look  upon  matter  as  a dead
mass,  for  from  its  interior  can  be  elicited  incredible  and  hitherto
unsuspected  powers.*

The  great  mass  of  mankind  see,  for  example,  that  when  a piece  or
steel  is  strongly  and  rapidly  rubbed  by  a downward  stroke  against  a
hard  stone  (agate,  flint),  an  operation  that  is  termed  striking  fire,
incandescent  sparks  fly  off  (and  kindle  the  tinder  or  punk  they  fall  on)  ;
but  how  few  among  them  have  carefully  observed  and  reflected  upon
what  really  takes  place  here.  All  of  them,  or  at  least  almost  all,  go

* Extracted  from  my  essay  in  the  Allgem.  Anz.  d.  Deutschen , 1825,  No.  194.


POWER  OF  SMALL  DOSES.


43

on  thoughtlessly  lighting  their  tinder,  and  almost  no  one  perceives
what  a miracle,  what  a great  natural  phenomenon  is  here  disclosed.

When  sparks  are  thus  struck  with  sufficient  force,  and  caught  on  a
sheet  of  white  paper,  then  we  may  see,  either  with  the  naked  eye  or  by
means  of  a lens,  usually  small  pellets  of  steel  lying  there,  which  have
been  detached  in  a state  of  fusion  from  the  surface  of  the  steel  by  the
smart  friction  blow  with  the  flint,  and  have  fallen  in  an  incandescent
state,  like  small  fire  balls,  in  the  form  of  sparks,  upon  the  paper,  where
they  cooled.

How ! can  the  violent  friction  of  the  flint  down  the  steel  (in  the
operation  of  striking  fire)  cause  such  a degree  of  heat  as  to  fuse  steel
into  little  balls  ? Does  it  not  require  a heat  of  at  least  3000°  of
Fahrenheit’s  thermometer  in  order  to  melt  steel  ? Whence  comes  this
tremendous  heat  ? Not  out  of  the  air,  for  this  phenomenon  takes
place  just  as  well  in  the  vacuum  of  the  air-pump,  therefore  it  must
come  from  the  substances  that  are  rubbed  together;  which  is  the  fact.

But  does  the  ordinary  individual  really  believe  that  the  cold  steel
which  he  draws  thoughtlessly  from  his  pocket  to  light  his  tinder
contains  hidden  within  it  (in  a latent,  confined,  undeveloped  state)  an
inexhaustible  store  of  caloric,  which  the  friction  only  develops,  and  as
it  were,  wakes  into  activity?  No,  he  does  not  believe  it,  and  yet  so
it  is.

But  this  inexhaustible  store  of  caloric  can  only  be  released  by
friction . Count  Rumford  teaches  us  (in  the  fourth  volume  of  his
works)  how  to  heat  our  rooms  solely  by  the  rapid  motion  of  two  plates
of  metal  rubbing  against  one  another,  without  the  employment  of  any
ordinary  combustible  material  whatever.

The  effect  of  friction  is  so  great  that  not  only  the  internal  physical
properties,  such  as  caloric,  odour,*  &c.,  are  roused  and  developed  by  it,
but  also  the  dynamic  medicinal  powers  of  natural  substances  are  thereby
called  forth  to  an  incredible  degree,  a fact  that  has  hitherto  escaped
observation.

I was  apparently  the  first  who  made  this  great,  this  extraordi-
nary discovery , that  the  properties  of  crude  medicinal  substances
gain,  when  they  are  fluid  by  repeated  succussion  with  unmedicinal
fluids,  and  when  they  are  dry  by  frequent  continued  trituration  with
unmedicinal  powders,  such  an  increase  of  medicinal  power,  that  when
these  processes  are  carried  very  far,  even  substances  in  which  for
centuries  no  medicinal  power  has  been  observed  in  their  crude  state,
display  under  this  manipulation  a power  of  acting  on  the  health  of  man
that  is  quite  astonishing.

Thus  pure  gold,  silver,  and  platina  have  no  action  on  the  human
health  in  their  solid  state — and  the  same  is  the  case  with  vegetable
charcoal  in  its  crude  state.  Several  grains  of  gold  leaf,  silver  leaf,  or
charcoal  may  be  taken  by  the  most  sensitive  person  without  his
perceiving  any  medicinal  action  from  them.  All  these  substances

* Horn,  ivory,  bone,  the  calcareous  stone  impregnated  with  petroleum,  &c.,  have
of  themselves  no  smell,  but  when  filed  or  rubbed  they  not  only  emit  an  odour,  but  an
extremely  foetid  one,  hence  the  last-mentioned  substance  has  obtained  the  name  of
Stinkstoney  though  when  not  rubbed  it  has  no  smell.


46


POWER  OF  SMALL  DOSES.


present  themselves  to  us  in  a state  of  suspended  animation  as  far  as
regards  their  medicinal  action.  But  by  strongly  triturating  for  an
hour,  according  to  the  method  of  homoeopathic  pharmaceutics,  one
grain,  e.g.  of  this  gold  leaf  with  ioo  grains  of  a non- medicinal  powder
(milk  sugar)  a preparation  results  which  has  already  great  medicinal
power.  But  a grain  of  this  preparation  rubbed  for  an  hour  with
ioo  grains  of  milk  sugar,  and  this  process  repeated  in  the  same  manner
with  always  fresh  ioo  grains  of  milk  sugar  until  the  last  preparation
contains  in  every  grain  the  quadrillionth  of  a grain  of  gold,  gives  a
medicine  in  which  the  medicinal  powers— completely  latent  and  locked
up  in  gold  in  its  massive  state — are  so  strikingly  called  into  life  and
roused  and  developed  into  activity,  that  when  a victim  of  melancholia
loathing  life  and  driven  to  contemplate  suicide  by  intolerable  anxiety
smells  for  a few  seconds  at  a single  grain  of  it  contained  in  a phial,
in  one  hour  the  evil  spirit  is  cast  out  of  this  miserable  creature,  and  com-
plete love  of  life  and  cheerfulness  are  once  more  wakened  up  in  him.

From  this  we  perceive  that  the  preparations  of  medicinal  substances
by  trituration , the  farther  the  development  of  their  powers  is  thereby
brought  and  the  more  perfectly  capable  they  are  thereby  rendered  for
displaying  their  power,  become  capable  also  of  answering  the  homoeo-
pathic purpose  in  proportionately  smaller  quantities  and  doses.

Medicinal  substances  are  not  dead  masses  in  the  ordinary  sense  of
the  term,  on  the  contrary,  their  true  essential  nature  is  only  dynami-
cally spiritual — is  pure  force,  which  may  be  increased  in  potency
almost  to  an  infinite  degree,  by  that  very  remarkable  process  of  tritura-
tion (and  succussion ) according  to  the  homoeopathic  method.

This  is  so  true  that  we  must  act  with  moderation  in  order  to  avoid
increasing  the  powers  of  the  medicines  to  an  undue  extent  by  such
trituration.  A drop  of  drosera  in  the  30th  dilution  succussed  with
twenty  strokes  of  the  arm  at  each  dilution,  given  as  a dose  to  a child
suffering  from  whooping-cough,  endangers  its  life,  whereas,  if  the
dilution  phials  are  succussed  only  twice,  a globule  the  size  of  a poppy-
seed moistened  with  the  last  dilution  cures  it  readily.


LEDUM.1

( Marsh  Tea.)

(The  twigs  of  Ledum  palustre , quickly  dried  and  powdered,  macerated  in  twenty
parts,  by  weight,  of  alcohol,  to  form  a tincture.)

The  subjoined  symptoms,  though  they  are  by  no  means  all  that
might  be  elicited  by  proving  on  the  healthy,  are  yet  enough  to  show
that  this  very  powerful  medicine  is  suitable  for  the  most  part  only  for
chronic  maladies  in  which  there  is  a predominance  of  coldness  and
deficiency  of  animal  heat,  particularly  as  the  duration  of  its  action  in
large  doses  extends  to  four  weeks.

The  dose,  in  cases  of  disease  for  which  ledum  is  homoeopathically
adapted,  I have  found,  by  numerous  trials  and  multiplied  experience,
requires  to  be  reduced  to  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  quintillion-
fold attenuation  of  the  tincture.

The  evil  effects  of  this  medicine  when  unhomoeopathically  selected
or  given  in  too  large  doses,  are  relieved  by  frequent  smelling  of  a
spirituous  solution  of  camphor,  or  by  repeated  ingestion  of  a drop  of
such  solution ; but  cinchona  bark  given  for  the  debility  produced  by
ledum  is  very  injurious.

From  the  following  symptoms  compared  with  the  similar  and
identical  ill  effects  of  many  intoxicating  beers,  it  may  be  inferred  that
they  are  adulterated  to  a hurtful  extent  and  in  a criminal  manner  with
ledum,  to  which  the  police  authorities  should  pay  more  attention.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Becher,  Franz,  Herrmann,
Langhammer,  Teuthorn,  Walther.

The  old-school  authorities  quoted  are  :

Linnjeus,  Flora  Lapponica.

Pallas,  Flora  Rossica , tom.  i,  p.  2.

In  the  Fragment  a ledum  has  80  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit.  31a,  and  in  this  2nd
edit.  338.]


LEDUM.

When  walking  and  standing  vertigo,  he  could  hardly  keep  him-
self upright  (aft.  9 h.).  [Zr.]

Vertigo : the  head  tends  to  sink  backwards.  [ Hrr.\

All  day  long  violent  vertigo,  even  when  sitting  still,  which  is
increased  by  stooping,  and  when  walking  amounts  to  falling  forwards,
as  if  from  intoxication,  with  feeling  of  heat  throughout  the  body,
especially  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  with  pale  cheeks  and  forehead
(aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.]


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


48


LEDUM.


Stupefaction  of  the  whole  head,  as  in  vertigo  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.]

5.  Intoxication,  giddiness  and  emptiness  in  the  head.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  is  as  if  intoxicated,  [Fz.]
Incontrollable  intoxication.  [Linn^us,1  Flora  Lapponica , p.  124.]
Loss  of  reason.  [Pallas,2  Flora  Rossica , tom.  i,  p.  ii,  p.  94.]
Headache,  as  from  a blow  or  knock.

10.  Head  affected;  when  he  makes  a false  step  the  brain  is  painfully
shaken.

Violent  headache.3  [Pallas, — Linnaeus,  1.  c.]

Raging  headache.

During  sleep  in  the  morning  he  feels  a dull  headache.  [Fz.]
Headache  that  makes  him  feel  stupid.

15 . Tearing  pain  in  the  head  and  eye ; the  white  and  the  conjunctiva  of
the  eye  are  swollen  and  highly  inflamed  ; the  tearing  pain  in  the  eye
is  aggravated  by  lying  and  alleviated  by  sitting ; the  eyelids  are  not
affected,  but  in  the  morning  are  sealed  up  as  with  matter,  and  an  ill-
smelling moisture  exudes  from  between  them;  at  the  same  time
there  is  evening  rigor,  followed  by  heat,  nocturnal  thirst,  rumbling  in
the  abdomen  (with  good  appetite),  more  internal  than  external  heat
of  the  head,  and  sweat  on  the  back  and  in  the  hair  of  the  head  (aft.

24  h.).

Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown.  \_Hrr. ]

Pressure  in  the  forehead.  [Hrr.]

Pressive  headache  on  the  top  of  the  forehead  with  confusion  of
the  head,  especially  on  covering  it.  [Tz.]

Pressive  headache  all  over  the  brain  like  a weight  on  it,  with
short  interruptions,  lasting  day  and  night  for  three  days.  [Bch.]

20.  Headache,  at  first  all  over  the  brain  like  flat  heavy  pressure,
which  the  second  day  became  a dull  pressure  on  a small  spot  in  the
right  temple.  [Belli]

Shooting  pain  under  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  in  the
brain.  [Hrr.]

On  touching  the  temple  aching  pain.4

Aching  stupefying  pain  externally  on  the  forehead,  as  from
dissipation  over-night,  in  every  position  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.]

Crawling  itching  on  the  forehead  and  hairy  scalp,  as  from  lice.

[&•*.]

25.  Pimples  and  boils  on  the  forehead.

Dry  pimples  on  the  forehead,  especially  in  the  middle,  like
millet  seeds,  without  sensation,  for  six  days  (aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.]

Eruption  of  red  lumps  in  the  face,  touching  them  causes  shooting
pain.

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  forehead,  as  in  brandy  drinkers,  and
smarting  itching  on  the  chest  as  from  lice,  with  red  spots  and
miliary  rash.

1 Statement.

2 Statement. — This  was  after  prolonged  intoxication.

3 With  the  intoxication.

4 Though  no  name  is  attached  to  this  symptom,  it  occurs  among  the  (( observations
of  others,”  and  is  therefore  not  one  of  Hahnemann’s  observations.


LEDUM.


49


Contracted  pupils  (aft:,  i h.).  [Zr.]

30.  Dilated  pupils  (aft.  3J,  5J,  9^  h.).  [Zr.]

Considerable  dilatation  of  the  pupils  (soon  after  taking
it).  [Bch.]

Excessive  dilatation  of  the  pupils.

Flickering  before  the  eyes,  he  could  not  see  anything  distinctly.

Weak  sight ; he  saw  nothing  with  sufficient  distinctness.  [Fz.]

3 5.  When  he  looks  at  anything  attentively  there  is  a halo  or  a
flickering  before  the  eyes,  as  after  running  quickly,  and  (as  in  vertigo)
he  cannot  fix  his  look  steadily  on  a certain  object.

Lachrymation  of  the  eyes  (without  inflammation  of  the  sclerotic) ;
the  tears  are  acrid  and  smarting,  and  excoriate  the  lower  eyelid  and
the  cheek.

Smarting  tears  in  the  eyes.

Pressure  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right  orbit,  worse  on  moving.
[. Hrr .]

Pain  in  the  eye,  without  inflammation,  a pressure  behind  the  eye-
ball, as  if  it  would  be  pressed  out.  [Bch.]

40.  Great  itching  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eyes.

Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  tensive  pain.

Burning  aching  in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  evening,  they  are
gummed  up  in  the  morning,  but  by  day  they  water,  even  in  the
room  (aft.  4 h.).

The  eyelids  are  gummed  together,  without  pains.

The  eyelids  are  full  of  gum,  but  neither  swollen  nor  inflamed.
45.  Paleness  of  the  face,  and  yet  not  chilly.

A noise  in  the  ears,  like  ringing  of  bells,  or  like  a
storm  of  wind.

Loud,  but  interrupted  roaring  in  the  ears,  almost  all  day.  [Bch.]
Roaring  in  the  ears,  as  from  wind.  [Bch].

Dulness  of  hearing  of  the  right  ear.

50.  Transient  deafness,  as  if  something  lay  before  the  membrana
tympani  of  both  ears  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.]

Deafness  of  the  right  ear ; it  feels  as  if  stopped  up  with  cotton
wool,  and  it  seems  to  him  as  if  he  heard  a distant  ringing  of  bells.
[Hrr.-]

Slight  epistaxis,  bloody  nasal  mucus.

A burning  pain,  as  from  red  hot  coals,  in  the  interior  of  the  nose,
during  which  the  nose  was  painful  when  pressed  and  blown  (aft.

24  h.).

Suppurating  pimple  on  the  border  of  the  upper  lip,  with  burning
itching,  which  forced  him  to  scratch,  but  was  aggravated  thereby
(aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.]

55-  Hard  pressure  inwards  in  the  left  lower  jaw  (aft.  1 h.).
[Hrr.]

After  some  great  stitches  in  the  tooth,  an  intolerable,  external
tearing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  face,  head  and  neck,  all  night
long,  which  goes  ofF  after  some  additional  stitches  in  the  tooth,  but
returns  from  time  to  time,  and  the  attacks  terminate  with  shivering
and  profound  sleep  and  absence  of  hunger  and  thirst  (aft.  96  h.).

VOL.  11.  4


LEDUM.


5°

(Pressive  pain  on  a left  upper  and  lower  incisor.)  [Zz.]

Swelling  of  a gland  anteriorly  under  the  chin,  touching  causes
aching  pain.  \_Hrr. ]

Fine  shooting  in  the  front  part  of  the  tongue  (aft.  § h.),  [L/rr.]

60.  Dry  feeling  in  the  palate,  with  thirst  for  water,  without  heat.
[Bch.]

Bore  throat,  with  fine  shooting  pain.

Shooting  in  the  throat  when  not  swallowing,  only  in  the  fore-
noon ; on  sneezing  there  was  only  an  aching  at  the  back  of  the
throat.

Sensation  as  of  a plug  in  the  throat ; when  she  swallows  there  is
shooting  pain.

Want  of  appetite.

65.  Great  thirst  for  cold  liquids,  especially  water  (aft.  4J,  8,  28  h.).

1 >.]

Continual  absence  of  thirst.  [ Hrr.  ]

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Zz.]

A sick  feeling  in  the  stomach,  as  if  qualmish,  and  at  the  same
time  bad  musty  taste  in  the  mouth.

She  has  no  hunger,  and  when  she  eats  something  she  instantly
feels  as  if  she  had  eaten  too  much  ; it  oppresses  her  and  she  gets
nausea.

70.  While  eating,  drawing  and  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  [Z%.]

On  eating  quickly  there  occurs  a contractive  pain  in  the  sternum.

Dislike  to  the  accustomed  tobacco  smoking,  with  proper  appetite
for  food.  [Bch.~\

Nausea  in  the  morning.

Nausea.  [Pallas,  1.  c.]

75.  Every  time  he  spits  he  becomes  sick  and  inclined  to  vomit.
[Bch.]

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  retching  with  eructation  and  fulness
and  straining  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  [Zz.]

A sudden  flow  of  watery  saliva  from  the  mouth,  with
colic— waterbr  ash.

Bellyache  : digging  under  the  navel,  with  flow  of  water  from  the
mouth,  like  waterbrash  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Bch.'\

Frequently  occurring  hiccup  (aft.  2§  h.).  [Zr.]

80.  (Bitter  eructation  after  eating.)

When  walking  in  the  open  air  nausea,  with  sweat  all  over  the
body,  especially  on  the  forehead.

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen.

Bellyache,  as  in  dysentery.

Bellyache,  as  if  the  bowels  were  contused  and  weakened,  a
sensation  such  as  remains  after  the  action  of  a strong  purgative  (aft.
6 h.).

85.  Bellyache,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  about  to  come  on,  from  the  navel
to  the  anus  3 at  the  same  time  anorexia,  with  correct  taste  and  cold
feet.

Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  every  evening.

(In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  feeling  as  if  there  were  present


LEDUM.


5i


in  the  stomach  a pressing  swelling,  as  from  over-loading  of  that
organ  with  food.)

In  the  abdominal  muscles  obtuse  shooting  and  pressure  between
the  pelvis  and  the  last  left  rib.  \_Hrr.~]

In  the  side,  above  the  hip,  a slow  stitch,  like  a sharp  pressure.

- 90.  Pressure  on  the  superior  border  of  the  left  side  of  the  pelvis  up
to  the  last  false  rib,  more  severe  when  walking,  [iZrr.]

Discharge  of  flatus  (the  1st  d.).  [Bch.]

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  1 h).  [Zr.]

Bellyache  (cutting?),  with  flow  of  blood  from  the  anus.

The  stool  is  mixed  with  blood.

95.  Faecal  diarrhoea,  with  mucus  (aft  24  h.).  [Bch. ]

Pappy  stool,  like  diarrhoea,  without  suffering.  [Zr.]

Constipation  for  several  days.

Above  the  anus  on  the  coccyx  a red,  moist  spot,  with  smarting,
sore  itching  pain,  when  sitting  and  walking  (aft.  48  h.).

Diuresis.

100.  He  must  urinate  often,  and  copiously  every  time,  even  at  night
several  times  (the  first  12  h.).  [Z/rr.]

' Diminished  secretion  and  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  12  d.).  [iZrr.]
Very  rare  and  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (the  first  12  h.).  [ Trn.]
Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
2 h.).  [Zr.]

Reddish  urine  (aft.  24  h.).  [Bch.~\

105.  (Yellow  urine,  with  white  chalky  sediment.)

(Burning  in  the  urethra  after  micturition.)

(A  clawing  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  in  the  bladder)
~ (immediately).

The  flow  of  urine  often  stops,  and  it  will  not  come  away,  and  when
she  has  urinated  there  is  shooting  pain.

Swelling  of  the  penis  : the  urethra  is  as  if  swollen  ; he  must  press
much  in  order  to  pass  the  urine,  and  the  stream  is  very  thin,  but
without  pains  (aft.  3 d.).
no.  (Itching  on  the  glans  penis.)

Violent  and  continued  erections  of  the  penis.  \_Hrr.~]

Nocturnal  emissions  of  semen.  [Z/rr.]

Nocturnal  pollutions  of  bloody  or  watery  semen  (aft.  12,  36  h.).
(After  a nocturnal  pollution  so  exhausted  that  he  can  scarcely
drag  his  feet  along.)

1 15.  Catamenia  some  days  too  early.

Catamenia  every  fourteen  days.

More  profuse  catamenia.

* -*

*

A spasmodic  double  inspiration  and  sobbing.*

On  inspiring  and  holding  the  breath  great  tension  in  the  sub-
costal region.

i2o.  TigM,  painful  respiration.

All  day  long  she  could  not  get  her  breath.

* As  with  children  who  have  cried  much  and  have  been  very  angry.


52


LEDUM.


Byspnoeic  constriction  of  the  chest,  aggravated  by
movement  and  walking.

Tightness  of  chest,  with  difficult,  more  rapid  respiration,  as  from
constriction  of  the  chest,  at  the  same  time  constant  painfulness  of
the  sternum  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Bch.~\

When  going  upstairs  tightness  of  the  chest.

125  Tracheal  asthma.

A crawling  in  the  trachea,  followed  by  rapid,  tight  breath.

(Foetid  breath.)

Before  the  cough  comes  she  loses  her  breath,  as  if  she  would  be
suffocated.

Cough  without  expectoration  (aft.  40  h.).  \_Bch.~\

130.  With  slight  cough,  expectoration  of  blood.

With  severe  cough,  profuse  expectoration  of  blood.

Expectoration  of  bright  red  blood  with  violent  cough.

Only  nocturnal  or  morning  cough,  with  purulent  expectoration.
A hoarse,  rough,  scrapy  condition  (in  the  windpipe)  on  the  chest
(aft.  48  h.).

135.  A pain  in  the  sternum.

Pain  externally  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  as  when  a wound  is
pressed  on,  per  se,  but  more  when  touched.

During  respiration  a pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  something  alive  caused
uneasiness  there.

Drawing  externally  on  the  chest,  when  walking  and  inspiring,
accompanied  by  single  stitches.  [Tz.]

Drawing  in  the  sides  of  the  chest,  especially  during  inspiration,
accompanied  by  single  stitches.  [/%.]

140.  Pain  of  the  sternum,  as  if  the  bone  were  painful,  in  jerks,  like
digging  and  scraping  in  it,  without  cough.  \_Bch. ]

Pressure  on  the  chest,  when  walking.  [Tz.]

Pressure  on  the  sternum,  in  bed,  aggravated  by  movement,  [iim]
Hard  pressure  from  within  outwards,  a hand's  breadth  below  the
right  nipple,  more  violent  during  expiration,  in  the  morning  in  bed
(aft.  44  h.).  [Hrr.~]

Tearing  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest  above  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  on  every  movement  of  the  arm  and  when  sitting.  [Tz.]

145.  Obtuse  shooting  on  the  last  right  true  rib.  \_Hrr.~\

In  the  morning,  stitches  in  the  chest.  [Tz.]

A kind  of  sheep-pocks  on  the  chest  and  upper  arms,  which  scab
off  after  five  days.

Pressure  outwards  in  the  left  axilla.  [iim]

Small,  red,  constantly-itching  pimples  on  the  back.

150.  A boil  on  the  scapula.

Under  the  left  scapula,  a bruised  pain.

On  moving,  painful  stiffness  of  the  back  and  scapulae.

Painful  stiffness  of  the  back  and  loins,  after  sitting.

Obtuse  shooting  and  pressure  near  the  dorsal  vertebrae,  aggravated
by  inspiration,  [i/m]

155.  Spasmodic,  cramp-like  pain  under  the  short  ribs,  and  immediately
above  the  hips,  towards  evening,  so  violent  that  he  could  have  cried


LEDUM.


53


out,  it  took  away  his  breath,  and  he  was  unable  to  rise  from  the  chair
without  assistance  (aft.  13  d.).

Pain  in  the  loins  after  sitting.

A tearing  from  the  sacrum  up  to  the  occiput,  the  left  half  of  the
brain  and  the  left  jaw,  especially  in  the  evening,  with  hot  bloated
cheeks,  and  red  inflamed  eyes.

Drawing  in  the  sacrum  and  stiffness  in  the  back  (aft.  12  d.).

When  standing,  drawing  pain  in  the  sacrum,  which  goes  off'  by
pressing  on  it.  [Tz.]

160.  Pain  in  the  sacrum,  when  rising  from  a seat.  \_Bch. ~|

On  raising  the  arm,  an  extremely  painful  shooting  in
the  shoulder.


Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint.  [Hrr.]

Pressure  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  aggravated  by
movement.  [. Hrr .]

Tearing  pressure  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  aggravated
by  movement.  [Hrr.]

165.  Pressure  in  both  shoulder-joints,  aggravated  by
movement.  [Hrr.']

Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm  on  movement.

A tearing  pain  in  the  arms  (aft.  3 h.).

Weakness  of  the  upper  extremities,  and  pressure  on  several  parts
of  them,  a kind  of  paralysis  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.]

Fine  shooting  itching  gnawing  on  both  upper  arms,  which  is
relieved  by  scratching,  but  soon  recurs  more  severely.  [Hrr.]

170.  Pressure  inwards  on  the  right  upper  arm.  [Hrr.]

Pressure  and  feeling  of  weight  on  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  40  h.).

[-&T.]

Intermittent  tearing  pressure  backwarks  on  the  left  upper  arm,
aggravated  by  movement.  [Hrr.]

Pressure  and  tearing  pressure,  with  feeling  of  heaviness,  on  various
parts  of  the  right  arm,  especially  in  the  joints  of  the  arm,  in  which
the  pain  was  very  much  aggravated  by  movement  (aft.  32  h.).  [Hrr.]
Pressure  in  the  right  elbow-joint,  aggravated  by  movement.  [Hrr.]
175.  Aching  tensive  feeling  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  like
pain  of  dislocation,  in  all  positions  (aft.  24  h.).  [Lr.]

Painful  twitching  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forearm.  [Wth.]
Desire  to  stretch  the  upper  extremities  (aft.  30  h.].  [Bch.]
Drawing  pain  in  the  extensor  tendons  of  three  fingers  of  the  left
hand.

A severe  or  fine  shooting  in  the  hand.

180.  Itching  miliary  rash  on  the  wrist-joint.

Tearing  pain  in  the  hands.

The  palms  are  sweaty  all  day.

The  periosteum  of  the  digital  phalanges  is  painful  when  pressed
upon.

A lump  (hard  swelling)  on  the  tendon  of  the  thumb,  near  the
wrist-joint,  which  is  painful  on  flexing  the  thumb.

185.  Pressure  between  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  thumb  and
the  bones  of  the  wrist,  aggravated  by  movement  (aft.  7 d,).  [Hrr.],


54


LEDUM.


Trembling  of  the  hands  when  grasping  and  when
moving  them,  [Bch.]

Great  trembling  of  the  hands,  as  from  old  age,  especially  when
moving  them  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb,  which  goes  off
on  moving  the  thumb.  [Fz.]

Fine  tearing  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  especially  in  the
joints,  aggravated  by  movement.  [Hrr,]

190.  A painless  lump  under  the  middle  joint  of  the  index  finger.

Pain  in  both  hip-joints  and  in  the  sacrum,  on  rising  from  a seat.
[Hrr.]

Pressure  on  the  right  hip-joint,  aggravated  by  move-
ment (aft.  4 d.).  [ Hrr .]

Tearing  pressure  from  the  hip-joint  to  the  ankles,  aggravated  by
movement.  [ Hrr .]

Pinching  drawing  pain  in  both  hip-joints,  in  the  cotyloid  cavity
itself,  which  also  extended  down  to  the  posterior  part  of  the  thigh  (aft.
2 h.).  [Trn.]

195.  Fine,  itching  shooting,  and  itching  gnawing  on  the  hip-joints,
which  is  somewhat  allayed  by  scratching,  but  then  recurs  more
violently,  [Hrr.]

The  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh  feel  as  if  paralysed.

Pain,  as  if  in  the  periosteum  of  the  femur,  on  walking,  sitting
and  touching,  as  if  bruised,  sore,  or  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  from
the  bone.

At  night,  burning  itching  on  the  thighs,  which  when  scratching
only  caused  burning,  and  then  went  off  (aft.  2 h.).  [Trn.]

Fine,  shooting  itching  gnawing  on  the  thighs,  which  was  some-
what allayed  by  scratching,  but  recurred  more  severely.  [Hrr.]

200.  Pressure  on  the  left  thigh,  posteriorly;  it  is  as  if
the  muscles  were  not  in  their  right  places,  like  pain  of
dislocation,  in  every  position,  but  especially  violent
when  touched  and  when  walking  (aft.  12  d.).  [Hrr.]

Pain  in  the  knees,  as  if  bruised,  or  sore.

Creaking  and  cracking  in  the  knees.

In  the  knees,  stiffness,  only  when  walking.

Stiffness  of  the  knee.

205.  Tensive  pain  in  the  knee  and  heel,  when  walking,  after  sitting.

Trembling  of  the  knees  (and  hands)  when  sitting  and
walking.  [Bch.]

Weakness  and  pressure  in  the  left  leg  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to
the  thigh  ; a kind  of  paralysis  or  paralytic  pain.  [Hrr.]

Great  weakness  in  the  knee-joints,  compelling  him  to  sit  down.
[Hrr.]

Weakness  in  the  knee-joints,  and  when  walking  a
tearing  pressure  in  them.  [Hrr.]

210.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  knee-joint  and  below
it,  aggravated  by  movement.  [Hrr.]

Obtuse  shooting  and  pressure  in  the  right  knee-joint,  aggravated
by  movement.  [Hrr.]


LEDUM.


55


Pain  anteriorly  on  both  patellae  as  if  bruised,  when  walking.

Pressure  on  the  right  side  near  the  left  patella,  aggravated  by
movement  (aft.  12  h.).  [Hrr.]

In  the  morning,  perspiration  on  the  knee.

215.  Swelling  and  tensive  and  shooting  pain  in  the  knee,
when  walking.

Itching  eruption  in  the  hough.

A stretching  and  extension  of  the  thighs.

A grasping  pain  on  the  calf,  down  along  the  tibia.

Tensive  pain  in  the  calves,  when  walking,  after  sitting.

220.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  calves.

At  night,  cramp  in  the  calves  when  lying,  it  went  off  on  rising
up,  but  returned  immediately  on  lying  down  (aft.  24  h.).

Weakness  and  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  legs.  [Hrr. ]

In  the  morning  he  is  stiff  and  rigid  in  the  legs.

Stiffness  of  the  legs,  with  chilliness  and  emptiness  of  the  head.

Z25.  A great  weariness  in  the  legs,  as  if  she  had  walked  many  miles,
she  feels  this  only  when  sitting  or  lying,  but  not  when  walking.

The  legs  very  heavy  ; there  is  often  a drawing  in  them  to  above
the  knees.

On  bending  the  legs,  feeling  as  of  a twitching  and  weariness  in  them.

When  sitting,  he  gets  a sensation  of  coldness  only  in  the  legs,  but
they  were  not  actually  cold.

A shooting  in  the  ankle.

230.  Pressure  above  the  left  inner  ankle,  aggravated  by
movement.  [Hrr.]

Pressure  as  with  a finger  under  the  left  ankle,  alike  in  every
position.  [Hrr.]

Pain  in  the  ankle-joint,  as  from  a sprain  or  bending  over  of  the  foot.

Pressure  in  the  left  ankle-joint,  here  and  there  ; aggravated  by
movement.  [ Hrr .]

On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  an  eruption  of  fine  pimples,  which
itches  in  the  evening.

235.  Very  severe  gnawing  itching  on  the  dorsum  of
both  feet;  after  scratching,  it  always  becomes  more
violent ; It  was  only  allayed  after  he  had  scratched  the
feet  quite  raw ; much  aggravated  by  the  heat  of  the

bed.  [ Hrr .]

Pressure  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  in  bed.  [ Hrr.\

Swelling  of  the  feet  about  the  ankles,  and  intolerable  pain  in  the
ankle-joint  on  treading  (aft.  5 d.).

Obstinate  swelling  of  the  feet.

Swelling  of  the  legs  to  above  the  calves,  with  tensive  pain,
especially  in  the  evening  (aft.  some  h.).

240.  Swelling  of  the  feet  for  eight  days.

Aching  in  the  feet,  here  and  there  (aft.  11  d.).  [Hrr.]

Pressure  on  the  inner  border  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  5 d.).
[Hrr.]

Pressure  on  the  inner  border  of  the  left  foot  and  on  its  dorsum.
[Hrr.]


56


LEDUM,


The  soles  of  the  feet  are  painful  when  walking  as  if
they  were  filled  with  blood.

245.  Presssure  on  the  soles  of  both  feet,  aggravated  by  walking.  [ Hrr .]

Burning  pressure  on  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  towards  the  fore
part.  [iLrr.]

Pain  under  the  heel  when  walking,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  2 h.).

Pressure  above  the  right  heel.  [iLrr.]

Feeling  of  rush  of  blood  towards  the  big  toe.

250.  A slow  and  continued  stitch  in  the  big  toe  (aft.  2 h.).

At  night  in  sleep,  a cutting  in  the  toes  of  the  left  foot  (aft.
48  h).

Pressure  on  the  proximal  joints  of  the  toes  of  the  left  foot.  [ Hrr .]

Fine  tearing  in  the  toes  of  the  left  foot,  especially  on  their  under
surface.  \_Hrr.']

Pressure  at  the  junction  of  the  three  last  toes  with  the  metatarsal
bones,  aggravated  by  movement  (aft.  3 d.).  \_Hrr.~\

255.  The"  ball  of  the  big  toe  is  soft,  swollen  and  painful
when  treading.

Heat  in  the  hands  and  feet,  in  the  evening.

Long  continued  warm  sweat  on  the  hands  and  feet.

(Tearing  pain  in  the  back  and  knees.)

The  gout  reappears.

260.  Small  round,  red  spots,  without  sensation,  on  the  inside  of  the
arms,  on  the  abdomen  and  on  the  feet  (aft.  48  h.).

Eruption  : small  elevations  like  red  millet-seeds,  all  over  the  body
(face,  neck  and  hands  excepted),  with  itching  by  day  and  only
occasionally  at  night,  allayed  for  but  a short  time  by  scratching.

Itching  on  the  knuckles  of  the  joints  of  the  toes,  on  the  ankle-
joint  and  loins.

After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  feeling  as  of  aching  and  tension  comes
from  the  side  towards  the  shoulder,  thence  over  the  chest,  clutch-
ing in  the  sternum,  hearing  and  sight  are  lost  ; he  must  lie  down
and  he  remains  pale  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  is  anxious  and  has  cold
hands  and  diarrhoea.

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  joints.

265.  (Tearing  twitching  pain  in  the  joints.)

A throbbing  pain  in  the  affected  joints,  that  impedes  move-
ment.

Only  the  pains  in  the  joints  became  more  violent  during  move-
ment, not  those  at  other  parts.  \_Hrr.~\

Painful  hard  lumps  and  nodes  on  the  joints.

At  night,  in  bed,  on  moving  the  body,  a paralytic  pain  in  all  the
joints.

270.  Drawing  in  all  the  long  bones  of  the  body,  when  moving.

[**•]

Transient,  tearing,  rheumatic  pains,  especially  on  movement.

The  limbs  and  the  whole  body  are  painful  (oppression  in  all  the
limbs),  as  if  they  were  bruised  and  beaten.

He  cannot  bear  the  heat  of  the  bed,  on  account  of
heat  and  burning  in  the  limbs.


LEDUM.


57


Intolerance  of  the  bed-clothes,  because  they  make  her  hot.

275.  Numb  and  heavy  feeling  in  the  limbs  with  pains  in  the  bones
(aft.  20  h.).

Numbness  and  gone-to-sleep  feeling  of  the  limbs.

Dry  excessively  itching  tetter,  with  anxiety.

Itching  of  the  skin.

On  the  side  of  the  abdomen  and  on  the  arms,  itching  and  gnaw-
ing, and  after  scratching,  burning  (aft.  24  h.).

280.  Itching  of  the  whole  body  as  if  an  eruption  would  break  out
(aft.  48  h.).

A transient,  fine  shooting  itching  of  the  skin  all  over  the  body.

Slight  itching  needle-pricks  on  several  parts  of  the  body,  that
excite  scratching,  whereby  it  is  allayed  for  some  time,  but  recurs
with  increased  intensity.  \_Hrr.]

Fine  itching  pricking,  and  itching  gnawing  on  several  parts  of
the  body,  especially  on  the  hip-joints,  thighs,  and  upper  arms,  that
compels  scratching,  by  which  it  is  somewhat  allayed,  but  then  recurs
every  time  with  increased  violence.  [Hrr.]

Bluish  spots  on  the  body,  like  petechiae.

285.  Tiresome  weariness  and  exhaustion  when  sitting,  standing,  and
walking  ; when  he  has  sat  for  some  time,  he  feels  pains  in  the  coccyx.
[. Hrr .]

Syncope.

In  the  morning,  great  desire  to  lie  down  ; he  is  sleepy,  sick  and
anxious  (aft.  4 d.).

Sleepiness.  [Hrr.']

She  cannot  sleep,  and  always  starts  up ; when  she  closes  her  eyes
she  is  delirious  and  has  visions,  when  almost  quite  awake.

290.  Sleeps  restlessly  and  dreams  the  most  confused  things,  all  mixed
up  together.

At  night,  restless  sleep,  tossing  about  in  bed  ; in  the  morning,  in
bed,  great  chilliness,  he  cannot  get  warm ; then  unusually  long
morning  sleep.  [Tz.]

Deep,  but  restless  sleep ; he  lies  at  night  on  the  unaccustomed
side,  and  in  the  morning  he  cannot  rouse  himself.  [Tz.]

Waking  up  from  a dream,  which  caused  her  to  start.

Dream  full  of  shame,  and  perspiration  at  night.

295.  Morning  sleep  full  of  dreams  of  murder  and  violence.  [ Trn.\

Dream  full  of  anxiety  of  conscience,  with  profuse  sweat.

Uneasy  dreams ; he  is  sometimes  in  one  place,  some-
times in  another,  sometimes  occupied  with  one  subject,
sometimes  with  another.  [Hrr.]

Vivid  dream  of  great  misfortunes.  [Lr.]

Vivid,  voluptuous  dreams,  with  erection  of  the  penis,  without
seminal  emission.  [Lr.]

300.  Lascivious  dreams.  [Hrr.]

He  wakes  frequently,  and  it  is  some  time  before  he  can  go  to
Sleep  again.

Sleeplessness  with  restlessness  and  tossing  about.

Sleeplessness  until  midnight.  [Trn.]


58


LEDUM.


On  waking  from  sleep,  slight  sweat  all  over  (aft.  22  h.).  [Lr.]
305.  On  waking  from  sleep,  slight  sweat  all  over,  with
itching  all  over  the  body  that  compelled  scratching.  [Lr.]

General  coldness  and  chilliness.

In  the  morning  cold  in  the  body,  without  sensation  of  chilliness.

(Rigor  with  trembling,  towards  evening,  without  thirst  and  not
followed  by  heat.)

Chilliness  and  febrile  drawing  in  the  limbs,  without  subsequent
heat,

310.  Chilliness,  as  though  he  were  sprinkled  with  cold  water  on  one
part  or  another.

Shivering  and  chilliness,  for  twenty-four  hours,  with  goose-skin,
without  external  coldness.

By  day,  much  thirst,  and  in  the  evening,  febrile  chill,  shortly
before  going  to  sleep.  [Bch.]

In  the  forenoon  he  is  very  chilly.  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  in  bed,  severe  chill  ; he  cannot  get  warm.

[*■»•]

315.  Sometimes  more,  sometimes  less  febrile  coldness,  with  shivering
all  over,  for  three  days,  without  heat,  but  with  thirst  for  cold  water,
with  heat  in  the  palate.  [Bch.]

Chilliness,  without  subsequent  heat ; the  rest  of  the
body  was  warm,  only  the  limbs  were  externally  cold

(aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr. ]

Rigor  over  the  whole  back,  with  rather  hot  cheeks
and  hot  forehead,  without  redness  of  face  or  thirst,  with

cold  hands  (aft.  f and  2f  h.).  [Lr.]

When  he  perspires  while  walking,  the  sweat  on  the  forehead  has
a bad,  sour  smell.

He  becomes  immediately  warm  and  hot  while  walking,  and
perspires  on  his  forehead.

320.  Sudden  perspiration,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  mingled  with
chilliness.

Ill-smelling  sweat  all  over  the  body,  even  the  hair  of  the  head
was  wet.

He  perspires,  and  cannot  bear  to  be  covered  by  the  bed-clothes.

Perspiration  all  night  long,  from  evening  till  morning  (aft.  4 h.).

Heat  all  over,  without  thirst.

325.  (Much  thirst : he  must  drink  even  at  night.)

Palpitation  of  the  heart.

Anxiety.

Easily  startled.

All  day  long,  discontented  with  his  fellow-creatures,
which  at  last  amounted  to  misanthropy.  [Lr.]

330.  Morose  humour,  with  much  restlessness  and  fickleness  ; he  cannot
reflect  steadily  or  work  quietly.  [Lr.]

Crossness,  surly  disposition.

Cross  ; everything  is  disagreeable  to  him.  [Ez.]

Cross:  he  retired  into  solitude,  and  almost  weeping  he  longed  for
death.  [Lr.]


LEDUM.


59


He  is  disposed  to  be  angry  and  cross.

335.  Passionate  : he  easily  gives  way  to  angry  expressions,  [Zz.]

All  day  long  great  seriousness  ; he  regarded  everything  that
happened  to  him  in  a serious  and  thoughtful  manner.  [Zr.]

All  day  long  quiet  and  silent  humour,  with  cheerfulness  and
gaiety.*  [Zr.]

Calm  and  happy  disposition  with  love  for  work  and  self-content.*

[Lr.]


# Curative  action,  reaction  of  the  organism.


MAGNES.1

(Magnet.)

To  the  ordinary  mechanical,  materialistic,  and  atomistic  heads — and
there  is  a vast  number  of  such — it  seemed  not  only  paradoxical,  but
childish  and  incredible,  that,  according  to  the  homoeopathic  medical
doctrine,  the  administration  of  doses  of  only  very  minute  fractions  of  a
grain  of  the  more  powerful  jnedicines  could  be  of  use.

I grant  that  it  may  [certainly  be  more  convenient  to  regard  all  dis-
eases as  accumulations  of  gross  impurities,  and  active  drugs  as  rough
levers  and  brooms,  or  as  chemical  reagents,  consequently  as  palpable
things.  This  may,  I repeat,  be  more  convenient  than  to  regard  those
alterations  of  the  being  of  living  creatures  (diseases)  as  pure  dyna-
mical affections  of  the  vital  force,  and  medicines  as  pure,  virtual,  tone-
altering  powers,  as  they  are  in  reality,  and  to  set  about  curing  accord-
ing to  these  views.

If  we  do  not  adopt  these  true  views,  but  adhere  to  those  ordinary
material  ones,  the  curative  powers  of  medicines  must  be  estimated
according  to  their  bulk  and  the  weight  of  their  dose ; and  hence  the
scales  must  determine  the  efficacy  of  the  dose.  But  in  that  case  we
must  first  ascertain  the  weight  of  the  disease,  in  order  to  be  able  to
reckon  whether  a disease  weighing  so  many  pounds  (it  has,  indeed,  been
hitherto  not  unusual  to  employ  the  phrase  u grave  illness5’)  could  be
prized  out,  as  with  a lever,  by  such  and  such  a weight  of  medicine.*

I willingly  abandon  to  those  colleagues  of  mine  such  atomistic  views,
by  which  the  business  of  treatment  can  be  carried  on  very  comfortably,
even  when  half  asleep  ; for,  as  we  all  know,  to  us  poor  mortals  nothing  is
more  easy  of  comprehension  than  the  material,  ponderable,  palpable,  and
sensible,  because  much  thinking  (and  observing),  as  an  Israelitish  teacher
says,  is  a weariness  to  the  body.  I cannot  suppose  them  capable  of

* The  therapeutic  aims,  according  to  the  ideas  of  Reil,  Ackermann,  Reich,
and  others  (they  call  them  systems),  appear  to  be  more  refined,  but  they  are  not  less
mechanical  and  atomistic.  For  how  heavy  must  not  those  substances  be,  which,
employed  as  medicines,  have  to  put  to  rights  the  altered  form  of  the  simple  parts  in
a diseased  body  weighing  a hundred  and  fifty  pounds  ? What  quantity  of  oxygen,
hydrogen,  or  nitrogen  will  be  required  in  order  to  supply  in  mass  and  weight  one  of
these  substances  presumably  deficient  in  a collection  of  morbid  humours  weighing
forty  or  fifty  pounds  ? Or  cap  medical  chemistry  act  otherwise  in  the  diseased
body  than  with  masses,  by  the  addition  or  subtraction  of  material  substances  accord-
ing to  measurement  and  weight  ?


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833.


MAGNES.


6x


regarding  diseases  as  immaterial  alterations  of  the,  vitality,  as  pure
dynamic  derangements  of  our  state  of  health,  and  medicinal  powers  as
merely  virtual,  almost  spiritual,  forces.  It  is  impossible  to  disabuse  them
of  the  idea  that  for  such  and  such  a grave  disease  a dose  of  medicine  of
such  and  such  a weight  is  required,  seeing  that  they  could  point  to  the
traditional  practice  of  thousands  of  years,  when  palpable  quantities  of
medicine  must  always  be  poured  into  the  patient  from  large  bottles,  pots,
and  boxes,  in  order  that  any  effect  should  be  produced  in  serious  diseases,
and  yet  even  this  did  not  usually  succeed.  I can  readily  believe  this  ; the
effect  of  the  ordinary  treatment  of  all  times  fully  corroborates  it  ! But
how  can  they  reconcile  it  with  the  atomistic,  materialistic  notions  they
entertain  respecting  the  action  of  medicines  and  their  curative  powers,
that  a single  imponderable  spark  from  a Leyden  jar  gives  a shock  to  the
strongest  man,  and  yet  no  ascertainable  ponderable  substance  is  commu-
nicated to  his  body  ? How  can  they  reconcile  with  their  atomistic,
materialistic'notions,  the  enormous  power  of  mesmerism,  when  a power-
ful man  with  a strong  will  to  do  good  approaches  the  point  of  his  thumb
to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  of  a nervous  patient  ? How  can  they,  finally,
reconcile  with  their  atomistic,  materialistic  notions  respecting  the  actions
of  medicines  the  fact  that  a carefully-constructed  magnetic  steel  rod  can
effect  such  a powerful  derangement  of  our  health,  even  when  it  is  not  in
actual  contact  with  the  body,  but  may  even  be  covered  with  some
thick  material  (such  as  cloth,  bladder,  glass,  &c.),  so  that  we  suffer
therefrom  violent  morbid  affections  ; or,  what  is  equally  remarkable,
that  a magnetic  rod  can  quickly  and  permanently  cure  the  most  severe
disease  for  which  it  is  the  suitable  medicine,  when  it  is  brought  near  the
body,  for  but  a short  time,  even  though  covered  as  above  described  ?
Atomist ! you  narrow-minded  wiseacre  ! tell  me  what  ponderable  quan-
tity of  the  magnet  entered  the  body  in  order  to  effect  these  often  enor-
mous changes  in  its  state  of  health  ? Is  not  the  centillionth  of  a grain
(a  fraction  of  a grain  that  has  600  ciphers  for  its  denominator)  still
infinitely  too  heavy  to  represent  this  absolutely  imponderable  quantity,
the  kind  of  spirit  that  emanated  from  the  magnetic  rod  into  this  living
body  ? Will  you  now  continue  to  express  your  amazement  at  the
homoeopathic  doses  of  powerful  medicines  of  the  sextillionth,  the  octil-
lionth,  the  decillionth  of  a grain,  which  are  gross  weights  compared  with
this  invisible  magnetic  power  ?

* * *

The  subjoined  symptoms  occurred  from  various  powerful  magnets
brought  in  contact  with  various  sensitive  individuals,  without  distinc-
tion of  the  poles.  They  were  observed  in  experiments  conducted  for
half  a year  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  proper  and  most
efficacious  mode  of  stroking  the  steel  with  magnets,  in  which  a
horse-shoe  magnet  capable  of  lifting  twelve  pounds  was  held  in  the
hands,  which  were  in  contact  with  both  poles  for  an  hour  at  a time.

The  additional  symptoms  from  general  contact,  taken  from  the  works
of  Andry  and  Thouret,  of  Unzer,  and  of*  de  Harsu,  also  resulted
from  the  application  of  the  whole  surface  of  various  magnetic  plates
to  the  skin,  consequently  of  both  poles  at  once.

The  symptoms  observed  from  the  two  poles  that  follow  occurred  from


62


MAGNES.


the  contact  of  a powerful  magnetic  rod  with  healthy  persons,  for  eight
to  twelve  minutes  at  a time,  seldom  repeated  several  times.

Although  each  of  the  poles,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  symptoms
recorded,  presents  something  peculiar  in  its  power  of  altering  the
human  health,  yet  each  of  them  seems,  when  applied  twice  or  oftener,
to  produce  alternating  actions  which  resemble  those  of  the  opposite
pole.

In  order  to  effect  a cure  the  magnet  must  be  applied  in  a much
milder  manner  to  enable  it  to  act  homoeopathically.  For  this  purpose
a magnetic  rod,  eighteen  inches  long,  which  can  lift  a quarter  of  a
pound  at  either  pole,  is  more  than  sufficiently  powerful,*  if  the  pole
selected,  according  to  similarity  of  the  symptoms  to  the  case  of  disease,
be  brought  in  contact,  or  almost  in  contact  for  one  minute  only,  with
the  affected  part  or  even  with  the  tip  of  the  finger.  I have  even  met
with  cases  for  which  the  contact  of  such  a magnetic  staff  for  only  half
a minute  was  an  amply  sufficient  dose.

But  if  the  first  application  of  the  pole  does  not  remove  the  whole
disease,  we  must  not  allow  the  application  of  the  same  pole  to  be
repeated  a second  time,  just  as  in  other  homoeopathic  treatment  it  is
not  proper  to  give  a second  dose  of  the  same  medicine  immediately
and  quickly  after  the  first  one.  In  such  cases  another  medicine  must
be  administered  corresponding  to  the  remaining  morbid  condition,  or
if  the  wrong  pole  have  been  first  selected,  the  opposite  pole  should  be
applied.

It  is  the  same  with  magnets  as  with  other  medicinal  agents  ; their
enantiopathic  or  palliative  employment  must  be  avoided  where  there
is  a homoeopathic  remedy  that  cures  radically  by  similarity  of  symptoms.
Therefore,  where  we  find  only  under  the  general  magnet  symptoms  a
homoeopathic  resemblance  to  the  case  of  disease  we  wish  to  cure,  and
where  we  do  not  know  which  of  the  two  poles  is  more  especially
indicated,  we  apply  that  one  which  offers  the  greatest  number  of  similar
symptoms.  But  if  after  applying  this  pole  we  observe  an  almost
instantaneous  disappearance  of  the  ailments  we  wish  to  cure  (or  even
the  occurrence  of  other  symptoms  not  previously  present)  for  half  an
hour,  or  only  a quarter  of  an  hour,  then  we  may  be  sure  that  the  pole
we  applied  was  not  the  curative  (homoeopathic),  but  the  palliative
(enantiopathic)  one.  We  shall  soon  be  convinced  of  this  by  the
speedy  recurrence  and  increasing  aggravation  of  the  malady.  But  the
practitioner  who  wishes  to  cure  and  not  to  experiment,  will  not  wait
for  this  aggravation,  but  when  the  sudden  palliative  relief  has  lasted
but  a quarter  of  an  hour  (and  especially  if  new  symptoms  have  appeared)
he  will  apply  the  opposite  pole,  but  not  for  a longer  time  than  he
applied  the  palliative  pole.  This  will  first  of  all  remove  the  new
symptoms,  then  cause  a slight  homoeopathic  aggravation  of  the

# Indeed,  a rod  eight  inches  long,  weighing  half  an  ounce,  which  (at  the  north
pole)  can  lift  four  ounces  of  iron  (which  I magnetised  to  this  extent,  and  surrounded
with  soft,  thin,  silk-covered  wire,  by  which  its  magnetic  power  is  retained  undiminished
for  ever,  in  whatever  direction  it  may  lie),  has  latterly  furnished  me  with  all  the
curative  powrer  to  be  expected  from  the  magnet,  by  its  application  for  a minute  or
even  only  half  a minute.  *


MAGNES.


63


original  malady,  and  finally  effect  the  complete  permanent  cure  by
homoeopathy,  as  occurs  with  all  other  medicines  selected  according  to
similarity  of  symptoms  (homoeopathically).

A mild  disposition,  or  a tendency  to  chilliness  in  the  subject  of
treatment,  directs  the  practitioner  first  to  the  north  pole  when  he  can
only  find  the  symptoms  similar  to  those  of  the  case  in  hand  under  the
general  magnet  symptoms.

The  duration  of  action  of  a moderate  dose  of  magnetic  power  is
upwards  of  ten  days.

When  the  magnet  has  been  improperly  selected,  the  resulting
sufferings,  which  are  sometimes  very  severe,  will  be  at  least  alleviated
by  the  occasional  administration  of  small  electrical  double  sparks.  But
they  will  be  more  generally  and  permanently  removed  by  laying  the
outspread  hand  on  a pretty  large  zinc  plate  for  half  an  hour.

If  the  practitioner  has  to  send  the  magnet  as  a remedy  to  a patient
at  a distance,  he  can,  if  he  will,  easily  prepare  one  himself,  by  attending
to  the  following  directions,  which  I have,  after  multiplied  trials,  found
to  be  the  best.

We  require  for  our  purpose  a rod  of  good  German  or  English  steel,
about  eight  inches  in  length  and  two  or  two  and  a half  lines  in  breadth
and  one  line  thick,  which  should  be  hardened  spring-hard  (not  glass-
hard),  and  a strong  horse-shoe  magnet  that  can  lift  from  ten  to  twelve
pounds.

Now,  in  order  to  impart  to  the  steel  rod  easily  and  rapidly  the
strongest  magnetic  power  it  is  capable  of  obtaining  in  this  wray,  the
plan  of  stroking  without  regularity  and  right  away  over  the  rod,  so  that
the  pole  of  the  magnet  used  for  stroking,  is  as  it  were  torn  away  at  the
end  of  the  rod,  is  improper,  for  the  magnetic  power  communicated  to
the  rod  during  the  stroke  is  to  a great  extent  taken  away  again  thereby,
and  cannot  be  replaced  by  frequent  repetition  of  the  stroking.

Hence  the  stroking  pole  of  the  magnet  must,  each  time  it  is  brought
almost  to  the  end  of  the  rod,  be  made  to  slide  over  a sharpened  soft  tin
plate  that  covers  the  extreme  end  of  the  rod,  whereby  an  imperceptible
harmless  transference  is  effected  from  the  rod  to  the  plate,  and  the
magnet  can  then  be  removed  without  injury  from  the  rod  we  wish  to
magnetize,  whose  end  lies  beneath  the  tin  plate.

But  the  tin  plate,  where  it  covers  the  end  of  the  rod,  must  be  bent
and  run  underneath  the  rod,  and  come  up  over  the  opposite  end  of  the
rod,  covering  it  in  a similar  manner,  so  that  by  means  of  this  strip  of
tin  plate  a connection  of  the  magnetic  stream  is  maintained  between
both  poles  of  the  rod.

For  this  purpose,  we  take  a strip  of  thin,  soft  tin  plate,  some  lines
longer  than  the  rod  to  be  magnetized  ; the  rod  is  laid  upon  it,  then  the
ends  of  the  strip  of  tin  plate  must  be  bent  in  the  form  of  a hook  over
the  ends  of  the  rod,  so  that  the  poles  of  the  rod  are  covered  by  these
hooked  extremities  to  a very  small  extent,  but  they  must  lie  in  close
contact  with  the  poles  of  the  rod,  and  their  extremities  being
sharpened  they  will  lie  on  the  ends  of  the  poles  of  the  rod  quite  thin,  so
that,  in  stroking,  the  magnet  passes  without  an  obstacle  just  before  the
end  of  the  rod  on  to  the  extremities  of  the  tin  plate,  slides  over  the


64


MAGNES.


latter,  and  thus  can  be  drawn  from  the  end  of  the  tin  plate  without
injury.

Each  of  the  ends  of  the  tin  plate,  bent  into  the  form  of  a hook,  should
be  marked,  one  with  N (north),  the  other  with  S (south),  and  the  N
end  should  lie  horizontally  pointing  to  the  north,  and  continue  to  lie
in  this  position  until  the  completion  of  the  magnetization  of  the  steel
rod.

The  rod  itself  must  be  marked  exactly  in  its  middle  with  chalk,  ink,
or  something  similar.  The  two  halves  made  thereby  are  each  marked
with  two  strokes,  one  of  which  is  placed  on  the  second  third  of  the
remaining  portion,  as  shown  by  the  points  indicated  below  :


The  figure  represents  the  rod  enclosed  in  its  tin-plate  clamp,  whilst  the  latter
remains  lying  with  its  N end  directed  towards  the  north.


Then  the  south  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  magnet  is  placed  perpendicularly
on  the  middle  of  the  rod  (at  a)  and  stroked  all  over  its  north  half  and  on  to
the  bent-over  end  of  the  tin  plate  (N)  and  drawn  away  from  this.  It  is
now  made  to  describe  a great  circle  in  the  air  and  brought  back  and
placed  on  the  second  point  of  the  rod  (at  b),  and  another  stroke  is  made
from  this  point  to  over  the  (N)  end  of  the  tin  plate.  The  horse-shoe
magnet  is  again  lifted,  made  to  describe  a circle,  and  its  south  pole
placed  on  the  third  and  last  point  (at  c)  and  drawn  along  this  short
space  to  over  the  covering  end  of  the  plate  and  then  taken  away.

The  rod  is  now  taken  out  of  its  tin  plate  clamp,  which  is  to  be  left
lying  undisturbed,  and  the  stroked  end  of  the  rod  is  marked  with  N ; it
has  become  the  north  pole.  The  rod  is  now  to  be  turned  round  and
inserted  into  the  tin  plate  clamp  so  that  the  already  magnetised  north  end
of  the  rod  shall  lie  under  the  extremity  of  the  tin  plate  clamp  marked
with  S,  whilst  the  unmagnetized  end  of  the  rod  lies  under  the  N end  of
the  clamp.

The  stroking  of  the  south  pole  of  the  rod  is  to  be  also  made  towards
the  north  (though  it  is  the  south  pole  that  is  to  be  stroked)  over  the  N end
of  the  tin  plate  clamp  ; for  this  remains  always  with  its  N-end  directed
towards  the  north  of  the  compass  (it  is  only  the  rod  that  has  been
turned  round).

We  take  the  north  pole  of  the  horse-shoe  magnet,  set  it  in  the
middle  of  the  rod  (a)  and  again  stroke  towards  the  north  upon  the
rod  and  over  the  N end  of  the  clamp,  we  then  set  it  on  the  south  side
of  the  rod  (at  b ),  stroke  it  along,  and  lastly  set  it  at  c,  and  stroke  it
over  the  N end  of  the  clamp.  In  this  way  the  south  pole  of  the  rod
is  made,  and  marked  with  S (south  pole).

The  rod  is  now  removed  from  the  tin  plate  clamp,  and  now  it  is  as
fully  magnetized  as  it  is  possible  to  make  it  with  the  horse-shoe
magnet,  by  means  of  these  six  strokes  (three  on  each  half  of  the  rod).


MAGNES.


65


We  take  a piece  of  fir  wood  of  the  length  of  the  rod  and  cut  a
groove  in  it,  in  which  the  magnetised  rod  is  accurately  fitted  and  sent
in  this  way  to  the  patient,  the  north  pole  of  the  rod  being  indicated  on
the  wooden  receptacle  by  the  letter  N.

For  medicinal  purposes  the  patient  touches  the  indicated  pole  of  the
magnetized  rod  (which  is  not  removed  from  its  wooden  case)  for  half
a minute,  one  minute,  or  a minute  and  a half,  according  as  the  nature
of  his  disease  or  the  strength  of  the  patient  requires.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  his  proving  of  the  north  pole  of  the  magnet  by
Franz,  Gunther,  Harnisch,  Hartmann,  Hempel,  Langhammer,  Michler;
in  that  of  the  south  pole  by  Franz,  Harnisch,  Kummer,  Stapf.

For  symptoms  of  the  magnet  generally  the  following  authorities  are  quoted  :
Andry  et  Thouret,  Beobacht.  ilher  den  Gebrauch  des  Magnets.  Leipzig,  1785.
De  Harsu,  Recueil  des  effets  salutaires  de  Vaimant.  Geneva,  1782.

Reichel,  J.  Dan.,  Diss  de  magnetismo  in  corpore  humano.  Leipzig,  1712.

Unzer,  Joh.  Christoph.,  Beschreibung eines mit  Magnet en gemackten  medhinischen
Ver sucks.  Hamburg,  1775.

For  north  and  south  pole  symptoms  the  following :

De  Harsu  (as  above).

Heinicke,  ldeen  und Beobachtungen  uber  denthierischen  Magnetismus . Bremen,  1800.
Weber,  Chtph.,  Wirkungen  des  kiinstlicken  Magnets.  Hannover,  1 767.

None  of  these  authorities  are  accessible.

Some  of  the  complex  symptoms  under  Magnetis  p.arcticus,  though  said  to  be  observed
by  different  provers,  are  curiously  alike,  such  as  384  and  392,  445  and  446,  447  and
448.  The  numbering  of  the  symptoms  has  been  very  carelessly  done,  owing  doubt-
less to  the  neglect  of  the  transcriber.

In  the  1st  edit,  Magnes  has  294  symptoms,  M.  p.  arcticus  250,  and  M.  p.  australis
285.  In  the  2nd  edit.  Magnes  has  393  symptoms,  M.  p.  arcticus  453,  and  M.  p.
australis  387.  In  this  last  edition  the  symptoms  of  Magnes  have  only  been  increased
by  five,  to  those  of  M.  p.  arcticus  six  have  been  added,  and  those  of  M.  p.  australis
remain  the  same.]

MAGNES.

(General  effects  of  the  magnet  when  touched  on  all  parts,  the  hands  being  brought
in  contact  with  both  poles,  or  the  magnet  lying  all  its  length  on  the  skin.)

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed  a vertigo  as  if  he  would
fall  (soon  passing  off).

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  a kind  of  vertigo,  like  a sudden
jerk  passing  through  the  head.

When  walking  he  loses  his  equilibrium  from  time  to  time  and
staggers,  without  being  aware  of  any  vertigo.

The  objects  of  vision  seem  to  hover  in  an  undecided  place  and  to
sway  ; hence  he  also  sways  when  making  a step  and  walking.

5.  When  he  tries  to  remember  anything,  and  exerts  his  memory,  he
gets  headache.

Vertigo.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  Beobacht.  uber  den  Gebrauch  des
Magnets , Leipzig,  1785,  p.  232.]

Rushing  noise  in  the  whole  head  (from  magnets  lying  flat  on  the
thighs  and  legs,  also  on  the  chest).  [Joh.  Christoph.  Unzer,
Beschreibung  eines  mit  kunstlichen  Magneten  gemachten  medizinischen
Versuchs , Hamburg,  1775,  p.  40.]

VOL.  II.


5


66


MAGNES.


Dazedness  of  the  head,  as  from  opium.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  14.]
Head  dazed,  and  sensation  in  it  as  if  some  one  tried  to  draw  it
away  from  the  body.  [Unzer,  1.  c.?  p.  23.]

10.  Sensation  in  the  head,  as  if  the  head  and  the  whole  body  would
be  pressed  down.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  64.]

Headache.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  232.]

Shock  in  the  head  and  right  shoulder  with  shivering.  [Unzer,
1.  C.,  p.  12.]

Transient  headache,  a single  jerk,  compounded  of  twitching  and
tearing.

In  the  middle  of  one  half  of  the  brain  a sharp  pain,  such  as  is  felt
in  the  first  instant  of  a blow  on  it.

15.  Headache  in  the  morning,  immediately  after  opening  the  eyes,  as
if  bruised,  which  goes  off  after  rising  from  bed.

In  the  morning,  at  the  instant  of  waking,  a furious,  digging,  stu-
pefying headache,  as  in  typhoid  fever,  which  goes  off  immediately
when  flatulent  movements  take  place  in  the  abdomen.

(Headache  such  as  occurs  from  a chill.)

From  a slight  vexation  a headache,  as  from  a sharp  impression  on
a small  point  of  the  brain.*

In  the  region  of  the  crown  on  a small  spot  of  the  brain  pain  as
from  the  impress  of  a blunt  nail ; the  spot  is  also  painful  externally
to  the  touch  (aft.  ^ h.).

20.  In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  headache,  almost  as  if  the
brain  were  raised  up  from  its  base,  which  goes  off  after  yawning.

Pimples  on  the  hairy-scalp  (with  phthiriasis).  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  219.]

Along  with  cold  hands,  heat  of  face,  and  smarting  sensation  in  the
skin  of  the  face.

Intolerable  burning  pricksf  in  the  muscles  of  the  face,  in  the
evening.

In  the  eye  burning,  tearing,  and  sparkling.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
p.  20.]

25.  Burning  drawing  and#continual  sparks  in  the  affected  eye.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  18.]

Fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes,  like  falling  stars.  [J.  Dan.  Reichel,
Diss.  de  magnetismo  in  corpore  humano , Lips.,  1712.]

Painful  stitches  through  the  right  eye,  which  lost  themselves  in
the  jaw,  and  then  a tug  through  this  eye  down  the  neck,  through
the  chest,  abdomen,  and  hips,  to  the  . right  leg.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
p.  101.]

Sensation  in  the  eye  as  from  the  pendulum  of  a clock.  [Reichel,
1.  c]

On  moving  the  body,  particularly  the  arms?  profuse  sweat  on  the
head  and  face.

30.  Sweat  on  the  face  without  heat,  in  the  morning.

Dilated  pupils.

* Ignatia  removed  this  immediately,  conformably  with  its  homoeopathic  symptoms
35,  284.  [These  figures  seem  to  be  wrong,  probably  SS.  59  and  297  are  meant.]
f Without  any  admixture  of  itching.


MAGNES.  6 7

Along  with  activity  of  the  mind  and  body,  dilated  pupils  (aft,

24  .

During  the  unconscious  convulsive  attacks  the  pupils  were  not
dilated.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  140.]

Beyond  the  visual  point  and  the  line  of  sight,  white  light-spots
quiver  with  great  rapidity  round  about  at  the  side  as  in  reflexion,*  in
the  dusk  of  the  evening.

35.  In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  a smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  from
acrid  tears.

Itching  of  the  eyelids  towards  the  outer  canthus.

Itching  of  the  eyelids  and  eyeballs  in  the  inner  canthus.

Dryness  of  the  eyelids  and  of  the  inside  of  the  mouth,  in  the
morning  after  waking.

Inflammation  of  the  eyelids.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  70.]

40.  Feeling  of  dryness  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  4 h.).

The  lower  eyelid  quivers  (aft.  1 h.).

A quantity  of  mucus  escapes  from  the  eyes,  nose,  and  ears.
[Reichel,  1.  c.]

The  external  ear  feels  to  him  hot,  and  yet  it  is  not  so.

Itching  in  the  auditory  organ.

45.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  itching  burning  in  the  meatus  audi-
torius.

A pimple  on  the  antitragus  of  the  ear,  which  itches  ; this  itching
does  not  go  off  by  scratching,  which  causes  pain  in  addition,

A fine  whistling  in  the  ear,  but  intermittent,  like  the  beat  of  the
pulse.

Loud,  strong  rushing  noise  in  one  ear,  and  at  the  same  time  some
headache  on  the  same  side,  as  if  a foreign  body  were  in  the  brain  there,
at  the  same  time  the  pupil  on  that  side  is  much  dilated  (after  touching
the  middle  of  the  magnet).

Heat  of  the  ear  to  which  the  magnet  was  applied.  [Andry  et
Thouret,  l.  c.,  p.  234.]

50.  Rushing  noise  before  the  ears.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  23.]

In  the  ear,  noise  like  boiling  water.  [Reichel,  1.  c.]

In  the  ear,  electric  shocks.  Reichel,  1.  c.]

Deafness  without  noise  in  the  ear.

Pain  in  the  cheek  and  ear.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  252.]

55.  On  a small  spot  under  the  ala  nasi,  burning  pain  (aft.  1 h.).

Illusion  of  smell : smell  before  the  nose,  like  dung  (aft.  \ h.).

Illusion  of  smell  : from  time  to  time  he  imagines  he  perceives  a
smell  before  the  nose  like  what  comes  from  a clothes  chest  that  has
long  been  shut  up.

Near  the  red  border  of  the  upper  lip,  not  far  from  the  commissure,
a white  pimple,  or  a red  inflamed  lump,  which  pains  as  if  sore  per  se,
but  most  when  moving  and  touching  the  part.

On  the  inside  of  the  lower  lip,  a small  ulcer,  painful  when
touched.

60.  Painful  sensitiveness  round  about  the  border  of  the  lips.

Metallic  taste  on  one  side  of  the  tongue.

* Almost  the  affection  called  by  Marcus  Herz  “false  vertigo,”


68


MAGNES.


Burning  of  the  tongue  and  pain  of  it  when  eating.  [Unzer,  1.  c.

P*112*]  . . . ...

In  the  periosteum  of  the  upper  jaw,  a jerking  tearing  pain,  like
jerks  compounded  of  tearing,  boring,  shooting  and  burning,  extending
to  the  orbit.

In  the  facial  bones,  especially  the  antrum  of  the  upper  jaw,  a
twitching  tearing  pain  in  the  evening.

65.  Blows  on  the  jaws.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  26.]

Trembling  of  the  chin  and  neck.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  25.]

Dislocation  pain  in  the  maxillary  joint.

Pain  of  the  front  teeth  on  drinking  some  cold  liquid  ; the  cold
penetrates  into  the  teeth  when  drinking  cold  liquid.

The  tooth  is  painful  from  air  entering  the  mouth  ; the  air
penetrates  painfully  into  the  tooth.

70.  Drawing  pain  in  the  jaws  to  the  temple,  with  a sensation  as  of
cramp  in  the  masseter  muscles.

Looseness  of  the  teeth.

A blow  with  burning  in  the  teeth.  [Unzer,  1.  c.  p.  33.]

The  tooth  is  painful  when  chewing.

Toothache  excited  by  stooping  (aft.  24  h.).

75.  Toothache  : a tapping  or  twitching  aching  only  in  single  jerks.

A violent  throbbing  in  the  teeth,  even  without  any  exciting
cause.

The  gum  of  a hollow  tooth  is  swollen  and  painful  when  touched.

Toothache  only  in  the  hollow  carious  teeth.

In  the  roots  of  the  lower  incisors,  a monotonous  pain  as  if  bruised,
sore,  or  as  if  it  were  corroded  by  something.

80.  Pain  in  the  palate  as  after  swallowing  a large  mouthful.

In  the  morning,  in  the  open  air,  the  submaxillary  gland  is  painful
as  if  it  were  swollen  (aft.  12  h.).

Tensive  pain  in  the  anterior  submaxillary  gland.

In  the  submaxillary  glands  single  obtuse  stitches,  in  the  evening.

A hard  pressure  in  the  lower  part  of  the  thyroid  cartilage  of  the
throat.

85.  Pimples  under  the  chin  on  the  neck  with  itching  per  se,  which  is
increased  by  touching,  and  with  a simple  sore  pain.

Swelling  of  the  neck,  redness  of  the  face  and  stronger  palpitation
of  the  heart.*  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  235.]

Copious  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  almost  like  ptyalism,
with  pains  in  the  submaxillary  glands.

Copious  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth.  [Reichel,  1.  c.]

Every  evening,  flow  of  saliva,  with  swollen  lips.

go.  Along  with  clean  tongue,  especially  in  the  morning,  foetid  smell
from  the  mouth,  which  he  did  not  himself  perceive.

In  the  morning,  foetid  smell  from  the  mouth,  with  much  mucus
in  the  throat.

Persistent  foetor  of  the  mouth,  which  he  does  not  himself  perceive,
as  in  active  mercurial  salivation.

* In  a person  subject  to  palpitation  of  the  heart,  when  the  magnet  is  brought  near
him.


MAGNES.


69


Hunger  (immediately).

Hunger,  especially  in  the  evening.

95.  He  has  appetite,  but  the  food  is  without  taste.

He  has  hunger  and  appetite,  but  no  taste  of  the  food  ; mucus  in
the  mouth  seems  to  deprive  him  of  taste  (immediately).

He  has  longing  for  tobacco,  milk,  beer,  and  they  are  relished  ;
but  scarcely  has  he  begun  to  partake  of  them  when  he  is  all  at  once
satiated,  and  can  only  take  very  little  of  them  (aft.  16  h.).

Disgust  at  tobacco  smoking,  as  if  he  had  become  satiated  with  it,
although  it  does  not  taste  disagreeably.

He  has  no  appetite,  without,  however,  experiencing  loathing  or
bad  taste.

100.  Want  of  hunger,  without  repugnance,  satiety  or  bad  taste
(immediately).

When  he  smokes  tobacco  it  has  no  taste,  and  only  stings  his
tongue  (immediately).

Beer  has  no  taste,  it  tastes  like  water  merely.

Some  things  seem  to  him  to  taste  mouldy,  though  they  have
really  a good  unspoiled  taste  (aft.  1 h.).

Eructation  of  the  smell  and  taste  of  filed  or  turned  horn-
shavings.

105.  The  eructation  has  the  taste  of  the  food,  but  it  is  a spoilt  taste.

Attacks  of  frequent  eructation,  which  is  in  part  incomplete  and
not  perfectly  performed.

Ineffectual  efforts  to  eructate,  incomplete  eructation  (aft.  1 h.).

When  he  stoops  acid  rises  up  from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth.

Pain  like  a band  pressing  over  the  stomach,  felt  in  both  sides.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  1 1 1.]

no.  A rushing  mingled  with  stitches  through  the  stomach  and  bowels.

Aching  in  the  stomach,  with  spasms,  which  rise  up  to  the  upper
parts  ; restlessness  that  does  not  permit  him  to  remain  in  any  one
place ; heaviness  of  the  tongue,  paleness  of  the  face,  and  coldness  of
the  body,  with  very  small,  tense,  irregular  pulse.*  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  155.]

A crepitation  and  creaking  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  when  a
clock  is  wound  up.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  174.]

In  the  region  of  the  diaphragm,  sensation  of  agreeable  distension.
[Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.  p.  232.]

Pressure  as  from  a stone  in  the  epigastric  region,  especially  on
making  an  effort  to  think  (aft.  2 h.).

1 15.  Tensive  aching  and  anxious  fulness  in  the  epigastrium  (im-
mediately).

Movement  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  with  loud  rumbling,
without  pain.

Great  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Unzer,  1.  c.  p.  98.]

Burning  and  rooting  in  the  abdomen,  like  a heaving.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  23.]

The  flatulence  went  hither  and  thither  in  the  abdomen,  with

* This  array  of  symptoms  recurred  daily  at  the  same  hour,  but  always  getting

weaker,  for  ten  days,  in  three  women,


7 o


MAGNES.


sharp  aching  pain  and  audible  rumbling  in  small  spots  here  and
there.*

120.  In  the  morning,  after  waking,  in  bed,  the  flatulence  makes  a
commotion  in  the  abdomen  with  rumbling  and  howling.

Loud,  but  painless,  rumbling,  especially  in  the  small  intestines,
to  close  underneath  the  os  pubis  and  in  the  iliac  region,  which  can  be
felt  by  the  hand  laid  on,  as  if  a diarrhoeic  stool  would  come  away,
although  nothing  or  only  a small,  short  discharge  of  flatus  ensues.

Short  snaps  of  flatus  are  discharged  with  loud  noise  and  pains  in
the  anus,  as  if  forced  away.f

Very  loud  rattling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  in

the  morning  in  bed  ; followed  by  colic,  as  from  displaced  flatu-
lence.

Flatulence  immediately  after  eating.

125.  Putrid  fermentation  in  the  bowels  ; the  flatus  discharged  is  very
foetid  and  hot  (aft.  12,  24  h.).

Straining  and  urging  to  stool  in  the  bowels.  [Andry  et  Thouret,
1.  c.,  p.  130.]

A qualmish  sensation  and  painfulness  as  from  a resinous  purgative
or  rhubarb  in  the  bowels,  with  hot,  foetid  flatus,  passed  with  pain.

He  feels  sick  and  sore  in  his  bowels — pains  in  the  bowels  as  if
they  were  bruised,  with  nausea  as  if  after  taking  purgatives,  foetid
flatus  and  diarrhoea  (aft.  16  h.).

Before  each  discharge  of  flatus,  pinching  in  the  abdomen.

130.  Soon  after  stool  pain  in  one  side  of  the  abdomen.

Threatened  protrusion  of  a hernia  (aft.  | h.).

A tensive  and  at  the  same  time  burning  pain  in  the  epigastrium
and  hypogastrium,  and  thereafter  a drawing  and  tensive  pain  in  the
calves  (aft  20  h.).

Itching  in  the  navel  itself.

In  the  morning  frequent,  almost  ineffectual  irritation  to  diarrhoea,
alternating  with  rumbling  of  the  restless  flatulence  in  the  abdomen.

135.  Diarrhoea  without  pain  in  the  abdomen.

Painless  faecal  diarrhoea,  mingled  with  flatus  (aft.  12  h.).

Diarrhoea  for  several  days.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.  p.  143.]

Diarrhoea.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.  p.  220.]

Constipation  of  the  bowels  for  several  days,  with  headache,  as
from  an  obstruction  in  the  brain,  which  involves  the  head  almost
uniformly,  with  peevish,  impatient  humour.

140.  Constipation  as  if  the  rectum  were  narrowed  and  contracted
(aft.  36  h.).

After  the  stool  violent  hsemorrhoidal  pain  in  the  anus,
(sore)  as  from  a wound,  and  a constrictive  sensation  more
in  the  rectum  than  in  the  anus.

When  sitting,  a burning  in  the  anus  as  in  a kind  of  haemorrhoids.

Itching  haemorrhoids.

After  a soft  stool  blind  haemorrhoids,  as  if  the  piles  at  the  edge
of  the  anus  were  sore,  when  sitting  and  walking.

* After  touching  the  magnet  in  the  middle,
j*  After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet.


MAGNES.


71

145.  H80BlOrrhoidal  flux.  [De  Harsu,  Recueil  des  effets  de  Faimant,
Geneve,  1782,  p,  26.]

Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  when  at  stool.

Pain  compounded  of  itching  and  soreness,  on  both  sides  of  the
anus,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Frequent  discharge  of  urine.  [Unzer,  1.  c.  p.  15.]

Some  minutes  after  micturition  a burning  in  the  bladder,  especially
in  the  neck  of  the  bladder.

150.  In  the  urethra,  near  the  caput  gallinaginis,  a burning  during  the
ejaculation  of  the  semen  in  the  act  of  coitus.

In  the  morning  on  awaking  a burning  in  the  region  of  the  seminal
vesicle.

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  a burning  itching  in  the  region  of  the
seminal  vesiele,  or  at  the  caput  gallinaginis  in  the  urethra,  which
excites  to  coitus  ; the  burning  is  increased  at  that  spot  during
micturition.

In  the  morning  after  sunrise  profound  sleep  full  of  lascivious
dreams,  after  waking.

Inclination  of  the  genital  organs  to  emission  of  semen,  and  an
inguinal  hernia  tends  to  protrude,  with  some  pain.

155.  Pain  in  the  inguinal  region,  as  in  the  protrusion  of  a hernia.*

Nocturnal  pollution  (aft.  some  h.)\

Sexual  desire  (aft.  12  h.).

When  walking  erection  of  the  penis,  without  amorous  thoughts.

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  constant  erections  of  the  penis,  without
amorous  thoughts.

160.  Absence  Of  sexual  desire,  disinclination  for  coitus.

The  penis  remains  soft  during  all  amorous  excitement  (im-
mediately).

The  prepuce  is  retracted  behind  the  glans  penis  and
does  not  cover  it  at  all,  or  only  to  a very  small  extent.

Swelling  of  the  epididymis  and  simple  pain  thereof,  on  moving  or
touching  it.

Itching  smarting  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  (aft.  2 h.).

165.  Burning  smarting  under  the  prepuce  (immediately).

The  metrorrhagia  increased,  f [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.
152.]

The  menstrual  discharge  that  had  ceased  for  some  days  came
back  the  next  day  after  applying  the  magnet,  and  continued  to  flow
for  ten  days.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  155.]

The  catamenia,  which  had  ceased  ten  days  previously,  returned
after  applying  the  magnet,  but  only  lasted  the  usual  time.  [Andry
et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  155.]

* *

*

In  the  evening  very  frequent  sneezing ; then  coryza  drops  out  of
one  nostril,  whilst  the  other  is  free  and  open.

170.  Epistaxis.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  73.]

Quickly  occurring,  and  as  quickly  ceasing  coryza.

* After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet,
f In  an  old  woman.


72


M AGNES.


(A  kind  of  catarrh)  (aft.  12  d.).  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,

P-  I55-]

Frequent  fits  of  coughing,  at  night— which  do  not  wake  him  up.
In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  a violent  fit  of  dry  cough  ; also
during  sleep  (before  midnight).

175.  At  night  and  at  other  times  a violent,  but  short  fit  of  dry  COUgh,
after  which  there  comes  a slight  expectoration  of  ordinary  tracheal
mucus  (aft.  some  h.).

Convulsive  cough  (immediately).

Sobbing  breathing.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  50.]

Mucus  in  the  trachea,  which  is  easily  expelled  hy

short  COUgh  (voluntary  tussiculation),  in  the  evening  and  morning
(aft.  24  h.).

After  midnight  when  lying  awake  and  thinking,  tightness  of  the
chest  on  account  of  mucus  on  the  chest,  which  is  diminished  by
coughing.

180.  After  midnight  when  lying  awake  and  thinking,  spasmodic  cough.
Oppression  on  the  chest,  i.e.  viscid  mucus  adherent  to  the  anterior
part  of  the  windpipe,  which,  however,  can  be  detached  by  voluntary
short  cough.

Fits  of  violent,  dry  cough,  by  which  smarting  and  burning  tears
are  forced  from  the  eyes.

Violent  fit  of  coughing,  with  copious  expectoration  of  blood
(aft.  6 d.).  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  27.]

Spasmodic  cough  with  blows  and  anxious  respiration  and  visible
oppression  of  the  chest.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  41.]

185.  Intolerable  burning  stitches  in  the  lateral  muscles  of  the  chest
towards  the  back.

Pressure  on  the  chest  (aft.  4 d.).  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  27.]
Shooting  in  the  chest  and  a cold  shuddering  burning  through  the
whole  body.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  21.]

Blow  on  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum,  which  excites  cough  and
watering  of  the  eyes.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  41.]

Great  oppression  on  the  chest,  tearing  in  the  stomach  and  bowels
and  throbbing  in  the  shoulders.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

190.  Tearing  intermingled  with  shooting  in  the  right  side.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  12.]

Tearing  from  the  right  side  into  the  internal  parts  of  the  body,
mixed  with  shocks  and  shooting,  just  as  if  small  pieces  of  flesh  would
be  torn  out,  or  sparks  of  fire  were  emitted.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  12.]
From  the  middle  of  the  chest  four  burning  streams  towards  the
back  and  sacrum,  with  anxiety  and  sensation  as  if  the  parts  were  cut
to  pieces,  and  divided.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  65.]

Burning  tug  from  the  left  shoulder  through  the  chest  on  its  right
side,  just  as  if  parts  were  separated.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  16.]

Burning  tug  from  the  stomach  through  the  abdomen  and  back,
whence  the  streams,  divided  in  the  sacrum,  went  towards  the  lower
extremities.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  20.]

195.  Blow  or  jerk  in  the  sacrum,  which  almost  takes  away  the  breath.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p,  1 13.]


MAGNES.


73


A burning  in  the  spine.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  25.]

In  the  morning  a painful  stiffness  in  the  cervical’ vertebrae  on
moving  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  morning  a cracking  in  the  cervical  vertebrae  on  moving.

Pain  in  the  cervical  muscles  which  goes  from  the  shoulder  to  the
lingual  bone,  as  if  cramp  would  occur  there.

200.  Backache  when  standing  and  sitting  still.

Twitching  of  the  dorsal  muscles  and  sensation  as  if  something
alive  were  in  them.

Pain  in  the  sacral  articulation  in  the  morning  in  bed,
when  lying  on  the  side,  and  by  day  during  prolonged
stooping  forwards.

Spasmodic  pressure  betwixt  the  scapulae  (aft.  5 d.).  [De  Harsu,
1.  c.,  p.  27.]

Pain  in  the  shoulder-joint  (or  the  ligaments  of  the  joint),  as  if  it
were  dislocated  and  had  fallen  out  (not  merely  as  if  sprained  or
twisted).

205.  Throbbing  on  the  shoulder  with  sensation  as  if  it  were  lacerated.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  37.]

Shocks  on  the  shoulders  whereby  the  arms  were  propelled  for-
wards. [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  21.]

Shocks  in  the  joints  of  the  arm  and  in  the  head,  as  if  they  were
beaten  with  a small,  light  hammer.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  11.)

Drawing  pain  in  both  shoulders  and  down  the  nape,  with  throb-
bing in  both  arms.  [UNzer,  1.  c.,  p.  100.]

Tugging  in  the  joints  and  muscles  of  the  arm.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
P-  • 3-]

210.  A tugging  in  the  right  arm,  a kind  of  digging  round  about  the
wrist,  elbow,  and  shoulder-joints.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  12.]

Pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  arm,  as  if  they  were  slightly  separated
from  one  another.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  12.]

Burning  and  cutting  in  the  arms  and  chest,  with  cold  shiver.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  98.]

Burning  in  the  right  arm,  as  from  sparks  of  fire.  [Unzer,  1.  c.

p.  16.]

Here  and  there  burning  pain  on  the  arm.  [Unzer,  1.  c.

p-11-]

215.  Needle-pricks  in  the  arm.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  11.]

Gentle  raising  and  also  superposition  of  the  arms,  caused  by
spasm.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  50.]

Spasmodic  throwing  of  one  arm  sometimes  away  from  the  body,
sometimes  upwards.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  47.]

Beating  and  throbbing  in  all  the  joints  of  the  arms  and  fingers.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  74.]

A deeply-seated  pain  in  the  arm  as  far  as  the  elbow,  during  which
the  arm  goes  to  sleep,  and  trembles  spasmodically.  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  220.]

220.  While  remaining  in  a cold  place  there  occurs  a tearing  twitching
in  the  muscles  of  the  arm.

Restlessness  in  the  sound  arm,


74


MAGNES.


Blows  in  the  elbow,  without  pain  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  io.]

Burning  in  the  elbow-joint  as  if  it  were  torn  by  hot  pincers,
with  violent  burning  and  sparkling  of  the  eyes.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.
102.]

(On  removing  the  magnet  from  the  arms  during  unconsciousness,
immediately  bending  of  the  fingers,  hands,  arms,  and  complete  con-
traction of  them.)  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p,  51.]

225.  Drawing  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forearm.

In  the  evening  (between  6 and  7 o’clock)  a tearing  pain  as  from
a bruise  in  the  joints  of  the  arm,  more  when  at  rest  than  when
flexing  the  arm — which  recurs  after  twenty-four  hours.

Cold  feeling  on  the  hands,  the  hands  are  icy  cold  all  day  * (for
several  days).

Pain  on  the  wrist,  as  if  a tetter  were  breaking  out,  or  an  electric
shock  went  through  it  (aft.  48  h.).

Drawing  from  the  head  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers.

[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  1 1.]

230.  Gouty,  digging,  boring  pain  on  a small  spot  on  the  distal  thumb-
joint,  when  at  rest.

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed,  a tearing  in  the  thumb-
joints.

In  the  morning  in  bed  in  the  distal  thumb-joint  when  moving
and  bending  it  back,  a pain  as  if  dislocated  and  bruised  (aft.  48  h.).

Continued  pain  in  the  distal  thumb-joint,  as  if  sprained  or
dislocated.

In  the  first  and  second  joints  of  the  thumb  a bending  and  a
kind  of  dislocated  feeling  (aft.  24  h.).

235.  Creeping,  digging  pain  in  the  top  of  the  thumb,  in  the  evening
after  lying  down.

Quivering  twitching  in  one  part  of  the  palmar  muscle  of  the
thumb  and  in  the  muscles  of  the  chin.

A long-continued  burning  stitch,  combined  with  sore  feeling  in
the  thickest  part  of  the  muscles  of  the  ball  of  the  thumb  and  in
the  calf;  afterwards  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia  (aft.  1 h.).

Shooting  and  burning  in  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  13.]

Fingers  disposed  to  knuckle  over.

240.  In  the  evening  the  thighs  and  legs  go  to  sleep.

Pain  from  the  hip  down  the  lower  extremity,  as  if  the  parts
were  slightly  separated  from  one  another.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  ,24.]

A drawing  through  the  hips  to  the  feet,  which  left  a burning
everywhere.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  104.]

Violent  shocks  of  the  right  lower  extremity,  caused  by  a burning
tug  from  the  chin  and  neck  down  through  the  right  side.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  25.]

Burning  and  fiery  heat  in  the  arms  and  legs,  so  that  when  the
right  leg  touched  the  left,  it  felt  as  if  the  latter  were  set  fire  to  by
the  former.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  38.]

245.  When  sitting  a creeping  painful  going  to  sleep  of  the  thighs  and
# After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet.


MAGNES.


75


legs,  which  goes  off  when  walking.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,
P-  J49']  ...

Burning  tearing  in  the  left  thigh,  mingled  with  running.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  31.]

Needle-pricks  running  down  from  the  knees  to  the  feet.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  66.]

Stitches  in  the  leg.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  26.]

Shocks  in  the  knee,  which  cause  the  limb  to  be  spasmodically
extended.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  20.]

250.  Blow  on  the  left  knee.  (Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  1 1 .]

On  rising  up  after  sitting  a feeling  in  the  upper  part  of  the  calf
as  if  it  were  too  short.

After  waking  from  sleep  attacks  of  cramp  in  the  calves  and
toes.

Cramp  in  the  calf  in  the  morning  in  bed  on  flexing  the  knee,
and  relaxation  of  the  muscles.*

In  the  fleshy  parts  on  the  outer  side  of  the  leg  near  the  tibia
pain  as  if  bruised,  in  the  evening  when  walking.

255.  In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed  when  he  seeks  to  make  a
step  and  to  walk  the  foot  is  painful  in  the  ankle-joint  and  above  it,
as  if  sprained.

Pain  in  the  outer  ankle  as  if  sprained  or  as  from  gout,  on  rising
up  from  a seat  and  commencing  to  walk,  but  which  goes  off  on
continuing  to  walk  (aft.  some  h.).

Stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  heel.

In  the  heel  a tearing  pain  in  jerks,  which  goes  off  immediately,
but  recurs  from  time  to  time.

In  the  evening  some  stitches  with  a little  burning  in  the  soft
part  at  the  side  of  the  heel  (aft.  4 d.).

260.  Painful  sensitiveness  and  sore  pain  at  the  root  of  the  nail  of  the
big  toe  and  of  the  skin  covering  the  root,  even  when  touched.

Under  the  nail  of  the  big  toe  of  both  feet  pain  as  if  the  shoe  had
pressed,  as  if  sore  and  as  if  it  would  fester.

A corn,  previously  without  pain,  is  the  seat  of  burning  sore  pain
in  the  shoe  on  commencing  to  walk.

Pain  on  the  joints  of  the  foot  as  if  the  shoe  had  pressed  and  there
was  a corn  there  (aft.  \ h.).

Pain  in  the  joints  of  the  foot  as  from  corns.

265.  Great  chilliness  ; when  he  comes  out  of  the  warm  air  (in  the
room)  into  the  cold,  immediately  stuffed  coryza.

In  the  morning  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  side,  in  all  the  joints
where  the  cartilages  of  the  heads  of  the  joints  touch  one  another  a
continued  intolerable  simple  or  bruised  pain,  which,  however,  imme-
diately ceases  on  lying  on  the  back  with  head  leaning  backwards,
and  with  flexed  knees  quite  separated  from  one  another.

Bruised  pain  in  the  joints  of  the  side  on  which  he  is  not  lying,
in  the  evening  in  bed.f

Bruised  pain  of  all  the  joints,  or  rheumatic  pain  m the  ligaments

* In  the  midst  of  amorous  toying  and  excitement,
f After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet.


76


MAGNES.


of  the  joints  of  the  arms  and  of  all  the  joints  of  the  thorax,  back
and  nape,  when  moving  and  when  breathing*  (aft.  12  h.).

Pain  as  if  bruised,  or  simple  pain,  and  painful  sensitiveness  in  the
junction  of  the  bones  of  all  the  joints,  in  the  morning  in  bed.

270.  Pain  as  if  bruised,  in  all  the  joints  where  the  heads  of  the
articulations  touch  one  another  with  their  cartilages,  when  at  rest
and  when  lying,  but  most  on  movement  and  exertion.

In  all  the  joints,  especially  of  the  sacrum,  loins,  and  thorax,  a
paralytic  pain,  or  as  if  the  joints  were  broken  on  the  wheel,  smashed
and  bruised — worse  when  moving  and  standing — with  a drawing
and  tearing  sensation,  especially  in  the  ligaments  of  the  joints  and
in  the  muscular  fibres  at  their  osseous  insertions, — especially  in  the
morning  after  rising  and  in  the  evening  before  lying  down  ; — on
grasping  them  externally  the  parts  are  not  painful ; the  pains  are
relieved  by  the  discharge  of  flatus ; when  the  pain  increases  the  eyes
must  be  shut.

Pain  in  all  the  joints,  in  the  morning  after  resting  in  bed,  after
rising  and  during  movement.

On  moving  the  limbs,  the  joints  are  painful  as  if  they  had  been
dislocated.

On  moving  a tingling  sensation  of  the  limbs,  like  the  feeling
caused  by  knocking  the  angle  of  the  elbow.

275.  The  limbs  go  to  sleep  especially  after  rising  from  a seat  and
standing  or  walking.

In  the  morning,  when  lying  in  bed,  on  being  excited  to  coitus
(if  he  steadfastly  resists  it),  he  gets  a kind  of  gouty  pains,  somewhat
as  from  a bruise  or  fatigue  in  the  sacrum,  the  knees,  and  all  the
joints.

A recent  wound  recommences  to  bleed.

A wound  that  was  almost  healed  commences  to  be  painful  like  a
recent  wound.

Small  boils  appear  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  and  soon  go  off.

280.  Here  and  there,  e.g.  under  the  ankle,  corroding  gnawing
pains.

Itching  occurs  on  the  affected  parts,  but  after  scratching  the  pain
increases  very  much,  like  burning  on  an  excoriated  spot.

A simple  rather  persistent  itching  in  the  soft  parts,  which  is  not
altered  by  scratching.

After  lying  down  (also  during  the  siesta),  here  and  there  below
the  joints,  a burning  itching  which  is  not  allayed  by  scratching.

Here  and  there  a sort  of  persistent  itching  prick,  ending  in  a
burning.*

285.  A burning  pricking  pain,  which  persists  more  or  less  in  various
soft  parts  of  the  body,  not  in  the  joints.

Here  and  there  single  stitches  in  soft  parts,  e.g.  in  the  ball  of  the
thumb.

When  he  has  become  warm  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,
single  burning  stitches  that  end  in  smarting  occur  here  and  there.

On  a small  spot,  e.g.  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  a prickling,

* After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet,


MAGNES.


77

grumbling  pain,  such  as  usually  precedes  the  going  to  sleep  of  a
limb.

Before  falling  asleep  single  twitchings  in  the  body.

290.  In  an  ulcer  a sharp  pain  as  from  a fresh  wound.

Burning  tug  from  the  head  down  the  right  side,  followed  imme-
diately by  sweat  all  over  the  body  with  moderated  temperature.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  11.]

Burning  tugs  through  all  parts  in  different  directions.  [Unzer,
1.  c.,  p.  31.]

Intolerable  burning  from  the  head  to  the  feet  with  pain  as  if  all
the  limbs  were  bruised  and  lacerated.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  108.]

Burning  and  shooting  pains.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  26.]
295.  During  all  the  burning  pains  in  the  parts  there  was  observed
neither  external  heat  nor  redness  of  the  parts.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
P.  136.]

Sensation  of  flying  sparks  of  fire  on  the  body.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
P.  1 16.]

Moaning  about  laceration  of  all  the  parts.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  32.]
Heaviness  in  all  the  limbs  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.*  [Andry
et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  152.]

Dull,  numb  pain.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  100.]

300.  (Nocturnal  pains.)  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  130.]

Drawing  and  shooting  pain  mingled  with  itching.  [Andry  et
Thouret,!  c.,  p.  219.]

Drawing  pain.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  220.]

Shuddering  drawing  through  the  whole  body.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,

P.  14.]

A tug  through  the  whole  body  almost  like  a shudder.  [Unzer,
1.  C,,p,  12.]

305.  Joints  painful  to  the  touch.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  no.]

Pain  of  the  part  to  which  the  magnet  is  applied,  as  from  the  near
approach  of  red-hot  coals.  [Unzer,!  c.,  p.  10.]

A formication  as  if  all  the  humours  accumulated  at  the  part
where  the  magnet  lay.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  130.]

On  the  chest  (at  the  part  where  the  magnet  was  applied)  small
pimples.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  149.]

(At  the  place  where  the  magnet  was  applied)  a very  itchy  erup-
tion. [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  159.]

310.  Under  the  applied  magnet  the  skin  is  painful  and  excoriated,
and  round  about  are  itch-like  pimples  filled  with  pus.  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  176.]

Red  eruption,  red  spots  (at  the  part  where  the  magnet  was
applied?).  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  196.]

Red  eruption,  like  vesicles,  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.  [Unzer,
I.  c.,  p.  33.]

At  the  part  where  the  magnet  is  applied  a burning  itching,
which  compels  him  to  scratch  till  the  blood  comes  5 the  skin  is  red,
and  round  about  there  are  small  papules,  which  soon  go  off.  [Andry
et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  pp.  214,  215.]

* After  leaving  off  the  accustomed  application  of  the  magnet.


78


MAGNES.


Round  about  the  part  where  the  magnet  is  applied  eruption  of
large  pimples.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  220.]

315.  At  the  part  where  the  magnet  is  applied  there  occur  deep  little
ulcers,  the  size  of  lentils.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1,  c.,  p.  219.]

Widely  extended  eruption  of  pimples  and  even  of  pocks,  with
drawing  and  shooting  pain, — also  red  spots  round  about.  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  pp.  241 — 243.]

Discharge  of  a reddish  fluid  from  the  wound.  [Andry  et
Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  128.]

The  spot  where  the  magnet  was  applied  goes  to  sleep,  becomes
numb  and  insensible.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  220.]

Twitching.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  232.]

320.  A shock,  so  that  the  upper  part  of  the  body  as  far  as  the  hips  is
forcibly  bent  upwards  and  forwards,  with  a cry.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
P-  23']

When  lying,  the  upper  part  of  the  body  is  spasmodically  raised
up  (with  a cry)  as  from  a shock,  so  that  the  body  is  thrown  forwards
with  the  nose  on  the  bed,  and  just  as  forcibly  thrown  backwards.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  29.]

The  upper  part  of  the  body  spasmodically  raised  up  and  driven
forwards,  and  thrown  back  upon  one  side.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  33.]

(Frequent  starting  and  raising  up  as  from  shocks)  violent  shocks,
which  were  followed  by  general  trembling  of  the  body,  burning  in
the  chest,  through  both  arms,  and  sweat  all  over.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
p.  18.

All  the  convulsions  from  the  magnet  did  not  alter  the  pulse.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  136.]

325.  Shock  like  a start  through  the  body,  followed  by  sweat  on  both
hands.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  18.]

On  rising  from  the  (midday)  siesta  stiffness  of  the  body  when
moving.

In  the  morning  after  rising  great  exhaustion  with  anxiety  (aft.

44  h*)*

Frightened,  starting  up  with  a cry,  followed  by  sweat  all  over  the
body.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  17.]

Paralysis  for  ten  days  with  loss  of  sensation,  but  with  normal
warmth  and  moisture  of  the  limb.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,
Pp.  214, 215.]

330.  Shocks  deprive  him  of  consciousness.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  25.]

The  spasmodic  raising  up  (and  shocks)  of  the  body  forwards  on
to  the  bed  are  followed  by  long-continued  unconsciousness,  thereafter
(p.  39)  a blowing  with  the  mouth,  as  if  he  felt  great  heat,  where-
upon consciousness  and  liveliness  return.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  32.]

Unconsciousness  with  staring  turned-up  eyes,  open  mouth,
almost  imperceptible  respiration,  and  with  a movement  in  the  chest
resembling  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  unaltered  ordinary  pulse.
[Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  101.]

During  the  unconsciousness  moving  of  each  finger  in  succession  ;
after  the  recurrence  of  consciousness  profuse  sweat.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
p.  96.]


MAGNES.


79


Exhaustion  in  all  the  limbs  with  a syncope  of  short  duration-*
recurring  several  times.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  155.]

335.  (Attacks  of  syncope,  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  suffocation.) f
[Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  160.]

Long-continued  syncopes,  during  which  she  retained  conscious-
ness. [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  196.]

Syncope,  wherein  she  feels  the  sufferings,  but  on  account  of
inability  to  speak  or  move  cannot  complain.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  48.]

Syncopes.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  232.]

He  becomes  exhausted  immediately,  without  sleepiness,  and
wishes  to  partake  of  something  of  a cordial  and  strengthening
character,  but  he  knows  not  what  (immediately).

340.  In  the  very  early  hours  a waking  slumber  of  several  hours’  dura-
tion, but  after  sunrise  stupefied  sopor  or  profound  sleep,  full  of  tiresome
passionate  (e.g.  vexatious)  dreams,  which  ends  with  a headache  as  it
the  whole  brain  were  sore,  this  goes  off  after  rising.

Sleep  with  dreams  full  of  distress  and  anxiety,  like  nightmare,
(aft.  30  h.).

Very  vivid,  lively  dreams,  as  if  an  adventure  occurred  to  him
when  awake.

Dreams  full  of  feasting,  boasting  and  talking  big.

Dreamful  sleep  with  open  mouth.

345.  Waking  up  about  3 a.m. — after  some  hours5  of  dreamful  slumber,

then,  without  thirst,  sensation  of  heat  in  the  limhs,
which  he  first  wishes  to  have  uncovered,  afterwards
carefully  covered  up.

He  snores  during  sleep  in  the  morning.J

He  wakes  up  from  3 a.m.,  but  in  the  morning  at  sunrise  his  eye-
lids close  and  he  lies  in  a state  of  stupefied  slumber,  full  of  tiresome
dreams.

In  the  morning  he  lies  asleep  on  his  hack,  one  open
hand  lies  under  his  occiput,  the  other  over  his  stomach,  with
the  knees  spread  out,  with  snoring  during  inspiration,  with
half-open  mouth  and  low  talking  in  sleep ; he  dreams  of  amorous
subjects  and  seminal  emission  (though  none  occurs)  ; after  waking,
headache  in  the  occiput,  as  after  a pollution,  tightness  of  the  chest

and  bruised  pain  of  all  the  joints,  which  goes  off  after
rising  and  moving  the  body,  whilst  a large  quantity  of  catarrhal
mucus  is  thrown  up.

Lascivious  dream,  even  during  the  midday  sleep,  with  discharge
of  prostatic  fluid  ; after  waking  the  genitals  are  very  much  inclined
to  emit  semen  (aft.  2 h.) .

350.  At  night,  towards  morning,  waking  sopor  (during  which  he
hears  every  noise  and  has  some  power  of  thinking),  which  after
sunrise  changes  into  a stupefied  sopor,  in  which  he  neither  hears
nor  feels  anything,  except  violent  pains,  as  from  a long  journey,  and

* These  symptoms  recurred  in  three  women  daily  at  the  same  hour,  for  ten  days,
but  they  became  always  weaker.

f After  leaving  off  the  customary  application  of  the  magnet.

} After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet.


8o


MAGNES.


as  if  bruised  in  all  the  joints,  which  compel  him  always  to  change
the  place  of  his  limbs,  with  loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  occa-
sionally interrupted  by  discharge  of  flatus,  and  a disagreeable  feeling
of  bodily  heat  ; during  which  he  generally  lies  on  his  back,  with
open  mouth.  After  waking  and  opening  the  eyes  the  pains  in  the
limbs  soon  diminish  ; but  instead  thereof,  there  occurs  a headache  of
a similar  character,  which  after  rising  changes  into  a headache  such
as  occurs  at  the  commencement  of  a stuffed  coryza,  but  which  soon
goes  off  after  sneezing  and  flow  of  mucus  from  one  nostril.

Fie  wakes  up  about  i a.m.

In  the  morning,  in  sleep,  sweat  without  heat,  or  bland  copious
exhalation  of  the  whole  body  which  does  not  weaken  him  (and  goes
off  after  waking).

He  talks  in  his  sleep.

Insensibility  and  (fatal)  sopor.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,
p.  115.]

355.  Moaning  in  sleep  as  from  an  anxious  dream.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,
p.  14.]

Sleep  interrupted  by  groaning.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  25.]

In  his  sleep  he  snores  during  inspiration  but  during  expiration  he
breathes  through  his  nose.

Tossing  about  in  bed  during  sleep.

He  throws  himself  about  in  bed  at  night  and  thinks  he  is
uncomfortable  in  every  place.

360.  In  the  morning,  after  waking  up  completely,  flatulence  accumu-
lates in  the  hypogastrium  with  loud  rumbling ; flatus  is  discharged,
there  occurs  great  sneezing,  copious  flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose,
and  yawning,  all  which,  however,  soon  go  off.

In  the  morning,  on  awaking  from  sleep,  the  mouth  is  covered
with  thick,  almost  dry  mucus,  and  the  eyelids  are  dry ; both  go  off
after  sneezing  and  discharge  of  nasal  mucus.

A mixture  of  cold  and  burning  shivering  all  over  the  body,  which
was  extremely  sensitive.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  28.]

In  the  evening,  before  lying  down,  an  attack  of  the  symptoms  of  a
catarrhal  fever ; the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  limbs  are  painful,  as  if
bruised  in  their  middle,  at  the  same  time  obtuse,  obnubilating  head-
ache ; he  is  hoarse,  and  viscid  mucus  lies  on  his  chest  (in  the  trachea)
(aft.  4 h.).

After  midnight  fever : without  shivering,  disagreeable  feeling  of
heat  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  palms  and  soles,  with  dry-
ness in  the  throat  and  sweat  on  the  face,  the  nape,  and,  indeed,  all
over  the  body.

365.  Fever  for  more  than  three  days.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,
p.  186.]

Fever  for  fourteen  days.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  176.]

On  the  affected  part  sensation  of  heat  and  formication.  [Andry
et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  pp.  214,  215.]

Dry  heat  in  the  morning  in  bed.

At  night  heat,  without  thirst,  which  desires  and  bears  un-
covering.


MacjneS.


8t


370.  Disagreeable,  unpleasant  warmth  in  the  whole  body,  with  sweat
on  the  face,  without  thirst  (immediately).

Insensible  perspiration  over  the  whole  body  of  a strong,  not
disagreeable  empyreumatic  odour,  such  as  a healthy  man  exhales
when  perspiring  freely.

General  sweat  after  midnight.

Profuse  sweat  with  frequent  shivering.  [Unzer,  1.  c.,  p.  108.]

At  night,  gentle  perspiration,  particularly  about  the  place  the
magnet  is  applied.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  27.]

375.  Sweat  (on  the  place  where  the  magnet  lies).  [Andry  et  Thou-


ret,  1.  c.,  pp.  129,  130.]


[Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  pp.  214,


Profuse  perspirations.

215.]

Sweat  all  over  the  body  especially  on  the  back,  in  the  morning
during  sleep.*

While  at  his  work  during  the  day  he  talks  aloud  to  him-
selft  without  knowing  it  (immediately).

He  is  exhausted  and  yet  extremely  careful  and  eager  to  com-
plete his  work  thoroughly.

380.  The  greatest  exhaustion  of  the  body,  with  sensation  of  heat  and
cool  sweat  on,  the  face,  with  restless  and,  as  it  were,  strained,  over-
hurried activity.

A zealous  over-hurry,  followed  by  pain  in  the  arm  and  head  of
the  shoulder  (in  the  first  hours).

Oven  hurried  thoughtlessness  and  forgetfulness;  he  says  and
does  something  different  from  what  he  meant  to  say  and  do,  and
leaves  out  letters,  syllables  and  words.

He  exerts  himself  to  do  things,  and  does  quite  the  opposite  of
what  he  intended,  against  his  own  wish.

Hesitating  resolve,  irresolution,  over-haste  (immediately).

385.  He  is  distraught  mid  cannot  fix  his  attention  on  a single  subject
(immediately).

All  around  him  seems  as  if  in  a kind  of  half-dream.

Involuntary  inattention  : he  cannot  direct  his  attention,  much  as
he  wishes  to  do  so,  on  a certain  subject.

When  he  reads  everything  seems  quite  clear  on  the  paper,  but  he
can  with  difficulty  comprehend  the  sense  of  what  he  reads.

Anxiety.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  232.]

390.  At  night  very  great  anxiety  with  very  strong  palpitation  of  the
heart.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,  p.  146.]

He  is  easily  startled  by  a noise.  [Andry  et  Thouret,  1.  c.,
P.  199.]

Very  much  disposed  to  get  angry  and  indignant,  and

when  he  does  get  angry  he  has  headache  of  a sore  description  (imme-
diately).

He  is  easily  vexed  and  gets  sufferings  therefrom,  especially  head-
ache, as  from  a nail  pressed  in.

Irascibility,


# After  touching  the  middle  of  the  magnet,
f Like  an  insane  person.


VOL.  II.


•CO


82


MAGNES.


95.  Resolution,  consideration,  strength  of  mind  and  body  (with  good
easy  digestion).*

In  the  morning  tranquil  disposition,  calm,  serious.*

Phlegmatic,  lazy  disposition  ; not  inclined  for  any  work,  lassitude,
and  drowsiness  f (aft.  5 h.).

* Seems  to  be  only  curative  action  after  a previous  opposite  disposition,
f A rare  alternating  action.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS  *

{North  pole  of  the  magnet .)

(Vertigo,  there  is  a whirling  in  the  head  and  she  feels  as  though
she  would  fall  on  either  side  (immediately).

Vertigo  as  if  from  intoxication,  which  compels  him  when  standing
to  place  the  feet  differently  in  order  to  support  the  body  (aft.  5 m.).
\_Htn .,  Fz.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  vertigo  so  that  he  could  not  tread
firmly  (aft.  26  h.).  [Lr.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  staggers  to  and  fro,  as  in  ver-
tigo (aft.  22  h.).  [Lr.]

5.  In  one  side  of  the  head  a vertiginous  drawing  (aft.  10  m.).

When  she  went  up  stairs,  she  has  a drawing  in  the  head  from  its
centre  to  both  ears  alternately,  like  the  pendulum  of  a clock.

He  is  not  quite  conscious,  cannot  think  accurately ; he  feels  as  if
the  intelligence  were  suspended,  and  as  if  something  in  the  brain
pressed  from  above  downwards  and  forced  out  the  eyes  ; a threatening
of  syncope.

When  walking  he  is  as  if  intoxicated.

Sensation  of  intoxication,  like  a humming  in  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).
10.  Confusion  of  the  head,  and  longing  for  open  air.

Confusion  of  the  head.  \_Mch . — De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  135.]*
Weak  memory  ; but  cheerful  (aft.  1 h.).

For  two  successive  days  he  wakes  up  each  time  from  the  after-
noon nap  with  violent  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  bruised  and
confused  ; it  is  alleviated  after  waking,  and  goes  off  on  getting  up
(aft.  3,  28  h.).

A pain  compounded  of  soreness  and  bruised  feeling  on  the  surface
of  the  brain  in  the  forehead  and  one  temple.

15.  Head  as  if  bruised  and  smashed  in  one  half  of  the  brain  (aft.

*h.).

Drawing  headache  on  the  left  side  (aft.  27  h.).  [Htn.]

In  the  right  temple  drawing  boring  pain  ; at  the  same  time  a
spasmodic  pain  just  below  the  left  zygoma.  [Mch.]

A side  shock  in  the  head  in  the  morning  in  bed.

Behind  the  right  ear  a shock-like  tearing  in  the  head  when  walking
in  the  open  air,  which  gradually  extends  also  to  the  front  (aft.  d h.).
[Htn.]

20.  Behind  the  left  ear  a shock-like  tearing  in  the  head  when  sitting
(aft.  I h.).  [Htn.]

* Applied  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  dorsal  vertebrae,  at  a distance  of
four  or  five  finger  breadths  from  the  body.


$4


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


He  has  a feeling  as  of  a weight  that  pressed  down  the  head.

In  several  parts  of  the  brain  a pressure  as  from  something  hard.
(Much  heat  in  the  head.)

In  the  head  a disagreeable  sensation  of  compression  as  if  a part  of
the  brain  were  pressed  in.

25.  The  noise  of  a hammer  causes  a shock  in  her  head.

In  the  right  temple  a pressure  involving  the  head  when  walking
in  the  open  air.  [Fz.]

An  (aching)  pain  above  the  left  temple,  externally  (aft.  27  h.).

[Lr-\

In  the  occipital  articulation  a pressure  going  outwards,  so  that  he
must  always  bend  the  head  forwards.  [Fz.]

Aching  pain  in  the  leftside  of  the  forehead  (aft.  22  h.).  [Zr.]

30.  An  aching  pain  externally  above  the  right  superciliary  arch  (aft.
28  h.).  [Zr.]

Headache  when  walking  ; a pressure  above  the  orbits.

Headache,  especially  when  raising  up  and  moving  the  eyes.

A tensive  sensation  in  the  brain  under  the  forehead  extending
into  the  root  of  the  nose.

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  several  times  some  stitches  superiorly
in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  until  the  afternoon.

35.  Headache  as  if  the  temples  were  pressed  asunder.

Violent  headache  all  the  afternoon  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed
asunder  (aft.  3 d.).

(Large  lumps  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  are  only  painful  when
touched.)

Tension  of  the  integuments  of  the  head,  as  if  they  were  closely
attached  to  the  skull,  causing  confusion  of  the  head  (for  several
hours)  [FF/.]

Smarting  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp  (aft.  ^ h.).

40.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  and  flush  of  heat  in  the  cheeks.
[FZ.]

A tension  over  the  face.

Paleness  of  the  face.

A cold  blast  in  the  eyes.

The  eyes  protruded  (aft.  \ h.).

45.  Staring  look  at  an  object,  when  sitting.

Fine  stitches  in  the  left  eye  (aft.  24  h.).

Stitches  in  the  eyelids.  [Christoph.  Weber,  Wirkungen
des  kunstlichen  Magnets , Hanover,  1767.]

In  the  evening  stitches  in  the  left  eyelids,  with  dryness  of  them.

[Fz.]

Fine  shooting  in  the  canthus  and  in  the  left  cheek.  [Weber,  1.  c.]
50.  Burning,  prolonged  stitch  in  the  upper  eyelid  (aft.  3 m.).

On  the  border  of  the  upper  eyelid  a vesicle  which  pressed  on  the

eye.

Eyelids  in  the  morning  strongly  gummed  up.  [Weber,  1.  c.]
Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  eyelids  when  reading  (aft.  12  h.).
Twitching  and  drawing  in  the  eyelids.  [Weber,  I.  c.]
35.  Drawing  in  the  eyelids.  [Weber,  1.  c.]


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


85


Drawing  in  the  eyelids  and  lachrymation.  [Weber,
1.  c.]

Mucus  in  the  outer  canthus.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Itching  in  the  inner  canthus  and  the  border  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  ^ h.] .
Itching  over  the  right  eye,  compelling  scratching.  [Weber,  1.  c.]
60.  Itching  in  the  eyelids.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Itching  in  the  eye.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  in  bed,  painful  dry  feel-
ing of  the  eyelids  (aft.  14,  20  h.).

Sensation  as  of  grains  of  sand  in  the  eye.  [Weber,  1,  c.]

Burning,  redness  and  lachrymation  of  both  eyes.  [Weber,  1.  c.]
65.  Great  movement  of  the  eyeball;  much  water  collects  in  both
eyes.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

The  eyes  water  in  the  morning.

The  eyes  water  much,  intolerance  of  sunlight.

(Applied  to  the  weak  right  eye)  (aft.  J h.)  a burning  in  it;
it  became  red  and  filled  with  water.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Applied  to  the  weak  eye,  a coldness  that  lasted  three  or  four
minutes  (aft.  2 m.).  [Weber,  1.  c.]

70.  Coldness  of  the  weak  eye,  as  if  a lump  of  ice  lay  in
the  orbit  instead  of  the  eye;  when  the  coldness  went  off,  a
prolonged  needle-prick  in  the  eye.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

First  coldness,  then  heat  in  the  eye.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Ticking  sensation  in  the  eye,  like  a watch  (for  25  m.).  [Weber,
1.  c.]

Restless  motion  of  the  eye.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Sensation  as  of  a spider’s  web  before  the  eyes.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

75.  Flash  of  light  in  the  eye,  like  a falling  star.  [Weber,  1.  c.]
Formication  between  the  two  eyes.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

(Applied  to  the  eye)  a strong  drawing  over  the  eye,  on  the  cheek,
and  the  ear  to  the  upper  jaw.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

The  pupils  are  much  dilated,  and  contract  but  little  to  the  light
(immediately).

The  pupils  contract  during  the  first  hours.

80.  A stitch  from  the  Eustachian  tube  into  the  inner  ear  (when
stooping).

Ringing  in  the  ear  of  the  same  side  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Fine  ringing  in  the  ear  of  the  opposite  side  (immediately).

Some  tearings  in  the  right  internal  ear,  like  earache  (aft.  18  h.).
A hissing  and  a drawing  sensation  in  the  ear.

85.  Applied  to  the  ear,  a crepitation  and  crackling  in  it.  [Weber,
1.  c.]

(Applied  to  the  ear)  a warmth  and  roaring  in  it,  as  when  water
boils  and  bubbles.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Applied  to  the  ear,  heat  and  pecking  in  it.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

A kind  of  deafness,  as  if  a skin  lay  before  the  right  ear
followed  by  heat  in  it.  [Ar.]

Tension  in  the  membrana  tympani.
go.  Acute  tensive  pain  in  the  face  that  extended  to  the  tonsils,
Weber,  1.  c.]


8(5


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


Drawing  in  the  left  cheek.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Fine  pricking  on  the  cheek,  as  from  innumerable  fine  needles,
with  hot  sensation,  but  without  heat  perceptible  to  the  touch  (aft.
a*h  ,).[Htn}.

A small  lump  in  the  face  near  the  nose,  which  causes  pain  like
excoriation  when  touched ; when  not  touched  some  rare,  slow
stitches  are  felt  in  it.

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  right  ala  nasi  with  shooting  itching
sensation.  [Tz.]

95.  Deception  of  the  sense  of  smell ; in  the  room  there  is  a smell
of  rotten  eggs,  or  as  if  a privy  was  being  cleaned  out  (aft.  27  h.).

»•]

Deception  of  the  sense  of  smell  ; in  the  room  there  is  a smell  of
whitewash  or  dust.

On  three  afternoons  profuse  epistaxis,  which  becomes  more  profuse
each  successive  afternoon,  preceded  by  aching  pain  in  the  forehead
(aft.  4 d.).

In  the  afternoon  (about  2 o’clock)  haemorrhage  from  the  left
nostril  (aft.  46  h.).  [Zr.]

In  the  afternoon  (about  4 o’clock)  when  walking  in  the  open
air,  after  blowing  the  nose,  epistaxis  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour
(aft.  23  h.).  [ Lr .]

100.  Sore  pain  on  the  nostrils,  even  when  not  touching  or  moving
them  (aft.  26  h.).

At  first  red  and  hot  nose-tip,  then  red,  hot,  sharply  defined  spots
on  the  cheeks.

Crepitating  shooting  pain  in  an  (already  existing)  pimple  on  the
right  angle  of  the  mouth  (immediately).  [Tz.]

Drawing  in  the  left  maxilla  and  the  left  cheek.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

In  the  morning  on  awaking  a tensive  pain  in  the  left  upper
maxilla  (aft.  36  h.).  [Zr.]

105.  A painful  squeezing  in  the  maxillary  joint  on  moving  the  lower
jaw,  as  if  it  were  dislocated  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn. ]

Under  the  mastoid  process,  between  the  sterno-cleido-mastoideus
muscle  and  the  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw  aching  drawing  pain  pro-
ceeding from  the  temple.  [Zz.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  left  anterior  submaxillary  glands  (aft.  19  h.).

[*>.]

In  the  left  submaxillary  gland,  squeezing  aching  pain,  under  the
left  angle  of  the  jaw  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  submaxillary  glands  a crushing  aching  or  pinching  pain,
per  se , such  as  is  felt  in  acute  sore-throat  (aft.  4 h.).

no.  Tearing  pain  in  the  cervical  muscles  as  if  they  were  too  tired.

Painful  cramp  in  the  cervical  muscles  from  one  ear  to  the  other.

Cramp  in  one  of  the  cervical  muscles  when  yawning ; afterwards
the  part  was  painful  to  the  touch.

In  the  left  angle  of  the  lips,  on  moving  the  mouth  sore  pain,  as
if  an  ulcer  would  come  there.

Slow  excessively  acute  and  painful  stitches  in  the  lower  lip.

1 15.  Small  papules  on  the  inside  of  the  upper  lip  opposite  the  gums.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.  87

Toothache  in  the  upper  incisors  of  the  right  side,  just  as  if  some-
thing hard  pressed  on  them  and  would  break  them  down.  [Tz.]

Toothache  when  eating  ; all  his  teeth  felt  loose  as  if  they  would
bend  over.  [-Fz.]

The  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw  feel  loose  (aft.  28  h.).  [ Lr .]

Painful  tingling  in  the  hollow  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw,  worst  on
the  right  side;  the  toothache  ceases  whilst  eating  (aft.  3 h.).
\_Htn.-]

120.  Cramp-like  toothache  in  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw.

Toothache,  as  if  the  tooth  were  torn  out ; it  becomes  worse
after  eating,  and  when  he  is  sitting  or  lying,  but  is  better  when  he
is  walking.

Toothache  going  towards  the  eye  ; a very  rapid  pecking  in  the
hollow  tooth,  with  swollen,  inflamed  gums  and  red  burning  cheek ;
the  toothache  grew  worse  immediately  after  eating,  got  better  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  but  was  aggravated  in  the  close  room.

Throbbing  in  the  hollow  tooth  (immediately)  and  then  a pressure
in  it,  as  if  something  hard  pressed  itself  into  the  cavity,  with  drawing
in  the  temples.

Throbbing  in  the  tooth,  with  burning  in  the  gums,  and  swollen,
red,  hot  cheeks,  with  burning  pain  and  throbbing  in  them,  in  the
afternoon.

125.  The  toothache  ceases  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  returns
in  the  room.

Sensation  of  numbness  and  insensibility  in  the  gum  of  the  tooth
that  was  painful.

Drawing  toothache  in  the  hollow  tooth  and  in  the  front  teeth,
increased  only  by  eating,  when  something  warm  touches  it,  and
along  with  the  pain  there  is  also  redness  of  the  cheek.

Swelling  of  the  gum  of  a hollow  tooth,  which  is  painful  when
touched  by  the  tongue.

Toothache,  as  if  the  gum  were  sore  or  incised,  increased  by  air
coming  into  the  mouth.

130.  Itching  in  the  front  part  of  the  tongue,  which  compels  him  to
rub  and  scratch  it.

On  awaking  from  sleep  the  mouth  is  full  of  thick,  almost  dry,
white  mucus  (aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

Smell  from  the  mouth,  that  is  very  disagreeable  to  the  patient
himself.

Retching  in  the  oesophagus  which  when  it  will  not  come  to
eructation  presses  upwards  and  causes  anxiety.

Copious  flow  of  saliva.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

135.  Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (immediately).

Heartburn  (aft.  ^ h.).

Long-continued  rancid  heartburn.

Food  of  the  nicest  taste  has  no  taste  to  him,  during  supper  (aft.
10  h.).

On  smoking  tobacco  he  felt  a scraping  in  the  throat  posteriorly,
as  if  heartburn  would  burn  or  had  burnt  him.

140.  In  the  morning  a sourish,  fasting  taste.


88


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


When  he  smokes  tobacco  it  tastes  bitter  on  the  back  of  the
tongue  (aft.  2 h.).

Tobacco-smoking  is  disliked  by  him  ; tobacco  tastes  bad  (aft.
2 h.).

At  noon  she  was  so  full,  that  she  could  not  eat.

(He  is  immediately  satiated.)

145.  Ravenous  hunger  in  the  evening.

Chocolate  had  an  insipid  disagreeable  taste,  as  if  mixed  with
impure  water.

(Supper  tastes  well,  but  soon  afterwards  there  comes  a flat  taste
in  the  mouth  and  heat  in  the  lobes  of  the  ears.)

Eructation,  like  a somewhat  painful  jerk.

Frequent  eructation  of  nothing  but  air.

150.  Nausea.

It  seems  to  promote  acid  derangement  of  the  stomach.

The  tongue  is  much  furred  and  slimy  ; loathing  at  milk.

His  stomach  feels  deranged ; there  is  such  a weight  in  his
stomach  as  if  he  had  eaten  something.

Heartburn  after  supper  (aft.  24  h.).

155.  In  the  night  she  wakes  up  from  a pressure  in  the  abdomen  as
from  a stone.

Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a stone.

Clutching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  \ h.).

(Throbbing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis)  (immediately).

Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  and  stomach,  as  if  the
walls  of  the  stomach  were  painfully  sensitive.

160.  A drawing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  extending  to  the  right  side
of  the  chest.

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  4 h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  a few  h.).

In  the  umbilical  region  warmth,  which  caused  him  anxiety,  and
afterwards  a sensation  as  if  vomiting  were  about  to  ensue.

Coldness  in  the  abdomen  (immediately  after  contact).

165.  Gurgling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  much  flatulence  were
incarcerated,  which  causes  also  a twisting  about  that
mounts  up  into  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  occasions
eructation  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Htn.]

A pinching  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  which  went  off  by
discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.]

While  walking  in  the  open  air  severe  cutting  stitches  in  the
centre  of  the  abdomen  from  below  upwards  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Zr.]

Shocks  and  jerks  from  the  abdomen  through  the  chest  up  into
the  throat  (immediately).

A couple  of  jerks  like  rattling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  something
fell  down  in  it  by  fits  (immediately).

170.  A couple  of  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  and  movement
in  the  abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  were  coming  on  (aft.  10  h.  the  next
morning).

Spasmodic  contractive  feeling  of  the  hvpogastrium,  externally
and  internally,  in  the  morning.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.  89

Pinching,  especially  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  imme-
diately after  eating  (supper).

In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  on  a small  spot,  a violent
unintermitting  pinching,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence.

Flatulent  colic  immediately  after  supper  ; a sharp  pressure  out-
wards in  all  parts  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  belly  would  burst ; it  is
alleviated  by  sitting  motionless  (aft.  30  h.).

175.  In  the  morning,  in  bed,  immediately  after  waking,  flatulent
colic ; the  flatulence  pressed  upwards  towards  the  hypochondria,
with  hard  pressing  and  tensive  pains  here  and  there  in  the  whole
abdomen,  during  rest  and  movement,  with  a qualmishness  and  nausea
arising  from  the  abdomen.

Uninterrupted  aching  pinching  pain  in  the  whole  abdomen,  like
a colic,  but  without  perceptible  flatulence,  which  does  not  go  ofF
either  by  rest,  motion,  or  by  taking  food  and  drink,  but  is  very  much
aggravated  by  thinking  and  over-exertion  of  the  mind,  and  then  is
attended  by  nausea  ; the  colic  is  somewhat  alleviated  by  perfect  rest,
but  by  touching  zinc  it  goes  off’  completely  within  an  hour.

In  the  evening  and  morning  there  is  pressure  here  and  there,  as
from  flatulence,  in  the  bowels,  as  if  the  pressure  occurred  on  a
bruised  spot,  and  at  the  same  time  here  and  there  in  the  brain  a
pressure  as  if  on  a bruised  spot ; when  flatus  is  discharged  the  pain
in  the  abdomen  and  the  headache  both  go  off ; whenever  and  as
long  as  flatulence  moves  in  the  abdomen,  the  above  pain  in  the
abdomen  and  headache  both  reappear  and  cause  a cross  state  of  the
disposition  ; at  the  same  time  the  flatus  smells  very  badly.*

(Painful  sensibility  of  the  abdominal  muscles.)

Suppression  of  the  discharge  of  flatus,  for  twenty-four  hours.

180.  In  the  night,  about  2 a.  m.,  he  wakes  up  with  the  most  violent
colic  ; a continued  intolerable  hard  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis
and  hypochondria,  which  always  rises  higher  up  into  the  chest,  and
becomes  more  severe,  up  to  the  pit  of  the  throat,  where  it  threatens
to  stop  the  breath  ; a kind  of  thoracic  colic,  f

In  the  morning  .drawing,  almost  dysenteric  pain  in  the  hypo-
gastrium,  then  a large  sized  faecal  evacuation  passed  with  difficulty
(aft.  24  h.).

Along  with  the  stool  blood  was  discharged  twice  during  the  day
(aft.  4 d.).

Hard,  large  sized,  rare  stool,  passed  with  difficulty

(aft.  some  d.).

A sharp  pressure  in  the  rectum  (aft.  ij  h.).

185.  A shooting  pinching  in  the  rectum.

After  midnight,  during  slumber,  an  aching  pressing  pain  in  the
rectum  (not  in  the  anus)  lasting  an  hour,  which  goes  off  on  waking
up  thoroughly.

# On  then  applying  the  south  pole  the  painful  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  also
the  headache,  go  off  within  an  hour.

f The  open  hands  laid  lightly  on  the  chest,  with  the  exertion  or  strong  will  (a  kind
of  self-mesmerising),  soon  gave  relief;  the  spasm  went  off,  and  an  easy  discharge  of
inuch  flatus  restored  rest  and  sleep.


9°


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


In  the  left  iliac  region,  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring,  a cutting
pain  with  a weak  feeling  there.

Stitches  in  the  right  lumbar  region.  \_Mch.~]

Stitches  in  the  left  groin  outwards  at  the  superior  process  of  the
os  ilii  (immediately).  [T%.]

190.  Out-boring  pain  above  the  left  inguinal  ring ; as  if  a hernia  would
protrude,  when  sitting,  [Tz.]

From  day  to  day,  increased  relaxation  of  the  inguinal  ring;  a
hernia  tends  to  protrude,  chiefly  when  coughing  (aft.  48  h.).

Pain  in  the  inguinal  ring,  like  excoriation,  especially  when
walking  (aft.  3 h.).

Bark  urine.


The  first  hours  diminished,  after  a day  and  night  much  increased
copious  secretion  of  urine.

195.  Frequent  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  18  h.).

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  (aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

Very  copious  discharge  of  urine,  for  more  than  one  day  (aft.  6 h).

(Relaxation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  from  1 p.  m.  until  8 p.  m.,
the  urine  dribbled  away  involuntarily)  (aft.  3 h.).

After  urinating  a persistent  smarting  pain  in  the  seam  of  the
prepuce.

200.  Itching  smarting  on  the  inside  of  the  prepuce,  which  compels  him
to  rub,  at  night  in  bed.

On  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  a painful  itching  (after
waking  at  midnight.

Nocturnal  pollution  without  erection,  from  which  he  awakes  with
anxiety.

Nocturnal  pollution.

Uncontrollable  erection  of  the  penis,  with  irresistable  inclination
for  coitus  and  for  ejaculation  of  semen.

205.  In  the  morning  strong  erections.

Laxity  of  the  genital  organs  and  diminished  inclination  for  coitus
(aft.  36  h.).

A throttling  pain  in  the  right  testicle  (aft.  3 h.).

On  crossing  the  thighs,  sharp  stitches  in  the  left  testicle  (aft.
i8i  h.).  [Zr.]

A sharp  drawing  and  a cutting  in  the  testicles.

2iO.  Moderated  sexual  desire,  he  can  master  it  (aft.  64  h.).

(The  catamenia,  which  were  expected,  came  on  in  twenty  hours,
increased  in  twenty-four  hours  beyond  their  usual  quantity  (they  had
hitherto  been  too  scanty)  and  became  healthy  in  amount,  without

any  more  accessory  symptoms  (consequently  curative  action),

* *

. *

One  nostril  is  stopped  up  with  stuffed  coryza,  whilst  thin  mucus
drops  from  the  other  nostril.

In  the  morning  quick  discharge  of  fluid  mucus  from  the  nose.

Sneezing  and  fluent  coryza  with  stopped  nose  (aft.  38  h.)  [Zr.]

215.  Coryza  and  sneezing  (aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

Violent  coryza  of  the  side  of  the  nose  on  which  the  magnet  was
applied  to  the  eye.  [Weber,  1.  c.]


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


9i


Discharge  of  an  acrid  water  from  the  nose.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Acrid  discharge  from  the  nose,  which  causes  burning  pain  in  the
nostril.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Flow  of  water  from  both  nostrils.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

220.  Very  severe  stuffed  coryza,  so  that  both  nostrils  are  stopped  up,
and  he  can  only  breathe  with  difficulty  (aft.  20  h.).  \_Htn.~]

At  night  complete  stoppage  of  the  left  nostril,  whilst  the  right
was  open,  but  quite  dry,  as  in  stuffed  coryza.  [.

After  gettting  up  from  bed,  the  nose  which  had  been  stopped  up
at  night,  opened,  but  the  dryness  remained  the  same.  \_Htn.].

Attack  of  sneezing  and  coryza  (aft.  2 h.).

Breathing  is  difficult  for  her.

225.  Shortness  of  breath  on  going  up  stairs.  [Tz.]

He  must  breathe  spasmodically  (in  interrupted,  deep  breaths)  as  if
in  his  need  to  make  a deep  inspiration  he  wished  to  displace  the  air  ;
at  the  same  time  he  perspired  all  over  (immediately).

Instantaneous  violent  cough  of  three  or  four  impulses.

The  cough  becomes  worse  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  it  stuck
and  choked  as  if  he  would  suffocate.

Sudden  oppression  of  the  chest.

230.  Squeezing  contractive  pain  transversely  through  the  chest,  which
causes  a trembling  anxious  respiration,  especially  inspiration  (when
leaning  forwards  on  the  arms  and  looking  out  of  the  window)  (aft.

3i  M-  [-»*•]

Anxiety  and  qualmishness  about  the  chest  (aft.  5 m.).  [Zr.]

Oppression  of  the  chest.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Heat  seems  to  go  in  over  the  throat  towards  the  interior  of  the
chest,  on  moving  in  the  open  air.  [Zz.]

A sensation  in  the  throat  and  trachea,  as  after  hearty  laughing,
i.  e.  a sensation  which  excites  the  internal  feeling  of  laughter,  and  the
saliva  collects  in  the  mouth.

235.  Oppression  in  the  chest  with  anxiety.

Itching  on  the  nipples  (aft.  1 h.).

Some  strong  beats  of  the  heart.

Burning  stitches  at  the  heart.

Burning  stitches,  first  on  the  muscles  of  the  back,  then  in  the
side  of  the  chest,  and  lastly  anteriorly  on  the  right  breast.

240.  Aching  in  the  region  of  the  heart  (immediately).

Several  sharp  stitches  in  the  cardiac  region.

Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  pectoral  muscles  on  moving
the  arm.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a shooting  on  the  left  side  of  the
chest  (aft.  10  m.).  [Zr.]

In  the  evening  a persistent  stitch  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest.
[Lr.]

245.  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  J h.).

In  the  evening  in  bed  before  going  to  sleep  frequent  dry,  hacking
cough.

(Dry  cough,  which  causes  a raw  pain  on  the  chest,  especially  at
night,  when  after  chilliness  she  has  become  warm  in  bed.)


92


MAGNET1S  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


Smoking  tobacco  causes  him  to  cough.

Whilst  going  to  sleep  there  occurs  a shaking  spasmodic  cough,
that  hinders  every  attempt  to  go  to  sleep.

250.  About  midnight  suffocating  spasmodic  cough  ; the  irritation  to
cough  is  in  the  smallest  and  most  remote  bronchial  tubes,  where  the
cough  cannot  yet  detach  the  phlegm,  and  the  mucus  that  is  loosened
by  the  cough  goes  into  the  upper  region  without  diminishing  the
tickling  cough,  which  has  its  seat  in  a deeper  region  ; the  cough,  in
consequence,  becomes  very  fatiguing  and  shaking  ; even  the  head  is
shaken,  and  the  whole  body  becomes  hot,  this  is  followed  by  a general
perspiration  lasting  till  morning,  with  cessation  of  the  cough.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  immediately  after  lying  down,  incessant
(not  tickling)  irritation  to  cough,  which  is  short  and  dry,  and  the
irritation  to  further  coughing  is  not  exhausted,  as  is  the  case  with
other  kinds  of  cough  ; this  irritation  to  cough  is  only  allayed  by  sup-
pressing the  cough  by  firm  determined  will.

Crepitation  or  cracking  in  the  cervical  vertebrae,  especially  in  the
atlas,  when  moving  (aft.  3 h.).

In  the  middle  of  the  spine,  on  bending  backwards,  pain  like  a
bruise  (aft.  36  h.).

Intermittent  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  back  (aft.  26^  h.).

i>.]  ...

255.  Persistent  pains  in  the  back  when  standing,  walking,  and  sitting,
as  if  he  had  stooped  for  a long  time  (aft.  28^  h.).  [Zr.]

Sensation  as  of  gurgling  and  formication  between  the  scapulae.

Heaviness  in  the  superior  extremities  as  if  lead  were  in  the  blood-
vessels (immediately).  [Hsch.]

Feeling  of  weight  in  the  arm  to  which  the  pole  is  applied.  [Z%.]

Considerable  feeling  of  weight  in  the  left  upper  and  fore-arm
(aft.  J h.).  [Htn.']

260.  Great  coldness  in  the  arm  stroked  with  the  magnet  (in  a woman  in
the  zoomagnetic  sleep  caused  by  contact  with  the  north  pole).
[Heinicke,  ldeen  und  Beobachtungen  uber  d.  thier.  Magnetism .,
Bremen,  1880,  p.  4.]

Prickling  shooting  pain  in  the  arm  up  to  the  shoulder,  especially
in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  forearm.  [Gth.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a pain  on  the  right  shoulder,  like
excoriation  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Zr.]

Sensation  in  the  arm  and  hand  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep
(immediately).  [ Htn .]

Quivering  in  the  lumbar  muscles  of  the  back.

265.  Before  noon  until  after  midnight  (4  a.m.)  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-
joint,  as  if  bruised,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest,  not  painful  when
touched  (aft.  3 h.).

Trembling  of  the  arm  of  the  hand  that  touches  the  magnet.

Arm  as  if  asleep,  like  cramp.

The  left  arm  is  much  heavier  than  the  other.

The  upper  arm  of  the  opposite  side  to  that  in  contact  with  the
pole  is  very  heavy.

270.  Above  the  elbow  an  itching,  consisting  of  fine  pricking  and


magnetis  polus  arcticus.


93

smarting,  which  is  not  allayed  by  scratching,  as  from  a gnat-bite ;
after  scratching  a burning.

Heaviness  in  the  upper  arm  (immediately).

Several  times  twitching  in  the  affected  upper  arm  (the  arm  and
leg  at  the  same  time  feel  to  him  as  if  dead).

Stitches  at  the  lower  part  of  the  forearm  near  the  wrist-joint  (aft.
251  h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  evening  aching  in  the  bone  of  the  left  forearm,  as  after  a
blow.  [Fz.~\

275.  Feeling  of  stiffness  in  the  elbow-joint.

In  the  elbow-joint  audible  cracking  on  moving  (immediately).

Pleasant  feeling  in  the  arm-joint,  as  if  it  were  rested  after  great
weariness.

Aching  and  drawing  in  the  wrist,  with  restlessness  in  the  forearm
(as  if  in  joy  and  expectation),  which  always  compels  him  to  flex  it.

[**.]

Sensation  in  the  hand  as  if  it  were  asleep,  [Tz.]

280.  Trembling;  in  the  left  hand  and  stiffness  of  the  index  finger  (aft.
9 m.).  [Lr.~\

When  walking  in  the  open  air  stitches  spreading  into  the  muscles
of  the  left  palm  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.]

Stiffness  and  rigidity  in  the  right  wrist  and  ankle-joints,  at
night  in  bed.

A trembling  of  the  hand  touching  the  magnet  and  of  the  foot  of
the  opposite  side.

A painful  and  almost  burning  itching  on  the  back  of  the  middle
phalanx  of  the  little  finger,  as  if  the  part  had  been  frostbitten  ; the
place  is  painful  when  touched  (aft.  4 h.).

285.  A fine,  frequent  pricking,  as  with  needles,  in  the  affected  part
and  in  every  finger  tip,  worst  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.

Drawing  upwards  in  the  fingers  with  formication  in  them
(immediately),  and  immediately  afterwards  somewhat  depressed  in
spirits.

Fingers  gone  to  sleep.  [Gth.~\

A formication  in  the  tip  of  the  left  index  (aft.  4 m.).  [ Lr .]

A twitching  in  the  thumb  applied  to  the  pole,  as  if  the  pulse  beat
in  it.  [Gth.']

290.  Great  heaviness  in  the  finger  touching  the  pole  (immediately).
[Htn.]

Icy  coldness  in  the  touching  finger  (immediately) . \_Htn.~\

Pain  in  the  finger-joints,  as  if  they  had  been  over-bent.

Tingling  in  the  touching  finger.

First  a quivering  in  the  touching  finger,  and  then  up  into  the
arm,  with  a kind  of  heaviness  in  it.

295.  (A  backward-drawing  pain  in  the  fingers,  combined  with  formi-
cation.)

Bruised  pain  in  the  hip-joints,  which  is  aggravated  by  stooping.

Exhaustion  of  the  lower  limbs.  \Mch\\

Great  weariness  of  the  lower  extremeties  from  4 to  8 o’clock
p.m.  (aft.  1 h.).  [_Hseh.~\


94


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


The  lower  extremities  feel  like  to  break  down  from  fatigue,
when  walking.  [Tz.]

300.  Drawing  in  the  right  thigh,  in  both  knees.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

A stitch  downwards  anteriorly  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh
(aft.  27  h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  morning  a voluptuous  itching,  more  in  front  than  on  the
inside,  on  the  left  thigh  (aft.  18  h.).  [Lr.]

Heaviness  and  numbness  in  the  thighs,  as  if  they  had  gone  to
sleep,  without  formication.

Aching  and  throttling  tearing  in  inner  parts  of  the  muscles  of  the
thigh  when  sitting  and  walking  (aft.  24  h.).

305.  An  aching  tearing  on  the  outer  side  of  the  knee  down  to  the
outer  ankle  (aft.  3 h.).

Bruised  pain  above  the  knee  when  sitting.  [Tz.]

Stitches  in  the  tendons  of  the  left  thigh  towards  the  hough  (aft.
19  h.).  [Lr.]

Stiffness  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough  when  rising  from  a seat,  as
if  they  were  too  short  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.]

Painless  tingling  in  the  left  leg,  with  feeling  of  heaviness,  as  if
it  were  asleep  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

310.  Aching  in  the  tibiae  when  standing.  [Tz.]

Painful  rigidity  of  the  calf  when  walking.

Burning  pulsating  stitches  in  the  calf.

Great  weariness  in  the  legs  (aft.  24  h.).

The  left  thigh  went  to  sleep  on  rising  up,  but  chiefly  when
standing,  after  sitting  (aft.  3 h.).

315.  When  walking  the  foot  became  as  if  asleep  (aft.  J h.).

Pain  on  the  upper  part  of  the  toes  as  if  sore  from  walking.

(When  sitting)  sudden,  tearing  stitches  in  the  heels,  the  big  toe
and  the  calf.  [Tz.]

Stitches  in  the  right  big  toe.  [Mch.]

Painful  crawling  on  the  toes  of  the  right  foot  (aft.  27  h.).

[Lr.-]

320.  Voluptuous  itching  under  the  toes  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  27J  h.).

[Lr.]

Tearing  stitch  in  the  big  toe.

Sore  painful  pressure  in  the  hitherto  painless  corns  from  the
slightest  tightness  of  the  shoes.

Pain  on  one  toe,  as  if  there  were  a corn  on  it.

A severe  stitch  in  the  heel.

325.  Sore  pain  in  the  heel  (aft.  \ h.).

(On  the  heel  sometimes  a pain  like  pressure.)

(Severe  pressing  about  the  ankle  of  the  diseased  ulcerated  foot.)

(Shooting  in  the  encysted  tumour.)

A crawling  over  the  skin.

330.  On  the  whole  body  a fine  pricking  itching  in  the  skin,  which
went  off  after  scratching  a little,  but  appeared  in  another  place
(aft.  4f  h.).  [Htn.]

A crawling  itching,  as  from  a fly  or  flea,  which  ended  in  a
feeling  of  excoriation,  first  on  the  inner  side  of  the  limbs,  then  on


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


95


their  outer  side,  in  the  evening  in  bed  and  in  the  morning  after
awaking.

Persistent  digging  stitches,  which  as  they  penetrated  deeper  and
deeper  became  all  the  more  acute  and  painful,  on  various  parts.

Slow,  persistent,  very  painful  stitches  on  various  parts,  e.g.  on
the  back  or  on  the  sides  of  the  fingers  and  toes.

Shooting  jerks  in  the  limb  in  contact  with  the  magnet  (imme-
diately).

335.  Jerks  in  the  limb  in  contact  with  the  magnet  (immediately).

A trembling,  vibrating,  tingling  sensation.

Sensation  as  from  rush  of  blood  to  the  part  in  contact  with  the
magnet,  as  if  the  blood  would  force  itself  out  there  (aft.  J h.).

In  the  neighbouring  parts  a quivering.

A quivering  and  throbbing  in  the  region  of  application  (aft.  \ h.).

340.  In  the  neighbouring  parts  tensive  sensation.

In  the  neighbouring  parts  pain  as  if  bruised,  and  as  if  a great
weight  had  been  carried.

In  the  neighbouring  parts  a creeping,  as  if  the  part  would  goto  sleep.

A trembling  feeling  through  the  whole  body,  chiefly  in  the  feet
(aft.  Jh.).

A trembling  in  the  parts  touching  the  magnet  (imme-
diately) ,

345.  The  hand  in  contact  became  soon  colder.

Cooling  sensation  on  the  place  of  application.


Cold  sensation  on  the  place  of  application  (aft.  \ h.).

Warm  sensation  in  the  neighbouring  parts.

In  the  (already  existing)  tetter,  burning  pain  all  day.

350.  In  the  (already  existing)  tetter,  sore,  almost  tearing  burning  pain.

A drawing  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones,  as  on  the  approach
_ of  an  ague  (but  without  chill  or  heat)  (aft.  2 h.).

Painless  drawing  sensation.

A rapid  drawing  or  darting  to  and  fro,  and  jerks  like  a shooting
on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue,  on  the  neck  and  over  the  foot.

Heaviness  in  single  limbs  (with  feeling  of  increased  strength  in
them)  (aft.  24  h.).

355.  A feeling  of  dryness  and  straining  in  the  body,  with  loss  or
strength.

He  is  very  exhausted,  must  rest  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
and  he  was  melancholy  and  dejected.

Exhaustion,  bruised  feeling  and  pains  in  the  limbs  were  aggravated
in  the  open  air.

In  the  morning  a general  exhaustion  with  sweat  of  anxiety,  at
noon  loss  of  appetite ; he  must  lie  down  ; afterwards  diarrhoea
(aft.  48  h.).

Weariness  in  all  the  limbs  (aft.  \ h.).

360.  Great  exhaustion  on  going  up  the  accustomed  stairs.  [Fz."]

In  the  morning  so  exhausted,  as  from  oppressive  sultry  air,
that  she  could  scarcely  drag  herself  along.

Immoderate,  spasmodic  yawning,  and  at  the  same  time  pain  in
the  left  maxillary  joint,  as  if  it  would  be  dislocated.


96


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


Too  frequent  yawning  without  sleepiness.

Frequent  yawning  (immediately).

365.  Great  drowsiness ; he  must  yawn.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Sleepy  stupefaction  : several  times  he  felt  as  if  the  eyes  were
suddenly  closed,  and  as  if  an  agreeable  sleep  would  suddenly  come
on  ; an  irresistible  sensation  which  tended  to  make  him  quickly
unconscious.

In  the  evening  he  was  overcome  by  great  sleepiness,  all  the
limbs  felt  paralysed  and  bruised.

By  day  always  sleepy  ; day  sleep.

Very  deep,  sound  sleep,  especially  towards  morning,  he  could
not  sleep  enough  in  the  morning.

370.  At  night  in  sleep  he  lay  on  the  back.

She  sings  in  the  evening  in  her  sleep,  wakes  up  in  consequence,
and  remembers  that  it  is  wrong,  goes  to  sleep  again  and  recommences
to  sing  and  again  wakes  up  from  it.

Historical,  very  vivid  but  innocent  and  unimpassioned  dreams,
which  cannot  be  remembered  on  awakening.

All  night  long  lascivious  dreams  (aft.  8 h.).

Dreamful  and  yet  very  sound  sleep ; he  dreams  on  commencing
to  slumber.

375.  About  midnight  a dream,  as  if  she  fell  from  a height,  on  which
she  started  and  trembled  all  over.

A dream  (about  midnight)  of  murder  and  assasination,  owing  to
which  she  commenced  to  weep  aloud  and  to  howl.

Appearance  in  a dream  of  a person  whom  she  saw  next  day  when
awake  for  the  first  time.

He  dreams  all  night  not  disagreeable  but  very  vivid  visions,  which
have  no  connection  with  one  another  ; when  awake  he  can  remember
them.

At  night  stupefied  sleep ; in  the  morning  he  lay  on  his  back  and
had  dreams  of  deformed  men,  abortions,  &c.  [F%.]

380.  Learned  occupations  at  night  in  dream.  [Lr.]

At  night  sleep  is  disturbed  by  vexatious  unremembered  dreams.
•]

At  night  in  sleep,  very  restless  tossing  about  with  vivid  dreams  ;
the  bed  seemed  too  warm.  \_Htn.~\

Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep  as  from  a fright  (aft.  34  h.).  [Zr.]

At  night  he  often  awakes  with  a burning  heat  of  the  whole  body,
and  must  sometimes  throw  off  the  clothes  and  get  air  ; at  the  same
time  his  mouth  was  very  dry,  without  thirst.  [ Htn .]

385.  In  the  evening  he  cannot  get  to  sleep  for  several  hours  (aft.  3,
4 d.)«

About  2 a.m.  half  waking  with  much  inner  consciousness,
great  wealth  of  thoughts  and  lively  memory ; he  thinks
of  an  important  subject  in  the  best  form  in  a foreign  language
with  which  he  was  not  very  conversant,  almost  as  if  in  a ZQO-
magnetic  sleep-talking  state ; but  when  fully  awake  he
cannot  remember  distinctly  the  subject  of  his  thoughts
(aft.  16  h.).


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


97


In  the  evening  immediately  after  going  to  sleep,  sudden  waking
with  a violent  jerk  in  the  muscles  of  the  head  and  neck,  as  if  the  head
were  jerked  backwards.

He  is  awoke  about  midnight  by  a violent  pressure  transversely
across  the  abdomen,  just  above  the  navel,  which  is  not  relieved  either
by  movement,  or  by  heat,  or  by  any  change  of  position.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  a violent  pain  in  the  top  of  the  gullet,  as
after  swallowing  too  large  a morsel ; but  when  he  turned  on  his  left
side  this  went  off.

390.  In  the  night  in  bed  he  tosses  about  half  awake.

At  night  collection  of  saliva  in  the  month,  so  profuse
that  each  time  he  wakes  the  pillow  is  quite  wet.

He  wakes  at  night  with  much  tiresome  heat  of  the  whole  body,
and  must  from  time  to  time  throw  off  the  clothes  and  give  himself
air ; at  the  same  time  dry  mouth  without  thirst.

Restless  sleep  ; he  tosses  about  in  bed  and  it  feels  too  warm.

At  night  a warmth  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out.

395.  Strong  smelling  night-sweat,  without  heat.

He  woke  up  at  night ; he  felt  very  warm,  and  he  became  still
warmer  by  drinking  a glass  of  cold  water  (aft.  16  h.).

Frequent  shivering  at  night  in  bed  and  jerks  in  the  arms,  so  that
they  were  propelled  towards  one  another.

In  the  morning  chill  with  yawning.

(Chill  all  day,  all  over  the  body  but  especially  over  the  back)  (aft.

48  h.).

400.  Cooling  of  the  whole  body.1

Cold  sensation  or  feeling  of  cooling  all  over  the  body  as  if  she  were
too  lightly  clad,  or  had  got  a chill,  but  without  shivering  ; imme-
diately she  had  a small  soft  stool  followed  by  straining  (aft.  ^ h.).

Chill,  shivering.

At  the  instant  of  touching  the  north  pole  with  the  tip  of  the
tongue,  shivering  all  over.

Coldness  of  the  hands.

405.  On  the  tip  of  the  finger  in  contact  with  the  magnet  cold  sensa-
tion and  at  the  same  time  beads  of  sweat  on  the  fingers  and  back  of
this  hand  (immediately).

Sweat  on  the  inside  of  the  hands,  which  are  cool.

Cold  sweat  on  the  hands  and  soles  of  the  feet.

Cold  sweat  all  over  (aft.  J h.).

Towards  morning  a profuse,  though  not  disagreeably  smelling,
steamy,  gentle  sweat  all  over.

410.  Night  sweat  towards  2 a.m.  all  over,  even  on  the  face  (chiefly  on
the  chest),  but  not  among  the  hairs  of  the  head  (not  even  on  the
part  of  the  hairy  scalp  on  which  he  lay) j only  in  sleep,  on  awaking
this  sweat  which  was  unattended  by  thirst  went  off.

1 In  the  3rd  edition  two  symptoms  have  been  omitted  here  by  the  transcriber,  and
there  is  a mistake  in  the  enumeration.  We  have  been  able  to  supply  these  symptoms,
399  and  4.00,  from  the  2nd  edition,  and  also  to  correct  the  next  symptom,  which  is
evidently  improperly  given  in  the  3rd  edition  j what  is  there  given  as  one  symptom
being  in  reality  two  different  ones.

VOL.  II.


7


9«


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


Heat  in  the  face.

In  the  evening  red  flush  of  the  whole  face  without  thirst  (aft.
28  h.).  [Zr.]

Warm  feeling.  [. Hsch .]

Even  at  the  open  window  excessively  great  heat  on  the  whole
body,  but  especially  on  the  back  and  forehead ; without  sweat  or
thirst  (aft.  2J).  \_Htn.~\

415.  A heat  spreading  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  abdomen
and  face,  so  that  sweat  broke  out  on  the  face  (aft.  8 m.).  [Zr.].

Hot  feeling  all  over  the  head,  with  hot  but  not  red  face,  and
thirst  (aft.  5^).  \_Htn.~\

Rapidly  occurring  heat  and  redness  in  the  right  cheek,  whilst
the  left  was  cold  to  the  touch  (aft.  26  h.).  [Zr.]

Fiery  redness  in  the  face,  oppression,  pulse  increased  in  strength.
[De  Harsu,  1.  c.]

In  the  evening  heat  over  the  whole  body  with  anxiety,  which
always  drives  him  about.  [Zz.]

420.  Heat,  especially  behind  down  over  the  cheeks  and  on  the  whole
body,  with  an  anxious,  unsettled  state  of  mind.  [Z%,]

In  the  evening  the  blood  mounts  to  his  head,  and  the  face
becomes  hot,  at  the  same  time  he  has  chilliness  in  the  lower
extremities,  especially  in  the  feet  (aft.  4 h.).

Heat  in  one  cheek,  and  feeling  of  heat  internally,  irritated  con-
dition, loquacity  (aft.  \ h.).

Sensation  of  warmth  in  the  feet.

With  quick,  strong  pulse,  hot  feeling  all  over  the  body,  without
external  warmth,  indeed,  even  with  cold  hands,  which  feel  hot  to
him,  without  thirst  (aft.  3 h.).

425.  (Fever:  from  noon  till  evening  chilliness  in  the  sacrum  up  the
back,  without  perceptible  coldness,  with  great  thirst ; then  about  9
p.m.  great  heat  in  the  face  without  thirst ; after  midnight  violent,
ill-smelling  sweat,  until  the  morning  in  sleep ; when  she  awoke,  it
ceased.)

Fever  : in  the  afternoon  frequent  flying  heat  only  in  the  head,
with  red,  hot  face  (only  for  two  or  three  minutes)  ; at  the  same  time
some  drawing  in  the  head.

Fever : about  3 p.m.,  each  time  first  a small  burning  spot  on  the
foot,  for  a minute,  which  suddenly  went  away,  and  instead  thereof
there  occurs  with  equal  suddenness  a heat  in  the  head  with  redness
of  cheeks  and  perspiration  on  the  face,  for  some  minutes.

Fever : about  4 p.m.  a general  shivering  for  a quarter  of  an  hour
(aft.  4 d.).

Fever:  frequent  shivering  in  the  back  for  some  minutes,  then
an  equally  short  heat  which  spreads  from  the  back  up  over  the
head,  during  which  the  blood-vessels  of  the  hands  swell,  without
sweat.

430.  Moist  warmth  runs  all  over  the  body  (immediately).

Very  ill-humoured  and  tired  (aft.  24  h.)»

Lachrymose  humour,  with  chilliness  and  rigor  at  the  same  time
(aft.  I h.).


MAGNETIS  POLUS  ARCTICUS.


99


In  the  evening  very  sad ; he  must  weep  against  his  will,  whereby
the  eyes  were  painful.

(In  the  evening)  he  felt  as  if  it  were  difficult  for  him  to  commence
to  carry  out  his  resolve,  and  it  was  long  ere  he  could  do  so ; but  then
he  did  it  quickly.

435.  Sluggish  imagination  ; sometimes  he  felt  as  though  he  had  no
imaginative  power.

When  sitting  he  felt  as  if  he  had  lost  all  power  of  moving,  and
were  fixed  to  his  chair ; when,  however,  he  moved  he  found  that  he
could  move  quite  well.

Lazy  disposition.

Anxious,  dejected,  fainthearted,  inconsolable  disposi-
tion, that  caused  him  to  make  self-reproaches  (aft.  1 h.).

Dejected  in  mind  (immediately).

440.  About  3 a.m.  he  could  sleep  no  more  and  anxiety  commenced ;
he  was  anxiously  concerned  about  himself,  as  if  he  were  dangerously
ill ; he  was  gloomy,  he  was  unwilling  to  speak  a word.

Anxious  scrupulosity,  excessive,  too  conscientious  concern.

Irritably  cross ; he  was  unwilling  to  be  disturbed  in  his  work,  and
yet  he  could  finish  nothing.

During  his  work  he  talks  aloud  to  himself.

He  is  apt  to  make  mistakes  in  writing  (aft.  h.).

445.  He  would  like  to  work  hard,  and  cannot  do  enough ; he  does
things  too  slowly.

He  would  like  to  work  hard,  and  cannot  do  enough ; he  does
everything  too  slowly.  [Zr.]

Disposition  alternately  sad  and  cheerful.

Disposition  alternately  cheerful  and  sad  all  day  long  (aft.  30  h.).

As  if  startled  and  timid  (immediately).

450.  Faint-heartedness,  want  of  courage.

Cheerfulness  and  feeling  of  great  strength  alternate  with  want  of
courage  and  weakness.  [Zz.]

Faint-heartedness,  anxious  scrupulosity  (immediately).

Hasty,  hurried.

Hasty,  bold,  firm,  quick.

455.  Bold  disposition,  as  after  drinking  wine.  [HschJ]

Quite  quiet,  calm,  free  from  care  (aft.  ij  h.).

Quite  quiet  and  calm  disposition,  all  day  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.]

Composure  of  the  whole  disposition,  calmed  passions.

Quiet  but  not  cheerful.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.

( South  pole  of  the  magnet .)

Confusion  of  the  head.

An  unsteadiness  and  instability  of  the  mind  : the  ideas  cannot  be
properly  fixed,  objects  hover  only  half  observed  before  the  senses  and
are  not  sufficiently  noticed  and  appreciated,  and  the  judgments  and
resolves  are  hesitating,  which  produces  a kind  of  anxious  and  restless
state  of  the  disposition.*

Imagination  obtuse,  memory  good.  \_Hsch.~\

Giddy  in  the  head,  as  from  intoxication,  as  if  he  would  stagger
and  reel  when  walking  ; also  somewhat  giddy  when  sitting.

5.  Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  without  heat.

Heaviness  of  the  head  and  fine  formication  or  digging  in  it.

A fine  digging  and  formication  in  the  brain  combined  with
heaviness  of  the  head.

Headache  : at  the  top  of  the  head  or  in  both  temples,  an  aching
(a  lively,  violent  pain)  like  catarrh,  which  is  bad  when  sitting
upright,  and  worst  on  shaking  the  head  and  thinking,  slighter  when
walking,  but  more  alleviated  and  almost  going  off  when  stooping
forwards  and  bending  backwards  (in  the  first  hours).  [£//*.]

Headache  in  the  occiput,  which  is  worst  in  the  room,  but  goes
off  in  the  open  air  (in  the  first  hours).

10.  Formication  on  the  left  side  of  the  head  towards  the  upper  part.

[Kr.]

Heaviness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head.  \_Hschf\

At  the  top  of  the  head  in  the  crown,  a creeping  as  if  something
ran  about  there,  and  somewhat  like  tearing.

Shocks  in  both  temples.

In  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  a pain  compounded  of  tearing
and  beating  (aft.  J h.).

15.  Superiorly  over  the  temple,  a couple  of  shocks  combined  with
tearing  pain.

Headache  : tearing  pain  behind  the  left  ear.  [Tz.]

Tearing  on  a small  spot  of  the  left  temple.

A drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  brain,  which
resembles  a slow  burning  stitch  (aft.  3 h.).

An  aching  here  and  there  in  the  occiput.

20.  In  front  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  a creeping  mingled  with
stitches,  in  the  evening  (aft.  8 h.).

* Touching  metallic  zinc  brings  this  derangement  of  the  mental  faculties  again
into  order.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


IOI


A transient,  obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead
(aft.  20  h.) .

A sharp-pointed,  outward-pressing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the
head,  a continued  stitch  combined  with  pressure  (aft.  2 h.)  (relieved
by  the  north  pole).

Headache  all  over  the  brain,  simple  and  tensive  pain,  which
came  on  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  soon  went  off  in  the
room.

(Headache,  in  the  evening  just  before  going  to  sleep,  with  dry
heat  in  the  hands.)

25.  At  night  when  lying,  throbbing  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  like
a pulse.

Twitching  in  the  head.

A spasmodic  contractive  headache  in  the  region  between  the
eyebrows.

Externally  on  the  hairy  scalp,  a place  which  pains  as  if  bruised,
still  more  painful  when  touched.

The  skin  of  the  forehead  is  as  if  dried.  [ Kr.~\

30.  (A  tension  in  the  affected  side  of  the  face.)#

(A  glandular  lump  in  the  nape  inflames  quickly,  the  skin  round
it  pained  as  if  sore,  and  could  not  bear  the  slightest  touch.)

The  skin  in  the  region  around  the  eyes  pains  as  if  sore.

[Kr.]

Slow  burning  stitch  in  the  border  of  the  eyelid  (aft.  2 h.).

When  held  to  the  weak  eye  (slight  and  short  coldness  in  the  eye,
but)  severe  itching  in  the  eyelids.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

35.  Watering  of  the  (touched)  eye.

In  the  eye,  a throbbing  and  itching.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

Weeping  of  the  eyes.

Watery  eyes  occasionally.

In  the  morning  the  eyes  are  gummed  up.  [Weber,  1.  c.]

40.  In  the  morning  and  evening  sore  pain,  especially  in  the  outer
canthus  of  the  eye  and  on  moving  the  eyelids,  as  if  a hair  lay  in  the
eye  ; a kind  of  inflammation  of  the  border  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  16,

24  h.).

A painful  sore  dryness  of  the  eyelids,  felt  especi-
ally when  moving  them,  chiefly  in  the  evening  and
morning.

Swelling  of  a Meibomian  gland  on  the  border  of  the  left  lower
eyelid  (in  the  morning)  as  if  a stye  would  come,  the  pain  is  only
aching.

Smarting  in  the  inner  canthi  (in  the  morning)  (aft.  48  h.).

Aching  in  the  eye  for  a minute.

45.  In  the  left  eye,  an  aching  and  obtuse  shooting.

Pricking  in  the  left  eye  like  a prick  of  a needle  (aft.  4 h.).

Spasmodic  contraction  of  one  eye  in  the  morning.

Defect  of  vision ; objects  appear  dim,  then  also  double.
(The  south  pole  applied  to  the  nape).  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  133.]

First  faint-like  obnubilation,  with  inclination  to  sit  down  ; objects
* On  touching  the  south  pole  with  the  tip  of  the  tongue,


102


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


are  as  if  veiled,  afterwards  the  objects  become  more  distinct  and
clearer  (than  they  are  in  the  normal  state)  ; at  the  same  time  an
ecstatic  frame  of  mind.  [£//'.]

50.  Vivacity  in  the  eyes.  [Hsch.']

Pupils  at  first  more  easily  dilatable  and  more  difficult  to  contract.

[St/.]

Flying  heat  in  the  face.  [Stf.']

The  face  (and  the  rest  of  the  body)  feels  as  if  a cold  air  played
on  it,  in  the  room.  \_Hsch.~\

An  almost  painless  drawing  behind  the  ear  up  into  the  head,
almost  uninterruptedly  (aft.  40  h.).

55.  Sometimes  stitches  and  ringing  in  the  ear.  \KrJ]

In  the  ear  a painful  jerk  as  if  it  would  be  driven  asunder  : a kind
of  ear-ache.  [£//.]

Tearing  pains  in  the  external  and  internal  cartilages  of  the  ears,
extending  to  the  vicinity  of  the  inner  auditory  cavities.

Roaring  in  the  ears,  felt  most  up  on  the  summit  of  the  head.
Noise  in  the  ears  like  the  flapping  of  a wing.

60.  Roaring  before  the  ear.

Sensation  as  if  a cold  wind  blew  on  the  ears.  \_Kr.~\

Sensation  as  from  a warm  breath  in  the  external  ear.

Fanning  in  the  ear  in  the  morning,  so  that  he  felt  it  as  far  as  the
forehead,  just  as  if  the  wind  blew.

(Inflammation  of  the  external  ear,  during  which  the  sulci  display
sore  painful  chaps.)

65.  Ringing  in  the  good  ear  (aft.  1 h.).

Coarse  stitches  in  the  cheek.

On  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  under  the  ear,  two  little  pocks,
which  are  painful.  \_Kr.]

Small  pimples  in  the  nape,  with  itching  burning.

Toothache,  aggravated  by  warm  drinks.

70.  A tearing  twitching  in  the  upper  jaw  towards  the  eye,  in  the
evening  (aft.  12  h.).

(Pain  in  the  gland  under  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  as  if  it  were
swollen.)

Eruption  on  the  skin,  painful  when  touched.  \KrJ\

Under  the  chin  the  skin  is  painful  as  if  excoriated.  \_Kr.~]

Single  stitches  on  the  left  border  of  the  tongue  (aft.  5 h.).

75.  Heat  in  the  vocal  organs,  with  difficulty  of  speaking;  feeling  of
swelling  of  the  tongue.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  133.]

Obtuse  pain  with  painful  stitches  in  hollow  teeth  (aft.  1 h.).

[*>.]

Sore  feeling  in  the  throat  during  swallowing  and  when  not
swallowing  (aft.  3 h.).

In  the  morning,  though  the  mouth  is  clean  and  he  himself
perceives  no  bad  smell  or  taste,  there  is  a nasty,  putrid  odour  from
his  throat.

Much  watery,  tasteless  saliva.  ['ST/'.]

80.  Much  watery  saliva  collects  in  the  mouth,  which  runs  out  when
he  stoops  forward.  [Zr.]


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


io  3


Copious  tasteless,  watery  saliva,  which  he  seldom  spits  out  (aft.

3 d.).  [St/]

Sometimes  sweet  metallic,  sometimes  sour  metallic  taste,  at  one
time  on,  at  another  under  the  tongue,  with  sensation  of  coldness  as
from  saltpetre.  [Stf.]

A scraping  scratching  feeling  in  the  fauces,  with  dry  sensation  in
the  mouth,  without  thirst.  [St/]

He  loses  his  taste  while  eating  warm  food,  it  returns,  however,
after  eating  (aft.  3d.).  [£//'.]

85.  Burning  in  the  gullet,  a closing  up  with  feeling  of  heat.

Little  appetite,  without  loathing  or  altered  taste,  otherwise  feeling
well  (aft.  24  h.).

Indifference  to  food,  drink  and  smoking  tobacco,  they  taste
well,  but  he  has  no  desire  for  them,  and  he  is  satiated  before  partaking
of  them  (aft.  12,  2\  h.).

Indifference,  bordering  on  repugnance,  to  milk,  in  the  morning
(aft.  18  h.).

Although  he  wakes  up  cheerful  in  the  morning,  neither  food  nor
coffee  is  relished,  they  have  rather  a bitter  taste.

90.  Food  has  not  a bad,  but  too  little  taste.

Ravenous  hunger,  in  the  middle  of  the  febrile  chill.

Ravenous  hunger,  at  noon  and  in  the  evening.

Inordinate  appetite  in  the  evening  (aft.  10  h.).

Absence  of  hunger  (immediately).

95.  Food  is  repugnant  to  him.  [££/".]

White  wine  tastes  sharp  to  him,  and  after  taking  a mouthful  of  it
there  occurs  extreme  repugnance  to  it.  [St/.]

Eructation  of  air  only  (aft.  3 d.).  [St/]

A single  but  very  violent  eructation.

Inclination  to  vomit  in  the  morning  after  awaking  (aft.  36  h.).

100.  Soon  after  dinner  inclination  to  vomit.

After  dinner  movements  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  followed
by  discharge  of  flatus.  [Kr.]

Nausea  as  if  in  the  stomach  on  bending  forwards.

Pain  in  the  stomach,  as  when  a bruised  spot  is  pressed  upon  ;
after  eating  this  pain  passes  gradually  into  the  bowels  (aft.  18  h.).

A kind  of  aching,  violent  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  from
long-continued  mental  effort  (aft.  6 h.).

105.  Twitching  in  the  right  side  (when  touched).  [Kr.]

From  the  navel  to  the  genitals  an  agreeable  feeling  of  warmth.

A kind  of  grasping  just  above  the  navel.

Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.

Disagreeable  loud  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,
towards  evening  (aft.  8 h.).

110.  In  the  morning  in  bed  flatulent  colic  (aft.  30  h.).

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  from  a draught  of  air  (aft.  2d.).

Flatulence  pushes  up  under  the  short  ribs  ; flatulent  colic  in  the
hypochondria,  in  the  evening  (aft.  4 h.).

After  supper  colic  ; in  all  parts  of  the  bowels  sharp  pressure  here


104


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS,


and  there,  it  increases  on  moving  so  as  to  be  intolerable,  and  goes  off
quickly  without  discharge  of  flatus,  when  at  rest  (aft.  4 h.).

Flatulent  colic  at  night : portions  of  flatulence  seem  to  jump  pain-
fully from  one  part  to  another,  which  causes  a breaking  disagreeable
sensation,  or  a sore  pinching  pressure  outwards  in  many  places  at
once,  which  does  not  permit  of  sleep  ; short,  interrupted  flatus,  which
is  occasionally  discharged  with  difficulty,  gives  no  relief.

1 15.  Flatulent  colic  in  the  morning  after  rising;  the  flatulence  goes
upwards  to  the  diaphragm  and  causes  coarse  shooting,  but  acute  pains
(aft.  16  h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  so  that  he  could
scarcely  walk.

Tearing  pains  in  the  abdomen  excited  by  (reading?  and)  walking,
allayed  by  sitting,  especially  in  the  epigastrium  (in  the  morning)  (aft.
16  h.).

In  the  evening,  just  before  going  to  sleep,  distended  abdomen
with  colicky  pains  (aft.  2 d.).

He  feels  very  full  in  the  abdomen  during  the  dyspnoea.

120.  In  the  evening,  just  before  going  to  sleep,  discharge  of  much
flatus  (aft.  3 d.).

Discharge  of  much  flatus  (aft.  4 h.).

A couple  of  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.

A continued  stitch  in  the  abdomen  towards  the  caecum,  which
only  goes  off  by  lying  on  the  opposite  side  (aft.  8 h.).

Feeling  of  dilatation  of  the  left  inguinal  ring,  as  if  a hernia  were
protruding ; with  every  cough  the  part  is  painfully  stretched  (aft.
1 h.).

125.  (Frequent  call  to  stool,  during  which  she  feels  sick,  but  she  can-
not evacuate.)

(Quick  urging  to  stool,  which,  however,  is  evacuated  with  diffi-
culty.)

First  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  chilliness,  then  diarrhoea  (aft.

5h).

After  two  days  two  soft  stools.

Evacuation  of  thin  stool  with  the  deceptive  sensation  of  discharge
of  flatus  (aft.  14  h.).

130.  Continued  narrowing  and  constriction  of  the  rectum  and  anus,  so
that  the  smallest  quantity  of  flatus  can  scarcely  pass.

Threads  of  mucus  among  the  hard  taeces.

Itching  of  a haemorrhoidal  lump  at  the  anus  (aft.  6 h.).

Whilst  walking  itching  formication  externally  on  the  anus.

In  the  right  renal  region  some  large  stitches  (immediately).

135.  A stitch  in  the  pubic  arch.

(Aching  pain  in  the  pubic  arch.)

Relaxation  of  the  sphincter  muscle  of  the  bladder  (immediately).

Incontinence  of  urine.

The  urine  drops  away  involuntarily,  even  when  voluntarily
urinating  there  is  little  inclination  in  the  bladder  to  evacuate  the
urine.

140.  (Increased  involuntary  flow  of  urine)  (immediately).


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


T05

Discharge  of  much  urine,  at  night  and  towards  morning  (aft.  10,
14  h.).

(Frequent  discharge  of  a quantity  of  pale  urine).  [St/'.]

At  midnight  he  must  get  up  from  sleep  in  order  to  pass  a large
quantity  of  urine.

During  micturition  smarting  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  the
urethra,  as  if  the  urine  were  acrid  or  acid  (aft.  2 h.).

145.  A drawing  in  the  spermatic  cord.

In  the  morning  when  the  testicle  is  hanging  down,  pain  in  the
spermatic  cord,  as  if  it  were  drawn  too  strongly  and  stretched  ; it  is
also  painful  when  touched  (aft.  4 h.).

Twitching  in  the  spermatic  cord.

In  the  spermatic  cord  a slow,  fine,  painful  drawing.

Tearing  in  the  spermatic  cord.

150.  A spasmodic  retraction  of  the  testicles  at  night.

Tearing,  choking  jerks  in  the  testicles  which  swell  (aft.  6h.).

Fine  itching  of  the  scrotum.

In  the  penis  pain  as  if  several  muscular  fibres  were  torn  or
tugged  back.

A red  spot  like  a pimple  on  the  corona  glandis,  and  on  the  inside
of  the  prepuce,  without  sensation.

155.  The  glans  penis  is  red  and  inflamed,  with  itching  and  tension.

(The  condyloma  bled  in  drops)  (aft.  48  h.).

Increased  warmth  of  the  genitals  at  night.

A formication  and  tickling  in  the  glans  penis ; semen  seemed  to
pass  without  his  knowledge.

At  night  a pollution  (in  a hemiplegic  person,  which  had  not
occurred  for  years)*  (aft.  48  h.).

160.  Pollutions  on  two  successive  nights  with  much  talking  in  sleep.

The  first  two  days  great  excitement  of  the  genitals  to  emit
semen  ; after  several  days  the  mind  obtains  the  mastery  over  the
sexual  desire.

Violently  excited  sexual  desire  after  the  midday  siesta  (aft.  4 h.).

Impotence  : coitus  with  sufficient  sensation  and  erection  ; but
when  the  extreme  moment  should  come,  the  amorous  feeling  suddenly
goes  off,  the  semen  is  not  ejaculated,  and  the  penis  falls  and  becomes
again  soft  (aft.  3 6 h.).

The  menses  that  had  continued  their  usual  time  go  on  for  six
days  longer,  but  only  when  moving,  not  when  at  rest ; there  is  also
always  cutting  in  the  abdomen  when  the  blood  is  discharged. f
165.  The  catamenia,  which  were  expected  every  day,  appeared  four
hours  after  touching  the  south  pole,  but  the  discharge  was  very
light  coloured  and  watery.

Heat  and  burning  in  the  female  genitals  with  many  fine
stitches  (aft  3 h.).

* After  this  the  paralysis  increased,  the  affected  limbs  felt  as  if  dead.

-j-  She  held  the  magnet  by  the  south  pole,  but  touched  it  at  the  same  time  in  the
middle.  The  south  pole  seems  to  excite  the  flow  of  blood,  and  particularly  metror-
rhagia in  its  primary  action,  consequently  to  cure  it  homoeopathically,  the  north  pole
seems  to  do  the  reverse.


io6


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


Sneezing  in  the  morning.

Severe  fluent  coryza.

Coryza  and  cough  with  green  mucous  expectoration  and  short
breathing.

170.  Dry  short  cough  (aft.  5 h.).  [St/.]

Several  fits  of  stinking  cough,  at  night  during  sleep,  which  do
not  wake  up  completely.

Pressure  on  the  chest  at  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  with  anxiety
and  quietness  of  thought  (immediately).  [Fz.]

Suffocative  oppression  of  the  chest.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  134.]

Sadness,  swelling  of  the  tongue.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  134.]

175.  Anxiety  in  the  sternum.  [£//'.]

Oppression  of  the  respiration,  transversely  across  the  lower  ribs.

A deep  respiration,  like  sighing,  and  involuntary  swallowing  at
the  same  time  (as  is  usual  with  sighing)  (immediately).

Shortness  of  breath  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

(Frequent  attacks  of  shortness  of  breath.)

180.  (In  the  evening,  after  getting  into  bed,  he  can  scarcely  recover
himself  from  the  shortness  of  breath.)

An  oppression  on  the  chest  as  if  the  breath  trembled,  and  as  if  the
breath  drawn  into  the  chest  felt  cool  (immediately).

Pain  compounded  of  aching  and  drawing  on  both  sides  of  the
sternum  at  the  same  time,  with  an  anxiety  that  will  not  allow  him
to  remain  in  any  one  place,  as  if  he  had  done  something  wrong.

Palpitation  of  the  heart  (immediately).

A sharp  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  that  takes  away  his
breath.

185.  Aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  during  which  she  has  nausea.

Aching  pain  in  the  chest,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening.

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  an  obtuse  aching  during  rest  and
when  moving.

Itching  shooting  in  both  nipples  at  the  same  time  (aft.  24  h.).

A creeping  in  the  left  pectoral  muscles.

190.  On  the  scapula  some  rapid  stitches.

Under  the  scapula  a pure,  not  quite  pointed  stitch  (immediately).

A heat  from  the  cervical  vertebrae  through  the  whole  spinal
column  (aft.  J h.).

Pinching  in  the  dorsal  muscles.

Shivering  from  the  nape  down  the  back.  [St/]

195.  Heat  in  the  back.

Erosion  and  smarting  on  the  back.

An  aching  and  at  the  same  time  burning  pain  in  the  sacrum  (aft.
6 h.)  lasting  into  the  night,  during  rest  and  movement.

Dull  stitches  in  the  sacrum.

Pain  as  if  dislocated  in  the  juncture  of  the  sacrum  with  the
lumbar  vertebrae,  afterwards  a bruised  pain  there.

200.  Above  the  sacrum  and  among  the  lumbar  vertebrae  violent
smarting  and  shooting,  which  on  moving  takes  away  the  breath.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


107

After  rising  from  a seat  he  feels  stiff  in  the  sacrum,  hips  and
knees.

At  night  in  bed  intolerable  bruised  pain  in  the  biceps  muscle  of
the  upper  arm  on  which  he  does  not  lie,  especially  when  it  is  raised
upwards  and  backwards,  which  goes  off  immediately  when  he  lies  on
the  painful  side  (aft.  32,  36  h.).

A crawling  down  the  left  arm,  like  small  shocks.

Rumbling  and  like  a gurgling  down  the  left  arm  (immediately).

205.  Rumbling  up  and  down  in  the  veins  of  both  arms  alternately,  for
several  hours.

Quick  rumbling  down  the  left  arm.

In  the  arms  quick  painful  twitching  downwards.

A shooting  itching  on  the  upper  arm  (except  the  joints)  in  the
evening  before  and  after  lying  down ; in  bed  he  must  scratch  the
parts.

Twitching  in  the  diseased  arm  (immediately).

210.  Cold  feeling  in  the  left  arm,  as  if  ice  lay  upon  it,  and  yet  it  was
sufficiently  warm  (immediately).

Coldness  in  the  arm  that  touches  the  magnet  (aft.  several  h.).

Drawing  paralytic  pain,  in  the  morning,  at  first  in  the  left  arm  on
raising  it,  then  in  the  sacrum  when  stooping  forwards,  then  in  the
left  hip  and  also  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh  and  leg  on  extending
the  knee  (aft.  1 6 h.).

In  the  evening  great  exhaustion  in  the  right  arm.

In  the  arm  a sensation  of  fulness  and  swelling  as  if  the  arteries
in  it  pulsated.

215.  The  left  arm  is  much  heavier  than  the  right,  and  requires  more
exertion  to  raise  it  j at  the  same  time  creeping  in  the  tips  of  the
fingers.  [ Kr.~\

Sensation  in  the  arm  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep.  [Zr.]

A pain  in  the  arms  as  if  the  blood  stagnated  in  the  veins,  some-
times on  one  spot,  sometimes  on  another.  [. Hsch.~\

Stiffness  of  the  elbow-joint  (immediately).  [Hsch.~\

Painful  stiffness  in  the  elbow-joint  of  the  arm  that  touches  the
magnet  (aft.  8 m.).

220.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  forearm,  or  as  if  it  had  been  over-
exerted.

Feeling  as  if  the  hand  were  asleep,  during  which  the  veins  swell,
with  quickened  pulse  (immediately).  [Z%.]

Sensation  on  the  hand  like  a puff  of  cold  wind.  [St/.]

Feeling  of  coldness  in  the  hands,  which,  however,  were  warm  to
the  touch.  [Hsch.]

Painful  drawing  in  the  fingers  backwards  towards  the  hand.

225.  A drawing  in  the  finger-joints.

Twitching  in  the  fingers  touching  the  magnet  (aft.  4 m.).

Pain  of  the  distal  thumb-joint,  as  if  dislocated  (aft.  3 h.).

A jerk  with  visible  twitching  in  the  left  index  finger.

The  tip  of  the  finger  (in  contact  with  the  magnet)  became  as  it
numb  and  insensible.

230.  Creeping  in  the  finger  touching  the  magnet.


io8


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


Creeping  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.

Sensation  of  heat  and  twitching  in  the  finger  touching  the  magnet.

A throbbing  in  the  finger  touching  the  magnet.

Throbbing  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb  (immediately).

235.  In  the  root  of  the  nails  (the  soft  part  behind  them)  a pain,  as  if
they  would  fester,  like  a throbbing  shooting.

A paralytic  and  bruised  pain  in  the  hip-joint,  when  lying  on  the
painful  side  (aft.  32,  36  h.).

The  thigh  and  leg  go  to  sleep  (in  the  morning)  when  sitting
which  does  not  readily  go  off  on  rising  (aft.  16  h,).

An  aching  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs,  worst  when
moving.

In  the  muscles  of  the  thighs  an  aching  drawing.

240.  In  the  evening  a paralytic  drawing  from  the  middle  of  the  thighs
down  to  the  feet.

A shooting  itching  on  the  thigh,  in  the  evening,  also  in  bed,  he
must  scratch  it.

A shooting  twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs  near  the  peri-


naeum.


Pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  when  going  up  stairs.

Sensation  of  cold  in  the  right  thigh.

245.  In  the  outer  tendon  of  the  hough  a drawing  pain.

A pain  compounded  of  shock  and  twitching  in  the  tendons  of  the
hough,  making  him  cry  out,  during  which  the  limb  is  convulsively
drawn  into  a flexed  position,  most  tolerable  when  at  rest,  aggravated
by  movement.

In  the  tendons  of  the  hough  a violent  drawing  twitching,  making
him  cry  out,  with  a pain  in  them  as  if  they  were  beaten  ; the  limb
was  visibly  drawn  into  a flexed  posture,  especially  when  moving.

When  walking  a kind  of  shooting  came  into  the  knee.

An  aching  tearing  in  the  patellae  (worst  when  moving),
which  was  aggravated  by  touching  (aft.  3 h.).

2^0.  The  knees  knuckle  under  him  when  walking  (aft.  20  h.).

Cracking  of  the  knee-joint  on  moving  (aft.  I h.).

A very  painful  drawing  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough,  sometimes
with  painful  twitching  in  the  calves.

Immediately  after  dinner  a pain  compounded  of  twitching  and
tearing  in  the  knee,  which  is  aggravated  by  grasping  it  (aft.  3 h.).

Cramp  pains  from  the  left  ankle-joint  to  above  the  knee ;
stretching  out  the  limb  gave  little  relief.

255.  After  walking,  when  she  sat  down,  there  was  throbbing  in  the
muscles  of  the  legs  (aft.  5 h.).

An  aching  or  drawing  tearing  in  the  tibiae.

An  aching  drawing  in  the  calves.

A kind  of  tearing  in  the  calves  downwards,  in  the  morning.

[*>•]

A cramp-like  drawing  pain  in  the  calves.

260.  During  the  day  cramp  in  the  calf  and  big  toe.

An  intolerable  painful  twitching  in  the  calves,  at  the  same  tipie
painful  drawing  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


109


The  feet  are  painful  when  he  lets  them  hang  down  when  sitting ;
all  over  them  there  is  a fine  throbbing.

An  itching  burning,  slow  stitch  on  the  side  of  the  calf  (aft.

J h.).

A drawing  or  aching  tearing  in  both  ankle-joints  and  ankles
(aft.  5 h.).

265.  First  shooting  under  the  ankles,  then  drawing  in  the  tendons  of
the  houghs  and  painful  twitching  in  the  calves.

The  feet  and  toes  feel  as  if  asleep  (aft.  J h.).  [Tz.]

In  the  morning  coldness  of  the  feet.  \_Kr.~\

Cold  feeling  in  the  feet  soon  followed  by  warmth  in  them.
[Hsch.]

Slight  dislocation  of  the  ankle-joint  on  making  a false  step
(aft.  20  h.).

270.  On  making  a false  step  dislocation  pain  in  the  ankle-joint
(aft.  20  h.).

On  bending  back  the  foot,  cramp  in  the  sole  (aft.  24  h.).

Shooting  in  the  soles,  especially  on  moving.

Itching  of  the  dorsum  of  the  toes  and  on  both  sides  of  the  feet
(in  the  evening),  just  as  if  they  had  been  frozen  (aft.  12  h.).

Sore  pain  in  the  inner  side  of  the  nail  of  the  big  toe,  in  the  flesh,
as  if  the  nail  had  grown  into  the  flesh  on  the  side,  very  painful  on
being  even  slightly  touched  (aft.  8 h.).

275.  The  shoe  presses  on  the  toes  and  on  the  nail  of  the  big  toe  when
walking,  as  from  corns  (aft.  18  h.).

A drawing  backwards  in  the  three  middle  toes,  only  when  walk-
ing (in  the  open  air).

Creeping  sensation  in  the  left  side  and  left  arm  (immediately).

Eroding  itching  in  the  evening  in  bed,  on  the  back  and  other
parts.

An  itching  shooting  tearing  here  and  there,  in  the  evening  in  bed.

280.  Pure  itching  here  and  there,  in  the  evening  in  bed  and  on  awaking,
which  readily  goes  off  by  scratching.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  itching  here  and  there  (also  on  the  but-
tocks) and,  after  gentle  scratching,  sore  pain  (aft.  5 h.).

A kind  of  anxiety  in  the  limbs  (immediately) .

Pinching  in  the  flesh  here  and  there.

A pinching  in  many  different  external  parts  of  the  body  in  the
afternoon.

285.  Nipping  and  pinching  in  various  parts  of  the  body  (immedi-
ately).

On  exposure  to  slight  cold  the  nose,  ears,  hands  and  feet  are  chilled ;
in  the  warm  room  they  became  hot,  they  creep  and  itch  (with
stitches)  (aft  4.  h.).

Some  pain  in  the  limbs  like  growing  pains.

Single  twitching  pains  here  and  there,  immediately  going  off’
again.

Twitching  sensation  all  over  the  body,  as  though  he  had  been
running  quickly,  and  he  is  at  the  same  time  anxious.

290.  Twitching  pains  here  and  there.


I IO


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


Shooting  burning  pains  here  and  there  in  the  body,  especially  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers.

Bruised  pain  of  all  the  limbs,  so  that  he  feels  as  if  he  were  lying  on
stones.

Stiffness  of  all  the  joints  (aft.  J h.).

Painless  cracking  in  all  the  joints  when  moving  (aft.  3 d.).  [*S7/\]
295.  Exhaustion  in  all  the  limbs  ; trembling  and  restlessness  in  the
limbs.  [J£r.]

In  the  morning  in  bed,  and  on  rising,  bruised  pain  in  all  the
joints,  even  in  the  junctures  of  the  pelvis,  with  weak  feeling  in  both
inguinal  rings,  as  if  a hernia  would  protrude  (aft.  18  h.).

(The  eruption  of  pimples  itch  when  they  are  touched.)

(A  paralysed  person  was  immediately  very  lively  after  the  appli-
cation.)

Very  soon  a great  mobility  of  the  muscles  and  quickness  in  all
the  movements,  with  calm  disposition.

300.  Agility  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  4 h.).

Very  weary  in  the  feet  on  going  up  stairs  (aft.  6 d.).

On  walking  in  the  open  air  the  legs  feel  bruised  and  he  is
suddenly  overcome  by  sleep,  so  that  he  must  hasten  to  sit  down.

In  the  midst  of  a walk  he  became  exhausted,  and  still  more  so
afterwards  when  sitting.

Laziness  and  heaviness  of  the  whole  body  with  a feeling


anxiety,  as  if  threatened  with  apoplexy  and  as  if  he  would  fall  j


of
at

the  same  time  feeling  of  heat  of  the  face  and  of  the  whole  body,
mingled  with  shivering  (aft.  \ h.).

305.  He  could  not  lie  on  either  side,  he  did  not  feel  right  in  any
position,  and  did  not  know  why.

On  awaking  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  left  hand  under  the  occiput.

In  the  morning  in  bed  he  could  not  lie  with  the  head  at  all  low
(though  he  was  accustomed  to  do  so)  on  account  of  great  rush  of
blood  to  the  brain,  without  feeling  any  attendant  heat  in  the  head
(aft.  17  h.).

Frequent  yawning  (with  chilliness)  (aft.  \ h.).

Drowsiness.  \_Stf.~\

310.  In  the  morning  wide  awake,  but  when  he  shuts  the  eyes  he  has
inclination  to  sleep.  \_Kr.]

In  the  evening  in  bed  weariness  of  the  eyes  ; they  closed,  yet  he
could  not  sleep.

At  night,  on  account  of  restlessness,  he  did  not  sleep ; he  only
did  so  a little  in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.).

Sleepless  wakefulness  before  midnight  and  no  inclination  to  fall
asleep  (aft.  12  h.).

He  could  not  fall  asleep  before  midnight.

315.  In  the  morning  at  break  of  day  great  desire  to  go  to  sleep,  with
inability  to  do  so.

Frequent  turning  and  waking,  in  bed  at  night  (aft.  30  h.).

Frequent  loud  talking  in  sleep,  with  many  confused  dreams
(aft.  8 h.).

He  starts  in  his  dream  and  wakes  up  in  consequence.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


hi


Towards  morning  vivid  dreams.  [Kr.~\

320.  Dreams  of  incendiary  fires.

Dream  that  a horse  bit  him  in  the  upper  arm  and  kicked  him  in
the  chest ; on  awaking  the  chest  was  painful  externally.

Quarrelling  and  fighting  in  dream.

Dreams  of  incidents  that  lasted  a long  time,  with  exertion  of  the
thinking  faculty.

Vexatious  dreams.

325.  Slow,  loud  blowing  expiration  in  sleep,  before  midnight  (aft.

5M-

Slow,  loud  blowing  inspiration,  after  midnight  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  afternoon  sleep  a rapid  shaking  of  the  arms  and  hands.

Palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  4 h.).

An  unusual  beating  at  the  heart,  not  as  if  the  heart  itself  palpi-
tated.

330.  Severe  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  great  heat  in  the  cardiac
region.

Small  pulse  that  can  scarcely  be  felt.  [De  Harsu,  1.  c.,  p.  134.]

A disagreeable  sensation  in  the  periosteum  of  the  limbs,  as  in  the
commencement  of  an  ague  (aft.  5 h.).

Seems  to  cause  a great  susceptibility  to  catch  cold.

In  the  afternoon  a slight  shivering  (aft.  30  h.).

335.  In  the  afternoon  often  a slight  shivering  all  over;  on  walking  in
the  open  air  it  became  black  before  the  eyes,  and  when  standing  there
occurred  a shaking  and  tossing  of  the  muscles  of  the  limbs,  which
she  could  not  keep  still,  for  several  minutes,  without  chilly  feeling  ;
then  when  sitting  there  came  on  heat  in  the  head  and  face.

General  shivering  (immediately).

Sensation  as  if  cool  water  were  poured  over  the  head  on  to  the
~ chest  (immediately).  ]HschJ\

Chilliness  in  the  room,  all  day,  especially  after  a sleep  in  the
evening  (aft.  24  h.).

Chilliness  of  the  legs  up  to  the  knee,  with  heat  rising  up  towards
the  head  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  head.

340.  Rigor  with  feeling  of  coldness,  for  two  hours,  without  thirst  and
without  being  actually  cold  ; then  great  warmth  (also  when  walking
in  the  open  air),  with  thirst  and  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  chest,
especially  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (immediately).

Chill,  in  the  afternoon,  especially  on  the  upper  arms  (aft.  3 h.).

Cold  feeling  in  the  left  arm  as  if  ice  lay  on  it  (immediately).

Cold  feeling  on  the  knees  (immediately).

(On  drinking  a shivering  in  the  calves.)

345.  General  shivering  (immediately).1

Chilliness,  with  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  thirst  (immediately),
then  headache  ; beating  on  one  side,  followed  by  out-pressing  in  the
middle  of  the  forehead  and  great  chilliness  in  the  open  air  (aft.  ^ h.).

Cold  feeling  in  the  left  scapula  (immediately).

Cold  feeling  in  both  arms  and  in  the  left  side.


1 Repetition  of  337.


MAGNETIS  POLUS  AUSTRALIS.


1 12

During  the  chill  much  itching  on  the  back.

350.  During  the  chill  flapping  noise  in  the  ears.

(In  the  chill  he  must  go  to  bed.)

In  the  evening  cold  feeling  (without  shivering)  all  over,  without
thirst  (except  at  the  commencement  of  the  chill),  and  without  being
actually  cold  ; at  the  same  time  very  cross,  everything  was  disagree-
able to  him,  even  eating ; followed  (aft.  2 h.)  by  heat  and  sweat  all
over,  without  thirst.

Internal  coldness  in  the  affected  part.

The  left  hand  seems  to  him  much  colder,  but  is  warm  enough,
indeed,  warmer  than  usual  (immediately).

355.  During  the  chill  proper  warmth  of  the  skin,  with  dryness  in  the
mouth  and  great  thirst ; after  some  hours  profuse  sweat  all  over,
without  feeling  of  heat,  on  the  contrary  he  had  shivering  over  the
sweating  parts  under  the  bed  clothes,  as  if  they  were  affected  with
goose-skin.

Some  hours  after  the  cold  feeling  an  inward  dry  warmth*  when
walking  (aft.  7 h.).

On  the  thighs  rather  a coldness  and  feeling  of  coldness,  with
heat  of  the  sexual  parts.

During  the  chill  or  feeling  of  coldness  he  was  quite  warm,  yet  he
was  constrained  to  lie  down  and  cover  himself  well  up  ; he  had
great  dryness  in  the  mouth ; he  then  broke  out  in  profuse  sweat  all
over,  without  hot  feeling,  on  the  contrary  he  had  always  shiver-
ing over  the  sweating  parts,  as  if  goose-skin  ran  over  them  ; at  the
same  time  flapping  noise  in  the  ears.

(Awakes  in  the  morning  with  violent  headache,  some  heat,
alternating  with  chill ; he  could  not  leave  the  bed)  (aft.  36  h.).

360.  Internal  warmth,  without  thirst.

After  a meal  heat  of  the  face.

Sensation  of  warmth,  which  gradually  passed  over  into  heat  (in  a
woman  in  the  zoomagnetic  sleep,  from  touching  with  the  south-pole).
[Heinicke,  1.  c.,  p.  4.]

Warm  sensation  at  the  point  of  contact.

Hot  hands  after  midnight  in  bed.

365.  Warmth  all  over,  especially  in  the  back  (aft.  6 h.).

Uncomfortable,  unusual  heat,  with  surly  disposition  (the  1st
36  h.).  [i-z.]

At  various  times  heat  rushing  over  one  part  of  the  body  to
another,  e.g.  from  the  thigh  down  over  the  tibia.  [Hsch.~\

When  lying  in  the  evening  in  bed,  ebullition  in  the  blood,  as  if
it  hopped  in  the  blood-vessels.

For  two  successive  mornings  perspiration  in  sleep.

370.  In  the  night  general  sweat.

Thirst  for  two  days,  without  heat.

Great  dread  of  open  air ; even  when  it  is  not  cold  it  penetrates
through  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  with  feverish,  lachrymose  humour
(aft.  12  h.).

From  a slight  cause,  violent  anger;  he  becomes  hasty  and  trem-
bling, and  breaks  out  into  violent  language.  [ St/. ]


MAGNETIS  polus  australis.


ii3

Wild,  hasty,  harsh,  viblent  in  word  and  deed  (which  he  is  not
himself  aware  of)  ; he  asserts  himself  with  vehemence  and  despises
others,  with  distorted  features.  [*Sy.]

375.  After  walking  in  the  open  air  quarrelsome,  surly  (aft.  20  h.).

After  a sleep,  towards  evening,  extremely  cross  and  surly  (aft.
24  h.).

Surly,  cross,  peevish  (aft.  3 d.).

He  is  silent;  it  vexes  him  to  speak  (aft.  2 d,).  [£//'.]

Society  is  disagreeable  to  him,  he  wants  to  be  alone.  [*SV/r.]

380.  He  dislikes  cheerful  faces  (aft.  3 d.).

He  is  much  given  to  start  when  any  one  touches  him.

Cheerless,  dejected,  as  if  he  were  alone,  or  had  received  some  bad
news,  for  three  hours  (immediately).

Weeping  (immediately).

Irresolution  (the  first  hours).

385.  Great  sadness,  discontented  with  himself.

Dislike  to  work  and  peevishness.

Great  quickness  of  fancy.


VOL  11.


8


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.1

(Acetate  of  Manganese .)

Manganese,  or  the  black  oxyde  of  manganese,  is  carefully  triturated
in  a stone  mortar  with  equal  parts  by  weight  of  pure  crystallised  green
vitriol  (sulphate  of  iron),  and  then,  mixed  with  some  sacchairine  syrup,
formed  into  balls  the  size  of  a hen’s  egg,  which  are  heated  in  glowing
charcoal  and  kept  for  some  minutes  at  a white  heat.  The  solution  of
this  in  pure  (distilled  or  rain)  water  contains  pure  sulphate  of  manga-
nese, the  sediment  remaining  contains  the  excess  of  oxyde  of  manga-
nese, mixed  with  oxyde  of  iron.

The  carbonate  of  manganese — a white  powder — obtained  by  preci-
pitation from  the  clear  solution  by  means  of  carbonate  of  soda,  and
frequently  washed  with  water,  is  dissolved  by  boiling  in  distilled  vine-
gar to  saturation,  that  is,  so  that  some  of  the  powder  still  remains  at
the  bottom.  The  clear  supernatant  fluid  ( acetate  of  manganese ) is
evaporated  to  the  consistence  of  syrup.  A drop  of  this,  representing
unity,  is  diluted  with  a hundred  drops  of  alcohol  by  two  succussions
(made  by  two  strokes  of  the  arm),  and  this  dilution  is  carried  on  further
until  the  decillion-fold  dilution  is  obtained,  which  I have  latterly
employed  for  homoeopathic  medicinal  use.

Even  this  would  still  be  too  powerful  for  most  cases,  so  that  only  a
small  portion  of  a drop  of  it  is  given  for  a dose.

It  will  be  perceived  from  the  following  symptoms  how  extremely
powerful  this  medicine  is,  and  if,  as  I wish,  it  shall  be  further  proved
by  other  accurate  observers,  we  shall  know  how  indispensable  it  is  for
many  of  the  worst  chronic  ailments,  for  which  other  medicines  are  not
so  perfectly  homceopathically  suitable.

It  will  be  found  to  be  very  efficacious,  especially  in  some  intolerable
pains  in  the  periosteum  and  joints,  diminution  of  the  senses,  and
diseases  of  the  larynx  and  trachea.

In  small  doses  it  acts  for  several  weeks.

Many  alternating  actions  will  be  found  amongst  its  symptoms.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Ahner,  Franz,  Gross,  Haynel,
Hornburg,  Langhammer,  L.  Ruckert,  Staff,  Teuthorn,  Urban,  Wahle,
Wenzel.

The  only  old-school  authority  cited  is  :

Kapp,  System.  Darstell.  d.  Verbess.  d.  Arznei  d.  Chemie.

The  number  of  symptoms  is  the  same  in  both  editions,  viz.  331.  The  Ck.  Kr.  has
138  additional  symptoms,  109  of  these  being  furnished  by  Nenning.]


From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


“5


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.

(Vertigo  when  sitting  and  standing ; he  must  lay  hold  on  some-
thing ; he  tends  to  fall  forwards.)

Head  gloomy  and  confused,  with  general  exhaustion,  when
sitting.  \Hnl.\

Confusion  and  heaviness,  first  in  the  occiput,  then  in  the  fore-
head. \Hnl.'\

Semilateral  headache  (aft.  4^  h.).  \_Hbg.]

5.  Every  time  he  walks  out  in  the  open  air,*  slow  drawing  stitches
— more  rarely  shooting  aching — in  the  sinciput  (after  being  some
time  in  the  room  this  pain  in  the  head  ceased)  ; at  the  same  time
rigor  without  goose-skin,  all  over  the  body,  also  only  in  the  open
air,  which  was  allayed  in  the  room  (aft.  24  h.).

Contractive  shooting  pain  in  the  whole  sinciput,  now  here,  now
there,  especially  in  the  temple — chiefly  in  the  open  air.

In  the  room  a dull  sensation  in  the  head.

On  rising  from  a seat  and  walking  out,  a sudden  sharp  aching
pain  over  the  left  temple,  which  went  off  entirely  on  sitting  down
again,  and  did  not  return  on  rising  up,  in  the  evening.

In  the  right  frontal  bone  a burning  sensation  in  one  spot  (aft.

4 *>•)•  [Hbg.1

10.  Pressive  stupefying  pain  on  the  forehead,  which  at  length  changed
into  needle  pricks  in  its  right  side  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.]

Pressive  stupefying  pains  externally  on  the  forehead,  which  at
length  changed  into  boring  internal  stitches  in  its  left  side  (aft.

SIM-  [>.]

Obtuse  pressive  pain  on  the  frontal  bone  superiorly  (aft.  1 h.).
[Fz.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  over  the  right  eye  (aft.  18  d.).

A burning  aching  pain  in  the  sides  of  the  head  and  occiput
which  was  diminished  by  walking  in  the  open  air.

15.  Dull  aching  pain  in  the  occiput,  with  feeling  of  emptiness  in  it,
which  takes  away  his  senses,  and  is  diminished  by  laying  the  hand  on
it.  [Fz.]

When  walking,  even  in  the  room,  a shooting  shock  over  the
right  eye.

Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput,  the  orbits  and  the  forehead,
which  latter  is  aggravated  by  stooping,  and  goes  off  by  pressure  with
the  hand.  [Zz.]

Drawing  tensive  pain  here  and  there  in  the  head.  [£//!]

Drawing  pain  first  on  the  left  then  on  the  right  temple,  almost  as
if  in  the  bone.  [Hnl.]

20.  Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  as  if  in  the  bone,  espe-
cially on  moving  the  frontal  muscles.  [Hnl.]

Drawing  tearing  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  for  half  an  hour
(aft.  8 h.).  [Jr. j

Aching  digging  pain  in  the  temples,  which  extends

* Alternating  action  with  14  and  23.


i6


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


towards  the  eyes  and  forehead,  is  not  removed  by  ex-
ternal pressure  with  the  hand,  goes  off  on  stooping
forwards,*  hut  returns  on  sitting  upright  and  bending
backwards  (aft.  4 h.).  [Trn.]

The  headache  that  was  persistent  in  the  room  goes  off  in  the
open  air,  and  he  feels  himself  free  from  his  other  sufferings  and  well.

[**•]

A shooting  external  headache  under  the  left  parietal  bone,  which
spreads  to  all  sides  of  the  skull.  [We.']

25.  Tearings  and  tearing  jerks  on  the  occiput  externally,  for  three
successive  afternoons  ; at  other  times  this  part  was  the  seat  of  simple
pain,  per  se,  but  was  more  painful  when  touched.

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  an  external  headache  consisting  of  fine
needle-pricks  on  the  right  occipital  bone,  which  extended  to  the  fifth
cervical  vertebra,  and  was  aggravated  by  turning  the  neck,  for  an
hour  and  a half.  [ We.~\

Transient  stitches  above  the  right  temporal  region  externally,
alternating  with  a kind  of  buzzing.  [Ur.]

Persistent  stitches  in  the  left  temporal  bone.  [ Hnl .]

Single  knife-stabs  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving  (aft.  33  h.).  [Lr.]

30.  Intermittent  needle-pricks  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.
15  h.).  [Lr.]

On  shaking  the  head  a painful  shock  in  the  brain.

On  walking  quickly  a shock,  like  violent  shooting  in  the  head
above  the  right  eye  (aft.  20  d.).

On  moving  a shockf  of  the  brain  and  an  aching  pain  in  the
head  ; at  the  same  time  aching  pain  in  the  epigastrium.  [Fz.]

The  blood  mounts  to  his  head,  when  sitting,  standing,  walking
and  lying,  with  feeling  of  heat  in  the  face,  without  external  redness
or  heat  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Trn.~\

35.  Cold  feeling  in  a small  part  of  the  crown,  with  standing  on  end
of  the  hair,  even  when  the  head  is  covered.  [Tz.]

During  the  whole  duration  of  action,  a miserable,  pale,  sunken
appearance  of  the  face,  as  from  excessive  indulgence  in  coitus.

In  the  right  superciliary  arch  a needle-prick  inwards  (aft.  32  d.).
[We.]

Twitching  running  to  and  fro  in  the  right  eye,  which  causes  an
almost  agreeable  tickling.  [ L . Rkt.]

On  moving  the  eye  inwards  and  upwards  a sharp  pressure  on
the  eyeball.  [Hnl.]

40.  While  reading  by  candlelight  an  aching  in  the  eyes,  as  from
reading  too  much,  with  irresistible  drowsiness  (aft.  12  h.).  [Wz.]
Persistent  dryness  of  the  eyes,  in  the  evening.  [Hnl.]

Feeling  of  heat  and  dryness  of  the  eyes.  [L.  Rkt.]

Swollen  eyelids.  [Lr.]

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Tm.]

45.  Very  dilated  pupils  ; the  light  dazzles  him,  there  is  pain  in
the  eyes  ; on  approaching  the  light  the  pupils  certainly  contract
* Alternating  action  with  17.  f Comp,  with  16,  31,  32.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


ii  7

gradually,  but  rapidly  dilate  again  on  removing  the  light  (aft.

18  h.).

The  right  pupil  is  more  dilated  than  the  left.

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  4 h.).  \_HbgJ] — (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.]

During  the  whole  action  of  the  medicine,  very  contracted
pupils,  and  only  for  short  periods,  chiefly  in  the  evening,  they  are
sometimes  slightly  dilated.  [$£/".]

During  the  contraction  of  the  pupils  dimness  of  vision  ; he  can-
not perfectly  make  out  objects  at  a distance.  [Zz.]

50.  Great  shortsightedness  ; he  could  make  out  nothing  distinctly  at
a short  distance,*  for  many  days.

(In  the  evening,  on  shutting  the  eyes,  he  saw  sparks  of  fire,  like
fire  wheels  ; but  when  he  looked  into  the  light  these  appearances  were
black.)

If  he  looks  closely  at  objects  held  near  him,  even  if  they  are  not
bright  the  eyes  are  painfulf  and  he  must  shut  them  ; they  are  more
painful  on  approaching  the  light.

The  eyelids  are  painful  on  moving  them  ever  so  slightly,  and
when  he  looks  at  a bright  light  they  are  very  dryj  and  feel  as  when
first  waking  from  sleep  in  the  morning.  [Zz.]

Twitching  stitches  in  both  upper  eyelids.  \Ar^\

55.  Throbbing  in  the  right  upper  eyelid.  [Zz.]

On  a small  spot  in  the  left  zygoma,  a pressive,  digging  pain  in
fits,  at  night  in  bed.  [Gjj.]

Pain  on  the  zygoma,  below  the  eye,  as  if  a sore  would  break  out
there.  [67/i]

After  stooping  roaring  in  the  ears  and,  for  a moment,  hardness  of
hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  up.  [Zz.]

Deafness : his  ears  feel  as  if  stopped  up  with  cotton

(aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.]

60.  Twitching,  shooting,  pinching  pain  in  the  outer  part  of  the  left
ear,  which  only  went  off  gradually  by  strong  rubbing.  \_Ar.~]

A kind  of  earache  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hbg.]

A horrible  pain  in  the  teeth  leaves  her  suddenly  and  settles  in  the
internal  ear.  [Stf.]

In  the  ear,  a crawling  tickling  sensation  in  the  region
of  the  membrana  tympani,  as  if  caused  by  the  beard  of  a
feather;  it  is  not  allayed  by  boring  in  the  finger  (aft.  ij,
12,  15  h.).  [Hbg.]

In  the  internal  bone  of  the  ear  a digging,  at  night.  [Gr.r.]

65.  In  the  forenoon  especially,  when  walking  quickly,  a violent
shooting  drawing  pain  from  the  forehead  into  the  ear,  which  ended  in
the  membrana  tympani  as  a persistent  out-darting  stitch  as  long  as
he  continued  to  walk ; after  standing  still  this  pain  gradually  sub-
sided (aft.  48  h.).

Every  time  he  laughs  a violent  drawing  shooting  pain  from  the
stomach  up  into  the  ear  in  the  region  of  the  membrana  tympani.

Every  time  he  speaks  an  obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  ear.§

* Comp,  with  49.  J Comp,  with  41,  42.

•j*  Comp,  with  40,  § Comp,  with  68,  69.


n8


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


From  time  to  time  sharp  aching  ip  the  right  ear,  when  walking
in  the  open  air,  as  if  earache  would  come  on,  in  the  evening.
\HnL]

A scraping  shooting  sensation  in  the  region  ot  the  membrana
tympani.  [Hbg.]

70.  Cramp-like,  aching  pain  behind  the  left  ear,  which  went  off  on
touching,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  34  h.).  [Zr.]

In  the  morning  noise  in  the  ear,  like  the  ringing  of  bells.-*

When  walking  a sensation  in  the  right  ear,  like  a frog  croaking.

[•£%•]

Cold  feeling  in  the  right  ear,  like  a cold  wind  blowing  into  it.

Tearing  in  the  mastoid  process  under  the  right  ear.  \_Hnl.]

75-  An  aching  contractive  sensation  in  the  parotid  glands  (aft.  f h.).
[Hnl.]

A suppurating  pimple  at  the  angle  of  the  right  ala  nasi  (aft.  3 h.).

!>•]

In  both  angles  of  the  lips  ulcerative  pain,  as  if  a bad  eruption
were  there,  though  no  sore  is  visible  in  the  angles  of  the  lips.

A red  pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  near  the  right  oral  commissure,
which  of  itself  has  a tensive  pain  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Zr.]

After  eating,  a peculiar  sensation  on  the  right  and  left  upper  and
lower  jaws,  like  cramp,  lasting  for  some  time  (aft.  7j  h.).  [Zr.]

80.  In  the  lower  jaw,  a sensation  as  if  the  newly-formed  scab  of  an
ulcer  were  torn  off,  consisting  of  soreness  and  excoriation  (aft.
13  h.).  [Hbg.]

Stitches  in  the  right  angle  of  the  lower  jaw  towards  the  parotid
gland.  [iZz/.]

A suppurating  pimple  on  the  chin,  which  of  itself  has  a tensive
pain  and  leaves  a red  mark  (aft  4 h.).  [Zr.]

On  the  chin  a pain  as  if  he  had  scraped  himself  there  with  a
jagged  razor,  or  as  if  some  sore  or  ulcer  would  break  out  there.
[St/.]

In  the  angle  of  the  right  lip  a pimple, t which  on  moving  the
mouth  and  on  touching  it  has  a tensive  and  eroding  pricking
pain.

85.  A suppurating  pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  near  the  right  commis-
sure of  the  mouth,  with  a red  areola,  which  of  itself,  but  more  when
touched,  has  a burning  tensive  pain  (aft.  25  h.).  [ Zr .]

For  many  days  dry,  quite  parched  lips,  with  corrugated  epidermis,
without  thirst.

On  clapping  the  teeth  together,  each  time  a shoot  in  one  of  the
upper  teeth,  now  in  one  and  now  in  another.

Tearing  drawing  toothache, J in  the  morning  in  bed  (aft.  4 d.).
In  an  under  and  an  upper  molar,  on  the  right  side  (sore)  tooth-
ache, increased  to  an  intolerable  degree  by  the  slightest  cool  drink.

[*/•]

90.  In  a molar  on  the  right  side  a (drawing)  pain,  which  often

* From  chloride  of  manganese.  Comp,  with  58,  72.
f Comp,  with  77,  78.  J Comp,  with  90 — 93.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


119

goes  ofF  suddenly,  and  gives  place  to  (drawing)  pains  in  other  parts,
on  the  face,  neck,  and  right  arm.  [St/'.]

Toothache  of  a horrible  kind  : it  darts  suddenly  into  two  some-
what decayed  molars  opposite  to  one  another — more  in  the  upper —
where  the  pain  is  then  indescribable,  thence  it  goes  occasionally  into
the  arm,  the  zygoma,  the  throat  or  the  ear,  and  again  returns  to  the
teeth,  with  complete  prostration  of  the  strength— he  can  scarcely  walk,
he  must  lie  down,  with  extraordinary  internal  uneasiness  and  oppres-
sion ; by  a few  mouthfuls  of  coffee  the  pain,  when  at  its  height,  was
momentarily  removed,  but  after  a minute  recurred  with  all  its  former
violence — with  rather  dilated  pupils  ; it  was  somewhat  alleviated  by
biting  on  something  elastic,  or  by  laying  the  forehead  on  the  table,  but
it  was  much  aggravated  by  sitting  upright.  [St/'.]

The  pains  in  the  teeth  last  four  or  five  days,  and  come  on
especially  in  the  forenoon  from  10  to  12  o’clock  and  in  the  evening  ;
by  a kind  of  drawing  (sucking)  with  the  tongue  on  the  painful  tooth
there  occurs  a very  painful  jerk  in  it,  whereupon  the  pains  cease  for
some  time.  [St/.]

The  tooth  is  very  painfully  sensitive  (as  if  ulcerated)  to  the
slightest  touch,  less  so  when  not  touched.  [<SV/r.]

In  the  left  upper  jaw  a pain  as  after  a blow  or  knock  (aft.  2 h.).

IHbg.-]

95.  When  laughing  a violent  twitching,  shooting  pain  from  the
right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  to  the  right  temple  (aft.  6 d.).

In  the  morning  drawing  cramp  in  the  muscle  in  the  left  mastoid
process,  so  that  he  must  hold  his  head  to  the  right  side.  [.Fz.]

A horrible  pain  in  the  teeth  leaves  them  suddenly  and  goes  into
the  cervical  muscles  ; the  neck  feels  swollen  and  stiff.  [St/]

In  the  evening  a cramp-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  on
' moving  them,  [Fz.]

Drawing  tensive  stiffness  of  the  nape,  which  alternates  with,
toothache.

too.  A stiffness  of  the  nape.  [L.  Rkt.]

At  night  a digging  in  the  most  internal  part  of  the  cervical
vertebrae.  [Cta.]

Dry  lips  and  palate  almost  all  day.  [ Fz .]

Dry  scraping  and  scratching  in  the  throat  making  him  hawk
often.  [67/'.]

In  the  morning,  dry  throat  without  thirst,  [Fz.]

105.  During  empty  deglutition,  each  time  obtuse  stitches  deep  down
in  the  throat,  he  felt  nothing  when  swallowing  food.*

On  both  sides  of  the  throat  an  obtuse  stitch,  only  during  empty
deglutition.

When  swallowing,  each  time  an  obtuse  stitch  from  both  sides  of
the  larynx — each  time  two  stitches,  one  from  either  side — also  when
swallowing  food  or  drink,  which  shooting  went  each  time  into  the
left  ear.

Collection  of  bitter  tasting  water  in  the  mouth,  with  inclination
to  vomit.  [Kr.~\


Alternating  action  with  107.


120


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  as  from  smoking  too  strong
tobacco  (aft.  \\  h.).  \Hbg.~\

no.  Flow  of  saliva.*  [Kapp,1  System . Darstell.  d.  Verbess.  d , Arznei  d,
Chemie.~\

An  oily  taste  in  the  mouth.

In  the  morning,  on  waking,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  with  dry
lips,  without  thirst  (aft.  6 h.).

More  insipidity  than  bitterness  remains  in  the  mouth  all  day,  in
spite  of  eating.

When  eating,  only  as  long  as  the  food  was  in  the  mouth  did  he
have  a good  taste  of  it,  and  when  drinking,  a good  taste  of  the  liquid
as  long  as  it  was  in  his  mouth  ; but  immediately  after  eating  or
drinking  the  insipidity  with  a little  bitterness  was  again  there.

115.  In  the  morning  everything  tasted  bitter,  but  the  taste  in  the
mouth  was  all  right  (aft.  48  h.).

Sourish  bitter,  dry  sensation  in  the  mouth,  and  qualmish  warmth
from  the  stomach  up  into  the  mouth,  in  the  morning  (aft  11  d.).

In  the  morning  after  rising  an  earthy  smell,  like  clay,  from  the
mouth,  observable  by  those  about  him,  but  not  by  himself.  [tST/i]

Eructation.  [Ar.~\

Occasionally  sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  he  would  vomit.
[Hnl.]

120.  Feeling  of  satiety  and  fulness ; but  when  he  ate  the  food  had  a
good  taste,  and  the  feeling  of  fulness  was  diminished  by  eating.  [i/«/.]

An  aching  hungry  feeling  in  the  throat.

At  noon  he  had  no  appetite,  and  was  as  if  satiated  ; eating  was
repugnant  to  him,  as  from  satiety ; but  the  food  tasted  all  right  (aft.
30  h.).

Complete  absence  of  thirst,  too  little  desire  to  drink,  for  many
days.

Neither  hunger  nor  appetite  ; when  he  saw  the  food  he  loathed
it,  and  yet  it  tasted  very  good.  \We^\

125.  Sour,  burning  sensation,  like  heartburn,  from  the  stomach
nearly  into  the  mouth,  in  the  evening  (aft.  several  d.).

In  the  morning,  on  rising,  sourish  burning,  sick  feeling  from  the
stomach  up  to  the  mouth,  like  heartburn  (aft.  9 d.).

Pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  stomach,  as  if  a stone  lay  on  the
outside  of  it  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hbg.~]

On  raising  up  and  stretching  the  body  each  time  stitches  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis  at  the  left  lowest  rib.  [Fz.]

Rough  sensation  from  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  to  the
sternum  (aft.  i^h.).  \_Hbg.~]

130.  Burning  and  sore  feeling  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  under
the  sternum  to  the  palate,  with  great  restlessness.

Whilst  eating,  and  especially  when  walking,  an  aching  under
the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  yet  the  part  is  painless  when  touched.

[Fz.]

# From  chloride  of  manganese,


1 Not  accessible.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


12 1


In  the  stomach  feeling  of  heat,  as  after  prolonged  hunger,
which  rises  up  in  the  oesophagus  to  the  head,  where  then  a shooting
twitching,  sometimes  tensive  shooting  pain,  occurs  in  the  temples  and
forehead.

Drawing  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with  nausea  there,  as  if
the  scrobiculus  cordis  suddenly  dilated  from  within.  [Fz.]

Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  on  the  chest,  aggravated  by
touch.*  [Fz.]

135.  (Under  the  last  ribs  an  aching  sore  pain,  increased  by  move-
ment and  touching.) f

Under  the  last  ribs  bruised  pain.

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  aching  contractive  pain  in  the
stomach,  in  every  position  of  the  body  (aft.  24  h.).

Aching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  while  eating,  which  goes  oft
on  laying  on  the  hands,  [Tz.]

Whilst  eating  drawing  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  goes
off  immediately  after  eating,  [Tz.]

140.  Discomfort  from  the  stomach  up  to  the  head,  as  when  a person
unused  to  tobacco  has  smoked.

From  the  middle  of  the  abdomen  to  the  half  of  the
chest  (the  oesophagus)  a rising-up  feeling,  consisting  of
nausea,  warmth,  and  contraction.

An  aching  rather  tensive  pain  about  and  above  the  navel,  followed
by  severe  pain  as  from  flatulence,  with  discharge  of  flatus.  [ Ur .]

In  the  umbilical  region,  drawing  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in
the  morning.  [Fz .]

On  breathing  deeply  cutting  pains  internally  in  the  umbilical
region,  for  an  hour,  [HnL]

145.  Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region,  before  dinner.  [Hnl.'\

Extremely  aggravated  aching  in  the  abdomen,  from  eating  cold
things,  [Fz.]

An  indescribable  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [5//T]

In  the  evening  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  [Fz.]

Splashing  in  the  abdomen  when  walking,  as  if  the  bowels
splashed.  [Fz.]

150.  The  whole  abdomen  is  painful,  in  the  evening,  per  se,  as  if
ulcerated ; at  the  same  time  aching  in  the  hypochondria.  [Fz.]

A stitch  in  the  left  side,  the  renal  region,  followed  immediately
by  contractive,  twitching-like  pain.  [Ur.]

Frequent  grumbling  along  the  rectum  to  the  anus  (aft.  1 h.).
[Wz.]

No  stool  occurred  the  first  day.  [Fz.]

Constipation  for  48  hours.  [Trn.]

155.  Rare,  dry  stool,  evacuated  with  difficulty.  [HnL]

Two  soft  stools,  each  time  preceded  by  some  stitches  in  the
hypogastrium.

Yellow,  gritty  stool,  with  tenesmus  and  constriction  of  the
anus,  after  passing  one  day  without  an  evacuation  of  the  bowels.  [Fz.]

* Comp,  with  135,  136.

f From  chloride  of  manganese.  Comp,  with  150.


122


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


Some  minutes  before  the  stool,  and  then  during  the  stool,  a
pinching  in  the  abdomen  and  in  the  side,  which  only  goes  off  by  com-
pressing the  abdomen  with  the  hands,  and  after  the  evacuation  of  a
rather  loose  and  viscid  stool  completely  disappears  ; at  the  same  time
rigor,  [Fz.]

Very  pale  yellow  and,  compared  with  what  had  been  eaten,
scanty  stool,  preceded  by  slight  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen.

[Stf.]

160.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate.*

Urging  to  urinate.  \_Hbg.'\

Whilst  eating  a (single)  apple,  immediately  urging  to  urinate.
[Fz.]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge
of  urine  (aft.  2 h.).  [/>.]

Frequent  discharge  of  golden  yellow  urine — from  the  very  first.

165.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  great  flow  of  urine

(aft.  27  h.).  [Z>.]

Horrible  cutting  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  without  urging  to
urinate,  for  some  hours,  when  sitting,  very  much  increased  by  rising
and  moving,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  sit  still,  in  the  evening  ;
but  he  could  pass  his  urine  without  suffering,  though  the  cutting  in
the  vesical  region  had  not  ceased.  \_Hnl.'\

Fine  shooting  pain  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  when  not
urinating. t

When  sitting,  if  he  has  a silent  discharge  of  flatus,  an  obtuse
stitch  darts  very  painfully  in  the  back  part  of  the  urethra.  [*SV/'.]

Cutting  in  the  middle  of  the  urethra,  when  not  urinating.  [ Hnl.~\

170.  Sometimes  a burning  twitching  sensation  from  the
region  of  the  seminal  vesicles  forwards  into  the  glans
penis  (aft  12  d.).

On  the  corona  glandis,  voluptuous  itching  (aft.  3,  5 h.).

[Hbgl

Stitches  in  the  prepuce.  \_Hnl.~\

Aching  drawing  pains  and  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  testicles
and  spermatic  cord,  as  if  the  latter  were  drawn  up ; at  the  same
time  feeling  of  weakness  of  the  whole  of  the  genital  organs,  for  two
hours.  \_Hnl.']

Catamenia  at  an  unusual  time  (aft.  48  h.).

* *

*

175.  Coryza  (aft.  36  h.).

Stoppage  of  the  nose  he  could  get  no  air  through  the  nose.

Violent  stuffed  coryza  (aft.  4 d.).

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  rough  throat,  with  hoarse,
wooden  voice.  \_L.  Rkt .]

In  the  morning  rough  voice,  without  sensation,  in  the  throat  ^
the  roughness  goes  off  when  smoking  tobacco.  [Fz.]

* Comp,  with  161  to  165.

f Comp,  with  168,  169.

J 175,  176,  comp,  with  186,  187.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


I23

180.  In  the  open  air  he  immediately  gets  dry  throat  and  rough  voice,
with  cutting  aching  in  the  abdomen  and  nausea  in  the  chest.

[a.]

Stuffed  coryza,  with  inflamed,  red  and  sore  nose  and  upper  lip,
in  the  evening,  [Fz.]

Frequent  sneezing  and  discharge  from  the  nose  of  bland  mucus
as  clear  as  water.  [Stf.]

In  the  right  clavicle  a gnawing  and  digging  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gw.]
First  slight  warmth,  afterwards  burning  sensation  in  the  cheeks,
which  at  first  occurred  without  externally  perceptible,  but  after-
wards with  perceptible  heat,  with  coryza  and  sick  warmth  in  the
chest.  [Fz.]

185.  On  the  chest  disagreeable  warmth  ; the  breath  is  hot  and  burns
in  the  trachea.  [Fz.]

Sensation  of  febrile  weakness  on  the  chest  and  disagreeable
warmth  in  it,  with  coryza  and  stuffed  nose.  [Fz.]

In  the  evening,  first  internal  chilliness,  without  external  cold-
ness, then  slight  warmth  in  the  chest  and  stuffed  coryza,  with  hot
breath,  which  he  feels  in  the  fauces  when  inspiring  and  expiring.
[Fz.]

A drawing  stitch  constantly  darting  down  and  up  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest.

On  expiration,  shooting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  (aft.
10  d.).

190.  Sometimes  on  expiration  an  upward  drawing  shooting  pain  in
the  chest.

Contractive  shooting  pain  on  the  sternum  when  breathing
deeply,  all  the  forenoon  (aft.  9 d.).

A grumbling  downwards-drawing  sensation  in  the  lower  part  of
the  chest.

Burning  shooting  pain  under  the  second  left  rib,  that

is  increased  by  expiration  and  movement,  but  is  somewhat  relieved  by
rest  and  inspiration.  [Ar.~\

Internal  warmth,  especially  in  the  chest ; the  limbs  felt  warm  to
him,  and  were  actually  rather  warm  to  the  touch  (aft.  n\  h.).

[*%•]

195.  On  both  sides  of  the  sternum,  somewhat  above  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  an  aching  cutting  pain,  like  a digging,  in  the  evening  (aft.
8 h.).  [Gss.]

A dull  pain  in  the  sternum,  as  after  a blow,  in  the  morning.
[JVe.]

In  the  evening  in  bed,  beating  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,
just  as  if  the  heart  were  beating  there.  [Fz.]

Palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Fz.]

When  sitting  a sudden  blow  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  from
above  downwards,  to  the  last  true  rib.  [Fz.]

200.  Bruised  pain  on  the  chest.

Flying  stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum.  [Ur.]

In  the  morning  several  fine  needle-pricks,  now  in  the  left  now
in  the  right  side  of  the  sternum.  [lVe.~\


124


MANGANUM  ACETICUJVL


Violent  stitches  closely  following  one  another  in  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  near  the  sternum,  from  the  second  to  the  fourth
and  fifth  ribs,  as  if  coming  from  the  outside,  not  removable  either  by
movement  or  rest,  for  half  an  hour.  \_bVz.\

Irritation  to  cough  : he  seeks  to  detach  by  coughing  something
adherent  in  the  larynx,  but  only  a little  mucus  is  brought  up  with
difficulty  and  rather  by  a certain  sharp  expiratory  movement  of  the
chest  than  by  actual  cough.  [67/'.]

205.  Reading  aloud  and  speaking  cause  a dry  cough  ; then  occurs  a
painful  dryness  and  roughness  in  the  larynx,  which,  in  conjunction
with  a constriction  of  the  larynx,  causes  a very  painful  cough,
during  which  some  mucus  is  expectorated  only  after  long  hawking.

[*/.]

In  the  morning  inclination  to  cough.*

Morning  cough  with  expectoration  (aft.  21  h.).  \Hbg.~\

In  the  morning  he  expectorates,  almost  without  coughing,  a
quantity  of  dull  greenish  yellow  mucus  in  lumps.  [67/1]

When  coughing  an  obtuse  pain  on  the  chest.  [67/.]

210.  Deep  cough,  without  expectoration,  all  day,  which  ceased  when
lying  down,  returned  the  following  day  with  tenacious  mucous  expec-
toration, and  pain  as  of  a concussion  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and
chest,  but  went  off  quickly  at  noon.  [Z.  Rkt.~\

A dry  cough,  and  every  cough  is  felt  in  the  sides  of  the  head.

im

Bloody  expectoration  (aft.  48  h.).

Above  the  left  pelvic  region  towards  the  first  lumbar  vertebra  a
small  spot  of  burning  pain  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.~\

Itching  shooting  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  towards  the  left
side,  which  went  oft' by  rubbing  with  the  hand.  \_Ar.~]

215.  Tearing  pain  down  the  whole  spine  for  six  hours,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving.  \Ar^\

Tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  scapula,  when  sitting  (aft.

t h.).  [£r.]

First  in  the  shoulder-joint,  then  in  the  elbow-joint,  sensation
like  an  internal  clucking,  but  on  both  joints  externally,  when
touched,  an  intolerable  pain  like  a boil  ; he  dared  not  grasp  it.

Drawing  and  tearing  from  the  shoulder  down  through  the  whole

arm.t

On  stretching  out  the  arm,  a tensive  pain  J below  the  elbow  as
if  it  were  too  short  there  ; he  did  not  feel  it  on  keeping  the  arm
flexed.

220.  Drawing  tensive  pain  from  both  shoulders  over  the  nape,  as  if  a
band  were  tightly  tied  there.  [67/1]

An  out-boring  shooting  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  upper
arm,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  \_Ar.~]

Single  stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  upper  arm  towards
the  shoulder.  [Ar.]


# From  chloride  ot  manganese.  :
f Comp,  with  216,  222.

£ Comp,  with  220,  242,  and  266,


MANGANUM  ACETlCTJJVi.  ii$

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  upper  arm.

[Jr.]

Sudden  twitching  pain  in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  upper  arm.
[Jr.]  .

225.  In  the  lower  end  of  the  shaft  of  the  humerus  a gnawing  pain,  at
night  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gjj.]

In  the  shaft  of  the  humerus  a digging  about  pain  in  fits,  at  night
when  lying  in  bed  on  that  side,  [yfr.]

Weakness  of  the  arm.

Sudden  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  upper  arm,  so  that  he  must
let  it  sink  down  3 at  the  same  time  drawing  in  the  biceps  muscle.

[*■*•] .

Pain  by  fits  in  the  joints  of  the  arms,

230.  A morbid  sad  feeling  in  the  arm.

A horrible  toothache  suddenly  goes  off,  and  the  pain  goes  into
the  arm,  which  then  pains  as  if  paralysed.  [£//'.]

A tensive  pain  here  and  there  in  the  joints  of  the  hand  and  arm,
which  is  not  excited  or  allayed  by  rest  or  by  movement.

Hard  pressure  in  the  muscles,  now  of  the  right,  now
of  the  left  forearm,  close  to  the  wrist-joint,  in  every
position  (aft.. I h.).  [Lr.]

Tearing  pain  on  the  lower  end  of  the  radius  of  the  left  forearm,
as  if  in  the  bone,  which  is  not  altered  by  anything,  for  three  minutes.
[Jr.]

235.  Drawing  shooting  pain*  on  the  back  of  the  right  forearm,  [ArL\
Tearing  stitches  above  the  right  wrist  towards  the  forearm.
[Hnl.]

Stitches  in  the  right  carpal  bones,  then  feeling  of  pain,  as  if  the
capsule  of  the  joint  were  dilated  and  the  bones  seized  hold  of  and
drawn  out.  \W ?.]

Tearing  shooting  pinching  pain  in  the  left  palm,  on  the  ball  of
the  thumb,  not  altered  by  anything,  for  four  minutes,^  [Ar.]

A firm  drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  right  hand  and
wrist-joint,  almost  as  if  tightly  bound  ; after  this  went  off  a heat
spread  over  the  hand.  [Stf.]

240.  Cramp-like  tearing  t in  the  muscles  of  the  right  hand,
especially  those  of  the  thumb  and  index,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving  (aft.  h.).  [ Lr .]

Tickling  itching — more  tickling  than  itching — in  the  left  palm,
only  allayed  for  an  instant  by  scratching,  but  then  recurring  all  the
more  severely  j the  pain  was  only  permanently  relieved  by  licking
with  the  tongue,  in  the  evening.  [Tz.]

On  spreading  out  the  fingers,  tension  in  the  skin  of  the  ring
finger.  [Tz.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  whole  of  the  left  middle  finger.  [Hnl.]

A drawing  or  twitching  pain  in  the  index  (in  the  evening).

* The  drawing  shooting  pain  seems  to  be  allied  to  the  twitching  shooting  in
262,  as  also  with  the  tearing  stitches,  272.

f The  cramp-like  tearing  seems  to  be  very  much  the  same  as  the  drawing  tension,
i20  and  239,  also  26 6,  and  the  cramp-like  drawing,  252.


126


MANGANUM  ACET1CUM.


245.  In  the  proximal  joint  of  the  left  index,  pain  as  if  he  had  had  a
blow  on  it — a paralytic  pain,  most  felt  when  at  rest  (aft.  1 h.).
[<?«.]

Cutting  pain  in  the  lowest  phalanx  of  the  right  index,  with  warm
feeling  in  it.  [.Fz.]

From  a small  scratch  (on  the  proximal  joint  of  the  little  finger)
there  occurs  a malignant  ulcer,  full  of  pus,  with  a blue  areola  and
shooting  pain  in  it,  especially  at  night.

Burning  itching  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right  thumb  that
excites  scratching,  whereupon  a red  spot  occurs  that  continues  for
a long  time  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.]

Burning  itching  on  the  outer  border  of  the  right  thumb,  which
compels  scratching,  whereupon  a blister  appeared  which  contained  a
fluid,  and  when  touched  there  occurred  smarting  pain  (aft.  30  h.).

\Lr-i

250.  In  the  left  thumb,  opposite  the  nail,  a quickly  occurring  cold
feeling.  [£7/'.]

In  the  muscles  of  the  left  buttock  a burning  point,  as  if  a pustule
would  come  on  there,  chiefly  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Hbg.']

On  the  left  buttock,  towards  the  anus,  a cramp-like  drawing,
which  on  extending  the  left  thigh,  on  standing  alone  on  that  leg,  and
in  the  act  of  sitting  down,  is  increased,  but  which  goes  off'  almost
completely  when  flexing  the  leg  and  sitting  ; it  is  most  troublesome
when  rising  from  his  seat,  so  that  he  cannot  walk  unless  he  presses
his  hand  upon  it.  [Zz.]

In  the  ischium  pain  when  sitting,  a persistent  stitch.

Weakness  in  both  thighs  and  legs,  with  drowsiness.  [ArJ\

235.  In  the  lower  extremities  twitching  of  all  the  muscles  on  the
slightest  movement,  [Tz.]

In  the  morning  paralytic  weakness  in  the  right  hip-joint  and
stitches  therein  when  treading;  he  must  limp.

Bruised  pain  transversely  across  the  thighs.

Shooting  pinching  pains  in  a small  spot  of  the  outer  side  of  the
thigh,  which  went  off  on  sitting,  but  increased  so  much  on  v/alking
that  he  must  stand  still.  [7r«.]

After  walking  a twitching  internally  of  the  muscles  in  the
thighs,  which  causes  anxiety  and  a faint  feeling  as  if  he  would  sink
together.  [Zz.]

260.  The  border  of  the  glutei  muscles  at  the  head  of  the  thigh  is
painful,  as  if  bruised,  especially  when  sitting.  [Zz.]

Eruption  on  the  thighs,  pimples,  on  the  tops  of  which  a scab
forms,  with  burning  itching,  in  the  morning  and  evening ; after
rubbing  it  pains  as  if  excoriated  and  ulcerated.

In  the  evening,  twitching  shooting  pain  from  above
the  knee  to  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh  (aft.  12,  36  h.).

On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  leg,  from  the  knee  to  the  ankle-joint,
a curious  tepid  sensation  (aft.  7 h.).  [HbgJ]

Itching  in  the  hough,  which  deprived  him  of  his  night’s  rest.

265.  Shooting  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  when  walking  and  sitting  (aft.
17  d.).


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


127


When  walking  in  the  open  air,  a peculiar  tensive  feeling  of  the
left  lower  extremity  as  if  it  were  stiff  (aft,  13  h.).  [Zr.]

Drawing  and  sore  pain  in  the  left  tibia,  when  standing,  as  if  it
were  broken  ; this  pain  goes  off  when  sitting,  [Zz.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  right  tibia,  when  sitting,  which
went  off  on  rising  up,  but  returned  when  at  rest.  \Ar.~\

(Sore)  sensation  on  the  right  tibia,  as  if  it  were  bruised.

[*.]

270.  In  the  evening,  when  walking,  trembling  and  unsteadiness  of  the
knees,  [Zz.]

Rigidity  as  from  coldness  and  actual  coldness  of  the  right  leg,
especially  of  the  calf,  and  sensation  in  it,  when  sitting,  as  of  soreness,
which  goes  off  on  rising  from  his  seat,  in  the  evening,  [Zz.]
Tearing  stitch  in  the  left  calf,  when  sitting.  [ZZz/.]

Hard  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg  near  the
ankle-joint  (aft.  j h.).  [Zr.]

Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  left  outer  and  inner  ankle  ;
shooting  from  the  outer  ankle  up  into  the  leg,  when  walking ; per
se  there  was  only  occasional  shooting  in  it.

275.  Drawing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  at  the  joint ; it  goes  off
on  moving.  [Zz.]

Long-continued  tickling  in  the  hollow  of  the  right  sole.  \_Hnl.']

A shooting  resembling  nipping  on  several  parts  of  the  body,
especially  in  the  interior  of  the  thighs.  \Hnl.~\

(Smarting  itching  on  the  body,  only  after  getting  heated  and
perspiring.*)

On  rising  up  from  bed,  in  the  evening,  a severe  burning  over  the
skin  of  the  whole  body,  which  went  off  on  lying  down  again  in  bed
(aft.  8 h.).

280.  Weakness  in  all  the  joints — they  seemed  to  him  as  if  expanded  ;
at  the  same  time  trembling  in  the  limbs,  and  trembling  feeling  in
the  knee-  and  arm-joints,  with  anxiety,  as  if  it  was  all  over  with
him.  [Zz.]

All  parts  of  the  body  are  painful  on  the  slightest  touch,  as  it
festering,  but  only  during  a febrile  warmth  in  the  chest  and  on  the
cheeks.  [Zz.]

In  the  morning  a sudden  shock  through  the  whole  body,  like  a
start  in  the  limbs  (aft.  14  h.).

Discomfort  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  stomach,  with
crossness,  [vfr.]

A clucking  and  welling  in  various  muscular  parts  of  the  body.

[Hnl.-]

285.  Most  of  the  sufferings  occur  at  night.  [Gw.]

Most  of  the  sufferings  are  aggravated  by  stooping.  [Zz.]
Nocturnal  digging  pains  in  several  bones.  [Gw.]

Drawing  tensive  pains,  as  from  a tightly  tied  band  in  several
parts  of  the  body.  [tf//'.]

Most  of  the  stitches  from  manganese  are  obtuse.  \JVe^\

290.  In  the  evening,  after  8 o’clock,  he  is  overcome  by  such  great
* From  chloride  of  manganese.


1*8


manganum  aceticoM.


weariness  that  it  is  with  difficulty  he  can  keep  awake,  for  two
successive  evenings.  [Hnl.]

After  midnight  (about  3 a.m.),  in  bed,  he  dreamt  that  he  was
awake  and  with  his  doctor,  as  in  perfect  consciousness,  and  he  could
afterwards  recall  every  word  of  the  conversation,  just  as  though  all
had  occurred  to  him  when  awake  * (aft.  a few  h.).

Very  vivid,  anxious  dreams,  as  if  everything  occurred  when
he  was  awake,  remembered  in  every  detail  ; on  waking  he  felt
strong.

He  dreams  immediately  on  going  to  sleep.  [ Trn .]

Vivid  dreams  with  rapid  changes  of  the  subjects,  with  frequent
waking  in  full  consciousness  of  what  he  had  dreamt,  but  in  the
morning  he  has  but  a dim  recollection  of  his  dreams.  [Zz.]

295.  About  midnight  he  was  half  awake  and  (without  being  troubled
with  any  particular  thoughts)  could  only  get  to  sleep  soundly
towards  morning  on  account  of  anxious  distressing  restlessness  ; at
the  same  time  tossing  about  in  bed.  \_Hnl.\

All  night  confused  and  sometimes  even  anxious,  very  vivid
dreams.  [Zz.J

He  sleeps  soundly,  but  with  anxious  dreams  about  soldiers,  who
are  shooting  him  through  and  through,  whereby  he  imagines  his
life  is  in  danger.  [ Trn.]

Vivid,  anxious,  frightful  dream.  [Zr.]

All  night,  without  cessation,  very  vivid  but  confused  dreams,
jumping  from  one  place  and  from  one  subject  to  another.  [Z.
Rkt .]

300.  Dream  of  alternately  anxious  and  agreeable  character.  [Zr.]

He  dreamt  very  vividly  of  two  persons  who  were  to  come  the
next  day,  and  who  did  actually  come.  \_Hbg.']

Vivid  dream  of  a reconciliation.  [Zr.]

Irregular  and  scarcely  perceptible  pulse,  sometimes  50,  some-
times 42,  sometimes  62  in  the  minute.  \Ar^\

Irregular  pulse,  sometimes  70,  sometimes  60,  sometimes  55,
sometimes  49  in  the  minute,  [yfr.]

305.  Rigor  and  coldness  when  walking  in  the  open  air — in  moderately
warm  air  ; when  walking  quickly  the  chilliness  was  allayed,  but  the
coldness  of  hands  and  feet  remained  until  he  came  into  the  room
where  they  became  warm.

Late  in  the  evening,  rigor  and  coldness  of  feet — the  right  leg  was
cold  up  to  the  knee — without  thirst  or  subsequent  heat.

In  the  evening  a rigorf  in  the  open  air  and  in  the  room  ; he
could  not  get  the  feet  warm  (but  the  hands  were  not  so  cold),  with
aching  shooting  pain  in  the  sinciput  ; in  the  room  the  chilliness  went
off  but  not  the  headache  (aft.  60  h.).

In  the  morning  rigor,  with  cold  hands  and  feet.  [Zz.]

Cold  hands  and  feet  continuing  even  in  the  room,  but  without
chilliness  (aft.  36  h.).

310.  Shivering  all  over  the  body.  \_WeI\

* 291,  292,  comp,  with  293  to  302.


MANGANUM  ACETICUM.


lig

Shivering  over  the  back,  and  at  the  same  time  stitches  in  the
head,  [Tz.]

Anxiety  with  short  breath,  and  profuse  sweat  all  over,  [dr.]
(When  sitting)  he  became  all  at  once  very  hot  all  over  the  back,
followed  soon  by  perspiration,  with  very  contracted  pupils.  [•S'//'.]
Agreeable  warmth  all  through  the  body.*  [Kapp,  1.  c.]

315.  Great  heat  in  the  head,  with  some  chilliness  on  the  rest  of  the
body.

Sudden  flying  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  especially
when  standing,  without  thirst— soon  passing  off  (aft.
f h.).  [Lr.]

On  waking  from  sleep,  sweat  only  on  the  neck.  [Lr.]

On  waking  at  night,  sweat  all  over  (aft.  66  h.).  [Lr.]

At  night  on  waking,  sweat  all  over  the  body,  which  compelled
him  to  scratch  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Lr .]

320.  On  awaking  from  sleep,  sweat  on  the  legs,  but  especially  on  the
feet.  [Lr.l

Sadness  (aft.  6 d.).

Sad  and  cross  (aft.  36  h.).

Lachrymose  humour,  [Tz.]

Cross,  reflective,  silently  reserved,  wrapped  up  in  himself,  with
discomfort  in  the  whole  body,  for  four  successive  afternoons  from
1 to  6 o’clock.  [. dr.]

325.  Cross  and  discontented  with  himself,  and  concerned  about  the
future  ; he  does  not  speak  much,  considers  himself  very  weak  in
mind,  and  makes  mistakes  whenever  he  speaks.  [Fz.]

Persistent  restlessness  of  disposition,  just  as  if  he  were  going  to
hear  some  sad  news.  [Lr.]

Ill-humoured,  so  that  the  most  joyful  music  does  not  cheer  him,
but  he  feels  as  if  refreshed  by  the  most  melancholy  music,  [dr.]

In  the  morning  wrinkled  forehead,  and  surly  and  cross  at  every
trifle;  even  the  talking  of  others  made  him  angry.  [Hnl.]

Embittered  humour  : he  could  not  forget  injustice  done  to  him;
he  fostered  resentment  for  a long  time.  [ Lr .]

330.  Great  restlessness  of  body  and  disposition,  as  if  something
bothered  him.

Tranquillity  of  disposition ; f he  could  easily  get  over  everything
of  a disagreeable  nature.  [Lr.]

* From  chloride  ol  manganese.

f Curative  action.  j


VOL.  If.


9


MENYANTHES  TRIFOLIATA.1

(Buck  bean.)

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  plant  just  coming  into  flower,  mixed
with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.)

Ordinary  medicine  has  hitherto  known  no  single  true  way  of  inves-
tigating  the  peculiar  powers  of  each  individual  medicinal  substance,  in
order  to  discover  what  each  is  capable  of  curing.  In  her  want  of
resources  she  knew  of  nothing  to  rely  upon  for  this  purpose,  except
external  resemblance.  She  even  imagined  that  the  taste  would  reveal
the  inner  medicinal  power.

Accordingly  all  plants  that  had  a bitter  taste  were  considered  as
identical  in  action , and  were  mixed  together  in  one  mess.  They  were
all  held  to  possess  one  quality  in  common,  which  was  this  sole  one : they
were  mild  tonics  and  strengthened  the  stomach  (in  all  the  innumerable
and  heterogeneous  morbid  states).  So  for  this  purpose  modern
doctors  (a  more  enlightened  posterity  will  scarcely  believe  it)  prescribed
right  away  extractum  amarum , without  indicating  any  bitter  plant  in
particular  of  which  it  should  be  made,  so  that  it  was  left  to  the  good-
will and  pleasure  of  the  apothecary  to  determine  what  plants  (they
might  differ  as  much  as  they  pleased  in  respect  to  medicinal  powers,
provided  only  they  had  a bitter  taste)  he  chose  to  boil  down,  in  order  to
make  the  decoction  for  such  an  extract,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  imaginary
intention  of  the  doctor  to  effect  God  knows  what  sort  of  strengthening
with  these  unknown  vegetable  juices.

More  thoughtlessly  it  would  be  impossible  to  act,  more  contemptu-
ously it  would  be  impossible  to  treat  the  noble  human  life.  For  as
every  plant  differs  so  strikingly  in  its  external  characters  from  every
other  plant,  that  botanists  think  they  cannot  too  carefully  enumerate
their  visible  differences,  so  must  they  differ  in  their  inner  nature  and
consequently  in  their  medicinal  properties.  Hence  it  is  impossible  that
such  an  obscure  expression  of  their  internal  character  as  a (bitter)  taste
can  be  intended  to  indicate  the  remarkable  differences  of  the  inner  medi-
cinal spirit  of  each  of  them.  Consequently,  we  must  not  from  the  mere
bitter  taste  determine  anything  either  in  respect  to  their  general  or
their  special  medicinal  actions,  or  their  identity  ; nor  must  we
assume  the  unconditional  tonic  action  of  all  bitter  plants  without  dis-
tinction as  their  sole  medicinal  power— not  to  mention  that  each  of  these
plants  always  has  its  own  peculiar  bitterness,  besides  some  other  collateral
taste,  which  cannot  fail  to  indicate  an  inner  difference  of  medicinal
action,  that  no  human  reason  can  discern  from  the  mere  taste.


1 From  vol.  v,  and  edit.,  1826.


MENYANTHES.


131

Such  being  the  case,  it  follows  that  it  would  be  absurd  and  nonsen-
sical if  we  should  be  so  foolish  as  to  infer  a stomach-strengthening
action  from  the  quality  of  bitterness.  If  not,  then  why  should  not  ear-
wax,  the  bile  of  animals,  squills,  agaric,  staphisagria,  nux  vomica,
ignatia,  colocynth,  elaterium,  &c.,  be  tonic,  stomach-strengthening
remedies  ? — they  are  surely  all  bitter  enough  ! — and  yet  several  of  them
in  moderate  doses  are  capable  of  destroying  human  life.

So  utterly  has  ordinary  medicine  misunderstood,  so  completely  iden-
tical with  other  bitter  plants  has  she  regarded  the  buckbean,  a plant
that  differs  from  all  other  bitter  plants  in  nature,  in  respect  to  its
singular  appearance,  its  habitat,  and  its  peculiar  bitter  taste.  Hence  it
is  a fact  that  its  true,  pure,  peculiar  medicinal  effects  and  the  morbid
symptoms  it  produces  in  the  healthy  human  body,  owing  to  which  it
can  cure  (homoeopathically)  similar  natural  morbid  states,  is  so  remark-
ably and  so  decidedly  different  from  those  of  every  other  bitter  plant,
that  it  would  be  absurd  to  consider  this  plant  as  identical  with  other
bitter  plants.

Physicians  of  the  ordinary  school  maunder  about  the  gout-curing  power
of  buckbean,  just  as  they  have  done  about  that  of  other  bitter  plants,
without  concerning  themselves  with  the  injuries  and  the  fatal  effects*
that  have  ensued  from  the  persistent  employment  of  such  unsuitable
medicines  in  cases  of  this  sort.  We  do  not  even  know  precisely  what
they  mean  by  that  word  of  many  meanings,  “ gout,”  for  a number  of
very  different  painful  diseases  of  the  limbs  and  joints,  attended  by
many  accessory  symptoms,  are  called  by  one  and  the  same  name.

And  so  undiscriminating  ordinary  medicine  idly  asserts  buckbean
has  cured  a number  of  other  pathological  affections  (which  in  nature
never  occur  in  the  same  manner),  yet  when  we  examine  for  our-
selves the  so-called  observations,  some  twenty,  thirty  or  fifty  other
powerful  remedies  were  employed  at  the  same  time,  or  mixed  up
together,  showing  in  the  most  palpable  manner  the  incorrectness  of  the
assertion  that  buckbean  did  good.  Even  when,  as  very  rarely  happened,
it  was  used  by  itself  in  some  cases  of  disease,  and  seemed  to  be  of  use
all  by  itself,  there  is  seldom  anything  worthy  of  imitation  to  be  learned
from  these  instances,  because  it  was  not  administered  on  intelligible
grounds  but  in  a sort  of  random  way,  and  the  case  of  disease  said  to
have  been  cured  stands,  like  every  other  case,  all  alone  by  itself  in
nature,  and  an  exactly  identical  case  never  occurs,  consequently  it
never  comes  under  our  treatment.

The  accurate  knowledge  of  the  pure,  peculiar,  morbific  effects  of
individual  drugs  on  the  healthy  human  subject  can  alone  teach  us  in  an
infallible  manner  in  what  morbid  states,  even  if  they  have  never  pre-
viously been  seen,  a medicine,  accurately  selected  according  to  similarity
of  symptoms,  can  be  employed  as  an  unfailing  remedy  that  shall  over-
power and  permanently  extinguish  them.

The  smallest  portion  of  a drop  of  the  undiluted  juice  I have  found
to  be  an  adequate  dose  for  homoeopathic  employment  in  every  case ;
further  experience  will  perhaps  show  that  a further  dilution  will  suffice
for  sensitive  persons  or  children.

* See  W.  Cullen’s  Materia  Medica , ii,  p.  79  (Leipzig;  Schwickert,  1790),


131


MENYANTHES.


[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Gutmann,  Hartmann,
Haynel,  Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Mockel,  Teuthorn,  Wislicenus.
Symptoms  are  taken  from  the  following  old-school  authorities :

Francus,  Joh.,  Trifolii  fibrini  historia,  Francofurti,  1701.

Schlegel,  in  Hufel.  Journal , VII,  iv.

In  the  1st  edit,  there  are  297  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit,  has  two  less.]


MENYANTHES.

(Vertigo  on  stooping  and  rising  up  again.)

Confusion  of  the  head,  in  the  room,  like  dazedness  ; the  thoughts
come  with  difficulty,  though  he  immediately  remembers  everything ;
in  the  open  air  he  feels  much  lighter  and  freer  (aft.  2 h.).  [T%.]
Stupid  in  the  head  (aft.  17  h.).  [Hnl.]

Pressure  from  within  outwards  in  the  front  part  of  the  forehead
(aft.  2J  h.).  [Htn.]

5.  On  the  left  temple  a persistent  pressure,  mingled  with  sharp
stitches.  [Htn.]

When  leaning  the  head  on  one  side  dull  headache.

Aching  pain  in  the  head,  more  violent  in  the  open  air  (aft.  12
h.).  [Gn.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  (aft.  J h.).  [Gn.]

A pressing  from  above  downwards  in  the  head,  which

goes  off  when  the  hand  is  strongly  pressed  on  it,  but  returns  again,
for  many  hours  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Htn.]

10.  Pressive  headache,  that  is  aggravated  by  going  up  and  down-
stairs, when  it  seems  to  him  as  if  a heavy  weight  lay  on  the  brain,
which  pressed  out  at  the  forehead  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Htn.]

Aching  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,  going  off  imme-
diately by  laying  on  the  expanded  hand  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Gbz.]

Headache  in  the  temples,  as  if  they  were  compressed  from  both
sides,  which  went  off  by  compressing  with  the  hand,  but  then
returned.  [Trn.]

Headache,  like  compression  on  both  sides,  and  at  the  same  time
some  stitches  in  the  occiput.  [Trn.]

Persistent  heaviness  of  the  head  (immediately).  [Gn.]

15.  Heaviness  with  aching  in  the  whole  head,  sometimes  also  violent
stitches  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance — a headache  which  goes  off
completely  on  laying  the  head  on  one  side.  [Htn.]

Obtuse  pressive  pain  in  the  forehead  from  within  outwards,  for
several  hours  (aft.  27  h.),  [Hnl.]

Compressive  pains  from  both  sides  in  the  crown,
together  with  a sensation  on  going  upstairs  as  if  a
weight  pressed  upon  the  brain  at  each  step  (aft.  2 h.).

[Ws.]

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  which  involved
the  forehead  especially,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving

(aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.]


MENYANTHES.


33


3i


h.).


Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  forehead,  just  above  the  root  of  the
nose  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zz.]

20.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  lobe  of  the  cerebrum,  from  below
upwards,  which  ends  in  the  occiput  (aft.  4 h.).  [//«/.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.

[Hnl.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead,  [Zz.]

Drawing  internal  pain  along  the  left  frontal  bone,  [Zz.]
Squeezing  drawing  on  the  side  of  the  occiput,  [Zz.]

25.  When  sitting  drawing  in  the  occiput  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zz.]

Tensive  headache  about  the  whole  crown.

Twitching  headache  in  the  crown,  especially  after  stooping  (aft.
5 h.).  [Ws.]

Single  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  brain  up  towards
the  crown  (aft.  2 h.).  [Mkl.]

Single  stitches  in  the  forehead  towards  the  crown  (aft.  6 h.).
[Mkl.]

30.  Feeling  of  sore  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  left  temple,  on  touching  it
(aft.  2 6 h.).  [ Gn.]

Gnawing  pain  externally  on  the  crown  (aft.  16  h.).  [ Ws .]
Burning  in  the  scalp  above  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  7
h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  above  the  left  superciliary  arch.  [ Gn.~\

Burning  pricks  in  the  forehead,  less  on  the  hairy  scalp,  with  heat
of  the  face  without  increased  warmth  of  the  rest  of  the  body  (aft.  12
h.).  [Ws.]

35.  Stitch-like  tearing  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead,
near  the  temporal  region  (aft.  1 £ h.).  [Zr.]

Visible,  but  not  painful  twitching  in  the  facial  muscles,  espe-
~ daily  of  the  right  side,  more  severe  when  at  rest  than  when  walking
(aft.  6J  h.).  [Mkl.']

Dimness  of  the  eyes,  only  in  the  open  air  (aft.  6 h.).
[Mkl.]

On  reflecting  when  reading  frequent  occurrence  of  blackness
before  the  eyes  (aft.  8 h.).  [Mkl.]

Flickering  before  the  eyes,  so  that  all  objects  appear  to  be  in  a
hopping  movement,  for  four  minutes  (aft.  4 h,).  [Mkl.]

40.  Contracted  pupils  (aft.  j,  1 h.).  [Lr.]

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  4J  h.).  [Zr.]

Burning  tension  above  the  left  upper  eyelid,  which  went  off  by
touching.  [Gn.]

Aching  on  a small  point  in  the  eye,  as  if  in  the  crystalline  lens,
with  a sensation  like  vertigo,  or  as  if  the  eyes  became  filled  with
tears,  or  of  distortion  of  them  (squinting),  but  without  dimness  of
vision  (when  sitting).  [Zz.]

Sensation  inside  the  left  lower  eyelid,  as  if  a not  very  hard  body
lay  beneath  it  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Gn.]

45.  Obtuse  stitches  in  the  eyeballs.  [Zz.]

In  the  eyes  a sensation  as  from  swelling  of  the  eyelids,  or  a stye
on  them,  when  keeping  the  eyelids  still.  [Zz.]


MENYANTHES.


*34


Tearing  stitches  in  the  inner  canthi,  during  which  the  eyes  fill
with  water  (aft.  12  h.).  [ TVs .]

From  time  to  time  weeping  of  the  eyes.  [ Gn.]

In  both  eyelids  a quivering  and  a pressure  on  both  eyeballs,
which,  however,  is  soon  allayed  after  eating.

50.  Sometimes  rigidity  of  one  or  other  eyelid,  like  tonic  spasm,  so
that  he  cannot  move  it.  [Fz.]

Nasty  smell  that  excites  loathing,  as  from  rotten  eggs,  before  the
nose,  both  in  the  room  and  in  the  open  air,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour
(aft.  qh.).  [MM.]

Persistent  ringing  in  the  right  ear,  which  ceases  when  the  ear  is
rubbed  inside,  but  returns  immediately  (aft.  4 h.).  [Mkl.]

In  the  right  ear  as  if  he  heard  bells  ringing  (immediately).  [Hull]
First  in  the  right  then  in  the  left  ear,  some  fine  stitches.  [Hnl.]
55.  Obtuse  stitches  though  the  ear  into  the  head,  and  in  the  facial
muscles  of  the  same  side,  below  the  eye  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

Small  stitches  in  rapid  succession  in  the  left  ear  internally  (aft.

71  h.).  [Mkl.]

Pinching  in  the  right  and  left  ear.  [Hbg.]

Itching  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear  for  three  days.  [Gn.]

Cold  feeling  in  the  internal  ear,  just  as  though  water  had  got
into  it  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

60.  On  blowing  the  nose  roaring  in  the  left  ear,  just  as  if  air  were
rushing  out  of  it  (aft.  26  h.).  [TVs.]

Slight  chirping  before  the  ears,  as  from  crickets  (aft.  48  h.).

[m.]

Shooting  tearing  in  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  cartilage  of  the
ears  and  on  the  mastoid  processes  (aft.  14  h.).  [TVs.]

Tension  in  the  root  of  the  nose.

In  the  morning  he  blows  blood  from  the  nose.

65.  Painful  cramp  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  cheek,  when  at  rest.
[Htn.]

Dry,  chapped  lips,  without  thirst  and  without  perceptible  heat
(aft.  3 h.).  [Mkl.]

Tension  in  the  jaws.

Stitch-like  tearing  in  the  left  upper  jaw,  when  at  rest  and  when
moving  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.]

A grumbling  in  the  upper  teeth,  not  increased  by  biting.

70.  Transient  very  fine  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck  (aft  1 h.).

[Hnl.l

Heavy  feeling  in  the  cervical  muscles ; he  must  bend  the  neck
backwards.  [Hbg.]

Cramp-like  pain  ending  in  a stitch  in  the  right  cervical  muscles,
which  went  off  after  touching  them,  but  returned  again  (aft.  2|  h.).

!>•]  .

In  the  evening  stiffness  in  the  nape.

On  moving  the  neck  stiff  feeling  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  (aft.
9 h.).  [Ws.]

75.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  nape  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.]

On  walking  in  the  open  air  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  as  if


MENYANTHES.


I35

contused,  paralysed,  and  tense,  as  after  bending  back  for  a long
time  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

Drawing  stiff  sensation  in  the  nape,  with  confusion  of  the
occiput.  [Fz.]

Fine  stitches  on  the  under  surface  of  the  tongue,  which  went  off
on  moving  it  (aft.  f h.).  [Gtz.]

Aching  on  the  top  of  the  palate.

80.  When  yawning  and  coughing,  sensation  as  if  the  left  side  of  the
palate  were  paralysed.

Dryness  of  the  palate,  which  causes  a shooting  when  swallowing,
without  thirst  and  with  a sufficient  quantity  of  saliva  in  the  mouth
(aft.  i h.).  [Fz.]

Dry  and  at  the  same  time  so  rough  in  the  oesophagus  that  it  is
difficult  for  him  to  swallow  his  saliva,  increasing  for  several  days.
\_Gn]

Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  throat  (aft.  20  m.).  \HnL\

From  the  morning  onwards  dryness  in  the  oesophagus,  for  two
days.  [G«.]

85.  Increased  secretion  of  saliva  (immediately).  [iZ«/.]

Saliva  collects  in  his  mouth,  without  nausea  (aft.  8m.).  \Hnl.~\
Water  collects  in  his  mouth,  with  nausea  (aft.  ij  h.).  \_Hnl.~\
Persistent  stitch  in  the  throat,  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  larynx,
only  when  swallowing,  which  is  hindered  by  it  (aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.]
Bitter  sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.]

90.  Bread  and  butter  have  no  taste  ; he  has  only  appetite  for  meat,
which  is  relished.  [Hbg.~\

Though  he  has  no  hunger,  food  tastes  to  him  as  usual  and  he
eats  almost  more  than  usual.  [Fz.]

After  eating  emptiness  of  the  head.

After  eating,  increase  of  the  headache  like  painful  confusion  of
it.  [Fz.]

After  eating,  drawing  pain  in  the  precordial  region  of  the  heart.

[Hnl.]

95.  After  dinner,  aching  in  the  chest.  [Fz.]

Empty  eructation.

Empty  eructation  (immediately).  [ Htn .]

Frequent  empty  eructation  (immediately,  aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.]
Frequent  hiccup  (aft  4I  h.).  [Zr.]

100.  Nausea,  rapidly  passing  off,  without  eructation  (aft.  10  h.).
[Mkl.-]

Heat  in  the  stomach  suddenly  occurring  and  lasting  twenty
minutes;  thereafter  violent  hunger  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Mkl.~\

After  aching  in  the  stomach  a cold  sensation  up  the  oesophagus,
with  great  nausea,  for  twenty  minutes  (aft.  10J  h.).  \MklJ\

Voracious  hunger  rapidly  occurring  and  lasting  half  an  hour,
which  goes  off  after  eating  a little  (aft.  5 h.).  \_Mkl^\

Great  inclination  to  vomit  combined  with  painful  retching  and
contraction  in  the  stomach,  but  without  eructation  (aft.  iojh.).  [ Mkl .]
105.  Contractive  sensation  in  the  stomach  (aft.  J h.).

An  aching  pinching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  which  extends


136


MENYANTHES.


slowly  down  towards  the  rectum  and  goes  off  after  the  discharge  of
some  flatus,  but  recurs  shortly  afterwards,  urges  to  stool,  and  then
ceases  (aft  £ h.).  [Htn]

A constant  rumbling  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  such  as  often
occurs  when  the  stomach  is  empty,  though  the  stomach  is  not
empty  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.]

Shooting  pain  beneath  the  short  ribs,  when  sitting,  unaltered  by
inspiration  or  expiration,  removed  for  an  instant  by  external  pressure
with  the  hand  (aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.]

Aching  cutting  in  the  subcostal  region  (aft.  8 h.).  \JVs.\ ]

HO.  Sore  pain  of  the  external  abdominal  integuments,  when  touched
and  rubbed  by  the  clothing,  just  as  if  they  were  covered  with  pimples
(aft.  72  h.).  [Ws.]

Sore  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  when
lying,  and  also  when  moving,  but  worst  when  stooping  (aft.  2 h.).
[Gn.]

Cold  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  especially  when  pressedon  by  thehand.

On  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,  cold  feeling  in  the  abdomen  ;
coldness  runs  over  the  back  and  side,  like  a shudder  when  one  hears
a horrible  story.

Tension  and  aching  in  a part  of  the  abdomen.

1 15.  Long-continued  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region,  which  sinks
down  towards  the  hypogastrium  like  a weight,  and  goes  oft  after
a discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Htn .]

Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gn. ]

Flatulence  moves  about  in  the  abdomen,  during  which  he  feels
quite  qualmish.  [Hbg.]

Audible  rumbling  in  the  bowels  (after  eating).  [ Hbg.]

All  day  long  distension  and  fulness  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  over-
loaded by  food,  with  undiminished  appetite ; at  the  same  time
sensation  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence  and  frequent  ineffectual
urging  to  discharge  flatus  ; in  the  evening  the  fulness  of  the  abdomen
was  much  increased  by  smoking  tobacco.  [Trn.]

120.  Distension  of  the  abdomen  (aft.  14  h.)  ; two  hours  afterwards
frequent  discharge  of  flatus.  [ Mkl .]

A cutting  pain  darts  suddenly  from  the  spine  through  the
abdomen  (aft.  12  h.).  [JVs^]

When  walking,  a persistent  sharp  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the
hypogastrium,  followed  by  small,  quick  jerks,  when  standing  still
(aft.  12  h.).  [E%.]

Quick  shooting  in  the  side  of  the  hypogastrium  when  sitting  ; it
goes  off  when  touched,  but  returns  immediately.  [Tz.]

(In  the  mons  veneris  a tensive  aching  pain,  when  walking  and
sitting.)

125.  Severe  pressure  in  the  groin,  as  if  in  the  spermatic  cord,  which  is
also  painful  to  the  touch.

Muscular  twitching  in  the  right  loin  (when  sitting)  (aft.  3 h.).
[Gn.]

Bruised  pain  of  the  left  loin  in  the  renal  region,  in  the  evening,
when  sitting  still  \F%.]


MENYANTHES.


J3  7


In  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium,  shaking,  twitching,  quick
stitches  when  sitting.  [Tz.]

Bubbling  movements  on  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  with
feeling  of  heat  all  over  the  abdomen,  and  internal  feeling  as  if
diarrhoea  were  coming  on,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  J h.).
[Lr.]

130.  On  bending  the  body  forwards,  aching  in  the  glands  round
about  the  inguinal  ring,  [Tz.]

Along  with  urging  to  stool  in  the  rectum,  a pinching  in  the
hypogastrium.  [Tz.]

Painful  itching  in  the  interior  of  the  rectum  (aft.  13  h.).  [Mkl.]
Twitching  in  the  anus.  [Gn.]

Retained  stool.

13^.  Constipation  for  two  days.

Constipation  for  thirty-two  hours ; then  evacuation  of  hard
faeces.  [TVs.]

Constipation  the  first  day,  but  the  second  day  difficult  evacua-
tion of  a hard  stool  with  drawing,  pinching  pains  in  the  hypogas-
trium. [Fz.]

Constipation  the  first  day,  and  only  on  the  third  day  two  easy
evacuations.  [Tz.]

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  a not  very  hard  stool,
which  occurred  several  hours  earlier  than  usual  * (aft.  J h.).
[Gn]

140.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  followed  immediately  by  hard  stool.

[Gn-]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge
of  urine  (aft.  4,  9 ih.).  [Lr.]

Great  sexual  desire,  without  excitement  of  the  imagination  and
without  erection  of  the  penis  (aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.]

Painful  twitching  in  the  right  testicle,  more  severe  when  at  rest
(aft.  h.).  [Mkl.]

Both  testicles  are  drawn  up,  the  right  most  (aft.  ij  h.).
[Mkl]

145.  On  the  right  side  of  the  scrotum,  aching,  drawing,  cutting  pain,
or  as  if  it  were  squeezed  in  on  one  side  (aft.  14  h.).  [Hbg.]

Persistent  burning  stitches  in  the  scrotum  and  in  the  symphysis
pubis  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Hnl.]

In  the  left  side  of  the  scrotum,  fine  stitches  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.]

■H"  , Hr

*

Sneezing  without  coryza  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Lr.]

Severe  fluent  coryza  all  day  ; an  involuntary  discharge  from  the
nose.  [Gn.]

150.  During  the  fluent  coryza  the  nose  appeared  to  be  stopped  up,
although  he  could  draw  air  through  it  well  enough  (aft.  2\  h.).

[£>■.]

Crawling  tickling  in  the  larynx,  frequently  recurring  (aft.  15  h.).
[Gn.]

* Curative  secondary  action  of  the  organism  in  a person  subject  to  constipation,
who  usually  had  a motion  of  the  bowels  not  oftener  than  once  in  3 a,  36  hours.


138


MENYANTHES.


Hoarseness.  [Joh.  Francus,1  Trifolit  fibrlni  historia , Franco-
furti,  1701.]

Rough  voice.  [Gn.]

When  speaking  his  voice  is  rough,  almost  hoarse,
and  at  the  same  time  the  ears  feel  stopped  up,  as  if
something  were  pushed  before  them  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.]

155.  Quickened  respiration,  even  when  standing,  with  quick  pulse  and
redness  and  heat  in  the  face  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Trn.]

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  larynx ; the  effort  to  draw  a breath
excited  coughing  for  seven  minutes  (aft.  9 h.).  [Mb/.]

Flying  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  \\  h.).  [HnlL]
Frequent  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  as  from  flatulence.
Violent  stitches  in  the  chest,  only  when  moving  (aft.  3^  h.).
[HnL]

160.  Obtuse  shooting  pain  in  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  heart  and
on  the  corresponding  spot  on  the  right  side,  which  is  aggravated  by
pressing  on  and  expanding  the  parts  (aft.  2i|  h.) ; it  was  only  after
the  lapse  of  twenty-six  hours  that  it  recurred,  and  then  it  lasted  for
several  hours.  [HnL]  ,

Violent,  persistent  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  heart ; on  holding
in  the  breath  the  stitches  became  numerous  (aft.  15  h.).  [HnL]

Boring  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting  and
when  moving,  but  aggravated  by  inspiring  and  expiring  (aft.  3J  h.).

[<?*■]

On  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  close  to  the  clavicle,  long,  fine
stitches,  on  inspiration  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Htn.]

Constant  pressure  mingled  with  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  remaining  the  same  during  inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.
i±h,).  [Htn.]

1 65.  Pressure,  together  with  single  sharp  stitches  on  the  sternum  (aft.
12  h.).  [WsL\

On  both  sides  of  the  chest  a compression,  with  sharp
stitehes,  very  much  increased  by  inspiration  (aft.  9 h.).

\_m.]

Grasping  pain  from  both  sides  of  the  chest,  with  sharp  stitches
(aft.  12  h.).  [WsL]

The  chest  is  compressed  round  about,  when  sitting,  walking  and
standing  ; a very  disagreeable  anxious  sensation  (aft.  6\  h.).  [HnL
Tightness  of  the  chest.  [Francus,  1.  c.]

170.  Throbbing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  continuing  during  inspira-
tion and  expiration,  but  only  when  lying  (aft.  14  h.).  [Gn!]

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  towards  the  axilla
(aft.  i±  h.).  [HnL]

When  sitting  in  a stooping  position  pain  of  the  chest,  as  if
bruised.  [Fz.]

Itching  prick  in  the  left  false  ribs,  persisting  during  inspiration
and  expiration  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Gn.]

In  the  sacrum  a contractive  pain,  late  in  the  evening,  like  a


1 Not  accessible.


MENYANTHES.


*39

pressure  with  the  thumb  on  it  j when  it  becomes  [worse  there  is
creeping  in  it.

175.  Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum,  chiefly  when  sitting  still,  which  goes
off  when  touched,  [Fz.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum  when  sitting  still,  in  the  evening.  [Fz.]
Aching  pain  in  the  sacrum,  when  stooping.  [ Gn. ]

When  stooping  drawing  aching  pain  in  the  sacrum.  [Fz.]

Each  time  he  stoops  aching  pain  above  the  os  sacrum  (aft.  8 h.).
[Hnl.]

180.  Upward-drawing  aching  sacral  pain,  when  sitting,  [Fz.]
Twitching  in  the  right  dorsal  muscles  (aft.  11  h.).  [Gn.]

When  sitting  pain  near  the  lower  dorsal  vertebrae,  like  dull
drawing,  when  stooping  the  body  forwards,  [Fz.]

Sharp  pinching  near  the  spine,  in  the  region  of  the  scapulae  (aft.

24  h.).  \Ws •]

Obtuse  boring  shooting  on  the  left  scapula,  over
towards  the  spine.  [Hbg.]

185.  Feeling  of  weight  betwixt  the  scapulae  when  walking,  he  must
always  bend  forwards  and  backwards  in  order  to  relieve  it.  [Hbg.]
Excessively  painful  tearing  downwards  betwixt  the
scapulae,  especially  on  breathing  deep,  going  off  when
sitting,  immediately  returning  when  walking  ; when  at  rest  a sore
pain  remained.  [Hbg.]

On  the  top  of  the  shoulder  a burning  scraping  sensation.  [Fz.]
Many  fine  stitches  in  the  right  axilla  towards  the  chest  (aft.
7ih.).  [MkL]

Fine  stitches  dart  into  the  axilla  on  moving  the  arm  (aft.  4 h.).
[JVs.]

190.  Painful,  visible  twitching  in  the  left  arm,  worse  when  at  rest
(aft.  6§h.).  \_MkL]

Stitches  in  the  deltoid  muscle  at  the  shoulder-joint.  [Fz.]

In  the  upper  arm  quick,  cramp-like  tearing,  when  sitting.  [Fz.]

Muscular  twitching  in  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  24  h.).
[Gn.']

Twitching  of  the  muscles  on  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  16^  h.).
[Hnl.]

195.  Repeated  spasmodic  drawing  in  the  inside  of  the  left  forearm  ; at
last  the  four  fingers  are  involuntarily  bent  in,  but  the  arm  itself  is
spasmodically  stiff,  and  cannot  be  moved  in  spite  of  all  efforts  (aft.
8i  h.).  [MkL]

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm,
which  extended  to  the  left  palm,  almost  like  paralysis
(aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .]

Cramp-like  aching  in  the  forearm,  just  beside  the  bend  of  the
elbow,  which  goes  off  on  touching,  but  immediately  returns.  [Fz.]
Sharp  stitches  under  the  elbow  and  on  the  wrist-joint  (aft.
12  h.).  [Ws.]

Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  right  wrist-joint  and  metacarpus,
when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.]

200.  Shooting  pain  in  the  left  wrist  (aft.  j h.).  [Hnl.]


140


MENYANTHES.


Paralytic  tearing  in  the  wrist-joints,  especially  on  moving  them
(aft.  2 h.).  \_Hnl.~\

When  writing  and  moving  the  hand  a drawing  pain,  which  goes
off  when  the  hand  is  kept  at  rest  (aft.  2 h.).  [T%.]

Cramp-like  drawing  on  the  dorsal  muscles  of  the  thumb,  [Zz.]
Shooting  pinching  on  the  outer  side  of  the  proximal  phalanx  of
the  thumb  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Ws.~\

205.  Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb  (aft.  5 h.).
[Lr.]

A stitch  outwards  in  the  right  thumb  and  index  (aft.  i\  h.).

[#»/•]

Painful  twitching  in  the  left  little  finger  (aft  9 h.).  [iZz/.]
Cramp-like  pain  on  the  left  index  more  outwards,  which  went  off
by  movement  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Zr.]

On  the  proximal  finger-joints  fine  stitches,  somewhat  relieved  by
movement  (aft.  3 h.).  \TVs.'\

210.  Quick  darting  stitches  in  the  glutei  muscles  of  the  right  side
(aft.  7 h.).  \JVs^\

Twitching  stitches  on  the  upper  border  of  the  left  gluteus
magnus.  [i^z.]

Shooting  contractive  pain  on  the  hip-joint,  about  the  cotyloid
cavity,  only  when  walking  (aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.].

When  walking  and  standing  very  acute  fine  stitches  in  the  right
hip-joint  (aft.  13  h.).  [Tf/f/.]

When  sitting  the  outstretched  right  thigh  and  leg  are  four  times
spasmodically  jerked  up,  but  when  standing  or  on  drawing  up  the
knees  towards  him  when  sitting,  this  is  not  perceptible  (aft.  8 h.).
[Mkl.]

215.  When  sitting  still  in  the  evening,  a drawing  bruised  pain  on  the
outer  side  of  the  thigh,  sacrum,  and  left  loin,  in  the  renal  region.
[Fz,~\

Anteriorly  on  the  thigh  a cramp-like  drawing,  when  sitting  (aft.

2 h.).  [ Fz.~\

Cramp-like  drawing  bruised  pains  on  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of
the  thighs,  with  hot  feeling  in  the  back  and  all  the  upper  part  of  the
body,  mostly  when  sitting,  [Zz.]

On  both  thighs  a numb,  tensive,  aching  bruised  pain,  when
walking  and  sitting,  [Z%.]

A quivering  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh.  [Hnl.~\

220.  Violent  burning  stitch  on  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  left  thigh,
somewhat  above  the  knee,  when  sitting  (aft.  15  h.).  [Hnl.]

On  the  inside  of  the  top  of  the  thigh  an  intermitting  pinching,
with  gurgling  as  from  something  alive,  most  severe  when  sitting  (aft.

5 h.).  [^.]

Tension  with  stitches  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the  thigh  and
leg,  near  the  knee  (aft.  10  h.).  \WsI\

Obtuse  outward  stitches  on  the  patellae,  with  hot  feeling  in  the
knees  (aft.  12  h.).  \W >.]

Dislocation  pain  on  the  knee-joint,  towards  its  interior,  when  at
rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  f h.).  [Zr.]


MENYANTHES.


141


225.  Drawing  in  the  right  hough  through  the  calf,  when  standing
and  sitting.  [Tz.].

Sharp  stitches  under  the  knees  (aft.  12  h.).  [Ws. ]

Itching  boring  prick  in  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee,  when
moving  and  when  at  rest  (aft.  11J  h.).  [ Gn.]

A not  exactly  painful  twitching  in  the  left  leg,  worse  when  at
rest  than  when  walking  (aft.  6\  h.).  [MklL]

Trembling  sensation  in  both  calves  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,
more  violent  when  sitting  than  when  standing  (aft.  2 h.).  [MkL]
230.  When  sitting  still  a cramp-like  drawing  upwards  on  the  outer
side  of  the  left  leg.  [Tz.]

A sharp  pressure  on  the  tibia.  [Fz.]

When  at  rest  obtuse  pulsating  stitches  under  the  middle  of  the
tibia,  which  go  off  on  moving,  but  return  when  at  rest  (aft.  2 h.) .
[Fz.]

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  leg  which
went  from  below  upwards,  like  paralytic  pain  (aft.  2\  h.).

Sharp  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  tibia,  with  twitching  grasping,
just  as  though  the  leg  had  been  long  held  in  an  uncomfortable
position  (when  at  rest)  (aft.  2 h.).  [TVs.]

235.  When  walking  a dislocation  pain,  at  one  time  on  the  left,  at
another  on  the  right  leg,  near  the  inner  ankle  (aft.  7^  h.).  [Lr.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a dislocation  pain  on  the  left  leg
from  one  ankle  to  the  other  (aft.  io|  h.).  [Lr.]

Cutting  on  both  outer  ankles  when  at  rest,  it  went  off  on  moving
(aft.  12  h.).  [TVs.]

M-  - . -

Persistent  corrosive  gnawing  pain  on  a very  small  spot,  between
the  outer  ankle  and  the  tendo  Achillis  of  the  right  foot,  recurring
several  times,  when  sitting  ; it  is  renewed  on  moving  (aft.  14  h.).
[#»/.]

240.  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  heel  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Hnl.]

Coarse  stitches  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  when  walking  (aft.  3^  h.).

Visible  twitching,  not  exactly  painful,  in  various  parts  at  once,
more  severe  when  at  rest  than  when  walking  (aft.  6J  h.).  [ MkL]
Twitching  of  small  portions  of  the  muscles  in  several  parts  of
the  body  at  various  times.  [Hnl.]

Shooting  pinching  now  here  now  there  on  the  body  (aft.  8 h.).
[TVs.]

245.  Weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving,  for
an  hour  (aft.  28  h.).  [MkL]

Weariness  and  prostration  (immediately).

Great  weakness  of  all  the  body  ; at  the  same  time  aching  pain
over  the  os  sacrum,  when  standing,  diminished  by  sitting  (aft.  17
h.).  [Hnl.]

When  walking  weakness  of  the  body,  together  with  chilliness  all
over  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Hnl.]


Burning  shooting  above  both  ankle-joints  when  walking  (aft.  1 \
T Hnl.~ 1


142


MENYANTHES.


(Extreme  weakness  with  heat  and  severe  headache.*)  [Schlegel,
in  Huf.  Jour.  VII,  iv,  p.  163.]

250.  Vital  activity  immensely  increased,  hurried  character  of  all  move-
mentsf  (aft.  32  h.).  [Mkl.]

Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.  2 h.).

[Lr.]

Lascivious,  vivid,  unremembered  dreams,  without  emission  of
semen.  [(?«.]

Restless  sleep ; he  threw  himself  from  one  side  to  the  other.  [Gnl]
Vivid  unremembered  dreams,  [Lr.]

255.  During  sleep  redness  and  heat  in  the  face  ; he  wakes  up  and  cries
out  “ There  ! there  !”  and  points  with  the  finger,  then  falls  asleep
again.

Shuddering  in  the  morning,  in  the  back,  as  from  hearing  horrible
tales,  not  like  chilliness.

Chilly  feeling,  especially  in  the  fingers.

Chilly  feeling  all  over  the  trunk  with  otherwise  moderate  tempe-
rature (aft.  8J  h.).  [Hnl.]

Shivering  over  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  with
yawning  (immediately).  [Htn.]

260.  Shivering  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot.  [Hbg.]

An  outward  shivering  runs  over  him,  without  internal  chilliness,
especially  on  the  legs,  in  the  warm  room  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs?]

In  the  warm  room  the  hair  stands  on  end,  without  chilliness,  for
ten  minutes  (aft.  7 h.).  [Mkl.]

(When  sitting)  shuddering  without  chilliness  over  the  back  as  if
he  were  afraid  of  something,  or  terrified  by  something — without
subsequent  heat  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.]

Coldness  in  the  spine  with  shivering  (aft.  4 h.).  [Mkl.]

265.  Icy  cold  hands  and  feet,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  is  warm
(aft.  |h.).  \_Htn.]

Cold  feet  for  forty-eight  hours.  [ Htn .]

Swollen  blood-vessels  on  the  hands  and  somewhat  beyond  them
on  the  forearms,  with  ordinary  heat  of  the  body  and  icy  cold  feet
(aft.  5 h.).  [Htn.]

Coldness  of  the  feet  lasting  into  the  night ; they  could  not  get
warm  even  in  bed  (aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.]

Cold  feet  up  to  the  knees,  as  if  they  stood  in  cold  water.  [Hbg.]
270.  Chilliness  all  over  the  body,  which  went  off  by  the  heat  of  the
stove,  but  returned  when  he  went  away  from  the  stove,  lasting  half
an  hour  (aft.  ± h.).  [Hnl.]

Chilliness  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  back,  which  was
not  removed  by  the  heat  of  the  stove  (aft.  f h.).  [Hnl.]

Febrile  rigor  all  over  the  back,  as  if  he  had  been  walking  for  a
long  time  naked  in  cool  air  (aft.  £ h.).  [Lr.]

Slow  pulse,  fifty-two  beats  in  a minute  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Lr.]

Heat  of  the  ears  (aft.  | h.).  [Hnl.]

275.  Hot  feeling  on  the  trunk,  especially  in  the  back,  sometimes

^ In  a case  of  intermittent  fever,
f Alternating  action.


MENYANTHES.


H3


mingled  with  cold  feeling,  without  thirst  and  without  heat  or  redness
of  the  face  (aft.  8 h.) — several  hours  thereafter  (aft.  i6\  h.)  redness
of  the  cheeks.  \Hnl!\

Heat,  especially  in  the  face  ; soon  afterwards  a general  chilliness,
both  without  thirst  (aft.  3 h.).  [Mkl.']

Towards  evening  flush  of  heat  over  the  cheeks.  [Tz.]

In  the  evening  elevated  temperature  of  the  body,  without  thirst,
with  freedom  and  lightness  of  the  mind.  [Tz.]

After  walking  in  the  open  air,  in  the  evening,  heat  without  thirst
and  slight  sweat  all  over  the  body.

280.  Sweat  from  evening  till  morning.

Sweat  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down.

Disagreeable  hot  feeling  on  the  trunk,  especially  on  the  back,  six
hours  after  the  chilliness  (aft.  7 h.).  [Hnl.~\

Very  great  heat  all  over  the  body  without  perspiration  and  with-
out thirst,  with  cold  feet  (aft.  2|  h.).  \_Htn.\

(Along  with  increase  of  the  heat1  delirious  talking,  with  small,
quick  irritated  pulse* *).  [Schlegel,  1.  c.]

285.  Anxious  feeling  about  the  heart,  as  if  something  bad  were  about
to  happen,  and  he  had  to  undergo  a calamity  (aft.  1 h.).3  [Schlegel,
1.  c.]

Cross,  ill-humoured  and  discontented  with  himself  and  his  posi-
tion ; anxiety  drives  him  from  one  place  to  another  (aft.  16  h.).3
[Schlegel,  1.  c.]

Gloomy,  out  of  humour,  and  cross  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Mkl.~\

Indifferent  to  amusements  (aft.  12  h.) — half  an  hour  afterwards
disposed  to  be  jocular.  [ Gn.~\

Lachrymose  disposition.  [ TrnJ]

. 290.  Melancholy  humour ; his  thoughts  are  disposed  to  dwell  on  past
sad  disagreeable  things  (aft.  80  h.).  \JVs^\

He  prefers  to  be  alone — though  not  ill-humoured— because  he
would  rather  be  silent  than  talk  (aft.  7 h.).

Dislike  to  work.  \_Htn.~\

Excessive  joyousness  + (aft.  11  h.),  \_Htn.~\

All  day  silent  reserved  humour,  with  self-satisfaction.  J [Zr.]
295.  Tranquil  disposition  -}  he  was  contented  with  his  position. §
[Xr.]

* In  a case  of  intermittent  fever,
f Alternating  action,
f Rather  curative  action.

§ Curative  reaction  of  the  organism.


1 It  should  be,  <c  of  the  chill .”

* Not  found,  probably  symptoms  of  Hartmann  erroneously  ascribed  to  Schlegel.


MERCURIUS.1

(Quicksilver,  Argentum  vivum.)

In  commerce  this  metal  is  often  adulterated  with  an  admixture  of
lead,  sometimes  also  of  bismuth.  The  best  way  to  purify  it  is  to  put  it
in  a porcelain  saucer,  pour  over  it  a watery  solution  of  nitrate  of
mercury,  and  let  it  boil  for  about  an  hour  over  a charcoal  fire,  always
adding  water  to  replace  that  lost  by  evaporation.  The  acid  in  this
solution  takes  up  the  lead  and  bismuth  and  disengages  its  mercury
which  becomes  added  to  the  mercury  to  be  purified.

Mercury  in  its  fluid  metallic  state  has  but  little  dynamic  action  on
man’s  health,  it  is  only  its  chemical  compounds  that  cause  great  effects.

Among  the  salts  of  mercury  those  which  for  several  centuries  have
been  chiefly  used  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  are  those  formed  with  a
small  proportion  of  muriatic  acid  ( sweet  mercury , mercurius  dulcis , calo-
mel, hydrargyrum  muriaticum  mite ) and  the  complete  muriatic  mercurial
salt  ( corrosive  sublimate , mercurius  sublimatus  corrosivus , hydrargyrum
muriaticum  corrosivus ) for  internal  use,  and  its  combination  with  fatty
substances  ( unguentum  mercuriale  s.  neapolitanum , unguentum  hydrargyri
cinereum ) for  external  inunction.  I will  pass  over  the  innumerable
other  preparations  of  mercury,  chiefly  combinations  with  other  acids  or
prepared  with  other  substances,  which  have  been  used  less  frequently
and  have  attained  no  lasting  repute.

This  is  not  the  place  to  estimate  the  medicinal  value  of  all  these
preparations.  It  would,  indeed,  be  impossible  to  do  this,  because  even
those  of  them  in  commonest  use  have  been  but  little,  and  those  more
rarely  employed  not  at  all,  tested  as  to  their  true  peculiar  action  on  the
healthy  human  body.  Consequently  they  cannot  be  homoeopathically
selected  for  particular  morbid  states  with  any  certainty  of  a curative
effect.  Thus  much  only  does  careful  proving  enable  me  to  express
from  experience,  that  they  all  display  in  their  action  a certain  general
similarity  as  mercurials  ; whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  they  differ  greatly
from  one  another  in  their  peculiarities,  and  very  much  in  the  intensity
of  their  action  on  the  human  health.  Especially  should  it  be  observed,
that  all  the  saline  preparations  of  mercury  display  a number  of  little
known  but  generally  very  active  accessory  effects,  according  to  the
nature  of  their  basic  acid,  which  differ  very  much  from  the  mild
absolute  effects  of  perfectly  pure  mercury,  unaltered  by  any  acid.

Even  mercury  merely  united  with  fatty  substances  in  the  form  of
ointment  excites  peculiar  effects  on  the  human  body,*  different  from

* John  Bell  complains  that  he  has  never  succeeded  in  curing  the  venereal  chancre
disease  by  merely  rubbing  in  mercurial  ointment,  without  being  compelled  to  destroy


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830.


MERCURIUS.


145


those  produced  by  the  internal  administration  of  the  mild,  pure,  semi-
oxydized  mercury  (cethiops  per  se ),  probably  because  in  the  ointment  it
is  chemically  combined  with  fatty  acids.

Now,  as  the  homoeopathic  method  rejects  all  medicinal  substances
that  produce  heterogeneous  accessory  effects  in  consequence  of  being
combined  with  something  else,  I have  long  endeavoured  to  obtain  pure
mercury  in  such  a condition  that  it  should  be  able  to  display  its  true,
pure,  peculiar  effects  on  the  human  organism  in  a more  powerfully
curative  manner  than  all  other  known  preparations  and  saline  combi-
nations.

What  a long-continued,  mechanical  succussion  of  fluid  mercury,  or
as  was  practised  in  ancient  times,  its  trituration  with  crab’s  eyes  or  solu-
tion of  gum  effected  very  imperfectly,  viz.  its  change  into  semi-oxyde
free  from  acids,  this  I sought  to  do  in  1787  and  1788,  by  precipitating
it  from  its  solution  in  nitric  acid  made  in  cold,  by  means  of  caustic
ammonia.  This  preparation  of  mercury,  distinguished  by  its  black
colour,  was,  under  the  name  of  mercurius  solubilis  Hahn,  (mercurius
oxydulatus  niger ),  preferred  in  almost  all  countries  to  all  other  mercurials
hitherto  in  use,  on  account  of  its  much  milder,  more  efficacious  antisy-
philitic virtues.  But  a more  careful  investigation  showed  me  that  even
this  did  not  possess  the  highest  degree  of  purity.  In  fact,  its  dark  black
colour  was  rather  owing  to  an  excess  of  the  caustic  ammonia  required
for  the  precipitation  of  the  somewhat  over-acid  nitrate  of  mercury.  But
nitrate  of  mercury  with  excess  of  acid  generally  contains  some  muriate
and  sulphate  of  mercury  (which  even  in  very  small  quantities  pos-
sess a deleterious  acridity).  These  are  concealed  by  the  dark  colour  of
the  black  oxyde,  are  precipitated  along  with  it,  and  thus  render  it  some-
what impure.

In  order  to  avoid  this,  in  the  preface  to  mercury  in  the  second
.edition  of  this  first  part  of  the  Materia  Medica  Pura , published  in  1822, 1
directed  the  mode  of  preparing  a perfectly  pure  precipitate  of  mercury,
obtained  by  caustic  ammonia  acting  on  nitrate  of  mercury  quite  free
from  superfluous  acid.  This  is  of  a dark  grey  colour  ; it  is  a perfectly
pure  oxyde  of  mercury,  like  the  powder  obtained  by  prolonged  succus-
sion of  the  metallic  mercury,  and  called  cethiops  per  se.

This  preparation,  being  a perfectly  pure  mercurial  medicine,  was
quite  unobjectionable,  except  that  the  process  for  making  it  required
much  care  and  labour.

But  as  one  of  the  rules  of  homoeopathy,  as  also  of  common  sense,
enjoins  that  we  should  attain  our  aim  in  the  simplest  and  shortest  way
[quod  fieri  potest  per  pauca^  non  debet  fieri  per  plura ),  so  in  this  case  the
aim  is  attained  in  the  speediest,  easiest,  and  most  perfect  manner  by
acting  according  to  the  directions  laid  down  in  the  second  part  of  the
Chronic  Diseases , p.  5.  One  grain  of  perfectly  pure  mercury  (such  as
is  employed  for  making  thermometers)  is  triturated,  as  is  done  with
other  dry  medicinal  substances,  with  three  times  100  grains  of  milk-

the  chancre  by  the  aid  of  external  remedies.  But  by  the  internal  use  of  a mercurial
preparation  uncombined  with  any  acid,  such  as  the  mercurius  solubilis  ( hydrargyrum
oxydulatum  nigrum ),  the  whole  disease,  including  the  chancre,  is  cured,  without  any
external  remedy  for  the  latter  being  required.

VOL.  II.


10


146


MERCURKJS.


sugar  for  three  hours,  up  to  the  million-fold  powder-attenuation  (as  is
described  in  detail  in  the  place  referred  to),*  and  one  grain  of  the  last  is
dissolved  in  diluted  alcohol ; this  solution  is  twice  succussed,  and  a drop
of  this  solution  is  raised  through  26  dilution  phials  to  the  decillion-fold
potency  {hydrargyrum purum  potentiatum  X).

One  small  globule  (300  of  which  weigh  one  grain),  moistened
with  the  last  dilution,  is  the  appropriate  dose  of  this  very  medicinal
metal  for  all  suitable  cases.

The  following  symptoms  were  produced  by  the  administration  or
the  black  oxyde  of  mercury  (mercurius  solubilis ),  which  was  generally
pure  enough  to  develope  mostly  pure  mercurial  symptoms,  whereby,  as
I hope,  the  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  powers  of  this  metal  has  been
increased  in  no  small  degree.

They  show  that  if  we  select  mercury  only  for  such  morbid  states,
the  totality  of  whose  symptoms  is  met  with  among  those  of  the  drug
in  striking  similarity ; — when,  moreover,  we  only  employ  it  in  the
most  perfect,  pure  and  highly  potentized  preparation  and  in  the  above-
named  dilution,  we  shall  find  in  it  an  indispensable,  highly  serviceable
remedy  for  very  many  cases.

But  mercury  has  been  only  too  often  improperly  employed  in  all
sorts  of  diseases  in  allopathic  practice,  in  which  either  it  was  believed
that  benefit  could  not  be  obtained  by  milder  remedies,  or  where  it  was
taken  for  granted  that  induration  and  obstruction  existed  which  had  to  be
resolved  by  this  metal  which  was  held  to  be  a universal  solvent,  or  where
in  obstinate  ailments,  as  so  many  are,  a concealed  venereal  infection
was  groundlessly  imagined  to  lurk.  When  aggravation  of  the  sym-
toms  ensued  from  the  daily  repeated  doses,  the  allopath  did  not  ascribe
this  to  the  unsuitability  of  the  medicine  for  the  disease,  but  he  usually
attributed  it  to  the  dose  being  too  small  for  such  a great  disease,  and
he  then  attacked  the  patient  with  larger  and  more  frequently  repeated
doses  of  more  energetic  mercurial  preparations  (if  he  wished  to  pro-
duce a very  powerful  effect  he  gave  corrosive  sublimate),  he  rubbed  a
quantity  of  mercurial  ointment  into  the  skin,  and  in  this  way  destroyed
life,  or  at  least  ruined  the  health  beyond  possibility  of  recovery,  in
innumerable  cases.

But,  as  we  now  know,  all  chronic  diseases,  with  but  few  exceptions
(pure  syphilis  and  sycosis  being  among  these),  arise  from  more  or  less
developed  psora  ; and  even  where  uneradicated  syphilis  or  sycosis  is
complicated  with  developed  psora,  the  latter  is  more  and  first  to  be
attended  to  in  the  treatment.  But  mercury  (and  especially  its  impure,
acrid  preparations)  can  never  serve  for  the  radical  cure  of  psora,  but  must
always  make  it  more  incurable.  This  will  easily  explain  the  disas-
trous results  of  the  mercurial  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  of  all  sorts.

I leave  out  of  consideration  the  injudicious  treatment  by  blood-
letting, by  repeated  purgatives,  by  the  frequent  abuse  of  opium  in  order

* After  the  trituration  of  the  grain  of  mercury  with  the  first  100  grains  of  milk-
sugar,  there  still  remains  on  the  smooth  surface  of  the  porcelain  mortar,  in  spite  of
the  most  diligent  scraping,  a considerable  black  discoloration,  which  is  almost  entirely
taken  up  by  the  trituration  of  one  grain  of  the  first  trituration  with  a second  100
grains  of  milk-sugar,  and  is  completely  effaced  by  the  third  trituration.


MERCURIUS.


147


to  allay  all  sorts  of  pains,  to  procure  sleep  and  check  diarrhoea  and
spasms,  by  cinchona  bark  in  order  to  cut  short  intermittent  fevers  and
strengthen  the  patient,  in  cases  where  the  uncured  disease  and  the
squandering  of  the  juices  and  strength  by  the  doctor  were  the  only
causes  of  the  weakness.  Apart  from  these  injudicious  operations,
there  is  no  remedy  employed  by  the  allopaths,  who  plume  themselves
on  being  healers  of  diseases,  whereby  the  life  of  patients  afflicted  with
chronic  diseases  is  oftener  destroyed  than  their  favourite  calomel  and
corrosive  sublimate.  How  different  are  the  results  obtained  by  homoeo-
pathy in  its  treatment  of  the  sick  !

In  it,  the  smallest  dose  of  the  purest  mercury  in  the  above-men-
tioned highest  development  of  potency,  demands,  on  the  part  of  the
true  disciples  of  this  method  of  treatment,  the  most  careful  selection  of
the  case  of  chronic  disease  in  which  this  remedy  may  be  unhesitatingly
given,  and  in  which  it  is  indispensable  to  the  cure.  I refer  to  other
cases  than  to  the  pure  venereal  chancre  disease  (syphilis),  uncomplicated
with  psora,  where  its  employment  is  positively  indicated.  In  this  case,
too,  one  single  smallest  dose  always  suffices  for  the  cure  of  this  chronic
miasm.

This,  the  only  rational  employment  of  this  noble  metal,  has  nothing
in  common  with  the  abuse  of  the  drug  which  has  for  several  years  past
been  prevalent  in  the  ordinary  method  of  treatment,  where  calomel
( mercurius  dulcis,  in  which  the  mercury,  owing  to  its  combination
with  muriatic  acid,  has  other  properties  very  different  from  its  original,
specific  ones)  is  blindly  employed  in  almost  all  diseases,  without
distinction,  in  large  doses,  generally  combined  with  opium,  without
any  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  practitioner  of  the  real  effects  of
either  the  calomel  or  the  opium,  and  without  any  attempt  to  distin-
guish the  cases  in  which  the  former  or  the  latter,  or  both  together,
are  suited.  We  may  well  say  that  here  the  irrational  practice,  allo-
pathy, has  reached  its  climax.  This  homicidal  practice  deserves  only
condemnation,  and  is  not  worth  further  notice.

The  perfect  saline  combination  of  mercury  with  muriatic  acid,  the
mercurial  sublimate  ( corrosive  sublimate , mercurius  corrosivus  sublimatus )
is  somewhat  better  known  by  reason  of  its  frequent  abuse.  On  account
of  its  solubility  in  water  and  alcohol,  and  hence  its  capability  of  being
diluted  to  every  degree,  it  is  more  adapted  for  homoeopathic  use.  I have
given  some  of  its  symptoms  further  on,  which  are  well  worth  being
added  to,  that  will  serve  to  give  some  idea  of  its  peculiar  action,  which
is  very  different  from  that  of  pure  mercury.  I have  found  a single  dose
of  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  quintillion-fold,  or  better  still,  of  the
decillion-fold  dilution,  given  alone , to  be  almost  specific  in  the  common
autumnal  dysentery.  In  this  case  the  truth  of  the  homoeopathic  law
of  cure  is  distinctly  corroborated.

So  also  the  sulphurous  combination  of  mercury,  cinnabar , possesses
its  own  peculiar  properties,  which  differ  from  those  of  pure  mercury,
though  they  are  not  yet  well  enough  ascertained.  In  the  symptoms
I have  given  below  I have  made  a small  commencement  to  the  know
ledge  of  its  medicinal  worth.

When  even  the  purest  mercurial  preparation  causes  injurious  effects,


148  MERCURIUS.

if  administered  in  unsuitable  cases  of  disease,  therefore  unhomoeopathi-
cally,  then,  according  to  the  character  of  the  untoward  symptoms
that  arise,  the  antidote  will  be  found  either  in  hepar  sulphuris,  sulphur,
camphor,  opium,  china,  or  nitric  acid.  All  these  remedies  must,
however,  be  given  in  very  small  doses,  selected  in  accordance  with  the
symptoms  present.

Cases  of  slow  poisoning  by  mercury,  especially  the  trembling  of
gilders,  are  said  to  be  relieved  by  electricity.

The  symptoms  here  recorded  that  have  been  observed  from  the
administration  of  the  black  oxyde  of  mercury  are  mostly  primary
effects.  Very  few  of  them  can  with  certainty  be  said  to  be  secondary
effects.  These  are  distinguished  by  painlessness  and  non-inflamma-
tory  character.  Among  them  I reckon  e.  g.  a kind  of  hard,  cold,
painless  swelling  of  the  glands  and  a certain  cataleptic  paralytic
weakness  of  the  muscles.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  his  proving  of  the  black  oxyde  oj  mercury  (often  called
mercurius  solubilis  Hahnemanni)  by  Gross,  Gutmann,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hart-
mann, Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Rummel,  Stapf.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited  for  the  symptoms  recorded  under  mercurius
solubilis , calomel , mercurii  acetas , mercurius  pracipitatus  ruber , and  cinnabar .

One  old-school  author  furnishes  some  symptoms  of  mercurius  corrosivus , viz.  :

Schwarze,  C.  Fr.,  Beob.  und  Erfahr.  i.  d.  Med.,  Dresden,  1827.

For  other  mercurial  preparations  the  following  authorities  are  quoted  :

Acrey,  Thom.,  in  Lond.  Med.  Journ .,  1788.

Bell,  Ueber  bdsart.  Tripper  und  vener.  Krankk .,  Leipzig,  1794,  ii.

Bethke,  Schlagfluss.

Cheyne,  J.,  in  Dublin  Hospital  Reports  and  Commentaries  on  Med.  and  Surgery ,
Dublin,  1816,  vol.  i.

Clare  (?).

Cullen’s  First  Lines , note  by  French  translator  of.

Degner,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  vi.

Engel,  Specimina  Med.,  Berol.,  1781.

Fourcroy,  in  the  translation  of  Ramazzini's  Maladies  des  Artisans.

Friese,  in  Geschichte  und  Versuche  einer  chirurg.  Gesellschaft , Kopenh.,  1774.

Heuermann,  Bemerk.  und  Untersuch.,  ii.

Hill,  Jac.,  in  Edinb.  Essays , iv.

Hoffmann,  in  Baldinger's  Magaz.

Huber,  in  Nova  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  iii.

Hufeland,  Journal  d.  pr.  A.,  x,  xxvi,  4.

Hunter,  J.,  On  the  Venereal  Disease.

Larrey,  in  Description  de  VEgypte,  t.  1.  Memoires  et  Obs.

Louis,  in  Pibrac,  Memoires  de  V Acad.  Royale  de  Chirurgie , t.  iv.

Louvrier,  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1810,  Dec.

Mich ae lis,  in  Hufel.  Journal,  vi  and  xxviii.

Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  Ann.  5,  6.

Qettinger,  Diss.  Cinnabris  exul.  redux.  Tubing.,  1760.

Plater,  Felix,  Obs.,  i,  Basil,  1614.

Richter,  A.  Gottl.,  Chirurg .,  Bibl.,  vi.

Riverius,  Obs.  Med.

Schenk,  Pet.,  vii.

Schlegel,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  vii,  4.

Schlichting,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  viii.

Swedjaur,  Traite  des  malad.  vener.,  tom.,  ii.

Wedel,  Amanit.  Mat.  Med.

The  1st  edit,  contains  342  symptoms  of  the  different  mercurial  preparations*  the
2nd  1424,  and  this,  the  3rd,  1450.]


MERCURIUS,


149


MERCURIUS  OXYDULATUS  NIGER.

( Mercurius  solubilis  Haknemanni.)

In  the  head  a vertigo,  during  the  day.

Vertigo  in  the  room,  so  that  when  walking  she  must  take  hold  of
something  in  order  not  to  fall.

She  is  giddy  even  when  sitting.

Vertigo  more  when  sitting  than  when  standing,  dimness  and
blackness  before  the  eyes,  especially  towards  evening.

5.  Vertigo;  when  sitting  at  his  desk  there  was  whirling  in  the
head,  as  if  he  were  drunk,  he  rises  up  and  walks  about  the  room
staggering,  then  anxious  heat  breaks  out  over  him,  with  nausea,  but
not  to  the  length  of  vomiting ; at  the  same  time  some  headache
(for  3 successive  days,  noon  and  afternoon).

When  he  has  sat  in  a stooping  position  and  rises  up,  he  feels  a
vertigo  at  the  first  instant.

When  she  lies  on  the  back  she  has  a whirling  and  qualmish
feeling ; this  goes  off  when  she  lies  on  the  side.

Vertigo,  cold  hands  with  febrile  rigor,  then  confusion  of  the
head.

(When  standing)  violent  vertigo,  during  which  he  bent  the  head
forwards.  [ Lr .]

10.  Vertigo,  compelling  him  to  lie  down.  [Fr.  H — «.]

On  turning  round  quickly,  vertigo  ; all  goes  round  with  him.

[^/.]

Vertigo,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  at  the  same  time  nausea
and  a sensation  as  if  a worm  in  the  chest  crawled  up  into  the  throat.
[Fr.  H-ti.]

Vertigo  and  staggering  when  she  comes  out  of  the  open  air  into
the  room.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Giddy  and  staggering  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  but  in  the
room  only  heaviness  of  the  head  (aft.  48  h.).  [(?«.]

15.  A kind  of  vertigo  ; when  lying  he  feels  as  if  swung  long- ways.

[Fr.  H—n.]

In  the  forehead  like  whirling.  [5//*.]

Dull  and  stupid  in  the  head.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

After  eating  she  is  as  if  drunk  ; heat  and  redness  mount  up  into
her  face,  which  swells.

By  day  drowsy  and  sleepy.

20.  Weakness  in  the  head  like  dazedness,  and  as  if  it  whispered
round  in  the  forehead  and  went  round  in  a ring.

When  she  has  eaten  and  stands  up,  stupid,  whirling  and  black
before  the  eyes,  above  the  nose,  worst  in  the  warm  room,  better
in  the  open  air.

Headache,  like  dizziness  and  fulness  in  the  brain.

Somewhat  dull  in  the  head,  in  the  morning  on  rising,  a dull
headache.


150


MERCURIUS.


Dullness  in  the  head,  in  the  morning  on  waking.

25.  In  the  room,  heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head,  also  when
sitting  and  lying.

The  head  is  heavy  and  as  if  involved  in  a dull  pain  and  confused.

In  the  morning  after  rising,  vacant  in  the  head  and  as  if  he  had
been  up  all  night ; this  goes  off  in  the  open  air.

It  takes  away  the  acuteness  of  his  intellect,  makes  him  dizzy ;
he  does  not  hear  what  is  said  to  him,  cannot  retain  well  what  he
reads,  and  is  apt  to  make  mistakes  in  speaking.

Speaking  is  disagreeable  to  him,  he  cannot  read,  his  head  is
vacant,  he  cannot  work,  and  falls  asleep  when  sitting,

30.  Thinking  power  very  weak  ; it  is  with  difficulty  that  he  can
recollect  himself,  and  answers  questions  wrongly  (this  he  is  conscious
of  himself).

His  thoughts  completely  forsake  him.  [Fr.  H — ».]

His  thoughts  sometimes  go  away  entirely  for  some  minutes.
[Fr.  H—n .]

He  knows  not  where  he  is.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

He  cannot  calculate,  cannot  reflect.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

35.  Unconsciousness  and  speechlessness  ; she  appeared  to  sleep,  but
was  pulseless  ; the  body  was  warm  enough,  but  she  looked  just  like
a corpse  ; after  an  hour  her  consciousness  returned  and  some  sound
in  her  voice  she  wished  to  speak  but  could  not,  not  till  after  12
hours  did  her  speech  return.  [Fr.  H — n.\

Distraction ; when  he  wishes  to  do  some  work,  something  else
always  comes  into  his  mind  ; one  thought  always  drove  out  another,
from  time  to  time  (for  a couple  of  days).  [ Gn. ]

Heat  and  pain  throughout  the  head.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

In  the  evening  an  uneasy  painful  feeling  in  the  head  till  he
goes  to  sleep  ; loud  talking  distressed  him,  one  must  talk  in  a low
voice  ; diminished  by  sitting  and  leaning  the  head  against  something.

Burning  in  the  head.

40.  Pain  in  the  head  like  an  annular  violent  out-stretching  in  a
stripe  not  above  three  fingers  broad,  which  appears  to  go  round  just
above  the  eyes  and  ears.

Pressive  headache  as  if  the  head  were  tightly  bound.

In  the  evening,  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  tied  round  with  a
ligature.

Headache  as  if  close  under  the  skull,  as  if  it  were  too  heavy  and
too  tight  there.

Headache,  a forcing  outwards,

45.  Headache,  like  a pressing  outwards  in  the  parietal  bones.

Head  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  pressed  asunder.

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  forced  asunder.

Fulness  in  the  brain  as  if  the  head  would  burst.

Aching  pain  in  the  occiput.

50.  Headache  ; outpressing  in  the  forehead  and  pain  in  the  bone  below
the  eyebrows,  even  when  touched.

Violent  headache,  as  if  the  head  in  its  upper  part  would  fall
asunder,  and  as  if  all  were  pressed  down  to  the  nose.


MERCURIUS.


151


In  the  evening  headache ; in  the  front  and  upper  part  of  the
head  a painful  dull  feeling,  with  crossness.  [Zr.  H — n .]

Pressing  pain  out  at  the  forehead.  [(?«.]

Pressing  pain  out  at  the  forehead,  worst  when  lying  ; he  got
relief  by  pressing  on  it  with  the  open  hand  (aft.  41  h.).  [Gtz.]

55.  Tensive  aching  pain  in  the  sinciput ; he  felt  relief  by  holding  his
open  hand  there.  [ Gn .]

Undulation  and  beating  in  the  whole  sinciput.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\
From  the  occiput  a strong,  tearing,  continued  pain,  which  went
into  the  forehead  and  there  pressed.  \_Hbg.~\

Shooting  in  the  forehead  whilst  walking  in  the  open  air.  [Zr.

II— n.]

Tearing  in  the  skull,  especially  in  the  frontal  bone.

60.  Tearing  headache  in  the  sinciput  extending  to  the  crown.
Tearing  headache  in  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput.

Headache  like  a slow  tearing  stitch,  and  as  if  bruised.

Stitches  all  through  the  head.

Shooting  headache  in  the  forehead  (immediately).

65.  (When  sitting)  intermitting  boring  stitches  in  the  left  side  of
the  forehead,  very  painful.  [Zr. ]

(When  standing)  painful  tearing  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
forehead.  [Zr.]

(When  sitting)  tearing  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,
with  rigor  over  the  whole  body,  cold  hands,  hot  cheeks,  and  warm
forehead,  without  thirst.  [Zr.]

Drawing  digging  in  the  front  part  of  the  head.  [ Gn .]

On  stooping  headache,  like  digging  in  the  forehead  and  a weight
there.

70.  Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  occipital  bone.

A boring  pain  in  the  occiput.

Contractive  headache  ; the  head  is  as  if  screwed  in,  sometimes  in
the  sinciput,  sometimes  in  the  occiput,  sometimes  on  the  left  side,
at  the  same  time  watering  of  the  eyes.  [Zr.  H — n.~\

In  the  morning  when  he  has  lain  in  a wrong  position  in  bed,  a
drawing  from  the  palate  into  the  brain,  where  it  is  very  painful,  as  if
all  were  bruised  there.

Jerking  blows  in  the  brain,  especially  when  moving  and  stooping
forwards.

75.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  temple.  \GnI\

Aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  [<j«.]

Violent  drawing  in  the  right  temple  (5th  d.).  [.£/.]

Twitching  drawing  and  pinching  in  the  right  temple,  on  the
occiput  down  the  nape.  [i£/.]

Tearing  headache  externally.

80.  The  whole  external  head  is  painful  to  the  touch.

Tearing  pain  externally  on  the  forehead,  in  all  positions.  [Zr.]
Burning  on  the  left  temple.  [ Gn .]

Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead.  \_Gn.~\

Itching  on  the  forehead.  [Zr.  H — n.]

85.  Burning  itching  on  the  forehead  and  head.  [Zr.  H — n.]


152


MERCURIUS.


Over  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  in  the  scalp,  burning  pain,  that
went  off  after  touching.  [Gn.]

Itching  smarting  in  the  nape  and  on  the  hairy  scalp.  \_Fr.  H — n.]
Burning  and  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  day  and  night.  [Fr.  H — n.]
go.  Itching  eruption  on  the  head,  compelling  scratching.  [Fr.  H — «.]
Dry  eruption  on  the  whole  head,  that  causes  pain  when  grasped
all  over.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Small  elevated,  firmly  adherent  scabs,  among  the  hairs  of  the
head.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Much  scurf  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  itched  and  after  scratching
burned.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

Moist  eruption  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  eats  away  the  hair  as  it
were,  with  painful  aching,  especially  on  the  sore  places.  \_Fr.  H — n.]
95.  Without  headache  the  hair  falls  off.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

Sensation  under  the  scalp,  when  the  open  hand  is  laid  on  it,  as  if
it  were  ulcerated.  [Gn.]

Horripilation  over  the  hairy  scalp,  whereby  the  hairs  seemed  to
stand  on  end,  or  the  integuments  of  the  head  to  contract  and
remble.  [Grr.]

Burning  feeling  in  the  right  superciliary  arch.  [Gn.]

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.]

100.  A black  spot  before  the  eyes,  which  always  seems  to  go  down  in
front  of  him.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Black  spots  before  the  eyes.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Black  insects  or  flies  seem  always  to  be  flying  before
the  sight.  [Fr.  H—n .]

All  appears  green  and  black  before  the  eyes,  the  room  seems  to
go  round  with  her  in  a ring  ; she  must  lie  down  (during  a meal).
[Fr.  H—n.]

The  sight  leaves  him  entirely  for  five  minutes,  and  every  half
hour  a similar  attack  occurs,  when  he  is  completely  deprived  of  sight
for  five  minutes.  [Fr.  H — n.]

105.  Fiery  points  before  the  sight  upwards  towards  the  clouds,  especially
in  the  afternoon.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Mist  before  one  or  both  eyes.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Amaurotic  dimness  before  the  left  eye,  which  gradually  increased,
lasting  ten  minutes.

(In  the  evening  when  reading  the  letters  appear  in  motion.)

IIO.  Amaurotic  blindness  of  the  left  eye,  without  pain,  for  some
minutes,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Weakness  of  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Dimness  of  sight  in  both  eyes.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Deception  of  the  vision  ; it  seems  to  him  that  a straw  hangs  down
before  both  eyes.  [Fr.  H — n.]

He  sees  pointed  things  [e.g.  an  awl)  as  if  with  a double  point.
[Fr.  H—n.].

1 1 5.  If  she  wishes  to  see  something  she  cannot  rightly  distinguish  it,
the  eyes  are  almost  always  involuntarily  closed,  and  the  more  she


MERCURIUS.


153

tries  to  prevent  this  closing,  the  less  able  is  she  to  prevent  it ; she
must  lie  down  and  shut  the  eyes.  \_Fr.  H — 72.]

He  cannot  open  the  eyes  well,  just  as  if  the  eyeballs  were
adherent.  [Fr.  H — ».]

When  sitting,  standing  and  walking,  the  eyes  are  as  if  forcibly
closed,  as  if  from  prolonged  want  of  sleep.  [ Fr . H — 72.]

The  light  of  the  fire  dazzles  the  eyes  greatly.  [Fr.

H 72.]

A burning  in  the  eyes,  as  if  he  had  read  much  at  night  ; one  eye
is  red.

120.  The  eyes  cannot  hear  the  light  of  the  fire  and  day-
light. [Fr.  H-n.]

Burning  in  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Burning  and.  smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  from  horse-radish.  [Fr,
H—n .]

Many  red  vessels  are  visible  in  the  white  of  the  eye.  [Fr.  H — 72.]
Inflammation  of  both  eyes,  with  burning  smarting  pain  ; worse
in  the  open  air.  [Fr.  H — n .]

125.  Heat  in  the  eyes  and  lachrymation.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Watering  of  both  eyes,  in  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Watering  and  lachrymation  of  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H—n .]

Great  lachrymation  of  the  right  eye.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

The  eyes  weep  in  the  open  air.

130.  The  eye  is  full  of  tears.

Burning  pains  in  the  right  upper  and  lower  lids.  [Gn.]

The  left  lower  eyelid  is  very  much  swelled,  especially  towards
the  outer  canthus,  with  burning  pains,  for  five  days,  with  much
watering  of  the  eye,  which  was  preceded  by  much  sneezing  for  three
days.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

The  eyelids  are  stuck  together  in  the  morning.

The  upper  eyelid  is  swelled  and  red  like  a stye.

135.  Constant  twitching  in  the  lower  eyelid.

Great  swelling,  redness  and  constriction  of  the  eyelids,  which
were  very  sensitive  when  touched.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Aching  in  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Aching  in  both  eyes,  as  from  sand.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Aching  in  the  eye,  when  it  is  moved  ; it  also  aches  when  touched.
140*  Itching  in  the  eyeballs.  [Fr.  H—n.]

In  the  left  eye  pricking  pain,  for  some  minutes  (7th  d.).

Shooting  in  the  eyes.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

Sensation,  under  the  left  upper  eyelid,  as  if  a cutting  body  were
behind  it.  [Gn.]

Quivering  and  twitching  in  the  eyelids.  [Fr.  H — 72.]

145.  Bluish-red  rings  round  the  eyes,  especially  below  them.  [Fr.
H 72.]

Inflammatory  swelling  in  the  region  of  the  lachrymal  bone.
Features  sunken,  eyes  dim  and  dull,  complexion  white  and  earthy  ;
lengthened  features.  [Hbg.]

The  right  side  of  the  face  is  swollen  and  hot,  especially  under-
neath the  eyes.  [Fr.  H — 72.]


i54


MERCURIUS.


Dull  stitch  in  the  left  superior  maxillary  bone,  near  the  eye.
[Fr.  H—n .]

150.  Red  spots  on  the  face.  [ Fr . H — n. ]

A rough-skinned,  partly  red,  partly  whitish  tettery  spot  on  the  skin
of  the  left  zygoma.  [Fr.]

Outward  pressive  pain  in  the  zygomatic  arches.  \Gn.]

Tearing  in  the  right  masseter  muscle.  [(?«.]

Great  swelling  of  the  left  cheek.  [Fr.  H — n.]

155.  On  the  left  cheek  a large  node  under  the  skin  (10th  d.).  [F/.]
Single  pointed  stitches,  each  lasting  live  minutes,  in  the  zygomatic
process  (also  in  the  chest,  knee,  and  external  elbow  process),  more  in
the  forenoon  and  when  walking.

Tearing  on  the  left  side  of  the  cheek,  it  involves  the  whole  ear.
He  can  hardly  hear  anything,  and  yet  everything  resounds  loudly
in  the  ear.  [F/.]

Ears  as  if  stopped  up,  and  a roaring  in  them.

160.  In  the  morning,  rushing  in  the  ears.

Roaring  and  rushing  in  the  ear,  as  if  something  were  sticking  in  it.
Roaring  in  the  ear,  as  if  something  were  stuffed  into  it.

Buzzing  before  the  ears,  as  if  he  were  about  to  faint.

Roaring  before  the  ears,  in  pulsations.

165.  Hardness  of  hearing  in  both  ears.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

Roaring  in  the  ears.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Roaring  before  both  ears,  when  lying  in  bed.  [Fr.  H — n .]
Roaring  with  hardness  of  hearing  in  both  ears.  \_Fr.  H — n.]
Rushing  before  the  left  ear.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

170.  Buzzing  as  from  wasps  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  5m.).  [Fr.  H — n.]
Fluttering  before  the  left  ear.  [Fr.  H — n.\

Fluttering  and  crawling  in  the  left  ear.  [Fr.  H — n .]

Ringing  in  the  ears,  as  from  several  loud  ringing  glasses,  espe-
cially in  the  evening.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Various  ringing  sounds  before  both  ears,  worst  in  the  evening,  for
many  days.  [Fr.  H — n.]

175.  Deep  in  the  left  ear  tearing,  at  the  commencement  of  the  menses.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  ear  ; the  warmer  she  got  in  bed  the
colder  and  wetter  it  became  in  her  ear,  at  last  as  if  she  had  ice  in  the
ear.


Stitches  in  the  internal  ear  on  stooping.

The  left  ear  is  painful  as  if  inflamed  ; the  meatus  auditorius
also  pains  as  if  inflamed.  [F/.]

Violent  pain  in  the  ear  as  if  something  was  forcing  itself  out.
[RL]

180.  The  ear  is  as  if  inflamed  externally  and  internally,  with  partly
cramp-like,  partly  shooting  pains  and  as  if  stopped  up  by  swelling.
[RL]

Earache.

Pinching  and  tugging  in  the  ears.

Shooting  and  burning  deep  in  both  ears,  worse  in  the  left.  [Fr.
H—n.]


MERCURIUS.


155

Both  ears  are  sore  and  excoriated  internally,  the  right  worst.

\_Fr.  H—n.]

185.  Several  times  daily  in  the  internal  right  and  left  ears  a sensation
as  if  cold  water  ran  out  of  them,  which  suddenly  comes,  and  goes
away  after  a few  minutes  ; in  the  intervals  great  itching  in  both
ears.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

A moisture  runs  out  of  both  ears.  [ Fr . H — n.]

In  the  morning  blood  comes  out  of  the  left  ear.  [ Fr . Hn.]

Blood  and  ill-smelling  pus  flow  out  of  the  right  ear,  with  tearing
pain  in  it.  [ Fr . H — n.]

Pus  flows  out  of  both  ears  j anteriorly  in  the  right  ear  is  a small
abscess,  which  when  touched  discharges  pus  out  of  the  ear  ; at  the
same  time  pains  in  the  whole  right  half  of  the  head  and  face,  on
account  of  which  she  cannot  lie  on  that  side.  \_Fr . H — n.]

190.  Yellow  pus  comes  out  of  the  left  ear.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Fluid  wax  runs  out  of  both  ears.  \_Fr . H — n.]

Burning  pain  in  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear.  [ Gn.]

The  lobe  of  the  ear  is  very  painful  for  eight  days,  and  is  red  and
hot ; two  days  afterwards  a pimple  appears  in  the  lobe,  that  con-
tinues for  twelve  weeks.  [Fr.  H — n .]

A lump  in  the  ear  lobe,  that  is  not  moveable,  it  is  only  painful  at
the  commencement,  it  lasts  four  weeks  (aft  34  d.).  [Fr.  H — n.]

195.  Burning  eroding  itching  and  exuding  pimple  of  a scurfy
appearance,  like  a small  tetter,  on  the  right  ear  lobe ; he  is  forced  to
scratch  it.  [Lr.]

T ugging  and  twitching  behind  the  left  ear,  that  prevents  sleep ;
the  part  is  painful  when  touched.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Swelling  of  the  root  of  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Crawling  and  gnawing  sensation  in  the  skin  of  the  root  of  the
nose.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Tension  transversely  across  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — ».]

200.  The  nasal  bone  is  painful  when  laid  hold  of.  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  whole  nose,  especially  on  the  left  side,  is  swollen,  very  red,
and  shining,  with  itching,  especially  in  the  inside  of  the  ala  nasi.
[Fr.  H—n.]

A very  painful  pustule  on  the  nose.

Inflammatory  swelling  on  the  nose.

The  tip  of  the  nose  swollen,  red,  inflamed,  itching.

205.  Great  itching  on  the  right  side  of  the  nose ; he  must  rub  it.

A pressure  down  from  the  nose,  as  if  a weight  were  tied  to  it.

IHbg.-}

Swelling  and  cracking  of  the  septum  nasi.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Swelling  on  the  left  ala  nasi,  as  in  severe  fluent  coryza.  [Lr.]
Cannot  get  air  through  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — n.]

210.  Epistaxis  of  various  degrees  of  intensity.  [Fr.  H—n.]
Bleeding  from  the  left  nostril ; the  blood  coagulated  as  it  dropped
out,  so  that  it  remained  hanging  in  strings  from  the  nose.  [Fr.  H — n.]
The  nose  is  scabby  internally,  and  bleeds  when  blown.  [Z7.]
Epistaxis  during  sleep.  [Fr.  H — n.]

When  coughing  severe  epistaxis.  [Fr.  H — «.]


156


MERCURIUS.


215.  Pain  on  touching  the  lips  with  the  fingers,  as  if  they  were  hot
and  burning,  as  from  nettles.  [Stf.]

Dryness  of  the  lips.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Roughness  and  dryness  of  the  lower  lip,  as  from  cold  rough  air
(aft.  7 h.).  [Lr.]

Eruption  on  the  upper  lip,  more  on  its  border,  covered  with
yellow  scabs,  with  smarting  burning  pain.  \_Fr.  H—n.]

Internal  swelling  of  the  upper  lip.

220.  On  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip,  opposite  the  incisor  teeth,
painful  ulcers.

Under  the  red  of  the  lower  lip,  and  spreading  towards  the  corner
of  the  mouth,  eruption  of  pimples,  which  when  touched  smart.

Soft  red  swelling  of  the  upper  lip,  which  internally  detaches  itself
from  the  gum,  and  there  looks  pulled  away ; on  its  inner  and  outer
surface  there  occur  deep  ulcerated  rhagades,  with  shooting  pain,  some-
times with  itching.  [ Fr . H — n.]

Great  swelling  of  the  upper  lip  and  of  the  lower  part  of  the  cheek,
which  is  soft  yet  very  red,  wherein  inch-deep  holes  (as  if  bored  out)
occur,  as  if  painted  over  with  greyish-yellow  matter,  from  them  is
discharged  only  a watery  yellow  fluid  ; they  had  a somewhat  putrid
smell,  and  bled  when  touched,  but  only  at  their  border.  \_Fr.  H — n.]
Ulcerated  angle  of  the  mouth,  that  pains  as  if  sore.

225.  On  the  inside  of  the  lips  a whitish-blue  spot.  [Fr.  H — n.]

In  the  angles  of  the  mouth  pain,  as  if  they  had  been  incised.

[Fr.  H—n.]

Cracks  in  the  corner  of  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Cracks  and  chaps  in  the  corner  of  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  muscles  betwixt  the  lower  lip  and  chin  were  visibly  spasmo-
dically drawn  hither  and  thither.

230.  In  the  morning,  about  3 a.m.,  the  mouth  is  drawn  towards  one
side,  with  loss  of  breath.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  cheek,  before  the  chin.  [Gn.]

Little  red  ulcers,  the  size  of  a millet  seed,  on  the  right  side  of  the
chin,  painless  when  touched.  [Lr.]

On  the  chin  a pustule,  the  size  of  a pea,  full  of  pus.

Suppurating  little  red  ulcers  on  the  left  side  of  the  chin,  painless

(3rd  d0-  [■*>.]

235.  He  cannot  separate  the  jaws  from  one  another.  [Fr.  H — n.]

A tension  in  the  maxillary  joint  on  opening  the  mouth.

Almost  complete  immobility  of  the  jaw,  so  that  he  can  hardly  open
the  mouth  a little  way,  with  the  most  violent  pains.  [Fr.  H — n.\

She  cannot  separate  the  jaws  from  one  another,  at  the  same  time
a tensive  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  hyoid  bone,  bitter  taste  of  all
food  (except  milk,  which  tastes  well),  tearing  and  hardness  of  hearing
in  the  right  ear,  loud  discharge  of  much  very  ill-smelling  flatus,  and
moist  eruption  on  the  head.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Pain  under  the  lower  jaw.

240.  Towards  evening  tearing  in  the  lower  jaw.

Under  the  chin  yellow  scabby  eruption,  a quarter  of  an  inch
thick,  almost  painless.  [Fr.  H — n.]


Mercurius.


The  gums  are  painful  when  touched  and  when  chewing,  par-
ticularly hard  food.  [Stf.~\

Itching  on  the  gums.  [Fr.  H — ».]

The  gums  separate  themselves  from  the  teeth.  \_Fr.  H — n. ]

245.  Tearing  in  different  parts  of  the  gums,  they  are  sore  and  swollen.

[<?«.]

The  gums  are  swollen  and  separated  from  the  teeth.

The  upper  border  of  the  gums  stand  up  in  jags,  which  are  white
and  ulcerated.

Ulcerated  gums.

Painful  swollen  gums.

250.  Swelling  of  the  gums  at  night,  better  by  day.

Every  night  swelling  of  the  gums.

Transient  swelling  of  the  gums,  only  in  the  morning.

At  night,  every  time  he  wishes  to  go  to  sleep,  burning  pain  in  the
gums,  that  wakes  him  up.

Burning  throbbing  paih  of  the  gums,  which  increases  after  noon,
is  allayed  by  lying  down,  and  goes  off  at  night.

255.  The  greatly  swollen  and  painful  gums  are  retracted.  [Hbg.~\

In  the  spongy  gums,  which  are  detached  from  the  teeth  and
bleeding,  a fine  tearing,  as  also  in  the  roots  of  the  exposed  teeth,
almost  all  day  and  in  the  morning  on  rising ; in  the  evening  the  pain
is  somewhat  allayed  by  smoking  tobacco.  [Gw.]

The  gums  that  are  detached  from  the  teeth  look  discoloured  and
are  white  at  their  borders.  [Gw.]

Painful  swelling  of  the  gums,  for  several  days.  [Zr.]

Bleeding  of  the  gums  at  the  slightest  touch,  for  fifty-six  days.
[Fr.  H-n .]

260.  Horrible  tearing  in  the  teeth,  especially  increased  by  eating ; the
teeth  commence  to  be  loose.  [Gw.]

Pain  in  the  teeth,  especially  after  eating,  as  if  they  were  eroded.

[<?«.]

The  teeth  become  greyish  black — black.  [Fr.  F[ — «.]

On  moving  the  mouth  sensation  as  if  the  teeth  were  loose,
especially  the  lower  front  teeth.  [Zr.]

Feeling  as  if  all  the  teeth  were  loose.  [Stf.~\

265.  Looseness  of  the  teeth,  which  are  painful  when  touched  by  the
tongue.  [Hbg.~\

Weakness  in  the  teeth.

The  front  teeth  as  if  dislocated.

Pain  of  the  incisors.

Pain  of  the  front  teeth  ; when  he  draws  air  into  the  mouth,  pain
shoots  into  the  teeth.

270.  Pain  of  the  front  incisors  when  he  draws  cold  air  into  the  mouth,
or  drinks  cold  or  warm  fluids,  but  only  so  long  as  this  is  done.
Toothache  as  from  teeth  on  edge.

At  night  severe  toothache,  and  when  that  went  off
great  chilliness  through  the  whole  body.

Tearing  in  the  roots  of  all  the  teeth,  all  day.

Tearing  toothache  after  midnight  and  particularly  in  the  morning.


158


MERCURIUS.


275.  Tearing  toothache,  that  darts  into  the  ears,  especially  at  night,
on  account  of  it  he  cannot  remain  in  bed  j he  must  sit  up  all  night.

Drawing  toothache,  even  in  the  front  teeth,  in  the  morning.

Jerking  toothache,  especially  at  night.

Toothache,  pulsating  jerks  from  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw  into
the  ear  and  from  the  upper  jaw  into  the  head,  with  painfulness  of  the
gums  from  9 p.m.,  only  ceasing  on  lying  down  and  going  to  sleep.

Toothache  like  strong  stitches.

280.  In  the  evening  frightful  stitches  in  a tooth.

During  sleep  at  night  she  grinds  her  teeth,  and  bites  them  so
strongly  together  that  it  causes  pain,  which  wakes  her  up.

Loss  of  speech  and  consciousness  for  twelve  hours.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Loss  of  speech  and  voice*  ; she  hears  everything  well,  but  can
only  reply  by  signs  and  grimaces,  and  though  she  endeavoured  to
bring  the  vocal  organs  into  action,  she  was  unable  to  speak  a single
word  even  in  a low  voice,  or  emit  a sound,  with  sunken  features
and  weeping  about  her  condition  ; she  cannot  sleep  and  feels  very
exhausted  ; but  she  has  appetite  for  all  sorts  of  food,  and  thirst  for
beer ; faeces  and  urine  are  passed  easily.  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  open  air  is  painful  and  strange  to  the  tongue.  [Fr.  H — ».]
285.  Tongue  white  furred,  with  whitish  swollen  gums,  that  bleed  when
touched.  [Zr.]

Tongue  thickly  furred.  [Hbg.~\

Tongue  white  as  if  covered  with  fur,  especially  in  the
morning.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

The  tongue  is  insensible  and  as  if  covered  with  fur.  [ Fr . H — w.]

Very  rough  tongue.  [Fr  Hn^\

290.  Great  swelling  of  the  tongue.  [Fr.  H—n .]

Swelling  of  the  tongue.

Swelling  of  the  white  furred  tongue.

Tongue  much  swollen,  white  furred.

A formication  on  the  tongue.

295.  Pain  like  needle-pricks,  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue.

On  the  upper  part  of  the  tongue  a longitudinal  furrow,  in  which
is  pricking  as  from  pins.

The  tongue  pains  as  if  cracked,  with  burning  pain.

Very  painful,  ulcerated  border  of  the  swollen  tongue.

Tongue  swollen  and  ulcerated,  hollow  internally.  [Fr.  H — «.]
300.  The  tongue  is  swollen  and  so  soft  on  the  edges,  that  it  is  shaped
in  indentations  corresponding  to  the  intervals  betwixt  the  teeth,  and
these  indentations  look  ulcerated.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

The  anterior  half  of  the  tongue  is  so  hard  that  when  struck  with
the  finger-nails  it  causes  a rattling  noise,  it  is  quite  dry.  [Fr.  H — «.]

The  tongue  on  the  right  side  of  the  hyoid  bone  feels  sore  and
stiff  (6th  d.).  [£/.]

The  interior  of  the  mouth,  especially  the  inside  of  the  cheeks,
gets  a bluish  colour.  [Fr.  FI - — n.~\

* This  condition  lasted  three  days,  and  was  almost  completely  removed  by  hyos-
cyamus,  so  that  on  the  fourth  day  she  could  say  everything,  and  with  her  proper
voice,  only  she  had  some  difficulty  in  doing  so.


MERCURIUS.


i59


Ulcers  on  the  inside  of  the  cheeks.

305.  At  night  burning  in  the  mouth.

Vesicles  in  the  mouth,  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  mouth  was  all  sore  in  the  inside.  [<S7Z]

On  the  inside  of  the  cheeks  round,  raised,  white  blisters  ; owing
to  which  the  skin  became  detached,  with  burning  pain.  [Hbg.]

Ulcers  and  fissures  in  the  mouth,  which  give  pain  of  a violent
burning,  smarting  character,  particularly  in  the  evening.  \_Fr.
H—n .]

310.  A kind  of  aphthae  in  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Aphthae  in  the  mouth.

Constant  dryness  in  the  mouth.

He  draws  much  mucus  from  the  posterior  nares  into  the  throat  ;
he  must  hawk  it  out.

Sore  throat ; feeling  as  if  something  stuck  in  the  throat.

315.  Pain  in  the  throat,  as  if  an  apple-core  were  sticking  in  it.

Sensation  as  if  he  had  something  in  the  throat,  which  he  must
swallow  down.  [$£/'.]

Difficulty  of  swallowing  ; with  great  difficulty  and  with  violent
straining  he  got  something  down.  \_Hbg.]

Pain  in  the  throat  on  swallowing,  and  hoarseness.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Roughness  on  the  palate,  which  gives  smarting  pain  when  touched
by  the  tongue,  as  if  the  palate  were  sore.  [Zr.]

320.  Dryness  in  the  palate  as  if  caused  by  heat.  [Zr.]

Something  hot  rises  to  her  throat.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Pain  in  the  throat  like  aching.

Burning  first  down  the  oesophagus,  then  in  the  abdomen.
Swallowing  is  difficult  and  painful,  as  if  he  had  burnt  the  back  of
his  throat,  or  had  swallowed  boiling  oil.

325.  After  a moderate  dinner,  a glowing  hot  vapour  rose  up  out  of
the  abdomen  into  the  throat,  whereby  the  throat  became  always  more
painful  and  violent  thirst  ensued.

Something  hot  rises  up  to  her  throat.

Pain  in  the  throat  as  from  dryness.

Anteriorly  on  the  tongue  very  slimy,  and  posteriorly  in  the  throat
very  dry.

Pain  at  the  back  of  the  throat,  as  from  excessive  dryness.

330.  So  dry  in  the  glottis  that  he  must  always  swallow.

Throat  always  dry,  it  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  narrowed  posteriorly  ;
there  was  aching  in  it  when  he  swallowed,  and  yet  he  must  always
swallow,  because  his  mouth  was  always  full  of  water.

Acute  pricking  pain  in  throat,  as  if  a pin  were  hanging  in  the
gullet.

On  swallowing  stitches  in  the  back  of  the  throat,  that  penetrate
even  into  the  ears.

Shooting  at  the  back  of  the  palate.

335.  When  swallowing  shooting  pain  in  the  tonsils.

Great  elongation  and  swelling  of  the  uvula.  [Fr.  H — n.]

On  blowing  the  nose  pain  on  the  side  of  the  throat,  also  internally
in  the  gullet,  aching  and  as  if  swollen.  [6V/*.]


MERCURIUS.


160


When  the  liquid  reaches  the  level  of  the  larynx,  she  cannot  get
it  down  lower,  it  flows  out  again  through  the  nose.  [Htn^\

Constant  aching  pain  in  the  oesophagus,  about  the  level  of  the
larynx,  which  becomes  more  violent  while  eating,  and  causes  a sensa-
tion as  if  she  must  swallow  over  a raw  place,  with  burning  pain
there.  [Htn.]

340.  He  feels  as  if  a worm  rose  up  so  that  he  must  always  swallow,
whereby  it  goes  off  somewhat,  but  he  does  not  feel  anything  pass
down.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Blood  comes  up  into  the  throat  and  out  of  the  mouth,  without
vomiting  or  coughing.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Ulceration  of  the  tonsils,  with  sharp  shooting  pains  in  the  pharynx
when  swallowing.

The  orifice  of  the  excretory  duct  of  the  salivary  gland  between
the  back  teeth  is  swollen,  white,  ulcerated  and  very  painful.

Discharge  of  viscid,  foetid  saliva,  especially  at  certain  hours  of
the  night  or  of  the  evening.

345.  Pain  and  swelling  of  the  salivary  glands.

Swelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck  and  parotids,  so  that  the  jaws
are  closed,  and  cannot  be  moved  on  account  of  pain.

Swelling  and  burning  aching  pain  in  the  parotid  gland,  which
went  off  in  the  cold  and  returned  in  the  warmth  ; if  he  touched  it
with  woollen  stuff,  he  always  had  inclination  to  cough.

Shooting  pain  in  the  cervical  glands.

By  fits,  an  aching  pain  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  an  ulcer  would
come  there.

350.  Sensation  in  the  gullet  as  if  sore,  on  the  right  side  of  the  throat,
also  when  not  swallowing.

He  ejects  much  saliva.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Constant  spitting.  [St/.]

Flow  of  very  acid  saliva.  [Urr.]

Spitting  of  very  slimy  saliva.  [St/.]

355.  Accumulation  of  soapy  saliva,  that  is  often  rather  slimy,  and
draws  out  into  long  threads.  [Hbg.]

Very  foetid  smell  from  the  mouth,  more  remarked  by  others  than
by  the  patient  himself.  [Fr.  H — #.]

Taste  of  the  food  not  exactly  bad,  but  such  as  occurs  in  inter-
mittent fever.

Butter  has  a disagreeable  taste  to  him.

The  tasteless  mercurial  oxyde  commences  to  have  a perceptible,
then  a very  marked  disagreeable  taste  (metallic,  earthy,  clayey,  soapy,
putrid,  sourish) — at  last  this  becomes  intolerable.

360.  In  the  morning,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.

In  the  morning,  great  bitterness  in  the  mouth.

Bitterness  in  the  mouth,  particularly  after  drinking  coffee.
Ejection  of  viscid  mucus,  that  tastes  bitter.

Bitterness  in  the  mouth,  especially  when  not  at  a meal,  and  when
not  eating  or  drinking  anything.

365.  The  food  does  not  taste  bitter,  but  before  and  after  he  has  a
bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.


MERCURIUS.


1 6 1


Constant  bitterness  in  the  mouth,  whilst  bread  is  eructated  of  a
sour  taste.

Bitterness  on  the  lips  and  tongue,  whilst  eating  and  at  other  times.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Rye  bread  tastes  bitter.  [ Fr . H — n.]

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  worst  in  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — n.]
370.  Metallic  taste  in  the  mouth  that  almost  makes  him  vomit.  [Hbg.]
Slimy  and  salt  taste  of  all  food  and  drink,  even  of  water.  [Fr.
H—n.]

Very  salt  on  the  lips.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Salt  taste  on  the  tongue  for  several  days.  [Fr.  H—n.]
Salt  expectoration.  [Fr.  H—n.]

375.  He  has  a taste  of  matter  in  the  throat.

Salt  taste  in  the  mouth.

Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth.  [i£/.]

Sweet  taste  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue.  [i£/.]

Sweet  taste  in  the ‘mouth,  and  illusory  sensation  in  the  body,  as  if
it  were  made  of  something  sweet.

380.  Putrid,  very  disagreeable  taste  in  the  throat.

Taste  of  rotten  eggs  in  the  mouth  when  he  moves
the  tongue,  and  then  involuntary  swallowing.

Faeculent  foul  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  the  saliva  tastes  salt.

Beer  made  with  hops  tastes  sour.

In  the  morning,  when  fasting,  she  has  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth,
which  goes  off  after  eating.

385.  Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth.

Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  when  eating  and  at  other  times.  [Fr.
H—n.]

Bread  tastes  sweet.  [Fr.  H — n.]

He  has  inordinate  appetite  and  hunger,  during  which  he  can
hardly  eat  anything,  because  he  has  no  relish  for  any  food,  it  has
no  bad  taste,  but  is  tasteless.  [Fr.  H — n.]

390.  Bulimy  , she  feels  that  it  is  not  real  hunger  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fr.H — n.]
Bulimy  of  short  duration,  soon  after  a sufficient  meal  (imme-
diately). [Fr.  H — n.]

Voracious  hunger  (aft.  J,  1 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.]

Continued  ravenous  hunger,  during  which  he  always  becomes
weaker  and  weaker.  [Fr.  H — n.]

He  has  no  appetite  for  dry  food,  he  takes  fluids  willingly.  [<9//'.]
395*  Want  of  appetite,  especially  in  the  morning.

Little  appetite  but  great  hunger.

He  loathes  sweet  things.

Beef  was  repugnant  to  him,  and  he  did  not  relish  it.

Extreme  loathing  of  flesh  meat.

400.  Dislike  to  coffee.

Dislike  to  butter.

Lost  taste  for  all  food,  and  loss  of  appetite.

No  appetite  for  any  warm  food,  only  for  cold  things,  bread  and
butter,  &c0
VOL.  11.


11


162


MERCURIUS.


No  desire  for  food,  but  when  it  is  put  before  him  he  relishes  it.

405.  Complete  loss  of  appetite.

More  appetite  for  drinking  than  for  eating.

More  thirst  than  hunger,  and  constant  chilliness.

He  is  immediately  satiated  after  eating  only  a couple  of  mouth-
fuls.

The  smell  of  food  is  more  agreeable  to  him  than  eating.

410.  No  relish  for  wine  and  brandy,  to  which  he  was  formerly
accustomed.  ['SV/'.]

Loathing  of  meat  and  vomiting  after  it.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Nausea.  [G«.]

He  feels  very  sick  in  the  chest,  where  he  feels  cutting  aching  ; he
feels  as  if  he  must  vomit,  and  he  has  no  rest  in  any  position  or
posture,  because  great  anxiety  drives  him  from  place  to  place.  [Gw.]
While  smoking  as  usual  he  feels  sick  in  his  chest,  from  the
scrobiculus  cordis  almost  up  to  the  pit  of  the  throat,  with  oppression
and  cutting  there.  [Gw.]

415.  Continual  sickness,  with  aching  cutting  in  the  chest,  and  here
and  there  (towards  the  sides  of  the  chest)  obtuse  stitches,  cutting  in
the  abdomen,  and  cutting  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.]
Sweet  taste  in  the  throat,  and  at  the  same  time  sickness.

Sensation  as  if  he  had  eaten  something  sweet,  that  excited
loathing  and  hence  nausea.

Nausea,  increased  after  eating.

All  day  nausea  and  shivering.

420.  Headache  each  time  he  has  nausea.

Nausea,  up  in  the  gullet  and  not  in  the  stomach,  so  that  he
cannot  vomit  (especially  after  eating).

He  is  so  sick  and  inclined  to  vomit  that  he  loses  his  hearing  and
sight.

Inclination  to  vomit,  accompanied  by  vertigo,  that  obscures  his
vision,  and  flying  heat.

Inclination  to  vomit,  immediately  after  eating,  with  very  good
appetite  and  taste.

425.  He  feels  nausea  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  then  he  has  eructation
that  sometimes  stops  his  breath.  [Htn.~\

Nausea  in  the  gastric  region  (immediately),  and  then  bruised
pain  in  the  right  side,  just  above  the  hips,  which  becomes  worse  by
movement  and  touch.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

At  night  (1  a.m.)  much  water  flows  into  the  mouth,
at  the  same  time  nausea,  so  that  he  wakes  up  from  it
and  must  vomit;  something  very  hitter  comes  up.  [Fr.
H — ».]

There  sometimes  rose  up  into  her  throat  a fluid,  acrid  like  brandy,
not  like  acid.

Violent  vomiting  of  bitter  mucus.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

430.  Not  loud  eructation,  [i^r.  H — #.]

Eructation  soon  after  dinner,  with  putrid  exhalation  from  the
mouth.  \_Fr.  H — n,~]

Constant  eructation  of  air.


MERCURIUS.


163


Eructation,  often  without  taste,  sometimes  with  a sour  taste.

Eructation  of  bitter  water.

435.  Eructation  tastes  bitter,  and  has  a putrid  smell.

Bilious  eructation  in  the  afternoon.

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  newly-baked  bread

After  eating  and  drinking,  belching.

Heartburn.

440.  Rancid  scraping  heartburn  after  a simple  supper  (1st  d.).

im

When  eating  eructation,  so  that  an  acrid  fluid  comes  into  the
mouth  (9th  d.).  [i£/.]

During  dinner  hiccuping  eructation  (9th  d.).  [jR/.]

After  eating  violent  hiccup.

Frequent  hiccup,  especially  in  the  forenoon.

445.  Hiccup.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Frequent  hiccup.  [Zr.]

When  walking  at  a moderately  rapid  pace  a pressure  from  the
left  side  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  to  the  thyroid  cartilage,  where
the  pain  is  worst.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a constrictive  tearing ; it  then  goes  into
the  chest.  \Fr.  H — n.\

On  a level  with  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  on  the  right  near  the
scrobiculus  cordis,  he  feels  an  artery  beating  violently,  and  he  felt
and  saw  it  through  the  clothes.  [Gw.]

450.  Burning  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (immediately).

Ulcerative  pain  in  the  stomach  and  abdomen.

Violent  pain  in  the  stomach,  as  if  he  had  been  vomiting  violently.

Great  shooting  in  the  hepatic  region,  on  account  of  which  he  can
neither  inspire  nor  eructate.

An  acute  pain  in  the  stomach,  especially  on  breathing  deeply  and
touching.

455.  In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a pain  like  a crucial  incision.

When  she  sits  on  a low  seat  she  feels  hot  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  and  she  has  blackness  before  the  eyes,  which  goes  off  on
standing  up.

When  he  sits  his  food  lies  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  like  a stone,
as  if  it  was  gathered  into  a lump.

Fulness  and  tension  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  oppresses  the
breathing,  with  undiminished  appetite.

After  eating  an  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  accompanied  by
nausea.

460.  Bread  oppresses  the  stomach.

If  he  eats  little  he  has  for  some  hours  a drawing  down  the
stomach,  and  a kind  of  spasm  in  it.

He  cannot  bear  even  the  most  easily  digested  food  ; even  a
morsel  of  bread  lies  in  his  stomach  and  draws  down  the  stomach,  and
yet  he  has  great  hunger ; if  he  eats  only  a little  more  he  becomes  so
ill-humoured  that  he  can  hardly  bear  it.

The  stomach  is  full  and  constricted.

When  he  bends  forwards  digestion  is  immediately  interrupted.


164


MERCURIUS.


465.  When  he  takes  hold  of  something  cold  [e.  g.  a bit  of  cold  wood)
he  gets  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Pain  in  the  abdomen  and  much  noisy  flatulence.  \_Fr.  H — «.]
Burning  around  the  navel.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Burning  in  the  abdomen.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  woke  him  up  at  midnight,  two  succes-
sive nights  for  an  hour.  [Fr . H — «.]

470.  Over  the  left  renal  region  a cutting  tearing.  [Gn.]

While  urinating,  cutting  in  the  abdomen.  [ Fr . H—n.~]

Aching  tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen ; it  was  aggravated  by  pres-
sure, it  went  off  during  expiration  ; was  aggravated  by  walking,
especially  going  upstairs,  when  it  became  a kind  of  cutting  pain.  [ Gn.~\
Sensation  in  the  bowels  as  if  they  were  too  loose  and  relaxed  ;
when  walking  the  bowels  shake  as  if  they  were  destitute  of  firmness.

When  walking  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  if  the  bowels  were
relaxed.

475.  Chilly  in  the  abdomen.

Above  the  navel  a tensive  pain,  deeply  seated,  relieved  by  eating.

[. Fr . H—n.~]

A boring  stitch  perpendicularly  from  the  middle  of  the  hypo-
gastrium  down  to  the  anus.  [Gn.]

Deep  down  in  the  hypogastrium  cutting  stabs,  as  with  a knife,
from  the  right  to  the  left  side,  worse  when  walking  than  when
standing  and  sitting ; at  the  same  time  a painful  urging  to  stool,
without  any  evacuation,  for  four  days.  [Fr.  H — n .]

In  the  hypogastrium  just  above  the  genital  organs,  sensation  as  if
something  very  heavy  pulled  down  towards  the  pudendum,  for  forty-
eight  hours  ; at  the  same  time  pulling  pain  in  both  thighs,  as  if  the
muscles  and  sinews  were  too  short.  [Fr.  H — «.]

480.  Painful  contraction  in  the  hypogastrium.  [Fr.  H — «.]

The  evening  air  causes  bellyache  and  diarrhoea.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  feels  as  if  he  had  got  a chill  in
the  abdomen.

Bellyache  as  if  from  a chill.

First  pinching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  then  soft  stool,  and  there-
after still  pinching  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening.
485.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen.

First  redness  and  heat  in  the  cheeks,  then  burning  pinching  pain
in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

He  feels  chilly  only  during  the  pinching  in  the  abdomen.

During  the  pinching  in  the  abdomen  chilliness  and  rigor  pass
over  him.

Cutting  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

490.  Twisting  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen  with  qualmish  sensation.

In  the  evening,  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  with  aching  pain  in  its
upper  part,  which  compels  him  to  loosen  his  clothes  in  this  region
(aft.  h.).

At  night  cutting,  or  rather  tearing  in  the  abdomen,  which  felt
cold  externally.

Indescribable  abdominal  pains,  that  only  go  off  on  lying  down.


MERCURIUS.  165

He  cannot  sleep  on  the  right  side,  for  the  bowels  are  painful  as  if
they  were  pressed.

495.  Violent  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  bowels
were  twisted  out.

Pressure  in  the  abdomen  (immediately).

Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  rises  up  to  the  larynx,  as  if  a
crust  of  bread  were  scraping  in  the  oesophagus  and  as  if  heartburn  or
eructation  were  coming  on.

Pressure  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a stone.

In  the  morning  in  bed  a painful  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen.

500.  A pushing  out-pressing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver.

Distension  of  the  abdomen.

After  a meal  gurgling  in  the  abdomen  or  abdominal  muscles,  syn-
chronous with  the  pulse.

After  drinking  always  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.

505.  In  the  evening  a shooting  itching  on  the  abdomen,  after  scratching
it  burns,  but  no  eruption  on  the  skin  is  perceptible.

Distended  hard  abdomen.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen  before  every  evacuation
(aft.  2 d.).  \_Hbg.~\

In  the  evening  an  hour  before  going  to  bed,  and  every  time  after
passing  water,  he  is  troubled  with  flatus,  which  distends  his  abdomen
much  and  is  discharged  without  smell.  \_Htn,'\

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.  [ Lr .]

510.  Inguinal  bubo.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Small  boils  in  the  left  groin  and  burning  on  passing  urine.  [Fr.
H — n.]

Aching  boring  pain  in  the  right  groin  when  lying  and  walking
(aft.  12  h.).  [Gn.~\

Aching  pain  in  the  left  groin  (aft.  30  h.).  [G«.]

Tension  in  the  left  inguinal  region.  \Htn .]

515.  Acute  stitches  in  the  left  groin,  aggravated  by  inspiration.  [Gjj.]

Pain  as  from  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands  (1st  d.).  [F/.]

Occasional  aching  pain  in  the  inguinal  gland.

Stitches  in  the  groin  (and  heel)  towards  evening.

Formication  in  the  inguinal  gland.

520.  Drawing  pain  in  the  groin  and  testicles.

Swelling  of  the  inguinal  gland  (bubo),  at  first  surrounded
by  redness,  painful  when  walking  and  pressing  on  it,  then  red  on  its
apex  and  inflamed ; he  can  neither  stand  nor  walk  without  great
pains,  he  must  lie  down.

The  inguinal  gland  swells  and  becomes  red  and  in-
flamed, it  is  painful  when  touched  and  when  walking
quickly.

Swelling  of  the  inguinal  gland,  the  surrounding  skin  is  red,
without  great  pains  per  se,  but  painful  when  pressed  and  after  pro-
longed walking.

Pains  like  needle-pricks  in  the  right  groin  op  the  os  ilji.  [Gtz.J


1 66


MERCURIUS.


525.  In  the  right  inguinal  region  great  violent  knife-stabs,  causing  him
to  start  each  time.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Frequent  urging  to  stool,  after  which  a small  quantity  of  hard
large-sized  faeces  comes  away  with  great  straining  at  long  intervals.

[£"•]

Evacuation  after  some  cutting  in  the  abdomen  (2nd  d.).  [i£/.]

Evacuation  after  pinching  and  twisting  in  the  abdomen  (10th  d.).

[*/.]

Every  instant  he  has  urging  to  stool,  with  tenesmus  in  the  rectum,
without  being  able  to  pass  anything.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

530.  Constant  urging  to  stool,  but  only  a little  came  away,  with
pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [*Sy.]

Evacuation  only  once  every  third  day  (aft.  14  d.).  \_Hbg.~\

Constipation  for  several  days  with  catarrhal  fever,  hypochondriacal
dejection  and  loathing  at  all  food  except  beer.

Fruitless  urging  to  stool  in  the  morning.

Ineffectual  pressing  to  stool,  and  extrusion  of  piles,  which  pain
as  if  sore.

535.  Anxious  urging  to  stool,  every  time  with  great  nausea  and
pressing  in  the  temples,  during  and  previous  to  it.

Cold  sweat  of  anxiety  in  the  face  with  extreme  discomfort  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  then  diarrhceic  stool.

Before  the  diarrhoeic  stool  much  urging,  anxiety  and  trembling
all  over  the  body,  after  the  stool  bitter  scraping  eructation  and  some
heartburn.

Much  urging  during  the  stool  with  little  evacuation  (3rd  d.) . [i£/.]

Great  desire  to  go  to  stool,  which  often  suddenly  forces  him  to
go  to  the  closet.

540.  Motion  passes  in  small  pieces  like  sheep’s  dung.

Tenacious  motion.

Motion  smells  sour.

Chilliness  before  every  motion  of  the  bowels.

Shivering  before  every  motion  of  the  bowels.

545.  Before  the  diarrhoeic  motion,  chilliness  and  urging,  and  during
the  chill,  flush  of  heat.

Chilliness  from  one  diarrhoeic  stool  to  another  ; but  when  actually
evacuating  flush  of  heat,  especially  in  the  face.

After  a motion  attended  by  much  pinching  he  is  much  exhausted.

During  the  purging  he  becomes  sick  and  has  much  eructation.

Small  evacuations  of  bloody  mucus  accompanied  by  cutting  in  the
abdomen  and  tenesmus.

550.  Very  costive  motion  which  can  only  be  passed  with  horrible  pains
in  the  anus  and  after  a long  time.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Evacuation  of  little  hard  faeces  without  pressing  (24th  d.).  [Zr.]

Hard  evacuation.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

Several  burning  smarting  evacuations  during  the  day  that  cause
great  strain  in  the  anus,  but  nothing  very  considerable  is  passed.
[Hbg.-]

Mucus  and  blood  on  the  faeces,  which,  however,  were  not  hard.
[Fr.  H—n.]


MERCURIUS.


167


555*  Pappy  stool  with  mucus.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Brimstone-coloured  stool.  [Fr.  H — n.\

Yellowish,  diarrhoeic  stool,  twice  a day,  without  sensation,  for
several  days.  \_Fr . H — n.]

Greyish  white  stool.  [Fr.  H — n.\

Discharge  of  mucus  by  stool  with  very  little  faeces,  four  or  five
times.  [Fr,  H — n.]

560.  The  motion  comes  only  at  night.  [ Fr . H — n. ]

He  often  cannot  get  rid  of  the  motion  quick  enough,  when  he
neglects  the  call  it  passes  involuntarily,  although  it  is  only  pappy.
[Fr.  H — n.]

Diarrhoea.  [Fr.  H—n.~\

Diarrhoea  in  the  evening.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Diarrhoea  at  night.  [Fr.  H — n.]

565.  Diarrhoeic  stool,  streaked  with  blood.  [Fr.  H — n.\

Red  slimy  stool  (aft.  a few  h.).

Bloody  stools,  withpainful  acrid  sensation  at  the  anus.

After  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  a ball,  there  occur  stools
of  dark  green  mucus.

Dark  green,  bilious,  frothy  stools.

57°-  Green,  slimy,  acrid  stools,  that  excoriate  the  anus.

Diarrhoea  of  green  mucus,  with  burning  at  the  anus  and  pro-
lapsus of  the  anus.

Soft,  brownish,  easy  stool,  which  floated  on  the  top  of  the  water.
Diarrhoea,  with  cutting  and  pressing  in  the  rectum.

Burning  diarrhoea.

575.  Burning  in  the  anus.

Diarrhoea,  with  much  blood,  for  several  days,  then  hard  stool
with  blood.  [Fr.  H—n .]

Green  diarrhoea  with  violent  pinching  and  cutting.

Along  with  soft  stools,  burning  pain  in  the  anus.

After  every  stool  burning  in  the  anus.

580.  A haemorrhoid  comes  out  of  the  anus  and  has  shooting  pain
during  the  stool  and  on  being  touched.

While  urinating  flow  of  blood  from  the  rectum.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Discharge  of  blood  after  a faecal  evacuation.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Pinching  feeling  in  the  anus,  as  in  diarrhoea,  with  discharge  of
much  flatus.  [Lr.]

Sharp  stitches  in  the  anus,  causing  him  to  start.  [Gjj.]

585.  Itching  in  the  anus  as  from  ascarides.

Soreness  at  the  anus  (10th  d.).  [R/.]

Ascarides  crawl  out  of  the  rectum  (aft.  \ h.).  [Fr.  H—n.']
Discharge  of  several  large  lumbrici.  [Fr.  H—n.]
Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
2 h.).  [Lr.]

590.  Constant  urging  to  make  water,  but  none  comes.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Urging  to  urinate,  so  that  he  must  pass  urine  at  least  once  every
hour,  day  and  night,  with  severe  burning  in  the  urethra  at  the
beginning  of  the  urinary  flow.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Uncommonly  weak  stream  of  urine.  [Fr.  H — «.]


i68


MERCURIUS,


Constant  urging  to  urinate,  about  every  ten  minutes,  but  little
passed.

Frequent  pressing  to  urinate  (after  a nocturnal  emission  of  semen).
595.  Pressing  after  making  water.

Whilst  urinating  a remote  sick  qualmish  feeling.

Pressing  in  the  genitals,  whereupon  she  must  make  much  water.
At  4 a.m,,  in  bed,  he  must  make  water.

She  must  rise  three  times  at  night  to  make  water,  and  much
urine  is  passed  each  time.

600.  Copious  flow  of  water,  also  several  times  at  night
Darker  urine.  [ Fr . H — n.]

Much  red  and  brown  urine.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Frequent  and  profuse  urination  (3rd  d.).  [i?/.]

Urine  with  flaky  white  clouds.  -

605.  Urine  immediately  after  being  passed  very  turbid
and  depositing  a sediment.

Urine  as  if  mixed  with  flour,  with  thick  sediment.

Urine  reddish,  becomes  thick  on  standing,  and  causes  cutting
pain  when  he  is  passing  it.

Very  dark  urine  for  several  weeks.  [i£/.]

Urine  passes  at  first  clear,  afterwards  white,  as  if  mixed  with
chalk,  and  shortly  afterwards  the  urethra  is  the  seat  of  burning  pain,
after  merely  touching  the  penis.

610.  Brownish-red  urine.  \_Fr.  H—n.]

He  passes  much  more  urine  than  the  liquid  he  has
drunk.  [ Fr . H—n.]

Too  frequent  and  too  profuse  urination.  [Fr.  H—n.]
Too  frequent  urination  with  burning  smarting  pain.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Small  masses  of  hardened  mucus,  like  pieces  of  flesh,  pass  along
with  the  urine.

615.  Considerable  pieces  of  white  threads  and  flakes  pass  out  after  the
urine,  without  pain.

Urine  smells  sour.

Very  little  urine,  as  if  mixed  with  blood,  passes.

Rare  discharge  of  fiery  red  urine.

Dark  red  urine,  as  if  mixed  with  blood.

620.  He  cannot  retain  his  urine  when  the  desire  comes.  [Fr.  H — n.]
When  the  desire  to  make  water  comes  he  must  hasten  to  pass  it,
otherwise  he  cannot  retain  it.

Burning  in  the  urethra  at  other  times  than  when  urinating.
Burning  in  the  urethra  at  the  commencement  of  urinating,  [i?/.]
In  the  morning  cutting  when  urinating  (8th  d.).  [i£/.]

625.  Cutting  at  the  commencement  of  urinating  (10th  d.).  [£/.]
While  urinating  at  first  burning  then  smarting  pain.

Burning  while  urinating.

Acrid  urine.  [Fr.  H—n.']

Burning  while  passing  water.  [Fr.  H — n.]

630.  Haemorrhage  from  the  urethra.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Itching  on  the  ossa  pubis  above  the  penis  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gn.]

A gurgling  in  the  urethra,  resembling  shooting.


MERCURIUS.


169


In  the  urethra,  more  a throbbing  than  a shooting.

Stitches  anteriorly  in  the  urethra,  at  other  times  than  when
urinating.

635.  Stitches  in  the  urethra  towards  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening.

An  obtuse  shooting  (several  times)  in  the  urethra.

Gone  to  sleep  feeling  (dying  away)  of  the  penis,  for  a quarter  of
an  hour.  [Fr . H — n. ]

Cut'ting  smarting  pain  in  the  whole  urethra  whilst  urinating,  espe-
cially towards  the  end  of  the  act  to  the  very  last  drop,  and  at  the
same  time  he  cannot  pass  his  water  quick  enough,  generally  some
passes  involuntarily  before  he  reaches  the  vessel.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Vesicles  on  the  front  and  at  one  side  of  the  glans  penis,  they  ate
in  deeper  and  spread  around ; several  small  white  vesicles,  which
also  discharged,  but  soon  disappeared.  [HbgJ]

640.  A drawing  shooting  in  the  urethra,  at  other  times  than  when
urinating.

In  the  evening  burning  about  the  glans,  then  vesicles  on  the
inner  surface  of  the  prepuce,  which  break  out  into  ulcers  that  soon
heal  of  themselves.

Itching  of  the  glans.

An  itching  shooting  in  the  glans  when  it  is  pressed.

Itching  shooting  in  the  glans  after  urinating.

645.  A formication  on  the  fraenum  preputii  and  in  the  scrotum.

Glans  very  cold  and  shrivelled  up  (aft.  3 h.).

Formicating  itching  on  the  glans.  [Gn. J

Swelling  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  with  suppuration
betwixt  the  glans  and  prepuce  9 it  is  red  and  hot  to  the  touch,  and
when  touched,  as  also  when  walking,  very  painful , at  the  same  time
raging  pain  in  the  forehead,  and  rough,  itch-like  eruption  on  the
hands,  especially  where  the  thumb  is  attached,  most  on  the  upper  side,
itching  severely  at  night.  \_Fr.  H — n. ]

Tearing  shooting  pain  in  the  glans  anteriorly  that  spreads  through
the  whole  penis  to  the  anus,  sometimes  also  into  the  flanks.  \Htn^\
650.  Inflammation  of  the  prepuce,  with  burning  pain  in  it.  [Tr.
H — n.~\

Great  swelling  of  the  prepuce,  as  if  it  were  distended  with  air  or
water  to  a blister.  [ Fr . H — n .]

Swelling  of  the  prepuce,  and  inflammatory  redness  and  painful
sensitiveness  of  its  inner  surface.

Gonorrhoea  glandis.

Greenish,  painless  urethral  blennorrhoea,  especially  at  night.

655.  Voluptuous  itching  on  and  in  the  prepuce  of  the  male  organ,  that
compels  him  to  scratch.  [Zr.]

Swelling  of  the  prepuce,  with  burning,  smarting  and  redness,
and  on  its  inner  surface,  chaps  and  rhagades,  on  the  outside  a red,
fine  eruption.  \_Fr.  H — n. ]

Several  small  red  vesicles  on  the  end  of  the  glans  under  the  pre-
puce, which  after  four  days  broke  out  into  little  ulcers,  which  excreted
a yellowish-white  matter  that  smelt  strongly  and  stained  the  linen  ;
afterwards  the  larger  ulcers  bled,  and  touching  them  caused  a pain


170


MERCURIUS.


that  affected  the  whole  body  ; they  were  round,  their  borders,  like
raw  flesh,  were  everted,  and  their  surface  was  covered  with  a cheesy
deposit.  [Hbg,~\

Shooting  itching  on  the  fraenum  preputii.  [ Fr . H — «.]

Agreeable  tickling  itching  on  the  front  of  the  glans  penis  that
compelled  him  to  scratch  (aft.  9 h.).  [Zr.]

660.  Cold  feeling  in  the  testicles,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening,  for
fourteen  days.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

Before  the  flatus  is  expelled  the  swollen  testicle  is  sensitive,  but
not  painful.  [Htn.']

Violent  stitches  in  the  scrotum.

An  aching  drawing  in  the  testicles,  but  more  drawing  than
aching.

Drawing  pain  in  the  testicles  and  groin.

665.  A drawing  in  the  spermatic  cord,  in  jerks.

Itching  in  the  right  testicle.  [Gn.~\

Spasmodic  tearing  pain,  that  commences  between  the  testicles,
then  penetrates  into  the  penis,  and  causes  considerable  itching  in
the  ulcers.  [Htn.~\

Seminal  emission  without  voluptuous  dreams.  [Zr.]

Incomplete  erections,  with  tension  in  the  pudendum,  caused,  as  it
seemed  to  him,  by  much  flatulence.  [Htn.']

670.  Boring  stitch  in  the  perineum  when  walking  and  sitting.  [ Gn.]
Emission  of  semen  in  the  midday  sleep,  followed  by  burning  pain
in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  when  urinating.

Painful  erections.

Nocturnal  seminal  emission.

Nocturnal  seminal  emission,  mixed  with  blood.

675.  In  the  morning  after  rising,  after  a nocturnal  pollution,  he  is  all
over  cold,  but  not  exhausted.

Burning  in  the  male  urethra  during  coitus  (7th  d.).  [i£/.]

When  walking  profuse  sweat  on  the  genitals  and  neighbouring
parts.

Excoriation  between  the  genital  organs  and  thighs.

Smarting  in  the  female  urethra  when  urinating.  [Fr.  H — n.]

680.  Bland  leucorrhoea.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Leucorrhcea,  especially  in  the  evening  from  8 till  9 o’clock,
which  does  not  drop,  has  a greenish  appearance,  and  causes  smarting
anteriorly  in  the  genitals,  so  that  she  must  scratch  much,  especially
in  the  evening  and  at  night ; after  scratching  it  burns  violently.  [Fr,
H — n.\

Discharge  of  flakes,  mucus  and  pus,  as  large  as  hazel  nuts  from
the  vagina.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Itching  in  the  labia  pudendi.

Long-lasting  itching  on  the  labia  pudendi  shortly  before  the
menses.

685.  Pimples  on  the  labia  pudendi.

Internal  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  vagina,  as  if  it  were  raw  and
sore.

Leucorrhoea  with  smarting  sensation.


MERCURIUS.


171


Purulent  leucorrhoea.

Eroding  leucorrhoea.

690.  During  coitus,  uncommonly  quick  and  certain  conception  and
occurrence  of  pregnancy.  [Fr.  H — n.]

During  the  menses,  anxiety,  so  that  she  knows  not  what  to  do
with  herself.

Six  days  after  the  menses,  recurrence  of  the  flow  of  blood.  \_Fr.
H—n.]

The  catamenia  come  on  too  profusely  and  accompanied
by  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [ Fr . H — ».]

Metrorrhagia  in  an  old  woman  in  whom  the  menses  had  ceased
eleven  years  previously.  [Fr.  H — ».]

695.  Metrorrhagia  for  three  weeks.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Menses  suppressed.  [Fr.  H — n .]

Great  prolapse  of  the  vagina.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Pimple  on  the  labia  pudendi.  [Fr.  H — n. J

* *

•3fr

Very  frequent  sneezing,  especially  in  the  morning.

700.  Very  violent  sneezing  (immediately).

Sneezing  (aft.  5 m.].  [Fr.  H — n.]

Frequent  sneezing.  [Fr.  H — «.}

Frequent  sneezing  without  fluent  coryza.  [Lr.]

She  must  sneeze  once  a day,  for  twelve  successive  days.  [Fr.

H — n.]

705.  For  three  days  almost  continual  sneezing,  then  great  swelling  of
the  left  lower  eyelid,  especially  towards  the  outer  canthus,  with
burning  pain  and  lachrymation,  for  five  days.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Foetid  smell  from  the  nose  as  during  severe  coryza.  [Fr.  H — n .]
Coryza  with  much  sneezing.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Coryza  for  two  days.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Much  fluid  drops  from  the  nose  all  day  long,  without  his  having
coryza.  [Fr.  H — «.]

710.  Acrid  pus  smellinglike  old  cheese  flows  from  the  nose.  [Fr.H — n.\
Dry  cough.  [Fr.  H—n.]

Cough  with  expectoration.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Fatiguing,  short,  dry  cough,  the  tickling  irritation  of  which  is
felt  under  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  and  which  is  especially  excited
by  talking,  and  hardly  allows  him  to  speak.

Many  nights  severe  cough,  and  irritation  thereto  from  below
upwards,  as  from  the  stomach  ; it  comes  when  he  is  awake  and  when
he  is  asleep,  and  he  needs  not  to  raise  himself  up  for  it.

715.  Cough  which  rings  and  appears  to  him  as  if  all  were  dry  in  the
chest,  with  pain  in  the  chest  and  sacrum.  [Fr.  H — n.]

On  alternate  evenings,  most  violent,  shaking  fit  of  coughing,  in
the  evening,  when  about  to  fall  asleep,  as  if  chest  and  head  would
burst,  for  half  an  hour  ; after  the  cough  great  stretching.

Rough  cough.

When  coughing  he  feels  as  if  he  should  lose  his  breath.

(The  cough  wakes  him  up  early,  about  % or  3 a.m.)

720.  During  the  cough,  inclination  to  vomit.


IJ2


MERCURIUS.


Coughing  of  blood.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Bloody  expectoration  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  [ Fr . H — n.~\
Bloody  expectoration  when  working,  [Fr.  H—n .]

He  coughed  up,  whilst  lying,  for  three  hours  (in  the  forenoon)
over  a pound  of  blood,  [Fr.  H — nf\

725.  Difficult  breathing  as  from  want  of  air,  in  the  morning.  [Fr.H- — «.]
Shortness  of  breath,  broken-winded.

When  going  up-stairs,  shortness  of  breath.

Shortness  of  breath  when  walking,  as  if  he  could  not  draw  in
enough  breath.

Anxiety  under  the  sternum  ; he  must  breathe  deeply.

730.  Tightness  in  the  region  of  the  sternum.

The  chest  pains  as  if  oppressed.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Anxious  about  the  chest,  a kind  of  tightness  of  chest.  [*S^]
When  he  lies  (in  bed,  in  the  evening)  on  the  left  side  he  has
tightness  of  the  chest,  and  must  breathe  very  deeply,  whereby  he
has  an  intolerable  pain  in  the  left  inguinal  region.  [Gjj.]

Tightness  of  the  chest  after  a meal.  \_Fr,  H — nf]

735.  A pressive  pain  on  the  side  of  the  sternum,  which  goes  through
the  back,  even  when  at  rest,  but  worse  when  walking,  in  the
evening  ; afterwards  the  part  was  painful  as  if  bruised.

Burning  sensation  in  the  chest  up  to  the  throat.  [Fr.  H — «.]
Burning  in  the  left  side,  where  the  ribs  terminate.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  which  prevents  deep
breathing.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  thoracic  cavity,  when  he  holds  his
breath  and  again  expires,  going  off  on  breathing  in  and  out.  [ Gn. ]
740.  A squeezing  and  tension  in  the  left  side,  immediately  beneath
the  ribs,  a sensation  which,  although  little  painful,  yet  threatens  his
life  ; he  is  very  deficient  in  breath  and  dare  not  move,  for  at  the
least  movement,  e.g.  of  the  arm,  or  on  speaking  a single  word,  his
life  threatened  to  leave  him  (aft.  1 h).  [Fr.  H — «.]

On  stooping,  pain  in  the  chest,  single  stitches.

At  other  times  than  when  breathing,  only  when  sneezing  and
coughing,  a stitch  anteriorly  and  superiorly  in  the  chest  through  and
through  to  the  back  ; there  is  shooting  and  squeezing  together  of
the  chest.

Single  pointed  stitches  (each  lasting  five  minutes)  in  the  chest
(knee,  zygomatic  process,  and  outer  tuberosity  of  the  elbow),  worst
in  the  forenoon  and  when  walking.

When  breathing,  stitches  in  the  anterior  superior  part  of  the
chest  and  through  to  the  back ; there  is  shooting  and  squeezing
together  of  the  chest.

745.  On  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  breathing  and  when  not,  five
or  six  severe  stitches.

Shooting  in  the  left  side.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  when  sneezing  and  cough-
ing.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

When  inspiring,  whilst  walking  in  the  open  air,  shooting  in  the
last  right  rib  and  in  the  inguinal  region,  with  tightness  of  breath.


MERCURItJS.


i73


Obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  thoracic  cavity,  for  some  minutes,
only  when  expiring,  while  lying  and  stooping.  [ Gn.~\

750.  At  every  inspiration  a stab  as  with  a knife,  under  the  left
short  ribs  in  the  side.  [Gtt.]

In  the  chest  a sore  pain.

Bruised  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  on  touching  it.  [Fr.

H-n .]

Pain  as  from  a blow  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening
[Fr.  H—n .]

In  the  left  side,  beneath  the  last  ribs,  painful  feeling  as  if  it  were
swollen  there.  [ Fr . H — «.]

755*  Quivering  in  the  right  pectoral  muscles  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Gn .]

Pain  in  both  breasts.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Unnatural  swelling  of  the  female  mammae,  especially  of  the
nipples,  which  were  also  harder  than  usual.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Periodical  pain  in  the  breasts,  as  if  something  in  them  were  about
to  suppurate.  [Fr.  H — «.]

After  eating,  under  the  breasts,  a jerking  griping.  [Fr.  H — «.]
760.  Horrible  tearing  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  near  the  left  shoulder.

[Gw.]

(When  sitting)  tensive  pain  anteriorly  about  the  breast,  that
impedes  breathing  (for  several  days).  [Fr.]

Violent  bruised  pain  anteriorly  over  the  breast;  he  knows  not
how  to  sit  or  move  in  order  to  get  rid  of  it.  [Fr.]

Smallpox-like  eruption  immediately  above  the  anus,  with  aching
pain,  worst  when  sitting.  [Fr.  H — n,~\

On  the  coccyx  tearing  pain,  which  is  diminished  by  pressing  on
the  abdomen.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

765.  Grasping  pain  in  the  sacrum,  especially  when  standing,  somewhat
allayed  by  walking.  [Fr.  H — w.]

Pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  bruised.

In  the  os  sacrum  pain  as  from  a hard  uncomfortable  couch.

Sacral  pain,  which  is  diminished  by  sitting.

Grasping  pain  in  the  sacrum,  especially  when  standing ; diminished
by  walking.

770.  Bruised  pain  in  the  sacrum,  especially  bad  when  sitting  (for
several  days).  [Fr.]

Itching  in  the  os  sacrum  when  walking.  [(?«.]

Shooting  itching  in  the  os  sacrum  when  walking.  \_Gn.~]

Shooting  in  the  sacrum  during  ordinary  breathing  (aft.  1 h.)e
[Fr.  H — n.~\

In  the  sacrum  and  thighs  shooting  pain  with  unsteadiness  in  the
sacrum,  knees  and  feet.  [Fr.  H — n .]

775.  Fine  stitches  on  the  right  near  the  false  spinous  processes  of  the
os  sacrum.  [(Frj-.]

In  the  sacrum  and  lower  limbs  shooting  pain  on  touching ; it
seemed  to  him  that  he  had  no  steadfastness  or  power  in  the  sacrum
and  legs  from  the  knee  to  the  sole  of  the  foot.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Sharp  needle-pricks  in  the  spine,  betwixt  the  scapulae.  [Gjj.]


174


MERCURIUS.


Fine  and  coarse  stitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  back  whilst
walking.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Smarting  pain  in  the  back,  especially  while  sitting.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
780.  Itching  on  the  back,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Tickling  itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  back,  that  compelled
scratching.  [Fr.]

(A  burning  itching  and  heat  of  the  whole  back,  most  when
walking  in  the  open  air.)

Pain  in  the  back  as  if  bruised.

Burning  hot  sensation  on  the  whole  back.  [Fr.  H — «.]

785.  The  back  pains  as  if  bruised.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

On  moving,  especially  in  the  open  air,  bruised  pain  on  the  left
side  of  the  back,  as  from  prolonged  stooping,  for  several  days.

On  the  right  shoulder  up  to  the  nape  burning  pain  (while
sitting).  [Fr.  H — n.\

Burning  betwixt  the  shoulders  down  the  back.

Betwixt  the  shoulders,  where  the  neck  begins,  on  turning  the
head  and  when  he  (when  lying)  turns  the  rest  of  the  body,  violent
pain,  which,  when  he  raises  himself  a little,  becomes  so  severe  that
he  must  bite  his  teeth  together.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

790.  Quivering  in  the  right  scapula.  \_Gn.~\

Tearing  in  the  scapulae.

In  the  scapula  a painless  throbbing,  that  ends  in  trembling.
Under  the  scapulae  a squeezing  pain  when  moving,  in  bed  after
midnight.

In  the  left  scapula  bruised  pain  with  shooting  and  tension  in  it,
so  severe  when  he  turns  his  head,  that  he  weeps  and  cries  out  (in  the
morning  immediately  after  waking) . [Fr.  H — n.\

795.  Pimples  and  boils  on  the  scapulae  and  abdomen.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Itching  in  the  back,  on  the  right  scapula.  [ Gn .]

On  the  right  shoulder  up  to  the  nape  burning  pain,  when  sitting.
[Fr.  H — «.]

Stiffness  in  the  nape,  and  shooting  in  it  when  moving.  [Fr.
H—n.]

Rheumatism  in  the  nape,  like  aching,  even  when  at  rest,  worst
when  bending  the  head  backwards.

800.  Neck  swollen  and  so  stiff  that  he  can  only  turn  it  with  difficulty.
IHbg.-}

Painful  stiffness  of  the  neck,  so  that  she  cannot  turn  her  head
round,  with  heavy  feeling  in  it.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

The  left  shoulder  becomes  perceptibly  higher  than  the  right,
but  without  increasing  its  dimensions  laterally,  with  pain  in  it,
especially  when  moving,  which  even  wakes  him  up  out  of  sleep.
[Fr.  H-n.]

The  shoulders  together  with  the  upper  arm  are  as  if  asleep,  in
bed  in  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — n .]

Frightful  stitches  on  the  shoulder-joint,  in  the  evening.

805.  Cracking  in  the  shoulder  and  elbow-joints.

More  twitching  than  throbbing  in  the  shoulder-joint,  once  every
quarter  hour.


MERCURIUS.


*75


Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  the  shaft  of  the  humerus  and
the  wrist-joint  (in  the  knee  and  hip-joints  and  the  shaft  of  the
femur).

In  the  shoulders  pain  like  a down-pressing  sensation.

In  the  humeri  a crushing  pain.

810.  A twitching  tearing  in  both  upper  arms;  then  their  flesh  is
painful  when  touched.

Burning  on  both  arms,  so  that  everything  falls  out  of  his  hands,
and  he  must  let  the  arms  sink  down.  \_Fr.  H — n?\

The  right  arm  and  hand  were  as  if  asleep,  relieved  by  movement.
[Fr.  H — n.\

Tearing  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  right  arm.  [Gtt.]

He  cannot  let  the  arm  lie  long  in  one  place,  there  occurs  an
intolerable  tired  feeling  in  it  ; he  must  at  one  time  extend,  at  another
flex  it,  but  it  is  better  when  he  extends  it.

815.  Twitching  of  whole  muscles  on  the  right  arm.  [i£/.]

The  right  arm  is  shaken  and  tossed  about  all  night.  \_Fr.

H—n .]

The  left  arm  feels  heavy  on  raising  it  up  high  and  pains  as  if
sprained.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Tearing  in  the  elbow-joint.

Single  sharp  stitches,  each  lasting  five  minutes,  in  the  external
tuberosity  of  the  elbow  (also  in  the  zygomatic  process,  chest,  and
external  tuberosity  of  the  knee),  worse  in  the  forenoon  and  when
walking.

820.  Slow,  tearing  stitch  in  the  elbow-joint.

On  the  left  arm,  especially  on  the  elbow,  eruption  of  small,  red,
not  inflamed  elevations,  whose  apices  became  covered  with  white
scurf  and  itched  ; after  scratching  they  burned.  \_Fr.  H — n.']

Large,  red,  hot  swelling  of  the  left  elbow,  which  spreads  to  the
hand  with  extremely  burning  and  tearing  pains  and -at  the  same  time
creeping  as  from  ants  (aft.  6 h.).  [ Fr . H — «.]

Burning  in  the  elbow-joints.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Itching  on  the  left  elbow.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

825.  Shooting  on  the  elbow.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

In  the  bones  of  the  forearm  (and  the  shafts  of  the  tibiae)  pain  as
from  fatigue,  per  se , but  not  when  touched.

Itching  miliary  eruption  on  the  forearm.

Tetter  on  the  right  forearm  of  a circular  form,  with  desquamation
of  the  cuticle,  which  caused  voluptuous  itching,  and  lasted  eighteen
days  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tr.  H — n.~\

Large,  red,  round,  scurfy  tetter  with  burning  pain,  an  inch  in
diameter,  on  the  forearm  and  wrist.  [Fr.  H — n.\

830.  In  the  wrist-joints  attacks  of  painless  throbbing.

On  the  back  of  the  hand  a red  pimple,  with  burning  sensation  on
its  first  appearance.

(When  walking)  dull  shooting  cramp-pain  in  the  periosteum  of
the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm.  [Zr.]

Dull  shooting  cramp- pain  of  the  right  forearm  inferiorly,  in  all
positions  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.~\


MERCURIUS.


176

In  all  positions,  dull  shooting  cramp-pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
outside  of  the  left  forearm.  [Lr.]

. On  the  inner  side  of  the  wrists  vesicles  full  of  watery  fluid,  [Fr.
H—n.]

Painful  stiffness  of  the  right  wrist-joint.  [Fr.  H — n.]

A powerlessness  and  paralytic  state  of  the  left  wrist-joint,  and
cracking  and  shooting  in  it.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

Pain  in  the  left  hand  (in  the  bones)  on  stretching  it  out  and
grasping,  followed  by  aching,  as  if  paralysed  and  rigid.  [.£/.]

The  hand  is  as  if  rigid  and  stiff.  [i£/.]

840.  In  the  wrist-joint  cracking,  shooting,  and  powerlessness.  [Fr.
H—n.]

The  left  wrist-joint  is  swollen  and  pains  when  grasped  firmly
and  moving.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Deep  rhagades  on  the  hands,  like  cuts  (chapped  hands).  [Fr,
H—n.]

Considerable  swelling  of  the  left  hand,  f Fr.  H — n.]

Tension  in  the  whole  hand.  [Fr,  H — n.]

845.  Drawing  pain  in  the  hands,  with  coldness  of  the  fingers.  [Fr.
H—n.]

(On  moving  the  hands)  great  cramp-pain  in  the  left  hand,  espe-
cially in  the  fingers.  [Lr.]

H ands  and  fingers  tend  to  grow  rigid  when  working,  with  cramp-
like pain  in  them  (7th  d.).  [-£/.]

The  back  of  the  hand  desquamates.  [Fr.  H — n.]

In  the  evening  in  bed,  on  the  backs  of  the  hands  eroding  itching,
which  goes  ofF  after  scratching,  but  soon  returns.  [Gn.]

850.  Great  tickling  in  the  left  palm,  which  compels  scratching  (aft.  6

h.).  [Lr.]

Fine  tickling  in  the  right  palm,  that  forces  him  to  scratch  (aft.  5
h.).  [Lr]

The  fingers  of  both  hands  are  drawn  together  and  flexed,  par-
ticularly the  thumb,  so  that  it  is  quite  bent  in,  as  in  epilepsy  ; with-
out assistance  he  can  with  a great  effort  and  with  trembling  of  the
hands  only  straighten  them  to  the  extent  of  two  thirds.  [Fr.
H—n.]

Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  fingers  and  hand ; they  are  drawn
into  a bent  position.

Painful  cramp  of  the  fingers  and  hand,  at  first  in  the  extended
position,  so  that  she  could  only  close  them  with  difficulty  ; after  they
are  closed,  however,  cramp  that  drew  the  fingers  firmly  inwards.

855.  Dying  away  of  the  fingers.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Deep  rhagades  on  the  fingers,  which  in  their  depths  look  sore
and  bloody.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Deep  chapping  of  the  fingers  like  cuts,  especially  on  their  inner
aspect.  [Fr.  H — n.]

A deep  chap  like  a cut,  between  the  thumb  and  index,  bloody
and  painful.  [Fr.  H — n.]

On  the  finger-joints  small  chaps,  which  are  somewhat  ulcerated.
[Fr.  H—n.]


MERCURIUS.


1 77

860.  In  the  morning  the  fingers  are  asleep,  then  tingling  in  them,
then  tearing  half  way  up  the  forearm.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Swelling  (painful)  of  the  proximal  finger-joints.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
Tearing  here  and  there  in  the  fingers.  [Gw.]

Tickling  pricking  itching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  proximal
phalanx  of  the  right  thumb  that  forces  him  to  scratch.  [Zr.]

(In  the  afternoon)  the  thumb  is  drawn  towards  the  index  (on
the  left  hand,  which  when  seated  is  held  in  a horizontal  position)  ;
this  thumb  and  index  remain  several  minutes  firmly  squeezed  against
one  another  as  if  by  a violent  cramp  (spasm)  ; at  the  same  time  fine
pricking  in  the  thumb  ; then  the  thumb  receded  by  itself  from  the
index,  but  previously  it  could  not  be  separated  even  by  great  force.
[Fr.  H—n .]

865.  On  flexing  the  middle  finger  an  aching  pain  in  the  middle  joint.
Under  the  thumb-nail,  when  writing,  a burning  twitching.

Visible  twitching  in  the  tendons  of  the  fingers  (toes  and  tendo
Achillis),  in  the  evening,  with  severe  rigor  that  threw  him  up  high.
Dull  shooting  cramp-pain  in  the  left  index.  [Zr.]

Down  the  ball  of  the  hand,  under  the  right  little  finger,  on  its
outer  side,  a digging  pain,  worst  when  at  rest.  [Gw.]

870.  Exfoliation  and  casting  off’ of  the  finger  nails.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Sharp  stitches  posteriorly  in  the  right  os  ilii  (aft.*  2 d.).  [Gw.]

In  the  anterior  inferior  process  of  the  left  os  ilii  painful,  rhythmical,
sharp  stitches  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gw.]

Boring  pain  in  the  right  glutei  muscles  (when  sitting).  [Gn.]
Burning  in  the  nates.  [Fr.  H — «.]

875.  Shooting  in  the  right  hip  joint  when  walking.  [Fr.  H — ».]

A red  pimple  with  a white  apex  on  the  natis,  which  has  shooting
pains.

Tearing  in  the  hip-joint  (at  night?),  in  the  knee,  and  in  the
shaft  of  the  femur  (in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  wrist-joint,  and  shaft
of  the  humerus) .

On  the  lower  extremities  itching,  in  the  evening.

Pain  of  the  right  thigh,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  especially  on  touching
it,  and  aggravated  by  walking.  [Fr.  H — «.]

880.  Itching,  which  becomes  pleasant  by  scratching,  on  the  inner
side  of  the  thigh,  whereon  small  elevations  appear.  [Fr.  Hn.~\
Coldness  of  both  thighs.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

(When  sitting)  cramp-like  pain  in  the  tendons  of  the  outer  side
of  the  left  thigh,  near  the  knee.  [Zr.]

On  treading  firmly  much  shooting  in  the  leg,  as  if  it  were  too
short.

The  leg  feels  stiff  when  walking.

885.  Stitch-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  in  all  positions.

[Lr\

1 ensive  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  when  sitting.  [G».]

When  slumbering,  not  sleeping,  at  night,  violent  tensive  pain  on
the  posterior  part  of  the  left  thigh,  in  the  natis  down  to  the
popliteal  space  (worst  at  the  point  where  the  natis  is  separated  from
the  thigh  by  the  furrow),  which  is  most  alleviated  by  lying  on  the
VOL.  11.  12


i78


MERCURIUS.


back  and  placing  something  under  the  back  of  the  thigh  to  support
it  ; she  dare  not,  on  account  of  the  increased  pain,  sit  on  the  chair
resting  on  the  back  of  the  thigh — periodically  aggravated.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
Drawing  pain  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh.  [Gw.]
Pain  of  the  right  thigh,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  much  aggravated  by
taking  hold  of  it  and  by  walking.

890.  Drawing  and  heaviness  in  the  legs.

Frequent  gone-to-sleep  paralysis  of  the  thighs.

In  the  morning,  in  the  thighs  a painful,  down-drawing  pressure,
deeper  than  the  muscles.

Soreness  betwixt  the  thighs  and  genitals.

Itching  on  the  thighs.

895.  In  the  evening  (after  heat  of  the  head  and  dorsum  of  the  foot),
eruption  on  both  thighs,  which  itched  and  after  scratching  exuded
a burning  water,  as  when  brandy  is  poured  into  a wound  ; after  the
itching,  about  midnight,  sweat  on  the  abdomen  and  thighs ; all
without  thirst.

Pricking  and  itching  on  the  skin  of  the  thighs,  which  wakes  him
up  about  3 a.m.

Stitches  in  the  thighs  and  legs  when  moving.

Itching  eruption  on  the  thighs,  especially  on  their  inner  surface.
[. Fr . H—n.]

Eruption  of  small  pimples  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs.  [. Fr .
H—n.]

900.  A tetter  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  thigh,  on  scratching  the
cuticle  comes  off,  and  every  scratch  causes  pain,  for  thirty  days  (aft.
5 weeks).  \_Fr . H — ».]

On  the  upper  part  of  the  left  thigh  a boil,  which  is  painful  when
walking  and  when  it  is  grasped.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Small  eroding  itching  ulcer  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,
that  makes  him  scratch.  [Zr.]

Shining,  transparent  swelling  of  both  thighs  and  legs.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
The  legs  give  way  beneath  him.  [Fr.  H — ».]

905.  The  legs  are  involuntarily  jerked  forwards.  [Fr.  H—n.~\
Involuntary  twitching  in  the  legs.  [ Fr.H — ».]

Cramp  in  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh,  just  above  the  popliteal  space.
She  can  scarcely  drag  the  legs  along,  they  feel  so  heavy.  [Fr*
H — ».]

Weariness  in  the  legs,  they  will  not  go  on,  the  difficulty  is  quite
low  down  about  the  ankles.  [<SVZ]

910.  Trembling  of  the  legs  when  walking.  [Fr.

Fine  trembling  of  the  legs  when  walking,  especially  about  the
knees  and  in  the  inguinal  region,  where  it  is  greatest.  [Fr.  H — n .]
Both  knees  seem  to  him  too  big  and  swollen,  and  he  feels  in  them
a twitching  for  thirty-six  hours.  [Fr.  H — ?z.]

Crawling  as  if  a large  beetle  crept  upwards  from  the  front  of  the
right  knee  up  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

The  knee-joints  are  painful  whilst  lying,  as  if  broken.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
9 l 5 . Drawing  pains  in  the  thighs  down  through  the  legs.

Slow  tearing  stitch  in  the  right  knee  while  sitting  and  walking.


MERCURIUS.


179


When  walking  great  fatigue  over  the  knees.

Tearing  in  the  knee-joint.

Simple  pain  in  the  right  knee,  as  if  it  were  stiff  (1st  d.).  [RI.~\
920.  In  the  knee-joints  attacks  of  painless  throbbing.

Weakness  in  the  knees  and  ankle-joints,  worst  when  standing,  as
if  the  ligaments  were  devoid  of  strength  and  firmness.

Sensation  as  if  the  houghs  were  too  short.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a shooting  in  the  knee-joint.
Single  sharp  stitches  (each  lasting  five  minutes),  in  the  outer
tuberosity  of  the  knee,  not  in  the  joint  (also  in  the  zygomatic  arch,
in  the  chest,  and  outer  tuberosity  of  the  elbow),  mostly  in  the  fore-
noon and  when  walking.

925.  Fatigue  and  restlessness  in  the  legs,  in  the  evening.

Spasmodic  drawing  up  of  the  legs  ; they  remained  drawn  up  all
night,  though  he  wished  to  extend  them.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Swelling  of  both  legs.  [Fr.  H — «.]

CEdematous  swelling  of  both  legs  and  feet.  [Fr.H—  n.~\

Very  great  swelling  of  one  leg.  [Fr.  H — ?z.]

930.  Many  ulcerated  chaps,  proceeding  from  very  itching  pimples,  on
the  left  leg,  which  remained  open  from  eight  to  ten  days  ; when
they  healed  the  skin  desquamated  around  them.  [ Fr ..  H — n.~\

Stiff  feeling  in  the  left  leg  up  to  the  hough.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Itching  in  the  legs.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

(When  walking  in  the  open  air)  shooting  tearing  in  the  muscles
of  the  right  leg.  [Zr.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  leg  over  the  calf,  drawing  pain.  [Grr.]
.935.  On  the  right  tibia  a hard  elevation,  which  looks  red  and
shining,  and  has  tensive  pain.  [Fr.  H — ».]

A boring  pain  in  the  tibia.

A drawing  pain  in  the  tibiae.

In  the  tibiae  (and  bones  of  the  forearm)  pain  as  from  fatigue,
per  se,  but  not  when  touched.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a shooting  in  the  calf.

940.  The  calf  was  drawn  spasmodically  together  in  large  knots.
Enormous  growth  of  one  calf.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Long  depressions,  deep  furrows  drawn  in  the  calves.  [ Fr . H — «.]
Aching  pain  in  the  periosteum  of  the  right  tibia,  almost  like
cramp  (when  standing) . [Zr.]

Painful  cramp  in  the  right  calf.  [Fr.  H — n?[

945.  (When  standing)  dull  shooting  cramp-pain,  almost  like  tearing,
in  the  periosteum  of  the  front  of  the  left  tibia  (2nd  d.).  [Zr.]

Violent  aching  under  the  ankles  and  in  the  flexure  above  the
ankle-joint  when  walking,  so  that  he  must  stand  still.  [Fr.  H — n. ]
Great  swelling  of  the  right  ankle-joint,  with  shooting  pains  in  it,
especially  when  walking  and  in  the  evening.  [Fr.  H—n.\

The  right  ankle-joint  pains  as  if  sprained  (4th  d.).  [RL]
Shooting  from  the  external  ankle  up  to  the  hough.

950.  Tearing  in  the  ankles  extending  to  the  dorsum  of  the  feet,  with
swelling  around.

Under  the  outer  ankle  in  the  joint  a painful  slow  drawing,  which


i8o


MERCURIUS.


also  came  in  the  hollow  of  the  sole  ; when  it  began  it  was  like
shooting  and  grasping.

Cold  feet  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed.

Towards  morning  cold  sweat  on  the  feet.

Stitches  in  the  heels  (and  groin)  in  the  evening.

955.  (Burning  in  the  soles  in  the  evening.)

Swelling  of  the  insteps.  [Fr.  H — «.]

On  the  soles,  a feeling  as  if  they  were  immersed  in  cold  water,
accompanied  by  a feeling  of  burning  in  them.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

(When  standing)  digging  pain  in  the  right  sole.  [Zr.]

Dull  shooting  cramp-pain  in  the  right  sole,  near  the  heel,  only
observed  when  sitting.  [Zr.]

960.  (When  sitting)  tearing  pain  in  the  left  heel,  like  pain  of  dislocation.

[*>•]

Tearing  drawing  pain  from  the  heel  up  to  the  nates,  only  up  the
back  of  the  limb,  almost  worse  at  night  than  by  day  ; he  cannot
walk  then,  for  the  knee  bent  beneath  him  and  was  thus  drawn
together.  [Fr.  H — n.]

When  walking  the  tendo  Achillis  is  painful.

Visible  twitching  in  the  tendo  Achillis  and  in  the  tendons  of  the
toes,  in  the  evening,  with  severe  rigor  that  jerked  him  up  high.

Great  swelling  of  the  heel,  so  that  she  could  scarcely  tread  on  her
toes,  at  the  same  time  severe  burning  and  smarting  in  the  whole  foot;
even  in  bed  there  was  so  much  pain  in  it  that  she  must  get  up  out
of  bed.  [Fr.  H—n.]

965.  Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  toes  at  night.

Attacks  of  tearing  from  the  big  toe  to  above  the  knee.

Swelling  of  all  the  toes.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Swelling  of  three  toes  that  came  and  went  and  returned,  they
were  painful  at  night.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Boring  pain  in  the  tip  of  the  third  toe,  when  at  rest  and  when
moving.  [ Gn. ]

970.  Burning  pain  under  the  left  big  toe  (when  at  rest)  (aft  25  h.),

[<?«.]

Itching  betwixt  the  toes,  mostly  in  the  afternoon  and  evening.
[Fr.  H — n.]

Itching  prick  at  the  root  of  the  two  last  toes  of  the  left  foot
(when  at  rest).  [Gn.]

Eroded  nails  of  the  fingers  and  toes  with  itching.  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  ulcer  (already  existing)  bleeds.

975.  Itching  eruption,  like  scabies,  on  the  abdomen  and  thighs.  [Fr.
H—n.]

Eruption  on  the  lower  limbs,  the  genitals,  houghs,  neck  and
abdomen,  which  is  red,  as  if  sore,  exudes  and  itches,  is  considerably
elevated,  and  in  several  nlaces  has  the  appearance  of  pustular  scabies.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Small  round  pimples,  that  gradually  change  into  roundish,  ulcerat-
ing spots,  and  finally  become  scabby,  especially  on  the  thighs  and
legs.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Eruption  of  red  elevated  spots,  with  itching  pricking  pain.


MERCURIUS,


1 8 1


Nettle-rash,  which  after  two  days  turns  into  red  spots.

980.  Tetters,  in  which  touching  causes  burning.

Quite  small,  transparent  elevations  (vesicles)  containing  a watery
fluid,  came  out  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  in  the  morning  before
daybreak.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Dry,  elevated,  burning  itching  tetters  all  over  the  body,  espe-
cially on  the  legs,  arms,  wrists  and  hands,  even  between  the  fingers.
[Fr.  FI — zz.]

Little  ulcers,  three  lines  in  diameter,  arising  out  of  small,  very
itchy  pimples,  which  healed  up  in  from  8 to  14  days,  whereon  the
surrounding  skin  desquamated.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Itching  which  becomes  pleasant  by  scratching.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

985.  Itching  in  the  joints,  as  if  from  scabies,  day  and  night,  worst  in
the  evening,  but  without  visible  eruption.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Intolerable  prickling  itching  on  the  body,  as  if  a flea  bit  here  and
there,  in  the  evening  (7th  d.).  [iG.]

Severe  itching  on  all  parts  of  the  body,  so  that  she  must  scratch
much,  especially  at  night ; at  the  same  time  intense  redness  and
heat  in  the  face.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Pustules  on  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  with  pus  in  their
apices  and  itching.  [Fr.  H—n.~\

Tearing  on  various  parts  of  the  body.  [Gw.]

990.  Tearing  here  and  there  in  the  limbs,  more  in  the  muscles,  much
increased  by  pressure.  [Gw.]

Twitching  and  tearing  in  the  limbs  here  and  there.  [££/'.]

He  was  much  fatigued  by  slight  manual  labour,  became  hot  and
the  blood  circulated  more  actively  (5th  d.).  [iG.]

After  a little  manual  labour  great  exhaustion,  fatigue,  trembling,
hot  feeling  (9th  d.).  [iG.]

When  washing  his  feet  he  becomes  quite  exhausted,  trembling
and  giddy.  [iG.]

995.  Tearing  pain  in  the  hands,  back  and  side  of  the  chest  with
internal  headache.

Drawing  and  tearing  in  all  the  limbs.

Drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  especially  at  night.

As  if  bruised  in  the  limbs,  weariness  in  the  thighs.
Twitching  pain  in  the  affected  parts.

1000.  Twitching?.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Involuntary  twitching  of  the  limbs.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

On  account  of  twitching  and  heaviness  of  the  thighs,  and  on
account  of  profuse  perspiration  all  over  the  body  and  on  the  face  he
must  lie  down  in  the  forenoon.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

Much  yawning  and  sacral  pain  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  ; then
stiff  stretching  out  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  with  thumbs
turned  in,  followed  by  exhaustion.  [Fr.  H—n.~\

Paleness  with  coldness ; at  the  same  time  heaviness,  laziness
and  sleepiness.  [Fr.  H — zz.]

i°°5.  Jaundice  with  smarting  itching  over  the  abdomen.

The  linen  becomes  of  a saffron-yellow  colour  from  the  insensible
perspiration,  a yellowness  that  is  not  removed  by  washing.  [Fr.  H — zz.]


182


MERCURIUS.


Swollen  spots,  on  which,  without  previous  exudation,  a grey  flat
scab  came,  after  the  appearance  of  which  the  swelling  and  pain
was  allayed.  \_Fr.  H—nf\

(Cracking  in  all  the  joints.)

In  several  parts  cramp  when  moving.

i OIO.  In  the  joints  attacks  of  painless  throbbing.

Going  to  sleep  of  the  head,  both  arms  and  both  thighs,  when
lying.  [Fr.  H — ».]

As  soon  as  she  sits  down,  all  the  parts  immediately  go  to  sleep,
the  thighs  and  legs,  the  upper  and  fore  arms,  together  with  the
hands,  also,  though  in  a less  degree,  the  abdomen,  back  and  chest,
so  that  she  has  no  sensation  anywhere ; all  is  as  if  numb  and  dead  ;
when  she  moves,  she  has  formication  in  the  parts  moved,  as  usually
occurs  after  parts  go  to  sleep.  [Fr.  H — nF\

Great  bruised  pain  in  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the  thighs  ;
he  feels  as  if  he  had  been  beaten,  for  many  days.

All  the  limbs  pain  as  if  dislocated,  chiefly  when  sitting.

1015.  Gouty  pain  in  the  joints,  with  swelling  of  them.

On  several  parts  of  the  body  very  fine  short  needle-pricks,  for
two  or  three  minutes  on  the  same  place,  quickly  succeeding  one
another,  as  if  in  the  bone  (aft.  8 h.).

Stiffening  of  all  the  limbs,  so  that  for  hours  he  cannot  move
them  the  very  least,  and  yet  they  can  easily  be  moved  by  others.
[Fr.  H—n.]

She  rubs  her  temples  and  cheeks  with  both  hands  and  becomes
faint.  [Fr.

All  his  bones  are  painful  when  sitting,  lying,  walking  and
standing.  [Fr.  Hn.~\

1020.  The  symptoms  are  generally  aggravated  in  the  evening.  [Fr.

H — n.~\

He  dislikes  the  evening  air.

Chilliness  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

When  walking  palpitation  of  the  heart.

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  immediately  perspiration  on  the
forehead.

1025.  While  walking  he  is  always  in  slight  perspiration.

Profuse  perspiration  when  walking.

Perspiration  on  every  movement.

When  he  drinks  something  warm  he  immediately  perspires.

The  sufferings  are  most  frequently  on  the  left  side  of  the  body
(as  in  syphilis  ?).  [Fr.  H — n.~\

1030.  He  is  better  when  walking  than  when  lying  or  sitting.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Dropsical  patients  (so-called)  very  rapidly  lost  the
swelling,  and  got  instead  fetid,  rapidly  decomposing
ulcers  on  the  legs  instead.  [Fr.  H—n .]

All  coverings,  clothes  and  bed-covers  feel  too  heavy  for  him.
[Fr.  H—n.]

In  the  evening  an  incessant  restlessness  in  all  the  limbs,  as  if  there
was  twitching  in  them^  as  after  excessive  exertion  3 he  cannot  keep
the  limbs  still.


MERCURIUS,


183


Towards  evening  restlessness  so  that  he  could  not  remain  in  any-
place ; he  could  not  sit  still  two  minutes  ; he  is  forced  to  go  away  ;
neither  could  he  lie,  for  then  he  got  twitchings  in  his  lower  extremi-
ties, they  became  heavy,  he  must  get  up ; also  at  night  he  must
always  rise  up,  with  twitching  even  of  the  head,  and  in  sleep  he
threw  his  arms  about.

1035.  Almost  incessant  pain  in  the  joints  as  if  compounded  of  disloca-
tion, compression  and  fracture,  which  will  not  allow  him  to  rest  in
any  place,  so  that  when  seated  and  when  lying  he  must  move  the
limbs  and  turn  and  twist  them  in  every  direction.

Weariness  with  tearing  drawing  pain  of  both  thighs,  after  mid-
night in  bed  ; after  rising  from  bed,  when  treading,  pain  from  the
inguinal  region  to  the  knee  as  if  the  flesh  of  the  anterior  part  of  the
thigh  were  beaten  loose.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Exhaustion  and  weariness  in  all  the  limbs.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Exhausted,  especially  when  sitting,  as  if  all  his  limbs  would  fall
off.

Attacks  of  internal  relaxation  of  mind  and  body.

1040.  When  sitting  he  is  not  exhausted,  but  is  very  much  so  on
walking  the  very  least,  then  the  lower  extremities  above  and  below
are  very  painful,  as  if  he  had  walked  a great  distance.

In  the  morning  he  is  not  exhausted,  but  the  least  walking  fatigues
him.

After  a stool  attended  by  much  pinching  he  is  very  exhausted.

Laziness  and  like  lead  in  the  blood-vessels,  worst  when  sitting.

Weakness,  less  when  walking  than  when  standing.

1045.  He  feels  ill  all  over,  without  having  pain  anywhere,  he  is  ex-
hausted, not  inclined  for  anything  and  cross.

Faintness  with  an  indescribable  malaise  of  body  and  mind,  which
compels  him  to  lie  down.

He  dislikes  speaking,  he  cannot  read,  his  head  is  dazed ; he
cannot  work,  and  falls  asleep  when  he  sits.

Great  exhaustion,  he  can  scarcely  get  along.  [Hbg.]

Extreme  exhaustion  and  his  knees  knuckle  under  him.  [<$y.]

1050.  A kind  of  faint,  during  which  consciousness  is  retained,  mostly
when  lying  ; at  the  same  time  he  gasps  for  breath,  with  laziness
and  weariness  in  all  the  limbs.  [Fr.  H — n.]

In  the  morning  squeamish  (sick),  heaviness  in  the  lower  extremi-
ties, exhaustion  and  sleepiness.

Great  weariness.

Every  afternoon  about  5 or  6 p.m.  he  is  overcome  by  great
exhaustion.

Very  tired  from  a slight  exertion.

1055.  Exhaustion  with  sadness.

Great  exhaustion  in  the  evening.

Short  syncope,  that  ended  in  a sleep  of  five  minutes ; before  the
syncope  something  sweet  rose  up  in  the  chest.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Syncope  with  tolerably  good  pulse,  for  ten  hours.  [Fr.  H — «.]

(When  sitting)  sleepiness,  which  went  off  immediately  on
walking.  [Zr.]


i84


MERCURIUS.


1060.  Much  yawning  before  dinner  and  supper.

Whilst  standing  irresistible  sleep  came  over  her.

First  sleepiness,  then  sleeplessness.

Great  inclination  to  sleep.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Always  slumbering,  but  no  sound  sleep.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

1065.  The  night  sleep  is  only  a sort  of  dazedness  ; he  tosses  about  as  if
the  bed-clothes  were  a burden  to  him,  and  constantly  wakes  up.

He  cannot  sleep  on  the  right  side,  for  his  bowels  are  painful  as  if
pressed.

Sleep  interrupted  by  starting  up  in  fright,  palpitation  of  the
heart  and  terrified  fancies  (e.g.  as  if  he  dreaded  an  epileptic  attack).

Nocturnal  sleep  with  open  mouth,  without  snoring,  but  frequent
tossing  about  in  bed,  as  if  he  could  get  no  rest  (aft.  23  h.).  [£r.]
Too  great  disposition  to  sleep,  sleeps  too  long  and  too  soundly.
[Fr.  H—n.]

1070.  Great  sleepiness  by  day.  [Fr.  H — n.\

He  sleeps  very  much  too  long,  for  twelve  hours,  and  would  sleep
longer,  if  some  one  did  not  wake  him.  [Htn.~\

Day  and  night  he  falls  asleep  every  instant,  and  wakes  up  again
every  minute,  so  that  he  was  neither  properly  asleep  nor  properly
awake.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Too  long  and  too  sound  sleep.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Too  much  sleep  by  day  and  night.  [Fr.  H — ».]

1075.  She  can  never  get  enough  sleep  ; even  in  the  afternoon  about
3 o’clock  her  eyes  close  forcibly,  so  that  she  must  sleep  two  or  three
hours  in  spite  of  herself.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

After  midnight  she  cannot  sleep  soundly,  and  in  the  night  she
feels  violent  tensive  pain  in  the  left  leg.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Much  sleep  by  day,  and  at  night  sleeplessness.  [Fr.  H — ».]
Sleeplessness  with  extreme  restlessness,  anxiety  and  ill-feeling.
Along  with  extreme  loss  of  strength  and  constant  drowsiness  he
is  unable  to  sleep.

1080.  Sleeplessness  and  wakefulness  at  night  until  3 a.m.,  and  before
getting  to  sleep  perspiration  (from  2 to  3 a.m.).

He  cannot  get  to  sleep  before  midnight  and  wakes  quite  early
while  it  is  still  dark,  with  some  perspiration.

He  cannot  get  to  sleep  before  1 a.m.  on  account  of  wakefulness.
He  can  only  fall  asleep  late  and  with  difficulty.

In  the  evening  it  is  long  before  he  can  go  to  sleep.

1085.  He  cannot  sleep  before  the  lapse  of  two  hours  in  the  evening.

He  wakes  up  every  night  from  2 to  4 a.m.

He  cannot  fall  asleep,  tosses  about  without  knowing  why,  and  in
the  morning  he  cannot  get  up  for  lassitude.

Tosses  about  in  bed,  and  cannot  sleep  till  1 a.m.

As  soon  as  he  goes  to  bed  in  the  evening  the  pain  returns  and
prevents  sleep.

1090.  Just  as  he  is  about  to  fall  asleep  the  pain  becomes  more  severe,
and  he  wakes  up  again.

He  wakes  up  every  night  about  4 a.m.  and  must  pass  water.

He  is  late  of  falling  asleep.  [Fr.  H — ».]


MERCURIUS.


185

He  can  only  go  to  sleep  towards  morning.  [Fr.  H — n .]

He  wakes  up  uncommonly  easily  at  night.  [Fr.  H — n. ]

1095.  In  the  night  he  wakes  up  and  perspires  only  on  the  legs,  from  the
knee  to  the  foot,  not  on  the  thighs  and  feet ; on  uncovering  the  legs
the  perspiration  goes  off  immediately.  [Gjj.]

(After  two  hours.)  She  wakes  up  from  sleep  about  11  o’clock,
as  from  a fright,  and  howls  aloud  with  tears  for  some  minutes  before
she  can  come  to  herself  and  again  become  quiet.  [. Fr . H — n.~\
Frequent  waking  up  from  sleep  as  from  fright.  [Zr.]

Frequent  waking  as  from  noise.  [Zr.]

Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  as  from  watchfulness

(aft.  22  h.).  [Zr.]

1 1 00.  He  wakes  up  at  night  every  quarter  of  an  hour  and  does  not
dream.

At  night,  during  his  frequent  awakings,  stretching  out  the  limbs.
He  wakes  very  early  and  cannot  go  to  sleep  again,  though  he
feels  nothing  the  matter  with  him.

On  going  to  sleep  she  starts  up  in  a great  fright,  accompanied  by
a pain  darting  into  her  teeth  and  a severe  stitch  through  the  knee,
with  shivering.

Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  as  if  he  had  already  slept  enough,
with  much  tossing  about  in  bed.  [Zr.]

1 105.  She  often  starts  up  in  sleep  and  throws  her  arms  up.  [Fr.  H — n.]
Restless  sleep.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Very  restless  sleep,  broken  by  frequent  waking  up.  [Zr.]

Many  dreams.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Much  delirious  talking  in  sleep.  [Fr.  H — n.~\
iiio.  Could  not  sleep  in  the  evening  owing  to  frightful  visions.
[-£%•]

In  sleep  groaning,  whining,  talking,  with  very  rapid  breathing
and  coldness  of  hands  (but  not  of  feet)  (aft.  2 h.).

Much  anxiety  and  ebullition  in  the  blood  at  night,  and  shooting
in  the  blood-vessels.

Restless  night  with  heat ; half  awake,  he  imagines  he  hears
thieves  breaking  in.

Has  almost  no  sleep,  is  afraid  to  go  to  sleep.

1 1 15.  Sleep;  but  when  he  wakes  all  goes  round  in  his  head  ; sleep  is
more  disagreeable  than  pleasant  to  him.

Before  midnight,  soon  after  going  to  sleep,  anxiety  in  sleep,  he
started  up  in  a fright,  and  was  anxious  until  he  woke  completely  up.
He  passes  the  greater  part  of  the  night  in  waking  and  dreaming.
Agreeable  dreams,  after  midnight.*

A number  of  historical  dreams  at  night.

1120.  Anxious  dreams  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  yet  he  cannot
awake.

Frightful  dreams  at  night,  as  if  he  fell  from  a height.

Restless  nights,  dreams  of  highwaymen.

Vivid  dreams  of  the  day’s  occupations ; he  does  not  dream  at  all
when  well.  [Htn.~\

* Probably  curative  effect,  after  a previous  opposite  state.


1 86


MERCURIUS,


Anxious  dreams  ( e.g . of  having  swallowed  a needle),  from  which
she  does  not  wake  up  completely.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

1125.  Anxious  dreams  : of  being  bitten  by  a dog,  of  getting  up  a revolu-
tion, after  midnight.  [_Gn.~\

Vivid,  agreeable  and  disagreeable  dreams.  [Ar.]

She  dreams  that  people  are  before  the  window,  and  on  being
woke  up  thereby  cannot  be  persuaded  that  they  were  not  there.  [Ar .
H — n .]

Dreams  of  danger  from  water.

Frightful  dreams  about  shooting.

1130.  Frightful  dreams,  in  which  he  started  up;  he  imagined  he  was
not  in  his  own  house,  sat  up  in  bed  and  spoke  about  a distant  village.
IHbg.-]

Vivid  dreams,  but  which  he  cannot  remember.  [ Gn.~\

Vivid,  unremembered  dreams.  [Ar.]

Amorous  dreams  and  erection  of  penis,  without  seminal  emission,
the  second  night.  [ Gn .]

Yawning.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

1135.  Much  yawning.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Frequent  yawning,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.  [Ar.]

Much  thirst.  [Ar.  H — n .]

He  wants  to  drink  constantly.  \Fr.  H — n.~\

Thirst  for  water  (towards  evening).  [Ar.  H — n .]

1140.  Much  thirst  day  and  night.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Excessive  thirst  for  ice-cold  water.  [Ar.  H — nJ]

Violent  thirst  for  cold  drinks,  particularly  for  fresh  water.
[Ar.]

Extraordinarily  intense  thirst.  [Ar.  H—n.]

Rigor  over  the  whole  body,  without  heat  and  thirst,  in  every
position.  [Ar.]

1145.  He  feels  chilly  when  walking  out  in  the  open  air.  [Ar.  H — n.]
She  is  more  chilly  in  the  open  air  than  in  the  room,  although  the
temperature  was  the  same.  [Ar.  H — «.]

In  the  morning  and  evening  chilliness  all  over  the  body ; he
shivers.  [<S7/'.]

Constantly  cold  hands  and  feet.  [iA%.]

Coldness  and  cold  feeling,  and  chilliness  and  shaking  with  blue-
ness of  the  body,  all  day  ; at  the  same  time  she  must  cower  forwards.
[Ar.  H — «.]

1150.  He  is  chilly,  and  cold  runs  over  him,  but  chiefly  over  the  hands ;
behind  the  ears  there  is  dry  heat.  \_Htn .]

Cold  feet  in  the  evening  in  bed  after  lying  down.

Chilliness  in  the  back  with  heat  of  both  ear  lobes.  [.&/.]

In  the  morning  on  awaking  chilliness  in  bed.

Shivering  in  the  morning  in  bed.

1155.  Internal  chilliness,  also  in  the  morning  in  bed.

In  the  morning,  immediately  on  rising,  chilliness  and  shivering.

In  the  forenoon  internal  chilliness  of  the  whole  body.

In  the  morning  chilliness,  and  towards  noon  heat.

After  the  midday  sleep  chilliness.


MERCURIUS,  387

1160.  Chilliness  towards  evening  ; the  more  he  seeks  to  warm  himself  at
the  stove  the  more  chilly  he  felt.

In  the  morning  in  bed,  and  in  the  evening  in  bed,  chilliness.

Shivering  in  bed  in  the  evening,  for  half  an  hour,  not  followed
by  heat.

Chilliness  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  for  half  an  hour,  chilliness  in  the  whole
body  under  the  skin.

1165.  Chilliness  in  the  evening  in  bed  until  midnight,  then  heat  with
violent  thirst.

In  the  evening  severe  rigor ; he  is  thrown  up  by  it  high  in  bed
(at  the  same  time  subsultus  of  the  tendo  Achillis  and  of  the  common
flexor  tendons  of  the  toes).

At  the  beginning  of  the  night,  chiefly  chilliness,  then  alternate
chill  and  heat.

Febrile  attacks,  particularly  at  night.

Icy  cold  hands.

1170,  Chilliness  all  over,  with  icy  cold  hands.

Chilliness,  as  if  splashed  over  with  cold  water.

He  feels  chilly  in  all  his  limbs,  like  severe  catarrhal  fever  $ he
must  lie  down.

After  the  chill  trembling  of  all  the  limbs.

Thirst  by  day.

1 175.  Shivering,  intermingled  with  frequent  flying  heat.

Shivering  from  above  downwards  on  the  slightest  movement ; in
the  intervals  attacks  of  heat.

Severe  chilliness  from  the  nose  and  eyes  to  the  occiput,  with  ex-
ternal tearing  pain,  before  midnight  when  lying  in  bed.  \_Fr.
H — n.~]

At  g p.m.  chilliness  all  over  and  all  night ; at  the  same  time  uri-
nating every  hour,  and  whilst  lying  in  slumber  involuntary  twitching,
jerking  and  tossing  about  of  head,  arms  and  legs.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

In  the  evening  in  bed  violent  shivering  from  cold ; she  cannot
get  warm.  [Hbg .]

lj8o.  Slow  weak  pulse.

Quick  strong  beating  of  all  the  pulses.

Pulse  of  double  quickness.

Along  with  heat  in  the  face  chilliness  of  the  whole  body.

He  is  chilly  internally,  with  heat  of  face  and  burning  sensation  in
the  cheeks.

1185.  Sometimes  heat  in  the  face,  sometimes  shivering.

Chill  alternating  with  heat  in  head  and  face.

Fever  : at  first  heat  and  redness  in  the  face  and  hot  feeling  in  the
whole  body,  especially  in  the  interior  of  the  hands,  without  externally
perceptible  warmth,  alternating  with  internal  chilliness,  which  com-
pels him  to  lie  down,  a rigor  even  into  the  night,  and  along  with  this
rigor  hot  feeling  in  the  palms  of  the  hands,  with  icy  cold  finger  tips.

Frequent  attacks  of  fever  composed  of  general  flying  heat  and
frequently  recurring  chill  and  shivering  (especially  over  face,  back,
chest,  and  arms).


1 88


MERCURIUS.


Alternate  sensation  of  heat  and  chill ; not  perceptible
externally  to  the  touch.

1190.  Heat  and  hot  sensation  in  the  face  with  pale  face.

After  midnight  heat  and  redness  of  the  left  cheek  and  perspira-
tion of  the  palms  ; afterwards  diarrhoea  and  loathing  of  food.

Attacks  of  heat  with  great  anxiety,  as  from  compression  of  the
chest,  without  thirst,  alternating  with  cold  feeling  over  the  whole
[ body  and  great  prostration.

Heat,  redness,  and  aching  in  both  eyes.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

When  he  has  been  seated  some  time  heat  comes  into  his  cheeks
and  head,  with  redness  of  face,  without  thirst.  [Stf.]

1195.  In  cold  and  raw  air  he  feels  very  warm  in  all  parts  of  the  body,
for  four  days  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — n.]

From  time  to  time  heat  in  head  and  face.  [*Sy]

Continual  intermingled  heat  and  chill ; when  out  of  bed  chill,  in
bed  heat,  with  great  thirst  for  milk  at  night  (he  drank  in  one  night
three  jugs  of  milk).  [^T/i]

Febrile  rigor  over  the  whole  body,  without  heat  or  thirst,  in
every  position  (aft.  7J  h.)_.  [Lr.]

Perspiration  which  causes  burning  sensation  on  the  skin.  [Fr.
H — n.]

1200.  Day  and  night  much  disposed  to  perspiration,  most  at  night.  [Fr.
H—n .]

Profuse  perspiration  all  night,  from  the  evening  till  the  morning.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Foetid  perspiration  for  many  nights.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Profuse  night  sweat.  [Fr.  H — n.]

At  night  very  profuse  perspiration  of  a fatty  or  oily  character,
making  the  linen  feel  stiff,  as  if  starched,  and  yellow.  [Fr.  H — n.]
1205.  Profuse  foetid  perspirations,  so  that  the  upper  and  under  sheets  are
as  if  soaked  in  water.  [Hbg.]

Perspiration  on  the  face  and  chest.  [Fr.  H — n .]

Profuse  cold  sweat  on  the  face,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  is  dry.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Uncommonly  profuse  sweat,  that  smells  sour  and  repulsive,  and
the  fingers  look  softened,  spongy,  and  wrinkled,  as  in  washerwomen.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Sour-smelling  perspiration,  and  when  she  put  a limb  out  of  bed
there  occurred  in  it  immediately  the  most  violent  tearing  pain.

1210.  Perspiration  every  evening  for  an  hour  and  a half  after  going  to
bed.


Profuse  morning  sweat,

During  the  morning  sweat,  thirst,  nausea  to  vomiting,  and
intolerable  uncontrollable  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Sweat  by  day  with  nausea.

Profuse  sweat  in  the  evening  in  bed  ; he  falls  asleep  during  the
sweat.

1215.  Profuse  night  sweat.

Sweat  in  the  palms  and  soles.

Partial  sweat ; he  perspires  at  night  on  different  parts  and  on


MERCURIUS.


189


other  parts  he  is  dry ; the  perspiring  parts  were  not  above  six  inches
large,  but  the  sweat  was  dripping ; the  head  and  all  the  face  were
dry.  \Fr.  H — tz.]

As  soon  as  she  eats  she  has  great  anxiety  and  perspiration  on  the
head  and  forehead,  which  feels  icy  cold  ; she  must  go  into  the  open  air
before  the  sweat  will  go  off ; at  the  same  time  she  has  loss  of  breath
and  shooting  in  the  right  side  close  under  the  ribs.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Attacks  of  trembling.

1220.  Palpitation  of  the  heart.

Excessive  fright  at  a slight  surprise,  she  trembles  in  her  whole
body,  is  as  if  paralysed,  a tremendous  glow  rises  into  the  right  cheek,
which  at  the  same  time  swelled  and  became’ bluish  red  and  remained
so  for  two  hours  ; she  was  so  much  affected  that  she  could  not
compose  herself  again  ; all  the  limbs  were  as  if  bruised,  violent  rigor,
tottering  of  the  knees  compelled  her  to  go  to  bed  before  the  usual
time.

Restlessness,  he  cannot  remain  quiet  in  any  place ; he  can  neither
stand  nor  lie,  and  is  as  if  mad,  or  as  if  he  had  committed  a great
crime.

Disposition  restless,  dejected ; anxiety  without  any  particular
thoughts.

Indescribable  sensation  of  an  internal,  intolerable  ill,  during  which
he  remains  silent  and  will  not  get  up  from  bed.

1225.  Imagines  he  is  enduring  the  tortures  of  hell,  without  being  able  to
account  for  it.

Anxiety.

Much  anxiety  and  ebullition  in  the  blood  at  night,  and  shooting
in  the  blood-vessels.1

She  is  always  anxious  and  fearful ; she  then  has  a sudden  pain
in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  the  hands  commence  to  perspire,  and  she
becomes  hot  in  the  face.

Anxiety  as  if  he  had  committed  a crime.  \^Hbg.’\

1230.  No  rest,  always  anxious.  \_Hbg.~\

He  has  no  rest,  and  must  go  hither  and  thither,  and  cannot
remain  long  in  one  place.  \_Fr.  H — 72.]

Extreme  restlessness  all  night  from  evening  to  morning ; he
would  sometimes  rise  up,  sometimes  lie  down,  nowhere  could  he
find  rest.  [££/\]

Extreme  restlessness  all  night,  beginning  about  8 p.m.  and  lasting
till  morning ; he  sometimes  rose  up  because  he  had  no  rest  when
lying,  sometimes  he  lay  down  again,  because  walking  was  intolerable
to  him,  nowhere  had  he  rest.  [S//'.]

Anxiety  and  apprehension  in  the  blood,  he  knew  not  how  to
compose  himself ; he  felt  as  if  he  had  committed  a crime,  without
heat,  also  at  the  same  time  as  if  he  was  not  quite  master  of  his  senses,
all  day.

1235.  Anxiety  that  could  drive  him  far  away,  as  if  he  had  committed  a
crime  or  some  misfortune  were  about  to  happen  to  him.


1 Repetition  of  S.  m2.


MERCURIUS.


He  thinks  he  is  losing  his  reason,  that  he  is  going  to  die ; with
illusions  of  the  imagination,  e.g.  he  sees  water  flowing  where  there
is  none  (in  the  morning).

With  absence  of  thought  he  feels  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad.
No  inclination  for  serious  work.  \GnJ\

In  the  evening  very  much  disposed  to  start  in  affright.  \_Fr.
H — n.~\

1240.  He  had  no  courage  to  live.  \_Fr.  H — /?.]

He  wished  to  die,  was  indifferent  to  every  thing,  even  to  what
he  took  most  delight  in.  \_Hbg.~\

All  day  long  great  seriousness  with  much  indifference ; he  got
angry  when  others  laughed  at  a trifle,  and  at  the  same  time  was
extremely  indifferent  to  all  about  him.  [Ar.]

He  is  indifferent  to  everything  in  the  world,  has  no  desire  to  eat,
and  yet  when  he  does  eat  he  relishes  his  food  and  can  partake  of
what  is  required.

Extreme  indifference.

1245.  He  cares  for  nothing  and  is  indifferent  to  everything.

Everything  is  distasteful  to  him,  even  music.

Disposition  rather  indifferent.  [GA.]

Without  cause  he  is  very  discontented  with  himself  and  his
position.  [ Gn.~\

All  day  long  depression  of  spirits  combined  with  anxiety ; he
always  thought  he  was  going  to  hear  of  something  disagreeable.  [Ar.]

1250.  All  day  long  sulky ; he  was  extremely  laconic  and  grave.  [Ar.]
All  day  long  cross  and  peevish  ; he  believed  that  all  his  efforts
would  finally  fail.  \_Lr.~\

Disposition  irritable,  irascible,  daring.

Very  cross  and  intolerant,  easily  irritated,  very  suspicious.
Quarrelling  with  every  one,  opinionative,  quarrelsome.

1255.  Disputatious,  quarrelsome.

All  day  long  sulky  and  distrustful ; he  almost  insulted  those
about  him,  and  regarded  them  all  as  his  greatest  enemies.  [Ar.]

During  the  whole  day  cross,  as  if  at  variance  and  dissatisfied  with
himself,  and  had  no  inclination  for  speaking  and  joking.  [Ar.]
Longing  nostalgia.  [Gn.~\

An  almost  irresistible  desire  to  travel  away  to  a distance.  [(?«.]

1260.  Hurry  and  rapidity  in  speaking.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

He  talked  nonsense  : look  ! you  strike  a fly  on  your  hand,  and
you  had  previously  forbidden  me  to  do  so  (which  was  not  the  case).

He  is  silly,  acts  the  buffoon,  and  does  stupid  nonsensical  things;
in  the  evening  (though  it  was  hot  summer  weather)  he  lit  his  fire,  laid
swords  across  one  another,  and  put  candles  in  one  corner  of  the
room,  in  the  other  boots,  and  all  this  quite  gravely,  while  at  the
same  time  he  was  quite  indifferent  to  heat  and  cold ; he  was  stupid
and  heavy  in  the  head.

Mania  ; she  throws  off  the  clothes  at  night,  tears  the  straw  about,
and  scolds  ; by  day  she  leaps  up  high  (like  a petulant  extravagant
person)  in  the  open  air  as  well  as  in  the  room ; she  talks  and  scolds
much  to  herself,  does  not  know  her  nearest  relations,  spits  frequently


MERCURIUS.


191

and  spreads  the  saliva  out  with  her  feet,  and  licks  some  of  it  up  again  ;
she  often  licks  cowdung  and  the  mud  of  ponds  ; she  often  takes  little
stones  in  her  mouth,  without  swallowing  them,  and  at  the  same
time  complains  that  they  are  cutting  her  bowels  ; much  clotted  blood
passes  with  her  motion ; she  does  no  harm  to  any  one,  but  resists
much  when  any  one  touches  her  j she  does  nothing  she  is  told  to  do,
will  not  sit  down  to  any  meal,  though  most  days  she  takes  food  and
drink  irregularly ; she  looks  very  pale  and  ill,  and  appears  to  be
much  more  exhausted  than  before.  [Fr.  H — ».]

When  taking  a walk  he  felt  a strong  inclination  to  catch  by  the
nose  strangers  whom  he  met.

1265.  During  his  nonsensical  acts  he  was  much  disposed  to  weep,  and
when  this  paroxysm  passed  he  felt  very  exhausted.

Almost  involuntary  weeping  with  relief.1 2


MERCURIUS  DULCIS.

( Calomel .)

During  a continued  fever  accompanied  by  constant  heat,  with
night-sweats,  sinking  of  the  strength,  tearing  pains  in  the  limbs  and
trembling,  numerous  round,  deep,  eroding  ulcers  in  . the  mouth  and
fauces,  on  the  face,  on  the  genitals,  and  on  the  rest  of  the  body,  with
white  bottom  and  inflamed,  very  painful  borders.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

( Corrosive  Sublimate .)

Weakness  of  the  mind  ; he  looks  at  us  with  staring  large  eyes
and  does  not  understand  us  (aft.  2 h.).

Headache,  shooting  combined  with  aching,  above  the  left  eye,
aggravated  by  stooping.

A humming  in  the  left  ear  synchronous  with  the  pulse.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  which  project  from  their  orbits.  [C.
Fr.  Schwarze, Beob.  una  Erfahr.^i.  Dresden,  1827,  p.  322.]

5.  Staring  look.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Distortion  of  the  features.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Tearing  in  the  upper  jaw  (antrum  Highmorianum)  towards  the
eye,  followed  by  swelling.

On  the  gums  and  in  the  mouth  a burning  pain.

The  lower  lip  much  swollen,  and  its  inside  so  much  everted
that  the  border  rests  on  the  chin.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]
jo.  Swelling  of  the  lips,  tongue  and  neck.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Roughness  in  the  throat  which  makes  speaking  but  not  swallow-
ing, difficult.

1 The  number  of  symptoms  apparently  exceeds  by  two  that  given  by  Hahne-
mann, owing  to  his  having  omitted  to  reckon  two  symptoms  between  890  and  the
end.

2 Not  accessible.


MERCURIUS.


19  2


Salt  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  2 h.).

Salivation.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Unquenchable  thirst.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

15.  Vomiting.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Aching  feeling  in  the  gastric  region  and  chest.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]
Immediately  after  a stool,  downward  pressure  in  front  below  the
navel,  which  lasts  some  time.

Cutting  in  the  abdomen  (immediately)  with  chilliness  in  the
open,  though  warm,  air.

Painful  burning  from  the  mouth  to  the  gastric  region.
[Schwarze,  1.  c.]

20.  Very  distended,  painful  abdomen.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.

Uncommon  distension  of  the  abdomen  (aft.  12  h.).

Stool  of  viscid  faeces.

Stool  of  thin  formed  faeces.

Along  with  almost  constant  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  intoler-
able painful  almost  ineffectual  pressing,  forcing,  and  tenesmus,  fre-
quent discharge  of  a little  bloody  mucus,  day  and  night.

25.  Evacuations  of  faeces  mingled  with  mucus  and  dark  coagulated
blood.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Diarrhoea.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Tenesmus.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Strangury.  [Schwarze,  1.  c.]

Itching  anteriorly  in  the  urethra.

30.  Urethral  blennorrhoea,  at  first  thin,  then  thick;  finally  with
smarting  pain  on  urinating,  and  stitches  through  the  urethra.
Leucorrhoea,  pale  yellow  with  disgusting  sweetish  smell.

(During  coitus  on  touching  the  mouth  of  the  womb,  an  aching
pain,  followed  by  a pressing.)

% *

*


35


40


Very  severe  coryza.

Dry  cough.

Hollow,  fatiguing,  dry  cough  (aft.  2 h.).

Nocturnal  shooting  pain  transversely  through  the  whole  chest.
Oppression  of  the  chest.

Round  about  the  nipples  painful  glandular  swelling.

Shooting  pain  in  the  hip-joint  when  moving  and  when  at  rest.
Sensation  of  going  to  sleep  of  the  leg.

Icy  cold  feet  (aft.  2 h.).

Towards  evening  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the
bones,  like  the  commencement  of  ague,  with  hot  feeling  in  the  head
(aft.  6 h.).

(In  the  morning,  on  the  arms  and  body  painless  blisters,  that  go
off  in  the  course  of  the  day.)

Fine  shooting  pain  here  and  there  in  the  muscles,  by  day.

45.  He  starts  suddenly  on  going  to  sleep  with  a shock  of  the  whole
body  (aft.  8 h.).

He  is  chilly  on  the  head.

On  the  slightest  movement,  even  on  rising  from  a seat,  chilliness
and  cutting  in  the  abdomen.


MERCURIUS.


*93

From  the  open,  though  warm  air,  which  is  very  repugnant  to
her,  chilliness,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  tenesmus.

On  stooping  heat,  on  rising  up  again  coolness.

50.  At  night  he  cannot  rest  in  any  position,  owing  to  a feeling  of
heat  and  anxiety.

Frequent  peevish  disposition,  so  that  no  one  can  do  anything  to
please  him,  alternating  with  cheerfulness.


MERCURIUS  ACETATUS.

{Acetate  of  Mercury .)

(Eyes  inflamed  in  the  canthi,  with  burning  itching  pain,  in  the
morning  and  evening.)

Dryness  in  the  throat,  that  impedes  speaking,  with  a scraping
cough.

On  coughing  more  than  on  swallowing,  at  the  back  of  the  throat
an  aching  shooting.

Frequent  urination.

5.  In  the  morning  he  passes  a quantity  of  water,  but  slowly  (stric-
ture of  the  urethra  ?)  with  tenesmus.

A burning  in  the  urethra,  when  urinating  and  at  other  times.

Cutting  in  the  urethra  with  the  last  drops  of  urine.

Swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  penis  (with
burning  and  pricking  pains,  that  wake  him  up  at  night) ; cold  water
aggravates  the  pains,  tepid  water  diminishes  them.

Contractive  pain  in  the  testicles.

10.  Internal  swelling  inside  the  labia  pudendi.

(Catamenia  four  days  too  early,  at  the  new  moon.)

In  the  chest  pain  as  if  it  were  ulcerated,  raw  and  sore.

On  the  sternum,  just  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a pressure
with  tightness  of  the  breath  when  standing,  even  when  he  did  not
walk.

Tearing  in  the  hands,  the  knuckles  of  which  become  red  and
swollen.

1 5.  The  borders  of  the  ulcer  become  very  painful.

Eruption  of  itching,  bursting  pimples  ; after  scratching  they
burn  like  fire.

In  the  forenoon  drawing  pain  in  the  limbs  and  shivering  not
followed  by  heat.

Anxious  dreams  after  midnight,  e.  g . of  drowning,  of  robbers  who
want  to  murder  him,  of  danger  from  water  and  fire.

At  night,  particularly  after  midnight,  heat  without  thirst  and
without  perspiration,  but  feeling  as  if  he  perspired.

20.  On  moving  profuse  sweat.


VOL.  11.


*94


MERCURIUS.


MERCURIUS  PRECIPITATES  RUBER.

(Red  Oxyde  of  Mercury.)

(Attacks  of  suffocation,  when  lying  at  night,  whilst  going  to
sleep ; he  must  leap  up  suddenly,  by  which  it  always  went  off.)

(Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  which  threatened  to  burst  his
chest.)


CINNABARIS.

( From  the  internal  use  of  Cinnabar  f)

Roaring  in  the  head,  half  an  hour  after  dinner  and  in  the  evening
before  going  to  sleep,  which  makes  him  dizzy.

A projection  on  the  external  parts  of  the  head,  only  by  day.

On  touching  the  head  the  skull  is  painful,  and  even  the  hairs  are
painful.

(Inflammation  of  the  right  eye ; itching,  aching  and  shooting  in
the  inner  canthus  and  on  the  lower  lid,  with  constant  lachrymation
when  he  looks  at  anything,  with  severe  coryza.)

5.  In  the  palate  a contractive  burning  sensation.

In  the  throat,  aching  contractive  pain,  on  swallowing  the  saliva.

At  night  much  dryness  and  heat  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  he
must  drink  frequently ; whilst  doing  so  some  shooting  posteriorly
beneath  the  tongue.

A pricking  itching  on  the  front  part  of  the  neck,  with  swollen
cervical  glands,  and  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  chest ; there  appear
red  points  that  coalesce  into  round  spots,  covered  with  hard  granular
papules  ; on  scratching  the  eruption  burns  and  itches  still  more  ;
finally  the  places  become  painful.

Great  appetite  for  eating  and  drinking  and  great  desire  for  coitus.

10.  Great  appetite  for  food  and  for  coitus.

No  appetite  ; all  food  is  repugnant  to  him.

Immediately  inclination  to  vomit.

While  lying  in  bed  at  night  a heat  rose  from  the  stomach  into
the  throat  and  head,  which  went  off  on  sitting  up.

Every  day  two  easy  soft  stools  each  time  preceded  by  pinching,
less  afterwards.

15.  Bowels  open  twice  daily.

A pain  like  soreness  in  the  urethra  when  urinating,  although  th^
urethra  is  not  painful  when  pressed.

The  penis  is  swollen.

Twitching  in  the  penis.

In  the  sulcus  behind  the  glans,  itching  pain  ; matter  of  a dis-
gusting sweet  smell  exudes  therefrom.

20.  Small  red  spots  on  the  glans  penis.

Tearing  stitches  in  the  glans.


# The  action  lasted  nine  days.


MERCURIUS.


195


On  the  glans  red  spots  appear,  as  if  pimples  were  about  to  come.

In  the  evening  on  the  corona  glandis,  burning  pricking  itching,
which  was  allayed  by  rubbing,  but  soon  returned  more  severely.

Redness  and  swelling  of  the  prepuce  ; it  looks  sore,  with  itching
pain.

25.  (Here  and  there  on  the  prepuce  warts,  which  bleed  when
touched.)

Leucorrhcea,  which  on  passing  causes  a pressing  in  the  vagina.

In  the  evening  in  bed  strong  erections.

Much  coryza.

(When  she  lies  down  she  must  continually  cough ; less  when
she  sits  y single,  quite  dry  cough-impulses.)

30.  Beating  like  a pulse  and  shooting  here  and  there  near  the  sternum
and  under  the  short  ribs,  most  when  walking,  least  when  sitting  and
tying.

Tearing  pain  and  as  if  everything  were  lacerated  on  the  side  of  the
back,  especially  at  night,  on  the  slightest  movement  in  bed,  and  in
the  arm  when  writing  ; both  diminished  by  the  heat  of  the  stove.

Severe  stitches  sometimes  in  the  arm.

Perspiration  betwixt  the  thighs  when  walking,  which  smells  badly
and  causes  excoriation.

In  the  evening,  after  falling  asleep,  a painful  twitching  in  the  legs,
which  woke  him  up,

35.  In  the  foot  an  aching  sensation,  as  if  the  foot  would  go  to  sleep.

(Rheumatic  pain  in  the  big  toe.)

After  eating,  a very  uncomfortable  feeling  in  the  body,  as  if  it  were
blown  out  and  distended  ; over  the  chest  and  stomach  as  if  oppressed.

Coldness  in  the  joints ; shivering  and  drawing  in  the  arms  and
legs.

Paralytic  feeling  in  all  the  limbs  ; he  is  lazy  and  sleepy.

40.  Sleeplessness  at  night,  without  pains  and  without  fatigue ; he
felt  in  the  morning  as  if  refreshed  and  required  no  more  sleep.

After  midnight  he  wakes  suddenly  as  from  a dream  and  has  no
breath,  like  nightmare.

( From  fumigation  with  Cinnabar.')

Intractable  headache.

Pain  in  the  cervical  vertebrae  as  if  dislocated.

Nocturnal  diarrhoea  for  two  weeks,  without  pain  in  the  bowels.

(The  borders  of  the  ulcers  become  painful  and  tense.)


VARIOUS  MERCURIALS.

Weakness  of  the  reason  [Swedjaur,*  Traite  des  malad.  verier,}
tom.  ii,  p.  368.]

Self  deception ; he  considers  himself  well.  [Jac.  Hill,+  in
Edinb.  Essays , iv.]

* From  mercurial  vapour,
f From  the  vapour  of  a drachm  of  cinnabar.


196


MERCURIUS.


Insanity.  [Larrey,* * * §  in  Description  de  /’ Egypte,  tom.  i,  Memoires
et  Obs.]

Complaining  : she  is  deranged  and  knows  not  what  she  is  doing.
[Degner,-]-  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur .,  vi,  Obs.  600.]

5.  Great  want  of  memory ; he  often  forgot  the  first  part  of  a
sentence  before  he  could  say  the  last  part  of  it.  \_Huf eland'* s J
"Journal  d.  pr.  A .,  x.,  J,  p.  62.]

Headache  in  the  temples.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

Attacks  of  intractable  headache,  which  required  external  compres-
sion of  the  head  in  order  to  alleviate  it.  [Pet.  Schenk, § vii,  Obs.  213.]
Swelling  of  the  head,  the  cervical  glands,  the  gums  [Schlegel,
in  Hufel.  Jour .,  vii,  4.]

Great  swelling  of  head  and  neck.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

10.  The  hair  falls  out  [Heuermann,||  Bemerk.  und  Untersuch .,  ii,
pP.  29, 30.]

Altered  features.  [Sweedjaur,^  1.  c.]

The  face  becomes  of  a leaden  hue.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  face,  neck,  and  all  internal  parts  of  the  mouth.
[Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Over-sensitiveness  of  the  auditory  organ ; he  starts  at  the  least  noise.
[Fourcroy,  in  the  translation  of  Ramazzini ,**  Maladies  des  artisans,
p.  42*]

15.  Epistaxis.  [Pet.  Schenk,  1.  c.]

Violent  epistaxis.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

Necrosis  of  the  bone  of  the  upper  jaw.  [Michaelis,  in  Hufel.
Jour,  xxviii,  4,  p.  57.]

Spasmodic  movement  of  the  lips.  [LouvRiER,ft  in  Annalen  der
Heilkunde , 1810,  December,  pp.  1123,  11 26.]

The  tendons  of  the  masseter  muscles  are  affected,  and,  owing  to
their  soreness,  render  the  opening  of  the  mouth  painful.  [Heuer-
mann, 1.  c.]

20.  The  gums  are  swollen  and  bleed  on  the  slightest  touch.  [Heuer-
mann, 1.  c.]

Swelling  of  gums  and  fauces.  [Misc.  Nat.  Cur., ft  Dec.,  iii,
ann.  5,  6.]

In  the  nerves  of  the  teeth  a violent  burning  pain.  [Heuermann,

1.  c.

The  teeth  rise  up,  become  loose,  and  fall  out.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]
Loose  teeth.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

25.  The  teeth  become  black,  loose, and  at  last  fall  out.  [Swedjaur,  l.c.]
Trembling  of  the  tongue  and  consequent  stammering,  which  was
not  removable  by  electricity.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

* From  the  internal  employment  of  various  mercurials  in  Egypt,

f From  the  external  employment  of  corrosive  sublimate  in  a plaster.

J From  the  use  of  oxyde  of  mercury— -using  at  the  same  time  a gargle  of  walnut
shells.

§ From  cinnabar  vapour.

||  From  various  mercurial  substances,  especially  calomel.

From  the  internal  employment  of  oxydes  and  salts  of  mercury.

**  From  the  vapour  of  mercury.

f-j-  From  rubbing  in  mercurial  ointment.


MERCURIUS.


T97


Swelling  of  the  tongue.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.]

Stiff,  swollen  tongue.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  tongue,  so  that  there  is  scarcely  room  for  it  in  the
mouth.  [Engel,  Specimina  med .,  Berol.,  1781,  p.  99.]

30.  Swollen,  very  sensitive  tongue,  projecting  a hand’s  breadth  out  of
the  mouth,  and  as  it  were  pinched  betwixt  the  teeth.  [Friese,*  in
Geschichte  und  Versuche  einer  chirurg.  Geselfschaft , Kopenh,  1774.]
Tongue  white  furred,  swollen,  almost  immovable,  eroded  on  the
borders  by  ulceration.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

A
1788.

Aphthae  in  the  mouth.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.]

Many  eroding  ulcers  in  the  mouth.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

35.  Very  painful  spreading  ulcers  in  the  mouth.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]
The  ulcers  in  the  mouth  bleed,  especially  at  night.  [Heuer-
mann, 1.  c,]

Foetor  of  the  mouth.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

Carrion-like  foetor  of  the  mouth.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.]

Great  foetor  of  the  mouth.  [Jac.  Hill, — Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

40.  The  palate  bones  or  the  jaw-bones  are  often  destroyed.
[SwEDJAUR,  1.  C.]

Commencing  salivation.  [Oettinger,^  Diss.  Clnnabris  exul .
redux , Tubing.,  1760,  p.  22.]

Immediately  the  most  profuse  salivation.  [Jac.  Hill,  1.  c.]
Salivation.  [Wedel,§  Amcenit.  Mat.  Med.,  p.  153.]

Profuse  salivation.  [Schlegel,  1.  c.]

45.  Bloody  salivation.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

Haemorrhage  with  the  salivation.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

The  orifices  of  the  salivary  ducts  of  the  parotids  are  eroded.
[Heuermann,  1.  c.]

The  intolerable  foetid  saliva  erodes  the  lips  and  cheeks,  even  eats
them  away.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

The  Eustachian  tubes  in  the  fauces  are  often  compressed  by
swelling,  hence  deafness.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

50.  Fauces  inflamed,  so  that  she  can  scarcely  swallow.  [Degner,  1.  c.]
Burning  pain  in  the  fauces,  as  from  live  coals.  [Degner,  1.  c.]
Trembling  of  the  pharynx  and  oesophagus  ; he  only  swallowed
spasmodically,  often  with  danger  of  suffocation.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]
Want  of  appetite.  [Huber,  ||  in  Nov.  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  iii,  Obs.  100.]
Inclination  to  vomit.  [Mzsc.  Nat.  Cur.,  1.  c.]

55.  Vomiting  with  convulsive  movements.  [Hoffmann,  in  Baldin -
ger's  Magaz.,  p.  963.]

Praecordial  anxiety.  \Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  1.  c.]

Great  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Riverius,^T  Obs.  Med.,  p,  92.]
Horrible  pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [Jac.  Hill,  1.  c.]

* From  rubbing  in  much  mercurial  ointment,
f Internally  calomel,  externally  rubbing  in  of  mercurial  ointment.

X From  the  internal  use  of  artificial  cinnabar.

§ From  the  internal  use  of  mineral  cinnabar.

||  From  the  internal  employment  of  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate  for  several  weeks.
From  rubbing  in  mercurial  ointment.


phthae  on  the  tongue.


[Thom.  AcREY,f  in  Lond.  Med.  Ji


ourn.


198


MERCURIUS.


Intolerable  shooting  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  1.  c.]

60.  Liver  diseases.  [Larrey,  1.  c.]

Complete  jaundice.  [J.  Cheyne,  in  Dublin  Hospital  Reports  and

Communications  in  Medicine  and  Surgery , Dublin,  1816,  vol.  i.]
Dangerous  diarrhoeas.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

Green  stools.  [Michaelis,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  vi,  pp.  22,  24.]
Stools  passed  with  burning  and  smarting  in  the  anus.  [Felix
Plater,  Obs.  1.]

65.  Frequent  stools  with  the  smell  of  the  foetor  of  the  mouth.
[Degner,  1.  c.]

Constant  tenesmus,  with  very  frequent  discharge  of  blood  by
stool.  [Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  1.  c.]

The  urine  passes  only  by  drops,  with  scalding.  [Fel.  Plater,*
Obs.  1,  Basil,  1614.]

When  urinating,  scalding  acridity.  [Plater,  1.  c.]

Enormous  flow  of  urine  (diabetes)  with  extreme  emaciation.

[Schlichting,  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  viii.]

70.  Inflammation  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.  [Hufel.  Journ. ,f
xxvi,  4.]

Urethral  blennorrhoea.  [Hufel.  Journ.,  1.  c.]

Constant  hoarseness.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

Cough.  [Jac.  Hill,  1.  c.]

Haemoptysis.  [Swedjaur,  1,  c.]

75.  Violent  haemoptysis.  [A.  Gottl.  Richter, { Chirurg.  Bibliot .,
vi,  p.  277.]

Violent  oppression  in  the  chest  and  about  the  heart.  [HEUER-
MANN, 1.  C.]

Great  tightness  of  the  chest,  recurring  in  fits ; on  account  of  the
fear  of  suffocation  he  can  neither  walk  nor  stoop.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]
Suffocation.  [River  ius,  1.  c.]

Trembling.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

80.  The  most  violent  trembling,  at  first  of  the  hands,  then  of  the
whole  body.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

Attacks  of  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  arms  and  legs.  [Riverius,
1.  c.]

Local  or  general  tetanus.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.j
First  flying,  then  fixed,  extremely  penetrating  pains  in  the  loins
and  knees,  then  also  in  the  rest  of  the  limbs.  [Huber,  1.  c.]

The  most  violent  pains  in  the  muscles,  tendons  or  joints,  similar
to  rheumatic  or  arthritic  pains.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

85.  Easy  frangibility  of  the  bones,  after  previous  rheumatic  pains.
[Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

Eroding  ulcers.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Spongy  looking,  bluish  ulcers,  which  bleed  easily.  [Swedjaur, 1.  c.]
Ulcers,  extremely  painful  at  the  slightest  touch,  which  excrete  an
acrid  corrosive  ichor,  rapidly  increase  in  size  and  form  irregular
elevations  and  depressions,  as  if  eaten  out  by  insects,  with  irregular

* From  crude  mercury  triturated  with  licorice  powder.

f From  the  internal  use  of  corrosive  sublimate.

£ From  corrosive  sublimate  internally.


MERCURIUS.


199


rapid  pulse ; the  patient  loses  sleep,  cannot  rest,  breaks  out  into
profuse  perspiration  at  night ; the  least  thing  irritates  him  and  makes
him  impatient.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

A sort  of  miliary  eruption  on  the  skin,  somewhat  resembling
measles,  accompanied  by  burning  and  itching.  [Bell,* * * §  On  Malignant
Gonorrhoea  and  Venereal  Disease , Leipzig,  1794,  ii,  p.  23 6.]

90.  All  the  skin,  especially  on  the  chest,  thighs,  and  lower  parts
of  the  back,  covered  with  miliary  rash.  [Engel,  1.  c.]

Spots  all  over  the  body,  resembling  scorbutus,  and  between  them
itch- like  eruption,  tetters  and  boils.  [Huber,  1.  c.]

The  epidermis  desquamates,  particularly  in  the  hands  and  feet.
[Heuermann,  1.  c.]

Erysipelas.  [Clare. f]

Thickening  of  the  periosteum.  [J.  Hunter,  Treatise  on  Venereal
Disease , p.  632.]

95.  Swelling  of  the  bones.  [Louvrier,  1.  c.]

Caries  of  the  bones  and  abscesses  in  the  joints.  [Bethke,  Schlag-
fiuss , p.  406.]

Extreme  emaciation.  [Fourcroy,  1.  c.]

Desiccation  of  the  whole  body.  [Richter,  1.  c.~ Louis  in  Pibrac ,
Memoires  de  V Acad,  royale  de  Chirurgie , t.  iv.]

General  emaciation  and  prostration  of  strength.  [Swedjaur,  l.c.]
100.  Extreme  sensitiveness  to  electricity.  [Hunter,  1.  c.]

General  immobility ; a kind  of  cataleptic  state.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]
Paralysis  of  various  limbs.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Apoplexy.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Syncopes.  [Swedjaur,!  1.  c.]

105.  Internal  repeated  syncopes.  [Misc.  Nat.  Cur.j  1.  c.]

Loss  of  strength.  [Huber,  I.  c.]

Continued  sleeplessness.  [Degner,  1.  c.]

First  quick,  intermittent,  strong  pulse,  then  trembling  weak
pulse.  [Jac.  Hill,  1.  c.]

Fever;  general  irritability  of  the  nervous  system.  [Swedjaur,

1.  c.'

no.  Fever,  with  very  painful  local  inflammations,  ending  in  gangrene.
[Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Slow  fever.  [Swedjaur,  1.  c.]

Slow  fever,  with  perceptible  emaciation  of  the  body.§  [Richter,
l.c.]

Hectic  fever.  [Richter,  1.  c.,  i,  1,  p.  40.]

Acute,  putrid  fever.  [Heuermann,  1.  c.]

1 15.  Exhausting  perspirations.  [Wedel,  1.  c.]

Very  oppressed  respiration,  great  dislike  to  fluids,  then  a kind  of
mania,  in  which  he  tried  to  tear  to  pieces  everything  he  could  lay
hands  on.||  [Remarks  of  the  French  translator  of  Cullen’s  First  Lines .]

* From  rubbing  in  mercurial  ointment,

f From  external  employment  of  mercurial  ointment.

J From  mercurial  vapour.

§ Removed  by  seltzer  water  and  milk.

||  Nine  days  after  inunction  of  mercurial  ointment  for  supposed  syphilis  in  a
young  man.


MOSCHUS.1

(Musk.)

(The  unctuous  substance  contained  in  the  hairy  bag  situated  behind  the  navel  of
the  musk  deer  ( Moschus  moschiferus ),  inhabiting  the  mountainous  parts  of  Asia,  is
dried  to  the  greenish  musk  of  commerce.)

The  following  symptoms,  which  it  would  be  desirable  to  see  increased
to  greater  completeness,  give  us  some  indications  of  a very  powerful
substance  with  qualities  not  met  with  in  any  other  drug.

Hitherto  only  a very  empirical  use  has  been  made  of  musk,  and
especially  in  these  latter  times  it  has  been  so  universally  abused  by
being  given  in  large  expensive  doses  to  dying  persons,  that  it  has  been
universally  ridiculed  by  the  public.

If  we  knew  the  exact  kinds  of  convulsions  that  musk  is  capable
of  producing,  which,  however,  have  been  only  indicated  by  this  one  word
by  medical  authors,  according  to  their  usual  custom,  we  might  deter-
mine the  cases  of  some  convulsive  affections  of  children  in  which  this
drug  might  be  homoeopathically  serviceable.

That  it  is  a useful  remedy  in  various  kinds  of  tetanus  we  learn  from
the  very  precise  experiences  of  Lentin,  Zanetti,  Morgenstern,
Robol  and  others.  In  these  cases  musk  acts  homoeopathically  as  we
can  see  from  its  peculiar  symptoms.

We  shall  learn  great  curative  powers  from  it  in  the  tense,
tonic  spasmodic  conditions  of  most  hypochondriacal  persons,  provided
we  do  not  use  it  in  the  large  doses  hitherto  employed,  but  in  the  smallest
highly  potentized  doses,  at  all  events  as  a homoeopathic  intermediate
remedy.

For  this  purpose  a grain  of  good  musk  is  triturated  with  three  times
ioo  grains  of  milk  sugar  for  three  hours  up  to  the  million-fold  powder
attenuation,  and  the  solution  of  one  grain  of  this  in  ioo  drops  of  diluted
alcohol,  after  two  succussions,  is  further  brought  through  25  dilution
phials  (each  filled  to  two  thirds,  by  100  drops  of  alcohol)  up  to  the
decillion-fold  potency  (according  to  the  directions  in  the  second  part  of
the  Chronic  Diseases ).  A small  globule  moistened  with  this  is  the  appro-
priate homoeopathic  dose.

Its  power  of  exciting  the  sexual  function  is  primary  action,  and  it
produces  the  opposite  condition  in  its  secondary  action  ; so  that  persons
who  carry  musk  about  them,  in  order  to  make  them  smell  pleasantly,
weaken  themselves  by  the  continual  influence  of  this  powerful  perfume
on  the  nerves,  and  cause  a number  of  nervous  excitations.

The  smell  of  musk  communicated  to  clothes  and  vessels,  remains


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1S30,


MOSCHUS.


201


for  ever  so  many  years,  and  is  hardly  to  be  got  rid  of  by  the  aid  of  heat,
wherefore  such  things  ought  to  be  carefully  removed  from  patients
affected  by  chronic  disease.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Gross,  Friedrich  Hahnemann,
and  Stapf.

Symptoms  are  derived  from  the  following  old-school  authorities :

Bartholin,  Th.,  Epist.  Med.,  Cent.  ii.

Boecler,  Adnot.  ad  Herrmanni  Cynos.  Mat.  Med.

Boerhaave,  De  Morb.  Nerv.

Boyle,  Rob.,  De  Insigni  Effl.  effic.

Cartheuser,  Eundam.  Mat.  Med.

Cranz,  H.  J.  N.,  Mat.  Med.,  i.

Crell,  Lor.,  in  Baldinger's  Magaz.,  vii.

Cullen,  Mat.  Med.,  ii.

Fuller,  Pharm.  Extemp.

Hemann,  J.  A.,  Med.  Aufsatze.  Berlin,  1778.

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Med.  Rat.  Syst.,  iii.

Loeseke,  Mat.  Med.

Mead,  Monita  med.

Medicus,  F.  C.,  Samml.  v.  Beobacht.  a.  d.  Arzn.,  ii.

Mercurialis,  H.,  De  Compos.  Med.,  i.

Morgenstern,  in  Nova  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  iv,  1770.

Pelargus,  Obs .,  ii.

Piderit,  Pharm.  Rat.

Reil,  Erkenntniss  u.  Kur  d.  Fieb.,  iv.

Riedlin,  Lin.  Med.

Rolfinck,  Epist.  Meth.  Cogn.  et  Curand.  m.,  Cap.  de  Cap.  dot.

Sanctorius,  Comment,  in  Artem.  Med.  Gal.

Schroeck,  Lucas,  Hist.  Moschi.  Aug.  Vindel.,  1682.

Sennert,  Med.pr.,  lib.  iv.

Sylvius,  Jac.,  Meth.  Medic.  Comp . et  Simpl,  i,  Cap.  de  Animalibus.

Tralles,  B.  L.,  De  Moschi  laudibus  et  abusu  limitandis  in  medela  morborum.
Vratisl.,  1783.

Vogel,  Hist.  Mat.  Med.

Wall,  in  Philosoph.  Transact.,  No.  474.

Wedel,  G.  W.,  Amoen.  Mat.  Med.

Weickhard,  Med.  Bract.  Handbuch.  Heilbronn  und  Rothenb.,  1798,  1799.
Whytt,  Rob.,  Works.

The  1st  edit,  has  39  symptoms,  the  2nd  and  3rd  152.]


MOSCHUS.

Vertigo.  [Cartheuser,  Fundam.  Mat,  Med.,  p.  380.1]

He  has  a feeling  in  the  head  like  vertigo.*  [Gw.]

On  the  slightest  movement  of  the  head,  giddy  swaying  before  the
eyes,  as  if  something  moved  rapidly  up  and  down  (immediately,  merely
from  smelling). f [*SV/'.]

Whirling  in  the  forehead  and  before  the  eyes,  worse  on  stooping
(aft.  | h.).  IStf.-]

* From  two  grains  in  powder.

f From  two  grains  rubbed  up  with  sugar  and  water,  given  in  three  doses  in  two
days.


1 Observation.


202


MOSCHUS.


5.  Vertigo  with  nausea,  so  that  he  must  lie  down  ; at  the  same
time  longing  for  black  coffee  (aft.  30  h.).  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Stupefaction  of  the  brain.  [B.  L.  Tralles,  De  Moschi  laudibus
et  abusu  limitandis  in  medela  morborum , Vratisl.  1783-8.* 1]

Stupefying,  compressive  headache  on  a small  spot,  just  above  the
root  of  the  nose  (aft.  1 h.).

He  feels  sometimes  as  if  his  senses  would  leave  him,  with  general
stupefying  pressure  on  the  brain,  like  a compression.  [Grr.j

Confusion  of  the  head,  with  stupefying  pressure  on  the  brain.

[£"•]

10.  Confusion  of  the  head ; its  upper  part  seems  to  him  stretched,
but  painless.  [Glt.]

Confusion  of  the  head.  [H.  J.  N.  Cranz,  Mat.  Med.,  i,  p.  252.2]
Confusion  of  the  head  as  from  intoxication.  [Tralles,  1.  c.]
Headache.  [Cartheuser,  1.  c. — Lucas  Schrock,  Hist . Moschi ,
Aug.  Vindel.,  1682.3 — Rolfinck,  Epist.  Meth.  cogn.  et  Curand . m.
Cap.  de  Cap.  do l.4']

Violent  headache.  [Rob.  Boyle,  De  Insigni  Effl.  effic.  Cap.  64.]
15.  During  strong  movement  of  the  head,  e.g.  on  going  up  stairs,  a
painful  feeling  therein  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Stf.~\

Heaviness  in  the  head.  [Tralles,  1.  c. — Fr.  H — n.\

Heavy  feeling  in  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).  [5^]

Her  whole  head  is  painful ; she  has  drawing  here  and  there,
extending  to  the  nape,  where  it  is  tensive  ; better  in  the  open  air,
much  worse  in  the  room  (aft.  1 h.).  [&/'.]

Painful  drawing  in  the  head,  from  the  occiput  into  the  ears  and
from  the  ears  to  the  teeth,  more  in  the  right  side  (aft.  3.).  [5^.]

20.  In  the  temple,  slight  quick  drawing.  [Glt.]

Spasmodic  drawing  through  the  whole  head.  [Gjj.]

Transient  drawing  aching  in  the  right  temple.  [Gjr.]

On  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the  forehead  general  pressure.
[Gss.]

Just  above  the  supra-orbital  ridge,  as  if  a blunt  body  were  there
pressed  into  the  brain.  [Grr.]

25.  On  the  left  eyebrow,  stupefying  pressure.  [Grr.]

The  blood  mounts  to  the  head.  [Sanctorius,  Comment,  in  Artem
Med.  Gal.,  § 7 1.4]

In  the  forehead,  slight  shooting.  [£//'.]

Itching  here  and  there  on  the  hairy*  scalp,  going  off  after  scratching.

[Gw.]

A smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  from  smoke,  with  lachrymation
(immediately  from  the  smell).  [£//'.]

30.  Itching  in  the  eyes,  so  that  she  must  rub  them  (aft.  \ h.).  [*Sy.]
Dimness  before  the  eyes.  \_Stf.'\

Heat  in  the  face  with  dimness  before  the  eyes.

Transient  pressure  on  the  zygomatic  arch,  freq

"•]  ‘

1 Observations.

2 General  statement.

1 Statements  and  observations.

4 Observation  of  effect  of  odour.


[*/.]

uently  recurring.


MOSCHUS.


203


On  the  right  zygoma  transient,  cooling  burning  (aft.  28  h.).  [Gw.]
35.  Sudden,  transient  rushing  in  the  ear,  as  from  the  fluttering  wing
of  a large  bird,  now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  60  h.),

Epistaxis.  [Schroeck,  1.  c. — Boecler,  Adnot . ad  Herrmanni
Cynos.  Mat.  Med .,  p.  io.1 2]

Instantaneous  epistaxis,  from  the  smell.  [H.  Mercurialis,  De
Compos.  Med .,  i,  Cap.  15.3]

Sensation  on  the  tip  of  the  nose,  as  from  the  crawling  of  an
insect,  which  he  often  tries  to  wipe  away  ineffectually,  until  it  goes
off  spontaneously  (aft.  28  h.).  [Gw.]

Everything  tastes  alike  ; milk  has  no  taste.

40.  Repeated,  strong,  audible  eructation  of  air.  [Gw.]

Eructation  of  air,  combined  with  rising  of  a tasteless]  fluid  into
the  mouth.  [Gw.]

Scraping  sensation  up  the  oesophagus,  like  heartburn,  with  some
nausea  as  in  water-brash.  [Gw.]

Nausea  seemed  to  rise  up  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  during  which
the  navel  was  retracted,  with  cramp-like  sensation.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

On  account  of  nausea  and  headache,  she  must  go  to  bed  on  two
afternoons.  \Fr.  H — n.~]

45.  Nausea  by  fits,  for  six  successive  days.  \_Fr.  H — #.]

Sickness,  morning  (aft.  22  h.)  and  evening  (aft.  9 h.).  [£//*.]
Vomiting.  [Morgenstern,  in  FI  ova  Aeta  Nat.  Cur .,  iv,  1770.3]
It  feels  too  tight  about  his  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  smarting
burning  feeling  of  soreness,  every  day  after  dinner,  for  three  succes-
sive days.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

Stomachache.  [Morgenstern,  1.  c.]

50.  Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  gastric  region,  increased  by  even
moderate  eating  (aft.  3 h.),

Some  pressure  on  the  left  side  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.]
In  and  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (in  the  chest)  pain,  parti-
cularly on  inspiration,  combined  with  anxiety  in  the  chest  (aft.  6 h.).

[<?«•]■

Tensive  aching  in  the  gastric  region  with  some  painfulness  of  the
abdomen  ; the  tensive  aching  extended  after  half  an  hour  to  the  whole
of  the  abdomen  (aft.  1^  h.).  [-$£/'.]

In  the  right  side,  under  the  short  ribs,  fine,  sharp,  transient
stitches,  almost  like  fine  pinching,  compelling  him  to  rub.  [Gw.]

55.  Itching  prick  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  under  the  short
ribs  ; the  itching  continues  after  the  prick  has  gone  and  compels  him
to  rub.  [Gw.]

Single  violent  stitches  in  the  umbilical  region,  deep  in,  especially
when  inspiring  (aft.  J h.).  [St/.']

Clutching  together  by  jerks  above  the  navel,  that  takes  away  his
breath.  [Stf.]

1 General  statement.

2 Observation  of  effect  of  inhalation.

3 All  the  symptoms  referred  to  this  author  (wrongly  given  as  u Morgenbesser  ”)
are  such  as  he  has  seen  cured  by  Moschus  (p.  259).


204


MOSCHUS.


Pain  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Morgenstern,  1.  c.]

In  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  below  the  navel,  simple  pain.

[<?«•]

60.  She  feels  too  tight  in  the  abdomen,  without  pain,  with  anxiety,
so  that  she  cannot  do  any  work  nor  remain  in  one  place,  but  must
run  about;  she  ran  to  several  of  her  acquaintances,  but  remained
with  none  above  a few  minutes  (immediately).  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Loud  rumbling  without  cessation  in  the  abdomen,  without  flatu-
lent sufferings ; it  ceases  after  a meal,  and  even  while  eating.  [Gw.]
Diarrhoea.  [Morgenstern,  1.  c.]

He  has  urging  to  evacuation  of  flatus  and  stool ; the  stool  is
natural ; before  but  not  with  the  latter,  a little  flatus  is  expelled.

[<?«•]

Constipation  for  several  days.  [Fr.  H — n.]

65.  Formication  at  the  orifice  of  the  rectum,  which  goes  off  on
rubbing.  [Gw.]

Its  seems  to  excite  the  sexual  desire.  [Gw.]

Excitation  of  the  sexual  desire.  [Vogel,  Hist . Mat.  Med .,  p.
356.1 — Piderit,  Pharm.  Rat.,  p.  268.2]

Exalted  sexual  power  in  a weak  old  man.  [Weickhard,3 4  Med.
Pract.  Handbuch , Heilbronn  und  Rothenb.,  1798,  1799.*]

Promotes  the  menses.  [Schroeck,  1.  c.]

70.  Occurrence  of  the  menses  from  the  mere  smell.  [Vogel,  1.  c.—
Th.  Bartholin,  Epist.  Med.,  Cent,  ii,  p.  87.*]

A drawing  and  forcing  towards  the  genitals ; feeling
as  if  the  menses  were  coming  on  (aft.  9,  22  h.).  [St/.]

The  menses  came  six  days  too  soon,  and  very  profusely  (aft.  5 d.).

im


Violent  sneezing.  [Gw.]

The  nose  which  was  previously  stopped  up  with  coryza  becomes
suddenly  free  after  copious  discharge  by  blowing  it.  [Gw.]

75.  In  the  larynx  a sensation  like  sulphur  vapour,  with  constriction
of  the  windpipe  from  the  smell  (immediately).  [5//'.]

During  inspiration,  which  is  quite  free,  he  has  almost  the  sensa-
tion as  if  he  had  previously  inhaled  sulphur  vapour.  [Gw.]

In  the  upper  part  of  the  larynx  a sudden  feeling  as  if  his  breath
would  be  stopped,  almost  like  what  occurs  when  sulphur  vapour  has
been  inhaled.  [Gw.]

Suffocating  constriction  of  the  chest.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.
Syst.,  iii,  p.  92. 5]

* 66,  67,  68  merely  primary  effects.


1 Observations.

2 General  statement  (p.  266).

3 Observation. — The  symptom  should  be,  “ A small  and  retracted  penis  in  an
octogenarian  suddenly  attains  its  former  size.”

4 Observation  of  effect  of  odour.

6 General  statement  of  effects  of  odour  of  “ suaveolentia.”


MOSCHUS.


205


Tightness  of  breath  ; she  must  breath  deeply.  [St/.']

80.  Compression  of  the  chest.1  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

In  the  left  side,  under  the  short  ribs,  tightness  on  breathing
deeply.  [G.^.]

Fulness  in  the  chest.  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

In  the  side,  at  the  short  ribs,  itching  pinching.  [Grr.]

In  the  left  side,  under  the  short  ribs,  intermittent  obtuse  stitches.
[Gss.]

85.  In  the  left  half  of  the  chest  obtuse,  intermittent  stitches  (aft.  28
h.).  [Gss.]

In  the  left  side,  above  the  coccyx,  in  the  sacrum,  painful  pressure,
as  with  a blunt  instrument.  [Grr.]

Violent  drawing  in  the  back;  she  feels  as  if  tightly  bound  there,
as  before  the  menses.  [£//'.]

On  the  left,  near  the  spine  in  the  middle  of  the  trunk,  inter-
mittent, obtuse  stitches.  [Grr.]

Drawing  pressure  in  a muscle  of  the  nape.  [Gss.]

90.  In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  there  came  a drawing
and  shooting  in  the  left  forearm,  from  the  wrist  to  the  elbow-joint,
which  prevented  her  going  to  sleep ; she  must  put  it  out  of  bed  and
move  it  up  and  down,  in  order  to  allay  the  pain,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.

6 h.).  [&/.]

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  under  side  of  the  left  forearm,  near  the
elbow.  [Grr.]

Paralytic  drawing  in  the  right  forearm,  just  above  the  wrist.

[Gss.-]

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  hands  and  fingers,  as  if  cramp
(tetanus)  would  come  there.  [Glt.]

In  the  left  hand  semi-obtuse  shooting.  [Gjr.]

95.  Paralytic  drawing  in  the  left  thumb,  as  if  cramp  would  come
there.  [Glt.]

In  the  left  thumb  paralytic  twitching.  [Gjj.]

A kind  of  chilling  burning  in  the  distal  joint  of  the  right
index.  [Gjj.]

In  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  left  index  an  inward,  simple  pain  ;
the  finger  trembles  from  it  (immediately).  [Gss.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh  paralytic  twitching.  [Grr.]
100.  On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh  sudden  aching.  [G^.]

Squeezing,  obtuse  pressure  in  the  flesh  of  the  right  thigh  on  its
posterior  aspect,  more  towards  the  outer  side.  [Gjj.]

Itching  pricking,  compelling  rubbing,  on  the  anterior  side  of  the
thigh.  [Grr.]

Above  the  right  knee  sharp  pinching.  [Grj.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  thigh,  not  far  from  the  knee,  simple
aching  with  feeling  of  weakness.  [Gjj.]

105.  On  the  left  tibia  sudden  feeling  of  coldness.  [Glt.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  tibia,  towards  the  calf,  sharp  itching,
which  is  removed  by  rubbing.  [Gjx.]


1 With  the  “fulness”  of  S.  82.


2o6


MOSCHUS.


A paralytic  pain  (painful  powerlessness)  extends  downwards
through  the  left  leg,  as  if  it  would  become  stiff,  when  sitting.  [Gw.]
Restlessness  in  the  left  leg,  so  that  he  must  now  draw  it  up,  now
extend  it — a paralytic  (stiff)  feeling,  that  compels  him  to  move  the
leg  in  order  to  obtain  momentary  ease.  [Gw.]

When  sitting  he  must  constantly  move  the  lower  extremities,
otherwise  they  feel  quite  weak,  and  he  has  a restlessness  in  them,  as
after  a long  walk.  [Gw.]

no.  If,  when  sitting,  he  holds  the  legs  still,  they  threaten  to  go  to
sleep,  a humming  sensation.  [Gw.]

If,  when  sitting,  he  draws  his  feet  back,  he  feels  in  the  legs,  some-
what also  in  the  thighs,  a whirring  (tingling)  sensation,  as  if  they
were  fatigued  by  a long  journey,  or  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep.

[G«.]

In  the  right  little  toe  a squeezing,  as  if  some  one  had  trod  on  it.

[<?«.]

Burning  aching  in  the  tips  of  the  toes  of  the  right  foot.  [Gw.]
Prickling  in  all  the  muscles.  [J.  A,  Hemann,  Med.  Aufsatze ,
Berlin,  1 778.1]

1 15.  Itching  pinching  and  fine  needle-pricks  on  various  parts  of  the
body,  which  compel  rubbing.  [Gw.]

(In  venereal  tetters,  which  generally  kept  quiet,  a violent,
intolerable  burning.)  \_Fr.  H — ».]

Haemorrhages.2  [Piderit,  1.  c.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  whole  body.  \_Stf.~\

He  knows  not  what  ails  him,  but  there  comes  on  sometimes  a
kind  of  discomfort,  a slight  faintness,  which  immediately  passes  off
again.  [Gw.]

120.  Tetanus.  [F.  C.  Medicus,  Samml.  v.  Beobacht . a.  d.  Arzn .,  ii,
pp.  605 — 618.3]

Convulsions.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,™ Morgenstern,  1.  c.]

The  most  violent  convulsions  in  women  and  men.  [Boerhaave,
De  Morb.  Nerv .,  p.  744-4]

Hysterical  sufferings.  [Schroeck,  1.  c. — Sennert,  Med.  pr .,
lib.  4, 5 p.  125. — G.  W.  Wedel,  Amoen.  Mat.  Med.,  p,  198.6 — Jac.
Sylvius,  Meth.  Med.  Comp,  et  Simpl. , i,  Cap.  de  Animalibus .7]
Hypochondriacs  are  affected  by  it.  [Wedel,  1.  c.]

125.  Hysterical  affections,  even  in  males.8  [Riedljn,*  Lin.  Med.,  p.
856.]

* Musk  was  combined  with  ambra.


1 Not  accessible.

2 The  original  is,  “ Sanguinis  profluvia  pellit.”

8 Observation. — The  original  simply  has  “ stiffness  of  the  body,”  and  the  symptom
occurred  in  a maniac.

4 General  statement  as  to  effects  of  odour. — Boerhaave  says,  “hypochondriacal
men.”

5 Observation  of  effects  of  odour.

6 Statement  as  to  effects  of  “ suaveolentia,  moschata,  et  volatilia  ” generally.

7 Observation  of  effects  of  odour. — All  these  observers  add  to  “ hysterical  affec-
tions”— “in  persons  subject  to  them.”

8 Should  be — “even  in  a man:”  i.e.  the  subject  of  the  observation.


MOSCHUS.


207


Syncopes.  [Fr.  Hoffmann. — Cartheuser,  l.c.— Mead,  Monita
Med.,  p.  123.1 2 — Pelargus,*  Obs .,  ii,  p.  492.3 4 — Fuller,  Pharm.
Extemp .,  p.  302.s]

Syncope,  followed  by  headache.  [Schroeck,  1.  c.]

When  walking  he  does  not  feel  any  weakness,  but  when  he  sits
down  he  immediately  feels  paralytic  weakness  in  the  knees,  as  from
great  loss  of  power  and  exhaustion,  [Gw.]

Somnolence  (coma).  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

130.  Sleep.  [Cullen,  Mat.  Med.,  ii,  p.  644^]

Restless  night ; he  dreams  incessantly,  dreams  full  of  effort  and
exertion ; he  could  not  lie  long  in  one  place,  for  the  part  on  which
he  lay  pained  as  if  dislocated  or  broken  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gw.]

Night  full  of  vivid,  defamatory  dreams,  in  which  everything  goes
wrong,  and  which  make  him  very  angry  (aft.  48  h.).  [Gw.]

He  felt  as  if  a cool  wind  suddenly  blew  on  him,  especially  on  the
uncovered  parts,  particularly  the  hands.  [Gw.]

When  he  went  out  into  the  open,  not  cold,  air  it  felt  cold  to
him,  and  he  sought  the  heat  of  the  stove  (aft.  h.).  [Gw.]

135.  Slight  shuddering  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  spread  in  a less
degree  over  the  whole  body  (immediately).  [Gw.]

Whilst  his  hands  seemed  to  be  of  the  natural  heat  the  left  felt
warm,  the  right  cold ; to  the  face  both  felt  cool  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gw.]
Pulse  fuller,  but  from  4 to  5 beats  slower  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lor.
Crell,  in  Baldinger  s Magaz .,  vii  st.,  p.  656. 5 6]

The  pulse  is  less  full  and  much  quicker,  accelerated  from  72  to
88  beats  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gw.]

No  thirst  either  during  the  shivering  or  afterwards.  [Gw.]

140.  After  the  shivering  comfortable  feeling  of  natural  warmth  through
the  whole  body  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gw.]

After  the  natural  agreeable  feeling  of  warmth  a slight  shiver  again
spreads  from  the  head  down  through  the  body  (aft.  1 5 m.).  [Gw.]
Very  much  increased  heat  of  the  whole  body,  with  copious  per-
spiration and  increased  liveliness  (immediately).  \_StfT\

Heat.  [Schroeck,  1.  c. — Loeseke,  Mat.  Med.,  p.  529.® — Rob.
Whytt,  Works,  p.  504. 7]

Increases  to  the  extremest  degree  the  movement  of  the  blood.8
[Piderit,  1.  c.]

145.  When  she  got  to  bed  (9  p.m.)  burning  heat  on  the  whole  body
(the  right  side  seemed  the  hotter),  with  dry  feeling  and  scraping  in
throat  and  mouth  and  moderate  thirst ; bed  was  intolerable  to  her,

* Musk  in  a pessary.


1 Observation.

2 Not  accessible.

3 General  statement  of  effects  of  odour.

4 Effects  of  large  doses.

6  Not  found.  (The  volume  specified  has  only  51 1 pages.)

6 General  statement.

7 Statement.

8 The  only  statement  answering  to  this  in  the  original  is  that,  in  disease,  musk
umorbi  materies,  prsesertim  exanthemata*  versus  corporis  peripheram  ducit.”


208


MOSCHUS.


she  must  lie  uncovered  ; at  the  same  time  shooting  (?)  pain  in  the
forehead,  giddy  before  the  eyes,  bruised  all  over  the  body,  sleepless,
restless  ; she  tossed  about,  felt  a jerking  clutching  together  above
the  navel,  and  a forcing  down  to  the  genitals,  with  extreme  cross-
ness ; the  attack  lasted  an  hour  (aft.  9 h.).  [£//'.]

Every  morning  slight  perspiration.

Perspiration.  [Piderit, — Cullen,  1.  c.]

Slight  transpiration.  [Wall,  in  Philosoph.  Trans .,  No.  4.74.1]
Sweat  without  heat.  [Reil,  Erkenntniss  und  Kur  d.  Fieb .,  iv,  p.

174.2]

150.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  as  from  anxious  expectation  (aft.
4 h.).  [St/.]

Great  anxiety.  [Fr.  Hoffmann, — Cartheuser,  1.  c.,  p.  380.]
Cross  (the  first  hours).  [<S7/i]


1 In  the  original,  u a universal  breathing  sweat.”

2 Not  found.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.1

( Muriatic  acid.)

(It  should  be  carefully  freed  from  the  sulphuric  acid  often  mixed  with  it,  by  means
of  re-distillation  over  chloride  of  sodium,  or  (better)  it  may  be  precipitated  by
muriate  of  baryta,  and,  after  being  thus  freed  from  the  sulphuric  acid,  re-distilled.)

For  medicinal  use  one  drop  of  it  is  first  diluted  by  means  of  two  suc-
cussions  with  ioo  drops  of  diluted  alcohol  (made  of  equal  parts  of
distilled  water  and  strong  alcohol  shaken  together  ten  times),  and  of
this  one  drop  is  to  be  twice  succussed  (with  two  strokes  of  the  arm)  with
ioo  drops  of  undiluted  alcohol  (Tofooth),  and  then  of  this  one  drop  is  to
be  again  twice  shaken  with  ioo  drops  of  alcohol  (4).  One  globule  the
size  of  a poppy  seed,  moistened  with  this  million-fold  dilution,  is  given
for  a homoeopathic  dose.  This  represents  the  smallest  portion  of  a
drop,  for  with  one  drop  200  such  globules  are  sufficiently  moistened.
Yet  this  million-fold  dilution,  although  administered  in  such  a small
volume,  will  be  found  in  many  cases  to  be  still  too  powerful  when
muriatic  acid  is  homoeopathically  indicated,  because  this  medicine
possesses  a high  degree  of  efficacy.

Although  a tolerably  homoeopathic  employment  in  suitable  morbid
states  can  be  made  from  the  following  observed  alterations  in  the
healthy,  yet  it  would  be  desirable  to  possess  a more  complete  proving
of  it  as  to  its  pure  effects.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-provers  were  Gutmann,  Hartmann,  Haynei,,  Lang-

HAMMER,  STAPF,  WlSLICENUS.

Symptoms  were  obtained  from  the  following  old-school  authorities :

Crawford,  in  Samml.f  prakt.  Aerzte , xv,  3.

Du  Mesnil,  in  Sachse , Hufel.  Journ .,  xxviii,  vi.

Hufeland's  Journal , xviii,  iii.

Humboldt,  XJeber  die  Reizbarkeit  der  Faser.

Letocha,  in  Hufel.  Journ. , xviii,  iii.

Ramazzini,  De  Mor bis  Artificum.

Samml.  f.  prakt.  Aerzte , xv,  3 .

Schaekel  (reference  not  given).

Schmidtmuller,  in  Horn's  Archie , ix.

Theiner,  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunst , 18 11,  April.

Westrumb,  in  Sachse , Hufel.  Journ.,  xxviii,  vi.

The  1st  edit,  has  274  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit,  only  5 more.]


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.

Whirling  in  the  open  air  and  unsteady  in  walking

(aft.  i|  h.).  [G».]


VOL.  II.


1 From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.,  1826.


14


210


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


Whirling  in  the  head,  more  so  in  the  room  than  in  the  open  air,
with  dimness  before  the  eyes.  [$£/".]

Headache  in  the  forehead  and  occiput,  which,  especially  that  in
the  forehead  is  aggravated  by  sitting  up  in  bed.

Tearing  pain  in  the  forehead.

5.  Pressive  pain  from  within  outwards  in  the  forehead  and  temples
(aft.  a few  m.).  \JVs.~\

A pressive  stupefying  pain  in  the  forehead  in  every  position  of
the  body,  which  went  off  by  touching  (aft.  i \ h.).  [Zr.]

Stupid  in  the  head,  in  the  forehead.  [£{/".]

Long,  frequently  recurring  stitches  from  both  frontal  protuber-
ances towards  the  middle  of  the  forehead  (aft.  7 h.).  \_Htn.~\

Headache  like  a boring  in  several  places  in  the  vertex,  from  the
bones  of  the  skull  into  the  brain  (aft.  10  h.).  \JVs.~\

10.  Long  tearing  pressing  pain  darting  by  shocks  into  the  forehead
towards  the  right  orbit  (aft.  5J  h.).  \_Htnt~\

Aching  pain  in  the  left  temple  (aft.  \\  h.).  [ Gn .]

Aching  pain  from  the  middle  of  the  brain  out  towards  the  left
side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  6 h.).  [ Gn .]

Aching  pain  in  the  front  of  the  brain,  increased  by  moving  the
eyes  (aft.  3d.).  [(?».]

Tensive  pressive  pain  spreading  from  the  occipital  bone  forwards
through  the  brain  and  ending  in  the  forehead  (aft.  h.).  [ Gn.~\

1 5.  Jerking  beating  tearing  pain  from  the  left  half  of  the
occiput  to  the  forehead ; soon  followed  by  a similar  pain
in  the  right  half  (aft.  7 h.).  [#/«.]

Heaviness  in  the  occiput,  as  if  it  drew  her  head  backwards,  or  as
if  the  anterior  cervical  muscles  had  lost  their  firmness  (aft.  if  h.).

IGn.]

Heavy  feeling  in  the  occiput,  with  drawing  stitches
there,  more  on  the  right  side,  close  to  the  nape,  with
swelling  of  a gland  in  the  nape,  which  is  painful  when
touched ; at  the  same  time  heaviness  and  vertigo  in  the
head,  with  dimness  of  the  eyes  as  when  intoxicated
(when  sitting)  (aft.  f h.).  \Htn.~\

Sensation  in  the  integuments  of  the  head  and  forehead,  as  when
the  hair  stands  on  end  after  a fright  (aft.  5,  7 h.).  [ Gn .]

Burning  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp  above  the  left  temple  (aft.  7ih.)

[G*.]

20.  Tensive  sensation  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  7^  h.).  [Gn!\

Pressive  stupefying  pain  in  the  forehead,  in  all  positions  (aft.  1 h.).

[Zr.]

(Headache  in  the  top  of  the  head  and  in  the  temples,  sometimes
also  in  the  occiput  and  forehead,  as  if  the  brain  were  lacerated  and
crushed,  as  in  typhus  or  putrid  fever.)  (aft.  4 h.)

When  yawning,  a stitch-like  tearing  on  the  right  temple,  which
went  off*  by  touching  and  when  walking  (when  standing)  (aft.  1 h.).

i^g

Shooting  in  the  forehead  extending  into  the  temple,  increased
by  stooping  forwards  and  by  pressing  on  it.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


21 1


25.  In  the  middle  of  the  forehead  two  small  pimples  which  suppurate
without  itching  or  pains  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.]

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  forehead  which  in  the  course  of  a day
and  night  coalesce  so  as  to  form  a scab.*  [Schmidtmuller,1  in
Horn’s  Archw , ix,  11.]

Suppurating  pimple  on  the  left  temple  without  sensation  in  it
when  touched  or  let  alone  (aft.  9.  h.).  [Zr.]

Burning  aching  pain  above  the  left  eye,  externally  (aft.  2j  h.)
[Htn.]

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  f,  if,  2,  2f  h.).  [Zr.]

30.  Dilated  pupils  (aft.  11  h.).  [Zr.]

Very  dilated  pupils  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.]

Pupils  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less  dilated,  sometimes  con-
tracted, in  periods  of  four  or  five  hours.  [Zr.]

From  the  left  occipital  protuberance  a painless  tug  into  the  left
eye,  which  causes  a quivering  in  the  upper  eyelid  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]
Swelling  of  the  upper  and  lower  eyelid,  with  redness,  but  without
pain  (aft.  7 h.).  [Gw.]

35.  Cutting  pain  in  the  right  eyeball,  when  at  rest  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Gw.]
In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye  an  eroding  smarting,  in  the
evening.

Itching  prick  in  the  right  outer  canthus,  when  at  rest.  [Gw.]
Twitching  through  the  upper  eyelid  towards  the  zygomatic
process,  as  if  a thread  were  drawn  through  (immediately).  [TVs.]
(Flickering  before  the  eyes  and  hemiopia ; he  sees  only  the  half
of  an  object  cut  off  perpendicularly  from  the  other  half.)

40.  Cramp-pain  near  the  left  maxillary  joint,  extending  as  a shooting
pain  into  the  interior  of  the  ear  when  pressed  upon  (aft.  5 h.).

[«<*.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  upper  jaw,  as  if  in  the  bone,  close  undei
the  orbit  (aft.  2^  h,).  [Htn.]

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  auricle,  which  in  the  course  of  a
day  and  a night  coalesce  to  form  a scab.  [Schmidtmuller,  1.  c.]
Fine  itching  prick  in  the  left  ear,  which  went  off  by  putting  the
finger  into  it  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gw.]

Twitching  pinching  deep  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  4 h.),
which  after  frequent  recurrence  became  cramp-like,
almost  like  earache.  [Htn.]

45.  Drawing  aching  on  the  tragus,  pressing  on  it  sends  the  pain  into
the  inner  ear  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Htn.]

Persistent  pinching  deep  in  the  right  ear,  sometimes  interrupted
by  severe  stitches  which  extend  to  behind  the  auricle,  where  the  part
is  painful  when  pressed  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  ear,  like  earache  (aft.  8J  h.).  [Htn.]
Obtuse  pressive  cutting  on  the  mastoid  process  ; when  touched
the  part  is  painful  as  if  gathering  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  behind  both  ears,  which  spreads  slowly  to
# From  drachm-doses  of  so-called  oxygenated  muriatic  acid  ( aqua  oxy  muriatic  a).


1 Not  accessible.


12


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


the  lower  part  of  the  nape  and  there  causes  a painful  stiffness  on
moving  the  neck,  for  twenty  minutes  (aft.  8J  h.).  \_Htn,~\

50.  More  acute  and  delicate  hearing.*

Shooting  pain  in  the  nostrils,  as  if  they  would  become  ulcerated
(aft.  2 h.).

When  walking  in  the  open  air  glowing  red  cheeks  (aft.  14  h.).
[Zr.]

In  the  red  of  the  lower  lip  a pustule.

Eruption  of  pimples  round  about  the  lips,  which  in  the  course  of
a day  and  a night  coalesce  to  form  a scab.  [Schmidtmuller,  1.  c.]
55.  A vesicle  on  the  upper  lip  close  to  the  left  commissure  of  the
mouth,  which  pains  like  an  ulcer  when  touched,  and  causes  tensive
pain  when  the  lips  are  moved,  lasting  two  days  (aft  \ h.).  \Gn.~\

Burning  tension  in  the  upper  lip,  on  the  right  side  (aft  7 h.).

[<?»•]

Pressing-asunder  pain  in  the  left  canine  tooth  of  the  lower  jaw,
going  off  on  compressing  it  with  two  fingers  (aft.  J h.).  \_Htn.~\

Tingling  sensation  in  the  inferior  maxilla  on  its  left  side,
which  changes  into  a disagreeable  creeping  sensation  in  the  left  lower
row  of  teeth  (aft.  1 h.).  \Htn^\

Cold  drink  darts  painfully  into  the  diseased  tooth  (aft.  24  h.)

60.  His  tongue  is  too  heavy  and  as  if  too  long ; he  felt  when  he  tried
to  speak  as  if  he  had  lead  in  the  tongue  3 and  he  could  only  raise  it
with  an  effort  ; at  the  same  time  great  dryness  in  the  mouth  and
fauces — both  lasting  five  minutes  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Htn.~]

The  tongue  becomes  sore  and  bluish.  [Letocha,1  in  Hufel.
Journ .,  xviii,  iii,  pp.  45,  46.]

A pock  in  the  middle  of  the  tongue  with  burning  pain.  [Letocha,

c.y

1 he  tongue  gets  a deep  ulcer  with  black  fundus  and  everted
borders.  [Letocha,  1.  c.]

The  tongue  wastes  away.  [Letocha,  1.  c.]

65.  A sharp  scraping  in  the  gullet.

Ravenous  appetite,  morbid  thirst. t [Ramazzini,  De  Morbis
Artificum , cap.  31.]

A taste  in  the  mouth  at  once  harsh  and  putrid,  almost  like  rotten
eggs,  with  flow  of  saliva  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Zr.]

Bad  taste  in  the  throat,  as  from  rancid  fat.

(Complete  loss  of  appetite  for  all  food,  with  proper  taste  and
without  nausea.)

70.  Constant  eructation.

Vomiting  of  food.

In  the  region  of  the  stomach  he  feels  qualmish  and  inclined  to
vomit  (aft.  1 h.).

* Curative  secondary  action  of  the  organism.

f In  the  workmen  employed  in  salt  manufactories,  from  the  vapour  of  muriatic
acid  arising  from  the  boiling  ley.


1 No  Letocha,  and  nothing  about  muriatic  acid,  to  be  found  at  this  reference.  (See
note  to  S,  134  .)


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


213


Obtuse  pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  combined  with  a
contractive  sensation,  for  several  days.*  [Crawford,  in  Samml.  f.
prakt.  Aerzte , xv,  3.1]

Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
especially  in  the  oesophagus,  which  does  not  go  off  by
eating,  together  with  rumbling  in  the  bowels  (aft.  1 h.).

\Ws.-\

75.  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  with  grumbling  (aft.  1 h.).
[Htn.]

(Colic  : pinching  when  moving  and  on  the  discharge  of  flatus.)
After  a proper  stool  of  natural  appearance,  painful  feeling  of
emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning  (the  5th  d.).  [Hnl.]

After  a very  moderate  meal,  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,
as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [ Stf. ]
Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  emptiness  (when  sitting)
(aft.  si  h.).  [£r.]

80.  Rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [*SV/'.]

Pain  like  needle-pricks  round  about  the  navel,  persistent  (aft.
24  h.).  [Gn.]

Shooting  in  the  left  side,  under  the  ribs.  [St/.]

In  the  hypogastrium,  violent  cutting  when  sitting,  walking  and
standing  (aft.  4 d.).  [ Hnl. ]

Cutting  pain  under  the  navel,  through  the  middle  of  the  whole
abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Htn .]

85.  Violent  pinching  from  the  umbilical  region  towards
both  sides,  with  grumbling  (aft  \ h.).  [Htn.]

Violent  pinching  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  a feeling  of
emptiness,  which  extends  to  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  oppresses
there  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Htn.]

Aching  squeezing  under  the  left  short  ribs,  unaffected
either  by  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  if  h.).  [Htn.]

The  distended  abdomen  has  aching  pain,  and  at  every  step  this
goes  through  her  abdomen.  [*SV/^]

Squeezing  tension  under  the  short  ribs,  causing  him  to  make
several  deep  inspirations,  and  going  off  after  the  discharge  of  some
flatus  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Htn.]

90.  Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  whole  abdomen  that  causes  anxiety,
is  alleviated  by  the  discharge  of  some  flatus,  and  goes  ofF  entirely
after  a stool  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

A violent  jerking  pinching  pain  externally  on  a small  spot  on  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen,  more  violent  at  every  expiration  (aft.  1 1
h.).  [Htn.]

Violent  cutting  pinching  from  the  rectum  up  to  the  epigastrium
(aft.  1 h.),  then  urging  to  stool,  which  was  softer  than  usual.  [Gn.]
When  standing  or  walking  a cutting  pinching  in  the  abdomen,
that  went  off  when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Lr .]

* From  taking  20  drops  of  oxygenated  muriatic  acid  diluted  with  water.


1 Translated  from  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  lxxx,  part  2,  p.  425,  which  has
been  compared.


214


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


Burning  stitch  in  the  left  groin  (aft.  n h.).  [Gn.']

95.  Pain  like  needle-pricks  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring  (aft.  3
d.).  [Gn.]

Pain  like  needle-pricks  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdominal  integu-
ment (aft.  1 \ h.).  [ Gn .]

Fine  pinching  in  and  below  the  umbilical  region,  rather  in  the
muscles  of  the  abdomen  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ws.]

At  the  anus  a creeping  pricking  itching,  combined  with  sore  pain
(aft.  1 h.).

Burning  stitches  in  the  anus.  [Hnl.]

100.  Swollen  haemorrhoidal  lumps  at  the  anus  (blind  piles)  with
burning  sore  pain.

Swollen  blue  haemorrhoidal  lumps  at  the  anus,  which  pain  on
being  pressed.

A burning  voluptuous  itching  in  the  perinaeum,  close  to  the
anus,  which  compelled  scratching,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  in  every
position  of  the  body,  and  which  did  not  go  off  immediately  on
scratching  (aft.  15  h.).  [Lr.]

Faeculent  diarrhoea  (aft.  10  h.).

(Soft  stool  with  cutting  and  a qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  as
from  a chill ; after  a stool  he  again  felt  well)  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.]

105.  After  a meal  evacuation  of  a fluid  stool.  \Hnl.]

When  urinating  there  passes  unexpectedly  a thin  watery  stool,
not  preceded  by  urging.  [Hnl.]

Frequent  call  to  make  water,  and  he  passes  much  urine.

(The  urine  is  passed  frequently  and  involuntarily.)

Constant  urging  to  urinate,  when  little,  but  always  some,  urine
is  discharged,  without  pain,  but  with  tenesmus  after  it  is  passed.

[St/.-]

no.  Frequent  micturition  with  urging*  (aft  ij  h.).  [Lr.]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  discharge  of  much
urine  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Lr.]

An  uncommonly  copious  flow  of  watery  urine.  [St/.]

With  frequent  and  urgent  call  to  urinate  he  passed  at  least  six
times  as  much  urine  as  the  water  he  had  drunk  since  morning  (aft.
i *>•)•  [Hnl.]

Weakness  of  the  bladder.  [Samml.  f.  prakt.  Lerzte , xv,  3.]

1 15.  He  has  a call  to  urinate  and  yet  no  urine  is  passed  ; he  must
wait  a while  before  it  comes  (aft.  6 h.).

The  urine  is  discharged  slowly,  just  as  if  the  bladder  had  no
power  to  expel  it  (aft.  12  h.).  [TVs.]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  discharge  of  very  little  water
(aft.  72  h.  and  for  several  hours  thereafter).  [Lr.]

Strangury : she  always  felt  as  if  the  urine  would  come  away,
but  nothing  passes,  yet  when  it  comes  it  is  passed  without  pains.

[Stf.]

* If,  soon  after  taking  the  muriatic  acid  in  too  large  a dose,  it  seems  to  excite  for
a short  time  almost  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate,  still  there  occurs  soon  after  the
peculiar  primary  action,  copious  discharge  of  urine,  the  secondary  action  of  which
(reaction  of  the  organism)  is  always' diminished  secretion  of  urine  with  frequent  urging
to  urinate,  or,  lastly,  relaxation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  or  of  the  bladder  itself.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


215


Immediately  after  urinating  a shooting,  smarting  pain  in  the
orifice  of  the  urethra  (aft.  4 h.).  [Zr.]

120.  The  urine  immediately  on  passing  becomes  cloudy  white  like  milk.
Cutting  quite  posteriorly  in  the  urethra  when  urinating  (during
the  stool).

Violent  burning  stitch  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  penis  on  the
right  side.  \HnL]

Pain  on  the  border  of  the  prepuce,  as  if  it  were  chapped  and
excoriated.

Boring  tensive  pain  from  the  right  testicle  to  the  middle  of  the
penis  (aft.  4J  h.).  [G«.]

125.  Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  genitals;  the  penis  hangs  down
relaxed;  complete  absence  of  erection  (aft.  24  h.).  [Ws.~\

He  awakes  in  the  morning  with  a sensation  as  if  a seminal  dis-
charge were  coming,  with  slight  stiffness  of  the  penis,  during  which
a watery,  frothy,  inodorous  fluid  is  passed,  followed  by  long-con-
tinued erection  of  the  penis,  with  tensive  pain.  [67/1]

A forcing  in  the  genitals,  as  if  the  menses  would  come  on  (aft.

6 h.).  [*/.]

An  itching  and  tickling  in  the  nose  and  persistent  inclination  to
sneeze.*  [Theiner,1  in  Annalen  der  Heilkunst , 18 n,  April.]

Along  with  feeling  of  coryza  troublesome  dryness  in  the  nose.
130.  Coryza,  [1 Samml.f.pr . Aerzte , 1.  c.]

Uncommon  catarrhal  hoarseness.  [Schmidtmuller,  1.  c.]
Hoarseness  for  eight  days.f  [Du  Mesnil,  in  Sachse , Hufel.  Journ .,
xxviii,  vi,  p.  3L.2]

Haemoptysis.^  [Westrumb,  in  Sachse , 1.  c.3]

He  breathes  deeply  and  with  groaning.§  [ Hufel . Journ .,  xviii,4
iv,  pp.  45 > 46-]

135.  Sighing.5  {Hufel.  Journ .,  1.  c.]

(Severe  whooping  cough,  and  after  coughing  there  was  audible
rumbling  down  the  chest.)

The  beat  of  the  heart  was  so  violent  during  the  nocturnal  fever
that  he  felt  it  in  the  face.  {Hnl.  ]

Dyspnceic  pressure  on  the  chest,  in  fits.

Very  painful  oppression  over  the  chest,  especially  on  the  right
side  (aft.  16  h.).  {Htn.~\

140.  Painful  aching  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which  became
gradually  more  violent  per  se,  not  affected  by  either  inspiration  or
expiration  (aft.  5 h.).  [ Htn .]

* From  distant  vapours  ot  muriatic  acid,  in  several  persons,
f From  inhaling  oxygenated  muriatic  acid.

X From  the  same  substance.

§ From  the  vapour.

1 Not  accessible.

2 “ Inhaled  muriatic  acid  gas,  and  was  hoarse  for  eight  days.”

3 “The  celebrated  Westrumb  had  haemoptysis  thereafter.”

4 From  fumigations  of  muriatic  acid  in  typhus  patients. — Hahnemann  wrongly
refers  this  to  the  third  part  of  the  volume  : it  is  in  the  fourth,  (See  note  to  S.  61.)

5 As  previous  symptom.


21 6


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


Squeezing  pressive  sensation  in  the  chest,  but  without  dyspnoea
(aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

Pressive  squeezing  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  at  the
fourth  and  fifth  ribs,  always  aggravated  during  inspiration  (aft  i h.).
[Htn.]


In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a drawing  sensation,
which  commenced  helow  the  nipple,  extended  towards
the  throat,  became  weaker,  and  then  went  off  (aft.  2j  h.).
[. Htn .]

Sharp  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  at  the  lowest  true
ribs,  without  reference  to  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.]
145.  Shooting  aching  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  nipple,
gradually  growing  worse  and  gradually  going  off  again  (aft.  3§  h.).
[ Htn.]

Violent,  severe  stitches  in  the  right  nipple  (aft.  14  h.).  [Htn.]

Tensive  pain  on  the  sternum,  which  impedes  respiration,  as  if  it
came  from  the  stomach  ; the  part  is  also  painful  when  touched  (aft.


20  h.).

Shooting  under  the  sternum,  just  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Stf.]

Cutting  blows  in  the  middle  of  the  inside  of  the
sternum,  along  with  obtuse  pressure  at  the  back  of  the
thoracic  cavity,  general  oppression  thereof,  and  impeded
respiration,  all  day,  occasionally  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.']

150.  On  expiration,  needle-pricks  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  betwixt
two  true  ribs  (when  sitting),  which  went  off  when  standing  and
walking  and  on  being  touched  (aft.  f h.).  [Lr.]

Tensive  twitching  stitch  from  the  left  false  ribs  out  at  the  right
ribs  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gn.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  right  intercostal  muscles,  continuing  when
not  breathing  and  when  inspiring  and  expiring  (when  sitting)  (aft.
8£h.).  [Gn.]

When  sitting,  on  expiration,  needle-pricks  on  the  right  side  of
the  chest,  under  the  true  ribs,  which  went  off  when  touched  and
when  walking  and  standing  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.]

Tensive  boring  pain  in  the  chest,  continuing  during  inspiration
and  expiration  (aft.  51  h.).  [Gn. ]

155.  Externally  on  the  sides  of  the  chest  broad  stitches  going  slowly
upwards  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

Fine  drawing  tearing  from  the  left  side  of  the  os  sacrum  to  the
lumbar  vertebrae.  [Hnl.]

On  inspiration  aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  close
beside  the  spine  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  aching  pains  along  the  spine,
which  went  off  when  standing  or  sitting  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Lr.]

When  sitting  an  aching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the
back,  as  from  prolonged  stooping,  which  went  off  when
standing  or  walking  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.]

160.  When  sitting  an  aching  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the
back,  as  from  prolonged  stooping,  which  did  not  go  off
by  touching,  walking,  or  standing  (aft.  9 h.).  [Lr.]


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


217


When  sitting  painful  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  back,  which
went  off  by  standing  or  walking  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Lr.]

After  prolonged  writing,  with  the  back  somewhat  bent,  violent
pain  in  the  back  and  scapulae,  as  if  he  had  strained  himself  by  lifting
(aft.  33  h.).  [Hnl.]

Sharp  stitches,  with  fine  drawing  on  the  scapulae  and  hot  feeling
in  these  parts  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws?\

Fine  aching  shooting  on  the  inferior  border  of  the  right  scapula
(aft.  10  h.).  [Htn.]

165.  Drawing  tensive  pain  between  the  scapulae,  which  alternates  with
a similar  pain  in  the  lowest  short  ribs,  but  does  not  impede  respira-
tion (aft  \ h.).  [Htn.]

When  standing  and  sitting  an  aching  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as
from  prolonged  stooping,  which  goes  off  on  touching  and  when
walking  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Lr.~\

Burning  sensation  on  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm
close  to  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  § h.).  [Htn.]

Heavy  feeling  in  both  arms  ; when  he  raised  them  the  whole
arm  felt  full  of  lead.  [Htn.]

On  making  some  exertion  with  the  left  arm,  cramp  in  the
upper  arm,  but,  on  flexing  the  arm,  in  the  forearm  (aft.  J h.).
[Hnl.]

170.  Pulsating,  sometimes  intermittent,  violent  twitchings  of  single
muscular  parts  in  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.  25  h.).  [Hnl.]

When  sitting  and  writing,  in  the  muscles  of  the  right
upper  arm  a drawing  tearing,  which  went  ©IF  on  moving
and  extending  the  arm  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.]

Shooting  tearing  pain  on  the  point  of  the  right  elbow-joint  (aft.
9ih.).  [Htn.]

Cutting  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  worse  when  flexing  the  arm,
diminished  by  extending  it  (aft.  4 h.).  [JVs.]

In  the  right  elbow  joint  a drawing  tensive  pain,
frequently.  [Hnl.]

175.  Dull  tearing  just  above  the  elbow-  and  wrist-joints,  worse  when
at  rest  than  when  moving  (aft.  24  h.).  [JVs.]

Cutting  on  the  right  forearm  in  front  of  the  elbow-joint  (aft.
some  m.).  [ Ws.~\

Burning  pains  in  the  right  forearm,  externally.  [Gn.]

Bruised  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm,  as  if  he
had  got  a blow  there,  when  moving,  but  worse  when  at  rest,  con-
tinuing for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  10 J h.).  [Gn.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left  forearm
to  the  fingers  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Htn.]

180.  Cutting  tearing  pain  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  right  fore-
arm, recurring  in  jerks  (aft.  7 j h.).  [Htn.]

Cramp-like  heavy  sensation  in  the  right  forearm,  close  to  the
wrist-joint  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Htn.]

ir  Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  back  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  which
in  the  course  of  a day  and  a night  coalesce  to  form  a scab.  [Schmidt-
muller,  1.  c.]


2l8


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


In  the  left  palm  a voluptuous  itching,  which  com-
pels scratching  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  right  palm  a voluptuous  shooting  tickling,
which  compels  scratching,  hut  is  not  immediately
removed  thereby  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

185.  Cramp  in  the  left  palm,  which  went  off  on  moving  the  hand
(aft.  5 h.).  [Lr,]

When  writing  a spasmodic  pain  like  cramp,  on  the
ball  of  the  right  thumb,  which  went  off  on  moving  it
(aft.  f h.).  [Lr.]

Pains  like  needle-pricks  in  the  tip  of  the  left  index,  only  when
touched,  lasting  some  minutes  (aft.  52  h.).  [Gn.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  on  the  fourth  finger  of  the  left  hand,
which  commences  in  the  middle  joint  and  extends  to  the  metacarpal
bone,  goes  off  by  flexing  the  finger,  but  immediately  after  extending
it,  when  at  rest,  returns  with  increased  violence  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn,]

Tearing  cutting  in  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger  (aft.  2\  h.).
[Htn.]

190.  Persistent  itching  prick  in  the  glutaeal  muscles  of  the  right  side,
which  becomes  still  more  intense  after  rubbing  (aft.  5 h.).  [Ws.]

When  sitting  a cutting  pinching  on  the  right  hip,  which  goes  off
when  walking  or  standing  (aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.]

Pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.

Twitchings  of  single  muscular  parts,  now  on  the  right  thigh,  now
on  the  left  (aft.  24  h.)  \Hnl.]

When  sitting  a stitch-like  pain,  combined  with
aching  and  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,
Close  to  the  groin,  which  goes  off  by  touching,  moving  and
standing  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Lr.]

195.  On  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh  a violent  burning  shooting,
when  walking  and  sitting  (the  4th  d.).  [Hnl.]

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  right  femur  when  walking  (aft.  if
h.).  [Htn.]

When  lying  in  bed  a painful  spasm  in  the  muscles  of  the  left
thigh,  just  above  the  knee,  on  the  inner  side,  which  went  off  on  being
touched  (aft.  16  h.).  [Lr.]

When  sitting  a stitch-like  aching  in  the  muscles  of
the  left  thigh,  which  went  off  on  standing  or  walking
(aft.  h.).  [Lr.]

When  sitting  a spasmodic  drawing  pain  down  the
muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  near  the  knee,  which  went  off
when  moving  and  standing  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.]

200.  Staggering  when  walking,  from  weakness  of  the
thighs.  [Gn.]

When  sitting  spasmodic  contractive  tearing  in  the  anterior
muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  which  went  off  when  touched  and  when
standing  (aft.  h.).  [Lr.]

A quivering  near  the  right  patella  (the  4th  d.).  [Hnl.]

Burning  shooting  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  knee.
[Hnl.]


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


219

When  going  to  sleep  a burning  itching  on  the  knees,  ankles,  and
toes.

205.  When  he  crosses  the  left  leg  over  the  right  he  feels  in  the  right
knee  a shooting  tearing  pain  through  its  middle  (aft.  1 h.).  \Htn.~\

Tearing  in  the  hough  and  calf,  chiefly  at  night,  and  more  when
rhen  walking.

cutting  in  the  right  calf,  when  sitting  (aft.  7 h.).

Aching  pain  in  the  left  calf,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.
25  h.).  [ Gn .]

Slow  coarse  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  sometimes  from  with-
out inwards,  sometimes  transversely  across,  which  disturb  his  sleep
at  night,  come  on  in  fits  and  impede  walking.

210.  When  walking,  a drawing  and  tension  in  the  tendo  Achillis,
whereby  the  leg  is  as  if  paralysed,  so  that  he  cannot  walk
with  it.

Persistent  itching  pricking  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left
foot  when  moving,  hut  worst  when  at  rest  (aft.  55  h.).

Persistent  aching  pricking  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  on
moving,  worst  when  at  rest.  [ Gn .]

When  standing  drawing  stitches  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot
near  the  ankle-joint,  which  went  off  when  walking,  but  returned
when  sitting  (aft.  if  h.).  [Zr.]

Sore  pain  under  the  left  external  malleolus,  when  at  rest,  worst
when  touched  and  when  lying  on  it,  lasting  all  night  (aft.  6 h.),

[<?*•]

215.  Burning  more  around  the  ulcer  on  the  foot  than  in  it ; after
walking  it  throbs  like  a pulse  in  it.

Itching  in  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,  when  walking  and  when  at
rest  (aft.  5J  h.).  [ Gn .]

When  sitting,  on  the  inner  border  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,
an  aching  shooting,  which  went  off  when  walking  and  standing  (aft.
h.).  [Zr.]

Cutting  cramp-like  pain  in  the  hollow  of  the  right  sole,  when
sitting  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Htn.']

Digging  quivering  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot,  when  at  rest  (aft.
9 h.).  [Gn.]  ...

220.  Itching  prick  in  the  ball  of  the  right  big  toe,  when  at  rest  (aft.
61  h.).  [Gn.]

Very  violent  throbbing  pain  in  the  three  middle  toes  of  the  left
foot  when  at  rest  (aft.  3 d.).  [ Gn.]

The  workmen  employed  in  salt  works  become  cachectic  and
dropsical,  and  get  indolent  ulcers  on  the  legs.  [Ramazzini,  1.  c.]

A number  of  very  painful  cutaneous  ulcers,  which  prevent  him
sitting  and  lying.  [Schaekel.1]

Oxygenated  muriatic  acid  restores  the  irritability  of  the  mus-


sitting  than  '
Shooting
[Htn.  ]


1 No  reference  to  be  found  anywhere.


220


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


cular  fibres  that  has  been  destroyed  by  alcohol  and  opium.  [Hum-
boldt,1 Ueber  die  Reizbarkeit  der  Faser.\

225.  Pain  of  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones,  as  in  agues.

Bruised  pain  of  all  the  joints.

(Fine  pricking,  tickling  itching  on  the  body,  which  went  off  only
for  a short  time  by  rubbing.)

Feeling  of  exhaustion  in  the  whole  body.  [£//'.]

Attack  : in  the  evening  (8  p.m.)  the  abdomen  felt  full  as  if  it
would  burst ; she  became  so  anxious  that  the  sweat  poured  down  on
the  head,  and  she  got  weak  as  if  she  was  paralysed  ; her  arms  fell
down.

230.  He  either  will  not  or  cannot  move,  it  annoys  him  to  move,  and
he  always  wants  to  sit.

When  sitting  her  eyes  closed  from  exhaustion ; hut
if  she  stood  up  and  moved  about  she  immediately
became  lively  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.]

When  working  sleep  almost  closed  his  eyes  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Htn.~\
All  day  long  great  disposition  to  sleep.  \_Htn.~\

Sleeplessness  before  midnight.

235.  Sleeplessness  after  midnight.

He  cannot  go  to  sleep  readily,  he  then  sleeps  but  lightly,  and  yet
he  cannot  rouse  himself  properly  from  sleep,  nor  wake  thoroughly
(aft.  3 h.).

Before  midnight  he  snores  loudly  and  tosses  about,  but  he  can  be
easily  awakened.

When  standing  or  walking  exhaustion  of  all  the  body,  so  that  he
fell  asleep  when  sitting  (aft.  9^  h.).  \_Lr. ]

He  wakes  before  midnight  very  cheerful,  and  cannot  afterwards
fall  asleep  again  (4th  night).

240.  Frequent  waking  from  sleep,  with  tossing  about  in  bed
(aft.  22  h.).  [Zr.]

Before  midnight  she  tosses  about  and  often  talks  aloud  in  sleep,
with  a cheerful  tone,  but  often  groans  at  the  same  time.

He  slides  down  in  the  bed  and  sighs  and  groans  in  his  sleep.
Restless,  frequently-interrupted  sleep ; with  vivid  anxious  dreams
and  during  sleep  profuse  sweat  all  over,  except  on  the  head.  \_Htn.\
Unremembered  dreams.  [Zr.]

245.  (Genial  dreams  of  home.)

Dreams  that  cause  anxiety,  vexation,  and  joy.  [Zr.]

Vivid,  anxious  dream.  [Zr.]

Vivid,  uneasy  dreams,  full  of  care  and  fear,  with  erection  of
penis  without  seminal  emission.  [ Gn.~\

Vivid,  anxious,  frightful  dreams.  [Gr.]

250.  Restlessness.  \HufeL  Journ .,  xviii,  iv,  pp.  45,  46.]

He  cannot  get  warm  all  day  (not  even  by  walking)  and  is  cold  to
the  touch.

Coldness.


1 From  experiments  on  animals. — The  author  is  speaking  of  the  effect  of  local
applications.


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


221


He  cannot  get  warm  at  night  and  tosses  about  in  bed  (aft.  16  h.).

Chilliness  with  goose-skin,  without  shivering  and  without  thirst.

255.  He  shivers  if  the  room  is  not  very  warm.

Chilliness  with  thirst,  without  subsequent  heat.

He  woke  up  from  chilliness  before  midnight,  and  could  not  get
warm  ; he  was  less  chilly  in  the  parts  on  which  he  lay  ; later  he
became  very  warm  and  he  perspired  (3rd  night.)  \_Hnl.']

With  hot  cheeks  and  cold  hands,  febrile  rigor  all  over  the  body,
without  thirst  (aft  1 h.).  [Ar.]

Febrile  shivering  all  over  the  body,  rigor,  with  yawn-
ing and  stretching  of  the  limbs,  but  without  thirst  and
without  heat  thereafter  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Lr. ]

260.  When  yawning  (with  slight  fluent  coryza)  febrile  shivering  all
over  the  body,  with  weak,  slow  pulse  and  cold  finger-tips,  as  if  they
were  dead,  and  blue  nails,  not  followed  by  thirst  or  heat  (aft.  2 h.)

Hardly  has  he  sat  down  for  a nap  (on  account  of  unnatural  day-
drowsiness)  than  he  feels  burning  heat  on  the  whole  head  and  on
the  hands,  with  cold  feet,  without  thirst  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Htn.~\

Heat  and  hot  feeling  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  palms  and
soles,  without  redness  of  face,  without  sweat,  without  thirst,  and
without  dryness  of  the  mouth,  with  some  inclination  to  throw  oft
the  clothes.

Slight  sweat  in  the  morning  all  over  the  body  (aft.  23  h.).  [Zr.]

Night  sweat.

265.  Every  third  pulse  intermits.

Silent  reserve,  with  anxious  concern  about  the  present  and  future.

[Lr.]

In  the  evening,  along  with  cheerful  disposition,  an  anxiety  and
restlessness  in  the  upper  extremities  (as  if  in  the  blood-vessels),  as
though  it  proceeded  from  a heaviness  in  the  arms;  he  must  always
keep  moving  the  arms  ; at  the  same  time  a restlessness  in  the  whole
body,  except  the  legs  ; he  became  hot,  he  must  throw  off  the  clothes,
and  yet  he  had  no  thirst.

Whilst  at  work  ideas  about  circumstances  that  had  occurred  a
short  time  previously  rush  upon  him,  and  are  vividly  represented  to
his  mind.

Sunk  in  profound  thought,  as  if  something  disagreeable  were
about  to  happen,  which,  however,  does  not  prevent  him  working.
[*>•]

270.  Anxious  scrupulosity  (immediately)  all  day  ; he  cannot  get  over
the  slightest  misfortune  or  become  contented  ; after  72  hours  more
cheerful,  less  scrupulous,  and  more  courageous  than  at  ordinary  times.

[Lr.]

Tendency  to  start.

Sad  disposition  without  assignable  cause  (aft.  6 d.).
[ Gn •]

Sulky  disposition.

Sadly  silent  and  discontented  with  his  lot.


222


MURIATICUM  ACIDUM.


275.  Laconic,  silent  and  sullen  (aft.  3 d.).  [Gn.\

Silent  reserve,  laconic  (aft.  4 h.).  [G».]

Pusillanimous,  desponding  and  cross  about  everything.
Disinclination  for  intellectual  occupations  (aft.  3 d.).  [G«.]

Very  tranquil,  calm  and  free  from  care  (chiefly  aft.  several  h.).-^


# Reaction  of  the  organism,  curative  action.


NUX  VOMICA.1

( Seeds  of  Strychnos  nux  vomica.)

(Ten  grains  of  nux  vomica  seed,  finely  triturated  in  a warm  mortar,  are  macerated
with  1000  drops  of  alcohol,  without  heat,  for  a week,  to  make  a tincture.  Of  this,
one  drop  is  raised  to  the  decillion-fold  potency  through  29  other  diluting  phials,  each
filled  to  three  quarters  with  alcohol,  by  means  of  two  succussions  given  to  each  phial
after  the  dilution  is  made.

The  same  medicine  is  prepared  in  a simpler  and  almost  more  powerful  and  uniform
manner,  by  taking  one  grain  of  the  powdered  nux  vomica  seed,  and  treating  it  like
other  dry  medicinal  substances,  by  triturating  it  thrice  with  100  grains  of  milk-sugar
(according  to  the  directions  for  the  homoeopathic  preparation  of  medicines  in  the
second  part  of  the  book  on  Chronic  Diseases ) up  to  the  million-fold  powder  attenuation.
One  grain  of  this  is  dissolved  in  100  drops  of  diluted  alcohol,  and  the  dilution  and
dynamization  is  brought  further  (as  taught  in  the  same  book),  by  means  of  26  more
phials  filled  three  quarters  full  of  good  alcohol,  up  to  the  decillion-fold  potency.

One  small  sugar-globule,  300  of  which  weigh  a grain,  moistened  with  this  last
dilution,  serves  as  a dose.)

There  are  a few  medicines,  the  majority  of  whose  symptoms  corre-
spond in  similarity  with  the  symptoms  of  the  commonest  and  most
frequent  of  human  diseases,  and  hence  very  often  find  an  efficacious
homoeopathic  employment.  They  may  be  termed  polychrests .

To  these  belong  particularly  the  nux  vomica  seed,  which  it  was
formerly  feared  to  employ,  because  it  had  hitherto  been  administered  in
enormously  large  doses  (a  whole  grain  or  several  grains)  in  unsuitable
cases  of  disease,  consequently  with  injurious  effects.  But  it  proves  the
mildest  and  most  efficacious  remedy  in  all  the  diseases  whose  symptoms
correspond  in  similarity  to  the  effects  nux  vomica  is  capable  of  pro-
ducing in  the  healthy  human  being,  when  administered  in  the  small
doses  above  indicated.

Some  practical  instructions  may  be  of  use,  deduced  from  the  results
of  the  careful  experience  of  many  years.

Among  these  may  be  mentioned,  that  it  is  more  frequently
required  by  those  persons  who  are  of  an  anxious,  zealous,  fiery,  hot
temperament,  or  of  a malicious,  wicked,  irascible  disposition.

If  the  menses  usually  come  on  some  days  too  soon,  and  are  too
copious,  the  ailments  remaining  or  occurring  after  their  cessation  are
quite  suitable  for  nux  vomica.

It  has  been  found  that  this  medicine,  administered  some  hours  before
bedtime,  acts  more  gently  than  when  given  at  other  times  of  the  day  3
but  there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule  in  cases  of  urgent  necessity.  Its
administration  in  the  morning  on  an  empty  stomach  is  attended  with
the  most  inconveniences  in  very  sensitive  persons,  for  it  displays  its  most


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830.


224


NUX  VOMICA.


frequent  and  most  severe  symptoms  immediately  after  waking  in  the
morning.

Next  in  frequency  its  symptoms  occur  soon  or  immediately  after
eating  and  during  mental  strain.  Hence  we  should  do  wrong  to  give
it  immediately  after  a meal  if  we  can  avoid  doing  so,  and  hence,  also,
no  mental  labour,  no  meditations  or  declamations,  no  reading  or  writing
should  be  engaged  in  immediately  after  taking  it  (and  the  same  may  be
said  of  the  administration  of  all  other  medicines).  We  ought  to  wait
for  at  least  a couple  of  hours  if  we  would  avoid  giving  its  action  an
improper,  injurious  direction.

Among  other  affections,  many  chronic  maladies,  also  the  evil  con-
sequences arising  from  drinking  much  coffee  and  wine,  especially
when  the  usual  mode  of  life  is  a sedentary  one  in  close  rooms,  and
those  affections  caused  by  prolonged  mental  labour,  find  their  remedy
in  this  seed  ; as  also  several  epidemic  diseases  and  other  acute  fevers,
especially  such  as  have  heat  before  the  chill  or  mixed  up  with  it.

Serious  ailments  from  catching  cold  are  often  removed  by  it.

So,  also,  this  medicine  is  more  especially  suitable  when  the
patient’s  state  is  worst  in  the  morning  and  when  he  wakes  up  about  3 a.m.
and  must  lie  for  several  hours  awake  with  intrusion  of  irrepressible  ideas,
and  only  involuntarily  falls  into  a sleep  full  of  oppressive  dreams  when
the  morning  is  far  advanced,  from  which  he  wakes  more  fatigued  than
when  he  lay  down  at  night,  and  is  lazy  about  getting  up  ; as  also  for
those  who  several  hours  before  bedtime  in  the  evening  cannot  forbear
sleeping,  even  while  seated.

In  this,  as  in  some  other  medicines,  we  meet  with  symptoms  which
seem  to  be  completely  or  partially  antagonistic  to  one  another,  alternat-
ing actions,  which  at  the  same  time  are  primary  actions,  and  which  make
nux  vomica  very  applicable  and  efficacious  for  a number  of  morbid
states.

When,  on  account  of  the  dose  being  too  large,  or  on  account  of
unhomoeopathic  employment,  it  causes  considerable  ill  effects,  its  action
may  be  speedily  completely  removed  by  a little  wine,  brandy,  and
camphor.  For  the  headache  and  anorexia  it  causes  the  appropriate
antidote  is  coffee  ; for  the  paralytic  symptoms  it  produces  cocculus  ; for
the  over-sensitiveness  and  dyspnoea  induced  by  it,  aconite  ; and  for  the
great  crossness  and  irascibility,  chamomilla.

Physicians  who  have  hitherto  been  in  the  habit  of  imagining  and
evolving  from  their  own  fancy  in  their  studies  the  powers  of  drugs  and
their  antidotes,  indicated  vinegar  and  other  vegetable  acids  as  the
surest  antidotes  to  nux  vomica  and  other  powerful  vegetable  sub-
stances. As  regards  nux  vomica  this  is  contrary  to  all  the  experience
that  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  on  men  and  animals.

The  following  symptoms  are  tolerably  complete,  and  give  an  almost
perfect  idea  of  the  effects  of  nux  vomica  on  the  human  body,  mind
and  disposition.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Flaeming,  Friedrich  Hahne-
mann, and  Wahle.

Symptoms  are  obtained  from  the  following  old-school  sources  :

Bergius,  Mat.  Med .


NUX  VOMICA.


225


Consbruch,  Hufel.  Journ .,  iv.

Hartmann,  Diss.  Spicileg.  ad  nucis  <vom . usum.  Traj.  ad  Viadr.,  1785.
Hoffmann,  Frid.,  Med.  Rat.  Syst .,  ii.

Hufeland,  Journal  d.pr.  Arzn .,  i.

Junghauss,  Diss.  de  nuce  vom.  Hal.,  1770.

Matthiolus,  Comment.Jn  Diosc .,  lib.  iv.

Rademacher,  Hufel.  Journ.,  iv.

Seutter,  Diss.  de  nuce  <vom.  L.  B.,  1691.

Strandberg,  in  Kier minder' s Med.  lac.

Thuessink,  Thomas  a,  Waarnemingen , xxxiii.

Veckoskrift  for  Lakare , ii.

Wiel,  J.  P.,  Obs.  de  usu  interno  nucis  cvom.  et  <vitr.  alb.  Viteb.,  1771.

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  there  are  308  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit.  961,  in  the  2nd  edit.
1267,  and  in  this  3rd  edit.  1301.]


NUX  VOMICA.

Stupefaction  of  the  brain.  [Hufeland,  Jour.  d.  p.  Arz .,  i,  p.

1 65-T]

Intoxication  (aft  J h.).  \Veckoskrift  for  Lakare , ii,  p.  169.1 2]
Vertigo.  [J.  P.  Wiel,  Obs.  de  usu  interno  nucis  vom.  et  vitr.  alb .,
Viteb.,  177 1.2 — Hufeland,  Jour .,  1.  c.— -Bergius,  Mat.  Med.,  p.

I49‘3]

Swaying  feeling  in  the  brain.

5.  Attacks  of  vertigo,  as  if  it  turned  round  in  a circle  in
the  brain,  with  momentary  loss  of  consciousness.

Vertigo,  as  if  he  would  fall  on  one  side  (aft.  68  h.).

Vertigo  with  obscuration  of  vision.

A giddy  sensation  in  the  brain,  going  from  one  place  to  another
(aft.  6h.).

Vertigo  (for  an  hour  and  a half)  after  dinner.

10.  Vertigo  after  a meal  when  walking,  that  leaves  off*  on  standing
still  (aft.  1 h.).

Whirling  vertigo  while  eating.

Vertigo  with  obscuration  of  vision  while  eating,  something  like
when  one  comes  suddenly  out  of  the  cold  into  a warm  room.

Head  wonderfully  confused ; on  moving  it  the  blood  rushes  into
the  head,  with  laziness  of  the  rest  of  the  body.

Vertigo  like  whirling,  when  he  has  eructation  from  the  stomach*
15.  Vertigo,  as  if  he  neither  heard  nor  saw  and  would  fall,  whilst
sneezing  and  coughing,  or  when  he  rises  up  after  stooping  low.

Giddy  staggering  when  walking,  as  if  he  would  fall  sideways  or
backwards.

When  lying  on  the  back,  unable  to  raise  the  head  on  account  of
vertigo  and  obscuration  of  vision  (aft.  24  h.).

On  two  successive  evenings,  after  lying  down,  vertigo,  as  if  the
bed  went  round  in  a ring  with  her.


1 F rom  nine  grains,  in  two  doses,  given  to  a woman  in  dysentery.

2 Not  accessible.

3 From  ten-grain  doses  in  a woman  suffering  from  dysentery.

VOL.  II.  15


226


NUX  VOMICA.


Vertigo  of  syncope  (immediately).

20.  Headache,  as  if  from  emptiness.

Intoxication.

Drunken  confusion  of  the  head.

Intoxication  rising  up  towards  the  head.

Dazedness  of  the  head,  as  from  a debauch  over  night.

25.  In  the  morning  headache,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  at  night.

Dulness  of  the  head  after  dinner,  which  recurred
twenty-four  hours  afterwards  (aft.  24,  72  h.).

Something  dull  is  spread  before  the  head  (in  the  forehead)  in  the
evening  in  the  open  air,  as  if  consciousness  would  leave  him  for  a
moment  (aft.  24  h.).

Some  dulness  comes  at  the  back  of  the  head.

A humming  and  whirling  in  brain  and  ear.

30.  A buzzing  in  the  forehead,  afternoon  and  evening.

In  the  open  air  and  sunshine  stupid  in  the  head.

A stupefying  headache  in  the  morning  in  bed,  on  awaking,  that
goes  off  after  getting  up  (aft.  16  h.).

Stupid  in  the  head  when  he  holds  it  erect ; but  when  he  depresses
it,  sensation  in  the  forehead  as  if  something  heavy  sunk  down  in  it.

When  stooping  he  feels  an  excessive  weight  on  the  head.  \We7\

35.  In  the  morning  drunken,  giddy  heaviness  of  the  head.

In  the  morning  heaviness  in  the  head  (aft.  4 d.).

Headache,  when  stooping,  as  if  something  heavy  in  it  fell
forwards.

Headache,  like  a heaviness  in  the  brain,  in  the  morning.

Headache  after  dinner,  composed  of  heaviness  and  pressure,  espe-
cially on  moving  the  eyes  (aft.  16  h.).

40.  Pressive  headache  (aft.  5 m.).  \JVe. J

On  closing  the  eyelids  (pressive  ?)  headache  in  the  middle  of  the
brain,  such  as  comes  on  after  vomiting.

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  relieved  by  laying  the  head  on  the
table  ; aggravated  by  open  air,  with  weariness  of  the  legs  when  going
up  hill  (aft.  3 h.).

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.

Aching  pain  over  the  left  eye,  and  in  the  bone  it  pained  as  if  he
had  got  a blow  there  ; he  cannot  open  the  eye.  \JVe.\

45.  Aching  pain  over  the  right  orbit,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  when  he
lies  on  the  right  side,  and  going  off  when  he  lies  on  the  opposite  side
or  on  the  back.

Aching  pain  in  the  occiput  in  the  morning  imme-
diately after  rising  from  bed.

He  wakes  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  with  the  eyes  still  closed
he  has  headache  in  the  middle  of  the  brain  (aft.  12  h.).

Deep  in  the  brain,  in  the  region  of  the  crown,  a down-pressive
drawing  headache.

Pain  in  the  occiput,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  or  knocked
forwards.

50.  Tensive  headache,  at  night.

Tensive  headache  in  the  forehead*


NUX  VOMICA.


227


Squeezing  headache.

Headache  on  the  least  mental  exertion  when  lying,  as  if  the
brain  were  pressed  asunder.

Headache,  a pressing  in  the  occiput  from  both  sides  outwards,  as
if  the  skull  posteriorly  were  forced  asunder,  with  heat  in  the  brain ;
relieved  momentarily  by  compressing  with  the  hands  for  twenty
hours  (aft.  11  h.).  [/Jr.].

55.  He  wakes  at  night  from  headache.  \_Fg.~\

From  exertion  of  the  head  he  has  pain  in  both  temples.

From  prolonged  attention  an  aching  and  beating  pain  in  the
crown.

Headache  in  the  morning  in  bed,  as  if  on  the  surface  of  the  whole
brain,  as  if  the  skull  would  burst  (aft.  10  h.).

Headache ; the  brain  as  if  pressed  and  beaten.

60.  Headache  in  the  morning  in  bed,  as  if  some  one  struck  his  head
with  an  axe,  going  off  after  rising.

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  split  (aft.  8 h.).

Headache ; in  the  morning,  while  lying  in  bed  on  the  left  side,  a
pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  brain  as  if  lacerated,  but  which  goes  off
when  she  lies  on  the  right,  the  painful,  side  (aft.  52  h.).

Tearing  pain  in  the  head  to  the  root  of  the  nose  and  upper  jaw,
aggravated  by  walking.

Tearing  in  the  crown,  forehead,  eyes,  with  qualmishness,  squeam-
ishness and  nausea  in  the  region  of  the  chest  and  weakness  of  the
vocal  organs  (aft.  2,  12  h.).

65.  Drawing  tearing  headache.

Tearing  in  the  head  at  the  ear  downwards  (aft.  40  h.j.

Tearing  headache,  after  a meal,  with  feeling  of  heat  in  the  cheeks
and  chilly  feeling  over  the  body,  at  least  on  the  hands.

Drawing  tearing  and  burning  pain  in  the  head  in  the  morning
(aft.  60  h.).

Burning  in  the  brain  beneath  the  frontal  bone.

70.  Drawing  pain  in  the  head  (aft.  6 h.).

Drawing  pain  first  in  the  temples,  then  in  the  forehead,
then  in  the  occiput.

Headache  drawing  upwards  in  the  right  side  of  the  brain  near  the
ear  (aft.  1 h.).

Drawing  in  the  back  of  the  head  as  if  she  were  freezing  there
(aft.  120  h.).

Drawing  movement  here  and  there  in  the  forehead  towards  the
root  of  the  nose.

75.  Painless  drawing  here  and  there  in  the  brain.

Tingling  and  shaking  in  the  brain  when  walking  and  running.

Splashing  and  bubbling  in  the  head  when  walking.

Single  twitches  in  the  head  (aft.  3 d.).

Drawing  twitching  headache,  in  the  morning,

80.  Single  blows  or  strokes  in  the  head.

(Headache  in  the  morning,  a constant  pecking  (obtuse  shooting
throbbing),  aggravated  by  stooping  forwards,  and  then  as  if  a bit  of
the  forehead  would  fall  out.)


228


NUX  VOMICA.


Violent  jerks  or  obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain,  in
the  direction  from  the  orbit  to  the  parietal  bone  and  occiput,  soon
after  eating  (aft.  10  h.).

Single  violent  stitches  in  the  head  (aft.  6 h.).

Headache,  beginning  some  hours  before  dinner,  increasing  after
eating  : then  violent  stitches  in  the  left  temple,  with  nausea  and  very
sour  vomiting ; these  ailments  disappear  in  the  evening  after  lying
down.

85.  Shooting  and  aching  above  the  eyelids.

From  time  to  time  pain  in  one  half  of  the  head,  as  from  a nail
driven  from  above  downwards,  always  deeper  and  deeper  in  the
parietal  bone  (aft.  1 h.).

Intolerable  (digging  ?)  headache  beginning  in  the  morning  when
lying  in  bed,  going  off  on  getting  up  (aft  some  h.)

Shortly  before  dinner,  headache.

Semilateral  headache  in  the  afternoon  (from  4 a.m.  till  night)
with  exhaustion  and  weariness.

90.  External  headache,  as  if  the  hair  on  the  occiput  were  painful.

External  headache ; pain  of  the  integuments  of  the  head  as  if
bruised ; the  hair  stands  on  end  and  is  painful  to  the  touch  (aft.
8 h.).

A drawing  pain  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  head.

External  headache  ; pain  on  the  integuments  of  the  crown,  on
being  touched,  as  if  bruised.

External  headache ; pain  of  the  integuments  of  the
head,  aggravated  by  touching.

95.  External  headache  ; during  cold  wind,  pain  as  if  the  head  were
sore  externally ; and  yet  the  part  is  not  painful  when  touched  (aft.
6 h.).

On  the  hairy  scalp  and  face  red,  painful  pimples  or  papules,  whose
apices  at  length  become  filled  with  pus.

(Itching  and  gnawing  on  the  hairy  scalp  and  nape,  as  when  an
ulcer  is  healing,  especially  in  the  forenoon.)

Painful,  small  swellings  on  the  forehead.

Crawling  externally  on  the  forehead.

100.  Formication  on  the  forehead  and  crown.

Itching  and  crawling  in  the  face  as  if  fleas  were  creeping  on  it,
which  goes  off  by  scratching,  but  soon  returns.

Sensation  in  the  face  as  if  innumerable  ants  were  creeping  upon
it.  [Rademacher,  Hufel.  Journ.  iv,  p.  573.1]

Sensation  of  tension  in  the  face  about  the  mouth,  eyes  and  nose,
with  perceptible  swelling  of  these  parts.  [£//'.]

Painless  drawing  in  the  face,  on  stooping.

105.  A twitching  as  if  a thread  were  pulled  in  the  right  side  of  the
face,  in  the  evening.

Twitching  in  the  facial  muscles,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.

Formication  here  and  there  in  the  cheeks,  which  are  red  and  hot
(aft.  1 — 12  h.).


1 From  eight  grains  given  to  a man  in  dysentety.


NUX  VOMICA.


229


Small  pustules  on  the  cheeks.

Complexion  wretched,  pale,  earth-coloured,  yellowish  ; but  the
white  of  the  eye  is  unaltered.

no.  Very  red,  swollen  face.  [Consbruch,  Hufel%  Journ^'w,  pp.  443,

444-'].

Pain  above  the  left  eye  in  the  skin  as  if  he  had  been  burnt.  \JVe.~]

The  right  eyebrow  is  painful  when  touched.

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  eyelids.

Quivering  of  the  eyelids.

1 15.  Contraction  of  the  eyelids,  as  if  from  a heaviness  of  the  upper
lid,  at  the  same  time  gush  of  tears.

Aching  in  the  upper  eyelids,  especially  in  the  morning.

Itching  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  1^  h.).

In  the  evening,  itching  of  the  eyelids  towards  the  internal
canthus  (aft.  12  h.).

On  the  eyelid  a burning  itching  pain.

120.  The  border  of  the  eyelids  pains  as  if  excoriated,  especially  when
touched,  and  in  the  morning.

Canthi  pain  as  if  excoriated.

The  inner  canthus  is  painful  as  if  excoriated  and
rubbed  raw  (aft.  2 h.).

Mattery  canthi.

The  outer  canthus  is  in  the  morning  as  if  stuck  together  with
matter.

125.  A sore,  dry  feeling  in  the  inner  canthi  in  the  morning  in  bed.

Smarting  in  the  inner  canthi  as  from  acrid  tears,  in  the  evening
in  bed.

Smarting  in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the  external
canthi,  as  if  from  salt;  they  weep.

Dryness  of  the  right  eye  (aft.  1 h.).

Burning  in  the  eyes  without  inflammation.

130.  Formicating  burning  in  the  eyes.

Pain  in  the  left  eye  as  if  bruised,  with  purulent  mucus  in  the
outer  canthus  (aft.  5 d.).

(Pain  like  needle-pricks  in  the  eyes.).

Itching  on  the  eyeball  (aft.  2 h.).

Itching  of  the  eyes  relieved  by  rubbing.

135.  The  eyes  are  full  of  water,  as  in  moist  inflammation  of  the  eyes
(lippitudo),  or  as  in  stuffed  coryza.

Painless  congestion  of  blood  in  the  white  of  the
14  h.).

Painless  redness  in  the  left  outer  canthus,  in  the  morning.

Blood  exudes  from  the  eye.

Sparkling,  staring  eyes.  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

140.  Swelling  of  the  eyes,  with  red  stripes  in  the  white,  and  aching
tensive  pain.

Inflammation  of  the  eyes.

Photophobia.


eyeball  (aft.


From  two  drachms  of  the  powder  taken  by  a man,


23°


NUX  VOMICA.


Intolerance  of  daylight,  in  the  morning,  with  obscuration  of
vision.

(Complete  obscuration  of  vision,  like  amaurosis,  for  a few  hours)
(aft.  24  h.).

145.  Glittering ; a shining  flickering  beyond  the  field  of  vision,
especially  on  the  left  side,  in  the  forenoon  (Herz’s  false  vertigo)
(aft.  24  h.).

Objects  appear  brighter  to  look  at  than  usual.  [Rademacher,

1-  c.]

(Black  and  grey  points  hover  before  the  eyes,  with  stupefaction
in  the  head.)

Far  sight,  presbyopia.

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (the  first  hours).

150.  Dilatation  of  the  pupils  with  very  slow  breathing.

Externally  at  the  entrance  to  the  ear  shooting  pressure.

Itching  in  the  internal  ear  through  the  Eustachian  tube,  which
necessitates  frequent  swallowing,  and  disturbs  the  night’s  rest.

Creeping,  crawling  and  itching  in  the  internal  ear.

Single  sharp  blows  in  the  inner  ear,  like  earache  (aft.  6 h.).

155.  Stitches  in  the  ear,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  which  cause  him  to
cry  out  (aft.  9 d.).

Tearing  stitches  into  the  inner  ear  towards  evening  (aft.
6 h.).

Sharp  blows  in  the  internal  ear  (aft.  8 h.).

Pain  in  the  internal  ear  compounded  of  blows  and  squeezing,  like
earache  (aft.  12  h.).

Ringing  hissing  in  the  ears.

160.  In  the  night  a twittering  in  the  ears,  as  from  a grasshopper.
Ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  2—4  h.).

(Buzzing  and  humming  in  the  ears  as  from  bees.)

In  the  morning  after  rising,  a roaring  before  the  ears  (aft.  12  h.).

Noise  in  the  ears  as  from  a fulling-mill,  at  night.

165.  (In  the  morning,  hollowness  in  the  ears,  so  that  the  words  he
speaks  resound  in  the  ears,  going  off  after  dinner  (aft.  5 d.).

When  chewing  and  pressing  the  jaws  together  a shooting  drawing
pain  towards  the  inner  ear,  almost  like  cramp  (aft.  4 h.) .

Intolerable  itching  of  the  nose.1  [Rademacher,  1.  c.]

It  drew  the  mouth  sideways.  [Rademacher,  1.  c.]

Locking  of  the  jaws  with  full  consciousness.  [Rademacher,
!•  c.]

170.  In  the  masseter  muscles  and  jaws  a sensation  as  if  trismus
would  come  on,  or  as  if  the  jaws  were  drawn  together,  though  their
movement  remains  free.

Drawing  pain  in  the  masseter  muscles.

Ulcerated  corners  of  the  lips.

Painful  desquamation  of  the  lips  (aft.  3 h.).

Over  the  border  of  the  upper  lip  itching  pimples.

175.  Sore  feeling  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip.


1 With  S.  1 02,


NUX  VOMICA,


231

A small  ulcer  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  lip,  painful  when
touched.

An  ulcer  with  scab  and  burning  pain  on  the  red  of  the  lip.

Ulcerated  scabs  on  the  border  of  the  lips,  an  eruption  which  on
its  first  appearance  causes  shooting  pain.

In  the  morning,  shooting  in  the  upper  and  lower  lip.

i8q.  The  under  lip  is  burst  in  the  middle  (a  chap)  (aft.  1 % h.).

Miliary  papules  containing  pus  round  the  lips.

A single  hair  of  the  beard  on  the  lip  pains  when  touched,  as  if  a
splinter  were  stuck  in  there  (aft.  5 h.).

A pimple  on  the  skin  of  the  lower  jaw  only  painful  when
touched.

On  the  chin  eruption  of  itching  papules,  the  largest  of  which  are
surrounded  by  redness.

185.  A tetter-like  eruption  on  the  lower  part  of  the  chin.

Swelling  of  the  gums.

Painful  swelling  of  the  gums  with  painful  papules  on  the  interior
of  the  lip  and  on  the  tongue,  as  in  mercurial  salivation.

Swelling  of  the  gums  with  pain  like  throbbing  in  them,  as  if  an
ulcer  would  form  there.

Gums  swollen  as  thick  as  the  finger,  with  throbbing  pain,  as  in  a
suppurating  abscess,  on  account  of  which  she  cannot  eat,  for  five  days.

190.  Swollen  gums  with  drawing  pain.

Ulceration  of  the  gums  at  an  incisor  tooth  with  drawing  and
burning  pain.

Swollen  gums  with  toothache  before  dinner.

Swollen  gums  with  toothache,  which  commences  with  aching
(aft.  1 h.).

Toothache  as  from  soreness  of  the  gums  in  the  morning.

195.  Continued  sore  pain  in  the  teeth,  increased  by  exertion  of  the
head  and  meditation.

While  walking  in  the  open  air  constant  toothache  like  slight  sore
feeling,  especially  when  the  mouth  is  opened.

Twitching  toothache  as  if  proceeding  from  swelling  of  the  gums.

Twitching  toothache  synchronous  with  the  pulse  with  swelling
of  the  gums.

Twitching  toothache  with  jerking  in  the  ear,  also  twisting  and
screwing  in  the  ear,  in  the  morning  immediately  on  waking,  and  in
the  evening.

200.  After  dinner,  toothache,  at  first  like  a blow  or  stab  into  it,  then
a humming  in  it  like  a painful  roaring,  which  extends  into  the
eyes,  and  is  aggravated  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  also  occasionally
lasts  into  the  night  ; it  is  relieved  when  she  wraps  up  her  cheek  very
warmly ; when  it  comes  again  it  always  commences  with  needle-
pricks.

Single  twitches  each  ending  in  a stitch  in  several  teeth,  in  the
open  air.

Drawing  toothache,  with  at  the  same  time  stitches  in  one  row  of
the  teeth,  especially  when  drawing  the  air  in  by  the  open  mouth
(aft.  J h,).


232


NUX  VOMICA.


Drawing  toothache  with  stitches  in  a tooth,  he  can-
not tell  which.

Drawing  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth,  when  he  sucks  it  with  his
tongue.

205.  In  the  hollow  tooth  pain  extending  up  to  the  head,  when  air
enters  the  mouth.

On  breathing  deeply  (in  the  open  air)  pain  as  if  air  entered  the
hollow  tooth.

Drawing  toothache  at  one  time  in  an  upper,  at  another  in  a lower
molar,  and  then  drawing  in  the  others  to  the  front,  especially  imme-
diately after  the  noonday  meal  and  in  the  evening,  during  which
red,  hot  spots  occur  on  the  cheeks  and  neck,  and  the  disposition  is
complaining,  he  makes  reproaches  and  is  desperate.

Drawing  toothache  from  warm  drinks  and  soups.

Tearing  toothache,  which  first  attacks  a hollow  tooth,  then
penetrates  now  to  the  upper,  now  to  the  lower  jaw,  then  through
the  facial  bones  into  the  head,  and  tears  in  the  temple  of  the  same
side,  recurs  by  fits,  is  relieved  for  some  time  by  sleep,  but  is
renewed  by  cold  water  or  by  a morsel  of  food  getting  into  the
hollow  tooth  (after  2 h.).

210.  Boring  gnawing  toothache,  which  is  neither  relieved  nor  aggra-
vated by  touching  and  chewing,  but  is  diminished  by  drawing  in  cold
air  ; on  the  other  hand  it  is  increased  by  the  warm  room.

Digging  toothache  on  exerting  the  head  and  thinking;  afterwards
a painful  gland  under  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  towards  evening
(aft.  9 h.).

Shooting  toothache  in  several  teeth  of  both  jaws.  \JVe.~\

Dull  shooting  toothache  in  an  upper  incisor.  \WeI\

Toothache,  as  if  the  tooth  were  dislocated  or  bitten  out  and
waggled,  with  single  coarse  stitches,  only  observed  on  inspiring  the
open  air  with  open  mouth.

215.  Loose  tooth  with  obtuse  pain  increased  by  chewing,  late  in  the
evening,  and  in  the  morning  before  rising  from  bed  (aft.  12  h,).

Looseness  of  the  teeth.

Looseness  of  a sound  tooth,  which  is  only  painful  when  knocked
against.

Falling  out  of  sound  teeth,  that  were  previously  hardly  ever
loose.

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  jaws.

220.  Drawing  pain  in  the  cervical  muscles.

White  tongue  (aft.  20  h. ) .

Speaking  is  difficult  for  him.

She  is  unable  to  speak  loud.

Dryness  in  the  front  of  the  mouth,  especially  on  the  tip  of  the
tongue.

225.  Dryness  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning,  without  thirst,  as  if  he
had  been  drinking  alcoholic  liquors  the  previous  evening.

Dryness  in  the  mouth  after  midnight,  as  if  the  tongue  stuck  to
the  palate,  without  thirst,  and  yet  great  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the
fauces  (aft.  5 h.),


NUX  VOMICA.


233


Itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  root  of  the  tongue.  \JVe.\

Painful  pimples  on  the  front  of  the  palate,  behind  the  upper
incisors  (aft.  40  h.).

Painful  vesicles  on  the  tongue  (aft.  6 h.).

230.  Shooting  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  after  lying  down,  or  going  to
sleep  at  the  midday  siesta  (aft.  2 h.).

Mouth  and  fauces  are  in  the  morning  covered  with  mucus,  and
there  is  yellow  mucus  in  the  canthi  of  the  eyes  (eyegum)  (aft.
16  h.).

Pain,  as  if  rough  and  sore  in  the  throat,  on  the  palate.

The  inside  of  the  mouth,  the  gums,  and  tongue  are  slimy,  and
as  if  raw  and  sore,  as  from  something  acrid.

Swelling  of  the  palate  with  an  aching  pain,  also  when  not
swallowing,  and  a burning  sensation  behind  the  palate  (aft.  32  h.).

235.  Swelling  of  the  palate  and  uvula,  as  if  from  adherent  mucus,
especially  felt  when  swallowing  (aft.  8 h.).

Sore  throat  as  from  swelling  on  the  palate,  but  not  felt  when
drinking.

Sore  throat ; an  aching  in  the  throat  only  felt  when  swallowing
the  saliva,  not  the  food.

Sore  throat ; in  bed  in  the  morning,  sensation  of  a swelling  in  the
gullet,  more  felt  when  swallowing  than  when  not.

Single  stitches  on  the  side  of  the  throat,  when  not  swallowing,
especially  felt  when  stooping  and  going  up  stairs  (aft,  1,  24  h.).

240.  Itching  pricking  in  the  gullet  towards  the  ears  when  swallowing
and  when  moving  the  jaws.

Shooting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.

7 M-

Shooting  in  the  uvula  and  in  the  sub-maxillary  glands  when
swallowing,  with  shivering  by  day,  perspiration  in  the  night  and
headache.

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  throat,  as  if  a plug  were  sticking  in
it,  more  felt  when  not  swallowing  than  when  swallowing.

Sore  throat ; sore  roughness  in  the  fauces,  only  felt  when  drawing
in  cold  air  and  when  swallowing.

245.  Sore  throat  as  if  raw  when  swallowing  (without  shooting).

Burning  in  the  fauces,  as  from  heartburn.

Bubbling  up  (boiling)  and  burning  up  into  the  throat.

Burning  in  the  throat  at  night ; she  must  sit  up,  when  she  lies
down  it  is  worse.

Burning  in  the  oesophagus  up  to  the  mouth.

250.  Heartburn.

Scraping  in  the  throat,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  larynx,  as  after
rancid  heartburn  (aft.  8 h.).

Rancid  heartburn,  as  if  from  overloading  the  stomach  with  rancid
fat  (aft.  6 h.).

Scraping,  scratching  feeling  in  the  throat,  such  as
remains  after  heartburn.

Scraping  and  scratching  in  the  fauces,  as  if  the  skin  had  been
scraped  off  with  a sharp  instrument,  not  perceived  on  swallowing.


234


NUX  VOMICA.


255-  Great  collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  (the  first  12  h.).

Copious  flow  of  watery  saliva  from  the  mouth  (water-brash).

On  stooping,  great  flow  of  water  from  the  mouth,  without
nausea.

Flow  of  saliva  from  the  mouth  during  sleep  (aft.  20  h.).

Bloody  saliva.

260.  Spitting  of  blackish,  almost  coagulated  blood,  at  first  about  2 a.m.,
then  about  2 p.m.,  with  a peculiar  taste  in  the  mouth  and  a smell  of
blood  in  the  nose,  at  the  same  time  there  always  comes  a little  blood
on  blowing  the  nose.

She  has  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  there  is  a sour  smell
from  it.

Sour  taste  in  the  mouth.

In  the  morning  especially,  sour  taste  in  the  mouth.

Food  and  drink  leave  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth.

265.  Immediately  after  swallowing  food,  which  tastes  properly,  there
comes  a sour  taste  in  his  mouth.

Bread  and  rolls  have  a sour  taste,  not  so  other  food.

After  drinking  milk,  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.

Drinking  milk  seems  to  cause  acidity  (aft.  15  h.).

(In  the  morning  a salt  taste  in  the  mouth.)

270.  Hawking  of  a salt  mucus  from  the  fauces.

Nasty  taste  in  the  mouth.

Disagreeable  taste  and  smell  in  the  mouth  and  nose,  almost
sulphurous.

(He  notices  a sweetish  disagreeable  taste,  and  a sweetish  dis-
agreeable smell  about  him.)

In  the  mouth  a bad,  slimy  taste,  herbaceous  and  metallic  united,
with  discontent  and  relaxation,  in  the  morning.

275.  Disgusting  herbaceous  taste  in  the  throat,  almost  like  carrots
(aft.  1 h.).

Beer  has  a herbaceous  taste  to  her.

Taste  in  the  mouth  as  if  the  stomach  were  deranged.

In  the  morning  milk  tastes  bad,  as  if  spoilt.

In  the  morning  he  wakes  with  a perfectly  dry  throat,  and  after
getting  up  he  notices  how  badly  he  smells  from  his  throat.

280.  After  eructating  an  ill-smelling  vapour  appears  to  come  out  of  his
mouth.

On  coughing  a putrid  taste  deep  in  the  throat  (aft.  2 h.).

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.

In  the  morning  before  eating,  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  which
goes  off  after  eating.

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning,  as  from  carious  teeth.
285.  In  the  morning  putrid  in  the  mouth,  but  food  and
drink  taste  right.

On  expectorating  the  mucus  from  his  chest  he  perceives  a bitter
taste  low  down  in  the  throat.

In  the  morning  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  but  food
and  drink  taste  right.

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  not  of  the  food.


NUX  VOMICA.


235


On  spitting  out  the  saliva  he  perceives  a bitter  taste.

290.  Bread  has  to  him  a smoky  taste.

He  tastes  little  or  nothing  of  what  he  eats  ; the  food  seems  to
him  to  have  no  taste  at  all.

In  the  morning  milk  has  no  taste  to  him.

Meat  has  no  taste  to  him.

Continued  anorexia.  [Hartmann,  Diss.  Spicileg . ad  nucis  vom .
usum , Traj.  ad  Viadr.,  1785,  p.  20.1]

295.  Coffee  has  no  taste  to  him.

Diminished  appetite.

Repugnance  to  food  (immediately).

He  loathes  sour  (black)  bread.

Dislike  to  bread.

300.  Dislike  to  rye  bread  ; when  he  takes  it  his  mouth  fills  with
water.

He  eats  without  appetite.

The  smell  of  food  is  disagreeable  to  him.

Food  and  drink  have  a disgusting  smell  to  him.

On  walking  (for  half  an  hour)  he  loses  his  appetite.

305.  Dislike  to  ordinary  food  and  drink,  and  to  the  accustomed
tobacco  smoking  and  coffee.

Thirst  afternoon  and  evening.

(Thirst  for  milk.)

He  has  thirst  and  yet  water  and  beer  are  repugnant  to  him.

He  became  sick  and  inclined  to  vomit  from  smoking  tobacco  (aft.
3,  8 h.).

310.  Longing  for  tobacco  (in  the  first  hours).

Great  hunger,  also  in  the  morning  (aft.  15  h.).

Hunger  and  yet  loathing  of  food.

An  hour  before  dinner  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  stomach  and
abdomen,  as  from  emptiness  combined  with  hunger.

Periodical  ravenous  hunger  in  the  afternoon,  especially  after
drinking  small  beer;  after  a small  draught  of  it  he  becomes  hungry,
if  he  passes  over  the  hunger  without  eating  then  he  feels  as  if  he  were
quite  full  and  satiated.

315.  Hunger;  but  if  he  eats  ever  so  little  he  is  immediately  satiated,
and  feels  quite  full  (aft.  3 h.).

After  eating  an  ill-feeling,  as  if  he  were  really  ill,  and  in  spite  of
his  malady  had  overloaded  himself  with  food.

After  eating,  the  stomachache  and  the  metallic  and  herbaceous
taste  return.

After  eating  unhappy  and  quite  sad.

After  eating  quite  hypochondriacal,  and  affected  by  the  least  trifle.

320.  After  dinner  chilliness  and  coldness.

After  dinner  and  after  supper  chilliness.

After  dinner  much  heat,  especially  in  the  face,  that  seemed  to  rise
up  from  the  abdomen  ; he  perspired  chiefly  all  over  the  back.

After  eating  heat  and  redness  of  cheeks,  with  confused  head.


1 ' Not  accessible.


236


NUX  VOMICA.


After  a meal  external  heat  of  the  cheeks,  with  intense  feeling  of
heat,  like  burning,  in  the  interior  of  the  cheeks,  with  very  dilatable
pupils,  photophobia,  and  chilliness  on  the  arms  with  goose-skin  (aft.
3h.).

325.  After  dinner  great  dryness  at  the  back  of  the  throat.

During  dinner  heat  in  the  head.

During  dinner  a kind  of  faintness,  at  the  same  time  nausea  and
flying  heat,  which  all  went  off  on  lying  down.

While  eating  he  perspires  on  the  forehead  and  scalp  (aft.  2 h.).

After  dinner  he  had  suddenly  squeamishness  and  loathing,
followed  by  vertigo  and  tendency  to  faint ; later  much  eructation
without  taste  or  smell  (aft.  13  d.).

330.  After  eating  and  drinking  eructation.

Frequent  eructation.

Painful  eructation.

She  often  feels  as  if  she  should  eructate,  but  it  does  not  take
place  ; she  then  feels  as  if  the  oesophagus  were  spasmodically  con-
tracted.

After  eating  a watery  fluid  belches  up  into  the  mouth.

335.  When  fasting  bitter  eructation.

Eructation  (belching)  of  a bitter  and  sour  fluid  (aft.  6 h.).

Eructation  of  a bitter  sour  fluid,  at  night  (aft.  12  h.).

After  a walk  in  the  morning,  some  eructation  up  to  the  front  of
the  tongue.

After  eating  (three  hours  afterwards),  eructation  of  a sour  taste
and  smell,  with  yawning  (aft.  8 h.).

340.  Frequent  hiccup,  without  cause.

Hiccup  before  dinner  (aft.  24  h.).

Thirst  without  bodily  heat,  and  yet  drinks  oppress  the  stomach
(aft.  6 h.).

Thirst,  and  the  drinks  are  relished,  but  soon  after  drinking  there
occurs  nausea,  in  the  evening  (aft.  12  h.).

Nausea.  [Matthiolus,  Comment . in  Diosc .,  lib.  iv,  cap.  23.1]

345.  When  she  wishes  to  eat  she  has  nausea.

Nausea  an  hour  before  dinner  (aft.  16  h.).

Nausea  in  the  morning.

In  the  morning  qualmishness  about  the  heart,  with  nausea  and
flow  of  saliva  \ in  the  afternoon  shivering.

In  the  morning  nausea,  which  spread  here  and  there  through  the
body,  as  if  all  were  in  commotion  (aft.  12  h.).

350.  After  a meal,  qualmish,  anxious,  sick  and  ill,  and  as  poorly  as
after  a strong  purgative ; something  rose  up  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

After  eating  loathing  of  what  had  just  been  eaten,  especially  when
sitting  up  and  refraining  from  lying  down.

Nausea  after  dinner  (aft.  40  h.).

Nausea  in  the  afternoon  (about  5 p.m.)  (aft.  20  h.).

In  the  afternoon,  nausea  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  but  not  coming
to  actual  vomiting  (aft  3 d.).


1 No  such  observation  found  in  work  mentioned  $ but  other  authors  mention  his
case  as  that  of  an  old  woman  killed  by  a small  quantity,


NUX  VOMICA.


2^7


355.  After  eating  sick  qualmishness  (squeamishness).

Inclination  to  vomit.  [Frid.  Hoffmann,  Med . Rat.  Syst.  ii,
P-  I75-1 2]

After  palpitation  of  the  heart  sickness  with  clean  tongue.
[Thomas  a Thuessink,  Waarnemingen , xxxiii.3]

Immediately  after  eating  inclination  to  vomit.

After  dinner  and  drinking,  nausea,  then  thirst  and  after  drinking
distension  of  the  abdomen,  like  swelling.

360.  After  dinner  inclination  to  vomit  for  an  hour  (aft.  3 h.).

On  hawking  (getting  up  the  mucus  from  the  throat)  retching  as
if  to  vomit  (aft.  4 h.).

Vomiting.  [Strandberg,  in  Kiernander  s Med . lac .,  p.  269. 3]
Repeated  vomiting  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fr.  H — ».]

Violent  vomiting.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

365.  Vomiting  of  sour  mucus,  in  the  forenoon  (aft.  20  h.).

Vomiting  of  sour  smelling  and  tasting  mucus  towards  evening,
with  headache  like  tearing  (?)  round  the  lower  part  of  the  skull  (aft.
9 h.).

Vomiting  of  blood.

V omiting  of  blood,  or  belching  of  blood  from  the  stomach  (aft.  1 h.) .
Aching  spasmodic  pain  from  the  fauces  down  to  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  in  the  morning.

370.  Scraping  sensation  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

A constant  pressure  on  the  heart  (in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus
cordis).

The  region  of  the  stomach  very  sensitive  to  external  pressure  3 he
dare  not  let  the  hand  lie  on  the  stomach,  because  it  causes  nausea.

Towards  evening  a sick  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  like
nausea.

Continued  stomachache.  \Veckoskrift , 1.  c.]

37 S’  Violent  oppression  of  the  stomach.  [Strandberg,  1.  c.]  %

Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  from  a stone.

After  eating  little,  aching  in  the  stomach  (in  the  morning).
Immediately  after  eating  aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
as  if  from  eating  too  much  (aft.  5 h.).

After  eating,  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  abdomen,  with
distension.

380.  Aching  in  the  heart  (scrobiculus  cordis).

After  drinking,  immediately  a pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis
causing  tightness  of  the  chest,  with  distension  of  the  abdomen  (aft.
2 h.).

Pressure  some  inches  below  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  causes
eructation.

An  aching  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  especially  after  walking
in  the  open  air,  which  when  sitting  does  not  go  off  under  a quarter
of  an  hour.

Long-continued  stomachache  and  pain  in  the  upper  part  of
the  abdomen.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

1 From  fifteen  grains  in  a girl  of  ten,— Should  be  “ efforts  at  vomiting”  (p.  283).

2 Not  accessible.


238


NUX  VOMICA.


385.  In  the  morning,  pressing  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  then  cutting
in  the  abdomen  with  constant  nausea  (aft.  24  h.).

In  the  morning,  pressure  as  from  a stone  in  the  epigastrium,
aggravated  by  walking,  relieved  by  sitting  (aft.  14  h.).

Tension  in  the  stomach.

Tension  over  the  stomach.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen.

390.  Tension  over  the  stomach  (epigastrium)  in  the  afternoon  (3
o’clock),  then  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all  were  raw  and  sore
there.

Spasms  of  the  abdomen.  [Strandberg,  1.  c.]

When  walking,  at  every  step  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all  were
sore  there.

Pain  in  the  epigastrium,  as  if  the  clothes  were  too  tight  there.

Contractive,  squeezing  stomachache.

395.  In  the  side  of  the  abdomen  a squeezing,  aching  pain.

After  squeezing  aching  bellyache  and  fermenting  rumbling  in
the  hypogastrium,  watery  diarrhoea,  quite  early  (aft.  24  h.) .

Contractive  pain  in  the  hypochondria  (aft.  6,  12  h.).
Contractive  pain  in  the  abdomen.

After  eating  a little  and  even  on  commencinj^to  eat,  fulness  in
the  epigastrium.

400.  In  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  under  the  short  ribs,  sensation  of  an
internal  swelling.

Distension  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  is  painful
to  the  touch.

Feeling  as  if  something  turned  over  in  the  gastric  region.

Gurgling  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  with  anxiety.

Throbbing  in  the  gastric  region.

405.  After  supper,  sensation  like  a throbbing  in  the  gastric  region,
chiefly  felt  on  touching  it  (aft.  24  h.).

Throbbing  pain  in  and  under  the  hepatic  region^  as  if  an
abscess  would  form  there.

Jaundice,  with  loathing  of  food  and  short  attacks  of  faintness ,
thereafter  weak  and  ill.

Pricking  pain  in  the  hepatic  region  (aft.  a few  h.).

A chill  running  over  the  hepatic  region,  a creeping  feeling.

410.  Spasmodic  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  combined  with  a
qualmishness,  felt  especially  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

Alternate  grasping  and  clawing  (now  clutching  now  Jetting  go)
in  the  upper  abdominal  region.

Griping,  bubbling,  digging  in  the  abdomen.

When  he  eats  something  he  has  griping  and  pinching  in  the
abdomen  above  the  navel.

Sensation  as  if  something  drawn  down  from  the  limbs  were  rolled
together  in  the  umbilical  region,  like  a fulling  and  kneading.

415.  Spasm  in  the  stomach,  clawing  in  the  stomach  after  midnight,
towards  the  morning,  as  from  a purgative,  changing  into  a burning
in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

Burning  at  the  mouth  of  the  stomach,


NUX  VOMICA.


239


Feeling  of  burning  in  tho  scrobiculus  cordis, ^coming  from  below
upwards.

Especially  at  night  a kind  of  cooling  burning  (as  from  saltpetre
on  the  tongue)  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  into  the  gullet.

Soon  after  supper  a burning  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and
further  downwards,  with  anxiety.

420.  Sensation  of  increased  warmth  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning.

Sensation  of  a not  disagreeable  warmth  in  the  abdomen,  and  as  if
something  unfolded  itself  there  and  were  in  movement.

Ebullition  in  the  abdomen  from  below  upwards  without  per-
ceptible heat.

(Coarse  stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  in  the  evening,  and
for  some  time  after  lying  down.)

Shortly  before  dinner,  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  if  bruised,
which  goes  off  after  eating.

425.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  pain  as  if  the  bowels  were  bruised,  also  in
the  loins,  with  a kind  of  nausea.

Tearing  pain  in  the  stomach.

Flatulent  colic  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  in
the  evening  after  lying  down  (aft.  5,  10,  13  h.).

Flatulence  rises  up  in  the  abdomen,  and  presses
under  the  short  ribs  (aft.  20  h.).

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  confined  incarcerated  flatulence.

430.  Deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  pain  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence,
with  pains  in  the  sacrum,  in  the  morning.

Flatulent  colic  after  stool,  as  if  the  bowels  were  hard  pressed  by
stones  here  and  there  (aft.  4 h.).

In  the  abdomen  pressing  flatulent  distension.

In  the  hypogastrium  a pressure,  like  distension,  when  he  draws
his  breath,  talks,  and  touches  it  externally.

After  a meal,  flatulent  distension  in  the  abdomen

(aft.  12  h.).

435.  After  drinking,  immediately  flatulent  distension.

Everything  he  takes  seems  to  turn  to  flatulence,  which  rises  up
and  causes  anxiety.

Here  and  there  in  the  abdomen  anxious  pressive  flatulence.  [T^.]

The  flatulence  seems  to  rise  up  into  the  chest,  makes  it  tight  and
causes  a shooting  aching  here  and  there  (immediately.)

Early  in  the  morning  he  has  working  about  in  the  abdomen  (aft,
18  h.)>

440.  In  the  abdomen  croaking  like  frogs.

Early  in  bed  along  with  rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  abdomen,
spasmodic  and  pinching  flatulent  colic,  with  heat  in  the  palms  and
soles  (aft.  20  ho).

Loud  rattling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  morning.

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon.

Loud  rattling  in  the  abdomen,  with  internal  movements  as  if
stool  were  about  to  ensue  ; at  the  same  time  she  is  weak  and  must
lie  down.

445.  Feeling  of  a weight  in  the  abdomen.


240


NUX  VOMICA.


Sensation  as  if  everything  in  the  abdomen  would  fall  down,  which
compels  him  to  walk  softly.

Sensation  in  the  abdomen  when  walking  as  if  the  bowels  splashed.

Bellyache  with  sensation  of  dryness  on  the  lips,  and  heat  of  the
face.

Pain  like  needle-pricks  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  4,  6 h.).

450.  Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  on  breathing  deeply.

Stitches  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen  on  moving.

Severe  stitches  in  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  J h.).

Shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  which  takes  away  the
breath,  and  is  relieved  by  pressing  in  the  hand,  in  the  forenoon.

Deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  a kind  of  flatulent  colic ; sharp
pressure,  as  with  a cutting  or  pointed  instrument,  on  the  bladder,  the
neck  of  the  bladder,  the  commencement  of  the  urethra,  the  perinaeum,
the  rectum  and  anus,  as  if  cutting  flatus  would  force  itself  out  at  all
these  parts  \ intolerable  at  every  step  (he  walks  in  a bent  attitude,  it
draws  him  so  together),  rapidly  going  off  when  at  rest,  when  sitting
and  lying.

455.  Cutting  bellyache  with  inclination  to  vomit.

Continued,  cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  rising  up  into  the
upper  abdomen,  where  it  becomes  a griping.

Cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  sickness,  sweetish,  dis-
gusting taste  in  the  mouth,  exhaustion  and  great  drowsiness  in  the
morning,  returning  after  24  hours  (aft.  J,  24  h.).

Burning  cutting,  more  in  the  upper  abdomen  and  more  fre-
quently when  moving.

More  cutting  than  pinching  bellyache,  which  causes  nausea.

460.  Bellyache  in  the  open  air,  as  from  catching  cold.

Bellyache,  as  if  a diarrhoea  from  a chill  would  occur

(aft.  5 h.).

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).

Intolerable  pains  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

After  drinking  coffee  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  worms,
which  goes  off  by  bending  the  body  backwards,  but  is  renewed  by
stooping  (aft.  1 h.).

465.  Pinching  drawing,  several  times,  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,
from  the  inguinal  ring  upwards  (aft.  \ h.).

Pinching  tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen  up  towards  the
chest  (aft.  1 h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  from  the  left  side  over  the  navel.

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen.

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen  from  both  sides,  which
unites  above  the  os  pubis.

470.  Tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  4 o'clock)
(aft.  1 h.).

A forcing  down  towards  the  genitals  in  the  hypogastrium.

On  walking  in  the  open  air  a contraction  in  the  hypogastrium
and  a forcing  towards  the  genitals.

Contractive  spasm  in  the  abdomen  and  uterus,  like  a griping
and  clutching  (with  increased  metrorrhagia  in  clotted  masses).


NUX  VOMICA.


241

Weak  feeling  in  the  inguinal  ring,  as  if  a hernia  would  come  (aft.
20  h.).

475.  Pain  in  the  inguinal  ring,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  as  if  a hernia
were  incarcerated.

Indication  and  commencement  of  an  inguinal  hernia

(aft.  5,  7,  8 h.).

In  the  region  of  the  os  ilii  an  aching  pain.

Twitching  and  quivering  in  the  abdominal  muscles,
under  the  skin.

Feeling  of  a running  in  the  right  abdominal  muscles  ; on  touching
the  part  it  is  numb,  stiff,  and  feels  as  if  swollen.

480.  Pain  as  if  bruised  on  the  side  of  the  abdomen  and  loins  when
touched.

The  abdominal  muscles  are  painful  as  if  bruised,  only  when
touched  and  when  moving  the  body.

Pain  of  the  abdominal  muscles  as  if  bruised,  especially  painful  on
movement.

The  abdomen  is  painful  to  the  touch.

After  quick  walking,  there  occurs  on  a small  spot  of  the  abdomen
a pain  when  touched,  or  from  the  pressure  of  the  clothes ; at  the
same  place  a fine  needle-prick  is  felt.

485.  Diarrhoea,  especially  in  the  morning  and  immediately  after  the
(midday)  meal,  of  a dark  colour.

Diarrhoea.  [Strandberg,  1.  c.]

Evacuation  enveloped  in  white  mucus.

Small  diarrhoeic  motions  in  the  morning,  which  excoriate  the  anus.

Diarrhoea  of  foetid  faeces.  [Wiel,  1.  c.]

490.  Green  slimy  thin  motions  (aft.  24  h.).*

After  a motion  smarting  and  sore  pain  in  the  anus,  in  the
evening  (aft.  10  h.).

Some  hours  after  the  motion  a burning  sore  pain,  as  if  a wound
had  been  cut  into,  at  the  anus,  as  from  haemorrhoids.

Difficult  evacuation  passing  with  burning.

Burning  pain  externally  at  the  anus,  immediately  after  the
motion  (aft.  20  h.).

495.  After  bellyache  evacuation  of  dark  coloured  mucus,
which  causes  a smarting  burning  at  the  anus  (aft.  8 h.).

Small,  frequent  evacuations.

Stool  consisting  first  of  soft  and  thin,  then  of  hard  faeces  (aft.  2Q

h.).

In  the  forenoon,  along  with  discharge  of  flatus,  involuntary
evacuation  of  liquid  stool,  followed  by  hard  faeces.

Stools  consisting  of  hard  and  soft  faeces,  mixed  with  discharge  of
flatus,  in  the  morning  and  after  eating  (and  drinking).

* Note. — The  production  of  continual,  copious,  diarrhoeic  motions — actual  diar-
rhoea it  is  called — is  never  to  be  met  with  in  the  primary  action  of  nux  vomica,  as  far
as  my  observation  goes,  and  the  diarrhoea  met  with  among  its  symptoms  consists  either
of  very  small  evacuations,  mostly  composed  of  mucus,  accompanied  by  faecal  motions
and  straining ; or  when  it  was  a copious,  thin  faecal  evacuation,  it  was  then  the
secondary  action  or  result  in  a patient  who  had  previously  suffered  from  constipation
and  costiveness,  with  fruitless  urging  to  stool.

VOL.  IX.


l6


242


NUX  VOMICA.


500.  Evacuation  of  hard  large-formed  faeces  (aft.  24  h.).

Constipation.

Constipation,  and  at  the  same  time  rush  of  blood  to  the  head.

Constipation,  as  from  constriction  and  contraction  of  the  bowels.

Constipation,  as  from  inactivity  of  the  bowels.

505.  Anxious  call  to  stool  (aft.  6 h.).

Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

After  sufficient  evacuation  of  the  bowels  frequent  ineffectual
urging  to  stool.

Pressive  pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  especially  towards  the  anus.

She  is  obliged  to  go  three  or  four  times  daily  to  stool,  with  some
pinching ; she  frequently  goes  without  result  and  when  something
passes  it  is  soft.

510.  When  he  has  an  evacuation  he  feels  as  if  some  faeces  still
remained  behind,  and  as  if  he  could  not  get  rid  of  enough,  with  a
feeling  of  constriction  of  the  rectum,  not  of  the  anus.

A daily  evacuation,  but  always  with  a colicky  sensation  in  the
abdomen,  and  when  the  stool  occurs  it  always  seems  to  her  as  if
enough  did  not  come  away,  and  as  if  the  evacuation  were  incomplete.

Pressing  in  the  rectum  before  the  motion.

When  she  goes  to  stool  the  pressing  is  more  upon  the  uterus
(just  as  if  the  child  would  come  away),  less  upon  the  rectum.

When  she  wishes  to  go  to  stool  a griping  in  the  upper  part  of
the  abdomen.

515.  Very  hard,  dry  stool,  and  for  some  time  thereafter  a shooting  pain
in  the  rectum,  as  from  haemorrhoids  (aft.  14  h.).

Blind  piles  (haemorrhoids)  (aft.  6 h.).

Shooting  in  the  rectum,  while  the  stool  is  passing.

Transient  feeling  of  piles  (aft.  8 h.).

Blood  passes  along  with  the  faecal  motion.

520.  Whitish  faeces  mixed  with  viscid  mucus  and  streaks  of  blood  (aft.

1,  2 h.).

Evacuation  covered  with  blood,  and  slimy  matter  along  with  it.

Along  with  feeling  of  narrowing  and  contraction  of  the  rectum,
during  the  motion,  discharge  of  bright  blood  with  the  faeces  (aft.  48  h.).

Discharge  of  blood  from  the  anus.

After  a meal,  and  after  exertion  of  the  head  and  reflection,
tearing  shooting  and  constrictive  pain  as  from  bad  blind  piles,  in  the
rectum  and  anus  (aft.  38  h.).

525.  Burning  and  shooting  in  the  rectum  with  piles  at  the  anus  (aft.
2 h.).

Sharp  pressing  pain  in  the  rectum  after  stool  and  after  a meal,
especially  when  exerting  the  head  and  studying.

Sharp  pressing  pain  in  the  rectum,  before  stool,  in  the  morning
(aft.  16  h.).

Pain  in  the  rectum  as  from  costiveness,  in  the  evening  after
eating,  which  is  alleviated  from  time  to  time  by  discharge  of  flatus
(aft.  4 h.).

Aching  pain  inside  the  anus  and  in  the  rectum,  in  the  evening
(aft.  11  h.).


NUX  VOMICA.


243

530.  Violent  aching  pain  deep  in  the  rectum  taking  away  the  breath,
about  midnight  (aft.  16  h.).

In  the  morning,  after  rising,  painful  contraction  in  the  rectum
and  anus  (aft.  10  h.).

Contractive  feeling  in  the  rectum  sometimes  like  an  urging  to  stool.

Contraction  and  stricture  of  the  rectum  which  prevents  the
expulsion  of  the  stool.

A twitching  in  the  anus  unconnected  with  the  stool.

535.  Itching  in  the  anus  and  hot  stool.

A voluptuous,  intolerable  itching  in  the  rectum,  down  to  the  anus,
(aft.  3 h.).

Formication  and  tickling  itching  in  the  rectum  as  from  thread-
worms.

Itching  in  the  rectum  as  from  threadworms.  [We.~\

Formication  in  the  anus  at  night  as  from  threadworms.

540.  Threadworms  pass  out  by  the  anus.

At  the  border  of  the  anus  itching,  which  passes  into  smarting
and  sore  pain,  as  from  blind  piles  (aft.  \ h.) .

Itching  in  the  anus  combined  with  sore  pain,  as  in  haemorrhoids,
whilst  walking  in  the  evening  (aft.  30  h.).

In  the  perinaeum,  itching  after  the  midday  siesta  (aft.  16  h.).

In  the  perinaeum,  aching  pain  after  dinner  (aft.  2 h.).

545.  (After  dinner,  shooting  pain  in  the  bladder,  independent  of
urinating,  which  is  allayed  by  discharge  of  flatus.)  (aft.  80  h.)

Urging  to  urinate.

Urging  to  urinate  in  the  afternoon.

Painful  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate.

Painful  discharge  of  turbid  urine.  [Wiel,  1.  c.]

550.  (More  urine  passed  than  the  fluid  he  had  drunk.)^

Watery  urine  (aft.  3 h.).

Discharge  of  pale  urine,  the  last  portion  of  the  discharge  consist-
ing of  a thick  whitish  matter,  like  pus,  with  severe  burning  pain  (aft.
16  h.)»

Whilst  urinating  there  is  discharged  from  the  bladder  very  viscid
mucus,  without  pain  (aft.  9,  12  d.).

Before  urinating  pain  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder.

555.  After  urinating  pressing  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder.

Whilst  urinating  a burning  and  tearing  pain  in  the
neck  of  the  bladder.

Whilst  urinating  a burning  in  the  urethra  (aft.,  10  h.).

Whilst  urinating  a burning  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  theAirethra.

Whilst  urinating  a burning,  but  when  not  urinating  a^  tearing
pain  in  the  urethra.

560.  Whilst  urinating  an  itching  in  the  urethra.

When  not  urinating  an  aching  pain  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,
with  shivering  (aft.  4 h.).

When  not  urinating,  in  the  morning  and  when  reflecting,  a
contractive  pain  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  backwards*

* Copious  discharge  of  urine  is  only  curative  secondary  action  in  this  medicine,

after  a previous  opposite  condition  in  this  patient.


244


NUX  VOMICA.


Before  urinating  a burning  and  pricking  pain  in  the  urethra,  after
dinner.

Itching  prick  in  the  fore  part  of  the  urethra,  which  went  back-
wards. [We.\

565.  Immediately  before  he  makes  water,  a pricking  or  twitching  in
the  urethra.

Before  or  after  urinating  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  pains  as  if  it
were  excoriated.

After  urinating  pain  on  the  tip  of  the  glans,  as  if  excoriated.

Itching  of  the  glans  penis  (aft  2 h.).

Itching  on  the  glans,  in  the  morning.

570.  A smarting  on  the  glans.

A smarting  itching  on  the  glans  (aft.  2 h.).

Eroding  itching  on  the  glans,  in  the  evening  and  morning.

On  the  posterior  part  of  the  glans,  burning  itching  (aft.  6 h.).

Increased  secretion  of  smegma  behind  the  corona  glandis.

575.  The  prepuce  is  retracted  behind  the  glans  (aft.  4 h.).

Smarting  itching  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce,

especially  towards  evening  (aft.  1^  h.).

Soreness  on  the  border  of  the  prepuce,  especially  towards
evening  (aft.  i\  h.).

Soreness  in  the  bend  of  the  groin.

(Glandular  swelling  in  the  groin.)

580.  Eroding  itching  eruption  on  the  female  genitals.

Pinching  pain  as  with  forceps  on  the  right  side  of  the  scrotum.
[We.]

Itching  on  the  scrotum  (aft.  2 h).

Heat  in  the  testicles  (aft  4 h.).

Stitches  in  the  testicles.

585.  Constrictive  pain  in  the  testicles  (aft.  2 h.).

Nocturnal  seminal  emission  with  lascivious  dreams  (aft.  48  h.).

Nocturnal  seminal  emissions,  followed  by  continued  coldness  of
the  feet,  not  removed  by  movement  (aft.  6 h,).

Nocturnal  seminal  emission  without  erection  of  the  penis;  followed
by  relaxation  of  the  lower  parts  (aft.  36  h.).

Prolonged  erection  of  the  penis.

590.  Erection  of  the  penis  after  the  (midday)  sleep.

For  several  successive  mornings  erection  of  the  penis.

Sexual  desire,  but  during  coitus  impotence  occurs  and  the  member
becomes  soft.

On  slight  excitation,  amorous  transport  (aft.  5 h.).

On  slight  excitation,  or  the  mere  touch  of  a woman,  there  occurs
strong  sexual  desire,  especially  in  bed  in  the  morning  (aft.  8 h.).

595.  An  itching  burning  in  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  in
the  morning  in  bed  ; it  seems  like  sexual  desire  (aft.  19  h.).

Burning  in  the  female  genitals,  with  strong  inclination  for  coitus
(aft.  15  h.).

Involuntary  excitement  in  the  genital  organs,  and  urging  to
seminal  emission,  in  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed.

After  coitus,  immediately  dry  heat  of  the  whole  body,  which


NUX  VOMICA.


245

cannot  bear  the  bedclothes  to  be  removed,  and  dryness  of  the
mouth  without  thirst  (aft.  5 h.).

Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  urethra.

600.  Discharge  of  foetid  mucus  from  the  genitals.

Painless  discharge  of  yellow  mucus  from  the  vagina.

Internal  swelling  of  the  vagina,  like  a prolapsus,  with  burning
pain,  which  renders  external  touch  intolerable.

In  the  morning  in  bed  a forcing  out  towards  the  genitals.

Menses  three  days  before  the  time  (aft.  48  h.).

605.  Menses  three  days  too  soon,  with  abdominal  spasms  (aft.  72  h.).

Menses  three  days  too  early,  last  a shorter  time,  and  are
scantier  than  usual.

Menses  four  days  before  the  proper  time  (aft.  3 h.).

Menses  four  days  too  soon,  and  in  smaller  quantity.

The  menses  which  had  left  off  a day  return  for  a few  hours  (aft.

3h.)-

610.  The  menses  reappear  on  the  fourteenth  day.

Menses  at  the  full  moon  (aft.  26  h.).

Brings  the  menses  back  at  the  full  moon.

The  menses,  suppressed  for  six  weeks,  reappear  at  the  full  moon.

During  the  menses,  in  the  morning,  nausea  with  chilliness  and
attacks  of  fainting.

615.  After  the  menses  are  established,  faintings  in  the  morning  after
rising,  preceded  by  spasmodic  movements  in  the  abdomen,  and  fol-
lowed by  exhaustion  and  chilliness  on  rising  from  the  couch  (aft.  1 o d.).

During  the  menses  she  becomes  quite  weak  after  every  stool.

During  the  menses  faintness  (about  2 p.m)  and  headache  as  if
the  eyes  would  fall  out  of  the  head  ; she  could  not  hold  up  the  head  ;
commenced  to  be  chilly  until  she  shivered,  and  an  hour  afterwards
she  had  internal  burning  heat  and  dry  lips.

At  the  term  of  the  menses  headache  in  the  occiput,  like  an  abscess
in  the  brain  and  as  if  festering  ; when  she  lay  it  was  much  worse
than  when  she  rose  up.

During  the  menses  an  out-pressing  pain  in  the  side  of  the  abdo«
men  (aft.  10  h.).

620.  During  the  menses,  after  the  noonday  sleep,  a tearing  in  the  left
arm  and  right  thigh.

During  the  menses  a crawling  upward  in  the  gullet,  in  the
evening  after  lying  down.

■&

* *

The  inside  of  the  nostrils  is  painfully  sensitive.

The  borders  of  the  nostrils  are  painful  round  about  as  if  sore  and
ulcerated,  on  moving  the  nose,  especially  in  the  evening.

The  anterior  angles  of  the  nostrils  are  painful  as  if
ulcerated,  and  as  if  a wound  were  cut  into  (aft.  1,  10  h.)0

625.  Increased  acuteness  of  smell  (aft.  132  h.).*

Deception  of  smell ; it  seems  to  her  as  if  there  was  a smell  of
rotten  cheese  about  her.


^ Merely  the  curative  effect  on  ^ previous  opposite  condition,


246


NUX  VOMICA.


Deception  of  smell;  he  has  a sulphurous  smell  in  the  nose.

Deception  of  smell ; in  the  evening  he  has  a smell  in  the  nose
like  the  smoking  wick  of  a candle.

Bloody  nasal  mucus  (aft,  1 h.).

630.  Prolonged  epistaxis.

Discharge  of  coagulated  blood  from  the  nose,  in  the  morning.

Discharge  of  an  acrid  fluid  from  the  nose.

Discharge  of  nasal  mucus  without  coryza.

(Can  breathe  freely  through  the  nose,  but  it  is  dry  inside.)

635.  Frequent  discharge  of  mucus  from  one  nostril  which  is  stopped  up
as  from  coryza  (aft.  1 h.).

Frequent  discharge  of  mucus  from  both  nostrils  which  are  stopped
up  as  from  coryza  (aft.  20  h.).

By  day  fluent  coryza,  at  night  stuffed  coryza.

In  the  morning  stuffed  coryza  with  extreme  dryness  of  the
mouth.

In  the  morning  fluent  coryza.

640.  Hot  in  the  head  as  from  coryza,  with  one  red  cheek,  and  running
of  mucus  from  the  nose  (aft.  2,  3 h.).

Continual  heat  in  the  nose  and  frequent  attacks  of  coryza.

True  coryza,  with  scraping  in  the  throat,  crawling  and  scratch-
ing  in  the  nose  and  sneezing  (aft.  1 h.).

Frequent  sneezing.

Sneezing  in  the  morning  in  bed,  but  after  rising  sudden  flow  of
coryza.

645.  Coryza  in  the  morning  and  after  dinner.

Itching  in  the  stopped- up  nose,  as  in  coryza.

Foetid  breath  through  the  nose.

On  stooping  ill-smelling  vapour  out  of  the  mouth  and  vertigo.

In  the  morning  after  rising  he  has  a foetid  odour  from  the  mouth,
not  perceived  by  himself.

650.  Ill-smelling  breath  and  exhalation  from  the  mouth,  which  he
does  not  perceive  himself,  in  the  morning,  whilst  the  tongue  is  clean
and  the  taste  is  perfect  (aft.  some  h.).

Foetid  breath  after  dinner  (aft.  36  h.).

Sour  smelling  breath.

Hawking  up  of  mucus  from  the  windpipe  without  cough.

Catarrh  with  headache,  heat  of  face,  chilliness,  and  much  mucus
in  the  throat.

655.  In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  dry,  painful  catarrh  in  the
larynx  (aft.  36  h.).

In  the  morning  he  has  catarrh  in  the  chest,  so  that  he  cannot
cough  up  anything  without  pain  in  the  windpipe  (aft.  14  h.).

Rough  throat  from  catarrh.

Oppression  on  the  chest  ; he  cannot  get  up  anything  by  coughing
(aft.  1 6 h.).

Early  in  the  morning  dry,  painful  catarrh  in  the  larynx,  with
increased  warmth  of  hands  and  feet,  which  at  first  induces  him  to
uncover,  but  an  hour  afterwards  to  cover  himself ; followed  by
general  perspiration  (and  cessation  of  the  catarrh)  (aft.  20  h.).


NUX  VOMICA,


247


660.  In  the  morning,  in  bed,  he  has  catarrh  in  the  chest  (like  a fur)  ;
he  is  hoarse  and  rough  in  the  chest,  and  on  a spot  in  the  windpipe,
where  the  cough  detaches  the  mucus,  it  is  painful ; relieved  by
rising  from  bed  (aft.  10  h.).

In  the  morning,  on  rising,  he  feels  viscid  mucus  strongly
adherent  to  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe;  chest  oppressed.

Scraping  on  the  chest  so  that  he  must  cough.

He  feels  as  if  mucus  constricted  and  squeezed  the  upper  part  of
the  larynx,  which  he  must  get  rid  of  by  voluntary  short  cough.

Mucus  adheres  to  quite  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe,  causing
cough.

665.  Tickling  in  the  region  of  the  palate,  that  excites  dry  coughing
(aft.  48  h.).

Roughness  and  scrapy  feeling  in  the  larynx  exciting  coughing.

Roughness  in  the  throat  compelling  him  to  cough.

Scraping  cough.

Itching  in  the  larynx,  which  excites  coughing.

670.  An  itching  tickling  in  the  windpipe,  in  the  middle  of  the
sternum,  causing  cough  (aft.  J h.).

Cough  on  bodily  exertion  (aft.  48  h.).

During  expiration  there  occurs  a tickling  in  the  windpipe,  which
causes  coughing.

Cough  occurs  while  reading  and  reflecting.

Cough  which  returns  with  violence  every  other  day.

675.  After  eating,  cough.

Dry  cough  from  midnight  till  day-dawn.

Violent  attacks  of  dry  cough,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,
and  quite  early  in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.).

Violent  cough,  in  the  morning  before  getting  up,  with  expecto-
ration of  coagulated  blood  and  pain  in  the  chest  (aft.  18  h.).

Cough  at  night ; at  the  same  time  oppression  of  the  chest.

680.  Nocturnal  cough.

Cough  comes  at  night  and  prevents  sleep.

She  could  not  get  properly  to  sleep  on  account  of  cough,  and
when  she  thought  she  would  sleep  the  cough  came  and  disturbed  her
till  midnight ; she  then  slept  on  tranquilly.

Dry,  persistent,  fatiguing  cough  about  midnight,  when  lying  on
the  back,  which  goes  off  when  she  lies  on  the  side  (aft.  5 h.).

Cough  which  becomes  loose  in  the  open  air.^

685.  Cough  and  expectoration  are  increased  when  walking  in  the  open
air,  and  are  followed  by  exhaustion.

Cough  with  sweetish  expectoration.

Only  during  the  cough  so  acrid  in  the  throat,  that  it
pains  her  in  the  pit  of  the  throat  (aft.  2 h.).

A sore  shooting  when  coughing.

Cough  which  brings  on  headache  as  if  the  skull
would  hurst.

690.  Cough  which  causes  bruised  pain  in  the  epigastric
region.

# Loose  cough  is  only  curative  action  with  this  medicine.


248


NUX  VOMICA.


Cough  which  causes  heat.

(Cough  which  causes  cracking  in  the  ear.)

Tightness  of  the  breath  and  then  hacking  (short)  cough.

Shortness  of  breath  ; she  cannot  draw  in  air  enough,  not  even
when  lying ; at  the  same  time  quick  pulse.

695.  An  asthmatic,  constrictive  tightness  transversely
through  the  chest,  when  walking  and  going  up  hill.

When  going  upstairs  tight  on  the  chest,  just  as  if  his  clothes  were
too  tight ; after  sitting  down  it  was  relieved.

When  the  clothes  are  tight  under  the  ribs  he  cannot  get  breath
when  walking  ; he  breathes  more  freely  when  they  are  loosened;  but
if  he  takes  off  his  clothes  entirely  the  breath  becomes  again  more
difficult.

The  fastening  of  the  clothes  over  the  hips  oppresses,  and  they
always  appear  to  be  too  tight.

Tightness  of  the  chest  in  the  evening  and  morning.

700.  Oppression  of  the  chest.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

Anxiety  in  the  chest.  \We7\

Oppression  of  the  chest  in  the  evening.

Tightness  of  chest  and  anxiety  increase  gradually  for  some  hours,
so  that  the  breath  becomes  ever  shorter,  and  from  time  to  time  per-
spiration breaks  out  all  over  the  body.

At  night,  on  awaking  from  frightful  dreams,  tightness  of  the
chest,  she  can  hardly  get  breath,  with  roaring  in  the  ears,  quick  pulse
and  perspiration.

70 5.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  back,  tightness  of  the
chest,  but  when  he  turns  on  the  right  side,  headache.

A somewhat  painful  weariness  in  the  chest,  which  is  not  painful
when  touched,  it  is  relieved  by  bending  back  the  trunk  (aft.  48  h.).

After  dinner  tightness  of  the  chest ; he  must  draw  deep  breaths
slowly  ; some  hours  afterwards  shortness  of  breath  (rapid  breathing)
(aft.  26,  30  h.).

Along  with  very  slow  breathing  dilated  pupils.

At  night  in  bed  squeezing  on  the  chest ; it  is  as  if  contracted.

710.  Immediately  after  dinner  pain  close  under  the  navel,  as  if  a stone
lay  there,  which  almost  takes  away  his  breath,  so  that  he  can  only
breathe  with  difficulty  (aft.  70,  90  h.).

A disagreeable  feeling  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  spreads  upwards
to  the  larynx  and  chokes  and  shuts  off  the  breath.

As  long  as  she  remains  up  the  breathing  is  difficult  and  tight,  but
on  lying  down  in  bed  it  is  natural.

In  the  open  air  a pain  on  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  compressed  by  a
weight.

A pressive  pain  transversely  across  the  chest,  which  takes  away
the  breath.

715.  A pain  extending  transversely  across  the  chest,  with  short
breathing.

1 At  night  a tension  and  pressure  in  the  external  parts  of  the  chest,
as  from  a weight,  and  as  if  the  side  were  paralysed,

Fain  as  if  his  sternum  were  pressed  in.


NUX  VOMICA.


249

A pain  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sternum,  only  by  day,  when
breathing,  as  if  the  chest  were  too  short.

Immediately  after  eating  an  aching  (and  cutting)  pain  in  the
chest.

720.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  she  sits  for  a little
while,  but  immediately  going  off  when  she  eructates.

A constrictive  pain  in  the  chest.

An  asthmatic  constriction  transversely  through  the
chest,  when  walking  and  going  up  hill.

A pinching  drawing  pain  near  the  sternum  (aft.  J h.).

A drawing  under  the  left  breast  with  anxiety,  a kind  of  oppres-
sion of  the  heart,  which  makes  breathing  difficult  (aft.  3 h.).

725.  Drawing  pain  in  the  chest.

Drawing  pain  in  the  ribs.

Like  a drawing  and  burning  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
in  the  morning  (aft.  36  h.).

Burning  on  the  chest,  with  anxiety  (aft.  20  h.).

Heat  in  his  chest.

730.  A warm  ebullition  in  the  chest  which  causes  anxiety.

Heat  in  the  chest,  which  rises  up  into  the  mouth  and  causes
restlessness,  anxiety,  and  sleeplessness  (aft.  6 h.).

A warm  tension  on  the  chest.

Warmth  in  the  chest  internally  and  externally,  with  pricking
in  the  pectoral  muscles  (aft.  4 d.).

Pain  in  the  sternum  like  needle-pricks,  in  the  afternoon.

735.  (Twitching  shooting  in  the  chest.)

Stitches  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  not  excited

3 h-)-

In  the  morning,  an  hour  after  rising,  some  violent  stitches Jn  the
cardiac  region  (aft.  7 d.).

Severe  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

Painful  blows  towards  the  heart,  synchronous  with  the  pulse.

740.  Throbbing  in  the  chest.

Palpitation  of  the  heart.

When  lying  down  after  dinner  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Ebullition  of  the  blood  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  quite  early
in  the  morning  (aft.  20  h.).

Frequent  slight  attacks  of  palpitation  of  the  heart.

745.  In  the  morning  beating  in  the  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  16,  80  h.).

Sensation  in  the  chest  as  if  something  would  fall  down  (aft.
6 h.).

Shooting  pain  in  the  chest,  which  becomes  more  violent  when
moving,  in  the  middle  of  the  chest.  \We.~\

Only  during  the  day,  a pain  like  a bruise  from  the  sternum  to
the  scapulae,  with  stitches  and  shortness  of  breath  when  at  rest  and
when  moving.

The  whole  sternum  is  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  bruised.

750.  In  the  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  shoulder,  a pain  as  if  beaten
and  bruised,  worse  when  touched  and  when  moving  than  when  at
rest.


by  breathing  (aft.


25°


NUX  VOMICA.


On  the  chest,  under  the  axilla,  pain  when  touched  ; he  dare  not
press  the  arm  against  the  chest.

Simple  pain  in  the  right  nipple  when  touched.

Painful  sensibility  in  the  nipples  (aft.  I h.).

Pain  in  both  nipples,  as  when  after  parturition  the  milk  would
shoot  into  the  breast.

755*  Rigor  runs  over  the  breast  with  tensive  pain.

Rigor  over  the  breasts  (aft.  J h.).

Itching  pricking  under  the  nipple.

(Accompanying  afternoon  chill,  violent  shooting  in  the  sacrum,
which  then  goes  into  the  sides  and  tightens  the  breath.)

On  turning  the  upper  part  of  the  body  sideways  a coarse  stitch  in
the  sacrum  which  takes  away  the  breath.  [We.]

760.  In  the  sacrum  and  ischia  a jerking  obtuse  shooting ; on  account
of  it  she  cannot  turn  in  bed ; also  when  at  rest  dull  pain  in  the
sacrum  ; she  could  not  lie  still,  nor  cough  nor  sneeze  on  account  of
this  painful  jerking.

Nocturnal  pain  in  the  sacrum,  which  prevents  her  turning  in  bed.

Along  with  rigor,  throbbing  pain  in  the  sacrum  with  eructation
(aft.  36  h.).

Contractive  pain  in  the  sacrum  which  then  extends  to  the  side.

The  sacral  and  lumbar  regions  are  as  if  tense,  and  painful  when
touched.

765.  From  a draught  of  air  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  if  it  would  break  ;
she  must  walk  bent  double.

Pain  only  by  day  in  the  sacrum,  as  if  it  were  bruised  or  very  weak,
as  after  confinement.

Sacrum  painful  as  if  bruised,  worse  when  moving  than  when  at  rest.

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  pain  in  the  sacrum  and  knees,  as  if
beaten  and  bruised,  mixed  with  a drawing  pain  and  neither  diminished
nor  increased  by  change  of  position  or  by  rest  ormiovement.

Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  sacrum  by  bending  very  much  forwards
and  backwards,  but  more  by  the  former  (aft.  4 h.).

7 70.  Pain  in  the  pelvic  region  as  if  dislocated,  on  the  slightest  movement.

Tearing  in  the  loins.

Drawing  pain  going  up  from  the  loins  into  the  back,  combined
with  a paralytic  stiffness.

Immediately  after  the  (evening)  meal,  aching  pain  in  the  loins  up
the  spine,  which  causes  anxiety  (aft.  1 h.).

(In  the  morning)  immediately  after  drinking,  a somewhat  aching
pain  in  the  loins  towards  the  spine,  thereafter  the  pain  presses  upon
the  hypochondria,  as  if  flatulence  were  displaced  (aft.  36  h.).

775.  Dragging  and  tearing  in  the  bottom  of  the  back  when  walking
and  sitting,  not  when  lying.

Dragging  tearing  backache.

Drawing  pain  in  the  back.

In  the  afternoon,  a drawing  in  the  back  from  the  nape  downwards
(when  sitting)  and  at  the  same  time  a violent  pain  like  clawing  in
the  scrobiculus  cordis,  so  that  she  must  sit  in  a bent  position.

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  back  (aft.  1 h.)


NUX  VOMICA.


251


70.  Burning  tearing  backache.

Contractive,  as  it  were  constrictive  backache.

Stiffness  of  the  back  (aft.  some  h.).

Aching  pain  in  the  spinal  vertebrae  (aft.  1 h.).

Bruised  pain  in  the  back ; on  touching  and  pressing  on  it  more
painful,  as  if  congested  with  blood.

785.  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  dorsal  and  abdominal  muscles,  even  when
touched  (aft.  30  h.).

Pain  in  one  scapula,  as  if  sprained.

Painful  feeling  in  the  scapulae,  as  from  over-exertion  and  spraining.

Betwixt  the  scapulae,  shooting  when  moving  and  breathing.

Single  stitches  betwixt  the  scapulae,  first  per  se , then  aggravated
by  breathing.

790.  Persistent  burning  shooting  pain  betwixt  the  scapulae.

Drawing  pain  as  if  bruised  betwixt  the  scapulae,  especially  when
stooping  forwards.

Constrictive  pain  betwixt  the  scapulae.

Pain  on  moving  the  head  betwixt  the  scapulae  and  in  the  nape
(aft.  1 h.).

A pain  betwixt  the  scapulae  as  if  bruised  and  drawing,  especially
when  stooping  forwards.

795.  On  the  last  cervical  vertebra  a pain,  as  if  the  flesh  were  torn
away,  he  cannot  even  bear  his  shirt  to  touch  it.  \We.~]

Cracking  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  on  moving  the  head  (aft.  3 h.).

The  joints  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  are  painful.

Drawing  pain  in  the  nape.

A drawing  pain  and  as  if  a weight  lay  on  the  nape,  in  the
morning.

800.  Stiffness  on  the  right  side  of  the  nape,  as  if  in  the  night  his  head
had  lain  in  a wrong  position.  \JVe.\

(In  the  evening)  tearing  pain  in  the  nape  in  fits  (aft.
2 h.).

Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  nape  on  moving  (stooping)  and  on
touching  (aft.  6 h.).

The  left  side  of  the  cervical  muscles  is  swollen  and  painful  when
the  head  is  moved,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short  and  would  not
yield.

In  the  shoulder-joint  and  scapula,  pain  like  a bruise  on  moving
the  head  sideways  towards  the  opposite  side.

805.  In  the  shoulder-joint,  pain  as  if  bruised,  on  account  of  which  he
cannot  raise  his  arm.

In  the  evening,  in  bed,  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  when  he
lies  on  the  opposite  side,  as  if  the  ligaments  were  torn,  which  goes  off
when  he  lies  on  the  painful  side  (aft.  48  h.).

In  the  morning,  about  3 a.m.,an  indescribable  pain  in  the  joint  of
the  shoulder  on  which  he  lies,  which  goes  off  gradually  after
turning,  with  general  perspiration  (aft.  16  h.).

Pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  paralysed  and  the  whole  arm
heavy  and  tired,  when  sitting  as  well  as  when  walking  ; after  moving
a little  he  cannot  keep  his  arm  up.


NUX  VOMICA.


252


Pain  as  if  fatigued  by  work  or  bruised  in  the  shoulder-joint,  when
on  walking  in  the  open  air  the  arms  hang  down  (aft.  4 d.).

810.  Drawing  pain  in  the  head  of  the  humerus.

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  right  shoulder  and  deltoid  muscle.  \JVe.~\

In  the  head  of  the  shoulder  and  arm  sensation  of  warmth  here
and  there.

On  both  deltoid  muscles  a burning  painful  spot,  which  also  feels
hot  to  the  touch.

Itching  miliary  rash  on  the  arms  ; smarting  after  being  rubbed.

815.  Feeling  as  if  the  arms  were  asleep,  but  without  prickling,  followed
by  sensation  of  contraction.

Pain  in  the  arm  preventing  movement  (aft.  24  h.).

Lassitude  of  the  arms.

After  good  sleep,  she  is  very  tired  on  rising  in  the  morning  ; arms
(and  legs)  are  painful  as  if  she  had  slept  on  a hard  bed  (after  sitting
quietly  for  half  an  hour  she  feels  quite  strong  again).

On  extending  the  arms  a darting  into  the  fingers  like  a spasm  and
pricks  like  needles.  \We^\

820.  Weight  and  weariness  of  arms  (and  legs)  in  the  afternoon.

Sensation  of  a sudden  powerlessness  of  the  arms  (and
legs)  in  the  morning  (aft.  12  h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  arm.

Upward  drawing  pain  in  the  arm  with  paralytic  stiffness.

Going  to  sleep  of  the  arms,  at  night  (aft.  4 h.).

825*  Contractive  aching  pain  in  the  elbow.

After  midnight  (about  2 a.  m.)  a boring  pain  in  the  elbow  when
she  lies  on  the  opposite  side  (aft.  60  h.).

Fatigue  of  the  forearms.

Paralytic  out-pressing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  right  forearm.

{We^

On  the  inner  side  of  the  left  forearm  the  muscles  are  swollen
and  painful  as  if  burnt.  \JVe^\

830.  On  the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm  a tetter  but  without  itch-
ing, lasting  fourteen  days.  \JVei\

Drawing  pain  in  the  forearm,  with  stitch  in  the  fingers  (aft.  -Jh.).

After  the  noonday  siesta,  a weakness  of  the  forearms  and  hands
as  if  they  were  almost  paralysed  (aft.  2 h.).

Every  morning,  or  every  alternate  morning,  after  rising  from  bed,
the  forearm  as  far  as  the  hand  is  asleep,  as  if  lifeless  (dead)  with
coldness  and  yet  with  distended  blood-vessels  (aft.  4 d.).

In  the  right  wrist-joint,  pain  as  if  dislocated  on  moving  and
exerting  the  hand.

835.  (Upward)  drawing  pain,  first  in  the  hand,  then  in  the  elbow-joint
(aft.  3 h.).

Going  to  sleep  (dying  away)  of  the  hands.

A drawing  shooting  in  the  external  protuberance  of  the  right
wrist,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep.

Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  palm  which  cannot  be  flattened
out  without  pain  (aft.  12  h.).

On  walking  in  the  open  air,  first  a pain  in  the  nape,  which


NUX  VOMICA.


253


then  extended  into  the  wrist-joint,  a paralytic  pain  as  from  weakness  ;
he  had  no  power  of  grasping  firmly ; going  off  in  the  evening  when
lying  in  bed.

840.  He  had  no  power  to  write  with  the  hand.

The  hands  are  easily  chilled  and  he  must  wrap  them  up.

Cold  hands.1  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

Quite  early  in  the  morning,  heat  in  the  hands,  which  he  endeavours
to  cover  up,  for  if  they  get  cool  he  has  intolerable  pains  in  them
(aft.  12,  6 4 h.).

Cold,  damp  hands,  with  cold  nose  tip.

845.  Cool  perspiration  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  hands.

Sweat  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  hands.

While  walking  in  the  open  air  great  perspiration  of  the  inner
surface  of  the  hands.

(Hands  often  dark  red,  full  of  distended  blood-vessels.)

Pale  swelling  of  the  hands  and  fingers  (aft.  20  h.).

850.  A burning  on  the  back  of  the  hands.

Twitching  shooting  pain  backwards  in  the  direction  of  the  thumb
bones.

Burning  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb  when  lying  down  after  dinner
(aft.  1 h.).

Hot  swelling  of  the  thumb  painful  to  the  touch,  which  at  the
joint  turns  into  an  abscess.

The  thumb  is  apt  to  become  dislocated  when  moved.

855.  Drawing  pain  in  the  fingers  up  and  down.

Itching  on  the  finger  joints.

In  mild  weather  the  fingers  are  in  parts  red  and  frozen  with
burning  itching  in  them,  especially  when  he  comes  into  a warm
room  or  into  bed.

Pain  of  the  finger  joints,  as  after  severe  work  and  as  if  the
tendons  were  too  short.

Going  to  sleep  of  the  fingers,  with  night  sweat.

860.  Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  fingers  when  yawning.

After  midnight,  in  bed,  cramp  in  the  fingers.

In  the  right  natis  pain  as  if  the  flesh  were  torn  away.  \_Fr.  H—n .]

On  the  nates,  itching  eroding  pimples.

In  the  right  hip-joint,  burning.

865.  In  the  hip-joint  shooting  as  from  dislocation.

Twitching  in  the  hip-joint,  before  dinner.

Quite  early  in  the  morning  a frequent  shooting  twitching  from
the  feet  upwards  towards  the  hips,  when  lying  on  the  back,  which
goes  off  when  he  lies  on  the  painless  side  (aft.  5 h.).

Heaviness  in  the  right  thigh,  so  that  he  cannot  properly  raise  the
leg.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.

870.  Feeling  of  twitching,  as  if  a thread  were  pulled,  on  the  side  of
the  right  thigh.

Frequent  twitching  and  quivering  in  the  flesh  of  the  thigh.

A drawing  pain  out  of  the  abdomen  through  the  thighs  (aft.  48  h.).


1 See  S.  1206,  and  note  there.


254


NUX  VOMICA.


A down-drawing  sensation  in  the  thighs.

A paralytic  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  and  the  calf,
painful  when  walking.

875.  When  fatigued,  tearing  pain  in  the  thigh  extending  into  the
knee.

In  the  head  of  the  thigh  to  below  the  knee  a paralytic  pain  when
walking  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  thigh  a painful  stretching  ; it  feels  too  short.

In  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh  a bruised  pain,  worst  when
rising  from  a seat.

In  the  flesh  of  the  thigh,  pain  as  after  great  exertion  ; also
bruised  pain  when  touched.

880.  In  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  in  the  muscles,  pain  as  if  bruised,
when  walking  (aft.  1 h.).

The  muscles  of  the  thigh  and  the  knees  are  painful  as  if  bruised,
worse  when  moving  than  when  at  rest  ; the  pain  is  also  increased  by
touch.

On  the  thigh,  boils  with  violent  shooting  pain  (aft.  24  h.).

On  the  back  of  the  thigh,  boils  (aft.  12,  30  h.).

On  the  front  of  the  thigh,  a boil  (aft.  6 h.).

885.  On  treading  and  walking  a burning  shooting  from  the  sacrum
through  the  thighs.

While  walking  an  itching  on  the  thighs.

Itching  on  the  left  thigh  and  foot,  especially  in  the  evening  when
he  gets  into  bed.  \We.~\

A burning  itching  miliary  rash  on  both  thighs  during  the
menses.

Eroding ; a smarting  itching  pain  on  the  thigh  and  over  the  knee,
in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed,  which  is  not  removed  by
scratching.

890.  At  night  coldness  of  the  thighs  ; they  do  not  get  warm  even  in
bed.

After  midnight,  sweat  on  the  thighs  and  calves.

Tearing  and  shooting  pain  a little  above  and  below  the  knee,  in
the  evening  (aft.  36  h.).

Weakness  in  the  right  lower  extremity,  when  walking  in  the
open  air.

Tottering  and  unsteadiness  of  the  lower  extremities

(aft.  2 h.).

895.  The  child  often  falls  when  walking.

After  good  sleep,  she  is  very  tired  on  rising  in  the  morning  5
(arms  and)  legs  are  painful,  as  if  she  had  slept  on  a hard  bed  (after
sitting  quietly  for  half  an  hour  her  strength  is  restored) .

Heaviness  and  fatigue  of  legs  (and  arms),  in  the  afternoon,
especially  when  going  up  hill.

The  legs  are  not  able  to  support  the  body  ; he  must  lie  down.

Sensation  of  sudden  powerlessness  of  (arms  and)  legs,  in
the  morning  (aft.  12  h.).

900.  From  the  morning  onwards,  heaviness  and  fatigue  of  the  lower
extremities,  so  that  they  are  painful  when  walking.


NUX  VOMICA.


255


Heaviness  of  the  legs  compels  him  to  sit  down.

Her  legs  feel  as  if  beaten.

While  sitting  at  dinner  the  lower  extremities  go  to  sleep.

Tottering  and  knuckling  of  the  knees.

905.  The  knees  readily  knuckle  under  when  moving  (aft.  1 h.).

Knees  sometimes  so  weak,  that  they  cannot  support  the  body.

Trembling  of  the  knees  and  of  one  foot.

Trembling  of  one  knee  and  foot,  along  with  an  eager  and  even
agreeable  tension  of  the  mind,  for  several  evenings,  when  standing.

After  walking  in  the  open  air  a twitching  in  the  houghs,  when
standing.

910.  When  rising  up  from  a seat,  sensation  in  the  houghs
as  if  they  were  too  short.

Stiffness  and  tension  in  the  hough,  especially  after  standing
(aft.  2 h.).

In  both  patellae  a tensive  pain  as  from  a fatiguing  journey,  on
going  up  stairs,  worse  in  the  morning.

Disagreeable  sensation  in  the  knee-joint  on  walking,  as  if  the
synovial  fluid  were  deficient  and  it  would  crack.

Only  in  the  day  time  pain  in  the  knees,  as  if  they  were  bruised,
when  moving  and  when  at  rest.

915.  Painful  swelling  on  the  knee.

On  the  knee  a miliary  burning  itching  eruption.

Itching  in  the  houghs  in  the  morning ; he  must  scratch.

A kind  of  small  boil  on  the  knee  that  makes  the  whole  leg  stiff’.

Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  legs.

920.  Going  to  sleep  of  the  leg  when  sitting  and  standing,  and  when
she  touches  it  with  the  other  leg,  shooting  in  it.

Sensation  in  the  leg  as  if  asleep,  but  without  prickling,  followed
by  a sensation  of  contraction.

The  leg  goes  to  sleep  after  sitting,  when  walking  and  standing
(aft.  18  h.).

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  leg  as  far  as  the  toes,  in  the  afternoon
(aft.  7 h.).

Tearing  pain  in  the  ulcer  on  the  leg,  when  the  open  air  comes  in
contact  with  it ; which  goes  off*  when  it  is  protected  from  the  air  by
being  covered  up  (aft  4,  20  h.).

925.  Inflammatory  redness  round  the  ulcer  on  the  leg  when  walking
and  during  other  movement.

Itching  of  the  leg  at  some  distance  from  the  ulcer.

The  calves  and  feet  go  to  sleep  in  the  morning.

By  the  contact  of  cold  air,  shooting  in  the  calf  as  if  the  leg  had
been  asleep  (aft.  2 h.).

An  aching  on  the  side  of  the  calf.

930.  In  the  morning,  when  rising  from  bed,  an  aching  on  the  outside
of  the  calf  as  if  cramp  would  come  on,  on  two  mornings  (aft*
7 d.).

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  calves.

Cramp  of  the  calf  in  the  evening  in  bed,  on  extending  the  limb

(aft.  24  h.).


NUX  VOMICA.


256


Cramp  of  the  calf  in  the  morning  in  bed,  on  bending  the  limb
(aft.  32  h.).

Cramp  of  the  calf  after  midnight,  in  bed,  when  he  draws  up  and
flexes  the  leg  (aft.  4 h.).

935.  Tensive  pain  in  the  calves.

A formication  in  the  calves  after  walking  in  the  open  air.

A fixed,  pricking  burning  pain  on  a small  spot  on  the  tibia
(aft.  J h.).

A formication  from  the  feet  upwards.

Pain  in  the  ankle-joints,  only  when  moving  and  walking,  as  if  she
had  taken  a long  walk  ; the  tendons  pain  as  if  stretched  and  as  if
they  were  too  short.

940.  Tendency  to  dislocation  of  the  ankle-joint  and  bending  under
him  when  walking  (aft.  4 h.).

In  the  morning  after  rising,  when  walking,  pain  in  the  ankle-
joint  as  if  dislocated  and  sprained;  he  cannot  step  without  great  pain,
which  goes  up  into  the  leg  (aft.  16  h.).

In  the  ankle  tearing  (after  the  noonday  siesta)  (aft.  2 h.).

A drawing  and  shooting  in  the  right  outer  ankle,  in  the  evening
before  going  to  sleep.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  right  foot.

945-  Going  to  sleep  (dying  away)  of  the  feet.

Quite  early  in  the  morning,  heat  in  the  feet,  which  he  seeks
to  cover  up,  because  when  they  get  cool  he  has  intolerable  pain  in
them  (aft.  12,  64  h.).

In  the  morning,  swelling  of  the  foot  (whose  leg  is  the  seat  of  an
ulcer) .

Swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.

Frequently  during  the  day,  when  she  has  been  seated  and  wishes
to  get  up,  she  gets  a cramp  in  the  soles,  she  must  stretch  out  the
foot  to  relieve  herself  and  run,  in  order  that  it  may  go  off  by  move-
ment ; at  night  she  cannot  go  to  sleep  on  account  of  painful  cramp
in  the  soles,  which  occurs  as  soon  as  she  draws  up  the  feet  and
bends  the  legs.

950.  Painful,  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  soles  when  the  legs  are
bent,  which  goes  off  on  stretching  out  the  legs.

In  the  soles,  burning  pain.

When  lying,  after  dinner,  tearing  in  the  soles  (preceded  by  a
burning  in  the  thumb-balls)  (aft.  1 h.).

In  the  soles,  stitches.

Single  stitches  in  the  heel  (aft.  2 h.).

955.  A dull  numb  pain  (numbness)  in  the  heel,  as  after  a high  leap.

(Pain  in  the  heel  when  treading  as  if  excoriated  from  walking,
worst  when  she  treads  on  a stone.)

Pain  as  if  the  shoe  were  too  tight  and  pinched,  and  as  if  the  soles
were  tired  and  sore  from  walking.

On  the  side  of  the  foot  and  toes,  as  also  in  the  upper  part  of  the
toes,  pain  like  burning  and  as  if  the  shoe  pinched,  in  the  evening
(aft.  36  h.).

Pain  of  the  corns  on  the  toes,  like  a wound  or  boil  (aft.  4, 16  h.).


NUX  VOMICA.  257

960.  Violent  pain  on  a chilblain  in  summer,  as  from  great  cold,  a kind
of  throbbing  in  it  (immediately).

Pain  at  the  root  of  the  toe-nails  when  he  knocks  or  merely
touches  them — as  if  they  would  ulcerate.

An  itching  burning  on  the  toes,  as  if  they  had  been
frost-bitten,  in  warm  weather,  especially  when  he  comes  into  a
warm  room,  or  into  bed.

On  the  toes  itching,  as  if  the  limbs  were  frost-bitten  (aft.
1 h*)-

Going  to  sleep  of  both  the  big  toes  (immediately).

965.  Spasmodic  pain  in  the  right  big  toe  (when  at  rest),  which,  however,
soon  went  off.  [ We .]

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  toes,  when  yawning.

After  midnight,  in  bed,  cramp  of  the  toes.

(The  pains  increase  in  the  evening  from  8 to  9 o'clock,  until  they
become  intolerable.)

(Sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  it  were  sore  ;
on  touching  it,  it  feels  as  if  that  part  of  the  skin  had  gone  to
sleep.)

970.  Old  wounds  that  were  healed  became  again  painful,  like  soreness
(immediately).

Eruptions  cause  itching  burning.

Itching  eruptions.  [Wiel,  1.  c.]

(Smarting)  itching  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  most  external
parts  of  the  body,  limbs  and  joints,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down
(aft.  4 h.).

Burning  itching  all  over  the  body.

975.  In  the  evening  in  bed,  a burning  itching  all  over  the  body.

Burning  itching  on  the  upper  arms,  thighs,  abdomen  and  back,
in  the  morning  while  dressing,  in  the  evening  while  undressing,  and
even  at  night.

A burning  pricking  here  and  there  on  the  body.

Here  and  there  burning  shooting  or  stitches  which  end  iil  a
burning.

A burning  itching  pricking  (like  needle-pricks)  here  and  there
in  the  skin,  as  from  fleas,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  (aft.

5td0-

980.  Burning  itching  pricks  on  different  parts  of  the  body.  \JVe!\

Single  stitches  on  the  affected  parts  from  time  to  time.

Here  and  there  on  the  body,  single  coarse  stitches  combined  with
a sore  pain.

Stitches,  like  twitching,  in  various  parts,  so  that  the
whole  body  is  shaken  by  them ; they  dart  as  it  were
through  the  whole  body  (aft.  4 h.) .

In  the  evening  in  bed,  twitching  in  the  limbs.

985.  Trembling  (aft.  2 h.).

Trembling  of  the  limbs  and  palpitation  of  the  heart  (aft.  1 h.).

In  the  morning  trembling  sensation  through  the  whole  body.

Stiffness  of  the  limbs  with  twitching.

Tension  and  stiffness  in  the  limbs  (aft.  8,  16  h.)c

VOL.  11.


NUX  VOMICA.


258

990.  Stiffness  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  body.  [Seutter,1  Diss.  de
nuce  vom .,  L.  B.  1691.]

Peculiar  stiffness  of  all  the  limbs,  especially  of  the  knees,  with
tension.  [ Veckoskrift , 1.  c.]

Tetanus  drawing  him  backwards,  oft  recurring  for  a minute  at
a time.  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

Spasmodic  movements.  [ Veckoskrift , 1.  c.]

Convulsions.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

995.  Tensive  pain  in  the  limbs,  early  in  the  morning,  with  stuffed
nose  (aft.  10  h.).

Diminished  mobility  of  all  the  joints.

Violent  contractive,  painful  sensation  through  the
whole  body.

Along  with  a painful  contractive  sensation  through  the  whole
body,  a weariness  in  the  lower  extremities,  so  that  he  can  scarcely
drag  them  along.

Sudden  attack ; the  body  is  spasmodically  contracted  sideways,
with  fruitless  attempts  to  keep  himself  upright  with  his  hands  ; then
vomiting,  and  involuntary  rapid  discharge  of  stool  and  urine,  with
perfect  consciousness.

1 000.  A sensation  in  the  muscles  of  the  limbs,  back,  scapulae,
&c.,  as  if  something  within  drew  to  and  fro,  more  spas-
modic than  painful.

Twitching  and  quivering  in  the  limbs  under  the  skin.

All  the  joints  are  more  painful  during  movement  than  when
lying  still,  after  midnight  (aft.  6 h.).

Pain  in  all  the  joints  as  if  bruised,  when  moving  (aft.  4 h.).

All  her  limbs  are  weary.

1005.  Gone-to-sleep  feeling  and  insensibility  (numbness)* 3  of  almost  all
parts  of  the  body.  [Seutter,  1.  c.]

Pain  in  all  the  limbs  as  if  bruised  and  beaten  all  over.

In  the  morning,  in  bed  (on  displacement  of  the  flatulence  deep
down  in  the  hypogastrium  under  the  os  ilii),  a pain  of  the  joints
and  of  the  shafts  between  them,  as  if  bruised,  both  of  which  go  off
after  rising  (aft.  20  h.).

In  the  morning,  in  bed,  the  longer  he  lies  the  more  painful  are
all  his  limbs,  especially  the  joints,  as  if  bruised  and  beaten,  which,
however,  goes  off  after  rising  from  bed  (aft.  18  h.).

Quite  early  in  the  morning,  in  bed,  a pain  as  if  bruised  in  the
joints  of  the  side  she  lies  on,  which  goes  off  after  turning  round
the  body,  but  while  lying  still  gradually  returns  on  the  side  on  which
she  is  now,  but  it  goes  off  completely  by  rising  from  bed  (aft.  30  h.).

1 010.  Simple  pain  as  if  bruised,  combined  with  a kind  of  tearing  sensa-
tion in  all  the  joints  on  which  he  does  not  lie,  which  is  only  relieved
and  goes  off  by  turning  so  as  to  lie  on  the  painful  side,  whereupon
the  pain  soon  begins  on  the  side  that  was  previously  unaffected  ;
hence  it  is  necessary  to  turn  frequently  in  bed.


1 From  a mixture  of  nux  vomica  and  gentian  given  to  a girl  in  fever.

3 The  phrase  in  the  original  is  " stupor.”


NUX  VOMICA.


259


Attack,  after  midnight ; she  has  formication  on  the  hands  and
feet,  this  rises,  with  heat  in  the  face,  up  to  the  heart  (in  the  scrobi-
culus  cordis),  as  if  it  burnt  and  ached  there  ; it  then  mounts  to  the
throat ; she  feels  ill  and  anxious  ; thence  it  comes  into  the  head  ;
she  feels  stupid  in  the  head  and  has  ringing  in  the  ears.

Attack,  in  the  evening  ; it  rises  to  the  heart ; he  feels  ill  and
anxious ; he  trembles  and  he  must  rest  his  head  bent  forwards
on  the  table  (aft.  4 d.).

Sudden  attack  soon  after  dinner  ; paleness  of  face  ; a nausea  rises
up  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  ; he  becomes  anxious  all  over,  with
trembling  and  slight  tremor  through  the  whole  body,  with  increasing
exhaustion,  so  that  he  must  lie  down  (aft.  8 d.).

When  walking  quickly  in  the  open  air  congestion  towards  her
head  ; she  feels  destitute  of  thinking  power,  must  remain  standing,  the
blood  rushed  to  the  heart,  the  upper  part  of  the  windpipe  contracted,
she  had  sparks  of  fire  before  the  eyes  ; she  did  not  see  where  she  was.

1015.  In  the  morning,  in  the  open  air,  her  eyes  became  all  at  once
staring  ; she  lost  consciousness  and  feeling,  as  in  an  attack  of  syncope,
but  only  for  a moment.

Great  exhaustion  after  enjoying  the  open  air,  and  sensation  in
the  left  foot  as  if  it  were  stiff  (aft.  6 h.).

A morning  walk  in  the  open  air  causes  extraordinary  fatigue.

Great  fatigue  of  the  whole  body  during  a walk  in  the  open  air
(aft.  28  h.).

After  a walk  in  the  open  air  very  sad  and  uncommonly  tired.

1020.  Exhaustion  after  a walk  in  the  open  air,  in  the  evening.  1

Great  exhaustion  and  relaxation  of  all  the  limbs  after
enjoying  the  open  air  (aft.  8 h.).

Great  weariness.

During  the  slightest  exercise,  immediately  weariness.

Staggering  gait,  with  fear  of  falling.  \_Veckoskrift , 1.  c.]

' 1025.  Weakness  and  staggering  of  the  legs,  he  must  sit  down.  [Rade-

MACHER,  1.  C.]

Great  weakness  of  the  limbs,  so  that  he  cannot  stand  on  his  feet.
[Hufeland.]

Weakness  in  all  the  limbs,  especially  after  going  up  stairs,  [i^.]

Sudden  sinking  of  the  strength.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

She  becomes  thinner.

1030.  Heaviness  in  the  arms  and  legs,  so  that  she  cannot  lift  either.

Sensation  of  sudden,  as  it  were  paralytic  powerlessness  in  all  the
limbs,  even  when  sitting,  but  mostly  when  moving  (aft.  1 h.).

Qualmishness  about  the  heart.

Syncope.

Attack  of  syncope  in  the  evening  (about  8 or  9 p.  m.)  while
sitting.

1035.  In  the  afternoon  great  weakness  with  loss  of  appetite.

Great  desire  to  sit  down  (after  6 h.).

The  pains  are  relieved  by  lying  down.

Desire  to  lie  down  ; he  cannot  remain  up.

In  the  forenoon  desire  to  lie  down,  [i^.]


2 6o


NtJX  VOMICA.


1040.  In  the  morning  desire  to  lie  down  again.

Great  dislike  to  get  up  in  the  morning,  without  knowing  why  (aft.
12  h.).

Greater  weariness  in  the  morning  after  rising  than
in  the  evening  when  he  went  to  bed.

Sleepiness  not  until  the  morning,  after  day  dawn.

Sleepiness  (aft.  1 h.).

1045.  She  is  always  inclined  to  yawn  and  go  to  sleep  in  the  daytime,  so
that  she  could  not  keep  awake.

Uncommon  drowsiness  by  day,  as  from  stupefaction  of  the  head.

When  walking  in  the  open  air,  first  drowsiness,  then  palpitation
of  the  heart  and  great  anxiety,  with  swelling  of  the  blood-vessels  of
the  hands,  without  heat  (aft.  36  h.).

Before  dinner  (about  11  a.  m.)  inclination  to  sleep.

After  eating,  almost  irresistible  sleepiness,  for  several  hours  (aft.

5 h.).

1050.  He  dreams  and  speaks  aloud  in  the  noonday  sleep.  [We.']

Late  of  going  to  sleep  in  the  evening  (aft.  2 h.).

He  falls  asleep  late  in  the  evening,  kept  awake  by  great  afflux  of
ideas.

Sleeplessness  until  midnight,  with  feeling  of  heat  without  thirst
(aft.  12  h.).

At  night  great  restlessness  without  pain.

1055.  At  night  restlessness  in  the  arms,  which  he  must  at  one  time
cover  up  at  another  uncover.

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down  in  bed,  a restlessness  and  anxiety,
so  that  he  must  always  draw  up  and  then  stretch  out  the  limbs  (aft.
8 h.).

Before  midnight  restlessness  in  the  lower  extremities,  an  almost
voluptuous,  agreeable,  but  intolerable  sensation  in  them,  which
prevents  him  going  to  sleep,  constantly  wakes  him  up  when  he
wishes  to  go  to  sleep,  and  compels  him  to  draw  up  and  stretch  out  his
legs  alternately.

Very  sweet,  almost  unconquerable  slumber  till  late
in  the  morning  (aft.  20  h.).

In  the  morning  hard  to  waken.

1060.  He  can  only  sleep  before  midnight,  from  11  to  1 o'clock,  he  then
wakes  up  and  must  get  up  at  3 o'clock.

Great  sleepiness  with  yawning,  in  the  evening,  two  hours  before
the  usual  time  for  sleep  ; in  bed  he  goes  to  sleep  immediately,  lies
awake  for  a long  time  after  midnight,  then  sleeps  until  late  in  the
morning,  with  vivid  dreams  full  of  events  of  the  previous  day,  and  in
the  morning  he  will  not  get  up  from  bed.

When  going  to  sleep  he  starts  up  in  affright.

Starting  at  night  in  sleep  and  by  day  when  awake.

Frightened  starting  in  sleep  so  that  he  does  not  awake  to  full
consciousness.

1065,  At  the  slightest  noise  he  wakes  with  a start.

In  the  afternoon  siesta  a start  and  jerk  through  the  whole  body,
like  an  electric  shock  -2  as  though  he  would  fall  to  the  ground.


NUX  VOMICA.


26 1

(In  the  evening  slumber  he  leaps  out  of  bed  in  a delirious
state.)

(Anxious  delirious  phantasies,  in  the  evening  in  bed  (about  9 p.m.),
as  if  some  one  were  coming  into  bed  beside  him,  and  there  is  no  room,
his  bed  has  been  sold,  &c.)

He  often  wakes  up  at  night,  and  cannot  readily  go  again  to  sleep,
if  he  does  sleep,  he  dreams  very  vivid  dreams.

1070.  Frightful  visions  in  his  dreams,  causing  fear.

At  night,  when  half-awake,  sad  phantasies  ; e.g.  of  trunkless
heads  of  deceased  acquaintances.

She  cannot  sleep  at  night,  and  when  she  slumbers  a bit  she  has
frightful  dreams,  which  wake  her  up  ; she  remains  awake  for  hours,
and  when  she  again  falls  asleep  she  has  other  frightful  dreams  and  on
waking  knows  what  she  has  dreamt.

Frightful  delirious  ravings  at  night.

Dreams  that  excite  horror  {e.g.  of  wild  beasts).

1075.  Dreams  of  diseased  or  maimed  human  beings.

Wakes  up  at  night  from  horrible  dreams  (aft.  10  h.).

Dreams  of  lice  and  vermin.

Dreams  that  all  his  teeth  fell  out  of  his  mouth.

Dreams  of  business  matters  that  require  the  greatest  atten-
tion.

1080.  Disagreeable  dreams  about  things  that  had  happened  or  been
talked  of  the  previous  day.

Quite  early  in  the  morning  (about  4 a.  m.)  an  anxious  whining
talking  in  sleep,  followed  by  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  10  h.).

Very  anxious  dreaming  and  weeping  in  sleep.

Early  waking  with  apprehensiveness.

On  waking  in  the  morning  anxiety  with  ebullition  of  the  blood
and  depression  of  spirits,  which  both  go  off"  when  he  gets  up.

1085.  Groaning  whining  in  sleep.

In  his  sleep  before  midnight,  muttering  of  incomprehensible
words,  sometimes  in  peevish  or  complaining  tone.

At  night  half-waking  dreams,  accompanied  with  fatiguing
thoughts  (aft.  a few  h.).

His  sleep  is  unquiet  and  full  of  cares.

Indifference  to  cruel  lacerations  and  mutilations  witnessed  in  a
dream  (aft.  6 h.).

1090.  The  night  seems  to  him  to  be  very  long  and  tedious,  with  a
kind  of  soporous  stupefaction  (coma),  with  dreams  full  of  urgent
business.

When  asleep  he  generally  lies  on  his  back,  with  one  or  other  arm
elevated  and  laid  under  the  head.

Lying  at  night  on  the  back  with  one  or  both  arms  stretched
above  the  head  ; he  talks  in  his  sleep  and  wakes  up  between  2 and
3 a.  m.

In  his  sleep  he  lies  on  his  back  with  head  thrown  back,  the  arms
above  the  head,  so  that  his  hands  lie  under  his  nape.

In  his  sleep  he  always  tries  to  lie  on  his  back  and  with  his  head
as  low  as  possible  (aft  36  h.).


262


NUX  VOMICA.


1095.  Before  midnight  in  sleep  snoring  inspiration,  as  if  the  posterior
orifices  of  his  nose  or  the  soft  palate  were  contracted  and  narrowed.

Loud  snorting  breathing  in  sleep  before  midnight.

Loud  blowing  and  whistling  expiration  through  the  nose  in  sleep
(aft.  4 h.).

In  the  morning  in  bed  he  does  not  feel  well ; he  fears  to  get  up,
as  if  over-tired  by  a long  walk,  which  went  off  on  rising.  \JVe^\

Very  convulsive  stretching  and  straining.1  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

1 100.  Much  yawning  and  stretching,  in  the  afternoon,  [i^.]

Very  frequent  stretching  and  straining  which  seems  to  do  her
good.  \Wei\

In  the  morning  uncommon  stretching  of  the  limbs  and  yawning,
and  after  the  stretching  a spasmodic  pain  in  the  limbs,  especially  the
knee.

In  the  morning  in  bed  a stretching  with  arms  extended  outwards,
which  seems  to  have  its  origin  in  the  abdomen.

Long  attack  of  continued  yawning,  which  leaves  great  exhaustion
(aft.  1 h.).

1105.  Whilst  yawning,  in  the  morning,  the  eyes  fill  with
water  and  weep.

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  rising  from  bed,  yawning  (aft.
16  h.).

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  yawning,  headache.

Yawning  which  excites  coughing.

In  the  morning  after  rising  (and  drinking)  diarrhceic  stool,  then
exhaustion,  yawning,  drowsiness,  chilliness,  confusion  of  the  head —
then  refreshing  sleep  (aft.  18  h.).

1 1 10.  After  the  stretching  and  yawning  spasmodic  pains  in  the  limbs,
with  chilliness  and  inward  tremor.

During  the  yawning,  shivering.

After  the  shivering,  sleep,  followed  by  shivering  and  coldness  of
the  toes  (aft.  16  h.).

After  lying  down,  in  the  evening,  chill  over  the  back  and  arms
(but  not  the  hands)  (aft.  3 h.).

In  the  evening  in  bed  she  is  chilly  before  going  to  sleep  and  when
she  wakes,  it  is  as  though  she  could  not  get  warm  in  bed  ; not  during
the  day.

1115.  At  night  tossing  about  and  coldness,  that  is  not  dispelled  by  the
heat  of  the  bed.

He  cannot  get  warm  in  bed  at  night.

Violent  chilliness  in  bed  at  night,  but  towards  morning  sweat
preceded  by  formication  in  the  skin.

In  the  morning  in  bed  excessive  rigor,  without  externally
perceptible  coldness,  for  half  an  hour  ; followed  by  cramp-like  con-
traction of  the  toes  and  soles.

In  the  morning  chilly  feeling  in  the  back  and  limbs,  with  pain-
fulness of  the  skin  as  from  exposure  to  cold  and  a sensation  of  going
to  sleep  in  the  limbs,  such  as  is  caused  by  cold  weather.


1 The  original  has  “ stretchings  ” only.


NUX  VOMICA.


263


1120.  In  the  morning  cold  feet.

In  the  morning  shivering  and  shuddering.

In  the  morning  after  rising  chilliness,  for  several  successive  days.

In  the  afternoon  sudden  coldness  either  of  the  arms  and  hands  or
of  the  legs  and  feet,  which  is  not  dispelled  by  any  movement.

After  drinking,  immediately  shivering  and  chilliness.

1125.  After  vexation,  chilliness  in  the  back  and  heaviness  of  the  lower
extremities.

Chilliness  on  the  slightest  movement  (aft.  1 h.).

From  the  slightest  movement  shivering  all  over  the  body,  but
not  when  lying  still.

On  the  slightest  exposure  to  the  open  air  shivering  and  chilliness
for  an  hour  (with  pain  in  the  back)  (aft.  1 h.).

On  the  least  exposure  to  the  open  air  chill  and  toothache,  like
fine  or  fine  burning  stitches.

1130.  He  dreads  to  go  into  the  open  air  {aft.  J h.).

By  the  slightest  draught  of  air  he  gets  chilled  (disagreeable  feeling
in  the  skin,  bellyache,  &c.)  (aft.  a few  h.).

Chilliness.

He  cannot  get  warm.

Great  coldness  not  removed  by  the  heat  of  the  stove  nor  by  bed
coverings.

1135.  Coldness  of  all  the  body,  with  blueness  of  the  skin  (aft.  1 h.).

Coldness  of  all  the  body,  with  blue  hands,  without  goose-skin.

The  temperature  of  the  body  is  diminished  all  over  the  body  (he
loses  heat).

Severe  chilliness  with  chattering  of  the  teeth.

Sensation  of  cold  running  over  the  face.

1140.  Sensation  of  cold  about  the  head  from  time  to  time.

(Coldness)  chilly  sensation  on  the  face  and  head.

Chilliness  on  the  feet  as  if  sprinkled  with  cold  water,  with
trembling.

Great  coldness,  at  least  of  the  limbs,  without  thirst.

Chill  without  thirst.

1145.  Thirst  for  small  beer  during  the  shivering  (aft  2 h.).

During  the  chill  thirst  for  beer  (aft.  24  h.).

An  attack  as  of  fever  : shivering  and  drawing  in  the  limbs,  as
if  proceeding  from  pain  in  the  sacrum,  while  lying  in  slumber,  during
the  noonday  siesta — not  followed  by  heat,  and  without  thirst.

An  attack  as  of  fever  : at  night  (at  2 a.m.)  intolerable  drawing
pain  through  thighs  and  legs,  so  that  he  could  not  compose  himself,
with  thirst.

Nocturnal  febrile  attack  (at  3 a.  m.)  ; before  the  chill  intolerable
drawing  pain  through  thighs  and  legs,  compelling  him  to  draw  them
up  and  stretch  them  out  alternately.

1150.  Without  thirst  and  without  sensation  of  heat,  indeed,  even  during
recurrence  of  the  chilly  feeling,  violent  heat  of  the  body  and  redness
of  cheeks,  except  the  hands,  feet,  and  hairy  scalp,  which  are  cold.

Fever  in  the  afternoon  or  evening;  after  the  heat  chill  and
coldness.


264


NUX  VOMICA.


During  the  external  or  internal  heat,  at  the  same  time  chilliness
and  great  exhaustion,  which,  especially  in  the  afternoon,  compel  him
to  lie  down  and  cover  himself  with  the  bedclothes,  or  at  least  put  on
warm  clothes.

In  the  morning  (about  6 a.m.)  chill,  occasionally  combined  with
general  heat  and  beads  of  perspiration  on  the  forehead  ; then  towards
evening  (6  p.  m.)  again  chill.

In  the  evening  redness  of  cheeks  and  heat  of  hands  with  cold  feet
and  recurrence  of  the  shivering.

1155.  Sensation  of  heat  of  face,  with  shiver  on  the  rest  of  the  body.

Heat  of  face  with  coldness  of  the  lower  parts  of  the  body.

Small  intermitting  pulse.  [Hufeland.]

Vanishing  pulse,  with  perfect  consciousness.1  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

After  coldness  of  the  feet  dry  heat  of  face.

1160.  Whilst  there  is  inward  heat  of  head  there  is  chill  on  the  outside
of  the  head.

Hot  cheeks  with  internal  chilliness.

Redness  of  cheeks  with  heat  in  head  and  chilliness  on  the  rest  of
the  body  (aft.  6 h.).

In  the  evening  red  face  with  shivering  and  coldness  of  limbs  and
thirst  for  beer.

First  shivering  then  heat,  causing  anxiety ; afterwards  thirst  for
beer.

1165.  Fever  towards  evening  (6  p.  m.)  ; chilliness  with  intermediate
attacks  of  heat,  recurring  the  following  day  at  the  same  hour.

At  night,  along  with  external  chilliness,  sensation  of  internal
heat,  with  dryness  of  mouth  but  horror  of  drinks.

Afternoon  fever  : chill  and  coldness  for  four  hours,  with  blue
nails;  then  general  heat  and  burning  in  the  hands,  with  thirst
at  first  for  water,  afterwards  for  beer,  not  followed  by  perspira-
tion.

In  the  evening  before  lying  down  chill,  but  when  in  bed  heat
of  head  and  face.

After  lying  down  in  the  evening  strong  chill,  and  sleep  for  an
hour,  then  heat  with  headache,  roaring  in  the  ears  and  nausea  (aft.
12  h.).

1170.  After  lying  down  in  the  evening  trembling  and  chilliness — then
some  heat  in  the  face  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  morning  unusual  heat,  with  thirst  for  water  (aft.  12  h.).

Attack  of  heat  of  the  whole  body,  without  redness  of  cheeks,  with
beads  of  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  anxiety.

Febrile  heat  more  inwardly ; she  felt  as  if  steam  and  smoke
exhaled  from  the  throat ; at  the  same  time  she  drank  a great  deal.

Quite  early,  in  bed,  an  intolerable  sensation  of  heat  either  of  the
whole  body,  or  especially  in  the  cheeks,  hands  and  feet,  particularly
in  the  palms  and  soles,  for  which  he  seeks  with  avidity  for  coolness
(throwing  off  the  clothes  and  lying  in  cold  parts  of  the  bed),  but  he
cannot  bear  it,  sometimes  on  account  of  a feeling  of  illness  in  the


1 See  S,  1206,  and  note  there.


NUX  VOMICA  265

whole  body,  sometimes  on  account  of  a momentarily  occurring
pinching  or  cutting  in  the  abdomen.

1175.  After  lying  down  in  the  evening  heat  in  the  face,  inner  surface
of  the  hands  and  feet.

External  heat  with  red  cheeks  and  sensation  of  anxious,  intolerable
inward  heat  (in  spite  of  which  he  covers  himself  up  carefully)  ; the
mouth  is  full  of  saliva,  and  although  the  lips  are  dry,  no  thirst,  or
only  a semblance  of  thirst  ; he  wishes  to  drink  and  yet  rejects  all
fluids  ; he  does  not  relish  drinks  ; — sleeplessness  during  the  heat  ; he
lays  his  arms  under  his  head  ; after  the  heat  thirst  for  beer.

At  night  heat  without  thirst  and  almost  without  sweat,  [i5^.]

At  night  anxiety ; in  his  sleep  he  threw  off  the  bedclothes.

Violent  thirst.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

1180.  About  midnight  in  bed,  dry  heat  without  thirst.

Along  with  heat  and  full  quick  pulse,  desire  to  go  to  bed,  and
thirst.

Inward  heat,  increasing  every  hour,  with  full  pulse,  without  thirst ;
— then  sleeplessness  (aft.  8,  16  h.).

In  the  morning,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  increasing  heat
with  full  pulse,  without  thirst  ; — then  sleeplessness  (aft.  8,  16  h.).

In  the  morning,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  heat  of  the  face
and  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  48  h.).

1185.  While  walking,  transient  heat  of  the  face  more  frequently  than
usual.

Transient  heat  when  moving.

Transient  redness  and  heat  of  cheeks  on  the  slightest
movement  and  exertion.

Sensation  of  heat  in  the  face,  without  externally  perceptible
increase  of  temperature.

Redness  of  cheeks  in  the  morning  after  waking.

1190.  Heat  on  the  head  in  the  evening.

Transient  heat  of  the  face  towards  evening  (aft.  48  h.).

Heat  of  face  in  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  with  consti-
pation and  rumbling  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  24  h.).

Red,  hot  cheeks,  without  thirst.

Heat  of  the  face,  in  the  evening  in  bed,  and  restless  sleep  before
midnight  (aft  8 d.).

1195.  Sensation  of  burning  inward  heat  through  the  whole
body  (aft.  6,  12  h.).

Perspiration  for  two  days  (aft.  16  h.).

(When  lying  in  bed  and  when  walking  quickly,  ready  perspiration.)

(Perspiration  when  moving  about  in  the  room.)

(Perspiration  in  the  room,  going  off  in  the  open  air)  (aft.  72  h.).

1200.  Clammy  perspiration  on  the  forehead  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Sweat  on  the  affected  side  of  the  face,  during  the  semilateral
headache.

Profuse  perspiration.  [Junghauss,1  Diss.  de  nuce  vomica , Hal.,
1770.]


1 General  statement  of  effect  of  nux  vomica  on  patients.


266


NUX  VOMICA.


Ill-smelling  perspiration  all  night.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Foetid  perspiration.  [Wiel,  1.  c.]

1205.  Cold  sweat.  [Matthiolus,  1.  c.]

On  the  occurrence  of  cold  perspiration  all  the  pains  are  allayed.
[Consbruch,1  1.  c.]

Sweat  on  one  side  of  the  head,  scalp  and  face  (aft.  10  h.).

Foetid  sweat  on  the  side.

Ill-smelling  sweat  on  one  side.

1210.  In  the  morning  when  waking  and  sleeping  perspiration,  especially
of  the  upper  parts,  then  drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  (aft.  16  h.).

Quite  early  in  the  morning  (at  3 a.  m.)  perspiration,  especially
under  the  nose,  on  the  forehead  (on  the  hairy  scalp),  in  the  nape,  on
the  neck,  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  between  the  thighs,  with
anxious  feeling  of  heat  and  dryness  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  hard
palate  and  lips,  without  desire  for  drink.

After  midnight  perspiration.

In  the  morning,  from  2 a.  m.,  sweat  during  sleep,  but  on
awaking  (from  time  to  time)  only  slight  transpiration  all  over.

Morning  sweat.

1215.  In  the  morning  in  bed,  after  waking,  profuse  general  sweat  (but
not  on  the  head  or  face)  (aft  3 d.).

Slight,  general  perspiration  (but  not  on  the  face)  night  and
morning,  smelling  like  damp  (mouldy)  straw.

Night  sweat  of  a sour  smell.

In  the  morning,  about  5 o’clock,  after  waking,  she  commences  to
perspire,  for  several  mornings.

During  the  morning  sweat,  simple  pain  of  all  the  joints  he  is
lying  on.

1220.  During  the  morning  sweat,  inclination  to  vomit.

During  the  morning  sweat,  on  the  least  exposure,  bellyache,  as
from  taking  cold.

Under  the  bed  clothes  great  heat  and  perspiration,  but  on  slight
exposure  and  letting  the  air  come  under  the  bedclothes,  shivering.

After  the  perspiration  chill  and  then  again  sweat.

In  the  morning  on  waking,  general  perspiration,  with  internal  heat
of  face  and  hands,  without  thirst.

1225.  After  the  morning  sweat  great  thirst  for  small  beer.

Frequent  attacks  of  perspiration,  followed  by  dry  heat.

During  and  after  great  anxiety,  profuse  sweat.

Anxiety  which  causes  perspiration,  at  least  on  the  forehead.

Only  internal  heat,  caused  by  anxiety,  followed  by  sweat  on  the
forehead  (aft.  some  h.).

t 230.  After  the  anxiety,  nausea  and  rapid  breathing,  then  dry  cough
caused  by  the  nausea,  inclination  to  vomit  and  vomiting.

Restlessness  with  very  dilatable  pupils  (aft.  56  h.).

In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  anxiety,  then  after  midnight
perspiration.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Anxiety  ; he  cannot  remain  quiet  in  any  one  place.  [ Fr . H — n.


1 The  immediate  precursor  of  death,  with  S.  842,  1158,  and  1245.


NUX  VOMICA.  267

In  the  evening  when  walking,  anxiety,  oppression  and  as  if  he
were  drunk.

1235.  In  the  morning  on  waking,  and  in  the  afternoon  (at  5 p.  m.),
anxiety  and  anxious  solicitude,  as  if  something  important  were  to  be
feared.

Anxiety  and  anguish  as  if  he  had  committed  some  crime.

Great  anxiety ; he  cannot  rest  in  any  place,  and  would  rather

die.

After  midnight  very  violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  with  extreme
anxiety,  which  urges  him  to  commit  suicide  (aft.  5 h.).

She  deems  the  pain  she  suffers  intolerable  and  will  rather  take
her  own  life.

1240.  Anxiety  with  impulse  to  commit  suicide.

(Suicide  ; she  throws  herself  from  a height.)

Extraordinary  anxiety.

Great  anxiety.  [Strandberg,  1.  c.]

Extreme  anxiety.  [F.  Hoffmann,  1.  c.]

1245.  Intolerable  anxiety,  for  an  hour.1  [Consbruch,  1.  c.]

He  fears  death.

She  thinks  herself  near  death.

Wrapped  up  in  sorrow  and  care.

Sadness.

1250.  (During  the  sadness  she  cannot  weep.)

He  is  apprehensive,  frightened,  and  readily  starts,  whilst  his  head
is  as  if  intoxicated  and  giddy.

On  seeing  some  irritating  object  she  has  a shock  through  the
legs  and  through  the  whole  body  ; she  is  almost  insensible  for  an
hour.

Pains  are  not  borne  without  loud  whining  and  lamenting,  mixed
with  reproaches  and  scolding.

She  cannot  get  over  the  smallest  evil.

1255.  Anxious  solicitude  and  inconsolableness,  which  breaks  out  in  loud
weeping  complaints  and  reproaches,  and  sometimes  passes  into
continual  groaning,  with  very  hot  red  cheeks,  without  thirst.

Anxious  solicitude  and  irresolution.

Anxiety  from  suspicious  and  timorous  solicitude,  especially  in  the
hours  after  midnight.

She  groans  and  sighs  in  a lamentable  manner,  without  giving  any
reason  for  doing  so.

He  weeps  when  any  one  does  the  slightest  thing  he  dislikes.

1260.  She  is  disposed  to  weep  peevishly.

She  weeps  aloud  and  sobs  (aft.  3 h.).

She  cannot  bear  the  least  contradiction,  nor  suffer  the  most
resonable  representations  to  induce  her  to  alter  her  conduct ; they
put  her  beside  herself.

He  is  peevishly  solicitous,  takes  everything  amiss,  and  readily
breaks  out  into  scolding  and  abuse  (aft.  2,  3 h.).

She  is  much  disposed  to  scolding  crossness.


1 See  note  to  S.  1206.


268


NUX  VOMICA.


1265.  Angry  peevishness,  angry  disposition  (aft.  1 h.).

Very  much  given  to  reproach  others  severely  for
their  faults.

Scolding,  reproaches,  abuse,  jealous  invectives,  mixed  with
indelicate  expressions — then  soon  howling  and  loud  weeping.

Scolding  humour  developing  into  acts.

He  obstinately  opposes  what  others  wish  (aft.  1 h.).

1270.  He  is  hasty,  looks  malignantly  at  any  one  who  asks  him  anything,
without  answering,  just  as  if  he  must  control  himself  in  order  to
avoid  becoming  coarse  ; it  seems  as  if  he  would  like  to  strike  any  one
in  the  face  who  speaks  a word  to  him,  so  irritable  and  uncontrollable
is  his  disposition.

He  feels  everything  too  strongly.

Over-sensitiveness  to  impressions  of  the  senses ; he
cannot  hear  strong  odours  and  bright  light.

He  cannot  bear  any  noise  or  speaking;  music  and
singing  affect  him  strongly.

Over  tender,  soft  disposition  ; music  affects  him  to  tears.

1275.  The  slightest  step,  and  the  smallest  shaking  of  the  floor  is  felt  by
her  painfully,  intolerably.

Hypochondriacal  disposition  after  dinner,  and  still  more  after
supper.

Hypochondriacal  sadness.

Dejected  peevishness.

He  puckers  up  his  forehead  in  wrinkles  and  crosses  his
arms.

1280.  Quietness,  as  if  everything  were  disagreeable  to  him.

Quietude  and  wrapped  up  in  himself,  slow  flow  of  ideas.

She  seeks  rest  and  quiet.

Ennui ; time  seems  to  him  intolerably  long  (in  the  first  h.).

No  inclination  for  any  work.

1285.  Lazy  about  all  undertakings  and  business  5 she  is  immediately
fatigued.

He  has  a complete  horror  of  work,  and  yet  does  not  dislike  move-
ment (aft.  2 h.).

He  dawdles  and  is  irresolute.

Irresolution,  constant  hesitation  in  his  intentions.

She  wishes  to  do  much,  but  thinks  she  will  not  succeed.

1290.  He  thinks  that  everything  will  go  wrong.

Everything  goes  wrong  with  him  (everything  goes  contrary)
(aft.  6 h.).

He  has  no  patience  for  work,  [i^.]

He  acts  awkwardly  and  stupidly ; he  knocks  himself  or  upsets
things  (aft.  10  h.).

Something,  he  knows  not  what,  hinders  him,  especially  in
scientific  occupations.

1295.  Indisposition  to  intellectual  occupations;  the  blood  mounts  to
the  head — until  towards  evening.

In  the  morning,  dread  of  those  literary  occupations  in  which  he
must  think  for  himself  and  unfold  ideas  from  his  own  mind  in  order


NUX  VOMICA.


i6g

either  to  commit  them  to  writing  or  to  express  them  orally  ; but
reading  and  learning  by  heart  are  not  distasteful  to  him  (aft.  16  h.).
He  can  with  difficulty  collect  his  thoughts.

Incapable  of  thinking  properly,  he  often  makes  mistakes  in
speaking,  seeks  the  words  with  an  effort  and  makes  use  of  inappropriate
expressions ; he  makes  mistakes  regarding  weights  and  measures.

He  is  apt  to  make  mistakes  in  speaking  and  writing,

leaves  out  syllables  and  whole  words  (aft.  6,  12  h.).

1300.  On  account  of  an  excessive  flow  of  ideas  he  is  scarcely  conscious,
in  the  morning  after  rising  (aft.  10  h.).

Clear  consciousness  of  his  existence  ; delicate,  strong,  proper
feeling  of  right  and  wrong.


OLEANDER.1

( Nerium  Oleander.')

(The  medicinal  power  of  this  vegetable  does  not  seem  to  be  very  volatile,  and  we
may  therefore  quite  well  employ  for  medicinal  purposes  the  freshly  dried  and  powdered
leaves  macerated  in  alcohol  so  as  to  form  a tincture.  But  in  order  to  obtain  a
uniformly  powerful  medicine,  I prefer  to  use  the  green  fresh  leaves  gathered  at  the
period  of  commencing  flowering.  One  ounce  of  these,  cut  into  small  pieces,  is  first
put  in  a mortar,  moistened  with  just  enough  alcohol,  and  well  pounded,  so  as  to  form
a thick  pap,  and  then  the  remainder  of  the  alcohol  (in  all  about  an  ounce)  added  in
order  to  attenuate  the  thick  mass.  The  juice  is  then  strained  through  a linen  cloth,
and  allowed  to  stand  for  a few  days  in  order  to  deposit  the  albumen  and  fibrous
matters.  After  this  the  clear,  dark-green  juice  is  decanted  off  for  use,  in  the  same
way  as  is  done  with  sabina,  taxus,  thuja,  and  similar  leaves  with  little  juice  in  them.)

I have  introduced  into  our  materia  medica  several  new  plants  and
parts  of  plants,  and  some  minerals  also,  and  I flatter  myself  that
I have  enriched  it  with  these  substances.  Among  these  oleander  is  a
new  remedy  with  desirable  curative  powers,  which  are  met  with  in
no  other  medicinal  agent.

It  will  be  found  to  be  if  not  a complete  remedy  yet  an  indispensable
intermediate  remedy  in  some  kinds  of  mental  derangements,^.^,  absence
of  mind,  and  in  certain  kinds  of  painless  paralysis,  in  eruptions  on  the
head,  and  some  external  head  affections.  The  homoeopathic  physician
will  know  how  to  employ  it  for  other  curative  purposes  from  the
symptoms  it  produces  in  healthy  persons.

Hitherto  I have  only  used  the  billion-fold  attenuation  of  the  above
juice,  but  I believe  that  in  order  that  it  may  be  used  without  prejudice
in  cases  of  excessively  sensitive  patients,  it  will  require  to  be  carried  to
a much  higher  potency  (and  development  of  its  inner  power).

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-observers  were  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Hartmann,
Langhammer.

Symptoms  are  taken  from  :

Abano,  Petrus  de,  De  Venenis.

Morgagni,  De  Sedib.  et  Caus.  Morb.,  Ep.  lix.

The  ist  edit,  has  28  symptoms,  the  2nd  and  3rd  edit.  352.]


OLEANDER.

(While  walking  in  the  open  air)  vertigo,  not  so  as  to  cause
staggering  and  falling  ; he  stood  firmly,  but  the  objects,  trees,  and
people  seemed  to  be  mixed  up  among  one  another,  as  in  a confused


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830.


OLEANDER.


271

dance,  and  there  came  darkness  before  the  eyes  with  flashing  glitter-
ing (as  when  dazzled  by  snow)  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Lr.]

Whirling,  reeling.  [Gn.]

When  he  stands  up,  and  wishes  to  look  on  the  ground,  he
has  giddiness  before  the  eyes  and  as  if  he  saw  all  objects  double  ; but
if  he  looked  straight  before  him,  whether  standing  or  stooping,  he
experienced  nothing  of  the  sort  (aft  7 h.).  \_Htn.~\

On  rising  from  the  couch  he  could  hardly  walk  across  the  room
on  account  of  violent  vertigo  in  the  whole  head  (aft.  10  h.).  [Htn.]
5.  Whirling  vertigo  in  the  forehead  and  staggering  of  the  lower
extremities,  as  from  weakness  of  them  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Htn.]

The  vertigo  does  not  leave  him  even  when  walking  in  the  open
air.  [Htn.]

Unconsciousness.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  de  Venenis , Cap.  37 T]
Confusion  of  the  whole  head  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Gn^\

The  mind  is  obtuse  ; he  cannot  think  properly.  [ Gn .]

10.  On  reading  rather  long  sentences  in  a book  it  is  often  difficult
for  him  to  apprehend  the  construction.  [Gw.]

It  is  very  difficult  for  him  to  read  a learned  book  he  must  read
many  sentences  three  or  four  times  over,  before  he  can  understand
them,  because  in  spite  of  the  greatest  effort  he  cannot  comprehend
what  he  reads,  but  is  distracted  by  other  spontaneously  arising
thoughts,  which  always  supplant  those  suggested  by  the  reading.

[<?«•]

While  studying  he  has  constantly  other  thoughts  ; he  dreams
about  the  future,  and  his  fancy  disports  itself  in  beautiful  visions
(aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

While  reading  a book  he  cannot  apprehend  the  thoughts
conveyed  by  it,  when  with  the  greatest  effort  to  understand  them  he
thinks  that  he  will  not  understand  them  ; his  thoughts  then  become
confused  and  render  him  quite  unable  to  read  further  ; but  he  certainly
understands  all  things  more  easily  when  he  does  not  think  about
understanding  them  ; in  that  case  no  accessory  ideas  occupy  him,
only  the  subject  itself.  [Gw.]

His  power  of  remembering  is  weak  ; he  cannot  recollect  the
most  familiar  names  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Gn.]

15.  Heaviness  of  the  head  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gn.]

He  cannot  keep  his  head  up  on  account  of  a great  feeling  of
heaviness  in  it ; he  must  leave  off  reading  and  lie  down  ; while  lying
he  has  no  headache  and  feels  well,  but  when  he  rises  up  he  again
feels  the  heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head,  the  nausea,  and  other
disagreeable  sensations  (aft.  9 h.).  [Gn.]

Pain  in  the  head  as  if  a hundred-weight  drew  it  forwards  (aft.
10  h.).  [Gn.]

Sensation  as  if  the  head  were  tightly  bound,  more  stupefying  than
painful.  [Gw.]

In  the  right  temple  squeezing  pain.  [Gw.]

20.  Aching  pain  in  the  brain  (aft.  6, 14  h.).


1 Statement.


OLEANDER.


Stupefying  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  as  from  a blunt
instrument  slowly  pressed  in.  [Gw.]

Out-pressing  pain  over  the  forehead,  from  within
outwards  (aft.  h.).  [Gw.]

A dull  compression  in  the  forehead.  [Gw.]

Pressing  out  pain  at  the  forehead  (aft.  4,  24  h.).

[<?».]

25.  Aching  in  the  upper  bones  of  the  skull,  with  a feeling  as  if  they
were  sore  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gw.]

Pain  in  the  forehead  as  if  it  would  burst.  [Gw.]

Painful  pressing  outwards  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  which
v/ent  off  on  pressing  on  it  with  the  hand  (aft.  1^  h.).  \_Htn.]

Aching  uneasiness  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  forehead.  [Gw.]

An  up  and  down  drawing,  aching  pain  in  the  left  temple,  which
goes  off  in  the  open  air.  [As.]

30.  A slight  drawing  in  the  left  temple.  [Gw.]

Slow  pulse-like  throbbing  pain  in  the  head,  in  the  forehead.

Pain  like  a blow  on  the  left  temple.  [Gw.]

Suddenly  a stupefying  pain  anteriorly  in  the  forehead,  as  from  a
hard  blow.  [Gw.]

Boring  pain  in  the  whole  brain.  [Gw.]

35.  Boring  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  brain  (aft.  26  h.).  [Gw.]
Deeply  penetrating  sharp  stitches  in  slow  succession  in  the  right
side  of  the  vertex.  [Gw.]

Eroding  itching  as  from  lice  on  the  whole  hairy  scalp,  compelling
scratching,  repeatedly  all  day  (aft.  56  h.).  [Zr.]

Severe  (itching)  eroding  on  the  hairy  scalp  as  from  lice  ; after
scratching  it  smarts,  as  if  excoriated.  [Gw.]

Eroding  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  that  forces  him  to  scratch.

[<?«.]

40.  Eruption  of  itching  pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp.

Desquamation  of  the  epidermis  on  the  hairy  scalp.

At  night  continued  smarting  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  as  from
lice.  [Zz.]

Contractive  burning  pain  externally  on  the  left  side  of  the  crown.

[*■*.]

Sharp  aching  external  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  [Tz.]
45.  On  a small  spot  of  the  occiput,  obtuse  pressure.  [Gw.]

Pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  as  if  it  were  pressed  in.

[<?«•]

Pressure  on  the  right  frontal  protuberance.  [Gw.]

A couple  of  blows  in  front  of  the  forehead  on  a small  spot  as  with
a hammer.  [Gw.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  occipital  bone.  [Gw.]

50.  Aching  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  right  side  of  the  face,  persisting
when  moving  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  J h.).  [Gw.]

Dull  aching  pain  in  the  right  upper  jaw  below  the  zygoma  (aft.
48  h.).  [Gw.]

Pressure  on  the  zygoma,  more  stupefying  than  painful,  that


OLEANDER.


273


extends  deep  into  the  head  and  root  of  the  nose  ; a tensive,  stupefy-
ing tiresome  sensation.  [Gw.]

Violent  aching  pain,  now  higher,  now  lower  in  the  temples,  when
chewing,  [Lz.]

After  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning,  countenance  quite  dis-
turbed ; he  looks  quite  pale,  the  eyes  are  surrounded  with  blue  rings
and  the  cheeks  are  fallen;in.  [ Htn .]

55.  All  day  long  pale  complexion  (aft.  40  h.).  [ Lr .]

On  touching,  sore  pain  in  the  right  eyebrow,  towards  the  temple
(aft.  14  h.).  [Gw.]

Obtuse  pressure  on  the  upper  border  of  the  orbit,  intermittent,
now  greater,  now  less.  [Gw.]

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.]

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  25  h.).  [Lr.]

60.  On  looking  sideways,  without  turning  the  head,  as  if  blackness
would  come  before  the  eyes.  [Gw.]

It  seems  to  him  as  if  blackness  would  come  before  the  eyes.  [Gw.]
While  reading  the  eyes  water.  [Gw.]

While  reading,  a tension  in  the  left  eyelids  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Gw.]
Pressure  in  the  left  eye  from  above  downwards  and  in  the  left
zygoma.  [Lz.]

65.  Pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if  he  had  strained  them  by  much  reading.

[<?«•]

Smarting  in  the  left  eye.  [Lz.]

A pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  if  a hard  body  were  in  them.  [Gw.]
Burning  in  the  lower  eyelid,  and  itching  round  about  the  lid.
[**•]

Burning  in  the  right  upper  eyelid  (aft.  ioj  h.).

70.  In  the  evening  a tensive  pain  in  one  canthus,  just  as  if  the  eye
were  strongly  turned  outwards  ; it  is  difficult  for  him  to  turn  the  eye
in  the  opposite  direction  (aft.  5 d.).  [Lz.]

Burning  tension  in  both  right  eyelids,  even  when  moving  (aft.

3 M-  [<?«.]

Itching  in  the  right  eyeball  (aft.  30  h.).  [Gw.]

Pricking  and  itching  on  the  left  upper  eyelid.  [Lz.]

The  eyelids  are  involuntarily  closed,  as  if  he  were  sleepy  (aft.  8|
h.).  [Gw.]

75.  Near  the  left  eye,  at  the  root  of  the  nose  and  on  the  left  zygoma
a pricking  itching.  [Lz.]

Red  swelling  below  the  eyes,  looking  as  if  an  eruption  would
break  out.

A peculiar  numb  sensation  externally  rises  from  the  neck  up  to
the  head.  [Gw.]

Numb  sensation,  like  a painless  pressure  on  the  back  of  the  nose.

[<?«.]

Smarting  itching  in  the  root  of  the  nose  towards  the  left  eye,  as
if  the  room  were  full  of  smoke.  [Lz.]

80.  Stupefying,  obtuse  pressure  betwixt  the  root  of  the  nose  and  the
left  orbit.  [Gw.]

Burning  itching  on  the  forehead,  the  left  cheek,  and  the  point  of
vol.  11.  18


274


OLEANDER.


the  chin,  on  which  small  pimples  appear  with  elevated  hard  borders
and  painless  when  let  alone  and  when  touched,  [Tz.]

On  the  left  cheek  feeling  as  if  a cold  wind  blew  on  it ; on  laying
the  hand  on  it  this  feeling  goes  off  and  it  feels  hot  to  the  hand,  and
warmer  than  the  other  cheek.  [G.^.]

Redness  of  the  cheeks  without  heat,  [Tz.]

Hot  feeling  and  heat  of  the  cheeks  without  redness,  with  dryness
in  the  palate  and  throat,  [Tz.]

85.  An  (itching  ?)  eroding  feeling  on  the  right  cheek.  [Gjj.]

Stupefying  compression  of  both  zygomatic  arches,  as  if  they  were
grasped  with  forceps.  [ Gss.~\

On  the  left  zygomatic  arch  close  to  the  ear,  a dull,  numb,  pain-
less pressure.  [Gtt.]

Violent  pressure  on  the  right  cheek  near  the  angle  of  the  lower
jaw.  [Gx?.]

Cramp-like  drawing  on  the  external  ear  and  beneath  it,
as  if  it  was  drawn  out,  at  first  gradually  increasing,  then  again
diminishing.  [Gjj.]

90.  Heat  commencing  at  one  time  in  the  right,  and  at  another  in
the  left  lobe  of  the  ear,  which  spreads  thence  over  the  corresponding
side  and  from  there  over  the  whole  face,  [Tz.]

In  the  left  temple  and  external  meatus  auditorius,  sensation  such
as  is  apt  to  occur  when  yawning,  [jFz.]

In  the  interior  of  the  ear  a sharp  pressive  pain,  [Tz.]

Constant  howling  in  the  left  ear.  [Tz.]

Singing  in  the  left  ear.

95.  A shrill,  stupefying  ringing  in  the  left  ear.  \_Gss.']

Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  left  ear.  [Gra.]

Beneath  the  ear,  above  the  mastoid  process,  a pain  as  if  a blunt
nail  were  knocked  into  the  head,  with  stupefaction.  [G^.]

All  the  afternoon,  itching  around  the  nose.  [G«.]

Burning  shooting  above  the  left  corner  of  the  mouth,  [i'z.]

100.  Painless  sensation,  as  if  the  upper  lip  were  swollen  (a  kind  of
numb  feeling).  [Gjj.]

Burning  pain  in  the  right  lower  lip  continuing  whilst  and  after
moving  (aft.  79  h.).  [G^.]

The  lips  are  brown,  especially  the  lower  lip,  with  otherwise
unaltered,  scarcely  pale  complexion.  [Morgagni,  de  sedibus  et  caus.
morb . Ep.  lix,  § 12.1]

Convulsive  twitching  outwards  of  the  left  angle  of  the  mouth.

IGss.l

Sudden  swelling  about  the  left  corner  of  the  mouth.

105.  A suppurating  pimple  on  the  right  and  left  side  of  the  chin  (aft.
78,  48  h.).  [Lr.]

Sensation  as  if  a cool  wind  blew  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck.

[<?«.]

Sharp  pressive  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  near  the  Adam's
apple.  [jFz.]


1 From  expressed  juice,  in  a woman  of  60.


OLEANDER.


275


Pain  as  if  a blunt  instrument  pressed  in  the  right  side  of  the  neck
on  the  oesophagus,  and  on  external  pressure  a simple  pain  in  the
cervical  muscles.  [Grr.]

A pushing  pressure  in  the  anterior  cervical  muscles,  so  that  he
must  loosen  his  cravat,  a throttling,  suffocating  sensation,  [Tz.]
no.  A violent  and  full,  though  slow  pulsation  of  the  carotids,  felt
without  touching.  [G^.]

Towards  evening  and  in  the  night,  obtuse  tearing  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  nape  and  in  the  left  scapula,  alternating  with  tearing  in
the  temple  and  in  the  second  molar  tooth  of  the  left  side.

[**•]

In  the  night  constant  toothache,  tearing  drawing  in  the  first  left
molar,  and  sometimes  in  the  hollow  tooth  next  it  ; this  toothache
went  off  immediately  on  leaving  bed,  and  returned  immediately  on
going  to  bed  again,  with  an  anxiety  as  if  he  should  die  ; at  the  same
time  frequent  micturition,  inclination  to  vomit  and  heat  in  the  left
cheek  (the  first  night).  [Fz.]

In  the  right  lower  molars,  simple  drawing.  [G^.]

Sharp  drawing  toothache  in  the  left  second  molar.  [Tz.]
ij 5.  Whilst  chewing,  a cutting  aching  toothache,  which  goes  off
immediately  after  chewing ; but  the  tooth  is  not  painful  when
touched  or  pressed  (aft.  2 h.).  [Tz.]

Sensitiveness  of  the  molars  when  chewing  as  if  they  were  all
hollow.  [Tz.]

Peculiar  sensation  in  the  mouth,  as  if  all  the  teeth  were  loose,
with  bluish  white  gums  of  the  whole  upper  and  lower  jaw  (aft.  34
h.).  [Lr.l

White  furred  tongue  with  dry  feeling  in  the  mouth  and  parched
lips  (aft.  31  h.).  [Zr.]

The  papillae  of  the  tongue  are  all  elevated,  which  gives  the
tongue  a rough  appearance,  of  a dirty  white  colour.  [G^r.]

120.  Burning  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  tongue  (aft.  2j  h.).  [ Gn .]
Fine  pricks  in  the  tongue.  [Gw.]

Power  of  speech  almost  completely  gone,  with  normal  respiration.
[Morgagni,  1.  c.1]

When  spoken  to  she  tries  to  answer,  but  is  only  able  to  produce
sounds,  but  no  intelligible  words.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.1]

A kind  of  burning  in  the  gullet  down  to  the  stomach  (aft.  9 h.).
[Gn.]

125.  She  relished  nothing,  would  not  take  anything.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.]
An  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth,  when  not  eating,  as  from  deranged
stomach.

No  appetite  for  food  or  tobacco  smoking.  \_Htn.~\

He  has  no  appetite,  but  is  not  without  hunger  ; he  eats  with
more  discomfort  than  pleasure  and  very  little.  [Tz.]

No  appetite  j he  relished  his  food,  but  was  immediately  satiated
(aft.  5i  h.).  [£r.]

130.  Thirst;  he  drinks  more  than  usual.  [Fz.]


1 With  small  and  feeble  pulse,  death  following  in  four  hours;


276


OLEANDER.


Thirst  for  cold  drinks,  especially  for  fresh  water  (aft.  30  h.).
[Zr.]

No  appetite  and  yet  ravenous  hunger ; he  swallowed  much  and
with  avidity.  \Gn.]

Ravenous  hunger  with  trembling  of  hands  when  eating,  and  great
weakness  in  the  whole  body  (after  walking  quickly  for  half  an  hour).
[£«•]

Trembling  of  the  hands  from  longing  for  the  food  before  him.

iGn-~\

135.  During  dinner,  which  he  swallows  hastily,  as  in  bulimy,  he  is
giddy  in  the  head,  as  if  he  would  lose  his  hearing  and  sight,  and
especially  as  if  it  would  become  black  before  his  right  eye.  [Gsw]
Great  hunger  with  much  appetite  (aft.  6 h.).  [ Gn.'\

While  eating,  at  noon,  violent,  frequent,  empty  eructation.
[Gss.]

Eructation  with  a foetid  smell,  several  times  (aft.  4 d.).

Violent,  frequent  empty  eructation.  [Gw.]

140.  While  eructating,  something  comes  from  the  stomach  into  the
mouth  (belching).  [Gw.]

Loathing  of  cheese  that  he  used  to  like.  \Gn.]

In  the  evening  all  food  tastes  insipid  and  qualmish.

[G^.]

No  appetite,  he  loathes  everything,  as  though  he  should  vomit  or
get  diarrhoea  after  it.  [Gw.]

He  has  a sickish  rising  and  water  collects  in  his  mouth.  [Gw.]
145.  He  is  very  sick,  and  his  mouth  fills  with  water  ; if  he  swallows
this  the  sickness  goes  off  for  an  instant ; at  the  same  time  a peculiar
flat  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Gw.]

The  sickness  increases  on  stooping,  and  is  allayed  for  instants
by  eructation.  [Gw.]

After  the  sickness  great  hunger.  [Gw.]

Nausea.  [Gn.]

Nausea  in  the  mouth,  as  if  he  must  vomit  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

150.  Nausea  as  if  in  the  mouth,  and  every  time  he  retches  water  often
runs  out  of  the  mouth,  like  waterbrash,  for  two  hours ; at  the  same
time  he  has  a painful  cramp-like  contraction  of  the  cervical  muscles,
as  if  he  should  be  choked,  and  also  of  the  abdomen  and  abdominal
muscles  ; at  first,  after  much  retching,  he  only  gets  mucus  from  the
fauces  ; then  there  followed  some  of  the  fluid  portions  of  the  food
with  sour  taste,  for  two  hours  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.]

After  eating  a morsel  of  bread  he  immediately  retched  and  he
must  vomit,  but  he  threw  up  nothing  but  small  pieces  of  bread  and
the  little  food  he  had  just  taken  along  with  a quantity  of  water  (aft.
6}h.).  [Htn.]

His  dinner  was  very  much  relished  $ but  he  must  soon  leave  off
eating  as  he  became  sick  and  qualmish.  [Gw.]

Excessive  vomiting  followed  by  thirst.  [Morgagni,  1.  c.]
Vomiting  of  a yellowish  green  water  with  a bitter  taste  (aft.
12  h.).  [Htn.]

155.  General  ill-feeling  with  sickness.  [Gn.]


OLEANDER.


277


Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  with  feeling  of
fulness  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

To  the  left  over  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  intermitting  throbbing.
LGss.]

Sensation  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  felt  each  pulsation  of
the  heart  beat  through  the  whole  chest,  as  after  overheating,  though
he  feels  nothing  of  it  with  his  fingers,  and  the  heart  does  not  beat
more  strongly  and  perceptibly  than  at  other  times.  [//>».]

Painful  aching  under  the  short  ribs  on  the  left  side  of  the  gastric
region,  on  only  a small  spot,  at  every  expiration,  which  disappeared  at
each  inspiration,  was  increased  by  external  pressure,  and  lasted  half
an  hour  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Htn.~\

160.  Cold  feeling  as  from  a cool  blast  on  the  right  side  of  the  hypo-
gastrium.  [Gw.]

Cold  feeling  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

On  the  right  near  the  navel,  a prolonged  shooting  pain,  as  if
twisting  out  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

In  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  above  the  left  hip-bone  a kind  of
twitching  aching  pain.  [Gw.]

On  the  left  under  the  navel,  obtuse  stitches  or  blows.  [Gw.]

165.  Itching  pricking  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  immediately
below  the  short  ribs.  [Gw.]

A pinching  shooting  in  the  abdomen,  whilst  walking  (aft.  60  h.).

[Qn-]

Intermitting  pinching  in  the  abdomen  sometimes  with  diarrhoeic
movement.  [Gw.]

Pinching  in  the  bowels  (aft.  24,  75  h.).  [G«.]

He  feels  as  if  the  bowels  were  weakened  by  purgatives  or  as  if  he
should  have  diarrhoea.  [Gw.]

170.  Great  emptiness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]
Inwardly  below  the  navel  a gnawing.  [Gw.]

On  the  left  just  above  the  navel  a gnawing  pain.  [Gw.]

Pain  like  needle-pricks  under  the  navel  (aft.  58  h.).  [Gzz.]

Painful  sensitiveness  around  the  navel,  with  discomfort  in  the
whole  hypogastrium,  and  an  uneasiness  about  the  navel,  which  shows
itself  at  one  time  as  aching,  at  another  as  gnawing.  [Gw.]

175.  Quite  low  in  the  hypogastrium,  above  the  root  of  the  penis,  tran-
sient twitching  blows,  which  make  him  start.  [Gw.]

Rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  empty
feeling  in  the  abdomen  ; soon  followed  by  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.
i h.).  [Htn.]

Rumbling  in  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]
Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  1.  c.,  cap.

370

Discharge  of  much  very  foetid  flatus  smelling  of  rotten
eggs  (aft.  26,  30  h.).  [ Gn .]

180.  Frequent  discharge  of  flatus.  [Gw.]

Ineffectual  straining  and  urging  to  stool.  [F2.]

Ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

The  first  day  no  stool.  [ Htn. ]


278


OLEANDER.


IS


hard  and


[<?*.]

before  the  stool  rattling  and
[Htn.2


Stool ; the  first  faeces  are  diarrhoeic,  but  the  next  firmer ; he
must,  however,  strain.  [Gn.]

185.  Stool  only  after  24  hours,  the  first  part  of  which
crumbly,  the  remainder  thin.  \_Htn.']

Stool  hard  and  difficult  (aft.  31  h.)

Stool  quite  thin  and  yellow,  but
rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  39  h.).

Diarrhoea.

The  food  eaten  the  previous  evening  passed  somewhat  undigested,
and  almost  without  effort ; he  thought  that  flatus  only  was  discharged
(aft.  48  h.).  [Htn.]

190.  Soft  stool  (aft.  48  h.).  [G«.]

Evacuation  of  scanty,  thin,  watery  stool  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.]
Burning  in  the  anus,  at  other  times  than  when  at
stool,  also  before  and  after  stool.  [ Fz .]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
27  h.).  [Lr.]

Frequent  discharge  of  much  urine  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Gn.~\


195.  Two  violent  sneezes.  [Gjj.]

Prick  in  the  thyroid  cartilage.  [ Gn .]

Viscid  mucus  in  the  windpipe,  he  has  much  hacking  cough  in  the
morning  on  rising.  [Gjj.]

Tickling  in  the  larynx,  which  is  excited  by  inspiration,  and
produces  a short  cough  that  shakes  the  whole  body.

Sudden  cold  feeling  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [G«.]

200.  Great  emptiness  of  the  chest,  as  if  eviscerated.  [Grr.]

Severe  palpitation  of  the  heart,  with  a sensation  as  if  the  chest
had  become  dilated  ; he  breathes  with  great  elevation  of  the  chest,
without  anxiety.  [Gjj.]

When  lying  he  feels  as  if  the  chest  were  too  narrow  ; he  must
draw  his  breath  in  long  and  deep  respirations  (aft.  6 h.).  \HtnJ\

His  chest  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  is  oppressed  when  lying,  and
a quarter  of  an  hour  after  lying  down  he  vomits  mucus,  water,  and
small  bits  of  bread  he  had  swallowed  previously  ; when  he  rises  up
from  lying  the  oppression  of  the  chest  goes  off  (aft.  7-J  h.).  \_Htn^\

Sensation  as  if  something  heavy  lay  on  the  chest,  which  pressed
it  together,  whereby  a deep  and  anxious  respiration  is  produced,  when
walking,  standing  and  lying  (aft.  10  h.).  \Htn.]

205.  Palpitation  of  the  heart1  and  anxiety.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  1.  c.,
cap.  13.]

Several  attacks  of  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Anxiety  about  the  heart,  without  anxious  thoughts,  with  trem-
bling of  all  the  body,  for  several  hours  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.]

Dull  drawing  pain  over  the  heart,  more  violent  when
stooping,  and  continued  during  expiration  (aft.  55  h.).

Digging  pain  in  the  costal  cartilages  of  the  right  side  of  the


1 Rather,  “ distress  at  the  heart.”


OLEANDER.


279

chest,  with  intermitting  pressure  on  a small  spot,  increased  by  pressing
on  it.  [Gjj.]

210.  Pain  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest  externally,  as  if  hard  pressed.

[<?«.]

Formicating  shooting  in  the  sternum.

In  the  sternum  an  obtuse,  continued  stitch  (aft.  24  h.).

[G».l

On  the  right  near  the  sternum,  on  one  of  the  false  ribs,  obtuse
stitches,  where  there  is  simple  pain  when  pressed.  [Gtt.]

Tensive  shooting  in  the  sternum,  more  violent  when  stooping
(aft.  12  h.).  [Gn.]

215.  Whilst  walking  obtuse  stitches  in  the  chest,  more  violent  when
expiring  (aft.  8 h.).  [ Gn.]

On  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  obtuse  pressure.  [Gjj.]

In  the  ribs  on  the  left  side,  some  intermitting,  obtuse  blows.  [G*r.]
On  one  of  the  ribs  on  the  left  side  (opposite  the  scrobiculus
cordis)  an  intermitting  gnawing.  [Gr*.]

On  the  chest  under  the  right  shoulder,  a beating  like  obtuse  blows.

l°SS.]

220.  Dull  pain  in  the  sternum  (aft.  10  h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  continuing
during  inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  29  h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  continuing  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  51  h.).  [Gn.]

Stitches  in  the  diaphragm  when  lying  during  inspiration  and  expi-
ration, which  cease  on  rising  up  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gn.]

Pricks  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft  ij  h.).  [Gn.]

225.  A stab  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  as  with  a knife  (aft  48  h.).

[Gn-]

Pinching  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  out  at  the  false  ribs
(aft.  6h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  while  walking.  [G^.]
Tensive  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  chest  (aft  31  h.).  [Gn.]
Twitching  in  the  right  pectoral  muscles  (aft.  15  h.).  [Gn.]

230.  In  the  right  side  of  the  back,  a pain,  as  if  a hand  were  forcibly
thrust  in  there,  or  as  if  from  over-lifting.  [Gr.f.]

Tensive  shooting  in  the  spine,  when  walking  and  standing  (aft.
29  h.).  [Gn.\

Burning  stitch  in  the  back  under  the  left  scapula,  when  sitting,
which  went  off  when  moving  (aft.  78  h.).  [Gn.]

In  the  right  half  of  the  back,  deep  in,  sudden  pricks,  so  as  almost
to  make  him  start.  [G^.]

Itching  on  the  right  scapula.  [Gn.]

235.  On  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder  obtuse  pressure.  [Gjr.]

When  he  raises  his  arms  up  high,  or  lays  them  under  his  head  in
bed,  their  shoulder-joints  are  painful  as  if  dislocated.  [G^.]

A lasting  stitch  in  the  left  axilla,  relieved  by  rubbing  (aft.  27  h.).
[Gn.]

Externally  on  the  upper  part  of  the  upper  arm,  a pinching  pain.


28o


OLEANDER.


Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  shaft  of  the  left  humerus  near  the
elbow,  in  measured  jerks.  [Gw.]

240.  Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  arm  (aft.  36  h.).  [ Gw .]
Sensation  of  twitching  in  the  right  upper  arm.  [jFz.]

Itching  prick  somewhat  prolonged  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.
31  h.).  [Gw.]

Sensation  of  itching  above  the  bend  of  the  elbow.  [Tz.]

Itching  on  the  point  of  the  right  elbow  (aft.  34  h.).  [Gw.]

245.  Obtuse  pressure  on  the  forearm,  as  from  a hard  blow.  [Gw.]

On  the  outside  of  the  left  forearm,  on  a small  spot,  intermitting
pressure.  [Gw.]

Obtuse  stitches  or  blows  on  the  left  forearm,  near  the  wrist.

[<?«■]

Drawing  in  the  right  forearm,  over  the  wrist-joint.  [Gw,]

Obtuse  pressure  on  the  forearm,  just  below  the  elbow.  [Gw.]

250.  Burning  stitch  in  the  left  forearm  (aft.  28  h.).  [Gw.]

Swollen  blood-vessels  of  the  hand,  without  heat  of  it.  [Ez.]
Intermittent  obtuse  aching  in  the  palm  of  the  hand.  [Gw.]
Pulsating  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm  near  the
wrist-joint.  [Gw.]

Trembling  of  the  hand  whilst  writing  (before  a meal).  [Gw.]
255.  In  the  fingers  cramp  pain  (cramp-like  drawing).  [Gw.]

’ in  the  proximal  finger-joints.  [Gw.]
stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  left  index

On  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  right  index  a burning  stitch,  so  that
the  finger  trembles.  [Gw.]

On  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  left  middle  finger,  cramp-like,
twitching  tearing.  [Gw.]

260.  Pricking  and  itching  on  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  middle
finger.  [Ez.]

Sudden  swelling  of  the  ring-finger,  with  burning  pain  ; he  could
not  bend  it.

Fine  twitching  on  the  finger.  [Gw.]

Itching  on  the  right  thumb,  so  that  he  must  scratch,  tvhereupon
it  first  goes  off,  but  soon  afterwards  changes  into  eroding.  [Gw.]
Tensive  burning  in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gw.]
265.  In  the  distal  phalanx  of  the  thumb  pain  as  if  he  had  got  a hard
blow  on  it,  whereby  the  thumb  becomes  trembling.  [Gw.]]

Above  the  nates,  itching,  compelling  him  to  scratch.  [Gw.]
Itching  vesicles  on  the  nates.  [Gw.]

In  the  gluteal  muscles  of  one  thigh,  contractive  pain  when  walk-
ing, like  dislocation  [Ez.]

Obtuse  stitches,  posteriorly  on  the  hip-bone  \ pressure  causes
simple  pain.  [Gw.]

270.  Drawing  shooting  in  the  right  thigh  ; not  observed  when  standing
and  going  up  hill  (aft.  37  h.).  [Gw.]

Pain  like  needle-pricks  in  the  muscles  of  the  inner  side  of  the  left
thigh  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Zr.]

Weakness  in  the  thighs  and  legs  and  a feeling  in  the


finger  (aft.  12  h.).


u rawing
Burning

[<?»•]


OLEANDER.


281


feet,  chiefly  in  the  soles,  as  if  they  were  gone  asleep,
when  walking  (aft.  12  h.).  [<?«.]

On  the  side  of  the  thigh  a hot  feeling,  soon  afterwards  a cold
feeling  lower  down.  [Gw.]

(Burning  and  tension  in  the  right  thigh.)  [Gn.]

275.  A quivering  down  through  the  lower  extremities.  [Gw.]

When  walking  quickly,  on  the  front  of  the  thigh  a pain  as
when  a bruised  spot  is  pressed  on.

Bubbling  in  the  right  thigh.  [ Gn .]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  thigh  a numbing  pressure,  as  if  the
part  were  tightly  bound  and  the  circulation  thereby  stopped.  [Gw.]
An  itching  prick  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh  ; it  burns
after  scratching.  [Gw.]

280.  On  the  right  thigh  an  obtuse  shooting  aching.  [Gw.]

On  the  upper  part  of  the  right  thigh,  intermitting  aching,
increased  by  pressing  on  it.  [Gw.]

On  the  external  and  anterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,  itching,
removed  for  a short  time  by  scratching.  [Gw.]

On  the  under  surface  of  the  left  thigh,  painless  twitching,  as  if  a
muscle  were  moved.  [Gw.]

On  the  thigh  just  above  the  knee,  simple  aching.  [Gw.]

285.  In  the  right  thigh,  just  above  the  knee,  a spot  with  burning  and
pricking  pain.  [Fz .]

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  right  bent  knee.  [Gw.]

A vibrating  sensation  in  the  legs  when  sitting,  as  after  a journey
on  foot.  [Gw.]

The  legs  are  painful  when  sitting,  he  must  alternately  flex  and
extend  them  in  order  to  get  momentary  relief.  [Gw.]

In  the  legs  a painful  feeling  of  weakness,  as  from  a long  journey
on  foot.  [Gw.]

290.  In  the  shafts  of  the  leg  bones  undulatory  drawing.  [Gw.]

When  the  leg  is  drawn  up  pulsating  pain  in  the  hough.  [Gw.]
Sensation  of  twitching  in  the  right  calf.  [#2.]

Painful  cramp  in  the  right  calf,  when  sitting.  [Gn.]

Tearing  in  the  left  calf,  when  walking  (aft.  34  h.).  [Gn. J
295.  After  sitting  for  some  time  with  the  legs  drawn  up  he  feels,  when
walking,  a paralytic  weakness  in  them.  [Gw.]

Just  above  the  left  ankle-joint  painful  aching,  at  long  intervals,
when  standing.  [Gw.]

Itching  and  rather  prolonged  prick  in  the  right  ankle-joint,
towards  the  front,  continuing  also  when  moving  (aft.  29  h.).
[<?»•]

On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  simple  aching.  [Gw.]

Itching  prick  in  the  right  internal  ankle,  that  went  off  by
scratching  (aft.  10  h.).  [Gn.']

300.  Pricking  and  itching  on  the  left  heel,  [.Fz.]

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  little  toe,  when  at  rest  and  when
moving  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gn.]

A pain  in  the  little  toe  and  its  ball,  as  if  it  were  strongly  pressed.


282


OLEANDER,


Burning  in  the  tip  of  the  right  big  toe,  when  sitting  (aft.  31  h.).

[<?«.]

Painful  throbbing  over  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe.  [Gw.]

305.  Tensive  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  left  big  toe  (aft.  32  h.).
[Gn.]

On  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  on  a small  spot,  intermitting,  obtuse
pressure,  as  though  he  had  received  blows  on  it.  [Gw.]

Itching  pricking  sensation  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  when  at
rest  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gn.]

Strong  pressing-in  on  several  spots  of  the  body,  gradually  in-
creasing or  diminishing.  [Gw.]

Cramp  pain  (cramp-like  drawing)  on  several  parts  of  the  limbs,
e.g.  on  the  balls  of  the  thumbs,  on  the  feet,  &c.  [Gw.]

310.  Squeezing  pressure  on  several  parts  of  the  body  and  limbs,  on  the
lingers  and  toes,  as  if  their  bones  were  crushed.  [Gw.]

Great  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body ; from  the
slight  friction  of  the  clothes  it  becomes  sore,  raw,  and  painful,  e.g.  on
the  neck  from  the  cravat,  on  the  thighs  from  loose  trousers  when
walking.  [Gw.]

(The  symptoms  are  much  more  violent  the  second  day  than  the
first.)  [Gw.]

Swelling.

General  itching.

315.  Itching  here  and  there  on  the  body,  so  that  he  must  scratch.
[< Gss .]

On  undressing  a smarting  itching  on  the  whole  body,  as  from  an
eruption,  forcing  him  to  scratch  (aft.  40  h.).  [Lr.]

Weakness  of  the  body.  [Gn.]

Ill  feeling  and  weakness  in  the  abdomen  and  chest ; he  feels  not
at  all  well.  [Gw.]

Tired,  lazy,  and  dislike  of  all  work.  [Gn.]

320.  Very  faint  and  down-hearted  ; he  feels  ill  all  over.  [Gw.]

Faint-hearted,  as  if  his  life  would  exhale  at  every  breath.  [Gw.]
Weakness  of  the  whole  body  ; he  was  unable  to  walk  alone,  but
must  be  driven  home  and  go  to  bed,  where  he  lay  until  evening  in
slumber,  but  then  he  slept  well  at  night.  [Lr.]

From  a short  walk  weariness,  and  the  soles  are  painful.  [Gw.]
Weariness  and  weakness  of  all  the  limbs  ; he  can  scarcely  walk
across  the  room ; the  knees  are  too  weak.  [ Htn .]

325.  Syncope.  [Petrus  de  Abano,  1.  c.,  cap.  13.]

Stretching  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body  and  arms  (aft.  9J  h.).

[Gn.-]

Stretching  and  straining  of  the  limbs,  combined  with  a general
feeling  of  well-being  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Htn.]

Frequent  yawning,  with  every  time  a shudder  running  all  over
the  body,  which  set  all  the  muscles  first  in  a shaking,  and  afterwards
a trembling  movement  (immediately).  [Htn.]

She  lay  as  if  in  slumber,  but  yet  is  conscious  and  able  to  move.
[Morgagni,  1.  c.]

330.  Sleeplessness,


OLEANDER.


283


Voluptuous  dreams,  with  emission  of  semen  (the  2nd
and  3rd  night).  \_Lr. — Gn. ]

Uneasy  dreams,  [Gn.]

At  night  in  bed  no  rest  and  no  sleep,  [i'z.]

After  sleeping  he  feels  when  lying  a qualmishness  and  squeamish-
ness in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  should  vomit,  with  a difficulty
of  breathing,  which  is  relieved  by  sitting  up  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Htn.]

335.  The  pulse  is  very  variable,  now  quick,  now  slow,  now  full,  small
and  weak.  [Gw.]

In  the  morning  after  rising  the  pulse  is  slower.  [Gw.]

He  often  shudders  suddenly,  as  in  the  severest  febrile  chill,  or  as
if  he  were  terrified  by  something.  [Gw.]

When  yawning  he  shudders.  [Gw.]

Febrile  rigor  all  over,  without  thirst  or  heat  after-
wards, when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Lr.]
340.  Febrile  rigor  all  over,  with  cold  hands  and  warm  cheeks,  without
thirst,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Lr.]

Quick  full  pulse  (in  the  evening).  [Gw.]

Feeling  of  heat,  and  simultaneous  chilliness  of  all  the  body,
without  thirst,  at  the  same  time  he  felt  warmer  to  the  touch  than
usual  (aft.  7 h.).  [Lr.]

Flying  heat  runs  over  him,  especially  when  he  sets  about  his  work
eagerly  (also  when  sitting) ; likewise  when  he  walks  quickly  he  grows
very  warm,  and  the  heat  pricks  his  face  like  numerous  fine  needles.
[Gw.]

Whilst  reading  heat  is  forced  out  of  his  body.  [Gn.]

345.  Dislike  to  work.  [Htn.]

Obtuseness  of  the  senses,  out  of  humour,  indisposed  for  everything.
[G*.]

Indisposed  both  for  work  and  the  most  agreeable  occupation.

[Gn.']

Want  of  self-confidence,  and  hence  serious  sad  disposition.  [Gn.]
Ill-humoured,  reserved.  [Gn.]

350.  He  cannot  bear  contradiction.  [Gw.]

Cross,  morose,  indisposed  for  everything.  [Fz.]

The  heat  rapidly  overcomes  him ; he  breaks  out  in  anger,  but
repents  immediately  afterwards.  [Gw.]


OPIUM.1

(The  dried  milky  juice  of  the  green,  half-ripe  heads  of  the  Papa<ver  somniferum ,
especially  of  the  large-headed  white  poppy,  Papa<ver  officinale , Gm.)

In  recent  times  many  chemists  have  given  themselves  unspeakable  trouble  to  analyze
opium,  and  to  dissociate  its  several  constituent  parts : morphium  (morphia),  narcotin
(opian),  meconic  acid,  extractive  matter,  caoutchuc,  opium-balsam,  fatty  substance,
gluten,  resin,  gum,  volatile  matter.  They  generally  differ  so  much  among  one
another,  both  in  respect  to  the  methods  used  to  separate  them,  consisting  of  a number
of  dissimilar  and  complicated  processes,  and  in  respect  to  the  chemical  nature  of  their
component  parts,  as  also  in  their  opinions  about  the  relative  efficacy  of  these  consti-
tuents, that,  all  things  considered,  very  little  of  a trustworthy  or  useful  character
seems  to  have  resulted,  either  for  the  medical  art  in  general,  or  for  the  benefit  of  the
sick  in  particular.

But  as  homoeopathy  concerns  itself  only  with  whole,  undivided  medicinal  substances,
as  they  exist  in  the  natural  state,  and  aims  at  the  simplest  mode  of  preparing  them,
in  which  all  their  constituents  shall  be  uniformly  dissolved  and  develop  their  medicinal
powers,  and  as  it  looks  only  to  healing  and  not  to  injuring  human  beings,  consequently
it  does  not,  like  the  new  pharmacy,  consider  it  an  honour  to  prepare  from  opium  the
most  painlessly  and  quickly  killing  substance  ( Morphium  aceticum) ; hence  the  homoeo-
pathic art,  which  is  only  intended  for  beneficent  ends,  willingly  dispenses  with  all
these  dangerous  manoeuvres.

It  will  therefore — as  has  hitherto  been  the  custom — macerate  one  grain  of  finely
pulverised  opium  in  ioo  drops  of  alcohol  in  the  temperature  of  the  room  for  a week,
in  order  to  make  a tincture,  and  mix  one  drop  of  this  with  another  ioo  drops  of
alcohol  by  two  succussions,  and  so  proceed  to  the  higher  developments  of  power ; or,
better :

One  grain  of  selected  good  opium  is  treated  like  other  dry  medicinal  substances,  is
first  brought  to  the  million-fold  trituration  in  three  hours,  by  triturating  with  three
times  ioo  grains  of  milk-sugar  (in  the  manner  taught  at  the  commencement  of  the
second  part  of  the  book  on  Chronic  Diseases)  ; of  this  one  grain  is  then  dissolved  in
ioo  drops  of  diluted  alcohol,  and  potentized  by  two  succussions.  This  gives  a fluid,
one  drop  of  which,  diluted  in  a similar  way  with  ioo  drops  of  alcohol,  and  potentized
with  two  succussions,  is  further  raised  to  the  decillion-fold  potency  through  2 5 more
dilution-phials.  One  or  two  globules  of  the  smallest  size  moistened  with  this  last
potency  will  do  all  the  good  that  is  capable  of  being  effected  homoeopathically  in  the
treatment  of  human  ailments  for  which  it  is  suitable.

It  is  much  more  difficult  to  estimate  the  action  of  opium  than  of
almost  any  other  drug.

In  the  primary  action  of  small  and  moderate  doses,  in  which  the
organism,  passively  as  it  were,  lets  itself  be  affected  by  the  medicine,  it
appears  to  exalt  the  irritability  and  activity  of  the  voluntary  muscles  for
a short  time,  but  to  diminish  those  of  the  involuntary  muscles  for  a
longer  period ; and  while  it  exalts  the  fancy  and  courage  in  its  primary
action,  it  appears  at  the  same  time  to  dull  and  stupefy  (the  external
senses)  the  general  sensibility  and  consciousness.  Thereafter  the  living
organism  in  its  active  counter-action  produces  the  opposite  of  this  in


1 From  vol.  i,  3rd  edit.,  1830,


OPIUM.


285


the  secondary  action  : diminished  irritability  and  inactivity  of  the
voluntary,  and  morbidly  exalted  excitability  of  the  involuntary  muscles,
and  loss  of  ideas  and  obtuseness  of  the  fancy,  with  faint-heartedness
along  with  over  sensitiveness  of  the  general  sensibility.

In  large  doses  the  symptoms  of  the  primary  action  not  only  rise  to
a far  more  dangerous  height,  but  they  pass  from  one  to  another  with
impetuous  rapidity,  often  mingled  with  secondary  actions  or  quickly
passing  into  the  latter.  In  some  persons  certain  symptoms  are  more
conspicuous,  in  others  other  symptoms.

No  medicine  in  the  world  suppresses  the  complainings  of  patients
more  rapidly  than  opium,  and  misled  by  this,  physicians  have  made
immense  use  (abuse)  of  it,  and  have  done  enormous  and  wide-spread
mischief  with  it.

Were  the  results  of  the  employment  of  opium  in  diseases  as  benefi-
cial as  its  employment  is  common,  there  would  be  no  medicine  by
which  patients  would  be  so  often  cured  as  by  opium.  But  exactly  the
opposite  of  this  is  universally  the  case.

Its  enormous  power  and  rapid  action  imply  that  an  uncommon
amount  of  knowledge  of  its  actions  and  an  uncommonly  accurate
judgment  and  appreciation  of  it  must  be  required  in  order  to  employ  it
medicinally,  if  we  would  use  it  in  a really  beneficial  manner , which
is  impossible  without  making  a homoeopathic  application  of  it.

Hitherto  opium  has  been  almost  exclusively  employed  antipathically
or  palliatively,  and  hardly  any  but  its  primary  actions  have  been  opposed
to  the  contrary  morbid  states,  contrariis  curentur — except  when  the
physician  prescribed  (by  mistake  ? or  numinis  affiatu  ?)  in  a sense
exactly  opposite  to  this  antiquity-hallowed  therapeutic  rule  of  Galen’s,
and  so  effected  miraculous  cures.  No  medicine  in  the  world  has
effected  more  illusory  relief,  more  deceptive  concealment  and  suppression
of  the  morbid  symptoms,  with  consequences  more  disastrous  than  the
original  disease.  No  medicine  in  the  world  has  done  more  harm  (with
preliminary  apparent  relief)  than  this  opium.

Opium  has  been  employed  as  the  supposed  chief  remedy  against  all
kinds  of  coughs,  diarrhoeas,  vomiting,  sleeplessness,  melancholy,  spasms
and  nervous  ailments — and  more  especially  against  all  kinds  of  pains
without  distinction.

But  all  these  innumerable  affections  are  not  contained  in  the  primary
action  of  opium,  but  just  the  opposite.  Hence  we  can  easily  understand
how  far  from  permanent,  how  far  from  beneficial  must  be  the  result  of
such  an  employment  of  this  drug  in  the  majority  of  diseases  of  the  body
and  mind  ! And  daily  experience  teaches  this.

If  in  some  few  cases  opium  removes  cough,  diarrhoea,  vomiting,
sleeplessness,  trembling  and  so  forth,  this  only  happens  when  these
ailments  are  of  recent  date  or  have  arisen  suddenly  in  a previously
healthy  body,  and  when  they  are  of  a slight  character.  Thus,  for
example,  a cough  brought  on  by  a chill,  a trembling  caused  by  recent
fright,*  a diarrhoea  suddenly  excited  by  fear,  a chill  or  other  trifling

* Smelling  at  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard-seed,  moistened  with  a potentized
dilution  of  opium,  gives  almost  immediate  relief  to  one  who  has  undergone  a violent
fright,  but  only  on  the  condition  that  he  performs  the  olfaction  immediately  after  the


286


OPIUM.


cause,  vomiting  and  other  symptoms  produced  by  mental  excitement,
loathing,  &c.,  are  sometimes  quickly  removed  by  opium,  because  it  is
only  necessary  that  it  should  suppress  these  ailments  in  a superficial
and  temporary  manner,  in  order  to  restore  to  the  previously  healthy
body  its  freedom  to  ward  off  spontaneously  all  further  tendency  to
these  affections,  and  to  continue  its  former  condition  of  health  by  its
own  powers  {vide  Organon  of  Medicine,  4th  edition,  § 63, 1 note)*

Though  opium  succeeds  in  the  palliative  suppression  of  these  rapid
trivial  ailments  in  the  few  instances  indicated  above,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  it  possesses  a true  curative  power  of  permanently  removing
such  affections  in  every  case  and  under  all  conditions  even  when  they
are  of  a persistent  character.  It  cannot  remove  them  and  restore  health
when  they  are  symptoms  of  another  disease  to  which  opium  does  not
correspond  as  a homoeopathic  remedy  in  its  primary  effects,  or  if  they
have  already  lasted  a considerable  time,  because  these  ailments  are  not
contained  in  the  primary  actions  of  opium.*

Hence  it  has  hitherto  been  universally  employed  in  medical  practice
throughout  the  whole  world,  almost  always  with  injurious  and  disastrous
results,  in  old  coughs,  persistent  diarrhoeas,  long-continued  sleeplessness,
chronic  vomiting,  habitual  spasms,  anxiety  and  trembling.  But  when
these  affections  existed  for  some  time  in  the  system  and  depended  on
totally  different  diseases  for  which  opium  is  not  the  homoeopathic
remedy,  they  could  never,  not  in  one  single  instance,  be  cured  by  opium,
so  that  permanent  health  was  restored  by  its  use.

In  employing  opium  in  the  above-mentioned  chronic  maladies
we  learn  that  it  effects  only  at  first  an  illusory  alleviation,  a transient
suppression  of  the  affection  for  a few  hours  ; that  it  then  ceases  to
alleviate  without  increasing  the  size  of  the  dose,  that  on  further
increasing  the  dose  it  only  allays  the  symptoms  for  a short  time,  and
even  when  it  does  this  it  creates  on  the  other  hand  new  affections  and
a much  more  serious  and  a worse  artificial  disease.  Verily  this  is  an
injurious,  though  hitherto  universally  practised  misuse  of  this  gift  of
God  which  was  created  for  the  removal  of  quite  opposite  morbid  states.f
But  most  striking  was  the  abuse  which  all  physicians  over  the  whole
world  down  to  the  present  time{  have  made  of  opium,  in  prescribing  it  as
a powerful  remedy  for  pains  of  all  sorts,  be  they  ever  so  old  and  deeply
fright  has  been  received.  If  employed  later,  it  not  only  brings  no  relief,  it  rather
does  harm.

* They  are  only  to  be  found  in  its  secondary  action  (and  in  the  preliminary,
momentary  reaction — their  reflexion — described  below).

f For  where  shall  we  find  a remedy  equal  to  opium  for  the  most  obstinate  consti-
pation and  for  acute  fevers,  with  uncomplaining  stupefied  sopor,  with  snoring  from  a
half-opened  mouth,  and  twitching  of  the  limbs,  with  burning  heat  of  the  perspiring
body,  and  in  several  other  morbid  states  corresponding  in  similarity  to  the  primary
effects  of  opium.

J Although  as  long  as  twenty  years  ago,  I showed  incontrovertibly  in  these  very
words  (in  the  first  edition  of  the  Organon , 1810),  the  misuse  universally  made  by
physicians  of  opium  for  pains  to  be  a palpable  injury  to  the  well-being  of  patients,  yet
we  have  not  seen  that  their  conscience  was  the  least  touched,  and  that  they  abandoned
a practice  that  is  as  stupid  as  it  is  criminal.  To  such  remonstrances  they  only  exclaim
that  their  routine  is  interfered  with,  and  they  abuse  and  persecute  the  man  who  calls
attention  to  their  erroneous  practice,  just  as  the  sinner  who  feels  himself  hit  by  the


1 5th  edition,  § 67.


OPIUM.


287


rooted.  It  is  obviously  contrary  to  common  sense,  and  is  almost  equal
to  the  folly  of  a universal  remedy,  to  expect  from  one  single  substance
the  cure  of  all  pains  which  differ  so  infinitely  among  one  another.
Seeing  that  the  various  kinds  of  pains  in  diseases  differ  so  much  from  one
another  in  their  seat,  in  the  time  and  the  conditions  of  their  occurrence,
recurrence,  increase  and  diminution,  & c.,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the
Creator  would  not  fail  to  create  a large  number  of  different  medicines
for  their  cure  ; for  every  finite  thing  can  only  have  a finite,  limited  sphere
of  action.  But  opium  is  precisely  not  one  of  those  pain-allaying  and
curing  remedies.  Opium  is  almost  the  only  medicine  that  in  its  primary
action  does  not  produce  a single  pain.  Every  other  known  drug,  on  the
other  hand,  produces  in  the  healthy  human  body  each  its  own  kinds  of
pains  in  its  primary  action,  and  hence  is  able  to  cure  and  remove
(homoeopathically)  similar  pains  in  diseases,  especially  if  the  other
symptoms  of  the  disease  correspond  in  similarity  to  those  observed  from
the  administration  of  that  medicine.  Opium  alone  is  unable  to  subdue
homoeopathically,  i.e . permanently,  any  one  single  pain,  because  it  does
not  cause  in  its  primary  action  one  single  pain , but  the  very  reverse,
namely,  insensibility , the  inevitable  consequence  (secondary  action)  of
which  is  greater  sensitiveness  than  before,  and  hence  a more  acute
sensation  of  pain.

Therefore  all  pains  of  any  duration  allayed  in  a palliative  and  tem-
porary manner  by  opium  by  means  of  its  stupefying  and  pain-subduing
power,  return  immediately  when  the  stupefying  primary  action  is
exhausted,  and  that  at  least*  as  severely  as  before,  as  the  experience  of
all  observant  physicians  testifies.  These  pains,  indeed,  generally
return  in  a worse  degree,  and  as  long  as  no  better  plan  than  this  old
injurious  routine  is  adopted,  they  must  be  again  and  again  allayed,  not
only  by  repeated,  but  by  larger  doses  of  opium,  whilst  it  developes
other  worse  ailments,  from  which  the  patient  did  not  suffer  previously.
Suppressing  pain  of  any  considerable  duration  and  intensity  by  opium  is
therefore  nothing  but  quackery — nothing  but  an  imposition  on  the  patient
and  his  friends  with  illusory  relief,  to  be  followed  by  injurious  results
that  are  often  disastrous,  and  not  unfrequently  fatal,  but  which  are
alleged  by  such  practitioners  of  the  non-healing  art  to  be  new  diseases
that  they  have  had  no  hand  in  producing.f

words  of  a sermon  on  repentance  only  abuses  the  preacher,  without  reforming  his
own  conduct.  But  why  should  I,  who  feel  an  inward  call  to  enunciate  such
important  verities,  and  who  have  truth  and  nature  on  my  side,  why  should  I bother
myself  about  these  incorrigible  sinners  ?

“ He  who  feels  he  has  the  power  to  expose  errors  and  to  extend  the  boundaries  ot
science,  is  not  only  under  an  obligation  to  do  so,  but  the  public  is  bound  to  listen  to
him,  even  should  it  be  disagreeable  to  a whole  school  which  thinks  its  authority  so
firmly  grounded  that  it  will  allow  no  appeal  to  nature  from  its  verdict,  or  which  at
least  does  all  it  can  to  consign  the  revolutionary  observer  to  oblivion.” — Fr.
Casimir  Medicus.

# Thus  Willis  in  his  Pharmacia  rationalise  p.  298,  says  : <e  Opiates  generally  allay
the  most  excruciating  pains,  and  produce  insensibility — for  a certain  time  5 but  when
this  time  is  past  the  pains  are  immediately  renewed,  and  soon  attain  their  ordinary
violence  5”  and  p.  295  : “ When  the  duration  of  the  action  of  opium  is  over,  the
abdominal  pains  return,  having  lost  nothing  of  their  excruciating  character,  until  we
again  employ  the  magic  power  of  opium.”

f The  true  (homoeopathic)  physician  never  sees  in  his  practice  any  inflammation


288


OPIUM.


Chronic  diseases  only  are  the  test  of  the  genuine  healing  art,  because
they  do  not  of  themselves  pass  into  health  ; slight  ailments  that  have
come  quickly  pass  away  with  or  without  medicine — evidently  by  the
inherent  powers  of  the  organism ; but  with  medicines  acute  diseases
must  distinctly  yield  more  quickly  and  permanently  than  when  left  to
themselves,  if  what  can  be  called  a cure  is  accomplished.

If  opium  sometimes  seems  to  remove  pains  in  acute  diseases,  this  is
owing  to  the  very  obvious  fact  that  such  diseases,  if  they  do  not  kill,
run  their  course  spontaneously  in  a few  days,  and  disappear  together
with  their  pains.

Opium  can  only  seem  really  to  cure  pains  in  those  rare  cases  where
it  corresponds  homoeopathically  in  its  other  primary  effects  to  the
symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  so  removes  the  disease  itself,  for  then  the
pains  also  must  naturally  depart ; but  this  is  only  an  indirect  cure  of  the
pains.  For  instance,  as  every  dysentery  depends  on  a retention  of  faeces
in  the  upper  part  of  the  intestines,  some  varieties  of  it  accompanied
by  heat  and  stupefaction  can  be  cured  by  opium,  because  these  sym-
ptoms will  be  homoeopathically  removed  by  the  similar  primary  action
of  opium,  and  as  a necessary  consequence  their  attendant  pains  also,
because  these  generally  depend  on  spasmodic  retention  of  the  faeces  in
the  bowels.

In  like  manner  opium  cannot  stop  the  pains  of  lead  colic  until  it
has  homoeopathically  removed  the  obstinate  constipation  produced  by
the  lead  by  virtue  of  its  constipating  primary  action  ; in  this  case  also
the  cure  of  the  pains  is  indirect  and  not  owing  to  the  stupefying  power
of  the  opium,  as  it  is  given  in  small,  not  stupefying,  doses.  But  opium  is
never  able  to  remove  pains  directly  without  injury ; on  the  other  hand,
it  is  a principal  remedy  in  those  stupefactive  diseases  where  the  pain  of  a
serious  malady  is  not  felt  by  the  patient,  as  for  example,  in  dangerous
bed  sores,  where  the  patient,  in  the  stupefied  state  of  his  consciousness,
cannot  complain  of  any  pain,  &c.

The  painful  diseases  of  acute  and  chronic  character  can  (whatever
the  whole  worldful  of  antipathic  and  allopathic  physicians  may  allege  to
the  contrary)  only  be  cured  and  altered  into  health  of  a permanent
character  by  a medicine  which,  besides  corresponding  in  similarity  in
its  other  primary  effects  to  the  symptoms  of  the  morbid  state,  is  at  the
same  time  able  to  excite  pains  very  similar  in  kind  to  those  observed  in
the  disease.  If  such  a medicine  be  selected  then  pain  and  disease  dis-
appear together  in  a marvellously  rapid  and  permanent  manner,  when
the  smallest  dose  is  administered,  as  is  taught  in  the  Organon  of  Medi -
cine,  and  as  experience  will  convince  every  one.

But  as  this  method  was  not  employed,  and  as  all  kinds  of  pains  were
antipathically  treated  by  opium  alone,  many  injurious  results  were
observed  from  its  use  : stupefaction,  constipation,  and  other  troublesome

of  the  brain,  except  at  the  commencement  of  the  most  dangerous  forms  of  typhus
fever,  which  he  cures  along  with  its  cerebral  inflammation}  nor  does  he  ever  encounter
inflammation  of  the  bowels,  except  in  cases  of  poisoning  and  strangulated  hernia  or
ileus  } but  fatal  cerebral  and  intestinal  inflammations  frequently  result  from  the  efforts
of  the  allopaths  to  suppress  severe  headache  and  intolerable  colic  by  increasing  doses
of  opium.


OPIUM.


289

and  dangerous  symptoms  which  naturally  resulted  from  this  inappro-
priate antipathic  employment  of  it,  and  these  are  the  peculiar  effects
of  opium,  without  which  it  would  not  be  opium.  But  these  inevitable
disastrous  effects  of  such  an  employment  of  opium  were  not  regarded
as  being  what  they  actually  are,  to  wit,  the  essential  characteristics  of
opium,  but  as  a kind  of  bad  behaviour  inherent  in  it,  which  must  be
eliminated  from  it  by  all  sorts  of  devices,  in  order  to  render  it  innocuous
and  well-behaved.  Under  this  delusion  attempts  have  been  made  from
time  to  time,  for  now  nearly  two  thousand  years,  to  do  away  with  this
pretended  improper  action  by  means  of  so-called  corrigentia , so  that
it  should  henceforth  be  taught  to  allay  pains  and  spasms  without
producing  delirium  or  constipation,  check  vomiting  and  diarrhoea
without  stupefying,  and  change  chronic  sleeplessness  into  sound  sleep
without  exciting  heat,  and  without  leaving  behind  it  headache,  trembling,
exhaustion,  chilliness  and  prostration.

Hence  pungent  spices  were  combined  with  it  in  order  to  prevent
the  chilling  propensity  observed  in  the  secondary  action,  and  purgatives
and  salines  were  added  in  order  to  counteract  its  constipating  misconduct,
&c.  More  especially  was  it  sought  to  separate  from  it  its  crude,  and
alleged  useless  and  hurtful  resin  by  repeated  solution  in  water,  filtra-
tion and  inspissation,  and  also  to  deprive  it  of  the  volatile,  and  supposed
poisonous,  narcotic  quality  attached  to  it  by  macerating  it  for  months  ;
and  practitioners  even  went  so  far  as  to  attempt  to  refine  it  and  render
it  mild  by  roasting  it  over  a fire,  and  in  this  way  they  imagined  that  they
had  produced  a precious  panacea  for  all  ailments  and  troubles,  for  pains,
sleeplessness,  diarrhoea,  & c.,  which  was  free  from  all  the  well-known
evil  propensities  of  opium.

But  they  were  completely  mistaken  ; by  these  processes  they  only
made  the  opium  weaker  without  altering  its  nature.  Now  much  larger
doses  were  required  in  order  to  obtain  the  same  result,  and  when  these
larger  doses  were  administered  they  always  acted  just  like  the  original
opium  ; the  new  preparation  caused  the  same  stupefaction,  the  same
constipation,  and  so  forth,  and  hence  it  became  evident  that  opium
possesses  no  removable  bad  qualities,  just  as  little  as  any  other  medicine,
but  that  its  peculiar  medicinal  powers  must  ever  prove  injurious  and
dangerous  when  it  is  employed  antipathically  in  large  doses  and  when
it  is  not  understood  how  to  make  a homoeopathic  employment  of  it ; —
opium  might  be  employed  in  its  natural  powerful  state  or,  weakened  by
a number  of  expensive  artificial  processes,  in  the  large  doses  required  to
produce  its  antipathic  effects.

Opium  has  this  peculiarity  more  than  many  other  medicines,  that
in  the  case  of  persons  unaccustomed  to  its  use  and  in  very  excitable
subjects,  and  still  more  when  given  in  large  doses,  it  sometimes  at  first
displays  a transient,  often  momentary,  reaction  of  a peculiar  sort,  which,
partly  on  account  of  its  short  duration,  partly  owing  to  its  rarity,  and
partly  owing  to  its  very  nature,  must  not  be  confounded  with  its  charac-
teristic chief  and  primary  action.  These  rare,  momentary,  preliminary
reactions  correspond  almost  exactly  with  the  secondary  action  of  the
organism  upon  opium  (and  are,  so  to  speak,  a reflexion  of  this  secondary
action)  : deathy  paleness,  coldness  of  the  limbs  or  of  the  whole  body,
vol.  11.  19


290


OPIUM.


cold  perspiration,  timorous  anxiety,  trembling  and  despair,  mucous
evacuations  from  the  bowels,  transient  vomiting  or  short  cough,  and
very  rarely  certain  kinds  of  pain.

Hardly  any  of  the  peculiar  primary  effects  of  opium  are  observed
from  large  poisonous  doses,  but  this  initiatory  reaction  passes  at  once,  as
secondary  action,  to  death,  as  I myself  have  seen,  and  as  Willis  ( Pharm .
Rat .,  sect,  vii,  cap.  1,  p.  292)  relates.

The  oriental  indulgers  in  opium,  after  sleeping  off  their  opium
intoxication,  are  always  in  a state  of  secondary  opium  action ; their
mental  faculties  are  much  weakened  by  too  frequent  indulgence  in  the
drug.  Chilly,  pale,  bloated,  trembling,  spiritless,  weak,  stupid,  and
with  a perceptible  anxious  inward  malaise,  they  stagger  in  the
morning  into  the  tavern  to  take  their  allowance  of  opium  pills  in  order
to  quicken  the  circulation  of  their  blood  and  obtain  warmth,  to  revive
their  depressed  vital  spirits,  to  reanimate  their  dulled  phantasy  with
some  ideas,  and  to  infuse,  in  a palliative  way,  some  activity  into  their
paralysed  muscles.

The  symptoms  of  opium  arranged  below  are  mostly  secondary
action  and  counter-action  of  the  organism.  Physicians  who  cannot
make  up  their  minds  to  refrain  from  making  a hurtful  use  of  opium  in
large  doses  for  palliative  (antipathic)  purposes,  may  be  encouraged  to
do  so  by  a perusal  of  these  horrible  secondary  effects ; their  feelings
of  humanity  can  hardly  fail  to  be  shocked  by  them,  and  their  con-
science  roused  so  as  to  compel  them  to  do  better.

The  antidotes  to  dangerous  doses  of  opium  are  tincture  of  ipeca-
cuanha, camphor,  but  especially  strong  warm  infusion  of  coffee,  intro-
duced in  large  quantities  above  and  below,  accompanied  by  frictions  on
the  body.  But  when  icy  coldness  of  the  body,  insensibility,  and  loss  of
irritability  of  the  muscular  fibres  have  already  set  in,  a (palliative)
warm  bath  must  be  resorted  to.

When  opium  has  been  given  in  large  doses  in  order  to  allay  pains
and  check  diarrhoea,  and,  as  not  unfrequently  occurs,  true  paralysis  of
the  limbs  has  been  produced,  there  is  no  cure  for  this  kind  of  paralysis,
just  as  paralysis  can  never  be  cured  by  strong  electric  shocks.

Some  of  the  primary  effects  of  opium  last  but  a few  hours,  others,
especially  those  caused  by  large  doses,  last  longer  when  they  do  not
prove  fatal.

Opium  belongs  to  those  medicines  whose  primary  effects  seldom
admit  of  a homoeopathic  application  in  human  diseases  ; but  when  it  is
so  used  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  decillion-fold  potency  suffices
for  a dose.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-observers  were  Cubitz,  Gutmann,  Schonike,  Stapf.

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  quoted :

Acta  Nat . Cur.,  iv.

Aepli,  sen.,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xxv.

Alibert,  in  Wibmer , Wirkung  der  Arzneien  u.  Gifte .

Alpin,  Med.  JEgypt.,  iv.

Alston,  Medical  Essays.

Bard,  Sam.,  Diss.  de  Viribus  Opii , Edinb.,  1765.

Bauer,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  ii.

Bautzmann,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  8.


kOPIUM.


291


Baylis,  Prax.  Med.,  Lib.  i.

Bellonius,  Observat.

Berger,  Diss.  de  <vi  Opii  rarifacient .,  Viteb.,  1703.

Bergius,  Mat.  Med.

Boerhaave,  Praelect.  iv, — De  Morb,  Nerv.

Bohn , De  Officio  Med.

Bo  net,  Sepulcret.  Anatom .,  lib.  i.

Borelli,  Pet.,  Cent.  4.

Buchner,  Diss.  de  Opio , Halae,  1748.

Buttner,  Ch.  G.,  Unterr.  uber  d.  Todtlichkeit  d.  Wunden.

Charas,  Moses,  Pharm.  Reg.  Chym.

Chardin,  Voyage  en  Perse , Amst.,  1771,  vol.  iv.

Charvet,  De  VOpium , 1826.

Clark,  Essays  and  Obs .,  Phys.  and  Lit .,  edit.  3,  1771.

Clauder,  Gabr.,  in  Misc.  Elat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  5.

Cocg,  in  Stalpaart  van  der  IVieVs  Observat.,  Cent.  ii.

Croix,  de  la,  Journ . de  Med.,  xxxix.

Crumpe,  Natur  und  Eigensch.  des  Opiums.

Ettmoller,  Diss.  de  vi  Opii  diaphor .,  Lips.,  1694.

Freind,  Opera , tom.  i,  Emmenol.

Garcias  ab  Horto,  Hist . Aromat.,  i.

Gaster,  de,  Med.  Dogm.

Guiand  (no  reference).

Geoffroy,  Mat.  Med.

Grimm,  F.  C.,  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  iii.

Haller,  de,  De  Partib.  corp.  irritab.  et  sensib. — in  Praelect.  Boerh.  Instit.,  iv.
Hamberger,  Diss.  de  Opio,  Jen.,  1749.

Hargens,  in  Hufel.  Journal,  ix.

Hecouet,  Reflexions  sur-  V us  age  de  VOpium,  a Paris,  1726.

Hellwich,  Ch.  de.,  Brest.  Samml .,  1702.

Histoire  de  V Acad,  des  Sc.,  173 5.

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Diss.  de  Operatione  Opii,  Hal.,  1700, — Med.  Rat.  Syst ii.— D
Correct.  Opii , Hal,  1702.

Hunter,  J.,  On  the  Venereal  Disease.

Jones,  The  Mysteries  of  Opium  revealed.

Joerdens,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xviii.

Juncker  and  Bohmer,  Diss.  sistens  casum  Matron a largissimo  usu  Opii  tractates,
Halae,  1744.

Kampfer,  Amcen.  exot .,  fasc.  iii.

Kilian,  in  Med.  Annal.,  1800,  Oct.

Knebel,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xxvi.

Lassus,  in  Mem.  de  VInst.  National  des  Sc.  et  des  Arts,  tom.  ii.

Leroux,  Journ.  de  Med.

Levesque-Blasource,  in  Journ.  de  Medec.,  1808,  Juillet.

Lindestolpe,  de  Venenis.

Lorry,  Journ.  Encyclop .,  i, — Re  cue'll  Period.

Manchart,  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Cent.  i.

Matth^i,  C.  C.,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xi.

Matthiolus,  in  Tralles,  1.  c.

Mead,  de  Venenis,  in  Opera,  t.  ii.

Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  10.

Monro,  Essays  Phys.  and  Liter.,  vol.  iii.

Muller,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xviii.

Murray,  Apparat.  Med.,  ii.

Muz  ell,  W ahrnehmungen,  ii.

Outrepont,  d’,  Deutsche  Zeitsch.f.  Geburtsheilk.,  i.

Pitcairne,  Diss.  de  Circulatione  in  Animalibus genilis  et  non  genitis,  L.  B. — Element .
Med.,  Lib.  ii.

Plater,  Observ.,  Lib.  i.

Pyl,  Aufsatze,  Samml.  i.

Rademacher,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  iv.


292


OPIUM.


Reineggs,  in  Blumenbach's  Med.  Bibl .,  i.

Renodaeus,  Mat.  Med.,  Lib.  i.

Rolandson,  Marten,  in  Fetensk.  Acad.  Handling .,  1773,  pt-  ii.

Rudgeri,  Ouvoens  Nodes  Hagan#,  Vorr.

Riedlin,  Lin.  Med.,  ann.  iv,  Dec.

Ruef,  de,  App.  ad  Nova  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  v.

Saar,  Jon.  Jac.,  Reise  nach  deni  Orient.

Sachs  von  Lewenheim,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  ann.  2.

Sauvages,  Nosol.  Method.,  i.

Schelhammer,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  5.

Schweikert,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  viii.

Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  Cent.  ii.

Stenzelius,  De  Venenis,  i.

Stutz,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  viii.

Swieten,  van,  Comment .,  i.

Thompson,  Al.,  Diss.  de  Opio.

Tralles,  De  Usu  et  Abusu  Opii,  i.

Thuessink,  Ev.  Jo.  Thomassen  a,  Diss.  de  Opii  usu  in  Syphilitide,  L.  B.,  1785.
Vermandois,  no  reference.

Vi  cat,  Plantes  Veneneuse  de  la  Suisse. — Observationum  Delectus.

Wald  Schmid,  J.  J.,  Monita  Medica  circa  Opium,  Marburg,  1679.

Ward,  in  Neues  Journ.  d.  Ausland.  Med.  Liter atur,  iv.

W e d e L,  Opiologia.

W e p f e R , De  Apoplexia.

Whytt,  Neva  Edinb.  Essays.

Willis,  Pharm.  Rat.

Young,  Treatise  on  Opium , Edinb.,  1753.

In  the  Fragmenta  de  Fir.  there  are  274  symptoms,  in  the  ist  edit.  578,  in  the  2nd
edit.  638,  and  in  this  3rd  edit.  662. J


OPIUM.

Vertigo  from  stooping  (aft.  20  h.).

Vertigo.  [C.  C.  Matth2Ei,  in  Hufel.  'Journ. , xi,  2} — Young,
Treatise  on  Opium? — Tralles,  De  Usu  et  Abusu  Opii ? — Clark,
Essays  and  Obs.  Phys.  and  Lit.,  edit.  3,  1771. 3 — Murray,  Apparat.
Med.,  ii,  p.  28 2.1 2 3 4]

Vertigo  and  stupefaction  of  the  head.  [Matth2EI,  1.  c.]

Great  vertigo  compels  him  to  lie  down.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

5.  Vertigo,  as  if  all  went  round  in  a circle  with  him.  [Schel-
hammer,5 6 in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  2,  obs.  12.]

Giddy,  anxious,  insane.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  283.]

Vertigo  and  confusion  of  the  head.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Giddy  intoxication,  he  staggered  hither  and  thither.  [Al.  Thom-

son, Diss.  de  Opio,  p.  L2i.2]

Intoxication.  [Rademacher,  in  Hufel.  Jour.,  iv,  3,  p.  587? —
Buchner,  Diss.  de  Opio,  Halae,  1748,  § 45-7].

1 Observations  on  patients.

2 Observations  and  statements.

3 Poisoning  of  a man  by  twenty  grains  (wrongly  given  as  u Clarck  ”).

4 General  statement.

5 From  pills  of  styrax  and  opium.

6 From  tincture  Thebaica  given  in  dysentery.

' Not  accessible.


OPIUM.


293

10.  A kind  of  intoxication,  that  prevented  her  supporting  herself  on
her  legs.  [Leroux,  Journ.  de  Med}~\

In  larger  doses  than  those  that  cause  cheerfulness,  opium  excites
intoxication.  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

Cloudiness  of  the  head  (immediately).  [De  la  Croix,  Journ.  de
Med .,  xxxix.1 2 3]

Dulness  in  the  head,  with  a dry  hot  feeling  in  the  eyes,  and
inclination  of  the  eyes  to  shut,  without  sleepiness,  with  a sensation  as
if  he  had  not  slept  the  previous  night.  \_Ctz.~\

The  head  is  heavy,  and  as  if  intoxicated  (for  12  hours).  [Tralles,
1.  c.,  p.  101.]

15.  Confusion  of  the  head.  [Mat-thjei,  1.  c.]

Confusion  of  the  head,  as  if  smoke  had  got  into  the  brain.3
[Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Stupor.  [Bergius,4  Mat.  Med.,  p.  482.]

Stupefaction  of  the  intellect,  as  if  he  had  a board  in  front  of  the
head,  and  vertigo  compelling  him  to  lie  down  ; then  trembling  of  the
body  for  some  time.5  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Violent  stupefaction  and  intoxication  (from  the  smell  of  a large
quantity  of  opium).  [Lorry,  Journ.  Encyclop .,  i,  part  ii,  p.  72.6]

20.  Dull  stupefaction,  with  dull  eyes  and  excessive  powerlessness.
[Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Stupefaction  and  insensibility,  and  yet  he  answers  rationally.
[Vicat,  Plantes  Veneneuses  de  la  Suisse , p.  226.7]  (Comp,  with  40.)

Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  he  had  slept  off  a severe  wine  debauch
and  awoke.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  1 or.]

Obtuseness  of  the  intellect,  short  anxious  respiration,  in  which
the  chest  is  raised  high  3 the  eyes  look  dead  and  are  full  of  water.
[Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Copious  flow  of  ideas  with  gaiety.

25.  It  makes  his  mind  livelier  and  more  disposed  to  serious,  impor-
tant work.  [Wedel,  Opiologia , p.  165.8]

More  disposed  to  elevated  contemplations  all  night,  without
sleep.  [Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  x,  obs.  80.9]

All  inclination  to  sleep  disappeared  (after  taking  opium  the
previous  evening),  the  imaginative  faculty  and  the  memory  became
exalted  to  a wonderful  degree,  so  that  he  was  compelled,  as  it  were,
to  pass  the  night  in  the  most  profound  meditations  ; at  day  dawn  he
slumbered  for  some  hours,  but  then  could  no  longer  recal  all  that  he


1 From  nearly  a drachm,  in  a woman  of  51.

2 From  two  grains  taken  by  a woman  in  a clyster  (p.  313).  Preceded  by  a feeling
as  if  something  mounted  to  her  head.

3 From  a mixture  of  Hoffmann’s  anodyne  and  opium  : momentarily  occurring.

4 General  statement  from  authors  (p.  458).

5 As  S.  16.

6 Observations  and  statements.

7 From  overdose  of  laudanum  mixed  with  amber  and  nitre.  (All  the  symptoms
referred  to  Vicat  belong  to  this  case.)

8 Not  accessible.

9 Statement  (wrongly  given  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.),


294


OPIUM.


had  been  thinking  of  at  night. * [Rudgeri,  Ouwens  Nodes  Hagan# ,
Vorr.,  p.  14.1]

Slow  recollection,  stupidity,  senselessness.  [Willis,  Pharm.
Rat.,  p.  305.]

Keeping  silence.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

30.  Weakness  of  mind.  [F.  C.  Grimm,  Ada  Nat . Cur .,  iii,  obs.  19.2]
The  mental  faculties  depart.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Obtuse  senses.  [Sauvages,  Nosol.  Method,  i,  p.  847.3 4]
Obtuseness  of  the  mind.  [Bohn,  De  officio  med. , p.  362^]

All  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  all  the  senses,  are  blunted.  [Chardin,
Voyage  en  Perse , Amst.,  1771,  tom.  iv,  pp.  203,  204. 5]

35.  Indifference  to  pain  and  to  pleasure.  [Reineggs,6 7  in  Blumen-
bacK s Med.  Bibl.  i,  1 . ]

Stupefaction,  indifference.  [Ev.  Jo.  Thomassen  a Thuessjnk,
Diss.  de  Opii  usu  in  Sy phi li tide,  L.  B.  1785,  8.17]

Confusion  of  the  head  ; he  has  no  true  conception  of  anything,
and  cannot  understand  the  sense  of  what  he  reads.  [Schelhammer,
1.  c]

Obtuseness  of  the  senses  (aft.  8,  12  h.).

He  does  not  know  his  nearest  relatives,  nor  the  most  familiar
objects.

40.  Obtuseness  of  senses,  insensible,  almost  unconscious  of  his
existence,  and  yet  his  answers  are  tolerably  appropriate.  [Schelham-
mer.  1.  c.]  (comp,  with  21).

Is  not  in  his  right  consciousness.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Stupefaction  of  the  senses  and  loss  of  reason.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,
Diss.  de  operatione  Opii , Hal.,  1700,  p.  5«8]

Blunts  the  sensibility  and  sometimes  take's  it  quite  away.
[Tralles,  1.  c,]

She  knew  not  what  was  going  on  around  her  and  gave  no  sign  of
feeling;  the  limbs  were  flexible  and  all  the  muscles  were  relaxed.
Lassus,  in  Mem.  de  l’ Inst.  National  des  Sc.  et  Arts , tom.  ii.9]

45.  Obscuration  and  weakness  of  the  understanding  ; self-deception,

# The  symptoms  of  the  mind  and  disposition  caused  by  opium  cannot  be  so  easily
separated  as  those  caused  by  other  medicines,  so  that  we  can  place  the  former  at  the
commencement  among  the  head  symptoms,  and  the  latter  at  the  end  of  all  the  other
symptoms,  because  in  opium  both  generally  occur  together.  When  opium  is  used  for
palliatively  suppressing  pains,  spasms,  and  the  opposite  mental  and  moral  states  (as  in
SS.  619,  25,  612,  613,  61 1,  605,  614),  or  even  for  dispelling  natural  night-sleep  (in
this  latter  case  in  some  degree  homoeopathically),  it  produces  in  their  stead  usually
such  mental  ecstasies  and  emotional  transports — all  transient  primary  action.  These
ecstasies  and  transports  often  closely  resemble  the  inner  lucid  waking  of  the  somnam-
bulists  (clairvoyance).


1 From  laudanum  taken  for  spasms  of  legs.

2 Experiments  on  self  with  gr.  j — iij.

3 From  5iss  of  laudanum  drunk  by  a boy  of  15.

4 Symptoms  not  found.

3 Statements  as  to  opium-eaters.

6 Account  of  the  effects  of  opium-eating.

7 Not  accessible.

8 General  statement.

9 From  twenty-six  grams  taken  by  a woman  of  60.


OPIUM.


295

as  if  his  eyes  were  four  times  larger  and  his  body  1 2 of  gigantic  size.
[SCHELHAMMER,  1.  C.]

He  feels  as  if  he  flew  or  floated  in  the  air,  and  as  if  all  turned
round  with  him.  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

He  is  not  destitute  of  sight  and  hearing,  but  of  the  senses  of  taste,
smell  and  touch  in  regard  to  external  objects  ; and  yet  he  feels  the
coldness  of  his  own  body3  (aft.  h.).  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]
Stupidity.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Stupidity,  indifference  to  external  objects.  [Crumpe,  Natur  und
Eigensch.  des  0/>.3]

50.  Stupidity  and  imbecility.  [Haller,  in  Pralect . in  Boerh . Instit .,
iv,  p.  51 9. 4]

Opium  eaters  are  drowsy  and  almost  stupid.  [Alp in,5  Med .
Aegypt.  iv,  cap.  i.]

Opium  eaters  are  always  lazy  and  intoxicated.  [Alpin,  1,  c.]
Want  of  memory.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.J
Loss  of  memory.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

55.  Often  weakness  of  memory  (from  the  frequent  use  of  opium).
[Willis,6  1.  c.]

Loss  of  memory  for  several  weeks.  [Willis,  1.  c.]

Long  continued  loss  of  memory.  [Cocq,7  in  Stalpaart  van
der  Wiel,  Observ .,  cent,  ii,  obs.  41.]

Lost  memory.  [Bonet,  Sepulcret.  Anatom .,  lib.  i,  sect.  1,  p.  214.7  *]
Fluctuating  conceptions.  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

60.  Insensibility  to  modesty  and  the  finer  feelings.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]
The  power  of  the  will  was  lost  at  the  merest  trifle.  [De  Ruef,8
App.  ad  Nova  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  v.,  p.  63.]

Opium  eaters  have  a reputation  for  fickleness  ; they  often  promise
what  they  hesitate  to  perform  (every  one  guards  himself  from  them,
no  one  will  have  anything  to  do  with  them).  [Alpin,  1.  c.,  cap.  2.]
Rush  of  blood  to  the  brain.  [Haller,  1.  c.,  iv,  p.  509.]

(The  cerebral  vessels  were  distended  with  blood.)  [Mead,9 10  De
Venenis,  in  Opera , t.  ii,  p.  190,  edit.  Gotting.]

65.  Pulsation  of  the  arteries  of  the  head.  [Charvet/0  1.  c.]

He  hears  the  arteries  bringing  the  blood  to  the  brain.  [Charvet,
1.  c.]

* Note  to  48,  49,  50,  51,  52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57,  58. — If  all  these  states  are  long
continued  they  become  permanent  after  a prolonged  repetition  of  indulgence  in  opium  ;
they  then  amount  to  the  chronic  disease,  to  a kind  of  paralysis  of  the  mental  organs,
which  may  well  be  incurable  (53  to  58  secondary  action).


1 Observer  says  nothing  about  his  body.

2 The  last  clause  in  the  original  is — “ He  felt  his  cheeks  cold  when  he  touched
them.”

3 General  statement  (p.  38).

4 General  statement.

5 General  statements  as  to  Egyptian  opium-eaters.

6 Observations  and  statements.

7 Symptom  not  found.

8 General  statement.

9 General  statement.  This  is  merely  an  hypothesis  thrown  out  by  the  author.

10  Experiments  with  various  doses  (Jet.  de  1' Opium,  Paris,  1826).


2g6


OPIUM.


Very  painful  headache,  involving  the  occiput.  [D’Outrepont.1]
Onesided  headache  in  the  forehead  as  if  it  pressed  out,  diminished
by  external  pressure.

Headache  like  outward  pressure  in  the  forehead.

70.  Tearing  and  pecking  in  the  forehead,  sour  eructation,  sour  vomit-
ing, she  must  lie  down  and  then  she  perspired.

Single  twitches  in  the  temporal  muscles.

A kind  of  pressure  in  the  forehead  that  seemed  to  extend  to  the
eyes  and  nose.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

A sensation  of  tension  in  the  head.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Headache.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.,  viii,  4.]

75.  Violent  headache.  [Muzell,2  Wahmehmungen , ii,  p.  1 3 1 .]

Aching  pain  in  the  head.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.,  viii,  4 ; and  xi,  2.]
Pain  as  if  all  were  lacerated  in  the  head  and  sensation  as  if  all
turned  round  in  the  body,  with  cross  discomfort.  [C^%.]

Heaviness  of  the  head.  [Murray,  1.  c. — Bergius,  1.  c.,  p.  482.
— Gn.]

For  several  days  very  heavy  head,  the  occiput  like  lead,  so
that  the  head  always  fell  back  and  he  could  not  hold  it  up.  [Tralles,
1.  c.,  p.  87.]

80.  He  cannot  hold  the  head  up  ; it  sways  to  and  fro.  [Tralles,,

I-  c.,  •>  P-  2^3-]

Sunken,  pale  face.  [Pyl,  Aufsat%e , Samml.  i,  p.  95 .3]

Pale  face.  \Sche.~]

Frequent  alternation  of  redness  and  paleness  of  the  face.

Paleness  of  the  face  and  nausea,  with  sensation  of  drowsiness  and
diminution  of.  all  secretions  and  excretions,  often  even  of  the  perspira-
tion. [A.  Thuessink,  1.  c.]

85.  Pale  face  and  forehead,  glassy  eyes.4  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Earthy  complexion.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Earthy  pale  complexion,  dull  eyes  full  of  water  ; he  slumbers
with  half  open  eyes,  observes  nothing,  gives  irrelevant  answers,  passes
his  faeces  involuntarily,  sinks  down  in  a heap,  and  has  short  anxious
respiration.  [Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Bluish  and  earthy  complexion.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Appearance  of  the  face  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  or  had
been  dissipating  during  the  night,  with  sunken,  blinking  eyes.  [ Ctz.~\

90.  All  the  facial  muscles  appear  to  be  relaxed,  whereby  the  coun-
tenance has  a stupid  expression  ; the  lower  lip  has  a tendency  to
hang  down  loosely,  the  nostrils  are  wide  open,  and  the  upper  eyelid
can  with  difficulty  be  raised.  [ Sche .]

Red  spots  on  the  pale  cheeks.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Bloated  face.5  [Thompson,  1.  c.,  p.  120. — Young,  1.  c.]


1 From  a large  dose  taken  by  a woman  eight  months  gone  in  pregnancy  ( Deutsche
Zeitschrift  f.  Geburtskunde , i,  1,  99).

2 From  a mixture  of  opium  and  spiritus  cornu  cervi.

3 From  a large  dose  of  the  extract  in  a man  of  50 — 60.

4 Observer  adds  “ fixed  ” before  “ glassy.”

5 “Somewhat  swollen”  would  better  represent  the  original.


OPIUM.


297

Bloated  face,  hot,  dry  skin,  white  tongue,  hoarseness,  very
oppressed  breathing,  haemoptysis.1  [Young,  1.  c.]

Dark  red  face.2  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

95.  Quite  red  face.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Red,  bloated,  swollen  face.  [Murray,  1.  c. — Muller,  in  Hufel.
Journ .,  xviii,  iv.3]

Cherry-brown  face.  [Schweikert,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  viii,  3.4]
Distended  blood-vessels  in  the  face.  [Rieneggs,  1.  c.]

Red,  bloated  face  and  distended  blood-vessels  on  the  head.  [Hoff-
mann, 1.  c.]

100.  Red  face  and  red  eyes.  [Berger,  1.  c.]

Red  face  and  red  inflamed  eyes.  [J.  Hunter,  IJeber  de  Vener.
Krankh .,  p.  640. 5]

Uncommon  redness  of  face  with  swollen  lips.  [Hamberger,  Diss.
de  Opio , Jen.,  1749,  § 16.6]

Face  not  merely  red,  but  as  if  inflamed.  [Hecquet,7 8  Reflexions  sur
I' usage  de  l’ Opium,  Paris,  1726,  p.  184.]

Face  quite  red,  with  wild,  projecting,  red  eyes.  [Stentzel,  De
Venenis , i,  § 46. 7]

105.  Distorted  features,  silence,  open  eyes.  [Aepli,  sen.,  in  Hufel.
Journ.,  xxv,  3.®]

Spasms  of  the  facial  muscles.  [Knebel,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xxvi,

2.9]

Spasmodic  movements  of  the  facial  muscles  (aft.  7 d.).  [Levesque-
Blasource,  in  Journ.  de  Medec.,  1808,  July.10]

Convulsive  trembling  of  the  facial  muscles,  lips,  tongue.  [Aepli,

i-  <--•]  .

Bright,  sparkling  eyes.  [Matth2ei,  1.  c.]
no.  Staring  eyes  of  excessive  brightness.  [Muller,  1.  c.]

Glassy,  projecting,  immovable  eyes  that  see  nothing,  like  those  of
a dying  person.  [Vicat,  Observationum  Delectus,  p.  242.]

Immobility  of  the  pupils  to  light.  [Murray,  1.  c.j
Dilated  pupils  (the  first  h.).

Pupils  easily  dilated.

1 15.  Contracted  pupils.

The  eyes  only  half  shut,  the  pupils  dilated,  their  contractility
gone.  [Kilian,  in  Med.  Annal.,  1800,  Oct.n]

Open  eyes  with  pupils  turned  upwards.  [Pyl,  1.  c.]


1 From  opium  taken  for  an  incipient  cold  when  in  a plethoric  state  (S.  144,  305,
316,  332,  578,  all  belong  to  this  observation).

2 Not  found.

3 From  a mixture  of  tinct.  Thebaica  and  Hoffmann’s  anodyne  given  for  a nervous
affection  (p.  55).

4 Not  found.

3 Observations  on  patients.

6 A general  statement  cited  from  Geoffroy.

7 Not  accessible.

8 From  mixture  of  opium  and  rhubarb  given  to  a baby  for  colic.

9 Observation  on  a child  with  whooping-cough  (p.  148).

10  From  large  doses  in  a man  (vol.  xvi,  part  1,  pp.  21 — 24).
u Not  accessible,


29$


OPIUM.


Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  too  large  for  the  orbits.
[Charvet,  1.  c.]

He  stares  at  those  about  him,  with  watery  eyes,  but  he  knows
not  what  is  going  on, and  cannot  recognise  people.  [Reineggs,!,  c.]
120.  Sparks  before  the  eyes.]  [Clark,  1.  c.]

Dimness  of  vision,  it  is  as  if  he  saw  through  a veil.  [Muller,  1.  c.]
Blackness  before  his  eyes  and  he  is  giddy.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

He  is  perfectly  sensible,  but  complains  that  his  eyes  become  dark,
and  he  is  blind1 2  (aft.  4 h.).  [Willis,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelids.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

125.  The  eyelids  hang  down  as  if  paralysed.  [D’Outrepont,  1.  c.]

Trembling  eyelids,  which  only  half  cover  the  globes.  [Guiand.3]
Dull  roaring  in  the  ears,  after  eating  (aft.  4 h.).  [Charvet,  1.  c.J
Humming  in  the  ears  (very  soon).  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Ringing  in  the  ears.  [Young,  1.  c. — Murray,  1.  c.]

130.  The  lower  lip  is  painful  when  he  touches  it  with  the  upper  teeth
or  with  the  fingers.  [ScheJ]

Distortion  of  the  mouth.4  [Lorry,  1.  c.]

Trismus.  [De  la  Croix, — Pyl,  1.  c.]

Violent  pains  of  the  lower  jaw5  (aft.  7 d.).  [Levesque-Bla-
source,  1.  c.]

Her  mouth  could  only  be  opened  by  force,  and  she  could  with
difficulty  swallow  some  spoonfuls  of  fluid.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

135.  Pain  of  the  upper  jaw  (aft.  8 h.).

Toothache.

Looseness  of  the  teeth.

Fine  eroding  pain  in  the  nerves  of  the  tooth  (aft.  8 h.).

The  lower  jaw  hangs  down.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

140.  Paralysis  of  the  tongue.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

The  voice  is  weak  when  he  speaks  ; he  can  only  speak  loud  with
an  effort.  \Ctz.~\

He  cannot  speak  with  open  mouth.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

He  stammers.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

White  tongue.  [Young, — Grimm,  1.  c.]

145.  Black  tongue.  [Levesque-Blasource,  1.  c.]

Flow  of  saliva.  [Hargens,  in  Hufel.  journ .,  ix,  2.6 — Reineggs,
1.  C.]

Profuse  flow  of  saliva.  [Alston,  Edinb.  Vers.,  v,  i.7]

Flow  of  saliva  as  from  mercury.  [A  Thuessink,  1.  c.]

Saliva  flowed  constantly  from  the  mouth.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

150.  Suppresses  the  secretion  of  the  salivary  glands,  the  nasal  mucus,
and  that  of  the  glands  of  the  larynx.  [Murray,  1.  c.]


1 The  original  is— “ he  thought  flashes  of  fire  came  from  his  eyes.”

2 Just  before  death.

3 Not  accessible.

4 With  delirium.

5 These  are  described  as  “ rapid  and  momentary.”

6 Observation  on  a patient,  a phthisical  old  woman,  who  had  this  symptom  when-
ever  she  took  opium  to  check  a colliquative  diarrhoea.  Not  found  under  Reineggs.

7 Observations.  (From  Essays  and  Observations,  Edinb.,  v,  93.)


OPIUM.


299

Inspissates  the  saliva,  the  nasal  mucus,  the  mucus  of  the  wind-
pipe, and  makes  the  tongue  dry.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Dryness  of  the  tongue,  palate  and  fauces,  without  desire  to  drink,

[fe.]

Feeling  of  dryness  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  tongue,  without
thirst,  in  the  morning.

With  dryness  of  the  mouth,  without  desire  for  drink,  chill  over
the  abdomen.

155.  Dryness  of  the  whole  mouth,  with  little  thirst.  [Sche.~\

Dryness  at  the  back  of  the  throat.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Dryness  in  the  throat  and  on  the  tongue.  [Ettmuller,  Diss.  de
vi  Opii  diaphor .,  Lips.,  1694,  cap.  i,  § 5.1 — Murray,  1.  c.]

Dryness  of  the  mouth,  so  that  he  can  hardly  utter  a word.
[SCHELHAMMER,  1.  C.]

Great  thirst,  especially  for  small  beer.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

160.  Urgent  thitst.  [Ettmuller, — Murray,  1.  c.]

Produces  small  ulcers  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue.
[Matthiolus,  in  Tralles , 1.  c.,  § iv,  p.  tqo.*]

Causes  ulcers  on  the  palate  and  tongue.  [Wedel,  1.  c.,  p.  26.]
When  chewed  it  burns  the  mouth  and  tongue,  and  inflames  the
fauces.  [Lindestolpe,  De  Venenis , p.  59 1.1]

Causes  intolerable  biting  burning  like  pepper  on  the  tongue.
[Boerhaave,  Praelect .,  iv,  p.  529.4]

165.  On  the  neck  distended  veins,  and  violently  beating  arteries.2 3
[Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Difficulty  of  swallowing.  [Lassus,  1.  c.]

Impossibility  of  swallowing.  [Aepli,  1,  c.]

Bitterness  of  the  mouth.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Insipid,  flat,  almost  no  taste.

170.  Sour  taste.

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  next  morning.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]
Anorexia.

(In  large  doses)  it  takes  away  the  appetite  immediately.  [Willis,

>• c-]

Loss  of  appetite.  [Joerdens,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xvii,  i.s —
Reineggs, — Bergius,  1.  c.]

175.  Want  of  appetite  for  food  and  drink.  [Murray*  1.  c.]

He  loathes  everything.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

For  a long  time  distaste  for  all  food.  [Tralles,  § i,  p.  142.]
Extreme  loathing  of  food  with  great  weakness.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]
Extreme  loathing  of  animal  food,  with  dirty  tongue.  [Matthjei,
1.  c.]

* From  tasting  opium.  [Rather,  from  retaining  it  some  time  in  the  mouth.  The
same  holds  good  of  S.  162.]

f Taken  into  the  mouth  in  some  quantity.


1 General  statement.

2 No  distinction  is  made  in  the  original  between  veins  and  arteries.

3 Observation  on  self,  when  taking  laudanum  to  secure  sleep.


3°°


OPIUM.


180.  He  wishes  to  eat,  but  has  scarcely  taken  a morsel  when  he
desires  no  more.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Increased  appetite.

Ravenous  hunger  in  frequent  fits,  sometimes  with  insipid  taste  in
the  mouth  (aft.  3 and  more  h.).

Ravenous  hunger.  [Kampfer,1  Amoen.  exot.,  fasc.  iii,  obs.  15.]
Ravenous  hunger,  with  distension  and  oppression  of  the  stomach
after  eating.  [Manchart,2  Eph.  Nat.  Cur .,  cent,  i,  obs.  15,]

1 85.  Excessive  hunger  with  great  exhaustion.  [Ward,  in  Neues  Journ.
d.  Ausland.  Med . Literatur , iv,  ] .3]

Ravenous  hunger  with  loathing  of  food.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Nausea.  [Grimm, —Matth^ei,  1.  c.,  viii,  4.]

Inclination  to  vomit.  [Matth^i,  1.  c.,  xi,  2.]

Frequent  loathing  and  vomiting.  [J.  J.  Waldschmid,  Monita
Medica  circa  Opium , Marburg,  1679.4 5]

190.  Violent,  ineffectual  retching.  [Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Ineffectual  efforts  to  vomit.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Vomiting  (after  a few  minutes).

Inclination  to  vomit  on  moving.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Vomiting  after  eating.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

195.  Efforts  to  vomit,  haematemesis.  [Hecquet,  1.  c.,  p.  314.]

Excites  vomiting.  [Wedel,  1.  c.]

Along  with  stomachache  and  convulsive  movements  she  vomits.
[Juncker  and  Boehmer,  Dtss.  sistens  casum  Matrons  largissimo  usu
Opii  tractates , Halae,  1744,  p.  7-4]

Constant  vomiting.  [Pyl,  1.  c.,  p.  94.]

Vomiting  of  green  matter.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

200.  Insensibility  of  the  stomach  to  emetics.  [Murray,  1.  c.]
Eructation  (aft.  5 h.).  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Full  in  the  stomach.  [Joerdens,  1.  c.]

Stomachache.  [Bohn,  1.  c.]

Hiccough  continued,  with  short  interruptions.  [Schweikert,  in
Hufel.  Journ.,  viii,  3.]

205.  Great  aching  in  the  stomach  (immediately).  [Willis,  1.  c.]
Weakness  of  stomach.

Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  if  a stone  lay  there  (aft.  2 h.).
Immediately  after  a meal  violent  pressure  in  the  gastric  region,
relieved  by  walking.  [ Ctz .]

Painful 5 distension  of  the  stomach.  [D’Outrepont,  1.  c.]

210.  After  dinner,  extremely  annoying  pressure  over  the  stomach,  as
if  he  had  eaten  too  much  or  too  hard  food,  which  was  relieved  by
movement  in  the  open  air.  \_Sche.~\

Violent  pains  in  the  stomach.  [Levesque-Blasource,  1.  c.]


1 Observation  on  self  in  health.

2 From  a grain  of  crude  opium  taken  by  self.  Said  by  reporter  to  be  a common
occurrence  with  him.  (Wrongly  printed  “ Mouchard.”)

3 From  external  application.

4 Not  accessible.

5 i.  e.  to  touch.


OPIUM.


3°i

Quickly,  stomachache  and  compression  of  the  diaphragm.  [Fr.
Hoffmann,  Diss.  de  corrections  Opii .,  Hal.,  1702,  § 16.1]

Constrictive  pain  in  the  stomach,  which  is  intolerable  and  causes
deathly  anxiety.  [Young,  1.  c.*]

Weakens  the  stomach.  [Haller,  1.  c.,  p.  519.]

215.  Makes  the  digestion  slower  and  diminishes  the  appetite.  [Geof-
froy,  Mat.  Med.,  ii.2]

Slow  digestion.  [Willis,  1.  c.  cap.  2.]

Deranges  the  digestion,  excites  a feeling  of  weight  and  compres-
sion in  the  stomach,  and  an  indescribable  uneasiness  in  the  scrobi-
culus  cordis.  [Ettmuller,  1.  c.]

Painful  distension  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,

p- 142-]

The  abdomen  is  distended  especially  in  the  umbilical  region.
[De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

220.  Feeling  of  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  particularly  of  the
stomach.

In  the  stomach  and  bowels  accumulation  of  flatulence.  [Murray,

1.  c.]

Distended  abdomen.  [De  la  Croix, — Tralles,  1.  c.]

Abdomen  tense  and  painful,  [J.  Hunter,  1.  c.]

Bellyache,  as  from  a purgative  (aft.  \ h.).

225.  Bellyache,  as  from  a chill.

Bellyache  of  simple  pain,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  2 h.).

Aching  and  pressing  distension  of  the  abdomen  as  if  it  would
burst ; it  was  relieved  by  bodily  exertion,  on  sitting  down  the  aching
returned  (aft.  2 h.).  [G«.]

Constant  development  of  flatulence.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  pp.  142,
148. — Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Gn.]

230.  Sensation  of  a weight  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  umbilical  region,
with  anxiety,  sensation  of  transient,  internal  heat,  and  stupefaction
of  the  head  (aft.  1 h.).

Throbbing  in  the  abdomen.

Aching  and  tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  24  h.).

Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  also  when  not  breathing
(aft.  3 h.).

Bellyache  before  and  after  evacuation  of  the  bowels.

235.  Pressure  and  heaviness  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a stone.  [Ch.  G.
Buttner,  TJnterr.  itber  d.  Todtlichk.  d.  Wunden , p.  224. 3]

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  bowels  were  cut  to  pieces.
[Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.,  p.  8.]

* From  opium  taken  immediately  after  dinner.  [Young’s  statement  is  that  the
man  took  his  dose  “ after  a plentiful  supper  and  load  of  liquor.”]


1 Not  accessible.

2 General  statement.

3 Observation  (p.  204.).


3°2


OPIUM.


Inactivity  of  the  bowels  and  retained  stool.1  [Willis,  1.  c.]
Paralysis  of  the  bowels.2  [Pyl,  1.  c.,  p.  94.]

240.  Almost  always  binds  the  bowels.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  145*]

Rare  evacuations.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Constant  retention  of  the  stool  and  costiveness.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,

p.  144*]

Retention  of  the  intestinal  evacuations.

Faeces  and  urine  interrupted.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

245.  Constipation  for  ten  days  (ending  in  death).  [Pyl,  1.  c.]

Hard  stool,  preceded  by  pinching  in  the  abdomen  and  flatus.  [ Gn .]
When  straining  at  stool  sensation  as  if  the  passage  through  the
rectum  were  closed.

Hard  stool  only  passed  with  an  effort,  for  six  days.  [C/%.]
Costiveness  for  six  or  eight  weeks,  with  anorexia  ; the  excrements
only  come  away  with  clysters,  and  in  the  form  of  small  hard  balls.
[Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.,  p.  8.]

250.  Costiveness  for  several  months.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  145.]

Stool  in  small  hard  lumps,  with  labour-like  pains,  as  in  parturition.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  146.]

Almost  incurable,  chronic  costiveness.  [Waldschmid,  1.  c.,

P-i7-].

Opium  sometimes  causes  diarrhoea  (in  its  secondary  action).
[Hamberger,  1.  c.,  § 15.]

Evacuation  of  the  bowels,  pappy  stool  (immediately  or
within  1 h.).

255*  Very  foetid  stool  (aft.  20  h.).

Increased  faecal  evacuation.  [Bauer,3  in  Acta  Nat.  Cur.,  ii,  obs.

93-]  ^ ..

Watery  diarrhoea.  [Bautzmann,4  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,
ann.  8.*]

Evacuation  of  a black  matter  by  stool  (aft.  24  h.).  [Levesque-
Blasource,  1.  c.]

Fluid  frothy  stools,  with  itching  burning  in  the  anus  and  violent
tenesmus.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

260.  Very  foetid  diarrhoea.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Violent  painful  movements  of  the  foetus,  often  remitting  for
hours,  but  recurring  in  still  greater  intensity.  [D’Outrepont,  1.  c.]
The  uterus  was  soft.5  [D’Outrepont,  1.  c.]

Horrible  labour-like  pains  in  the  uterus,  which  compelled  her  to
bend  the  abdomen  double,  with  anxious,  almost  ineffectual  urging  to
stool  (aft.  \ h.).

Horrible  pressing-asunder  pain  in  the  rectum  (between  4 and  6 h.).
* Whenever  she  uses  opium  for  her  toothache.


1 In  the  original — “ dulness  or  difficulty  of  evacuation.”

2 Rather — “ the  intestines  seemed  paralysed.”

3 Observation.

4 Observation  (Obs.  44).

5 In  the  original — “The  uterus  was  so  soft  that  the  movements  of  the  child” —
see  previous  symptom — “ could  be  felt  externally,”  This  was  coincident  with  a
general  paralysed  state.


OPIUM.


3°3


265.  Lemon-coloured  urine,  with  much  sediment.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Dark  coloured  urine.  [Riedlin,  Lin.  Med .,  ann.  iv,  Decemb.,
obs.  16. *]

Dark  urine  and  dry  tongue  (in  himself).  [Young,  1.  c.]

Yery  dark  red  urine,  which  deposits  a sediment.  [Matth^ei,
1.  c.]

Haematuria.  [Hecquet,  1.  c.]

270.  Very  scanty,  very  red  urine,  without  cloudiness.  [Matth^i,
L c.]

The  urine  has  a brick-coloured  sediment.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]
Sensation  when  straining  to  pass  urine  as  if  the  passage  to  the
urethra  were  closed.

Involuntary  interruption  of  the  stream  when  urinating.  [Charvet,
Lc.]

He  can  only  pass  the  urine  after  long  straining.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]
275.  He  passes  little  urine  of  very  dark  red  colour,  with  cutting  pains
while  urinating.  [Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Suppresses  the  evacuation  of  urine.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Urine  suppressed.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

Retention  of  urine.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c. — Hunter,  1.  c.,  p.  641.]
Opium  suppresses  the  secretion  of  urine.  [Pitcairne,  Diss.  de
Circulatione  in  Animalibus  genitis  et  non  genitis , L.  B.,  § 1 3-1 2]

280.  Retention  of  urine,  with  quite  dry  mouth  and  increased  thirst.
[MATTHiEI,  1.  c.]

Keeps  back  the  evacuation  of  urine.  [Ettmuller,  1.  c.,  §§

3)  4-]

Weakens  the  contractile  power  of  the  bladder.  [De  Haller,  De
Partib . corp.  irritab.  et  sensib .,  sect.  2.3]

Opium  sometimes  suppresses  sometimes  promotes  the  urine.
[Geoffroy,  1.  c.]

Excites  the  urinary  secretion.  [Willis,  I.  c. — Berger,  1.  c.,

§*•].  . ,

285.  Stiffness  of  the  penis  during  sleep,  and  after  waking  complete

impotence.  [Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  cent,  ii,  obs.  41.4 *]

Excessive  stiffness  of  the  penis.  [Moses  Charas,  Pharm.  Reg .,

cap.  5 1.6]

Exalted  sexual  desire,  with  erections,  pollutions,  and  lascivious
dreams.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Exaltation  of  the  sexual  desire,  erections  of  the  penis,  nocturnal
emissions  of  semen.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.]

Lascivious  dreams  and  nocturnal  emissions  of  semen.  [Wedel,
1.  c.,  ii,  3.]

290.  It  excites  the  sexual  desire.  [Wedel,  1.  c.]

Amorous  ecstacy,  erection  of  the  penis  for  twenty-four  hours,


1 Observation.

2 Observations.

3 Not  found.

4 From  5SS  of  solid  opium.

6 Symptoms  not  found.


3°4


OPIUM.


lascivious  dreams,  nocturnal  seminal  emissions.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  i,
P-  I 231-]

Nocturnal  seminal  emission  (the  ist  n.).

At  night  amorous  pictures  of  fancy,  pollutions.  [Ch.  de
Hellwich,  Bresl.  Sammlungen , 1702.1]

Uncontrollable  lechery.  [Joh.  Jac.  Saar,  Reise  nach  dem
Orient .3]

295.  In  some  excitation,  in  others  diminution  of  the  sexual  desire.
[Sachs  von  Lewenheim,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  ann.  2,  obs.  69.3]
Sluggishness  of  the  sexual  desire.  [Renodaeus,  Mat.  Med.,  lib.
1,  sect.  13,  cap.  2.4]

Is  considered  as  emasculating  and  weakening  the  sexual  desire.
[Wedel,  1.  c.]

Excitation  of  the  sexual  passion.

Impotence.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

300.  Impotence  of  the  male.  [Reineggs,  1.  c. — Garcias  ab  Horto,
Hist.  Aromat.,  i,  cap.  4.5]

Cooling  of  the  sexual  desire.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Increased  menstrual  flux  (aft.  2 h.).

Opium  left  the  menses  regular,  even  in  a case  where  the  patient
had  swallowed  for  thirty  years  a drachm  and  more  daily,  on  account
of  very  painful  and  spasmodic  attacks.  [Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.]

%

% . . *

In  the  warm  room,  after  walking  in  the  open  air,  stoppage  of  the
nose  like  a stuffed  cold.  [ Gn .]

305.  Hoarseness.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Hoarseness,  with  very  dry  mouth  and  white  tongue.  [Grimm,
1.  c.]

Extreme  hoarseness.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Hoarseness,  as  from  mucus  in  the  windpipe.

She  coughed  while  swallowing  fluid.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

310.  The  cough  becomes  worse  after  eating.

Hollow,  very  dry  cough  (immediately  after  taking  it)  ; it  goes
off  again  quickly.

Attack  of  violent,  dry  cough  ; thereafter  yawning  and  sudden
loud  cry  (aft.  36  h.).

He  becomes  suddenly  blue  in  the  face  and  wants  to  cough,  bu  t
the  breathing  stops  (suffocative  spasm)  ; thereafter  deep  sleep  with
cold  sweat  of  the  body  (aft.  30  h.).

Cough  when  swallowing.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

313.  He  coughs  up  frothy  mucus.  [MATTHiEi,  1.  c.]

Haemoptysis.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Expectoration  of  thick,  bloody  mucus.  [Matth2ei,  1.  c.]

Keeps  back  bloody  expectoration  and  stool.  [Thompson,  1.  c.]
Quick  breathing.  [Buchner,  1.  c.,  § 45.]

1 Not  accessible.

2 Statement  as  to  use  of  opium  by  Chinese.

1 General  statement.

4 Statement.

5 Observation.


OPIUM.


305


320.  Quick,  oppressed,  anxious  breathing.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

More  rapid,  difficult  breathing.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Breathing  always  shorter  and  shorter.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Slow  breathing.

Difficult,  tight  breath,  especially  at  night.

325.  Sometimes  single  deep  respirations,  sometimes  cessation  of  breath-
ing for  a minute  at  a time.

The  respirations  are  long  and  sighing.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Short,  stertorous  1 respiration,  which  from  time  to  time  ceases  for
half  a minute.  [Pyl,  1.  c.,  p.  95.]

Difficult  respiration.  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

Attacks  of  anxiety  of  short  duration,  with  short,  tight  respiration,
and  trembling  of  arms  and  hands.  [Ctz.~\

330.  Difficult  breathing  and  anxiety.2  [Hamberger,  1.  c.,  §§  10  and

4-9-J

Anxiety  with  contraction  and  tightness  of  the  chest.  [Matthjei,
I.C.]

Constriction  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  stiff ; difficult  respiration.
[Young,  1.  c.]

Tightness  of  the  chest  as  if  pleurisy  were  about  to  occur,  and
tension  in  the  shoulder-blade.  [Gabr.  Clauder,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,
Dec.  ii,  ann.  5,  obs.  178.3]

Spasmodic  tightness  of  the  chest.4  [Young,  1.  c.]

335.  Tightened  and  difficult  respiration  and  praecordial  anxiety.
[Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.  Syst .,  ii,  p.  270. 5]

Obstructed  respiration,  tightness  of  the  chest.  [Stutz,  in  Hufel.
Journ .,  viii,  3.6]

Difficult,  obstructed  respiration.  [Vicat,  PI.  Venen .,  h c.]

Deep  stertorous  breathing.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Difficult  deep  breathing.  *[De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

340.  Panting,  loud  breathing.7  [Willis,  Pharm.  rat.,  p.  305.]

Loud,  difficult  breathing.  [Lassus,  1.  c.]

He  fetches  his  breath  with  the  greatest  effort  and  anxiety,  with
open  mouth.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

The  respiration  was  sometimes  stertorous  and  loud,  sometimes
difficult  and  very  weak.  [Leroux,  1.  c.]

Loud,  laboured,  rattling  respiration.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

345.  Slow,  difficult,  stertorous  breathing.  [Crumpe,  1.  c.]

Groaning,  slow  breathing  (aft.  4 h.).  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

Groaning,8  interrupted  respiration.  [Aepli,  1.  c.]

The  inspiration  is  interrupted.  [Alibert,  1.  c.9]


1 Instead  of  “ schnarchendes,”  snoring,  Pyl  says  “ rochelndes,”  rattling.

2 “ Anxiety  ” not  found  in  original.

3 Experiment  with  an  extract  prepared  with  sulphuric  acid.

4 In  the  original,  “ asthma.”

5 General  statement  (p.  273).  “Praecordial  anxiety”  not  found.

6 From  opium  given  in  a convulsive  attack  (X.  4,  35-7).

7 Not  found.

8 Rather,  “ sobbing.”

9 Not  accessible.

VOL.  II.


20


3°6


OPIUM.


Respiration  imperceptible,  sometimes  with  a noise.  [Vermen-
dois.1]

350.  Irregular  breathing  threatening  suffocation.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Oppressed  and  not  merely  difficult,  but  also  irregular  breathing.
[Willis,  1.  c.]

Breathing  ceasing  for  some  minutes,2  then  returning  with  a deep
sigh.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Cessation  of  respiration  ; he  was  for  five  minutes  as  if  dead,  then
short,  sudden  snatches  of  breath,  as  if  hiccup  would  come  on.
[ScHWEIKERT,  1.  C.]

The  respiration  ceases  for  a longer  and  longer  time  until  death.
[Sauvages,  1.  c.]

355.  Excessive  aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  also  when
not  breathing,  with  stitches  in  the  same  side  while  inspiring  (aft.  1 h.).
Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  side  of  the  chest.

Contractive  (squeezing)  pain  in  the  sternum  and  back,  felt  when
moving.

He  feels  heat  in  the  chest  (on  himself).  [Bellonius,  libr.  3,
Observ .,  cap.  15.3]

In  the  heart,  burning  as  from  live  coals,  so  that  he  thinks  he
must  die.  [Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.,  p.  7.]

360.  Pain  in  the  hypochondria,  especially  the  right.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]
Tension  of  the  region  below  the  ribs,  which  is  very  painful  when
touched  (aft.  4 h.).  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Tensive  pain  under  the  short  ribs  along  where  the  diaphragm  is
attached,  whilst  breathing.

Single  twitches  in  the  arms.  [Rademacher,  1.  c.]

Single  twitches  in  the  arms.

365.  In  one  or  other  arm  a convulsive  moving  to  and  fro.

Trembling  of  the  left  arm  in  fits  (aft.  3 h.).

Formication  as  if  asleep  in  the  fingers,  increased  by  grasping
anything.

Itching  in  the  arms  and  on  the  shoulder.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]
Trembling  of  the  hands.  [A  Thuessink,  1.  c.].

370.  The  (left)  arm  is  paralyzed  (aft.  48  h.).  [Levesque-Blasource,

!•  c.]

Disagreeable  formication  in  the  hands  and  feet,  which  changed
into  a frightful,  intolerable  rolling.  [Muller,  1.  c.]

Almost  no  feeling  in  the  legs.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Severe  itching  in  the  legs,  in  the  evening.  [MATTHiEi,  1.  c.]
Weakness  of  the  legs.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

375.  Sensation  sometimes  as  if  flashes  of  fire,  sometimes  as  if  ice-cold
water  flowed  through  the  blood-vessels.  [Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.]
Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  back.

He  kicks  his  feet  up  and  down  as  in  convulsion,  with  sudden
loud  cry.

Numbness  in  the  foot.


1 Not  accessible.

2 Rather,  “ for  a minute  at  a time.1’

3 From  opium  eating  (p.  431).


OPIUM.


307

The  foot  is  so  stiff  and  sensitive  that  he  cannot  tread  on  it  nor
walk.

380.  Swelling  of  the  foot.

Heaviness  of  the  feet  after  eating  (aft.  2 h,).

Frightful  pains,  that  penetrate  through  the  marrow  of  his  bones.1
[Chardin,  1.  c.]

Emaciation  of  the  body.  [Bergius,  1,  c.]

Dropsical  state  of  the  body.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

385.  Intolerance  of  the  open  air  and  feeling  as  if  he  would  catch  cold.
Pale,  bluish  colour  of  the  skin.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Blueness  of  the  skin  of  the  body,  especially  of  the  genitals.2
[Aepli,  1.  c.]

Blue  spots  here  and  there  on  the  body  (aft.  15  h.).  \Histoire  de
r Academie  des  Sc .,  1735.3]

Redness  of  the  whole  body.  [J.  Hunter,  1.  c.]

390.  Burning  pain,4  sometimes  itching  of  the  skin.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]
Burning,  itching  and  elevation  of  the  epidermis  into  pustules.
[Hecquet,  1.  c.*]

Here  and  there  in  the  skin  pricking  itching.

Itching,  especially  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  from  the  chest
up  over  the  face,  especially  the  nose.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Very  tiresome  itching.  [Willis,  1.  c.]

395.  Tiresome  itching  all  over  the  body.  [Berger,  1.  c.,  § 3.]
Redness  and  itching  of  the  skin.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.]

Itching  all  over  the  body  ; after  scratching  there  come  thick  red
lumps  (wheals)  which  itch  much,  but  soon  go  off.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]
Cutaneous  eruption  and  occasional  itching.  [Freind,5  Opera ,
tom.  i,  Emmenol .,  cap.  14,  p.  139.]

After  perspirations,  frequent  cutaneous  eruptions  and  smarting
itching  on  the  skin.  [Tralles,  1.  c.]

400.  Small  red,6  itching  spots  here  and  there  on  the  skin.  [Matthjei,

he.]

Itching  and  formication  in  all  the  limbs 7 (aft.  5 h.).  Schel-

HAMMER,  1.  c.]

First  diminution  of  sensibility,  afterwards  diminution  of  the
irritability.

Obtuseness  and  insensibility  of  the  limbs.  [Stutz,  1.  c.,  x,  4.]
Numbness  and  insensibility  of  the  limbs  with  coldness  of  the
whole  body  (aft.  2 h.).  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

405.  Cold,  stiff  body.8  [Pyl,  1.  c.]

Tetanus.  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

* From  taking  opium  frequently.


1 In  confirmed  opium-eaters.

2 During  the  opisthotonos  of  S.  407.

3 Not  accessible.

4 In  the  original,  simply  “ burning.”

5 General  statement.

6 Matthaei  adds  (( thick  ” to  <£  red.”

7 Schelhammer  simply  speaks  of  ((  pruritus.”

8 “The  whole  body  paralysed  and  stiff”  is  Pyl’s  statement!


3o8


OPIUM.


Beginning  of  opisthotonos.  [Aepli,  1.  c.]

Head  bent  backwards  (a  kind  of  tetanus  of  the  nape)  (aft.  I h.).
The  back  is  stiff  and  straight  (a  kind  of  tetanus)  (between  land  2 h.).
410.  Bending  of  the  trunk  like  a bow  from  the  violent  trembling
movement  in  the  limbs,  which  strains  all  the  nerves.  [Juncker  and
Bohmer,  1.  c.]

Stiffness  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  1 h.).  [Levesque-Blasource,

L c.]

Tetanus  and  epileptic  convulsions.  [Stentzelius,  de  Venen.  i,

§ 46  .*]

Convulsions.  [Van  Swieten,1 2  1.  c.,  p.  372. — Acta  Nat.  Cur .,
cent,  i,  obs.  54.1 — Schweikert,  1.  c.f]

Spasmodic  movements  accompanied  by  crying.  [Levesque-
Blasource,  1.  c.]

415.  Convulsive  movements.  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

Epilepsy.  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

Epileptic  fits,  with  violent  delirium.  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

Foam  before  the  mouth.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Restlessness  in  the  sound  limbs,  which  cannot  remain  a moment
in  one  place.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

420.  Trembling  in  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  been  frightened,  with
single  jerks  of  the  body  and  twitchings  in  the  limbs,  in  which  only
the  flexor  muscles  are  involved,  with  external  coldness  of  the  body.
Convulsive  trembling  of  the  limbs.  [Aepli,  1.  c.]

Spasmodic  trembling  of  the  limbs.  [Stutz,  1.  c.]

Trembling  movement  in  all  the  limbs,  which  distorts  all  the
nerves.  [Juncker  and  Bohmer,  1.  c.]

Staggering.  [Reineggs, — Grimm,  1.  c.]

425.  Unsteadiness;  he  cannot  walk  without  staggering.  [Schel
HAMMER,  1.  C.]

Agreeable  lassitude,  as  from  intoxication.  [Matth^ui,  1.  c.]

Slow,  unsteady  gait.

Unconquerable  lassitude.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Laziness.  [Stutz,  1.  c. — Fr.  Hoffmann,  Correct.  Opii,  § 16.]
430.  Great  desire  to  lean  against  everything,  to  stretch  out  the  lower
limbs  lazily  and  to  support  the  head  on  a hand.  \_Sche.'\

Feeling  of  strength.

Exhaustion  (aft.  8,  12  h.).

Relaxation,  laziness.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Lazy  movement.  [Murray,  1.  c.,  p.  285.]

435.  Exhaustion  ; everything  external  is  distasteful  to  him,  he  is  sleepy,
dazed,  stupefied,  sad,  and  his  memory  fails  him.  [Murray,  1.  c.J]
Exhaustion.  [Bergius, — (immediately)  Willis,  1.  c.]

Checks  the  activity  of  the  voluntary  muscles,  diminishes  sensi-
bility and  hence  induces  sleep.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  1 10.]

* Shortly  before  death.

j*  From  large  doses.

f When  the  primary  action  of  the  opium  is  passed.


1 General  statement.

2 From  a large  dose  of  " Theriaca  ” given  to  a child  of  four  weeks.


OPIUM.


309


Diminishes  (in  robust  persons)  the  power  of  the  muscles  subject
to  the  will,  causes  weight  of  the  head  and  great  exhaustion.  [Tralles,
1.  c.,  p.  107  .*]

Premature  senility.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

440.  It  causes  remarkable  loss  of  the  powers,  and  deprives  the  firm
parts  of  tone  and  mobility.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat .,  ii,  p.  270.]
Relaxation  of  the  limbs  and  weakness.  [Hamberger,  1.  c.,  § 16.]
The  power  of  movement  of  the  muscles  is  depressed.  [Ett-

MULLER,  1.  C.]

Heaviness  of  the  limbs  (aft.  ij  h.).  [ Gn .]

Weakness  of  the  powers.  [Kampfer,  1.  c.,  p.  645.4]

445.  Apoplexy  not  rare.  [Wepfer,  de  Apoplexia , p.  24.1 — Mead,  1.  ck,
p.  133. — Van  Swieten,  1.  c.,  p.  325. — Lorry,  1.  c.]J
Sinking  of  the  powers.  [Clark, — Willis,  1.  c.§]

Debility,  sinking  of  the  powers.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Unfit  for  all  work,  exhausted  and  weak.  [Chardin,  1.  c.]

He  can  scarcely  move  the  feet,  can  hardly  walk  forwards  even
when  forcibly  compelled  to  do  so.  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

450.  Exhaustion  of  the  powers  and  inability  to  move.  [Fr.  Hoff-
mann, Dissert,  de  Operatione  Opii , p.  8.]

He  lay  in  the  greatest  weakness.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  238.]

The  muscles  move  with  greater  difficulty.  [Berger,  1.  c.,  § 10.]
Increased  immobility  of  the  limbs.  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

The  muscular  tone  is  relaxed,  so  that  a kind  of  paralysis  ensues.
[Freind,  1.  c.,  cap.  14.]

455.  All  the  muscles  relaxed.  [Lassus,  1.  c.]

Paralysis.  [Baglio,2  Prax.  Med.,  lib.  1,  p.  65. ||]

The  limbs  lay  immovable,  and  remained  lying  in  the  place  where
they  were  laid.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

Great  prostration,  sinking  of  all  the  vital  spirits.  [Willis,  1.  c.]
Discomfort,  ill  feeling  of  body  and  mind  (aft.  8,  12  h.).

460.  Syncope.  [Muller,  1.  c. — Fr.  Hoffmann,  Diss.  de  Correct.  Opii ,
§16.]

Syncope  recurring  every  quarter  of  an  hour  ; he  closes  the  eyes,
lets  the  head  hang  down,  with  weak  respiration,  without  conscious-
ness, with  unaltered  pulse  ; then  some  spasmodic  shocks  of  the  body,
whereupon  after  a few  minutes  the  paroxysm  ends  with  a sigh  ,
followed  by  anxiety.3  [Muller,  1.  c.^1]

* Opium  diminishes  only  in  the  secondary  action  the  power  of  the  muscles  subject
to  the  will,  and  then  also  paralyses  them  completely ; but  in  its  primary  action  it
excites  them  ; but  if  this  primary  action  is  interrupted  by  stupefaction  and  stupefied
slumber,  then  in  this  opium  sleep  one  or  other  limb  twitches,
f From  the  daily  abuse  of  opium.

X From  large  doses.

§ Till  death.

||  From  too  many  and  too  strong  doses  of  opium.

From  a mixture  of  laudanum  and  hartshorn.

1 Not  accessible.

2 Statement.

3 The  symptoms  of  Muller’s  patient  before  and  after  taking  the  opium  were  so
similar,  that  the  effects  ascribed  to  the  drug  on  his  authority  are  very  dubio\t§.


310


OPIUM.


Flow  of  blood  from  a recently  opened  vein  (until  death).  [Pet.
Borelli,  cent.  4,  obs.  57.1]

With  increased  powers  she  tries  to  get  up  out  of  bed,  but  imme-
diately becomes  faint  and  giddy ; on  lying  down  again  she  imme-
diately revives.  [Matth^i,  1.  c.]

Inclination  to  lie  down.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

465.  Yawning  for  several  hours,  with  pain  in  the  jaw-joints  as  if  they
would  break.  [<S7/i]

Drowsiness.  [Bergius, — Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

Great  inclination  to  sleep.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Sudden  falling  asleep  (aft.  a few  m.).  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

Waking  sopor.

470.  Incomprehensible  chattering  in  the  sopor.

A kind  of  stupefied  sleep,  with  half-opened  eyes,  eyeballs  turned
upwards  under  the  upper  lid,  mouth  more  or  less  open  and  stertorous
inspiration.

Drowsiness,  slumber,  stupefaction.  [Freind,  1.  c.,  xiv,  p.  140.]
Slumber.  [Sauvages, — Buchner,  1.  c.]|

In  place  of  sound  sleep  it  easily  induces  a morbid  slumber.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  112]

475.  He  lay  as  if  sunk  in  slumber.  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

Nocturnal,  continued  sopor,  with  increased  thirst,  tongue  almost
clean,  with  dark  red  border  and  dry  cracked  lips.  [Juncker  and
Bohmer, — Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Soporous  stupefaction.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

The  sleep  caused  by  opium  passed  into  an  unusual  stupefaction.
[Riedlin,  1.  c.,  ann.  v,  Oct.,  obs.  30.]

Such  a stupefied  slumber  that  an  answer  cannot  be  got  from  him.
[Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  Cent,  ii,  obs.  42.]

480.  Very  sound  sleep  with  rattling  respiration,  as  after  apoplexy
(aft.  6 h.).  [Lassus,  1.  c.]

During  almost  constant  slumber,  with  half-shut  eyelids,  he  has
floccilation  and  feels  all  about  him.  [Rademacher,  1.  c.]

Stupid  sleep  without  any  consciousness,  with  rattling  on  the
chest.  [Kilian,  1.  c.]

Sleep  with  consciousness  : he  hears  everything  about  him,  but
cannot  rouse  himself;  waking  after  two  hours.  [Charvet,  1.  c.]

On  shaking  the  patient  and  speaking  to  her  she  can  be  roused
from  her  sleep ; she  then  complained  and  wished  to  die.  [Leroux.]
485.  Sopor  and  insensibility,  with  sufficient  warmth  and  normal  pulse
and  respiration.  [Willis,  1.  c.]

Unconquerable  sleep,  in  which,  however,  he  feels  pain,  and  when
pinched  opens  his  eyes.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Irresistible  sleep  (immediately  after  taking  two  grains  and
upwards),  but  which  is  disturbed  by  dreams,  and  on  awaking  he  is
not  refreshed,  but  feels  nausea.  [A  Thuessink,  1.  c.]

Unrefreshing  sleep  with  general  perspiration.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

After  long  opium  sleep  weariness.  [Young,  1.  c.]


1 Observation.


OPIUM.


311

490.  On  awaking  faint-heartedness.1 *  [Young,  1.  c.]

After  waking  inclination  to  vomit.  [Young,  1.  c.]

After  the  opium  sleep  exhaustion,3  heaviness  of  the  head,  and
dryness  of  the  throat.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

During  sleep  erection  of  the  penis,  and  after  waking  impotence
— in  the  male.  [Stalpaart  van  der  Wiel,  1.  c.,  obs.  41.]

After  the  opium  sleep  stammering.  [Plater,  Observ .,  lib.  i,  p.
127.3]

495.  After  waking  difficulty  of  moving  the  tongue.4  [Schelhammer,
1.  c.]

After  the  sleep  dulness  of  the  head.  [Jordens,  1.  c.,  xvii,  1.]
Starting  in  sleep,  and  after  waking  he  is  as  if  intoxicated  and  half
mad.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  i,  p.  282.]

After  sleep  intoxication  and  vertigo.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  i,  p.  282.]
More  exhausted  after  waking,  by  uneasy  dreams  during  the  night.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,  i,  p.  122.]

500.  A man  who  had  long  been  unused  to  dreams,  dreams  after  taking
opium.  [Riedlin,  1.  c.,  ann.  ii,  Nov.,  obs.  16.]

The  sleep  from  large  doses  of  opium  is  not  without  dreams.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  120.]

The  whole  night  occupied  with  a number  of  visions  and  fancies
in  sleep.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  121.]

The  sleep  of  opium  is  always  associated  with  dreams  and  grimaces.
[Lindestolpe,  1.  c.,  cap.  10,  thes.  75.]

Merry  dreams.  [De  Ruef,  1.  c.]

305.  Sometimes  agreeable,  sometimes  sad,  sometimes  anxious  and
frightful  dreams.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  120.]

Sleep  disturbed  sometimes  by  pleasant,  sometimes  by  horrible
dreams,  degenerating  either  into  sopor  or  an  apoplectic  death  with
convulsions.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Opium  affects  the  brain  and  produces  uneasy  dreams.  [Bellonius,
1.  c.]

Deep  sound  sleep  with  rattling  respiration,  like  an  apoplectic.
[Lassus,  1.  c.]

Snoring.  [De  la  Croix,  1.  c.]

510.  Snoring  in  sleep  whilst  expiring.

Whining  in  sleep  (aft.  2 h.).

Piteous  cry  in  sleep.

Restless  sleep,  full  of  sighs  and  moanings.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Anxious  sleep,  full  of  dreams  (aft.  7 h.).  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

515.  Anxious  dreams.  [De  Ruef,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Anxious  sleep  disturbed  by  the  saddest  dreams,  so  that  in  slum-
berous intoxication  he  seems  to  be  constantly  delirious.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]
Sleep  full  of  dreams.

Attack  of  suffocation  in  sleep  (nightmare).

1 In  original,  “ sense  of  faintness  and  failing  about  the  heart,  seizing  him  as  often
as  he  was  dropping  asleep/’

8 Better,  “ lassitude,”

3 Not  found.

4 With  the  dryness  of  mouth  of  S,  158,


3r*


OPIUM.


Sleep  full  of  horrible  phantasies  and  frightful  dreams.  [Fr.  Hoff-
mann, Diss.  de  Operat.  Opii , §5.]

520.  Sleep  full  of  horrors ; when  he  closes  his  eyes  he  feels  as  if  he
had  lost  his  reason  (aft.  3 h.).  [Schelhammer,  1.  c.]

Very  vivid,  vexatious  dreams,  in  which  everything  goes  wrong,
there  is  much  of  an  annoying  and  irritating  character  (aft.  2 h.).
Horrible  dreams.  [Fr.  Hoffmann,  1.  c.]

Starting  in  sleep.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  282.]

Soft,  pleasant  slumber,  from  which  he  is  suddenly  awakened  by
horrible  jerks  in  the  limbs.  [CYz.]

525.  Sleep  interrupted  by  starting.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Restless,  sleepless1  night.  [Matth^ei,  1.  c.]

In  spite  of  drowsiness  he  cannot  go  to  sleep,  with  slow  pulse.
[Grimm,  1.  c.]

The  sleep- producing  power  of  opium  is  much  diminished  by  great
pain  or  serious  distress.  [Young,  1.  c.]

Sleepless  night  with  restlessness  and  talking  nonsense.  [Mat-

TH  JEI,  1.  C.]

530.  Sleeplessness  attended  by  unwelcome  visions  and  full  of  phantasies,
which  are  very  different  from  the  things  around  him,  as  in  insanity.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  122.]

Betwixt  waking  and  sleeping  dreams  and  visions  of  dragons,
skeletons,  and  horrible  ghosts  and  grinning  spectres.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,
p.  125.]

Restless  night,  sopor  alternating  with  wakefulness,  much  raving,
hot  skin  and  stupefaction,  during  which  he  lies  in  a heap.  [Matth^ei,
1.  c.]

Sleep  and  redness  of  face.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

From  108  the  pulse  falls  to  72  ; at  the  same  time  chilliness  and
shivering,  diminished  activity,  great  exhaustion  and  yet  increased
hunger.  [Ward,  Neues  yourn.  d.  Ausland.  Med.  Chir .,  lib.  iv,  1.]
535.  Diminishes  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse  and  respiration.  [A
Thuessenk,  1.  c.]

Pulse  first  14  beats  slower  (the  first  4 h.),  afterwards  (aft.  10  h.)
30  beats  quicker.  [Sam.  Bard,2 3  Diss.  de  Viribus  Opii , Edinb.,  1765.*]
(Circulation  diminished  by  one  half.f)

(The  heart  beats  four  times  slower.  [Whytt,  Neue  Edinb.  Vers.,
i>  art.  194]

Large  slow  pulse,  with  laboured  deep  breathing.  [De  la  Croix,
1.  c.]

540.  Large  slow  pulse,  with  slow,  laboured  stertorous  breathing.
[Crumpe,  1.  c.]

* From  rubbing  in  two  drachms  of  opium — after  50  minutes.

•f*  This  was  seen  by  Alston  {Edinb.  Fers.,  v,  pt.  i,  sect,  iii)  through  a magnifying
glass  in  the  foot  of  a frog,  to  which  he  had  given  some  drops  of  tincture  of  opium.

J In  a frog  to  which  opium  had  been  given.


1 Instead  of  “ schlaflose  ” original  has  “ traumlose  ” (dreamless),  which,  however,

may  mean  the  same  thing.

3 Experiment  on  self  with  i|-grain  doses  (p.  15),


OPIUM.


3X3


Slow  pulse.

Stronger  pulse.

At  first  full,  slow  pulse,  afterwards  weak  pulse.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]
Slow  pulse,  with  groaning,  slow  breath,  very  red,  bloated  face,
and  very  profuse  perspiration  with  convulsions.  [Muzell,  1.  c.,
P.  131.*]

545.  Full,  regular,  slow  pulse,  with  deep  stertorous  breathing.
[Sauvages,  1.  c.]

Weak,  suppressed,  slow,  small  pulse.  [Fr.  Hoffman,  Med.  Syst .,
iii.  P-  537-]

He  complains  of  chilliness.  [Willis, — Reineggs,  1.  c.]
Tendency  to  shiver.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Diminution  of  the  temperature.

550.  Chilliness  in  the  back,  with  suppressed,  scarcely  perceptible
pulse.  [ScHELHAMMER,  1.  C.]

Chilliness  in  the  back.

Coldness  of  the  limbs.

Thirst  during  the  chill.

Fever  : at  first  chilliness,  then  flying  heat  in  the  face  (with  white
tongue,  and  perspiration  before  midnight).

555.  Fever:  first  rigor,  then  heat  with  sleep,  during  which  he  pers-
pires profusely.

(Fever  : he  falls  asleep  during  the  chill ; no  thirst  during  the
chill  ; during  the  heat  thirst  and  profuse  general  perspiration.)

In  the  evening  in  bed,  immediately  chill,  and  as  soon  as  she  falls
asleep  she  breaks  out  in  perspiration,  which  is  particularly  profuse  on
the  head.

(Fever  : Rigor  with  thirst,  then  increased  heat  of  the  whole
body,  with  tendency  to  throw  ofl  the  bedclothes,  with  strong  full
pulse,  dryness  of  the  fauces  without  thirst,  and  liveliness  of  the  ideas
and  memory)  (aft.  I h.).

External  coldness  of  the  limbs.  [Willis,  1.  c.]

560.  Coldness  with  stupefaction.  [Chardin,  1.  c.]

At  first  diminished  temperature  (shown  by  the  thermometer),
afterwards  increased  transpiration.  [Rolandson  Martin,  in  Vetensk .
Acad.  Handling , 1773,  pt.  ii,  No.  7.]

Strong,  very  quick  pulse,  which  at  last  (aft.  h.)  becomes  weak
and  intermittent  (shortly  before  death) . [Alston,  Y Medical  Essays. f]
Quick  and  uncommonly  weak  pulse,  with  quick,  oppressed,
anxious  respiration  (aft.  several  h.).  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

Quick  pulse  with  headache.  [Young,  1.  c.]

565.  Quick,  violent,  hard  pulse,  with  dark  red  face.  [Vicat,  Obs.f  1.  c.]
Rush  of  blood  to  the  brain.  [Haller,  in  Praelect.  Boerhavii , iv,
p.  5° 9> — Murray,  1.  c.]

# From  laudanum  and  heartshorn.
f From  a scruple.


1 This  symptom  should  read,  “ Her  pulse,  which  was  large,  equal,  and  not  very
frequent,  sank,  and  began  to  intermit  a quarter  of  an  hour  before  she  died,”


OPIUM.


3T4

(The  vessels  of  the  brain  were  distended  with  blood.)  [Mead,
1.  c.]

Violent,  rapid,  hard  pulse,  with  difficult,  obstructed  respiration.
[Vicat,  Plantes  Venen .,  1.  c.]

Quickened  circulation  with  sensation  of  heat.  [Murray,  1.  c.,
pp.  281,  282.]

570.  The  blood-vessels  distended.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Increased  heat.  [Murray,- — Young,  1.  c.]

Alternation  of  moderate  heat  with  cold.

Heat.

Great  redness  of  face,  with  burning  heat  of  the  body,  for  eight
hours  ; then  convulsive  striking  out  of  right  arm  and  leg,  with  loud
cry,  difficult  breathing  and  coldness  of  face  and  hands,  covered  with
beads  of  perspiration  (shortly  after  taking  it).

575.  For  six  successive  evenings,  a burning  heat  in  the  face  and  feeling
of  heat  especially  in  the  eyes,  without  thirst.  [CVz.]

Heat  with  thirst.  [Clark,  1.  c.]

Increases  the  heat  of  the  whole  body  and  leaves  dryness  of  the
mouth  and  thirst.  [Berger,  1.  c.,  § 2.]

Sometimes  dry,  hot  skin,  sometimes  slight  perspiration.  [Young,

!•  c-3

Heat  of  the  body  with  great  anxiety.  [Berger,  1.  c.]

580.  Intolerable  heat  with  great  anxiety.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Acute  fever  with  delirium,  which  occurred  after  a short  sleep  and
lasted  twelve  hours,  after  which  he  became  very  weak  and  sick,  with
weak  pulse  ; after  three  hours,  delirium  returned  which  lasted  forty-
eight  hours,  with  strong  full  pulse  ; thereafter  sleep  for  eight  hours.
[J.  Hunter,  1.  c.,  p.  641.]

With  restlessness,  oppression,  confused  ideas  and  sparks  before  the
eyes,  there  rises  up  a burning  disagreeable  heat  into  the  head  which
then  spreads  all  over  the  body.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Perspiration  1 2 first  on  the  head  then  all  over  the  body,  like  drops
of  dew,  and  sleep.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Increased  transpiration.

585.  Perspiration  only  on  bodily  exertion.

General  perspiration.

In  the  morning,  during  sleep,  perspiration  all  over,
with  inclination  to  uncover  himself  (aft.  12,  36  h.).

Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead.

Perspiration  especially  on  the  upper  parts,  whilst  the  lower  parts
are  hot  and  dry.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

590.  Almost  always  induces  perspiration.  [Berger,  Buchner,  Freind,
Geoffroy,  Haller,  Pitcairne,  Thompson,  Wedel,  1.  c.]
Frequent  perspiration.  [Muzell, — Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  134.]
Profuse  perspiration  3 (for  12  h.).  [Vicat,  Pl.  Ven.^  1.  c.]
General  perspiration  (aft.  6 h.).  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

During  tolerably  quiet  sleep,  profuse  perspiration.  [Matthjei,
1.  c.]


1 “ Thick  sweat  ” in  original.

2 During  convalescence.


OPIUM.


3*5


595.  Perspiration  very  profuse,  so  that  the  skin  itches  and  is  covered
by  an  eruption,  whilst  all  the  senses  become  blunted — touch,  vision,
and  smell.  [Murray,  1.  c.]

Perspiration  and  red  miliary  rash  with  itching.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,
p.  138.]

General  perspiration  of  the  extremely  hot  body,  with  great  thirst,
full,  strong  pulse,  bright  eyes  and  active  mind.  [Mattmi,  1.  c.]
Contentedness.

Alternating  state  of  careless  sullenness  and  cheerfulness.

600.  Taciturn  reserve  (after  the  smallest  dose).

Tranquil  indifference  to  earthly  things;  she  cared  for  nothing  in
comparison  with  the  ecstasies  of  the  phantasy.  [Mead,  1.  c.]

Always  quiet  cheerfulness  of  disposition ; as  if  in  heaven.
[Hecquet,  1.  c.]

Free  from  pain  he  remained  the  whole  night  in  extreme  cheerful-
ness of  mind.*  [Van  Swieten,  Comment .,  i,  p.  878.]

The  most  agreeable  sensation  that  can  be  imagined,  with  tran-
quility of  mind  and  forgetfulness  of  all  ills.  Van  Swieten,  1.  c.]
605.  In  no  other  way  could  she  procure  for  herself  complete  tranquility
and  happiness  of  mind.  [Jones,  The  Mysteries  of  Opium  revealed l1]
Not  often  an  uncommon  self-satisfaction  and  unusual  tran-
quility of  mind.  [Mos.  Charas,  1.  c.]

He  did  not  sleep,  but  became  as  tranquil  as  if  he  were  in  heaven.
[Eph.  Nat . Cur .,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  x,  obs.  80. f]

Sweet,  delightful  phantasies,  which  she  prefers  to  all  known
happiness,  chiefly  when  she  had  previously  been  tortured  with  pains.
[Boerhave,  Praelect.  in  Inst .,  ad  § 856.]

Sensation  as  if  he  were  in  heaven,  strong,  delightful  phantasies
hover  before  him  like  waking  dreams,  which  drive  away  sleep.
[Mead,  1.  c.]

. 610.  The  cheerfulness  of  mind  from  opium  may  rather  be  called  a
dream  without  sleep.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  122.]

Tranquility  of  mind.  [De  Ruef,  1.  c.]

Activity  of  mind.  [De  Ruef,  1.  c.]

A woman  subject  to  melancholy  thoughts  is  wonderfully  relieved
by  it;  her  sorrow  ceased  for  some  time.J  [Jet . Nat.  Cur .,  iv,  obs.

1 45  -3]

It  causes  the  mental  sufferings  to  be  forgotten  for  a time  and
brings  on  an  ecstasy  and  refreshing  happiness  of  mind.  [Tralles,
1.  c.,  p.  98.]

615.  It  makes  the  (usually  sad  stupid)  opium-eaters  happy;  they  are
very  riotous,  sing  amorous  songs,  laugh  much  and  play  other  pranks ;

# He  had  taken  a grain  in  the  evening  for  a very  annoying  pain.
f After  taking  a moderate  dose  of  opium  for  intolerable  pain  from  stone.

| But,  as  it  acted  antipathically  (palliatively),  in  order  to  procure  the  same  relief,
she  must  not  only  continue  the  use  of  opium,  but  increase  the  doses,  so  that  at  last
she  was  obliged  to  take  an  ounce  and  a half  of  opium  in  one  week.


1 Observations.
^Observation.


316


OPIUM.


this  agreeable  elevation  of  mind  and  disposition  lasts  an  hour,  then
they  became  angry  and  uncontrollable,  after  which  they  again
become  sad  and  weep,  until  they  go  to  sleep,  and  thus  again  return
into  their  previous  state.  [Alpin,  1.  c.]

Cheerfulness,  liveliness,  contentment,  increased  strength.  [Freind,
1.  c.,  p.  139.]

Strength,  liveliness,  self-satisfaction.  \Hufel.  Journ .,  xiii,  i.1]
Invigoration.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

Cheerfulness,  inclination  for  work,  fearlessness,  courage.  [Alpin,
1-  c.]

620.  Courage,  intrepidity,  magnanimity.

Feeling  of  courage  and  merriment,  so  that  he  is  as  if  he  would
carry  out  what  was  required  with  energy,  without  repugnance  or
fear,  with  a peculiar  feeling  of  voluptuousness  (but  lasting  only  a few
minutes)  (aft.  |h.);  immediately  afterwards  dulness  in  the  head,  See.
[Ctz.]

Intrepidity  in  danger.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Opium  inspires  courage  and  resolution  in  one  who  is  afraid  of  a
surgical  operation.  [G.  Young,  1.  c.]

Criminals  (in  India)  lose  their  fear  of  death  and  go  courageously
to  execution.  [Tralles,  1.  c.*]

6 25.  Daring  wildness.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

Wildness,  cruelty  like  furious  beasts.f  [Kampfer,  1.  c.]

Fury.  [Lorry,  in  Recueil  Period. , p.  74.]

Insanity  and  fury.  [Berger,  De  vi  Opii  rarefacient .]

Furious  madness  and  distortion  of  the  mouth  (from  applying
opium  on  the  temples).  [Lorry,  1.  c.]

630.  Confusion  of  the  reason.  [Clark,— -De  Garter,  Med.  Dogm .,
cap.  i.2]

Delirium.  [Pitcairne,  Element.  Med.,  lib.  ii,  cap.  6,  § 8.]

The  patient  has  visions.  [Muller,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xviii,

4.]

Fearfulness  and  fright.  [Young, — Tralles,  1.  c.]

Want  of  courage.

635.  Fear  (aft.  8,  12  h.).

Horrible  pictures  of  fancy.  [Clark,  1.  c.]

She  was  troubled  when  awake  with  the  supposed  sight  of  ghosts,
devils  and  spectres,3  which  she  believed  to  be  surrounding  her  bed

* The  last  nine  symptoms  are  palliative  primary  actions  of  opium  in  otherwise
melancholy  timorous  dispositions.

f In  larger  doses  than  those  that  give  palliatively  courage  and  increased  strength
to  the  timid  and  weak,  opium  causes  daring,  unruliness,  anger,  and  fury.  This
palliative  primary  action  brings  the  Turks  during  the  first  onslaught  in  the  com-
mencement of  a battle  into  an  almost  irresistible  fighting  fury,  which,  however,  in  an
hour  or  two  passes  into  the  most  cowardly  irresolution  or  stupefaction,  in  which  they
are  more  easily  conquered  than  any  other  army.


1 Not  found.

2 Not  accessible.

3 Jn  original,  “ghosts,  spectres,  and  chimseras.”


OPIUM.


$17

and  which  annoyed  her  much,  as  she  chattered  deliriously.  [Tralles,

1.  c .*]

He  chattered  all  sorts  of  unconnected  stuff  and  pointed  with  his
fingers  to  imaginary  masked  people  approaching  him  ; sometimes  he
broke  out  into  loud  laughter ; sometimes  he  started  at  imaginary
swordsmen,  who  might  kill  him  ; he  became  angry  when  one  talked
to  him  and  wished  to  regard  him  as  insane,  but  in  his  delirium  he
accused  himself  of  folly.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  I26.f]

Delirious,  he  raves  about  all  sorts  of  events,  with  open  eyes,
and  afterwards  remembers  his  chatter  only  as  if  he  had  dreamt  it.
[Manchart,  1.  c.]

640.  Hot,  anxious  and  intoxicated  she  talked  all  sorts  of  things  mixed
up  together,  retracted  what  she  had  said,  sometimes  suddenly  started
sometimes  angrily  laid  hold  of  the  hands  of  those  about  her.
[Tralles,  1.  c.,p.  125.J]

He  does  nonsensical  things.  [Reineggs,  1.  c.]

The  increasing  hilarity  and  happy  thoughts  pass  into  nonsensical
and  irrational  behaviour.  [Tralles,  1.  c.§]

Violent  mania  with  red  face,  sparkling  eyes  and  greater  activity
of  body.  [Matthjei,  1.  c.]

He  throws  himself  about  on  the  floor  in  a maniacal  state,  with
burning  anger  and  threatening  expression  ; he  does  not  know  his
friends  ; with  swollen  head  and  face,  reddish  blue,  swollen  lips,  and
projecting  inflamed  eyes.  [Tralles,  1.  c.,  p.  90.]

645.  First  ecstasy  and  thereafter  sadness  and  dejection.  [Chardin.]
Sadness.

Hopelessness,  sulky  disposition,  moroseness  (aft.  8,  12  h.).
Lamentable  weeping  and  howling  (in  the  first  h.).

She  is  vexed  about  a pain  so  that  she  weeps.

650.  Suspicion.

Fretfulness.  [Grimm.]

Melancholy.  [Berges,  1.  c.]

Anxiety.  [Rademacher, — Tralles,  1.  c.]

Horrible  anxiety.  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

655.  Praecordial  anxiety  and  restlessness  (aft.  2 h.).  [Young,  1.  c.||]


( From  the  external  application , especially  in  substance .)

Burning  pain  and  irritation.  [Alston,  1.  c.]

Laid  on  the  skin  it  raises  blisters.  [Boerhave,  Praelect.  iv,
p.  520.]

Applied  to  the  skin  as  a plaster,  it  causes  great  heat  and  pains,

* Every  time  when  her  morbid  states — palpitation  of  the  heart,  vomiting,  hiccup,
praecordial  pain,  bellyache,  trembling,  and  convulsive  movements — are  relieved  pallia-
tively  by  opium.

f After  opium  given  in  a case  of  dysenteric  diarrhoea.

% From  opium  given  for  indescribable  pain  that  tended  to  pass  into  convulsions.

iFrom  larger  doses.

Ever  renewed  doses  of  opium  were  the  only  palliative  relief  for  it,  but  only  for  a
short  time.


3>B


OPIUM.


raises  a blister,  erodes  the  skin  and  produces  mortification.  [Boerhave,
De  Morb  Nerv .,  p.  448.]

Eats  into  the  skin,  erodes  the  hair  and  causes  itching.  [Jones,
L c0

66 o.  Eats  away  the  hair,  causes  itching,  erodes  the  skin  and  raises
blisters.  [Geoffroy,  1.  c.]

Applied  directly  to  the  nerves,  it  does  not  take  away  their
sensitiveness,  but  on  the  contrary  increases  the  pain.  [Monro,
Essays  Phys.  and  Literar.,  vol.  iii,  p.  327.1]

Applied  to  the  muscles,  it  speedily  destroys  their  irritability.
[Monro,  1.  c.,  p.  309.]


1 Experiments  on  frogs.  The  author  simply  states  that  u when  applied  directly  to
a nerve,  it  does  not  diminish  its  functions.”  (Name  correctly  given  in  and  edition,
incorrectly  as  “ Monno  ” in  3rd  edition.)


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.1

( Phosphoric  acid.)

(To  prepare  it,  we  take  one  pound  of  bones  calcined  white  and  broken  into  small
pieces,  place  them  in  a porcelain  jar,  and  pour  over  them  one  pound  of  the  strongest
sulphuric  acid.  The  mixture  is  to  be  stirred  with  a glass  rod  several  times  during
twenty-four  hours,  then  well  mixed  and  diluted  with  two  pounds  of  good  brandy,
and  the  whole  tied  up  in  a linen  bag  and  pressed  out  between  two  smooth  boards
loaded  with  weights.  What  remains  in  the  bag  may  be  again  diluted  with  two  pounds
of  brandy,  and  the  expressed  fluid  added  to  the  first  quantity.  The  whole  is  to  be
allowed  to  stand  for  two  days,  so  that  the  cloudiness  may  settle  down.  The  clear
fluid  is  now  to  be  decanted  off,  evaporated  in  a porcelain  dish  over  the  fire,  and
melted  at  a red  heat.  The  melted  phosphoric  acid  should  be  as  clear  as  crystal,
and  while  still  warm  it  is  to  be  broken  into  small  fragments  and  preserved  in  a well-
corked  bottle,  because  when  exposed  to  the  air  it  soon  completely  deliquesces  into  a
thickish  fluid  as  clear  as  water.)

A grain  of  this  crystalline  acid  is  dissolved  in  ioo  drops  of  a mixture
of  nine  parts  of  water  with  one  part  of  alcohol  (the  alcohol  being  added
in  order  to  make  it  drop  easily).  The  solution  is  succussed  twice  (with
two  strokes  of  the  arm).  A drop  of  this  is  again  succussed  with  ioo
drops  of  alcohol,  by  means  of  two  strokes  of  the  arm.  This  contains
-j-o-^Q-oth  part  of  a grain  of  phosphoric  acid.  Of  this  one  drop  is  well
mixed  with  ioo  drops  of  alcohol  by  means  of  succussion  with  two
strokes  of  the  arm.  This  is  I.  And  the  process  is  repeated  up  to  the
trillion-fold  dilution  (Hi).  A sugar  globule  the  size  of  a poppyseed,  and
moistened  with  this  trillion-fold  dilution,  is  administered  for  a homoeo-
pathic dose.

The  following  remarkable,  pure,  artificial  morbid  symptoms  pro-
duced by  phosphoric  acid  on  the  healthy  body  indicate  of  themselves  the
natural  morbid  states  in  which  it  is  specifically  curative  by  reason  of
homoeopathic  similarity.

Every  dose  acts  for  more  than  two  weeks  in  chronic  diseases.

The  over-violent  action  of  phosphoric  acid  is  diminished  by
camphor.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Becher,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,
Friedrich  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,  Herrmann,  Langhammer,  Meyer,
StaPF,  TeUTHORNj  Wislicenus.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited.

The  ist  edit,  has  571  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit.  679;  the  Chrt  Kr.  has  818,  55  of
the  new  symptoms  being  contributed  by  Dr.  C.  Hering.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

Vertigo  all  day.

Vertigo  towards  evening,  when  standing  and  walk*


From  voh  v,  end  edit.,  1826.


20  PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.

ing,  as  if  intoxicated  ; he  staggers  ; no  vertigo  when  sitting  (several
evenings).

Vertigo  in  the  morning,  making  him  fall,  when  standing.

Several  mornings  vertigo  on  rising  from  bed.

5.  Heat  in  the  head,  which  often  caused  vertigo,  even  when  sitting ;
when  writing  he  must  often  nod  involuntarily  ; objects  seemed  to
turn  round  ; the  table  seemed  as  if  falling  ; when  he  clutched  hold  of
it  in  walking,  and  when  he  looked  on  the  ground  when  standing,  he
was  like  to  fall  forwards,  and  must  make  a step  forwards  in  order  to
keep  himself  erect.  \_Myr.~]

Vertigo:  the  head  tends  to  sink  forwards  and  backwards  (aft.
some  m.).  \_Hrr. ]

Vertigo  : the  head  tends  to  sink  backwards  (aft.  J h.)  [ Hrr.~\

Vertigo:  in  the  morning  in  bed,  when  he  shut  his  eyes,  he  felt
as  if  the  feet  rose  up  and  he  was  standing  on  his  head.  [Bch.]

In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed  weakness  of  the  head,  as  if
he  should  stagger.

10.  He  cannot  rid  himself  of  a thought,  and  the  connecting  ideas  do
not  come.

He  dare  not  be  alone  without  falling  into  absence  of  thought  and
unconsciousness  (in  the  morning).  [A%.]

He  cannot  reflect  on  anything  properly  on  account  of  want  of
ideas  and  weakness  of  mind  ; he  became  giddy  on  attempting  to  think
about  anything.  \_Hrr.~\

Lazy,  obtuse,  inactive  mind,  without  imagination,  indisposed  for
even  agreeable  mental  work.  [6’^/'.]

In  the  evening  when  sitting  he  sees  nothing  but  ciphers  before
the  eyes,  for  an  hour ; at  the  same  time  he  was  very  stupid  and  bad
in  the  head — at  last  very  hot.

15.  He  cannot  bring  his  thoughts  into  proper  connexion.

When  reading  there  came  a thousand  other  thoughts  into  his
head,  and  he  could  not  rightly  comprehend  anything  ; what  he  had
read  became  as  if  dark  in  his  head,  and  he  immediately  forgot  all
(for  48  h.)  ; what  he  had  long  known,  he  can  only  recall  with
difficulty.  [Alyr.']

Illusion  of  the  senses ; he  imagines  he  hears  a bell  pealing  and
sees  things  lying  near  him  (outside  the  sphere  of  vision)  moving.

[*■*•]

His  reason  is  affected.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Emptiness  in  the  head,  for  three  hours,  [^z.]

20.  In  the  forenoon  his  head  is  cloudy,  as  if  he  had  sat  up  all  night
or  as  if  after  a nocturnal  debauch.

Dulness  of  the  head  (aft.  4 d.).

In  the  evening  when  he  comes  into  the  warm  room,  he  is  dazed
in  his  head.

Confusion  of  the  whole  head.  [Hrr.~\

Confusion  of  the  sinciput,  especially  of  the  orbits.  [Gfj.]

25.  Confusion  of  the  head  as  from  excessive  indulgence  in  venery,  for
three  days  (immediately).  \_Fr.  H — #.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


32.1

He  feels  quite  empty  in  the  head  and  tired  in  the  limbs,  as  if  he
had  not  slept  enough  after  a debauch  (aft.  1 h.).  [Tz.]

Roaring  in  the  head.

Headache,  like  stupidity,  with  buzzing  in  the  head ;

on  coughing  the  head  feels  quite  painful  as  if  it  would  burst.

In  the  morning,  pressure  in  the  head  and  bitter  taste  in  the
mouth  (the  5th  morning).

30.  Headache,  in  the  morning  immediately  upon  awaking,  which
goes  off  on  rising.

Dull  pain  in  the  forehead  and  temples,  during  which,  however,
he  is  pretty  lively,  [Tz.]

Dull  creeping  sensation  in  the  sinciput,  with  sweat  on  the  fore-
head (immediately).  \_Fr . H — w.]

Shooting  over  the  left  eye  upwards  into  the  head  (when  standing)
(aft.  14  h.).

Constant  headache.  \_Hrr.~\

35.  Severe  headache,  which  compelled  him  to  lie  down,  and  his  nape
was  stiff.

On  the  slightest  shock  or  noise,  the  pains  in  the  head
became  extremely  violent.  [. Hrr .]

Painful  shock  in  the  head  when  walking.

Extremely  severe  pressure  in  the  head,  in  the  afternoon.
Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  upwards,  at  the  same  time
beating  in  it,  like  the  beating  of  the  pulse.

40.  Single  blows  in  the  head  as  with  a hammer.

In  the  morning  on  rising,  and  all  the  forenoon,  a prickling
headache.

Aching  and  shooting  pain  in  all  parts  of  the  head,  in  fits.
Twitching  in  the  head.

A great  weight  in  the  whole  head  which  extended  to  the  left
frontal  protuberance  with  a violent  pressure.

45.  Headache,  as  from  a strain,  like  a weight  in  it.

His  head  is  heavy.  [G«.]

Headache  in  the  occiput,  which  compels  him  to  lie  down.

On  bending  the  head  forwards  a pressure  forwards  combined  with
heaviness  in  the  occiput,  which  only  goes  off  when  he  bends  the  head
backwards  (aft.  sf  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Aching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  which  partly  spreads
to  the  front ; on  pressing  on  it  with  the  open  hand  and  on  turning  the
head  it  became  more  violent,  all  day  (aft.  7^  h.).  [ Gn.~\

50.  Aching  pain  in  the  brain  behind  the  left  ear  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gn.~]

In  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  a painful  pressure  outwards  (aft.

2|  h.).  [#*»•]

A pressure  as  from  a weight  from  above  downwards  in  the  head,
or  as  if  he  had  a blow  on  the  top.

Intermittent  pressure  as  with  a blunt  point,  deep  in  the  left  side
of  the  crown,  so  that  he  cannot  tell  the  precise  spot  (aft.  7 d.).  [Gn.]
Dull  headache  with  pressure  over  the  orbits  and  stitches  behind
the  ears,  in  the  afternoon  for  four  hours.  [TWz.]

55.  In  the  morning  on  awaking,  severe  headache,  a pressure  in  the
VOL.  II.  2 1


322


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


forehead  so  that  she  was  quite  stupefied  and  could  not  open  the  eyes  ;
on  account  of  the  pain  she  could  scarcely  speak,  the  slightest  move-
ment increased  it.

Violent  headache ; a forcing  and  pressing  upwards  in  the  crown,
for  three  days.

Hard  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead.  [Hrr.]

A violent  out-pressinp;  pain  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance
(aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.]

An  aching  in  the  forehead  as  after  a debauch.  [MyrT]

60.  A hard  pressure  above  the  left  temple  extending  to  the  occiput,
with  dread  of  moving.  [Myr.]

Squeezing  pressure  in  and  on  the  right  temple,  more
violent  on  moving  (aft.  J h.).  [Hrr.]

A violent  pressure  outwards  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  2\  h.).
[Hrr.]

A squeezing  pressure  in  the  right  temple.  [Gss.]

Pain  in  the  whole  brain  as  if  it  were  compressed  (aft.  34  h.).

65.  Squeezing  pressure  in  both  parietal  bones,  worse  when
moving.  [Hrr.]

Pain  as  if  both  temples  were  pressed  towards  one
another,  as  if  violently  pinched  together  by  forceps.

[£"•]

Boring  aching  pain  in  the  left  temple,  [/%.]

Headache  as  if  holes  were  bored  through  the  skull,  especially  in
the  crown.  [ Fr . H — n.]

Digging  boring  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  2 h.);

[<?»•]

70.  In  the  left  temple  a regularly  intermitting,  squeezing  pressive
pain  as  with  a blunt  hard  body.  [Gjj.]

Drawing  pressure  in  the  right  parietal  and  occipital
bones,  more  violent  when  moving.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  and  squeezing  pressure  in  the  brain  here  and
there  (aft.  7 h.).  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pressure  in  the  occiput  aggravated  by  noise
and  by  the  slightest  movement.  [Hrr?]

Pressure  in  the  occiput  as  if  he  lay  on  something  hard.  [Afyr.]

75.  Drawing  in  the  left  temple  and  tragus,  which  be-
comes an  aching  pain  on  moving  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hrr.]

Twitching  through  the  head  from  behind  forwards,  synchronous
with  the  pulse  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.]

Tearing  in  the  vertex  and  occiput.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  in  the  left  temple  to  the  forehead,  aggravated
by  movement  (aft.  J h.).  [Hrr.]

In  the  evening  in  bed,  headache  in  both  temples  as  if  they  were'
constricted  in  single  jerks  (tearings).  [Fz.]

80.  Obtuse  shooting  pain  out  at  the  middle  of  the  forehead.  [Gn.]

In  the  right  temple  an  obtuse  stab,  as  from  a blunt  arrow,  darts*
deep  into  the  brain  in  frequent  attacks.  [Grr.]

Single  sharp  blows  in  the  right  temple.  [Htn.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


323

Violent  shooting  pain  in  the  right  temporal  region
which  extended  into  the  right  eye.  [Myr.]

A severe  shooting  in  the  right  temple.  [Htn.]

85.  A sharp,  long-continued  stitch  externally  on  the  vertex,  increased
by  touching.

Shooting  drawing  on  the  vertex,  that  is  allayed  by  pressure  with
the  hand  (aft.  20  m.).  [ TVs .]

Burning  headache  at  the  top  of  the  brain.

On  the  head  a burning  stitch,  [Tz.]

Burning  sensation  on  the  right  side  of  the  hairy  scalp  (aft.  3^  h.).
[Gn.]

90.  Dull  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gn.]

The  hairy  scalp  is  painful  when  touched,  as  if  his  hair  were  pulled  5
a kind  of  sore  pain.

A painful  elevation  is  formed  on  the  scalp ; he  feels  as  if  the  hair
were  pulled  at  the  part — when  touched  there  was  pain  as  if  bruised.
Sensation  of  coldness  on  the  hairy  scalp,  [i/rr.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  occipital  bone,  every  day  ; but  no  pain  was
caused  by  touching.

95.  Aching  pain  on  the  occiput,  as  though  he  had  lain  on  a hard
stone,  diminished  by  external  friction.  [Myr.]

Pressive  pain  on  the  right  temple  (aft.  30  h.).  [Gn.]

On  the  occiput  where  the  muscles  of  the  nape  are  inserted,  pain,
as  if  they  were  bruised.  [T%.]

A drawing  shooting  aching  in  the  nape,  which  extends  unnoticed
to  the  occiput,  and  there  goes  off  (aft.  h.).  \Htn.]

A twitching  sensation  in  the  nape,  when  at  rest,  but  more  fre-
quently on  raising  up  the  head  (from  6 to  8 d.).  [Bch.]

100.  Feeling  of  stiffness  of  the  nape,  when  at  rest,  going  off  on  moving
(aft.  8 h.).  [Htn.]

A painful  aching  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  as  if  it  would
become  sore  internally,  but  which  is  not  aggravated  either  by  swal-
lowing or  by  speaking  (aft  3J  h.).  [Htn.]

A pinching  pain  on  a small  point  on  the  neck.  [Htn.]

Pressure  in  front  and  at  both  sides  of  the  neck  (aft.  4 h.).
[Hrr.]

In  the  right  cervical  muscles  there  occurs,  on  turning  the  head,
a spasmodic  drawing  pain  extending  to  the  right  eye.

105.  The  right  cervical  muscles  are  very  painful.

Painful  stiffness  in  the  left  cervical  muscles  ; tightness  up  into
the  head.

Burning  sore  pain  on  the  side  of  the  nape  (aft.  9 h.),

[Fz.]

Great  pressure  from  the  forehead  down  to  the  nose.

Aching  and  gnawing  on  the  forehead  at  the  root  of  the  nose
(aft.  5 h.).  [/%.]

no.  Itching  erosion  on  the  forehead.  \JVs.\

Burning  pain  on  the  skin  of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  57  h.).

[ Gn.-]

Warm  feeling  on  the  side  of  the  frontal  bone,  [Tz.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


324


A large  pimple  on  the  forehead  which  causes  sore  pain  when
touched  and  when  let  alone.

Fine,  very  transient  drawing  through  the  left  cheek  into  the
inner  ear  (aft.  | h.).  [TVs,]

1 15.  Heat  of  that  half  of  the  face  on  which  he  has  not  lain.  [Tz.]

(During  a heat  in  the  face,  felt  on  touching  it,  a tension  of  the
skin  of  the  face,  as  if  white  of  egg  had  dried  on  it.)

In  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  paleness  of  the  face  and
tendency  to  stare  (aft.  17  h.).  [Bch.]

Paleness  of  the  face.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Crawling  and  creeping,  as  if  a small  insect  ran  about  on  the  face
and  on  some  parts  of  the  body.  [Hrr.]

120.  Burning  pain  on  a small  spot  on  the  left  cheek.  \_Fr.  H — ».]
Eruption  of  some  large  pimples  on  the  face.

Eruption  of  large  pimples  on  the  face.

Red  pimples  on  the  face,  cheeks  and  nose,  smaller  than  a lentil,
filled  with  a little  pus  ; they  itch  especially  when  touched  (aft.  3 d.).
[Hrr.]

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  \ h.),  and  then  contraction  (aft.

1 h.),  which  lasted  sixteen  hours.  [ Trn.]

125.  The  pupils  became  very  contracted,  without  diminution  of  the
power  of  vision  (aft.  f h.).

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  ^ h.),  for  several  days.  [£//’.]

Dilated  pupils  for  six  hours  (aft.  3 h.).  [ATyr.]

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr. — Htn.]

The  pupil  of  the  right  eye  became  uncommonly  dilated,  so  that
the  whole  iris  seemed  to  disappear  (aft.  2 m.)  ; the  more  he  strained
the  eyes  to  see,  the  larger  the  pupil  became,  and  after  seven  days  it
was  four  times  larger  than  that  of  the  left  eye,  which  remained
constantly  normal.  [Bch.]

130.  Very  greatly  dilated  pupils  (aft.  8^  h.).  [HtnT]

The  eyes  are  glassy  and  dull  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Trn .]

The  eyes  are  quite  lustreless  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hrr.]

Dull  sunken  eyes  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.]

Blue  rings  round  the  eyes.  [Hrr.]

135.  The  eyes  are  surrounded  with  blue  borders.  [Myr%]

Staring  look.  [Hrr.]

Heaviness  of  the  eyelids  as  if  they  would  close  (immediately).  [G^.]
Pressive  squeezing  in  the  left  superior  orbital  border.  [Gw.]
Aching  and  burning  in  the  eyes  ; in  the  evening  she  cannot  look
into  the  light ; but  they  are  not  gummed  up  in  the  morning.

140.  Very  transient  burning  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  some-
thing pungent  had  been  smelt  (aft.  1 h.).  [Myr.]

Fain  as  if  the  eyeballs  were  forcibly  pressed  together
and  into  the  head.  [Gss.]

Pressure  in  both  eyes  backwards  (aft.  9 h.).  [Hrr.]

Sudden  pain  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  a grain  of  sand  were  pressing  on
it,  or  as  if  a pimple  were  there.  [Fz.]

'Burning  in  the  integuments  of  the  eye  all  day,  and  burning  itching
in  the  inner  canthus.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


325


145-  Pressure  on  the  left  lower  eyelid  (aft.  i h.).  [Hrr.~\

Pressure  [on  the  right  eyelid  and  feeling  of  heaviness  in  it.
[Hrr]

Inflammation  of  the  eye,  a stye  on  the  upper  eyelid  (aft  24  h.).

Burning  under  the  upper  eyelid.

A burning  in  the  inner  canthus,  usually  in  the  afternoon,  just  as
if  too  much  air  and  light  penetrated  to  that  part ; on  closing  the
eyes  it  is  less.

150.  In  the  morning  he  has  dry  eye-gum  on  the  lids,  and  on  clearing
this  away  they  smart.

(The  eyes  are  gummed  up.)

A constant  pressure  on  the  eyes,  as  from  looking  long  at  one
object,  which  compels  him  to  close  the  eyes  (aft.  f h.).  \Htn.]

The  eyes  feel  as  if  pressed  out,  on  account  of  which  he  must
often  wink  (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.]

A pressure  on  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  too  large  and  had  not
room  in  their  orbits  ; the  eyes  are  immovable  as  if  he  had  not  slept
enough,  and  at  the  same  time  the  head  feels  stupid.  [Myr.]

155.  Swelling  and  redness  of  the  lower  eyelids.  [Zr.]

Swelling  of  the  lower  eyelids.  [ Myr .]

Swelling  under  the  lower  eyelids.  [Myr.]

The  lower  eyelid  twitches  towards  the  inner  canthus  (aft.  9 h.).

[m.]

Shooting  drawing  through  all  the  eyelids,  from  one  canthus  to
the  other,  together  with  sharp  pricks  in  the  canthi  themselves,  and
around  the  orbits  (aft  14  h.).  [hVs.]

160.  In  the  morning  on  opening  the  eyes  they  are  painful ; she  cannot
keep  them  open  long.

Both  eyes  had  a glassy  look,  and  the  eyeballs  were  very  and
almost  involuntarily  mobile,  chiefly  when  staring  before  him.  [Bch.]

A dull,  sometimes  shooting,  sometimes  burning,  sometimes  burn-
ing shooting  pain  forced  the  right  eyeball  towards  its  outer  cantjius  ;
he  could  not  then  see  anything  with  this  eye,  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  he
were  looking  over  an  illimitable  expanse  of  snow  running  up  a hill,  on
which  fiery  shining  points  occasionally  fell ; when  this  had  occurred
several  times  the  expanse  became  fiery  and  the  falling  points  dazzling
white  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Bch.]

Quick  stitches  like  electric  shocks  under  the  right  eyelid  ; he
must  close  the  eyes.  [Myr.]

Aching  pain  under  the  lower  left  eyelid  ; it  became  violent  by
pressing  on  it  with  the  finger  and  then  went  ofF  immediately.

[<?*•]

165.  Sharp  shooting  in  the  thin  osseous  wall  of  the  orbit  towards  the
root  of  the  nose.  [Myr. ]

A burning  in  the  eyes,  and  the  tears  that  occasionally  came
scalded  still  more  severely  (aft.  6 d.).  [Bch.]

Pain  rather  smarting  than  burning  in  the  eyes,  especially  in  the
evening  by  candle  light.

The  inner  borders  of  the  eyelids  are  very  cold,  observed  when
shutting  the  eyes  (aft  | h.).  [Htn.]


326


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM0


Both  eyes  water.

170.  Smarting  water  runs  out  of  the  eyes  (aft.  some  h.).

A yellow  spot  in  the  white  of  the  eye,  towards  the  inner  canthus,
but  more  towards  the  cornea  ; at  the  same  time  a dimness  of  vision,
which,  however  went  off  when  he  shaded  the  eye  with  his  hand
(causing  the  pupil  to  dilate).  [Afyr„]

Dimness  of  the  eyes  j if  she  looks  long  at  one  place,  there  comes
a flickering  before  the  eyes  ; it  commences  to  ache  in  the  inner
canthus — if  she  then  rubs  the  eye,  tears  come,  and  the  dimness  goes
off.

Weakness  of  the  eyes,  more  in  the  forenoon  than  in  the  after-
noon ; distant  objects  seemed  enveloped  in  a mist,  and  only  became
more  distinct  on  straining  the  sight  5 but  every  near  object  which
was  somewhat  illuminated  dazzled  him  and  caused  aching  in  the
eyes — the  same  happened  when  he  suddenly  came  into  the  dark.

He  sees  better  in  the  distance.*  [Zr.]

1 75.  When  reading  by  candle  light,  glittering  before  the  eyes.

Roaring  before  the  ears,  especially  the  right  ear  (aft.  15  h.).

Roaring  before  the  ears,  with  hardness  of  hearing.

Crying  in  the  ear  on  blowing  the  nose.

Ringing  like  bells  in  the  right  ear.  \Myr.~]

180.  In  both  ears  he  did  not  hear  a watch  hung  at  a moderate  distance  ;
held  at  three  spans  from  the  ear  he  heard  the  ticking  distinctly ; but
when  held  close  to  the  ear  he  heard  only  a hissing  in  the  ear  itself,
but  not  the  ticking  (aft.  j-J  h.).  [Z<;/z.]

The  watch  which  in  his  usual  state  he  heard  at  a distance  of
twenty  paces,  he  could  only  hear  at  a distance  of  ten  paces  (aft.
6 d.).  [Bch.~\

At  every  stroke  of  the  bell  and  at  every  musical  note  he  felt
stitches  in  his  ears,  like  earache,  also  when  he  himself  sang ; but  non-
musical sounds  and  noises,  like  the  rattling  of  carriages,  shutting  of
doors  and  the  like  caused  no  stitches,  and  he  was  quite  indifferent  to
them  (aft.  53  h.).  [. Bch .]

Musical  notes  were  and  continued  to  be  intolerable  to  him,  though
they  did  not  cause  pain  in  the  ear.  \_Bch.~\

Spasmodic  drawing  pain  in  the  left  ear.

185.  A long  continued  fine  prick  deep  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  30  h.).

Burning  stitches  in  the  ears.

Drawing  pain  in  the  left  cheek  and  stitches  in  the  ears.

Drawing  in  the  right  internal  and  external  meatus,

[. Hrr .]

Tearing  in  the  external  and  internal  meatus  of  the  ears  (aft.
3°  h.)-  [Myr.]

190.  (Both  ears  are  swollen,  hot,  with  burning  and  itching.)

Twitching  tearing,  sometimes  only  simple  tearing,  in  the  left
auricle.  [Z/rr.]

Painful  drawing,  as  it  were  spasmodic  pain  in  the
right  auricle  (aft.  44  h.).  [Htn.]

* Curative  reaction  of  the  organism  in  a myope.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


3^7

An  almost  painless  stitch  in  the  left  ear  that  went  off  on  putting
in  the  finger  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Gzz.]

Itching  pricks  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear,  continuing  while
moving  the  lower  jaw  (aft  27  h.).  [G/z.]

195.  Pricking  itching  on  the  lobe  of  the  right  ear  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fx.]

Fine  twitching  on  the  right  ear  lobe  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Ws7[

A large  red  lump  behind  the  lobe  of  the  ear,  with  sore  pain  per
sey  but  much  more  violent  when  touched.

(A  creeping  and  burning  in  the  nose.)

Itching  in  the  point  of  the  nose ; he  must  scratch
there.  _ [Myr.]

200,  A pimple  on  the  point  of  the  nose,  with  throbbing  sensation  in
it ; it  is  also  painful  when  touched.

The  dorsum  of  the  nose  is  swollen  and  studded  with  red  spots,
and  there  are  red  spots  on  its  side  which  go  away  and  come  again,
accompanied  by  tensive  sensation.  \MyrI\

On  the  lower  part  of  the  septum  of  the  nose  an  itching  scab.

Epistaxis  and  frequent  blowing  of  blood  from  the  nose,

(Pus  flows  out  of  the  nose.)

205.  (Mucus  stops  up  the  nose.)

On  the  right  side  of  the  upper  lip  an  oblique  chap,  as  if  he  had
cut  himself,  with  sore  pain,  especially  on  moving  the  lip,  for  several
days.  [Stf.]

In  the  red  part  of  the  upper  lip,  a point  with  obtuse  shooting  and
creeping  as  if  gone  to  sleep  (aft.  32  h.).  [Tz.]

(Pimples  on  the  red  of  the  upper  and  lower  lips,  which  cause
burning  pain.)

(On  the  red  of  the  upper  and  lower  lips,  ulcerous,  depressed  spots,
which  cause  a tensive  and  smarting  pain,  even  without  moving  the
lips ; they  become  covered  by  a dark-coloured  skin,  which  is  readily
detached  by  washing ; they  then  bleed,  and  when  touched  there  is
sore  and  smarting  pain  in  them.)

210.  Yellowish-brown,  scabby  eruption  containing  pus  in  the  lower
lip,  towards  the  commissure  of  the  mouth,  without  pain,  for  six  days.
[Fr.  H—n.-}

Eruption  on  the  border  of  the  lower  lip,  not  far  from  the  angle  of
the  mouth.

The  lower  lip  is  burst  in  the  middle.

Violent  burning  pain  in  the  right  lower  lip,  persisting
also  when  moving  it  (aft.  5,  8J  h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  lip  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gzz.]

215.  Burning  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  cheek  near  the  right  angle  of  the
mouth  (aft.  27  h.).  [G«.]

Obtuse  pressive,  drawing  pain  on  the  right  angle  of  the  lower
jaw  (aft  7 h.).  [Gzz.]

Pain  as  if  the  right  lower  jaw  were  forced  out  of  its  joint  in  front
of  the  ear,  even  when  the  part  is  not  moved — but  more  severe  when
chewing.  [ATrr.]

Pain  on  touching  the  gland  under  the  left  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,
like  a broad,  aching  stitch,  in  connexion  with  sorethroat.


328


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


When  he  chews  anything  he  gets  a cold  (in  the  morning,  pain-
fully cold)  sensation  in  the  roots  of  the  molars  especially,  which  goes
off  after  eating.  \Htn. ]

220.  The  teeth  are  on  edge,  as  from  a corrosive  acid.

The  whole  of  the  gums  are  painful  when  touched,  as  if  sore,  and
they  bleed  when  rubbed.

Bleeding  of  the  gums,  on  the  slightest  touch.

The  inner  surface  of  the  gums  is  swollen  and  painful  when  eating
and  on  being  touched.

Great  bleeding  from  a hollow  tooth.

225.  Pain  of  the  wisdom  tooth.

In  a hollow  tooth  a tingling  like  tingling  burning.

Burning  pain  in  the  incisors,  at  night.

Jerking  tearing  in  the  right  upper  molars,  neither  increased  nor
diminished  by  chewing.

Boring  shooting  pains  in  the  teeth,  which  end  in  swelling  of  the
cheek.

230.  A tearing  in  the  teeth  up  into  the  head  as  if  the  teeth  were
pressed  asunder  and  forced  out,  increased  by  the  heat  of  the  bed,  as
also  by  hot  and  cold  things.

Pain  in  the  mouth  as  if  sore  and  raw,  when  not  swallowing
(aft.  2 h.).

Shooting  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue.  [Tz.]

Itching  pricking  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (aft.  1 \ h.).  [Ws.~\
Shooting  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue  (aft.  26  h.).  [GnJ]
235.  The  tongue  is  quite  dry  (aft.  24  h.).

Dry  feeling  on  the  tongue  and  palate,  without  thirst  (aft.
6 h.).  [Tz.]

In  the  afternoon,  great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  with  a quantity  of
tasteless,  sticky,  soapy  mucus,  which  he  often  spits  out.  [S//1]

Burning  on  several  points  of  the  tongue  as  if  something  corrosive
had  got  upon  it,  without  external  alteration  of  it  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Ws.~\
Dryness  of  the  palate,  without  thirst  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tz.]

240.  He  could  not  swallow  well ; he  felt  as  if  something  had  got
behind  the  palate  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Myr.~\

Burning  posteriorly  on  the  velum  pendulum  palati  as  if  it  were
inflamed  and  sore  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Tz.]

Painful  soreness  on  the  velum  pendulum  palati  and  rawness  in  the
throat,  felt  especially  when  expiring  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Tz.]

Feeling  of  swelling  and  soreness  at  the  posterior  nares  (aft.  3^  h.).
[Tz.]

Nausea  in  the  palate.  [ Hrr.]

245.  Soreness  in  the  throat,  when  not  swallowing.

On  swallowing,  sore  sensation  in  the  throat.

Throat  as  if  raw ; she  must  hawk  3 it  is  painful  when  talking
and  swallowing.

Sorethroat : pain  on  the  leftside,  like  an  abscess,  throbbing,  tensive,
and  as  if  dry  on  that  part,  when  not  swallowing  ; speaking  is  difficult
for  him  ; when  swallowing  there  occurs  a scrapy  sore  pain  extending
to  the  ears,  where,  at  the  same  time,  there  is  scrapy  shooting  pain.


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


329

Inflammation  of  the  throat  (with  a vesicle  causing  smarting  pain) .
250.  When  swallowing  the  saliva,  an  aching  stitch,  which  lasts  as  long
as  the  swallowing  continues.

When  swallowing  food,  shooting  in  the  throat.

When  swallowing  bread,  it  feels  scrapy  in  the  throat.

The  mouth  always  comes  full  of  water,  with  excitation  of  nausea
on  the  chest.  [Fz.]

Great  secretion  of  sourish  saliva  in  the  mouth.  [Trn.]

255.  Constant  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  4 h.).  JVs.~\

Much  frothy  saliva  in  the  mouth  of  a harsh  taste  (aft.  2 h.).
[Fr.  H—n .]

Putrid,  steamy  taste  in  the  mouth.

Putrid  flat  taste  in  the  mouth.  [(?».]

In  the  morning  he  has  still  the  taste  of  food  in  his  mouth,
especially  of  bread.

260.  Long  after-taste  of  bread  that  had  been  eaten,  with  some  scrapi-
ness  in  the  throat.

He  loathed  even  the  sight  and  smell  of  black  bread ; the  smell  of
sour  things  was  most  repulsive  to  him  ; even  when  eating  the  sour-
ness of  the  bread  was  repugnant  to  him  and  almost  made  him  vomit
(aft.  24  h.).  [Bch.]

In  the  forenoon,  herb-like  taste  in  the  mouth,  breakfast  has  the
same  taste.

Bread  tastes  as  bitter  as  gall,  otherwise  the  taste  in  the  mouth  is
normal.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

In  the  morning  he  is  thirsty  and  slimy  and  oily  in  the  mouth.
265.  Intense  thirst.  \_Fr.  H—n.~\

An  almost  insatiable  thirst  for  cold  milk.  [Bek.]

Much  thirst  for  beer  after  the  abdominal  pains,  all  day.  \Myr^\

Anorexia.  [F/rr.]

Food  has  a very  slight  but  not  altered  taste.  \_Fr.  H — w.]

270.  After  and  during  eating  she  has  confusion  of  the  head.

Every  time  after  eating  a pressure  in  the  stomaoh,  as
if  there  were  a down-pressing  weight  in  it ; at  the  same
time  drowsiness,  so  that  he  can  do  no  work.

After  a meal  (breakfast)  she  was  overcome  by  such  exhaustion
that  she  fell  down  and  had  to  be  carried  to  bed  (but  without  uncon-
sciousness or  cold  perspiration)  (aft.  10  d.).

After  eating  pressure  in  the  stomach  and  great  drowsiness,  the
same  after  drinking;  after  eating  he  felt  as  heavy  as  lead  in  the
stomach.

Pressure  in  the  stomach,  even  before  eating,  and  also  after  eating,
which  is  aggravated  by  movement.

275.  After  eating  his  head  is  confused,  for  two  hours.

After  eating  frequent  and  persistent  eructation  of  air,  each  time
preceded  by  rumbling  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  [ Trn.~\

After  a meal  the  abdomen  feels  immediately  full,  and  yet  the
appetite  is  tolerable.

Frequent  eructation  of  air.  JFs.~\

Incomplete,  disagreeable  eructation  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUMo


33°

280,  Sourish  eructation,  an  hour  after  a meal.  [T%.]

Burning,  sourish  eructation  without  taste,  which  is  not  audible,
and  does  not  rise  up  as  high  as  the  mouth  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Bch.~\

He  is  full,  uncomfortable,  and  anxious.

Sickness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (immediately).  \_Trn.~]

A twisting  in  the  stomach  (after  eating),  then  very  severe  nausea,
so  that  she  must  lie  down  in  bed.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

285.  Vomiting  of  food,  and  then  almost  every  hour  vomiting,  day
and  night,  until  the  morning.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Grumbling  and  rumbling  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (aft.  il-
h.).  [Htn.]

Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  [Bch.'\

Aching  and  pressing  in  the  hypochondria,  which  causes  him
great  anxiety,  as  though  he  could  not  live  long  (chiefly  when
standing)  (aft.  38  h.).  [T%.]

Under  the  short  ribs  a periodical  aching  squeezing.  [Gw.]

290.  After  walking  some  time  an  aching  squeezing  just  above  the
liver,  below  the  ribs  and  thence  into  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  10
d.).  [Gw.]

(Feeling  of  weight  of  the  liver.)

Boring  pain  in  one  spot  of  the  hepatic  region.

Towards  the  left  side,  under  the  false  ribs,  a squeezing  (aft.  5

m.).  [<?*.]

(When  walking  in  the  open  air)  a burning  and  soreness  in  the
umbilical  region.

295.  In  the  navel  a periodical  aching  squeezing.  [ Gw.]

In  the  umbilical  region  a persistent  severe  aching
squeezing  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gw.]

A burning  pain  in  the  stomach  which  commenced  under  the
scrobiculus  cordis  and  spread  thence  towards  the  left.  [ Myr .]

Tensive  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  which  almost
took  away  his  breath  (aft.  6.J  h.).  [ Gn.~\

Round  about  the  umbilical  region  and  also  on  many  other  parts
of  the  body  and  limbs,  intermittent  pressive,  obtuse  pricks,  as  with
a blunt  point.  [Gw.]

300.  Fine  intermittent  pricks  in  the  abdomen,  up  to  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  especially  on  raising  up  the  body  when  sitting  (aft.  9 h.).

Shooting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  under  the  last  left  true  rib,  more
violent  during  inspiration  (aft.  1 hs).  [ Gn. ]

Boring  stitch  in  the  integuments  of  the  upper  part  of  the  abdo-
men, persistent  during  inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  4 h.),  \Gn.]
Incarcerated  flatulence.

Distension  of  the  abdomen  and  sensation  of  fulness,  though  he
does  not  feel  flatulence  (aft.  \ h.).  [7r?z.]

305.  The  abdomen  is  much  inflated  by  wind;  but  after  a single  dis-
charge of  flatus  of  moderate  amount  the  abdomen  immediately
resumed  its  usual  state  (aft.  1 h.).  \Htn.\

Flatulence  and  discharge  of  flatus  to  a much  greater  extent  than
when  in  his  healthy  state.  [. Htn,]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACXDUM,


33 1


When  he  bends  forwards  or  backwards  he  has  a gurgling  in  the
abdomen,  as  if  it  contained  water ; also  when  touching  the  abdomen
there  is  a squashing  and  gurgling  in  it.

Loud  rumbling  in  the  whole  abdomen,  especially  in
upper  part,  only  when  lying.  [Gn.]

Pressure  on  several  parts  of  the  hypogastrium.  [ Hrr.]

310.  Out-pressing  pain  in  the  right  groin,  as  if  a hernia  would  occur,
when  walking,  more  violent  when  pressing  on  it  with  the  hand,
lasting  a quarter  af  an  hour.  [Gn.]

An  extremely  violent  pinching  contraction  of  the
bowels  from  both  sides  of  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  4 h.).
[Htn.]

Bellyache,  like  griping  and  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region
(when  sitting)  not  followed  by  stool.  \_Myr.~]

Before  going  to  sleep  cutting  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
diarrhoea  would  come  on,  in  the  evening,  [Tz.]

Attacks  of  cutting  pain  transversely  through  the  abdomen,  [T%.]

315.  Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  pelvis,  at
night.

Squeezing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,  when  taking  a
walk  (aft.  36  h.).

Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  when  walking,  [Fz.]

Quite  low  down  in  the  hypogastrium,  just  above  the  groin,  a
shooting,  only  when  changing  his  position,  when  commencing  to
walk  or  on  sitting  down.

Single  gurgling  jerks  in  the  right  groin.

320.  Cutting  pain  in  the  left  groin  (aft.  n h.).  [ Gn. ]

Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  and  at  the  same  time  a blunt-pointed
pressive  pain  in  the  coccyx  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Gn.~\

Tensive  shooting  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen  and  thorax,  so  that  it  almost  took  away  his  breath  (aft.  ioJ
h.).  [G».]

Needle  pricks  in  the  abdominal  muscles  on  the  left  side  (aft.  J
h.).  [Ws.]

An  itching  erosion  above  the  rectum,  on  the  coccyx.

325.  Itching  prick  on  the  outer  circumference  of  the
anus  (aft.  | h.).  [Gn.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  anus  and  on  the  penis,  in  the  evening  and
morning.

In  the  rectum  tearing  pain  and  diarrhoeic  irritation,  not  followed
by  stool.  [T%.]

In  the  morning  on  going  to  stool  a contraction  of  the  bowels,
followed  by  a smarting  in  the  rectum.

After  evacuation  of  the  bowels  a long  forcing  and  tenesmus,  with-
out bellyache  ; the  first  faeces  were  always  hard,  the  following  pappy.
[Trn.]

330.  Ineffectual  urging  to  stool  for  twenty-four  hours,  then  difficult
evacuation  of  the  bowels  ; the  following  day  there  was  no  stool.  [Tz.]
Evacuation  of  the  bowels  only  after  thirty-two  hours  ; the  first
faeces  were  hard,  the  following  pappy.  [Myr.]


332


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


The  first  six  days  a daily  motion  of  the  bowels,  then  for  several
days  only  one  stool  in  forty-eight  hours,  later  on  only  every  seventy-
two  hours.

Hard  stool  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gn.'j

Very  hard  stool  passed  with  difficulty  (aft.  30  h.).  [Tz.]

335.  Stool  hard  and  broken  up.  \Myr.]

Stools  soft  and  frequent  (aft.  72  h.).  [Bch.']

With  the  feeling  as  if  flatus  would  be  discharged,  there  comes
quickly  and  involuntarily  a rather  pappy  bright  yellow  stool.

Every  two  or  three  hours  a soft  stool  (aft.  24  h.).  [Tr.  H — «.]

A diarrhoea  that  does  not  weaken.

340.  Whitish-grey,  diarrhoeic  stool.

Four  diarrhoeic  stools,  one  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  with  belly-
ache (aft.  i \ h.).  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Painful  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  bladder,  without  urging  to
urinate.  \_Htn .]

Urging  to  make  water,  as  often  as  eight  times  during  the  day,  and
two  or  three  times  at  night.

Urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
1,  I,  3 h.).  \Lr.)

345.  Urging  to  urinate,  and  at  the  same  time  burning.

An  urging  in  the  urethra  and  rectum,  as  from  acrid  water  (aft.
14  d.).

No  urine  passed  the  first  seven  hours,  then  frequent  micturition,
but  the  urine  passed  is  not  so  much  in  quantity  as  usual,  with  a
disagreeable,  almost  burning  sensation  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder.
[T/yr.]

The  urine  is  like  limpid  water.  \_Ws.'\

In  the  forenoon  no  urine  is  passed,  but  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  10,
14  h.)  more  frequent  discharge  of  a watery  urine,  which  he  is  often
unable  to  retain.  ,[Tz.]

350.  On  the  discharge  of  the  last  portion  of  urine  he  feels  as  if  a
pressive  weight  lay  in  the  hypogastrium  and  pressed  down  towards
the  genitals  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gw.]

The  second  day  the  urine  is  passed  very  frequently,  but  is  dark
coloured  and  a cloud  forms  in  it.  [Tz.]

He  must  urinate  frequently  and  each  time  copiously  (aft.  24  h.),
for  many  days.  \Htn.~\

Frequent  micturition  (aft.  24  h.).

Diuresis,  with  cutting  burning  in  the  urethra  and  spasmodic
pain  in  the  sacrum.

355.  During  the  two  last  days  more  frequent  and.  copious  urinary
discharge.  \_Htn.~\

Quite  pale  urine,  which  immediately  forms  a thick
whitish  cloud  (aft.  some  d.).  [Gw.]

When  urinating  a burning  (and  thereupon  increase  of  the  gonor-
rhoeal discharge).

Great  burning  in  the  urethra,  whereby  the  discharge  of  the  urine
is  delayed  ; afterwards  he  had  always  renewed  irritation  to  urinate.

A burning  when  passing  water,  and  a cutting  before  it  came  ; the


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


333

urine  did  not  come  immediately  but  he  had  ineffectual  urging  to
urinate  for  half  a minute.

360.  (A  drawing  in  the  urethra  extending  to  the  anus.)

A shooting  in  front  of  the  urethra,  when  not  urinating  (imme-
diately).

A creeping  in  the  urethra,  when  not  urinating.

Creeping  itching  downwards,  posteriorly  on  the  external  skin  of
the  penis  (aft.  \\  h.).  [F%.]

Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  glans  penis,  especially  when  urinating
[Hrr.]

365.  Itching  pricking  on  the  glans  penis  (aft.  28  h.).  [i/rr.]

Itching  creeping  under  the  glans  penis  on  the  frenum.

A creeping  near  the  frenum  under  the  glans  penis  ; small  vesicles
broke  out  there,  which  exuded  and  itched.

Vesicles  near  the  frenum  which  itch  only  when  pressed.

A burning  cutting  in  the  glans  penis,  with  an  out-pressing  pain
in  both  groins.

3 70.  Fine  pricking  on  the  point  of  the  penis  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.]

(On  the  condylomata  heat  and  burning.)

On  the  condylomata  sore  pain  when  walking  and  sitting.

Painful  pricks  at  the  end  of  the  urethra.  \Ws. ]

Sore  pain  on  the  scrotum.  [F%.]

375.  Itching  long  prick  on  the  scrotum.  [F%.]

A drawing  sore  pain  in  the  testicles  as  from  something  excoriated.

Pressive  pain  on  both  testicles  worse  when  touched  and  when
walking.  [iZrr.]

An  eruption  of  small  red  pimples  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the
scrotum  and  the  posterior  lower  part  of  the  penis  with  feeling  of
heat  there  (aft.  32  h.)  ; the  hairs  on  the  genitals  fell  out  to  some
extent  (aft.  52  h.).  \_Bch.']

A creeping  on  the  scrotum,  as  from  ants,  which  after  scratching
changes  into  burning  and  sore  pain  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Htn.]

380.  Burning  tearing  in  the  left  testicle  and  burning  in  the  prostate
gland,  with  frequent  erections  (aft.  8 h.).  [i'z.]

Loss  of  sexual  desire.

Great  stiffness  of  the  penis  without  sexual  desire.

Swelling  of  the  penis  for  several  minutes,  without
amorous  excitement  either  from  thoughts,  or  words  or
acts  (aft.  if  h.).  [Htn.]

Nocturnal  seminal  emission,  without  erection  of  the  penis  (the
1st  night).

385.  (The  catamenia  that  had  ceased  for  several  months,  came  on
again  at  full  moon.)

Leucorrhoea  after  the  catamenia,  lasting  some  days.

* , *

#

(Catarrhal  fever,  all  his  limbs  are  painful  and  he  has  no  relish  for
food.)

A contractive  pain  that  seemed  to  narrow  the  pit  of  the  throat,
worse  when  bending  the  neck,  for  ten  minutes  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Gn.]
Great  hoarseness.


334


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


390.  Roughness  in  the  throat,  that  impedes  talking.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Sometimes  an  irritation  as  to  cough,  which,  however,  only  causes
a couple  of  stitches  in  the  palate,  but  no  actual  cough.

Irritation  to  cough  from  a tickling  in  the  pit  of  the  throat.

In  the  morning  cough  with  whitish-yellow  expectoration.

(Before  the  cough  comes,  he  cries  out  about  pains  in  the
abdomen.)

395.  Headache  as  if  the  skull  would  burst,  from  coughing.

Along  with  fluent  coryza  and  cough,  burning  in  the  chest  and  up
into  the  throat  as  far  as  the  mouth,  even  when  she  did  not  cough.

Dry  cough  5 the  irritation  and  tickling  that  caused  it  were  felt
deep  in  just  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis  3 in  the  evening  after  lying
down  the  cough  is  worst.  [Ar.  H — /z.]

Severe  cough,  which  causes  heaving  as  if  to  vomit,  but  without
pain.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

A creeping  pain  in  the  chest,  when  at  rest  3 on  bending  forwards
there  is  pain  in  the  sternum,  as  also  during  any  movement  and  on
touching.

400.  Pain  in  the  chest  as  from  exhaustion,  as  if  it  arose  from  prolonged
sitting,  through  the  whole  chest — ameliorated  by  walking.

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum  (aft.  4 h.).  [G/z.]

A shooting  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  when
sitting,  on  drawing  in  the  breath,  which  goes  off  on  walking.

Obtuse  shooting  on  the  left  side  betwixt  the  lowest  false  rib  and
the  pelvis,  which  appears  to  spread  over  the  abdomen,  more  violent
during  inspiration,  \_Hrr,~\

Sharp  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  first  right  false  rib  (aft.  34
h.).  [i/rr.]

405.  Difficult,  tightened  breathing,  with  small  stitches  between  the
short  ribs  of  both  sides,  chiefly  the  left  (aft.  3^  h.).  \_Htn.']

In  the  upper  region  of  the  chest  under  the  right  arm,  a sharp
shooting,  which  takes  away  the  breath  for  instants,  as  when  one
falls  suddenly  into  the  water  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  \Myr.']

Boring,  obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  continued  3
more  violent  during  inspiration  (aft.  J h.).  [ Gzz.]

(A  severe  pressure  all  over  the  chest  waking  him  up  out  of  sleep
at  night,  which  extended  to  the  abdomen  and  went  off  after  a
discharge  of  flatus.)

Pinching  shooting  in  the  whole  chest  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gzz.]

410.  Boring  pinching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  persisting  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  3J  h.).  [ Gn. ]

Pressure  and  oppression  behind  the  sternum,  whereby
inspiration  is  rendered  difficult  (aft  3 h.).  [ Fz .]

In  the  right  side,  in  the  region  of  the  seventh  rib,  a pressive
squeezing.  [Gw.]

In  the  region  of  the  seventh  rib,  not  far  from  the  sternum,  an
intermitting,  pressive  squeezing.  [Gw.]

In  the  region  of  the  left  nipple,  a pressive  squeezing.  [Gw.]

415.  Oppression  of  the  chest  3 the  chest  is  contracted,  with  attendant
stitches  (in  the  afternoon).


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


335


Painful  oppression  of  the  chest  on  commencing  to  walk.  [SV/i]
Pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  constricted.

Squeezing  pressure  under  the  last  right  false  rib,  anteriorly  in  the
region  of  the  sternum  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Hrr.~\

Squeezing  pressure  opposite  the  right  nipple  under  the  right
axilla  (aft.  23  h.).  [Hrr.]

420.  Pressive  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  most  severe  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Gn .]

Pressive  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  most  severe
when  expiring;  he  felt  as  if  the  sternum  would  he
pressed  out ; on  pressing  the  hand  on  the  sternum  the
pain  was  more  violent,  as  also  on  stooping,  coughing,  &c.,
for  an  hour  (aft.  25  h.).  [ Gn. ]

Burning  on  the  chest,  externally.

Sharp  pressure  in  the  left  mammary  gland  (aft.  i \ h.).  [Fr.  H — «.]
Sensation  on  the  side  of  the  chest  as  if  the  ribs  were  beaten  in
(aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

425.  Cutting  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  on  breathing  deeply.

\m.j

A burning  in  the  chest  causes  her  to  cough.

Burning  cutting  pain  in  the  left  breast  (when  sitting),  more
severe  when  touched  (aft.  9 h.).  [Myr.]

Burning  sore  pain  internally  on  the  last  rib  (aft.  7 h).  [Fz.]
Burning  on  the  chest.  [Fr.  H — ».]

430.  An  itching  pricking  as  from  many  fleas,  betwixt  the  mammae,
owing  to  which  she  awoke  about  midnight  and  could  neither  lie
nor  sit  still  on  account  of  it,  but  had  to  get  out  of  bed  and  walk
about  the  room  for  an  hour.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Itching  erosion  on  the  right  side  at  the  false  ribs,  which  excites
hacking  cough,  [Hrr.]

After  each  starting  up  out  of  sleep,  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Red  pimples  on  the  neck,  chest  and  back,  particularly  above  the
scapulae,  which  are  only  sensitive  when  touched  or  when  rubbed  by  the
clothes  (especially  those  on  the  sternum),  and  which  show  themselves
chiefly  in  the  evening,  but  have  partially  disappeared  in  the  morning  ;
some  of  them  last  a fortnight.  \JVs.]

Itching  erosion  on  several  parts  of  the  trunk  and  thigh,  sometimes
in  one  place  sometimes  in  another.  [Hrr.]

435.  Itching  erosion  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  which
excites  scratching.  [Hrr.]

On  lifting  there  occurred  a stitch  over  the  hip  into  the  loins,
which  persisted  while  sitting  ; it  went  off  at  once  on  moving.

Itching  prick  above  the  anus  on  the  coccyx  for  some  minutes
(aft.  8 h.).  [Gn.]

Fine  pricks  above  the  anus,  on  the  coccyx  and  sternum  (aft.  \ h.).

[m.]

Just  above  the  sacrum  a place  where  there  is  burning  pain.

440.  On  rising  up  after  cowering  down,  a severe  stitch  in  the  sacrum.
In  the  sacrum  a lively  pain,  like  drawing  and  pressing,  sometimes
tearing — only  distinctly  felt  when  standing  (aft.  si  h*)*


3 36


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


Intermittent  quick  drawing  and  aching  sacral  pain,  mostly  when
standing,  less  when  walking,  which  goes  off  by  pressing  on  it,  sitting
down,  and  also  when  stooping,  [Tz.]

Intermittent  tearing  sacral  pain  after  rising  up  from  stooping,  but
quietly  drawing  in  jerks  when  he  stands  still.  [A;.]

At  night  tearing  pain  in  the  back.

445.  Pinching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine  (aft.  6 h.).  \_JVs.~]

Small  violent  jerking  stitches  on  the  middle  of  the  spine  (aft.  \
h.).  [Htn.]

In  the  dorsal  vertebrae  painful  drawing,  as  if  they  were  bruised,
chiefly  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.]

Painful  tearing  on  the  left  scapula,  when  sitting,  with  the  body
bent  forwards  (aft.  26  h.).  [Tz.]

Eruption  on  the  scapula,  which  does  not  itch,  but  is  painful  when
touched.

450.  Under  the  apex  of  the  scapula  a slight  drawing  and  pressure  on
the  bone,  like  gnawing.  [T%.]

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder.  \_Hrr.~\

In  the  shoulder-joint  drawing  and  throbbing.

Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder  and  left  hand.

Plere  and  there  on  the  arm  and  shoulder  a burning  pain,  as  from
a red-hot  coal.

455.  In  the  forenoon  a weakness  in  the  arm,  so  that  it  trembled.

The  (injured)  arm  becomes  stiff  and  painful  on  every  movement ;
the  hand  becomes  as  heavy  as  lead  5 in  the  ulcer  there  is  a jerking
and  shooting,  and  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb  and  in  the  fingers  there  is
a tearing  and  shooting ; the  hand  feels  an  internal  burning  pain ; on
allowing  the  arm  to  hang  down  the  blood  rushes  into  the  hand.
Drawing  in  both  arms,  from  the  shoulder  downwards.

An  itching  prick  on  the  right  upper  arm,  which  did  not  quite  go
off  by  scratching  (aft.  1 h.).  [_Gn.~\

Muscular  twitching  on  the  left  upper  arm,  above  the  bend  of  the
elbow,  which  went  off  on  moving  (aft.  ij  h.).  [G/z.]

460.  Very  painful  twitching  tearing  in  the  limbs,  in  the  arms,  fingers,
&c.  [Gw.]

Paralytic  squeezing  pressure  on  the  right  upper  arm  anteriorly,
more  violent  when  touched  (aft.  13  h.).  \_Hrr.~\

Paralytic  pressure  on  the  left  upper  arm,  posteriorly,  more  violent
when  touched.  \_Hrr.~\

A feeling  of  icy  coldness  on  the  right  upper  arm.  [ Myr .]

The  forearms  are  painful,  as  if  bruised,  when  he  leans  upon  the
table  with  them  (aft.  26  h.).  [T%.]

465.  A drawing  from  the  elbow  to  the  shoulder.

In  the  points  of  both  elbows  a burning  sensation.

Drawing  cutting  pain  in  the  elbow-joint,  in  the  wrist-joints,  and
the  proximal  finger-joints.

The  elbow-joint  is  painful  to  the  touch.

Under  the  elbow,  on  the  outer  side  of  the  forearm,  a paralytic
pain,  which,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  movement  of  the  arm.

470.  Sharp  shooting  boring  pains  on  the  inner  side  of  the


PHOSFHORICUM  ACIDUM.


337


left  forearm,  near  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  worst  when  at
rest  (aft.  37  h.).  [Gn.]

Painful  squeezing  heaviness  in  the  right  forearm,  [Htn.]
Squeezing  pressure  on  the  forearm,  on  the  inner  side  inferiorly
(aft.  4 h.).  [Hrr.]

Sensation  of  stiffness  and  squeezing  pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint,
more  painful  on  moving  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Htn .]

On  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  forearm  and  the  bones  of  the
hand  and  firagers  a tearing  rolling  upwards  and  downwards,  some-
times an  obtuse  shooting  therein  (from  the  6th  to  the  8th  d.).  [ Bch .]
475.  The  hands  tremble  when  writing,  he  cannot  keep  them  quiet,
and  he  feels  a creeping  and  itching  in  them  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.]
Pinching  pain  above  the  right  wrist-joint  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.]
Tearing  across  the  right  wrist-joint  (aft.  10  h.).  \_Myr.~\

Rough,  corrugated,  dry  skin  of  the  hands.

Itching  on  the  backs  of  both  hands,  which  is  increased
scratching.


by


480.


A 3

44


Increased  warmth  in  both  palms  (aft.  \ h.).  [Fr.  H — n.]
Drawing  shooting  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  palm  (aft
h.).  [Htn.]

Drawing  shooting  pains  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  palm.  \_Htn.\

Pricks  in  the  finger-joints.

Tearing  in  the  thumb  and  index  of  the  right  hand,  especially  in
the  joints  ; on  moving  them  there  occurs  a kind  of  tension,  a feeling
as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short.  [Hrr.]

485.  Tearing  in  the  middle  and  index  fingers  of  the  right  hand  (aft.  2
h.).  [Hrr.]

Tearing  in  the  left  ring  finger.  [Hrr.]

Violent  sharp  shooting  tearing  in  the  proximal
phalanx  of  the  right  middle  finger  (aft.  8J  h.).  [Htn.]

(Among  the  metacarpal  bones  an  exostosis,  very  painful  per  sey
especially  at  night,  most  painful  when  touched.)

Pinching,  squeezing  pain  between  the  right  metacarpal  bones,  as
if  they  were  squeezed  together  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Htn.]

490.  A kind  of  cramp  pain  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  during
which,  however,  movement  remains  free.  [ Gss .]

On  the  little  finger  a painful  aching  drawing,  especially  at  the  joint,
which  goes  off  when  he  bends  the  extended  fingers  into  the  hand.  [Zz.]

During  the  chill  one  side  of  the  left  index  quite  dies  away  and
is  softer  to  the  touch,  so  that  it  seems  as  if  a hard  line  ran  along  the
finger  between  the  living  and  the  dead  parts  (aft.  3 h.).  [Zz.]

Pimple-like  red  spots  on  the  backs  of  the  fingers,  without  sensa-
tion. [Bch.]

Red  papules,  the  size  of  a pin’s  head  (latterly  with  a white  eleva-
tion in  their  centre),  on  the  backs  and  sides  of  the  fingers  and  between
the  fingers,  without  any  sensation,  which  lasted  five  days  (aft.  11  d.).
[*■*■]

495.  The  fingers  became  cold,  yellow,  corrugated,  and  as  if  asleep,  and
at  the  same  time  the  pulse  was  slow,  very  small,  and  could  scarcely
be  felt  (aft.  13  h.).  [Myr.]

VOL.  II.  22


338


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


Intermittent,  obtuse  stitches  in  the  bail  of  the  left  thumb.
[Gss.]

Fine  pricking  through  the  back  of  the  right  thumb  extending  to
beneath  the  nail  (aft.  h.).  [ Ws .]

Erosive  itching  on  the  middle  finger  of  the  left  hand,  which  went
off,  for  a short  time  only,  after  scratching.  [Grr.]

A boil  on  the  natis.

500.  When  walking  crampy  drawing  in  the  left  natis.  [Fz.]

Itching  twitching  in  both  glutaei  muscles  above  the  coccyx  (aft.
28  h .).[£».]

Feeling  as  if  bruised  in  the  hips,  thighs,  arms,  and
nape  like  growing  pains;  at  the  same  time  repeated
single  tearing  stitches  in  all  these  parts  at  once;  the

stitches  occur  each  time  he  commences  to  walk,  and  especially  to
go  up  stairs  ; the  bruised  pain,  however,  is  persistent  whilst  sitting,
standing,  and  walking  (aft.  53  h.).  [Bch.'\

A stretching  and  bruised  pain  in  the  hip-joint,  worse  on  moving.
[Bch.]

After  sitting,  a heaviness  and  as  it  were  paralysis  in  the  left  hip-
joint,  on  commencing  to  walk,  which,  however,  goes  off  after
continuing  to  move  (aft.  2 J h.) . \_Htn.~]

505.  In  the  trochanter,  a pain  when  walking  and  touching,  as  if
broken.

Tearing  pain  in  the  thigh  some  inches  below  the  hip,  which
seems  to  go  up  from  the  hough,  but  is  not  relieved  by  pressing  on  it.

[■ F* •]

Below  the  hip  a tearing  pressive  pain  upwards  in  the  thigh  and  at
the  same  time  on  the  tibia  (immediately).  [Fz.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh.

In  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  thigh  a burning  sensation,  when
standing,  which  goes  off  on  walking  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Fz.]

510.  Pressure  as  with  a blunt  bit  of  wood  posteriorly  on  the  thigh.
[FFrr.]

Severe  stitches  in  the  thighs,  on  moving,  but  chiefly  when  sitting
down  and  rising  up  from  the  seat.

Boring  obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  thigh,  near  the  inguinal  ring,
when  at  rest  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Gn.~\

Pressive  cramp-pain  in  the  right  thigh  (aft.  2 d.).  [FFrr.]

When  walking  the  thighs  and  legs  feel  as  if  bruised.  [Myr.']

515.  When  sitting  an  anxious  weariness  in  the  thighs;  in  order  to
relieve  it  he  must  constantly  move  the  legs.  [ Myr .]

The  thighs  across  their  middle  are  as  if  bruised,  only  when
walking  ; he  feels  as  if  they  would  break  in  the  middle,  so  that  he
must  stagger.  [Myr.']

A very  sharp  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh  down  to
the  knee  (aft.  2\  h.).  [FF>.]

Painful  pulsating  twitching  from  the  middle  of  the  thigh  to  the
knee  (aft.  2j  h.).  [PTs.\

Pressure  as  with  the  finger,  a hand’s  breadth  above  both  knees
(aft.  \ hi).  [FFrr.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


339

520.  Pressive  squeezing  above  the  knee,  on  the  outer  side
of  the  left  thigh.  [• Gss .]

Pressure  a hand’s  breadth  below  both  knees,  [Afrr.]

Just  below  the  left  knee,  a pressure,  as  with  something  blunt,  a
kind  of  squeezing,  at  intervals  of  from  five  to  six  minutes,  and  lasting
from  two  to  six  seconds  (aft.  % h.).  [Grr.]

A stretching  pain  in  the  tendons  of  the  houghs — worse  when
moving — -which  then  were  painful  when  touched.  \_Bch.~\

Painful  drawing  deep  in  the  left  knee  and  down  towards  the
tibia,  when  on  walking  the  weight  of  the  body  rests  on  one  leg,  and
the  body  is  about  to  be  supported  on  the  right  leg  that  is  moved
forwards.  [Gjj-.]

525.  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  patella,  when  at  rest ; worst  when
moving  (aft.  32  h.).  [G/z.]

On  the  knee  and  calf,  several  pimples  with  violent  itching,  by
day  and  in  the  evening  in  bed  ; scratching  was  at  first  agreeable,  but
afterwards  left  a burning  ; the  pimples  ran  together,  became  sore,
spread  around,  and  each  became  a small  easily  bleeding  ulcer.  \Myr.]
Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  leg,  also  at  night  in  bed  ; she  must  lay
the  limb  at  one  time  in  one  place  at  another  in  another  place  ; when
it  comes  on  by  day  she  must  get  up  and  walk.

Perceptible  pulsation  in  the  left  leg,  when  at  rest  (aft.  8^  h.).  [Gn.'\
Itching  erosion  on  the  left  leg  ; it  excites  to  scratching  ; after
the  scratching  there  is  transient  alleviation,  and  then  the  erosion
becomes  more  severe  than  before.  \_Hrr.~\

530.  Exhaustion  in  the  legs,  when  walking.  [Myr.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  tibia,  when  at  rest,  which  went  off  when
walking  (aft.  12  h.).  [G/z.]

Sharp  shooting  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.]
Spasmodic  nipping  in  the  left  calf,  which  is  removed  for  some
time  after  rubbing  (aft.  10  m.).  \Ws.~\

Cutting  shooting  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  calf,  downwards
(aft.  6^  h.) . [. Htn .]

535*  Formication  on  the  right  leg.  [Gss.]

On  the  ankle  a severe  itching ; the  part  becomes  red  from
scratching.

Pain  as  if  sprained,  in  the  ankle-joint,  even  in  bed  in  the  morning.
(On  the  right  inner  ankle,  a tensive  shooting  pain  up  towards  the
right  foot.)

The  left  foot  is  quite  numb  and  as  if  lifeless  and  without  sensa-
tion, only  when  walking,  not  when  sitting.

540.  Dull  paralytic  pain  in  the  left  ankle-joint,  when  at  rest,  on
moving  there  is  cracking  in  it  (aft.  15  h.).  [G/z.]

Tensive  sensation  and  gone  to  sleep  feeling  in  the  anterior  portion
of  the  right  foot  and  toes  (when  walking).  [G/z.]

Tearing  stitches  in  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe  (aft.  2J  h.).  \_Htn.']
Squeezing  pressure  on  the  two  last  toes  of  the  right  foot  (aft.
ih.).  [Hrr.-]

Persistent  boring  stitch  in  the  left  little  toe,  when  at  rest  and
when  moving  (aft  12J  h.).  [G/z.]


540


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


545.  In  the  morning,  sore  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  foot.

In  the  soles  a burning  shooting  pain,  especially  in  the  evening,
but  in  the  morning  only  burning  in  them.

Burning  in  the  feet  and  soles.

Violent  jerk-like  stitches  on  the  right  sole  (aft.  7!  h.).  [Htn.]

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  right  sole,  anteriorly  (aft.
7 h.  [Hrr.]

550.  Intermittent  pressure  on  the  left  sole,  anteriorly,  in
the  region  of  the  big  toe.  |_ Hrr.]

Squeezing  pressure  on  the  left  sole  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr .]

Shooting  and  burning  in  the  corns  for  eight  days.

Red  spots  on  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  which  burn  like

fire.

The  whole  body  (face,  hands  and  feet  excepted)  looks  redder
than  usual ; very  conspicuous  large  red  spots  and  places,  without
sensation,  appear  on  the  shoulders  ; broad  red  stripes  spread  over  the
patellae  and  from  both  hips  to  the  navel ; when  the  body  is  uncovered
it  is  very  sensitive  to  the  open  air,  but  the  heat  of  the  bed  is  pleasant ;
the  large  red  spots  lasted  more  than  twenty-four  hours.  [TVs.]

555.  On  several  parts  of  the  body  a violent  burning  pricking  itching;
the  more  he  scratched  the  redder  the  part  became,  and  the  more
burning  and  pricking  was  there  in  it  afterwards.

Eruption  of  red,  smooth  pimples  on  the  forearms  and  neck,
surrounded  by  red  areolae,  which  per  se  are  without  sensation,  but
when  touched  are  painful  as  if  excoriated.

Miliary  rash  all  over  the  body,  which  burns  rather  than  itches.

(Burning  pain  in  the  ulcers.)

Every  sore  or  injured  place  on  the  body  is  painful  as  if  excoriated.

360.  In  the  wounds,  sore  pain,  even  in  the  wounds  of  the  bones.

Feeling  all

with  some  fine  pricks  (aft.  some  m.).  [TVs.']

Feeling  as  if  ants  were  running  over  the  body  here  and  there.
[Hrr.]

Here  and  there  over  the  body  a creeping  (itching)  like
ants  running  about  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gss.]

Itching  creeping  on  the  body  and  hands,  in  the  even-
ing after  lying  down.  [Gss.]

565.  Rapidly  occurring  itching  here  and  there  on  the  body,  on  the
back,  arms,  pudendum  and  even  on  the  scalp,  which  goes  off  only  for
instants  by  scratching.

Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  hands  and  feet,  as  if  asleep,  in  the
morning  and  evening.

The  arms  and  legs  go  to  sleep  at  night ; he  cannot  then
move  them  himself,  the  limbs  must  be  moved  by  others  from  their
place.

Sensation  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  as  if  gone  to  sleep,
creeping  and  powerlessness  in  them.

In  the  morning  the  joints  are  as  if  bruised,  in  the
arms,  legs  and  nape.

570.  Hand  and  foot  as  if  bruised  (as  if  paralysed).


, sore  pain,

over  the  body  as  if  something  ran  over  the  skin,  mixed


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


34*

All  the  pains  from  phosphoric  acid  are  neither  aggravated  nor
ameliorated  by  pressure  with  the  hand.  [Gjj.]

Very  acute  pain  like  scraping  with  a knife,  on  the  periosteum  of
all  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  I,  2 h.).  \_Myr.~]
All  the  limbs  feel  contracted.  [Fr.  H — n .]

He  thinks  he  staggers  when  walking.  [Fr.  H — n.]

575.  Exhaustion  in  all  parts  of  the  body.  \_Hrr.]

The  body  is  unwieldy,  the  mind  inactive.

The  body  exhausted,  the  mind  depressed  (the  4th  d.).

He  is  weaker  and  more  exhausted.

In  the  morning  after  rising,  she  is  so  exhausted  (and  looks
pale)  that  she  must  lie  down  again  for  some  time  ; then  she  feels
well.

580.  Exhaustion  of  the  body  (in  the  afternoon).  [Wsi]

(A  kind  of  epilepsy  [immediately  after  taking  the  medicine]).  [ Fr .
H-n.]

Feeling  of  an  agitation  in  the  blood.

Great  restlessness,  a forcing  and  driving  in  the  blood  ; he  is  as  if
beside  himself  (aft  4 d.).

He  sweats  profusely  when  walking.

585.  Very  much  fatigued  by  a walk,  exhausted  and  prostrated  ; chilli-
ness in  the  house  (aft.  50  h.).

When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  sweats  profusely  all  over,
especially  in  the  genitals.

He  becomes  thinner,  looks  wretched  in  the  face,  and  has  deeply
set  eyes.

Constant  yawning  and  stretching  of  the  arms,  with  drowsiness
(aft.  1 1 h.).  [Htn.]

Much  yawning,  during  which  water  runs  out  of  the  eyes.

590.  By  day  great  weariness  and  drowsiness,  which  goes  off  on  walking ;
but  at  night  she  cannot  go  to  sleep,  and  from  evening  till  midnight
she  has  heat  and  perspiration.

He  falls  irresistibly  into  a sound  and  deep  sleep  in  the  middle
of  writing.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Sopor;  must  sleep  afterdinner;  he  falls  asleep  while  talking.  [Myr^\
Drowsiness  all  day  with  yawning,  which  always  makes  him
close  his  eyes.  [Fz.]

In  the  evening  early  sleeping ; and  in  the  morning  great
drowsiness  for  a long  time.

595.  He  falls  asleep  earlier  than  usual,  from  exhaustion,  and  sleeps
more  profoundly  than  usual.

In  the  evening,  great  drowsiness  with  yawning,  which  always
makes  him  close  his  eyes.  [Fz.]

Such  deep  sleep  that  he  can  hardly  be  awoke  in  the  morning.  \HtnJ\
He  can  only  fall  asleep  late  in  the  evening  (aft.  3 d.).

Sleep  with  sometimes  vexatious,  sometimes  indifferent  dreams,
during  which,  towards  morning,  he  lays  his  arms  under  his  head,  and
they  then  go  to  sleep.  [Fz.]

600.  Ravenous  hunger  wakes  him  up  at  night.

(He  moans  much  in  his  sleep.)


342


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUJVL


(With  half  open  eyes  he  wails  and  talks  in  his  slumber,  and  his
hands  twitch.)

In  the  evening  he  lay  for  a couple  of  hours  in  bed,  without  being
able  to  sleep  ; ciphers  came  before  his  eyes,  as  if  he  was  not  quite
right  in  his  head  ; when  he  rose  up,  this  went  off*.

(In  slumber  he  has  sometimes  a smiling  sometimes  a lachrymose
expression,  and  the  half  open  eyes  are  distorted.)

605.  Lascivious  dreams  with  seminal  emission.  [ Gn.\

Sleep  at  night  disturbed  by  dreams  and  erections.

Before  midnight  agreeable,  after  midnight  very  frightful  but  ill-
remembered  dreams.  [Gbz.]

(Wonderful  dreams  at  night.)

All  night  in  his  dreams  he  is  occupied  with  the  things  that  had
last  happened  to  him  in  the  evening.

610.  Very  vivid  dreams,  as  by  day,  of  feasting.

Restless  night  with  dreams  full  of  scolding  and  quarrelling.  [Zr.]
Vivid,  gruesome  dreams,  not  remembered  in  the  morning.  [*SV/\]
Disturbing  dreams.

Frequent  starting  up  at  night  out  of  sleep,  as  if  he  fell  down  and
into  the  water.  [Zr.]

615.  He  wakes  up  about  1 a.m.,  and  though  his  consciousness  is
pretty  clear,  he  has  very  gloomy,  anxious,  care-beset  thoughts,  for
half  an  hour,  whereupon  he  falls  asleep  again  until  the  morning.  [*S7/.]
The  first  night  dreams  of  dead  people,  which  make  him  very
anxious,  and  when  he  is  half  awake  he  is  uncommonly  fearful.  [Zz.J
Restless  sleep  with  dry  heat  (the  6th  night).

Too  early  waking  at  night,  and  he  cannot  go  to  sleep  again.  \Fr.
H—n .]

Anxious  waking  (the  first  night).

620.  In  the  morning  he  can  hardly  be  roused  from  sleep,

and  is  still  very  drowsy.

In  the  morning  he  gets  up  in  very  bad  humour,  exhausted  and
sleepy.

Chilly  feeling  on  the  face,  temples,  and  forehead,  as  if  from  a
cool  wind  blowing  on  him,  with  cold  feeling  in  the  tips  of  the
fingers,  which  were  quite  cold  to  the  touch  (aft.  1 h.).  [‘ST/'.]

Shivering  over  the  abdomen,  with  cold  finger  tips,  for  two  hours,
without  thirst,  chiefly  from  the  access  of  the  open  air,  even  when  he
merely  looked  out  of  window,  without  subsequent  heat  (aft.  2 h.).
[Trn.]

Frequent  cold  feeling  on  the  right  cheek,  and  warm  feeling  on
the  left,  without  outwardly  perceptible  alteration  of  the  temperature.
[Bch.-]

625.  In  the  evening  attacks  of  febrile  rigor,  followed  at  night  by
exhausting  perspiration  (the  2nd  night).

Chilliness,  even  when  walking  in  the  warm  room.  [*SY/',]

Chill  all  over  the  body  (aft.  26  h.).  [Myr.]

Chill  all  the  forenoon,  by  jerks,  like  general  shudder  (but  not
running  over  him)  even  in  the  room,  with  blue,  icy  cold  hands  and
dry  palate,  without  particular  thirst.  [Zz.]


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


343


Every  night  fever  : in  the  evening,  after  sleeping  for  an  hour,  she
is  awakened  by  chilliness  all  over  the  body  and  drawing  in  the  limbs,
without  subsequent  heat.

630.  Towards  evening,  chilliness  and  coldness  for  an  hour,  without
thirst  and  without  subsequent  heat.

Alternation  of  shivering  and  heat,  in  the  evening.

Frequent  alternations  of  chilliness  and  heat,  in  the  evening;  the
dry  heat  in  the  face  is  not  attended  by  redness,  and  during  this  heat
there  is  chilliness  ; after  the  cessation  of  the  heat  still  greater  chilli-
ness, coldness  runs  all  over  his  body ; towards  morning  profuse
sweat  in  the  second  sleep,  that  is,  when,  after  awaking,  he  again  fell
asleep.

Severe  rigor,  from  afternoon  till  evening,  10  o’clock,  then  dry
heat  to  such  a degree  that  he  became  almost  unconscious.

Rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  icy  cold  fingers,  without  thirst  (an
hour  after  eating)  ; after  four  hours  increased  warmth,  without  thirst.
[Myr.]

635.  Frequent  rushing  over  of  cold  and  chilliness,  and  palpitation  of
the  heart.

Occasional  rigor  running  over  him,  without  thirst,  for  a minute,
followed  immediately  by  heat  rapidly  alternating  with  cold  for  a
minute.  [ Gw.]

In  the  evening  on  lying  down  chilliness,  and  after  the  first
awaking  heat  all  over,  without  thirst  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  evening  chilliness  causing  trembling,  then  in  the  morning
heat  of  the  face,  dryness  in  the  mouth,  and  shooting  pain  in  the  throat
when  swallowing.

The  temporal  arteries  and  the  blood-vessels  of  the  hand  are
distended,  and  the  arteries  beat  more  full.  \JVs7\i

640.  On  going  to  sleep  dry  heat  (the  4th  evening) .

In  the  evening  heat  of  all  the  body,  followed  by  restless  night.

After  lying  down  in  the  evening  heat  all  over  the  head,  with
only  moderately  warm  body,  but  very  cold  feet  (aft.  14J  h.).

Internal  heat  throughout  the  body,  without  thirst,  not  perceptible
outwardly  and  without  redness  of  the  cheeks ; he  becomes  anxious
and  breathes  deep  (aft.  h.).  \JVs.~\

In  the  evening  when  walking  in  the  open  air  heat  on  the  cheeks
and  flying  heat  in  the  back.  [Tz.]

645.  Morning  sweat,  with  heavy  direams  of  dead  people,  and  as  if  he
were  hunted.

Profuse  morning  sweat.

On  two  nights,  about  midnight  and  when  he  awakes,  profuse
sweat,  which  commenced  on  the  head,  and  was  most  profuse  on  the
chest.

(Great  thirst  for  water,  with  much  heat  and  perspiration  all  over,
by  day  and  night.)

Pulse  beats  strongly  (aft.  9 h.).  [Bch.~\

650.  The  pulse  is  irregular  and  often  intermits  one  or  two  beats.


344


PHOSPHORICUM  ACIDUM.


In  the  afternoon  heat  in  the  face,  without  redness,  with  thirst.
[*■*•]

In  the  evening  before  falling  asleep,  heat  in  the  cheeks  and  ears.

At  night  much  heat  in  the  face.  [ Bch.~\

Internal  heat  and  anxiety ; he  feels  as  if  the  chest  were  too
narrow  (aft.  8 h.).  \_Hrr.~]

655.  Great  anxiety ; he  must  lie  down  in  the  afternoon  (the  3rd  d.).

Restlessness  and  anxiety  throughout  the  body.

He  looks  very  ill  humoured  and  sullen,  so  that  everybody
asks  him  what  is  the  matter,  and  yet  he  does  not  look  actually  ill.

im

Very  irritated,  the  mind  depressed,  the  body  exhausted.

Very  irritated,  cross,  ill  humoured.  [S//1]

660.  Always  cross,  disinclination  to  speak.

Silent  crossness.  \_Hrr.~\

A trifling  vexation  makes  him  very  angry  and  hot.

He  speaks  unwillingly,  talking  is  very  disagreeable  to  him.  [67/".]

He  speaks  little  and  answers  unwillingly  questions  put  to  him
(aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.]

665.  Dislike  to  speak.  \_Lr.~\

When  speaking  a kind  of  hurriedness ; he  cannot  get  anything
quickly  enough,  whereas  he  is  usually  very  patient.

Restlessness  in  the  morning  in  bed.

Inward  restlessness  hinders  him  in  his  work.

Restless,  indifferent.  [Sz/l]

670.  Sad  humour,  on  account  of  concern  for  the  future  (aft.
50  h.).  [G».]

Dejection  (aft.  4 d.).

Serious,  dejected,  and  sad,  only  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  and
the  more  he  walked  the  more  sad,  serious,  and  dejected  he  became ;
in  the  house  this  went  off  gradually,  and  he  became  cheerful.

Disposition  lachrymose,  as  from  home  sickness.  \_Trn.~]

Discontented  with  himself,  self-reproaches.  [Zr.]

675.  He  is  very  wilful  about  everything.

Disposition  active  and  lively*  (aft.  24  h.).  [Z%.]

He  became  very  cheerful  and  well  disposed.*  [Bch.]

(Disposition  is  often  extravagantly  gay.f)

(A  woman  affected  with  epilepsy  danced  in  a senseless,  violent,
and  wild  manner  for  several  days,  without  lying  down,  except  at
night. f)  \_Fr.  H—n .]

* Reaction  of  the  organism,  secondary  action,
f This  inordinate  gaiety  seems  to  be  a (rare)  alternating  action.


PULSATILLA.1


( Anemone  Pratensis .)

(The  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  green  fresh  plant  mixed  with  equal  parts  of
alcohol  by  shaking.  After  the  cloudiness  has  settled  down,  the  clear  fluid  is  decanted
off.  Of  this  two  drops  are  dropped  into  the  first  of  30  diluting-phials  (each  filled
three  quarters  full  with  99  drops  of  alcohol),  and  the  phial  being  corked  is  held  in
the  hand  and  the  contents  potentized  by  means  of  two  strokes  of  the  arm  from  above
downwards.  This  is  to  be  marked  first  dilution  or  t^q.  Of  this  one  drop  is  to  be
introduced  into  the  second  phial  and  two  equal  shakes  administered  (to  be  marked
second  dilution  or  yoWo)’  One  drop  of  this  is  to  be  introduced  into  the  third  phial,
and  this  process  is  to  be  repeated,  until  the  thirtieth  phial  is  provided  with  one  drop
from  the  twenty-ninth  (which  had  got  its  drop  from  the  twenty-eighth  phial  and
been  twice  shaken)  5 this  is  also  to  be  twice  shaken  and  marked  30th  dilution  or  X.)

This  very  powerful  plant  produces  many  symptoms  on  the  healthy
human  body  (as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  tolerably  complete
list),  which  often  correspond  to  the  morbid  symptoms  commonly  met
with  3 hence,  also,  they  admit  of  frequent  homoeopathic  employment,
and  often  do  good.  We  can  therefore  unquestionably  reckon  it  as  a
remedy  of  many  uses  (polychrest).

It  is  useful  in  acute  as  well  as  in  chronic  diseases,  as  its  action,  even
in  small  doses,  lasts  from  ten  to  twelve  days.

I have  indicated  the  peculiarities  of  its  symptoms  in  the  notes,  there-
fore I will  not  repeat  them  here.

As  the  experiments,  whose  results  will  be  found  below,  were  chiefly
made  by  me  with  very  moderate  and  small  doses,  the  symptoms  recorded
are  consequently  almost  without  exception  primary  effects.

The  homoeopathic  employment  of  this,  as  of  all  other  medicines,  is
most  suitable  when  not  only  the  corporeal  affections  of  the  medicine
correspond  in  similarity  to  the  corporeal  symptoms  of  the  disease,  but
also  when  the  mental  and  emotional  alterations  peculiar  to  the  drug
encounter  similar  states  in  the  disease  to  be  cured,  or  at  least  in  the
temperament  of  the  subject  of  treatment.

Hence  the  medicinal  employment  of  pulsatilla  will  be  all  the  more
efficacious  when,  in  affections  for  which  this  plant  is  suitable  in  respect
to  the  corporeal  symptoms,  there  is  at  the  same  time  in  the  patient  a
timid,  lachrymose  disposition,  with  a tendency  to  inward  grief  and  silent
peevishness,  or  at  all  events  a mild  and  yielding  disposition,  especially
when  the  patient  in  his  normal  state  of  health  was  good  tempered  and
mild  (or  even  frivolous  and  good-humouredly  waggish).  It  is  therefore
especially  adapted  for  slow,  phlegmatic  temperaments  ; on  the  other
hand,  it  is  but  little  suitable  for  persons  who  form  their  resolutions  with


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833,


346


PULSATILLA.


rapidity,  and  are  quick  in  their  movements,  even  though  they  may
appear  to  be  good  tempered.

It  acts  best  when  there  is  a disposition  to  chilliness  and  adipsia.

It  is  particularly  suitable  for  females  when  their  menses  usually  come
on  some  days  after  the  proper  time  ; and  especially  also  when  the  patient
must  lie  long  in  bed  at  night  before  he  can  get  to  sleep,  and  when  the
patient  is  worst  in  the  evening.  It  is  useful  for  the  ill  effects  caused  by
partaking  of  pork.

When  pulsatilla  has  been  given  in  too  large  a dose,  or  in  an  unsuit-
able case,  and  has  consequently  produced  disagreeable  effects,  these,
according  to  their  peculiar  character,  may  be  removed  by  chamomilla
(particularly  when  drowsiness,  exhaustion,  and  diminution  of  the  senses
are  permanent)  or  bv  an  infusion  of  coffee  (e.g.  in  the  timorous  anxiety),
or  by  ignatia  or  nux  vomica.  The  fever,  the  disposition  to  weep,  and
the  pains  of  pulsatilla  with  all  their  after-sufferings  can  be  most  quickly
removed  by  the  tincture  of  raw  coffee.

The  proper  dose  is  a small  globule  moistened  with  the  thirtieth
potency,  repeated  at  most  every  twenty-four  hours  3 in  acute  diseases
the  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard  seed  is  preferable.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow  provers  were,  Friedrich  Hahnemann,  Hornburg,
Michler,  E.  F.  Ruckert,  Stapf.

Symptoms  are  taken  from  the  following  sources  :

Bergius,  Mat.  Med.

Hellwing,  Flora  Campana , Lips,  1719.

Heyer,  in  Cr ell's  Journ,  ii.

Saur,  in  Bergius'  Mat.  Med.

Stoerck,  Ant.  v.,  Von  der  Pulsatille.

In  the  Frag,  de  Vir.  pulsatilla  has  309  symptoms,  in  the  1st  edit.  1073,  in  the  2nd
edit.  1163,  in  this  last  edition  they  are  reduced  to  1154  (correcting  the  erroneous
enumeration).]


PULSATILLA.

Vertigo.

Violent  vertigo,  like  intoxication.  [Stf.’]

Vertigo,  like  that  which  occurs  on  turning  round  for  a long  time
in  a circle,  combined  with  nausea.  \_Hbg.~]

Vertigo  (immediately),  still  worse  the  next  day.  [Fr.  H — n.]

5.  Vertigo  as  from  intoxication, #

Vertigo  as  if  the  blood  mounted  to  the  head  3 raking  and  grasping
in  it.

Giddy  staggering,  as  from  intoxication,  with  internal  heat  of  head
and  paleness  of  the  normally  warm  face,  especially  in  the  evening.
Staggering  as  from  the  side.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Staggering,  as  from  drinking  spirits.  [ Hbg.’ ]

10.  Attacks  of  vertigo,  intoxication,  heat.

After  eating  he  feels  as  if  intoxicated.

Vertigo,  especially  when  sitting.

*


5,  7,  comp.  41,  1077,


PULSATILLA,


347

Vertigo  in  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed  ; on  account  of  it  he
must  lie  down  again.

Vertigo  when  taking  a walk  in  the  open  air,*  which  goes  off  on
sitting  down.

15.  Whirling,  only  when  sitting,  and  stupid  in  the  head,  and  as  if
sleepy.

Vertigo,  he  imagines  he  cannot  stand  (in  the  1st  hours).

Vertigo,  he  imagines  he  cannot  comprehend  a subject  (in  the  1st
hours).

A kind  of  vertigo — when  he  turns  the  eyes  upwards — as  if  he
would  fall,  or  as  if  he  were  dancing,  f

Vertigo  when  stooping,  as  if  he  would  fall  down,  as  from  intoxi-
cation ; followed  by  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  6 h.).

20.  Vertigo  when  stooping  down,  so  that  she  could  hardly  raise  her-
self up  again.

When  stooping  he  feels  as  if  the  head  became  too  heavy,  and  he
could  not  raise  himself  up  again.

Vertigo  as  from  a weight  in  the  head,  when  walking  and  stooping,
with  some  whirling  which  was  also  felt  when  lying.

When  stooping  forwards  sensation  in  the  head  as  if  he  would  fall
forwards.

Staggering  when  walking  as  if  he  had  vertigo,  and  yet  he  is  not
giddy,  in  the  evening J (aft.  3 d.).

25.  Dulness  in  the  head  and  vertigo,  caused  by  moving.

Cannot  support  his  head  nor  hold  it  upright,  must  lie  down,  and
yet  cannot  remain  in  bed.§

Headache,  when  lying  down  for  the  midday  siesta,  in  the  half  of
the  brain  of  the  side  on  which  he  is  not  lying ||  (aft.  18  h.).

Cannot  maintain  the  head  erect,  cannot  raise  it.

Heaviness  of  the  head.H

30.  Heaviness  in  the  head,  he  cannot  bear  the  light  of  a candle.**
Dulness  of  the  head  and  pains  in  the  forehead  as  if  beaten  to
pieces.

Headache,  so  that  he  would  like  to  incline  his  head  to  one  side.
Headache  on  moving  the  eyes,  deep  in  the  orbits,  as  if  the  fore-
head would  fall  out,  and  the  frontal  bones  were  too  thin,  with  dulness
of  the  head,  in  the  eveningft  (aft-  4$  h.).

Semilateral  headache,  as  if  the  brain  would  burst,  and  the  eyes
fall  out  of  the  head.

* One  of  the  alternating  states  of  pulsatilla , which  always  comes  on  later  and  more
rarely  than  the  opposite  state,  where  the  ailments  are  relieved  or  go  off  in  the  open  air,
but  recur  when  sitting  and  when  at  rest,  as  may  be  seen  in  part  in  S.  15.
f Comp.  64.

J Comp.  810.

§ A kind  of  third  alternating  state,  which  is  intermediate  between  the  production
of  the  symptoms  when  sitting  and  the  production  of  symptoms  by  movement.

1|  Comp.  58.

Comp.  102,  733,  1014.

The  oversensitiveness  of  the  eyes  to  light,  comp.  103,  104, 105, 107  is  an  alter-
nating state  with  the  dimness  of  vision  caused  by  pulsatilla.  See  94,  98,  99,  ioj,
102.

ft  33>  34->  comp,  with  213,  712,  788,  900*


348  PULSATILLA.

35.  Head  stupid,  so  that  the  eyes  in  her  head  are  painful.

Head  as  if  stupid  and  heavy.

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  and  pain  as  from  a bruise
in  the  forehead,

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  as  if  his  memory  were  defective  (aft.
2 h.).

Emptiness  and  hollowness  in  the  head  3 his  head  felt  like  a
lantern.

40.  Emptiness  and  pain  in  the  head  as  from  a debauch  the  previous
day.* * * §

Headache  as  from  intoxication  and  night-watching  (aft.  12  h.).

Dulness  in  the  head ; his  thoughts  leave  him.

A thought  he  has  once  entertained  he  cannot  get  rid  of.

Headache  causing  him  to  be  confused,  when  he  comes  into  the
warm  room.f

45.  Creeping  pain  in  the  forehead J (aft.  1 h.).

Gurgling  in  the  head,  at  night ; he  distinctly  heard  the  pulse
beating  in  it.

Headache  like  throbbing  of  the  arteries  in  the  brain  (aft.  6 h.).

Throbbing  headache  about  midnight.

Throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead,  when  stooping  and  when  exerting
his  mind,  which  goes  off  on  walking,  in  the  evening.

50.  Headache  in  the  occiput,  a rythmical  throbbing.  [Hbg.]

Throbbing,  aching  pain  in  the  head,  which  was  alleviated  by
external  pressure§  (aft.  h.).

Aching  pain  in  the  head  on  stooping  forwards.

In  the  forehead,  above  the  orbits,  an  aching  pain  involving  the
head.  \_Rkt.~\

Dull  headache,  especially  pressive  in  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.)

[Rh.]

55.  Aching  pain  in  the  whole  forehead  at  once,  only  when  walking.

Aching  pain  in  the  occiput ; at  the  same  time  frequently  hot  in
the  body  and  always  in  transpiration.

Aching,  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  in  the  morning
(aft.  60  h.).

After  lying  down  to  sleep  heavy  headache,  on  the  side  on  which
he  is  not  lying.  ||

Drawing  pain  in  the  occiput  above  the  nape,  in  the  morning^!
(aft.  60  h.).

60.  Headache  on  awaking  and  some  time  thereafter  j the  brain  con-
fused and  as  if  lacerated,  as  in  putrid  fever,  or  after  drinking  spirits
(aft.  6,  12  h.).

Watering  of  one  eye  with  drawing  headache.

* Comp.  931,  1051.

f Comp.  573.

J Comp.  102,  723.

§ This  diminution  of  the  pains  by  external  pressure  occurs  in  other  pulsatilla
pains  5 see  840,  841.

||  Comp.  27.

Comp.  61,  102.


PULSATILLA.


349

Pain  on  the  hairy  scalp  on  stroking  back  the  hair,  a kind  of
drawing  pain.

Tensive  headache  over  the  brain  (aft.  i h.).  [£/£/.]

Tensive  drawing  pain  in  the  forehead  above  the  orbits ; which  is
aggravated  by  raising  up  the  eye.* * * §

65.  Headache  : the  brain  is  as  if  squeezed  in,  with  a boring  pain
in  the  vertex.

Headache  in  the  temples,  as  if  constricted.  [*$'//'.]

Above  the  eyes  a contractive  headache,  which  is  aggravated  if  she
looks  closely  at  anything.

An  out-boring  headache  with  dull  stitches.

Single  sharp  blows  or  jerks  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain  (aft.  1 h).

70.  Jerking  tearing  in  both  temples,  as  if  they  would  be  torn
asunder.

Headache  : Shooting  from  the  occiput  through  the  ears.

Shooting  in  the  occiput,  which  is  aggravated  by  lying  down,  but
goes  off  on  rising  up.

Stitches  which  dart  through  the  whole  brain,  after  dinner  till  bed-
time, mingled  with  shivering  and  attacks  of  faintness  (aft.  16  h.).
Semilateral  shooting  in  the  head.

75.  Shooting  pain  in  the  head.  [Heyer,  in  Crell’s  Journ .,  ii,  p.  205.]
Shooting  and  tearing  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  temples.
[Fr.  H—n .]

Stitches  in  the  temples.

Stitches  out  at  the  forehead,  in  the  evening.

Cutting  headache.

80.  Evening  headache,  as  from  stuffed  coryza ; followed  by  dry  heat
in  bed  and  sopor,  with  delirious  visions  and  almost  waking  dreams. t
Headache  as  from  having  eaten  too  much,  or  from  having  dis-
ordered the  stomach  by  over-loading  it  with  too  fat  meat.J
Humming  in  the  head.

Rushing  in  the  head,  and  still  louder  roaring  before  the*  ears,  on
account  of  which  he  must  go  to  bed  in  the  evening  earlier  than  usual.
[Fr.  H—n.]

Headache,  occasionally,  as  if  a keen  wind  blew  through  the
brain. § (aft.  40  h.).

85.  Crepitation  in  the  brain,  when  walking,  synchronous  with  the
pulse.

The  headache,  which  ceases  and  returns  at  indeterminate  times,
is  especially  severe  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  [i£/£/.]

Contracts  the  pupils  at  first.

Dilates  the  pupils  at  last.

Dilated  pupils.

90.  Swollen  eyes  and  sensation  in  them  as  if  they  were  squinting.

He  sees  objects  double  (aft.  several  h.).

* Comp.  33.

f Comp.  999,  1006,  1093.

j Comp.  321,  327.

§ Comp.  155.


350


PULSATILLA.


Obscuration  of  the  sight  with  inclination  to  vomit  and  pale
face.*

Vertiginous  obscuration  of  the  sight  after  sitting,  on  standing
upright  and  commencing  to  walk  (aft.  24  h.).

Dimness  of  vision,  like  a mist  before  the  eyes,  on  rising  from  a
seat  and  walking  (aft.  24  h.).

95.  Dim  vision  like  a mist  before  the  eyes.  [Hbg. ]

Pale  vision.  \_Stf.]

Obscuration  of  sight. f [Saur,1  in  Bergius,  Mat.  Med.,  p.  517.]

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  it  is  very  dark  before  his
eyes.

Transient  obscuration  of  sight.

100.  Greater  acuteness  of  vision  for  distant  objects.^

During  some  days  recurring  obscuration  of  sight.

Sight  and  hearing  leave  him,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  head  and  a
sensation  of  heaviness  and  formication  in  the  brain,  followed  by
chilliness. §

(Glittering  before  the  eyes.)

He  sees  fiery  circles  before  the  eyes,  which  become  more  expanded
and  larger  towards  noon  (this  ceases  towards  evening) .

105.  The  flame  of  a candle  appears  surrounded  by  a star-like  halo.

On  shaking  the  head  there  is  shooting  in  the  left  eye,  and  a tear
escapes.

One  eye  or  the  other  suffers  shooting  pains,  almost  without
inflammation  of  the  white,  and  he  cannot  look  into  the  flame  of  a
candle  ; he  can  only  open  the  eyelids  a little  way  (aft.  3 h.).

Headache  extended  into  the  right  eye,  there  was  aching  in  the
latter,  and  a tear  escaped  from  it.

Headache  extended  down  into  the  eyes,  so  that  they  were  painful,
in  the  evening.

no.  In  the  white  of  the  eye  near  the  cornea,  a small  (inflamed)  red
spot  (aft.  30  h.).

The  border  of  the  lower  eyelid  is  inflamed  and  swollen,  and  in  the
morning  a tear  escapes  from  the  eye.

The  eyes  are  full  of  water,  they  weep ; eyes  deeply  sunk.
[Ant.  v.  Stoerck,2  Von  der  Pulsatille , Frft.,  1771..]

Swelling  and  redness  of  the  eyelids.  [Saur,  1,  c.]

A stye  on  the  eyelid,  and  inflammation  of  the  white  of  the  eye,
now  in  one  now  in  the  other  canthus,  with  drawing  tensive  pain
therein  on  moving  the  facial  muscles,  and  with  ulcerated  nostrils. |j

1 15.  Dryness  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  12  h.).

Dryness  of  the  eyelids  especially  when  he  is  sleepy  (aft.  h.).

Dryness  of  the  right  eye  and  sensation  as  if  it  were  obscured  by

* 92>  93?  94?  98>  99>  101,  102,  comp,  with  97,  1078.
f From  the  emanations,
j Curative  action  after  a large  dose.

§ Comp.  723,  also  29,  30  and  45,  likewise  59,  61.

||  Comp.  184,  185,  585,  586.


1 Effects  of  emanations  while  evaporating  the  juice. — With  S.  113.

2 Effects  observed  mainly  in  patients.


PULSATILLA.


35i

mucus  hanging  upon  it,  which  could  be  wiped  away,  in  the  evening
(aft.  24  h.)  *

Dryness  of  the  eyes,  and  in  the  morning  a sensation,  as  if  a foreign
body  pressed  on  it  (aft.  many  h.).

Pain  in  the  eye,  as  if  it  were  scraped  with  a knife,1 2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]
120.  An  aching  pain  in  the  left  eye.

An  aching  pain  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eye.

An  aching  burning  pain  in  the  eyes  especially  in  the  morning  and
evening.

Aching  pain  in  the  eyes  as  if  heat  were  in  them.

Aching  burning  pain  in  the  eye  as  if  a hair  had  got  into  it.

125.  Uncommon  tearing,  boring  cutting  pains  in  the  eye.3  [Stoerck,

J.C.]

When  reading,  an  aching  in  the  eye,  as  if  sand  were  in  it,  which
went  off  when  he  left  off  reading,  and  returned  on  again  reading.

In  the  evening  after  sunset  itching  in  the  inner  canthi  of  the
eyes,  as  if  a sore  were  healing 3 after  rubbing  there  occurs  an  aching,
pricking  pain.

In  the  eyes  a burning  and  itching,  which  compels
scratching  and  rubbing.

Itching;  pricking;  in  the  eyes,  compelling;  scratching;  (aft.  24  h.).

130.  Itching  in  the  eyes.

Itching  of  the  eyeball  in  the  outer  canthus  in  the  evening  ; in  the
morning  the  eyelids  are  as  if  gummed  up  with  matter  (aft.  8 h.).
The  inner  canthus  is  as  if  glued  up  with  matter  in  the  morning. f
The  eyelids  are  gummed  up  in  the  morning.

Itching  (eroding)  and  burning  in  the  eyelids  in  the  evening.

135.  In  the  innercanthus  a smarting  pain,  as  if  it  were  excoriated  (aft.
8 h.).

In  the  cold  open  air  the  eyes  water.J

In  the  open  air  there  is  dimness  before  the  eyes  and  they  weep.
In  wind  the  eyes  become  full  of  water  (aft.  10  h.).

Blear  eyed.

140.  Quivering  of  the  eyelids.

(A  pimple  on  the  forehead.)

A smarting  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp  § (aft.  9 h.).

On  the  hairy  scalp,  small  swellings,  with  pain  like  ulceration.

On  the  hairy  scalp,  in  the  occipital  region,  a large  pimple  or
pustule  filled  with  matter,  with  fine  tearing  pains.  [HbgJ]

* Also  in  the  morning  after  waking,  and  in  the  afternoon  after  the  siesta,  there
occurs  with  pulsatilla  not  unfrequently  such  a dimness  of  vision  as  if  something  hung
upon  the  cornea,  whereby  vision  is  impeded,  more  in  one  eye,  less  in  the  other,  which
seems  as  if  it  might  be  wiped  away,  but  does  not  actually  go  away  until  this  symptom
naturally  disappears  of  itself,
f Comp.  139,  181 .

J 136,  137,  138.  This  watery  state  of  the  eye  is  an  alternating  state  with  115,
1 18.

§ 14a,  143,  comp,  with  144.


1 In  a case  of  chronic  syphilitic  ophthalmia.

2 In  a case  of  amaurosis,  coincident  with  improvement  of  vision.


PULSATILLA.


35*

145.  Sweat  on  the  face  and  hairy  scalp.  [Hbg.~\

Quivering  in  the  muscles  and  cheeks.

Warmth  and  feeling  of  warmth  in  the  face.  [Hbg.~\

Shuddering  on  one  side  of  the  face.*

Pallor  of  the  face.

150.  A tension  in  the  face  and  in  the  fingers  (especially  on  taking
hold  of  something)  as  if  the  parts  would  swell.

Painful  sensitiveness,  like  excoriation  of  the  skin  of  the  lips  and
face,  when  touched.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  auditory  apparatus  (aft  8 h.).

Murmur  in  the  ear  synchronous  with  the  pulse. f
Frequent  humming  in  the  ear.

155.  Noise  in  the  ear  as  from  wind,  or  from  the  rushing  of  water,  after
4 p.  m.  (aft.  10  h.).

Roaring  in  the  ears  (aft.  7,  8 h.),  which  lasted  two  days  and  went
off  by  a sudden  shock  which  went  like  an  electric  shock  from  the
head  to  over  the  chest,  with  sensation  before  the  eyes  as  when  a soap
bubble  bursts.  \_Mch.']

Sensation  in  the  ear,  as  if  it  were  stopped  up,  and  a roaring  in  it,
as  from  a loud  distant  noise  (aft.  21  h.).  [Rkt.']

A trembling  vibrating  ringing  in  the  ears,  as  when  an  iron  bar  is
struck  (aft.  3 h.).

Ringing  in  the  ears  (from  the  4th  to  the  8th  h.).

160.  A fine  ringing  in  the  right  ear,  then  in  the  left  .with  an  agreeable
tickling  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  membrana  tympani.  iHbgJ]
Chirping  in  the  ear  as  of  grasshoppers,  in  the  morning  in  bed  (aft.

50  h.).

Hardness  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  up  J (aft.  3 h.).
Hardness  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  stopped  up,  with  trembling
and  perspiration  on  the  back — recurring  on  alternate  hours  (aft.  3 h.).
Itching  deep  in  the  ear  (aft.  24  h.).

165.  In  the  right  ear  much  itching,  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  (aft.

3°  M- "

Itching  pricking  in  the  interior  of  the  ear  (aft.  6 h.).

Single  tearing  twitching  through  the  ears  (aft.  12  h.).

Twitching  in  the  ears.

Twitching  in  the  auricle,  then  heat  only  of  that  ear.

170.  Violent  pain  in  the  ear,  as  if  something  would  force  itself  out
there.

Heat,  redness  and  swelling  of  the  auricle  (aft.  some  h.).

On  the  auricle  heat  and  perspiration.

When  blowing  the  nose  the  air  penetrates  from  within  into  the
ear,  as  if  it  would  be  distended  thereby  ; at  the  same  time  stitches  that
-dart  thence  to  the  eye.

Pus  flows  out  of  the  left  ear  (aft.  12  h).

* The  occurrence  of  symptoms  on  only  one  half  of  the  body  is  a frequent  pecu-
liarity of  pulsatilla.  Comp.  906,  921,  1073,  1074,  1077,  1098,  1099,  1100.  Rhus,
belladonna  and  cocculus  show  something  similar,
t 1 53>  1 54>  l55t  comp,  with  82.
t l6*,  163,  comp.  157.


PULSATILLA.  353

175.  A small  painful  gland  rises  between  the  tragus  and  the  maxil-
lary joint.

A large,  red  lump  in  the  region  of  the  zygoma.

A red  hard  elevation  on  the  right  cheek  in  front  of  the  ear,  with
burning  contractive  pain  (aft.  5 d.).

On  the  tragus  there  occurs  a scabby  eruption  with  burning
smarting  pain,  which  exudes  a watery  fluid,  and  a glandular  swelling
further  down  on  the  neck,  which  is  painful  when  touched.

A creaking  in  the  ear  on  moving  the  head  or  the  body  (aft.  4,
16  h.).

180.  In  the  parotid  gland  a shooting  pain.

In  the  root  of  the  nose,  near  the  canthus  of  the  eye,  an  abscess,  as
if  a lachrymal  fistula  would  form  there.*

(On  stooping  forwards  pain  in  the  root  of  the  nose  as  from  an
ulcer.)

Aching  sensation  in  the  root  of  the  nose.  [*SV/'.]

In  the  left  nostril  sensation  as  from  an  ulcer  (aft.  8 h.) .

185.  The  ala  nasi  is  ulcerated  externally  and  exudes  a
watery  fluid  (aft.  6 h.).

Twitching  pain  in  the  nose.

In  the  morning  smell  in  the  nose  like  old  coryza,  f

Bad  smell  before  the  nose,  as  from  old  coryza.  [ Hbg.~\

Illusion  of  smell ; he  always  felt  as  if  he  smelt  a mixture  of
tobacco  and  coffee,  even  in  the  open  air.

190.  Epistaxis.

Flow  of  blood  from  the  nose  (aft.  1 h.).

Flow  of  blood  from  the  nose  with  stuffed  coryza.

In  the  morning  blowing  of  blood  from  the  nose  (aft.  48  h.).

On  the  outer  border  of  the  lips  the  epidermis  peels  off  down  to
the  living  flesh.

195.  The  epidermis  of  the  lips  becomes  chapped  (aft.  2 h.).

Quivering  in  the  lower  lip  for  two  days.

Lower  lip  swollen,  chapped  in  the  middle,  with  tensive  pain.

Itching  in  the  region  of  the  chin,  especially  in  the  evening.

In  the  lower  jaw  (drawing)  tearing  pains. J
200.  A contractive  pain,  as  from  an  acid,  in  the  jaws,  with  shivering
and  cold  sweat  on  the  face.

(Shooting,  throbbing  toothache,  in  the  afternoon  about  4 or  5
o'clock),  which  is  aggravated  by  cold  water.

Toothache  renewed  every  time  he  eats.

Toothache,  which  commenced  about  2 a.m.,  did  not  allow  him
to  lay  the  head  on  a cold  part  of  the  bed  3 a shooting  digging  first
in  the  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw  then  in  those  of  the  upper  jaw,  from

* Comp.  132,  135.
f Comp.  188,  589.

X The  so-called  tearing  pains  of  pulsatilla  are  mostly  a transient  drawing  tension,
which  always  changes  into  a twitching  like  tearing — somewhat  as  if  a nerve  were
painfully  drawn  out  and  stretched,  and  then  let  loose  with  a sudden,  painful  jerk.
Hence  the  expressions,  “single  tearing  twitching,”  167,  “drawing  twitching,”
208,  &c.


354


PULSATILLA.


the  root  of  one  tooth  into  another,  which  recurred  at  noon  when
eating.

Pricking  toothache,  which  was  relieved  by  vinegar.

205.  Pricking  gnawing  toothache  in  the  gums,  especially  towards
evening,  which  was  aggravated  by  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  but  was
alleviated  by  throwing  off  the  bed  clothes  and  the  blowing  in  of  the
cold  open  air,  and  was  removed  by  the  evening  sleep*  (aft  6 h.).

Shooting  pain  in  the  furthest  back  molar,  which  was  aggravated
when  he  opened  his  mouth,  from  2 to  6 p.m.

Toothache  immediately  on  taking  something  very  warm  into  the
mouth.

Drawing  twitching  toothache,  aggravated  by  drinking  cold  fluid.
Twitching  in  the  molars,  with  a small  swelling  of  the  gums.

210.  (Twitching  toothache,  especially  in  the  morning,  which  was
relieved  by  cold  water  when  it  became  warm  in  the  mouth,  was  not
increased  by  chewing,  but  was  excited  by  picking  the  teeth.)

In  the  evening  (6  o'clock)  (after  heat  in  the  head  with  thirst)
twitching  pains  in  the  teeth  until  1 1 p.m. ; thereafter  sweat.

Tearing  toothache. f

Pain  in  the  teeth,  as  if  they  were  pushed  outwards.  J
A tooth  is  painful  when  chewing  and  biting.§

215.  The  pains  in  the  teeth  are  increased  in  the  wind.||

Looseness  of  the  teeth  in  the  morning.

The  gums  are  painful  as  if  excoriated.

In  the  gums  a beating  synchronous  with  the  pulse  ; aggravated
by  the  heat  of  the  stove.  \_HbgJ]

The  gums  are  painful  on  their  inner  aspect,  as  if  they  were
eroded  (aft.  8 h.).

220.  On  the  back  gums  feeling  of  swelling,  though  there  was  none ;
he  had  then  a burning  sensation  when  he  took  anything  into  his
mouth,  food  or  drink,  cold  or  warm.

The  tongue  feels  to  him  to  be  broader.

The  tongue  is  covered  with  viscid  mucus,  as  with  a
skin  (fur).fl

with  white  tongue  nasty  taste  in  the  mouth,  in  the
morning.**

On  the  tongue  at  first  tearing,  then  persistent  heat  in  it.1
[Stoerck,  1.  c.]

225.  On  the  side  of  the  tongue's  tip  a painful  blister  (aft.  6 d.).

# See  note  to  215.
f Comp.  199.

% Comp.  713.

§ Alternating  action  with  210.

||  The  increase  or  excitation  of  the  symptoms  by  cool,  especially  open  air,  is  a
rarer  alternating  action  which  renews  the  symptoms  in  the  warmth,  especially  in  the
warm  air  of  the  room,  e.g.  573.

Comp.  249.

##  Comp.  247,  248,  251,  258,  262.


1 From  extract  placed  on  the  tongue,— Literally — “ At  first  a slight  sense  of
astringency,  then  painful  pungency,  and  subsequently  heat  lasting  for  a long  time.”


PULSATILLA.


355


On  the  middle  of  the  tongue,  even  when  it  is
moistened,  a sensation  as  if  it  we^e  burnt  and  insen-
sible, at  night  and  in  the  morning*  (aft.  6 h.).

Dysphagia,  as  from  paralysis  of  the  oesophageal  muscles.  [ Hbg .]

Sore  throat : stitches  at  the  back  of  the  throat  when  not  swallow-
ing, none  when  swallowing.

Shooting  sore  throat.

230.  Sore  throat : cutting  pain  in  the  throat  (aft.  8 h.).

Sore  throat : pain  on  the  side  of  the  palate  when  it  is  touched  and
when  speaking,  as  if  there  were  a blister  or  a painful  pimple  there,
with  dilatation  of  the  pupils,  in  the  morning.

Painless  sensation,  as  if  the  palate  were  covered  with  viscid  mucus
or  were  swollen.

Sore  throat : sensation  on  swallowing  as  if  the  throat  at  the  back
were  narrowed  and  swollen  up.

Aching  and  tension  in  the  throat  on  swallowing.

235^  Sore  throat : pain  when  swallowing,  as  if  the  uvula  were  swollen.

Sore  throat : sensation  as  if  something  were  swollen  in  the
oesophagus,  at  one  time  up  above  at  another  down  low  (aft.  6 h.).

Sore  throat 3 pain  on  swallowing,  as  if  the  submaxillary  glands
projected  into  the  throat,  and  were  as  if  excoriated  and  raw  (aft.
8 h.).

Sore  throat : the  palate  smarts  as  if  it  were  raw,  on  swallowing.
The  throat  is  painful  posteriorly,  as  if  it  were  raw,  at
the  same  time  a drawing  pain  in  the  cervical  muscles.

240.  Sore  throat : rawness  and  sore  sensation  in  the  throat  when  not
swallowing,  and  as  if  it  were  too  dry,  in  the  morningf  (aft.  2 h.).

Sore  throat : in  the  throat  as  if  scrapy,  scratchy,  and  raw,  as  if
after  severe  vomiting ; he  feels  nothing  when  swallowing 3 at  the
same  time  dry  ih  the  throat.

Raw,  scrapy,  and  scratchy  in  the  throat,  with  dryness  in
the  mouth.

Sore  throat : when  swallowing  feeling  of  a swelling  in  the  throat
and  roughness  in  the  windpipe.

Dryness  of  the  throat  after  midnight.

245.  In  the  morning  dryness  of  the  throat  (aft.  6,  20  h.).

Intolerable  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  throat  extending  to  the  tip
of  the  tongue  (without  visible  dryness)  with  thirst ; he  can  drink  but
little,  because  it  is  repugnant  to  him  internally,  like  sickness.

In  the  morning  the  mouth  and  throat  are  dry  and  covered  by  a
tasteless  insipid  mucus,  with  a bad  smell  from  the  mouth,  which,
however,  he  is  not  himself  conscious  of  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  morning  dryness  of  the  tongue.

When  he  wakes  from  sleep  in  the  morning  he  feels  a dryness  of
the  palate,  tongue,  and  lips,  which  afterwards  changes  into  very  viscid
mucus. t


# Comp.  248.

f Alternating  action,  235,  238.
£ Comp,  222,


35<>


PULSATILLA.


250.  Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth  and  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the
morning.

(In  the  morning  a slimy,  saltish,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  not
without  appetite.)

The  interior  of  the  throat  is  covered  with  a viscid  mucus  in  the
morning.*

The  inside  of  the  mouth  is  covered  with  foetid  mucus,  in  the
morning  on  waking  from  sleep.

He  has  a bad  smell  from  the  mouth  in  the  morning,  f
255.  He  has  a foetid  smell  from  the  mouth  in  the  morning.

At  night  there  is  a foetid  smell  from  the  mouth.

In  the  evening;  after  lying;  down  he  has  a smell  from  his  mfouth
(aft.  96  h.).

A foetid  herbaceous  taste  at  the  back  of  the  throat.

He  has  in  his  mouth  a taste  as  of  putrid  flesh,  with
inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  2 h.).

260.  After  dinner  eructation  with  the  taste  of  putrid  flesh,  and  this
same  taste  remains  afterwards  in  the  mouth,  with  inclination  to
vomitt  (aft.  14  h.).

On  hawking  there  occurs,  especially  in  the  morning,  a taste  in
the  mouth  like  putrid  flesh.

Sometimes  mattery  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  morning.
Loathsome,  fasting  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  when  one  rises  too
soon  (aft.  12  h.).

A burnt  (empyreumatic)  taste  in  the  mouth.

265.  An  earthy  taste  in  the  mouth  with  inclination  to  vomit  (also  aft.

1 h->

A flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  if  he  had  eaten  earthy  things  (aft.
10  h.).

Constant  sweetish  taste  of  the  saliva  in  the  mouth.

Disgusting  sweetish  taste  of  beer  (aft.  2 h.).

Bitter  beer  has  to  him  a disgusting  sweetish  taste.

270.  Disgusting  taste  from  smoking  tobacco.

Tobacco  smoking  has  no  taste,  is  completely  tasteless,  but  yet  it
produces  no  repugnance,  towards  evening  (aft.  20,  50  h.).

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  at  6 p.m.§

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  h.),  which  goes
off  after  eating.

After  eating  and  smoking  tobacco  there  occurs  a bitter,  bilious
taste  in  the  mouth.  \_Hbg.~]

275.  Constant  bitter,  bilious  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  after  a meal.
After  rumbling  and  working  in  the  bowels  and  pinching  in  the
abdomen  there  was  a rising  up  in  the  throat.

* Comp.  222,  247.
f Comp.  246.

X Comp.  321,  & c.

§ Rarely  (and  then  only  in  the  evening  or  morning)  there  occurs  from  pulsatllla
a persistent  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  ; the  alternating  actions,  however,  when  there  is
no  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  per  se , but  when  it  either  comes  on  when  drinking,  and
when  eating  and  chewing,  especially  black  bread,  or  when  the  bitter  taste  only
appears  after  swallowing  drinks  and  food,  are  far  the  most  frequent  from  this  plant.


PULSATILLA.


357


Bitter  taste  with  longing  for  lemon  juice.

Bitter  taste  of  all  food,  followed  by  chilliness  with  cold  sweat.

Bitter  taste  even  of  the  food.  \_StfJ\

280.  In  the  morning,  on  an  empty  stomach,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
which  persists  while  smoking  tobacco.  \_Rkt.~\

After  drinking  beer,  in  the  evening,  a bitter  taste
remains  in  the  mouth  (aft.  8 h.).

In  the  morning  dislike  to  milk,  though  it  tasted  all  right.

Milk  taken  in  the  morning  has  no  taste.

All  the  food  she  takes  tastes  too  salt  (black  bread  excepted),  and
after  eating  it  there  always  rises  a scraping  salt  taste  up  in  the  throat
for  several  hours  (aft.  4,  28  h.).

285.  After  drinking  coffee,  especially  in  the  morning,  a bitter  taste
remains  in  the  mouth.

Wine  tastes  bitter  to  him  (aft.  8 h.).

Dislike  to  butter,  it  tastes  bitter  to  him.

Bitter  taste  of  bread,  roll  and  meat.

He  has  a loathing  only  at  black  bread,  it  tastes  bitter,  not  so
other  food.

290.  Bread  sometimes  tastes  bitter  ; he  loathes  bread.

Bread  tastes  bitter  when  he  chews  it,  but  as  soon  as  it  is
swallowed  the  bitter  taste  is  gone.

A quarter  of  an  hour  after  eating  with  good  appetite  the  mouth
is  bitter.

A somewhat  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  morning,
and  some  time  after  eating  and  drinking,  but  the  taste  of  the  food  is
all  right.

Bitterness  after  vomiting.*

295.  Eructation  (belching)  of  a bitter  fluid  up  into  the  mouth.

Loud  eructation.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Bitter  eructation  at  night.

Bilious  eructation  in  the  evening  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  morning  beer  tastes  bitter,  and  afterwards  there  remains  a
sour  taste  in  the  mouth  f (aft.  12  h.).

300.  Bread  tastes  sour  to  her  and  is  too  dry.

After  eating,  a sourish  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  3 h.).

After  drinking  coffee  a sour  fluid  is  eructated  (belched)  up  into
the  mouth.

In  the  morning  sour  eructation.

Anorexia  with  pure,  proper  taste.

305.  Dislike  to  meat  and  stale  baked  bread.

Diminished  taste  of  all  food  (aft.  4,  8, 16  h.).

Meat  has  no  taste  to  him.

Fresh  meat  tastes  putrid  to  him.

Though  he  has  some  appetite,  bread,  butter  and  beer  have  little
or  no  taste  (plum  jam  only  tastes  perfectly  good  to  him)  (aft.
12  h.).

* Comp.  353.

f The  bitterness  and  sourness  in  the  taste  or  on  eructation  is  alternating  action,

and  yet  both  are  primary  actions.


358


PULSATILLA.


310.  (He  will  not  eat  anything  warm,  and  desires  only  butter,  bread
and  fruit.)

Want  of  appetite  on  account  of  tastelessness  of  the  food  and
fulness  of  the  stomach.

Adipsia.

In  the  evening  increased  appetite  (aft.  5 h.).

In  the  middle  of  her  meal,  at  noon,  she  is  overcome  by  sleep  and
must  take  a nap.

315.  In  the  morning  when  rising  from  bed  a kind  of  clawing  in  the
stomach,  as  if  he  had  been  hungry  for  a long  time ; this  goes  off
after  eating  (aft.  12  h.).

A gnawing  sensation  in  the  stomach  like  bulimy  (aft.  8 h.).

Ravenous  hunger  (immediately,  but  soon  going  off).

He  has  longing  for  food,  but  knows  not  for  what.  He  also
relishes  nothing  that  he  eats.*

Is  hungry,  but  no  desire  for  any  article  of  food  in  particular.

320.  Appetite  he  knows  not  for  what.

Sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were  deranged.f

Symptoms  of  very  much  deranged  stomach.

After  a slight  overloading  of  the  stomach  at  breakfast,  tension  in
the  feet  (aft.  48  h.).

Frequent  eructation  with  the  taste  of  what  had  been
previously  eaten.J

325.  After  eating,  persistent  eructation  with  the  taste  of  what  had
been  eaten.  \_Rkt .]

After  eating  cake  eructation  like  old,  rancid  tallow.

Sensation  in  the  stomach  as  from  eating  too  much  ; the  food
comes  up  again  into  the  mouth,  as  if  it  would  be  vomited.

Tendency  to  imperfect  eructation;  eructation  that  fails  to  come
to  completion.

After  eating  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food,  and  then
inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  4 h.).

330.  Nausea  rises  up  into  the  mouth.

Sick  nausea  rises  up  into  the  throat.

In  the  morning  nausea  and  sliminess  of  the  mouth,  which  soon
changes  into  a sour  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  13  h.).

A feeling  comes  up  into  the  oesophagus,  as  if  a worm  were  crawl-
ing  up  it.

In  the  morning,  after  taking  milk,  nausea,  qualmishness.

335.  Sick  nausea  rises  up  in  the  oesophagus  with  a very  disagreeable
feeling.

Inclination  to  vomit  solid  food,  bread,  meat.

Intolerable  nausea,  without  vomiting  (aft.  1 h.).

Inclination  to  vomit  with  chilliness.

Nausea  only  in  the  throat,  but  not  when  swallowing.

* Comp.  320.
f Comp.  81,  259,  260,  261.

X The  eructation  with  the  taste  and  smell  of  what  had  previously  been  eaten  (see
also  325)  is  a much  more  frequent  alternating  action  of  pulsatilla  than  empty  eructa-
tion of  nothing  but  air.


PULSATILLA,


359


340.  Nausea,  when  about  to  take  food.

She  felt  nausea  when  eating,  so  that  food  is  repugnant  to  her.

Nausea  from  smoking  tobacco  in  persons  accustomed  to  smoke.

Dislike  to  tobacco-smoking,  as  though  he  had  smoked  to  satiety
(aft.  5 h.).

Extreme  loathing  to  tobacco-smoking.

345.  During  slumber  (or  during  sleep)  there  occurs  nausea,  though
appetite  is  present,  even  for  black  bread  * (aft.  20  h.).

Nausea  which  seemed  to  arise  from  heat  of  the  body.

Loathing  and  nausea  as  if  from  drinking  oil.

Inclination  to  vomit.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

After  exercise  in  the  open  air,  towards  evening,  nausea  and
vomiting  of  something  salt  or  sour  (aft.  3J  h.).

350.  Sensation  of  sickness  in  the  epigastric  region,  espe-
cially after  eating  and  drinking  (aft.  1 h.).

Inclination  to  vomit  with  grumbling  and  rumbling
in  the  subcostal  region.

Vomiting  of  food  that  had  been  eaten  a long  time  previously.

In  the  evening  vomiting  of  food $ followed  by  bitterness  in  the
mouth  with  teeth  on  edge.

Nocturnal  vomiting  with  shooting  drawing  pain  in  the  back
towards  the  scapula,  f

355.  In  the  evening,  after  a meal  and  on  lying  down  in  bed,  violent,
straining  vomiting  of  a green  slimy  watery  matter,  which  smells  sour,
and  burns  like  fire  in  the  oesophagus  ; this  vomiting  occurred  on
three  successive  evenings.  [£//'.]

(Vomiting  before  midnight  of  a small  quantity,  almost  entirely
without  nausea.)

Short  bilious  vomiting.

After  the  vomiting  burning  in  the  oesophagus,

After  the  vomiting  loss  of  appetite.  J

360.  She  belches  from  below  upwards  a watery  fluid  up  into  the  mouth
(without  nausea  or  vomiting),  which  she  must  spit  out  (aft.  3 h.)  3
immediately  before  this  a sensation  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  if
something  were  torn  away,  and  in  the  same  place  an  aching  during
the  eructation.

Accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  as  after  drinking  vinegar.

[Hbg.]

Salivation.1  [Stoerck.,  1.  c.]

Salivation.

During  a flow  of  saliva  that  lasted  four  and  twenty  hours,  incli-
nation to  vomit.

365.  Frequent  flow  of  watery  saliva  from  the  mouth.§

* Comp.  576.

f Comp.  345,  572.  Allied  irritations,  also  at  night,  see  453,  464,  and  other

nocturnal  symptoms,  614 — 616,  633,  683,  751,  765,  780,  355.

J Alternating  action  in  opposition  to  345.

§ 3 65,  366,  360  are  allied  symptoms  to  572.


1 Stoerck  adds,  “ tenacious,”


360


PULSATILLA.


Flow  of  watery  saliva,  like  water-brash.

Jerks  from  the  stomach  up  to  the  throat,  and  in  the  throat  tensive
pain,  with  anxiety  and  feeling  of  internal  heat,  which  goes  off  after
eating  (aft.  6 h.).

Hiccup  when  smoking  tobacco.

(Hiccup  at  night  in  sleep.)

370.  After  drinking  tendency  to  hiccup.

In  the  morning,  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  aching
drawing  pain,  which  sometimes  goes  into  the  side  of  the  chest
like  a shooting,  and  at  last  into  the  back  like  a tearing  (aft.  24  h.).

A tension  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  scrobiculus  cordis  up
into  the  mammae.

Grasping  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [*S7/".]

An  arterial  pulsation  is  felt  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.*

375.  On  laying  the  hand  on  the  stomach  a throbbing  is  felt  in  it.

Pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  on  inspiration.

First  aching  then  twitching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

In  the  morning  violent  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  combined
with  inclination  to  vomit.

Aching,  squeezing  or  choking  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which
impedes  respiration,  in  the  afternoon.

380.  Several  attacksof  contractive  or  choking  pain  in  the  oesophagus,  just
as  if  a large  lump  of  new-baked  bread  had  been  swallowed  (aft.  10  h.).  .

Very  disagreeable  sensation  of  tight  tension  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
all  were  too  full,  hard  and  impassable,  and  as  if  no  stool  or  flatus
could  be  expelled,  though  a stool  does  pass,  slowly  but  not  hard,  and  yet
the  flatus  is  passed  with  difficulty  and  in  small  quantities  at  a time.

Twitching  and  shooting  in  the  subcostal  region,  as  if  there  were
an  ulcer  there,  back  into  the  sacrum.

Contractive  and  squeezing  sensation  in  the  epigastric  and  sub-
costal (hypochondrial)  region,  as  if  the  flatus  stuck  there  (especially
after  eating)  which  then  goes  into  the  chest  and  stops  and  impedes
respiration  (aft.  16  h.).

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  hypochondria.

385.  A tension  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon,  which
went  off  by  moving  (aft.  26  h.).

Stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  t on  making  a false  step  on  an
uneven  pavement,  &c.

Sensation  of  anxiety  about  the  gastric  region.

Pain  in  the  stomach  an  hour  after  eating.

A weight  in  the  stomach  like  a stone,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  on
awaking.}

390.  After  supper  immediately  aching  in  the  stomach  and  flatulent
colic,  followed  by  nausea  (aft.  24  h.).

In  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  pinching,  shooting  pains  with
flatulent  colic,  in  the  morning  (aft.  24  h.).

Pinching  pains  in  the  epigastrium.

# Comp.  47 — 50,  926.

f Comp.  391,  725.

} Comp.  3 77,  378.


PULSATILLA.


361


Pains  in  the  abdomen  omly  when  walking.

When  sitting,  obtuse  pain  and  sensation  of  tense  distension  in  the
upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

395.  The  abdominal  integuments  feel  swollen,  with  tensive  pain,  and
at  the  same  time  no  flatus  passes.

Hard  distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  stretching  pain  therein,
and  a feeling  as  if  the  abdomen  would  burst  (with  swelling  of  the
dorsum  of  the  feet).

Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  waking  and  sleeping.  [Fr,
H — «.]

Tearing  pain1 2  in  the  abdomen.  [Stoerck,  1.  c,]

Shooting  3 pains  in  the  abdomen.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

400.  Rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  \_Hbg.~\

Early  in  the  morning,  immediately  after  waking  in  bed,  flatulent
colic  ; flatulence  rumbles  and  moves  about  painfully,  especially  in
the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

A persistent  obtuse  stitch  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  from
displaced  flatulence.

Immediately  after  supper  flatulent  colic ; flatulence
rumbles  about  painfully,  especially  in  the  upper  part  of
the  abdomen.*

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen  above  the  navel,  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  onf  (aft.  1 h.).

405.  A firm  prominent  ring  round  the  navel,  which  is  painful  when
walking  (aft.  24  h.).

A formicating  itching  in  and  above  the  navel ; painful  after
scratching.

Flatulence  moves  about  like  colic  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening
after  lying  down  in  bed.

Flatulence  passes  with  loud  rumbling  from  one  part  of  the  bowels
to  another  with  a jerking  and  even  a pinching  sensation,  especially
in  the  evening  in  bed.

Grumbling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  as  from  flatulence.

410.  Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent  purging  and
griping  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen.

In  the  evening  bellyache  or  rattling  in  the  abdomen.

After  eating  fulness  and  occasional  bellyache  with  rumbling.

Sensation  of  a flatulent  colicky  fulness  in  the  abdomen  after  supper
(aft.  2 h.).

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen  just  as  if  the  abdomen
were  eviscerated  (emptied  of  its  intestines).

415.  She  feels  as  if  empty,  and  there  is  pinching  and  bubbling  in  the
abdomen,  as  from  something  fermenting.

Bellyache  after  drinking  (aft.  3 h.).

# Comp.  390,  413.

f Comp.  722,  and  partly  also  723,  also  419,  424,  and  466.


1 Literally,  “ Tormina.”

2 Literally,  “ Somewhat  sharp.”  Both  these  pains  and  those  of  S.  398  were

relieved  when  a loose  stool  occurred.


362


PULSATILLA.


Bellyache  after  drinking,  in  the  evening  (aft.  6 h.).

Flatulent  distension  after  all  food.

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen  as  from  flatulence,  before  eating  in
the  evening*  (aft.  36  h.).

420.  Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen  by  day  and  particularly  in  the
evening,  every  other  day  (aft.  4,  5,  6 d.).

Bellyache : cutting  deep  down  in  the  abdomen,  relieved  by  stooping
forwards,  as  if  about  to  vomit,  towards  5 o’clock  after  the  afternoon’s
meal,  for  three  successive  days  about  the  same  time  ; in  the  evening
about  9 o’clock  it  went  ofF  when  he  lay  curled  up  and  he  fell  asleep
(aft.  24  h.).

Cutting  in  her  abdomen,  after  moving.

The  flatus  is  discharged  with  cutting  pains  in  the
abdomen,  in  the  morning  (aft.  8,  20  h.).

Very  foetid  flatus  after  eating.

425.  Pain  in  the  hypogastrium  more  pinching  than  cutting,  with  soft
stool.

Pinching  pain  in  the  belly,  which  involves  the  whole  abdomen  in
a uniform  manner  (aft  J h.).

Griping  pain  in  the  abdomen  on  the  left  side ; she  must  bind  up
the  belly  tightly,  f

(In  the  morning  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  with  chilliness  and
heat.)

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  4 h.)  and  sharp  stitches  which
darted  from  the  abdomen  into  the  penis,  frequent,  thin  stools,  with
great  thirst  for  brown  beer.

430.  Bellyache  as  if  diarrhoea  must  ensue,  and  yet  there
only  occurs  a good  natural  stool  (aft.  48,  72  h.).

Aching  pressing  pain  in  the  abdomenj  (aft.  1,  42  h.).

Nocturnal  colic  : after  midnight  a pressure  here  and  there  in  the
abdomen  as  from  displaced  flatulence,  with  hot  feeling  all  over  the
body,  without  thirst ; a discharge  of  flatus  gave  no  relief.

Bellyache  after  the  stool.

Drawing  in  the  back  during  the  stool,  otherwise  scarcely  at  all.

435.  After  the  stool  colicky  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  from  flatulence
(aft.  5 h.).

After  the  stool  aching  in  the  rectum.

When  yawning  pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  integuments  of  the  hypo-
gastrium (aft.  2 h.).

Chilliness  over  the  abdomen  (also  round  about  to  the  lower  part
of  the  back).

A pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles  when  sitting  and  when  coughing
(aft.  3 d.).

440.  Painful  tenderness  of  the  abdomen  which  is  excited  by  touching
it  (aft.  several  h,).

After  purging,  with  violent  thirst,  painful  tenderness  of  the  abdo-

# 419 — 423,  comp,  with  404,  466,  722,  and  partly  with  723.

f Comp.  410,  373.

X Comp.  378,  379/3^9-


PULSATILLA,  363

minal  integuments  j the  abdomen  could  not  be  touched  without
causing  pain.

Obstinate  constipation.

Daily,  but  hard  stool  (with  pain  in  the  haemorrhoidal  lumps).
Difficult  evacuation  of  the  stool  with  painful  pressing  and  pain  in
the  back.* * * §

445.  In  the  morning  difficult  stool,  then  two  soft  stools  during  the  day.
He  has  frequent  call  to  stool  with  greyish  pale  complexion  (bad
appearance)  aid  faintness.

Frequent  urging  to  go  to  stool  (frequent  call  to  stool)

as  if  diarrhoea  would  occur  occasionally.

Without  tenesmus,  either  in  the  rectum  or  anus,  he  has  constant
call  to  stool  (in  remote  parts  of  the  bowels)  without  getting  rid  of
sufficient  stool.

Frequent  soft  stool  mingled  with  mucus  (also  aft.  2 h.).
450.  Frequent  evacuation  of  mucus  only  (also  aft.  48  h.)  with

bellyache  before  every  stool.

Stools  consisting  of  nothing  hut  yellowish-white
mucus,  mingled  with  a little  blood  (aft.  12  h.).

Faecal  evacuations  coloured  with  blood,  in  the  morning  (aft.  72

h*)«  . .

Diarrhoea  as  green  as  bile  once  or  twice  at  night ; before  each
stool  a working  about  in  the  bowelsf  (aft.  4 d.).

Diarrhoea  of  green  mucus  (aft.  2 d.).

455.  Diarrhoea  first  green,  then  slimy.

A not  debilitating  diarrhoea.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

Diarrhoea  without  bellyache.  [Hbg."\

For  five  successive  mornings,  every  time  immediately  after  rising,
a slimy  diarrhoeic  stool.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

For  five  successive  nights  (in  sleep)  diarrhoeic  stool  passed  with-
out being  aware  of  it ; also  by  day  three  to  four  diarrhoeic  stools.
[. Fr . H — nJ]

460.  After  the  stool  a slight  chill,  especially  in  the  lower  part  of  the
back  (sacrum)  (and  an  aching  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis).
(For  four  days)  quite  white  Stool  (aft.  3d.,  also  aft  8,  24  h.).
Stool  like  chopped-up  eggs,  with  cutting  before  and  after  the  stool,
especially  in  the  morning.

(In  the  morning,  diarrhoea.)

At  night  watery  diarrhoea.

465.  (The  faeces  passed  are  thin  in  form  and  as  if  passed  flat.)
Diarrhoea  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen. J
In  the  morning  soft,  acrid,  smarting  stool. §

Acrid  evacuations  by  stool.

Blind  piles  with  itching  in  the  evening  (aft.  10  h.).

* This  and  the  six  following  symptoms  (comp.  568)  are  the  most  characteristic
and  commonest  forms  of  the  fgecal  evacuations  from  pulsatilla.

f Comp.  464.  These  kinds  of  nocturnal  diarrhoea  are  characteristic  of  pulsatilla,
and  are  hardly  met  with  in  such  a marked  manner  in  any  other  medicine.

X Comp.  404

§ Comp.  508.


PULSATILLA.


364

470.  Blind  piles  with  itching  at  the  anus.

(Fluent  piles)  discharge  of  blood  by  the  anus  (aft.  8 d.).

Severe  haemorrhage  from  the  anus  (aft.  7 d.).  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Severe  haemorrhage  from  the  anus  during  stool.  [Mch.]

Hemorrhoidal  flux  for  three  days.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

475.  A persistent  obtuse  stitch  in  the  rectum  as  from  displaced  flatus
(aft.  1 h.).

Hemorrhoidal  lumps,  with  single  itching  pricks  in  the  anus.

During  stool  a burning  in  the  rectum.

Blind  piles  in  the  evening  until  about  9 o’clock,  with  sore  pain
at  the  anus,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving,  but  which  is  somewhat
greater  when  moving  (aft.  24  h.).

Sore  pain  of  the  anus,  immediately  after  the  evacuation  of  stool
(aft.  4,  5,  d.).

480.  Blind  piles,  with  sore  pain  (aft.  t h.).

Sore  (excoriation)  pains  in  the  anus  and  the  haemorrhoidal  lumps
(aft.  3 h.).

Painful,  protruded  blind  piles.

(When  standing  an  aching  tearing  down  into  the  anus.)

After  sacral  pains,  in  the  morning,  blind  piles.

485.  Excoriation  and  sore  pain  on  the  nates,  externally,  where  the  sulcus
begins  (aft.  1 h.).

In  the  groins  several  small  pocks  the  size  of  a pea  containing  pus
and  with  burning  shooting  pains.  [ Hbg .]

The  vesical  region  is  painful  when  touched  externally.

Pain  pressing  like  a stone  and  constrictive  in  the  hypogastrium
down  into  the  bladder.

Frequent  call  to  urinate.

490.  At  night  he  wets  the  bed  involuntarily.

Involuntary  micturition  : the  urine  dribbles  away  when
sitting  and  walking.

A persistent,  obtuse  stitch  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  as  from
displaced  flatulence  (aft.  1 h.).

A sharp  (almost  cutting)  pressure  on  the  neck  of  the  bladder  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  as  from  flatulence,  but  without  call  to
urinate.

Persistent  pressure  on  the  bladder,  without  call  to  urinate,  in  the
evening  and  night.

495.  A pressure  on  the  bladder  as  from  displaced  flatulence,  towards
morning.

Strangury,  tenesmus  of  the  bladder.

(Strangury.)  [Hbg.]  ^

Frequent  almost  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate,  with  (acrid  urine)
cutting  pain  when  urinating.

Pressing  before  passing  urine.

500.  A pressing  and  urging  to  urinate.

The  urging  to  pass  urine  is  only  felt  when  he  lies  on  his  back,
and  he  must  soon  urinate  ; but  not  when  he  lies  on  his  side.


1 With  relief  of  a chronic  sacral  pain,  and  therefore  probably  a curative  effect.


PULSATILLA.


365


Copious  flow  of  urine.*

Increased  urinary  discharge.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

Diuresis.  [Heyer,  1.  c.]

505.  Almost  continual  diuresis.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

When  he  coughs  or  discharges  flatus  some  urine  passes  involun-
tarily (aft.  48  h.).

Colourless  urine  as  clear  as  water  (aft.  ij  h.).

Whilst  passing  watery  urine  and  with  feeling  of  weakness  in  the
loins,  acridf  slimy  stools.

The  urine  is  occasionally  red.

510.  Brownish-red  urine.

Dark  red  urine,  without  sediment.

Brown  urine.

Urine  with  a ring  of  violet  foam  over  a sandy  sediment.

(Gelatinous  urinary  sediment.)

515.  Urine  with  violet  red  sediment.

Urine  with  red  sediment.

Urine  with  brick-coloured  sediment.

Severe  stitches  which  darted  from  the  abdomen  into  the  penis.

After  passing  a brown  urine,  burning  in  the  anterior  part  of  the
urethra.J

520.  Troublesome  scalding  of  the  urine.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

In  the  evening  before  lying  down,  a burning  at  the  neck  of  the
bladder,  as  if  it  urged  him  to  urinate.

Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  during  and  after  passing  urine,
which  deposits  a brick-coloured  sediment.

Narrowing  of  the  urethra,  thin  stream  of  the  urine  as  it  passes
(aft.  1 h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  urethra  when  not  urinating.

525.  After  urinating  a sharp  pressive  pain  as  if  with  the  nail  of  the
finger,  in  the  urethra.  [Hbg.~\

After  urinating  an  aching  creeping  pain  in  the  orifice  of  the
urethra.

After  urinating,  aching  and  creeping  in  the  glans  penis.

Constrictive  pain  behind  the  glans  penis.  [i£i*.]

(Swelling  of  inguinal  glands  and  bubo,  on  the  disappearance  of  a
venereal  chancre.)

530.  Fine  pricking  itching  in  the  prepuce  when  sitting  and  lying,  but
not  when  walking  (in  the  evening).

Pricking  itching  sensation  under  the  prepuce  (aft.  \ h.).

Itching  smarting  pain  in  the  inner  and  upper  part  of
the  prepuce  (aft.  6 h.).

Smarting  itching  under  the  prepuce  on  the  glans.

* Rather  secondary  or  curative  action,  after  removal  of  a previous  strangury,

489,  496,  and  500. — With  these  strangury  symptoms  490,  491,  seem  to  be  alter-
nating primary  actions,
f Comp.  467.
t Comp.  553,  520.


1 In  a case  of  chronic  gonorrhoea.


366


PULSATILLA.


(A  fine  pricking  about  the  genitals.)

535.  In  the  morning  in  and  out  of  bed,  itching  of  the  scrotum.

On  the  scrotum  frequent  itching,  especially  in  the  morning  and
evening.

Scrotum  swollen  on  the  right  side.

Swelling  of  the  testicles  (aft.  48  h.).

Very  pendant  testicles  (aft.  1 h.).

540.  Tearing  pain  in  the  testicles  (aft.  24  h.).

The  right  testicle  is  drawn  up  and  swollen,  the  spermatic  cord
swollen  with  tensive  pain,  whereas  the  left  testicle  hangs  down
low  (aft.  i \ h.).

Drawing  and  drawing  tensive  pains  come  from  the  upper  part  of
the  abdomen  through  the  spermatic  cord  into  the  testicles,  which  hang
down  low  (aft.  6 h.j.

In  the  morning  after  waking  prolonged  stiffness  of
penis,  not  without  sexual  desire  (aft.  6 h.)

In  the  morning,  on  awaking,  excitement  of  the  geni-
tals and  desire  for  coitus  (aft.  24  h.).

545.  Nocturnal  seminal  emission.

At  night  during  sleep,  pollutions.  \_Rkt.~\

Two  pollutions  in  one  night  unaccompained  by  amorous
dreams,  and  the  following  day  an  intolerable  weight  and  lassitude  in
the  limbs*  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  morning  in  bed  an  itching  irritation  in  the  region  of  the
seminal  vesicles,  which  disposes  greatly  to  the  ejaculation  of  semen,
almost  without  stiffness  of  the  penis  and  without  amorous  thoughts
(aft.  12,  36  h.).

Erection  of  the  penis  by  day  and  by  night.

550.  (Frequent  stiffness  of  the  penis  with  discharge  of  prostatic  fluidf)
(aft.  36  h.).

Agreeable  tickling  on  the  glans,  then  discharge  of  a colourless
mucus  like  prostatic  fluid.  \_HbgJ]

Discharge  of  an  ill-smelling  fluid  from  the  urethra  (gonorrhoea?).1
[Stoerck,  1.  c.]

Gonorrhoea  of  the  colour  and  consistence  of  semen,  with  burning
pain,  especially  immediately  after  urinating. f

During  the  (already  present)  gonorrhoea,  dropping  of  blood  from
the  urethra  (aft  4 h.).

555.  In  the  vagina  and  externally  on  the  labia  pudendi  a burning
(shooting  ?)  pain.  \_Hbg.]

Cutting  pain  at  the  mouth  of  the  womb  (aft.  6 h.).

Drawing  pressing  pain  towards  the  uterus,  with  inclination  to
vomit  towards  morning.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  like  labour  pains  (aft.  4,

5h.).

^ Alternating  action  with  1007.
f Comp.  551.
j Comp.  519,  520.


1 In  the  case  of  chronic  gonorrhoea  mentioned  in  note  to  S.  520.


PULSATILLA.  367

Contractive  pains  on  the  left  side  of  the  womb,  like  labour  pains,
which  compel  her  to  bend  forwards.

560.  Leucorrhoea  with  burning  pain.* * * §

Acrid  thin  leucorrhoea.

Milky,  painless  leucorrhoea.

Milky  leucorrhoea,  with  swelling  of  the  pudendum.

Painless  leucorrhoea  of  thickish  mucus,  of  the  colour  of  milk,
observed  particularly  when  lying  down.

565.  Painless  leucorrhoea  like  cream.

Before  the  occurrence  of  the  catamenia,  chilliness,  stretching,
yawning.

Feeling  of  a weight  in  the  abdomen  like  a stone,  when  the  menses
were  about  to  occur  (aft  1 h.).

During  the  menses  a down-pressing  pain  like  a stone  in  the  abdo-
men and  sacrum,  during  which  the  lower  extremities  have  a tendency
to  go  to  sleep  while  sitting,  with  fruitless,  ineffectual  calif  to  evacuate
by  stool.

(Spasmodic  and  almost  burning  pains  in  the  abdomen  during  the
menses.)

570.  During  the  menses  : the  blood  is  thick  and  black  and  comes  only
in  gushes  two  or  three  times  a day.J

(The  menses  during  their  flux  come  away  only  by  day,  and  but
little  or  not  at  all  by  night.)

During  the  menses  : she  had  nausea  at  night  and  water  was
ejected  from  her  stomach  with  retching,  like  water-brash. §

During  the  menses  : there  is  blackness  before  her  eyes,  and  this
is  worst  when  she  comes  into  a warm  room.||

Non-appearance  of  the  menses,  with  coldness  of  the  body,  chilli-
ness, and  trembling  of  the  feet.^1
575.  Suppression  of  the  menses.**

During  the  suppression  of  the  menses,  nausea  with  inclination  to

• vomit,  but  not  actual  vomiting,  with  good  appetite. ff

During  the  menses  pain  in  the  stomach  (precordial  pressure,
cardial  gia).

During  the  menses  pain  in  the  side  for  a couple  of  days.JJ
During  the  menses  stitch  in  the  chest  on  drawing  a breath.

580.  Before  the  occurrence  of  the  menses  and  during  them  a stitch
in  the  side  excited  by  moving  the  arm,  by  drawing  the  breath,  and
talking  loudly,  during  which  the  arm  is  as  if  paralysed.

* 560,  561,  alternating  action  with  564,  565.

f Comp.  444.

X Difficult,  retarded,  and  even  suppressed  discharge  of  the  menstrual  flux  seems  to
be  the  chief  primary  action  of  pulsatilla,  whereas  its  too  early  appearance  (58 1)
seems  to  be  a rarer  alternating  action.

§ Comp.  345,  354,  35 6,  and  360,  365,  366.

[I  Comp.  44.

IT  Comp.  825*  935,  936.

##  In  several  elderly  persons,  especially  when  the  menses  usually  occurred  at  full
moon.

ff  Comp.  345.

X J Which  went  off  by  perspiration.


368


PULSATILLA.


The  menses  come  on  seven  days  too  soon.*

The  menses  that  had  been  delayed  beyond  the  usual  time,  came
on  (aft.  h.).

Increased,  copious  menses.1 2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

* *

Stuffed  coryza.

585.  Stuffed  nose,  ulcerated  nostrils. t

Stuffed  coryza  with  ulcerated  nostrils. J

Green  foetid  discharge  from  the  nose.

Purulent  discharge  from  the  right  nostril. § 2 [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

The  nasal  mucus  has  a bad  smell  as  from  old  coryza.  \_Hbg.~\

590.  In  the  evening,  on  going  to  sleep,  stoppage  of  the  nose,  as  from
coryza,  and  in  the  morning  thick,  yellow,  opaque  mucus  is  blown
from  the  nose  as  in  an  old  coryza.

In  the  nose,  tickling  as  from  fine  snuff,  followed  by  severe  sneez-
ing.  [/%.]

Continual  tickling  in  the  nose.

Sneezing  (aft.  4,  12  h.).

Sneezing  in  the  evening  in  sleep.

595.  Sneezing  in  the  morning  in  bed.

Coryza  for  two  hours  (immediately  and  aft.  2 h.).

Coryza  with  loss  of  smell  and  taste.

Scrapy  sensation  in  the  epiglottis,  such  as  is  usual  in  hoarseness
(aft.  1 h.j.

In  the  morning,  after  rising  oppression  on  the  chest,  with  cough
and  expectoration  (aft.  24  h.).

600.  Oppression  on  the  chest  with  cough  without  expectoration.

[*»*.]

Hoarseness  with  inability  to  speak  a word  aloud.

Cough  (aft.  4 h.).

A scraping  and  dryness  in  the  throat  which  excites  cough  of  two
or  three  impulses.

A scratching  on  the  chest  (in  the  trachea)  excites  the  cough.

605.  Cough  excited  as  if  by  dryness  in  the  chest  (trachea).

In  the  trachea  and  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  up  to  the  epi-
glottis an  itching  which  excites  cough.

When  the  child  coughs  it  is  much  shaken.

When  coughing  he  feels  as  if  the  stomach  turned  over  and  as  if
he  would  vomit ; the  cough  forces  tears  from  his  eyes.

(Cough  immediately,  when  she  has  eaten  a morsel.)

610.  (Cough  excited  by  a contractive  sensation  in  the  larynx,  especi-
ally after  eating,  with  vomiting  and  epistaxis.)

During  the  cough  sensation  as  of  sulphur  fumes  in  the  throat.

* See  note  to  570.

f Comp.  1 14.

% Comp.  33.

§ Comp.  687.


1 Literally,  “ Menses  much  more  copious  than  usual.”

2 In  a case  of  chronic  ophthalmia,  where  pus  was  discharged  also  from  the  eye.


PULSATILLA.


369

Tickling  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid  cartilage  causing  short
(hacking)  cough.

Inspiration  excites  movements  as  if  to  cough  (aft.  2 h.).
Nocturnal  cough,  which  causes  sleeplessness  and  exhaustion.

615.  Nocturnal  cough  and  dryness  in  the  throat  therefrom.

Nocturnal  dry  cough,  which  goes  off  by  sitting  up  in
bed,  hut  returns  on  lying  down  * (aft.  8,  32  h.).

After  lying  down  in  the  evening,  continual  cough.

Dry  cough,  with  difficult  expectoration  f (aft.  several  h.).

The  child  hacks  much  after  the  cough.

620.  Severe  cough  with  difficult  expectoration  of  scanty  viscid  mucus.
Towards  evening  a hard  cough.

Expectoration  of  blood.

Cough  with  expectoration  of  black  masses  of  coagulated  blood,
until  evening  (aft.  1 h.).

First,  for  half  a day  dry  cough,  and  then  for  several  days  mucus
constantly  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  trachea  which  can  be  expec-
torated in  quantity  by  voluntary  coughing.

625.  Cough  with  expectoration  (aft.  2 h.).

Cough  with  expectoration  of  yellow  mucus.

(During  the  morning  cough  expectoration  with  a salt  disgusting
taste.)

(Ulcerated,  eroded  lungs,  hectic  fever,  haemoptysis,  purulent
expectoration. J)  [Hellwing,1  Flora  campana , Lips.,  1719,  p.  86.]
Cough  with  bitter  expectoration.

630,  The  mucus  expectorated  by  coughing,  of  a bitter,  bilious  taste.
The  expectoration  from  cough  tastes  bitter  to  him.

The  mucus  expectorated  by  coughing  has  a pungent  empyreu-
matic  taste,  almost  like  cray-fish  soup  or  the  juice  from  a tobacco
pipe  (aft.  several  h.).

Nocturnal  cough  which  causes  stitches  in  the  side.

Pain  in  the  side  during  the  cough  and  on  rising  from  bed.

635.  From  a slight  cough,  a fatigue  pain  in  the  region  of  the  short
ribs  on  both  sides,  such  as  is  wont  to  occur  from  a long  continued
shaking  cough  (aft.  20  h.).

Cough  with  pain  in  the  chest.

Shooting  in  the  shoulder  from  the  cough.

Whilst  coughing  a pain  darted  several  times  down  his  right  arm.

# Comp.  655.

f 618,  620,  621.  These  and  the  preceding  symptoms  of  dry  cough  seem  to  be  in

alternation  with  the  symptoms  of  copious  expectoration  with  the  cough  (625 627,

629—632),  but  the  latter  seem  to  be  the  principal  symptoms,  so  that  diseases,  which
in  other  respects  are  suitable  for  pulsatilla  are  removed  more  readily  and  permanently
when  the  cough  is  attended  by  copious  expectoration  than  those  with  dry  cough.  In
624  the  chief  alternating  action  with  copious  expectoration  occurred  only  after  dry
cough,  which  is  rarer.

J From  syrup  made  with  the  purple-coloured  flowers  which  a woman  administered
to  a man  and  two  children  in  fevers,  cough,  roughness  of  the  larynx,  sharp  catarrhs,
and  stitches  in  the  side.


1 Not  accessible.


fOL.  II.


24


37°


PULSATILLA.


During  the  cough,  stitches  in  the  back.

640.  Oppression  and  pain  on  the  chest.*

Shortness  of  breath  immediately  after  dinner,  for  several  hours.

Loss  of  breath  on  drawing  the  air  through  the  nose,  but  not  on
respiring  through  the  mouth  (aft.  \ h.).

(. Asthma , on  smoking  (the  accustomed)  tobacco.)

(Tightness  of  the  chest.f)  [Bergius,1  Mat.  Med .,  p.  519.]

645.  Tightness  of  the  chest  and  vertigo  together  with  weakness  of  the
head,  when  lying  horizontally  on  the  back,  which,  however,  goes  of!
on  sitting  upright.  J

Oppression  as  if  in  the  trachea,  as  though  it  were  pressed  in  from
without  and  constricted — so  that  he  was  completely  deprived  of  breath
for  a minute,  in  the  evening  when  sitting,  without  any  cough.

In  the  evening  tightness  of  the  chest,  then  slumber,  then  waking
with  a fit  of  suffocation,  short  or  hacking  cough,  a tearing  frontal
pain  through  the  eyes,  formication  on  the  tongue,  cold  feet,  cold
sweat  on  the  face,  and  much  eructation.

In  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  sensation  of  tightness  of  the  chest,
as  if  it  were  too  full  and  contracted  there,  in  the  morning. §

Spasmodic  feeling  through  the  chest.

650.  Persistent  spasmodic  tension  under  the  chest.

When  she  lies  on  the  left  side  she  complains  of  anxiety  and
great  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and  that  she  loses  her  breath.

A single  spasmodic  inspiration  and  expiration,  which  changed
into  a short  suffocative  sensation,  as  though  the  breath  went  away
and  death  must  ensue.  \_Hbg.~]

A constriction  across  the  chest.  [ Rkt.~\

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a spasmodic  contractive  tension,
with  ebullition  of  blood  and  internal  warmth  (heat)  (aft.  26  h.).

* Comp.  599.  In  the  catarrhal  state,  which  in  ordinary  parlance  is  indicated  by
these  symptoms,  the  internal  glands  of  the  trachea  seem  to  be  in  a swollen  and  in-
flamed state,  and  incapable  of  secreting  the  requisite  moistening  mucus.  Hence  the
sensation  of  dryness,  roughness,  painfulness,  and  the  illusory  sensation,  as  if  a very
viscid  and  adherent  mucus  narrowed  the  lumen  of  the  trachea  and  could  not  be
detached.

f From  the  allied  wood  anemone.

j Comp.  616.  The  occurrence  of  symptoms  from  pulsatilla  during  the  horizontal
recumbent  posture,  when  sitting  up,  when  standing  up  after  sitting,  when  walking  and
when  standing,  are  so  many  different  alternating  states,  which  all  belong  to  the  primary
action,  but  are  of  very  different  intrinsic  value.  As  a rule  the  sufferings  occurring
when  lying  quietly  on  the  back  from  pulsatilla  are  relieved  by  sitting  up,  rarely  the
reverse  3 frequently  the  symptoms  caused  by  pulsatilla  when  sitting  still  are  relieved
or  removed  by  gradual  movement  and  walking,  rarely  the  reverse.  On  the  other
hand,  the  act  of  standing  up  before  commencing  to  walk  usually  excites  sufferings
more  numerous  and  more  severe  the  longer  the  sitting  posture  has  been  continued  ;
and  so  also  prolonged  and  violent  movement  excites  symptoms  no  less  than  pro-
longed sitting,  which,  however,  generally  become  perceptible  only  on  again
resting  and  sitting  down.  But  the  alternating  actions  a medicine  most  frequently
displays,  and  which  are  most  severe  and  most  singular,  are  the  most  efficacious  for
the  homoeopathic  cure  of  diseases.

§ Comp.  379,  383.


1 Observation.


PULSATILLA.


37i

655.  Twitching  sensation  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  especially  in  the
morning  after  waking.

Spasmodic  pain  over  the  chest.

In  the  morning  after  rising  painful  stiffness  of  the  pectoral
muscles  on  breathing  deeply  and  on  moving  the  chest  (aft.  12  h.).

Cramp-like  pain  first  in  the  right  then  in  the  left  side,  then  in
the  chest.

On  one  or  other  side  of  the  chest  drawing  tensive  pain  that  is
increased  by  breathing.

660.  A shooting  in  the  middle  of  the  pectoralis  muscle  on  raising  up
the  arm,  towards  evening  and  all  night  until  the  morning  (aft.  4 h.).

Shooting  pain  in  the  chest  on  moving  the  body.

Shooting  in  the  side  only  when  lying  down.* * * §

(In  the  praecordial  region  obtuse  stitches  and  persistent  aching,
with  anxiety,  whereby  the  breathing  was  impeded  ; relieved  by
walking.)

Pricking  pain  in  the  left  side  after  lying  down,  in  the  evening
(aft.  }h.).

66  K.  Tearing, f and  to  a certain  extent  shooting,  pain  in  the  side  of
the  chest  (aft.  1 h.).

(The  ribs  are  painful  when  grasped.)

Compressive  cutting,  almost  like  a stitch,  on  one  of  the  lower
ribs,  when  lying  on  the  right  side,  which  went  off  on  stretching
himself  out  or  lying  on  the  painful  side.

In  the  chest  here  and  there  a cutting  pain  (aft.  6 h.).

An  anxious  sensation  in  the  chest  with  quicker  pulse  (aft.  1 h.).
670.  In  the  morning  difficulty  of  drawing  the  breath  from  anxiety  in
the  chest.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest  and  heart,  at  night,  with  anxious
.dreams  ( e.g . “ that  he  is  walled  up  ”),  with  starting  up  in  affright,  and
anxious  cry.

In  the  middle  of  the  chest,  in  the  sternum,  pain  as  from  an  in-
ternal ulcer,  with  frontal  headache,  before  midnight J (aft.  4 h.).

A small  spot  in  the  region  of  the  sternum  is  painful,  as  if  the
breath  impinged  upon  it.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  sternum.

675.  (A  drawing,  burning,  and  clutching  in  the  region  of  the  sternum
extending  down  into  the  stomach.)

On  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  an  eroding  itching,  not
removed  by  scratching,  in  the  evening  § (aft.  36  h.).

Swelling  of  the  mammae  with  tensive  pain  in  them,  as  if  milk
came  into  them  and  pressed,  when  suckling.

Itching  on  the  right  nipple,  not  removed  by  scratching  (aft.
24  h.).

* Comp.  378,  645.

f Comp,  note  to  199.

J Pains  here  and  there  as  from  (something  sore)  an  internal  ulcer  are  charac*
teristic  of  pulsatilla.  Comp.  143,  184,  692,  693,  713,  778,  780,  840  ; as  also  sore
pain  chiefly  observed  on  taking  hold  of  the  part.  Comp.  151,  ^27*

§ 676,  678,  comp,  with  694,  696.


PULSATILLA.


37*


Cracking  in  the  scapulae  on  the  slightest  movement,  in  the
morning  (aft.  64  h.).

680.  In  the  right  scapula  a squeezing  pain  when  sitting.

Shooting  pain  betwixt  the  scapulae  on  moving,  which  impedes
respiration.*

Shooting  pain  betwixt  the  scapulae,  even  when  at  rest.f

Stitches  in  the  scapulae  at  night.

A pain  as  from  a weight  under  the  scapula.

685.  Drawing  pricking  pains  in  the  nape,  betwixt  the  scapulae  and
in  the  back.f

From  the  scapulae  to  the  middle  of  the  back  papules  with  per-
sistent itching,  especially  in  the  evening  on  undressing.

Shooting  pain  in  the  nape.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  nape.

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  nape  with  fatigue  of  the  feet  (aft.  84  h.).

690.  In  the  afternoon  drawing  into  the  nape  like  rheumatism  ; he
could  only  move  himself  with  difficulty.

Pain  in  the  nape,  as  if  he  had  lain  at  night  in  a wrong  position.

Swelling  in  the  nape,  on  both  sides  of  the  neck  to  the  large
carotid  arteries,  which  is  only  painful  when  touched,  and  then  the
pain  is  violent,  as  if  an  internal  ulcer  were  concealed  beneath  it.

Swelling  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  with  a sensation  on  moving
the  neck  or  on  touching  it,  as  if  the  parts  were  lacerated  and  stretched, §
or  as  if  an  internal  ulcer  lay  concealed  there,  and  yet  nothing  is  felt
when  swallowing  (aft.  4 h.).

A pimple  on  the  side  of  the  neck,  which  merely  itches,  but  the
itching  is  not  removed  by  scratching  or  rubbing  (aft.  21  h.).

695.  In  the  first  cervical  vertebra  *a  painless  (creaking)  cracking,  on
moving  the  head  (aft.  1 h.).

After  shaving  the  beard,  on  the  side  of  the  neck  a (smarting)
itching  which  is  not  removed  by  scratching  and  rubbing,  but  this
causes  pain  ||  (aft.  5 h.).

By  day  an  itching  on  the  neck  and  cheeks  ; on  scratching  papules
appear.

Eruption  of  papules  on  the  neck  under  the  chin,  which  are  painful
when  touched.

Pain  of  the  cervical  (submaxillary)  glands.

700.  Boring  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands  even  when  the  parts  are
not  moved  (aft.  4 h.).

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands. fl

The  back  is  painfully  stiff  (like  a board).

Backache  betwixt  the  shoulders,  as  if  from  prolonged  stooping
and  then  rising  up  again  ; going  off  on  walking.

# It  is  characteristic  of  pulsatilla  that  sufferings  in  other  parts  than  those  apper-
taining to  respiration  cause  tightness  of  chest.  Comp.  379,  383,  715,  722,  723.
f An  alternating  action  with  the  symptoms  immediately  preceding.
x Comp.  354.

§ Comp.  367,  688.

||  Comp.  676,  678,  694.

Comp.  367,  701,  692.


PULSATILLA.


3 73


Tearing  pain  in  the  back.*

705.  A throbbing  tickling  sensation  in  the  back.  [Hbg.~\

Shooting  pain  in  the  back  and  over  the  chest.

Pricking  pain  in  the  back  (aft.  2 h.).

Upward  pressive  pain  in  the  back.

Itching  in  the  back  and  over  the  loins.

710.  In  the  fourth  lumbar  vertebra  an  aching  pain  especially  after
walking.f

In  the  os  sacrum  an  aching  pain  as  from  fatigue,  in  the  evening.

In  the  sacrum  an  out-pressing  pain,  in  the  evening.^

Stiffness  and  pain  in  the  sacrum  when  lying,  as  if  festering,  and
as  if  from  a tight  band  which  will  not  yield.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  on  raising  up  and  bending  back  the  upper  part
of  the  body,  which  goes  off  when  stooping  forwards  (aft.  12  h.).

715.  Pain  in  the  sacrum  like  labour  pains,  as  if  a band  went  through
the  sacrum  and  drew  everything  together,  which  takes  away  her
breath,  especially  in  the  morning.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  dislocated,  when  moving.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  on  stooping  forwards,  which  goes  off  on
raising  up  the  upper  part  of  the  body  and  bending  backwards  (aft.
2+ h’)-

When  lying  still  in  bed  pain  in  the  sacrum  and  knees,  as  if
bruised,  which  is  not  felt  on  rising  up  and  walking  about.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  after  sitting ; he  can  hardly  raise  himself  up.

720.  Pain  in  the  sacrum  after  sitting  ; he  can  hardly  stoop.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  in  the  evening,  as  from  prolonged  stooping,
which  is  chiefly  felt  when  standing  and  sitting,  but  on  the  other
hand  is  relieved  by  bending  the  back  backwards  and  by  walking  3 at
the  same  time  fatigue  in  the  feet,  which  compels  him  to  sit  down.§

Shooting  pain  in  the  sacrum  and  abdomen  with  cutting  pains  in
the  bowels  which  obstruct  respiration.

At  first  shooting  in  the  sacrum ; afterwards  the  pain  goes  into
the  abdomen  where  it  becomes  cutting  and  shooting  and  takes  away
the  breath  ; then  in  the  head  a formication, [|  a weight  and  a drawing
sensation,  during  which  the  sight  and  hearing  go  away  3 then  chilli-
ness as  if  cold  water  were  poured  over  him.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  loins. fl

725.  Drawing  pain  from  the  loins  to  the  scrobiculus  cordis  where  it
becomes  a shooting,  during  inspiration.

In  the  loins  a shooting  when  stooping  forwards,  in  the  morning
in  bed  (aft.  10  h.).

In  the  lumbar  region  and  on  the  wrist  a sore  pain  as  from  an
external  wound.

Pain  in  the  shoulder  on  attempting  to  raise  the  arm.

* 703,  704,  706,  707,  comp,  with  354,  371.
f See  note  to  645.

;£  Comp.  213,  33,  34,  788.

§ This  and  713,  717,  are  similar  symptoms,  which  are  alternating  states  with  714,

719,  the  first  of  which  are  the  principal  ones.

||  Comp.  29,  30,  45,  59,  61,  102.

A kind  of  artificial  lumbago.


374


PULSATILLA.


(Some  stitches  in  the  axilla  when  sitting.)

730.  In  the  shoulder-joint  a persistent  tearing*  pain,  which  compelled
him  to  (move)  bend  the  arm  ; it  occurs  in  the  morning  on  awaking,
and  after  half  an  hour  goes  off  of  itself  or  when  he  lies  on  the  painful
arm.

In  the  shoulder-joint  a shooting  rheumatic  pain  in  the  morning,
on  moving  the  arm  or  on  bending  the  head  sideways  (aft.  18  h.).

In  the  shoulder-joint  a shooting  pain  on  moving  the  arm  quickly.
Severe  stitches  in  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  right  upper  arm  (aft.

1 h0-

' In  the  shoulder-joint  a twitching  pain  (aft.  4 h.).

735.  In  the  shoulder-joint  a twitching  sensation.

In  the  afternoon,  on  the  right  shoulder  a gurgling,  a kind  of
trembling  sensation  (aft.  3 d.).

In  the  shoulder-joint  a sensation  as  from  a heavy  weight  and  as
from  paralysis  in  it,  on  attempting  to  raise  the  arm.

In  the  shoulder-joint  pain  like  squeezing  and  heaviness  (aft.
60  h.).

In  the  shoulder-joint,  on  bending  the  arm  backwards,  pain  as  of
dislocation.

740.  From  the  shoulder  to  the  wrist  drawing  pains  in  short  recurring
fits.

A burning  ran  down  through  the  arm  from  the  shoulder,  at
night.

In  the  evening  a burning  pain  in  the  arm  with  dry  feeling  in
the  fingersf  (aft.  48  h.).

Stitches  here  and  there  in  the  arm.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

Nocturnal  itching  in  the  arm.2  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

745.  On  the  arm  vesicles,  which  afterwards  fill  with  pus  and  fall  off
as  scales.  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

On  raising  the  arm  while  holding  something  with  it,  or  on  doing
any  other  work  with  it,  a numb  sensation  in,  and  heaviness  of  it.
Pain  of  the  upper  arm  when  touched.

In  the  upper  arm  shooting  pain.  [ Hbg.~\

The  arm  is  painful  even  when  at  rest,  as  if  the  shaft  of  the
humerus  were  bruised  in  the  middle  ; a pain  that  extends  to  the
thumb,  so  that  she  could  not  use  it.

750.  Tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper  arm  (immediately).

Even  when  at  rest  drawing  pain  in  the  arm,  all  night  long,  from

* See  note  to  199  and  note  to  900,  901.

f The  symptoms  of  pulsatilla  vary  also  in  reference  to  the  times  of  the  day  when
they  arise  and  when  they  usually  persist.  The  principal  time  of  the  day  for  them
is  the  morning,  next  in  frequency  the  hours  until  midnight  (with  reference  to  the
nocturnal  symptoms  see  note  to  354).  The  time  of  the  recurrence  of  the  pulsatilla
symptoms  is  more  rarely  in  the  afternoon,  about  4 o’clock,  still  more  rarely  the
morning,  & c.


1 “ In  the  ” means  in  the  paralysed  arm.  These  stitches  occurred  in  a case  of
rheumatic  paralysis  of  the  left  arm,  in  which  alone  they  were  felt.

2 In  the  same  arm.  The  itching  was  followed  by  the  eruption  of  S.  745,  where-
upon the  arm  regained  its  power.


PULSATILLA


375


the  shoulder  down  to  the  fingers,  which  thereafter  go  to  sleep  (die
away)  to  insensibility,  but  without  becoming  pale  or  cold.

(When  she  holds  something  in  her  hand  she  feels  as  if  the  arm
went  to  sleep.)

Pain  in  the  elbow-joint  on  moving,  as  if  bruised,  with  dilated
pupils,  in  the  morning  (aft.  8 h.).

Pain  in  the  elbow-joint  on  extending  it.

755.  Pain  in  the  elbow-joint  on  moving  (aft.  18  h.).

An  eroding  itching  on  the  point  of  the  elbow-joint,  like  itching
and  the  friction  of  wool  (aft.  2 h.) .

Over  the  elbow-joint  small  (not  inflamed)  swellings  beneath  the
skin,  which  are  painful  when  touched.

Heaviness  of  the  arms,  with  tearing  pain  in  the  elbow-joint  on
attempting  to  flex  it,  only  by  day.

A tensive  pain  of  the  tendons  of  the  bend  of  the
elbow  on  moving  the  arm.

760.  In  the  bones  of  the  forearm  drawing  tearing  pain  in  repeated
attacks  by  day  and  in  the  evening.*

Distended  blood-vessels  (veins)  in  the  forearm.t

Sensation  of  coldness  in  the  arms,  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep  (aft.

72  M-

Twitching  tearing  pain  in  the  armsf  (aft.  3 h.).

Twitching  sensation  in  the  forearm  towards  the  wrist,  especially
in  the  morning  after  waking.

765.  In  the  arm,  particularly  in  the  fingers,  tearing  drawing  pain  at
night.

In  the  inner  part  of  the  arms  drawing  tensive  pain  down  to  the
wrists.

In  the  forearm,  particularly  on  the  back  of  the  hand  and  between
the  fingers,  an  itching  which  compels  scratching,  but  vesicles  do  not
subsequently  appear  there.

A rigidity  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  even  when  he  did  not  move
the  hand.

In  the  wrist-joint  pain  as  if  stiff,  on  moving,  and  as  if  he  had
sprained  the  hand.

770.  In  the  morning  after  rising,  sweaty  hands.

In  the  bones  of  the  wrist,  then  in  the  arm,  in  the  evening,  a pain
as  if  he  had  sprained  himself,  more  perceptible  when  moving  than
when  at  rest  (aft.  4 d.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  thumb,  with  stiff  sensation  on  moving  it.

Pain  in  the  second  joint  of  the  thumb  on  moving  as  if  sprained.

Stiffness  in  the  second  joint  of  the  thumb  and  in  the  knees,  as  if
these  joints  were  dislocated,  and  cracking  would  occur  in  them  (aft.
2 h.).

775.  Tension  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the  fingers,  in  the  morning.

Tearing  pain  in  the  extensor  tendons  of  the  fingers  § (aft.  10  h.).

# Comp,  notes  to  199.

f See  note  to  1073,  854.

+ 763 — 7 66  are  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  the  note  to  199.

§ To  be  judged  in  conformity  with  the  note  to  199,


376


PULSATILLA.


Papules  containing  water  betwixt  the  fingers,  with  fine  pricking
pain,  as  from  a splinter  sticking  in,  on  touching  them  or  moving  the
fingers  (aft.  4 d.).

At  the  side  of  the  nail  of  the  index  pain  as  if  an  onychia  would
occur.

Going  to  sleep  of  the  fingers  in  the  morning  in  bed  (aft.  36  h.).
780.  At  night  going  to  sleep  of  the  fingers  (aft.  30  h.).

In  the  muscles  of  the  nates  a simple  pain,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if
ulcerated  internally,  after  sitting.

In  the  hip-joint  pain  on  bending  the  back,  about  noon.

An  aching  in  the  left  hip  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  head,  in
the  forenoon,  which  went  off  on  moving  (aft.  26  h.).

The  hip-joint  is  painful,  as  if  dislocated  (aft.  3 d.).

785,  A visible  painless  twitching  of  some  bundles  of  muscular  fibres
in  the  thigh,  in  the  evening  in  bed.

A twitching,  almost  sore  pain  from  the  hip-joint  into  the  knee,  in
the  morning  when  lying  in  bed,  which  was  allayed  by  walking.

When  he  is  lying,  a shooting  in  the  front  of  the  left  thigh  to  the
knee  and  from  the  right  calf  to  the  heel  ; not  when  moving.

A violent  aching  splitting  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  and
upper  arm  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  a drawing  pain  at  night,  which  com-
pels him  to  move  them ; he  knows  not  how  to  compose  himself ; at
the  same  time  sleeplessness,  tossing  about  in  bed  even  when  there  is
no  longer  pain  there,  and  coldness  all  over.

790.  When  walking  sudden,  transient  paralytic  weakness  in  the  thigh.*

(Pain  in  the  right  thigh  like  stiffness  ; but  on  graspingf  (touching)
it  a pain  like  shooting  in  it.)

A drawing  and  tension  in  the  thighs  and  legs,  in  the  evening.

Pain  in  the  thighs  as  if  bruised,  not  in  the  flesh  but  in  the  bones ;
also  when  pressing  on  them,  it  feels  as  if  in  the  bones  ; she  could  not
flex  the  knees  nor  kneel  ; it  feels  as  if  the  bones  would  break.

Bruised  feeling  of  the  thighs  in  the  muscles  and  bones  (aft.  18  h.),
795.  (A  tension  about  the  thigh  when  walking  and  stooping.)

After  sitting  when  he  commences  to  walk  a paralytic  pain  in  the
knees  and  heel,  as  after  a long  journey  on  foot.

(A  painful  stiffness  in  the  right  knee  when  walking,  when  the
limb  is  stretched  out  straight.

Excessive  weariness  of  the  legs  with  trembling  of  the  knees.  J

Tearing  pains  (like  jerks)  in  the  knees  (aft.  3^  h.).

800.  Tearing  pain  from  the  knee  to  the  hip  only  when  sitting,  not
when  walking.

Tearing  and  drawing  pain  in  the  knee.

Tension  in  the  hough  (immediately).

Tearing  pain  with  swelling  in  the  knee.

(Eruption  of  pimples  in  the  hough.)

* Actually  at  the  commencement  of  walking  after  rising  up  from  (prolonged)
sitting.  See  note  to  645,  comp  with  796,  825.
t Comp.  777.

J Comp.  825,  826.


PULSATILLA.


377


805.  Painless  swelling  of  the  knee.

(At  night  coldness  in  the  knee,  under  the  bed-clothes.)

On  one  side  of  the  knee  there  is  a small  spot  that  is  painful  as  if
brpised.  •

(She  could  not  move  the  affected  thigh  and  leg  at  night,  she  had
to  let  the  limb  lie  in  one  position  on  account  of  bruised  pain  in  and
under  the  knee  ; it  did  not  hurt  when  touched.)

Cracking  in  the  knees.

810.  Unsteadiness  and  weakness  of  the  knees  ; they  bent  under  him
involuntarily  when  walking.

On  rising  up  after  sitting  the  legs  go  to  sleep.* * * §

On  rising  up  after  sitting  a paralytic  pain  of  the  legs,  which  goes
off  on  walking  on  again.

Pain  as  if  bruised  on  the  tibia.

Simple  pain  of  the  legs.

815.  Pain  in  the  leg  when  he  lets  it  hang  down.

A drawing  pain  in  the  legs,  in  the  evening.

At  night  he  must  let  the  lower  limb  lie  bent,  otherwise  he  had
no  rest  from  it.

In  the  evening  painful  drawing  in  the  lower  limbs  to  the  knees,
with  more  chilliness  than  by  day,  without  subsequent  heat.f

In  the  legs  from  the  feet  to  the  knees  a drawing  pain  as  from  a
long  journey  on  foot,  which  in  the  morning  declines  and  goes  off
almost  completely.

820.  He  feels  bruised  in  the  feet  as  if  he  had  walked  a long  way.

Cold  sensation  in  the  leg,  though  it  is  sufficiently  warm.
Heaviness  and  drawing  pains  in  the  legs,  less  in  the  arms.
Heaviness  of  the  legs,  especially  in  the  forenoon.

Heaviness  of  the  legs  by  day.

-825.  The  feet  were  insensible  towards  evening,  and  yet  very  heavy;
they  trembled  when  walking  (aft.  48  h.).

Trembling  in  the  lower  extremities  in  the  morning. J
In  the  evening  after  lying  down,  trembling  sensation  in  the  legs
and  knees  (aft.  3 d.).

Weariness  of  the  legs  (aft.  50  h.).

Weariness  in  the  knees  (not  in  the  feet)  when  he  rises  up  from  a
seat.

830.  Weakness  of  the  feet,  so  that  he  can  hardly  stand. §

In  the  feet,  when  standing,  (a  tingling  sensation)  a buzzing  and
grumbling  which  goes  off  on  walking.

(The  varicose  veins  of  the  leg  bleed.)

The  tibia  is  painful  when  touched.

On  the  tibia  pain  as  if  bruised,  especially  on  lifting  up  the  foot.
835.  On  the  tibia  pain  as  after  a blow  with  a stick,  from  afternoon  till
evening.

* Comp.  568.

f Most  of  the  pains  of  pulsatilla  are  accompanied  by  chilliness.  Comp.  844,
1013.

% 826,  827,  comp,  with  798,  890,  891,  929,  935,  936.

§ Comp.  810.


378


PULSATILLA.


Stitches  upwards  in  the  shaft  of  the  tibia  with  external  burning
pains  and  erysipelatous  redness.* * * §  [ St/, 1]

Papules  exuding  watery  fluid  on  the  leg,  with  burning  pain.

After  walking  a long  way,  when  sitting  in  the  house,  a drawing
on  the  inner  side  of  t£e  calves  (aft.  36  h.).

Visible  twitching  in  a part  of  the  right  calf  in  the  morning  in
bed,  not  without  an  agreeable  sensation.

840.  After  lying  down,  especially  in  the  evening,  the  flesh  of  the  legs
is  painful,  as  if  festering  and  gathering,  a pain  that  is  relieved  by
compression  with  the  hands  (aft.  3 d.).

Pain  in  the  bones  of  the  legs,  like  pressure  on  an  ulcerated
place,  on  walking  for  a considerable  time,  especially  in  the  afternoon,
which  is  relieved  by  pressing  on  it,  as  also  by  sitting,  but  most  of  all
by  the  night's  rest.

Drawing  tensive  pain  in  the  calves.

Tensive  pain  of  the  calves.

Cramp  of  the  leg  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  with  chillinessf
(aft.  4 h.).

845.  When  walking  pain  in  the  calves  like  cramp.

When  walking  sudden  pain  in  the  ankle-joint,  as  if  sprained.

Tearing  in  the  ankle-joint  on  moving  the  foot,  with  dilated
pupils.  %

On  the  inner  ankle  tearing  pains,  aggravated  by  walking  (aft.  4 h.) .

Over  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  to  the  heel  a tearing  pain,  morning
and  evening.

850.  Burning  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.  [£7/~.]

Swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.

(Swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  with  stretching  pain.)

Swelling  of  the  foot  above  the  ankles,  not  below  them.

Increase  of  the  swelling  of  the  foot,  the  varicose  veins  become
distended.  [ St/.']

855.  Swelling  of  one  foot  in  the  evening.

Swelling  of  the  feet.

Hot  feet.

Feet  swollen  as  high  as  the  calves,  hot  swelling.

When  at  rest  a persistent  burning  and  heat  of  the  foot  which  is
increased  by  walking.

860.  Red,  hot  swelling  of  the  foot,  with  tensive,  burning  pain,  which
changes  into  a shooting  when  standing.

Red,  hot  swelling  of  the  feet,  with  itching  creeping,  as  if  frozen. §

Profuse  sweat  on  the  feet  every  morning  in  bed  (secondary  action  ?
after  the  cure  of  a swelling  of  the  feet).

On  first  treading,  in  the  morning,  an  over-sensitiveness  and
formication  in  the  foot,  as  from  excessive  accumulation  of  blood  in  it.

When  standing  a formicating  pricking  pain  on  the  soles  of  the  feet
as  if  gone  to  sleep  or  numb.

* In  a woman  of  58,  from  yi^th  grain  of  the  juice.

f See  note  to  818.

J 847—849,  see  note  to  199.

§ Comp.  885.


PULSATILLA.


379


865.  A numb  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe.

In  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  a numb*
pain,  as  after  a great  jump,  and  as  if  benumbed,  immediately  on
putting  the  foot  to  the  ground  after  prolonged  sitting  ; a pain  that
goes  off  gradually  by  walking  (aft.  1 h.).

The  soles  of  the  feet  are  painful  as  if  bruised.

In  the  soles  of  the  feet,  above  the  knee,  and  in  the  back,  a tearing
pain.f

Tearing  pain  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  above  the  knee.

870.  Single  stitches  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  and  the  tips  of  the  toes,
when  at  rest.

Pain  of  the  soles  of  the  feet  on  treading,  just  as  if  blood  were
extravasated  in  them,  festering  or  ulcerated.

A burning  pain  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.

Pain  in  the  middle  (the  hollow)  of  the  sole  when  treading,  as  if  a
tumour  projected  there,  or  an  internal  ulcer  were  there,  with  stitches
thence  into  the  calves.

Boring  pain  in  the  heel  towards  evening  (aft.  58  h.).

875.  In  the  morning  in  bed  a pricking  in  the  heel,  which  goes  off  after
getting  up.

In  the  ball  of  the  heel  a burning  shooting!  pain  with  itching  as
in  frozen  limbs  (aft.  4 h.).

In  the  heel  a boring  shooting  pain  (aft.  3 h.).

In  the  heel  a cutting  pain  in  the  evening,  after  he  had  got  warm
in  bed.

A somewhat  red  and  elevated  spot  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  with
prickling  somewhat  shooting  pain  as  if  an  ulcer  would  form,§  also
very  painful  to  the  touch.

880.  Tearing  jerks  (ictus)  in  the  big  toe  (aft.  3 h.).

Shooting  in  the  toes,  especially  the  big  toe  (aft.  1 h.).

Pain  in  the  toes  as  if  the  shoe  had  pressed  them.

T ransient  burning  pains  from  the  toes  up  to  the  groin.1  [Stoerck,
1-  C.]

Pain  in  the  big  toe,  increasing  in  the  evening  and  going  off  when
he  lies  down  to  sleep  (aft.  30  h.).

885.  Itching  creeping  in  the  toes,  as  in  frozen  limbs,  in  the  evening. ||

In  the  evening  when  he  has  got  warm  in  bed,  there  occurs  in  the
balls  of  the  little  and  second  toes  a burning  shooting  pain  combined
with  itching,  which  gradually  increases  to  an  extreme  degree,  as  in
frozen  limbs  (aft.  3 h.).

Before  midnight  a painful  intolerable  itching  and  itching  pricking
of  the  feet  and  toes  that  feel  as  if  inflamed,  especially  close  to  the

* A pain  of  the  periosteum  on  external  pressure  accompanied  by  insensibility  of

the  integuments  (skin  and  muscles),
f 868,  869,  see  note  to  199.

J The  shooting  pains  of  pulsatilla  are  usually  burning  shooting.

§ To  be  judged  in  conformity  with  the  note  to  672.

||  Comp.  558.


1 In  a paralysed  leg,  coincident  with  improvement  in  power.


38°


PULSATILLA.


roots  of  the  nails,  penetrating  through  the  whole  body ; the  feet  feel
as  if  severely  frozen,  but  without  leaving  any  painful  numbness  when
walking,  as  happens  in  feet  actually  frozen.

Great  heaviness  and  great  chilliness  in  the  arms  and  legs.  [Tr.

H — n.~\

(Coldness  of  the  hands  and  feet  when  at  rest,  when  sitting.)

890.  In  the  left  arm  and  left  leg  trembling,  with  tearing  pain*  (aft.
1 h,)-

In  all  the  limbs  trembling  with  tearing  pain  (aft.  3 h.).

In  the  evening  in  bed  drawing  from  above  downwards  in  the
legs.

Formicating  gone-to-sleep  feeling  of  the  forearm  (and  hands)  and
of  the  legs,  when  they  are  lying  quiet ; diminished  by  moving  them
(aft.  1 h.).

The  limbs  on  which  he  has  lain  in  sleep,  are  on  awaking  gone  to
sleep  and  formicating.

895.  The  symptoms  are  ameliorated  in  the  open  air  f (aft.  \ h.).

The  symptoms  are  particularly  severe  on  alternate  evenings.  [*SV/.]

He  longs  for  the  open  air,  and  yet  the  abdominal  pain  and
inclination  to  vomit  in  particular,  are  aggravated  in  the  open  air
(aft.  10  h.).

Sufferings  from  open  air ; he  dreads  it  (aft.  6 to  8 h.).

After  a walk  at  noon  he  was  altogether  so  exhausted  that  he
could  not  refrain  from  sleeping  ; and  the  more  he  tried  to  keep
awake  the  more  sleepy  he  became.

900.  In  the  morning  and  at  night,  when  in  bed,  he  lies  most  com-
fortably and  best  on  his  back  with  the  legs  drawn  up  ; but  when  he
lies  on  one  side  or  the  other  there  occur  various  spasmodic  symptoms  ;
e.g.  haemorrhoidal  pain  at  the  anus,  headache  as  if  the  skull  would
burst,  pains  in  the  joints,  tightness  of  the  chest,  anxiety  J (aft.  38  h.).

When  lying  on  the  back  the  pains  are  diminished  and  go  off ;
but  when  lying  on  either  side  they  are  aggravated  or  renewed  (aft.

Drawing  tearing  pain,  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another
limb,  with  chilliness  and  coldness. §

Drawing  tearing  pains  here  and  there  throughout  the  body,  in
short  but  speedily  recurring  fits.

Drawing  pricking  pain  in  the  limbs,  but  especially  in  the  joints,
which  are  painful  as  if  bruised  when  touched.

905.  Twitching  drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  as  if  they  were  tugged  on
one  side,  not  in  the  joints. ||

Twitching  pain  in  the  left  side  (aft.  4 h.).

Smarting  itching  here  and  there  in  the  skin.


* 890,  891,  comp,  with  825  and  note  to  199.

f 89 5,  897,  898.  Three  alternating  symptoms  of  pulsatilla , the  first  of  which  is
the  most  important,  i.  e.  the  most  frequent  and  most  severe.

+ 900,  901.  This  condition  is  the  most  usual ; but  it  not  unfrequently  alternated
with  another,  in  which  the  pain  of  a part  occurring  when  lying  on  the  back  goes  off
by  lying  on  the  affected  part  (see  730),  or  on  the  side  (see  501),

§ 902,  903,  to  be  judged  in  conformity  with  the  note  to  199.

||  Comp.  199.


PULSATILLA.  381

Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  and  betwixt  the  breasts,  in  the
morning  in  bed.

Itching  pricking  sensation  in  the  skin  as  from  a number  of  fleas.

910.  A (burning)  itching  before  midnight  when  he  becomes  warm  in
bed,  all  over  the  body,  which  becomes  more  violent  by  scratching  ;
he  cannot  sleep  for  it  at  night ; little  felt  by  day  and  then  only  when
he  has  got  warm  by  walking,  or  when  he  rubs  himself — no  eruption
is  to  be  seen.

Boils  here  and  there.

(Red,  hot  spots  on  the  body,  which  rise  up  in  lumps  as  if  stung
by  nettles,  with  eroding  itching  pain.)

The  (existing)  ulcer  is  disposed  to  bleed.

In  the  ulcer  there  occurs  a severe  shooting  smarting  pain,
whilst  itching  comes  on  around  the  ulcer.

915.  In  the  morning  in  bed  a burning  smarting  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  scab  (ulcer)  (together  with  dry  cough)  (aft.  20  h.).

In  the  morning  close  to,  or  above  the  ulcer  on  the  leg,  a burning
as  from  a red-hot  coal,  for  two  minutes.

Below  the  ulcer  on  the  leg  a tickling  itching.

Around  the  ulcer  there  occurs  an  increased  itching  as  if  it  were
going  to  heal  up.

In  the  ulcer  there  occur  stitches,  which  give  a shock  to  the
whole  body,  whilst  round  about  it  only  pricking  pains,  afterwards
passing  into  burning,  are  felt.

920.  Stitches  in  the  recent  wound,  in  the  evening.

In  the  ulcer  of  one  leg  there  occur  stitches  darting  upwards,  but
in  that  of  the  other  leg  burning  (aft.  24  h.).

Shortly  before  the  time  for  dressing  the  ulcer  on  the  leg  there
occurs  in  it  a smarting,  in  the  morning  and  evening.

The  redness  around  the  ulcer  becomes  hard  and  shining.

A part  that  had  previously  been  burnt,  but  was  now  healed,  is
painful  when  touched.

925.  The  pain  in  the  ulcer  increases  on  preparing  to  eat.

Troublesome  throbbing  of  the  arteries  throughout  the  body,  felt
chiefly  when  touching.*

Drawing  pains  in  the  limbs  and  the  whole  body,  with  anxious
trembling.

A trembling  anxiety,  which  is  increased  when  at  rest,  when
sitting  and  lying,  but  diminished  by  movement.

An  anxious  trembling  sensation  in  the  limbs.

930.  An  extremely  disagreeable  feeling  throughout  the  body,  which
brings  him  to  despair,  so  that  he  knows  not  how  to  compose  himself,
and  which  lets  him  neither  sleep  nor  have  rest  in  any  way  whatever.

A feeling  at  night  throughout  the  body  as  if  he  had  been  long
awake,  with  emptiness  in  the  head  as  from  a debauch  the  previous
day  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  morning  in  bed,  simple  pain  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the
joints,  which  compels  him  to  stretch  out  the  limbs,  with  heat  of  the
whole  body,  without  thirst  (aft.  12,  36  h.).

* Comp.  47— 49>  Sh  374-


382


PULSATILLA.


When  sitting  by  day,  great  inclination  to  stretch  out  the  legs
(aft.  24  h.).

In  the  morning  after  rising  a discomfort  in  the  whole  body  (aft.
22  h.),  which  went  off  on  moving.

935.  On  moving  trembling  of  the  hands  and  feet  * (aft.  28  h.).

A trembling  weakness.

Inclination  to  stretch  himself.

Weakness  and  relaxation  of  the  limbs,  without  feeling  tired,  in
the  morning  after  rising  from  bed  (aft.  24  h.).

Weariness  in  the  legs,  not  when  walking,  but  only  on  getting  up
after  sitting.

940.  An  immobility  and  stiffness  in  the  body.

Heaviness  of  the  whole  body  f (aft.  8 h.).

He  is  lazy  and  always  wishes  to  sit  and  lie  down.

The  limbs  feel  bruised.

Prostration  of  the  limbs.

945.  Extreme  fatigue  from  a short  walk,|  for  many  days.

Exhaustion  of  all  the  body,  he  must  lie  down  (aft.  3 h.).

Painful  paralytic  feeling  in  the  region  of  the  articular  liga-
ments^

In  the  morning,  the  longer  he  lies  the  more  exhausted  he  becomes,
and  this  makes  him  lie  still  longer,  and  even  go  to  sleep  again.

In  his  sleep  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  hands  crossed  over  the
abdomen,  and  the  legs  drawn  up.  ||

950.  During  the  evening  sleep,  when  seated,  snoring  through  the  nose
in  inspiration.

In  his  sleep  he  lies  on  his  back,  the  arms  laid  above  the  head.

Persistent,  dreamful  sleepiness.

In  the  evening  he  cannot  refrain  from  sleeping,  without  being
tired  (aft.  4 d.).

On  account  of  exhaustion  he  can  hardly  walk  for  a few  minutes,
and  then  he  again  goes  to  sleep  for  hours,  and  so  on  alternately,  all
day  long.

955.  Sleep  at  an  unusual  time,  either  late  in  the  morning,  or  early  in
the  evening.

Irresistible  afternoon  sleep.

(Drowsiness  during  dinner.)

Sleep  too  prolonged,  with  closed  eyelids,  which  is  from  the  first
only  light  slumber  full  of  fantasies  and  dreams.

A slumber  full  of  dreams  of  unconnected  subjects,  to  each  of
which  the  dreamer  attaches  words  in  thought,  though  the  names  do
not  apply  to  the  things  seen  in  his  dreams  ; hence  unconnected  loud
talking  in  such  sleep.

# 935,  936,  comp,  with  798,  825 — 827,  890,  891,  929,  1103.
f The  weariness  and  weakness  of  any  part  from  pulsatilla  generally  shows  itself
by  heaviness.

{ Comp.  898.

§ This  symptom  comes  on  also  particularly  in  the  evening,  when  it  grows  dark,
with  a painful  sensation  in  the  joints  of  all  the  limbs,  such  as  usually  occurs  at  the
commencement  of  a fit  of  ague,  with  chilliness.

||  Comp.  900.


PULSATILLA,  383

960.  Very  light  superficial  sleep  ; afterwards  he  feels  as  if  he  had  not
slept  at  all.

Comatose,  stupid,  restless  sleep  ; he  tosses  about.

He  moves  about  in  sleep.

Restless  sleep  at  night  ; on  account  of  intolerable  sensation  of
heat  he  must  throw  off  the  bed-clothes,  during  which  the  insides  of
the  hands  are  warm,  but  without  perspiration.

(The  first  three  nights)  he  could  only  sleep  when  seated,  or  with
his  head  bent  sideways  and  forwards,  and  he  did  not  fall  asleep  before
midnight.

965.  He  could  not  go  to  sleep  in  the  evening.  \_Stf.~\

Sleeplessness  with  extreme  restlessness.  [ Si lf.~]

He  could  not  get  to  sleep  at  night  before  2 a.m.  \_Hbg.~\

Very  restless  sleep,  with  tossing  about  in  bed,  as  from  great  heat.

{Hbg.l

At  night  in  bed,  intolerable  dry  heat.  [Hbg.]

970.  Intolerable  burning  heat  and  restlessness,  at  night  in  bed.  [Hbg^\

Intolerable  itching,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  [Stf.]

She  frequently  jumped  out  of  bed,  because  she  felt  better  when
up.  [*/.]

Cannot  get  to  sleep  in  the  evening  owing  to  anxious  feeling  of
heat  (aft.  4 h.).

Wakes  from  a feeling  of  heat.

975.  Sleeplessness,  as  from  ebullition  of  blood.

At  night  anxiety  as  from  heat.

Feeling  of  heat  at  night  without  thirst  (aft.  3 6 h.).

He  easily  wakes  up  in  the  evening  (before  midnight).

In  the  evening  in  bed  he  cannot  get  to  sleep  for  a long  time,  and
then  he  generally  wakes  up  early,  without  being  able  to  go  to  sleep
again.

980.  After  lying  down  in  the  evening  he  sleeps  for  an  hour  and  a
half  without  dreaming,  he  then  wakes  up  and  remains  wide  awake
until  the  morning ; he  must  always  change  his  position.

He  often  wakes  up  at  night  and  remains  awake  5 on  the  other
hand,  he  is  sleepy  by  day.

She  wakes  up  before  midnight  and  dreams  much,  and  only  sleeps
quietly  from  2 a.m.,  but  the  following  forenoon  she  is  so  tired  that
she  could  have  slept  during  the  entire  half  of  the  day.

Sleeplessness  : he  wakes  up  completely  every  three  hours  during
the  night.

Sleeplessness,  with  a throng  of  ideas.

985.  Before  midnight  sleep  prevented  by  a fixed  idea,  e.g.  a tune
always  repeated  in  his  thoughts,  whilst  drowsiness  suspends  the
dominion  of  the  mind  over  the  memory  and  imagination.

In  the  evening  after  going  to  bed  anxiety,  with  a profusion  of
ideas  and  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  which  compels  him  to  get  up
(aft.  5 h.).

After  midnight  very  vivid  dreams  and  fancies,  which  incessantly
strain  and  fatigue  the  thinking  faculty,  their  theme  is  almost  always
the  same  subject,  until  he  awakes  (aft.  48  h.).


384


PULSATILLA.


Vivid  dreams  about  events  that  had  been  talked  about  or  had
occurred  the  day  before.

She  sat  up  in  her  slumber,  stared  at  every  one,  and  said  cc  Send
that  man  away  from  me.5’

990.  Frightful  dreams  : he  must  raise  himself  up  (aft.  5 h.).

Wakes  up  frequently  on  account  of  frightful  dreams,  e.g.  as  if  he
were  falling.

Frightful  dreams  : he  starts  up  in  his  sleep  as  if  terrified.

Dreamful  sleep,  in  which  he  starts  up.

He  starts  up  in  affright  in  his  sleep.

995.  At  night  dreams  full  of  fright  and  disgust.

A slumber  with  jerks  in  his  arms  and  starting  up  in  affright.

When  he  wakes  up  from  sleep  the  sound  of  words  seems  to  him
to  be  too  loud,  and  vibrates  shrilly  in  his  ears  (aft.  2 h.).

At  night  he  wakes  up  frightened  and  confused,
knows  not  where  he  is,  and  cannot  rightly  collect
himself  (aft.  5,  12  h.).

Confused  dreams  at  night.

IOOO.  He  dreams  of  quarrelling  (aft.  24  h.).

Cries  out  and  starts  up  in  sleep,  terrified  about  a black  dog  or
cat,  wishes  the  bees  to  be  chased  away,  and  so  forth.

Nocturnal  anxiety  on  awaking,  as  if  he  had  committed  a crime.

He  dreams  horrible  things,  e.g.  that  he  would  be  killed,  and  mis-
fortunes ; he  sighs  and  weeps  aloud  in  sleep,  and  when  awake  the
dream  continues  to  be  so  vividly  present  to  him  that  he  must  draw  a
deep  breath,  like  sighing.

Chattering  in  his  sleep  (also  aft.  40  h.).

1005.  After  midnight  half-waking  chattering  about  trifles  which  had
presented  themselves  to  his  mind.

After  midnight  slight  general  sweat,  with  stupefied  slumber  and
vivid  dream  pictures.*

Lascivious  dreams  in  the  evening  and  morning,  almost  without
excitation  of  the  genital  organs.

In  its  sleep  the  child  worked  its  mouth  to  and  fro,  opened
its  eyes,  distorted  them,  and  closed  them  again,  and  twitched  with  its
fingers.

Twitching  in  one  or  other  limb,  when  about  to  fall  asleep.

IOIO.  Single  twitches  of  the  limbs  or  of  the  whole  body  in  sleep.

Spasmodic  shaking  and  twitching  of  the  head  and  of  the  whole
on  going  to  sleep  (in  the  afternoon  siesta),  twice  in  succession
(aft.  86  h.).

Yawning.

Chilliness  during  the  pains  in  the  evening,  f

After  the  chilliness  of  the  body  in  the  afternoon,  heaviness  and
heat  in  the  head.

1015.  Coldness,  paleness,  and  sweat  all  over  the  body,  for  two  hours
(aft.  2 h.).  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

Chilliness,  as  on  going  out  of  a warm  room  into  the  cold.

[Hbg.-]


* Comp.  1093.


f Comp.  818,  844.


PULSATILLA.  385

Shivering  almost  without  chilliness,  so  that  the  hair  stood  on
end,  with  anxiety  and  oppression.*  \_Hbg.']

Slight  chilliness  in  the  afternoon.  [£//'.]

Shivering.

1020.  Repeated  shivering.

Shivering,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.

Chilliness  and  internal  coldness ; he  always  felt  as  if  he  would  be
chilled  even  in  the  warm  room,  in  the  morning  and  evening.

Cold  hands  and  feet ; they  felt  dead.

Chilliness  on  rising  from  bed  in  the  morning.

T025.  In  the  afternoon  warm  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  on  the
lower  part  of  the  body  internal  chilliness  without  external  coldness.

In  the  evening  chilliness  all  over,  without  shivering  he  felt
cold.

Towards  evening  chilliness  only  on  the  thighs,  which  were  also
cold,  whereas  the  legs  and  feet  remained  warm.

Chilliness  all  the  evening  before  bedtime,  even  when  walking.

Chilliness  towards  evening  without  cause.

1030.  Chilliness  in  the  evening  with  goose-skin.

Shivering  along  the  back  all  day,  without  thirst.

Shivering  in  the  back,  extending  into  the  hypochondria,  and
chiefly  on  the  front  of  the  arms  and  thighs,  with  coldness  of  the  limbs
and  a feeling  as  if  they  would  go  to  sleep,  in  the  afternoon  about  4
o’clock  (aft.  10  h.).

Shuddering  shiver  over  the  arms,  during  which  heat  came  into
the  cheeks,  and  the  air  of  the  room  seemed  to  him  to  be  too  hot.

At  noon,  after  a meal,  a very  transient  chill  (aft.  6 h.).

1035.  Chilliness  after  the  midday  meal,  over  the  upper  part  of  the
abdomen  and  upper  arms  (aft.  5 h.).

Chilliness  after  lying  down  in  the  evening ; after  lying  down  a
slight  heat.

Chilly  feeling  with  trembling,  which  recurs  after
some  minutes,  with  little  heat  thereafter  and  no  sweat.

In  the  evening  chilliness  in  the  room.

Towards  evening  he  feels,  in  the  warm  room,  chilliness  or  a
sensation  as  if  he  were  cold,  intermingled  with  hot  feeling.

1040.  All  day  chill  and  three  times  transient  heat  in  the  face.

Chilliness  with  interposed  warmth  (aft.  £ h.),  then  increased
warmth  in  the  face  and  the  rest  of  the  body.f

Febrile  chill  without  thirst ; thirst  in  the  heat.

Thirst  for  water  in  the  heat.

In  the  evening  thirst  for  water.

1045.  Thirst  for  beer  and  yet  it  tastes  disagreeably  to  him  (aft.  10  h.).

* Alternating  action  with  1055.

f The  intermittent  fever  that  pulsatilla  can  produce  has  generally  thirst  only
during  the  heat  (not  during  the  chill),  more  rarely  only  after  the  heat  or  before  the
chill.  When  there  is  only  feeling  of  heat,  without  externally  perceptible  heat,
the  thirst  is  absent.  A condition  alternating  with  this  consists  of  a feeling  of
heat  mingled  with  a feeling  of  cold.  There  are  some  other  changes  somewhat
different  from  these  (alternating  actions),  which  are  rarer,  and  hence  are  less  or
more  rarely  available  for  curative  purposes.

VOL.  II.


25


386


PULSATILLA.


After  the  cessation  of  the  febrile  heat  very  violent  thirst,  especi-
ally for  beer,  with  white  tongue.

Thirst,  especially  in  the  morning,  and  particularly  for  beer  (aft.
some  h.).

Thirst  for  alcoholic  liquors.

He  wishes  to  drink  something  strong  and  of  a cordial  character.

1050.  In  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down  in  bed,  heat,  with-
out thirst  or  sweat ; the  sweat  only  occurred  in  the  morning  between
2 and  5 o’clock,  with  thirst,  and  increase  of  the  sweat  every  time
after  drinking.

In  the  evening  a chill  came  over  him  ; then  for  some  hours  heat
rather  externally,  with  weariness  and  exhaustion  ; in  the  night  the
heat  became  internal  only,  and  until  5 a.  m.  quite  dry,  without
perspiration  ; then  emptiness  of  the  head  and  in  some  hours  bloody
expectoration  from  the  chest,  which  afterwards  assumed  a liver-like
colour.

Fever : repeated  shivering  in  the  afternoon ; in  the  evening
general  burning  heat  with  excessive  thirst,  terrified  starting  that
prevented  sleep,  pains  like  severe  labour-pains,  painfulness  of  the
whole  body,  so  that  he  cannot  turn  himself  in  bed,  and  watery
diarrhoea.

He  has  heat  and  withal  wishes  to  be  covered  up  ; he  licks  his
lips  and  does  not  drink  ; he  sighs  and  groans.

Fever  : in  the  evening  very  severe  chill  and  external  coldness,
without  shivering  or  thirst ; in  the  morning  feeling  of  heat  as  if
perspiration  were  coming  on  (which,  however,  does  not  take  place),
without  thirst  or  external  heat,  but  with  hot  hands  and  disinclination
to  be  uncovered*  (aft.  26  h.).

1055.  Fever  : severe  chill  ; then  a mixed  feeling  of  internal  heat  and
shivering ; afterwards  general  burning  heat  with  very  quick  pulse
and  very  rapid  deadly-anxious  respiration.

Fever  : after  rigor,  general  heat  and  perspiration,  with  drawing  *
twitching  pains  in  the  shafts  of  the  bones  of  the  limbs.

Fever : every  afternoon,  about  1 o’clock,  chill  with  hot  ears  and
hands.

Fever : in  the  afternoon  (about  2 o’clock)  thirst , thereafter
(about  4 o’clock)  chill  without  thirst,  with  coldness  of  the  face  and
hands,  with  anxiety  and  oppression  of  the  chest ; thereafter  lying
down  and  drawing  pains  in  the  back  upwards  to  the  occiput,  and
thence  to  the  temple  and  crown  of  the  head  ; after  three  hours  heat
of  the  body  (without  thirst)  ; the  skin  is  burning  hot,  sweat  only  in
the  face  in  large  drops  dripping  down  like  beads,  sleepiness  without
sleep  and  great  restlessness  ; the  following  morning  sweat  all  over
the  body  (aft.  70  h.).

Internal  heat  with  thirst  (but  not  extreme  thirst)  in  the  afternoon.

1060.  Heat  at  night,  and  on  turning  in  bed  chill  (shivering).

In  the  afternoon  (6  o’clock)  a burning  heat  on  the  chest  and
between  the  scapulae,  and  at  the  same  time  chilliness  of  the  thighs
and  legs,  without  thirst.

* Comp,  the  alternating  action  1018.


PULSATILLA.


387


Heat  and  then  shivering.

First  heat  and  thereafter  great  chilliness.

Dry  heat  of  the  whole  body,  at  night  and  in  the  morning.

1065.  Sensation  of  warmth  as  if  in  an  over-heated  room  (aft.  3 h.).
[Hbg.-]

Everything  seemed  too  tight  on  her  body,  she  wished  to  throw
off  her  clothes.  [£//'.]

In  the  evening  (7  o’clock)  excessive  heat  all  over  (with  inclina-
tion to  cover  herself  up  and  great  thirst  for  beer).  [£7/\]

First  chilliness,  then  heat  and  feeling  of  heat  on  the  head  and
hands,  with  slow  full  pulse  (aft.  12  h.).  [ Rkt .]

In  the  face  redness  and  burning  heat  (immediately)  followed  by
paleness  of  face.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

1070.  (Midnight  thirst,  without  being  more  than  warm.)

In  the  evening  dry  heat  of  the  body,  with  distended  bloodvessels
and  burning  hands,  which  seek  for  cool  places.

Heat  of  one  hand  and  coldness  of  the  other.

Hand  and  foot  cold  and  red  on  one  side,  hot  on  the  other,  in  the
evening  and  night.*

Heat  in  the  hands  and  feet  (aft.  4 h.).

1075.  In  the  evening  especially,  sudden  heat  and  redness  of  the  cheeks,
with  warm  frontal  sweat ; during  and  after  the  heat  of  the  face
shivering  in  the  back  and  over  the  arms,  without  goose-skin,  and  out-
boring  headache  with  obtuse  stitches  3 between  whiles  frequent
attacks  of  anxiety.

Redness  of  the  right  cheek,  with  violent  burning  in  it,  especially
in  the  open  air 3 at  the  same  time  heat  of  the  right  hand,  with
shivering  all  over  the  body,  cloudiness  of  the  head,  like  intoxication,
and  crossness  causing  every  trifle  to  be  taken  in  bad  part  (aft.  \ h.).

Sudden  heat  with  profuse  sweat  on  the  face,  trembling  of  the
limbs  and  faint-like  obscuration  of  the  sight,  f

Attacks  of  transient  heat  (aft.  12  h,).

In  the  evening  hot  all  over  the  face.

1080.  Sudden  redness  of  the  face  with  shivering  in  the  feet  and  anxious
trembling.

Heat  in  the  afternoon  for  an  hour,  all  over  the  body.

Heat  all  over  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  hands  which
are  cooler,  with  aching  pain  over  the  eyes  and  anxious  moaning.

Anxious  heat  all  over  the  body,  but  so  that  chiefly  the  hands  are
hot  and  burning,  with  tearing  pain  in  the  occiput.

He  feels  as  if  a too  hot  air  were  blowing  on  him,  which  caused
headache.

1085.  External  warmth  is  intolerable  to  him,  the  veins  are
distended.!


* This  redness,  even  of  the  cold  parts  (comp.  1108  and  836),  indicates  the  power
of  pulsatilla  to  cause  distension  of  the  veins  and  swelling  of  them  without  heat,  just
as  other  observations,  not  recorded  here,  point  to  the  production  of  varicose  vessels
by  pulsatilla.  Comp.  761  and  1085.
f Comp.  92 — 94,  98,  99,  101,  102.


388


PULSATILLA.


In  the  morning  in  bed,  heat  and  sensation  as  if  perspiration  had
broken  out.

Tendency  to  perspire  by  day  (aft.  14,  30  h.).

In  the  morning  tendency  to  perspire.

Slight  perspiration  in  the  morning.  [St/.]

1090.  Profuse,  ill-smelling  nocturnal  perspiration.1  [Stoerck,  1.  c.]

For  fourteen  successive  nights  nocturnal  perspiration.  [Fr.
H* — n.]

Sweat  throughout  the  night,  with  stupefied  slumber,  full  of
extravagant  fancies  and  thirst  for  beer.*

Perspiration  in  the  morning  during  sleep,  which  goes  off  after
waking.

Slight  general  perspiration.

1095.  (During  the  night-sweat  cramp  (?)  in  the  hands  and  muscles  of
the  arms.)

Profuse  perspiration  in  the  morning  (aft.  48  h.).

Sweat  on  the  right  side  of  the  face.

Sweat  only  on  the  right  side  of  the  body.

Sweat  only  on  the  left  side  of  the  body  (aft.  40  h.).

1 100.  Anxiety  as  if  he  were  in  a hot  atmosphere. f

Anxious  heat  as  if  hot  water  were  thrown  over  him,
with  cold  forehead.

Trembling  all  over  the  body,  with  cold  perspiration  (aft.  3 h.).

Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  great  anxiety  so  that  he
must  throw  off  the  clothes.

She  feels  too  hot  in  her  clothes,  and  when  she  undresses  she  feels
chilly  % (aft  2 h.).

1 105.  Palpitation  of  nearly  a minute’s  duration,  without  anxiety.

Palpitation  of  the  heart  after  dinner  (aft.  5 h.).

Palpitation  of  the  heart  from  speaking.

Anxiety  in  the  afternoon,  with  trembling  of  the  hands,  which
are  flecked  with  red,  but  are  not  hot.

The  child  grunts  and  groans  when  carried  about,  or  when  want-
ing to  have  a motion  of  the  bowels.

1 1 10.  When  it  becomes  evening  (for  four  successive  evenings)  he  began
to  be  afraid  of  ghosts ; also  in  the  daytime  anxiety  with  trembling
and  sensation  of  flushes  of  heat  all  over  the  body,  although  the  hands
and  face  were  pale  and  cold.

An  anxious  dream  in  the  morning,  and  after  waking  the
anxiety  continues,  fear  and  depression  of  spirits  in  reference  to  a
baseless  frightful  picture  of  the  imagination  (the  same  that  pursued
him  in  his  dream)  (aft.  6 h.).

Anxiety,  he  knows  not  how  to  calm  himself  (before  1 h.) .

Anxiety,  thinks  he  will  be  ruined  (aft.  1 h.).

Anxiety  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  suicidal  impulse,  and
feeling  of  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

* Comp.  80,  999,  1006.

f Comp.  1065.

X Comp.  10 66.


1 On  one  occasion,  in  a case  of  chronic  syphilitic  ulceration  and  bone-pains.


PULSATILLA.


389


1 1 15.  Anxiety,  as  if  threatened  with  apoplexy,  in  the  evening  after  lying
down,  with  chilliness,  noises  in  the  ears  like  music,  with  twitching  in
the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  (aft.  \ h.).

Trembling  anxiety,  as  if  about  to  die  (aft.  1 h.).

Anxious  solicitude  about  his  health.

Solicitude  about  his  domestic  concerns,  in  the  morning.

Cannot  think  without  fretting  about  his  affairs,  in  the  morning
(aft.  8 h.).

1120.  Restless  state  of  the  disposition,  as  if  he  did  not  do  his  duty
properly  (aft.  18  h.).

Extreme  hesitancy.

Neglect  of  his  business,  hesitancy,  sobbing  respiration  and  loss  of
composure.

Sometimes  he  wants  to  do  one  thing,  sometimes  another,  and
when  he  is  given  something  to  do,  he  will  not  do  it*  (aft.
10  h.).

Even  when  in  good  humour  the  child  wishes  first  one  thing  then
another.

1125.  Envious,  avaricious,  dissatisfied,  greedy,  wants  to  have  every-
thing for  himself.

Crossness,  dislike  to  work  (aft.  1 h.).

Sullenness,  breaking  out  into  weeping,  when  interrupted  in  his
work  (in  the  afternoon  about  4 o’clock)  (aft.  36  h.).

Peevishness  (also  aft.  several  h.).

Very  discontented,  weeps  for  a long  time,  in  the  morning  after
waking  from  sleep.

1130.  All  day  long  ill  humour  and  discontent,  without  cause  (aft.  24

h.).

On  hearing  some  disagreeable  news  he  became  affected  with
sadness  and  despondency  (aft.  20  h.).

Dull,  cross,  very  chilly.

Cross,  takes  in  bad  part  what  others  say  (aft.  J h.).

Hypochondriacal  moroseness;  takes  everything  in
bad  part.

1:135.  Sullen,  lachrymose,  anxious.  [5//1]

He  is  very  silent.  [ Fr . H — ».]

A dull,  melancholy  humour  comes  on  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Rkt.']

Very  much  out  of  spirits  and  cross.  [St/.]

The  child  makes  itself  quite  stiff  with  crossness.

1140.  In  the  evening  (about  sunset),  extraordinarily  sulky,  will  not
answer,  and  takes  everything  amiss.

He  hesitates  in  his  speech  ; it  vexes  him  to  have  to  answer.

Everything  disgusts  him ; everything  is  repugnant
to  him.t

Her  head  is  so  quiet  and  all  about  her  is  so  empty  as  if  she  were
alone  in  the  house  and  in  the  world  ; she  does  not  wish  to  talk  to
any  one,  just  as  if  all  around  her  were  no  concern  of  hers  and  she
belonged  to  nobody.

* 1123,  1124,  comp,  with  318,  319.
f 1142,  1144,  1154,  alternating  states.


39°


PULSATILLA.


JHe  is  not  indifferent  to  external  things,  but  he  has  no  respect  for
them  (aft.  i h.).

1 145.  He  has  a great  many  but  vacillating  ideas  in  his  head.

Hurry.

Inattention,  acts  with  precipitancy,  does  something  different  to
what  he  wished  to  do  (aft.  2 h.).

It  is  only  with  a great  effort  that  he  can  express  himself  properly
when  talking.

When  writing  he  omits  several  letters.

1 150.  Head  work  affects  him  most.

More  indisposed  to  mental  work  in  the  evening  than  at  other
times  of  the  day.*

After  walking  in  the  room  cross  and  without  appetite  (aft.  48  h.).

Has  pleasure  in  nothing,  but  he  vexes  himself  about  nothing  at  all.

Extraordinarily  whimsical  and  cross  with  everything,  even  with
himself.


* Curative  action.


RHEUM.1


( Rhubarb .)

(A  grain  of  fresh,  good,  pulverised  rhubarb-root  is,  for  homoeopathic  use,  to
be  brought  to  the  thirtieth  potency  (x)  in  the  same  way  as  is  taught  in  the  preface
to  arsenic,  viz.  by  three  hours  of  trituration  with  milk-sugar  and  subsequent  dilution
and  potentization.)

In  the  thousand  years  since  this  root  was  introduced  into  medicine —
first  of  all  by  the  Arabians — it  has  been  misused,  sometimes  (and  indeed
very  frequently)  for  senseless  scouring  out  of  the  intestinal  canal,  some-
times for  allaying  certain  diarrhoeas,  but  even  for  the  latter  purpose
seldom  with  good  results.

Had  physicians  known  that  rhubarb,  like  all  other  medicines,  can
only  cure  easily,  certainly  and  permanently,  affections  similar  in  every
respect  to  those  it  produces  on  the  healthy  body,  they  would  not  have
remained  for  so  many  centuries  in  ignorance  about  the  pure  character-
istic effects  of  this  valuable  plant,  nor  would  they  have  made  so  many
injurious  applications  of  it.

The  following  short  list  of  the  positive  effects  of  rhubarb  will  serve
as  a guide  to  some  useful  homoeopathic  employment  of  it ; they  will
show  in  what  particular  cases  it  must  be  decidedly  efficacious  ; they
will  show  that  it  causes  symptoms  which  enable  us  to  make  a curative
homoeopathic  employment  of  it  in  similar  symptoms  of  many  common
diseases  (especially  of  children),  and  hence  that  we  may  often  give  it
advantageously  in  certain  cases,  without  making  mistakes.

A very  minute  globule  moistened  with  the  thirtieth  dilution  (x)
suffices  for  all  homoeopathic  curative  purposes,  to  be  repeated  if  neces-
sary. The  olfaction  of  a globule  the  size  of  mustard  seed  moistened
with  this  dilution  is  almost  always  sufficient.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Gross,  Hornburg,  F.  Ruckert,
Teuthorn.]

Symptoms  are  derived  from  the  following  old-school  sources  :

Baker,  in  Murray,  Appar.  Medic.,  iv.j

Brocklesby,  in  ibid.

Fallopius  (no  reference).

Fordyce,  in  Murray , 1.  c.

Menzel  and  Tilling,  in  ibid.

Murray,  Appar.  Medic.,  iv.

Pallas,  Reise , iii.

Paulli,  Sim.  (no  reference).

Paullini,  in  Murray,  1.  c.

The  Frag,  de  Fir.  gives  52  symptoms;  the  1st  edit.  194;  the  2nd  209,  this  3rd
edit.  . one  less,  the  omitted  symptom  being  merely  a slight  variation  on  113.]


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833.


392


RHEUM.


RHEUM,

Vertigo.  [Sim.  Paulli,1

When  standing,  attack  of  vertigo  with  inclination  to  fall  on  one
side.  [Trn.]

Cloudiness  in  the  sinciput,  drawing  about  in  it.  [Gh.]

Head  quite  stupid,  as  after  intoxication.  [ Trn.]

5.  Throbbing  headache.

A hammering  rose  up  into  the  head  as  if  from  the  abdomen  (aft.
6 h.).

Formication  in  the  temporal  region.  [Hbg.]

A drawing  pain  deep  behind  the  frontal  eminences.  [Gtt.]
Pulsating  squeezing  pain  sometimes  in  the  left,  sometimes  in  the
right  temporal  bone  and  over  the  crown  (aft.  15  h.).  [Hbg.]

10.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  head  and  intermittent  tearing  in  it
(whilst  walking)  (aft.  1 h.).  [Rkt.]

Aching  pain  over  the  whole  anterior  part  of  the  skull.  [ Hbg .]
Pressive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,  especially  on  the  crown
and  in  the  temples  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Hbg .]

Dull,  beating  pain  in  the  sinciput,  chiefly  when  standing.  [Trn.]
Slight  stitches  over  the  temples.  [Trn.]

15.  First  an  aching  then  a tearing  pain  in  the  head  extending  into
the  occiput.

An  obtuse  stretching  dizzy  headache,  which  spreads  all  over  the
brain,  but  is  worst  on  the  crown  and  in  the  temples.

Headache  as  if  stupefying,  as  if  wrenched  in  the  head,  and  great
anxiety  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad,  but  more  when  moving  and
stooping.

Heavy  in  the  head,  with  a sultry  heat  rising  up  into  it.

On  stooping,  feeling  as  if  the  brain  moved.

20.  Dulness  of  the  head  with  swollen  eyes  ; afterwards  aching  pain
in  the  head  over  one  orbit,  with  dilated  pupils  (aft.  1 to  4 h.).

On  the  border  of  the  upper  eyelid  a small  gland  which  causes
aching  and  burning  pain.

Before  going  to  sleep  an  eroding  pain  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  dirt,
dust,  or  an  insect  had  got  into  it,  with  flow  of  tears.  [Hbg.]

The  eyes  weep  and  water  in  the  open  air.  [Rkt.]

Throbbing  pain  in  the  eyes.  [Trn.]

25.  Pressure  on  the  eyelids,  even  when  they  are  shut.  [G^.]
Drawing  in  the  eyelids.

Pupils  contracted,  sometimes  more  sometimes  less.  [Rkt.]
Contraction  of  the  pupils,  accompanied  by  an  internal  uneasiness
(for  sixteen  hours).

Eyes  as  if  weak,  and  when  he  looks  long  at  anything,  an  aching
in  them  as  if  they  were  fatigued.

30.  Itching  miliary  rash  on  the  forehead  and  arm  (aft.  36  h.).


3 Observation.


RHEUM.


393

Inclination  to  contract  and  wrinkle  the  frontal  muscles.  [ Trn .]
Tensive  sensation  in  the  skin  of  the  face.

Roaring  in  the  right  ear  and  sensation  in  it  as  if  the  membrana
tympani  were  relaxed,  with  dulness  of  hearing  (as  if  something  had
fallen  before  the  ear)  ; the  roaring  and  the  relaxation  of  the  mem-
brana tympani  went  off  (the  hearing  was  restored)  every  time  he
swallowed  strongly,  but  only  for  an  instant,  they  recurred  imme-
diately.

A crepitation  and  gurgling  in  the  ear  and  lateral  cervical  muscles,
which  could  be  felt  externally  with  the  hand.

35.  In  the  left  ear  a squeezing  with  some  itching,  which  compels
him  to  bore  in  with  the  finger.  \_Hbg.'\

Pressure  in  the  meatus  auditorius,  as  if  a finger  were  pressed  into
it  from  without.

Sometimes  a throbbing  in  the  ears,  especially  when  stooping
whilst  writing.  [ Rkt .]

Marked  warmth  round  about  the  nose.  [HbgJ\

A drawing,  as  it  were  stupefying  pain  along  the  root  of  the  nose,
which  caused  a formication  in  the  tip  of  the  nose.  \_Gss .]

40.  Pressure  as  with  a finger  at  the  junction  of  the  head  with  the
nape.  [Rkt.~\

Drawing,  gushing  sensation  on  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  up
into  the  right  temple.

Digging  pain  in  the  (hollow)  teeth,  which  seem  to  be  higher  and
loose  (aft.  12  to  24  h.).

In  the  left  molars  a pain  accompanied  with  cold  feeling  which
excited  a flow  of  saliva.  [HbgJ]

In  the  left  upper  incisors  a pain  accompanied  by  cold  feeling.

{.Hbg.l

45.  Contraction  of  the  gullet.*  [Pallas,  Reise , iii,  p.  235.]

Bitterness  only  of  the  food,  even  when  it  is  sweet,  but  not  per  se
in  the  mouth  (aft.  10  h.).

The  sensibility  of  the  tongue  and  the  whole  taste  become  lost
for  one  day.f  [Pallas,  1.  c.]

Sour  taste  in  the  mouth.  [Gjj.]

Great  appetite,  but  the  food  though  tasting  nice  soon  becomes
repugnant.  [Gw.]

50.  Whilst  he  loathes  certain  things  (such  as  fat,  insipid  food),

appetite  for  a variety  of  things,  but  he  cannot  eat  much
of  them,  for  they  immediately  become  repugnant.  [Gw.]
The  food  does  not  taste  right,  and  soon  becomes  repugnant,
though  he  has  a tolerable  appetite.  [ Gss .]

Anorexia.

Hunger,  but  no  appetite.

He  feels  qualmish  (squeamish,  loathing  and  inclined  to  vomit).

55.  Coffee  is  repugnant  to  him  unless  it  is  highly  sweetened.

Dryness  and  dry  sensation  in  the  mouth,  without  desire  for
drink.


# From  chewing  and  eating  the  stalks  and  leaves,
f From  chewing  the  stalks,


394


RHEUM.


Fulness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much,

sometimes  followed  by  drowsiness  (aft.  8 to  12  h.).

Contractive  sensation  in  the  stomach,  accompanied  by  nausea
(aft.  ■§  h.).

Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  very  full  of  food  (aft.  J h.).
[Hbg.]

60.  Distension  of  the  abdomen  after  a meal.  [Gw.]

Urging  to  stool  after  a meal.  [Gw.]

Nausea  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.  [ Hbg .]

Feeling  of  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Gw.]

Nausea,  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Murray,1  Jppar.  Medic.,  iv,

P-  392-]

65.  Feeling  of  nausea  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  io  m.).  [(?«.]

Aching  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  [i£/£/.]

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  left  side  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gw.]
A stitch  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Rkt.]

Violent  throbbing  and  rhythmical,  painless  clucking  in  the  scro-
biculus cordis  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Hbg.]

70.  Tension  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

On  inspiration  a pressure  in  the  bowels  as  if  they  were  full  of
fluid.  [Gw.]

Rumbling  and  rattling  in  the  abdomen.  [Hbg.]

Across  the  abdomen  obtuse,  forcing  cutting.  [Hbg.']

Single  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  without  stool.  [. Rkt .]

75.  Pressure  in  the  umbilical  region  (immediately).  [Gw.]

Pressure  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  if  pressing  out  the  bowels.
[Gw.]

Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Gw.]

(Eating  some  plums  increases  the  cutting  in  the  abdomen.)  [Gw.]
Bellyache,  flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Baker,  in
Murray , 1.  c.,  p.  396.]

80.  Flatulence.  [Hbg.]

A cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen  soon  (J  h.)  after  dinner  ; he  must
bend  double  when  sitting  in  order  to  allay  it  ; worst  when  standing.

Cutting  drawing  in  the  left  loin  under  the  short  ribs,
and  in  front  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium,  just
above  the  OS  pubis  , a digging  about  in  the  bowels.  [Gw.]
(Sharp)  cutting  in  the  left  loin.  [Gw.]

A tension  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium,  low  down  just
above  the  os  pubis,  after  a meal  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gw.]

85.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  os  pubis  like  a strong  pressure  with
the  point  of  the  thumb.  [Hbg.]

Twitching  in  the  abdominal  muscles  (aft.  20  h.).  [Hbg.]
Violent  cutting  in  the  region  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae,
as  if  it  were  in  their  substance ; increased  by  evacuation
of  the  bowels.  [Gw.]

In  the  abdominal  muscles  a gushing  gurgling  sensation,  just  as  if
he  could  hear  it.


1 Observation.


RHEUM.


395

Pains  in  the  abdomen  before  and  during  the  stool,  which  cease
after  completion  of  the  evacuation.

90.  Pinching  pains  in  the  abdomen  preceding  a discharge  of  flatus
(aft.  24  h.).

Pinching  * in  the  abdomen,  he  has  great  inclination  for  stool  (the
colon  is  greatly  disposed  for  evacuation)  but  he  can  do  nothing,  as
the  rectum  is  inactive  (aft.  24  h.).

Flatulence  in  the  abdomen  seems  to  rise  up  towards  the  chest,
and  to  cause  pressure  and  tension  here  and  there.

Pappy,  sour  smelling  stool;  its  evacuation  is  fol-
lowed by  shivering,  and  after  its  evacuation  there  occurs
renewed  urging  with  pinching  (constriction)  in  the
bowels  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gss.]

Frequent  urging  to  stool,  whereupon  a thin,  pappy,
foetid  stool  occurs,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and
immediately  after  its  evacuation  feeling  of  tenesmus-
in  spite  of  every  effort  nothing  will  come  away,  although
urging  to  stool  is  still  present— whereupon  after  some
time  an  evacuation  takes  place ; when  he  at  length
gets  off  the  night-stool,  the  urging  that  had  gradually
been  allayed  becomes  again  much  more  violent;  the
pains  in  the  abdomen  also  increase  which  come  on  with
the  evacuation  of  the  stool.  [Gw.]

95.  In  the  morning  in  bed  after  waking,  when  throwing  off  the
clothes,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  discharge  of  flatus  (aft,  14  h.).
[<?«.]

The  urging  to  stool  is  Increased  by  moving  and
walking.  [Gss.]

A kind  of  tenesmus  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hbg.]

In  the  region  of  the  anus  a painful  sensation  as  after  long  con-
tinued diarrhoea.  [Hbg.]

Stool  mixed  with  mucus.  [Hbg.]

100.  Stool  first  of  soft  then  of  hard  faeces  ; before  and  during  it  violent
cutting  (aft.  24  h.).  [Trn.]

Stool  the  first  portion  of  which  was  firm,  the  last  liquid.

Diarrhceic  evacuations  of  faeces  with  mucus.

Stool  of  greyish  mucus.

When  walking  a pressive  pain  in  the  inguinal  ring  as  if  a hernia
would  protrude.

105.  Fine,  frequent,  itching  pricks  in  the  last  inguinal  gland.

Weakness  of  the  bladder  ; he  must  press  strongly  when  urinating,
otherwise  the  urine  would  not  come  away  completely.  [Hbg.]

Urging  to  pass  water.  [Murray,  1.  c,,  p.  400.]

Burning  in  the  kidneys  and  bladder.  [Fallopius, ]

# The  chief  primary  action  of  rhubarb  in  the  abdomen  does  not  seem  to  be  so
much  an  easy,  loose,  copious  evacuation,  or  painless  diarrhoea,  but  rather  a colicky,
or  even  ineffectual,  urging  to  evacuate  altered  faecal  stools.  As  its  evacuations  are
generally  faecal  stools  it  cannot  be  suitable  for  autumnal  dysenteries  (notwithstanding
the  partial  similarity  of  its  abdominal  pain),  particularly  as  the  other  symptoms  of
rhubarb  differ  considerably  from  those  of  this  epidemic  ailment.


396


RHEUM.


Reddish-yellow  urine,  as  in  jaundice  and  acute  fevers.  [Murray,
1.  c.,  p.  390.]

1 10.  Urine  bright  yellow,  verging  towards  green.  [I'm.]

Scalding  of  the  urine  (aft.  20  h.).

(Frequent  discharge  of  much  urine.)

* *

*

Obtuse,  quick  stitches  under  the  last  rib,  on  expiration  and
inspiration  (lasting  a long  time).

Single  stitches  in  the  chest  (aft.  6 h.).

1 1 5.  (Oppression  on  the  chest.)

First  in  the  left,  then  in  the  right  pectoral  muscles  also,  a
crepitating  gushing  as  in  small  bubbles,  audible  to  himself  and
persistent.

Contraction  of  the  chest.  [Brocklesby,1  in  Murray , 1.  c.,  p.

396-]

Tightness  of  the  chest : on  breathing  deeply  the  chest  does  not
give  way  sufficiently,  just  as  if  a weight  lay  on  the  front  of  the
chest  under  the  neck,  and  pressed  it  down.  [Gjj.]

Pressive  tightening  pain  above  the  sternum,  sometimes  also
single  stitches.  [Rkt.]

120.  A burning  pain  at  the  left  side  of  the  sternum.  [Hbg.]

Dry  cough  in  the  evening  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hbg.]

Cough  with  expectoration  of  mucus  for  five  minutes  (aft.  13  h.).
[Hbg.]

Yellow  bitter  milk  in  nursing  women.  [Paullini,1  in  Murray ,
1.  c.,  p.  390.]

Simple  pain  in  both  nipples,  apparently  proceeding  from  flatulence
in  the  abdomen.

125.  A long-continued  stitch  in  both  nipples.

Stiffness  in  the  sacrum  and  hips,  he  cannot  walk  upright.

Single  stitches  in  the  arms.

Tearing  in  the  upper  arms  and  finger-joints.  [Rkt.]

Feeling  of  twitching  in  the  right  elbow.

130.  In  the  morning  a twitching  in  the  arms  and  hands,  also  on  the
rest  of  the  body,  for  two  successive  days.

In  the  elbow-joints  a gushing  gurgling  sensation,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving.

Tearing  in  the  forearms.  [i£/£f.]

The  muscles  of  the  forearm  are  as  if  contracted,  with  trembling
movement  of  the  hands.  [Rkt.]

Sensation  as  of  commencing  going  to  sleep  in  the  under  side  of
the  forearm.  [Rkt.]

135.  Swollen  blood-vessels  on  the  hands  (aft.  2 h.),  [Hbg.]

Hot  feeling  and  heat  in  the  palm.  [Rkt.]

Cold  sweat  on  the  palm,  whilst  the  back  of  the  hand,  as  also  the
rest  of  the  body,  was  warm  (aft.  20  h.).  [Hbg. ]

Sweat  on  the  palms  when  the  hands  were  closed.  [Rkt.]


1 Observation.


RHEUM.


397


A tearing  from  the  thumb  to  the  little  finger,  across  the  hand.

[£%•]

140.  A violent  shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  thumb  (aft,  3 h.).

Fatigue  of  the  thighs,  as  after  too  great  exertion.

Twitching,  felt  and  seen  from  without,  of  single  muscular  parts
on  the  back  of  the  thigh,  especially  when  these  muscles  are  stretched
out,  when  sitting  ^nd  when  drawing  up  the  knees  whilst  lying.

The  legs  go  to  sleep  when  they  are  crossed  over  one  another.

Tensive  aching  pain  in  the  left  hough  down  to  the
heel.

145.  In  the  hough  a gushing  gurgling  sensation,  just  as  if  it  could  be
heard.

Painless  gurgling  in  the  hough  to  the  heel.

Stiffness  of  the  knee,  which  is  painful  when  moved.

When  standing  a down-drawing  tired  pain  in  the  left  hough.

Tired  tension  in  the  right  hough.

150.  Shooting  in  the  left  knee  when  walking.  [Gjj.]

A gurgling  downwards  in  the  leg,  accompanied  by  shooting.

(In  the  morning  after  rising,  feeling  of  dislocation  of  the  left
ankle-joint,  painful  when  treading.)  [Gjj.]

Shooting  in  the  left  foot  on  the  border  of  the  sole  behind  the
little  toe.  [//%.]

A burning  intermittent  pain  between  the  inner  ankle  and  the
tendo  Achillis,  as  if  a red-hot  coal  were  occasionally  applied  there
(aft.  5 h.).  [Hbg.]

155.  Transversely  across  the  instep  a pain  compounded  of  tearing  and
shooting.

A pricking  itching  in  the  hollow  of  the  sole.

In  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe  a gushing  crepitating  sensation.

Pricking  itching  at  the  root  of  the  little  toe,  almost  as  if  after
frost  bite.

Exhaustion  in  the  whole  body  when  walking.  \_Trn.~\

l6o.  Exhaustion  and  weakness  in  the  whole  body.  \_Rkt. ]

Heaviness  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.
[Hbg.]

All  the  joints  are  affected  with  a simple  pain  when
moving  (fatigue  of  all  the  limbs)  (aft.  12  and  more  h.).

The  limbs  on  which  he  lies  go  to  sleep.

Heaviness  of  the  whole  body,  as  when  awaking  from
a deep  sleep.

165.  Frequent  yawning.  [G^.]

Sleepiness.

Sleepiness.  \_Hbg.'\

Causes  sleep.  [Eordyce,  in  Murray , 1.  c.,  p.  393.]

Before  going  to  sleep  he  involuntarily  raises  the  hands  over  the
head.  [HbgJ\

170.  Nocturnal  phantasy  in  restless  sleep,  as  if  he  were  going  about  in
a half-conscious  state,  half  dreaming  half  waking.  \_Hbg.~]

During  sleep  snoring  inspiration  (aft.  1 h.).

At  night  dreams  of  vexatious,  annoying  things.


398


RHEUM.


Anxious  dreams  of  deceased  relations.  [ Trn .]

Vivid  dreams  of  sad  anxious  import.

175.  During  sleep  he  stretches  his  hands  over  the  head.

In  sleep  he  is  restless,  whines  and  bends  the  head  back.

The  child  tosses  about  at  night,  begins  to  cry  out  several  times,
and  asserts  while  trembling  that  men  were  there.

The  child  is  pale  \ in  sleep  she  grumbles  in  a quarrelsome
manner,  and  has  convulsive  drawing  in  the  fingers,  facial  muscles
and  eyelids.

In  the  evening  in  sleep  he  talks  nonsense  and  moves  about  in
bed  with  closed  eyes,  without  speaking,  and  has  at  the  same  time
great  heat.

180.  In  the  morning,  after  sleep,  laziness  and  a violent  squeezing
and  tensive  headache  across  the  whole  anterior  half  of  the  head.
[Hbg.-]

After  waking  she  is  a long  time  in  coming  to  herself.

After  sleeping  he  feels  a heaviness  in  the  whole  body.

After  sleeping  the  eyes  are  sealed  up  with  eye-gum.

After  sleeping  the  mouth  is  covered  with  ill-smelling  mucus.

185.  After  sleeping  he  has  a foul  taste  in  the  mouth.

After  sleeping  he  smells  badly  from  his  mouth  (has  a foetid
breath).

After  sleeping  he  has  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which
on  inspiring  spreads  over  the  sternum  and  changes  into  a bruised
pain.

(Slight  chilliness,  in  the  morning.)  [ Trn .]

He  has  shivering  without  being  outwardly  cold  (aft.  j h.).

190.  Occasionally  one  cheek  pale,  the  other  red,  or  both  quite  pale.

Alternate  chill  and  heat,  only  for  two  minutes,  at  the  same  time
quite  tired  and  anxious,  everything  was  disagreeable  to  her,  even  what
she  usually  liked  best.

He  feels  hot  all  over,  without  having  thirst  (aft.  2 h„).

He  has  heat  in  the  hands  and  feet,  though  the  arms  and  thighs
are  not  hot,  and  the  face  is  cool.

Heat  and  hot  feeling  in  the  cheeks.  \_Rkt.]

195,  Warmth  of  the  whole  body  without  thirst.  [Hbg.]

Heat  of  the  body  and  restlessness.  [Murray,  1.  c.,  p.  391.]

Quick  pulse.  [ Hbg .]

Sweat  smelling  of  rhubarb  and  staining  the  linen  yellow.  [Men-
zel  and  Tilling,1  in  Murray , 1.  c.,  p.  390.]

Cool  sweat  in  the  face  especially  about  the  mouth  and
nose  (aft.  3 h.).

200.  On  the  slightest  exertion  he  perspires  on  the  forehead  and  hairy
scalp.

Talking  nonsense.  [Brocklesby,  1.  c.]

He  is  silent  and  nothing  makes  an  impression  on  him.

He  is  lazy  and  laconic.

Sulky,  silent  and  reserved.  [TV#.]


1 Observation.


RHEUM.


399


205.  Whining,  anxious  peevishness.

The  child  demands  various  things  impetuously  and  with  weeping.
Mental  state  as  if  half  asleep  (aft.  1 1 h.).  [i£/£/.]

Gloomy  disposition  ; he  cannot  remain  long  at  one  occupation.

[Rkt.]


RHUS.

( R . radicans , also  called  toxicodendron.')

(The  freshly  expressed  juice,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  and  diluted  and
potentized  up  to  the  thirtieth  development  of  power  (x),  as  taught  in  the  preface  to
pulsatilla.)

Careful  consideration  and  comparison  of  the  symptoms  of  this
remarkable  and  valuable  medicinal  substance  enable  us  to  perceive  a
great  number  of  characteristic  peculiarities  in  it.

To  mention  one  only:  we  observe  this  curious  action  (which  is
found  in  very  few  other  medicines,  and  in  these  never  in  such  a great
degree),  viz.  the  severest  symptoms  and  sufferings  are  excited  when  the
body  or  the  limb  is  at  rest  and  kept  as  much  as  possible  without  movement .
The  opposite  of  this,  namely,  an  increase  of  the  symptoms  by  move-
ment is  much  more  rarely  observed.  The  other  remarkable  pecu-
liarities will  be  easily  found  in  the  following  list  of  symptoms  of  rhus,
which  are  truthfully  and  faithfully  recorded.

When  we  attentively  examine  the  symptoms  of  bryonia , we  shall
perceive,  on  the  one  hand,  a strong  resemblance  to  those  of  rhus , and,
on  the  other,  remarkable  contrasts.  How  striking  is  the  aggravation
of  symptoms,  almost  identical  with  those  observed  from  rhus  during
movement  of  the  body  in  the  case  of  bryonia,  and  their  amelioration  by
avoiding  all  movement — exactly  the  opposite  of  what  rhus  does  !
From  the  symptoms  of  these  two  antagonistic  sister  remedies  we  can
easily  understand  how  both  (each  in  its  place)  would  prove  the  most
suitable  homoeopathic  remedies  for  the  disastrous  pestilence  which
desolated  the  countries  that  were  most  exposed  to  the  war  that  raged
from  the  summer  of  1813  onwards.  No  treatment  of  this  typhus  that
is  based  upon  inferences  derived  from  ordinary  therapeutics,  as  also  no
other  mode  of  treatment  whatever,  could  do  anything  for  the  worst
cases  (the  slighter  cases  would  in  any  case  have  recovered  by  the  power
of  dear  nature,  though  but  slowly  and  with  difficulty).  It  was  only  the
employment  of  the  medicines  homoeopathically  suited  to  them,  viz.
rhus,  in  alternation  with  bryonia  (as  briefly  described  by  me  in  the
sixth  number  of  the  Allgemeiner  Anzeiger  der  Deutschen  in  1814),  that
could  cure  all  cases  of  the  disease,  and  which  did  actually  cure  them  in
the  hands  of  careful  practitioners ; whilst  the  rest  of  the  medical  pro-
fession only  carried  on  vain  disputations  respecting  the  presumed  internal
nature  of  the  disease,  and  whilst  so  occupied  allowed  their  patients  in


1 From  vol.  ii,  3rd  edit.,  1833.


RHUS.


401

thousands  to  be  gathered  to  their  fathers.  If  ever  there  was  a triumph
for  the  only  true,  the  homoeopathic  treatment,*  this  was  one.

The  duration  of  the  action  of  large  doses  of  rhus  extends  over  six
weeks,  that  of  small  doses  is  less  proportionally  to  the  smallness  of  the
dose.  On  account  of  this  long  duration  of  action  the  preliminary
homoeopathic  aggravation  of  symptoms  is  also  of  longer  duration  than
with  most  other  vegetable  drugs  j so  that  in  the  employment  of  even
the  smallest  doses  we  often  do  not  observe  the  amelioration  until  after
the  lapse  of  twenty-four  hours  after  taking  the  medicine.  Hence,  as
with  every  other  medicine,  so  especially  in  the  selection  of  this  one,
the  homoeopathic  rule  must  be  strictly  followed.  The  injurious  effects
of  an  erroneous  selection  are  often  removable  by  bryonia,  sometimes  by
sulphur,  at  other  times  by  camphor  or  raw  coffee,  according  to  the
untoward  symptoms  produced.

After  multiplied  and  repeated  experience,  I can  assert  that  if  we
would  act  with  certainty  we  should  never  employ  homceopathically  the
pure  undiluted  juice,  not  even  in  chronic  maladies  or  for  patients  who
are  otherwise  robust.  It  should  only  be  used  in  very  high  dilution
(in  accordance  with  careful  trials  during  many  years,  the  decillion-
fold  dilution).  The  strongest  dose  should  never  exceed  a very  minute
globule  moistened  with  the  thirtieth  dilution  (x).  And  it  is  even
preferable  to  employ  a single  olfaction  of  a globule,  twenty  of  which
weigh  one  grain,  on  account  of  the  mildness  of  this  mode  of  administra-
tion, while  its  curative  efficacy  is  just  as  great.  The  ordinary  allopathic
practitioner  who  knows  nothing  about  the  administration  of  vegetable
drugs  unless  in  drachms,  scruples,  or,  at  all  events,  grains  and  whole
drops,  may  sneer  at  this  in  his  ignorance.  Pure  experience  and  con-
scientious, unprejudiced  observations  can  and  must  be  the  only  judge  in
such  an  important  matter  as  the  treatment  of  disease.

Of  late  years  multiplied  experience  has  taught  me  that  rhus  is  the
most  efficacious  and  the  specific  remedy  for  the  frequently  fatal  effects
of  over-lifting,  inordinate  exertions  of  the  muscles  and  contusions.
One  single  olfaction  of  a globule,  the  size  of  a mustard  seed,  moistened
with  the  thirtieth  potency  effects  a magical  cure.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hart-
laub  and  Trinks.  Hornburg,  J.  G.  Lehmann,  Michler,  E.  F.  Ruckert,
Schroder,  Stapf.

The  following  old-school  sources  supplied  symptoms  :

Alderson,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.fprakt.  Aerzte , xvii.

Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1 8 1 1 .

Dossie,  Institutes  of  Experimental  Chymistry , 1759.

Dudley,  in  Dufresnoy.

Dufresnoy,  JJeber  den  'wurzelenden  Sumach , Halle,  1801.

Du  Roy,  Harbkesche  Baumzucht,  ii.

Fontana,  in  Edinb.  Med.  Comment , ii.

Gleditsch,  in  Beschdft.  d.  Berlin  Naturfy  iv.

Lavini,  in  Orfila , i.

Monti,  Jos.,  in  Act . lnstit . Bonon.  Sc.  et  Art .,  iii.

Nasse,  in  the  Preface  to  Dufresnoy.

* Of  183  cases  treated  by  me  in  Leipzic  not  one  died,  which  created  a great
sensation  among  the  Russians,  then  ruling  in  Dresden,  but  was  consigned  to  oblivion
by  the  medical  authorities.

VOL.  II.


2,6


402


RHUS.


Sherard,  in  Dufresnoy.

S yb  E l,  in  Medic . Annalen , 1 8 1 1 .

Van  Mons,  in  Dufresnoy.

Wichmann,  Ideen  zur  Diagnostik , i.

Zadig,  in  Hufeland's  Journ v.

In  the  i st  edit.  Rhus  has  743  symptoms,  in  the  2nd  936,  and  in  this  last  edit.
975-]


RHUS.

On  getting  up  out  of  bed,  she  is  as  if  intoxicated  and  thinks  she
will  fall  down.

Her  head  is  so  much  affected  that  she  cannot  stand  well,  cannot
keep  herself  upright.

Violent  vertigo  on  lying  down  with  fear  that  he  will  die  (aft.  10  h.).
Vertigo : all  went  round  with  her  3 worst  when  walking  and
standing,  also  (but  less)  when  sitting,  but  not  at  all  when  lying.*

5.  When  walking  reeling,  unsteady  and  staggering  in  the  body,
without  being  giddy  in  the  head.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  sensation  of  something  turning
about  in  the  head,  and  yet  no  vertigo.

Vertigo.  [Alderson,1 2  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.f.prakt.  Aerzte , xvii,  i.]
Very  severe  vertigo.  [Zadig,3  in  HufeL  Journ .,  v,  iii,  194.]
Vertigo,  as  if  he  were  held  up  high,  while  sitting,  [Tz.]

10.  Absence  of  thought  when  walking,  after  a meal  (aft.  28  h.).
[*■*•]

Reeling  and  staggering  when  walking,  without  vertigo.  [ Rkt .]

He  always  staggers  to  the  right  when  walking.  [Tz.]

Emptiness  in  the  head  without  decided  pain.  [aSz/a]

Vertigo  and  stupid  feeling  in  the  head.  \_Fr,  H — nf\

15.  Dizzy  in  the  head.  [£//'.]

Weakness  in  the  head  3 when  she  turned  her  head  she  lost
consciousness  5 when  she  stooped  she  felt  as  if  she  could  not  rise  up
again.  \_Hbg.~\

Vertigo.  [Hb.  Ts.  from  Hufel.  Journ. ,3  Bd.  lxi,  Heft.  4,  p.  28,
in  the  Reine  Arzneimittellehre  of  Hartlaub  and  Trinks , Bd.  iii.]

When  sitting,  stupid  in  the  head  as  if  intoxicated,  giddy  with
tendency  to  fall  forwards  and  backwards.*

When  walking,  giddy  as  if  she  would  fall  forwards.*

20.  In  the  morning  on  rising  quite  dizzy  3 he  can  hardly  keep  on  his
legs.

The  head  is  dull  and  stupid.

A stupefied  state,  a weakness  in  the  head.

Confusion  of  the  head  (immediately).  [Tz.]

Confusion  of  the  whole  head  (aft.  h.).  [Z«.]

* Comp.  309.


1 Symptoms  observed  in  patients.  The  English  original  has  been  consulted.

2 Effects  in  a patient.

3 Collection  of  observations  of  effects  of  handling  the  plant.


RHUS.


403


25.  Confusion  of  the  head  and  disinclination  for  literary  work,

He  is  relaxed,  thinking  is  difficult,  and  speaking  distasteful,  or
quite  repugnant  to  him.  [&/*.]

Relaxation  of  the  mind  for  several  days,  he  could  not  collect  his
thoughts  and  was  almost  stupid.*

Very  slow  flow  of  ideas.  [££/'.]

Forgetfulness  : he  cannot  remember  what  occurred  quite  recently.

[Stf.]

30.  The  memory  is  very  obtuse  ; he  remembers  with  difficulty  even
the  most  familiar  things  and  names,  and  again  they  are  sometimes
distinctly  and  clearly  remembered,  when  he  has  no  febrile  chill.

[**•]

Weakness  of  memory.

Absence  of  thoughts  ; he  seems  to  be  thoughtful,  and  yet  has  a
deficiency  of  ideas.

When  walking,  is  dizzy  as  if  he  did  not  see  persons  who  were
before  his  eyes.

When  she  has  walked,  or  when  she  stoops,  she  feels  a whirling,
not  otherwise.

35.  An  absence  of  thoughts,  as  from  vertigo  before  the  eyes,  often,  as
it  were,  a disappearance  of  all  objects.

Absence  of  thoughts  : e.g.  when  he  wished  to  write  12,  he  put
down  the  1,  but  could  not  remember  the  2 ; when  he  had  paper  in
his  hands  he  must  make  an  effort  to  remember  what  it  was  he  held
in  his  hands.

Headache  as  if  stupefied,  and  buzzing  in  the  head.

Confusion  of  the  head  (immediately).

The  head  is  confused  and  as  if  intoxicated,  in  the  morning  (aft.
12  h.).

40.  Giddy  headache,  involving  the  whole  head  ; when  writing  his
thoughts  and  memory  left  him,  and  he  could  not  remember.

The  head  is  full  and  heavy,  with  sensation,  on  stooping,  as  if  the
brain  fell  forwards.  [Fz.]

On  shaking  the  head  sensation  as  if  the  brain  were  loose  and  fell
against  the  skull.  [Fz.]

Pain  transversely  across  the  forehead.1  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

Headache  in  the  occiput,  which  goes  off  on  bending  the  head
backwards.  [Fz.]

45.  When  moving  the  arms  energetically,  pressive  pain  in  the  fore-
head as  with  a blunt  point  (aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

Pressure  and  drawing  on  the  left  side  of  the  hairy  scalp  towards
the  top.  [Fz.]

Pressive  drawing  on  the  left  side  of  the  hairy  scalp.  [Fz.]

Confusion  of  the  head,  aching  in  the  right  temple,  and  close
above  and  behind  the  right  orbit  a downward  pressure  as  from  a
weight.

Aching  in  the  temples.

* From  moistening  the  fingers  with  a strong  tincture  of ' rhus.


1 With  S.  7 and  294.


404


RHUS.


50.  Headache,  as  if  the  eyes  were  pressed  out  of  the  head,  with  yawn-
ing and  chilliness,  without  thirst.

When  he  stoops,  he  feels  as  if  he  could  not  rise  up  again  ; some-
thing hinders  him  in  the  nape ; he  feels  when  stooping  as  if  a
quantity  of  blood  shot  into  his  brain.

There  is  always  something  heavy  in  the  head,  and  on  stooping  it
feels  as  if  a weight  fell  forwards  into  the  forehead  and  drew  the  head
down,  whilst  the  face  becomes  hot,

A forward-pressing  pain  behind  the  left  eye.

Head  so  heavy  that  she  must  hold  it  straight  up  in  order  to
relieve  the  weight  that  pressed  forwards  in  the  forehead.

55.  Heavy  and  dull  in  the  head,  when  he  turns  his  eyes  ; the  eye-
balls themselves  are  painful.

In  the  temples  a heaviness  as  if  there  were  a painful  downward
pressure  there.

Headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  together  from  both  temples.

After  heat,  only  internally,  in  the  head  alone,  with  dry  lips  and
thirst,  violent  headache,  as  if  the  forehead  would  be  pressed  asunder,
with  an  extraordinary  weight  in  it,  especially  when  she  comes  out  of
the  open  air  into  the  room,  or  on  awaking  out  of  the  midday  sleep ;
but  as  soon  as  she  lies  down  in  bed  in  the  evening,  the  headache  goes
away.

A burning  pressure  on  the  right  temporal  bone.

60.  A pressure  radiating  upwards  in  the  right  temple  in  the  evening
in  bed,  worst  when  at  rest  ; in  order  to  relieve  it  he  must  either  sit
up,  or  get  out  of  bed.

A real  tearing  to  and  fro  in  the  head,  worse  when  stooping,  in  the
evening  from  5 o’clock  onwards  until  he  went  to  bed.

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  | h.).  \_Mch.'\

Simple  tearing  transversely  over  the  hairy  scalp,  externally.  [Tz.]

Headache,  drawing  in  the  occiput  and  temples,  with  aching  in
the  eyes  ; it  is  so  bad  that  it  drives  him  out  of  bed  quite  early  (4.30
o’clock).

65.  (Headache  as  from  deranged  stomach.)

Tearing  and  pressive  pain  in  the  head.

On  waking  from  sleep,  when  he  opens  his  eyes,  he  quickly  gets
a violent  headache,  at  first  in  the  forehead  behind  the  eyes,  as  if  the
brain  were  lacerated,  as  after  drinking  too  much  brandy,  aggravated
by  moving  the  eyes  ; then  in  the  occiput,  as  if  the  cerebellum  were
bruised  ; in  the  temples  there  occurs  an  out-pressing.

(Headache  in  the  left  side  and  in  the  occiput,  as  if  sore,  extending
into  the  teeth.)

When  she  goes  up  hill,  sensation  of  rushing  into  the  head,  she
feels  every  step  in  it.

70.  Sometimes  a splashing  in  the  whole  brain.

A running  and  crawling  over  the  forehead  and  nose  when  sitting
upright,  which  goes  off*  on  stooping.  [Tz.]

When  walking  a swaying  in  the  brain.

Stitches  outwards  in  the  head.

Fine  beating  in  the  right  side  of  the  head.


RHUS.


405


75.  Burning  in  the  head  and  fine  beating  or  pecking  pain  in  it.

A burning  pain  sometimes  in  the  occiput,  sometimes  in  the
forehead.

A burning  creeping  sensation  in  the  forehead.

He  feels  the  pulse  at  the  back  of  the  head.

Some  very  fine  violent  stitches  inwards  in  the  right  temple.

80.  Her  head  feels  too  full  and  heavy  (with  tinnitus  aurium),  at  the
same  time  sometimes  stitches  out  at  the  left  temple.

A weight  at  the  top  of  the  head,  after  walking.

A single  stitch  of  four  minutes  duration  above  the  eye,  from
within  outwards,  while  eating  ; then  nausea  and  fulness  ; heat  rose
up  from  within.

Headache  : single  jerks  in  the  occiput,  in  the  afternoon.

Soon  after  eating  a tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,
where  also  it  is  externally  painful  to  the  touch  ; sometimes  the
drawing  pain  involves  the  whole  head.

85.  A painful  crawling  in  the  head  like  scratching  with  a needle,  a
fine  prickly  scratching.

After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  headache  like  formication.

In  the  afternoon  a formication  on  a spot  of  the  occiput,  as  if  an
abscess  would  form  there.

A formication  on  the  scalp  (aft.  72  h.).

Headache  as  if  externally,  drawing,  as  it  were,  the  skin  together,
just  as  though  she  were  pulled  by  the  hair,  and  yet  the  head  is  not
painful  to  the  touch.

90.  Hairy  scalp  very  painful  when  touched  and  when  the  hair  is  stroked
backwards.

The  head  is  painful  externally  when  touched,  like  a boil.

Eroding  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  the  forehead,  the  face  and
round  about  the  mouth,  where  miliary  papules  appear.

Towards  evening,  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  pain  as  if  the
parts  were  asleep,  and  as  if  the  head  had  been  held  too  long  in  an
upright  position.

Paleness  of  the  face.  [Fr.  H — ».]

95.  Appearance  of  illness,  sunken  features,  blue  rings  round  the  eyes
(aft.  18  h.).  [St/.]

Sharp-pointed  nose,  for  three  days.  [Fr.  H — n.]

The  face  is  distorted  and  drawn  awry ; the  left  side  is  as  if
shortened  by  contraction,  the  right  as  if  lengthened  (aft.  22  h.).  [*Sy.]

Redness  and  sweat  of  the  face,  without  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fr.
H—n.]

Desquamation  of  the  skin  of  the  face.  [Fr.  H — n.]

100.  Great  swelling  of  the  face;  the  head  is  twice  as  big  ; a kind  of
phlegmonous  pustular  erysipelas,  which  compels  him  to  keep  his  bed
for  four  weeks.*  [Van  Mons,  in  DufresnoyJ  Ueber  den  wurzelenden
Sumach , Halle,  1801.]

# From  the  emanations  of  the  plant  and  from  plucking  it.


1 Observations, — The  French  original  has  been  consulted.


406


RHUS.


Erysipelatous  swelling  of  the  face  and  neck.*  [. Annalen  der
HeilkundeJ  1811,  April.]

Great  swelling  of  the  head,  face  and  eyelids,  so  that  he  could  not
open  them  for  more  than  twenty-four  hours.  [Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

Great  swelling  of  the  face.  [Du  Roy,1 2  Harbkesche  Baumzucht ,
ii,  p.  308.]

Swelling  of  the  face,  especially  of  the  eyelids  and  lobes  of  the
ears.  [Fontana,3  in  Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  ii,  11.]

105.  Swelling  of  the  face  in  some  persons.  [Dudley,3  in  Dufresnoy ,

i-  c-i  .

Violent  burning  on  the  swollen  face,  eyelids  and  earlobes.
[Fontana,  1.  c.]

Intolerable  itching  on  the  swollen  face,  eyelids  and  earlobes.
[Fontana,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  head,  neck  and  chest,  as  far  as  the  navel.  \_Hbg.~\

Stiffness  and  swelling  of  the  face.  \_Hb.  7j.]

1 10.  Face  and  hands  so  swollen,  that  he  could  not  open  the  eyes  for
eight  days,  and  his  face  had  not  a human  form.  \Hb.  Ts.~\

Fine  scales  on  the  tace  (the  11th  d.).  [Hb.  jfjr.J

Redness  and  sweat  of  the  face  without  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).4

Swelling  of  the  lips  and  nose,  then  pale  swelling  of  the  face  ; the
third  day  the  facial  swelling  increased,  with  burning  pain,  the  eyelids
closed  by  swelling,  the  eyes  watering ; the  fourth  and  fifth  days  the
face  was  studded  with  vesicles  full  of  yellow  water,  which  burst  and
let  out  a little  water  ; the  swelling  of  the  face  lasted  eight  days,  that
under  the  chin  longer  ; it  desquamated  like  bran.f  [ Annalen  der
Heilkunde , 1.  c.]

Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  superciliary  region,  and
in  the  cheek  hones.  [Rkt.]

1 15.  Inflammation  of  the  eyelids.  [Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

A smarting  itching  on  the  right  upper  eyelid  (which  goes  off
after  some  rubbing),  [i'iz.]

Twitching  sensation  in  the  left  upper  eyelid  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Fr.
H—n.]

A sensation,  made  up  of  twitching  and  contraction,  in  the  right
lower  eyelid.  [Tz.]

The  right  upper  eyelid  seems  to  be  swollen  and  presses,  this  goes
off  in  the  open  air  (aft.  26  h.).  [Tz.]

120.  The  eyelids  are  dry  and  become  always  closed,  as  if  by  sleepiness,
in  the  evening.  [Tz.]

of  the  eyelids  and

* From  the  emanations  of  the  plant,
f From  wetting  the  hands  with  the  juice.


Quivering
chill.  [Fz.]


dry  feeling  in  them,  during  a febrile


1 Not  accessible.

2 From  handling  the  leaves.

3 Observation.

4 Repetition  of  98,  except  the  name  of  the  authority.


RHUS.


407


Itching  in  the  right  outer  canthus  (aft.  27  h.).  [/z.]1

On  the  left  lower  eyelid  towards  its  inner  canthus  a red  hard
swelling,  like  a stye,  with  aching  pain,  for  six  days  (aft.  48  h.).  [ir.
H — n.\

Sensation  of  swelling  in  the  right  inner  canthus.  [Fz.]

1 25.  Smarting  as  from  an  acrid  acid  in  the  right  eye.  [Fz.]

Weakness  of  vision  : objects  seem  pale.*

She  seems  to  have  a veil  before  the  eyes,  she  cannot  see  well.

When  he  turns  the  eye,  or  when  it  is  pressed,  the  eyeball  is
painful,  he  can  hardly  move  it.

Aching  in  the  eye  as  if  dust  were  in  it.

130.  Aching  pain  in  the  eyes.

Great  swelling  of  the  eyelids  (4th  d.).  [Hb.  Tr.]

The  eyes  closed  on  account  of  great  swelling,  and  they  became
inflamed  (4th  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.]

Pain  in  the  eyes.  [Hb.  Ts.]

Periodical  cutting  in  the  eyes  ; he  has  difficulty  in  opening  the
eyelids  in  the  morning.  [<9/*.]

135.  Aching  in  the  eye  on  straining  the  sight.

Aching  as  from  inflammation  in  the  left  eye,  which  is  red  in  the
inner  canthus,  and  in  the  evening  is  sealed  up  with  eye  gum.

Pressive  and  contractive  pain  in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening.

Burning  aching  sensation  in  the  eye  from  evening  till  morning;
it  goes  off  in  the  morning  after  getting  up.

In  the  morning  the  white  of  the  eye  is  red,  with  burning  aching
in  it ; the  eyes  seem  to  be  protruded.

140.  The  eyes  are  red  and  stuck  together  with  matter  in  the  morning.

Her  eyes  are  stuck  together  with  muco-pus  in  the  morning.

Inflammation  of  the  eyes.

Blear  eyes  full  of  water.

In  the  evening  weeping  of  the  eyes,  with  burning  pain.

145.  A smarting  in  the  eyes  ; in  the  morning  they  are  sealed  up  with
eye  gum.

Smarting  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  lower  eyelids  (aft.  2 h.).

The  eyelids  in  cold  air  as  if  sore  from  salt  smarting  tears.

Dry  sensation  of  the  eyelids,  especially  in  the  inner  canthus.

In  the  evening  (about  8 o’clock)  a heaviness  and  stiffness  in  the
eyelids,  like  paralysis,  as  if  it  were  difficult  for  him  to  move  the-
eyelids.

150.  Stitches  below  the  eye.

On  the  inner  side  of  the  orbit,  in  the  bone  towards  the  nose,
bruised  pain.

An  aching  with  fine  pricking  on  the  zygoma.

An  aching  on  the  frontal  bone,  which  constantly  increases  and
then  suddenly  ceases.  [T%.]

* From  wetting  the  fingers  with  a strong  tincture  of  rhus  tox.


1 The  numbers  from  this  onwards  do  not  correspond  with  those  in  the  original,
several  errors  of  enumeration  occurring  in  Hahnemann’s  list,  and  S.  115  being
repeated  at  this  place.


RHUS.


40  8

A dull  drawing  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  through  the  left
cheek,  down  the  jaw,  through  the  muscles  and  teeth,  as  if  toothache
would  ensue.  [Z«.]

155.  Fine  painful  tearing  behind  the  left  ear.  \_Hbg.~\

Ringing  in  the  right  ear  when  walking  (aft.  ij  h.).  \_Mch.~\

Two  violent  cracks  in  the  left  ear  at  short  intervals,  as  if  the
membrana  tympani  burst,  when  lying  whilst  going  to  sleep  in  the
midday  siesta,  so  that  he  started  up  trembling  each  time,  but  then
soon  went  to  sleep  again  (aft.  4 h.).  \_MchJ]

Painful  beating  at  night  in  the  inner  ear.

Earache.

160.  A sudden  drawing  pain  in  the  ears,  as  if  a thread  were  drawn
through.  [*SV.]

Before  the  right  ear  sensation  as  if  something  were  blown  in  or
lay  before  it.

(Roaring  in  the  ear.)

Squeaking  before  the  ears,  like  young  mice.

(An  itching  creeping  in  the  ears,  as  if  something  alive  were  in
them-;  she  must  bore  in  them  with  the  finger.)

165.  Swelling  of  the  nose,  ears,  and  neck.  \Hb.  Ts .]

Epistaxis  frequently,  almost  only  when  stooping.

Epistaxis  at  night  (aft.  4 h.).

Epistaxis.  [i/%.]

Feeling  of  hardness  and  swelling  under  the  nose,  going  off  when
touched.  [Tz.]

170.  Tension  under  the  right  nostril.  [Fz.]

The  tip  of  the  nose  is  red,  and  painful  when  touched,  as  if  it
would  fester  (aft.  8 d.).  [Fz.]

Scabby  eruption  near  the  left  ala  nasi  and  under  the  nose  (aft.
48  h.).  [Fr.  H—n .]

Hot  burning  under  the  left  nostril,  so  that  the  breath
seems  to  come  out  hot,  which  goes  off  in  the  open  air.  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  epistaxis  (aft.  40  h.).

175.  Epistaxis  on  clearing  the  throat  and  hawking.

Sensation  of  excoriation  at  the  nostrils.

A tettery  eruption  about  the  mouth  and  nose,  sometimes  with
twitching  and  burning  itching  pain  in  it  (aft.  24  h.).

(On  the  fold  of  the  cheek  a pustule,  which,  painless  per  se,  pricks
like  fine  needles  when  touched.)

(Vesicles  about  the  mouth  and  nostrils  which  burn.)

180.  Coldness  in  the  shut  mouth,  as  if  wind  blew  into  it,  with  roaring
in  the  left  ear.  [Fz.]

A pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  in  the  white  skin  below  the  red.

In  the  morning  on  rising,  in  the  right  side  of  the  lower  lip,  a
pinching  point,  which  gives  rise  to  the  sensation  as  if  it  were  bleeding
(aft.  48  h.).  [Fz.]

Parched  dry  lips,  covered  by  a red  scab.  [Fz.]

A conglomeration  of  pimples  at  first  filled  with  a watery  fluid,
not  far  from  both  angles  of  the  lips,  on  the  border  of  the  lower  lip,


RHUS.


409


smarting  as  from  salt  per  se , and  with  a sore  feeling  when  touched
(aft.  10  h.).

185.  In  the  afternoon- a fine  burning  cramp  in  the  right  cheek,  as  if  all
became  ulcerated ; at  the  same  time  the  skin  of  the  cheek  became
very  hot  and  rough,  as  if  an  eruption  were  breaking  out  there  ; he
must  get  out  of  bed  and  had  much  thirst.

Quick  needle-pricks  in  the  right  cheek,  [jFz.]

Cutting  contraction  in  the  right  cheek,

On  a spot  of  the  cheek  a cutting  pain,  thereafter  itching  and
pricking  there,  which  goes  off  by  scratching  (aft.  10,  11  h.).  [i^z.]

Burning  contracted  feeling  in  the  right  cheek,  with  aching  pain
in  the  crowns  of  the  three  upper  molars,  [/%.]

190.  On  the  side  of  the  chin  pimples,  which  contain  pus  in  their
apices,  which  cause  a pain  like  a knife  blade  pressed  in,  only  when
touched,  and  a burning  which  is  persistent.

A pain  at  the  maxillary-joint  close  to  the  ear,  cramp-
like when  at  rest  and  when  moving  the  part,  which  is
alleviated  by  strong  pressure  from  without,  and  by  partaking  of
warm  things.

Pain  in  the  maxillary-joint,  as  if  bruised  or  as  if  it  would  break,
when  it  is  moved  (aft.  1 h.).

During  spasmodic  yawning  in  the  evening,  pain  in  the  maxillary-
joint  as  if  it  would  be  dislocated  (aft.  1 h.).

When  moving  the  jaw  to  and  fro,  creaking  in  the  joint  (in  the
morning)  (aft.  12  h.).

195.  At  every  movement  of  the  lower  jaw,  even  when  drinking,  a
cracking  beside  the  ear  (in  the  maxillary-joint).

The  gland  under  the  angle  of  the  jaw  is  painful,  even  without
movement,  like  aching  and  digging.

Sensation  in  the  lower  jaw  as  if  the  gums  were  squeezed  in  from
both  sides,  with  a very  musty  feeling  in  the  mouth.  [Az.]

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  maxillary-joint.  [jFz.]

Swollen  hard  parotid  and  submaxillary  glands.  [ Hbg .]

200.  Swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands,  swallowing  causes  a shooting
in  them.

In  the  evening  (7  o’clock)  a shooting  twitching  in  single  jerks,
from  the  temple  down  into  both  jaws  and  rows  of  teeth,  during
which  he  became  quite  exhausted,  with  a bruised  pain  in  the  left
temple ; he  yawned,  but  could  not  go  to  sleep  immediately  from  fear
lest  the  pain  might  return.

Slow  shooting  and  at  the  same  time  twitching  pain  in  the  canine
tooth,  in  the  evening.

At  night  (about  10  o’clock)  twitching  toothache,  it  twitched
up  into  the  head ; it  was  alleviated  by  laying  a cold  hand  on  the
outside.

Twitching  in  the  root  nerves  of  the  hollow  teeth.

205.  Twitching  in  the  dental  nerve  from  below  upwards,  alleviated,
but  only  transiently,  by  laying  on  the  cold  hand.

Aching  on  the  outer  side  of  the  gums  of  the  lower  molars,  and  at
the  same  time  on  the  shoulder  at  the  left  clavicle,


4io


RHUS.


Dull  aching  in  the  lower  molars  and  on  the  left  shoulder  at  the
clavicle,  [Tz.]

Toothache  in  the  right  upper  teeth,  as  if  at  the  roots  they  were
drawn  into  their  alveoli.  [Tz.]

Toothache  in  the  lower  molars  : a sharp  pressure  and  an  obtuse
pain,  with  a feeling  in  the  mouth  as  from  a musty  smell.  [Tz.]

210.  Sensation  betwixt  the  teeth  on  the  right  side  as  if  a tough  body
were  betwixt  them.  [Tz.]

Toothache,  like  cutting  and  like  a wound.

In  the  night  (2.30  a.m.)  intolerable  sore  pain  combined  with
burning  in  the  gums  extending  into  the  roots  of  the  molars,  compelling
him  to  sit  up  in  bed,  with  feeling  of  heat  on  the  body,  and  especially
on  the  head,  and  sweat  on  the  forehead.

At  the  back  of  the  palate,  where  the  teeth  terminate,  a cutting
throbbing  pain,  as  if  an  ulcer  were  forming,  per  se ; but  on  touching
it  there  is  shooting  pain  like  an  ulcer.

On  the  inside  of  the  gums  of  the  front  teeth  and  in  the  peri-
osteum of  the  teeth  a pressure,  moving  hither  and  thither.

215.  The  teeth  are  loose,  and  there  is  occasionally  a formication  in
them  as  in  a limb  that  has  gone  to  sleep.

A painful  formication  in  the  tooth,  like  scratching  with  a needle,
a fine  prickling  scratching.

The  teeth  are  painful  only  when  biting  and  chewing,  as  if  they
were  too  high  and  loose,  and  yet  they  do  not  hurt  or  feel  loose  when
touched.

Toothache  (in  the  evening),  first  in  the  hollow'  tooth,  w'hich
became  higher  and  looser,  then  in  the  other  teeth  also,  in  which
there  was  sometimes  shooting,  sometimes  formication.

The  front  teeth  are  loose,  and  are  painful  from  cold  and  warm
drinks.

220.  Pain  in  the  front  teeth  on  knocking  against  them  with  the
tongue.

Visible  looseness  of  the  first  two  molars,  of  both  canine  teeth,
and  of  the  four  lower  incisors,  with  formicating  pain  in  the  gums,
also  when  not  chewing.

Looseness  of  the  lower  incisors,  she  cannot  bite  on
them.

Great  looseness  of  the  four  lower  incisors ; the  gum  recedes  from
these  teeth,  it  can  be  pulled  away  from  them  and  touched  without
pain,  except  when  the  teeth  themselves  are  painful.

Water  collects  in  his  mouth;  he  must  frequently
spit  it  out.

225.  Internal  inclination  to  spit  out,  as  if  she  had  too  much  saliva  in
the  mouth.

While  sitting  asleep  in  the  afternoon  the  saliva
runs  out  of  his  mouth.

In  the  afternoon  sleep  the  mouth  becomes  full  of  water.

In  the  morning  in  bed  the  mouth  was  full  of  salt  water.

He  must  spit  out  much  saliva  and  mucus  all  day;  at  the  same


RHUS.


4ii

time  something  tasting  sour  comes  up  from  the  stomach  into  the
mouth.

230.  In  the  morning  frequent  hawking  of  mucus.

She  must  hawk  much  in  the  morning  only,  and  the  more  she
rinses  the  mouth  the  worse  it  is  with  the  mucus  in  the  throat.

In  the  morning  the  mucus  and  tongue  are  salt.

Dry  feeling  in  the  throat.

Thirst  and  dryness  in  the  throat.  [Hb.  Ts.']

235.  The  tongue  is  not  furred,  but  very  dry,  which  incites  to
drinking.

Dry  feeling  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue  (without  visible  dryness),
and  to  this  he  attributes  the  thirst.

Thirst  owing  to  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  mouth,  which  remains
in  spite  of  drinking  ever  so  much,  in  the  afternoon  and  after
midnight.

Perceptible  dryness  of  the  mouth,  dry  feeling  with  extreme
thirst.  [$£/’.]

Accumulation  of  saliva.  [£^/'.]

240.  Flow  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  after  (customary)  tobacco  smoking.

O-]

Much  saliva  flows  into  the  mouth.  \_Stf.']

Frequent  spitting  of  very  viscid  mucus.  \_Stf. ]

Much  mucus  in  the  mouth,  without  unusual  taste.  [Tz.]

Viscid  mucus  in  the  throat,  which  goes  off  after  hawking  a little,
but  leaves  a kind  of  roughness.  [Tz.]

245.  Feeling  of  swelling  in  the  throat  combined  with  bruised  pain,  per
se  and  when  speaking,  but  on  swallowing  pressive  pain  as  if  swollen,
with  a prick  as  if  something  sharp  had  stuck  in  there  (aft.  3 h.).

When  swallowing  and  yawning  there  is  a prick  in  her  throat,  as
if  she  had  swallowed  a needle.

She  cannot  drink  ; every  time  she  swallow^  liquids  she  chokes,
just  as  if  the  epiglottis  did  not  act  or  were  paralysed ; at  the  same
time  dry  feeling  in  the  back  of  the  throat.

Severe  pricks,  which  at  their  onset  are  obtuse,  but  end  sharp  and
pointed,  in  the  throat  in  the  region  of  the  epiglottis,  not  when
swallowing,  but  always  removed  by  swallowing.

Sensation  in  the  left  tonsil,  like  roughness  and  excoriation,  when
swallowing  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tz.]

250.  When  the  throat  is  dry  he  has  pricking  in  it,  but  when  it  is
moist  aching  in  it,  when  swallowing.

When  swallowing  an  aching  in  the  throat,  not  so  bad  when
swallowing  food  as  during  empty  deglutition.

Throbbing  pain  in  the  back  of  the  throat,

A pungent  bitter-sour  taste  in  the  mouth.

A coppery  taste  in  the  mouth  and  a scrapy  feeling  extending
deep  down  into  the  throat.

255.  In  the  morning,  after  waking  and  after  eating,  a putrid  taste  in
the  mouth,  but  without  bad  smell  from  the  mouth.

A greasy  taste  in  the  mouth,  but  the  food  tastes  all  right.

In  the  forenoon  taste  in  the  mouth  as  of  putrid  meat,  as  if  the


412


RHUS.


stomach  had  been  deranged  with  putrid  meat,  but  the  food  tastes  all
right  and  nice  (after  eating  the  putrid  taste  did  not  return).

Putrid  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth,  she  must  spit  much.

Slimy  taste  in  the  mouth  , the  mouth  feels  as  if  covered  with
mucus.

260.  Food  is  relished  (in  the  evening)  with  the  exception  of  bread,
which  tastes  rough,  dry,  and  scrapy.  [Fz.]

Bread  tastes  bitter  and  rough.  [Fz.]

Beer  is  not  relished.  [Fz.]

Flat  taste  in  the  mouth.  [*Sy.]

Bread  and  food  generally  are  repugnant  to  him.  [*S'//r.]

265.  Aversion  to  meat  and  meat  soup  for  several  days.  [Stf, !]

Longing  for  cold  milk,  he  swallows  it  hastily.

After  a glass  of  wine  he  feels  full ; he  gets  a loathing  at  wine  and
at  the  same  time  heaviness  of  the  head.  [*S’//rI]

(All  day  long  bitter  in  the  mouth,  the  food  even  tastes  bitter.)

In  the  morning  bitterness  in  the  mouth,  which  goes  off  on  eating.

270.  (Bread  tastes  bitter.)

(Sour  things  taste  bitter  to  her.)

After  partaking  of  milk  a sourish  taste  comes  into  the  mouth.
Aversion  to  coffee.

0 No  relish  for  tobacco,  and  yet  no  loathing  at  it.

275.  Frequently  sudden  appetite  for  dainties.

Complete  want  of  appetite.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Complete  anorexia  for  several  days.  [Hbg.~\

Want  of  appetite ; he  eats  little,  is  immediately  satiated  and  yet
has  hunger.  [£//".]

At  the  time  when  healthy  hunger  might  be  expected  there  came
complete  anorexia,  with  much  saliva  in  the  mouth  of  a flat  slimy
taste.  [Fz.]

280.  Anorexia  in  the  palate  and  throat,  with  empty  feeling
in  the  stomach  and  at  the  same  time  ravenous  hunger,
which  goes  off  after  sitting  for  some  time.  [Fz.]

A peculiar  heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  which  seems  to  be  quite
empty,  with  hunger,  when  sitting  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  he  was  hungry,  but  when  he  sat  down  to  table
food  was  immediately  indifferent  to  him,  and  it  was  all  one  to  him
whether  he  ate  or  not.  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  natural  hunger,  at  noon  indifference  to  food,
which,  however,  he  relished.  [Fz.]

Appetite  greater  than  usual*  (aft.  4 d.).  [Fz.]

285.  Little  appetite,  but  at  the  same  time  hunger,  with  sensation  as  if
the  hunger  affected  the  chest.  [Fz.]

Occasionally  a shudder  of  loathing  and  nauseous  shaking  all  over
the  body  without  feeling  of  chilliness.

She  has  no  appetite,  but  the  food  tastes  all  right ; but  when  she
has  swallowed  a mouthful  a putrid  taste  comes  into  the  mouth.

A fulness  in  the  sub-sternal  region,  with  a feeling  as  if  all
appetite  were  for  ever  gone.

* Curative  action.


RHUS.


4i3


Complete  loss  of  appetite  for  all  food ; nothing  tasted  well,
neither  food  nor  drink,  nor  tobacco  (aft.  16  h.).

290.  She  ate  without  any  desire  to  eat,  and  it  tasted  well.

Though  food  is  tolerably  relished  yet  she  has  no  appetite  for  it,
and  her  stomach  always  feels  full.

Food  will  not  go  down  in  the  morning  on  account  of  internal
fulness.

He  felt  squeamish  and  sick,  as  if  in  the  chest,  in  the  morning
after  rising.  [Fz.]

Nausea.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

295.  Nausea,  as  if  in  the  throat.  [Fz.]

Nausea  in  the  chest,  with  ravenous  hunger,  after  satisfying  it  the
nausea  went  off.  [Fz.]

Nausea  in  the  stomach  and  qualmishness  in  the  chest,  which
becomes  worse  on  stooping  (aft.  2 6 h.).  [Fz.]

After  moderate  eating  fulness  and  eructation.

A kind  of  ravenous  hunger,  and  yet  he  has  a soapy  taste  in  the
mouth  ; everything  tastes  like  straw  and  is  eructated,  and  after  the
smallest  quantity  of  food  the  appetite  is  immediately  gone,  and  he
feels  full.

300.  A creeping  in  the  stomach  and  excessive  eructation,  which  was
only  allayed  by  lying,  but  every  time  he  raised  himself  up  it
returned.

After  eating  and  drinking  there  is  empty  eructation.

In  the  evening  very  violent  eructation  of  wind,  followed  imme-
diately by  hiccup  without  sensation  (aft.  36  h.).

Eructation  from  the  stomach,  which  seems  to  he
transferred  to  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  settled
there,  [Fz.]

Frequent  eructation,  also  of  what  had  been  eaten.

305.  A sort  of  burning  eructation.

Soon  after  eating  giddy  in  the  head.

Soon  after  dinner  (drawing)  toothache  in  an  undecayed  tooth
(aft.  30  h.).

Mostly  after  eating  an  anxiety  in  the  abdomen,  with  flatulent
distension.

After  dinner  (when  standing)  suddenly  such  a weakness  in  the
head  and  vertigo,  that  he  thought  he  would  fall  forwards.*

310.  Immediately  after  eating,  headache  (tension  in  the  whole  sinciput).

Soon  after  eating,  headache.

(Immediately  after  eating,  cough.)

(Immediately  after  eating  very  tired.)

Immediately  after  eating,  extraordinary  drowsiness ;

he  could  not  refrain  from  sleeping.

315.  Immediately  after  eating,  enormous  distension  of  the  abdomen.

On  drinking  beer  headache.

On  drinking  beer  it  goes  to  his  head,  as  if  it  caused  heat  there.

Especially  after  eating  shivering.


Comp.  4,  18,  19.


4*4


RHUS.


After  eating  stomachache,  for  several  hours,  as  from  indigestible
food.

320.  After  eating  and  drinking  some  pinching  in  the  upper  part  of  the
abdomen.

After  eating  and  drinking  nausea.

After  eating  and  after  coffee  nausea  and  flow  of  saliva  into  the
mouth.

(During  dinner  she  got  stomachache,  which  delayed  her  getting
to  sleep  ; after  waking  it  was  gone.)

In  the  morning  after  rising  he  got  warm  and  qualmish  as
though  he  should  vomit ; after  lying  down  again  the  nausea  went  off.

325.  After  a meal  he  became  exhausted  and  giddv.  [jFz.]

Pressive  drawing  forwards  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  with
anxiety  and  nausea  on  the  chest  (aft.  63  h.).  [/%.]

In  the  morning  after  rising  nausea,  with  a kind  of  anxiety  which
gradually  went  oft' in  the  open  air  (aft.  27  h.).  [i'z.]

Nausea,  which  became  a little  better  after  eating,  but  returned,
with  hunger  without  appetite,  [Fz.]

After  a moderate  meal  fulness  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  over-
loaded, with  persistent  great  appetite,  [jFz.]

330.  Ravenous  hunger  and  emptiness  in  the  stomach,  with  anorexia  in
the  palate  and  throat,  which  goes  off  after  sitting  for  some  time,  [/z.]1 2
In  the  night  during  sleep,  she  often  rises  up  and  heaves  as  though
she  would  vomit,  but  nothing  comes.

In  the  morning  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  with  nausea
nearly  coming  to  vomiting,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  hunger.

In  the  evening  several  times  a rising  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  to
the  pit  of  the  throat,  which  almost  took  away  her  breath  for  instants.

A pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  it  were  all  swollen  there,
which  makes  the  breathing  difficult  (in  the  evening).

335.  A pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  if  a too  large  morsel  had
been  swallowed.

An  oppression  in  the  stomach  towards  evening,  as  if  all  were
drawn  together  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  6 h.).

A kind  of  squeezing,  as  if  full  and  tight  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.
Aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  on  moving.  [.Fz.]

A shooting  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  if  h.).  \_Ln.]

340.  Simple  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  at  the  right  hypo-
chondrium (aft  10  h.).  [i^z.]

Pinching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  thence  quickly  into  the
hypogastrium  on  a small  spot  (aft.  3 h.).  [67/1]

V iolent  beating  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

Pain  in  the  stomach.3  [Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

A lump  seems  to  lie  in  the  stomach  after  a meal,  especially  when
standing,  [.Fz.]

345.  Under  the  diaphragm,  above  the  stomach,  painful  pinching,  after-
wards deeper,  in  the  stomach  itself,  [Fz.]


1 Repetition  of  280,  the  u which”  must  refer  to  the  “hunger.”

2 In  the  original,  “ slight  stomachache.”


RHUS.


4 15


A severe  beating  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.

On  the  right  side  towards  the  stomach,  a contractive  pain.

A pushing  forwards  in  the  hypochondrium,  with  anxiety,  as  if
about  to  die,  when  sitting  in  a stooping  posture  (aft.  9 h.).  [.Fz.]

A pushing  in  the  abdomen  as  if  the  bowels  were  raised  up  towards
the  heart,  when  sitting  (aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

350.  On  rising  up  after  stooping,  a feeling  as  if  the  abdomen  were
distended,  with  warm  feeling  on  the  chest.  [Mch.]

A pushing  in  the  left  side  under  the  ribs.  [#2.]

Shooting  from  the  right  side  towards  the  stomach.

Pressive  shooting  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (whereby
deep  breathing  was  prevented).

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  like  a lump  lying  oppressive  and  heavy  in
the  belly.

355.  When  lying  no  pain  in  the  abdomen,  but  when  sitting  the
abdomen  is  painful  as  if  it  were  pressed.

A pressive  pain  on  a small  spot  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  flatulence
were  displaced  there,  only  when  turning  the  body strongly,  e.g.  when
going  upstairs,  but  not  when  touching  it.

Pinching  in  the  right  side  of  the  umbilical  region,  with  rush  of
chilliness  in  the  upper  arms,  [Fz.]

Pinching  in  the  abdomen  when  sitting  with  oppression  rising  up
(aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

A pinching  in  the  right  side  under  the  ribs,  which  soon  extended
towards  the  umbilical  region,  as  if  he  had  worms  in  the  abdomen,
when  sitting  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Ln.]

360.  (In  the  forenoon)  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  pinching  in  the
abdomen  with  displaced  flatulence,  which  is  not  freely  discharged
(aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

Almost  twitching  pinching  in  different  parts  of  the  abdomen.

[**•]

During  the  evacuation  of  a natural  stool,  extraordinary  pinching
in  the  abdomen  (aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the  umbilical  region,  with
violent  pinching.  [Ln.]

Digging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  [Fz.]

365.  A shooting  from  the  navel  to  the  cardiac  region,  as  if  a stitch
darted  up,  repeated  at  every  pulse  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Ln.]

A shooting  above  the  navel,  [Fz.]

Drawing  extending  downwards  from  the  umbilical  region  towards
the  pubes  (aft.  27  h.).  [Fz.]

Pain  as  from  contusion  below  the  navel.  [Fz.]

A visible  contraction  in  the  middle  of  the  abdomen  above  the
navel,  so  that  the  abdomen  below  and  above  this  contracted  stripe
was  distended,  hard  and  stiff  to  the  feeling  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ln.]

370.  A cramp-like  drawing  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Ln.]

Cutting  in  the  left  side  of  the  navel  on  expiration  while  sitting.

[Fz.]

In  the  morning,  on  getting  a slight  chill,  spasmodic  pains  (spasms)


416


RHUS.


in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  with  moaning,  timorous,  dis-
consolate humour  (aft.  24  h.).

First  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  then  a shooting  in  the  right  side  of
the  abdomen.

Bellyache  compounded  of  cutting,  tearing  and  pinching,  which
involves  the  whole  of  the  bowels  without  indication  of  much  flatu-
lence and  without  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  is  worse  when
moving,  but  becomes  gradually  better  when  at  rest  (aft.  24  h.).

375.  Painful  distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  pain  in  the  belly  as  from
much  incarcerated  flatulence,  soon  after  a meal.

Enormous  distension  of  the  abdomen  immediately  after  eating.
Up  the  abdomen  a scarlet  redness  to  four  fingers’  breadth  below
the  navel  (the  nth  d.).  [Hb.  Ts .]

The  abdomen  was  distended  all  day  long  ; there  was  a welling
in  it  like  fermentation.

Fermentation  in  the  abdomen.

380.  Very  foetid  flatus.

Burning  in  the  abdomen  and  thirst.

A digging  and  twisting  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  if  a worm  moved
in  it.

In  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  a drawing  pain  when  breathing.
Grumbling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  with  blows  towards  the
pubes  (aft.  36  h.).  [Fz.]

385.  Fulness  and  fermentation  in  the  abdomen  with  hunger  which  all
went  off  after  eating  (aft  26  h.).  [Fz.]

The  flatulence  excites  a twitching  in  the  abdomen.  [Fz.]

Easy  discharge  of  much  flatus  which  seems  to  be  produced  only
in  the  rectum  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.]

Much  flatus  in  the  abdomen  which  is  not  discharged,  in  the
evening.  [Fz.]

Rumbling,  flatulent  sufferings  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,
without  discharge  of  flatus.  [St/.]

390.  Twitching  and  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]
When  walking  the  abdomen  seems  to  be  so  relaxed  internally,  that
there  is  a shaking  in  it  at  every  step.  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  on  stretching  the  body,
the  abdomen  is  painful  as  if  ulcerated,  and  the  abdominal  integuments
seem  to  be  too  short  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.]

In  the  right  side  of  the  hypogastrium  a drawing  pressive  sensation,
and  in  the  abdominal  integuments  a feeling  as  if  a cobweb  were
spread  over  them,  when  sitting  (aft.  J h.).  \J\4ch.\

Pressing  on  the  pubes.  [Fz.]

395.  In  the  pubes  sensation  as  if  stretched,  when  walking  in  the  open
air.  [Fz.]

In  the  region  above  the  inguinal  ring  a drawing  transversely
across,  when  sitting.  [Fz.]

In  the  left  flank  a tension  with  shooting.  [Fz.]

In  the  left  flank  sensation  as  if  a part  (hernia)  were  protruded.


RHUS.


w

417

Outstretching  in  the  right  groin,  as  if  a hernia  would  occur.
[Fz.]

400.  In  the  left  flank,  when  walking,  a weight  as  if  a boil  hung  down
there,  [Tz.]

An  out-pressing  in  the  right  groin,  with  ravenous  hunger,  and
rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  11  h.).  [Tz.]

Contractive  pain  in  the  left  groin.

On  the  mons  veneris  two  red  excoriated  spots  from  bursting  of
blisters  (11  d.).  [ Hb . Ts .]

Pain  and  contraction  in  the  abdomen,  so  that  she  must  walk  in  a
stooping  attitude.

405.  In  the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  before  noon,  cutting  ; at  the
same  time  she  must  often  go  to  stool,  when  the  evacuation  was
normal ; the  pain  was  alleviated  by  bending  the  body  together,
aggravated  by  walking  (aft.  16  h.).

Constant  urging  to  stool,  with  nausea  and  tearing  in  the  bowels ;
the  call  to  stool  often  resulted  in  nothing,  often  in  a small  quantity
of  watery  fluid.

Along  with  greater  pinching  and  digging  in  the  hypogastrium
frequent  rapid  evacuations,  extremely  foetid,  first  more  consistent,  then
watery,  mingled  with  flatus  (aft  ij  h.).  \_Stf.']

After  the  faecal  evacuation,  remission  of  the  pains  in  the  abdomen,
which,  however,  soon  returned,  exciting  new  evacuations.

Diarrhoea.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

410.  Diarrhoea  several  times  in  an  hour,  for  sixty  hours  (aft.  30  h.).
[Fr.  H—n.]

Stools  mixed  with  blood.  \_Hbg.\

Stools  with  mucus,  red  and  yellow,  like  jelly  and  liquid.

[Hbg.-]

Quickly  occurring,  thin,  yellow,  frothy  stools,  with  hardly  any
smell,  not  preceded  by  pain  in  the  abdomen  ; the  first  portions  pass
involuntarily,  as  in  paralysis  of  the  sphincter  ani  (aft.  24  h.).  [*57/1]

Connected  but  very  soft  whitish  yellow  stool  (aft.  45  h.).  [<S7/'.]

415.  Before  every  stool  a burning  in  the  rectum.

Before  every  stool  the  child  screams  ; after  each  it  is  quiet.  1

She  has  four  ordinary  stools  in  rapid  succession  (aft  a few  h.).

Seven  diarrhoeic  motions  like  jelly,  yellow  streaked  with  white,
without  pain  in  the  belly  (aft.  20  h.).

Three  or  four  almost  watery  stools  with  much  flatus  (aft.  24  h.).

420.  Diarrhoea.

(Thin  stool,  several  times  a day,  followed  by  empty  pressing,
tenesmus.)

Diarrhoea,  pinching  before  each  stool  (aft.  40  h.).

Diarrhoea,  stool  as  if  chopped  up.

(Perfectly  white  stool,  neither  too  soft  nor  too  hard.)

425.  (Constipation)  (aft.  3 d.).

(Stool  somewhat  bloody.)

Frequent  call  to  stool,  but  he  can  pass  only  very  little  (aft.  68  h.).

After  a soft  stool,  sore  projecting  piles  ; blind  haemorrhoids  (aft.

24  h.).

VOL.  II.


27


4i8


RHUS.


Sore  pain  at  the  anus  at  other  times  than  when  at  stool.

4.30.  When  standing  a labour-like  drawing  towards  the  uterus.

Drawing  down  the  back,  and  tension  and  pressing  in  the  rectum,
as  if  all  would  come  out  there.

Creeping  in  the  rectum,  as  from  thread-worms  (aft.  some  h.).
Itching  deep  in  the  rectum.

Itching  pain  at  the  anus,  as  from  piles.

435.  Burning  pain  posteriorly  at  the  root  of  the  urethra,  when
urinating.

When  urging  to  urinate  stitches  from  both  sides  upon  the  bladder.
He  must  pass  urine  every  minute  during  the  day.

Great  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  14  h.).

He  must  rise  up  three  times  to  urinate  at  night.

440.  When  passing  water  he  gets  eructations.

Hot  urine.

Dark  urine.

The  urine  is  already  cloudy  when  it  is  passed.

Dark  urine  that  soon  becomes  turbid.

445.  Cloudy  white  urine,  that  became  always  more  cloudy  white  the
longer  he  urinated,  so  that  the  last  drops  were  the  most  turbid,  like
flakes  (aft.  24  h.).

Urine  like  water,  with  snow-white  sediment.

(The  urine  passed  in  a double  stream.)

Pain  in  the  inguinal  glands,  only  at  night  in  bed,  when  she
moves,  on  turning  and  rising  up.

At  the  inguinal  ring  a simple  pain,  as  if  a hernia  would  protrude
there.

450.  Frightful  eruption  on  the  genitals,*  closure  of  the  urethra  by
swelling. f \_Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1.  c.]

A profusely  exuding  eruption^  on  the  scrotum  and  swelling  of
the  prepuce  and  glans  penis.  \_Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1.  c.]

Stiffness  and  swelling  of  the  genitals  (3rd  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.]
Tympanitic  swelling  of  the  genitals,  especially  of  the  scrotum,
with  much  itching1  (2nd  d.).  [ Hb . Ts.]

Down  from  the  scrotum  a dark  scarlet  redness,  without  swelling,
becoming  streaky  at  the  middle  of  the  thighs  (nth  d.).  [Hb.  7>.]
455.  The  scrotum  became  always  more  swollen  and  harder,  and
itched  intolerably,  especially  towards  the  perinaeum  (4th  d.).  [Hb.

Ts.-]

The  scrotum  felt  like  thick  pigskin  (nth  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.]

With  the  aid  of  a magnifying  glass  a miliary  eruption  was  seen
on  the  scrotum,  which  exuded  moisture  where  the  scrotum  touched
the  thigh  and  in  the  perinaeum  (nth  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.]

* From  smearing  the  hands  with  the  juice,  and  probably  wetting  the  genitals
with  it.

f And  death.

£ From  smearing  the  hands  with  the  juice.


1 This  and  the  previous  symptom  occurred  in  the  same  subject.  The  phrase
tympanitisch  ” is  applied  only  to  the  accompanying  swelling  of  the  face.


RHUS.


419


In  the  left  testicle  a cutting  drawing,  [T%.]

Red  spots  on  the  inside  of  the  prepuce,  near  the  fraenum.

460.  The  glans  was  painful  because  the  swollen  prepuce  formed  a
paraphimosis.  [ Hb . Ts.]

The  prepuce  was  darker  than  usual  (nth  d.).  [Hb.  TV.]

On  the  top  of  the  glans  an  exuding  vesicle.  [*SV.]

A large  blister  under  the  prepuce  on  the  glans,  which  burst  the
following  day  (6th  d.).  [Hb.  Ts .]

Swelling  of  the  prepuce  close  to  its  junction  with  the  glans.

465.  Great  smarting  on  the  front  part  of  the  urethra,  continuing
during  and  after  micturition,  worse  when  at  rest  than  when  walking
(aft.  5 h.).  [Ln.]

In  the  morning  on  rising  swelling  of  the  glans,  with  simple  pain
when  it  is  touched,  at  the  same  time  smarting  in  the  urethra,  during
and  after  micturition  (aft.  12  h.).  [Ln.]

Shooting  itching  inside  the  prepuce  (aft.  9 h.).  [Tz.]

Towards  morning  violent  erection  of  the  penis,  with  frequent  call
to  urinate.  [Tz.]

At  night  frequent  erection  of  the  penis,  with  frequent  discharge
of  urine.  [Fz.]

470.  Irresistible  excitation  to  seminal  emission  after  3 a.m.  (aft.  20  h.).

Large  nocturnal  seminal  emission  (aft.  6 h.).

Violent  labour  pains,  as  if  the  menses  would  instantly  come  on,
deep  in  the  hypogastrium  (immediately,  for  four  hours).

Shooting  in  the  vagina,  not  increased  by  touching.

In  the  evening  soon  after  touching,  pain  in  the  vagina,  as  if
excoriated.

475.  In  the  vagina,  in  the  evening,  sore  pain,  per  se,  for  two  successive
evenings.

Discharge  of  blood  from  the  womb  (menses)  (aft.  7 h.).

Some  discharge  of  blood  from  the  womb  without  pain,  in  a
pregnant  woman,  at  the  new  moon  (aft.  72  h.).

On  the  third  day  of  the  menses  in  an  elderly  woman*  the  dis-
charge ceased  all  at  once,  and  not  a drop  more  came.

Return  of  the  menses  that  had  long  been  absent,  the  discharge  is
copious  (aft.  7 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.]

480.  Brings  on  the  menses  that  had  been  delayed  eleven  weeks.

[»*.]

The  menstrual  discharge  causes  a severe  smarting  pain  on  the
genitals.  [Fr.  H — n.]

* * * *

Frequent,  very  violent,  almost  spasmodic  sneezing.

Severe  sneezing  (aft.  4 h.).

Hoarseness  deep  in  the  trachea.

485.  A scraping  rough  feeling  in  the  larynx  causing  hoarseness.

In  the  throat  and  trachea  a roughness,  as  if  the  chest  were  raw
and  sore.

* She  was  50  years  old,  and  the  menses  were  usually  too  long  continued,  so  that

after  three  days  they  always  caused  many  morbid  symptoms.  The  suppression  was

therefore  curative  action.


420


RHUS.

Roughness  in  the  throat,  causing  short  cough  (aft.  3 h.).  [*SV/".]
Masai  mucus  runs  in  profusion  involuntarily  out  of
the  nose,  as  in  the  most  severe  coryza,  though  he  has
not  got  coryza,  in  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed.

(Nose  sometimes  stopped,  as  in  stuffed  coryza,  worse  in  the
room,  better  in  the  open  air.)

490.  A hot  vapour  rises  up  out  of  the  throat  (out  of  the  lungs).

Cough  and  coryza,  with  expectoration.  \_Hbg.~]

During  expiration  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  throat,  as  if  a cold
breath  came  away.  [jFz/]

Weakness  on  the  chest,  so  that  talking  is  difficult  for  him,  after
walking  in  the  open  air.  [Tz.]

He  feels  very  full  in  the  chest ; at  the  same  time  hunger  without
appetite,  [Tz.]

495.  In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  not  far  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a
pushing,  while  sitting  in  a stooping  posture  (aft.  25  h.).  [Az.]

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  so  bad  when  he  sits  still  that  the  body
is  moved  by  every  beat  of  the  pulse.

A disagreeable  feeling  of  weakness  of  the  heart,  trembling  of  the
heart.

An  itching  on  the  mammae.

Itching  on  the  left  nipple,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed.

500.  The  milk  disappears  in  the  mammae  (aft.  J2  h.).

Contractive  sensation  in  the  sternum,  with  shooting  jerks  in  it.

(In  the  morning  in  bed)  pain  in  the  chest,  as  if  the  sternum  were
pressed  in  ; after  rising  it  went  off.

Feeling  of  constriction  of  the  chest.

In  the  evening  tension  over  the  chest,  very  short  breath  and
weakness  in  all  the  limbs.

505.  On  the  chest  and  in  the  upper  molar  teeth  a feeling  of  insensibility
(numb  and  stiff).  [Tz.]

The  left  side  of  the  trunk  from  the  axilla  to  below  the  ribs  is
swollen  and  painful.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Oppression  of  the  thoracic  cavity  (aft.  2 h.).  [Z».]

Aching  oppression  on  the  chest.  [Fz.]

Oppression  on  the  chest,  as  after  violent  weeping.  [Fz.]

510.  The  chest  feels  constricted,  and  he  is  squeamish  and  sick.

[*■*•]

At  night  an  oppression  of  the  chest,  with  shooting  pains,  espe-
cially on  fetching  a breath  (aft.  5 h.).

Short  breathing,  especially  when  at  stool.

She  cannot  sit,  must  breathe  deeply  as  if  she  should  be  suffocated,
especially  after  every  meal.

Nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit  under  the  short  ribs,  which
oppresses  the  breath.

5 1 5.  Oppressed  and  anxious,  as  if  she  could  get  no  breath.

In  the  pit  of  the  throat  sensation  as  if  the  windpipe  were  stopped
up  and  constricted  ; it  went  off'  for  a short  time  by  eating  and
drinking,  but  soon  returned.

When  he  has  walked  a little  the  breathing  becomes  difficult.


RHUS.


421


Scraping  and  burning  on  the  chest,  also  when  not  breathing.

Short  anxious  painful  cough,  which  often  wakes  him  before
midnight  from  sleep,  with  very  short  breath.

520.  Frequently  a tickling  irritation  in  the  air  passages  as  though  he
would  cough,  which  makes  his  breathing  short,  this  goes  off  after
moving  moderately.

In  the  evening  especially  a tickling  cough,  caused  by  dryness  in
the  throat.

Cough  with  a disagreeable  tension  on  the  chest.

In  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  frequent  hacking  cough  with
bitter  taste  in  the  throat,  until  he  went  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning
the  same  hacking  cough  and  the  same  taste  in  the  throat  until  he
gets  up.

When  coughing  perspiration  all  over.

525.  (Cough  in  the  open  air.)

Spasmodic  cough,  causing  a shock  in  the  head.

The  cough  shakes  the  whole  chest,  as  if  all  its  contents  were
loose.

When  coughing  pain  in  the  stomach.

(Vomiting  of  the  food  when  coughing,  in  the  evening.)

530.  During  the  cough  she  gets  a taste  of  blood  in  the  mouth,  but
does  not  cough  up  blood.

At  night  he  cannot  sleep  well  on  account  of  the  cough,  which
plagues  him  much.

Before  midnight  dry  cough,  which  caused  shooting  in  one  side  of
the  loins.

Cough  about  3 a.m.,  most  severe  after  waking.

Cough  particularly  severe  after  waking.

535.  (Some  cough,  especially  in  the  morning,  with  black  viscid
expectoration.)

When  coughing  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.

Disagreeable  feeling  of  heat  in  the  chest  when  walking  in  the
open  air.

A pricking,  oppressive  pain  on  the  sternum,  which  impedes
respiration,  with  a constant  short  cough  without  expectoration  (aft.
i h.).  [Mch.]

Very  fatiguing  cough  with  expectoration  of  white  mucus,  by  day
and  night.  \_Hbg.~]

540.  Some  severe  pulsating  stitches  over  the  region  of  the  heart,  so
that  he  cried  out  loudly,  when  sitting,  in  the  evening  (aft.  J h.).

[£»•]

Boring  pain  in  the  left  side,  in  the  evening  in  bed  (aft.  5 h.).

[/z.]

A slow  drawing  down  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  per  se,  not  when
breathing.

On  the  right  side  of  the  chest  to  the  half  of  the  back  an  eruption
of  pimples,  which  is  painful  as  if  sore  and  excoriated,  with  fine  stitches
darting  outward.

On  both  sides  of  the  sternum  deep  stitches,  when  sitting  in  a
bent  posture.


422


RHUS.


545.  In  the  evening  a violent  shooting  in  the  left  side  under  the  ribs
until  midnight.

Boring  stitches  in  one  of  the  lowest  ribs,  when  standing.

A tearing  stitch  from  the  right  side  of  the  chest  to  the  left  side
of  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening.

Shooting  in  the  left  side  when  speaking  and  breathing  deeply.
Frequent  stitches  in  the  side.

550,  Frequent  stitches  in  the  right  side.

Stitches  in  the  side  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

The  nape  is  painful  on  moving  as  if  stiff  and  tense.

Itching  pricks,  like  flea-bites,  in  the  nape.  [Fz.]

Aching  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape,  on  moving  the  head  forwards.

555.  Pressure  on  the  upper  part  of  the  nape ; the  part  is  as  if  numb
(aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.]

When  stooping  drawing  over  one  side  of  the  nape.  [Fz.]
Rheumatic  stiffness  in  the  nape.  [Rkt.~\

Stiff  in  the  nape  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Stiffness  of  the  whole  neck,  so  that  when  she  tries  to  move  the
head  she  must  complain  loudly  of  pain  in  the  nape.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

560.  Itching  on  the  neck  and  on  the  forearms.  [Van  Mons,  in
Dufresnoy , 1.  c.]

The  left  shoulder  is  as  if  paralysed.  [Fz.]

Tensive  cutting  across  the  scapulae.  [Fz.]

Bubbling  twitching  and  contractive  sensation  in  some  parts  of
the  left  scapula  and  over  the  right  knee.  [Fz.]

On  the  left  scapula  a pain  as  from  strong  pressure  with  the
finger  (aft.  J h.).  [Ln.]

565.  Contraction  of  the  skin  on  the  left  scapula  (aft.  54  h.).  [Fz.]

Twitching  in  the  side  close  to  the  left  scapula  when  sitting.  [Fz.]
Drawing  from  below  upwards  and  pressure  under  the  left  scapula
in  the  side  of  the  back.  [Fz.]

Drawing  and  pressure  under  the  right  scapula,  which  tightens
the  breath.  [Fz.]

Pressure  on  the  right  scapula.  [Fz.]

570.  Pain  in  the  nape,  as  from  a heavy  weight,  like  lead,  on  account  of
which  he  cannot  lie  (aft.  4 d.).

Tearing  between  both  shoulders,  and  drawing  together  as  it  were
from  both  sides.

Violent  rheumatic  pain  between  the  scapulae,  neither  relieved  nor
aggravated  by  movement  or  by  rest,  only  alleviated  by  warmth,  but
increased  by  cold  (aft.  48  h.).

When  stooping  shooting  in  the  back  (in  the  evening).

Pressive  stitches  in  the  back,  worse  when  walking  than  when
sitting  ; also  when  stooping,  but  more  when  raising  himself  up  again.

575.  In  the  evening  drawing  pain  in  the  back  ; he  must  sit  up  straight.
Drawing  pain  in  the  back  when  sitting ; it  goes  off  when
walking.

When  sitting  a constrictive  pain  in  the  dorsal  muscles,  diminished
by  leaning  back,  increased  by  bending  forwards.


RHUS.


423

When  sitting  the  sacrum  is  painful,  as  from  too  much  stooping
and  bending  the  back.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  as  if  bruised  when  he  lies  still  upon
it,  or  sits  still  ; he  feels  nothing  when  moving.

580.  Shooting  jerks  in  the  sacrum  (when  walking).

Stiffness  of  the  sacrum,  painful  when  moving.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  when  grasping  it,  as  if  the  flesh  were  torn
away.

In  the  right  side  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae  and  in  the  sacrum,  sensa-
tion as  if  bruised,  [Tz.]

Sacrum  as  if  bruised,  [Tz.]

585.  Stiffness  in  the  sacrum.  [Fz.]

Across  the  sacrum  a pressure  as  with  a knife,  when  standing  and
bending  backwards,  [Tz.]

At  the  bottom  of  the  sacrum  a burning  point  towards  the  right
side,  [Tz.]

Heaviness  and  pressure  in  the  sacrum,  as  if  he  had  had  a blow
there,  when  sitting  (aft.  6 d.).  [Fz.]

Drawing  twitching  shooting,  as  with  a nail,  in  the  coccyx.

IHbg.]

590.  (When  walking  and  standing  a kind  of  tearing  and  drawing  from
the  hip  to  the  knee.)

When  he  lies  on  the  side  the  hip  is  painful,  and  when  he  lies  on
the  back  the  sacrum  is  painful.

Shooting  in  the  shoulder  when  lying,  which  goes  off  on  moving.
Swelling  of  the  axillary  glands,  painful  when  touched  and  when
not  touched.

From  the  shoulder  down  into  the  hand  a sensation  as  if  something
rolled  down  in  it,  but  it  is  neither  warm  nor  cold.

595.  On  the  left  shoulder,  near  the  clavicle,  sensation  as  if  some  one
pressed  there.  [Tz.]

Tearing  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  the  top  of  the  scapula.  [Rkt.]

Burning  shooting  under  the  left  axilla,  on  the  arm.

[^.]

When  raising  the  left  arm  a drawing  under  the  axilla,  which
goes  down  into  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm.  [Tz.]

Sensation  as  if  hot  water  ran  through  the  arm.  [Alderson,  1,  c.]
600.  On  moderate  exertion  of  the  arm  a trembling  of  it.

In  the  arms,  from  the  shoulder  downwards,  drawing  stitches.
Needle-pricks  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  5 d.).  [Tz.]

A violent  stitch  on  the  right  upper  arm,  as  if  it  came
from  without.  [ Fz .]

In  the  open  air  tension  in  the  left  upper  arm  (aft  10  h.).  [Fz.]
605.  Twitching  sensation  in  the  left  arm.  [Tz.]

Boring  stitches  in  the  upper  arm  (when  standing).

Tearing  in  both  upper  arms  ; it  becomes  worse  when  working,
she  must  let  the  arm  hang  down  ; it  is  still  more  painful  when  under
the  bedclothes,  and  when  it  is  touched  the  bone  is  painful.

Pain  and  swelling  of  the  arms.  \_Hb.  Ts. ]

On  the  upper  arm  single,  small  round,  red  spots.  [Hb.  Ts.]


RHUS.


424


6 JO.  On  the  left  elbow  a painless  throbbing.

A drawing  and  tearing  from  the  elbow-joint  to  the  wrist-joint.
Tension  in  the  elbow-joint  when  she  extends  the  arm  ; she  could
with  difficulty  raise  the  arm.

On  moving,  a cramp-like  drawing  in  the  left  elbow-joint  (aft.
76  h.).  [Fz .]

Burning  itching  pain  on  the  left  elbow,  which  compels  scratching,
and  goes  off  after  scratching  (aft.  h.).  \_Mch.']

615.  In  the  left  forearm,  on  moving,  a digging  pain  in  the  bone  and
twitching  in  the  right  wrist ; the  whole  forearm  feels  stiff.  [Tz.]
Powerlessness  and  stiffness  of  the  forearms  and  fingers  on  moving
them  (aft.  25  h.).  [Fz.]

Coldness  of  the  forearms.  [Ez.]

Eroding  burning  in  the  right  forearm  (aft.  4 d.).  [Fz.]

Twitching  tearing  in  the  elbow-joint  and  wrist-joint,

even  when  at  rest,  better  when  moving  (aft.  5,  6 h.).  [i£/£/.]

620.  In  the  arm  violent  tearing  pain,  worst  when  lying  still.  \_Fr.
H—n.]

Feeling  of  powerlessness  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  forearm
when  moving,  and  a pain  as  of  dislocation  in  the  wrist  on  grasping
(aft.  27  h.).  [Fz.]

The  left  forearm  is  painful  as  if  bruised  (aft.  48  h.).  [Fz.]
Erysipelas,  swelling,  pustules  with  burning  and  itching  on  the
arms  and  hands.  [Fontana  and  Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

Sensation  on  the  skin  of  the  left  forearm,  as  if  it  were  rubbed  with
a woollen  cloth  or  scraped  with  a knife,  accompanied  by  a cold  feeling
in  it.  [Fz.]

625.  In  the  upper  side  of  the  left  wrist,  on  flexing  it,  sensation  as  if  it
were  sprained.  [Ts.]

A tearing  shooting  in  the  left  wrist.

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  palm.

On  the  wrist,  which  is  normally  warm,  sensation  of  coldness,  as
from  a cold  wind.

The  back  of  the  hand  is  covered  with  chaps  and  hot ; the  skin  is
hard,  rough,  and  stiff.

630.  In  the  evening  hot  swelling  of  the  hands  and  face.

(A  fine  twitching  lasting  several  hours  in  the  right  hand  between
it  and  the  thumb.)

On  the  hands  hard  pimples,  with  burning  eroding  itching.
Burning  in  the  flesh  betwixt  the  left  thumb  and  index  (aft.  11  h.).

[*■*■]

Involuntary  painless  jerking  inwards  of  both  thumbs,  only  on
laying  down  the  hand,  e.g.  on  the  table  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Fr.  H — 77.]
635.  A creeping  and  formication  on  the  lowest  knuckles  of  the  second
and  third  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  [Mch.~\

Shooting  on  the  back  of  the  index  in  the  tendon.  [Ez.]

Sensation  in  the  left  index,  as  after  having  gone  to  sleep.  [Tz.]
Over  the  middle  joint  of  the  ring  finger  an  inflamed  lump,  with
itching  burning  pain,  which  sometimes  changes  into  a slow  prick  5
not  removed  by  rubbing  and  scratching.


RHUS.


Blisters  on  the  right  wrist-joint,  which  continued  to  increase,  on
a pale  red  surface  of  four  fingers’  breadth  ; they  were  mostly  the  size  of
a pin’s  head  or  a lentil,  and  increased  to  the  size  of  a pea,  and  became
so  numerous  that  not  only  was  every  salient  point  covered,  but  all
seemed  to  present  the  appearance  of  a big  bunch  of  grapes,  the  several
depressions  of  which — intervals  they  could  not  be  called — had  a
brownish  shining  look,  owing  to  the  dried  secretion  which  the  patient
pressed  out  of  the  blisters  in  the  form  of  water  as  clear  as  crystal
(5th  d.).  [Hb.  7 j.]

640.  Four  fingers’  breadth  round  about  the  wrist  there  was  an  appear-
ance as  if  a blister  had  been  applied  to  a stiff  skin,  in  the  form  of  a
bracelet,  which  had  caused  vesicles  to  be  heaped  upon  vesicles.  The
nearer  they  were  to  the  hand  the  more  separate  they  were ; some
bright  and  clear  on  the  outer  border  of  the  hand,  and  these  had  no
red  areola ; when  opened  they  poured  out  the  clearest  lymph,  and
this  immediately  formed  a shining  yellow  gum  on  the  parts  on  which
it  flowed  (nth  d.).  [Hb.  Ts. ]

Violent  itching  of  the  hands  (4th  d.).  [Hb.  Ti.]

First  betwixt  the  fingers,  then  on  the  whole  hand,  small  vesicles,
which  exactly  resembled  Willan’s  water-blebs  (pompholyx),  except
that  there  was  more  swelling  with  them  (2nd  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.]

On  account  of  great  swelling  the  fingers  could  only  be  moved
with  pain  (4th  d.).  [Hb.  Ts.']

On  the  inside  of  the  wrist  and  on  the  lower  part  of  the  cheek,
papules  like  itch,  which  are  the  seat  of  burning  itching,  and  after
scratching  are  sore.

645.  (On  the  backs  of  the  fingers,  on  the  outer  parts  of  the  arms,  and
on  the  back  of  the  head,  nipping  and  pinching.)

Fine  pricking  pain  in  the  fingers.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

Sensation  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  (in  the  warm  room)  as  if  they
were  too  full  of  blood,  with  cold  backs  of  the  hands  (aft.  10  h.).

[*■*■]

Creeping  like  gone-to-sleep  state  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  [Fr.
H—n.]

(Spasmodic  drawing  inwards  of  the  fingers.)

650.  In  the  morning  the  index  and  middle  finger  of  one  hand  were  as
if  numb  and  gone  to  sleep.

Tearing  in  all  the  finger-joints.  [Rkt.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  right  natis  just  below  the  sacrum,  which
goes  off  on  pressing  on  it.  [Tz.]

Cramp-like  contraction  in  the  right  natis.  [Tz.]

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  natis,  when  standing  (aft.  29  h.).

[^z-]

655.  Cramp  in  the  left  natis  and  thigh.  [Tz.]

In  the  groin  at  the  left  hip,  when  sitting,  a tension,  as  if  the
skin  were  insufficient.  [Tz.]

In  the  right  hip  a pain  compounded  of  tension  and  drawing.  [Tz.]
Tension  in  the  left  hip-joint  when  sitting.  [Tz.]

A down-drawing  tension  in  the  left  thigh,  down  from  the  joint.


426


RHUS.


660.  Tearing  pain  on  the  middle  outer  part  of  the  thigh  when  sitting,
which  went  off  by  moving.  \MchJ\

In  the  upper  part  of  the  right  thigh,  internally  towards  the  groin,
a sensation  like  what  is  felt  on  spreading  out  the  lingers  when  the
wrist-joint  is  sprained  or  dislocated  (aft.  58  h.).  [T%.]

On  crossing  the  legs  a tension  on  the  posterior  aspect  of  the
thigh  (aft.  6 d.).  [Fz.]

In  the  right  thigh  pain  as  if  bruised  and  drawing  (aft.  56  h.).

[**•]

On  the  right  thigh  under  the  groin  on  a spot,  a cramp-like
pressure,  when  sitting,

665.  A burning  point  on  the  right  thigh,  on  the  inner  side  near  the
testicle  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Tz.]

In  both  hip-joints  an  aching  pain  at  every  step,  and  like  a
paralysis  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  thigh.

On  the  right  hip  a red  very  hot  spot  with  burning  pain.

Twitching  in  the  thigh,  with  trembling  of  the  knees.

Stitches  in  the  thigh  outwards.

670.  Boring  stitches  in  the  thigh  when  standing.

Sometimes  a pain  in  the  thigh  like  a drawing,  so  that  she  must
crouch  together,  when  rising  from  a seat  and  when  standing,  but  not
when  sitting  (aft.  96  h.).

In  the  right  thigh,  a little  above  the  knee,  a twitching  tearing
(aft.  96  h.).

When  he  sits  down  after  walking  there  is  a humming  and
tingling  in  the  knees  and  houghs.

Stiffness,  especially  in  the  knees  and  feet.

675.  A drawing  and  tearing  from  the  knee  to  the  ankle-joint.

Drawing  pain  in  the  knee.

On  the  inner  side  of%6th  knees  red  burning  spots  and  streaks,
with  small  blisters  that  soon  dry  up.  \_Annalen  der  Heilkunde , 1.  c.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee  a crawling,  with  tension  of
tendons  (aft.  2\  h.).  [T%.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  right  knee  a stretching,  with  tension  of
tendons,  which  causes  restlessness  in  the  leg  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Tz.]

680.  Tension  in  the  left  knee-joint  when  rising  from  a seat.  [Tz.]

A drawing  in  the  right  hough  when  bending  the  knee  (aft.  27

h-)-  [**•]

1 earing  in  the  knee  and  in  the  ankle-joint,  chiefly  when  at  rest.

[Rh.-]

Shooting  just  below  the  right  knee.  [#2.]

Shooting  whilst  walking,  first  in  the  interior  of  the  left,  then  of
the  right  knee.  [Tz.]

685.  On  the  side  of  the  knee  an  out-shooting  when  walking.

In  the  evening  when  drawing  off  the  stockings  great  itching  in
the  tendons  of  the  houghs  ; scratching  caused  pain.

Cramp-like  aching  in  the  left  tibia  on  bending  the  knee,  followed
by  burning.  [Tz.]

Coldness  on  the  left  tibia.  [Fz.]

Aching  on  the  right  tibia,  followed  by  burning.  [Tz.]


RHUS.


427  '


690.  On  account  of  the  stiffness  of  the  lower  limbs  he  can  scarcely
walk  in  the  street ; he  staggers  in  the  street  always  towards  the  right
(in  the  forenoon),  [Tz.]

A drawing  in  the  whole  leg,  like  paralysis,  when  sitting.

In  the  morning  in  bed  a great  inclination  to  stretch  out  the
thigh  and  leg.

In  the  houghs  and  calves  such  a great  weight  that  he  cannot
bring  the  legs  forwards.

The  lower  limbs  are  as  heavy  and  tired  as  if  she  had  had  a long
walk.

695.  (In  the  afternoon)  when  walking  in  the  open  air  very  tired  in
the  legs  ; he  could  hardly  move  them  forwards,  so  heavy  and  bruised
were  they,  but  after  sitting  for  an  hour  all  the  weariness  was  gone.

Fine  pricking  on  the  outer  side  of  the  leg  (aft,  11  h.).  [ Fz .]

Pricking  itching  in  the  left  calf.  [Fz.]

In  the  interior  of  the  right  calf  a drawing,  which  made  the  leg
restless.  [Tz.]

Feeling  of  tension  of  the  skin  of  the  calf,  with  shooting  in  it
when  sitting,  which  went  off  on  walking.  [Tz.]

700.  Spasmodic  drawing  up  in  the  left  calf  to  the  hough.  [Tz.]

When  walking  tension  in  the  calves,  as  if  the  ligaments  of  the
knee  were  too  short.

Twitching  in  the  calves.

In  the  legs  heaviness  and  tension  when  sitting,  but  when  he
walks  merely  weariness.

Painful  weariness  in  the  legs  when  sitting,  which  went  off  by
walking  (aft.  36  h.).

705.  Tension  in  the  knee  as  if  it  were  too  short.

A heaviness  in  the  legs  from  the  region  just  above  the  knee  to
the  ankle-joint,  so  that  she  cannot  stand,  which  is  diminished  when
walking  and  unobservable  when  sitting.

He  only  feels  weary  in  the  feet  when  sitting,  as  if  the  blood  sank
down  into  them.

A weariness  in  the  feet,  so  that  she  cannot  ascend  readily,  just  as
if  she  had  been  running  too  quickly.

She  is  as  if  paralysed  in  the  lower  limbs  (aft.  12  d.).

710.  Cramp  in  the  calf  after  midnight,  when  lying  in  bed

and  when  seated  after  walking ; it  goes  off  on  bending  the  knee.

Cramp  in  the  calf  when  sitting,  which  goes  off  immediately  on
rising  up  and  moving  (immediately).

Just  above  the  calf,  in  the  tendons  of  the  hough,  a stitch  during
energetic  moving,  when  getting  up  from  a seat,  and  when  the  part  is
touched.

(In  the  outer  side  of  the  calf  a throbbing  for  several  hours.)

A tearing  shooting  on  the  tibia,  at  the  same  time  exhausted  and
tired.

715.  When  she  stands  up  after  sitting  she  feels  a stitch  over  the  knee.

(In  the  affected  leg,  towards  evening  (6.30  p.m.),  suddenly  a pain
for  half  an  hour,  a general  throbbing  and  creeping,  combined  with
cramp-like  pain  (something  like  an  ulcer  at  the  finger-nail),  even  per


428


RHUS.


se , but  increased  by  moving,  and  worst  when  touched  externally ; it
went  off  suddenly.)

On  the  tibiae  and  loins  an  eruption  with  swelling  and  hardness,
without  pains.  [ Hb . 7j.]

At  night  when  she  crosses  the  legs  pain  in  the  shafts  of  the  tibiae
like  a tingling  in  them  ; she  must  often  change  the  position  of  the
legs,  and  cannot  sleep  for  it.

A jerking  and  throbbing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.

720.  Creeping  in  the  foot  in  the  morning,  when  dying  in  bed  (and
after  getting  up).

In  the  left  ankle-joint  a stab  inwards  as  from  a knife,  [Fz.]

Drawing  in  the  right  ankle-joint,  [Fz.]

Burning  stitches  and  warm  feeling  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right
foot  (aft.  4 d.) . [Fz.]

On  the  left  heel  a drawing  outwards  with  burning,  [Fz.]

725.  Hot  feeling  in  the  feet.  [Rkti]

Shooting  in  the  left  heel  when  sitting  (after
air),  [Fz.]

Dead  feeling  and  numbness  of  the  right  foot ; it  felt  to  him  as  if
made  of  wood.

On  the  left  outer  ankle  and  over  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  itching.

Swelling  in  the  foot,  which  is  painless  when  scratched,  in  the
evening  (aft.  48  h.).

730.  On  the  lower  part  of  the  tendo  Achillis  stabs  as  with  knives,
worse  when  touched  and  after  lying  down.

On  rising  up  from  a seat  shooting  in  the  right  inner  ankle.

Spasmodic  shooting  in  the  ankle-joint.

In  the  morning,  on  rising,  the  foot  is  painful,  as  if  dislocated  or
sprained.

Spasmodic  contraction  on  the  inner  side  of  the  sole,  which  is
relieved  by  extending  and  flexing  the  foot  (aft,  64  h.).  [Fz.]

7 35.  (Sweat  on  the  feet.)

Pain  in  the  right  sole  near  the  ball,  as  if  a painful  place  were
persistently  pressed  on  always  more  and  more  strongly.

Tension  and  pressing  in  the  sole.

(When  treading  the  heels  are  painful,  as  if  numb.)

Shooting  in  the  heel  when  treading  on  it.

740.  A short  burning  shooting  between  the  little  toe  and  the  one  next
it,  in  the  evening  when  walking,  and  also  at  night  in  bed  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  (affected)  ball  of  the  big  toe  jerking  shooting,  as  in  a boil
about  to  burst ; in  the  evening  throbbing  in  it.

Pricking  itching  on  the  ball  of  the  left  big  toe.  [Fz.]

Drawing  aching  pain  in  the  right  big  toe,  with  feeling  of  warmth.

[Fz.]

Fine  pricking  in  the  left  big  toe.  [Fz.]

745.  Fine  pricking  in  the  fourth  toe  of  the  left  foot.

When  standing  a stitch  from  the  big  toe  to  the  middle  of  the  left
side  of  the  chest.

Shooting  in  the  right  big  toe.

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  toes.  [ *SV.]


walking  in  the  open


RHUS.  419

Recurrence  of  the  chilblains  of  the  previous  year,  three  months
and  a half  too  soon  ; a burning  itching  in  them,  in  the  afternoon  and
evening  ; when  he  forbears  to  scratch  there  is  a shooting  in  them,
so  that  he  cannot  refrain  from  scratching,  and  after  scratching  blains
appear.*

750.  The  corn  has  a burning  sore  pain  from  the  pressure  of  the  shoe
(aft.  3 h.).

On  first  treading  in  the  morning  pain  in  both  heels,  as  if  he  trod
on  pins.

In  the  evening  pricking  in  the  sole,  as  if  she  walked  on  needles.

(Small,  red,  round  spots  on  the  ball  of  the  foot.)

Shooting  on  a small  spot  of  the  limbs,  which  is  aggravated  by
lying  down.

755.  Shooting  in  the  joints,  when  at  rest  (and  when  reposing  the
limb,  but  not  by  extending  it),  not  when  touched  nor  at  night  when
lying.

(Creeping  pain  in  the  face,  back,  and  sternum.)

On  applying  the  juice  to  the  first  phalanx  of  the  index  finger
there  appear  two  black  spots  after  an  hour,  but  twenty-five  days
afterwards  severe  burning  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  rapid  swelling  of
the  left  cheek,  upper  lip,  and  eyelids ; the  following  night  great
swelling  of  the  forearm,  the  skin  becomes  of  a leathery  character,
and  there  occur  intolerable  itching  and  very  great  heat.  After  four
days  pustules  on  the  hands  and  forearms,  which  burst  and  exude  a
clear  fluid.  [Lavini,1  in  Orfila , i,  pp.  596,  597.]

Creeping  in  the  ulcer.

Depressing  pains  in  the  affected  part,  owing  to  which  he  sits
moaning.

760.  (Smarting  pain  in  the  ulcer,  as  from  salt,  only  at  night ; she
wakes  up  often  on  account  of  it ; by  day  it  went  off,  and  only
recurred  when  walking  in  the  open  air.)

In  the  morning  on  awaking  a shooting  in  the  seat  of  the  scab.

(Pain  in  the  ulcer  as  if  bruised.)

Burning  smarting  pain  in  the  ulcer,  with  weeping  and  moaning.

(A  very  transient  burning  on  the  affected  part.)

765.  The  limbs  whereon  he  lies,  especially  the  arm,  go  to  sleep.

During  a whole  afternoon  extraordinary  mobility  and  excessive
corporeal  liveliness  (the  3rd  d.).  [Tz.]

A sensation  resembling  a trembling  in  the  upper  and  lower
extremities,  even  when  at  rest.  \_Rkt.~]

Twitching  in  various  parts  of  the  body  outside  the  joints.  [Tz.]

Twitching  in  the  limbs.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

770.  Twitching  of  several  muscles.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

Burning  itching  here  and  there.  [Dudley,  in  Dufresnoy , 1.  c.]

Fine  pricking  pains2  in  the  limbs.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

* Comp.  747,  748.


1 Wrongly  given  as  “ Cavini.”  From  two  drops  of  juice  applied  to  the  fingers
for  two  minutes  only.

2 Literally,  u formication,”


43o


RHUS.


Severe  formication  in  the  paralysed  parts.  [Nasse,1  in  the
Preface  to  Dufresnoy.]

Swelling  of  the  hands  and  feet.  [Alderson,  1.  c.]

775.  A wound  inflamed  and  became  surrounded  by  small  vesicles  (6th
d.).  [Hb.  Ts .]

The  blisters,  which  mostly  contained  a milky,  but  some  of  them
also  a watery  fluid,  ran  together.  This  condition  lasted  three  days,
then  the  skin  desquamated.  [Hb.  Ts.']

Itching  on  the  head.  [Sr.]

Eruption  resembling  nettle-rash.  [Hb.  Ts.]

Black  pustules  with  inflammation  and  itching,  which  in  a short
time  spread  all  over  the  body.  [Jos.  Monti,2  in  Act.  Instit.  Bonon.  Sc.
et  Art.,  iii,  p.  165.]

780.  Scabby  eruption  all  over  the  body.  [Sybel,3  in  Medic.  Annalen ,
1811,  Jul.]

Burning  eruption  of  small  vesicles  filled  with  water,  and  redness
of  the  skin  all  over  the  body,  except  on  the  hairy  scalp,  the  palms
and  soles.  [Sybel,  1.  c.]

Very  painful,  violently  burning  and  itching  eruption,  which
appeared  particularly  on  the  scrotum,  prepuce,  eyelids  and  eyes,
causing  at  the  same  time  swelling  in  these  parts,  and  consisted  of
small  yellowish  vesicles,  which  coalesced  here  and  there,  exuded
moisture  \ also  single  ones  on  the  arms  and  loins  after  some  days
attained  the  size  of  lentils,  and  burst  by  the  scratching  of  the
patient.  Many  of  these  larger  pustules  or  ulcers  slowly  suppurated,
had  a red  areola,  became  broader,  and  healed  more  slowly  (in  the
third  week),  whilst  the  smaller  confluent  pustules  dried  more  rapidly,
and  in  a few  days  scabbed  off.  This  eruption  came  on  without
preliminary  vomiting,  nausea,  or  fever,  in  a healthy  man  of  forty,  who
four-and-twenty  hours  previously  had  pulled  up  a plant  of  rhus.  tox.
in  his  garden,  consequently  had  been  much  in  contact  with  it,  one  of
his  fingers  having  a small  wound  on  it.  [Wichmann,4  Ideen  zur
Diagnostik , t.  i,  p.  74  v.]

Itching  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  hairy  parts,  on  the
hairy  scalp  and  genitals.  [Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

Red  spots  the  size  of  the  largest  lentils,  with  small  water-vesicles
in  their  centre.  [Fr.  H — n.]

785.  A black  spot  on  the  part  touched  by  the  juice  (aft.  3 d.).  [Fon-
tana, 1.  c.]

The  parts  of  the  skin  touched  by  the  juice  became  stiff7  and  hard
like  leather.  [Gleditsch,4  in  Beschaft.  d.  Berlin . Naturf.  Fr.  iv.
p.  299.]

The  juice  makes  the  skin  it  touches  hard  like  tanned  leather ;
after  some  days  the  indurated  parts  desquamated.  [Dossie,5  Institutes
of  Experimental  Chemistry , 1759.]

1 Observation.

2 Observation. — The  “ black  ” is  not  in  the  original.

3 Not  accessible.

4 Observation.

5 Not  accessible.


RHUS.


43i


Great  exhaustion  in  the  whole  body.  \_Hbg.~\

Very  great  weakness.  [Zadig,  1.  c.]

790.  Some  fell  into  syncope.*  [Sherard,  in  Dufresnoy , 1.  c.,  p.
2 °4-]

He  is  exhausted,  bruised,  as  if  he  had  been  up  all  night.  [^ST/i]

Uncommon  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  chiefly  when  at  rest.
[Rkt.]

The  left  arm  and  leg  are  somewhat  contracted  and  as  if  stiff.
[Fr.  H—n .]

Paralysis  of  the  lower  extremities  for  three  days  ; he  walked  with
the  greatest  effort,  dragging  himself  slowly  along.f  [£{/'.]

795.  During  and  after  a walk  all  the  limbs  feel  stiff  and  paralysed  ;
he  has  a feeling  as  if  a great  weight  lay  on  the  nape.  [T%.]

Inclination  to  lie  down.  [St/.]

She  cannot  remain  out  of  bed.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

The  arm  on  which  his  head  lay  when  slumbering,  goes  to  sleep.

When  lying  a drawing  in  all  the  limbs.

800.  In  the  evening  (8  o’clock)  constant  tearing  drawing  pain,  when
she  sits  still ; but  when  she  walks  it  goes  off  (she  feels  nothing  more
of  it  after  lying  down) .

The  pains  in  the  joints  are  worse  in  the  open  air.

When  going  down  hill  he  feels  stiff,  the  stiffness  goes  off  when
walking  on  the  level.

When  she  rises  from  a seat  she  feels  stiff.

Feeling  of  stiffness  on  first  commencing  to  move  the  limb  after
resting.

805.  Weariness,  worst  when  sitting,  it  diminishes  when  walking  ; but
there  is  marked  stiffness  on  rising  up  from  sitting.

Great  exhaustion,  as  if  the  bones  were  painful ; she  always  sits
or  lies.

During  the  chill,  unsteadiness  of  the  limbs ; owing  to  which
standing  was  impossible.

Paralysis  of  the  whole  body,  in  all  the  joints,  worst  when  he
attempts  to  rise  after  sitting,  and  towards  evening.

After  walking  an  hour  in  the  open  air,  he  felt  pain  in  the  feet,
and  became  as  if  incapable  of  moving,  this  was  relieved  by  sitting.

810.  The  lower  limbs  feel  bruised  they  are  so  tired.

In  the  evening  (9  o’clock)  sudden  faintness,  with  perfect  conscious-
ness ; he  could  not  feel  his  heart  beating,  was  more  cold  than  warm  ;
in  the  interior  he  was  quite  easy  •,  his  mind  was  calm,  but  he  could
hardly  walk  (aft.  48  h.).

After  some  exertion  the  limbs  used  tremble.

He  clutches  hastily  at  things  and  trembles.

In  the  morning  on  rising,  she  staggers  and  cannot  stand  upright
(aft.  20  h.).

815.  When  lying  in  bed  in  the  morning,  pain  as  if  bruised  in  those
limbs  and  joints  that  are  opposite  to  the  ones  on  which  he  is  lying.

When  sitting  after  walking,  immediate  inclination  to  sleep.

* From  fumigation  with  the  wood  of  rhus  radicans,  in  five  or  six  persons,
f From  touching  the  finger  with  a strong  tincture  of  rhus  radicans.


RHUS.


43^

In  the  morning  much  yawning,  as  if  sleepy,  and  the  same  also  in
the  evening.

He  wants  always  to  lie  down  ; drowsiness  by  day,  anxiety,  rest-
lessness, sadness,  dry  lips.

Drowsiness  by  day ; even  in  the  morning  in  bed,  when  about  to
get  up,  she  is  extremely  sleepy.

820.  During  the  day  sleep  restlessness  ; he  moves  his  hands  to  and  fro
in  sleep  and  plays  with  the  fingers  and  hands.

When  sitting  up  he  feels  sick.  ]

Exhausted  and  tired  ; desire  to  lie  down  ; sitting  is  not  enough
for  him.

In  the  morning  he  is  unwilling  to  get  up  and  dress  himself.

In  the  evening  (about  6 o'clock)  sleep  suddenly  overtakes  her,
so  that  she  is  not  able  to  undress  herself ; at  the  same  time  paralysed
in  all  her  limbs.

825.  Yawning  so  violent  and  spasmodic.*  that  it  causes
pain  in  the  maxillary  joint,  which  is  in  danger  of  being
dislocated,  in  the  morning  and  at  all  times.

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  frequent  yawning.  [Fr.
H—n .]

Some  were  attacked  by  yawning.  [Sherard,  1.  c.]

He  had  no  rest  at  night.  \_Hbg.~]

Restless  broken  sleep,  with  much  turning  about.  \_Ln.~\

830.  At  night  great  sleeplessness.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Restless  sleep  with  tossing  about,  throwing  off  and  airing  the
bedclothes.  [jFz.]

Late  of  falling  asleep  and  tossing  about  in  bed.  [£//*.]

Loud  weeping  in  sleep.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

Violent  pain  in  the  belly  at  night  (aft.  5 d.).  \_Fr.  H — n.]

835.  Waking  about  midnight  from  very  violent,  pinching,  digging
pains  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  a sensation  of  relaxation  and
emptiness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and  very  transient  inclination  to
vomit.  \_Stf.~\

Anxiety  at  night ; he  felt  inclined  to  get  out  of  bed  and  seek
assistance  on  account  of  an  indescribable  disagreeable  feeling.  [6V/".]

After  waking  from  sleep,  along  with  convulsive,  irregular  move-
ments of  the  limbs,  crying  out  about  dreadful  headache,  arising  from
a sensation  in  the  limbs  as  if  they  were  forcibly  stretched  out.1
[Alderson,  1.  c.]

In  the  evening  in  bed,  nausea  on  the  chest,  and  in  the  stomach,
which  goes  off  after  falling  asleep.  [A%.]

# The  masticating  muscles  in  the  neck  seem  to  gain  a spasmodic  ascendancy,
often  of  such  intensity,  that  the  lower  jaw  must  be  held  with  the  hand,  in  order
to  prevent  it  being  drawn  down  too  deeply.  This  symptom  is  also  produced  by
ignatia,  and  by  the  north  pole  of  the  magnet.

1 The  original  is  : — “ Some  twitching  across  the  abdomen,  with  irregular  and
convulsive  motion  in  the  limbs  ; and  when  the  nervous  influx  seemed  to  pass  to  the
extremities,  it  excited  in  the  brain  such  a sensation  of  pain  as  made  him  frequently
exclaim  most  violently  5 but,  when  any  one  asked  him  where  his  pain  was,  he
answered,  he  could  not  mention  any  particular  place,  but  that  all  his  limbs  were
as  if  stretched  forcibly.  This  was  more  especially  after  sleep.1'


RHUS.


433


Before  midnight,  sleeplessness,  with  or  without  sweat.

840.  Sleeplessness  until  midnight,  without  heat ; he  remained  merely
wide  awake.

He  cannot  go  to  sleep  at  night  3 as  soon  as  he  lay  down  he  broke
out  in  perspiration,  without  thirst,  and  could  get  no  rest  on  account
of  it.

In  the  forenoon  in  bed,  very  painful  cramp  first  in  one  then  in
the  other  leg,  which  is  not  removed  either  by  flexing  or  extending
the  limb,  nor  yet  by  pushing  the  sole  of  the  foot  against  something,
for  half  an  hour  (aft.  12  h.).

In  the  evening  he  cannot  go  to  sleep  on  account  of  great  wake-
fulness and  intolerable  hot  feeling,  without  thirst — (he  was  chilled  by
throwing  off  the  clothes) — and  ebullition  in  the  blood,  throbbing  of
the  arteries,  and  appearances  in  the  eyes  as  if  thick  clouds  passed
before  his  sight  ; after  midnight  he  became  quiet  and  slept  well.

On  lying  down  in  the  evening  she  became  sick ; she  had  no  rest
in  bed  and  must  always  turn  from  side  to  side.

845.  Sleeplessness  for  four  whole  nights  ; she  could  not  remain  in  bed.

Great  nocturnal  restlessness.  \_Hb.  Ts.~\

On  account  of  burning  of  the  eruption,  restless  sleep.  [Hb.  Ts.]

Twitching  on  the  part  of  the  head  on  which  he  lay  at  night.

At  night  she  wakes  often  on  account  of  a nasty  bitter  taste,  with
dry  feeling  in  the  mouth.

850.  Thirst  at  night,  without  desire  to  drink,  with  slimy  mouth.

When  about  to  go  to  sleep  she  had  violent  pain  in  the  stomach,
which  did  not  allow  her  to  go  to  sleep  for  a long  time.

When  he  tried  to  go  to  sleep  his  business  presented  itself  to  him
in  a dream,  in  an  anxious  manner.

In  the  evening  when  asleep  he  talks  half  aloud  about  his  daily
business  (aft.  12  h.).

Soporous  slumber  full  of  tiresome  uninterrupted  dreams.

855.  After  midnight  restless  slumber,  full  of  vexatious  disagreeable
ideas  and  thoughts.

Dreams  of  subjects  of  which  he  had  heard  and  thought  the
previous  evening  (aft.  72  h.).  [Tz.]

At  night  slight  dreams  of  things  thought  of  and  done  the  day
before,  [Fz.]

At  night  dreams  of  the  accomplishment  of  ideas  entertained  the
day  before,  in  connection  with  subjects  whence  they  were  derived.
[Fz.]

Frightful  dreams,  e.g.  that  the  world  was  consumed  by  fire,  and
on  awaking  palpitation  of  the  heart.

860,  Dreams  of  fire.

After  3 a.m.  he  cannot  go  to  sleep  again,  and  if  he  falls  asleep
he  dreams  in  a very  vivid  manner,  and  after  he  awakes  he  feels  as  if
he  had  not  slept  at  all.

She  sleeps  with  her  mouth  open.

At  night  very  short  breathing.

At  night  he  can  only  lie  on  his  back.

865.  At  night  he  feels  as  if  something  forced  him  out  of  bed.
vol.  11.  28


434


RHUS.


Great  anxiety  at  night  ; he  cannot  remain  in  bed.

Disagreeable  feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  body,  all  night,  without
thirst.

After  midnight  no  sound  sleep  ; she  tosses  restlessly  about  on
account  of  a disagreeable  feeling  as  of  burning  all  over  the  body,
without  thirst ; at  the  same  time  dreams  full  of  anxious  striving
and  urging.

In  the  morning  he  talks  aloud  in  his  sleep.

870.  At  night  he  talks  in  his  sleep  about  his  business,  wishes  to  throw
away  everything,  and  longs  for  one  thing  or  another.

Starting  in  affright  on  going  to  sleep,  as  if  he  had  let  something
important  fall.

During  the  forenoon  sleep  he  jerked  together  every  quarter  of  an
hour.

In  sleep  expiration  is  easy  and  blowing,  inspiration  inaudible.

In  the  morning  in  bed  on  awaking  very  dizzy  in  the  head  ; this
soon  went  off  after  getting  up.

875.  Very  early  waking,  with  cross  peevish  disposition.  [St/.]

Peevishness  in  the  open  air ; he  felt  like  to  fall  asleep  when
walking,  [Fz.]

Sensitiveness  to  the  open  cool  air  (aft  4 h.).  [£'//'.]

Chilliness  with  dry  lips,  and  less  thirst  than  hunger.  [Fz.]

Constant  chilliness.  [Fr.  H — n.]

880.  Rigor,  on  coming  out  of  the  open  air  into  the  warm  room,  with-
out thirst,

Excessively  cold  hands  and  feet  all  day.  [Fz.]

On  getting  out  of  bed  in  the  morning  feeling  of  shivering.

Feeling  of  internal  coldness  in  the  limbs  [e.g.  dying  away  of  a
finger,  or  as  if  a limb  would  go  to  sleep,  or  like  the  disagreeable  feeling
of  coldness  that  seizes  upon  the  inward  parts  of  the  limbs  at  the
ushering  in  of  a paroxysm  of  intermittent  fever)  and  yet  no  external
coldness  is  perceptible.

He  is  very  sensitive  to  the  cold  open  air,  and  the  skin
is  as  it  were  painful,  though  there  is  no  dislike  to  cold
air.

885.  In  the  evening  in  bed,  icy  cold  feet  that  cannot  get  warm,  whilst
the  rest  of  the  body  is  warm  (aft.  3 h.).

When  she  goes  to  a distance  from  the  stove  she  is  immediately
attacked  by  shivering.

In  the  cold  air  when  walking  he  cannot  get  warm  though  well
wrapped  up,  he  has  rigor  in  the  open  air,  with  great  thirst,  and  slime
betwixt  the  lips  which  seals  them  together.

Chilliness  in  the  room  towards  evening;  coldness  ran  all  over  her.

Chill  (immediately).

890.  Shivering  in  the  back  (immediately).

In  the  evening  (about  5 o’clock)  chilliness  and  shivering  in  the
room,  with  throbbing  toothache  and  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the
mouth,  without  thirst ; in  the  open  air  still  greater  rigor  ; then  in
the  warm  room,  even  close  to  the  hot  stove,  continued  rigor  with
great  thirst  and  cessation  of  the  flow  of  saliva  ; the  chilliness  went  off


RHUS.


435


only  in  bed,  whereas  the  thirst  continued  ; then  stupid  sleep,  like
confusion  of  the  head  ; in  the  morning  the  thirst  and  confusion  of
the  head  are  still  there,  they  go  off  after  getting  up  (aft.  6 d.).

Towards  evening  chill ; he  must  lie  down  in  bed  and  cover
himself  up  ; then  he  got  warmer.

In  the  evening  (about  7 o'clock)  external  chill  and  sensation  of
coldness,  without  shivering  or  externally  perceptible  coldness,  no
internal  coldness  ; he  cannot  drink  anything  cold  without  suffering ;
immediately  after  lying  down  in  bed,  external  heat,  which  does  not
permit  him  to  uncover  himself,  without  thirst,  with  watery  mouth
and  dry  lips ; then  about  midnight  general  transpiration  during  half-
slumber, and  after  midnight  perspiration,  first  in  the  face,  then  on
the  hairy  scalp  and  neck  to  the  chest.

Chilliness  in  the  open  air  without  thirst.

895.  After  a walk  in  the  open  air,  shivering  and  heat  at  the  same  time
all  over  the  body,  without  thirst,  also  rather  warm  sweat  all  over
the  skin  ; the  palms  perspire  most.

All  day  long  she  is  hot  inwardly  and  chilly  externally,  and
yet  she  feels  normally  warm  to  the  touch,  and  without  any  remark-
able thirst  ; coffee  increases  the  inward  heat.

Pinching  chill  in  the  feet  and  betwixt  the  shoulders,  and  a
quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards  much  external  heat  and  burning  pain
on  the  left  arm  and  on  the  left  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body,
with  redness  of  cheeks.

In  the  evening  chill  and  heat ; her  face  felt  very  hot,  and  yet  the
cheeks  were  pale  and  cold  to  the  touch,  but  the  breath  came  very
hot  out  of  the  mouth  ; — for  two  successive  afternoons.

Her  face  looks  red  and  she  feels  a burning  heat  in  the  skin,  and
yet  she  feels  only  moderately  warm  to  the  touch.

900.  Evening  fever  with  diarrhoea  : at  8 p.  m.  chill ; then,  in  bed,  dry
heat  with  much  thirst  for  several  hours,  with  cutting  in  the  bowels
as  with  knives,  and  diarrhoea  during  the  heat,  for  some  hours  ; then
sleep ; in  the  morning  again  diarrhoea  (aft.  24  h.).

Evening  fever  with  diarrhoea  (as  a second  paroxysm) ; in  the
evening,  after  6 o'clock,  chili  for  an  hour  (without  thirst)  through  all
the  limbs  ; then  first  dry  heat,  then  heat  with  profuse  sweat,  altogether
lasting  three  hours,  with  thirst  ; diarrhoea  of  mucus  only  with
violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  tenesmus  and  accom-
panied by  headache,  a pressing  from  both  temples  towards  the  middle,
and  accumulation  of  blood  and  heat  in  the  head  (aft.  48  h.).

Fever:  first  (in  the  forenoon)  sleepy  weariness  and  yawning;
while  walking  he  feels  as  if  he  could  go  to  sleep,  with  anxiety  ; then
stool  with  cutting,  then  extreme  heat  throughout  the  body  (about
10  a.  m.),  without  thirst ; he  felt  (though  with  shivering  intermixed)
as  if  warm  water  were  thrown  over  him,  or  as  if  the  blood  coursed
hot  through  the  blood-vessels  and  too  strongly  through  the  head,  and
as  if  the  head  were  pressed  down  to  bow,  with  throbbing  headache ;
about  7 p.  m.  chilliness  ; he  felt  as  if  cold  water  were  thrown  over
him,  or  as  if  the  blood  coursed  too  cold  through  its  vessels  ; after
lying  down  and  covering  himself  up  he  immediately  became  hot,  but


436


RHUS.


at  night  also  a kind  of  drawing  in  the  spine,  betwixt  the  shoulders
and  in  the  limbs,  as  if  he  must  always  extend  and  stretch  himself ;
in  the  morning  perspiration.

Fever  : towards  noon  he  is  attacked  by  a feverish  coldness  through
every  limb,  with  violent  headache  and  vertigo  (somewhat  allayed  by
taking  a walk)  ; towards  evening  once  more  chilliness,  he  must  lie
down  ; he  cannot  sleep  at  night,  he  lies  in  continual  vertigo  and
constant  perspiration  (aft.  48  h.).

Fever  : (about  5 o’clock)  in  the  afternoon  a stretching  in  the
limbs,  a shivering  all  through  the  body,  with  much  thirst,  cold  hands,
heat  and  redness  of  face  ; also  shivering  in  the  evening  in  bed  ; in
the  morning  he  had  transpired  all  over,  and  at  the  same  time  had  a
pressing  in  the  temples.

905.  Fever,  accompanied  by  twitchings.  \Hb.  Ts.]

Chilliness  in  the  feet  and  betwixt  the  scapulae  ; soon  afterwards
heat  on  the  left  side  and  in  the  left  arm  (immediately).

Fever  : in  the  afternoon  (about  6 o’clock)  warmth  of  the  body,
with  inward  and  outward  heat  of  the  head  and  shivering  over  the
body,  without  thirst  ; at  the  same  time  stretching,  drawing  and
exhaustion  in  the  limbs,  and  headache  like  confusion  and  compression
at  the  side  of  the  occiput  ; also  violent  cough  with  very  short  breath,
and  pain  in  the  throat  as  if  the  tonsils  were  swollen  ; slight  transpira-
tion all  over  the  body  towards  morning.

Warmth  in  the  face  and  fingers  with  rigor  in  the  scapulae,  with-
out thirst.  [F%.]

Heat  and  great  thirst.  [Hbg.'\

910.  In  the  evening  in  bed,  after  the  rigor,  slight  warmth,  without
thirst.  [Fz.]

Double  tertian  fever,  with  jaundice.1  [Dufresnoy,  1.  c.]

Heat  on  the  left  side  of  the  body  and  coldness  on  the  right  side,
without  chilliness.

Chilliness  on  the  head  and  back,  heat  on  the  anterior  part  of  the
body.

Occasionally  cold  shivering  in  the  middle  of  the  sweat,  at  night
in  bed,  and  during  the  shivering  spasms  in  the  abdomen.

915.  First  sick,  with  heat  on  the  head  and  hands  and  chilliness  on  the
rest  of  the  body,  then,  along  with  inclination  to  vomit,  chilliness  all
over.

Feeling  of  heat  and  heat  perceptible  outwardly,  with  distended
blood-vessels,  with  such  weakness  that  she  must  lean  back  while
sitting,  with  intense  thirst,  also  frequent  nocturnal  thirst ; the
following  day  shivering  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  especially  the
arms.

In  the  evening  an  inward  heat  in  the  forehead  and  the  whole
head,  less  perceptible  outwardly  to  the  touch.

In  the  evening  an  unnatural  heat,  especially  in  the  hands,  with
dull  headache.

(When  seated  heat  comes  over  him.)


1 Not  found  in  either  French  or  German  edition.


RHUS.


437

920.  When  he  has  been  walking  in  the  open  air  and  conies  into  the
house,  heat  and  sweat  come  all  over  the  body.

A severe  burning  in  the  skin,  with  a quivering  in  it  and  general
perspiration  at  night ; on  then  putting  the  hand  outside  the  bed-
clothes he  gets  a severe  cough.

* When  walking  in  the  open  cold  air  he  becomes  warm  and  breaks
out  into  a cold  sweat  all  over.

Sweat  all  over  the  body,  except  the  face,  which,  however,  is  hot
(in  the  afternoon).

In  the  morning  in  bed,  slight  perspiration  all  over  the  body  except
the  head.

925.  Slight  exhaling  sweat,  by  day,  during  which  he  likes  to  be
covered.

The  skin  is  moist  and  the  hair  of  the  head  wet.

At  night  perspiration,  especially  round  the  neck.

Perspiration  before  midnight.

Profuse  morning  sweat.

930.  Perspiration  all  over,  also  on  the  face  (aft.  J h.).  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Perspiration  all  over  the  body,  without  smell  and  not  weakening,
in  sleep,  from  about  3 to  4 a.m.  \_Mch.~\

Daily  morning  sweat.

Sour-smelling  morning  sweat,  with  cold  sweaty  cheeks.

Slight  sweat  all  night  long.

935.  In  the  morning  sweat  on  both  thighs.

In  the  night  exhalation  of  a pungent  smell,  without  being  wet.

Thirst  even  in  the  morning.

Great  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).

Much  thirst  at  night  (from  2 to  5 a.m.),  then  transpiration.

940.  Great  thirst  for  water  or  beer.  [£//'.]

Slow,  sometimes  irregular  pulse  (aft.  f h.).  \_Mch.]

Quick  pulse.  [Fontana,  1.  c.]

Impatient  and  cross  at  every  trifle,  she  cannot  bear  to  be  much
talked  to.

Peevishness.

945.  Every  occupation,  even  the  most  trifling,  is  disagreeable  to
him.

He  is  frightened  (on  going  to  sleep)  at  a trifle,  as  if  he  had  to  fear
the  greatest  calamity  from  it.

Slight  vexation  excites  and  increases  the  morbid  symptoms,  e.g.
discharge  of  blood  clots  after  the  menses  had  ceased,  &c.

Sad,  begins  to  weep  without  knowing  why.

Involuntary  weeping,  without  lachrymose  humour,  with  rumbling
in  the  belly.

950.  He  could  not  be  pleased,  was  indifferent  to  society.

Sad,  dejected  ; he  feels  disposed  to  weep.

Sadness,  making  him  prefer  quiet  solitude  (aft.  10  hf).

Melancholy,  sad,  and  anxious,  as  if  about  to  hear  of  a calamity,
or  as  if  she  were  solitary,  and  all  around  her  were  dead  and  silent  j or
as  if  she  had  bid  farewell  to  an  intimate  friend ; worst  in  the  room,
dirninished  by  walking  in  the  open  air.


438


RHUS.


Along  with  dryness  of  the  throat,  horrible  anxieties  with  un-
easiness of  disposition.

955.  Timorous,  anxious,  and  trembling  (from  the  10th  to  the  27th  d.).

Along  with  sinking  of  the  strength,  anxiety,  as  if  he  must  die,
worse  after  than  before  midnight.

Without  sadness,  as  if  tired  of  life,  with  desire  to  die.  •

Anxiety  : she  must  hold  on  by  something  when  sitting,  because,
on  account  of  the  pains  (bruised  feeling  of  the  limbs  and  drawing  in
them),  she  imagined  she  could  not  bear  up.

More  in  the  afternoon  than  in  the  forenoon,  true  cardiac  anxiety;
she  could  not  sleep  half  the  night  on  account  of  great  anguish,  and
was  always  so  anxious  that  she  perspired  (aft.  12  d.).

960.  On  account  of  inward  uneasiness  she  could  not  sit  still,  but  must
rock  herself  to  and  fro  on  her  chair,  and  move  all  the  limbs  a little.

Very  restless  disposition,  and  anxiety  and  anguish,  so  that  she
had  always  a clutching  at  the  heart  (scrobiculus  cordis),  with
dyspnoea.

She  did  not  sleep  half  the  night,  was  timorous,  full  of  anguish
and  cardiac  anxiety.

Ill-humoured,  dejected,  and  as  if  in  despair.

Full  of  sad  thoughts,  anxious  and  timorous,  during  which  she
always  lost  her  strength,  and  must  lie  down  for  hours,  in  order  to
recover  her  strength.

965.  He  imagines  an  enemy  seeks  to  poison  him.

She  can  seldom  have  a cheerful  thought.

She  was  inexpressibly  anxious  ; she  had  pressure  at  the  heart  and
tearing  in  the  sacrum.

In  the  morning,  from  3 o’clock  onwards,  she  could  sleep  no
more  ; she  got  up  very  restless,  anxious,  and  weak,  and  had  constant
trembling,  especially  in  the  knees  (with  sweat  on  the  back).

During  the  anxiety  she  feels  a weight  under  the  chest,  which
causes  such  a tight  feeling  that  she  breathes  with  difficulty,  and
sometimes  very  profoundly,  whereby  she  is  relieved  ; pulse  sometimes
slow,  sometimes  quick.

970.  In  the  dusk,  towards  evening,  anxiety  and  anguish,  as  if  he
would  kill  himself,  for  an  hour.

Confusion  of  the  reason  ; he  thinks  he  is  dying.  [Zadig,  1.  c.]

From  sad  thoughts,  which  she  could  not  get  rid  of,  she  became
timorous  and  fainthearted.

When  she  had  disagreeable  thoughts  in  her  head  she  could  not
get  rid  of  them.

He  can  restrain  the  rush  of  ideas  at  his  will,  follow  out  unin-
terruptedly any  train  of  thought  he  chooses,  without  being  troubled
with  other  thoughts.*

975.  He  can  master  his  thoughts  and  think  calmly  of  any  subject
he  will  and  as  long  as  he  likes,  and  at  his  pleasure  take  up  some
other  topic,  with  tranquil,  slow  inspiration.*


* Curative  action.


RUTA.1

(Rue.)

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  plant,  Ruia  graveolens,  mixed  with  equal
parts  of  alcohol.)

This  powerful  plant,  hitherto  almost  only  employed  in  haphazard
fashion  by  common  folk  as  a domestic  remedy  in  indeterminate  cases,
acquires  considerable  importance  from  the  following  (all  too  meagre  !)
symptoms  observed  from  its  administration.  The  homoeopathic  prac-
titioner sees  what  peculiar  serious  cases  of  disease  he  is  able  to  cure  by
its  means.

If  Rosenstein  ( Reseap .,  p.  40)  cannot  sufficiently  commend  the
virtues  of  rue  in  affections  of  the  eye  and  dimness  of  vision  from  too
much  reading , in  which  Swedjaur  and  Chomel  agree  with  him,  he
must  be  very  blind  who  fails  to  see  that  these  are  solely  owing  to  the
homoeopathic  power  of  rue  to  cause  a similar  condition  in  healthy
persons.  See  symptoms  44,  45.

By  this  so  similarly  acting  medicine  the  malady  is  certainly  not
increased  and  aggravated  as  our  opponents,  who  think  themselves  so  wise
in  their  ignorance,  would  conclude  with  ridiculous  expressions  of  alarm,
and  without  interrogating  experience.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  be  cured,
quickly  and  permanently  cured  (if  not  dependent  on  a miasmatic
dyscrasia)  to  the  bitter  disappointment  and  confusion  of  learned
routinists  who  reject  the  most  beneficent  of  all  truths.

A dilution  which  in  every  drop  contains  tfoVoo^  of  a grain  of
this  juice,  one  drop  for  a dose — all  heterogeneous  irritants  being  kept
away — I have  found  to  be  even  a somewhat  too  large  dose  in  many
cases.

Camphor  removes  the  too  violent  effects  of  rue.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Gross,  Hartmann,  Herr-
mann, Hornburg,  Langhammer,  Stapf,  Wislicenus.

The  following  old-school  authorities  furnish  symptoms  :

El.  Camerarius,  Hort.  Med.

Lev.  Lemnius.  De  Occultis  Nature  Miraculis,  ii„

The  1st  edit,  has  224,  this  2nd  edit.  288  symptoms,]


RUTA.

When  sitting  sudden  severe  vertigo  : all  turned  round  him  in  a
circle;  thereafter  glowing  cheeks  (aft.  12  h.).  [Z>.]


From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


440


RUT  A.


When  walking  in  the  open  air  severe  vertigo ; he  would  almost
have  fallen  on  the  right  side  had  he  not  held  on  to  something  (aft.
26  h .).  [Lr.]

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed  severe  vertigo;  he  would  have
fallen  forwards  had  he  not  held  on  to  something  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.]
Slow  flow  of  ideas,  slow  to  remember  things.  [Stf]

5.  Frequent  absence  of  thinking  power;  he  does  things  which  had
become  easy  to  him  from  frequent  repetition,  quite  mechanically  at
the  wrong  time  (aft.  48  h.).  [/Fj.]

Dulness  of  the  head,  a kind  of  want  of  recollection.  \_Hbg.~\
Confusion  of  the  brain  in  the  forehead,  with  throbbing  pain  in  it,
in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  and  still  worse  in  the  morning
on  awaking  from  a too  profound  sleep.

Confusion  of  the  head.

Sensation  in  the  head  and  body  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough.

[*%•] ...

10.  Persistent  heaviness  in  the  head,  chiefly  in  the  forehead,  as  if  a
weight  lay  in  it  (aft.  § h.).  [Htn.]

After  dinner,  headache,  like  pressure  on  the  whole  brain,  with  a
great  mobility  of  the  nervous  system  and  restlessness  in  the  whole
body,  which  did  not  permit  him  to  remain  seated.  [Fz.]

In  the  morning  after  rising  pressive  pain  on  the  whole  brain  (aft.

34  h.).  [Fz.]

In  the  whole  head  a stupefying  pressure.  [6YF]

Pressive  stupefying  headache  with  nausea,  especially  in  the  right
side  of  the  forehead,  with  feeling  of  heat  in  the  face  (aft.  4^  h.).

[Lr.]

15.  A regularly  recurring  aching  pain  in  the  sinciput,

\_Htn.']

Aching  in  the  forehead  above  the  root  of  the  nose  (aft.  2-J  h.).

[^•]

Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  [ Hbg.~\

In  the  side  of  the  occiput  a pecking  aching  pain.  [Fz.]
Intermittent  boring  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead
(when  sitting)  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Zr.]

20.  A shooting  drawing  pain  from  the  frontal  to  the
temporal  hone.  [ Htn .]

Shooting  drawing  on  the  crown  externally  (aft.  24  h.).  [/FZ]

(A  tearing  on  the  right  parietal  bone,  which  went  off  in  the
evening,  the  following  morning  a boil  the  size  of  a walnut  on  the
same  spot,  painful  when  touched  as  if  festering,  which  went  off  after
a few  days.)

Tensive  drawing  pain,  as  after  a blow  or  knock,  externally  on  the
lateral  parts  of  the  head.  \_Hbg.~\

(First  a violent  pain — shooting  and  tearing — on  the  hairy  scalp,
after  which  a lump  arose  the  size  of  a dollar  and  a finger’s  breadth  in
height,  which  at  first  was  painful  when  touched.)

25.  Itching  on  the  hairy  scalp  close  behind  the  left  ear,  which  part  was
painful  when  touched  by  the  hand,  like  itching  combined  with  sore-
ness ; both  itching  and  pain  were  removed  by  scratching.  [Fz.]


RUTA.


44  t


Eroding  itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  hairy  scalp,  as  from  lice,
which  compelled  scratching  and  frequently  recurred  (aft.  36  h.).

ILr •]

Eroding  itching  on  the  whole  of  the  hairy  scalp,  especially  on
the  left  side  and  the  occiput,  as  from  vermin,  which  was  only  allayed
by  scratching  much,  but  always  recurred  (aft.  38  h.).  [Zr.]

Two  small  ulcers  on  the  hairy  scalp,  one  on  the  left  side  and
one  near  the  nape,  the  eroding  itching  of  which  made  him  scratch,
and  often  recurred  (aft.  38  h.).  [Zr.]

Gnawing  aching  pain  on  the  forehead  (aft.  12  h.).  \_TVs.~\

30.  Dull  tearing  in  the  temporal  bones  (aft.  1 h.).  \JVs.~\

From  the  temporal  bones  to  the  occiput,  in  the
periosteum,  pain  as  from  a fall.  [Z%.]

Burning  compressive  pain  outwardly  on  the  head,  which  stupefies
(aft.  11  h.).  \_Hbg.~\

Heat  in  the  head.  \_Hbg,~\

In  the  evening  (about  11  o’clock)  great  heat  in  the  head  with
febrile  restlessness  of  the  whole  body  and  anxiety.  [Zz.]

35.  Sweat  on  the  crown  of  the  head  (immediately).

Erysipelas  on  the  forehead.*  [El.  Gamer arius,  Hort.  Med.]
Itching  on  one  side  of  the  face  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zz.]

Cramp-like  tearing  pain  on  the  zygomatic  process,  with  aching
stupefying  pain  in  both  sides  of  the  forehead  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.]

Quivering  and  visible  twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  eyebrows
(aft.  12  h.).

40.'  Dimness  before  the  eyes  as  if  shadows  hovered  before  him.  \JVsi\
(Flying  points  before  the  eyes.)

It  seems  to  be  not  clear  enough  before  his  eyes.  [ Hbg.~\
Contracted  pupils  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Zr.]

His  eyes  feel  as  if  he  had  strained  the  sight  too  much  by  reading.

IHbg.-]

45.  Weak  pressive-like  pain  in  the  right  eye,  with  dimness  of  sur-
rounding objects,  as  if  from  having  looked  too  long  at  an  object  that
was  fatiguing  to  the  eyes.  \_Hrr.]

A feeling  of  heat  and  burning  in  the  eyes  and  pain  in  them  when
he  reads  (in  the  evening  by  candle  light).  [Gjj.]

A burning  under  the  left  eye  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Hbg .]

Itching  in  the  inner  canthi  and  on  the  lower  eyelids,
which  becomes  smarting  after  rubbing  them,  where-
upon the  eye  becomes  filled  with  water  (aft.  \ h.).  [JVs.]
Pressure  on  the  upper  border  of  the  orbits,  with  tearing  in  the
eyeball.  [Zz.]

50.  Pressure  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  left  eye,  with  great  watering
of  it,  in  the  open  air  (aft.  48  h.).  \_Hrr.]

Pressure  on  both  eyeballs,  together  with  a spasm  of  the  lower
eyelids,  whereby  they  are  drawn  sometimes  upwards,  sometimes  and
to  a greater  degree  towards  the  inner  canthus,  for  some  days  (aft.  8
h.).  [TVs.]

Spasm  in  the  lower  eyelid,  the  tarsus  is  drawn  hither

* From  plucking  the  plant.


442


RUTA.


and  thither,  and  when  it  ceases  water  runs  from  both
eyes,  for  an  hour  and  a half.  [Hbg.]

Spasm  of  the  lower  part  of  the  orbicularis  muscle  drawing  it
hither  and  thither.  [Hbg.]

Involuntary  staring  at  an  object,  with  contracted  pupils  (aft.  J
h.).  [Htn.]

55.  If  he  shakes  his  head  he  feels  a rumbling  to  and  fro  in  the  ear.
[Hbg.]

He  feels  in  his  ear  as  if  a blunt  j)iece  of  wood  were
pushed  about  in  it,  a kind  of  scratching  pressure  (aft.  2
h.).  [Hbg.-]

Pain  about  the  ears  as  if  they  were  strongly  pressed.  [Hbg.]

A tickling  hot  pressure  in  the  ears,  which  was  aggravated  by
introducing  the  finger.  [Hbg.~]

Itching  pricks  in  the  right  internal  ear  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVs.]

60.  In  the  cartilages  of  the  ears  pain  as  after  a contusion.
[Hbg.]

Under  the  mastoid  process  a pain  as  from  a blow  or
fall.  [Hbg.]

In  the  bones  of  the  face  numb  pain,  as  from  a blow,  which
spreads  down  into  the  teeth  and  jaw.*  [Hbg,]

Sharp  pressure  on  the  root  of  the  nose  (aft.  36  h.).  [TVs.]

In  the  upper  part  of  the  nose  a pain  as  if  a plug  were  pushed
transversely  through  it,  which  scratched  and  pressed  ; a sensation
not  removed  by  blowing  the  nose  nor  by  boring  in  the  finger.  [Hbg.]
65.  On  the  dorsum  of  the  nose  slight  sweat;  the  nose  is  warmer,  as
also  the  cheeks,  with  slight  redness  of  the  face,  without  thirst.  [t-Aj.]
(Epistaxis.)

(She  blows  blood  from  the  nose,  all  day.)

Pinching  in  the  left  cheek  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.]

In  both  cheeks  an  eroding  gouty  pain.  [Hbg. ]

70.  Eruption  on  the  upper  and  lower  lips  (from  rue  vinegar).  [Lev.
Lemnius,  De  Occultis  Natures  Miraculis , ii,  chap.  1.]

Digging  pain  in  the  lower  teeth.

The  right  upper  gums  are  painful  on  their  inner  side  as  if  sore  and
swollen,  with  drawing  stitches  in  them,  most  severe  when  touched
(aft.  36  h.).  [Ws.]

Bleeding  of  the  gums  when  cleaning  and  brushing  the  teeth.
Sometimes  dry  and  sticky  in  the  mouth.  [*S7/\]

75.  Aching  pain  in  the  palate,  more  when  not  swallowing  than  when
swallowing  (aft.  2 h.).

When  swallowing,  but  not  otherwise,  a sore  feeling  and  aching
on  the  velum  palati.  [GjjJ

In  the  afternoon  thirst  for  cold  water  (aft.  33  h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  afternoon  unquenchable  thirst  for  cold  water  ; he  drinks
often  and  much  and  it  does  not  oppress  him  (aft.  24  h.).  [Cjj.]
Eructation  (immediately).  [Hbg.]

80.  Eructation  of  air  only.  [Htn.]


Several  pains  in  the  bones  and  periosteum  seem  to  be  caused  by  rue.


RUTA.


443-

After  eating  and  drinking,  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  ingesta.

[<?«•]

Food  has  to  her  a woody  taste,  as  if  dry  and  insipid  (2nd  d.).

[<?«•]

He  has  appetite,  but  as  soon  as  he  eats  anything  he  feels  a tensive
oppression  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  and  chest,  as  if  he  were
satiated  (aft.  5 h.).  [Gw.]

She  has  appetite  as  usual  ; but  as  soon  as  she  begins  to  eat,  every-
thing is  repugnant  to  her  and  fills  her  with  loathing.  [Gw.]

85.  Frequent  hiccup  (during  the  accustomed  tobacco-smoking)  (aft.
4 h.).  [Lr]

Frequent  hiccup  with  some  nausea  (during  the  accustomed
tobacco-smoking)  (aft,  34  h.).  [Z*r.]

Inclination  to  vomit  when  stooping.  [67/1]

A kind  of  nausea  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  with  call  to  stool,
which  is  allayed  for  instants  by  discharge  of  flatus.  [Gw.]

(Shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.)
go.  Shooting  tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  24
h.).  \_Ws\

Gnawing  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  'Cordis,  at  night  and  in  the
morning  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gw.]

Aching  causing  restlessness  in  front  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis,
in  the  hepatic  region.  [Fz.]

Burning  gnawing  in  the  stomach.  \_Hbg.~\

Emptiness  and  gnawing  in  the  stomach,  as  if  he  had  been  long
without  food  (aft.  10  h.).  [HhgJ\

95.  Under  the  left  short  ribs  a fine  painful  beating  or  pecking.  [Gw.]
Under  the  left  short  ribs  a pain  per  se^  which  becomes  more  severe
when  pressed  upon  and  impedes  inspiration,  when  she  awakes  at
night.  [Gw.]

Corrosive  burning  in  the  left  abdominal  region.  [ Hbg ,]

When  she  attempted  to  sit  down  something  stabbed  her  upwards
from  the  abdomen.

Coldness  in  the  internal  umbilical  region  and  a sensation  as  if
something  got  loose  there.  \Hbg^\

100.  Severe  stitches  in  the  abdominal  muscles  in  the  umbilical  depres-
sion, which  compel  her  to  draw  in  the  abdomen  (aft  1 h.).  \Ws,~\
From  below  the  navel  shooting  jerks  dart  towards  the  pubes,
during  expiration,  so  as  to  take  away  her  breath  } she  feels  nothing
on  pressing  strongly  there.  [Gw.]

In  the  hepatic  region  an  aching  gnawing  pain.  IHbg.}
In  the  umbilical  region  a scratching  and  gnawing,  intermingled
with  nausea  (aft.  6 d.).  [Gw.]

In  both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  pushing  cutting  pinching,  as  from
flatulence  (aft.  2§  h.).  [Ar.]

105.  Pinching  and  aching  pain,  with  discomfort  in  the  hypogastrium,
as  after  a chill  (aft.  48  h.).  \_HrrJ\

In  the  night  a tensive  pressing  in  the  whole  hypogastrium  from
the  navel  downwards,  as  if  the  catamenia  were  about  to  come  on  ;
the  pain  is  aggravated  by  pressing  on  it.  [Gw.]


444


RUTA,


Agreeable  coolness  in  the  abdomen  and  chest.  \_HbgJ]

Inward  heat  in  the  abdomen  and  chest.  \Hbg.~\

When  sitting  drawing  pressure  in  the  renal  region,  along  the
loins,  [Az.]

no.  In  the  loins,  a bruised  pain  with  contractive  tension  opposite  in
the  hypogastrium,  only  when  sitting,  but  not  when  walking  or
standing.  [Gw.]

(After  a long  walk)  when  sitting,  a digging,  as  if  bruised  in  the
lumbar  region  just  above  the  sacrum  ; when  walking  it  lasts  for  some
time  and  then  gradually  goes  off ; when  standing  still  and  sitting  it
recurs.  [Gw.]

Grumbling  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  i h.).  [Hrr.]

Discharge  of  very  foetid  flatus  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.]

Flatus  easily  discharged.  \_Hbg.]

1 15.  Discharge  of  flatus  with  feeling  as  if  a stool  would  follow  (aft.

39  M-  [ Lr -J

When  sitting  tearing  stitches  in  the  rectum.  [Fz.]
Tearing  in  the  rectum  and  urethra,  when  not  urinat-
ing (aft.  2 d.).  [Fz.~\

Stool  of  scanty  hard

•]

The  stool  was  evacuated  with  difficulty,  as  if  from  absence  of
vermicular  movement  in  the  rectum,  in  the  first  twenty-four  hours,
and  it  was  of  large  size.  [Hbg.]

120.  Constant  urging  to  stool,  which,  however,  is  softer  than  usual,
and  even  after  the  evacuation  straining  and  urging  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hrr.]
After  sick  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  two  soft  stools,  which  were
evacuated  with  difficulty  on  account  of  a kind  of  rigidity  and  in-
activity of  the  rectum  (aft.  1^  h.).  [A%.]

Stool  on  the  second  day  much  later  than  usual,  [i^z.]

Frequent  pressing  to  stool  with  prolapsus  of  the  rectum,  which
then  occurred  frequently,  with  feeling  of  urging,  during  which  much
flatus  is  always  discharged  ; the  slightest  stooping,  and  still  more
crouching  together  brought  down  the  rectum  (aft.  72  h.)  ; the  fol-
lowing days  the  rectum  remained  constantly  prolapsed,  and  though  it
can  easily  be  replaced  without  pains,  still  it  always  came  out  again
immediately,  for  several  days,  [jFz.J
Discharge  of  blood  with  the  stool.

125.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  like  a painful
closure  of  it,  shortly  after  urinating  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.']

On  the  whole  he  passes  but  little  urine,  but  after  urinating  there
occur  a pressure  and  urging  in  the  bladder  without  further  discharge
of  urine  (2nd  and  3rd  d.).  [Fz.]

Immediately  after  urinating,  at  every  step  she  feels  as  if  the  bladder
were  full  and  were  moved  up  and  down  ; not  when  sitting  (aft.  48

h.).  [<?».]

Great  pressing  to  urinate  as  if  the  bladder  were  always  full,  and
yet  but  little  urine  passed,  and  after  it  is  discharged  there  is  urging
as  if  more  would  come,  but  it  does  not  (aft.  some  h.),  for  several
days.  [Gtt.]


faeces  almost  like  sheep-dung  (aft.  40  h.).


RUTA.


44$


She  feels  as  if  she  could  not  retain  her  urine  any  longer,  such
extreme  urging  she  has,  though  but  a drop  of  urine  was  in  the
bladder ; during  and  after  urination  there  is  painful  burning  in  the
genitals  and  the  urging  continues  for  a long  time ; but  at  night  she
could  sleep  just  as  quietly  as  ever ; she  has  urging  to  make  water
only  early  in  the  morning  before  daybreak.  [Gjj.]

130.  Increased,  powerful  sexual  desire.  [G^.]

Nocturnal  seminal  emissions  without  amorous  dreams.  \_Lr.]

*

Frequent  sneezing.  [Lr.]

On  the  larynx,  pain  as  from  a blow  or  contusion.  [Hbg.]
Agreeable  coolness  in  the  chest.  [Hbg.]

135.  Inward  hot  feeling  in  the  chest.  [ Hbg .]

Corrosive,  eroding  drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [Hbg.]
A gnawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [Hbg.]

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a gnawing  sensation
combined  with  something  corrosive  and  burning.  [Hbg.]
Great  compression  of  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  at  the  last  false
ribs,  at  night ; he  dreamt  that  some  one  was  clasping  him  violently,
and  he  wakes  in  consequence  (aft.  24  h.).  [Wsi]

140.  A pressive  fulness  in  the  chest  which  causes  tightness  of  the  chest
and  short  breathing.

Pressure  on  the  sternum,  according  to  the  feeling,  inwardly  and
outwardly.  [Hrr.]

Hard  pressure  on  the  sixth  true  rib,  more  violent  during  expira-
tion and  when  touched  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

Obtuse  blow  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [Hbg.]

Sharp  shooting  between  the  left  nipple  and  axilla,  worse  during
inspiration  (aft.  30  h,).  [Hrr.]

145.  Shooting  pain  inside  the  left  nipple,  worse  during  inspiration  (aft.
4 d.).  [Hrr.]

On  going  upstairs  stitches  on  the  chest  and  stoppage  of  the
breath  which  caused  him  the  greatest  anxiety.  [F%.]

Stitches  on  the  sternum  at  every  movement  (2nd  d.).  [F%.]
During  both  inspiration  and  expiration  pressive  oppressive
shooting  on  the  sternum  (when  sitting)  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

Fine  cutting  extending  from  the  throat  into  the  chest,  especially
at  the  clavicle  and  axilla  where  it  is  persistent,  when  walking  ; in-
creased by  quick  walking  (aft.  36  h.).  [Ws.]

150.  Trembling  twitching  on  the  last  true  ribs  of  the  right  side  (aft.

i h.).  \m.]

At  night  over  the  ensiform  cartilage,  on  one  of  the  costal  carti-
lages, an  intermittent  gnawing  or  pecking.  [Gw.]

Pain  from  the  coccyx  to  the  os  sacrum  as  from  a fall  or  blow.

[-£%•]

Hard  pressure  on  the  left  lower  surface  of  the  os  sacrum.
[Hrr.]

Pain  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  as  if  bruised.  [Hbg.]

155.  In  the  spine,  opposite  to  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a painful  twitch-
ing ; when  she  presses  on  it  with  her  hand  it  is  worse,  and  then


446


RUTA.


there  occurs  at  the  same  time  a pain  under  the  last  short  ribs,  that
afterwards  extends  into  the  belly  and  impedes  respiration.  [Gw.]

The  spine  is  painful,  as  if  bruised,  when  sitting  and  walking— a
pain  which  takes  away  the  breath.  [Tz.]

Hard  pressure  on  the  left  about  the  os  innominatum,  near  the
spine  (aft.  2 h.).  [//rr.]

In  the  back  just  above  the  left  os  ilii,  when  at  rest  and  when
moving,  an  intermittent  painful  throbbing  that  goes  off  by  pressing
on  it,  and  afterwards  recurs.  [Gw.]

(After  a long  walk)  at  the  posterior  border  of  the  left  os  ilii,  a
throbbing  that  extends  downwards  over  the  hip,  on  the  anterior
aspect  of  the  thigh  almost  to  the  knee,  and  goes  off  by  pressing  on
the  os  ilii.  [Gw.]

160.  In  the  anterior  spinous  process  of  the  left  ilium  an  intermittent
beating.  [Gw.]

Pain  on  the  posterior  spinous  process  of  the  ilium,  even  when
sitting,  like  a forcing  forwards  and  as  if  something  would  come  out
there  ; it  was  always  relieved  by  pressing  on  it.

When  sitting,  stitches  in  the  spine,  with  quickly  occurring
anxiety.  [Tz.]

In  the  right  side  of  the  spine,  opposite  the  liver,  aching  drawing
pain,  especially  severe  during  inspiration  (aft.  2 d.).  [Tz.]

In  the  dorsal  vertebrae  pain  as  from  a fall,  when  moving  and
when  at  rest.  \_Hbg. ]

165.  Drawing  bruised  pain  in  the  spine  which  often  takes  away  the
breath.  [Tz.]

When  sitting,  bruised  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  back,  which
went  off  when  walking  and  standing  (aft.  Jo]r  h.).  [Zr.]

In  the  spine  pain  as  if  bruised  and  like  lumbago.  \Hbg.~\

(When  sitting)  bruised  pain  along  the  spine,  especially  on  the
left  side  (aft.  7 j h.).  [ Lr .]

Pressure  on  the  inside  of  the  right  scapula  (aft.  14  h.).  [iZrr.]

170.  Pricking  itching  between  the  scapulae  ; not  removed  by  rubbing
(immediately).  \JV r.]

On  moving  the  scapula  a drawing  shooting  pain  on  its  apex,  so
that  he  must  immediately  let  the  arm  sink  down.  [Zz.]

Drawing  pain  on  the  scapula,  that  takes  away  the  breath.  [Zz.]
Drawing  in  the  nape.  [£//]]

In  the  shoulder-joints  acute  pain,  as  from  dislocation  ; when  he
draws  and  turns  the  upper  arm  upwards  this  pain  is  somewhat
relieved,  but  it  returns  immediately  when  he  hangs  or  lays  down  the
arm.  [ Hbg .]

175.  Under  the  right  axilla  a pain  as  from  a burning  smarting  ulcer
(aft.  48  h.).  [Hbg.]  '

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  biceps  muscle  of  the  upper  arm.
[*•*■]

Painful  jerks  in  the  upper  arms,  from  their  middle ; when  the
pain  reaches  the  elbow  it  extends  further  into  the  lingers  and  seems
to  be  in  the  shaft  of  the  bones,  at  the  same  time  fatigue  and  heavi-
ness of  the  lower  extremities.  [Gn.]


RUTA.


447


Coolness  inwardly  in  the  arms,  [Hbg."]

Itching  on  the  left  upper  arm  that  excited  scratching

(aft.  8 h.).  [Zr.]

180.  In  both  arms  fine,  very  close,  deep  pricks,  that  changed  into  an
eroding  itching,  with  redness  and  heat  of  the  skin  of  the  arms.

Hard  pressure  on  the  right  elbow-joint,  worse  on  extending  the
arm  (aft.  12  h.).  [iZrr.]

In  the  left  elbow-joint  pain,  as  from  a blow,  with
weakness  in  the  arm  (aft.  36  h.).  [Hbg.]

Dull  tearing  in  the  arm  bones  (aft.  1 h.).  [Ws^\

Dull  tearing  pain  in  the  right  elbow-joint  and  neighbouring
parts,  extending  to  the  lower  end  of  the  humerus  ; on  extending  the
arm  merely  an  aching  pain  (aft.  3 6 h,).  [Hrr.~\

185.  The  shaft  of  the  ulna  is  as  if  bruised.  [Hbg.~\

Cramp-like  tearing  in  the  left  forearm  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.]
Paralytic  pressure  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  forearm  (aft.  10
h.).  [ Hrr .]

Painful  aching  drawing  in  the  middle  of  the  anterior  surface  of
the  right  forearm  (aft.  34  h.).  [Hrr!\

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  more  severe  during
energetic  movement  (aft.  32  h.).  [ZZrA]

190.  Swollen  veins  on  the  hand,  after  eating  (aft.  4 h.).  [HbgJ\

Fine  pricking  itching  tickling  in  the  left  palm  (aft.  36  h.).  [Zr.]
Erysipelas  on  the  hands  from  plucking  the  plant.  [Camerarius,
1-  c-]

The  left  wrist-joint  is  painful  as  if  broken,  even  when  at  rest.

[Hbg.]

The  hones  of  the  wrist  and  hack  of  the  hand  are
painful,  as  if  bruised,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving.

[Hbg.]

195.  Cramp-like  pain  transversely  across  the  right  hand  (aft.  7 h.).

[^.]  .

Painful  aching  drawing  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the  two  last
fingers,  at  night  (aft.  42  h.).  [Hrr.]

In  the  fingers  pains  as  from  a blow  or  contusion,  when  at  rest
(aft.  6 h.).  [Hbg.]

Tearing  in  the  left  middle  finger,  especially  its  middle  joint  and
middle  phalanx  (aft.  f h.).  [ Hrr. ]

Aching  drawing  in  the  middle  joints  of  the  three  right  central
fingers.  [Hrr.]

200.  In  the  bones  about  the  hips  pain  as  from  a blow  or
fall  (when  moving).  [ Hbg. ]

He  cannot  bend  his  body,  all  the  joints  and  the  hip
bones  are  painful,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hbg.]

(A  violent  contractive  and  spasmodic  drawing  pain  from  the
middle  of  the  thigh  to  the  hip-joint  and  thence  into  the  sacrum.)

On  touching  the  painful  parts,  especially  the  hips
and  thigh  bones,  they  are  painful,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  29

M-  [»*•]

On  the  upper  and  inner  aspect  of  the  thigh  a burning  pain,  only


448


RUTA.


when  sitting,  and  especially  on  awaking  while  lying,  not  when
standing  or  walking.

205.  Burning  sharp  pressure  in  the  bend  of  the  right  thigh  (aft.  1 h.).
[Hrr.]

The  thigh  bones  are  painful  in  their  middle,  as  if  bruised  (when
moving).  [Hbg.]

The  whole  anterior  surface  of  the  thighs  is  as  if
bruised  and  painful  to  the  touch  (aft.  31  h.).  [Hbg.]

If  he  stretches  out  the  lower  extremities,  even  a
little,  the  thighs  are  painful,  as  if  they  were  broken
through  the  middle.  [Hbg.]

The  bruised  pain  of  the  thighs  lasts  for  two  days,  so  that  he  can
hardly  walk.  [Hbg.]

210.  Pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh.
[Hrr.]

In  the  posterior  part  of  the  thigh  and  above  the  knee
he  feels  as  if  bruised  (on  moving).  [Hbg.]

On  rising  up  after  sitting  he  cannot  walk  imme-
diately ; he  falls  back  again ; the  bones  are  as  if  broken,  the
thighs  refuse  to  perform  their  office  on  account  of  powerlessness  and
pain.  [Hbg.]

When  walking  he  staggers  from  side  to  side.  [Hbg.]

When  walking  he  falls  from  one  side  to  the  other ;
his  legs  cannot  support  him ; he  had  no  power  and  no
stability  in  the  thighs.  [Hbg.]

215.  Hard  pressure  on  the  upper  inner  surface  of  the  left  leg.  [Hrr.]

Hard  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  outer  side  of  the  left  leg.
[Hrr.]

Giving  way  of  the  knees  on  rising  up  from  a seat  and  com-
mencing to  walk  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hbg.]

Paralytic  heaviness  in  the  knees  ; he  must  change  the  position  of
his  feet  (aft.  I h.)  ; he  feels  relieved  after  walking.  [TVs.]

He  has  difficulty  in  going  up  and  down  stairs ; the
legs  bend  under  him.  [Hbg.]

220.  Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  houghs  on  rising  up  from  a seat.

[Hbg.]

Weariness  in  the  left  knee  after  walking  a little ; the  knees  gave
way  under  him.  [Gjj.]

His  knees  tremble,  with  weariness  in  the  feet.  [Stf.]

Trembling  heaviness  of  the  legs.  [Hbg.]

(In  the  inner  side  of  the  legs,  an  inward  cold  feeling,  almost  as  if
gone  to  sleep,  from  the  soles  up  to  the  knees,  without  shivering)  (aft.
24  h.).

225.  He  dare  not  tread  strongly  on  the  feet,  the  bones  of
the  feet  are  painful,  with  feeling  of  heat.  [Hbg.]

Obtuse  stitches  dart  from  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  slowly  up  the
tibia  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ws.]

On  the  front  of  the  left  ankle-joint  a pain  compounded
of  throbbing  and  hacking  as  if  an  ulcer  were  there.

[Hbg.]


RUTA.


449


Burning  and  corrosive  pain  in  the  bones  of  the  feet
when  at  rest.  [£%•]

Burning  sensation  under  the  outer  ankle  when  standing,  [Tz.]
230.  (When  sitting)  aching  stitch-like  pain  first  in  the  left,  then  in
the  right  heel  (aft  12  h.).  [Zr.]

Burning  tearing  in  the  left  big  toe,  especially  on  external  pressure
(aft.  6 h.).  \JVs.~\

In  the  toes,  burning  pains  as  after  a blow  or  contusion  when  a
foreign  body  has  been  knocked  in.  \_Hbg.~]

Cramp-like  pricking  in  the  right  little  toe  (when  sitting),  which
became  more  penetrating  and  more  severe  on  moving  the  toes  (aft.
33  I \Lr.-\

A painful  drawing  in  the  toes.  [Hbg.~\

235.  Painful  pressure  in  the  left  sole  (when  sitting)  (aft.  36  h.).

Tickling  hot  prickling  in  the  sole  of  the  foot.  \_Hbg.’]

Aching  cramp-like  tearing  at  one  time  in  the  upper  at  another
in  the  lower  extremities,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  3^  h.).

[Lr-]

When  lying  all  the  parts  on  which  he  lies  are  painful  as  if  bruised,
even  in  bed  (aft.  17  h.).  \_Hbg.~\

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed  itching  all  over  the  body
which  was  relieved  by  scratching  (aft  24  h.).  [Zr.]

240.  Hands  and  feet  powerless,  she  could  hold  nothing  firmly  in  her
hands,  and  when  treading  she  could  not  stand  firmly  on  her  feet.

He  feels  exhausted  and  lazy  only  when  sitting  ; but  he  does  not
feel  this  after  walking  a short  while,  \_Htn.']

He  knows  not  where  to  put  his  legs  on  account  of
restlessness  and  heaviness,  he  puts  them  first  in  one
place  then  in  another,  and  turns  his  body  from  side  to
side.  [Hbg.]

His  whole  body  feels  as  if  stuffed  full,  whereby  his  breathing  is
impeded.

Great  weariness.  [$£/'.]

245.  After  a meal,  a great  weariness  and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,
her  eyes  closed  she  was  so  sleepy  ; she  was  better  in  the  open  air.
[Gss.]

After  every  short  walk  he  is  very  exhausted  ; his  limbs  feel
bruised  ; the  sacrum  and  loins  are  painful,  but  he  only  feels  his  suffer-
ings when  he  comes  to  sit  down  ; if  he  stands  up  and  walks  about
he  feels  better.  [Gw.]

All  the  limbs  of  the  whole  body  are  heavy  and  tired  and  without
strength  ; work  of  all  kind  was  too  much  for  him  and  repugnant  to
him.

Exhaustion  in  the  limbs  when  sitting  ; he  does  not  move  will-
ingly ; when  he  let  his  hands  lie  in  his  lap,  he  felt  so  comfortable  that
he  did  not  like  to  raise  them.  \Htn?\

Lassitude  and  heaviness  in  the  whole  body.  [Hbg!\

250.  Yawning,  stretching  and  extending  the  hands ; after-
wards he  is  attacked  with  drowsiness.  \_Hbg^\

VOL,  II.


29


450


RUTA.


Yawning  with  stretching  and  extending  the  arms  and  legs,
especially  the  former.  [ Htn.]

Several  times  (imperfect)  yawning  which  did  not  come  to  com-
pletion ; when  in  the  middle  of  a yawn  he  must  stop  it.  [Htn7\

In  the  evening  as  soon  as  she  lay  down,  she  instantly  fell  fast
asleep,  and  could  with  difficulty  be  roused.  [Gw.]

After  a meal  extreme  sleepiness ; he  fell  asleep  while  reading,  a
sleep  with  semi-consciousness  ; at  the  slightest  touch  he  woke  up
with  a cry  of  the  greatest  terror.

255.  Nocturnal  restlessness  ; she  wakes  very  often  and  then  has  nausea
and  at  the  same  time  a painful  twisting  about  the  navel ; sometimes
she  has  a rising  up  in  the  pit  of  the  throat  as  if  water  would  come
into  her  mouth.  [Gw.]

Extreme!)'  restless  he  throws  himself  from  side  to  side,  wakes  up
almost  every  hour,  and  can  with  difficulty  fall  asleep  again.  [Zr.]
Restless  sleep  with  dreams  of  a vexatious  morose  character.
[Hbg.-]

Frequent  waking  at  night,  just  as  though  it  was  time
to  get  up.  [Zr.]

Vivid  confused  dreams.  [ Lr .]

260.  Shivering  all  over  the  body,  even  beside  the  stove ; the  hands
and  feet  feel  cold,  with  inward  and  outward  warmth  of  the  face  and
a stupidity  of  the  head  as  in  catarrhal  fever,  with  thirst  that  went  off
on  drinking  once,  intense  though  it  was  before.  [Gw.j
Chilliness  and  coldness  all  over  the  body.  [*S7/'.]

Coldness  spreads  over  one  half  of  the  head  and  face.  [Hbg.]
Coldness  from  the  spine  downwards.  [Hbg.]

Febrile  rigor,  especially  in  the  back  and  over  the  chest  at  short
intervals.  [££/".]

265.  Cold  feeling  spreading  up  and  down  the  back.  [Hbg,]

Chilliness  or  rather  rigor  all  over  the  body,  with  goose-skin,
accompanied  by  yawning  and  stretching.  [Htn.]

Inward  chilliness  ; she  cannot  warm  herself  (a  sensation  that
when  in  her  usual  health  always  occurred  before  the  appearance  of
the  menses.)  [Gw.]

Heat  all  over.

Inward  and  outward  heat  in  the  face  with  redness.  [Hbg.]

2 jo.  In  the  afternoon,  heat  all  over  the  body  and  febrile  restlessness
with  anxiety  as  if  he  must  die,  which  takes  away  his  breath,  and
great  heat  especially  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  with  white  furred
tongue  and  rough  dry  feeling  on  it.  [Zz.]

(Cold  perspiration  on  the  face,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  with  red
cheeks.)

For  three  successive  evenings  great  restlessness  with  pressive
headache  and  febrile  heat.  [Zz.]

Increased  warmth  in  the  feet.  \_Hbg.~\

After  walking  in  the  open  air  perspiration  broke  out  all  over  the
body  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hbg.]

2 75.  Very  frequent  anxiety  with  desponding  thoughts  and  fears.  [ Fz .]
Very  discontented  and  very  much  disposed  to  weep  over  every-


RUTA.


45i

thing  that  happens  about  him  and  especially  over  what  he  himself
has  done.

Indifference.  [*SV/J]

She  feels  herself  indisposed  for  all  work  and  has  no  pleasure  in
anything  ; she  is  uncomfortable.  [Gxx.]

In  the  afternoon  and  throughout  the  evening  very  dejected  ; his
thoughts  are  melancholy  and  sad  and  he  is  tired  of  life,  \_Fz.~\

280.  All  day  long  very  anxious  as  if  he  had  done  something  bad  ;
when  the  door  was  opened,  he  feared  that  some  one  was  coming  to
take  him  to  prison.  [Zr.]

Sullen,  cross,  when  something  did  not  occur  as  he  wished  (aft.
24  h.).  [TVs.-]

Sullen,  cross,  ill-humoured.  [Gxx.]

Ill-humoured,  indisposed,  irresolute.  [ St/, !]

Angry  and  disposed  to  quarrel  and  crossness.  [Gxx.]

285.  Inclined  to  contradict.  [Gxx.]

All  day  long  cross  and  suspicious  ; he  would  no  longer  trust  his
best  friend,  and  imagined  he  was  always  being  deceived  (aft.  40  h.).
[Zr.]

Good  humour.*  [Zr.]

[From  external  application.)

Erodes  the  skin  and  raises  blisters.  [Lsmnius,  1.  c.]

# Reaction  of  the  organism,  curative  action.


SAMBUCUS.1

{Elder.)

(The  freshly-expressed  juice  of  the  leaves  and  flowers  of  Sambucus  nigra,  mixed
with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.)

Next  to  camomile  no  plant  has  been  more  frequently  misused  as  a
domestic  medicine  than  elder.  It  was,  indeed,  not  considered  to  be  a
true  medicine,  but  was  often  only  called  by  the  contemptuous  name  of
domestic  remedy , just  as  if  its  employment  were  of  little  or  no  con-
sequence.

The  frequent  employment  of  elder  in  common  life  is  indeed  a tacit
proof  of  its  great  utility.  But  its  great  utility  does  not  prove  that  it  is
innocuous  when  given  in  unsuitable  cases.

Common  sense  would  infer  that  as  a medicine,  and  such  it  truly  is,
and  a powerful  one,  it  must  be  injurious  in  unsuitable  cases,  because
every  medicine  that  is  curative  in  appropriate  cases  can  of  itself  cause
morbid  symptoms  in  the  healthy  ; how  much  more  must  it  not  be
productive  of  evil  consequences  in  cases  of  disease  for  which  it  is  not
adapted.

Practitioners  of  the  ordinary  stamp  will  no  doubt  fail  to  perceive
the  injurious  effects  produced  by  elder  in  diseases  in  which  it  has  been
wrongly  administered,  but  only  for  this  reason,  that  they  neither  know
nor  wish  to  know  the  pure  peculiar  ailments  that  this  plant  produces,
per  se  (in  healthy  bodies).  But  because  they  are  ignorant  of  these
ailments  it  does  not  follow  that  they  do  not  occur  and  do  not  aggravate
the  diseases  in  which  elder  is  wrongly  administered.  The  sufferings  of
oppressed  subjects  exist,  though  the  minister  may  avert  his  eyes  from
them,  refuse  to  receive  their  petitions,  or  turn  a deaf  ear  to  their
complaints.

The  ordinary  practitioner,  in  order  to  make  his  quackery  complete,
permits  his  patient  to  drink,  along  with  the  complex  mixture  of  quite
another  sort  he  prescribes  as  medicine,  camomile  or  elder-flower  tea  (it
is  a matter  of  indifference  to  him  which  of  the  two  domestic  remedies).
How  can  he  in  this  way  learn  what  good  or  evil  is  done  by  the  elder  or
camomile  ? Indeed,  he  often  permits  the  healthy  to  drink  daily  as  a
breakfast  drink  infusions  of  elder-flowers  or  camomile,  in  order  to
keep  them  well,  as  it  were  to  make  them  better  than  quite  well.  So
little  does  he  know  the  nature  of  medicines  !

Though  the  symptoms  recorded  below  are  but  few  in  number  (this
plant  is  capable  of  developing  many  more)  they  will  suffice  to  open  the
eyes  of  such  as  are  not  blinded  to  the  truth  by  antiquated  prejudice  and


1 From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.,  1826.


SAMBUCUS.


453


routine,  so  as  to  make  them  see  that  those  ailments  that  occurred  to
healthy  persons  when  drinking  elder-tea  are  real  morbid  conditions  due
to  this  infusion  ; and  if  the  practitioner  be  willing  to  act  according  to
nature  and  his  conscience,  he  will  from  these  symptoms  learn  in  some
degree  where  he  can  make  use  of  elder  for  curative  purposes,  if  only  he
will  employ  it  in  suitable  homoeopathic  cases.

For  homoeopathic  use  we  require  only  a small  part  of  a drop  of  the
above-mentioned  juice  for  a dose  in  order  to  effect  all  that  can  be  done
with  it  in  a curative  way.  On  the  other  hand,  drinking  great  potfuls
of  elder-tea  cannot  do  more  in  suitable  cases  than  remove  the  malady
homoeopathically ; but  these  large  doses  are  injurious  by  their  excessive
production  of  heat  and  immoderate  perspiration,  which  rob  the  patient
of  his  strength,  so  that  he  requires  a longer  time  to  recover.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Franz,  Gross,  Hartmann,
Langhammer,  Wislicenus.

The  only  old-school  authority  he  quotes  is  :

Haller,  A.  von,  Arzneimittellehre , Leip.,  1806.

Sambucus  has  116  symptoms  in  the  1st  edit.,  only  3 more  in  this  2nd  edit.]


SAMBUCUS.


In  the  morning,  on  rising,  dizzy.

Dizziness,  cloudiness  of  the  head  for  some  minutes  (aft.  1 h.).
[Fz.]

In  the  morning  he  feels  very  well ; only  when  he  moves  his  head
he  becomes  giddy  and  dizzy,  with  a tensive  sensation,  as  if  he  had
water  in  the  head  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.]

Tearing  stitch  through  the  left  half  of  the  occiput,  frequently
recurring  and  lasting  long,  and  in  the  intervals  a dull  feeling  there
(aft.  Jh .).  [Htn.]

5.  Tearing  pressive  pain  superiorly  in  the  forehead  which  radiates,  so
to  speak,  into  the  eye  (aft.  2d.).  [Fz.]

On  stooping  pressive  tearing  pain  above  the  left  temple  in  front,
in  the  bone.  [Fz.]

Tearing  in  the  temple,  more  on  the  bone,  rapidly  passing  away
in  single  paroxysms  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.]

Pressing  and  pushing  on  the  whole  head  out  at  all  sides  (aft.  1
h.).  [Htn.]

Pressure  out  at  the  temples  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

IO.  Aching  pain  in  the  forehead  and  a sudden  painful  jerking  through
the  brain  from  one  side  to  the  other  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.]

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  as  from  catarrh  (aft.  1 h.).

[Lr-l

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  as  from  intoxication  (aft.  20
h.).  [ Lr .]

Digging  pain  in  the  crown  (aft.  J h.).  [TVs.]

Itching  on  the  forehead  which  is  removed  by  rubbing  (aft.  ^ h.),


454


SAMBUCUS.


15.  Pupils  at  first  contracted,  afterwards  (aft.  40,  44  h.)  very  dilated.

A warm  feeling  rising  up  into  the  face,  as  when  blushing  (aft.  \\

h.).  [Fz.]

Red  spots  here  and  there  on  the  cheeks  with  burning  feeling  (aft.
1 h.).

A forcing  forwards  and  feeling  of  weight  in  the  tip  of  the  nose,
as  if  it  would  bleed  (aft.  2 d.).  [F%.]

Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose  with  a slight  numb  feeling  in
its  skin  (aft.  34  h.).  [Fz.]

20.  Tension  in  the  left  cheek,  with  gnawing  pressure  on  the  upper
maxillary  bone.  [F%.]

Tensive  pain,  as  from  swelling  in  the  cheek,  with  numbness  of
it  (aft.  1 1 h.).  [Fz.]

Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  inner  ear  with  cramp  pain

in  it  (aft.  4 h.).  [/FT]

Itching  creeping  in  the  ears  and  in  the  throat ; that  in  the  throat
can  be  somewhat  alleviated  by  the  tongue.

A painless  suppurating  pimple  with  red  areola  on  the  left  side  of
the  lower  lip  (aft.  37  h.).  [Zr.]

25.  Pressive  weight  in  the  nape  ; more  exertion  than  usual  is  required
to  move  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).  \TVs .]

Cutting  stitches  deep  in  the  cervical  muscles  of  both  sides,
especially  on  moving  the  neck  (aft.  \ h.).  [/FT]

Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  teeth  of  the  upper  and  lower  jaws  of
the  left  side,  extending  forwards  into  the  incisors  (aft.  2 h.)  ; the  pain
spread  to  the  eye,  with  sensation  in  the  cheek  as  if  it  were  swollen,
which  it  was  not.

Great  dryness  in  the  palate,  without  thirst.  [Fz.]

Thirst,  and  yet  drinks  do  not  taste  pleasant  to  him.

30.  Hiccup  during  and  after  eating.  [Fz.]

Feeling  of  commencing  nausea  in  and  below  the  scrobiculus
cordis.  [Gw.]

Slight  shooting  close  under  the  stomach,  increased  by  external
pressure  (when  sitting)  (aft.  \ h.).  [FF/«.]

Feeling  of  obtuse  pressure  in  the  gastric  region  (aft.  4 h.).

[<?«■]

Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

35.  Pinching  in  the  belly  with  discharge  of  flatus,  as

from  a chill  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.]

The  abdomen  is  painful  inwardly,  as  if  the  bowels  were  bruised.

[*■*•]

In  the  abdomen  pinching  pain  when  he  leans  it  against  a sharp
corner.  [Fz.]

Aching  in  the  abdomen  with  nausea  when  he  leans  it  against
anything  (aft.  io|  h.).  [Fz.]

Stitches  in  the  left  obliquus  muscle,  when  sitting  and  standing
(aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.]

40.  Spasmodic  tearing  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  especially  on  moving
them,  in  the  evening  on  lying  down  (aft.  12  h.).  [/FT]


SAMBUCUS.


455


Fine  pinching  in  the  right  abdominal  muscles  below  the  short
ribs  (aft.  t h.).  [/F>.]

Fine  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  (aft.  i h.).  \JVs^\

A shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  hypogastrium,  above  the  hip,
single  rather  obtuse  needle-pricks,  in  regular  succession  like  pulse
beats,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  sometimes  increasing  and  then  again
decreasing.  [Grr.]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
2,  18  h.).  [Lr.]

45.  Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  copious  discharge  of  urine  (aft.
38  h.).  [Lr.]

He  had  urging  to  urinate  at  night.  [G^r.]

Frequent  discharge  of  dark  yellow  urine,  [ Htn .]

The  urine  passes  in  a thinner  stream  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.]

Itching  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  (aft.  1 h.).  [/Fr.]

After  midnight,  seminal  emission.  [Fz.]


5°-


*
from


much  viscid,  sticky  phlegm  in  the  larynx.


Hoarseness
[Fz.]

Oppression  and  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  below  the
nipple  (aft.  5 h.).  [Fz.]

Oppression  and  aching  below  the  sternum,  and  aching  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis  and  gastric  region,  with  nausea  and  feeling  of  faint-
ness (aft.  5 h.).  [Fz.]

Cutting  pinching  in  the  last  false  ribs,  towards  the  spine  (aft.  9
h.).  [Ws.]

55.  Sharp  intermittent  cutting  anteriorly  at  the  third  false  rib,
especially  when  moving  the  trunk  (aft.  3 h.),  [/F>.]

In  both  sides  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  true  rib,
internally,  a sudden  clutching  together  (aft.  \ h.).  [/Fir.]

Drawing  aching  in  the  sacrum,  which  extends  forward  to  the
muscles  on  the  inside  of  the  ossa  ilii,  when  standing  (aft.  2 h.).
[Fz.]

Cutting  blows  in  the  os  sacrum,  most  severe  when  bending  for-
wards, with  a pain  like  tension  (aft.  9 h.).  [TVs.]

Aching  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine,  not  removed
by  any  movement  and  lasting  a long  time  (aft.  \ h.).
\_Htn.]

60.  When  sitting,  a pulsating  beating  shooting  under  the  right
scapula.  [Fz.]

Cutting  stitches  on  the  scapulae,  when  at  rest  (aft.  \ h.).

[^•] . .

Inside  the  right  scapula  sharp  stitches  from  within  outwards,
most  severe  when  at  rest.  [TVs.]

Fine  pinching  in  the  axilla  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs  I]

Fine  pricks  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm,  on  its  inner  side
(aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

65.  The  upper  arm  feels  to  him  as  if  it  would  break  when  he  supports
himself  on  it  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

Paralytic  heaviness  in  the  elbow-joints  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVs.]


456


SAMBUCUS.


Drawing  pain  in  the  carpal  bones  and  up  the  radius,  when  at  rest.
[Fz.]

Sharp  stitches  on  the  outer  projection  of  the  wrist  (aft.  \ h.).

Cutting  stitches  in  both  wrist-joints,  synchronous  with  the  pulse,
somewhat  relieved  by  moving  them  (aft.  J h.).  \WsI\

70.  Tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  fingers.

Tearing  pain  over  the  hip-joint  round  about,  only  when  walking
(aft.  |h.)-  [Hin.]

When  walking,  cramp-like  drawing  posteriorly  and  superiorly  in
the  thigh  at  the  insertion  of  the  glutseus  maximus.  [Tz.]

A drawing  shooting  sensation  superiorly  through  the  anterior
muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  when  at  rest  (aft.  3^  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Pricking  itching  on  the  inner  side  of  both  thighs,  which  after
rubbing  changes  into  a burning  (aft.  1 h.).  \Ws.~\

75.  The  tendons  of  the  hough  are  very  tense  and  as  if  too  short,  so
that  standing  is  difficult  for  him  (aft.  4-^  M-  [^z*]

Violent  itching  on  the  patella,  with  a rough  and  scrapy  sensation
as  if  an  eruption  would  break  out  (aft.  4J  h.).  [Tz.]

Tired  feeling  in  the  legs  ; with  sensation  as  if  a cold  air  blew  on
them  ; both  only  when  standing  (aft.  J h.).  \_Htn.~\

Sharp,  deeply  penetrating  stitches  on  the  inner  side  of  the  tibia,
somewhat  relieved  by  moving  (aft.  \ h.).  \Ws!\

Feeling  of  dying  away,  gone-to-sleep,  and  coldness  in  the  middle
of  the  right  tibia,  when  standing  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.]

80.  In  the  evening  in  bed,  tearing  pain  in  the  right  outer  ankle  and
up  the  side  of  the  leg  among  the  muscles.  [Tz.]

When  sitting  he  is  suddenly  seized  with  a painful  drawing  on
all  points  of  the  whole  surface  of  the  body  (aft.  3 h.).  [T%.]

The  hands  tremble  when  he  writes.  [Az.]

Great  general  heat  when  walking  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Ws^\

Most  of  the  sufferings  come  on  when  the  body  is  at  rest  and
are  removed  by  movement ; very  few  are  caused  by  movement.
[Fz.]

85.  GEdematous  swelling  (after  external  application) . [A.  v.  Haller,
Ar%neimittellehre , Leipz.,  1806,  p.  349.]

Slumber  with  eyes  and  mouth  half  open  ; when  he  woke  there-
from he  could  not  get  his  breath,  he  had  to  sit  up,  and  then  the
breathing  was  very  quick,  with  wheezing  in  the  chest  as  though  he
should  be  suffocated  ; he  beat  about  him  with  his  hands,  the  head
and  hands  were  swollen  and  blue  ; he  was  hot,  without  thirst ; when
the  attack  came  on  he  wept ; all  this  without  cough,  and  especially
in  the  night  from  12  till  4 o'clock.*

Sleepiness  without  sleep.

Restless  sleep  ; on  sitting  up  in  bed  he  felt  as  if  the  sufferings
went  downwards,  and  he  became  relieved.

He  starts  up  in  affright  from  sleep,  with  anxiety  and  dyspnoea  to
suffocation  and  with  trembling.

90.  Frequent  waking  out  of  sleep  as  from  watchfulness.  \_Lr.~\

* A kind  of  Millar’s  asthma.


SAMBUCUS.


457


Dreams  at  night.

Vivid,  unremembered  dreams.  [Zr.]

Lascivious  dreams  with  seminal  emission.  \_Lr.~]

The  pulse  becomes  slower  and  falls  from  70  to  60  beats  (aft.  ^

h.).  [G«.]

95.  The  pulse  became  slower  by  ten  beats  but  fuller  (aft.  6 h.).

[**■]

Repeated  attacks  of  slight  shivering  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Gn.]

Slight  chill,  during  which  the  face  was  warmer  than  usual  (aft.
1 h.).  [< Gss .]

Rigor  before  going  to  sleep  (aft.  4 h.).

Rigors  all  over  the  body  with  fine  pricking  crawling
here  and  there,  with  very  peculiarly  cold  hands  and
feet ; the  rigors  go  down,  chiefly  over  the  knees,  to  the
feet  (aft.  i h.).  [m.]

100.  A chilly  coldness  runs  over  the  whole  body,  especially  the  hands
and  feet,  which  feel  cold  to  the  touch,  though  he  had  wrapped  up
the  latter  very  warmly  (aft.  \ h.).  \_Htn.'\

The  hands  are  cold  (aft.  1 h.).  [G^.]

Creeping  on  the  fingers  which  are  quite  cold  (aft.  £ h.).
[Ws.]

Icy  cold  feet,  while  the  remainder  of  the  body  is  sufficiently
warm  (aft.  f h.).

Ebullition  of  the  blood,  in  the  evening,  half  an  hour  after  lying
down,  with  a feeling  of  trembling.

105.  Feeling  of  intolerable  dry  heat  on  the  whole  body.

During  the  heat,  dread  of  being  uncovered  ; he  imagines  he
will  catch  cold  or  get  bellyache  if  he  does  so.

Heat  on  the  whole  body,  without  thirst,  soon  after  lying  down
(aft.  2 h.).

When  one  touches  him  one  feels  considerable  heat,  especially  in
the  palms  and  on  the  soles.

Burning  hot  feeling  in  the  face,  with  moderately
warm  body  and  icy  cold  feet,  without  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).
[Htn.]

no.  Pulse  quicker,  some  beats  over  70  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gtt.]

Feeling  of  warmth  on  the  head  and  neck  ; the  face  and  the  rest
of  the  body  also  feel  warmer  than  usual  to  the  touch,  but  without
thirst.  [G.^.]

In  the  afternoon,  frequent  flushes  of  heat,  with  great  heat  in  the
face,  and  perspiration  breaks  out  in  the  face  not  until  half  an  hour
after  this  heat  (aft.  10  h.).  [Z%.]

Only  many  hours  after  the  dry  heat  had  gone  off,  sweat  in  the
face.

Great  perspiration,  without  thirst,  when  lying  awake  from  7
p.  m.  till  1 a.m.  ; the  drops  stood  on  his  face  and  he  also  sweated
all  over  ; but  after  sleeping  he  was  more  hot  than  perspiring,  but
still  without  thirst.

1 15.  A pretty  considerable  sweat,  after  midnight,  but  not  on  the  head.


458


SAMBUCUS.


On  awaking  from  sleep,  he  finds  himself  perspiring  all  over — two
nights.  [Zr.]

Periodical  delirium  : he  saw  frightful  things  on  the  wall.

Great  disposition  to  start ; lie  starts  with  affright  at
things  which  he  is  accustomed  to  have  around  him.
[^•]

Persistent  crossness ; everything  makes  a disagree-
able impression  on  him.  [Lr.]


SARSAPARILLA.1

(The  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  powdered  root  of  Smilax  sarsaparilla.)

Because  this  root  has  some  resemblance  in  external  appearance  to
the  root  of  the  carex  arenaria,  the  teachers  of  materia  medica  recom-
mended the  latter  to  be  used  in  diseases  instead  of  sarsaparilla,  because,
stupidly  imagining  that  the  root  of  the  carex  was  quite  as  good  if  not
better  than  sarsaparilla,  and  the  carex  was  an  indigenous  plant  whereas
the  sarsaparilla  was  a foreign  drug,  it  was  to  be  preferred  from  patriotic
motives.  This  is  a sample  of  the  ordinary  capricious  conduct  of  our
beloved  teachers  of  materia  medica,  and  illustrates  the  honourable  and
rational  mode  in  which  the  medicines  of  the  mdteria  medica  have  come
to  be  vaunted  on  account  of  their  pretended  virtues,  viz.  by  the  arbitrary
decrees  of  writers  on  materia  medica  ! They  reasoned  thus  : because
carex  arenaria  is  indigenous  and  has  a stronger  taste  (which,  however,
differs  toto  ccelo  from  that  of  sarsaparilla)  it  ought  to  have  the  preference,
for  it  must  possess  the  same  powers,  as  is  evident  from  its  similar  long
thin  shape.  Consequently,  the  similar  form  of  the  two  roots  proves
that  their  powers  must  be  identical  ! An  excellent  inference,  alto-
gether worthy  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica ! And  what  pure
peculiar  effects  do  the  one  and  the  other  possess  so  that  we  may  know
in  what  morbid  states  the  one  or  the  other  may  be  employed  with
the  certainty  of  a happy  result  ? Not  a syllable  of  information  on  this
point.

In  the  following  list  I make  a small  commencement  to  reveal  the
peculiar  action  of  the  root  of  sarsaparilla  in  some  symptoms  observed
from  its  administration.  From  this  will  be  seen  in  some  degree,  what
good  homoeopathic  employment  may  be  made  of  it,  and  that  it  is  false
to  say  that  it  is  inert.  It  seems  to  lose  the  greater  part  of  its  medicinal
powers  by  boiling.  Apparently  it  acts  for  more  than  two  weeks  in  a
single  not  too  small  dose.  For  homoeopathic  use  the  undiluted  tincture
in  the  dose  of  one  drop  is  much  too  strong.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Hartmann,  Hermann,  Teuthorn.

The  only  old-school  authority  quoted  is :

Brunner,  in  Ra/m' s Magazin , i,  vi.

The  i st  edit,  has  the  same  number  of  symptoms  as  the  2nd,  viz.  145.]


SARSAPARILLA.

Vertigo  when  sitting  and  walking  ; the  head  tends  to  sink  for-
wards (aft.  \ h.).  [Hrr.~]


1 From  vol.  iv,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


46°


SARSAPARILLA.


Head  as  if  confused  and  stupid  all  the  forenoon  ; in  the  afternoon
cross  and  indisposed  to  do  anything.

A pressive  headache  like  a great  weight  in  the  head  ; it  tends  to
sink  forwards.  [Hrr.]

Aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead.  [Htn.]

5.  An  aching  pain  in  the  forehead  and  occiput  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn.]
Pressive  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  head,  particularly  in  the
temple,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving.  [Htn.]

Slowly  increasing  pressure  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  accom-
panied by  fine  pricking.  [Htn.]

Slowly  increasing  and  slowly  declining  pressive  headache  ; chiefly
in  the  upper  part  of  the  brain.  [Htn.]

Aching  pressing  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Htn.]

IO.  Severe  pressure  in  the  right  temple  with  drawing  pain  from  the
occiput  to  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Htn.\

Acute  fine  pricks  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead  (aft.  ij  h.).
[Htn.]

Shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  \_Htn.\

Violent  pressive-like  tearing  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,
which  on  account  of  their  severity  caused  shivering  (aft.  7 h,).
[Htn.]

Violent  pressive  shooting  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  crown  (aft.
3h .).  [Htn.]

15.  Violent  aching  followed  by  shooting  in  the  left  frontal  protuber-
ance (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

Shooting  pressive  pain  on  the  temporal  hone  in-
creased by  touching.  [Hrr.]

Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  vertex.  [Hrr.]
Pressive-like  tearing  in  the  whole  left  side  of  the
head  (aft.  7 h.).  [Htn.]

Shooting  tearing  on  the  left  parietal  bone,  not  altered  by  touching.
[Hrr.]

20.  Pressive  tearing  on  several  parts  of  the  head,  outwardly,  more
violent  when  moving  and  walking.  [Hrr.]

Shooting  drawing  on  the  right  mastoid  process  extending  to  the
left  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

Shooting  drawing  on  the  right  parietal  and  temporal
bones  (aft.  i h.).  [Hrr.]

Pressive  drawing  on  the  right  temporal  bone  and  cartilage  of  the
ear  at  the  same  time.  [Hrr.]

Dull  shooting  pain  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance.

[Hrr.]

25.  Burning  obtuse  stitches  on  the  left  temporal  bone.  [Hrr.]

The  pains  on  the  head  are  aggravated  by  touching  and  walking.
[Hrr.]

Eye  affection  : in  the  morning  all  objects  hurt  the  eyes  ;

everything  he  looks  at  by  daylight  gives  him  pain  in  the  eyes  ; the
eyelids  are  dry  and  as  if  inflamed  ; in  the  evening  when  reading  by
candlelight  he  has  aching  in  the  eyeball  and  white  paper  has  a red
appearance.


SARSAPARILLA.  461

Constant  burning  in  the  eyelids  sometimes  alternating  with  an
aching  pain  in  them.

As  if  mist  were  before  the  eyes  ; he  has  difficulty  in  reading  (aft.
12  h.).  [Hrr.]

30.  Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  2 h.).  [Trn.]

Ringing  in  the  left  ear.  [Htn.]

Violent  aching  and  compression  in  the  left  ear,  which  seems  to
go  into  the  temple  and  causes  a pressing  there  (aft.  2 h.  [Htn.]
Contractive  sensation  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Htn.]

Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  cartilage  of  the  right  ear  and  external
meatus.  [Hrr.]

35.  Painful  contraction  on  the  right  auricle.

(A  scab  on  the  lobe  of  the  ear,  where  there  was  at  first  a burning
pain  and  afterwards  itching)  (aft.  19  d.).

Obtuse  shooting  pain  on  the  root  of  the  right  mastoid  process,
which  went  off  when  touched.  [Hrr.]

Drawing  (shooting)  tearing  pain  in  the  iiiasticating  muscles  of
the  right  side  which  seemed  to  have  spasmodically  contracted  them-
selves (aft.  4^  h.).  [Htn.]

A fine  pricking  itching  round  the  neck,  on  the  shoulders,  the  face
and  hairy  scalp,  with  feeling  of  increased  warmth  on  those  parts  ;
scratching  allayed  it  at  one  place,  but  it  immediately  recommenced
on  another  part  (aft.  2\  h.).  [ Htn.\

40.  A transient  heat  in  the  face  with  sweat  on  the  forehead,  heat  on
the  chest  and  back,  combined  with  needle-pricks  from  within  out-
wards, most  frequent  and  most  severe  on  the  neck,  [Hrr.]

(An  itching  pimple  on  the  cheek,  with  inflammation  to  a con-
siderable extent  round  about  it,  with  severe  burning ; a large  thick
scab  came  upon  it,  with  tearing  pain  in  the  open  air)  (aft.  F9  d.).
Pustules  on  the  face,  without  sensation,  [Hrr.]

(Epistaxis.)  [Brunner,1  in  Rahns  Magazin , i,  vi,  p.  545.]

Little  pocks  on  the  upper  lip.  [Brunner,  1.  c.]

45.  Pressive  shooting  pain  on  the  lower  and  inner  border
of  the  lower  jaw  on  the  right  side,  hut  only  when
touched  and  when  bending  Sack  the  head  (aft.  33  h.).
[ Hrr .]

Aching  painful  stitches  in  the  thyroid  cartilage,  which,  however,
do  not  interfere  with  swallowing.  [Htn.]

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  cervical  muscles,  aggravated  by
touching  and  moving,  [Hrr^]

Violent,  long-continued,  drawing  stitches  in  the  cervical  muscles  of
the  right  side,  from  the  clavicle  to  the  os  hyoides  (aft.  2§  h.).  [Htn.]
Shooting  tearing  pain  in  the  gum  and  root  of  the  last  lower  right
molar,  [Hrr.]

50.  Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  soft  palate.  [ Hrr. ]

Nauseous,  herbaceous  taste  in  the  mouth.

In  the  morning  a nasty  sour  slimy  taste  like  fermented  dough  in
the  throat.

Bitter  taste  of  bread.  [Trn.]


1 Not  accessible.


462


SARSAPARILLA.


No  appetite  and  no  hunger,  food  has  too  little  taste,  and  when  he
had  eaten,  he  felt  in  his  stomach  as  if  he  had  not  eaten,  just  as  though
the  stomach  were  insensible.

55.  He  felt  loathing  when  he  thought  of  the  food  he  had  eaten.

A nauseous  exhalation  comes  from  below  up  into  the  mouth,
that  causes  nausea  in  the  throat,  with  confusion  of  the  head.

A constant,  incomplete  (not  rising  up  into  the  mouth)  eructation
(immediately).  [Htn^\

Though  he  eats  but  little  it  distends  his  stomach,  just  as  though
he  had  eaten  a great  quantity.

In  the  morning,  great  nausea  even  to  vomiting,  with  increased,
sickly,  herbaceous  taste  in  the  mouth.

60.  After  dinner,  nausea,  and  then  exhaustion.

Aching  pain  just  below  the  ensiform  cartilage  and  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis,  aggravated  by  touching.  [Hrr.]

Severe  pinching  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  \ h.)  ; followed  by  a painful
contraction  of  the  sphincter  muscle  of  the  anus.  [Htn.]

Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  after  a chill  (aft.  1 h.).
[. Hrr .]

Painful  inward  pressure  and  pinching  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen,  on  a small  spot,  aggravated  by  deep  breathing,  unaffected
by  touch  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

65.  Rumbling’  in  the  abdomen,  and  sensation  of  emptiness

in  it  (aft.  4 h.).  [Hrr.']

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  whole  abdomen,  which  causes  a
gurgling  and  rumbling.  [Htn.]

Pinching  in  the  left  iliac  region.  [Htn.]

Call  to  stool,  but  no  evacuation.

First  the  abdominal  intestines  are  drawn  together,  and  though  he
has  a great  call  to  stool  he  is  unable  to  evacuate,  and  he  must  wait
some  time  on  the  night  stool,  with  excessive  pressure  downwards,  as
if  the  bowels  would  be  forced  out ; then  something  is  evacuated  with
a jerk,  but  with  great  smarting  and  cutting  in  the  rectum,  and
immediately  thereafter  another  stool,  as  if  the  rectum  would  be
pressed  out,  so  that  he  can  hardly  sit  for  pain.

70.  The  first  day  hard  stool,  the  second  day  constipation,  the  third
day  evacuation  first  of  hard  then  of  soft  faeces,  [Trn.]

In  the  night  he  is  awakened  by  a sore  pain  at  the  anus,  which
changes  into  a (burning)  itching,  that  lasts  all  day.

He  has  call  to  urinate  and  pressing  and  forcing  in  the  bladder
(strangury),  and  yet  the  urine  will  not  pass  ; when  at  last  the  urine
passes,  it  cuts.

Almost  all  day  he  has  urging  to  make  water,  but  little  urine
passes.

Without  any  particular  thirst,  he  passes  urine  more  frequently
than  usual,  and  each  time  (with  the  exception  of  the  first  day)  daily
in  larger  quantity,*  the  longer  he  took  the  medicine,  and  also  for  48
hours  afterwards.  [Trn.]

* As  will  be  perceived  from  symptoms  72,  73,  the  symptoms  74,  75,  76,  77  seem
to  be  merely  reaction  of  the  organism  (secondary  action).


SARSAPARILLA.  463

75.  More  frequent  and  more  copious  micturition  (aft.  4 and  more  h.).
[Htn.]

Every  morning  he  is  awakened  from  sleep  by  urging  to  urinate,
even  after  24,  48  hours.  [ Trn .]

The  urine  passes  without  being  felt  in  the  urinary  passages,  as
after  taking  a diuretic  drink.  \_Trn.~\

(When  the  urine  has  been  discharged  there  is  pain  like  burning
and  itching  tearing  from  the  glans  to  the  root  of  the  penis.)

Burning  when  urinating,  with  discharge  of  long  flakes.  [Brunner,

!.  c.3

80.  Severe  strangury,  as  in  stone  in  the  bladder,  with  discharge  of
white,  acrid,  opaque  matter  with  mucus.  [Brunner,  1.  c.]

Painful  constriction  of  the  bladder,  with  urging  to  urinate.
[Htn.]

*

(Coryza  and  cough.)1  /

Pressive  drawing  pain  on  the  clavicle,  close  to  the  sternum  (aft.
8 h.).  [Hrr.]

Pressive  pain  on  the  sternum,  increased  by  touching

(aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

85.  Stitches  on  the  centre  of  the  chest,  near  the  sternum,  without
relation  to  inspiration  or  expiration.  [Htn.]

Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  not  affected  by  inspiration
or  expiration.  [Htn.]

Aching  shooting  pain  under  the  last  true  ribs.  [Hrr.]

Palpitation  of  the  heart,  frequently,  by  day.

Small  violent  stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  spine  between  the
scapulae  (aft.  h.).  [Htn.]

90.  Tearing  shooting  pain  worming  down  from  the  scapulae  to  the
lowest  false  rib,  much  more  severe  on  inspiration  ; on  breathing
deeply  the  breath  is  quite  stopped  by  it  (aft.  9 h.).  [Hrr.]

Shooting  pain  near  the  spinal  column,  from  the  right  scapula  to
the  last  false  rib ; much  more  severe  on  inspiration.  [Hrr.]

A pulse-like,  intermittent,  shooting,  transient,  outward  pain  on
the  upper  arm  near  the  shoulder-joint.  [ Trn.]

Obtuse  shooting  pain  on  the  upper  and  anterior  part
of  the  humerus.  [Hrr.]

Paralytic  tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  fore-
arm, near  the  elbow-joint.  [Hrr.]

95.  Paralytic  tearing  on  the  right  forearm,  especially  on
the  elbow-joint,  more  severe  when  at  rest  than  when
moving.  [Hrr.]

Pressive  tearing  pain  on  the  right  ulna,  which  sometimes  extends
to  the  metacarpal  bones.  [Hrr.]

Pressive  shooting  pain  on  the  ulna,  in  the  muscles  of  both  fore-
arms. [Hrr.]

Drawing  shooting  tearing  on  the  muscles  of  the  inner  side  of  the
left  forearm  (aft.  i\  h.).  [Htn.}


1 Though  no  name  is  given  this  belongs  to  the  “ Observations  of  others.”


464


SARSAPARILLA.


Tearing  stitches  over  the  left  wrist-joint,  upwards.  [Htn.]
ioo.  Tearing  pain  over  the  upper  aspect  of  the  left  wrist-joint,  which
goes  on  with  drawing  tearing  stitches  to  the  fourth  finger  (aft.  2 h.).
[Htn.]

Cold  hands,  colder  towards  the  tips  of  the  fingers  (for  eight  days).
[Trn.]

Pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint  as  if  the  hand  were  dislocated,  which
seemed  to  extend  towards  the  fourth  finger.  [Htn.]

(Pain  in  the  left  hand,  without  swelling.)  [Brunner,  1.  c.]

In  the  first  joint  of  the  thumb,  a pain  as  from  innumerable  pins,
afterwards  the  part  was  painful  to  the  touch.

105.  Pressive-like  shooting  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thumb,  when  at
rest  and  when  moving.  [Htn.]

Small  pricks  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  right  little  finger  (aft.
2i  h.).  [Htn.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  fourth  finger  of  the  right
hand  through  the  hones,  increased  hy  moving  the  joints.

[Htn.']

Intermittent  pressive  shooting  pain  on  the  meta-
carpal bones  of  the  right  index  finger  (for  two  days).  [ Hrr .]
When  he  presses  with  the  fingertips  they  are  painful  as  if  gather-
ing, or  as  when  salt  gets  into  a wound.

110.  Pressive  shooting  pain  on  the  right  ischium,  in  every  position.
[Hrr.]

Pressive  though  painless  heaviness  in  the  left  thigh,  when  sitting
and  walking  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Hrr.]

Dull  pressive  pain  on  the  right  thigh,  a little  above  the  hough,
when  sitting  (aft.  3J  h.  [Htn.]

Shooting  pressive  pain  on  the  left  thigh,  not  far  from  the  patella
(aft.  9 h.).  [Hrr.]

Pressive  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh  near  the  knee-
joint.  [Hrr.  ]

1 15.  Pressive  tearing  pain  on  the  thigh  near  the  knee-joint,  upwards
and  outwards  (aft.  13  h.).  [Hrr.]

Single,  acute,  fine  pricks  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  knee.
[Htn.]

Aching  drawing  shooting  pain  over  the  right  knee  (aft.  \ h.).
[Htn.]

Dull  drawing  pain  upwards  over  the  right  tibia  (aft.  3 h.).
[Htn.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  leg  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Htn.]
120.  Pin-pricks  above  the  right  outer  ankle,  forwards.  [Hrr.]

A painful  drawing  changing  into  twitching  on  the  dorsum  of  the
right  foot  (aft.  7^  h.).  [Htn.]

(Pain  on  the  right  tarsus  with  swelling  and  redness  which  was
increased  at  2 p.  m.).  [Brunner,  1.  c.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  big  toe  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Htn.]

Painful  pressive  throbbing  and  throbbing- shooting  on
the  inner  side  of  the  right  sole,  but  afterwards  on  the
whole  sole,  when  sitting  (aft.  2,  6 h.).  [Htn.]


SARSAPARILLA.  465


125.  Itching  on  the  forearm  to  the  hand,  and  on  the  inner  side  of  the
* knee,  above  the  hough,  especially  in  the  evening  in  bed.

(Every  evening  before  going  to  bed,  an  itching,  that  goes  off  in
bed.)

A pricking  itching  all  over  the  body,  in  the  evening  from  5 to  7
o’clock,  and  in  the  morning  on  rising.

When  he  goes  from  the  warm  room  into  the  cold  air,  miliary
papules  appear.

Burning  itching  all  over  the  body,  with  rigor.

130.  (Burning)  itching  on  the  abdomen  and  thighs.

Red  pimples  the  size  of  a pin’s  head,  without  moisture,  on  the
back  and  thighs  ; they  itch  (eroding)  only  in  the  warmth  ; the
itching  went  off  by  scratching,  without  leaving  any  other  sensation,
but  only  for  a short  time  (aft  8 h.).  [Hrr.~\  (

At  night,  waking  up  as  from  a startling  noise.  [7V«.]

Frightful  dreams  during  profound  sleep.

Restless  sleep,  dreams  of  misfortunes  (aft.  72  h.).

135.  A shivering  that  spreads  from  below  upwards,  all  over  the  body*
[Hrr.]

Inward  chilliness  and  drowsiness.


Chilliness  all  over  the  body,  except  the  face  and
chest  which  were  unusually  warm ; the  other  parts  of
the  body  are  cold,  even  when  near  the  stove.  \_Hrr.]

In  the  evening  in  bed,  one  hour  before  falling  asleep,  he  becomes
so  hot,  that  the  blood  boils,  the  heart  palpitates,  and  sweat  stands  on
the  forehead  (for  two  successive  evenings).

At  night  in  bed,  severe  chilliness,  especially  on  the  feet,  which
are  very  cold,  whilst  the  face  and  chest  are  hot.  \_Hrr.']

140.  Distraught  disposition.

Silent  crossness,  [ii/rr.]

Extremely  cross  ; the  flies  on  the  wall  annoy  him.

Sullen  humour,  and  yet  disposed  to  work.  [7r«.]

Sullen  and  yet  disposed  to  work.  [Htn.\

143.  Every  word  can  offend  him.


3©


VOL.  II.


SCILLA.1

(Squill.)

(The  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  bulbous  root  of  S cilia  maritima.)

In  order  to  make  the  solution  of  squill  in  alcohol  the  simplest  and
best  mode  is  to  cut  out  a fresh  piece  of  ioo  grains  weight  from  a very-
fresh  squill-bulb,  to  pound  it  in  a mortar,  gradually  adding  ioo  drops
of  alcohol,  till  it  becomes  a fine  uniform  pap,  then  to  dilute  and
thoroughly  mix  it  with  500  drops  of  alcohol ; to  allow  it  to  stand
for  some  days,  to  decant  the  clear  supernatant  brownish  tincture,  and
to  mix  6 drops  of  this  with  94  drops  of  alcohol  by  means  of  ten  suc-
cussions,  so  as  to  form  the  first  dilution

The  observations  recorded  below  may  be  much  added  to ; but  they
already  suffice  to  enable  us  to  estimate  and  correct  the  employment  that
has  hitherto  been  made  of  this  root;  this  I have  partly  done  in  some
notes.

In  large  doses  the  action  of  squill  lasts  fourteen  days  ; in  small
doses  its  action  is  proportionally  shorter.

Murray  and  Tissot  tell  us  that  camphor  is  an  antidote  to  squill,
and  this  agrees  with  my  own  observations.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow  provers  were,  Becher,  Hartmann,  Hornburg,
Mossdorf,  Stapf,  Teuthorn,  Walther,  Wislicenus.

The  following  old-school  authors  are  cited  :

Bergius,  Mat.  Med.

Caspari,  Diss.  de  Scilla.

Cohausen,  Commerc.  lit.  Norimb .,  vol.  xii,  sect.  ii.

Cranz,  Mat.  Med.,  ii.

Home,  Clinical  Exper.

Lange,  Medicina  dom.,  Brunsvic.

Ludwig,  Adversaria  Med.,  vol.  ii.

Muzell,  Wahrnehm .,  ii.

Schulze,  J.  H.,  et  Schroeter,  Diss,  Asthma  rad.  Scilla  usu  sublatum , Hake,
1735-

Tissot,  Epist.  Med.  Pract.,  edit.  Bald.

Valentini,  Hist.  Simpl.  Reform.,  lib.  ii.

Wagner,  J.  G.,  Observ.  Clin.,  Lub.,  1737.

Weikard,  Vermischte  Sckriften , i.

Zwelfer,  Pharmac.  regia.

The  1st  edit,  has  286  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit,  only  two  more.]


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit,  1825.


SCILLA.


467


SCILLA.

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed,  a vertigo  as  though  he  would
fall  sideways  (aft.  48  h.).

Sick-vertigo  as  if  he  had  been  turning  round  in  a circle  for  a long
time.  [Hbg.]

Weak  in  the  head  and  dreamy  (aft.  6 — 12  h.).

Confusion  of  the  sinciput  and  occiput,  as  after  intoxication,  with
an  aching  in  the  front  and  back  of  the  head.  [Htn.]

5.  Cloudy  dizziness  in  the  head  (aft.  2 m.).

In  the  morning  after  rising  dull  humming  headache.  [Bch.]

In  the  morning  after  waking  heaviness  in  the 'whole  of  the  top  of
the  head.  [Bch.]

An  extraordinary  heaviness  in  the  whole  head,  as  if  he  could  not
hold  it  still,  only  when  sitting.  [Htn.]

(Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  head,  which  does  not  permit  mental
work)  (aft.  12  h.).

10.  Flat  pressure  all  over  the  head  as  from  a weight  (aft.  12  h.).
[Bch.]

Transient  aching  in  the  occiput.  [ Bch.'}

Pressive  pain  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  on  a small  spot.
[ Htn.]

Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Htn.]

A transient  pain  in  the  occiput  spreading  from  the
left  to  the  right  side.  [Htn.]

15.  Single  painful  stitches  combined  with  drawing  in  the  forehead
from  the  left  to  the  right  side.  [Htn.]

A drawing  ending  in  a stitch  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  § h.).
[Htn.]

Contractive  pain  in  both  temples.

Twitching  stitch  in  the  right  temple  to  the  forehead.

Violent  drawing  stitches  in  the  right  temple  ; they  drew  half  of
the  brain  together.

20.  Squeezing  headache  in  the  lateral  parts  of  the  head  (aft.  1 h.).

A drawing  shooting,  long  continued  pain  in  the  occiput,  when
sitting.  [Htn!]

Rather  slow  stitches  into  the  right  side  of  the  fore-
head. [Htn.]

A painful  penetrating  blow  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (aft.

1 h.).  [Htn.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  occiput.  [Htn.]

25.  A digging  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Htn.]

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  top  of  the  head.  [TVs.]

Every  morning  painful  sensitiveness  on  the  top  of  the  head,  and
stupefaction  in  the  interior  of  it.  [TVs.]

A splashing  in  the  head  when  shaking  it.

(Eroding)  itching  on  the  forehead  and  chin,  as  if  an  eruption
would  break  out,  going  off  on  scratching,  but  returning  immediately.
[Bchl


468


SCILLA.


30.  Stitches  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance  down  to  the  nose.
[Htn.]

The  appearance  of  the  countenance  varies,  and  is  sometimes
very  much  dejected,  sometimes  animated,  without  heat  or  chilly
feeling.  [£//'.]

Distorted,  strained  * features,  large  wide  open  eyes  and  staring
look,  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  without  thirst.  [Htn.]

Staring  look.  [Htn.']

The  left  eye  looks  smaller  than  the  right ; the  upper  left  eyelid
is  as  if  swollen,  and  hangs  perceptibly  down,  making  the  eye  seem
smaller.  [£//'.]

35.  The  eyes  appeared  to  swim  in  cool  water  for  some  minutes.

[*/•]

The  pupils  contract  (aft.  5 h.).

Great  contraction  of  the  pupils  (immediately).  [Trn.]

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  \ h.).  [Bch,]

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  I h.).  [Htn.]

40.  Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  2 m.).

(Very  dilated  pupils.)  [££/'.]

Tickling  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye.

Fine  burning  in  the  outer  canthi.  [Hbg.]

Swarming  pricking  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye.  [Bch.]
45.  Itching  in  the  left  eye  (aft.  24  h.).

A contractive  sensation  in  the  right  eye.

Violent  tearing  in  both  eyes  at  once,  as  it  were  behind  the  eye-
balls. [Bch.  ]

Drawing  stitch  from  the  forehead  into  the  right  ear.

(Tearing  pains  in  the  interior  of  both  ears.)

50.  A tearing  pain  behind  the  left  ear.  [Htn.]

Acrid  nasal  mucus.

Sore  feeling  on  the  borders  of  the  nostrils.

Stiffness  in  the  left  cervical  muscles.  [Hbg.]

A pricking  itching  in  the  neck  and  jaws,  as  from  a flea,  which
was  removed  only  for  an  instant  by  scratching,  and  returned  imme-
diately afterwards.  [Htn.]

55.  Daily,  until  the  seventh  day,  increasing  pimples  on  the  neck,
which  are  only  painful  when  rubbed  (aft.  4 d.).  [TVs.]

Drawing  and  squeezing  in  the  cervical  muscles,  also  when  not
moving.  [Hbg.]

The  skin  on  the  neck  is  outwardly  painfully  sensitive  on  being
slightly  rubbed  by  the  neckcloth,  and  exhibits  red,  almost  excoriated,
spots  (aft.  24  h.).  [TVs.]

(Pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands)  (aft.  3 h.,).

Above  the  middle  of  the  upper  lip  an  eruption,  which  exudes
moisture  and  erodes  about  it,  like  an  ulcer,  with  pricking  itching.

60.  Stickiness  and  sliminess  in  the  mouth.  [Stf.]

Vesicles  on  the  tongue.

Stitches  darting  upwards  in  both  upper  canine  teeth,  as  when  a
sharp  cold  air  comes  into  the  teeth,  when  eating  and  drinking  either
cold  or  warm  things.


SCILLA.


469


Far  back  on  the  palate  a rough  and  scrapy  feeling.  [*SV/'.]

Burnt  taste  in  the  palate,  even  when  chewing  food,  which
remained  also  after  eating,  and  is  only  not  felt  when  swallowing  the
food.  [Bch.]

65.  Burning  in  the  palate  and  throat.  [Hbg. ]

Scratching  burning  in  the  palate,  like  heartburn  (aft  5,  6 d.).

im.]

Ravenous  hunger  (aft.  some  h.).  [Trn.]

Insatiability  in  eating  food  which  tastes  well ; his  stomach  felt
full  and  yet  he  had  appetite.  [Htn.]

Complete  anorexia ; he  cannot  eat  anything  and  yet  his  taste  is
unimpaired.

70.  Complete  anorexia.  [J.  H.  Schulze  et  Schroeter,1  Diss.  Asthma
rad.  Scilla  usu  Sublatum , Halae,  1735.]  j

Anorexia,  partly  on  account  of  feeling  of  fulness,  partly  because
the  food  tasted  burnt,  partly  because  some  food  had  no  taste  at  all,
e.g.  meat  and  soup,  whilst  other  food  tasted  disagreeably  sweet,  such
as  bread  and  butter.  [Bch.]

Spoils  the  appetite.  [Bergius,2  Mat.  Med.,  p.  278.]

(Everything  tastes  sour  and  bitter  to  him.)

The  taste  for  food  is  diminished  and  as  if  blunted.  [Ws.]

75.  Weak  appetite.  [WsS]

Tastelessness  of  tobacco  when  smoked.  [Hbg.]

Disagreeable  sweetish  taste  of  all  food,  especially  meat  and  soup
(aft.  48  h.).  [Bch.]

Empty  eructation,  for  several  hours  (aft.  1 h.).

Empty  eructation.  [St/. — Htn.']

80.  Short  eructation.  [5^]

Frequent  eructation  of  a sour  taste,  up  into  the  mouth.

Eructation  of  a disagreeable  taste.  [St/']

After  dinner,  eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  food  and  nausea.

. [Bch.]

Nausea  with  eructation.  [Wth.]

85.  Irritation  to  vomit  in  the  gastric  region.  [Hbg.]

Nausea  at  the  back  of  the  throat  and  almost  constant  flow  of
saliva  into  the  mouth  (aft.  48  h.).  [Bch.]

Constant  alternation  of  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis  and  diarrhoeic  feeling  in  the  hypogastrium ; when  one  is
present  the  other  is  absent,  but  the  diarrhoeic  feeling  is  greatest.

im

Extreme  retching  to  vomit.  [Tissot,3  Epist.  Med.  Bract.,  edit.
Bald.,  p.  207. — Muzell,4 5  JVahrnehm.,  ii,  p.  34. 6]

Excessive  nausea.  [Muzell, — Bergius,  1.  c.— Cohausen,  Com-
mere.  lit.  Norimb.,  vol.  xii,  sect,  ii,  cap.  34.]

90.  Vomiting.  [Muzell, — Cohausen,  1.  c.]


1 Observations,  on  a case  of  anasarca. — This  symptom  not  found.

2 Statements. — “ Spoils  ” is,  literally,  (t  prostrates.”

3 Statements.

4 Observations.

5 Observations  in  patients.


470


SCILLA.


Weakness  of  stomach.1 *  [Tissot,  1.  c.]

Spoils  the  digestive  power  of  the  stomach.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Painful  squeezing  below  the  chest  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

Fine  pricks  on  the  left  side  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  32  h.).

\_m.]

95.  Cardialgia.  [Zwelfer,3  Pharm.  regia.,  p.  146.]

Intermittent  aching  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Bch.]
Pressure  like  a stone  in  the  stomach.3  [Schulze  et  Schroeter,

1.  c.]

Excessive  pain  in  the  stomach,  [Lange,4  Medicina  dom .,
Brunsvic.,  p.  176.]

Inflammation  of  the  bowels.  [Zwelfer,  1.  c.]

100.  Painless  rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Hbg,~\
Pinching  in  the  abdomen.  \Wthd\

Pinching  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  flatus,  which  was
discharged  (aft.  14  h.).  [jf5>«.]

Incarceration  of  flatulence  and  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  with-
out discharge  of  flatus.  [Z?c/l]

Rumbling  and  rattling  in  a jerky  manner  in  the  hypogastrium
above  the  pubic  region,  like  flatus,  which,  however,  is  not  discharged
(more  frequently  when  walking  and  standing  than  when  sitting),
which  went  off  quickly  and  permanently  after  eating.  [<Sy.]

105.  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  fasting.  [Htn.']

Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  increased  by  walking,  and  not
relieved  by  compression  (aft.  28  h.).  [Bek.]

Tearing  through  the  abdomen  below  the  navel  (aft.  4 h.).  [Ws^\
In  the  hypogastrium,  betwixt  the  navel  and  pubes,  an  acute  pain
(as  from  flatulence,  or  from  a purgative,  or  as  if  diarrhoea  were  about
to  come  on)  (aft.  2 h.).  [67/1]

Tension  of  the  abdomen,  which,  however,  felt  soft  to  the  touch.

[*/]

110.  Cutting  pinching  in  the  hypogastrium.  [. HtnJ\

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdominal  muscles
(aft.  24  h.).

Gurgling  bubbling  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen.

Painful  tenderness  of  the  abdomen,  which  is  considerably  distended
though  soft.  [5//;]

Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  14  h.),  which  recurred  the
following  day  at  the  same  hour,  and  was  relieved  and  removed  by
discharge  of  flatus.

1 15.  Every  time  and  however  often  he  touched  the  abdomen  a loud
discharge  of  flatus  took  place.  [67/1]

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  24  h.).  [Bch.'\


1 Literally,  “ enervates  the  forces  of  the  stomach.”

3 Statements.

3 Not  found.

4 Effects  of  a spoonful  of  powdered  squill.


SCILLA.


47i


Discharge  of  flatus  broken  off  short.  [aS*//*.]

Frequent  discharge  of  very  foetid  flatus  (aft.  1 h.).  [Trn.]
Incessant  discharge  of  very  noisy,  foetid,  strong  flatus,  whereby
the  abdomen  is  relieved,  but  only  momentarily.  [l*Sy.]

120.  Hard,  scanty  stool,  in  the  evening  (aft.  12  h.).  [Bch.]

Very  hard,  but  daily  stool,  [Ws.]

Pappy  stool,  without  pain  in  the  belly.  [Bch. ]

Diarrhoeic  evacuation  of  a quantity  of  brown,  quite  thin,  slimy,
very  foetid  excrement,  without  pain  or  tenesmus,  with  spluttering
flatus,  and  mixed  with  thread-worms  and  a quantity  of  shapeless
white  shreds.  [£//'.]

Diarrhoea  from  2 till  7 a.m.,  at  last  quite  watery,  almost  without
flatus.  [ St/, !]  ,

125.  Constipation  for  several  days.  [5//:]

Itching  at  the  anus.

Shooting  at  the  anus  when  walking  (aft.  8 d.).  \JVsi\

Stool  coloured  with  blood.  [Tissot,  1.  c.]

Great  urging  to  urinate  and  stool ; on  first  making  water  a thin
stool  without  pain  in  the  belly  (aft.  10  m.).  [Htn.]

130.  On  the  second  call  to  make  water  there  occurred  simultaneously
loose  stool  without  pain  in  the  belly.  [Htn.]

Constant  but  ineffectual  urging  to  urinate  (aft.  \ h.).  [Wth.]
Less  urine  than  usual  seems  to  pass  (aft.  48  h).  [TVs.]

Scanty  discharge  of  watery  urine  (aft.  ^ h.).  [Wth.]

Violent  urging  to  urinate ; he  passed  an  uncommonly  large
quantity  of  urine,  which  had  the  appearance  of  water  (aft.  7 h.).
[Bch.]

135.  On  a slight  call  to  urinate,  reddish  urine  (of  the  usual  quantity)
with  reddish  sediment,  for  three  days  (aft.  20  h.).  [Bch.]

He  cannot  retain  his  urine  because  the  quantity  is  so
great ; it  would  have  escaped  had  he  not  been  quick  to  discharge  it
' (aft.  J h.) — a state  that  lasted  twelve  hours.  [Htn.]

Great  urging  to  pass  very  little  water  (aft.  40  h.).

Great  urging  to  urinate*  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn.]

Micturition  not  more  frequent,  but  less  urine  is  passed  (for  three
days).  '

140.  Rare  call  to  urinate  and  scantier  secretion  of  urine  (aft.  20  h.).
Rarer  micturition  than  ordinary,  and  scantier  secretion  of  urine
which  is  not  dark  coloured  (aft.  24  h.).  [Htn.]

(Urine  hot,  and  stool  with  undigested  portions  and  very  foetid.)
Bloody  urine.  [Tissot,  1.  c., — Caspari,1  Diss.  de  S cilia , p.  1 1 .]
Brownish  yellow,  transparent  urine,  which  is  secreted  in  small
quantity,  and  after  standing  forms  flakesf  (the  first  8 h.).  [Trn.]

* The  prover  was  in  the  habit  of  passing  a moderate  quantity  of  urine,  only  twice
a day.

f Seemed  to  be  a kind  of  curative  action,  as  the  prover  had  previously  too  copious
a secretion  and  discharge  of  urine.


Statements.


4 73


SCILLA.


145.  Frequent  micturition,*  without  increase  of  the  urine  (in  the
first  hours).

Frequent  discharge  of  urine  as  limpid  as  water;  he  has  a quick
call  to  urinate  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Stf.~\

He  woke  up  at  night  to  urinate  (aft.  18  h.).

After  urinating  strangury,  there  is  no  water  in  the  bladder  (aft.  5
h.,  for  3 d.).

Shooting  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  and  somewhat  farther  back
(aft.  2j  h.).  \m.\

150.  Shooting  pain  in  the  urethra  when  pressing  at  stool  (aft.  8 d.).

L^.]  .

Anxious  obtuse  stitches  in  the  glans  penis.

Compressive  pain  in  the  testicles.

Metrorrhagia.  [J.  G.  Wagner,1  Observ.  Clin .,  Lub.,  1737.]

*

(She  sneezes  several  times  at  night.)

155.  Violent  persistent  sneezing  and  fluent  coryza  (immediately).
{Mss.—Ws^

(Flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose.)

Stuffed  coryza.

Smarting  coryza  with  frequent  sneezing  (aft.  48  h.).  [ Bch.~\


# The  primary  action  of  squill  on  the  urinary  passages  is  at  first  a great  urging
to  urinate,  14.5,  with  copious  discharge  of  urine,  136,  especially  of  colourless  urine,
134,  146  ; at  least,  when  it  is  not  copious,  it  is  watery,  141.

After  the  expiry  of  this  primary  and  positive  action  of  squill,  there  occurs  after
several  hours  the  reaction  (secondary  action)  of  the  organism,  as  the  opposite  of  the
primary  medicinal  action,  namely,  slight  call  to  urinate,  scanty  secretion  of  the  urine
and  rarer  discharge  of  it,  139,  140,  sometimes  of  the  usual  colour,  141,  but  more
frequently  of  darker  colour,  135,  144,  and  also  with  great  urging  to  pass  it,  but  only
scanty,  137,  or  even  with  no  evacuation  of  urine,  148.

Now,  as  hitherto  all  this  was  not  known,  not  ascertained,  the  very  way  to  do  so
not  being  known,  it  was  impossible  that  any  true  cures  of  dropsical  diseases  could  be
made  with  squill  during  all  those  thousands  of  years  (very  long  before  the  Greeks,
this  drug  was  considered  in  Egypt  as  the  only  remedy  for  these  diseases),  hence
most  of  those  so  affected  were  all  the  more  certainly  hurried  to  their  graves  by  its
employment.  There  was  always  great  rejoicing  because  at  first  it  brought  away  so
much  urine,  and  a speedy  cure  was  joyfully  anticipated  ; but  it  was  not  known
that  this  was  only  the  primary  action  of  squill,  and  in  such  cases  the  opposite  of  the
actual  morbid  state,  consequently  only  palliative.  With  sorrow  it  was  perceived
that  notwithstanding  an  increase  of  the  doses,  nothing  but  the  contrary  effect
(secondary  action)  could  be  maintained,  to  wit,  a scanty  quantity  of  dark  urine,
becoming  ever  rarer  and  rarer.

Only  the  few  dropsical  diseases  (for  they  are  extremely  numerous,  and  the  dropsy
is  only  a single  symptom  of  them  ; hence  the  general  term  dropsy , which  should
include  them  all,  as  though  they  are  but  one  unvarying  disease,  is  an  unpardonable
falsehood  of  the  pathologists),  only  those  few  dropsical  affections  whose  symptoms
can  be  found  in  tolerable  similarity  among  the  positive  effects  of  squill,  whose
symptoms  relating  to  the  urinary  discharge  particularly  correspond  to  those  primary
symptoms  of  squill  recorded  above  (and  such  cases  are  rare),  can  be  really  and  per-
manently cured  by  squill.  Those  kinds  of  wasting  diseases  (diabetes)  will  be  much
more  likely  to  find  an  efficacious,  specific  remedy  in  squill,  which  in  its  primary
action  causes  increased  secretion  of  uiine,  the  more  so  as  it  is  homoeopathically  suit-
able in  respect  to  the  similarity  of  the  other  symptoms  of  these  maladies.


1 Observation. — This  symptom  not  found.


SCILLA,


473

In  the  morning  outbreak  of  severe,  fluent  coryza  (aft.  6 d.).

\Ws^

160.  Very  violent  coryza;  the  eyes  have  a dim  dull  look  and  fill  with
water  (in  the  forenoon)  (aft.  7 d.).  \JVs7[

Coryza  with  ulcerated  nostrils.

Difficult,  slower  inspiration  and  expiration.  [. Bch .]

Tightness  of  the  chest  with  frequent,  quicker  breathing  and
anxiety  as  long  as  the  tightness  of  chest  lasts.  [ Bch .]

Tightness  of,  and  shooting  in,  the  chest,  which  is  most  trouble-
some on  inspiration.  \JVth^\

165.  Oppression  over  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow.  \TVth.']

A tickle  inwardly  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid  cartilage  that
excited  coughing,  whereby,  however,  the  tickle  was  increased.

Frequent  irritation  to  dry,  short  cough  of  four  or  five  impulses,
caused  by  a tickle  under  the  thyroid  cartilage.

Slight  irritation  to  cough  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,  in  the  upper
part  of  the  trachea ; he  coughs  several  times  (aft.  1 h.).  [£//;]

He  is  forced  to  breathe  deeply,  and  this  deep  breathing  excites  him
to  cough.

170.  Dry  violent  cough  which  causes  pain  like  a shock  in  the  abdomen
and  dryness  of  the  throat.

Cough  with  diminished  expectoration  (aft.  9 d.)  ; at  every  cough
impulse  painful  pressure  outwards  in  the  thoracic  cavity  and  painful
contraction  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  \TVs7\

A cough,  at  first  accompanied  by  expectoration.*

In  the  morning  cough  with  copious  mucous  expectoration  (aft.
7 d.  [m.]

A continual  expectoration  of  mucus  (aft.  2 h.) .

175.  When  coughing  and  when  walking  pain  on  the  side  of  the
abdomen,  as  if  an  intestine  would  burst  out.

Cough  so  as  to  cause  retching.

Whilst  coughing,  whilst  talking,  and  from  the  slightest  move-
ment, an  intolerable  feeling  of  heat  without  outwardly  perceptible  heat
(aft.  20  h.).

(Before  the  cough  rattling  which  went  away  after  the  cough.)
Peripneumonia.  + [Zwelfer,  1.  c.]

* All  my  observations  show  that  squill  excites  the  mucous  glands  of  the  trachea
and  bronchial  tubes,  so  that  the  phlegm,  rendered  more  movable  and  thinner,  can
be  expelled  by  coughing,  only  in  its  primary  action.  (See  172,  173,  174,  178,  180.)
Hence  its  employment  as  a so-called  expectorant  can  be  only  palliative,  that  is  to  say,
its  continued  employment  must  certainly  increase  the  malady  if  the  fulness  of  the
chest  from  tough  adherent  mucus  was  a chronic  complaint,  for  after  this  primary
expectorant  action  the  organism  produces  the  opposite  state  as  its  secondary  action ;
the  mucus  of  the  bronchial  glands  becomes  ever  tougher,  and  the  cough  drier.  (See

166,  167,  170,  171.)  This  root  will  therefore  rather  prove  curative  in  too  copious
and  too  frequent  mucous  secretion  on  the  chest,  as  was  formerly  insisted  on  by
Weikard.

f If  we  consult  the  observations  of  practitioners  of  all  ages,  we  shall  occasionally
find  that  the  best  of  them — the  empirical  discovery  being  confirmed  by  experience
— made  use  of  squill  with  excellent  results  in  the  stitches  in  the  side  accompanying  some
inflammation  of  the  thoracic  organs,  though  they  knew  very  well  the  great  acridity
of  this  root  on  the  tongue  and  in  the  internal  parts,  when  administered  in  large  doses.


474


SCILLA.


180.  In  the  morning,  suddenly  a violent  cough  with  stitches  in  the
side  at  every  cough,  with  expectoration  (aft.  6 d.) ; the  preceding
days  there  was  hardly  a trace  of  cough.  [Ws.~\

Stitches  on  the  left  and  right  true  ribs,  simultaneously.  [ Htn .]

A kind  of  stitch  in  the  side.1  [Wagner,  1.  c.]

During  expiration  pressive  broad  stitches  under  the  last  rib  on
both  sides  (for  two  days).

Obtuse,  broad  stitches  in  the  lowest  left  rib,  in  the  morning  in
bed,  causing  him  to  awake.

185.  In  the  left  side,  just  below  the  last  rib,  a constrictive  stitch,
excited  by  quick  walking.  [ Trn .]

Shooting  in  the  left  side  (aft.  £ h.).  [Hbg.~\

Stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  ensiform  cartilage,  almost  like  a
continued  stitch.  [Htn.]

On  the  left  and  right  side  of  the  chest  not  far  from  the  sternum,
twitching  stitches  during  inspiration  (aft.  24  h.).

Recurring  stitch  in  the  side.  \_HbgJ]

190.  A compressive  pain  ending  in  a stitch,  in  the  right  side  of  the
chest.

(In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  arm,  an  aching,  and
when  he  stoops,  a throbbing  pain  ; when  touched,  however,  the  pain
was  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  there.)

A drawing  pain  in  the  chest  (aft.  8 — 12  h.).

Drawing  stitch  from  the  last  true  rib  to  the  shoulder  (aft.  46  h.).

Sharp  stitches  at  the  end  of  the  clavicle,  towards  the  shoulder,
during  inspiration  and  expiration.

195.  Extremely  violent  shooting  downwards  near  the  sternum,  so  that
he  can  only  draw  his  breath  with  difficulty.  \_Hbg.]

A pressure  (tension  ?)  on  both  sides  from  the  axillae  to  the  hypo-
gastrium,  chiefly  on  expanding  the  thoracic  cavity  by  inspiration  (aft.
2 h.).  [JVs.-]

Stiffness  in  the  nape  (aft  12  h.).

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  lateral  cervical  muscles.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  from  one  hip  to  the  other  over
across  the  back  (aft.  6 d.).  \_JVs.']

It  was  inevitable  that  they  should  find  it  so  useful  as  it  proved  in  their  hands,  on
account  of  the  many  homoeopathic  primary  effects  of  this  root  on  the  chest  of  healthy
persons  (see  164,  179 — 190,  194, 195).  They  did  vastly  more  good  than  the  ordinary
practitioners,  who,  as  has  again  become  the  fashion,  acting  on  theoretical  views,  only
employ  so-called  antiphlogistics  and  merciless  bleedings  (venesections),  and  thereby
do  an  immensity  of  harm.  Yet  the  former  would  have  been  still  more  successful  in
curing  acute  pleurisy  had  they  made  a more  accurate  homoeopathic  selection  of  the
cases  for  which  squill  is  suitable  in  accordance  with  its  now  ascertained  symptoms,
and  if  they  had  preserved  their  patients  from  all  heterogeneous  influences,  and
refrained  from  mixing  with  this  medicine  any  other  drugs,  and  had  understood  how
to  give  the  squill  in  the  most  appropriate  cases,  not  merely  alone,  but  also  in  a suffi-
ciently small  dose.  In  most  cases  I have  found  the  most  serviceable  dose  to  be  a
small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  quintillion-fold  dilution  of  squill,  indeed,  often  only
of  the  sextillion-fold,  or  a still  smaller  quantity.

1 From  squill  mixed  with  vincaetoxicum.  The  patient  (a  dropsical  woman)  had
first  “ muscular  rheumatism  ” of  left  arm  and  neck  (to  which  she  was  subject),  and
then,  on  the  same  side,  a “ pleuritis  sicca  exquisitissima.”  She  died  soon  after.


SCILLA.


475


of  a dollar  made  up  of
confluent,  with  tickling
after  scratching  changed


200.  Painless  drawing  on  the  left  scapula.  [ Bch .]

Painful  twitching  over  the  left  scapula  (aft.  8 d.).  [}Vs.\

Under  the  scapulae,  in  the  back  and  left  upper  arm  a gurgling
like  bubbling  up.

Eruption  of  very  red  pimples,  their  apices  filled  with  a little  pus,
on  the  back,  with  pricking  itching  and  after  scratching  burning
pricking  itching  ; the  following  day  each  pimple  was  covered  with
a small  scab.  [Htn.]

Betwixt  the  scapulae  a spot  the  size
papules  or  pimples  thickly  set  but  not
(crawling)  itching,  as  from  a flea,  which

into  a burning  pricking  itching,  but  after  some  time  again  became  a
crawling  itching.  [Htn.]

205.  On  the  chest,  under  the  right  arm  a crawling  itching  which  is
removed  for  a short  time  only  by  scratching.  [Htn.]

Perspiration  in  the  axilla.

Convulsive  twitching  of  the  left  arm  (when  standing).

Painless  twitching  and  palpitation  in  the  muscles  of  the  upper
arm.  [Hbg.]

Slow  needle-prick  along  the  skin  from  the  shoulder  to  the  middle
of  the  upper  arm.  [Htn.]

210.  During  the  day  the  hands  often  go  to  sleep  when  supporting  the
head,  and  the  lower  limbs  when  the  legs  are  crossed.  [Bch.]

In  the  middle  of  the  left  metacarpus  an  occasional  pain  like  a
needle-prick.  [Htn.]

Twitching  pain  across  in  the  wrist-joints.  [TVth.]

(When  handling  squill  in  its  fresh  state  it  causes  blisters  on
the  hands.  [Valentini,  Hist.  Simpl.  Reform .,  lib.  ii,  sect.  2,
cap.  34-]

A stitch-like  drawing  pain  from  the  left  wrist  into  the  fingers.
[Htn.]

21  <5.  Acute  shooting;  in  both  the  wrist- joints,  even  when  not  moving;
(aft.  3 d.).  [TVs.]

Small  red  spots  on  the  hands,  feet,  chest  and  whole  body,  which
develop  into  scabious  pustules,  like  the  scabies  humida  that  appears  on
the  hands,  betwixt  the  fingers,  on  the  feet  and  the  whole  body,  with
burning  itching  (aft.  some  d.).1  [Muzell,  1.  c.]

Pricking  in  both  thighs  as  with  needles.  [Hbg.-\

Convulsive  twitching  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  when  sitting  (aft.

24  h-)-

Drawing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  both  thighs  (aft.  7 h.).  [Bch.]

220.  Bruised  feeling  of  the  thighs.

Weariness  of  the  thighs.

A gurgling  extending  in  a line  from  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh
to  the  toes.

In  the  left  hough  a contractive  pain,  which  compelled  him  to
bend  the  knee,  when  standing.


1 The  word  here  rendered  “ body  ” is  in  the  original  “ leibe,”  which  was  most
probably  meant  for  " abdomen.”


476


SCILLA.


Intermittent  drawing  pain  on  the  thighs,  when  sitting  and
walking.  \_Bch.']

22 5»  Drawing  pain  in  the  leg.

Burning  pain  on  the  ball  of  the  right  foot,  as  after  frost-bite.
Sweat  on  the  toes.

Burning  and  itching  in  the  skin.1  [Zwelfer,  1.  c,]

Excoriation  betwixt  the  limbs.

230.  Cold  mortification.2  [Zwelfer,  1.  c.]

Causes  scirrhus.3  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Scirrhus  accompanied  by  pain  and  inflammation,  causes  a fear  that
cancer  may  be  produced  by  squill.  [Cranz,4  Mater . Medic . ii,  p.

830

Pains  all  over  the  body.  [Tissot,  1.  c.]

Restlessness  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  he  must  move
them  incessantly,  in  order  to  get  relief  (aft.  2\  h.).  \_Htn.~\

235.  Severe  pains  in  the  limbs.  [Weikard,5  Vermischte  Schriften , i,

P.  245.]

Constant,  dull,  rheumatic  pains  on  the  whole  body,  which  are
alleviated  when  at  rest  and  increased  by  movement  (aft.  6 — 24  h.).

A shooting  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another  part  of  the
body.  \JVs?1

It  often  causes  twitchings  in  nervous  debility.  [Cranz,  1.  c.]
Spasmodic  movements.6  [Weikard, — Zwelfer,  1.  c.]

240.  Convulsions.7  [Tissot, — Lange,  1.  c.]

Weariness  (aft.  6 h.).

Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  whole  body,  as  from  exhaustion  (aft.
8—12  h.).

Exhaustion  of  the  whole  body,  very  noticeable  during  along  walk.

Frequent  yawning,  without  drowsiness  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Htn.~\

245 . Stretching  or  extension  of  the  upper  extremities,  with
yawning,  without  drowsiness  (aft.  i|  h.).  [ Htn .]

He  feels  more  exhausted  by  the  sleepless  night  than  by  the
diarrhoea,  is  dazed  in  the  head  and  yet  in  tolerable  good  spirits  and
cheerful.  [iST/i]

Sleeplessness  without  obvious  cause.

Sleepiness  in  the  evening  some  hours  before  bedtime.  [Htnd\

Sleep  with  funny  dreams.  \Trn.~\

250.  After  dinner  exhaustion  and  sleepiness.  [ Htn,']

Bestless  sleep.  [ Hbg .]

Frequent  waking  from  sleep  and  turning  about  in  bed.  [Rr/z.]
Tossing  about  in  bed.  \_HbgI\


1 From  handling  squill.

2 Not  found  ; unless  it  represents  the  ((  viscerum  lethales  inflammationes  ” already
seen  in  S.  99.

3 By  “ scirrhus  ” any  hard  swelling  is  meant.

4 Observations. — The  “ krebs  ” in  the  original  is  “ ulceration,”  not  (l  cancer.”

5 Observations. — This  symptom  occurred  in  a sensitive  nervous  woman.

6 Not  found  in  Zwelfer.

7 “ In  nervous  subjects,”  Tissot  says.


SCILLA.


477

Dream,  that  his  body  is  swollen  to  an  enormous  size,  so  vivid
that  on  awaking  he  felt  himself,  to  see  if  it  were  true.  [ Bch .]

255.  After  midnight  (1  o’clock)  he  wakes  up  with  inclination  to  vomit
and  anxiety  and  draws  a deep  breath  several  times.  [5//'.]

In  the  morning  after  awaking  and  getting  up,  exhaustion,
especially  in  the  thighs  in  the  region  of  the  hip.  [Bch.']

After  a quiet  sleep  without  dreams,  in  the  morning  a dazed
feeling  and  heaviness  in  the  head  (aft.  72  h.).  [ Bch .]

Very  small  hard  pulse,  like  a tense  string.  [6V/1]

When  vomiting  the  pulse  falls  td  40  beats.  [Home,1  Clinical
Exper.,  p.  394.]

260.  Shivering  all  over  the  body  with  some  coldness  of  the  skin  (aft.
6 h.).  [TVs.]

When  walking  even  in  the  heated  room,  he  feels  cold  and  chilly
in  the  back  and  arms,  not  when  sitting.  [St/.]

Icy  cold  hands  in  the  warm  room  (aft.  1^  h.).  [Htn.]

Icy  cold  hands  and  feet,  the  rest  of  the  body  being  warm  (aft.
ih.).  [Htn.]

Icy  cold  feet.  [Htn.] .

265.  Thirst  during  the  evening  chill,  without  inward  or  outward
heat.

At  night  inward  chill,  with  outward  heat,  without  thirst  (aft.
6 d.).  [TVs.]

More  inward  than  outward  heat  in  the  face,  without  thirst,
which  is  increased  by  moving  the  body,  with  chilliness  of  the  rest
of  the  body  on  the  slightest  exposure.

Heat  and  redness  especially  in  the  face  on  the  slightest  movement
and  when  talking  (aft.  10  h.).

(Dry  outward  and  inward  heat,  without  thirst  for  three  hours
(aft.  | h.),  thereafter  only  inward  dry  heat,  without  thirst.)

270.  Heat  in  the  head  with  cold  feet.

Every  afternoon  heat  of  the  body,  without  thirst,  with  cold  feet.
(In  the  afternoon)  great  feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  body,  but
without  outward  redness  and  without  thirst,  for  some  hours  (aft.
6 d.).  [TVs.]

In  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down,  outward  heat  with
inward  chill  (aft.  7 d.).  [TVs.]

Chilliness  and  soon  afterwards  heat  all  over  the  body.  [TVth.]

275.  Heat  all  over  the  body,  as  from  heating  drinks,  with  icy  cold
feet,  without  shivering,  thirst  or  sweat.  [Htn.]

Feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  body  without  thirst  or  sweat  (aft*
2 h.).  [Bch.]

In  the  morning  laziness,  with  repugnance  to  all  kinds  of  head
work.  [Hbg.]

Crossness  at  everything,  and  disinclination  to  mental  activity.

Ws.]

Crossness  at  all  occupations  ; he  was  cold  towards  others  and  did
not  answer.  [Bch.]

280.  Vexation  about  trifles.


1 Observations*


478


SCILLA.


Disinclined  to  think,  with  dejection  (aft.  i h.).  \_TVth.]
Disinclination  for  writing  and  thinking.  [Bch.]

Anxiety  of  disposition,  fear  of  death.  [£//'.]

Anxiety.  [Ludwig,1  Adversaria  Med .,  vol.  ii,  p.  713 — Cohausen,

1.  c.]

285.  Great  anxiety.  [Tissot,  1.  c.]

Whining.2  [Lange,  1.  c.]

Cheerful,  happy  humour.^  [ Trn.~\

Courage,  sedateness.

# Probably  curative  action.


1 Observation.

2 On  account  of  pain  of  S.  98.


SPIGELIA.1

\

(The  tincture  is  made  by  macerating  for  a week,  without  heat  and  with  a daily
shaking,  fifty  grains  of  the  powder  of  the  whole  plant  of  Spigelia  anthelmia  in  500
drops  of  alcohol.)

This  annual  plant,  which  was  first  used  in  South  America  as  a
domestic  remedy  for  round  worms,  became  known  about  eighty  years
ago  to  our  practitioners,  who,  however,  since  that  time  have  made  no
other  employment  of  it  than  that  which  they  were  originally  taught  by
the  simple  negroes  of  the  Antilles,  viz.  solely  for  the  expulsion  of
round  worms.

It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  accumulation  of  round
worms  in  the  intestines  is  never  a peculiar  independent  disease,  but  is
merely  a symptom  of  some  other  fundamental  disease  of  man,  and
unless  it  is  cured,  the  round  worms,  though  many  of  them  may  be
expelled,  always  collect  again  in  the  bowels.  It  would,  therefore,
be  foolish  to  employ  a very  powerful  medicine  like  spigelia  merely
in  order  to  expel  these  worms,  if  this  plant  did  not  at  the  same  time
remove  the  disease  on  which  they  depend.  This,  however,  it  is  capable
of  doing,  as  many  observations  seem  to  prove,  in  which  the  patient  has
recovered  without  the  expulsion  of  any  worms  whatever.

And  yet  it  has  been  persistently  asserted,  with  a strange  want  of
perception,  that  spigelia  can  only  be  regarded  and  employed  as  a ver-
mifuge. But  if  no  more  important  use  has  been  made  of  this  very
remarkable  medicine  (and  the  same  object  may  often  be  easily  accom-
plished by  cina  seed),  this  would  be  to  act  as  injudiciously  as  if  some
trivial  operation  should  be  performed  with  a costly  tool.  The  extra-
ordinary and  manifold  powers  of  this  plant  indicate  a much  higher
destiny  than  to  remove  a few  worms  from  the  bowels,  as  we  are
taught  by  the  following  manifestations  and  symptoms  of  medicinal
disease.

If  we  consider  the  inconsiderateness  of  physicians  of  the  ordinary
stamp  in  administering  this  plant  to  patients  in  doses  of  60  and  70
grains  of  the  powder,  we  must  acknowledge  that  medicines  could  not
well  have  come  into  more  inappropriate  and  improper  hands  than  those
of  ordinary  physicians,  who  were  content  to  employ  medicines,  those
inestimable  and  useful  gifts  of  God,  only  for  those  purposes  for  which
common  folk  imagined  them  to  be  adapted,  and  who  gave  them  in
doses  dangerous  to  life  which  it  pleased  them  to  determine  at  their
desks,  quite  unconcerned  as  to  what  was  the  inward  peculiar  medicinal
quality  of  each  medicinal  substance  in  particular,  that  is  to  say,  uncon-


From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.,  1826.


480


SPIGELIA.


cerned  about  the  true  dynamic  relation  of  each  of  them  to  the  human
health,  as  it  is  only  clearly  revealed  in  pure  experiments  on  healthy
persons.

This  plant  has  this  peculiarity,  that  the  primary  action  of  a single
unrepeated  dose  usually  increases  somewhat  daily  during  the  first  seven
to  ten  days,  so  that  pure  experiments  with  it  on  healthy  persons  should
only  be  conducted  with  caution,  seeing  that  60,  80  to  100  drops  of  the
tincture  produce  violent  effects  even  in  otherwise  robust,  healthy
persons.

For  the  homoeopathic  employment  the  decillion-fold  dilution,  each
diluting  phial  of  100  drops  being  shaken  not  oftener  than  twice,  is
almost  too  strong,  even  when  but  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  it  is
given  for  a dose.

Spigelia,  even  in  a small  dose,  acts  for  more  than  four  weeks,  and
on  account  of  this  powerful  and  long-lasting  action  it  ought  never  to  be
given  as  a remedy,  except  after  careful  selection  ; in  which  the  pecu-
liarly marked  characteristic  symptoms  of  the  case  of  disease  are  found
in  great  similarity  among  those  of  spigelia.  When  this  is  so  it  is
capable  of  removing  very  severe  diseases.

The  excessive  action  of  this  important  drug  may  be  gradually
removed  by  frequent  and  sufficiently  long-repeated  small  doses  of
camphor.

[Hahnemann  was  aided  by  Becher,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Hartmann,
Herrmann,  Hornburg,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  Meyer,  Stapf,  Walther,
Wislicenus.

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  cited  :

Bergius,  Mat.  Med.

Browne,  Patrick,  Gentleman's  Magazine , 1751,  and  Natural  History  of  Jamaica .

Chalmers,  On  the  Weather  and  Diseases  of  South  Carolina , Lond.,  1776,  vol,  i.

Linning,  J.,  in  Neue  Edinb.  Vers.,  pt.  i.

Martin,  in  Konigl.  Vetensk.  Ak.  Handlingar , 1771.

Wright,  W.,  in  Samml.  br.  Abh.fpr.  Aerzte,  xiv,  iii.

The  1st  edit,  has  638  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit.  672,  the  additional  symptoms
being  contributed  by  Hahnemann  himself.]


SPIGELIA.

Vertigo.  [J.  Linning,^  in  Neue  Edinb.  Vers .,  pt.  i.1]

Vertigo:  when  he  stands  for  a few  minutes  he  is  in  danger  of
falling.

V ertigo : when  he  looks  down  he  thinks  he  will  fall.

Vertigo  when  sitting,  standing,  and  walking— he  is
most  free  from  it  when  lying— the  head  sinks  back-
wards, with  nausea  in  the  palate  and  discomfort  in  the
abdominal  and  thoracic  cavities;  in  the  abdominal
cavity  a pinching  pain,  with  feeling  as  if  he  must  go  to
stool,  during  which  he  loses  all  consciousness.  [Hrr. J

* He  employed  Spigelia  Marylandica.

1 Essays  and  Obs.,phys,  and  literary , 1,  438.  Observations  of  effects  of  too  iarge
doses  in  children.


SPIGELIA.  184

5.  Vertigo : when  he  looks  in  front  of  him  he  is  in  danger  of
falling  forwards  instantaneously.  [Myr.]

Vertigo  when  he  turns  his  head  when  walking;  if  he  looks
straight  in  front  of  him  he  feels  nothing — in  the  open  air  (aft.  5 h.).
[■ Fz .]

When  walking  he  feels  a whirling ; all  goes  round  in  a ring  with
him ; he  must  stand  still  ; he  feels  as  if  intoxicated.

Vertigo  : when  walking  he  staggered  as  though  he  would  fall  to
the  left  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr .]

Vertigo,  as  if  he  were  intoxicated  and  could  not  walk  steadily
(aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.]

10.  He  sits  as  if  buried  in  thought,  and  stares  at  one  place  (aft.  3 h.).

[&.]

Weakness  of  memory : he  cannot  remember  the  most  familiar
things.

Great  forgetfulness,  want  of  memory.  [Myr.]

Laziness  of  mind  and  great  forgetfulness.  [BchJ\

His  memory  seemed  to  him  to  be  truer  and  stronger  than  before
(aft.  5 d.).  [Bch.]

15.  Intoxication.  [Chalmers,1  On  the  IVeather  and  Diseases  of  South
Carolina , Lond.,  1 776,  tom.  i,  p.  67.]

Confusion  of  the  head.

Confusion  of  the  whole  head  (aft.  J h.).  [Gn.]

Confusion  of  the  whole  head  and  at  the  same  time
pressure  outwards  in  the  forehead  (aft.  5 d.).  [Gn.]

Painful  confusion  of  the  head.  [Stf]

20.  In  the  evening  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  drawing  confusion
in  the  occiput  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zz.]

In  the  evening,  confusion  in  the  whole  head,  it  feels  to  him  quite
dazed.  [E%.]

His  head  is  stupefied  as  from  much  tobacco-smoking  (aft.  \ h.).
[Wth^

Feeling  as  of  emptiness  and  giddiness  in  the  head,  as  after  intoxi-
cation, when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.~\

Constant  stupidity  in  the  head,  so  that  every  occupa-
tion requiring  thought  is  difficult  for  him.  [Hrr.]

2 5.  All  occupation  requiring  an  effort  of  the  head  is
difficult  for  him.  [Hrr.]

Dull  pain  in  the  forehead  and  temples  ; at  the  same  time  a feeling
of  compression  from  both  sides  to  the  front.  [Stf]

Headache  like  dazedness.

Dazedness  and  emptiness  in  the  head  at  the  top  of  the  forehead ;
the  scalp  is  very  sensitive  to  touch,  and  the  hair  seems  to  stand  on
end  (aft.  3 h.).  [/%.]

Heaviness  and  pain  in  the  head,  when  he  shakes  it.

30.  He  dares  not  shake  his  head  ; that  gives  him  pain  in  the  brain
and  makes  him  giddy.


1 Observations.  This  symptom  is  represented  in  the  original  by  “ drowsiness  44
only.

VOL,  II,


31


482


SPIGELIA.


When  he  speaks  loudly  or  coughs  his  head  is  painful  as  though  it
would  burst.

He  dares  not  stoop ; when  he  does  so  he  feels  as  if  the  brain
expanded  and  would  come  out  in  front.

Pain  in  the  forehead.  [Chalmers,  1.  c.]

Aching  pain  in  the  whole  sinciput.  [Hbg.~\

35.  A violent  pressure  in  the  right  temple,  spreading  gradually  more
and  more  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Htn.]

Very  severe  pressure  in  the  temples  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

Sensation  in  the  brain  as  if  the  head  were  tightly  bound,  lasting
a long  time  (aft.  28  h.).  [ Gn.~\

Pressure  on  the  left  frontal  protuberance  from  without  inwards,
outwardly  and  inwardly  in  the  brain  at  the  same  time.  [Hrr.]

Pressure  outwards  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  ij  h.).
[Htn.]

40.  In  the  forehead  violent  aching  and  pressing  outwards  (aft.  2 h.).
[Htn.]

Pressure  in  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  which  makes  him
dizzy.  [ Myr .]

Pressive  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  (immediately).  [Gn.]
Pressive  pain  out  at  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.).

[< Gn .]

Persistent  pressive  headache,  worse  when  stooping
forwards  (aft.  35  h.).  [Gn.]

45.  A pressing  out  in  the  forehead,  when  stooping  forwards  (aft.  f

h.).  [G»;]

Pressing-asunder  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  (aft.  82  h.).
•]  .

Pressing  in  the  forehead,  as  if  the  brain  would  come  out,  which
went  off*  for  a few  moments  on  holding  the  hand  there.  [Myr.]

Tensive  pressive  headache  out  at  the  forehead  (aft.  34  h.).  [Gn.]
Violent  pressure  from  without  inwards  in  both  temples,  especially
the  right  (aft.  56  h.).  [Htn.']

50.  Headache  like  a weight  in  the  head  ; when  he  draws  the  facial
muscles  he  feels  as  if  the  skull  would  burst  asunder  at  the  top.

Pain  as  if  a heavy  weight  were  under  the  left  frontal  protuberance.

lGss.1

Violent  pressive  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  on  a small  spot.
[G«.]

The  occiput  is  heavy  and  drags  down  like  a weight.

Most  violent  pressure  inwards  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,
during  which  he  could  not  stoop  forward  without  aggravation  of  the
pains,  unless  he  pressed  strongly  with  his  hand  on  the  painful  part.
[. Myr .]

55.  Aching  drawing  in  the  right  side  of  the  vertex  and
occiput.  [ Hrr .]

Tearing  pressure  in  the  head  from  the  left  frontal  protuberance  to
the  occiput  (aft.  34  h.).  [Hrr.]

A drawing  pressure  at  the  left  temple,  frequently  recurring.


SPIGELIA.  483

Tearing  pressure  externally  on  the  frontal  bone  (aft.  8 d.).  [IVs.]

Boring  pain  in  the  forehead.  [ Gn .]

60.  Boring  pain  on  the  occiput  and  crown,  as  if  it  strove  to  draw
the  head  backwards.  \_Bch.~]

Splashing  in  the  brain  when  walking ; he  feels  every
step.  [Gn.]  _ N

Sensation  of  splashing  in  the  brain  when  walking.  [ Myr .]

When  he  moves  his  head  there  is  shaking  and  splashing  in  the
forehead.  [Myr.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  there  occurs  at  every  step  a
violent  pressure  in  the  head  as  if  thrusting  from  without  inwards
towards  a point  in  the  middle  of  the  brain  (aft.  6 h.).  [Htn.]

65.  While  walking  in  the  open  air,  at  every  step  violent  jerks  in  the
occiput,  then  in  the  temples  (aft.  28  h.).  [Htn.]

In  the  occiput  pain  as  if  the  arteries  had  to  pulsate  over  an
obstacle.

The  pains  in  the  head  are  worst  in  the  open  air.  [Gn.]

The  pain  in  the  head  is  worse  when  lying,  better  when  walking
about.*  [Myr.]

Blows  and  jerks  on- the  left  side  of  the  head  (aft.  54  h.).  [Htn.]
70.  Tearing  blows  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  50  h.).  [Htn.]

Tearing  pain  like  thrusting  in  the  forehead,  most  severe  in  the
right  frontal  protuberance,  which  also  causes  him  to  fix  his  eyes  in-
voluntarily on  the  object  he  is  looking  at,  when  standing  and  sitting
(aft.  27  h.).  [Htn.]

Very  violent  tearing  in  the  forehead,  occiput,  and  temples.
[Myr.-]  ....

Tensive  tearing  pain  in  the  forehead,  especially  under  the  left
frontal  protuberance  towards  the  orbit  (aft.  6 h.).  [Ghr.]

Fine  digging  tearing  in  the  brain,  particularly  severe
In  the  left  parietal  bone,  when  moving,  when  walking,
and  especially  violent  on  making  a false  step,  towards
evening;  for  several  successive  evenings  (aft.  n h.).
[Hrr.]

75.  Digging  and  digging  tearing  pain  in  the  occiput,  left
side  of  the  crown  and  forehead,  aggravated  by  moving,
as  also  by  every  loud  noise,  and  when  he  speaks  loudly,
or  only  opens  the  mouth  a little ; when  lying  it  is  most
bearable  (aft.  12  h.).  [Htn.]

Intolerable  bubbling  pain  in  the  occiput,  which  is  increased  to
violence  at  first  by  walking,  afterwards  on  the  slightest  movement,
and  is  most  relieved  by  sitting  reclined  backwards  ; lying  horizontally
aggravated  it.  [Myr.]

When  he  holds  the  head  bent  forwards  for  a while,  he  cannot
raise  it  up  again  on  account  of  pain  in  the  nape.

Towards  morning  (about  3 or  4 o’clock)  severe  pains  at  (in  ?)
the  occiput,  and  the  nape  is  as  if  stiff ; in  the  morning  he  cannot
move  the  head,  until  he  has  risen  ^and  dressed  himself — then  it  is
gone.


* Alternating  action.


484


SPIGELIA.


In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  pain  in  the  nape ; when  he
holds  his  nape  still  it  is  painful!  as  if  gone  to  sleep  ; he  must  conse-
quently always  move  it,  for  it  does  not  hurt  him  when  moving.

80.  The  occiput  is  painful  as  from  an  external  blow.

The  occiput  particularly  is  painful ; he  cannot  lie  on  it  well.

Slow  tearing  stitch  on  the  left  side  of  the  head.  \HtnJ]

An  intermittent  contractive,  tearing  shooting  pain  on  a small
spot  of  the  left  parietal  bone  more  towards  the  back,  which  appears
to  be  rather  external.  [Gw.]

Pressive  shooting  on  a small  point  of  the  left  side  of  the  occiput
(aft.  49  h.).  [Htn.~\

85.  Large  pulsative  stitches  in  the  forehead  from  evening  till  morning,
so  that  he  could  have  cried  out ; at  the  same  time  a hammering
before  the  ears.

Acute  shooting  immediately  behind  and  above  the  right  frontal
protuberance.  [Gw.]

Violent,  but  fine  pricks  as  from  electric  sparks,  in  the  left  temple.
[Hbg.]

Much  heat  in  the  head.  [Myr.\

Burning  pain  in  the  left  frontal  bone  (aft.  31  h.).  [G«.]

90.  Burning  pain  in  the  left  temporal  region  and  forehead,  [Hbg.~\

Burning  on  the  left  temple,  externally.  [Gn.]

Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  right  temple  near  the  eye.  [G«.]

Burning  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  which  extends
into  the  eyes,  so  that  he  cannot  turn  them  without  pain.  [Afyr.\

Burning  pain  in  the  left  supraorbital  arch.  [G».]

95.  Burning  itching  in  the  right  eyebrow,  that  went  off  on  scratching
(aft.  26  h .).  [G».]

A running  itching  on  the  forehead,  which  compels  much  rubbing.

Itching  crawling  on  the  left  side  of  the  crown  (aft  32  h.).  [Gn.]

Smarting  pain  in  the  skin  of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.
34  h.).  [Gn.-]

The  scalp  feels  to  him  as  if  contracted  and  tense.  [Kr.~\

100.  In  the  region  of  the  vertex  the  scalp  is  painful  when  touched  and
also  when  not  touched,  as  if  ulcerated,  and  there  occurs  there  occa-
sionally an  obtuse  shooting  jerk,  which  seems  to  penetrate  deep  into
the  brain.


The  scalp  is  painful  and  the  hairs  hurt  when
touched.

Sensitiveness  of  the  whole  head  when  touched,  especially  when
moving  the  scalp.  [TVs.]

(The  hairy  scalp  is  full  of  miliary  papules.)

Pain  as  if  the  left  orbit  were  compressed  from  above  downwards.
[Gw.]

105.  Swelling  of  the  temporal  side  of  the  orbit,  with  aching  pain  per
se , and  sore  pain  when  touched.

Severe  pressure  above  the  right  orbit,  and  a dull  pressive  pain  in
the  whole  head  (aft.  2\  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Obtuse  pressure  above  the  orbits  (aft.  10  m.).  [TVs.]

On  the  left  orbital  bone  near  the  temple,  down  towards  the


SPIGELIA.  485

zygoma,  severe  pressive  pain,  followed  by  swelling  of  the  bone  at
that  place,  which  is  painful  when  touched.

He  always  feels  as  if  there  were  feathers  or  hairs  in  the  eyelashes  $
or  as  if  there  were  a mist  before  the  eyes  3 a sensation  that  is  aggra-
vated by  rubbing  them  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

110.  Formication  in  the  eyes.  [Martin,1 2  in  Konigl.  Vetensk . Ak .
Handlingar , f.  a.  177.1.]

Itching  in  the  left  eyeball,  which  \^ent  off  by  rubbing.  [ Gn.]

Itching  prick  in  the  right  eyeball,  which  returned
after  rubbing  (aft.  1 h.).  [Gn.]

Persistent  pricking  pain  in  the  right  eyeball,  also  when  moving
it  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gn.]

Violent  digging  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  eye  and  in  its  inner
canthus,  which  does  not  interfere  with  vision,  but  presses  down  the
upper  eyelid  (aft.  74  h.).  [Htn.]

1 15.  In  the  morning  redness  and  inflammation  in  the  white  of  the
eye  3 his  eyelids  are  so  heavy  that  he  can  hardly  open  them.  [Tz.]
Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye  and  dilated  bloodvessels  in  it.
[W.  Wright,  in  Samml  br.  Abh.f.  pr.  Aerzte , xiv,  iii.3]

Pain  in  the  eyes.  [Chalmers,  1.  c.]

Pain  in  and  above  the  eyes.  [Linning,  1.  c.]

He  could  not  turn  the  left  eye  in  all  directions  without  pain.
[Myr.]

120.  The  eyes  are  painful  when  moved,  as  if  they  were  too  large  for
their  orbits.  [. Myr .]

Tensive  pain  in  the  left  eyeball  (aft.  49  h.).  [Gn.]

Feeling  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  weeping,  which  they  are  not,
with  slight  pressure  in  them  3 the  sight  is  at  the  time  affected  just  as
if  the  eyes  were  full  of  tears  (aft.  26  h.).  [ Hrr .]

Pain  in  the  eyes  as  "if  sand  were  in  them.

At  the  side  of  the  right  eye  a pain  pressing  from  without  (aft.  3
h.).  [Htn.]

125.  Aching  pain  in  the  eyeballs.

Intolerable  aching  pain  in  the  eyeballs,  aggravated
by  turning  the  eyes  ; if  he  attempts  to  look  with  the  eyes
askance  he  becomes  giddy  ; he  must,  consequently,  when
he  wishes  to  look  to  the  side  turn  the  whole  head.  [Myr.]
A contractive  burning  pain  in  the  right  eyeball.  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  in  the  left  eye,  towards  the  temple  (aft.  33  h.).

[G«.]

Dry  heat  in  the  eyes  in  the  afternoon.  [ Kr .]

130.  Burning  pain  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye.  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  in  both  eyes,  so  that  he  must  close  them  involun-
tarily, and  is  unable  to  open  them  for  five  or  six  minutes,  with  an
anxiety  as  if  he  should  never  be  able  to  open  them  again  3 when,
after  this  pain  is  gone,  he  could  again  open  them,  his  sight  is  impeded
by  a sea  of  fire,  which  has  surged  up  before  his  eyes  in  blood-red


1 Not  accessible.

2 London  Med.  and  Phys.  Journal,  viii,  217. — Observation's,


486


SPIGELIA,


masses  ; along  with  watering  of  the  eyes  and  great  dilatation  of  the
pupils,  the  visual  power  returns  (aft.  14  d.).  [Bch.]

Sparks  before  the  eyes,  as  before  an  outbreak  of  smallpox  or
measles.  [Patrick  Browne,1  Gentleman's  Magazine,  1751,  p.  544,
and  Natural  History  of  Jamaica,  p.  156.]

The  eyes  move  involuntarily  left  and  right,  from  irregular  actions
of  the  ocular  muscles  that  draw  the  eye  inwards  and  outwards.2
[Linking,  1.  c.]

Distortion  of  the  eyes.3  [Browne,  1.  c.]

135.  Long  sightedness  ; he  can  see  well  at  a distance,  but  not  close  at
hand.

When  he  directs  his  eyes  upon  anything,  his  sight  goes.

He  does  not  see  so  distinctly  as  usual,  and  must  strain  his  eyes
very  much  when  writing,  as  though  water  stood  in  the  eyes,  [Hrr.~]
Transient  amaurosis.  [Chalmers,  1.  c.]

Dilatation  of  the  pupils.  [Chalmers,  1.  c.]

140.  Pupils  dilated  (aft.  a short  time).  \_Kr. ]

Pupils  dilated  by  the  smallest  dose.  [Bergius,4  Mat , Med,,
P-  97-]

Pupils  unaltered,  only  dull  and  dim  in  appearance.

\Bch.]

The  eyes  are  very  dull,  with  as  it  were  an  inward  obstruction  ;
whithersoever  he  directs  them,  there  they  remain  fixed  and  he  knows
not  what  he  is  looking  at,  like  one  whose  sight  fails  him.

The  eyes  have  a dim  and  dull  appearance  (aft.  7 d.).  \JVsd\

145.  Yellow  borders  round  the  eyes.  [iTr.]

Dim  dull  appearance  of  the  eyes,  with  unaltered  pupils.5  [Bch.~\
Pain  as  if  the  upper  eyelids  were  hard  or  immovable  ; he  cannot
well  raise  them.

The  eyelids  are  so  relaxed  and  paralysed  that  they  hang  low
down,  and  must  be  raised  by  the  hand,  with  very  dilated  pupils.
[Bergius,  1.  c.]

Sensation  as  of  a hard  body  under  the  right  upper  eyelid  ; this
was  removed  by  rubbing  (aft.  4 d.),  [ Gn.~\

150.  Burning  pain  under  the  right  eyelid  (aft.  3^  h.).  [ Gn.~\

Ulceration  and  smarting  painful  soreness  of  the  borders  of  the

lids.

On  the  border  of  the  left  lower  lid,  a fine  painful  cutting  as  with
a small  knife  (aft.  9 h.).  [. Htn .]

Shooting  aching  under  the  lids  of  both  eyes  (aft.  2|  h.).  [Bch.']
On  the  border  of  the  right  upper  eyelid,  a very  fine  but  painful
pricking  like  a needle-prick  (aft.  23  h.).  [Htn.']


1 Statements. — In  the  original  this  symptom  is  u the  eyes  appear  bright  and
sparkling,  as  they  generally  do  before  the  eruption  of  smallpox  or  measles.”

2 This  represents  “ The  musculi  adductores  et  abductores  oculorum  seem  to  be
greatly  affected,  from  their  irregular  actions,  while  the  other  muscles  of  the  eye,  so
far  as  I have  had  an  opportunity  of  observing,  remain  unaffected.”

3 Literally,  “ The  eyes  seem  distended.”

4 Observation.

5 Same  as  141,  only  not  emphasized.


SPIGELIA.


487


155.  Single  recurring  pricks  in  the  left  eyelid.  [ Myr.]

Shooting  pain  in  the  inner  right  canthus  of  the  eye  (aft.  ii|  h.),

[Gn.]

Great  watering  of  the  eyes,  without  sensation.

The  eyes  run  over  with  tears  ; much  water  runs  out  of  the  eyes,
which  is  smarting  and  acrid.

Much  gum  coming  frequently  in  the  eyes  all  day.

160.  In  the  morning,  on  rising  from  bed, The  facial  muscles  are  as  if
distorted  and  swollen.  [Tz.]

On  awaking  from  the  midday  siesta,  the  whole  face  was  swollen,
puffy,  pale  and  distorted,  like  a person  about  to  be  seriously  ill,  with-
out pain  or  tension,  or  any  other  disagreeable  sensation  ; the  swelling
only  went  off  almost  entirely  after  six  hours,  but  reappeared  in  a
greater  degree  the  next  morning  after  waking,  but  more  roundabout
the  eyes.  [St/.]

Burning  pain  in  the  right  zygoma.  [Gn.]

Obtuse  pressure  on  the  zygomata  (aft.  4 d.).  [JVs.]

In  the  temporal  process  of  the  left  zygoma  a tearing  pressure,
and  like  the  dull  sensation  of  a swelling  when  the  pain  goes  off  a
little.  [Gjj.]

165.  Twitching  tearing  in  the  right  zygomatic  arch  (aft.  30  h.).
[Htn.]

Violent  drawing  stitch  from  the  right  upper  jaw  to  the  crown  of
the  head  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.]

A fine  prick  in  the  left  cheek  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  in  the  left  cheek,  persistent  (aft.  27  h.).  [Gn.]
Burning  in  the  skin  of  the  temple  in  front  of  the  right  ear  (aft.
75  h.).  [<?».]

170.  Drawing  pain  in  the  antitragus  of  the  left  ear.

[Gss.]

On  the  border  of  the  left  auricle  pain  like  earache

(aft.  22  h.).  [Htn.]

On  the  posterior  part  of  the  right  auricle  a squeezing  pain  (aft,
f h.).  [Htn.]

Quivering  in  the  right  auricle.  [Gn.]

Itching  on  the  right  auricle  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gn.]

175.  Itching  in  both  auricles  at  once  (aft.  5 d.).  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  of  the  right  auricle.  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  left  auricle.  [Gn.]

An  in-pressing  pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius,  gradually  increasing
(aft.  | h.).  [Htn.]

There  is  a pressure  as  from  a plug  into  the  left  ear

(aft.  i h.).  [Gjj.]

180.  Aching  pain  in  the  left  ear  ear  (aft.  13  h.).  [Gn.]

Aching  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear,  that
spreads  over  the  whole  zygoma  and  into  the  right  molar  teeth  (aft.

57  h.).  [G«.]

Continual  pain  in  the  right  ear  as  if  it  would  be  forced  asunder
(aft.  59  h.).  [Gn.]

A drawing  pain  in  the  left  ear  towards  the  zygoma.  [5^.]


488


SPIGELIA.


In  the  internal  ear,  occasionally,  a boring,  obtuse  shooting  jerk,
which  darts  into  the  throat  (through  the  Eustachian  tube).

185.  Several  times  a violent  thrusting  tearing  in  the  right  ear.  [i/<fw.]
Twitching  pain,  recurring  by  fits,  in  the  ear,  which  extends  to
the  eye  and  lower  jaw  (aft.  12  h.).  \JVth.~\

Beating  in  the  left  ear.  [Gw.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear  (aft.  49  h.).  [Gw.]

In  the  left  ear,  an  itching  pricking.  [Gw.]

190.  Itching  formication  in  the  right  ear.  [Gw.]

Itching  prickling  sensation  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  77  h.).  [Gw.]
When  stepping  quickly,  a lapping  sensation,  as  if  water  splashed,
in  the  ears  (aft.  J h.).  [Tz.]

Noise  in  the  left  ear,  as  if  the  wind  blew  quickly  over  it.  [Gw.]
A constant  crepitation  and  buzzing  before  the  ears  extending  into
the  forehead,  and  an  undulating  pulsation  in  them  ; he  gets  relief  by
holding  the  hands  above  the  eyes.

195.  Great  humming  and  bubbling  in  the  ears,  especially  in  the  evening.
Flapping  in  the  ears  as  from  a bird’s  wing,  whereupon  a moisture
flows  from  the  ears  and  very  clear  hearing  ensues.

When  she  speaks,  it  rings  like  bells  in  both  ears  and  resounds
through  the  whole  head.

Roaring  before  the  ear.  [Myr. ]

It  seems  as  if  lie  heard  some  distant  ringing  Before
both  ears,  with  a sensation  as  if  the  ear  were  loosely
stopped  up,  or  as  if  there  was  a great  fog  before  it.

[Hrr.]

200.  A loud  noise  produces  a painful  impression  in  the  internal  ear
(aft.  several  d.).  \JVs7\

On  blowing  the  nose  the  ear  closes  and  he  does  not  hear  ; but
when  he  shakes  the  finger  in  the  ear,  it  goes  off  and  he  hears  again.

In  the  open  air  when  the  wind  blows  into  the  ears  they  become
stopped  up  as  with  a finger  (aft.  5,  6 h.).  [Tz.]

In  the  evening  the  ears  become  stopped,  as  if  something  lay  before
the  membrana  tympani,  which  feels  as  if  contracted  (aft.  14  h.).
IFz.]

The  ear  feels  stopped  up,  even  when  she  does  not  wish  to  hear,
or  does  not  speak.

205.  Something  seems  to  prevent  her  hearing.

In  the  left  ear,  hardness  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  closed  by
the  finger,  and  at  the  same  time  a fluttering  noise  in  it  (aft  2 h.).
[Hbg.]

Feeling  as  if  the  left  ear  were  loosely  stopped  up,  but

without  hardness  of  bearing  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Hrr .]

Disagreeable  sensation  as  from  an  obstruction  in  the  root  of  the
nose.  \_Myr.\

Pricking  creeping  in  the  nose,  which  compels  scratching,  and
then  it  goes  off  for  a short  time.  [Fz.]

210.  Itching  on  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  the  nose  (aft.  35  h.).

[Gn.]

Tickling  on  the  dorsum  of  the  nose  as  if  the  hairs


SPIGELIA.  489

there  were  lightly  touched,  or  as  if  a gentle  air  blew  on
it,  lasting  a long  time.  [Gss.]

Itching  on  the  right  ala  nasi.  [Gn.]

Itching  boring  in  the  right  nostril,  so  that  he  must  sneeze  (aft.
78  h.).  [Gn.]

Tettery  eruption,  with  sore  feeling  when  touched  on  and  in  the
right  nostril  (aft.  12  d.).  [Hrr.]

215.  Burning  in  the  right  upper  lip,  continuing  also  when
it  is  moved  (aft.  52  h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  in  the  upper  lip.

Persistent  burning  tension  in  the  upper  lip  when  at
rest.  [Gn.]

In  the  red  of  the  lower  lip,  a blackish,  painless  papule.

Several  small  pimples  on  the  chin  which  contain  pus,  almost
without  sensation  even  when  touched  (aft.  4 ht).  [Myr.]

220.  On  the  left  side  of  the  chin  a great  swelling  which  itches  during
the  midday  siesta  (aft.  12  h.).

Painful  pressure  on  the  right  angle  of  the  lower  jaw.  [Gfj.]

(In  the  maxillary  joint,  a tensive  pain.)

In  the  lower  jaw  tearing  towards  the  ear  and  around  the  ear
extending  into  the  nape,  so  that  he  cannot  move  the  head  without
pain.

Pain  as  if  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  were  torn  out  of  its
joint,  only  when  chewing,  when  not  chewing  there  only  remained
an  obtuse  pain  in  the  maxillary  joint  (aft.  34  h.) . [Hrr.]

225.  Shooting  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  throat  ; when  swallowing
there  is  shooting  in  the  parotid  gland  and  in  the  interior  of  the  ear
itself,  like  something  between  earache  and  sorethroat.

Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.

Coldness  in  the  upper  teeth  with  pricking  twitching  in  them.
[Hbg.]

In  a hollow  tooth  drawing  pains.  [Stf.]

Intermittent  twitching  through  both  rows  of  teeth,  but  chiefly  in
a hollow  tooth  (aft.  \ h.).  \JVs?\

230.  Painful  jerking  in  the  nerve  of  a hollow  tooth,  from  the  crown
to  the  root,  recurring  at  intervals  of  about  ten  minutes,  worse  in  the
afternoon  ; if  he  brings  some  water  in  contact  with  it,  or  the  air  has
access  to  it,  the  pain  is  aggravated  ; tobacco-smoke  seems  to  diminish
it  (aft.  48  h.).  [m.]

Throbbing  tearing  pains  in  the  teeth,  which  are  particularly
aggravated  by  cold  water,  but  go  off  on  lying  down.

Toothache  like  a pressing  outwards,  worse  when  he  lies  on  the
right  side ; when  eating  and  drinking  he  feels  nothing  of  it,  but
immediately  thereafter  the  toothache  recurs,  and  he  frequently  wakes
up  at  night  from  the  pain.

Toothache  on  account  of  which  he  cannot  sleep  at  night;  it
drives  him  out  of  bed ; it  is  not  present  during  the  day,  except
immediately  after  eating,  not  while  eating.

In  the  evening  (customary)  smoking  tobacco  causes  toothache.

235.  Throbbing  pain  in  one  of  the  left  molars  (aft.  20,24  h.).  [ JVth .]


49°


SPIGELIA.


Cramp-like  pain  in  the  upper  row  of  teeth,  during  which  the
lower  jaw  seems  to  be  pressed  against  them  in  a cramp-like  manner,
when  the  mouth  is  shut,  [Tz.]

Eroding  pain  in  the  hollow  tooth,  [Fz.]

Itching  boring  prick  in  the  right  side  of  the  tongue  from  behind
forwards,  with  a sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.  \Gn.]

Fine  pricks  in  the  right  side  of  the  tongue.  [Gn.~\

240.  The  tongue  was  full  of  chaps,  just  as  if  it  would  scale  off,  which
go  off  the  following  night  (aft.  5 d.).  [Bch,~\

Vesicles  at  one  time  on  the  tongue,  at  another  on  the  palate,
with  burning  sensation  when  touched  (aft.  4J  h.).  [Bek.]

When  chewing  the  tongue  was  painful  as  if  it  were  swollen  at
the  back,  \_Myr.~]

Sensation  at  the  back  of  the  tongue  as  if  it  were  swollen  (aft.
12  h,).  [ Myr .]

Burning  pain  on  the  palate.

245.  Swelling  on  the  left  side  of  the  fauces  and  pricking  there  when
swallowing.  \JVth.~]

First  shivering  and  chilliness,  towards  evening,  in  the  open  air,
with  tensive  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck  below  the  ear  ; the
following  morning  at  that  place,  glandular  swelling,  which  is  hard
and  painful  when  touched  ; at  the  same  time  shooting  in  the  leftside
of  the  throat  when  swallowing,  with  swelling  of  the  gums  and
difficulty  of  opening  the  jaws  ; the  shooting  while  swallowing  ceased
when  he  pressed  the  cervical  glandular  swelling  inwards ; for  two
successive  mornings  he  perspired  at  the  same  time  (aft  9 d.).  \Htn?±
In  the  throat  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  a frequent  pressing
stitch  which  is  at  first  fine,  and  then  becomes  always  stronger  and
coarser,  goes  off  when  swallowing,  but  recurs  immediately  after-
wards (aft.  28  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Tongue  covered  with  a white  fur.

White  furred  tongue.  \_Myr.~\

250.  Disgusting  smell  from  the  mouth,  all  day,  only  perceptible  to
others.  [Gn .]

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  he  has  much  mucus
sometimes  white,  sometimes  yellowish,  without  parti-
cular taste,  in  the  fauces  and  mouth  (aft.  22  h.).  [F/rr.]
White  frothy  saliva,  of  ordinary  taste,  collects  in
the  mouth,  which  he  must  often  spit  out  (aft.  16  d.).  [Bch.]
Tickling  itching  in  the  oesophagus  and  sensation  as  if  a semi-
fluid substance  would  rise  from  the  oesophagus  into  the  fauces,
accompanied  by  a hollow  cough  and  water-brash ; all  so  severe  that
in  his  anxiety  he  feared  to  fall  into  a faint,  for  three  minutes  (aft.
4ih  .)•[<?<]

He  could  not  swallow  his  saliva,  because  it  was  always  brought
up  again,  as  if  from  disgust } he  must  spit  it  out.  [ Bch .]

255.  Collection  of  saliva  in  the  fauces.  [Fz.]

Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth  and  he  thinks  he  has  foetid  odour  from
the  mouth.

Foetid  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.


SPIGELIA,


49 1


Flat  taste  in  the  mouth  ; but  food  tastes  well.  [Gn.]

In  the  morning  immediately  after  waking,  an  extreme  dryness
in  the  mouth  ; he  felt  as  if  his  mouth  were  full  of  pins  and  as  if  stuck
together,  without  thirst,  indeed  with  much  saliva  (aft.  24  h.).  [*S7/\]
260.  Late  in  the  evening,  great  thirst  (aft.  28  h.).

Much  thirst  and  no  appetite.  [Myr.]

He  has  no  wish  to  eat,  but  great  thirst.

(Whilst  eating  cool  food  he  becomes  hot.).  [*Sy.]

Very  great  appetite  for  food  and  drink,  for  three  and  a half  days.
[Htn.]

265.  No  relish  for  smoking  tobacco.

Complete  aversion  from  smoking  and  snuffing  tobacco.  [Bch.]
Aversion  from  tobacco  smoking  and  coffee  during  the  whole
duration  of  the  medicine’s  action.  [5c/?.]

Eructation.  [Lr.]

Empty  eructation.  [Fz.]

270.  Frequent  eructation  of  air,  after  every  meal.

Empty  eructation  of  air  only.  \_Stf.~\

Sour  eructation  up  to  the  tongue.  [ Myr .]

Nausea  as  if  he  had  fasted  for  a long  time  ; a kind  of  bulimia  with
nausea.  [Myr.]

Inclination  to  vomit.  [Martin,  1.  c.]

275.  Aching  in  the  stomach  (aft.  13  h.).  [Afyr.]

Pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  from  a weight  lying  on  it.
Pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  from  a lump  packed
together,  which  goes  off  when  pressed  with  the  hand  and  changes
into  tension  and  pressure  in  the  chest.  [Fz.]

Pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  as  if  he  would  eructate  and
thereby  get  relief ; but  no  eructation  occurred  until  he  swallowed
some  air.  [Myr.]

Stitches  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  during  expiration,  not  so  much
when  lying  as  when  sitting  and  walking.

280.  In  the  evening,  under  the  left  ribs,  several  stitches,  so  that  he  was
drawn  quite  crooked.

Troublesome  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen,  after  a very
moderate  meal.  [6V/1]

Feeling  in  the  hypogastrium  as  if  a great  weight  fell  down  ; it
seemed  to  fall  down  particularly  during  inspiration  (aft.  3 h.).  [Myr.]
Pain  in  the  abdomen  as  from  a hard  swelling  packed  together  in
the  umbilical  region,  in  the  evening.

Painful  pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  it  would
hurst  outwards,  especially  in  the  evening,  before  a soft
stool,  after  which  it  is  somewhat  relieved  (aft.  9 d.).  [TVs.']
285.  In  the  abdomen,  a wandering,  pressive  pinching,  which  goes  off
after  the  discharge  of  some  flatus,  on  three  successive  afternoons  about
3 o’clock.  [Htn.]

Aching  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [ Gn .]

Pinching  in  the  whole  abdomen,  when  lying,  so  violent  that  he
could  not  move  for  pain  (aft.  44  h.).  [Gn.]

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all  the  bowels  were


49*


SPIGEJLIA.


constricted,  which  causes  great  anxiety,  and  makes
respiration  difficult  (aft.  4,  7 d.).  [Htn.]

Violent  pinching  in  the  belly,  and  immediately  afterwards  a soft
stool,  always  becoming  thinner,  which,  however,  is  not  evacuated
without  effort  (aft.  49  h.).  [Gn.]

290.  Sometimes  a pinching,  sometimes  a rumbling  and  turning  about
in  the  hypogastrium,  and  at  each  attack  of  this  kind  of  pain,  urging
to  pass  water,  which  was  unaltered,  but  discharged  in  greater  quantity,
for  six  days  (aft.  14,  15  d.).  [Bch.]

Pinchingpain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  n d.).  [. Hrr .
—Gw.]

Pinching  in  the  umbilical  region,  on  the  left  (aft.  10  h.).  [Myr.]
Pinching  stitch  in  the  belly  with  discharge  of  flatus  ; imme-
diately thereafter,  urging  to  stool  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gn.]

Pinching  in  the  belly,  which  extended  as  a stitch  to  the  chest,
with  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  84  h.).  [Gn.]

295.  On  the  left  near  the  navel,  a shooting  while  walking.  [Gw.]

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  oppression
of  the  chest,  worse  when  inspiring.  [ Gw .]

On  the  left  side  of  the  navel,  obtuse  stitches  during  inspiration.

[Gss.]

Obtuse  intermittent  stitches,  a couple  of  fingers’  breadth  on  the
left  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  1 h.),  [Gw.]

Sharp  stitches  in  the  abdominal  cavity,  in  the  region
of  the  os  innominatum,  like  stitches  in  the  spleen,  only
when  walking,  which,  however,  always  go  off  after
taking  thirty  or  forty  steps.  [Hrr.]

300.  On  the  left  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  intermittent,  burning
sharp  stitches.  [Gw.]

In  the  right  side  below  the  ribs,  deep  inwards,  regularly  recurring
sharp  stitches,  which  go  off  when  he  takes  a very  long  deep  breath,
and  return  during  expiration.  [Gw.]

On  walking  quickly  and  jumping,  stitches  in  the  hepatic  region,
which  went  off  on  walking  more  quietly.  [Kr.]

Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region,  on  several  afternoons  (from  5 to
6 o’clock)  with  chilliness,  diarrhoea  and  profuse  micturition.

In  the  abdomen,  severe  cutting  from  both  sides  towards  the
middle  (in  the  morning;  in  bed),  with  discharge  of  flatus  without
relief.  [Bch.]

305.  The  cutting  and  digging  in  the  whole  abdomen,  which  appeared
to  occur  from  sitting  down,  and  to  proceed  from  displaced  flatulence,
became  much  less  painful  when  he  rose  up  from  his  seat.  [Gw.]
Tearing  drawing  through  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  5 d.).  [Gw.]
Slight  burning  in  the  whole  abdomen,  with  tasteless  eructation
apparently  mixed  with  some  watery  fluid  (aft.  2\  d.).  [Bch.]

Itching  in  the  left  groin.  [Gn.]

Above  the  groin  in  the  hypogastrium,  stitches,  with  stitch-like
oppression  of  the  chest.

310.  Obtuse  stitch  in  the  groin.  [Gn.]

In  the  right  groin  a tensive  pain  when  touched.


SPIGEL1A.


493


Tensive  stitch  in  the  right  groin,  only  whan  walking.  [Gw.]
Boring  digging  pain  in  the  right  groin.  [Gw.]

In  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring,  a cutting  and  shooting ; the
bowel  protruded  (which  had  seldom  hitherto  occurred)  and  remained
out  as  a hernia  ; the  part  was  painful  as  if  sore  when  touched.

315.  Itching  eroding  pricking  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  os  innomina-
tum.  [ Hrr. ]

Intermittent  obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  side  just  above  the  os
ilii.  [Gjj.]

Posteriorly  on  the  border  of  the  left  os  ilii,  near  the  os  sacrum,
a burning  stitch  at  every  inspiration.  [Gw.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  os  ilii.  [Gw.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  perinaeum  (aft.  37  h.).  [Gw.]

320.  Crawling  in  the  rectum  and  anus  as  from  thread-worms  (aft.
1 h.).  [Afyr.]

Itching  for  many  days  at  the  anus  and  on  the  coccyx,

which  was  with  difficulty  removed  by  scratching.  [Gw.]

Itching  at  the  anus  which  went  off  by  scratching  (aft.  4^  h.).
[G«.]

Obtuse  pressure  in  the  rectum,  independent  of  stool.  [Gw.]
Grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  like  the  croaking  of  frogs  (aft.  4 h.).

[Lr.]

325.  Audible  grumbling  in  the  belly  (aft.  40  h.),  [Gw.]

Loud  grumbling  in  the  abdomen  in  the  left,  then  also  in  the  right
side  (aft.  \ h.).  [KrJ]

Rattling  as  from  flatulence  here  and  there  in  the  hypogastrium,
occasionally  painful.  [6V/1]

Rumbling  in  the  bowels  before  stool,  which  is  evacuated  of  a
pappy  character  twice  in  the  morning  and  once  in  the  evening  (aft,
6 d.).  [TVs.']

On  the  discharge  of  flatus,  sensation  as  if  at  the  same  time  some
diarrhoeic  evacuation  came  away,  which,  however,  was  not  the  case.

[*4]

330.  Flatus  of  the  smell  of  rotten  eggs,  for  several  hours.  \_Kr.]

During  the  stool  and  whilst  urging  to  it,  a painful  bruised  feeling
on  the  first  four  ribs  of  the  left  side,  which  went  off  every  time  after
the  evacuation.  [Bch.]

The  first  day  no  stool,  the  second  day  (after  repeating  the  dose)
hard  stool,  which  was  only  evacuated  after  much  pressing.  [Gw.]

In  the  rectum,  a spasmodic  urging  and  pressing ; as  if  he  were
unable  to  retain  the  stool  (aft.  3 h.).  [Kr.]

After  the  evacuation  of  a complete  stool,  ineffectual  feeling  of
wanting  to  go  to  stool  in  the  belly  remains  for  a long  time.

335.  A frequent  call  to  stool ; but  he  cannot  pass  anything  (aft.  4 d.).
[Bch.]

Call  to  stool  : he  has  an  urging  to  stool  3 but  nothing  is  evacuated
and  the -desire  goes  off.  [iSV/i]

Faecal  evacuation,  the  first  half  of  which  is  firm,  the  remainder
thin,  after  its  evacuation  a couple  of  pressive  thrusts  out  at  the  fore-
head ensue  (aft.  26  h.).  [Gw.]


494


SPIGELIA.


Wlaite  stool,  every  day.

For  two  days  diarrhoea  of  thin  faeces,  mixed  with  a viscid,  yellow
mucus,  two  to  four  times  each  day,  at  indeterminate  times  (aft.  3 d.).
[Bch^

340.  Masses  of  thick  mucus  pass  through  the  anus  for  two  days  ; he
felt  as  if  flatus  was  passing  ; the  stool  itself  looked  as  if  composed  of
sheep’s  dung  enveloped  in  mucus.

Every  day  one  or  two  thin,  even  watery  evacuations  (aft.  16  d.).

[Boh.]

At  night  the  urine  is  passed  with  difficulty,  and  after  it  is  dis-
charged burning  ensues.

Urging  to  pass  water  as  from  a diuretic  potion.  [ Hbg.~\

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  copious  discharge  of  urine
without  suffering  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Lr.]

345.  Copious  discharge  of  urine,  twice  in  succession,  though  he  had
previously  made  water  before  taking  the  medicine  (aft.  i-|  h.).  [ Gn.]
Copious  and  frequent  secretion  of  urine  for  three  and  a half  days.
[Htn.]

He  must  urinate  often  and  much  (aft.  3 d.).  [Gn.]

Copious  micturition  ten  times  in  one  night,  with  pressive  pain  on
the  bladder,  which  always  went  off  when  the  urine  was  passed  (aft.
12  h.).

(When  the  bladder  was  pressed  on  externally,  the  urine  spurted  out.)

350.  In  the  afternoon,  when  rising  from  a seat,  five  or  six  drops  of
urine  dribble  away  suddenly  and  involuntarily,  and  this  occurs  four
successive  times;  each  time  the  urine  dribbles  away  there  is  a burn-
ing in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra.

Watery  urine  (aft.  2\  h.).  [ Myr .]

Urine  with  whitish  sediment  for  several  days.  [Htn.]

Burning  stitch  in  the  urethra  with  urging  to  urinate  (aft.  59  h.).
[Gn.]

Frequent  erections  of  the  penis,  without  internal
physical  sexual  excitement,  hut  with  lascivious  thoughts
(aft.  17  h.).  [Htn.]

355.  Swelling  of  one  half  of  the  glans  penis  (aft.  7 d.).

A formication  about  the  glans  penis,  every  day.

Prostatic  fluid  escaped  out  of  the  orifice  of  “the
urethra  (aft.  20  h.).  [Htn.]

Itching  prick  in  the  left  testicle  (aft.  51  h.).  [Gn.]

Itching  prick  in  the  right  testicle  and  penis,  from
behind  forwards.  [ Gn .]

360.  Burning  prick  in  the  right  testicle  and  penis.  [Gn.]

Quivering  in  the  scrotum  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gn.]

* *


Frequent  sneezing  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  morning,  after  waking,  one  sneeze  with  bloody  mucus.

W.]

Stoppage  of  the  front  of  the  nose,  from  the  posterior
nares  of  which  the  mucus  often  flows  down  into  the


fauces,  for  eight  days.  [Hrr.]


SPIGELIA.


495


365.  Nose  stopped  up  for  several  days.  [G^.]

Sudden  coryza  ; first  stuffed  coryza  and  after  four  hours  fluent
coryza,  which  lasts  twenty-four  hours.

Catarrh,  like  catarrhal  fever  ; he  was  hoarse,  and  hot  to  the  touch
day  and  night ; without  thirst  or  sweat,  with  protruded  eyes,  and
great  flow  of  coryza,  severe  headache  and  lachrymose  humour.

All  day  long  he  ejects  much  mucus  from  the  fauces,
which  comes  chiefly  from  the  posterior  nares  (aft.  24  h.).
[Hrr.]

The  nasal  mucus  came  away  spontaneously  only  from  the
posterior  nares  through  the  mouth  ; by  vigorous  blowing  of  the  nose,
very  little,  extremely  viscid,  yellowish  coloured  mucus  came  away  ;
in  addition  the  anterior  part  of  the  nose  was  constantly  dry  (from  the
16th  till  the  26th  d.).  [Bch. ]

370.  The  discharge  of  mucus  through  the  posterior  nares  into  the
mouth  often  occurred  very  perceptibly  and  in  such  a great  quantity,
that  he  had  to  hawk  it  up  immediately  to  avoid  choking,  by  which
he  was  often  wakened  up  at  night.  [. Bch.]

On  snuffing  tobacco  he  had  no  sensation,  no  irritation  from  the
snuff  in  the  nose.  [Bch.']


Sometimes  white,  sometimes  yellow  mucus  comes
through  the  nose,  at  the  same  time  also  much  comes
from  behind  through  the  mouth  (aft.  7 d.).  [Hrr.]

Coryza  chiefly  of  a stuffed  character,  after  eating  (aft.  12  h.).  [Lr.]

In  the  morning  when  the  coryza  was  almost  gone,  some  cough
(aft.  48  h.).

375.  At  night  she  gets  cough  and  catarrh.

Quite  sudden,  violent  cough  from  water  getting  from  the  mouth
into  the  windpipe.  [Tz.]

A kind  of  suffocative  cough  as  if  produced  by  a quantity  of  water
streaming  from  above  downwards  into  the  glottis.  [Tz.]

Dry,  violent,  hollow  cough,  from  an  irritation  deep  down  in  the
trachea,  excited  especially  by  stooping  forwards ; the  cough  takes  away
his  breath.

In  the  open  air  he  gets  a short  dry  cough  causing  sore  pain  in  the
chest.  [Bch.]

380.  Sensation  on  the  chest  as  from  excessive  hunger,  with  flow  of
saliva  into  the  back  of  the  mouth  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.]

Intermittent  pain  in  the  chest.  [Afyr.]

Under  the  left  clavicle  a severe  pressure  on  the  chest.

[Gss.]

(After  hawking  and  clearing  the  throat  an  aching  pain  in  the
whole  chest.)

Towards  evening,  an  excessive  hard  pressure  on  the  whole  chest.
[Tz.]

385.  On  the  middle  of  the  chest,  a severe,  painful,  oppres-
sive pressure.  [Gss.]

Pressure  over  the  ensiform  cartilage  when  standing.  [Tz.]

Aching  and  at  the  same  time  drawing  in  the  chest,  when  stands
ing.  [Fz.]


496


SPIGELIA.


Tearing  constriction  of  the  pectoral  muscles,  when
standing.  [G«.]

Tearing  constriction  of  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,
above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  oppression,  then  the
same  pain  also  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  under  the
pit  of  the  throat,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Gss.]

390.  Violent  pain  like  that  caused  by  dislocation,  in  the  upper  left
side  of  the  chest,  only  when  turning  the  body  to  the  right,  on
making  a false  step,  or  when  twisting  the  left  arm,  for  one  day  (aft.
7 d.).  [Htn.-\

Cutting  tearing  pain  which  begins  under  the  left  nipple  and
spreads  to  the  region  of  the  scapula  and  upper  arm,  aggravated  only
by  inspiration  and  by  taking  a deep  breath  (aft.  11  h.).  [ Hrr^\

Tearing  boring  pain,  from  within  outwards,  under
the  right  nipple ; the  pain  always  spreads  to  the  sternum,
and  becomes  a sharp  pressive  tearing  pain  (aft.  2 h.).
[ii/rr.]

Cutting  constriction  of  the  chest  with  anxiety.

[<?«.]

Unconnected  with  breathing,  a shooting  in  the  chest  from  within
outwards  ; but  he  can  breathe  easily.

395.  Quick,  drawing,  pricking  pain  downwards  near  the  sternum.

[Mg-]

Tensive  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  more  severe  during
expiration  (aft.  27  h.).  [Gw.]

Persistent  tensive  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  chest  and  abdomen,
lasting  during  inspiration  and  expiration,  worst  when  walking,  for
two  hours  (aft.  82  h.).  [Gw.]

The  chest  is  contracted  with  stitches,  so  that  he  cannot  fetch  a
breath.

Tensive  drawing  stitch  in  the  right  true  ribs  persisting  during
inspiration  and  expiration,  aggravated  by  external  pressure.  [Gw.]
400.  Tensive  persistent  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  more
severe  during  inspiration  and  expiration.  [Gw.]

Tensive  boring  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  persisting
during  expiration  (aft.  57  h.).  [Gw.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  right  false  ribs,  always
expiration.  [Gw.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  diaphragm  on  the  right  side,
persisting  during  inspiration  and  expiration.  [Gw.]

Across  the  chest,  but  chiefly  in  the  sternum,  stitches  as  from
within  outwards,  in  all  positions.  [Myr.]

405.  Sharp  stitches  inwards  above  the  left  nipple,  recurring  at  various
periods,  when  writing  whilst  he  sat  bent  forwards  ; but  if  he  raised
himself  up  they  went  off  quickly  (aft.  31  h.).  \_Hrr.~\

Pricking  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  as  with  fine  needles  (aft.
5 h.).  [£r.]

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  towards  the  clavicle,  a momentary
violent  shooting  pain,  which  impedes  respiration,  in  the  evening  (aft.
12  h.).  [*/.]


persisting  during


SPIGELIA.


497


In  the  front  of  the  chest  a quick  fine  twitching  pain  as  from  an
electric  spark.  [Hbg.]

In  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  under  the  axilla,  a twitching
shooting  pain  (aft.  55  h.).  [Htn.]

410.  Violent  stitch  in  the  left  side  just  below  the  heart,  which  for  a
short  time  changed  into  formication,  but  then  returned  just  as
severely  as  a stitch  (aft.  f h.).  [Htn.]

Pinching  stitch  on  the  left  side  in  the  diaphragm,  so  violent  that
it  took  away  his  breath,  and  he  must  stand  still  (aft  2f  h.).  [ Gn.]
Itching  prick  under  the  clavicle.  [Gn.]

Itching  eroding  pricking  towards  the  front  at  the  left  axilla  (aft.
ij  h.).  [Hrr.]

An  itching  prick  in  the  left  pectoral  muscles  (aft.  10  h.).  [Gn.]

415.  An  obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  persisting  when
inspiring  and  expiring.  [ Gn.]

Obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  persist-
ing only  during  inspiration  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  shooting  pinching  pain  under  the  right  nipple,
in  the  thoracic  cavity,  from  within  outwards,  more
violent  only  during  inspiration  (aft.  8 d.).  [ Hrr .]

Where  the  heart’s  beat  is  felt,  only  somewhat  more
externally,  obtuse  stitches  recurring  synchronously
with  the  pulse  (aft.  3 h.).  [Hrr.]

Obtuse  shooting  on  the  place  where  the  heart’s  beat
is  felt  (aft.  56  h.).  [Gss.]

420.  Obtuse  oppressive  cardiac  stitches  betwixt  the  place  where  the
heart’s  beat  is  felt  and  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (stomach)  ; there  is  also
shooting  of  the  same  kind  in  and  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  and
the  chest  is  oppressed.  [Gjr.]


Unusually  strong  beat  of  the  heart,  so  that  he  not
unfrequently  hears  the  heart  beating ; the  heart’s  beat
can  also  be  seen  through  the  clothes.  [Hrr.]

Palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxious  oppression  of
the  chest.  [Gss,]

Palpitation  of  the  heart  in  the  morning  after  rising,  when  sitting,
with  anxious  oppression  ; the  heart  seems  to  be  in  a trembling
movement.  [Gjj.]

The  palpitation  of  the  heart  is  always  increased  by
sitting  down  and  bending  the  chest  forwards.  [Gss.]

425.  When  he  takes  a long  breath  and  holds  his  breath,  the  anxiety
increases  ; he  gets  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  oppression ; the
heart  beats  more  strongly  and  he  also  feels  it  beating  when  he  lays
his  hand  upon  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gjj.]

In  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed  as  soon  as  he
sits  down  the  heart  begins  to  beat  strongly,  and  above
the  place  where  it  is  felt  beating  a heavy,  painfully
pressing  weight  seems  to  lie,  which  causes  oppression ;
at  the  same  time  he  feels  in  the  hypogastrium  a
cutting  and  digging,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence,


VOL.  II*


32


498


SPIGELIA.


which  lasts  longer  than  the  palpitation  of  the  heart.
[«"■].

Stitches  in  the  sacrum,  worse  when  expiring  and  inspiring,  when
sitting  (aft.  h.).  [Gn.]

Quivering  in  the  dorsal  and  costal  muscles.  [Gn.]

In  the  back,  opposite  the  heart,  he  feels  stitches.  [Gjtj.]

430.  When  walking,  needle-pricks  on  the  back,  which  spread  along
the  left  side  (aft.  12  h.).  [Lr.]

Needle-prick,  pain  in  the  upper  dorsal  vertebrae  (aft.  32  h.).  [Gn.]
Itching  prick  in  the  right  dorsal  muscles.  [Gn.]

Itching  in  the  back,  at  the  left  scapula,  which  did  not  go  off  by-
scratching.  [Gn.]

He  felt  as  if  bruised  in  the  spine,  even  when  at  rest

(aft.  38  h.).  [Gn.]

435.  Feeling  in  the  left  scapula  as  if  the  blood  forced  itself  by  drops
through  a valve,  a kind  of  gurgling  (aft.  J h.).  [TVs.]

Obtuse,  boring  stitch,  in  the  left  scapula  (aft.  70  h.).  [On.]

On  the  right  scapula,  sharp  stitches,  recurring  at  uniform  intervals.
[. Hrr .]

Single  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  shoulder.  [Gn.]

A red  pimple  on  the  neck,  with  sore  pain  when  touched  (aft.
10  d.).  [Hrr.]

440.  On  the  neck  some  red  pimples  with  sore  pain  when  touched
(aft.  5 d.).  [TVs.]

Intermittent  drawing  in  the  posterior  cervical  muscles  and  along
to  the  occiput.  [A%.]

On  the  left  side  of  the  nape  a feeling  of  paralysis  ; which,  how-
ever, does  not  impede  the  movement  of  the  head  and  quickly  goes
off  (aft.  1 h.),  [Htn.]

Quivering  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder.  [Gn.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  left  axilla,  when  at  rest  (aft.  38  h.).  [ Gn.]
445.  Burning  pain  in  the  left  axilla  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gn.]

Itching  in  both  axillae,  especially  the  left  (aft.  13  h.).  [Gn.]

The  left  shoulder  and  arm  hang  down  quite  heavy  when  walking,
with  tension  anteriorly  in  the  upper  arm.  [Tz.]

Pain  as  if  dislocated,  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  the  proximal
joints  of  the  thumb  and  index.

Pain  as  if  dislocated  (or  bruised),  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  the
proximal  joints  of  the  thumb  and  index.

450.  Trembling  of  the  upper  extremities.  [Hbg.]

When  writing  the  arm  often  went  to  sleep,  so  that  he  could  not
guide  the  pen.

Feeling  of  weight  in  the  right  upper  and  forearm  when  he  is  at
rest,  and  yet  easy  movement  of  the  arm  when  he  raises  it  (aft.  3 h.).
\Htn.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  left  deltoid  muscle,  more  violent  when  he
presses  strongly  on  it.  [Hrr.]

Cutting  drawing  over  the  deltoid  muscle.  [Fz.]

455.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  middle  and  inner  side  of  the  right  upper
arm,  more  violent  when  touched,  [Hrr.]


SPIGELIA.


499

Quivering  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm  [aft  n\  h.).

[<?*•]  ...

Itching  prick  in  the  point  of  the  left  elbow  (aft.  n h.).  \_Gn.~\
Itching  pains  like  needle-pricks  in  the  bend  of  the  right  elbow,
compelling  him  to  scratch  (aft.  35  h.).  [G«.]

Severe  stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  left  elbow  and  in  the  fingers.
460.  Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm,  just
above  the  wrist-joint,  only  when  at  rest  (aft.  55  h.).  [Gn.]
Aching  pain  in  the  right  forearm.  [ Gn.]

In  the  right  forearm,  pain  as  if  both  bones  were  squeezed  between
pincers,  when  at  rest  (aft.  22  h.).

Boring  stitcKes  in  the  right  forearm  (aft.  52  h.).  \_Gn.~\

Itching  on  the  right  forearm  (aft.  5 d.).  [G«.]

465.  Single  shooting  jerks  over  the  wrist-joint.

Aching  pain  over  the  right  wrist-joint,  when  at  rest

(aft.  34  h.).  [Gn.]

Violent  shooting  cutting  pains  over  the  left  wrist,  on  moving  the
index  finger,  when  he  held  the  arm  firmly  against  the  trunk  (aft.
45  h.).  [Htn.]

Rhythmical  tearing  in  the  joints  of  the  left  hand  which  abut
upon  the  metacarpus,  soon  afterwards  an  almost  cramp-like  tearing
in  the  palm,  but  with  free  movement.  [(?«.]

Cramp-like  pain  transversely  through  the  metacarpal  bones  of
the  left  hand  from  the  thumb  side  to  the  little  finger  side,  just  as  if
the  whole  hand  were  crushed  together  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

470.  Drawing  pain  transversely  through  the  metacarpal  bones.  [Zz.]
Single  shooting  jerks  near  the  proximal  joints  of  the  fingers.

Fine  tearing  in  the  joints  where  the  metacarpal  bones  are  united
to  the  finger-joints  (aft.  40  h.).  [Zz.]

Cold  hands,  with  cold  sticky  sweat,  especially  on  their  inner
surface.

The  hands  are  pale  yellow,  as  after  a long  illness.  [ Myr .]

475.  The  hands  went  to  sleep  when  they  were  at  rest,  with  formica-
tion in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  which  went  off  when  he  wetted  them,
or  when  he  firmly  grasped  something  with  them.  \_Bch.~\

On  compressing  the  hands  a formication  in  them,  as  if  they
were  asleep  (aft.  12  h.).  [Ws7\

Boring  formication  on  a small  point  of  the  right  palm  (aft.  79
h.).  [Gn.]

Itching  in  the  palm  and  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  just  as  if  they
had  been  frost-bitten.  [Zz.]

Burning  itching  in  the  middle  of  the  palm  (aft.  24  h.).  \WsJ\
480.  An  involuntary  drawing  of  the  tendons  in  the  left  hand,  so  that
the  fingers  were  all  drawn  bent,  with  spasmodic  pains  in  the
palm.  [Gn.]

A red,  hard  pimple  on  a spot  in  the  left  palm  which  the  day  before
was  the  seat  of  burning  itching  ; this  remained  for  several  days  as  a
burning  itching  sensation.  [TVs.]

Painful  drawing  in  the  proximal  thumb-joint  where
it  is  united  with  its  metacarpal  bone.  [Hrr.]


5do


SPIGELIA.


Tearing  pain  in  the  phalanges  of  the  right  thumb

(aft.  7 d.).  [ Hrr.]

Rhythmical  tearing  in  the  phalanges  of  the  fingers  of  the  right
hand  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gjj.]

485.  Burning  pain  on  the  back  of  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  little
finger  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  on  the  left  thumb-joint.  [Gn.]

Paralytic  pain  in  the  right  index  finger.  \_Htn. ]

On  the  middle  finger  of  the  right  hand  a pimple,  which,  in  itself
painless,  exudes  a yellow  pus  when  pressed,  and  disappears  the  next
day  (aft.  17  d.).  [Bch.]

Aching  tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  left  little  finger  (aft.  48  h.),
[Hrr.]

490.  Itching  pricking  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  (aft.  10  m.).  [IVs.]

In  the  tips  of  the  fingers  throbbing,  obtuse  stitches,  as  if  they
had  been  frost-bitten  (aft.  J h.).  [F%.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  left  glutaei  muscles,  when  walking  (aft.  5
d.).  [Gn.]

Great  exhaustion  of  the  lower  extremities,  especially  the  thighs
to  below  the  knee,  as  after  running  quickly,  even  when  sitting.
IHbg.-]

Bruised  pain  in  the  groin  and  on  the  inner  side  of  the  upper  part
of  the  thigh  towards  the  perinaeum,  as  after  a long  ride  in  one  un-
accustomed to  riding  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  [Kr.]

495.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  hip  and  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh.

IHbg.l

Under  the  neck  of  the  left  femur,  in  the  muscles  outwards  and
backwards,  on  a small  spot,  intermittent,  burning,  sharp  stitches,
when  sitting,  little  diminished  by  standing  up,  but  more  violent  than
before  when  he  sits  down  again.  [Gw.]

Itching  in  the  skin,  more  of  the  thighs  than  of  the
legs,  frequently  recurring  after  scratching  (aft.  11  h.).
[<?».]

Constant  eroding  itching  on  both  thighs,  as  if  an  eruption  would
break  out,  not  removable  by  scratching,  but  not  observed  at  night  in
bed.  [Gn.]

Formicating  itching  on  the  right  thigh,  going  off  by  scratching.

[<?».]

500.  Tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  anterior  aspect,1  only  when
walking.  [G^.]

Tension  in  the  right  thigh,  when  sitting  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gn.]
Itching  persistent  prick  on  the  left  thigh.  [Gn.]
Tensive  persistent  prick  In  the  left  thigh,  when
walking,  which  ceased  when  standing,  and  afterwards
recurred  when  sitting  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gn.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  when  sitting  (aft.
29  h.).  [Htn.]

505.  Pressive  tearing  outwards  in  the  left  thigh,  from  the  knee  up  to


1 Qu,  of  the  thigh  ?


SPIGELIA.


501


the  os  innominatum,  as  if  in  the  periosteum  ; where  the  bone  can  be
immediately  pressed  on  the  pain  was  more  violent  (aft.  11  d.).
[Hrr.]

In  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  thighs  bruised  pain,  only  when
walking.

Aching  pain  in  the  right  thigh,  more  violent  when  pressed  (aft.
5*h.).  [(?«.].

Aching  pain  over  the  right  knee,  when  sitting,  which  goes  off
on  moving  (aft.  J h.).  \_Htn.)

In  the  knees  a compressive  pain  mingled  with  drawing  and
shooting ; the  longer  he  walks  the  worse  the  pain  becomes.

510.  Boring  pain  over  the  right  knee-joint,  only  when  at  rest.
[<?»•]

On  the  outside  of  the  left  knee-joint,  when  he  is  going  upstairs,
at  every  step  a tearing  tension  (aft.  76  h.).  [G^.]

The  knee  pains  as  if  bruised  when  touched.

Bruised  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  knee-joint  on  bending  the
knee.


A digging  and  great  restlessness  in  the  left  knee  ; he  could  not
sleep  on  account  of  it,  and  must  sometimes  bend  it  and  sometimes
^straighten  it,  and  lay  it  here  and  there  (aft.  4 h.).

515-  Tearing  pain,  like  dislocation,  in  the  left  knee-joint,
only  when  walking,  so  that  he  must  sometimes  limp
because  he  cannot  bend  the  knee  sufficiently,  [Hrr.]
Single  jerks  in  the  patella.

On  the  right  patella  a sharp,  deep  needle-pricking,  when  sitting.
[Gss.]

Severe  needle-pricks  going  through  the  middle  of  the  knee,  when
bending  it,  interrupted  momentarily  only  when  walking  (aft.  5 d.).
[Htn.]

In  the  right  leg  a (transient)  feeling  of  heaviness,  when  sitting
(aft.  9 h.).  [Htn.]

520.  A drawing  down  the  legs,  with  feeling  of  warmth,  or  as  if
warmth  extended  to  it ; the  feet  also  were  warmer  then.

Itching  digging  in  the  left  tibia,  below  the  patella,  when  at  rest.
[Gk.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  left  tibia,  when  at  rest  (aft.  4 d.).  [ Gn .]
Shooting  in  the  calf,  together  with  twitching  and
pulsation  in  the  patellae  of  both  legs,  when  the  knees
are  held  stretched  out  stiffly  (aft.  13  d.).  [Bch.]

Sensation  in  the  right  calf  as  if  the  blood  pressed  through  a valve
by  drops — a kind  of  gurgling  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ws.]

525.  Digging  pain  in  the  right  calf  on  the  inner  side,  more  violent
when  walking.  [ Gn .]

Cramp  in  the  left  calf  (aft.  11  h.).  [Gn.]

Tensive  drawing  in  the  left  calf,  when  walking.  [Gn.]

A formication  in  the  calves.

Sneezing  causes  a movement  through  the  thighs,  as  if  from  above
downwards,  almost  like  a trembling  chilliness.  [Gjj.]

530.  Burning  pain  oveyr  the  right  inner  ankle  (aft.  37  h,),  [Gn,]


502


SPIGELIA,


Fine  boring  stitch  in  the  right  inner  ankle,  when  at  rest  (aft.  33
h.).  [Gn.]

On  bending  the  foot  up  and  down  a pain  as  if  the  tendons  about
the  ankle-joint  were  too  short-— a cramp-like  sensation  (aft.  10  h.).

In  the  ankle-joint  a sore  drawing,  combined  with  a feeling  of
excoriation  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.]

Single  shooting  jerks  over  the  ankle-joint.

535.  In  the  ankle-joint  a hard  pressure,  as  from  a hard  stone,  with
drawing  in  it  at  the  same  time,  when  standing.  [Fz.]

Twitching  tearing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  (aft.  45  h.).  [Htn.]
Intermittent  tearing  in  the  metatarsal  bones  of  the  left  foot  (aft.
12  h.).  [Gbr.]

Intermittent  tearing  in  the  left  foot,  just  behind  the  toes.  [Gbr.]
Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  when  at  rest,  which  is  not
removed  by  scratching.  [ Gn. ]

540.  Itching  boring  prick  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  when  at
rest,  causing  him  to  scream  out  loudly  (aft.  79  h.).  [ Gn .]

Burning  pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  56  h.).1
Aching  digging  in  the  right  foot  behind  the  toes,  only  when  at
rest.  [Gn.]

Fine  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  toes  (aft.  10  d.).  \_Hrr.~\
On  the  second  toe  of  the  left  foot  there  occurred  a wart-like
elevated  growth,  without  sensation,  which  disappeared  in  three  days
and  left  behind  a white  cicatrix  (aft.  3 d.).  [ Bch.]

545.  On  the  second  left  toe  a wart-like  growth,  with  smarting  pain
per  se,  but  the  pressure  of  the  shoe  caused  burning  pain,  like  a corn  ;
it  left  behind  a thick  white  cicatrix  (aft.  17  d.).  [Bch.]

Itching  prick  in  the  second  right  toe.  [ Gn.]

A formicating  running  in  the  tips  of  the  right  toes,  only  when  at
rest  (aft.  53  h.).  [ Gn .]

In  the  morning  on  first  treading  the  soles  of  the  feet  are  painful
as  if  festering.

Itching  prick  in  the  right  sole,  continuing  when  moving.  [Gn^]
550.  Violent  stitches  in  the  left  sole,  when  sitting  (aft.  4 d.).  [Htn.]
Boring  stitch  in  the  balls  of  the  second  and  third  toes.  [Gn.]

On  treading  a sensation  on  the  left  sole  as  if  the  parts  were  too
much  stretched  and  were  too  short,  on  account  of  which  there  was  a
pricking  pain  (aft.  29  h.),  [Htn.]

Itching  formication  in  the  right  sole  (aft.  77  h.).  [Gn.]

When  walking  he  feels  every  false  step ; a pain  darts  through  all
the  limbs.

555.  The  lower  extremities  feel  heavy,  there  is  tingling  in  them,  he
drags  them  along  with  difficulty ; walking  is  very  disagreeable  to  him.

Everything  hurts  him  as  if  bruised,  and  when  he  rises  from  a seat
he  is  giddy  and  unsteady  in  the  legs,  like  vertigo.

Trembling  first  of  the  lower  then  of  the  upper  extremities.

[*%•]

1 Though  no  name  is  attached  to  this  symptom  it  is  not  one  of  the  symptoms
observed  by  Hahnemann  himself  5 probably  it  belongs  to  Gn.


SPIGELIA.


503

After  scratching  on  the  lower  extremities  some  lumps  (wheals)
arise.  [ Gn .]

Great  sensitiveness  to  touch  of  the  whole  body ; when  he  gets  a
knock  on  any  part  a painful  crawling  runs  quickly  through  the  whole
body  up  to  the  head.  \_Myr^\

560.  Painful  sensitiveness  to  touch  of  the  whole  body 3 at  the  slightest
knock  on  any  part  there  occurs  pain  and  as  it  were  a shivering  about
the  part 3 even  when  treading  there  occurs  a disagreeable  shock  in
the  body  (aft.  3 d.).  [Ws.~\

(After  moderate  walking)  needle-pricks  on  various  parts  of  the
body,  when  going  up  stairs,  [ii/rr.]

Fatigue  in  all  the  limbs,  chiefly  when  walking ; the
spine  feels  to  him  as  if  bruised.  [ Gn .]

He  feels  unwell  in  the  whole  body,  attacked  by  a heaviness  and
lassitude  in  the  limbs,  with  disinclination  for  work,  and  yet  without
uncheerful  disposition  (aft.  6 d.).  \Gn.'\

Tearing  in  the  limbs,  either  immediately  above  or  some-
what Below  the  joints,  on  the  bones,  as  if  they  were  scraped.

[ 'Adyr.~\

565.  Great  heaviness  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities  3 after  going
^ upstairs  he  must  breathe  with  an  effort.  \_Myr^\

Great  exhaustion  of  body  and  mind,  especially  after  standing.

Great  exhaustion  especially  observable  on  going  upstairs  (aft.  2
h-)-  \Kr.]

Great  exhaustion  in  the  morning 3 such  a weight  in  all  his  limbs
that  he  was  unwilling  to  move  (aft.  7 d.).  \Ws^\

Exhaustion  when  walking,  standing  and  lying  3 he  is  hardly  able
to  do  the  slightest  thing  with  his  hands,  not  even  to  dress  himself.
[Myr.]

570.  Along  with  weakness  and  faintness  of  the  whole  body,  trembling
of  the  hands  when  he  attempts  to  grasp  or  hold  fast  anything  (aft.
r3 2 d-)-  [Bch.]

Writing  is  a trouble  to  him  on  account  of  great  heaviness  of  the
arm,  and  walking  is  a trouble  on  account  of  great  heaviness  of  the
lower  limbs.  \_Myr.~\

During  moderate  exercise  he  is  overcome  by  a great  intolerable
heat,  which  is  particularly  obvious  in  the  face  3 during  stronger  exer-
cise sweat  all  over  the  body  (aft.  14  dt).  [ Bch.~\

He  is  very  sensitive  to  cool  air.  [_Bch^\

Great  exhaustion  of  the  body  after  a walk.  \_BchJ\

5 75.  When  hungry  he  is  overcome  by  great  exhaustion.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  he  is  at  first  vigorous  and  strong 3
but  he  very  soon  becomes  weak  and  exhausted,  especially  in  the
muscles  of  the  thighs,  with  an  anxious  pressure  on  the  chest,  so
that  he  would  like  to  eructate,  which,  however,  he  cannot  do  3 after
this  relief  in  the  abdomen  ensues  from  urging  to  stool  and  discharge
of  flatus  (aft,  5^  h.).  [Tz.]

In  the  open  air,  in  the  evening,  he  feels  very  ill  and  anxious  with
inward  heat,  and  he  must  hasten  to  get  within  doors,  where,  how-
ever, he  does  not  feel  much  better  (aft,  11  h.).  [Tz.]


504


SPIGELIA.


He  is  so  exhausted  and  faint,  after  slight  exercise,  that  he
imagines  his  end  is  near  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Bch.'\

In  the  afternoon  all  the  symptoms  are  aggravated.

580.  Convulsions — death.1  [Chalmers,  1.  c.]

Yawning  without  sleepiness.

Almost  incessant  yawning  (immediately).

Frequent  inclination  to  sleep,  which,  however,  he  can  resist.

[Bek.]

Drowsiness  with  yawning  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  (aft.
5 h.).  [Z,r.]

585.  In  the  evening  as  long  as  he  remained  up,  irresistible  drowsiness,
but  after  going  to  bed  he  could  not  fall  asleep  for  a considerable
time.  [Htn.]

Every  night  before  midnight,  no  sleep,  yet  without  pains.

After  lying  down  in  the  evening,  he  lies  awake  till
late  at  night  and  cannot  go  to  sleep.  [ Gss .]

Exhaustion  in  the  morning  on  awaking.

W eariness  in  the  morning  ; shortly  after  getting  up  out  of  bed
he  cannot  when  sitting  help  falling  asleep  (aft.  7 d.).  [Ws.~]

590.  All  the  forenoon,  irresistible  desire  to  sleep,  with  yawning  (aft.
2 h,).  [Htn.]

Such  great  drowsiness  in  the  morning,  that  his  head  falls  forwards
and  he  must  close  the  eyes  (aft.  2^  h.).  [ifr.]

Very  long,  unusual  midday  sleep,  and  when  he  awoke  he  could
not  prevail  on  himself  to  rise  up,  but  always  fell  asleep  again.

im .

Night  sleep  with  many,  but  unremembered  dreams.  [/%.]

Sleep.* 3  [Browne, — Wright,  1.  c.]

595.  At  night  constant  restlessness  in  all  the  limbs  ; every  instant  he
must  put  one  limb  or  another  in  a different  position,  sometimes  flex,
sometimes  extend  them,  and  in  consequence  cannot  get  a moment’s
sleep  * (aft.  10  h.).

Very  restless  sleep  disturbed  by  frequent  waking,

full  of  anxious,  frightful  dreams,  e,g.  that  lightning  knocked  off  his
shoulders.

Restless  sleep.  \_Myr.~\

Heavy  stupefied  sleep,  f [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Sleep  not  refreshing  r,  in  the  morning  he  is  more  tired  than  when
he  went  to  bed  the  previous  evening.

600.  Very  restless  sleep,  disturbed  by  vivid  but  unremembered  dreams  ;
he  only  falls  asleep  late  on  account  of  excessive  liveliness  of  the
mind  ; after  midnight  he  frequently  wakes  up,  tosses  about,  and  is  as
if  in  a half-waking  state.  [£?/'.]

Confused  dreams,  in  which  he  is  so  busy,  that  in  the
morning  he  feels  tired ; on  awaking  he  knows  nothing

* Gold  took  away  this  affection  in  a short-time,
f From  a very  small  dose,  as  he  tells  us.


1 In  two  lusty  children.

3 As  from  opium,  Browne  says.


SPI'GELIA.


505

about  the  dreams,  and  cannot  recal  them,  or  only  imper-
fectly. [Hrr.]

Vivid  dreams  of  well-known  past  events — long  about  one  single
subject.  [Kr.]

Dreams  at  night  which  he  only  dimly  remembers.  [TVs.]

Very  restless  sleep ; . he  tosses  from  one  side  to  the  other,  has
vivid  dreams  of  fire  and  quarrelling  and  strife,  and  at  1 a.m.  imagines
it  is  time  to  get  up.  [Gn.]

605.  Very  vivid  anxious  dreams  of  a great  conflagration  and  of  ghosts
appearing  to  him.  [Gn.]

Anxious  dreams  at  night.  [Myr. ]

In  the  morning  shortly  before  awaking,  during  a lascivious  dream
(an  unusual  thing  with  him),  seminal  emission  not  followed  by
weakness.  [St/.]

Lascivious  dreams  with  seminal  emission  (the  first  night).

[<?»•]

Voluptuous  dreams  with  seminal  emission,  without  erection  of
the  penis.  [Gn.]

610.  The  pulse  at  the  wrist  beats  weakly  and  irregularly,  sometimes
quick  sometimes  slow  (aft.  7 h.).  [Hrr.]

His  pulse,  which  is  usually  72,  at  the  period  of  the  morning  fever
is  only  54  (aft  24  h.).  [Gw.]

Chilliness  every  morning  after  rising  from  bed.  [Hrr.]

In  short  intervals  of  two  to  ten  minutes,  a shiver  running  all
over  the  body,  which  seems  especially  to  proceed  from  the  chest.

[<?«.]

Sometimes  the  chilliness  spreads  from  the  scrobiculus  cordis  only
to  the  belly  and  lower  limbs,  but  sometimes  also,  at  the  same  time,
to  the  back  (aft.  24  h.).  [ Gss .]

615.  Very  slight  movement  of  the  body  brings  on  chilli-
ness. [Gss.]

Immediately  after  dinner,  severe  chilliness  and  coldness  ; he  must
on  account  of  that  lie  down  in  bed.

In  the  morning  rigor,  without  thirst,  with  tolerable  facility  in  the
movements  of  the  fingers  and  wide  awake  condition  of  the  mind.
[*■*•]

Chilliness  every  morning,  after  getting  up  from  bed,
off  and  on  for  a couple  of  hours.  [Hrr.]

Chilliness  in  the  whole  body,  without  thirst,  only  in
the  morning  (aft.  2 h.),  for  several  successive  mornings,
recurring  by  fits,  and  spreading  from  the  feet  upwards.
[Hrr.]

620.  A severe  chill  spread  through  all  the  limbs  all  day,  without
thirst  for  two  successive  days.

Every  morning  chilliness  rapidly  running  over  him,

sometimes  only  on  the  feet,  sometimes  on  the  head  and  hands  only,
sometimes  on  the  back,  or  on  the  chest  and  belly,  sometimes,  also,
all  over  the  body,  without  thirst  (aft.  72  h.).  [Gw.]

In  the  afternoon  he  has  first  chill  then  he  becomes  very  hot,  and
has  great  thirst  (for  beer) .


5 o6


SPIGELIA.


Slight  chilliness  in  the  hack  spreading  to  the  ab-
domen as  far  as  the  umbilical  region  (aft.  2 h.).  [St/.]
Shivering,  running  all  over  the  body,  without  heat  or  thirst  (aft.
1 h.).  [Lr.]

625.  Sensation  on  the  right  thigh  as  if  goose  skin  spread  over  it,  but
without  feeling  of  chilliness.  [Fz.]

Severe  chill  over  the  arms  and  shoulders.

On  the  arms  feeling  of  chilliness  and  occurrence  of  goose  skin  ;
he  durst  not  bring  his  arms  close  to  the  body  on  account  of  a dis-
agreeable shivering  sensation  (aft.  4 d.).  [Fz. ]

Cold  shiver  runs  over  all  the  body,  except  the  arms,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  the  hair  stood  on  end.  [Htn.]

A shiver  runs  over  the  whole  body  and  yet  at  the  same  time  heat
over  the  whole  body,  without  thirst  (aft.  7 h.).  [Lr.]

630.  When  he  lies  down  in  the  evening,  he  has  in  bed,  first  half  an
hour  of  chill,  then  immediately  afterwards  heat  with  perspiration  all
over,  almost  all  night.

Cold  feeling  on  the  whole  body,  without  actual  coldness ; he  was
warm  to  the  touch  all  over,  warmest  on  the  chest.  [ Hrr.]

Fever:  in  the  evening  chilliness  with  cold  hands  and  distended
abdomen,  without  thirst ; thereafter  at  night  he  lay  Qn  the  back,  he
had  bruised  pains  in  all  the  joints  while  lying  quietly,  vivid,  urgent
dreams,  talking  in  sleep,  and  dry  heat  on  the  body,  with  dryness  of
mouth,  nose,  and  eyes,  without  thirst.

Inward  matutinal  fever  : chilliness  running  over  him,  recurring  at
intervals  of  five  to  ten  minutes,  with  externally  perceptible  almost
increased  warmth  ; the  chilliness  seems  to  come  from  the  scrobiculus
cordis  and  to  spread  over  the  trunk,  head,  and  upper  extremities,
without  thirst  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gjj.]

The  tips  of  the  fingers  are  cold,  yet  the  rest  of  the  hand  is
moderately  warm  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.']

635.  Cold  hands,  with  hot  face,  without  thirst  (aft.  5 d.).  [TVs.]

Though  he  has  a feeling  of  heat  on  the  whole  body,  and  heat  espe-
cially in  the  face,  yet  (in  the  evening)  he  longs  for  the  warmth  of  the
bed  (aft.  7 d.).  [Ws.]

When  he  lays  his  hands  on  his  face  they  appear  cold
to  his  face,  whereas  to  one  another  they  seem  more
warm  than  usual ; in  the  palms  only  they  feel  somewhat
sticky.  [ Gss .]

Feeling  of  heat  in  the  face  and  hands,  whilst  the  hands  held  to
the  face  appear  cold  to  the  face  and  the  face  appears  cold  to  the
hands  (aft.  8 h.).  [Ar.]

Cold  feeling  and  hot  feeling  alternated  with  one  another  only  on
the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  but  externally  no  change  of  temperature
was  perceptible.  [ Myr .]

640.  For  five  successive  days  at  the  same  hours,  first  chill
in  the  morning  after  rising  from  bed,  and  at  noon  (five
hours  later)  heat  chiefly  on  the  trunk,  but  still  more
severe  in  the  face,  with  redness,  without  particular
thirst.  [ Hrr .]


SPIGELIA.


507


Chill  and  heat  alternating  all  day  long,  with  redness  of  face.
Alternate  heat  and  chill,  the  chill  showing  itself  chiefly  on  the
back,  whereas  the  heat  is  in  the  hands  and  face.  \_Myr.]

When  he  gets  into  bed  in  the  evening  chill  comes  on  immediately,
and  he  then  has  perspiration  of  a disagreeable  odour,  so  very  profuse
that  he  is  wet  all  over.  [Myr.]

Feeling  of  heat  in  the  body,  in  the  forenoon,  without  externally
perceptible  heat.

645.  Heat  with  great  thirst  for  beer.  [Myr.]

At  night  feeling  of  inward  heat,  with  dryness  of  the  mouth,  with-
out thirst.

After  slight  exercise  very  great  heat  all  over  the  body,  with
sweat,  especially  on  the  head,  without  thirst  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

Increased  warmth  in  the  back ; the  hands,  abdomen,  &c.,  seem
to  him,  to  judge  by  his  sensations,  burning  hot,  and  so  he  becomes
hot  all  over.  [St/.]

Flying  heat  over  the  back,  after  supper.  [Myr.]

650.  A hot  feeling  in  the  whole  spine.  [ Gn .]

At  night  heat  only  on  the  lower  extremities,  without  sweat  or
thirst.

A flush  of  heat  over  the  face,  but  no  redness  (aft.  J h.).
[Htn.]

Though  but  lightly  covered  he  immediately  got  into  perspira-
tion.

Want  of  attention.  [Gn.]

655.  He  does  not  speak  willingly  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Myr!\

He  cannot  enjoy  himself  with  others  though  he  is  not  sad  (aft.  7
h.).  [Htn.]

Anxiety  and  anxious  concern  about  the  future  (aft.  10  d.).

[m.]

Profound  reflection  about  his  future  fate  (aft,  24  h.).  [Zr.]
Anxious  forebodings  about  the  future,  at  the  same  time  with  an
intolerant  humour  disposed  to  crossness.  [Bch.]

660.  Restlessness  and  anguish  ; he  could  not  remain  in  one  place.

Disposition  sad,  and  at  the  same  time  discouraged  and  apprehen-
sive (aft.  1 h.).  [mh.]

Disposition  sad,  and  at  the  same  time  very  cross.  [Myr.]

Sad  and  cross  (with  redness  of  face).

Great  dejection,  in  the  evening;  he  could  have  killed  himself —
with  chilliness  of  the  body  (aft.  8 d.).

665.  Serious  humour,  he  gets  cross  if  the  slightest  joke  is  attempted  on
him.  [Gn.]

He  is  very  cross  and  sensitive  to  everything  that  he  thinks  not
good,  for  many  hours.  [Myr.]

He  is  easily  roused  to  anger.  [Kr.]

At  first  for  three  hours  gloomy,  then  cheerful  and  in  good  spirits  ;
in  the  afternoon  again  gloomy.  [Fz.]

Cheerfulness,  contentment  with  his  state,  and  trustful  humour —
alternating  with  conditions  of  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  anxious
oppression  of  the  chest.  [ Gss .]


5°8


SPIGELIA.


670.  Cheerful,  insouciant,  tranquil,  and  contented  disposition*  during
all  his  pains  and  sufferings.  \_Hrr.~\

After  the  first  day  he  is  livelier  in  mind  and  more  active  than
usual. f [i5Tr.]

Almost  extravagant  cheerfulness  of  disposition.  [iSV/i]

# Formerly  he  was  nearly  always  full  of  care  and  suspicion — therefore  secondary
action,  reaction  of  the  organism,  curative  action,
f Curative  reaction  of  the  life.


SPONGIA.1

( Roasted  Sponge.)

(The  bath-sponge — the  habitation  of  the  animal  of  the  Spongia  officinalis , L. — is  cut
into  pieces  of  moderate  size  and  roasted  in  a tin-plate  coffee-roaster,  turned  round
over  glowing  charcoal  until  it  becomes  brown,  and  can  without  much  labour  be
triturated  to  a powder.  Of  this  20  grains  are  added  to  400  drops  of  good  alcohol,
shaken  twice  a day  and  allowed  to  macerate  for  a week  without  warmth.  Thus  a
tincture  is  made  which  contains  a grain  of  roasted  sponge-power  in  every  20  drops.)

Sponge  burnt  to  a black  coal  (spongia  usta,  combusta)  as  it  is  not
seldom  prepared,  seems  to  be  less  powerful.  On  the  other  hand,  if  only
roasted  brown  in  the  manner  described  above,  it  is  very  odorous,  and
communicates  all  its  great  medicinal  powers  to  the  alcohol.  If  the
tincture  be  dropped  into  water  a milkiness  is  produced,  yet  a good  deal
ofit  is  retained  in  solution.  The  sponge  is  said  to  contain  some  iodine.

That  remarkable  swelling  of  the  thyroid  gland  of  the  neck  called
goitre,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  of  deep  valleys  and  their
termination  in  plains,  which  arises  from  a concurrence  of  apparently
tolerably  identical  causes,  though  most  of  these  are  unknown  to  us,
constitutes  a malady  which  is  almost  always  uniform  in  its  nature,  for
which  a medicine,  if  it  has  in  one  case  been  proved  serviceable,  must  be
so  always  and  in  every  case  (specific) .

But  the  ordinary  medical  school  did  not  know  how  to  obtain  a
knowledge  of  medicines  a priori , before  their  administration  in  diseases,
and  knew  not  for  what  morbid  states  they  would  and  must  be  curative,
and  consequently  it  prescribed  them  in  a blind  sort  of  way  in  diseases,
several  medicines  at  once,  always  in  mixtures.  Hence  the  ordinary
school  was  unable  to  discover  any  certain  remedies  for  chronic  ailments,
not  even  for  diseases  that  always  remained  the  same.  Hence  common
folk  had  to  look  to  themselves  for  help,  but  this  they  could  only  obtain
in  the  slowest  and  most  tedious  way  in  the  world,  namely,  by  incessantly
trying  all  sorts  of  simple  substances  which  chance  offered  them,
whereby  after  some  millions  of  fruitless  trials  at  last  a remedy  came
into  their  hands,  which  having  once  been  of  use,  must  assuredly  be  always
serviceable  in  diseases  of  fixed  character  and  identical  nature.  Thus
medicine  has  to  thank  this  thorough  trial  by  the  common  folk  of  all
conceivable  medicinal  substances,  for  the  few  surely  curative  drugs  for
such  diseases  as  are  always  the  same,  that  is,  arising  from  identical
causes  and  hence  of  fixed  character.  The  ancient  medical  school  that
thinks  itself  so  wise  could  not  do  this  for  itself,  as  we  see.

In  this  way  thousands  of  years  might  have  elapsed  ere  the  ordinary
domestic  medical  practice,  after  innumerable  trials  of  drugs,  at  length


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827.


510


SPONGIA.


lighted  upon  roasted  sponge  as  the  remedy  for  this  troublesome  ailment,
the  goitre,  and  found  it  to  be  a specific  for  the  disease.  At  all  events,
we  find  it  first  mentioned  a specific  for  goitre  in  the  thirteenth  century
by  Arnald  von  Villanova.

The  medical  art  then  reaped  where  it  had  not  sowed,  and  appro-
priated this  discovery  of  common  folk.  But  as  it  has  ever  held  sim-
plicity to  be  dishonourable,  it  mixed  the  roasted  sponge  when  employing
it  as  a remedy  for  goitre  with  a number  of  other  substances,*  always
varying  them,  in  order  as  it  declared  in  its  learned  way,  to  act  as
adjuvants  to  the  sponge,  but  in  reality  this  only  spoilt  its  action.
The  mixture,  on  account  of  these  perturbing  additions,  often  proved
useless,  or  if  it  still  did  good,  then  in  course  of  time  the  good  effects
were  ascribed  by  subsequent  practitioners  to  the  auxiliary  ingredients,
so  that  at  length  it  was  not  known  which  was  the  efficacious  ingre-
dient  in  the  prescription.  Thus  roasted  sponge,  owing  to  this
quackish  but  learned  addition  of  other  drugs,  gradually  lost  its  repu-
tation, and,  indeed,  sometimes  disappeared  altogether  from  the  'goitre-
remedy  t ( pulvis  ad  strumas ),  so  that  at  length  roasted  sponge  was
dropped  out  of  many  modern  works  on  materia  medica  as  a useless
thing.  So  the  distinguished  medical  school,  by  means  of  its  learned
mixture-art,  succeeded  once  more  in  destroying  and  burying  in  oblivion
a truth  which  the  unsophisticated  experience  of  the  common  folk  had
discovered  by  an  infinity  of  tedious  trials  carried  on  during  thousands
of  years.  This  is  a little  specimen  of  the  benefits  which  have  been
bestowed  on  the  human  race  by  the  ordinary  medical  art.

But  granting  that  practitioners  of  the  ordinary  stamp  knew  the
original  value  of  roasted  sponge  in  the  treatment  of  the  goitre  of  residents
in  valleys,  how  can  they  apply  the  other  great  curative  virtues  of  this  medi-
cinal substance  in  many  other  morbid  states  that  do  not  occur  in  a uniform
manner , when  they  do  not  know  or  scorn  to  follow  the  only  sure  way
to  discover  the  pure  powers  of  drugs,  experimentation  on  the  healthy  ?

The  following  symptoms  of  roasted  sponge  observed  on  healthy
persons  (I  would  they  were  three  times  as  numerous)  will  teach  us  what
further  medicinal  use  this  drug,  as  powerful  as  it  is  useful,  can  be
applied  to  by  the  homoeopathic  healing  art.

Where  the  ordinary  practitioner  still  employed  roasted  sponge  for
the  cure  of  goitre  he  gave  it  in  doses  of  half  to  a whole  drachm  daily,
mixed  with  pepper,  lamp-black,  &c.  On  the  other  hand,  I found  one
or  two  doses  of  the  smallest  portion  of  a drop  of  the  tincture  several
times  diluted  quite  sufficient  for  curative  purposes.

For  other  homoeopathic  curative  objects,  I found  a still  farther
dilution  and  diminution  of  the  dose  necessary— latterly  a very  small
portion  of  a drop  of  the  decillion-fold  dilution  for  a dose.

The  most  powerful  antidote  of  roasted  sponge  is  camphor.

Homoeopathy  has  found  the  most  remarkable  remedial  employment
of  roasted  sponge  in  that  frightfully  acute  disease  membranous  croups

* In  the  Pharmacopoeia  Angustana,  for  example,  ten  other  ingredients  are  added,
and  so  the  actual  efficacious  remedy,  the  Spongia  usta,  is  deteriorated.

f As  for  example  in  Klein’s  Selectus  Medicaminum,  p.  168,  compared  with
p.  183.


SPONGIA.


511

guided  thereto  partly  by  other  symptoms  of  this  medicine,  but  chiefly
by  symptom  231.  The  local  inflammation,  however,  should  first  be
diminished  or  removed  by  the  exhibition  of  an  extremely  small  dose  of
aconite.*  The  accessory  administration  of  a small  dose  of  hepar
sulphuris  will  seldom  be  found  necessary.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow -p rovers  were  Gutmann,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hartmann,
Haynel,  Hornburg,  Langhammer,  J.  G.  Lehmann,  Stapf,  Wagner,  Wis-

LICENUS.

No  old-school  authorities  are  referred  to.

The  1 st  edit,  has  316  symptoms,  the  2nd  edit.  391.]


SPONGIA.

Vertigo  when  sitting,  as  if  the  head  would  sink  to  the  side,  with
hot  feeling  in  the  head  (aft.  \ h.).  \_JVr.~]

Vertigo,"  inclining  to  fall  backwards.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

He  has  whirling  in  the  head,  he  staggers  and  must  support  him-
self by  something,  as  in  intoxication  (aft.  | h.).  [iift/z.]

, Violent  rush  of  blood  to  the  brain,  with  heat  outwardly  on  the
forehead  3 the  cervical  arteries  beat  perceptibly  (aft.  1 h.).  [JVr.]

-5.  Increased  afflux  of  blood  to  the  head.

In  the  forehead  sensation  of  accumulation  of  blood.

Weakness  of  the  head  and  an  obtuseness  that  makes  him  unfit
for  all  mental  work,  with  a sensation  of  weariness  through  the  whole

head  is  confused  and  stupid.

Confusion  of  the  head  3 he  staggers  like  a drunken  person  when
walking,  for  an  hour  (aft.  \ h.).

10.  Heaviness  of  the  head  all  day.

When  she  lays  down  her  head  on  the  table  before  her  in  order
to  rest  and  then  lifts  it  up  again,  she  feels  it  heavy.

Painful  heaviness  in  the  occiput,  as  if  lead  lay  in  it,  whilst
walking,  which  is  repeated  in  jerks  (aft.  i\  h.).  \Htn^\

Heaviness  of  the  head  (aft.  J h.).  \TVr.\

Heaviness  and  fulness  of  the  head,  increased  by  stooping.  \Wr^\
15.  Aching  pain  in  the  crown  (aft.  5 m.).  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Obtuse  pressive  pains  from  within  outwards  in  the  right  frontal
protuberance  (aft.  30  h.).  [Htn.]

Dull  headache  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain,  on  coming
from  the  open  air  into  the  warm  room  (aft.  i|,  35  h.).
[<?»■]

Pressive  pain  out  at  the  right  parietal  bone,  when  lying.  [ Gn.~\

Dull  pressive  pain  from  the  front,  in  the  forehead  above  the  eyes,
to  the  occiput  and  nape,  for  ten  hours,  until  he  goes  to  sleep  (aft,
3 h.).  \Wr. ]

# The  smaller  the  drug-doses  in  acute  and  the  most  acute  diseases,  the  more
quickly  do  they  effect  their  action.  In  the  case  above  alluded  to  one  single  olfaction
of  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard-seed  moistened  with  the  thirtieth  dilution  of
aconite-juice,  fulfils  this  object  in  the  best  and  most  complete  manner.


body.

The


5 12


SPONGIA,


20.  Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  left  temple,  close  to  the  orbit,  which
also  sets  up  a pressive  sensation  in  the  left  half  of  that  eye  (aft.  2 h.).

[#%•]  .

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead  (aft.  J h.).  [Ws.~\

Out-pressive  sensation  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  i£  h.).  [Htn.\
Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  all  would  come  out  at  the  forehead.
Violent  pressing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  head
would  burst  there  (aft.  9J  h.).  j [Htn.]

25.  Jerking  through  both  sides  of  the  head,  especially  at  the  temples
up  into  the  top  of  the  head  when  he  moves  his  arms  and  at  every
step  (aft  1 h.).  [/Ar.]

On  the  whole  side  on  which  the  (small)  goitre  is,  a jerking  pain  ;
in  the  head  a beating  which  descends  into  the  cheeks  and  spreads  into
the  neck  as  a tearing.

Twitching  stitches  in  the  forehead,  increased  by  walking  (aft.
5 h.).  [/Ar.]

Pressive  down-drawing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  and
neck  (aft.  4 h.).  [/Ar.]

Violent  pressure  in  the  forehead  and  occiput  simultaneously  as
if  the  two  were  pressed  together  towards  one  another,  at  noon  (aft.
5 h.)-

30.  Aching  pain  over  the  right  eye  rather  externally  (aft.  \ h.).

Aching  pricking  at  one  time  in  the  forehead,  at  another  in  the
occiput,  only  every  time  he  moves,  with  burning  hot  sensation
spreading  from  the  region  behind  the  ear  over  the  occiput  to  the
nape.  [/Ar.]

Needle-pricks  going  transversely  across  on  the  left  side  of  the
forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [Ar.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  boring  needle-pricks  on  the  left
side  of  the  forehead  as  from  within  outwards  (aft  34  h.).  [Ar.]
Beating  in  the  left  temple.

35.  When  lying  she  feels  in  her  head,  in  the  region  of  the  ear,  on
v/hich  she  is  lying  in  bed,  a noise  like  a strong  pulsation,  each  time
with  a double  beat ; if  she  lies  round  on  the  other  ear,  she  feels  it  on
that  side.

Sharp  stitches  on  the  left  teniple_  externally,  extend*
ing  into  the  forehead  (aft.  6, 14  h.).  [Ar.]

Pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  8^  h.).  [Ar.]

Sharp  external  pressure  on  both  temples  (aft.  \ h.).  [/AT]

An  out-pressing  pain  on  the  top  of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,
when  sitting,  which  went  off  after  standing  up  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Ar.]

40.  Drawing  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head  (immediately).

Gnawing  pain  externally  on  the  upper  part  of  the  head  (aft.  1 h.).

Disagreable  sensitiveness  of  the  integuments  of  the  head,  espe-
cially on  moving  the  scalp  (aft.  J h.).  [/Ar.]

Burning  in  the  scalp  on  the  right  side  (aft.  15  h.).  [(?«.]

Feeling  as  if  the  hairs  on  the  crown  stood  on  end,  or  as  if  some  one
moved  them,  most  severe  at  any  movement  of  the  body  (aft.  1 h.).
[/Ar.]


SPONGIA.  513

45.  Tensive  contractive  sensation  above  the  root  of  the  nose  (aft.
11J  h.).  [Htn.]

A yellow  scabby  eruption  on  the  left  superciliary  ridge,  where  it
is  only  somewhat  painful  when  touched.  \_Fr.  H — n.\

The  eyes  have  a dull  look  and  the  eyelids  are  swollen  as  after
intoxication,  or  as  if  he  had  been  revelling  all  night ; at  the  same
time  exhausted,  tired  and  sleepy  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Htn.]

Sudden  shooting  drawing  in  the  outer  angle  of  the  left  orbit
which  spreads  upwards  and  downwards  round  the  eye  to  the  inner
angle  (aft.  ij  h.).  [TVs,]

Tensive  shooting  pain  in  the  left  outer  canthus  of  the  eye,
worst  on  moving  the  eyes  j it  went  off  when  touched  (aft.  4J  h.).

[<?»•]

50.  Pricking  itching  under  the  left  eye  which  is  somewhat  relieved
by  rubbing  (aft.  5 h.).  [TVs.]

Aching  round  beneath  the  eyelids.

Itching  on  the  eyelids.

In  the  morning  in  bed  the  lids  of  the  left  eye  are  closed  so  that
she  can  only  open  them  with  difficulty.

Heaviness  of  the  eyelids.  [ Wr .]

55.  Pressive  heaviness  in  the  eyelids,  just  as  if  they  would  close  (aft.

-ih.).  {Wr.}

Tension  in  the  left  eye,  near  the  temple  (aft.  \ h.).

In  both  eyes  shooting  and  at  last  aching  pain,  in  the  evening
(aft.  9 h.).  [JVr.]

Aching  and  shooting  in  the  right  eye.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Burning  in  the  left  eye  round  about  the  eyeball.

60.  Shooting  in  the  eye.

The  eyes  suppurate.

The  eyes  are  deeply  sunk.

Burning  pain  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  left  lower  lid.  [ Gn .]
Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

65.  Great  watering  of  the  eye.  [Fr.  H — n.]

When  she  looks  fixedly  at  a point,  there  occur  headache  and
weeping  of  the  eyes.

She  can  only  make  out  distant  objects  by  a great  effort.

Severe  heat  of  one  side  of  the  face,  which  is  renewed  even  by
merely  thinking  of  it.

He  has  red  cheeks  and  yet  only  the  usual  warmth  in  the  face.
[Htn.]

70.  Paleness  of  face.

Dull  ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVr.]

Ringing  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  10  h.).  [Lr.]

Red  swelling  of  the  anterior  convolution  of  the  right  auricle,  with
a pimple  in  it,  which  discharged  like  an  ulcer  for  nine  days ; the  ear
was  painful  when  pressed  from  without  (aft.  24  h.).

In  the  left  auricle,  close  to  the  entrance  to  the  meatus  auditorius,
an  inflamed  lump,  which  later  on  was  covered  by  a scab,  remaining
for  several  days  painful  to  touch.  [Hnl.]

VOL.  11.


33


5H


SPONGIA.


75.  Formation  of  boils  on  the  left  ear  which  are  painful  when
touched  (aft.  1 h.).  [Z?z.]

Burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  right  ear.  [Gn.~\

Pain  in  the  ear-cartilages  per  se  like  soreness — not  altered  by
touching  (aft.  J h.).  \JVsf\

Tensive  pain  in  the  swelling  at  the  orifice  of  the  meatus  auditorius
and  formication  therein,  as  if  it  would  become  an  ulcer  ; sometimes
stitches  in  it  (aft.  15 \ h.).  \_HnlJ\

Fine  pricks  in  the  right  ear  towards  the  outside,  as  if  through
the  membrana  tympani  (immediately).  \Wsf\

80.  Pressure  in  the  ears  and  forcing  in  them.

Earache — a contractive  pain  (aft.  3 h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear  (aft.  9 h.).  \}Vrf\
Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  ear  when  walking  in  the  open  air
(aft.  24  ih.).  \Htn.~]

Hardness  of  hearing.

85.  Formicating  pricks  in  the  left  nasal  bone  (aft.  \ h.).  \Wsf\
Tearing  in  the  nose.

(Stoppage  of  the  nose  by  mucus.)

Eruption  on  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  on  the  lips.

During  dinner,  after  gently  blowing  the  nose,  a violent  and
long-continued  epistaxis  (aft.  3 d.).  \_Hnl.]

90.  Aching  tearing  sensation  in  the  right  zygomatic  arch  (aft.  \ h.).
[Htn,  ]

Itching  on  the  left  cheek  (aft.  | h.).

Pricking  itching  in  the  left  cheek  (aft.  f h.).

Shooting  on  the  cheek.

Swelling  of  the  cheek.

95.  Cramp-like  pang  from  the  left  maxillary  joint  down
along  the  cheek,  in  the  evening  when  eating  (for  five  days).

Twitching  prick  posteriorly  from  the  right  upper  jaw  into  the
right  inner  ear,  in  the  evening  in  bed.  \_Hnl.~\

Cramp-like  pain  on  the  left  upper  jaw  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Zr.]

On  the  left  upper  jaw  needle-pricks  darting  across

(aft.  2},  3|  h.).  [Zr .]

The  lower  jaw  is  painful  when  touched.

100.  Fine  pricks  under  the  lower  lip  (aft.  7 h.).  \JVsJ\

Constant  violent  burning  under  the  right  commissure  of  the
mouth,  on  the  chin,  as  if  an  eruption  were  about  to  come  there ; on
stretching  the  skin  it  becomes  more  violent  (aft.  6 h.).  [Hnl.']

The  left  side  of  the  chin  is  painful  to  touch,  extending  to  the
oral  commissure,  as  if  festering  (aft.  4 h.).  \JVs^\

Sensation  as  if  the  cervical  glands  were  swollen  (aft.  14  h.).

Pain  as  if  the  cervical  glands  near  the  larynx  and  trachea  were
swollen  (aft.  3 h.).

105.  Several  glandular  swellings  under  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw,
which  interfere  with  the  movement  of  the  neck  and  have  a tensive
pain  when  touched  (aft.  38  h.).  [Zr.]

Glandular  swellings  under  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw,  which
are  painful  on  touching  the  neck  (aft.  73  h.).  [Zr.]


SPONGIA.


5i5

Sensation  in  the  thyroid  gland  and  the  cervical  glands,  on  taking
breath  as  if  air  in  them  rushed  up  and  down.

In  the  goitre  shooting  pain  on  swallowing,  when  not  swallowing
slight  pain.  [Stf.]

In  the  goitre,  stitches,  also  when  not  swallowing.  [*SY/'.]
no.  Pressive  sensation  in  the  goitre,  several  times  daily.

Externally  over  the  pit  of  the  throat  constant  needle-pricks  (in
the  lower  part  of  the  goitre).

Several  large  pimples  under  the  chin  on  the  neck,  which  are
painful  when  pressed  on  (aft.  12  h.).

Stiffness  of  the  neck  when  bowing  and  turning  the  head.  [Ln.]

Intermittent,  slow  pressure  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  as  if
the  skin  were  compressed  between  the  fingers,  the  part  down  the
jugular  vein  was  also  outwardly  painful  when  touched.  [Hbg.]

1 15.  Painful  pressure  over  the  thyroid  cartilage  increased  by  touching
(immediately).  [ Hbg .]

Whilst  singing  an  aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  larynx  (aft.
6Jh.).  [Htn.]

Tension  of  the  cervical  muscles,  especially  on  the  right  side,  on
bending  back  the  head  (aft.  3d.).  [TVs.]

In  the  goitre  sensation  as  if  something  waggled  and  moved  about
in  it  as  if  alive,  especially  when  swallowing'  [£//".]

In  the  goitre  sensation  as  of  a working  in  it,  a distension  and
pushing,  as  if  all  would  come  out  there.  [St/.]

120.  Painful  tension  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck  near  Adam’s  apple,  on
turning  the  head  towards  the  right  side  (aft.  i\  h.).  [TVs.]

The  region  of  the  thyroid  gland  is  as  if  indurated  (aft.  4 d.).

[m.]

Twitching  in  the  right  cervical  muscles,  when  lying  (aft.  24  h.).

[<?*•]

At  various  times,  twitching  pricks  externally  in  the  region  of  the
larynx.  [Hnl.]

A transient  stitch  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck  (aft.  ij  h.).  [TVs.]
125.  Coarse  slow  stitches  in  the  right  cervical  muscles,  immediately
on  waking  from  sleep,  which  went  off  when  swallowing  and  then
immediately  recurred  (aft.  23  h.).  [Htn.]

Transient  formication  on  the  neck  (aft.  h.).  [TVs.]

After  opening  the  mouth  wide  and  biting  the  teeth  strongly  to-
gether, a painful  spasm  in  the  cervical  muscles,  which  drew  the
lower  jaw  forcibly  down,  with  heaviness  in  the  maxillary  joint  as  if  it
were  dislocated.  [Hnl.]

Drawing  needle-pricks  through  the  left  side  of  the  neck  (aft.  60
h.).  [TVs.]

Painful  sensation  of  stiffness  on  the  left  side  of  the
nape,  when  he  turns  the  head  to  the  right  side  (aft.  \ h.).
[Htn.]

130.  Frequently  recurring  pressive  cracking  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the
nape,  close  to  the  scapula,  which  is  not  altered  by  any  movement
(aft.  h.).  [Htn.]

On  bowing  a cracking  in  the  nape  (aft  16  h.).  [Hnl.]


SPONGIA.


516

Vesicles  on  the  border  of  the  tongue  with  sore  pain.

On  the  inside  of  the  cheek  and  on  the  border  of  the  tongue
vesicles  with  shooting  and  burning  pain,  on  account  of  which  she  could
not  eat  anything  solid.

Itching  in  the  upper  and  lower  teeth.

135.  Shooting  in  the  upper  incisors.  [Z/£g-.]

Pain  in  the  back  molars  of  the  right  lower  jaw,  as  if  the  gums
and  teeth  were  swollen  and  the  latter  raised  up,  for  two  days.

Pain  as  if  he  bit  on  something  between  the  teeth.

When  chewing  food  a painful  sensation  as  if  the  molars  were
on  edge  and  loose  (aft.  6\  h.).  [Z>.]

A (burning)  pain  in  the  left  upper  molars  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.]

140.  When  chewing,  painful  gums  which  are  swollen.

A burning  in  the  throat,  the  larynx,  and  then  in  the  ears.

In  the  throat,  especially  after  eating,  a shooting  and  on  the  neck
sensation  as  if  something  passed  out  there,  in  the  morning  and
evening.

Accumulation  of  saliva  (aft.  J h.).

Hiccup  (aft.  8£,  33,  37,  57  h.).  [Zr.]

145.  Repeated  hiccup  (aft.  ± h.).  [Wr.\

Sweet  taste  in  the  mouth.

Deep  down  in  the  throat,  not  in  the  mouth,  a persistent  bitter
taste.

In  the  throat  bitter  taste  (aft  J h.).  \_Htn.~\

Empty  eructation  (aft.  \ h.).

150.  Eructation  several  times  (aft.  2 h.).  \WrI\

Sour  belching  (aft.  5 h.).  \_Htn.~\

Bitter  eructation  (aft.  1 h.).  \TVr.]

Thirst  for  cold  water,  in  the  evening  (aft.  38  h.).  [Zr.]

Increased  appetite.

155.  Great  hunger;  she  cannot  be  satiated.

Diminished  appetite.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Water  collects  in  his  mouth,  with  nausea  (aft.  24  h.).  [Hnl.~\
Persistent  nausea.

Nausea  during  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking  (aft.  30  h.).  [Zr.]
160.  Inclination  to  vomit,  without  vomiting.  [6'//'.]

The  (accustomed)  tobacco,  when  smoked,  tastes  scrapy  bitter  in
the  mouth  and  fauces  (aft.  \ h.).  [ Htn.~\

Every  time  he  smokes  (the  customary)  tobacco,  violent  thirst.
[Htn.]

Extremely  disagreeable  sensation  of  relaxation  in  the  oesophagus
and  stomach  as  if  he  had  drunk  a great  deal  of  tepid  water — for
several  hours  (aft.  23  h.).  [Hnl.]

Aching  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  in  the  afternoon.

165.  Aching  pain  in  the  gastric  region,  lasting  all  the  forenoon  (aft.

J h.).

She  cannot  bear  any  tight  clothing  on  the  body,  especially  in  the
region  of  the  stomach.

Inward  sensation  of  cold  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  with  fulness  in
that  region  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn.]


SPONGIA.


5i7


During  the  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking  there  occurs  immedi-
ately heat  in  the  belly  which  goes  also  up  into  the  chest,  without
heat  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  which  on  the  contrary  is  chilly  (aft.
3 h.).  [**.]

When  sitting  painful  contraction  on  the  left  below  the  stomach,
especially  when  lying  on  the  right  side  (aft.  17  h.).  \_Hnl.~\

170.  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  belly,  in  the  hepatic  region  (aft.
1 h.).  [/Fr.]

Rumbling  m the  abdomen  and  empty  eructation  (aft.  h.).
Pinching  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  loud  rumbling  (aft.  5 h.).

[G*.]

I requent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  which  ceases  after  discharge
of  flatus  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.]

After  eating  a cutting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  in  the
morning  (aft.  2 6 h.).  [Hnl.~]

175.  After  eating  distress  and  fulness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  digestion
would  not  go  on.

In  the  evening  after  eating,  cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  going
towards  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  4 d.).  \_Hnl.~\

In  the  morning  after  eating,  violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  so
that  he  must  bend  up  the  abdomen ; at  the  same  time  great  urging
to  stool,  when  the  evacuation  is  normal  but  scanty  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hnlf]
Spasms  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  6 d.).

Bellyache,  pinching  in  the  whole  abdomen.  [S^.]

180.  Pinching  deep  in  the  abdomen,  when  sitting,  which  compels  him
to  get  up,  because  he  thinks  he  has  a call  to  stool;  but  immediately
after  getting  up  the  pain  lessens  and  goes  off  entirely  when  standing
in  a stooping  posture  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Htn.~\

Fine  prick  externally  at  the  navel  (aft.  2 h.).  \_tVs.']

Tensive  pain  in  the  upper  abdomen  when  walking,  but  worse
when  stooping  (aft.  1 h.).  [G«.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  upper  abdomen  when  sitting.  \Gn.~\

Tense  abdomen  (aft.  24  h.).

185.  Digging  shooting  in  the  hypogastrium,  on  the  left  side,  only
observed  when  expiring,  and  worst  when  stooping  (aft.  10 \ h.).
[<?«.]

Sensation  like  fine  digging  as  from  something  alive  under  the
abdominal  integuments  above  the  left  hip,  in  the  left  side  on  which
he  lies  in  bed,  in  the  morning  (aft.  22  h.).  \}Vsf\

On  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  a strangling  sensation  which  is
aggravated  by  the  pressure  of  the  hand  (aft.  J h.).  \_Htn.~]

Deep  in  the  abdomen,  a strangling  sensation  which  is  relieved  by
the  discharge  of  some  flatus,  but  soon  increases  again  (aft.  7 h.).
[Htn.]

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  lumbar  muscles  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gtz.]

390.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  left  inguinal  region,  when  sitting  (aft.  i\
h.).  [Htn.]

Glandular  swelling  in  the  right  groin,  which  has  a tensive  pain
when  walking.  [Zr.]

Pain  in  the  inguinal  ring,  as  in  a hernia.


SPONGIA.


5i8

Only  when  sitting,  aching  tearing  pain  in  the  region  of  the
inguinal  ring,  on  both  sides,  at  various  times.  [Hnl.]

Qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  together  with  frequent  liquid
stools  like  diarrhoea.  [ Ln.]

19 5.  White  diarrhoea  (aft.  48  h.).

Discharge  of  flatus  and  a soft  stool  without  suffering  (aft.  6 h.).

[<?*.]

(The  first  part  of  the  stool  is  hard,  the  second  soft.)

Hard  motion  seven  hours  too  late  (aft.  9 h.).  [Wr.]

During  the  stool  pressure  from  flatulence  in  the  lumbar  regions
(aft.  36  h.).  [Ws.]

200.  Tensive  pain  from  the  middle  of  the  hypogastrium  out ’at  the
anus  (aft.  11^  h.).  [Gn.]

During  the  evacuation  of  the  stool  sore  pain  for  some  days  (aft.
2 d.).  [Hnl]

Tenesmus  with  every  stool.

Bruised  pain  at  the  anus,  almost  like  sore  pain.

Before  every  stool  stitches  in  the  anus  and  rumbling  in  the  belly.

205.  During  the  stool  tenesmus  at  the  anus,  as  if  diarrhoea  would
come  on  (aft.  4 d.).  [TVs.]

Every  day  many  thread-worms  come  away ; every  evening  there
is  creeping  in  the  rectum.

Frequent  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  i\  h.).  [ Lr .]

(Inability  to  retain  the  urine.)

The  clear  bright  yellow  urine  on  standing  deposits  a yellow
sediment  (aft.  23  h.).  [Gn.]

210.  (The  urine  is  foamy  and  frothy.)

The  urine  deposits  a thick  greyish-white  sediment.

(Pain  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  as  a hint  to  urinate.)

Very  thin  stream  of  urine.

A voluptuous  itching  on  the  point  of  the  glans  penis,  for  several
hours,  which  forced  him  to  rub  it  (aft.  52  h.).  \_Lr.~\

215.  Itching  burning  in  the  scrotum  and  the  body  of  the  penis,  several
times.  [Hnl.]

Drawing  painful  stitches  from  the  body  of  the  penis  through  the
glans  (aft.  4 d.).  [Hnl.]

Simple  pain  of  the  testicles,  also  when  touched.

Squeezing,  contusive,  strangling  pain  in  the  testicles.

Coarse  rather  obtuse  stitches  which  dart  from  the  testicles  into
the  spermatic  cord.

220.  Aching  painful  swelling  of  testicles  (aft.  10  h.).

Swollen  painful  spermatic  cord.

Before  the  appearance  of  the  menses  first  pain  in  the  back  then
palpitation  of  the  heart,  all  day.

During  the  menses  drawing  in  the  thighs  and  legs.

The  menses  come  on  too  soon  and  too  copiously  (immediately).

[*/.]

* * *

225.  Sneezing  and  fluent  coryza.  [ Lr .]

Stuffed  coryza  (aft.  25  h.).  [Gk.]


SPONGIA.


5i9


Cough  and  coryza,  very  severe.

Scrapy  burning  and  constriction  of  the  larynx.  [Ln.]

Dryness  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  aggravated  by  hawking  (aft.

ih  .).[&*.]

230.  Hoarseness.

Difficulty  of  drawing  the  breath,  as  if  a cork  were  sticking  in  the
larynx  and  the  breath  could  not  penetrate  through  the  narrowed
orifice  of  the  larynx  (aft.  \ h.).  [Ln.~\

Slow,  deep  breathing,  as  after  exhaustion,  for  several  minutes  (aft.

ih-)-

After  some  exertion  she  suddenly  became  exhausted,  the  chest
especially  was  affected ; she  could  hardly  speak,  got  heat  in  the  face
and  nausea ; after  some  hours  heaviness  in  the  head.

After  a dance  frequent  gasping  for  breath,  very  quick  panting
respiration.

235.  Hollow  cough  with  some  expectoration,  day  and  night.  \_Fr.
H — «.]

When  coughing  pain  in  the  chest  and  trachea,  with  roughness  of
the  throat.

Continued  cough  from  a spot  deep  down  in  the  chest,  where
there  is  pain  as  if  it  had  become  sore  and  bloody  from  coughing  (aft.

i h.).

When  coughing  painful  aching  under  the  short  ribs  (aft.  1 h.).
[Htn.]

Hacking  up  of  mucus  (aft.  25  h.),  [/>.]

240.  Dry  cough  (aft.  ± h.).

Dry  cough,  day  and  night,  with  burning  in  the  chest,  as  if  she
had  something  hot  inside  her ; after  eating  and  drinking  the  cough
goes  off.

(Frequent  cough  at  night,  lasting  two  minutes,  and  cross  expres-
sion along  with  it.)

(Great  tightness  of  the  chest)  (aft.  to  d.).

Boring  stitch  in  the  right  costal  muscles,  continuing  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  7 h.).  [Gn.]

245.  Severe  needle-pricks  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  from  within
outwards  (aft.  56  h.).  [Lr.]

When  sitting  with  the  back  somewhat  bent,  but  especially  during
slow  deep  inspiration,  drawing  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest
(aft.  5 d.).  [HnL]

Severe  intermittent  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  [f
h.).  [Lr.]

Drawing  stitches  under  the  second  rib  of  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  only  when  walking  (aft.  8 h.).  [HnL]

Transient,  painful  stitches  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest ; if  he
rubs  on  the  spot  he  feels  as  if  a weight  were  drawn  downwards  under
the  skin  there  (aft.  50  h.).  [Lr.]

250.  Pricking  itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  towards  the  shoulder
(aft.  \ h.).

Outwardly  on  the  chest  and  arms  fine  pricking  for  several  days.

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  an  aching  cutting  pain  on  taking  a


520


SPONGIA.


deep  breath;  rat  other  times  he  feels  but  little  of  it  (aft.  3 d.).

[^•]

Shooting  pinching  crawling  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  in  the
region  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  which  becomes  more  painful
when  pressed  from  without  (aft.  10  h.).  [ TVs .]

Sudden  pain  simultaneously  in  the  pectoral  and  dorsal  muscles  of
the  left  side,  as  if  a broad  body  furnished  with  points  forced  itself  up
— a broad  pressure  with  much  pricking  (aft.  3 d.).  [JVs.]

255.  An  aching  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  and  sometimes  several
stitches  in  it,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest.  [Hnl.]

Pinching  jerk  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  towards  the  interior
(aft.  20  m.).  [JVs.]

Dull  pain  in  the  seat  of  the  junction  of  the  right  os  ilii  with
the  os  sacrum,  when  standing  (aft.  27  h.).  [Hnl.]

Pressive  sensation  going  up  and  down  through  the  spine,  when
sitting  erect  (aft.  6 h.).  [HtnJ]

Feeling  of  coldness  on  the  back  in  the  region  of  the  last  ribs  (aft.
i h.).  \Ws\

260.  Severe  stitch  in  the  sacrum.

An  aching  pain  in  the  sacrum  only  when  walking,  particularly
when  treading  with  the  left  foot  (aft.  J h.).  [ Hnl. ]

Fine  tearing  upwards  on  the  os  sacrum,  from  the  right  to  the  left
' side,  only  when  sitting  (aft.  5 d.).  [ Hnl.']

The  sacrum  and  buttocks  are  very  numb.

At  night  a burning  itching  exciting  scratching,  especially  on  the
back ; he  only  slumbers  and  tosses  about  constantly,  with  thirstless
heat  all  over  the  body,  especially  towards  morning.  [JVs.]

265.  Excessively  painful  transient  stitch  on  the  right  scapula  (aft.  17
h.).  [Hnl.]

Pain  on  the  scapulae,  as  if  something  pointed  were  stuck  in  there
— a constant  shooting  pain  combined  with  sore  pain  (aft.  J h.).

Muscular  twitching  about  the  left  shoulder-joint.

[Gn.]

Burning  on  the  left  shoulder  (aft.  16  h.).  [Hnl.]

Fine  pricks  in  the  axilla  (when  sitting)  (aft.  1 h.).  [JVs.]

270.  A constant  prickling  itching  in  the  left  axilla,  when  sitting  (aft.
5 h.).  [Hnl.]

Shooting  drawing  through  the  upper  arm  (aft.  \ h.).  [JVs.]
Stitches  in  the  elbow-joint  on  moving.

When  bending  the  arm,  a stitch  in  the  point  of  the  elbow  and
then  tearing  in  the  joint  as  long  as  he  keeps  the  arm  bent.

Aching  pain  at  the  point  of  the  left  elbow  (aft.  f h.).

275.  Under  the  elbow-joint  on  the  upper  part  of  the  forearm  a cramp-
like pain  with  slow  gurgling,  especially  when  leaning  on  the  arm
(aft.  3 d.).  [Ws.]

Pain  in  the  left  forearm  as  if  the  bone  were  compressed  (aft.
1 h’)-

In  the  internal  muscles  of  the  right  forearm,  severe  out-boring
stitches  (aft.  | h.).  [Lr.]


SPONGIA.


521


Great  blisters  on  the  right  forearm.

Heaviness  in  the  forearms  (aft.  ^ h.).  \JVs^\

280.  Drawing  pain  in  the  forearms.

Trembling  of  the  forearms  and  hands  (in  a few  m.).  \JVs^\

(Burning  in  the  arms  and  hands.)

Several  stitches  in  the  right  wrist,  when  at  rest  (aft.  J h.).

Drawing  aching  pain  over  the  right  wrist  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Htn.~\

285.  Tensive  pain  in  the  left  wrist,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving
(aft.  i h.).

Severe  drawing  in  the  left  wrist-joint  (aft.  3 d.).

A tired  feeling  in  and  behind  the  wrists  (aft.  f h.).  \JVs?[

Swelling  of  the  hands ; she  could  not  bend  the  fingers.

An  in-drawing  pinching  on  a point  in  the  middle  of  the  palm
(aft.  a few  m.).  \WsI\

290.  The  tips  of  the  index  fingers  lose  feeling  without  becoming  pale
(aft.f  h .).\_Ws.-\

The  middle  joint  of  the  left  middle  finger  became  swollen  and
red  and  was  stiff  when  bending  it.

Aching  pain  in  the  proximal  finger  joints  of  the  right  hand  (aft.

i h.)-

Itching  in  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb,  not  removed  by  rubbing
(aft.  f h.).

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb  only  when  moving
the  hand,  all  day  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

295.  Painful  drawing  in  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  left  thumb
extending  into  the  forearm  (aft.  1^  h.).  \_Hnl.]

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb,  which
lasts  all  day,  and  on  moving  the  hands  extends  also  into
the  thumb  itself  (aft.  1, 141,  25  h.).  [Lr.]

A persistent  stitch  combined  with  sore  pain  in  the  distal  thumb-
joint  (aft.  h.).  [Ws.]

On  the  right  natis,  quick  muscular  twitchings.  [Hnl.]

The  lower  extremities  felt  quite  stiff.

300.  Backwards  pressing  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh  above
the  knee  (aft.  \ h.).

A very  acute  prick  in  the  skin  of  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh
(aft.  54  h.).  [Hnl.]

On  the  front  of  the  right  thigh  near  the  hip,  severe  out-boring
stitches  (aft.  8 h.),  [Lr.]

Persistent  drawing  stitches  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  thigh
just  below  the  groin,  especially  when  walking  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Hnl.]

A tickling  itching  on  the  left  thigh  close  to  the  groin,  compelling
rubbing  (aft.  2.\  h.).  [ Lr .]

305.  At  the  upper  end  of  the  thigh  at  every  step,  a tension  as  if  a
muscle  were  too  short,  each  time  accompanied  by  a stitch  (aft.  ± h.).

In  the  morning  in  bed,  pulsating  sharp  stitches  through  the  right
thigh  above  the  knee  (aft.  22  h.) . [IVs.]

Aching  shooting  pain  above  the  right  knee  (when  sitting)  (aft.
4 h.)-  [Htn.]


522


SPONGIA.


Severe  drawing  in  the  left  knee  ; thereafter  profuse  sweat,  at
night.

Heaviness  in  the  knee-joints,  felt  when  walking  (aft.  t h.).

[*"'.]

310.  When  walking  a weakness  in  the  knees  as  if  they  would  knuckle
under  him,  though  he  plants  the  foot  firmly  down  (aft  4 h.).
[Htn.]

On  the  left  hough  a jerking  drawing  pressure,  which  only  occurs
on  flexing  the  knee,  and  alternates  with  a similar  sensation  in  the
axilla  (aft.  6 h.).  \Htn.\

In  the  evening  when  lying,  an  obtuse  shooting  in  the  left  knee,
(continuing  also  when  moving),  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.  41  h.).

i>.]

When  walking,  a persistent  prickling  itching  in  the  houghs,
which  compels  scratching  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hnl.]

Aching  pain  in  the  external  tendon  of  the  flexor  muscle  of  the
right  hough,  more  violent  when  walking  than  when  sitting  (aft.  7,
9 h.).  [Hnl.]

315.  After  a short  nap  at  noon,  first  the  right  then  the  left  leg  goes  to
sleep  ; on  attempting  to  walk  the  left  leg  was  drawn  spasmodically
up  to  the  thigh  ; even  when  sitting  he  could  not  keep  it  extended —
it  was  then  also  drawn  spasmodically  backwards  (aft.  5 d.).  [Hnl.]

Sharp  stitches  on  the  right  calf,  when  walking  (aft.  ij  h.).

Ws.-\

Great  irritation  and  restlessness  in  both  legs,  he  must  often
change  their  position  (aft.  i6\  h.).  \_Hnl.~]

Tearing  in  the  tibia,  all  the  afternoon.

Tearing  heavy  feeling  in  the  left  tibia  close  to  the  ankle  (aft.
34  h.).  [Htn.]

320.  When  walking  quickly,  a sensation  at  the  lower  part  of  the  left
tibia  as  if  a weight  hung  to  it  (aft.  3 d.).  [ Ws .]

Tearing  in  the  ankles;  the  feet  are  as  heavy  as  lead,  up  into
the  tibiae.

Drawing  tearing  from  the  right  ankle-joint  to  the  knee  (aft.  84
h.).  [Hnl.]

Drawing  pain  from  the  right  foot  to  the  thigh  (aft.  11J  h.).
[Hnl.]

Formication  in  the  left  foot,  coming  on  when  walking  and  not
going  off  when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVs.]

325.  (After  a long  walk  pin-pricks  in  the  heels,  when  sitting,  for  an
hour.)

Severe  intermittent  needle-pricks  on  the  left  heel  from  within
outwards,  when  standing,  which  went  off  on  moving  (aft.  1 h.).

[Lr.]

In  the
6 h.).  [Lr

When

ih .).  [Zr.]

A pressive  pain  on  the  right  heel,  which  increased  when  walking
(aft.  14  h.).  [Lr.]


right  heel  needle-pricks  going  upwards,  when  sitting  (aft.

•]

standing,  a severe  needle- prick  out  at  the  right  heel  (aft.


SPONGIA,


523


330.  In  the  morning  on  awaking  a voluptuous  itching  on  the  back  of
the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  which  compels  scratching  (aft.  24  h.),
[Lr.]

At  all  times  of  the  day  on  any,  even  a small  part  of  the  body,
often  only  for  a minute,  at  first  a creeping  in  the  skin,  then  the
spot  becomes  red  and  hot,  then  there  is  eroding  itching,  like  a flea
moving  about  (not  biting),  and  on  the  spot  miliary  vesicles  arise —
the  eroding  itching  is  not  allayed  by  scratching,  on  the  contrary,  that
seems  to  make  it  last  all  the  longer  (aft.  2 h.).

Causes  itching  eruption  on  the  skin  and  red,  itching  spots.

When  he  scratches  an  itching  spot,  there  occurs  itching  on  many
other  parts.

There  occurs,  especially  when  she  feels  cold,  an  itching  erosion
on  the  chest,  scrobiculus  cordis,  back,  and  under  the  upper  arms — at
other  times  only  on  the  feet ; by  rubbing  the  part  becomes  red  and
the  erosion  becomes  more  severe  for  a short  time  ; vesicles  appear  on
the  spots,  which,  however,  soon  go  off.

335.  Itching  all  over  the  body,  as  when  sweat  breaks  out,  which
compels  him  to  scratch,  and  always  returns,  in  the  morning  on  waking
(aft.  48  h.).  [Lr.]

All  over  the  body,  now  here  now  there,  a persistent  itching
prick,  as  with  a very  fine  needle,  which  compels  rubbing,  but  this
does  not  remove  it.  [LTs.]

Painful  stitches  on  several  parts  of  the  body,  that  compel  him  to
scratch  (aft.  49  h.).  [Hnl.\

On  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  24  h.).

He  awakes  with  bruised  pain  all  over  the  body.

340.  Numb  sensation  on  the  lower  half  of  the  body.

Weariness  in  the  lower  extremities  (aft.  \ h.).  [TVr.]

Weariness  in  the  whole  body,  especially  the  arms.

Such  a heaviness  of  the  body  that  when  walking  in  the  open  air
he  was  obliged  to  sit  down  on  the  ground,  without  drowsiness  (aft.
9 h.).  [Lr.]

Extreme  exhaustion  of  body  and  mind  ; she  preferred  to  do
nothing  and  rest.

345.  Persistent  exhaustion  and  bruised  feeling  of  all  the  limbs,  espe-
cially of  the  muscles  of  the  lower  extremities  (aft.  2 h.).  [Wr\

After  every  exertion  of  the  body,  however  slight,  she  becomes
weak,  the  blood  surges  up  in  her  chest,  the  face  becomes  hot,  the
body  commences  to  glow,  the  blood-vessels  are  greatly  distended,  and
her  breath  leaves  her ; she  can  only  recover  after  a long  rest.

After  moderate  exercise  in  the  open  air  she  suddenly  becomes
weak  and  sways  about  on  her  seat ; with  great  anxiety,  nausea,  pale
face,  short,  panting  breath,  there  is  a surging  from  the  heart  up  in  the
chest  as  if  it  would  burst  out  above ; at  the  same  time  her  eyes  close
involuntarily,  almost  spasmodically,  and  tears  are  forced  out  between
her  closed  lids — she  retains  her  consciousness,  but  her  will  is  incap-
able of  acting  on  her  limbs.

When  she  rests  in  a horizontal  position  she  feels  best.

Great  weariness  and  inclination  to  sleep  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hnl.]


SPONGIA.


5H

350.  Drowsiness  with  yawning,  without  inactivity,  in  the
afternoon  (aft.  8,  33  h.).  [Lrt\

Sad  dreams.

Fatiguing  dreams.

Vexatious  and  lachrymose  anxious  dreams.

Sleep  broken  by  dreams.  [Lr.]

355.  Sleeplessness  until  midnight.

He  could  not  sleep,  and  as  soon  as  he  fell  asleep  he  wandered  and
was  delirious  ; his  forehead  felt  swollen  and  was  painful  to  the  touch,
an  aching  pain  above  the  eyes,  increased  by  stooping,  as  if  all  would
come  out  at  the  forehead  ; he  felt  chilly  and  as  if  cold  in  the  back—
this  lasted,  with  chilliness,  twenty- four  hours.

He  passed  the  night  almost  without  sleep,  with  frightful  dreams
about  murder  and  assassination  (6th  night).  [Hnl.~\

At  night  frequent  waking  as  from  fright.  [£r.]

At  night  in  her  sleep  she  spoke  out  loud  several  times,  but  not
in  an  anxious  manner.

360.  Four  successive  nights,  very  short  sleep,  with  many  dreams  ; he
awakes  about  midnight,  but  cannot  fall  asleep  again  from  restlessness  ;
until  the  morning  he  had  but  to  close  his  eyes,  when  though  still
awake  visions  immediately  hovered  most  distinctly  before  him  ;
sometimes  it  seemed  as  if  a battery  were  fired  off,  sometimes  all
seemed  to  be  in  flames,  sometimes  scientific  subjects  forced  themselves
upon  him — in  short,  a number  of  subjects  intersected  one  another
in  his  imagination,  which  all  vanished  as  soon  as  he  opened  his  eyes,
but  reappeared  when  he  closed  them.  [Hnl.]

In  the  morning  on  waking  he  lay  bathed  in  sweat  (aft.  25  h.).

[Lr.]

Cold  hands.

Cold  feeling  in  the  lower  extremities.

Along  with  heat  on  the  whole  body,  coldness,  paleness  and  sweat
on  the  face.

365.  Violent  chill  in  the  back,  which  did  not  go  off*  by  the  heat  of  the
stove  (aft.  h.).  [Hnl.']

Shivering  and  chilliness  all  over  the  body  but  especially  in  the
back,  though  he  stood  near  the  warm  stove,  without  thirst,  lasting
two  hours  (aft.  J,  22-J-  h.).  \HnU\

He  has  a feverish  feeling  in  the  limbs ; he  is  disposed  to  stretch
himself  (aft.  30  h.).  \Gn.~\

Stretching  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities  (aft.  J h.).

Stretching  of  the  arms  (aft.  f h.).

370.  Fever  : in  the  morning,  at  first  headache  and  belly-ache,  then
severe  rigor  with  cold  bluish  hands  and  some  thirst  ; then,  when
lying,  a dry  burning  heat  with  some  thirst  and  much  restless  slumber
for  thirty-six  hours ; all  night,  on  waking  and  moving,  nausea  and
vertigo — between  times,  every  twelve  hours  slight  sweat,  when  the
heat  was  occasionally  mitigated  ; thereafter,  tearing  and  shooting  in
the  left  eye  and  left  cheek  and  eruption  on  the  lips.

In  the  afternoon,  pain  in  the  occiput,  like  a weight  and  a stitch
there,  when  he  turned  his  head,  with  heat  in  the  face,  hands  and


SPONGIA.


5*$

feet,  and  chilliness  in  the  rest  of  the  body  and  tendency  to  coryza,  at
the  same  time  exhaustion  of  the  body  and  bitterness  in  the  mouth  ;
in  the  evening  after  undressing,  rigor,  and  a quarter  of  an  hour
thereafter,  in  bed,  heat  in  the  whole  body,  with  the  exception  of  the
thighs  which  were  numb  and  chilly  ; at  night,  perspiration.

Increased  warmth  of  the  whole  body,  with  thirst.

Quicker,  fuller  pulse  (aft.  \ h.).  \WrI\

Feeling  of  burning  heat  on  the  forehead,  without  heat  perceptible
outwardly,  with  quick  hard  pulse  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  i h.).  \Wr7\
375.  Great  heat  on  the  forehead,  alternating  with  shivering  in  the
back,  without  thirst,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Wr .]

Flying  heat  in  the  face  and  in  the  blood  and  nervous  excitement.

Every  day  several  fits  of  heat,  with  anxiety,  pain  in  the  cardiac
region,  weeping  and  inconsolableness  ; she  would  like  to  die  there
and  then.

He  becomes  suddenly  anxiously  warm  all  over  the  body,  with
heat  and  redness  of  the  face  and  perspiration  (aft.  \ h.).

In  the  evening  when  sitting  cool  sweat  in  the  face  and  at  the
same  time  increased  sensation  of  warmth  throughout  the  body.

380.  Headache,  anorexia,  drowsiness,  lassitude  throughout  the  body,
cross ; everything  was  distasteful  to  her.  [<SV/.]

She  is  very  timorous  and  particularly  pursued  and  incessantly
plagued  by  a frightful  picture  out  of  a melancholy  past.

Anxious,  as  if  a misfortune  threatened  him  and  he  had  a fore-
boding of  it.

She  is  very  much  given  to  be  frightened  and  starts  at  every  trifle,
which  goes  every  time  into  her  feet  and  leaves  therein  a weight.

She  is  not  satisfied  with  her  work ; she  cannot  do  her  work
properly,  she  is  not  successful  with  it.

385.  Monosyllabic  and  discontented  humour.

Insolent,  obstinate,  rude  humour.

Ill-humoured  ; he  spoke  and  answered  very  unwillingly,  \Wr.\

He  is  ill-humoured  and  idle;  he  prefers  to  rest,  and  is  but  little
disposed  to  speak  (aft.  3 h.).  \JVr.'\

An  irresistible  inclination  to  sing,  with  excessive
gaiety,  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  J h.)  ; thereafter  distraught  and
indisposed  for  all  work,  for  an  hour.  [Gn.]

390.  Pert  witty  humour.

Alternate  gay  and  lachrymose  and  cross  quarrelsome  humour.


STANNUM.1

(Tin.)

(Tin  beaten  out  to  the  finest  leaf  by  gold  beaters,  under  the  name  of  false  or
plate  metal,  is  the  purest  tin.  For  medicinal  purposes  a grain  of  this  is  triturated
with  a hundred  grains  of  milk-sugar  for  an  hour  in  a porcelain  mortar,  whilst
frequently  scraped  up  with  a bone  spatula ; this  produces  the  first  hundred-fold
dilution  of  this  metallic  powder,  which  is  then  treated  in  a similar  manner  up  to  the
million-fold^  dilution.}

The  ancients  have  recorded  wonderful  cures  of  the  most  serious
diseases  with  tin,  some  of  which  I will  refer  to  in  the  notes.  • But  the
moderns  know  (or  think)  nothing  of  all  this — after  careful  testing  or
from  well-founded  conviction  ? I doubt  this  very  much.f

The  moderns  only  know  tin  as  a remedy  for  tape-worm,  and  use  it
only  in  the  form  of  tin  filings , of  which  they  theoretically  (for  careful
testing  is  too  much  trouble  for  them),  of  which,  I repeat,  they  theore-
tically declare  : “ that  it  expels  the  tape- worm  from  the  bowels  solely
in  a mechanical  manner,  by  means  of  its  weight  and  sharp  points,”  with-
out thinking  that  were  this  true  iron,  silver,  or  gold  filings  must  be
able  to  do  the  same.

Now,  in  order  to  effect  this  theoretically  inferred  scouring  out  of
the  tape-worm  by  the  sharp  points  of  the  tin  filings  with  greater
certainty,  they  gave  to  the  patient  these  tin  filings,  in  doses,  the
larger  the  better ; as  much  as  half  or  a whole  ounce  or  even  more  at  a
time,  and  this  dose  repeated  several  times.

This  procedure,  however,  is  founded  on  caprice  and  a foregone
conclusion,  for  the  original  receipt  which  Alston  first  communicated
to  us  from  the  domestic  practice  at  the  beginning  of  last  century — for
it  was  from  this  source  that  the  employment  of  tin  for  tape-worm  was
derived — before  then  no  doctor  knew  anything  about  it— is  quite
different.

“ A woman  of  Leith,  in  Scotland,”  says  Alston  ( Mater . Med.,  i,
p.  150),  “had  a domestic  receipt  against  tape-worm  (fluke-worm,
Tcenia  solium ),  which  a publican’s  wife,  Maria  Martin,  got  from  her,
whereby  she  got  rid  of  this  worm.”  Alston  procured  it  from  her

* I used  to  carry  the  dilution  up  to  the  billion-fold,  but  in  the  course  of  time  found
the  million-fold  adequate  for  all  medicinal  purposes.

f The  trashiest  idea  or  most  frivolous  proposal,  if  it  only  comes  from  England,
Italy,  or  France,  and  especially  if  it  be  brought  by  the  very  latest  post,  is  in  Ger-
many esteemed  as  something  incomparable,  and  it  is  considered  a point  of  honour  to
accept  it  blindly  with  effusion  (until,  after  three  or  six  months,  the  usual  uselessness  of
the  foreign  recommendation  is  discovered,  when  there  is  again  a hunt  for  some  fresh
novelty  from  foreign  countries) — whilst  honest  fellow-countrymen  and  the  truth-
loving  men  of  former  times  remain  unnoticed  and  unread.


1 From  vol,  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827.


STANNUM.


527


daughter.  It  was  as  follows  : — cc  Take  an  ounce  and  a half  of  tin
(pewter  metal*)  and  grind  it  small  to  powder,  mix  it  with  sugar  syrup,
and  take,  on  a Friday  before  the  change  of  the  moon,  one  half  of  it,  the
following  day  the  half  of  the  remainder,  and  the  Sunday  following  the
rest,  but  on  the  Monday  a purgative/’

Here  there  is  no  question  of  sharp-pointed  coarse  tin  filings,  but
only  of  a fine  powder  ground  in  a mortar  or  on  a grindstone.  It  is
impossible  that  the  fine  powder  of  the  original  receipt,  from  which
alone  all  the  curative  power  of  tin  for  tape-worm  was  learnt,  could
have  been  efficacious,  if  its  efficacy  depended  on  the  mechanical  points
of  tin  filings.

Here  we  see  how  stupidly  the  theory  of  the  medical  school  was
wont  to  spoil  the  good  that  lay  in  the  discoveries  of  domestic  practice.

But  more  accurate  observation  and  experience  show  that  neither
tin  filings  nor  Alston’s  syrup  prepared  with  tin  powder  really  kill  any
species  of  tape-worm.  For  who  has  ever  seen  the  former  or  the  latter
by  itself  expel  the  tape-worm  dead  from  the  intestines  ? Always  and
in  every  case  the  aid  of  purgatives  must  be  had  recourse  to,  and
even  then  the  worm  was  seldom  seen,  and  even  if  it  were  thereby
expelled,  the  tin  seemed  only  to  have  acted  as  a stupefying  agent  on
the  tape-worm.  So  little  is  tin  capable  of  killing  the  worm,  that  if  the
purgative  (as  usually  happens)  fails  to  expel  it  wholly,  after  frequent
repetitions  of  the  administration  of  tin,  the  tape-worm  goes  on  increasing
in  the  bowels  to  a still  greater  degree ; indeed,  it  usually  excites  more
frequent  fits  of  suffering  (these  being  readily  induced  by  some  little
ailment  of  another  sort).  Moreover , workers  in  tin  not  unfrequently  suffer
from  tape-worm  to  a very  great  extent . Hence  tin  seems  rather  to  cause
a palliative  suppression  of  the  disagreeable  movements  of  the  worm,  and
this  in  the  secondary  action  contributes  more  to  the  injury  than  the
benefit  of  the  patient.

But  if  a palliative  of  this  character  be  sometimes  necessary,  then,
as  sure  experience  has  taught  me,  it  is  not  necessary  to  give  whole
ounces  of  tin,  as  has  hitherto  been  believed,  but  a very  small  portion
of  a grain  of  the  above-described  million-fold  dilution  of  tin  powder  is
more  than  sufficient  for  a dose.

On  the  other  hand,  the  following  few  observations  of  the  artificial
morbid  symptoms  produced  by  tin  on  the  healthy  body  teach  us  how  to
make  a multitude  of  much  more  useful  homoeopathic  employments  of  its
great  healing  powers.

The  duration  of  the  action  of  tin  is  over  three  weeks  in  chronic
diseases.

I must,  however,  warn  every  careful  practitioner  never  to  entrust
the  preparation  of  triturations  of  this  and  other  similar  metal  powders
to  a hired  workman  if  he  would  wish  to  be  certain  to  have  that  which
he  means  and  ought  to  have.  He  must  prepare  them  himself,  with
care,  accuracy  and  patience,  if  he  would  be  sure  of  the  result.

* Pewter-metal  is  not  pure  tin,  which,  as  is  well  known,  is  very  soft,  but  the  hard,
brittle,  so-called  English  tin,  which  is  composed  of  soft,  pure  tin,  with  a twentieth  part
of  alloy,  generally  zinc  (but  sometimes  also  copper,  bismuth,  & c.),  melted  together.
This  may  be  not  only  easily  filed,  but  even  triturated  to  a powder  in  a mortar  (see
Nicholson,  Chemistry , Lond.,  1790,  p.  355).


5*8


STANNUM.


[Hahnemann  was  assisted  by  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Hartmann,  HayneL,
Herrmann,  Langhammer,  Wislicenus.

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  cited  for  pathogenetic  and  therapeutic
observations :

Abraham,  Meyer,  Diss.  Cautela  de  Anthelminth .,  Gottingen,  1782.

Commerc.  lit.  Nor .,  Ann.  1734.

Ettmuller,  Colleg.  Consult.

Fothergill,  Med.  Observ.  and  Inquiry  London,  1784,  vi.

Geischlaeger,  in  Hufel.  Jour.,  x,  iii.

Hoffmann,  Fr.,  Opera , tom.  ii.

Monro,  Don.,  Arzneimittell .,  i.

Muraltus,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  Ann.  i.

Quincy,  New  Dispensat.

Stahl,  G.  E.,  Mat.  Med.

Thierry,  Med.  Experiment.

Vogel,  R.  A.,  Praelect.de  Cogn.  et  Cur.  Morb.

The  first  edition  has  552  symptoms,  this  second  edition  660  ; in  the  Chr.  Kr.  there
are  only  648].


STANNUM.

Stupefying  vertigo,  only  when  walking  in  the  open  air ; he
staggered  hither  and  thither  in  walking,  so  that  he  feared  he  must
fall  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.]

Giddy  when  seated  as  though  he  would  fall  from  his  chair  (aft.
12  h.).  [Gn.]

Sudden  attack  of  vertigo,  on  sitting  down  (aft.  12  h.).  \_TVs.\
Transient  feeling  of  vertigo,  just  as  if  he  were  sitting  quite  apart
and  the  objects  and  persons  about  him  were  at  a great  distance  from
him  (aft.  24  h.).  \Ws^

5.  Vertigo  as  if  the  brain  turned  round  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Hrr .]

Transient,  but  frequently  recurring  vertigo  : he  feels  as  if  the
brain  turned  round j he  loses  his  thinking  power,  cannot  read  any
more,  and  sits  there  as  if  bereft  of  consciousness,  [Hrr.]

Dizziness  of  the  whole  head  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

Great  heaviness  and  confusion  of  the  head — worse  in  the
evening.

Confusion  and  stupidity  of  the  head,  as  if  about  to  have  catarrh
—also  sneezing  ; but  it  does  not  come  to  catarrh.

10.  Heaviness  in  the  head  when  at  rest  and  when
moving,  in  the  evening,  for  two  hours  (aft.  9 h.).

Usually  every  morning  headache,  nausea,  anorexia,  and  crossness.
A humming  in  the  head  3 external  noises  vibrated  in  the  head.

As  if  sleepy  and  exhausted  in  the  head.

Painless  pressure  from  within  outwards  in  the  left  side  of  the
occiput  (aft.  5 d.).  [. Hnl .]

15.  In  the  left  half  of  the  brain  a feeling  of  emptiness,  with  pressive
heavy  sensation,  impossible  to  relieve  (aft.  25  h.).  \_Htn.]

Pressive  pain  out  at  the  right  side  of  the  head.  [Gn.]

Pressive  pain  from  within  outwards  in  the  right  temple,  almost
externally  (aft.  3 h.).  [(?».]


STANNUM.


529

Pressure  in  the  left  temple,  beginning  weak  then  increasing  and
again  declining,  as  if  it  would  be  pressed  in.  [Grr.*]

Pressive  pain,  extending  from  the  middle  of  the  fore-
head to  the  centre  of  the  brain  (aft.  n h.).  [G».]  •

20.  A kind  of  pressure  in  the  temple,  crown,  and  especially  forehead,
which  is  alleviated  by  the  pressure  of  the  hand.  [Grr.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  temple  when  lying  on  it,  which  goes  off
on  rising  up  (aft.  5 d.).  [G».]

Pressure  in  the  forehead,  undiminished  by  stooping  forward,
relieved  by  external  pressure,  aggravated  by  bending  backward.

Sudden  sharp  pressure  on  the  crown,  with  the  feeling  as  if  the
hairs  were  moved  at  the  same  time.  [Gj\t.]

Obtuse  pressure  outwards,  and  especially  upwards,  in  the  middle
of  the  forehead,  in  the  region  of  the  frontal  suture  inwardly  (aft.  3
h.).  [Hrr.]

25.  A pain  pressing  outwards  at  the  forehead  with  sleepiness,  un-
altered by  stooping  forward  or  bending  backward,  worse  when  she
ceases  to  press  on  it  with  the  hand.  [Grr.]

A pain  pressing  outwards  at  the  frontal  protuberances.  [Gjj.]

Pressive  stupefying  headache  close  above  the  eye-
brows, as  if  the  brain  there  were  pressed,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving  (aft.  3^  h.j.  [Lr.]

Dizzy  pressive  feeling  distributed  through  the  whole  head,  [i/rr.]
Aching  pain  in  the  forehead.

30.  Pressive  stupefying  pain,  especially  in  the  forehead,
more  externally  than  internally,  when  moving  and
when  at  rest  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

Compression  of  the  occiput,  under  the  crown.  [Tz.]

Painful  pressing  of  the  brain  in  the  crown  and  occiput  against
the  skull,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep,  and  lasting  after  lying
down.  [Hnl.]

Pain  like  pressing-in  of  the  temples  all  day.

Headache,  as  if  the  temples  were  pressed  in.

35.  Compressive  feeling  at  the  temples  and  occiput.

Painful  feeling  in  the  head  as  if  the  whole  brain  were  stretched
out  and  drawn  asunder.

Constrictive  pressing  pain  suddenly  attacks  the  whole  upper  half
of  the  head,  beginning  slightly,  slowly  increasing,  and  then  gradually
declining.  [Grr.]

Spasmodic  pain  on  the  head  as  if  the  head  were  outwardly  com-
pressed by  a band.

Contractive  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  53  h.).

[<?»•].

40.  His  head  often  feels  as  if  it  were  screwed  in,  with  intermittent
slow  jerks  or  drawing  pressure  here  and  there.  [Grr.]

* Five  grains  of  pure  tin-leaf  were  intimately  triturated  with  100  grains  of  milk-
sugar,  and  this  two  provers  took  for  four  successive  days,  in  the  morning  fasting,
increasing  the  dose  every  day ; the  man  took  in  all  three  grains,  the  woman  only
two.

VOL.  II.


34


53°


STANNUM.


Violent  painful  jerk  above  the  forehead  through  the  anterior  half
of  the  brain,  leaving  behind  it  an  obtuse  pressure,  until  the  jerk
returns  (aft.  6 h.).  [ Htn .]

Sudden  pressive  jerk  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  and  left
temple,  so  that  he  cried  out  loudly.  [Gjj.]

Pain  as  if  smashed  in  the  forehead.

Stupefying  boring  pressive  pain  on  the  surface  of  the  left  half  of
the  brain,  spreading  from  the  centre  of  the  parietal  bone  to  the  left
frontal  protuberance  (aft.  8 h.).  [ Htn .]

45.  Boring  pain  in  the  left  temple  all  day  (aft.  4 d.).

Aching  boring  pain  in  the  right  temple,  which  is  removed  by
external  pressure  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Htn.~\

In  the  occipital  bone  painful  heaviness  with  feeling  of  boring
(aft.  11  h.).  [Htn.]

Transient  pain  draws  through  the  left  frontal  protuberance  with
slight  pressure,*  [Gjj.]

A pressive  drawing  through  the  forehead  and  crown.  [Gjj.]

50.  Pressive  tearing  through  the  right  side’ of  the  head  (aft.  2 h.).

[m.-]

Pressive  tearing  in  the  right  half  of  the  forehead  recurring  by
fits,  worse  when  stooping  (aft.  12  h.).  [Htn.]

Pressive  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occipital  bone  (aft.
5 h.).  [Htn.]

Drawing  pressure  from  the  right  parietal  bone  towards  the  right
orbit.  [Gjj.]

Drawing  pressure  on  the  upper  border  of  the  left  orbit.  [Gw.]

55.  In  the  temple  and  half  of  the  forehead  of  the  same  side,  a
confusing  pressive  drawing.  [Gjj.]

Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  forehead.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  half  of  the  head  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Hrr.]
tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  crown,  inwardly  (aft.
15  M-  [Hrr.]  _

Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  [ Hrr .]

60.  Persistent  aching  tearing  of  the  head  with  dizziness  and  vertigo.
[Hrr.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  parietal  bone  and  forehead.  [Hrr.]
Jerk-like  drawing  tearing  above  the  left  eyebrow,  outwardly  (aft.
1 h.).  [Lr.]

On  the  left  frontal  protuberance  a long,  blunt  stitch.  [Gjj-.]

On  the  right  side  of  the  top  of  the  head  some  quick  yet  blunt
stitches.  [Gjj.]

65.  Fine  pricking  on  the  forehead  above  the  region  betwixt  the
eyebrows.  [Tz.]

Burning  shooting  on  the  crown.  [Tz.]

Stitch-like  headache,  especially  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,
with  fluent  coryza.  [Lr.]

Shooting  in  the  forehead,  even  when  at  rest,  for  several  days —
on  stooping  feeling  as  if  all  would  come  out  at  the  forehead.

Along  with  chilliness  of  the  body,  heat  in  the  head,  pulse-like
* Drawing  pressure,  or  pressive  drawing  seems  to  be  a chief  pain  with  tin.


STANNUM.


53l


shooting  in  the  temple  and  weakness  of  the  head,  so  that  the  reason
was  almost  gone  ; at  the  same  time  slumber  and  unconsciousness.

70.  Beating  pain  in  the  temples.

Heat  inwardly  in  the  forehead,  whilst  she  was  also  hot  to  the
external  feeling.

Headache  : burning  in  the  half  of  the  sinciput,  like  fire,  so  also
in  the  nose  and  eyes — these  parts  were  also  hot  outwardly — just  the
same  when  moving  as  when  at  rest  ; he  must  lie  down  ; at  the  same
time  nausea  and  retching  as  though  he  would  vomit  (for  a whole  day
from  morning  till  evening.)

Festering  pain  on  the  head.

Burning  tensive  pain  on  the  hairy  scalp  in  front,  just  above  the
right  side  of  the  forehead  (aft.  7 h.).  [ Gn. ]

75.  On  shaking  the  head  the  brain  seems  to  him  to  be  loose  and  to
strike  painfully  against  the  walls  of  the  skull.  [Gr*.]

A pimple  in  the  left  eyebrow,  with  pain  of  an  aching  character
when  touched,  but  burning  when  let  alone.

Suddenly  some  jerks  on  the  upper  border  of  the  right  orbit  and
on  other  parts  with  painful  stupefaction  of  the  head.  [Grr.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  upper  orbital  border,  painful  obtuse
blows  in  quick  succession.  [Gjj.]

Dull,  dim,  sunken  eyes  (aft.  2 d.).  [ Hrr .]

80.  Her  eyes  are  very  dim.

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  J,  J h.).  [Lr.]

Dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  26  h.).  [Lr.]

Burning  in  the  eyes.

Smarting  in  the  eyes,  as  after  rubbing  with  a woollen  cloth.

[Fz.]

85.  Pain  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  had  been  rubbed  with  a woollen  cloth,
alleviated  by  moving  the  eyelids  (aft.  1 h.) .

Itching  sensation  in  the  whole  left  eyeball ; it  did  not  quite  go
off  by  rubbing  (aft.  30  h.).  [Gn.]

The  eyes  project  and  are  painful  as  though  she  had  been  crying.
Pressure  in  the  eyes.

Aching  in  the  left  eye  as  from  a stye  on  the  lids.  [Tz.]

90.  Tensive  stitch  in  the  left  eyeball,  most  violent  when  it  is  moved
(aft.  58  h.).  [Gn.]

Pressure  in  the  left  inner  canthus  as  from  a stye,  with
weeping  of  the  eye  (aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  inner  canthus.  [Hrr.]

Burning  shooting  pain  towards  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right
eye  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gn.]

Pricking  burning  pain  in  the  left  canthus  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gn.]

95.  Itching  in  the  inner  canthus.

In  the  left  inner  canthus  an  abscess,  like  a lachrymal  fistula.

The  eyelids  contract,  with  redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye  and
burning  sensation  (aft  5 d.).

Aching  in  both  upper  eyelids  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

Sensation  behind  the  right  eyelid  as  if  a hard  body  were  betwixt
it  and  the  eyeball  (aft.  4J  h.).  [Gn.]


STANNUM.


53a

100.  Violent,  small,  burning  pricks  in  the  right  upper  and  lower  lids,
rather  towards  the  outer  canthus  (aft.  9 h.).  [Htn.]

Burning  pain  in  the  left  lower  eyelid  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gw.]

The  eyes  are  gummed  up  every  night  and  very  weak  by  day.
Quivering  at  the  right  inner  canthus  (aft.  4 d.).  [Hnl.]

Quivering  of  the  left  eye,  for  a week.

105.  Twitching  of  the  eyes.

Ringingin  the  left  ear  (aft.  J,  9 h h.).  [Lr.]

Rushing  in  the  ear  as  from  blood  streaming  through  it.  [Fz.]

On  blowing  the  nose  a screeching  in  the  ear.

In  the  evening,  creaking  before  and  in  the  left  ear,  as  from  a
door.  [Fz.]

110.  F eeling  as  if  the  left  ear  were  stopped  up,  with  hardness  of  hearing,
which  is  diminished  after  blowing  the  nose,  in  the  morning  after
rising  from  bed,  for  four  days.  [ Hnl .]

Drawing  in  the  external  ear,  like  painful  earache.  [Gjj.]

Repeated  drawing  in  the  left  ear,  like  earache.  [Gjj.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  right  inner  meatus  auditorius,  as  in  earache
(aft.  6 h.).  [Hrr.]

Drawing  in  the  whole  right  inner  and  outer  ear,  more  painful
when  moving  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gw.]

J15.  Cramp-like  pain  in  the  whole  right  ear  for  eight  hours  (aft.  6 h.).

[G».]

Pinching  tearing  through  the  cartilage  of  the  left  ear,  at  the
lobe  of  the  ear,  together  with  sensation  if  a cool  wind  sometimes
blew  upon  it  (aft  4 h.).  \Ws^\

Drawing  stitch  on  the  top  of  the  left  auricle  (aft.  10  h,).

[<?».]

(Itching  in  the  left  ear.)

The  ring-hole  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear  becomes  ulcerated.

120.  Boring  pain  in  the  right  ear,  with  cold  feet.

Aching  externally  on  the  bone  behind  the  ear.

Feeling  of  stoppage  and  weight  in  the  upper  part  of
the  nasal  cavity,  [Hrr.]

Immediately  on  awaking  in  the  morning  violent  epistaxis.
Epistaxis  in  the  morning  immediately  after  rising  from  bed  (aft.
22  h.).  [Hnl.]

125.  Flying,  quickly  coming  and  quickly  going,  heat  in  the  face,  per-
ceptible inwardly  and  outwardly.  [Gjj.]

Pale,  sunken  countenance  (aft.  2d.).  [ Hrr .]

Long,  pale  face,  sickly  appearance  (aft.  2 d.).  [Hrr.]

Drawing  aching  attacks  on  the  right  side  of  the  facial  bones,  espe-
cially the  zygomatic  process  and  orbit,  in  a jerky  manner.  [Gj.?.]

Aching  gnawing  on  the  left  side  of  the  face,  especially  on  the
zygomatic  process  (aft.  3 d.).  [TVs.]

120.  A sense-stupefying  sensation  in  the  face,  especially  on  the  fore-
head (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.]

Cramp-like  pressure  in  the  facial  muscles,  on  the  left  malar  bone
under  the  eye  (aft.  6 h.).  [TVs.]

Contractive  pain  in  the  facial  bones  of  the  right  side,  including


STANNUM.


533


the  teeth  ; it  feels  as  if  the  right  side  of  the  face  were  drawn  shorter*

[<?«.]

Burning  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  face  under  the  right  eye  (aft.
6h.).  [Gn,]

Tearing  from  the  zygoma  downwards  into  the  lower  jaw  near
the  angle  of  the  mouth.  [Gr.r.]

135.  Drawing  pressure  on  the  right  zygoma.  [Grr.]

In  the  evening  burning  cramp-pain  in  the  left  cheek,  and  soon
afterwards  swelling  of  the  cheeks,  which,  only  when  he  draws  the
face  awry,  has  cutting  aching  pain,  as  if  splinters  of  glass  were
between  the  cheek  and  teeth,  [i'z.]

Burning  sensation  in  the  right  cheek  (aft.  10  h.).  [G?z.]
Contraction  and  aching  under  the  right  cheek  internally.  [Tz.]
Painful  swelling  of  the  left  cheek  with  a gum  boil — the  pains  make
her  sleepless.

140.  In  the  face,  itching  papules,  which  have  sore  pain  when  touched
or  washed.

Cramp  and  spasm  in  the  jaws.

Pain  of  the  upper  jaw;  it  is  swollen,  the  cheeks  are  red,  and  there
is  shooting  in  them.

In  the  lower  lip  a shooting  tearing  pain  on  a small  spot.

On  the  angle  of  the  right  lower  jaw  a red  boil  with  drawing  pain,
aggravated  by  touching,  for  eight  days.

145.  Broad  cutting  stitches  anteriorly  on  the  chin  (aft  10  h.).  \_JVs.~]
Painful  swelling  of  the  submaxillary  glands  (aft.  8 h.).

On  the  fore  part  of  the  neck,  a red,  somewhat  elevated  spot  with
a white  papule  in  the  centre,  not  painful  even  when  touched.

[**•]

The  teeth  feel  too  long.

Looseness  of  the  teeth.

150.  Speaking  is  disagreeable  for  him.

Speaking  is  difficult  for  him,  because  he  wants  the  power  to  do
it.  [Gss.]

Flow  of  saliva  into  the  mouth . [Tz.]

Viscid  mucus  in  the  mouth.

Tongue  covered  with  yellowish  fur  (aft.  5 d.).  [G?z.]

1 55 . When  swallowing  a cutting  as  with  knives  in  the  oesophagus.

[*■*•]

Shooting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  fauces  causing  dryness,  when
not  swallowing.  [#s.]

Dry  sensation  and  shooting  in  the  throat  at  the  right  tonsil,
which  makes  him  cough,  and  is  slightly  allayed  as  well  by  coughing
as  by  swallowing.  [/z.]

Under  the  pit  of  the  throat  inwardly  a scratchy  scrapy  feeling.
[Gss.]

In  the  evening  scratchy  in  the  throat.

160.  In  the  morning  scrapy  in  the  throat.

Much  mucus  in  the  throat.

In  the  evening  irritation  in  the  throat  making  him  hawk  up
much  mucus,  followed  by  pain  of  excoriation  in  the  throat,


534


STANNUM.


Painful  feeling  in  the  throat,  as  if  the  throat  swelled  with  sore
pain,  neither  increased  nor  diminished  by  swallowing ; after  hawking
up  much  mucus,  the  voice  becomes  higher  than  usual  in  pitch  when
singing.


In  the  throat  a feeling  of  swelling  and  drawing  tensive  pains  in
it,  with  dry  feeling.

165.  Flat  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  5 d.).  [(?».]

Sour  and  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  (the  first  3 d.).

Beer  tastes  herbaceous  (aft.  55  h.).  [G».]

Beer  tastes  flat  and  sourish-bitter.

Bitter-sour  taste  in  the  mouth.

170.  Tobacco  when  smoked  tastes  acrid  and  dry.

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth.

He  has  no  appetite  and  yet  the  food  tastes  well  (aft.  i^>  h.).
[<?*•]

1 he  infant  will  not  take  the  breast  of  the  mother  who  has  taken
tin,  bends  itself  backwards,  and  will  not  suck  her  again.

He  has  a good  appetite  as  usual  and  eats  a great  deal  because  he
relishes  the  food.  [Gss.~\

1 75.  Only  on  one  occasion  at  dinner,  though  she  had  empty  feeling  in
the  stomach,  she  had  no  proper  appetite  ; otherwise  she  retains  her
appetite  and  hunger  undiminished,  as  when  in  good  health.
[<?"■]


Great  appetite  and  hunger  ; he  ate  more  than  usual,
and  could  not  become  satiated  (aft.  7 d.).  [Gss.]

Increased  hunger  (aft.  36  h.).  [ZZrr.]

Increased  appetite  and  hunger  (aft.  60  h.).  [Hrr.]
Increased  thirst  (aft.  8 h.).  [Z/rr.]

180.  Whilst  eating,  when  he  has  just  swallowed  the  morsel  and  it  is
not  far  from  the  entrance  to  the  stomach,  there  occurs  a rumbling  in
the  belly — a peculiar  dull  noise,  audible  to  himself.  [Ujj,]

Soon  after  a meal  (whilst  smoking  the  accustomed  tobacco)
hiccup.  [Zz.]

Hiccup  occasionally.

Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  ij,  8 h.).  [Zr.]

Frequent  empty  eructation  (aft.  | h.).  [Zr.]

185.  Something  sweetish  rises  up  in  his  throat.

Frequent  bitter  eructation  after  a meal.

Eructation  from  the  stomach  with  flat  taste  in  the  mouth  and
much  saliva.  [Zz.]

Sourish  eructation,  whereupon  his  oesophagus  became  rough,  when
walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  9 h.).  [ Gn.~\

Early  in  the  morning  frequent  eructation,  at  first  of  sulphuretted
hydrogen  gas,  then  merely  of  air.  [Gjj.]

190.  Several  times  shuddering,  as  from  loathing,  with  a nauseous
fulness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (immediately).

After  eating,  nausea.

After  partaking  of  some  soup  she  became  sick  and  must  vomit
something  bitter  as  gall.

Sensation  of  nausea  (and  bitterness)  in  the  mouth.  [Zz.]


/


STANNUM.


535

Nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  in  the  oesophagus  (aft.  3 h.).
\_Hrr.']

195-  Nausea,  as  if  he  would  and  must  vomit,  in  the  fauces
and  oesophagus  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.]

(He  vomits  acid.)

Violent  retching  and  at  last  vomiting  of  undigested  food  (aft.  2
h.)  ; in  the  evening  again  retching,  and  thereafter  first  sour,  then
bitter  taste  in  the  throat — the  following  day  renewed  retching,  and
again  on  the  third  day,  with  great  nausea  and  a feeling  of  deranged
stomach  and  bitterness.

Vomiting  of  blood. ^ [Geischlager,1  in  Hufel.  Journ.  d.  pr.  A .,
x,  iii,  p.165.]

Anxious  pressive  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  when  lying,  just  as
if  he  should  have  an  attack  of  haemorrhage,  for  a couple  of  hours  ; it
went  off  by  pressing  on  it  (aft.  3 d.).  [Gn!\

200.  Pressure  in  the  stomach.2  [Geischlager,  1.  c.]

In  the  forenoon  pressure  in  the  stomach.

After  partaking  of  a little  soup  pressure  in  the  stomach  and  dis-
comfort.

Violent  stomachache.

Pushing  and  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Fz.]

205.  Pushing  and  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  which  pains  as  if
festering  when  touched.  + [Fz.]

Tensive  aching  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  2 d.).  [ Gn.~\

Cutting  about  the  stomach.

Spasmodic  griping  in  the  stomach  and  round  about  the  navel,  so
that  she  was  constantly  sick,  and  when  it  came  up  towards  the
scrobiculus  cordis  she  became  very  anxious.

Anteriorly  in  the  abdomen,  immediately  below  the  cartilages  of
the  last  ribs,  on  the  left  near  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a pressure  as
with  a blunt  stick — somewhat  relieved  by  pressing  on  it  with  the
hand.  [Ghj.]

210.  Soon  after  eating  a painful  long  fine  prick  on  the  ensiform
cartilage.  [G^.]

Sensation  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  as  from  disordered  stomach.

[Fz.]

Fulness  and  distension  of  the  stomach,  and  yet  at  the  same  time
hunger,  [Fz.]

Whilst  walking  sensation  in  the  stomach  as  if  swollen  up  under
the  skin,  with  pinching  in  the  bowels.  [Fz.]

# Alston  (Mat.  Med.,  i,  p,  152)  saw  haematemesis  cured  by  tin,  as  by  magic,
f This,  the  previous  and  the  following,  as  also  some  other  symptoms,  e.  g.  201 —
203,  207,  208,  217—219,224—226,  231,  232,  234,  235,  237,  240— 243,  258,  259,
point  to  some  kinds  of  hysterical  and  hypochondriacal  spasms  and  pains  in  the
abdomen  and  diaphragmatic  region,  in  which  tin  is  homoeopathically  useful,  as  was
known  to  St.  J.  Aug.  Albrecht  (Diss.  exh.  medic,  saturn.  et  jo*v.  hist,  et  usum ,
Gott.,  1772,  p.  34)  and  Geischlager  (in  Hufel.  Journ.  d.pr.  A .,  x,  iii,  p.  165).


1 Effect  of  swallowing  granulated  tin.^

2 The  pressure  is  described  as  insufferable.


536


STANNUM.


Causes  sufferings  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.  [G.  E.  Stahl,1
Mat.  Med..,  cap.  vi .]

215.  Transient  burning  transversely  across  below  the  diaphragm.  [Fz.]
Cutting  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  more  severe  when
sitting  in  a bent  position  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Ws,~\

Pressive  cramp-like  pain  under  the  left  short  ribs,  alternately
weaker  and  stronger  (aft.  7 h.).  \_Htn.’]

Several  severe  stitches  one  after  the  other  in  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  especially  when  coughing  and  breathing.

A shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  ; thereafter,  drawing
in  the  right  shoulder — she  must  lie  down,  with  sweat  on  the  face
and  arms,  during  which  a chilliness  ran  over  her.

220.  First  simple  pain  in  both  sides  under  the  short  ribs,  then  there
are  jerks  from  the  right  to  the  left  side  through  the  belly,  like  obtuse
blows — it  seemed  to  be  worse  when  she  pressed  on  the  right  side.

[<?«•]

In  both  sides  under  the  true  ribs  suddenly  a painful  starting  or
jerking  together.  [Gw.]

Here  and  there  in  the  abdomen  painful  jerks.  [Gw.]

On  the  left,  betwixt  scrobiculus  cordis  and  navel,  pain  as  if  the
muscles  were  nipped  with  two  lingers.  [Gw.]

When  he  presses  with  his  hand  on  the  umbilical  region  he  feels
a pain  up  to  the  stomach  and  to  both  sides  under  the  ribs.

225.  In  the  left  side  under  the  ribs  bruised  pain.

Aching  in  the  hepatic  region.

Boring  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  upper  belly,  when  walking
(aft.  12  h.).  [G».]

On  the  right,  near  the  navel,  a slow  obtuse  pressure.  [Gw,]
During  inspiration  a stab  as  from  a sharp  knife  darted  suddenly
from  the  left  to  the  right  side  through  the  belly,  so  that  she  started
in  affright.  [Gw.]

230.  The  abdomen  is  painful  to  the  touch  as  if  gathering,  at  the  same
time  shortness  of  breath.  [Fz.]

Frequent  attacks  of  bellyache.

Pinching  cutting  pain  in  the  umbilical  region  almost  all  day.
Painful  digging  about  above  the  umbilical  region ; when  she
pressed  on  it  it  felt  as  if  she  came  on  a sore  place.  [Gw.]

Digging  in  the  abdomen  before  every  motion  of  the  bowels.

235.  Spasmodic  bellyache  below  and  above  the  navel,  which  went  off
in  a few  minutes  by  lying  over  a table,  without  discharge  of  flatus.

Sore  feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen,  worse  when  touched.

[<?«.]

Sore  pain  in  the  abdomen.

With  weakness  of  the  whole  body  all  the  intestines  seem  to  be
in  a languishing  state,  with  great  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,  and  yet
no  proper  hunger — on  commencing  to  eat  he  relished  the  food,  ate
a great  deal,  and  felt  better  thereafter.  [Gw.]

After  a meal  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen.

[. Hrr .]


T £Jot  accessible.


STANNUM.


537


240.  After  eating  fulness  in  the  abdomen.

Painful  distension  of  the  abdomen,  which  is  painfully  sensitive  to
external  touch.

Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen.

Displacement  of  flatulence.

Gurgling  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

245.  Loud  rumbling  after  every  meal,  only  when  lying  (aft.  54  h.).

[<?»•]

He  has  much  rumbling  about  in  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

On  stretching  the  body  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as
from  emptiness  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.]

Rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  2 h.).  [iLrr.]

Much  flatulence  accumulates  in  the  abdomen.  [Lz.]

250.  A pinching  and  noise  in  the  stomach  as  if  diarrhoea  were
imminent.  [Lz.]

Pinching  in  the  abdomen.  [Lz.]

Pinching  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  from  a chill.  [Gw.]

Nausea  in  the  abdomen  with  painful  flatulence ; on  pressing  on
it  both  are  alleviated.  [Gw.]

Movements  in  the  abdomen  like  griping,  as  from
displaced  flatulence  (aft.  J h.).  [Lr.]

255.  Creeping  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  from  a
purgative  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.]

Pinching  and  aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  especially
in  the  umbilical  region,  with  feeling  as  if  he  must  go  to
Stool  (aft.  2 h.).  [iLrr.]

Aching  pain  here  and  there  in  the  hypogastrium  with
urging  to  stool.  [iLrr.]

Burning  pain  in  the  abdomen.

Burning  sensation  in  the  hypogastrium.

260.  Burning  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  belly.  [Lz.]

Pressure  above  on  the  liver.  [Lz.]

Drawing  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  here  and  there  (aft.  1 h.).
[iLrr.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  abdomen  more  towards  the  sacrum,  most
severe  when  stooping  (aft.  5 h.).  [G».]

Cutting  pain  transversely  across  the  hypogastrium,  like  cuts  with
a knife  (aft.  60  h.).  [iLrr.]

265.  Drawing  cutting  sensation  in  the  hypogastrium,  close  beside  the
right  hip-bone  (aft.  3J  h.).  [. Htn .]

A pricking  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  30  h.).  [G«.]

Obtuse  stitches  inwards  in  the  left  renal  region.  [Lz.]

Pinching  pain  on  stooping  just  above  the  left  os  ilii,  as  if  a
tendon  were  jerked  over  (aft.  25  h.).  [Htn."]

Above  the  projecting  angle  of  the  pelvis,  in  the  abdominal
muscles  of  the  right  side,  a feeling  of  being  over-stretched.  [Lz.]

270.  Pricking  in  the  junction  of  the  ossa  pubis,  in  the  left.  [Lz.]
Pressure  in  the  inguinal  glands  with  some  swelling  of  them.

Fine  pinching  in  the  left  groin  (aft.  48  h.).  \Ws .]

When  stooping  shooting  pain  in  the  right  groin,  as  if  he  hacl


53«


STANNUM.


sprained  himself  in  leaping,  which  went  off  on  raising  himself  up
again  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Z>.]

In  the  left  groin,  sensation  as  if  a hernia  would  come  out.  [Fz.]
275.  Pressive  pain  in  the  rectum  (aft.  4 d.).  [G».]

Itching  prick  in  the  rectum  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gn,~\

Itching  round  about  the  anus,  persistent  (aft.  6 h.).

LGn-l

On  the  left  side  of  the  anus  a small  lump,  like  a pile,  with  sore
pain  only  when  touched.  [GFr.]

Retention  of  the  stool  : the  evacuation  occurred  twenty-five
hours  later  than  usual.  \_Hnl.]

280.  Stool  six  hours  later  than  usual.  [Gn.~\

Scanty  stool.

Constipation,  for  some  time,  in  the  mother  and  her  sucking  infant.

Dry  stool  in  lumps.

Stool  with  worm-shaped  mucus.

285.  Greenish  and  scanty  stool.

The  stool  is  unaltered,  though  he  has  frequent  call  to  evacuate.
\Hrr .]

Sudden  call  to  stool,  which  is  at  first  of  an  ordinary  character,
then  pappy,  and  lastly,  thin  and  attended  by  a shudder-like  sensation
through  the  body  from  above  downwards,  and  a drawing  from  the
sacrum  through  the  thighs — when  he  would  get  up  he  always  feels
as  if  he  had  not  finished^  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gjr.]

Soon  after  stool  again  an  urging  to  it.  [Fz.]

Ineffectual  call  to  stool.

290.  Frequent  call  to  stool,  when  but  little  faecal  matter  is  evacuated,
sometimes  only  mucus.

Frequent  call  to  stool,  which  he  had  already  evacuated  twice  that
day,  and  when  he  again  went  to  the  closet  he  could  do  nothing.

[G«.]

She  has  more  frequent  call  to  stool  than  usual.  [Gjj.]

In  the  evening  she  felt  as  if  she  should  have  diarrhoea  and  must
always  go  to  stool,  with  pinching  and  painful  moving  about  in  the
bowels,  as  if  from  a chill,  at  the  same  time  she  feels  some  blows  in
the  left  side,  as  from  a foetus  in  advanced  pregnancy,  with  distension
of  the  abdomen — when  she  then  went  to  stool  there  occurred  a
thinner  evacuation,  and  when  she  wished  to  get  up  she  always  felt  as
if  more  were  to  come ; the  bellyache  remained  until  she  got  into
bed,  when  it  gradually  went  off.  [Gjj.]

Evacuation  of  dry,  large-sized  fasces,  with  violent  cutting  pains
(aft.  2 d.).  \_Hnl.~\

295.  Evacuation  of  a single  lump  of  hard  faeces,  with  pressing  (aft.  6
h.).  [Zr.]

Difficult  evacuation  of  a very  firm  but  not  hard  stool,  just  as
though  the  bowel  had  not  sufficient  power  to  expel  it  (aft.  24  h.).

[^.]

Immediately  after  evacuation  of  the  stool,  a feeling  in  the  anus  as
if  it  were  excoriated  and  sore,  with  fine  pricks.

* In  one  who  was  usually  constipated.


STANNUM.


539

Occasionally,  generally  immediately  after  stool,  but  also  at  other
times,  a burning  in  the  anus.

After  the  stool,  burning  pain  in  the  hepatic  region.

300.  After  the  stool  obtuse  pressure  in  the  rectum.

After  the  stool  discharge  of  mucus.

Firm  stool,  which  seemed  to  him  to  be  slippery  but  was  not  so.
[Fz.]

In  the  forenoon  a soft,  in  the  afternoon  a thin  stool  (aft.  3 d.).

[<?»•]

Corrosive  gnawing  pain  about  the  anus,  when  walking  and
sitting.

305.  Frequent  call  to  urinate  : every  night  he  must  get  up  from  sleep
to  pass  water  ; this  lasted  three  days,  then,  along  with  diminished
quantity  of  urine,  there  occurred  also  slighter  and  rarer  inclination  to
urinate  than  when  in  his  usual  health.  [ Lr. ]

Retention  of  urine.

He  has  no  desire  to  urinate — a fulness  in  the  abdomen  alone
gives  a hint  of  his  need  to  do  so— and  when  he  then  passes  water  it
is  very  scanty  and  of  a very  bad  odour ; he  can  urinate  very  seldom,
but  all  this  without  pain.

Painful  pressure  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder  and  along  the  urethra
after  passing  water  ; he  always  felt  as  if  some  urine  were  to  come,  and
when  a few  drops  do  come  away,  the  pressure  becomes  still  worse  for
ten  minutes  (aft.  25  h.).  [Htn.~]

Burning  in  the  urethra  anteriorly,  especially  when  urinating  ; he
had  desire  to  pass  water  every  minute,  and  urinated  copiously.

310.  (Soreness  of  the  extremity  of  the  urethra.)

A vesicle  at  the  border  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

Burning  pain  in  the  glans  penis  and  immediately  afterwards
urging  to  urinate  (aft.  h.).  [Gn.~\

Burning  stitch  in  the  glans  penis  (aft.  26  h.).  \_Gn.~\

Needle-prick-like  sensation  in  the  glans  penis  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Gn.']

315.  Stiffness  of  penis,  immediately — the  following  days  he  had  no
erections  at  all.

Jerks  in  the  penis  to  the  back  part,  almost  as  if  semen  would  be
ejaculated.

Burning  in  the  internal  genitals,  a kind  of  strong  inclination  to
seminal  emission  (aft.  24  h.).

Intolerable  feeling  of  sexual  desire  in  the  genitals  and  the  whole
body  going  on  to  seminal  emission  (aft.  40  h.).

Seminal  emission  without  lascivious  dreams.  [Lr. —
Gn.]

320.  (Prolapsus  of  the  vagina  renders  the  hard  faecal  evacuation  very
difficult.)

In  the  hypogastrium,  pressing,  as  if  the  menses  were
coming,  aggravated  by  pressing  on  it.  [Gss.]

The  menses  come  on  more  profusely  than  usual  (12th  d.),
[Gss.]

A week  before  the  menses  an  indescribable  anxiety  and  melan-
choly, which  ceases  when  the  discharge  is  established,


540


STANNUM.


Before  the  catamenia,  pain  in  the  zygomatic  process  when
touched,  but  during  the  menstrual  flux  a pain  on  the  zygomatic
process  as  from  a blow,  on  merely  moving  the  facial  muscles.

325.  Leucorrhoea  of  transparent  mucus  from  the  vagina.

The  leucorrhoea  ceases.*

* *

*

Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza  (aft.  J h.).  [£r.]

Severe  stuffed  coryza — -he  can  only  get  air  through  the  right
nostril.  [Gjj.]

The  left  nostril  is  impermeable  to  air  and  is  outwardly  swollen,
red,  and  painful  to  the  touch.

330.  At  noon  when  blowing  the  nose,  it  becomes  quite  free  and  he
can  draw  in  air  without  impediment  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gjj.]

Severe  coryza  (aft.  4 d.).

Roughness  in  the  larynx.

When  she  attempted  to  sing,  she  must  leave  off  every  instant
and  breathe  deeply  on  account  of  exhaustion  and  extreme  emptiness
in  the  chest,  and  she  immediately  became  hoarse — a couple  of  weak
cough  impulses  removed  the  hoarseness,  but  only  for  instants.  [Gw.]

Occasionally  a hacking  cough  as  from  weakness  of  the  chest,
without  any  other  cough-irritation  and  without  expectoration — the
trachea  seems  quite  free  from  mucus — with  a hoarse,  very  weak
sound  because  he  was  deficient  in  strength  in  the  chest.  [ Gss .]

335.  In  the  forenoon,  phlegm  in  the  windpipe,  which  is  expectorated
by  slight  cough- impulses,  with  an  uncommon  weakness  of  the
chest  as  if  it  were  eviscerated,  and  with  great  exhaustion  in  the  whole
body  and  limbs,  in  which  a weak  feeling  spreads  up  and  down — this
expectoration  recurred  on  several  successive  mornings.  [Gw.]

He  feels  the  chest  full  of  phlegm — a perceptible  rattling,  especi-
ally inwardly,  and  observed  when  breathing.  [Tz.]

Irritation  to  cough  in  the  windpipe  when  taking  a breath,  as  from
phlegm,  and  yet  the  excited  cough  was  neither  attended  by  phlegm
nor  dry — not  so  perceptible  when  walking  as  when  sitting  bent
forwards.  [Tz.]

Short  cough  with  threefold  impulse.  [Tz.]

Constant  irritation  in  the  chest  to  cough  as  from  much  phlegm —
inwardly  feeling  of  gasping  and  snoring  (aft.  24  h.).  [Tz.]

340.  Constant  contraction  of  the  windpipe,  which  excites  coughing.

[**■]

Tickling  cough,  as  from  a soreness  deep  down  in  the  trachea  ;
there  was  scraping  upwards  as  far  as  the  throat.

Scrapy  cough,  at  the  commencement  loose,  with  greenish  expec-
toration of  a disgusting  sweetish  taste,  worse  before  lying  down  in
the  evening  (10  o’clock)  ; at  the  same  time  hoarse  voice  ; after  each
time  he  coughs  a sensation  as  of  soreness  in  the  trachea  and
thorax ; the  irritation  to  cough  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  trachea,  in
the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  (aft.  5 d.).

Yellow  expectoration  from  the  trachea  of  a foul  taste.

* Curative  secondary  aption  of  the  vital  force.


STANNUM.


54 1


Expectoration  tastes  salt.

345.  Before  midnight  much  cough-irritation  with  scanty  expectora-
tion— for  several  nights.

Violent  shaking,  deep  cough.

Fatiguing  cough-impulses,  causing  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus
cordis  to  be  very  painful  as  if  bruised.

Oppression  of  the  chest  as  if  it  were  inwardly  contracted,
which  caused  the  breath  to  be  apparently  drawn  in  very  dry.  [Tz.]

Pressive  squeezing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting,
increased  by  inspiration  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Htn.~\

350.  Pressure  deep  inwardly  in  the  chest  as  from  a weight  lying  on
it.  [Tz.]

Tightness  of  chest : on  moving  hut  little  he  imme-
diately loses  his  breath.  \_Hrr.~]

When  going  upstairs,  and  making  other  slight  move-
ments, want  of  breath.  \_Hrr. ]

In  the  evening  he  is  attacked  by  a severe  tightness  of  chest,
dyspnoea,  and  dreadful  anxiety  (aft.  60  h.).

Tightness  of  chest:  he  must  unbutton  his  clothes—
they  feel  too  tight-*-in  order  to  be  able  to  breathe
properly.  \_Hrr.~\

355.  Constriction  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  with  anxiety.

Troublesome  oppression  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest — he  must
often  breathe  deeply,  at  the  same  time  a feeling  of  great  emptiness
in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Gjj.]

In  the  evening  anxiety ; the  respiration  becomes  shorter  and  he
must  breathe  quickly  for  a long  time,  until  he  can  take  a single  very
deep  breath,  as  when  yawning — -then  the  anxiety  and  short  breathing
are  gone.

Oppression  on  the  chest  : something  mounts  up  to  the  throat
and  stops  the  breath.  [Gjj,]

On  breathing  deeply  she  gets  a feeling  of  agreeable  lightness,
which,  however,  lasts  no  longer  than  the  respiration.  [Ujj.]

360.  When  at  rest  he  sometimes  experiences  a feeling  of  wide-chested-
ness — just  as  if  the  chest  expanded — and  yet  at  the  same  time  there  is
a peculiar  sensation  of  anxiety  as  from  palpitation  of  the  heart.  [Urr.]

His  breathing  is  short,  and,  though  he  does  not  want  for  air,
laboured,  from  weakness  of  the  respiratory  organs,  with  great
emptiness  of  the  chest.  [Gjj.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  sternum  persistent  during  inspiration  and
expiration  (aft.  3 d.).  [G«.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  persistent
during  inspiration  and  expiration,  worst  when  stooping

(aft.  4 h.).  [ Gn.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which  almost  took
away  his  breath  (aft.  h.).  \Gn.']

365.  While  breathing,  stitches  in  the  chest  and  shoulder-joint.

Violent  stitches  in  chest  and  side,  from  morning  till  midday,
which  hindered  him  in  breathing — several  forenoons  ; in  the
afternoon,  distension  of  the  abdomen.


54-2


STANNUM.


Tension  and  pressure  over  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  in  the
morning,  on  rising  from  bed.

Contractive  chest-pain  under  the  right  arm,  shooting  when
moving.

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  a hand^s  breadth  below  the  axilla,
suddenly  a long  stitch,  making  him  start.  [Gjj.]

370.  In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  suddenly,  sharp  knife-stabs.  [Gjj.]
Sharp  penetrating  needle-pricks  on  the  clavicle.  [Gjj.]

Cutting,  not  quick  stitches  frequently  repeated,  up  through  the
thoracic  cavity  and  anteriorly  out  at  the  uppermost  ribs  ; without
reference  to  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  14  h.).  [TVs.']

Tearing  cutting,  almost  like  colic,  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
when  walking  and  standing.  [Zr.]

When  walking,  a squeezing  cutting  pain  in  the  right  ribs,  only
occurring  during  inspiration  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Htn.]

375.  When  walking  in  the  open  air,  burning  stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest  mostly  during  inspiration.  [ Hnl. ]

In  the  last  right  true  rib,  and  the  left  false  rib,  a pricking  as
from  a flea.  [ Fz .]

Internal  pressure  outwards  under  the  right  nipple  (aft.  3 h.).
[Hrr.]

The  whole  chest,  from  the  throat  downwards,  feels  to
her  sore  inwardly.  [Gss.]

The  chest  pains  as  if  bruised,  when  moving  and  when  at  rest.
380.  A pain  in  the  whole  chest,  especially  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,
worse  during  inspiration.  [Grr.]

Painfulness  in  the  chest,  like  digging ; it  then  goes  down  into
the  abdomen  and  digs  painfully,  with  desire  to  go  to  stool.  [Grr.]
Drawing  pressure  on  the  projection  formed  by  the  last  united
costal  cartilages  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  [Grr.]

Drawing  from  the  clavicles  across  to  the  left  axilla.  [Gjj.]

On  rising  up  in  bed  a sudden  drawing  under  the  left  breast ; she
then  gets  a couple  of  violent  sharp  knife-thrusts  inwardly  from
thence  towards  the  shoulder  to  below  the  clavicle  ; the  pain  then
remains  at  the  latter  place,  goes  down  on  the  left  side  and  involves  the
hypogastrium  as  a fixed  drawing — on  bending  in  the  left  side  and  on
pressing  on  it  the  pain  is  worse,  but  especially  during  inspiration
and  hacking  cough,  when  it  always  gives  a painful  jerk,  which  goes
off  but  slowly.  [Gss.]

385.  Muscular  twitching  on  the  upper  part  of  the  chest  near  the
left  axilla  (aft.  6^  h.).  [Gn.]

Quivering  twitching  on  the  muscles  of  the  false  ribs  (aft.  36  h.).

[Gn.]

In  the  sacrum,  somewhat  to  the  right,  an  aching  burning.  [Fz.]
In  the  left  side  of  the  back  above  the  hip  a painful  pressing  down
from  above  (immediately).  [Gss.]

On  the  left  side  near  the  spine,  above  the  os  ilii,  an  undulating
blow,  making  him  start  with  affright.  [G«.]

390.  Shooting  pinching  on  the  back  at  the  false  ribs  (aft.  1 h.).

[**.]


STANNUM.


543


Violent  tearing  pain  in  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  which
spreads  from  both  sides  into  the  renal  region,  aggravated
by  every  movement  of  the  trunk  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

Obtuse  blows  in  the  lumbar  region  with  sensation  of  cold  coming
to  him  from  without  (aft.  24  h.).  [Gw.]

A sharp  twitching  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  back,  and  at  the
same  time  in  the  left  thigh  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gw.]

Burning  pricking  on  a small  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  back  (aft.
13  h.).  [Htn.]

395.  Pricking  out  at  the  back.  [Gw.]

Digging  shooting  in  the  right  dorsal  muscles,  persisting  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gw.]

Stitch-like  tearing  on  the  left  side  of  the  back  spreading  more
upwards,  when  standing  (aft.  | h.).  [Lr. ]

Aching  drawing  in  the  spinal  column  below  and
between  the  scapulae,  worse  when  moving,  and  espe-
cially when  turning  the  body.  [ Hrr .]

In  the  middle  of  the  spine,  betwixt  the  scapulas,  slow,  inter-


mittent, obtuse  stitches.


[<?«.]


400.  When  lifting  a considerable  weight  she  suddenly  felt  betwixt  the
scapulae,  more  towards  the  left,  as  if  sprained  ; if  she  then  moves


the  least,  or  draws  her  breath,  or  yawns,  she  gets  the  most  'violent
sharp  knife-stabs — she  can  more  easily  bend  forward,  but  on  bending
backward  she  feels  intolerable  pains ; pressing  on  the  part  produces
no  change.  [Gw.]

Sharp,  broad  stitches  from  within  outwards  in  the  spine  betwixt
the  scapulae  (aft.  5 h.).  [TVs.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  left  scapula,  sometimes  towards  the
back  sometimes  towards  the  shoulder.

On  the  upper  part  of  the  scapula  a violent  burning  shooting,
which  went  off  by  rubbing,  but  came  back  immediately  afterwards.
[HnL]

Itching  pricks  in  the  nape,  in  the  morning  in  bed  (aft.  24  h.).

[m.]

405.  Boring  blunt  stitches  from  the  fauces  out  at  the  muscles  of  the
nape  (aft.  13  h.).  [Gw.]

Drawing  up  the  nape  with  stiff  feeling,  so  that  she  cannot  move
the  head  properly.  [Gw.]

On  bending  the  head  forward  there  is  pain  in  the  nape.  [Gw.]

Low  down  in  the  nape  suddenly  a painful  stitch.  [Gw.]

Weakness  of  the  nape  muscles ; it  feels  as  if  they  could  not
sustain  the  head — with  painfulness  on  moving  the  head.  [Gw.]

410.  If  she  shakes  her  head  quickly  the  cervical  vertebrae  crack  per-
ceptibly, audible  even  to  others.  [Gw.]

A burning  stitch  on  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder  (aft.  2 d.).
[G«.]

Tearing  pain  on  the  left  shoulder  (aft.  2 d.).  [Gw.]

Compressive  sensation  on  the  shoulder.

A pain  compounded  of  pressure  and  drawing  on  the  left  shoulder,
as  from  a weight,  as  also  on  the  outer  aspect  of  the  upper  arm,  and


STANNUM.


544

from  the  elbow  downwards  into  the  deep -lying  muscles  of  the  fore-
arm, which  goes  off  gradually  in  the  room.  [Fz.]

415.  Paralytic  tearing  pain  in  and  below  the  right  shoulder-joint —
more  violent  when  moving  (aft.  1 h.).  [Hrr.]

Pain  of  dislocation  in  the  arm-joints,  they  cannot  be  flexed  with-
out great  pain.

On  the  left  shoulder  suddenly  several  painful  blows  as  with  a
small  iron  hammer.  [Gjj.]

Itching  pricks  in  and  below  the  axilla  (aft.  5 h.).  [TVs r.]

Paralytic  pain  as  from  dislocation  just  below  the  shoulder-joint,
only  when  at  rest — on  moving  it  went  off  for  a short  time  (aft.  6 h.).
[<?».]

420.  Weariness  in  the  arms  and  legs — he  must  let  the  arms  sink  down.

[<?"•]

: Great  want  of  power,  especially  in  the  arms  and  legs  : feeling
as  if  there  were  no  strength  in  them,  and  as  if  the  latter  could  not
carry  the  body.  [Gjj.]

Here  and  there  on  the  limbs,  sometimes  on  the  arm,  sometimes
on  a spot  on  the  hand  or  on  one  finger,  a painful  twitching  as  though
he  had  just  got  a hard  blow  there.  [Gjj.]

Paralytic  weakness  of  tlie  right  arm.  [ Hrr .]

Paralytic  heaviness  and  weakness  in  both  arms,
especially  the  upper  arms  and  shoulder- joints — more
violent  at  every  movement  (aft.  41  h.).  [ Hrr.]

425.  Paralytic  weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  right  arm,
especially  in  the  joint— more  violent  on  movement.
[Hrr.]

Paralytic  pressure  and  heaviness  of  the  whole  right
arm,  more  violent  on  movement,  by  which  he  is  imme-
diately fatigued,  with  loss  of  breath  (aft.  14  h.).  [Hrr.]
Paralytic  weakness  in  the  arms,  when  he  holds  a small  weight  for
but  a short  time  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.]

Arms  and  fingers  are  almost  quite  immovable.

Paralytic  weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  left  arm,  but  less  severe
than  in  the  right  and  somewhat  later  than  in  the  latter.  [Hrr.]

430.  The  right  arm  is  easily  fatigued  by  very  moderate  exertion,
so  that  he  allows  what  he  has  in  it  to  fall,  and  the  same  in  the  left  but
less  and  later.  [Hrr.]

Paralytic  tearing  in  the  left  arm,  especially  in  the  wrist-joint,
more  violent  on  movement  (aft.  4 h.).  [HrrT]

Aching  tearing  in  the  middle  of  the  right  upper  arm,  quickly
occurring  and  as  quickly  going  off.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  left  arm,  especially  the  upper  arm — the  pain
seems  to  be  deeply  seated.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  left  upper  arm,
towards  the  posterior  and  inner  aspect,  limited  to  a spot
a hand’s  breadth  in  size  (aft.  48  h.).  [Hrr.]

435.  Intermitting  aching  tearing  in  both  upper  arms.

[Hrr.]

When  lying  on  the  left  arm  a constant  twitching  of  a muscular


STANNUM.


545


part  in  the  interior  of  the  upper  arm,  which  goes  off  on  altering
the  position,  but  returns  on  resuming  the  former  position.  \_Hnl.\

In  the  bone  of  the  left  upper  arm  a penetrating  pain,  in  fits,  as  if
it  were  compressed  and  crushed,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving.

Quivering  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm  above  the  elbow-
joint,  when  at  rest  (aft.  h.).  [Gn.]

Suivering  in  the  right  deltoid  muscle  (aft.  26  h.).  [Gn. ]
igging  stitch  in  the  right  deltoid  muscle  (aft.  5 d.).  [<?«.]
Tearing  pain  anteriorly  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right  upper  arm
(aft.  24  h.).  [ Hrr .]

On  the  lower  part  of  the  left  upper  arm  a bruised  pain.

Drawing  as  from  powerlessness  in  the  left  deltoid  muscle.  [Tz.]
Transient  drawing  from  the  elbow  up  towards  the  upper  arm.

[<?«.]

445.  Tension  with  sore  pain  on  the  point  of  the  right  elbow,  espe-
cially when  flexing  the  arm  (aft.  5 h.).  [Ws7\

In  the  right  forearm  cramp-like  stiffness.  [Tz.]

Paralytic  tearing  pain  on  the  right  forearm  above  the  wrist-joint.
[Hrr.-]

Pressive  pain  in  the  right  forearm,  towards  the  anterior  and  outer
part.  [Hrr.'\

Above  the  left  wrist,  on  the  styloid  process  of  the  radius,  a pain
as  if  he  had  over-exerted,  sprained,  or  dislocated  the  hand.  [Tz.]

450.  Pain  as  from  dislocation  in  the  left  wrist-joint.  [Tz.]

Aching  tearing  pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  more  violent  when
moving  it  (aft.  32  h.).  [Hrr.']

Transient  twitching  on  the  left  hand  over  the  wrist-joint.  [Gjj.]
Two  inches  above  the  left  wrist-joint  on  the  radial  side,  a
pinching.  [Glt.]

A quick  drawing  in  short  fits  from  the  wrist-joint  towards  the
hand  on  the  radial  side.  [€«,]

455.  Trembling  and  hot  feeling  in  the  left  hand.

The  hands  tremble  most  when  he  lays  them  down  (on  the  table).

[<?«•]  ..

Writing  even  becomes  difficult  for  him  on  account  of  weakness
in  the  hands,  which  then  tremble.  [Gjj.]

On  the  back  of  the  left  hand,  betwixt  the  index  and  middle
fingers,  a cramp-like  pain.  [Tz.]

Burning  itching  on  the  back  of  the  hand  as  if  a gnat  had  stung
him,  not  removed  by  rubbing,  for  eight  hours.

460.  Under  the  wrist  small  wheals,  with  itching  all  day,  which  was
aggravated  by  rubbing.

On  the  backs  of  both  hands,  a number  of  small,  red,  painless
little  spots.

Chilblains  on  the  hand  (during  mild  weather).

Swelling  of  the  hands  (in  the  evening).

Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  left  palm,  in  the  evening.  [Tz.]
465.  Cramp  in  the  fingers  which  remain  contracted  for  a long
time.

Tearing  in  jerks  from  the  fingers  up  into  the  hand.  [Gjj.]
vol.  11.  35


54-6


STANNUM.


Intermittent  aching  tearing  in  the  carpal  hones,
metacarpal  hones,  and  proximal  phalanges  of  the  fingers
of  the  left  hand.  [. Hrr .]

Aching  tearing  in  the  proximal  phalanges  of  the  fingers
of  the  right  hand,  aggravated  by  moving  them.  [Hrr.]

Aching  shooting  burning  in  the  outer  border  of  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  left  little  finger  (aft.  n h.).  [Htn.]

470.  Cutting  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger,  aggravated  by
flexing  the  finger  (aft.  5 h.).  [Htn.]

Fine  needle  pricks  in  the  tip  of  the  left  middle  finger.  [Zz.]

A drawing  pain  in  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  left  thumb  and  at
the  same  time  under  the  wrist.  [Zz.]

In  the  left  middle  finger  a painful,  spasmodic  drawing,  inter-
mixed with  jerks  so  that  the  finger  trembles.  [G^.]

In  writing,  when  he  grasps  the  pen,  an  acute  twitching  pain
betwixt  thumb  and  index — but  if  he  holds  the  pen  loosely  or  ceases
to  write,  he  feels  nothing,  but  after  a while  the  twitching  returns  and
lasts  a long  time.  [Gw.]

475.  Few  obtuse,  painful  blows  on  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left
index  and  on  other  parts  of  the  hands,  just  as  though  a stretched
nerve  were  painfully  touched  with  a little  hammer.  [Gw.]

In  the  proximal  joint;  of  the  left  index  drawing  shooting
towards  the  finger-tip.

Tearing  pain  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  index,  which  gradually
goes  off  on  moving  the  hand  (aft  i\  h.).  [Zr.]

On  the  whole  left  index,  a pain  like  dislocation  on  flexing
and  extending,  and  during  rest,  lasting  several  hours  and  frequently
recurring  for  five  days  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

Very  painful  hang- nails  on  the  finger-tips  (aft.  4 d.).

480.  Shooting  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  both  hands.

In  the  muscles  about  the  hip-joint  severe  pain  on  raising  up  the
thigh.

Persistent  itching  prick  in  the  left  natis,  near  the
anus  (aft.  33  h.).  [G».]

Muscular  twitching  in  the  left  natis  (aft.  3 d.).  [G«.]

Restlessness  in  the  lower  extremities ; he  must  lay  them  first  in
one  place  then  in  another,  in  the  evening  (aft.  15  h.  [Hnl.]

485.  Heaviness  and  feeling  of  exhaustion  in  the  lower
extremities,  especially  in  the  thighs  and  knee-joints  as
if  the  legs  would  sink  down  ; he  is  obliged  to  sit  or  lie
(aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.]

Extreme  heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities, especially  in  the  knee-joints ; he  can  hardly
drag  them  along  when  walking,  which  is  very  difficult

for  Mm  (aft.  8 h.).  [Hrr.]

Paralytic  weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  lower
extremities,  especially  of  the  thighs;  he  can  hardly
drag  them  along.  [Hrr.]

when  sitting  feeling  of  weakness  in  the  lower  extremities,  as  if
they  were  tired  by  over- walking.  [Gw.]


STANNUM.  547

After  a walk  of  two  hours,  great  weariness  of  the  lower  extremi-
ties as  if  he  had  blocks  fastened  to  them.  [Gjj.]

490.  Great  heaviness  of  the  lower  extremities  ; she  can  hardly  get  up-
stairs, and  must  immediately  sit  down.  [Gjj.]

When  standing  he  feels  in  the  lower  extremities  a painful
weariness,  and  there  is  so  little  strength  in  them  that  they  cannot
support  the  body,  but  threaten  to  give  way.  [Gjj.]

On  going  upstairs  the  lower  extremities  are  above  as  if  bruised,
but  below  they  are  so  unsteady  and  weak  that  he  is  in  danger  of
falling.  [Gss.]

When  sitting  suddenly  a transient  obtuse  pressure  in  the  ossa
ischii.  [Gjj.]

When  walking  dislocation  pain  in  the  right  hip  so  that  he  must
almost  limp  when  walking,  lasting  many  hours  (aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.]

495.  Drawing  in  the  left  hip.  [Fz.]

Paralytic  pain  in  the  hip-joint,  when  walking  (aft,  25  h.).  [Gn.~\
Pain  as  if  sprained  just  under  the  hip-joint,  in  the  thigh,  only
when  walking,  not  when  standing  (aft.  J h.).  [Gnf]

On  bringing  forward  the  thigh  in  walking,  a pain  as  if  sprained
in  the  upper  muscles  anteriorly,  which  hinders  him  in  walking,  for
two  days.  [Hn/.]

Weakness  of  the  right  lower  extremity,  especially  of  the  thigh,  as
if  in  the  bone,  so  that  it  was  painful  when  standing ; he  must  support
himself  on  the  left  leg.  \_Hnl.'\

500.  Feeling  of  powerlessness  in  the  thighs.  [F%»]

On  the  left  thigh  an  itching  pimple.

Pricking  itching  on  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  which  goes  off
only  for  a short  time  by  rubbing  (aft.  \ h.) .

Itching  prick  quite  high  up  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh  (imme-
diately). [G».]

Stitch-like  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh,  above  the
knee,  only  when  standing  ; it  goes  off  on  walking  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.]
505.  Pricking  as  with  a pin  in  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh,  above
the  knee.  [F%.]

A pressive  dragging  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left
thigh,  in  the  groin,  from  the  ascending  ramus  of  the
ischium  to  the  hack  of  the  thigh ; it  then  comes  into  the
hip  and  extends  thence  upwards  over  the  sacrum,
towards  the  right  side— sometimes  the  pain  in  the
ischium  develops  into  a fine  throbbing.  [■ Gss .]

Cutting  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  left  thigh.  \_Fz.~\

Pulsating  pressure  as  with  a blunt  stick,  on  the  inner  side  of  the
middle  of  the  thigh.  [Gjx.]

When  walking  a kind  of  sprain  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  thigh
below  the  hip-joint.  [Gjj.]

510.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  when  at  rest
and  when  moving  (aft.  6J  h.).  [Zr.]

Painful  pressive  drawing  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,
which  he  has  thrown  over  the  left  one  when  sitting.  [Zr.]

Pressure  in  the  right  knee-joint  (aft.  9 h.),  [iZrr.]


STANNUM.


548


Drawing  tearing  in  the  bone  from  the  knee  to  the  middle  of  the
thigh,  when  sitting.  [Htn.]

Sudden  stiffness  of  the  knee,  which  she  can  only  bend  with  great
pain.

515.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  knee-joint,  in  front,  towards  the
inner  side  and  below  the  patella  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  ligaments  of  the  inner  side  of
the  left  knee,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  9
h.).  [Lr.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  knee  a burning  scraping  sensation.
[Css.]

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  knee,  only  when
standing,  which  went  off  on  moving  the  leg  and  when  sitting  (aft.
2i  h.).  [Lr.]

Tensive  pain  in  the  left  hough,

520.  Stiffness  in  the  right  hough.

Fine  painful  pricks  on  the  right  knee  and  hough,  when  sitting.
[HnL]

In  the  evening,  bruised  pain  in  the  houghs  and  calves,  when  at
rest  and  when  moving,  as  if  he  had  walked  many  miles.

Weakness  in  the  knee-joints,  so  that  he  can  hardly  walk,  with
inclination  to  slumber.  [Fz.]

Very  cold  knees  and  feet.

525.  Itching  quivering  under  the  patella  (aft,  55  h.).  [Gn.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  leg,  when  sitting  (aft.
10  h.).  [Lr.]

Cramp-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  leg,  when  walking
aft.  J-h.).  \_Lr.\

Painful  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  leg,  on  the  outer
side  of  the  calf,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  10  h.),  [ Lr .]

Tensive  sensation  in  the  left  leg  (aft.  56  h,).  [ Gn .]

530.  On  the  left  leg,  yellow,  round  spots,  some  of  them  large,  for  ten
days.

Sensation  in  the  leg  as  if  it  were  tightly  bound  round  with  a
cloth.

Drawing  from  the  right  hough  towards  the  calf.  [Fz.]

Great  weariness  of  the  legs,  especially  the  left  one,  and  particu-
( larly  when  she  stands,  extending  from  the  feet  upwards  into  the
knees,  and  jerking  drawing  in  the  knees — at  the  same  time  the  soles
are  painful  as  if  sore  (when  standing).  [TVs,]

When  walking  the  knees  tend  to  give  way  beneath  her,  with
exhaustion  of  the  whole  body,  especially  when  she  walks  in  the  sun,
when  a sweat  of  weakness  breaks  out  in  the  face.  [Gw.]

535.  Severe  cramp  in  the  calf,  almost  all  night.

When  standing  a painful  tension  at  the  top  of  the  inner  side  of
the  left  calf.  [Gw.]

(On  the  tibia,  a small  swelling,  with  a red  point  on  it  which  is
painful  when  touched,  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  from  the  bone.)

Pulsating  pressure  on  the  right  tibia.  [Gw.]

General  aching  pain  in  the  right  calf  (aft.  4 d.).  [Gn.]


STANNUM.


549

540.  Pinching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  inner  calf  muscles  (aft.
24  h.).

Frequent  heavy  pain  in  the  outer  muscles  of  the  left  calf,  when
walking  (aft.  14  h.).  \Htn^\

A general  pressure  under  the  left  calf,  when  at  rest  and  when
moving  (aft.  3 d.).  [ Gn.~\

When  sitting,,  in  the  left  foot,  which  thrown  across  the  other
hangs  down,  a painful  sensation,  as  if  a heavy  weight  hung  on  its
point.  [Gw.]

When  sitting  the  feet  from  above  the  ankles  to  the  soles,  including
some  of  the  toes,  are  painful,  less  so  when  she  walks  and  stands.

[<?«•]

545.  The  feet  are  affected  with  a disagreeable  heat,  though  outwardly
they  feel  but  little  warmer  than  the  legs.  [Gw.]

Transient  heat  in  the  feet.

Tearing  mingled  with  jerking  in  both  ankles  (worst  in  the  inner
ankle)  of  the  right  foot  and  thence  downwards  into  the  toes,  when
sitting — on  standing  it  appears  less,  then  there  is  again  tearing  from
the  toes  upwards.  [Gw.]

When  sitting  a constant  formicating  sensation  in  the  feet,  as  if
they  would  go  to  sleep — which,  however,  they  do  not — or  as  if  he
had  had  a very  long  walk — which,  also,  was  not  so  ; this  sensation
gradually  goes  up  the  legs.  [Gw.]

On  the  feet,  especially  about  the  ankles,  reddish  swelling,  with
feeling  as  if  they  were  too  tightly  bound.

550.  In  the  evening,  sudden  swelling  about  the  ankles.

In  the  evening,  when  lying  in  bed,  pain  below  both  ankles,  as  if
the  left  heel  were  torn  out.

Itching  prick  under  the  left  inner  ankle  (aft.  7 h.).  [G«.]

Itching  prick  on  the  left  outer  ankle  (aft.  3 d.).  [G«.]

Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  4 and  72  h.).

[g*.]

555.  Drawing  tearing  pain  betwixt  the  metatarsal  bones  of  the  two
last  left  toes  (aft.  7 h.).  \_Htn.\

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  heel  (aft.  30  h.).  \_Hrr.~\

When  treading  on  the  outside  of  the  right  heel  a pressive  obtuse
shooting  pain  up  to  the  calf,  going  off  on  raising  up  the  foot,  only
when  walking  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

Cramp-like  pain  on  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  when
sitting  (aft.  | h.).  [Lr.]

Sharp  pressure  above  the  right  sole,  transversely  across,  when
sitting.  [Gw.]

560.  Violent  burning  in  hands  and  feet.

After  walking  in  the  open  air  internal  heat,  especially  in  the
chest  and  abdomen,  without  thirst.

(From  fright,  paralysis  in  the  left  arm  and  left  leg,  which  went
off  in  the  night.)

Shooting  pinching  alternately  on  different  parts  of  the  body  (aft.
10  h.).  [m.]

Itching  burning  pricks  over  the  whole  body?  but  yyqrse  on  the


550


STANNUM.


trunk  than  on  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  morning  in  bed,  for  some
days  (aft.  24  h.).  \JVsi\

565.  Itching  eruption  all  over  the  body.

On  undressing  an  eroding  itching  on  the  skin  of  the  whole  body
which  compels  him  to  scratch,  just  as  when  an  eruption  is  breaking
out  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.]

When  walking  and  standing  fine  needle-pricks  over  almost  the
whole  left  side  of  the  body  ; the  following  day  only  on  the  right  side.
[. Hnl.\

Weight  in  all  the  limbs,  exhaustion  on  the  chest,  and  fits  of  great
anxiety.

Painful  heavy  pressure  first  in  one  then  in  another  bone,  e.g.  in
the  right  temple,  the  left  zygoma,  the  middle  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-
arm, &c.  (aft.  9 h.).  [Htn.]

570.  Bruised  feeling  in  the  limbs,  and  especially  over  the  sacrum.

The  sufferings  often  begin  slightly,  then  slowly
increase  to  considerable  intensity,  and  decline  equally
slowly,  especially  the  pressive  drawing  pains.  [Gss.]

When  walking  the  symptoms  seem  to  go  off,  they  return  imme-
diately when  at  rest-— only  the  weariness  is  most  felt  when  walking.
[Gss.]

Causes  emaciation  and  consumption.*  [Stahl,  1.  c.]

Extreme  prostration  of  mind  and  body.  [ZZr.]

575 • Very  exhausted  and  sleepy,  so  that  he  can  scarcely  hold  up.

Excessive  exhaustion  of  the  whole  body  and  prostra-
tion of  the  mind— he  cannot  remain  long  at  work,  must
lie  down,  and  cannot  keep  off  sleep;  he  falls  asleep,  but
frequently  awakes  with  unimportant  dreams.  [Hrr. j

Powerlessness  : she  feels  as  though  her  legs  were  broken.  [Gw.]

Extreme  prostration  : he  would  always  sit  or  lie  down,  and  when
he  does  sit  down  he  falls  as  it  were  into  the  chair,  because  he  has  no
strength  to  sit  down  slowly.  [Ur a]

Weariness  in  the  whole  body,  especially  after  going  upstairs,  for
seven  days.

580.  By  day  great  weariness  ; he  must  lie  down,  but  cannot  sleep;  if
he  dozes  off  he  gets  thereafter  vertigo  and  a kind  of  absence  of  mind
and  stupidity,  for  half  an  hour.

Extreme  weariness,  though  he  moved  about  but  little  all  day —
he  will  always  be  seated ; on  walking  slowly  he  feels  it  most,  on
account  of  which  he  involuntarily  walks  quickly,  when  he  feels  it
less.  [Gw.]

When  he  goes  upstairs  quickly,  or  otherwise  moves  quickly,  he

* Taking  together  symptoms  331,  332,  337  to  379,  along  with  the  above  obser-
vations of  Stahl’s,  we  can  understand  how  some  kinds  of  ulcerative  pulmonary
phthisis  have  been  cured  homoeopathically  by  means  of  tin  ; e.g.  Muraltus  ( Misc .
Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  ann.  i,  obs.  9),  Commerc.  lit.  Nor.,  ann.  1734,  p.  67,  Fr.  Hoff-
mann (Opera,  tom.  ii,  sect.  2,  c.  13,  14),  Thierry  (Med.  Experiment .,  p.  163),
Ettmuller  (Colleg.  Consult .,  cas.  30,  61),  R.  A.  Vogel  (Preelect,  de  Cogn.  et  Cur.
Morb § 646),  without  including  the  corroborative  testimony  I could  myself  adduce
in  proof  of  its  curative  virtue  in  such  diseases.


STANNUM.


55i

does  not  feel  his  weakness  so  much  while  so  moving  as  when  he
moves  slowly,  but  he  feels  all  the  weaker  afterwards.  \_Gss.~]

In  the  limbs  and  in  the  whole  body  he  trembles  much  ; he  has
no  steadiness  in  them — when  he  grasps  anything  firmly  the  hand
does  not  tremble,  but  it  does  so  when  he  lays  it  down  lightly  and
loosely.  [Ctjj.]

When  going  upstairs  she  feels  nothing  of  exhaustion  ; but  when
she  has  come  downstairs  she  feels  so  exhausted  that  she  can  hardly
breathe.  [Gjj.]

585.  (True  epilepsy.*)  [Meyer  Abraham,  Diss.  Cautelce  de  Anihel -
minth .,  Gotting.,  1782.]

Frequent  starting  at  night  in  bed,  as  from  affright.  [Zr.]

After  a walk  in  the  open  air  sleepiness,  particularly  induced  by
music,  and  on  closing  her  eyes  there  occurred  immediately  a vivid
dream.

Drowsiness;  his  eyes  close  (aft.  2 h.).  [i/m]

Profound  sleep  several  nights.

590.  When  walking  in  the  open  air  much  yawning,  but  with  oppres-
sion as  from  a hoop  round  the  chest.

Though  he  had  a great  desire  to  yawn  he  could  not  yawn  com-
pletely, however  wide  he  opened  his  throat.

Stretching  of  the  arms  and  yawning  (aft.  a few  m.).

Frequent  yawning  as  though  he  had  not  slept  sufficiently  (aft.
6*  h.).  [Zr.]

Inclination  to  yawn.  \_Hrr. ]

595.  Frequent  waking  at  night  as  though  he  had  slept  enough.  [Zr.]

Evening  doze  prevented  by  constant  restlessness  in  the  legs.

(He  talked  in  his  sleep  and  insisted  on  the  uselessness  of  an
external  remedy  for  an  internal  complaint,  as  in  a somnambulic
state.)

The  child  whines  at  night  in  sleep,  it  weeps,  begs  and  implores
in  a frightened  manner.

On  two  nights  dreams  about  the  same  subject,  with  anxiety  as  if
he  had  neglected  his  business.  [Fz.]

600.  After  waking  at  1 a.m.  restlessness  in  the  whole  body  and  at  the
same  time  a digging  in  the  tibiae.

Anxious  dreams  of  quarrelling,  strife,  and  fighting.

[Gn.~\

Very  vivid  anxious  dreams  at  night.

Confused  but  very  vivid  dreams,  in  which  a great  many  things
go  contrary,  and  she  sometimes  talks  aloud — she  often  tosses  about

* In  a boy,  aged  7,  subject  to  attacks  of  convulsions  in  the  morning,  before  eating
(combined  with  jalap. powder).  If  this  effect  is  properly  attributable  to  the  tin,1
then  we  can  understand  how  Don.  Monro  ( Arzneimittell .,  i,  p.  226)  and  Fother-
gill  (Med.  Obsernj.  and  Inquir .,  Lond.,  1784,  vi)  could  cure  similar  affections  with
tin,  and  how  Quincy  (No<v.  Dispensat .)  could  say:  “There  is  no  more  powerful
anti-epileptic  than  tin.”


1 The  tin  was  given  to  destroy  the  worms  which  were  supposed  to  be  present  $
and  thereupon  the  fits  increased  and  multiplied  to  perfect  epilepsy.


552


STANNUM.


in  bed  and  wakes  up  four  times,  when  to  her  astonishment  she
always  finds  herself  sitting  up  in  bed.  [Gw.]

She  has  confused  unremembered  dreams.  [Gw.]

605.  Vivid,  but  yet  confused  dreams;  in  the  morning  he  can  only
partially  remember  them.  [Gw.]

Dreams  of  fire.  [Hnl.]

Vivid  dream  full  of  cruelty — the  second  night.  [Zr.]

Agreeable  dreams  of  earthly  pomp  and  grandeur,  which  after  she
awakes  keep  her  in  a cheerful  humour.  [Gw.]

Lascivious  dreams,  without  erection  and  yet  seminal  emission.

, OJ

610.  Lascivious  dreams,  with  erection  without  seminal  emission.

[G«.]

At  night  erection  of  the  penis  without  lascivious  dreams.  [Zr.]
When  he  wakes  up  at  night  he  finds  himself,  contrary  to  custom,
lying  on  the  back,  the  right  leg  extended,  but  the  left  drawn  quite
up  to  the  body  and  half  exposed.  [Gw.]

He  wakes  up  at  night,  and  before  going  to  sleep  again  he  has
undulating  drawing,  painful  jerks  in  one  hand,  as  it  were  in  the
course  of  the  nerves,  so  that  he  could  have  cried  out.  [Gw.]

After  lying  down  in  the  evening  he  soon  falls  asleep,*  and  only
awakes  late  in  the  morning.  [Gw.]

615.  Dizzy  in  the  morning  on  waking,  as  though  he  had  not  slept
enough,  and  yet  he  had  slept  more  than  usual.  [Gw.]

In  the  morning  on  waking  headache  with  heat  of  head.

In  the  morning  on  rising  the  back  and  lower  extremities  are
painful  as  if  bruised  ; she  is  as  tired  as  if  she  had  not  slept,  and  as  if
the  limbs  had  rested  too  little — this  goes  off  somewhat  some  hours
after  rising.  [Gw.]

Having  risen  from  bed,  when  dressing  she  is  suddenly  attacked  by
such  exhaustion  that  she  can  hardly  breathe.  [Gw.]

Chilliness  all  over  the  hedy  for  half  an  hour  (aft.  3 h.).
\_Hrr .]

620.  A very  transient  chilliness  ; especially  along  the  back,  [iZrr.]

Shivering  only  in  the  left  arm,  during  which  the  arm  was  convul-
sively contracted.

"Shivering  in  the  evening,  only  in  the  left  leg  to  half  way  up  the
thigh.

Several  forenoons  (about  10  o’clock),  shivering,  cold  hands  and
fingers  dying  away,  with  insensibility  of  the  tips  of  the  fingers.

Along  with  slight  sensation  of  coldness  and  slight  shivering,
goose-skin  over  the  arms  and  constant  chattering  of  the  teeth,  like  a
convulsion  of  the  masticatory  muscles.

625.  Feeling  of  heat  especially  internally.  [iZr.]

Great  heat  in  the  head,  with  hot  forehead — also  redness  of  face — -
and  general  though  slighter  heat  of  the  whole  body,  more  severe  in
the  evening,  with  much  thirst,  for  five  successive  evenings  (aft.

5 d.).

* Reaction  of  the  vital  force,  curative  action,  secondary  action  ; he  was  in  the

babit  of  lying  for  a long  time  before  he  could  get  to  sleep.


STANNUM.  553

Sensation  of  heat  all  over  the  body  especially  notice-
able on  the  thighs  and  back.  [Hrr.]

Great  heat  all  over  the  body,  especially  on  the  chest
and  back,  with  a feeling  as  if  hot  sweat  were  running
down,  without  externally  perceptible  heat  (aft.  4 h.)

[ Hrr.]

In  the  afternoon  (from  4 to  5 o’clock),  heat  and  sweat  all  over
the  body  (aft.  9 h.)  followed  by  chilliness — during  and  after  the
heat,  thirst,  and  so  for  several  afternoons  about  the  same  time,  thirst.

630.  During  only  slight  movement,  hot  sweat  all  over  the
body  and  complete  loss  of  strength.  [Hrr.]

He  feels  as  if  sweat  would  break  out— an  anxious
heat  attacks  him  in  fits.  [Gss.]

Anxious  heat  and  sweat  continually  break  out  on  him,  even  on
the  slightest  movement.  [Gjj.]

Profuse  night-sweat,  for  two  nights  (aft.  48  h.).

Every  morning  after  4 o’clock,  profuse  sweat.

635.  In  the  morning,  sweat  chiefly  on  the  neck,  nape  and  forehead.

Extremely  restless  and  distracted  ; he  has  no  perseverance  in
work.  [Lr.]

He  stays  in  no  place  long,  but  goes  from  one  place  to
another.  [Hrr.]^

Dawdling  and  irritable,  with  heat  of  face  ; she  wished  to  do  all
sorts  of  things  and  could  accomplish  nothing.

Busy  uselessness  : he  exerts  himself  to  get  a necessary  task  done
at  the  appointed  hour,  and  cannot  accomplish  it,  as  though  prevented
by  an  over-crowding  of  thoughts,  during  which  one  thing  and  another
occur  to  him  which  he  wishes  to  do.  [Gw.]

640.  Peevish  : nothing  was  done  according  to  his  wish.  \_Lr.]

He  is  disinclined  for  all  intellectual  work  and  cannot  collect  his
thoughts.  [Hrr.]

In  the  morning  on  waking  his  memory  is  defective.

Obtuse  in  mind,  indifferent  to  external  things  and  disposed  for
nothing  ; at  the  same  time  he  looks  pale  and  dull  about  the  eyes  (aft.
10  h.).  [ Gn .]

(Anxiety  for  several  days — indescribable  anguish  and  melan-
choly.)

645.  Moroseness  all  day,  which  gradually  goes  off  when  walking  in
the  open  air.  [i^z.]

Dull,  hypochondriacal  humour.

Despondency.

Silent,  reserved  disposition  ; he  thought  about  the  present  and  the
future  and  was  much  concerned  about  the  latter.  [Lr.]

Aversion  from  and  dread  of  people.

650.  Silent  moroseness;  he  speaks  and  answers  unwill-
ingly and  only  in  broken  words  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hrr.]

Silent  moroseness  : he  is  easily  angered,  readily  gets  heated,  speaks
and  answers  very  unwillingly.  [Hrr.]

He  has  no  wish  to  speak?

He  has  pleasure  in  nothing  and  yet  is  not  exactly  morose.


554


STANNUM.


Reserved  and  silent,  with  indescribable  discomfort  in  the  whole
body  (aft.  7 h.).  [ Gn.~\

655.  In  the  first  three  days  he  is  rather  calm  and  his  vexation  quickly
passes  off,  does  not  fly  into  a passion,  is  rather  quickly  sensitive  ;
the  fourth  day  he  is  disposed  to  stormy  anger  and  to  fly  into  a
passion — but  the  angry  disposition  does  not  last  long.  [Gjj.]

Very  violent  but  quickly  passing  anger.  [G^.]

Silent  but  not  ill-humoured  disposition.*  [Zr.]

Good-humoured,  talkative  and  sociable.  [Zr.]

Calm,  collected  disposition  : he  was  reconciled  to  his  fate  and
was  perfectly  contented  with  his  lot.  [Zr.]

660.  Excessively  merry  + (aft.  12  h.).  [G».]

* This  and  the  two  next  symptoms  are  secondary  or  curative  action,
f Seems  to  be  alternating  action.


STAPHISAGRIA.1

(Staves  acre.}

(A  drachm  of  the  seeds  of  Delphinium  staphisagria  is  pulverised,  along  with  an
equal  quantity  of  chalk  (for  the  purpose  of  absorbing  the  oil),  and  macerated,  with-
out heat  and  with  daily  succussion,  for  a week  in  600  drops  of  alcohol,  in  order  to
form  the  tincture.)

The  ancients  may  have  made  a very  rude  employment  of  this  seed
in  order  to  excite  vomiting  or  salivation,  as  we  may  see  in  Dioscorides,
who,  however,  also  talks  about  its  administration  for  toothache  in
general,  the  origin  of  which  application  is  evidently  domestic  practice.

Joh.  Heinr.  Schulze  ( Theses  de  Materia  Medica , editae  a C.  C.
Strumpff,  Hal.,  1746,  p.  435)  when  suffering  from  toothache  took
some  of  it  in  his  mouth,  but  it  gave  him  such  a violent  exacerbation
that  he  thought  he  should  go  mad.  What  enormous  power  must  not
this  drug  possess  !

As  an  exterminator  of  head  vermin  this  seed  was  called  by  the
Greeks  <j)OeipoicoKicov>  and  as  such  it  still  enters  into  the  composition  of
an  officinal  ointment  (unguentum  pediculorum).

Now,  as  our  new  and  only  true  healing  art  shows  by  experience
that  every  drug  is  medicinal  in  proportion  to  the  energy  of  its  action
on  the  health,  and  that  it  only  overcomes  the  natural  disease  by  virtue  of
its  pathogenetic  power  provided  it  is  analogous  to  the  latter ; it  follows
that  a medicine  can  subdue  the  most  serious  diseases  the  more  injuriously
it  acts  on  healthy  human  beings,  and  that  we  have  only  to  ascertain
exactly  its  peculiar  injurious  effects  in  order  to  know  to  what  curative
purposes  it  may  be  applied  in  the  art  of  restoring  human  health.  Its
power,  be  it  ever  so  energetic,  does  not  by  any  means  call  for  its  rejec-
tion ; nay,  it  makes  it  all  the  more  valuable ; for,  on  the  one  hand,  its
power  of  altering  the  human  health  only  reveals  to  us  all  the  more
distinctly  and  clearly  the  peculiar  morbid  states  which  it  can  produce  on
healthy  human  beings,  so  that  we  may  all  the  more  surely  and  indu-
bitably discover  the  cases  of  disease  in  which  it  is  to  be  employed  in
similarity  (homoeopathically)  and  therefore  curatively ; whilst,  on  the
other  hand,  its  energy,  be  that  ever  so  great,  may  be  easily  moderated  by
appropriate  dilution  and  reduction  of  dose,  so  that  it  shall  become  only
useful  and  not  hurtful  if  it  is  found  to  correspond  in  the  greatest  possible
similarity  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  we  wish  to  cure.  It  is
just  to  the  most  powerful  medicines  in  the  smallest  doses  that  we
may  look  for  the  greatest  curative  virtue  in  the  most  serious  diseases
of  peculiar  character  for  which  this  and  no  other  medicine  is  suitable.


1 From  vol.  v,  2nd  edit.  1826.


556


STAPHISAGRIA.


For  these  unexceptionable  reasons  I anticipated  a great  treasure  of
curative  action  in  the  most  peculiar  diseases  from  staphisagria  ; and  these
reasons  led  me  to  make  careful  trials  of  it  on  healthy  subjects,  the
results  of  which  are  recorded  in  the  following  symptoms.  Thus,
curative  virtues  have  been  elicited  from  this  medicinal  substance  which
are  of  infinitely  greater  value  than  its  power  to  kill  lice  (the  only
medicinal  property  the  ordinary  quackish  medical  art  knew  it  to  possess)
— curative  virtues  which  the  homoeopathic  practitioner  may  make  use
of  with  marvellous  effect  in  rare  morbid  states,  for  which  there  is  no
other  remedy  but  this.

Ten  drops  of  the  tincture  are  first  intimately  mixed  by  succussion
with  two  strokes  of  the  arm  with  ninety  drops  of  alcohol  in  order  to
obtain  the  first  dilution  (-ToO  ; of  this  one  drop  mixed  in  the  same  way
with  another  100  drops  of  alcohol  gives  the  t o"o  o 0th  dilution;  and  in
this  manner  through  thirty  diluting  phials  in  all,  the  dilution  is  brought
so  far  that  the  last  phial,  which  is  that  destined  for  medicinal  use,
contains  a decillion-fold  dilution  (to  be  marked  ^),  of  which  the
smallest  portion  of  a drop  (a  sugar  globule  the  size  of  a poppy  seed
moistened  with  it)  is  to  be  employed  as  a dose.

I have  seen  the  action  of  a larger  dose  last  more  than  three  weeks.

Camphor  subdues  the  excessive  action  of  this  medicine,  and  is  a
principal  antidote  of  staphisagria.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-provers  were  Cubitz,  Franz,  Gross,  Gutmann,  Hart-
mann, Haynel,  Herrmann,  Hornburg,  Kummer,  Langhammer,  Stapf,
Teuthorn.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited.

The  i st  edit,  has  608  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit.  721.]


STAPHISAGRIA.

In  the  room  vertigo,  like  stupefaction,  not  in  the  open  air.

On  stooping  and  on  turning  the  head  quickly  vertigo ; every
thing  whirled  round  in  half  a circle  (only  once).

Vertigo : when  walking  he  ran  up  against  the  door.

Vertigo  when  lying  in  bed  in  the  evening  as  if  all  turned  round
with  him.

5.  Whirling  vertigo,  especially  when  sitting,  diminished  by  walking
about  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Ctz.~\

Giddy  (aft.  8J  h.).  [(?».]

When  standing  and  speaking  confusion  of  the  head,  as  if  vertigo
would  come  on,  lasting  a long  time  (aft.  14  h.).  \_Hnl.~\

Whirling  in  the  forehead  and  dulness  in  the  head  (aft.  s h.).

im

Confusion  of  the  head,  only  in  front  in  the  centre  of  the  fore-
head on  a small  spot  the  size  of  a finger-tip,  like  stupidity — in  the
street  he  did  not  know  whether  he  was  walking  to  the  right  or  left ;
he  had  to  take  great  care.


STAPHISAGRIA.  357

10.  Confusion  of  the  head  only  in  fits  ; sometimes  his  head  was  quite
free  and  clear.

The  head  is  confused,  as  if  stupid  and  heavy  (aft.  ^ h.).  \Hnl7\

The  head  is  always  confused  and  the  spirits  depressed.  [Jtr.]

Obtuseness  of  the  mind,  which  kept  him  from  work  of  all  sorts.

Dazed  in  the  head  as  in  catarrh.

15.  When  he  wishes  to  seize  on  an  idea  it  escapes  him.

Vanishing  of  the  thoughts  ; when  he  speaks  or  reflects  on  any
subject  and  some  one  interrupts  him,  or  suggests  to  him  another
thought,  he  immediately  forgets  the  first  thought  and  cannot  recal  it.

[<?«•]

Vanishing  of  the  thoughts  (memory  disturbed  by  fancies)  ; when
he  reflects  on  anything  so  many  things  confusedly  mixed  together
occur  to  him  that  he  cannot  get  rid  of  them  and  quite  forgets  what
he  wished  to  think  about.  [Gjj.]

Weakness  of  memory : when  he  has  read  something
after  a few  minutes  he  remembers  it  only  dimly,  and
when  he  thought  about  anything  for  himself  it  soon
after  escaped  him,  and  after  long  reflection  he  could
hardly  recal  it  . [Hrr.]

Pain  in  the  whole  head  like  tingling  (aft.  5 h.).

20.  Tingling  and  shooting  in  the  whole  head,  worse  when  stooping
forwards  and  walking,  in  the  evening,  for  many  hours  (aft.  36  h.).

the  morning  quite  dazed  in  the  head  with  contractive  pressure
in  the  crown  (aft.  4 d.).  [Tz.]

Headache  in  the  crown  like  contraction  from  all  sides  and
pressure.  [Tz.]

Headache,  alternately  stupefying  and  boring.

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  especially  in
the  forehead,  more  severe  when  moving  the  head  and  when
standing.  [Zr.]

25.  A heavy  weight  seems  to  lie  on  the  cribriform  plate  of  the  ethmoid
bone,  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  like  a kneaded-together  lump.  [Tz.]

Headache  when  moving  as  if  all  the  brain  would  fall  out ; also
when  at  rest  as  if  the  brain  were  pressed  together,  were  separated  from
the  skull  and  lay  loosely  in  it.

On  stooping  forwards  pain  in  the  head  as  if  everything  would
come  out  at  the  forehead  (aft.  5 h.).

Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  compressed  (chiefly  in
the  forehead),  with  attacks  of  roaring  in  the  ears,  which
goes  off  much  sooner  than  the  headache.  [GssT]

He  feels  as  if  the  occiput  were  compressed  inwardly
and  outwardly.  [ Hrr .]

30.  A pressing  of  the  brain,  especially  in  the  occiput,  against  the
skull  bones,  and  aching  in  it,  as  if  too  much  blood  had  collected  there,
in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed,  which  continues  after  lying  down
(aft.  39  h.).  \_Hnl7]

A forcing-out  and  asunder^pressing  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the
forehead  (aft.  \ h.).


im

In


558


STAPHISAGRIA.


Aching  asunder-pressing  heavy  pain  in  the  occiput,  when  walking
in  the  open  air  (aft.  | h.).  \Htn.]

Heavy  pressure  over  the  right  orbit,  in  the  open  air  (aft.  h.).
n.

Heaviness  in  the  head  (aft.  72  h.).  [ Gn.~\

35.  Heaviness  of  the  head  relieved  by  supporting  it  on
the  hand  (aft.  1 h.).  [<?».]

When  he  shook  his  head  he  felt  on  a small  spot  in  the  middle  of
the  forehead  as  if  there  were  something  heavy  there,  like  a leaden
bullet  in  the  brain,  which  could  not  be  detached.

Hard  pressure  in  the  head  in  the  region  of  the  right
temporal  bone  and  vertex.  [ Hrr .]

Hard  pressure  oh  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  [ Hrr.~\

Pressure  above  the  right  eye  and  drawing  upwards,  [Tz.]

40.  Pressure  above  the  right  eye  behind  the  superciliary  ridge,  as  from
something  hard,  [Tz.]

Pressive  pain  in  the  left  temple  outwardly  and  in-
wardly, as  if  the  finger  were  strongly  pressed  on  it.
(aft  h.).  [Hrr.~\

Occasional  drawing  pressure  in  the  forehead.  [_Hnl.~\

In  the  morning  immediately  after  waking,  severe  headache,  as  if
the  brain  were  torn,  which  went  off  afterwards  with  frequent  spas-
modic yawning.

Tearing  in  the  forehead,  in  the  evening  when  sitting;  on
stooping  there  was  shooting  in  it  and  it  was  relieved  by  walking.

45.  Violent  tearing  pressure  through  the  left  half  of  the  brain,
especially  severe  in  the  forehead,  gradually  increasing  and  gradually
going  off  (aft.  54  h.).  [///«.]

Dull,  painful,  sometimes  shooting  pressure  outwards,  first  in  the
whole  forehead,  then  only  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  which
went  off  during  rest,  but  returned  more  violently  during  movement
(aft.  4 h.).  \_Hnl.~\

Occasional  sharp  pressure  on  the  vertex.  [Pz.]

Shooting  pain  in  the  head,  all  day  (aft.  17  d.).

Aching  stitch-like  and  drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  fore-
head (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.]

50.  Dull  pinching  pain  in  the  forehead,  with  stitches  on  the  temples,
which  went  off  by  walking,  but  returned  when  sitting  and  standing
(aft.  4 h.).  [ Trn .]

Quick  stitches  in  the  top  of  the  frontal  bone,  making  him  start.

if* T

Boring  stitch  from  within  outwards  in  the  vertex  (aft.  56  h.).
[<?*•]

Single  coarse  obtuse  stitches  from  the  skull  into  the  brain,  not
far  from  the  crown  ; at  the  same  time  the  part  is  very  painful
externally,  especially  when  touched.

Pressive  boring  stitch,  lasting  a minute,  in  the  whole
left  half  of  the  forehead,  from  within  outwards,  the
violence  of  which  wakes  him  up  twice  from  sleep  in  the
morning  (aft.  22i  h.).  [Htn.]


STAPHISAGRIA.


559


55-  Sharp  burning  needle-pricks  in  the  left  temple.  [Gjj.]

Transient  burning  stitches  in  the  occiput,  the  first  days  from  the
right  to  the  left  side,  the  following  days  from  below  upwards.
[Ctz.]

Shooting  in  the  left  temple.

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  right  temple,  outwardly  and
inwardly,  as  if  the  bone  would  he  pressed  out,  more
violent  when  touched.  [ Hrr .]

Drawing  cutting  tearing  in  the  side  of  the  forehead.  [Lr.]

60.  Burning  shooting  pains  on  the  left  parietal  bone,  [Hrr.]

On  the  frontal  bone  externally,  burning  stitches.  [F%.]

Itching  over  the  hairy  scalp.

Eroding  itching  all  over  the  occiput,  which  compels  scratching,
by  which,  however,  it  is  rather  aggravated  than  ameliorated  (aft.
14  d.).  [Hnl.]

On  the  upper  part  of  the  occiput,  an  eroding  itching,  with  sore
pain,  which  returns  at  the  same  time  of  the  evening  and  in  the
same  place.  \_Hnl .]

65.  Itching  erosion  on  the  hairy  scalp,  increased  by  rubbing,  for
several  days.  [Hnl.]

Itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  like  needle-pricks,  and  eruption  of
small  pimples  on  the  forepart  towards  the  forehead.  [Tz.]

On  the  hairy  scalp  as  also  immediately  above  and  behind  the
ear,  an  itching,  scurfy  eruption.

The  hairy  scalp  itches  much,  is  scurfy  and  exudes  watery
discharge.

Fine  burning  needle-pricks  externally  on  the  vertex.  [Fz.]

70.  Much  hair  can  be  drawn  from  the  head  without  pain,  by  slightly
pulling  it  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

His  hair  falls  out  very  much.

Burning  in-pressive  pain  in  the  left  parietal  bone,  just  above
the  ear  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Htn.]

At  the  occiput  from  the  occipital  joint  upwards,  rheumatic
aching  drawing  on  bending  the  head  forwards.  [Fz.]

Painful  drawing  externally  on  several  parts  of  the
head,  more  violent  when  touched.  [Hrr.]

75.  Tearing  externally  on  the  head  and  in  the  teeth.

Drawing  tearing  shooting  in  the  left  temple,  as  if  in  the  bone,
persisting  in  a pulsating  manner  (aft.  40  h.)  ; the  following  day  it
returned  occasionally  with  less  violence,  now  in  the  left,  now  in  the
right  temple,  soon  also  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  lasting
several  days.  [HnL]

Painful  drawing  on  and  below  the  occipital  protuberance,  at  every
movement  of  the  head  (aft.  10  m.).  [Hrr.]

Feeling  of  excoriation  on  the  right  parietal  bone,  only  when
touched  ; on  account  of  the  pain  he  cannot  lie  at  night  on  the  right
side  (aft.  80  h.).  [Gxj.]

In  the  depression  behind  the  ear-lobe,  a large  but  painless  lump,
with  some  white  papules  on  the  top  of  it.

80.  A stretching  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  nape  and  occiput,  only


56  o


STAPHISAGRIA.


at  night,  which  often  wakes  him  from  sleep,  and  owing  to  which  he
cannot  lie  on  either  the  left  or  right  side.  [Ar.]

Itching  papules  in  the  nape.

Face  as  if  bloated  by  catarrh.  [Stf.]

He  looks  so  hollow-eyed  and  big-eyed  and  so  suffering
pinched  in  his  features  as  if  he  had  been  raking  over  night,  or
after  a disagreeable  emotional  shock.  [Stf.]

On  the  face  eruption  of  small  (itching  ?)  discrete  pimples.

85.  On  the  face  eruption  of  small  pimples,  on  the  forehead,  cheeks,
and  near  the  commissures  of  the  mouth,  which  cause  pricking


and
as  if


itching,  and  when  touched  are  painful  as  if  festering  (aft.  9 h.).

iFz.y

On  the  face,  on  the  forehead,  cheeks,  and  around  the  mouth  and
wrists,  eruption  of  pimples  which  cause  drawing  itching,  which  is
removed  for  only  a short  time  by  scratching,  but  then  returns  of  a
pricking  character.  [Az.]

The  eruption  of  pimples  on  the  face  sometimes  causes  tensive
sore  pain  of  itself;  on  being  touched  it  pains  as  if  festering.  [Az.]
Throbbing  and  aching  pain  in  the  whole  face  from  the  teeth  into
the  eye,  for  sixteen  days.

Very  fine  needle-pricks  in  the  face  and  the  rest  of  the  body.
[*■*•]

90.  Burning  aching  tearing  in  the  right  temple,  close  to  the  eye
(aft.  7 h.).  [Htn.]

Burning  pressive  sensation  round  about  the  eye  (aft.  4 h.).  [ Htn.]
Contracted  pupils  (aft.  J,  1 h.).  [Ar.]

The  pupils  are  contracted  after  half  an  hour,  after  which  they
become  much  dilated.  [Trn.'\

Dilatation  of  the  pupils.

95.  Dilated  pupils,  the  first  days.  [*SV/'.]

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  26  h.).  [Ar.]

Very  dilated  pupils,  for  many  hours.  [Stf.]

A contractive  sensation  in  the  upper  eyelid,  which  presses  out
tears.


Pressure  on  the  upper  eyelid  all  day— more  severe  on
shutting  the  eye.

100.  Severe  sharp  cutting  pain  under  the  left  upper  eyelid  (aft.  75  h.).

[<?«.]

Under  the  left  upper  eyelid  pain  as  if  a hard  body  lay  beneath  it
(aft.  13  h.).  [<?».]

Itching  on  the  border  of  the  upper  eyelid  in  the  open  air  (aft.  £■
h.)  ; two  hours  afterwards  also  in  the  other  eye — it  went  off  by
rubbing.  [Ar.]

Itching  on  the  borders  of  the  eyelids  (aft.  2 h.).

A pain  pressing  the  eye  from  within  outwards,  on  the  upper
border  of  the  right  orbit,  just  behind  the  eye,  persisting  for  a long
time  and  frequently  recurring  (aft.  10  d.).  \_Hnl.]

105.  Aching  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  eyeball  (aft.  3J  h.).
[Htn.]

Aching  in  the  eye  ; she  must  wink  frequently.


STAPHISAGRIA.


561


Hard  pressure  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye.  [Hrr.]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye  (aft.  3}  h.).

[<?».]

The  eyes  are  very  dry  in  the  evening,  and  ache.

1 10.  The  eyes,  in  the  morning  on  waking,  are  very  dry  $ they  ache
so  that  she  cannot  open  them  unless  they  are  moistened.

Dryness  of  the  eyes,  lasting  all  day  (aft.  13  h.).  [Hnl.]

A smarting  sore  pain  in  the  inner  canthi.*

In  the  left  inner  canthus  a pain  rather  smarting  than  itching.

Smarting  water  runs  out  of  the  eyes,  in  the  morning.

1 15.  In  the  inner  canthus  a severe  itching,  worst  in  the  open  air — he
must  rub  it.

A not  disagreeable  burning  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye,
which  extends  to  a considerable  distance  behind  the  eye  towards  the
ear,  and  recurs  paroxysmally  (aft.  h.).  [iSY/i]  4

Inflammation  of  the  white  of  the  eye,  with  pains.

Pimples  around  the  inflamed  eye.

The  eyes  soon  begin  to  pain  when  writing  (especially  in  the  after-
noon), a smarting  and  burning,  and  then  some  drops  escape  which
smart ; he  must  avoid  the  light,  as  that  brings  on  the  pain  sooner.

120.  On  straining  the  eyes,  coarse  stitches  in  them.  [Fz.~]

Shooting  thrusts  in  the  eyeball,  as  if  it  would  burst  (aft.  ij  h.).
[Fz.]

The  eyes  are  excessively  deeply  sunk,  with  blue  raised
borders,  as  in  a person  who  had  been  raking  much,  for  four
days.  [<SY/.]

The  right  eye  is  much  larger  (more  expanded,  more  open)  than
usual  (aft.  78  h.).  [Ts.]

On  looking  at  an  object  a white  veil  comes  before  it,  making  it
invisible.

125.  When  reading  small  black  flashes  seemed  to  come  before  the
letters,  and  then  whole  lines  disappeared.

Also  when  looking  in  the  open  air  sometimes  black  flashes  came
before  the  eyes,  like  a kind  of  flickering.

In  the  dark  night,  in  bed,  he  sees  a pillar  of  lire  before  the  eyes.

The  sight  is  dim  and  the  eyes  so  hot  that  the  spectacle  glass
becomes  covered  with  condensed  vapour.

Dimness  of  sight,  as  if  the  eyes  were  full  of  water,  with  itching
and  pricking  in  the  inner  canthi ; he  must  rub  the  place.

130.  Dimness  of  sight  in  near  and  distant  vision  (aft.  10  h.).  [Hnl.]

Illusion  of  vision : when  he  stands  up  from  his  seat  he  appears
to  himself  much  larger  than  usual,  and  all  below  him  seems  to  be
much  lower  down  (aft.  26  h.).  [Tz.]

A halo  round  the  candle  flame  in  the  evening.

Tearing  pressure  in  the  outer  canthus  in  the  region  of
lachrymal  gland  (aft.  72  h.).  [Fz.]

Feeling  in  the  eyes  as  if  they  were  full  of  sleep.

135.  The  eyes  sometimes  close,  although  he  is  not  sleepy.  [Fz.]

At  night  dry  matter  is  deposited  on  the  eyelashes  and  on

* In  a man  who  had  never  had  anything  the  matter  with  his  eyes  in  his  life.

VOL.  II*  36


the


the


562


STAPHISAGRIA.


in  the  open  air  the  eye  gum  also  hardens  and  causes

of  dry


outer  canthus ;
stiffness.

In  the  inner  canthus  there  is  always  an  accumulation
matter,  which  he  must  rub  away  frequently  during  the  day.

The  eyes  are  sealed  up  in  the  morning  in  their  inner  canthus.

On  the  concha  of  the  left  ear  posteriorly,  a cramp-like  burning
aching  pain  (aft.  8 h.).  [ Htn.]

140.  (A  drawing  pain  on  the  ear.)

A pinching  and  nipping  in  the  left  ear.

A stitch  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  31  h.).  [Gn.]

Blunt,  but  deep  stitches  in  the  interior  first  of  the  left,  then  of
the  right  ear.

Deep  in  the  right  ear  a dull  painful  stitch,  in  the  evening  (aft.
48  h.).  [Kr.]

145.  A tensive  stitch  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  8J,  36  h.).  [Gn.]

In  the  right  meatus  auditorius  a feeling  of  cold  streaming  in  like
a cool  breath,  for  some  hours.  [S//\]

Ringing  in  the  left  ear  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Kr.]

On  moving  the  head  ringing  in  one  or  the  other  ear,  which  went
off  when  at  rest  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Lr.]

Sometimes  a slight  crack  in  both  ears  as  if  the  wind  suddenly
rushed  in — without  diminution  of  the  hearing.  [A%.]

150.  Drawing  in  both  malar  bones  (zygomatic  arch).  [Hrr.]

Aching  tearing  in  the  left  zygomatic  process  involving  the  teeth
(aft.  1 h.).  [Gss.]

Tearing  and  tugging  from  the  head  down  through
the  cheeks  into  the  teeth  (aft.  36  h.).  [St/.]

Cutting  drawing  in  the  left  zygoma  (aft.  22  h.).  [GYr.]

Burning  stitch  in  the  right  malar  bone  (aft.  J h.).  [(?«.]

155.  Obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  zygoma  (aft.  22  h.).  [Gn^]

Burning  sharp  shooting  in  the  left  cheek,  inciting
him  to  scratch.  [Gss.]

Itching  on  the  cheeks.

Itching  (eroding)  needle-pricks  on  both  cheeks,  inciting  him  to
scratch.  [Gta.]

The  left  cheek  is  painful  as  if  ulcerated,  when  yawning.  [T%.]
160.  When  yawning  the  right  maxillary-joint  in  front  of  the  ear  tends
to  become  dislocated,  with  shooting  pain.

Pain  in  the  maxillary-joint  when  yawning.

Swelling  of  the  cheek  over  the  lower  jaw.

In  the  left  nostril  on  the  cartilage  of  the  nasal  septum  there
occurs  a sore  pain  when  it  is  touched,  as  if  it  would  ulcerate.  [Gta.]
Sore  pain  on  one  nostril  as  if  it  were  much  ulcerated.

Sore  nose  inwardly,  with  a scab  deeply  seated  in  the  interior.
Itching  in  the  left  ala  nasi,  which  went  off  on  touching  it  (aft.  78

[<?»•]

Sensation  as  of  fine  cuts  in  the  lip,  as  if  they  were  chapped.  [/%.]
In  the  middle  of  the  upper  lip  a scabby  ulcer.

A burning  lasting  a minute  about  the  middle  of  the  outer  border
of  the  upper  lip.  [67/.]


165.


h.).


STAPHISAGRIA.  563

170.  On  the  red  of  the  upper  lip  a pimple  covered  by  a seab,  with
burning  sensation.

A vesicle  on  the  border  of  the  red  of  the  lower  lip  with  shooting
burning  pain.  [7r».]

Pressive  sharp  stitches  from  within  outwards  in  the  upper  lip.

[<*«.]

An  ulcer  on  the  border  of  the  red  of  the  lower  lip,  of  shining  red
appearance  with  obtuse  shooting  drawing  pains  per  se , sometimes
accompanied  by  not  disagreeable  itching,  which  induces  scratching,
whereupon  an  obtuse  shooting  ensues  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Hrr.~\

Lip  ulcer  with  gnawing  drawing  pain  in  it  (aft.  37  h.).  [i/rr.]

1 75.  Lip  ulcer,  from  which  at  first  matter,  then  (aft.  3 d.)  only
greenish  water  comes.  \_Hrr.~\

Anteriorly  beneath  the  chin,  under  the  border  of  the  lower  jaw,  a
tensive  sensation,  as  if  a pimple  would  come  there,  [Tz.]

Under  the  chin  anteriorly  at  the  symphysis  of  the
lower  jaw,  it  feels  as  if  there  were  a swollen  gland;
there  is  something  hard  there,  like  cartilage,  of  the  size
of  a hazel  nut— when  swallowing,  as  also  when  touched
or  rubbed  with  the  neck-cloth,  he  feels  there  a hard  pres-
sive pain  (aft.  26  h.).  [i/rr.]

On  bowing  the  head  forwards  it  falls  forward  almost  involun-
tarily, when  sitting  (aft.  10  h.).  [jFz.]

Heaviness  of  the  head  and  weakness  of  the  cervical  muscles  ; he
must  lean  the  head  either  backwards  or  to  one  side  or  the  other  (aft.
12  h.).  [Hnl.]

180.  Down-pressing  sensation  in  the  nape.  [/%.]

Paralytic  drawing  posteriorly  in  the  joint  of  the  nape,  at  the
spinous  process  of  the  first  dorsal  vertebra.  [G.^.]

Externally  on  the  neck  eruption  of  some  pimples.

Jerking  stitches  at  the  side  of  the  neck,  almost  behind  the  ear,  in
the  evening.  [£7/i]

Tensive  stitch  in  the  left  cervical  muscles.  [ Gn.]

185.  Pressive  drawing  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  irrespective  of
movement  or  touch  (aft.  32  h.).  [iLrr.]

Tensive  aching  in  the  side  of  the  neck,  [/%.]

On  bowing  forward  the  neck  a drawing  aching  (rheumatic)  pain
in  the  side  of  it.  [T%.]

Fine  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  neck  (aft.  5m.).  [i/rr.]

On  bowing  forward  the  neck  where  it  joins  on  to  the  shoulder  is
the  seat  of  rheumatic  pains,  drawing,  aching,  stiffness.  [Tz.]

190.  The  submaxillary  glands  are  painful  when  touched  and  also
independently  of  touch.

The  submaxillary  glands  are  painful  as  if  swollen
and  contused.

Swelling  of  the  tonsils  and  submaxillary  glands.

Compressive  drawing  pain  in  the  right  row  of  teeth,  excited  by
cold  water.  [Tz.]

In  the  morning  drawing  pain  only  in  a hollow  tooth  (aft.  72  h.)*


s4


ST  APHIS  AGRIA.


195.  Violent  tearing  in  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  whilst  at  the  same  time
the  facial  muscles  are  drawn  awry,  first  to  one  side  then  to  the  other.

[Hbg.]

The  teeth  soon  become  black  5 she  must  brush  them  twice  a day
and  still  they  remain  striped  black  transversely.

A tooth  that  had  long  remained  but  slightly  decayed  became
rapidly  more  hollow,  in  eight  days.  [Tz.]

A piece  of  the  posterior  surface  of  an  incisor  tooth  exfoliates  (aft.
28  h.).  [ Hrr .]

Swelling  of  the  gums  with  heat  in  the  cheek.

200.  The  gums  are  painful  to  the  touch.

The  gums  bleed  when  pressed  on,  and  when  brushing
the  teeth,  for  many  days.

The  gums  become  pale  and  white.

The  inside  of  the  gums  is  painful  and  swollen — it  is  also  painful
when  swallowing.

A blister  on  the  inside  of  the  gums  turns  into  an  ulcer,  with
shooting  drawing  pains.

205.  A lump  on  the  gums  is  painful  when  pressed  on  by  something
hard,  not  otherwise  (aft.  17  d.).

The  gums  are  eaten  away.

Painful  drawing  in  the  gum  of  the  last  molar  and  in  its  root.
[Hrr.]

Painful  drawing  in  the  gum  of  the  incisors  and  of  the  canine
tooth,  and  in  their  roots,  on  the  right  side,  which  extends  down  into
the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  26  h.).  [Hrr.]

The  gums  of  the  upper  and  lower  teeth  of  the  right  side  are  pain-
fully spasmodically  drawn  together,  so  that  she  cannot  separate  the
teeth  on  account  of  the  pain.  [Hbg.]

210.  While  eating  tearing  in  the  gums  and  roots  of  the
lower  molars  (aft.  72  h.).  [Hrr.]

Tearing  throughout  both  rows  of  teeth,  with  feeling  of  the  teeth
on  edge  when  biting  on  them  (aft.  40  h.).  [Sf/'.]

Toothache  excited  by  drawing  air  into  the  mouth.

Eroding  pain  in  the  four  lower  front  teeth,  especially  at  night.

Occasionally  a painful  tug  in  the  teeth  followed  by  throbbing  in
the  gums.

215.  Aching  drawing  pain  in  the  front  row  of  teeth,  as  from  taking
mercury,  worst  in  the  night  towards  morning.

A penetrating  drawing  in  the  tooth  that  is  becoming  hollow  and
in  the  corresponding  tooth  of  the  opposite  side,  in  the  morning.

Violent  drawing  toothache,  with  swelling  of  the  cheek,  aching
pains  in  the  same  side  of  the  head  and  heat  in  the  face.

Toothache  when  eating ; the  teeth  are  not  firm,  but
when  touched  waggle  to  and  fro ; he  cannot  masticate
his  food  properly;  when  chewing  he  feels  as  if  the
teeth  were  pressed  deeper  into  the  gums,  and  it  is
the  same  when  the  two  rows  of  teeth  only  touch  one
another ; at  the  same  time  the  gums  are  white  (aft.  56  h.).
[Hrr.]


STAPHISAGRIA.


565

The  decayed  teeth  are  sensitive  to  the  slightest  touch,  and  if  the
smallest  portion  of  food  remains  in  their  cavities  after  eating,  there
occurs  a violent  pain  extending  into  the  roots,  and  the  gums  around
the  teeth  are  the  seat  of  sore  pain.  [Htn.]

220.  Immediately  after  eating  and  chewing,  as  also  after  drinking
anything  cold,  a tearing  toothache,  which  went  off  in  half  an  hour,
but  immediately  recurred  on  again  chewing ; after  drinking  a liquid
not  cold  and  after  partaking  of  fluid  nourishment,  it  did  not  occur ;
it  was  not  brought  on  by  moving,  but  when  already  present  it  was
increased  by  movement,  but  chiefly  by  movement  in  the  open  air.

[a.]

When  she  drank  something  cold,  it  darted  into  her  teeth  as  if
they  were  hollow.

Immediately  after  every  meal,  pain  in  a hollow  tooth — an  eroding
drawing  (but  in  the  incisors,  aching),  which  is  immensely  increased
in  the  open  air  even  when  the  mouth  is  kept  shut,  but  it  gradually
leaves  off  in  the  room,  for  several  days  (aft.  5 d.).  [Fz.]

Fine  throbbing  in  the  teeth  even  when  chewing.  [/%.]

Tearing  first  in  the  root  of  the  hollow  tooth,  then  forwards  into
the  crowns  of  the  teeth,  only  immediately  after  eating  and  chewing,
very  much  increased  in  the  open  air ; at  the  same  time  a pressure  on
the  crowns  of  the  painful  teeth  towards  their  roots  ; on  touching
with  the  finger  the  other  teeth  also  commence  to  ache  (aft.  9 d.).
[Fz.]

225.  Tickling  pricking  in  the  right  lower  molars  (aft.  | h.).

[Gtt.]

Whitish  furred  tongue  (aft.  46  h.).  [St/.]

White  furred  tongue  (aft.  27  h.).  [ Lr .]

Shooting  in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  when  not  touched  by  any-
thing.

Pricking  pain  on  the  border  of  the  tongue  when  he  presses  it
against  the  palate,  as  if  a thorn  were  sticking  in  it — it  went  off  when
eating.

230.  Sore  pain  of  the  forepart  of  the  tongue.

Painful  drawing  from  the  hyoid  bone  deep  into  the  throat  to
below  the  lower  jaw ; aggravated  by  touching  the  side  of  the  neck
(aft.  48  h.).  [Hrr.]

Swelling  of  the  sublingual  gland,  which  hinders  him  in  swal-
lowing for  four  hours  (aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.]

A blister  in  the  mouth.

Shooting  in  the  palate  extending  into  the  brain.

235.  Burning  scraping  in  the  palate  when  swallowing  and  otherwise.
[Hrr.]

Rough  and  scrapy  but  very  moist  on  the  palate.  [<Sy.]

Shooting  on  the  palate,  when  it  is  dry,  in  the  evening  (aft.  12  h.).

[■**•]

Aching  soreness  at  the  back  of  the  palate,  only  when  not  swal-
lowing (aft.  4,  5 h.).  [Fz.]

Scrapy  sensation  in  the  fauces,  behind  the  posterior  naree,  as
though  he  had  drawn  snuff  through  them.  [Gn.]


566


STAPHISAGR1A.


240.  Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  at  the  same  time  tenacious  mucus  in
the  posterior  nares,  by  which  they  are  stopped  up.  [^z.]

He  speaks  quite  faintly,  on  account  of  weakness  of  the  vocal
organs,  though  otherwise  he  is  lively,  [Fz.]

Dry  sensation  on  the  tongue,  collection  of  sourish  water  in  the
mouth,  and  at  the  same  time  tenacious  mucus  stopping  up  the
choanse.  [.Fz.]

Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth.

Ptyalism.

245.  Bloody  saliva  (immediately).  [Gn.]

Rough,  throat,  with  sore  pain,  when  talking  and  swallowing.
Dryness  in  the  throat,  especially  in  the  evening,  before  going  to
sleep  ; stitches  in  the  throat  when  swallowing.

Bread  tases  sour  to  him.

Bread  tastes  sourish.  [Fz.]

250.  In  the  mouth  a nasty  bitter  taste,  per  se.  [*Sy.]

A qualmish,  flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  yet  food  tastes  well.
Watery  taste  in  the  mouth,  although  food  tastes  all  right.

Food  has  no  taste  and  yet  he  has  appetite.

Nasty  bitterish  taste  of  food  (aft.  46  h.).  [5//'.]

255.  He  has  a constant  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the
mouth,  without  had  taste.  [Hrr.]

The  mouth  is  constantly  full  of  watery  fluid,  as  during  great
hunger.

False  sensation  of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  hung  down  in  a
flaccid  state,  and  yet  no  appetite.

Extreme  ravenous  hunger,  even  when  the  stomach  was  full  of
food,  and  when  he  again  ate,  he  relished  the  food.

Great  appetite  for  milk.

260.  (From  drinking  beer  there  occurs  a scrapy  disagreeable  taste  in
the  throat.)

Tobacco-smoke  has  a pungent  taste.

During  (the  accustomed)  tobacco-smoking,  heartburn.

Every  morning,  nausea  even  to  vomiting.

Inclination  to  vomit.

265.  In  the  morning  inclination  to  vomit  (aft.  1 h.).  [Fz.]

When  eating  there  occurs  nausea  in  the  mouth  and  rgullet,  as
though  he  should  vomit  (aft.  9 h.).  [Zr.]

Collection  of  water  in  the  mouth,  after  eating — a kind  of  water-
brash.  [Fz.]

Qualmish  (immediately)  ; water  collects  in  his  mouth,  with  single
short  eructations,  as  when  an  emetic  has  been  taken  which  will  not
act.  ■[&/:]

A kind  of  eructation  ; a quantity  of  mucus  comes  from  the  upper
part  of  the  throat  into  the  mouth  (aft.  \ h.).  [Stf.]

270.  Tasteless  eructation  ; but  neither  air  nor  anything  else  comes  up.

Eructation  of  a tasteless  fluid  after  eating.  [67/".]

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  the  ingesta.  [67/".]

Frequent  empty  eructation.  [£*/".]


STAPHISAGRIA.


5^7


Repeated  eructation  (aft.  \ h.).  [Kr.]

275.  Scrapy  eructation,  which  affects  the  larynx  and  causes  cough
(scrapy  heartburn).

When  he  wishes  to  eructate  he  has  pressure  and  shooting  up
into  the  chest.

Hiccup  every  time  after  eating.

Much  hiccup  half  an  hour  after  supper.

Frequent  hiccup  during  (the  accustomed)  tobacco-smoking.

280.  Frequent  hiccup,  combined  with  nausea  and  stupefaction  of  the
head  (aft.  f h.).  [Lr.]

Adipsia:  he  drinks  less  than  usual.  [Hrr.]

A few  hours  after  a full  nutritious  meal  he  gets  a feeling  of  violent
hunger,  with  flow  of  water  into  the  mouth.  ['SV/'.]

For  three  days  he  is  qualmish  and  squeamish.

Tensive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (aft.  13  h.).  [St/.']
285.  Digging  pain  in  the  stomach.

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a pinching  oppressive  pain,  which  only
went  off  when  he  sat  and  bent  the  body  forwards  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

Fulness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  pressure  and  shooting  in  it.

In  the  morning  after  waking,  in  bed,  a pressure  in  the  stomach
as  from  a weight,  not  relieved  by  any  change  of  position  (aft.  6 h.).

Squeezing  pressure  below  the  sternum  on  the  left  close  to  the
ensiform  cartilage.  [Gjj-.]

290.  Only  on  beginning  to  walk  a persistent  stitch-like  pain  in  the
abdomen  under  the  right  ribs.

Transient  pressive  pain  as  from  displaced  flatulence  under  the
ribs.  [St/]

A contraction  in  the  hypochondria  oppressing  the  chest  and
impeding  respiration  (aft.  2 d.),  lasting  three  days.  [Kr.]

In  the  morning  fasting  (in  bed)  a tension  transversely  through
the  upper  part  of  the  belly,  causing  anxiety  and  impeding  respiration,
in  the  hypochondria  (such  as  hypochondriacs  are  wont  to  complain
of).

Squeezing  pressure  under  the  right  short  ribs  (aft.  h.).  [Htn.]
295.  A great  rattling  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  without  pain  or
discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  i|  h.).  [£//'.]

Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.

Rumbling  and  cutting  in  the  belly,  for  many  days.

Rumbling  in  the  left  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  belly  (aft.  I h.) .
\_Hnl.l

Aching  and  at  the  same  time  heaviness  and  tension  in  the
abdomen.

300.  The  abdomen  is  as  if  compressed,  impeding  respiration.

A tensive  painful  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  as  though  he  had
eaten  too  much  ancr  then  pressed  on  his  belly,  with  nausea  and  flow
of  saliva  into  the  mouth.

Drawing  pain  transversely  through  the  abdomen.

A drawing  downwards  in  the  sides  of  the  abdomen  as  if  the
menses  were  about  to  come  on  (aft.  4 d.).


568


STAPHISAGRIA.


Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  from  flatulence.

305.  After  dinner  a rattling  in  the  abdomen,  which  sounded  like  the
formation  and  bursting  of  bubbles.  [KrJ\

Rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium  and  drawing  in  the  intestinal
canal.  \_Hrr. ]

Flatulence  becomes  displaced  in  the  hypogastrium

(the  first  8 h.).

Hard  painful  pressure  in  the  right  side  below  the
navel.  [Gw.]

On  the  left  above  the  navel,  squeezing  stitches,  which  are  sharp
and  occur  in  rhythm.  [Gw.]

310.  Cutting  in  the  umbilical  region,  as  if  externally,  in  the  evening
in  bed,  in  three  paroxysms.

In  the  bowels  cutting,  especially  after  each  time  she  eats  and
drinks,  and  at  the  same  time  such  nausea  that  the  water  runs  into
her  mouth,  and  likewise  great  exhaustion  ; after  the  cutting  she  has
great  heat  in  the  face  and  the  blood  rushes  to  her  head,  the  veins  of
the  hands  also  are  distended.

Spasmodic  cutting  in  the  abdomen  with  trembling  of  the  knees  ;
by  day,  on  the  slightest  movement,  particularly  severe  after  urinating  ;
in  the  evening,  cutting  even  without  moving,  which  became  better
on  crouching  together.

Pinching  stitch  in  the  abdominal  viscera,  on  the  left
side  (aft.  38  h.).  [Gw.]

Long-continued  blunt  stitch  in  the  region  around  the  navel,
worse  during  expiration  and  when  pressed  on  (aft.  8 h.).  [Gw.]

315.  Tensive  stitch  in  the  left  abdominal  muscles  (aft.  32  h.).  [Gw.]
Bruised  pain  above  the  hips  in  the  loins,  which  spreads  to  below
the  navel,  most  perceptible  when  bending  forwards,  but  also  painful
when  touched  (aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  48  h.).  [*S7/'.]

Itching  needle-pricks  in  the  renal  region.  [ Gw.]
Painless  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  which  is  most  visible
when  walking  and  standing  and  lasts  many  days  (aft.  36  h.).

320.  Blunt  stitch  in  the  left  groin,  worse’  when  pressed  on,  going
off  during  inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  84  h.).  [Gw.]

Great  discharge  of  flatus.  [Gw.]

Hot  flatus  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gw.]

A large  quantity  of  flatus  is  developed  and  is  freely
discharged,  of  very  bad  smell,  for  thirty-six  hours.

Discharge  of  indescribably  foetid  flatus.  [iSV/'.]

325.  Excessively  foetid  flatus  in  great  quantity  for  many  days.  \_KrJ]
Pinching  in  the  bowels  with  discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  13  h.).
[Gw.]

Violent  twisting  about  pinching  pain  in  the  whole
abdomen,  sometimes  in  one  part,  sometimes  in  another

(aft.  <x\  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Pinching  transversely  across  the  abdomen,  and  drawing  in  the
muscles  on  the  sides  of  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come
on.  [Tz.]


STAPHISAGRIA.  569

In  the  morning  pinching  in  the  upper  part  of  the  belly,  as  if
diarrhoea  would  come  on,  and  yet  he  cannot  go  to  stool,  [Tz.]

330.  In  the  abdomen  a shaking  feeling  and  diarrhoeic  movements.

17*.]

In  the  morning  the  stool  is  long  delayed,  on  account  of  want  of
peristaltic  movement  of  the  colon,  [T%.]

Stool  twelve  hours  later  than  usual  and  coming  away  in  hard  little
pieces  (aft.  14,  15  h.).  [Hnl.]

The  first  day  hard  stool,  the  second  none,  the  third  again  a hard
stool,  the  fourth  day  an  ordinary  stool,  [Kr.]

Cutting  and  digging  about  in  the  upper  and  lower  part  of  the
abdomen,  with  call  to  stool,  followed  by  a thin  but  scanty  evacuation  ;
when  it  is  passed  there  ensues  a fresh  call  to  stool  with  increased
cutting  in  the  abdomen,  but  in  spite  of  all  efforts  no  evacuation — a
kind  of  tenesmus,  which,  as  well  as  the  abdominal  pains,  only  goes
off  after  rising  up  from  the  night  stool.  [G^.]

335.  Cutting  in  the  belly,  with  violent  call  to  stool,  whereupon
perfectly  fluid  but  scanty  faeces  are  evacuated,  with  inward  chilliness
in  the  head  ; immediately  after  the  evacuation  there  ensues  a kind  of
tenesmus.  [Gjj.]

After  a hard  stool  a kind  of  contused  pain  deep  in  the  rectum,  for
three  quarters  of  an  hour.

Hard  scanty  stool,  with  burning  cutting  pain  in  the  anus  (aft.  10
h.).  [HnL]

Costiveness  for  several  days  (the  first  days).

The  normal  firm  stool  passes  with  discharge  of  flatus  between
times.

340.  Small,  hard,  thin-shaped  stool,  which  is  evacuated  with  pressive
pains  in  the  anus  (aft.  26  h.).  [Hnl.]

Persistent  aching  pain  in  the  rectum,  when  sitting.  [Gn.]

Difficult  stool ; at  first  hard  faeces  are  evacuated ; this  is  followed
by  soft  faeces  which  teased  and  urged  him  just  as  if  the  rectum  were
constricted ; it  wanted  to  come  away  but  could  not $ thereafter
tenesmus  continued.  [Trn.]

In  the  morning  cutting  in  the  belly  before  the  stool.

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  a hard  stool,  a very  thin,
yellowish,  copious  evacuation.  [££/!]

345.  Soft  stool  which,  however,  is  evacuated  with  difficulty,  on
account  of  constriction  of  the  anus,  as  in  haemorrhoids,  [Fz.]

Soft  stool  (aft.  49  h.).  [Gn.]

He  had  frequent  call  to  stool,  without  bellyache ; each  time  the
evacuation  was  very  scanty  and  very  hard,  with  a pain  in  the  anus
as  if  it  would  burst.

In  the  morning,  after  cutting  in  the  belly  and  nausea,  diarrhoea
comes  on  ; the  last  stool  is  pure  mucus.*

* The  four  following  symptoms  seemed  to  be  caused  by  a too  large  dose,  which
jnakes  almost  every  medicine  a purgative  ; for  the  peculiar  primary  action  of  this  drug
seems  to  be  : during  the  stool  forcing  bellyache,  constipation,  or  else  a very  scanty,
hard,  or  even  (but  more  rarely)  thin  evacuation,  as  may  also  be  seen  in  SS.  328  to
333*


57  0


STAPHISAGRIA*


Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  diarrhoeic  stool,  at  the  last  slimy  (aft.
42,  84  h.).

350.  Along  with,  the  feeling  as  if  flatus  would  be  dis-
charged, there  occurs  unnoticed  a thin  stool  (aft.  2 h.).
Diarrhoeic  stool  mixed  with  flatus  (aft.  3 h.).

For  many  successive  days  several  ordinary  thin  stools.

After  the  completed  stool  a similar  but  fruitless  urging  in  the
rectum  without  evacuation.

Long  after  the  stool  a momentary  sore  pain  in  the  rectum.

355.  Great  itching  at  the  anus,  with  small  lumps  there.

Itching  in  the  anus  when  sitting,  independent  of
stool  (aft.  7 h.).  [Gn.]

The  first  day  very  scanty  secretion  of  urine.**

Frequent  discharge  of  watery  urine  at  first,  but  after  some  days
dark-coloured  urine.

Copious,  very  frequent  micturition,  for  several  days

(aft.  24,  40  h.).

360.  The  first  four  days  the  urine  is  discharged  every  quarter  of  an
hour  in  small  quantities  ; the  following  days  in  sufficient  quantity,
but  of  a dark  colour  and  every  hour.  [Gta,]

He  must  urinate  frequently  and  the  discharge  is  scanty,  the
second  day  not  so  frequently,  but  the  quantity  is  greater.  [Z/rr.]

He  urinates  somewhat  oftener  than  is  usual  with  him,  but  passes
little  at  a time  (aft.  7 d.).  [Z/rr.]

Frequent  call  to  urinate,  when  very  little  dark-
coloured  urine  is  discharged,  for  three  days.  [Gjj.]

Copious  red  urine.

365.  Frequent  call  to  urinate  with  great  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  6 h.).

[*>•]

When  she  coughed  the  urine  was  ejected  involuntarily.

Call  to  urinate;  scarcely  a spoonful  passes,  mostly  of
reddish  or  dark  yellow  urine  in  a thin  stream,  some-
times by  drops,  and  after  he  has  passed  it  he  always
feels  as  if  the  bladder  were  not  empty,  for  some  urine
continues  to  dribble  away.  [Gss.]

He  urinates  frequently,  but  always  only  scantily,  about  a cupful
of  dark  urine  (aft.  24  h.).  [Z/rr.]

On  awaking  from  sleep  pressure  on  the  bladder ; she  must
pass  much  urine,  and  yet  an  hour  afterwards  she  had  again  a call  to
urinate  with  pressure.

370.  He  urinates  less  frequently  than  on  the  first  day,  but  more
frequently  than  in  his  normal  state,  and  a little  more  in  quantity
than  the  first  day  (aft.  3 to  7 d.).  [Z/rr.]

Cutting  while  urinating  and  still  worse  afterwards.

Every  time  water  is  passed  burning  in  the  whole
urethra,  for  many  days.

Immediately  after  urinating  a dislocative  pain  above  the  urethra
behind  the  os  pubis.  [Zr.]

* The  urinary  symptoms  resemble  those  connected  with  the  stool,  as  is  also

seen  in  the  symptoms  of  my  fellow  provers.


STAPHISAGRIA.


57i


The  urine  is  passed  at  night  with  stiff  penis  and  at  last  only  in
drops,  with  burning  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  at  the  same  time
ineffectual  urging  to  stool ; lying  doubled  up  gave  relief.  [ Trn .]

375.  A smarting  and  burning  formication  at  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,
when  not  urinating.

Only  when  not  urinating,  while  sitting,  a burning  deep  back  in
the  urethra.

A kind  of  burning  in  the  middle  of  the  urethra,  when  not
urinating  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Kr,~\

When  evacuating  a hard  stool,  discharge  of  prostatic  fluid.

All  night  long  excessive  stiffness  of  the  penis,  without  seminal
emission  (aft.  1 6 h.).  [Zr.]

380.  All  night  stiffness  of  the  penis,  without  amorous  thoughts  and
without  seminal  emission.  [Zr.]

At  night  amorous  dream-pictures,  with  two  seminal  emissions.

[Lr.]

At  night  a seminal  emission  without  dreams.  [Zz.]

A pollution  in  the  afternoon  siesta  in  an  old  man,  to  whom
nothing  similar  had  occurred  for  thirty  years  (aft.  12  h.).

Seminal  emissions  on  three  successive  nights.

385.  Seminal  emissions  on  five  successive  nights,  each  time  with
lascivious  dreams.

After  a nocturnal  pollution  exhaustion  and  heaviness  in  both
arms,  as  if  he  had  lead  in  them.

In  its  primary  action  it  excites  strong  sexual  desire,  but  in  the
secondary  action  or  reaction  of  the  organism  (aft.  5,  6 d.)  there
ensues  indifference  to,  and  persistent  deficiency  of,  sexual  desire,  both
in  the  genital  organs  and  in  the  mind.

Violent  drawing  burning  stitches  out  of  the  right
inguinal  ring  as  if  in  the  spermatic  cord  as  far  as  the
right  testicle  (which,  however,  is  painless  when  touched),  when
sitting,  standing,  and  walking,  but  most  violent  when  stooping  (aft.
33  h [HnL]

Aching  drawing  (tearing)  in  the  right  testicle,  as  though  it  were
forcibly  compressed.  [Gjj.]

390.  Aching  pain  on  the  left  testicle  when  walking,  as
also  whenever  it  is  rubbed ; the  pain  is  more  violent  on
touching  it  (aft.  8 h.).  [ZZr.]

An  itching  in  the  inside  of  the  scrotum,  which  can  only  be
somewhat  removed  by  pressing  and  rubbing  between  the  fingers.

Voluptuous  itching*  about  the  scrotum,  which  is  always  increased
by  rubbing  ; on  the  surface  it  turns  into  a sore  pain,  whilst  deeper  the
itching  continues  and  at  length  causes  a seminal  emission  (aft.  5,  6,
8 d.).

A painless  gurgling  in  the  scrotum.

Moisture  on  the  corona  glandis,  beneath  the  prepuce.

395.  Soft  exuding  growth  in  the  groove  behind  the  corona  glandis,  and
a similar  growth  on  the  corona  itself,  both  of  which  itch  from  the
friction  of  the  shirt.

* Removed  by  smelling  at  ambra.


57*


STAPHISAGRIA.


Shooting  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  glans  when  standing  and
walking.  [Zr.]

Painful  sensibility  of  the  female  genitals ; when  she  sits  she  has
pain  there.

Spasmodic  pain  in  the  female  genitals  and  vagina.

Pricking  itching  in  the  female  genitals.

400.  A smarting  in  the  female  genitals,  even  when  not  urinating.

Posteriorly,  within  the  right  labium  majus,  a blister,  which  causes
smarting se,  but  sore  pain  when  touched  (aft.  9 d.).

Appearance  of  the  menses  at  new  moon  that  had  been  absent  for
a year,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  great  rumbling.*

* *

Frequent  sneezing  without  coryza  (aft.  2 and  10  h.).

[it-.]

Sneezing  with  coryza.

405.  (In  the  evening  a stoppage  in  the  nose  so  that  she  can  get  no
air  through  it  and  it  renders  speech  difficult.)

Coryza  : at  first  he  blows  only  thick  mucus  from  the
nose,  afterwards  thin  discharge  (aft.  4 d.).  [ Hrr .]

Quickly  developed  fluent  coryza,  with  catarrhal  speech,  lasting
a quarter  of  an  hour  (at  2 p.  m.).

Severe  coryza  without  cough.

Violent  fluent  coryza  ; one  nostril  is  stopped  up,  the  other  not,
with  frequent  sneezing,  flow  of  tears  from  the  eyes  and  chapped  lips
(aft.  3,  + d.).  [Kr.]

410.  Violent  coryza:  along  with  tickling  in  the  nose  and  sneezing
there  flows  from  the  nose  at  one  time  a copious,  bland,  watery
discharge,  at  another  time  thick  mucus— -later  on  only  the  thick
mucous  matter.  [67/1]

Coryza  and  cough,  for  several  weeks.

Constant  irritation  to  hacking  cough,  on  account  of  viscid  mucus
in  the  larynx,  which  he  cannot  detach  by  coughing.  [Gw.]

She  feels  her  chest  weak  ; something  adheres  in  her  windpipe,
causing  hacking  cough.

Easy  expectoration  of  a quantity  of  mucus  by  hacking  cough.
[Kr.]

415.  Cough  with  mucous  expectoration.

Severe  cough  which  threatens  to  tear  out  the  larynx,  as  from  a
persistent  contraction  of  the  windpipe,  not  preceded  by  any  particular
irritation  (aft.  4 h.).  [E%.]

Cough  caused  by  tickling  irritation,  only  by  day.

Immediately  after  eating  severe  irritation  to  cough  in  the  larynx,
but  little  cough  (aft.  4 d.).  \_Fz.~\

Adhesive  mucus  lies  in  his  chest  the  first  six  to  eight
hours  and  on  several  mornings ; later  on  and  during  the  day,  easy
detachment  of  mucus  from  the  chest.

420.  Severe  cough  after  lying  down  in  the  evening  and  at  noon,  with
viscid  mucous  expectoration.

* But  as  this  was  only  primary  action,  the  menses  did  not  reappear  the  following

month.


STAPHISAGRIA .


573


Shortly  after  every  meal  severe  cough  with  collection  of  water  in
the  mouth — it  is  as  if  this  water  were  forcibly  propelled  through  the
oesophagus  and  caused  cutting  pain  in  it  (aft.  26  h.).  [■ Fz.~\

Expectoration  of  mucus  each  time  with  five  to  eight  drops
of  blood,  and  always  preceded  by  a scraping  sensation  in  the
chest.

Cough  with  yellow  expectoration  like  pus,  worst  in  the  forenoon
from  9 to  12  o’clock,  little  in  the  morning  (aft.  5 d.).

When  coughing  pain  behind  the  sternum  as  if  festering.

425.  In  the  chest  a pressure  and  a heaviness  in  it  when  sitting,  which
was  allayed  by  walking.

Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  breathing  has  no  influence
on  it.

At  the  top  of  the  sternum  immediately  beneath  the
pit  of  the  throat,  itching,  fine,  sharp  pricks,  which
compel  scratching.  [ Gss .]

Painful  stitches  in  the  chest,  impeding  expiration.  [Zr.]

Obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  recurring  after  several
minutes.  \Gn.'\

430.  On  bending  the  upper  part  of  the  body  towards  the  right  side
and  forwards,  a violent  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  when
sitting  (aft.  2\  h.).  \Hnl!\

Tensive  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  lying  and
moving,  more  violent  when  expiring  than  when  inspiring,  worst
when  going  upstairs,  when  at  last  a persistent  stitch  ensues,  which
almost  stops  the  breath  (aft.  16  h.).  [Gn.~\

A persistent  boring  obtuse  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
(aft.  37  h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  stitches  on  both  sides  in  the  intercostal  muscles,  when
sitting,  worse  when  leaning  backward,  and  continuing  during
inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gn.~\

Uneasiness  in  the  chest.

433.  Feeling  of  soreness  behind  the  sternum.  [Gw.]

In  the  afternoon  an  oppression  on  the  chest  and  a feeling  of
restlessness  that  drives  him  from  one  place  to  another  and  does  not
allow  him  to  remain  in  any  one  place.

Towards  the  end  of  coitus,  tightness  of  the  chest.

Oppression  of  the  chest,  like  contraction  of  it,  causing  slow  and
difficult  inspiration  ; expiration  affords  relief  at  the  same  time
restlessness  and  anxiety,  worst  when  sitting,  easier  when  walking,
lasting  five  hours  (aft.  6 h.).  [CV%.]

Constant  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  as  if  something  sore
(ulcerated)  were  there,  worst  when  raising  up  and  stretching  out  the
body,  also  more  painful  when  touched,  like  tension  and  pressure,  so
that  the  breath  is  sometimes  taken  away.

440.  Pressure  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  like  soreness,  with  nausea
there.  [Gjj.]

Shooting  cutting  on  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs  of  the  left  side  ; it
feels  as  if  an  incision  were  made  into  it,  accompanied  by  stitches.
[Hrr.]


574


STAPHISAGRIA.


Sharp  stitches  which  commence  at  the  posterior  part  of  the
right  ribs  and  meander  forwards  to  the  cartilages.  \_Hrr.~\

Pricking  itching  betwixt  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs.

[Hrr.]

Sharp  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  costal
cartilages  of  the  right  and  left  sides*  intermitting  in
pauses  of  several  seconds*  and  lasting  longer  than  usual ;
they  penetrate  slowly  from  within  outwards,  with-
out relation  to  inspiration  or  expiration  (aft.  14  h.),
\_Hrr.~\

445.  Pain  as  if  bruised  in  the  pectoral  muscles,  in  the  morning,  when
she  moves  in  bed,  and  during  the  day  when  she  lays  the  arms
together  1 on  touching  the  parts  themselves  she  feels  nothing,  nor
yet  when  breathing.

The  chest  is  outwardly  painful  when  touched.

On  stooping,  an  obtuse  pressive  pain  on  the  cartilages  of  the  last
ribs,  also,  when  touching,  a sore  pain.

Miliary  rash  on  the  chest  ; when  he  becomes  warm  it  gets  red
and  itches.

On  the  lower  ribs  a tettery  eruption,  consisting  of  small,  thick,
red  pimples,  with  burning  itching  pricking  as  from  stinging  nettles  ;
after  rubbing  the  part  is  painful ; at  the  same  time  a chilliness
running  over  this  part  and  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

450.  Palpitation  of  the  heart  when  walking  and  when  listening  to
music.

Trembling  palpitation  of  the  heart  on  slight  movement.

He  wakes  from  his  afternoon  sleep  with  the  most  violent  palpita-
tion of  the  heart.

Stiffness  in  the  nape.

Itching  in  the  nape.

455.  Pressure  and  tension  in  the  nape  and  left  shoulder  muscles  (aft.

ib •)•

In  the  morning  rheumatic  pain  in  the  nape  and  between  the  scapulae,
like  drawing  ; on  rising  up  from  bed  she  could  not  move  her  arms
nor  turn  her  neck  for  pain,  all  the  forenoon,  for  several  successive
mornings,  with  exhaustion  of  the  whole  body  till  noon.

In  the  sacrum  stitches  and  pain  as  from  a strain,  when  at  rest,
which  goes  off  on  walking.

In  the  morning  in  bed  pain  in  the  sacrum,  as  if  all  were  broken  ;
on  rising  from  bed  she  could  not  lift  anything  from  the  floor,  until
8 or  9 o’clock ; then  came  on  hunger,  then,  with  cutting  in  the
abdomen,  diarrhoea,  which  at  last  was  slimy.

A down-drawing  pain  in  the  sacrum,  more  when  stooping  than
when  standing  upright,  least  when  sitting.

460.  The  whole  night  a pressing  in  the  sacrum  as  if  bruised  ; she
woke  up  from  the  pain,  which  was  worst  at  4 a.m. ; when  she  got  up
it  went  off.

Sacral  pain  hindering  her  less  in  walking  than  on  rising  from  a
seat,  turning  the  body  in  bed,  and  at  every  sideward  movement,  per-
sisting many  days  (aft.  10  h.).  [ Kr .


STAPHISAGRIA.  575

Externally  on  the  lower  part  of  the  os  sacrum  a violent  burning
(aft.  ih.).  [HnL]

When  sitting,  drawing  shooting,  sometimes  twitching  in  the  os
sacrum.  [HnL]

(Pain  in  the  back  at  night,  from  the  evening  until  5 a.m.,  like
blows  and  jerks,  which  took  away  his  breath,  with  slumber.)

465.  Severe  stitches  up  the  back  (aft.  7 d.).

Hard  pressure  on  the  left  near  the  spine  on  the  dorsal  muscles
(aft.  4 d.).  \_Hrr. J

In  the  two  first  dorsal  vertebrae  a drawing  pressure,  with  a sore
sensation  at  the  same  time  (aft.  if  h.).  [Fz.]

Burning  aching  pain  under  the  right  scapula,  close  to  the  spine,
with  a painful  feeling  of  weight  on  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.
2h  .).  [Htn.]

Betwixt  the  last  cervical  and  first  dorsal  vertebrae,  a pain  as  if
stabbed  with  a knife,  [Tz.]

470.  Stitches  in  the  left  axilla.  [Gn.]

Itching  needle-pricks  in  the  right  axilla  (aft.  3 m.).  [Hrr.]
Itching  pricks  in  both  axillae  (aft.  5 m.).  [Gw.]

In  the  right  axilla  an  obtuse  pressive  pain.  [St/.]

In  the  left  shoulder-joint  a drawing  shooting,  especially  on  moving
the  arm  to  the  chest.  [HnL]

475.  Pressive  stitch  in  the  right  shoulder  from  below  upwards  (aft.
4i  h.).  [<?«•]

Loose  pressure  on  the  shoulder,  which  is  painful  to  the  touch,  as
if  the  flesh  were  detached,  when  walking,  [Tz.]

A pressing-down  of  the  shoulder,  as  if  a weight  lay  on  it,  when
sitting,  [.Fz.]

Pain  like  dislocation  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  only
on  moving.  [Hrr.]

Obtuse  shooting  pains  on  the  shoulder -joint,  more
severe  when  moving  and  when  touched.  [Hrr.]

480.  Aching  drawing  in  the  shoulder-joints,  in  the  morning  in  bed  and
immediately  after  getting  up;  more  severe  when  moving  (aft.  5 d.).
[Hrr.]

Violent  aching  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  not
removed  by  any  motion  (aft.  36  h.).  [Htn.]

Fine  tearing  on  the  head  of  the  left  humerus,  more  severe  when
moving.  [HrrL]

Paralytic  drawing  in  the  shoulder-joint,  sometimes  also  in  the
whole  arm  when  as  he  lies  in  bed  he  lays  it  under  his  head  (aft.  90
h.).  [Gw.]

Pain  on  the  bones  of  the  arm  ; not  spontaneously  when  at  rest,
also  not  when  touched,  but  only  when  moving.

485.  Pain  on  the  right  humerus,  an  intolerable  aching  in  the  peri-
osteum, when  at  rest  and  when  moving ; on  touching  it  the  part  is
still  more  painful  (aft.  36  h.).

In  the  right  upper  arm  an  aching  drawing,  in  the  evening  in  bed.
Tearing  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  in  the  deltoid  muscle,  when
sitting,  which  goes  off  by  movement.  [Fz.]


576


STAPHISAGRI  A.


Tearing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm  close  to  the
elbow.  [Zr.]

Stitch-like  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm,  near
the  elbow-joint.  [Zr.]

4QO.  Paralytic  aching  pain  on  the  left  upper  arm,  aggravated  by
touching  (aft.  72  h.).  [ Hrr.']

Hard  pressure  inwards  on  the  right  upper  arm,  aggravated  by
touching  (aft.  2 h.).  [Hrr.]

Paralytic  aching  pain  on  the  left  upper  arm,  aggra-
vated by  touching  and  motion ; the  arm  is  weakened
(aft.  36  h.).  [Hrr.]

Aching  drawing  here  and  there  on  the  upper  extremities,  aggra-
vated by  touching  (aft.  7 h.).  [Hrr. ]

Paralytic  pressure  on  both  upper  and  forearms;
aggravated  by  motion  and  touch  (aft.  5 d.).  [ Hrr .]

495.  Aching  drawing  in  the  deltoid  muscle.  [Z%.]

Slow,  blunt  stitches,  like  pressure,  in  the  middle  of  the  forearm.

[<?«.]

Eruption  of  itching  pimples  on  the  elbow  and  towards  the  hand.
Paralytic  weakness  about  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  2 h.).  [Fz.]

Near  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  more  towards  the  forearm,  a sensa-
tion as  if  a cutaneous  eruption  had  broken  out,  or  on  being  scratched
by  a needle — a kind  of  goose-skin  feeling,  rather  burning ; and  yet
nothing  is  to  be  seen  on  the  part,  which  is  especially  painful  wThen
touched.

500.  Below  the  left  elbow  on  the  outer  side  of  the  radius,  aching
drawing,  like  a squeezing.  [Gtt.]

Drawing  tearing  pain  in  the  forearm,  especially  when  moving  the
arm  and  hand.

On  the  forearm  a red  elevation,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a
pustule,  with  burning  pain  when  at  rest  and  per  se , but  with  pain
more  like  a boil  when  touched.

Shooting  tearing  in  the  left  forearm  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kr.]

Aching  drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  forearm  and  on  the  back  of
hand.  [Tz.]

505.  Twitching  in  the  left  forearm  when  at  rest  (aft.  75  h.).  [Gn.]

Cramp-like  pain  about  the  right  wrist-joint,  which  goes  off  on
extending  the  fingers,  but  returns  on  flexing  them,  and  this  causes
at  the  same  time  also  a tearing  stitch  through  the  whole  arm  up  into
the  shoulder  (aft.  24^  h.).  [Htn.]

In  the  wrist  a pressure  extending  across  it,  especially  on  move-
ment. [Tz.]

Shooting  tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint  (aft.  1 h.).  [Kr.]

Tetters  on  the  hands,  which  itch  in  the  evening,  and  burn  after
scratching.

510.  Drawing  pain  through  the  bones  of  the  back  of  hand,  especially
during  movement.  [Fz.]

Tickling  itching  on  the  left  palm,  exciting  scratching.  [Lr.]
Painful  drawing  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  index.  [Hrr. ]

Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  proximal  joints  of  the


STAPHISAGRIA.


57?

fingers,  where  they  are  united  to  the  metacarpal  hones
— aggravated  by  movement.  [Hrr.\

Hard  pressure  on  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left  index,  aggra-
vated by  touch  and  by  moving  the  finger  (aft.  4 m.).  [Hrr.]

515.  Intermittent  pressive  pain  on  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  left
thumb,  aggravated  by  touch.  [Hrr.]

Painful  drawing  in  the  phalanges  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand
(aft.  5 h.).  [Hrr.]

Fine  twitching  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  thumb,
especially  severe  at  its  tip  (aft.  45  h.).  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  ball  of  the  left  thumb,  which
went  off*  on  moving  the  thumb.  [Lr.]

Fine  twitching  tearing  in  the  muscles  of  several
fingers,  especially  in  their  tips.  [Hrr.]

520.  When  he  extends  the  fingers  freely  they  make  convulsive  move-
ments up  and  down.  [Grr.]

Formication  in  the  fingers,  as  though  thev  would  go  to  sleep  (aft.
4ih  .).[Hnl.]

Pressive  cramp-like  pain  on  the  ball  of  the  right  little  finger,  on
moving  the  hand.  [Lr.]

Persistent  pressive  pain  from  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  middle
finger  spreading  forwards,  continuing  also  during  movement  (aft.  77
h.).  [Gn.]

Deep,  itching  burning,  sharp  needle-pricks  in  the
left  thumb,  which  incite  to  scratch.  [Gss.]

525.  Tensive  stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb  (aft.  52  h.).  [Gn.]
Needle-prick-like  pain  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  index  and
the  joint  next  it,  continuing  during  movement  (aft.  54  h.).  [Gn.]
Cramp  in  the  fingers  and  various  parts  of  the  extremities.  [Gjj.]
Feeling  as  if  a hard  skin  were  drawn  over  the  finger-
tips of  the  left  hand ; he  has  little  feeling  in  them  and
cannot  distinguish  anything  well  by  touch.  [Hrr.]

Rather  a feeling  of  heat  than  actual  heat  of  the  right  hand,  which
was  also  redder  than  the  other,  with  fine  tearing  in  the  middle  joints
of  all  the  four  fingers  of  that  hand.  [Hnl.]

530.  Tickling  sharp  pricks  in  the  palm  (aft.  1 h.).  [Gjj.]

After  sitting  for  a little  while  the  nates  are  painful.

Burning  itching  erosion  on  the  nates,  as  when  a woollen  material
is  drawn  over  the  skin,  in  the  evening  in  bed  ; on  scratching  it  went
off*  in  one  place  and  came  on  another.  [Trn.]

Boring  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  buttock,  when  sitting  (aft.
12  h.).  [Gn.]

Pricking  itching  in  the  muscles  of  the  buttocks  and
several  other  parts  of  the  body.  [Hrr.]

535.  When  standing  a numb  feeling  in  the  left  hip,  extending  to  the
abdomen.

About  the  hip-joint  an  aching  pain  when  walking  and  sitting.
When  lying  a pain  of  fatigue  across  the  thighs  and  as  if  they
were  bruised ; at  the  same  time  sensation  of  excessive  stiffness  in  the
VOL.  11.  37


578


STAPHISAGRIA.


joints  and  of  something  trembling  and  restless  in  them,  so  that  he
cannot  keep  them  still,  [Tz.]

Pain  as  of  dislocation  in  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh,  especially
when  walking  (aft.  8 h.).  [ Hrr .]

Tension  in  the  large  muscles  of  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  when
walking.  [Tz.]

540.  Bruised  pain  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  thighs,  on  walking  quickly,
for  two  days.

Paralytic  pain,  like  drawing,  in  the  middle  of  the  front  of  the
thigh,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving.  [Gjj-.]

Sore  pain  on  the  upper  and  inner  part  of  the  thigh.

Burning  sharp  shooting  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  left  thigh.

[<?«.]

Deeply  penetrating  obtuse  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  left  thigh,
towards  its  outer  side.  [Gw.]

545.  Extremely  painful,  penetrating  pricks  on  the  inner  side  of  the
left  thigh  just  above  the  knee  (aft.  38  h.).  [ Hnl.]

Itching  pricking  on  the  inner  sides  of  the  thighs,
which  compels  scratching  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gss.]

Tetters  on  the  thighs  and  legs.

A formication  on  the  thighs  and  legs  which  for  many  years  had
been  the  seat  of  hard  elastic  swelling,  with  feeling  as  if  the  parts
were  inwardly  hot,  pressed  asunder,  and  very  heavy.

A kind  of  goose-skin,  without  chilliness,  over  both  thighs  and
legs,  many  red  and  white  papules  on  them,  which  contain  whitish
pus  in  their  apices,  without  the  slightest  sensation  (aft.  10  d.).
[Hnl.]

550.  Weakness  of  the  thigh  and  leg,  especially  in  the  knee-joint,  for
several  days — he  must  drag  the  leg;  at  the  same  time  shooting
tearing  in  the  calf  and  pains  in  the  sacrum  (aft.  10  h.).  [Kr.]

A coarse  shooting  almost  scraping  sensation  on  the  right  thigh  on
* its  inner  side  above  the  knee-joint  (aft.  8 h.).  [Ez.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  knee  an  aching  shooting  pain  when
treading  and  on  touching  it.

Stitch-like  pain  on  the  inner  border  of  the  knee.  [Lr.]

Twitching  above  the  right  patella  (aft  9 h.).  [HnL]

555.  Under  the  left  patella  a drawing  tearing  which  does  not  go  off  by
movement  (aft.  54  h.).  [. Htn .]

.When  walking,  pain  in  the  thighs  (worst  in  the  left),

which  she  must  almost  drag  along  (aft.  51  h.).  [iS//’.]

Drawing  shooting  in  the  right  knee-joint,  aggravated
by  movement,  [//rr.]

Obtuse  stitches  on  the  knee-joint  near  the  patella ;
on  touching  the  stitches  changed  into  an  aching  pain.
[Hrr.]

In  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  obtuse
stitches  in  the  right  knee-joint,  aggravated  by  move-
ment (aft.  5 d.).  [Hrr.]

560.  In  the  right  knee-joint  and  the  heads  of  the  calf  muscles  when
walking  a paralytic  drawing,  like  a weakness,  which  after  walking,


STAPHISAGRIA.


579

and  also  when  seated,  continues  for  a long  time  before  gradually
going  off.  [Gw.]

In  the  right  knee  a pain  (as  from  making  a false  step  ?)  lasting  a
minute,  when  walking  and  when  moving  the  leg.  [St/'.]

On  rising  from  a seat  a sensation  as  if  the  limbs  would  knuckle
together  in  the  hough — a tremulous,  over-irritated  drawing  up  in  the
hough,  [T%.]

As  soon  as  he  lies  down  there  occurs  a sensation  of  drawing  up
in  the  houghs — a kind  of  over-irritation  and  voluptuous  restless-
ness in  them,  so  that  he  cannot  remain  lying,  but  must  get  up.

w

Drawing  shooting  in  the  left  knee-joint  when  sitting  ; sometimes
twitching  in  it.  [Hnl.]

565.  Burning  shooting  under  the  left  knee,  on  its  outer
side,  sometimes  in  paroxysms.  [Gss.]

Boring  stitch  in  the  right  tibia,  when  at  rest  (aft.

35  h.).  [Gn.]

Itching  on  the  right  tibia  above  the  outer  ankle,  which  did  not  go
off  by  rubbing  (aft.  2^  h.).  [Gn.]

On  the  leg,  pimples  with  burning  itching  pain.

Itching  in  the  evening  in  bed,  on  the  leg  ; after  rubbing  flat
ulcers  appear  which  are  very  painful.

570.  Paralytic  pressure  outwards  on  the  calf-muscles  of  the  right  leg  ;
aggravated  by  touching.  [Hrr.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  muscles  of  one  or  the  other  leg,

when  standing  and  sitting  (aft.  some  m.).  [Lr.]

Heaviness  and  tension  in  the  calf.

Shooting  tearing  under  and  in  the  right  calf  and
above  the  left  heel  (aft.  1,  10  h.).  [Kr.]

A continual  itching  pricking  in  the  right  calf  when  standing  and
walking,  which  went  away  by  scratching  (aft.  78  h.).  [Gn.]

575.  A intolerable  cramp  in  the  calf  and  sole  of  the  foot  of  the  leg  he
is  lying  on,  wakes  him  out  of  his  afternoon  sleep  (aft.  24  h.).

Cramp,  especially  in  the  upper  and  lower  part  of  the  calf,  on
waking  from  sleep,  which  is  not  allayed  either  by  stretching  out
or  by  bending  the  leg  ; on  directing  the  thoughts  to  this  pain  when
it  has  become  allayed,  it  immediately  increases  and  becomes  more
painful  (aft.  6 h.).

On  the  tibia  pressive  drawing  when  sitting  (aft.  6 h.).  [Tz.]
Transversely  across  the  tarsus  a drawing  aching,  especially  when
moving.  [Fz.]

Aching  tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  left  foot,  close  to  the  tarsus
(aft.  51  h.).  [Htn.]

580.  Contractive  heavy  sensation  in  the  bones  of  the  left  foot,  close
to  the  ankle-joint  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Htn.]

Pricking  itching  just  above  the  right  outer  ankle ;
it  Compels  him  to  scratch,  and  then  leaves  behind  it  no
particular  sensation.  [Hrr.]

Burning  itching  on  the  right  inner  ankle  (aft.  4 d.).  [Hrr.]
Itching  above  the  heel  on  the  tendo  Achillis.  [Fz.]


STAPHISAGRIA.


580


Bony  swelling  of  the  metatarsal  bone  of  the  right  little  toe,
painful  when  touched.

585.  Painless  swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  both  feet,  long-continued  (aft.

13  d-)-

Pricking  itching  on  the  right  big  toe.  [Hrr.]

Aching  burning  in  the  tip  of  the  right  big  toe,  when  at  rest  (aft.
4i  h.).  [<?».]

In  the  interior  of  two  toes  a burning  painful  itching,  just  as
though  they  had  been  frost-bitten  (aft.  4 h.).

In  the  evening  burning  itching  of  the  little  toes,  as  if  they  were
frost-bitten  ; they  are  painful  when  touched  and  the  painful  parts
are  red,  for  four  days  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.]

590.  In  the  evening  itching  burning  on  the  right  little  toe,  as  if  it
were  frost-bitten  and  it  was  also  painful  when  slightly  pressed.
[HnL]

Formication  on  the  under  surface  of  the  toes,  which  does  not
induce  scratching ; they  feel  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep.  [Gw.]
Pressive  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  sole  when  at  rest  (aft.
29  h.).  [Gn.]

Formication  and  prickling  in  the  sole  of  the  foot  of  the  leg  that
is  crossed  over  the  other  when  sitting,  as  if  gone  to  sleep  (aft.  17  h.).
[HnL]


Drawing  tearing  pain  here  and  there  in  the  muscles
of  the  whole  body,  when  sitting  (aft.  8 J,  34  h.),1

595.  In  the  joints  of  the  shoulders,  elbows,  hand,  fingers,  back,  knees,
a drawing  (?)  pain  on  moving  the  parts,  less  when  at  rest,  especially
in  the  evening.  \_Stf.]

In  the  morning  inward  trembling  in  the  limbs,  when  he  keeps
them  long  in  one  position  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.]

Paralytic  drawing  on  various  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the
joints,  when  he  lets  the  limbs  lie  for  some  time  in  an  unusual  and
uncomfortable  position.  [Gw.]

Itching  over  the  head  and  the  whole  body,  especially  in  the
morning,  a running  itching  and  crawling,  like  the  creeping  of  a flea,
which  goes  from  one  part  to  another.

Itching  sharp  pricks  on  various  parts  of  the  body.

[Gss.]'

600.  Pricks  like  flea-bites,  on  the  lower  extremities,  hand,  nape,  head,
&c.  (aft.  ii  h.).  [Kr.]

Pricking  burning  here  and  there  on  the  skin.  [HnL]

Eruption  of  lumps  as  large  as  a pea  on  the  whole  body  and  thighs,
which  itch  and  when  scratched  become  excoriated,  exude  moisture,
and  then  occasion  burning  pain.

In  the  evening  and  morning  tearing  and  twitching  about  the
ulcer,  when  at  rest ; it  ceases  when  walking.

Tearing  shooting  in  the  ulcer.

605.  Smarting  in  the  ulcer  as  from  salt.


1 Though  no  name  is  attached  to  this  symptom,  it  occurs  among  the  “ Observa-
tions of  others,”  therefore  is  not  to  be  credited  to  Hahnemann.


STAPHISAGRIA.


5Sr

A smarting  itching  as  from  salt  in  the  ulcer.

The  skin  on  the  ulcerated  leg  becomes  covered  with  a thin
scab,  with  twitching  and  pecking  pains,  yellowish  water  exudes
from  it.

Violent  burning  pains  in  the  ulcer,  in  the  evening  after  lying
down,  lasting  hours,  so  that  he  cannot  go  to  sleep.

The  tetters  itch  only  at  night.

610.  Burning  sensation,  sometimes  in  one  place  sometimes  in  another,
but  always  only  in  the  limbs,  never  on  other  parts  of  the  body.
[Htn.]

Deeply  penetrating  sharp  stitches  on  various  parts  of  the  limbs,
recurring  after  long  pauses  (aft.  \ h.).  [G^.]

The  limbs  below  the  shoulder  and  below  the  hip-joint  are  as  if
bruised  and  painful  as  if  after  a long  walk.  [Z%.]

General  bruised  feeling,  worse  when  walking,  better  when  sitting
and  lying  ; especially  in  the  calves,  an  extreme  pain  of  exhaustion  as
if  severely  beaten — she  could  hardly  drag  her  legs  along.

Painfulness  of  the  whole  body  as  if  bruised,  with  feeling  of
uncommon  exhaustion,  worse  when  moving — when  she  walked  a
little  after  sitting,  this  painful  feeling  was  renewed  and  aggravated
(aft.  40  h.).  [S//'.]

615.  Fatigue  in  all  the  limbs  and  pain  everywhere — in  the  muscles
when  touched,  in  the  joints  when  moved — more  in  the  forenoon
than  the  afternoon.

Pain  in  all  the  bones.

In  the  morning  on  rising  from  bed  all  the  joints  are  stiff,
especially  the  shoulders,  sacrum,  and  hip-joint.

In  the  morning  in  bed  she  is  very  tired,  without  drowsiness,  all
the  limbs  are  painful  as  if  bruised  and  as  if  there  were  no  strength  in
them,  for  an  hour.

In  the  morning  on  awaking  great  weariness,  which,  however,  soon
goes  off.

620.  In  the  morning  immediately  after  rising,  great  weakness  in  the
knee-joints,  which  compels  him  to  sit  down  ; walking  and  standing
are  a great  trouble  to  him  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zfrr.]

Weak  in  the  body,  especially  in  the  knees,  when
walking.  [Gn.]

Weariness  and  exhaustion  in  the  body,  in  the  morning  (aft.  \\
h.).  [HnL]

Great  weariness  and  inclination  to  sleep,  in  the  afternoon  when
sitting  (aft.  3 d.).

In  the  forenoon,  after  rising  from  a seat,  he  becomes  pale,  giddy,
and  whirling,  falls  on  the  side  as  if  in  a faint ; the  following  day
about  the  same  time  a similar  attack.

625.  Violent  yawning  so  that  tears  come  into  his  eyes  (aft.

45  2 h.).  [Kr.]

Frequent  yawning  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough

(aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.]

Great  inclination  to  yawn  and  stretch  ; she  cannot  stretch
herself  enough.


582  STAPHISAGRIA.

Great  weariness  and  sleepiness  after  eating;  he  feels  a need  to  lie
down,  falls  asleep  quickly,  but  awakes  dull  and  heavy  in  the  limbs,
and  dreads  walking;  but  when  he  did  walk  it  was  very  disagreeable  to
him,  especially  going  up  hill — but  on  walking  farther  he  felt  very
fresh  and  cheerful,  indeed  strong  after  a long  walk.

In  the  morning  wakefulness,  then  sleepiness  with  rigor  in  the
back.  [Zz.]

630.  He  wakes  up  towards  morning  as  if  he  had  already  slept  enough,
but  falls  asleep  again  immediately  (aft.  46  h.).  [Zr.]

In  the  evening  he  cannot  reach  his  bed  without  falling  asleep,
and  yet  as  soon  as  he  gets  into  bed  he  instantly  falls  asleep.

Drowsiness  in  the  afternoon ; Ms  eyes  close.  [Hrr.~\

Drowsiness  in  the  daytime  ; he  falls  asleep  on  his  seat.

In  the  afternoon,  from  2 to  4 o’clock,  great  drowsiness.

635.  First  she  cannot  go  to  sleep  before  1 1 o’clock,  and  she  wakes  up
at  4 a.m.,  for  several  nights.

Several  nights  he  often  starts  in  the  whole  body,  in  the  arms  and
legs,  as  if  he  were  suddenly  tickled — a kind  of  spasmodic  but  painless
twitching;  at  the  same  time,  though  he  is  but  lightly  covered,  he
feels  very  hot,  but  without  thirst  or  sweat.

On  account  of  wakefulness  he  could  not  get  to  sleep  before
midnight,  but  he  had  hardly  gone  to  sleep  when  he  had  vivid  dreams
of  strife  and  quarrelling.  [Zr.]

At  night  the  child  is  very  restless  and  calls  to  its  mother  every
instant.

He  wakes  up  from  2 a.m.,  and  so  from  hour  to  hour,  without
cause.

640.  Restless  night ; every  hour  waking  half  up,  and  again  failing  into
slumber ; he  did  not  go  quite  asleep  nor  wake  up  completely.

All  night  he  did  not  sleep,  and  yet  his  eyes  closed.

He  falls  asleep,  but  is  immediately  woke  up  by  a dream,  in  which
he  fights  with  a beast,  which  frightens  him  and  makes  him  start  (aft.
30  h.).  [ Hrr .]

Restless  dreams  of  an  anxious  description.  [ Gn.~\

Restless  sleep  and  tossing  about.  [ Gn.~\

645.  Several  nights  restless  ; he  could  not  lie  on  either  side  ; before
midnight  he  was  much  occupied  by  many  thoughts.  \_Trn.~\

At  the  very  commencement  of  his  sleep  he  dreams  about  his
daily  occupations.

Very  vivid  dreams  with  rational  connexion.

Vivid,  but  disagreeable  dreams,  towards  morning.  [Zfr.]

At  night  vivid,  but  unremembered  dreams.  [Zr.]

650.  Dreams  full  of  exasperation.  [Zr.]

Restless  dreams  : he  is  occupied  first  with  one,  then  with  another
subject ; sometimes  he  starts  and  wakes  up,  but  cannot  rightly  collect
himself.  [Z/rr.]

Amorous  dreams  and  seminal  emission.  [Gn.]

Voluptuous  dreams,  without  pollution.  [Zz.]

In  the  evening  in  bed  on  account  of  pain  in  the  calves  she  could
not  go  to  sleep ; she  knew  not  where  to  put  her  legs,  she  must  alway


STAPHISAGRIA.


5«3


change  their  position  in  order  to  get  relief;  though  she  once  got  out
of  bed  and  then  lay  down  again  she  had  the  same  sensation  in  the
calves  (aft.  37  h.).  [£//'.]

655.  As  soon  as  he  goes  to  sleep  he  dreams ; sometimes  he  is  fighting
with  some  one,  sometimes  he  has  anxious  visions  which  wake  him
up,  and  then  he  dreams  again.  [Gjj.]

Dream  of  murder.

Dreams  of  murder,  the  second  night.  \Hnl.)

For  several  days,  in  the  afternoon  about  3 o’clock,  inward  shivering
with  great  thirst,  not  followed  by  heat.

For  several  days,  in  the  afternoon  about  3 o’clock,  shivering
with  goose  skin,  which  ceased  in  the  open  air  and  was  unattended  by
thirst.

660.  In  the  morning  in  bed  chill,  not  followed  by  heat.

In  the  morning  in  bed  first  chill,  then  heat ; she  was  unwilling
to  get  up  in  the  morning.

Cold  feet,  only  in  bed  in  the  evening.  [ Trn.]

Evening  fever  consisting  of  coldness.

In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep  such  violent  rigor  that  he
shook  through  and  through  in  bed,  and  he  could  not  get  warm  again
(aft.  20  h.).  [Z>.]

665.  All  night  shivering  without  thirst  or  subsequent  heat.

In  the  night  he  often  wakes  up  with  a chilly  feeling,
hut  cannot  properly  collect  himself.  [Hrr.]

Shuddering  together  with  drowsiness  and  dryness  of  the  mouth
(aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

Shivering  and  chilly  feeling  when  eating,  without
thirst,  two  hours  before  the  heat.  [Hrr.]

Chilliness  in  the  back  even  beside  the  hot  stove  (aft.  J h.).
[Hnl]

670.  Although  he  stood  beside  the  stove  he  could  not  get  warm  in
the  back  and  arms ; at  the  same  time  frequent  shivering  over  the
back  and  arms  up  to  the  nape,  over  the  head  and  face,  in  the  morning
after  rising.  [£//'.]

Rigor  shaking  through  the  whole  body,  with  warm  forehead  and
hot  cheeks,  but  cold  hands,  not  followed  by  heat  or  thirst  (aft.  ij
h.).  [Lr.]

Shivering  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst  and  not
immediately  followed  by  heat  (aft.  30  h.).  [Hrr.]

After  eating  a transient  rigor  down  the  back.  [£//!]

After  the  shivering  a slight  heat.

675.  Hot  feeling  and  heat  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  an  hour  after
the  chill,  [Hrr.]

In  the  morning  in  bed  a heat  about  the  head,  with  sweat  on  the
forehead.

In  the  open  air  she  had  some  heat  and  some  headache  (towards
evening).

Great  feeling  of  heat,  as  though  she  were  burning  hot  externally,
with  thirst ; the  blood  was  in  a state  of  great  commotion — no  chill
previously.


584


STAPHISAGRIA.


Great  feeling  of  heat,  at  night,  in  the  hands  and  feet ; he  must
keep  them  uncovered.

680.  Three  hours  after  a meal,  a not  disagreeable  feeling  of  warmth
over  the  back.  \_Stf.']

Flushes  of  heat  spread  over  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  the  rest
of  the  body  being  merely  warm,  not  followed  by  sweat.  \_StfJ\

Heat  in  the  night,  especially  about  the  forehead,  so  that  she
cannot  sleep  after  3 a.m.,  then  about  9 a.m.  rigor.

A warm  feeling  on  the  forehead,  as  if  a constant  wTarm  air  blew
on  it— sometimes  also  a cold  air- — with  red  cheeks  and  also  external
corporeal  warmth  (aft.  4 d,).  [Stf,]

When  he  wakes  up  at  night  he  is  covered  by  warm  sweat  on  the
abdomen,  feet,  and  genitals,  though  they  are  only  moderately  covered,
without  thirst ; when  he  uncovers  himself  it  feels  cold  to  him,  the
perspiration  disappears,  and  he  thinks  he  has  caught  cold  (aft.  72  h.).

[<?«.]■■■•

685.  In  the  afternoon  extraordinary  perspiration  with  heat  all  over  the
body,  without  thirst,  though  he  is  quietly  seated.  [A%.]

Tendency  to  perspire.

Several  nights  much  perspiration  after  midnight.

Night-sweat  of  putrid  odour  (aft.  8 d.).

Towards  midnight,  sweat  of  the  odour  of  rotten  eggs  (aft.  4,  6 d.).

690.  Profuse  night-sweats  (aft.  10  d.).

Serious,  silent,  occupied  with  himself,  he  speaks  but  little.  \Lr  ]
The  most  attractive  things  made  no  impression  on  him.
Phlegmatic,  prostrated  mind  and  sad  disposition,  unsympathetic,
indifferent  to  all  externals,  yet  not  cross  or  exhausted.  [(?».]

He  is  very  much  prostrated  in  mind,  has  no  desire  to  talk,  is  not
disposed  to  think,  and  indifferent  to  outward  things.  [G«.]

695.  As  if  dead  in  mind  and  sad,  but  not  to  weeping.

He  does  not  know  if  what  is  hovering  before  his  imagination  like
something  in  his  memory  has  actually  taken  place  or  whether  he  only
dreamt  it  (in  the  afternoon  from  5 to  7 o’clock).

(When  he  walks  quickly  he  feels  as  if  some  one  were  following
him  \ this  caused  anxiety  and  fear,  and  he  must  always  look  about
him.)

Indisposed  for  serious  work.  [Gn.]

Peevishness  and  disinclination  for  mental  work  (aft.  2 h.).  \Gn.’\

700.  All  day  long  peevish  and  cross ; he  did  not  know  what  to  do  for
ill-humour,  and  was  extremely  pensive  (aft.  37  h.),  [Ar.]

Silent  peevishness  ; he  gets  cross  about  everything,  even  what  does
not  concern  him.  [iArr.]

All  day  long  peevish  and  restless  ; he  found  rest  nowhere.  [Ar.]
Anxious  thoughts  and  things  long  past  come  before  him  as  if
they  were  actually  present  and  stood  before  him,  which  causes
anxiety  and  the  sweat  of  anguish — -then  blackness  comes  before  his
eyes  he  knows  not  if  what  he  sees  is  true  or  deception,  then  he
regards  everything  as  something  different  to  what  it  is,  and  he  loses
all  wish  to  live.


STAPHISAGRIA.  585


Great  inward  anxiety,  so  that  he  cannot  remain  in  one  place,  but
he  says  nothing  about  it.

705.  Anxious  and  timorous.

Great  anxiety ; he  dreads  the  future.  \_HrrJ\

Hypochondriacal  humour ; everything  is  indifferent  to  him  ; he
would  like  to  die.

Sad;  he  apprehends  the  worst  consequences  from  slight  things
and  cannot  calm  himself.  \_Stf,~\

Sad,  without  being  able  to  assign  any  cause  for  being  so.  [Gn.'\
710.  Peevish  and  sad.

Peevish  and  lachrymose.

She  will  not  hear  about  anybody  or  anything ; she  covers  up  her
face  and  weeps  aloud,  without  cause.

Every  word  annoys  her ; she  weeps  if  any  one  speaks  to  her.

Sulky  ; she  weeps  often  about  nothing  at  all.

715.  Very  lachrymose.

She  was  all  day  long  full  of  grief ; she  was  afflicted  to  weeping
about  her  circumstances,  and  she  cared  for  nothing  in  the  world  (aft.

5°  h.).

Very  cross  (in  the  morning)  ; he  is  inclined  to  throw  away  every-
thing he  took  in  his  hand.

Disposition  quarrelsome  and  yet  at  the  same  time  gay.  [ZWz.]

Variable  humour;  at  first  a cheerful,*  then  an  anxious,  finally  a
calm  and  contented  disposition.  [Lr.]

720.  He  became  cheerful,  entertaining  in  society,  and  merry. f [£r.]

Good  humour : he  was  cheerful  and  talkative  in  society,  and
enjoyed  existencef  (aft.  13  h.).  [Zr.]


* Commencing  transient  reaction  of  the  organism  in  a person  of  timid,  depressed
disposition  ; afterwards  the  primary  action  of  the  medicine  was  noticeable  in  the
anxiety,  but  then  again  the  reaction  of  the  corporeal  power  conquered  and  left  a
calm,  contented  state  of  the  disposition.

f Curative  secondary  action  of  the  organism  in  a man  of  an  opposite  character  of
disposition.


STRAMONIUM.1

( Thorn-apple .)

(The  juice  expressed  from  the  fresh  plant,  Datura  Stramonium , and  mixed  with
equal  parts  of  alcohol.)

This  narcotic  plant  shows  in  its  primary  action,  with  the  exception
of  very  disagreeable  sensations  which  the  prover  cannot  call  w pain,”  no
actual  pains.  Sensations  which  can  strictly  be  called  pain  only  occur  in
the  secondary  action,  from  the  subsequent  reaction  of  the  organism,
which  develops  not  only  the  natural  sensation  as  opposed  to  the
sensation-destroying  action  of  the  thorn-apple,  but,  in  the  case  of  large
doses,  even  morbidly  exalted  sensation  (pain).  So,  also,  this  plant
produces  in  its  primary  action  great  mobility  of  the  voluntary  muscles
and  suppression  of  all  secretions  and  excretions,  the  reverse  of  which
occurs  in  the  secondary  action,  to  wit,  paralysis  of  the  muscles  and
excessive  secretions  and  excretions.  On  the  other  hand,  in  suitable
doses  it  curatively  allays  some  spasmodic  muscular  movements,  and
restores  suppressed  excretions  in  several  cases  in  which  absence  of  pain
is  a prominent  symptom.

Hence  thorn-apple  can  only  cure  homoeopathically  the  morbid
states  produced  in  its  primary  characteristic  action.

The  symptoms  of  the  secondary  action,  which,  as  with  all  narcotic
drugs,  are  much  more  numerous,  better  expressed  and  more  distinct
than  with  non-narcotic  drugs,  serve  to  make  the  observant  physician
refrain  from  its  employment  in  cases  where  the  patient  is  already  suffer-
ing from  ailments  resembling  those  of  the  secondary  action.  Thus,  a
true  physician  would  never  administer  thorn-apple  in,  for  example,  com-
plete paralysis,  or  inveterate  diarrhoeas,  or  in  cases  where  violent  pains
constitute  the  chief  feature  of  the  disease.

But  what  incomparable  curative  action  (I  speak  from  experience)
follows  the  homoeopathic  application  of  the  peculiar  mental  affections
caused  by  thorn-apple  for  similar  natural  mental  maladies,  and  how
useful  it  is  in  convulsive  ailments  similar  to  those  it  causes  !

I have  found  it  efficacious  in  some  epidemic  fevers  with  symptoms
similar  to  those  it  is  capable  of  exciting  in  the  mind  and  body.

As  sure  as  there  are  several  varieties  of  hydrophobia  from  the  bite
of  rabid  animals,  so  sure  is  it  that  we  cannot  cure  them  all  with  one
remedy,  and  that  we  require  belladonna  in  some,  henbane  in  others,
and  thorn-apple  in  yet  others,  in  order  to  cure  them^  according  as


From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


STRAMONIUM.  587

the  totality  of  the  morbid  symptoms  presents  more  similarity  with  the
symptoms  of  the  first,  second,  or  third  of  these  plants.

Moderate  doses  act  for  only  36  to  48  hours,  small  doses  a shorter
time.  Injurious  consequences  of  several  days’  duration  are  to  be  feared
from  very  large  doses,  these  are  partly  primary  partly  secondary  effects.

Excessively  violent  primary  actions  are  removed  by  citric  acid,  or
fruits  containing  it  (currants,  barberries,  &c.),  much  more  effectually
than  by  vinegar.  Smoking  tobacco  greatly  allays  the  stupefaction  of
the  head  caused  by  thorn-apple.  According  to  Falck,  alcohol,  and
according  to  Plehwe,  cold  foot-baths  are  useful  for  it.

A drop,  often  even  but  a small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  trillion
fold  dilution  of  the  juice,  is.  an  adequate  homoeopathic  dose,  all  other
extraneous  medicinal  influences  being  removed.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow  provers  were  Franz,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Michler.

The  following  old-school  authorities  are  cited  :

Alberti,  Jurisp.  Med.,  i.

Boerhaave,  Kaaw,  Impet.  Fac.  Hipp .,  L.  B.,  1745.

Brera,  in  Harles  Bemerk.  ub . d.  Behandl.  d.  Hundswuth , Fft.  a.  M.,  1809.
Buchner,  Bresl.  Samml. , 1727.

Busch,1  B.,  in  Philos.  Transact.,  vol.  60,  1771.

Comment arii  de  rebus  in  Med.  et  Sc.  nat.  gestis , vol.  ii.

Costa,  Cph.  a,  in  Schenk , Lib.  vii,  obs.  139.

Cruger,  Dan.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  2.

De  Witt,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journale,  Leipz.,  1800,  January.

Doderlin,  in  Comment,  lit.  Nor.,  1744.

Du  Guid,  in  Salvages,  Nosol,  ii.

Fowler,  in  Medical  and  Philosoph.  Comment.,  v. — Edinb . Med.  Comment .,  v.
Garcias  ab  Horto,  De  Plantis , cap.  24.

Gardane,  Gazette  de  Sante , 1773,  1774.

Greding,  in  Ludwig.  Adders.,  i.

Grimm,  J.  C.,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent.  ix.

Heim,  in  Sellers  Neue  Beitrdge  z.  Nat.  u.  Arzn.,  ii.

Johnson,  in  Medic.  Facts  and  Observe.,  vol.  v.

Kellner,  Bresl.  Samml.,  172 7.

King,  in  Phys.  Med.  Journale , Leipz.,  1800,  March.

Kramer,  in  Comment,  lit.  Nor.,  1733.

Lobstein,  J.  F.,  Obs.  de  Sir  am.  sem.  <virt.  ‘yen.,  in  Append.  Diss . Spielmann  et
Guerin,  de  Plant,  njenen.  Alsat .,  Argent.,  1766.

M.,  in  Baldinger's  Neues  Magaz.,  vol.  i.

Odhelius,  L.  L.,  Mem.  sur  Bus.  du  Stramonium , 1773.

Pfennig,  in  Hufel.  Journ .,  xiv.

Ray,  Histor.  Plantar.,  tom.  i.

Rush  (wide  supra , “ Busch  ”).

Sauvages,  Epist.  ad  Haller,  iii. — Nosol.,  ii.

Schroer,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  x.

Stoerck,  Lib.  de  Stram.,  Aeon.,  Hyoscyam.,  Viennae,  1762.

Swaine,  Abr.,  Essays  phys.  and  lit.,  ii,  Edinb.,  1756.

Unzer,  Med.  Handbuch,  ii.

Van  Eems,  in  H.  Boerhaawe , Praelect.  de  Morb.  Nerw.,  i.

Vi  cat,  Plantes  Veneneuses  de  la  Suisse.

Wedenberg,  A.  F.,  Diss.  de  Stramonii  usu  in  Morbis  conwulsiwis , Ups.,  1773.
The  Frag,  de  Fir.  has  216,  the  1st  edit.  546,  this  2nd  edit.  569  symptoms.]

1 In  the  1st  edit,  this  is  given  as  u B.  Rush,”  but  neither  name  can  be  found
under  the  reference  given.


588


STRAMONIUM.


STRAMONIUM.

Vertigo.  [King,1  in  Phys.  Med.  Journale , Leipzig,  t8oo,
March. — -Vicat,2  Plantes  Veneneuses  dela  Suisse^ p.  248. — Greding,3
in  Ludw.  Advers.Ji,  p.  285.]

Vertigo  (immediately).  [Du  Guid,4  in  Sauvages , Nosol. , ii,  p.
241. — Abr.  Swaine,5  Essays  Phys.  and  Lit .,  ii,  Edinb.,  1756,  p.  247.]

V ertigo  : his  head  always  feels  drawn  backwards ; he  is  at  the
same  time  very  sleepy.

Vertigo,  with  red  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

5.  Vertigo  with  bellyache  and  dimness  of  vision,  like  a veil  before
the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  327.]

Vertigo  with  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  306.]

Vertigo,  headache,  dimness  of  vision,  great  thirst,  viscid  mucus
in  the  mouth,  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  and  pain  in  its  upper  part
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  300.]

Vertigo  for  eight  days.  [Pfennig,6  in  Hufel.  Journal , xix,  i,
P.  158.]

Vertigo  so  that  he  staggered  to  and  fro  as  if  drunk.  [D.  Cruger,7
in  Misc.  Nat . Cur .,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  2,  obs.  68.J
10.  He  is  giddy  when  sitting  and  standing,  in  the  room  3 he  staggers.

[*■*•]

(Four  successive  mornings)  after  he  has  risen  from  bed,  vertigo,
absence  of  thoughts  ; everything  hovers  before  his  memory  only  in  a
dim  and  distant  manner  (weakness  of  memory),  and  he  seems  to  have
a veil  before  the  eyes,  for  ten  hours.  [ihz.]

Staggering.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Staggering  as  from  intoxication.  [Du  Guid, — Swaine,  1.  c.]

He  staggers  when  walking.  [Fr.  H — n.]

15.  He  staggers  about  the  room  and  seems  to  be  looking  for  some-
thing. [T%,]

He  always  knocks  up  against  the  door,  when  going  out  at  it.  [T%.]

A disagreeable  lightness  in  the  head,  with  weak  feeling  in  it.

Intoxication  (aft.  8 h.).

Intoxication  and  heaviness  in  the  body  (aft.  1 h.).

20.  Intoxication.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,4  Impet.  Fac.  Hipp .,  L.  B.,
1745,  p.  282. — Brera,8  in  Harles , Bemerk.  uh.  d.  Behandl.  d.
Hundswuth , Frft.  a.  M.,  1809,  4.]


1 Effects  of  large  medicinal  doses.

2 Observations  of  poisoning.

3 Symptoms  occurring  in  patients  taking  the  extract.  Those  referied  to  p.  261 —
277  of  his  essay  were  maniacs  and  melancholics,  those  of  p.  277 — 311  epileptics,  and
those  of  p.  314 — 335  epilepto-maniacs.

4 From  root,  in  an  old  man.

5 From  decoction  of  fruit.

6 From  seeds,  in  an  adult.

7 From  the  fruit.

8 Not  accessible.


STRAMONIUM.  589

Intoxication  with  thirst  and  great  flow  of  scalding  urine.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  301.]

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.  [Schroer,1 2  in  Hufel . Journ .,  x,  1,
p.  195.]

Heat  of  the  head  and  sparkling  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]
Apoplexy.  [Buchner,3  Brest.  Samml. , 1727.]

25.  Weakness  of  the  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  307.]

Heaviness  in  the  head.  [A.  F.  Wedenberg,3  Diss.  de  Stramonii
usu  in  Morbis  Convulsivis , Ups.,  1773,  4.]

Stupefaction  of  the  head.4  [King,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  271.]
Stupefaction  of  the  head  with  dimness  of  vision.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
p.  290.]

Stupidity.  [Fowler,5  in  Medical  and  Philosoph.  Comment .,  v,  p,

161.]

30.  She  sits  devoid  of  reason  and  immovable  like  a statue.  [Fowler,

1.  c.]

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head.

Stupid  feeling  in  the  head.  [Fr.  H — ?z.]

Diminished  memory.

The  loss  of  consciousness  seems  to  be  attended  by  an  internal
restlessness,  and  to  proceed  from  that.

35.  Obscuration  of  all  the  senses.  [Du  Guid,  1.  c.]

After  the  obscuration  of  all  the  senses  and  anxiety,  red  miliary
rash6  on  the  back,  with  sweat,  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  289.]

Extreme  insensibility  of  all  the  senses.7  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]
Insensibility.  [Swaine,  1.  c. — Vicat,  1.  c.]

Headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  285. — Fowler,  1.  c.]

40.  Violent  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  293. — Doderlin,8  Comm .
lit.  Nor .,  1744,  p.  15. — Fowler,  1.  c.]

Obtuse  headache.  [Stoerck,9  Lib.  de  Stram .,  Aeon.,  Hyoscyam .,
Viennas,  1762,  p.  5.]’

Pain  in  the  head  and  pelvis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  276.]

Headache  with  anorexia.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  278.]

Alternately  headache  and  distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  279.]

45.  Squeezing  headache.

Throbbing  headache  in  the  right  temple,  with  diarrhoea,
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  310.]

Giddy  headache,  with  faintness  and  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p,

327  0


1 From  seeds,  in  a child.

2 Not  found.

3 Statement.

4 King’s  word  is  (l  mlmbness,”  Greding's  u obnubilatio.”

5 From  seeds,  in  children.

6 In  original,  “ purpura.”

' Literally,  “ entire  unconsciousness,”

8 From  cooked  plant.

9 Effect  of  sleeping  in  a room  where  he  had  been  expressing  the  juice  of  the  fresh
leaves.


590


STRAMONIUM.


Pains  in  the  head  and  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  325.]

Severe  headache  and  toothache,  with  profuse  flow  of  tears.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  325.]

50.  Convulsions  of  the  head  and  arms,  with  hiccup.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
p.  232.]

Spasmodic  drawing  only  of  the  head,  with  snoring.  [Greding,
!•  c->  P-  333-]

Spasmodic  drawing  only  of  the  head  and  eyes,  with  grinding  of
the  teeth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  232.]

Frequent  raising  of  the  head  from  the  pillow.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]
Spasmodic  drawing  only  of  the  head  on  both  sides,  with  screaming
and  raising  of  the  arms  over  the  head.  .[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  298-]

55.  In  the  morning  moving  of  the  head  to  and  fro,  with  extreme
thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

Moving  of  the  head  to  and  fro,  which  was  interrupted  by  hiccup.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

Swollen  face  distended  by  blood.  [Kellner,1  Bresl.  Samml. ,
1727.]

Swelling  of  the  face.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  face  with  very  red  cheeks  and  lips.  [J.  F.
Lobstein,2  Obs . de  Stram.  Sem.  virt.  ven .,  in  Append . Diss.  Spiel -
mann  et  Guerin  de  Plant,  venen.  Alsat .,  Argent.,  1766.]

60.  Swelling  of  face,  eyes,  and  tongue.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Swelling  and  redness  of  the  eyes  and  face.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]
Redness  of  the  face.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave, — Pfennig, — Doder-

L1N,  1.  C.]

The  skin  of  the  forehead  is  wrinkled,  the  look  staring,  the  whole
face  distorted  and  horrible,  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

His  face  is  at  first  pleasant-looking,  all  except  the  staring  eyes  ;
but  at  last  it  is  quite  disfigured  by  deep  furrows  which  run  from  the
inner  canthus  of  the  eye  to  the  cheek,  and  by  furrows  over  the  com-
missure of  the  mouth  down  from  the  alae  nasi,  and  by  knitted  eye-
brows, and  at  first  looks  frightful  with  the  sparkling  eyes  ; but  after
an  hour  it  is  disfigured  by  dim  eyes  (aft.  2 h.).  [Tz.]

65.  At  first  his  face  looks  quite  pleasant,  with  the  exception  of
dilated  pupils,  it  is  then  disfigured  by  deep  furrows  and  wrinkled
forehead  like  the  face  of  a person  suffering  from  anxiety.  [Tz.]

The  face  is  red  and  puffy  on  the  cheeks,  but  above  is  narrowly
contracted  and  gloomy.  [Fz.]

Frequent  redness  of  face  with  staring  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
232.]

Erysipelas  on  the  right  side  of  the  cheeks,  nose,  and  face.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  276.]

Paleness  of  the  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  293  and  307.]

70.  Very  profuse  sweat  on  face  and  forehead.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.

334.]

Pupils  quite  contracted,  they  scarcely  dilate  at  all  in  the  dark ;


1 Not  found.

2 From  seeds,  in  children.


STRAMONIUM.


591 2

he  sees  everything  much  smaller  and  more  distant,  and  like  a person
dazzled  by  the  light  (aft.  \ h.).  [Tz.]

Dilatation  of  the  pupils.  [King, — Kaaw  Boerhaave, — Vicat,

1-  c.]

Extremely  dilated  pupils  with  obscuration  of  sight.  [Brera,  1.  c.]
Pupils  extremely  dilated  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Tz.]

75.  After  drinking  vinegar  the  pupils  again  become  extremely  con-
tracted. [Tz.]

Dilated,  immovable  pupils.  [Pfennig, — Schroer,  1.  c.]

Dull,  sad  look.  [Du  Guid,  1.  c.]

Sparkling  eyes,  with  complaints  of  dazzling  of  the  sun’s  rays,1
and  anorexia.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  273.]

Gleaming  eyes.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

80.  Staring  eyes.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Staring  sleepy  eyes.3  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

Burning  of  the  eyes  with  dimness  of  vision  and  profuse  sweat.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  314.]

Pressure  and  tension  in  both  eyes,  for  six  days  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Fr.
H — n.~\

Pressure  in  the  eyelids,  as  if  they  were  swollen,  which  they  are,  or
as  if  they  were  overcome  by  sleep;  hence  a great  inclination  to  sleep,
which,  however,  he  succeeds  in  overcoming  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Tz.]

85.  Ulcerated  eyelids.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  272.]

At  night  the  eyelids  stick  together.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  288.]
Swelling  of  the  eyes.  [Fowler,  Med.  Edinb.  Comment .,  v,  p.
17°.]

Swollen  eyes,  with  very  dilated  pupils  and  turning  of  the  eyeballs
to  all  sides.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

The  eyes  are  involuntarily  closed,  blackness  before  the  eyes,
[-fz.]

90.  Swollen  and  inflamed  eyelids.

Hanging  down  of  the  upper  eyelid  as  if  caused  by  a spasm  of  the
orbicular  muscle.  [Tz,]

The  white  of  the  eyes  and  the  edges  of  the  lids  are  red,  the
eyes  weep  much.  [Tz.]

The  eyes  are  excessively  sensitive  to  daylight,  they  weep  (aft.  24

h-)-  [As.]

Involuntary  weeping.

95.  Weeping  of  the  left  eye.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  300.]

Weeping  of  the  right  eye.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  300.]

Weeping  of  both  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  300.]

Without  consciousness,  he  sheds  tears.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  267.]
Weeping  of  both  eyes,  with  dimness  of  vision.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  300.]

100.  He  opens  his  closed  eyes  only  when  spoken  to.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]
Dimnesss  of  vision.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  271,  273,  274,  280,
283.]


1 Though  no  such  cause  was  actually  present.

2 In  original,  “ dull,  heavy  eyes.”


STRAMONIUM.


Obscuration  of  sight.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  264,  2 75, — L.  L.
Qdhelius,1  Mem . sur  I’us.  du  Stramonium,  par.  4,  1773.]

Great  obscuration  of  sight.  [Greding,  1.  c,,  p.  293.]

Extreme  obscuration  of  sight.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  316.]

105.  Every  morning,  obscuration  of  sight.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  278.]
Usually  every  morning  dimness  of  vision,  as  if  the  eyes  were
covered  by  a veil.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  287.]

Dimness  of  vision  with  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  327.]
Almost  complete  blindness,  for  six  hours,  after  which  on  the
following  day  (in  the  secondary  action)  a pressure  as  if  from  the  centre
of  the  eyeball  outwards  ensued  at  every  change  of  light,  either  when
he  came  into  the  sun  or  suddenly  into  the^dark.

Along  with  dimness  of  vision  at  the  same  time  thirst  and  sweat.


[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  284.]

no.  After  dimness  of  vision,  blear-eyed.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  3 c 4.]
After  dimness  of  vision  vertigo,  then  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  301-]

Very  clear  vision,  more  distinct  than  ordinary.*

Long-continued  presbyopia  ; he  could  only  read  writing  at  a con-
siderable distance.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  310.]

During  the  contraction  of  the  pupils  (reproduced  by  drinking
vinegar)  all  objects  appear  extremely  small,  he  hardly  sees  distant
objects  at  all  ; but  if  he  looks  into  the  sun  the  pupils  remain  fixed,
and  it  is  quite  black  before  his  eyes.  [Tz.]

115.  Small  objects,  e.g.  the  point  of  a needle,  he  cannot  perceive.
[King,  1.  c.]

Indistinct,  confused  vision.  [King,  1.  c.]

Objects  always  appear  to  have  a sloping  position.

False  vision  : all  objects  seem  sloping.  [Greding,  1.  c.,p.  276.]
Displaced  diplopia  small  objects  he  sees  in  their  true  position,
but,  as  it  were,  a second  example  of  them  is  perceived  above  and  to
one  side.  \_Fr.  H — n.']

120.  Diplopia.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  275,  280.]

It  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  saw  the  objects  through  coarse  linen,
as  if  only  in  bits,  and  as  if  cut  through,  e.g.  of  a face  he  only  sees  the
nose,  See.,  just  as  though  the  eyes  had  only  a small  field  of  vision,
and  he  could  only  see  a small  point  at  once.

Objects  appear  multiplied  and  of  various  colours.  [King,  1.  c.]

He  fancies  he  sees  around  white  things,  e.g.  around  a piece  of
paper,  a reddish  grey  border.

Black  things  appear  of  a grey  colour.  [Fr.  H — nf\

125,  Black  letters  appear  to  him  grey,  and  as  if  another  of  a lighter


grey  stood  above  and  at  the  side  of  it  (a  kind  of  diplopia)  e.g.  F


F.f


^ Curative  action  after  24  h.

f When  he  attempted  to  draw  this  appearance,  he  first  drew  a single  F,  and  in
order  to  draw  the  second  he  went  over  the  same  marks,  and  yet  imagined-that  he  had
indicated  the  double  appearance.


1 Not  accessible.

2 Literally  “ lippitudo.”


STRAMONIUM.


593


He  sees  in  the  room  objects  that  are  not  there.  [King,  1.  c.]

She  sees  fiery  appearances  before  the  eyes.  [Johnson,1  in  Med.
Facts  and  Observ .,  vol.  v,  p.  78.]

When  reading  he  could  not  bring  out  a syllable  ; the  letters
seemed  to  move  and  run  into  one  another.

Vision  obscured,  like  a mist  before  the  eyes,  as  if  he  saw  the
objects  through  a glass  of  turbid  water  ; the  objects  seemed  as  if  they
flowed  into  one  another,  and  as  though  they  were  too  distant.

130.  Loss  of  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing.  [Kellner,  1.  c.]

Wind  is  discharged  from  both  ears.  [Greding,  1.  c,,  p.  276.]
Shuddering  on  the  chin.  [Van  Ems,2  in  H.  Boerhaave , Praelect.
de  Morb.  Nerv .,  i,  p.  237.]

Trembling  of  lips,  hands  and  feet.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]
The  lips  have  a yellow  stripe  on  their  vermilion,  as  in  malignant
fevers,  and  stick  fast  together  ; he  fears  they  might  grow  together.
[/*.]

135.  Toothache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  319.]

Throbbing  pain  in  the  teeth  as  if  some  of  the  teeth  would  fall

out.

Grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Kellner, — Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]
Grinding  of  the  teeth  with  shivering  all  over  the  body.  [Greding,
1.  C.,  p.  293.]

Grinding  of  the  teeth,  during  which  he  raises  the  hands  above
the  head  and  moves  them  as  if  he  were  winding  thread.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  394.]

140.  Grinding  of  the  teeth,  with  dulness  of  the  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

P-  3940

Grinding  of  the  teeth,  twisting  of  the  hands  and  shivering.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  294.]

Trismus  with  closed  lips.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

He  mutters  to  himself.  [Du  Guid,— Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Constant  muttering.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

145.  The  patient  cries  out  till  he  is  hoarse.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  272.]
He  cries  out  till  he  loses  his  voice.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  323.]

The  patient  stammers.  [King, — Du  Guid, — (aft.  \ h.)  Swaine,
— Kaaw  Boerhaave,  I.  c.]

He  stammers  and  speaks  imperfectly.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

He  speaks  little,  and  then  stammers  out  single,  interrupted  words
in  a loud  voice.  [Tz.]

150.  His  speech  is  quite  deficient  in  proper  modulation  ; it  is  much
higher  and  finer,  it  is  a mere  intonation  of  the  voice,  he  cannot  bring
out  any  word  that  can  be  understood  (he  hears  and  feels  this  himself
and  gets  anxious  about  it).  [Tz.]

A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  vocal  organs  : he  must  try  for  a long
time  before  a word  comes  out  ; he  only  stammers  and  stutters  (aft.

4,  5 h.).  IFzJ]


1 From  seeds,  in  an  adult. — Literally,  “ she  had  repeatedly  a sensation  of  a flashing
light,  which  made  her  think  that  she  saw  it  lighten  ” (comp.  S.  78).

2 Nothing  about  Stramonium  found  here.

VOL.  II,


38


594


STRAMONIUM.


He  is  dumb  and  does  not  answer.1  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Dumbness.  [Swaine,* — Vicat,  1.  c.— Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  272].

To  a great  extent  dumb,  he  indicates  his  wishes  by  pointing  to
objects.  [Sauvages,2  Nosol.  ii,  p.  242.]

155.  Dumb,  quiet  and  pulseless,  with  paralysed  limbs,  he  lay  for  six  to
seven  hours  without  consciousness,  then  tossed  about  raging  furiously
in  bed,  made  innumerable  signs  to  those  around  him,  which  could
not  be  understood,  and  then  again  became  quiet.  [Du  Guid,  1.  c.]

Sensation  as  if  the  interior  of  the  mouth  were  raw  and  excoriated
(aft.  24  h.).

The  tongue  is  paralysed,  or  when  he  wishes  to  put  it  out  it
trembles,  as  in  typhoid  fever.  [King,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  tongue.  [Fowler,  Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  v,  p.
170.]

The  tongue  is  swollen  all  over.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  285.]

160.  The  swollen  tongue  hangs  out  of  the  mouth.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Bloody  foam  before  the  mouth.  [Unzer,3  Med.  Handbuch , ii,

§ 28.]

Hydrophobia.  [Brera,  1.  c.]  (In  connexion  with  the  symptoms
recorded  in  their  proper  places  : restlessness,  the  most  violent  con-
vulsions, during  which  he  was  furious  so  that  he  must  be  bound  ;
sleepless,  he  turned  very  restlessly  about  in  bed,  and  uttered  a piercing
cry  ; he  was  delirious  without  memory  or  consciousness ; extremely
dilated  pupils  j excessive  desire  to  bite  and  tear  everything  with  his
teeth  ; extreme  dryness  of  the  interior  of  the  mouth  and  fauces  ;
horrible  convulsions  on  seeing  a light,  a mirror,  or  water,  insuper-
able repugnance  to  water,  with  constriction  and  convulsion  of  the
oesophagus,  slaver  from  the  mouth,  and  frequent  spitting.)

Fear  or  horror  of  water  and  every  other  liquid,  with  spasmodic
movements.  [De  Witt,4  in  Phys.  Med.  Journale , Leipz.,  1800,
January.]

Horror  of  watery  fluids,  as  in  hydrophobia,  which  became  trans-
formed into  fury  when  his  lips  were  wetted.5  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

165.  Excessive  dryness  in  the  mouth,  so  that  he  can  hardly  eat  a bit
of  roll  ; it  tastes  like  straw.

Dryness  of  the  palate,  so  that  he  cannot  eat  a bit  of  roll.  \_Fr.
H—n.-}

Great  dryness  in  the  mouth,  so  that  he  cannot  spit  out  any
saliva,  with  moist-looking,  clean  tongue.

Extreme  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  absence  of  saliva ; he  can-
not spit,  though  the  tongue  is  pretty  moist  and  clean.  \_Fr.
H—n.]

Dryness  of  the  tongue  and  palate  so  that  they  felt  quite  rough,  at
first  without  thirst  (aft.  \ h.).  [Tz.]


1 With  S.  37.

2 Observation,

3 Not  accessible.

4 Observation.— (Vol.  i,  p.  84,  of  English  edition.)

5 The  convulsions  (S.  420)  thereupon  returned.


STRAMONIUM.  595

170.  Velum  palati  drawn  deep  down;  food  and  drink  went  down
with  difficulty  and  with  scrapy  pain  of  the  velum  palati.

Extreme  dryness  of  the  interior  of  the  mouth.  [Brera,  1.  c.]
Extreme  aridity  of  the  tongue  and  mouth.  [Du  Guid,  1.  c.]
Sensation  of  dryness  of  the  tongue  and  throat.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]
Great  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  absence  of  saliva,
whilst  the  tongue  looks  moist  and  clean.  \_Mch.~\

175.  Great  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  fauces.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  295.]
Dryness  of  the  mouth,  thirst ; dimness  of  vision,  sparkling  eyes,
sweat  and  diarrhoea.  [Gredj’ng,  1.  c.,  p.  286.]

During  the  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  palate,  violent  thirst  (aft.
6 h,),  and  at  the  same  time  such  a want  of  taste  that  he  drank  nearly
a pint  of  vinegar  at  a draught,  without  tasting  it.  [Tz.]

Tobacco  alone  has  still  some  taste,  but  food  tastes  like  sand
and  becomes  packed  together  in  the  oesophagus,  so  that  he  fears  he
shall  be  choked  (aft.  3 h.).  [Tz.]

Buttered  bread  tastes  like  sand,  on  account  of  dryness  of  the
mouth  ; it  sticks  in  the  oesophagus  and  threatens  to  choke  him.  [Tz.]
180.  Dryness  in  the  throat.

Inability  to  swallow  on  account  of  dryness  in  the  throat.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  297.]

Dryness  of  the  throat,  with  frequent  urination.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  275.]

Thirst  with  great  dryness  of  the  throat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  275.]
His  oesophagus  is  as  if  constricted.  [Dan.  Cruger,  1.  c.]

185.  Inability  to  swallow.

Dysphagia,  with  shooting  pain  in  the  oesophagus.

Dysphagia  with  (aching)  pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands.

She  attempts  to  partake  of  bread  and  milk,  but  cannot  swallow
either.  [Fowler,  Edinb.  Med.  Comment .,  v,  p.  170.]

Constrictive  feeling  in  the  fauces  after  eating  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Tz.]
190.  The  throat  is  as  if  constricted,  as  though  he  would  choke,  or
would  have  a stroke  of  apoplexy.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Constriction  and  spasm  of  the  oesophagus.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

Choking  in  the  throat.

Thirst.  [Odhelius,  1.  c.]

Extreme  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  271,  293.]

195.  Thirst  with  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  273.]

Violent  thirst  with  frequent  discharge  of  urine  with  scalding
sensation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  301.]

Long-continued  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  283.]

Extremely  troublesome  thirst  with  slavering.  [ Commentarii  de
rebus  in  Med.  et  Sc.  nat.  gestisf  vol.  ii,  p.  241.]

Frequent  ejection  of  saliva.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

200.  Slaver  from  the  mouth.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

Salivation.

Great  flow  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  273,  290.]
Long-continued  salivation  with  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  283.]


Not  found.


STRAMONIUM.


596


Great  flow  of  saliva  with  ever  increasing  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

P-  3*4-]

205.  Excessive  flow  of  saliva,  amounting  to  three  or  four  pints  in  the
day  and  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  316.]

Salivation  with  hoarseness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  278.]

Flow  of  viscid  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  328.]

Good  appetite  with  very  viscid  saliva  in  the  mouth.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  330.]

Hiccup.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

210.  Violent  hiccup.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  298.]

Sour  eructation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  306.]

Persistent  bitterness  in  the  mouth,  food  also  tastes  bitter  to  him.
Persistent  bitterness  in  the  mouth,  all  food  also  tastes  bitter.  \Fr.
H—n.]

Food  has  a spoilt  taste.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  275.]

215.  Everything  tastes  like  straw.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Diminished  appetite.  [Greding,  1.,  p.  281.]

Loss  of  appetite.

Undiminished  appetite  with  pain  in  the  abdomen,  diarrhoea  and
vomiting.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  283.]

Increased  appetite.

220.  (During  artificial  vomiting  the  limbs  twitched.)  [Kaaw  Boer-
haave,  1.  c.]

Nausea,  loathing.

Inclination  to  vomit.  [Fowler, — Brera,  1.  c.]

In  the  evening,  inclination  to  vomit,  with  profuse  salivation.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  279.]

Nausea,  with  flow  of  exceptionally  salt  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  334-1 .

225.  At  night  vomiting.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  265.]

Vomiting  of  bile  after  slight  movement,  even  on  merely  sitting
up  in  bed.

In  the  evening  vomiting  of  green  bile.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  264.]
In  the  evening  he  vomits  bile  with  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
2&9-]

Vomiting  of  green  mucus,  with  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
288.]

230.  Vomiting  of  sour-smelling  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  297.]

In  the  evening  vomiting  of  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  266.]
Smarting  pain  in  the  stomach.1  [Doderlin,  1.  c.]

Pressive  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  279.]

Pressure  at  the  praecordium.

235.  Anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  274.]
Anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis  before  noon.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  288.]

Anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  with  dry  heat  of  the  body.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  274.]


• Not  found.


STRAMONIUM.  597

Great  anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.

276-]

Anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  difficult  respiration.
[Greding,  1.  c.]

240.  Abdomen  distended,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus
cordis.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the  evening,  with  heat  of  the  body
and  anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  278.]
Distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Sensation  as  if  the  abdomen  were  distended  to  the  utmost.

A not  hard  distension  of  the  abdomen.

245.  Distended,  but  not  hard  abdomen.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

In  children  the  abdomen  is  greatly  swollen  from  eating  thorn-
apple  seeds,  with  anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  cold  sweat,  chilli-
ness on  the  limbs,  confused  intellect,  stupefied  half-slumber,  and
anxious  evacuations  upwards  and  downwards.  [Alberti,1  Jurisp.
Med .,  i,  p.  206.]

Abdomen  excessively  distended,  not  painful  to  the  touch.
[Pfennig.]

Upper  part  of  abdomen  tense,  hard  and  painful.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
p.  285.]

Rumbling  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Kellner,  1.  c.]

250.  Rumbling  in  the  belly  with  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  275.]
Rumbling  in  the  belly  with  colic.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp,  279,
29°.]

Great  formication  in  the  abdomen  for  seven  days.  [Fr.  H — nJ\
Rumbling  in  the  belly  with  obscuration  of  sight.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

P-  3oo0  . .

He  complains  of  rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  if  living

animals  cried  and  moved  in  all  the  bowels.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
321-]

255.  Bellyache,  rumbling,  and  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  327.]
Bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  264.]

Severe  pain  in  the  belly,  as  if  it  were  swollen  j merely  touching
the  side  caused  pain  in  the  abdomen.

Pain  in  the  abdomen,  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  266.]

Pain  in  the  abdomen  followed  by  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
27S-]

260.  Colicky  pains.3  [Wedenberg,  1.  c.]

Pressive  pain  in  the  abdomen.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  276.]

Tearing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  though  the  navel  would  be  torn
out,  the  pain  goes  thence  into  the  chest.

Bellyache,  watery  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
274-]

Inguinal  bubo.

265.  He  has  call  to  stool,  but  can  evacuate  nothing  till  twenty-four
hours  afterwards.  [F%.]

1 Effect  of  eating  seeds.

2 The  words  from  “ as  if”  are  not  in  the  original,

3 In  the  original,  “ borborygmi  ” only.


598


STRAMONIUM.


Constipation.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  261.]

Constipation  for  six  days,  without  any  feeling  of  fulness  or
tension  of  the  abdomen.

Suppression  of  all  the  excretions.

Twisting  pain  in  the  bowels  before  every  evacuation  of  them  ;
every  hour  there  occurred  a blackish  diarrhoeic  stool  (aft.  26  h.).
[Fr.

270.  Diarrhoea  on  six  successive  days.  [ Fr . H — n.~\

Diarrhoea,  which  goes  off  with  profuse  perspiration.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  266.]

Diarrhoea  with  increasing  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  268.]
Diarrhoea  with  paleness  of  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  291.]

Stools  smelling  of  asafcetida.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  320.]

275.  Discharge  of  clotted  Mood  from  the  anus.

Haemorrhoidal  flux  for  several  days.

Discharge  of  a great  quantity  of  flatus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  275,
327-]

He  had  very  frequent  calls  to  urinate,  but  the  urine  was  each
time  kept  back  for  a minute  before  it  passed,  and  though  it  only
dribbled  away  yet  a large  quantity  was  passed  in  the  forenoon  (aft.  4
and  5 h.).  [Tz.]

During  micturition,  though  there  are  frequent  pressing  and  urging
no  stream  is  formed  ; the  urine  comes  away  warmer  than  usual,  but
only  by  drops ; he  cannot  hasten  its  discharge  nor  press  out  the  last
drops,  but  he  has  not  the  slightest  painful  sensation  in  the  urethra,
except  that  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  a cylindrical  body  were  pushed
through  the  urethra."*  [Pz.]

280.  Suppressed  evacuation  of  urine  and  stool.3  [Swaine,  1.  c.]
Retention  of  urine.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  325.]

Diuresis  with  shivering  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  327.]

The  urine  passed  without  effort ; he  could  keep  it  back,  but  it
always  seemed  to  him  as  though  he  had  no  power  to  retain  his  urine
and  to  close  the  neck  of  the  bladder  ; at  the  same  time  he  had  a
feeling  as  if  the  urethra  were  too  narrow  and  unable  to  expand.
Profuse,  involuntary  discharge  of  urine.  [De  Witt,  1.  c.]

285.  Profuse  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  262,  267,  288,  291,  293,
297.]

Profuse  diuresis,  without  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  263,  268.]
Lasciviousness,  lewdness.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

Complete  inability  to  perform  coitus.  [Sauvages,4  Epist,  ad
Haller , iii.]

* After  drinking  vinegar  there  came  again  a thin  stream,  and  he  had  not  such
frequent  calls  to  urinate.


1 Should  be,  “ bowels  more  costive.”

2 For  fourteen  hours.

3 Greding  merely  says  that  the  usual  involuntary  discharge  of  urine  during  the  fit
did  not  take  place.

4 Not  accessible.


STRAMONIUM.


599


Impotence.1  [Sauvages,  Nosol.  ii,  p.  241.]

290.  Lascivious  odour  of  the  body  during  menstruation.  [Greding,
1-  c->  P-  335-]

Excessive  talkativeness  during  menstruation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  335-]

Watery2  menses.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  284.]

Discharge  of  black  blood  from  the  uterus.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  275.]
Increased  catamenia ; the  blood  comes  away  in  large  clots.

295.  Too  profuse  catamenia,  metrorrhagia,  with  drawing  pains  in  the
abdomen,  thighs,  and  other  limbs.

Profuse  catamenia.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  280.]

Immoderate  menstrual  flux.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  255.]

The  catamenia  that  had  been  absent  four  years  return.4  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  282.]

Immediately  after  the  menses  erysipelas  on  the  left  cheek.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  285.]

300.  After  the  menses  hiccup  and  whining.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  328.]

* *

*

The  nose  is  stopped  up.  [T%.]

The  nose  seems  to  him  to  be  stopped  up  and  dry,  though  he  can
get  air  through  it.

The  nose  seems  to  him  to  be  stopped  up,  though  he  can  readily
get  air  through  it.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Frequent  sighing.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

305.  His  chest  feels  violently  constricted  across.5  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

An  aching  pain  in  the  chest  and  sternum,  produced  by  talking.
Hard  pressure  anteriorly  on  the  cartilages  of  the  third  and  fourth
ribs,  with  difficult  breathing ; he  cannot  draw  in  enough  air,  without
great  anxiety  (aft.  \ h.).  [i'z.]

Sensation  as  if  something  turned  round  in  the  chest,  followed  by
heat  of  the  face.

Oppression  and  unusual  pains.6  [De  Witt,  1.  c.]

310.  After  lying  down  at  night,  cutting  pain  in  the  sternum,  which
goes  off  on  the  discharge  of  flatus,  but  returns.

During  dyspnoea  anxiety  about  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Greding,

1.  c.,  p.  307.]

Dyspnoea.

Tightness  of  breath.

His  breath  is  more  and  more  taken  away  and  he  becomes  blue  in
the  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.]

315.  Sensation  of  dryness  in  the  chest.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

Haemoptysis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  262.]

Slow  inspiration  and  very  quick  expiration.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,

1.  c.]


1 Temporary  loss  of  sexual  energy  after  convalescence  from  poisoning.

2 In  original,  “ dilute.”

3 In  original,  “rather  more  copious  catamenia.”

4 In  a woman  of  40.

5 Literally,  **  violent  girding  across  the  thorax.”

6 In  original,  “ unusual  pain  and  anxiety.”


STRAMONIUM.


600


A drawing  (rheumatic)  pain  proceeding  from  the  side  of  the  neck
into  the  limbs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  285.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  back  and  abdomen,  excited  by  moving  (aft.
12  h.).

320.  Pain  in  the  back  and  shoulder,  as  if  bruised  (aft.  12  h.).

A spot  in  the  back  which  is  painful  when  touched  and  per  se.

A small  spot  on  the  back  with  drawing  pain  when  touched.

Drawing  tearing  pains  in  the  back  and  upper  part  of  the  abdo-
men (aft.  1 h.).

Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine,
drawing  pain  opposite  at  the  hack  of  the  stomach.

325.  Drawing  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  spine.

Drawing  pains  in  the  sacrum.

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  side  and  back.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.

Severe  pain  in  the  loins.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  319.]

Fine  sharp  pricks  in  the  forearm  and  rheumatic  contractive  pain
in  the  deltoid  muscle  (aft.  32  h.).  [Fz.]

330.  Trembling  of  the  arms  when  eating.

Trembling  of  the  sound  hand  when  eating.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Trembling  of  a sound  hand  when  eating.

He  grasps  hastily  and  quickly,  thinks  he  has  already  seized  the
object  before  he  has  touched  it,  and  when  he  does  hold  it  he  does  not
feel  that  he  has  got  it  (aft.  4 — 5 h.).  [Fz.]

Spasmodic  tenseness  of  the  whole  lower  limbs  (aft.  36  h.).  [Fz,]

335.  Drawing  pains  in  the  thighs.

Pain  in  the  right  thigh.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  31 1.]

Some  sharp  stitches  on  the  right  tibia.  [Fz.]

Several  boils  on  the  feet.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  333.]


with


290.


340


Burning  and  itching  on  the  feet.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  334.]


Rheumatic  drawing  (pressure)  in  the  left  tarsus,  in  the  evening
(aft.  36  h.).  [Fz.]

Burning  on  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  sometimes  slighter  sometimes
severer  (aft.  24  h.).  [F4.]

He  longs  for  open  air.1  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

He  runs  too  quickly,  as  fast  as  he  can,  when  he  wants  to  go  from
one  place  to  another.  [Fz.]

Extraordinary  excitement ; he  moves  so  quickly  (in  the  first
hour)  that  at  last  all  movement  ceases  and  blackness  comes  before
his  eyes.  [Fz.]

345.  He  does  all  movements  with  such  diligence,  haste  and  power,  that
he  becomes  anxious  if  he  does  not  get  through  them  immediately.
[Fz.]

Tottering  of  the  limbs  when  walking  and  standing.

Although  his  walk  is  staggering  yet  his  legs  execute  his  will  so
easily  that  it  seems  to  him  he  has  none ; they  seem  to  him  to  be
much  longer,  so  that  when  walking  he  thinks  he  touches  the  ground
when  he  is  still  a span  from  it,  and  hence  at  last  he  brings  down  the
foot  every  time  very  quickly.  [Fz.]

In  going  upstairs  he  always  takes  two  steps  at  a time,  because  he


1 To  relieve  himself  of  the  vertigo  of  S.  z.


STRAMONIUM.  601

thinks  they  are  but  one,  nor  does  he  observe  this  until  he  tumbles.

[Tz.]

Syncope.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  274.]

350.  Faintness,  in  the  forenoon,  with  very  pale  face,  and  thereafter
anorexia.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  298.]

Faintness,  with  great  dryness  in  the  mouth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p-  327-].

During  syncope  snoring.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p,  321.]

After  the  syncope  spasm  only  of  the  head  towards  both  sides,
with  red  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  332.]

Heaviness  of  the  limbs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  314.]

355.  Heaviness  of  the  feet  and  weariness  of  the  thighs.1 2  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  310-]

Weariness  of  the  limbs  (aft.  2 h.).  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Lazy  movement  of  the  limbs  with  formication  in  them.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  301.]

On  the  slightest  movement  heat  on  the  whole  body  and  perspira-
tion (aft.  24  h.).  [Fz.]

Difficulty  of  moving  and  formication  in  the  limbs,  with  watering
of  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

360.  Sensation  in  the  arms  and  legs  as  if  the  limbs  were  severed  from
the  body.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Sensation  as  if  every  portion  of  the  limbs  were  completely
severed  in  the  joints  from  the  other  parts  and  could  not  be  joined
together  again.

He  feels  his  hands  and  feet  as  if  separated  in  the  joints,  and  he  is
inconsolable  on  account  of  this  sensation.  \_Fr.  H — n.~]

The  limbs  go  to  sleep.

The  limbs  go  to  sleep.3  [Doderlin,  1.  c.]

365.  Difficulty  of  moving,  with  almost  extinguished  pulse.  [Swaine,
1.  c.]

Immobility.  [Du  Guid,  1.  c.]

Stiff  immobility  of  the  body,  the  child’s  arms  and  legs  could  not
be  moved  (aft.  1 h.).  [Heim,3  in  Belli s Neue  Beitrdge  z.  Nat.  u .
Arzn .,  ii,  p.  125.]

Immobility  of  the  limbs,  she  cannot  move  (a  kind  of  catalepsy).
Voluntary  muscular  movement  is  lost  (catalepsy4)  and  the  senses
are  gone,  but  swallowing  is  unaffected.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]
370.  Stiffness  of  the  whole  body  (aft.  1 h.j.  [Unzer,  1.  c.]

Paralysed  limbs.  [Swaine, — Vicat,  1.  c.]

Paralysed  thighs.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

Various  parts  of  the  body  become  paralytic.  [King,  1.  c.]

He  is  like  to  fall  down  on  rising  from  a seat  (in  the  first  8 h.).

[*■*•]

375.  He  cannot  walk  alone;  he  falls  when  not  supported.  [M.,  in
Baldingers  Neues  Magaz.f  vol.  i,  p.  35.]

1 Literally,  “ lassitudo  crurum  pedumque  pondus.”

2 Not  found.

3 From  seeds,  in  a child.

4 The  author  says  nothing  aboqt  “ catalepsy.”


602


STRAMONIUM.


The  lower  extremities  knuckle  under  him  when  walking.  [Tz.]
Weakness  of  the  body,  weariness  of  the  feet.

Weak  in  walking.  [Sauvages,  Nosology  ii,  p.  242.]

He  cannot  stand  on  his  feet.  [Schroer,  1.  c.]

380.  All  his  limbs  were  painful.

On  several  parts  of  the  body,  and  also  in  the  palms,  a great  erup-
tion of  lumps,  like  wheals,  with  pricking  itching  as  from  stinging-
nettles  per  s€j  aggravated  by  rubbing.

Intense  desire  to  lie  down.

He  must  lie  down  in  bed.  [Du  Quid,— -Swaine,-—  Lobstein,
1.  c.]

Drowsy  and  staggering.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

385.  Sleep.  [Schroer,  1.  c,]

Sleep  for  a few  hours  (aft.  a few  m.).  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]
Drowsiness  by  day.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  281.]

He  falls  asleep  by  day,  and  wakes  with  an  important  and  pompous
air.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

He  often  falls  asleep,  and  on  awaking  assumes  a comical  majestic
look.

390.  Quiet  sleep.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  267.]

Quiet  sleep  on  the  cessation  of  the  convulsions.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]
Sleep  for  four  and  twenty  hours.  [J.  C.  Grimm,2  in  Eph.  Nat .
C«r.,  cent,  ix,  obs.  94.]

Difficulty  of  waking  in  the  morning.

It  causes  in  some  deep  sleep,  sometimes  for  twenty-four  hours,  so
that  they  lie  as  if  dead.  [Garcias  ab  Horto,3  De  Plantis , lib.  ii,
cap.  24.]

395.  After  a deep  dreamful  sleep  (aft.  24  h.),  in  which  he  has  a seminal
emission,  he  is  quite  dizzy  and  only  sees  as  if  through  a veil.  [Tz.]
Deep,  sound  sleep,  in  which  he  breathes  deeply  with  a great
effort,  and  snores  during  inspiration  and  expiration.  [Tz.]

Deep  sleep  with  snoring.  [Unzer,  1.  c.]

Deep  snoring  sleep  yvith  occasional  drawing  up  of  the  thighs.
[Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

Slumber  with  rales,  bloody  foam  before  the  mouth  ^ dark  brown
face,  death.*  [Heim,  1.  c.,  p.  126.]

400.  He  lies  on  his  back  with  open,  staring  eyes.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,
1.  c.]

Restless  sleep.

Restless  sleep,  violent  headache,  and  profuse  diuresis.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  310.]

* After  six  hours,  from  swallowing  the  seeds,  in  a child  of  eighteen  months,  in
whom  after  death  there  were  many  brown  stripes  on  the  body  externally,  and  on
opening  the  body  there  is  found  much  yellow  water  in  the  abdominal  cavity,  the  bowels
distended  with  flatulence,  similar  brown  stripes  on  the  liver,  spleen  and  lungs,  much
water  in  the  pericardium,  the  heart  shrivelled,  and  in  it,  as  also  in  all  the  blood-
vessels, quite  fluid,  thin  blood.


1 Curative  effect.

2 Observation.

3 Statement.


STRAMONIUM.  603

Very  restless  dreamful  sleep,  with  turning  about  in  bed.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  295.]

Vivid  historical  dreams.

405.  Dreams  of  various  kinds.  [Ray,1 2  Histor.  Plantar .,  tom.  i.]

After  restless  sleep  violent  headache,  vertigo,  flow  of  tears  and
saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  279.]

Sleep  broken  by  crying  out.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  283.]

At  night  crying  and  howling.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  268.]

Waking  up  from  sleep  with  crying  out.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  334.]
410.  Remained  awake  all  night,  turned  about  restlessly  in  bed,  and
uttered  a piercing  cry.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

Sleeplessness.  [Swaine,3  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  268.]
Persistent  cramp  in  both  hands  and  feet.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
396.]

The  hands  are  doubled  up  into  a fist  (yet  the  thumbs  are  not
bent  in),  but  they  can  be  spread  out.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]
Violent  movement  of  the  limbs.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

415.  Constant  movements  of  the  hands  and  arms,  as  though  he  were
spinning  or  weaving  (aft,  8 h.).  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Convulsions  of  the  limbs.

Convulsions.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave, — Doderlin,— -Buchner,

1.  <=.]

In  bed  the  most  violent  convulsions,  during  which  he  was
furious,  so  that  he  must  be  bound  (aft.  6 h.).  [Brera,  1.  c.]

Horrible  convulsions  on  seeing  a light,  a mirror  or  water.
[Brera,  1.  c.]

420.  The  convulsions  and  delirium  are  particularly  apt  to  be  excited
by  touching,  and  they  are  followed  by  weakness.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]
The  convulsions  with  dilated  pupils  still  continued,  even  after  the
pulse  had  become  slower,  the  breathing  freer,  and  the  tension  of  the
abdomen  was  gone3  (aft.  18  h.).  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Spasmodic  movements.  [De  Witt,  1.  c.]

Spasms  first  on  the  left  arm,  then  on  the  right  leg,  then  very
quick  spasms  of  the  head  in  all  directions.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  297.]
He  moves  the  limbs  to  and  fro.  [Kellner,  1.  c.]

425.  Trembling  of  the  hands  on  grasping  anything,  [Fz.]

Spasmodic  jerking  drawing  upwards  and  inwards  of  the  anterior
crural  muscles,  [ife.]

Convulsions,  jerk-like  twitchings.  [Tz.]

Twitchings  in  the  left  lower  extremity,  which  commence  as
shocks,  and  draw  it  upwards  and  inwards.  [Tz.]

Spasmodic  jerking  up  of  the  limbs.  [Tz.]

430.  Contractions  of  the  hands  and  feet  alternately.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]
Slow  contraction  and  extension  of  the  limbs,  in  recurring  fits.
[Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

Trembling  of  one  and  of  several  limbs.


1 From  the  root.

2 Not  found  in  Swaine.

8 After  emetics  and  clysters.


STRAMONIUM.


604

Trembling  of  the  limbs.  [B.  Busch,1  in  Philos.  Transact .,  vol.  60,
Lond.,  1771. — Kellner,  1.  c.]

Trembling  all  over  the  body.  [Tz.]

435.  Persistent  trembling  of  the  feet.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

Trembling,  weak,  irregular,  sometimes  intermittent  pulse.
[Kellner,  1.  c.]

Small,  rapid  pulse.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

Quick,  intermittent  pulse.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

Frequent,  quick,  small,  irregular  pulse.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

440.  Small,  quick,  at  last  scarcely  perceptible  pulse.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]
Extinguished  pulse.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

Strong,  full  pulse  of  eighty  beats.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Strong,  full  pulse  of  ninety  beats.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Rigor  through  the  whole  body  with  single  twitches,  sometimes  of
the  whole  body,  sometimes  of  single  limbs,  of  the  elbows  and  knee-
joints,  without  thirst.  [Tz.]

445.  Every  time  he  takes  stramonium  there  comes  over  him  a dis-
agreeeble  shuddering  chill,  just  as  though  he  were  frightened  at  it
(aft.  3,  4>  5 h.).  \_Fz-]

Coldness  of  the  limbs.

In  the  morning  the  feet  were  very  cold  and  yet  very  sensitive  to
every  cold  draught  of  air.

Great  coldness  all  over  the  limbs  and  trunk.2  [Swaine,  1.  c.]
Coldness  of  the  whole  body.

450.  Coldness  and  chilliness  for  eight  hours.

Cold,  insensible,  weak,  she  lies  on  the  ground,  with  weak  respira-
tion (aft.  2 h.).  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

In  the  afternoon,  chilliness  down  the  back.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p.  288.]

In  the  night,  chilliness  and  shivering  of  the  limbs.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  303.]

In  the  afternoon,  a trembling  tossing  or  beating  of  the  knees  and
feet,  with  perfect  consciousness,  as  from  a severe  rigor.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  330.]

455.  Violent  fever.  [Rush,  1.  c.]

Fever  in  the  afternoon.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  263.]

At  noon,  violent  fever,  which  recurs  with  equal  violence  at  mid-
night. [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  270.]

After  the  vomiting  in  the  evening,  a persistent,  violent  fever,
with  profuse  sweat.4  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  265.]

Daily  fever,  after  noon.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  273.]

460.  On  two  days,  fever  in  the  evening.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  274.]

Fever  : at  first  heat  in  the  head,  then  coldness  of  the  whole  body,


1 Not  found. — (Given  as  te  B.  Rush  ” in  first  edition — see  SS.  455,  487,  498  of
this  translation  j but  this  name  also  untraceable.  Allen  refers  all  the  symptoms
under  these  two  names  to  ee  B.  Rush,  Trans,  of  Am.  Phil.  Soc .,  Philad.,  1769;  a
child,  aet.  between  3 and  4 years,  swallowed  over  100  dried  seeds.”)

2 Literally,  u his  extremities,  and  also  the  trunk  of  his  body,  were  cold.”

3 Apparently  only  sympathetic  of  an  inflamed  arm.

4 The  beginning  of  phthisis,  of  which  the  patient  died.


stramonium.


605


then  heat  of  the  whole  body,  with  anxiety — sleep  during  the  heat,
and  after  waking  very  great  thirst,  so  that  he  has  pricking  in  the  '
palate,  till  he  drinks.

Heat  in  the  face.

Sensation  of  heat  in  the  face,  when  the  chilliness  and  coldness
are  over.

Becomes  hot.

465.  Towards  noon,  great  heat,  redness  of  the  face,  vertigo  and  flow
of  tears  from  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  302.]

Great  heat  with  quick  and  small  pulse,  and  bright  red,  vermilion-
coloured  face.  [M,,  1.  c.,  p.  34.]

He  covers  himself  carefully  up  during  the  heat ; but  if  he  only
puts  a finger  out  from  under  the  clothes,  the  pains  immediately  attack
him  violently.

In  the  evening,  burning  above  the  knee  when  walking,  and  heat
throughout  the  body  with  the  most  violent  thirst  (aft.  12  h.).  [Tz.]
Heat  of  the  whole  body.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

470.  Great  heat  of  the  body.  [Gardane,1  Gazette  de  Sante , 1773,
J774,  P-I43-1

Great  heat,  slight  sweat,  quick,  soft  pulse.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Great  heat  and  chattering  in  sleep.  [Lobstein,  1.  c.]

Profuse  sweat.2  [J.  C.  Grimm,  1.  c.]

Sweat  with  diminished  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  266.]

475.  At  night  slight  sweat.

Heat  and  sweat  all  over,  without  thirst  (aft.  5 h.).

Profuse  sweat  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  297.]

Very  profuse  sweat  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  297.]

Sweat  with  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  272.]

480.  Sweat  in  the  back.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  293.]

Profuse  sweat  with  good  appetite,  diarrhoea,  distension  of  the
abdomen  and  bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  306.]

Violent  sweat  with  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  306.]

Great  sweat  with  bellyache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  310.]

Greasy  sweat  with  increased  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  290.]

485.  Cold  sweat  all  over  the  body.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

(Shapeless,  fleabite-like  spots  on  the  arm)  (aft.  3 h.).

Eruption  * all  over  the  body  with  swelling,  inflammation,  itching.
[Rush,  1.  c.]

Blisters  on  the  skin,  after  the  violent  symptoms  have  abated.
[De  Witt,  1.  c.]

Inflamed,  painful  pustules  on  the  right 3 thigh,  which  exude  an
acrid  water  (aft.  some  weeks).  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

490.  Itching  eruption.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

Red  miliary  eruption  over  the  skin.

The  chest  and  back  are  covered  with  a red  miliary  rash,  which

* All  eruptions  (and  itching)  after  taking  stramonium  seem  to  be  in  the  secondary
action.

1 Effects  when  given  in  mania.

2 During  convalescence,  after  antidotes.

3 For  “right”  read  “ left.”


6o  6


STRAMONIUM.


in  the  morning  is  paler,  in  the  afternoon  redder  and  more  copious,
and  more  visible  when  warm,  for  eleven  days  ; then  desquamation.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  288.]

In  the  morning  after  awaking,  itching  all  over  the  body.  [Gre-
ding, 1.  c.,  p.  276.]

Formication  in  all  the  limbs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  381.]

495.  Formication  under  the  skin.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  300,  301.]

Formication  from  the  left  side  down  into  the  thigh  or  into  the
toes  of  the  same  side,  thence  upwards  into  the  abdomen,  whence  it
again  spreads  downwards  into  the  right  thigh  and  right  foot.  [Gre-
DING,  1.  C.,  p.  33O.]

Restlessness.  [Swaine,-—  Brera,  1.  c.]

Delirium.  [Rush, — Pfennig,  1.  c.]

In  his  slumber  he  hears  two  persons  talking  but  knows  not
who  they  are.  [Fz.]

500.  He  does  not  seem  to  observe  objects  around  him,  and  does  not
really  observe  them.  [Fz.]

Stupefaction  of  the  senses  : some  always  laugh  but  hear  and  see
nothing  of  what  is  always  before  their  eyes,  but  they  speak  and
answer  all  questions  as  if  they  were  rational,  though  it  seems  to
them  to  be  only  a dream.  [Garcias  ab  Horto,  1.  c.]

After  waking  he  recognises  nothing  about  him,  takes  his  book
and  goes  to  school,  but  enters  at  a wrong  door  (aft.  6 h.).  [Fz.]
After  waking  all  objects  seem  to  him  new,  even  his  friends  as
though  he  had  never  in  his  life  seen  them  before.  [Fz.]

He  appears  to  himself  large  and  tall,  but  surrounding  objects
appear  small  to  him.  [Fz.]

505.  Absence  of  mind  (24  h.)  5 slight  delirium.  [Kellner,  1.  c.]

He  is  not  quite  rational.1  [Cruger,  1.  c.]

He  fears  he  is  losing  his  senses.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

Loss  of  reason.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

Idiocy.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

510.  Folly.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Obtuseness  of  senses,  loss  of  reason.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.j
Confusion  in  the  head.  [Odhelius,  1.  c.]

Wonderful  pictures  of  fantasy.2  [Ray,  1.  c.]

Many  strange  illusions  hover  before  him.  [Cruger,  1.  c.]

515.  Delirious  loquacity,  nonsensical  chatter.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

He  was  delirious  and  destitute  of  memory  and  recollection.
[Brera,  1.  c.]

In  the  intervals  of  half-consciousness  he  is  aware  of  his  waking
dreams,  but  cannot  remember  what  he  had  done  and  said  in  the
previous  lucid  intervals.  [Fz.]

He  talks  with  some  one  whom  he  does  not  recognise,  and  answers
him,  as  though  he  were  rational,  but  cannot  remember  the  conversa-
tion when  he  comes  to  himself.  [Cph.  a Costa,3  in  Schenk , lib.  7,
obs.  139.]

1 laterally,  “ his  mind  was  unsteady.”

2 In  sleep.

8 Effect  of  eating  seeds,


STRAMONIUM.


607

He  speaks  to  absent  persons  as  though  they  were  present,  and
addresses  lifeless  objects  ( e.g . chessmen)  by  the  names  of  those  persons,
but  does  not  notice  any  of  those  around  him.  [Fz.]

520.  Loquacious  madness ; he  complains  of  a dog  biting  and  tearing
the  flesh  off  his  chest.

He  walks  about  the  room  in  a reverie,  with  staring  sparkling
eyes  and  blue  rings  round  them,  he  does  not  notice  external  objects,
but  is  only  taken  up  with  the  objects  of  his  imagination.  [Fz.]

He  dreams  with  his  eyes  open,  begins  to  chatter  nonsense,  and
when  his  friends  set  him  right,  he  excuses  himself  by  saying  that
they  had  suggested  them  to  him,  and  immediately  recommences  his
waking  dreams  and  talking  about  the  same  subjects.  [Fz.]

Insane  and  irrational,  the  patient  is  occupied  with  thousands  of
not  disagreeable  fancies,  expresses  his  wishes  by  signs  without  speak-
ing, then  runs  about  for  several  days  occupied  with  his  fancies,  with
joyous  disposition.  [Sauvages,  Nosol .,  tom  ii,  p.  242.]

He  dances  at  night  in  the  churchyard.  [Sauvages,  1.  c.]

525.  Insane  (aft.  3 h.),  he  dances,  gesticulates,  bursts  out  laughing,  and
sings.  [Grimm,  1.  c.]

He  sings  and  talks  lewdly.  [Kaaw  Boerhaave,  1.  c.]

He  is  as  if  in  an  ecstasy  and  beside  himself.  [Cruger,  1.  c.]

He  snatches  with  his  hands,  laughs,  creeps  about  in  bed.
[Schroer,  1.  c.]

He  shows  his  confusion  of  mind  in  his  actions  : he  kneels  down
and  stretches  out  his  arms  as  though  he  were  searching  for  something.
[Du  Guid,  1.  c.]

530.  With  staring  eyes,  and  greatly  dilated,  immovable  pupils,  he  saw
nothing,  recognised  none  of  his  own  people,  felt  about  with  his  hands,
as  though  he  would  catch  hold  of  something,  and  stamped  with  his
feet.  [M.,  1.  c.,  p.  34.]

He  bends  his  knees  and  kneels  and  stretches  out  his  arms  in  front
of  him  as  though  he  were  searching  for  something.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]
Confusion  of  the  understanding,  laughing,  whining.  [Cph.  a
Costa,  1.  c.]

In  fits  he  chatters  incessantly,  or  gets  into  a fury  and  bursts  out
into  loud  laughter,  or  acts  as  if  he  were  spinning.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
p.  266.]

Senseless  .quarrelling.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  298.]

53 5.  Constant  violent  quarrelsomeness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  332,
3330  ....

With  frightful  cries  he  strikes  those  around  him  and  becomes
furious.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  277.

She  bites  a person  standing

I.C.]

Fury.  [Vic at,  1.  c.]

Furious  delirium.  [Kramer,1  in  Comm . Lit.  Nor .,  1 733,  p.  251.]
540.  Ungovernable  fury.  [Schroer,  1.  c.]


]

beside  her  in  the  hand.  [Fowler,


1 Observations.


608  STRAMONIUM.

She  can  only  be  kept  in  bed  by  force.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Exertion  of  strength  : a strong  man  could  scarcely  hold  him  down
in  bed.  [Pfennig,  1.  c.]

Ungovernable  fury ; can  hardly  be  held,  attacks  people,  strikes
them,  and  endeavours  to  seize  them.  [Swaine,  1.  c.]

Great  desire  to  bite  and  tear  everything  with  his  teeth  that  comes
near  his  mouth,  even  his  own  limbs.  [Brera,  1.  c.]

54-5  * Alternations  of  convulsions  and  fury  ; he  got  such  violent  spasms
that  his  mother  could  not  keep  him  on  her  lap,  and  when  they  were
allayed  he  became  furious,  struck  about  him,  and  tried  to  bite  when
he  was  held.  [M.,  1.  c.]

Furious  endeavours  to  kill  people.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  265.]
Furious  endeavours  to  kill  himself.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  322,

323']

Nonsensical  idea,  as  though  he  were  killed,  roasted,  and  being
devoured.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  323.]

He  thinks  he  is  dying,  and  that  he  will  not  live  over  the  evening  ;
he  rejoices  that  he  is  dying,  and  gives  directions  about  his  funeral,
otherwise  he  is  rational  and  does  not  fed  particularly  ill.

550.  At  night  he  jumps  out  of  bed  and  cries  out  that  the  disease  is
breaking  out  of  his  head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  325.]

She  sometimes  cries  out  about  cats,  dogs  and  rabbits,  which  were
approaching  her  from  above,  from  the  side  and  from  the  middle  of  the
room.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

Delirious  fear,  as  though  a dog  were  attacking  him.  [Greding,
].  c.,  p.  279.]

Frightful  pictures  of  the  imagination  ; he  fancies  he  sees  ghosts.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  276.]

He  often  starts  up  as  if  in  affright.  [M.,  1.  c.]

555.  Sadness.1  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

In  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed  very  sad,  with  thoughts
of  death  and  violent  weeping.

The  imagination  is  confused  and  disturbed  by  fear.  [King,  1.  c.]
Strange  objects  always  appear  before  his  imagination,  causing  him
to  start.  [Fz.]

She  fancies  she  sees  a number  of  people  who  are  not  present,  and
she  grasps  at  them.  [Fowler,  1.  c.]

560.  Frightful  fancies  take  possession  of  his  mind,  and  terror  and  fear
are  depicted  in  his  features.  [King,  1.  c.]

In  the  moments  of  consciousness  he  begged  to  be  held  as  he  was
falling.  [M.,  1.  c.]

His  surroundings  appear  to  him  quite  strange  : although  in  the
first  minutes  he  knows  that  he  is  surrounded  by  his  friends,  he
forgets  this  in  the  second  minute,  and  imagines  he  is  quite  alone  in  a
desert,  and  is  afraid  ; figures  of  beasts  suddenly  spring  out  of  the
ground  at  his  side,  so  that  he  moves  to  the  other  side,  where,  how-
ever, other  similar  figures  pursue  him,  and  he  runs  forward.  [Fz.]
Asa  rule  he  has  more  imaginary  figures  at  his  side  than  in  front


1 At  first.


STRAMONIUM.  609

of  him,  they  all  inspire  him  with  horror  (between  3 and  4 h.).

[Fz.]

He  always  imagines  he  is  alone  and  is  afraid.  [Tz.]

565.  Nowhere  has  he  rest,  is  startled  by  dream-pictures,  even  when  his
eyes  are  open,  which  in  the  form  of  big  dogs,  cats  and  other  horrible
beasts,  grow  out  of  the  ground  at  his  side,  and  from  which  he  jumps
away  to  the  side  with  signs  of  terror,  and  knows  not  how  to  save
himself.  [Tz.]

Disposed  to  start,  excited  (aft.  32  h.).  [Tz.]

Despair.

Great  crossness  amounting  to  violence,  immediately  followed  by
disposition  to  laugh,  and  loud  laughter.

Alternations  of  consciousness  and  madness.1  [Swaine,  1.  c.]


1 Literally,  “restless  and  delirious  by  turns.”


VOL.  II.


39


SULPHUR.1


(Flowers  of  sulphur,  Flores  sulphuris , sublimed  in  fine  acicular  rorm  into  the  receiver
of  a retort,  washed  by  being  shaken  up  with  alcohol,  in  order  to  remove  any  acid
that  may  be  adhering  to  them.)

Though  sulphur  has  been  employed  for  many  centuries,  by  medical
and  non-medical  persons,  in  the  itch  of  workers  in  wool,  yet  none  of
them  ever  observed  that  the  beneficial  effects  they  saw  from  its  use  in
the  eruption  of  itch  was  effected  by  sulphur  by  similarity  of  action  and
homoeopathy.

In  the  note  to  symptom  673  I have  pointed  out  the  exact  distinctive
signs  of  the  phenomena  of  itch.

Physicians  cured,  also,  some  haemorrhoidal  afiections  with  sulphur
clumsily  administered,  without  suspecting  that  they  had  (unconsciously)
effected  homoeopathic  cures  ; whilst  they  aggravated  other  affections  of
the  rectum  and  anus  with  it,  because  the  symptoms  by  means  of  which
sulphur  (see  347,  348,  350  to  353,  366,  488  to  492)  and  hepar  sulphuris
(see  112,  113 — 129,  130,  1 8 1,  183,  184,  185,  187)  can  cure  only
similar  natural  diseases  homoeopathicallv,  were  unknown  to  them  ; and
also  because  they  administered  too  large  doses — 5,  10,  20,  30  grains  at  a
time — whereas  they  should  have  given  hardly  T7T^_^.th  part  of  a grain.

Even  though  the  idea  had  not  occurred  to  Schmitjan  to  prescribe
sulphur  in  an  autumnal  dysentery,  yet  the  symptoms  of  sulphur  and
hepar  sulphuris  would  suggest  to  every  true  physician  to  employ  them
in  order  to  combat  the  troublesome  tenesmus  occurring  especially  at
night  in  such  cases,  for  these  substances  themselves  produce  a similar
affection.  For  this  object  a dose  of  less  than  -075--0  0th  °f  a grain  is
required  (one  grain  of  flowers  of  sulphur  triturated  for  one  hour  with
too  grains  of  milk  sugar,  and  one  grain  of  this  mixture  again  triturated
for  an  hour  with  100  grains  of  milk  sugar).

The  homoeopathic  physician  (who  alone  acts  in  conformity  with
natural  laws)  will  meet  with  many  important  morbid  states  for  which
he  will  discover  and  may  expect  much  assistance  in  the  symptoms  of
sulphur  and  hepar  sulphuris.

Sulphur  seems  to  act  in  the  smallest  doses  for  from  16  to  20  days,
and  finds  its  antidote  in  camphor.

{Hahnemann’s  fellow-provers  were  Friedrich  Hahnemann,  Walther.

Citations  are  made  from  the  following  old-school  sources  :

Ardoynus,  De  Venen.>  Lib.  ii.

Huf eland's  journ.  d.  pr.  A .,  iii.


1 From  vol.  iv,  and  edit.,  1825.


SULPHUR.


6 ii


Lange,  Domest.  Bruns<v.

Morgagni,  De  Sedib.  et  Cans.  Morb.,  lv.

Walther,  Aug.  Fr.,  Progr.  de  Sulpk.  et  Marte .,  Lips.,  1743.

The  1 st  edit,  has  16 1 symptoms,  this  2nd  edit.  8141  (not  reckoning  the  two
ppended  symptoms  from  the  “fumes  of  burning  sulphur”)  ; in  the  Chr . Kr.,  2nd
ed.,  there  are  1969.]


SULPHUR.

Vertigo  in  the  morning  with  slight  epistaxis.

In  the  morning  much  vertigo  with  slight  epistaxis.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Vertigo  when  stooping.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  (after  supper)  vertigo;  she  durst
not  look  down  nor  stoop  in  the  slightest  degree ; she  must  take  hold
of  something  to  avoid  falling.

5.  When  walking  up  hill  in  the  open  air  vertigo,  lasting  eight
minutes ; he  could  not  tread  with  certainty,  the  senses  were  clouded
(aft.  4 d.).

When  standing  vertigo  (in  the  evening),  with  rush  of  blood
towards  the  heart.

Vertigo  when  she  lies  at  night  on  the  back.

In  the  evening,  after  he  had  lain  in  bed  a quarter  of  an  hour,
whirling  vertigo,  as  though  he  would  fall  into  a faint,  as  if  all  went
round  in  his  head  ; for  two  successive  evenings.

(Vertigo  when  sitting;  staggering  on  rising  up.)

10.  Giddiness  in  the  head.

Confusion  in  the  head,  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough.

In  the  morning  the  head  is  confused  and  pressed  in  the  forehead
until  noon.

In  the  evening  confusion  of  the  head.

After  walking  in  the  open  air  confusion  of  the  head.

15.  When  walking  in  the  open  air  weakness  in  the  head,  like  stupe-
faction, with  gloomy  disagreeable  ideas,  for  several  minutes,  some-
times slighter,  sometimes  severer.

So  forgetful  that  even  what  had  happened  but  a short  time  pre-
viously is  either  not  at  all  or  only  dimly  remembered.

(Forgetful.)

Such  stupefaction  of  the  head  that  she  imagined  she  had  lost  her
reason.  [Morgagni,2  De  Sedib.  et  Cans.  Morb.,  lv,  9.]

Great  stupidity  and  dulness.

20.  Dizziness  and  shooting  in  the  head.

Heaviness  in  the  head,  felt  not  only  when  moving  and
stooping,  but  even  when  sitting  and  lying.

Every  morning  headache  above  the  eyes  as  from  stuffed  coryza  ;
he  must  sneeze  constantly.


1 In  the  original  815  symptoms  are  reckoned,  but  this  is  a mistake  on  the  part  of
the  transcriber,  who  has  counted  S,  189  as  190.

2 Observations. — “ Pertubatio  ” in  the  head  is  all  that  is  mentioned,


6i2


SULPHUR.


(Headache  as  from  displaced  flatulence.)

Headache  with  nausea.

25.  Pressure  in  the  front  of  the  head,  as  after  a nocturnal  debauch,
which  after  some  days  changes  into  glowing  tearing  in  the  right  side
of  the  head  and  teeth  (aggravated  by  the  application  of  cold  water).

Aching  pain  above  the  left  eye  (in  the  afternoon  for  half  an
hour).

Aching  pain  in  the  forehead  aggravated  by  movement.

Pain  in  the  forehead  as  if  it  would  press  out  there.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Frequent  headache  for  a minute  : a pinching  together  of  the
brain  from  one  temple  to  the  other.

30.  Immediately  after  supper  semilateral,  sharp  pressive  pain  under
the  left  parietal  bone.

In  the  whole  head  pain  as  if  the  head  were  pressed  from  without,
e.g.  by  a tight  hat.

On  wearing  a tight  covering  on  the  head  in  the  room,  pressive
pain  in  the  head,  which  goes  off  on  uncovering  the  head.

Tension  in  the  forehead.

Headache  especially  late  in  the  evening  and  at  night  in  bed  : an
occasional  painful  pressing  inwards  from  the  top  of  the  head  to  deep
into  the  brain,  which  compels  him  to  wrinkle  the  forehead  and  close
the  eyes.

35.  Headache,  during  which  the  eyes  are  as  it  were  shut  up.

Headache,  especially  in  the  forenoon,  as  if  the  head  were  drawn
downwards  and  forwards.

Tearing  (?)  in  the  head,  more  in  the  afternoon  than  the  forenoon,
with  exhaustion  and  heat,  without  thirst ; he  must  lay  his  head  down
on  the  table  to  obtain  relief.

Nocturnal  headache  as  though  the  skull  would  be  torn  out.

Tearing  in  the  forehead.

40.  After  waking  from  the  midday  siesta,  on  opening  the  eyes,  a
quickly  occurring,  severe,  chiefly  semilateral  headache,  as  if  the  brain
were  lacerated  or  sore  (aft.  36  h.).

Tearing  in  the  head  as  with  a saw.

Twitching  pain  in  the  head.

Twitching  pains  above  the  right  eye.

Burning  pain  above  and  below  the  eyebrows,  always  in  the  after-
noon. \_Fr.  H — «.]

45.  A single  stitch  in  the  head.

Stitches  in  the  head  and  out  at  the  eyes.

Headache  in  the  temples,  like  a twirling  and  creeping.

Severe  headache  in  the  crown  of  the  head  for  twelve  hours  (aft.
ij  h.),  of  a febrile  character,  on  several  mornings.

Pain  on  the  crown  when  chewing,  coughing,  and  blowing  the
nose.

50.  When  chewing,  drawing  pain  in  the  occiput  near  the  cervical
joint,  so  severe  that  he  must  leave  ofF  eating.  \_Fr.  H — n.~\

Severe  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  head  when  coughing  and  sneez-
ing.

Much  headache  especially  when  stooping.


SULPHUR.  613

Ringing  noise  through  the  head  which  seems  to  go  out  at  the
ears.

Throbbing  in  the  head,  in  the  morning.

55.  Throbbing  in  the  head  (temple),  neck,  and  about  the  heart ; he
had  beating  and  trembling  all  through  him.

Hammering  headache  during  animated  conversation.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head  ; there  was  pressure  in  it,  as  if  out  at
the  eyes  ; she  seemed  to  be  deaf.

In  the  morning  heat  in  the  head.

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  great  dry  heat  in  the  head  ; the  face
glowing.

60.  In  the  evening  heat  in  the  head  with  cold  feet.

Pulsating  throbbing  on  the  head,  perceptible  externally.

A pressure  externally  on  the  vertex  towards  the  forehead.

Pressure  externally  on  the  vertex  towards  the  forehead  ; a place
in  the  left  side  of  the  head  is  also  painful  to  touch.

Boring  pain  under  the  vertex  : the  part  is  also  painful  externally
when  touched.

6 5.  There  is  sometimes  a burning  pain  on  a small  spot  of  the  head
down  at  the  nape  when  lying  on  it,  especially  when  he  has  scratched
there.

Itching  on  the  occiput.

Great  falling  out  of  the  hair  of  the  head.

Falling  out  of  the  hair.

Itching  pimples  on  the  forehead,  on  rubbing  there  is  pricking  in
tm  .

70.  Shooting  in  the  forehead,  as  if  on  the  bone.

Much  itching  in  the  eyebrows  and  on  the  tip  of  the  nose.

Daily  quivering  of  the  lower  eyelid.

Twitching  in  the  eyelids.

Twitching  in  the  eyelids,  chiefly  in  the  afternoon.  [Fr.  H — «.]

75.  Trembling  of  the  eyes.

Itching  on  the  eyelids  as  though  they  would  inflame.

Stye  on  the  upper  eyelid  in  the  inner  canthus.

The  upper  eyelid  swollen,  and  on  the  border  dry  matter  among  the
eyelashes.

Sore  dry  pain  in  the  borders  of  the  eyelids.

80.  Sore  excoriation  pain  on  the  inside  of  the  eyelids,  after  mid-
night ; followed  by  feeling  of  rubbing  drynesss  on  their  inner
surfaces.

Pain  in  the  eyeballs,  as  from  dryness  and  as  if  they  rubbed
against  the  eyelids.

In  the  morning  flow  of  tears  from  the  eyes,  thereafter  dryness  of
the  eyes.

Both  eyes  excrete  greasy-feeling  tears.  \_Fr.  H — n.~]

The  eyes  are  full  of  muco-pus  (eyegum)  (aft.  3 d.).

85.  Burning  in  the  eyelids,  which  are  inflamed  and  red,  and
stiff  on  movement.

Swelling  and  redness  of  the  eyes,  with  papules  on  the  eyelids.

Burning  externally  on  the  eyelids,


SULPHUR.


614


From  sulphur-fumes  immediately  a sensation  as  of  many
burning  little  sparks  on  the  eyelids,  which  immediately  cause  them
to  close.

A burning  jerk  in  the  right  eyelid.

90.  Burning  in  the  eyes.

Sensation  like  heat  in  the  eye.

Stabs  in  the  right  eye  as  with  knives.

The  eye  pains  as  if  bruised  on  shutting  it  and  on  touching  it.

Every  evening  aching  in  the  eyes,  as  if  for  sleep,  and  yet  no
sleepiness.

95.  Aching  in  both  eyeballs  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Aching  in  the  eyes,  especially  when  he  works  in  the  sunshine.
[Fr.  H — n.~\

Heaviness  in  the  eyes.

In  the  white  of  the  eye  close  to  the  cornea  a white  vesicle.

Intolerance  of  sunlight.

100.  Flickering  before  the  eyes  (aft.  48  h.J.

When  looking  into  the  air  a white  spot  before  the  eyes.

Dark  points  and  spots  floating  before  the  sight.

(Like  a vail  before  the  eyes,  and  dim  vision  for  near  and  distant
objects.)

Deep-lying  eyes  and  blue  borders  round  them.

105.  Blue  borders  round  the  eyes.

Heat  and  dark  redness  of  the  face,  especially  when  walking  in
the  open  air.

In  the  forenoon  and  afternoon  transient  heat  in  the  left  cheek  for
an  hour.

Burning  sensation  and  heat  in  the  face  with  several  particularly
red  spots  between  eye  and  ear.

Burning  painful  heat  of  face  and  heat  on  the  neck  ; the  face
flecked  with  red.

no.  Burning  sensation  in  the  face,  and  heat  and  redness  of  it;  the
burning  was  particularly  severe  round  about  the  mouth.

Burning  in  the  face  and  on  the  neck,  without  redness.

Sometimes  a quivering  on  the  cheek  at  the  zygoma,  sometimes  at
the  chin.

Drawing  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  face  as  if  in  the  skin,  above
the  left  eye,  on  the  left  temple,  and  on  the  zygomatic  process,
extending  into  the  lobe  of  the  ear  (worst  in  the  morning).

Tearing  in  the  right  half  of  the  face.

1 15.  Tearing  in  the  left  ear.

(Earache  in  the  left  ear.)

In  the  evening  in  bed  roaring  before  the  ears  and  rush  of  blood  to
the  head.

Ringing  in  the  ears  and  like  the  howling  of  the  wind,  especially
after  lying  down.

Much  tinnitus  aurium  in  both  ears  when  sitting.

120.  Humming  in  the  ears  for  several  days.

Splashing  in  the  ear,  as  if  water  were  in  it,  with  over-
sensitiveness of  hearing  (at  the  cracking  of  a whip).


SULPHUR.


6 f5


(Very  transient)  deafness  in  both  ears  (aft.  9 d.).

Boring  above  the  root  of  the  nose.

Inflammation  in  the  nose  (aft.  9 d.).

125.  Black  sweat-holes  on  the  nose,  upper  lip,  and  chin  (aft.  9 d.).

Epistaxis  (aft.  14  d.)  for  seven  days.

Occasional  epistaxis  for  several  days.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Epistaxis,  in  the  afternoon  (about  three  o’clock),  for  two  succes-
sive afternoons ; afterwards  the  nose  was  painful  to  the  touch.

In  the  morning  when  blowing  the  nose  great  epistaxis.

130.  Blowing  of  blood  from  the  nose.

On  blowing  the  nose  some  blood  comes  from  the  nose.  \_Fr.
H—n.]

Every  time  the  nose  is  blown  some  pieces  of  clotted  blood  come
away.

Smell  in  the  nose,  as  from  burnt  horn.

Smell  in  the  nose,  as  from  old  fetid  coryza.

135.  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip.

At  the  edge  of  the  vermilion  of  the  lower  lip  a scabby  ulcer  with
burning  pain.

Eruption  of  a blister  on  the  middle  of  the  lower  lip.

Trembling  of  the  lips.

Twitchings  in  the  lower  jaw  when  going  to  sleep.

140.  Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  jaws.

In  the  lower  jaw  shooting  out  at  the  ear.

Submaxillary  glands  swollen.

Swelling  of  the  gums  at  old  stumps  of  teeth.

The  gums  bleed  on  spitting.

145.  Looseness  of  the  teeth  and  bleeding  of  the  gums  for  three  weeks.

Teeth  on  edge.

The  teeth  are  greatly  on  edge,  but  are  only  painful  when  biting
on  them  ; he  could  not  chew  black  bread  on  account  of  the  pain  (aft.

5 d.)-

Toothache  in  the  open  air.

The  tooth  is  simply  painful  per  se,  even  without  touching  or
biting  on  it,  and  it  is  higher.

150.  Toothache,  like  boring  with  a hot  iron.

Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth.

A drawing  pain  in  the  molars,  aggravated  by  drawing  air  into  the
mouth.

Toothache,  fine  throbbing  and  drawing.

Toothache  in  fits  of  one  to  two  hours,  followed  by  digging;  she
can  bear  cold  things  better  than  warm.

155.  Toothache,  like  jerks  and  some  stitches,  periodically,  also  after
midnight  and  in  the  morning,  whether  he  eats  or  no ; on  drawing  in
the  open  air  it  darts  into  the  gums,  which  are  painful  per  se,  and  as
if  they  were  loose  and  detached.

The  teeth  are  as  if  paralysed  when  eating,  and  as  if  rather  loose
when  biting  on  them.

Toothache  : shooting  in  all  the  teeth  day  and  night ; aggravated
by  biting  when  eating.


6 1 6


SULPHUR.


Toothache  : day  and  night  shooting  in  all  the  teeth.

Toothache  : shooting,  throbbing,  and  burning,  going  also  into
the  orbits  and  ear.

160.  (A  smarting  on  the  tongue,  as  if  there  were  vesicles  in  it.)

Tongue  red,  studded  with  very  white  dots,  in  appearance  like
aphthae.

White  tongue.

Tongue  in  the  morning  very  white,  in  the  afternoon  red  and
clean.

Tongue  furred.

165.  In  the  morning  very  dry  tongue.

In  the  morning  very  slimy  mouth.

Every  morning  a salt  slime  which  adheres  to  the  tongue.

In  the  morning  very  dry  in  the  throat,  and  thereafter  a very  salt
taste  in  the  mouth  (which  goes  off  after  eating).

At  night  dryness  in  the  throat,  and  on  awaking  much  slime  on
the  tongue.

170.  Dryness  in  the  throat:  the  tongue  adheres  to  the  palate,  and
it  is  moist  but  covered  with  frothy  slime  (aft.  6 d.).

After  eating  very  dry  in  the  mouth.

A dryness  in  the  mouth  and  a scraping  in  the  throat,  as  if  the
food  would  not  go  down.

Aridity  in  the  throat.

A great  dryness  in  the  palate,  with  thirst ; she  must  drink  a great
deal.

175.  Dryness  in  the  oesophagus.

In  the  evening  a burning  in  the  oesophagus  and  heat  on  the
tongue.

In  the  morning  burning  in  the  mouth,  without  thirst.

At  night  much  heat  in  the  mouth,  and  much  thirst.

The  uvula  fallen  down.

180.  Sore  throat,  as  from  elongation  of  the  uvula,  with  feeling  when
swallowing  as  though  she  swallowed  a piece  of  flesh.

Sore  throat : during  empty  deglutition  as  though  she  swallowed
down  a piece  of  flesh.

In  the  throat  sensation  as  if  inwardly  swollen,  and  shooting  in  it
when  she  eats  ; also  outwardly  at  the  angles  of  the  lower  jaw  she  feels
a swelling  of  the  neck.

Painful  swelling  of  the  front  of  the  neck.  \Fr.  H — n.]

In  the  middle  of  the  oesophagus  sensation  of  spasmodic  contrac-
tion ; the  food  meets  with  an  obstacle  when  swallowed.

185.  Pressive  pain  in  the  throat  when  swallowing,  as  from  swelling  of
the  palate.

Pressive  pain  in  the  throat,  as  from  a plug,  when  swallowing  and
when  not.

By  fits  a pressure  in  the  oesophagus  posteriorly  (just  as  though  it
were  in  the  nape),  felt  even  when  breathing,  all  through  the  night
until  towards  morning.

A burning  up  the  oesophagus,  with  sour  eructation.

[mi,.]


SULPHUR.


617


195.


200.


205.


Blood  in  the  saliva.

190.  Expectoration  of  mucus  without  cough.

Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  (sour  and  bitter).

In  the  morning  on  waking  great  sweetness  in  the  mouth  with
much  mucus.

In  the  morning  pappy  taste  in  the  mouth.

Insipidity  in  the  mouth.

Insipidity  in  the  mouth  with  anorexia  (aft.  2 h.).

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth  after  a meal.

In  the  morning  on  rising  bad  smell  from  the  mouth.

Contractive  sensation  in  the  mouth.

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  ill  humour,  and  confusion  of  the  head.
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  on  awaking  in  the  morning.

Bitter  taste  in  the  morning,  which  goes  off  by  eating.  [Fr.

H — n.~\

The  taste  in  the  mouth  is  hitter,  though  food  is  relished.
(Soon  after  eating  she  has  a bitter  taste.)

All  food,  e.g.  bread,  tastes  bitter.

Tongue  very  furred  ; everything  tastes  bitter.

Taste  of  all  food  too  salt.

What  he  eats  has  no  taste,  like  rotten  wood.

Food  has  no  taste  : everything  tastes  like  straw.  [ Fr . H — «.]
Food  smelt  to  him  like  lime,  but  tasted  well.

210.  The  food  at  dinner  smells  putrid,  but  tastes  well.

Complete  anorexia;  he  has  an  inclination  for  sour  things
only.

Complete  anorexia  ; inclination  for  sour  things  only.  [Fr.H — «.]
Complete  anorexia  as  though  quite  constricted  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis.

Aversion  to  butcher’s  meat ; she  becomes  inclined  to  vomit
after  eating  it.

215.  He  has  some  appetite  but  as  soon  as  he  sees  food  his  appetite
goes  away,  and  he  feels  as  if  full  in  the  abdomen  \ on  commencing
to  eat  he  feels  repugnance.

Inordinate  hunger.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Inordinate  appetite.  [Fr.  H — «.]

From  eating  but  little,  immediately  full  in  the  belly  as  if  over-
loaded, and  the  breathing  becomes  tight.

After  eating  he  feels  as  if  the  top  of  the  oesophagus  were  tightly
closed.

220..  After  eating  pressure  in  the  stomach.

After  eating,  loud,  painless  grumbling  in  the  abdomen.

Especially  after  eating,  troublesome  stuffed  coryza,  making  the
head  dull.

After  eating  burning  in  the  hands.

After  eating  shivering  and  cold  feeling.

After  a meal  (and  in  the  morning)  chilliness.

After  eating  chilliness  in  the  abdomen.

Constant  intense  thirst  for  beer,  worst  an  hour  after  eating.

Great  thirst,  without  heat ; what  he  drinks  tastes  well,  but


225,


6i8


SULPHUR.


does  not  allay  the  thirst,  seems  also  to  oppress  the  stomach  (aft.
2 h.).

Thirst  (immediately)  for  several  hours.  [JVth7\

230.  Uncommon  thirst  for  beer.  \_Fr.  H — n.]

Very  great  thirst  by  day.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Complete  loss  of  appetite,  but  constant  thirst.

A small  quantity  of  beer  easily  causes  him  ebullition  of  blood.

From  drinking  milk,  immediately  sour  taste  like  vinegar  in  the
mouth.

235.  Milk  does  not  agree,  causes  violent  eructation  and  vomiting  of
mucus.

Drinking  milk  makes  bitter  scraping  eructation.

Food  is  eructated  bitter  and  scraping  in  the  throat.

Scraping  eructation  after  drinking  small  beer.

Eructation  like  rotten  eggs,  with  nausea.

240.  Sour  eructation  several  times  in  the  day  and  pressure  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis.

Sour  eructation,  several  times  a day.  \_Fr,  H — ».]

In  the  morning  sweetish  eructation.

Eructation  with  the  taste  of  food.

Every  morning  empty  eructation.

245.  Baulked  eructation  on  going  to  sleep.

Belching  up  of  a portion  of  the  food  that  had  been  eaten  (break-
fast)  (aft.  35  h.).

Undigested  food  is  belched  up  again  from  the  stomach  into  the
mouth.

All  day  long  heartburn.

In  the  morning  feeling  of  heartburn  in  the  front  of  the  chest  ;
burning  and  crawling.

250.  In  the  evening  water  accumulated  in  the  mouth  ; he  must  let
much  water  run  out  of  the  mouth  (waterbrash),  and  then  he  could
not  speak ; then  vomiting  of  the  food  eaten  seven  hours  previously.

Waterbrash  twice  a day  ; twisting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  she
gets  sick  and  retches,  and  much  water  runs  out  of  her  mouth  that
comes  from  below  upwards.

Two  hours  after  eating  he  has  eructation,  water  runs  out  of  his
mouth  ; he  must  vomit  his  food,  with  great  nausea,  during  which  he
shivers.

At  night  a nausea  and  twisting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (as  if  going
to  have  water  brash).

Nausea  in  the  mouth  with  collection  of  saliva,  after  breakfast.

255.  Every  morning  nausea.

He  became  sick  and  at  first  he  eructates  mucus,  afterwards  bitter
scraping  eructation.

In  the  afternoon  nausea  and  bitter  vomiting.

Transient  but  frequent  inclination  to  vomit  during  the  day.

In  the  morning  inclination  to  vomit,  retching,  vomiting
of  mucus.

260.  (He  vomits  his  breakfast,  with  trembling  of  hands  and  feet.)

He  vomits  acid.


SULPHUR.  619

Vomiting.  [Aug.  Fr.  Walther,1  Provr.  de  Sulph.  et  Marte ,
Lips.,  1743,  P.  5-]

Vomiting  with  profuse  perspiration  (aft.  24  h.).  [Fr.  H — n .]

At  noon,  before  eating,  a cramp-like  contraction  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis,  which  takes  away  the  breath.

265.  In  the  evening  a tension  in  the  chest  and  stomach  to  the  back  ;
he  felt  as  if  he  had  eaten  too  much  ; in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  there
was  pain  on  touching  and  pressing  on  it.

On  taking  a full  breath  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

When  standing  (in  the  morning)  shooting  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

(Intolerable  pressure  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  upper  part  of
the  abdomen,  in  fits,  chiefly  in  the  morning,  somewhat  relieved  by
the  pressure  of  the  hand,  for  several  days)  (aft  6 d.).

Pressure  under  the  stomach,  very  severe  when  lying.

270.  Pressure  under  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [Fr.  H — «.]

A pressive  pain  in  the  stomach  with  some  anxiety  (aft.  3 h.).

(Clawing  feeling  in  the  stomach  up  into  the  throat.)

Full  feeling  of  the  stomach,  as  though  it  were  blown  out  and
yet  it  is  not  swollen.

Feeling  in  the  stomach,  as  though  it  were  quite  full  (spongy).

275.  At  night,  for  several  hours,  violent  spasm  in  the  stomach.

In  the  morning  on  awaking  clutching  in  the  stomach  for  a short
time.

Feeling  of  heat,  also  of  hacking,  in  the  gastric  region  when
sitting  still.

Burning  in  the  stomach  and  afterwards  also  in  the  abdomen,
chiefly  when  walking  and  standing.

Burning  in  the  stomach,  several  times  a day.

280.  Burning,  cutting  and  twisting  in  the  stomach.  [Ardoynus,2  De
Venen .,  Lib.  ii,  cap.  15.]

Cool  feeling  in  the  stomach.

The  region  of  the  stomach  is  cold  outwardly  to  the  touch.

The  stomach  and  hepatic  regions  are  painful  to  the  touch.

Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen,  just  below  the  chest,  as  if
all  there  would  get  loose  and  as  if  congested  with  blood,  only  when
moving  and  breathing.

285.  At  night  pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  internally  bruised  and  con-
gested with  blood.

A painfulness  and  over-sensitiveness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all
inside  it  were  raw,  or  as  if  she  had  just  been  delivered  of  a child,  at
the  same  time  something  seemed  to  move  in  it  (also  as  if  there  were
occasional  sudden  shootings  in  it  darting  thence  into  the  whole  head).

Pain  in  the  abdomen  as  if  all  were  raw  inside  and  so  over-sensi-
tive as  though  she  had  just  had  a child.  [Fr.  H — «.]


1 Not  accessible.

2 Statement. — The  original  from  which  this  symptom  is  taken  runs  thus  : — “ Fortis
calor  in  corpore,  et  dolor  in  hepate,  et  tensio  intestinorum,  et  gravedo  linguae  et
stomachi,  et  solutio  plurima  ventris.”


620


SULPHUR.


Cutting  in  the  upper  abdomen  just  as  if  it  were  in  the  chest.

Violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen  for  instants.

290.  In  the  evening  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  and  such  weariness  on
going  upstairs  as  if  the  catamenia  were  coming  on.

In  the  morning  in  bed,  cutting  in  the  abdomen  (aft,  3 d.).

In  the  hypogastrium  pain  like  a cutting  when  she  strains  at  stool
or  presses  on  the  abdomen,  or  bends  backwards  ; not  during  ordinary
sitting.

Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  belly  on  taking  a deep  breath  and
walking  in  the  open  air.

Sudden  shooting  in  the  abdomen  which  goes  through  the  whole
body.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

295.  Needle-pricks  in  the  small  intestines  in  the  upper  part  of  the
abdomen,  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  [TVth.'\

Burning  shooting  pain  on  a small  spot  near  the  navel,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour.

Stitches  and  violent  burning  deep  in  the  hypogastrium  (with  a
spasmodic  pain  in  the  right  lower  extremity).

A heat  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.

First  anguish  in  the  abdomen,  and  as  this  went  off,  a feeling  of
weakness  in  the  feet  to  above  the  ankles,  like  an  inward  trembling.

300.  Tensive  pressed  feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen,  especially  beneath
the  short  ribs,  with  anxious  hypochondriacal  humour  some  hours
after  dinner  (aft.  4 d.).

Tensive  and  burning  pain  in  the  hepatic  region.

In  the  hepatic  region  transient  stitches  from  within  outwards.

Pressure  under  the  right  ribs  as  if  in  the  liver.

Pressure  in  the  liver  wakes  him  up  at  night,  with  yellowness  of
the  white  of  the  eye.

305.  After  eating  full  and  heavy  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  overloaded  with
food.

Abdomen  full  after  eating  but  little.

Distension  of  the  abdomen,  frequently.

Distension  and  hardness  of  the  abdomen,  especially  in  the
evening.

Tension  in  the  abdomen.

310.  Tension  in  the  abdomen  as  from  displaced  flatulence.

In  the  morning  on  awaking,  in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen  pain,
as  from  displaced  flatulence,  which  was  discharged  in  a short,  inter-
rupted manner,  without  relief.

Flatulence  accumulates  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  with  anxiety.

Something  seems  to  move  about  in  the  abdomen.  [ Fr . H — n.]

From  noon  till  evening  tension  and  violent  pinching  in  the
abdomen.

315.  Shooting  pinching  pain  just  above  the  hips  and  on  the  last  false  rib.

After  dinner  itching  about  the  abdomen,  and  when  she  rubbed
herself  this  caused  inwardly  a kind  of  pinching  together  of  the  bowels  ;
there  was  a compression,  especially  in  the  groin,  as  if  towards  the
middle ; when  stooping  and  breathing  deeply  it  was  worst,  better
when  walking.


SULPHUR.


621


After  stool  pinching  in  the  belly.

After  midnight  colic,  painful  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen.

Ulcers  in  the  bowels.1  [Ardoynus,  1.  c.]

320.  Four  stools  in  the  day  with  pinching  in  the  belly  before  and
during  their  evacuation.

Much  flatulence.

Rumbling  in  the  hypogastrium,  as  when  one  has  gone  without
food.

A rattling,  rumbling,  and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen

(immediately).

Rumbling  in  the  belly  as  from  strongly  fermenting
beer,  thereafter  quick  call  to  stool,  which  is  evacuated
with  cutting  in  the  abdomen ; the  first  part  of  the  stool
was  hard,  the  remainder  fluid,  without  mucus,  in  the
morning  and  late  in  the  evening  (aft.  3 h.).  \TFth.]

325.  The  abdominal  muscles  are  painful  when  touched  as  if  bruised.

Persistent  pressure  in  the  groin  passing  over  the  whole  pubic
region,  as  though  she  were  tightly  bound  there.

Tearing  (?)  in  the  inguinal  glands  on  both  sides.

Forcing  in  the  region  of  the  inguinal  ring  as  though  a hernia
would  come  through  there.

Before  stool  pain  in  the  bowels.

330.  After  stool  bruised  feeling  in  the  bowels.

After  stool  great  exhaustion.

During  stool  (in  the  evening)  nausea,  very  severe,  as  though  she
must  vomit.

Two  thin  stools  followed  by  stomachache,  in  the  forenoon.

Under  the  impression  that  flatus  is  being  discharged  a thin
pappy  stool  of  a bilious  appearance  comes  away  quickly  and  involun-
tarily.

335.  Frequent  pappy  stool  with  cutting  in  the  belly.  [Wth.~\

The  stool  passes  quickly  and  almost  involuntarily ; he  cannot
get  out  of  bed  in  time.  [Fr.  H — ».]

Diarrhoea  (aft.  48  h.)  for  four  days.

Diarrhoea  six  times,  causing  fainting,  first  with  heat  and  warm
perspiration,  then  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  feet  and
white  tongue.

Soft  half-liquid  stool,  frequently.

340.  Three  times  in  the  day  stool  with  mucus.

Stool  very  slimy.

Lumpy  stool  mixed  with  mucus.

Stool  in  lumps,  but  not  hard.

Occasional  constipation.

345.  Constipation  for  two  days,  after  which,  without  pain  in  the  belly,
one  stool,  which  passed  unawares.  \_Fr.  H — n .]

Stool  insufficient  and  too  scanty.

Frequent  ineffectual  urging  to  stool.

Tenesmus.  [Walther,  1.  c.]


1 Put  forward  hypothetically  only  by  Ardoynus.


622


SULPHUR.


He  has  sudden  call  to  stool,  and  yet  he  must  strain  much  before
anything  comes  away,  although  the  stool  is  soft  and  normal.

350.  Hard  stool  with  burning  pain  in  the  rectum  and  anus  (aft.  24  h.).

After  soft  stool  aching  pain  in  the  rectum,  as  after  a hard  stool.

Stool,  and  thereafter  much  pressing  (tenesmus),  for  an  hour;
then  she  could  not  sit  for  pain  at  the  anus.

At  night  constant  urging  to  stool ; she  must  get  out  of  bed  ten
times ; she  could  neither  lie  nor  sit  on  account  of  a shooting  and  a
kind  of  sore  pain  at  the  anus  ; it  felt  as  if  she  had  forced  all  out,  and
she  had  pain  as  if  excoriated  and  like  needle-pricks  in  the  anus,
especially  when  she  drew  it  in.

After  a difficult,  not  hard  stool,  such  violent  pricking  like  needles
from  the  anus  up  the  rectum,  that  she  almost  lost  consciousness
owing  to  the  pain  ; thereafter  chilliness  and  exhaustion.

355*  Severe  shooting  in  the  rectum,  also  when  not  at  stool

(which  takes  away  the  breath).

Good  stool  accompanied  by  cutting  in  the  rectum.

Throbbing  pain  in  the  rectum  after  stool,  all  day.

Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  during  stool.

After  a good  stool  piles  which  exude.

360.  A pressing  fulness  in  the  rectum.

Rumbling  in  the  rectum.

In  the  evening,  when  sitting,  a creeping  and  smarting  in  the
rectum  as  from  worms.

Itching  in  the  rectum.

When  lying  strangling  sore  pain  in  the  rectum.

365.  Sore  pain  between  the  nates.

After  stool  contractive  pain  in  the  anus.

Contractive  sensation  in  the  perinaeum.

Dark  brown  urine.

The  urine  becomes  clouded  after  some  hours.

370,  Reddish  urinary  sediment.

Very  foetid  urine.

Urine  quite  like  water  (aft.  2 h.),  and  very  frequent  micturition.

He  must  rise  after  midnight  to  pass  water,  and  does  so  very
copiously.

He  must  get  out  of  bed  twice  during  the  night  to  make  water.

375.  At  night  great  urging  to  urinate.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  which  he  can  hardly  resist  for  a
moment.

Frequent,  quick  call  to  urinate  : she  must  often  make  water  in
quick  succession.

Often  quick  urging  to  urinate.

Feeling  in  the  urethra  as  if  he  must  be  always  passing  water.

380.  Violent  urging  to  urinate  ; as  soon  as  this  occurs  he  must  go  and
make  water,  otherwise  it  would  come  away  involuntarily.

When  he  passes  water  it  comes  away  with  great  force.

Frequent  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  6 d.).

Constant  desire  to  pass  water,  but  little  comes  away  each  time.

(Interrupted  stream  of  urine.)


SULPHUR.


623


385.  Much  thinner  stream  of  urine.

She  has  frequent  urging  to  urinate,  each  time  preceded  by  cutting
in  the  hypogastrium.

Before  urinating  cutting  in  the  abdomen.

Hard  pressure  on  the  bladder.

At  the  end  of  the  act  of  making  water  and  afterwards  a cutting
in  the  urethra,  as  if  the  urine  were  acrid  and  like  corrosive  lye.

390.  During  the  passage  of  the  urine  burning  in  the  forepart  of  the
urethra.

Burning  anteriorly  in  and  on  the  urethra  when  not  urinating.

Burning  in  the  urethra.

Itching  in  the  middle  of  the  urethra.

Stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra.

395.  Cutting  in  the  urethra,  before  and  during  stool.  \JVth.\

Pains  in  the  urethra,  as  at  the  commencement  of  a gonorrhoea.

Redness  and  inflammation  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

Stitches  in  the  penis.

In  the  morning  when  urinating  shooting  in  the  penis,  especially
in  the  glans,  as  though  the  urethra  were  bored  through  ; the  urine
dribbled  away  only  at  the  commencement,  but  afterwards  there  was
complete  retention  of  it.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

400.  Prepuce  swollen  and  red.

Itching  on  the  glans  penis.

(Gians  and  prepuce  icy  cold.)

(Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  scrotum.)

Aching  and  tension  in  the  testicles  and  spermatic  cords.

405.  A vibration  in  the  testicles  and  genitals.

(A  resistance  of  the  genitals  to  complete  ejaculation  of  the
semen.)

Impotence  in  the  male,  even  during  amorous  fancies  (the  first
16  h.).

Increased  sexual  power  (aft.  56  h,).

In  the  morning  after  waking  the  greatest  voluptuous  excitement
in  the  internal  sexual  organs,  at  first  with  strong,  at  last  with  weak
erection,  which  lasted  an  hour  and  a half,  and  at  the  same  time  passed
into  a rather  burning  pain,  which  was  only  gradually  allayed  after  the
emission  of  semen  (aft.  24  h.).

410.  Pollution  with  a burning  pain  in  the  urethra.

During  the  midday  siesta,  when  sitting,  seminal  emission  in  a
man  seventy  years  of  age,  who  had  not  had  anything  of  the  sort  for
twenty  years  (aft.  5 h.).

Seminal  polutions  the  first  nights.

Weak  feeling  in  the  female  genitals.

Violent  itching  on  the  clitoris.  *

415.  More  profuse  discharge  of  the  catamenia,  which  smelt  sour.

The  catamenia  which  were  in  full  flow  stopped  immediately
(after  they  had  lasted  only  two  and  a half  days).

Retards  the  menses  three  days  beyond  the  proper  time.

Irregularity  of  the  menstrual  flux.  [Lange,  Domest.  Brumv
p.  291.]


624  SULPHUR.

(Very  severe  leucorrhcea.)

420.  rrequent  sneezing.

Violent  sneezing  for  several  days.

Coryza  (aft.  14  d.).

Severe  coryza  (aft.  5,  17  d.).

Fluent  coryza  and  also  bloody  mucus  on  blowing  the  nose.

425.  Great  stoppage  of  the  nose  for  several  days  and  clots  of  blood  are
sometimes  blown  from  the  nose.

Coryza,  catarrh  and  cough,  with  chilliness.

Severe  coryza  with  rawness  on  the  chest  and  cough  with  much
expectoration.

Roughness  in  the  throat.

Very  rough  throat  (aft.  16  d.).

430.  Coldness  in  the  throat  during  inspiration.

Hoarseness  in  the  morning.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

On  the  chest  (in  the  trachea)  there  is  always  mucus  ; hacking
cough.

At  every  breath  there  is  irritation  to  cough  in  two  or  three
impulses,  worse  in  the  afternoon.

On  going  to  sleep  much  cough,  with  heat  of  head  and  face  and
cold  hands.

435.  Dry  cough  in  bed  in  the  evening  for  a long  time  before  she  goes
to  sleep,  and  more  severe  than  during  the  day.

Dry  cough  wakes  him  at  night.

Cough.  \_Hufel.  Journ.  d.  pr.  A.J-  iii,  p.  773 .]

Cough  at  night  not  by  day.

Cough  causes  headache,  as  if  beaten  and  lacerated.

440.  (Expectoration  from  the  chest  of  the  taste  of  old  catarrh.)

Tightness  of  the  chest.

After  a walk  tightness  of  chest,  hence  he  must  often  take  a deep
breath,  until  evening  (aft.  28  h.).

Shortness  of  breath  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

A pressing  sensation  on  the  chest,  that  hinders  breathing.

445.  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  aching  oppression  and  tightness  in
the  whole  body  but  mostly  about  the  chest,  as  if  outwardly,  with
anxiety  j after  lying  down  he  perspired  and  then  he  felt  quite
relieved.

By  day  frequently  choking  and  stoppage  of  the  breath  amounting
to  suffocation  (aft.  14  d.).

On  turning  round  on  the  left  side  at  night  in  bed  sudden  loss  of
breath  which  goes  off  on  sitting  up.

Her  breath  was  often  stopped  during  sleep,  so  that  those  about
her  must  wake  her  up  to  prevent  her  being  suffocated.

He  is  like  to  be  suffocated  at  night  (about  1 a.m.)  in  sleep,  and
yet  he  feels  no  pain  (aft.  some  h.).

450.  Scarcely  had  she  fallen  asleep  at  night  when  the  breath  was  gone  ;
she  was  like  to  be  suffocated,  started  up  with  a loud  cry  and  could  not


1 Statement.


SULPHUR.


625

get  her  breath  again  ; towards  morning  severe  palpitation  of  the
heart,  followed  by  exhausting  perspiration  (aft.  13  d.).

Excessive  tightness  of  the  chest,  twitchings,  and  death  within
four  days.1  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  § 10.]

As  if  exhausted  in  the  chest ; she  could  only  fetch  her  breath
with  difficulty.

Tight  in  the  chest  as  if  something  had  grown  on  there.

The  whole  chest  as  if  stretched.

455.  Anxiety  in  the  chest.  ^

On  stooping  the  breathing  is  oppressed.

Very  heavy  in  the  chest.

Sometimes  violent  spasm  in  the  chest.

A pressure  across  the  middle  of  the  chest,  as  from  having  swallowed
too  large  a morsel.

460.  In  the  morning  in  bed  an  ever-increasing  pressure  on  the  chest  \
he  must  get  up  and  then  it  went  off.

Tension  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and  shoulder.

At  night,  when  lying  on  the  left  side,  on  the  slightest  movement
stitch  in  the  cardiac  region  or  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest.

Violent  stitches,  which  commenced  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,
and  went  through  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  stomach.

Some  stitches  in  the  chest  through  to  the  back  (aft.  16  h.).

465.  Stitches  in  the  back  at  every  breath  (aft.  24  h.).

Stitches  in  the  dorsal  muscles  and  chest.

In  the  morning  on  waking  the  chest  is  as  if  heated.

In  the  morning  on  waking  burning  in  the  throat  and  hot  breath.

Burning  in  the  chest  and  great  heat  in  the  face.

470.  Cold  feeling  in  the  chest,  a kind  of  Chilly  tension.

In  the  region  of  the  heart  a strange  movement.

Crackling  throbbing  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting
and  lying,  which  ceases  on  holding  the  breath.

In  the  evening  when  going  to  sleep  quick  and  strong  palpitation
of  the  heart.

Palpitation  of  the  heart  without  anxiety,  almost  without  cause,
e.g.  when  lying  down  for  the  midday  siesta.

475.  Anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Great  rush  of  blood  to  the  heart.

Wakes  in  the  morning  with  rush  of  blood  to  the  chest.

A strong  ebullition  of  blood  to  the  chest.

Violent  ebullition  of  blood  in  the  chest,  like  a boiling,  during
which  he  became  qualmish  almost  to  fainting,  with  a trembling  in
the  right  arm.

480.  Pain  in  the  chest  as  if  sprained,  with  oppression.

Frequent  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  chest,  as  though  he  had
fallen  on  it.

The  chest  is  painful  on  moving  the  arms.

The  right  ribs  are  painful,  especially  when  touched.

Shooting  in  the  sternum  per  se , and  still  worse  when  touched.


VOL.  11.


1 From  free  drinking  of  sulphur  in  wine.


40


62  6


SULPHUR.


485.  Pain  in  the  sternum.

(Twitching  in  one  of  the  breasts,  which  swelled  as  though  milk
would  come  into  it.)

Pain  in  the  sacrum.  \_Fr.  H — ».]

(Horrible  pains  in  the  sacrum  on  stooping  (not  when  lying),  like
a tension,  as  if  all  were  too  short ; the  pains  went  over  the  abdomen
into  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  knee.)

A hard  pressure  in  the  sacrum  alleviated  by  walking.

490.  Pressure  in  the  sacrum  which  went  off  on  walking  and  returned
when  sitting.

Pain  over  the  sacrum.

Pain  Over  the  sacrum  when  walking,  not  when  sitting.

Sudden  pain  in  the  sacrum  and  lower  muscles  of  the  back,  as  if
sprained.

On  making  a false  step  pain  in  the  back  as  if  sprained.

495.  In  the  left  pelvic  region  and  betwixt  the  scapulae  when  at  rest  as
if  sprained,  but  on  the  slightest  movement  intolerable  painful  jerks.

Dorsal  and  sacral  pains  as  if  beaten.

In  the  back  a spot  painful  as  if  bruised.

Pain  in  the  back  when  stooping.

When  stooping  a drawing  up  the  spine.

500.  In  the  morning  heaviness  in  the  back,  as  if  he  had  lain  in  a
wrong  position,  and  weariness  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough.

In  the  back  and  sides  stiff  as  if  he  had  got  a chill.

Stiffness,  sometimes  in  the  back  sometimes  in  the  hip,  painful
when  turning  in  bed  ; he  must  hold  his  breath  at  the  time.

Stiffness  in  the  back  after  sitting.

On  sitting  for  some  time  stiffness  in  the  back,  which  is  relieved
by  walking.

505.  A hot  flush  down  the  back.

Burning  and  smarting  on  the  back.

Burning  pain  betwixt  the  scapulas.

Burning  betwixt  the  scapulae.

Pain  betwixt  the  scapulae  ; when  lying  and  moving,  tension.

510.  Tension  betwixt  the  scapulae  and  on  one  side  of  the  neck.

The  right  scapula  is  painful  as  if  sprained,  on  moving  the  arm.

In  the  nape,  close  to  the  hair  of  the  head,  a gland  swollen  and
inflamed,  with  itchy  sensation.

Tearing,  originating  in  the  shoulder-joint  and  spreading  down  the
humerus.

Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left  shoulder.

515.  Neuralgic  pain  in  the  shoulder.

(Pressure  on  the  shoulder,  like  a weight,  when  walking  in  the
open  air.)

In  the  right  shoulder  pain  on  breathing.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

The  shoulder-joint  pains  as  if  dislocated,  especially  when  lying  at
night.

Swollen  axillary  glands.

520.  A swelling  of  the  axillary  glands  which  proceeds  to  suppuration.

Sweat  in  the  axillae.


SULPHUR.  627

Stitches  from  the  shoulder-joint  down  into  the  arm  when  lying
on  it  and  at  the  same  time  inspiring  and  expiring.

A twitching  aching  in  the  deltoid  muscle  (aft.  2,  3 h.).  \JVth.'\

(Bruised  pain  of  the  arms.)

525.  On  the  upper  and  fore-arms  after  washing  with  soap  and  water
red  spots,  which  caused  burning.

Under  the  bend  of  the  elbow  burning  pain,  but  on  being  touched
as  if  numb.

Tearing  in  the  muscles  of  the  arm,  which  does  not  interfere  with
movement.

An  internal  aching  and  drawing  in  the  arm,  less  when  at  rest
than  when  moving,  especially  on  stretching  it  out  or  raising  it.

Cramp  in  the  arms  after  midnight  (aft.  16  h.).

530.  A drawing  and  tearing  in  the  arms  and  hands.

Twitching  drawing  pain  (at  night  in  bed)  from  one  joint  of  the
arm  to  another,  but  more  in  the  joints.

Slow,  almost  tearing  jerks  out  of  the  shoulder-  or  elbow-joint,
down  through  the  corresponding  limb ; a pain  of  a gouty  character,
most  acute  in  the  joint  itself,  so  that  he  is  forced  to  frown  and  shut
the  eyes.

Slow,  very  painful  drawing,  as  if  in  the  nerves,  from  the  elbow  to
the  wrist  and  back  again.

Tearing  from  the  elbow-joint  up  the  upper  arm  and  down  the
forearm,  also  when  at  rest.

535.  An  aching  in  the  elbow-joint  when  moving.

In  the  bend  of  the  elbow  the  tendons  as  if  tense.

Pustules  in  the  bend  of  the  elbow  with  much  itching.

Itching,  especially  on  the  hands,  in  the  wrist-joints  and  elbow-
joints,  especially  in  the  evening ; some  vesicles  appear  here  and  there
which  contain  a yellowish  serum.

Pain  in  the  wrist-joint  as  if  sprained.

540.  Stiffness  in  the  wrist-joints,  especially  in  the  morning,  which  goes
off  during  the  day.

Pain  in  the  wrist-joints,  like  tearing.

Very  painful  stitches  outwards  through  and  through  the  wrist-
joint.

Itching  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.

Burning  in  the  hands.

545.  Sweaty  hands.

Swollen  blood-vessels  on  the  hands.

Frequent  swelling  of  the  hands.

Chapped  skin  of  the  hands.

The  skin  on  the  hand  bursts  like  chaps  and  cuts,  especially  on
the  joints  ; the  chaps  are  painful  as  if  excoriated.

550.  Almost  painless  chapping  of  the  skin  on  the  hands,  especially
where  the  fingers  join  the  metacarpus.  [Fr,  H — «.]

Creeping  in  the  left  hand.

After  immersing  the  hands  in  cold  or  warm  water  the  whole
hand  immediately  goes  to  sleep,  with  formication.

In  the  morning  trembling  in  the  right  hand.


628


SULPHUR.


Involuntary  grasping  with  the  hands,  mostly  in  the  afternoon.
[Fr.  H—n.]

555.  Tearing  in  the  knuckles  of  the  hand.

Drawing,  alternating  with  stitches,  on  the  hand.

On  the  back  of  the  hand  a sudden  burning  stitch.

In  the  balls  of  the  fingers  a burning  (in  the  forenoon).

On  the  back  of  the  middle  finger  a persistent  burning  tearing
stitch.

560.  In  the  left  middle  finger  a burning  jerk.

Involuntary  twitching  of  the  fingers.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

Tearing  in  the  fingers.

On  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger,  every  five  minutes,  a pain  com-
pounded of  pinching  and  pressure,  which  radiates  up  into  the  arm
when  he  leans  on  the  elbow,  with  chilliness  ; during  the  day  this  pain
changes  into  severe  stitches,  also  with  chilliness,  during  which  all  his
limbs  felt  tired  as  if  after  very  fatiguing  exertion.

Great  swelling  of  the  three  centre  fingers  of  both  hands.  \_Fr.
H — n.~\

5 65.  Dislocation  pain  in  the  proximal  joint  of  the  thumb  (aft.
10  h.).

The  little  finger  is  numb  for  some  time.

Finger  joints  swollen,  stiff,  red,  as  if  frost-bitten  ; formication  in
them.

Chilblains  on  the  fingers.

Coldness  of  the  fingers.  [Fr.  H — n.']

570.  Great  perspiration  between  the  fingers.

Many  hang-nails  on  the  fingers.

Ulceration  of  a finger-nail  (panaritium),  twice  in  succession.

Ulcer  on  a finger  nail  (panaritium).

When  he  has  been  seated  a long  time  the  whole  nates  and  ischia
are  painful.

575.  (A  kind  of  lameness  in  the  thigh,  as  if  in  the  hip  over  the  nates.)

Tensive  pain  in  the  hip-joint  when  walking.

Sudden,  cramp-like,  excessively  painful  jerks  about  the  hip-joint.

Drawing  pain  in  the  left  hip.

The  lower  extremities  thrill,  as  from  weariness.

580.  Restlessness  in  the  lower  extremities,  in  the  evening,  so  that  she
could  not  remain  in  the  room,  until  bedtime,  on  two  evenings.

Dry  heat  in  the  lower  extremities  (aft  11  d.).

The  left  lower  extremity  went  to  sleep  for  an  hour,  on  two
successive  evenings.

Heaviness  in  the  lower  extremities  and  tension  in  the  knees  and
thighs,  more  at  night  than  during  the  day.

In  bed,  in  the  morning  and  evening,  drawing  pain  in  the  lower
extremities.

585.  In  the  morning  in  bed  heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  lower
extremities,  which  went  off  immediately  after  rising.

Lower  extremities  as  if  prostrated  by  fatigue.

After  a short  walk  exhaustion  and  heaviness  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities.


SULPHUR.


629


Crawling  itching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh.  \_Fr.  H-nS]
Excoriation  betwixt  the  thighs,  especially  when  walking
in  the  open  air.

590.  Pain  as  if  excoriated  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh,  in  the
evening.

In  the  night  violent  pain  in  the  thigh  as  after  a blow.

In  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh  bruised  pain,  also  when  touched.

The  posterior  femoral  muscles  are  painful  when
sitting.

(Thighs  as  if  constricted  by  a ligature.)

595.  Twitching  in  the  thigh  and  leg.

Drawing  pain  in  the  thigh.

Tearing  in  the  knees  to  the  toes  (in  the  forenoon)  ; the  feet  are
so  heavy  she  can  hardly  drag  them  along.

Especially  in  the  forenoon  weakness  in  the  knees  ; after  going
upstairs  there  is  burning  in  the  knee-joints.

Lameness  in  the  knee,  as  if  sprained  when  going  downstairs.

600.  Stiffness  of  the  knees.

The  knees  (in  bed)  are  several  times  spasmodically  flexed  and
again  suddenly  and  involuntarily  extended.  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Pain  in  the  knee,  as  from  stiffness,  when  rising  from  a
seat.

Stiffness  in  the  houghs.

In  the  houghs  pain  as  if  too  short,  when  treading.

605.  The  tendons  of  the  lower  extremities  seem  to  be  too  short,  when
standing.

A violent  cramp-like  pressure  from  the  hough  to  the  ankles,  mostly
when  sitting,  in  the  afternoon,  twice  a day  for  an  hour  at  a time,
with  great  weariness  and  stretching  pain  in  the  head.

On  the  left  patella  a pressure  even  when  sitting,  but  also  when
walking.

An  aching  in  the  knee-joint  when  moving  it.

Blunt-pointed  pressure  on  a very  small  spot  in  the  outermost  point
of  the  knee.

610.  Trembling  in  both  legs,  shooting  and  tearing  and  weariness  from
the  knees  to  the  feet ; when  sitting  more  tearing,  when  walking
shooting  and  tension,  whilst  the  toes  are  icy  cold.

From  the  calves  to  the  toes,  tearing  with  shooting  to  and  fro  (in
the  evening)  ; when  standing  and  when  she  sat  down,  the  feet
twitched  internally ; at  the  same  time  trembling  sensation  through
the  whole  body,  a heaviness  mixed  with  tearing  in  the  whole  back,
chilliness  without  thirst,  with  red  cheeks  without  heat  in  them  ; it
then  came  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  tension  and  contraction  under
the  ribs,  with  oppressed  breathing  and  many  stitches  throughout  the
chest  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

Cramp  in  the  calf,  even  when  walking,  when  the  calf  is  painful  as
though  it  were  too  short.

Stretching,  tensive,  contractive  pain  in  the  calves,  as  though  they
were  sewed  together.

When  going  upstairs  the  calves  are  very  painful.


630


SULPHUR.


615.  (On  the  inner  part  of  the  legs,  near  the  tibiae  (in  the  evening),
when  touched  pain  as  if  bruised,  or  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  from
the  bones.)

Coldness  and  cold-feeling  of  the  legs,  in  the  evening  (aft.  24  h.).

Feet  always  cold  ; she  cannot  get  them  warm  in  bed  in  the
evening.

When  stretching  out  the  foot  tendency  to  cramp  in  the  leg.

Swollen  veins  on  the  lower  extremities,

620.  Varicose  veins  and  blue  spots  about  the  ankles.

Swelling  of  the  foot  in  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  which  goes  off
when  out  of  bed.

Swelling  on  the  ankle  with  dislocation  pain  on  moving.

Pain  like  stretching  about  the  ankle  when  walking.

In  the  left  ankle-joint  pain  as  if  sprained  when  standing  and
walking.

625.  When  treading  the  joint1  knuckled  over  as  if  dislocated.

In  the  ankle-joints  tendency  to  knuckle  over  especially  when
going  downstairs.

In  the  ankle-joint  a burning  nipping  ; the  burning  was  increased
after  rubbing.

At  night  tearing  and  shooting  in  the  diseased  foot.

Shooting  in  the  right  foot.

630.  On  the  tendo  Achillis  severe  stitches  almost  every  five  minutes.

Under  the  left  ankle  shooting  even  when  at  rest,  but  much  more
when  stretching  out  the  foot  and  also  during  the  slightest  movement,
whereby  he  was  hindered  in  walking.

A squeezing  shooting  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  aggravated  by
movement.

On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  suddenly  a burning  stitch.

Shooting  in  the  right  heel,  as  if  a splinter  were  in  it.

635.  Tearing  in  the  right  heel  for  half  an  hour.

In  the  soles  of  the  feet,  in  the  morning  in  bed,  drawing  pain  ; also
in  the  morning  when  treading  severe  pain  in  them.

The  soles  of  the  feet  are  painful  when  treading  and  walking  as
if  festering.

Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  when  treading  after  sitting  for  a
long  time.

In  the  evening  throbbing  in  the  hollow  of  the  sole  with  severe
burning  for  an  hour.

640.  Perspiration  on  the  soles  of  the  feet.

Cold  sweat  on  the  left  sole.

(Ulcerous  vesicles  on  the  left  sole.)

In  the  hollow  of  the  sole  a tension.

In  the  sole  cramp  when  treading,  at  every  step.

645.  In  the  soles  pain  as  if  too  short  when  treading.

Stitches  in  the  soles.

In  the  middle  toes  and  both  big  toes,  pricks.

Often  violent  shooting  in  the  corns.


1 Joint  not  named,  but  evidently  the  ankle-joint,


SULPHUR.


63l


Shooting  burning  in  the  corn,  in  easy  shoes.

650.  The  corns  pain  as  though  pressed  by  tight  shoes.

(Swelling  and  inflammation  and  pain  of  the  left  big  toe.)

Obtuse  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  left  toe.

On  extending  the  feet  cramp  in  the  toes.

When  lying  the  limbs  immediately  go  to  sleep.

655.  The  limbs  are  apt  to  go  to  sleep  when  lying — the  arms,  cervical
muscles,  &c.

An  aching  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  as  though  they
would  go  to  sleep.

Cracking  in  the  knees  and  elbows.

A dragging  in  the  limbs,  almost  like  drawing.

Drawing  pain  in  all  the  limbs*

660,  Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs,  in  the  evening.

Drawing  in  the  knee,  arm,  and  shoulder  for  instants.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  tearing  pain  in  the  back,  knees  and  legs.

In  the  morning,  immediately  after  rising,  bruised  pain  of  the
limbs.

A pinching  in  the  flesh  of  the  body  here  and  there.

665.  In  the  evening  after  getting  warm  in  bed,  a stitch-like  prickling
in  the  skin  of  the  whole  body.

A prickling  on  the  skin  of  the  cheeks,  shoulders,  and  thighs.

Pricking  itching,  especially  when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Burning  sensation  on  the  skin  of  the  whole  body.

A small  cut  wound  commences  to  be  painful,  first  sore,  then
burning ; it  inflames  and  becomes  the  seat  of  throbbing  pain.

670.  On  slightly  rubbing  the  skin  on  the  elbow  it  is  very  painful  for  a
long  time,  as  if  destitute  of  skin  and  rubbed  sore.

Liver  spots  on  the  back  and  chest,  which  itch  in  the  evening.

Cutaneous  eruption.1  \_Hufel.  Journ .,  1.  c.]

Cutaneous  eruption,  burning  and  itching.*

A disagreeable  creeping  itching ; after  scratching  the  part  becomes
painful.

675.  The  itching  spot  after  scratching  is  very  painful  (does  not  burn).

* 673  to  678.  In  these  symptoms — comp.  588,  and  199,  234  in  the  schema  of
Hepar  sulphuris — is  manifested  the  characteristic  itching  eruption  which  sulphur  can
excite,  in  which  is  revealed  an  affection  similar  (homoeopathic)  to,  but  not  identical
with,  the  itch.  And  homoeopathy  requires  medicines  that  produce  diseases  only
similar  to  those  they  should  be  administered  for  in  order  to  cure  them.  For  as  it
employs  medicines  for  curative  purposes  and  not  the  exciting  causes  of  the  diseases,
consequently  is  not  so  foolish  as  to  employ  chancre  virus  for  the  cure  of  venereal
diseases,  or  the  itch  miasm  in  the  treatment  of  the  itch  disease,  so  it  can  certainly
never  occur  to  homoeopathy  to  expect  anything  else  from  its  medicines,  save  the
power  of  producing  only  a similar  morbid  affection.  And  yet  the  stupid  spirit  of
contradiction  will  try  to  delude  the  laity  and  prejudice  them  against  homoeopathy,  and
since  it  has  no  honest  objection  to  adduce  it  makes  use  of  a dishonest  one,  in  fact,  a
falsehood.  But  homoeopathy  has  never  pretended  to  produce  an  identical  disease  with
medicines,  but  has  airways  enjoined  the  selection  of  a medicine  for  the  cure  that  produces
only  a similar  affection.  And  yet  this  mendacious  reproach  is  reiterated — whether
from  stupidity  and  ignorance  of  the  doctrine  or  from  malice  I shall  leave  others  to


1 From  local  application.


632


SULPHUR.


Itching  burning  on  various  parts ; after  scratching  it  pained  as  if
sore,  but  did  not  burn.

When  he  has  scratched  the  itching  part  it  bleeds  and  smarts,  but
does  not  burn.

Itching  worst  at  night  and  in  the  morning  in  bed  after  waking.

(After  scratching  the  part  becomes  as  if  hot.)

680.  Cutaneous  eruption  such  as  is  apt  to  occur  after  vaccination.

The  skin  cracks  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  open  air.  [ Fr .

H — n. ]

In  the  afternoon  when  wide  awake  he  starts  violently,  and  at  the
same  time  a shudder  goes  through  his  whole  body.

The  body  is  jerked  high  up,  as  in  severe  twitchings.  [Fr.
H — n.]

Violent  starting  on  merely  being  called  by  name.

685.  Single  twitching  of  one  hand  and  one  foot,  in  the  day  time.

Twitching  and  jerking  of  all  the  limbs,  during  which  he  bites  the
teeth  together  and  moans  low,  lasting  eight  minutes ; then  a quarter
of  an  hour’s  slumber ; thereafter  renewed  jerking  and  spasmodic
drawing  in  the  limbs,  after  which  he  is  much  exhausted.  [Fr.  H — n.~\

(Epilepsy  after  a fright  or  after  running  violently.)

The  child  (after  being  washed  with  tepid  water)  hangs  the  head
on  one  side,  and  after  it  is  raised  up,  on  the  other  side ; the  face
and  lips  become  pale,  the  eyes  stare  for  about  two  minutes,  then  she
sneezes,  and  thereafter  closes  her  mouth  and  eyes  firmly,  but  only  for
a moment,  and  some  mucus  runs  from  the  mouth  ; followed  by  calm
sleep  (aft.  3 d.).

Speaking  is  a great  effort  and  excites  her  pains.

690.  Trembling  feeling  in  the  upper  and  lower  extremities.

Great  restlessness  : it  does  not  allow  him  to  sit  long  ; when  lying
he  must  always  move  the  feet.*

Great  ebullition  of  blood,  much  burning  in  the  hands.

Uneasiness  in  the  blood,  with  swollen  veins  on  the  hands.

In  the  afternoon  unsteady  when  walking,  and  trembling  in  the
hands.

695.  Trembling  of  the  limbs,  especially  the  hands.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  great  loss  by  perspiration.

In  the  morning  in  bed  sweat  on  the  face  and  nape,  and  on  getting
up  the  limbs  are  as  if  bruised.

From  morning  till  evening  very  heavy  and  exhausted  in  all  the
limbs.

judge.  Canova’s  statue  of  the  captive  of  St.  Helena  may  be  very  like,  but  it  is  not
Napoleon  ! Do  not  our  stupid  opponents  understand  that  ? Are  they  unable  to
comprehend  the  difference  between  identical  {same)  and  similar?  or  do  they  not
wish  to  comprehend  it  ?

Sulphur  produces  pimples  and  vesicles  very  similar  in  appearance  to  the  itch  of
workers  in  wool,  and  these  are  chiefly  seen  on  the  joints  and  at  night,  but  the  attendant
sensations  exhibit  greater  differences,  for  itch  is  accompanied  by  a kind  of  intolerable
agreeable  creeping  itching  gnawing , as  from  lice,  which  is  indicated  by  the  expression
intolerable  voluptuous  tickling  itching , which,  when  the  finger  is  applied  for  the  purpose
of  scratching,  ceases  to  itch  and  commences  to  burn , and  after  scratching  continues  to
burn  on  the  spot.

* See  also  580.


SULPHUR.


63  3


Lassitude  all  day.

700.  Weariness  in  all  the  limbs.

Always  tired  and  exhausted.

Weariness  as  if  after  an  illness.

Weariness  in  the  feet.

Weariness  that  goes  off  when  walking.

705.  When  walking  in  the  open  air  at  first  the  feet  are  heavy,  they
become  lighter  on  continuing  to  walk.

Walking  is  a trouble  to  her,  her  feet  will  not  bear  her  ; she  feels
as  though  she  had  a weight  on  the  feet  (there  is  tension  over  the
chest  when  walking).

In  the  afternoon  exhausted  and  dejected  (aft.  8 d.).

In  the  afternoon  very  exhausted ; he  must  always  be  seated  and
has  no  strength  for  walking.

In  the  evening  before  going  to  sleep  incessant  spasmodic  yawning.
710.  Great,  insuperable  drowsiness  by  day;  when  sitting
by  day  at  her  work  she  cannot  ward  off  sleep.

Great  day-drowsiness  : as  soon  as  he  sits  down  he  falls  asleep.

Drowsiness  in  the  afternoon.

Every  afternoon,  from  2 to  3 o’clock,  very  exhausted  and  sleepy
(then  again  wide  awake).

In  the  evening  very  drowsy  : as  soon  as  the  lights  are  put  on  the
table  she  must  sleep.

715.  Long  sleep:  he  must  make  a great  effort  to  get  up  in  the
morning.

Without  the  least  inclination  to  get  out  of  bed  in  the  morning.

Getting  up  in  the  morning  after  waking  is  difficult  for  him.

Heaviness  in  the  back  and  lower  extremities  on  rising  in  the
morning.

At  nights  she  is  very  sleepy  and  her  eyes  close,  as  if  heavy ; but
she  cannot  go  to  sleep,  though  there  is  nothing  the  matter  with
her.

720.  She  cannot  sleep  for  an  hour  after  going  to  bed  at  night,  but  yet
she  feels  no  ailment.

He  wakes  up  every  hour  at  night,  and  can  only  sleep  for
a couple  of  hours  towards  morning.

Sleepless  and  wide  awake  all  night  (aft.  3 6 h.).

Sleeplessness  as  from  over-excitement  and  restlessness.

Restless  tossing  about  at  night  in  bed.

725.  In  the  evening  excessive  wakefulness,  the  blood  rushed  to  his
head,  and  the  night  was  sleepless.

She  sleeps  restlessly  at  nights  but  without  waking.

Restless  nights : he  wakes  up  every  time  with  a start,
as  if  from  a frightful  dream,  and  after  waking  was  still
occupied  with  anxious  visions  as  if  of  ghosts,  which  he
could  not  immediately  get  rid  of.  [Wth. ]

Starting  up  in  affright  twice  in  the  evening  in  bed  when  going  to
sleep.

In  the  evening  when  going  to  sleep  he  starts  up  in  affright  from
imaginary  noise,  a fright  that  went  through  his  whole  body.


63  4 SULPHUR.

730.  Great  starting  up  when  going  to  sleep.

Starting  up  in  affright  in  the  midday  siesta.

Waking  in  the  morning  with  giddy  confusion  of  the  head.

Wakes  at  night  frequently  from  throbbing  of  the  blood  in  the
head,  then  in  the  chest  also.

At  night  burning  in  the  mouth  with  thirst.

735.  At  night  stomachache  for  an  hour,  relieved  by  eructation.

At  night  stomachache  and  throbbing  pain  in  the  head.

He  snores  every  night.

In  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down,  hacking  cough  for
a whole  hour;  it  made  her  hot;  about  3 a.m.  she  awoke  again  to
cough.

He  wakes  in  the  morning  with  rawness  on  the  chest.

740.  At  night  much  stretching  and  straining.

In  the  evening  in  bed,  for  two  hours,  tickling  formication  in  the
left  upper  and  lower  extremities,  which  compels  him  to  draw  up
these  limbs  frequently.

At  night  he  must  lay  his  lower  extremities  outside  the  bed  clothes,
owing  to  tearing  in  them.

Tossing  about  at  night  in  bed,  with  hot  feet.

She  woke  up  at  night  in  great  anxiety,  with  heat  all  over,  and
her  body  felt  in  a spasmodic  state.

745.  (After  midnight  restless  sleep ; she  dreams  that  she  is  getting  a
fever,  and  wakes  up  in  full  perspiration  with  great  heat,  especially  in
the  face,  so  that  she  cannot  bear  the  bed  clothes  on  her,  with  great
thirst  and  rigor,  which  becomes  worse  on  moving,  so  that  her  teeth
chatter.)

Anxious  dreams  at  night:  dreams  of  fire  coming  from
heaven.

Anxious  dream,  as  if  something  pressed  him  down  (night-
mare).

After  midnight  anxious  dreams,  every  night.

Horrible  and  anxious  dreams,  every  night.

750.  Startling  dreams  : as  if  he  fell  from  a height.

Vexatious  anxious  dreams.

Dreams  full  of  loathing  at  night,  and  on  awaking  nausea.

Many  and  vivid  dreams  at  night,  from  which  she  frequently
woke  up.

Before  falling  asleep,  ridiculous  fancies  in  a half  dreamy  state  ;
she  laughed  aloud  (many  evenings).

755.  Dream- pictures  immediately  after  closing  the  eyes.

Fear  that  he  might  catch  cold  in  the  open  air  ; he  cannot  tell
whether  the  feeling  is  physical  or  mental  (yet  he  was  never  previously
disposed  to  catch  cold,  and  never  dreaded  exposure  to  the  causes  of  a
chill).

Formicating  shudder  over  the  skin,  without  chilliness.

Transient  chilliness  on  chest,  arms  and  back.

Coldness  of  the  nose,  hands  and  feet.

760.  Cold  feeling  through  all  the  limbs,  not  followed  by  heat,  in  the
forenoon.


SULPHUR,  635

In  the  evening  for  an  hour  chilliness  up  the  back  not  followed
by  heat.

Chilliness  with  diarrhoea,  for  some  hours.  [Fr,  H — «.]

Internal  chilliness.

Frequent  internal  chilliness,  without  thirst.

765.  In  the  evening  rigor  and  great  paleness  of  face.

Frequent  febrile  rigor  in  the  evening.

In  the  evening  (from  7 to  8 o’clock)  rigor  with  cold  hands,  with-
out thirst,  and  great  pressure  as  from  a weight  in  the  stomach
afterwards  ordinary  warmth  returns  with  thirst.

In  the  evening,  at  first  shivering,  then  heat  in  the  hands  and  face
with  thirst.

Wakes  at  night  with  febrile  rigor  and  yet  is  warm  to  the  touch  ;
thereafter  some  heat.

770.  Much  cold  feeling  in  the  afternoon  ; she  then  became  warmer,
but  the  feet  remained  cold.

In  the  forenoon  chilly,  in  the  afternoon  feeling  of  heat,  though
she  was  cold  to  the  touch.

In  the  morning,  about  10  o’clock,  chilliness  for  an  hour,  then  quiet
until  3 p.m.,  when  there  ensued  a heat  in  the  head  and  hands  for  two
hours,  with  thirst  for  beer ; repeated  for  several  days.

In  the  evening  (at  half  past  5 o’clock)  chilliness,  then  heat ;
then  again  chilliness  with  some  thirst  until  8 o’clock.

Flush  of  heat  in  the  face  ; thereafter  coldness  and  cold  feeling  in
the  whole  body  ; after  this  weakness  of  the  bones  of  the  lower  ex-
tremities, felt  especially  when  sitting,  as  if  there  were  no  marrow  in
the  bones.

775.  Flush  of  heat  in  the  face  and  febrile  rigor  on  the  body.

In  the  afternoon  febrile  heat  mingled  with  chilliness  and  with
persistent  palpitation  of  the  heart.

Fever  : great  heat  in  the  face  and  feeling  as  if  she  had  just
recovered  from  a severe  illness  ; after  the  heat  some  chilliness  with
much  thirst  (aft.  4 d.).

Fever  : every  forenoon  inward  chilliness,  every  day  stronger,
with  vertigo  as  though  the  head  would  sink  down,  without  thirst,  and
thereafter  such  great  exhaustion  that  he  could  not  walk  upstairs,
with  perspiration  day  and  night  only  on  the  head,  which  was  swollen.

Every  evening  (about  8 o’clock)  chill  for  two  hours  without
heat the  following  night,  however,  when  she  awoke  she  had  heat
without  thirst.

780.  In  the  morning  very  thirsty.

Much  thirst  during  the  day.

Heat  all  day  long  with  much  thirst,  but  not  at  night.

Dry  heat  in  the  morning  in  bed.

Heat  on  waking  in  the  morning,  which  soon  goes  off.

785.  In  the  morning  in  bed  anxious  disagreeable  heat,  with  sweat  and
dryness  in  the  throat  (aft.  3 d.).

Towards  morning  heat  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out.

In  the  morning  during  sleep  perspiration  which  went  off  on
awaking.


636


SULPHUR.


Profuse  perspiration  in  the  morning  only  on  the  parts  subject  to
itching.  \_Wth7\

In  the  morning  sweat  on  the  hands  and  feet.

790.  In  the  evening  before  lying  down  perspiration,  especially  in  the
hands,  and  immediately  after  lying  down  heat  and  difficulty  of  falling
asleep.

In  the  evening  in  bed  some  perspiration.

In  the  evening  anxious  sweat  with  trembling,  followed  by  vomit-
ing ; urging  to  stool  during  the  anxiety  ; thereafter  heaviness  in  the
head  and  weakness  in  the  arms.

Anxiety,  febrile  delirium,  with  great  tightness  of  chest ; he  com-
plained of  burning  in  the  stomach,  vomiting,  twitchings  of  the  whole
body*— death.1  [Morgagni,  1.  c.,  §11.]

Restlessness  and  hurry  (in  the  day)  $ he  could  not  restrain  him-
self.

795.  Great  distraction  ; he  cannot  concentrate  his  attention  upon,  the
matter  before  him  and  does  his  business  awkwardly.

Dilatory,  irresolute.

(He  imagines  he  is  getting  thin.)

Sometimes  disposed  to  weep,  sometimes  to  laugh.

In  the  morning  very  ill-humoured,  cross,  and  lachrymose,
particularly  so  in  the  evening.

800.  Very  peevish,  ill-humoured  ; nothing  is  right  for  her  (aft.  \ h.).

He  is  cross  with  everything,  is  offended  at  every  word  and  takes
everything  in  bad  part ; thinks  he  must  defend  himself  and  gets
angry.

Morose,  gloomy  and  dull  in  the  head  as  on  the  occurrence  of
catarrh.

Ill-humoured  ; she  was  vexed  with  herself.

Ill-humoured  and  captious.

805.  All  day  an  indolent  disposition  of  mind  and  body,  indisposed  to
all  occupation  and  movement  (aft.  7 d.).

He  takes  no  pleasure  in  anything.

In  the  evening  disinclination  for  everything— work,

amusement,  conversation  and  movement ; he  is  very  uncomfort-
able and  yet  knows  not  what  ails  him.

Discontented  with  himself  3 owing  to  inward  dejection  he  does
not  know  how  to  calm  himself,  can  do  nothing  to  please  himself,
obstinate  and  unyielding,  without  knowing  why.

Embittered  humour,  as  though  he  had  been  insulted.

810.  Humour  quarrelsome  and  cross  about  everything.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  she  suddenly  becomes  sad  ; only
vexatious,  anxious,  depressing  thoughts  occur  to  her,  of  which  she
cannot  divest  herself,  which  makes  her  serious  and  peevishly  lachry-
mose.

Very  much  out  of  humour,  with  great  anxiety.

Dejection.

Sad,  without  courage.


1 All  this  occurred  six  months  after  taking  the  sulphur.


SULPHUR.


637


Fumes  of  burning  Sulphur.

(Antidote — electric  shock.)

Stiffness  (painful)  of  the  spine  betwixt  the  scapulae,  during  and
after  movement,  with  pain  as  though  it  were  broken.

Painful  stiffness  in  the  junction  of  the  sacrum  with  the  bones  of
the  pelvis  ; on  moving  there  occurred  very  painful  jerks.


TARAXACUM.1

( Dandelion .)

(The  fresh  expressed  juice  of  the  whole  plant  Leontodon  taraxacum , gathered
when  not  quite  in  full  bloom,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.)

This  plant,  like  many  others,  has  been  wrongfully  administered  in
diseases  in  enormous  quantities,  on  merely  theoretical  grounds,  as  a
remedy  of  universal  every-day  use.

In  all  diseases  which  the  so-called  practical  glance,  which  pretends
to  be  able  to  see  everything,  even  the  inner  processes  of  morbid  nature,
could  make  nothing  of,  as  also  in  all  those  that  would  not  fit  in  with
any  name  in  pathology,  it  was  theoretically  assumed  that  there  were
present  viscid,  inspissated  humours  and  obstructions  of  the  minute  name-
less vessels  in  the  interior  of  the  body  which  nobody  could  see,  in  order
that  the  favourite  dandelion  might  be  prescribed  in  accordance  with  this
fantastical  assumption.  On  account  of  its  milky  juice  it  was  theoreti-
cally assumed  that  it  must  act  like  a soap,  and  as  soap  chemically  dis-
solves all  sorts  of  substances  in  a vessel,  so  dandelion  must  dissolve  in
the  interior  of  the  living  body  whatever  the  practitioner  was  pleased  to
imagine  existed  in  the  diseased  human  system  of  a viscid,  inspissated
and  obstructive  character.

Had  the  pure  powers  of  dandelion  to  effect  changes  in  the  human
health  been  ever  tested,  and  had  it  thus  been  experimentally  ascertained
what  peculiar  morbid  states  it  was  able  characteristically  to  produce,
and  had  then  a pure  therapeutic  trial  been  made  of  this  plant,  adminis-
tered alone , in  any  case  of  disease,  and  it  had  been  found  to  effect  a
rapid  and  permanent  cure,  it  would  have  been  seen  convincingly  on  com-
paring the  totality  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  cured  by  this  remedy
with  the  morbid  symptoms  dandelion  can  produce  in  the  healthy  body,
that  this  plant  can  only  cure  in  virtue  of  its  symptoms  being  similar  to
those  of  the  case  of  disease , and  that  it  could  not  fail  to  cure  it  in  accord-
ance with  the  eternal  homoeopathic  law  of  nature , and  that  for  that  very
reason  it  could  not  be  of  use  in  those  morbid  states  the  like  of  which
dandelion  is  not  able  to  produce.

A knowledge  of  this  fact  would  have  converted  practitioners,  had
they  been  capable  of  being  converted,  from  a belief  in  their  imaginary
indication  of  an  internal,  non-existent,  pathological  obstruction-monster,
which  they  pretended  had  to  be  dissolved.

The  following  pure  pathogenetic  symptoms  of  dandelion,  which
are  far  from  complete,  may  perhaps  help  to  dispel  this  pathologico-


1 From  vol.  v,  and  edit.,  i8a6.


TARAXACUM.


639


therapeutical  self-deception.  But  they  will  do  more,  for  they  will
teach  us  a priori  for  what  morbid  cases  this  vegetable  juice  will  be
and  must  be  a sure  remedy,  and  prevent  us  torturing  patients  for  whom
it  is  unsuitable  (unhomoeopathic)  in  a useless  and  injurious  manner  by
giving  it  in  large  doses,  as  has  hitherto  been  done.

When  this  drug  is  suitable  from  its  homoeopathic  similarity,  we
require  to  give  it  in  the  dose  of  scarcely  a single  drop  of  the  juice  in
order  to  effect  a cure:  The  juice  as  prepared  above  is  much  preferable

to  the  officinal  extract,  which  by  prolonged  stirring  in  a copper  kettle  is
rendered  impure  by  admixture  with  this  metal.

[The  provers  of  this  medicine  are  Franz,  Gutmann,  Kummer,  Langhammer,
Rosazewsky  ; no  symptoms  are  contributed  by  Hahnemann.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited.

The  i st  edit,  has  209,  this  2nd  edit.  264  symptoms.]


TARAXACUM.

Vertigo  on  walking  in  the  open  air,  as  if  intoxicated,  the  head
fell  at  one  time  to  the  left,  at  another  to  the  right  side  (aft.  2J  h.).
[Zr.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  unsteady  step  and  vertigo,  as
though  he  would  fall  forwards  (aft.  10  h.).  [Z,r.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  great  confusion  and  dizziness  of
the  head  ; he  seemed  to  stagger  as  if  giddy.  [Tz.]

Sometimes  contraction  and  whirling  above  the  nose  in  the  fore-
head, like  vertigo,  sometimes  sensation  as  though  the  brain  were
distended  here  and  there,  painless.  [Tz.]

5.  Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  the  brain  were  constricted  by  a soft
pressure  from  all  sides.  [Tz.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  aching  crawling  pain  in  the  fore-
head, which  spreads  out  from  the  centre  of  it,  as  though  there  were
something  alive  in  it  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Lr.~\

A sensation  in  the  head  compounded  of  pressure  and  itching.  \_Gn.~\

Pressure  deep  down  in  the  occiput  and  heaviness
there  (aft.  g\  h.).  [G».]

Heaviness  of  the  head  and  redness  of  the  face.  \_Gn.~\

10.  In  the  sinciput  pressive  pain  out  towards  the  forehead.  [G/z.]

Pressive  stupefying  pain  on  the  forehead,  as  after  a debauch  (aft.
1 h.).  [Lr.]

Aching  pain  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  35  h.).  [G».]

Burning  pressive  pain  in  the  head  going  upwards.  [Gtz.]

Pressive  pain  in  the  head  from  within  outwards  (aft.  2j  h.).  [G«.]
15.  Heaviness  in  the  occiput  which  goes  off  every  time  he  stoops,
and  returns  on  raising  up  and  keeping  the  head  straight,  and  then  it
is  worst.  [G«.]

When  sitting  aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  whole  forehead,  so
that  he  became  unconscious  when  reading  and  did  not  know  where


6\6


TARAXACUM.


he  was,  accompanied  by  nausea  ; he  felt  better  only  in  the  open  air
(aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.\

Constant  pressive  pain  on  the  forehead  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gw.]

Drawing  aching  pain  in  the  temple.  [Lz.]

When  standing  drawing  pressive  pain  on  the  frontal  bone.  [Lz.]
20.  When  sitting  drawing  pain  at  the  left  temple,  which
ceases  when  walking  and  standing  (aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.]

When  walking  tearing  pain  in  the  occiput,  which  goes  off  when
standing  still.  [Lz.]

When  walking  tearing  on  the  occiput  outwardly.  [Lz.]

Shooting  tearing  in  the  occiput  behind  the  right  ear.  [Lz.]
Tearing  stitches  in  rapid  succession  on  the  left  side  of  the  fore-
head. [Lr.]

25.  A persistent  shooting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  for  six
hours.  [Xz.]

When  sifting  needle-pricks  in  the  left  temple,  which
go  off  when  standing  (aft.  i|  h.).  [Lr.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a violent  persistent  stitch  in  the
left  temporal  region,  which  went  off  when  standing  (aft.  38  h.).
[Lr.]

Sharp  stitches  externally  on  the  left  side  of  the  fore-
head, which  are  not  allayed  by  touching  (aft.  13  h.).
[Lr.]

Obtuse  shooting  pressure  on  the  forehead  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gw.]

30.  A pimple  on  the  hairy  scalp  on  the  right  side  above  the  temple,
which  is  painful  when  touched,  as  if  the  part  were  festering  (aft.  15
h.).  [Lr.]

The  anterior  skin  of  the  hairy  scalp  is  tense,  as  though  it  were
tightly  fastened  to  the  crown.  [Xr.]

A pimple  in  the  centre  of  the  hairs  of  the  left  eyebrow  with
pressive  pain  when  touched  (aft.  27  h.).  [Lr.]

Contracted  pupils  (aft.  4 h.).  [Lr.]

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  26  h.).  [Lr.]

35.  In  the  morning  on  waking  the  eyelids  are  stuck  together  with
matter,  for  several  days.  [Xr.]

A kind  of  inflammation  of  the  eyes ; the  eyes  are  intolerant  of
light  and  are  constantly  watering,  with  a pressure  on  the  right  upper
eyelid,  as  if  something  were  there  which  he  in  vain  endeavoured  to
wipe  away.  [Xr.]

Eye-gum,  more  in  the  morning  than  during  the  day.  [Xr.]
Burning  in  the  left  eyeball  (aft.  nj  h.).  [ Gn .]

Violent  burning  in  the  right  eyeball  towards  the  inner  canthus.
[*r.]

40,  Fine  burning  prickling  in  both  left  eyelids  (aft.  J h.).  [Xr.]
Shooting  burning  pain  in  the  left  eyeball  (aft.  20  h.).  [Xr.]

A burning  shooting  in  the  left  eyeball,  towards  the
outer  canthus  (aft.  J h.).  [Xr.]

Sharp  shooting  pain  in  the  right  eye.  [Xr.]

Acute  aching,  as  from  a grain  of  sand  in  the  right  inner  canthus,
with  sensation  as  if  the  eyelids  were  swollen  there.  [Lz.]


TARAXACUM.  641

45.  (In  the  evening  hardness  of  hearing  ; something  seems  to  be
before  the  ears ; he  only  hears  in  a dull  manner.)  [Zz.]

Inward  pressure  in  the  interior  of  the  left  ear.  [Gn.]

Chirping  in  the  left  ear,  as  from  grasshoppers  (aft.  33  h.).  [Zr.]
In  the  meatus  auditorius  externus  tearing,  and  behind  the  ramus
of  the  lower  jaw  sharp  pressure.  [Zz.]

Stitches  behind  the  ear,  with  tearing  down  the  side  of  the  neck.

[**•]

50.  In  the  right  ear  a shooting  from  within  outwards,  which  always
receded  inwards  again.  [Gn.]

Itching  burning  shooting  in  the  right  ear.  [ Gn.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  auricle  (aft.  5 h.).  [Lr.]

A sharp  pressure  in  the  right  cheek  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

An  aching  stitch  in  the  cheek.  [Gn. J
55.  A suppurating  pimple  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  cheek,  with
red  areola,  which  when  touched  has  a gnawing  pain  (aft.  24  h.).

A suppurating  pimple  on  the  angle  of  the  right  ala  nasi  (aft.  8 h.).
[Zr.]

Two  attacks  of  epistaxis  from  the  left  nostril,  at  noon  before
eating  (aft.  30  h.).  [Zr.]

The  upper  lip  cracks  in  the  middle  (aft.  6 h.).  [XV.]

A suppurating  pimple  at  the  right  commissure  of  the  mouth
49  h.).  [Lr.]

60.  Sudden  itching  below  the  chin  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.]

In  the  lower  part  of  the  parotid  gland  and  on  the  cervical
muscles,  and  from  the  sternum  to  the  mastoid  process,  an  acute  pain
on  moving  the  jaw  and  neck.  [XV.]

Twitching  on  the  side  of  the  neck,  inferiorlv  (aft.  15
h.).  [Gn.]

Sharp  boring  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck  from  within
outwards,  for  some  minutes  (immediately).  [Gn.]

Pressive  twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  nape  behind  the  left  ear
(aft.  3|  h.).  [Gn.]

65.  Pricking  in  the  left  side  of  the  nape,  as  from  a rather
blunt  needle,  when  standing,  which  went  off  on  sitting
down  (aft.  1 4 h.j.  [Zr.]

Pressive  shooting  in  the  nape.  [Gn.]

Pressive  pain  like  blows  on  two  incisor  teeth,  more  in  their  crowns*
[Gn.]

Blood  flows  from  the  carious  teeth  on  the  right  side  (which  tastes
sour).  [Kr.]

On  chewing  food  sensation  in  the  teeth  as  if  they  were  set  on
edge  by  sour  fruit  (aft.  37  h.).  [Zr.]

70.  Drawing  pain  in  the  carious  teeth  of  the  right  side,  which
extends  up  the  cheek  to  the  superciliary  arch.  [Kr.]

Burning  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  tongue  (aft.  9 h.).  [Gn.]
White  furred  tongue  (aft.  2J  h.).  [Zr.]

White  fur  on  the  tongue  which  gradually  exfoliates  in  patches
(aft.  ill  h.).  [Zr.]

VOL,  II


41


642


TARAXACUM.


The  tongue  is  covered  with  a white  skin,  with  raw
feeling  in  it,  it  then  exfoliates  in  patches  and  leaves  dark
red,  tender,  very  sensitive  places  (aft.  34  h.).  [Zr.]

75.  In  the  morning  on  waking  a quite  dry  brown  furred  tongue.

[*>.]

Collection  of  saliva  in  the  mouth  and  sensation  as  if
the  larynx  were  compressed  (aft.  31  h.).  [Lr.]

Difficult  deglutition ; a kind  of  pressure  as  from  an  internal
swelling  in  the  throat.  \Gn.'\

Sharp  pressure  on  the  anterior  wall  of  the  oesophagus  and  larynx
when  not  swallowing,  which  excites  cough,  but  goes  off  when  swal-
lowing. [Zz.]

Water  of  a sourish  taste  collects  in  the  mouth.  \_KrJ]

80.  The  mucus  hawked  up  tastes  quite  sour  and  sets  the  teeth  on
edge  (aft.  3,  4 h.).  [Kr.~]

Dryness  and  shooting  in  the  throat.  [Zz.]

Dry  sensation  in  the  fauces  and  a bitter  mucus  there,  which
makes  the  voice  hoarse.  [Zz.]

On  the  tip  of  the  tongue  butter  tastes  repulsively  salty-sour  ; on
the  palate,  however,  it  tastes  as  usual.  [Z>.]

Butcher’s  meat,  but  especially  the  gravy  of  roast  meat,  tastes  quite
sour  when  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  tip  of  his  tongue.  [Xr.]

85.  Before  eating  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  ; but  food  has  a natural
taste.  [Zr.]

A bitter  taste  rises  up  the  oesophagus  into  the  mouth.  [Zz.]
Tobacco-smoke  has  no  taste,  it  causes  burning  in  the  throat,
almost  like  heartburn,  and  takes  away  the  breath  j this  is  removed  by
drinking.  [Xr.]

Bitter  eructation  and  hiccup.  [Zz,]

Empty  eructation,  which  lasted  several  days,  and  came  on  especi-
ally after  drinking  (aft.  \ h.).  [XV.]

90.  Nausea,  accompanied  by  anxiety,  when  sitting,  which  goes  off
when  standing  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Zr.]

Nausea,  as  from  overloading  with  fat  food  ; he  thought  he  must
vomit,  with  aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  forehead — he  only  got
better  in  the  open  air  (aft.  if  h.).  [ Zr.]

Qualmishness  and  nausea  in  the  oesophagus  (aft.  2f  h.).  [Zr.]
After  eating  great  chilliness,  and  especially  after  drinking.  [Zz.]
Painless  movement  and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [X>.]

95.  Rumbling  in  the  umbilical  region,  towards  the  left  side.  [Gn..~\

A quickly  occurring,  persistent  movement  in  the
hypogastrium  as  if  bubbles  were  developed  in  it  which
burst  (aft.  51  h.).  [ZrJ

Tension  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  and  pressure  on  the  ensiform
cartilage  when  stooping.  [Zz.]

Aching  under  the  ribs  on  the  left  side.  \_Gn.~\

Aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  [GnJ]
ioo.  Pinching  in  the  belly  (aft.  if  h,)»  [ Gn.~\

Bellyache  : pinching  in  the  abdomen  followed  by  discharge  of
flatus  (aft.  3,  1 6 h.).  [Zr,]


TARAXACUM.  643

Persistent  aching  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen  (aft.  24,  30  h.).  [Gw.]

Boring  pain  from  within  outwards,  in  the  umbilical  region,  towards
the  right  side.  [Gw.]

Tensive  aching  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen.  [Gw.]

105.  Single,  violent  and  sharp  stitches,  sometimes  in  the
left  side  of  the  upper  abdomen,  sometimes  in  the  left  or
right  side  of  the  abdomen,  sometimes  also  in  the  hypo-
gastrium  (aft.  14,  31  h.).  [Gw.]

A severe  stitch  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen,  lasting  a minute.
[Rz.]

Burning  stitches  in  the  left  hypogastrium  towards  the  genitals
(aft.  25  h.).  [Gw.]

Pressure  in  the  left  lumbar  region  from  within  outwards.  [Gw.]
Itching  pricking  pain  in  the  right  abdominal  muscles.  [Gw.]
no.  Painless  gurgling  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  hypogastrium.

[<?«.]

Feeling  of  pain  in  the  left  groin  when  walking,  as  if  dislocated,
which  is  somewhat  diminished  by  standing  and  touching  (aft.  6 h.).

Tickling  itching  on  the  perinseum,  between  the  anus  and  puden-
dum, which  compels  scratching  (aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.]

Voluptuous  itching  on  the  perinaeum,  which  compels  scratching,
which  caused  an  eroding  pain  in  this  part,  lasting  many  hours  (aft.
32  h .).[Lr.]

The  first  day  a second,  not  hard  stool,  evacuated  with  difficulty
and  with  much  pressing  (aft.  8|  h.).  [Zr.]

1 1 5.  The  first  day  a third,  less  hard  stool,  evacuated  with  much
pressing  (aft.  16  h.).  [Zr.]

Stool  sooner  than  usual  and  pappy ; but  the  urging  to  evacuate
continued  without  anything  more  passing.  [Z%.]

Urging  to  urinate  without  pains  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.]
Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  copious  discharge  of
urine*  (aft.  3 h.) . [Lr.]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine*  (aft.

25  h.).  [M]

120.  Tickling  on  the  prepuce,  which  compels  rubbing  (aft.  7J  h.).

[*>.]

A constant  boring  pain  in  the  glans  penis.  [Gw.]

A fine  stitch  in  the  left  testicle.  [Gw.]

Burning  shooting  in  the  right  testicle.  [Gw.]

Seminal  emission  on  alternate  nights.  [Xr.]

* From  these  two  symptoms,  the  first  of  which  is  primary  action,  but  the  second
secondary  action,  or  permanent  reaction  of  the  organism,  we  see  how  perverse  is  the
ordinary  practice,  when  it  is  attempted  to  cure  chronic  dropsical  effusions  with
diminished  urinary  secretion  by  means  of  dandelion.  If,  as  it  is  its  nature  to  do,  it  at
first  produces  a greater  discharge  of  urine,  it  diminishes  the  secretion  all  the  more  in
its  permanent  secondary  action.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  ihore  likely  to  effect
homoeopathic  service  in  certain  kinds  of  morbid  diuresis  (diabetes)  for  which  dandelion
is  otherwise  suitable,  provided  no  miasmatic  cachexy  is  the  cause  of  the  affection — as,
indeed,  is  often  the  case.


644


TARAXACUM.


125.  Long-continued,  involuntary  erections  (aft.  9 d.).1

* *

.y.

When  walking  in  the  open  air  frequent  sneezing  (aft.  4,  28  h.).

iLr-'\

Tickling  irritation  to  short  cough  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the
throat,  the  coming  on  of  which  he  is  sensible  of  several  seconds
previously,  but  is  unable  to  suppress  it  (aft.  40  h.).  [Zr.]

A boring  and  digging  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  more
severe  and  persistent  when  walking  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Gn .]

Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  under  the  axilla.  \_Gn.^\

130.  In  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  from  the  hepatic  region  up  into  the
chest,  on  a space  larger  than  a hand,  a pressure  from  within  on  the
ribs  during  expiration,  when  standing.  [Fz.]

Burning  aching  in  the  sternum,  more  severe  during  expiration
than  inspiration  (aft.  \ h.).  [Gn.]

An  aching  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which  went  off
on  inspiring  and  expiring  more  strongly ; but  when  he  pressed  on  the
spot  it  returned  more  violently  and  extended  farther,  as  a prolonged
stitch-pain  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Gn. ]

A stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  1 h.).  [ Gn. ]
135.  In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  shooting  towards  the  back.  [ Gn .]

When  standing  stitches  darting  inwards  in  the  chest  during
inspiration.  [Zz.]

When  walking  continued  shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest.
[Gn.l

Violent  shooting  in  the  sternum  (aft.  6 h.).  [Gn.~\

Stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  just  below  the  axilla  (aft.  1 \
h.).  [Gn.]

140.  Under  the  last  rib  of  the  left  side,  towards  the  back,  three  violent
stitches,  one  at  every  breath.  \Kr.]

A severe  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  sixth  rib.  \_Kr.~]

Violent  shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  at  the  lowest  rib.

[<?*•]

Shooting  in  the  right  side  of  the  diaphragm,  when  lying  on  that
side.  [Gn.~]

On  the  shoulder  end  of  the  right  clavicle  a boring  shooting
drawing.  [Zz.]

145.  Twitching  in  the  left  intercostal  muscles.  [ Gn.]

Twitching  in  the  right  intercostal  muscles  (aft.  14  h.).
\Gn.]

On  taking  a full  inspiration  tensive  pain  in  the  region  of  the
diaphragm  (aft.  11  h.).  [Gn. ]

Aching  in  the  sacrum.  [ Gn .]

Gentle  pressure  in  the  sacrum  when  standing.  [Tz.]

150.  Painless  running  in  the  sacrum.  [ Gn .]

Tensive  shooting  in  the  back  towards  the  right  side.  [ Gn. ]
Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  whole  spine  towards  the  right  side,


1 No  name  is  attached  to  this  symptom.


TARAXACUM.  64.5

when  lying,  with  difficult  respiration,  especially  severe  in  the  sacrum.

[<?*•]

A persistent  obtuse  stitch  in  the  right  scapula,  from  within  out-
wards (aft.  2 1 h.).  [ Gn .]

Vibration  and  quivering  in  the  right  scapula.  [Gn.]
155.  Pulsating  throbbing  on  the  left  shoulder,  for  a minute.  [Kr.]
Twitching  in  the  top  of  the  left  shoulder.  [ Gn .]

Painless  vibration  on  the  left  shoulder,  with  chilliness  all  over.
[Gn.]  .

Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  on  the  outer
side  (aft.  4 h.).  [Gn.]

Quivering  in  the  upper  arm.  [Gn.]

160.  In  the  interior  of  the  upper  arm  pulsating  throbbing,  in  fits.
Pressive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm  (aft.  30  h.).

[ Gn 0

Pressive  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  arm.  [ Gn .]

Pain  like  electric  shocks  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  upper  arm.

[Gn.]

Shooting  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left  upper  arm.  [ Gn.']

165.  Sharp  shooting  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left  arm.  [G«.]

At  the  back  of  the  upper  arm  a series  of  painful,  sometimes
violent,  needle-pricks,  which  are  removed  by  rubbing.  [ Kr .]

Intermittent  stitches  on  the  outer  side  between  the  elbow  and
middle  of  the  right  upper  arm,  when  at  rest.  [T%.]

Shooting  in  the  right  elbow-joint.  [Gn.]

Pricking  in  the  left  forearm,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.
13  !>•)•  [Lr.]

170.  Sharp  stitches  in  the  right  forearm,  which  go  off  on  touching
(aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.]

Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  forearm  (aft.  10
h.).  [Gn.]

Burning  in  the  right  forearm.  [Gn.]

Pressive  pain  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm.  [Gn.]

In  the  forearm  frequently  recurring  drawing  pains.  [Kr.]

175.  In  the  left  wrist-joint  a tearing  drawing,  which  spreads  into  the
three  last  fingers.  [Kr.]

On  the  hands  a papular  eruption,  especially  on  the  sides  of  the
fingers,  also  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  with  some  itching.  [Kr.]

Burning  pain  in  the  third  and  fourth  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  [Gn.]
Shooting  pain  in  the  fourth  finger  of  the  left  hand.  [Gn.]

Aching  pain  in  the  three  last  fingers  of  the  right
hand.  [Gn.]

180.  The  tips  of  the  fingers  are  icy  cold  (aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.]

Twitching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  natis  extending  downwards.
[Gn.]

Itching  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  natis.  [Gn.]

Quivering  in  the  upper  muscles  of  the  thigh  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gn.]

Shooting  pain  in  the  whole  of  the  left  thigh  (aft.  9J,
ioi  h.).  [Gn.]


646


TARAXACUM.


185.  When  sitting  boring  shooting  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thigh,

[Fz.  ]

Quite  at  the  top  of  the  thigh  in  front  a part  is  painful  as  if
bruised,  worse  when  touched  than  when  walking.  [Kr.]

Pressure  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh,  when  sitting  and
standing,  but  not  when  walking  (aft.  2 h.).  [Gn.]

Eroding  itching  on  the  left  thigh,  compelling  scratching  (aft.  7J
h.).  [Lr.]

Tearing  in  the  hough,  on  its  outer  tendon,  when  sitting.  [Xz.]
190.  Drawing  shooting  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  knee,  when
at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  3 h.).  [Lr.]

A shooting  pain  pervading  the  whole  knee-joint.  [Gn.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  knee  sharp  pressure  when  he  flexes  the
leg.  [Zz.]

Burning  pain  in  the  left  patella.  [Gn.]

A persistent  burning  pain  anteriorly  in  the  right  knee.  [Gn.]

195.  Burning  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  leg.  [Gn.]

Burning  pain  on  the  lower  part  of  the  right  leg.  [ Gn.]

Burning  anteriorly  on  the  tibia.  [ Gn .]

In  the  right  leg  a violent  pricking,  going  from  below  upwards,
when  standing,  which  went  off  when  sitting  (aft.  30  h.).  [Lr.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  left  leg  needle-pricks  darting  upwards,
when  standing,  which  go  off  when  sitting  (aft,  31  h.).  \_Lr.~\

200.  Drawing  pains  in  the  legs  when  sitting  and  when  walking.  [XV.]
Weakness  of  the  legs,  especially  when  going  upstairs.  [Kr.]

The  right  leg  is  when  walking  weaker  than  the  left,  and  yet  its
muscles  feel  more  tense.  [XV.]

Eroding  gnawing  pain  on  the  right  leg  (when  standing)  (aft.  ij
h.).  \Lr.-]

Tearing  pain  on  the  outer  border  of  the  left  leg  (when  standing)
(aft.  2 h.).  [ Lr .]

205.  Throbbing,  obtuse  stitches  in  the  right  calf,  just  below  the
hough.  [Xz.]

Shooting  in  the  right  calf.  [ Gn.]

Constant  burning  stitches  in  the  calf  (when  standing).  [ Gn .]
Aching  pain  in  the  left  calf  (aft.  f h.).  [Gn.]

Twitching  pain  in  the  right  calf,  which  goes  off
quickly  when  touched  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.]

210.  Violent  itching  on  the  left  calf  on  lying  down  in  the  evening,
which  compelled  scratching,  but  continued  to  itch  after  scratching ;
the  part  then  became  red  and  exuded  (aft.  17  h.).  [Lr.]

A stitch  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  towards  the  big  toe  (aft.
37  M-  [Gn.]

A stitch  in  the  right  inner  ankle  when  sitting  (aft.  32  h.).

[G«.]

Itching  pricking  on  the  inner  ankle.  [Gn.]

When  standing  a drawing  pain  on  the  dorsum  of  the
right  foot,  which  went  off  when  sitting  (aft.  1 h.).  [£r.]

215.  When  standing  an  aching  drawing  pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  foot  (aft.  f h.),  [Lr.]


TARAXACUM.


647


In  the  left  ankle-joint  a tearing  drawing.  [Kr.]

Burning  pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  right  foot.  [ Gw.]

Burning  drawing  on  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  (aft.  37  h.),

[G»-l

Pressure  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  when  sitting
(aft.  22  h.).  [Gw.]

220.  Itching  on  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  which  was  removed  by-
scratching  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Gw.]

On  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  some  vesicles  which  itched.  [ Kr .]
Stitches  from  the  dorsum  of  the  foot  into  the  sole  (aft.  1 j h.).

[<?*.]

Boring  pain  in  the  right  sole.  [Gw.]

Burning  boring  in  the  left  sole  towards  the  little  toe.  [Gw.' ]

225.  Sometimes  violent,  sometimes  fine  shooting  pain  in
the  right  sole,  from  within  outwards,  when  sitting  (aft.  10,  21  h.).

[<?»•]

Itching  pricking  in  the  right  sole  (aft.  32  h.).  [Gw.]

Burning  pressive  pain  in  the  right  sole  towards  the  toes  when
sitting.  [Gw.]

A tug,  going  from  the  little  toe  up  the  tibia,  when  sitting.  [-#2.]
Attacks  Of  burning  in  the  toes,  especially  on  the  top  of  the
right  big  toe.  [Gw.]

230.  Shooting  in  the  right  big  toe  towards  the  second  toe.  [Gw.]

Burning  shooting  in  the  right  big  toe  when  walking  (aft.  9 h.).

[Gn.]

Tearing  stitches  in  the  toes.  [Zz.]

Violent  itching  on  the  fourth  toe  of  both  feet  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.]
Much  sweat  between  the  toes,  especially  of  the  right  foot.  [. Kr .]
235.  All  the  limbs  move  easily,  but  he  feels  as  if  the  moving  power
were  in  a constrained  state.  [Zz.]

Weak  feeling  in  the  whole  body ; a languishing  state  of  all  the
powers,  so  that  he  was  always  disposed  to  lie  or  sit  down,  when  he
felt  in  an  intermediate  state  between  consciousness  and  unconscious-
ness, as  when  going  to  sleep.  [ Fz .]

Inward  feeling  as  if  he  were  very  ill ; all  the  limbs  were  painful
when  touched  and  in  a wrong  position.  [Zz,]

Almost  all  the  sufferings  come  on  only  when  sitting ; they  almost
all  go  off  when  walking.  [Gw.]

When  sitting  frequent  yawning,  as  though  he  had  not  slept
enough  (aft.  5J  h.).  [Zr.]

240.  Sleepiness  by  day  (when  reading)  ; the  eyes  even  closed  so  that
he  must  actually  lie  down  ; the  sleepiness  went  off  when  moving
(aft.  5 h.).  [Zr.]

Unconquerable  drowsiness  after  a meal  ; on  awaking  he  had
urging  to  urinate  with  some  burning,  but  only  before  and  after  the
discharge  of  urine.  [Zfr.]

On  listening  to  scientific  subjects  he  goes  to  sleep  in  spite  of  all
efforts  to  keep  awake,  and  immediately  vivid  dream  visions  occur.
[Kr.-]

Anxious,  vivid,  unremembered  dreams.  [ Kr .]


648


TARAXACUM.


Vivid  unremembered  dreams.  [Ar.]

245.  At  night  dreams  full  of  quarrelling.  [Ar.]

Voluptuous  dreams.  [Ar.]

Frequent  waking  from  sleep  with  much  tossing  about  in  bed,  he
could  find  rest  nowhere.  [Ar.]

Frequent  waking  from  sleep  as  if  he  had  slept  enough.  [Ar.]

On  waking  from  sleep,  slight  perspiration  all  over  the  body,
which  causes  smarting  all  over  the  skin,  compelling  him  to  scratch
(aft.  23  h.).  [Zr.]

250.  On  going  to  sleep  in  bed  in  the  evening  he  immediately  perspired
all  over  the  body,  and  this  he  did  all  night ; in  the  morning  he  felt
lively.  [Ar.]

Immediately  he  fell  asleep  he  began  to  perspire  all  over,  so  that
he  often  woke  up  in  consequence,  when  he  felt  each  time  a heat  all
over  the  body  but  a much  greater  glowing  heat  in  the  cheeks ; he
got  quite  wet  from  perspiration,  but  was  lively  in  the  morning.  [Ar.]
Slight  sweat  all  over  the  body  (aft.  22  h.).  [Ar.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  sudden  warmth  of  the  face,  as
also  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  without  thirst  (aft.  37  h.).  [Ar.]

Sensation  of  heat  and  heat  in  the  face,  with  redness

(aft.  tJ  h.).  [Ar.]

255.  The  face,  hands,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  are  hot,  without
thirst  (aft.  6^  h.).  [Ar.]

A chilliness  throughout  the  body  (aft.  26  h.).  [Ar.]

Chilliness  for  some  hours  with  persistent  aching  pain  in  the  head.

[<?»•]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  violent  rigor  all  over  the  body,
like  an  attack  of  fever,  without  thirst  or  heat  thereafter  (aft.  h.).

iLri

Irresolution  and  disinclination  for  work,  though  it  goes  on  very
well  as  soon  as  he  makes  a commencement.  [A%.]

260.  Without  occupation  he  is  quite  dull ; he  cannot  compose  himself,
and  yet  cannot  make  up  his  mind  to  do  anything.  [A%.]

In  the  morning  dissatisfied  and  disinclined  for  business  or  con-
versation (aft.  25  h.).  [Ar.]

Very  much  inclined  to  laugh.  [Ar.]

Loquacity  and  constant  chattering.  [Ar,]

Religious,  cheerful  disposition,  happiness,  contented  with  him-
self and  his  position.  [Ar.]


THUJA.1

[Arbor  'vita.')

(The  green  leaves  of  the  Thuja  occidentalis  are  first  bruised  to  a fine  pulp  by  them-
selves, then  stirred  up  with  two  thirds  of  their  weight  of  alcohol,  and  the  juice  then
expressed.)

No  serious  medicinal  employment  has  been  made  in  Europe  before
now  of  this  plant,  which  somewhat  resembles  in  external  characters  the
yuniperus  Sabina ; for  what  Parkinson  and  Herrmann  say  of  it  is
evidently  mere  theoretical  speculation,  after  the  fashion  of  the  dear  old
Therapia  generalis.  According  to  Boerhaave  its  distilled  water  has
been  found  useful  in  dropsical  diseases.  According  to  Kalm  it  is
popularly  employed  in  North  America  as  an_  external  remedy  in  some
undefined  pains  of  the  limbs.

The  following  elements  of  artificial  diseases,  the  pure  effects  of  this
uncommonly  powerful  medicinal  substance,  will  be  regarded  by  the
homoeopathic  practitioner  as  a great  addition  to  his  medicinal  treasury,
and  he  will  not  fail  to  make  a useful  application  of  them  in  some  of  the
most  serious  diseases  of  mankind,  for  which  hitherto  there  has  been  no
remedy.  For  example,  he  will  perceive  from  these  symptoms  that  the
juice  of  thuja  must  be  specifically  useful  in  that  hideous  disease  arising
from  impure  coitus,  the  fig-warts,  if  they  be  not  complicated  with  other
miasmata;  and  experience  also  shows  that  thuja  is  the  only  efficacious
remedy  for  them.  And  for  a similar  reason  it  most  certainly  cures  that
bad  kind  of  gonorrhoea  resulting  from  impure  coitus  if  it  be  not  com-
plicated with  other  miasmata.

I employed  the  decillion-fold  dilution  of  the  juice,  in  the  dose  of  a
very  small  portion  of  a drop,  even  in  the  worst  cases.

As  the  fig-wart  gonorrhoea  is  one  of  the  few  permanent  miasmatic
diseases,  I was  able  to  test  in  the  most  certain  manner  the  degree  of
efficacy  of'  the  higher  dilutions  of  thuja  juice.  Thus  I found  that
even  the  higher  dilutions,  e.g.  the  decillion-fold  or  even  the  vigesillion-
fold  dilution  (^,  made  with  sixty  diluting  phials,  each  of  ioo  drops),  if
each  diluting  phial  were  succussed  ten  times  and  oftener  (that  is,  with
ten  or  more  shakes  of  a powerful  arm),  was  not  weaker  in  power  than
the  less  diluted  preparations,  nor,  on  account  of  the  enormously  dimin-
ished arithmetical  fraction,  had  it  sunk  to  complete  powerlessness,  to
nothing,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  had  rather  become  even  more  intensely
charged*  with  the  medicinal  virtue  of  thuja.

* The  discovery  that  crude  medicinal  substances  (dry  and  fluid)  unfold  their  medi-
cinal power  ever  more  and  more  by  trituration  or  succussion  with  non-medicinal


1 From  vol,  v,  and  edit.,  1826,


650


THUJA,


Innumerable  accurate  trials  have  so  completely  confirmed  this  (also
with  regard  to  other  high  fluid  medicinal  dilutions  prepared  in  a similar
way)  that  I can  certify  to  its  truth  from  conviction.

In  order  to  obtain  real  preparations  of  sufficiently  developed,  but  at
the  same  time  suitably  moderated,  power  for  even  the  more  and  most
sensitive  patients  by  the  dilutions  of  medicinal  substances  for  homoeo-
pathic use,  for  some  time  back  I have  adopted  the  plan  in  the  case  of
all  fluid  medicines  of  succussing  each  diluting  phial  with  only  two
strokes  of  the  arm.

The  duration  of  the  action  of  even  the  smallest  doses  is  nearly  three
weeks.

Camphor  appears  to  be  the  best  antidote  to  mitigate  the  excessive
action  of  this  juice  in  larger  doses.

[Hahnemann’s  fellow-provers  were  Franz,  Gross,  Fr.  Hahnemann,  Hart-
mann, Haynel,  G.  Hempel,  Langhammer,  Teuthorn,  Wagner,  Wisli-

CENUS.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited.

The  1st  edit,  has  509  symptoms,  this  2nd  edit.  633.]


THUJA.

When  he  has  stooped  he  staggers.

Whirling  vertigo,  even  when  siting 3 when  walking  she  staggers.

Frequent  vertigo,  even  when  lying  in  bed.

Much  vertigo  when  sitting,  like  a moving  to  and  fro,  very  much
aggravated  by  lying.

5.  Vertigo,  especially  when  he  was  seated  and  the  eyes  were  closed  3
it  went  off  when  lying.

Sensation  of  giddiness  as  after  frequent  turning  round  in  a circle
(aft.  | h.).  [Htn.~\

His  head  is  confused  and  incapable  of  thinking.

Cloudiness  in  the  forehead  (immediately).  [Zz.]

Slow  recollection  and  slow  speaking  3 he  has  to  seek  for  the  words
when  talking  (aft.  3 d.).

10.  Inward  weakness  of  the  head  3 the  brain  feels  numbed  and  dead.

In  the  morning  stupefaction  of  the  head  (aft.  6 h.).  \JVs.~\

Dull  pain  in  the  whole  head  like  stupefaction  (aft  1 h.).  [Zr.]

A numb  sensation  and  humming  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  and
in  the  left  ear  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Htn.~\

Preoccupation  of  the  mind  3 he  could  not  get  rid  of  the  thoughts
he  had  been  engaged  with.

things,  and  in  greater  extent  the  further,  the  longer,  and  the  stronger  this  trituration
or  succussion  is  carried  on,  so  that  all  their  material  substance  seems  gradually  to  be
dissolved  and  resolved  into  pure  medicinal  spirit  j — this  discovery,  unheard  of  till
made  by  me,  is  of  unspeakable  value,  and  so  undeniable,  that  the  sceptics,  who  from
ignorance  of  the  inexhaustible  resources  of  nature  in  the  homoeopathic  dilutions,  see
nothing  but  mechanical  division  and  diminution  until  nothing  remains  (therefore,
annihilation  of  their  medicinal  power),  must  see  their  error  as  soon  as  they  appeal  to
experiment.


THUJA.  651

15.  He  becomes  cloudy  in  the  head,  so  that  he  knows  not  where  he
is,  when  standing  (aft.  J h.).  [Tz.]

Want  of  attention  to  what  took  place  around  him.  [TVs.]

Stupid  in  the  head,  with  nausea.  [Fr.  H — n.]

Dazed  in  the  head  and  as  if  intoxicated,  especially  in  the
morning.  [Fr.  H — n.]

His  head  feels  empty,  when  sitting  and  walking  (aft.  6\  h.).

[>.]

20.  In  the  morning  headache,  sometimes  as  if  the  head  were  severed
asunder  in  the  zygoma  and  upper  jaw,  sometimes  in  the  crown  as
if  a nail  were  driven  in  with  a jerk,  sometimes  in  the  forehead  as
if  it  would  fall  out,  with  internal  chilliness ; all  this  was  ameliorated
by  walking  in  the  open  air.

In  the  morning  headache,  as  after  sleeping  too  soundly  or  as  after
stooping;  a pulsation  or  short  pressive  jerks  in  the  forehead  with
redness  of  face.

A cramp-like  sensation  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  followed  by
feeling  of  warmth.  [Fz.]

A boring  pressure  in  the  head.

Drawing  pain  in  the  head.

25.  Painless  drawing  in  the  right  parietal  bone,  with  slight  pressure,
during  which  an  almost  agreeable  warmth  spreads  over  the  body  (aft.
4 h.).  [Fz.]

Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  sinciput  and  face,  transversely
across  the  nose  to  the  zygoma,  and  over  the  eyes ; most  severe  in
the  morning  and  evening.

Violent  contractive  pressure  externally  on  the  left  frontal  pro-
tuberance, which  seemed  as  it  were  to  press  down  the  upper  eyelid
(aft.  i|  h.).  [Htn.]

Shooting  pain  in  the  head.

Dull  drawing  pressure  transversely  across  the  forehead,  as  if  a
weight  sank  down  in  it  (aft.  4^  h.).  [Lr.]

30.  A deep  pressure  in  the  right  temple  (aft.  if  h.).  [Htn.]

Jerking  pressure  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (aft.  4 h.).
[. Htn .]

Jerking  pressure  in  the  right  frontal  protuberance,  which  spread
down  to  the  eye  (aft.  4^  h.) . [Htn.]

Aching  in  the  left  parietal  bone,  with  a dull  pain  (aft.  2 h.).

[*■*•]

Dull  aching  pains  in  the  occiput,  for  six  hours  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVr.]
35.  A pressive  pain  transversely  across  the  forehead  (aft  \ h.).  [Lr.]
Furious  pressing  inwards  in  both  temples,  as  though  the  brain
would  be  pressed  out.  [Htn.]

Severe  painful  pressure  in  the  head,  sometimes  in  one  part  some-
times in  another,  only  momentary  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.  j
Aching  drawing  in  the  left  temple.  [Fz.]

Twitching  tearing  in  the  occiput,  more  on  the  right  side  (aft.  1
h.).  [Htn.]

40.  Drawing  tearing  pain  from  the  crown  to  the  middle  of  the  brain.
\Hnl.]


6$2


THUJA.


Heaviness  in  the  head  as  if  a weight  pressed  the  brain  inwards,
(aft.  ii  h.).  [Htn.]

Feeling  of  weight  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  occiput,  aggravated
by  every  movement  (aft.  ^ h.).  \Wr.'\

Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  crossness  and  disincli-
nation to  speak  (aft.  3 h.).  [/Fr.]

A headache  compounded  of  aching,  bruised  and  lacerating  pain
from  the  forehead  to  the  occiput,  on  waking  from  sleep,  which  went
off  on  continuing  to  sleep.  [Fr.  H — «.]

45.  Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  skull  as  if  it  were  beaten  in.

L^-i

Sensation  in  the  right  parietal  bone  as  though  a nail  were  driven
in  there,  which  goes  off  on  touching  that  part  (aft.  J h.).  [Z%.]

Jerk-like  stitch  through  the  whole  head,  which  leaves  behind  an
aching  sensation  (aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.'\

Violent  tearing  stab  through  the  right  half  of  the  brain  from  the
occiput  to  the  forehead  (aft.  11  h.).  \_Htn.']

Headache  as  if  his  head  were  compressed  from  without,  with
pulse-like  beating  and  shooting  on  the  temples,  which  pains  are
removed  by  external  pressure  and  bending  backwards,  but  return
by  bending  forwards  (aft.  4 h.).  \Trn.~\

50.  Headache  : a pricking  formication  in  the  head  in  the  morning.

Drawing  in  the  temporal  muscles,  an  external  headache,  worse
when  chewing.

Severe  stitches  externally  on  the  left  temporal  region

(aft.  8,  12  h.).  [Zr.]

Prickling  pain  on  the  temples.

Needle-pricks,  especially  along  the  forehead  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Zr.]

55.  Swelling  of  the  veins  on  the  temples  when  at  rest,  without  heat
(aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

Three  red,  painful  lumps  on  both  temples.

Eruption  of  pimples  betwixt  the  eyebrows,  with  matter  in  their
apices,  which  itch  somewhat  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

An  itching  on  the  occiput.

Pain  at  the  back  of  the  skull,  as  though  it  were  contracted  from
both  sides.  [Z%.]

60.  At  night  he  is  unwilling  to  lie  on  the  left  side,  because  when  he
does  so,  as  also  when  he  touches  it,  a spot  on  the  head  near  the
occipital  protuberance  is  painful ; even  the  hair  there  is  painful  when
touched.  [CAr.]

Obtuse  pressive  pain  behind  the  left  ear  (aft.  \ h.).  \JVr.~]

Violent  aching  burning  pain  behind  the  right  ear  (aft.  9 h.).
[/Tr.]

A corrosive  gnawing  in  the  skin  of  the  occiput,  with  the  sensa-
tion as  if  something  were  running  among  the  hair  there,  for  half  an
hour  (aft  13  h.).  [Hnl.]

On  the  right  side  of  the  hairy  scalp  a smarting  and  corrosive
gnawing,  in  the  evening.  [Hnl.]

65.  In  the  nape  a sensation  as  if  it  were  beaten  to  pieces  (aft.  3 h.).


THUJA.  653

Tension  of  the  skin  of  the  nape  on  moving  the  head  (aft.  16  hr).

[TVs.]

Stiff  feeling  in  the  nape  and  on  the  left  side  of  the
neck,  up  to  the  ear,  even  when  at  rest,  which,  however,
does  not  impede  the  movement  of  the  neck  in  any  way

(the  stiff  pain  was  not  increased  by  moving  the  neck)  (aft.  2\  h.).
[Htn.]

A pressive  and  drawing  pain  from  below  upwards  on  the  right
side  of  the  neck,  even  when  at  rest  (aft.  2 h.).  [Wr.]

Tearing  pain  on  the  left  eyebrow,  going  off  after
touching  (aft.  II  h.).  [Lr.]

70.  An  aching  pain  above  the  left  eye  which  extends  towards  the
right  and  goes  off  there.  [Tm.]

A considerable  aching  above  the  right  eye,  externally  (aft.  3!  h.).
[Htn.]

Boring  pain  above  the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye  (aft.  3 d.),
[Ws.]

Short  sightedness.

A dimness  like  a veil  before  the  eyes  and  aching  in  them  as
though  the  eyes  were  pressed  forwards  out  of  the  head,  or  the  eyes
were  swollen.

75,  In  the  open  air,  dimness  before  the  eyes,  like  a veil,  in  near  and
distant  vision,  with  dulness  in  the  head,  for  half  an  hour.

When  reading  the  objects  are  darker,  with  a feeling  in  the  eyes
as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough.

Illusion  of  sight : when  writing  all  surrounding  objects  seemed
to  tremble  (immediately  after  eating).  [Lrn.]

Black  points  before  the  eyes,  even  when  they  are  closed,  which
do  not  remain  steady,  but  appear  to  move  about  among  one  another,
with  a confusion  in  the  occiput.  [Tz.]

The  sight  of  the  uninflamed  eye  is  dark.

80.  Weak  eyes  ; aching  in  them  as  from  fine  sand.

Shooting  in  the  eyes  in  the  morning  (in  sharp  air).1
On  every  exposure  to  bright  light  some  stitches  in  the  eye.

The  white  of  the  eye  is  blood  red.

The  white  of  the  eye  is  very  inflamed  and  red,  with  smarting  and
aching  in  it  as  from  sand.

85.  In  the  morning,  in  the  white  of  the  left  eye,  near  the  cornea,  a
redness,  without  sensation  (aft.  74  h.).  [Lr.]

Aching  in  the  eyes,  for  two  or  three  days.

The  lower  eyelid  has  on  its  border  a red  lump.

Swelling  of  the  upper  eyelid  (aft.  76,  120  h.).  [Lr.]

From  time  to  time  a violent,  deeply  penetrating  sharp  stitch  in
the  right  inner  canthus  (aft.  2 h.).

90.  Violent  stitch  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  which  forced
out  moistureand  thereby  rendered  the  vision  obscure  (aft.  1 Jh.).  [Htn.]
A burning  aching  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  without
redness  (aft.  9 d.).


1 This  symptom  is  repeated.


654


THUJA.


In  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye  feeling  of  heat  and  dryness,
as  if  the  parts  would  inflame  (aft.  29  h.).  [//«/.]

Dry  feeling  in  the  eyes.  [Hnl.']

The  left  eye  waters  when  walking  in  the  open  air  (aft.  9 d.).

The  eyes  deposit  eyegum  in  their  inner  canthi  all  day.

Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

Great  contraction  of  the  pupils,  which  remained  for  five  days
more  contracted  than  in  the  healthy  state  (aft.  t h.).  \_Trn.~]

In  the  evening  in  bed  a frightful  hammering  and  tearing  in  the
ear  until  after  midnight ; at  the  same  time  urinating  every  half  hour,
with  cold  feet  up  to  the  knee.

Ringing  in  the  ears  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Wr.~\

100.  Roaring  in  the  ears,  like  a drawing  stove  (aft.  1 h.).  \WrJ]

On  the  lower  part  of  the  auricle,  a tension  as  if  a ligature  there
were  drawn  downwards  (aft.  6 h.).  \JVs.~\

Cramp  sensation  in  the  right  auricle  (aft.  \\  h.).  [T%.]

Spasm  in  the  internal  ear,  like  forcing  together  and  compression,
followed  by  a stitch  in  it  like  a flash  of  lightning,  so  that  he  trembled  ;
frequently  in  the  evening.

Fine  cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius  externus,
most  severe  when  he  draws  the  scalp  downwards  from  the  uppermost
part  of  the  crown  (aft  4.  d.).  \JVs^\

105.  Violent  thrust-like  stabs  in  the  right  side  of  the  fauces,  which
quickly  go  into  the  ear,  and  on  opening  and  shutting  the  mouth  cause
a sensation  in  the  ear  as  though  there  were  a hole  in  it,  through
which  the  air  could  penetrate  (aft.  6^  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  right  meatus  auditorius  (aft.  5 h.).
\Wr.1

A pinching  pain  in  the  right  ear.  \_Htn.~\

Pressive  pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius  (at  noon).

(Increased  secretion  of  ear-wax.)
no.  Formication  and  quivering  towards  the  zygomata.

A digging,  painful  itching  in  the  left  zygoma  (aft.  \ h.).  [Zr.]

Boring  pain  in  the  left  zygomatic  process,  diminished
by  touching  (aft.  7,  29  h.).  [Lr.]

A twitching  pricking  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  cheek,  only
when  walking  in  the  open  air.

Cramp-like  pain  in  the  right  cheek  when  this  part  is  at  rest  (aft.
i h.).  [Htn]

115.  An  itching  in  the  face,  so  that  he  must  scratch.  [Zz.]

Glandular  swelling  in  the  left  cheek.

Burning  heat  only  in  the  face  and  cheeks,  lasting  all  day.

On  the  cheek,  not  far  from  the  commissure  of  the  lips,  a scabby,
itching  eruption.

Eruption  of  pimples  all  over  the  face  (aft.  17  h.).  [Lr.]

120.  An  ulcerated  place,  half  an  inch  deep  in  the  nose,  where  a scab
has  formed.

Erosive  formication  on  the  nose.

A red  pimple  in  the  depression  behind  the  left  ala  nasi,  filled
with  a watery  fluid,  itching  somewhat  (aft,  6 h.)t  [. Lr *]


THUJA.


655


Sensation  of  tension  over  the  right  ala  nasi,  which  went  off  after
rubbing  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Hnl.~\

Swelling  and  hardness  on  the  left  ala  nasi,  with  tensive  pain.

[#»/.]

125.  Under  the  right  nostril  sensation  as  if  a part  there  would  become
indurated  (aft.  3J  h.).  [Tz.]

Nasal  mucus  mixed  with  coagulated  blood.

Epistaxis  every  day,  two  or  three  times.

He  often  blows  blood  from  the  nose.  [Gss.]

In  the  morning,  after  rising  from  bed,  on  blowing  the  nose  gently
it  bleeds,  for  two  days.  \Hnl.\

130.  Epistaxis,  epecially  when  he  gets  heated  (aft.  70  h.).  [G^.]

Drawing  pain  between  the  mouth  and  nose,  as  if  the  periosteum
were  more  tightly  stretched  ; afterwards  this  pain  spreads  over  the
nasal  bones,  as  though  they  had  a saddle  on  them.  [

(Stitches  in  the  lip.)

Twitching  on  the  upper  lip.

Sensation  of  twitching  in  the  upper  lip,  near  the
commissure  of  the  mouth.  [Hnl.]

135.  Fine  itching  in  the  inner  side  of  the  upper  lip.  [T%.]

Itching  pimple  on  the  border  of  the  upper  lip,  near  its  middle
(aft.  6 h.).  [Lr.]

Red  pustules  above  the  lip,  which  bleed  when  scratched  (aft.  36
h.).  [Ws.]

Dryness  of  the  lips  without  thirst  (aft.  it  h.).  [Lr.]

Burning  on  the  red  of  the  lips  and  on  the  palate.

140.  Violent  tearing  in  the  left  upper  jaw  towards  the  eye  (aft.  2 h.).

[Htn.]

Drawing  tearing  in  the  right  lower  jaw  in  the  evening.  [Hnl.]
Repeated  gnawing  boring  pain  in  the  left  upper  jaw  (aft.  i\  h.).

[£'••]

Shooting  in  the  lower  jaw  out  at  the  ear.

A violent  drawing  stitch  in  the  angle  of  the  left  lower  jaw,  which
goes  off  after  touching  (aft.  8 m.).  [Lr.]

145.  Needle-pricks  in  the  left  side  of  the  lower  jaw  (aft.  h.).  [ Lr .]
Itching  pimples  on  the  chin  (aft.  5 d.) . [Lr.]

Stiffness  of  the  left  muscles  of  mastication,  painful  when  the  jaws
are  opened  (aft.  4 d.).  [Ws.]

Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck  as  from  having  lain  on  an  uncom-
fortable bed  or  in  an  improper  position.

On  moving  the  neck  a short  stitch  in  the  cervical  muscles,  which
made  him  start.

150.  Pain  in  the  (swollen)  cervical  glands,  so  that  he  could  not  lie  at
night  on  account  of  it.

The  veins  of  the  neck  are  distended  and  of  a blue  colour.

Itching  on  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  neck,  which  excites
scratching.  [Ws.]

On  both  sides  of  the  neck,  from  back  to  front,  a stripe  of  small  red
papules  close  together,  with  sore  pain  when  touched  (aft.  26  h.),

[»*•]


658


THUJA,


Before  meal-time  and  some  time  after  eating,  thirst  for  cold
drinks  (aft.  10,  n h.).  [Zr.]

During  dinner  a frequent  pinching  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.
n.\

After  a meal,  great  exhaustion  and  laziness ; a slight  movement
is  very  difficult  for  him  ; at  the  same  time  he  feels  sick  and  must
lie  down.

Anxiety  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis  which  mounted  to  the  head  and
went  back  again  ; at  the  same  time  qualmishness.

220.  Nausea  and  qualmishness  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  (aft.  \ h.).

[>•]

Nausea  and  repeated  vomiting  of  sour  tasting  fluids  and  food
(aft.  3 h.).  \_Fr.  H — «.]

Inclination  to  vomit  after  the  (accustomed)  tobacco-smoking,
with  bursting  out  of  sweat  all  over  the  body,  without  thirst  ; after
evacuation  of  the  bowels  the  nausea  and  perspiration  went  off  (aft.
20  h.).  [Zr.]

Spasmodic  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.

In  the  middle  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis  a fine,  painless  throbbing,
almost  like  arterial  pulsation  (aft.  j h.).  [iZf/z.]

225.  Spasm  in  the  stomach,  which  becomes  enormously  increased  in
the  evening.

Contractive  spasm  in  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen.

Tension  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  3 d.).

In  the  hypogastrium  tension  as  if  too  tightly  bound  (aft.  12  h.).

Distension  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  contractive  pains,  like
spasms.

230.  Swollen  abdomen.

Pressure  of  fulness  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  in  the  lumbar
region,  which  impedes  respiration,  when  lying  in  bed  after  midnight
(about  2 or  3 a.  m.).

(Burning  in  the  belly,  but  more  in  the  chest,  hypochondria,  and
scrobiculus  cordis,  and  all  these  parts  also  felt  hot  externally.)

(Burning,  especially  in  the  hepatic  region.)

Pressure  downwards  on  the  liver  as  from  a stone  when  walking
(aft.  I h.).  [Fz.]

235.  In  the  side,  above  the  liver,  during  inspiration,  whilst  walking  a
cutting,  which  goes  off  when  pressed  on  and  when  standing  still.
[*■*.]

Pinching  in  the  left  side  of  the  belly  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.]

Shooting  in  the  left  side  of  the  belly,  whereby  walking  was
impeded  (aft.  T4  h.).  [Zr.]

Pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles  on  bending  backwards,  as  from  a
strain.

Pain  in  the  abdominal  muscles  on  the  left  side  as  though  a hook
were  drawn  up  in  them,  a clawing  from  below  upwards.  [ Ws .]

240.  A burning  compression  transversely  across  the  abdomen,  as  it
were  externally  (aft.  f h.).  [Zr.]

Distension  of  the  abdomen,  as  though  the  bowels  in  the
umbilical  region  were  constricted.  [Z//.]


THUJA.


659


Rumbling  in  the  abdomen.

Audible  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Hnl.~]

Rumbling  in  the  right  side  of  the  hypogastrium  after  stool  (aft.
10  h.).  [Lr.]

245.  Movement  in  the  hypogastrium  as  from  something  alive,  like  a
forcing  out  of  the  abdominal  muscles  as  from  the  arm  of  a child,  but
painless.

Tearing  upwards  in  the  abdomen,  from  the  right  groin,  in  jerks
(aft.  7 d.).


Cutting  pains  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.  i,  9 h.).  [TVs.]
Swelling  in  the  groin,  but  painless  when  walking  and  when
touched.

Drawing  pain  in  the  groin  when  she  stood  and  walked,  but  not
when  sitting.

250.  Drawing  pain  from  the  inguinal  glands  through  the  thigh  to  the
knee,  more  violent  when  going  to  sleep,  followed  by  lassitude  in  the
limbs.

Stitches  from  the  groin  down  through  the  thigh,  only  when
sitting  down,  but  not  when  standing  and  walking.

Throbbing  shooting  pains  in  the  right  groin  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVr.]

In  the  right  groin  a pressure  inwards  (aft  4 h.).  [Fz.]
Discharge  of  flatus  without  smell  (aft.  \ h.).  [Lr.]

255.  First  pressing  as  if  she  should  go  to  stool,  but  nothing  was
evacuated ; afterwards  (the  1st  d.)  there  occurred  a rather  loose
stool ; the  following  day  a loose  stool  without  pressing ; the  third
day  no  stool.

Before  going  to  stool  pressing  in  the  hypogastrium  especially
against  the  sides,  as  from  flatulence  (aft.  9 d.).  [TVs.]

Three  times  urging  to  stool  with  erection  of  the  penis.
Evacuation  of  the  stool  takes  place  almost  always  along  with
painful  contraction  of  the  anus.


Ordinary  stool  several  times  (aft.  13,  16  h.).  [Lr.]

260.  Soft  stool  (immediately).  [TVs.]

Soft  stool  several  successive  mornings.  [TVs.]

Soft  stool  several  times  (aft.  2,  10,  12,  14  h.).  [Lr.]
Frequent  evacuations  of  copious  pappy  faeces,  which  give  great
relief.  [Grr.]

Evacuation  of  hard,  large,  brown  faeces  in  balls  covered  with
streaks  of  blood  (aft.  14  d.).  [Gjj.]

265.  Hard  stool  evacuated  with  difficulty,  especially  in  the  afternoon*
(aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.]

Frequent  call  to  stool,  but  no  stool  is  evacuated  (aft.  16  h.).

[^•]  . . .

After  a copious  nocturnal  emission  of  semen,  constipation  for

several  days.  [HI.]

Diminished  stool  (aft.  5 d.).

(After  stool,  exhaustion)  (aft.  5 d.).


* This  is  only  primary  action ; in  the  secondary  action  the  opposite  occurs  after
12,  14  days.


66o


THUJA.


270.  During  stool,  violent  pain  in  the  rectum  so  that  she  must  leave
off.

In  the  rectum  and  anus  painful  contraction  and  tearing  upwards
as  if  in  the  bowels,  in  jerks.

Single  painful  needle-pricks  in  the  perineum  from  within  out-
wards, which  go  off  on  drawing  in  the  anus  (aft.  8 h.).  [TVs.']

Severe  burning  in  the  depression  between  the  nates  when
walking  (aft  9 d.).

Burning  in  the  anus.

275.  Burning  shooting  in  the  rectum,  independent  of  stool.

The  haemorrhoidal  node  at  the  anus  is  painful  at  the  slightest
touch.

(Red,  painless  lumps  at  the  anus,  like  fig-warts.)

Very  frequent  micturition,  almost  every  hour,  but  without  pain.

Great  discharge  of  urine  ; he  must  also  get  up  at  night  to  urinate
(aft.  12  h.),

280.  Frequent  discharge  of  a large  quantity  of  urine.

Frequent  urging  to  urinate  and  discharge  of  urine  without  pain
(aft.  if  h.).  [Lr .]

Copious  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  20  h.).  [Fr.  H — n.]

He  must  urinate  frequently  and  copiously  (aft.  4J  h.).

[Htn.-]

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  followed  by  copious  discharge  of  urine
as  clear  as  water,  also  at  night  (aft.  36  h.).  [Gss.]

285.  Tlie  urine  when  passed  is  quite  like  water,  hut  after
standing  a long  time  there  is  some  cloudiness  in  it.
[Htn.]

Red  urine,  in  which  after  standing  a thick  brick-dust  sediment  is
deposited.  [Gjj.]

When  he  has  to  urinate  he  must  press ; he  has  a call  to  urinate
every  minute  ; some  urine  only  comes  away  by  jerks,  and  then  only
he  has  burning  pain  in  the  urethra.

The  urine  stops  five  or  six  times  before  it  is  completely  evacuated
and  the  bladder  emptied.

Sensation  in  the  urethra  as  if  a moisture  ran  forward  through  it,
especially  in  the  evening.

290.  After  micturition  feeling  as  if  some  drops  still  ran  through  the
urethra  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.

After  micturition  some  urine  still  lingers  in  the  urethra,  which
afterwards  only  comes  away  by  drops,  not  from  the  bladder,  only
from  the  urethra.

Burning  in  the  urethra  during  the  whole  time  the  urine  is
flowing.

Burning  in  the  urethra  when  urinating  and  for  some  time  after-
wards.

Burning  in  the  urethra  when  not  urinating.

295.  Cutting  when  urinating.

Sore  burning  pain  in  the  urethra  whilst  urinating  (aft.  48  h.),

Burning  itching  in  the  tip  of  the  glans  penis  when  urinating.

Immediately  before  and  whilst  urinating,  but  also  at  other  times,


THUJA.


661


behind  the  os  pubis  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  a cutting  pain,  most
violent  when  walking  (aft.  12  d.).  [Hnl.]

In  the  female  pudendum  smarting  and  itching,  mostly  in  the
urethra  when  urinating  and  a short  time  afterwards.

300.  Pain  in  the  pudendum  as  if  sore  and  smarting,  especially  when
urinating.

Near  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  burning,  penetrating  stitches,  when
not  urinating  (aft.  9 h.).  [Hnl.]

Drawing  cutting  pain  in  the  urethra  when  walking  (aft.  10  h.).
[Hnl.]

In  the  urethra  some  stitches  from  behind  forwards  when  not
urinating,  not  during  micturition.

An  extremely  violent  stitch  from  the  rectum  forwards  into  the
urethra  under  the  frenum.

305.  A severe  stitch  in  the  urethra  in  the  evening  (aft.  3 d.).

At  night  during  frequent  erections  of  the  penis  stitches  in  the
urethra,  preventing  him  from  sleeping.

Tearing  stitches  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra.

A twitching  cutting  shooting  in  the  urethra  when  not  urinating
(aft.  30  h.).

Single  stitches  on  the  point  of  the  glans  penis  when  not  urinating,
especially  when  the  part  is  pressed.

310.  Painful  stitches  on  the  inside  of  the  prepuce.

Tickling  itching  sensation  betwixt  prepuce  and  glans  (aft.  \ h.).

[Wr.]

Several  burning  stitches  in  the  glans  penis  (aft.  8 h.).  [Wr.]

Pricking  itching  on  the  side  of  the  glans  penis.

Pricking  and  itching  on  the  glans  penis.

315.  Violent  stitches  in  the  glans  penis,  near  the  urethra,  which  are
always  accompanied  by  an  urging  to  urinate ; the  urine  then  only
dribbles  away  ; during  this  discharge  of  urine  the  stitches  are  some-
times more  violent,  sometimes,  however,  they  go  away  completely  ;
but  the  urging  to  urinate  lasts  until  the  shooting  quite  ceases  (aft.
7i  h.).  [Htn.]

Frequent  burning  stitches  in  the  penis,  spreading  to  the  testicles
and  umbilical  region,  most  severe  when  sitting,  going  off  when
walking,  and  recurring  when  sitting  (aft.  24  h.).  [Wr.]

Twitching  pain  in  the  penis,  as  though  a nerve  were  drawn  quickly
and  painfully.  [HI.]

In  the  morning,  when  half  asleep,  erection  of  the  penis  lasting
several  hours.

At  night-long-continued  erection  of  the  penis.

320.  Discharge  of  prostatic  fluid,  capable  of  being  drawn  out  into
threads,  in  the  morning  after  waking.  [HI.]

Nocturnal  seminal  emission,  with  distressing  pa-in  in  the  orifice  of
the  urethra,  as  if  it  were  too  narrow.  [///.]

Nocturnal  seminal  emission,  waking  him  up  (aft.  23,  48

M,  [^.]

Needle-pricks  in  the  scrotum.

Itching  on  the  left  side  of  the  scrotum  (in  the  evening).


662


THUJA.


325.  Aching  burning  stitches  along  through  the  scrotum  and  spermatic
cord,  from  below  upwards.  \Wr.~\

Drawing  sensation  in  the  testicles.

Whilst  walking  and  sitting  a pressive  pain  in  the  testicles,  as
though  they  were  contused,  increased  when  walking  (aft.  2 h.).  [Ar.]

Repeated  sharp  stitches  in  the  left  testicle  (aft.  7 h.).  [Wr.]

The  left  testicle  is  strongly  retracted  towards  the  abdomen,  with
swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands.

330.  (Degeneration  of  the  epididymis  like  varicocele.)

Crawling  in  the  scrotum  and  itching ; the  part  when  rubbed  has
burning  pain.

Sweat  on  the  scrotum.

Sweat  on  one  half  of  the  scrotum.

Profuse  perspiration  of  the  male  genitals  all  over.

335.  Itching  in  the  female  pudendum  when  walking.

The  genital  organs  are  painful,  the  pain  is  sore  and  smarting.

Swelling  of  both  labia,  where  there  is  only  burning  pain  when
walking  and  touching  (aft.  15  d.).

A burning  and  smarting  in  the  vagina  when  walking  and  sitting.

When  she  takes  a (long)  walk  she  has  shooting  in  the  genitals.

340.  When  sitting  a pain  in  the  genitals  like  pressing  and  contraction.

In  the  genital  organs  and  perinaeum  cramp  pain  when  rising  from
a seat.

Cramp  pain  in  the  female  pudendum  up  into  the  hypogastrium
(aft.  10  h.).

Flow  of  mucus  from  the  female  urethra.

On  the  corona  glandis  a rather  round,  flat,  dirty  ulcer,  with
burning  pain,  with  redness  all  round ; after  some  days  shooting  in  it.

345.  (In  the  inside  of  the  labium  majus  a whitish  ulcer,  first  with  pain
like  excoriation  and  sore  to  the  touch,  then  itching,  lasting  a long
time.)

On  the  scrotum  an  exuding  papule.

Great  swelling  of  the  prepuce.

On  the  outer  surface  of  the  prepuce  a red,  gritty,  elevated  spot,
which  turns  into  an  ulcer  covered  by  a scab,  with  itching  and  some-
times  rather  burning  pain.

On  the  inside  of  the  prepuce  small  pocks,  which  are  depressed  in
the  centre  and  exude  matter  ; painful  only  when  touched  (aft.  16  d.).

350.  Some  red  smooth  growths  with  creeping  sensation  behind  the
glans  under  the  prepuce,  lasting  ten  days  (aft.  22  d.).

A red  growth  on  the  inside  of  the  prepuce,  like  a condyloma.

Moisture  on  the  glans,  balanorrhoea  (aft.  8 d.).

On  the  glans  a small  low  vesicle,  which  causes  shooting  pain
when  urinating  (aft.  24  d.).

Tickling  in  the  condylomata.

355.  Tickling  itching  on  the  condylomata.

Itching  pricking  on  the  condylomata.

Burning  and  painful  shooting  in  the  condylomata.

Pricking  in  the  condylomata  at  the  anns,  when  walking.

Severe  stitches  in  the  condylomata  on  the  genitals.


THUJA.


663


360.  Burning  pain  in  the  condylomata  when  touched.

(The  condylomata  at  the  anus  are  painful  as  if  excoriated,  also
when  touched.)

Great  bleeding  of  the  condylomata.

* ^ •*

*

Sneezing  (aft.  28  h.).  \_Hnl.~\

Creeping  in  the  nose,  as  if  coryza  were  coming  on.

365.  Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose  like  stuffed  coryza,  worst
in  the  evening,  and  yet  the  nose  is  as  if  stopped  up.

Violent,  quickly  occurring  coryza.

Stuffed  coryza  with  persistent  headache,  such  as  is  usual  in
stuffed  coryza  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.]

Stuffed  coryza,  without  sneezing,  with  mucus  in  the  fauces  com-
pelling  hawking,  but  which  is  not  hawked  up  (aft.  26  h.).  [Zr .]

Stuffed  coryza,  which  in  the  open  dir  turns  to  fluent  coryza  by
sneezing  (aft.  10  h.).  [Zr.]

370.  In  the  morning  fluent  coryza  (aft.  70  h.).  [Zr.]

Frequent  flow  of  coryza  (aft.  2 h.).  [Zr.]

Hoarseness  and  fluent  coryza  (towards  evening)  (aft.  11  h.).
[£r.]

A hoarseness  as  from  contraction  in  the  throat.

Severe  fluent  coryza  and  catarrh,  such  as  had  not  happened  to
him  for  many  years.

375.  Severe  coryza  with  nocturnal  cough  (aft.  13  d.).

In  the  morning  on  rising  cough,  as  if  excited  by  eating  acrid
things  (aft.  25  h.).  [Zr.]

Shooting  in  the  windpipe  in  the  region  of  the  pit  of  the  throat
when  drawing  a breath,  for  two  days.

An  aching  shooting  on  the  left  side  of  the  windpipe,  just  below
the  larynx,  which  is  aggravated  by  swallowing  (aft.  3!  h.).  \Htn^\

In  the  cervical  muscles,  nape  and  chest,  an  uneasiness,  or  slow
squeezing,  alternately  coming  and  going,  accompanied  by  a kind  of
nausea.

380.  Blueness  of  the  skin  in  the  region  of  the  clavicle.

Oppression  of  the  chest  as  if  something  were  grown  on  in  it  (aft.
some  h.).

On  the  middle  of  the  chest  a strong  pressure  as  from  a heavy
body,  which  does  not  impede  respiration  (when  sitting)  (aft.  \ h.).
[Htn.\

Visible  palpitation  of  the  heart,  without  anxiety.

Tightness  of  chest,  often  compelled  to  breathe  deeply.

385.  Tightness  at  one  time  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  at  another  in
the  left  hypochondrium,  which  excites  hacking  cough.

Tension  from  the  first  false  rib  to  the  axilla  on  the  left  side,
especially  when  raising  the  arm  (aft.  1 h.).

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  a creeping  pricking  (aft.  3 h.).  [Z%.]

Pressive  obtuse  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  remaining
the  same  during  inspiration  and  expiration  (aft.  1 h.).  \Wr.~\

Several  throbbing  stitches  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  2 h.).


664


THUJA.


390.  Severe,  obtuse  intermittent  stitches  in  the  chest  from  the  left
axilla  inwards  (aft.  12  h.).  [Gjj.]

Pinching  pain  in  the  region  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs.  [TVs.']
Boring  pressure  above  the  scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  40  h.).  [TVs.]

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  close  beside  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  a
sensation  as  though  he  had  sprained  or  hurt  (over-lifted)  himself  by-
lifting  a heavyweight  (aft.  h.).  [. Htn .]

In  the  right  side  of  the  chest  under  the  arm  a bruised  pain  (aft.

3ih.);  [**•]  .

395.  Difficult,  tightened  respiration,  with  great  thirst  for  water  and
much  anxiety.

Sensation  as  if  the  chest  were  distended  from  within.

Pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

Pressure  on  the  chest,  occurring  after  eating.

Pain  in  the  chest,  like  a pressure,  more  after  eating.

400.  Attacks  of  pressure  on  the  chest  round  about  the  axilla.

On  going  upstairs  great  ebullition  of  blood  ; the  heart  beats
violently ; she  must  often  rest.

(A  stitch  in  the  back  through  the  chest  upwards.)

Pressive  pain  here  and  there  on  small  spots  in  the  back  when
sitting.

Boring  on  a small  spot  in  the  back.

405.  When  walking  violent  stitch-like  pains  in  the  back  on  the  left
side  towards  the  lumbar  vertebrae,  not  altered  by  sitting  (aft.  10  h.).
[Lr.-j

Aching  stitches  in  the  back  (aft.  3 h.).  [TVr.]

Burning  shooting  pains  in  the  back,  betwixt  the  scapulae,  when
sitting  (aft.  13  h.).  [TVr.]

In  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying  down,  pains  in  the  back,
as  from  prolonged  stooping  (aft.  66  h.).  [Lr.]

Sore  feeling  on  the  back  (aft.  4 d.j.

410.  Drawing  pain  in  the  back  when  sitting.

Sensation  in  the  spine  as  if  a large  artery  were  pulsating  there,
when  sitting  (aft.  6f  h.).  [Htn.]

Stiff  feeling  in  the  spine,  as  after  standing  long  in  a stooping
posture  (aft.  13  h.).  [Htn.]

When  standing  leaning  sideways  he  feels  above  the  hip  in  the
lumbar  region,  close  to  the  spine,  an  obtuse  pricking  pain,  as  from  a
blunt  needle  (aft.  \ h.).  [Htn.]

Pressing,  out-pressing  pains  in  the  left  renal  region  when  sitting
(aft.  2 h.).  [TVr.]

415.  Drawing  aching  pains  in  the  left  lumbar  region  (aft.  J h.).
[TVr.]

Burning  feeling  of  heat  in  the  lumbar  region  (aft.  1 h.).  [TVr.]
Tensive  pain  in  the  sacrum.

Drawing  in  the  sacrum.

When  sitting  painful  drawing  in  the  os  sacrum  and  coccyx  and
in  the  thighs,  which  prevents  him  standing  upright  after  prolonged
sitting,  (aft.  4 h.).  [TVs.]

420.  Sudden,  cramp  like  pain  in  the  sacrum  whep  he  changes  the


THUJA.  665

position  of  the  feet  after  standing  long  in  one  place  ; the  body  tends
to  sink  down  (aft.  6 d.).  [TVs."]

In  the  morning,  after  getting  up  out  of  bed,  a dull  aching  pain,
as  if  bruised,  in  the  sacral  and  lumbar  regions,  more  violent  when
standing  and  turning  the  trunk,  but  diminished  by  walking  (aft.

*5  d-)-  ...

Aching  pain  in  the  sacrum  when  stooping,  [Fz.]

Aching  stitches  from  the  os  sacrum  to  the  side  of  the  pelvis  (aft.

7 h.).  \Wr.]

On  the  right  side,  close  beside  the  os  sacrum,  a jerking,  burning
shooting,  which  went  off  completely  after  strong  friction  on  this  part
(aft.  3|  h.).  [Htn.]

425.  Near  the  sacrum  an  itching  boil  with  large  red  areola.

Sharp  stitches  betwixt  the  scapulae  (aft.  ^ h.).  [iifrz/.]

Tearing  in  the  left  scapula  (aft.  3 d.).

Under  the  scapula  a pain  as  if  bruised,  for  several  hours.

Painful  shooting  on  the  front  of  the  right  shoulder  near  the
clavicle,  accompanied  by  dull  tearing  (aft.  5 h.).  [ Fz .]

430.  A beating  and  throbbing  in  the  shoulder-joint.

Cracking  of  the  shoulder-joint  when  bending  back  the  arm  ; she
could  not  then  move  the  arm  for  pain,  like  dislocation.

Drawing  stitches  in  the  right  shoulder-joint  and  the  bend  of  the
right  elbow.  [Hnl.~\

Profuse  sweat  in  the  axilla.

In  the  left  arm,  from  the  middle  of  the  upper  arm  to  the  fingers,
a heaviness  felt  on  movement  and  when  at  rest.

435-  The  arm  twitches  involuntarily  by  day.

Raging  pain  in  both  arms  in  the  morning  from  3 till  getting  up
at  6 o’clock.

A severe  drawing  for  several  hours  as  if  in  the  bones  of  the  arms.

In  the  whole  arm,  in  the  periosteum  of  the  bone-shafts,  a digging
drawing  pain  extending  into  the  fingers,  with  a pressure  as  from
within  outwards  ; on  pressing  deeply  down  to  the  periosteum  there  is
pain  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  from  the  bone.

In  the  upper  arm,  when  he  presses  on  it,  he  feels  a pain  on  the
. bone  as  if  the  flesh  were  detached  from  the  bone.

440.  Creeping  itching  on  the  upper  arm,  followed  by  a fine  prick  on  a
small  spot.

Frequent  paralytic  pain  in  the  middle  of  the  muscles  of  the  left
upper  arm,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving  (aft.  lj  h.).  [Zr.]

Stitches  on  the  right  upper  arm,  felt  in  all  positions,  which  go  off
by  touching  (aft.  h.).  [Zr.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  upper  arms,  as  though  they  had  been  beaten
black  and  blue.  [iZ/.]

Shooting  pain  as  with  a blunt  point,  in  the  right  deltoid  muscle,
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  [HnL]

445.  When  he  has  been  writing  for  half  an  hour  the  arm  trembles,
and  there  occurs  a drawing  pain  in  it.

In  both  arms  a painful  difficulty  of  moving  them?  as  if  the  joints
w^re  without  synovial  fluid  (they  feel  rusty).


666  THUJA.

Paralytic  sensation  in  the  arms,  as  if  he  had  lifted  too  heavy  a
weight  (aft.  8 h.).  [m.~]

(Shooting  pain  in  the  elbow-joint.)

Throbbing  and  beatings  like  pulse-beats,  in  the  elbow-joint,
by  day  ; in  the  evening  drawing  in  the  arm  extending  into  the
fingers.

450.  Pricking  like  needles,  especially  on  the  outer  side  of  the  left
elbow,  the  same  in  all  positions,  rapidly  going  off  when  touched  (aft.
i h.).  [ Lr .]

Boring  pain  on  the  elbow-joints  (aft.  5 d.).  \_Ws7\

Drawing  pain  in  the  front  of  the  left  forearm.

Heaviness  in  the  forearms  (aft.  5 h.).  \Ws^\

Sore  pain  on  the  right  forearm.  [T%.]

455.  On  the  outer  side  of  the  right  forearm  a tearing  stitch  occasion-
ally (aft.  3*  h.).  \Htn.]

In  the  left  forearm  a shooting  tearing  on  its  inner  side,  from  the
hand  to  the  elbow-joint  (aft.  3J  h.).  \Htn?\

Bruised  pain  in  the  elbow  and  wrist-joints  as  if  they  were  smashed
and  limp  (aft.  42  h.).  \W r.]

On  the  left  forearm  a red  marbled  spot,  painless.

Dry  feeling  of  the  skin  especially  on  the  hands.

460.  Dry  feeling  on  the  hands  (aft.  26  h.).  \_TVs.\

Tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint.

Pain  as  if  dislocated  in  the  right  wrist-joint.

A burning  shooting  pain  just  above  the  right  wrist  (aft,  6 h.).
[/Tr.]

When  writing  trembling  of  the  hands,  as  from  the  debility  of  old
age  (aft.  20  h.).  [Zr.]

465.  The  balls  of  both  index-fingers  become  red  and  swollen.

Fine  prickling  pain  on  the  proximal  finger-joints.

Pricking  on  the  fingers.

In  the  tips  of  the  three  centre  fingers  of  the  left  hand  a pricking
(in  the  afternoon).

Shooting  behind  the  middle  joint  of  the  middle  finger,  as  if  a
thorn  were  sticking  in  there,  most  painful  when  flexing  the  fingers
(aft.  £6  h.).  \WsJ]

470.  Violent  cramp-like  pressure  on  the  left  hand,  betwixt  the  little
and  ring  fingers  on  their  inner  sides,  with  hot  sensation  of  all  the
fingers  of  this  hand,  whilst  the  left  metacarpus  and  the  whole  right
hand  were  icy-cold  (aft.  2j  h.).  [Htn.\

Formication  in  the  tips  of  the  three  centre  fingers  of
the  left  hand,  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep  (aft.  14  h.).

[Htn.]

Shooting  tearing  on  the  little  finger.  [Fr.  H — «.]

(Her  fingers  are  all  as  if  numb.)

A sharp  stitch  in  the  nail  of  the  left  thumb  (aft.  48  h.).

475.  The  distal  phalanges  of  the  three  left  centre  fingers  become  red
and  swollen,  with  pricking  extending  to  the  finger-tips  (about  5 p.  m.).

Cracking  in  the  joints  of  the  elbow,  knee  and  ankle,  on  extending
the  limbs.


THUJA.


667


Painful  relaxation  in  both  4hip-joints  as  if  the  capsules  of  the
joints  were  too  lax  and  too  weak  to  support  the  body,  only  when
standing  (not  when  walking),  with  weakness  of  the  whole  body  (aft.
12  d.).  [Hnl.]

Eruption  of  pimples  on  the  right  natis,  which  itch,  and  on  being
touched  and  after  scratching  burn.

A tension  from  the  hip-joint  into  the  groin  and  down  the  back
of  the  thigh  to  the  hough,  even  when  sitting  still,  but  more  when
walking,  less  when  standing.

480.  Transient  burning  stitches  on  the  lower  extremities  which  spread
out  in  them  in  all  directions  (aft  28  h.).  [Zr.]

While  sitting  the  thigh  and  leg  go  to  sleep.

The  right  thigh  and  leg  are  painful  as  if  dislocated,  when,  on
walking,  the  limb  was  behind  and  was  in  the  act  of  being  brought
forward.  \_Fr.  H—  n,~]

At  the  very  top  of  the  thigh  a shooting.

Perspiration  on  the  upper  part  of  the  thighs,  near  the  genitals,
when  sitting.

485.  Above  the  middle  of  both  thighs  a pain  as  if  bruised  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air.

(In  the  evening)  pain  in  the  left  thigh  when  walking,  as  if  it
would  break  down  (aft.  10  d.).  \Ws?\

Scrapy  sore  sensation  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh,  [Zz.]
Attacks  of  weariness  of  the  internal  muscles  of  both  thighs.
Pustules  on  the  knee  like  true  smallpox  in  appearance  ; they
suppurate,  do  not  itch,  and  disappear  in  eighteen  hours.

490.  On  both  knees  itching  papules,  which  burn  when  touched  and
after  scratching.

On  the  anterior  aspect  of  the  left  knee  a persistent  burning
smarting  stitch  (aft.  25  h.).  [Hnl.\

A dull  throbbing  pain  on  the  outer  aspect  of  the  knee  when
sitting,  but  aggravated  by  walking  (aft.  6 h.).  [Wr.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  knee  a painful  pressure  inwards  when
sitting  (aft.  2J  h.).  \Wr.~\

Cramp-like  pain  above  the  left  knee  when  sitting  (aft.  46  h.).
•]

495.  Under  the  knee  sensation  as  if  a fine  knife  were  cutting  into  it ;
a coarse  stabbing.  [jFz.]

In  the  knees  single  stitches,  only  on  commencing  to  walk,  and
especially  on  rising  up  from  a seat.

Short,  interrupted,  burning  smarting  stitches  near  the  internal
tendon  of  the  hough.  [i/w/.J

In  the  left  hough  a long  continued  burning  as  if  an  eruption  were
about  to  break  out  there  (aft.  25  h.).  [ Hnl.~\

The  knee  (during  the  more  violent  pain)  moves  involuntarily  to
and  fro.

500.  Persistent,  corrosive  stitches  in  the  skin  of  the  right  patella,  with
quivering  twitching  of  the  skin  during  the  stitches  (aft.  |h.).  [//»/.]
Squeezing  pressive  pain  under  and  near  the  patella,  when  flexing
and  extending  the  right  leg  (aft.  7J  h.).


668


THUJA.


The  lower  limb  is  stiff  and  heavy  when  walking.

In  the  right  leg  a downward  drawing  pain,  by  jerks.

Intermittent  pinching  in  the  calves  (aft.  4 d.).  [JVs.']

505.  White  lumps  on  the  calf  the  size  of  a hazel  nut,  which  itch
violently  and  for  a great  way  around,  but  after  rubbing  cause  a
shooting,  burning  pain.

A tension  through  the  whole  leg  as  from  fatigue.

Weakness  of  the  left  leg,  when  sitting,  which  on
walking  changed  into  a cutting  sensation  in  the  muscles
Of  the  calf,  and  afterwards  when  sitting  recurred  in  jerks  (aft.  3 h.).
[Htn.]

Bruised  pain  in  the  legs.  [HI.']

In  the  tibia  a pressure  outwards.

510.  (The  shaft  of  the  tibia  is  thickened  as  if  swollen.)

Sharp  drawing  pain  on  the  left  inner  ankle,  which  spreads  thence
gradually  into  the  calf  (aft.  21  h.).  [Lr.]

Frequent  numbing  pain  on  the  right  inner  ankle  (aft.  ij  h.),

[Lr.-]

Pricks  on  the  right  outer  ankle  (aft.  4 d.).  \JVs.~\

Near  the  right  outer  ankle  a burning  continued  stitch,  when  at
rest  (aft.  28  h.).  [. Hnl. ]

515.  Fine,  extremely  painful  pricks  like  gnat- bites,  in  rapid  succession,
in  the  bend  of  the  right  ankle-joint.  [Hnl.]

On  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  on  the  joint,  whilst  walking,  a
kind  of  cutting,  followed  by  feeling  of  warmth.  [T%.]

On  the  inner  side  of  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot  a voluptuous
itching  (aft.  1 h.).  [Lr.]

The  dorsum  of  the  foot  and  the  toes  are  swollen,  inflamed  and
red,  and  painful  per  se,  as  if  numb,  but  feel  tense  when  treading
and  moving.

The  foot  (during  the  more  severe  pain)  twitches  up  involun-
tarily.

520.  On  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot  a painless  red  marbled  spot.

Pain  in  the  heel,  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  in  the  morning  on  rising
from  bed.

In  the  tendo  Achillis,  above  the  heel,  a sharp  stitch  (aft.  2 h.).
Drawing  in  all  the  toes  up  into  the  leg.

Drawing  in  the  big  toe.

525.  Tearing  stitches  at  both  sides  of  the  nail  of  both  big  toes.

Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  tendinous  parts  of  the  distal  phalanx
of  the  right  big  toe,  with  feeling  of  warmth,  less  perceptible  when
walking  than  when  sitting  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

Intermittent  pinching  near  the  metatarsal  bone  of  the  little  toe
(aft.  3d.).  [W r.]

Tearing  stitches  in  a corn.

The  corns  burn  (aft.  5 d.).  [JVs.]

530.  All  the  toes  are  inflamed,  shining  red  and  swollen  ; they  itch,
and  after  rubbing  burn.

When  sitting  and  walking  feeling  of  weariness  in  the  right  sole,
as  after  a long  walk  and  as  if  bruised  (aft,  6 h.).  [Lr.~]


THUJA.  66$

Creeping  twitching  in  the  soles,  as  after  a long  walk  (aft.  4 d.).

Voluptuous  itching  under  the  toes  of  the  right  foot,  felt  in  all
positions  (aft.  io^  h.).  [Zr.]

Very  transient  violent  shooting  in  the  left  sole,  near  the  big  toe
(aft.  2i  h.).  [Zr.]

535.  Sweat  on  the  feet,  especially  on  the  toes.

Sweat  on  the  hands  and  feet..

An  upward  drawing  pain  from  the  legs  through  the  thighs  to  the
head  and  thence  back  into  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  during  which  there
was  blackness  before  the  eyes  and  qualmishness.

Stiffness  and  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs.  \Ws?\

On  single  points  on  the  thighs,  elbows  and  forearms,  there
occurred  pimples,  like  chicken-pox,  their  apices  full  of  matter,  sur-
rounded by  a large  red  areola.

54°-  Itching  like  flea  bites  on  the  body,  back,  arms  and
legs,  especially  in  the  evening  and  night.

Prickling  itching  all  over  the  body,  at  night  until  after  1 o’clock,
which  left  no  sensation  after  scratching.

The  arms  and  legs  are  gone  to  sleep  on  awaking  at  night.

Creeping  itching  all  over  the  body.

The  itching  places  of  the  body  become  the  seat  of  burning  pain
after  rubbing.

545.  (Nettle  rash)  (aft.  20  d.).

An  aching  combined  with  scrapy,  prickling  sensation  in  various
parts,  just  as  if  in  the  bones.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  of  the  whole  body  when
touched.

The  pains  are  worst  after  3 o’clock  of  the  afternoon  as  well  as
at  night— also  preventing  going  to  sleep  in  the  evening.

Jerking  up  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body  by  day.

550.  Attack : when  walking  in  the  open  air  he  became  sick  and  as  if
intoxicated  and  whirling ; he  got  heat  in  the  face  and  the  sweat  of
anxiety,  and  could  hardly  get  his  breath ; the  legs  were  so  heavy  that
he  staggered  (for  an  hour)  (aft.  20  h.).

In  the  shoulder  and  thighs  he  is  very  tired ; he  feels  these  parts
as  if  bruised,  as  after  great  fatigue.

Weakness  of  the  body,  with  free  activity  of  the  mind.

Great  weariness  and  bruised  feeling  of  the  body,  with  disinclina-
tion for  movement,  in  the  afternoon  (aft.  11  h.).  \JVs.~\

Great  weakness  in  all  the  limbs  in  the  afternoon  when  sitting
(aft.  13  h.).  [Lr.]

555.  Illusion  of  sensation,  as  if  the  whole  body  were  very  thin  and
tender  and  must  yield  to  every  touch,  just  as  though  the  cohesion
of  the  body  were  very  much  exposed  to  the  danger  of  disruption,
and  such  a dissolution  was  to  be  feared.  [iZ/.]

He  becomes  sleepy  early  in  the  evening,  but  sleeps  uneasily,  with
dreams,  and  wakes  up  very  early,  cross,  and  indisposed  to  get  up.
Repeated  sleepiness  when  sitting,  without  exhaustion  (aft.  4^  h.).


6yo


THUJA.


In  the  afternoon  extreme  sleepiness ; his  eyes  closed  when  sitting
(aft.  14  h.).  [Zr.]

Towards  evening  drowsiness,  but  unable  to  sleep  (aft.  9J  h.).

560.  In  the  morning  he  has  not  slept  enough,  is  disinclined  to  get  up,
and  cross,  weary,  and  prostrated  (aft.  38  h.).  [Tz.]

She  tosses  restlessly  about  in  her  sleep  before  midnight  for  an
hour.

Restlessness  for  two  hours  in  the  evening  in  bed  before  she  could
fall  asleep.

Restless  sleep  ; he  tosses  about  on  account  of  feeling  too  warm.

Restless  sleep,  with  dreams  (aft.  68  h.).  [Z>.]

565.  Restless  sleep,  with  inodorous  perspiration  (aft.  48  h.).  [Zr.]

As  soon  as  he  falls  asleep  at  night  an  agreeable  warm  sweat  breaks
out  on  all  the  covered  parts,  which  goes  off  on  waking,  and  this
occurs  frequently  during  the  night.  [Gfj.]

Much  dry  heat  during  the  night  and  restless  sleep.

Restlessness  at  night  and  anxiety ; he  cannot  sleep,  with  coldness
of  both  legs,  which  are  covered  with  cold  sweat.

Restless  night ; he  often  woke  up  and  passed  from  one  dream  to
another,  with  seminal  emission.  \_Wr.~\

570.  He  cannot  get  to  sleep  before  midnight,  and  wakes  up  again  at
4 a.m.

Great  restlessness  before  going  to  sleep ; he  turns  about  and
cannot  find  any  resting  place.

Sleeplessness  at  night  with  great  restlessness  and  coldness  of  the
body  ; when  he  slumbered  for  an  instant  he  dreamt  of  dead  men.

Refreshing  sleep*  (aft.  24  h.).  [Zr.]

When  slumbering  he  immediately  dreamt.

575.  On  going  to  sleep  an  anxious  dream  vision  ; he  feels  some  dull
blows  in  the  left  side,  wakes  and  gasps  for  air  (aft.  18  h.).  \Ws .]

Sleep  at  night  full  of  dreams  and  starting.

He  slept  at  night  only  till  12  o’clock,  and  then  lay  wide  awake
without  suffering,  he  was  not  sleepy  even  in  the  morning.

Inclination  to  vomit  all  night ; he  only  retched  up  mucus.

Quiet  talking  in  sleep.

580.  Long  dreams,  caused  by  the  conversation  in  the  evening,  with
profound  thinking ; accused  of  crimes  he  appealed  to  his  good
conscience.  JVs.~\

Anxious  dreams  with  loud  calling  out.

Frightful  dreams,  from  which  he  wakes  up,  with  hot  feeling  in
the  body.  JVr.~\

She  weeps  at  night  in  sleep.

When  he  lies  at  night  on  the  left  side  he  dreams  of  danger  and
death.

585.  Lascivious  dreams  of  coitus,  but  without  seminal  emission ; on
awaking  painful  erection  of  the  penis.

In  the  morning  on  awaking  he  can  hardly  collect  himself,  for
half  an  hour.

* Reaction  of  the  organism,  curative  action.


THUJA.


67 1


Thirst  in  the  morning  on  awaking,  without  heat.  [Ws.~\

In  the  morning  on  rising  very  tired.

After  a profound  sleep  at  night,  on  awaking  in  the  morning,  a
violent  headache,  as  if  the  brain  were  swollen,  with  nausea  and
vomiting  three  times  bitter  water,  along  with  chilliness  of  five  hours’
duration ; he  did  not  get  warm  in  bed ; at  the  same  time  anorexia
and  adipsia.

590.  Every  morning  chilliness  without  thirst.

Chilliness  without  thirst  in  the  forenoon.

The  tips  of  the  fingers  are  icy  cold,  as  if  dead,  whilst  the  rest  of
the  hand,  the  face,  and  the  remainder  of  the  body,  are  hot  to  the
touch,  without  thirst  (aft.  £ h.).  [Zr.]

All  the  evening  an  agreeable  warmth  all  over  the  body,  with  cold
fingers,  especially  of  the  left  hand,  without  thirst ; at  the  same  time
sensation  as  if  goose-skin  and  a slight  shiver  ran  over  the  body
(aft.  3i  h.).  [f  *.]

Warm  hands  with  distended  veins,  whilst  the  face  is  cold,  but
the  forehead  is  hot  (aft.  12  h.).  [Zr.]

595.  Rigor  all  over  the  body,  without  externally  perceptible  coldness
of  it  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.'\

A shiver  runs  occasionally  over  his  back  (aft.  32  h.).  [Ws.~\

Coldness  in  the  back,  not  diminished  bv  the  heat  of  the  stove.
[HnL]

On  (slight)  exposure  of  the  body  in  warm  air  shivering
all  over,  with  or  without  goose-skin,  whilst  the  hands  and  face
were  warm  (aft.  if  h.).  [Zr.]

When  dressed  he  has  frequently  shivering  all  over  the  body,
without  goose-skin  (aft.  2£  h.).  [Zr.]

600.  Rigor  with  much  yawning ; the  warm  air  feels  cold
to  him,  and  the  sun  seems  to  have  no  power  to  warm
him  (aft.  3 h.).  [Ws.]

Nausea  and  vomiting,  and  after  vomiting  several  attacks  of  rigor,
with  heaviness  of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities,  and  tearing  in  the
occiput.  [Fr.  H — «.]

Rigor  in  the  evening  in  bed,  only  on  the  left  side  of  the  body,  on
which  he  was  also  cold  to  the  touch.

Every  evening  (from  6 to  7.30  o’clock)  chilliness,  with  external
heat  of  the  body,  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  thirst.

After  slight  heat  chill  runs  over  him,  with  icy  cold  hands,  in  the
evening  (aft.  5 to  6 h.).  [Z%.]

605.  Great  ebullition  of  blood  every  evening ; throbbing  and  beating
in  all  the  blood-vessels  at  every  movement ; more  quiet  when
sitting.

The  pulse  is  weak  and  falls  to  below  sixty  beats  (aft.  4 d.).

[»*•]

On  two  successive  evenings  heat  in  the  face  and  burning  and
redness  in  the  cheeks.

Sudden  heat  and  redness  of  the  face  (aft.  1 h.).  [Zr.]

Flush  of  heat  in  the  face,  without  thirst,  while  the
hands  and  the  rest  of  the  body  were  only  warm  (aft.  J h.).  [Zr.]


6/2  THUJA.

6 10.  Heat  and  redness  of  face,  without  thirst,  when  sitting  (aft.  3 h.).

Persistent  feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  face,  without  alteration  of
its  colour  and  without  thirst,  whilst  the  tips  of  the  fingers  were  cold,
the  rest  of  the  hand  luke  warm,  and  the  whole  of  the  remainder  of
the  body  was  hot  to  the  touch  (aft.  f h.).  [Z>.]

In  the  face  feeling  of  burning  heat,  which,  however,
does  not  produce  either  actual  heat  or  redness  or  per-
spiration, with  icy  cold  hands,  the  body  being  other-
wise only  moderately  warm  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.\

Redness  and  burning  in  the  left  cheek  and  at  the  same  time  on
every  movement,  when  she  rose  up  and  sat  down,  chill  up  the  back
(not  when  standing  and  sitting  still)  ; her  fingers  died  away.

Swelling  of  the  veins  on  the  temples  and  hands  (when  at  rest),
without  heat  (aft.  18  h.).  [Zr.]

615.  Even  when  undressed  rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  with  sweat
breaking  out  on  the  face  and  thirst  for  cold  drinks  (aft.  nf  h.).
\Lr.-]

About  3 a.m.  severe  rigor  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  thereafter
thirst,  then  profuse  sweat  all  over,  but  not  on  the  head,  which  was
only  warm.

Heat  with  thirst,  without  chill  either  before  or  after-
wards, and  at  the  same  time  activity  of  the  mind  (aft.  1,
4 h.).  [Fz.]

During  the  febrile  warmth  he  had  clearer  thoughts  and  was  in-
clined for  all  kinds  of  work  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Zz.]

Towards  morning  heat  with  perspiration.

620.  (On  walking  quickly  he  became  restless  and  dejected.)

Restlessness  of  disposition  for  many  days  ; everything  is  trouble-
some and  distasteful  to  him.

Distraction,  unsettled  disposition,  and  inclination  to  do  first  one
thing  then  another  (aft.  6 h.).  [Zr.]

Very  depressed  and  dejected.

Weariness  of  life.

625.  Discontent.

Sulky,  angry  at  innocent  jests.  [JVs.\

Crossness  when  all  does  not  go  according  to  his  wish,  [/Zj.]

Prolonged  thoughtfulness  about  the  merest  trifle.

Everything  is  distasteful  to  him  ; he  is  anxious  and  concerned
about  the  future.

630.  Walking  is  performed  with  extreme  ease  ; she  feels  as  though  her
body  were  borne  up  by  wings  ; she  ran  many  miles  in  an  uncom-
monly short  time,  and  with  unusual  high  spirits  (immediately).  \_Fr.
H—n .]

Good  humour*  (aft.  15  h.).  [Zr.]

Cheerful  disposition  without  extravagance*  (aft.  7 h.).  [Zr.]

Inclination  to  speak*  (aft.  16  h.).  [Zr.]


# All  three  symptoms  were  curative  reaction  of  the  organism.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.1

( White  Hellebore.')

(The  alcoholic  tincture  of  the  root  of  Veratrum  album.)

Though  the  subjoined  symptoms  indicate  a powerful  action  of  this
medicinal  substance  on  the  human  health,  a great  capacity  for  effecting
changes  in  it,  and  consequently  show  that  we  may  expect  great  things
from  its  suitable  employment,  yet  the  investigation  of  all  its  medicinal
symptoms  is  so  far  from  complete,  that  the  following  can  be  regarded
as  only  a fraction  of  its  wealth  of  pathogenetic  effects.

In  the  meantime,  however,  I have  resolved  to  communicate  to  the
world  what  I have  been  able  to  ascertain  up  to  the  present  moment,
because  even  this  amount  is  capable  of  being  usefully  employed.

I might  certainly  have  adduced  the  symptoms  recorded  by  the
older  Greek  authors  in  corroboration  of  my  own,  but  I have  refrained
from  doing  so  in  order  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  wishing  to  make  a
display  of  learning.

This  much  is,  however,  certain,  that  the  ancients  could  not  have
obtained  so  much  reputation  for  their  hellebore  treatment  at  Anticyra
and  other  places  in  Greece,  unless  they  had  effected  much  with  it,  and
unless  they  had  restored  many  sick  persons  to  health  by  means  of  this
medicinal  plant.

Our  modern  physicians  do  not  know  how  to  make  any  good  use  of
this  valuable  medicine,  and,  indeed,  do  not  employ  it  at  all,  as  they  are
unable  to  give  it  in  a justa  dosis , i.e.  in  drachms  and  ounces,  without
killing  their  patients.

Consequently  they  must  leave  uncured  those  diseases  which  cannot
he  cured  without  this  root.

Physicians  have  no  notion  of  the  power  possessed  by  this  drug  to
promote  a cure  of  almost  one  third  of  the  insane  in  lunatic  asylums  (at
all  events  as  a homoeopathic  intermediate  remedy),  because  they  know
not  the  peculiar  kind  of  insanity  in  which  to  employ  it,  nor  the  dose  in
which  it  should  be  administered  in  order  to  be  efficacious  and  yet  not
injurious.

As  there  can  be  no  rapid  and  permanent  cure  of  dynamic  diseases,
unless  by  medicines  endowed  with  the  dynamic  power  of  producing
similar  morbid  states,  as  I have  shown  often  enough,  so  we  have  only
to  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  the  peculiar  kinds  of  insanity  in  the
following  observations,  regard  being  paid  to  the  other  symptoms,  in


VOL.  II.


1 From  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  1825.


43


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


67  4

order  to  know  in  which  of  the  manias  white  hellebore  root  may  be
homoeopathically  employed  with  good  effect.

We  must  not  imitate  the  ancients  in  their  doses.  No  doubt  many
of  their  patients  were  cured,  but  not  a few  succumbed  to  their  enormous
doses.  For  even  in  those  times,  just  as  nowadays,  the  delusion  existed
in  the  medical  art  that  diseases  depended  on  a morbific  matter  in  the
body,  and  consequently  that  they  could  not  be  cured  without  the
elimination  of  this  (imaginary)  morbific  matter.  Hence  the  ancients
in  their  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  gave  their  white  hellebore  root
almost  always  in  such  doses  (a  drachm  and  more  of  the  medicine  in  the
form  of  coarse  sifted  powder)  as  were  capable  of  exciting  excessive
vomiting,  and  at  last  also  purgation  ; and  (blinded  by  the  above  theory)
even  those  cases  in  which  the  patients  were  cured  of  their  diseases  by
white  hellebore,  without  undergoing  vomiting  or  purging,  failed  to
convince  them  that  the  cures  were  effected  in  quite  another  way  than
by  evacuations  upwards  and  downwards.

It  is  also  quite  false  that  patients  affected  with  emotional  and  mental
diseases  as  a rule  require  and  bear  enormous  doses  of  medicine,  as  our
physicians  still  imagine.  No  doubt,  allopathic  and  unsuitably  chosen
drugs,  even  in  large  doses,  seem  to  have  but  little  effect  on  the  grosser
part  of  the  organism  and  the  general  health  of  such  patients.  But  in
such  diseases  the  general  health  is  but  little  implicated,  and  their  subjects
are  often  very  robust  in  that  respect  ; as  a rule,  the  malady  has  settled
in  the  fine  invisible  organs  of  the  mental  and  emotional  spheres  undis-
coverable  by  anatomy  (which  serve  as  the  medium  of  the  purely  spiritual
soul  by  which  the  grosser  body  is  ruled).  These  subtle  organs  suffer
most  in  those  diseases,  it  is  they  that  are  most  morbidly  deranged.

When  unsuitable,  unhomoeopathic  (allopathic)  drugs  in  large  doses
were  administered  to  such  patients,  the  more  massive  body  assuredly
suffered  but  little  from  them  (it  was  often  seen  that  twenty  grains  of
tartar  emetic  caused  no  vomiting,  &c.)  ; but,  on  the  other  hand  (and
this  our  physicians  did  not  observe,  for,  as  a rule,  they  are  gifted  with
but  small  powers  of  observation),  the  mental  and  emotional  organs  were
all  the  more  severely  affected  ; the  mania  or  melancholia  was  much
aggravated  by  such  violent  unsuitable  remedies,  sometimes  even
rendered  incurable.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  undeniably  true,  though  not  hitherto  sus-
pected, that  patients  suffering  from  mental  and  emotional  diseases  soon
regained  a healthy  state  of  their  mental  and  emotional  organs,  that  is  to
say,  perfect  recovery  of  their  health  and  reason,  by  means  of  doses  as
small  as  those  that  suffice  for  other  non-psychical  maladies,  namely,  by
quite  small  doses,  but  only  of  the  appropriate  and  perfectly  homoeopathic
medicine.

I have  never  found  it  necessary  to  give  a dose  of  more  than  a single
drop,  often  only  a small  portion  of  a drop,  of  white  hellebore  tincture,
diluted  to  such  an  extent  that  one  drop  contains  a quadrillionth  of  a
grain  of  this  root.  This  dose  may,  when  necessary,  be  given  to  the
patient  without  his  knowledge  in  his  ordinary  drink — consequently
without  it  being  requisite  to  employ  the  slightest  force,  which  is  always
prejudicial  in  such  cases,  provided  the  regimen  is  so  regulated  that  all


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


675


the  conditions  generally  required  to  sustain  healthy  life  are  simulta-
neously enforced,  and  everything  that  can  interfere  with  the  cure,  from
heterogeneous  medicinally-acting  food  and  drink  to  moral  and  psychical
hindrances,  is  most  carefully  eschewed.  This  is  not  the  place  to  treat
this  subject  in  greater  detail.

Paroxysms  of  pains  similar  to  those  the  white  hellebore  root  can
itself  produce,  and  which  always  brought  the  patient  for  a short  time
into  a sort  of  delirium  and  mania,  often  yielded  to  the  smallest  dose  of
the  above  solution.

Also  in  agues  which  consist  of  outward  cold  only,  or  are  attended
by  only  inward  heat  and  dark  urine,  this  root  is  often  employed  advan-
tageously, especially  when  cold  sweat  of  the  body  or,  at  least,  of  the
forehead,  is  present.

In  several  hypochondriacal  affections,  as  also  in  certain  kinds  of
inguinal  hernia,  it  is  very  useful,  at  all  events  as  an  intermediate
remedy.

Sudden,  grave  accidents  from  taking  white  hellebore  root  are  most
surely  removed  by  a few  cups  of  strong  coffee.  But  if  the  predomi-
nant state  is  pressive  pain  in  the  head  with  coldness  of  the  body  and
unconscious  sopor,  camphor  is  the  antidote.

If  an  anxious,  distracted  state,  accompanied  by  coldness  of  the  body
or  burning  sensation  in  the  brain  is  present,  then  aconite  is  of  service.
The  other  chronic  affections  caused  by  the  abuse  of  white  hellebore
root,  e.g.  a daily  forenoon  fever,  are  best  relieved  by  small  doses  of  cin-
chona bark .

Among  the  following  symptoms  of  white  hellebore  root,  some  seem
to  belong  to  the  secondary  action  (J.e.  the  opposite  state  developed  in  the
organism  after  the  primary  action),  but  these  can  only  be  elucidated  by
repeated  observation.

I have  seen  the  positive  effects  of  this  root,  even  in  small  doses,  last
five  days  and  longer.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Becher,  Franz,  Friedrich
Hahnemann,  Staff,  Teuthorn.

Citations  are  made  from  the  following  old-school  sources  :

Alberti,  Jurispr.  Med.,  vol.  vi.

Alston,  Lectures  on  the  Materia  Medica.

Benivenius,  in  Schenk,  viii.

Bergius,  Mat.  Med.

Borrichius,  Acta  Hafn.,  vi.

Dessenius,  Composit.  Medicam.,  lib.  x.

Dobrzewsky,  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  arm.  2.

EttmuLLER,  Op.,  tom.  ii.

Forestus,  P.,  xviii.

Galenus,  Cl.,  Comment.,  v.

Gesner,  Conr.,  Epist.  Med.

Grassius,  S.,  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  i,  ann  4.

G reding,  Vermischte  Sc  hr  if  ten.

Kalm,  Nordameric . resa.,  iii.

Ledelius,  S.,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  1.

Lentilius,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  1,  app

Lorry,  Be  Melanch.,  ii.

Muralto,  J.  de,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  ii,  anm  2.

Muller,  F.,  in  Hufel.  Journ.,  xii,  1.


676


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Reimann,  in  Bresl.  Sammi .,  1724.

Rodder,  L.,  in  Alberti , Med.  leg.

Scholzius,  in  Schenk , lib.  viii.

Smetius,  Misc.  Med.

Smyth,  in  Medical  Communications , vol.  i.

Vi  cat,  Plantes  <vtn6n.  de  la  Suisse.

Winter,  in  Bresl.  Sammi.,  1724.

The  Frag,  de  Vir.  gives  267  symptoms;  the  1st  edit.  71 1 ; this  2nd  edit.  716,
8 new  symptoms  being  added  to  Hahnemann’s  own  observations,  and  3 symptoms
omitted  from  the  <e  observations  of  others.”  Many  of  the  symptoms  quoted  from
modern  authors  are  given  in  Hahnemann’s  thesis,  On  the  Helleborism  of  the  Ancients ,
for  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  effects  of  “ white  hellebore,”  recorded  in  the
works  of  ancient  physicians,  especially  those  of  Antyllus,  a physician  who  flourished
between  the  second  and  fourth  centuries  of  our  era,  and  who  was  the  first  writer  who
described  the  operation  of  tracheotomy  ; but,  for  the  reason  given  (p.  689),  Hahne-
mann has  not  admitted  these  latter  symptoms  into  his  Materia  Medica. ]


VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Vertigo.  [Smyth,1  in  Medical  Communications , vol.  i,  p.  207. —
S.  Ledelius,2  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  i,  obs.  65.]

Vertigo  ; all  goes  round  in  a circle  with  him  (aft.  3^  h.).
Vertigo;  all  goes  round  in  a circle  in  his  head.  [Greding,3 4
Vermischte  Schriften,  p.  87.]

Excessive  vertigo.  [Reimann,2  in  Bresl.  Sammi.,  1724,  p.  535.]
5.  Want  of  ideas.

Mental  work  will  not  go  on  continuously  ; a want  of  ideas  soon
ensues.  [£//'.]

Intoxication  and  giddiness  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Fr.  H — «.]

When  walking  the  headache  increases  to  giddiness,  but  is  relieved
when  sitting  (aft.  2 h.).  \_Trn. ]

His  reason  leaves  him.

10.  Memory  almost  destroyed  ; he  forgets  the  word  on  his  tongue.

[Greding,  1.  c.]

His  memory  leaves  him.

His  consciousness  is  as  if  in  a dream.

Mild  delirium  ; cold  on  the  whole  body,  with  open  eyes,  cheerful,
sometimes  smiling  countenance  ; chatters  about  religious  subjects
and  of  vows  to  be  fulfilled,  prays,  and  thinks  he  is  somewhere  else
than  at  home  (aft.  1 h.).

Almost  complete  extinction  of  the  senses.  [Vic at, 4 [ Plantes
veneneuses  de  la  Suisse,  p.  167.]

15.  Dizzy,  he  feels  as  if  there  were  nothing  steady  in  his  head.

1 Effects  of  tincture  given  for  cutaneous  disease.

2 Effects  of  infusion  in  wine.

3 Effects  when  administered  to  patients,  all  of  whom  were  melancholics,  maniacs,
or  epilepto-maniacs.  These  do  not  succeed  one  another  in  regular  classes,  as  in  those
treated  with  Belladonna , Hyoscyamus  and  Stramonium , and  hence  cannot  be  identi-
fied as  there  ; but  all  symptoms  of  the  mind  and  disposition,  and  all  spasmodic  and
convulsive  phenomena  occurring  in  these  subjects,  may  safely  be  ascribed  to  their
disease  rather  than  to  the  drug,  as  its  dosage  was  quite  moderate.

4 From  powder  taken  in  soup.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


677


In  the  morning  very  dizzy.

Dizzy  continually  for  three  d*ys.

Stupid  in  the  head  with  nausea  for  two  days.  \_Fr.  H—n.~\
Headache.  [Ledelius,  1.  c.]

20.  Headache  with  some  stiffness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

Headache  with  vomiting  of  green  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.]
Headache  and  backache  with  bellyache  and  inclination  to  vomit.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

Painful  confusion  of  the  head,  with  tensive  pressure,  sometimes
in  the  temples,  sometimes  more  in  the  vertex,  most  violent  when
sitting  bolt  upright  and  standing,  but  diminished  when  stooping
forward  and  lying  on  the  back,  with  rather  contracted  pupils.  [67/1]
Intermittent  throbbing  headache  (aft.  6 h.).

25.  Throbbing  pain  above  the  left  eye,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.
1 h-)-

Aching  throbbing  pain  in  the  head.

In  the  morning  after  waking,  obtuse  pressure  in  the
crown  of  the  head.

Pressive,  semilateral  headache,  accompanied  by  pain  in  the
stomach  (aft.  4 h.).

Dull  pressive  headache,  which  extends  from  the  temples  to  the
forehead,  is  aggravated  by  lying  forwards,  but  goes  off  by  bending
backwards  and  by  external  pressure  ; on  the  other  hand,  it  recurs  after
raising  himself  up  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Trn .]

30.  Flat-pressing  headache  in  the  vertex,  which  became
throbbing  when  moving.  [Bch.]

Internal  cutting  in  the  vertex  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.]

Single  stitches  in  the  forehead  even  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.).
\Trn .]

His  head  is  very  heavy  and  all  turns  round  in  a circle  in  it.
[Ledelius,  1.  c.]

Humming  and  buzzing  in  the  front  of  the  forehead,  with  dull
internal  headache  (aft.  4 h.).  [T%.]

35.  Drawing  pain  in  the  head  and  sacrum.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.]
Violent  headache  with  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.]
(Sensation  as  if  a drop  of  water  ran  down  on  the  temple,  but  not
like  a coolness.)

Extremely  violent  headache,  which  goes  off  on  the  occurrence  of
the  menses.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.]

Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  shattered.

40.  By  fits,  pain  here  and  there  in  the  brain,  compounded
of  bruised  feeling  and  pressure.

Constrictive  headache,  with  constrictive  pain  in  the  oesophagus.
Shock  in  the  head  and  twitching  in  the  left  arm,  with  paleness  of
the  fingers.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  59.]

The  blood  rushes  strongly  into  the  head  when  stooping  (aft.  8 h.).
Feeling  of  warmth  and  coldness  at  the  same  time  on  the  head,
during  which  the  hairs  are  sensitive.

45.  Chilliness  on  the  crown  of  the  head  and  at  the  same  time  in  the
feet  (aft.  1 h.).


676


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Reimann,  in  Bresl.  Sammi .,  1724.

Rodder,  L.,  in  Alberti , ikW.  leg.

Scholzius,  in  Schenk , lib.  viii.

Smetius,  Misc.  Med.

Smyth,  in  Medical  Communications , vol.  i.

Vic  at,  Plantes  <vtn6n.  de  la  Suisse.

Winter,  in  Bresl.  Sammi.,  1724.

The  Frag,  de  Vir.  gives  267  symptoms;  the  1st  edit.  711  ; this  2nd  edit.  716,
8 new  symptoms  being  added  to  Hahnemann’s  own  observations,  and  3 symptoms
omitted  from  the  “ observations  of  others.”  Many  of  the  symptoms  quoted  from
modern  authors  are  given  in  Hahnemann’s  thesis,  On  the  Helleborism  of  the  Ancients ,
for  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  effects  of  “ white  hellebore,”  recorded  in  the
works  of  ancient  physicians,  especially  those  of  Antyllus,  a physician  who  flourished
between  the  second  and  fourth  centuries  of  our  era,  and  who  was  the  first  writer  who
described  the  operation  of  tracheotomy  ; but,  for  the  reason  given  (p.  689),  Hahne-
mann has  not  admitted  these  latter  symptoms  into  his  Materia  Medicai]


VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Vertigo.  [Smyth,1 2  in  Medical  Communications , vol.  i,  p.  207. —
S.  Ledelius,3  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  Dec.  iii,  ann.  i,  obs.  65.]

Vertigo  ; all  goes  round  in  a circle  with  him  (aft.  35  h.).
Vertigo;  all  goes  round  in  a circle  in  his  head.  [Greding,3
Vermischte  Schriften,  p.  87.]

Excessive  vertigo.  [Reimann,3  in  Bresl.  Sammi.,  1724,  p.  53 5.]
5.  Want  of  ideas.

Mental  work  will  not  go  on  continuously  ; a want  of  ideas  soon
ensues.  [6’//'.]

Intoxication  and  giddiness  (aft.  24  h.).  \_Fr.  H — ».]

When  walking  the  headache  increases  to  giddiness,  but  is  relieved
when  sitting  (aft.  2 h.).  [ Trn.~\

His  reason  leaves  him.

10.  Memory  almost  destroyed  ; he  forgets  the  word  on  his  tongue.

[Greding,  1.  c.]

His  memory  leaves  him.

His  consciousness  is  as  if  in  a dream.

Mild  delirium  ; cold  on  the  whole  body,  with  open  eyes,  cheerful,
sometimes  smiling  countenance  ; chatters  about  religious  subjects
and  of  vows  to  be  fulfilled,  prays,  and  thinks  he  is  somewhere  else
than  at  home  (aft.  1 h.).

Almost  complete  extinction  of  the  senses.  [Vicat,4  [ Plantes
veneneuses  de  la  Suisse , p.  167.]

15.  Dizzy,  he  feels  as  if  there  were  nothing  steady  in  his  head.

1 Effects  of  tincture  given  for  cutaneous  disease.

2 Effects  of  infusion  in  wine.

3 Effects  when  administered  to  patients,  all  of  whom  were  melancholics,  maniacs,
or  epilepto-maniacs.  These  do  not  succeed  one  another  in  regular  classes,  as  in  those
treated  with  Belladonna , Hyoscyamus  and  Stramonium , and  hence  cannot  be  identi-
fied as  there  ; but  all  symptoms  of  the  mind  and  disposition,  and  all  spasmodic  and
convulsive  phenomena  occurring  in  these  subjects,  may  safely  be  ascribed  to  their
disease  rather  than  to  the  drug,  as  its  dosage  was  quite  moderate.

4 From  powder  taken  in  soup.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


677


In  the  morning  very  dizzy.

Dizzy  continually  for  three  d*ys.

Stupid  in  the  head  with  nausea  for  two  days.  [Fr.  H — ».]
Headache.  [Ledelius,  1.  c.]

20.  Headache  with  some  stiffness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

Headache  with  vomiting  of  green  mucus.  [Greding,  1.  c.]
Headache  and  backache  with  bellyache  and  inclination  to  vomit.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

Painful  confusion  of  the  head,  with  tensive  pressure,  sometimes
in  the  temples,  sometimes  more  in  the  vertex,  most  violent  when
sitting  bolt  upright  and  standing,  but  diminished  when  stooping
forward  and  lying  on  the  back,  with  rather  contracted  pupils.  [£//!]
Intermittent  throbbing  headache  (aft.  6 h.).

25.  Throbbing  pain  above  the  left  eye,  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  (aft.
1 h.).

Aching  throbbing  pain  in  the  head.

In  the  morning  after  waking,  obtuse  pressure  in  the
crown  of  the  head.

Pressive,  semilateral  headache,  accompanied  by  pain  in  the
stomach  (aft.  4 h.).

Dull  pressive  headache,  which  extends  from  the  temples  to  the
forehead,  is  aggravated  by  lying  forwards,  but  goes  off  by  bending
backwards  and  by  external  pressure  ; on  the  other  hand,  it  recurs  after
raising  himself  up  (aft.  3 h.).  \_Trn.']

30.  Flat-pressing  headache  in  the  vertex,  which  became
throbbing  when  moving.  [Bch .]

Internal  cutting  in  the  vertex  (aft.  4 h.).  [Fz.]

Single  stitches  in  the  forehead  even  when  sitting  (aft.  4 h.).
[ Trn .]

His  head  is  very  heavy  and  all  turns  round  in  a circle  in  it.
[Ledelius,  1.  c.]

Humming  and  buzzing  in  the  front  of  the  forehead,  with  dull
internal  headache  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.]

35.  Drawing  pain  in  the  head  and  sacrum.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.]
Violent  headache  with  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.]
(Sensation  as  if  a drop  of  water  ran  down  on  the  temple,  but  not
like  a coolness.)

Extremely  violent  headache,  which  goes  off  on  the  occurrence  of
the  menses.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.]

Headache  as  if  the  brain  were  shattered.

40.  By  fits,  pain  here  and  there  in  the  brain,  compounded
of  bruised  feeling  and  pressure.

Constrictive  headache,  with  constrictive  pain  in  the  oesophagus.
Shock  in  the  head  and  twitching  in  the  left  arm,  with  paleness  of
the  fingers.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  59.]

The  blood  rushes  strongly  into  the  head  when  stooping  (aft.  8h.).
Feeling  of  warmth  and  coldness  at  the  same  time  on  the  head,
during  which  the  hairs  are  sensitive.

45.  Chilliness  on  the  crown  of  the  head  and  at  the  same  time  in  the
feet  (aft.  1 h.).


6y  8


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Itching  on  the  forehead.

Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead.

Itching,  eroding,  persistent  prick  on  the  hairy  scalp,  that  compels
scratching  (aft.  ioj  h.).  [Tz.]

Feeling  in  the  hair  on  the  right  side  of  the  head  as  if  a tuft  of  it
were  electrified,  a creeping  in  it  and  as  if  it  stood  on  end,  with  a
slight  shiver  of  the  skin  under  that  hair  (aft.  5 h.  and  more).  [St/.]
50.  During  the  headache  a painful  stiffness  in  the  nape.  [£//'.]

The  pupils  have  a tendency  to  contract.

Contraction  of  the  pupils  (aft.  1 \ h.),  with  persistent  contractive
pain  in  the  eyes.

Contracted  pupils  (immediately  and  aft.  6 h.).  [. Bch .]

Very  contracted  pupils  in  the  first  six  hours.  [£//'.]

55.  Dilated  pupils.

Very  dilated  pupils  (aft.  4 h.).

Very  dilated  pupils  (aft.  4 h.).  [Trn.]

Enormously  dilated  pupils  with  very  marked  weakness  of  sight  ;
he  cannot  recognise  people  even  close  to  him,  or  only  very  slowly,
at  seven  p.  m.  (aft.  8 h.).  [St/.]

Pain  in  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  34.]

60.  Complains  of  pain  in  both  eyes  and  moves  the  hands  over  the
head.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  62.]

Aching  pain  in  the  eye  with  loss  of  appetite.*'  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p-  58-]

After  a short  siesta  at  noon,  aching  in  the  eyelids  as  if  from  too
great  dryness  of  them,  followed  by  watering  of  the  eyes  (aft.  6\  h.).

L stf.\

Painful  dry  feeling  in  the  upper  eyelid,  as  if  there  were  salt  betwixt
it  and  the  eyeball,  without  much  redness  of  the  eye,  at  noon  after
dinner.  [SY/l]

Sensation  of  dryness  of  the  eyelids.

65.  The  eyelids  are  dry,  especially  when  he  has  slept  ; they  are
painful  as  if  they  had  been  rubbed  sore  ; they  are  stiff  and  stick
together.

Excessive  dryness  of  the  eyelids.

Painful  aching  shooting  in  the  upper  eyelid,  at  the  outer  canthus
(aft.  10  h.).  [T%.]

A kind  of  paralysis  of  the  eyelids,  they  felt  too  heavy,  he  could
hardly  raise  them  with  the  greatest  effort.

Fine  sharp  pricks  in  the  canthi.  [T%.]

70.  Internally  in  the  coverings  of  the  eye  a pricking  itching  (aft.  2
h.).  [Fz.]

The  right  eyeball  is  painful  at  the  outer  canthus  as  if  bruised,  in
repeated  attacks ; by  pressing  on  it  it  ceases  to  be  painful  (aft  3 h.).

[**•]

Heat  in  the  eyes  with  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Redness  of  the  white  of  the  right  eye.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  39.]

Painful  inflammation  of  the  eyes  with  excessively  violent  head-
ache5  on  account  of  which  he  cannot  sleep  at  night  (aft.  6 d.).

# At  the  same  time  the  blood  has  an  inflammatory  coat.


VERATRUM  ALBUM


679


75.  Inflammation  of  the  eyes  with  tearing  pain.

Inflammation  of  the  white  of  the  eye  with  tearing  pain  in  it.
Inflammation  of  the  right  eye.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  58.]
Inflammation  of  the  right  eye  with  febrile  heat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  36-]

Severe  inflammation  of  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

80.  Eyes  of  a watery  appearance,  as  if  they  were  covered  with
albumen.  \_Trn.~]

Blueness  of  the  left  eye  with  frequent  eructation.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  62.]

Distorted  projecting  eyes.

Eyes  turned  backwards,  so  that  the  white  only  can  be  seen,  for
an  hour.  [Borrichius,1  Acta  Hafn vi,  p.  145.]

Sparks  before  the  eyes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  35.]

85.  When  he  rises  from  his  seat  black  spots  and  sparks  come  before
the  eyes,  on  account  of  which  he  could  not  rise  for  eight  hours,  but
must  either  sit  or  lie  (aft.  3 h.).  [ Trn.  1

Diplopia.

Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  eyes.

His  sight  leaves  him  ; he  cannot  see.  [Borrichius,  1.  c.]

Dull  appearance  of  the  eyes  with  blue  rings  round  them.

90.  Copious  flow  of  water  from  the  eyes  and  cutting  pains,  with
dryness  and  heat  in  them  at  the  same  time  (aft.  A h.).

Frequent  flow  of  tears  from  the  eyes,  with  redness  of
them,  as  in  catarrh  (aft.  6 h.).  [Bch.]

Long  continued  intense  hot  feeling  in  the  eyes.

The  eyelids  stick  together  in  sleep  (aft.  2 h.).

Heat  in  the  eyes  and  face  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  as  if  a hot
vapour  blew  on  them.

95.  Paleness  of  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Cold,  distorted,  death-like  face.

Bluish  complexion.

Dark  red,  hot  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  41  and  64.]

Redness  of  face  with  great  thirst  and  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  42.]

100.  Extraordinary  redness  and  heat  of  the  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  80.]

Burning  in  the  face  and  head.  [Conr.  Gesner,2  Epist.  Med,.,
P.  69.]

An  itching  here  and  there  in  the  face  and  behind  the  ears,  as
though  pimples  would  break  out  there  (without  perceptible  redness),
with  feeling  of  excoriation  behind  the  ears  (aft.  28  h.).  [Stf.J

Creeping  (shuddering)  itching  on  various  parts  of  the  face,  more
smarting  than  pricking,  whereupon  small  red  papules  are  thrown  out,
with  red,  hard,  elevated  borders,  and  brown,  subsequently  yellow,
purulent  heads,  which  at  first  are  painless,  but  when  they  become
ripe,  touching  causes  sore  feeling.  [Tz.]


1 Not  accessible.

2 Effects  of  infusion.


68o


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Thick  miliary  eruption  on  the  cheek,  with  pain  in  the  face.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  64.]

105.  Copper-coloured  eruption  on  the  face,  round  the  mouth  and  chin.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.]

Swelling  of  the  face  lasting  several  days.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  49.]
(Twitching,  pinching  sensation  in  the  muscular  parts  of  the  face)
(aft.  3 h.).

At  noon  twitching  in  the  cheek,  sparks  before  the  left  eye,  pale-
ness of  the  face  and  faint  feeling,  then  vomiting  of  a quantity  of
white  froth — an  attack  that  returns  for  three  days.  [Greding,  1.  c ,

p-  6o-i

Drawing  and  tensive  pain  all  over  the  right  side  of  the  face  and
right  ear.

no.  Stitches  in  the  right  cheek  and  right  side  of  the  chest,  with  flow
of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  35.]

(Sweat  on  the  face  and  in  the  axillae  when  walking.)

In  the  morning  a pressing  in  the  right  ear  (aft.  2 d.).

Single  stitches  deep  in  the  left  ear.  [ Trn .]

Aching  pain  in  the  meatus  auditorius  externus.

1 15.  In  the  right  ear  first  a sensation  as  from  a cold  breath,  followed
by  sensation  of  great  heat  in  it,  then  again  cold  feeling,  and  so  on
alternately  several  times  (aft.  26  h.).  [<SV/1]

Tinnitus  aurium.

Roaring  in  the  ears  like  wind  and  storm.

When  he  rises  up  from  a seat  he  has  immediately  rushing  and
roaring  before  the  ears,  and  it  is  as  if  he  saw  nothing  but  fire  before
the  eyes,  for  eight  hours  (aft.  4 h.).  [Trn.]

Sensation  as  if  a skin  were  stretched  over  the  ear.

120.  Deafness  ; one  or  other  ear  is  stopped  up.

He  complains  of  deafness  and  pains  in  the  chest.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  43-1

(Tearing  in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.)

Under  the  right  ear-lobe  smarting  formication  and  itching.  [Tz.]
Sharp  stitches  close  behind  the  left  ear  and  maxilla.

125.  Sensation  as  if  the  nose  were  too  dry  inwardly,  such
as  is  caused  fey  the  dust  of  a dry  road  in  the  nose  (aft.  3 h.).

Sensation  as  if  the  nose  were  ulcerated  inwardly.

Sensation  as  of  compression  and  pressing  in  of  the  nasal  bone.

Red  spots  on  the  nose.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  38.]

Vesicles  close  together  on  the  nose.1  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  38.]

130.  (Epistaxis  at  night  during  sleep.)

Epistaxis  from  the  right  nostril.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  58.]

A smell  of  dung  before  the  nose  (aft.  16  h.).

Eruption  of  a pimple  near  the  angle  of  the  mouth,  at  the  border  of
the  red  part,  which  is  painful  per  se , but  still  more  when  touched.

At  the  left  angle  of  the  mouth  vesicular  eruption.  [Greding,
].  c.,  p.  41.]


1 The  day  after  S.  128,  in  the  same  subject.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


68 1


135.  Red  eruption  round  the  mouth  and  on  the  chin.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p-  52-]

In  the  evening  dry  lips  and  mouth,  not  without  thirst  (aft.  13

h.).  [F*.]

The  skin  of  the  lips  cracks.

A burning  on  the  vermilion  of  the  upper  lip  and  somewhat
beyond  it.

Foam  before  the  mouth.

140.  On  opening  the  jaws  shooting  pain  in  the  maxillary-joint,  which
prevents  him  depressing  the  lower  jaw  sufficiently  (aft.  4 h.).  [Trn.]
Closed  jaws.

When  eating  all  the  muscles  of  the  lower  jaw  are  painful,  as  if
bruised,  so  that  he  must  cease  chewing.  \_Trn.~\

Obtuse  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  side  of  the  jaw,  like  a
strong  pressure  with  a blunt  piece  of  wood.

In  the  lower  jaw  a painful  little  lump,  in  which  touching  first
causes  a contractive  pain,  it  then  becomes  a pustule  with  inflamed
areola.  [Fz.]

145.  Anteriorly  on  the  lower  jaw  a sore  pain  per  se  (aft.  9 h.).  [Fz.]
Pain  in  the  submaxillary  glands,  as  if  they  were  pinched  (aft.

3 h-)-

The  glands  of  the  left  lower  jaw  swell ; at  the  same  time  sore-
throat,  especially  on  the  left  side,  which  when  swallowing  causes  a
kind  of  choking  and  constriction  of  the  fauces,  lasting  a short  time
after  swallowing  (aft.  1 h.).  \_Bch.']

Drawing  and  pressure  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck.  [Fz,]

Grinding  of  the  teeth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  6 r .]

150.  Looseness  of  the  teeth.

Swelling  of  the  gums  and  lower  jaw.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  56.]
Violent  toothache  and  headache.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  69.]

First  toothache,  then  swollen  red  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]
During  the  toothache  and  inflammation  of  the  tonsils  great  weak-
ness. [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  69.]

155.  In  the  left  upper  molars  toothache  compounded  of  aching  and
heaviness,  as  if  they  were  filled  with  lead.  [Fz.]

Toothache,  first  pressive,  then,  when  chewing,  ending  in  a drawing
radiating  into  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  even  when  he  merely  takes  some-
thing soft  between  the  teeth.  [Fz.]

Stammering.  [S.  Grassius,1 2  Misc.  Nat . Cur .,  Dec.  i,  ann.  4,  p.

93-]

He  cannot  speak.

Speechlessness.  [Rodder,3  in  Alberti , Med.  Leg.,  obs.  15.]

160.  Burning  on  the  tongue  and  in  the  oesophagus.  [Gesner,  1.  c.]

Burning  in  the  mouth,  as  if  it  were  rubbed  with  pepper,  yet  it  is
not  dry  (aft.  1 h.).  [£^F]

Burning  in  the  throat.  [Bergius,3  Mat.  Med.,  p.  872.]


1 Effects  of  root  taken  medicinally. — This  symptom  temporary  only.

2 Not  accessible.

3 Statement.


682


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Inflammation  of  the  inside  of  the  mouth.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  36.]
At  the  back  of  the  mouth  and  fauces  a warmish  sensation.  [/%.]

165.  After  the  nausea,  first  pain  in  the  mouth  then  great  inflamma-
tion of  the  mouth,  lastly,  very  red  swollen  tongue.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  3r-]

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  on  the  palate,  and  thirst  for  water.  [Bch.]
Sticky  and  dry  in  the  mouth,  without  particular  thirst.  [6'//'.]

In  the  morning,  after  waking  and  rising,  for  an  hour,  extremely
tiresome  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  and  stickiness,  without
thirst,  which  is  but  slightly  relieved  even  after  rinsing  out  the  mouth
(aft  20  h.).  [iST/i]

Wateriness  alternating  with  dryness  and  stickiness  in  the  mouth
(aft.  24  h.).  [St/.]

170.  Much  tasteless  water  collects  in  the  mouth.  [St/]

Saliva  runs  incessantly  out  of  the  mouth,  like  water-
brash.

Flow  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  35  and  45.]

Flow  of  viscid  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  40.]

A numb  sensation  on  the  palate,  as  if  a burnt  place  had  healed
and  were  covered  with  thick  epidermis,  or  as  if  the  palate  were
covered  by  the  skin  of  a plum.

175.  A quantity  of  water  comes  suddenly  into  the  throat  (water-brash),
which  he  cannot  swallow  quick  enough,  and  on  account  of  its  getting
into  the  windpipe  he  often  chokes  (aft.  12 \ h.).  [/z.]

Something  very  cold  rises  up  in  the  oesophagus  (also  a part  far
back  in  the  palate  is  very  cold),  soon  after  which  a quantity  of  very
warm,  sweetish-salt  tasting,  slimy  fluid  is  belched  up  (water- brash),
whereupon  the  coldness  in  the  oesophagus  and  palate  ceases  for  a few
moments,  but  comes  back  again  (aft.  24  h.).  [$£/i]

Increased  flow  of  saliva,  with  pungent  salt  taste  in  the  mouth  and
on  the  tongue,  and  great  heat  in  the  palm  of  the  hand  and  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  82.]

Flow  of  mucus  from  the  mouth  towards  noon.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  71.]

Drawing  pain  in  the  throat,  thirst,  and  bellyache.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  87.]

180.  Spasmodic  constriction  and  choking  in  the  oesophagus,  as  though
he  had  eaten  an  unripe  or  wild  pear.

Narrowing  of  the  oesophagus  as  from  a tumour  pressing  on  it.
Burning  in  the  throat.

Scrapy  feeling  in  the  throat.

Roughness  in  the  throat.

185.  Dryness  in  the  throat,  which  cannot  be  removed  by  drinking  (aft.

6 h.).

Swelling  of  the  oesophagus.1  [Reimann,  1.  c.]

Swelling  of  the  oesophagus  with  feeling  as  if  he  should  choke.
[Gesner,  1,  c.]

Hiccup.


1 Not  found.


VERATRUM  ALBUM,  683

Hiccup.  [Smyth,  1.  c. — J.  de  Muralto,1  Misc.  Nat . Cur .,  Dec.
ii,  ann.  2,  p.  240.]

190.  Hiccup  for  half  an  hour.  [Gesner,  1.  c.]

Long  continued  hiccup.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  43.]

Hiccup  in  the  morning  when  smoking  tobacco  to  which  he  is
accustomed  (aft.  24  h.).

In  the  chest  he  feels  so  full  that  he  must  always  eructate,  with-
out nausea.  [ Fz .]

Empty  eructation  (immediately).

195.  (Eructation,  even  when  fasting;  sour  eructation  in  the  after-
noon.)

Bitter  eructation.

Empty  eructation  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  in  bed,
followed  by  a scratchy,  scrapy  feeling  in  the  larynx,  almost  like  after
heartburn  (aft.  12  h.).

(Eructation  with  the  taste  of  food.)

Frequent  movement  as  though  to  eructate.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
3i-]

200.  Forcible  eructation,  mostly  of  air  (aft.  6|  h.).  [Stf.]
After  eating  empty  eructation  of  air.  [7r».]

After  frequent  eructation  copious  ejection  of  mucus.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  49.]

Constant  sick  eructation  with  very  violent  cough.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  86.]

Voracious  hunger.2  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  36.]

205.  Voracious  hunger,3  without  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  69.]

Along  with  hunger  great  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  39  and  69.]
Diminished  taste ; a pappy  taste  in  the  mouth  (aft.  £

^ •)*

(Constant  sour  taste  in  the  mouth  with  great  accumulation  of
watery  saliva.)

Tasteless  saliva,  want  of  taste  in  the  mouth.

210.  Taste  and  coolness  in  the  mouth  and  thirst,  as  from
peppermint  drops.

Putrid  herbaceous  taste  in  the  mouth  almost  like  butter-burr
(tussilago  petasites)  (aft.  3 h.).

Pungent  peppermint  taste  in  the  throat,  with  sensa-
tion as  of  heat  rising  up  from  the  (Esophagus  into  the

mouth,  which  persists  and  is  accompanied  by  nausea  with  inclina-
tion to  vomit.

Foul  taste  in  the  mouth  like  dung.

At  noon  no  appetite  for  warm  food,  but  all  the  more  for  fruit.

[Bch.]

215.  Longing  only  for  cold  food,  herrings,  sardines,  fruit.  \_Bch.~\
Appetite  for  fruit.

Longing  for  lemon-juice.


1 Effects  of  root  taken  medicinally.

2 Not  found  here.

3 Greding  adds  tl  insatiable.”


684


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Longing  for  sour  things.

Persistent,  very  eager  longing  for  sour  gherkins.  [Fr.  H — «.]
220.  No  appetite  or  hunger;  he  did  not  relish  what  he  ate.  [TWz.]

Aversion  to  warm  food,  and  when  he  ate  it  he  did  not  relish  it,
though  he  had  not  eaten  for  a long  time ; whereas  he  had  longing  for
fruit.

Drinking  is  followed  by  shivering  and  goose-skin.  [T%.]

Along  with  hunger  and  thirst  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]
He  is  very  qualmish,  he  would  like  to  eat  something  but  has  no
appetite  for  food.  [SY/^.]

225.  He  eats  a great  deal,  but  complains  notwithstanding  of  hunger
and  emptiness  of  the  stomach.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]

Qualmishness  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis.  [*SY/\]

Nausea.  [Smyth,  1.  c.]

Whilst  eating  nausea  with  hunger  and  pressure  in  the  region  of
the  stomach,  which  goes  of  immediately  after  eating.

Breakfast  was  followed  by  inclination  to  vomit,  which  went  off
after  eating  meat  at  noon  (aft.  12  h.).

230.  Great  nausea  before  the  vomiting.

Constant  nausea  and  flow  of  saliva,  with  good  appetite  and  thirst.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  66.]

Inclination  to  vomit  with  taste  of  bile  in  the  mouth.

Great  nausea  with  much  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Great  nausea  with  profuse  flow  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.
54,  55,  56,  59,  63-]

235.  Nausea  with  great  thirst  and  diuresis,  for  three  days.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Great  nausea,  with  red,  perspiring  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  56.]
Inclination  to  vomit  and  hoarseness,  much  cough.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  85.]

Inclination  to  vomit,  during  which  froth  runs  out  of  his  mouth.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.]

Inclination  to  vomit,  with  lock-jaw  (trismus).  [Greding,  1.  c.,
p- g2-] . .

240.  Inclination  to  vomit,  with  flow  of  saliva  and  lock-jaw.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  83.]

Extreme  irritation  to  vomit  almost  to  fainting.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

P.  68.]

Vomiting.  [Smyth,  1.  c. — Muralto,  1.  c. — Greding,  1.  c. —
(immediately)  Ledelius,  1.  c.]

Vomiting  of  food.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  39.]

Two  attacks  of  vomiting,  each  time  vomiting  three  or  four  times;
in  the  intervals  of  half  a quarter  of  an  hour  between  the  attacks  of
vomiting,  the  nausea  persisted  ; the  vomited  matter  smelt  sour.-*

245.  Vomiting  of  the  food  with  green  slime.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  34.]
Vomiting  of  all  food  and  long  sleep.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  77.]
Vomiting  of  the  ingesta  with  slime  and  green  matter.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  32.]

# The  vomiting  was  allayed  by  drinking  cold  milk?  but  there  occurred  afterwards
in  bed  a very  severe  chill.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


685


Vomiting  of  green  slime.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  37.]

Vomiting  of  green  slime  and  then  of  a quantity  of  froth.  [Gred-
ing, 1.  c.,  p.  59.]

250.  Vomiting  of  green  slime,  then  chilliness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,p.  72.]
First  vomiting  of  froth  then  of  yellowish-green,  sour  smelling
slime.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  60.]

Nocturnal  vomiting  of  very  viscid  slime.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  56.]
Vomiting  of  white  slime  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]
Vomiting  of  white  slime,  with  good  appetite.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  68.]

255.  During  vomiting  of  dark  green  slime  and  diarrhoea  he  has
appetite  for  food  and  drink.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  80.]

Vomiting  of  much  slime  with  extreme  weakness.  [Greding,
].  c.,  p.  83.]

Vomiting  of  greenish-black  slime.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  40.]

Black  vomit.  [Alston,1  Lectures  on  the  Materia  Medica,  i,  4.88.]
First  vomiting  of  bile  then  of  very  viscid  mucus.

260.  He  vomits  first  bile  and  slime,  then  black  bile,  lastly,  blood.
[Benivenius,2  in  Schenk , viii,  obs.  174.]

Cholera.  [Cl.  Galenus,3  Comment,  v,  Aphor.  1. — P.  Forestus,4


XVlll.


obs.  44. — Reimann,  1.  c.'


Violent,  enormous  vomiting.  [Ettmuller,5  0/>.,  tom.  ii,  pt.  ii,
p.  435. — Vicat,  1.  c. — Forestus,  1.  c. — Lorry,6  De  Melanch ,,  ii,
p.  312. — Lentilius,7  Mtsc.  Nat.  Cur.y  Dec.  iii,  ann.  j,  app.]

Each  time  before  vomiting  shivering  all  over  the  body.

At  the  very  commencement  of  the  vomiting  he  must  lie  down,
and  at  the  termination  of  it  he  is  so  weakened,  the  femora  seem  as
if  they  would  escape  from  the  hip-joints.

265.  Before  the  vomiting  cold  hands  ; after  the  vomiting  hot  hands
with  ebullition  of  the  blood.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  83.]

Vomiting  with  heat  of  the  body.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  40.]
Distension  of  the  abdomen.  [Reimann,  1.  c.]

Distension  of  the  abdomen  with  flow  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p.  82.]

Swelling  of  the  abdomen,  with  bellyache  and  emission  of  flatus.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

270.  Loud  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  50  and

56.]

Bellyache  with  loud  rumbling.  [Greding,  1,  c.,  p.  39.]

Painless  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  flatulence  (aft.  J h.).

im

In  the  abdomen  flatulent  grumbling  and  pinching  ; rare  and
scanty  flatus  is  also  discharged.  [£//~.]


1 Statement. — This  symptom  occurred  when  the  drug  was  administered  to  maniacs
and  melancholics.

2 Observation  of  poisoning.

s Statement.

4 Observation  of  poisoning.

5 Effects  of  root  taken  medicinally.

6 Effects  of  cooked  root.

7 Effects  of  infusion  in  wine.


686


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Discharge  of  flatus  (aft.  7 h.).  [Stf.~\

275.  Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  as  if  he  had  diarrhoea,  during  which
flatus  is  often  expelled  (aft.  6 h.).  [Trn.]

Cardialgia.  [Reimann,  1.  c.]

Pressure  in  the  stomach.

Pressure  in  the  stomach.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  71  and  78.]
Burning  (incendium)  in  the  region  of  the  scrobiculus  cordis.
[Muralto,  1.  c.]

280.  Squeezing  pain  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,  more  when  walking.
Pain  in  the  stomach  as  from  voracious  hunger.

Violent  pressure  in  the  scroMculus  cordis,  which
extends  into  the  sternum,  hypochondria,  and  ossa  ilii

(aft.  8 h.).

Complains  of  stomachache,  and  yet  he  eats,  drinks,  and  sleeps
much.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.]

Pains  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.  [Lorry,  1.  c.]

285.  (Feeling  of  weakness  of  the  stomach  with  inward  coldness  in  the
region  of  the  stomach  and  slight  pressure.)

After  a moderate  meal  when  walking  shooting  in  the  region  of  the
spleen  (aft.  24  h.).

Tensive  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  as  from  flatulence.

About  the  scrobiculus  cordis  aching  and  drawing  pains.

Pain  in  the  hypochondria  and  chest  on  account  of  inability  to  get
rid  of  the  flatus.

290.  In  the  afternoon,  shortly  after  eating,  pinching  in  the  belly,  some-
times below  sometimes  above  the  navel,  which  went  into  a different
place  when  sitting  to  what  it  did  when  walking,  and  vice  versa.

[Bch.]

Bellyache,  thirst  and  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  63.]

Nocturnal  bellyache  with  sleeplessness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  54.]
Pain  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  44  and  77.]
Soon  after  eating  cutting  shooting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  (aft.
29  h.).  [T%.]

295.  Cutting  pains  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  diuresis  and  thirst.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  70.]

Sometimes  shooting  pain  in  the  belly,  sometimes  shooting  pains
here  and  there  on  the  body,  with  a smarting  as  if  from  pepper  in  the
throat.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

During  the  whole  morning  an  aching,  obtuse  pain,  as  if  bruised
in  the  bowels  in  the  pubic  region,  at  the  same  time  in  the  left  groin
a sensation  as  though  a hernia  would  occur  there,  chiefly  when
sitting.  [St/.]

Dull  bellyache  from  distension  and  tension  of  the  abdomen  by
flatulence,  as  if  the  bowels  were  constipated,  with  restlessness.

Without  much  tension  of  the  abdomen  or  pain  when  touched,
pain  round  the  navel  as  from  flatulence  (aft.  6 h.).  [St/.]

300.  Pain  in  the  abdomen  now  in  one  place  then  in  another  as  if  knives
were  cutting  into  it  (immediately).

Twitching  in  the  abdominal  muscles,  with  not  disagreeable
warmth  in  the  chest  (aft.  \ h.).


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  687

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  in  diarrhoea,  but  without  call  to
stool  (aft.  2 h.).  [Trn.]

In  the  evening  when  walking  drawing  aching  pain  in  the  belly.
[Fz.]

Pain  in  the  belly  from  the  back  forwards  to  the  navel.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  50.]

305.  Drawing  tearing  pain  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  chiefly  above  the
os  pubis,  for  a minute  at  a time  (aft.  1 h.).

Cutting  pains  in  the  belly  (aft.  12  h.).

Very  early  in  the  morning  (about  4 o'clock)  cutting  pains  in  the
belly  with  diarrhoea.

Flatulent  colic,  which  attacks  the  bowels  here  and
there  and  the  whole  abdomen ; the  longer  the  flatus  is
retained  the  more  difficult  is  it  to  be  expelled  (from  6 to
12  h.).

The  bowels  are  painful  as  if  bruised  when  the  flatus  delays  to
come  away.

310.  Painful  pressure  in  the  caecal  region,  as  from  spasmodically
incarcerated  flatulence  (aft.  1 h.).

Frequent  discharge  of  flatus  (the  first  hours).

Wind  is  forcibly  discharged  upwards  and  downwards.

Attempts  at  protrusion  of  an  inguinal  hernia.

Movement  as  if  a hernia  would  become  strangulated.

315.  When  coughing  stitches  occur  which  dart  out  from  the  abdomen
through  the  inguinal  ring  along  the  spermatic  cord  (aft.  3 h.).

After  drawing  pinching  pain  in  the  belly  there  occurs  discharge
of  flatus  and  a stool  of  viscid  faeces,  that  is  very  adherent  to  the
rectum.  [Fz.]

Frequent  sensation  in  the  abdomen  as  though  diarrhoea  would
ensue,  but  without  urging  to  stool  5 only  a kind  of  qualmishness  and
rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  [£//'.]

A feeling  of  want  to  go  to  stool  and  urging  to  stool  in  the  upper
part  of  the  abdomen,  and  yet  the  stool  is  only  evacuated  with  diffi-
culty or  not  at  all,  as  if  on  account  of  inactivity  of  the  rectum,  and
as  though  it  took  no  part  in  the  peristaltic  motion  of  the  rest  of
the  bowels  (aft.  4,  15  h.).

In  the  morning  after  waking,  in  bed,  sudden  (pinching  ?)  pain  in
the  belly,  and  immediately  afterwards  urging  to  evacuate ; during  the
bellyache  he  passed  yellowish-green,  pappy  faeces,  the  latter  portion
of  which  consisted  half  of  mucus  ; even  after  the  evacuation  the
urging  remained,  during  which  almost  nothing  but  mucus  was
passed  ; there  remained  behind  a sensation  in  the  bowels  above  the
pubes  as  if  they  were  bruised,  and  a squeamish  sensation  in  the
scrobiculus  cordis  (aft.  20  h.).  [St/.]

320.  Along  with  flatus  some  thin  faeces  pass  unobserved  (aft.  4,  16

M-

After  dinner  flatus  is  discharged  unobserved  with  fluid  stool  ;
then  diarrhoea  of  acrid  faeces  with  tenesmus  (aft.  1 h.).

Excessive  evacuations.  [Rodder,  1.  c.]

Very  frequent  and  painful  diarrhoea.  [Ledelius,  1.  c.]


688


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Frequent  and  violent  diarrhoeic  stools  (immediately).  [Benive-
nius,  1.  c.]

325.  Quick  often  soft  stools  (the  first  hours).

Too  soft  stool.  [Tr.  H—n.~\

Diarrhoea.  [Lentilius,  1.  c.]

Diarrhoea  with  profuse  perspiration.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  56.]
Before  stool  a sensation  deep  in  the  hypogastrium  as  if  syncope
were  about  to  ensue.

330.  Before  stool  a twisting  in  the  abdomen  and  back,  preceded  by
great  exhaustion,  after  stool  stronger  and  lighter.

During  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels  an  anxiety  with  dread  of

with  pains  during  and  after  the  stool.

During  the  frequent  stools  chilliness  and  shivering.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  60.]

During  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels  extraordinary  exhaustion.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  44.]

335.  He  becomes  pale  in  the  face  during  the  stool.1 2  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  40.]  _

During  the  diarrhoea  appetite  for  food  and  drink.  [Greding,  1.  c.,

p.  76.]

Violent,  bloody  diarrhoea.  [Ettmuller,  1.  c. — Dessenius,3  Com-
posit.  Medica?n .,  lib.  x,  p.  422.]

A diarrhoeic  stool  (aft.  12  h.).  [Bek.]

Stool,  the  first  part  of  which  is  of  large  size,  but  the  remainder
comes  away  in  thin  strips,  but  of  proper  consistence  and  colour.  [67/1]

340.  The  excrements  are  acrid  (aft.  12  h.).

Costiveness,  constipation  on  account  of  hardness  and
large  size  of  the  faeces  (aft.  3,  14  h.).

The  first  day  constipation.  [Tr».]

During  the  costiveness  diuresis.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  28.]

During  the  costiveness  heat  and  pain  in  the  head.  [Greding,
1.  cv  p.  44.]

345.  Long-continued  constipation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]

Ail  the  evacuations  are  suppressed.*

During  the  evacuations  profuse  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead.
[Alberti,4  Jurisp.  Med.,  t.  vi,  p.  718.]

Burning  in  the  anus  during  the  stool  (aft.  12  h.).

A burning  in  the  anus  during  the  stool.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  36.]

350.  (Sore  pain  at  the  anus.)  [S/f.]

Pressing  upon  the  anus,  with  blind  piles.

Blind  piles  (aft.  10  h.).

Aching  pain  in  the  bladder,  and  burning  when  urinating.3
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  55.]

* For  some  days,  from  an  excessively  large  dose.


apoplexy.

Diarrhoea


1 Should  be  u during  the  frequent  stools,”  as  in  S.  333.

2 Not  accessible.

3 Not  found.

4 This  sixth  volume  not  accessible.


VRRATRUM  ALBUM.


689


Burning  in  the  fore  part  of  the  urethra  during  micturition  (aft.  3
h.).  [ Trn.~\

3 55*  Scalding  urine.

Acridity  of  the  urine.

Stitch  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  after  micturition.

Pinching  pain  in  the  urethra  when  not  urinating.

Pajn  in  the  urethra  as  if  it  were  constricted  behind  the  glans
penis,  accompanied  by  urging  to  urinate,  ineffectual  because  the
bladder  was  empty  (aft.  24  h.).

360.  Involuntary  micturition.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  31.]

During  the  flow  of  urine  loud  rumbling  in  the  belly.  [Greding,
h c.,  p.  51.]

Diuresis.  [Kalm,1  Resa  til  Norra  America , iii,  p.  49.]

Diuresis  with  severe  coryza.  [Greding,  1.  c.]

The  scanty  urine  is  yellow  and  turbid,  even  when  first  passed
(aft.  24  h.).

365.  Excoriation  of  the  prepuce.

Drawing  pain  in  the  testicles.

Erections  of  the  penis.

Greater  feeling  and  sensitiveness  of  the  genital  organs  (aft.  12,
15  h.).


Copious  menses.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

370.  The  long-absent  menses  return  at  the  new  moon.

The  menses  that  had  been  suppressed  many  years  reappear.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  pp.  51,  80.]

Before  the  catamenia  epistaxis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  59.]

The  catamenia  return  too  soon,  on  the  thirteenth  and  ninth
days.  [Greding,  1.  c.]

Small  pimples  on  the  right  labium,  before  the  menses.  [Greding,
1.  c.]

375.  Before  the  menses  (towards  noon)  vertigo2  and  (at  night)  sweat.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  70.]

During  the  flow  of  the  menses  (which  had  remained  absent  six
weeks)  headache  (tearing?),  especially  in  the  morning,  with  incli-
nation to  vomit ; in  the  evening  the  headache  is  relieved.

During  the  catamenia  roaring  in  the  ears,  pain  in  all  the  limbs,
and  great  thirst.3  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  81.]

Towards  the  end  of  the  menstrual  flux  grinding  of  the  teeth  and
bluish  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  61.]

* *


Dryness  and  heat  in  the  nose  as  in  stuffed  coryza  (aft.  6 h.),

[*/.]

380.  Coryza  (aft.  8 h.).

Violent,  very  frequent  sneezing.  [Muralto,  1.  c.]

Catarrh  on  the  chest,  without  actual  (involuntary)  cough ; the
viscid  mucus  must  be  brought  up  by  hacking  cough  (aft.  8 h.).


VOL.  11.


1 Statement,  (ii,  93,  of  English  translation.)

2 In  original,  “ Drehen  im  Kopfe.”

3 Not  found.


44


6go


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Violent  palpitation  of  the  heart  which  pushes  the  ribs  out ; the
heart  beats  very  high  and  pushes  the  hand  away,  without  pain.

Palpitation  of  the  heart  with  anxiety,  and  quicker,
audible  respiration.  [Bch.]

385.  Excessive  anxiety  that  takes  away  the  breath.

Oppression  of  the  chest  after  a burning  in  the  throat  and  a
gnawing  pain  in  the  stomach.  [Bergius,  1.  c.]

Tightness  of  the  chest  and  difficult  respiration,  even  when  sitting,
and  at  the  same  time  headache.  \_Bch.']

Tightness  of  the  chest : he  cannot  draw  in  sufficient  breath  on
account  of  narrowing  of  the  air  tubes  by  viscid,  dense  mucus  (aft.  \\
h.).  [Fz.]

On  the  slightest  movement,  even  in  the  house,  short  breath  (a
kind  of  oppression  of  the  chest),  which  only  goes  off  on  sitting
quite  silent  and  motionless.

390.  Extremely  laboured  and  difficult  respiration.  [Benivenius,  1.  c.]

Spasmodic  contraction  of  the  intercostal  muscles  towards  the  left
side,  which  hinders  breathing  (aft.  3 h.).

Painful  constriction  of  the  chest.

Soft  pressure  on  the  chest,  when  standing,  and  tightness  of  the
chest  (aft.  1 ij  h.).  [Tz.]

When  walking  tightness  of  the  chest  and  pressing  in  it  as  from
fulness,  so  that  his  breath  fails  him.  [Tz.]

395.  It  takes  away  his  breath.

It  takes  away  his  breath.  [Forest,  1.  c.]

Almost  completely  extinct,  unnoticeable  breathing.

They  were  in  danger  of  suffocation,  so  tight  was  their  breath.
[L.  Scholzius,1 2  in  Schenk , lib.  viii,  obs.  178.]

Constriction  of  the  larynx.  [Muralto,  1.  c.-— Winter, 2 in
Breslauer  Sammlung , 1724,  p.  267.]

400.  Suffocative  constriction  of  the  larynx.  [Reimann, — Lorry,  1.  c.]

Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  larynx,  with  contracted
pupils.

Attacks  of  constriction  of  the  larynx,  suffocative
attacks,  with  protruding  eyes  (aft.  \ h.).

Scrapy  feeling  in  the  throat,  like  catarrh.

Pulsating  pressure,  as  with  a blunt  point,  on  the  left  side  of  the
chest,  in  the  region  of  the  fourth  rib  ; on  touching  the  part  there  was
sore  pain  and  as  if  festering.  [Tz.]

405.  Attacks  of  anxiety  at  the  heart,  which  then  beats  very  strongly,
and  with  a feeling  as  if  it  were  very  warm  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Trn.~\

In  the  left  side  of  the  chest  contractive  pain,  like  cramp,  period-
ically recurring  (immediately).

Frequent  oppression  on  the  chest,  and  on  breathing  a pain  in  the
side,  especially  in  the  morning  on  rising  (aft.  5 d.).

Squeezing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  sternum,  more  after  drinking
than  after  eating.


1 Observation  of  poisoning.

2 Observation.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


691

A pressive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  sternum  after
eating  and  drinking.

410.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  ste,rnum  (aft.  2 h.).

A pressure  ending  in  a stitch  under  the  last  right  rib,  worst  when
breathing  (aft.  24  h.).

Cutting  pain  in  the  chest  (aft.  15  h.).

Pain  under  the  ribs,  especially  during  expiration.

Some  attacks  during  the  day  of  shooting  pain  in  the  right  side  of
the  chest  that  interrupts  respiration.

415.  In  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  on  a small  spot,  a pricking  throbbing
pain  (aft.  5 h.).

Stitches  in  the  right  side.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  32.]

Pain  in  the  side  with  pains  in  the  region  of  the  stomach.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  53.]

Pain  on  all  the  ribs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  31.]

Pain  in  the  side,  in  the  breasts  and  thighs.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  54-]

420.  Sharp,  slow  stitches  near  the  nipple,  that  at  last  itch.  [#2.]

Pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  then  in  the  back.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  54.]

Frequently  recurring  chest  pains.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  44.]

A painful  rhythmical  pressure  in  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum.
[Bch.]

Grasping  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  (aft.  20  h.).  [Fr.

H — n.]

425.  Pain  in  the  chest  with  dry  cough.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  42.]

Tickling  quite  low  down  in  the  air  tubes,  causing
cough,  with  slight  expectoration  (aft.  1,  6 h.).

Dry  short  cough,  excited  by  a tickle  in  the  lowest  part  of  the
sternum  (immediately).

Tickle  quite  low  down  in  the  ramifications  of  the  air  tubes,
causing  cough,  without  expectoration  (aft.  24  h.).

During  the  Cough  oppression  in  the  chest.

430.  Along  with  almost  dry  cough,  pain  in  the  side  and  headache.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

During  the  cough  pain  in  the  left  side,  with  weakness  and
dyspnoea.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  35.]

In  the  evening  deep,  hollow  cough,  each  time  of  three  to  four
impulses,  which  seemed  to  come  from  the  abdomen.  \_Bch.~\

Hollow  cough  with  long  impulses,  and  cutting  pain  in  the
abdomen  (aft.  6 h.).  \_Bch.~\

Tickle  on  the  chest  as  though  to  cough,  in  the  middle  of

the  sternum  (aft.  \ and  1 h.).  [i?r/?.]

435.  In  the  evening  severe  cough,  for  three  hours,  with  flow  of  sain  a.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  42.]

At  night  hoarse,  dry  cough.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  61.]

At  night  and  in  the  morning  severe  dry  cough.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P-  43-1

After  dry  cough  frequent  expectoration.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  43.]


692  VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Cough  and  copious  expectoration,  with  blueness1 *  of  the  face  and
involuntary  micturition.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  85.]

440.  Heaviness  of  the  head  in  the  nape ; the  cervical  muscles  cannot
support  the  head.

The  muscles  of  the  nape  are  as  if  paralysed.

Rheumatic  stiffness  of  the  nape,  which  causes  vertigo,  especially
when  moving.

Round  about  the  neck  and  on  the  chest  a pricking  as  from
stinging-nettles,  which  is  allayed  by  stroking  with  the  hand  (with
redness  and  miliary  eruption  on  the  skin,  only  observable  on  passing
the  hand  over  it).

Pain  outwardly  on  the  neck,  as  if  the  skin  were  excoriated  there.

445.  Burning  in  the  region  of  the  scapulae.  [Gesner,  1.  c.]

Pain  from  the  scapulae  all  over  the  back,  with  diuresis,  thirst,  and
costiveness.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  53.]

Oppression  between  the  scapulae,  also  when  sitting ; on  turning
the  pain  becomes  decidedly  tugging.

Rheumatic  pain,  felt  when  moving,  betwixt  the  scapula
and  from  the  nape  to  the  sacrum  ; it  is  particularly  severe  when  going
to  stool.

Violent  pressure  on  the  scapulae,  as  if  they  were  bruised  and
contused.

450.  After3  pains  in  the  back  pain  in  the  umbilical  region.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  80.]

When  stooping  and  raising  himself  up  again  aching  pain  in  the
back,  and  as  if  it  were  broken,  in  the  morning.  [Tz.]

The  spine  is  painful  when  walking,  and  afterwards  a drawing
aching,  as  if  bruised  ; this  pain  is  removed  by  pressure  (aft.  J 1 h.).
[Fz.]

Pain  in  the  loins.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  54.]

Pain  in  the  loins  and  gouty  tearing  pains  in  the  inferior  extre-
mities. [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  49.]

455.  After  rising  from  a seat  when  moving  a paralytic  and  bruised
pain  in  the  joint  of  the  sacrum  and  knee.

Pain  in  the  sacrum  when  walking  on  a level,  not  when  sitting  (in
the  morning).

When  stooping  there  occurred  in  the  sacrum  a stitch  which
lasted  a long  time.

When  standing  an  aching  pain  in  the  sacrum.

When  stooping,  as  well  as  when  rising  up,  the  sacrum  on  its  left
side  is  painful  as  if  bruised.  [Tz.]

460.  Intermittent  stitches  on  the  coccyx  when  standing,  more  itching
than  shooting.  \_FzJ\

On  the  shoulder  a cutting  pain  like  a single  cut.

Single  stitches  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  even  when  at  rest  (aft.
4h.).  [7r«.]

In  the  right  axilla  a slight  indescribable  pain.  ['SV/'.]


1 In  original,  “ schwarz.”

(<  After  ” should  be  " before.”


VERATRUM  ALBUM.  693

Gouty  pain  in  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  upper  arm  and  in  the
knee.

465.  The  arms  are  affected  with  paralytic  pain,  as  if  bruised  ; he  can
only  raise  them  up  and  keep  them  up  with  pain  and  effort.

Twitchings  in  both  arms.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  71.]

Paralytic  bruised  pain  of  the  left  upper  arm  on  stretching  it  out.

Feeling  of  coldness  of  the  arms  on  raising  them  up.

Sensation  in  the  arm  as  if  it  were  too  full  and  swollen.

470.  In  the  middle  of  the  left  humerus  a down-drawing  pain,  as  if  sore
from  lying  on  it  (aft.  J h.).  [Fz.]

On  flexing  the  elbow  drawing  pain  in  the  bend  of  it ; it  feels
to  him  to  be  swollen  and  as  if  he  could  not  bend  it  perfectly  in  con-
sequence ; at  the  same  time  a paralysed  feeling  in  the  arm  (aft.  15  h.).

LFz'h

Pain  in  the  middle  of  the  left  forearm,  as  if  the  hone
were  pressed.

Trembling  in  the  arm  when  grasping  anything  with  the  hand.

Twitching  in  the  right  wrist  and  further  up  towards  the  elbow.

475.  (A  dry  tetter  on  the  hand  between  the  thumb  and  forefinger.)

An  eroding  itching  on  the  inner  side  of  the  wrist  (aft.  24  h.).

Formication  in  the  hands  and  fingers.

Formication  in  the  hand  as  if  it  had  been  asleep.

Formication  in  the  fingers  causing  anxiety.

480.  Dying  away,  going  to  sleep  of  the  fingers  (aft.  1 h.).

The  second  row  of  the  bone  shafts  of  the  fingers  is  painful  on
grasping  anything  (aft.  20  h.).

Red  painless  pimples  on  the  backs  of  the  fingers  between  the
second  and  third  joints  (aft.  20  h.).

Tensive  pain  in  the  middle  finger  on  moving  it  (aft.  20  h.).

Pain  in  the  thumb-joint  as  if  dislocated.

485.  Burning  itching  pain  in  the  first  phalanx  of  the  little  finger,  as  if
it  were  frost-bitten.

In  the  upper  part  of  the  glutaei  muscles  a cramp-like  drawing
when  standing.  [Fz.]

Very  great  difficulty  of  walking,  like  paralysis,  first
of  the  right,  then  also  of  the  left  hip-joint.

The  thighs  and  hips  seem  as  if  they  would  break  down  and  are
painful  as  if  paralysed.

Weakness  almost  only  in  the  thighs  and  knees.

490.  Visible  pulsating  twitching  of  the  large  outer  femoral  muscle
when  sitting  and  standing;  this  muscle  rose  up  in  a painless
pulsating  manner,  and  sank  down  in  a similar  way,  recurring  im-
mediately after  walking  (aft.  9 h.).  [Fz.]

In  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  rheumatic  drawing  pain  when
standing  (aft.  3 h.).  [Fz.]

Cramp-like  pressive  pain  in  the  thigh  or  in  the  calf  when  he
supports  himself  less  on  that  leg  when  standing  (aft.  31  h.).  [Fz.]

The  thighs  are  painful  when  sitting,  as  if  broken  (aft.  8 h.).  [Fz.]

Tension  in  the  houghs  when  standing  and  walking  as  if  they
were  too  short.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


694  •

495.  When  standing  spasmodic  drawing  pain  from  the  hough  up  into
the  right  thigh  (aft.  12  h.).  [T%.]

On  the  outer  side  of  the  knee-joint  a cold,  sore  sensation.  [T%.]

Cracking  in  the  knee.

A cutting  pain  as  if  with  a knife  on  the  knee,  transient,  a single

cut.

(Shooting  in  the  knee  and  ankle)  (aft.  5 d.).

500.  Drawing  in  the  knees  sometimes,  when  standing,  walking,  and
sitting.

Bruised  pain  in  the  knees  when  going  downstairs  (aft.  4 h.).

Painful  twitching  in  the  right  knee.

Single,  visible,  high  raising  up  of  the  knee  when  sitting  (in  the
afternoon),  once  every  quarter  and  half  hour,  without  pains  ; he
started  every  time  it  occurred  ; it  ceased  on  lying  down  in  the
evening.

Sensation  like  electric  shocks,  followed  by  bruised  pain  in  the
knee  and  elbow.

505.  Pains  in  the  legs,  especially  the  knees,  as  from  extreme  weariness,
as  if  large  stones  were  fastened  to  them  ; in  order  to  get  relief  he
must  lay  them  first  in  one  place  then  in  another  (aft.  48  h.).

Pain  on  treading  immediately  under  the  knee  in  the
hone,  as  if  it  had  been  broken  and  was  not  yet  quite  firm.

A downward  tearing  pain  in  the  tibia.

His  tibiae  burn  in  the  evening  as  though  they  emerged  from  great
cold  (aft.  14  h.).  [T%.]

Heavy  pain  of  the  legs  as  from  fatigue.

510.  A formication  in  the  legs  up  to  the  knee,  a painful  swarming
in  them.

Heavy  pain  of  the  legs,  as  if  paralysis  impended,  in  the  morning.

Cramp  in  the  calves.

In  the  calf  smarting  itching  and  formicating  sensation  when
standing  (aft.  4 h.).  [Tz.]

Pain  in  the  calves  and  tibia,  as  if  they  would  break  down.

515.  Pressure  on  the  ankle,  as  if  the  bone  were  actually  touched  and
pressed,  momentarily  (aft.  8 d.).

Painful  drawing  transversely  through  the  joints  of  the  foot  when
sitting  (aft.  ij  h.).  [Tz.]

A burning  in  the  ankle.

The  ankle  joints  are  painful  when  walking  as  if  sprained,  after
having,  while  sitting,  stretched  the  feet  so  far  behind  him  that  they
came  to  rest  on  the  backs  of  the  toes,  in  the  evening  (aft.  15  h.).

[*■*•]

The  feet  swell  quickly  and  after  a few  hours  again  become  thin.

520.  Twitchings  in  quick  succession  in  the  weak  foot  when  standing
but  not  when  walking  (aft.  3 d.).

Coldness  in  the  feet,  as  if  cold  water  were  running  about  in  them,
with  trembling.

When  walking  a tensive  pain  in  the  extensor  tendons  of  the  toes.

Short  shooting  pains  on  the  toes  of  the  right  foot
when  standing,  for  two  hours  (aft.  14  h.)  [Bch.].


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


695


Shooting  pains  in  the  big  toe  (aft.  5 h.).

525.  Brings  on  a return  of  the  podagra.

Almost  burning  itching  deep  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left  heel
(after  2 h.).

When  sitting  a violent  prick  in  a corn  on  the  left  foot  (aft.  14  h.).
[*•*•]

Sore  pain  in  the  corn  when  he  raises  himself  up  so  that  he  comes
to  stand  only  on  his  toes,  in  the  evening  (aft.  15  h.).  [Tz.]

Tottering  gait.

530.  When  walking  he  feels  a clumsiness  and  heaviness  in  the  feet  and
knees.  [£7/.]

His  arms  and  legs  always  feel  as  if  gone  to  sleep,  even  when
lying  (aft.  8 h.).  [Trn.~\

Painful  paralysis,  as  from  over-exertion  in  the  upper  and  lower
extremities,  only  when  moving ; he  can  scarcely  drag  himself  along.

Heat  and  formication  in  the  whole  body  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers
and  toes.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  83.]

An  itching  on  the  arms  and  legs,  as  though  an  eruption  would
break  out,  but  without  redness  (aft.  2 h.).

535.  Eroding  itching  on  the  skin  (aft.  12  h.).

An  itching  apparently  in  the  bones.

Desquamation  of  the  skin  [Smetius,1  Misc.  Med,.,  p.  265.]

Cutaneous  eruption  like  the  itch.

In  several  places  (spots)  agglomerated  painful  papules.

540.  Miliary  rash,  which,  when  he  becomes  warm,  even  during  the
day,  itches  (only  in  the  region  of  the  joints  ?)  ; after  scratching  the
places  burn,  and  wheals  arise,  as  from  stinging-nettles.

Burning  sensation.2  [Kalm,  1.  c.]

Pain  in  the  muscular  parts  of  the  body,  compounded
of  aching  and  bruised  feeling.

Sensation  in  the  bones  as  if  they  were  bruised  (aft.  2 h.).

Flying  stitches  here  and  there  in  the  body.

545.  Drawing  pain  in  the  limbs.

When  walking  quickly  drawing  pain  in  the  limbs,  which  goes
off  on  walking  farther.

When  sitting  tearing  pain  in  the  extensor  muscles.

(Pain  in  the  limbs  on  which  he  lies,  as  if  the  bed  were  as  hard  as
stone.)

Stiffness  of  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  forenoon,  and  after  stand-
ing.

550.  The  limbs  go  to  sleep.

Pain  of  all  the  limbs,  as  though  they  were  exhausted
by  excessive  fatigue.

Extension  (tensio)  of  the  limbs.3  [Ledelius,  1.  c.]

In  the  limbs  spasmodic  drawing  up  over  the  joints  when  moving
(aft.  10,  12  h.).  [Fz.~\


1 Observation. — After  but  slight  vomiting  and  purging.

2 From  external  application,

3 With  S.  33.


696


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Twitchings  in  the  limbs  and  profuse  perspiration  ; then  headache,
vertigo,  and  great  drinking.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  71.]

555.  Spasm,  convulsions.  [Muralto, — Winter,—  Rodder,— Lede-
lius, — Lorry,  1.  c.]

Epileptic  spasms.*  [Lentilius,  1.  c.]

Trembling  of  the  whole  body.

Trembling  in  all  the  limbs,  horrible  cardiac  anxiety,  and  tendency
to  syncope.  [Alberti,  1.  c.]

Desire  to  lie  down.

560.  The  open  air  affects  him  greatly,  just  as  the  open  air  affects  and
oppresses  a person  recovering  from  an  acute  disease.

Tendency  to  perspire  at  every  movement.

Exhaustion  in  all  the  limbs.

Exhaustion  all  over  the  body  as  though  he  had  walked  too  far
(aft.  2 h.).  [Trn,]

Exhaustion  as  though  the  air  were  too  hot.

565.  Long-continued  weakness.

Prostration  and  weakness  of  the  whole  body,  especially
of  the  arms  and  hands,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  hold  out
a not  heavy  book  before  him.  \_Bch.~\

In  the  morning  drowsy  exhaustion,  which  prevents  him  rising
from  bed.

He  cannot  stand  up  for  eight  hours,  but  must  either  sit  or  lie  ; if
he  stands  up  he  is  tortured  by  horrible  anxiety,  during  which  the
forehead  is  covered  by  cold  sweat,  and  he  becomes  sick  to  vomiting
(aft.  3 h.).  [Trn.]

When  lying  the  exhaustion  was  not  relieved,  but  all  the  other
sufferings  were,  and  they  recurred  only  when  he  stood  up  j when
sitting  they  went  off,  the  headache  alone  remained.  [ Trn.]

570.  Extreme  weakness.!

Extreme  weakness.1  [Benivenius, — Smyth, — Vicat,  1.  c.]

The  strength  gives  way,  he  sinks  together.

Paralytic  sinking  of  the  strength.

Rapid  sinking  of  all  the  strength,  which  invites  to  sleep,  in  the
forenoon.

575.  Slow  movement  of  the  body.

Relaxation  of  the  muscles.

He  dreads  an  attack  of  syncope.  [Lorry,  1.  c.l

Syncope.

Syncope.  [Forest,  1.  c.]

580.  Apoplexy.  [Dobrzewsky,2  in  Eph.  Nat.  Cur .,  Dec,  1,  ann.  2,
P.  279.]

Pulse  almost  extinct.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

* General  spasms  seem  hardly  ever  to  be  caused  by  'veratrum , except  just  before
death,  and  seem  to  be  an  antagonism  of  nature  indicative  of  its  powerlessness,
f Iron  seemed  to  remove  this.


1 Smyth  says,  a especially  in  lower  extremities.”

2 Effects  of  root  taken  medicinally  — By  this  term  the  reporter  simply  means
unconsciousness  which  supervened  upon  much  vomiting  and  purging.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


697


Imperceptible  pulse.  [Rodder,  1.  c.]

Pulse  very  slow  and  almost  extinguished  (aft.  4 and  more  h.).

The  pulse  of  ordinary  rapidity,  but  quite  weak  and  almost
imperceptible  (aft.  8 h.).  [Bch.]

585.  Yawning.

After  the  midday  nap  yawning  and  stretching.  [*SV/.]

Yawning,  often  so  violent  that  it  caused  a roaring  in  the  ears.

[Bch.]

Repeated  yawning  and  stretching,  with  weakness  and  bruised
feeling  in  the  joints,  as  though  he  had  not  slept  enough  (in  the
morning).  [Tz.]

General  powerlessness  of  the  body  as  though  he  had  not  slept
enough,  with  liveliness  of  the  mind  (in  the  morning).  [Tz.]

590.  On  account  of  excessive  liveliness  of  the  mind  he  could  not  get
to  sleep  before  midnight,  for  two  successive  nights  ; at  the  same  time
an  intolerable  feeling  of  heat  in  bed  (he  endeavoured  to  throw  off  the
clothes)  with  restless  tossing  about.  [£y]

He  is  late  of  falling  asleep.  [5^.]

Long,  uninterrupted  sleep.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  43.]

(Too  profound  sleep.)

Sleep  for  three  days,  even  during  the  epileptic  fits.*  [Greding,
c„  p.  32.]

Tranquil  sleep,  with  thirst  and  diuresis.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
49-1

Stupefied  sleep,  waking  sopor.

Waking  sopor  ; one  eye  remains  open,  the  other  is  closed  or  half
closed,  and  he  often  starts,  as  if  from  affright  (aft.  \ h.).

(After  going  to  bed,  in  the  evening,  almost  until  midnight,
anxiety  and,  during  waking  sopor,  drawing  movements  in  the
abdomen,  which  cause  roaring  in  the  head.)

Drowsiness  with  starting  in  affright,  which  prevents  him  sleeping  ;
afterwards  febrile  symptoms.

600.  He  fell  asleep  with  half  consciousness,  sitting  on  a chair.  [£//'.]

When  asleep  he  lays  his  arms  over  his  head  (the  first  hours).

Moaning  in  sleep.

Sleep  interrupted  by  anxiety  and  emotional  disturbance,  with
complaints  that  the  blood  in  all  his  blood-vessels,  especially  in  the
head,  was  burning,  and  spasm  rose  from  the  chest  to  the  throat,
with  particular  heat  of  the  head  and  hands  ; heat  and  anxiety  went  off
in  the  open  air,  and  were  followed  by  frequent  yawning.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  82.]

(At  night  waking  up  with  much  chilly  trembling  in  the  right
arm.)

605.  Indistinct  dreams  ; in  the  morning  he  wakes  unusually  early.

[^.]. .

Vivid  anxious  dreams  of  robbers  ; he  woke  up  in  a fright  and
continued  to  believe  that  the  dream  was  true,

Dream  of  being  violently  hunted.


1.

595

P


fn  an  epileptic  patient.


698


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


Frightful  dreams,  and  then  vomiting  of  very  viscid  green  slime.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

At  night  frightfully  anxious  dreams,  e.g.  that  a dog  bit  him  and
he  could  not  escape.  [Bch.]

610.  At  night  quarrelsome  dreams.  [Frn.]

Coldness  of  the  whole  body.

Coldness  of  the  whole  body.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

Coldness  and  feeling  of  cold  in  the  whole  body  (aft.  11  m.).
[Bch.]

Coldness  running  over  the  whole  body  soon  after
taking  it.  [Bch.]

615.  Feeling  of  internal  chill  ran  through  him  from  the
head  to  the  toes  of  both  feet  at  once,  with  thirst  (imme-
diately after  taking  it).  [Bch.]

Chilliness  in  the  whole  body.  [Rodder,  1.  c.]

Shivering,  horripilation  in  the  skin,  e.g.  of  the  face  (aft.  2 h.).

In  the  morning,  chilliness  and  shivering.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  60.]
Continued  rigor  in  the  back  and  over  the  arms.  [*SV/.]
620.  All  day  chilliness  and  shivering  and  drawing  pain  on  the  neck  and
in  the  back.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.]

Chilliness  in  the  limbs  and  drawing  pain  in  them.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  87.]

In  the  morning  immediately  after  risi/ig,  whilst  dressing,  febrile
rigor.  [Bch.]

Chilliness  and  heat  alternating  from  time  to  time,  at  the  same
time  vertigo,  constant  anxiety  and  inclination  to  vomit.1  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  81.]

Sudden  alternation  of  general  paleness  of  the  face,  with  heat  and
redness  of  the  face.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  37.]

625.  In  the  morning  febrile  chill  and  coldness  with  thirst,  for  half  an
hour,  not  followed  by  heat,  with  weakness  of  the  limbs,  especially  the
thighs  (aft.  24  h.).  [Bch.]

Much  thirst  for  cold  drinks  (immediately).  [Fr.  H — n.]

In  the  afternoon  and  evening  much  thirst.  [Bch.]

In  the  evening  heat  and  redness  in  the  face  (and  shivering  in  the
body),  also  in  the  morning  in  bed  heat  of  the  face.

In  the  sinciput  and  forehead  heat  which  passes  first  into  warm
then  into  persistent  cold  frontal  sweat.

630.  Redness  and  heat  of  the  face  with  slight  febrile  rigor.

Heat  and  redness  in  the  face  and  heat  of  the  hands,  with
careless  disposition,  giving  attention  only  to  the  things  in  his  imme-
diate neighbourhood,  and  tendency  to  start  (aft.  1 h.).

Heat  and  burning  and  redness  of  the  cheeks  with  contracted
pupils  and  cold  feet  (aft.  10  h.).  [Fz.]

Febrile  movements.

Fever,*  recurring  on  several  days,  sometimes  for  a long  time.

* I have  observed  it  sometimes  in  the  evening,  sometimes  in  the  morning.


1 Not  found.


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


699

635.  Daily  fever,  before  midnight.

Internal  heat,  and  yet  he  refuses  to  drink.  [Grassius,  1.  c.]

Heat  all  over  the  body  and  general  sweat,  without  thirst,  with
pale  face  (aft.  2 h.).  [Trn.]

In  the  evening  in  bed  immediately  heat  and  perspiration,  but
more  heat.

In  the  evening  while  walking  slowly  in  the  open  air  heat  in  the
back,  as  if  perspiration  would  break  out.  [St/.]

640.  In  the  evening,  when  about  to  go  to  sleep,  perspiration  all  over.
In  the  morning  some  perspiration,  especially  on  the  face  ; also
by  day  tendency  to  sweat  on  the  face.

Sweat  only  on  the  hands.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

Very  profuse  sweat  all  over  the  body  towards  morning.  \_Fr
H — n.]

Bitter  smelling  sweat,  towards  morning.  \Fr.  H — n.  1

645.  Cold  sweat.

Cold  sweat.1 2  [Reimann,' — Rodder,  1.  c.]

As  soon  as  he  rises  from  his  seat  cold  sweat  breaks  out  on  hfs
forehead.  [ Trn.]

Cold  sweat  all  over  the  body.  [Vicat,  1.  c.]

Cold  sweat  breaks  out  all  over  the  head  and  on  the  trunk.
[Benivenius,  1.  c.]

650.  Sour  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.]

Profuse  sour  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  77.]

Whilst  sweating  a burning  in  the  skin.  [J.  F.  Muller,3  in  Hufel,
/ourn .,  xii,  1.]

Long-continued  night  sweat.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  51.]

Profuse,  persistent  sweat  during  prolonged  sleep.  [Greding,  1.  c ,

p.  58.]

655.  Profuse  sweat,  with  great  thirst  and  good  appetite.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  80.]

During  the  sweat  excessive  thirst.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.]
Anxiety.  [Muralto, — Reimann, — Lorry, — Rodder,  1.  c.]
Anxiety  and  vertigo.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  87.]

In  the  evening  and  after  dinner  extreme  anxiety,  so  that  he  knew
not  where  to  turn.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  83.]

660.  Throughout  the  night  great  anxiety.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  pp._  58,

59-]

In  the  morning  great  anxiety.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  58.]

Slight  delirium.4  [Grassius,  1.  c.]

He  makes  a great  noise,  tries  to  run  away,  and  can  hardly  be
restrained.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  66.]

Cursing  and  making  a noise  all  night,  and  complains  of  being
stupid,  with  headache  and  flow  of  saliva.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  78.]
665.  Stamps  with  his  feet  (with  anorexia).  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  67.]


1 “ On  the  forehead.’ ’ Reimann  says.

2 In  original,  “ on  the  whole  head  and  chest.”

3 Observation  on  a patient.

* 11  Vix  mente  constans”  in  original.


VERATRUM  ALBUM,


700

Along  with  persistent  fury  great  heat  of  the  body.  [Greding,
1.  c.,  p.  69.]

Fury  : tears  his  clothes,  and  does  not  speak.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.

69-]

He  bites  his  shoes  to  pieces  and  swallows  the  fragments.  [Gre-
ding, 1.  c.,  p.  42.]

He  swallows  his  own  excrement.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  43.]

670.  He  does  not  know  his  relations.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  41.]

Mania  : he  alleges  that  he  is  a hunter.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  35.]
He  pretends  he  is  a prince,  and  gives  himself  airs  accordingly.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  43.]

He  asserts  that  he  is  deaf  and  blind  and  that  he  has  got  cancer.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  42.]

She  asserts  that  she  has  labour  pains.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  54.]
675.  She  boasts  that  she  is  pregnant.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  49.]

She  announces  her  imminent  confinement.  [Greding,  1.  c,,  p.

45-1

She  kisses  every  one  who  comes  near  her,  before  the  occurrence
of  the  menses.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  45.]

Great  redness  and  heat  of  the  face  with  continual  laughing.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  51.]

Laughing  alternating  with  whining.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  86.]
680.  He  sings  and  hums  quite  joyously  at  night.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.
69.]

She  claps  her  hands  together  above  her  head  and  sings  ; at  the
same  time  cough,  with  very  viscid  mucus  on  the  chest.  [Greding,
1,  c.,  p.  60.]

Frequent  attacks  ; running  about  in  the  room  till  she  falls  down.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  60.]

Crying  out  and  running  about,  with  dark  blue  face.  [Greding,
].  c.,  p.  61.]

Restlessness  of  disposition,  oppression,  and  anxiety  (aft.  1 h.).

[BcL]

685.  Despondency,  despair.

Melancholy,  with  chilliness,  as  if  he  were  sprinkled  with  cold
water,  and  frequent  inclination  to  vomit.

Gloominess,  dejection,  sadness,  with  involuntary  weeping  and
flow  of  tears  from  the  eyes  and  inclination  to  hang  the  head.

She  is  inconsolable  about  an  imaginary  misfortune,  runs  about  the
room  howling  and  crying  out,  with  her  looks  directed  to  the  ground,
or  sits  absorbed  in  thought  in  a corner,  lamenting  and  weeping
inconsolably  ; worst  in  the  evening ; sleeps  only  till  2 o’clock.

He  groans,  is  besides  himself,  does  not  know  how  to  calm  him-
self (aft.  2,  3 h.).

690.  Anxiety  as  from  a bad  conscience,  as  if  he  had  done  something
bad.

Anxiety  as  though  he  anticipated  misfortune,  as  if  threatened  with
some  calamity.

A feeling  in  his  whole  being,  as  if  he  must  gradually  come  to  a^
end,  but  with  calmness.


Veratrum  album


?oi

Soft,  sad  humour  even  to  weeping  (aft.  24  h.).

Anxiety,  crying  out  and  running  about.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  61.]
695.  Crying  out  and  running  about  with  pale  face  and  timidity.
[Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  61.]

Fear.

Timidity,  that  ends  with  frequent  eructation.  [Greding,  1.  c.,
P.  61.]

T.  endency  to  start  and  timidity.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]
Loquacity.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]

*-oo.  Taciturnity.

He  does  not  talk  unless  excited  to  do  so,  then  he  scolds.
Taciturnity  : he  is  reluctant  to  say  a word,  talking  is  repugnant
to  him,  he  speaks  low  and  with  a weak  voice.  [67/'.]

Cannot  bear  to  be  talked  to.  [Greding,  1.  c.,  p.  76.]
Crossness  when  cause  is  given  (aft.  4 h.).

705.  He  gets  very  cross,  every  trifle  excites  him  (aft.  1 h.).  [67/V]

He  searches  for  faults  in  others^  (and  taunts  them  with  them).
Cross  at  the  slightest  cause  and  at  the  same  time  anxiety  with
rapid  audible  respiration.  [ Bch .]

Over-sensitiveness  ; increased  mental  power.

He  is  too  lively,  excentric,  extravagant.

710.  Joyousness,  acuteness  of  senses.  [Gesner,  1.  c.]

When  he  is  occupied  his  head  is  cheerful,  but  when  he  has
nothing  to  do  he  is  as  if  dazed,  cannot  think  properly,  is  quiet  and
absorbed  in  himself  (aft.  2,  15  h.).  [Tz.]

Busy  restlessness.

Busy  restlessness  ; he  undertakes  many  things,  but  becomes  always
tired  of  them,  nothing  succeeds  with  him.  [67/'.]

Activity  and  mobility,  with  diminution  of  the  pains  and  passions.
715.  Inclination  to  and  pleasure  in  work.

All  day  a kind  of  indifference,  so  that  he  often  rubbed  his  fore-
head in  order  to  come  to  himself  and  to  collect  his  thoughts.  [ Bch .]


VERBASCUM.1

( Mullein .)

(The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  Verbascum  thapsus  at  the  commencement  of
flowering  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  alcohol.)

Who  would  believe  that  the  medical  school,  as  it  has  hitherto
existed,  in  place  of  earnestly  endeavouring  to  ascertain  experimentally
what  genuine,  peculiar  dynamic  powers  this  plant  manifests  on  the  health
of  human  beings,  was  content  to  ascribe  to  it  conjecturally  (falsely)  a
demulcent,  resolvent  and  laxative  medicinal  power,  from  the  sickly  odour
of  its  flowers  when  crushed  with  the  fingers,  and  from  the  slimy
character  of  its  juice,  and  to  employ  it  blindly,  in  combination  with
other  herbs  whose  medicinal  qualities  were  equally  unknown,  for
such  conjectural  objects,  in  the  form  of  gargles,  poultices,  and  clysters  ?

The  following  pure  symptoms  and  morbid  states  which  have  been
produced  by  this  plant  on  healthy  persons  will  show  how  much
mistaken  the  medical  world  was  in  its  frivolous  conjecture,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  for  what  true  curative  objects  it  maybe  employed  with  sure
effect  in  natural  morbid  states  corresponding  in  similarity  to  the
characteristic  symptoms  produced  by  it.

A small  portion  of  a drop  of  the  above  juice  is  a sufficient  dose  for
homoeopathic  purposes.

[Hahnemann  was  assisted  in  this  proving  by  Gross,  Hartmann,  Lang-

HAMMER,  MOSSDORF.

No  old-school  authorities  are  cited.

The  ist  edit,  has  175  symptoms,  two  less  appear  in  this  2nd  edit.]


VERBASCUM.

Attacks  of  vertigo  when  the  head  is  supported  by
pressure  on  the  left  cheek.  [Gss.]

Sudden  vertigo,  as  from  a pressure  in  the  middle  on  the  whole
head.  [Gss.]

Confusion  of  the  head  (aft.  5 h.).  [Mss.]

Diminished  memory,  it  costs  him  a great  effort  to  recal  ideas  he
had  had  a short  time  previously  (aft.  4 h.).  [Mss.]

5.  He  is  stupid  and  dazed  in  the  head,  as  if  all  would  come  out  at
the  forehead.

Violent  pressure  in  the  whole  forehead.  [Gw.]


1 From  vol.  vi,  2nd  edit.,  1827.


VERBASCUM.


703


Violent  but  transient  outward-pressive  pain  in  the  whole  right
half  of  the  brain,  which  gradually  declines  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

Persistent  pressing  outwards  in  the  forehead,  especially  between
the  eyebrows  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

Violent  outward-pressive  pain  in  the  forehead,  which  is  removed
by  stooping  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Htn.]

10.  Twitching  pressure  in  the  left  half  of  the  brain  (aft.  5 h.).  [Mss.]
Violent,  stupefying  deep  pressure  in  the  right  frontal  protuber-
ance, on  coming  from  the  cold  into  the  warmth.  [Gjj.]

Stupefying  pressure  on  the  whole  left  side  of  the  head  and  face
(cheek).  [Gjj.]

Aching  stupefying  pain  in  the  head,  which  affected  particularly
both  sides  of  the  forehead,  in  every  position  (aft.  J h.).  [ Lr. ]

Violent  pressing  inwards  in  the  left  side  of  the  frontal  bone,  like
a stupefaction.  [Gjj.]

15-  Aching  stupefying,  more  external  pain,  especially
in  the  forehead,  in  all  positions  (aft.  j h.).  [Lr.]

Severe  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  occipital  protuberance
(aft.  \\  h.).  [Htn.]

Pressing  pain  in  the  occiput  (aft.  J h.).

A stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput  (aft.  i|  h.).

Tearing  pressure  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain  (aft.  4 h.).
[Htn.]

20.  More  pressive  than  tearing  pain  above  the  left  orbit  (aft.  2\  h.).
[Htn.]

An  intermittent  pressure  and  fine  throbbing  near  the  left  frontal
protuberance.  [Gjj.]

A slow  hammering  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance  (immediately).

[<?«•]

In  the  right  temple  an  aching  pain  (immediately).

Pressure  in  the  left  temple  from  behind  forwards.

25.  Sensation  as  if  both  temples  were  pinched  together
with  forceps.  [Gss.]

Violent  intermittent  deep  shooting  behind  the  left  parietal  protu-
berance. [Gjj.]

Violent,  slowly  occurring  and  slowly  declining  stitch  in  the  left
frontal  protuberance,  going  outwards  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.]

Prickling  in  the  left  frontal  sinus  (aft.  5 h.).  [Mss.]

Stupefying,  deeply  penetrating  shooting  in  the  right
temple,  while  eating,  increased  by  external  pressure ; it
extends  as  a tearing  into  the  upper  teeth  of  that  side,
after  some  hours.  [Gss.]

30.  Aching  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head.

Pressive,  long  drawing  stitch  through  the  left  half  of
the  brain,  from  behind  forwards  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.]

Just  above  the  right  temple,  sharp,  stupefying  knife-stabs.  [Gjj.]
Deep,  sharp,  intermittent  stitches  between  the  left  frontal  protu-
berance and  the  parietal  protuberance.  [Gn.]

Intermittent  fine  needle-pricks  in  the  right  side  of  the  forehead
(aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.]


^04  VERBASCUM.

35.  Stupefying  drawing  in  the  left  frontal  protuberance,  in  a draught
of  air  (aft.  72  h.).  [Gss.]

Burning  and  prickling  in  the  left  temple  (aft.  8 m.).  [G^.]
When  walking  a tingling  in  the  head  (aft.  \\  h.).  [Mss.]
Tension  on  the  left  side  of  the  vertex,  which  gradually  becomes
a sharp  pressure,  during  which  the  left  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw  feels
pressed  against  the  upper  jaw.  [G^.]

Shooting  twitching  externally,  first  on  the  left  temple  (aft.  1 h.)
then  on  the  right,  externally.  [Mss.]

40.  Dull,  painful  heaviness  in  the  head  (aft,  f h.).

Heat  in  the  eyes  and  feeling  of  contraction  of  the  orbits  (aft.

fh.).

Dilated  pupils  (aft.  7J  h.).  [Zr.]

A myope  became  still  more  myopic  (dim-sighted  ?)  ; he  could
hardly  recognise  objects  at  a yard  distance,  on  account  of  gauzy  and
watery  dimness  of  vision  ; the  objects,  as  they  became  indistinct,
seemed  to  be  magnified,  and  the  daylight  generally  seemed  to  be
diminished,  though  such  was  not  the  case  (aft.  8J  h.).  [Zr.]

Violent  pressure  on  the  right  zygomatic  process  (aft.  36  h.).
[Gn.]

45-  Obtuse  pressive  shooting  sensation  on  the  left  zygo-
matic arch  (aft.  2j  h.).  [Htn.]

Stupefying,  intermittent  pressure  on  the  upper  border  of  the
zygomatic  process.  [G^.]

An  intermittent  frightful  shooting  in  the  left  zygomatic  process.
[_Gss.]

Tension  in  the  left  zygomatic  process,  in  the  articular
projection  of  the  temporal  bone,  and  on  the  frontal  pro-
tuberance, when  exposed  to  the  air  and  when  in  a draught
of  air.  [Gss.]

Obtuse  pressure  on  the  articular  projection  of  the  temporal  bone,
painfully  increased  by  biting  the  teeth  together.  [Gjj.]

50.  The  whole  cheek  takes  part  in  the  obtuse  pressure  in
the  left  maxillary  joint  and  the  pressure  becomes  a
stupefying  tension.  [Gss.]

Sensation  as  if  the  left  zygomatic  process  as  far  as
the  ear  were  violently  pressed,  aggravated  by  the  pres-
sure of  the  hand,  frequently  during  the  day,  in  the
evening  before  going  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning  on
awaking.  [Gss.]

Sensation  as  if  both  the  articular  projections  of  the  temporal  bone
were  forcibly  seized  by  a pair  of  forceps  and  pinched  together.  [G^.]

Obtuse  pressure  on  the  articular  projection  of  the
temporal  bone  just  in  front  of  the  left  ear.  [Gss.]

Tearing  shooting  downwards  in  front  of  the  left  ear  (immediately).

55*  Quickly  occurring  pressure,  coming  on  with  a severe  stitch
behind  the  right  ear,  which  gradually  went  off"  (aft.  J h.).  [Htn.]

A tearing  stitch  in  the  left  ear  (while  eating)  (aft.  2 h.).

Violent  tearing  in  the  interior  of  the  right  ear.  [Gjj.]


VERBASCUM.


7°5


Painful  tearing  and  drawing  inwards  in  the  left  ear.

[Gss.]

Sensation  as  if  the  left  ear  were  drawn  inwards.  [Gss.]
60.  Sensation  as  if  something  had  fallen  before  the  ears,
first  the  left  then  the  right  ear.  [Gss.]

He  is  as  if  deaf  in  the  left  ear.  [Gss.]

On  reading  aloud  feeling  as  if  the  nose  were  stopped  up,  also  the
larynx  and  the  ears,  which,  however,  did  not  interfere  with  hearing
(aft.  8 h.).  [Lr.]

In  front  of  the  right  ear,  on  the  cheek,  a papule,  which  has
shooting  pain  when  touched  (aft.  24  h.).

A pressive  squeezing  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  (aft.
Ah.).  [Htn.]  ' .

65.  Great  tension  in  the  integuments  of  the  chin,  of  the  masseter
muscles  and  of  the  neck,  during  which,  however,  the  jaws  can  be
readily  moved  (aft.  10  m.).  [Gw.]

On  the  neck,  near  the  thyroid  cartilage,  a large  red  lump,  which
is  painful  when  pressed  for  two  or  three  days  (aft.  2 d.).

Tearing  in  the  large  right  lower  molars.  [Gw.]

Intermittent  tearing  in  the  small  left  lower  molars.  [Gw.]
Brownish  yellow  tongue,  covered  with  viscid  slime,  without  bad
taste,  immediately  after  dinner.  [Gw.]

70.  In  the  morning  on  rising  and  in  the  forenoon  the
root  of  the  tongue  is  brown,  without  bad  taste  in  the
mouth.  [Gss.]

Root  of  the  tongue  brown,  with  flat,  disgusting  taste,  in  the
forenoon.  [Gw.]

Flat  taste  some  time  after  a meal.  [Gw.]

Flat  taste,  with  disagreeable  smell  of  the  breath  and  brownish-
yellow  furred  tongue,  in  the  morning  (aft.  96  h.).  [Gw.]

(Salt  water  collects  in  his  mouth.)

75.  Empty  eructation  (immediately).  [Lr.]

Much  empty  eructation.

Belching  up  of  a tasteless  fluid  (aft.  5 m.).  [Htn.]

Bitter  nauseous  eructation  (immediately).  [Mss.]

Hiccup  (aft.  J h.).

80.  Frequent  hiccup  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.]

All  day  hunger  without  appetite;  he  relishes  nothing  and  yet  he
will  eat.  [Gw.]

Pressure  in  the  stomach.

Intermittent,  blunt  needle-pricks  on  the  left  near  the  ensiform
cartilage.  [Gw.]

On  the  left  near  the  ensiform  cartilage,  under  the  last  ribs,  an
intermittent,  benumbing,  frightful  cutting.  [Gw.]

85.  In  the  left  side,  where  the  ribs  terminate,  a deep  sharp  stitch,  so
violent  that  it  makes  him  start.  [Gw.]

In  the  region  below  the  right  ribs  (hypochondrium)  a shooting
pinching  (aft.  A h.).  [Htn.]

In  the  scrobiculus  cordis  feeling  of  great  emptiness,  which  went
off  with  a rumbling  under  the  left  ribs.  [Htn.]

VOL.  11.


45


706


VERBASCUM.


A tearing  shooting  downwards  in  the  abdomen.

Flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen,  and  thereupon  repeated
rumbling  under  the  left  ribs,  which  several  times  caused  a loud
violent  eructation  (aft.  4 h.).  [Htn.]

90.  Constant  grumbling  and  rumbling  under  the  left  ribs  (aft.  5 h.).
[Htn.]

Gurgling  in  the  hy'pogastrium  (aft.-  Jh.).  [Gw.]

Sharp,  intermittent  stitches  on  the  left  above  the  navel.  [Gw.]

On  the  right  near  the  navel  intermittent  blunt  needle-pricks.

I/'XI  . .

Intermittent,  obtuse  shooting  on  the  left  under  the  navel,  increased
by  bending  the  body  forwards,  after  a meal  (aft.  3 h.).  [Gw.]

95.  When  taking  a deep  breath  and  stooping  forwards  pricks,  as  from
many  needles,  in  the  whole  umbilical  region  to  round  about  behind,
and  also  in  the  dorsal  vertebrae.  [Gw.]

Painful  deep  knife-stabs  on  the  right  in  the  hypogastrium,  above
the  os  pubis.  [Gw.].

Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  from  displaced  flatulence,  in  every
position  (aft.  if  h.).  [Lr.]

A cutting  pinching  in  the  whole  abdomen,  with  repeated  eructa-
tions. [Htn/]

Cutting  pinching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  sometimes  in  one  place,
sometimes  in  another,  but  always  rising  up  towards  the  ribs,  where
it  settled  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

100.  The  pain  in  the  belly,  that  extended  deep  down,  causes  a spasmodic
contraction  of  the  sphincter  ani  and  a transient  call  to  stool.  [Htn.]

Painful  hard  pressure,  as  from  a stone,  on  the  navel,
aggravated  by  bending  the  body  forwards.  [Gw.]

Sensation  as  if  the  bowels  near  the  navel  were  adherent  to  the
peritoneum  and  were  forcibly  drawn  out,  which  was  increased  by
external  pressure.  [Gw.]

Constriction  of  the  abdomen  in  the  umbilical  region  at  different
times.  [Gw.]

No  stool  the  first  day.  [Mss,]

105.  Scanty  evacuation  of  faeces  in  small,  hard  bits,  like  sheep’s  dung,
with  pressing  (aft.  15  h.).  [Lr.]

A soft  stool,  with  urging  (aft.  3 h.).

Frequent  call  to  urinate;  the  urine  passed  in  greater  quantity  (aft.
2 h.).

He  must  urinate  very  often  and  very  copiously  (aft.  ±
h.),  but  after  thirty- six  hours  uncommonly  little  urine  is
passed.  [ Htn .].

Frequent  urging  to  urinate,  with  scanty  discharge  of  urine  (aft.  7
h.).  [Lr.]

110.  Nocturnal  seminal  emissions.

Nocturnal  seminal  emission,  without  lascivious  dreams.  [Lr.]


Hoarseness  when  reading  aloud.  [Lr.]

Sharp  pressure  just  under  the  left  nipple.  [Gw.]

Under  the  left  nipple  several  times  a violent  stitch,  during  inspi-


VERBASCUM.


707

ration,  which  went  off  slowly,  whereby  another  deep  inspiration  was
caused  (aft.  4 h.).  \_Htn.~]

1 15.  Immediately  after  lying  down  in  bed  in  the  evening  a painful
tension  over  the  chest,  with  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  heart.

Aching  shooting  pain  in  the  penultimate  false  rib,  where  it  passes
into  cartilage,  which  rapidly  goes  off  by  pressure  from  without,  but
also  returns  immediately.  \_Htn .]

In  the  region  of  the  first  and  second  costal  cartilages  a stupefying,
oppressive  stitch,  that  takes  away  the  breath  (aft.  5 m.).  [Gw.]

A very  fine  persistent  prick  in  the  last  dorsal  vertebra  when
sitting  in  a crooked  posture  (aft.  J h.).  [Htrt.~\

In  the  middle  betwixt  the  right  flank  and  the  spine  intermit-
tent, deep,  sharp  knife-stabs,  quite  in  the  interior  of  the  bowels.

[<?«.]

120.  Sharp,  intermittent  stitches  in  the  left  scapula.  [Gw.]

On  the  top  of  the  right  shoulder  a pain  more  pressive  than
tearing,  which  goes  off  by  movement  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Htn.~\

Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  left  elbow  extending  into  the  forearm,
in  every  position  (aft.  3^  h.).  [Lr.]

Tearing  downwards  in  the  shaft  of  the  left  ulna.

Itching  on  the  forearm  (aft.  f h.).

125.  Tensive  pain  in  the  left  wrist,  when  at  rest  and  when  moving
(aft.  20  m.).

Obtuse  shooting  in  the  outer  knuckle  of  the  palm.  [Gw.]

Tearing  shooting  in  the  palm.

Some  obtuse  stitches  in  the  joint  where  the  carpal
bone  of  the  thumb  is  joined  to  the  radius,  like  a kind  of

(paralysis  or)  sprain.  [Gw.]

Sharp  shooting  in  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  thumb.  [Gw.]

130.  Numbness  and  insensibility  of  the  thumb.*

When  moving  the  arms  cramp-like  pressure,  at  one  time  on  the
right,  at  another  on  the  left  metacarpus,  which  went  off  when  at
rest  (aft.  2J  h.).  [ Lr.\

In  the  thick  flesh  betwixt  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  thumb
and  that  of  the  forefinger  a violent  stabbing,  as  with  a blunt  knife.

[<?«•]  ,

Itching  formicating  tickling  on  one  side  of  the  middle  finger,
exciting  scratching  (aft.  3J  h.).  \_Lr.~\

In  the  middle  joint  of  the  forefinger  a violent  pecking  (inter-
mittent obtuse  sho'oting).  [Gw.]

135.  Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  right  thumb,
which  went  off  on  moving  it  (aft.  7 h.).  [£r.]

Paralytic  drawing  in  the  whole  of  the  left  forefinger.  [Gw.]
Violent  tearing  stitch  through  the  whole  left  little  finger  (aft.  4
h.).  [Htn.]

Paralytic  pain  of  the  left  fingers,  especially  in  the  joints  connecting
them  with  the  metacarpal  bones.  [Gw.]

Violent,  intermittent  blunt  shooting  in  the  distal- phalanx  of  the


* From  applying  the  juice  externally.


708


VERBASCUM.


forefinger ; on  moving  the  finger  the  pain  extends  into  the  proximal
joint.  [Grr.]

140.  Pain  on  the  outer  side  of  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  and
left  little  fingers,  as  from  a contusion — only  felt  on  touching  it.  [Grr.]
On  the  back  of  the  right  hand  a pain  more  pressive  than  tearing
(aft.  1 h.).  [Htn.]

On  going  up  and  down  stairs  a very  great  heaviness  in  the  lower
extremities,  as  if  a weight  were  attached  to  them  (aft.  2 h.).  [Htn.]
When  walking  in  the  open  air,  staggering  gait,  as  if  the  lower
extremities  could  not  bear  the  rest  of  the  body  for  weakness  (aft.
4 h.).  [Z,r.]

When  crossing  the  right  thigh  over  the  left,  a weakness  and  tired
feeling  in  the  bones  of  the  right  leg,  which,  however,  he  does  not  feel
when  walking  (aft.  3!  h.).  [Htn.]

145.  On  the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh  a paralytic  pain  when  the
limb  is  drawn  up  in  a sitting  posture — when  treading  pain  (like
shooting)  towards  the  knee.  [Grr.]

Drawing  aching  sensation  from  the  middle  of  the  right  thigh  to
the  knee  (when  sitting)  (aft.  3 h.).  [Htn.]

When  walking  in  the  open  air  a cramp-like  pain  in
the  muscles  of  the  right  thigh  (aft.  41  h.).  [Lr.]

Above  the  right  knee  an  aching  spasmodic  pain  in  the  muscles
when  sitting  and  standing  (aft.  § h.).  [Htn.]

Blunt  stitches  just  above  the  left  patella,  only  when  treading
(aft.  24  h.).  [Grr.]

150.  His  knees  tremble  as  if  he  had  had  a great  fright  (aft.  2\  h.).
[Htn.]

Sudden  pain  through  the  right  knee  when  standing,
sitting,  and  walking  (aft.  36  h.).  [Htn.]

Tearing  downwards  in  the  leg.

Cramp-like  pressure  on  the  left  leg  near  the  ankle-joint  (aft.  2\
h.).  [Lr.]

Violent  intermittent  obtuse  shooting  in  the  metatarsal  bones  of
the  big  toe  and  the  next  one  on  the  left  foot,  when  at  rest.  [Grr.]

1 55.  When  standing  a cramp-like  pressure  on  the  right
sole,  which  went  off  when  walking  (aft.  2\  h.).  [Lr.]

Weariness  of  the  lower  extremities  (aft.  5^  h.).  [Mss.]
Disinclination  for  work  (aft.  8 h.).  [Htn.]

Laziness  and  drowsiness  in  the  morning  after  rising.  [Grr.]
Stretching  in  the  limbs  (aft.  \ h.).

160.  Frequent  yawning  and  stretching  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough
(aft.  2 h.).  [Lr.]

Immediately  after  a meal  he  cannot  resist  sleep,  his  eyelids  close
(aft.  7 h.).  [Mss.]

Restless  sleep  at  night,  he  tossed  from  one  side  to  the  other.

ILr.]

Sleep  only  till  4 a.m.,  full  of  dreams  of  war  and  corpses,  on
several  nights.

Slight  transient  coldness  in  the  whole  body,  also  perceptible
externally  on  the  hands  and  feet.  [Grr.]


VERBASCUM.


709


165,  Shivering,  especially  on  one  side  of  the  body,  from  the  shoulders
to  the  thighs,  as  if  cold  water  were  poured  down  them.

Unquenchable  thirst  (aft  2\  h.).  \_Htn.~\

Indifference  to  things  at  other  times  interesting  to  him  (aft.  4 h.).
[Mss.']

Very  great  crossness  and  surly  humour,  without  exciting  cause  ;
at  the  same  time,  however,  inclination  for  and  urging  to  work  ; he  also
feds  pleasure  in  having  people  about  him  and  in  talking  to  them  (aft.
2\  h.).

All  day  long  peevish  humour,  but  somewhat  more  cheerful  towards
the  evening.  \_Lr. ]

170.  All  day  long  faint-hearted  disposition  ; he  held  all  effort  and  hope
to  be  useless.  [Z-r.]

Excessive  gaiety,  with  laughter  (aft.  24  h.).

Distraction  : various  trains  of  thought  and  fancies  forced  them
selves  upon  him  (aft.  8 d.).

Excitement  of  the  imagination,  especially  by  fancies  of  a volup-
tuous character  for  several  days.


END  OF  VOL.  II.


Corrigenda  in  Vol.  I.

Page  323,  S.  77 ,/or  “ The  speech  stops  ” read  “ The  speech  is  given  out  ”

„ 489,  S.  275,  should  be  “ Cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  hands.”

„ 542.  In  the  pathogenesis  of  Cyclamen,  the  abbreviation  of  Herrmann’s
name  has,  by  an  oversight,  been  rendered  “ Hrn  ,”  in  place  of  “ Hrr as
elsewhere  throughout  the  work.


PRINTED  BY  J.  E.  ADLARD,  BARTHOLOMEW  CLOSE.
