The Lesser Writings of Samuel Hahnemann
Samuel Hahnemann
The Lesser Writings of Samuel Hahnemann. Collected and translated by R. E. Dudgeon, with annotations by Richard Hughes. London: Headland, 1852.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/lesserwritingss00hahngoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful. Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


IL^^aaiBj


Zbe  Sodet?  of  the  mew  SDovh  Ibospltal,

/Darcl),  1898.


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY
MEDfCAt  CENFEH
STANFORD.  CALIF,  '54^05


4.


ESSER WRITINGS


lAMUEL HAHNEMANN


OOLLBCTBD


E, Dl'  DfJZO  N, H.  n.


PRKFAOK AND NOTBS,


Eiramis.  KrunUng  In  Ari  a!  CoBgreH.  In  Oii!  yiml  IBS),  bj
WILLIAM  RADDE,
rMl>>  (Iffim  u.-  tin  DlMMM  Ootirt  tor  tks  Ssohara  DIMrlul  V  Nrnr-rnrk.


Lfcd


AMERICAN PREFACE.


br  presen^g  to  the  Ameiioan  public,  at »  veiy  moderate  price,
#  reprint  of  Hahnemann's  Lesser  Writings,  the  Publisher  has  been
IMtuated  by  an  earnest  desire  to  make  generally  kziown  to  laymen,
00  well  as  to  medical  men,  the  yast  knowledge,  the  genius,  and  the
l^uine  philanthropy  of  the  illustrious  founder  of  Homoeopathy.
Hie  present  yolume,  comprising  as  it  does,  many  clearly  expressed
articles  of  general  interest  to  all  dasses,  commends  itself  to  the  atten-
tion of  aU  who  fed  a  true  interest  in  the  advancement  of  the  healing
art

On  rising  from  the  perusal  of  almost  any  portion  of  tliese  pages,
die  reader  will  not  £ul  to  be  impressed  with  the  noble  b^aevolenoe,
aa  well  as  the  natural  and  acquired  talents  of  Hahnemann.

Commencing,  as  tke  Tolume  does,  with  papers  which  were  written
while  our  author  still  belonged  to  the  Old  School,  and  at  a  period
several  years  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the  homoeopathic  prindple
of  cure,  we  are  enabled  to  appredate  in  the  fullest  manner  his  great-
ness even  as  an  allopathic  writer.

The  most  intelligent  critics  of  all  schools  who  are  familiar  with  his
literary  works,  entertain  the  opinion  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  pro-
found thinkers,  and  one  of  the  most  learned  and  intelligent  writers  of
his  day,  even  when  he  is  judged  by  those  productions  which  have
no  special  bearing  upon  Homoeopathy.  His  descripticms  of  disease,
his  thorough  knowledge  of  ancient  languages,  and  of  the  medical
literature  of  the  past,  his  wonderful  powers  of  observation,  his  critical
acumen,  and  above  all,  his  acknowledged  benevolence  and  integrity,
would  have  seciHred  for  him  a  position  among  the  great  men  of  his
century  under  any  droumstances.  But  as  a  reformer  of  the  opinions
and  practices  of  a  class  of  men  whose  influence  has  remained  pre-
eminent for  more  than  two  thousand  years,  he  has  met  with  the  most
violent  and  determined  opposition  from  the  commencement  to  the
termination  of  his  career. His  earlier  essays,  however,  published  in


IT  AMSRIOAK  PBEFAOK.

Hufeland's  Journal,  and  in  pamphlet  form,  attracted  universal  admi-
ration from  all  sources,  for  their  great  originality,  comprehensiveness,
and  justice.  Eminent  among  his  cotemporaries  as  a  classical  scholar,
and  for  his  profound  knowledge  of  the  lore  of  the  ancients,  his  trans-
lations from  the  Syriac»  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  French,  and  English,
were  looked  upon  as  becai  ideals  of  what  such  works  should  be,  and
were  appreciated  and  used  accordingly.

No  sooner,  however,  had  he  announced  a  doctrine  of  cure  which
dashed  with  the  stereotyped  dogmas  of  his  brethren,  and  which  threat-
ened to  impair  their  pecuniary  interests,  than,  a  system  of  opposa-
tion  and  persecution  of  the  most  dishonourable  character  was  insti-
tuted by  both  physicians  and  apothecaries.  Not  content  with  circu-
lating bitter  denunciations,  and  the  most  unfounded  calunmies  vrith
respect  to  Hahnemann  and  his  doctrines,  they  appealed  to  several
European  governments  for  legislative  enactments,  which  should  re-
press their  promulgation  and  practice,  in  order  that  they  might  still
continue  to  dictate  to  the  public  what  should  be  their  medical  faith.

For  a  time,  this  arbitrary  course  was  partially  successful,  and
victims  were  drugged  as  usual  with  poisons,  to  swell  the  coffers  of  the
doctors  and  druggists ;  but  gradually  honest  minds  were  directed
to  the  subject,  and  notwithstanding  the  almost  certain  risk  of  losing
caste  with  their  friends,  and  of  sacrificing,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent^
their  general  influence  and  their  business  interests,  nearly  all  who
had  the  candour  to  investigate,  became  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the
homoeopathic  theory  and  had  the  moral  courage  to  adopt  it  in  prac-
tice. As  time  has  rolled  on,  the  system  has  continued  steadily  to  ex-
tend, always  among  the  most  intelligent  classes,  until  at  the  present
time,  every  civilized  nation  on  the  earth  hails  it  as  the  most  impor-
tant discovery,  and  the  greatest  blessing  to  suffering  humanity  of
modem  times.

All  must  concede  that  but  few  medical  writers  have  appeared  since
the  days  of  Hippocrates,  whose  opinions  have  stood  the  test  of  half
a  century  so  triumphantly  as  those  of  our  author.  In  a  subject  so  ex-
tensive and  difficult  as  that  of  the  healing  art,  it  is  of  course  impos-
sible for  any  single  man,  however  exalted  his  genius  and  talents,  to
arrive  at  absolute  perfection,  or  to  remain  entirely  free  from  errors ;
but  in  the  instance  of  Hahnemann,  we  might  almost  daim  an  excep-
tion to  the  rule,  were  it  not  for  two  or  three  minor,  and  really  unim*
portant  matters  of  opinion  which  are  of  but  little  importance  in  a


AMXBIOAN FREFAOX.  V

practical  point  of  view.  His  great  law  of  cure  similia  iimilibua  cu-
ranlur,  stands  forth  before  the  world,  and  will  ever  continue  to  stand,
an  immutable  and  glorious  truth.

His  doctrine  of  applying  remedies  which  operate  specifically  upon
iiisecued  parts  alone,  rather  than  upon  those  which  are  healthy ^  must
ever  commend  itself  to  the  sound  judgment  of  all  thinking  men.

In  like  manner,  the  discovery  that  the  subdivision  of  crude  sub-
stances, and  the  diffusion  of  their  atoms  through  an  inert  vehicle,  de-
veloped in  them  new  and  previously  unappreciated  curative  powers,
^wheQ  properly  administered,  is  in  itself  sufficiently  important  to  im-
mortalize its  author.

So  also,  the  introduction  into  medicine,  of  drug-provings  for  the
purpose  of  ascertaining  the  pure  specific  action  of  each  article  upon
the  healthy  organism  and  thus  of  enabling  the  practitioner  to  apply
Ills  remedies  in  disease  knowingly  and  efficiently,  is  another  feature  in
modem  medical  science  which  has  already  conmianded  the  attention
and  admiration  of  the  whole  scientific  world.

But  while  we  claim  for  Hahnemann  so  exalted  a  position  among
the  good,  the  wise,  and  the  great  benefactors  of  modem  times,  we
are  not  so  devoid  of  common  sense  as  to  claim  for  him  infallihiUty,
The  wisest  and  best  men  of  all  ages,  have  had  their  faults  and  their
errors,  and  it  would  be  folly  on  the  part  of  the  homoeopath,  to  attri-
bute to  the  discoverer  of  similia,  absolute  perfection  in  every  thing
pertaining  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine. By  so  doing  we
should  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  allopathists  who  for  so  many  centu-
ries have  adopted  the  views  and  practice  of  Hippocrates,  without  ques-
tion and  without  comment. Hahnemann  has  laid  the  foundation  of  the
true  healing  art  on  a  firm  and  incontrovertible  basis. The  great  fun-
damental principles  to  which  we  have  already  alluded,  have  been
thoroughly  tested  for  more  than  half  a  century,  with  the  most  grati-
fying results ;  and  it  is  now  very generally conceded by  impartial
observers  who  have  investigated  the  subject,  that  upon  these  princi-
ples alone  can  a  rational  system  of  medicine  be  founded.

But  if  this  solid  and  glorious  foundation  has  been  laid  for  us,  let  it
not  be  supposed  that  the  edifice  is  complete,  and  that  nothing  more
remains  to  be  accomplished.  Let  it  not  be  supposed,  that  with  the
death  of  the  venerated  Hahnemann,  the  genius  of  Homoeopathy  per-
ished also ;  but  let  us  give  a  just  meed  of  praise  to  the  many  noble
spirits  who  by  their  labours  have  contributed  so  much  towards  the


VI  AMSRIOIK  PEOBrAOI.

vancement  of  our  art.  We  need  only  mention  the  names  of  Jabr,  Bau,
BcBKNiNaHAnsEK,  NoAOK,  Trinks,  Hbrino,  Henderson,  Hartmann,
Staff,  Gross,  and  Ruckert,  to  call  forth  a  cordial  response  to  our  sen-
timents. Our  School  at  the  present  time,  contains  a  large  number  of
gentlemen  of  the  highest  order  of  talent,  who  are  labouring  assiduously
to  perfect  the  system  in  all  its  details,  and  it  becomes  us  as  seekers
after  truth,  to  avail  ourselves  of  their  experience  and  industry.  We  are
aware  that  there  is  a  limited  number  of  intolerant  and  contracted  per-
sons, who  would  gladly  repress  all  further  original  thought,  and  stifle  all
future  investigations  upon  the  subject  of  Homoeopathy.  Bigoted,
weak  of  intellect,  and  incapable  of  generating  an  original  idea  them-
selves, they  have  the  presumption  to  set  up  a  doctrine  of  infallibility,
for  the  present  as  well  as*  for  all  future  generations,  perfect  in  all  re-
spects, and  ever  to  be  blindly  worshipped.  Forgetting  the  old  maxim
that  "  to  err,  is  human,  but  that  perfection  belongs  only  to  Grod,"
they  would  inculcate  a  fixed  standard  of  belief  and  practice  for  all
ooming  time,  regardless  of  all  new  discoveries  and  improvements.
Such  men  are  a  curse  to  any  system,  and  were  the  great  Master  him-
self living, — he  who  passed  his  whole  life  in  patiently  seeking  after
new  facts,  in  order  to  modify  and  correct  his  erroneous  ideas  upon
medical  subjects — he  would  be  the  first  to  condemn  such  an  illiberal
policy.  The  author  of  Homoeopathy,  throughout  the  whole  of  his
glorious  carreer,  was  remarkable  as  a  man  of  facts.  Without  a
particle  of  bigotry  or  prejudice  in  his  composition,  and  possessing  no
special  reverence  for  the  heathen  dogmas  which  had  been  handed
down  from  generation  to  generation,  his  aim  was  truth  alone,  to  ar-
rive at  which,  his  eflbrts  were  untiring,  as  the  manifold  facts  he  has
put  upon  record  amply  prove.  May  all  of  his  disciples  follow  in
his  footsteps,  and  by  exercising  the  same  industry,  the  same  libera,
lity,  and  the  same  devotion  to  science,  seek  to  advance  Homoeopathy
to  that  state  of  perfection  which  it  must  eventually  attain.


TRAKSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


To  fonn  a  jost  estimate  of  the  genius  and  learning  of  Hahnemann,
and  of  the  gradual  and  laborious  manner  in  which  he  developed  and
perfected  his  great  Medical  Reform,  it  is  necessary  to  study  not  only
his  more  finished  and  larger  works,  the  Organan^  the  Pure  Materia
Medica  and  the  Chronic  diseases^  but  also  his  miscellaneous  medical
writings,  which  I  have  here  collected  into  one  volume.  In  these  we
traoe  the  gradual  and  progressive  development  of  the  homoeopathic
doctrine,  and  of  the  peculiarities  of  its  practice ;  we  perceive  that  from
the  very  earliest  period  of  his  career,  Hahnemann  felt  dissatisfied  with
the  practice  of  medicine  as  it  had  hitherto  existed,  and  that,  casting
from  him  as  much  as  possible  the  prejudices,  dogmas  and  false  as-
sumptions of  the  schools,  ¥rith  which  we  know  from  his  own  confessions
he  was  deeply  imbued,  he  sought  by  various  ways  to  improve  the
most  important  of  all  arts,  that  of  medicine,  until  at  length,  abandoning
the  time-honoured  by-ways  of  vain  speculation,  he  entered  on  the  only
true  but  hitherto  almost  unbeaten  track— of  interrogating  nature
herself;  with  what  success,  the  wonderful  results  furnished  by  the
practice  we  owe  to  his  genius  and  labours,  testify.

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  here  into  a  critiea)  analysis  of  the
writings  contained  in  this  volume,  they  must  be  read  by  every  student  of
homoeopathy  who  wishes  to  become  acquainted  with  the  Master-mind;
suffice  it  to  say  I  have  thought  fit  to  include  in  this  collection,  an  elab-
orate work  ( On  Venereal  Diseases)  of  a  date  antecedent  to  Hahnemann's
first  notion  respecting  the  homoeopathic  principle,  which  will  be  found
to  contain  many  original  ideas,  and  most  important  innovations  on
the  common  practice  ;  the  date  of  its  publication  sufficiently  accounts
for  its  old-fashioned  pathology  and  chemistry.  I  have  also  included
a  work  of  a  popular  character,  consisting  chiefly  of  Essays  on  subjects
connected  with  Hygiene,  which  will  well  repay  a  perusal.  The  re-
Eoainder  of  the  Essays  in  this  volume  bear  more  or  less  upon  the  re-
formed system  of  medicine,  with  the  exception  of  the  "  Dissertation
on  the  Helleborism  of  the  Ancients,''^  which  could  not  have  been  omit-


viii  trafblator's  frxfacb,

ted  from  a  collection  of  Hahnemann's  works,  as  it  shews  the  extent  of
his  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  the  ancients,  and  is  a  masterly
specimen  of  critical  acumen,  medical  knowledge  and  philological  re-
search. It  will  be  observed  that  I  have  arranged  the  writings  as  much
as  possible  in  the  order  of  their  appearance.  I  may  mention,  that
this  volume,  besides  containing  all  the  Essays  in  Stapf 's  coUection,
includes  upwards  of  twenty  that  are  not  to  be  found  there,  some  of  whidi
were  only  published  after  Stapf 's  volumes  appeared  (1829),  but  (Others
were  either  over-looked,  or  purposely  omitted  by  that  editor.

The  notes  I  have  added  between  brackets  [  ]  are  simply  such  as  I
have  deemed  requisite,  in  order  to  explain  certain  passages  which
seemed  to  require  elucidation.*

The  remainder  of  Hahnemann's  lesser  writings  which,  from  their
not  referring  strictly  to  the  subject  of  medicine,  from  their  antiqua-
ted character,  or  from  other  causes,  I  have  not  introduced  into  this  col-
lection, I  shall  now  briefly  enumerate.

L  Orioikal  Works. —

1.  DissertaHo  inauguralis  medica^  ConspectuB  adjhctuum  gpasmodu
corum  aetiologicus  et  tkerapeuticus. £rlangae»  1779,  p.p.  20,  4to.

2.  Some  small  writings  in  the  second  part  of  Krebs'  Medic,  ^fieo-
hachtungen^  Quedlinburg,  1782.  I  have  been  unable  to  lay  my  hand
upon  these,  but  from  a  reference  in  the  next  work,  I  find  that  one  of
them  relates  to  a  mode  of  checking  salivation  a^  its  commencementt
probably  by  means  of  liver  of  sulphur,  or  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas,

8.  Directions  for  curing  radically  old  sores  and  indolent  ulcers,  with
an  appendix,  containing  a  more  appropriate  treatment  of  fistulas,  caries,
spina  ventosa,  cancer,  white  swelling  and  pulmonary  consumption,
Leipzic,  1784,  pp.  192, 12mo.  This  work  contains  a  good  many  use-
ful observations  on  the  management  of  the  system  in  general,  and  o^
old  ulcers  in  particular:  it  shews  up  the  absurdities  of  many
of  the usual modes of treating disease, illustrated by  exam-

*  The  "  Case  of  Ck>lioodyiiia''  was  translated  by  Dr.  Ruseell,  and  the  two  Kfleay.),
"  JSsculapius  in  the  Balance,"  and  "  On  the  Value  of  the  Speculative  Systems  o^
Medicine,"  originally  appeared  in  an  incomplete  form  in  the  BritUh  Journal  of
Homctopathy^  by  whom  translated  I  am  unable  to  ascertain ;  I  have  adopted  these
IzanslatioDs,  supplying  their  omissions,  and  making  many  alterations  so  as  to  consti.
tute  them  more  exact  renderings  of  the  originals.  For  these  translations,  therefore,  I
hold  myself  as  much  responsible  a?  for  the  rest^  which  were^entirely  translated  by
myselC


niAirsLATOR^e  pbxfaos.  ix


ple8  chiefly  deriTed  from  the  author's  own  practice  at  'Hermanstadt
in  Transjlvania. He  gives  a  very  naive  relation  of  several  cases
mrhich  he had  treated according  to  the  most approved methods
of  the  schools,  with  no  other  result  but  that  of  rendering  his  patients
'worse,  and  he  mentions  how  they  were  cured  by  some  fortuitous
circumstance,  such  as  a  total  change  in  their  habits  of  life,  dec. In
this  work  he  mentions  that  he  has  invented  a  certain  ^'  strengthening
balsam,"  for  the  treatment  of  old  ulcers,  whose  composition  he  does
not  reveal,  but  whidi  he  offers  to  supply  genuine  to  any  one. Per-
baps,  like  Shakspere's  starved  apothecary,  it  was  his  poverty  and  not
hiB  will  that  consented  to  this  unprofessional  bit  of  retail  trade — ^but
l>e  this  as  it  may,  this  is  probably  the  circumstance  that  has. given
rise  to  the  accusation,  magnified  by  transmission  through  a  host  of
eager  calunmiators,  of  his  having  sold  a  nostrum  for  all  diseases. As
r^ards  the  medicinal  treatment  recommended  in  this  book,  it  is  just
what  might  satisfy  the  Edinburgh  College  of  Physicians,  but  what
Hahnemann  himself,  afler  a  period  of  reflection  and  labour,  some
years  of  which  were  spent  in  retirement  from  practice,  subsequently
inveighed  against  with  all  his  might ;  and  we  know  that  every  dis-
covery he  afterwards  made  in  medicine,  and  every  improvement  he  ef-
fected in  its  practice,  he  immediately  revealed  to  the  world,  so  that
all  might  derive  from  it  the  benefit  it  was  capable  of  affording ;  though
as  he  himself  observes  in  his  preface  to  the  Chronic  Diseases,  with
perhaps  the  slightest  suspicion  of  a  reminiscence  of  the  old  balsam
speculation,  his  discoveries  would  have  been  much  more  profitable  to
himself  had  they  been  kept  secret  until  after  his  death.

4.  On  Poisoning  hy  Arsenic ,  the  remedies  for  it,  and  its  medico-legal
investigation,  Leipzic,  1786,  p.  p.  276,  8vo.  This  is  a  most  learned
work  and  displays  great  chemical  knowledge.  I  would  willingly
have  translated  it  for  the  present  collection,  but  chemistry  is  a  science
that  has  advanced  with  such  gigantic  strides  of  late  years,  that  a  work
upon  the  subject  written  upwards  of  fifty  years  ago  would  be  scarcely
intelligible  now  a-days.

5.  On  the  difficulties  of  preparing  soda  from  potash  and  kitchen  salt.
(In  CreWs  Chem,  Annd.,  1787,  pt.  2.)

6.  Treatise  on  the  prejudices  existing  against  coal  fires,  on  the  modes
of  improving  this  combustible^  and  on  its  employment  in  heating  bakers*
ovens,  Wiih  an  appendix,  containing  M,  M,  Lanoix  and  Brunts  prize
essays  on  this  subject. With  three  copper-plates. Dresden,  1787, 8vo.


7.  On  the  injiuente  o/sotm  hindt  6/  gas  im  the  fetm$MaHt>f$  of
(In  CreWs  Chan,  AnnaLy  Vol.  i,  1788^  pt.  4.)

Sn  On  the  tests  for  iron  and  lead  in  mne.  (In  CreWs  Chsm*  AnnaUf
Vol.  i,  1788,  pt  4.)

9.  On  ^  hik  and  gallstones. (In  OrelTs  Chem.  AnndL^  VoL  ii,

1788,  pt.  10.)

10.  On  an  uncommonly  powerful  means  fir  cheeking  putr^tetion,
(In  CrelPs  Chem.  AnnaL,  Vol.  ii,  pt.  12^  1788.)  This  was  translated
into  French  bj  Cruet,  in  the  Journal  de  Medecine^  T.  Ixxxi,  Paris,

1789,  Nov.,  No.  9.

11.  Unsuccessful  experiments  with  some  pretended  new  discoveries.

(In  CrdVs  Chem.  Annal.^  1789,  Vol.  i,  pt.  8.)

12.  Letter  to  L,  CreUj  respecting  heavy-spar,  (In  CreWs  Annal.^
Vol.  i,  1789,

Id.  Discovery  of  a  new  constituent  in  plumbago,  (In  CreWs  Chem,
Annal.,  1789,  VoL  ii,  pt.  10.)

14.  Some  observations  on  the  <  astringent  principle  of  plants,  (In
CreWs  Beiir&ge  zu  den  Chem,  Annal,,  iv,  x,  1789.)

15.  Ihsact  mode  of  preparing  the  soluble  mercury,  (In  the  Neuen
literarischen  Nachrichten  fur  Aerzte^  for  the  years  1788  and  1789,  4th
Quarter,  Halle,  1789 ;  and  in  Baldinger^s  Neue  Magazin  f.  Aerzte^
Vol.  xi,  pt.  5,  1789.)

16.  Complete  mode  of  preparing  the  soluble  mercury,  (In  CrtUVs
Chem.  Annal,  Vol.  ii,  1790,  pt.  8.

17.  Insolubility  of  some  metals  and  (heir  oxydes  in  cattstic  ammonia
(In  CreWs  Chem,  Annal,,  VoL  il,  1791,  pt.  8.)

18.  Means  fir  preventing  salivation,  and  the  disastrous  effects  of
mercury, (In  JBlumenbacVs  med,  Bibliotheky  Vol.  iii,  1791,  pt.  3.)

19.  Contributions  to  the  art  of  testing  wine.  (In  Scherf^s  Beitrdge
zum  Archiv  der  med,  Polizei  und  Volksarzneik,,  Vol.  iii,  Leipzic,
1792.)

20.  On  the  preparation  of  Glauber^ s  salts  according  to  ^  method  of
Ballen. (In  CrdPs  Chem.  Annal,  1792,  pt.  1.)

21.  Pharmaceutical  Lexicon^  First  vol.,  first  part.  A  to  £.
Leipzio,  1793.— First  vol.,  second  part.  F  to  E.  Leipzic,  1795. —
After  the  publication  of  these  two  parts  the  work  ceased.  It  contains
as  far  as  it  goes  a  great  deal  of  useful  information,  though  the  plan
adopted  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  the  most  felicitous  that  could
be  devised  :  thus  the  objects  of  natural  history,  in  place  of  being


moraLAxbft't  nunrAOi.  zi

treated  of  imdflr  iheir  wdl-knowii  sdentifio  appellatioiia,  are  amnged
alphabedoally  under  the  most  barbaroua,  break-jaw  oompound  Qer-
man  worda,  invented  for  the  oocadon :  for  example  the  him;  wmUca
here  appears  under  tllie  hideona  name  of  JtrMentmgmudimnddbtmm^
ikkeJUuf  ARM  is  metamorphosed  into  M&imlrifiwwrmH^^Jarn^  and  die
tmmUka  crupahaUiBlumaifkopkraitBemiinMe^  which  nomendiftlure,  al-
though it  may  be  very  euphonious  to  a  G^erman  ear,  and  very  ezpres-
siwe  to  a  German  understanding,  is  oertainly  &r  from  sdentifici  and
neoeesitates  the  separation  of  things  that  ought  to  have  beoi  found
together.  The  principle  of  the  arrangement  will  be  best  understood
by  likening  it  to  a  Directory  arranged  alphabetically  according  to  the
fshriatian  names  in  place  of  the  surnames  of  individuals

22.  Semarki  on  tk$  Wirtemberg  and  Haknemann^t  tsitt  fof  vtfie.
(In  the  InidUgewtblatt  of  the  AUg.  Ui.  %.,  178a Na  70,  p.  080.)

28.  FrqHMralum  o/Uu  CoMBdl  ydhw.  £rfi2rt»  1798^  4to.  (It  is
sdflo  published  in  the  AtL  Academ,  ScitnL  Erford  ad  ann.  1704)

24L  On  Raknemann^8  tut  fit  io«m  and  the  new  liquor  probaiariui
JarHor.  (In  Tromtdorfa  Jaumalder  PkarmoMie  fiut  Ajtrzk.  Vol.  ii,
pt.  1, 1704.)

25.  FTOgmenta  dt  virihu  medieameniorum  po9iihi$^  8%v€  m  iono  cor-
pare  humano  obtervatU.  2  vols.  Leipiic^  1805.  This  is  the  germ
of  the  Pure  Materia  Materia.

IL  Translations from various lanouaoss,  oensrallt  with

ADDITIONS  AND  NOTES Bt HaHNSMANN. —

1.  Physiological  essays  and  observations^  by  John  Stedman*  Lon-
don, 1760.— Leipsdc,  1777.

2.  Nugent^s  essay  on  the  hydrophobia.  London,  1758, — Leipzic,
1777.

8.  W,  Falconer  on  the  waters  commonly  used  at  Bath,  1775.  2
vols. — Leipzic,  1777.

*4.  BalTs  modem  practice  of  physic — 2  vols.  Leipzic,  1777  and
1780.

5.  Procedes  chimiques^  ranges  methodiquement  et  d^finispar  M,  Dc
maehy.  On  y  a  joint  precis  d*une  nouvelle  table  des  combinaisons  ou
rapport  p,  s.  de  suite  d  Vlnstitut  de  Chimie.  1760,  reimprime  avec  des
annotations  de  Struve  dans  les  descriptions  des  Arts  et  Mitiers.  Neuf-
chatel,  V.  xii,  1780.— In  2  vols. Leipzic,  1784.

6.  L'Art  du  destiUateur  liquoriste^  par  Dmachy  et  Dubuisron^  w r«


Xii  translator's FR£FACS.


des  annoUUioM  du  Dr.  Struve, Paris,  1775. — In  2  ^ols. Leipzic,
1785.

7.  L'Art  du  vinaigrier^par  Demacky,  avec  des  annotations  de  Struve
dans  les  descriptions  des  Arts  et  Metiers,  Neufchatel,  V.  xii,  1780. —
Leipzic,  1787.

8.  Les  falsifications  des  medicaments  devoilees,  ouvrage  dans  lequel
on  enseigne  les  moyens  de  decouvrir  les  tromperies  mises  en  usage  pour
falsifier  les  medicaments  tant  simples  que  composes^  et  oii  on  etablit  des
regies  pour  s^assurer  de  leur  bonte.  Ouvrage  non  settlement  utile  auz
medecins,  chirurgiens,  apothecaires^  droguistes,  mais  aussi  aux  malades,
A  la  Haye  et  a  Bruxelles,  1784.— Dresden,  1787.

9.  The  history  of  the  lives  of  Abelard  and  Heloisa^  comprising  a
period  of  eighty  four  years^from  1079  to  1163,  vjith  their  genuine  letters
from  the  collection  of  Amboise  ;  by  Sir  Joseph  Barrington.  Birming-
ham and  London,  1787. — Leipzic,  1789.

10.  Inquiry  into  the  nature^  causes  and  cure  of  the  consump-
tion  of  the  lungs,  with  some  observations  on  a  late  publication  on  the
same  subject;  by  Michael  Ryan,  M,  2>.,  F.R.A,S,  Edin,  London,
1787.— Leipzic,  1790.

11.  DeW  arte  di  fare  U  vino  ragionamente  di  Ad.  Fabbroni,  pre^
miato  delta  Reals  Academia  economica  di  Firenge.  Florence,  1787,  2d
edit.  1790.— Leipzic,  1790.

12.  Advice  to  the  female  sex  in  general,  particularly  in  a  state  of
pregnancy  and  lying-in,  to  which  is  added  an  appendix,  containing
some  directions  relative  to  the  management  of  children  in  the  first
part  of  life,  by  John  Origg,  accoucheur  and  surgeon  to  the  Bath  Work-
house, London,  1789. — Leipzic,  179L

13.  Annals  of  agriculture  and  other  useful  arts,  by  Arthur  Youngs
F.RS. London,  pts.  1  to  30, 1786.— Leipzic,  2  vols.,  1790  and  1791.

14.  A  treatise  of  the  materia  medico,  by  William  Cutlen,  M.  D,,
Professor  of  the  Practice  of  Physic  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
Edinburgh,  1789.— Leipzic,  2  vols.,  1790.

15.  A  medical  and  pharmaceutical  chemistry  and  the  materia  medico^
by  Donald  Monro,  M.  D,,  physician  to  St.  George'* s  Hospital,  F.R.C.J
Land,  d;  F.R.S.  London,  1788.— Leipzic,  2  vols.,  1791.

16.  Essai  anaJyt?que  sur  V  air  pur  et  les  differentes  especes  d^air
par  De  la  Metherie,  doet.  med,,  membre  des  Academies  de  Dijm  e,
Mayence.  Paris,  1758. — Leipzic,  2  vols,  1791  and  1792.

17.  Chemical  observation^^  on  sugar,  by  Edward  Ringby.  London
1788.— Dresden,  2  vols.,  1791.


trasblator's  frsfaoi.  ziii

18.  /Vuic^pef  A«r.«r.JKotttieoiiftrrMiO(ilm
Han  nor  b  eanMrvaHtm  du  tnfamU^  %t  twr  Itmr  Uiaeaiitm  pkjftigtte
cf  morale^  depuU  km'  maummee  /u$qu^d  P^po^ue  d$  lewr  emitk
dam»  let  keok»  noHmwhi.  Ouwrage  indiqui  pour  k  etmeourM^
mnvamt  It  dient  ife  2bi  Comvemtkm  natUmdU  du  9  PIvwom  dernier.
A  Paris,  Pan  2  de  la  B6publiqae  frangaise. — ^lUs,  which  was  publish-
ed at  Leipzic  in  1796»  under  the  titl^ifHamdbuch/hrJIBUieriUothBr'B
Manual),  is  usuallj  inserted  among  the  original  works  of  Hahnemann,
but  a  careful  oomparison  with  the  work  whose  title  I  have  given  enaUes
me  to  state  that  it  is  nothing  more  then  a  translation  of  that  work,
with  a  few  additions  and  one  or  two  alterations  by  the  translator.  It
therefore  properly  belongs  to  this  list

18,  Tkesawrwe  medicamimum.  A  new  eoUeetkm  of  medieal  preecrip-
Hone^  dittribuied  mio  iwehe  elateee^  and  aeeompanied  wUh  pharmaceu*
Heai  and  praeHeal  remarket  exhSbiting  a  view  of  Ae  present  eiaUt  of  the
wuiiena  mediea  and  praetieefifpkpeic^  both  aihme  and  abroad,  na
second  editum^wUh  an  appendix  and  other  addiiiane*  By  a  member  of  the
Zandon  College  rf  phyeiekme.  London,  1794. — ^Leipzio,  1800.  Hah-
nemann published  this  translation  anonymously ;  I  have  given  his
preface  to  it,  whidi  is  a  masterly  satire  on  the  contents  of  the  woiiE
itself  at  p.  344  of  this  volume.

20.  ne  materia  medica  of  Albert  von  Sailer. Leipzic,  1806.
Besides  the  above,  many  translations  from  the  English  and  Latin
were  made  by  EUmemann  for  the  Samndung  der  auserleeeneten  und
neuesten  Abhandlungen  fwr  Wunddrzte,  Leipzic,  1788,  1784,  1787.

Loodm,  July,  1861.


Appended  as  a  fac-simile  of  Hahnemann's  handwriting,  which  may
be  interesting  to  his  admirers.  The  little  note  possesses  no  particular
interest  in  itself,  beyond  being  a  good  specimen  of  his  minute  and
beautiful  writing  at  the  age  of  86,  and  shewing  the  affectionate  style
be  had  of  addressing  his  friends. The  following  is  a  translation  of  it.

•*  To  Hofrath  Lehmann,*

•*  Dear  friend,

'*  I  beg  you  to  send  me  the  third  trituration  in  powder  of  the

*  Dr.  Lehmann  of  Cdtlien,  to  wbom  Hahnemann  entrusted  the  preparation  of  all
hia  medicinea  up  to  the  latest  period  of  his  life,  and  to  whom  J  am  indebted  fat  thb
autographic  relks.


xjv  translator's  prefacx.

medicines  in  the  aopompanying  list,  which  you  have  not  yet  sent  me,
and  to  give  them  to  Amelia,*  she  will  bring  them  with  her  to  me,
along  with  a  few  lines  from  your  pen,  so  that  I  may  see  that  you  are
still  alive,  and  that  you  are  well  and  happy,  and  also  how  your  dear
family  are.

^'  Both  of  us  here  are  well,  and  send  you  all  our  hearty  regards.

"  Yours,

*'  Sam.  Hahmbmanh.
"Paris,  23d  March,  1841."

*  One  of  Hahnemaim's  daughters,  Madame  liebc^  fonnerly  SQbs.


Fwsinufe  of  HaJttumunn's  wriHnq .


1^  A.>^tU^  ^r


^^  <6j;i  ^?s^  w^.yO^  ^M.^1;^


>«>>/


CONTENTS.


. . . .  ii

IVmuktoc's  PKeiMe • • •  rll

99C  riinila  of  Hwhnwmmtfs  writing,  to  hm  page • • . •  •  sir


iMtnictMn  fcr  8aigeoi|B  rwpeetn^  VioewdL  Dimati  (1199)  •  .  •  .  1
Tl.oftkodofH«.W,P«L(m«) I  . . . .IW

T1ioRi«idofHMdth,PtetIl<17»6)f  ^^^  *^  ]  •  .  .  300
PoMriptioQ  of  Bockenbrii^  dnriiy  hit  IhMnity  (1796) ...  .  84S

BMftj  on  a  New  Prinoqila  fiv  aaoertalsBig  the  Oiaalivia  Powws  o^

afew^^bnoeaattlioaefaitliefifeoenpkTedcnoe) S49

Oaie  of  lapidlj  cued  Oolieod^  (1797) SOS

Aie  the  Obstadea  to  (Je^aint J  aod  Simplio^7  m  Fkw^

aUet  (1797) , . .  S07

Antidotes  to  aome  Heroie  Vegetable  Sabatances  (179S) 8d2

Some  kinds  of  CVntinaed  and  Remittent  Fevers  (1798) 826

Some  Periodical  and  Hebdomadal  Diseases  (1798) .  . . .  S41

A  IVefi¥»  (1800) ....  844

Fmgmentarj  ObserratioiiB  on  Brown*s  JSIements  of  Medicine  (1801)  •  .  860
View  of  Professiooal  libemlily  at  the  eommenoement  of  the  Nineteenth  CJentocy

(1801) 862

Cure  and  Prerention  of  Scariet^fever  (1801) 869

On  the  Power,  of  SmallDoses  of  Medicine  in  General,  and  of  Belladonna  in  partir

cubr  (1801) 886

On  a  proposed  Remedy  for  Hydrophobia  (1808)  .889

On  the  EfledaofOoffee,  from  original  Obaervalions  (1808) . . . .  89;i

.^EsculapinsintheBaUmoe  (1806)  410

The  Medicine  of  Experience  (1806) 486

Objections  to  a  proposed  Sabstitnte  for  Cinchona  Bark  and  to  Suocedanea  in

general(1806) 476

ObserFattoQBonthe  Scarlet-fever  (1808) 479

On  the  present  want  of  Foreign  Medicines  (1808) 484

On  the  Valoe  of  the  Speculative  Systems  of  Medicine,  especially  as  vieved  in

connexion  with  the  usual  methods  of  practice  with  which  they  have  been

associated  (1808) 488


XYl  C0KTBNT8.

On  Substitutes  for  Foreign  Drugs,  and  on  the  recent  announcement  of  the
Medical  Faculty  in  Vienna  relative  to  the  Superfluousness  of  the  latter

(1808) ,....*..  606

Extract  from  a  letter  to  a  Physician  of  High  Standing  on  the  great  Necessity  of

a  Regeneration  of  Medicine  (1808)  611

Observations  on  the  Three  Current  Methods  of  Treatment  (1809) . . .  62S

To  a  Candidate  for  the  Degree  of  M.  D.  (1809)  66S

On  the  Prevailing  Fever  (1809) 666

Signs  of  the  Times  in  the  Ordinary  System  of  Medicine  (1809)  . . .  666

Medical  Historical  Desertation  on  the  Helleborism  of  the  Ancients  (1812)  . .  669

SjMrit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Doctrine  of  Medicine  (1818) 617

Treatment  of  the  Typhus  or  Hospital  Fever  at  present  prevailing  (1814)  .  681

On  the  Treatment  of  Bums  (1816)  686

On  the  Venereal  Disease  and  its  ordinary  improper  treatment  (1816) . .  646

Nota  bene  for  my  Reviewers  (1817)  669

Examination  of  the  Sources  of  the  ordinary  Materia  Medica  (1817)  . .  664

On  the  Uncharitableness  towards  Suicides  (1819)  696

Treatment  of  the  Purpura  Miliaris  (1821) 696

On  the  Preparation  and  Dispensing  of  Medicines  by  Homoeopathic  Physicians
themselves :

L  Representation  to  a  Person  high  in  Authority  (1820)  . .  696

XL  Tlie  Homoeopathic  Physician  is  prevented  by  no  existing  Laws  regu-
lating medical  practice,  from  himself  Administering  his  Medicines

to  his  patienU  (1821) 708

IIL  How  may  Homcsopathy  be  most  certainly  eradicated?  (1825) .  706
Contrast  of  the  Old  and  New  systems  of  Medicine  (1825) . . . .712

The  Medical  Observer  (1825)  , 724

How  can  Small  Doses  of  such  very  Attenuated  Medicine  as  Homoeopathy  em-

ploys  still  possess  great  power  f  (1827) 728

On  the  Impregnation  of  the  Globules  with  Medicine  (1829) .  . .  786

Allopathy:  a  word  of  Warning  to  all  Sick  Persons  (1881) ....  786

Oure  and  Prevention  of  tlie  Asiatic  C!holera  (1881)  758

Appeal  to  tliinking  Philanthropists  respecting  the  mode  of  Propagation  of  the

Asiatic  Cholera  (1881) • . .766

Remarks  on  the  extreme  Attenuation  of  Homoeopathic  remedies  (1882)  .  768

Oases  illustrative  of  Homoeopathic  Practice  (1888)  766

Two  cases  from  Hahnemann's  Note  book  (1848) ....  778


*


INSTRUCTION  FOR  SURGEONS

KESPECIINO

VENEREAL DISEASES,

TOGETHER  WITH

A  NEW  MERCURIAL  PREPARATION.
By  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN,  Doctor  of  Medicine.

FiBST  PUBU8HED  AT  I^BIFZIQ,  IN 1789.


PREFACj:.

My  intention  in  this  book  is  to  make  the  medical  public  familiar
with  a  wholesome  theory  and  an  improved  treatment  of  the  diseases
herein  spoken  of.

Hunter,  Schwediauer,  Hecker,  Andr6,  Simmons,  Peyrilhe,  Falk,
and  some  other,  known  and  anonymous,  older  and  more  recent  authors
have  assisted  me,  partly  by  supplying  me  with  what  I  did  not  know,
partly  by  enabling  me  to  arrange  my  matter.  I  have  made  grateful
mention  of  their  names  or  books.

I  therefore  trust  my  labour  is  not  superfluous,  for  to  the  construc-
tion of  a  building  belong  not  only  beams  and  pillars,  but  also  parti-
tion walls  and  buttresses ;  not  only  stone  blocks,  but  small  stones  to
fill  up  the  intervening  spaces ;  and  well  is  it  if  they  fit.

It  is  in  every  way  a  ticklish  undertaking  to  propose  a  new  remedy
or  to  bring  again  into  notice  a  neglected  or  little  known  one. The
person  who  attempts  this  must  cither  be  a  man  of  high  repute,  or  be
entirely  free  from  any  suspicion  of  mean  objects.

Although  destitute  of  the  former,  I  am  quite  at  ease  respecting  the
latter.  I  give  an  accurate  account  of  the  mode  of  preparing  an  ex-
cellent remedy.  Any  one  who  has  been  in  the  habit  of  prepai-ing
other  chemical  drugs,  can  unhesitatingly  prepare  this  one,  assured  oi
the  result ;  I  conceal  no  step,  no  manipulation  in  the  process.  The  ex-
cellence  of  the  remedy  is  obvious  from  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,
and  is  further  proved  by  the  observations  of  myself  and  niy  friends,
who  have  seen  similar  advantage  from  its  employment.  Any  one  who
knows  a  better,  is  at  perfect  liberty  to  make  it  known  and  give  it  the
preference  to  mine.

When  I  call  it  mine,  I  only  mean  thereby  to  say,  that  I  show  a
purer  and  more  certain  mode  of  preparing  it  than  my  predecessors,
and  give  more  definite  instruction  regarding  the  precautions  to  be  at-
tended to  in  its  use  and  .its  mode  of  action,  and  not  that  no  one  has

ever  thought  of  employing  anything  similar.

1


2  ox VENEREAL  DISEASES.

A  precipitated  luercury,  very  similar  to  the  "  soluble  mercury,"
{prcccipiiatum  mercurli  carnei  colons,  qui  ex  soluiione  mercurii  vivi
la  aqua  forti  puratnr^  aJFuso  volatili  itrhur  sinritu)  was  first  used  inter-
nally with  the  hest  effects  in  syphih's,  IrtO.I,  by  Gorvaise  Ucay,  made
into  pills  with  equal  parts  of  oxydised  mercury  and  some  honey — the
dose,  two  or  three  grains  several  times  a  day.  I  refer  the  reader  to
his  TraiU  de  la  maladic  v/'n^rie/inr,  Tuuk>use,  1693,  chap.  9,  though
the  preparation  could  not  liavc  been  entirely  free  from  turbith  and
white  i)recipitate.

This  excellent  remedy,  however,  subsequently  fell  into  complete
neglect,  until  in  recent  times  the  progress  of  chemistry  suggested
similar  mercurial  preparations;  but  we  can  hardly  say  that  their  em-
ployment was  ever  greatly  in  vogue,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of
Black's  pulvis  cinerevs.  Prepossession  in  favour  of  what  was  old,  al-
though less  efficacious  or  even  prejudicial,  combined  with  no  small
]>rejudice^  against  all  that  could  be  called  new  and  untried  in  mercu-
rial preparations  or  other  remedies  for  venereal  affections,  induced
practitioners  not  to  give  the  latter  a  trial,  but  rather  to  stick  to  their
calomel,  sublimate,  and  Neapolitan  ointment.

And  yet  the  more  recent  pharmacopoeias  furnish  us  with  remedies
which  bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  mine,  and  may  have  occasionally
been  used.

Such  a  pri'paration  is  the  mercury  precipitated  from  nitric  acid  by
ammonia,  ^;?//i'/»  mercurii  cinereus^  E.,  turpethum  albvm,  O.,  mercw-
rlus  pra:ci2)i(atu8  dulcis^  O,,  as  also  the  (urpelhinn  nigrum  or  mercuriu4
prcccipitutus  niger^  precipitated  by  ammonia  in  vapour  from  the  same
acid.  1  long  made  my  preparation  in  the  latter  way,  until  I  corrected
its  imperfections  by  the  changes  mentioned  below.

Dr.  Black  is  said  to  be  the  in  venter  ^  of  the  pulvis  mercurii  cine'
reu8^  which  he  directs  to  be  made  in  the  following  way.  "  Take  equal
parts  of  weak  nitric  acid  and  mercury,  mix  together  and  let  the  mer-
cury dissolve,  dilute  it  with  pure  water,  add  ammonia  until  the  mer-
cury is  completely  separated,  wash  the  powder  with  pure  water  and
dry  it."

I  may  here  allude  to  the  merctirius  lirascip.  fuscus Wu^rzii^  a  pre-


*  The  many  db^appointcd  hopes  respecting  tlic  more  recent  specifics  fur  syphilis,
which  their  qiiackish  vendors  announced  Tcith  the  most  exaggerated  recommcnda>
tiun<t,  and  kept  secret  to  the  great  advantage  of  their  pockety  hare  served  to  raider
practical  physidans  very  shy  of  such  remedies.  They  did  not  observe  any  of  the
boasted  effects  of  these  costly  nostrums,  but  often  the  injurious  results  from  their
use ;  and  the  discovery  of  their  composition  often  revealed  some  mercurial  prepara-
tion that  had  long  been  known.

*  Gervaise  Ucay,  as  I  have  shewn  above,  prepared  it  long  before  him  fiir  the  same
object


PREFACE.  S

cipitate  from  nitric  acid  by  potash,  merely  because  it  bears  some  re-
semblance to  mine.

All  the  authors  of  the  remedies  I  have  named  sought  to  obtain  a
pure  oxyde  of  mercury  free  from  corrosive  acids,  especially  from
sulphuric  and  muriatic  acids,  and  from  the  disadvantages  of  the  white
precipitate  and  turbith  ;  let  us  see  if  they  attained  their  object.

The  purest  saltpetre  is  never  used  for  the  preparation  of  nitric  acid  *
it  is  always  adulterated  with  earthly  muriates  or  neutral  salts.  Even
the  most  purified  is  not  free  from  these.  When  mercury  is  dissolved
in  this,  heat  is  usually  applied  by  means  of  a  sand-bath,  in  order  to
hasten  the  solution.  The  liquid  is  at  first  clouded  white  but  soon  af-
terwards aU  becomes  dear,  that  is  to  say  the  white  precipitate  at  first
formed  is  redissolved  and  retained  in  solution  in  the  acid  in  such  a
way  that  even  dilution  with  water  cannot  precipitate  it,  and  this  can
only  be  done  by  an  alkaline  solution.  If  the  mercury  be  now  pre-
cipitated from  this  solution  by  any  alkali,  the  liberated  white  precipi-
tate falls  at  the  same  time,  and  the  precipitate  is  thus  adulterated  by
no  small  quantity  of  a  very  poisonous  medicine.

If  we  take  any  one  of  the  mercurial  preparations  I  have  named,  put
it  into  a  medicinal  bottle  of  considerable  size,  and  place  this  in  a  sand-
bath  in  such  a  way  that  it  lies  almost  inverted,  but  so  that  the  powder
rests  upon  the  side ;  the  neck  of  the  bottle  being  completely  buried  in
the  hot  sand,  and  the  bulging  out  part  of  the  bottle  wherein  the  pow-
der lies  completely  surrounded  by  the  sand.  If  heat  be  now  gradual-
ly applied,  a  white  deposit  will  take  place  in  the  uppermost  part  of
the  glass,  composed  partly  of  corrosive  sublimate,  partly  of  calomel
these  being  the  two  preparations  into  which  the  white  precipitate  is
resolved  by  sublimation.  The  weight  of  both  together  will  indicate
the  quantity  of  white  precipitate  contained  in  the  mercurial  prepara-
tion, and  every  one  can  easily  convince  himself  of  the  truth  of  my  as-
sertion. If  we  employed  purified  and  redistilled  nitric  acid  for  its
preparation,  we  should  certainly  be  much  more  sure  of  the  result,  but
greatly  increase  the  price  of  the  substance.  But  even  this  will  not
suffice  to  free  it  from  sulphuric  acid.

But  as  the  ordinary  nitric  acid  is  procured  by  the  action  of  ordinary
vitriol  on  nitre,  it  has  frequently  an  admixture  of  sulphuric  acid.  It
must  first  be  rectified  over  fresh  nitre,  before  we  attempt  to  purify  it  by
redistillation,  and  this  will  increase  still  more  the  value  of  the  dissol-
vent. Who  could  trust  to  avaricious  apothecaries  paying  attention
to  all  these  particulars  1

I  now  pass  on  to  the  precipitating  agent,  and  it  is  a  matter  of
indifference  which  of  them  be  used,  (whether  volatile  or  fixed  alkali  or
alkaline  earths),  provided  only  it  be  pure.

Common  chalk,  marble,  oyster-shells  furnish,  when  calcined  and


4  ON  YEKEBEAL  DISEASES.

dissolved  so  as  to  form  lime-water,  a  verj  good  precipitant  in  many
cases  but  I  may  here  observe  that  all  are  products  of  the  sea,  con-
sequently, as  experiment  likewise  demonstrates,  not  free  from
muriatic  acid.

Ordinary  fixed  alkali  is  usually  obtained  from  potashes,  which  in
many  cases  contain  an  admixture  of  sulphuric  acid,  (oflen  designedly
added  to  it  for  the  sake  of  adulteration)  but  chiefly  of  magnesia,  and
also  ordinary  kitchen  salt.  The  water  usually  employed  for  its
purification  contributes  not  a  little  to  this  impurity.

The  potash  prepared  from  tartar  w^ould  be  much  more  serviceable
for  the  purpose,  if  it  were  prepared  by  burning  pure  crude  tartar  and
extracting  the  salt  therefrom  by  means  of  distilled  water ;  but  even
this  has  the  disadvantage  of  containing  too  much  carbonic  acid,  and
when,  in  a  watery  solution,  it  should  precipitate  the  mercurial
oxyde  from  the  nitric  acid,  it  redissolves  the  greater  part  of  it
again.

The  carbonate  of  ammonia  and  ordinary  spirits  of  hartshorn
possess  the  same  disadvantages,  from  their  excess  of  carbonic  acid.
But  caustic  ammonia  and  that  distilled  with  alcohol  have  not  this
fault,  but  both  of  them,  as  well  as  the  dry  carbonate  of  ammonia  and
the  ordinary  fluid  spirit  of  hartshorn,  contain  no  small  proportion  of
muriatic  acid ;  as  we  may  perceive,  by  saturating  them  with  acetic
acid  and  adding  nitrate  or  sulphate  of  silver,  when  the  chloride  of
silver  is  precipitated.

It  is  not  indifferent  what  water  we  employ  for  the  necessary
dilution.  Well  water  almost  always  contains  a  proportion  of
muriatic  acid  and  will  not  do  for  this  purpose.  Many  spring-waters
also  are  not  free  from  it.

It  is  well  known  that  much  depends  on  the  purity  of  the  mercury,
which  is  frequently  adulterated  with  lead  and  bismuth.  A  mere
distillation  of  the  suspected  metal  will  not  suffice  ;  much  of  the  mixed
metals  would  pass  over  along  with  it.  Still  less  will  the  mere
mechanical  purification  by  squeezing  it  through  leather  suffice;  a
certain  proportion  of  bismuth  liquifies  the  lead  in  the  mercury  so
much,  that  it  will  also  pass  through  the  pores  of  the  leather.  A
much  better  plan  is  to  get  the  metal  by  the  reduction  of  cinnabar,
especially  that  in  the  massive  form,  which  may  be  mingled  with
potash,  lime,  or  iron  filings,  and  the  metallic  mercury  obtained  there-
from by  diBtillation.

If  a  saturated  solution  of  the  mercury  of  commerce  in  nitric  acid,
diluted  with  equal  parts  of  water,  be  boiled  for  half  an  hour  with
twice  as  much  suspected  mercury  as  there  is  in  the  solution,  ^e
mercury  will  lose  all  traces  of  foreign  metals  and  be  as  pure  as  that
obtained  by  reducing  cinnabar.


PREFACB.  6

PreparaHan  of  the  Soluble  Mercury.

Mercury  purified  in  the  latter  manner  I  placed  in  a  deep  cellar,*  and
poured  upon  it  as  much  nitric  acid  of  an  inferior  kind  (distilled  with
ilamina  or  otherwise)  as  was  necessary  for  its  dissolution,  and  stirred
this  several  times  a  day,  for  the  heaviest  portion  of  the  solution  floats
closely  above  the  mercury  and  soon  puts  a  stop  to  its  fnrther  dissolu-
tion unless  we  adopt  this  manipulation.

After  the  lapse  of  eight  days  we  may  be  certain  of  the  saturation
of  the  acid,  though  there  should  always  remain  some  undissolved
mercury  at  the  bottom.

This  solution  should  now  be  decanted  off  from  the  sediment,  evapo-
rated and  crystallized  ;  the  crystals  are  to  be  taken  out,  the  fluid  shaken
off  them,  and  after  being  dried  upon  blotting  paper  they  are  to  be
dissolved  in  as  small  a  quantity  of  pure  alcohol  as  possible.  By  this
means  they  will  be  completely  freed  from  all  admixture  of  turbith  and
white  precipitate.  The  solution  must  now  be  filtered,  and  it  will  then
be  serviceable  for  use.

The  precipitating  agent  is  prepared  in  the  following  way  :  carefully
washed  eggshells  are  exposed  to  a  red  heat  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;
they  are  then  slaked  like  quick-lime,  with  distilled  water,  and  the
resulting  powder  is  put  into  a  well  stopped  bottle.

When  we  wish  to  prepare  the  soluble  mercury,  we  take  a  pound  of
the  fine  slaked  lime  prepared  from  the  eggshells,  and  mix  it  in  a
large  new  cask  with  GOO  pounds  of  distilled  water,  heated  to  100°  or
150^,  stirring  well  for  some  minutes  till  we  are  assured  of  the  most
perfect solution.

After  allowing  it  to  remain  at  rest  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  by
means  of  a  tap  two  inches  from  the  bottom  of  the  cask,  we  draw  off
the  pure  and  clear  lime-water  (if  it  be  thought  necessary  through  an
outstretched  woolen  cloth  of  close  texture)  into  a  similar  cask  of  equal
dimensions,  which  must  either  be  new  or  only  used  for  this  purpose,
and  which  must  be  very  even  and  smooth  inside.

Into  this  clear  lime-water  we  pour  without  delay,  and  stirring  con-
tinuously, a  quantity  of  the  above  mercurial  solution,  containing  two
pounds  of  the  metal.

The  black  liquid  soon  settles,  we  then  draw  off  the  clear  water,
wash  out  the  heavy  black  sediment  with  distilled  water  into  glass  jars,
allow  it  to  settle  for  twenty-four  hours,  pour  off  the  water,  mix  up
the  Sediment  with  as  much  fresh  distilled  water  as  we  have  poured  off,
let  it  again  settle  completely,  decant  the  water,  place  the  glasses  in  a
large  pot,  (filling  up  the  intervals  betwixt  them  with  ashes  or  sand)


*  If  thecoW  was  intcn:^  (in  winter),  I  let  the  solution  take  place  at  a  temperature
of40=Fahr.


6  OK  YEKEBEAL  DISEASES.

and  put  it  in  an  oven  just  warm  (200*^)  until  the  deposit  is  completely
dry.  This  may  be  more  quickly  effected  by  spreading  it  out  on  white
paper  and  heating  it  gradually  on  tin  pans  over  a  moderate  charcoal
fire,  taking  care  not  to  singe  the  paper.

This  dark  greyish-black  powder  is  the  soluble  mercury^ ;  which
name  I  give  it  because  it  is  completely  dissolved  in  all  animal  and
vegetable  acids,  and  in  water  impregnated  with  carbonic  acid ;  also  in
the  gastric  juice  with  great  speed,  as  every  practitioner  may  observe
from  the  rapidity  with  which  it  causes  the  mercurial  fever.

Zockawizt  near  Dresden,
29th  September,  1788.

Just  as  I  had  laid  down  my  pen  and  was  about  to  send  my  book  to
press,  Girtanner's  work  ( Treatise  on  the  Venereal  disease,  by  Christo-
pher Girtanner,  Gottingen,  1788)  reached  me  and  gave  me  great  plea-
sure. He  has  well  thought  over  his  plan  and  his  subject.  I  was  glad
to  observe  that  he  adopts  Hamilton's  excellent  treatment  of  gonorr-
hoea in  its  essentials,  and  shews  up  the  ordinary  irrational  mode  in  its
true  colours  ;  that  he  combats  the  a  priori  dread  of  an  obstruction  af^
ter  such  a  rapid  suppression  of  the  discharge,  and  denies  the  possibili-
ty of  a  metastasis  of  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  in  sympathetic  chemosis ;
he  gives  the  distinctive  signs  of  the  various  secondary  gonorrhoeas,
shews  where  the  venereal  differs  from  other  leucorrhoeas,  and  the  scro-
fulous from  the  venereal  glandular  swellings,  and  gives  very  useful
instructions  for  preventing  the  suppuration  of  the  latter.  I  was  re-
joiced to  find  that  he  perceives  that  the  antivenereal  metal  can  only
destroy  the  venereal  poison  by  a  previous  alteration  in  it,  produced  by
the  reactive  powers  of  the  animal  digestive  and  assimilative  functions ;
that  is  to  say,  not  by  mere  contact  or  chemical  affinity,  I  was  pleased
to  observe  that  he  is  deeply  impressed  with  the  hurtful  character  of
corrosive  sublimate,  a  poison  which  has  been  so  imprudently  deified  :
that  he  strongly  recommends  the  strengthening  plan  before,  during
and  after  the  mercurial  treatment,  and  generally  rejects  the  French
debilitating  system,  and  that  he  convincingly  exposes  the  harm  of  all
excessive  evacuations  during  the  mercurial  treatment.  I  was  delight-
ed to  see  that  he  unmasks  so  beautifully  the  absurdity  of  talking
about  **  masked  "  venereal  diseases,  and  shews  up  the  worthlessness
of  preservative  remedies  against  infection.  I  was  glad  to  find  that
he  refutes  the  assertion  relative  to  the  innocculation  of  the  child  by
the  semen  and  in  the  uterus,  as  also  by  the  nurse's  milk,  and  advises


*  [For  an  improvement  on  the  above  mode  of  preparing  the  Soluble  Mercury,  see
Postscript  to  the  Venereal  Diseases.  This  complicated  preparation  was  afterwards
superseded  in  homceopathic  practice  by  the  mercuriua  vtime.  Sec  Jieine  Arzneimit-
Ullehre,  3d  edit^  voL  L]


CONTENTS.  7

the  treatment  of  even  children  with  the  antisyphilitic  metal — all  max-
ims which  are  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  weal  of  humanity.

How  often  have  I  wished  for  the  concurrence  of  some  physician  of
eminence  on  these  very  points !  I  always  hoped  to  obtain  it,  believing
that  observations  conducted  by  really  practical  minds  must  eventual-
ly unite  in  truth,  as  the  radii  of  a  circle  though  ever  so  far  asunder  at
the  circumference,  all  converge  in  a  common  centre.

What  else  I  deemed  it  expedient  to  extract  from  Girtanner,  as  it
was  no  longer  possible  to  incorporate  it  with  the  text,  I  have  subjoin-
ed in  the  form  of  notes.
Uth  October,  1788.


CONTENTS.

Pur  ACE.

l5Tioi>ucnow,  §  1 — 11.

PART  FIRST.

miOPATfflO  LOCAL  VENEREAL  AFFECTIONS.

FIBST  CLASS. Idiopathic  local  yenereal  afifections  on  secreting  8iirfifu:e9  of  the
body  destitute  of  epidermis.

FiKST  Divisiox. Primary  GoDorrhoea.

Chap.  L Grooorrhoea  in  the  male,  g  12 — 58.

Chap.  XL Treatment  of  gonorrhoea  in  the  male,  §  54 — 126.

Chap.  IIL GonorrhcBa  in  tlie  female,  g  127—135.

Chap.  IV. Treatment  of  Gonorrhoea  in  the  female  g  136—147.

Seoo5d  Division. Sequekc  of  Gronorrhcea.

Chap.  L Chronic  btrangury  and  its  treatment,  g  148—152.

Chap.  IL Chronic  chordee,  §  153—158.

Chap.  IIL Induration  of  the  testicle,  g  159 — 165.

Chap.  IV. Secondary  gonorrhoea,  in  the  male  and  its  treatment,  g  1 66 — 1 99.

Chap.  V. Secondary  gonorrhff*a  in  the  female  and  its  treatment,  g  200 — 206.

Chap.  VI. Stricture  of  the  urethra  and  its  cure,  g  207 — 245.

Chap.  VIL Induration  of  the  prostrate  gknd,  g  246 — 256.

SECOND  CLASS. Idiopathic  local  venereal  affections  on  parts  of  the  body  pro-
vided with  epidermis.

First  Dmsiox. — Chancre.

Chap,  L Chancre  in  general,  and  especially  that  in  males,  g  257 — 271.
Chap.  II. On  the  ordinarj-  treatment  of  simple  chancre,  g  272 — 286.
Chap.  111. Treatment  of  simple  cliancre,  g  287-  293.
Cliap.  IV. Contraction  of  the  prepuce  (phiraosLs)  and  constriction  of  the

glans  (paraphimosis),  g  294 — 801.
Chap V. Treatment  of  phim<»>is  and  paraphimosis,  g  302 — 311.
Chap.  VL Chancre  in  the  female,  g  312—318.


8  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

Chap.  VIL Treatment  of  chancre  in  the  female,  §819 — 826.
Chap.  VIIL Treatment  of  the  accidents  resulting  from  improper  treat-
ment of  the  chancre,  §  327 — 389.
Chap.  IX. Venereal  warts  and  excresences,  §340 — 851.
Chap.  X. Treatment  of  venereal  warts  and  excresences,  §  352 — 361.

SsooND  Division. Buboes.

Chap.  I. Diagnosis  of  inguinal  buboes,  §  862—383.

Chap.  IL Observations  on  the  treatment  of  buboes  hitherto  practised,

§384—399.
Chap.  Ill Treatment  of  buboes,  §  400—410.


PART  SECOND.

SYPHILIS.

First  Division. Diagnosis  of  Syphilis.

Chap.  1. Introduction  to  the  Diagnosis  of  Syphilis,  §  411 — 426.

Chap.  II. Diagnosis  of  the  symptomatic  local  venereal  affections  of  the

more  proximate  kind,  §  426—448.
Chap.  IIL Diagnosis  of  the  symptomatic  local  venereal  affcctioDS  of  the
more  remote  kind,  §  449 — 459.

Second  Division. Anti  venereal  remedies.

Chap.  L Mercurial  preparations  in  general,  §  460-473.
Chap.  II. Particular  mercurial  preparations,  §  474 — 540.
Chap.  IIL Non-rnercuriid  remedies,  §  541 — 563.

Tuian  Division. Removal  of  the  obstacles  to  the  mercurial  treatment

Chap.  L  Observations  upon  the  ordinary  preparatory  and  accessory  treat-
ment, §  564-672.
Cliap.  IL Preparatory  treatment,  §673 — 590.
Chap.  in. Prevention  of  the  dLsagreciible  effects  of  mercury,  §  591 — 613.

Fourth  Division. Nature  of  the  soluble  mercury,  and  its  employment  in  vene-
real diseases,  §  614-635.

Fifth  Division. Local  affections  after  the  treatment  for  syphilis.

Chap.  I. Local  affections  that  remain  after  a  suitable  treatment  for  syphilis

and  their  removal,  §636 — 647.
Chap.  II. Local  affections  and  secondary  sufferings  that  follow  the  abuso

of  mercury,  §648 — 662.


APPENDIX.

Venereal  affections  of  new-bom  in^EUits  §  668 — 693.
Postscript


INTEODUCTION.

1.  Thebe  is  much  that  is  puzzling  and  inexplicable  in  the  nature
of  the  venereal  virus.

2.  It  has  this  peculiarity,  that  once  communicated  to  the  body  it
increases  indefinitely,  and  that  the  forces  of  the  corporeal  life  of  the
human  being  possess  no  power  of  overcoming  it,  and  of  expelling  it  by
their  own  efibrt,  like  other  diseases  and  even  gonorrhoea.  Its  seat  ap>
pears  to  be  in  the  lymphatic  system.

3.  We  find  that  neither  the  breath,  nor  the  perspiration,  nor  the
exhalation,  nor  the  urine  of  persons  affected  with  the  venereal  disease
are  capable  of  communicating  either  the  local  or  the  general  affection.
The  semen  of  a  person  affected  with  general  syphilis  does  not,  according
to  the  testimony  of  the  most  experienced  observers,  beget  syphilitic
children ;  mothers  affected  with  general  syphilis  only  do  not  seem  to
bave  any  power  of  infecting  their  offspring,  nor  can  nurses
affected  with  syphilis  communicate  the  poison  by  their  milk.

4.  Usually  the  venereal  diseases  consist  only  of  local  affections ;
a  general  malady  accompanying  these  is  something  merely  acci-
dental.

5.  The  most  remarkable  thing  about  them  is  the  difference  betwixt
the  first  and  the  second  infection.

6.  The  first  infection  gives  rise  only  to  independent  local  diseases
or  idiopathic  venereal  local  affections,  gonorrhoea  and  chancre ;  in
their  essential  character  buboes  and  condylomata  belong  to  these,  yet
as  regards  the  period  of  their  occurrence,  they  constitute  the  transition
into  the  second  infection,  in  which  the  absorption  of  the  hitherto  merely
local  virus  of  the  gonorrhoea,  chancre  and  buboe  into  the  general
fluids,  proiluces  a  state  of  the  system  that  only  makes  itself  known  by
lo?aI  affections  of  another  description,  which  may  therefore  be  called
**jmpto?rtafic  venereal  disease,  and  the  individual  or  collective
j'henornena  of  which  are  usually  termed  general  venereal  disease  or
srj.hilis.

7.  Many  experiments  shew  that  true  gonorrhoeal  matter  when
:r:«Kulated  produces  chancre,  and  that  matter  from  the  latter  gives
"iv?  to  true  gonorrhrra,  that  consequently  both  of  these  affections
apr-arently  so  different  arise  from  the  same  virus,  which  only  exhibits
diiferent  phenomena  according  as  it  is  applied  to  different  sur-
fk-es.  *


'  [HuLnemann,  in  common  with  the  whole  medical  world  at  this  period,  entertained
*li€  of/uiion  that  the  syphilitic  and  gonorrhceal  poi-<ons  were  identical  His  views
Jf'-n  :LL*  jxunt,  as  well  as  up(»n  others  of  higher  importance,  were  subsequtntly
dttoged.] — Am,  Pub.


10  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

8.  Parts  of  the  body  destitute  of  epidermis  designed  for  the
secretion  of  natural  fluids,  when  the  virus  is  brought  in  contact  with
them,  become  subject,  as  Hunter  demonstrated,  to  abnormal  fluxes  of
mucus  and  pus  without  loss  of  substance  ;  this  phenomenon  is  called
gonorrhoea.  On  the  other  hand  when  applied  to,  or  rather  rubbed  into,
surfaces  of  the  body  provided  with  epidermis,  it  excites  specific  ulcers,
which  on  account  of  their  corroding  character  are  termed  chan-
cres (iilcera  cancrosa).  In  agglomerated  glands  it  gives  rise  to
buboes.

9.  As  long  as  the  virus  continues  in  the  form  of  these  local
aflections  at  the  seat  of  the  first  infection  (or  in  its  neighbourhood,  as
in  buboes)  it  retains  unaltered  the  power  to  cause  local  infections  and
to  excite  («.  g.  by  inoculation)  similar  idiopathic  venereal  aflections
according  to  the  nature  of  the  part  acted  on.  Should,  however,  these
local  affections  disappear  without  treatment,  or  should  a  small  portion
of  their  matter  pass  into  the  circulation  (the  second  infection)  this
virus  is  thereby  altered  in  such  a  manner,  that  along  with  the
development  of  the  general  malady,  besides  other  local  affections,  ulcers
arise,  the  matter  of  which,  according  to  Hunter's  careful  researches,
can  neither,  when  applied  to  moist  surfaces,  produce  venereal  gonorr-
hoea, nor  when  introduced  into  wounds  develop  chancre,  and  hence  is
incapable  of  producing  syphilis  in  healthy  organisms.

10.  The  matter  absorbed  by  the  lymphatic  vessels  from  chancre
gives  rise  to  buboes,  but  the  matter  of  the  ulcers  of  the  general
affection  when  driven  inwards  produces  none.  As  little  can  the  virus
of  syphilis  produce  chancres  on  the  genitals  or  gonorrhoea  from  within
outwards  ;  if  it  break  out  on  parts  destitute  of  epidermis,  as  for  instance
on  the  alae  nasi,  it  forms  only  general  venereal  ulcers,  whilst  the
chancre  virus  applied  to  the  same  part  produces  a  nasal  blennorr-
hoea.

11.  The  virus  of  chancre  and  gonorrhoea  inserted  into  general
venereal  sores  or  into  suppurating  buboes,  does  not  aggravate  either
of  these,  neither  does  the  chancre  become  more  malignant  than  it  was
previously  by  the  application  of  gonorrhoeal  matter,  nor  the  gonorr-
hoea by  that  of  chancrous  matter.


PART  FIRST.

IDIOPATHIC  LOCAL  VENEREAL  AFFECTIONS.

<|tntCUfl.

UMOPAIHIC  LOCAL VZHKEKAL AFFECnOMB  09  gnSXTCVa  SOKFACEB
or  THE BODY DMTrnJTE OF XPimEUCia

FIRST  DIVISION.

PRIBIARY  GONORRHCEA


CHAPTER  I.

GONORRH(EA>  IN  THE  MALK

•

12.  Ordinarily  not  long,  oflen  immediately  after  connection  with  a
▼Oman  affected  with  venereal  leucorrhoea,  or  who  has  in  the  vagina
TeDereal  matter,  the  male  experiences  a  notable,  not  miplcasant^  itch-
ing in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  sometimes  resembling  a  fiea-bite,  ac-
companied by  a  not  disagreeable  sensation  of  heat  in  the  genitals ;  a
kind  of  formication  is  felt  in  the  testicles ;  the  lips  of  the  urethral  ori-
fice become  somewhat  swollen.  Every  gonorrhoea  is  ushered  in  by
this  irritation, — the  Jlrst  stage  of  the  disease.

13.  The  transition  of  the  first  into  the  second  stage  is  accompanied
hj  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  tension  of  the  penis,  the  sensation  of  a
constriction  in  the  urethra,  and  of  a  twisting  formicating  motion  in  the
testicles.  By  pressing  in  the  region  of  the  specific  seat  of  the  gonorr-
bcea.  some  mucus  appears  at  the  mouth  of  the  urethra.

1-L  The  second  stage.  The  tickling  sensation  changes,  usually  after
one  or  two  days,  into  a  painful  feeling,  into  a  shooting  and  intolerable
burning  in  the  urethra  when  the  patient  makes  water,  the  usual  seat
d  which  is  under  the  fraenum,  namely  in  the  navicular  fossa''  of  the
mucous  membrane,  behind  the  glans  (the  usual  primary  seat  of  the
gonorrhoea).

'  The  Gennan  name  for  this  disease,  Tripper ^  is  derived  from  the  principal  pheno-
BenoD,  the  dropping  frc»n  them^thra.  Common  people  say,  "cs  trippt,"  instead
rf-es  tropfelt  ** — it  drope.

'  Sometimes  it  spreads  all  over  the  glans,  causing  erection  of  the  penis  and  semi-
osl  emLsedon,  and  seems  to  incite  to  an  abnormal  excercise  of  the  sexual  function.
^  the  sensation  is  sometimes  less  pleasant

'  I  believe  Cockbom,  in  1717,  was  the  first  who  demonstrated  gonorrhoea  to  be  an
■ftctioD  of  the  mucous  follicles,  and  its  original  seat  this  spot ;  hence  he  explained
tike  nature  of  the  disdiarge  much  more  correctly  and  naturally  than  his  predecessors
and  many  of  his  successors,  who  alleged  that  a  large  quantity  (the  gonorrhocal  dis-
^fcargt  sometimes  amounts  to  4  oz.  in  the  twenty -four  hours)  of  semen  and  prostatic
ftiid  Ajwed  from  the  seminal  vesicles  and  prostate  gland,  thereby  giving  an  expLi-
Batiro  of  this  phenomenon  directly  opposed  to  all  sound  physiology.


12  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

15.  As  long  as  the  gonorrhoea,  as  in  this  stage,  retains  its  specific  seat,
the  patient  experiences  no  pain  in  making  water  until  the  urine  comes
to  within  an  inch  or  an  inch  and  a  half  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.

1 6.  The  natural  white  viscid  mucus  of  this  canal,  which  is  scarcely
observable  in  health,  now  exudes  by  drops.  The  lips  of  the.glans
are  more  than  usually  congested  with  blood ;  the  glans  is  shining,
cherry-red,  and  transparent.  The  whole  penis,  or  at  least  the  glans,
appears  fuller  and  thicker  than  it  is  naturally  when  unerected ;  it
seems  half  erected.  The  urine^  commences  to  be  of  a  dark-yellow
colour.  There  occur  frequent,  painful  erections,^  especially  at  night,
occasionally  accompanied  by  emission  of  semen.

17.  Usually  a  short  time  after  the  occurrence  of  the  scalding^  on
making  water,  there  occurs  a  discharge*  of  a  watery  white  fluid,  as  if
it  were  mingled  with  milk.

18.  The  patients  point  to  just  behind  the  glans'*  in  the  urethra,  as
the  seat  of  their  pains,  which  they  feel  most  intensely  when  the  penis
is  erected  ;  on  looking  into  it,  we  observe  that  is  has  a  raw  appearance
near  the  orifice.

19.  During  the  continuance  of  this  discharge,  the  scalding  diminish-

*  On  account  of  the  swelling  of  the  penis,  probably  also  on  account  of  contracdon
of  the  urethra  by  the  inflammation,  perhaps  also  because  the  patient,  on  account  of
the  pain,  dreads  to  let  his  water  come  freely,  the  urine  flows  in  a  smaller  stream
than  usual ;  sometimes  it  splits  on  emerging  from  the  urethra,  probably  on  account
of  the  unequal  contraction  internally.

*  The  painful  erections  and  the  scalding  of  the  urine  distinguish  the  primary  from
secondary  gonorrhoea  and  other  discharges  fit)m  the  urethra.

'  Which,  with  its  concomitant  symptoms,  continues  until  the  irritating  poison  is  ex-
pelled with  the  discharge,  from  a  few  days  to  several  weeks.  If  it  continue  some
time  without  any  discharge,  this  troublesome  and  sometimes  dangerous  condition  is
usually  denominated  by  the  contradictory  name  of  dry  gonorrhcea.

*  The  interior  of  the  urethra  in  the  healthy  state  is  always  kept  covered  with  a
fine,  mild,  viscid  transparent  mucus,  that  spontaneously  exudes  from  the  exhalent
vessels  and  from  the  excretory  ducts  of  the  mucous  glandules,  so  that  the  acrid  urine
may  flow  over  without  irritating  it  But  when  irritated  by  the  venereal  poison,  these
excretory  ducts  are  compelled  to  pour  out  more  of  their  moisture ;  a  bountiful  pro-
vision of  nature  to  dilute  and  carry  off  the  injurious  poison.  The  contractile  power
of  the  urethra  suffices  to  expel  the  gonorrhoea  matter  by  drops.

*  The  usual  scat  of  gonorrhoea  is  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  inches  behind  the
orifice  of  the  urethra,  (in  some  anomolous  cases  of  a  worse  description  the  inflam-
mation  extends  throughout  the  whole  urethra,  and  seems  to  be  of  an  erysipelatous
character.)  How  it  is  that  the  gonorrfaceal  matter  should  always  find  its  way  into
exactly  that  spot  of  the  urethra,  it  is  not  easy  to  determme ;  perhaps  it  first  lies  at
the  orifice,  and  thence  gradually  runs  backwards  till  it  reaches  the  spot  which  is
most  susceptible  of  its  irritation,  and  where  it  can  be  least  readily  washed  away  by
the  urine.


PBIMABY  GONORBHCKA.  13

es  graduallj.*  In  the  course  of  time,  and  often  alternately,  this
watery  mUky  discharge  changes  into  a  tiiicker  fluid,  resembling  melt-
ed lard,  becomes  yellower,  exactly  like  pus,^  and  has  a  peculiar  disa-
greeable odour.

20.  When  the  pains  and  inflammatory  symptoms  have  subsided,
the  third  stage  commences.  The  simple  gonorrhoea  is  tljen  usually
disposed  to  heal  spontaneously  without  artificial  aid  f  all  pain  ac-

'  There  are  dape  almost  without  scalding,  in  which  the  dischai^ge  is  copious,  and
ottierB  in  which  the  painful  sensations  precede  the  discharge  some  weeks.  There
are  eyen  some,  although  these  are  rare,  where  the  disease  remains  quite  stationary
at  the  second  stage  (ffonarrhee  8eehe\  where  the  scalding  and  even  some  dysuria
eadsts  withbut  heing  followed  by  a  gonorrhceal  discharge,  and  among  these  are  some
that  are  cured  without  this  latter  phenomenon  «yer  occurring.  If  such  a  dry  clap  be
of  a  bad  kind,  the  membranous  portion  of  the  urethra  may  become  inflamed,  and  if
Dot  speedily  relieyed,  a  perinseal  fistula  be  the  result.

'  The  porulent  character  of  the  gonorrhceal  discharge  seems  to  indicate  the  existence
of  an  ulcer  in  the  urettuB ;  this  is  not  the  case  however,  in  the  ordinary  simple  gonorr-
hcEa. Tliere  are  several  instances  in  which  pus  \b  produced  without  loss  of  substance,
without  ulceration. The  outer  surfiEUic  of  ^e  lungs,  the  costal  pleura,  also  the  ab-
dominal viscera  have  been  found  surrounded  by  pus  without  the  slightest  trace  of
uloeratioii  of  these  parts. In  ophthalmo-blennorrhfiea  of  scrofidous  or  other  kinds,  as
afeo  in  cases  of  severe  catarrh,  there  occurs  a  discharge  of  true  pus,  without  a  suspi-
cioD  of  the  presence  of  an  ulcer. Were  we  to  attribute  the  ordinary  yellow  gonnorr-
hceal  discharge  to  an  ulcer,  it  is  obvious  that  if  the  whole  internal  soxfACG  of  the  ure^
fhra  were  ulcerated,  the  size  of  tlus  suppurating  surface  would  not  suffice  to  produce
tiie  quantity  of  pus  that  sometimes  comes  away  in  gonorrhoea. And  moreover  as  the
ordinary  gonorrboBa  depends  on  a  true  venereal  miasm,  it  is  impossible,  if  it  arose
frum  an  ulcer,  that  any  case  could  be  cured  without  mercury  (without  which  no
venereal  ulcer  <aui  be  radically  cured) ;  but  we  find  that  a  simple  clap  is  often  cured
by  the  power  of  nature  or  with  some  slight  unmcrcurial  remedy. In  persons  who
have  been  cured  of  clap,  tJic  urethral  mucus  often  suddenly  comes  away  yellow  and
puriform  after  being  heated,  after  the  abuse  of  spirituous  drinks,  frequent  sexual  in-
tercourse, &c It  is  especially  in  the  inflammatory  stage  of  the  clap  that  the  dis-
chai^  comes  away  of  a  purulent  character,  whereas  ulcers  only  secrete  pus  after
their  inflammatory  stage  is  past What  we  have  stated  is  superabundantly  corrobo-
rated by  innumerable  dissections  of  the  urethra,  both  in  cases  which  died  during  the
<^p  ^id  in  such  as  had  clap  long  before  their  death. In  the  latter  no  cicatrices  were
found,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  rare  cases ;  in  the  former,  however,  it  was  observ-
ed that  the  seat  of  the  discharge  was  not  ulcerated,  but  only  very  red  and  raw-look-
ii^,  and  the  coloured  matter  could  be  often  pressed  out  of  the  lining  membrane.
whilst  the  gonorrhceal  pus  lay  free  in  the  mucous  cavities  (/acu7Mt),  that  is  to  say  in
the  depr^sions  caused  by  the  mouths  of  the  excretory  ducts  of  the  urethral  glan-
dules, without  the  slightest  loss  of  substance  being  discoverable ;  tlie  lymphatic  ves-
sels were  congested,  as  if  injected  with  a  white  fluid. Pott,  Morgagni,  Hunter,  StoU
and  others  are  the  authorities  for  these  facts.

*  [The  £Eu;t  that  simple  gonorrhoea  has  a  tendency  to  subside  spontaneously,  whai
not  aggravated  and  complicated  by  drugs,  is  of  much  importance.  K  this  opinion,
which  was  announced  by  the  founder  of  homoeopathy  more  than  fifty  years  ago,  had
been  appreciated  by  his  cotemporarics,  and  by  his  successors,  a  vast  amount  of  un-
necessary sufiering  would  have  beea  spared  the  human  race.] — Am,  Fttb,^


14  OF  YSNEBEAL  DISEASES.

company ing  erections  is  gone  ;Hhe  power  of  retaining  the  urine,  4nd
of  discharging  it  in  a  full  stream  and  without  discomfort,  is  restored ;
the  acrid,  coloured  discharge  takes  on  gradually  a  whitish  colour,  and
at  length  becomes  colourless  (in  rarer  cases  it  remains  yellowish  to
the  last),  similar  in  character  to  white  of  egg,  viscid  (it  can  be  drawn
into  strings  betwixt  the  fingers),  transparent,  mild.*

21.  It  continues  to  decrease  more  and  more  in  quantity,  accom-
panied by  a  tickling  sensation  and  a  sort  of  not  disagreeable  itching
of  the  glans  and  urethra,  exciting  erections,  until  at  length  only
fibrous  flakes  are  perceived  in  the  urine,  and  even  these  at  last  disap-
pear along  with  the  cessation  of  the  tickling  alluded  to.  The  gonorr-
hoea is  cured,  usually  from  four  to  five  weeks  after  it  first  broke  out.

22.  The  above  is  the  usual  course  of  the  gonorrhoea,  but  there  are
innumerable  varieties.

23.  When  the  irritation  from  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  advances
nearer  to  inflammation,  the  sensations  of  the  patient  are  not  confined
any  longer  to  the  original  seat  of  the  gonorrhoea.

24.  Weakness  in  the  whole  pelvic  region,  disagreeable  sensitive-
ness in  the  scrotum,  testicles,  breast,  hips,  shooting  extending  into  the
glans  and  great  scalding  on  passing  the  urine,  dark  redness  of  the
latter,  frequent  painful  erections  and  difRcult  passage  of  the  fax^es  are
the  general  concomitant  symptoms  usually  observed.  The  inguinal
glands  are  oflcn  at  the  time  swollen.

25.  If  the  inflammation  be  more  intense,  the  whole  urethra  seems
to  be  affected  in  an  erysipelatous  manner ;  it  is  as  if  shortened,  in
consequence  of  which  the  frequent  sometimes  continued  priapism
crooks  the  penis  downwards,  (chordee),  causing  the  most  excruciating
pain,  and  oflen  the  discharge  of  some  drops  of  blood.*  The  emis-
sions of  semen  that  sometimes  ensue  *are  agony.  The  urine  is  dark
red,  acrid,  hot ;  the  patient  is  forced  to  emit  it  every  moment  by  tea-
spoonfuls  or  even  drops,  accompanied  by  the  most  violent  cutting  and
with  involuntary  contortions  of  the  features,  especially  as  the  last
drops  flows  out.  Sometimes  the  patient  cannot  remain  a  quarter  of
an  hour  on  his  legs  (and  then  complete  retention  of  urine  oflen  en-
sues). The  penis  is  externally  very  painful,  the  lips  of  the  urethra
gape ;  some  swelling  of  the  glandules  along  the  urethra,  and  a  pain-
ful tumefaction  of  the  perinaeum  are  observable,  frequently  conjoined

'  This  fluid  seems  to  be  coagulable  lymph,  and  its  imiocaousness  is  known  by  this
(besides  the  cessation  of  all  painful  sensations)  that  it  dries  only  upon  one  side  of
the  linen,  and  the  spot  it  makes  may  be  rubbed  completely  off  without  leaving  be-
hind a  coloured  place,  while  the  prerioos,  more  acrid  discharge,  stains  and  wnlm  into
(helinea

*  Which  comes  from  some  distended  or  lacerated  bloodveasel  of  the  inflamed  mem-
hnuneof  the  nretlira,  orer-flAretcfaed  by  the  onectkna.


PBIMABY  GOHOBBHCEA.  16

with  tenesmus  ;  the  gonorrhoeal  discharge  is  then  acrid,  discoloured,
greenish,  or  greyish,*  sometimes  even  mixed  with  streaks  of  blood ;  it
sinks  into  the  linen  where  it  makes  marks  of  a  similar  colour.  The
pain' is  great,  it  excites  the  pulse  ;  rigour  and  heat  are  present,  especial-
ly towards  evening ;  blood  drawn  from  the  arm  presents  occasionally
tiie  bufiy  coat.

26.  The  above  course  which  is  never  the  normal  one,  and  whose
violence  is  often  dependent  on  a  bad  constitution,  but  more  frequent-
ly on  improper  treatment  of  the  patient  by  himself  or  his  surgeon,  or
ED  accession  of  febrile  disease,  a  chill,  fright,  anger,  vexation,  riding,
dancing,  coition,  heating  liquors,  purgatives,  corrosive  injections,  &c.,
does  not  remain  stationary  at  these  symptoms,  but,  if  efifcctual  aid  be
withheld  goes  on  to  the  most  dangerous  results.

27.  The  priapism  readily  passes  into  mortification,  the  inflamma-
tion of  the  glandules  along  the  urethra  into  suppuration,  which  opens
into  the  urethra,  more  rarely  outwards ;  the  tumefaction  of  the  peri-
nseum,  probably  in  Cowper's  glands,  forms  an  abscess  which  in  course
of  time  gives  rise  to  a  fistula  perinsei,  whereby  an  abnormal  outlet  for
the  urine  in  this  region  is  constantly  maintained.  The  prostrate  gland
passes  into  inflammation  and  induration,  less  frequently  into  suppura-
tion. The  foreskin  inflames,  chiefly  in  consequence  of  the  contact  of
the  acrid  gonorrhoeal  matter  which  penetrates  betwixt  it  and  the  glans
(diancres  under  the  foreskin  and  gonorrhoea  preputials  are  not  unfre-
quent  consequences) ;  it  swells  and  gives  rise  to  phimosis  or  paraphi-
mosis. The  discharge  may  sometimes  stop  suddenly  (chaude-pisse
avortee)  and  sympathetic  inflammation  of  the  testicles  or  inguinal
glands  ensue.

28.  Along  with  the  sensation  of  a  colicky  pain  in  the  abdomen  and
a  weakness  in  the  loins  and  pelvis,  along  with  the  pains  in  the  coccyx
and  the  whole  urethra,  and  along  with  inclination  to  vomit,  the  effe-
rent duct  of  one  testicle,  then  the  epididymis,  and  at  last  also  the
body  of  the  testicle,  seldom  of  both  testicles,  begins  to  swell,  accom-
panied by  symptomatic  fever,  quick,  full  and  strong  pulse.  The  tes-
ticle gets  soft,  full  and  swollen,  (chaude-pisse  tombie  dans  lea  bourses),
by  and  by  it  becomes  hard,  yet  the  epididymis  on  the  top  of  it  is
harder  to  the  touch ;  it  is  sensitive,  full  of  a  dull  pain,  sometimes  ac-
companied by  shooting.  It  appears  to  the  patient  to  be  intolerably
heavy.

29.  The  spermatic  chord  also  frequently  swells  and  its  bloodvessels
are  distended  so  as  to  become  varicose,  the  spermatic  duct  becomes
hard  and  painful.

30.  In  the  meantime  the  gonorrhoeal  discharge  diminishes,  and,  ex-
cept in  a  few  cases,  stops  completely  ;  the  scalding of  the  urine

*  Both  <x>lourB  may  be  owing  to  the  admixture  of  small  quantities  of  blood.


16  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

ceases.  On  the  other  hand,  there  occurs  a  more  frequent  call  to
urine,  a  strangury,  as  the  region  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder  appears  to
be  now  affected;  the  formerly  superficial  inflammation  penetrates
deeper  into  the  substance  of  the  urethral  membrane.  Sometimes  the
swelling  goes  alternately  from  one  testicle  to  the  other.

31.  Other  viscera  also  suffer,  as  has  been  said,  from  sympathetic
irritation ;  indigestion  flatulence,  colic,  tendency  to  vomit  are  the
usual  symptoms.^

32.  Resolution  is  the  most  frequent  termination,  scirrhus  the  more
rare,*  and  mortification  or  suppuation  the  most  rare.^

33.  In  like  manner,  along  with  the  cessation  of  the  scalding  and  the
occurrence  of  strangury,  as  also  of  the  most  of  the  other  symptoms,
there  sometimes  arises  a  swelling  of  the  ingumal  glands  which  has  but
a  remote  resemblance  to  true  venereal  bubo,  as  it  is  only  caused  by
sympathetic  irritation.  (Slight  swellings  of  the  inguinal  glands  are  a
usual  and  unimportant  symptom  in  every  gonorrhoea  of  any  severi-
ty, without  the  discharge  thereupon  ceasing.  They  go  off  without
further  inconvenience  on  the  cessation  of  the  urethral  irritation.)

34.  Resolution  or  scirrhus  is  the  most  frequent,  suppuration  the
rarest  result.

35.  Rare  but  much  more  dangerous  is  the  ophthalmia  that  occurs
under  similar  circumstances.* After  a  diminution  or  sudden  cessation

*  Excitement  of  the  nervous  system  by  passions,  over-heating  of  the  whole  body
or  of  the  genitals  in  particular,  astringent  injections,^the  rude  emplovmcnt  of  bougies,
purgatives,  perhaps  also  a  not  sufficiently  understood  predisposition  of  these  parts
may  give  rise  to  these  swellings  of  the  testicles  and  inguinal  glands,  which  with  few
exceptions  are  not  venereal  [syphilitic].  A  mere  sympathetic  irritation  of  the  lym-
phatic vessels  in  the  urethra  and  caput  gallinaginis  seems  to  excite  the  remote  swell-
ing of  these  glands.  A  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  frequent  reappearance
and  disappearance  of  these  swellings,  and  in  their  curability  by  antiphlogistic,  seda-
tive remedies,  without  mercury,  which  is  never  the  case  with  true  venereal  buboes
and  swellings  of  the  testicle.  It  is  very  rare  that  with  moderate  care  either  pass  in-
to suppuration,  and  if  this  do  happen  the  ulcers  formed  are  as  Hunter  has  shewn,
not  venereal,  and  may  be  cured  by  non-mercurial  means  without  being  followed  by
syphilis.  Not  to  mention  that  true  venereal  buboes  and  swellings  of  the  testicles
produced  by  a  real  metastasis  of  the  miasm  are  much  larger  and  more  painful  than
those  arising  from  sympathetic  irritation  in  cases  of  suppressed  gonorrhoeal  diachaige.

*  Induration  occurs  especially  when  the  discharge  cannot  be  re-established,  and
the  swelling  of  the  testicle  does  not  diminish.

'  Girtanner  says^  *'it  never  passes  into  suppuration,"  contrary  to  Hunter's  obser-
vations.

*  There  is  certainly  a  sympathy  known  to  exist  betwixt  the  visual  organs  and  the
genital  apparatus,  but  whether  that  is  sufficient  to  account  for  this  phenomenon  I
cannot  decide.  Although  this  blennorrhceic  ophthalmia  is  usually  attributed  to  a
true  metastasis  of  the  gonorrhoBal  matter,  this  assertion  remains  improbable  and  un-
proved as  long  as  the  venereal  nature  of  the  matter  dischaiiged  from  the  eyes  is  not


PRIMABT  GONORRHCEA.  17

of  the  gonorrhoea  (frequentl j  from  two  to  three  days  after  its  suppres-
flion)  in  consequence  of  severe  chill  of  the  whole  body  or  of  the  geni-
tal oi^ns,  by  the  intemperate  or  excessive  employment  of  cold  ap-
plications, by  draughts,  dec,  a  violent  inflammation  attacks  the  eyes,
which  very  soon  (in  a  few  days)  usually  inevitably  results  in  incura-
ble blindness.  At  first  the  conjunctiva  becomes  inflamed,  swells  and
presents  the  appearance  of  a  mass  of  raw  meat,  from  which  a  copious
purulent  fluid  runs,  soon  causing  inflammation  of  the  lower  eyelid.
Every  glimmer  of  light  is  intolerable  to  the  patient.  Most  of  the
conjunctiva  of  the  sclerotic  inflames  and  swells  over  the  cornea  to  such
an  extent  that  the  latter  appears  as  if  sunk  in  a  pit.  A  production  of
pus  is  observed  to  take  place  behind  the  cornea,  which  becomes  whit
ish  and  opaque,  scales  ofl*,  and  at  length  projects  forward  and  bursts
from  the  pressure  of  the  suppuration  of  the  eye.  The  destroyed  con-
tents of  the  eyeball  escape,  and  the  visual  organ  is  forever  destroyed.'
30.  Ulctrs  in  the  urethra  are  certainly  of  rare  occurrence,  at  least
they  are  far  from  being  an  essential  portion  of  the  ordinary  gonorr-
hoea when  left  to  itself.  The  end  of  the  pipe  of  an  injecting  syringe
of  the  catheter,  or  of  a  hard  bougie  in  the  hands  of  an  incautious  per-
son, may  readily  cause  a  wound  in  the  urethral  canal ;  a  chancrous  ul-
cer is  the  consequence.  The  laceration  of  a  bloodvessel  in  the  ure-
thra (by  priapism,  onanism,  coition)  may  give  rise  to  something  simi-
lar.  An  internal  ulcer  may  also  often  arise  from  the  bursting  of  aa
abscess  of  the  external  urethral  glandules.

urethra,  which  is  renewed  on  introducing  a  catheter  or  bougie,  as  also
by  external  pressure  on  the  same  spot,  betrays  the  presence  of  such
an  ulcer. Ordinarily  some  blood  escapes  before  the  ulcer  occurs.^

38.  In  such  a  case  though  all  the  inflariimatcry  symptoms  of  the
gonorrhcea  may  have  subsided,  yet  the  pain  persists  in  the  suspected
spot  even  during  the  secondary  gonorrhcea,  and  does  not  cease  until
a  proper  course  of  mercury  puts  a  stop  to  it  and  its  source,  the  ure-
thral ulcer.  If,  in  place  of  the  antivenereal  specilic,  astringent  injec-
tions are  employed,  general  syphilis  is  the  result.

39.  Sometimes,  though  rarely,  (almost  never  in  those  who  have  a
short  foreskin,  and  never  in  those  who  have  got  none)  connexion  with
a  diseased  woman  causes  a  sort  of  external  gonorrhoea.  With  a  tickling
and  burning  smarting  sensation,  there  occurs,  chiefly  in  the  region  of

demonstrated,  as  long  as  chancres  have  not  resulted  from  inoculating  it  In  the
m#yn  time  we  shall  hesitate  to  allow  it  the  name  of  eye-clap.  I  perceive  that
Qirtanncr  holds  the  same  opinion  as  myselfl

*  Sometimes  in  from  four  to  five  days  after  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  aa
Girtanncr  remarks.

•  And,  as  Girtanncr  alleges,  sometimes  true  pus  mingled  with  blood  is  dischaiiged
akxig  with  the  ordinary  goDorrhoeal  matter.

2


18  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

the  junction  of  the  prepuce  and  glans,  on  the  corona  of  the  latter  and
inside  the  lower  part  of  the  former,  a  secretion  of  an  acrid  viscid  matter,
without  our  being  able  to  detect  any  abrasion  of  the  skin,  or  visible
ulceration ;  occasionally  we  may  observe  through  a  magnifying  glass
that  the  affected  part  seems  as  if  covered  with  aphthae.  This  abnor-
mal secretion  on  the  spot  indicated,  is  termed  preputial  gonarrhosa,^

40.  Sometimes  it  involves  the  whole  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  and
the  whole  extent  of  the  glans,  at  least  I  have  noticed  it  also  on  its  apex.^

41.  Indubitable  observations  shew  that  the  gonorrhoeal  matter
may  in  some  rare  cases  be  absorbed,  and  produce  general  syphilis.^
But  the  special  conditions  under  which  this  may  occur  are  not  very
clear.  That  this  may  arise  from  urethral  ulcers,  which  date  their  origin
almost  invariably  from  some  violence  from  without  or  injury  received,
is  self-evident  and  requires  no  further  proof.  But  under  what  cir-
cumstances the  gonorrhoeal  virus  may,  without  injury  of  the  lining

membrane  of  the  urethra,  be  absorbed  into  the  general  circulation,  is
all  the  more  doubtful ;  whether  by  too  full  living,  or  on  the  contrary,

by  inordinate  blood-letting  and  purgatives,  or  generally  by  a  debili-
tating regimen  and  internal  and  external  relaxing  remedies,  the  local

'  Sydenham  seems  to  be  the  first  that  observed  it

*  Perhaps  this  last  phenomcDoo  is  a  not  unfrequent  commencement  of  urethra]
gonorrhoea.  The  following  case  seems  to  throw  light  upon  this  assertion,  and  to  give
rise  to  some  inferences.  A  man  who  had  never  had  clap,  after  an  impure,  half-com-
pulsory connection,  was  affected  by  an  almost  raw,  dark  red  spot,  three  lines  in
diameter,  at  the  distance  of  two  lines  from  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  which  exuded
but  little,  and  caused  very  little  uneasiness ;  he  was  otherwise  free  from  venereal
disease.  Under  these  circumstances  he  had  connection  with  a  lady  who  was  quite
healthy  in  every  respect  She  got  from  him  a  very  violent  clap,  and  a  sympathetic
buboe  in  the  right  groin,  besides  an  abscess  in  the  fold  betwixt  the  greater  lip  and
nympha  of  the  same  side.  The  man  now  ceased  to  have  connexion  with  her,  and
commenced  bathing  the  exuding  spot  with  warm  milk,  whereupon  the  disease  gra-
dually changed  its  seat  and  in  a  few  days  reached  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  the
lips  of  which  commenced  to  inflame.  Some  fluid  had  already  commenced  to  flow
from  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  when  he  first  put  himself  under  treatment,  and  in  the
course  of  six  days  he  was  perfectly  cured  without  further  accident  merely  by  the
rapid  and  vigorous  use  of  the  soluble  mercury.  Subsequently  he  did  not  again
infect  the  lady,  and  he  is  still,  (after  one  year  and  three-quarters)  in  perfect  health.
The  lady  recovered  by  the  external  and  internal  use  of  antiphlogistics,  and  her  ab-
scess yielded  to  mercury.

Preputial  gonorrhcea  seems  to  give  evidence  of  a  peculiar  tenderness  of  the
epidermis  of  the  glaas ;  at  least  it  is  never  met  with  in  persons  whose  prepuce  is  shorty
cut  offf  or  always  retracted  behind  the  glans.  The  epidermis  of  such  a  glans  be-
comes thicker,  and  is  therefore  only  inoculable  by  the  venereal  poison  with  chancres.
Perhaps  the  apthous  coating  of  the  glans  in  these  external  claps  consists  of  small
chancres.  Many  observers,  among  others  Gardane,  have  observed  an  alternation  of
urethral  and  preputial  gooonixBa,  the  one  appearing  when  the  other  ceased,  and
vice  verscL

'  [During  the  latter  years  of  his  life,  Hahnemann  abandoned  this  idea,  and  advo-
cated the  opinioD  thai  the  two  poisona  were  distiiict  and  diwrimilir.] — Am,  Pub*


PRIMARY  GONORRHCBA.  19

employment  of  mercurial  ointments  and  plasters,  dec.  ?  Perhapa
aometiraes  by  some  peculiar  morbid  diathesis,  an  accidental  fever,^
or  habitual  general  indisposition.  All  this  lies  in  obscurity,  and  there
is  but  little  probability  that  any  metastasis  of  the  gonorrhceal  matter
is  possible,  except  when  there  is  a  urethral  ulcer.

42.  Thus  much  is  certainly  true,  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  mild-
ness or  malignancy  of  the  infecting  matter,  as  the  various  suscepti-
bility^ of  the  constitution  of  the  different  subjects  exposed  to  the  in-
fection, that  makes  slighter  or  more  severe  gonorrhoea ;  but  still  it  it
going  too  fiur^  to  deny  all  modifying  power  to  the  different  degrees  of
the  poison,  as  Hunter  does,  who  also  maintains  that  it  is  the  same
with  respect  to  other  miasms.^

43.  In  most  persons  the  first  gonorrhoea  seems  to  be  the  moal
severe,  especially  when  it  occurs  in  a  sensitive  or  ardent  temperament.

44.  Repeated  attacks  of  gonorrhoea  seem  to  fortify  the  urethra
against  a  new  irritation  of  the  same  kind ;  each  time  it  generally  be-
comes unsusceptible  for  a  new  infection  for  a  considerable  time  (always
longer  and  longer.)

45.  Persons  who  have  what  is  called  an  unhealthy  skin,  are  not  on
that  account  more  difficult  to  cure  of  gonorrhoea ;  and  again,  those
who  are  insensible  to  many  irritants  have  often  the  most  obstinate
gonorrhoeas.

46.  Long  continued  scalding  of  the  urine  without  the  occurrence  of
a  discharge,  indicates  a  bad  form  of  gonorrhoea,  which  before  it  breaks
forth  is  often  preceded  by  an  anxious  sort  of  restlessness ;  and  yet  s^
vere  scalding  does  not  always  prognosticate  a  great  discharge,  nof
slight  scalding  a  moderate  one.

47.  Men  rarely  communicate  gonorrhoea  before  the  discharge  ap^
pears;  women  do  so  more  frequently.  Yet  the  poison  is  not  inactive
between  the  period  of  infection  and  that  of  the  appearance  of  the  dia.
diarge ;  it  always  in  the  interim  causes  sensations  in  the  urethra.

4S.  On  surfaces  of  the  body  which  are  destitute  of  epidermis  and
which  are  naturally  moist,  the  gonorrhoea!  virus  can  excite  similar

'  J.  Foote  saw  oo  the  occurrence  of  the  small-pox  a  gonorrhoea  disappear  and
gcDenJ  syphilis  follow  thereupon.  Was  it  £Eiirly  ascertained  that  no  urethral  uloer
vac  present!

'  Instances  are  not  wanting  where  one  woman  has  communicated  clap  of  the  mo8|
▼anxis  degrees  to  sereral  men,  and  yet  has  not  given  it  to  those  with  whom  she
w  in  the  habit  of  having  most  frequent  connexion.

*  In  this  Girtanner  agrees  with  me.

*  Is  it  perfectly  indifferent  whether  the  variolous  virus  be  taken  from  mild
of  small  poK  or  from  children  who  have  died  of  confluent  small  pox  t  In  ao
mic  of  putrid  fever,  I  saw  ten  individuals  who  frequented  the  same  room  at*

iatked  with  almost  exactly  the  rame  symptoms,  whilst  in  other  fiunilies.  including
the  dnmeartcs,  quite  difiennt  modificatioos  of  the  disease  obtained,  and  were  trane-
■itted  from  ooe  membef  to  another  with  almost  no  diflferenoe.


20  OK  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

discbarges.  It  must  therefore  be  carefully  kept  from  the  anus,*  mouth,
nose,^  eyes  ;^  but  in  such  situations  also,  as  it  is  constantly  washed
away  and  diminished,  it  cannot  be  easily  absorbed,  the  same  as  when
it  is  in  the  urethra  (consequently  it  can  rarely  give  rise  to  general  ve-
nereal symptoms),  and  hence  is  not  to  be  cured  by  mercury.

49.  But  when  introduced  into  wounds,  it  seems  to  act  exactly  like
the  chancre  virus,  and  to  infect  the  body  with  the  venereal  disease*
(which  is  curable  by  mercury  only.)  J.  Hunter  innoculated  the  glans
of  a  healthy  man  with  gonorrhoeal  matter,  who  thereupon  was  attacked
by  chancre,  then  buboes,  and,  lastly,  had  general  syphilis.

50.  Who  knows  but  that  many  chancres  on  the  glans  and  prepuce
might  be  avoided,  if  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  that  flows  out  were  care-
fully kept  from  those  parts  ?

51.  If  the  ordinary  gonorrhoea  be  venereal,  as  cannot  be  denied,
there  are  not  a  few  other  gonorrhoeas  whose  infecting  properties  can-
not be  disputed,  which  are  of  a  gouty,  scrofulous,  or  other  nature.
These  latter  can  often  be  very  quickly  cured,  and  an  inexperienced
practitioner  might  be  apt  to  suppose  the  remedy  he  employed  to  be
a  specific  for  gonorrhoea,  until  its  inefficacy  or  hurtful  character  in
true  venereal  gonorrhoea  shall  convince  him  and  others  of  the  contrary,

52.  Any  one  who  wishes  for  information  upon  the  subject  of  the  non-
venereal  ones,  which  do  not  fall  to  be  considered  here,  will  do  well  to
consult  Hecker's  work.

53.  The  infecting  power  of  a  venereal  gonorrhoea  does  not  cease
until  the  discharge  has  completely  ceased,  and  erections  and  the  emis-
sion of  semen  takes  place  without  the  slightest  pain,  scalding,  or  ab-
normal tickling  sensation.

CHAPTER  II.

TREATMENT  OF  GONORRHCEA  IN  THE  MALE

54.  The  mildest  (rarest)  kind  of  gonorrhoea  requires,  besides  a
good  diet  and  regimen,  almost  no  artificial  aid,  although  the  time
required  to  effect  the  cure  may  thereby  be  much  shortened.

55.  The  more  severe  (the  ordinary)  kind  will  no  doubt  ultimately
yield  in  most  cases  to  the  efforts  of  nature,  but  it  will  give  way  more
happily,  more  quickly,  and  more  easily  with  some  assistance ;  the
chief  points  to  be  attended  to  in  furnishing  that  assistance  being  the

'  I  saw  goDorrhceal  matter  which  had  been  introduced  into  the  rectum  by  one  of
the  most  unnatural  of  vices,  give  rise  to  chronic  gonorrhcea  of  the  rectum.

*  Duncan  observed  it  accompanied  by  violent  inflammation  of  the-Schneiderian
inembrane.

*  Swicten  saw  a  true  case  of  gooorrhoBal  ophthalmia. — ^A  common  symptom  in
children,  which  during  bhih  are  infected  by  the  local  virus  in  their  modicre'  geoi''
tais,  is  among  others  a  gonorrhoea  of  the  eje.

[*  HahnexDMm  nndottbtedly  imbibed  this  ettauowm  notion  tttm  tndttbn.I^
Am.  Pub.


PBIICABY  GOKORRHOEA.  21

following:  %o  allay  the  inflamination  and  pain ;  to  oheok  the  oonsequenoea
of  the  morbid  irritability ;  to  second  the  efforts  of  nature  in  its  endeav-
ours to  throw  oil  the  poison  ;  and  in  some  cases  to  rouse  to  increased
acdon  the  indolent  fibres.  We  should  not  have  so  many  points  to  at-
tend to,  did  we  know  of  any  specific  antidote  to  the  gonorrhoei&l  matter.

56.  If  we  are  consulted  immediately  after  infection,  or  in  the  first  stage
of  the  disease,  we  may  succeed  in  preventing  many  cases  of  gonorrhoea  by
counselling  diligent  ablution  of  the  penis,  and  injections  of  tepid  milk  ^
into  the  urethra,  which  have  oflen  been  attended  with  complete  success.

57.  But  we  are  usually  consulted  only  when  the  pains  compel  the
patient  to  seek  advice  in  the  second  stage.

58.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  should  advise  a  mild  -vegetable
diet,  forbid  the  employment  of  acrid  salts,  of  spirituous  liquors  and
spices,  (especially  pepper,  brandy,  pickled  or  smoked  meat),  of  pork,
of  &t,  and  all  indigestable  articles,  and  all  excess  in  eating.  The
penis  should  be  frequently  bathed  or  washed  in  tepid  milk.

59.  For  the  proper  treatment  of  the  gonorrhoea,  however,  in  order
to  remove  the  superficial  inflammation  of  the  urethra  and  to  make  it  in-
sensible to  the  irritation  of  the  venereal  matter,  (the  most  important
consideration  in  the  second  stage,)  we  should  inject  as  oflen  as  possi-
ble into  the  urethra  as  far  as  the  seat  of  the  gonorrhoea,  a  fluid  which
possesses  the  power  of  doing  both  these.  Three  grains  of  opium
are  to  be  dissolved  in  30  drops  of  sweet  spirits  of  nitre,  and  the  solu-
tion mingled  with  lin  ounce  of  water  which  contains  three  grains  of
acetate  of  lead  in  solution. The  thin  tube,  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  of

the  small  tin  syphon  here  delineated,
is  to  be  carefully  inserted  into  the  fore
part  of  the  urethra,  whilst  the  penis  is
allowed  to  hang  down ;  the  funnel  shap-
ed part  of  the  instrument  is  to  be  held
betwixt  the  fore  finger  and  thumb  of
the  left  hand,  and  the  tepid  fluid  above
opening  of  the  small  syphon,  ten  or
twelve  times  a  day,  each  time  for  a  min-
ute or  longer.  The  fluid  overflows  out
of  the  narrow  end,  exactly  at  the  ordi-
nary seat  of  the  gonorrhoea,  and  forces
its  way  down  by  the  side  of  the  instru-

'  Or,  still  better,  according  to  Oirtanner,  by  injections  of  lime-water,  whereby
aooortling  to  him,  the  gonorrhoBa  is  stifled  in  its  germ.  Does  the  power  posssessed
by  Uua  remedy  give  evidence  of  an  acid  character  of  the  venereal  poison  t  In  place
of  lime-water,  he  employs  also  a  weak  solution  of  caustic  potash.


22  OK  YENEBEAL  DISEASES.

ment,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  urethra;  wherebj  only  those  parts  of
it  are  moistened  which  require  the  application  of  the  remedy.  The
patient  performs  this  little  manoeuTre  himself  most  readily  when  stand-
ding.  He  can  thereby  do  no  harm.  All  the  inconveniences  of  the  ordi-
nary syringe  are  obviatedby  this  contrivance.  (The  patient  should  pre-
viously make  water  each  time.)  Even  when  there  is  great  sensitiveness
of  the  urethra,  so  that  the  syringe  dare  not'  be  employed,  this  opera-
tion may  be  performed,  and  that  without  difficulty.  The  rounded
end  of  the  tube  should  be  moisted  with  milk  or  cream,  before  being
introduced  into  the  urethra.  We  may  increase  the  opium  and  acetate
of  lead  in  the  one  ounce  of  water  gradually  to  five  grains  of  each.

60.  Diluent  drinks  should  at  the  same  time  be  employed.  An
emulsion  made  with  three  to  six  pounds  of  water  and  six  to  eight
ounces  of  hemp-seed,  and  sweetened  with  two  ounces  of  syrup  of  pop-
pies  and  an  ounce  of  syrup  of  lemons,  may  be  drunk  daily ;  and
this  drink,  in  the  inflammatory  stage  of  the  gonorrhoea,  will  do  instead
of  any  other  internal  remedy.

61.  If  the  bowels  are  constipated,  clysters  of  honey  and  water  should
alone  be  used,  and  to  render  these  as  seldom  necessary  as  possible,
fruit  may  be  eaten.

62.  In  order  to  diminish  the  nocturnal  erections,  a  tepid  foot  bath
for  half  an  hour  and  a  few  drops  of  laudanum,  taken  just  before  going
to  bed,  lying  on  the  side  upon  an  elastic  mattrass,  light  bedclothes
and  a  cool  apartment  will  be  found  advantageous.  •

63.  In  the  course  of  an  ordinary  gonorrhoea  the  patient  goes  on  in
this  manner  until  the  scalding  of  the  urine  changes  into  slight  itching,
until  the  glans  loses  its  red  colour  and  shining  transparency,  and  the
thin  discoloured  discharge  changes  into  a  viscid,  colourless  mucus,
small  in  quantity.

64.  Under  such  treatment,  this  result  would  happen  in  from  seven
to  eight  days.

65.  This  mode  of  treatment  is,  however,  far  from  that  generally
adopted.  In  ordinary  gonorrhoeas  much  work  is  made  with  many
dificrent  remedies  and  a  great  deal  is  done,  only  not  what  is  necessary  ;
and  by  a  variety  of  manoeuvres  a  simple  gonorrhea  is  changed  into  a
complicated  and  malignant,  or  at  all  events  a  chronic  one.

66.  Judging  from  the  maxim  that  gonorrhoea  arises  from  venereal
poison,  mercury  was  from  time  to  time  looked  upon  as  the  peculiar
antidote  for  gonorrhoea.

67.  Physicians  did  not  consider,  and  would  not  be  taught  by  ex.
perience,  that,  there  being  no  specific  for  gonorrhoea,  mercury  could
not  possibly  be  one,  as  long  as  this  poison  acts  upon  a  moisture-secre-
ting surface  of  the  body,  such  as  the  interior  of  the  urethra  is,  where  it
causes,  so  to  speak,  only  a  mechanical  irritation,  and  on  which  conse-


PRIM ABY  QOKOBRHCBA.  28

qaenUy,  seeing  that  it  lies  as  it  were  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  circu
lation,  the.anti-y^iereal  specific  cannot  act. (Gonorrhcea  is  a  merely
local  disease,)'

68.  Some  facts  prove  this  superabundantly.  A  man  that  had  just
got  rid  of  chancres  and  a  buboe  by  means  of  mercury,  was  infected
anew  and  got  clap,  which  would  not  have  been  possible,  if  the  go-
norrbceal  irritation  could  have  been  acted  on  through  the  circulation ;
for  as  long  as  the  juices  are  filled  with  this  metal,  there  is  no  possibil-
ity of  a  penetrating  venereal  infection,  such  as  a  chancre,  occurring.
During  the  mercurial  treatment,  cured  gonorrhoea  has  been  known  to
break  out  again,  and  to  remain  for  a  long  time  as  secondary  gonorrhoea.

69.  In  cases  of  simple  gonorrhoea,  not  the  slightest  use  has  ever
been  observed  from  mercury  ;  and,  therefore,  any  unnecessary  exhaus-
tion of  the  patient's  strength  by  this  metal  is  quite  contra-indicated,
often  ev^i  hurtful :  thus,  for  instance,  a  large  dose  of  calomel,  as  of
any  other  drastic  puigative,  has  often  been  found  to  be  followed  by
increased  irritation  in  the  genitals,  wide-spreading  inflammation,  swell-
ing of  the  testicles  and  inguinal  glands,  and  so  forth.

70.  Peyrilhe  has  recommended  his  volatile  alkali  as  a  specific  in
venereal  diseases,  and  especially  in  gonorrhoea.  Observations  are
wanting  to  corroborate  this  statement :  in  the  meantime,  I  may  re-
mark, that  Murray  has  seen  stoppage  of  the  gonorrhoea  and  orchitis
strangury  and  hsematuria  follow  its  internal  employment.

71.  Now  as  we  possess  no  specific  remedy ^  for  gonorrhoea,  there
remains  nothing  for  us  to  do  but  to  remove  all  obstacles  to,  and  to
second  the  eftbi*ts  of  nature,  which  generally  performs  the  greater
part  of  the  cure  alone,  though  in  a  somewhat  tedious  manner.

72.  Nature  herself  will  usually  establish  a  copious  discharge  of  fluid,
probably  for  the  purpose  of  gradually  washing  away  the  firmly  adhe-
rent gonorrhoeal  poison,  and  of  rendering  it  innocuous  by  extreme  dilu-
tiom

73.  This  effort  of  nature  is  however  oflen  insufficient  and  difficult,
at  all  events  disgustingly  tedious,  since  along  with  the  increase  in  the
secretion  of  the  urethral  fluid,  the  gonorrhoeal  poison  is  simultaneously
reproduced,  and  continues  to  exercise  its  specific  irritation,  until  the
seat  of  the  gonorrhoea,  grown  accustomed  to  the  irritation,  becomes  at
length  insensible  to  it,  whereupon  the  poison  (from  want  of  the  objective


■  [This  remark  appears  to  clash  with  what  has  just  before  been  advanced,  thus
causing  some  coofusioo  in  regard  to  the  real  idea  of  Hahnemann  at  this  period.  It  is
erident,  however,  that  he  is  inclined  to  break  away  from  the  then  prevalent  belief
opoo  this  subject]  Am.  Pub,

•  Otherwise  the  in^oduction  of  the  before- mentioned  (§  69),  or  of  some  similar
jSoid  into  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  wliich  has  been  employed  by  modem  physi-
dans  with  such  incredibly  rapid  success,  must  be  regarded  as  such  a  specific.


2i  OK  YSNEBBAL  DI9BASES.

specifio  irritant)  diminishes  and  goes  awaj  completely,  whilst  the
sensitiveness  in  the  urethra  vanishes,  and  the  discharge  decreases  or
becomes  mild.

74.  Honc^  it  is  no  wonder  that  this  process  of  nature  is  tedious
and  accompanied  by  much  pain,  often  by  swelling,  inflammation,  and
spasm ;  symptoms  that  all  demand  the  succours  of  art.  It  is  only  a
pity  that  the  best  plan  has  not  always  been  pursued  in  these  cases,
that  the  first  of  all  the  indications  has  been  missed,  namely  to  destroy
the  local  irritation  and  the  local  inflammation  at  its  very  seat.  The
poisoi),  or  at  least  the  inflammation,  was  short-sightedly  enough  sought
for  in  the  general  circulation,  in  the  primse  viae,  in  the  whole  urinary
system,  &c.

75.  It  would  occupy  volumes  to  record  the  sometimes  useless,  often
hurtful  remedies,  usually  employed  in  this  view.

76.  Laxative  salts,  saltpetre,  baths  and  venesections,  appear  at  first
sight  to  be  advisable,  and  yet  their  employment  cannot  bo  allowed  as
a  general  rule,  and  only  very  rarely  and  exceptionally.

77.  For  since  in  the  pure  inflammatory  state  of  a  gonorrhoea,  the
whole  mass  of  blood  seldom  takes  part  in  the  inflammation,  it  follows
that  it  is  only  in  these  few  cases  that  it  is  admissible  and  beneficial
to  open  the  vein,  and  none  but  an  experienced  practitioner  can  deter-
mine this.

78.  Therefore,  I  know  not  what  can  be  said  for  the  frequently  re-
peated venesections  usually  employed  for  every  case  of  gonorrhoea ;
but  this  I  know,  that  in  ordinary  often  mild-looking  gonorrhoeas,  the
system  is  thereby  unnecessarily  weakened,  and  the  foundation  for  the
most  obstinate  secondary  gonorrhoeas  is  laid ;  and  that  in  more  severe
cases,  when  irritabilty  from  weakness  produces  an  accumulation  of  the
most  dangerous  symptoms,  venesections,  and  still  more  repeated  vene-
sections, usually  increase  the  symptoms  to  the  most  frighful  extent.
Local  biood-letting,  on  the  contrary,  can,  as  will  be  shewn- below,  be
more  frequently  and  certainly  employed  with  benefit.

79.  Warm  baths,  be  they  fur  the  entire  body  or  for  the  half  only,
should  likewise  not  be  uselessly  lavished  in  simple  gonorrhoeas,  as  they
rob  the  patient  of  much  of  his  strength  ;  even  in  inflammatory  symp-
toms, their  employment  is  a  matter  of  doubt,  whenever  these  arise
from  pure  morbid  irritability.

80.  Nitre  is  another  favourite  remedy  of  the  French  physicians  in
gonorrhoea;  every  one  that  has  a  clap  must  swallow  a  quantity  of  the
universal  cooling  remedy,  nitre.  Whatever  truth  or  untruth  there  may
be  in  the  cooling  virtues  of  this  salt,  experience  teaches,  that  when
taken  in  the  inflammatory  stage  in  considerable  quantity,  it  invariably
does  harm,  on  account  of  the  great  irritation  of  the  urinary  passage  it
causes,  not  to  mention  that  it  is  almost  a  specific  weakener  of  the  sya-


PBIH4&T  GONORRHCEA.  26

<
tern,  and  thus  contributes  to  aggravate  the  symptoms  due  to  that  state.
I  have  seen  dyspepsia,  low  fever,  and  obstinate  secondary  gonorrhoea,
result  from  its  abuse  in  gonorrhoea.

81.  Very  nearly  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  other  neutral  salts.
The  use  of  laxative  salts  must,  therefore,  (likewise  on  account  of  the
irritation  to  be  feared  and  the  weakness  to  be  expected  from  their  use,)
be  confined  to  cases  in  which  clysters  of  honey-water  fail  to  kvep  the
bowels  open.  Glauber's  salts  given  in  drachm  doses  until  an  effect  is
produced,  will  suffice.  In  cases  of  impurities  in  the  stomach,  a  mode-
rate emetic  will  be  serviceable,  and  diminish  the  irritation  of  the  geni-
tals caused  by  the  use  of  laxative  salts.

82.  Still  more  dangerous  are  the  drastic  purgative  medicines,  so
frequently  used  in  gonorrhoea.  Their  usual  effects  are,  —  increase  of
the  inflammation  of  the  genitals,  suppression  of  the  gonorrhoea  with
all  its  dreaded  concomitants,  such  as  swelling  of  the  testicles,  inflam-
mation of  the  perinoeum,  chordee,  &c.  Jalap  root  and  resin,  gamboge,
scammony,  agaric,  colocynth,  the  purgative  extracts  (extr,  ^mnchim,
cathoL),  but  above  all,  aloes  and  its  preparation,  are  apt  to  produce
these  results.

83.  Thre  is  still  another  sort  of  empirical  remedies  that  are  said  to
remove  the  gonorrhoeal  discharge  rapidly.  Such  are,  the  os  sepice,  olive
oil  with  citron  juice,  alum,  sugar  of  lead,  &c.,  given  internally.  The«e
things  must,  on  the  one  hand,  be  very  injurious  to  the  system,  whilst
on  the  other  they  can  oflen  do  no  good  to  the  disease.

84.  In  like  manner,  in  the  second  stage  of  gonorrhoea,  all  kinds  of
balsams,  and  all  irritating  and  very  astringent  injections  into  the  ure-
thra, must  be  avoided,  as  hurtful  and  dangerous.

85.  But  more  horrible  still  than  all  1  have  mentioned,  is  the  menda-
cious counsel,  which  has  been  devised  by  wickedness,  —  that  a  person
affected  by  gonorrhoea  should  have  conn(.'.\ion  with  a  pure  virgin,  and
that  he  would  thereby  get  quit  of  his  disease.  —  In  this  case,  the  un-
hjippy  wretch  inoculates  the  poor  girl  with  the  same  poison  that  per-
vades his  own  genitals,  and  sensibly  aggravates  his  disease  by  an  ac-
cession of  inflammation,  while  he  has  the  fearful  reflection  that  he  has
added  afresh  crime  to  the  original  cause  of  his  malady.

SQ.  Finally,  in  the  third  stage  of  an  ordinary  claji,  after  the  com-
plete cessation  of  the  scalding  and  all  other  painful  sensations  of  these
parts,  especially  the  troublesome  erections,  when  the  discharge  has
become  lessened,  almost  colourless,  mild,  and  viscid  so  as  to  be  drawn
into  strings  betwixt  the  flngers,  nature  may  be  assisted  in  following
manner.

87.  I  refer  now  to  a  gonorrhoea  neglected  under  the  ordinary  treat-
ment, which  most  certainly  requires  such  aid,  for  if  the  best  antiphlo-
gistic and  sedative  local  treatment  have  been  vigorously  employed


26  OK  V£N£B£AL  DISEASES.

from  the  commencement,  all  the  discharge  ceases  of  itself  either  in
a  week  or  a  little  longer.

88.  On  account  of  their  calefacient  and  stimulating,  but  at  the  same
time  also  their  diuretic,  inspissating  and  strengthening  powers,  the  na-
tural balsams  of  Copaiba,  Tolu,  Canada,  but  especially  the  Rackasira-
balsam^  and  the  other  turpentine-like  substances  are  of  use  in  these
cases.  They  may  be  given  alone,  or  rubbed  up  with  sugar,  or  dissolv-
ed in  water  by  means  of  yolk  of  egg,  or  in  the  form  of  pills  to  the
extent  of  50  or  100  grains  daily .^  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  give
them  before  this  stage,  when  the  irritability  has  ceased.

89.  This  is  the  time  when  linseed  tea,  the  Thebaic  tincture,  and
the  bathing  of  the  genitals  must  be  left  off,  but  the  diet  must  be
allowed  of  stronger  and  more  nutritive  articles.

1)0.  If,  however,  we  have  to  do  with  very  lax  systems,  or  such  as
have  been  treated  with  remedies  of  a  too  relaxing  character,  in  which
the  third  stage  of  the  gonorrhoea  comes  to  be  of  a  tedious  character,
and  in  which,  though  the  disagreeable  sensations  in  the  urethra  have
all  gone  oflf,  the  discharge  still  continues  in  considerable  quantity,
yellowish  and  of  some  consistence,  it  is  necessary  to  abridge  this
stage  energetically,  in  order  to  avoid  the  occurrence  of  gleet.

91.  Besides  the  internal  use  of  tonics  and  balsams,  the  inner  se-
creting surface  of  the  urethra  must  be  roused  ^  from  its  inactivity,
as  old  skin  diseases  are  cured  by  blisters,  chronic  catarrhs  by  sternu-
tatories, or  habitual  perspirations  by  a  flannel  shirt.

92.  One,  two  or  four  grains  of  caustic  potash  or  corrosive  subli-
mate dissolved  in  eight  ounces  of  water  will  form  the  best  injections
for  this  object  The  frequency  of  their  repetition  should  be  regu-
lated by  the  degree  of  irritation  that  these  injections  manifest  on  the
affected  parts  ;*  if  it  be  slight,  they  may  be  repeated  the  oflener.

'  As  early  as  1695  Job-  Vicrzigman  makes  mentioo  of  these  and  similar  remedies
with  the  greatest  approbatiotu See  Disp.  de  Phimosit  Cor.  22.

^  The  most  certain  sign  that  the  balsams  have  been  given  too  soon  is  the  occur-
rence of  retention  of  urine,  the  rencval  of  the  scalding,  Ac ;  in  that  case  their  use
is  to  be  discontinued.

*  These  stimulating  injections  have  many  things  in  common  with  tonic  remedies ;
when  they  rouse  to  activity  the  lax  fibres,  the  latter  gain  a  tone,  whereby  they  are
put  on  a  par  in  point  of  strength  with  the  imrelaxed  fibres ;  they  then  react  with  a
power  peculiar  to  the  natural  tense  fibres.  We  may  therefore  reckon  these  artificial
stimulating  remedies  among  the  number  of  tonics,  just  as  in  certain  respects  carda-
moms and  ginger  deserve  to  be  called  tonic  stomachics,  as  much  as  the  bitter  and
astringent  vegetable  substances.

*  We  f>hould  take  care  to  ascertain  beforehand  that  the  organism  has  no  tendency
to  morbid  irritability  and  erysipelatous  inflammation,  which  will  be  perceived  from
the  characteristics  of  this  kind  of  constitution  given  below,  and  will  be  known  not  to
exist  if  the  previous  painful  sensaUons  in  the  urethra  were  confined  to  the  actual  seat
of  the  gbnorrhflBa.


PBIMARY  GONORRH(KA.  27

93.  In  this  way  we  may  eradicate  this  malady  in  a  short  space  of
time  irjom  those  organisms  that  are  apt  to  entertain  chronic  gonorrhoea
(from  five  to  seven  days  of  injection  usually  suffice) ;  we  must  only
take  care  not  to  excit«  any  inflammation  by  means  of  the  instru-
ment ^  used,  by  diluting  or  concentrating  the  injection  to  keep  up  the
stimulation  in  a  moderate  yet  sufficiently  great  degree.  But  this  is
a  matter  requiring  some  skill  which  the  beginner  is  rarely  possess-
ed of.

94.  These  stimulating  injections  properly  employed,  are  at  the
same  time  a  good  preservative  against  secondary  gonorrhoea,  which
usually  depends  on  weakness  and  laxity  of  the  urethral  fibres  and  of
the  excretory  ducts  or  the  mucous  glands.

95.  On  the  other  hand,  in  those  systems  in  which  the  inflammatory
gonorrhoeal  symptoms  were  of  an  erysipelatous  character,  and  which
possessed  a  high  degree  of  that  irritability  from  weakness,  they  must
not  be  used,  nor  yet  in  those  cases  where  after  a  long-lasting  dry  go
norrhoeal  irritation  the  discharge  is  with  difficulty  established,  or
where  tendency  to  strangury,  to  sympathetic  buboe,  and  hernia  humo
ralis,  or  to  abscess  of  the  perinseum  exists  ;  and  in  general  not  as  long
as  the  discharge  continues  thin  and  watery.

96.  Along  with  these  irritating  injections  and  the  internal  use  of  the
balsams,  the  part  should  be  frequently  bathed  with  cold  water,  and
bark  taken  in  order  to  aid  in  the  complete  recovery  of  the  body.

97.  By  such  means  an  ordinary  gonorrhoea  usually  terminates  soon
and  without  further  ailments.

98.  But  this  is  not  always  the  fortunate  result.  A  bad  constitution
of  body  and  other  circumstances  often  give  rise  to  the  above  men-
tioned violent  and  even  dangerous  symptoms,  the  relief  of  which  will
now  occupy  our  attention.

99.  Persons  who  are  of  weakly  constitution  and  who  have  a  liabi-
lity to  a  number  of  nervous  complaints,  spasms,  and  erysipelatous  in-
flammations, are  very  often  subject  to  the  most  severe  gonorrhoeas.

100.  In  such  cases  the  malady  is  not  limited  to  the  special  and
ordinary  seat  of  the  gonorrhoeal  virus.  The  inflammation  extends  in
an  erysipelatous  manner  along  the  urethra,  and  frequently  extends  to
a  considerable  distance  over  the  adjacent  parts,  accompanied  by  the
(§  23 — 25)  as  occurring  in  the  worst  form  of  gonorrhoea.  The  whole
array of  malignant  gonorrhoeal  symptoms  may  ensue  without  the

*  If  the  practitioner  will  not  employ  the  small  syphon  (§  59),  but  will  make  use  of
the  unsafe  syringe,  he  would  do  well  to  have  the  end  of  the  pipe  made  quite  round
azkI  two  lines  in  breadth,  increxising  in  thickness  rapidly  from  the  end  backwards,
eo  that  it  cannot  be  introduced  more  than  half  an  inch ;  if  this  be  done,  no  injury
can  occur  to  the  iDtemal  part,  without  the  greatest  want  of  caution.


28  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

virus  that  entered  the  urethra  necessarily  being,  as  some  think,  of  a
peculiarly  bad  nature.  The  corporeal  constitution  which  is  so  unfa-
vourable in  this  case  has  besides  other  evils  a  peculiar  morbid  irrita-
bility resulting  from  nervous  weakness,  the  characteristics  of  which  1
shall  point  out  more  accurately  below.

101.  In  consequence  of  this  kind  of  constitution,  the  frequent  or
even  persisting  erections  (priapism)  and  curvature  (chordee)  of  the
penis,  the  pains  in  the  whole  organ  on  urinating  and  on  being  touched,
the  redness  of  the  penis  and  of  the  perinceura  and  even  of  the  adjacent
parts,  the  strangury,  the  discharge  of  a  green  or  grey  matter,  and  all
the  other  obvious  inflammatory  symptoms,  have  this  peculiarity,  that
by  the  relaxing  antiphlogistic  treatment  not  only  are  they  not  re-
moved, but  they  are  very  often  thereby  aggravated.

102.  Repeated  venesections,  purgatives,  nitre,  and  the  other  em  pi-
rical  remedies,  do  harm  in  such  cases,  even  in  those  to  all  appearance
most  purely  inflammatory;  and  laxative  salts,  relaxmg  fomentations
and  drinks,  are  not  admissible.

103.  The  only  things  that  do  good  in  such  cases,  are  derivative
irritants  applied  at  a  distance,  and  tonic  antiphlogistic  sedatives  em-
ployed locally  and  internally,

104.  To  this  end  we  may,  in  a  case  where  there  is  a  constant  in-
crease in  the  violence  of  the  erysipelatous  inflammatory  symptoms
the  sacrum  ;  bathe  the  affected  parts  with  a  lukewarm  fomentation,
made  by  boiling  one-part  of  oak-bark  in  30  of  water,  and  on  removing
it  from  the  fire,  infusing  in  it  half-a-pint  of  elder-flowers  and  a  third  of
opium  ;  and  make  the  patient  drink  elder-flower  tea,  mixed  with  from
15  to  20  drops  of  a'/ic^.  /Ae6a/c/.  We  should  also  use  the  injection
stances, diminish  the  quantity  of  sugar  of  lead  in  it.

105.  Rest  on  a  horizontal  hard  couch,  moderate  coverings  over  the
body,  a  well-aired  not  too  warm  room,  and  a  nutritious  easily  di.
gestible  vegetable  diet,^  consisting  of  barley-water,  oatmcal-gruel,
sago,  rice,  groats,  and  farinaceous  puddings,  will  be  of  use.  Clysters
of  asafcetida,  prepared  by  rubbing  it  up  with  water  into  the  appear-
ance of  milk,  will  serve  to  keep  the  bowels  open.

106.  But  if  the  morbid  irritability  of  the  body,  its  abnormal  ner-
vous weakness,  and  its  tendency  to  this  kind of  bad  inflammation,  is


'  We  must  take  especial  care  to  forbid  the  use  of  the  very  diuretic  vegetables,  aa
water-cresses  (tiaymbr.  ncuturt),  parsley  (ap.  petroseL),  hops  {humul.  Inp.),  and  an
^cess  of  asparagus ;  as  also  the  hard  husked  seeds,  as  lentils,  beans  and  peas,  cspe*
dally  if  cooked  sour ;  and,  as  a  general  rule,  much  vinegar  and  strongly  fermented
liquors  are  to  be  avoided,  on  acooont  of  their  irritating  e£fects  on  the  urinary  organs-


PRIMARY  GONORRHOEA.  29

lieveloped  in  the  highest  degree*  and  if  by  this  treatment  the  symp-
toms become  if  not  aggravated  at  all  events  not  ameliorated,  we
should  adopt  another  method.

107.  We  must  endeavour  to  discover  if  bilious  impurities  of  the
primaj  viie  are  not  the  cause  of  this  aggravation  (which  is  sometimes
accompanied  by  febrile  symptoms),  in  which  case  it  will  be  necessary
to  give  one,  or,  according  to  circumstances,  several  emetics.

103.  Besides  this,  cold  half  baths,  or  foot  baths,  must  be  used  once
or  twice  daily  for  two  or  three  minutes  at  a  time,  and  cold  compresses
frequently  renewed  must  be  kept  to  the  affected  parts  (of  the  same
ployment of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  bark  in  wine,  in  some  cases,  par-
ticularly towards  night,  combined  with  laudanum,  as  also  the  acid
elixir  of  Haller  taken  several  times  a  day  in  doses  of  40  drops,  are  of
the  greatest  service.  The  patient  should  lie  only  on  the  side,  not  on
the  back.  Above  everything,  we  should  diligently  employ  the  care-
ful injection  (§  59)  into  the  urethra  of  a  fluid,  which  without  possessing
any  astringent  power,  shall  most  rapidly  remove  the  irritation.  Ac-
cording to  the  experiiince  of  myself  and  others,  from  five  to  ten  grains
of  opium,  with  as  much  gum  arabic,  dissolved  by  tritunation  in  an
ounce  of  water,  is  the  most  suitable  preparation  f6r  this  object.  In
addition  to  these  means,  clysters  of  a  similar  solution  of  opium  in
water  are  of  excellent  service,  after  we  have  procured  a  copious
evacuation  of  the  bowels,  according  to  the  counsel  of  Schwediauer.

100.  Under  such  treatment  all  the  ])ad  symptoms  usually  yield,
the  gonorrha^al  irritation  commences  to  limit  itself  to  its  circumscrib-
ed specific  seat  in  the  anterior  part  of  tiie  urethra,  and  there  again
ensues  a  simple,  mihl  clap,  which  is  easily  removable  by  nature  or
flight  artificial  aid.  However,  the  patient  must,  during  the  remainder
^»f  the  treatment,  remain  entirely  in  bed,  or  at  ail  events  confined  to
one  room,  he  must  not  lay  aside  the  suspensory  bandage,  and  must
keep  to  low  diet,  as  the  disease  is  very  apt  to  return.

110.  But  as  good  and  extensive  acquirements  are  required  in
order  to  judge  of  the  nature  of  the  malady  and  of  the  patient's
constitution,  as  well  as  of  the  suitable  remedies,  a  physician  will  be  re-
quired, and  the  attendant  surgeon  will  not  fail  to  call  one  in  in  such  a
case,  for  the  sake  of  his  own  reputation.  He  will  determine  whether,
*»pium,  blisters,  <fcc,  are  to  be  used  along  with  the  strengthening  re-
medies.

111.  Persons  of  strong,  robust  systems,  wnth  firm  tense  fibre,  swart
animated countenance,  of violent disposition,  and  in  the  habit  of


'  In  such  cases  there  iR  generally  rapid  pulse,  much  pain, and  copious  thin  dis-
charge.


80  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

taking  much  exercise,  are  more  disposed  to  pure  inflammatory  gonor-
rhoea than  others.

112.  Moreover,  violent  and  long  continued  exercise  (especially
during  great  heat  and  cold),  dancing,  riding,  the  ingestion  of  indiges-
tible or  strongly  seasoned  dishes  (especially  with  pepper),  and  heating
or  spirituous  liquors,  anger,  very  hot  rooms,  late  lying  in  bed,  violent
purgatives,  irritating  injections,  the  incautious  introduction  of  bougies,
are  very  apt  to  change  a  slight,  mild  gonorrhoea  into  a  very  inflam-
matory one.

to  be  regarded  as  purely  inflammatory,  and  to  demand  antiphlogistic
treatment,  are  :  violent  scalding  on  making  water ;  the  escape  of  some
drops  of  blood  after  the  operation  of  urinating ;  "great  pain  on  touch-
ing the  urethra,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  peculiar  seat  of
gonorrhoea,  from  one  to  one  and  a  half  inch*  behind  the  orifice  of  the
urethra ;  the  discharge  of  a  greenish  or  greyish  thin  ichor ;  frequent
tension  of  the  penis,  especially  its  curvature  downwards ;  and  some-
tiiped  a  febrile  attack.

114.  I  put  in  the  same  class,  because  it  demands  the  same  treat-
ment, the  dry,  scalding  clap  (ganorrhee  seche)^  which  occurs  after  an
impure  connection  in  some  individuals,  and  often  lasts  several  weeks
before  the  discharge  sets  in,  and  may  even  be  cured  without  any  dis-
charge occurring,  especially  by  the  diligent  injection  of  a  watery
solution  of  opium  into  the  urethra.

'115.  In  general  it  will  be  found  useful  in  all  such  aflections  to
employ  a  tepid  foot-bath,  especially  at  night,  emollient  poultices  of
linseed  meal,  or  bread-crumb  with  boib'ng  milk,  combined  with  a
little  saflron,  well  mixed  together  into  paste  and  applied  luke-warm;
as  also  injections^  of  warm  milk,  with  infusion  of  saflron  or  opium ;
together  with  the  most  cooling  diet,  linseed  tea,  strict  abstinence
from  exercise,  a  horizontal,  quiet,  hard,  cool  couch ;  rarely  venesection.

*  The  most  characteristic  pathogDomcHuc  sign  that  the  gonorrhoea!  symptoms  be
they  ever  so  intense,  are  of  a  purely  inflammatory  character,  and  do  not  depend  on
irritation  from  weakness  or  an  erysipelatous  constitution,  J.  Hunter  rightly  alleges
to  be  the  limitation  of  the  scalding  of  the  urine  to  the  special  seat  of  gonorrhoea ;  a
fiurt  we  would  do  well  to  remember  in  practice.

the  note  to  §  93  with  caution,  taking  care,  while  we  regulate  the  piston-rod  of  the
eyringe  with  the  right  hand,  to  compress  the  urethra  just  in  front  of  the  scrotum
with  the  left  thumb  and  forefinger,  so  that  the  gooorrhoeal  virus  may  not  be
carried  by  the  injected  fluid  beyond  the  special  seat  of  the  disease,  and  thus  to
give  rise  to  fresh  inflammation,  which  is  dangerous  in  proportion  as  it  extends
nearer  the  bladder.  Some  deny  that  the  goDorrhoeal  virus  can  produce  inflam-
mation beyond  the  proper  seat  of  the  disease.


PRIKABY  GONORRHCBA.  81

116.  The  priapism,  the  painful  curvature  of  the  penis,  the  micturi-
tion of  blood,  the  phimoses  and  paraphimoses,  demand,  in  addition  to
the  above,  the  application  of  leeches  to  the  affected  parts,  a  poultice
with  a  good  quantity  of  opium  in  it  (often  a  fiflieth  part),  steam
fomentations  from  an  infusion  of  elder  flowers,  as  also  the  internal
use  of  laudanum,  especially  at  night.

1 17.  The  same  treatment  is  to  bo  adopted  for  the  violent  pain  in
passing  water,  the  painful  inflammation  of  the  perinseum,  and  the  dry,
Maiding  of  urine.  We  may,  in  addition,  employ  in  these  cases  frequent
injections  of  equal  parts  of  opium  and  isinglass,  or  gum  arabic,  dis-
solved in  60  parts  warm  (80*^  Fahr.)  water.

1 18.  The  febrile  symptoms  decline  spontaneously  when  the  pain  is
diminished,  so  that  we  need  not  use  any  means  specially  for  them.

119.  If  on  the  diminution  or  suppression  of  the  gonorrhoeal  dis-
diarge  (§  28, 29),  the  testicles  swell,  they  must  be  put  in  a  suspensory
bandage,  and  held  up  thereby  sufliciently,  yet  gently.  The  testicles,
in  their  suspensory  bandage,  should  be  dipped  every  half  hour  or
every  how  for  some  minutes  in  quite  cold  water,'  and  at  the  same
time  a  tepid  (§116)  poultice  should  be  applied  around  the  penis.
The  same  cold  applications  should  be  made  to  the  inflamed  perinseum,
or  the  groin,  when  under  similar  circumstances  the  inguinal  glands
(§  33)  are  swollen.

120.  In  these  cases,  a  cautions  injection  into  the  urethra  of  warm
infusion  of  saflron  or  of  opium  (§  108)  may  be  of  great  use  in  restor-
ing the  discharge,  whereupon  the  tumefaction  disappers  spontaneously  *
We  may  for  the  same  end  employ  as  an  enema  hall'  a  drachm  of
opium  dissolved  in  a  pint  of  water,  which  is  also  often  effectual  in  re-
moving the  accompanying  strangury.

121.  The  repeated  exhibition  of  a  gentle  emetic,  even  though
the  stomach  be  not  affected  with  the  bile  or  dyspepsia,  in  addition  to
the  above  mentioned  topical  applications,  and  an  occasional  opiate  at
night,  will  often  succeed  in  restoring  the  discharge  and  dissipating  the
swelling  of  the  testicles.  But  when  all  other  means  fail,  a  few  doses  of
soluble  mercury  will  often  restore  the  discharge,  as  I  can  attest  from  ex-
perience. The  introduction  of  a  bougie  covered  with  ammonia^  will
seldom  be  required  to  bring  back  the  gonorrhoea.

122.  Until  this  has  taken  place,  there  is  always  danger  of  the  oo-


'  Care  should  be  taken  not  to  use  warm  applications  for  sympathetic  buboes.

'  The  sfwelling  of  the  testicle  ia  seldom  capable  of  being  resolved  before  the  sixth
day  after  its  appearance.

*  I  would  not  advise  (seeing  that  along  with  otlier  irritations  of  the  urethra,
the  mere  introduction  of  a  common  bougie  excites  inflammation  of  the  testicles,)
this  mode  of  restoring  the  clap,  especially  with  fresh  gonorrhceal  matter,  and
in  the  inflammatory  utage  of  the  disease.


32  OK  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

currence  of  complete  retention  of  urine,  which  will  demand  im-
we  may  order  a  tepid  half-bath  with  chamomile  and  soap,  and  apply
leeches  to  the  perina3um,  or  a  blister  to  the  sacrum.  Every  thing  of
a  diuretic  jcharactcr  should  be  avoided  in  the  food  and  drink.*

123.  If,  as  seldom  happens,  the  discharge  cannot  be  restored,  and
swelling  of  testicles  or  inguinal  glands  continues,  we  must  then  change
the  compresses  of  cold  water  for  vinegar  and  sal-ammoniac,  or  en-
deavour to  bring  about  a  revolution  by  rubbing  Naples  ointment  into
the  scrotum  or  buboe,  as  soon  as  all  the  inflammatory  symptoms  of
the  gonorrhcea  are  gone ;  but  not  before,  otherwise  the  irritation  in
the  buboe  is  readily  transferred  to  the  testicles,  or  from  one  testicle  to
another,  or  we  may  expect  other  annoying  symptoms.

124.  Still  more  rarely  do  these  sympathetic  swellings  proceed,
under  this  treatment  to  suppuration;  if  this  do  take  place,  it  is* a
simple  abscess  with  usually  nothing  of  a  venereal  nature  in  it.  It
will  become  quite  healthy  in  character,  if  it  be  not  so  already,  under
the  diligent  employment  of  bark  externally  and  internally.  The  inflam-
mation of  the  perinaeum  also  does  not  always  yield  to  the  repeated
application  of  a  cold  (50°)  decoction  of  oak-bark,  which  is  usually  so
effectual,  but  sometimes  passes  on  to  suppuration.  If  the  abscess  bo
not  connected  with  the  urethra,^  and  no  urine  escape  by  it,  it  also  ia
of  a  simple  character,  and  curable  without  mercury.

125.  It  still  remains  to  speak  of  the  treatment  of  that  rare  but
dangerous  attendant  of  suppressed  gonorrhoea — the  purulent  oph-
thalmia (§  24),  which  goes  on  rapidly  to  complete  blindness.  The
first  and  most  important  point  is  to  restore  the  gonorrhoeal  discharge*
We  must  make  use  of  all  the  procedures  spoken  of  (§  119 — 121),  ex-
cept the  cold  compresses,  as  early  and  vigorously  as  possible ;  the  tepid
narcotic  injections  into  the  urethra,  frequently  repeated  small  emetics,
the  plentiful  internal  adminstration  of  opium,  and  even,  if  all  other
means  fail,  the  introduction  of  a  bougie  covered  with ammonia. At

■--  ,  ,1  I  _  IB  ■!■  IIIMIBIWB^

*  If  DotATithstanding  all  these  means  the  retention  of  urine  continues  with  it9
threatened  fiital  consequences,  we  should  carefully  introduce  a  catlieter  (a  gum  elas-
tic one  Ls  preferable),  and  draw  off  the  water.  If  this,  perhaps  in  consequence  of
swelling  of  the  prostate,  be  impossible,  we  must  have  recourse  to  perforatioii  of
the  bladder  through  the  rectum  with  the  trocar  (taking  care  to  avoid  the  seminal
vesicles),  or  to  opening  the  neck  of  the  bladder  from  the  side.

2  In  order  to  prevent  this,  it  must  be  opened  as  early  as  possible ;  that  is  to  say,
whenever  the  inflammation  presents  a  shining,  soft  elevation,  m  which  the  general
paiuM  are  concentrated  to  a  mere  throbbing.  If  this  he  neglected,  abscess  usually
bursts  also  internally  into  the  urethra,  whereby  a  serious  disease,  the  urinary  fistula
occurs ;  which  requires,  besides  the  internal  employment  of  mercury,  goo<l  external
applications  and  the  use  of  the  elastic  catheter,  through  which  we  must  allow  thb
urine  to  flow  each  time  it  is  passed  until  the  cure  is  effected,  which  generally
takes  a  long  time.


FRIMABT  GOK0KRHIKA«  91

the  8une  time  we  must  constantlj  apply  to,  or  still  better,  baUie  the
«je  in  water  cooled  with  ice,  mixed  with  a  thousandth-part  of  sugar
of  lead.  Tepid  foot  baths,  or  half  baths,  venesectioiis,  blisters  to  the
saenim,  scarifications  of  the  conjunctiva,  leeches  to  the  temples,  must
not  be  n^ected,  nor  indsions  in  the  oomea  if  pus  be  accumulated
betwixt  its  layers.  But  I  will  advise  in  preference  to  this  operation,
lool  ivmigations  with  cinnabar,^  and  Uie  application  of  a  poultice  of
mnidrigora  root.  Some  say  they  have  seen  advantage  from  the  em«
ployment  of  hemlock  and  monkshood.

126.  As  regards  preputial  gonorriicea  (§  39),  Uie  symptoms  it
oeetsions  are  of  no  great  importance — sometimes  a  moderate  degree
of  ptimosis,  ilnd  a  slight  discharge  jfrom  the  inferior  part  of  the  glands
ind  prepuce ;  frequent  washing  with  a  mucilage  of  gum  arabio  k
almost  of  itself  sufficient  to  cure  every  case  of  this  affection  in  a  short
space  of  time.  But  if  it  penetrate  deeper,  or  if  it  be  obstinate,  it
requires  the  internal  use  of  mercury  like  other  venereal  affections,
€Qiijoiiied  with  cold  and  astringent  applications.

CHAPTER  in.

GONORRHGBA  IN  THE  FEMALK

127.  As  the  genital  organs  of  the  female  are  less  composite  in  their
dnneter,  generally  less  sensitive  and  of  laxer  tissue  than  those  of  the
male,  it  follows  that  gonorrhoea  in  the  female  should  also  present  less
complicated,  less  violent,  indeed,  often  unrecognizable  symptoms. —
And  such  is  the  case.

128.  The  simple  venereal  leucorrhoea,  when  the  vagina  is  only  af- '
fected  by  it  in  a  minor  degree,  is  often  so  painless,  and  the  functions  as
well  as  the  appearance  of  the  genitals  appear  to  be  so  natural,  that  even
experienced  persons  might  often  take  the  dischai^e  merely  for  a  symp-
(om  of  weakness,  scrofula,  chlorosis,'  &c.,  did  not  the  general  consti-
tution of  the  patient  testify  plainly  to  the  contrary,  or  should  we  not
have  ascertained  that  she  infected  one  or  more  men  with  gonorrhoea. —
Did  we  possess  any  specific  antidote  to  gonorrhoea,  its  discovery
would  be  very  easy,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  frequent  spread  of  this
affection  occasioned  by  the  difficulty  of  detecting*  the  venereal  charac-
ter of  a  simple  gonorrhoea  in  the  female,  might  be  prevented.

'  As  kng  ago  as  1556,  Gabriel  Fallopius  {De  morbo  Gallico,  Batav.  4ta  1564,
«qL  99)  observe  this  sympathetic  metastasis  of  gonorrhGea  (lippitudinem  rcbellem,
fut  >dfBitwm  inflammat  membranam  et  oonicam  ezcoriat),  and  cured  it  with
t^mt^y^r  fomigatioDs.
'  A  leaootffaaea  araiiig  from  ooanism  is  as  obstinate  as  any  of  a  yenereal  origin.
'  Girtamer  mentiaiis  some  droumstanoes  that  should  senre  to  distinguish  the  vene-
ml  from  the  unveoereal  leucorriKBas ;  the  liUter  appear  at  first  only  before  the
kCDoemcnt  of  each  menstrual  flax,  afterwards  they  also  eontinue  a  few  days
ita  eeflsalioD,  and  then  cease  for  from  eight  to  fourteen  days;  they  cause  tha
3


84  ON  y£N£B£AL  DISEASES.

129.  But  the  oase  is  quite  different  with  the  gonorrhoea  of  a  com-
plicated character  in  the  female.  It  comes  on  with  a  sensation  of
warmth  in  the  genital  organs,  and  a  tickling  sensation  causing  desire
for  coition,  with  frequent  erection  of  the  clitoris,  lliese  premonitory
symptoms,  however,  soon  give  place  to  pains  accompanied  by  some
discharge  from  the  vagina.

130.  The  patient  experiences  in  a  few  days  a  fulness,  tension  and
burning  in  the  vagina  and  labia,  which  along  with  increased  heat  and
swelling,  especially  towards  the  lower  commissure,  are  intolerant  of
the  slightest  touch.  The  urethra  is  inflamed  at  its  orifice,  in  worse
cases  throughout  its  whole  extent ;  the  scalding  on  making  water  is  as
painful  as  in  males.  The  clitoris  is  excessively  sensitive.*  Coition  or
contact  is  impossible ;  walking,  sitting  and  making  water  almost  un-
endurable.

131.  An  acrid  ichorous  discharge  of  various  colours  issues  from  the
whole  inner  surface  of  the  vagina,  or  at  least  from  beyond  its  sphinc-
ter muscle,  and  from  the  myrtiform  rugse,  and  in  more  severe  cases
from  the  urethra.

132*  When  exercise  or  over-heating  of  the  body  or  of  the  genital
organs  is  not  avoided,  or  when  injurious  irritating  remedies  are  given
internally,  there  occurs  also,  as  in  males,  sometimes  a  sympathetic
swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands  or  inflammation  of  the  perineum,
along  with  diminution  of  the  discharge.  In  bad  cases  there  may  also
occur  retention  of  urine,  likewise  dependent  on  sympathetic  irritation,

133.  When  the  disease  is  of  a  more  violent  character,  we  perceive
deep  seated  glandulaf  inflammations  in  the  body  of  the  labia  majora,
which  become  painful,  increase  in  size,  and  generally  form  abscesses
betwixt  their  inner  surfaces  and  the  nympha^^  which  burst.

134.  Gradually  the  discharge  from  the  vagina  becomes  thicker  and
more  like  pus ;  the  scalding  of  the  urine  begins  to  diminish,  and
afler  a  longer  or  shorter  time  at  length  ceases,  along  with  the  other
troublesome  and  painful  symptoms.

135.  If  the  gonorrhoea  be  near  its  termination,  (nature  frequently
takes  many  months  to  cure  it),  the  discharge  becomes,  as  in  men,
colourless,  mild  and  viscid  before  it  completely  ceases.

dimiznxtioQ  and  at  length  gradually  the  total  disappearance  of  the  catamenia,  where-
npoD  the  leaoorrbcoa  begins  to  flow  oootmoally.  They  are  alao  generally  aooompa-
Died  b]r,  pains  in  the  loins,  a  dragging  in  the  thiols,  debility  of  the  legs  pale  complez-
ko,  dyspepeiaand  hysteria,  and  at  length  stenlifyt all  whidi serve  to  distiBgaishthem
pretty  well  from  venereal  gonorrfacea.

>  De  Home  observed  almost  in  the  same  plaoe  in  the  ialemal  surfiMe  of  the
great  and  small  lips  and  in  the  vagina,  oocaaunally  some  pomts  (perhaps  the  orificea
of  similar  glandular  sappuratioQs)  which  poured  out  a  laige  quantity  of  watery  pus,
and  might  ooeariofially  be  regarded  as  seoocidarygooorrhfBa  in  the  female.  Hecured
it  by  opening  these  small  fistukoi  docta.


FBDCABT  GONOBRHCBA.  35

CHAPTER  lY.

TREATMENT  OF  GONORRHCEA  IN  THE  FEMALE

136.  In  general  its  cure  is  attended  with  fewer  difficulties  than  in
the  male,  but  so  much  the  more  tedious  is  it.

137.  In  mild  cases  of  gonorrhoea  in  the  female,  we  have  little  else  to
do  than  to  remove  the  irritation  in  the  vagina  and  to  strengthen  Uie
relaxed  parts.

138.  We  fulfil  all  these  indications  by  the  simple  treatment  of
making  eight  or  ten  times  daily,  repeated  injections  into  the  vagina  of
fifteen  grains  of  sugar  of  lead,  and  eight  grains  of  opium  dissolved  in
an  ounce  of  water. (§  59. )

139.  If  this  be  not  strong  enough  we  may  use  in  place  of  the  sugar
of  lead,  from  10  to  15  grains  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  which  will  certain-
ly prove  effectual. About  a  fortnight  is  require^  to  effect  a  cure.^

140.  We  must  treat  with  contempt  the  old  bugbear  of  the  dangers
of  suppressing  a  gonorrhoea,  which  goes  off  without  leaving  behind  it
scalding  of  urine,  strangury  or  other  inconvenience.  Everything
that  removes  the  local  irritation  and  alters  the  specific  gonorrhoeal  dis-
position, cures  the  ordinary  gonorrhoea.  But  only  locally,  some  one
may  retort ;  to  which  1  reply,  certainly,  and  most  properly  too,  for
it  is  merely  a  local  malady.

141.  These  remedies  will  not  be  found  to  be  too  strong  when  com-
pared with  those  for  gonorrhoea,  in  the  male,  more  especially  as  the
texture  of  the  vagina,  especially  in  the  case  alluded  to,  is  astonishingly
lax,  spongy  and  unirritable,  and  not  to  be  compared  with  any  part  of
the  male  genital  organs.

142.  The  more  severe  kind  of  gonorrhoea  in  the  female,  however,  re-
quires a  different  mode  of  treatment.  Of  the  remedies  proposed  in
the  treatment  of  gonorrhoea  in  the  male,  the  only  admissible  ones
are  the  opiated  linseed  tea  and  the  local  sedative  antiphlogistic  com-
presses, as  the  excessive  pain  of  the  inflamed  parts  renders  all  injec-
tions impossible.

143.  In  this  case  we  must  make  frequent  applications  of  tepid  poul-
tices of  linseed-meal,  combined  with  saffron,  to  tlie  external  parts,  and
these  must  be  repeated  until  the  diminishing  inflammation  and  tume-
fiu^tion  of  the  vagina  admits  of  the  injections  at  flrst  of  tepid  and  at
length  of  cold  infusion  of  saffron,  which  should  be  continued  until  the
scalding  of  urine  and  the  pain  of  the  other  parts  of  the  genital  organs

>  Oirtaimer  advisee  fresh  lime  water,  or  an  equally  strong  solution  of  caustic  pot-
Mh  to  be  injected  from  six  to  eight  times  daily  into  the  vagina,  by  which  process,  he
tflKris,  goDorrhcBa  in  the  female  wiU  be  cured  in  five  or  six  days ;  a  period  of  time
■o  short,  as  if  experience  corroborates  the  assertion,  would  point  to  an  almost  sped-
fie  power  of  these  antacid  remedies  against  the  gonorrhiBal  virus.


36  ON  YBNEREAL  DISEASES.

are  completely  removed. Injections  of  ten  grains  of  opium  with
gum-arabic  in  an  ounce  of  water,  will  also  be  of  the  greatest  service.

144.  On  the  occurrence  of  the  glandular  abscesses  (§  133)  on  the  in-
ternal surface  of  the  labia  majora,  we  have  nothing  particular  to  do.
The  swelling  will  be  resolved  if  that  is  possible  by  the  external  fomen-
tations, or  burst  from  the  same  treatment  We  must  in  that  case
take  care  to  keep  open  the  ulcer,  which  is  always  somewhat  deeply
seated,  and  when  the  gonorrhoea  has  lost  all  its  inflammation,  give  the
soluble  mercury  till  slight  mercurial  fever  is  produced,  partly  in  order
to  prevent  the  serious  effects  of  the  absorption  of  the  virus  into  the
general  circulation,  partly  to  effect  the  most  speedy  healing  up  of  the
ulcer ;  which  according  to  my  experience  is  most  surely  and  easily
effected  by  this  means.

145.  During  the  inflammatory  stage  of  the  disease,  we  should  pre-
regimen,  and  the  strictest  rest.  The  only  other  things  required  are  an
enema  of  honey -water  to  keep  the  bowels  open,  a  mild  opiate  at  night,
and,  in  the  purely  inflammatory  state,  a  few  tepii  foot-baths.  Vene-
section is  seldom  requisite.

146.  When  the  injections  of  the  opium  solution  (§  143)  have  re-
moved the  violent  irritation,  the  inflammatory  symptoms  and  the  pains,
we  should  go  on  with  the  narcotic  astringent  injections  (§  138,  139)
until  the  cure  is  perfect.*

147.  A  syringe  with  a  pipe  at  least  two-thirds  of  an  inch  thick  and
with  a  rounded  end  perforated  with  several  small  holes,  but  having  a
narrow  canal,  is  best  for  such  injections  ;  we  are  sure  not  to  injure  the
internal  parts  with  it,  and  the  fluid  is  propelled  far  in  and  made  to  re-
main as  long  as  possible.  The  thickness  of  the  pipe  dilates  the  myrti-
form  folds  of  the  mucous  membrane  and  the  fluid  comes  in  contact
with  the  whole  surface,  thereby  relieving  the  irritation  and  washing
away  the  virus.  The  patient  can  herself  most  effectually  perform  the
injections  by  lying  on  the  back  with  the  shoulders  elevated,  and  the
knees  drawn  up  and  separated  ;  in  this  way  the  injected  fluid  can  re-
ms&iL  longest  in  the  vagina,  act  longest  on  the  affected  parts  and  deve-
lope  the  greatest  power.^

'  Orwe  may  employ  for  this  end  the  lime-water  bo  strongly  recommended  by
Girtaimer.

*  StiU  more  ooovenient  is  Girtatmer^s  instrmnent,  which  consistB  of  an  india-rubber
bag  loitead  of  Ibe  waal  syriDge^  adapted  to  the  cylindrical  pipe.


SIQITBLJB OP GOKORRHOSA.  87

SECOND  DIVISION.

SEQUELS  OF  GONORRHCEA.
CHAPTER  I.

CHRONIC  STRANGURY  AND  ITS  TREATMENT.

148.  In  cases  of  obstinate  gonorrhoea,  especially  in  the  male,  when
the  bladder  and  neighbouring  parts  have  been  implicated  in  the  erysi-
pelatous inflammation  and  unskillfully  treated,  there  sometimes  re-
mains a  frequent  painful  inclination^  to  make  water,  a  burning  or
shooting  pain  in  the  urethra,  often  as  far  as  the  glans,  pressure  on  the
bladder  after  the  evacuation  of  the  urine,  and  a  disagreeable  sensa-
tion in  the  perinseum  ;  a  pitiable  disease  that  in  course  of  time  lays
the  foundation  for  thickening  of  the  walls  of  the  bladder,  ulceration
of  it,  urinary  calculus,  and  even  dOatation  or  suppuration  of  the  pelvis
of  the  kidneys.

149.  If  these  symptoms  be  not  owing  to  stone  in  the  bladder,  or
stricture  of  the  urethra,  which  may  both  be  ascertained  by  means  of
the  catheter,  or  swelling  of  the  prostrate  gland,  which  may  be  ascer-
tained by  the  catheter  and  the  introduction  of  the  finger  into  the  rectum,
they  depend  on  the  above  mentioned  cause ;  but  the  patient  need  not
therefore  fear,  as  he  often  does,  that  there  still  exist  imeradicated  remains
of  the  venereal  disease  in  his  system,  to  occasion  these  sufferings.

150.  These  grave  symptoms  may  often  be  removed  by  frequent
bathing  of  the  genitals  in  cold,  and  even  the  very  coldest  water,
(whereby  the  weak  parts  are  strengthened  and  their  irritability  dimin-
bhed),  and  by  the  injection  of  a  solution  of  opium. (§108.)

151.  If  this  remedy  be  used  for  several  weeks  without  effect,  (which
very  seldom  is  the  case),  the  employment  of  opium  internally  and  ex-
ternally (in  topical  applications  and  clysters)  is,  according  to  my  ex-
perience, of  excellent  service.

152.  If  this  do  not  suffice,  besides  the  last  named  remedy,  the  ap-
plication of  a  blister  to  the  sacrum,  or  the  introduction  of  a  seton  into
the  perinseum  will  produce  the  desired  effect.

CHAPTER  II.

CHRONIC  CURVATURE  OF  THE  PENia

153.  The  curved  erection  of  the  penis  (chordee)  sometimes  per-
sists after  the  removal  of  the  gonorrhoea  and  its  attendant  symp-

'  These  sufiferings  are  usually  caused  by  a  renewed  irritation,  resulting  from  spasm
and  weakne$«,  and  an  irregular  reaction  of  the  bladder  against  the  urethra.  In  the
betlthy  state,  before  the  evacuation  of  the  urine,  the  neck  of  the  bladder  and  the  ure-
tbra  are  contracted  and  the  bladder  is  relaxed,  but  when  the  urine  is  to  be  passed,  the
bbdder  eootracts,  and  first  the  neck  of  the  bladder  and  then  the  urethra  relaxes,  and
after  the  urine  has  flowed  out  the  two  latter  contract  before  the  first  becomes  relaxed ;
vhereas  in  this  case  the  oatural  operatioiis  of  these  jiarts  are  reversed,  or  at  Ifiaai  take
pbee  m  a  perrcrted  order.


88  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

toms. It  renders  coition  painful,  often  impossible,  or  at  all  events  un-
prolific.

154.  An  induration  of  the  membrane  of  the  urethra,  or  thickening
of  a  part  of  the  corpora  cavernosa  is  usually  the  cause  of  this  affection.

155.  Recourse  is  usually  had  to  venesections  and  purgatives,  al-
though they  cannot  be  of  the  slightest  benefit,  and  often  do  much  injury
to  the  system.

156.  The  internal  use  of  hemlock  is  said  to  be  of  use ;  the  extract
may  at  the  same  time  be  applied  outwardly.  If  this  do  not  succeed,
mercury  should  be  rubbed  into  the  affected  part,  and  bark  taken  in-
ternally as  Schwediauer  advises.  Good  results  may  be  anticipated  from
the  employment  of  electricity.

157.  These  things  may  prove  serviceable  when  the  symptom  does
not  depend  on  too  great  induration  and  adhesions  of  the  corpora  ca>-
vemosa,  or  of  the  substance  of  the  urethra.  In  worse  cases,  however,
when  the  remedies  just  n^entioned  are  inefficient  against  the  cartila-
ginous adhensions,  De  la  Peyronie  has  found  the  baths  of  Bardges  use-
ful. (These  baths  greatly  resemble  the  other  warm  alkaline  mineral
waters  containing  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  at  Aix,  Baden,  Toplitz,
Kirchberg,  Wolkenstein,  <Sz;c.)  In  order  that  they  may  do  more  good
than  the  other  remedies,  I  believe  they  ought  to  be  used  in  the  form  of
douche  on  the  affected  parts.

158.  Peyrilhe  asserts  that  he  has  cured  those  almost  osseous  indu-
rations by  the  internal  employment  of  volatile  alkali,  and  by  applica-
tions of  diluted  soap  lie.

CHAPTER  III.

INDURATION  OF  THE  TESTICTLK

159.  In  general  this  only  remains  after  injudicious  treatment,  of  the
sympathetic  swelling  of  this  gland ;  it  is  worst  when  at  the  same  time
the  spermatic  chord  is  thickened,  varicose  and  scirrhous.  This  affec-
tion is  often  very  tedious,  often  incurable.  If  the  epidydimis  only  be
Indurated,  it  is  of  less  importance,  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  re-
productive faculty.

160.  In  cases  of  induration  of  the  testide  that  is  not  of  too  long
standing,  the  application  of  a  compress  imbibed  with  a  strong  decoc-
tion of  oak-bark  has  proved  of  excellent  service  in  my  hands.  Others
have  recommended  the  internal  use  of  hemlock  and  local  fumigations
with  cinnabar,  along  with  repeated  emetics ;  I  have  never  seen  the
slightest  utility  from  any  of  these  means  in  any  kind  of  indura-
tion.

161.  Some  have  advised,  in  addition,  the  rubbing-in  of  Neapolitan
ointment  ^  into  the  scrotum  and  perinsum,  together  with  the  internal

'  Girtanner  advises  that  ammoDia  dntment  be  nibbed  in  aeveral  timee  daily  at  the
pennaiim  and  scrotum. I  have  eiqperieiiced  its  eflSca^  in  other  glandular  sweDinQa


' SBQUEUi  OF  GONORBH<BA.  89

use  of  mercury  (but  as  no  lymphatics  proceed  from  the  scrotum  to  the
testicles,  this  does  no  good,  unless  from  the  mere  friction)  and  the  ex-
tonal  and  internal  employment  of  decoction  mezereum.  Poultices
with  belladonna  leaves  have  also  been  enjoined.  Where  nothing  else
succeeded,  good  effects  have  been  perceived  from  electricity  (espe-
oally  from  the  electrical  bath  and  the  simple  spark,  or  very  small
shocks  from  the  Leyden  jar).  Acrel  has  seen  good  results  from  the
internal  use  of  a  decoction  of  an  ounce  of  ononis-root  in  water.

i62w  Some  redcon  amongst  the  best  remedial  means  the  inoculation
of  an  artificial  gonorrhoea  (by  the  introduction  of  gonorrhoeal  matter
by  means  of  a  bougie,  or  by  the  injection  of  diluted  ammonia  ^) ;
others  ^>eak  disparagingly  of  it.

163.  Sdiwediauer  advised  a  warm  poultice  of  fresh  mandragora  root
to  be  applied  to  the  scrotum.  Van  Swieten  trusted  to  a  medicament
composed  of  two  ounces  of  crabs^eyes  and  a  pint  of  Austrian  wine,
four  tablespoonfuls  to  be  taken  night  and  morning.  Aepli  of  Dies-
senhofen  completely  cured  a  peasant  of  scirrhous  and  ulcerated  testicle^
by  the  administration  internally  of  fifleen  or  sixteen  green  lizards,
raw,  cut  into  pieces.  We  frequently  have  to  alter  the  constituticMi
before  resorting  to  local  remedies.

164.  If  the  cure  progresses  favourably,  the  hardness  of  the  epidy-
dimis  is  the  last  to  disappear.  Before  the  body  of  the  testicle  decreases,
it  first  becomes  soft,  and  softer  ^  than  in  the  natural  state,  as  Himter
observed  and  1  can  testify.

165.  If  all  attempts  prove  fruitless,  and  the  testicle  remains  very
sensitive  to  touch,  or  traversed  by  agonizing  shoots,  grows  rapidly  in
volume,  &c.,  we  may  perform  castration  without  tying  the  spermatic
cord.  If  however  the  latter  up  into  the  abdominal  ring  be  thickened,
knotted  and  hard,  this  operation  is  inpracticable.  Still  it  rarely  passes
into  cancer.  ^

•CHAPTER  IV.

SECONDARY  GONORRH(EA  IN  THE  MALE  AND  ITS  TREATMENT.

166.  The  mucous  discharge*  from  the  urethra,  which  continues  un-
diminished from  a  primary  gonorrhoea  long  after  the  cessation  of  the
scalding  of  urine  and  of  the  painful  erections,  is  termed  secondary
gonorrhoea  (gleet).

'  Girtaxmer  reoommends  a  simple,  clean  bougie  for  this  purpose.

*  Almost  pappy.

>  Glrtanner  is  of  opinion  that  induration  of  the  testicle  never  passes  into  cancer.

*  Perhaps  I  should  add  *Vithout  venereal  miasm,"  but  the  infecting  power  of  clap
and  of  gleet  has  not  yet  been  accurately  determined  by  observers,  especially  as  in
realitv  there  are  gleets  whose  continuance,  as  will  be  seen,  depends  on  their  vene-
real  nature,  I  mean  those  arising  from  ulcers  in  the  urethra.


'40  OK  VBNBREAL  DI8BA8SS.

167.  The  same  appellation  may  be  given  to  the  discharge  that  re-
eurs  afler  excitation  of  the  passions,  after  severe  exercise,  excesses  in
fermented  liquors,  or  after  repeated  coitus.  ^  All  these  re-exciting
causes  tend  to  change  the  mucous  colourless  gleet  into  a  puriform
discharge.

168.  Seeing  that  there  is  no  universally  efficacious  remedy  for  gleet,
and  seeing  that  things  that  do  good  in  some  cases,  do  manifest  injury
in  others,  it  follows  that  this  aflfection  may  arise  from  several  causes.

169.  Sufficient  for  practical  purposes  may  be  the  division  into  gleet
from  irriiabilUyy  gleet  from  heal  or  general  toeakness,  gleet  from

halnty  gleet  from  ulcers  of  the  urethra,  and  gleet  from  strictures  of  the
urethra  ;  although  there  may  also  be  some  from  scrofulous  and  gouty
causes,  as  would  seem  to  be  shewn  by  some  cases.

170.  The  cure  of  these  kinds  of  gleets  would  often  not  be  attended
with  such  difficulty  if  it  were  easy  to  ascertain  the  cause '  in  every
case  with  certainty.  But  the  following  distinctive  marks  will  suffice
in  most  cases.

171.  The  gleet  from  irritability  chiefly  aflects  those  persons  who
are  subject  to  irritable  weakness  of  the  nerves  and  frequent  indisposi-
tion, and  in  whom  during  the  primary  gonorrhea  the  pains  extend
beyond  the  special  seat  of  gonorrhoea  to  the  neighbouring  parts,  and

172.  Along  with  this  gleet  there  is  usually  a  disagreeable  irritating
sensation  in  the  urethra,  which  however  is  not  fixed  to  any  particular
spot ;  the  distinctive  features  of  the  other  gleets  are  not  present,  and
their  remedies  manifestly  aggravate  it.  ^

173.  It  has  this  peculiarity,  that  when  it  is  getting  better  it  is  ag-
gravated by  the  use  of  mercury,  irritating  clysters  and  purgatives,  by
drinking  much  tea,  by  anger  and  other  passions,  or  by  slight  excesses
in  venery,  in  eating  and  in  drinking,  and  after  it  has  ceased  for  some
time  is  brought  back  again  by  such  causes.

174.  If  we  can  remove  the  irritability  from  the  system,  or  from  the
genitals  if  they  only  are  the  seat  of  irritability,  then  the  gleet  will  go
off  of  its  own  accord.  Therefore  the  method  I  recommended  (^150
— 152)  for  the  irritation  of  tlie  bladder  and  the  accompanying  pains
in  the  urethra  remaining  after  gonorrhssa  should  be  adopted.

175.  The  genital  parts  are  to  be  bathed  in  cold  astringent  fluids,  rs

'  That  the  gleet  occaaioaed  by  excessive  coition  is  not  produced  by  a  new  infecti*  a»
we  know  from  this,  that  it  comes  on  immediatily  after  the  act,  that  it  is  accompanied
by  scarcel  J  any  pain,  and  from  other  circumstances.

*  Sometimes  it  appears  to  be  quite  bexplicable,  as  is  obeenred  in  tiiose  gleets
that  cease  of  their  own  accord  after  the  fruitless  employment  of  the  most  approYed
remedies.

*  In  this  land  of  gleet  we  mustinetther  employ  irritating  nor  styptic  injectiooi  if
we  would  avoid  aggraTatiDg  it  and  exciting  erysipelatous  ii


SSQUSUB  OF  60N0BBHCEA.  41

•  strong  decoction  of  oak-bark,  a  solution  of  common  vitriol  or  of
mlum  in  cold  water,  and  the  like,  and  a  tepid  solution  of  opium  in
water  (in  the  proportion  of  one  to  sixty)  should  be  injected^  into  the
urethra,  if  that  can  be  done  without  causing  irritation.

176.  Should  there  be  no  opportunity  of  doing  all  this,  the  continu-
ed and  repeated  dipping  of  the  genitals  in  plain  cold  water  will  often
answer  the  purpose  alone ;  especially  conjoined  with  moderate  exer-
cise in  the  open  air  and  a  cold  foot-bath  for  some  minutes  every  day.

177.  A  general  tonic  treatment  of  the  whole  system,  especially  in
obstinate  cases,  will  contribute  much,  often  more  than  anything  else,
to  the  removal  of  this  kind  of  gleet,  which  is  usually  caused  by  an
improper  treatment  of  the  original  gonorrhoea  by  the  abuse  of  Nea-
politan ointment,  venesections,  purgatives  and  irritating  injections
during  the  inflammatory  period.

178.  Oleeifrom  habit.  Excessive  coition  and  the  unnecessary  use
of  the  bougie  during  the  third  stage  of  gonorrhoea,  frequent  infections,
and  other  causes,  may  bring  the  excretory  ducts  of  the  mucous  glands
into  a  state  of  insensibility  and  induration,  whereby  they  lose  the
power  both  of  expanding  and  contracting  themselves.  Through  their
oallons  orifices  they  permit  the  escape  of  a  quanlity  of  the  mucus  con-
creted in  the  glands  which  would  else  be  taken  up  again  by  the  absor-
bent vessels.  The  discharge  becomes  almost  like  an  issue,  like  that
in  chronic  ophthalmo-blennorrhoea.

179.  Astringent^  or  relaxing  injections  have  no  effect  on  this  kind
of  gleet.

180.  The  discharge  is  not  so  copious  or  so  watery  as  that  in  gleet
from  w^eakness:  the  urethra  is  painless  and  will  readily  bear  the  in-
troduction of  a  bougie ;  but  that  arising  from  weakness  may  in  course
of  time  degenerate  into  this  kind,  if  treated  too  remissly  or  not  at  all.

181.  This  kind  of  gleet  must  be  treated,  at  least  in  the  first  place,
with  stimulating  injections,  for  which  a  solution  of  a  grain  of  corro-
sive sublimate  in  four  ounces  of  water  will  suffice.  The  injection
must  be  performed  for  the  first  two  or  three  days,  twice,  afterwards
three  or  four  times  daily.  We  may  then,  if  the  urethra  bears  this  in-
jection without  any  sensation,  diminish  the  quantity  of  the  water  for
the  solution,  in  order  to  make  it  stronger.

182.  If  we  suspect  that  the  injection  does  not  penetrate  to  the  af-
fected part  (for  the  fluid  rarely  goes  more  than  four  or  five  inches  in-
to the  urethra),  we  may  introduce  a  bougie  covered  with  onion-juice
and  dipped  into  the solution  of  sublimate. In  obstinate  cases  we

*  By  means  of  a  email  syphon  (§  59).

■  If  this  Idnd  of  gleet  arises  from  Icng-lasting  gleets  from  weakness,  styptic  in-
jectiofB  may  frequently  cause  inflammation  of  the  urethra,  sympathetic  swelling  of
the  testicles  and  other  inconveniences.


42  ON  ySNEREAL  DISEASES.

may  roll  the  bougie  in  finely  pulverized  red  predpitate,  and  leave  it
but  an  instant  in  the  urethra.

183.  If,  as  ought  to  happen,  the  discharge  hereupon  increases,  we
cease  and  wait  until  the  discharge  diminishes  to  less  than  its  usual
quantity.  We  may  then  employ  a  solution  of  turpentine  in  water  by
means  of  yolk  of  egg,  gradually  increasing  its  strength  until  the  cure
is  cx)mplete,  or  if  it  be  delayed  make  use  of  strong  astringent  injec-
tions (§  188).

184.  These  are  the  cases,  especially  when  the  disease  is  obstinate,
in  which  the  internal  use  of  cantharides-tincture*  has  sometimes  ap-
peared to  produce  wonderful  effects.  We  may  try  it  in  obstinate
cases. Frequent  horse  exercise  has  also  proved  of  use.

185.  Gleet  from  weakness,  notwithstanding  its  frequency,  has  been
denied  by  some^  who  were  unable  to  reconcile  the  idea  of  weakness
with  increased  secretion,  but  as  weakened  glands  and  excretory  vessels
do  not  throw  out  an  increase  of  humours  from  their  own  energy,  but
because,  when  weakened,  they  yield  to  the  impetus  of  the  bloodves-
sels, and  are  thus  compelled,  as  it  were,  on  account  of  the  diminution
of  their  reactive  force,  to  receive  a  quantity  of  fluid,  which  they  per-
mit to  flow  in  excess 'from  their  excretory  orifices  almost  crude  and
but  half  concocted,  in  consequence  of  their  inability  to  ofier  any  re-
sistance. We  may  therefore  say  that  in  this  increased  secretion  they
are  rather  passive  than  active.  This  is  sufficiently  evident  from  the
mode  of  action  of  the  remedies  that  are  efficacious.

18).  Ordinarily  this  kind  of  gleet  occurs  in  persons  of  phlegmatic
constitution  who  have  weakened  the  genital  organs  by  excessive  venery
or  onanism,^  or  by  the  abuse  of  relaxing  drinks  and  baths,  or  in  those
in  whom  the  primary  gonorrhoea  was  accompanied  by  little  irritation,
but  much  discharge.  Probably  the  relaxing  method  of  treatment
continued  till  the  third  stage,  and  the  use  of  a  quantity  of  laxative
salts,  or  of  saltpetre,  and  repeated  venesections,  contribute  in  no  small
measure  to  its  production,  as  also  the  employment  of  sedative  injec-
tions continued  after  the  cessation  of  the  scalding.

187.  These  gleets  have  this  peculiarity,  that  almost  no  pain  accom-
panies them,  or  at  most  only  a  sense  of  weakness  in  the  loins  and
testicles,  which  hang  do?m  loosely. The  discharge  of  a  thin  fluid  is

'  As  early  as  1698  this  was  recommended  by  Martin  lister  {ExercU.  chs,  12)  in
goDorrfaiBa,  but  if  used  at  the  commencement  it  might  prove  injurious.

*  Particularly  Hunter.

*  The  itching  in  the  genitals  that  usually  occurs  towards  the  termination  of  a
gonorrhcea,  causes  frequent  erections,  and  if  the  patient,  as  might  be  anticipated,
do  not  resist  this  sensation  by  abstinence,  exercise  and  temperance,  but  if  he  rather
obey  what  seems  to  him  a  healthy  call  of  nature,  by  onanism  or  repeated  coitus,  he
will  often  bring  on  this  kind  of  gleet  We  must  take  care  to  warn  him  against  this
erroneous  OQuduct


BXQUSL^  OF  GONORRHQBA.  48

more  oopious  than  in  the  other  kinds.  It  often  diminishes  and  in-
creases again  aLoiost  without  any  caase,  but  the  latter  occurs  usually
after  venereal  excitement,  the  former  sometimes  after  the  inordinate
use  of  wine,  dsc.

188.  The  genitals  should  frequently  be  bathed,  for  a  minute  at  a
time,  in  very  cold  water  in  which  some  common  vitriol  has  been  dis-
solved, and  a  similar  footbath  may  be  used  for  several  minutes.  Along
with  this,  injections  of  a  strong  decoction  of  oak-bark  may  be  em-
ployed, and  the  strength  gradually  increased.  If  all  this  fails,  a  solu-
tion of  one  part  of  white  vitriol  in  thirty  parts  of  water  may  be
injected.

189.  The  internal  administration  of  bark,  horse  exercise,  the  open
air  and  nourishing  diet,  with  a  little  wine,  may  greatly  further  the
core.  Finally  we  may  have  recourse  to  electricity,  t.  e.  small  sparks
drawn  from  the  genitals.

190.  Venereal  gleet.  Modem  authors  go  too  far  when  they  allege
the  presence  of  ulcers  in  the  urethra  to  be  so  excessively  rare  in  gon-
oniioea,  although  they  are  quite  right  in  asserting  that  they  are  quite
non-essential*  to  venereal  gonorrhceas,  and  do  not  frequently  occur.

191.  These  ulcerations  may  arise  from  the  laceration  of  considerable
bloodvessels  in  the  urethra  during  spasmodic  erections  and  coitus,  from
blows  and  otber  injuries  from  without,  and  from  wounds  of  the  inter-
nal lining  membrane  by  the  syringe,  the  catheter,  or  the  bougie,  &c.
TTie  gonorrhceal  matter  transforms  these  wounds  into  true  chancres.
In  some  rare  cases  they  are  formed  by  an  abscess  of  an  external  ure-
thral gland  bursting  into  the  canal.

192.  We  know  this  to  be  the  cause  of  a  gleet  when  during  the
gonorrhoea  pure  blood  has  flowed  from  the  urethra,  or  when  one  or
other  of  the  exciting  causes  we  have  indicated  above  has  occurred,  but
especially  when,  after  the  cessation  of  the  inflammatory  period  of  the
gonorrhoea,  the  bougie  touches  a  small  raw,  painful  spot,  causing  a  pain
that  is  felt  exactly  in  the  same  situation  on  touching  the  urethra  ex-
ternally. Hence  it  happens  that  even  after  the  judicious  treatment  of
Uie  original  gonorrhoea  the  discharge  continues  to  flow,  though  in  less
quantity ;  and  it  may  occur  that  after  the  employment  of  astringent
injections  symptoms  of  lues  venerea  may  begin  to  shew  themselves.

193.  It  is  self-evident  that  after  the  recognition  of  the  cause  of  these
gleets,  the  last-mentioned  remedies  should  not  be  made  use  of.  Even
the  internal  employment  of  balsamic  remedies  is  contra-indicated.

194.  The  only  remedy  we  can  have  confidence  in  is  a  good  prepara-

*  It  may  well  be  that  cicatrices  are  bo  seldom  discovered  in  the  urethra  after
death,  for  we  often  can  scarcely  observe  in  the  glans  or  prepuce  a  trace  of  the
diancres  that  formerly  existed,  provided  they  were  not  very  large  or  deep,  and  were
only  cured  by  the  internal  use  of  mercury,  and  not  by  caustics.


44  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

tioB  of  mercury  (such  as  the  soluble)  given  in  gradually  increasing
doses  until  mercurial  fever  (§  290)  is  developed.  By  this  medicine
alone,  without  the  employment  of  any  injection,  this  kind  of  gleet,
with  all  traces  of  general  venereal  symptoms,  will  be  easily,  certainly
and  radically  cured,  and  this  remedy  tends  to  aggravate  every  other
kind  of  gleet.

195.  Gleets  from  strictures  in  the  urethra  seldom  occur  immediately
after  the  gonorrhoea;  they  often  appear  twenty  or  thirty  years  thereafter.
They  consist  of  a  scanty,  almost  colourless,  mild,  mucous  discharge,
with  retention  of  urine,  or  at  least  diminished  size  of  the  stream  of
urine.

196.  The  bougie  is  the  only  way  to  detect  their  cause,  by  revealing
the  strictured  spot.

197.  It  ceases  spontaneously  after  removing  the  stricture,  without
any  additional  aid,  wherefore  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  treatment
of  the  latter*  affection  (§  207—245).

198.  If  the  body  have  much  predisposition  to  scrofula  or  gout,  gleets
often  become  complicated  thereby.

19i).  The  internal  use  of  crude  antimony,  of  burnt  sea- weed,  of
purple  fox-glove,  and  bathing  in  sea  water,  will  perform  in  the  case  of
the  first  what  the  remedies  recommended  for  the  other  gleets  are  una-
ble to  effect,  and  extract  of  monk's-hood,  cold  baths  and  electricity
will  do  the  same  for  the  last.

CHAPTER  V,

SECONDARY  GONORRH(EA  IN  THE  FEMALE  AND  ITS  TREATMENT.
260.  The  usual  seat  of  this  is  the  vagina,  rarely  the  uterus,  and  still
more  rarely  the  urethra.  To  all  appearance  it  does  not  differ  from
ordinary  leucorrhoea ;  its  very  origin  is  undiscoverable  if  it  have  not
continued  to  flow  immediately  after  the  venereal  gonorrhoea.  Its
varieties  are  much  less  numerous  than  those  in  the  male.

201.  If  it  is  already  of  long  standing,  it  belongs  to  the  gleets  from
habit,  and  must  be  treated  entirely  by  stimulating  injections  (^  181)
gradually  increased  in  strength.

202.  After  pursuing  this  treatment  for  ten  or  twelve  days  we  should
pause,  in  order  to  see  whether  the  discharge  will  decrease  in  a  few
days ;  in  which  case,  the  strong  astringent  cold  injections,  recommended
above  for  primary  gonorrhoea  in  women,  especially  a  strong  decoction
of  oak-bark  combined  with  alum,  must  be  employed  until  the  discharge
ceases,  and  even  for  a  couple  of  weeks  thereafter.

203.  But  as  in  women  we  are  unable  to  determine  accurately  in
every  case  whether  it  be  a  gleet  from  habit  or  from  weakness,  we

*  Ab  urethral  calculi  only  cause  gleets  when  they  have  produced  strictures  in  the
urethra,  as  they  often  do^  thuir  treatment  does  not  belong  to  this  place.


SEQUSUB  OF  QONOBBHOBA.  46

would  do  well  in  most  cases  (seeing  that  on  account  of  the  loose  tex-
ture and  inferior  sensibility  of  the  parts  we  have  less  to  fear  than  in
the  case  of  the  male  urethra)  .to  combat  the  malady  at  once  with  in-
jections possessing  both  a  stimulating  and  strengthening  character. —
An  injection  of  an  ounce  of  blue  vitriol  dissolved  in  a  pint  of  watert
or  of  Uiree  or  even  four  oimces  of  white  vitriol  in  Che  same  quantity
of  water,  will  be  found  very  serviceable.

204.  Should  we,  on  the  first  injections  of  this  fluid,  meet  with  any
disagreeable,  painful  and  inflammatory  symptoms,  we  will  know  from
that  that  the  gleet  belongs  to  those  arising  from  disability.  We  must
leave  them  ofi*  and  treat  the  case  only  with  injections  of  cold,  even
ioe-cold  water ;  and  at  length  we  may  have  recourse  to  a  decoction  of
oak-bark.  If  the  irritability  be  excessive  (which  will  be  ascertained
by  other  symptoms,  the  rapid  pulse,  the  character  of  the  primary
g(H)orrhoea,  6ic.)  we  may  substitute  injections  with  tincture  of  opium.

205.  If  along  with  gleet  of  this  kind  there  be  symptoms  of  a  gouty
or  scrofulous  disposition,  they  must  first  be  eradicated  as  far  as  possi-
ble by  suitable  remedies  for  these  states,  before  we  proceed  with  the
local  treatment.

206.  If,  however,  on  the  introduction  of  the  syringe  a  painful  inter-
nal spot  should  be  observed,  without  any  induration  of  the  mouth  of
the  womb  or  other  signs  of  internal  cancer  (the  acrid  nature,  dis-
coloured appearance  or  specific  odour  of  the  ichor  discharged,  the
diootings  from  the  hips  into  the  pelvis,  dec.)  being  present,  we  may
suspect  a  venereal  ulcer  in  the  vagina ;  for  which  the  internal  use  of
mercury  (§  614  et  seq.)  without  any  local  means,  is  alone  efficacious.

CHAPTER  VI.

STRICTURE  OF  THE  URETHRA  AND  ITS  CURK

207.  All  the  phenomena  of  obstructed  flow  of  urine,  when  no  stone
was  present,  were  formeriy  attributed  to  cicatrices  and  excrescences
in  the  urethra,  which  without  examination  were  termed  carunculae
and  collosities,  and  in  conformity  with  the  prevalent  notion,  were  held
to  be  the  relics  of  ulcers  in  the  urethra,  which  were  taken  for  granted
to  exist  in  every  case  of  gonorrhoea.

208.  This  opinion  was  for  long  the  general  one,  until  by  an  enor-
mous number  of  autopsies  it  was  proved  that  cicatrices  and  fleshy
excrescences  in  the  urethra  were  of  very  rare  occurrence,  and  that  in
cause  arose  from  narrowing  and  constriction  of  the  urinary  canal*
without  actual  thickening  of  its  substance.

209.  Although  we  do  not  allege  that  these  strictures  are  always  the
eflect  of  gonorrhoea,  this  at  least  is  certain,  that  they  are  chiefly  to  be
found  in  men  who  have  been  affected  by  this  fashionable  complaint ;


46  OK  YElfEBEAL  DISEASES.

but  yet  a  disposition  to  rheumatism  ^  may  contribute  not  a  little
towards  this,  especially  as  they  usually  occur  only  in  the  middle  or
advanced  periods  of  life  (oflen  20  or  30  years  after  the  patient  has
had  gonorrhcea).  What  a  distance  betwixt  the  probable  cause  and  the
effect !  Hence  it  happens  that  strictures  are  very  rarely  met  with  in
the  place  where  the  gonorrhoea  has  its  special  seat ;  usually  further
backwards  :  whence  we  may  infer,  at  least  thus  much,  that  it  cannot
strictures  have  been  met  with  in  persons  who  had  had  very  slight
gonorrhoea)  or  even  none  at  all),  and  those  who  have  had  the  most
violent  gonorrhoeas  have  remained  free  from  strictures.  Neither  can
the  bougie  or  of  injections  in  the  treatment  of  gonorrhoea ;  for,  ac-
cording to  Hunter,  strictures  have  occurred  when  gonorrhoeas  have
been  removed  without  these  appliances.  Be  this  as  it  may ;  as  the
actual  exciting  cause  is  still  involved  in  obscurity,  and  as  the  general
opinion  has  hitherto  attributed  strictures  to  a  previous  gonorrhoea,  I
feel  myself  necessitated  to  say  what  is  essential  regarding  them.

210.  Probably  any  severe  irritation  of  the  urethra  (t.  c,  by  urethral
calculi)  or  any  inflammation  of  it,  more  than  merely  superficial,  is
capable  of  making  it  liable  to  strictures.

211.  Moreover  it  is  subject  to  this  affection  in  common  with  other
canals  of  our  body ;  as  examples  of  continued  strictures  I  may  instance,
constrictions  of  the  oesophagus  (I  had  recently  an  opportunity,  at  an
autopsy,  of  observing  a  great  contraction  of  the  middle  portion  of
the  stomach)  and  those  of  the  bowels,  especially  of  the  colon ;  the
spasmodic  strictures  of  the  nasal  duct  at  the  lacrymal  sack,  of  the
gullet  and  of  the  bowels,  have  also  some  resemblance  to  urethral
stricture.

212.  Strictures  are  constrictions,  or  narrowings  of  the  urethra  as  if
it  were  drawn  together  by  a  thread,  which  are  most  frequently  met
with  in  the  vicinity  of  the  bulbus,  much  more  frequently  anterior  to
it,  (from  five  to  three  inches  from  the  orifice),  and  very  seldom  behind
it ;  they  either  constrict  the  canal  more  or  less  uniformly  all  round
towards  the  centre,  or  only  at  one  side  more  than  the  other.

213.  In  consequence  of  the  bladder  reacting  against  the  constriction
of  its  excretory  canal,  and  not  being  able  to  get  rid  of  its  contents
easily,  there  oflen  occurs  a  frequent  anxious  call  to  make  water ;  the
coats  of  the  bladder  become  thickened, the  posterior  part  of  the

>  A  man,  68  years  old,  had  for  many  years  been  troubled  with  pain  in  the  hips,
especially  after  drinking  a  fitUe  wine.  His  hitherto  unnoticable  urethral  stricture
once  increased  suddenly,  and  the  most  fearful  retention  of  urine  took  place.  Whilst
thia  dji^ffiMfe  jNTeTailed  and  I  sought  to  relieve  him  from  it,  he  bad  not  the  slightest
attack  of  his  iheumatic  sufferings,  not  even  when  I  let  him  drink  wine ;  only  the
•tricture  appeared  to  be  aggravated  by  ti


SKQUELiB  OF  GONORBHCBA«  47

urethra,  as  &r  as  the  stricture,  gradually  dilates  (often  also  the  ureters
up  to  the  kidneys,  sometimes  the  pelvis  of  the  kidneys  ^  themselves)
in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  the  stricture ;  and  the  internal  mem-
brane  of  this  portion  of  the  canal,  distended  and  irritated  by  the
stagnating  urine,  exudes  a  gleety  looking  mucus,  or  its  coats  inflamed
or  corroded  by  the  acrid  urine,  if  the  stricture  continue  or  contract
fllill  further,  form  an  abscess  which  opens  externally  and  usually  gives
rise  to  a  perineal  fistula,  whereby  nature  is  forced  to  provide  a  new
passage  for  the  urine.

214.  The  patient  does  not  in  general  notice  his  malady,  or  think  fit
^  seek  advice  for  it,  until  the  stricture  has  attained  a  serious  height.
Hie  stream  of  urine  commences  to  grow  smaller  and  smaller,  the
demre  to  pass  water  more  frequent,  and  still  he  apprehends  nothing
bad.  Inflammation  may  occur,  and  even  an  abscess  in  the  course  of
the  urethra,  still  he  r^;ards  it  only  as  a  local  affection  that  will  go  off
of  itself,  and  does  not  suspect  that  it  arises  from  the  diminished  flow
of  urine  (which  he  may  at  that  time  have  not  deemed  worthy  of  no-
tice),  or  from  the  slow  and  unnoticed  advance  of  the  constriction  of
the  urinary  canal.  It  is  often  only  when  the  urine  passes  by  drops,
or  when  complete  ischuria  has  occurred,  along  with  anxious  desire  to
pass  water,  that  he  applies  for  aid ;  when  inflammation,  mortification
and  death  are  at  the  door.

215.  Strictures  that  gradually  increase  to  the  highest  pitch  without
intermission,  in  which  the  urine  does  not  pass  at  one  time  more  at
another  less  freely,  are  termed  persistent  or  continuous.  On  intro-
ducing the  bougie  we  find  at  one  time  just  the  same  amount  of  resis-
tance as  at  another.  The  contraction  remains  under  all  circumstances,
under  every  regimen  the  same,  only  that  it  goes  on  imperceptibly
increasing  until  at  last  it  will  not  permit  even  the  smallest  bougie  to
penetrate  into  the  bladder.  It  is  diminished  neither  by  antispasmodic
nor  yet  by  derivative  irritating  remedies.

216.  Externally  the  afiected  part  generally  presents  a  whiter  ap-
pearance than  the  other  parts  of  the  urethra,  and  it  frequently  appears
as  if  drawn  together.  The  contracted  part  is  seldom  an  inch  in  length,
usually  not  more  than  a  line ;  there  is  rarely  more  than  one  present
in  the  urethra.

217.  This  persistent  stricture  never  comes  on  immediately  afler
gonorrhoea,  and  usually  only  attains  its  acme  at  the  end  of  the  middle

'  A  presBive  dull  pain  in  the  region  of  this  organ  (one  kidney  is  usually  the  worst)
indicates  this  affaction,  and  the  same  pain  with  a  roundish  elevation  in  the  side,
ipeedOy  followed  by  the  passage  of  a  uniformly  mixed  whitish  urine,  with  puriform
sediment  and  diminution  of  the  sweUing,  indicates  an  abscess  of  the  renal  pelvis
OQomiOQ  in  severe  ehronic  strictures,  which  often  comes  on  in  consequence  of  serious
tamm  of  regimes,  aa  I  have  frequently  had  an  opportunity  of  observing.


48  ON  YEKEBEAL  DISEASES.

period  of  life  (between  48  and  60).  It  alone  is  accompanied  bj  tha»
sort  of  gleet  (§  195—197)  that  goes  off  spontaneously  after  the  curt
of  the  stricture.

218.  The  spasmodic  stricture  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  persistent
It  does  not  remain  in  exactly  the  same  spot,  but  sometimes  moves  as
inch  forwards  or  backwards.  The  bougie  that  would  formerly  paai
easily,  becomes  all  at  once  impeded  in  its  passage  or  completely
stopped ;  occasionally  also  it  is  pushed  back  again,  after  lying  then
for  some  time.

219.  In  these  cases  the  urethra  is  very  irritable  and  sensitive,  and
vrith  difiiculty  bears  the  introduction  of  the  bougie  or  its  continuance
in  the  urethra,  but  more  readily  after  the  passage  of  the  urine,  although
this  is  denied  by  Hunter,  and  after  the  local  or  internal  employment
of  antispasmodic  remedies.  It  is  increased  by  the  use  of  astringent  or
stimulating  medicines.

220.  It  has  the  greatest  similarity  to  the  irritation  of  the  bladder
(§  148  etseq,),  and  the  spasm  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder  accompanying
that  state,  and  apparently  contributes  much  to  aggravate  that  affeo^
tion.  It  is  the  only  kind  of  stricture  that  can  occur  soon  after  bad
gonorrhoeas ;  it  may  also  have  much  to  do  with  the  retention  of  urine
(§  25)  that  often  accompanies  them.

221.  Very  rarely  (at  most  only  after  the  removal  of  persistent
strictures)  it  is  the  sole  affection  of  the  urethra;  most  frequently  it  is
merely  the  concomitant  of  the  persistent  contraction  caused  by  an
urethral  calculus,  or  of  inflammation  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder.  I  am
unable  to  say  with  certainty  whether  it  may  not  in  course  of  time
assume  the  persistent  form.  ^

222.  It  almost  never  happens  that  a  persistent  stricture  exists
without  a  spasmodic  one,  and  if  it  do  it  can  only  be  a  very  slight
one.  The  narrower  the  persistent  one  is,  and  the  more  it  obstructs
the  exit  of  the  urine,  the  more  frequently  does  the  spasmodic  one  ac-
company it,  and  the  more  intense  it  is.

223.  Hunter  is  unable  to  determine  whether  the  spasmodic  stricture
is  behind  or  in  the  persistent  one.  I  believe  I  have  always  noticed  the
former ;  for  I  have  frequently  only  required  to  press  upon  the  stric-
ture with  a  bougie  too  large  to  enter  it,  in  order  by  this  remote
irritation  to  remove  in  a  revulsive  manner  the  spasm  behind  it,  where-
upon I  could  easily  penetrate  through  the  spasmodic  stricture  mth
a  smaller  bougie,  whidli  before  this  manipulation  could  not  pass
through  it.

224.  We  may  always  recognise  the  complication  of  the  persistent
stricture  with  the  spasmodic  one  in  this  way :  a  bougie  not  too  large
for  the  first  two  or  three  inches  of  the  urethra  cannot  penetrate  to  the
neck  of  the  bladder*  but  when  pushed  in  from  four  to  six  inches  it


SSQURUB  OF  OOKORBH(BA.  49

meets  with  an  insuAnountable  obstacle  (the  persistent  stricture)  at  a]l
tunes,  which,  however,  a  smaller  bougie  (except  in  the  worst  cases)
passes  with  ease,  except  occasionally  (the  spasmodic  stricture)  when  its
passage  is  more  or  less  difficult.

225.  Hiree  modes  are  known  of  curing  the  persistent  or  permanent
stricture  (whereby  no  attention  is  at  first  paid  to  the  accompanying
spasmodic  contraction),  of  which  the  two  first  are  adapted  to  the  case
in  whidi  a  small  sound  can  still  be  passed,  but  the  last  is  required
when  even  the  smallest  bougie  cannot  pass.  The  first  consists  in  the
gradual  dilatation  of  the  stricture ;  the  second  in  causing  ulceration  of
it ;  the  third  in  burning  through  it  with  caustics.  All  three  are  prac-
ticable if  the  contraction  be  not  seated  exactly  in  the  curvature  of  the
urethra,  in  which  case  perhaps  there  is  no  remedy  but  the  knife.

226.  By  the  first  method,'  we  endeavour  to  pass  the  largest  bougie
that  can  be  made  with  a  little  force  ^  to  pass  through  the  stricture,
and  allow  it  to  remain  a  few  minutes  in  the  urethra,  or  as  long  as  the
patient  can  bear  its  presence  there  without  great  discomfort. If  he
can  bear  it  for  an  hour  at  a  time,  we  then  take  a  larger  one,  with
a  point  of  a  conical  shape,  and  try  to  introduce  it. We  press  it
in  cautiously,  and  for  a  short  time  also  in  an  intermitting  manner,
and  with  a  slight  twisting  movement. If  it  spring  back,  either  we
have  not  hit  the  opening  of  the  constriction,  or  it  is  too  narrow  to  ad-
mit the  instrument,  and  we  must  use  a  smaller  one. But  if  it  pene-
trates in  and  remains  fast  we  are  certainly  in  the  stricture,  especially
when  the  introduction  has  caused  no  pain  and  the  point  of  the  bougie
is  squeezed  flat. We  remove  it  again  when  the  patient  can  bear  it
no  longer,  and  endeavour  on  a  subsequent  occasion  to  make  it  pene-
trate further. If  it  pass  through  the  stricture,  we  next  try  a  larger
one,  and  then  again  one  still  larger,  until  we  have  overcome  the  con-
traction; that  is  to  say,  until  we  are  able  to -introduce  into  the
bladder  a  bougie  of  from  two  to  two  and  a  half  lines  in  diameter ;
for  should  there  be  obstacles  farther  backwards,  we  must  proceed  as
witb  the  first  stricture.

227.  The  bougie  must  be  neither  too  soft  else  it  will  easily  bend,
nor  too  hard,  otherwise  we  might  readily,  as  oflcn  happens  with  the
catheter,  especially  when  due  caution  is  not  exercised,  push  through  a
fiklse  passage  near  the  stricture  in  the  spongy  body  of  the  urethra.

'  This  mode  of  curing  strictures  of  the  urethra  by  the  pressure  of  bougies,  was
known  m  early  as  the  year  1 660,  when  a  physician  of  Nimes  whose  name  has  been
kst,  (see  the  22d  of  the  87  observations  appended  to  Laz.  Reverii  Obt,  Med,
Logd  4,  1669.)  cored  them  with  leaden  sounds.

*  Hie  stricture  is  often  so  narrow,  that  bougies  sufficiently  small  to  pass  through
it  at  first,  and  at  the  same  time  of  adequate  strength,  cannot  be  procured :  in  this
eaae  we  make  use  of  catgut  harp-strings  of  gradually  increasing  thickness,  making
their  extremity  rocmd,  and  mtiodiicing  them  covered  with  oiL

4


60  ON  YJ&NILW^  i>IW.4J9«8.

Yfe  become  awure  of  this  having  ooourred,  whea^in  introduoing  the
instrumeiit,  we  make  way,  with  much  suffering,  to  the  patient,  with*
out  at  all  facilitating  the  passage  of  the  urine;  and  we  avoid  this
accident  in  the  case  I  speak  of,  by  the  employment  of  elastic  bougies
and  carefulness.  We  ought  also  to  withdraw  the  bougie  from  time  to
time,  in  order  to  observe  whether  or  no  its  point  be  bent  up.  Should
we  allow  the  bougie  to  remain  some  time  in  the  urethra,  especially  at
night,  it  ought  to  be  bent  over  about  an  inch  at  the  top,  and  &stened
with  a  thread  behind  the  glans,  in  order  to  prevent  its  slipping  into
the  bladder;  an  accident  that  could  only  be  remedied  by  opening  the
bladder  by  the  lateral  operation  to  extract  this  foreign  body,  which  is
attended  by  much  danger.  The  bougies  ought  not,  as  they  usually
are,  to  be  made  conical  throughout  their  whole  length,  but  they  should
be  uniformly  of  the  same  thickness,  consequently  cylindrical,  and
should  only  be  somewhat  narrower  at  their  point.  The  patient  must
soon  learn  to  introduce  the  bougie  himself;  he  will  be  best  able  to
pass  it  with  facility  into  himself;  he  will  be  best  able  to  feel  the^^ait
that  is  to  be  dilated,  and  will  not  be  liable  to  make  a  false  passage
near  the  stricture,  even  with  a  harder  bougie.

228.  We  should  not  discontinue  the  use  of  the  bougie  in  conse-
quence  of  the  presence  or  occurrence  of  a  swelling  of  the  testicles,  as
in  the  case  under  consideration  this  swelling  is  usually  the  effect  of
the  stricture  of  the  urethra,  of  an  urethral  calculus, *or  of  an  abscess
of  the  glands  of  the  canal,  and  by  the  employment  of  the  bougie
would  in  the  first  case  be  removed,  in  the  second  relieved,  and  in  the
third  not  aggravated.

229.  Sometimes,  especially  in  cases  of  irritable  nervous  weakness,
and  when  the  stricture  already  causes  troublesome  symptoms,  as  dif-
ficult passage  of  the  urine,  irritable  bladder,  dca,  there  is  usually  pre-
sent, along  with  the  persistent  stricture,  as  has  been  said,  also  a  spas-
modic contraction,  generally  behind  the  former.  This  is  an  obstinate
and  frightful  malady.  In  this  case,  if  the  ordinary  bougie  will  not
pass,  we  must  resort  to  all  sorts  of  expedients  in  order  to  gain  our
object.  We  press  a  large  bougie  against  the  persistent  stricture  for
a  minute,  and  then  try  the  smaller  bougie  which  ought  to  be  intro-
duced. Jf  this  do  not  succeed,  we  must  tickle  or  gently  rub  the  peri-
naeum,  whilst  with  the  other  hand  we  press  the  bougie  against  it.  If
this  too  fail,  we  should  try  the  inmiersion  of  the  whole  genitals  in
cold  water,  and  the  einployment  of  a  tepid  foot-bath.  If  the  spasm
be  frequently  in  the  way,,  .we  may  place  a  seton  in  the  perinaeum.  In
this  case,  certainly  the  best  time  for  introduoing  the  bougie  is  imme*
diately  after  making  water.

280.  We  must  besides  ascertain  aiid.  make  the  patient  avoid  all  t}|iajt
increases  the  spasm^  fi^fi^^^fi^xj^ 4»vff^jf^  t^idimuist^  tb^imta^


SEQUEUB  OF  GONOBRHGSA.  51

bilitj,  the  patient  should  frequently  pass  his  water,  should  use  cold
baths,  take  exercise  in  the  open  air,  shun  spices  and  heating,  as  well
as  relaxing  drinks,  and  take  internally  quassia-powder.  Astringent
tonics,  as  bark,  iron,  dsc,  increase  the  spasmodic  constriction  in  my
experience.

231.  This  mode  of  removing  persistent  strictures  by  gradual  dilata-
tion, is  certainly  the  easiest,  but  at  the  same  time  the  most  uncertain
method.  Even  though  by  advancing  to  the  very  largest  bougie,  we
have  got  so  far  that  ihe  dilated  constriction  of  the  urethra  allows  the
free  passage  of  the  urine,  the  patient  is  notwithstanding  not  yet  per-
fectly cured,  nor  guaranteed  against  a  relapse.  For  a  long  time  to
come  he  must  still  introduce  the  thick  bougie  from  time  to  time,
every  eight  hours,  at  least,  and  let  it  remain  there  some  hours,  other-
wise the  place  where  the  stricture  is  gradually  contracts  again,  so  aa
not  to  allow  the  passage  of  the  largest  bougie,  and  so  on.  He
must  never  travel  without  providing  himself  with  bougies  in  case  of
necessity,  as  the  tendency  of  the  dilated  part  to  contract  again  is  not
radically  cured.

232.  If  the  patient  take  upon  himself  to  assist  in  this  dilatation,  he
can,  after  some  smaller  bougies  have  been  passed,  rapidly  go  to  larger
and  much  larger  ones,  and  by  means  of  the  irritation  produced  in  the
afiected  part,  create  a  small  amount  of  inflammation  and  suppuration
(the  second  method)  which  gradually  rids  him  completely  and  radi-
cally of  his  malady.  The  texture  of  the  contracted  part  is  always  a
morbid  abnormality,  and  hence  it  is  much  more  readily  brought  into
a  state  of  inflammation  and  suppuration  than  the  healthy  portion  of
the  urethra.

233.  In  order  more  certainly  to  attain  this  object,  the  forcible
pushing  through  of  the  stricture  with  a  bougie  of  large  diameter  has
been  advised,  and  this  manoeuvre  has  sometimes  been  wonderfully
successful ;  probably  in  this  case  a  small  part  of  the  internal  mem-
brane in  the  stricture  was  thereby  torn,  and  thus  suppuration  was
produced,  or  the  forcible  stretching  might  have  caused  a  contusion
and  thereupon  inflammation  proceeding  to  suppuration,  or  the  circular
fibres  of  the  contracted  urethral  muscle  might  have  been  paralyzed  by
the  force  applied,  or  even  torn,  whilst  the  dilatable  part  of  the  stric-
ture yielded.  The  last  is  the  most  probable,  for  cases  have  been  ob-
serr^  in  which,  after  this  forcible  manoeuvre,  the  stricture  disap-
peared suddenly  and  without  relapse.

234.  In  spite  of  all  this,  this  operation  is  attended  with  much  un-
certainty,  and  its  performance  is  not  advisable.  With  the  force  em-
ployed, it  may  easily  happen,  as  we  work  in  the  dark,  that  we  misg
the  stricture,  or  its  central  point,  which  is  often  far  from  being  in  the
axis  of  the  urethra,  and  so  form  a  false  passage.


52  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

235.  In  order  to  attain  the  same  object  with  eertaintj,  we  take  a
horn  staff,  of  the  thickness  of  a  bougie  that  fits  the  commencement  of
the  urethra,  we  bend  this  by  means  of  heat  into  a  slightly  curved
form,  and  scrape  down  half  an  inch  of  its  end,  till  it  has  almost  uni-
formly the  thickness  of  the  bougie  that  hitherto  readily  passed  through
the  stricture.  This  smaller  end  will  form  a  sort  of  process  to  the  rest
of  the  staff  (of  which  we  smooth  down  somewhat  the  abrupt  point  of
junction),  just  as  if  a  smaller  staff  projected  from  a  larger  one.  We
first  insert  this  smooth  round  honi  staff  into  the  urethra,  in  such  a
manner  that  its  smaller  end  (up  to  the  larger  portion)  passes  through
the  persistent  stricture,  and  if  wc  can  rely  on  the  patient's  steadiness,
we  allow  him  to  push  it  in  further  himself,  until  the  thicker  portion
passes  through  the  stricture.  It  will  at  once  be  seen  that  in  this  way
the  smaller  terminal  portion  shews  the  way,  and  guides  the  whole
horn-staff,  so  that  it  must  accurately  follow  the  direction  of  the  ure-
thra, and  cannot  take  a  false  direction.  In  this  way  we  shall  attain
our  object  with  much  greater  certainty.  Should  we  think  the  horn-
sound  too  inflexible,  we  may  before  using  it  let  it  soak  for  some  time
in  linseed  oil.

236.  More  peculiarly  belonging  to  the  ulcerating  method  is  the
destruction  of  the  stricture  with  corrosive  substances,  with  which  we
may  arm  the  bougie  we  introduce,  or  the  instrument  itself  may  be  en-
tirely* composed  of  irritating  matters.

237.  For  this  purpose,  we  select  the  largest  bougie  of  uniform  size
throughout  that  can  pass  into  the  anterior  part  of  the  urethra,  in  the
abruptly  tnmcated  extremity  of  which  we  make  a  circular  excavation,
and  fill  this  with  red  precipitate,  firmly  pressed  in.  This  is  to  be
moistened  on  the  sides  with  oil,  and  passed  up  to  the  stricture,  and
pressed  against  it  for  a  minute.  This  is  to  be  repeated  once  daily,
until  the  stricture,  having  gradually  passed  into  suppuration,  will  easily
admit  the  thickest  bougie.  Then,  until  the  healing  process  is  finished,
we  insert  twice  a  day  into  the  urethra,  and  allow  to  remain  there  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  a  large  sized  bougie,  not  armed  with  red  precipitate,
but  moistened  with  a  solution  of  myrrh  in  yolk  of  egg,  in  order  that
the  cicatrix  which  is  formed  may  be  sufficiently  wide.  This  trouble-
some operation  is  somewhat  tedious,  but  it  effects  a  radical  cure.

^  Philip,  a  Portuguese,  (see  A.  Lacuna,  Method.  Extirp.  earunc.  Rom,  1551,  12,
p.  84,)  was  the  first  who,  in  the  middle  of  the  16th  century,  destroyed  strictures  of
the  urethra,  by  means  of  a  corrosive  mass,  composed  of  verdrigris,  orjHmeiit,  ia^
wherewith  he  armed  the  end  of  a  bougie.  A  similar  treatment^  variously  modified,
coDtinued  to  be  used  from  time  to  time,  until  Le  Daran,  a  few  years  before  the
middle  of  this  century,  began  to  trumpet  forth  tJie  excellence  of  his  secret  bougies,
which  were  composed  entirely  of  corrosive  ingredients,  and  ocnsequently  they  fre-
quently excited  inflammation  and  suppuration  in  healthy  parts  of  the  urethra,  b«-
aideB  a  number  of  other  iU-effiectB,  wkicfa  rendered  their  use  inadmissible,  before  hit
object^  the  destruction  of  the  stricture,  was  attained. Guerin  improved  them.


SBQUELJS  OF  GONOBRHiBA.  68

238.  By  this  method  we  may  in  most  cases  (even  in  those  in  which
tlie  smallest  sound  or  harp-string  cannot  get  through  the  stricture)  be
independent  of  the  third  mode,  which  Hunter  teaches,  for  burning
trough  the  narrowest  strictures,  and  which,  as  far  as  my  experience
goes,  may  be  best  performed  in  the  following  manner.

239.  We  take  a  tube  of  Bne  silver  of  the  size  of  the  thickest  bougie
and  slightly  curved,  and  we  introduce  this,  the  opening  at  its  extremity
being  closed  by  a  plug  at  the  end  of  a  wire,  which  runs  backwards
and  forwards  in  the  cavity  of  the  tube,  so  that  we  may  remove  this
ping  whenever  the  extremity  of  the  tube  has  reached  the  stricture.
Were  the  tube  unprovided  with  this  plug,  the  mucus  of  the  urethra
would  enter  its  cavity.  As  soon  as  we  have  removed  the  wire  with
the  plug,  we  push  in,  in  place  of  it,  another  wire  of  fme  silver,  at  the
end  of  which  a  piece  of  lunar  caustic  is  fastened  in  a  small  forceps.'
By  means  of  the  wire  we  press  this  caustic  into  the  stricture  for  a
couple  of  seconds,  draw  it  back  into  the  tube,  and  remove  both ;  and
this  operation  we  repeat  every  second  day ,2  until  we  can  pass  through
the  stricture  with  the  tube.  It  is  well  to  inject  tepid  milk  immediately
after  the  operation,  in  order  to  avoid  the  irritation  which  the  caustic
that  flows  from  the  cauterized  part  might  produce  on  the  adjoining
healthy  urethra. It  is  obvious  that  this  method  needs  great  caution.

240.  Both  these  latter  methods  are  of  service  when  there  is  scarcely'
any  opening  remaining  in  the  stricture,  and  where  consequently  the
first  method  is  not  suitable  In  case  of  inflammatory  symptoms
manifesting  themselves,  we  ought  to  allay  them  by  means  of  cold
applications,  tepid  foot-baths,  &c.

241.  When  an  urethral  calculus  may  have  occasioned  the  stricture,
a  passage  for  it  outwards  may  be  made  in  cither  of  the  two  last  men-
tioned ways.  If  the  stricture  be  still  permeable,  and  if  the  stone  be
seated  in  the  region  of  the  scrotum,  the  symptoms  it  gives  rise  to
might  easily  be  confounded  with  those  of  a  spasmodic  stricture,  if  we
neglect  to  ascertain  its  presence  by  the  use  of  a  metallic  sound,  which
as  soon  as  it  touches  the  stone,  communicates  to  a  delicate  touch  a
peculiar  grating  sensation.  I  have  seen,  after  retention  of  urine  from
strictures  owing  to  this  cause,  the  urethral  calculus  discharged  by  the
efforts  of  nature  through  a  dangerous  abscess  in  the  perinopum.

242.  It  is  rare  that  the  spasmodic  stricture  (§  218 — 224)  remains
long  after  the  destruction  of  the  permanent  one,  so  as  to  demand
special  treatment. On  the  other  hand,  in  the  treatment  of  strictures

'  In  the  mode  ia  which  a  8iiiaU  piece  of  drawing-chalk  is  fastened  at  the  end  of  a
ixxte-crajon ;  a  simall  pair  uf  pincers,  which  embraces  Uic  caustic  or  chalk  in  itd
koUow  blade-*,  whilst  a  ring  piu^lied  from  behind  effects  the  approximation  of  the
blades,  aod  holds  fast  the  substance  they  enclose.

*  Id  moet  strictures  we  do  not  require  to  do  it  more  than  twice.


64  ON  VfiNBJEtSAL .  DI8SASJS0h

of  the  urethra  merely  by  dilatation,  the  spasm  persists  as  long,  and
recurs  from  time  to  time,  until  all  the  tendency  of  the  part  (where
the  permanent  stricture  was  seated)  to  contract  again  has  gone  off;
which  may  sometimes  last  all  the  patient's  life,  if  we  do  not  perform
the  radical  cure  of  the  stricture  after  the  second  or  third  manner.

243.  Before  the  spasm  afler  the  destruction  of  the  persistent  sbrio-
ture  goes  off,  we  would  do  well,  especially  if  i|;  closes  the  urethra  very
suddenly  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  bougie,  to  employ  a  hollow
catheter  of  gum-elastic/  which  the  patient  should  bear  about  with  him^
in  order  to  draw  off  his  urine  at  any  time.

244.  Frequent  immersion  of  the  genitals  in  cold  water  will  com-
pletely dissipate  the  spasmodic  stricture,  especially  if  we  endeavour  to
remove  the  morbid  irritability  of  the  organism  by  the  use  of  external
and  internal  tonic  remedies.  If  it  be  already  of  long  standing  and  if
this  method  do  not  suceeed,  a  seton  introduced  into  the  perinaeum  will
greatly  diminish  and  in  course  of  time  remove  the  malady.

245.  Those  subject  to  this  affection  must  frequently  pass  their  urine,
and  never  retain  it  long.  They  must  guard  against  chills,  excessive
passions,  heating  liquors  and  spices,  and  debauchery.

CHAPTERVII.

INDURATION  OF  THE  PROSTATE  GLAND

246.  When  neither  paralysis  of  the  bladder  nor  inflammation  of  its
neck  (in  bad  cases  of  gonorrhoea),  nor  a  stone  in  the  bladder,  is  the
cause  of  the  retention  of  urine,  and  when  the  introduction  of  the
bougie  or  sound  into  the  urethra  detects  no  stone  nor  stricture,  and
yet  the  urine  will  not  flow  in  spite  of  every  effort,  we  may  suspect  a
morbid  condition  of  the  prostate  gland.

247.  A  finger  moistened  with  oil  is  to  be  introduced  into  the  rectum
and  directed  towards  the  pubic  region.  If  this  be  the  cause  of  the
retention,  we  shall  here  detect  a  hard  body  pressing  in  upon  the  rectum,
often  of  such  a  size  that  we  are  obliged  to  pass  the  finger  from  one
side  to  the  other  in  order  to  ascertain  the  whole  magnitude  of  this
indurated  prostate  gland.

Ji48.  We  may  easily  imagine  to  what  a  considerable  extent  thia
tumefied  body  must  compress  from  both  sides,  and  block  up  the  com-
mencement of  the  urethra,  and  how  dangerous  retention  of  urine  may
result  therefrom.

249.  In  such  cases  the  ejaculation  of  the  semen  is  very  painful.

250.  A  bougie^  or  catheter  carefully  introduced  will  easily  draw  off

'  These  are  also  the  best  we  can  ose  when  a  retentioD  of  arine  is  produced  by  a
merely  spasmodic  stricture.  It  shotild  be  introduced  by  suitable  mampolatioiis  into
the  bladder,  and  helped  into  the  neck  of  the  bladder  by  a  finger  placed  in  the  rectom.

*  The  urine  usually  flows  oif  by  the  side  of  it)  but  not  without  some  effort  of  the
bladder.


saqvjom  of  eoKossHCBA.  66

the  urine ;  but  this  is  only  *  tranaieiit  remedy.  The  best  plan  is  to
insert  an  elaetic  catheter  and  to  assist  its  passage  through  the  neck  of
die  bladder  bj  introducing  a  finger  into  the  rectum.

251.  If  we  could  with  certainty  disperse  this  glandular  induration,
we  should  then  be  able  to  promise  ourselves  permanent  benefit,  a  cure.
But  as  yet  we  know  no  remedy  that  can  be  relied  on.

252b  The  internal  use  of  hemlock  has  sometimes  been  of  use,  also
burnt  sponge,  but  especially  burnt  sea-weed  and  sea-bathing,  as  this
afiection  is  often  of  a  scrofulous  nature.  Poultices  of  mandragora
root  frequaiUy  applied  to  the  perinaeum  are  said  to  have  proved  very
^icacious  in  dispersing  this  indurated  gland.  Purple  foxglove,  crude
antimony,  hartshorn  and  electricity,  perhaps  also  local  fumigations
with  cinnabar,  might  be  tried.

253.  A  seton  inserted  and  long  maintained  in  the  perinaeum  the
openings  of  which  were  two  inches  distant,  once  succeeded  in  reducing
to  a  great  extent  an  indurated  prostate.

254.  The  best  palliative  remedy  is,  immediately  after  withdrawing
the  bougie  to  insert  in  the  bladder,  according  to  Pichler's  plan,  a  cathe^
ter  of  gum  elastic  (without  any  spiral  wire  in  its  cavity)  to  let  the  urine
flow  through  it,  to  fasten  it  in  front  of  the  glans  and  close  up  its
extremity,  only  removing  it  about  once  a  week  in  order  to  remove  the
calculous  concretion  that  may  be  attached  to  it.

255.  !(  in  a  case  of  swelling  of  this  sort,  the  urine  do  not  flow
on  Uu)  introduction  of  wa.  ordinary  catheter,  and  if  the  instrument  en-
counter an  obstacle  just  behind  the  neck  of  the  bladder  (a  rare  affec-
small  swollen  portion  of  the  indurated  prostate  projecting  into  the
bladder  forms  here  a  sort  of  valve,  which  lies  upon  the  mouth  of  the
bladder  and  obstinately  prevents  the  egress  of  the  urine.

256.  In  this  case  a  very  much  curved,  large-sized  bougie  introduced
into  the  bladder  has  sometimes  proved  serviceable,  the  urine  flowing
past  it.  If  this  should  not  be  effectual,  we  should  carefully  introduce
a  catheter,  and  whenever  it  has  reached  this  valve-like  projection,  press
it  with  the  handle  downwards,  whereby  its  further  bent  extremity  will
almost  always  slip  past  and  to  the  outside  of  the  abnormal  body  into
the  bladder,  and  permit  the  urine  to  flow  off.


66  OK  YSNKBBAL  DI8KA8S8.

IDIOPATHIO  LOCAL  TKNIBXAL  AVFBCnOlfa  OIC  PAKT8 OW  TBI BODY

PBOYIDXD  WITH EPXDEEMIB.

FIRST  DIVISION.
CHANCRE.


CHAPTER  I.

CHANCRE  IN  GENERAL  AND  ESPECIALLY  THAT  IN  MALES.

267.  The  venereal  infection  is  most  readily  communicated  to  sur-
faces of  the  body  that  are  destitute  of  epidermis ;  hence  the  much
greater  frequency  of  gonorrhoea  than  all  the  other  venereal  symptoms.
Next  in  point  of  frequency  are  the  affexjtions  that  occur  on  parts  of
the  body  provided  with  a  delicate  epidermis ;  in  the  latter  case  there
occur  ulcers  which  are  termed  chancres.  The  thinner  the  epidermis
the  more  easily  does  the  infection  take  place  and  the  more  does  the
chancre  thus  produced  extend.

258.  The  most  usual  seat  of  the  venereal  infection  is  the  genital
organs ;  hence  chancre  in  the  male  generally  makes  its  appearance  in
the  fossa  where  the  glans  unite  with  the  prepuce,  especially  on  either
side  of  the  insertion  of  the  frenum,  next  in  point  of  frequency  on  the
internal  surface  of  the  prepuce  and  its  border,  on  the  glans,  and  some-
times on  the  external  surface  of  the  genitals,  e.  g,  on  the  scrotum.

269.  Should  the  lips  of  the  mouth,  the  nipple,  or  a  wound  on  any
other  part  of  the  body  be  touched  with  this  virus,  chancre  will  be  the
result  in  either  sex.

260.  A  small  dark-red  elevated  spot  appears,  in  some  cases  thirty-
six  hours,  rarely  several  days  after  the  impure  coitus,  and  with  painful
itching  it  forms  a  hard,  inflamed  pimple  filled  with  pus,  that  rapidly
developes  itself  into  an  ulcer.  When  the  chancre  first  appears  it  is
raised  above  the  surface  of  the  skin ;  but  its  hard,  light-red  (or  dirty
yellowish-white)  base  is  a  little  sunk  below  the  suety  whitish  borders
whose  periphery  is  inflamed  and  indurated,  but  yery  defined.  When
touched  the  patient  experiences  severe  pains,  and  we  can  feel  that  the
hardness  of  the  whole  ulcer  extends  very  deep.  The  matter  that
exudes  is  of  a  greenish  yellow  colour.  Such  is  the  chancre,  which
gradually  increases  in  superficial  extent  and  depth,  accompanied  by
pains  more  of  a  gnawing  than  shooting  character.

261.  Those  chancres  that  have  their  seat  in  the  inner  surface  of  the
prepuce  are  much  more  painful  and  inflamed,  and  generally  larger
than  those  that  occur  on  other  parts ;  the  induration  in  and  surround-
ing these  chancres  is  more  perceptible  and  more  considerable  than
when  they  occur  on  the  glans.

262.  At  the  junction  of  the  prepuce  with  the  glans  they  are  at  first


CHANCRE.  67

often  no  bigger  than  millet  seeds ;  their  most  frequent  seat  is  on  either
side  of  the  frenum,  where  they  readily  eat  around  them  and  rapidly
destroy  this  part.

263.  Chancres  on  the  glans  are  rare ;  the  inflammation,  pain  and

hardness  of  the  small  abscess  is  not  so  great  as  in  those  on  other

parts ;  their  borders  do  not  usually  project  like  those  on  the  prepuce  for

example,  but  the  whole  ulcer  is  as  it  were  excavated  in  the  body  of  the

glin&

264.  More  painful  and  more  inflamed  are  the  chancres  occurring  on
those  parts  of  the  genitals  covered  with  a  thicker  epidermis,  on  the
penis,  or  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  scrotum.  In  these  situations  they
appear  in  the  form  of  pimples  that  become  covered  with  a  slough,  on«
thefidling  off  of  which  a  larger  one  is  produced.  The  same  is  the  case
with  chancres  produced  by  the  inoculation  of  the  virus  in  wounds  or
parts  covered  by  a  firm  epidermis.^

265.  All  chancres  on  a  given  spot  would  probably  always  present
the  same  phenomena,^  as  the  inoculating  virus  is  perhaps  of  only  one
and  the  same  nature,  and  seldom  milder  or  more  malignant  in  itself,
if  the  various  corporeal  constitutions  did  not  themselves  cause  those
great  varieties  in  the  malignancy  of  the  chancre  (gonorrhoea,  buboes,
^),  by  the  numerous  modifications  of  their  reaction.

266.  It  follows  from  this,  as  experience  also  teaches,  that  to  treat
these  idiopathic  veneral  ulcers  with  the  greatest  success,  we  should
pay  particular  attention  to  the  peculiar  constitution  of  the  body  in
every  case,  which  with  proper  attention  wc  can  soon  learn  from  the
course  of  the  chancre  and  its  accompanying  symptoms.

267.  In  a  diathesis  that  has  a  more  than  ordinary  tendencv  to  in-
flammation,  the  chancre  will  inflame  to  a  considerable  extent  round
about,  and  acquire  great  depth ;  the  reverse  will  happen  in  cases  of
an  opposite  character.  In  a  system  peculiarly  liable  to  irritability,
the  chancre  will  cause  great  pains,  will  have  a  blackish  and  discoloured
appearance,  and  excrete  a  thin  ichor.

26S.  The  earlier  the  chancre  begins  to  form  sloughs,  the  greater  is
the  tendency  to  sphacelus,^  whereby  the  whole  penis  is  often  lost.  We
may  apprehend  great  haimorrhage  in  such  ulcers,  when  they  erode  the
parts  about  them  much.

'  Thv  inoculatioD  with  diancre  vims  on  parts  covcrtnl  by  a  tluck  epidermis  (by
meaDii  of  wounds  in  the  arms,  tliighs,  <tc.)  produces  more  painful  and  sserious  symp-
ttms  r in AammatioQ, swelling,  viitlent  pains)  than  in  the  glans,  lips,  prepuce,  A*c.

*  Andre  observes  that  the  worst  clumcres  affect  in  a  verj*  niild  degree  those  per-
HQs  who  are  only  liable  to  the  mildest  infections,  and  tliat  the  interval  betwirt  the
infection  and  appearance  of  the  chancre  is  of  the  same  length  in  most  pen>oDs  who
have  been  several  times  inoculated  with  very  different  viru>e."*.

*  The  inflammatioa  of  the  chancre  is  usually  of  an  erysipelatous  character,  hence
the  great  tendency  to  sphacelus,  as  Girtanner  has  also  observed.


68  ON  VEl^B&BAL  DISSASBS.

269.  In  general  the  chancre  appears  later  than  the  gonorrhcea  from
the  same  infection  (perhaps  they  often  are  primarily  caused  by  the  go-
norrhoea! discharge  remaining  on  those  parts),  and  its  virus  may  there-
fore  be  frequently  removed  by  merely  wiping  the  part  or  washing  it
with  lime-water ;  they  also  appear  more  rarely,  for  we  may  reckon
that  gonorrhoeas  occur  four  times  as  often  as  diancres.  They  occur
more  rapidly  on  the  prepuce  ;  still  more  rapidly  betwixt  the  junction
of  the  prepuce  and  glands,  especially  at  the  frenum  ;  most  slowly  on
the  other  parts,  probably  because  the  epidermis  is  thicker.

270.  The  earlier  a  chancre  breaks  out  after  infection,  the  more  is  it
disposed  to  inflammation ;  the  later  it  appears,  the  more  readily  will
the  blood  be  inoculated  by  the  poison,  and  lues  venerea  produced.

271.  There  are  but  few  diseases  of  the  body  that  haVe  not  been
occasionally  overcome  by  the  efforts  of  nature.  Chancre  and  lues
venerea  are  to  be  reckoned  amongst  those  few.  If  circumstances  do
not  occur  to  produce  the  absorption  of  the  virus  out  of  the  ulcers  into
the  general  mass  of  the  circulating  fluids  (whereon  buboes  and  lues
venerea,  diseases  of  still  greater  gravity  than  chancre,  ensue),  they
may  remain  in  the  same  place  for  several  years  without  the  least
change,  except  perhaps  growing  somewhat  larger.

CHAPTER  II.

ON  THE  ORDINARY  TREATMENT  OF  SIMPLE  CHANCRE.

272.  It  is  generally  assorted  that  next  to  inveterate  syphilis  that
has  fastened  on  periosteum,  ligaments  and  tendons,  no  veneral  affec-
tion is  more  hard  to  cure  than  a  chancre  of  considerable  size  and  depth.
The  most  skilful  practitioners  rejoice  if  they  are  able  to  cure  a  deeply
rooted  chancre  within  four  to  six  weeks,  by  means  of  a  host  of  exter*
nal  and  internal  medicaments,  that  inconvenience  the  patients  not  a
little,  and  if  they  can  be  certain  that  in  the  course  of  treatment  the
virus  has  not  slipped  into  the  general  mass  of  the  circulating  fluids^
wandering  about  there  undestroyed.

273.  The  most  distinguished  masters  of  our  art  are  unable  to  pro-
mise to  themselves  that  they  will  succeed  in  expelling  it  from  its  in-
trenchment  in  less  time,  assuredly  not  without  the  local  employment
of  corrosive  remedies.  Without  the  latter,  which  are  regarded  in  the
light  of  an  open  assault,  whilst  the  treatment  by  inunction  or  the  in-
ternal use  of  the  ordinary  mercurial  preparations  is  looked  upon  as  an
attack  from  behind,  without  these  local  corrosives,  I  repeat,  they  con-
sider the  art  as  impotent  to  eradicate  this  virulent  ulcer.

274.  now  uncertain  they  are  upon  the  subject,  is  evident  from  this^
that  some  hold  the  local  employment  of  mercurials  as  useless,  whilst
their  opponents  know  besides  Uie  antivenereal  metal  no  efficacious


CHAKCBX.  69

tapkal  applioAtioii  for  dmicra,  but  yet  neither  can  adduce  sufiicient
TCMons  based  upon  fitcts  for  their  contradictory  assertions,

1^5.  Did  the  latter  know  that  their  local  mercurial  remedies  have
BO  efiect  on  chancres  if  thej  be  not  of  a  corrosive  nature,  or  at  least
beoome  such  in  the  sore,  that  consequently  no  form of  mercury  un-
prepared in  the  general  circulation  is  capable  of  eradicating  the  vene-
ml  rirus ;  and  were  the  former  avrare  that  their  non-mercurial  sceptics,
equally  with  their  mercurial  caustics,  possess  the  undoubted  power  of
eidting  the  lymphatic  glands  to  absorb  the  local  venereal  poison  (and
thus  give  rise  to  general  lues,  which  can  then  only  be  eradicated  by  the
internal  use  of  mercury),  that  they  moreover  cause  much  pain  without
being  of  any  material  service,  they  certainly  would  not  at  the  present
dty  be  quarrelling  with  one  another,  they  would  amicably  discard  their
errors  on  either  side.

276.  All  the  objects  we  would  propose  to  obtain  by  the  employ-
ment of  local  caustics  would  certainly  be  best  obtained  by  the  use  of
lunar  caustic It  coagulates  and  destroys  with  the  rapidity  of  fire,
and  with  the  least  possible  inflammation,  all  moist  animal  parts. But
bow  much  pain  does  not  the  use  of  even  this  substance  occasion  ! It
mikes  a  slough,  'beneath  which  the  remainder  of  the  virus  cannot
escipe ;  when  this  falls  off  the  ulcer  looks  clean  ;  we  flatter  ourselves
that  recovery  is  at  hand ;  it  dries  up,  and  behold  the  inguinal  glands
becomes  painful,  a  buboe  appears — the  premonitory  symptom  of  lues ;
or  suddenly  the  curative  process  is  arrested,  the pain  the  caustic  oc-
casions prevents  its  further  use,  proud  flesh  shoots  up,  which  must  now
in  its  turn  be  destroyed. Frequently  things  do  not  go  on  so  well  with
the  employment  of  caustics  ;  under  this  treatment  the  edges  of  the
chancre  we  wish  to  destroy  turn  over,  tubercles  appear  round  about
it,  the  ulcer  commences  to  bleed  readilv,  it  is  the  seat  of  constant
pain,  it  eats  all  about  it  incessantly,  and  become  a  true  cancerous  sore.

277.  Instances  are  recorded  of  small  chancres  having  been  burnt
away  by  the  repeated  vigorous  application  of  nitrate  of  silver,  without
bein;;  followed  by  lues  venerea ;  but  so  rare  as  such  cases  (Simmons
has  obser\'ed  some,  I  confess  1  have  not  been  so  fortunate),  that  it  is
highly  dangerous  to  reckon  on  such  a  piece  of  good  luck.

278.  But  even  let  us  take  for  granted  tliat  with  proper  care  no  evil
results  ensue.  Supposing  the  clumcre  to  disappear  without  these  bad
effects,  still  (I  need  only  refer  adepts  in  the  medical  art  to  their  own
experience)  caustics  are  cruel  remedies  in  chancres,  which  from  the  tor-
ture they  occasion  in  most  cases,  change  the  local  virus  into  a  general
affection,'  consequently  do  more  hann  than  good.

'  Girtaooer  asserts  that  the  abetorption  of  tho  virod  is  so  rare  an  event  under
■Mrelj  lucal  treatmeot,  that  I  can  scarcely  believe  my  own  eyes  when  I  read  the
faUowmg  wards  of  his  :  "  Of  the  many  chancres,"'  says  he,  **  which  I  have  treated


60  ON  YENEBEAL  DISEASES.

279.  If  my  enemy  remains  in  front  of  me,  I  remain  always  on  my
guard,  I  am  convinced  I  have  not  yet  conquer^  him ;  but  I  cannot  be
said  to  overcome  him  if  I  drive  him  into  an  inaccessible  corner.

280.  There  is  not  a  single  one  of  all  the  so-called  corrosive  sore-
cleansing  remedies,^  from  calomel  to  blue  vitriol,  from  lunar  caustic
to  sugar  of  lead,  which  does  not  at  the  same  time  possess  astringent,
vessel-contracting  properties ;  that  is  to  say,  the  ppwer  of  exciting
the  lymphatic  vessels  to  absorb,  and  which  does  not  display  all  this
power  in  the  local  treatment  of  chancre.  Could  we  find  any  remedies
that  would  more  certainly  transform  a  chancre  into  lues  venerea  than
these  ?

281.  The  universal  embarrassment  that  prevails  in  the  treatment  of
a  chancre  concealed  beneath  a  phimosis,  when  the  patient  will  not
submit  to  theof  ten  dubious  operation,  shews  how  ill  ordinary  practi-
tioners can  dispense  with  the  employment  of  caustics.

282.  But  in  order  to  cure  chancre,  local  caustics  are  not  the  only
things  they  use,  they  have  recourse  also  to  the  internal  employment
of  the  anti venereal  metal !  That  this  is  done  proves  that  the  former
are  insufficient  of  themselves  ;  perhaps,  also,  it  is  had  recourse  to  be-
cause experieucc  suggested  that  the  ill  effects  of  th©  local  applications
should  be  prevented  by  the  internal  remedy.  Of  a  truth  they  re-
quired to  introduce  all  the  larger  quantity  of  mercury  into  the  interior
of  the  body,  in  order  to  endeavour  to  destroy  the  virus  that  had  been
driven  into  the  system  by  these  local  applications  (for  that  this  takes
place  all  are  agreed);  and  on  the  other  hand  they  found  it  necessary


merely  by  local  remedies,  without  employing  any  internal  medicines,  not  more  than
two  cases  have  occurred  in  which  after  the  treatment  was  completed,  lues  venerea
broke  out."  Truly  an  incredibly  small  number  only  to  be  accounted  for  by  a  per-
haps almost  specific  power  in  the  caustic  potash,  which  was  his  local  remedy  (which
I  confess  I  have  not  yet  tried) ;  but  still  too  large,  when  we  consider  that  under  the
appropriate  treatment  by  the  best  preparation  of  mercury  given  internally,  it  is  im-
possible that  in  any  case  lues  can  occur  after  the  chancre  has  disappeared  under  its
use.  I  do  not  therefore  understand  what  he  says  further  on  :  "  Supposing  the  virus
were  absorbed  (from  the  chancre),  the  mercury  would  not  prevent  this  absorption,  and
could  not  hinder  the  occurrence  of  the  general  disease.  Mercury  never  prevents  lues  ve-
nerea ;  but  it  cures  it  when  it  has  occurred :  it  never  destroys  the  latent  virus,  (is  it  more
latent  in  idiopathic  chancre  tlian  in  general  syphilitic  ulcers?)  but  it  eradicates  the
poison  when  it  has  developed  its  external  effects.'*  As  if  it  did  not  exhibit  its  effects
in  cases  of  merely  local  chancre.  In  what  a  dilemma  does  he  not  place  himself  also
with  his  lime-water  or  solution  of  caustic  potash  in  phimosis  I  Still  I  have  such  oon
fidence  in  the  unprejudiced  mode  of  thinking  of  this  author,  that  lam  sure  be  would
strike  out  the  greater  part  of  this  chapter,  if  he  had  for  some  time  cured  chancree
with  the  mercurial  fever  produced  by  soluble  mercury.  No  external  treatment  cores
so  easily,  certainly,  and  quickly.

*  Pulverized  glass  even,  certainly  a  powerful  remedy  for  cleansing  sores,  which  acts
by  mechanical  irritation  without  any  corrosive  power,  scarcely  forms  an  exoeptico,  bat
it  has  not  yet  been  employed  in  chancre


CHAKCBE.  61

to  come  to  the  aid  of  the  slow,  sleepj  efficacy  of  the  mercurial  treat-
ment hitherto  employed,  in  order  to  do  something  for  it  in  a  reason-
able time.

283.  But  when  are  we  sure  that  we  have  conquered  the  enemy  by
tUs  double  assault  ?  We  are  answered :  1st,  when  the  local  affection
»  gone  and  the  chancre  cured  ;  2d,  when  as  much  mercury  has  been
introduced  into  the  body  as  will  suffice  to  affisct  the  mouth,  until  the
commencement  of  ptyalism,  and  a  little  beyond ;  3d,  if  afler  this,
idgns  of  syphilis  appear,  we  must  have  recourse  to  a  new  course  of
mercurv.

m

284.  The  third  point  shews  sufficiently  the  want  ofconfidencetobe
placed  in  the  ordinary  mode  of  treatment ;  the  second  is  undecided
as  we  sometimes  witness  a  very  rapid  action  of  mercury  on  the  mouth,
and  on  the  other  hand  there  are  cases  in  which  it  is  impossible  to
i«nse  salivation  by  the  greatest  amount  of  mercury,  (so«>ner  would
the  vital  powers  succumb),  and  yet  neither  in  the  one  case  nor  the
other  is  the  venereal  virus  eradicated. The  first  is  of  no  value  as  a
diagnostic  sign,  for  every  chancre  disappears  when  its  poison  has  re-
itded  into  the  body  by  the  use  of  external,  astringent,  irritant,  or  cor-
rosive substances. The  mere  application  of  blotting-paper  will  cure
chtDcre  equally  well.

285.  1  shall  shew  further  on,the  great  disadvantages  attending  the
coDcomitant  employment  of  the  different  mercurial  preparations  in
this  case,  the  danger  of  the  Balivation  accompanying  them,  that  can
never  properly  be  guarded  against,  and  the  ruinous  effects  on  the  sys-
*em  of  the  long  continued  use  of  mercury,  (until  the  mouth  is  affect-

386.  Could  ^e  discover  an  easier  and  surer  mode  of  curing  chancre
vith  certainty,  I  imagined  it  must  supersede  that  hitherto  in  vogue,
and  be  much  more  acceptable  both  to  physicians  and  patients.  I  hope
to  be  able  to  shew  such  a  method  in  the  following  pages;  but  I  have
my  doubts  whether  the  prejudice  in  favour  of  the  old  method  will  al-
low it  to  gain  a  footing.*

CHAPTER III.

TREATMENT  OF  SIMPLE  CHANCRK

287.  I  shall  be  very  brief  on  this  point,  as  I  would  be  merely  an-
ticipating what  I  have  to  say  when  treating  of  syphilis,  were  I  now

>  The  mechanical  expulsion  of  the  venereal  vims  by  the  infinitely  divisble  and
ezoeseively  heavy  globules  of  mercury  is  a  whim  long  since  exploded,  which  is  forced
to  take  for  granted  that  the  hurtful  salivation  is  alone  efficacious  ;  it  is  completely
refuteil  by  the  power  of  a  few  grains  of  oxydiscd  mercury  in  deeply  rooted  syphilis^
and  by  the  efficacy  of  as  few  grains  of  sublimed  mercury  in  the  less  severe  venereal
•ymptoms.


92  OK  YENSRSAL  PISEASES.

nothing  more  than  this :  in  order  to  cure  a  chancre  radically,  the  sqIh-
ble  mercury  must  be  given  in  increasing  doses,  imtil  the  mercurial
fever  that  supervenes  has  completely  cured  the  chancre,  without  the
employment  of  the  slightest  topical  application.  From  seven  to
fourteen  days  are  sufficient  in  ordinary  cases.

288.  I  shall  merely  mention  what  I  mean  by  mercurial  fever,  and
what  is  the  appearance  of  a  cured  chancre.  The  special  metJiod  of
using  the  mercury  to  be  employed  for  chancres,  is  the  same  as  that
for  syphilis,  to  which  I  refer  the  reader  at  §  614—635,  and  which
should  be  followed  in  every  respect,  even  in  regard  to  the  removal  of
all  unfavourable  symptoms  that  should  be  avoided  during  mercurial
treatment.

289.  I  am  unable  to  determine  whether  the  eradication  of  the  vene-
real virus  by  mercury  depends  on  a  chemical  decomposition,^  or  per-
haps I  should  say  neutralization  (something  after  the  manner  in  which
the  corrosive  oil  of  vitriol  instantaneously  becomes  tasteless  and  mild
when  combined  with  lead,  or  like  arsenic  with  sulphur),  or  as  the  ex-
pression is,  on  the  specific  irritation  which  it  excites  in  our  body—
which  b  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  injurious  irritation  (irritability
from  weakness,  chronic  trembling,  dec.)  which  the  long  continued  use
of  mercury  creates,  even  without  destroying  the  venereal  poison  ; —
but  this  is  certain,  that  the  true  destruction  of  the  miasm  depends  neither
on  stuffing  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  mercury  into  the  body  in  the
shortest  space  of  time,  as  has  hitherto  been  imagined,  nor  in  the  a£>
fection  of  the  mouth  (in  salivation,  which  oflen  does  so  little  good,  it
is  certainly  affected),  nor  on  any  other  copious  evacuation  that  the
metal  is  liable  to  produce  in  some  cases,  as  ptyalism,  diarrhoea,  di-
aphoresis (as  Sanchez  alleges),  or  diuresis,  but  rather  on  that  spedfio
alteration  of  the  body  which  may  not  inaptly  be  termed  mercwrial-
Jwer^  in  which  a  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  mouth  is  a  common  but
only  accidental  symptom.

290.  The  following  is  a  description  of  the  mercurial  fever.  —  The
patient  gets  a  metallic  taste  in  the  mouth,  a  disagreeable  smell  in  the
nose,  a  painless,  audible  rumbling  in  the  bowels,  an  earthy  complexion,
a  pinched  nose,  blue  rings  round  the  eyes,  pales  leaden-coloured  lips,
an  uninterrupted  or  frequently  recurring  shuddering  (always  getting
stronger)  that  thriMs  deeply,  even  into  the  interior  of  the  body.  His
pulse  becomes  small,  hard  and  very  rapid ;  there  is  an  inclination  to
vomit,  or  at  least  nausea  at  everything,  especially  at  animal  diet,  but

*  In  imitotioQ  of  Scfawedianr,  BarrisoQ  rq^eatodly  inoculated  recent  diancnnis
mati^  which  he  had  preriqialy  nuzed  with  Pleock'e  mndhiginout  preparation  of
OMrawy,  i^^diflbrent  parte  of  the  body  of  a  hesUfay  peiSQi^  vitiboot  ever  htiog  ahla
to  eanoe  A  veaereal  uloer  or  loee  Tenerea.


GHAKCBX.  68

cUeflj  ft  very  violent  headache  of  a  tearing  and  preaaive  character,

w^uh  aometimeB  ragea  without  intermiaaion  in  the  occiput  or  over  the

root  of  the  noae. The  nose,  ears,  hands  and  feet  are  cold. The  thirst

la  inoonaiderahle,  the  boweb  constipated,  great  sleeplessness,  the  short

dreamaof  a  fisarfiil  character,  accompanied  by  frequent  slight  perspira-

tbna. The  weakness  is  extreme,  as  also  the  restlessness  and  anxious

i^ppresMon  which  the  patient  thinks  he  never  before  felt  anything  like.

The  eyea  become  sparkling  as  if  full  of  water,  the  nose  is  as  if  stuffed

from  catarrh ;  the  muscles  of  the  neck  are  somewhat  stifi^  as  from

ihenmatism ;  the  back  of  the  tongue  is  whitish. At  this  period  the

patient  experiences,  if  all  goes  on  well,  some  discomfort  in  swallowing,

a  ibooting  pain  in  the  root  of  the  tongue,  on  both  sides  of  the  mouth

a  looseness  or  setting  on  edge  of  the  teeth  (the  gums  recede  a  little

towards  the  root  of  the  teeth,  become  somewhat  spongy,  red,  painful,

swollen) ;  there  is  a  moderate  awelling  of  the  tonsils  and  sub-maxil-

Ivy  glands,  and  a  peculiar  rancid  odour  from  the  mouth,  without  the

oeeorrence,  however,  of  a  notable  increase  in  the  secretion  of  saliva,

and  without  diarrhoea  or  immoderate  perspiration. Four  days  seems

to  be  the  usual  favourable  period  of  duration  of  a  fever  of  this  sort,

and  iti  best  crisis  consists  only  in  the  permanent  disappearance  of

ereiy  venereal  symptom  and  the  complete  extirpation  of  the  miasm.

Tids  picture  is  taken  from  an  exqiusite  case  of  very  severe  mercurial

fever.

291.  For  the  eradication  of  the  venereal  poison  a  sufficient  amount
stinacy of  the  venereal  affection,  is  required. The  result  of  the  treat-
moit  depends  on  this,  not  on  the  copiousness  of  the  evacuations. Ac
oompanying  slight,  inconsiderable  febrile  action,  there  may  often  occur
imoontrollable  perspirations,  a  flow  of  fetid  urine,  a  choleraic  diarrhoea,
or  a  salivation  to  the  extent  of  ten  pounds  daily  ;  the  venereal  symp-
toms cease  for  the  time,  but  they  return  again,  not  because  the  latter
are  too  strong,  but  because  the  former  was  too  weak.  We  may  always
pronounce  such  evacuations  during  the  mercurial  fever  as  injurious,  but
only  as  regards  their  debilitating  effects  on  the  body,  for  they  cannot
prevent  the  cure  of  the  venereal  affection,  if  there  have  only  occurred
febrile  action  of  the  kind  alluded  to,  of  sufficiently  strong  character,
on  which  all  their  efficacy  depends. If  we  can  prevent  the  violent
evacoalions,  as  I  will  attempt  to  shew  how  when  I  come  to  speak  of
the  treatment  of  syphilis,  we  shall  thereby  increase  the  intensity  of  the
fever  which  is  so  efficient,  and  spare  the  patient^s  strength.

292.  While  giving  the  soluble  mercury  for  the  cure  of  chancre  un-
til this  action  is  developed,  we  should  dress  the  ulcer  with  tepid  wa-
ter or  leave  it  without  any  application.

293.  Whilst  the  above  de8aribeda£bctio&  of  the  organism,  the  mer-


64  ON  YENSBSAL  DISEASES.

curial  fever,  pursues  its  course,  the  chancre  commences  without  the  aid
of  local  remedies  to  assume  the  appearance  of  a  clean  suppurating  sore»
and  heals  up  in  a  few  days,  that  is  to  say,  there  is  formed  (without
subsequent  occurrence  of  lues,  and  without  pain  or  swelling  of  the  in-
guinal glands)  a  healthy  cicatrix,  of  the  natural  colour  and  consistence
of  the  neighbouring  parts ;  it  presents  indeed  at  first  a  somewhat  deep-
er red  colour,  and  on  several  parts  small  elevations  if  the  chancre  was
very  old,  but  gradually  both  these  appearances  disappear.  In  general
the  ulcer  is  healed  up  before  the  mercurial  fever  is  completely  gone.
It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  there  were  one  or  several  chan-
cres, whether  they  were  old  and  large  or  small  and  recent,  if  only  the
intensity  and  completeness  (§  290)  of  the  mercurial  fever  be  propor^
tioned  to  them.

CHAPTER  IV.

CONTRACTION  OF  THE PREPUCE (PHIMOSIS]  AND CONSTRICTION

OF  THE  GLANS  (PARAPHIMOSIS).

294.  Phimosis  is  not  a  frequent  symptom  accompanying  gonorrhoea
if  the  prepuce  was  not  previously  naturally  too  narrow,  in  which  case
the  gonorrhccal  matter  that  insinuates  itself  betwixt  it  and  the  glans
can  readily  produce  inflammation  or  chancre.

295.  This  symptom  occurs  most  generally  when  one  or  several
chancres  seated  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  become  considerably
inflamed,  thereby  violently  irritating  the  loose  cellular  tissue,  and
causing  it  to  swell  and  become  thickened,  and  its  occurrence,  if  it  be
not  evidently  produced  by  other  violent  causes  (such  as  over-heating
the  parts  by  walking,  dancing,  nding,  coitus,  onanism,  ardent  drinks
and  spices),  always  depends  on  a  particular  predisposition  of  the
system  to  irritability,  as  this  inflammation  is  usually  of  an  erysipela-
tous character.

296.  In  this  affection  the  prepuce  projects  over  the  glans  in  the  form
of  a  shining,  transparent,  inflamed,^  tense,  painful  swelling,  so  that  the
dilatation  and  retraction  of  this  skin,  and  the  exposure  of  the  chancres
for  the  purpose  of  their  local  treatment  is  impossible,  and  even  passing
water  is  a  matter  of  difficulty  in  consequence  of  the  narrowing  of  the
urethral  opening ;  this  condition  is  termed  phimosis.

297.  The  matter  from  the  ulcer  becomes  accumulated  in  the  interior,
and  increases  still  more  the  swelling,  irritation  and  inflammation  ;  it
may  even,  if  not  relieved,  bore  through  the  prepuce,  and  thus  efi*ect  8
passage  outwards. The  abscess  thus  opened  outwardly  is  often  so

*  Andat  the  same  time  it  is  of  a  pale  ooloor.  Tliis  drcunutanoe  Bhoold  not  allow
08  to  regard  the  danger  as  lets,  as  Qirtanner  rightly  remarks.


iOHANORS.  65

ooQsiderable  in  siie  that  the  glans  forces  itself  oat  through  it,  and  the
remainder  of  the  prepuce  at  the  opposite  side  forms  a  distinct  swelling.

298.  This  catastrophe  will  be  so  much  the  more  rapidly  brought
about,  when,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,  there  was  in  the  healthy  state
a  natural  contraction  of  the  prepuce,  consequently  an  impossibility  of
retracting  it  behind  the  glans.

299.  But  if  the  prepuce  be  accustomed  to  retract  itself  easily,  spon-
taneously, behind  the  glans,  or  to  remain  habitually  behind  it,  and  if
in  this  state  of  affiiirs  it  be  affected  by  the  chancrous  inflammation  ;  or
it,  when  the  prepuce  is  already  contracted  by  inflammation,  we  bring
it  behind  the  glans,  regardless  of  the  impossibility  of  again  drawing  it
over ;  or  i^  after  retracting  the  prepuce  aflected  by  chancres,  for  the
purpose  of  dressing  the  ulcers  on  it  or  on  the  glans,  wo  imprudently
leave  it  so  retracted  until  the  inflammation  and  distention  render  its
replacement  impossible ;  or  if  under  similar  circumstances  the  act  of
ccNtion  be  performed,  there  will  occur  the  troublesome  and  dangerous
affection  termed  S^nuh  collar^  paraphimosis^  or  constriction  of  the

300.  We  can  easily  perceive  that  it  must  be  accompanied  by  much
more  violent  symptoms  than  phimosis  (which  is  often  its  producer)^
for  in  it  the  prepuce  compresses  itself,  and  its  tension  and  swelling  are
soon  so  increased  that  it,  together  with  the  glans  whose  afllercnt  vessels
are  thereby  completely  constricted,  is  affeeted  by  gangrene.  It  re*
sembles  a  tumour  composed  of  several  rings.

301.  This  gangrene  not  unfrequently  extends  to  a  part  of  the  corpus
cavemosum  of  the  penis.

CHAPTER  V.

TREATMENT  OF PHIMOSIS  AND  PARAPHIMOSIS.

302.  If  chancres  be  the  cause  of  either  of  these  two  affections,  it
will  be  requisite,  while  resorting  to  external  measures,  even  though  we
should  be  called  in  late  *  to  the  case,  immediately  to  commence  the
chief  means,  which  is  to  destroy  the  poison  as  quickly  as  possible  by
the  internal  use  *  of  soluble  mercury.

303.  As  soon  as  the  mercurial  fever  commences,  which  may  be
brought  about  on  the  second,  third,  or  at  latest  the  fourth  day,  all  the
inflammatory  swelling  caused  by  the  chancre  poison  disappears,  in
consequence  of  the  miasm  being  exterminated,  as  also  what  there  is

'  I  have  found  the  beneficial  cffecta  of  rapidly  employing  soluble  mercury  even
wkeo  gangrene  had  already  oommenoed,  if  the  most  powerful  local  means  were  at
the  nme  time  made  use  o£

*  In  urgent  ca^es  we  should  commence  with  half  a  grain  of  Bolnblc  mercury,  and
iacrease  the  dose  by  a  grain  every  twelve  hours  until  the  artificial  fever  sets  in.  We
woold  do  well  to  combine  the  mercurial  with  half  ita  weight  of  opiiim.

5


66  ON  YENBRBAL  DI8EA8S8.

of  an  erysipelatous  oharacter  in  it,  by  the  revulsion  caused  by  the
febrile  commotion.  In  the  case  of  paraphimosis  the  mercurial  fever
also  removes  the  chief  stumbling-block :  the  chancres  heal.

804.  I  said,  this  should  be  done  during  the  employment  of  external
means.  Before  the  soluble  mercury  can  perform  even  its  most  rapid
service,  the  most  powerful  local  means  must  be  used  as  soon  as
possible,  in  order  to  avoid  the  urgent  danger.

305.  In  all  cases  of  inflammatory  contraction  or  retraction  of  the
prepuce,  we  must  enforce  strict  rest,  lying  on  one  side  on  a  horse-hair
or  straw  mattrass  in  a  cool  room  and  with  light  coverings,  and  the
abstinence  from  all  exciting  passions,  drinks  and  spices.

306.  In  phimosis  we  should  frequently  inject  with  caution  beneath
the  prepuce  tepid  milk  in  which  100th  part  of  saffron  has  been  steeped
for  some  time,  in  order  to  bring  away  or  at  least  dilute  the  acrid  pus,
so  as  to  prevent  it  bursting  through  the  substance  of  the  prepuce  like
a  pent-up  abscess.  To  the  base  of  the  inflammatory  swelling  we  should
apply  several  leeches,  and  therewith  draw  off  an  adequate  quantity  of
blood.  Some  advise  the  application  of  warm  emollient  poultices ;  but
they  are  injurious :  they  relax  the  part,  and  make  it  less  able  to  resist
the  pressure  of  the  blood ;  the  swelling  and  inflammation  are  thus
increased.  We  should  rather  apply  to  the  affected  part,  immediately
after  the  leeches  are  removed,  ice-cold  water  mixed  with  a  twentieth
part  of  extract  of  lead  or  sugar  of  lead  and  a  fiflieth  part  of  laudanum,
renewing  the  application  every  minute.  A  few  tepid  footbaths  may
not  be  disadvantageous.

307.  We  should  proceed  in  very  much  the  same  manner  in  cases
of  constriction  of  the  glans  by  the  retracted  inflamed  prepuce.  We
may  omit  the  leeches,  but  the  ice-cold  compresses  or  immersion  of
the  penis  in  water  of  that  temparature  should  be  repeated  as  frequently
as  possible.  After  a  few  hours,  when  the  greater  part  of  the  inflam-
mation has  subsided,  we  must  grasp  the  swollen  glans  in  the  hand,
and  by  means  of  a  gentle  gradual  pressure,  attempt  to  press  back  the
blood,  accumulated  in  it,  and  thereby  diminish  its  size  to  such  a  degree
that,  seizing  the  prepuce  with  the  nails  of  the  thumb  and  foreflnger  of
both  hands,  we  may,  by  exercising  some  force,  be  able  to  draw  it  over
the  glans. This  will  succeed  in  most  cases.

308.  It  is  only  after  we  have  several  times  tried  this  manoeuvre
without  success  that  we  should  proceed  to  the  operation.  In  order
that  we  may  not  be  induced  to  have  recourse  to  it  at  first,  before
every  other  means  has  been  tried,  we  should  consider  that  there  are
very  few  cases  in  which  the  operation  is  indispensable,  partly  because
it  cannot  be  done  without  great  care  and  diflliculty,  partly  because  it
usually  increases  the  irritation  still  more,  and  usually  is  followed  by
sloughing,  partly  because  the  patient  rarely  submits  to  it  at  the  right


CHANCRE.  67

time.  In  «mple  gonorrhoeas  it  is  also  injurious  for  this  reason,  that
the  wound  is  almost  inevitably  infected  bj  the  miasm,  and  turns  into
a  chancre.

309.  In  all  cases  where  the  operation  is  unavoidable,  we  must  search

St  the  neck  of  the  swelling  for  the  part  of  the  prepuce  that  presents

the  greatest  resistance  to  dilatation,  which  will  be  found  to  be  its

interior  border ;  beneath  this  we  insert  the  point  of  a  curved  bistoury,

and  sKt  it  up  to  the  extent  of  a  quarter  or  a  third  of  the  whole  length

of  the  prepuce. Ha^'ing  removed  the  constriction  in  this  manner,  if

the  prepuce  cannot  be  easily  drawn  over  the  glaus  we  may  leave  it

behind  the  glans  until  the  cure  is  completed.

310.  If  it  can  be  drawn  over,  we  must  take  care,  during  the  healing-
op  of  the  chancre  under  the  mercurial  course,  and  during  the  closing-
np  of  the  wound,  to  push  it  frequently  backwards  and  forwards  over
the  glans,  partly  in  order  to  prevent  the  prepuce  uniting  with  the
gbns,  partly  also  in  order  that  the  orifice  of  the  prepuce  may  not  con-
tract daring  the  healing,  and  thus  form  a  phimosis. A  similar  ma-
DSQvre  is  necessary  also  in  the  case  of  venereal  phimosis,  when  the
dmcres  beneath  it  commence  to  heal  under  the  internal  use  of  mer-
cury, in  which  case  the  prepuce  is  apt  to  unite  with  the  glans  if  this
movement  be  not  employed  to  prevent  this  taking  place. The  oede-
ma often  remaining  after  the  operation  is  best  dissipated  by  a  strong
satumine  lotion  or  decoction  of  oak-bark.

311.  If  however,  in  the  case  of  paraphimosis,  gangrene  have  already
set  in,  relief  must  be  given  as  speedily  as  possible. In  such  a  case
the  following  mode  of  procedure  affords  almost  immediate  relief;  at
Jeast  it  is  the  best  of  all  expedients. — Two  ounces  of  finely  powdered
oak-bark  are  to  be  boiled  slowly  in  two  pounds  of  river-water  for  five
hours,  down  to  one  pound  of  fluid,  strained  through  a  cloth,  the  strain-
ed sediment  diluted  with  four  ounces  of  white  wine  and  this  also
strained  ;  the  two  fluids  are  then  to  be  mingled  together,  and  sofl  rags
moistened  with  the  decoction  when  perfectly  cold,  to  be  applied  cold
and  fresh  every  half  hour. I  have  observed  that  by  this  procedure  all
odour  has  gone  off  by  the  fiflh  hour. From  that  moment  the  gan-
grene ceases  and  the  sphacelated  part  will  be  thrown  off  by  healthy
suppuration  in  the  course  of  four  days. The  requisite  manual  aid
should  not  be  neglected,  the  operation  on  the  prepuce  will  sometimes
be  indicated  if  there  be  still  time  for  it. The  same  decoction,  only
ice-cold,  may  also  be  employed  when,  after  the  operation  for  paraphi-
mosis (§  309),  the  prepuce  cannot  be  drawn  over  the  glans.


68  ON  YENXBSAL  DISEASES.

CHAPTER  VI.

CHANCRE  IN  THE  FEMALE.

312.  la  the  case  of  woraen  we  may  very  readily  conviDce  ourselves  of
the  truth  of  Hunter^s  maxim,  that  the  idiopathic  venereal  pobon  pro-
duces gonorrhoea  when  applied  to  surfaces  of  the  body  destitute  of
epidermis  that  in  the  healthy  state  secrete  moisture,  and  chancres
when  applied  to  those  parts  that  are  naturally  dry  and  covered  by
epidermis.  We  cannot  find  any  chancres  in  the  female  genital  organs
where  no  epidermis  exists.

313.  The  ulcers  that  occur  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  genitals  of
females  when  they  are  affected  by  gonorrhoea  differ  very  much  from
chancres.  They  are  usually  seated  in  the  folds  betwixt  the  labia  ma-
jora  and  nymphce,  are  formed  slowly  out  of  inflamed  hard  swellings,
have  a  deep,  concealed  seat  in  the  body  of  the  labium,  probably  in  its
glandular  parts,  and  have  very  minute  openings  which  must  be  art!-
^cially  enlarged  and  kept  open.  They  always  secrete  a  muco-puru-
lent  fluid  until  they  heal  up  ;  in  all  their  external  characters  they  diflfer
from  the  chancre.  They  resemble  the  ulcers  of  the  glands  along  the
urethra  in  gonorrhoea  in  the  male.  They  have  only  a  partial  resem-
blance to  chancres  in  this,  that  they  cannot  be  cured  without  mercury,
because  by  the  contact  with  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  they  become  vene-
real.

314.  Chancres,^  on  the  contrary,  are  seated,  in  their  usual  form,
only  on  those  parts  of  the  female  genitals  which  are  invested  with
epidermis,  and  generally  just  where  that  is  about  to  cease;  in  persons
who  do  not  make  a  trade  of  voluptuousness,  right  in  the  border  of
the  labia  majora,  at  the  inferior  commissure  and  on  the  prepuce  of  the*
clitoris  in  rarer  cases,  and  in  such  as  have  a  more  delicate  skin,  also
on  the  external  surface  of  the  larger  lips,  on  the  mens  veneris,  on  the
anus  and  the  perinaeum.  In  public  prostitutes,  on  the  other  hand,  and
other  persons  of  a  similar  description,  the  chancres  are  seated  from
the  above  reason  sometimes  deep  *  in  the  vagina,  on  the  nympha^,  6ic
L^rge  chancres  on  the  labise  cause  these  to  swell  considerably.

315.  The  chancres  on  the  external  parts  invested  with  a  thicker
epidermis,  as  the  mons  veneris,  perinaeum,  dec,  resemble  those  of
males  which  are  observed  on  the  penis,  scrotum,  dsc,  and  are,  like
these,  usually  covered  by  a  scab,  beneath  which  a  larger  one  is  always
formed  when  the  first  falls  off;  they  are  excessively  painful.

316.  Probably  the  latter  sometimes  arise  when  the  matter  from
chancres  on  the  internal  border  of  the  genitals,  where  they  always
remain  moist,  repeatedly  comes  in  contact  with  these  external  parts,

'They  are  of  the  same  nature  and  same  appearance  in  the  female  as  in  the  male


CHANORE.  69

•ad  tkus  gndvally  complete  the  innocoktion  through  the  thicker  epi-
dermia  At  any  rate,  this  is  often  the  case  with  respect  to  those  on
the  fourdiette  and  on  the  anus.

817.  The  simple  construction  of  the  female  genital  organs,  in  those
parts  where  the  chancre  can  occur,  does  not  allow  of  any  sudi  com-
plex symptoms  as  occur  in  the  more  complicated  male  genitals.

318.  The  only  chancres  they  are  subject  to  that  men  are  not,  are
those  on  the  nipples,  which  they  generally  get  by  suckling  those  chil-
dren whose  lips  are  affected  by  true  chancres.  Tliey  eat  rapidly  about
them,  and  if  not  speedily  checked  by  the  anti-venereal  specific,  they
soon  destroy  the  nipples.

CHAPTER  VIL

TREATMENT  OF  CHAK^CRE  IN  FEMALES.

319.  As  the  parts  are  not  of  so  complex  a  character  as  in  the  male,
we  have  as  a  general  rule  less  serious  symptoms  to  combat

3^.  The  external  treatment  has  hitherto  been  the  same  as  that  of
dancres  in  the  male,  by  local  remedies  of  corrosive,  astringent,  irri-
tating character,  precipitate  ointment,  saturnine  lotions,  solution  of
corrosive  sublimate,  ^c. Such  treatment  is  as  prejudicial  in  females
18  in  males,  and  even  more  so,  because  the  absorbmg  surface  is
larger,  and  they  have  frequently  several  chancres  at  the  same  time.
Just  as,  in  males,  the  employment  of  irritating  and  corrosive  reme-
dies, whether  mercury  enter  into  their  composition  or  not,  always
increases  the  absorbing  power  of  the  lymphatic  vessels,  so  from
the  same  reasons  this  happens  all  the  more  readily  in  females ;  per-
haps also  because  the  whole  vascular  system  in  females  is  more  irrita-
ble. Astringent substances* are  injurious in proportion to their
energy. These  topical  applications,  moreover,  cause  a  great  deal  of
local  mischief:  they  alter  the  chancre,  as  in  males,  into  ulcers  that
eat  round  about  them,  into  spongy  excrescences,  into  sycotic  condy-
lonuita,  dec

321.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  abandon  this  destructive  method,  and
daring  the  proper  treatment  by  internal  mercurial  remedies  dress  the
chancre,  either  not  at  all,  or  with  something  quite  indifferent.*

322.  As  regards  the  internal  treatment,  practitioners  are  much  more
at  a  loss  than  in  the  case  of  chancres  in  the  male. We  are  advised  to

*  Ezpfrieooe  teadies  that  of  all  remedies  that  promotothe  abaorptioD  of;  the  poi-
na  k)  chancres,  none  act  so  powerfully  aa  the  preparatiooB  of  lead ;  thej  are  there-
fore of  aQ  the  most  hurtful  in  such  cases.

*  AB(ir6  also  advices  that  nothing  but  tepid  water  be  ap{^ed  to  diancrcB  dnring
hii  ahentnre  mercurial  treatment.


70  OK  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

continue  the  treatment  an  extraordinary  ^  long  time,  and  to  use  twice
as  much  mercury  as  we  do  for  the  male  sex.

323.  This  destructive  method  will  be  easily  superceded  by  the  em-
ployment of  a  better  mercurial  preparation  and  the  requisite  circum-
spection. I  have  not  found  it  necessary  to  employ  longer  time  nor '
to  use  more  soluble  mercury  for  the  cure  of  chancres  in  females  than
in^males.^

324.  Attending  to  the  rules  to  be  hereafler  (§  591  et  seg.)  laid
down  for  preventing  violent  evacuations,  (ptyalism,  diarrhoea,  ^sc^)
I  likewise  in  their  case  rose  from  a  very  small  to  a  larger  dose  of  the
soluble  mercury,  in  order  if  possible  to  bring  on  a  sufficiently  strong
mercurial  fever  betwixt  the  fourth  and  seventh  days,  reckoning  from
the  commencement  of  its  employment ;  and  during  that  time  I  caused
the  chancre  to  be  dressed  only  with  tepid  milk  or  water.  In  ordi-
nary cases  from  ten  to  twenty  days  sufficed  to  complete  the  cure.

325.  If  the  chancres  spread  very  much,  and  extend  deep  into  the
vagina,  we  should  fill  that  part  with  charpie  during  the  treatment,
so  that  the  granulations,  when  they  cicatrize,  shall  not  contract  the
vagina.

326.  We  should  proceed  in  the  same  way  with  chancres  on  the  nip-
ples, that  is  to  say,  we  should  treat  the  body  only  internally,  without
the  employment  of  any  external  means ;  but  here  we  must  endeavour
to  produce  the  mercurial  fever  as  quickly  as  possible,  in  order  to  pre-
vent, if  possible,  the  rapid  destruction  of  these  soft  parts  by  the  viru-
lent ulcer.

CHAPTER  VIII.

TREATMENT  OF  THE  ACCIDENTS  RESULTING  FROM  IMPROPER

TREATMENT  OF  THE  CHANCRR

327.  The  chronic  phimosis  (from  induration  and  thickening  of  the
prepuce)  that  remains  after  the  cure  of  the  chancre,  especially  when

*  Andr^  and  some  others  advise  the  use  of  internal  mercurial  remedies  for  nine  or
ten  weeks  before  we  can  with  certainty  pronounce  the  chancres  in  the  fenude  cured,
and  aU  the  virus  eradicated  out  of  the  body.  It  would  probably  be  a  matter  of
difficulty  to  determine  when  this  had  occurred,  if  they  employed  local  remedies.  Hie
beet  indication  would  be  wanting  to  them  (the  spontaneous  cure  of  the  chancre)  if
they  repelled  it  locally.  Moreover,  the  weakness  and  uncertainty  of  their  mercurial
preparations  required  that  they  should  employ  for  to  long  such  a  large  quantitg  of
mercury^  frequently  without  any  real  result,  and  to  the  certain  injury  of  the
constitution.

*  A  woman  who  for  some  days  had  a  buboe,  and  for  a  year  several  chancres  on  the
inner  border  of  the  labium  majus  of  the  same  side,  the  largest  of  which  measured
from  four  to  five  lines  in  diameter,  but  who  was  otherwise  healthy,  took,  without
employing  any  local  remedy,  three  grains  of  soluble  mercnry  in  five  days.  The
artificial  fever  came  on  strongly  and  characteristicaUy;  four  days  afterwards,  after
aU  the  pams  in  the  head  and  aU  the  fever  were  gone,  the  chancres,  together  with
the  small  buboe,  had  completely  disappeared ;  for  a  year  and  a  half  she  has  remained
perfectly  free  from  all  complaints.


CHAKCRX.  71

performed  in  the  ordinary  manner,  increases  with  the  lapse  of  time,
e^>edall7  if  the  orifice  be  too  small  for  the  full  stream  of  urine.  It
becomes  schirrhous,  and  lays  the  foundation  for  a  number  of  disagree-
able symptoms.

S28.  In  order  to  remove  this  evil,  we  draw  the  thickened  portion
of  the  prepuce  over  the  glans,  grasp  it  tightly,  and  cut  it  off  cau-
tiously, without  injuring  the  glans.  While  the  wound  is  healing,  the
prepuce  must  be  frequently  pushed  back  over  the  glans,  in  order  to
prevent  the  cicatrix,  and  thereby  the  orifice  of  the  prepuce,  from  con-
incting  again.

329.  Where  the  scirrhus  pervades  the  whole  prepuce,  it  must  be
cut  away  entirely,  or  it  may  be  merely  slit  up  at  a  convenient  point
in  order  to  allow  the  patient  to  perform  the  act  of  coition.

330.  Hunter  alludes  to  a  kind  of  false  chancre,  that  seems  to  result
from  the  previous  improper  treatment  of  a  true  one.  Its  diagnostic
marks  are  as  follow  : — It  is  only  met  with  in  persons  who  liave  pre-
Tiousl)'  (^frequently  only  four  to  eight  weeks  before)  been  affected
with  real  (idiopathic  venereal)  chancres ;  it  never  occurs  exactly  on
the  cicatrix  of  the  healed  up  chancre,  but  close  beside,  or  at  least  not
&r  from  it ;  it  does  not  extend  so  rapidly  nor  so  extensively  as  the
true  one ;  is  not  so  painful  nor  so  inflamed ;  has  not  such  a  hard  base,
ud  does  not  cause  buboes  by  absortion,  like  the  true  chancre.

331.  Of  quite  a  different  nature  arc  those  chancres  that  by  a  long
abuse  of  mercury,  and  perhaps  also  by  the  use  of  improper  external
remedies,  have  degenerated  into  malignant  ulcers.  Such  ulcers  se-
crete much  thin  acrid  ichor,  are  excessively  sensitive  and  painful,  their
borders  are  very  elevated,  violet-coloured,  and  hard ;  in  a  word,  they
resemble  old  scrofulous  ulcers,  and  are  of  a  similar  nature.

332.  In  these  cases  there  may  be  no  longer  any  venereal  miasm  in
the  system.  The  abuse  of  mercury  and  other  debilitating  methods
have  caused  the  whole  body  to  take  on  the  scrofulous  disposition,  and
have  produced  a  cachexia  of  morbid  irritability,  and  the  ulcers  do
not  effectually  heal  up  before  this  condition  of  the  organism  is  im-
proved.

333.  A  further  employment  of  mercury  aggravates  them  percepti-
bly. The  most  powerful  antidotes  to  this  cachexia,  cold  baths,
country  air,  bark,  opium,^  exercise,  ammonia,  and  local  tonics  are  of
ier\ice.

334.  When,  in  cases  where  there  is  an  original  predisposition  to  de-
bility, nervous  diseases  and  erysipelas,  the  chancres,  which  have  in
auch  states  of  the  constitution  already  a  tendency  to  abnormal  inflam-


Mt  k  io  such  cases  that  Tumbull's  external  employment  of  the  opiate  solution
(degenerated)  cbaneres  has  sach  excellent  effecta


72  OK  y£N£BfiAX<  DISEASES.

matioD,  are  treated  with  irritating  local  remedies  and  with  an  ezoea-
flively  long  employment  of  mercurials,  purgatives,  and  tepid  baths,  it
sometimes  happens  that  the  morbid  irritabUity  of  the  system  increases
to  such  a  degree,  that  even  afler  the  healing  up  of  the  dbaneres,  in-
jBammation  of  such  intensity  is  developed  on  the  genitals,  that  a  dan-
gerous affection  occurs,  which  some  have  improperly  termed  cancer
of  the  penis.

S35«  The  swelling  of  the  whole  organ  is  great,  the  heat  considerable,
the  colour  bright  red.  Suppuration  beneath  the  whole  of  the  skin
and  prepuce  rapidly  ensues,  and  ulcerations  break  out  here  and  there.
I9  such  cases  a  portion  or  the  whole  of  the  glans  is  not  unfrequently
lost ;  sometimes  also  the  urethra,  and  even  the  whole  of  the  penis,  are
destroyed  by  the  suppuration,  if  the  disease  be  not  arrested  in  time.

330.  Here  also  mercury  will  be  found  injurious.  I  have  found  no
good  results  from  anything  besides  the  free  internal  employment  of
bark  with  ammonia  and  opium,  and  a  very  strong  and  ice-cold  decoc-
tion of  oak-bark,  (if  we  are  called  in  good  time,  strongly  impregnated
with  opium)  applied  fresh  every  hour  or  half  hour.  When  the  danger
is  past  and  the  ulcer  commences  tp  heal,  we  must,  in  order  to  prevent
a  reli^se,  make  use  of  the  other  remedies  usually  employed  for  irrita-
bility with  weakness.

887.  Those  chancres  which  have  only  been  aggravated  by  the  abuse
of  corrosive  remedies,  of  which  the  borders  become  suddenly  everted,
very  sensitive  and  excessively  painful,  which  bleed  easily,  eat  around
them,  and  are  beset  with  tuberculous  indurations  (a  sort  of  cancerous
ulcer),  demand  speedy  aid.  The  affected  part  is  to  be  constai^y
bathed  with  a  lotion  composed  of  one  part  of  laudanum  with  twenty
or  ten  parts  of  water,  and  bark  largely  combined  with  opium  is  to  be
given  internally  until  the  pain  begins  to  yield.  The  ulser  will  then
begin  to  assume  a  more  healthy  character,  and  may  now  be  cured  gene-
rally with  mild  digestives  (of  cocoa-nut  oil,  yolk  of  egg  and  Peru-
vian balsam,  dec.),  if  the  venereal  miasm  have  been  previously  de-
stroyed by  an  appropriate  mercurial  course,

338.  It  is  usual  to  stop  the  profuse  haemorrhage  of  an  old  chancre
(when  the  miasm  has. not  yet  been  destroyed  from  within)  when  it
throws  off  an  artificial  or  self-generated  thick  slough,  by  means  of  ap-
plications of  turpentine.  In  many  cases  the  local  employment  of
opiates  as  palliatives  is  indispensable,  especially  when  the  recurrence
of  haemorrhage  is  kept  up  by  irritability  from  nervous  weakness.

339.  The  spongy  excrescences  that  protrude  from  chancres  that  have
been  treated  with  local  remedies  of  an  irritating  diaracter  belong  to
the  class  of  degenerated  chancres  among  which  I  reckon  the  sycotio
condylomata,  of  which  I  am  about  to  treat.


CHAKGBX.  78

CHAPTER IL

VENEREAL  WART9  AXD  EX0BE9GEKCES.
S40.  Very  little  of  a  positive  character  has  been  written  concerning
the  nature  of  the  condylomatous  warts,  and  the  place  they  should
hold  among  venereal  affections  is  still  so  undetermined,  that  I  must
take  leave  not  to  regard  them  as  a  symptom  of  syphilis,  but  to  place
them  among  the  idiopathic  venereal  affections.

841.  They  certainly  never  appear,  like  gonorrhcea  and  chancre,  im-
mediatelv  ailer  local  inoculation,  but  in  this  thev  resemble  buboes ;
bat  still  the  humour  they  exude  possesses,  like  the  pus  of  inguinal  bu-
boes, the  power  of  producing  local  infection,^  a  property  that  seems
only  to  belong  to  the  idiopathic  venereal  symptoms.

342.  Their  power  to  cause  local  inoculation,  and  the  fact  that  when
iH)t  of  a  homy  hardness,  the  internal  use  of  mercury  can  alone  eradi-
Cite  them  as  I  have  frequently  observed,  amply  suffice  to  refute  Hun-
ters opinion,  that  they  are  mere  consequences  of  the  venereal  malady,
iDd  not  themselves  of  venereal  nature.

343.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  they  are  not  a  primary  symptom  of
immediate  infection,  but  that  they  onl  v  appear  from  the  neglect  or  im-
proper treatment  of  the  proper  chancre.  Usually  when  the  latter  are
treated  only  by  external  remedies  of  an  irritating  and  astringent  cha-
ncter,'the  chancre,  without  losing  its  idiopathic  venereal  virus,  gra-
daallv  changes  its  appearance,  the  irritated  sensitive  fibres  attain  a
luxuriant  growth,  and  excrescences  arise  on  the  former  seat  of  the
chanercs :  at  least  I  have  never  seen  a  case  where  the  chancres  were

#

healed  according  to  my  plan,  only  by  the  internal  employment  of  the
best  mercurial  preparation  without  the  slightest  topical  application,
▼here  anv  such  excrescence  remained.  We  would  therefore  not  be
wrong  in  regarding  this  as  a  degeneration  of  the  chancre,  standing  in
the  same  relation  to  that  as  a  gleet  does  to  the  primary  gonorrhoea.

344.  Their  seat  therefore  is  the  locality  where  chancres  may  occur
after  an  impure  coitus;  the  prepuce,  glands,  clitoris,  the  orifice  of  the
urethra,  the  labia,  &c.,  and  in  those  places  most  generally  where  the
epidermis  is  thickest,  round  about  the  anus,  in  the  perinzcum,  on  the
scrotum,  &c.

345.  Their  appearance  is  various;  they  are  sometimes  broad  and
famished  with  a  pedicle,  in  which  case  they  are  termed  ^^r  warts  ;  or
they  are  long-shaped,  and  resemble  a  cock's  comb ;  or  their  head
sprouts  out  enormously,  giving  them  the  appearance  of  cauliflowers,
^'•;  and  writers  have  classified  them  according  to  their  resemblance

'  Andr^  saw  a  venereal  wart  upon  the  glans  oommunicate  genorrhcea  to  a  fenude*
'  The  pofver  thete  remedies  poflseaB  of  causing  the  lymphatic  vessels  to  absorb  is

the  NasoQ  why  we  seldom  observe  condylomata  unaccompanied  by  some  symptoms

of  irphiliflL


74  OK  YEKSBKAL  DISEASES.

to  buttons,  onions,'  strawberries,  mulberries,  and  so  on,  without  reflect-
ing that  these  names  indicate  no  difference  of  nature,  but  only  depend
upon  an  accidental  conformation,  consequently  are  of  no  essential  utili-
ty and  cannot  influence  the  mode  of  treatment.  More  interesting  is
a  knowledge  of  their  nature  and  of  their  course.

346.  The  warts  on  the  prepuce,  glans,  clitoris  and  labia,  are  gene-
rally harder  and  drier  than  those  on  other  parts ;  sometimes  they  are
painless,  and  then  they  not  unfrequently  wither  and  disappear  sponta-
neously (probably  when  the  venereal  poison  they  contain  retreats  in-
wardly into  the  general  circulation);  sometimes  they  inflame,  and
then  usually  degenerate  into  cancerous  ulcers.

347.  In  addition  to  these,  immediately  afler  improper  treatment  of
chancres  with  local  irritating  substances,  spongy  growths  shoot  out
rapidly  on  the  penis  and  in  the  vagina,  which  sometimes  have  little  or
no  sensibility.

348.  The  condylomata  on  the  nates  and  perinssum  are  also  spongy,
and  the  hollows  and  furrows  in  the  skin  betwixt  them  are  usually  ulce-
rated and  painful.  In  this  condition  their  surface  appears  full  of  chaps,
which  exude  a  fetid  ichor.  They  are  attended  by  gradually  increasing
inflammation  and  painful  burning,  until  they  in  the  course  of  time  de-
generate into  flstulous  ulcers  of  the  rectum,  &c.

349.  But  hard  growths  of  this  kind  are  also  met  with  in  this  posi-
tion, which  are  often  covered  with  scales  and  inflamed,  and  even  accom-
panied by  violent  pains;  injudicious  local  treatment  (without  eflicient
internal assistance,) readily  transforms  them  into  cancerous  ulcers.

350.  The  non-venereal  warts  and  excrescences  on  the  genital  organs
of  both  sexes  are  distinguished  from  the  venereal  ones  by  this :  that
the  former  have  their  roots  in  soft  healthy  skin,  that  they  are  usually
of  soft  texture,  dry  and  flesh-coloured,  also  that  no  venereal  symptoms
either  have  preceded  or  accompany  them ;  whereas  the  base  of  the
venereal  ones  is  upon  a  hardened  part,  they  are  inflamed,  and  are  al-
ways preceded  by  other  idiopathic  venereal  aflections,  and  generally
accompanied  by  several  symptoms  of  syphilis ;  more  particularly  there
usually  exist  betwixt  them  ichor-secreting  venereal  Assures.

351.  If  the  excrescences  are  only  seated  on  the  anus,  before  we  can
pronounce  them  venereal,  or  treat  them  as  such,  we  must  pay  atten-
tion to  their  diagnostic  marks,  and  also  endeavour  to  ascertain  whether
they  do  not  result  from  sodomy,  or  from  some  acrid  discharge  from
hemorrhoids,  or  from  leucorrhoca,  as  not  unfrequently  happens,  or
whether  they  are  not  relics  of  external  piles.

CHAPTER  I.

CURE  OF  VENEREAL  WARTS  AND  EXORESCENOEa

352.  If  we  have  convinced  ourselves  of  the  venereal  nature  of  the
condylomata,  from  the  above  signs  and  from  the  history  of  the  case^


CHANCRB.  76

we  proceed  to  the  treatment,  which  divides  itself  into  external  and
interaaL

353.  As  a  general  rule,  these  excrescences  must  not  be  primarily
treated  bj  local  remedies,*  for  the  same  reason  as  I  have  given  for
oondemning  the  topical  treatment  of  chancres.  If,  as  we  have  every
reason  to  believe  is  the  case,  these  excrescences  be  malignant  trans-
fennations  of  the  chancre  owing  to  local  treatment,  the  injudiciousness
of  such  applianees  will  be  more  palpable,  and  the  usual  bad  effects  of
tbeir  employment  afford  ample  corroboration  of  this  assertion.

354.  We  must  consequently  discard  what  made  them  from  chan-
cres into  condylomata — the  irritating  and  styptic  local  remedies,  and
make  use  of  a  judicious  and  internal  administration  of  mercury ,2  un-
less which  had  been  neglected  they  had  not  degenerated  into  that  con-
dition ;  in  a  word,  in  order  to  cure  them  radically,  we  must  do  what
ought  to  have  been  done  long  ago.

355.  The  administration  of  (soluble)  mercury  serviceable  in  this
ctte,  and  the  rules  for  its  employment,  are  the  same  as  for  the  more
remote  degree  of  syphilis  (for  they  belong  to  the  most  obstinate  local
a&ctions),  to  which  latter  I  refer  Uie  reader,  in  order  to  avoid  unneces-
aiy  repetition.

356.  I  may  merely  observe  that  a  properly  developed  (and  rather
strong)  mercurial  fever  (§  290)  cures  all  true  venereal  warts  and
excrescences ;  that  is  to  say,  they  dry  up  and  fall  off  whole  or  in
fragments,  or  (but  this  is  rare)  they  put  on  a  healthy  suppurative  pro-
cess and  ulcerate  away.

357.  Those  warts  that  do  not  fall  off  nor  suppurate  away,  nor
gradually  disappear  by  this  internal  destruction  of  the  virus,  are
usually  of  a  horny  character  ;  at  all  events  are  innocuous  and  non-
i'enereal.

358.  If,  notwithstanding,  we  wish  to  get  rid  of  them,  they  may,  like
all  other  non-venereal  warts,  according  to  circumstances,  be  removed
^7  ^y^^S  them  with  a  wax  thread  and  gradually  drawing  it  tighter,  or
they  may  be  burnt  off  with  lunar  caustic,  or  cut  off  with  the  scissors.
Sume  have  also  advised  to  apply  onions  boiled  in  oil  until  the  warts
become  soft,  and  then  sprinkle  over  them  powdered  mezerium,  whereby
they  are  changed  into  mucus,  that  may  easily  be  scraped  off.

359.  But  as  it  nevertheless  sometimes  happens  (although  very

*  Tbey  produce  syphilis,  if  that  be  not  already  present,  or  cause  them  to  degeoe-
ate  into  epreading  ulcers.

*  When  Dease  adduces  as  proof  that  mercury  b  of  no  use  for  warts,  and  that  they
eongequcntly  contain  do  Tcnereal  virus,  that  they  sometimes  have  remained  uncured
sltboGgfa  the  patient  has  long  used  the  metal  and  been  salivated  almost  to  death,  he
ibooki  have  remembered  that  8uch  abuse  of  mercury  often  leaves  uncured  other  local
ifffictkos  evidently  dependent  on  the  venereal  poison,  which  a  rational  administratioo
fd  mercory  eradicates  rapidly  and  radically.


76  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

rarely  in  the  ease  of  the  non-venereal  remains  of  formerly  yenereal
excrescences)  that  they  again  grow  after  removal  by  the  ligature  or
scissors,  we  would  do  well,  immediately  after  their  removal  by  these
instruments,  if  we  observe  any  disposition  on  their  part  to  grow  again,
to  touch  the  part  once  or  twice  with  lunar  caustic ;  except  in  such
cases,  when,  in  spite  of  the  radical  destruction  of  the  venereal  miasm
by  the  mercurial  fever,  such  a  wart  still  remains  inflamed  and  painful,
in  which  very  rare  case^  we  must  abstain  from  all  topical  applications,
and  content  ourselves  with  destroying  the  cancerous  or  scrofulous
constitution  of  the  humours  by  hemlock,  cold  baths,  opium,  ammonia,
setons  in  the  neighborhood,  dsc.

360.  Peyrilhe  recommended,  in  order  to  destroy  the  large  spongy
excrescences  in  the  vagina,  to  apply  butter  of  antimony  with  great
caution,  and  immediately  thereafter  to  cleanse  with  injections  of  lime-
water  the  parts  where  this  easily  spreading  caustic  may  have  touched
the  healthy  tissues.  He  prefers  it  to  the  lunar  caustic,  because  the
slough  formed  by  the  latter  does  not  fall  off  under  36  hours ;  which
would  allow  sufficient  time  to  renew  the  excrescence  beneath  it.  We
may  act  in  a  similar  manner  by  excrescences  on  the  male  genitals.  I
would  not  however  advise  any  beginner  in  surgery  to  resort  to  this
method.  The  judicious  internal  employment  of  mercury  must  always
precede  it.

861.  llie  rectal  and  perineal  fistulco  arising  from  condylomata,  are
hardly  ever  benefitted  by  the  ordinary  employment  of  mercurials  in
the  shape  of  calomel,  Neapoliian  ointment,  <kc.  The  soluble  mercury
is,  as  it  generally  is,  more  powerful  in  such  cases,  when  all  the  morbid
irritability  of  the  body,  which  is  almost  always  present,  is  subdued
before  its  employment,  and  when  at  the  same  time  topical  fumigation^
with  cinnabar,  dec,  are  not  neglected.


SECOND  DIVISION.
BUBOES.

CHAPTERI.

DIAGNOSIS  OF  INGUINAL  BUBOES.

362.  The  swelling  produced  in  the  inguinal  glands  by  the  dessication
of  a  chancrd  that  has  been  treated  only  locally,  that  is  to  say  by  the
absorption  of  the  idiopathic  venereal  poison,  is  the  most  ordinary  kind
of  buboe.  We  need  not  here  dwell  on  the  diagnostic  marks  of  the
«wellings  in  the  groin  occasioned  by  the  sympathetic  irritation  of  .the
gonorrhoeal  inflammation,  as  they  are  not  of  a  venereal  nature,  and
have  been  already  discussed  when  treating  of  gonorrhoea.

*  Morbid  irritability  must  be  the  caufie  of  this  phenoineiioD.


fiUBOSs.  77

363.  Seeing  that  the  lymphatic  system  consists  partly  of  single
absorbent  vessels  and  trunks,  partly  of  glands,  that  is,  as  &r  as  we  at
present  know,  of  the  division,  reunion  and  interlacing  of  their  smallest
branches,  we  might  easily  suppose,  a  priori^  that  the  former  would  be
less  frequently  afieoted,  irritated  and  inflamed,  by  the  passage
through  them  of  the  virus  ailer  its  absorption  from  chancres  than  the
glands.

864.  And  this  opinion  is  corroborated  by  experience,  which  teaches
08  that  the  simple  lymphatic  vessels  are  seldom  affected  and  almost
odIt  after  the  small  glands  along  their  course  have  already  been
swollen.

365.  When  such  an  occurrence  does  take  place,  if,  for  instance,  the
seat  of  the  absorption  was  a  chancre  on  the  prepuce  or  the  glans,  a
lymphatic  vessel  in  the  neighbourhood  along  the  dorsum  of  the  penis
wfll  be  found  thickened  and  indurated,  apparently  terminating  at  the
root  of  the  penis  beneath  the  pubis,  or  it  will  be  felt  to  run  into  the
inguinal  region,  interrupting  in  its  course  by  elevated  tubercles  (small
hnboes).

366.  Something  similar,  it  is  alleged,  occurs  from  the  absorption
of  gonorrhoeal  matter.  A  cord-like  thickening  of  a  lymphatic  vessel
with  small  knots  upon  it  is  formed  upon  the  penis,  usually  taking  its
origin  from  an  indurated  part  on  the  prepuce,  which  frequenly  pre-
sents a  raw  appearance  on  the  inner  surface,  a  sign  that  it  should  be
regarded  as  something  more  than  an  immediate  metastasis  of  the
gonorrhoeal  matter) which  appears  to  me  to  be  quite  incomprehensible).
The  same  thing  happens,  though  more  rarely,  from  the  absorption
of  the  chancre  virus  from  the  female  genitals.  The  vessel  leading  to
the  gland  feels  like  a  cord,  and  is  painful ;  small  glandular  swellings
are  also  produced in  its  course.

367.  Usually  however,  as  has  been  said,  this  does  not  occur ;  the
absorbents  opening  into  the  chancre  generally  convey  the  poison,
without  being  affected  themselves,  to  the  nearest  larger  gland,  where
the  angles  of  the  anastomoses  and  the  interlacings  of  the  finer
lymphatic  branches  retard  the  passage  of  the  humours,  and  thereby
allow  the  poison  time,  and  give  it  the  opportunity  of  exercising  its
irritant  power.

368.  Here  the  idiopathic  venereal  virus  is  arrested  *  on  its  way  to
mingle  with  the  mass  of  the  blood,  whilst  it,  without  in  the  meantime

'  The  glandular  swelling  however  does  not  appear  at  any  time  to  arrest  with  ccr-
tamty  the  venereal  poison  from  passing  into  the  mass  of  the  fluids,  not  even  when  it
goes  CD  to  sapporation ;  which  fact  may  bo  alleged  in  opposition  to  those  who  say
we  slioald  regard  the  buboe  as  a  critical  metastasis,  and  who  therefore  direct  all  their
efibrts  to  cause  it  to  suppurate ;  certainly  in  most  cases  a  meaflure  of  very  doubtful
utility.


78  ON  VANEREAL  DISEASES.

altering  its  nature,  develops  that  specific  painful  inflammation  and
tumefaction  in  the  lymphatic  gland,  termed  buboe,  the  immediate
result  of  the  absorption  of  the  virus  from  a  chancre,  more  rarely  from
a  primary  gonorrhoea,  and  still  more  rarely  from  the  uninjured  skin,  and
the  proximate  source  of  lues  venerea  by  its  further  absorption  by  the
lymphatic  vessels  into  the  general  circulation.

369.  The  absorbed  poison  usually  settles  in  the  nearest  gland  to-
wards the  centre  of  the  circulation ;  in  the  case  of  chancres  on  the
prepuce  or  the  glans,  ordinarily  in  the  groin  of  the  same  side ;  from
chancres  of  the  frcnum  however,  and  from  absorbed  (gonorrhceai  1)
virus  from  the  urethra,  on  either  side  without  distinction,  and  often  on
both  sides.  But  as  the  situation  of  these  glands  varies,  so  there  are
buboes  which  are  seated  pretty  deeply  under  Poupart's  ligament  in
the  thigh,  others  close  to  the  os  pubis,  and  others  again  that  are
located  in  the  abdomen  right  over  or  above  the  ligament  indicated.
•If  the  absorbed  poison  be  in  greater  activity,  several  glands  may  be
affected  at  onceJ

370.  In  women  affected  with  chancres  of  the  genitals  on  the  clitoris,
on  the  mons  veneris,  <kc.,  they  occur  also  on  the  same  side,  but  at  the
commencement  of  the  round  ligament  of  the  womb,  whence  they  pass
into  the  abdomen  ;  probably  these  are  lymphatic  vessels  inflamed  by
chancre- virus  only.  If  the  chancres  be  seated  quite  far  back,  at  the
posterior  part  of  the  labia  or  on  the  perinaeum,  buboes  are  developed
along  the  furrow  formed  betwixt  the  greater  labium  and  the  thigh.  The
other  seats  of  buboes  in  the  female  are  the  same  as  in  the  male.

371.  If  the  chancres  be  seated  on  the  hand  or  arm  (by  the  intro-
duction of  the  chancre-virus  into  wounds,  ulcers,  dec),  the  absorbed
virus  is  also  transplanted  into  the  nearest  lymphatic  gland  towards
the  heart,  usually  not  far  from  the  elbow  at  the  inside  of  the  biceps
muscle,  but  also  occasionally  in  the  axillary  glands.

372.  Chancres  on  the  lower  lip  in  one  instance  gave  rise  to  buboes
on  both  sides  of  the  neck  over  the  submaxillary  glands.

373.  The  infection  of  the  glands  proceeds  rather  slowly ;  they
have  been  observed  to  swell  afler  from  six  days  to  several  weeks
subsequent  to  the  local  destruction  of  the  chancre.

374.  Chancres  that  are  not  treated  at  all  impart  their  poison  mudi
more  rarely  and  slowly  to  the  glands  than  those  treated  by  local
corrosive,  irritating  substances. Of  twenty  chancres  treated  solely


'  Some  cfaancres  on  the  prepuce  of  ao  officer  of  very  dindute  habits,  who  had  at
the  same  time  gononrboBa,  were  merely  covered  by  him  with  falotting-paper,  and  not
otherwiM  attended  to.  He  continued  hiB  dissipation,  and  got  not  only  a  buboe  in  both
groins  and  suppuration  of  Ckywper's  glandsi  causing^a  perineal  flsUUa,  but  also  a
aindhur  ailbctioii  hi  each  aadlla.


BUB0S8.  79

U^callf  /  probably  not  one  case  oocurs  in  which  absorption  does  not
take  place ;  whereas  I  haye  seen  many  chancres  that  were  subjected  to
DO  treatment  persist  for  years  on  their  seat,  without  the  occurrence  of
buboes  or  lues  yenerea.

375.  Venerereal  buboes  commence  with  a  sh'ght  pain  in  the  groin
an  almost  characteristic  anxiety  in  the  chest,  and  a  small,  hard
swelling,  which  if  it  be  not  restrained  by  a  scrofulous  diathesis,  by
eitemal  remedies,  the  inunction  treatment,  &c.,  soon  rises  up  (and
tiien  the  swollen  gland  is  from  the  first  yery  painful),  inflames,  and
passes  on  to  suppuration.

876.  At  first  and  when  still  small,  this  venereal  glandular  swelling
may  be  pushed  hither  and  thither  in  the  cellular  tissue ;  we  observe
that  but  a  single  gland  is  affected ;  its  boundaries  are  very  circum*
•cribed.  It  is  only  when  inflammation  has  perceptibly  set  in  (the
inflamed  part  is  bright  red)  that  its  size  increases  considerably,  and
then  suppuration  soon  ensues.

377.  An  abscess  occurs,  which  only  differs  from  the  chancre  as  to
iiie,  in  other  respects  its  nature  is  exactly  the  same.

878.  Occasionally  an  erysipelatous  inflammation  accompanies  the
■welling,  or  watery  fluid  accumulates  there  (oedema),  and  the  sup-
paration  advances  tardily.

879.  If  we  take  into  consideration  all  these  signs,  and  if  we  are
eooyinoed  by  the  history  of  the  disease  of  the  venereal  origin  of  the
buboe,  we  shall  very  readily  be  able  to  distinguish  it  from  others  of  a
similar  character.

380.  Buboes  from  other  causes  arc  usually  sofler,  and  generally  more

easily  dispersed. There  are  usually  several  glands  swollen  at  once;  in

acrofulous  affections,  glands  in  other  parts  of  the  body  are  likewise

affected. Non-venereal  buboes  are  commonly  less  painful,  and  often

complicated  with  catarrhal  or  hectic  fever,  in  such  a  way,  that  the

fever  was  already  there  before  their  appearance. They  are  so  far  from

being  amenable  to  mercury,  that  they  are  rather  aggravated  by  its  use

(and  can  only  becombatted  by  means  of  tonics,  especially  the  cold  bath,

rubbing in  of  volatile ointment, burnt sea-weed, small doses  of

ipecacuan  not  pushed  to  emesis,  shower  baths,  dsc.) Non-venereal

buboes  increase  more  slowly,  or  even  should  they  swell  more  rapidly,

they  do  not  readily  pass  into suppuration. If  they do  suppurate,

more  than  one  gland  takes  on  the  process,  and  sinuses  are  more  apt  to

be  formed,  which  is  not  the  case  with  true  venereal  buboes.

381.  A  species  of  unhealthy  suppurating  venereal  buboes  sometimes
remains  after  the  treatment  by  mercurial  inunction ;  the  irritating
qualities  of  the  large  quantity  of  mercury  rubbed  in  seems  to  be  the

>  Qirtanner^B  caostic  alkali  must  be  considered  an  exception,  and  must  possess  a
■pecific  aotiveiieresl  power  which  destroys  the  poison,  and  thus  .eradicates  it  directly.


80  ON  VENSBSAL  DISEASES.

cause  of  this  phenomenon.  A  more  dilatoiy  employment  of  the
inunction  treatment,  on  the  other  hand,  is  apt  to  change  enlarged  but
not  suppurated  inguinal  glands  into  scirrhus.

382.  In  young  persons  buboes  are  apt  to  become  scrofulous,  in  old
persons  they  tend  to  become,  cancerous.

383.  A  surgeon  who  exercises  a  due  amount  of  attention  will  not
easily  mistake  a  hernia,  an  abscess  in  the  groin,  or  aneurism  in  the
thigh  for  a  venereal  buboe.

CHAPTER  II.

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ORDINARY  MODE  OF  TREATING  BUBOES.  •

384.  When  satisfied  from  the  symptoms  present  of  the  real  vene-
real character  of  the  buboe,  it  is  almost  universally  the  custom  to  at-
tempt to  disperse  the  inguinal  swelling,  discarding  the  ancient  notion
that  they  are  critical  metastases  of  the  poison  and  real  beneficial  pro-
cesses of  nature,  and  that  the  way  pointed  out  by  nature  ought  to  be
followed,  which  seeks  to  convert  them  into  abcesses,  in  order  thereby
at  once  to  get  rid  of  the  venereal  virus  in  the  best  manner.*  This  de-
lusion has,  as  I  have  said,  been  discarded  and  it  is  now  sought  to  dis-
perse them.

385.  To  accomplish  this  object  no  better  method  was  known  than
to  rub  in  mercurial  ointment  (lard  rubbed  up  with  an  equal  weight  of
the  quick  metal)  in  the  region  situated  betwixt  the  place  of  absorption
(the  chancre)  and  the  deposit  in  the  gland  (the  buboe)  ;  that  is  to  say^
the  mercury  was  introduced  into  the  system  in  the  same  way  in  which
it  had  received  the  poison,  in  order  that  this  metal  should  pass  through
the  gland,  and  thus,  as  was  imagined,  destroy  the  poison  at  the
diseased  place.

386.  This  treatment,  founded  merely  upon  the  course  of  the  lym-
pathic  vessels,  seems  highly  advisable  in  an  anatomical  point  of  view,
and  Hunter  takes  great  credit  to  himself  for  the  discovery  ;  it  involved
the  d  priori  unproved  (and  certainly  groundless)  supposition  that
mercury  (it  mattered  not  whether  in  the  form  of  oxyde,  solution  or
salt)*  chemically  destroys,  as  mercury,  the  venereal  poison  by  mere
contact ;  and  if  under  the  inunction  treatment,  it  passed  through  the
swollen  gland,  it  must  necessarily  come  in  contact  with  all  the  poison,
and  therefore  destroy  it  in  its  seat.

387.  I  admit  the  propulsive  power  of  this  metal,  whereby  it
removes  mechanically  some  obstructions .  of  the  glands — ^for  in  truth
perhaps  not  above  the  two-hundredth  part  of  tkie  metal  is  oxydised  in

'  Hence  the  injurious  advice  given  by  ignorant  practitioners  even  of  the  present
day,  as  soon  as  an  inguinal  swelling  appears  to  indulge  in  disaipatioDi,  drinkbg  and
venery,  toiide,  and  in  a  word  to  do  eveiy  thing  to  cause  these  parts  to  inflame  and
BUfyqrate. Nothing  oocdd  be  advised  more  repugnant  to  sense.

*  QrmiitedwiththefiittyaGidintheformofaBalt


BUBOSS.  81

the  Nei|M>litaii  ointment ,  the  result  of  the  inunction  treatment  more.
over  shews  that  the  virus  located  in  the  inguinal  gland  really  yields
to  this  ointment ;  but  the  inefficacj  of  all  applications  of  mercurials  to
cbncres,  and  tiieir  injurious  power  (especially  that  of  the  mercurial
oiotmoit)  in  hastening  the  absorption  of  the  poison  from  chancres  into
tbe  general  circulation,  might  have  taught  that  the  mercury  does  not
destroy  the  venereal  poison  as  mercury,  not  ex  cpere  operaiOj  but  that
a  previous  reaction  of  the  powers  of  the  whole  system  (the  mercurial
ierer)  is  required  to  do  that,  either  by  directing  the  action  of  the
mefcury  dissolved  in  the  fluids  of  the  body  to  lay  hold  of  the  poison,
Qfhj  extinguishing  the  venereal  irritation  through  the  instrumentality
of  the  specific  irritation  excited  in  the  whole  sensitive  system,  or  by
means  of  a  peculiar  change  effected  upon  the  metal  during  its  con-
eoction  in  the  secundie  vise  (probably  by  its  combination  with  some
anmikting  substance  from  the  animal  juices)  to  render  it  capable  of
fSdc^tmg  a  chemical  neutralization  of  this  virus.

388.  lliis  preparatory  action  of  the  animal  organism  on  the  metal
before  it  is  capable  of  eradicating  the  venereal  virus,  should  not  have
been  overlooked ;  its  oversight  has  been  the  cause  of  so  many  false
steps  in  the  treatment  of  venereal  diseases,  that  the  history  of  this
^rine  antisyphilitic  specific  leaves  us  in  uncertainty  whether  it  have
Utherto  done  more  good  than  harm  to  suffering  humanity.

389.  The  innumerable  instances  of  buboes  and  of  general  lues  caused
by  tbe  merely  local  treatment  of  chancres  by  mercurial  topical
spplications,*  and  of  buboes  by  the  merely  propulsive  force  of  the
quick  mercury  contained  in  the  ointment ,  would  have  diverted  the
observer  from  a  prejudicial  theory  to  one  of  a  more  beneficial  character,
hsd  he  not  been  led  astray  by  certain  accessory  circumstances.

390.  The  internal  employment  of  the  mercury,  namely,  was  com-
bined with  its  external  application  (to  the  chancre) ;  hence  it  followed
as  a  natural  consequence,  that  from  the  efficacy  of  the  former,  the
injurious  character  or  inefficacy  of  the  latter  could  not  be  perceived.
Buboes  were  dispersed  by  rubbing  Neapolitan  ointment  into  the  groin,
but  the  effects  of  the  propulsion  of  the  venereal  virus  into  the  general
circulation  which  inevitably  follow  this  treatment  were  not  waited  for.
hot  the  rubbing-in  process  was  persisted  in  much  longer,  and  in  some
case*  the  patient  was  actually  cured,  and  thus  general  (undeveloped)
lues  was  produced,  to  be  cured  if  so  be  it  might.

*  If  the  virus  be  not  abmrbed  into  the  circulatioa  from  the  chancre  under  the
appbcatkn  of  the  mercurials,  it  will  remain  for  ever  undestroyed  under  their  local
anploynient ;  this  is  an  incontrovertible  maxim  of  experience :  otherwise  the  infi-
nilelv  rare  case  must  occur,  in  which  the  mercurial  applied  to  the  small  surface
voald  be  absorbed  in  suflBcient  quantity  to  produce  the  same  effects  as  arise  from
<W  intenial  use  of  the  metal  (mercurial  fever,  <Scc.)

6


82  ON  YEKEBXAL  DISEASES.

391.  If  it  were  possible  for  the  general  lues  venerea  to  break  forth
during  the  employment  of  th^e  very  minutest  portion  of  mercury,  it
would  certainly  always  be  observed  in  the  interval  betwixt  the  dis-
appearance of  the  buboe  and  the  termination  of  the  rubbing-in  treat-
ment ;  and  in  truth  it  was  always  noticed,  if  any  considerable  period
of  time  were  allowed  to  elapse  after  the  disappearance  of  the  buboe
before  resuming  the'  rubbing-in  (a  convincing  proof  that  the  virus  was
not  destroyed  by  direct  contact  with  mercury  as  mercury)  ;  or  if  after
ever  so  long  a  continuance  of  the  rubbing-in,  the  action  of  a  sufficiently
intense  mercurial  fever  did  not  ensue,  consequently  the  treatment  was
left  incomplete,  the  lues  broke  out  some  time  thereafter ;  in  this  case
the  buboe  had  long  disappeared,  and  yet  the  lues  broke  out.

392.  The  observation,  that  the  same  quantity  of  mercurial  ointment
rubbed  into  parts  whence  the  lymphatic  vessels  do  not  pass  through  the
swollen  inguinal  glands,  although  it  did  not  dispel  the  latter  so  rapidly,
yet  ejected  a  cure  as  often,  might  have  taught  medical  men  that  as
in  these  cases  the  disappearance  of  the  buboe  depended  on  the  radical
destruction  of  all  the  venereal  poison,  it  was  foolish  to  deprive  them-
selves of  this  most  certain  criterion  of  the  true  destruction  of  the  virus
contained  in  the  inguinal  tumour,  by  the  useless  local  dispersion  of
the  buboe.  For  immediately  after  the  local  dispersion  of  the  buboe  by
the  Neapolitan  ointment,  the  venereal  virus  still  exists  in  the  system
as  intact  as  when  during  the  internal  mercurial  treatment  the  venerea]
inguinal  buboe  is  still  present,  only  that  in  the  latter  case  the  persistence
of  the  buboe  gives  me  the  full  assurance  that  the  cure  is  not  complete;
but  this  is  wanting  in  the  first  case,  and  the  physician  deceives  both
himself  and  his  patient  with  a  vain  hope.  For  how  is  it  possible  to
demonstrate  to  both  immediately  after  the  inunction  treatment  that
the  patient  is  not  cured  ?  It  is  only  after  the  lapse  of  several  months,
that  the  breaking  out  of  the  lues  venerea  will  shew  them  how  greatly
they  have  been  deceived ;  every  unprejudiced  person  will  perceive
how  foolishly  the  physician  has  acted,  in  himself  extinguishing  the
light  which  alone  could  guide  him  along  the  dark  path  to  this  desired
goal.

393.  Let  it  not  be  alleged  that  recent  lues  venerea  requires  no  more
time  nor  mercury  for  its  cure  than  buboes  and  chancres,  and  that,
consequently,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  we  have  to  destroy
the  local  or  the  general  virus.  For  even  though  it  should  in  general
require  less  time  and  mercury  for  the  cure  of  lues,  it  will  always  be
much  more  difficult  (at  all  events  for  the  ordinary  treatment)  to  cure
lues,  when  it  presents  itself  under  such  an  obscure  form,  and  often
takes  such  a  long  time  before  its  presence  can  be  ascertained  by
indtihi^able  signs ;  and  even  these  indubitable  signs  are  often  removed
from  the  observation  of  the  physician  by  the  smallest  dose  of  mercury.


BUBOES.  88

long  before  we  can  entertain  an  idea  of  the  radical  cure  of  the  disease.

Hie  employment  of  mercary  should  be  persisted  in  until  the  complete

care  is  accomplished. But  when  is  it  accomplished  1 by  what  sign

sh^l  we  recognise  the  extinction  of  the  virus  ?

394.  How  then  can  it  be  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the  vene-
real virus  be  treated  in  the  form  of  lues  or  of  buboes  and  chancres,
seeing  that  the  latter  especially  and  only  ^  draw  the  in&llible  boundary-
tine  betwixt  the  complete  and  incomplete  extinction  of  the  miasm,
when  MTithout  local  treatment  and  by  the  sole  internal  employment  of
mercury  they  are  cured  and  disappear  without  leaving  a  trace  behind,
whereas  the  undeveloped  or  concealed  lues  has  nothing  of  the  sort
to  shew.

895.  But  on  the  other  hand,  how  useless  was  the  anxious  direction
of  those  who  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  rubbing  in  the  mercurial
ointment  exactly  upon  the  part  where  the  metal  must  by  means  of  the
absorbent  vessels  pass  through  the  swollen  gland,  seeing  that  in  many
cases  there  does  not  exist  a  sufficiently  extensive  surface  of  the  kind
required  for  effecting  this  rubbing-in ;  as,  for  example,  when  the  bubo
is  seated  near  the  body  of  the  genital  organ  or  close  to  the  pubic
region  in  males,  or  on  the  round  ligaments  of  the  uterus  or  betwixt
the  labiA  &Qd  thigh  in  females.

896.  But  even  this  result  of  doubtful  value  could  often  not  be
effected  by  the  rubbing-in  process  performed  on  the  most  convenient
spot,  (for  example,  on  the  thigh  when  the  buboe  was  seated  below
Poupart's  ligament),  it  often  remained  hard  and  swollen  without  going
on  either  to  resolution  or  suppuration  ;  lues  venerea  might  thereupon
ensue  or  not.  The  virus  often  only  lies  latent  in  this  indurated  gland,
and  often  breaks  out  visibly  when  the  inunction  treatment,  which
debilitates  by  long-continued  irritation  and  violent  evacuations,  is
discontinued,  and  the  scrofulous  diathesis  excited  by  it  is  removed.

397.  If  however  it  be  frequently  powerless  to  cure  a  single  buboe,
how  often  must  this  be  the  case  where  there  is  a  buboe  on  each  side,
where  even  the  most  zealous  advocate  for  the  rubbing-in  system
would  not  venture  to  rub  in  as  much  mercury  as  would  suffice  to  dis-
perse the  buboes  and  destroy  the  virus  in  the  whole  system,  as  the
quantity  of  mercury  that  would  be  required  for  such  a  purpose  would
ruin  the  constitution.

396.  Moreover,  the  rubbing-in  of  the  Neapolitan  ointment  at  a
distance^  will  at  the  utmost  only  succeed  in  dispersing  a  slightly  in-


*  I  hare  elsewhere  shewn  the  deceptive  character  of  the  sign  of  the  extinction  o{
the  Tims  drawn  from  the  severe  affection  of  the  mouth  by  mercury.

'  In  cases  where  there  is  no  surface  of  the  body  betwixt  the  place  of  absorption
of  the  poison  and  the  buboe  fitted  for  the  rubbing-in,  it  has  been  the  custom  of  some
to  perfcrm  the  <^p6ratioii  oo  the  buboe  itself;  but  they  did  not  oonsider  that  the


84  ON  VENEBEIAL  DISEASES.

flamed  buboe,  but  not  one  of  any  considerable  size  that  is  on  the  point
of  suppurating,  far  less  one  that  is  already  in  a  state  of  suppuration;
on  the  contrary,  a  long  continuation  of  the  inunction  not  unfrequently,
makes  the  buboe,  when  at  length  it  suppurates,  an  unhealthy,  fistulous,
corroding  ulcer.

399.  Now  as  every  physician  who  has  skill  in  his  profession  has
recourse  to  the  internal  exhibition  of  mercury  when  there  is  betwixt
the  place  of  absorption  and  the  buboe  no  suitable  place  for  rubbing  in
the  ointment,  or  when  two  buboes  are  present  at  once,  when  suppura-
tion has  already  commenced  in  the  buboe,  or  when  after  repeated
employment  of  the  inunction  method  for  buboes  and  their  consequences
there  still  ensue  symptoms  of  lues,  what  is  it  that  prevents  him  from
employing  it  alone  at  the  very  commencement,  in  every  case  of
buboe^,  if  it  be  not  partly  that  he  has  overlooked  those  objections  to
the  rubbing-in  system,  partly  that  he  has  sometimes  found  his  calomel,
his  corrosive  sublimate,  &c.,  inefficient  and  uncertain,  or  in  a  word,  if
it  be  not  because  he  has  not  been  acquainted  with  such  an  excellent
preparation  as  the  soluble  mercury  is  1

CHAPTER  III.

TREATMENT  OF  BUBOES.

400.  The  same  reasons*  that  have  induced  me  when  treating  of
chancre  to  refer  to  the  treatment  of  lues,  lead  me  to  do  the  same  in
the  present  case  in  reference  to  the  employment  of  the  soluble  mercury,
as  neither  more  nor  less  is  required  for  the  cure  of  the  one  than  the
other,  namely,  a  sufficiently  severe  mercurial  fever  (§  290),  taking
care  to  avoid  all  the  hindrances  to  the  cure,  as  I  shall  hereafter  (§  573
— 613)  endeavour  to  show  how.

401.  For  the  reasons  given  above  we  must  avoid  all  external  reme-
dies, all  lubbings-in  of  ointment ;  we  must  discard  all  other  mercurial
preparations  which  are  either  inefficient  or  uncertain  in  their  operation,
and  make  use  of  the  soluble  mercury  in  preference  to  all  others.  We
can  employ  it  in  all  stages  of  the  inguinal  swelling,  at  its  onset,  when

ointment  cannot  in  such  a  case  p^ietrate  through  the  lymphatic  vessels  directly  to
the  empoisoned  gland,  and  that  the  friction  on  this  place  would  tend  to  piomote  that
inflammation  and  suppuration  that  was  sought  to  bo  avoided.

'  In  order  to  mamtain  the  excellence  of  the  ointment  at  the  expense  of  the
internal  employment  of  the  mercury,  instances  are  adduced  where,  during  the  use  of
the  latter  means,  buboes  are  said  to  have  appeared,  without  the  chancre  being
removed  by  local  remedies.  A  careful  examination  of  such  cases,  however,  wfll
shew  ihat  the  chancres  were  not  left  without  local  applications,  to  which  however
the  mjurioua  power  of  increasing  the  absorbing  faculty  of  the  lymphatic  vessels  wa«*
not  ooDsidered  to  be  attributable.

'  In  order  to  avoid  repetition.


BUBOSS.  85

it  swells,  and  eyen  when  it  is  suppurating.^  In  the  first  and  second
cise,  on  the  occurrence  of  the  factitious  fever  the  buboes  decrease  and
disappear  (the  sole  and  most  certain  sign  of  the  true  cure  and  complete
extinction  of  the  miasm)  ;  in  the  third  it  has  often,  contrary  to  all
expectations,  produced  its  dispersion,'  and  even  when  this  was  no
longer  possible  it  hastened  the  concoction  of  the  pus,  and  the  abscess
was  a  pure  healthy  ulcer  that  soon  healed  up,  almost  without  pain  and
without  any  ulterior  consequences,  for  in  this  case  the  virus  was  at  the
flune  time  destroyed,  which  is  the  final  aim  of  all  treatment  for  venereal
maladies.

402.  When,  in  such  cases,  I  was  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of
resolation,  I  first  excited  a  slight  commencement  of  mercurial  fever.
I  then  discontinued  the  medicine,  and  as  soon  as  the  buboe,  afler  having
krst  in  a  healthy  manner,  commenced  to  heal  up,  I  excited  by  means
of  rapidly  increased  doses  of  soluble  mercury,  a  second  more  severe
mercurial  fever,  which  effected  the  cicatrization  and  the  complete
eradication  of  the  virus.  Lint  dipped  in  milk  is  the  best  compress  to
employ.

403.  If  called  on  t^  treat  a  buboe  of  long  standing  that  is  already  in
a  state  of  unhealthy  suppuration,^  we  must  first  ascertain  the  cause
of  its  malignant  character  before  we  proceed  to  the  administration  of
the  soluble  mercury.  If  it  have  been  mistreated  with  emollient  local
remedies,  we  must  einploy  balsamic  digestive  remedies  (composed  of
mjrrh,  yolk  of  egg  and  cocoa-nut  oil)  or  a  mixture  of  decoction  of
oak  bark  with  wine ;  if  the  ill-effects  were  caused  by  irritating  and
corrosive  substances,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  local  use  of  opium  ;

'  When  Girtanner  eajs,  ''During  the  suppurative  process  mercurial  preparations
irehigUj  mjmious. As  long  as  the  patient  is  taking  mercury,  not  only  does  the  ulcer
not  heal  up,  but  it  becomes  aggravated  and  more  virulenf*,  he  either  means — ^but
this  ooQstruction  the  sentence  will  not  bear — an  ancient  buboe  degenerated  under  an
excessive  employment  of  mercury,  or,  as  that  cannot  be  his  meaning,  he  intends  to
disoomtenance  an  irritating,  ineffectual  mercurial  treatment  of  the  ordinary  ^tamp.
Be  iroold  inroWaWy  have  seen  the  reverse  from  a  mercurial  fever  rapidly  developed
hj  soluble  mercury. In  that  case  he  would  not  have  needed  to  expose  his  patients
to  the  risk  of  having  lues  venerea,  as  he  now  does,  when  he  forbids  the  employment
<tf  mercury  not  only  during  the  suppurative  process,  but even  after  the  buboe  is
healed  up,  "  until  symptoms  of  syphilis  display  themselves." Why  this  delay  if  his
fcrmer  maxim  (p.  250)  be  correct,  as  it  undoubtedly  is, "  that  syphilis  always  super-
venes if  we  allow  the  buboe  to  come  to  suppuration**  I If  given  before  this  period
(previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  syphilis),"  he  says  further  on,  **  it  has  absolutely
00  ether  efifect  than  to  debilitate  uselessly  the  patient's  system.** How  I  pity  every
booest  man  whom  the  badness  of  his  mercurial  puts  in  such  a  fright  that  may  be  so
prejudicial  to  his  patients.

*  Certainly  the  most  desirable  termination  of  the  venereal  glandular  swelling,  if
it  can  be  effected  along  with  the  simultaneous  eradication  of  the  miasm  (§  420).

'  In  all  cases  of  abscesses  of  glands,  especially  in  unhealthy  ones,  we  should  take
tspecial  care  to  avoid  the  use  of  emollient  and  relaxing  applicatioDS.


86  OK  VEKEREAL  DISEASES.

but  if  the  whole  constitution  be  ruined,  this  obstacle  must  be  previouslj
removed  as  much  as  possible,  in  the  manner  detailed  below  (§  573^-
585),  if  we  would  obtain  rapid  and  radical  aid  from  the  mercurial
treatment ;  above  all  we  should  seek  to  remove  the  debility  and  the
irritability,  which  has  probably  been  caused  by  the  long-continued
employment  of  an  excessive  quantity  of  mercury  and  by  the  accessory
treatment  usually  employed  in  conjunction  with  it.

404.  We  have  to  remove  almost  the  same  obstacles,  and  to  employ
almost  the  same  preliminary  treatment,  where  a  long-continued  inunction
of  Neapolitan  ointment  or  other  inappropriate  external  remedies  have
produced  induration  of  the  inguinal  tumour.  We  should  endeavour
to  remove  the  irritable,  weak  and  scrofulous  disposition  by  means  of
bark,  opium,  cold  bathing,  exercise  in  the  open  air,  gentle  emetics,  burnt
sea-weed  and  volatile  alkali,  and  we  may  employ  externally  with
advantage  douches  of  sal-ammoniac  dissolved  in  vinegar,  dry  cupping,
and  sea  bathing,'  in  order  to  disperse  the  induration.  If  there  be  still
relics  of  the  virus  present,  the  internal  administration  of  the  soluble
mercury,  after  the  system  is  improved,  will  hasten,  the  resolution.

405.  Multiplied  observations  have  established  it  as  a  maxim,  that  it
is  best  to  let  a  buboe  that  has  suppurated^  burst  of  itself.  It  is  the  least
painful  process ;  the  opening  that  is  formed  allows  a  free  passage  to
the  pus,  prevents  the  suppurating  buboe  from  closing  up  too  soon,  and
leaves  the  most  inconsiderable  cicatrix.

406.  Should  we  deem  it  advisable  to  make  an  artificial  opening,  we
ought,  according  to  the  advice  of  the  most  eminent  authors,  to  give  a
preference  to  the  caustic  potash,  which  is  said  to  give  much  less  pain
and  to  make  an  opening  of  a  more  lasting  character  than  the  knife*
The  wound  that  remains  is  said  to  degenerate  into  an  unhealthy  state
much  more  readily  when  the  knife  is  used  than  when  the  caustic  is
employed.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  the  caustic  makes  an  opening
much  more  suitable  for  the  discharge  of  the  pus,  and  one  through
which  we  can  more  readily  observe  the  internal  character  of  the  ab-
scess, and  manage  it  more  conveniently,  as  Franz  Renner^  long  ago
taught.

407.  It  is  only  in  cases  where  the  opening  of  the  buboe  from  other

'  Girtanner  recommends  volatile  ointment  to  be  rubbed  in.

*  We  may  hasten  the  process,  if  it  should  advance  too  slocwly,  by  applying  warm
roasted  onions,  boQed  in  soap  water ;  or  where  the  inflammation  is  greater  by  vene-
sections, leeches  to  the  part,  and  emollient  fomentations  impregnated  with  saffitn.

'  ''When  the  buboe  is  rod  and  soft  to  the  fieel  it  should  be  opened.  I  seldom  do
this  with  fleam,  lancet  or  knife,  but  generally  by  the  application  of  lapis  caustic,  so
as  to  make  a  pretty  large  opening,  in  order  to  allow  the  waste  and  impurity  to  be
the  better  diacbaiged ;  and  in  this  way  we  can  obtain  a  much  better  view  of  what  is
going  on  in  the  interior  than  by  any  other  method,  and  can  evacuate  and  cleanse  the
abscess  more  oonvemently,'*  <{sc. {Mn  new  HandUoMin,  4toL,  NOrxiburg,  1559»  p  940


BUBOES.-  87

important  reasons  1)66011168  a  matter  of  urgency,  and  when  the  abscess
is  ripe  and  ready  to  burst,  that  the  knife  should  be  preferred  to  the
ouitieL

406L  But  as  thesnitable  employment  of  mercury  often  succeeds  in  re-
nlring  buboes  after  suppuration  has  commenced,  or  when  that  js  not
possible^  fiualitates  and  hastens  their  bursting,  I  scarcely  ever  find  it
nquifflte  to  open  them*

409.  I  have  never  required  to  make  use  of  the  resolvent  power  of
emetics,  useful  though  they  undoubtedly  are,  along  with  the  soluble
meieary.

410.  When  it  is  doubtful  whether  a  buboe  arises  firom  the  sympa-
tMc  irritation  of  a  declining  gonorrhcea  or  from  the  true  metastasis
of  yie  venereal  poison  from  chancres,  it  is  always  advisable,  before
lesQitiiig  to  the  employment  of  mercury,  to  try  the  effects  of  com-
piOBes  moistened  with  ice-cold  water,  which  speedily  disperse  that
arising  from  the  sympathetic  gonorrhoea!  irritation,  but  have  no  effect
on  the  true  venereal  one,  or  at  most  will  prevent  it  from  anticipating
the  resolvent  powers  of  the  soluble  mercury  by  too  rapid  inflammation
ffid  sappuration.  If  we  should  consider  it  still  practicable  to  disperse
a  Teoereai  buboe,  we  may  employ  some  other  expedients  in  addition
to  the  administration  of  the  soluble  mercury.  A  cool,  hard  couch,
leedies  applied  near  the  swelling,^  and  ice-cold  water  compresses  will
be  found  serviceable.


PART  SECOND.

SYPHILIS.

FIBST  DmSION,
DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYPHILIS.


CHAPTER  L
DrrRODUcnoN  to  the  diagnosis  of  syphilis.

411.  When  the  virus  that  produces  the  local  affections  of  chancres
gonorrhoea  and  buboes,  is  absorbed  into  the  general  circulation,  it
gives  rise  to  an  universal  disease  of  the  body,  whose  visible  effects
may  shew  themselves  on  all  the  external  parts ;  with  the  exception
probably  of  the  seat  of  the  previous  gonorrhoea  and  the  situation  of
the  former  chancres  and  buboes.

412.  When  thus  assimilated  to  the  body,  the  virus  changes  its
Mtnre  almost  entirely  :  from  being  previously  a  violent,  rapid,  pain-
ful, inflammatory  (very  infectious)  virus,  it  becomes  (with  the  excep-

'  Girtaonier  advises  the  mbbing-ia  of  volatile  ointment  beneath  the  gland


88  ON  VENEBEAL  DISEASES.

r

tion  of  the  affections  of  the  tendons  and  bones)  almost  painless,  slow
and  insidious,  and  the  more  insidious  tl)e  longer  it  has  lain  latent  in
the  body  ;  it  no  longer  gives,  rise  to  chancre,  gonorrhoea  or  buboe,'
either  in  the  same  body  or  in  that  of  another  individual,  by  innoculation.

413.  The  venereal  virus  cannot  be  communicated  to  and  incorpora-
ted into  the  general  fluids  of  the  body  otherwise  than  by  absorption
from  one  of  the  two  local  affections  that  are  caused  directly  by  local
infections  (gonorrhoea  ?  and  chancre),  and  from  them  alone  can  buboes
(the  precursors  of  lues)  arise  ;  some  rare  cases  excepted,  where  the  ab-
sorption occurs  from  an  unaffected  part,  that  is  to  say,  where  the  chan-
cre-virus penetrates  into  the  circulation  without  injury  to  the  epidermis.

414.  According  to  Hunter,  out  of  10,101  persons  affected  with
lues,  in  one  case  at  the  very  moist  might  the  virus  applied  to  the  glans
have  been  absorbed  into  the  system  without  giving  rise  to  local  symp-
toms. A  hundred  of  these  might  be  infected  by  the  absorption  of  the
poison  from  gonorrhoea,  whilst  10,000  receive  the  lues  venerea  by
the  absorption  of  the  virus  from  chancres,  almost  always  in  conse-
quence of  their  merely  local  treatment.

415.  In  the  stomach  the  chancre  virus  is  digested  without  infecting
the  system,  as  Huhter  found.  Neither  the  breath  nor  the  perspiration
of  individuals  affected  with  the  venereal  disease  communicates  syphi-
lis to  healthy  persons.

416.  Where  the  disease  has  been  communicated  to  mothers  by
persons  employed  to  suck  out  the  milk,  and  to  nurses  by  strange  in-
fants, this  happened  by  means  of  chancres  on  the  lips,  which  produced
similar  ulcers  on  the  nipples,  then  buboes  in  the  axilla,  and  thence
syphilis.  Nurses,  by  giving  their  breasts  on  which  are  chancres  or  the
chancre  virus  to  their  infants,  cause  the  latter  to  have  chancre  on
the  lips,  6zo,  Mothers  inoculate  their  children  in  the  act  of
parturition ;  the  chancres  or  gonorrhoeal  matter  in  their  genitals  is
rubbed  in  through  the  tender  epidermis  of  their  bodies,  or  penetrates
into  the  genitals,  mouth,  eyes,  nose,  or  anus  of  the  little  creatures.
The  virus  of  general  lues  is  not  communicated  to  the  foetus  either  by
the  semen  of  the  father  or  by  the  blood  of  the  mother ;  and  just  as  little
is  the  pus  from  general  venereal  ulcers  capable  of  producing  either
syphilis  or  idiopathic  venereal  local  affections  by  moculation,  accor-
ding to  the  observations  and  experiments  of  Hunter  and  some  others.

417.  Simple  wounds  in  persons  affected  with  syphilis  may  be  treat-
ed and  cured  by  the  ordinary  vulneraries ;  the  general  venereal  virus
in  the  system  apparently  does  not  complicate  them,  perhaps  because
the  syphilitic  poison  itself  determines  the  places  where  it  shall  break
out.

*  The  caises  that  seem  to  shew  it  can  do  this  are  not  quite  clear ;  on  the  contrary
they  admit  of  a  good*  many  obj^ctioos  and  doubts.


DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYPHILIS.  89

4 IB.  Hie  nmture  of  syphilis  consists  in  a  peculiar  irritation  of  a
^pedfio  diameter  distributed  throughout  the  whole  organism,^  which
gives  rise  to  divers  local  changes  and  symptoms  that  are  accompanied
by  an  insidious,  scarcely  observable  inflammation,  and  which  shews
itsd^  but  only  in  sensitive  individuals,  by  a  slight  fever  with  uneasi-
neas,*  sleeplessness,  anorexia,  headache,  and  so  forth.  This  fever  ap-
pears at  first  to  be  of  a  rheumatic  character,  and  then  gradually  de-
generates into  hectia  The  fever  may  be  present  before  the  local  af-
fections break  out  (and  then  it  is  easily  curable  by  mercury),  or  vice
versa.

419.  Syphilis  may  be  disposed  to  break  out  more  rapidly  by  all
torts  of  derangements  of  the  system,  chills,  overheatings,  fevers,  and
the  like  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  scrofula,  gout,  rheumatism,  erysipelas,
dEC,  may  be  excited  by  its  irritating  action.

420.  The  tendency  of  this  disease  to  'be  roused  into  activity  and  to
luive  its  symptoms  aggravated,  in  an  especial  manner,  by  cold,  is
diewn  partly  by  this,  that  in  hot  countries  it  is  far  from  spreading  so
r^idly,  and  does  not  attain  nearly  the  height,  and  can  also  be  more
readily  cured  than  in  colder  climates ;  partly  also  by  this,  that  the
symptomatic  venereal  local  aflections  appear  only  on  the  external  sur-
&ee  of  the  body,  and  chiefly  on  those  parts  that  are  most  exposed  to
the  cold  air.

421.  Although,  as  has  been  observed,  all  parts  of  the  body  seem  to
be  infected  by  the  lues  venerea  at  once,  yet  some  local  aflections  ap-
pear usually  sooner  than  others.  The  former  may  be  called  those  of
a  proximate^  the  latter  those  of  a  more  remote  kind ;  the  latter  general-
ly occur  at  a  much  later  period  than  the  former,  often  only  after  these
are  healed,  and  then  the  susceptible  part  is  probably,  before  their  out-
break only,  in  a  state  of  simple  infection.

422.  Before  proceeding  to  an  enumeration  of  the  local  affections,  I
must  observe  that  the  older  authors,  and  even  those  of  the  most  re-
cent period,  indicate  such  a  large  number  of  symptoms  and  modes  of
breaking  out  of  syphilis,  that  one  is  uncertain  whether  they  have  been
deceived  or  have  sought  to  deceive  others.  All  kinds  of  cutaneous
eruptions,  ulcers,  indurations  and  swellings  of  the  fluid,  soft  and  firm
parts  of  the  bones  and  ligaments,  all  conceivable  diseases  of  the
brain,  nerves  and  viscera,  in  a  word,  all  maladies  of  the  body  that
did  not  yield  to  a  slovenly  system  of  treatment  were  pronounced
to  be  venereal.

—  J  -  m m -  —  iri---— r---

'  Perhaps  only  in  the  lymphatic  system  ?

*  There  ia  usuaUy  an  anxious  solicitude  about  the  incurability  of  the  enemy  within
and  iti  deraating  progress.  With  grief  they  see  the  poison  that  nature  is  unable  to
•fmdicate  gradually  preying  upon  their  organism,  nor  is  it  possible  to  allay  their
anxiety  by  reaaoning  with  them,  nor  to  comfort  them.


90  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

423.  This  multiplication  of  pretended  venereal  symptoms  dates
from  that  remote  period  when  no  proper  attention  was  paid  to  the
course  of  this  disease,  and  when  ignorance  of  the  diagnosis  and  treat-
ment of  chronic  diseases  was  concealed  under  an  array  of  names  that
were  either  pure  inventions  or  had  no  definite  meaning  attached  to
them:  they  were  attributed  to  magic,  to  the  omnipotent  influence  of
sidereal  influences  or  of  the  Archaeus,  to  the  morbific  principle  of  the
acids,  to  hypochondriasis,  to  piles,  to  spasms,  to  the  venereal  disease,  to
infarctus,  &c.,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  physicians  to  include  them,
with  a  good  grace,  in  the  list  of  diseases  excessively  diflicult  to  cure,
and  so  to  obtain  for  an  uncertain  art  a  surer  footing  with  the  uninitiated,
to  give  it  a  more  important  air  and  to  increase  the  profits  of  its
professors.*

424.  In  addition  to  this,  everything  that  did  not  yield  to  the
general  mode  of  treatment  by  purgatives  and  venesections,  but
was  cured  by  salivation,  was  said  to  be  of  a  venereal  character,  be-
cause it  was  assumed  that  the  latter  alone  were  amenable  to  salivation.^
Dropsies,  hydrocephalus,  cutaneous  aflections,  old  scrofulous  ulcers,
pulmonary  consumptions,  inveterate  agues,  dec,  were  cured  by  saliva-
tion, and  thereupon  these  maladies,  by  this  mode  of  reasoning,  were
pronounced  to  be  venereal  affections.

425.  In  order  to  escape  from  this  labyrinth  of  opinions  which  com-
plicated to  such  an  extent  the  true  nature  of  syphilis,  and  so  effectu-
ally ef&ced  the  boiindary  line  betwixt  truth  and  error,  we  shall
symptoms  of  syphilis  the  genuineness  of  which  is  not  called  in  ques-
tion by  any  writer  of  eminence  or  practitioner  of  experience,  but  shall
pass  over  in  silence  all  other  alleged  symptoms,  until  indubitable  facts
shall  remove  all  doubts  as  to  their  hitherto  assumed  origin.

CHAPTER  II.

DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYMPTOMATIC  VENEREAL  LOCAL  AFFECTIONS  OP

THE  MORE  PROXIMATE  KIND.

426.  The  most  certain  symptoms  and  local  affections  of  syphilis  of
the  more  proximate  kind  are  the  venereal  spots y  among  which  we  may
include  venereal  pimples,  ulcerations  of  the  skin  and  mouth,  onychia
and  rhagades  on  the  hands.

427.  From  six  weeks  to  several  months,  at  most — and  that  rarely

'  [These  remarks  indicate  the  lack  of  oonfidciice  entertained  by  Hahnemann,  at  this
early  period  (1789),  reelecting  the  valne  of  allopathic  theoiy  and  practice.] — Am,  P.

'  Hence  the  work  made  about  so-called  masked  syphilitic  diseases  and  their
vaunted  ctu%  by  mercorials,  generally  by  salivation.  How  were  they  recognised
beneath  this  mask  ?  Was  not  the  inference  drawn  from  the  efficacy  of  ihe  remedy  f
By  a  similar  process  of  ratocination  obscure  diseases  may  henceforth  be  considered
of  a  scorbutic  character  if  they  are  curable  by  water-cresses.


DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYPHILIS.  91

u  months  after  the  presumed  absorption  of  the  idiopathic  venereal
poiflOD,  the  skin  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  body,  first  on  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  then  on  the  forehead,  &oe,  and  so  on,  is  observed  to  pre-
sent s  bright  coloured,  spotted  appearance.  These  spots  become  in
eonne  of  time  of  a  definite  form,  rose-red  and  darker.  On  those
pirts  the  skin  shines  through  the  epidermis  as  if  semi-transparent,
c^wdsUy  in  warm  weather  or  when  the  body  is  otherwise  very  warm.
Tbese  spots  do  not  however  project  above  the  general  surface  of  the
dm  where  they  are  located,  nor  do  they  occasion  pain  or  itching.
There  the  lightest  coloured  spots  gradually  disappear,  the  darker  ones
raniin  and  assume  a  round  form  of  from  four  to  ten  lines  in  diameter,
h  coarse  of  time  the  epidermis  covering  them  scales  off,  and  the  spot
leems  to  be  scarcely  red  any  more.  We  might  suppose  it  was  going
iiraj  entirely.  But  soon  afterwards  it  appears  again,  the  epidermis
again  scales  off,  and  this  takes  place  several  times  successively.
The  more  frequently  this  takes  place  the  more  elevated  (though  but
ilig^tly  so)  the  rougher,  the  more  yellowish  red^  and  hard  is  the
epidermis  that  comes  off;  the  spots  then  begin  to  be  surrounded  by  a
vhiti^  circle.  The  warmer  parts  of  the  body,  betwixt  the  nates  and
betwixt  the  l^s,  present  redder  spots  than  those  exposed  to  the  air.

428.  The  more  frequently  the  spot  throws  off  its  epidermis,  the
rougher,  harder  and  thicker  does  it  become,  and  then  it  is  termed  a
■cab  (schorf).

4*29.  Every  scab  that  comes  off  is  replaced  by  anew  one  of  larger  size.

430.  At  first  the  spot  beneath  the  scab  that  falls  off  is  dry,  but  at
last,  when  it  becomes  too  thick  to  allow  the  exhalations  to  escape,  a
humour  is  formed  beneath  the  scab,  which  rapidly  dries  and  forms  a
scalj  base.

431.  Beneath  the  latter  the  skint)efomes  corroded  by  the  acrid  humour,
and  after  several  scabs  have  been  thms  thrown  off  there  occur  open  vene-
real ukers,

432.  These  spots  are  frequently  seated  at  the  borders  of  the  hairy
parts  of  the  body,  on  the  chest  about  the  hairy  part  of  the  axilla,  on
the  temples,  round  the  forehead  and  behind  the  ears,  at  the  border  of
tbe  hairy  scalp,  at  the  circumference  of  the  hairy  parts  of  the  genitals,
and  so  forth ;  also  betwixt  the  shoulders,  and  then  the  hairs  fall  out
from  those  parts ;  also  on  the  beard,  the  eyebrows,  &c.

433.  In  the  palms  of  the  hands  and  soles  of  the  feet  they  also  throw
off  one  layer  of  epidermis  after  another ;  on  account  of  the  natural
thickness  of  the  latter  no  scabs  are  formed  in  these  situations,  but  the
furrows  in  the  skin  termed  the  lineaments  at  last  crack,  the  epidermis
^llts  and  forms  raw  chaps,  which  go  by  the  name  of  venereal  rhagades,

434.  On  other  parts  of  the  body  also,  as  has  been  said,  there  occur

^  Tliey  are  Uieo  called  n»t  ipots  (copper-coloiired  spots).


92  ON  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

are  on  parts  that  are  usually  covered  by  other  parts  of  the  body  op-
posite to  them,  betwixt  the  nates,  betwixt  the  scrotum  or  the  labia
majora  and  the  thigh,  in  the  popliteal  space  and  under  the  arms,  where
the  transpiration  is  more  copious,  they  do  not  become  covered  by  a
dry  bark,  but  are  invested  with  a  moist  greyish  white  substance,
through  which  a  humour  exudes.

435.  When,  as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case,  venereal  spots  occur
beneath  the  nails  of  the  fingers,  they  also  shine  through  of  a  red  co-
lour. Gradually  the  root  of  the  nail  is  affected,  the  nails  fall  off,  and
a  new,  irregular,  imperfect  one  appears.  If  no  remedial  means  are
used,  then  venere^il  ulcers  are  formed  at  the  root  of  the  nails,  which
are  called  venereal  onychia.

436.  All  these  cutaneous  affections,  even  afler  their  transformation
into  scabs  and  ulcers,  are  wonderfully  free  from  pain.

437.  The  so-called  venereal  pimples  or  venereal  itch  are  just  as  little
sensitive  ;  they  arise  from  small,  reddish  spots,  much  less  raised  above
the  skm  than  other  pimples ;  they  have  not  such  dark  areolse,  and
neither  itch  nor  burn.  They  appear  mingled  with  the  copper-coloured
spots  on  the  forehead  and  other  parts.  Some  are  deeply  seated  in  the
skin,  and  these  produce  bran-like  scales ;  others,  though  also  seated
deeply  in  the  skin  and  in  like  manner  small  and  red,  possess  a  hard-
nees  like  small  buttons,  and  there  exudes  from  their  apices  a  small
drop  of  reddish  coloured  lymph.*  It  is  only  on  those  parts  of  the
body  that  are  covered  by  other  parts,  in  the  flexures  of  the  elbows  and
knees,  6z;c.,  that  they  are  somewhat  painful  and  exude  more  moisture.
Just  as,  on  the  external  surface  of  the  body,  the  general  venereal  ul-
cers above  mentioned  gradually  arise  from  venereal  spots,  so  is  it  with
the  ulcers  in  the  throat  and  mouth,2#which  on  account  of  their  earlier
appearance  I  shall  treat  of  before  the  ulcers  of  the  skin,  although  they
resemble  each  other  in  their  essential  nature.

^  They  may  be  distinguished  from  so-called  heatspots  and  other  pimples  on  the
skin  by  the  latter  forming  small  abscesses,  or  soon  dispersing  and  disappearing  wiQh
out  causing  any  change  in  the  skin,  as  Girianncr  rightly  observes.

'  Andr^  docs  not  regard  ulcers  of  the  tonsils  as  a  sign  of  general  lues,  but  as  m
idiopathic  venereal  affection  or  something  similar,  that,  is  to  say,  as  a  transference  of
the  chancre  to  these  parts,  because  he  says  that  the  chancre  on  the  genitals  manifeelij
declines  when  the  ulcers  on  the  tonsils  appear ;  that  the  latter  occur  bood  after
the  disappearance  of  the  former ;  that  tonsillar  ulcers  frequently  occur  without  any
other  symptom  of  syphilis,  and  that,  like  chancres,  they  are  capable  of  produdng
local  infection,  as  for  instance  by  kissing.  The  first  proofs  are  of  no  value,  eveo
though  they  were  correct,  if  the  power  of  causing  local  infection  be  not  certain  wfaiGh
we  have  great  reason  to  doubt  Moreover,  this  does  not  agree  with  the  observation
that  chancres,  whenever  the  poison  for  the  production  of  a  buboe  (meet  assuredly  an
nicer  very  analagous  to  the  chancre)  has  been  absorbed,  are  not  always  thereby  in
the  least  ameliorated ;  they  may  cause  all  this  and  still  go  on  increasing. Now  aaall


DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYPHILIS.  98

488.  The  dark-red,  painless  spots  on  the  tonsils  of  the  throat,  at
the  back  part  of  the  inside  of  the  checks,  on  the  palate,  on  the  lateral
aspect  of  the  tongue(in  the  angles  of  the  lips  ?)  are  oflen,  on  account  of
their  want  of  sensitiveness,  not  observed,  until,  afler  frequent,  gene-
rdly  unnoticed  throwing-off  of  the  thin  epidermis,  they  become  some-
whtX  elevated,  and  until  a  moist,  whitish  crust  covers  the  part,  which
caimot  be  wiped  off,  becomes  thicker  and  thicker,  and  eats  more  and
more  into  the  subjacent  substance.

489.  In  these  soil,  warm,  moist  parts  covered  with  such  a  thin
epidermis,  the  venereal  spots  pass  much  more  rapidly  into  ulcers  than
vfaen  they  are  seated  on  the  more  external  surface  of  the  body,  and
their  transition  into  tonsillar  ulcers  is  at  first  so  little  observed,  both
(m  that  account  and  because  they  are  not  particularly  perceptible  to
the  feeling  or  the  sight.

440.  When  their  tough  crust  falls  off  from  the  motions  of  these
ptrts,  swallowing,  d^.,  or  from  an  impulse  from  within,  we  observe
somewhat  excavated  round  ulcers,  with  well-defined  whitish  borders.

441.  These  venereal  ulcers  of  the  throat  are  so  little  sensitive  that
they  do  not  cause  any  actual  pain,  but  only  on  swallowing  a  feeling
of  rawness  and  slight  shooting  as  if  the  outer  skin  of  that  part  had
Qome  off;  the  part  whereon  they  are  seated  too  is  neither  swollen  nor
hofci  their  circumference  and  base  is  not  hard,  as  is  the  case  in  other
ulcers  of  the  tonsils,  quinsy,  (Ssc.  Still  these  ulcers  spread  more
rajudly  and  are  a  little  more  sensitive  than  the  other  general  venereal
cutaneous  ulcers  on  the  surface  of  the  body. In  some  few  cases  they

' impede  speech  a  little.

442.  The  tonsils^  are  usually  the  first  (and  in  most  cases  the  only)
parts  of  the  mouth  that  are  affected  by  venereal  ulcers.

443.  Sloughs  or  ulcers  in  the  throat  that  do  not  occur  till  a  year
afler  the  disappearance  of  the  idiopathic  venereal  local  affection  (e,  g,
a  chancre)  do  not  seem  to  be  of  a  venereal  character.

444.  Venereal  spots  on  the  skin  last  several  months  before  they
form  scabs,  and  these  again  some  months  before  they  penetrate  suffi-

tbe  drcumstanoes  whence  the  physician  must  draw  his  inferences  of  this  kind,  in  gene-
nl  ioTQlye  to  such  a  degree  the  honour  of  the  patient,  our  mquirics  will  often  clidt
the  most  downright  falsehoods  on  the  part  of  persons  otherwise  of  most  trust-
worthj  character.  The  ulcers  of  the  tonsils  are  of  the  same  nature  as  other  symp-
tooatie  Tenereal  ulcers,  whoso  great  difference  from  chancres  may  be  readily  per-
esved  by  comparing  the  description  of  chancres  (§  260)  with  that  of  ulcers  of  the
toBBlB  (§  438—447).

*  Scorbutic  ulcers  usually  attack  first  the  gums,  which  then  bleed  very  easily,  be-
foR  ih/ej  reach  the  tonsils ;  they  are  not  like  the  venereal  ulcers  of  a  defined  round
fcnn,  (hey  have  no  whitish  borders,  no  whitish  grey  excavated  bottom ;  on  the  con-
trary, they  are  angular,  bluish  and  filled  by  spongy  looking  flesh  ;  scorbutic  ulcers
an  ■ooompaoied  by  other  symptoms  of  scurvy,  and  renereal  ulcers  usually  by
cynptoms  of  syi^iilifl.


94  ON  VKNEREAL  DISSA8BS.

cienti  J  deep  to  constitute  open  cutaneous  ulcers,  so  that  the  latter  often
only  appear  from  ten  to  thirty  months  after  the  absorption  of  the
chancre  poison  into  the  general  circulation.

445.  Although  the  venereal  cutaneous  ulcers  usually  arise  only
from  the  scabs  of  the  venereal  spots  and  from  the  venereal  pimples,
appearing  as  discrete  ulcers,  from  six  to  ten  lines  in  diameter,  chiefly
confined  to  the  anterior  surface  of  the  body,  first  in  the  forehead  and  top
of  the  head,  in  the  face,  alse  nasi,  on  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  &c.,  but
afterwards  also  on  the  legs,  principally  over  the  tendinous  expansions
(fascial) ;  yet  this  is  not  always  the  case,  for  when  the  spots  are  seated
very  closely  together,  the  small  ulcers  unite  to  form  a  larger  one  whioli
has  sometimes  a  diameter  of  six  inches,  as  I  have  not  unfrequently
observed  upon  the  vertex  and  forehead,  on  the  sides  of  the  neck  and
other  parts,  as  also  on  the  legs.  But  even  when  as  large  as  this  they
retain  as  much  as  possible  the  rounded  form.

446.  On  other  parts  also  where  spots  are  but  rarely  observed,  e.  g,
on  the  body  of  the  penis,  we  see  venereal  ulcers  occur,  which  however
differ  from  those  lying  on  muscular  parts  or  bones  in  being  somewhat
more  sensitive  and  painful;  they  increase  more  rapidly  in  extent,  and  their
red  bottom,  covered  with  small  elevated  fleshy  granulations,  becomes
raised,  like  a  cancerous  growth,  almost  above  the  borders,  which  are
however  neither  everted  nor  discoloured,  nor  hard,  as  they  are  in
cancer.

447.  On  the  other  hand,  the  other  general  venereal  ulcers  on  firmer
parts  already  alluded  to,  have  some,  though  but  a  shallow  depth,
oflen  only  one  line,*  still  oflener  but  half  a  line  of  depth.  Their
bottom,  which  is  rose-coloured,  smooth  and  firm,  spreads  out  in  an
undulating  manner,  is  raised  slightly  towards  the  borders,  that  are
almost  level  with  the  sound  skin ;  there  is  no  perceptible  inflammation
nor  hardness  about  the  borders  nor  surrounding  them.  They  have
this  peculiarity,  that  they  almost  always  retain  their  round  form.  They
are  distinguished  by  the  indolence  of  their  course :  they  arise  gradually,
without  any  previous  symptoms  of  inflammation,  itching,  burning,  &o.,
out  of  copper-coloured  spots  and  venereal  eruptions,  are  accompanied
by  very  insignificant  pains,  even  when  of  considerable  extent ;  they
secrete  a  thickish  not  viscid  matter,  like  melted  tallow,  and  of  a  pale
green  colour ;  they  are  sometimes  covered  with  a  cheesy  substance. .
They  may  sometimes  be  healed  up  by  means  of  astringents;  but  then
others  occur  in  other  parts. As  a  general  rule  the  general  venereal

'  Besides  the  skb  they  appear  to  destroy  only  the  cellular  strocture  wmt^nwy
the  £Eit»  at  all  events  the  depressed,  hard,  shining  cicatrix  appears  to  be  close^
united  to  the  underlying  solid  parts,  e.  g,  the  musde,  and  the  latter  loses  its  power
of  movement  The  haizs  upon  the  seat  of  the  ulcer  do  not  again  grow,  an  their
roots  are  destroyed.


DIAGNOSIS  OF  SYPHILIS.  96

ulcers  on  the  head,  ^sc  (the  parts  nearest  the  heart),  heal  up  before

those  on  more  distant  parts,  e,  g.  the  legs,  just  as  at  first  they  appeared

sooner  on  the  former  than  on  the  latter  parts. Does  the  healing  up

of  a  portion  of  such  ulcers  give  evidence  of  a  diminution  of  the  syphi-

Dtic  Yims  (I  believe  it  remains  the  same),  or  does  the  cause  of  the

phenomenon  consist  in  this,  that  these  parts  have  at  length  become

insensible  to  the  venereal  irritation,  whilst  the  newly  attacked  parts,

imaociistomed  to  this  irritation,  have  more  susceptibility  for  it? The

first  general  venereal  ulcers,  for  example  those  on  the  tonsils,  are

more  sensitive  and  spread  more  rapidly,  and  the  other  symptomatic

venereal  ulcers  become  all  the  more  indolent  in  their  extension,  and

ill  the  less  sensitive  the  longer  the  virus  has  existed  in  the  body.

(Even  gonorrhoeas  become  all  the  milder  the  oftener  they  occur  in

^  same  individual, and  he  becomes  less  susceptible  to  infection.

lliese  are  facts  that  demonstrate  a  predisposition  for  the  poison,  which

the  above  serves  to  explun,  at  least  to  illustrate). General  venereal

vkers  do  not  propagate  by  inoculation  either  idiopathic  venereal  virus

or  lues  venerea. All  these  circumstances  are  sufficient  to  distinguish

them  fiom  all  other  kinds  of  ulcers.

448.  Pulmonary  phthisis  occuring  without  haemoptysis  and  during
the  existence  of  evident  local  afiections  of  syphilis  that  has  not  been
treated  medicinally,^  should  be  regarded  as  venereal  in  its  nature. —
When  1  said  that  lues  venerea  only  attacks  external  parts  (according
to  the  best  observations),  venereal  phthisis  is  no  exception  to  this.
The  lungs  have,  in  reference  to  the  air  that  surrounds  us,  a  great  re-
semblance to  the  external  cutaneous  surface ;  their  transpiration  is
even  greater,  and  they  are  oflener  exposed  to  the  cold  of  the  atmosphere
(on  account  of  the  frequent  respirations)  than  the  skin ;  why  then,
seeing  that  the  lungs  are  obnoxious  to  similar  diseases,^  should  we
hesitate  to  believe  that  in  this  case  they  will  also  follow  the  nature  of
tike  skin,  and  on  account  of  their  frequent  exposure  to  the  cold  air  be
liable  to  venereal  eruptions  and  ulcers  7^

*  We  migfat  add :  which,  along  with  the  syphiUs  may  be  rapidly  and  radically
oved  \rj  aiinple  mercarial  fever,  without  any  need  for  Balivation.  It  has  also  some-
timei  cored  noo-reoereal  phthisis  by  reTulaion.

'  Tarious  cotaiieoQB  emptions  are  accompanied  by  chest  diseases,  and  the  driTing-
in  of  the  former  is  often  followed  b^  the  occurrence  of  the  latter.

'  A  poor  woman,  forty  years  of  age,  had  had  for  some  years  seyeral  venereal  ul-
cat  OD  the  hairy  part  above  the  forehead  and  on  its  upper  part,  also  occasionally  a
<^  OQg^  Id  the  year  1787,  these  ulcers  having  been  healed  up  by  means  of  mer.
cvial  plMters,  the  anterior  part  of  the  thigh  and  leg  became  affected  with  many  ul-
<A  of  the  same  kind.  She  also  applied  various  things  to  these  parts,  and  a  number
<if  than  healed  np^  She  now  became  affected  by  a  more  violent  cough,  great  dys-
poiBa  and  moderate  fever,  that  was  ameliorated  on  the  occurrence  of  pmiilent  ex-
P^ctontioa Hie  ezpectoratioii  was  very  copious ;  her  strength did  not,  however


96  ON  YENSRBAL  DISEASES.

CHAPTER  III.

DIAGNOSIS  OF  THE  SYMPTOMATIC  VENEREAL  LOCAL  AFFEOTIONB

OF  THE  MORE  REMOTE  KIND.

449.  I  have  already  stated  that  these  affections  usually  occur  many
months  and  even  some  years  after  the  absorption  of  the  idiopathic  ye-
nereal  virus,  oflen  after  all  the  affections  of  the  proximate  kind  are
healed  and  gone,  sometimes  by  topical  applications,  sometimes  by  the
internal  employment  of  mercury  in  quantity  sufficient  to  cure  them,
but  not  to  eradicate  the  infection  in  distant  parts.  Sometimes  they
occur  along  with  affections  of  the  proximate  kind,  seldom  without  any
pre-cxistence  of  the  latter  so  as  to  constitute  the  sole  local  symptoms
of  lues  venerea.

450.  Li  all  cases  the  symptoms  of  the  more  remote  kind  testify  to
the  greatest  obstinacy  of  the  syphilitic  virus,  which  has  become  as
chronic  and  insidious  as  possible.

451.  In  this  case  also  the  nature^  of  the  poison  betrays  itself  by  its
usual  course  of  selecting  those  parts  of  the  body  for  its  seat  which  lie
nearest  to  the  cold  atmosphere.

452.  The  tendinous  expansions  (fasciae)  and  the  periosteum  on
those  bones  that  are  of  the  hardest  structure  and  not  covered  by  mus-
cle (consequently  the  coldest),  on  the  bones  of  the  skull,  especially
the  most  projecting  parts  of  the  parietal  and  frontal  bones,  on  the  dor
sum  of  the  nasal  bones,  on  the  anterior  flexure  of  the  clavicle,  on  the
coracoid  process,  on  the  external  protuberance  of  the  elbow  (more
rarely  on  the  internal  one),  on  the  anterior  surface  of  the  tibia,  seldom
on  the  ribs,  become  gradually  enlarged  by  a  hard  swelling,  which  either
shape  (venereal  nodes).  It  is,  especially  in  the  former  case,  so  hard,
and  is  so  closely  attached  to  the  bone,  that  one  would  take  it  and  it
has  been  considered  as  an  osseous  tumour.

453.  These  tumours  and  nodes  are  at  first  unaccompanied  by  pain,
and  are  usually  not  noticed  until  with  the  lapse  of  time  pains  occur
in  them,  that  gradually  increase  in  severity,  so  that  it  seems  to  the
patient  as  if  the  bone  were  hacked  to  pieces  or  crushed,  as  if  it  con-*
sisted  of  two  dry  pieces  that  were  rubbed  against  one  another,  or  as  if

dimioish  proportionably ;  the  ulcers  on  the  legs  were  still  present  in  considerable
numbers,  but,  as  she  said,  without  pain.  I  made  her  lay  aside  the  plasters  and  take
in  the  course  of  eight  days  six  grains  of  soluble  mercury  in  increasing  doses.  She
became  affected  by  severe  sickness,  disgust  at  food,  and  a  feeling  of  illness  that  she
tiye  in  the  bowels.  In  the  mean  time  the  cough  and  expectoration  went  ofi^  the
breathing  became  as  free  as  if  she  hadnever  ailed  anything  in  that  respect  Hie
ulcers  were  healed  up  in  the  course  of  fourteen  days  after  the  first  dose  of  the  reme-
dy, and  for  fourteen  months  she  has  been  quit«  free  from  all  venereal  and  chest  af-
fSoctioDs.


DUiQNOBIS  OF  STPHILI&  97

sometluDg  were  gnawing  therein.  Thej  oooor  in  greatest  intensity  at
aigiity  espeoiallj  towards  the  morning,  but  in  some  rare  cases  they
are  equally  severe  during  the  day.

454.  At  this  period  the  swelling  is  very  painful  on  being  touched.
At  first  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  inflammation ;  but  in  this  later
stage  it  sets  in  and  increases  ever  more  and  more,  until  at  length  the
swelling  gradually — often  some  years  after  its  first  appearance — bursts
and  discharges  an  albuminous-looking  matter.

455.  In  these  circumstances  the  subjacent  bone  is  almost  always
corroded,  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  periosteum,  or  at  least
it  is  very  nearly  approaching  to  a  carious  state  and  is  swollen.'

456.  It  IS,  however,  difficult  to  determine  the  time  when  the  node

'  Id  Older  that  we  may  be  able  to  treat  these  swellings  in  time,  we  most  be  satis-
fied of  their  yenereal  nature,  which  is  sometimes  difficult In  order  to  aid  our  diagr
nods,  the  foDowing  drcumstanoes  should  be  attended  to. — Rheumatic  swellings  of  the
boDSB.  and  pains,  usually  occur  at  the  joints  where  the  osseous  structure  is  spongy ;
ftej  ire  preceded  by  redness  and  inflammation  of  the  superincumbent  soft  parts,
puD  snd  ferer,aDd  when  these  symptoms,  which  are  usually  of  a  sudden  diaracter
lie  put,  then  only  does  the  node  commence  to  deposit  its  calcareous  matter  ia  the
jgMttfnts ;  gradually  it  becomes  free  from  pain. Cold  baths,  frictions  and  aoooite
dimmdi  and  remore  commencing  rheumatic  nodes. Bj  warm  applications  to  parts
iftcted  with  rheumatic  pains»  the  pain  is  ameliorated ;  cold  baths  are  a  good  remedj
iiortbem. They  are  not  only  not  diminished  (permanently)  by  the  most  violent  mer-
cund  ferer,  on  the  contrary,  they  are  thereby  aggravated  and  rcndured  more  obsti*
uMie  and  incurable. Distilled  spirits  cause  fever,  but  no  pain  in  the  rheumatic
oodes.
Tenereal  nodos  and  periosteal  swellings,  on  the  other  hand,  are  seated  in  the  parts

iDificited  above  (§  452)  of  the  bones  of  densest  structure,  probably  never  on  the
capnks  of  the  joint&  At  their  first  appearance  they  are  quite  destitute  of  pain ;
it  it  only  afterwards  that  they  are  accompanied  by  it,  without  any  perceptible  local
roftunmstion,  without  swelling  of  the  skin,  and  it  increases  so  progressively  that  it
attaiiB  at  length  such  a  d^ree  of  severity  that  the  pains  of  the  nodes  not  only  con-
tinoe  to  gnaw  uninteniptcdly  (especially  after  midnight)  but  even  merely  touching
the  part  becomes  quite  intolerable.  The  contents  of  the  swelling,  when  it  is  cut  into
ire  of  an  albuminous  character.  External  warmth  increases  these  pains  in  the
booes ;  they  are  also  aggravated  by  cold  baths,  by  friction,  and  by  partaking  of  ^•
rituogs  liquora.  Aconite  and  bitter  vegetable  extracts  afford  no  relief.  An  adii*
^oately  strong  mercurial  fever  removes  the  pain  speedily  and  permanently.

If  a  faithful  confession  of  the  previous  infection  be  made,  or  if  there  are  present
ie?eral  symptoms  of  syphilis,  we  can  the  more  speedily  beo(Hne  convinced  of  the  true
latere  of  thfue  nodes  and  pains  in  the  bones.

The  harometrical  pains  of  the  elevated  cicatrix  (callus)  of  an  old  .fracture  of  a

bone  cannot  easily  be  oonfiounded  with  the  pains  of  venereal  nodes,  partly  on  ao-

omt  of  the  difierenoe  in  the  shape  of  the  swelling,  partly  because  the  history  of  •

Ue  ctte  given  by  the  patient  helps  us  m  our  diagnosis,  parUy  also  because  the  pains

of  the  callus  usually  occur  when the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  is  diminished,  and

iR  more  of  a  tearing  and  drawing  than  of  a  gnawing  and  boring  character,  and  are

Mki  ameliorated  by  the  cold  shower-batii,  which  increases  those  of  venereal
aodo,

7


98  ON  V£NSBSAL  DISSABBflb

changes  into  the  abscess  which  is  fraught  with  so  much  danger  to  the
bone  beneath.  There  is  little  inflammation  present,  and  that  which
may  exist  is  too  slight  to  produce  a  properly  elaborated  pus ;  a  thick
mucous  albuminous  matter  is  formed  that  lies  close  upon  the  bone  and
corrodes  it.  This  circumstance  and  the  hardness  of  the  node  prevent
us  perceiving  any  fluctuation.

457.  But  if  wo  carefully  consider  the  inflammation,  slight  though
it  be,  and  the  throbbing  and  shooting  pains  experienced  by  the  patient
in  the  centre  of  the  node,  it  will  not  be  impossible  to  discover  the
formation  of  this  kind  of  abscess.^

458.  On  no  part  of  the  body  do  the  bones  lie  nearer  to  the  atmos-
pheric air,  in  other  words  are  covered  with  so  b'ttle  and  such  soft  parts
as  in  the  nose.  Hence  the  delicate  nasal  bones  are  usually  the  first
that  are  acted  upon  by  the  venereal  virus  afler  the  soft  parts  cover-
ing them  (the  Schneiderian  membrane)  are  completely  or  partly  de-
stroyed. Generally  the  ethmoidal  and  turbinated  nasal  bones,  that  is
to  say  the  most  delicate  ones,  are  the  first  destroyed ;  then  the  vo-
mer, the  palatial  bones,  and  lastly  the  maxillary  bones.

459.  But  as  has  been  8aid  before,  the  bones  beneath  the  venereal
nodes  become  also  corroded,  and  necrosis  is  the  result,  which  does  not
differ  from  ordinary  caries  from  other  causes,  except  that  it  is  more
rapidly  cured  by  the  aid  of  mercury.


SECOND  DIVISION.

ANTI VENEREAL  REMEDIES.
CHAPTER  I.

MERCURIAL  PREPARATIONS  IN  GENERAL.

460.  Ever  since  the  wide  diffusion  ^  of  the  venereal  disease,  imme-
diately afler  the  discovery  of  America,  when  mercury  was  apparently
at  the  first  used  for  this  disease,  no  one  has  been  able  to  deny  with
reason  the  specific  curative  powers  of  this  metal  in  that  fearful  dis-
ease; although  from  the  year  1515  until  the  middle  of  that  century,
medical  men  having  been  frightened  by  the  murderous  employment  of

*  GaitUne  includes  among  the  symptoms  of  syphilb  that  scnsitivenesB  of  the
month  of  the  womb  which  is  increased  to  intolerable  pain  on  the  occurrence  of  the
catamenial  period,  on  the  introduction  of  the  finger  or  of  the  male  organ,  and  which
is  frequently  the  cause  of  miscarriage  (probaUj  also  of  cancer  of  the  womb.)  I  my-
self have  frequently  observed  this  affection,  but  am  unable  to  determine  if  it  is  vene-
real  as  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  treating  it.  Gardane  recommends  the  use  of
cinnabar  fumigations  for  it

'  Girtanner,  by  adducing  the  original  authorities,  renders  it  highly  probable  that
it  first  came  from  America  in  the  year  1498,  and  was  first  brought  to  Barcelona  by
the  ships  of  Columbus.


AKTITSNSRSAL  RXMBDIEa  99

that  drag  by  empirical  practitioners,  sought  to  replace  it,  first  by
goaiac,  then  by  aarsaparilla  and  bark.

461.  Bat  as  this  liquid  metal  can  only  be  brought  by  artificial  pre-
paration into  a  fit  state  to  be  taken  into  intimate  combination  by  the
flaida  of  our  body ^  in  sufficient  quantity,  so  an  infinite  number  of  mer-
curial preparations  were  invented,  the  almost  endless  list  of  whose
names  in  the  ancient  dispensatories,  especially  those  of  Falk  and  Bald*
ingen,  and  in  the  London  pharmacopoeia,  fills  us  with  astonishment.
ft  would  be  sad  indeed  if  only  those  who  had  extensively  tested  all
these  mercurial  preparations  in  their  own  experience  were  qualified  to
treat  the  venereal  disease  properly.  A  long  series  of  generations  wore
not  sufficient  to  do  so.  Strictly  speaking,  we  require  but  one,  the  best
preparation.  Had  medical  men  always  had  in  view  the  attributes  of
such  a  one,  based  on  true  physiological  and  therapeutical  principles,
they  had  not  fallen  into  such  adventurous  speculations.

4&SL  Now,  how  can  we  ascertain  which  among  the  innumerable
mercurial  preparations  is  the  most  efficacious,  the  most  certain,  and
the  mildest,  seeing  that  in  this  pitiable  disease  wo  should  regard
Celsus's  maxim  of  cito,  tuto  et  jucunde  as  our  highest  aim,  much  more
than  in  almost  all  other  corporeal  JUs,  which  beneficent  nature  alone
it  often  able  to  conquer  without  any  aid  from  man  ?

463.  I  think  I  do  not  err,  if,  as  an  answer  to  this,  1  lay  down  the
following  maxim,  that  that  mercurial  preparation  is  the  most  efficacious^
the  most  certain  and  the  miidest,  which  is  completely  soluble  m  our  juices^
can  readily  he  taken  up  by  the  system  of  absorbent  vessels,  and  not  ren-
dercd  corrosive  by  combination  with  any  chemical  substance^  is  capable
of  exciting  the  pure  and  simple  specijic  powers  of  this  metal.  Such  a
preparation  will  possess  the  virtue  of  producing  definite  eficcts,  which
it  will  be  in  the  power  of  the  physician  to  regulate,  diminish  and  in-
crease with  certainty.

464.  The  farther  all  known  preparations  diverge  from  these  attri-
butes, so  much  the  more  inefficacious,  so  much  the  more  injurious  are

*  Mercury  does  Dot  act  on  the  venereal  virus  until  it  is  dissolved  in  our  juices,  and
then  it  develops  its  effects  in  a  pretty  uniform  manner  in  the  Becundse  viae.  Mer-
cnrial  preparntiom  that  are  not  powerless  all  act  upon  the  mouth,  but  with  different
degrees  of  intensity ;  pure  quicksilver  and  corroiuve  sublinuite  letm  powerfully  than
the  otherSb  All  produce  the  same  taBte  when  dissolved  in  the  saliva ;  the  saliva  of
dme  that  are  salivated  has  a  similar  odour,  by  whatever  preparation  the  ptyalism
may  have  been  produced.  The  greatest  difference  among  them  that  is  notice<l  by
the  superficial  observer,  consists  partly  in  their  greater  or  less  solubility  in  water,
vhidi  diflerH  widely  from  the  property  they  possess  of  being  assimilated  by  our
joioe*,  MB  they  possess  this  property  in  very  various  degrees,  quite  independent  of
their  mlnbility  (thus  the  sublimate  is  much  less  assimilable  by  our  juices  than  oz.
ydiaed  mercury);  partly  in  their  action  on  the  primie  vixe  (thus  corrosive  sublimate,
the  yellow,  white  and  red  precipitates  act  chiefly  in  a  poisonous  manner  oo  the  sto-
uiadi,  calomel  diiefly  on  the  bowels.)


100  ON  ymxxsKAL  tmausKk

thej ;  cinnibar  and  tnrbith  may  aenre  aa  examples.  I  shall  briefly
pass  in  review  the  most  ordinarj  preparations  judged  by  thia
standard.

465.  As  regards  the  corrosive  mercurial  medicines,  it  will  readily
be  granted  that  it  is  impossible  there  can  exist  in  the  mineral  adda
to  which  they  owe  their  excessive  acridity,  anything  curative  of  the
venereal  virus  (for  the  dessiccant  and  antisceptic  power  that  they  dis-
play in  wounds  and  elsewhere  does  not  come  into  play  here.)  Among
these  corrosive  preparations  I  include  the  nitrate  of  mercury,  the  cor*
rosive  sublimate,  the  various  white  precipitates,^  the  red  precipitate^'
calomel  and  turbith.^

466.  If  greater  efficacy  in  this  disease  has  sometimes  been  observed
from  the  use  of  these  preparations  than  from  the  less  active  ones,  thia
arose  from  the  accidental  irritant  qualities  of  the  acids  combined  with
them,  but  only  in  the  same  manner  as  other  not  specific  irritant  reme-
dies act,  such  as  the  volatile  alkali,  the  acrid  resin  of  guaiao,  mezereum,
lobelia  and  cantharides — also  from  their  exciting  an  accidental  fever,
which  sometimes  promotes  the  cure  of  syphilis  by  mercury,  by  rous-
ing the  activity  of  the  nervous  power,  increasing  the  force  of  the  dr*
culation,  and  thus  as  it  were  facilitating  the  detection  of  the  recondite
virus  by  the  only  specific  drug,  or  because,  by  setting  up  an  irrita-
tion of  a  different  kind,  they  silenced  the  venereal  irritation,  as  rheu-
matic pains  are  subdued  by  blisters,  dysentery  by  ipecacuan,  or  inter-
mittent fever  by  arsenic ;  these  substances  thus  remove  afiectiona
without  possessing  any  spedfio  action  upon  the  diseases  just  named.

467.  But,  as  1  have  said,  the  borrowed  irritation  of  these  prepara-
tions is  far  from  contributing  materially  to  the  cure  of  the  venereal
affections ;  it  often  smothers  the  spedfic  power  of  the  metal  to  such
a  degree,  and  is  so  uncertain  in  its  action,  that  it  not  unfrequently
happens  that  we  may  kill,  but  are  unable  to  cure  a  patient  affected  by
inveterate  syphilis,  with  calomel,  sublimate,  nitrate  of  mercury,- white
and  red  precipitates  and  turbith.

468.  Were  it  easy  to  prepare  mercurial  salts  with  v^etable  acids  in
a  ponderable  definite  form,  it  would  be  much  preferable  to  adminis-
moreover,  such  salts  in  a  concentrated  form  have  something  in  them
that  exdtes  the  sensitive  fibres  of  the  prinue  vise  much  more  readily
to  evacuations  upwards  and  downwards  than  to  absorp^on  into  the


'  '  MayenMfWM,  I  bdiere,  the  first  wbo  in  1669  reeommended  the  inftemal  use  of
ordimury  white  predpitAte.

'  Ahont  the  year  1686,  Mattlnoli  fini  reoammended  the  intenud  usecf  red  pre-
dlpitate  (cskined  sod  washed  a  seoood  time)  fire  gnins  lor  a  dose.  Aeoording  to
OirtaDDsr,  it  was  Joh.  Vigo  who  firet  emplojed  it  as  early  as  1618.

•  WiUiam  Ckiwes,  was,  I  imagine,  the  first  who  in  1676  oonnselled  the  btvul
use  of  tuihith  in  syphilia


AXnyXNEKKAL  SKKEIHSS.  101


secuiidBVUB,  wliere  alone  the  mereory  is  tnilj  efficacioaa.  Experience
also  •hews  that  they  readily  cause  nlivation,  and  still  frequently  iail
to  effeet  the  cure.

469.  On  the  other  hand,  as  might  be  supposed,  it  is  inadvisable  to
employ  internally  for  the  treatment  of  syphilis  the  almost  insoluble
mercurial  preparations,  such  as  cinnibar,  Ethiops  mineral,  prepared  by
the  humid  process,  {puhit  hypnolicus)  or  by  the  dry  process,  for  they
usually  produce  no  perceptible  action,  and  then  perhaps  all  at  once,
though  rarely,  cause  ptyalism.

470.  The  cause  of  this  uncertainty  may  be,  either  that  we  are  un-
able always  to  determine  how  much  there  is  in  these  preparations  ca-
pable of  being  taken  up  by  our  fluids,  or  what  quantity  there  is  in
ihem  capable  of  penetrating  into  the  secunds  vias ;  but  this  well-
grounded  objection  of  uncertainty  of  action  applies  also  to  Plenck^s
mudlaginons  preparation  of  mercury,  and  to  those  preparations  in
winch  the  quicksilver  is  extinguished  by  sugar,  honey,  crab's-eyes,
fAtj  substances,  balsams,  ^cc

471.  If  it  is  sought  to  lay  the  blame  in  such  cases  on  the  great
variety  in  the  susceptibility  of  the  absorbent  vessels  of  the  primse
vie,  1  reply  that  this  very  circumstance  is  to  be  attributed  to  these
preparations,  that  they  are  not  of  such  a  character  as  to  enable  them
to  be  uniformly  received  into  the  system  by  every  degree  of  suscep-
tibility  of  these  vessels,  and  I  am  fully  convinced  that  the  fault  of
this  occurrence  lies  in  the  infinite  variety  of  the  solubility  of  these
preparations  in  the  gastric  juice,  and  the  extraordinary  variety  of
their  capability  for  being  taken  into  the  secundse  viae,  and  not  in  the
great  difference  of  the  solvent  and  absorbent  powers  of  our  system,
(whidi  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  can  exist  to  such  an  extent.)

472.  What  there  is  of  a  servicable  character  in  these  latter  prepa-
rations,  consists  in  the  proportion  of  mercury  that  has  been  oxydized
in  them  during  their  preparation  ;  but  as  this  varies  so  much  (accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  medicine,  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  or
the  force,  time  and  skill  of  the  preparer)  that  sometimes  the  twentieth
part,  but  often  scarcely  the  two  hundredth  part  of  the  metal  employed
is  oxydized,  it  follows  that  we  can  never  reckon  confidently  on  obtain-
bg  a  certain  effect ;  these  preparations  must  sometimes  be  almost  in-
crt,  while  at  other  times,  when  the  physician  expects  a  moderate  effect,
be  finds  the  most  violent  action  occur  from  their  use.

473.  Of  equally  uncertain  effect  are  the  mercurial  fumigations,
vbether  cinnabar,  calomel,  or  amalgam  be  employed  for  this  end,
partly  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  applying  them  equally  to  all
parts  of  the  body  at  once,  whilst  avoiding  a  respiration  of  them,  partly
on  acoount  of  the  very  various  absorbent  power  of  the  cutaneous
vessels. In  the  employment  of  this,  as  in  that  of  the  other  merca-


102  ON  YENERBAL  DIBKAfllS.

rifils  we  hftTe  mentioned,  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  oaloulate  the
quantity  of  Uie  metal  introduced  into  the  body,  and  yet  we  should
have  a  positive  knowledge  of  the  dose  of  the  remedy  as  well  as  of  its
potency,  in  order  to  allow  us  to  make  an  accurate  repetition  of  a
medicinal  experiment.

CHAPTER  II.

PARTICULAR  MERCURIAL  PREPARATIONS.

474.  Mercurial  ointment  has  been  employed  since  the  thirteenth
century  in  various  forms,  and  with  various  admixtures,  for  the  cure  of
leprosy,  itch,  and  other  cutaneous  diseases.  At  the  end  of  the  iifleenth
century  it  was  at  once  employed  to  combat  the  venereal  disease  that
had  then  gained  a  fearful  height,  as  it  was  held  to  be  a  similar  cuta-
neous disease.

475.  Its  use  has  never  been  quite  abandoned ;  and  notwithstanding
that  attempts  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  to  replace  it  by  some
better  internal  remedy,  as  occurred  in  preceding  centuries  as  well  as
especially  about  the  middle  of  the  present  century,  yet  it  has  at  all
times  been  resorted  to  in  extreme  cases.  In  recent  times  also,  afler
the  fond  dream  of  the  omnipotence  of  corrosive  sublimate  was  dis-
pelled, the  ointment  was  again  promoted  to  the  rank  of  an  antisyphi-
litic  remedy.

476.  The  chief  reason  for  the  preference  given  to  it,  I  believe,  lies
in  this,  that  it  is  imagined ;  "1.  That  the  greater  the  quantity  ^  of
mercury  that  can  bo  introduced  into  the  body  in  a  given  time,  the
greater  is  the  certainty  of  curing  the  venereal  disease.  2.  That  the
metal  when  rubbed  into  the  skin  does  not  incommode  the  primjc  vi®
like  the  preparations  of  mercury  given  internally :  and,  3.  That  by
means  of  frictions  we  can  apply  the  mercury  exactly  to  the  spot  where
its  presence  is  most  required,  in  order  to  be  efficacious."

477.  It  is  very  easy  to  refute  these  three  maxims  that  have  served
to  obtain  for  inunctions  such  a  great  preference  in  practice.  The  first
is  overthrown  by  the  experience  that  the  smallest  quantity  of  mer-
cury, if  it  do  but  excite  a  sufficiently  strong  mercurial  fever  (§  290)  is
capable  of  eradicating  the  greatest  degree  of  the  most  deeply  rooted
syphilis,  and  that  the  subtle  exhalation  proceeding  from  the  saliva  of  a
salivated  person,  which  is  certainly  impregnated  with  a  scarcely  pon-
derable quantity  of  the  metal,  has  sometimes  succeeded  in  curing  the
venereal  disease.  On  the  other  hand,  we  often  find  that  some  almost
incurable  diseases  are  the  result  of  a  larger  quantity  of  mercury
gradually  introduced  into  the  body  ;  such  as,  irritability  from  weak-
ness, hectic  fever,  chronic  trembling,  scrofula,  caries  of  the  bones,  and

'  No  other  way  was  known  of  introdudng  the  largest  quantity  of  mercniy  into
the  body  but  by  meaoi  of  the  ointment


AKnVSNXRKAL  REKEBIES.  lOS

90  forth,  witlioiit  the  venereal  poison  being  thereby  eradicated.  The
MooBd  point  it  weakened  by  the  observation  that  colicky  diarrhoeas
not  unfireqaently  result  from  frictions  with  mercury.  As  regards  the
tMrd  maxim  I  have  •already  expressed  by  opinion  (§  887),  where  I
diewed  that  the  mercury  must  first  permeate  the  whole  mass  of  the
Uood,  and  undergo  a  sort  of  digestion  or  intimate  assimilation,  before
it  is  capable  of  overcoming  venereal  affections,  that,  consequently,  the
local  power  of  this  metal  over  the  venereal  poison  is  illusory,  and  often
does  more  harm  than  good.

478.  But  the  following  maxims,  deduced  from  experience,  irrefra-
gably  demonstrate  the  doubtful  propriety  of  employing  frictions.  1 .
The  quantity  of  metallic  or  oxydised  mercury  that  can  be  introduced
into  the  body  by  rubbing  in  the  ointment  can  not  be  determined,  and
is  entirely  uncertain.  2.  There  are  often  obstacles  that  prevent  the
nibbing-in.  3.  The  frictions  are  oflen  not  suitable  for  the  disease.
4.  They  are  frequently  injurious.

479.  In  reference  to  the  first  point,  it  should  be  remembered,  that
the  power  of  the  person  who  rubs  in  the  ointment  can  never  be  de-
termined, can  never  be  relied  on.  If  strong  rubbing-in  favours  the
the  absorption,  if  it  be  done  more  weakly  the  absorption  will  be  much
less.  But  if,  as  some  allege,  stronger  friction  prevents  the  absorption,
the  same  variety  in  reference  to  the  quantity  of  mercury  that  pene-
trite*  into  the  body  will  occur,  but  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  force
employed  in  the  rubbing-in.

480.  Be  this  as  it  may,  however,  this  at  least  is  certain,  that  when
the  force  employed  in  the  rubbing-in  is  less,  the  oxydation  ^  of  the
minute  mercurial  globules,  and  consequently  the  solubility  of  this
metal  in  our  juices,  is  not  favoured  to  such  an  extent  as  by  stronger
frictions.  The  same  undeterminable  variety  in  the  demetallization^
of  the  mercury  occurs  also  in  the  preparation  of  the  ointment  itself,
which  is  considered  good  when  we  can  no  longer  see  metallic  globules
in  it.  How  deceptive  is  this  sign  !  There  are  ointments  of  exactly
the  same  appearance  which,  according  to  the  different  manner  in  which

*  I  cumot  say  with  certainty  whether  the  rubbing  employed  in  the  preparation  of
the  mercnnal  ointment  oxydises  the  metal,  or  whether  a  combination  of  the  latter
vith  the  £itiy  adds  occurs ;  the  Utter  appears  to  me  the  more  probable.  This
t»veTer  is  certain,  that  it  is  only  that  part  of  the  mercury  that  has  become  noo-
aennic  in  the  ointment  that  is  the  really  senriceable  part  against  the  venereal
nna

'  Hie  warmth  or  coldness  of  the  ingredients,  the  hardness  or  softness  of  the  &tfy
iubitaMe,  the  parity  of  the  mercury  or  its  adulteration  with  other  metals  (in  the
hutr  cate  it  is  more  easily  nibbed  down^  the  employment  or  withholding  of  turpeo-
tiK,  the  force  exerted  l^  the  preparer,  his  skill,  and  the  time  he  expends  oo  its
pRpmtkm,  render  different  specimens  of  the  Neapolitan  ointment  extremely  different.
tisiof^  they  hare  all  the  same  appearance.


10^  OK  ySNSBJBAIr  JOB^J^EBi

they  are  prepared,  contain  from  a  two-hundredth  to  a  thirtieth'  part
of  the  metal  in  the  non-metallie  form.  But  in  the  Neapolitan  ointment
it  is  only  the  mercury  that  has  been  oxydised  by  friction  that  is  effi*
cacious  against  the  venereal  poison,  whereas  the  metallic  globules,  even
though  they  be  invisible  to  the  eye,  are  absolutely  insoluble  in  onr
juices,  and  only  possess  a  mechanical  propelling  power.  Who  can
fiul  to  perceive  here  an  infinity  of  unavoidable  causes  which  may  render
the  power  of  the  ointment  on  our  system  extremely  various  1

481.  The  absorbing  power  of  the  cutaneous  vessels  is  inconceivably
various,  and  caimot  be  relied  on.  There  are  skins  so  constituted  that
they  will  not  take  up  the  ointment  at  all,  and  yet  the  physician  is
unable  to  detect  them  accurately ;  and  on  the  other  hand  there  are
some  individuals  on  whoso  skin  if  we  but  lay  the  ointment,'  we  cause
the  most  severe  ptyalism.  £ven  in  the  same  individual  the  skin  la
more  susceptible  to  the  ointment  under  certain  ou'cumstanoes  than
under  others ;  and  even  one  part  of  the  skin  may  be  more  susceptible
than  another.^

482.  But  admitting  we  always  knew  with  certainty  (although  this
is  incredible)  what  proportion  of  oxydised  mercury  the  ointment  con-
tained, and  what  quantity  of  it  entered  the  system,  how  can  we  know
what  length  of  time  the  vessels  of  the  skin  will  take  to  deliver  up  their
contents  into  the  general  circulation,  seeing  that  they  are  more  active
at  one  time  than  at  another,  in  order  that,  when  the  absorbent  vessels
have  scarcely  brought  their  contents  that  just  suffice  to  produce  sali-
vation into  the  general  circulation,  we  may  not,  by  a  fresh  rubbing-ui
of  the  ointment  excite  an  uncontrollable  attack  of  this  fearful  excretory
process,  before  the  mercury  first  rubbed  in  has  commenced  to  act  ?

483.  With  regard  to  the  second  point  (§  478)  the  frictions  not  un-
frequently  cause,  especially  in  delicate  and  sensitive  individuals,
erysipelatous  inflammations,  desquamation  of  the  epidermis  or  painful
itching  herpetic  eruption,  ^  rendering  their  further  employment  im-
possible.

'  A  bealthy,  veiy  senatiye  man  was  aftected  with  pecficoli  on  the  hairy  parts  of
the  genitals,  and  anointed  that  portion  of  his  skin  with  a  piece  of  Naples  ointment,
the  ose  oi  a  hasel  not,  only  once,  and  that  quite  enfierficiallj,  without  rubbixig  it  in
in  the  least  Soon  afterwards  he  had  to  make  a  jouniey  during'Uie  prsYalenoe  of  a
odd,  moist  wind.  After  the  lapee  of  twenty-four  hours  he  was  attacked  by  nnooir
trollable  ptyalism  that  lasted  four  weeks.

'  What  a  quantity  of  ointment  must  remain  on  the  patients  linen,  and  on  hSs  skuii
and  on  the  hand  or  glove  of  the  person  who  performs  the  frictions,  that  we  cannot
weigh,  and  thai  must  diffior  in  every  case.

'  These  eflecte  are  not  produced  only  by  ointments  mixed  with  turpentine.
Bandd  fiitty  matters  produce  them;  and  in  all  mercurial  omtments  the  frtty  matter
is  already  randd,  probably  because  the  metal  absorbs  its  adds.  The  sudden  oocor-
renoe  of  ptyalism  prevents  their  further  employment,  and  not  lees  frequently  an  yn
obliged  to  desist  on  account  of  their  long  cootmued  inutili^.


ABnVZNSREAL  B8MEDIX8.  106

484.  Bat  even  were  thie  not  the  ciise,  the  cLreamstances  of  every
patient  do  not  admit  of  our  uBing  this  method.  Not  only  its  trouble-
■ome  and  repolsiye  diaracter,  neither  of  which  are  inoonsiderable,  but
also  its  auspieioua  diaracter  ofVen  forbids  its  employment,  for  the
prooesa  of  rubbing-in  and  the  presence  of  venereal  disease  are  so  in*
timately  associated  in  people's  minds,  and  this  operation  is  so  difficult
to  be  concealed  from  all  observation,  that  it  exposes  every  patient,
whose  good  name  should  be  a  matter  of  inviolable  sanctity  to  the
physician,  to  injurious  reports  of  this  kind.

485.  With  respect  to  the  third  point  (§  478) ;  in  cases  of  deeply
rooted  syphilis  that  has  existed  a  loug  time,  whose  symptoms  have  be>
eome  in  the  highest  degree  insidious  and  chronic,  and  are  seated  no  longer
in  the  soft  superficial  parts,  but  in  the  tendinous  expansions,  or  have
even  attacked  the  pert«)steum  or  bones  themselvss,  where  the  virus  is
obstinately  concentrated,  the  rubbing-in  of  the  ointment  is  very  rarely
able  to  extirpate  the  disease.

486.  In  reference  to  the  fourth  point,  or  the  injurious  effects  of  the
mercurial  ointment,  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  the  frictious  must  be
continued  for  a  long  time  in  order  to  be  of  any  considerable  service ;
nd  in  that  case  the  long-continued  irritation  exercised  by  such  a  large
qniDtity  of  mercury  on  the  fluids  and  solids  of  the  body,  gives  rise
tot  number  of  chronic  and  oflcn  incurable  diseases,  that  are  sometimes
worse  than  the  venereal  disease  itself.

487.  The  fluids  of  the  body  become  acrid,  its  fibres  are  thrown  into
abnormal  vibrations  and  relaxed,  and  the  vital  force  is  gradually
melted  down  to  such  a  degree,  that  impaired  digestion,  sleeplessness,
debility,  flying  heat,  hectic  fever,  chronic  ulcers,  caries  of  the  bones,
tumours,  scrofula,  irregular  rheumatic  pains,  and  chronic  trembling,
are  the  most  ordinary  results  of  this  employment  of  mercury.

488.  The  equivocal  repulsion  of  the  local  virus  from  buboes  into
the  general  circulation,  and  the  lues  venerea  that  not  unfrequently
thence  arises  may  justly  be  attributed,  as  experience  shows,  to  mercu-
rial ointment,  when  it  is  rubbed  into  parts  where,  as  has  been  shewn
above,  the  mercury  must  be  conducted  by  the  absorbent  vessels
through  the  buboe.

4S9.  It  is  by  no  means  a  rare  thing  in  practice  to  meet  with  buboes
that,  by  the  long-continued  employment  of  such  frictions,  have  become
>chirrhous,  and  ultimately  cancerous.

490.  According  to  Fabre's  observations,  of  twenty  patients  treated
▼ith  frictions,  fifteen  became  affected  with  ptyalism,  which  oflen  comes
on  so  unexpectedly,  and  in  spite  of  every  precaution  is  so  uncontrollable,
that  cither  the  life  of  the  patient  is  thereby  endangered,  or  those  parts
that  arc  aflected  by  this  disgusting,  weakening  and  painful  discharge
^  seriously  injured. Corroding  ulcers  in  the  mouth  and  on  the


106  ON  YEirSBEAL  DISBA8BS.

tongue,  loss  of  the  palate  and  uvula,  caries  of  the  alveoli  and  of  the
spongy  bones  of  the  nose,  are  common  results.  The  more  modem,
almost  playful  employment  of  the  ointment  seems  to  be  a  modified
copy  of  this  frightful  picture ;  but  it  is  ou  the  whole  the  same  thing;
the  terrors  of  the  salivation  are  somewhat  more  Carefully  avoided,
without  on  that  account  curing  more  cases  of  the  venereal  disease,  and
the  terrible  effects  (§  649)  are  almost  more  frequent  than  before.

491.  Inunctions  of  the  ointment  when  gonorrhcsa  is  present
frequently  transform  the  latter  into  an  almost  incurable  gleet,  probably
in  consequence  of  the  excessive  relaxation  of  the  lymphatic  system
and  the  morbid  irritability  they  occasion.

492.  What  can  I  say  of  the  hurtful  nature  of  frictions  when  they
are  employed  in  those  cases  in  which  a  previous  injudicious  employ-
ment of  mercury  has  already  complicated  the  venereal  affection  with
an  accession  of  those  chronic  non-venereal  diseases  (§  487)  ?

493.  The  treatment  of  venereal  diseases  by  frictions  is  usually
commenced^  with  vcne^ctions,  purgation  and  tepid  baths.  By  these
means  it  is  imagined  that  the  system  is  best  prepared  for  this  mode
of  using  the  mercury.  Then  two  drachms  or  a  dram  and  a  half,  seldom
only  one  drachm  of  the  ointment  (composed  of  one  drachm  of  the
fluid  metal,  rubbed  up  with  the  same  quantity  by  weight  of  lard)  is
slowly  rubbed  in  beside  a  coal  fire,  upon  the  lower  extremities,  usually
every  other  day  ;  by  and  bye  the  same  process  is  repeated  on  the
upper  extremities ;  the  patient  is  required  to  keep  his  room  and  drink
frequently  of  some  thin  warm  drink.  This  process  is  continued  until
salivation  commences,  which  is  sought  to  be  checked  by  discontinuing
the  medicine  and  by  the  employment  of  the  purgatives,  baths,  diuretic
remedies,  ptisans  and  clean  linen.  When  the  mouth  has  again  returned
to  a  state  of  quiescence,  the  frictions  are  again  continued  with  the
same  or  even  increased  quantities  of  the  ointment,  until  fearful  symp-
toms forbid  their  further  employment,  or  until  the  venereal  symptoms
disappear  and  the  patient  appears  to  be  cured.  Finally,  venesections,
purgatives  and  baths  are  again  made  use  of.  During  the  whole  treat-
ment no  solid  food  is  allowed.  However  great  the  hunger  may  be,
the  patients  dare  not  partake  of  anything  but  soups.

494.  On  an  average,  thirty -two  drachms  of  ointment  and  about
forty-five  days  are  required  for  a  moderate  degree  of  lues  venerea,
but  sometimes  forty-eight  drachms^  of  ointment  (three  ounces  of
mercury  !)  have  been  rubbed  in,  and  above  three  months  employed  in
the  treatment.

495.  The  treatment  of  syphilis  by  fumigatums  with  mercury  is,

*  In  accordance  with  the  alteratiye  method  usually  adopted  at  Mootpellier.

*  Girtanner  says  hem  twelve  to  thirteen  ounces  of  ointment ;  six  and  a  half
ooDoesof  mercuiy!


A2fTIYSNER£AL  BSMKDIS8.  107

ifter  the  rabbing^in  treatment,  the  most  ancient^  mode  of  treating
this  disease,  and  for  this  purp>oso  cinnabar  is  used.  In  later  times  it
fell  into  oblivion,  except  that  it  was  still  employed  by  some  rude
people  (as  I  found  to  be  the  cose  among  the  Wallachs  of  Transylvania).
Recently  experiments  with  *it  have  been  instituted  (Lalouettc^  is
the  principal  person  who  has  revived  it),  expedients  being  devised  for
keeping  the  vapour  away  from  the  mouth  during  its  use,  and  in  place
of  cinnabar,  the  vaponr  of  volatilized  calomel,  or  of  mercury  amalga-
mated with  tin,  has  been  selected.

496.  Although  this  vapour  is  very  penetrating,  wound -clean  sing  and
deasicative,and  moreover  when  the  inspiration^  of  it  is  avoided,  does
not  readily  cause  salivation  or  diarrhoea,  yet  its  employment  for  the
complete  eradication^  of  syphilis  is  scarcely  advisable.

497.  It  should  be  bonie  in  mind  that  the  quantity  of  mercury  that
on  each  occasion  penetrates  into  the  organism  in  the  form  of  vapour
ia  quite  undeterminable,  and  can  never  be  relied  on,  as  will  be  suffi-
ciently obvious  without  my  testimony ;  experience  al:(o  shews  that  this
method  of  treatment  is  only  of  some  utility  in  slighter  coses  of  syphilis,
in  cutaneous  affections  and  the  like,  as  an  accessory  means  along  with
the  employment  of  other  mercurial  remedies  ;  and  it  not  unfrequently
becomes  injurious  when  there  is  too  great  sensitiveness  and  inflamma-
tkm  of  the  sores,  in  dry  and  spasmodic  asthma,  great  emaciation  of
the  body,  in  ulceration  of  the  womb  and  the  like.

498.  I  have  also  sometimes  noticed,  from  its  local  employment,
chancres  pass  into  buhoe^*,  and  the  local  virus  thereby  driven  into  the
general  circulation.  An  immense  number  of  authors'*  have  observed
convulsions,  gcnenil  trembling  and  fatal  apoplexies  result  from  the  use
of  cinnabar  fumigations.

490.  In  the  modem  employment  of  mercurial  fumigations,  it  is  the
custom  to  prepare  the  system,  as  in  the  case  of  frictions,  by  baths,
venesections  and  purgatives.  Tlien  according  to  Lalouette's  method
the  patient  is  placed  in  an  apparatus  (usually  a  box  made  expressly,
where  the  head  of  the  person  who  is  seated  therein,  in  a  state  of  nudity,
projects  through  the  lid,  and  his  neck  is  so  enveloped  and  all  apertures
are  so  closed  that  no  vapour  can  escape)  in  which  the  whole  body  is
played  on  by  the  vapour,  but  the  mouth  is  not  touched  by  it. The

'  Oataoeos  first  brought  it  into  use  in  1606.

*  He  has  however  had  few  imitators.

'  Which  the  older  physiciaofl  did  not  always  employ  proper  precautions  to  prevent,
uA  bj  the  dreadful  accidents  that  their  rude  practice  gave  rise  to,  they  brought  this
meuM  into  great  discredit

*  The  local  employment  of  mercurial  fumigations  with  proper  care  will  always
remain  one  of  the  most  excellent  remedies  for  the  removal  of  obstructions  and  the
improvement  of  malignant  diseases.

*  From  Joh.  Benedict  (1610)  up  to  the  most  recent  times.


108  OK  YENSBBAL  DISBABBS.

calomel  is  made  to  evaporate  in  a  sublimating  apparatus  introduced
beneath  the  seat.

500.  The  fumigation  is  repeated  usually  every  other  day,  and  from
half  a  drachm  to  one  drachm  and  a  half  of  calomel  is  employed  (oiii*
nabar  or  mercury  amalgamated  with  tin  is  seldom  used),  and .  the
patient  is  at  the  same  time  made  to  drink  frequently  some  warm  th&i
ptisan.

501.  On  an  average  about  three  ounces  of  one  of  these  substaQces
are  required  to  complete  satisfactorily  the  treatment  of  a  moderate
syphilis  (with  symptoms  of  several  Icinds)  in  thirty  days  or  thereabouts.

502.  Attempts  are  often  made  with  success  to  cure  or  to  ameliorate
malignant  venereal  ulcers  or  slight  pains  in  the  bones  by  means  of
small  local  fumigations.

503.  The  employment  of  corrosive  sublimate  in  venereal  diseases  is
also  pretty  ancient,^  but  it  was  previously  avoided  by  regular  physicians
as  a  dangerous  method  of  treatment,  or  it  was  confined  chiefly  to  the
practice  of  the  mystic  physicians,  until,  about  the  middle  of  the  present
(18th)  century,  a  more  convenient  mode  of  administering  it  with  safety
was  discovered.

504.  It  has  this  advantage,  that  it  can  be  introduced  into  the  sys-
tem in  a  determinate  small  quantity,  that  it  does  not  frequently  ez^
cite  salivation,  at  least  not  long-continued  salivation,  and  in  obstinate
gleets  does  more  good  than  harm.  It  has  oflen  succeeded  in  curing
children  affected  with  slight  symptoms  of  syphilis,  in  whom  the  other
preparations  of  mercury  could  not  be  employed  with  safety.  It  has
also  proved  of  service  in  some  slight  symptoms  of  syphilis  in  adultSi
and  another  especial  advantage  it  possesses  is  that  during  its  use  pa-
tients do  not  require  to  be  so  strictly  confined  to  their  room  as  during
the  employment  of  frictions  and  calomel,  because  it  seldom  excites
salivation,  and  because  it  does  not  produce  such  excessive  debility


'  Richard  Wiseman  {Sev.  chir.  treatiiet)  was  the  first  who  in  1676  alluded  to  the
employment  by  empirical  practitioners  of  a  watery  solution  of  corrosiye  sublimate  in
water  for  syphUis ;  and  according  to  Malouin  it  was  about  that  time  very  much  med
as  an  internal  remedy  under  the  name  of  remide  du  cavalier.  Stephen  Blaokaart  IB
1690  also  made  mention  of  its  employment.  Thereafter,  in  1717,  Turner  alluded  to
its  empirical  employment  against  this  disease.  The  better  method  of  using  it,  however,
remained  unknown  until  in  1742  Sandiez  heard  from  a  Gtirman  physician  who  had
been  some  time  in  Siberia  that  it  was  the  custom  in  that  country  (as  travellers  have
mentioned  since  1709)  to  give  in  syphilis  sublimate  dissolved  in  brandy,  ooigoiiied
with  the  use  of  vapour  hatha  Saochei  instituted  experiments  with  it^anda  few
yean  afterwarda  communicated  the  results  to  the  oelebratod  Van  Swieten^who
promulgated  this  method  about  the  year  1764  in  letters  to  Benvenuti  and  Handat^
mark,  and  subsequently  at  greater  length  in  the  fifth  volume  of  his  Oommeataries»
and,  without  making  mention  of  the  vapour  baths  (according  to  Saochea  the  most
efficient  part  of  the  treatment),  praised  it  above  ita  merits,  having  been  deceived  by
the  mendacious  eulogiumsof  his  flatterers


ASTXYENERBAL  BEHEDIS8.  lOd

the  other  ordinary  mercarial  preparations,  with  the  exception  of  the
mercurins  nitratus  and  the  oxyde  of  mercury.

505.  This  is,  however,  all  the  good  I  can  say  of  it,  for  on  the  other
hand  it  is,  1st,  of^n  inefficacious  to  effect  any  considerable  amcliora-
tioQ,  and  2d,  its  use  is  attended  by  peculiar  ill  effects  and  disadvanta-
ges.

506.  As  regards  the  first  point,  it  has  seldom,  when  given  internal-
ly, been  of  much  use  in  chancres,  in  buboes,  especially  such  as  are  of
long  standing  and  have  hard  borders  and  a  cancerous  appearance,  in
condylomata  and  other  venereal  growths,  in  swellings  of  the  bones,
and  generally  in  inveterate  symptoms  of  syphilis.  I  have  employed
it  without  success  in  chancres  and  general  syphilitic  ulcers,  notwith-
standing that  I  have  gradually  increased  it  to  the  very  largest  doses.

507.  It  has  besides  this  deceptive  character,  that  the  adventitious
acridity  it  derives  from  the  muriatic  acid  combined  with  it,  enables  it
to  excite  an  irritation  foreign  to  the  mercury  it  contains,  which  (by
oounter-irritation),  lulls  for  a  time  the  venereal  symptoms ;  which,
however,  when  the  patient  thinks  himself  cured,  usually  again  burst
forth  with  redoubled  violence.  During  its  use  the  ulcers  in  the  throat
are  cored  in  an  almost  miraculously  short  space  of  time ;  but  this
eare  is  generally  of  a  deceptive  character,  for  on  leaving  it  off,  simDar
sjmptomatic  venereal  affections  arise,  or  the  same  disease  appears
tod  spreads  with  greater  rapidity  than  before.

508.  With  regard  to  the  second  point  (§  505),  it  is  one  of  its  great
&ults,  that  its  acrid  character^  obstinately  prevents  its  entrance  into
the  lymphatic  vessels  of  the  prima)  vice.  Besides  this,  its  taste  is  hor-
rible ;  a  sensitive  stomach  cannot  bear  it  at  ail.  Oppression  of  the
stomach,  inclination  to  vomit,  colic,  inflammatory  eruptions  on  the
skin,  are  often  the  accompaniments  of  its  use.  Hectic  fever  has  been
laid  to  its  charge,  which  is  produced  by  small  ulcerations  in  the  stomach
caused  by  its  corrosive  properties.  Brambilla,  a  respectable  witness,
has  observed  it  give  rise  to  blindness  and  deafness,  spitting  of  blood,
phthisis,  hectic  fever,  and  abortion.

509.  As  a  general  rule,  its  employment  is  contraindicated  where
there  are,  slow  fever,  derangement  of  the  alimentary  canal,  tendency
to  haemoptysis,  fluent  haemorrhoids,  melancholic  temperament,  dispo-

'  Bardnuen  has  misled  Girtanner  to  apprehend  the  presence  of  arsenic  in  the  cor-
roHTe  sublimate  made  in  Holland.  I  doubt  if  arsenic  be  more  poisonous  than  corro-
iKre  sublimate,  but  still  more  do  I  doubt  (although  Bergman  has  shewn  the  posaibilUy
of  die  onioD  of  these  two  substances  in  the  process  of  sublimation)  if  corrosive  sub-
limate be  ever  really  adulterated  with  arsenic.  With  the  exception  of  Barchusen,
vboie  chemical  knowledge  cannot  be  very  implicitly  trusted  to,  no  diemist  has  ob-
■ored  this  mixture.  The  modes  Girtanner  employs  for  detecting  the  presence  of
anenic  in  corrosive  sublimate  are  either  dangerous  or  unsatisfiactory.  Those  men-
tkoed  io  my  work  On  ArtmietU  Poisoning  are  easier  and  surer.


110  OK  YBNEBBAL  DISEAfiES.

sition  to  violent  mental  emotions,  gout,  spasmodic  affections,  or  other
symptoms  of  an  irritable,  nervous  system,  and  a  dry  constitution.

510.  After  preparing  the  body  in  the  good  French  style,  by  means
of  purgatives,  venesections  and  baths  (but  these  are  not  so  absolute-
ly insisted  on  for  the  corrosive  sublimate  treatment,  as  for  that  with
other  mercurial  preparations),  it  is  usual  to  commence  the  treatment
with  the  daily  dose  of  a  quarter*  of  a  grain  dissolved  in  two  pints  of
fluid,  and  to  increase  the  dose  until  it  amounts  to  one  grain  in  the  day,
fn  the  case  of  children  an  eighth  of  a  grain  is  at  first  given  daily,  and
increased  to  one  fourth  of  a  grain  in  a  pint  of  fluid.

511.  On  an  average,  twenty- eight  grains  and  about  forty  days
were  required  to  remove  moderate  venereal  symptoms  in  adults.
From  six  and  a  half  to  ten  grains  were  sufficient  for  children.

512.  Sanchez,  who  revived  the  use  of  corrosive  sublimate,  em-
ployed conjointly  with  this  remedy,  after  the  Siberian  method,  frequent
Russian  Vapour-baths,  and  by  this  combination  he  cured  an  immense
number  of  internal  and  external  chronic  maladies,  which  he,  without  any
proof,  asserted  to  be  masked  venereal  affections,  (for  there  is  scarcely
any  tedious  or  complicated  malady  that  he  does  not  consider  as  a
consequence  of  syphilis).  These  affections  were  usually  cured,*  as
might  be  expected,  from  the  powerful  diaphoretic  means  (the  vapour
baths)  alone ;  but  they  were  not  always  venereal  diseases  because  a
plan  of  treatment  succeeded  wherein  a  mercurial  remedy  was  at  th'f
same  time  used.  lie  makes  infinite  confusion  with  the  symptoms  of
syphilis ;  it  is  certain  that  the  maladies  so  cured  were  seldom  of  that
nature,  or  only  a  small  proportion  of  them,  in  which  corrosive  sub-
limate and  diaphoretic  remedies  can,  as  is  well  known,  prove  service-
able, or  if  they  were  syphilitic  then  the  cure  was  not  permanent,  and
only  in  appearance.^

513.  Calomel  has  for  a  long  time,*  but  especially  since  the  com-
mencement of  this  century  (the  18th),  been  one  of  the  most  frequently
used mercurial  remedies  for  syphilis,  and that especially on this

'  Swieten  gave  twice  a  day  a  fifth  of  a  graia  dissolved  in  half  an  ounce  of  brandy.
1  may  mentioa  here,  incidentally,  that  Girtanner  is  wrong  when  he  says  of  this  so-
lotion,  that  corrosive  sublimate  does  not  dissolve  well  in  brandy.

*  The  sublimate  did  not  need  to  contribute  more  than  its  irritating  powers.

'  I  do  not  make  mention  of  the  corrosive  sublimate  clysters  of  Royer,  or  of  the
analogous  baths  of  Baum6,  as  the  former  caused  painful  tenesmus,  and  both  are  un-
tterviccable,  as  experience  has  shewn.

*  The  surgeon  David  de  Planis  Campy  (la  verolle  recogneue.  8.  Paris,  1623)  seems
to  be  one  of  the  first  who  gives  the  recipe  for  the  Pilules  de  la  violette  (p.  174),  whidi
along  with  purgatives,  wore  at  that  time  much  used  in  syphilis,  and  he  lauds  in
i-ather  an  empirical  manner  their  efficacy  in  this  disease ;  ^ey  contain  calomel,  a
scruple  for  a  dose.  Mayeme  followed  in  1660  with  his  pultnt  eolomelanictu.  (Oswald
making  this  mercurial  preparation.)


ijn!iyXKSBEAL  REMBDIE8.  Ill

Booount^  that  the  supposed  poisonous  acridity  of  the  motal  was  pre-
sumed to  be  corrected  and  sweetened^  in  it,  and  experience  taught
that  this  preparation,  of  all  the  internal  remedies  then  known,  had  the
least  corrosive  qualities.

514.  The  following  maxims,  deduced  from  experience,  however,  arc
imposed  to  its  reputed  mild  nature  and  much  vaunted  eflicacy  in  the
treatment  of  syphilis.  1.  The  ordinary  semitransparent  lanceolatcd
calomel  in  the  form  of  cakes  contain  no  mean  proportion  of  sublinuite.
In  this  form  it  of^en  occasions  violent  vomiting.  If  this  bo  not  the
case^  and  if  it  be  purer,  still  it  causes  almost  specifically  enormous  alvine
evacuations,  which  are  accompanied  by  pains  and  great  weakening  of
the  body.  2.  If  it  be  quite  pure,  it  is  an  almost  insoluble  mercurial
salt,  in  which  the  small  quantity  of  muriatic  acid  (oden  less  than  a
sixth  of  the  whole)  is  saturated  with  so  much  mercury,  that  but  very
little  of  it  is  dissolved  in  the  gastric  juice  and  passes  into  the  absor-
bent vessels,  the  whilst  coliclike  irritation  of  the  bowels  it  produces  expe-
dites its  expulsion.  8.  The  portion  of  it  that  penetrates  into  the  secundie
Tke  excites  almost  uncontrollable  ptyalism,  a  fault  that  seems  to  be  most
peculiarly  attached  to  it  of  all  mercurial  preparations  next  to  the  oint-
ment. It  possesses  all  the  powers  inherent  in  the  latter,  of  causing
weakness  of  the  body  ani  innumerable  chronic  maladies  thence
aecruing  (§  649) ;  or  if  possible  it  even  excels  the  ointment  in  this.

515.  Attempts  have  been  made  in  vain  to  deprive  calomel  of  its
irritating  effects  on  the  bowels,  by  subjecting  it  to  repeated  subli-
mation. The  excess  of  its  purgative  property  is  best  removed  by
boiling  it  in  a  large  quantity  of  water  along  with  a  tenth  part  of  sal-
ammoniac,  as  has  been  the  custom  in  recent  times,  or  by  mere  boiling
in  water  (as  F.  Hoffman  used  to  do),  with  the  intention  of  thereby
depriving  it  of  the  corrosive  sublimate  adhering  to  it;  it  is  also
sometimes  combined  with  opium.

51  f5.  Of  late  years^  it  has  been  used  as  a  chief  remedy  for  syphilis
in  combination  with  some  earthy  powder,  or  made  into  pills  with  dias-
coridium.  Afler  a  methodic  preparatory  treatment  by  venesections,
purgatives  and  baths,  the  patient  being  strictly  kept  to  one  well
warmed  room,  and  partaking  especially  of  warm  drinks,  first,  two
grains  were  given,  and  the  dose  increased  daily  by  about  a  grain,
aod  if  still  no  ptyalism  occurred  the  dose  was  elevated  to  a  scruple

'  The  white  precipitate  sweetened  by  boiling  with  sal-ommonic  has  the  same  action
a»  the  calomel  Girtonnor  gives  the  preference  to  Hermbst&dt's  white  precipitate
before  all  others  (I  do  not  know  why),  and  proclaims  him  as  the  discoverer  of  the
sweet  mercury  prepared  from  turbith  and  kitchen  salt^  although  ho  has  done  nothing
more  than  make  some  improvements  on  the  mode  pointed  out  in  the  Laborant
^2dpLppl56,l6d).

^  In  olden  times  it  was  sought  to  remove  the  disease  by  large  doses,  often  from  a
half  to  a  whole  drachm  givcnat  once. A  dangerous  procedure  I


112  OK  VENEREAL  DISEASEa'

daily,  and  thereafter  the  dose  was  decreased  daily  in  the  same  mao^
ner  in  which  it  had  been  increased.

617.  If  it  was  wished  to  perform  the  treatment  without  aalivatioQi
as  has  been  atterly  the  custom,  either  the  doses  were  not  increased  m>
rapidly,  or  when  the  disgusting  evacuation  occurred,  strong  puigativea
were  given,  which  oflen  did  not,  but  sometimes  did,  stop  it,  though
with  but  small  advantage  in  regard  to  the  eradication  of  the  venereal
virus,  but  with  such  manifest  loss  of  strength  (§  648,  649),  that  this
so-called  alterative  method  of  treating  syphilis  usually  lasted  longer
than  that  by  salivation,  and  was  often  not  so  efficacious  in  destroying
the  virus  as  the  latter.

518.  All  the  ills  that  can  arise  from  the  employment  of  any  irritating,
debilitating  mercurial  treatment  (§  648, 649)  have  been  observed  from
even  the  gradual  administration  of  calomel ;  the  production  of  scrofiila
and  erysipelas,  the  gouty  diathesis,  obstinate  ulcers  in  the  mouth  and
on  other  parts  of  the  body,  caries  of  the  nasal  bones,  wasting  fevefi
and,  in  short,  every  malady  that  can  be  produced  by  long-continued
mercurial  irritation  and  depression  of  the  strength.  Even  in  this
case  physicians  failed  to  perceive  that  mercury  loses  its  effect  upon
the  venereal  virus  in  proportion  as  it  causes  any  increased  evacuation,
be  that  ptyalism  or  diarrhoea,  or  whatever  other  inordinate  excretion.^

519.  Still  more  celebrated  in  modem  times  is  the  so-called  mix§d
method^  of  curing  syphilis  by  means  of  frictions  and  corrosive  subli-
mate at  the  same  time ;  whereby  it  was  thought  to  unite  the  advanta-
ges of  both,  after  the  frequent  insufficiency  of  both  used  separately
had  been  perceived.

520.  I  shall  not  dilate  upon  its  disadvantages,  as  they  are  the  same  as
1  have  pointed  out  relative  to  both  methods  separately ;  except  that
they  affected  the  system  more  severely  than  the  employment  of  a
single  mercurial  preparation,  and  that  lees  of  the  ointment  was  used,
consequently  the  excessive  salivation  caused  by  it  was  to  a  certain  ex-
tent avoided.  Indeed  it  was  often  possible  to  do  more  by  the  combi-
nation of  the  two  than  by  either  separately.

521.  For  this  purpose  it  was  usual,  after  the  ordinary  preliminary
treatment,  either  to  give  these  two  remedies  in  alternation,  adminis-
tering at  one  time  the  corrosive  sublimate  alone,  and  at  another  the
frictions  without  the  corrosive  sublimate,  or  both  were  employed  at
once,  from  one  to  two  drachms  of  ointment  every  third  or  fourth
day,  and  from  a  quarter  to  a  whole  grain  of  corrosive  sublimate  dis-
solved in  two  pints  of  water  daily.

*  Glare's  method  of  rabbiiig4Q  the  calomel  oo  the  interior  of  the  month  does  not,
it  is  true,  inoommode  the  bowels,  but  it  readily  produces  salivation,  and  is  incapabla
of  eorii^  syphilis  of  any  great  intensity.
Oardane  is  said  to  have  invented  it


AHXIYENSREAL  BEUSDUS.  118

522.  In  order  to  remove  syphilis  in  this  manner,  twelve  drachms
to  four  ounces  of  ointment,  and  from  one  drachm  to  fifteen  grains  of
corrosive  sublimate,  according  to  circumstances,  and  a  period  of  from
dnrty  to  one  hundred  days  were  required  ;  on  an  average,  nineteen
drachms  of  ointment  and  twenty-eight  grains  of  corrosive  sublimate
in  forty-eight  days,  in  moderately  deep-rooted  cases.

523.  To  gain  the  same  end,  especially  for  symptoms  of  the  prox-
imate kind,  recourse  was  also  liad  to  fumigatioM  combined  with  frio>
tioDs ;  in  which  case  a  smaller  quantity  of  ointment,  or  less  calomel
for  fumigating  was  required  than  when  either  process  was  employed
alone.

524.  Three  ounces  of  ointment  and  twelve  drachms  of  cinnabar,  or
calomel,  were  on  an  average  the  quantity  required  for  the  eradication
of  moderate  venereal  afiections.

more  than  two  different  mercurial  preparations  were  given  at  onoe,
plainly  proving,  if  I  mistake  not,  that  frequently  neither  the  employ-
ment of  a  single  one  of  the  mercurials  ordinarily  used,  nor  yet  the
mixed  employment  of  two  of  them  at  once,  sufiiced  to  cure  a  high
degree  of  syphilis.

526.  I  may  here  mention  the  not  very  new  preparation,  the  so-called
Ikrcuriut  nitratus  ^  {Solutio  mercuriality  Edin.,  Mercurius  Hquidus^
Aqua  mercurialiSy  Paris),  or  the  solution  of  mercury  in  nitric  acid.  I
admit  that  in  some  cases  it  acts  in  a  milder  and  more  antiseptic  manner
than  corrosive  sublimate,  and  for  that  reason  sometimes  does  more  for
the  cure  of  syphilis  than  the  latter ;  also  that  it  equally  seldom  ex.
cites  ptyalism.  I  will  also  admit,  that  by  employing  it  wo  ecu  sub-
stitute the  uncertain  form  of  the  mere  solution  for  the  more  defined
one  of  the  crystallized  nitrate  of  mcrcur)'' ;  also  that  it  has  this  ad-
vantage, when  the  solution  has  been  prepared  by  the  heat  of  a  sand-
bath,  that  it  is  not  decomposed  by  the  muriatic  acid  in  the  priniie  vine
into  the  pernicious  white  precipitate,  like  that  dissolved  in  vegetable
acids ;  certainly  a  great  recommendation !  But  all  this  does  not
make  it  into  a  good  preparation ;  it  always  remains  a  corrosive  me-
tallic salt,  with  which  we  must,  as  with  all  the  preparations  of  mercury
with  mineral  acids,  on  account  of  its  accidental  corrosive  properties,
frequently  go  much  more  cautiously  to  work  than  the  obstinacy  of  the
venereal  affections  will  admit  of. Its  acridity  easily  excites  vomiting

'  As  early  as  1676  Charas  employed  a  similar  solutiou  of  mercury  {essetUia  tner-
CMfialiM),  respecting  which  it  has  been  asserted,  without  reason,  that  it  was  powerless,
■od  resembled  a  weak  dilution  of  aqua  fortis,  because  the  greater  portion  of  the  mer-
CVT  has  precipitated  from  it  by  the  large  quantity  of  water  used ;  distilled  or  pure
iping^-water  has  not  this  e^ect ;  well-water  precipitates  white  precipitate  and  changes
the  liberated  nitric  add  into  nitrate  of  soda,  but  not  into  aqua  Ibrtis.
8


114  ON  YSNSaSAL  DISEASES.

in  sensitive  stomachs ;  colics  and  oppression  of  the  stomach  are  no
unusual  concomitants  of  its  employment,  and  if  we  are  thereby  ne-
cessitated to  give  it  in  smaller  doses  we  shall  seldom  obtain  our  object
of  a  radical  cure.  Profoundly  roote^l  syphilis  is  as  seldom  cured  by
it  as  by  corrosive  sublimate,  because,  like  every  other  mercurial  salt
formed  by  a  mineral  acid,  it  is,  on  account  of  its  irritating  property*
taken  up  by  the  absorbents  of  the  bowels  and  brought  into  the  genenl
circulation,  only  in  the  smallest  undeterminable  quantity.  It  deceives
us  by  the  adventitious  irritation  it  excites,  which  smothers  the  venereal
symptoms  by  its  greater  intensity,  or  by  a  mere  superficial  cure,  aa^
for  instance,  a  deceptive  amendment  iu  the  ulcers  of  the  mouth.

527.  A  third  of  a  grain  is  given  at  first  and  the  quantity  gradually
increased  until  from  two  to  three  grains  are  given  daily,  dissolved  in
two  pints  of  liquid.

528.  Mercury  changed  into  powder  by  laborious  *  shaking,  then
calcined,  dissolved  in  vinegar,  and  made  into  pills  with  manna,  waa
the  composition  of  Keyset  s  Drag^es,  of  which  from  1000  to  3000  often
had  to  be  taken  before  the  desired  effect  ensued.  This  expensive*
remedy  has  gone  out  of  fashion,  as  it  also  occasions  diarrhoea  and
salivation,  and  is  very  often  unable  to  cure  deeply-rooted  syphilis.
From  forty  to  seventy  days  were  usually  required  for  the  treatment.

529.  The  limited  character  of  my  design  does  not  require  that  I
should  attempt  the  thankless  task  of  describing  the  remaining  mer-
curial preparations  of  this  kind,  which  bear  a  great  resemblance  to
those  already  treated  of.

530.  More  nearly  allied  in  nature  to  the  best  preparation  of  mer-
cury  is  on  the  one  hand,  PlenISs  mucilaginotis  mercury^  a  remedy  that
is  indebted  for  the  efficacy  it  possesses  to  the  oxydation  of  the  mercurj'j
by  being  rubbed  up  with  mucilage.  In  this  oxydised  state  the  metal
is  very  mild  and  not  at  all  irritating,  at  least  to  the  primse  viae ;  it  is
readily  dissolved  by  the  gastric  juice,  and  brought  without  difficulty
into  the  general  circulation,  where  it  destroys  the  venereal  poison  with
the  greatest  power. This  is  the  ideal  excellence  of  this  remedy.

531.  We  may  bestow  the  same  commendation  on  Belloste^s  pills,'
the  mercurial  pills  of  the  London  and  latest  Edinburgh  pharmacopceifti
or  the  trituration  of  mercury  with  honey,  sugar,  or  crabs'  eyes.  These
preparations  owe  their  mildness  to  the  absence  of  mineral  acids,  and

^  Kcyser's  remedy  b  nothing  new.  Bemhard  Pcnot  had  (before  1618)  a  shorter
mode  of  preparing  this  remedy. Theatr.  Chym.  lib.  I,  p.  654.

'  Tweoty-seveD  livres*  worth  of  these  pills  were  required  for  the  (often  fruitlesi)
treatment ParalHU  des  diff.  m^th.  de  tr.  la  mal.  v^n. Amst  1794,  p.  178 — 272.

'  The  first  pills  of  this  sort  that  were  used  in  Europe  (in  1587)  for  syphilis  were
the  Barbaroesa  piUs  (almost  the  first  preparation  that  was  much  given  internally  for
this  disease),  the  dose  of  which  was  one  pill  daily,  which  contained  about  four  gnuns
of  mercury,  extinguiahed  by  rubbing.


AHnVSNERSAL  REMEDIES.  115

their  efficacy  to  the  portion  of  oxjdised  mercury  they  contain  that  is
10  soluble  in  our  fluids,  and  that  is  produced  by  rubbing  up  mercury
with  any  of  these  substances.

5S2.  But  how  much  is  the  value  of  such  preparations  diminished
when  we  know  how  unequal,  how  indefinite  is  the  small  portion  of
oiyde  of  mercury  that  is  produced  by  rubbing  up  with  mucilage,  &c.
The  temperature  during  the  operation,  the  strength  uf  the  mucilage,
hut  more  than  all  the  strength  and  skill  exercised  by  the  operator
during  the  rubbing-up  process,  are  subject  to  such  great  varieties,  and
render  these  and  the  other  preparations  I  have  mentioned,  such  uncer-
tun,  I  had  almost  said  such  useless,  remedies,  that  we  may  well  he-
atate  before  bestowing  on  them  even  a  moderate  amount  of  praise.

533.  I  shall  not  dwell  upon  the  fact,  that  in  Plenk's  solution  the
greater  part  of  mercury  falls  again  to  the  bottom,  and  that  it  cannot
be  kept  above  eight  days  in  summer ;  for  this  objection  he  has  ob-
liated  by  his  pills,  which,  however,  on  the  other  hand,  become  exces-
avely  hard,  and  pass  undigested  through  the  bowels  if  they  be  not
prepared  fresh  every  day.  The  greatest  disadvantage  attendant  on
die  employment  of  these  preparations  is,  that  they  sometimes  cause
ndden  salivation,  sometimes  diarrhoea,  sometimes  they  produce  no
effect,  and  seem  to  be  quite  powerless ;  a  plain  but  unnecessary  proof
of  the  truth  of  my  assertions.  They  contain  often  scarcely  the  eightieth,
but  sometimes  again  the  twentieth  part  of  the  mercury  rubbed  up  in
them,  in  the  oxydised  form.

534^  Pure  oxyde  of  the  mercury  alone^  without  the  slightest.  admlX'
Ure  of  anything  acrid^  that,  without  cans' ng  any  inconvenience  to  the
primce  vi(B,  is  unobservedly,  easily  and  certainly  assimilated  by  the
juices  of  our  body,  and  may  be  given  in  determined  quantities,  is  the
most  powerful  and  surest  mercurial  preparation,  and  is  superior  to  all
others,  which,  either  from  the  quantity  of  active  matter  they  contain
being  undeterminable,  or  from  their  corrosive  acridity,  or  also  from
their  insolubility,  arc  injurious  or  untrustworthy.

535.  In  this  important  respect  the  mercury  oxydised^  per  se,  has
become  justly  celebrated,  and  it  is  certainly  among  the  preparations
hitherto  employed,  the  one  best  calculated,  with  proper  precautions,
for  removing  the  highest  degree  of  inveterate  syphilis,  speedily,  easily,
and  surely.

536.  Of  this  oxydised  mercury,  (mere,  calrin,,  Lond.)  one  grain  is
given  daily,  and  the  dose  gradually  increased  up  to  three  grains  daily,
until  amendment  ensues  or  the  mouth  becomes  affected. It  does  not

*  lliere  is  an  extremely  ancient  though  previously  seldom  used  rem(»iiy  that  was
^hly  reoommendcd  for  the  treatment  of  syphilis  by  Anthony  Qallus,  in  1540,  un-
do liie  name  of  praseipitatum  rvbrwn  solare^  but  itp  mode  of  preparation  was  first
made  known  in  1693,  by  Genraise  Ucay.


116  OK  VJB^BSiAh  PiaKASSa

80  readiij  (for  what  reason  is  not  known)  produce  true  aaliyatioii,
and  seldom  diarrhoea  or  vomiting,  if  it  do  not  encounter  any  muriates
in  the  stomach.  As  this  last  circumstance  was  not  understood,  it  was
usual  to  mix  it  with  some  preparation  of  opium  in  order  to  guard
against  this  effect.

537.  The  mode  of  preparing  this  substance  is  well  known,  but  tlia
experienced  professional  man  must  be  aware  how  extremely  diffioolty
intricate  and  tedious  is  its  true  preparation.  These  difficulties  in  jts
manu&cture  are  so  excessive  that  it  is  one  of  the  dearest  medioa-
ments.  Now,  as  in  the  matter  of  pharmaceutical  preparations  the
frequency  of  the  adulteration  of  a  remedy  is  always  in  the  direojt
ratio  of  its  price,  I  shall  not  be  discredited  in  asserting  that  this  drug
is  very  seldom  to  be  obtained  genuine*  The  corrosive  red  precipitate^
is  probably  the  substance  most  frequently  used  for  its  adulteration,

538.  I  cannot  tell  why  such  an  expensive,  untrustworthy  and  cir-
cuitous mode  of  preparing  a  pure  mercurial  oxyde  has  been  soug^
to  be  retained.  I  know  not  why  medical  men  did  not  undertake  more
frequently  to  precipitate  a  pure  metallic  oxyde  from  the  solution  fai
nitric  acid,  and  to  bring  it  into  general  use  In  the  treatmoit  of  vene-
real diseases,  it  has  been  prepared,  but  assuredly  a  number  of  se-
rious accidents^  have  been  observed  from  its  administration,  the
source  and  remedy  of  which  it  was  thought  impossible  to  discover.

539.  Chemistry  should  have  taught  them  that  their  solvents,  as  alao,
all  their  precipitants,  were  contaminated  with  muriatic  or  vitriolic  add
which  imperceptibly  adulterated  their  precipitate  with  those  dangerous
mercurial  precipitates  (see  preface).  As  regards  turbith,  it  is  well
known  to  have  frequently  caused  death,  and  I  once  saw  a  strong  per-
son die  in  strong  convulsions  from  taking  two  grains  of  white  precipi-
tate.

540.  We  can  expect  the  best  effects  only  from  a  mercurial  oxyde
precipitated  from  pure  nitrate  of  mercury  by  lime  free  from  all  ad-
mixture ;  we  may  expect  that  well-prepared  soluble  mercury  will  re-
move the  most  deeply  engrafted  syphilis  easily  and  surely.  But  of
this  more  below.

CHAPTER  III.

NON-MEROURIAL  REMEDIEa

541.  The  dreadful  effects  of  injudicious  mercurial  treatments,  and

'  We  may  ooDTiDce  ounelyes  of  its  presence  by  boiling  with  acetic  add ;  H  >»-
maim  undiBMlYed  wfaOst  the  oo^dised  mercury  is  taken  up  in  eolatioo.

*  The  mere,  prmip.  futcue  WtuntU  has,  according  to  Girtanner,  fallen  into  disaaeL.
Bladc't  pulv.  meratr.  ctfK  (Certainly  one  of  the  best  of  the  ordinary  preparatiooB)  stiU
letaim  its  poettaoiL  It  is  giren  at  fint  in  from  one  to  two  grains  daily,  and  gradnallj
inoreased  to  six-grains.  It  is  CtffroBoi  being  free  from  fiuilts,  as  I  hare  shewn  in  the  pra-
Cmc,  but  it  approaches  near  to  my  solnble  mercury.


AMnVVMCUBAIr '  ttXlCSDIXB.  11 7

Mr  frequent  inefiksaoy,  has  from  time  to  time  diverted  the  attention
•f  practitioners  from  the  diyine  metal,  the  true  antisyphiliUc  specific,
ind  their  conscientiousness  led  them  to  resort  to  remedies  from  the
.-egetable  and  animal  kingdoms,  in  order  to  avoid  the  poisonous  effects
:hit,  according  to  them,  every  medicine  in  general,  and  mercury  in
particular,  exercises  on  the  human  body.

542.  It  is  probable  tiiat  the  venereal  disease  at  the  commencement
of  its  extension  over  Europe  spread  much  more  rapidly,  and  in  its  ra-
pid course  produced  more  disastrous  symptoms  than  are  now  observed.
Hie  inexperience  of  physicians  that  then  prevailed  might  have  ren.
dered  them  unable  to  meet  the  horrible  effects  of  the  virus,  and  pa-
tients were  readily  abandoned  to  the  practice  of  rash  empirics ;  the
diigrace  of  the  disease  also  might  have  the  effect,  as  is  still  the  case,
of  driving  the  sufferers  to  these  nameless  vagabonds,  partly  seduced
bj  thdr  wonderful  promises,  and  partly  in  order  to  recover  their  health
ia  privacy. These  unconscientious  advisers,  who  were  always  pro-
Tided  with  the  most  active  medicines,  had  as  usual  no  object  but  to
fin  their  purses  quickly,  and  in  a  short  time  to  bring  about  the  decep*
tire  semblance  of  a  cure  without  caring  for  the  afler  effects. Hence
it  happened  not  unfrequently  that from  their  furious  salivation  the
noft  dangerous  dilapidations  and  maimings  of  the  body  resulted,
vhkhwere  often  more  horrible  than  the  venereal  disease  itself;  many
died  from  these  effects,  whilst  the  lues  venerea  more  rarely  proved
fatil. What  could  be  more  natural  than  that  physicians  generally
fadd  the  blame  upon  the  mercury,  and  hesitated  to  employ  it? What
ooold  be  more  natural than  that  from  an  early  period  (from  1515^)
they  looked  about  for  non-metalic  remedies,  which,  as  they believed
were  more  suited  to  the  human  body  ?

543.  Guaiac  wood  was  the  first  lucky  hit  in  this  way,  which  the
Chevalier  von  Huttcn,  before  any  one  else,  undertook  to  praise  in  a
book  specially  written  for  that  pui7>osc,^  alleging  that  it  had  worked,
miracles  on  him  afler  the  fruitless  employment  of  the  most  dangerous
mereurial  treatment. He  died  nevertheless  of  syphilis.

544.  The  an ti venereal  plants  probably  first  derived  their  reputation
from  America;  for  want  of  mercury  the  inhabitants  of  tliat  continent
tried  their  most  potent  plants  for  this  disease,  and  in  many  respects
they  may  have  caused  at  least  alleviation  of  the  disease.

545.  After  guaiac  wood,  cinchona  bark,^  sarsuparilla,^  and,  finally,
oesnothos  and  lobelia,  gradually  obtained  a  reputation  in  Europe.
Prom  the  resemblance  of  their  mode  of  action  to  that  of  these  plants,

'  Oirtaimer  eays  ag  early  a  1509.
'  After  him  an  enormous  number  of  others.
'  Aoooivling  to  Girtanner  in  the  year  1625.
*  Aooording  to  Girtanner  m  1580.


118  ON  YENEBEAL  DISSA8E8.

we  added  to  them  mezereum,  conium,  walnut-husks  and  dulcamara.
Ammonia,  opium  and  lizards  completed  the  list.

546.  Guaiac  wood  was  and  is  still  given  in  a  strong  decoction  in
water  of  from  one  to  several  ounces  per  diem,  drunk  warm ;  it  is  aa
acrid  vegetable  substance,  possessing  much  power  to  act  on  the  skia
and  urinary  secretion.  The  small  green  twigs  of  this  tree,  which  the
Americans  use,  arc  probably  still  more  powerful  than  the  hard,  dry
wood  employed  by  us. It  is  most  useful  in  soft,  spongy  systems.^

547.  Sarsaparilla  fell  gradually  into  complete  disrepute,  until  later^
physicians  again  commenced  prescribing  it  to  the  extent  of  three
ounces  daily  in.  strong  watery  decoction.^  Cinchona  bark  underwent
the  same  fate,  but  has  as  yet  found  no  resuscitator.

548.  Of  lobelia,  which  was  so  much  recommended  by  the  North
Amerians,  a  handful  of  the  dried  roots  is  boiled  in  twelve  pints  of  water
down  to  sLx  or  nine  pints,  and  half  a  pint  of  this  is  given  to  the  patient,
at  first  twice,  thereafter  four  times  a  day,  until  the  diarrhoea  it  causes
becomes  intolerable.  It  is  then  left  off  for  three  or  four  days,  and  again
given  until  the  cure  is  completed.

549.  Mezereum^  has  been  considered  to  possess  similar  proper-
ties.* Two  drachms  of  this  were  boiled  in  three  pints  of  water  down
to  two  pints,  and  half  a  pint  drunk  from  twice  to  four  times  daily.
daily,  boiled  in  water,  and  mixed  with  milk.  A  much  larger  quantity
could  be  given  by  increasing  the  dose  gradually.^  The  green  husks
of  walnuts  are  said  to  have  been  not  less  efficacious.''

^  Oirtaimer  alleges  that  it  speedily  causes  incurable  consumption  in  weak  and  thm
persons.
'  Especially  W.  Fordyce. Oirtanncr  has  never  soon  any  good  effects  from  its  uae.
'  As  much  as  fifteen  pounds  of  this  dear  medicament  were  used  for  one  treatment

*  I  find  as  early  as  1653,  in  the  works  of  Augerius  Ferriftre  of  Thoulouse  {De
pudendagra  lue  hispan.  lib.  duo.  Antwerp,  1664,  p.  26),  this  shrub  much  recom-
mended fur  this  disease  in  the  form  of  decoction.

*  Especially  in  pains  of  the  bones  and  venereal  cutaneous  diseases.

*  So  that  it  shall  not  occasion  convulsions  or  vomiting,  as  Girtanncr  remarks,  who
recommends  this  plant  highly  in  this  disease.  *

'  Girtanner  speaks  very  highly  of  tliis  remedy,  to  the  extent  of  two  ounces  daflj
in  decoction,  when  it  is  fircsh,  and  in  the  form  of  extract  for  the  most  inveterate
symptoms.  This  writer  also  recommends  a  perfectly  new  non-mercurial  remedy,  the
Astragalus  exscapus  (he  gives  an  engraving  of  it),  from  the  reports  of  his  firiendB  in
nodes  of  the  bones,  venereal  cutaneous  eruptions,  venereal  warts,  <i:c.  Winterl  fizvt
mentioned  it  as  an  ordinary  domestic  remedy  for  this  disease  in  Hungary ;  after  him
Quarin  spoke  highly  of  it ;  Huncczovsky  has  seen  good  effects  from  it  in  gout,  but  not
in  venereal  affections.  It  causes  pui^ng,  diueresis,  most  frequently  copious  diapho*
resis,  and  a  kind  of  cutaneous  eruption.  One  ounce  boiled  in  a  pint  of  water  down
to  three-fourths  is  given  daily.

The  ledum  palustre  may  probably  act  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner,  espedaUy
in  venereal  skin  diseases ;  of  this  we  should  give,  daily,  at  first  half  an  oimce,  gradu*
ally  increasing  the  doee  to  an  ounce  in  infiiskm.


jUfinVXNSBBAL  BS1C£DIES.  119

550.  I  have  elsewhere  observed  that  many  very  different  irritant  sub-
fltanoes  are  capable  of  producing  amelioration  in  venereal  affections,
inaamuch  as  the  counter-irritation  caused  by  them  alters  the  morbid
disposition  of  the  primarily  affected  parts,  and  the  pains  they  are  sub-
ject to  (e.  g^  the  venereal  pains  in  the  bones)  are  alleviated  by  the
greater  irritant  efiects  of  the  drug.

551.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  most  of  these  plants  appear  to  have
acted  when  they  have  done  any  good ;  at  all  events,  this  is  the  case
vith  the  purgative  herbs,  lobelia  and  mezereum,  and  the  diuretic  and
diaphoretic  ones,  guaiac,  walnut  shells  and  dulcamara.  In  this  respect
tUs  good  effect  resembles  that  of  turbith,  corrosive  sublimate  and
blisters  (applied  to  swellings  of  the  bones.  The  mucilaginous  diu-
retic sarsaparilla,  may  contribute  not  a  little  to  the  diminution  of  the
morbid  irritability.)

WL  If  they  be  given  in  conjunction  with  the  mercurial  treat-
mtot,  their  irritating  power  may  also  assist  the  action  of  the  metal,
bat  ovdy  in  the  manner  in  which  ginger  assists  in  strengthening  the
itomach  when  given  along  witli  bitters,  which  it  is  unable  to  do  of
itaelf.  Perhaps  idso,  when  by  a  long-continued,  fruitless  use  of  mer-
<Diy,  the  body  has  become  insensible  to  the  curative  stimulus  of  Uiis
metal,  the  new,  unaccustomed  irritation  of  these  drugs  may  have
called  amelioration,  and  on  this  account  they  were  regarded  as  anti-
venereal.

553.  The  last-mentioned  plants  may  often,  when  given  quite  alone,
in  consequence  of  their  great  depurative  power,  have  cured  a  number
of  external  diseases,  even  such  as  arc  of  a  painful  character,  which
from  want  of  pathological  knowledge  had  been  considered  as  venereal.
With  respect  to  mezereum  and  guaiac,  at  least,  it  is  certain  that  they
cinnot  cure  the  most  indubitable  incipient  sign  of  syphilis,  e,  /?.,  the
copper-coloured  spots ;  how  then  could  they  remove  inveterate  lues  ?

554.  But  more  than  this,  it  was  the  custom  formerly  (and  is  so
still)  for  physicians,  in  ignorance  of  venereal  semeiotics,  to  look  upon
diseases  arising  from  the  long  use  of  mercury,  such  as  caries,  tu-
mours, rheumatic  symptoms,  scrofula,  &c.,  as  of  a  true  venereal  na-
ture, and  when  guaiac,  mezereum,  and  the  like,  lemoved  these  affec-
tions, to  laud  these  plants,  as  antisyphilitic  remedies.^ The  foreign
irritation  of  these  drugs,  especially  of  guaiac,  has  not  unfrequently
been  of  great  service  in  those  after  sufferings  resulting  from  the  long-
eontinued  use  of  mercurial  treatment,  which  had  arisen  from  mor-
bid  irritability  and  dissolution  of  the  humours :  obstinate  ulceiB,
trembling,  febrile  states,  and  the  like,  the  first  of  which  are  still  some-
times mistaken  for  venereal.

'  Sfjme  of  the  andents  were  more  diBceniing  than  these  ehort-siglited  persona
when  thcnr  said :  /im«  venn<e  mercuriui  antidatutn,  mercurii  ffuaieum.


ISO  OK  VXNEREAIf  DISlABia

555.  I  may  be  permitted  to  eBtertain  almost  the  same  notions
q>ecting  Peyrilhe's^  antidote  to  venereal  disease,  ammonia.  With
the  exception  of  cariee  and  nodes  of  the  bones^  aphthse  of  the  >yagina*
schirrhous  buboes  and  urinary  fistulaB,  he  alleges  that  it  is  specific  iSw
all  other  venereal  symptoms.  Of  ammonia  obtained  from  sal  ammo-
niac by  means  of  potash,  he  directs  from  fifleen  to  eighteen  grainji
(and  in  bloated  individuals  as  much  as  thirty  grains)  dissolved  in
four  or  five  ounces  of  fluid,  to  be  taken  early  in  the  morning  and  four
hours  afler  dinner,  and  this  to  be  continued  for  about  eight  days,  thea
to  be  left  off  for  the  same  time  and  again  used  as  long,  again  omitted
and  again  used,  until  the  affection  is  removed  I  believe  this  sab-
stance  to  be  really  a  powerful  adjuvant  in  the  treatment  of  venereal
diseases,  and  I  go  so  far  as  to  believe,  that  if  any  medicine  can  be  ct
use  in  syphylis,  besides  mercury,  this  is  the  one.

550.  Plenk,  Murray  and  others  aflirm  that  they  have  seen  foUow-
ing  its  employment  increased  inflammation  of  the  venereal  ulcers.  In-
flammatory suppression  of  gonorrhoea  with  swelled  testicle,  strangoiy
with  hematuria,  and  several  other  disagreeable  effects.  It 'has  proTsd
of  much  service  in  my  hands  in  chronic  affections  resulting-  from  •
long  course  of  mercurial  treatment,  and  has  materially  aided  in  dimia^
ishing  the  morbid  irritability.

557.  Before  all  other  remedies,  however,  opium^  owes  its  reputatkm
to  this  virtue.  Hunter  could  not  succeed  in  curing  the  slightest  ven&'
real  symptoms  with  opium,  although  he  gave  it  in  increasing,  and  at
length  in  the  very  largest  doses,  whereby  he  once  killed  a  man  with-
out previously  curing  his  disease.  He  and  Grant,  like  myself,  found
it  a  chief  remedy  in  the  morbid  irritability  resulting  from  the  abuse
of  mercury.

558.  Hemlock  has  probably  just  as  little  specific  virtue  in  syphilis^
and  all  the  action  it  has  may  be  owing  to  its  peculiar  irritant  power,
and  even  when  it  has  proved  serviceable  for  supposed  venereal  after-
sufferiogs,  it  might  have  acted  by  virtue  of  its  sedative  and  anti-scro-
fulous powers.

559.  The  lizard,  which  was  first  employed  in  America,  and  subse-
quently also  in  Europe,  according  to  report  with  extremely  h^py
effects,  in  inveterate  syphilis  with  nodes,  pains  in  the  bones,  ulcers
and  slow  fevers,  besides  other  diseases,  is  the  lacerta  agilis^  L.,  a  large
(greenish  coloured)  species ;  the  smaller  varieties  also  are  useful,
though  in  a  less  degree.  They  reside  in  old  walls,  and  prey  upon
spiders,  flies,  ants,  earth-worms,  crickets  and  locusts.

'  Lemcrj  and  Sjlvius  had  already  recommended  ammonia  in  syphilis,  as  Girtan-
ner  remarks.

*  It  is  DO  novelty  to  give  it  in  venereal  diseases.  I  found  that  Femel  freqiieiiflj
employed  it  hi  syphilis  as  early  as  1660.  Willis  and  SimoD  Panli  followed  ha  ex-
ample, as  Qirtanner  obserree.


AinnmrxREAL  bemsdibs.  131

MO.  We  take  the  liYfng  animal,  quickly  out  off  its  head,  tail  and
1^8,  extract  the  Ti8oe^^  akin  it,  and  cut  it  into  a  number  of  small
hite,  which  we  make  the  patient  swallow  with  some  liquid,  while  still
afire  and  warm^  either  alone  or  covered  with  liquorice  powder,  or
ToBed  np  in  a  wafer,  but  without  further  preparation.  Of  the  larger
kh-],  the  flesh  of  one  or  two  is  to  be  swallowed  daily  ;  of  the  smaller
Und  that  of  several.  From  twenty  to  one  hundred  are  required  to
complete  the  treatment.

561.  The  chief  effects  resulting  from  their  use  are,  increased
heat  of  the  whole  organism,  a  certain  amount  of  nausea,  a  (frequently
eoplous)  flow  of  yellowish  opapue  saliva,  occurring  afler  twelve  or
twenty-one  have  been  taken,  sometimes  sooner,  a  (sometimes  profuse)
fetid  diaphoresis,  fetid  urine,  and  also  occasionally  copious  bilious  al-
Tine  evacuations.

562.  According  to  the  observations  of  some  writers,  they  are  pro-
bibly  not  less  efficacious  when  the  flesh  is  minced  fine,  made  into
pUs  by  means  of  flour,  and  so  swallowed.  This,  however,  remains
to  be  determined  by  experience.  This  remedy  dcsen^es  attention,  as
it  it  in  itself  so  harmless.  Its  chief  efficacy  seems  to  reside  in  the  vo*
Iitile  alkaline  component  parts.  It  may  be  very  powerful,  but  we
ire  unable  to  determine  if  it  can  radicaUy  cure  true  syphilis.

563.  But  whilst  the  other  reputed  antisyphilitic  remedies  are  for
die  most  part  only  able  to  cure  accessory  symptoms,  heterogeneous
mnnants  of  the  venereal  disease,  and  the  various  affections  produced
by  the  irritation  occasioned  by  the  abuse  of  mercury,  all  of  which
hive  been  considered  to  be  venereal  merely  on  account  of  their  co-
existence with  syphilis,  it  always  remains  an  established  fact  that
mercury  is  the  only  thing  that  removes  all  sorts  of  venereal  affections
with  certainty,  so  that  we  have  no  need  to  look  about  us  for  any  other
remedy  for  venereal  diseases,  provided  the  preparation  we  possess  be
of  the  very  best  kind.


THIRD  DIVISION.

REMOVAL OF  THE OBSTACLES  TO THE MERCURIAL

TREATMENT.

CHAPTER  I.

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  ORDINARY  PREPARATORY  AND  ACCESSORY

TREATMENT.

564  Those  to  be  subjected  to  the  mercurial  treatment  (with  very  few
exceptions)  are  prepared,  after  the  French  fashion  (§  493),  by  purging.


122  ON  ySNSREAL  DIBEA8ES.

venesections  and  tepid  baths ;'  the  last,  moreover,  are  employed  often
during  the  whole  treatment  and  during  the  after  treatment  (Haguenot
was  the  first  who  sought  to  make  their  use  general),  but  the  first  aze
used  at  various  intervals.  At  the  same  time  a  watery,  non-nutritioua
diet  is  given,  consisting  chieHy  of  a  multitude  of  tepid  and  warn
drinks ;  and  all  this  is  {lone  in  order  to  guard  against  any  symptom  of
the  venereal  disease  inimical  to  the  cure,  and  to  make  the  mercury  all
the  more  efficacious.

565. 1  have  oflen  puzzled  myself  in  vain  to  determine  how  this  prepar-
atory treatment  could  have  the  effect  of  preventing  all  ill  consequences
during  the  treatment,  and  I  believe  I  have  found  that  all  this  is  done
under  the  erroneous  impression  that  all  possible  disagreeable  symptoms
occurring  during  the  mercurial  treatment,  even  the  salivation  that  espe-
cially ensues  under  this  method,  arc  of  a  purely  inflammatory  nature,
and  depend  solely  on  tension  of  the  fibres  and  an  excess  of  red  blood.
This  must  have  been  the  indication  that  guided  the  originators  of  this
method,  or  they  must  have  chosen  it  for  want  of  something  else  to
do,  for  in  no  other  case,  except  to  remove  the  most  violent  pure  in-
flammatory diathesis  of  the  organism,  is  it  capable  of  doing  the  slight-
est good ;  in  all  other  states  of  the  body  whatsoever  it  is  quite  the
reverse  of  beneficial.

560.  Now  as  pure  inflammatory  diseases  and  symptoms  are  rare
amongst  us  now-a-days,  especially  among  the  inhabitants  of  large
towns,  and  all  those  symptoms  in  this  kind  of  diseases  that  can  be  re-
garded as  inflammatory  are  chiefly  of  scorbutic,  erysipelatous,  scrofu-
lous, rheumatic,  or  of  that  character  which  I  have  termed  irritability
from  nervous  weakness,  and  as  all  strength-destroying,  debilitating
and  enervating  treatment  aggravates  all  the  symptoms  in  the  latter
case,  as  experience  teaches,  we  perceive  on  the  one  hand  how  inappro-
priate that  common  treatment  by  the  so-called  alterative,  emol*
lient,  attenuating,  relaxing  and  antiphlogistic  method  is,  and  on  the
other  hand  how  much  of  the  frequently  disastrous  results  of  that  French
weakening  system.

567.  There  are  few  constitutions  so  good  as  to  be  able  to  bear  up
against  the  force  of  this  strength- wasting  method,^  and  not  very  many
in  which  the  amendment  produced  by  the  mercury  does  not  suddenly

*The  number  used  in  the  preparatory  treatment  atMontpeUier  is  usually  thirty,
without  reckoning  what  are  employed  when  salivation  sets  in  and  after  the  treatmeot.

*  This  method,  which  in  the  opinion  of  its  defenders  is  best  calculated  to  check
the  salivation  and  to  point  out  to  the  mercury  the  direct  way  of  eradicating  the  vima^
is  termed  the  alterative  treatment.  The  Spanish  physician  Almenar,  as  Girtaimer
observes,  was  one  of  the  first  to  insist  on  the  use  of  purgatives  and  baths  for  this
purpose ;  Chikoynean  reiterated  his  maxims,  and  Haguenot  increased  the  number  of
baths  to  be  used.


BKMOYAL  OF  OBSTACLES  TO  MEBCUBIAL  TBEATMENT. 128

oome  to  A  stand-still  in  the  middle  of  the  treatment,  in  which  an  ener-
Tating,  uncontrollable  salivation^  does  not  occur,  which  cats  away  the
nasal  and  palatial  bones  and  gives  rise  to  corroding,  often  sloughing
ulcers  of  the  mouth  and  tongue ;  in  which  the  borders  of  bubonic  ab-
scesses do  not  suddenly  become  everted,  spread  in  a  cancerous  man-
ner, pour  out  fetid  corrosive  ichor,  and  terminate  in  mortification ;  in
which  cutaneous  ulcers  and  condylomata  do  not  take  on  an  unhealthy
suppuration,  become  painful,  and  degenerate  into  deep  sinuses  and
fistulous  ulcers ;  in  which  swellings  of  the  periosteum  do  not  occasion
more  speedy  caries  of  the  bones  beneath,  and  in  which  sinking  of  the
strength,  uncontrollable  diarrhisas,  debilitating  perspirations,  and  the
vhole  array  of  symptoms  of  hectic  fever,  do  not  occasionally  effect
the  deliverance  of  the  unhappy  sufferer  from  the  methodical,  urtificial-
Ijr  produced  disease,  by  conducting  him  prematurely  to  the  Anal  goal
of  all  mortals  (^  648,  649).

508.  This  French  folly  of  pretending  to  assist  the  action  of  mercury
bj  enervating  the  body  is  cat  ried  to  such  a  height,  that  when  in  the
treatment  of  venereal  diseases  the  last  named  disagreeable  symptoms
occurred,  which  were  chiefly  produced  or  at  least  aggravated  by  the
debilitating  accessory  treatment,  frequently  nothing  more  was  done
than  to  renew^  or  to  increase  the  anti-phlogistic  method,  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  patient.

569.  Physicians  did.  not  observe  that  the  serious  symptoms  that
occur  during  the  use  of  mercury  in  this  disease  are  seldom  of  a  purely
inflammatory  character,  and  that  when  thoy  will  not  yield  to  the  anti-
syphilitic  metal,  an  ext-css  of  corporeal  strength  and  of  pure  strong
blood  is  certainly  not  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon ;  in  a  word,  they
imagined  they  had  to  do  with  savage  Gauls  and  rude  Germans  whose
seething  blood  required  to  be  drawn  ofl*,  whose  flaming  nervous  force
hid  to  be  smothered  by  pouring  in  streams  of  water,  and  whose  over-
tense  fibres  needed  to  be  relaxed  by  soaking  in  a  succession  of  warm
baths,  so  as  to  prevent  the  irritating  metal  exciting  the  most  uncon-
trollable inflammatory  symptoms; whereas  they  really  had  only  to
deal  with  their  degenerate  descendants,  their  mere  shadows,  whose
already  weak  blood  they  draw  off  in  large  quantity,  in  order  to  make
it  still  more  watery  by deluging  it  with  ptisans ; whose  delicate
stomachs  and  bowels  they  weakened  into  dyspepsia  by  mucilaginous
fluids  and  laxatives,  and  whose  skin,  that  was  already  fre(][Uently  too

'  Amhu:  mentiona  that  Morond  employed  on  five  soldiers  the  same  kind  of  frio-
tkns;  of  three  of  these  \pho  got  no  batlu  ono  only  had  slight  salivation,  but  the  two
othen  who  daily  employed  baths  at  the  same  time  were  salivated  violently  and  for
tloDg  time.

•  As  may  be  seen  in  the  fourth  part  of  Ohaervationa  faites  et  publieia  9ur  Us
Sfirtntet  nttkodes  cTatbniniatrer  le  tnacure  darts  les  maladies  vineriennes,  par  de
J70nie.-.Pari8, 1779.


IH  OS  YEirSREAL  DI8EA8SS;

sensitive  to  every  change  of  weather,  thej  weakened  by  heated  aptr^
ments  and  repeated  baths,  to  the  highest  degree  of  irritability  and
extreme  susceptibility  to  take  cold.  Experience  teaches  often  enough
that  those  cases  in  which  this  method  was  employed  to  its  full
extent  on  the  most  approved  principles  had  almost  always  the  saddest
termination.  We  cannot  readily  conceive  of  anything  more  inappro*
priate  than  to  weaken  fibres  that  ought  to  be  strengthened,  to  abstract
vital  force  that  ought  to  be  multiplied,  and  to  diminish  the  tone  of  the
nerves  that  require  strength  for  the  due  performance  of  their  operations!

570.  If  it  be  alleged  that  this  method  is  directed  more  against  the
venereal  affections  than  against  the  symptoms  to  be  dreaded  from  the
employment  of  the  mercurial  treatment,  why,  it  may  be  asked,  should
the  venereal  disease,  whose  nature  is  the  very  opposite  of  purely
inflammatory,  be  combatted  with  antidotes  calculated  for  subduing  the
most  violent  inflammatory  fever  of  a  sunburnt  savage  ?

571.  If  it  be  contended  that  the  bad  symptoms  and  obstinate  after>
sufferings  during  the  treatment  of  venereal  diseases  may  arise  from
the  irritating  metallic  poison  used,  I  will  readily  grant  that  they  occur
even  where  the  French  preparatory  and  accessory  treatment  has  not
been  employed,  but  I  am  all  the  more  astonished  that  the  latter  can
equal  injury,  and  thus  lends  a  helping  hand  to  the  devastations  of  the
mercury.

572.  If  it  be  asserted  that  the  venesections,  the  confinement  to  a
heated  room,  the  streams  of  warm  drinks,  and  the  baths,  constitute  a
diaphoretic  treatment,  which  is  to  keep  the  mercury  from  irritating  the
bowels  and  salivary  glands,  I  ask,  what  is  the  object  of  the  anti-
diaphoretic  purgatives  ?  I  ask,  has  not  experience  shewn  that  such  a
sudorific  treatment  most  frequently  creates  a  tendency  to  take  cold,
whose  effexits  are  worse  in  proportion  to  the  weakening  tendency  of
the  diaphoretic  treatment  ?

CHAPTERII.

PREPARATORY  TREATMENT.

573.  If  there  be  any  general  method  whereby  those  who  enter  into
a  venereal  hospital  must  be  artificially  prepared  for  the  mercurial
treatment,  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  shews  us  a  directly  opposite
system  should  be  adopted,  since  laxity  of  fibre  and  nervous  weakness
have  come  to  be  the  chief  ingredients  of  all  the  chronic  diseases  of
our  age.

574.  In  most  cases  of  old-standing  syphilis'  we  observe  a  general
weakness  of  the  body,  a  pale  countenance,  a  dull  eye,  relaxed  muscles,

>  Also  in  cases  of  idic^thio  Tenereal  diseases,  especially  those  fiar  which  meraoij
has  alreadj  been  employed  in  vain.


BEMOYAL  OF  OBBTACLES  TO  MSBCURIAL  TREATMENT. 126

and  frequentlj,  on  aooount  of  the  low  fever  kept  up  by  the  venereal
irritation,  a  weakened  digestion,  a  smal],  unsteady,  very  rapid  pulse,
toidency  to  cramps,  and  all  the  signs  of  increased  morbid  irritability  of
the  whole  nervous  system.

575.  All  these  symptoms  indicate  tonics  fbr  the  preparatory  treat-
Bent,  which  are  all  the  more  necessary  because  without  them  the
nercury  increases  the  delicate  state  of  the  constitution,  or  thereby  is
prevented  from  exercising  the  requisite  power  over  the  venereal  \'irus.

576.  If  they  be  neglected,  then  the  low  fever  and  tendency  to
scrofulous  inflammation  increases,  and,  what  is  worst,  on  the  adminis-
tntion  of  the  smallest  quantity  of  mercury  a  dysenteric  diarrhoea,  an
uncontrollable  diaphoresis,  or  most  commonly  an  irrepressible  saliva-
tkMi,  breaks  out,  that  consumes  all  the  strength,  and  frequently  leaves
behind  it  the  afler-sufierings  often  alluded  to,  frequently  without  having
mdicated  the  syphilitic  virus.

577.  Not  unfrequently  a  tendency  of  the  system  to  rheumatic  and
gouty  acridities,  to  scrofula  and  to  scorbutus,  forms  an  impediment  to
the  mercurial  treatment;  and  these  diatlieses  must  previously  be
nmoved  if  we  would  not  see  these  affections  uncommonly  aggravated
during  or  after  the  venereal  treatment,  or  if  we  would  employ  the
mercury  with  certainty  and  efficacy.

578.  Accordingly,  in  order  to  diminish  beforehand  the  morbid
lialnlity  to  the  above  (§  576)  evacuations,  and  to  eradicate  the  un-
iiTourable  diatheses  alluded  to,  it  is,  for  the  reasons  given,  indispensably
necesisary  to  employ  the  strengthening  preparatory  treatment  according
to  circumstances,  with  special  regard  to  the  removal  of  the  scrofulous,
scorbutic  or  other  disposition,  according  as  the  one  or  the  other  betrays
its  presence  by  its  diagnostic  marks.

579.  Among  general  tonic  remedies  1  reckon  footbatlis,  half,  and  at
length  whole  baths  of  cold  (50°)  water,  each  used  for  a  few  minutes,
once  or  several  times  a  day,  combined  with  energetic  friction^  of  the
parts  bathed.  For  internal  remedies,  at  first  the  bitter  vegetable
extracts  (if  the  morbid  irritability  is  very  great),  before  proceeding  to
the  astringent  bitter  medicines,  as  cinchona  and  the  like,  if  the  body
ifi  bloated  and  full  of  indolent  juices,  we  may  at  first  combine  them
with  carminative  and  stimulating  things,  as  cardamoms,  peppermint
oil,  and  so  forth,  in  order  to  accelerate  their  action.  Among  the  best
of  strengthening  remedies  I  reckon  the  use  of  moderate  exercise  in
the  open  air.  Great  irritability  from  weakness,  with  urgent,  painful
symptoms,  demands  the  cautious  external  and  internal  employment  of
opium,  combined  with  the  strengthening  treatment.  But  if  the  irrita-
tftbiility  from  weakness  be  not  excessive,  we  may  soon  have  recourse  to

bark,  iron -filings  and  sulphuric  acid  as  internal  tonics. I  now  come  to

I I  ■  ■  ■■•II  I.I

'  With  woollen  towole.


126  OK  ySNBBEAL  BISEASSS.

the  accessory  treatment  of  the  prevailing  morbid  concomitant  diathesis.

580.  It  is  only  in  the  case  when  previous  to  or  during  the  employ-
ment of  the  strengthening  method  the  tongue  becomes  white,  and
thirst  for  cold  water,  severe  headache,  a  full,  hard  pulse,  &c,  occur,
without  any  bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  fulness  of  the  abdomen,  indigestion,
or  commotion  of  the  bile,  then  and  then  only  must  we  make  a  moderate
bleeding,  which  paves  the  way  for  the  tonic  treatment,  which  may
then  be  gradually  increased.

581.  If  we  combine  the  tonic  treatment  with  the  fresh  expressed
juices  of  the  cochleara,  the  arum  root,  and  the  water-cress,  and  aid  it
by  fermented  liquors,  fresh  fruits,  and  exercise  in  the  open,  dry  air,
we  shall  subdue  the  scorbutus,  which  offers  the  greatest  impediments
to  the  cure  of  sy  philis.  For  if,  without  this  precaution,  we  proceed  at  onee
to  the  employment  of  the  mercurial  treatment  on  a  scorbutic  venereal
patient,  there  occur,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  energetic  action  of  this
metal,  rapidly  spreading  foul  ulcers,  which  give  sufficient  evidence  of
their  non-venereal  nature  by  their  being  worst  at  this  particular  time*

582.  The  strengthening  method  alluded  to,  combined  with  the
employment  of  carbonate  of  ammonia  and  small  doses  of  ipecacuan^
or  burnt  sea- weed,  will  prevent  the  scrofulous  diatheses  interfering
with  the  cure  of  syphilis.

583.  In  like  manner  guaiac  resin  dissolved  by  the  combined  action
of  potash  and  alcohol,  but  especially  the  extract  of  aconite  conjoined
with  the  tonics  indicated  above,  more  especially  with  the  cold  bath,  is
generally  sufficient  to  destroy  the  gouty  diathesis  in  the  system.

584.  Steel  filings  will  remove  the  chlorotic  disposition,  and  along
with  the  other  tonic  remedies,  help  to  increase  the  red  parts  of  the
blood.

585.  A  tendency  to  erysipelas  demands  great  moderation  in  the  use
of  meat  and  similar  articles  of  diet,  and  the  plentiful  use  of  fruit  and
whey  combined  with  the  general  strengthening  method.

586.  Ilaller's  or  similar  acid  elixirs  will  moderate  or  remove  inflam-
matory dispositions  of  unknown,  indefinite  or  composite  character.

587.  It  is  only  after  having  strengthened  the  fibres  in  this  or  some
similar  manner,  thereby  bringing  the  tone  of  the  nerves  into  more
uniform  and  powerful  vibrations,  and  afler  having  dimininished  or  re-
moved the  obvious  accessory  disease,^  that  we  should  undertake  to
attack  the  syphilis  with  mercury.

588.  Let  it  not  be  objected  that  such  a  preparatory  treatment  would

'  So  that  for  a  couple  of  weeks  every  foreDooQ  is  passed  in  constant  nausea  and
alight  heaving.

*  Also  where  hysteria  is  present  we  must  adopt  some  similar  preparatory  treat-
ment, or  at  least  be  always  on  our  guard  for  fear  of  the  occurrence  of  couvulaioos.
The  occurrence  of  the  catamenia  demands  the  intermission  of  the  mercury  until  it  is
post;  bleeding  hemorrhoids  demand  a  similar  precaution.


BEMOYAL  OF  OBSTACLSS  TO  KSROUBIAL  TREATMENT. 127

consame  much  time  and  put  off  for  a  long  period  the  employment  of
the  mercury.  If  the  morbid  accessory  diathesis  be  strong,  and  the
diief  ingredient  of  the  composite  disease,  then  nothing  more  expedi-
ent, nothing  more  appropriate  can  be  conceived,  let  it  last  ever  so  long.
But  even  in  the  very  worst  cases  we  shall  have  advanced  so  far  with
the  general  or  special  strengthening  treatment  (if  it  were  at  all  appli-
cable) in  from  three  to  five  weeks,  that  we  shall  be  able  to  commence
the  use  of  the  metal.

589.  Sometimes  it  is  requisite  to  continue  the  tonic  treatihent  along
with  the  mercury,  which,  with  the  exception  of  the  cold  baths,  may
be  done  without  restriction^  in  the  most  of  such  cases.

590.  It  is  only  when  the  symptoms  of  syphilis  arc  very  violent  and
urgent,  and  when  they  constitute  the  major  part  of  the  composite  dis-
ease, whilst  the  accessory  morbid  diathesis  constitutes  its  minor  part,
only  in  such  cases  can  we  employ  the  mercury  at  once,  combined
with  the  tonic  treatment.

CHAPTER  III.

PREVENTION  OF  THE  DISAGREEABLE  EFFECTS  OF  MERCURY.

591.  It  has  been  proved  by  thousands  of  observations  that  no  deep-
ly rooted  venereal  virus  can  bo  expelled  by  any  visible,  far  less  ex-
cessive evacuations,  diarrhoea,  salivation,^  diuresis  and  diaphoresis,  and
that  these  rather  have  the  effect  of  palpably  hindering''  the  metal  in
its  antisyphilitic  action,  and  ought  consequently  to  be  avoided.-*

592.  Whether  the  threatened  salivation  can  be  kept  back  by  the
use  of  powdered  sulphur,  my  experience  has  not  yet  tauglit  me ;  still
the  trials  of  others  lead  us  to  anticipate  much  advantage  from  it,  as
also  the  expectation  deduced  from  chemical  science,  that  the  sulphur,
penetrating  the  mass  of  blood,  effects  a  mineralization  of  the  dissolved
metal  (Ethiops  mineral),  and  suddenly  renders  it  inefficacious.

593.  Some  advise  that  the  patient  should  be  exposed  to  severe  cold,
others  that  he  should  be  kept  very  warm,  both  with  the  view  of  check-
ing the  salivation ;  but  both  frequently  fail  of  their  object,  especially
when  the  exciting  cause  that  could  indicate  one  or  other  of  them  is
lost  sight  of

^  Only  that  the  Btrengthening  remedies  should  not  be  giyen  all  day,  but  only  two
hours  before  and  two  hours  after  dinner.

*  It  is  remarkable  that  as  early  as  the  conunencement  of  the  sixteenth  ccntuiy
(1502)  the  Spaniard  Almenar  sought  to  prevent  and  remove  salivation  by  every  pos-
sible means,  in  order  the  better  to  cure  this  disease.

'  At  all  events  by  diminishing  the  mercurial  fever.

*  Sydenham  says,  in  liis  £pist.  resp.  ad  Henr.  Faman,  tliat  a  remedy  must  destroy
the  venereal  poison  in  the  body  directly,  without  evacuation,  in  order  to  deserve  the
namie  of  an  antisyphilitic  spedfic.


128  ON  VSKSBEAL  DiaSASKS.

504.  If  A  previous  chill  have  caused  an  inoonaiderably  small  qtuuti*
tj  of  mercury,  that  has  been  given,  to  act  on  the  salivary  glands  withr
out  there  being  present  any  plethora,  a  diaphoreticy  moderately  warm
treatment  may  be  of  service.  If  plethora  and  an  inflammatory  fever
be  the  cause  of  the  rapid  salivation,  then  sometimes  a  venesection,  but
most  certainly  a  general  cool  treatment,  cold  air»  dsc.,  will  tend  to
check  it.

595.  But  what  are  chiefly  relied  on  are  drastic  purgatives,^  under
the  supposition  that  the  salivation  will  thereby  be  suddenly  brought  to
a  stop,  although  many  thousands  of  cases  demonstrate  the  improprie-
ty of  this  treatment.  The  salivation  is  not  thereby  restrained ;  oil
the  contrary,  it  often  increases  still  more  when  the  action  of  the  pur-
gative is  over,  especially  when,  as  is  often  the  case,  irritability  was  the
cause  of  the  sudden  ptyalism.  Moreover,  who  is  ignorant  of  the  de-
bility that  such  a  powerful  evacuant  medicine,  or  the  repetition  of  such
is  equivalent  to  a  venesection  in  its  weakening  efiects  ?  In  a  word,
experience  and  reflection  are  equally  opposed  to  this  proceeding,  as
hurtful  as  it  is  useless.^

596.  Were  we  better  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  camphor  than
we  are,  much  might  be  expected  from  its  use.  But  both  the  constitu-
.tion  that  indicates  it  in  this  case,  and  the  dose  in  which  it  can  be  of
service,  are  still  uncertain.  I  have  often  experienced  the  opposite  from
its  use,  and  sometimes  maintained  in  full  force,  for  certain  purposes,
ptyalism  persisting  from  irritability,  by  the  daily  administration  of
six  grains  of  camphor ;  but  the  salivation  that  occurred  was  destitute
of  smell.  Perhaps  it  is  most  powerful  as  an  antidote  to  salivation,
when  the  latter  has  resulted  from  suppressed  perspiration.

597.  Linnoeus  observed  chronic  salivation  cured  by  an  infusion  of
\ white  horehound ;  the  infusion  prepared  with  wine  likewise  merits

attention. Sanchez  lauds  the  eflicacy  of  vapour  baths  for  preventing
^  salivation ;  they  do  not,  however,  prevent  it,  as  the  Chevalier  von
Ilutten  piteously  relates.

598.  Morris  found  contrayerva,  in  the  dose  of  two  scruples  twice  a
day,  efiicacious  in  obstinate  cases.  Others  have  advised  blisters  to
the  nape.

■  599.  I  mention  these  things  in  their  proper  place,  but  believe  that
we  shall  always  meet  with  more  success  if  we  prevent  the  ptyalism
beforehand,  than  if  we  rely  upon  checking  it  when  it  has  already  com-
menced.

■ -  ■ — — - -  — I  - 1  -ji 'i  „^_^— .

'  Desault  brought  them  into  great  repute  lor  this  eTAoufttioo,  about  the  year  17  SO.

*  [It  is  ioterestiiig  to  remark  the  diasatiaiactioQ  of  our  author,  respecting  most  of
the  prevaleot  notions  of  this  period,  upon  medical  topics.  Fnm  the  multitude  of  em-
pirinl  methods,  he  is  earnestly  seeking  for  something  cf  reason  and  truth.]— liiin.  P.


REICOYAL  OF  OBSTAGLSS  TO  MERCURIAL  TREATMEIH'. 129

dOO.  For  this  end  it  will  be  most  expedient,  in  all  the  states  of  the
system  above  spoken  of,  whether  a  general  weakness  and  irritability,
or  any  other  accessory  disposition,  constitute  the  obstacle  to  the  mer-
curial treatment,  to  regard  the  genea»l  (§  578, 579)  or  specially  direct-
ed (§  580 — 585)  tonic  treatment  as  the  chief  preventive  remedy  of
Mlivation,  and  by  no  means  to  neglect  its  employment.  Still  we
would  do  well,  in  obstinate  cases  of  composite  venereal  disease,  to
precede  the  use  of  the  mercury  by  a  local  treatment  of  the  mouth,
which  shall  communicate  the  greatest  possible  tone  to  the  salivary
glands,  and  give  them  sufficient  firmness  to  resist  the  too  facile  pene-
tration of  the  mercurial  irritation.

601.  For  this  purpose  I  have  found  in  my  experience  that  the  best
tiling  to  do,  is  for  some  days  previously  to  hold  in  the  mouth  or
move  them  frequently  hither  and  thither,  substances  that  are  strongly
attringent  without  causing  nausea.  I  have  oflen  found  of  service  an
electuary  of  catechu  or  kino,  mixed  with  a  portion  of  alum,  and  with
the  addition  of  some  syrup.  I  have  employed  a  cold  solution  of
sulphate  of  zinc,  and  also  alum  and  sulphuric  acid,  with  much  benefit,
to  gargle  or  rinse  out  the  mouth.

60^2.  If  we  have  to  do  with  some  (rare)  cases  of  syphilis  accompa-
nied by  such  urgent  symptoms  as  to  require  the  immediate  use  of
the  mercury,  we  must  immediately  after  the  first  dose  of  the
mercury,  proceed  to  strengthen  the  mouth  (§  601),  and  if  that  will
not  suffice  to  prevent  those  hurtful  evacuations,  we  must  have  recourse
to  external  remedies  also.  A  strong  solution  of  alum  or  sulphate  of
zinc  in  water,  frequently  applied,  quite  cold,  (or  cooled  by  ice),  round
the  whole  neck,  has  proved  uncommonly  useful  to  me.

603.  In  very  irritable,  emaciated,  debilitated  subjects,  especially  in
such  as  have  already  suffered  salivation  from  a  previous  employment
of  mercury,  the  early  administration  of  this  metal  is  always  of  doubt-
ful propriety.  In  spite  of  every  precaution  we  shall  sometimes,  es-
pecially if  the  obstinate  symptoms  of  syphilis  demand  large  doses  of
the  antivenercal  metal,  be  completely  unable  to  prevent  salivation  by
these  external  remedies.

604.  If  this  take  place  we  must  immediately  discontinue  the  mer-
cury, and  besides  the  external  use  of  the  ice-cold  compresses  (§  602 )
frequently  renewed,  we  should  uncover  or  shave  the  head,  pour  over
it  cold  water,  and  again  dry  it,  whilst  we  envelop  the  feet  in  warm
coverings,  or  place  them  every  four  hours  in  a  tepid  (96°)  foot-bath
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  patient  must  rest  in  a  cool  dark  room,
in  a  sitting  posture,  with  a  light  covering  over  him.  His  attention
fihould  be  engaged  with  amusing  stories,  with  music,  &c.

605.  As  chewing  greatly  excites  the  salivary  glands,  we  should  not
allow  at  this  time  any  other  articles  of  diet  besides  thin  soups,  or

9


-  »•


ISO  ON  y£NEB£AL  DISEASES.

easilj  digestible  vegetables  in  the  fonn  of  pur6e,  with  beer,  milk  and
the  like ;  but  solid  food,  tasty  and  sweet  things,  especially  coffee,  as
also  everything  that  excites  disgust,  must  be  avoided.  If  the  thirst  is
great,  we  may  give  sour  drinks  and  food.

60 1>.  We  may  at  the  same  time  continue  assiduously  the  use  of  the
astringent  electuary  gargle  (§  601),  combined  with  an  eighth  part  of
laudanum.  It  is  under  these  circumstances  that  I  have  also  found
good  effects  from  the  internal  employment  of  opium  ^  (sometimes
combined  with  Minderer's  spirit.)

607.  If  the  bowels  are  constipated,  they  should  be  opened  by  one
or  several  clysters  of  vinegar.

608.  I  think  I  have  been  able  to  convince  myself,  by  some  experi-
ments I  have  instituted,  that  drinks  saturated  with  sulphuretted
hydrogen  gas  do  in  a  short  time  remove  all  the  irritation  produced  by
the  presence  of  mercury  in  our  fluids,  as  this  remedy  rapidly  penetrates
all  the  vessels,  and  instantaneously  mineralizes  the  mercury  wherever
it  encounters  it.  We  should  give  from  six  to  eight  grains  of  some
good  preparation  of  hepar  sulphuris  in  the  form  of  pills  within  twelve
hours,  and  cause  the  patient  to  drink  thereader  a  large  quantity  of
warm  tea,  made  sour  with  lemon  juice  or  cream  of  tartar.

609.  But  the  surest  way  to  prevent  salivation  is  always  a  gradual,
cautious  employment  of  mercury,  and  especially  the  selection  of  such
a  preparation  from  which  such  an  injurious  effect  is  least  to  be  appre-
hended. I  have  already  sufficiently  pointed  out  that  the  ordinary
mercurial  preparations  (especially  the  insoluble  precipitates  combined
with  mineral  acids,  the  turbith  mineral,  the  red  and  white  precipitates,
and  calomel,  as  also  Keyser^s  drag^es,  frictions,  dec.)  possess  this
disadvantage  in  a  high  degree,  with  the  exception  of  corrosive  sublimate
and  nitrate  of  mercury,  also  Plenk^s  mucilaginous  mercury,  but  al-
most only  when  it  is  least  powerful,  but  especially  the  mercury
oxydized  per  *«,  partly  because  it  is  not  very  apt  to  excite  this  eva-
cuation of  itself,  partly  and  chiefly  however  because  it  can  be  given  in
determinable  small  doses  that  we  may  rely  upon  penetrating  into  the
fluids,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the  mucilaginous.  I  have  found  that
the  soluble  mercury  uncommonly  seldom  produces  salivation,  not  only
on  account  of  its  peculiar  nature,  but  also  particularly  because  it  acts
in  such  small,  such  definite  doses,  so  very  uniformly,  and  far  more
certainly  and  mildly  than  that  oxydised  per  ae.  If  we  commence  its
use  in  very  small  doses,  and  only  increase  it  gradually,  paying  great
attention  to  the  state  of  the  mouth,  and  if  we  employ  at  the  same  time
the  accessory  treatment  pointed  out,  we  shall  very  rarely  be  surprised
by  salivation,  even  in  those  urgent  cases  in  which  it  is  requisite  to
give  it  at  the  very  commencement,  or  if  it  do  come  on  it  may  readily

>  Aocording  to  the  experienoe  of  Hunter,  Oirtanner  and  myselt  it  has  certainly
great  power  in  nlivatiaoi,  although  Blodi  deniea  it


BEKOYAL  OF  OB8TACLS;3  TO  MERCUBIAL  TREATMENT. 181

be  checked  bj  some  of  the  means  indicated.  So  much  is  this  the  case
that  when  I  deemed  salivation  of  use  in  certain  non- venereal  affections,
I  never  thought  of  employing  the  soluble  mercury  for  its  production ;
In  such  cases  calomel  best  answered  my  purpose.

610.  Viol^it  diarrhoeas  are  not  easily  avoided  during  the  employ-
ment of  the  ordinary  mercurial  remedies,  for  either  the  preparation
itself  is  a  purgative,  such  as  calomel,  or  it  becomes  such  from  the
muriates  that  are  present  in  the  primse  viae  (white  precipitate),  like  the
mercury  introduced  into  the  system  by  the  rubbing-in  process,  the
nitrate  of  mercury  prepared  in  the  cold,  Keyser's  drag6es,  and  Plenk's
preparation ;  substances  of  which  the  first  and  last,  if  perchance  they
be  very  well  prepared,  contain  an  unexpected  quantity  of  oxydised
mercury,  which  may  be  transformed  by  the  muriates  in  our  system
into  a  quantity  of  white  precipitate  sufficient  to  excite  all  at  once  vio-
leat  diarrhoea ;  the  other  preparations  named  are  always  ready,  the
moment  they  come  in  contact  with  a  gastric  juice  impregnated  with
muriates,  to  change  entirely  into  that  strong,  noxious  purgative,  white
precipitate. The  addition  of  opium  to  these  remedies  is  of  little  use.

611.  Regarding  the  soluble  mercury  we  may  be  sure,  that  even
yiongfa  we  neglect  the  rules  for  diet  given  below,  it  will  excite  no
purgation,  but  only  one  or  a  couple  of  loose  stools,  because  the  small
white  precipitate,  is  not  sufficient  to  cause  drastic  evacuations.

612.  If,  as  sometimes  happens,  a  violent  continued  perspiration
disturb  the  action  of  the  mercury,  a  cool  regimen  and  the  employment
of  sulphuric  acid,  will  speedily  check  this  evacuation.  Some  have
fbnnd  bark  very  useful.

613.  The  diuresis  that  is  more  rarely  observed,  may  be  stopped  by
a  diaphoretic  regimen  and  the  intercurrent  exhibition  of  cinchona  bark,
as  long  as  we  know  of  no  remedy  that  possesses  the  power  of  speci-
fically checking  this  evacuation.


FOURTH  DIVISION.

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SOLUBLE  MERCURY  AND  ITS
EMPLOYMENT  IN  VENEREAL  DISEASES.

614.  Well  prepared  soluble  mercury  (see  Preface)  is  of  a  blackish
grey  colour  and  tasteless.  It  may  be  dissolved  in  vinegar,  and  in
water  impregnated  with  carbonic  acid,  without  leaving  behind  a  trace
of  turbith  mineral  or  of  white  precipitate.

615.  The  rapidity  of  its  action  shews  that  it  is  almost  instantly
dissolved  in  the  gastric  juice. It  very  quickly  combines  with  the


132  ON  YEKEBEAL  DISEASES.

saliva  in  the  mouth,  and  then  immediately  produces  the  peculiar
mercurial  taste.  *

616.  When  the  proper  diet  is  observed  (§  619)  it  causes  no  dis-
agreeable sensation  in  the  stomach  or  in  the  bowels,  no  vomiting,  no
diarrhoea,  but  passes  directly,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  dis-
solved by  the  process  of  digestion,  into  the  mass  of  the  fluids.

617.  It  is  only  when  there  are  muriates  in  the  primae  vise  that  there
is  an  exception  to  this ;  in  that  case  there  occurs  slight  nausea,  or  one
or  two  loose  stools.  But  it  is  usually  taken  so  rapidly  into  the
general  mass  of  the  fluids,  that  even  in  this  case  there  is  seldom  time
for  its  complete  conversion  into  white  precipitate.

618.  As  it  is  in  every  case  the  duty  of  a  patient  to  avoid  over-
loading his  stomach,  which  he  cannot  transgress  with  impunity  under
any  moderate  treatment,  we  may  safely  expect  from  any  man  whose
nature  is  not  quite  bestial,  that  in  the  treatment  of  such  an  important
disease  as  syphilis  is,  he  will  observe  a  slight  restriction  in  diet  whidi
will  cost  him  such  a  small  sacriflce  and  have  so  much  influence  on  the
well-being  of  his  future  days.

619.  In  order  to  obtain  this  object  and  to  remove  all  traces  of  mu.
nates  from  the  primee  viae,  if  the  antivenereal  remedy  is  to  be  taken,  as
is  usually  the  case,  in  the  morning,  we  let  the  whole  supper  of  the
previous  evening  consist  of  some  uncooked  fruit.  The  following
morning  we  allow  the  dose  of  soluble  mercury  to  be  taken  as  early
as  possible  in  some  distilled  water,  and  nothing  to  be  partaken  of  for
four  or  six  hours  thereafter  ;  then  if  there  be  great  thirst  ^  the  patient
should  take  a  little  more  distilled  water,  or  cow's  milk,  or  If  there  be
weakness,  a  draught  of  good  wine ;  so  that  during  a  period  of  twenty
hours  nothing  shall  enter  the  stomach  that  contains  a  trace  of  muriate
of  soda.  At  dinner  time  (noon)  he  makes  an  ordinary  or  moderate
meal  of  anything  ^  that  comes  to  table,  excepting  the  flesh  and  fat  of
geese,  ducks  and  pork.  We  may  allow  those  accustomed  to  it  a  glass
of  wine.

620.  We  may  give  the  soluble  mercury  either  alone,  or  in  order
to  make  the  dose  appear  larger,  rubbed  up  with  some  liquorice  or
mallow  root.  If  we  have  to  do  with  persons  who  are  not  to  be  trusted
to  in  the  observance  of  dietetic  rules,  we  may  add  a  half  or  whole
grain  of  opium.

'  This  shoiild  be  endeavoured  to  be  avoided ;  for  during  its  cootinuaoce  there
seems  to  be  developed  in  the  gastric  juice,  or  to  be  deposited  therein  fix>m  the  blood,
an  ammoniacal  or  muriatic  acridity.  The  distilled  water  may  be  used  either  cold,  or
in  the  form  of  tea,  made  with  liquorice  and  linden  flowers,  provided  we  dispenss
with  the  use  of  sugar.  The  thirst  may  also  be  quenched  in  the  morning  by  means
of  fruit

*  Meat  may  be  partaken  of  along  with  the  vegetables  as  long  as  the  former  is  not
contraindicated  by  the  advent  of  the  mercurial  fever  or  any  other  inflammatoiy
state.  «


NATIJBE  OF  THE  SOLUBLE  MEBGUBY,  ETC.  188

621.  Although  in  the  case  of  very  sensitive  but  healthy  persons
who  are  very  obedient  in  respect  to  diet,  I  have  sometimes  not  had
occasion  to  use  more  than  one  grain  of  soluble  mercury  in  all,  in  order
to  cure  moderate  idiopathic  venereal  symptoms  and  commencing
syphilis,  yet  I  have  met  with  cases  in  which  sixty  grains  were  ne-
cessary.

622.  This  extreme  variety  depends,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to
oheerve  accurately,  on  this,  that  in  the  first  case  the  mercurial  fever
(g  290)  occurred  as  rapidly  as  could  be  wished  for.  But  when  I  was
Ibroed  to  use  such  a  large  quantity,  the  reason  was,  that  either  some
circumstance  suddenly  occurred  that  frequently  interrupted  the  em-
ployment of  the  medicine,  or  that  previously  much  mercury  had  been
used  ID  vain,  or  that  (in  the  case  of  persons  of  good  constitution  who
could  not,  on  account  of  their  avocations,  omit  appearing  in  public
every  day)  I  had  to  excite  and  maintain  a  gradual  (slow)  mercurial
fever.

623w  On  an  average  however  I  have  found,  that  in  order  to  era-
dicate a  moderately  severe  syphilis,  not  more  than  ei^ht  grains  were
required,  while  for  a  severe  and  deeply  rooted  case,  about  twelve
grains  were  needed.

624.  But  if  we  wish  and  are  able  to  excite,  1st,  a  rapid  mercurial
fever  {febria  murcurialis  dcuta),  a  still  smaller  quantity  is  necessary
in  the  very  severest  cases ;  but  if,  2dly,  on  account  of  the  circum-
stances that  may  arise,  we  must  divide  the  mercurial  fever  into  two
or  three  small  attacks,  then  more,  sometimes  much  more,  than
the  quantity  indicated  is  required  ;  but  much  the  largest  quantity  is
necessary  when  from  the  above  reasons  we  have  to  excite,  3dly,  an
unnoticeable  mercurial  fever  {febris  mercurialis  lento).  I  beg  that
these  three  cases  may  be  carefully  distinguished.

625.  In  the  first  case  I  must  be  satisfied  that  no  tendency  to  saliva-
tion exists,  or  that  the  patient  has  previously  used  mercury  without
having  incurred  this  evacuation.  In  that  case  1  gave  from  the  very
first  lai^e  doses  of  the  soluble  mercury,  and  increased  them  rapidly,
in  order  to  excite  quickly  a  severe  mercurial  fever, — (probably  from
a  half  to  one,  two,  three  grains  ;  or  in  robust  subjects  and  severe  cases
of  lues,  one  two,  three,  four  grains.)

626.  In  the  second  case  (§  624),  usually  when  there  was  present  a
tendency  to  salivation,  or  when  this  evacuation  had  already  occurred
during  a  previous  employment  of  mercury,  I  increased  the  quantity
of  the  soluble  mercury  very  gradually,  so  that  I  could  leave  it  off  on
the  slightest  appearance  of  salivation,  employ  measures  to  combat  it
(in  the  progressive  scale  of  from  \  to  ^,  j^,  },  1,  \\  grain).  I  calmed
the  irritation  of  the  mouth  and  recommenced  after  an  interval  of
from  eight  to  fourteen  days,  to  increase  the  dose  (from  about  ^  to  1,


18i  OK  VENEBEAL  DISEA^ISS.

1^  up  to  2  grains),  and  so  on  until  the  syphilis  had  completely  dis-
appeared.

627.  In  the  third  case  (§  624)  I  used  for  eight  or  ten  days  only
one  quarter  of  a  grain^  daily,  then  for  about  the  same  period  one  grain,
then  two,  then  four  grains,  until  all  traces  of  the  lues  were  destroyed.
Patients  of  this  sort  must  either  be  otherwise  of  very  healthy  robust
constitutions,  or  else  they  must  be  unremittinsly  treated  with  tonics
at  the  same  time,  in  order  that  the  long  continued  irritation  shall  not
injure  them.  On  the  slightest  affection  of  the  mouth  the  mercury
was  discontinued  for  one  or  even  several  days,  and  the  precautions  I

628.  As  a  rule  it  is  good,  after  the  complete  disappearance  of  the
venereal  symptoms,  and  the  occurrence  of  a  proper  mercurial  fever,
especially  in  the  rapid  treatment  (to  which,  when  it  is  admissible,
I  give  the  preference),  at  once  to  discontinue  the  soluble  mercury,
and  to  wait  and  see  whether  or  no  the  same  symptoms  do  not  reap-
pear after  four  or  five  weeks.  If  nothing  occurs  we  may,  even  in
cases  of  deeply  rooted  syphilis,  rest  assured  that  a  cure  has  been
effected  (even  without  waiting  till  this  time  has  elapsed,  we  can  be
perfectly  sure  of  the  cure,  if  a  sufficiently  severe  mercurial  fever  made
its  appearance)  ;  but  should  the  same  symptoms  shew  themselves,  the
mercurial  fever  must  have  been  too  weak,  an  error  we  must  seek  to
repair  by  endeavouring,  after  the  lapse  of  this  time,  to  develope  a  new
and  much  more  severe  mercurial  fever  than  the  first  was  (which  is
done  with  more  trouble  and  by  means  of  doses  increased  more  rapidly),
whereby  all  remains  of  the  venereal  poison  will  be  certainly  eradicated
to  the  very  last  trace.  But  this  is  a  very  rare  case,  that  can  only
happen  to  an  inexperienced  practitioner.

629.  Recent  buboes,  simple  chancres,  and  commencing  lues,  require
almost  the  same  degree  of  mercurial  fever ;  but  lues  with  symptoms
of  the  more  remote  kind,  with  nodes,  &c.,  as  also  condylomata  and
old  degenerated  chancres  and  so  forth,  require  the  more  severe  fever.

630.  If  we  wish  to  prevent  a  painful  and  inflamed  buboe  from  sup-
purating, by  the  speedy  destruction  of  the  venereal  virus,  or  timeously
avert  the  threatened  danger  in  phimosis  and  paraphimosis  from
chancres,  a  severe  mercurial  fever  must  be  quickly  excited.  Accord-
ingly directing  our  attention  to  the  preservation  of  the  salivary  glands,
of  which  I  have  treated  in  the  previous  chapter,  we  should  here
increase  the  doses  of  soluble  mercury  from  2  to  3,  4,  5  grains,
and  whenever  the  fever  shews  itself  of  sufficient  severity,  call  a  halt,
and  then  terminate  gradually  what  we  were  forced  to  commence
violently.

*  This  dose  given  for  four  or  five  successive  days  without  increase,  frequently  suf-
ficed with  sensitive  individuals  to  produce  an  adequate  artificial  fever,  and  thereby
to  effect  a  perfect  cure.


KATIJBE  OF  THE  SOLUBLE  MERCUBY, ETC.  185

631.  All  the  doses  spoken  of  in  this  chapter  are  to  be  understood
as  daily  doses,  as  it  is  well  always  to  wait  for  twenty -four  hours,  and
during  that  time  to  observe  the  effects  of  each  dose.

632.  In  cases  where  I  have  found  no  special  preparatory  means
requisite,  e.  ^.,  in  otherwise  healthy,  robust  subjects,  not  only  are  no
laxative  medicine,  even  should  there  be  plenty  of  time  for  all  this,  (of
in  the  medical  art  nothing  unnecessary  should  be  done.  When  cir-
even  give  previously,  or  during  the  course,  emetics,  when  obstinate
impurities  of  the  stomach,  derangements  of  the  bile,  and  so  forth,
present  obstacles  to  the  treatment.

633.  As  mercury  does  not  cure  syphilis  by  causing  evacuations
(§  591)  (but  often  thereby  makes  it  more  obstinate),  but  as  it  rather
only  cures  the  disease  by  the  gradual  or  sudden  antipathic  irritation
of  the  fibres  of  a  specific  nature  (I  do  not  deny  that  there  may  be  a
diemical  neutralization  or  destruction  of  the  venereal  virus  by  the
mercury  dissolved  and  assimilated  in  the  fluids  of  the  circulation) ;  it
£)llows,  that  the  physician,  carefully  avoiding  all  severe  mercurial
evacuations  (salivation,  diarrhoea,  &c.),  should  direct  his  especial
the  manner  indicated,  in  a  degree  accurately  proportioned  to  the  inten-
sity and  age  of  the  lues,  and  of  the  idiopathic  venereal  aflection.

634.  Thus,  when  all  circumstances  are  favourable,  the  most  inveterate
lues  may  be  radically  removed  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  by  a  severe
mercurial  fever,  while  a  slighter  degree  of  recent  syphilis,  a  single
chancre,  &c,  may  require  a  long  time  for  its  cure  (let  alone  an  old
standing  case  of  syphilis)  if  we  do  not  produce  an  obvious  mercurial
fever,  but  administer  the  mercury  in  too  weak  doses,  and  do  not  increase
them  sufficiently  when  the  symptoms  are  about  to  disappear.

635.  If  during  the  latter  mode  of  treatment,  which  is  of  very
doubtful  propriety,  the  system  should,  from  the  long-continued  mer-
curial irritation,  have  become  very  sensitive  and  weakly,  as  often
happens  if  the  tonic  treatment  have  not  at  the  same  time  been  em-
ployed, it  must  be  resorted  to  immediately  after  the  termination  of

,  the  mercurial  treatment,  or  still  better,  immediately  on  the  appearance
of  the  debility  and  symptoms  of  irritability,  and  be  energetically
continued  until  the  body  can  be  pronounced  sound  in  every  respect.

'  I  lay  it  down  as  an  already  proved  axiom,  that  tlie  effect  of  the  mercury  on  the
Teneieal  poison  stands  in  direct  relation  to  the  intensity  of  the  mercurial  fever,  and
b  diverted  by  any  attack  on  the  mouth;  the  bowels,  and  other  excreting  organs  ;  but
the  mercurial  fever  is  so  much  the  greater,  the  less  mercury  there  has  previously  been
osed:  and  the  milder  and  more  soluble  the  mercurial  preparation  employed  is,  the
more  rapidly  it  b  introduced  into  the  system,  and  the  more  completely  all  evacuations
are  avoided  during  its  use.


136  OK  YEKEBEAL  DISEASES.

On  this  account  also  we  must  beware  of  a  too  sleepy  employment  of
mercury,  as  it  only  tends  to  make  the  virus  more  obstinate,  and  even
disposes  the  system  to  let  it  break  out  still  more  virulently,^  when  the
metal  is  no  longer  in  the  fluids.


FIFTH  DIVISION.

LOCAL  AFFECTIONS  AFTER  THE  TREATMENT  OF

SYPHILIS.

CHAPTER  I.

LOCAL  AFFECTIONS  THAT  REMAIN  AFTER  A  SUITABLE  TREATMENT

OF  SYPHILIS  AND  THEIR  REMOVAL.

636.  There  are  few  local  affections  dependent  for  their  morbid
character  on  the  virus  of  syphilis  that  should  remain  in  the  body
after  a  rational  employment  of  soluble  mercury.^  I  shall  only  make
mention  of  the  warts,  the  periosteal  and  osseous  swellings,  and  the
caries  of  the  bones.

637.  The  venereal  warts  must  be  uncommonly  hard  and  old  if  thej

^  I  gave  a  peasant,  who  was  affected  with  some  ooodylomata  on  the  anus,  scaroelj
observable  pains  in  the  bones  of  the  shoulder,  and  small  ulcers  in  the  tonsils  of  Hib
throat,  in  the  course  of  seven  weeks,  12^  grains  of  soluble  mercury,  divided  into  equal
small  doses.  In  the  first  two  or  three  days  all  the  symptoms  were  aUeviated,  withoal
his  having  experienced  the  slightest  mercurial  fever :  the  ulcers  had  disappeared  firom
the  mouth,  the  pains  in  the  bones  were  gone,  and  the  condylomata  were  painless  and
dry.  His  amelioration  remained  in  this  state  until  after  this  small  number  of  pow-
ders had  been  used.  He  thought  he  required  no  further  aid,  discontinued  attendance*
and  only  returned  after  the  lapse  of  four  weeks.  His  mouth  was  now  covered  to  the
lips  with  ulcers ;  an  ulcer  2^  inches  in  length  and  half  as  broad,  had  eaten  away  the
upper  surface  of  the  penis,  the  anus  was  beset  with  similar  ulcers,  humid  fissures^
and  a  number  of  moist  condylomata ;  ihe  pains  in  the  bones  were  intolerable,  and  the
patient  seemed  to  be  weary  of  life.  X  now  gave  him  12  grains  of  soluble  mercury,  to
take  the  first  day  8,  the  second  4,  and  ihe  third  6  grains.  He  had  a  very  seyere
fever  without  salivation,  and  after  five  days  not  a  trace  of  hb  venereal  malady  re-
mained. The  ulcers  were  healed,  the  pains  gone,  and  the  warts  dried  up  and  gradually
fell  oft  At  the  present  time,  after  2i  years,  he  is  as  well  as  ever.  From  this  it
appears  Ist^  that  a  sleepy  employment  of  mercury  rather  excites  than  cures  the
venereal  disease  ;  2d,  that  the  point  of  importance  is  not  the  quantity  of  m^ncuiy*
introduced  into  the  system,  but  the  adequate  intensity  of  the  mercurial  fever.

*  We  have  still  greater  advantages  in  the  treatment  of  chancres  and  buboes ;  for  if
we  have  once  cured  them  by  internal  mercurial  remedies  only,  we  may  be  assured  of
the  eradication  of  the  idiopathic  virus.  But  in  syphilis,  especially  when  it  is  of  loog
standing,  the  local  affection  is  often  so  masked,  so  very  similar  to  other  diseases,  that
we  cannot  be  immediately  certain  of  the  cure,  if  we  cannot  be  convinced  of  the  in-
tensity of  the  previous  mercurial  fever ;  but  especially  difficult  is  it  to  decide,  when
local  affections  remain  that  present  the  appearance  of  uncured  venereal  ones,  for
then  the  eradication  of  the  virus  becomes  a  matter  of  only  doubtful  probability.


NATURE  OF  THE  SOLUBLE MERCURY, ETC.  187

do  not  wither  and  fall  off,  or  otherwise  disappear,  under  a  mercurial
fever  of  due  intensity,  or,  as  more  rarely  happens,  terminate  in  healthy
suppuration.

638.  If  afler  complete  extinction  of  the  virus  there  remain  some
old,  homy,  large  warts,  they  may  be  removed  by  surgical  means.
Hiey  may  either  be  tied  with  a  waxed  thread,  by  drawing  which  daily
tighter  and  tighter,  they  will  be  gradually  perlectly  dried  up  and  so
fall  oSj  or  they  may  be  cut  off  close  to  the  root,  and  the  wound  touched
once  or  several  times  with  lunar  caustic,  and  when  the  last  slough  falls
off  the  wart  is  completely  removed.

6^9.  But  if  they  are  in  situations  where  they  do  not  cause  any
inconvenience,  if  they  are  not  very  large  or  elevated,  we  may  in
many  cases  allow  them  to  remain.  They  are  innocuous,  and  generally
disappear  gradually  of  their  own  accord.

640.  It  is  almost  the  same  with  the  periosteal  and  osseous  swellings.
They  usually  diminish  gradually  of  themselves  after  the  complete
eradication  of  the  lues  venerea.  The  parts  exposed  to  the  more  remote
kinds  of  local  diseases  are  affected  by  a  perceptible  swelling  whose
removal  we  should  not  attempt  to  obtain  by  pushing  the  employment
of  the  mercury  too  far.  Even  were  the  virus  not  completely  eradi-
cated in  them,  it  cannot  be  again  absorbed  into  the  system  from  them,
and  so- cause  fresh  symptoms  of  syphilis;  but  it  will  be  destroyed,
provided  the  mercurial  fever  was  of  sufficient  intensity.  In  the  latter
case  the  swelling  and  induration  will  usually  remain  stationary,  shew-
ing that  the  virus  has  been  destroyed ;  after  some  time  it  declines
spontaneously  if  it  be  not  too  hard,  and  if  the  patient  be  not  too  aged.

641.  I  have  already  said  that  such  nodes  usually  pass  spontaneously
into  a  mucous  suppuration,  which  on  account  of  the  ensuing  destruc-
tion of  the  periosteum,  becomes  dangerous  for  the  bone  beneath.
Under  the  adequate  mercurial  fever  the  unhealthy  pus  already  formed
becomes  changed,  and  not  unfrequently  resolved ;  a  true  cure,  which
at  the  most  only  leaves  behind  it  a  painless  elevation  of  the  node.  If
the  result  be  so  fortunate,  it  often  remains  a  matter  of  uncertainty
whether  an  abscess  was  previously  formed,  as  its  existence  is  so  diffi-
cult to  discover  while  the  lues  is  still  uncured.  It  is  however  a
matter  of  great  indifference  ;  it  suffices  if  the  cure  is  effected.

642.  But  if  the  abscess  have  gone  too  far,  if  the  mercurial  fever
have  indeed  deprived  it  of  its  venereal  character,  but  is  unable  to
effect  its  resolution,  then  there  is  always  danger  of  the  bone  being
corroded  after  the  destruction  of  the  periosteum.  We  must  ascertain
the  exist<ince  of  the  abscess  in  order  to  be  able  to  treat  it  locally.

643.  It  is  moreover  not  difficult  to  discern  the  presence  of  this  non-
venereal  abscess  (however  difficult  the  discovery  of  the  venereal  ab-
«CC8S  may  be),  as  its  existence  caimot  be  doubted  if  during  the  adequate


138  ON  YENEBEAL  DISEASES.

mercurial  fever,  or  a  few  days  thereafter,  a  throbbing  pain  continues
or  occurs  in  the  centre  of  the  periosteal  node ;  a  sensation  that  differs
widely  from  the  agonizing  pains  of  the  still  venereal  node.

644.  We  should  then  make  a  sufficiently  deep  and  extensive  incision,
evacuate  the  pus,  clean  the  ulcer,  taking  care  not  to  remove  any  of  the
sound  periosteum,  and  we  should  treat  the  wound  like  an  ordinary
ulcer.  When  we  make  this  opening  we  perceive  a  pus  of  a  mucous
character  certainly,  but  mostly  well  concocted,  whereas  what  existed
before  the  mercurial  treatment  was  merely  an  albuminous  fluid.

045.  This  it  is  that  after  corroding  the  periosteum  causes  caries  of
the  bone.  If  the  mercurial  treatment  is  at  an  end,  and  the  node,  on
account  of  the  persistence  of  the  pains,  opened  and  cleaned,  we  shall
soon  be  able  to  discover  the  caries,  if  it  exist.  It  is  now  no  longer
venereal,  if  the  mercurial  fever  was  of  sufficient  intensity,  and,  like  all
other  caries  from  external  causes,  it  will  take  on  the  healing  procesS}
and  will  require  to  be  treated  by  similar  remedies.

646.  If  the  caries  be  superficial,  advantage  will  be  derived  from
scraping  the  bone,  from  the  employment  of  the  actual  cautery,  from
sprinkling  it  with  cuphorbium  powder,  from  touching  it  with  a  solution
of  nitrate  of  silver,  and  so  forth.  If  it  penetrate  more  deeply,  and
be  already  seated  in  the  interior  of  the  hard  tubular  bone,  it  is  gene-
rally accompanied  by  slow  fever,  brought  on  by  the  acrid  ichorous
secretion.  We  should  bore  holes  in  different  parts  of  the  bone,  and
deep  enough  to  allow  of  the  escape  of  the  matter,  and  then  treat  the
interior  with  a  solution  of  lunar  caustic  or  nitrate  of  mercury,*  die
Caries  of  the  spongy  bones,  e,  g,  of  the  nose,  requires  a  cautious  in-
jection of  the  latter  remedies,^  and  the  moderate  introduction  of  the
vapour  of  a  small  portion  of  cinnabar  into  the  nose.^  If  all  these
kinds  of  caries  are  mere  remains  of  the  cured  syphilis,  they  will  be
susceptible  of  cure  without  much  difficulty ;  but  much  more  destruc-
tive and  obstinate,  as  also  more  frequent,  is  the  caries  produced  by  the
irritation  of  mercury  and  from  the  morbid  condition  of  the  fluid  and
solid  parts  thence  resulting,  of  which  more  anon.

647.  The  swellings  of  the  ligaments,  tendons  and  tendinous  aponeu.
roses  that  remain  are  very  obstinate.  If,  as  is  however  seldom  the
case,  they  have  not  yielded  on  the  extinction  of  the  venereal  virus  by
mercury,  we  must  combat  them  by  the  application  of  blisters.  If  this
prove  ineffectual,  and  they  still  remain  painful  after  the  mercurial  fever

^  One  part  of  each  dissolved  in  from  800  to  400  parts  of  water,  to  which  should
be  added  thirty  parts  of  tincture  of  myrrh  or  aloes.

'  Girtanner  recommends  strongly  the  repeated  injection  of  a  solution  of  caustic
potash,  or  the  same  remedy  used  as  a  gaigle.

'  Without  however  drawing  in  air  by  the  nose,  in  order  to  prevent  the  vapour  from
getting  into  the  lungs.


LOCAL  AFFSCnONS  AFTER  TH£  TREATMENT  OF  SYPHILIS. 189

(a  sign  tliat  they  have  become  non-Tenerea]  abscesses),  they  must  be
opened.  They  must  then  be  treated  with  proper  vulnerary  (one  part
of  corrosive  sublimate  dissolved  in  from  400  to  500  parts  of  water)
and  balsamic  remedies.

CHAPTER  II.

LOCAL  AFFECTIONS  AND  SECONDARY  SUFFERINGS  THAT  FOLLOW

THE  ABUSE  OF  MERCURY.

t>48.  We  might  d  priori  suppose  that  a  drug  like  mercury,  which
produces  such  tremendous  effects  on  the  body  (such  as  mercurial  fever,
salivation,  dec  are),  must  by  a  long>continued  and  too  frequent  em-
ployment weaken  the  strength  to  a  great  degree,  and  set  the  fibres  into
morbid,  irritable  vibrations,  the  source  of  all  sorts  of  chronic  diseases
that  are  difficult  to  cure,  of  rheumatic,  erisipelatous,  and  especially  o^
scrofulous  (scorbutic)  and  chlorotic  character,  of  trembling,  of  low,
wasting  fevers,  of  malignant,  corroding  ulcers  of  the  soft  and  hard
parts  of  the  human  body,  &c.  And  this  is  just  what  we  find  from  ex-
perience, which  presents  us  with  thousands  of  lamentable  instances  of
this  sort,  produced  by  the  immoderate  use  of  inunctions,  mercurial
jdasters,  calomel  and  the  like.

W9.  Gonorrhoeas  are  transformed  into  gleets,  and  those  already
eared  again  commence  to  discharge ;  buboes  take  on  an  unhealthy  sup.
puration,  become  deep  and  excavated,  excrete  a  large  quantity  of  acrid
fetid  ichor,  evert  their  hard  borders,  and  eat  about  them  in  a  cancerous
manner,  accompanied  by  agonizing  pains ;  close  to  the  seat  of  the  pre-
viouslv  healed  chancre  numerous  ulcers  break  out ;  the  constitutional
syphilitic  ulcers  break  out  again,  or  become  altered  in  their  nature ;
they  inflame,  excrete  much  matter,  get  a  hard  base,  a  cancerous  look,
and  are  painfully  sensitive ;  condylomata  discharge  much  ichor,  and
jtfe  corroded  into  deep,  painful  fistulous  ulcers ;  others  grow  into  sen-
sitive, spongy  swellings,  almost  impossible  to  be  got  down  ;  we  per-
ceive on  different  parts  the  periosteum  thickened  and  painful ;  vene-
real ulcers  in  the  throat  that  have  healed  up  again  break  out ;  the  ton-
sils swell  again  and  become  sore ;  the  palate  also  becomes  affected  by
intolerable  shooting  pains,  studded  over  with  small  ulcers,  and  at
length  perforated ;  the  uvula  sloughs  off,  a  fetid  smell  proceeds  from
the  nose,  which,  along  with  the  antrum  Highmorianum  (in  the  worst
cases)  arc  gradually  eaten  out ;  the  body  becomes  pale  and  lax,  the
digestion  is  deranged,  the  catamcnia  disappear,  the  legs  swell  some-
times, the  patient  is  excessively  sensitive  to  all  impressions,  to  heat
and  cold  ;  there  is  great  weakness  and  despondency ;  his  nights,  full
of  pains  and  restlessness,  are  martyrdom  to  him ;  the  bowels  are  at
one  time  constipated,  at  another  purged :  towards  evening  he  has  tran-
sient debilitating  heats,  and  his  pulse  usually  ranges  fron\  100  to  130


140  ON  YENEEEAL  DISEASES.

in  the  minute ;  only  for  a  few,  often  fixed,  hours  during  the  day  do
his  agonizing  pains  lessen  somewhat ;  at  other  times  they  prevail  con-
stantly, especially  during  the  night.  There  are  stiffness  of  the  joints
and  chronic  trembling. One  or  both  eyes  are  affected  by  amaurosis.

650.  There  are  various  causes  for  these  ill  effects  of  mercury,  which
have  mostly  been  already  mentioned  in  the  former  parts  of  this  book.
It  has  been  usual  to  lay  down  the  following  pernicious  maxim  for  the
treatment  of  venereal  disease:  that  as  much  mercury  as  possible  must
be  introduced  into  the  system — though  modern  physicians  have  wisely
added  this  limitation  (which  however  is  unsatisfactory  and,  on  account
of  the  nature  of  the  ordinary  mercurial  preparations,  impracticable) —
in  as  short  a  time  as  possible  without  causing  salivation.  Had  they
been  aware  that  success  depends  upon  the  adequate  intensity  of  the
mercurial  fever,  and  not  on  the  introduction  of  an  enormous  quantity  of
the  metal  into  the  system,  they  had  forborne  to  lay  down  this  perni-
cious rule.  Moreover,  as  the  nature  of  the  ordinary  mercurial  pre-
parations rendered  it  impossible  to  know  whether  much  or  little  of  the
active  part  of  the  metal  got  into  the  circulation  in  a  given  time,  it
could  not  but  happen  that  sometimes  too  much  was  imperceptibly  dis-
solved  in  the  juices,  and  occasioned  horrible  devastations.  Besides
this  it  has  hitherto  been  the  custom  to  employ  the  irrational  French
weakening  system,  both  during  and  after  the  treatment,  which  did  all
that  was  possible  to  assist  the  irritating  and  debilitating  power  of  the
mercury.

651.  But  what  did  more  than  all  the  causes  I  have  mentioned  to
render  the  ordinary  mercurial  treatment  so  injurious,  was  the  un-
pardonable inattention  to  the  connexion  betwixt  cause  and  effect,  for
the  symptoms  that  arose  during  the  treatment  from  the  mercurial  ir-
ritation were  considered  to  be  genuine  venereal  symptoms,  and  were
combattcd  anew  with  a  still  longer  continuance  of  the  mercury,  to  the
injury  of  the  patient,  who  thus  became  the  victim  of  stupidity.  Weak,
chlorotic,  scrofulous,  or  scorbutic  subjects,  those,  namely,  who  had  be-
come affected  with  spreading  ulcers  in  the  mouth,  from  the  quantity  of
mercury  they  had  taken,  were  dosed  with  still  larger  quantities  of  this
irritating  metal,  and  caries  took  possession  of  the  nasal  and  palatial
bones ;  these  were  still  held  to  be  venereal,  the  consequence  of  which
was,  that  the  malady  increased  to  the  most  horrible,  often  fatal  ex-
tent. Buboes  that  had,  by  a  succession  of  errors,  degenerated  under
the  long  continued  employment  of  mercury  into  spreading  ulcers,  were
treated  by  an  increased  administration  of  mercury,  and  mortification
or  cancer  (or  whatever  this  sloughing  diathesis  may  be  called),  hectic
fever,  hemorrhages,  diarrhoeas,  night  sweats  and  death,  were  the
result.

652.  And  yet  what  opportunities  presented  themselves  for  deducing


LOCAL  ATFECmONS  AFTEK  THE  TREATMENT  OF  SYPHILIS. 141

this  maxim,  diat  the  very  first  day  when  the  amendment  of  the  venereal
symptoms  stood  still  under  the  jridiciously  increased  administration  of
the  mercury — that  the  very  first  hour,  when,  under  the  mercurial  treat-
ment, new  affections,  new  pains,  new  abnormalities  presented  themselves,
or  the  previous  genuine  venereal  symptoms  were  aggravated — we  should
pause ;  and  that  state  of  the  body  that  presented  these  obstacles  to  the
venereal  treatment,  be  it  scrofula,  chlorosis,  erysipelas,  gout,  scorbutus,
or  only  weakness  and  irritability,  should  be  combatted,  and  the  {fre-
quently irritating)  mercurial  preparation,  the  usual  exciting  cause  of
such  morbid  diathesis,  should  be  discontinued  immediately.  All  the
pains  that  remain,  increase,  or  arise  during  the  mercurial  treatment,
all  local  affections,  further,  swellings,  ulcers,  caries  of  the  bones,  6ec.,
that  break  forth  anew,  increase  or  occur  for  the  first  time  during  the
use  of  mercury,  are  no  longer  of  a  purely  venereal  nature,  they  are
often  of  a  totally  non-venereal  character,  and  can  never  be  cured*  by
the  further  administration  of  ever  so  large  doses  of  this  metal — ^but
will,  on  the  contrary,  be  aggravated.  If  this  maxim  had  been  kept
in  view,  there  would  not  assuredly  be  so  many  unfortunate  beings
whose  health  has  been  undermined  and  destroyed  by  misdirected
mercurial  treatment

653.  I  say,  no  longer  of  a  purely  venereal  nature,  for  all  those  whose
Bufferings  have  been  aggravated  by  the  continued  or  renewed  mercu-
rial treatment,  are  not  therefore  free  from  all  taint  of  the  venereal
Tims.  In  deeply  rooted  syphilis  occurring  in  scrofulous,  scorbutic,
gouty,  erysipelatous,  chlorotic,  or  otherwise  weakly  irritable  indivi-
duals, the  ordinary  inappropriate  mercurials  may,  after  a  debilitating
preparatory  treatment,  or  along  with  a  similar  accessory  treatment,
be  given  in  such  a  drowsy  fashion,  that  this  metal  can  scarcely  do
more  than  exercise  its  weakening  irritation,  but  not  its  antisyphilitic
power ;  and  then  it  will  happen  that  the  concomitant  morbid  diathesis
gains  so  much  the  upper  hand,  that  when  wo  would  endeavour  to  de-
stroy the  venereal  virus  (which  is  now  almost  concealed  beneath  symp-
toms foreign  to  it,  so  as  scarcely  to  be  cognizable)  by  means  of  a  fur-
ther or  increased  employment  of  mercury,  the  slow  fever,  the  scrofu-
lous ulcers,  &c.,  arising  from  the  concomitant  diathesis,  increase  to
such  a  height  that  the  patient  is  in  danger  of  losing  his  life,  or  a  chro-
nic dyscrasia  is  the  result,  and  still  all  remains  of  syphilis  may  not
thereby  have  been  eradicated.

654.  The  traces  of  the  venereal  virus  in  the  system  are  not  at  once
cognizable  amid  these  exacerbations,  and  amid  these  obvious  injurious
effects  of  the  mercury.  It  is  only  when,  by  an  energetic  (often  te-
dious and  lengthened)  treatment  of  another  kind,  the  patient  has  jo^r-
fectly  recovered  from  his accessory  diseases,  and has  regained  his

'  A  cure  might  occasionally  have  been  effected  by  a  dangerous  salivatioD.


142  ON  YENEBEAL  DISEASES.

health,  then  only  does  the  syphilis  again  rear  its  head  in  an  unmistake-
able  manner,  the  symptoms  proper  to  it  still  remain,  which  may  not
be  removed  by  any  remedy  in  the  world,  any  tonic,  anti-scorbutic,
anti. scrofulous,  and  anti-chlorotio  drug — ^but  only,  and  that  easily,  by
the  renewed  employment  of  a  good  mercurial  preparation  alone.  This
event  alone  (we  have  no  other  mode  of  proving  it)  demonstrates  by
the  result,  that  during  the  former  unfortunate  mercurial  treatment  the
syphylitic  virus  was  still  undestroyed.

655.  This  is  the  place  to  dispel  the  delusion  that  after  such  an  ex-
cessive administration  the  mercury  still  remains  almost  ineradicably
in  the  system,  and  gives  rise  to  all  the  horrible  devastations,  the  hectic
fever,  corroding  ulcers,  caries  of  the  bones,  trembling,  wandering
pains,  &c.

656.  The  metalic  mercury  occasionally  found  in  the  cavities  of  the
bones  proves  nothing  ;  we  may  carry  this  about  with  us  without  our
health  being  thereby  affected.  How  can  an  insoluble  substance  be-
yond the  circulation-  act  upon  the  latter  1  But,  it  is  replied,  this  fluid
metal  is  a  proof  of  the  probable  coexistence  of  a  dissolved  portion  of
mercury  in  our  fluids  !  As  long  as  we  are  unable  to  prove  its  exist-
ence in  our  fluids  more  accurately  than  by  supposition  in  those  chronic
other  causes,  which  as  I  have  shown  in  many  places,  are  not  fiu*  to
seek.

657.  The  fact  of  gold  growing  pale  and  brittle  when  worn  by  those
who  have  this  metal  in  their  fluids,  the  destruction  of  the  vermin  on
their  head,  but  chiefly  the  non-infecting  power  of  their  chancres,  &c.,
gives  us  distinctly  to  understand  that  where  these  phenomena  are
wanting,  there  can  be  no  question  of  the  existence  of  mercury  in  the
circulation.  According  to  accurate  observations  we  may  with  cer-
tainty assert  that  the  portion  of  mercury  dissolved  in  the  circulation
to-day  will  be  no  longer  present  after  the  lapse  of  four  weeks,  but  will
be  indubitably  expelled  by  its  own  constant  irritation  through  some
excretory  channel.  We  may  perhaps'  at  first  find  traces  of  the  metal
in  the  saliva  of  a  person  undergoing  ptyalism  ;  but  shall  we  be  able
to  detect  any  after  the  lapse  of  three  weeks  from  the  last  dose  of
mercury  1

658.  Should  it  be  still  time  to  suspect  an  excess  of  this  metal  in

the  secundce  viae,  in  order  to  remove  the  secondary  suflerings  from  a

mis-directed  mercurial  course,  sulphuretted  hydrogen  as  a  drink
(§  608),  or  used  as  a  bath  in  a  similar  form,  may  prove  of  service.

659.  The  removal  of  the  other  symptoms,  cccasioned  or  aggravated
by  the  mercurial  treatment,  is  to  be  conducted  on  nearly  the  same

^  CniikBhank's  experiments  do  not  allow  that  any  mercury  exists  either  in  the
saliva  or  in  the  urine  of  a  person  undergoing  saliTation.


LOCAL  AFFECTIONS  AFTEB  THE  TREATMENT  OF  SYPHILIS. 143

principles  as  I  have  laid  down  in  regard  to  the  preparatory  treatment
(§  579—  586).  We  may  employ  in  addition,  country  air,  sea  voyages,
the  diligent  use  of  cold  bathing,  especially  in  the  sea,  and  in  many
oaaes  the  use  of  the  Pyrmont  waters.  The  sores  should  be  dressed
with  cleansing  and  strengthening  remedies,  especially  with  a  solution
of  lunar  caustic,  with  the  addition  of  essence  of  myrrh  and  tincture
oi  opium,  the  latter  of  which,  both  externally  and  internally,  must  be
the  chief  remedy  in  many  of  these  cases.

660.  Hiis  same  medicament,  consisting  namely  of  one  part  of  ni-
trate of  silver  dissolved  in  from  500  to  600  parts  of  distilled  water,  to
whidi  is  added  30  parts  of  laudanum,  and  40  parts  of  essence  of
myrrh^  will  be  the  very  best  injection^  for  the  carles  of  the  bones,
produced  or  aggravated  by  the  same  cause.  All  that  surgery  requires
to  do  besides,  consists  in  an  appropriate  extension  of  the  fistulous  ori-
fices that  occur,  in  order  to  remove  the  dead  pieces  of  bone  con-
veniently and  without  employing  any  force,  and  in  making  suitable
opoungs  at  the  most  dependent  points,  in  order  to  allow  the  matter
to  escape.  A  numb  sensation  of  the  external  integuments  of  the
olieeks,  and  the  severe  pain  inwardly  at  that  part,  enables  us  to  disco-
ver a  collection  of  matter  shut  up  in  the  antrum  Highmorianum,
which  we  should  endeavour  to  let  out  by  extracting  the  third  molar
tooth  of  the  same  side,  and  boring  through  the  alveolar  cavity,  and
through  this  hole  the  injections  should  be  performed.

661.  But  besides  these  operations  the  chief  thing  we  have  to  at-
taid  to  in  such  cases  of  caries  of  the  bones,  which  are  generally  kept
tip  by  irritability  from  weakness,  is  the  general  constitutional  treat
ment. If  any  other  accessory  diathesis  be  present  at  the  same  time,
we  should  bear  it  in  mind. The  remedies  serviceable  for  the  latter
should  therefore  be  continued  with  the  general  tonic  treatment,  which
should  be  gradually  increased  to  the  very  utmost  extent. Cold  steel
bath»  for  the  whole  body,  exercise  in  the  open  air,  bathing  the  shaven
head  in  ice  cold  water,  general  frictions,  steel,  bark,  wine,  &c. With
these  tonics  we  must  combine  opium,  wherewith  we  shall  best  be  able
to  soothe  the  sleepless  painful  nights,  and  we  should  also  give  it  in
combination  with  tonics  as  a  general  rule,  in  order  to  moderate  the  ir-
ritability for  which  it  is  almost  specific  in  this  combination,  as  Grant
has  remarked,  and  1  have  had  opportunities  of  observing. In  this
combination  I  have  also  employed  ammonia  with  the  best  effects.

662.  Sarsaparilla  in  strong  decoction ^  taken  to  the  extent  of  three
ounces  daily,  and  lai^e  doses  of  assafoetida  or  hemlock,  are  said  to  be
of  great  use  in  this  caries  of  the  bones.

'  Should  the  disease,  as  usually  happens,  have  its  primary  seat  in  the  back  of  the
palate,  the  nitrate  of  silver  mixed  with  8000  parts  of  water,  and  used  aa  a  gargle
(also  oombiaed  with  laudanum),  will  prove  the  beet  remedy.


APPENDIX.


VENEREAL  AFFECTIONS  OF  NEW-BORN  INFANTS.

663.  The  venereal  affections  of  new-born  infants  have  very  rarely
been  an  object  of  investigation  on  the  part  of  medical  men,  partly
because  they  have  seldom  come  under  their  cognizance,  partly  because
these  poor  creatures  often  survive  their  birth  but  a  few  months,  partly
because  their  disease  has  oflen  been  mistaken.  Doublet^  has  given
us  the  best  information  on  this  subject ;  I  shall  follow  him  in  many  of
the  subsequent  remarks.

664.  Most  authors  hold  them  to  be  an  infection  in  the  mother's
womb ;  others,  but  few,*  consider  the  venereal  affections  of  infants  to
be  local  inoculation,^  and  degenerations  and  extensions  of  the  disease.
I  must  confess  that  I  incline  to  the  latter  opinion,  for  several  reasons.

665.  That  the  cure  of  the  pregnant  mother  of  the  venereal  disease
is  followed  by  the  birth  of  healthy  children  proves  nothing,  as  no  one
can  be  cured  of  syphilis  without  at  the  same  time  losing  the  local  and
idiopathic  venereal  affections.  On  the  other  hand,  syphilis  may  seem
to  be  born  with  the  children,  because  in  them  all  symptoms  foDow
each  other  more  rapidly,  and  local  affections  pass«o  rapidly  into  general
maladies ;  their  bodies  are  more  tender  and  irritable,  their  skin  is
much  more  delicate,  and  the  circulation  twice  as  rapid  as  that  in  adults.
But  has  any  one  ever  observed  in  infants  immediately  after  their  births,
the  copper-coloured  spots  or  the  ulcers  of  the  tonsils,  or  genuine  open
syphilitic  ulcers  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  or  even  the  venereal  itch?
That  these  are  found  after  several  weeks  or  months  proves  nothing.
On  the  other  hand,  we  find  those  parts  of  the  bodies  of  new-bom
infants  affected  with  the  venereal  inoculation,  which,  either  on  account
of  their  being  destitute  of  epidermis,  are  capable  of  being  inoculated
in  adults  also,  or  are  most  pressed  upon  or  rubbed  in  their  passage
through  the  female  parts.  Their  epidermis  is  still  so  delicate  (so
much  the  more  so,  as  these  children  on  account  of  the  mother's  ind»-
position  can  seldom  be  carried  to  the  full  term,  or  are  otherwise  weakly
and  delicate),  that  on  those  parts  the  poison  can  penetrate  through  the

*  And  now  Qirtanner.

'  Among  these,  more  especially  Qirtanner.

'  The  inoculation  of  healthy  nurses  by  venereal  infemts  is  no  rare  occurrence*
How  could  the  latter  however  communicate  chancres  to  the  nipples  when  sucking,  if
they  had  not  themselves  chancres  seated  on  the  outer  or  inner  surOEice  of  the  lips,  that
is  to  say,  idiopathic  venereal  ulcers,  which  oonstitutioDal  syphilis  can  never  prodooe  t


VSNEBEAL  AFFSCTIONS  OF N£W*BOBN  INFANTS. 145

e{udermis»  wMdi,  from  an  opposite  reason,  cannot  occur  in  adults.
But  I  shall  admit  all  these  affections  to  be  of  a  general  syphilitic
character,  whenever  any  one  shall  shew  me  such  a  child  was  bom  of  a
mother  that  had  been  infected  with  syphilis,  but  who  was  completely
free  from  all  local  idiopathic  venereal  affections  on  and  in  the  genitals,
from  gonorrhoea,  chancres,  and  condylomata.

666.  We  find,  1st,  the  following  affections  on  parts  where  adults
also  may  be  inoculated  without  any  previous  injury.  The  eyelids,
especially  the  upper  ones,  are  swollen  ;  the  eyes  are  at  first  i^ected
by  dry  inflammation,  subsequently  they  usually  discharge  an  acrid,
purulent  whitish-green,  oflen  copious  matter  (blennorrhoea  of  the  eye
fiom  local  inoculation) ;  during  sleep  the  lids  stick  together.  (This  is
one  of  the  chief  diagnostic  marks  of  this  sad  disease  in  children.)
Spots  on  the  cornea,  hypopyon,  blindness,  are  not  very  frequent
effects  of  it. The  ears  also  are  apt  to  discharge  similar  matter.

667.  The  comers  of  the  mouth,  the  frenulum  of  the  tongue,  the  an-
terior part  of  the  gums,  are  studded  over  with  small  ulcers,  which  are
Tery  hard  at  their  bottom  and  all  around  them — true  chancres.  Bu-
boes in  the  parotid  gland,  at  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  &c.,  ensue.

668.  The  nostrils  discharge  a  purulent  matter  (nasal  blennorrhoea)
tliey  are  also  stopped  up  with  masses  of  hardened  pus.

669.  Inflammation  of  the  genitals,  chancres  in  the  glans  and  labia;
strangury,  swelling  of  the  scrotum  and  of  the  external  labia,  and
fbaures  and  pustules  at  the  anus,  are  common  symptoms.  Gonor-
riicBa,  however,  is  not  found  in  male  children ;  but  from  the  female
genitals  there  exudes  a  yellowish  matter,  that  may  easily  be  distin-
guished from  the  discharge  of  a  natural  fluid,  to  which  all  new-bom
female  infants  are  subject.

670.  The  affections  of  new-bom  infants,  2dly,  on  parts  where  adults
are  not  infected  without  being  wounded,  are  most  frequently  regarded
as  signs  of  syphilis  communicated  to  them  in  the  womb,  although
they  are  manifestly  quite  the  reverse ;  they  are  infiammations  of  the
skin  on  parts  of  the  body  where  the  skin  alone  is  stretched  over  pro-
jecting bones,  which  have  been  during  delivery  particularly  rubbed
against  the  genital  parts  of  mothers  that  are  covered  with  the  chan-
erous  discharge,  and  thus  have  been  inoculated  (per  diapedesih)
through  the  thin  epidermis. They]^are  of  the  following  kinds  :

671.  The  region  of  the  coronal  suture,  the  protuberance  of  the  pa-
rietal and  occipital  bones,  the  shoulders,  the  region  of  the  sacrum  and
hip  bone,  the  ankles  and  the  heels,  are  externally  reddened  and  inflamed
The  epidermis  soon  falls  off,  the  sore  places  extend  and  become  covered
with a white  crust,  beneath  which  an  acrid fetid ichor  exudes.*

*  Or  these  parts  rise  up  in  inflamed,  brown,  soft  swellings,  which  usually  pass
duigerouB  suppuratioD.

10


146  ON  YSKEBSAL  PISSASES.

When  these  parts  become black,  mortification  is  nigh,  the  sign  of
approaching  death.

672.  A  similar  inflammaiion  of  the'  skin  and  ulceration  attacks  from
the  same  cause  the  neighbourhood  of  the  navel,  in  consequence  of  this
part  being  very  much  strained  during  the  process  of  delivery ;  and
moreover  the  natural  inflammation  that  takes  place  in  infants  before
the  navel  string  falls  off  may  favour  the  action  of  the  virus  on  that
part.

673.  The  affections  that  constitute  the  transition  of  the  idiopathic
virus  into  the  general  circulation  in  adults  are  also  not  unfrequently
met  with  in  infants  some  time  after  birth,  I  mean  the  glandular
swellings.  These  buboes  occur  in  them  in  the  cervical  glands,  in  the
parotid  gland,  and  in  the  auxiliary  glands,  either  from  the  chancres  on
the  lips  or  from  similar  ulcers  (§  671)  on  the  head  and  shoulders —
in  the  groins  from  chancres  on  the  genitals  or  from  similar  sores  on
the  sacrum  and  hip  bones,  the  ankles,  6ec. — or  also,  in  any  of  these
situations,  from  the  direct  penetration  of  the  chancre  poiscm  through
the  external  integuments,  without  any  previous  chancres ;  and  this
occurs  much  more  frequently  in  these  delicate  creatures  than  in
adults.  These  glandular  swellings,  like  those  in  adults,  usually  ter-
minate in  suppuration  if  the  virus  be  not  destroyed  by  mercury.
The  suppuration  of  the  parotid  gland  has  a  great  tendency  to  involve
the  bony  structure  of  the  mastoid  process.

674.  The  symptoms  of  general  lues  always  occur  only  afVer  several
weeks,'  sometimes  (according  to  some  authors)  not  before  eight
months  after  birth.  The  skin  becomes  covered  with  bluish  spots,
which,  as  in  adults,  become  in  course  of  time  somewhat  elevated,  and
gradually  are  covered  with  a  greyish  dry  crust.  Or  there  are  at  first
merely  excoriations.  Subsequently  there  are  formed  at  these  parts
venereal  ulcers,  which  arise  most  rapidly  in  the  axilla,  betwixt  the
thighs  and  betwixt  the  nates,  and  have  a  white,  suety-looking  ap-
pearance. The  whole  skin  is  also  sometimes  covered  with  bran4ike
points.  General  venereal  ulcers  also  appear  in  the  mouth  and  on  the
tonsils.  Single  elevated  pustules  are  formed  on  the  dorsum  of  the
fingers  and  toes,  which  rapidly  pass  into  ulcers  and  cause  the  nails  to
fall  off  by  the  roots.  Running  chaps  appear  at  the  anus.  Swellings
of  the  bones,  however,  and  gonorrhoea  in  the  male,  are  not  met  with  in
infants.

675.  Such  children  are  usually  very  weak  and  emaciated;  their
skin,  especially  that  of  the  face,  is  of  a  bluish  colour,  shrivelled  and
full  of  wrinkles,  like  an  old  person's.

676.  The  usual  mode  of  treating  the  venereal  diseases  of  new-born
infants  at  Vaugirard  consists  in  treating  the  mothers  before  they  are

'  QirUimer  Bays,  in  from  ten  to  fourteen  daysr


YSKSRBAL  AFFECTIONS  OF  NSW-BORN  INFAKTS. 147

bom  or  while  they  are  at  the  breast. None  of  the  metal  is  given  to
the  infant  directly.^

677.  If  the  mother  be  subjected  to  treatment  before  her  confine-
ment, she  is  treated  with  diluent  drinks,  bitters,  mild  purgatives,  baths
and  mercurials,  so  as  to  alleviate  her  disease  and  to  facilitate  her  de-
liTery ;  but  after  delivery,  from  the  twelfth  day  onwards,  she  is  made
to  rub  in  every  other  day  from  one  to  two  drachms  of  mercury  at
a  time,  so  as  that  she  shall  use  from  three  to  four  ounces  in  the  course
of  five,  twelve,  or  even  twenty  weeks.  During  this  course  she  suckles
the  infected  infant,  or  even  a  couple  of  them,  in  order  to  impregnate
them  with  the  antisyphilitic  specific  along  with  the  milk.

678.  It  is  observed  that  children  whose  mothers  have  been  treated
with  mercury  before  their  confinement  suffer  little  inconvenience  from
the  ti  ercurialized  milk  (they  are  already  used  to  the  metallic  im-
pression) ;  those,  however,  who  have  experienced  none  of  the  influence
of  the  mercury  on  their  fluids  before  their  birth,  on  using  this  milk  be-
come pale  and  get  belly-ache,  heat  and  loss  of  appetite,  especially  if
they  are  kept  not  warm  enough  or  too  warm.  In  this  case  the  fric-
tions are  discontinued,  and  soothing  medicines,  mucilaginous  drinks
lod  clysters  are  employed.

679.  Very  soon  the  putrid  hospital  apthse  attack  and  carry  oflf  a
laige  number  of  these  children.

680.  In  course  of  time,  about  the  sixth  week,  slow  fever,  diarrhoea,
dsc,  usually  set  in,  whereby  many  are  destroyed.

681.  The  rest  gradually  escape  the  danger;  the  venereal  symp-
toms disappear,  and  there  only  remains  a  greater  or  less  liability  to
the  common  diseases  of  children.

682.  From  all  this  we  learn  nothing  more  than  that  the  venereal
affections  of  new-born  infants  are  curable,  for  as  regards  the  mode  of
treatment,  it  is  burdefted  with  such  a  vast  number  of  evils  that  it
cannot  be  recommended  for  imitation.  Let  us  for  a  moment  consider
how  much  injury  the  health  of  the  pregnant  woman  must  at  first  suffer
from  the  five  to  twenty  weeks  of  mercurial  irritation,  and  how  aimless
such  a  treatment  is,  as  not  only  are  they  not  cured  by  it,  but  it  is
not  intended  for  their  cure !  If  the  mother  have  syphilis  in  a  great
degree,  this  treatment,  continued  for  a  considerable  time,  affords  no
relief  either  to  the  mother  or  to  the  infant ;  the  latter  usually  dies.
Rendered  liable  to  various  diseases  from  the  treatment  during  preg-
nancy, or  from  ordinary  ailments,  or  from  other  circumstances,  the
mother  is  often  not  in  a  position  to  suckle  her  child,  and  then  the  wet-
nurse  who  takes  it  gets  venereal  fissures  and  ulcers  on  the  nipples


'  Now,  aooording  to  Qirtanner,  they  are  subjected  to  the  fumigation  treatment —
or  they  get  eighty  drops  of  Swieten's  solutioD  of  corrosive  sublimate  every  night
both  oi  thsM  are  either  uaeleM  or  hurtful  procedures.


148  ON  ySNEB£AL  DISSASB8.

from  the  chancrous  mouth  of  the  child,  whereupon  inflammation  of
the  mamma,  stoppage  and  drying  up  of  the  milk,  usually  ensue.  The
chancres  on  the  lips  and  frenulum  lingus  of  the  infant  impede  or  pre-
vent its  sucking.  But  besides  this,  how  tedious  is  this  treatment^
how  often  does  not  the  death  of  the  little  sufferer  anticipate  its  ter-
mination, or  if  that  does  not  happen,  how  many  are  carried  off  by  the
hospital  air,  how  many  (if  some  few  do  go  through  all  this),  how
many,  1  repeat,  of  these  few,  by  the  instrumentality  of  this  long-con-
tinued  mercurial  irritation  that  makes  their  fluids  acrid,  their  fibres
weak  and  irritable,  are  rendered  liable  both  to  dangerous  maladies
and  to  chronic  dyscrasias,  to  which  death  itself  is  oflen  preferable  I
Of  the  injury  that  accrues  to  the  mothers  and  nurses  from  such  a
treatment  I  shall  say  nothing  further,  as  I  have  already  spoken  of  the
disadvantages  attending  the  inunction  treatment.

683.  From  an  institution  so  conducted  I  can  imagine  no  real  ad-
vantages to  society  which  could  outweigh  all  the  sacrifices  connected
with  it ;  but  this  we  see,  that  the  French  nation  ^  probably  surpasses
all  other  civilized^  people  in  delicacy  of  sensibility  for  suffering
mankind.

684.  I  shall  not  stop  to  consider  the  other  mode  commonly  prac-
tised of  curing  children  of  the  venereal  disease,  as  they  usually  only
come  under  treatment  when  they  are  a  year  and  a  half  old  or  still
older,  and  are  ^treated  with  sollution  of  corrosive  sublimate,  as  in
adults,  only  with  smaller  doses.  A  tenth,  an  eighth,  a  quarter,  and  at
length  as  much  as  half  a  grain  is  given  them  daily  in  different  kinds
of  mild  fluids,  frequently  with  greater  success  than  in  adults.  But
how  many  of  them  die  before  they  attain  this  age,  before  they  are
brought  under  the  action  of  this  remedy,  be  it  ever  so  efficaciously
administered!  Besides,  my  business  at  present  is  with  new-born
infants.

685.  The  medical  police  could  arrive  at  a  much  shorter  way  for
attaining  this  object  ^  of  preserving  these  young  citizens  of  the  state,
if  they  kept  in  view  the  maxim  that  I  have  been  induced  from  a  mul-
titude of  observations  and  reasons  to  propound  as  an  axiom  ;  if  they
were  convinced  that  syphilitic  children  have  only  become  so  by  their

'  The  only  hospital  for  syphilitic  children  that  I  know  of  is  the  Hotpice  de  Charii4
of  Vaugirard,  which  requires  enormous  sums  of  money  lor  its  maintenance.
■  *  Gknnans.

*  Girtanner  says,  **a  venereal  mother  is  i^enerally  (on  account  of  the  bad  state  of
her  lymph,  whereby  she  is  unable  to  nourish  the  foetus)  confined  in  the  sixth  or
seventh  month,  without  any  other  exciting  cause,  and  the  child  is  usually  dead :  or
the  movements  of  the  foetus  cease  in  the  sixth  or  seventh  month,  and  at  the  end  of
the  pregnancy  the  child  is  bom  dead  and  half  decayed.  If  it  is  alive  it  has  a  very
thin  and  emaciated  appearance,  and  soon  dies."  What  a  loss  for  posterity !  How
necessary  is  the  cure  of  the  syphilitic  mother  in  her  pregnancy,  to  prevent  the  state
experiencing  a  great  loss !


YENSBEAL  AFPSOTIONS  OF  NEW-BORN  INFANTS. 149

local  infeotioQ  in  the  genitals  of  their  mothers  during  parturition,'  and
that  pregnant  women  are  not  more  difficult  to  cure  of  their  venereal
aSecdons,  without  injury  or  premature  labour,  than  other  weak  per-
sona are  to  be  freed  from  this  disgraceful  malady.

086.  If  the  first  point  is  conceded  to  me,  all  the  greater  objecdons
are  made  to  the  last.  Let  it  be  remembered  however  that  to  dread
ill  effects  from  a  radical  mercurial  treatment  for  pregnant  women  and
their  offspring,  and  on  that  account  to  leave  both  uncured  till  after
birth,'  implies  that  the  treatment  is  more  dangerous  than  the  disease
itselfl  If  the  inunctions,  calomel,  &;g,  are  of  this  character,  1  am  sorry
for  it.  As  far  as  I  am  aware  the  cautious  administration  of  soluble
mereory  indicated  in  this  book  is  not  so ;  I  am  indebted  to  it  for  the
lives  and  health  of  many  mothers  and  their  offspring.  I  must  refer
to  what  I  have  already  said  as  regards  its  employment  in  this  case.
A  physician  who  is  such  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  will  understand
liow  to  supply  what  is  necessary  for  the  accessory  circumstances.

687.  If  however  we  are  called  on  to  treat  a  new-born  infant  affected
with  venereal  symptoms,  there  is  very  little  hope  for  it  if  the  symp-
toms are  in  their  highest  degree,  if  the  child  is  much  emaciated  and
euinot  take  the  breast,  or  if  its  mother  cannot  suckle  it.  But  even  in
ncli  circumstances  we  ought  not  to  despair.

688.  In  the  last  case  we  shall  not  be  able  to  do  much  without  a  wet
nnrse,  as  the  poor  creature  will  hardly  be  able  to  contend  with  the
process  of  accustoming  it  to  unnatural  food  and  the  attacks  of  such  a
dangerous  malady,  without  succumbing.  We  may  however  attempt
to  nourish  it  (and  this  we  roust  at  all  events  do  if  it  be  unable  to  suck)
^th  goat's  milk  for  drink,  and  in  the  commencement  without  any
other  food,  until  the  case  takes  a  favourable  turn  (and  then  it  will  be
able  to  partake  of  pounded  biscuit,  &c.),  and  on  the  very  first  day  we
are  called  in,  afler  purging  the  primae  viae  of  their  impurities,  com-
mence with  the  soluble  mercury,^  which  is  the  only  preparation  that
from  its  mildness,  certainty  and  rapidity  of  action,  holds  out  to  us
any  hope,  where  no  other  remedy  is  admissible.

689.  In  most  cases  not  more  than  one  grain  of  soluble  mercury  will

^  lo  public  Ijing-ia  institutions  no  woman  affected  with  syphilis  should  be  allowed
to  be  confined  without  being  cured  of  all  her  venereal  symptoms.  If  little  can  be
done,  we  should  at  least  treat  and  cure  their  genitals  by  the  local  application  of  a
•Iraig  solution  of  lead,  in  order  to  prevent  the  child  being  infected  during  delivery.
Tike  syphilitic  virus  can  afterwards  be  eradicated  by  an  appropriate  mercurial  treat-
ment after  parturition.  But  the  latter  may  also  be  done  during  pregnancy,  and  that
ii  the  preferable  course  to  pursue

'  Who  can  reckon  the  number  of  abortions  that  occur  in  those  unfortunate  beings
who  are  with  methodical  over-cautiousness  designedly  left  unciu'ed  of  their  syphi-
litic oomplainte  until  after  delivery.

*  Girtanner  also  considers  it  best  to  give  the  child  mercury.


160  ON  VSKERSAL  DISEASES.

be  required.  We  may  rub  it  up  with  a  drachm  of  liquorice  root
powder,  and  of  this  mixture  give  the  first  day  (for  we  should  give  but
one  dose  daily)  five  grains,  the  second  seven  grains,  and  so  on,  until
we  observe  a  marked  alteration  in  the  complexion,  restlessness,  rumb-
ling in  the  bowels,  fetor  of  the  breath,  heat  in  the  eyes,  dsc,  the  signa
of  the  mercurial  fever.  If  the  signs  are  but  of  moderate  intensity,
and  the  change  in  the  venereal  symptoms  not  striking,  we  may  repeat
the  last  dose ;  otherwise  not,  for  if  the  mercurial  fever  was  sufficiently
strong  it  would  fully  perform  its  service,  and  remove  the  venereal
affection.  The  infant  may  take  the  medicine  in  its  goat's  milk,  and
not  partake  of  anything  else  until  the  cure  is  effected.

690.  If  the  child  can,  immediately  after  birth,  take  its  infected
mother's  breast,  we  should  only  treat  the  latter  with  soluble  mercury,
in  the  doses  above  indicated  for  adults ;  but  we  should  commence
immediately  after  being  called  in  and  attend  to  the  accessory  treat-
ment and  precautions^  required  in  such  cases. The  child  will  recover

by  partaking  of  her  milk,  if  any  adequate  mercurial  fever  is  developed
in  her.

691.  Similar  doses  of  the  antisyphilitic  metal  and  similar  precautions
must  be  employed  in  the  case  of  the  nurse  (even  though  she  be  per-
fectly well)  who  suckles  the  child  in  place  of  its  mother,  partly  in  order
that  she  may  not  be  infected  herself,  partly  in  order  that  the  child  may
be  restored  to  health  by  partaking  of  her  medicated  milk,  which  will
be  the  case  if  she  get  a  sufficiently  intense  mercurial  fever.

692.  If  the  child  cannot  or  will  not  take  the  breast,  or  if  there  be
none  to  give  it,  we  must  endeavour,  afler  its  recovery,  to  send  it  into
the  country  and  allow  it  to  be  reared  by  some  experienced  person.

693.  During  the  treatment  the  child  must  be  bathed  and  gently
washed  twice  a  day  in  a  tepid  decoction  of  marsh-mallow  root,  for  a
few  minutes.  The  sores  and  excoriations  should  be  dusted  with  lyco-
podium  powder,  or  dressed  with  lint.  Its  linen  should  be  changed
twice  a  day  until  it  is  quite  recovered ;  it  should  be  carried  about,
and  the  air  in  the  apartment  should  be  renewed  as  often  as  possible.
If  there  be  constipation,  soap  and  water  injections  should  be  used ;
the  aphthae  may  be  cured  by  frequently  touching  them  with  water
acidulated  with  from  rJ^ifth  to  y^th  part  sulphuric  acid.

'  If  the  circumstances  are  not  urg^t  we  may  delay  the  treatment  until  the  twelith
day  after  confinement


POSTCRIPT.

(Whilst  these  sheets  were  going  through  the  press  I  have  been
enabled  to  make  the  following  additions  and  corrections.)

As  r^ards  the  preparation  of  the  soluble  mercury  (see  Preface),  I
have  found  that  in  order  to  deprive  the  nitrate  of  mercury  of  all  traces
of  muriate  of  mercury,  there  ought  to  be  no  free  acid  at  all  in  the
metallic  salt  before  the  precipitation  is  performed.  Accordingly  I  find
it  requisite  to  wash  the  crystallized  mercurial  salt  with  about  a  tenth
of  its  weight  of  distilled  water,  and  then  dry  it  on  bibulous  paper  before
proceeding  to  dissolve  and  precipitate.  I  have  further  observed  that
ammonia  carefully  prepared  contains  but  an  inconsiderable  quantity  of
munatic  acid,  and  may  consequently  be  appropriately  used  instead  of
tlie  ege  shell  lime  to  precipitate  the  (in  this  case  white)  soluble  mercu-
ry. But  as  no  acid  is  more  frequently  met  with  in  nature  than  this
muriatic  acid  which  is  so  prejudicial  to  our  object,  and  as  it  may»  in
ipite  of  the  greatest  carefulness  on  the  part  of  the  operator,  exist  in  a
nnall  proportion  in  our  preparation,  we  would  do  weU  to  change
by  a  simple  operation  the  white  precipitate  that  may  be  present  into
^  much  more  innocuous  calomel.  For  this  end  we  boil  the  crude
precipitate,  in  place  of  sweetening  it,  in  fifty  times  its  weight  of  distil-
led water  for  an  hour,  then  pour  off  the  water  and  dry  the  sediment
on  bibulous  paper  for  use.

If  it  be  objected  to  (^  619)  that  muriates  exist  even  in  the  cleanest
stomach,  which,  let  the  oxyde  of  mercury  thus  prepared  be  ever  so
free  from  white  precipate,  would  soon  decompose  it,  and  change  it  in
the  alimentary  canal  into  something  similar,  my  observations  teach
me,  that  the  ingestion  of  white  precipitate  already  prepared,  in  conse-
quence of  its  forming  small,  insoluble,  corrosive  masses,  causes  much
more  poisonous  effects  than  that  which  is  only  changed  in  the  stomach,
by  decomposition,  into  amazingly  fine  heavy  particles  of  white  precipi-
tate, which  only  cause  a  slight  griping,  and  enveloped  in  the  mucus
of  the  bowels  are  soon  expelled.  But  even  this  need  not  be  dreaded,
if  in  place  of  any  other  fluid,  a  couple  of  glasses  of  Selters  or  Piilna
water  be  drunk,  for  as  1  have  found  by  numerous  experiments,  the  car-
bonic acid  redissolves  the  white  precipitate  that  has  already  been  form-
ed, and  even  the  turbith  mineral,  and  retains  it  in  solution  until  this
gas  is  driven  off  by  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  so  that  the  metal
(in  that  case  it  must  have  been  prepared  with  lime-water,  or  with
caustic  potash)  cannot  be  precipitated  from  the  fluid.  If  this  precau-
tion be  adopted  in  taking  the  medicine,  even  the  iuconsiderable  grip-


152  ON  YENEBEAL  DISEASES.  ^

ing  that  occurs  from  the  oxjde  of  mercury  may  be  prevented,  if  that
be  deemed  necessary.

Among  the  most  powerful  antidotes  to  the  ulcers  that  d^enerate
into  corroding  sores  (§  331,  381,  403,  648,  649,)  or  are  caused  by  the
abuse  of  mercury,  I  must,  from  my  experience  since  the  foregoing  was
written,  place  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas,  spoken  of  at  §  608,  as
it  is  preferable  to  all  other  remedies  for  removing  all  affections  aria-
ing  from  the  long  continued  irritation  of  mercury,  the  pains  in  tbe
limbs,  the  low  fever  and  night  sweats,  and  the  exhausting  salivation.

A  young  man  was,  on  account  of  a  gonorrhcea  and  small  chancre,
so  mistreated  by  a  barber-surgeon  with  enormous  quantities  of  calo-
mel for  six  weeks,  that  besides  having  an  immoderate  salivation,  he
got  also  severe  hectic  fever,  profuse  night  sweats,  tearing  pains  in  the
limbs,  trembling,  and  large  pustules  all  over  the  body,  which,  being
aggravated,  (and  these  aggravations  the  quack  considered  to  be  vene-
real symptoms)  by  additional  quantities  of  mercury,  degenerated  into
large  deep  ulcers  (some  were  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,)  8ur>
rounded  by  inflamed  elevated  borders,  and  covered  with  a  suety  look-
ing substance.  The  worst  symptoms  were  the  ulcerations  in  the  throat,
at  the  posterior  nares,  in  the  tonsils,  on  the  palate  and  uvula ;  in  this
situation  on||  large  ulcer  seemed  to  be  eating  away  all  the  parts ;  from
the  mouth  and  nose  bloody  pus  flowed  ;  he  could  not  utter  any  intel-
ligible sounds  ;  he  was  emaciated  and  excessively  feeble.  All  the  re-
medies used  were  of  no  avail  until  1  gave  him  ten  grains  of  hepar  sul-
phuris^  within  twenty-four  hours,  which  produced  a  rapid  amelioration
of  all  the  symptoms,  so  that  the  other  remedies  required,  the  sulphuric
acid  for  the  low  suppurative  fever,  and  a  solution  of  lunar  caustic  for
the  foul  ulcers  in  the  mouth  were  speedily  beneficial.  He  was  soon
so  well  as  to  be  able  to  enjoy  the  open  air,  and  whilst  he  was  out  hia
room  was  thoroughly  aired.  This  course  was  attended  by  increasing
benefit  for  some  weeks,  and  he  had  almost  completely  recovered  when
he  one  day  by  staying  out  too  long  in  severe  weather,  took  cold,  and
was  confined  to  the  house  in  a  febrile  state.  The  precaution  of  open-
ing the  window  was  omitted,  without  my  being  aware  of  it.  Hia
former  symptoms  now  rapidly  returned,  the  ulcers  in  the  throat  and
on  the  other  parts  of  the  body  broke  out  with  increased  violence,
and  even  the  glans  penis  was  rapidly  perforated  by  deep,  rapidly
spreading  ulcers  here  and  there,  but  not  on  the  seat  of  the  former
chancre.  The  fever  with  the  night  sweats,  the  pains  in  the  limbs
and  the  salivation  returned,  and  increased  daily  in  violence.  I
made  use  of  every  thing  that  had  previously  proved  serviceable,  but

1  ■ I  I ■ ■  i_ -  -  *• ~

'  I  had  also  to  give  the  healthy  persoD  who  slept  in  the  same  room  the  same  re-
medy for  salivatioQ  and  night  sweats,  that  had  arisen  spontaneously,  so  saturated
mm  the  air  of  the  room  with  mercurial  exhalntinnB.


POSTSCRIPT.  163

without  success ;  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  he  was  brought  to  the
verge  of  the  grave. He  would  take  nothing  more,  had  frequent  hic-
cough, recognized  his  friends  no  longer,  and  could  not  move  himself.
I  now  began  to  suspect  that  the  confined  atmosphere  of  the  room
might  perhaps  be  loaded  with  mercurial  vapour,  which  had  again
penetrated  his  system,  and  thus  caused  a  recurrence  of  these  suffer-
ings. I  ventured  to  give  the  half-dead  patient  three  grains  of  hepar
sulphuris  every  hour,  with  such  good  results,  that  in  the  course  of
twelve  hours  I  observed  some  traces  of  amendment,  and  by  continuing
this  and  the  former  remedies,  I  gradually  restored  him  to  life  and
health,  and  I  did  not  neglect  to  place  a  solution  of  hepar  sulphuris  for
some  weeks  in  his  room,  in  order  completely  to  mineralize  and  to
destroy  the  mercurial  vapour  in  the  room,  by  the  evaporation  of  tlie
milphuretted  hydrogen. I  leave  every  thinking  man  to  draw  his  own
inferences  from  this  striking  case.


KNO OF THB VBNERKAL DI8KA8E8.


THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

BT

SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN,

Doctor  of  Medicina,  ICombar  of  tho  Acadsmy  of  Science!  of  IConU,
and  of  Um  Eoonomioal  Society  of  Lelpsl^-


PART  I.^


PREFACE.

When  we  behold  the  large  family  of  mankind  acting  as  they
do,  when  we  see  with  what  perseverance  they  go  through  their
more  or  less  important  spheres  of  action,  which  some  wretched
passion  often  traces  out  for  them,  when  we  see  how  they  all
strive  after  the  attainment  of  some  kind  of  happiness,  be  it  ease,
rank,  money,  learning,  amusement  or  excitement,  scarcely
deigning  to  cast  a  single  glance  towards  the  real  blessings  of  this
world,  -vsdsdom  and  health,  which  beckon  them  back  into  Eden,
we  can  scarcely  refrain  from  pitying  a  race  of  such  noble  origin
and  high  destiny.  My  mission  permits  me  not  to  point  out  the
means  of  ennobling  the  mind  ;  it  behoves  me  only  to  preach  upon
the  greatest  of  corporeal  blessings,  health,  which  scarcely  any
take  the  trouble  to  seek  after,  and  few  know  how  to  value  until
it  is  lost.  It  will  scarcely  be  credited  when  I  assert  that  nought
is  shunned  more  earnestly,  nay  is  held  to  be  more  disgracefiil,
than  rational  care  about  the  health.  We  indeed  hear  it  occasion-
ally remarked  that  this  or  the  other  article  of  diet  is  wholesome
or  hurtful,  that  this  or  that  remedy  is  a  specific  for  this  or  that
disease,  this  or  the  other  habit  is  injurious ;  in  the  higher  and
lower  circles  of  society,  people  interest  themselves  with  fashion-
able modes  of  treatment,  marvellous  diseases,  cases  of  sudden
death,  beautifying  remedies,  and  anecdotes  about  physicians.
But  all  this  is  only  vain  trifling.

*  Published  at  Frankfort  oo  the  Main,  in  1792.


156  THE  FBIEKD  OF  HEALTH.

The  lover  of  highly  spiced  dishes  exclaims  against  the
indigestible  nature  of  puddings ;  the  tea-drinker  can  speak  like
a  book  about  the  evils  of  spirit-drinking;  the  lady  who  has  a
weakness  for  coffee  talks  learnedly  on  the  coarse  juices  of  her
who  has  a  liking  for  beer ;  and  the  guzzler  of  puddings  declaims
upon  the  poisonous  nature  of  mushrooms.

hurtful  character  of  the  day-labourer's  life ;  to  that  young  gen-
tleman with  his  pimpled  face,  how  he  depicts  the  disadvantages
of  a  sedentary  life ;  hear  how  that  lady  who  sticks  close  to  her
tapestry  work  inveighs  against  the  dangers  of  dancing ;  and  how
the  dancing  nymph  points  out  that  much  sewing  causes  green-
sickness. All  know  something,  only  not  what  is  wholesome
for  tJiemselves,

To  take  ourselves  to  task  about  our  pernicious  habits,  to  study
our  own  system,  to  follow  the  regimen  most  appropriate  for  our
own  constitution,  and  heroically  to  deny  ourselves  everything
that  has  a  tendency  to  undermine  our  own  health,  or  that  may
already  have  done  so,  to  bestow  a  thought  upon  all  this,  is  held
to  be  puerile,  old-fashioned,  and  vulgar.  The  courtier  rebels  at
the  idea  of  attending  to  the  advice  of  his  physician  on  dietetic
points;  the  young  lady  who  excels  in  dancing  would  think  it
beneath  her  to  listen  to  the  warning  voice  of  her  mother ;  the
romance-reading  damsel  scorns  to  be  corrected  by  the  sarcasms
of  her  old-fashioned  uncle ;  and  the  wild  student  will  not  be
persuaded  by  his  banker  to  frequent  better  company.

I  readily  grant  that  excessive  concern  about  one's  health  is  an
evil ;  that  there  is  no  occasion  for  an  active  lad  to  trouble  him-
self about  fur-boots,  for  a  rosy-cheeked  lass  to  interest  herself
in  the  various  kinds  of  obstetric  forceps,  or  for  the  pleasure-seeker
to  concern  himself  about  hospitals ;  but  everything  has  its  proper
bounds;  every  human  being  his  particular  sphere,  which  he
ought  to  be  thoroughly  conversant  with,  and  which  he  should
blush  to  be  unacquainted  with.

If  the  minister  of  state  were  to  possess  no  thorough  knowledge
of  medical  police,  the  chief  municipal  magistrate  no  accurate
notion  respecting  the  arrangement  of  prisons,  workhouses  and
hospitals,  if  the  general  officer  were  to  know  his  hospitals  only  by
plan,  if  the  student  who  has  completed  his  studies  were  to  bring
away  with  him  from  the  university  no  knowledge  of  physiology  or
anatomy,  if  the  laughing  girl  were  to  enter  into  the  married  state


PREFACE.  167

without  everliayiiig  heard  of  amother^s  duties,  if  the  governess  can
do  nothing  but  descant  on  silly  gentilxtieB  to  her  chlorotic  pupils,
and  if  the  pedantic  usher,  enveloped  in  a  mist  of  phrases,  elegances
and  verbiage,  were  unable  to  perceive  how  numbers  of  hopeful
boys  entrusted  to  his  care  fidl  victims  to  the  most  enervating
vices,  how  unfit  for  their  respective  spheres  these  persons  would
be.  Indeed  I  should  like  to  know  if  there  is  any  condition  in
life,  where  some  medicA  knowledge  and  some  care  for  our  own
and  our  neighbour's  health  are  not  necessary,  or  if  it  is  ridicu-
lous or  degrading,  beyond  the  mere  rude  routine  of  our  actual
business,  to  devote  some  time  to  the  finer  but  often  not  less  im-
portant study  of  the  structure  and  modes  of  preservation  of  the
human  body.

Of  course  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  works  of  Frank,  or
Howard,  or  Fritz,  or  Haller,  or  Levret,  or  Whytt,  are  for  such
persons  as  these,  and  I  should  commit  a  most  egregious  blunder
were  1  to  recommend  a  total  reformation  in  the  plan  of  educa-
tbn  to  those  who  have  made  it  their  special  study.  But,  jesting
apart,  for  all  these  there  are  studies  of  general  utility,  springs  to
which  all  may  resort  with  profit,  for  they  flow  only  to  supply
the  wants  of  all  the  conditions  of  life.

Oh  I  that  in  the  following  pages  I  were  so  fortunate  as  to  be
able  to  contribute  something  to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  if  they
would  listen  to  the  voice  of  a  warm  friend  of  his  fellow  creatures,
as  if  it  ^ere  the  voice  of  a  friend !  In  a  few  years,  nay  days,
and  we  have  reached  the  termination  of  our  earthly  life ;  would
that  I  could  now  and  then  prolong  it  were  it  but  for  a
few  hours,  would  that  I  could  improve  it  were  it  only  in  trivial
things  I


THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.


THE  BITE  OF  MAD  DOGS.

The  disease  that  results  from  the  bite  of  rabid  animals,  most
frequently  of  mad  doga,  is  of  such  an  extraordijiarj  and  teniWe
character,  that  we  are  struck  with  horror  on  beholding  a  patient
affected  by  it,  and  the  mere  description  of  his  sufferings  causee
us  to  shudder.  Among  a  thousand  persons  affected  by  real
hydrophobia,  often  not  one  ia  saved.  The  moat  vigoroua
constitution,  the  best  physician,  the  most  recondite  remedies,  and
tho  most  implicit  obedience  of  the  patient  and  his  friends,  are  in
moat  cases  ajl  of  no  avail ;  in  the  possession  of  perfect  conscious-
ness the  unfortunate  being  is  usually,  amid  the  moat  fearful
symptoms,  hurried  off  in  a  few  days  to  an  untimely  end.

The  patient  feels  an  accession  of  pain  in  the  bitten  part,  which
may  either  be  perfectly  healed  or  still  an  open  wound,  it  becomes
auiTOunded  by  a  blue  border ;  a  creeping  sensation  proceeds
from  it  up  to  the  throat,  which  feels  as  if  contracted.  The
patient  has  pain  in  the  bead  and  stomach,  and  sometimes  bilious
vomiting.  His  sleep  is  disturbed  by  frightful  dreams,  he  becomes
reatlesa,  the  bands,  feet  and  tip  of  the  nose  grow  cold,  the
features  distorted.  He  thinks  he  seea  fiery  sparks  dancing
before  his  eyes.  He  feels  neither  hunger  nor  usually  thirat,  the
tongue  is  moist  but  covered  with  viscid  mucus,  stools  and  urine
suppressed,  or  he  passes  them  of  natural  colour,  but  with  pain.
The  pulse  ia  weak  and  jerking,  but  not  inflammatory. He  cannot


THE  BITE  OF  HAD  POQS.  159

bear  the  approacli  of  any  liquid  without  trembling  all  over,  with
wild,  anxious,  sad  expression.  In  like  manner  he  cannot  bear
anything  glittering,  bright  or  white,  anything  approached  sudden-
ly towards  him,  loud  talking,  a  draught  of  air,  &c.  In  the  lucid
intervals  he  speaks  rationally,  but  in  a  more  timid  rapid  and
nervous  manner  than  usual;  a  hacking  cough,  sometimes
combined  with  hiccough,  interrupts  his  speech.  His  face  becomes
always  paler  and  more  distorted,  the  anxiety  that  dominates  over
all  his  actions  is  expressed  also  by  the  cold  clammy  sweat  on
his  fece  and  hands,  his  eyes  are  tearful  and  the  pupils  dilated.
He  tosses  convulsively  about  in  his  bed.  He  seeks  to  run
away.  At  length  he*  hides  his  face,  becomes  quieter  and
expires.

The  post  mortem  examination  exhibits  usually  nothing  abnor-
mal.* The  extreme  tension  and  excessive  irritability  of  the  ner-
vous system  and  the  sense  of  self  preservation  shewn  in  the
anxious  dread  of  approaching  dissolution,  these  are  the  sole
characteristics  of  this  fearful  disease.

I  shaU  not  here  enter  into  a  description  of  the  countless  reme-
dies that  have  been  proposed  for  it ;  their  enormous  quantity  is
of  itself  to  a  certain  extent  a  proof  that  no  sure  mode  of  cure
is  yet  known,  otherwise  that  would  be  adhered  to.  I  shall  mere-
ly endeavour  to  remove  some  erroneous  notions  prevalent  on
the  subject,  and  thus  if  possible  endeavour  to  render  this  dis-
ease of  less  frequent  occurrence.

The  Jirst  and  most  prejudicial  of  these  is  the  great  confidence
reposed  in  certain  remedies  said  to  be  infallible,  among  which  I
allude  chiefly  to  internal  remedies.  Some  persons  are  bitten  by
a  dog  supposed  to  be  mad.  They  use  with  all  speed  the  re-
nowned specific,  and  none  of  them  takes  the  hydrophobia ;  all
recover  from  their  wounds  without  any  serious  consequences
following ;  and  in  all  the  country  round  nothing  is  talked  of
but  the  wondrous  curative  virtues  of,  it  may  be,  the  may- worm
electuary,*  or  whatever  else  these  patients  used.  It  foUows,  of
course,  that  in  similar  cases  occurring  in  this  district  nothing

'  [In  two  instaDces,  a  medical  friend  of  ours  has  niade  very  thorough  and  careful
(fineetioDS  of  dogs  which  bad  died  of  hydrophobia,  but  in  neither  case  could  any
morbid  changes  be  discov^ered  which  would  in  any  way  account  for  death.  In  one  of
these  examples,  portions  of  the  brain,  spinal-cord  and  nervous  apparatus,  were  sub
nutted  to  microscopic  examinations,  but  without  throwing  any  new  light  upon  the
nbject] — Am.  P,

*  [A  nostrum  for  the  hydrophobia  purchased  at  an  extravagant  price  by  the  Pros
Mn  Ooremmeiit]


160  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

more  will  be  done  than  to  give  the  bitten  individuals  the  may-
worm  electuary. '  One  of  these,  however,  dies  of  hydrophobiai
but  the  vaunters  of  the  nosti-um  can  furnish  reasons  for  its  inu-
tility in  this  case,  at  all  events  this  single  unfortunate  case  is  Ttr
garded  as  the  exception,  against  the  many  successful  ones.
Should  it  happen  a  third  time  that  some  one  or  other  in  the
neighbourhood  is  inoculated  with  the  poison  of  a  mad  dog,  bo
that  in  the  course  of  nature  he  must  be  affected  by  the  hydro-
phobia, the  electuary  is  at  once  confidently  administered  to  the
unfortunate  individual,  and  it  is  only  by  die  sad  termination  of
this  case  that  the  remedy  falls  into  disrepute.

Had  the  first  cases  of  reported  success  been  more  carefully
investigated,  it  would  have  been  found  that  these  first  patients
had  received  no  true  virus  of  rabies  into  their  wounds,  and  that
(Consequently  the  electuary  had  no  difficulty  in  curing,  as  there
was  nothing  to  cure.  The  subsequent  unfortunate  cases  might
then  have  been  prevented,  had  not  such  implicit  confidence  been
placed  in  this  internal  remedy,  but  the  far  more  trustworthy  ex-
ternal preventive  remedies  been  employed.

But  what  are  the  best  external  preventive  remedies,  and  how
can  we  confidently  pronounce  on  the  madness  of  an  animal  ?
These  questions  shall  be  answered  farther  on.

Thus  much  is  certain,  that  the  commencement  of  the  malady
is  at  first  merely  local.  The  poisonous  saliva  of  the  animal  lies
at  first  inactive  in  the  bitten  woimd.  The  wound  heals,  and  not
the  slightest  inconvenience  is  experienced,  until,  after  a  longer
or  shorter  period,  symptoms  of  irritation  of  the  nervous  system,
and  along  with  them  the  fatal  hydrophobia  make  their  appear-
ance. Could  we  at  first  extract  the  poisonous  saliva  fix)m  the
wound  as  completely  as  we  can  a  splinter  or  a  bullet,  it  would
be  impossible  that  rabies  could  result  from  such  a  bite.  But  if
it  be  already  present  we  know  no  remedy  whereby  it  may  be
certainly  cured.  Hence  all  trusting  to  such  specifics  is  imsafe
and  injurious  if  we  have  not  already  frequently  tested  their  ef-
ficacy on  fiiUy  developed  hydrophobia.

The  second  error  which  may  prove  injurious,  is  the  belief,
that  a  dog  has  communicated  the  poison  by  its  bite  if  he  die
within  a  few  days  of  rabies,  and  has  not  communicated  it  if  he
continue  alive ;  consequently  that  a  dog  that  soon  dies  with  the
symptoms  of  this  disease,  which  fear  magnifies  excessively,  was
mad,  but  that  one  that  recovers  could  not  have  been  mad.  In
the  former  case  (and  who  can  deny  it,  as  we  know  as  yet  so  lit-


THE  BITS  OF  MAD  DOeS.  161

tie  of  the  maladies  of  the  domestic  animals)  it  might  have  been
quite  a  different  disease  that  the  dog  had  which  inflicted  the
Utes,  and  the  remedies  employed  for  these  bites  thus  falsely  ac^
quire  a  reputation  as  specifics  for  hydrophobia.  In  the  latter
case  in  spite  of  all  the  danger,  none  is  apprehended ;  the  only
oseM  remedies  for  the  parts  infected  by  the  vims  are  neglected,
and  the  fatal  disease  is  in  all  certainty  allowed  to  break  out

We  find  in  the  records  of  medicine  many  instances  ^  in  which
the  severe  bite  of  a  dog  that  afterwards  died  with  all  the  signs
of  rabies,  infected  some  persons  but  not  others,  without  the
latter  employing  anything,  and  on  the  other  hand  there  are  un-
deniable  instances  shewing  that  dogs  of  whose  bite  persons  have
died  of  hydrophobia  have  remained  alive.

To  refer  to  but  one  case  of  the  latter  sort,  I  may  mention
that  Martin  Lister,  in  the  13th  vol.  of  the  Philosophical  Iransac-
UonSf  relates  the  case  of  a  robust  young  man,  who,  six  weeks
after  being  bitten,  became  affected  by  hydrophobia,  of  which
he  died  fourteen  days  thereafter.  At  the  same  time,  the  same
dog  bit  a  little  dog,  which  died  the  day  following  of  rabies ;  but
tbe  large  dog  itself  recovered,  and  was  quite  well  eight  weeks
after  it  had  been  mad.

A  similar  instance  of  a  rabid  dog  which  recovered,  some
ehfldren,  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  diligently  washing  its
wounds,  is  to  be  found  in  the  20th  volume  of  this  instructive
collection,  where  we  also  meet  with  the  cases  of  two  young
men,  related  by  Dr.  Kennedy,  who  recovered /ram  the  hydro-
phobia without  employing  any  means.  Had  any  of  the  renowned
specifics  been  used  in  these  cases,  would  not  the  cure  have
in&llible  for  this  disease,  or  even  as  verj  useful,  that  has  not
cored  at  least  ten  cases  of  developed  hydrophobia? — Where  is
there  such  a  medicine  ?^

The  third  error  is  the  delusion  entertained  even  by  physi-
cians, that  the  virus  of  mad  dogs  can  only  cause  infection  when

>  Yaugfaan  saw  from  twenty  to  thirty  persons  bitten  by  a  Aiad  dog,  of  whom  only
one  amoDg  them,  a  boy,  died  of  hydrophobia,  the  rest  escaping  unaffected.

*  Unlen  it  be  perhaps  the  root  of  belUdonna.  Might  not  a  very  strong  extract  of
blick  henbane,  prepared  toUhotU  heat,  administered  in  sufficient  quantity  in  the  fonn,
of  piUa,  be  able  to  cure  this  disease  ?  A  number  of  theoretic  reasons  lead  us  to  ha¥e
•InQg  hopes  that  it  might  But  the  extract  must  be  so  strong  that  two  grains  of
it  are  suffident  to  cause  in  a  healthy  individual,  troublesome  symptoms,  atupefiio-
tnB,Ac

11


1^  THE  FRIEITD  OF  HEALTH.

introduced  into  the  wound  caused  by  a  bite,  or  some  other  open
wound.

As  a  proof  of  the  incorrectness  of  this,  cases  are  not  rare
where  mad  dogs  have  merely  licked  the  external  skin,  and  yet
have  communicated  the  disease.  Two  boys,  as  we  learn  frttm
De  la  Prime,  in  the  20th  vol.  of  the  Philosophical  Transactiom^
frequently  cleaned  with  their  hands  the  wounds  of  a  dog  that
had  been  bitten  by  a  mad  dog ;  many  months  afterwards  unth-
out  ever  having  been  wounded^  they  both  were  attacked  simulta-
neously by  hydrophobia,  which  lasted  a  week,  when  the  eldest
recovered,  and  said  timidly  to  his  father,  "I  am  well."  The
same  happened  to  the  other.  They  remained  well  three  or  fiwr
days,  then  again  had  violent  attacks  of  hydrophobia  for  a  weeik^
and  thereafter  recovered  without  relapsing.  *  Likewise  in  the
23d  vol.,  we  find  the  histoiy  of  two  servants,  who  frequendj
inserted  their  fingers  into  the  throat  of  a  dog  (that  had  been
bitten  by  another  rabid  dog,  and  did  not  die  for  three  weeks
afterwards),  in  order  to  feel  if  there  was  anything  the  matter
with  it.  Both  were  affected  by  hydrophobia  without  having
been  wounded;  the  stronger  of  the  two  recovered  without
using  any  medicine,  but  the  younger  died  of  hydrophobia  on
the  third  day.

I  myself  knew  a  boy  whose  feice  was  licked  by  a  dog  that
was  going  mad,  and  who  died  of  hydrophobia.*

'  [These  are  probably  cases  of  fympathetie  hydrophobia.  The  painful  mental
impressioD  which  continued  to  prey  upon  their  imaginations  for  so  loi^  a  period,
finally  induced  pschychological  phenomena^  yiz.,  symptoms  of  the  very  malaii^
which  they  had  so  much  dreaded.  An  instance  of  tlds  kind  occurred  in  oar  own
knowledge,  several  years^  since,  in  the  person  of  a  nervous  girl  of  16  years.  She  fand
been  bitten  about  a  year  previously  by  a  dog,  which  was  at  the  time  supposed  to  bt
rabid,  and  which  was  immediately  killed.  The  idea  that  she  should  have  the  lij-
drophobia  continued  to  tormont  her,  and  to  wear  upon  her  health  and  spirits,  unlfl,
fimdly,  all  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia  made  their  appearance.  Tliese  symptomt
continued  at  intervals  for  two  days,  when  the  dread  of  water,  the  convulsive  mo-
tioDs,  the  anxious  and  wild  expression,  ^  disappeared,  leaving  only  a  general  sora-
ness  throughout  the  body,  and  a  sense  of  debility.

We  fully  believe- that  there  is  such  a  disease  as  genuine  hydrophobia,  from  the  ab-
sorption into  the  system  of  the  virus  of  rabid  dogs ;  yet,  it  is  quite  probable  that
cases  not  unfrequently  occur,  and  terminate  fatally,  in  which  there  has  been  no  a6-
forpiion  of  the  otrtw,  but  simply  a  painful  and  intense  action  upon  the  imagini^tym,
thus  inducing  pschychological  phenomena,  somewhat  analogous  to  those  produced  by
the  mesmeric  processes.  It  would  not  be  difficult  for  a  mesmeriser,  or  a  pschycho-
logist,  to  mduoe  in  his  subject  a  temporary  conditioa  doecly  aimilntipg  hydrophobia.]
—Am,  P.

*  Ocslius  Aurelianus,  Pahnarius,  Van  Hilden,  Callisen,  Odhelius,  Oruner,  and
Morando  have  recorded  similar  cases.


VBX  BITE  OF  MAD  DOGS.  188

It  is  in  general  tlie  safest  plan  to  consider  the  bite  of  an  nn-
irritated  dog  as  that  of  a  mad  dog,  and  to  treat  it  accordingly.
This  is  the  surest  way  to  guard  against  hydrophobia.

The  wound  should  be  immediately  washed  out  with  water  in
which  a  quantity  of  potash  has  been  mixed,  and  this  should
be  repeated  firequently,  and  until  the  surgeon  arrives,  who
should  bring  with  him  a  piece  of  caustic  potash,  and  touch  the
open  wound  therewith  until  a  slough  the  thickness  of  the  back
of  a  knife  is  formed,  whilst  the  moisture  that  eludes  should  be
removed  by  blotting-paper.  The  pain  is  not  very  severe,  the
dough  fisills  off  in  a  few  days  and  the  clean  wound  soon  heals.
If  this  is  done  first  of  all  and  very  quickly,  we  may  feel  quite
at  ease,  and  do  all  in  our  power  to  comfort  and  console  the  pa-
tient^ ^  and  tranquilize  his  circulation.  A  moderate  blood-let-
ting in  plethoric  individuals,  or  a  glass  of  wine  given  to  per-
sons of  an  opposite  constitution,  will  suffice  for  this  purpose.
If  this  frightfol  disease  can  by  any  means  be  prevented,  it  is  by
nch  means ;  but  not  by  any  internal  medicine  hitherto  known.

The  part  of  the  skin  which,  although  not  broken,  may  have
been  wetted  by  the  saliva  of  a  dog  which  has  become  suspicious
fiom  having  bitten  others,  must  be  diligently  rubbed  with  potash,
and  washed  continually  for  an  hour  witli  the  solution  of  the
alkali.  If  a  blister  be  afterwards  applied  to  the  spot,  then  all
danger  will  be  more  than  warded  of.

No  dog  should  be  trusted  that  bites  people  unirritated,  and
has  a  gloomy  wild  expression.  It  is  far  better  to  kill  too  many
of  these  often  useless  beasts,  than  to  allow  one  actually  rabid  to
Toam  at  large ;  man*s  life  is  too  precious,  and  should  be  held
paramount  to  every  other  consideration.  Merely  to  shut  up  for
a  few  days  dogs  bitten  by  a  mad  one,  is  always  dangerous,  as
examples  are  not  wanting  where  they  only  became  mad  several
weeks  after  being  bitten.  They  must  either  be  killed,  or  be
kept  in  safe  custody  for  at  least  four  weeks,  before  they  are
trusted ;  the  former  must  absolutely  be  done  in  case  the  dog  that
inflicted  the  bite  was  very  suspicious.

A  dog  may  be  suspected  of  commencing  rabies  when  it  ceases
to  be  fiiendly,  will  scarcely  wag  its  tail  on  being  patted  by  those
it  likes  best,  appears  very  tired  and  lazy,  is  cross  and  dejected,

'  A  defgyman  was  affected  by  chronic  hydrophobia  merely  from  imiigining  that
tdog  that  had  bitteo  him  was  mad.  He  would  have  died  had  not  a  physician  pointed
cot  to  him  the  errooeouB  nature  of  his  idea.  He  soon  recovered  after  the  physician
bvl  noceeded  in  conyindng  him,  and  without  taking  any  medicine.


164  THE  F&UBND  OF  HXALTH.

dreads  the  light,  and  creeps  into  dark  oomers,  where  it  lies  down
without  sleeping.  It  never  barks,  not  even  when  there  is  the
greatest  cause  for  it  doing  so ;  it  merely  growls  at  any  thing
approaching  it  suddenly,  and  springs  out  at  it  The  eyes  are
dim,  the  tail  and  ears  hang  done.  At  this  stage  the  bite  com-
mences to  be  dangerous.

This  state  lasts  but  half  a  day,  or  a  whole  day,  and  then  the
second  stage  of  rabies  breaks  out.  The  animal  no  longer  knows
its  own  master,  eats  and  drinks  no  more,  becomes  restless,  growls
with  a  hoarse  whine,  without  ever  barking,  goes  about  threatening^
ly  with  dependent  head,  red  watery  eyes,  having  a  sad  expression
and  directed  towards  the  ground.  It  involimtarily  moves  the
lower  jaw  in  a  mumbling  manner ;  its  leaden-coloured  tongoei
dripping  with  saliva,  hangs  out  of  the  niouth ;  the  taU  is  stuck
betwixt  the  legs ;  the  hairs  of  the  whole  body  stand  out  ia  a
disorderly  manner.  It  tries  to  run  away,  snaps  at  every  thing
before  it,  and  runs  along,  irrespective  of  the  road,  without  ap-
parent object,  straight  and  crooked,  at  a  quick,  usually  unsteady
pace. Other  dogs  run  away  from  it.

The  wood-cut  at  the  head  of  the  article  represents  a  dog  in
this  state.


THE  VISITER  OF  THE  SICK.

If  it  be  not  from  want  of  something  better  to  do  or  from  mere
curiosity,  which,  as  the  story  goes,  is  among  the  attributes  of  the
fair  sex — if,  in  a  word,  it  be  not  from  some  important  object  thftt
Mrs.  X.  visits  Mrs.  Z.  in  her  serious  febrile  disease,  if  she  does
it  out  of  christian,  sisterly,  or  cousinly  affection  and  friendship,
I  fear  I  should  be  denounced  as  a  bad  man  were  I  in  this  last
case  to  forbid  such  visits.  And  yet  it  must  be  done ;  I  must
forbid  them,  but  I  beg  to  be  heard  before  being  condemned.

Malignant  fevers  that  spread  among  the  people  have  usually,
at  all  events  often,  a  coAtagious  character,  notwithstanding  that
some  of  my  colleagues  have  endeavoured,  most  learnedly,  to
prove  the  contrary.  It  is  safer  to  consider  them  so,  as  it  is  in
all  cases  safer  to  believe  in  a  little  too  much  hell  than  too  little,
in  order  that  we  may  take  greater  precautions  to  preserve  our-
selves from  it,  whether  it  be  a  reality  or  only  a  sort  of  a  woodcut
in  rerum  natura.  It  is  likewise  quite  praiseworthy  to  make  our
children  believe  that  the  brook  that  flows  by  is  somewhat  deeper
and  more  fearful  than  it  actually  is.


THB  VISITER  OF  THB  BICE.  166

The  very  probably  contagious  nature  of  prevalent  fevers  being
ecmoededy  it  must  be  highly  criminal,  at  least  very  imprudent,
for  the  healthy  lady  to  sit  b^de  her  deadly-sick  gossip  for  hours
at  a  time  without  the  slighiest  necessity.

"She  would  be  very  much  offended  if  I  did  not  visit  her;
what  would  the  relations  say  to  my  impoliteness  ?  I  am  told
she  longed  to  see  me — ^if  she  should  die  without  me  seeing  her
once  more,  I  should  never  forgive  myself  I"  Such  excuses  might
probably  be  considered  as  valid  by  a  gallant  man ;  but  they
have  no  weight  with  me,  for  I  am  not  a  gallant  man.  Admitting
die  had  a  real  affectionate  desire  to  see  her  friend  once  more,
this  good  intention  must  remain  unfulfilled,  just  as  many  good
tilings  in  this  world  must  remain  undone  because  they  cannot
be  done,  or  at  least  not  without  great  injury  or  palpable  danger.
If  you  wish  to  save  your  friend  from  drowning  you  must  be
ible  to  swim ;  if  you  cannot,  do  not  jump  into  the  water  after
him — for  any  sake  don't  I  but  run  for  assistance,  and  if  he  is
drowned  by  the  time  assistance  arrives,  then  help  to  drag  the
water  for  him;  help  with  all  your  might  to  bring  him  back  to
life,  or  if  all  is  of  no  avail,  follow  his  body  to  the  grave.  There
are  in  like  manner  cases  where  you  can  do  nothing  but  pray
when  your  neighbour  is  being  burnt  to  death  in  the  fourth  story
and  your  heart  is  bleeding  for  him.

Your  sick  friend  most  probably  knows  you  no  longer  in  her
delirium ;  but  supposing  she  would  know  you,  you  may,  when
fihe  recovers,  make  up  in  many  ways  for  this  neglected  service
of  love,  as  such  unnecessary  and  dangerous  visits  to  the  sick
are  commonly  called.  (Would  that  we  poor  creatures  began  to
testify  our  friendship  more  in  deed  and  in  truth  than  in  empty
compliments  and  visits ;  there  is  already  enough  of  the  empty
and  windy  in  this  world  of  ours !)

No  one  requires  fewer  persons  about  him  than  a  dangerously
rick  person,  himself  nearly  related  to  death,  which  slumbers  in
aohtude  beneath  grave-mounds,  as  we  learn  from  friend  Hain.

Who  does  the  patient  who  is  seriously  ill  prefer  having  near
him  ?  none  but  the  necessary  person,  at  the  most  a  father,  a
mother  or  a  spouse,  but  best  of  all  the  sick-nurse  and  the  doctor
(two  persons  ordained  by  God  and  placed,  like  Uriah  in  the
battle,  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight — forlorn  hopes  quite  close  to
the  advancing  enemy,  without  any  hours  of  relief  firom  their
irksome  guard— two  very  much  misunderstood  beings,  who
Bacnfice-  themselves  at  hard-earned  wages  for  tlie  public  weal.


166  THE  FBIKND  OF  HEALTH.

and,  in  order  to  obtain  a  civic  crown,  brave  the  life-destroying,
poisoned  atmosphere,  deafened  by  the  cries  of  agony  and  tl^
groans  of  death).

Let  patients  affected  with  contagious  fevers  be  left  to  these
two,  the  only  necessary,  the  only  useful  individuals,  and  to  a
beneficent  Ghod ;  they  alone  can  attend  to  them  properly,  from
their  hands  must  they  expect  all  the  good  that  we  can  wish  for
them,  life  and  health.

The  anxious  lady  that  visits  her  sick  firiend  can  do  her  no
manner  of  good ;  all  she  can  do  will  be  to  shew  her  a  pocket-
handerkchief  which  she  has  moistened  with  her  sympathizing
tears,  irritate  her  morbid  nerves  with  chattering,  help  to  spoil
the  air  of  the  close  sick-room  with  her  breath,  increase  the  noise
that  is  often  so  hurtful  to  patients,  disarrange  the  good  order  by
her  officious  interference,  give  well-raeant  but  erroneous  advice,
and,  what  is  of  still  greater  consequence,  carry  back  the  disease
with  her  into  her  own  house.

Let  it  not  be  alleged  that  the  sick  nurse  and  the  doctor  must
run  the  same  risk  if  the  doctrine  of  contagiousness  be  true.
They  do  so  no  doubt  to  a  certain  degree,  as  the  death  of  many
doctors  and  nurses  shew.  But  they  do  not  do  so  much  as  Madam
Gossip,  and  this  is  the  reason.

The  Creator  of  mankind  has  so  ordained  that  haint  shall  be  a
protector  against  many  dangers.  Thus  the  chimney-sweeper
gradually  accustoms  himself  to  the  smoke  from  wood,  which
would  choke  any  one  else,  and  he  can,  if  it  be  not  too  intense,
easily  exist  in  it.  The  glass-blower,  from  gradual  custom  with-
stands the  most  intense  heat  of  his  furnace,  and  goes  much  closer
to  it  than  other  persons  can.  The  Greenlander,  a  man  like  our-
selves, laughs  and  jokes  in  a  degree  of  cold  that  would  freeze  to
death  those  unused  to  it.  The  courier  who  travels  many  himdied
miles  in  a  few  days,  and  the  runner  who  makes  a  day's  journey
in  a  few  hours ;  the  fisherman  who  spends  much  of  his  life  in
the  water  without  taking  cold,  and  the  Scotch  miner  who  lives
to  the  age  of  a  hundred  years  in  his  unhealthy  occupation,  are
all  proofe  of  this.

In  like  manner  some  stout-hearted  men  can  gradually  accustom
themselves  to  the  exhalations  of  the  most  infectious  diseases,
and  their  system  in  course  of  time  becomes  quite  insensible  to
them.  There  are  some  layers-out  of  dead  bodies  in  large  cities
who  attain  a  great  age,  and  have  breathed  the  exhalations  from
thousands  of  corpses  that  have  died  of  infectious  diseases. There


PBOTEOnOK  AGAINST  IKF£CTIOKy  £TC.  167

have  alao  been  graye-diggers  who  in  the  time  of  a  pestilence  have
buried  the  last  inhabitant  of  ^eir  district.

But  it  is  only  cautious  nurses  and  physicians  that  can  rejoice
in  this  immunity  from  infection ;  they  must  accustom  themselves
to  it  very  gradually,  continue  to  habituate  themselves  and  em-
ploy various  precautions  in  order  not  to  be  destroyed  by  the
murderous  exhalation.

A  casual  visiter  cannot  pretend  to  such  advantages,  she  must
be  totally  imused  to  the  insidious  miasm,  and  in  all  probability
she  runs  the  greatest  risk  to  her  life.  She  may  be  happy  if  her
imprudence  does  not  make  orphans  of  her  children,  or  even
eaase  the  death  of  all  of  them,  without  any  &ult  of  theirs.


PROTECTION  AGAINST  INFECTION  IN  EPIDEmC  DISEASES.

For  every  kind  of  poisonous  exhalation  there  is  in  all  probabi-
lity a  particular  antidote,  only  we  do  not  always  know  enough
about  the  latter.  It  is  well  known  that  the  air  of  our  atmosphere
ccmtaina  two-thirds  of  a  gas  that  is  immediately  fatal  to  man  and
beast,  and  extinguishes  flame.  Mixed  up  along  with  it  is  its
peculiar  corrective;  it  contains  about  one  third  of  vital  air,
irliereby  its  poisonous  properties  are  destroyed;  and  in  that  state
only  does  it  constitute  atmospheric  air,  wherein  all  creatures  can
live,  grow  and  develop  themselves.

The  suffocative  and  flame-extinguishing  exhalations  in  cellars
in  which  a  quantity  of  yeast  or  beer  has  fermented,  is  soon
removed  by  throwing  in  fresh  slaked  lime.

The  vapour  developed  in  manufectories  where  much  quick-
silver is  employed,  together  with  a  high  temperature,  is  very
prejudicial  to  health ;  but  we  can  in  a  great  measure  protect
ourselves  against  it  by  placing  all  about  open  vessels  containing
firesh  liver  of  sulphur.

To  chemistry  we  are  indebted  for  all  these  protective  means
against  poisonous  vapours,  after  we  had  discovered,  by  means
of  chemistry,  the  exact  nature  of  these  exhalations.

But  it  is  quite  another  thing  with  the  contagious  exhalations
from  dangerous  fevers  and  infectious  diseases.  They  are  so
subtle  that  chemistry  has  never  yet  been  able  to  subject  them  to
analysis,  and  consequently  has  failed  to  furnish  an  antidote  for
them.  Most  of  them  are  not  catching  at  the  distance  of  a  few
paces  in  the  open  air,  not  even  the  plague  of  the  East ;  but  in
dose  chambers  these  vapours  exist  in  a  concentrated  form  and


168  THE  FBIBND  OF  HEALTH.

then  become  injurioas,  dangerous,  fatal,  at  a  considerable  dk*
tance  from  the  patient.

Now  as  we  know  of  no  specific  antidotes  for  the  several  kinds
of  contagious  matters,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  general
prophylactic  means.  Some  of  these  means  are  sometimes  in  the
power  of  the  patient,  but  most  of  them  are  solely  available  by
the  nurse,  the  physician,  and  the  clergyman,  who  visit  the  sick.

As  regards  the  former  of  these,  the  patient,  if  not  too  weak,
may  change  his  room  and  his  bed  every  day,  and  the  room  he
is  to  occupy  may,  before  he  comes  into  it  in  the  morning,  be
well  aired  by  opening  the  doors  and  all  the  windows.  Khe  have
curtains  to  his  bed  he  may  draw  them  to,  and  let  the  firesh  air
circulate  once  more  through  his  room,  before  the  physician  or
clergyman  comes  to  visit  him.

The  hospitals  used  by  an  army  in  a  campaign,  which  are  often
established  in  churches,  granaries,  or  airy  sheds,  are  for  that
reason  much  less  liable  to  propagate  contagion,  and  also  muoh
more  beneficial  for  the  patients  than  the  stationary  hospital^
which  are  often  built  too  close,  low,  and  angular.  In  the  latter,
the  nurses,  physicians,  and  clergymen  often  run  great  risks.
And  what  risks  do  they  not  constantly  run  in  the  half  under-
ground  damp  dwellings  of  the  lowest  class  of  the  people,  in  the
dirty  cellars  of  back  courts  and  narrow  lanes  that  the  sun's  re-
viving rays  never  shine  in,  and  the  pure  morning  air  never
reaches,  stuffed  full  with  a  crowd  of  pauper  families,  where  pale
care,  and  whining  hunger  seem  for  ever  to  have  established  their
desolating  throne !

During  the  prevalence  of  contagious  diseases  the  poisonous
qualities  of  the  vitiated  air  are  concentrated  in  such  places,  so
that  the  odour  of  the  pest  is  plainly  perceptible,  and  every  time
the  door  Ls  opened,  a  blast  of  death  and  desolation  escapes.
These  are  the  places  fraught  with  greatest  danger  to  physician
and  clergyman.  Is  there  any  mode  whereby  they  can  efiectu-
ally  protect  their  lungs  fix)m  the  Stygian  exhalation,  when  the
crying  misery  on  all  sides  appeals  to  them,  shocks  them,  and
makes  them  forgetful  of  self?  And  yet  they  must  try  to  dis-
cover some  preventive  I How  are  they  to  do  so  ?

I  have  said  above,  that  wc  may  gradually  accustom  ourselves
to  the  most  poisonous  exhalations,  and  remain  pretty  well  in
the  midst  of  them.

But,  as  is  the  case  with  accustoming  ourselves  to  every  thing,
the  advance  from  one  extreme  to  the  otJier  must  be  made  with  the


PBOTEOTION  AGAINST  INFECTION, ETC.  169

utmost  caution^  and  hy  very  smaU  degrees^  so  it  is  especially  with
this.

We  become  gradually  accustomed  to  the  most  imwholesome
prison  cells,  and.  the  prisoners  themselves  with  their  sighs  over
the  inhuman  injustice  of  their  lot,  often,  by  their  breathing  and
flie  exhalations  fix>m  their  bodies,  gradually  bring  the  few  cubic
feet  of  their  atmosphere  into  a  state  of  such  pestilential  malignity,
that  strangers  are  not  unfrequently  struck  down  by  the  most
dangerous  typhoid  fevers,  or  even  have  suddenly  died  by  ven-
turing near  them,  whilst  the  prisoners  themselves,  having  been
gradually  accustomed  to  the  atmosphere,  enjoy  a  tolerable  health.

In  like  manner  we  find  that  physicians  who  see  patients  la-
bouring under  malignant  fevers  rarely  and  only  occfusionally,
and  clergymen  whose  vocation  only  requires  them  to  pay  a  visit
now  and  then,  are  much  more  frequently  infected  than  those
vho  visit  many  such  cases  in  a  day.

From  these  facts  naturally  proceeds  the  first  condition  for
those  who  visit  such  sick-beds  for  the  first  time,  "that  they  should
in  the  commencement  rather  see  their  patients  more  frequently,
but  each  time  stay  beside  them  as  short  a  time  as  possible,  keep
as  fer  away  as  possible  from  the  bed  or  chamber  utensil,  and
especially  that  they  should  take  care  that  the  sick  room  be  tho-
roughly aired  before  their  visit."

After  these  preliminary  steps  have  been  taken  with  proper
caution  and  due  care,  we  may  then,  by  degrees,  remain  some-
what longer,  especially  beside  patients  with  the  slighter  form  pf
the  disease,  and  of  cleanly  habits,  we  may  also  approach  them
sufficiently  close  to  be  able  to  feel  their  pulse  and  see  their  tongue,
taking  the  precaution  when  so  near  them,  to  refrain  from  breath-
ing. All  this  can  be  done  without  any  appearance  of  affecta-
tion, anxiety,  or  constraint.

I  have  observed,  that  it  is  usually  the  most  compassionate j  young
physicians,  who,  in  epidemics  of  this  sort,  are  soonest  carried  off,
when  they  neglect  this  insufficiently  known  precaution,  perhaps
fix)m  excessive  philanthropy  and  anxiety  about  their  patients ;
that  on  the  other  nand,  the  hard  hearted  sort  of  every -day  doc-
tors who  love  to  make  a  sensation  by  the  large  number  of  patients
they  visit  daily,  and  who  love  to  measure  the  greatness  of  their
medical  skill  by  the  agility  of  their  limbs  and  their  rapidity,
most  certainly  escape  infection.  But  there  is  a  wise  middle  path
(which  young  clergymen  who  visit  the  sick  are  counselled  to  adopt),


170  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

whereby  they  may  unite  the  most  sensitive  and  warmest  phi-
lanthropy with  immimity  to  their  own  precious  health.

The  consideration  **that  a  precipitate  self-sacrifice  may  do  them
harm  but  cannot  benefit  the  patient,  and  that  it  is  better  to  spare
one's  life  for  the  preservation  of  many,  than  to  hazard  it  in  order
to  gratify  a  few,"  will  make  the  above  first  precaution  acceptablei
viz. — hy  very  gradually  approaching  and  accustoming  ourselves  to
the  inflammatory  rnaterial  of  the  contagion^  to  blunt  hy  degrees  our
nerves  to  the  impression  of  the  miasm  (morbid  exhalation)  otherwise
so  easily  communicahle.  We  must  not  neglect  to  impress  the  same
precautionary  measures  on  the  attendants  of  the  sick  person.

The  second  precaution  is  "that  we  should,  when  visiting  the
patient,  endeavour  to  maintain  our  mind  and  body  in  a  good
equilibrium."  This  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  during  this  occa-
pation  we  must  not  permit  ourselves  to  be  acted  on  by  debili-
tating emotions ;  excesses  in  venery,  in  anger,  grief  and  care,
as  also  over-exertion  of  the  mind  of  all  sorts,  are  great  promoters
of  infection.

HcQce  to  attead  either  as  physician  or  clergyman  a  dear
friend  sick  of  the  prevalent  fever  is  a  very  dangerous  occupa-
tion, as  I  have  learnt  from  dear-bought  experience.

We  should  endeavour  moreover  to  preserve  as  much  as
possible  our  usual  mode  of  living,  and  whilst  our  strength  is
still  good  we  should  not  forget  to  take  food  and  drink  in  the
usual  manner,  and  duly  apportioned  to  the  amount  of  hunger
and  thirst  we  may  have.  Unusual  abstinence  or  excess  in  eat-
ing aud  drinking  should  be  carefully  avoided.

But  in  this  respect  no  absolute  dietetic  rules  can  be  laid  down.
It  has  been  said  that  one  should  not  visit  patients  when  one's
stomach  is  empty,  but  this  is  equally  erroneous  as  if  it  were  to  be
said,  one  should  visit  them  with  an  empty  stomach.  *  One  who
like  myself  is  never  used  to  eat  anything  in  the  forenoon,  would
derange  his  digestion  and  render  himself  more  susceptible  of
infection  were  he,  following  the  old  maxim,  to  eat  something
for  which  he  had  no  appetite  and  visit  his  patients  in  this  state ;
and  vice  versa.

On  such  occasions  we  should  attend  more  than  ordinarily  to
our  desires  for  particular  articles  of  diet,  and  procure  if  possible
that  for  which  we  have  most  appetite,  but  then  only  eat  as
much  as  will  satisfy  us.

All  overfetigue  of  the  body,  chills  and  night-watchings,
should  be  avoided.


PBOTEOTIOK  AGAINST  INFECTION, ETC.  171

Every  physician  who  has  previously  been  engaged  in  practice,
eyeiy  dergyman  and  nurse  will  of  course  have  learned  to  get
over  the  unnecessary  repugnance  he  may  feel.

Thus  we  become  gradually  habituated  to  the  occupation  of
tending  patients  suffering  from  malignant  fevers,  which  is  fraught
with  so  much,  danger  and  cannot  be  compensated  by  any
amount  of  pecuniary  remuneration,  until  at  length  it  becomes
almost  as  difB.cult  to  be  infected  at  all  as  to  get  the  small-pox
twice.  If  under  all  these  circumstances  we  retain  our  courage,
sympathizing  compassionate  feelings,  and  a  clear  head,  we  be-
come persons  of  great  importance  in  the  state,  not  to  be  recom-
pensed by  the  favour  of  princes,  but  conscious  of  our  lofty
destiny  and  rising  superior  to  ourselves,  we  dedicate  ourselves
to  the  welfare  of  the  very  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest  aniong
the  people,  iwe  become  as  it  were  angels  of  God  on  earth.

Should  the  medical  man  experience  in  himself  some  com-
mencing signs  of  the  disease,  he  should  immediately  leave  off
visiting  the  patient,  and  if  he  have  not  committed  any  dietetic
or  regiminal  error,  I  would  recommend,  notwithstanding  I  have
endeavoured  in  this  book  to  avoid  anything  like  medicinal  pre-
scriptions, the  employment  of  a  domestic  remedy,  so  to  speak,
empirically.

In  such  cases  I  have  taken  a  drachm  of  cinchona  bark  in
wine  every  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  until  all  danger  of  infec-
tion (whatever  kind  of  epidemic  fever  the  disease  might  be)
was  completely  over.

I  can  reconomend  this  from  my  own  experience,  but  am  far

from  insisting  upon  the  performance  of  this  innocuous  and  power-

fol  precaution  by  those  who  are  of  a  different  opinion. My

r«asons  would  be  satisfactory  if  I  could  adduce  them  in  this  place.

But  as  it  is  not  enough  to  protect  ourselves  from  infection,

but  also  necessary  not  to  allow  others  to  come  in  the  way  of

danger  through  us,  those  who  have  been  engaged  about  such

patients  should  certainly  not  approach  others  too  nearly  until

they  have  changed  the  clothes  they  had  on  when  beside  the

patients  for  others,  and  the  former  should  be  hung  up  in  an  airy

place  where  no  one  should  go  near  them,  until  we  again  need

them  to  visit  our  patients. Next  to  the  sick-room,  infection

takes  place  most  easily  by  means  of  such  clothes,  although  the

person  who  visits  the  patient  may  not  have  undergone  any

infection.

A  highly  respectable  and  orderly  individual  who  for  years


172  THE  FRIBND  OF  HEALTH.

had  never  walked  anywhere,  but  only  to  his  oiBce  at  the  fixed
hours,  had  a  female  attendant  with  whom  he  was  on  very  friendly
terms,  an  old  good-natured  person,  who  without  his  knowledge
employed  all  her  leisure  hours  in  making  herself  useful  to  a
poor  family  living  about  a  hundred  yards  from  his  house,  who
were  lying  sick  of  a  putrid  fever,  the  prominent  character  of
which  was,  a  malignant  typhoid  fever.  For  a  fortnight  all
went  on  well ;  but  about  this  time  the  gentleman  received  some
intelligence  of  a  very  annoying  and  depressing  character,
and  in  a  few  days,  although  to  my  certain  knowledge  he  had
seen  no  one  affected  with  such  a  disease,  he  got,  in  all  proba-
bility from  the  clothes  of  his  attendant  who  was  oflen  very
close  to  him,  exactly  the  same  kind  of  malignant  fever,  only
much  more  malignant.  I  visited  him  as  a  friend  with  unre-
served sympathy  as  I  ought,  and  I  fell  sick  of  the  same  fever,
although  I  had  been  already  very  much  accustomed  to  infection.

This  case,  together  with  many  other  similar  ones,  taught  me
that  clothes  carry  far  and  wide  the  contagious  matter  of  such
fevers,  and  that  depressing  mental  emotions  render  persons  sus-
ceptible to  the  miasm,  even  such  as  are  already  used  to  its  influ-
ence.

It  would  appear  that  the  lawyer  who  draws  up  a  will,  the  no-
tary and  the  witnesses  would,  on  account  of  not  being  habitua-
ted to  such  impressions,  run  much  greater  risk  of  being  infected
in  these  cases.  I  do  not  deny  it ;  but  for  them  there  are  modes
of  escape  which  are  not  so  accessible  to  the  other  persons  of
whom  we  have  spoken.

Where  there  is  nothing,  the  sovereign  has  lost  his  rights,
there  is  no  will  to  be  made.  But  when  wealthy  persons  wiah
to  make  their  last  will  and  testament  on  their  sick  bed,  there
are  two  circumstances  in  favour  of  the  lawyer  and  his  assistants.
As  in  the  formalities  of  a  legal  testament,  the  patient's  bed  of-
ten cannot  remain  in  its  usual  situation,  and  as  moreover  it  is
essential  for  such  a  testament  that  the  testator  should  be  in  full
possession  of  his  intellectual  faculties,  it  follows  that  for  those
patients  wJio  are  not  absolutely  poor  another  room  and  another
bed  may  be  got  ready,  thoroughly  aired  and  free  from  infectious
atmosphere.  They  do  not  need  to  remove  thither  until  all  this
has  been  properly  performed  a  short  time  before.

The  weakness  of  the  intellect  in  such  patients  generally  keeps
pace  with  their  corporeal  weakness,  and  a  patient  who  possesses


PROTECTION  AGAINST  INFECTION, ETC.  17S

sofflcient  strength  of  intellect  to  make  his  will  would  not  allege
that  he  is  too  weak  to  be  removed  to  another  bed  and  room.

How  little  chance  there  is  of  the  legal  officials  catching  the
infection  under  these  circumstances  (provided  they  take  moder-
ate care  not  to  approach  the  patient  nearer  than  necessary),  I
need  not  dwell  upon.

I  should  mention  that  after  one  has  once  accustomed  himself
to  any  particular  kind  of  miasm,  for  example  the  bloody  flux,
the  nerves  remain  for  a  considerable  time,  often  for  years,  to
some  degree  insensible  to  the  same  kind  of  disease,  even  though
during  all  that  time  we  may  have  had  no  opportunity  of  seeing
patients  affected  with  that  disease,  and  thus  as  it  were  of  keep-
ing the  nerves  actively  engaged  in  keeping  up  this  state  of  spe-
cific unsusceptibility.  It  gradually  goes  off,  but  more  slowly
than  one  would  suppose.  Hence  with  moderate  precaution  a
nurse,  a  physician,  or  a  clergyman,  may  attend  dysenteric  pa-
tients this  year  if  they  have  had  to  do  with  similar  patients
several  years  previously.  But  the  safest  plan  is  to  employ  even
in  this  case  a  Kttle  blameless  precaution.

But  as  the  superstitious  amulets  and  charms  of  our  ancestors'
times  did  harm,  inasmuch  as  full  credit  was  given  to  their  medi-
cinal virtues,  and  better  remedies  were  consequently  neglected,
80  for  like  reasons  the  fumigations  of  the  sick  room  with  the  va-
pour of  vinegar,  juniper-berries  and  the  like,  is  inadvisable,  al-
though the  majority  of  my  colleagues  highly  recommend  it,
and  assert  that  the  most  infectious  miasms  of  all  kinds  have
thereby  been  overpowered  and  driven  away,  and  thus  the  air
purified.

Being  convinced  of  the  contrary,  I  must  directly  contradict
them,  and  rather  draw  upon  myself  their  disfavour  than  neglect
an  opportunity  of  rendering  a  service  to  my  fellow-creatures.
But  as  the  spoiled  (phlogisticated,  foul,  fixed,  &c.)  air  can  never
be  restored  to  purity  or  turned  into  vital  air  by  means  of  these
fumes,  and  as  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  a  proof  that  the  subtle
contagious  exhalations,  whose  essential  nature  is  quite  unknown
to  us  and  not  perceptible  to  our  senses,  can  be  weakened,  neu-
tralized, or  in  any  other  manner  rendered  innocuous  by  these
ftunes,  it  would  be  foolish,  I  would  almost  say  unjustifiable,  by
recommending  such  fumigations  for  the  supposed  purification
of  the  air,  to  encourage  ordinary  people  in  their  natural  indo-
lence and  indisposition  to  renew  the  air  of  their  apartments,
and  thereby  expose  every  different  person  who  comes  in  con-


174  THE  FBIEKD  OP  HEALTH.

tact  with  them  to  a  danger  to  bis  life,  which  shall  be  all  the
more  obvious  and  great,  the  more  confident  he  has  been  made
by  the  futile  representation  that,  without  driving  away  the  dis-
ease-spreading miasm  by  means  of  repeated  draughts  of  air,
the  pestilential  atmosphere  of  the  sick  room  has  been  converted
into  pure  healthy  air  by  means  of  simple  fumigations  with  vine-
gar and  juniper  berries.  That  is  just  like  the  old  superstition
of  hanging  an  eagle-stone  at  the  hip  of  the  woman  in  labour,
at  the  very  moment  when  all  hopes  of  saving  her,  even  by  the
forceps,  are  over.

When  a  physician  or  clergyman  enters  an  unfumigated  cham-
ber he  can  at  once  tell  by  his  sense  of  smell  whether  his  need-
ful order  to  air  the  room  has  been  obeyed  or  not.  All  sick
people  make  a  disagreeable  smell  about  them.  Therefore  the
freedom  from  smell  of  a  chamber  is  the  best  proof  that  it  has
previously  been  aired,  but  if  fumigations  have  been  had  re-
course to,  the  latter  becomes  doubtful  and  suspicious.  Neither
the  physician  nor  the  clergyman,  neither  the  sick-nurse  nor'the
patient,  require  perfumes  when  they  have  to  think  and  speak
seriously  concerning  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  They  should
never  be  used  I


IN  OLD-WOMEN'S  PHILOSOPHY  THERE  IS  SOMETHING  GOOD,  IF  WE

ONLY  KNOW  WHERE  TO  FIND  IT.

I  hope  by  this  section,  at  all  events  by  the  title  of  it,  to  have
made  my  peace  for  all  future  times  with  that,  please  heaven,
small  portion  of  my  fair  readers  who  suspect  me  of  heresy  from
the  faith  of  our  grandmothers,  and  I  should  be  sorry  to  fall  out
with  these  respectable  old  people,  certainly  I  should.

So  let  us  hasten  from  the  preface  to  the  main  point  of  our
matter.  I  once  lived  in  a  place  where  the  midwife,  who  was
there  called  emphatically  the  vnse  moman,  gave  to  all  newly  con-
fined (peasant)  women  a  good  large  quantity  of  brandy.  Even
I  had  to  submit  to  this  inevitable  fate,  and  I  did  it  without  a
murmur.  For  who  dare  say  a  word  against  the  Parcae,  especial-
ly against  the  the  third  and  last  of  them  ?

I  was  assured  that  this  fiery  spirit  did  great  good  in  many
cases.  With  folded  hands  I  held  my  peace,  as  was  reasonable,
and  looked  on,  and  I  foimd  that  in  this  locality  there  were  ac-


old-women's  philosophy.  175

toallj  many  puerperal  women  who  when  left  to  themselves  had
serious  symptoms  arising  from  weakness  or  excessive  irrilabili-
ty  of  the  nervous  system,  accompanied  by  impurities  of  the
stomach  and  bowels,  or  by  plethora — in  these  the  brandy  did
real  service,  but  these  were  exactly  the  cases  in  which  we  find
opium  (a  very  analagous  thing)  of  use.

Here  then  the  old-woman's  philosophy  was  really  right  for
once.  But  what  became  of  the  other  cases  in  which  the  bran-
dy was  poured  into  the  poor  creatures  in  a  useless  and  hurtful
manner  ?  I  shall  say  nothing  about  that,  because  at  the  pre-
aent  time  the  third  fate  is  still  much  too  intractable,  and  has
even  become  fearful  to  the  sons  of  -^Esculapius.

"  If  you  are  a  woman,  tie  a  man's  stocking  round  your  swol-
len neck,  and  it  will  subside ;  say,  I  said  it."  This  good  coun-
sel of  the  old  dame  is  true  in  so  far  as  slightly  swollen  cervical
glands  in  lymphatic  constitutions  only  require  a  warm  covering
in  order  to  dissipate  the  swelling,  more  especially  a  covering  which
(as  will  readily  be  done  by  a  woollen  cloth  on  the  tender  skin  of
a  lady's  neck)  shall  cause  friction  and  produce  irritation  and  red-
ness. Thus  far  the  old  women's  philosophy  is  again  correct.  But
why  a  dirty  stocking?  might  we  not  use  flannel — and  howl  in
troe  inflammations  of  the  throat  what  good  will  a  dry,  wool-
len, heating  covering  do  I — Here  the  old  witch  holds  her  tongue,
and  so  do  I,  for  it  is  advisable  to  do  so  in  her  presence.

Swollen  cervical  glands  are  cured  by  the  lucky  hand  of  some
wise  woman  or  midwife,  who  must  each  time  that  the  moon  is
on  the  wane,  in  silence  press  thrice  upon  the  swollen  glands
with  her  thumb,  in  a  crucial  manner.  Superstition  places  much
confidence  in  this  semi-magical  remedy,  which  sometimes  is  ac-
tually of  great  service.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  glandular
swellings  in  middle-aged  individuals  of  lymphatic  constitutions
who  have  not  much  general  scrofulous  disposition,  not  unfre-
quently  disappear  rapidly  by  rubbing  and  moderate  pressure.
Thereby  is  produced  an  increased  circulation  of  the  blood  and
a  greater  activity  of  the  lymphatic  vessels,  and  even  an  inci-
pient inflammation,  whereby  the  swelling  is  removed.  In  so
fiaff  the  vaunted  petticoat  wisdom  is  right.

But  what  the  period  of  the  wane  of  the  moon  has  to  do  with
the  matter,  we,-  who  belong  to  the  inferior  class  of  untranscen-
dental  doctors,  are  too  dull  to  perceive,  because,  alas,  we  are
not  endowed  with  the  super-subtle  sixth  or  perhaps  seventh
sense ;  were  it  otherwise  we  might  see  the  great  importance  of


176  THE  FRI£ND  OF  HEALTH.

the  triple  and  crucial  pressure,  more  especially  if  the  exoes-
sively  lucky  precaution  is  observed  of  commencing  and  carry-
ing out  the  operation  from  beginning  to  end  without  ^peaking  a
word^  which  indeed  it  were  almost  too  much  to  expect  firom  an
ordinary  woman.


THINGS  THAT  SPOHi  THE  AIR.

It  cannot  be  indifferent  to  those  of  my  readers  who  wish  to
enjoy  a  long  and  healthy  life  whether  the  air  of  their  roomB
possess  the  necessary  degree  of  purity  or  not.

There  are  many  familiar  things  that  render  the  air  that  we
breathe  more  or  less  unsuitable  for  the  maintenance  of  life,  so
my  readers  must  listen  to  the  warnings  of  a  friend.

Flowers  are  an  ornament  to  a  room,  and  if  we  are  content  to
deck  one  room  with  but  a  few  of  extreme  beauty,  and  very
feWy  on  account  of  their  perfume,  it  will  not  much  signify ;  it  is
rather  praiseworthy  than  blameworthy.  The  more  we  refresh
our  senses  in  an  innocuous  manner  the  more  lively  and  easy
does  our  power  of  thinking  become,  the  more  capable  and  dis*
posed  for  business  are  we,  and  the  delight  of  the  sight  and  the
smell  in  flowers,  the  pride  of  lovely  nature,  is  especially  of  this
character.

But  an  excess  does  harm  in  all  things,  so  it  does  likewise
here.  A  large  bouquet  of  lilies,  tuberous  plants,  love-floweis,
centifolia,  jasmine,  lilac,  and  so  forth,  makes  such  a  strong  per-
frime  in  a  small  room  that  many  sensitive  persons  have  occa-
sionally been  made  to  faint  by  them.  This  does  not  depend  so
often  on  the  antipathy  of  the  nervous  system  to  such  odours  as
it  does  on  the  injurious  property  of  such  strong-scented  flowers
of  quickly  spoiling  the  air  and  rendering  it  unfit  for  respiration.
Other  writers  have  already  called  attention  to  this  &ct,  so  that
I  need  not  dwell  longer  on  it,  and  will  content  myself  with
having  repeated  the  warning.

People  who  wish  to  be  very  genteel,  love  to  bum  in  the
evening  more  candles  than  are  necessary;  and  if  they  are
entertaining  company,  they  light  up  chandeliers,  sconces  and
all  the  other  receptacles  for  candles  they  may  possess,  in  order
that  the  fashionably  dressed  ladies  and  gentlemen  may  see  each
other  welL  It  is  considered  a  capital  holiday  spectacle  to  see
so  many  candles  burning  at  once ;  it  dazzles  one's  eyes  so  bril-


THIiraS  THAT  SPOIL  THE  AIB.  177

liantlj  that  we  scaicelj  know  where  we  are ;  it  also  costs  a
good  round  sum.

But  if  we  view  all  this  display  of  candles  in  the  proper  light,
we  shall  find  that  they  spoil  the  air  in  a  very  ugly  manner.
Considering  that  they  are  only  lighted  for  a  nimiber  of  guests
who  are  to  be  well  feasted,  who,  seated  in  close  rows,  pollute
the  atmosphere  for  each  other  by  their  breathing  and  exhaJa^
tions,  in  one  word  that  they  are  only  lighted  for  feasts  and
balls,  considering  this,  I  say,  I  know  not  what  sort  of  compli*
mentary  speech  I  can  make  to  my  entertainer  for  purposely
depriving  me  of  the  little  bit  of  pure  God's-air,  and  giving  me
the  very  worst  sort  instead,  in  which  an  animal  could  with  dif-
ficulty sustain  life.  Amid  how  many  attacks  of  faintness  will
ixyt  yon  lady  express  her  thanks  to  him,  after  having  worked
away  for  hours  at  her  toilette,  preparing  for  the  festivities,  in
the  endeavour  to  diminish  by  one  third  the  capacity  of  her
chest  by  means  of  a  whalebone  apparatus,  until,  drawn  in  so
tightly  as  to  look  like  a  wasp,  she  could  scarcely  take  in  air
enough  to  support  life  in  a  pure  atmosphere !  Belish  it  who
may — I  must  say,  for  my  part,  that  I  have  no  wish  to  be
regaled  with  so  many  candles  in  a  room.

He  who  wishes  to  act  wisely  will  not  tarry  in  the  room  where
he  has  dined,  and  where  the  vapour  from  the  warm  food  has
deteriorated  the  air,  until  it  has  been  thoroughly  aired.

It  is  very  unwholesome  to  sleep  in  rooms  where,  as  is  often
the  case  among  the  lower  classes,  there  is  a  store  of  green  fruit
A  quantity  of  phlogiston  that  exhales  from  the  fruit  in  the  form
of  their  odour  soon  approximates  the  pure  atmospheric  air  to
the  condition  of  phlogistic  and  unhealthy  air.

Also  store-rooms  of  other  kinds,  where  domestic  articles  and
food  from  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms  arc  kept  in
quantity,  such  as  oils,  candles,  lard,  raw,  boiled,  and  roasted
meat,  pastry,  &c.,  are  not  healthy  places  for  people  to  dwell  in.
It  should  be  observed  that  everything  that  emits  much  smell,
perceptibly  vitiates  the  atmosphere.

In  foul  linen  the  excretions  from  the  skin  are  present,  and  no
rational  person  would  submit  to  have  them  kept  or  washed  in
his  room  for  similar  reasons,  but  also  for  delicacy's  sake.

No  one  who  can  avoid  it  should  sleep  in  the  room  in  which

be  remains  during  the  day. The  beds  part  very  gradually

with  the  exhalation  they  have  received  from  the  sleeper  during

the  night,  and  continue  to  vitiate  all  day  long  the  air  of  the

12


178  THE  FBUCNB  OF  HEALTH.

room,  even  though  it  ^ad  been  thoroughly  aired  in  the  morn-
ing.

Six  busy  watchmakers  do  not  spoil  the  air  nearly  so  much  as
two  workmen  engaged  in  sawing  wood.  I  would  thereforo
advise  that  the  workshops  in  manufactories,  especially  where
much  corporeal  exercise  is  employed,  should  be  built  rather  too
high  than  too  low,  rather  too  airy  than  too  dose,  and  be  they
ever  so  cleanly  and  well  situated  they  should  be  frequently
aired.  It  is  incredible  in  how  short  a  time  in  such  cases  the  air
of  the  room  becomes  vitiated  and  unfit  for  respiration.  The
miserable,  sick  aspect  and  the  great  mortality  of  the  workmen
of  many  manufactories  renders  further  proof  of  my  propoaitioii
superfluous.

Working  with  unclean  wool,  with  oil-colours,  or  with  thingB
for  which  burning  charcoal  is  employed,  is  for  other  reasons
not  innocuous.

But  even  though  the  air  should  not  be  altered  in  its  compo-
sition, it  may  become  hurtful  in  another  way  by  the  mixture  of
something  extraneous. Such  is  especially  maiaiure.

Reservoirs  attached  to  chamber-stoves,  wherein  the  water  is
kept  hot  for  domestic  use,  are  in  this  respect  injurious.  For
this  reason  also,  workmen  who  are  engaged  in  drying  wet
things  in  highly  heated  rooms,  cabinet-makers,  turners,  potters^
bookbinders,  &c.,  are  very  liable  to  swellings  and  other  affec-
tions proceeding  from  relaxation  of  the  absorbents.

A  person  who  from  an  idea  of  extreme  convenience  should,
notwithstanding  the  vicinity  of  a  water-closet,  keep  a  night-
chair  in  his  sleeping  apartment,  should  bear  in  mind  that  the
disgusting  exhalation  from  it  spoils  the  air  uncommonly,  and
renders  the  bed-chamber  in  which  we  pass  a  third  of  our  life  (if
it  be  not  very  roomy)  a  very  unwholesome  place  of  abode.
There  are  however  many  houses  so  ill-arranged  as  either  to
have  no  water-closet  at  all,  or  where  it  is  at  such  a  distance  as
as  not  to  be  very  accessible  in  the  night.

K  this  is  the  case,  and  cannot  be  remedied,  we  should  have  a
small  closet  constructed  of  stone  in  the  comer  of  some  public
room  near  the  bed-chamber  which  has  a  good  opening  to  the
outside  of  the  house,  and  a  well  fitting  door  to  enter  at  In
this  place  we  may,  under  such  circumstances,  place  the  night-
chair,  and  have  it  carried  out  afterwards,  without  having  to
fear  any  vitiation  of  the  air  or  bad  smell.

We  should  not  permit  large  thiddy-leaved  trees  to  stand


THINGS  THAT  SPOIL  THE  AIR.  179

dose  to  the  windows  of  a  house.  In  addition  to  their  prevent-
ing the  access  of  daylight  and  of  the  pure  air,  their  exhalations
in  the  evening  and  at  night  are  not  very  favourable  to  health.
Trees  at  a  distance  of  from  ten  to  twelve  paces  from  the  house
admit  the  air  much  more  readily,  and  cannot  be  sufficiently
recommended,  as  well  on  account  of  their  beautiful  appearance
and  their  pleasant  shade,  as  on  account  of  the  wholesomeness  of
their  exhalations  by  day.  If  we  have  the  choice  we  should
have  the  windows  of  our  bed-room  to  the  east,  where  the  view
15  quite  free,  uninterrupted  by  very  close  trees,  and  unpoisoned
by  the  febrile  exhalation  from  a  marsh.

Poverty  has  brought  many  injurious  habits  into  this  world,
one  of  the  worst  of  which  is  that  where  persons  in  the  lower
ranks  of  life,  especially  women,  sit  over  a  vessel  filled  with  red
hot  charcoal,  in  order  thereby  to  save  themselves  the  expense
of  a  stove  in  winter.  The  closer  the  room  is  shut  up  in  such
circumstances,  and  the  more  the  external  air  is  excluded,  the
more  dangerous  and  fatal  is  this  habit,  for  the  air  inside  will
thereby  soon  become  a  stupifying  poison.

We  feel  a  pressive,  stupifying  headache,  that  seems  to  bore
through  both  temples,  at  the  same  time  we  experience  an  incli-
nation to  vomit^  which  however  is  soon  suppressed  by  a  rapidly
increasing  comatose  state,  in  which  we  sink  helplessly  to  the
ground  and  generally  die  without  convulsions.

When  the  person  falls  down  the  clothes  are  apt  to  catch  fire
from  the  burning  charcoal,  and  indeed  fires  have  oflen  origin-
ated in  this  manner,  which  arc  all  the  more  dangerous  because
it  is  only  when  they  have  fairly  burst  forth  that  they  will  be
observed  by  strangers,  seeing  that  the  person  who  originates  it  is
too  stupified  to  be  able  to  extinguish  the  first  flames.

Not  less  dangerous  to  life  is  it  to  close  the  valve  in  the  chim-
neys of  stoves  that  are  heated  from  within,  as  long  as  the  stove
continues  full  of  glowing  cinders.  From  motives  of  economy
people  often  like  to  retain  the  heat  in  the  room.  An  economy
that  is  very  ill-directed.  The  more  glowing  charcoal  there  is  in
the  stove,  and  the  tighter  the  valve  is  closed,  the  quicker  is  the
air  vitiated,  just  as  it  is  by  a  brazier  full  of  red  hot  charcoal
standing  free  in  the  room,  and  there  ensue  accidents  just  as  bad

The  valves  in  the  chimneys  of  stoves  are  solely  intended  to
moderate  the  draught  of  air  into  the  stove  and  the  violence  of
the  fire,  or  in  the  event  of  the  soot  in  the  chimney  catching  fire


180  THS  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

to  prevent  a  destructive  conflagration  by  entirely  ahntting  tb9
clihnney.  If  this  latter  should  happen,  every  sensible  p^Bon
will  as  soon  as  he  has  shut  the  valve  at  once  open  the  doors  and
windows  in  order  to  remove  the  air  of  the  room  that  has  been
deteriorated  by  the  confined  fire.

We  should  rather  seek  to  save  wood  by  using  well  construct*
ed  stoves,  than,  by  stopping  up  every  hole  and  cranny  in  the
doors  and  windows,  exclude  every  breath  of  air,  as  is  done  by
many  persons  of  slender  and  of  moderate  means.  Such  persons
must  be  ignorant  of  the  incalculable  value  of  air,  who  paste  up
with  paper  every  chink  and  hole,  and  even  hang  up  cloths  be-
fore their  doors,  and  thus  retain  all  the  unwholesome  exhala-
tions from  the  pores  of  the  skin  and  from  the  lungs  in  their
small  rooms,  so  as  to  respire,  instead  of  life  and  health,  disease
and  death.  I  have  seen  melancholy  examples  of  this  nature^
and  I  fear  that  my  warning  will  have  some  difficidty  in  pene-
trating to  the  miserable  cellars  they  have  themselves  selected.

Deathly  pale  and  spiritless  they  feel  an  unknown  poison  per-
meating all  their  bloodvessels,  they  feel  their  health  gradually
being  undermined,  just  as  the  water  that  runs  down  from  their
windows  rots  the  window-frames ;  cachexy,  dropsical  awellings
and  pulmonary  consumptions  carry  them  off  after  having  seen
their  children  die  around  them  of  low,  wasting  diseases,  which
they  attribute  principally  to  teething  or  bewitchment,  or  reduced
by  rickets  to  cripples.  Where  is  the  compassionate  man  w^ho
will  teach  them  something  better  ?


IHERE  IS  GOOD  EVEN  IN  HURTFUL  THINGS.

It  is  well  known  that  the  tailor  s  trade  is  not  one  of  the
healthiest  of  occupations.  We  find  in  these  good  folks,  if  they
are  diligent  workmen,  usually  emaciated  legs,  knock-knees,  a
dragging  of  the  left  leg,  round  shoulders,  the  head  bent  for-
wards, drawn-in  abdomen,  and  so  forth.  Their  complexion
shews  very  plainly  the  unhcalthiness  of  their  occupation :  loss
of  appetite,  piles,  constipation,  weakness  of  the  body,  itch,  &c^
are  things  quite  common  among  them,  and  yet  there  are  cases
in  which  this  mode  of  life  has  been  favourable  to  health.

A  young  man  in  England  was  born  with  the  feet  turned  in-
wards. A  surgeon  whom  his  mother  consulted  pronounced  the
deformity  incurable* When  he  grew  up,  he  could  only  walk


THERE  18  GOOD  EVEN  IK  HURTFUL  THINGS.  161

with  difficxQiy  upon  the  outer  border  of  his  feet  and  heels,  he
always  knocked  one  foot  against  the  other,  and  frequently  fell :
the  musdes  of  his  thighs  and  calves  were  extremely  attenuated,
and  the  tumed-in  feet  were  so  deformed,  that  shoes  of  a  particu-
lar shape  and  tie  had  to  be  made  for  him.

The  poor-house  authorities  bound  him  apprentice  to  a  tailor
thinking  that  this  was  the  only  trade  that  his  deformity  permi?
ted  him  to  follow.

In  this  work,  whereby  one  usually  sits  at  the  shop-board,  as  is
well  known,  with  the  legs  crossed,  he  observed  a  gradual
change  in  his  limbs,  which,  without  the  slightest  employment  of
external  or  internal  remedies,  continued  to  turn  outwards.  In
the  course  of  three  years  they  attained  their  natural  position,
flo  that  he  could  wear  ordinary  shoes,  they  were  indeed  directed
more  than  usually  outwards.  The  muscles  of  his  legs  grew
stout,  xuid  his  body  was  so  well  formed  that  he  enlisted  in  the
marines,  and  thenceforward  remained  in  the  service.

Probably  in  this  case  a  peculiar  stiffness  (rigidity)  of  the  mus-
des that  adduct  the  foot  was  the  cause  why  the  abductor  mus-
des could  not  maintain  the  balance  of  power,  and  so  allowed
ihe  foot  to  be  drawn  inwards.  The  strain  upon  the  former,
when  the  legs  were  crossed  at  his  work,  stretched  and  relaxed
them  more,  and  thus  the  abductor  muscles  of  the  leg  and  foot
were  enabled  gradually  to  attain  their  natural  opposing  power ;
indeed  the  latter  gained  in  this  way  an  excess  of  power,  and  his
feet  were  turned  outwards  more  than  is  usuaL

Joiners  and  cabinet-makers  usually  have  the  right  shoulder
higher  than  the  left,  because  they  exert  the  former  most  during
their  work.  It  might  be  tried  whether  individuals  whose  left
shoulder  was  the  highest,  would  not  become  straight  by  follow-
ing these  trades.

In  like  manner,  to  give  another  example  of  the  good  effects  of
hurtful  things,  there  have  been  eases  where  by  a  stab  of  a  sword
in  the  chest,  purulent  deposits  in  its  cavity  that  threatened  a  fatal
result,  have  been  opened,  and  where,  after  the  murderous  wound
was  healed,  general  health  was  the  result.

So,  also,  persons  who  were  paralysed  on  one  side  of  the  body,
on  being  struck  by  lightning,  have  recovered  the  perfect  use  of
their  limbs.

I  knew  a  melancholic  gentleman  who  in  a  fit  of  the  spleen
wounded  the  veins  in  his  neck,  and  after  losing  several  pounds  of
blood,  recovered  from  his  melancholy  madnesa


182  THE  JTBIEND  OF  HSALTH-

Cases  have  been  recorded  of  patients  who,  in  order  to  put  a
period  to  their  sufferings,  swallowed  large  doses  of  opium,  and
attained  their  object  in  this  way — that  they  did  not  indeed  die,
but  were  completely  delivered  from  their  disease.

And  how  many  instances  might  be  cited  where  persons  have
become  wiser  and  better  by  disease,  or  have  grown  healthier  by
•calamity,  misery  and  hunger,  and  have  become  more  useful
members  of  society !  I  know  a  physician,  to  whom  the  world
owes  much,  who  would  never  have  adopted  this  honourable
profession,  had  not  the  delicate  state  of  his  health  when  a  young
man  almost  compelled  him  to  do  so.

He  who  has  made  a  narrow  escape  from  drowning  learns  to
swim,  and  by  this  accomplishment  is  enabled  to  save  the  lives  of
others.

The  police-inspector  has  his  house  burnt  down,  and  the  fire-
engines  of  the  place  are  put  by  him  into  a  state  of  perfection.

Yon  prince  would  not  have  placed  the  lands  of  his  subjects  in
a  state  of  security  against  inundations,  had  not  some  of  his  own
estates  been  feaiiully  inundated ;  and  had  not  his  throne  been
several  times  shaken  by  the  thunderstorm,  he  would  not  have
introduced  the  valuable  lightning-conductor  into  his  domioions. '

Pfeffel  and  Euler  must  lose  their  sight  in  order  to  surpass  the
most  of  their  fellow-beings  in  poetical  and  mathematical  talent ;
and  if  we  had  space,  we  might  adduce  many  other  examples
of  benefits  derived  from  injurious  things,  to  the  glory  of  the
Creator.


DIETETIC CONVERSATION WTTH MY  BROTHER,  CHIEFLY ABOUT

THE  INSTINCT  OF  THE  STOMACH.

He.  Are  you  not  ashamed  of  yourself  to  be  eating  pears  early
in  the  morning  ?  you  will  chill  your  stomach,  and  then  you  can't
say  I  did  not  warn  you.

/.  Certainly  not,  for  I  have  no  fear  of  such  a  catastrophe.  But
tell  me,  at  what  time  of  day  should  one  eat  fixiit?

He.  After  dinner,  and  as  a  rule,  after  having  taken  something
warm  into  the  stomach ;  such  was  the  opinion  of  our  ancestors,
and  they  were  no  fools.

/.  But  we  moderns  on  the  contrary  are  of  course  ?  and  this  I
would  almost  concede  to  you  for  the  sake  of  peace,  if  this  ver-
dict only  applied  to  some  of  us. But  tell  me,  can  the  stomach  of


MRSnC  OONVSBSATIOV.  188


diflEbrent  indiyidualB  be  regulated  by  <Kie  general  role,  even  were
it  as  old  as  the  twelve  oommandmenta.  Is  not  every  one's  sto-
mach as  peculiar  as  every  person^s  foot,  which  the  shoe  of
another  iirill  not  and  cannot  fit?

Ek,  Yes,  I  grant  you  that ;  but  we  can  take  the  measure  of
the  foot^  it  is  something  visible  and  tangible,  but  who  can  tell
the  exact  and  peculiar  condition  of'  the  stomach  ?  Would  wb
not  act  more  wisely,  by  following  in  its  proper  place,  the  gene-
ral rules  for  it  laid  down  by  wise  men  ;  and  not  attempting  to
speculate  further  on  such  a  ticklish  subject  ?

/.  Did  then  the  wise  men  of  former  generations  know  every
individual  stomach,  its  condition  and  requirements,  so  clearly  as
to  enable  them  to  lay  down  those  general  rules  for  their  postcrty,
which  were  suited  for  each  one  of  the  innumerable  varieties  of
stomachs  ? Is  that  possible  ?

He.  Not  that  exactly  1  but  you  modems  have  apparently  been
more  lucky  in  finding  a  general  rule  for  the  stomach  {dietetics  as
it  is  commonly  termed),  as  I  guess  &om  your  eating  fruit  in  the
morning.

/.  Just  so,  I  just  wished  you  to  tell  me  that  the  modems  were
diet-mongers.  They  are  but  too  much  so,  to  reply  seriously  to
your  irony.  In  their  law-giving  mania  they  imagine  themselves
just  as  wise,  and  make  just  as  many  mistakes,  as  the  ancients.

He.  In  what  horrible  uncertainty,  brother,  would  we  be  grop-
ing about  in  a  matter  of  such  importance  for  preserving  the
proper  standard  of  health !  how  unlucky  would  we  be  were
what  you  say  correct  1

/.  Neither  unlucky,  nor  yet  in  horrible  uncertainty,  I  should
ihink.

This  article  in  our  vital  breviary  is  of  such  great  importance
that  it  is  certain  the  beneficent  Creator  could  not  have  founded
it  upon  the  shifting  standard  of  the  professional  dietists ;  he  must
have  given  us  an  infallible  guiding  principle  to  direct  us  in  the
selection  of  food  and  drink.  Could  any  one  seriously  attempt
to  bring  up  good  children  according  to  the  literal  principles  of
a  pedagogic  book  ?  What  think  you  ?  the  good  Claudius  will
cut  oflf  his  finger  if  this  be  true.

He.  And  what  then  is  your  infallible  guide  to  the  only  saving
system  of  dietetics  7

L  Just  what  you  yourself  usually  follow,  without  thinkinis
about  it  ?

He.  And  what  is  that  I  demand,  you  tantalizing  fellow  ?


184  THS  FBIEND  OF  HEAIAS.

/.  I  should  suppose,  ''Moderation  and  attention  to  what  best
suits  your  individual  constitution  in  every  condition."  I  will
allow  a  finger  to  be  cut  off  if  this  be  not  the  natural  religion  of
the  stomach  and  the  only  infallible  dietetic  rule  for  every  one.

He.  No  doubt,  if  we  had  the  instinct  of  beasts,  you  might  be
right.

/.  What  mutilater  of  the  rights  of  man  could  have  told  yon
that  our  beneficent  mother  Nature  has  not  endowed  ns  with  just
as  much  instinct  as  we  require  ?  Who  teaches  the  infant  to  pre-
fer its  mother's  milk  to  pastry  ?  Who  instructs  him  that  is  sunk
in  grief  and  distress  to  take  a  glass  of  wine  ?  Who  tells  the  patient
ill  of  a  bilious  fever  to  avoid  meat  ?  the  dysenteric  patient  to
pant  for  grapes?  Who  tells  us  when  we  are  hungry,  when
thirsty  ?  A  rotten  ^g  is  just  as  repulsive  to  us  as  it  would  be
dangerous  to  life,  and  arsenic  is  as  abhorrent  to  a  delicate  tongue
as  it  is  &tal  to  t^e  stomach.

But  all  these  are  only  striking  fragmentary  reasons  for  the
reality  of  a  beneficial  instinctive  principle  in  us.  I  am  incapable
of  erecting  a  scholastic  system  upon  it,  irrefragable  though  it  be
in  itself.

Do  not  retort  by  referring  me  to  the  appetite  with  which  the
parched  brandy -drinker  pours  in  his  murderous  liquor ;  to  the
ravenous  hunger  with  which  the  glutton  fills  the  very  last  cubic
line  of  his  stomach  with  hurtful  chef-d'oeuvres  of  the  culinary
art ;  to  the  greediness  wherewith  the  hypochondriac  swallows
his  malt  liquor,  which  has  frequently  before  caused  him  dange-
rous colics ;  to  the  coffee-drinking  woman  who  will  give  her  last
fitrthing  in  order  to  purchase  the  enervating  drink,  although  she
is  just  about  to  lose  her  last  pair  of  black  teeth,  or  must  sigh
over  her  unfruitful  marriage  amid  the  reproaches  of  her  husband.

To  retort  in  that  way  would  be  as  if  from  the  innumerable
daily  examples  of  want  of  conscientiousness  we  should  seek  to
prove  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  conscience.

Oh  my  brother  I  he  who  has  preserved  this  delicate,  never-
deceptive  feeling  for  the  good  and  the  noble,  in  all  its  simplicity
and  innocence,  aftd  exercises  it  with  the  readiness  of  an  unso-
phisticated child,  for  his  own  and  his  brother's  benefit ;  he  asks
not  if  there  be  human  beings  so  degenerate  as  to  presume  to  de-
monstrate away  the  conscience  to  a  mere  shadow,  who  assert
knavery  to  be  a  necessary  fiishion,  and  a  Sybarite's  life  to  be  a
lawful  recreation.  In  like  manner  he  who,  moderately  enjoy-
ing the  gifls  of  God,  has  made  it  lus  study  to  discover  the  reality


BUTKTIC  00NVEB8ATI0N.  186

of  his  desires  for  articles  of  food,  and  has  by  degrees  acquired  a
ftcility  in  being  able  to  determine  before  he  sees  it,  and  firoin
the  mere  name  alone,  whether  this  or  that  food,  this  or  that
diink  would  agree  with  him  at  the  time, — he  does  not  inquire
if  there  be  men  who  bid  defiance  to  all  nature's  wholesome  hints,
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  all  her  wanings,  confound  the  mere  tickling
of  the  palate  with  a  sufficiency,  and  repletion  with  the  satisfac-
tion of  their  wants,  and  acknowledge  no  dietetic  rule  besides  the
gratification  of  their  taste,  their  indolent  habits,  and  the  exam-
ple of  their  neighbours.  He  inquires  not  about  them,  I  repeat,
nor  does  he  imitate  them  in  the  crowd  of  ailments  and  maladies
that  from  time  to  time  endeavours  harshly  enough  to  call  them
back  to  resolutions  of  temperance.  Do  not,  however,  take  up
my  observations  as  though  I  imagined  that  the  instinct  of  our
stomach  should  in  all  cases  indicate  even  particular  varieties  of
nutritious  articles  which  we  must  especially  partake  of  in  order
to  keep  in  good  health ;  this  would  be  foreign  to  the  purpose  of
the  Creator.

In  its  healthy  state  the  human  stomach  only  needs  an  instinct
to  direct  us  to  certain  classes  of  food,  which  we  should  partake
of  firom  time  to  time  if  we  would  continue  in' right  good  health.*
Thus,  for  instance,  the  peasant  who  has  overworked  himseli^
says  to  his  vnfe  when  she  is  about  to  set  before  him  cheese  and
eggs,  "  I  wish  you  would  make  me  a  little  salad ;  if  you  have  any
sour  milk,  give  me  a  little  of  the  wlicy  in  place  of  any  food,  or
something  else  sour."  Or  if,  during  a  couj)le  of  holidays,  he
has  not  had  an  opportunity  of  working  at  all,  he  only  asks  for
weak  soup  for  supper,  or  will  not  eat  any  thing  at  all.  Or,  if
he  has  been  dissipating  for  several  days,  he  asks  her  for  some-
thing strong,  something  tasty,  a  bit  of  bacon,  cheese,  peas,  and
the  like.  In  this  case  he  would  feel  as  if  he  wanted  something
more  were  he  to  get  nothing  but  a  dish  of  milk ;  he  does  not
name  any  article  of  food  in  particular  that  he  must  absolutely
have,  he  only  wishes  something  of  a  verj^  nutritious  character.
In  like  manner  many  persons  of  from  eighty  to  ninety  years  of

'  [This  is  true,  aud  the  reason  is  quite  obvious.  When  the  palate,  or,  as  our  Au-
thor terms  it,  the  "  instinct  of  t/w  Btomach^  calls  for  certain  articles  of  food,  the  sa-
lirmiy  gUnds,  the  ptomach,  the  pancrca<i,  and  the  liver  all  pour  out  their  secretioDB
abandantly,  and  thw«  produce  the  conditions  essential  to  healthy  digestioa  If|  how-
ever, food  or  drink  be  taken  which  is  repugnant  to  Die  palate,  the  digestive  secretions
are  not  furnished,  and,  as  a  consequence,  chylification  is  imperfectly  performed,  and
iodigesUoii,  with  its  concomitants  obtain.  The  ideas  advanced  by  our  great  master
upon  this  snbjeet  are  of  great  importance  in  a  dietetic  point  of  view.] — Am.  P.


186  TBI  FBISVl)  OF  HIAIAH.

age,  oommenoe  fiom  mere  instinct  to  live  upon  honey,  sugar
and  milk.  Who  infonns  them  that  such  substances  only  will
keep  their  fibres  in  a  pliant  condition?

But  whenever  we  jget  into  a  morbid  state,  and  accustom  our-
selves to  attend  dispassionately  to  the  wants*  of  our  stomachy
then  the  voice  of  this  true  guardian  of  our  life  becomes  louder
and  more  audible.  We  perceptibly  lose  our  appetite  for  certain
classes  and  even  varieties  of  food,  and  a  desire  for  other  classes
and  varieties  is  developed,  without  our  knowing  why.  The
pleuritic  patient  calls  for  water,  cold  water,  the  patient  ill  of  pu-
trid fever  demands  beer ;  soups  and  the  like  are  intolerable  to
both.

The  delicate  woman  in  the  family  way  puts  chalk  into  her
mouth,  and  if  we  keep  it  from  her  she  scrapes  the  lime  from  the
wall  and  consumes  it.  She  knows  not  that  she  has  an  intolera-
ble acid  in  her  stomach,  and  still  less  does  she  know  the  chemi-
cal property  of  the  chalk  of  neutralizing  and  removing  adds.
What  teaches  her  to  swallow  greedily  this  specific  for  her  ail-
ment ?  What  else  but  the  awakened  wise  instinct  implanted  by
the  infinitely  wise  Creator?

The  man  who  is  extremely  exhausted  from  starvation  desires
a  spoonful  of  wine ;  what  tells  him  that  a  supply  of  meat  and
bread  which  an  ignorant  person  would  endeavour  to  force  him
to  swallow,  might  prove  fatal  to  him  ?

I  saw  a  lying-in  woman,  who,  after  a  difficult  labour,  suffered
from  intolerable  after-pains  and  a  great  loss  of  blood.  She  cried
for  coffee,  although  when  she  was  well  she  could  scarcely  en-
dure it.  Who  told  her  that  her  haemorrhage  resulted  from  ato-
ny of  the  womb,  and  this  from  diminished  irritability  of  the
fibres,  and  that  the  specific  remedy  for  this  was  coffee?  A  few
cups  of  very  strong  coffee  were  given  to  her,  and  hsemorrhage
and  pains  ceased  suddenly ;  opium  would  have  had  no  effect  in
such  a  case.

A  person  who  has  contracted  a  bilious  fever  from  anger  and
vexation,  longs  for  nothing  so  much  as  fruit,  who  tells  him  that
this  is  almost  the  only  thing  that  can  do  him  good  ?

And  so  I  might  give  you  many  more  examples  of  the  expres-
sion of  the  instinct  of  the  stomach,  did  I  not  fear  to  weary  yoiL
We  understand  it  under  the  terms  appetite  and  repugnance,
two  very  important  but  much  neglected  monitors  for  our  well-
being  I

If  we  would  only  study  this  voice  of  nature  often  enough,


DUBTSTIG  OONVSBSATIOK.  187

and  in  a  perfectly  unprejudiced  manner,  we  would  obtain  a
gpeat  &cility  in  understanding  its  feeblest  manifestations ;  we
should  be  enabled  thereby  to  escape  a  large  number  of  diseases,
and  in  many  cases  to  attain  to  long  life  without  difficulty.

But  we  find  (as  a  proof  of  all  I  have  said)  that  this  small
voice  of  nature  is  only  audib^  to  persons  who  live  upon  very
simple  articles  of  food,  and  that  they  come  at  last  to  understand
it  in  a  very  remarkable  manner ;  almost  just  as  the  cattle,
which  we  allow  to  range  at  large  over  the  fields,  never  swallow
a  plant  that  would  hurt  them,  but  only  those  that  are  suitable
for  them ;  but  when  they  are  ill  they  often  recover,  if  we  drive
them  out  to  the  meadows  where  they  can  instinctively  select
the  food  that  will  do  them  good.

But  how  often  does  it  happen  that  cattle  before  whom  we  place
hurtful  plants,  mixed  with  good  hay,  are  gradually  induced
to  swaUow  the  former  along  with  the  latter,  and  so  grow  ill  ?
Just  as  often  (let  me  be  permitted  to  employ  this  appropriate
comparison  as  regards  animal  nature  in  general)  as  a  gentleman
gets  ill  at  the  richly  furnished  table  by  the  artistic  mixtures  of
his  cook ;  the  taste  of  the  healthy  person  decoys  him  into  eating
unwholesome  things  without  knowing  they  are  so;  or  the
viands  become  unwholesome  by  the  contradictory  mixtures,  and
the  palate  is  seduced,  deceived.

But  as  the  Creator  did  not  wish  to  limit  our  appetite  when  in
health  specially  to  one  single  particular  kind  of  food  or  drink,
and  only  directed  our  stomach's  instinct  to  general  classes  of
nutriment,  in  order  that  we  might  remain  healthy  and  useful
members  of  society  in  every  condition,  under  various  relations,
in  all  degrees  of  latitude,  and  under  all  circumstances  of  for-
tune, so  he  sought  to  avert  all  injurioiis  consequences  that  might
arise  £rom  this  instinct  of  the  stomach,  that  is  so  much  less
limited  than  is  the  case  with  the  lower  animals,  by  endowing
us  with  an  accurate,  definite  sense  of  when  it  is  time  to  leave  off
or  to  partake  of  food  and  drink.

This  sense,  which  we  term  hun{fer,  thirsty  and  satiety,  is  in  the
case  of  healthy  persons  who  have  not  much  choice  of  food,  al-
most the  only  guardian  of  their  health.  This  feeling,  this  in-
stinct, as  I  may  term  it,  is  in  persons  who  regard  moderation
as  one  of  the  greatest  of  virtues,  so  watchful,  so  active — ^they
hear  this  internal  voice  as  distinctly  as  any  animal  to  which  we
especially  attribute  instinct,  so  distinctly,  that  they  can  deter-
mine to  a  mouthful  when  they  have  taken  enough  for  their


188  THB  FBISKD  OF  HEALTH.

health ;  that  they  would  deny  themselves  half  a  glass  of  wine  or
beer  beyond  what  would  agree  with  them.  (The  sick  man,  how-
ever, whose  imagination  has  got  a  wrong  direction,  does  not  be-
long to  this  class.)  And  ii  is  this  last  kind  of  bodily  sensation,
(hunger,  thirst,  satiety,)  dear  brother,  that  I,  as  a  physician,
cannot  sufl5ciently  recommend  1^  be  kept  in  an  active  state.

Moderation,  strict  moderation,  that  is  not  to  be  bribed  by  a
pampered,  corrupt  palate,  is  a  sublime  corporeal  virtue,  with-
out which  we  cannot  become  healthy  nor  happy.

This  virtue,  which  is  nothing  more  than  faithful  obedience  to
the  internal  voice  of  our  digestive  organs,  relative  to  the  proper
quantity  of  nutriment  we  should  take  in,  has  the  most  percep-
tible influence  even  over  all  other  virtues  (which,  in  feet,  do
also  consist  mainly  in  some  kind  of  moderation  or  another) —
and  just  as  certain  is  it  that  excess  is  always  accompanied  by  at
least  one  vice.

We  may  readily  attain  sufficient  proficiency  in  this  attention
to  ourselves,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  much  more  difficult
to  maintain  in  an  active  and  understandable  condition,  under  the
various  circumstances  of  life,  that  instinct,  those  secret  hints  of
our  digestive  organs  which  beckon  us  to  certain  classes  or  even
certain  varieties  of  nutriment  that  are  most  wholesome  for  the
particular  state  of  our  system  for  the  time  being.  If  you  desire
it,  however,  you  may  acquire  even  this  latter  art,  but  only  after
having  perfected  yourself  in  the  former  one.

But  where  is  the  wise  man  to  be  found  who  is  capable  of
rightly  dictating  to  me  in  a  book  once  for  all  what  and  how
much  I  ought  to  eat  and  drink?  To  me,  an  isolated  individual,
with  a  peculiar  constitution,  in  all  the  daily  varying  relations  of
my  life,  and  the  circumstances  of  my  health  ?  I  must  judge  by  my
own  sensations  what  and  how  much  will  suit  me ;  /  must  know
it,  or  no  one  else  can,  unless,  perhaps,  my  ordinary  medical
attendant.

Do  not  blame  me,  therefore,  brother,  if  I  am  somewhat  pre-
judiced against  those  general  dietetic  rules  for  sensible  persons ;
do  not  blame  me  if  I  eat  or  drink  this  or  that  at  this  or  that
time,  and  again  pass  over  whole  periods  for  meals  without  tak-
ing anything,  as  I  do  all  this  only  when  I  am  so  inclined.

He,  But  tell  me  what  is  meant  by  depraved  appetite,  which
makes  so  many  people  ill  ?  Most  derangements  of  the  stomach
seem  to  me  to  proceed  from  that  cause.

/.  Tell  me,  on  the  other  hand,  whence  do  most  of  the  moral


DIKTETIC  CONVEBSATION.  189

defonniiies  come  into  the  world  ?  is  it  not  from  misguided,  per-
verted feeling  for  the  good  and  the  desirable  ?  And  these  erro-
neous directions  of  our  moral  faculty,  whence  oomc  they,  if  not
from  a  seared  conscience  and  ignorance  of  what  is  good  and
desirable  7

J%.  Ignorance  you  say,  and  I  take  you  at  your  word.  Con-
sequently in  order  that  your  analogy  should  hold  good,  we  re-
quire, in  order  to  carry  out  a  rational  system  of  diet,  a  his-
torical knowledge  of  wholesome  and  unwholesome  articles  of
food ;  and  hence  the  dietists  should  be  most  acceptable  to  us.

/.  There  is  not  and  cannot  be  any  thing  which  as  a  general
rule  is  absolutely  unwholesome  or  wholesome.  Just  as  bread  is
useless  to  him  that  has  an  inflammatory  disease,  and  to  him
that  has  his  belly  full,  and  as  belladonna  can  in  certain  cases  re-
store  the  health,  so  none  of  the  other  general  maxims  of  the
dietists  can  be  accounted  good —such  as,  veal  is  the  most  whole-
some butcher's  meat,  chervil  is  a  wholesome  vegetable,  &c.

How  can  a  thing  that  we  can  swallow  be,  under  all  circum-
stances and  in  every  condition  of  the  body,  universally  whole-
some healthful,  innocent,  hurtful,  or  poisonous?  There  is  a
time  for  every  thing,  says  the  king-sage,  and  to  my  mind  he
speaks  much  more  sensibly  than  most  of  the  dietists.

It  is,  however,  very  good  and  laudable  (and  in  this  respect
you  are  right)  to  have  some  knowledge  of  the  various  articles
of  food,  their  nature  and  propcilics,  before  entering  on  the  great
world,  in  order  that  we  may  avoid  mistaking  toad-stools  for
mushrooms,  or  swallowing  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate  for
liqueur.  But  I  should  like  if  our  dietists  were  more  careful
and  exact  in  respect  of  these  matters,  I  should  like  them  to
enter  more  into  details,  and  that  their  maxims  in  regard  to  the
particular  constitution  of  the  body  in  which  this  or  that  article
of  food  makes  this  or  that  peculiar  impression,  were  derived
more  from  trustworthy  and  select  authorities  and  from  their
own  experience,  than  from  mere  hear-say.  But  this  is  a  hercu-
lean task,  and  a  useful  system  of  diet  of  this  kind  will  long
remain  ideal  only.  And  with  this,  adieu,  dear  brother.  Think
over  the  subject  and  tell  me  on  some  future  occasion  where
you  think  I  am  wrong.


AN  OCCASIONAL  PURGATIVE,  SURKLY  THAT  CAN  DO  NO  HARM.

My  dear  Doctor,

I  have  been  advised  to  apply  to  you,  as  you  have  the


190  THE  FRIEin)  OF  HEALTH.

character  of  always  telling  people  in  a  pretty  straightforward
manner  what  they  ought  to  do.  It  occurs  to  me,  and  my
fiunily-surgeon  also  has  often  reminded  me,  that  it  is  surely
high  time  for  me,  my  wife  and  my  children,  to  take  a  good  dose
of  purgative  phj^sic.  "  Your  honour,"  he  is  always  saying,  "  only
think  what  a  quantity  of  dirt  must  accumulate  in  the  abdomen
in  the  course  of  half  a  year,  if  the  refuse  be  not  swept  out  and
cleansed  away  at  least  once  a  month."  The  like  of  us,  to  be
sure,  do  not  understand  it,  but  one  would  think,  that  of  all  the
food  and  drink  we  take,  somewhat  must  occasionally  stick  in
the  body,  though  it  may  not  be  so  desperately  bad  as  my  suiv
geon  alleges.  Thinks  I  to  myself,  if  everything  collects  in  the
body  in  that  way,  then  my  shepherd,  who  is  in  his  seventieth
year,  and  has  never  taken  any  medicine  in  his  life,  must  carry
about  with  him  in  his  belly  an  accumulation  of  impurities
enough  to  fill  a  barrel.  But  my  surgeon  ought  to  know  more
about  the  matter  than  I  do.  The  fellow  has,  as  he  assures  me,
had  great  experience  during  the  seven  years*  war ;  he  has  am-
putated a  fearful  number  of  arms  and  legs  in  the  military  hoe-
pitals,  and  helped  to  extract  many  bits  of  broken  skulls.  Do
not  blame  me,  doctor,  for  adopting  his  views ;  the  chap  makes
an  impression  on  one  with  his  talk.  He  looks  as  fierce  as  a
savage,  stammers  out  horrible  Latin  and  Greek  words,  gesticu-
lates with  his  arms,  and  distorts  his  features  to  such  an  extent
that  one  cannot  help  being  moved  when  one  listens  to  him.
And  what  he  says  may  be  perfectly  correct ;  and  is  there  any
greater  blessing  than  health?  What  a  lot  of  diseases  with
Greek  and  Latin  names  one  might  get  in  one's  gullet  by  neg-
lecting the  proper  precautions !  My  wife  and  children  are  very
precious  to  me ;  they  are  all  lively  and  ruddy,  and  as  sound  as
a  nut.  May  God  keep  them  so !  But  all  my  household  must
lend  a  hand,  and  work  according  to  their  abilities.  After  being
busy  all  day  in  the  open  air  they  get  a  brave  appetite  for  their
meals.  None  of  them  ail  in  the  least,  that  is  true.  If  we  could
but  prevent  their  suffering  hereafl;er !  If  you  should  think  a
good  purgative  advisable  for  us,  please  to  send  us  our  portions,
and  say  how  we  should  take  them.  The  chemist  will  tell  you
the  ages  of  myself  and  family.  You  may  send  the  stuflF  to  us
by  the  brewer's  cart.  I  am,  Ac,

W.  von  TEUTON,

Sdilo88  Bergbauaen,  Reiirtd  Oapiain,

1st  October.


AN  OCCASIONAL  PUBOATIYE.  191

Ansioer.
My  dear  Captain,

It  is  well  that  you  have  not  given  the  preference  to
the  idle  talk  of  jour  Bramarbas  of  a  surgeon  over  your  sound
judgment,  as  so  many  in  your  situation  do.

You  appear  to  appreciate  the  truth  of  that  very  sensible
Tnaxim,  '*  The  whole  need  not  the  physician,  but  they  that  are
sibk."  Who  would  take  medicine  if  there  was  nothing  the
matter  with  him?  Is  there  any  better  preventive  of  diseases
than  a  good  robust  state  of  health  ?  That  you  enjoy,  as  I  pei^
ocive  from  your  letter,  along  with  your  femily ;  do  you  wish
for  anything  better  ?

It  18  only  in  cases  of  excessive  over-loading  of  the  stomach  in
delicate  persons,  and  such  as  are  afflicted  with  chronic  diseases,
that  the  circumstance  occurs  of  nature  being  too  weak  to  expel
the  ordure  at  the  right  time,  and  we  require  to  assist  her  by
meuis  of  a  purgative  medicine.  But  in  the  healthy  state,  nature
18  able  of  herself  to  evacuate  the  useless  refuse  of  the  food,  and
that  infinitely  better  than  can  be  done  by  our  good  art.

Therefore,  trust  me,  take  no  physic,  neither  you  nor  your
fimnlj.  Anything  else  that  you  have  to  ask  I  shall  be  happy
ta  infimn  you  o£  Let  your  barber-surgeon  stick  to  your  beard ;
the  inferior  class  of  these  gentry  usually  only  understand  the  art
of  making  healthy  people  less  healthy,  and  the  sick  worse  than
they  were ;  they  bring  nothing  out  of  the  military  hospital  with
them  but  disregard  for  the  sufferings  of  others. Farewell.


ON  MAKING  THE  BODY  HARDY.

Modem  instructors  and  other  clear-headed  men  have  deeply
felt  the  necessity  of  making  young  persons  destined  for  various
pursuits  and  for  fighting  their  way  in  the  great  world,  hardy,  as
they  term  it,  and  thereby  rescuing  them  from  that  effeminating
and  coddling  mode  of  rearing  which  has  for  long  been  the  pri-
vilege of  fjBishionable  people,  in  which'  they  have  been  en-
couraged by  the  ordinary  class  of  physicians,  who  arc  accus-
tomed to  reap  a  golden  harvest  from  the  fur-coats,  fur-boots,
fur-caps,  the  heated  rooms,  the  intemperance,  the  warm  drinks,
and  the  destructive  passions  of  their  clients.

The  many  unfruitful  marriages,  the  delicacy  and  bad  health
of  the  richer  classes  have  excited  attention,  and  it  has  been
found  that  these  &vourites  of  fortune  have  been  changed  into


192  THE  FBIBND  OF  HEALTH.

the  most  wretched  specimens  of  humanity  by  the  habits  of
life  they  adopt,  that  many  of  their  families  gnwiually  die  out
inevitably,  and  that  the  delicate  members  that  may  still  remain
of  some,  encompassed  by  a  host  of  diseases  and  pains,  joylessly
drag  out  their  existence,  without  any  pleasure  in  life,  in  the
midst  of  their  abundance  of  the  good  things  of  this  world,  like
the  fabled  Tantalus  of  heathen  mythology.*

The  open  air  was  never  warm  enough,  it  chilled  the  young
ambassador;  the  comfortable  travelling  carriage  was  altered  a
dozen  times  in  order  to  exclude  every  breath  of  air.

The  prince  was  not  allowed  to  walk,  for  how  easily  might  he
not  get  his  feet  wet,  and  in  consequence  die  suddenly  of  appoplexyl
The  young  count,  destined  to  be  a  general,  slept  in  beds  of
the  softest  eider-down,  was  fed  upon  sweet  cakes,  coffee,  highly
seasoned  dishes,  two  servants  must  wait  on  him  to  assist  hinn  to
dress,  but  not  before  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  because  tlie
tender  plant  might  have  withered  if  exposed  to  the  rude  morn-
ing air.  And  so  he  grows  up,  enters  upon  his  important  post^
and  must  now  play  the  iron  denizen  of  camps ;  only  imagine  I
In  like  manner  there  are  king's  messengers  who  would  be
suffocated  in  a  peasant's  heated  cot,  and  rangers  of  the  royal
forefets  who  would  catch  their  death  if  they  were  forced  to  wade
through  the  snow.

How  many  toothaches  and  diarrhoeas  has  not  last  night's
opera  occasioned !  what  an  amount  of  colics,  rheumatisms,  sore-
throats  and  erysipelas  will  not  our  to-morrow's  illumination  give
rise  to  I

I  said  before,  that  effeminacy  is  the  privilege  of  the  rich
fashionable  classes ;  I  am  wrong!  This  privilege  has  been  said
to  belong  to  the  nobility.  In  order  to  appear  fashionable,  the
manners  of  hrnit  ton  have  been  assumed  by  the  very  lowest
classes.  A  merchant's  wife,  nay  a  hair-dresser's  lady,  would
think  it  a  disgrace  not  to  be  able  to  talk  about  vapours,  perte
blanche  and  digestive  lavements  from  her  own  experience.  The
son  of  the  poor  secretary  takes  his  afternoon  nap  on  soft  pillows,
and  the  ostler's  daughter  eats  her  Swiss  biscuits  with  her  sugared
coffee ;  she  would  blush  to  wash  her  own  clothes.

These  depraved  habits  have  crept  in,  even  among  country
people :  for  the  farmer's  daughter  can  undoubtedly  not  consider

'  [We  are  here  reminded  of  the  remark  since  made  by  Majendie,  **  that  Paris
would  become  depopulated  io  two  or  three  generations,  were  it  not  for  the  robuat
recruits  who  constantly  come  in  from  the  country  as  residents."] — Am,  P.


OS  ICAKma  THE  BODY  HABD.  198

Iienelf  thoroogUjeducated  until  she  has  acquired  the  blanched
complexion  of  the  French  lady.  She  carries  on  an  affected
eourtship  with  the  downy-bearded  young  squire,  Fritz,  with  his.
fidae  calves,  artificially  enlarged  thighs,  and  coat  padded  with
leathers;  a  striking  contrast  to  the  shirt  of  mail  of  his  great-
grandfather. Siegwart,  Idris,  Musarion,  Grecourt,  and  Ecole  deft
Filles !  are  you  not  partly  to  blame  for  this  climax  of  enervation?

But  the  phUanthropic  genius  of  the  last  quarter  of  this  cen-
tury saw  all  this  abomination  and  destructive  degeneracy,  and
deplored  it. It  resorted  to  bathing  in  cold  rivers.

In  these  the  tender  sprouts  of  gentle  lineage  were  immersed;
they  were  forced  to  tramp  over  the  frosty  ground,  bare-footed ;
bare-headed  and  with  uncovered  chest,  and  to  rest  for  but  a  few
hoQiB  on  a  hard  bed.

Of  thy  good  intention,  dear  genius,  there  could  not  be  a  doubt^
even  though  the  poor  children  from  these  experiments  got  their
hands  and  feet  frostbitten,  died  of  consumption  and  catarrhal
fevers,  or  in  other  ways  shewed  in  lamentable  manner  that  a
hot-house  plant  should  not  be  transplanted  in  November  in  order
to  accustom  it  to  the  northern  climate.

Thy  good  intention,  I  repeat,  could  not  be  doubted,  only  the
interpreters  of  thy  counsels  did  not  quite  enter  into  thy  spirit^
and  by  their  imperfect  execution  of  them  caused  thy  name  to
be  reviled  among  the  heathen.

Allow  me  (if  I  understand  thee  better)  to  translate  thy  hea-
venly ideas  into  the  common  language  of  mortals,  and  if  not  to
inculcate  doctrines,  at  least  to  throw  out  hints,  as  to  how  the
effeminate  race  may  be  changed  into  men  bearing  at  least  a
distant  resemblance  to  the  rock-like  bodies  of  the  ancient  Ger-
mans ;  how  they  may,  if  engaged  in  business,  manfully  encounter
the  dangers  of  their  calling,  regardless  of  all  variations  in  the
weather,  undergo  the  labours  of  life  with  courage  and  strength,
and  see  their  great  grandchildren  play  like  young  eagles  around
their  untottering  knees.

Father  Hippocrates,  whose  knowledge  of  mankind  was  of  the
most  profound,  remarks  in  one  part  of  his  writings  that  changes
finom  one  extreme  to  another  cannot  be  undertaken  without
danger  and  caution,  and  I  cannot  too  strenuously  insist  upon  the
truth  of  this  observation.  Nature  does  nothing  without  prepa-
ration; all  her  operations  are  performed  gradually,  and  the  more
complex  and  artistic  the  work  is  that  she  performs,  so  much  the

more  cautiously  and  gradually  does  she  do  it.
18


IM  THE  FBISNB  OF  HXALTH*

She  never  goes  from  summer  to  winter  without  interposing
the  transition  period  of  autumn.

The  cherry  tree  loaded  with  fruit  would  immediately  wither
and  die  if  January  followed  immediately  after  June.  She  knowm
better  how  to  prepare  it  for  the  winter's  frost.  She  first  causes
the  tree  to  drop  its  fruit,  protects  the  buds  for  the  next  year  by
means  of  hard  barks  and  balsamic  resins,  and  during  five  months
diminishes  the  circulation  of  its  juices  so  gradually  that  the  sap-
tubes  contract  and  tlie  moisture  in  them  is  evaporated  almost  to
dryness  by  Jaimary ;  she  sends  cold  and  ever  colder  nights
and  days,  so  that  the  biting  frost,  when  it  arrives,  finds  the  tree
prepared  to  encounter  its  tyranny.  In  an  equally  gradual
manner  does  she  put  the  sap  again  into  circulation,  until  its  ac-
tivity, fostered  by  the  increased  warmth  of  spring  and  its  rains,
is  in  a  condition  to  bear  the  full  glow  of  the  dog-days.

Let  us  unitate  nature — let  us  never  make  January  to  follow
close  upon  June,  nor  July  upon  January,  if  we  do  not  wish  our
tender  plants  to  be  blasted  and  withered  by  both  of  these  ex-
tremes.

The  hardening  of  the  human  creature  in  respect  to  heat  and
cold  no  doubt  is  commenced  with  greatest  safety  in  childhood
(with  older  |)ersons  it  is  more  difficult  to  eflfect  such  clianges,
just  as  it  is  more  difficult  to  transplant  an  old  tree  to  a  new
soil),  but  we  require  to  exercise  the  greatest  caution  at  first  with
these  tender  creatures,  in  order  to  prevent  nninbers  of  them
firom  remaining  behind,  withering  and  fading  during  the  transi-
tion to  a  mode  of  life  to  which  they  arc  unvused  !

When  the  sunshiny  days  coniniencc,  the  gardener  removes
the  shutters  from  the  windows  of  his  forcing  frames;  when  the
air  becomes  warmer  he  opens  the  windows  to  allow  of  the
entrance  of  fresh  air :  he  opens  them  more  and  more  as  the
warm  weather  becomes  more  constant,  and  only  transfers  per-
manently to  the  open  air  the  tender  plants  which  he  has  thus
accustomed  as  it  were  to  the  atmosphere,  when  he  no  longer
dreads  the  occurrence  of  night-frosts.

The  modern  hardening  methods  seem  to  bear  a  great  resem-
blance to  the  incautious  transference  of  hot-house  planto  to  the
open  air  in  February.

It  is  incredible  what  man  can  endure  if  ho  be  gradually  habit-
uated to  it.  The  Russian  leaps  into  the  ice-covered  Neva  the
instant  he  creeps  out  of  the  stewing-hot  sweating  bath;  the
llalle  brewer  plui^es  into  the  Saale  after  roasting  half  naked


ON  MAKING  THE  BODY  HABDY.  105

beside  his  brewing  vat ;  the  negro  readily  endures  the  heat  of
the  equator,  and  works  under  it  like  a  horse ;  the  Greenlander
goes  forth  to  hunt  the  bear  by  moonlight  in  a  cold  of  which  we
can  form  no  conception,  and  returns  to  his  lowly  hut,  which  is
£lled  by  the  exhalations  Irom  the  large  oil-lamp,  and  from  his
own  and  other  families,  with  a  deteriorated  air  that  would
almost  suffocate  a.  stranger;  here  he  is  cheerful  and  gay,  and
gratifies  his  palate  with  things  that  disgust  would  prevent  us
bringing  near  our  lips.

If  it  be  supposed  that  there  are  peculiar  varieties  of  the
human  .■>pecics,  that  would  be  to  make  a  great  mistake ;  they
h^TP  come  from  their  mother's  womb  as  delicate  and  soft  as
any  of  ourselves.

All  these  people,  however,  give  their  children  no  other  cdu»
cation  but  their  own  example ;  they  abandon  them  to  their  own
will  until  they  have  attained  a  good  age.

The  young  creature  at  first  creeps  on  all  fours  after  his  father
as  far  as  he  can,  in  heat  and  in  cold,  and  cree£)s  home  again
when  he  can  go  no  farther.  This  he  docs  day  after  day,  until
he  can  bear  it  better  and  go  farther ;  no  one  forces  him,  he  turns
back  again  when  he  has  had  enough,  but  he  is  always  acted  on
by  that  most  jx)werful  of  all  agents  in  education,  the  imitative
faculty,  the  desire  to  act  as  like  his  father  as  possible ;  this  is  a
stimulus  that  will  not  easily  induce  him  to  do  anything  that
miglit  (*ndangcr  his  life,  because  lie  can  unrestrainedly  atteu
to  Ills  sensatioiu*  of  pain,  and  of  his  own  free-will  return  to
place  of  security.  The  stronger  of  the  children  of  the^c  people
(theiryoungolVspring  know  not  the  j)lcasiire  of  mischief,  as  ours
do)  assist  the  weaker,  pull  thcni  out  of  the  snow,  fetch  them
away  from  the  burning  sanil-desert,  or  rescue  them  l>y  swim-
rain^r  when  they  I'all  into  the  water,  and  thus  the  cliild  learns
gradully  (but  only  gmdualb/^  be  it  observed)  to  endiu'e  as  much
as  his  father  can.

The  objection  might  fairl}^  be  made  to  what  I  have  said  tha
this  kind  of  gradual  accustoming  to  heat  and  cold,  and  so  forth
is  not  applicable  to  our  education  .and  to  our  mode  of  living.

This  cjbjection  is  a  fair  one,  I  repeat ;  but  only  partially  so.
True,  the  father  and  the  mother  among  us  cannot  become  Samo-
jcdes  or  Ethiopians,  but  the  teacher  of  the  children  (be  he  a
peasant,  a  schoolmaster  or  a  tutor)  must  have  brought  this  kind
of  hardening  process  to  a  certain  degree  of  i)erfecti(m  in  his  own
person,  he  ought  to  have  several  children  at  once  under  his


t96  THB  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

taperintendence,  for  the  parpoae  of  ezcittng  emulation  among
them.  Here  it  is  much  worse  on  the  part  of  the  teacher  to  err
on  the  ^de  of  doing  too  much  than  too  little.  He  may  leave  it  to
the  free-will  of  the  children  to  inure  themselves ;  he  does  it  be-
fore them,  they  imitate  him,  each  according  to  his  strength,  and
none  must  be  forced  to  overstep  the  latter.

The  teacher  cannot  put  himself  in  the  situation  of  the  boy,
cannot  enter  thoroughly  into  his  feelings,  consequently  the  boy
must  be  allowed  to  draw  back  when  he  wishes  to  do  so.  He
will  rather  have  sometimes  to  keep  him  back,  for  imitation  ia
often  too  powerful  a  spur.

It  is  best  that  these  exercises  should  be  carried  on  in  the  pre-
sence  of  the  pupils  only,  without  any  other  spectator,  for  then
all  present  would  be  animated  by  the  same  mind.

But  to  send  one's  children  with  bare  feet,  head,  chests  and
arms  through  the  crowded  streets  of  a  town,  accompanied  by  a
well  clothed  tutor,  amid  the  jeers  of  the  boys  in  the  street,  and
the  audible  expressions  of  cx)mpassion  from  the  windows,  would
be  to  turn  to  ridicule  an  affair  of  great  seriousness,  and  to  inspire
the  children  with  an  invincible  repugnance  to  the  hardening
system  generally.

When  the  children  have  played  long  enough  in  their  ordinary
clothing  in  the  cold  or  in  the  heat,  and  if  they  have  advanced
so  &r  as  to  be  able  in  such  guise  to  bear  both  extremes  readily,
we  may  proceed  to  diminish  the  amount  of  their  clothing  some-
what and  by  degrees,  and  even  allow  them  to  go  with  sundry
parts  of  their  person  uncovered  when  they  are  alone.

But  this  should  not  be  done  in  the  severest  winters,  for  the
bodies  of  children  will  not  be  able  to  stand  so  much  cold ;  there
is  besides  no  possible  case  when  their  being  habituated  to  it
would  be  necessary.  Even  beggar-children  find  rags  to  put  their
feet  in,  when  they  have  no  shoes;  and  we  should  only  seek  to
prepare  our  children  for  the  positions  in  which  they  may  chanoe
to  be  placedl

Here  I  must  refer  to  what  I  should  long  since  have  spoken
about  The  new  hardening-system  commits  the  usual  fault|  of
seeking  to  harden  the  body  only  in  reference  to  the  enduranoe
of  cold.  But  would  it  not  be  just  as  delicate,  to  be  unable  to
endure  heat?  Persons  who  cannot  bear  the  heat  of  the  sun,  or
of  very  warm  rooms,  are  liable'  to  the  most  serious,  even  fatal
Incidents ;  why  are  they  not  accustomed  to  this  also  ?  To  be
able  to  endure  cold,  will  not  require  much  effort  on  the  part  of


OK  MAJUNa  THE  BODY  HARDY.  197

the  Buaman,  but  the  alternations  of  heat  and  oold  and  vice  vena
(this  great  promoter  of  diseases  in  the  delicate  denizens  of
towns),  these  he  endeavours  to  learn  to  endure  by  his  alternate
sweating  and  ice- water  baths ;  to  these  he  seeks  to  become  quite
indifferent  He  attains  his  object,  as  we  well  know,  and  is  the
hardiest  soldier  history  makes  mention  o£

But  in  the  case  of  children  this  habituation  to  heat  must  also
take  place  only  gently  and  by  degrees,  and  we  should  take  care
that  they  have  not  too  much  given  them  to  do  at  first.  They
should  have  for  their  instructor  a  wise  man,  who  knows  the
capabilities  of  each  of  his  pupils,  and  he  must  not  urge  them  on
but  rather  keep  them  back,  if  he  sees  that  his  example  is  likely
to  make  them  go  too  far.

Frequent  recreation  (without  witnesses,  or  among  suitable
companions)  in  the  open  air,  in  summer,  will  furnish  many
opportunities  for  this.

For  pupils  of  more  mature  age,  there  can  be  no  better  oppor-
tunity for  hardening  them  against  the  variations  of  temperature,
than  little  pedestrian  excursions.  Here  imder  the  rational
gaidance  of  their  master,  they  have  at  the  same  time  an  op-
portunity of  habituating  themselves  to  other  inconveniences
and  dangers  of  the  world;  I  allude  to  fatigue,  the  various
atmospheres  of  different  houses,  to  draughts,  and  damp.

One  may  be  able  to  bear  very  well  the  pure,  dry,  cold  air  of
winter,  and  the  heat  of  summer,  but  readily  get  ill  in  a  damp
cellar-like  room.

Draughts  of  wind  are  something  quite  different  from  the  open
air,  and  a  damp  stocking  in  cold  weather  may  often  cause  one
who  is  used  to  swimmiug  to  be  laid  on  the  bed  of  sickness.
And  yet  all  these  are  incidents  occurring  in  human  life,  which
can  scarcely  be  escaped  by  him  who  mixes  with  the  world,  or
who  does  not  dread  dangerous  consei^uences  to  his  health  from
such  every -day  trifles.

In  all  these  exercitationsit  is  necessary  to  employ  caution  when
accustoming  ourselves  to  them,  beginning  with  the  less  and
going  on  to  the  greater,  but  always  only  gradually^  interruptedly
and  by  progressive  advances.

Very  young  children,  that  Ls,  such  as  are  not  above  seven  years
of  age,  cannot  become  very  habituated  to  the  deteriorated  air  of
rooms.  If  we  carry  things  too  fiir  with  them  we  render  them
liable  to  become  ricketty.

But  since  if  we  wish  to  render  ourselves  useful  for  business,


ISfff  tHE  FBIEND  OP  HEALTH.

we  must  also  live  in  unhealthy  deteriorated  air,  and  be  particu-
larly anxious  to  preserve  our  health  in  it,  so  we  must  endeavour
to  render  growing  children  capable  of  living  not  only  in  puro
country  air,  but  also  in  rooms ;  in  rooms  filled  with  people  they
must  be  able  to  exist  at  first  for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  then  for
a  whole  hour,  for  several  hours,  and  at  length  for  whole  days ;
and  the  hardening  process  must  put  them  in  a  condition  to  re-
main well  in  spite  of  this,  the  most  pernicious  of  all  situations
in  which  man  can  be  placed.  If  their  habituation  be  performed
gradually,  they  will  be  able  to  do  this  bravely.  Those  children,
however,  should  not  be  under  ten  or  twelve  years  of  age  if  we
do  not  wish  the  whole  plan  to  fail.

Pedestrian  expeditions  aftbrd  many  opportunities  for  this  also ;
these  the  teacher  should  direct,  limit  and  define  with  wisdom
and  forbearance.

A  teacher  who  is  acquainted  with  the  habits  of  life  of  the  lowest
dass  of  peasants'  children,  and  has  observed  how  they  have  to
bear  all  the  discomforts  of  life,  and  to  get  a  hardy  body  thereby,
will 'be  enabled  to  employ  many  of  their  practices  upon  his
pupils.

When  the  peasant-lad,  for  instance,  falls  through  the  ice  and
gets  wet  up  to  the  knees,  he  commences  to  jump  about  more
vigorously  than  his  companions ;  in  order  not  to  be  laughed  at,
he  carries  on  this  process  of  warming  himself  by  moving  about
until  either  he  becomes  quite  dry,  or  until  he  can  bear  it  no
longer ;  he  then  goes  home  and  dries  his  stockings.  If  he  has
got  himself  chilled,  he  docs  not  much  care,  he  only  waits  till  he
is  dry  and  then  runs  out  again  to  play  with  his  companions.

If  he  has  the  care  of  horses  he  gains  courage,  if  of  oxen  he
learns  patience,  if  he  has  to  cart  dung  he  learns  to  overcome  his
feelings  of  disgust,  if  he  is  engagt^d  in  mowing  grass  he  acquires
caution  in  handling  sharp  instrument**,  the  rigour  of  the  school-
master tends  to  make  him  docile,  listening  to  a  wretched  sermon
teaches  him  to  be  silent— from  going  barefoot  his  feet  lose  their
tendency  to  get  corns,  gout  and  dropsy,  climbing  make^  him  lose
his  liability  to  turn  giddy.  His  black  bread  needs  no  layer  of
butter,  and  his  water  requires  not  the  addition  of  sugar  and
lemon-juice.

To  unite  the  good  that  is  to  be  found  in  this  station  of  life
with  the  cultivation  of  the  mind,  such  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  ne
plus  ultra  of  a  rational  and  suitable  education.

Gleaning  corn  in  August,  sheep-washing,  crab-catching,  tend-


ON  MAKING  THE  BODY  HABDT.  199.

ing  the  cattle  in  all  kinds  of  weather  in  the  open  fields,  as  well
when  he  remains  motionless  beside  them  as  when  he  runs  after
them  over  the  hills,  fetching  wood  from  the  distant  forest  in  all
weathers,  the  damp  school-room^  the  fair  that  excites  disgust  at
the  excesses  committed,  the  three-hours'  sermon  in  the  cellar-like
church — all  these  are  excellent  exercises  and  modes  of  hardening
the  body,  which  would  be  serviceable  to  a  person  in  after  lifd|
whatever  position  he  might  occupy.

In  the  centre  of  a  great  and  populous  city  it  is  utterly  impos-
sible to  bring  up  healthy  childreu,  and  equally  so  to  harden
their  frames.  Should  they  walk  all  through  the  town  in  order
to  get  into  the  oj)en  country,  they  would  be  tired  before  they
could  escape  from  the  depraved  air  of  the  city.  Tired  children
could  not  endure  any  of  the  exercises  we  have  proposed  without
getting  ill ;  they  would  require  strength,  I  might  saj'^  a  super-
lative degree  of  strength,  to  stand  heat  or  cold,  wind,  damp,  &c.
Should  they  drive  out  of  town,  there  are  several  difficulties  in
the  way ;  to  endure  all  sorts  of  weather  seated  in  an  open  car^
riagc  can  only  be  done  by  robust,  grown-up  people.  Should
they  only  drive  out  in  good  weather,  theu,  during  bad  weather,
confined  to  the  air  of  the  town  rooms,  they  would  go  back  fiur-
ther  than  they  had  gone  forward  from  the  few  exercises  in  the
country.  In  shut-up  carriages  the  space  is  so  confined  that  the
depravation  of  the  air  by  breathing  soon  attains  to  a  great  height
If  the  carriage  windows  be  let  down,  a  draught  is  produced
which  the  poor  hot-house  plants  cannot  bear.

In  small  towns  of  about  a  couple  of  thousand  of  inhabitants,
or  in  the  environs  of  larger  towns,  it  is  more  possible  to  rear
healthy  and  hardy  children  witli  proper  care,  provided  we  with-
draw them  gradually  and  as  much  as  possible  from  the  ener-
vating influences  of  genteel  life,  and  allow  them  to  pass  at  least
one-third  of  the  day  in  the  open  air,  mindful  always  of  their
relative  strength  and  of  the  necessity  of  accustoming  them  gra-
dualh'  to  all  that  is  strange  and  unusual  to  them.

Children  Ccan  be  brought  up  healthy  and  hardy  mo^t  easily
and  certainly  at  a  distance  from  towns,  for  example  on  an  estate
or  in  a  village  residence,  but  the  circumstances  of  all  parente  do
not  admit  of  this,  and  equally  certain  is  it  that  we  may,  even
in  the  most  healthy  villages,  make  our  children  delicate  and
puny.  To  do  tliis  wo  need  only  to  deprive  them  of  their  free-
dom, to  leave  them  usually  shut  up  in  the  low,  damp,  hot  room,
to  overload  their  stomachs,  and  to  let  them  sleep  in  hot,  soft
feather  beds,  to  encourage  uncleanhness,  and  so  fortli.


800  THX  FBIXND  OT  HEALTH.

Bat  on  tbe  other  hand  the  propinquity  of  a  town  ofifefs  so
many  advantages  for  the  ealtiyation  of  the  mind  of  growing
ehildren,  that  we  should  make  the  greatest  sacrifiees  in  order
that,  in  all  the  circumstances  in  which  we  parents  may  be  placed^
we  may  give  or  cause  to  be  given  to  the  bodies  and  minds  of
our  children  the  development  most  suitable  for  their  destined
situation  in  life.

PART  11/


SOCRATES  AND  PHYSON-

ON  THE  WORTH  OF  OUTWARD  SHOW.

Socr.  I  am  pleased  that  thou  comest  nearer  me,  Phj'^son ;  I
have  been  admiring  thy  beautiful  garment  at  a  distance.

PA.  It  cost  me  a  great  many  drachmas ;  thrice  must  the  purple
shell-fish  yield  its  costly  dye  to  produce  this  rich  colour.  Now
none  can  compare  with  mc ;  the  greatest  in  Athens  envioualy
makes  way  for  me,  and,  only  think!  before  1  inherited  my  pro-
perty, nobody  cared  an  iota  for  me.

Socr,  Then  I  presume  thou  art  now  worth  infinitely  more,  art
infinitely  happier,  than  formerly,  when  thou  usedst  to  dig  my
little  garden  for  a  scanty  hire.

Ph.  I  should  think  so  indeed !  He  that  can  regale  himself  for
hours  together  at  the  most  richly  furnished  table  with  the  most
delicious  viands,  that  can  set  before  twenty  guests  wine  firom  the
Cyclades  fifty  years  of  age,  and  complete  their  intoxication  with
the  music  of  the  lute  and  the  sweet  voices  of  female  choristers,
that  can  drive  over  great  estates  as  the  sole  possessor,  and  can
issue  his  commands  to  a  hundred  slaves — should  such  an  one
not  be  deemed  happy  ?

Socr,  But  thou  wast  formerly  a  healthy,  sensible  man  before
thou  inheritedst  the  property;  thou  hadst  thy  house,  wast  beloved
by  thy  wife,  thy  children  and  thy  neighbours;  thou  camedst  thy
bread,  together  with  an  excellent  appetite  and  robust  health. —
At  what  dost  thou  value  thy  fortune?

i%. — At  five  millions.

Socr.  How  much  richer  dost  thou  esteem  a  man  with  a  sound
reason  than  that  unfortunate  maniac  Aphron.

Ph.  The  greater  richness  of  the  former  is  to  be  measured  by
no  amount  of  wealth.


'  Publiiihed  at  Leipag,  in  1796.


ON  THS  WOBTH  OF  OITTWARD  SHOW.  201

Soer.  At  what  price  woldat  thou  part  with  thj  five  children  ?

PA.  Certainly  not  for  all  my  wealth.  Physicians  would  be
kings  could  they  make  women  fruitAil  or  save  children  fix)m
death.

Socr.  Thou  art  right,  but  in  that  case  thy  wife  could  not  have
been  much  less  valued  7

Ph.  By  Juno !  I  would  not  part  with  her  for  millions  if  she
still  liv^  I  The  charming  woman,  with  whose  fidelity  and
thriftiness  and  goodness,  and  excellent  manner  of  bringing  up
children  when  I  used  to  live  u])on  boiled  beans,  all  the  treasures
of  the  earth  were  not  to  be  compared.

Socr.  But  blindness,  lameness,  a  pair  of  deaf  ears,  and  a  linger-
ing fever,  thou  wouldst  suflFer  for  an  inconsiderable  sum  ?

Ph.  Zeus  forbid !  Dost  thou  imagine  that  this  prospect  of
the  sun  gilding  the  mountain  tops  as  in  the  morning  it  issues
finth  from  the  misty  ocx^an,  diffusiug  life  and  joy  over  all  the
habitable  globe,  that  the  melting  song  of  Apollo's  rival,  the
nightingale,  that  my  warm  blood,  the  healthy  breath  of  my
Inngs,  my  strong  stomach  and  my  refreshing  sleep,  could  be
bartered  by  me  for  any  amount  of  gold  ?

Socr.  Hygieia  preser\'e  them  to  thee !  But  it  seems  from  thy
calculation  that  thou  hast  not  become  richer  by  thine  inheritance
than  the  sea-shore  would  become  by  the  addition  of  a  spoonful
of  sand.  What  arc  thy  boasted  five  millions  when  compared
with  the  innumerable  millions  of  thy  former  blessings !  Of  a
truth,  when  thou  conuuencest  to  esteem  thyself  happy  only  after
thou  hast  got  this  little  addition,  when  thou  lookcst  down  so
contemptuously  on  thy  former  apparently  poor  condition,  I  must
pity  thee ;  thou  shewest  thereby  that  thou  luust  never  rendered
the  thanks  due  from  thee  to  the  immortal  gods !  1  am  sorry
for  thee,  thou  that  was  formerly  so  brave  a  man !  Did  they  former-
ly regard  loss  beneficially  thy  well-meant  offering  of  salt  and
roasted  flour,  than  they  do  now  thy  proud  siicrifice  of  a  bull  ?
I  am  sorry  for  thee !

Go  into  the  dark  at  midnight  and  feel  the  costliness  of  thy
purple  garment ;  thou  sccst  nought,  thou  fcelest  nought  but  that
thy  nakedness  is  covered,  and  was  not  this  also  the  case  when
thou  perforniedst  thy  hard  manual  labour  for  a  few  oboli.  Are
the  flatteries  of  thy  fawning  guests  dearer  to  thee  than  formerly
was  the  pressure  of  thy  master's  hand  when  he  was  pleased  with
thee  ?  Dost  thou  really  walk  softer  on  thy  gold-embroidered
carpets  than  thou  usedst  to  do  on  the  uupaid-for  green  turf?


20S  THE  FBIEKD  OF  HEALTH.

•

Perhaps  the  dark  Persian  wine  now  quenches  thy  thirst  better
than  the  spring  that  formerly  trickled  forth  beside  thy  moss-
grown  cottage ;  perhaps  thou  risest  now  more  refreshed  from
thy  soft  Ixid  at  noon,  to  which  time  a  splendid  supper  causes
thy  sleep  to  be  prolonged,  than  thou  didst  formerly  from  thy
not  very  soft  straw  matniss,  which  the  fatigues  of  the  day^s
work  made  welcome  to  thee?  Probably  flamingoes'  tongues
served  on  gold  plate,  though  from  rcfjcatcd  repletion  thou  hast
but  little  hunger  left,  are  much  more  relished  than  milk  and
bread  after  hard  work  !  Perhaps  the  thouwmd  forced  and
artificial  endearments  of  the  hired  girls  tiiat  hover  round  thee
now  afford  a  purer,  more  permanent  enjoyment  to  thy  senses,
nearh^  worn  down  to  obtusencss,  than  did  formerly  the  artless,
trusting  embrace  of  thy  true  and  hearty  wife  in  rare  'moments
of  happiness,  when  the  unadorned  black  hair  fell  artlessly  upon
her  neck  browned  by  the  sun,  her  constant  heart  throbbed  for
thee  alone,  and  love  for  thee  alone  streamed  forth  from  her  dark
eyes.  Perhaps  we  live  more  secure  from  diseases,  lightning  and
thieves,  in  marble  pillared  palaces,  filled  with  numbers  of  dear
bought  slaves,  in  beds  inlaid  with  ivory,  and  beside  bags  filled
with  the  precious  metals,  than  in  the  lowly  cottage  covered  with
ivy,  provided  with  the  necessaries  of  life  for  several  days  to
come,  among  honest  neighbours  and  friends  ?  Physon !  Physon !
mistake  not  the  destiny  of  man,  forget  not  the  happiness  of  thy
former  days  which  the  gods  granted  to  ihcc,  and  which  were
dear  to  thee.  Only  a.>k  thyself,  if  ever  thou  hast  an  hour  to
spare  for  this  purpose,  whether  thou  hast  not  more  cause  to  en-
vy thy  former  lot,  than  others  have  to  euvv  thee  thy  present
life !

Knowest  thou  the  man  that  hsus  just  passed  us  clad  in  a  coarse
woollen  garment?  In  his  venerable  aged  form  beams  universal
philanthro[»y.  That  is  p]umencs,  the  physician.  The  many
thousands  that  he  yearly  makes  by  the  j)ractice  of  his  art,  he
does  not  spend  on  fine  country  houses  and  on  the  other  vain
trifles  of  the  luxurious.  His  happiness  consists  in  doing  good!
About  the  tenth  part  of  his  large  income  he  uses  for  his  limited
wants,  the  rest  he  puts  out  to  interest  in  the  state.  Ajid  how  ?
thou  askest  me.  To  the  f>oor  he  gives  his  aid,  his  medical  skill.
With  his  stores  he  supports  the  convalescent  families  until  they
can  again  help  themselves,  and  with  the  costliest  of  his  wines
he  revives  the  dying.  He  seeks  out  the  miserable  in  their  dirty
hovels,  and  appears  to  them  as  a  beneficent  divinity ;  yes,  wheu


PI^NS  FOR  ERABICATIKG  A  MALIGNANT  FEVEB. 208^

the  all- vivifying  sun,  the  image  of  the  unknown  God,  rcfraina
from  shewing  the  dying  its  life-bestowing  face,  and  even  at  mid-
night, he  appears  in  the  huts  of  the  miserable  to  assist  them^
and  lavishes  on  them  consolation,  advice  and  aid.  They  wor-
ship  him  as  our  ancestors  worshipped  the  beneficent  demi-gods,
Osiris,  Ceres  and  ^Esculapius.  Wilt  thou  soon  commence  to
envy  him  ?  Go,  Physon,  and  engage  in  some  better  pursuits,
and  then  count  on  mv  esteem.


PLANS  FOR  ERADICATING  A  MALIGNANT  FEVER.

IM  X  LETTER  TO  THE  MINISTER  Of  POLICE.

You  will,  no  doubt,  yourself,  see  tlic  results  that  the
infection  that  was  brouglit  to  *  *  *  lour  weeks  ago  might
produce  if  its  farther  spread  be  not  arrested,  still  I  consider  it  to
•  be  a  duty,  as  I  have,  here  and  there,  had  eoiLsidcrable  experience
in  extensive  epidemics,  to  offer  my  mite  at  the  altar  of  father-
land, in  the  form  of  some  unpretending  propositions.

Taking  into  account  the  malignancy  of  this  fever,  if  the  epi-
demic be  left  to  itself,  it  may,  in  the  course  of  half-a-year,  at  this
season,  and  in  the  present  condition  of  the  town,  sweep  away
about  250  individuals,  a  considerable  luinian  capital,  seeing  that
it  is  especially  adults,  the  most  useful  class,  that  will  first  and
most  e^rtainh^  be  cut  off  by  it.  Should  it.  as  scx^n  will  happen,
once  penetrate  into  the  damp  dirty  houses  of  the  i)Oor,  who  arc
alread}''  often  rendered  lial)le  speedily  to  catch  the  disease,  by  un-
healthy miserable  fare,  by  sorrow  and  depression,  it  is  diHicult,
very  difficult,  to  extinguish  it  in  these  situations.  In  addition  to
this,  there  is  the  carelessness  of  the  common  people,  who  incline
to  Turki.sh  fatalism,  as  tlu^  most  convenient  of  all  creeds  respect-
ing Pro\'idence,  and  their  want  of  reflection  in  only  considering
as  dangerous  what  they  can  see  with  their  eyes,  such  as  a  flood
or  a  conflagration.  From  these  they  will  flee,  but  they  are  in-
different to  a  murderous  pestilential  vapour,  because  it  does  not
&1I  within  the  recognizance  of  their  coarse  senses.  So  the  igno-
rant person  fcarle^ly  approaches  a  charged  electric  battery,  and
smilingly  enters  tiie  pit  filled  with  poisonous  gases,  though  his
predecessor  may  just  have  been  brought  out  of  it  dead.  Every
one  thinks  he  possesses  enough  strength  to  resist  the  enemy  of


204  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

lifi3.  Bat  vain  are  his  expectations ;  the  giant  himself  if
breathed  on  by  the  breath  of  death  sinks  down,  and  the  wisest
loses  his  consciousness.  Resistance  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  In
flight,  in  flight  alone,  is  safety.

The  only  means  on  which  we  can  rely  for  checking  epidemics
in  their  birth,  is  the  separation  of  the  diseased  from  the  healthy.
But  if  it  be  left  to  the  public  to  preserve  themselves  from  in-
fection, every  one  for  himself,  even  with  the  help  of  published
advice,  experience  teaches  us  that  all  such  recommendations  do
little  good — and  oflcn,  in  spite  of  the  best  intentions,  cannot  be
carried  out

But  just  as  the  police,  when  a  conflagration  breaks  out  in  the
town,  does  not  leave  it  to  the  caprice  of  the  possessor  of  the
house,  to  extinguish  the  fire  in  the  way  he  thinks  fit,  but  makes
itself  the  necessary  arrangements,  and  erects  the  fire-stations  to
be  employed  without  delay,  if  necessary  in  opposition  to  the  will,
and  even  in  spite  of  the  resistance  of  the  owner  of  the  tenement —
acting  upon  the  just  principle,  that  the  security  of  the  commu-
nity ought  to  weigh  infinitely  more  than  the  property  of  an  in-
dividual— in  like  manner,  I  assert  it  ought  not  be  left  to  the  indi*
vidual's  caprice  to  nurse  his  relatives  afiected  with  infectious  dis-
orders, in  his  house,  since  it  is  not  to  be  presumed  that  he  has
either  sufficient  power,  or  judgment,  or  opportunity,  to  prevent
the  spread  of  the  disease,  and  no  amount  of  wealth  on  his  part^
no  damages  expressible  in  figures,  can  compensate  for  the  life  of
one,  not  to  speak  of  many  families,  fathers,  mothers,  husbands,
wives,  children,  endangered  by  him.

Of  a  truth  if  ever  the  better  part  of  the  public  ought  anx.
iously  to  look  to  the  authorities  and  to  the  police  for  protection
it  is  in  the  case  of  the  invasion  of  epidemics,  if  the  protecting
divinities  of  fatherland  do  not  stretch  forth  their  powerful  hands
on  that  occasion,  where  else  can  wc  look  for  deliverance  from  the
danger?

I  could  easily  exhibit  a  picture  of  the  most  frightful  scenes,
that  still  haunt  me  from  similar  epidemics,  whereby  the  most  un-
cosmopolitan  soul  must  be  deeply  moved — but  to  you,  sir,  such
things  are  not  unfiimiliar,  and  you  require  not  such  reasons  to
induce  you  to  put  your  hand  to  the  work.

Taking  for  granted,  then,  that  you  concede  the  above  pre-
mises, I  make  bold  to  make  the  following  preliminary  proposals,
for  whose  efficacy  experience  is  my  warranty,  and  thereon  I
stake  my  honour.


PLANS  FOB  KBABICATIKG  A  MALIQKANT  FEYER. 205

They  may  all  be  set  in  action  in  the  course  of  a  few  days ;  in
this  case  speed  saves  expense  and  human  life.

1.  Let  a  hospital  or  other  public  building  without  the  gates
of  the  town  be  prepared,  solely  for  the  reception  of  such  patients ;
the  court-yard  must  be  surrounded  by  a  stone  or  wooden  fence,
as  high  as  a  man.

2.  From  twenty  to  thirty  cheap  bedsteads  are  requisite,  pro-
Tided  with  straw  matrasses  and  frieze  coverings.

3.  The  male  and  female  nurses — of  whom  there  should  be  one
forevery  four  or  five  patients — must  always  remain  in  the  house
with  their  patients,  and  should  never  go  outside  the  door.  The
fixxi  and  medicines  they  require  should  be  brought  to  them  daily
in  the  open  court  by  persons  who  should  immediately  afterwards
retire,  so  that  the  two  parties  shall  not  approach  within  three
paces  of  each  other,  and  nothing  should  be  brought  from  the
house  into  the  town.

4.  In  order  to  enforce  this  regulation,  place  a  guard  of  two
soldiers  before  the  outer  door,  which  they  only  are  to  open,  and
oommand  them  to  let  none  but  these  persons  and  the  physician
and  surgeon  in  and  out.

5.  A  small  sentry-box  formed  of  boards  will  protect  them
from  the  weather,  outside  of  which  should  hang  a  linen  (or,  still
better,  an  oil-cloth)  cloak  for  the  physician  and  surgeon,  which
fiiey  should  put  on  when  they  enter  the  house  and  lay  aside  on
leaving  it

6.  The  medical  officers  should  get  a  written  notice  of  the
mode  in  which  it  is  desirable  that  they  should  protect  themselves
and  others  from  infection,  and  the  attendants  of  the  sick  should
get  instructions  of  a  similar  character.

7.  All  who  fall  ill  of  this  malignant  nervous  fever  in  the  town
(the  police  officers  should  get  a  gratuity  for  all  they  detect)  should
be  removed  to  the  hospital  by  their  friends  in  a  covered  sedan
chair,  kept  for  this  purpose  in  the  court-yard  of  the  hospital,  and
there  they  should  be  taken  care  of  and  cured — (at  the  expense
of  their  friends  ?).

Persons  so  dangerous  to  the  community  cease  to  belong  to
their  friends ;  from  the  nature  of  their  malady  they  come  under
the  surveillance  and  care  of  the  state,  like  a  highwayman,  a
madman,  a  murdering  quack-doctor,  an  incendiary,  a  robber,  a
poisoning  courtesan,  &c.  They  belong  to  the  state  until  they  are
rendered  innocuous.  Hzlus  publica  pertclitatur  is  the  simple
standard  for  determining  all  the  wholesome  regulations  of  a


S06  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

philauthropic  police  in  such  cases.  To  forbear  pulling  down
neighbouring  houses  during  a  spreading  conflagration,  in  oon-
soquence  of  the  unreasonable  request  of  their  owners,  this  is  %
&ult  that  no  police  now-a-days  would  commit.  In  the  case  wd
allude  to,  however,  there  is  no  pulling  down,  but  on  the  con-
trary, building  up. Men's  lives,  not  houses,  are  to  be  saved.

Should  my  patriotic  general  pro{K>sitions  meet  with  your  ap-
probation, I  shall  not  fail,  if  no  one  else  does  it,  t^>  treat  of  the
subject  in  greater  detail,  and  to  furnish,  in  writing,  the  additional
plans  for  the  general  weal,  as  circumstances  prevent  me  taking  a
personal  share  in  them.

If  I  could  thereby  prevent  some  misfortune,  I  should  feel  my-
self richly  rewarded.  But  the  reason  why  I,  a  private  indi-
vidual, occupying  no  official  post,  and  not  intimately  connected
with  this  country,  wish  to  lend  my  aid  in  this  matter,  is  owing
to  this,  that  I  think  that  in  such  public  calamities  the  motto
should  hesauve  quipeut!  and  hence  I  am  wont  to  exert  myself
to  the  utmost,  and  to  save  what  can  be  saved,  be  it  friend  or  foe.

I  am,  &C.

Db.  H.

More  particular  directions.

The  police  officials  ought  to  ascertain  where  any  person  haff
been  Fuddcnl y  taken  ill  in  the  town,  or  hfus  suddenly  complained
of  headacho,  rigour,  stupefaction,  or  has  rapidly  become  very
weak  and  d(»lirious ;  they  should  rei)ort  what  they  learn  to  the
api)ointcd  j^hysician,  who,  after  a  rapid  but  careful  examination,
during  which  he  attends  to  the  directions  below  for  avoiding
infection,  sees  that  the  i>atient  is  couveyod  to  the  hosjrital.  At
the  same  time  the  j)olice  officer  receives  his  fixed  remuneration.*
^  The  large  hall  of  the  hospital  should  be  divided  longitudi-
nally by  means  of  a  partition  of  boards ;  the  one  part  so  divided
to  form  the  i)atient\s  ward,  whilst  the  other  and  much  narrower
division  forms  a  kind  of  passage,  into  which  the  bedstead  of
each  patient,  which  should  be  placed  on  castors,  may  be  pushed
through  a  trap-door  in  the  partition,  in  such  a  manner  as  that
only  the  patient  in  the  bed  shall  qome  inU)  the  i)assage,  where

»  If  this  remuneration  be  ccmsiderable  (about  a  tlAcr  \Z».  6(i]  for  the  discoveiy  of
every  case  of  this  kind),  the  progress  of  the  epidemic  will  be  <»peedily  checked,  then
will  soon  be  no  more  sick  to  be  separated  from  the  healthy.  Tlie  sick  will  be  db-
eoTcrcd  in  time,  before  they  can  (easily)  communicate  the  infection.  Again  in  ho*
man  life  and  in  the  smalJer  sum  required,  will  be  the  manifest  result


PLANS  FOH  SRADICATING  A  HALIONANT  FEVER. 207

on  the  trap-door  falls  to  again.  Here  the  physician  examines
the  external  and  internal  condition  of  the  patient,  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  surgeon,  then  he  causes  him  to  be  pushed  back
into  the  ward,  and  the  next  patient  to  be  brought  forward,  and
so  on.

But  before  performing  this  examination,  and  indeed  before
the  arrival  of  the  physician,  all  the  windows  of  the  passage  should
be  opened  in  order  to  air  it.  Before  the  patients  are  brought  in
they  must  be  closed.

The  physician,  accompanied  by  the  surgeon,  both  covered
with  the  oil  cloth  cloak,*  visit*^  the  patients  twice  a  day,  and
questions  them  at  a  distance  of  throe  pace.-?.  If  he  require  to
feel  their  pulse,  he  must  do  this  with  averted  head,  and  imme-
diately afterwards  wash  his  hand  in  a  ba^^^in  containing  water
and  vinegar.  If  the  patient's  face  be  directed  towards  the  light,
it  is  not  difficult  to  observe  the  state  of  the  tongue  at  a  distance
of  tliree  paces.  At  a  less  distance  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  avoid
the  danger  of  inhaling  the  patient's  breath,-*  whence  the  conta-
gious principle  spreads  farthest  and  most  powerfully.

When  the  patient  has  a  clean  tongue,^  as  is  found  in  those
who  arc  most  dangerously  ill,  it  is  often  advisable  to  give  him
large  quantities  of  bark  and  wine,  in  place  of  any  other  medi-
cine ;  and  as  it  is  to  be  apprehended  tliat  the  nurse  might  make
away  with  the  wine,  it  is  better  to  j)roscribc  the  bark  and  wine
mixed,  or  fur  the  j)hysician  to  mix  it  himself.  Aft(T  every
visit  the  medical  oHicers  should  wash  their  hands  and  faces  in
vinc^rar  and  water.

The  nurses  must  also  bo  warned  no"  to  hold  their  faces  near
the  patient's  mouth,  and  after  every  time  they  raise  up,  turn  or
touch  the  patient,  they  should  immodiatoly  wash  their  hands
and  faces.  It  is  advisable  to  use  a  mixture  of  vinegar  and
water  for  the  purposes  of  ablution.

Each  lx)d  should  be  provided  with  a  linen  matrass,  well
stuffed  with straw,*  over  which  is  spread  a  linen  sheet,  and  on

'  When  the  dUe-ost*  i:^  particularly  malignant  in  itn  character,  it  is  advisable  to  hav^e
t  hood  attached  to  the  cloak,  which  the  medical  officer  may  draw  over  his  head  when
he  makes  hi^  risit,  for  it  haH  been  obfierrcd  that  the  contagious  matters  nXtuch  them-
BeWes  n»oRt  readily  to  wotA  and  liair.

•  The  odour  of  the  contagiou^iiuiim  of  malignant  typhu;;  fever  is  a  kind  of  earthy,
moaldy  smell,  like  that  fn)m  old  gravc»s  newly  opened.  It  lias  little  or  no  ref^emblance
to  the  Oilour  of  putrid  flef»h.

•  Tliis  difvase  was  chiefly  a  goal- fever  without  anything  in  the  first  |)iissage3.

•  3fatrAtaCR  equally,  smotvthly  and  fijrmly  stuffed  with  some  yegetablo  subetance,


208  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

this  a  piece  of  oilclotji*  about  three  feet  in  length,  whereon  the
nates  and  back  of  the  patient  lie.

There  should  be  two  frieze-coverlets  for  each  bed,  in  ord^
*  that  the  one  may  hang  all  day  long  in  the  open  air,  whilst  the
other  is  covering  the  patient.  They  should  be  washed  once  a
week  by  the  nurses,  together  with  the  rest  of  the  patient's  linen,
either  in  the  open  court  yard,  or  beneath  a  shed  only  covered
at  top.  They  should  first  be  washed  clean  in  merely  tepid
water  with  soap,  and  subsequently  scalded  with  boiling  water,
care  being  taken  to  avoid  the  steam  that  rises,  and  they  should
not  be  washed  a  second  time  until  the  whole  is  almost  quite
cooled  down.^

The  oil-cloth  should  also  be  frequently  wiped  with  a  wet
cloth.

Every  day  at  noon  all  the  windows  of  the  sick-room  should
be  opened,  and  a  draught  of  air  kept  up  for  an  hour,  during
which  the  patients'  beds  should  be  pushed  through  into  the
ante-room,  and  remain  there  all  the  time.

In  the  centre  of  the  ward  should  stand  a  stove,  heated  fixmi
within.^

The  most  trustworthy  of  the  nurses  must  be  responsible  far
the  accurate  carrying-out  of  these  directions,  as  well  as  those  of
the  physician.

as  barley  Htraw,  hay  or  moes,  are  for  this  object  preferable  to  feather  beds.  Tht
ftiriner  allow  the  exhalations  to  pass  tlirough,  do  not  retain  the  miasm  so  long,  and  M
they  are  not  so  yieldmg  form  no  wrinkles,  and  are  cooler :  they  prevent  the  farmatkn
of  those  often  fatal  bed  sores  {spacelui  a  dccMtu)  so  often  met  with  io  malignmt
fevers.

'  By  its  smoothness  it  prevents  the  formation  of  bed-sores,  and  catdiea  the  {mem
that  often  pass  involmitarily  in  patients  seriously  ilL  They  may  be  easily  remowd
without  soiling  the  bed  linen  or  matrass,  which  has  a  very  bad  effect  on  the  parii^
of  the  air.

*  A  washcrw(Mnan  in  America  had  to  wash  some  dirty  clothes  that  had  been
brought  over  by  a  ship  from  England  (among  them  were  some  that  had  been  won
by  a  person  wIk>  had  recently  recovered  from  small-pox  in  London),  and  she  was  im*
mediately  thereafter  infected  with  malignant  smallpox,  from  the  hot  steam  thatavoM
from  the  wash- tub.  Boerhaave  has  brought  forward  abundant  proof  of  the  frequen^
and  facili^  with  which  washerwomen  are  infected.  He  recommended  soap  not  to
be  used  in  washing,  probably  because  he  thought  thai  the  miasmatic  matter  wm
mare  apt  to  be  vohitihxed  by  it;  but  this  danger  is  only  to  be  apprehended  from  tbft
employment  of  hot  water.

'  Stoves  heated  by  a  fire  in  tiieir  interior,  and  liill  more  open  fire-places,  rentw
the  air  of  the  room  very  effectually  as  loiig  as  the  fire  bums  (and  also  to  a  fwrtmn
extent  at  other  times),  because  the  fiame  must  always  have  fresh  nourishment  horn.
the  air  which  it  draws  through  the  vent-hole  of  the  stove  in  large  quantity.  At  tbft
«une  time  puro  froth  av  peoetimtea  through  tkM  chinks  of  the  windows,  or  through  tha
the  air-holes  above  them,  into  the  room.^


PLANS  FOR  KRADICATIKG  A  HAI.iaNANT  FEVER. 209'

Those  nuTBes  who  have  already  attended  patients  affected
with  the  complaint',  are  more  secure  from  infection  than  those
who  have  not  To  the  former  should  be  assigned  the  duty  of
the  more  immediate  attendance  on  the  patients.  A  new  nurse
should  during  the  first  days  only  be  employed  in  work  at  some
distance  from  the  patients,  such  as  scrubbing,  sweeping,  Aa^
until  she  is  gradually  habituated  to  the  miasm.

The  state  of  the  health  of  the  whole  household  should  be
every  day  carefully  investigated  by  the  physician,  even  though
they  consider  themselves  to  be  quite  well.  They  should  each
day  be  reminded  of  the  directions  for  their  own  preservation.

The  excrements  of  the  patients  should  be  carried  in  well-
covered  night-stools  to  the  most  distant  part  of  tlie  court  or  gar-
den, and  there  emptied  in  such  a  way  that  the  wind  shall  blow
the  exhalations  from  them  away  from  the  bearer.  This  should
be  done  b^  those  of  the  nurses  who  are  most  habituated  to  the
contagious  virus  (not  by  the  new-comers),  upon  a  thick  layer  of
nw-dust,  and  the  ordure  immediately  covered  with  one  or  seve-
nl  bundles  of  lighted  faggots  or  straw,  whereupon  the  nurse
should  withdraw,  and  allow  the  excrement  to  be  consumed  by
the  fire.

Two  of  the  attendants  who  have  been  longest  in  the  service
should  be  api)ointed  the  bearers  of  the  sedan-chairs,  for  the  pur-
pose of  fetching  new  patients  from  the  town.  For  this  purpose
they  should  each  time  put  on  clean  cloLhos,  and  apply  to  the
eentrv,  who  will  give  them  from  a  chest  in  the  sentry-box  a
clean  linen  cloak,  which  they  arc  to  put  on,  leaving  their  house
doak  hanging  up  on  ihc  outside  of  tlie  sentry-box  ;  they  fetch
the  patient  in  the  chair,  and  whenever  they  have  brought  him
within  the  inner  door  (whence  he  is  removed  by  others  into  the
sick  ward),  they  take  oil'  their  clean  cloak  and  return  it  into
the  custody  of  the  sentry.

All  the  attendants,  male  and  female,  should  wear  a  linen
doak  in  the  hoiLse,  reaching  down  to  the  feet ;  this  should  be
washed  at  least  once  a  fortnight.

The  attendants  cook  the  meals  for  themselves  and  the  conva-

kflcents,  but  they  ought  to  be  sui)plied  daily  with  fresh  meat

and  vegetables ;  half  a  pound  of  the  former  sliould  be  reckoned

as  \jpLe  daily  allowance  of  each  person. The  male  attendants

should  get  about  three  j)ints  of  good  beer  a-piece,  the  females

somewhat  less.

They  should  get  double  the  amount  of  the  daily  wages  usua]
14


SIO  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

in  the  town.  It  would  be  well  to  promise  them  additional  re-
mimeration  in  the  event  of  the  happy  termination  of  the  epi-
demic It  is  inconceivable  the  power  to  prevent  infection  poa-
fiessed  by  the  beneficent  emotions,  hope,  content,  comfort,  &o^
as  also  by  the  strengthening  qualities  of  good  living,  and  of
that  liquor  that  is  so  refreshing  to  such  people,  beer  I

They  should,  moreover,  have  no  lack  of  wood,  soap,  vinegar,
lights,  tobacco,  snuflF,  &c.

If  a  clergyman  is  wanted  for  any  of  the  patients,  his  visit
must  be  paid  in  the  presence  of  a  physician,  and  the  same  for-
malities must  be  gone  through  as  when  the  latter  makes  his
visit,  namely,  the  passage  must  be  well  aired  before  the  bed
containing  the  patient  is  pushed  through  the  trap-door. .  The
physician  instructs  him  how  near  and  in  what  manner  he  maj
approach  the  patient.*

When  a  patient  dies  he  must  be  immediately  pushed  through
on  his  bed  into  the  passage,  and  left  there  until  the  physician
has  convinced  himself  of  his  decease.  The  corpse  is  then  to  be
covered  with  straw,  and  carried  out  on  his  bed  into  the  court-
yard or  dead-house,  where  he  is  to  be  put,  along  with  the  clothes
in  which  he  died,  into  a  coffin  well  stuffed  with  straw  ;  the  corpse
should  be  covered  with  straw,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  physi-
cian and  clergyman,  conveyed  to  the  churchyard  in  silence.  The
grave  should  be  four  feet  in  depth,  and  the  coffin  should  rest
upon  a  layer  of  faggots,  and  straw  piled  upon  the  top  of  it  up
to  the  level  of  the  top  of  the  grave.  After  the  lapse  of  three  days
in  this  manner,  the  grave  should  either  be  covered  over  with
earth,  or,  still  better,  the  straw  ignited  and  the  miasmatic  virus
consumed  along  with  the  corpse,  or  at  least  dried  till  it  is  render-
ed innocuous.  This  is  a  precautionary  measure  that  cannot  be
too  forcibly  recommended.

When  a  patient  recovers  so  as  to  be  able  to  be  restored  to  his
fiiends,  he  should  be  taken  into  a  clean  room,  the  key  of  which
should  be  kept  by  the  physician  alone,  and  there  put  into  a  bath
and  well  washed  over  all  the  body,  not  excepting  the  hair,  at
first  with  clean  warm  water,  and  then  sprinkled  all  over  with
vinegar  before  being  finally  dried.  He  is  then  to  put  on  the
clean  clothes  which  his  friends  have  sent  him ;  and  all  his  old
clothes,  without  exception,  are  to  be  burnt  in  the  court-yarc>,  in


*  By  incautiously  approaching  the  beds  of  such  patients,  I  have  frequently  seen  tlw
moit  promising  young  clergymen  infected  and  die.


PLANS  FOR  ERADICATING  A  MALIGNANT  FEVKR. 211

ihe  presence  of  the  physician/  and  finally  he  is  to  be  accompan*
led  home  by  the  physician  and  surgeon.

Whenever  a  patient  has  recovered  or  died,  the  wooden  close-
stool  he  has  used  must  be  burnt  in  the  open  air,  and  the  pot-de-
chambre  broken  and  the  fragments  thrown  into  the  fire.

After  the  epidemic  has  been  subdued,  the  male  attendants
should  not  be  dismissed  until  they  have  whitewashed  the  whole
of  the  interior  walls  of  the  house,  not  only  the  sick  ward,  but
every  other  room,  and  the  females  not  until  they  have  thoroughly
scrubbed  all  the  floors,  all  the  wood-work  and  all  the  utensils.

The  sick-ward  should  then  be  heated  in  the  early  morning  as
much  as  possible,  at  least  up  to  100°  Reaum.,  and  after  this  heat
has  been  kept  up  for  two  hours,  all  the  windows  should  be  opened
and  kept  so  till  night.

Before  they  quit  the  house,  both  male  and  female  attendants
diould  bathe  themselves,  each  sex  in  seperate  apartments,  and
all  their  articles  of  clothing  and  the  linen  they  have  used  during
their  residence  in  the  hospital  should  be  placed  in  an  oven  of
about  the  temperature  of  a  baker's  oven  after  the  bread  has  been
removed  (about  120®  Keaum.),  and  kept  there  for  at  least  a
quarter  of  an  hour,*  the  vent-hole  being  duly  regulated  the  time.

After  this  is  done,  all  the  other  linen  or  woolen  articles  which
have  been  used  by  the  patients,  the  straw  matrasses  (after  taking
out  the  straw),  the  towels,  sheets,  &c.,  should  also  be  exposed
for  fuUv  an  hour  to  the  same  heat  in  the  oven,  and  thereafter
the  bedsteads,  aft«r  they  have  been  well  scoured,  should  be  put
in  the  oven  and  left  there  till  it  cools.

The  straw  out  of  the  matrasses,  the  accumiilated  sweopingsi
rags,  bandage-s,  scrubbing  cloths,  brooms,  and  other  articles  of
small  value,  should  be  burnt  in  the  court-yard  in  the  doctor's
presence.

*  Too  much  care  cannot  be  taken  to  secure  the  destruction  of  such  things,  as  the
paltry  lore  of  gain  of  the  nuriJOd  induces  them  to  keep  them  for  themselves,  in
ipite  of  the  danger  to  themselves  aod  others  of  doing  sa

'  The  pestiferous  miasmata  which  have  become  attxu^hed  to  clothed,  linen,  beds,  Ac^
can  according  to  my  observations  be  expelled  from  such  things  and  dfstroycd  by  do
meain  more  certainly  than  by  a  heat  of  upwards  of  100*  Reauin.,  the  higher  the
temperature  the  better,  even  should  the  articles  suffer  a  little  from  its  effects.  The
celebrated  Oook  expelled  in  thb  manner  the  morbific  vapours  that  had  become  air
tached  to  the  cabins  of  his  ships  and  infected  the  walls ;  the  efficacy  of  this  measure
is  well  known.  The  earliest  physicians  discovered  the  wholesome  effect  of  fire  and
heat  in  deetroying  the  plague  virus,  and  their  excellence  is  corroborated  in  our  infee.
tioQB  epidemics  by  Howard,  Lind  and  Campbell  It  is  moreover  remarkable  that  all
the  iiifectioD  of  typhus  fever  ceases  when  ships  are  under  the  line.


213:  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

In  his  presence  the  attendants  should  leave  the  house  all  to-
gether and  the  sentinels  should  be  withdrawn.

The  house  may  be  allowed  to  stand  empty,  and  reserved  for
similar  purposes  on  a  future  occasion,  one  of  the  best-deserving
male  attendants,  with  liis  wife,  being  allowed  to  live  in  it  gratui-
tously as  housekeeper.  Their  business  would  be  to  see  that  the
building  is  kept  in  good  repair  (in  case  it  is  required  for  another
epidemic).

.  A  house  of  this  description  and  so  arranged  might  subse-
quently be  used  with  the  greatest  advantage,  with  some  slight
modifications,  in  epidemics  of  small-pox,  measles,  dysentery,
and  other  infectious  maladies  dangerous  to  the  population,  and
might  be  the  means  of  preserving  many  useful  citiisens  to  the
Btate.

There  might  be  a  few  beds  kept  there  permanently  for  the
reception  of  all  sick  journeymen,  beggars  and  trampers  from
the  inns  and  lodging  houses  (a  fine  being  imposed  for  the  con^
eealment  of  such  cases),  whereby  a  source  of  epidemics  of  no
small  importance,  but  one  that  is  frequently  overlooked^  might  be
effectually  checked  at  its  origin.

This  should  be  the  duty  imposed  upon  the  housekeeper  in
return  for  his  free  dwelling,  but  at  the  same  time  he  should  re-
ceive an  adequate  (not  paltry')  remuneration  for  each  patient
who  recovers,  whenever  he  leaves  the  house.


SUGGICSTIONS  FOR  THE PREVENTION  OF  EPIDEMICS  IN  GENERAU

ESPECIALLY  IN  TOWNS.

A  well-ordered  police  should  take  care  that  rag-gatJiercrs  are
not  allowed  to  live  anywhere  but  in  isolated  houses  near  the
paper  mills,^  nor  should  they  be  permitted  to  have  in  any  house
in  the  town  a  place  where  they  may  deposit  the  rags  by  little
and  little,  only  to  remove  them  when  they  have  collected  a
large  quantity.  The  regulations  prevalent  in  Electoral  Saxony
should  be  adopted,  viz. :  that  the  rag-gatherer  should  keep  in
the  open  street  with  his  barrow  or  cart,  by  some  signal  summon

*  If  the  rcmuDcration  be  not  very  Kmall,  he  and  his  frieudR  take  good  core  to  be
trer  oo  the  watch  for  any  such  patients  that  may  have  slipped  into  the  town,  aa4  ht
will  do  his  utmost  to  i)btain  it  as  speedily  as  possible  by  the  rapid  recovery  of  the
patientk  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  state  (and  of  the  patients).

*  Which  should  never  be  built  dose  to  towns  and  villages.


PREYEHTION  OF  EPIBEMICB  IN  TOWNS.  !2l|

iuoimd  him  those  who  have  rags  to  sell,  and  not  remain  in  the
town  with  his  collection  of  rags,  but  go  into  the  country,  and
when  he  puts  up  at  a  country  inn,  leave  his  cart  in  the  open
court-yard,  or  before  the  door  of  the  inn  ;  in  a  word,  leave  it  in,
the  open  air.  lie  should  be  forbidden,  under  penalty  of  im-
prisonmeht,  to  pick  out  from  his  heap  of  rags  and  sell  to  others
for  their  use  any  articles  of  clothing  that  may  be  still  fit  for
wear.

They  should  also  be  forbidden  to  wear  such  articles  them-
selves or  put  them  on  their  children,  which  they  will  often  do,
to  the  great  detriment  of  their  health,  as  I  have  often  observed.
I  have  seen  'a  malignant  epidemic  of  small-pox  spread  over  the
country  from  so  doing.

The  paper-miUs  should  be  so  arranged  that  the  supply  of  the
crade  rags  should  be  kept  in  well  ventilated  buildings  far  away
fix>m  the  dwelling  houses,  and  the  reception  of  the  rags  from
the  gatherer,  and  the  weighing  of  them,  in  order  to  determine
flie  sum  he  is  to  receive,  should  be  carried  on  in  a  shed  only
covered  at  top.

'  The  dealers 'in  old  clothes  should  only  be  allowed  to  carry  on
(heir  trade  in  open  shops,  and  should  not  be  permitted  to  sell
diem  in  their  houses  imder  penalty  of  imprisonment.  All  the
linen  and  articles  of  clothing  they  have  for  sale  in  their  shops
should  be  previously  washed,  not  excepting  even  the  coloured
and  woollen  articles  ;  and  a  police  officer  should  be  charged  to
examine  if  they  be  washed,  who  should  overhaul  the  whole
contents  of  the  shop  on  undetermined  days.  Every  article  that
he  finds  still  dirty  should  become  his  property  after  having
shewn  it  to  the  inspector  of  police  in  the  presence  of  the
dealer.^

It  should  only  be  permitted  to  the  burghers  of  the  town  to
deal  in  old  clothes.  Jews  engaging  in  this  trade  should  be  de-
prived of  their  letters  of  protection.  Women  found  carrying  it
on  should  be  put  in  the  House  of  Correction.

The  civic-crown  merited  by  him  who  improves  the  prisons
has  been  gained  from  us  Germans  by  an  Englishman — Howard.
Wagnitz  follows  in  his  steps.  It  is  inconceivable  how  often  the
most destructive  vapours are concentrated  in  these  dens  of

'  Should  it  be  feared  that  such  an  article  of  clothing,  probably  worn  by  a  sick
fenon,  might  prove  dan^rous  to  the  policeman,  it  should  be  coasidered  that  th«
poor  broker,  in  order  to  avoid  such  a  loss,  will  most  certainly  take  care  to  have  none
hot  clean  washed  things  in  his  shop,  and  thus  the  police  agent  will  have  little  or
nothing  to  ooofiecate.


214  THE  FBIEND  OF  HEALTH.

misery,  fraught  with  death  to  those  that  enter  them ;  how  often
their  visiters  are  prematurely  sent  to  the  grave  by  fatal  typhua.
Destructive  epidemic  diseases  often  have  their  origin  in  these
death-laden  walls.

There  are  several  kinds  of  prisons.  I  shall  here  allude  only
to  those  where  the  imprisonment  is  for  life  and  to  those  gaols
where  prisoners  guilty  of  capital  crimes  are  kept  until  the  ter-
mination of  their  trial,  often  for  several  years,  the  visitation  or
inspection  of  which  is  not  unfrequently  the  cause  of  infectious
diseases.  Even  when  the  prisoners  themselves  have  not  been
ill  of  such  fevers,  their  exhalations,  their  breath,  and  the  miasm
lurking  about  their  dirty  clothes,  have  often  occasioned  malig-
nant fatal  fevers.  Heysham,  Pringle,  Zimmermann,  Sarcone
and  Lettsom  adduce  a  number  of  cases  of  this  kind.

Now  as  in  the  true  spirit  of  laws  that  are  free  from  all  bar-
barity, even  the  punishment  of  death  should  have  (and  can
have)  no  other  aim  than  to  render  an  incorrigible  criminal
innocuous,  and  to  remove  him  from  human  society,  what  else
•can  both  these  kinds  of  imprisonment  be  than  rendering  the
prisoner  harmless,  in  the  former  case,  for  life,  in  the  latter  for  a
certain  time  pending  the  duration  of  the  trial.  None  but  Syra-
cusan  tyrants  could  dream  of  uniting  a  more  inhuman  object
with  such  prisons.

If  then  the  gaol  even  for  capital  oflfendcrs  can  and  ought  to
be  nothing  but  a  means  of  depriving  them  of  all  opportunity  of
injuring  society,  in  that  case  every  torture  that  is  unnecessarily
inflicted  on  them  when  thus  in  custody  is  a  crime  on  the  part  cf
the  police,  I  only  allude  here  to  the  pain  inflicted  on  them  by
unhealthy  (disease-producing)  prisons.  In  order  to  avoid  this^
prisons  should  never  be  raised  less  than  four  feet  above  the
ground,  and  the  openings  of  the  windows,  while  they  are  sufEl-
ciently  narrow,  should  be  always  so  long  as  to  allow  the  fi'ee
access  of  fresh  air.  Where  two  windows  opposite  each  other
cannot  be  obtained  (which  is  the  best  plan),  there  ought  to  be
at  least  three  windows  for  each  small  cell.  The  floor  should
either  be  paved  with  slabs  of  stone  or  better,  with  rounded
stones,  so  that  it  may  be  deluged  and  scrubbed,  once  a  week,
with  boiling  water.  The  walls  and  roofs  should  be  lined  with
woodei  boards,  like  the  peasants'  houses,  in  order  to  allow  of
their  being  also  washed  with  hot  water,*  as  is  customary  with

'  The  ezlialaUon  from  these  wretched  creatures,  that  ooDstautly  tends  to  decom-
position, and  the  animal  poison  developed  from  their  breath,  whereby  the  air  of  tbdr


FBSYIMTION  OF  SPIDSICIG8  IN  TOWNS.  215

the  country  poople.  By  these  means  these  dismal  habitations
are  at  all  events  rendered  dry  residences,  and  the  cachexias  and
tumours  so  frequently  met  with  in  such  as  have  undergone  a
long  imprisonment  are  in  a  great  measure  prevented.  If  it
were  possible  to  construct  an  air-hole  for  the  purpose  of  carry-
ing off  the  deteriorated  vapours  into  the  open  air,  gaols  would
thereby  lose  much  of  their  dangerous  aptitude  to  generate  pests.
The  prisoner  should  have  at  least  once  a  week  a  bundle  of
fresh  straw  for  his  bed.  llis  bed-cover,  together  with  his
clothes  and  linen,  should  be  washed  at  least  once  a  week  in  hot
¥ater.  He  himself  should  be  forced,  before  putting  on  his
clean  clothes,  to  wash  his  body  all  over.  His  chamber  utensil
should  be  emptied  daily,  and  rinsed  out  with  boiling  water.
He  should  be  allowed  to  walk  about  in  the  open  air  at  least
once  a  week,  for  at  least  an  hour  at  a  time.

When  he  is  removed  from  prison,  his  cell  must  be  prepared
for  the  reception  of  future  prisoners  by  washing  anew  the  floori
the  walls  and  the  roof  with  hot  water,  and  by  placing  a  small
ftove  in  it,  the  funnel  of  which  goes  out  at  the  window.  With
this  the  cell  is  to  be  heated  very  highly,  so  that  the  heat  shall
almost  take  away  one's  breath  (up  to  120°  Reaum.),  and  then
the  stove  should  be  again  removed,  supposing  it  is  not  allowed
to  have  one  in  the  cell.

If  not,  an  iron  tube  communicating  with  the  open  air  should
open  in  the  floor  of  the  cell,  passing  in  winter  through  a  heated
stove,  in  order  to  conduct  in  a  supply  of  fresh  warm  air.

It  is  great  cruelty  to  shut  up  many  prisoners  together  without
aUowing  at  least  500  cubic  feet  of  space  and  air  for  each.  If
this  be  not  allowed,  the  better  ones  among  the  prisoners  are  ex-
posed to  much  annoyance  by  the  bad  behaviour  of  the  worse
ones;  and  it  is  incredible  the  rapidity  with  which  that  most
destructive  of  all  animal  poisons,  the  virus  of  the  most  fatal
pestilence,  is  generated. Police  authorities,  be  humane !

I  scarcely  need  to  remark,  that  the  (often  long-continued)  im-
prisonment of  debtors  who  are  frequently  deserving  of  compas-
sion, ought  to  be  made  at  least  as  innocuous  for  the  health  of
the  prisoners,  of  the  turnkeys,  and  of  those  who  visit  them,  &e.,
as  that  of  criminals.

When  foreign  prisoners  or  field  hospitals  are  introduced  into  a


cells  is  deteriorated,  attaclies  itself  in  great  quantity  to  the  waUs  of  gaols,
md  in  course  of  time  degenerates  into  a  pestilential  miasm ;  by  t)ic  process  abov«


216  . THB  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

healthy  country  in  time  of  war,  whether  temporarily  or  perznat-
nently,  the  authorities,  if  they  have  it  in  their  power  to  act^
should  take  care  that  an  epidemic  is  not  thereby  brought  into
.the  country.

Prisoners  of  war,  who  are  not  unfrecjucntly  suffering  from
typhus  and  putrid  fevers,  in  their  transit  through  a  country,  wm,
generally,  when  remaining  for  the  night  in  towns,  lodged  in  the
town-halls,  apparently  in  order  that  they  may  be  kept  more  se-
curely. But  how  often  has  this  practice  given  rise  to  the  spread
of  epidemics !

It  would  be  safer  to  quarter  them  in  large  coach-houses,  sta-
bles, bams,  &c.,  outside  the  town,  to  make  them  lie  undressed  on
straw  matrasses,  keeping  them  warmly  covered  in  winter,  and
in  this  manner  retaining  them  until  their  march  can  be  renew-
ed.* If  the  season  of  the  year  admit  of  it,  they  must  be  com?-
pelled  to  wash  each  other's  clothes  and  linen  with  hot  water^
and  to  dry  them  in  the  open  air.

The  mo.^t  destructive  pestilences  are  most  easily  engendered
by  military -hospitals.  It  would  be  the  most  disgraceful  barbart
ty  even  in  an  enemy,  to  erect  them  in  the  middle  of  towns.

But  if,  nevertheless,  this  is  done,  there  remain  for  the  poor
town's-man,  if  tbev  bring  pestilence  along  with  them,  as  they
usually  do,  very  few  means  of  preserving  the  life  and  health  of
himself  and  family,  and  these  he  should  carefully  attend  to.

If  he  will  not  or  cannot  leave  the  town,  he  must  at  all  events
avoid  all  intercourse  and  communication  with  the  sick,  with  itt^
fected  houses,  and  even  with  those  who  frequent  such  houses.
If  they  bring  him  any  thing  he  should  take  it  from  them  at  his
house-door  or  in  the  open  court.  Should  it  be  articles  of  cloth-
ing or  linen,  he  should  not  make  use  of  them  before  he  has
plunged  them  into  hot  water  mingled  with  vinegar,  in  the  opeik
court,  or  thoroughly  fumigated  them  with  sulphur.  Should  it
be  articles  of  food,^  let  him  not  partake  of  them  before  prepare
ing  them  on  the  fire,  or  otherwise  heating  them.

'  On  the  march  they  have  plenty  of  air  and  exercise;  in  this  way  they  get  rust  and
warmth,  and  are  uioipacitated  fn)m  making  Uieir  escape.

*  A  person  who  is  exposed  to  the  danger  <»f  infection,  should  not  allow  his  coufa|;»
to  sink,  should  not  leave  off  any  of  his  accustomed  comforts,  rest,  exercise,  iuod»  or
dniik ;  but  he  ^.hould  also  carefully  avoi<l  all  excess  in  any  of  these  thing}*,  aa  aIm  in
passions,  venereal  excitement,  <fec.  Tlie  other  prophylactic  measures  that  should  \m
adopted  will  be  found  in  Uie  first  part  of  the  '*  Friend  of  Health."  A  slight  increMa
of  stimulants^  such  us  wine,  tobacco  and  bqu£^  is  said  to  be  a  powerful  propl^laolia
against  infectious  disorders.


PREvmsnoN  OP  epidemics  in  towns.  217

Infectious  diseases  have  even  been  communicated  by  monej
and  letters ;  the  former  may  be  washed  in  boiling  water,  the  lat-
ter fumigated  with  sulphur.

Although  the  animal  poisons  called  infectious  miasmata  aro
not  infectious  at  the  distance  of  several  paces  in  still  open  air,
80  that  we  may  (with  the  exercise  of  great  care)  preserve  our
house  free  from  infection  in  the  midst  of  houses  where  the
malady  is  raging,  we  should  remember  that  a  draught  of  air  can
carry  the  miasm  arising  from  a  sick  person  to  a  distance  of
many  paces,  and  then  occasion  infection.

On  that  account  we  should  avoid  traversing  narrow  lanes
where  we  should  have  to  pass  close  by  a  sick  person,  and  for  a
amilar  reason  we  should  shun  narrow  passages  througli  houses.
Above  all  we  should  refrain  from  looking  into  an  open  winduw
and  conversing  with  people  in  whose  house  or  room  cases  of  in-
fectious disease  may  exist.

Acquaintances  kiss  each  other  or  shake  hands ;  this  ceremo-
ny should  be  omitted  when  the  danger  is  so  iminent,  as  also
drinking  out  of  another's  glass.  We  should  particularly  avoid
making  use  of  a  stranger's  water-claset,  or  allowing  a  stranger
to  use  ours.

At  such  times  we  should  never  bring  second-hand  furniture*
into  our  premises.

Domestic  animals  that  arc  given  to  rove,  such  as  dogs  and  cats,
often  carry  about  with  them  in  their  hair  the  virus  of  infectious
diseases.  For  security's  sake  it  is  advisable  to  get  rid  of  them
at  such  times,  and  not  to  allow  strange  dogs  or  cats  to  approach

OS.

The  drying  up  of  marshes  and  old  ditches  close  to  human
dwellings  has  frequently  been  the  occasion  of  the  most  mur-
derous  pestilences.'*

If  the  fosse  surrounding  the  town  is  to  be  cleared  out  or  dried

*  I  have  seen  putrid  fevew  occur  periodically  for  many  years  in  the  country,  mere-
ly by  old  furniture,  which  had  beUmgcd  to  persons  who  liad  died  of  such  affectiona^
ttmiag  into  other  families  by  purchai^.

'  I  saw  the  fortieth  pert  of  the  inhabitant:)  of  a  large  town  dio  of  typhus,  in  come-
qoeoce  of  tlie  mcaut'.ous  draining  of  tlie  town  fosse.

Whenever  the  shnie  of  such  a  town  fosse,  which  may  hivvc  been  accumulating  for
ntDy,  pcrfaape  hundreds  of  years,  is  deprived  of  the  fresh  water  covering  it,  tho
kdf  putrified  animal  matters  contained  in  it  immcdLvtely  pass  into  the  last  stage  of
^feoompufiition.  This  last  stage  of  decomposition  of  animal  substances  is  infiuitelj
potscoous  than  all  the  previous  ones,  as  we  may  see  in  the  rapid  fatality  of  the
frmn  ccss-pools  which  have  not  been  cleared  out  for  thirty  yeiurs  or  more.
Of  this  more  hereafter.


218  THK  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

up,  03  is  highly  desirable  for  the  health  of  the  inhabitants  of  all
towns,  this  work  should  only  be  undertaken  in  the  depth  of  win-
ter. The  water  should  be  carried  off  in  the  form  of  ice-layera|
and  the  ice  that  forms  again  in  a  few  nights  should  next  be  taken
away,  and  so  on  till  no  more  water  remains.

But  as  the  removal  of  the  mud  from  town-ditches  is  much
preferable  to  letting  it  gradually  dry  up,  seeing  that  throughout
the  whole  time  required  for  the  latter,  noxious  vapours  are  con-
stantly exhaling,  there  is  no  better  time  for  removing  it  than  in
severe  cold.  The  mud  which  is  always  in  a  state  of  putrefaction
is  always  warm,  and  never  freezes  so  much  as  to  prevent  its
being  easily  dug  out  in  winter.  We  can  also  more  readily  dia-
pense  with  draught-cattle  on  account  of  the  excellent  condition
of  the  roads  in  severe  frosty  weather.

After  great  inundations  on  flat  land,  the  spontaneous  drying
up  of  which  cannot  be  expected  to  take  place  in  a  short  time,  it
is  requisite  that  all  should  lend  a  hand  to  cut  ditches  through
and  roTind  about  the  inundated  country  ;  but  if  it  is  impossible
to  drain  off  the  water  into  the  river  on  account  of  its  low  level,  a
number  of  small  wind-mills  must  be  erected  in  order  to  pump  olDF
the  water  as  quickly  as  possible  and  dry  the  land ;  for  if  this  be
not  done  the  water  readily  takes  on  the  putrefactive  process,
giving  rise  from  spring  to  autumn  to  dysenteries  and  putrid
fevers.

The  hw'lying  houses  that  have  been  inundated  by  the  water  are
a  fertile  source  of  epidemic  diseases  (see  Kiockhoff).  The  police
authorities  must  see  that  every  householder  digs  a  deep  ditch
round  his  premises,  and  especially  round  his  dwelling-house;
that  he  has  all  his  windows  and  doors  open  for  the  greater  part
of  the  day ;  that  he  occasionally  lights  fires  even  in  summer ;
and  that  in  winter,  at  all  events  before  he  rises  in  the  morning
all  the  doors  and  windows  are  left  open,  for  an  hour  at  a  time.

There  are  places  thatare  destitute  of  the  (often  unacknowledged
benefit  of  a  sufficient  supply  of  fresh  flowing  water,  in  place  of
which  the  inhabitants  are  obliged  to  make  use  of  spring  or  rain-
water brought  from  a  distance,  or  to  put  up  with  rain-water  only.
In  all  such  cases  they  collect  their  supply  of  water  for  along  time
in  large  reservoirs,  in  which  it  becomes  stale  in  a  few  days  and
furnishes  a  very  unwholesome  drink,  the  source  of  many  dis-
eases. Soon,  it  again  becomes  clear  and  inodorous ;  but  in  a
short  time  the  putrefaction  recommences,  and  so  it  goes  on  until
the  water  is  all  consumed,  the  greater  part  of  it  in  a  very  bad


PREVENTION  OF  EPIDEMICS  IN  TOWN&  219

state.  I  sliall  not  here  attempt  to  determine  whether  these  dis-
advantages might  not  be  obviated  by  the  construction  of  arti-
ficial aqueducts  on  no  very  expensive  scale,  or  of  (very  deep)
wells ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  in  flat  localities  on  firm  soil  it
is  possible  to  resort  to  one  or  other  of  these  plans,  whatever  may
be  alleged  against  it  by  the  paltry  parsimony  of  many  corpora-
tions, who  look  on  unmoved  whilst  many  such  communities
gradually  die  out.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  radical  cure,  I
would  advise  every  householder  to  keep  his  supply  of  water  in
casks,  in  which  for  every  400  pounds  of  water  one  pound  of
powdered  wood  charcoal  should  be  thrown,  which,  according  to
the  discovery  of  Lowitz,  possesses  the  power  of  preserving  v^ater
from  putrefaction  and  of  making  stale  water  sweet.  The  clear
fluid  may  be  drawn  off  when  required  through  a  tap  provided
with  a  tight  linen  bag.

A  similar  precaution  against  the  production  of  disease  is
adopted  in  large  $/iips  that  go  to  sea,  which  are  often  reduced  to
great  straits  on  account  of  a  deficient  supply  of  fresh  water.  But
many  causes  conspire  in  ships  to  produce  destructive*  diseases.
Among  these  are  the  mode  of  feeding  the  crew  so  much  in
rogue,  ^ith  often  half-decayed,  dried  and  salted  meat,  with  un-
wholesome fatty  substances  of  various  kinds ;  the  want  of  fresh
air  when  during  continued  storms  they  have  to  pass  many  days
together  below  deck  with  the  port-holes  closed,  when  the  exha-
lations from  their  bodies  increase  to  a  pestilential  fetor ;  the  ex-
haustion of  the  sailors  when  kept  at  work  too  long,  during  which
their  wet  clothes  check  the  perspiration.  These  causes  engender
and  keep  up  scurvy,  dysentery,  and  other  maladies.

The  risk  of  such  disorders  may  be  avoided  by  the  following
measures :  supplying  vegetable  food,  and  in  the  absence  of  green
herbs,  dried  legumes  that  so  easily  ferment ;  sour-crout ;  some-
times brown  sugar  in  place  of  oil ;  brandy  for  strengthening ;
meat-soups  boiled  down  and  dried,  in  place  of  kept  meat ;  malt-
liquor  to  drink  in  addition  to  water ;  the  division  of  labour  into
eight-hours'  work ;  care  that  the  crew  have  always  dry  clothes  to
pat  on,  and  that  their  habits  are  cleanly ;  frequent  pumping  out
of  the  necessary ;  and  the  purification  of  the  air  between  decks
by  means  of  large  braziers  of  burning  charcoal  according  to


'  llAJar  Nantc  observed  during  the  war  betwixt  England  nnd  North  America  a
pestilential  gaol-fever  break  out  on  board  the  fleet  lying  off  the  Havana,  of  such
Mverity  that  numbers  of  men  who  seemed  to  be  in  perfect  health  died  after  an  illness
of  not  mure  than  from  three  to  four  hours.


220  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

Cook's  method.  The  frequent  \vashing  with  sea- water  of  tlie
various  utensils,  the  floor,  the  walls  and  the  decks,  must  not  "be
neglected.  If  powdered  charcoal  be  mingled  with  the  sea- water
used  in  scrubbing,  the  stench  of  the  walls  will  be  effectually  gat
rid  of  In  addition  to  all  this  care  should  be  taken  not  to  take
on  board  sick  persons,  or  such  as  have  scarcely  recovered  from
iUness;  and  all  the  utensils  and  furniture  should  be  frequently
exposed  to  the  air  on  deck  when  the  weather  is  good.

By  the  employment  of  Sutton's  method  of  conducting  leaden
pipes  into  all  parts  of  the  ship  which  all  terminate  in  the
kitchen  fire-place,  the  deteriorated  air  will  most  certainly  bb
drawn  off  by  the  fire.  But  Cook's  braziers  do  much  more,  tot
they  heat  the  walls,  and  thus  destroy  the  contagious  matter  mucb
more  elfectually.  Hale's  ventilator  (a  kind  of  wooden  bellows)
are  little  used  in  ships.  Would  not  the  so-called  garden-cresB
{lepulium  sativum)  be  a  valuable  vegetable,  or  at  all  events  be
useful  on  board  ship  as  a  medicine,  in  order  to  diminish  the
noxious  matters  in  the  first  passages  ?  The  fiicility  with  whidi
its  seed  grows  is  well  known.  We  only  need  to  strew  it  upon
a  piece  of  old  wet  sail  cloth,  and  cover  it  with  unravelled  pieces
of  old  moistened  tow.

In  towns  where  no  rapid  stream  of  water  can  be  conducted
through  even  the  small  streets  wherein  the  animal  excrements,
the  washing- water,  the  urine  and  other  impurities  of  men  and
animals  can  be  carried  oflf  without  doing  any  harm,  covered
cess  pools  cannot  be  dispensed  with.

These  cess-pools  are  always  a  bad  thing  for  the  health  of  maUi
from  their  aptitude  to  engender,  or  at  least  to  promote,  pestilence.

In  order  to  render  them  as  innocuous  as  possible,  they  should
be  built  up  with  masonry,  not  only  on  the  roof  and  walls,  but
they  should  also  be  paved  on  the  floor  with  stones  cemented
together,  in  order  that  the  putrefying  impurities  may  not  sink
into  the  ground,  but  be  capable  of  being  taken  clean  away.
They  must  be  frequently  cleansed  out,  and  the  odour  removed
quickly.

The  time  selected  for  cleansing  them  should  be  during  the
prevalence  of  a  strong  wind,  more  especially  one  from  the  north,
north-east,  east  or  south-east,  and  those  days  should  be  avoided
when  a  long  period  of  warm  rain,  calm  and  foggy  weather,  with
a  low  state  of  the  barometer  prevails.

Though  we  are  not  able  to  adduce  any  instances  in  which  the
-exhalations  from  old  privies  have  spread  a  pestilence  of  any  dn-


PBEVKNTION  OF  EPIDEMICS  IN  TOWNS.  221

ration,  yet  no  good  police  which  attends  to  the  health  of  tho
oommunity  should  permit  them ;  and  moreover,  cases  have  oc-
curred where  workmen  suffocated  in  such  places  have  spread
such  a  virulent  exhalation  from  their  clothes,  that  manv  of  those
approaching  them  have  been  cut  off  by  typhus  fever.

In  order  to  avoid  the  pestilential  poison  proceeding  from  ani-
mal substances  in  tlie  last  stage  of  putrefaction,  the  most  destruc-
tive of  all  poisons,  the  removal  of  such  murderous  pits  should
be  advised,  and  no  sensible  person  will  object  to  this.

But  when  they  are  already  in  existence  and  require  to  be
cleared  out,  we  must  not  go  to  work  incautiously.  The  simplest
method  of  freeing  such  pits  from  their  poisonous  exhalations  is
always  the  lowering  into  them  of  small  loose  bundles  of  ignited
straw  attached  to  a  wire,  since  there  is  rarely  in  them  any  in-
flammable gas  that  might  endanger  the  house  by  its  ignition.
These  bundles  are  to  be  let  down  to  the  depth  at  which  they
will  almost  be  extinguished  by  the  vapour,  and  then  they  should
be  allowed  to  burn  out.  This  process  is  to  be  repeated  with
lisu^ger  and  larger  ignited  bundless  until  the  stratum  of  gas  is  re-
moved to  the  very  floor  of  the  pit,  and  atmospheric  air  occupies
the  place  of  the  lire-extinguishing  gas.  But  our  precautionary
measures  should  not  cease  here :  for  it  is  not  only  want  of  at-
mospheric air  that  kills  the  workmen  in  such  situations,  but  still
more  the  vapour  that  rises,  though  not  to  any  great  height  in  con-
sequence of  its  weight,  from  stirring  uj)  the  human  excrement  that
has  entered  on  the  last  stage  of  putrefaction,  in  order  to  render
this  as  harmless  as  possible,  a  quantity  of  dry  faggots  ignited
should  be  thrown  into  the  pit,  suAicient  to  cover  all  the  bottom
of  it,  and  there  they  should  be  left  till  they  are  totally  consumed.
The  heat  thus  generated  will,  after  the  lapse  of  an  hour,  have
rendered  the  odour  innocuous  to  at  least  a  loot  in  de])th.  This
quantity  should  then  be  removed  by  the  woi-knien  ;  faggots  are
then  to  be  burnt  as  before  on  what  is  beneath,  wheieuj)on  the
next  layer  is  removed,  and  so  on  until  it  is  all  cleared  away.

Should  it  really  prove  true,  that  the  most  of  our  police  authori-
ties have  abolished  burials  in  churches,  we  should  not  be  thereby
set  quite  at  our  ease.  Tlte  old  graves  still  exist  in  our  churches,
in  which  the  la.st  and  most  poisonous  stage  of  decomposition
of  the  dead  bodies  has  not  yet  ceased  to  emit  its  destructive
emanations.* Hence  alterations  and  building  o])eratlons  in  the

*  It  >houId  be  b<>riic  in  mind  that  the  most  fatal  fi;n^  gcncr;it<5d  by  the  last  stage
of  putrufoctioii  docH  not  readily  rise,  but  is  heavy,  and  not  unfrcqucotly  reposes  in  »


222  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

floors  of  such  churches  are  fraught  with  manifest  danger  to  the
life  of  the  workmen  and  the  congregations  in  the  churcheSi
whence  diseases  may  spread  over  a  considerable  portion  of  the
population.

In  June,  1773,  a  grave  was  opened  in  the  church  of  SaulieU|
Burgundy,  and  church-service  performed  soon  afterwards,  in
conscciuence  of  which,  40  children  and  200  grown-up  people,  to-
gether with  the  clergyman  and  sexton,  were  assailed  by  the  ex-
halation that  arose,  and  carried  off  by  a  malignant  disorder.
Moreover,  it  has  not  yet  been  perfectly  ascertained  how  many
years  the  contagious  principle  may  remain  attached  in  undi-
minished virulence  to  the  buried  corpses  of  those  who  have  died
of  malignant  diseases.

In  many  countries,  die  lying  in  state  of  all  bodies  is  very  pro-
perly forbidden.  But  in  others  where  not  so  much  enlighten-
ment prevails,  infectious  diseases  are  often  propagated  by  the
exposure  of  such  poisonous  bodies,  of  which  I  could  adduee
many  examples  from  Saxony.

In  1780  a  girl  brought  a  putrid  fever  with  her  to  Quenstadt
from  Aschersleben.  All  her  numerous  brothers  and  sisters  and
her  parents  took  ill  of  it,  one  after  the  other,  but  they  all  gra-
dually recovered  except  one  grown-up  daughter,  who  died  of
bed-sores.  I  took  the  greatest  pains  to  prevent  the  disease  be-
ing propagated  to  others  from  this  house.  I  succeeded  in  this
for  five  months  until  this  girl  had  to  be  buried.  The  young
men  of  the  village  bore  the  body  in  a  coffin  nailed  up  accord-
ing to  my  directions,  to  the  grave.  Here,  from  their  attach-
ment to  the  deceased,  they  disobeyed  the  strict  orders  given
by  my  friend,  the  clergyman ;  they  forced  open  the  lid  of  the
coffin,  in  order  to  see  the  corpse  once  more  before  it  was  let
down  into  the  grave.  Others,  moved  by  curiosity,  approached.
The  third  and  fourth  day  thereafter,  all  those  that  had  been
guilty  of  this  excess,  lay  mortally  sick  of  this  fever,  as  also  all
those  who  had  come  near  the  grave  (some  of  them  from  neigh-
bouring villages,)  to  the  number  of  eighteen,  of  whom  only  a
few  escaped  death.  The  epidemic  of  putrid  fever  spread  around
at  the  same  time.

It  is  not  desirable  that  those  important  personages  in  the  state
called  inspectors  of  the  dead  and  corpse  washers,  whose  business
it  originally  was  to  form  a  silent  judgment  respecting  the  kind

low  stratam  above  the  carrupting  matter,  iiotil  it  is  stirred  up,  and  is  thus  rendered
dangerous  to  life.


PREVENTION  OP  EPIDEMICS  IN  TOWNS.  228

of  death  that  had  occurred,  and  to  verify  the  decease,  should
receive  from  the  juridical  medical  oflScer  accurate  instructions
on  this  by  no  means  easy  point,  before  undertaking  such  an  im-
portant, such  an  exceedingly  important  duty  ?  How  many  lives
of  those  apparently  dead  might  they  not  be  instrumental  in  re-
storing, how  many  cases  of  murder  might  they  not  detect,  and,
what  interests  us  peculiarly  in  this  place,  how  often  might  they
not  discover  that  some  who  have  died  without  having  been  seen
by  any  physician,  might  have  laboured  under  contagious  dis-
eases?

We  should  not  be  too  rash  with  bodies  brought  to  the  dissect-
ing roomSj  not  receive  such  as  we  may  suspect  to  have  died  of
contagious  diseases,  nor  keep  the  subjects  until  they  are  in  the
last  stage  of  putrefaction,  nor,  for  the  sake  of  bravado,  have  too
much  to  do  with  macerated  parts  in  a  state  of  extreme  decom-
position, and  often  melting  away  under  our  touch,  which  can  no
longer  teach  us  anything.  Examples  are  not  wanting  of  the
students  who  were  merely  looking,  on  being  rendered  danger-
ously ill  thereby.

But  chiefly  are  the  contagious  pestilences  in  towns  harboured,
renewed,  promoted,  and  rendered  more  contagious  and  more  mur-
derous, in  the  small  low,  old  houses^  situated  close  to  the  town-
walls,  huddled  together  in  narrow  damp  lanes,  or  otherwise  de-
prived of  the  access  of  fresh  air,  where  poverty  dwells,  the  mother
of  dirt,  hunger  and  despondency.  In  order  to  save  firing  and  the
expensive  rent,  several  miserable  families  are  often  packed  close
together,  often  all  in  one  room,  and  they  avoid  opening  a  window
or  door  to  admit  fresh  air,  because  the  cold  would  enter  along
with  it. He  alone  whose  business  takes  him  into  these  abodes
of  misery,  can  know  how  the  animal  matters  of  the  exhalationfT
and  of  the  breath  are  there  concentrated,  stagnant  and  putrefy-
ing ;  how  the  lungs  of  one  are  struggling  to  snatch  from  those
of  another  the  small  quantity  of  vital  air  in  the  place,  in  order
to  render  it  back  laden  with  the  effete  matters  of  the  blood ;  how
the  dim,  melancholy  light  from  their  small  darkened  windows
is  conjoined  with  the  relaxing  humidity  and  the  mouldy  stench
of  old  rags  and  decayed  straw ;  and  how  grief,  envy,  quarrel-
someness and  other  passions  strive  to  rob  the  inmates  com-
pletely of  their  little  bit  of  health. In  such  places  it  is  where
infectious  pestilences  not  only  smoulder  on  easily  and  almost
constantly,  when  a  spark  falls  upon  them,  but  where  they  take
their  rise,  burst  forth  and  even  become  fatal  to  the  wealthy
citizens.


224  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

It  is  the  province  of  the  authorities  and  the  &jbhers  of  the
country,  to  change  these  birth-places  of  pestilence  into  healthy,
happy,  human  dwellings.  Nothing  is  left  for  me  but  to  turn
my  face  away  from  them,  and  to  keep  my  compassion  to  mysel£

If,  howxver,  the  inmates  of  them  be  not  without  employment^
their  systems,  accustomed  to  meagre  fare  and  hard  work,  resist
infections  tolerably  well ;  but  when  they  are  out  of  work,  when
dearness  of  the  first  necessaries  of  life  and  famine  prevail  among
them,  then,  from  these  dirty  sources  of  misery  and  woe,  diseases
of  malignant  character  and  pestilences  perpetually  issue.  It  is
only  since  the  fearful  years  1771,  1772  and  1773,  that  some
rulers  have  learned,  from  the  dangers  to  which  they  themselves
were  exposed,  to  provide  for  the  safety  of  their  many  thou-
sand subjects,  by  establishing  corn-granaries  and  flour-magazines
against  seasons  of  scarcity.

.  I  must  make  the  general  observation  belonging  to  this  placey
that  most  of  our  towns  are  not  adapted,  not  calculated,  to  pro-
mote health.  High  town-walls  and  ramparts  are  now  generally
acknowledged  to  be  useless  for  towns  that  are  not  fortified.
That  they  are  injurious  by  preventing  the  access  of  fresh  air,
will  also  be  readily  conceded.  But  that  the  masses  of  houses  of
most  towns  are  too  closely  huddled  together  is  not  yet  generally
seen,  and  when  it  is,  it  is  attempted,  but  without  success,  to  be
excused,  by  the  greater  facilities  offered  for  business  and  trade
by  having  everything  within  a  small  circle.

In  towns  about  to  be  built,  it  should  not  be  allowed  to  build
houses  higher  than  two  stories,  every  street  should  be  at  least
twenty  paces  in  width,  and  built  quite  straight,  in  order  that
the  air  may  permeate  it  unimpeded,  and  behind  every  house,
(the  corner  houses  perhaps  excepted,)  there  should  be  a  court-
yard and  a  garden,  as  broad  and  twice  as  long  as  the  house.  In
this  way  the  air  may  be  readily  renovated,  behind  the  houses  in
the  considerable  space  formed  by  the  adjoining  gardens,  and  in
front  in  the  broad  and  straight  streets.  This  arrangement  would
be  so  effectual  for  suppressing  infectious  diseases  and  for  pre-
serving the  general  health,^  that  if  it  were  adopted  most  of  the

•  Tlie  deteriorated  air  in  closely  built  t^wns  with  high  houses  is  especially  injunoiis
to  childreo  and  gives  ri^e  to  thosKi  defbrmitcs  of  the  beautiful  human  figure  denumip
Dated  racliititfi,  which  consists  of  a  softening  of  the  bones,  combined  with  laxn^aa  of
muscle^  inactivity  of  the  lymphatic  system,  and  a  high  degree  of  irritability.  The
Don*medical  observer  docs  not  readily  notice  the  large  number  of  these  pitiable  little
momtrositics  in  closely  built  towns,  partly  because  a  great  many  of  them  sink  into
tlw  grave  in  the  first  years  of  tlieir  lite,  partly  because  the  cripples  who
oooceal  themselves  lur  shiune  from  the  public  gaze.


PBXVENnON  OF  KPIDEMICS  IN  TOWNS.  226

precantioiiary  measures  against  pestilence  I  have  inculcated
above  would  be  rendered  to  a  great  degree  superfluous.  What
advantages  in  this  respect  do  not  Neuwied,  Dessau,  &c.,  possess!

The  handsome,  roomy,  high  and  airy  hictfiers*  shops  we  meet
with  in  some  towns,  {e,  g,  Dresden)  are  not  so  good  as  the  open
butchers'  stalls  standing  in  market  places,  and  only  covered  by
a  roo£  A  putrid  stench  is  always  concentrated  in  the  shops  built
lor  the  sale  of  meat

The  shops  for  the  sale  of  stock-fish  and  herrings  should  be
atoated  in  the  open  air,  at  the  outside  of  the  city -gates ;  the
disgusting  stench  that  proceeds  from  them  is  sufficient  evidence  of
their  imwholesomcness.

Were  it  possible  to  banish  entirely  from  the  interior  of  towns
all  the  manufactories  and  warehouses  of  the  butchers,  soap-
boilers, parchment-makers,  catgut-spinners,  glue-boilers,  and  all
other  trades  that  are  engaged  with  animal  substances  that  become
readily  decomposed,  and  to  transfer  them  to  special  buildings
outside  the  town-gates,  this  would  be  a  great  advantage  as
regards  infectious  diseases.  I  have  seen  many  butchers'  houses
in  narrow  lanes  completely  cleared  of  their  inmates  in  epidemics,
whilst  the  houses  in  the  neighborhood  suffered  much  less  severely.

It  is  astonishing  how  the  indolence  of  that  class  of  men  who
cherish  their  prejudices,  inspires  them  with  such  deep  respect  for
some  things  that  appear  horrible  to  thorn,  so  that  there  is  with
them  but  little  difference^  betwixt  them  and  things  that  arc  holy.
It  can  only  be  attributiible  to  this  unaccountable  prejudice  that
the  bodies  of  il^fui  flnmnstic  ani'mah^  as  also  those  persons  who
liave  todo  with  them,  have  been  considered  as  not  to  be  meddled
with  and  as  exempt  from  the  regulations  of  a  good  police.
Owing  to  this,  great  confusion  and  injuries  to  the  health  of  the
community  have  resulted.  In  this  place  I  shall  only  complain  of  the
custom  of  leaving  the  bodies  of  dead  domestic  animals  in  the  open
air,  on  greens  and  commons  not  far  removed  from  the  dwellings  of
man,  a  custom  so  opposed  to  all  ideas  of  the  preservation  of
health.^ If,  as  is  assuredly  the  case,  all  putrefying  animal  sub-

'  It  k  curious  that  in  olmoet  all  languages  the  same  expressions  arc  applied  to  the
ffioti  hccrible  as  well  as  to  tho  most  revered  things — ttchaudervoU^  sacfr^  awful,  are
hwUinrfu  in  point

'  Does  this  custom  originate  in  the  vanity  of  man,  who  thinks  to  vindicate  his  right
to  the  title  of  sole  lord  of  creation  by  assuming  to  be  ulone  wortliy  of  the  high  honour
of  being  buried  beneath  the  ground,  and  to  shew  his  supreme  contempt  for  animala
(even  of  toch  as  are  most  useful  and  most  valuable  to  us),  gives  them  the  vileai
names  and  leaves  them  unburied  in  the  open  air,  in  defiance  of  nature  which  seeka
^  io  ooDoeal  all  putrefying  processes  from  the  public  gaze  t

15


226  THB  FBISND  OF  HEALTH.

Stances  make  a  horrible  impression  on  our  senses,  i^  moreover,
all  contagious  diseases  are  hatched  in  corruption,  how  can  we
imagine  that  such  large  masses  of  putrefying  flesh  of  horses
and  horned  cattle,  particularly  during  periods  of  great  mortalitj
among  cattle,  can  be  a  matter  of  indifference  as  far  as  human
health  is  concerned. The  thing  speaks  for  itself  1

It  is  in  large  well-i:egulated  towns  only  that  I  have  met  with
some  (although  seldom  sufficient)  attention  directed  to  the  sale
of  spoiU'/ood,  especially  animal  food.  In  districts  where  fish
abound,  many  kind,  especially  smaller  ones,  are  brought  to  mar-
ket with  all  the  signs  of  putrefaction  upon  them.  They  are
chiefly  purchased  by  poor  people,  because  they  are  cheap —
nobody  gives  himself  any  concern  about  the  matter,  and  the  la-
bourer when  he  is  taken  ill  throws  the  blame  of  his  sickness  on  any
cause  but  the  right  one.  Nobody  concerns  himself;  the  seller
of  this  pernicious  food  returns  home  after  having  pursued  his
avocation  unimpeded.  The  authorities  who  may  perchance
hear  of  it,  say  to  themselves :  Where  there  is  no  complainant,
there  is  no  judge.  Can  such  be  called  Fathers  of  the  town?
Other  kinds  of  spoilt  food  can  also  produce  infectious  typhuH
fever.

In  large  manufactories  and  work/iouses  where  the  workpeople
live  in  the  house,  those  who  fall  ill  should,  whenever  they  com-
mence to  complain,  be  immediately  separated  from  the  healthy
workmen,  and  kept  apart  until  they  have  completely  recover^
their  health.  And  even  where  the  workmen  reside  out  of  the
house  but  come  to  work  together  in  large  workrooms,  it  is  the
duty  of  the  master  manufacturer,  especially  at  the  time  of  the
prevalence  of  epidemics,  to  send  home  immediately  such  of  the
workmen  as  begin  to  complain  of  illness.  Great  care  should
be  taken  always,  but  especially  when  disease  is  about,  to  have
the  workrooms  and  warerooms  well  aired  and  clean.

Public  schools  are  generally  places  for  the  diffusion  of  contagious
diseases,  such  as  small -pox,  measles,  scarlet  fever,  malignant  sore
throat,  miliary  fever,  (hooping  cough  ?)  and  many  skin  diseases.
K  schoolmasters  in  general  were  given  to  attend  more  to  the
physical  and  moral  training  of  their  pupils  than  to  cranmiing
their  memories,  much  mischief  of  this  character  might  be  pre-
vented. It  should  be  impressed  upon  them  not  to  admit  any
sick  child  to  the  classes,  whose  altered  appearance  betrays  the
oommencement  of  a  disease.  Besides,  a  sick  child  can  learn
nothing.


ON  THX  aATS3FACnON  OF  OUB  ANIMAL  REQUIBEMSNTS. 227

In  times  of  prevailing  sickness  tbe  clergymen  should  publicly
warn  the  members  of  their  congregations,  not  to  come  to  churdi
when  they  are  feeling  indisposed,  and  thereby  expose  their
neighbours  to  danger.

I  cannot  here  enter  into  details  regarding  the  power  of  bad
arrangements  in  poor  houses^  houses  of  correclion^  orphan  asylums
and  invalid  hospitals^  as  also  of  ordinary  hospitals  and  infirmaries^
in  producing  and  promoting  infectious  diseases,  and  still  less  can
relief  of  the  most  miserable  classes  of  society.  The  subject  is
too  important,  and  in  many  respects  much  too  vast  to  be  dis-
missed here  with  a  few  words.


ON  THE  SATISFACTION  OF  OUR  ANIMAL  REQUIREBiIENTS,  IN
ANOTHER  THAN  A  MEDICAL  POINT  OF  VIEW.

Man  seems  manifestly  created  for  enjoyment.  This  is  the
language  of  the  infant  when  it  cries  for  its  mother's  breast ;
this  is  the  language  of  the  shivering  old  man  as  he  pokes  the
fire ;  this  is  the  language  spoken  by  the  child  playing  with  its
doll,  of  the  girl  eager  for  the  dance,  of  the  youth  disporting
himself  in  the  bath,  of  the  matron  preparing  for  the  domestic
festival,  of  the  delighted  look  of  the  father  returning  home  from
his  daily  work,  as  old  and  young  run  out  to  meet  him.

All  creation  around  him  is  happy  and  rejoices;  why  should
man,  endowed  as  he  is  with  finer  sensibilities,  not  do  so  likewise?

Certainly  he  ought  to  do  so.  But  in  his  choice  of  enjoyments
and  in  the  quantity  of  them  he  indulges  in,  he  alone  transgresses
the  bounds  of  moderation  ;  he  alone  of  all  living  beings.  No
animal  living  in  a  state  of  a  freedom  partakes  of  any  food  except
what  is  suitable  for  its  nature  and  health  ;  it  consumes  no  more
than  what  it  requires  for  its  well-being ;  it  drinks  not  after  its
thirst  is  quenched ;  rests  itself  only  when  it  is  weary  ;  and  in-
dulges in  sexual  pleasures  only  when  the  period  for  the  propa-
fjatio':  of  its  species  has  arrived,  and  when  its  matured  irresistible
instinct  attracts  it  to  the  delightful  object  of  its  desires.

The  satisfaction  of  our  animal  requirements  has  no  other  object
than  the  preservation  of  our  life,  our  health,  our  species ;  the
pleasure  accompanying  it  is  lively  and  great  in  proportion  to
the  strength  and  completeness  of  the  requirement,  but  in  the
happiest  class  of  human  beings  (those  who  live  in  conformity
with  nature)  it  instantly  assumes  a  shade  of  indifference  as  soon


228  THE  FBISND  OF  HEALTH.

as  the  requirement  has  received  the  appropriate  degree  of  satb-
faction.

When  we  pass  the  boundary  line  beyond  this  moderation,  as
is  so  frequently  the  case  among  the  higher  and  middle  ranks  of
society,  luxury,  gluttony  and  depraved  sensuality  commence.
Persons  in  easy  circumstances  are  apt  to  imagine  that  the  exces-
sively multiplied  indulgence  in  excitement  of  the  senses  of  all
kinds  is  to  live  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  "  /  liave  lived
mitch^^^  says  the  enervated  voluptuary ;  to  me  it  seems  that  he
has  lived  little.

To  every  human  being  only  a  certain  amount  of  corporeal
enjoyments  has  been  allotted,  which  his  nervous  system  is  capa-
ble of  partaking  of  and  of  indulging  in  only  to  that  amount
without  prejudice  to  the  health.  The  temperate  man  easily
discovers  these  limits  assigned  to  his  organization  by  experience
iminfluenced  by  partiality,  and  in  the  observance  of  the  laws  he
has  discovered  he  is  happy,  happier  than  the  intemperate  man
can  have  any  idea  of.

But  if,  seduced  by  bad  cxa«nple  or  by  the  flattering  advantages
of  fortune,  I  should  exceed  the  measure  of  indulgence  consistent
with  my  health,  I  shall  find  that  this  excess  Ls  at  first  repugnant
to  my  senses.  There  occur  satiety,  disgust — the  warnings  of
nature  in  her  wisdom !  But  if  I  go  on  undeterred,  making  it
my  business  to  force  more  indulgcncies  uj)on  1113^  body  than  is
consistent  with  its  well-being;  if  J  employ  ingenious  methods,
by  means  of  stimulants  of  various  kinds,  to  coax  the  nerves
fatigued  by  the  excess,  to  the  recc])tion  of  new  and  immoderate
enjoyments,  I  shall  doubtless  at  length  be  enal)led  to  indulge  in
debauchery,  that  is,  to  burden  my  nerves  with  an  unnatural
number  of  impressions,  which  the  temperate  man  could  not  bear ;
but  this  is  only  a  semblance  of  greater  enjoyment.  There  is  no
reality  in  it.

In  proportion  as  we  seek  to  increase  to  multiply  our  animal
enjoyments  by  unnatural  means,  our  other  senses  become  blunted,
and  commence  to  derive  less  and  less  pleasure  from  a  number
of  enjoyments.

By  spices,  condiments,  and  fiery  wines,  the  gourmand  onust
seek  to  keep  the  nerves  of  his  tongue  up  to  the  mark  to
enable  them  to  allow  still  more  food  to  pass  down  his  throat,
and  at  length  he  comes  to  such  a  state  that  even  his  higlily
seasoned  dishes  are  relished  no  more,  and  he  must  stir  up  his
respected  chef  de  cuisina  to  invent  something  new  to  tickle  the


OK  THE  SATISFACTION  OF  OUR  ANIMAL  BEQUIBEMENTS. 229

languid  palate  of  his  poor  master,  and  so  to  over-stimulate  the
cardiac  orifice  of  his  stomach  that  it  shall  forget  its  office  to  re-
ject what  is  superfluous.  If  his  honour  have  fully  satisfied  his
appetite  with  the  first  two  dishes,  the  omnipotent  genius  of
his  cook  must  follow  these  up  by  one  or  more  dozen  dishes,  which
by  their  elegant  appearance,  their  enticing  odour,  the  dissimilarity
of  their  taste,  and  their  stronger  seasoning,  shall  deceive,  ever
anew,  ever  more  powerfully,  the  sister  senses,  and  particularly
the  sense  of  taste.

But  this  is  only  a  vain  artifice,  an  imaginary  greater  enjoy-
ment, not  a  real  enjoyment,  accompanied  by  inward  entire
gratification. It  is  all  vain,  vain  pitiable  imagination.

The  thresher  regales  himself  with  his  black  rye-porridge,
with  his  potatoes  and  salt,  much  more  than  his  worshipfiil
lord  and  master,  though  his  meal  may  not  perhaps  have  cost  a
thousandth  part  of  the  latter's  sumptuous  repast  The  fbrmer
is  gay  and  happy  over  his  frugal  fare,  and  sleeps  soundly  until
the  cheerful  mom  wakes  him  up  refreshed  and  vigorous ;  whilst
the  latter  in  his  satiety  finds  the  world  too  small  for  him,  and
his  dull,  dream-beset  slumber  scantily  fills  up  the  long  hours  of
nighty  until  he  rises  unrefreshed  from  his  soft  down  bed,  with
oonAised  head,  foul  tongue,  and  spasmodic  yawning.

Whose  repast  was  worth  most  ?  which  of  the  two  had  the
higher,  the  more  genuine  enjoyment,  the  greater  sensuous
pleasure  ?

The  ploughman  who  only  drinks  his  pot  of  beer  in  an  ale-
house on  a  Sunday  afler  church,  has  in  the  few  hours  he  spends
over  it  perhaps  twice  as  much  enjoyment  for  his  few  half-pence
as  my  Lord  Mayor  who  can  boast  perhaps  of  having  swallowed
during  the  week  a  thousand  times  as  much  money  in  luscious
Constantia  wine.  The  former  quenched  his  thirst  on  working-
days  at  a  spring  behind  his  cottage,  and  was  refreshed  whilst
the  latter  was  made  hot,  sleepy  and  stupid,  by  the  excessive
quantity  of  his  costly  liquor.

Which  of  the  two  best  enjoys  life  ?  which  has  the  higher
enjoyment  ?

In  vain  does  the  libertine  imagine  that  the  disgusting  dissipa-
tion of  hus  faculties  that  were  created  for  higher  objects  can
procure  him  great  pleasure  and  real  enjoyments.  Not  to  speak
of  the  enervation  and  the  innumerable  sufferings  that  must  result
from  his  head-strong  folly  ?  not  to  speak  of  how  incapable  he  is
rendering  himself  for  future  paternal  joys,  or  of  the  deep  lamenta-


2S0  THB  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

ble  furrows  ?  lie  is  ploughing  in  his  youthfiilbrow ;  not  to  mention
these  and  a  thousand  other  considerations  (which  I  purposely
avoid  touching  upon) ;  he  is  the  unhappy  slave  of  a  habit  which
from  the  falsely  dazzling,  inebriating  goblet  confers  on  him  fer
more  pains  than  pleasures.  Poor  fellow  I  he  knows  not  the
ecstatic  feeling  of  a  rare,  an  ardent  embrace  of  the  fisdthful  wife,
whose  virtue -and  modesty  inspire  the  deepest  respect,  and  can
conjure  love  of  the  real  sort  into  her  enraptured  husband.

But  he  who  has  a  fancy  for  the  dregs  of  beastly  lust  may
drink  them  to  satiety  in  the  shameless  intercourse  with  mercen-
ary courtesans.  Soon  will  all  his  fine  feelings  be  blunted  in  such
laudable  society ;  true  love,  that  daughter  of  heaven,  is  to  this
deluded  being  a  ridiculous  absurdity.  Soon  does  his  sexual
passion  become  deadened  to  such  a  degree,  that,  in  order  to
excite  it,  he  must  resort  to  a  number  of  coarse  stimulants  and
aphrodisiacal  arts,  revolting  to  every  chaste  imagination.
Exhaustion  of  body  and  mind,  self-contempt,  disgust  for  life,
and  a  wretched  and  premature  death,  such  are  the  natural
results  of  this  destructive  intemperance.

The  wealthy  classes  in  other  respects  seek  to  distinguish  them-
selves by  the  refinement  of  their  manners,  of  their  appearance,
and  of  all  the  things  wherewith  they  are  surrounded ;  why  do
they  in  the  gratification  of  their  animal  requirements  sink  so
far  beneath  the  poorest  classes  of  the  people,  and  I  might  say
still  lower  ?  Apparently  for  this  simple  reason,  that  they  are
bent  on  having  much  enjoyment  here  below,  and  this  they  might
have,  if  they  knew  the  proper,  the  true,  the  sole  means  of
attaining  it  it?  that  genuine  mother  of  ecstatic,  inexhaustible
enjoyments,  that  rich  awarder  of  pleasure — moderation  I


A  NURSERY.

I  lately  paid  a  visit  to  one  of  my  relations.  Our  conversa^
tion  soon  turned  upon  my  favourite  subject,  children.  My  fair
cousin  (her  husband  very  properly  left  her  to  speak)  talked  like
a  book  about  physical  education,  and  made  me  very  desirous  to
see  her  j'oung  fimiily.

She  led  me  to  the  corridor  at  the  back  of  the  house  that  abut-
ted on  the  court-yard,  and  opened  the  door  of  a  dark,  low  re-
ceptacle full  of  disgusting  smells,  which  she  informed  me  was
her  nursery.

A  steaming  tub  in  which  dirty  linen  was  soaking  stood  in  the


A  NURSSBT.  281

&3nt  of  the  room,  surroimded  by  some  low  washerwomen,  whose
umnannerlj  chattering  polluted  the  ear,  as  the  vapour  from  the
dirty  hat  water  did  the  lungs.  The  steam  condensed  into  drops
ran  down  the  window  panes.

I  expressed  to  my  feir  cousin  my  incredulity  as  to  the  utility
of  this  arrangement,  and  hinted  how  much  the  emanations
from  the  clothes  that  were  being  washed  must  deteriorate  the
air  the  little  ones  had  to  breathe,  how  the  excessive  humidity
thereby  engendered  relaxed  all  the  fibres  of  our  bodies,  and
must  consequently  be  doubly  injurious  to  children  of  a  tender
age.

"  Do  you  really  mean  to  say,"  cried  she,  "that  washing  causes
any  pollution?  I'm  sure  I  see  no  dirt  made  by  it,  and  a  little
mdstare  can't  do  much  harm."

"  I  allude  to  the  invisible,  but  very  injurious,  deterioration  of
the  air,  the  bad  effects  of  which  on  such  delicate  creatures  as
diildren  arc,  you  must  have  heard  of."

"  Oh,"  she  replied,  "  I  fumigate  occasionally  with  juniper  ber-
ries, and  they  soon  remove  all  impurities."

I  now  perceived  that  a  learned  demonstration  of  the  difference
betwixt  the  properties  of  azotic  gas  and  pure  oxygen,  although
they  differ  but  slightly  in  odour,  and  not  at  all  in  appearance,
would  have  been  quite  incomprehensible  to  my  dear  cousin,  nor
eould  I  hope  to  make  her  understand  how  a  prolonged  sojourn
in  impure,  air  acted  as  a  slow  poison  on  animal  life,  especially  at
a  tender  age,  and  how  impossible  it  was  that  children  could  en-
joy even  tolerable  health  in  such  an  atmosphere,  and  so  forth.
Neither  did  I  venture  to  speak  of  the  quantity  of  humidity  that
was  imperceptibly  taken  up  by  the  warm  air  of  the  room  from
the  scalding  water,  and  equally  imperceptibly  absorbed  by  the
open  mouths  of  the  absorbent  vessels  in  the  child's  soft  body,
whereby  the  natural  exhalations  were  obstructed.  Nor  did  I  at-
tempt to  prove  to  her  by  the  syllogysm  in  Barbara^  though  I
had  it  on  my  scholastic  tongue,  that  fumigation  with  juniper
berries  and  such-like  things  would  rather  tend  to  plogisticate
and  deteriorate  the  air,  but  could  never  transform  the  impure  air
into  vital  gas. —However,  as  I  have  said,  I  luckily  suppressed
my  spirit  of  logical  refutation  that  was  about  to  burst  forth,
and  endeavoured  to  bring  forward  some  argumentum  adhominem,

"  It  is  possible,"  I  said,  **that  I  may  be  mistaken,  and  that
you,  my  esteemed  cousin,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  are  in  the
right  in  supposing  that  the  frequent  repetition  of  a  washing  fes-


1^  THE  FBISND  OF  HEAI/TH.

tival  in  a  nuraeiy,  together  witt  the  exhalations  that  arise  fiom
the  blankets  hung  to  dry  near  the  stove  there,  may  be  without
any  unfavourable  influence  on  the  health  of  children,  and  I  shall
give  up  my  point  at  once  when  you  produoe  me  your  dear  little
children,  who  doubtless  are  very  lively  and  stout."

"  Produce  them,"  she  replied,  "  I  cannot,  but  you  may  see
them  yourself  back  there.  I  don't  know  what  ails  my  poor
Freddy,  yonder ;  he  is  nine  years  old,  but  cannot  walk  well
without  his  crutches."

At  these  words  a  little  miserable  looking  figure  crawled  to-
wards us  with  diflBculty.  His  knees  were  bent  inwards,  and  hia
legs  completely  destitute  of  muscle.  His  head  drawn  back-
wards, stuck  betwixt  his  shoulders;  his  face  was  pale  and
withered ;  his  eyes  dull,  but  projecting  beyond  the  prominent
forehead.  His  large  ears  stuck  out;  his  nostrils  were  ex-
panded; his  broad  tongue  always  hung  partially  out  of  hia
half-open  mouth.  His  emaciated  arms  could  scarcely  support
him  on  his  crutches.

He  soon  returned  panting  to  his  little  arm-chair,  to  rest  lum*
self  after  this  slight  exertion.

I  involuntarily  shrugged  my  shoulders,  and  heaved  a  deep
sigh.

A  mixed  feeling  of  gratitude  to  God  and  profound  pity  took
possession  of  me,  as  I  called  my  own  rosy  cheeked  Fritz  to  my
side  and  bade  him  shake  hands  with  this  innocent  victim  of  a
fisilse  and  injurious  method  of  bringing  up  children.  My  little
urchin  kissed  this  poor  object  affectionately,  and  asked  him
what  was  it  he  drank  out  of  the  large  jug  beside  him.  "My
afternoon  coflfee" — was  his  reply,  and  at  the  same  time  he
poured  out  a  cup  for  my  boy,  who,  however,  refused  it,  as  he
was  not  in  the  habit  of  drinking  things  he  was  not  acquainted
with.

'*  You  do  not  seem  to  approve  of  that,"  said  my  cousin,  "  but  .
what  else  can  the  child  drink,  it  is  the  only  thing  that  seema  to
do  him  good ;  he  cannot  enjoy  any  thing  else."

"  Do  him  good?"  I  hastily  asked,  in  a  paroxysm  of  half-sap-
pressed,  but  extreme  anger — and  I  turned  away  from  the  odious
sight.

Oh  I  what  an  inclination  I  felt  to  give  this  unhappy  mother
a  severe  lecture,  and  to  shew  her  that  a  drink  which  sets  our  ,
blood  in  agitation,  whilst  it  exalts  the  irritability  of  our  muscu-
lar fibre  to  such  a  degree  as  in  course  of  time  to  render  it  quite


A  NUBSERY.  2S$

lax,  and  to  weaken  it  so  that  it  trembles  -  which  gradually  ex-
hausts our  vital  heat — which,  possessing  no  nutritive  properties
in  itself  unnaturally  stifles  hunger  and  thirst,  and  which  com-
municates a  false  overstrained  liveliness  to  its  votaries,  who  are
often  reduced  to  the  last  stage  of  weakness,  that  like  a  transient
intoxication  leaves  behind  it  an  opposite  state  of  the  nervous
system, — how  injurious  such  a  drink  must  be  for  the  delicate
child,  endowed  as  it  is  with  great  irritability,  and  how  impossi-
ble it  is  that  such  a  badly  treated  creature  can  become  any  thing
but  rachitic  and  cachectic  in  the  last  degree — a  shrivelled  dimin-
utive of  a  human  being,  for  whom  death  were  the  most  desirable
k)t

With  all  these  evident  truths  I  should  have  wished  to  fan  the
smouldering  spark  of  a  mother's  love  in  her  breast,  but  I  re-
findned  from  so  doing  because  it  occurred  to  me  that  coffee  was
the  fevourite  beverage  of  mamma  herself,  so  suppressing  niy  feel-
ings, I  mildly  gave  her  to  understand  that  in  my  opinion  coffee
should  only  be  an  occasional  beverage  of  persons  above  forty

years  of  age,  or  employed  in  certain  cases  as  a  medicine."

"I  suppose,  my  censorious  cousin,"  was  her  reply,  "you
would  be  for  depriving  the  little  creature  yonder  at  the  table
of  her  fiivourite  food  ?"

It  was  some  kind  of  confectionery  which  the  girl  three  years
old,  who  could  not  stand  on  hef  legs  and  could  not  be  taught  to
walk,  was  swallowing  wdth  a  degree  of  greediness  that  excited
my  disgust  and  horror.  This  pale,  bloated  creature  had  a  rat-
tliiig  at  the  chest,  slavered  at  the  mouth,  had  a  dull  look,  a  pro-
jecting abdomen,  and,  as  I  learned,  little  sleep,  and  a  perpetual
diarrhoea,  whereby,  my  cousin  assured  me,  all  impurities  of  the
body  were  discharged.

I  begged  her  to  try  whether  she  herself  would  remain  in  good
health  if  she  were  constantly  eating  sweet  things,  and  if  she
would  not  get  sour  eructations,  worms,  deficient  or  excessive  ap-
petite and  diarrhoea,  and  if  so,  how  much  more  the  delicate
stomach  of  a  child  who  was  incapable  of  taking  exercise,  and  in
whom  there  was  a  natural  tendency  to  acidity.

This  seemed  to  make  some  imj>ression  on  her,  especially  when
I  begged  her  to  try  the  strength  of  my  home-made  vinegar,
which  was  made  of  sugar  and  yeast  alone.

"  I  wish  you  would  advise  me  what  to  do  for  the  miserable
skeleton  yonder  in  the  cradle  at  the  side  of  the  stove ;  it  has  con-
stant cold  sweats,  it  does  not  sleep,  and  is  always  crying  as  if  it


234  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

were  on  the  rack.  It  has  fits  occasionally.  I  wish  God  would
mercifully  take  it  to  himself  its  sufferings  are  so  heart-rending
to  witness.  I  have  already  buried  three  boys,  peace  be  with
them  I  they  all  died  teething.  The  little  fellow  has  been  about
his  teeth  these  three  months;  he  is  always  putting  his  litd©
hands  to  his  mouth.  I  only  trust  he  has  not  got  into  this  state
from  the  evil  eye  of  some  bad  people,  as  my  mother-in-law  con-
fidently asserts  must  be  the  case ;  it  was  she  tied  the  scarlet  ragjB
round  its  little  hands.  They  arc  said  to  be  good  for  bewitchment
She  also  often  fumigates  with  nine  kinds  of  wood."

"  What  harm,"  I  replied,  "  could  the  poor  innocent  child  have
done  to  the  bad  people  ?  where  are  these  Bad  people  that  possess
the  power  to  make  ill  by  a  few  words  a  healthy  child  fed  mode-
rately on  wholesome  food  and  strengthened  by  exercise  in  the
open  air  and  cleanliness  ?  I  am  perfectly  con\Tinced,"  I  con-
tinued, with  some  bitterness,  caused  by  the  sight  of  so  much
misery,  "  I  am  convinced  that  if  you  left  off  letting  the  poor
child  suck  such  a  quantity  of  chewed  bread  from  that  bag,
whereby  its  stomach  is  made  sour  and  overloaded,  if  you  would
clean  and  dry  it  oft«n  enough  so  that  all  the  stench  I  observe
about  its  cradle  were  removed,  if  you  would  not  cover  it  up  so
warm,  would  wash  it  all  over  every  day  with  cold  water  and
take  it  away  from  the  unnatural  heat  of  the  stove,  if  you  would
send  it,  or,  better,  take  it  yourself  frequently  into  the  open  air,
would  never  give  it  unwholesome  food,  nor  overload  its  stomach
with  the  most  wholesome — the  little  creature  might  still  be
able  to  enjoy  life,  it  would  not  have  to  whine  so  much  at  all  the
misery  you  heap  upon  it  and  which  you  attribute  to  teething
and  witchcraft ;  it  would  become  healthy  and  lively,  in  a  word  it
would  be  to  you  a  source  of  joy,  and  not  as  now,  one  of  sorrow.
Believe  me,  teething  diseases  arc  almost  impossible,  almost  un-
heard of  among  quite  healthy  children  ;  this  name  is  a  mere  in-
vention of  ignorant  persons,  and  is  applied  by  them  to  children's
diseases  which  they  know  nothing  about,  and  the  blame  of
which  they  lay  upon  nature,  whereas  they  are  in  reality  the
fault  of  the  mothers,  the  nurses  and  the  doctors !  None  of  my
six  children  have  manifested  any  serious  illness  when  cutting
their  teeth ;  when  I  looked  into  their  mouths  I  usually  found
their  teeth  as  I  expected,  planted  along  their  gums  in  an  even
row.  Why  do  we  hear  those  everlasting  complaints  about  the
pretended  teething  diseases  of  children,  for  which  we  have  ovLt-
selves  to  blame  ?"


A  NURSERY.  286

I  went  on  in  my  overflowing  zeal  to  give  her  to  understand,
in  the  most  decided  manner,  what  a  poisonous  atmosphere  the
air  of  this  low,  dark,  hot  room  was,  filled  as  it  was  with  exhala-
tions of  all  kinds,  and  so  often  with  the  emanations  from  the
dirty  clothes  washed  in  it — ^how  well  children  were  worth  the
trouble  of  giving  them  a  roomy,  high,  bright,  frequently  aired
and  extremely  clean  room  to  stay  in  during  those  hours  of  the
day  which  they  do  not  spend  in  the  open  air,  which  is  quite
indispensable  for  little  children.

"  Come,  Fritz,"  I  added,  "  let  us  quit  this  wretched  children's
hospital  and  clear  our  lungs  in  the  autumnal  breeze  outside
from  this  bad  air.  God  will  provide -for  these  helpless  children
in  the  cold  earth,  including  the  poor  cripple  whose  sad  state
causes  your  tears  to  flow. Come  away  1"

My  cousin  was  much  affected,  wished  to  have  more  advice
from  me,  wished  to  thank  me,  and  so  forth.  But  I  hastily  took
my  leave,  exclaiming  that  she  had  got  quite  enough  to  do  for
the  present  if  she  made  those  changes  which  my  compassionate
seal  had  induced  me  to  suggest,  and  away  I  went  with  my
stout  and  healthy  little  Fritz.*

'  [Be«pectii^  the  fate  of  this  same  Fritz  or  Frederick  Hahuemann,  the  only  son
of  the  founder  of  Honusopatliy,  nothiDg  is  known  for  certain.  To  those  conversant
with  EUdiiiemann*B  Materia  Medica  his  name  is  very  familiar,  as  it  constantly  appears
among  the  early  proved  medicines,  and  indeed  he  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the
oiOBt  devoted  and  daring  among  those  who  were  the  pioneers  of  our  pathogenetic
knowledge.  In  1811  he  wrote  an  aihnirable  reply  to  Heckcr's  attack  upon  the
Organon,  which  may  still  be  read  with  interest  and  profit.*  After  taking  his  degree
io  Leipzig,  he  contracted  a  matrimonial  alliance  with  a  widow,  who  I  believe  still
lifea  in  Dresden  with  a  daughter,  but  who,  according  to  what  I  have  heard,  was  not
well  quali6ed  to  make  his  nuuried  life  Imppy.  This  marriage  gave  great  offence  to
his  father,  and  led  to  an  estrangement  between  them  which  was  never  removed.
FMerick  left  the  paternal  roof  and  set  up  in  practice  in  Wolkenstein,  a  small  town
JD  the  Saxun  Erzcbirge  where  his  success  obtained  him  great  celebrity,  so  much  so
tbU  it  is  said  his  house  was  beset  with  crowds  of  patients.  The  jealousy  of  his  pro-
iwBimal  brethren  was  aroused,  and  by  some  intrigue  a  letter  was  obtained  from  the
Medical  College  of  Saxony  forbidding  him  to  practice.  Young  Hahnemann  on  this
WM  obliged  to  remove,  but  before  doing  so  he  wrote  a  most  contemptuous  letter  to
the  College  which  gave  great  offence,  as  it  was  intended  it  should.  What  became  of
lam  for  a  long  time  after  that  is  not  known.  I  find  it  stated  in  the  Augsburg  Allg,
Ztg.  f.  Horn,  that  he  went  to  Edinburgh  and  staid  there  several  years,  but  I  am
■»ble  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  this  statements  In  the  same  journal  it  is  mentioned
that  eome  years  previous  to  1 880  a  traveller  calling  himself  Frederick  Hahnemann
had  visited  the  interior  of  Pennsylvania  and  cured  many  people  by  means  of  small
powdeni.  Since  that  time  no  authentic  traces  of  him  have  been  met  with,  and  I
WM  last  year  assured  by  his  sister,  who  cherished  his  memory  with  a  sister  s  love,
that  she  knew  not  whether  he  was  dead  or  alive,  never  having  heard  any  tidings  of
\aak  nnce  he  quitted  his  native  country.]

*  This  wort  U  entiUed  **  Friedruk  H^nemann'§  dea  Soknes  fTidtrle/fung  ier  AnfmlU  Htckm^t
M/iM  Orgmtm  Ur  ratiiuUtn  Utilknnde,^ Dresden,  1811.


286  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

ON  THE  CHOICE  OF  A  FAMILY  PHYSICULN.

Dear  Doctor,

Since  I  left  your  neighbourhood  I  have  felt  a  want,  to
supply  which  I  am  sure  you  are  able,  and  I  now  write  to
request  you  to  do  so.  "When  anything  happens  to  me  I  know
not  what  doctor  to  apply  to ;  and  yet  you  have  repeatedly  and
urgently  recommended  me  to  pay  more  than  ordinary  attention
to  my  health.  "We  have  here  many  doctors  whom  you  know,
and  also  some  with  whom  I  presume  you  are  not  acquainted.
Some  of  them  have  pressed  their  services  upon  me,  have  got
themselves  recommended  to  me  in  various  ways,  and  some
have  even  recommended  themselves.  Now  I  know  very  well
what  recommendations  are,  especially  to  a  person  of  my  rank.
It  is  the  most  forward,  the  most  insolent,  I  might  say  the  most
impudent,  that  gets  the  best  recommendation,  though  he  may
be  the  most  ignorant  and  most  immoral  of  the  lot.  Either
monstrous  vanity  (and  you  know  full  well  that  this  is  always
allied  to  ignorance)  trumpets  forth  that  its  important  possessor
is  the  mighty  hero  he  thinks  himself  to  be,  who  can  boldly
oflFer  himself  for  the  most  important  posts  without  fear  of  jA
repulse ;  or  a  mixture  of  self-satifaction  and  avarice  makes  him
fertile  in  all  kinds  of  devices  in  order  to  enlist  in  his  interest
those  whose  recommendation  may  be  serviceable,  whilst  the
latter  are  weak  enough  to  bring  all  their  influence  to  bear  in
his  favour.

Such  is  the  character  of  most  recommendations,  and  he  who
trusts  to  them  will  have  to  put  up  with  sorry  trash ;  I  have  no
faith  in  them,  and  must  be  perfectly  satisfied  in  my  own  mind
before  I  can  make  my  choice.

But  tell  me,  dear  Doctor,  how  can  I  become  satisfied  in  my
case  ?  On  what  principles  must  I  choose  a  physician  in  order
to  avoid  the  bait  of  the  ordinary  run  of  recommendations,  in
which  we  are  not  always  sharp  enough  to  perceive  the  point  of
the  hook  ? Pray  give  me  your  advice.

Yours,  &c.

Prince  of  * * *

My  dear  Prince,

You  are  right  in  supposing  that  I  am  not  well  ac-
quainted with  the  medical  men  of  your  capital ;  I  know  none
of  them  sufficiently  well,  and  I  perceive  with  pleasure  that  you


ON  THE  CHOICE  OF A  FaKILY  PHYSICIAN.  287

have  a  decided  objection  to  receive  the  recommendations  of
those  who  are  unknown  to  you.

•  Without  being  oneself  a  very  great  physician,  it  is  impossible
to  form  an  immediate  judgment  respecting  the  scientific  attain-
ments of  another  physician ;  therefore  you  as  a  non-medical
person  must,  in  order  to  be  able  to  select  a  really  good  man  of
this  profession,  have  recourse  to  some  circuitous  methods,  which
ahall  guide  you  to  your  object  with  not  less  certainty  than  the
knowledge  attained  by  school  learning  can  bestow.  Certain
trivial  things  in  their  outward  appearance,  a  certain  mode  of
conducting  themselves  when  i)rofessionally  engaged,  and  some
other  accessaries  characterize  the  difl'erent  classes  of  medical
men.

Look  how  A.  walks  into  the  assemblage  that  reverentially
expects  him,  with  carefully  measured  steps,  with  expanded
chest  and  elevated  head ;  how  he  announces  the  dignity  of  his
great  person  by  a  gracious,  slow  inclination  of  his  body,  and
how  he  decides  the  most  important  questions  with  a  few  short
words  and  a  disdainful  air.  He  only  honours  the  great  people
in  the  company  uvith  his  notice,  he  flatters  them  in  high  soimd-
ing  phrases,  in  order  to  be  entertained  by  them  in  return,  and
he  talks  about  the  highest  personages  in  the  land  and  the  great-
est savants,  as  he  would  about  the  most  ordinary  trifles  which
may  be  estimated  with  the  fifth  part  of  a  glance.  Merit
rewarded  or  neglected,  heart-breaking  domestic  occurrences,
danger  and  delivery,  life  and  death,  arc  all  the  same  to  him ;
nothing  produces  any  change  in  his  frigid  manner,  or  at  the
most  they  elicit  from  him  a  witty  remark,  which  the  crowd  of
his  admirers  do  not  omit  to  acknowledge  with  their  plaudits.
He  talks  the  modern  languages  with  the  most  refined  accent ;
his  house  is  the  model  of  fashion  and  the  furniture  in  the  best
taste.

You  surely  would  never  be  so  foolish.  Prince,  as  to  seek  to
make  a  display  by  selecting  such  a  Khan  among  Doctors.  Such
an  eccentric  part  must  engage  the  whole  mind  of  the  best  actor ;
it  has  to  be  learned,  rehearsed,  played.  Who  can  be  surprised
that  the  details  of  a  case  of  disease  are  tiresome  to  him,  and  that
he  defers  till  to-morrow  doing  anything  for  the  urgent  symp-
toms of  some  poor  man,  the  sole  support  of  a  wretched  family,
because  he  must  go  and  leave  his  card  on  some  lord  who  is
passing  through  the  town.  His  medical  wisdom  must,  in  the
face  of  all  these  fashionable  accessaries,  be  but  a  thin  coating


288  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

which  he  has  enough  to  do  to  keep  well  polished,  so  that  all
uninvited  inquiring  glances  may  be  arrested  by  its  mirror-like
gloss,  and  be  repelled  without  having  penetrated  its  shallow
depth.

Should  I  advise  you  to  select  B.  I  felt  half  inclined  to  do  so!
See :  by  half-past  four  in  the  morning  he  is  in  his  carriage,  for
this  morning  he  has  thirty  visits  to  pay  to  patients.  His  horses
foam  with  the  rapidity  of  the  pace,  and  have  to  be  changed  for
fresh  ones  in  a  few  hours.  Whilst  he  drives  along  he  is  seen  to
bend  in  deep  meditation  over  a  long  clearly  written  list,  wherein
the  names  and  abodes  of  the  patients  who  are  sighing  for  him,
and  the  minute  at  which  he  believes  he  will  be  at  each  of  them,
are  carefully  marked.  He  looks  at  his  watch  which  indicates
the  seconds,  he  calls  to  the  coachman  who  instantly  draws  up.
Out  he  jumps,  says  a  few  words  to  his  servant  and  runs  up  the
stairs.  Doors  fly  open  at  his  approach,  three  steps  bring  him  to
his  patient's  side.  He  feels  his  pulse,  asks  him  a  couple  of
questions,  and  without  waiting  a  reply  he  calls  for  pen,  ink  and
paper :  and  after  deep  reflection  for  two  seconds  in  his  chair  he
suddenly  dashes  off  the  complex  prescription,  politely  hands  it
to  the  patient  for  his  iminterrupted  use  with  a  few  solemn  words^
rubs  his  hands  together,  makes  his  bow  and  disappears,  in  order
to  be  with  another  patient  six  seconds  afterwards,  on  whom  also
he  bestows  his  two  minutes  of  advice ;  for  his  presence  is  in
such  great  request  that  he  is  perfectly  unable  to  devote  a  longer
period  to  each  patient.  He  wipes  the  perspiration  from  his
brow,  complains  of  having  too  much  to  do,  makes  his  servant
call  him  half  a  dozen  times  out  from  a  party  where  he  stays
altogether  only  half  an  hour ;  beckons  to  him  every  surgeon
he  meets,  in  order  to  whisper  a  few  important  words  in  his  ear,
pointing  at  the  same  time  to  some  houses  or  streets.  At  his
consultation  hour  his  ante-room  teems  with  the  friends  of  pa-
tients, sick-nurses,  midwives,  surgeons,  and  patients.  There  he
dispenses  in  proftision,  prescriptions,  recommendations,  advice —
like  tickets  for  the  theatre.

Do  you  still  hesitate,  prince,  to  select  this  the  most  renowned
practitioner  in  the  to^n,  whose  residence  every  child  knows,
who  according  to  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  whole  public
owes  his  great  and  wide-spread  reputation  to  his  indefiitigable
industry,  his  enormous  experience  and  knowledge  of  disease,
which  must  of  necessity  procure  him  such  an  extensive  practice  ?
Methinks  I  hear  you  insinuate  that  with  such  a  superabundant


ON  rn^  CHOICE  OF  A  FAMILY  PHYSICIAN.  239

practioe  the  man  cannot  attend  to  any  of  his  patients  properly,
cannot  in  a  few  minutes  maturely  reflect  upon  all  the  circum-
stances of  each  case,  and  still  less  find  the  proper  remedies  for
it^  seeing  that  the  greatest  and  best  physicians  sometimes  require
half  and  whole  hours  for  the  consideration  of  similar  cases.
You  will  doubtless  consider  him  to  be  some  delusive,  fleeting
phantom,  whose  charlatanism  consists  in  having  too  much  to  do,
and  whose  only  recommendations  are  a  light  hand,  agile  legs,
and  fleet  horses.  Well,  I  presume  you  will  be  inclined  to  look
out  for  some  one  else.

Possibly  your  approbation  may  be  bestowed  on  the  next  most
celebrated  practitioner.  Dr.  C,  late  surgeon  in  the  army.  He
unites  in  his  person  to  perfection  all  the  arts  that  can  enhance  his
superiority  as  a  physician.  His  very  appearance  gives  an  aristo-
cratic dignity  to  our  science.  His  dress  is  in  the  last  style  of
fiushion.  The  cloth  of  his  coat — which  by  the  way  is  not  yet
paid  for — could  not  have  cost  less  than  thirty  shillings  the  yard,
and  the  pattern  of  his  gold-embroidered  waistcoat  excites  the
admiration  of  every  lady.  Those  ambrosial  curls  on  his  hair,
which  are  dressed  thrice  a  day,  are  the  work  of  the  greatest
artist  in  town.  Look  how  elegantly  he  sticks  out  the  little  finger
of  his  left  hand,  and  how  neatly  he  advances  his  foot — calumny
asserts  that  he  does  so  in  order  to  show  off  his  diamond  rings
and  sparkling  buckles.  See  with  what  grace  he  kisses  the  lily
hands  of  dames  and  damsels,  how  charmingly  he  seats  himself
beside  them  on  the  sofa  in  order  to  feel  their  pulse  in  his  in-
imitable manner,  with  what  sweet  words  he  commences  the
conversation,  how  fascinatingly  he  carries  it  on,  and  liow  art-
fully his  philanthropic  spirit  revives  it  when  it  commences  to
flag,  with  scandalous  half-invented  anecdotes  about  other  fami-
Ues,  who  had  unfortunately  made  him  their  confidant.  In  order
to  charm  the  ears  of  his  curious  auditors  he  never  forgets  to  tell
them  about  all  the  false  teeth,  stuffed  backs,  and  pertes  blanches^  of
all  their  friends  and  neighbours ;  but  all  this  he  does  in  mysterious
whispers  and  imder  the  solemn  promise  of  inviolable  secresy,
which  he  had  not  omitted  to  swear  to  observe  in  all  the  other
houses.  If  he  is  ever  at  a  loss  for  something  else  to  talk  about,
he  delights  to  pass  his  colleagues  in  malicious  review.  This  one
has  no  knowledge  of  the  world,  that  one  is  deficient  in  anato-
mical knowledge,  the  other  has  a  repulsive  appearance ;  a  third
wants  genius,  a  fourth  has  got  a  bad  pronunciation,  a  fifth  has
.no  skill  in  dancing,  a  sixth  has  little  practical  talent ;  and  so  he


240  THE  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.

goes  on  to  a  seventh  and  a  tenth,  ascribing  to  them  all,  heaTen
knov^s  what  faults.  Every  unsuccessful  case  of  his  colleagues
is  retailed  from  house  to  house,  and  he  takes  care  at  the  same
time,  by  delicate  insinuations,  to  extol  the  wonderful  powers  of
his  own  far  superior  genius.  To  the  wife  who  complains  of  her
husband  he  gives  ingenious  reasons  to  confirm  her  suspicions;
and  on  the  other  hand,  he  expresses  to  the  husband  by  a  few
dexterous  shrugs  of  his  shoulders  the  honest  sympathy  he  feels
for  him  on  account  of  the  unhappiness  the  conduct  of  his  wife
must  occasion  him.  Those  who  employ  him  must  prefer  him
to  all  his  colleagues,  for  he  launches  out  into  praise  of  every-
thing about  them.  Thus  any  ordinary  looking  children  are
darling  angels,  the  new  furniture  of  the  room  is  in  the  best  pos-
sible taste,  the  pattern  of  the  knitted  purse  has  not  its  equal  for
ingenuity  of  invention,  the  cut  of  the  new  gown  forms  an  epoch
in  fashion,  the  favourite  daughter's  wretched  strumming  on  the
piano  is  the  music  of  the  spheres,  her  stupid  remarks  are  sparks
of  the  most  brilliant  genius.  He  has  the  conplaisance  to  allow
his  patients  to  drink  their  favourite  mineral  waters,  and  to  take
their  favourite  medicines  as  often  as  they  choose,  and  deferen-
tially conforms  to  their  fancies  with  regard  to  having  their  me-
dicine in  the  form  of  powders,  pills,  draughts,  or  electuaries.
He  can  also  give  it  them  as  liqueur,  lozenges,  or  confections.
He  whispers  many  a  sly  word  in  the  chamber-maid's  ear ;  and
no  one  gives  more  in  christmas-boxes  to  the  servants  who  bring
him  his  annual  presents.  He  is  perfectly  conscious  of  his  own
talents ;  before  ladies  he  parades  his  profound  knowledge  of  the
Greek  and  Hebrew  languages,  and  his  nocturnal  studies  of  the
Latin  author  Hippocrates ;  to  the  police  magistrate  he  exhibits
his  botanicol  lore ;  to  the  clergyman  his  anatomical  acquire-
ments ;  and  to  the  mayor  his  skill  in  writing  prescriptions.

*'In  a  calumnious  mind  no  love  for  mankind  can  dwell,"  me-
thinks  I  hear  you  say  "and  he  whose  head  is  occupied  in  trying
to  ingratiate  hinself  by  the  elegancies  of  the  toilette,  by  indirect
self-praise,  and  all  sorts  of  dishonourable  practices,  cannot  possess
any  real  merit.' ^

The  fear  of  wearying  you,  my  prince,  prevents  me  pursuing
further  the  disagreeable  occupation  of  displaying  more  of  these
caricatures  composed  of  fragments,  and  which  are  by  all  means
to  be  shunned.  Thank  God !  their  number  is  daily  diminishing
and  it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  much  difficulty  for  you  to  find  a
good  physician  if  you  will  only  be  guided  by  your  own  feelings.


OK  THE  GHOICK  OF  A  FAMILY  FHYSICIAK.  '  241

Search  for  some  plain  man  of  sound  common  sense,  who  takes
great  pains  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  all  he  hears  and  says,  and
does  not  merely  look  to  its  passing  muster,  who  knows  how  to
give  clear  and  condensed  information  respecting  everything  that
belongs  to  his  art,  and  never  obtrudes  his  opinion  unasked  or
it  an  improper  time,  and  who  is  no  stranger  to  everything  else
important  for  man  as  a  citizen  of  the  world  to  know.  More
eepecially  let  the  man  you  choose  be  one  who  does  not  shew
temper  nor  get  angry,  except  when  he  beholds  injustice,  who
never  turns  away  unmoved  from  any  except  flatterers,  who  has
but  few  friends  but  these  men  of  sterling  principle,  who  listens
tttentively  to  the  complaints  of  those  who  seek  his  aid,  and  does
not  pronounce  an  opinion  without  mature  reflection,  who  pre-
•cribes  but  few,  generally  single,  medicines  in  their  natural  state,
who  keeps  out  of  the  way  until  he  is  sought  for,  who  is  not  silent
respecting  the  merits  of  his  colleagues,  but  does  not  praise  him*
•elf;  a  fiiend  to  order,  quiet  and  beneficence.

And  when,  my  prince,  you  have  found  such  a  person,  as  is
not  so  very  difficult  now-a-days,  no  one  will  rejoice  more  than

Yours,  &c.,

S.  H.

P.  S.  One  word  more  I  Before  you  finally  fix  on  him,  see
how  he  behaves  to  tlie  poor,  and  if  he  occupies  himself  at  home
unseen  with  some  useful  work  I


CONTENTS  OF  THB  FRIEND  OF  HEALTH.


PART I.

Litroductioo 156

The  bite  of  mad  dogs 168

The  visiter  of  the  sick !•*

Protection  against  infection  in  epidemic  diseases  • • - ' 197

In  old  women's  philosophy  there  is  something  good,  did  we  know  where

to  find  it  IH

Things  that  spoil  tlie  air  !*'•

TTiere  is  good  even  in  hurtful  things  ..---- 180

Dietetic  conversation  with  my  brother,  principally  respecting  the  instinct  of

the  stomach -- 18S

An  occasional  purgative,  surely  that  can  do  no  harm  t  •  -  -  189
On  making  the  body  hardy !•!

PART  II.

Socrates  and  Physon.  On  the  worth  of  outward  show  ...  800
Plans  for  eradicating  a  malignant  fever,  in  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Police  201
More  particular  directions  on  the  same  subject  . . . > 206

Suggestions  for  the  prevention  of  epidemics  in  general,  especially  in  towns  211
On  the  satisfaction  of  our  animal  requirements  in  another  than  a  medical

point  of  view  22t

A  nursery  280

On  the  choice  of  a  family  physician  286


DESCRIPTION  OF  KLOCKENBRING

DURING  HIS  INSANITY.*


After  having  bpen  for  several  years  much  occupied  with  the
treatment  of  diseases  of  the  most  tedious  and  desperate  character
in  genera],  and  with  all  sorts  of  venereal  maladies,  cache.\i8D|
hypochondriasis  and  insanity  in  particular,  with  the  assistance  of
the  excellent  reigning  duke,  I  established  three  years  ago  a  con-
valescent asylum  for  patients  affected  with  such  disorders,  in
Oeorgenthal,  near  Gotha.  Hither  the  privy  secretary  of  the
chancery,  Klockenbring,  of  Hanover,  who  lately  died  from  the
efl^ts  of  a  surgical  operation  iu  the  53d  year  of  his  age,  was
brought  and  placed  under  my  care.  He  was  a  man  who  in  his
days  of  health  attracted  the  admiration  of  a  large  portion  of
(Jennany  by  his  practical  talents  for  business  and  his  profound
fagacity,  as  also  by  his  knowledge  of  ancient  and  modern  lore,
and  his  acquirements  in  various  branches  of  science.

His  almost  superhuman  labours  in  the  department  of  state
police,  for  which  he  had  a  great  talent,  his  constant  sedentary
life,  the  continued  strain  upon  his  mind,  together  with  a  too  nu-
tritious diet,  had,  five  years  before  the  mental  alienation  oc-
curred, brought  on  a  deranged  state  of  the  system,  which  gra-
dually assumed  the  form  of  offensive  whimsicality  and  intolera-
ble ill-humour;  I  am' unable  to  say  how  much  his  copious  in-
dulgence in  strong  wines  contributed  to  bring  on  this  state.

His  hypochondriasis  had  already  attained  a  considerable
height  when  that  most  disgusting  satire  of  a  petulent  and  dege-
nerate wit,  BartJi  mit  der  eisemen  Stirne^  appeared,  wherein  he
found  himself  held  up  to  ridicule  in  a  manner  that  would  have
set  even  the  coldest  philosopher  on  fire.  His  mind,  that  was
almost  too  sensitive  to  honour  and  fair  fame,  sank  deep  into  the
dust  beneath  this  hail-storm  of  abusive  accusations,  which  were,
for  the  most  part,  without  foundation,  and  left  it  to  his  disordered
nervous  system  to  complete  the  sad  catastrophe.

In  the  winter  of  1791-2,  the  most  fearful  furious  madness
burst  forth,  that  for  half  a  year  completely  baffled  all  the  most

*  From  the  DeuUche  Monatttehrift,  February,  1796.


244  D£SCRIPTION  OF  KLOCKENBBma

assiduous  treatment  of  one  of  the  greatest  physicians  of  our  age,
Dr.  Wichraann,  physician  to  the  Hanoverian  court

He  was  brought  to  me  towards  the  end  of  June,  in  a  very
melancholy  state  accompanied  by  the  strong  keepers.

His  bloated  body,  which  in  his  days  of  health  was  somewhat
unwieldy,  now  exhibited  a  wondrous  agility,  quickness  and  flexi-
bility in  all  its  movements.  His  face  was  covered  with  large
reddish-blue  elevated  spots,  was  dirty,  and  bore  an  expression
of  the  greatest  mental  aberration.  Smiles  and  grinding  of  the
teeth,  inconsiderateness  and  insolence,  cowardice  and  defiance,
childish  folly  and  unlimited  pride,  desires  without  want — such
was  the  admixture  of  traits  displayed  by  the  patient.

For  the  first  fortnight  I  only  observed  him  without  treating
him  medicinally.

Incessantly,  day  and  night,  he  kept  on  raving,  and  was  never
composed  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  a  time.  When  he  sank
down  exhausted  on  his  bed,  he  rose  to  his  feet  again  in  a  few
minutes.  He  either  pronounced  with  the  most  threatening  ges-
tures capital  sentences  on  criminals,  which  he  often  declared  his
former  superiors  to  be;  or  he  lost  himself  in  declamations  of  a
heroic  character,  and  spouted,  as  Agamemmon  and  Hector,  entire
passages  from  the  Iliad ;  then  he  would  whistle  a  popular  song^
roll  about  on  the  grass,  and  sometimes  vary  his  amusements  by
singing  a  stanza  from  Pergolese's  Stabat  mater.  Anon  it  would
occur  to  him  to  relate  to  his  honest  keeper,  Jacob,  the  bargain
made  by  ancient  Jacob  with  Esau,  about  the  birth-right,  in  the
exact  words  of  the  Hebrew  text ;  but  he  finished  nothing  that
he  began,  for  some  new  idea  constantly  led  him  into  a  diflferent
region ;  thus  he  would  sing  an  ode  of  Anacreon,  or  of  the
Anthologia,  to  what  he  imagined  to  be  an  ancient  Greek  melody,
or  he  would  burst  forth  in  an  agony  of  weeping  and  sobbing,
oft«n  throwing  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  amazed  attendant.  But
all  at  once  he  would  often  suddenly  arise  and  with  the  most  ex-
traordinary hideous  roars,  hurl  imprecations  at  his  enemies,
mingled  with  passages  from  Milton's  Paradise  Lost  and  Dante's
Itifemo ;  or  he  would  mutter  a  form  of  exorcism  for  evil  spirits
in  the  Vandal  tongue,  point  with  any  stick  he  could  lay  his  hands
on  to  the  four  quarters  of  heaven,  write  magical  characters  on
the  sand  at  his  feet,  make  the  sign  of  the  cross,  &c.,  and  then  he
would  burst  out  into  inmioderate  fits  of  laughter,  or  recite  an
amorous  rhapsody  from  some  play,  and,  in  the  fire  of  his  de*
luded  imagination,  he  would  warmly  embrace  one  of  his  cold
keepers,  taking  him  for  his  beloved  Daphne.


SURINa  HIS  INSANITY.  246

The  most  wonderful  thiDg  was  the  correctness  with  which  he
delivered  all  the  passages  from  writings  in  all  languages  that
ooconed  to  his  memory,  especially  all  that  he  had  learnt  in  his
youth.  The  fEurago  he  uttered  was  certainly  a  proof  of  his
great  acquirements  in  languages,  but  was  at  the  same  time  a
kind  of  ostentatious  display  of  learning,  which  shone  through  all
his  extraordinary  actions.

But  nothing  equalled  the  confidential  friendship  in  which  he
pretended  he  had  lived  with  emperors  and  queens,  the  love  a£.
fidrs  he  had  had  with  princesses,  his  relationship  to  the  highest
peraonages  in  the  world,  &c.,  of  which  he  often  talked  under  the
seal  of  the  strictest  confidence  to  his  keepers,  with  laughably  im-
portant gestures  and  half-whispered  words.

In  his  worst  period  he  called  every  one  thou^  and  would  not
allow  any  one  to  address  him  otherwise.

When  he  was  awake  and  alone  he  always  kept  talking  to
himself.

If  his  oonversation  was  disordered,  his  other  behaviour  was
not  less  so.

In  spite  of  all  remonstrances  he  tore  and  hacked  to  pieces  his
attiTe  and  his  bed,  generally  when  unobserved,  with  his  fingers,
or  with  fragments  of  glass  and  the  like.

Every  instant  he  had  some  urgent  desire,  he  wanted  to  eat  or
to  drink,  or  he  wished  for  some  article  of  dress,  or  some  piece  of
furniture,  or  a  musical  instrument,  or  some  one  of  his  private
friends,  or  tobacco,  or  something  else,  although  at  first  aJl  food
was  rejected,  laid  aside,  thrown  out  or  dirtied,  and  in  spite  of  his
rapid  pulse  and  white  tongue,  all  drink  was  put  aside,  ^  spilt,
mixed  with  all  sorts  of  impurities,  and  at  length  poured  out.
He  never  waited  till  he  got  one  thing  before  ordering  another.

By  taking  his  piano  to  pieces  and  setting  it  together  again  in
an  absurd  manner,  he  endeavoured  in  the  midst  of  the  most  tre-
mendous noise  and  the  most  absurd  tricks,  to  discover  the  an-
cient complementary  tone  of  harmony,  the  ir^«rA«iK««foV;T«f,  he
drew  up  algebraic  formulas  for  it,  explained  them  and  his  im-
portant projects  to  his  keepers,  and  day  and  night  he  was  al-
ways exce^ngly  busy.

At  first  he  ran  about  and  bellowed,  mostly  at  night

He  exhibited  a  great  inclination  to  dress  himself  up,  so  as  to

'  At  the  wont  period  his  Denroua  system  was  so  powerfully  influenced  by  the  initft-
lioQof  his  disordered  imsginatioo,  that  25  grains  of  tartar  emetic  onlj^cauied  him
woaUj  to  voniii  moderately  fhree  times,  ■ometiiiiet  eTeo  lem  frequentl/.


248  DESCBIFTION  OF  KLOCKENBRING

give  himself  an  amazingly  majestic  or  half  heroic,  half  Merrj«
Andrew-like  appearance.  He  painted  his  fece  with  variously
coloured  dirt,  fat  and  such-like  things,  curled  his  hair,  drew  up
his  shirt  collar  and  pulled  down  the  rufHes  of  his  shirt,  scaroelj-
ever  went  without  a  wreath  of  hay,  straw,  flowers,  or  something
similar  on  his  brow,  never  without  a  kind  of  girdle  over  his  hip%
a  pathognomonic  sign  that  he  felt  gome  disorder  in  the  organs
seated  there'  that  required  attention ;  but  what  kind  of  atten-
tion ?  his  instinctive  somnambulic  sensibility  did  not  teach  him
feo  much.

But  he  once  put  my  metaphysical  learning  fairly  at  iault,  when
one  evening,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  extravagant  paroxysm  of
folly,  he  hastily  called  for  pen,  ink  and  paper,  and  though  on
bther  occasions  he  would  not  listen  to  anything  about  corporeal
diseases,  he  now  wrote  a  prescription^  which  he  wished  to  he
made  up  immediately.  The  extraordinary  ingredients  of  this
were  so  extremely  well  arranged  and  so  admirably  adapted  to
the  cure  of  an  insanity  of  this  sort,  that  for  the  moment  I  was
almost  tempted  to  consider  him  a  very  well  instructed  physician,
had  not  the  ridiculous  direction  he  gave  as  to  how  it  should  be
used — namely,  with  a  few  bottles  of  burgundy  as  a  vehicle,  to
be  followed  up  by  lard — ^given  another  turn  to  my  thoughts.
But  how  was  it^  that  in  the  midst  of  the  very  hurricane  of  its
most  extravagant  passion,  his  mastlcssand  hclraless  mind  lighted
on  a  remedy  so  excellent  for  insanity  and  unknown  to  many
physicians  ?  How  came  he  to  prescrrbo  it  for  himself  in  the
mos:  appropriate  form  and  dose?

•  Scarcely  less  remarkable  was  the  circumstance  that  in  the
very  worst  period  of  his  insanity  he  would,  when  asked,  tell  not
only  the  exact  day  of  the  month  (that  one  could  understand,
though  he  had  not  an  almanac),  but  even  the  true  hour  by  day
or  by  night  with  astonishing  accuracy.

As  he  began  to  improve,  this  faculty  of  divination  became
always  more  and  more  vague  and  uncertain,  until  at  last,  when
his  reason  was  completely  restored,  he  knew  neither  more  nor
less  about  the  matter  than  other  people.

When  he  had  completely  recovered  I  begged  him,  in  a  friendly
Sensation  that  used  to  teach  him  this  knowledge.

'  He  never  foii^  this  appendage,  even  when  he  ran  or  rolled  ahout  naked,
•ometimee  coold  not  be  prevented.
*  Hie  oommenc^ment  was :  R.  Sem,  Datura^  gr.  ij.  ^
'  He  had  DO  aooe«  to  booka  or  writidgt  of  any  iort


DURING  HIST  INBANITY.  247

I

*'I  sliudder,  and  a  cold  chill  comes  all  over  me,"  he  replied,
**  when  I  think  about  it ;  I  must  beg  of  you  not  to  remind  me
<yf  this  subject"  And  yet  at  that  time  he  was  able  to  talk  with
perfect  sang-froid  about  his  whole  previous  madness.

deathlike  state,  and  indicated  the  day  on  which  he  iblt  as  if  he
awoke.

From  time  to  time,  especially  when  he  commenced  to  improve,
he  used  to  give  me  things  that  he  had  written,  among  which  I  oflen
found  some  subjects  which  must  have  cost  him  much  profound
meditation.  The  chief  part  of  these  consisted  of  sonnets  and
elegies  in  various  languages  upon  his  present  state,  or  addressed
lo  his  friends,  odes  to  God,  to  his  king,  to  me,  to  my  family,  &c.
The  language  of  these  was  usually  correct,  and  they  were  inter-
spersed with  quotations  from  the  ancient  poets  and  philosophers,
or  the  Bible,  of  which  book,  chapter  and  verse  were  given  with
great  accuracy,  although,  as  I  before  remarked,  he  had  not  a
single  book  at  his  command.

Whilst  he  was  still  very  ill  he  wrote  his  autobiography  in
classical  Latin,  composing  a  portion  each  day,  and  although  he
kept  no  copy  he  always  resumed  the  thread  of  his  tale  exactly
where  he  had  left  off.

But  all  these  prose  essays,  odes,  romances,  ballads,  elegies,  &c.^
though  in  themselves  often  irreproachable,  always  bctn\yed  their
origin  by  something  ludicrous  about  them.  They  were  either
written  on  pieces  of  paper  torn  into  a  triunguUir  form,  or  if  on
square  pieces  tliey  were  written  so  that  the  lines  ran  obliquely
across  the  sheet,  the  writing  commencing  in  one  of  the  corners.
Or  he  drew  various  kinds  of  geometrical  figures,  in  which  he
childishly  wrote  in  a  small  hand  these  compositions,  which
sometimes  consisted  of  the  most  sublime  dithyrambics.

His  w^him  was  to  apply  the  triangular  figure  and  the  number
three  wherever  he  could ;  thus  he  folded  his  bed-clothes  and
laid  his  pillow  in  a  triangular  manner,  he  disenchanted  his  drink,
his  food  and  his  clothes  by  spitting  thrice,  by  makingthe  sign  of  the
cross  thrice,  &c.,  and  this  folly  he  kept  up  partially  until  very  near
the  period  when  he  had  almost  recovered  his  full  reason,  and  in
every  other  respect  could  be  perfectly  well  trusted  by  himself.

His  propensity  to  compose  verses^  was  remarkable,  and  this

'  He  played  very  well  on  Uie  flute,  but  even  nftcr  his  reason  had  been  considerably
restored  I  could  not  allow  him  to  do  so,  uur  yet  to  play  the  organ,  which  he  did  in
A  most  mantcrly  style,  as  both  of  these  instruments  throw  him  into  paroxjtamyt


S4d  DltSCBIPTION  OF  KLOCKSNBBINa

waa  especially  the  case  when  his  reason  was  somewhat  restored;
these  chiefly  consisted  of  popular  songs  conveying  a  moral  lesaoiii
oombating  popular  prejudices,  &c.,  illustrated  by  examples,  many
of  which  were  excellent^  in  the  style  of  ancient  times.  He  set  them.
them  to  simple  appropriate  melodies,  in  the  same  style,  and  often
sang  them,  accompanying  himself  on  the  piano,  wUchhe  played
with  great  skill.*

In  the  midst  of  all  these  sometimes  very  pleasing  performanoes;
to  which  I  did  not  in  the  least  incite  him,  the  rest  of  his  beha-
viour, especially  when  one  noticed  him  unseen,  was  very  foolish,
adventurous,  grotesque.

But  I  must  do  him  the  justice  to  say,  that  in  all  his  oral  and
written  communications,  and  even  when  he  was  not  observed,
both  during  the  periods  of  his  greatest  insanity  and  afterwards,
he  never  shewed  the  slightest  traces  of  any  unbecoming  behaviour
in  regard  to  sexual  morality,  but  very  frequently  the  very  reverse.
On  this -point  he  was  certainly  no  saint  in  the  strict  meaning  of
the  word,  still  he  was  much  better  than  most  men  of  the  world
His  body  in  this  respect  was  in  the  most  untainted  and  healthy
pondition ;  he  must  have  therefore  felt  all  the  more  deeply  the
calumnies  that  had  been  spread  concerning  him,  and  especially
the  satire  alluded  to  above.

Loyalty  to  his  sovereign  and  affection  for  his  family  and  for
some  of  his  deceased  friends,  was  perceptible  through  all  the
stages  of  hLs  malady.

Much  as  he  loved^  and  esteemed  me,  even  in  the  height  of
his  madness,  as  also  after  his  complete  recovery,  and  though  he

madness.  Even  during  the  height  of  his  mania  he  was  uncommoolj  sensitive  to
certain  things.  Althoogfa  mj  presence  was  always  very  agreeable  and  oonsolaloij
to  him,  yet  he  often  begged  me,  especially  when  he  was  still  considerably  insane^  not
to  put  my  hand  on  his  arm  or  to  touch  his  bare  hand ;  it  went  through  his  marrow
and  bones,  so  he  expressed  himself,  like  an  electric  shock.

'  I  repeatedly  requested  him,  when  he  was  completely  restored,  to  compose  me  a
small  poem  by  way  of  a  souvenir.  He  tried  to  do  so,  but  was  unable  to  produce  aoy
thing  tolerable,  justas  previoas  tohis  malady  he  had  but  little  talent  for  making  rhyBM.

*  I  never  allow  any  insane  person  to  be  punished  by  blows  or  other  painM
eorporeal  inflictions,  since  there  can  be  no  punishment  where  there  is  no  sense  of
responsibility,  and  since  such  patients  only  deserve  our  pity  and  cannot  be  improved,
but  must  be  rendered  worse  by  such  rough  treatment  He  often  however  diewad
me  with  tears  in  his  eyes  the  marks  of  the  blows  and  stripes  his  former  keepers  had
employed  to  keep  him  in  order.  The  physician  of  such  imfortunato  creatores  oqghi
to  behave  so  as  to  inspire  them  with  respect  and  at  the  same  time  with  confidence ;
he  should  never  feel  offended  at  what  they  do,  for  an  irrational  person  can  give  ne
oflfence.  The  ejdiibition  of  their  unreasooaUe  anger  should  only  ezdte  his  f ympatlqr
and  alfannUtB  his  philaothropy  to  relieve  their  sad  cooditioD.


BUBIKQ'  HIS  IK&UfnT.  %t^

obliging  and  pleasant  to  every  one  after  his  recovery,  yet
lie  became  malicious,  deceitful  and  offensive  as  he  was  passing
horn  the  first  state  into  the  last,  I  mean  when  his  reason  was
just  b^inning  to  dawn,  when  he  was  able  to  entertain  himself
with  visitors  for  half-hours  at  a  time,  and  when  he  could  behave
himself  quite  well  as  long  as  he  was  noticed.  A  most  puzzling
phenomenon  1  This  perverted  state  of  the  disposition,  in  which
head  and  heart  seemed,  so  to  speak,  to  have  mutually  lost  their
equilibrium,  was  accompanied  in  a  corresponding  degree  by  an
astonishing  canine  hunger,  or  to  speak  more  correctly,  insatiable-
ness.'  They  both  went  away  together  gradually,  when,  under
the  medicines  used,  health  and  reason  were  completely  restored.

His  friendship,  which  1  enjoyed  for  two  years  after  his  comiT
plete  restoration,  has  richly  repaid  me  for  these  and  thousanib
of  other  sad  moments  I  passed  on  his  account.

Before  he  quitted  my  establishment  he  shewed  to  the  publioi
l^  his  translation  pf  a  statistical  work  of  Arthur  Young,  his
ngeoerated  intelligence  in  a  very  advantageous  manner,  and
after  he  quitted  me,  the  government  of  his  native  land  bestow(^
on  him,  in  place  of  his  former  too  toilsome  office,  the  directiou
of  the  lottery,  which  he  continued  to  hold  till  his  death,  whicli
was  caused  by  a  retention  of  urine.^

Peace  be  with  his  ashes  I


ESSAY  ON  A  NEW  PEINCIPLE  FOR  ASCERTAINING
THE  CURATIVE  POWERS  OF  DRUGS,

WrrH  A  FEW  GLANCES  AT  THOSE  HITHERTO  EMPLOYED**


At  the  commencement  of  this  century,  the  unmerited  honour
was  conferred  on  chemistry,  more  especially  by  the  Academy
of  Sciences  of  Paris,  of  tempting  it  to  come  forward  as  the  dis-
coverer of  the  medicinal  virtues  of  drugs,  particularly  of  plants.
They  were  subjected  to  the  action  of  fire  in  retorts,  generally

'  He  was  not  aatisfied  with  ten  pounds  of  bread  daily,  besides  other  food.  When
k»  had  reoorered  his  health  he  ate  very  nxxkrately,  I  might  almost  say  extreaui^
Kttle.

*  [Where  among  modem  authors,  can  be  found  so  clear  and  masterly  a  descriptioa
«f  a  case  as  this  of  Klockenbring  I  Surely  not  in  any  of  the  medical  records  of  tha
Iflh  century.]— ilm.  P.


)60  suoGEsnoifs  for  ascsrtainiko

without  water,  and  by  this  process  there  were  obtained,  fton
ihe  most  deadly  as  from  the  most  innocent,  yery  much  the  sanq^
products,  water,  acids,  resinous  matters,  charcoal,  and  from  tfaJB
last,  alkali ;  always  the  same  kind.  Large  sums  of  money  weri
thus  wasted  on  the  destruction  of  plants,  before  it  was  perceived
that  none  of  the  important  component  parts  of  vegetables  coold
be  extracted  by  this  fiery  ordeal,  &r  less  that  any  conclusioii
respecting  their  curative  powers  could  be  come  to.  This  foily,
which  was,  with  divers  variations,  perpetrated  for  nearly  half  a
century,  gradually  produced  an  unfavourable  impression  on  die
minds  of  modem  physicians,  \frhich  had  been  in  the  mean  tim^
more  enlightened  respecting  the  chemical  art  and  its  limits,  so
that  they  now  almost  unanimously  adopted  an  opposite  view^
and  denied  all  value  to  chemistry  in  the  search  for  the  medicinal
powers  of  drugs,  and  in  the  discovery  of  remedial  agents  for  the
diseases  to  which  humanity  is  liable.

In  this  they  palpably  went  too  far.  Although  I  am  far  from
conceding  to  the  chemical  art  a  universal  influence  on  the  ma-
teria medica,  I  cannot  refrain  from  alluding  to  some  notable
discoveries  in  this  respect  which  we  have  to  thank  it  for,  and
to  what  it  may  hereafter  efifect  for  therapeutics.

Chemistry  informed  the  phyaiciau  who  sought  a  palliatiye
remedy  for  the  evils  occasioned  by  morbid  acids  in  the  sto-
mach, that  the  alkalis  and  some  earths  were  their  remedies.  If  it
was  desired  to  destroy  in  the  stomach  poisonous  matters  which
had  been  swallowed,  the  physician  applied  to  chemistry  for  the
antidotes  that  should  speedily  neutralize  them,  Ijefore  they  should
injure  the  alimentary  canal  and  the  whole  organism.  Chemistry
alone  could  tell  him  that  the  alkalis  and  soaj)  were  the  antidotes
of  acid  poisons,  of  vitriol,  of  aquafortis,  of  arsenic,  as  well  as  of
-the  poisonous  metallic  salts ;  that  the  acids  were  the  counter-
poisons  of  the  alkalis,  of  quicklime,  &e.,  and  that  for  speedily
oounteracting  the  effects  of  all  metallic  j)oisons,  sulphur,  liver  of
sulphur,  but  especially  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  were  effectuaL

It  taught  him  to  remove  lead  and  tin  from  a  cavity  of  the
body  by  living  quicksilver,  to  dissolve  iron  that  had  been  swal-
lowed by  acids,  and  ingested  glass  and  flint  by  fluoric  and  phos-
phoric acids,  in  the  way  it  is  seen  to  take  place,  with  respect  to
the  last  substance,  in  the  stomach  of  fowls.
•  Chemistry  produced  vital  air  in  its  purity,  and  when  the
physiologist  and  clinical  observer  perceived  its  peculiar  power
of  maintaining  and  increasing  the  vital  energy,  chemistry  showed


THK  ousAnyx  powbbs  of  drugs.  861

Aat  a  part  of  this  power  lay  in  the  great  specific  caloric  of  this
sir,  and  furnished  a  supply  of  it,  which  neither  the  therapeutio
materia  medica  nor  clinical  experience  could  do,  {rom  many
different  sources,  in  greater  and  greater  purity.

Chemistry  alone  could  supply  a  remedy  for  those  suffocated
by  fixed  air,  in  the  vapour  of  caustic  ammonia.

What  would  the  Galenic  school  have  done  in  cases  of  suffo-
cation  frora  charcoal  vapour,  had  chemistry  not  pointed  out  vital
air,  the  second  component  of  atmospheric,  as  the  proper  thing
wherewith  to  inflate  the  lungs  ?

Chemistry  discovered  a  meanrf  of  destroying  the  remains  of
poisons  which  had  penetrated  the  system,  by  administering  sul^^
phoretted  hydrogen  in  drinks  and  baths.

What  but  chemistry  taught  us  (with  nitrous  ether  and  acetate
of  potash)  how  to  dissolve  those  gall  stones  that  often  give  rise
to  so  many  most  troublesome  diseases?

For  centuries,  chemistry  has  been  applied  to  by  medicine  for
a  remedy  fi)r  stone  in  the  bladder,  and  with  what  result?  Those
that  applied  to  it  know  best.  It  has  at  all  events  done  some-
thing, since  it  has  brought  soda  saturated  with  fixed  air  into
repute.  A  still  better  remedy  will  be  found  in  the  employment
of  phosphoric  acid.

Were  not  all  sorts  of  medicinal  agents  applied  to  mammsB  in
which  the  milk  had  curdled  and  caused  pain?  This  was  a
hopeless,  fruitless  way.  Chemistry  showed  a  true  remedy  in
fomentations  of  hartshorn,  which  renders  curdled  milk  once
more  fluid.

Chemical  experimentation  with  Colombo  root  and  morbid  bile,
showed  that  that  vegetable  substance  must  be  a  remedy  in  de-
ranged biliary  secretion  in  the  human  body,  and  medical  expe-
rience has  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  chemical  induction.

Does  the  practitioner  seek  to  know  if  a  new  remedy  is  of  a
heating  description  ?  Distillation  with  water,  by  showing  the
presence  or  absence  of  an  ethereal  oil,  will  with  few  exceptions
BoiBce  to  jsolve  the  problem.

Practice  cannot  always  tell  by  sensible  signs  if  a  vegetable
Bubstancc  possess  astringent  properties.  Chemistry  discovers
that  astringent  principle,  sometimes  of  no  small  use  in  practice,
ind  even  its  degree,  by  means  of  sulphate  of  iron.

The  science  of  dietetics  alone  cannot  tell  if  a  newly-discovered
plant  possess  anything  nourishing  in  its  composition.  Chemistry
diows  this,  by  separating  its  gluten  and  its  starch,  and  can,  fixmi


16t  «0aOS8nONS  fob  ASOIBTAIKINa

the  quantity  of  these  ingredientSy  determine  the  degree  of  iti
nutritive  quality.  ' ^

•  Although  chemistry  cannot  directly  point  out  medicinal  poweirSi
yet  it  can  do  this  indirectly,  by  demonstrating  the  powerlessnen
of  medicines,  in  themselves  powerful,  from  being  mixed;  or  the
noxious  properties  of  mixtures  of  medicines,  in  themselves  iai
nocuous.  It  forbids  us,  when  we  seek  to  produce  vomiting  by
means  of  tartar  emetic,  to  add  to  it  substances  containing  gallio
acid,  by  which  it  is  decomposed ;  it  forbids  us  to  drink  lime
wa'er  when  we  seek  to  obtain  benefit  from  the  astringent  prin-
eiple  of  cinchona  bark,  by  which  it  is  destroyed ;  it  forbids  us,
if  we  do  not  wish  to  produce  ink,  to  mix  bark  and  iron  in  the
same  potion ;  it  forbids  us  to  make  the  Goulard  lotion  powerles
by  adding  alum ;  it  forbids  the  mixture  of  an  acid  with  those
laxative  neutral  salts  having  cream  of  tartar  for  their  bases^
which  remove  acids  from  the  primaB  vi© ;  it  forbids  us  to  render
poisonous,  by  admixture,  those  otherwise  innocuous  substanoeSi
diaphoretic  antimony  and  cream  of  tartar;  it  prohibits  the  use
of  vegetable  acids  during  a  milk  diet,  (whereby  an  insoluble
curd  would  be  formed,)  and  when  acids  are  required  for  diget*
tion,  it  points  to  the  vitriolic  acid.

It  furnishes  the  tests  for  detecting  the  adulteration  of  remedieSi
extracts  the  deadly  corrosive  sublimate  from  calomel,  and  teaches
the  difference  betwixt  the  latter  and  the  poisonous  white  preci-
pitate which  it  so  closely  resembles.

These  few  examples  may  suffice  to  show  that  chemistry  cannot
be  excluded  from  a  share  in  the  discovery  of  the  medicinal  powers
of  drugs.  But  that  chemistry  should  not  be  consulted  with  respect
to  those  medicinal  powers  which  relate,  not  to  hurtful  substanoes
to  be  acted  on  immediately  in  the  human  body,  but  to  change!
wherein  the  functions  of  the  animal  organism  are  first  conoemed|
is  proved,  inter  alia,  by  the  experiments  with  antiseptic  substanoeSi
respecting  which,  it  was  imagined  that  they  would  exhibit  ex-
actly the  same  antiputrefactive  power  in  the  fluids  of  the  body,
as  they  did  in  the  chemical  phial.  But  experience  showed  f^^
saltpetre,  for  instance,  which  out  of  the  body  is  so  highly  anti-
septic,  shows  exactly  opposite  qualities  in  putrid  fever  and  in
tendency  to  gangrene ;  the  reason  of  which,  I  may  mention^
though  out  of  place  here,  is,  that  it  weakens  the  vital  powers.
Or  shall  we  seek  to  correct  the  putrefiatction  of  matters  in  the
etomach  with  saltpetre  ?  An  emetic  will  remove  them  at  onoe.
.  Still  wone  for  the  materia  medica  was  the  advioe  of  thoee  wbo


THS  OXTBATiyS  POtnERS  OT  DBUGS.  258

sought  to  asoertain  the  medicinal  powers  of  its  various  agentSi
bjf  mixing  the  unknown  drug  unth  newly-drawn  bloody  in  order  to
see  whether  the  blood  grew  darker  or  lighter,  thinner  or  thicker;
just  as  if  we  could  bring  the  drug  into  the  same  immediate  coor
lact  with  the  blood  in  the  artery,  as  we  can  in  the  test-tube ;
just  as  if  the  drug  must  not  first  undergo  an  infinity  of  changes
in  the  digestive  canal,  before  it  can  get  (and  that  only  by  a  most
drcuitous  method)  into  the  blood.  What  a  variety  of  appear-
ances does  not  the  blood  itself  present  when  drawn  from  the
vein,  according  as  it  is  taken  from  a  heated  or  a  cool  body,  by
a  smaller  or  larger  opening,  in  a  full  stream  or  by  drops,  in  a
oold  or  warm  room,  in  a  fiat  or  a  narrow  vessel.

But  such  paltry  modes  of  ascertaining  the  powers  of  medicines
bear  on  their  face  the  stamp  of  their  worthlessness.

Even  the  injection  of  drugs  into  tfie  bloodvessels  of  animals  is
for  the  same  reason  a  very  heterogeneous  and  uncertain  method.
To  mention  only  one  circumstance, — a  teaspoon  full  of  concen-
trated cherrylaurel-water  will  most  certainly  kill  a  rabbit,  when
tskea  into  the  stomach,  whereas,  if  injected  into  the  jugular
vein,  it  causes  no  change,  the  animal  remains  lively  and  well.

Bat  at  all  events,  some  will  say,  the  adminstration  of  drug$
A^  animdb  by  the  mouth  will  furnish  some  certain  results  respect-
ing their  medicinal  action.  By  no  means  I  How  greatly  do  their
bodies  diflTer  from  ours  I  A  pig  can  swallow  a  large  quantity
of  nux  vomica  without  injury,  and  yet  men  have  been  killed
with  fifteen  grains.  A  dog  bore  an  ounce  of  the  fresh  leaves^
flowers,  and  seeds  of  monkshood ;  what  man  would  not  have
died  of  such  a  dose  ?  Horses  eat  it,  when  dried,  without  injury.
Yew  leaves,  though  so  fatal  to  man,  fatten  some  of  our  domestic
animals.  And  how  can  we  draw  conclusions  relative  to  the
action  of  medicines  on  man,  from  their  effects  on  the  lower
animals,  when  even  among  the  latter  they  often  vary  so  much  ?
The  stomach  of  a  wolf  poisoned  with  monkshood  was  foimd
inflamed,  but  not  that  of  a  large  and  a  small  cat,  poisoned  by
the  same  substance.  What  can  we  infer  from  this  ?  Certainly,
not  much,  if  I  may  not  say,  nothing.  Thus  much,  at  least,  is
oertain,  that  the  fine  internal  changes  and  sensations,  which  a
man  can  express  by  words,  must  be  totally  wanting  in  the
knrer  animals.

In  order  to  try  if  a  substance  can  develope  very  violent  or
dangerous  effects,  this  may  in  general  be  readily  ascertained  by
experiments  on  several  animals  at  once,  as  likewise  any  general


164  8U0GSSTI0NS  FOB  ASCEB^AINnm

manifest  action  on  the  motions  of  the  limbs,  variations  of  tem>
peratnre,  evacuations  upwards  and  downwards,  and  the  like,  but
never  anyihing  connected  or  decisive,  that  may  influence  our
conclusions  with  regard  to  the  proper  curative  virtues  of  the
agent  on  the  human  subject.  For  this,  such  experiments  are
too  obscure,  too  rude,  and  if  I  be  allowed  the  expression,  too
awkward.

As  the  above-mentioned  sources  for  ascertaining  the  medicinal
virtues  of  drugs  were  so  soon  exhausted,  the  systematizer  of  tho
materia  medica  bethought  himself  of  others,  which  he  deemed
of  a  more  certain  character.  He  sought  for  them  in  the  drugi
themselves ;  he  imagined  he  would  find  in  them  hints  for  his
guidance.  He  did  not  observe,  however,  that  their  sensibU
external  signs  are  often  very  deceptive,  as  deceptive  as  the  phy-
siognomy is  in  indicating  the  thoughts  of  the  heart

Lurid-coloured  plants  are  by  no  means  always  poisonous;
and  on  the  other  hand,  an  agreeable  colour  of  the  flowers  is  far
from  being  any  proof  of  the  harmlessness  of  the  plant  The
special  qualities  of  drugs,  which  may  be  ascertained  by  the
smell  and  the  taste,  will  not  allow  us  to  form  any  trustworthy  con-
clusions respecting  untried  substances.  I  am  far  from  denying
utility  to  both  these  senses  in  corroborating  the  probable  pro-
perties of  drugs  which  have  been  ascertained  in  other  ways,  but
I  would  counsel,  on  the  other  hand,  great  caution  to  those  who
would  form  their  judgment  from  them  alone.  If  the  bitter
principle  strengthens  the  stomach,  why  does  squill  weaken  it  7
If  bitter  aromatic  substances  are  heating,  why  does  marsh  rose-
mary diminish  the  vital  temperature  in  such  a  marked  manner?
If  those  plants  only  are  astringent  that  make  ink  with  sulphate
of  iron,  how  is  it  that  the  highly  astringent  principle  in  quinces^
medlars,  &c.,  cannot  furnish  ink  ?

K  the  astringent  taste  gives  evidence  of  a  strengthening  sub-
stance, why  does  sulphate  of  zinc  excite  vomiting?  If  the  acids
are  antiseptic,  why  does  arsenious  acid  produce  such  rapid
putrefaction  in  the  body  of  one  poisoned  by  it  ?  Is  the  sweet
taste  of  sugar  of  lead  a  sign  of  its  nutritive  properties?  If  the
volatile  oils,  and  everything  that  tastes  fiery  on  the  tongue,  are
heating  for  the  blood,  why  are  either,  camphor,  cajeput  oil,  oil
of  peppermint,  and  the  volatile  oil  of  bitter  almonds  and  cherry^
laurel,  the  very  reverse  ?  If  we  are  to  expect  a  disagreeable
odour  in  poisonous  plants,  how  is  it  so  inoosiderable  in  monks-
hood, deadly  nightshade,  and  foxglove  ?  why  so  imperoeptible


THX  CURATIVX  FOWSB8  OF DBUOS.  26B

m  nox  vomica  and  gamboge  7  If  we  are  to  look  for  a  disagree*
able  taste  in  poisonous  plants,  why  is  the  most  deadly  juice  of
the  root  of  jcUropha  manihot  merely  sweetish,  and  not  the  least
acrid?  If  the  expressed  fatty  oils  are  often  emollient,  does  it
follow  that  they  are  aU  so,  even  the  inflammatory  oil  expressed
irom  the  seeds  of  the  jalropha  curcas  ?  Are  substances  which
have  litUe  or  no  smell  or  taste  destitute  of  medicinal  powers?
How  is  that  ipccacuan,  tartar  emetic,  the  poison  of  vipers,  ni-
trogen, and  lopez-root,  are  not  so?  Who  would  use  bryony-
root  as  an  article  of  diet,  on  the  ground  that  it  contains  much
starch?

Poi  haps,  however,  botanical  affinity  may  allow  us  to  infer  a
rimilarity  of  action  ?  This  is  far  from  being  the  case,  as  there
are  many  examples  of  opposite,  or  at  least  very  different  pow-
ers, in  one  and  the  same  family  of  plants,  and  that  in  most  oi
them.  We  shall  take  as  a  basis  the  most  perfect  natural  system^
that  of  Murray.

In  the  family  of  the  caniferoe^  the  inner  bark  of  the  fir-tree
{pinus  sylvestris)  gives  to  the  inhabitants  of  northern  regions  a
kind  of  bread,  whereas  the  bark  of  the  yew-tree  (taocus  baccifera)
gives — death.  How  come  the  feverfew  {anlhemis  pyrethrum^
with  its  burning  root,  the  poisonous  cooling  lettuce  lactuca  vtro-
m\  the  emetic  groundsel  {senecio  vulgaris)^  the  mild  scorzoner%
the  innocuous  cudweed  {jnaphalium  arenarium),  the  heroic  ar-
nica (a.  montana),  all  together  in  the  one  family  of  the  compo^
mkel  Has  the  purging  globularia  alypum  anything  in  common
with  the  powerless  statice^  both  being  in  the  family  of  the  aggre-
gatae  /  Is  there  any  similarity  to  be  expected  betwixt  the  action
of  the  skirret  root  (sium  sisarum)  and  that  of  the  poisonous
water-drop  wort  {cenanthe  crocata),  or  of  tie  water-hemlock  {cicur
ia  virosa)j  because  they  are  in  the  same  family  of  the  umbelli'
ferce  ?  Has  the  not  harmless  ivy  (hedera  }ielix\  in  the  family
hederaceoe^  any  other  resemblance  to  the  vine  {vilus  vinifera)^  ex-
cept in  the  outward  growth  ?  How  comes  the  harmless  butcher's-
broom  {ruscus)  in  the  same  family  of  the  sarmeniacece  with  the
stupifying  cocculus  [raenispermum  coccuhis\  the  heating  aristo-
lochia,  and  the  dsarum  europceum  ?  Do  we  expect  any  similari-
ty of  effect  from  the  goose-grass  (jalium  aparine)  and  the  often
deadly  spigeUa  marylandica,  because  they  both  belong  to  the
itaUatce  ?  What  resemblance  can  we  find  betwixt  the  action  of
the  melon  {cucumis  melo)  and  the  elaterium  (momordica  elaterium)^
in  the  same  &mily  of  the  cucurbitacecB  t And  again,  in  the


266  -BVOQEaciosawoB  AaoEBTAJJsmfQ

SBOxdly  solanacea^  how  comes  the  tasteless  great  mullein  {verba$-^
(Bum  ihapsus\  along  with  the  burning  Cayenne  p^per  {capri-
turn  annuum) ;  or  tobacx^,  which  has  such  a  poweri'ul  spaamr
exciting  action  on  the  primss  viae,  with  nux  vomica,  which  inL-
pedes  the  natural  motions  of  the  intestines? Who  would  cosi-
pare  the  unmedicinal  perriwinkle  {vinca  pervinca)  with  the  sto-
pifying  oleander  {nerium  okander)^  in  the  £Banily  contarke  f Does
the  lY&tery  moneyvrort  (lysimachia  nummulafna)  act  similarly  to
the  marsh  trefoil  {menyanthes  iri/oliata),  or  the  powerless  cow-
slip {primtda  veris),  to  the  drastic  sowbread  (cyclamen  euro-
pceum),  in  the  family  of  the  rutacece  f From  the  strengthening
effects  of  the  bear-berry  {arbutus  uva  ursi)  on  the  urinary  ap-
paratus, can  we  infer  the  heating,  stupifying  acti6n  of  the  rho^
dodendron  chrysanthum^  in  the  family  hicomest Among  the
verticillatoBj  can  any  comparison  be  made  betwixt  the  scarcely  as*
tringent  self-heal  (prunella  vulgaris)  or  the  innocent  bugle  {ajuga
pyramidalis)j  and  the  volatile  germander  {teucrium  marutn)^  or
the  fiery  majoram  {origanum  creticum)f How  can  the  powers
of  the  verbena  {v.  officinalis)  be  said  to  resemble  those  of  the
active  hyssop  (gratiola  officinalis)  in  the  family  personatae  f How
different  are  the  actions  of  the  glycyrrhiza  and  geoffroya,  althou^
in  the  same  family  of  the  papUionaceoe  I In  the  fiimily  of  the
lomentacece^  what  parallel  exists  betwixt  the  properties  of  the
oeratonia  silliqua  and  those  of  the  fumatory  {fumaria  officinalis)^
ef  tlcLG  polygala  senega  and  the  Peruvian  balsam  {myroan/lon  pe*
ruiferum)  ? Or  is  there  any  likeness  in  properties  amongst  the
nigeUa  saiiva^  the  garden  rue  {rata  graveokns),  the  peony  {pasonia
offficinalis\  and  the  ccllery-lcaved  crowfoot  {ranunculus  scelera*
tus),  although  one  and  all  are  in  the  family  of  the  muUis^iliquce  f
The  dropwort  {spiroea  filipendula)  and  the  tormentil  {tormentiUa
erecta)  are  united  in  the  fiimily  seyiticoscPj  and  yet  how  different
in  properties ! The  red  currant  {ribes  rubrum\  and  the  cherry-
laurel  {prunus  laurocerasus),  the  rowan  {sorbus  aucuparia),  and
the  peach  {amygdalus  pirsica)j  how  different  in  powers,  and  yet
in  the  same  family  of  the  pomacece  I The  family  succutenim
unites  the  wall-pepper  {sedum  ojcre)  and  the  portulaca  oleracea^
certainly  not  because  they  resemble  each  other  in  effects  1 How
is  it  that  the  stork's-bill  and  the  purging-flax  {linum  catfiarticum\
the  sorrel  {oxalis  aceiosdla)^  and  the  quassia  {q.  amara\  are  in
the  same  fistmily  ? Certainly  not  because  their  powers  are  simi-
lar  I How  various  are  the  medicinal  properties  of  all  the  mem'^
Wrs  of  the  &mily  ascyroideael  and  of  these  of  the  dumosce  I  and


TBM  CURATIVK  POWBB  OF  DRUQB.  2ST

of  those  of  the  trihibUoe  I  Id  the  family  tricoccce^  what  has  th^
oorrofiiye  sparge  (euphorbia  officinalis)  in  common  with  the  box
(jktxua  sempervirens),  which  has  such  a  decided  influence  on  the
nervous  system?  The  tasteless  rupture- wort  {hemiaria  glabra\
the  acrid  phytolouxa  decandra^  the  refreshing  goosefoot  {chenop^
dium  ambrosioide$)j  and  the  biting  persicaria  {polygonum  hydros
fiper\  what  a  motley  company  in  the  femily  oleraceas  I  Hoir
dissimilar  in  action  are  the  scabridcB  I  What  business  has  the
Biild,  slimy,  white  lily  {lilium  candidum)  beside  the  garlic  {allium
9iUivum)j  or  the  squill  {scilla  mariiima) ;  what  the  asparagus  (cl
officinalis)  beside  the  poisonous  white  hellebore  {vercUrum  alburn)^
in  the  &mily  liUaceoR  f

I  am  fiur  from  denying,  however,  the  many  important  hinti
the  natural  system  may  afford  to  the  philosophical  student  of
the  materia  medica  and  to  him  who  feels  it  his  duty  to  discover
new  medicinal  agents;  but  these  hints  can  only  help  to  confirm
and  serve  as  a  commentary  to  facts  already  known,  or  in  ihm
case  of  untried  plants  they  may  give  rise  to  hypothetical  con-
jectures, which  are,  however,  far  from  approaching  even  to
probability.

But  how  can  a  perfect  similarity  of  action  be  expected
amongst  groups  of  plants,  which  are  only  arranged  in  the  so-
called  natural  system,  on  account  of  often  slight  external  simi-
larity, when  even  plants  tliat  are  much  more  nearly  connected,
plants  of  one  and  the  same  genus,  arc  sometimes  so  different  in
their  medicinal  effects.  Examples  of  this  are  seen  in  the  spe-
cies of  the  genera  impatiens,  serapias,  cystmis^  ranunculus^  cakh
muSj  hibiscus^  prunus^  sedum^  cassia^  polygonum^  convaUaricL
Unum^  rhus,  scseli^  coriandrum^  aithnsa^  sium,  angelica^  cheno-
podium^  asclepias,  solanum^  lolium^  allium^  rhamnus,  arnygdalusL
rubuSj  delphinium^  sisymbrium^  polygala^  teucrium^  vaccinium^
cucumiSj  apium,  pimpinella^  aneUium^  seandia^  Valeriana^  ary-
themisj  artemisia^  ccntaurea,  juniperus,  brassica.  What  a  differ-
cnce  betwixt  the  tasteless  tinder  amadou  {bolatus  igniarius)  and
the  bitter,  drastic  boletus  laricis ;  betwixt  the  mushroom  {agari-
cus  deliciosus)  and  the  agaric  {agaricus  muscarius)  ;  betwixt  the
woody  stone  moss  {lichen  saxatilis)  and  the  powerful  Iceland
moss  {lichen  Islandicus  I)

Though  I  readily  admit  that,  in  general,  similarity  of  action
will  be  much  oflener  met  with  betwixt  species  of  one  genu^
than  betwixt  whole  groups  of  families  in  the  natural  system.

and  that  an  inference  drawn  from  the  former  will  have  a  muoli

17


1^  SUGGESTIONS  FOR  ASGSBTAININ0

greater  degree  of  probability  attaching  to  it,  than  one  from  the
Ijitter;  yet  my  conviction  compels  me  to  give  this  warnings
that,  be  the  number  of  genera  ever  80  many  whose  species  jej
semble  each  other  very  much  in  their  eifects,  the  lesser  number
of  very  dilTerently  acting  species  should  make  us  distrustful  of
this  mode  of  drawing  inferences,  since  we  have  not  here  to  do
with  mechanical  experiments,  but  that  most  important  and  dif^
ficult  concern  of  mankind — health.'

As  regards  this  method  also,  therefore,  we  come  to  the  con-
clusion, that  it  cannot  be  considered  as  a  sure  principle  to  guida
us  to  the  knowledge  of  the  medicinal  powers  of  plants.

Nothing  remains  for  us  but  expeninent  on  the  human  body.
Put  what  kind  of  experiment  ? Accidental  or  meihodicalt

The  humiliating  confession  must  be  made,  that  most  of  the
virtues  of  medicinal  bodies  were  discovered  by  accidental,  empin
rical  experience,  by  chance ;  often  first  observed  by  non-medi*
qal  persons.  Bold,  often  over-bold,  physicians,  then  gradually
made  trial  of  them.  •

I  have  no  intention  of  denying  the  high  value  of  this  mode^
of  discovering  medicinal  powers— it  speaks  for  itself.  But  in  it
t^ere  is  nothing  for  us  to  do ;  chance  excludes  all  method,  all
voluntary  action.  Sad  is  the  thought,  that  the  noblest,  the
most  indispensable  of  arts,  is  built  upon  accident,  which  always,
pre-supposes  the  endangering  of  many  human  lives.  Will  the
chance  of  such  discoveries  suflBce  to  perfect  the  healing  art,  to
supply  its  numerous  desiderata  ?  From  year  to  year  we  become
acquainted  with  new  diseases,  with  new  phases  and  new  com-
plicatipns  of  diseases,  with  new  morbid  conditions ;  if,  then^  we
possess  no  better  method  of  discovering  the  remedial  agents
around  us  than  chance  allows,  nought  remains  for  us  to  do  but
to  treat  these  diseases  with  general  (I  might  often  wish  with  no)
I'eraedies,  or  with  such  as  have  seemed  to  be  of  service,  in  what
we  imagine,  or  what  appear  to  us  to  be,  similar  diseased  states.
l^ixt  how  oft«n  shall  we  fail  in  accomplishing  our  object,  for  if
there  be  any  difference,  the  disease  cannot  be  the  same  I Sadly

*■  —  ■ —  I  ■  ■ »

•

'  '  CkmclusioDs  relatiTe  to  umilAiity  of  action  {betwixt  species  of  a  geDus  beooM
§lXIX  more  hazardous,  when  we  consider  that  one  and  the  same  species,  one  and  tbt
■ame  plant,  frequenUy  shows  very  various  medicinal  powers  in  its  diffemit  paiiik
How  different  the  poppy  head  from  Uie  poppy  seed ;  the  manna  that  distils  from  tlM
leaves  of  the  larch  from  the  turpentine  of  the  same  tree ;  the  coolii^  camphor  in  thi
fpot  of  the  cinnamon  laurel,  from  the  burning  cbnamon  oil ;  the  astringent  juice  i^
t^  fruit  of  several  of  the  mimose,  from  the  tasteless  gum  that  exudes  from  .tlHil
^ip ;  the  oorrotiTe  stalk  of  the  ranunciilus  from  its  mild  root  I


TXX  OURATIVS  FOWEBS  OF  DRUGS.  260

we  look  forward  into  future  ages,  when  a  peculiar  remedy  for
this  particular  form  of  disease,  for  this  particular  circumstance^
may,  perhaps^  be  discovered  by  chance,  as  was  bark  for  pure
Hitermittent  fever,  or  mercury  for^syphilitic  disorders.

Such  a  precarious  construction  of  the  most  important  science
— ^resembling  the  concourse  of  Epicurian  atoms  to  make  9
world — could  never  be  the  will  of  the  wise  and  most  bountiful
Preserver  of  mankind  How  humiliating  for  proud  humanity^
did  his  very  preservation  depend  on  chance  alone.  No!  it  is
exhilarating  to  believe  that  for  each  particular  disease,  for  each
peculiar  morbid  variety,  there  arc  peculiar  directly -acting  rem^
dies,  and  that  there  is  also  a  way  in  which  these  may  be  tne-
ihodiraUy  discovered.

When  I  talk  of  the  methodical  discovery  of  the  medicinal  potaer$
9tiU  required  by  u$^  I  do  not  refer  to  those  empirical  trials
usually  made  in  hospitals,  where  in  a  difficult,  often  not  accu-
nitely  noted  case,  in  which  tliose  already  known  do  no  good,
recourse  is  had  to  some  drug,  hitherto  either  untried  altog^ther^
or  untried  in  this  particular  affection,  which  drug  is  fixed  upon
either  from  caprice  and  blind  fancy,  or  from  some  obscure  no»
tion,  for  which  the  experimenter  can  give  no  plausible  reason,
either  to  himself  or  to  others.  Such  empirical  chance  trials  are,
to  call  them  by  the  mildest  appellation,  but  foolish  risks,  if  not
something  worse.

I  speak  not  here,  either,  of  the  somewhat  more  rational  trials,
made  occasionally  in  private  and  hospital  practice,  with  reme-
dies casually  recommended  in  this  or  that  disease,  but  not  fur-
ther tested.  These,  also,  arc  performed,  unless  under  the  gui-
dance of  some  scientific  principle,  to  a  certain  degree  at  the
peril  of  the  health  and  life  of  the  patient ;  but  the  caution  and
practical  skill  of  the  physician  will  often  avail  to  smooth  much
that  is  uneven  in  his  half-empirical  undertakings.

As  we  already  possess  a  large  number  of  medicines,  which
are  evidently  powerful,  but  concerning  which  we  do  not  rightly
know  what  diseases  they  arc  capable  of  curing,  and  moreover,
otbeis  which  have  sometimes  proved  serviceable,  sometimes
not,  in  given  diseases,  and  concerning  which  we  have  no  accu-
rate knowledge  of  the  exact  circumstances  under  which  they
are  applicable,  it  may  not  at  first  sight  appear  very  necessary  to
increase  the  number  of  our  medicinal  agents.  Very  probably
all  (or  nearly  all)  the  aid  we  seek  lies  in  those  we  already


MO  ^SrOGESTIONS  FOB  ASCEBTjClNINa

.  Before  I  explain  myself  further,  I  must,  in  order  to  prevenj^
misapprehension,  distinctly  declare  that  I  do  not  expect,  and
do  not  believe,  there  can  be  a  thoroughly  specific  remedy  for
any  disease,  of  such  and  such  a  name,  burdened  with  all  the
ramifications,  concomitant  affections  and  variations,  which,  in
pathological  works,  are  so  often  inconsiderately  detailed  as
essential  to  its  character,  as  invariably  pertaining  to  it  It  is
only  the  very  great  simplicity  and  constancy  of  ague  and
syphilis  that  permitted  remedies  to  be  found  for  them,  which
appeared  to  many  physicians  to  have  specific  qualities ;  for  the
variations  in  these  diseases  occur  much  more  seldom,  and  are
usually  much  less  important  than  in  others,  consequently  bark
and  mercury  must  be  much  more  often  serviceable  than  not  so.
But  neither  is  bark  specific  in  ague,  in  the  most  extended  sense
ot  the  term,*  nor  mercury  in  syphilis,  in  its  most  extended
sense;  they  are,  however,  probably  specific  in  both  diseases,
when  they  occur  simple,  pure,  and  free  from  all  complication.
Our  great  and  intelligent  observers  of  disease  have  seen  the
truth  of  this  too  well,  to  require  that  I  should  dwell  longer  on
this  subject.

Nqw,  when  I  entirely  deny  that  there  are  any  absolute  spe*
cifics  for  individual  diseases,  in  their  full  extent,  as  they  are

*  Pity  it  is,  that  it  was  not  observed  wht/,  for  example,  of  the  seven-fifteenths  of  all
the  so-called  agues  in  which  bark  was  aseless,  three-fift«cnths  required  nux  vonuoi
or  bitter  almonds,  another  fifteenth  opium,  another  fifteenth  blood-letting,  and  still
another  fiftcentli  small  doses  of  ipecacuan,  for  their  cure !  It  was  thought  sufficient
to  say,  "  Bark  was  of  no  use,  but  ignatia  cured ;"  the  tr Ay  was  never  satisiactoril/
answered.  Were  it  a  case  of  pure  ague,  bark  must  be  of  service ;  where  there  were
eomplications,  with  excessive  irritability,  especially  of  the  primss  viae,  however,  it
was  no  longer  a  pure  case  of  ague,  and  it  could  not  do  good ;  here  were  now  reotoiu
ibr  choosing  as  a  remedy,  or  as  an  auxiliary  means,  ignatia,  nux  vomica,  or  bitter
almonds,  according  to  the  different  conditions  of  the  system  ;  and  it  could  not  and
should  not  have  been  wondered  at,  tliat  bark  was  not  useful.

'  The  liistory  of  diseases  is  not  yet  advanced  so  far  that  we  have  been  at  pains  to
■eparate  the  essential  from  the  accidental,  the  peculiar  from  tlie  adventitioufl^  tlia
foreign  admixture,  owing  to  idiosyncrasy,  mode  of  life,  passions,  epidemic  constitn-
tioDs,  and  many  other  circumstances.  When  reading  the  description  of  one  diseaae^
we  might  often  imagine  it  was  a  compound  admixture  of  many  histories  of
with  suppression  of  the  name,  place,  time,  Ac,  and  not  true,  abstractedly  pure,
ted  characteristics  of  a  disease  separated  from  the  accidental  (which  might  be  altar-
wards  appended  to  it,  as  it  were).  The  more  recent  nosologists  have  attempted  to
do  this:  their  genera  should  be  what  I  call  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  each  dii
ease,  their  s|>ecie3  the  accidental  circumstances.

Before  all  things,  we  have  to  attend  to  the  chief  disease ;  its  divergencies  and
eomitaot  drcumstancea  only  domand  particular  aid  when  Uiej  are  aerioua^  or


THE  CURATIVS  POWERS  OF  DRXTOa  tdi

band,  convinced  that  there  are  as  many  specifics  as  there  are
different  states  of  individual  diseases,  t.  e.,  that  there  are  peculiar
q)ecifics  for  the  pure  disease,  and  others  for  its  varieties,  and
for  (ther  abnormal  states  of  the  system.

If  I  mistake  not,  practical  medicine  has  devised  three  ways
of  applying  remedies  for  the  relief  of  the  disorders  of  the  hu-
man bcxly.

The  first  tvay,  to  remove  or  destroy  the  fundamental  caiLse  of  the
disease^  was  the  most  elevated  it  could  follow.  All  the  imagin-
ings and  aspirations  of  the  best  physicians  in  all  ages  were
directed  to  this  object,  the  most  worthy  of  the  dignity  of  our  art
But,  to  use  a  Spagyrian  expression,  they  did  not  advance  be-
yond particulars ;  the  great  philosopher's  stone,  the  knowledge
of  the  fundamental  cause  of  all  diseiises,  they  never  attained  Jto.
And  as  regards  most  diseases,  it  will  remain  for  ever  concealed
from  human  weakness.  In  the  mean  time,  what  could  be  ascer-
tained respecting  this  point,  from  the  experience  of  all  agea^
was  united  in  a  general  system  of  therapeutics.  Thus,  in  cases
of  chronic  spasms  of  the  stomach,  the  general  weakness  of
the  system  was  first  removed ;  the  convulsions  arising  from  tape-
worm were  conquered  by  killing  that  animal ;  the  fever  arising
from  noxious  matters  in  the  stomach  was  dissipated  by  power-
fid  emetics ;  in  diseases  caused  by  a  chill  the  suppressed  perspi-
ration was  restored ;  and  the  ball  was  extracted  that  gave  rise  to
traumatic  fever.  This  object  is  above  all  criticism,  though  the
means  employed  were  not  always  the  fittest  for  attaining  it.  I
shall  now  take  leave  of  this  royal  road,  and  examine  the  other
two  ways  for  appl3'ing  medicines.

By  the  second  way^  the  symptoms  present  were  sought  to  be
removed  by  medicines  which  j>roduced  an  opposite  condition  ;  for
example,  constipation  by  purgatives;  inflamed  blood  by  vene-
section, cold  and  nitre ;  acidity  in  the  stomach  by  alkalis :  pains
by  opium.  In  acute  diseases,  wliicS,  if  we  remove  the  obsta-
cles to  recovery  for  but  a  few  days,  nature  will  herself  generally,
conquer,  or,  if  we  cannot  do  so,  succumb;  in  acute  diseases,  I
repeat,  this  application  of  remedies  is  proper,  to  the  purpose,
and  sufficient,  as  long  as  we  do  not  possess  the  above-mentioned
philosopher's  stone  (the  knowledge  of  the  fundamental  cause  of

•bdUcles  to  recover? ;  they  demand  c»ur  chief  attention,  and  the  primary  disease
may  be  less  reg:irded,  when  the  latter,  by  passing  into  the  dironic  state,  has  become
•f  lew  importance,  and  is  less  urgent,  whilst  the  former  has  graduaUy  become  the
dirf  dtaease.


30S  suoGEarioNs  fob  AacEBTAjjsnjsa

each  disease,  aud  the  means  of  its  removal,)  or  as  long  as  we
havo  no  rapidly-acdng  specific,  which  would  extinguish  the  var-
riolous  infection,  for  instance,  at  its  very  commencement  In  this
case,  I  would  call  such  remedies  temporary,
,  But  if  the  fundamental  cause  of  the  disease,  and  its  direct
means  of  removal  are  known,  and  we,  disregarding  these,  com*
bat  the  symptoms  only  by  remedies  of  this  second  kind,  or
employ  them  seriously  in  chronic  diseases,  then  this  method
of  treatment  (to  oppose  diseases  by  remedies  that  produce  aa
opposite  slate)  gets  the  name  of  palliative^  and  is  to  be  reprobat-
ed. In  chronic  diseases  it  only  gives  relief  at  first ;  subse-
quently,  stronger  doses  of  such  remedies  become  necessary,
which  cannot  remove  the  primary  disease,  and  thus  they  do
mQre  harm  the  longer  they  are  employed,  for  reasons  to  be  spe-
cified hereafter.

I  know  very  well  that  habitual  constipation  is  still  attempted
i/o  be  cured  by  aloetic  purgatives  and  laxative  salts,  but  with
what  melancholy  results!  I  J^now  well  that  efforts  are  still
made  to  subdue  the  chronic  determination  of  blood  of  hysteiical,
cachetic,  and  hypochondriacal  individuals,  by  repeated,  al^
though  small  venesections,  nitre,  and  the  like ;  but  with  what
untoward  consequences  I  Persons  living  a  sedentary  life,  with
chronic  stomachic  ailments,  accompanied  by  sour  eructations,  are
still  advised  to  take  repeatedly  Glauber  salts ;  but  with  what
disastrous  effects !  Chronic  pains  of  all  kinds  are  still  sought  to
be  removed  by  the  continued  use  of  opium ;  but  again,  with
what  sad  results  I  And  although  the  great  majority  of  my
medical  brethren  still  adhere  to  this  method,  I  do  not  fear  to
call  it  palliative,  injurious,  and  destructive.

I  beseech  my  colleagues  to  abandon  this  method  {contraria
contrariis)  in  chronic  diseases,  and  in  such  acute  diseases  as  take
on  a  chronic  character ;  it  is  the  deceitful  by-path  in  the  dark
forest  that  leads  to  the  fatal  swamp.  The  vain  empiric  imagines
it  to  be  the  beaten  highway,  and  plumes  himself  on  the  wretch-
ed power  of  giving  a  few  hours'  ease,  unconcerned  if,  during
this  sjxjcious  calm,  the  disease  plants  its  roots  still  deeper.

But  I  am  not  singular  in  warning  against  this  fatal  practice
The  better,  more  discerning,  and  conscientious  physicians,  have
from  time  to  time  sought  for  remedies  (the  t/iird  loay)  for  chronic
diseases,  and  acute  diseases  tending  to  chronic,  which  should
not  cloak  the  symptoms,  but  which  should  remove  the  disease
radically,  in  one  word,  for  specijic  remedies ;  the  most  desirable.


THE  CHBATiyS  POWERS  OF  BBUGS.  86^

most  praiseworthy  undertaking  that  can  be  imagined.  Thufl^
for  instance,  they  tried  arnica  in  dysentery,  and  in  some  in-
stances found  it  a  useful  specific.

But  what  guided  them,  what  principle  induced  them  to  try
such  remedies?  Alas!  only  a  precedent  from  the  empirical
game  of  hazard  from  domestic  practice,  chance  cases,  in  whicli
these  substances  were  accidentally  found  useful  in  this  or  that
disease,  often  only  in  peculiar  unmentioncd  combinations,  whicli
might  perhaps  never  again  occur;  sometimes  in  pure,  simple
diseases.

It  were  deplorable,  indeed,  if  only  chance  and  empirical
apropos  could  be  considered  as  our  guides  in  the  discovery  and
application  of  the  proper,  the  true  remedies  for  chronic  diseases,
which  certainly  constitute  the  major  portion  of  human  ills.

In  order  to  ascertain  the  actions  of  remedial  agents,  for  the
purpose  of  applying  them  to  the  relief  of  human  suffering,  we
should  trust  as  little  as  possible  to  chance ;  but  go  to  work  as
rationally  and  as  methodically  as  possible.  We  have  seen,  that
for  this  object  the  aid  of  chemistry  is  still  imperfect,  and  must
only  be  resorted  to  with  caution ;  that  the  similarity  of  genera
of  plants  in  the  natural  system,  as  also  the  similarity  of  species
of  one  genus,  give  but  obscure  hints ;  that  the  sensible  proper-
ties of  drugs  teach  us  mere  generalities,  and  these  invalidated  by
many  exceptions ;  that  the  changes  that  take  place  in  the  blood
from  the  admixture  of  medicines  teach  nothing ;  and  that  the
injection  of  the  latter  into  the  bloodvessels  of  animals,  as  also
the  effects  on  animals  to  which  medicines  have  been  administered,
is  much  too  rude  a  mode  of  proceeding,  to  enable  us  therefrom
to  judge  of  the  finer  actions  of  remedies.

Nothing  tlien  remains  but  to  test  the  medicines  we  vnsh  to  investi-
gate on  the  human  body  itself.  The  necessity  of  this  has  been
perceived  in  all  ages,  but  a  false  way  was  generally  followed,  in^
asmuch  as  they  were,  as  above  stated,  only  employed  empirically
and  capriciously  in  diseases.  The  reaction  of  tlie  diseased  or-
gacism,  however,  to  an  untested  or  imperfectly  tested  remedy,
gives  such  intricate  results,  that  their  appreciation  is  impossible
for  the  most  acute  physician.  Either  nothing  happens,  or  there
occur  aggravations,  changes,  amelioration,  recovery,  death— r
without  the  possibility  of  the  greatest  practical  genius  being  able
todivine  what  part  the  diseased  organism,  and  what  the  remedy
pn  a  dose,  perchance,  too  great,  moderate,  or  too  small)  played
in  efifecting  the  result. They  teach  nothing,  and  only  lead  to


IM  SUGOESTIONS  FOB  ASCSBTAINIKe

iilae  conclusions.  The  everyday  physicians  held  their  tongaea
about  any  harm  that  ensued,  they  indicated  with  one  word  only
the  name  of  the  disease,  which  they  often  confounded  with  ano-
ther, in  which  this  or  that  remedy  appeared  to  do  good,  and
tiiuswere  composed  the  useless  and  dangerous  works  of  Schro-
der, Eutty,  Zorn,  Chomel,  Pomet,  &c.,  in  whose  thick  books  are
to  be  found  a  monstrous  number  of  mostly  powerless  medicineSi
each  of  which  is  said  to  have  cured  radically  this  and  at  least
ten  or  twenty  other  diseases.*

The  true  physician,  whose  sole  aim  is  to  perfect  his  art,  can
avail  himself  of  no  other  information  respecting  medicinea,
than —

First — What  is  the  pure  action  of  each  by  itself  on  the  human
hody?

Second —  Wfiat  do  ohservations  of  its  action  in  this  or  that  simple
or  complex  disease  teach  us  f

The  last  object  is  partly  obtained  in  the  practical  writings  of
liie  best  observers  of  all  ages,  but  more  especially  of  later  timea
Throughout  these,  the,  as  yet,  only  source  of  the  real  knowledge
of  the  powers  of  drugs  in  diseases  is  scattered :  there  we  find  it
fiiithfully  reLated,  how  the  simplest  drugs  were  employed  in  ao
how  far  they  were  hurtful  or  less  beneficial.  Would  to  God
iuch  relations  were  more  numerous  1

But  ev^en  among  them  contradictions  so  often  occur,  one  con-
demning in  a  certain  case  what  another  found  of  use  in  a  similar
ease,  that  one  cannot  but  remark  that  we  still  require  some  natu-
ral normal  standard,  whereby  we  may  be  enabled  to  judge  of
the  value  and  degree  of  truth  of  their  observations.

This  standard,  methinks,  can  only  be  derived  from  the  effeots
that  a  given  medicinal  substance  has,  by  i  self  in  this  and  that
dose  developed  in  the  healthy  human  body.

To  this  belong  the  histories  of  designedly  or  accidentally
swallowed  medicines  and  poisons,  and  such  as  have  been  pur-
posely taken  by  persons,  in  order  to  test  them ;  or  which  have
been  given  to  healthy  individuals,  to  criminals,  &c. ;  probably^

'  To  me,  the  strangest  circumstance  connected  with  tliesc  specubititms  upon  the
▼irtues  of  single  drugs  is,  that  in  the  days  of  these  men,  tlie  habit  that  still  ul
in  medicine,  of  joining  together  several  different  medicines  in  one  prescription,
carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  I  defy  CEdipus  himf^elf  to  tell  what  was  tlie  exact  ae*
tlon  of  a  single  ingredient  of  the  hotch  potcli ;  the  prescription  of  a  single  remedy
ai  a  time  was  in  those  days  almoMt  rarer  than  it  is  nowadays.  How  was  it  posribl*
ii  vueh  a  complicated  practice,  to  distinguish  the  powers  of  individual  medicines  t


tHB  GURATITE  POWEBS  OF  DRUGS.  266

also,  those  cases  in  which  an  improper  powerfully  acting  sub-
stance has  been  employed  as  a  household  remedy  or  medicine,  in
slight  or  easily  determined  diseases.

A  complete  collection  of  such  observations,  with  remarks  on
the  degree  of  reliance  to  be  placed  on  their  reporters,  would,  if
I  mistake  not,  be  the  foundation  stone  of  a  materia  medica,  the
sacred  book  of  its  revelation.

In  them  alone  can  the  true  nature,  the  real  action  of  medici-
nal substances  be  metliodically  discovered ;  from  them  alone  can
we  learn  in  what  eases  of  dis.-ase  they  may  be  employed  with
Bucces.s  and  certainty.

But  as  the  key  for  this  is  still  wanting,  perhaps  I  am  so  fortu-
nate as  to  be  able  to  point  out  the  principle,  under  the  guidance
of  which  the  lacunae  in  medicine  may  be  filled  up,  and  the  sci-
ence perfected  by  the  gradual  discovery  and  application,  on  ra-
tional principk^^  of  a  suitable  specific'  remedy  for  each,  more  es-
pecially for  each  chronic  disease,  among  the  hitherto  known
(and  among  still  unknown)  medicines.  It  is  contained,  I  may
Bay,  in  the  following  axioms.

Eoery  powerful  medicinal  suhstance  produces  in  the  human  body
a  kind  of  peculiar  disease  ;  tiie  more  powerful  tJie  medicine^  the  more
peculiar^  marked^  and  violent  tfie  disease,'^

We  should  imitate  nature^  which  sometimes  cures  a  chronic
disease  by  superadding  another,  and  employ  in  the  (especially
chronic)  disease  ice  wish  to  cure^  that  medicine  which  is  able  to  pro-
duce anotlier  very  similar  artificial  disease^  and  the  former  will  be
cured ;  similia  similibus.

We  only  require  to  know,  on  the  one  hand,  the  diseases  of  the
human  frame  accuratelv  in  their  essential  characteristics,  and
their  accidental  complications ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  pure
eflfects  of  drugs,  that  is,  the  essential  characteristics  of  the  spe-
cific artificial  disease  they  usually  excite,  together  with  the  ac-
cidental symptoms  caused  by  diftercnce  of  dose,  form,  &c.,  and
hy  choosing  a  remedy  for  a  given  natural  disease  that  is  capable
of  producing  a  very  similar  artificial  disease,  we  shall  be  able  to
cure  the  most  obstinate  diseases.^


'  In  this  Essay  my  cbief  object  i3  t<»  discover  a  permanently  acting  specific  remedy
fcr  (especially)  chronic  diseases.  Those  remedies  which  remove  the  fundamental
caofte.  and  the  temponiry  acting  remedies  for  acute  disteases  which  in  some  cases  re-
cove  the  name  of  palliiitive  modicines,  I  shall  not  touch  on  at  present
'  *  Non-meilical  |)eople  c:dl  those  medicine:*  w^hich  produce  the  most  powerful  spe-
cific di<<eaM8,  and  whicii  therefore  are  actually  the  most  serviceable  pouon*.

*  Hie  cautious  physician,  who  will  go  gradually  to  work,  giTOs  the  ordinsi7


266  SUGGESTIONS  FOR  ASC£RTAINnr€(

This  axiom  has,  I  confess,  so  much  the  appearance  of  a  barren,
analytical,  general  formula,  that  I  must  hasten  to  illustrate  it
synthetically. But  first  let  me  call  to  mind  a  few  points.

I.  Most  medicines  have  more  than  one  action  ;  the  first  a  cK-
rect  action,  which  gradually  changes  into  the  second  (which  I
call  the  indirect  secondary  action).  The  latter  is  generally  a
state  exactly  the  opposite  of  the  former.^  In  this  way  most
vegetable  substances  act.

II.  But  few  medicines  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  continuing
their  primary  action  uninterruptedly,  of  the  same  kind,  though
always  diminishing  in  degree,  until  after  some  time  no  trace  of
their  action  can  be  detected,  and  the  natural  condition  of  the
organism  is  restored.  Of  this  kind  are  the  metallic  (and  other
mineral  ?)  medicines,  e.  g,  arsenic,  mercury,  lead.

III.  If,  in  a  case  of  chronic  disease,  a  medicine  be  given,
whose  direct  primary  action  corresponds  to  the  disease,  the  indi-
rect secondary  action  is  sometimes  exactly  the  state  of  body
Sought  to  be  brough  about ;  but  sometimes,  (especially  when  a
wrong  dose  has  been  given)  there  occurs  in  the  secondary  action
a  derangement  for  some  hours,  seldom  days.  A  somewhat  too
large  dose  of  henbane  is.  apt  to  cause,  in  its  secondary  action,
great  fearfulness ;  a  derangement  tliat  sometimes  lasts  several
hours.  If  it  is  troublesome,  and  we  wish  to  diminish  its  dura-
tion, a  small  dose  of  opium  affords  specifically  almost  immedi-
ate relief;  the  fear  goes  off.  Oj)ium,  indeed,  in  this  case,  acts
only  antagonistically,  and  as  a  palliative ;  but  only  a  palliative
and  temporary  remedy  is  required,  in  order  to  suppress  effectu-
ally a  transitory  affection,  as  is  also  the  case  in  acute  diseases.

rcinedv  only  in  such  a  (iose  as  will  scarcely  perceptibly  developc  the  expected  aiti*
ficiul  disease,  (for  it  acts  by  virtue  of  its  power  to  produce  such  an  artificial  disease,)
and  gradually  increases  the  dose,  so  that  he  may  be  sure  that  the  intended  internal
changes  in  the  organism  are  produced  wiUi  sufficient  force,  although  with  phonomena
vastly  inferior  in  intensity  to  the  symptoms  of  the  natural  disease;  thus  a  mild  and
certain  cure  will  be  effected.  But  if  it  is  sought  to  go  rapidly  to  work,  with  the  oth-
enn'ise  fit  and  properly  chosen  remedy,  the  object  may  be  certainly  attained  in  this
iray  too,  though  with  some  danger  to  life,  as  is  often  done  in  a  rude  manner  bj
quacks  among  the  peasant^  and  which  they  call  miraculous,  or  horse  curesi,  a
disease  of  many  years*  standing  being  thenthy  cui*ed  in  a  few  days ;  a  proceeding
that  testifies  to  the  truth  of  my  principle,  while  at  the  same  time  it  shows  the  haatfd-
ous  nature  of  this  mode  of  effecting  it

'  Opium  may  serve  as  an  example. A  fearless  elevation  of  spirit,  a  sensation  of
strength  and  high  courage,  an  imaginative  gaiety,  arc  part  of  the  direct  primary  ao
lion  of  a  moderate  doiie  on  the  system :  but  after  the  lapse  of  eight  or  twelve  honn
an  opposite  state  sets  in,  the  indirect  secondary  action  ;  there  ensue  relaxation,  dejeo-
tion,  difiidence,  peevLihness,  loss  of  memory,  discomfort^  fear.


THB  CUBATIYS  POWEfiS  OF  DRUGS.  267

ly.  Palliative  remedies  do  so  much  harm  iD  chronic  diseases,
and  render  them  more  obstinate,  probably  because  after  their
first  antagonistic  action  they  are  followed  by  a  secondary  action,
which  is  similar  to  the  disease  itsel£

V.  The  more  numerous  the  morbid  symptoms  the  medicine
produces  in  its  direct  action,  corresponding  to  the  symptoms  of
the  disease  to  be  cured,  the  nearer  the  artificial  disease  resem-
bles that  sought  to  be  removed,  so  much  more  certain  to  be
&vourable  will  the  result  of  its  administration  be.

VL  As  it  may  be  almost  considered  an  axiom,  that  the  symp-
toms of  the  secondary  action  are  the  exact  opjx)site  of  those  of
the  direct  action,  it  is  allowable  for  a  mas:er  ojtlie  art,  when  the
knowledge  of  the  symptoms  of  the  direct  action  is  imperfect,  to
supply  in  imagination  the  lacuna)  by  induction,  i.  e,  the  oppo-
site of  the  symptoms  of  the  secondary  action  ;  the  result,  how-
ever, must  only  be  considered  as  an  addition  to,  not  as  the  basis
of^  his  conclusions.

After  these  preliminary  observations,  I  now  proceed  to  illus'
treUe  by  examples  my  maxim,  that  in  order  to  discover  the  true
remedial  poioerg  of  a  medicine  for  chronic  diseases^  ive  must  look  to
the  specif  artificial  disease  it  can  develope  in  tlie  human  boily,  and
emplot/  it  in  a  very  similar  morbid  condition  of  die  organism  which
ii  is  wished  to  remove.

The  analogous  maxira,  that  in  order  to  cure  radically  certain
Aronic  diseases j  we  must  search  for  medicines  iliat  can  excite  a
similar  disease  {tlie  more  similar  the  Letter)  in  the  human  body —
will  thereby  almost  become  evident.

In  m}'  additions  to  Cullen's  Materia  Mcdica,  I  have  already
ob:3erved  that  bnrk\  given  in  large  doses  to  sensitive,  yet  healthy
iDdividuals,  produces  a  true  attack  of  fever,  very  similar  to  the
intermittent  fever,  and  for  this  reason,  j^^obably^  it  overpowers,
and  thus  cures  the  latter.  Now  after  mature  experience,  I  add,
not  on\y  probcd)ly^  but  quite  certainly,

I  saw  a  healthy,  sensitive  person,  of  firm  fibre,  and  half  way
through  with  her  pregnancy,  take  five  drops  of  the  volatile  oil  of
Aamoniile  {Matricaria  cliamomilla)  for  cramp  in  the  calf  of  the  leg.
The  dose  was  much  too  strong  for  her.  First  there  was  the  loss
of  consciousness,  the  cramp  increased,  there  occurred  transient
convulsions  in  the  limbs,  in  the  eyelids,  &c.  A  kind  of  hysteri-
cal movement  above  the  navel,  not  unlike  labour  pains,  but
more  annoying,  lasted  for  several  days.  This  explains  how  cha-
momile has  been  found  so  serviceable  in  after-pains,  in  excessive


268  SUGGESTIONS  FOR  ASCERTAJ^TESQ

mobility  of  the  fibre,  and  in  hysteria,  when  employed  in  doses
in  which  it  could  not  perceptibly  develope  the  same  phenomenal
that  Li,  in  much  smaller  doses  than  the  above.

A  man  who  had  been  long  troubled  with  constipation,  but
was  otherwise  healthy,  had  from  time  to  time  attacks  of  giddi-
ness that  lasted  for  weeks  and  months.  Purgatives  did  no  good*
I  gave  him  arnica  root  {arnica  monlana)  for  a  week,  for  I  knew
that  it  causes  vertigo,  in  increasing  doses,  with  the  desired  result.
As  it  has  laxative  properties,  it  kept  the  bowels  open  during  its
employment,  by  antagonistic  action,  as  a  palliative ;  wherefore
the  constipation  returned  after  leaving  oft' the  medicine ;  the
giddiness,  however,  was  effectually  cured.  This  root  excites,  as
I  and  others  have  ascertained,  besides  other  symptoms,  nausea^
uneasiness,  anxiety,  peevishness,  headache,  oppression  of  the
stomach,  empty  eructation,  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  and
frequent  scanty  evacuations,  with  straining.  These  effects,
not  Stollen's  example,  induced  me  to  employ  it  in  an  epi-
demic of  simple  (bilious)  dysentery.  The  symptoms  of  it
were  uneasiness,  anxiety,  excessive  peevishness,  head-ache,
nausea,  perfect  tastelessness  of  all  food,  rancid  bitter  taste  on  the
(clean)  tongue,  frequent  empty  eructation,  oppression  of  the
stomach,  constant  cuttings  in  the  abdomen,  complete  absence  of
faecal  evacuations,  and  instead,  passage  of  pure  grey  or  trans-
parent sometimes  hard,  white,  flocculent  mucus,  occasionally
intimately  mixed  with  blood,  or  with  streaks  of  blood,  or
without  blood,  once  or  twice  a  day,  accompanied  with  the  most
painful  constant  straining  and  forcing.  Though  the  evacuations
were  so  rare,  the  strength  sank  rapidly,  much  more  quickly,
however  (and  without  amelioration,  but  rather  aggravation  of
the  original  affection),  when  purgatives  were  employed.  Those
^ffe^'ted  were  generally  children,  some  even  under  one  year  old,
but  also  some  adults.  The  diet  and  regimen  were  proper.  On
comparing  the  morbid  symptoms  arnica  root  produces  with  those
developed  by  this  simple  dysentery,  I  could  confidently  oppose
to  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  of  the  latter,  the  collective  action
of  the  former.  The  most  remarkable  good  cftccts  followed,
without  it  being  necessary  to  use  any  other  remedy,  l^efore  the
employment  of  the  root,  I  gave  a  powerful  emetic,^  which  I  had
occasion  to  repeat  in  scarcely  two  cases,  for  arnica  sets  to  right

'  Without  using  Uic  nmica  root,  the  emcticij  took  awuy  the  raiicid  bitter  tu8te  for
but  one  or  two  duys ;  all  the  other  symptoms  remained,  tliough  they  were  ever  so
dfieu  repeated.


TEX  CUKATIVE  POWERS  OF  DRUGS.  269

the  disordered  bile  (also  out  of  the  body,)  and  prevent  its  de-
rangement The  only  inconvenience  resulting  from  its  use  in
this  dysentery  was,  that  it  acted  as  an  antagonistic  remedy  in
regard  to  the  suppression  of  fajces,  and  produced  frequent,
though  scanty  evacuations  of  excrement ;  it  was  consequently
a  palliative ;  the  effect  of  this  was,  when  I  discontinued  the  root,
continued  constipation.^

In  another  less  simple  dysentery,  accompanied  by  frequent
diarrhoea,  the  arnica  root  might  be  more  useful  and  suitable,  on
account  of  this  latter  circumstance ;  its  property  of  producing
frequent  faecal  evacuations  in  its  primary  direct  action  would
constitute  it  a  similarly  acting,  consequently,  permanent  remedy,
and  in  its  secondary  indirect  action  it  would  effectually  cure  the
diarrhoea.

This  has  already  been  proved  by  experience ;  it  has  been
found  excellent  in  the  worst  diarrlirras.  It  subdues  them,
because,  xoWiout  weakening  Vie  body,  it  is  capable  of  causing
frequent  evacuations.  In  order  to  prove  serviceable  in  diarrhceas
without  foecal  matter,  it  must  be  given  in  such  small  doses  as
not  to  produce  perceptible  purgation ;  or  in  diarrhoeas  with  acrid
matters,  in  larger  purgative  doses ;  and  thus  the  object  will  be
ittainecl.

I  saw  glandular  swellings  occur  from  the  misuse  of  an  infusion
of  flowers  of  arnica ;  I  am  mucli  mistaken  if,  in  moderate  doses,
it  will  not  remove  such  altbctions.

AVe  should  ea<leavour  to  find  out  if  the  milljoil  {achiUea
milh/olium)  cannot  itself  produce  lia3morrhages  in  large  doses,
as  it  is  so  efficacious  in  moderate  doses  in  chronic  hemorrhages.
•  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  valerian  {Valeriana  officinalis)
m  moderate  doses  cures  chronic  diseases  with  excess  of  irritability,
since  in  large  doses,  as  I  have  ascertained,  it  can  exalt  so  remark-
ably the  irritability  of  the  whole  system.

The  dispute  as  to  whether  the  hrooklime  {anagallis  arverisis)
and  the  bark  of  the  misletoe  {viscum  album)  possess  great  curative
virtues  or  none  at  all,  would  immediately  be  settled,  if  it  were
tried  on  the  healthy  whether  large  doses  produces  bad  effects,  and

'  I  bod  to  increase  tlie  dose  daily,  more  rapidly  than  is  necessary  with  any  other
powerful  medicine.  A  child  of  four  years  of  ago  got  at  first  four  grains  daily,  theo
•eren,  eighty  and  nine  grains.  Children  of  six  or  seven  years  of  age  could  at  first
«d1j  bear  six  grains,  afterwards  twelve  and  fourteen  grains  were  requisite.  A  child
ftrae  quarters  of  a  year  old,  which  had  taken  nothing  previously,  could  at  first  bear
hA  two  graiot  (mixed  with  warm  water)  in  an  enema ;  latterly  six  grains  werf


270  SUGGESTIONS  FOB  ASC£BTAIKUra

an  artificial  disease  similar  to  that  in  which  they  have  been
hitherto  empirically  used.

The  specilic  artiiicial  disease  and  the  peculiar  affections  that
the  spoiled  li^mlock  {coniuni  viaculatam)  causes,  are  not  nearly  so
the  empirical  praise  and  the  equally  empirical  abuse  of  this
plant.  It  is  true  that  it  can  produce  ptyalism,  it  may  therefore
possess  an  excitant  action  on  the  lymphatic  system,  and  be  of
permanent  advantage  in  cases  where  it  is  requisite  to  restrain
the  excessive  action  of  the  absorbent  vessels.*  Now  as  it,  besides
this,  produces  pains  (in  large  doses  violent  pains)  in  the  glands,
it  may  easily  be  conceived  that  in  painful  induration  of  the
glands,  in  cancer,  and  in  the  painful  nodes  that  the  abuse  of
mercury  leaves,  it  may  be  the  best  remedy,  in  moderate  doses,  not
only  for  curing  almost  specifically  this  peculiar  kind  of  chronic
pains,  in  a  more  effectual  and  durable  manner  than  the  palliative
opium  and  all  other  narcoctic  remedies  which  act  in  a  different
manner,  but  also  for  dispersing  the  glandular  swellings  them-
excessive  local  or  general  activity  of  the  lymphatic  vessels,  or
occur  in  an  otherwise  robust  frame,  so  that  the  removal  of  the
pains  is  all  that  is  required  in  order  to  enable  nature  to  cure  the
complaint  herself.  Painful  glandular  swellings  from  external
injuries  are  of  this  description. ^

In  true  cancer  of  the  breast,  where  an  opposite  state  of  the
glandular,  system,  a  sluggishness  of  it,  seems  to  predominate,  it
must  certainly  do  harm  on  the  whole  (it  may  at  first  soothe  the
pains),  and  especially  must  it  aggravate  the  disease  when  thj
system,  as  is  often  the  case,  is  weakened  by  long-continued  suf-
fering ;  and  it  will  do  harm  all  the  more  rapidly,  because  its
continued  use  produces,  as  a  secondary  action,  weakness  of  the
stomach  and  of  the  whole  body. From  the  very  reason  that  it^*

'  If  uiuployud  in  inactivity  of  tliese  vessels,  it  will  first  act  as  a  palliative ;  alter-
wards  do  little  one  way  or  other ;  and  lastly,  prove  injurious,  by  the  productitjo  of
the  opposite  conditiim  to  that  wislied  for.

*  A  healthy  peasant  child  got,  from  a  violent  fiiU,  a  painful  swelling  of  the  under
lip,  which  increased  very  much  in  the  course  of  four  weeks  in  hardness,  size,  and
painfulness.  Hie  juice  of  the  spotted  hemlock  applied  to  it,  effected  a  cure  without
any  relapse  in  fourteen  days.  A  hitherto  uncomnionly  healthy,  robust  girl,  had
■everely  bruised  the  right  breast,  whilst  carrying  a  heavy  burden,  with  the  strap  of
the  basket  A  small  tumour  arose,  which  for  six  months  increased  in  violence  of
pain,  in  size,  and  hardness,  at  each  monthly  period.  The  external  application  of
■potted  hemlock  juice  cured  it  within  five  weeks.  This  it  would  have  dune  soono;
bad  it  not  affected  the  skin,  and  produced  there  painful  pustules,  in  cuid^t^^uenoe  of
which  it  had  frequently  to  be  disouotinued  for  leveral  daya.


THE  GUBATIYE  POWERS  OF  DRUGS.  271*

like  other  umbelliferous  plants,  specifically  excites  the  glandular
system,  it  may,  as  the  older  physicians  remarked,  cure  an  ex-
cessive secretion  of  milk.  As  it  shows  a  tendency  to  paralyse
the  nerves  of  sight  in  large  doses,  it  is  comprehensible  why  it
has  proved  of  service  in  amaurosis.  It  has  removed  spasmodic
complaints,  hooping  cough,  and  epilepsy,  because  it  has  a  ten-
dency j:o  produce  convulsions.  It  will  still  more  certainly  be  of
ijse  in  convulsions  of  the  eyes  and  trembling  of  the  limbs,  because
in  large  doses  it  dcvelopes  exactly  the  same  phenomena.  The
same  with  respect  to  giddiness.

The  fact  XhdX  fooVs  parsky  {cetliusa  cr/napium),  besides  other
afiections,  as  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  colicky  pains,  cholera,  and  others
for  the  truth  of  which  I  cannot  vouch  (general  swelling,  &c.),
produces  so  specifically  imbecility,  also  iinbecijity  alternately-
with  madness,  should  be  of  use  to  the  careful  ])hysician  in  this
disease,  otherwise  so  diflScult  of  cure.  I  had  a  good  extract  of
it  prepared  by  myself,  and  once,  when  I  found  myself,  from  much
mental  work  of  various  kinds  coming  upon  me  in  rapid  succcs-
rion,  distracted  and  incapable  of  reading  any  more,  I  took  a  grain
of  it.  The  effect  was  an  uncommon  disposition  for  mental  labour,
which  lasted  for  several  hours,  until  bed-time.  The  next  day,
however,  I  was  less  dis{x>sed  for  mental  exertion.

The  icater hemlock  {cicula  vhvsa)  causes,  among  other  symptoms,
violent  burning  in  the  throat  and  stomach,  tetanus,  tonic  cramp
of  the  bladder,  lockjaw,  erysipelas  of  the  face,  head-ache,  and
true  epilepsy;  all  diseases  for  which  we  require  cflicient  remedies.
one  of  which,  it  may  be  hoped,  will  be  found  in  this  powerfully,
iMSting  root,  in  the  hands  of  the  cautious  but  bold  physician.

Amatus  the  Portuguese  observed  that  coccubcs  seeds  {nienis-
permum  cocculiis\  in  the  dose  of  four  grains,  produced  nausea,
hiccough,  and  anxiety  in  an  adult  man.  In  animals  they  pro-
duced a  rapid,  violent,  but  when  the  dose  was  not  fatal,  a  transi-
tory stupefaction.  Our  successors  will  find  in  them  a  very
powerful  medicine,  when  the  morbid  phenomena  these  seeda
produce  shall  be  more  accurately  known.  The  Indians  use  tho
root  of  this  tree,  among  other  things,  in  malignant  typhus  (that
accompanied  by  stupefaction).

The/ox-grapc  {paris  quadrifolia)  has  been  found  efficacious  in
cramps.  The  leaves  cause,  in  large  doses  at  all  events,  cramp
in  the  stomach,  according  to  the  still  imperfect  experience  wo
of  the  morbid  phenomena  they  are  capable  of  developing*
Ck^ec  produces,  in  large  doses,  head-aches ;  it  therefore  curea^


272  BU60ESTI0NS  FOB  ASC£RTAINIHa

in  moderate  doses,  head-aohes  that  do  not  proceed  from  derange-
ment of  the  stomach  or  acidity  in  the  primsB  viae.  It  fitvoure
the  peristaltic  motion  of  the  bowels  in  large  doses,  and  therefore
cures  in  smaller  doses  chronic  diarrhoeas,  and  in  like  manner
the  other  abnormal  effects  it  occasions  might  be  employed  against
eimilar  affections  of  the  human  body,  were  we  not  in  the  habit
of  misusing  it.  The  effects  of  opium  in  stupifying  the  ^ensea^
and  irritating  the  tone  of  the  fibres,  are  removed  by  this  berry
in  its  character  of  an  antagonistic,  palliative  remedy,  and  that
properly  and  effectually,  for  here  there  is  no  persistent  state  of
the  organism,  but  only  transitory  symptoms  to  be  combated.
Intermittent  fevers,  too,  where  there  is  a  want  of  irritability  and
inordinate  tension  of  the  fibres,  precluding  the  employment  of
otherwise  specific  bark,  it  apparently  suppresses  in  large  doaea^
merely  as  an  palliative  remedy ;  its  direct  action,  however,  in
Buch  large  doses,  lasts  for  two  days.

The  hitter-sweet  {sohnum  dulcamara)  producers,  in  large  dosea^
among  other  symptoms,  great  swelling  of  the  affected  parts  and
acute  pains,  or  insensibility  of  them,  also  paralysis  of  the  tongue
and  of  the  optic  nerves  ?).  In  virtue  of  the  last  powerful  action,
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  it  has  cured  paralytic  affectiona,
amaurosis,  and  deafnass,  and  that  it  will  render  still  more  speci-
fic service  in  paralysis  of  the  tongue,  in  moderate  doses.  In
virtue  of  the  two  first  properties,  it  is  a  main  remedy  in  chronic
rheumatism,  and  in  the  nocturnal  pains  from  the  abuse  of  mer-
cury. In  consequence  of  its  power  of  causing  strangury,  it  has
been  useful  in  obstinate  gonorrhoea,  and  from  its  tendency  to
bring  about  itching  and  shooting  in  the  skin,  it  shows  its  utility
in  many  cutaneous  eruptions  and  old  ulcers,  even  such  as  arise
firom  abuse  of  mercury.  As  it  causes,  in  large  doses,  spasms  <rf
the  hands,  lips  and  eyelids,  as  also  shaking  of  the  limbs,  we  may
easily  understand  how  it  has  been  useful  also  in  spasmodic  affeo-
tions.  In  nymphomania  it  will  probably  be  of  use,  as  it  acts  so
specifically  on  the  female  genital  organs,  and  has  the  power  of
causing  (in  large  doses)  itching  and  pains  in  these  parts.

The  berries  of  the  black  nightshxidc  {solanum  nigrum)  have  caused
extraordinary  convulsions  of  the  limbs,  and  also  delirious  ravings
It  is,  therefore,  probable  that  this  plant  will  do  good  in  what  are
called  possessed  persons  (madness,  with  extraordinary,  empbalifly
eften  unintelligible  talking,  formerly  considered  prophesying  and
the  gift  of  unknown  tongues,  accompanied  by  convulsions  of  the
limbs),  especially  where  there  are  at  the  same  time  pains  in  the


THK  CURATIVE  POWEBS  OF  DRUGS.  278

region  of  the  stomach,  which  these  berries  also  prodace  in  large
doses.  As  this  plant  causes  erisypelas  of  the  face,  it  will  be  use-
fhl  in  that  disease,  as  has  already  been  ascertained  fix>m  its  ex-
ternal employment  As  it  causes,  to  a  still  greater  degree  than
bitter-sweet,  by  being  used  internally,  external  swellings,  that
iSy  a  transient  obstruction  in  the  absorbent  system,  its  great  diu-
retic power  is  only  the  indirect  secondary  result;  and  hence  its
great  virtue  in  dropsy,  from  similarity  ofdction,  is  plainly  percep-
tible ;  a  medicinal  quality  of  so  much  the  greater  value,  as  most
of  the  remedies  we  possess  for  this  disease  are  merely  antagonis-
tically acting  (exciting  the  lymphatic  system  in  a  merely  tran-
(dtorj  manner),  and  consequently  palliative  remedies,  incapable
of  effecting  a  permanent  cure.  As,  moreover,  in  large  doses  it
causes  not  only  swelling,  but  general  inflanmiatory  swelling,  with
itching,  and  intolerable  burning  pains,  stiffness  of  the  limbs,
pustular  eruptions,  desquamation  of  the  skin,  ulcers,  and  spha-
celus, where  is  the  wonder  that  its  external  application  has
cured  divers  pains  and  inflanmiations  ?  Taking  all  the  morbid
symptoms  together  that  the  black  nightshade  produces,  we  can-
not mistake  their  striking  resemblance  to  raphania,  for  which  it
will,  most  probably,  be  found  to  be  a  specific  remedy.

It  is  probable  that  the  deadly  nightshade  {atropa  belladonna)  will
be  useful,  if  not  in  tetanus,  at  least  in  trismus  (as  it  produces  a
kind  of  lockjaw),  and  in  spasmodic  dysphagia  (as  it  specifically
causes  a  diflSculty  of  swallowing) ;  both  these  actions  belong  to
its  direct  action.  Whether  its  power  over  hydrophobia,  if  it  do
possess  any,  depends  on  the  latter  property  alone,  or  also  on  its
power  of  suppressing  palliatively,  for  several  hours,  the  irrita-
biUty  and  excessive  sensitiveness  that  are  present  in  so  great  a
d^ree  in  hydrophobia,  I  am  imable  to  determine.  Its  power  of
soothing  and  dispersing  hardened,  painful  and  suppurating  glands,
is  owing,  undeniably,  to  its  property  of  exciting,  in  its  direct
action,  boring,  gnawing  pains  in  these  glandular  swellings.  Yet
I  conceive  that  it  acts  antagonistically,  that  is,  in  a  palliative  and
merely  temporary  manner,  in  those  which  proceed  fi:om  excessive
irritation  of  the  absorbent  system  (with  subsequent  aggravation,
$B  is  the  case  with  all  palliatives  in  chronic  diseases) ;  but,  by
virtue  of  similarity,  that  is,  permanently  and  radically,  in  those
arising  from  torpor  of  the  lymphatic  system.  (Then  it  would  be
serviceable  in  those  glandular  swellings  in  which  the  spotted
hemlock  {conium  macuhtum)  cannot  be  used,  and  the  latter  will

be  useful  where  the  former  does  injury.) As,  however,  its  con-

18


S74  8UOOES1TOKS  TOB  AflCEBTAINnfO

turned  employ ment  ^7  reason  c^  its  indirect  secondttry  action)
ezhanfits  the  whole  body,  and  when  given  in  too  large,  or  too  often
repeated  doses,  has  a  tendency  to  produce  a  gangrenous  feircTi
its  good  eftects  will  sometimes  be  destroyed  by  these  secondaij
bad  consequences,  and  fatal  results  may  ensue  (especially  in  the
case  of  cancerous  patients,  whose  vital  powers  have  been  ex-
hausted by  the  sufterings  of  many  years),  if  it  be  not  cautiously
employed.  It  produces  directly  mania,  (as  also,  as  above  de-
it  only  produces  as  a  secondary  action,  by  reason  of  the  state  of
the  organism  that  remains  after  the  direct  action  of  belladonn*
(obstruction  of  the  animal  and  natural  functions.)  Hence  its
power  in  epilepsy  with  furor  is  always  most  conspicuous  upoa
the  latter  symptom,  whilst  the  former  is  generally  only  changed
by  the  antagonistic  (palliative)  action  of  belladonna,  into  trembling^
and  such-like  spasmodic  affections  peculiar  to  weakened  irritable
systems.  All  the  spasmodic  symptoms  that  belladonna  produces
in  its  direct  primary  action  are  of  a  tonic  character ;  true,  the
muscles  are  in  a  state  of  paralytic  relaxation:  but  their  deficient
irritability  causes  a  kind  of  immobility,  and  a  feeling  of  health|
as  if  contraction  were  present  As  the  mania  it  excites  is  of  a  wild
character,  so  it  soothes  manias  of  this  sort,  or  at  least  deprives
them  of  their  stormy  nature.  As  it  extinguishes  memory  in  its
direct  action,^  nostalgia  (home  sickness)  is  aggravated,  and,  as
I  have  seen,  is  even  produced  by  it.

Moreover,  the  increased  discharge  of  urine,  sweat,  menses^
feces,  and  saliva,  which  have  been  observed,  are  merely  conse*
quences  of  the  antagonistic  state  of  the  body,  remaining  aftev
an  excessive  exaltation  of  the  irritability,  or  else  sensilivenen
during  the  indirect  secondary  action,  when  the  direct  primaij
action  of  the  drug  is  exhausted,  during  which,  as  I  have  seve-
ral times  observed,  all  these  excretions  are  often  completely  sup-
pressed by  large  doses  for  ten  hours  and  more.  Therefore,  in
oases  where  these  excretions  are  discharged  with  difficulty,  and
excite  some  serious  disease,  belladonna  removes  this  difficultj*
permanently  and  completely,  as  a  similarly -acting  remedy^  if  it
be  owing  to  tension  of  the  fibres,  and  want  of  irritability  and
sensibility.  I  say  purposely,  serious  disease^  for  only  in  sueh
cases  is  it  allowable  to  employ  one  of  the  most  violent  of  medi*
cines,  which  demands  such  caution  in  its  use«  Some  kinds  cf
dropsy,  green  sickness,  Ac,  are  of  this  nature. The  great  ten-

'  It  wiU,  Uierefine^  be  useful  in  weaknets  of  mcmoiy.


THB  omu^vnrs  powsbs  of  bbuob.  875

dency  of  belladonna  to  paralTBe  the  optic  nerve^  makes  it  im-
portant^ as  a  similarly-acting  remedy,  in  amaurosis.^  In  its  di^
rect  action  it  prevents  sleep,  and  the  deep  sleep  which  subi^
quently  ensues  is  only  in  consequence  of  the  opposite  state  pro*
duced  by  the  cessation  of  this  action.  By  virtue,  therefore,  of
this  artificial  disease,  belladonna  will  cure  chronic  sleeplessness
(firom  want  of  irritability)  more  permanently  than  any  palliative
remedy.

It  is  said  to  have  been  found  beneficial  in  dysentery ;  proba-
bly, as  in  its  direct  action  it  retards  the  stool,  in  the  most  sim-
pie  cases  of  diarrhoea,  with  suppressed  faecal  evacuations,  and
imre  motions,  but  not  in  dysentery  ¥nith  lienteric  diarrhoea,
where  it  must  do  positive  harm.  Whether,  however,  it  is  ap-
propriate for  dysentery,  by  reason  of  its  other  actions,  I  am  un-
able to  say.

It  produces  apoplei^ ;  and  if  it  have,  as  we  are  told,  been
found  serviceable  in  serous  apoplexy,  it  is  owing  to  this  pro-
perty. Besides  this,  its  direct  action  causes  an  internal  burning,
with  coldness  of  the  external  parts.

Its  direct  action  lasts  twelve,  twenty-four,  and  forty-eight
hours.  Hence,  a  dose  should  not  be  repeated  sooner  than  after
two  days.  A  more  rapid  repetition  of  ever  so  small  a  dose  must
lesemble  in  its  (dangerous)  effects  the  administration  of  a  large
dose. Experience  teaches  this.

The  feet  that  henbane  {hyoscyamits  niger)  in  large  doses  dimi-
nishes remarkably  the  heat  of  the  body  and  relaxes  its  tone  for
a  short  time  in  its  direct  action,  and  therefore  is  an  efficacious
palliative  remedy  when  given  in  moderate  doses  inwardly  and
outwardly  in  sudden  attacks  of  tension  of  the  fibres  and  infiam-
mation,  does  not  fall  to  be  considered  in  this  place.  This  is  not
tibe  case,  however,  witli  the  observation,  that  this  property  only
enables  it  to  palliate  very  imperfectly,  in  any  dose,  chronic  af-
fections with  tension  of  the  fibre ;  in  the  end,  however,  it  rather
increases  than  diminishes  them  by  its  indirect  secondary  action,
which  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  its  primary  action.  On  the
otiier  hand,  it  will  help  to  assist  the  power  of  the  strengthening
ranedy  in  chronic  relaxation  of  the  fibres,  as  in  its  primary  ac-
tion it  relaxes,  and  in  its  secondary  action  it  tends  all  the*  more
to  elevate  the  tone,  and  that  in  a  durable  manner.  In  large
doses  it  likewise  possesses  the  power  of  produdng  haemorrhage,
specially  bleeding  of  the  nose,  and  frequently  recurring  cata-

*  I  baye  myself  aeeo  the  good  efifocti  of  it  in  this  disease.


270  , 8UQOESTI0N8  FOR  ASCEBTAIimrO

menial  flax,  as  I  and  others  have  ascertained.  For  this  reason
it  cures  chronic  haemorrhages,  in  small  doses,  in  an  extremely
effectual  and  lasting  manner.  The  most  remarkable  thing  is
the  artificial  disease  it  produces  in  very  large  doses,  suspicioiu^
quarrelsome,  spitefully -calumnious,  revengeftd,  destructive,  fear-
less,^ mania  (hence,  henbane  was  termed  by  the  ancients  aUar-
cum)j  and  this  is  the  kind  of  mania  it  specifically  cures,  only
that  in  such  cases  a  tenseness  of  fibre  sometimes  hinders  it  ef-
fects from  being  permanent.  Difficulty  of  moving,  and  insen-
sibility of  the  limbs,  and  the  apoplectic  symptoms  it  produces^
it  may  also  very  probably  be  capable  of  curing.  In  large  doses^
it  produces,  in  its  direct  primary  action,  convulsions,  and  is  con-
sequently useful  in  epilepsy,  probably  also  in  the  loss  of  memo-
ry usually  accompanying  it,  as  it  has  the  power  of  producing
want  of  recollection.

Its  power  of  causing  in  its  direct  action  sleeplessness  with
constant  tendency  to  slumber,  makes  it  in  chronic  sleeplessnesB
a  much  more  permanent  remedy  than  the  frequently  merely
palliative  opium,  especially  as  it  at  the  same  time  keeps  the
bowels  open,  although  only  by  the  indirect  secondary  action  of
each  dose,  consequently  in  a  palliative  way.  It  causes  dry  cou^
dryness  of  the  mouth  and  nose,  in  its  direct  action ;  it  is,  there-
fore, very  useful  in  tickling  cough,  probably  also  in  dry  coryza.
The  flow  of  mucus  from  the  nose,  and  the  flow  of  saliva  observed
from  its  use,  only  belong  to  its  indirect  secondary  action.  The
seeds  cause  convulsions  in  the  facial  and  ocular  muscles,  and  by
their  action  on  the  head,  cause  vertigo,  and  a  dull  pain  in  the
membranes  lying  under  the  skull.  The  practical  physician  will
be  able  to  take  advantage  of  this.  Its  direct  action  lasts  scarcely
twelve  hours.

The  thorn-apple  (datura  stramonium)  causes  extraordinary
waking  dreams,  unconsciousness  of  what  is  going  on,  loud  delirious
talking,  like  a  person  speaking  in  sleep,  with  mistakes  respecting
personal  identity.  A  similar  kind  of  mania  it  cures  specifically.
It  excites  very  specific  convxilsions,  and  has  thus  often  proved
useful  in  epilepsy.  Both  properties  render  it  serviceable  in  the
case  of  persons  possessed.  Its  power  of  extinguishing  reoolleo*
tion  should  induce  us  to  try  it  in  cases  of  weak  memory.  It  is
most  useful  where  there  is  great  mobility  of  the  fibre,  because
its  direct  action  in  large  doses  is  increased  fibrous  mobility. It

'  Hie  sabsequent  iodirect  Beoondaiy  action  is  a  kind  of  fiunt-heartedneai  and  ter-
falnwi.


THB  CVRATINS  POWBBS  OF  DBUQ8.  277

/

eaoses  (in  its  direct  action  ?)  heat  and  dilatation  of  the  pupil,  a
kind  of  dread  of  water,  swollen,  red  face,  twitching  in  the  ocular
musdea,  retarded  stool,  difficult  breathing;  in  its  secondary
jKStion,  slow,  soft  pulse,  perspiration,  sleep.

The  direct  action  of  large  doses  lasts  about  twenty-four  hours ;
rf  small  doses,  only  three  hours.  Vegetable  acids,  and  apparently
citric  acid  in  particular,  suddenly  put  a  stop  to  its  whole  action.*
The  other  species  of  datura  seem  to  act  in  a  similar  manner.

The  specific  properties  of  Virginia  tobacco  (nicotiana  tabacum)
consist,  among  other  things,  in  diminishing  the  external  senses,
and  obscuring  the  intellect ;  it  may  therefore  be  useful  in  weak-
ness of  mind.  Even  in  a  very  small  dose,  it  excites  the  muscular
action  of  the  primae  via)  violently ;  a  property  which  is  valuable
as  a  temporary  oppositely-acting  remedy  (as  is  well  known,
though  it  does  not  fall  to  be  considered  here ) ;  and  as  a  similarly-
acting  remedy  it  is  probably  serviceable  in  chronic  disposition
to  Tomiting  and  to  colics,  and  spasmodic  constriction  of  the
(Bsaphagns,  as  indeed  experience  partially  corroborates.  It
din^nishes  the  sensibility  of  the  primae  viae ;  hence  its  palliative
power  of  lessening  hunger  (and  thirst?)  In  larger  doses,  it
deprives  of  their  irritability  the  muscles  of  voluntary  motion,
and  temporarily  removes  from  them  the  influence  of  the  cerebral
power.  This  property  may  give  it  as  a  similarly-acting  remedy,
curative  powers  in  catalepsy  ;  but  this  very  property  makes  its
constant  employment  in  large  quantities  (as  with  tobacco-smokers
and8nuflF-takers)so  injurious  to  the  tranquil  state  of  the  muscles
belonging  to  the  animal  functions,  that  a  tendency  to  epilepsy,
hjrpochondriasis,  and  hysteria,  are  in  course  of  time  developed,
lie  remarkable  fact,  that  the  employment  of  tobacco  is  so
agreeable  to  insane  persons,  arises  from  the  instinct  of  those  un-
fortunates to  produce  a  palliative  obtuseness  in  the  sensibility  of
their  hypochondria^  and  brain  (the  two  usual  seats  of  their
complaints).  But  as  it  is  here  an  oppositely-acting  remedy,  it
gives  them  but  temporary  relief;  their  desire  for  it  increases,
but  the  end  for  which  it  is  taken  is  not  attained, — on  the  whole

'  A  patieni,  who  was  always  Tiolciitly  affected  by  two  grains  of  the  extract  of  the
pbat^  oDce  experienced  not  the  slightest  effects  from  this  dose.  I  learned  that  he
kad  partaken  of  the  juice  of  a  large  number  of  red  currants  ;  a  considerable  dose  of
pulTerized  oT^r-shells  at  once  restored  the  full  efficacy  of  the  thorn  apple.
'  To  tills  belongs  the  fiseling  of  insatiable  hunger,  which  many  insane  persons
from,  and  for  which  they  generally  appear  to  use  tobacco ;  at  least,  I  have  seen
,  who  had  no  desire  for  tobacco^  especially  such  as  were  affected  with  melancholia^
who  had  rerjr  little  himger.


278  0UGOESnON8  for  ASCSRTAIKIKa

the  oomplaint  is  thereby  increased,  as  it  renders  no  permanent
service.  Its  direct  action  is  limited  to  a  few  hours,  except  in
the  case  of  very  large  doses^  which  extend  to  twenty-four  houiB
(at  the  farthest).

The  seeds  of  the  poison  tree  {strychnos  nux  vomica)  are  very
powerful ;  but  the  morbid  symptoms  it  produces  are  not  yek
accurately  known.  The  most  I  know  concerning  them  is  derived
from  my  own  observation.  They  produce  vertigo,  anxiety,
febrile  rigour,  and  in  their  secondaiy  action  a  certain  immobility
of  all  parts,  at  least  of  the  limbs,  and  a  spasmodic  stretchings
according  to  the  size  of  the  dose.  Hence  they  are  useful,  not
only,  as  is  already  known,  in  intermittent  fever,  but  in  cases  of
apoplexy.  In  their  first  direct  action,  the  muscular  fibre  has  a
peculiar  mobility  imparted  to  it,  the  sensitive  system  is  morbidly
exalted  to  a  species  of  intoxication,  accompanied  by  fearfiilneas
and  horror.  Convulsions  ensue.  The  irritability  seems  to  exhaust
itself  during  this  continued  action  on  the  muscular  fibre,  first  in

the  animal,  then  in  the  vital  functions.  On  passing  into  the  indi-
rect secondary  action,  there  occurs  a  diminution  of  the  irritability^
first,  in  the  vital  functions  (general  perspiration),  then  in  the  ani-
mal, and  lastly  in  the  natural  functions.  In  the  latter,  especially,
this  secondary  action  lasts  several  days.  During  the  secondary
action,  there  is  a  diminution  of  sensibility.  Whether  in  the
primary  direct  action  the  tonicity  of  the  muscle  is  diminished,
to  be  proportionately  increased  in  the  secondary  action,  cannot
be  accurately  determined;  this  much,  however,  is  certain,  that
the  contractility  of  the  fibre  is  as  much  diminished  in  the  secon-
dary action,  as  it  was  increased  in  the  direct  action.

If  this  be  true,  nux  vomica  produces  attacks  similar  to  hysterical
and  hypochondriacal  paroxysms,  and  this  explains  why  it  is  so
often  useful  in  these  complaints.

Its  tendency  to  excite,  in  its  primary  direct  action,  the  contrac-
tility of  the  muscles,  and  cause  convulsions,  and  then  again  in  its
secondary  action  to  diminish  to  an  excessive  degree  the  contrac-
tility of  the  muscles,  shows  such  a  resemblance  to  epilepsy,  that
from  this  very  circumstance  we  must  have  inferred  that  it  would
heal  this  disease,  had  not  experience  already  demonstrated  it.

As  it  excites,  besides  vertigo,  anxiety  and  febrile  rigour,  a  kind
of  delirium  consisting  in  vivid,  sometimes  frightful  visions,  and
tension  in  the  stomach,  so  it  once  quickly  subdued  a  fever  in  a
laborious  reflective  mechanic  in  the  country,  which  began  with
tension  in  the  stomach,  followed  by  a  sudden  attack  of  vertigo,
80  as  to  make  him  fall,  that  left  behind  it  a  kind  of  coiifusion  of


XHS  CUBAraVK  FOWBBS  Or  DBXSQB.  279

tiieundenrtaiidiiig,withfrightftd,  hypochondriacal  ideas,  anxiety,
and  exhaustion.  In  the  morning  he  was  pretty  lively  and  not
exhausted,  but  in  the  afternoon,  about  two  o^clock,  the  attack
commenoed«  He  got  nux  vomioa,  in  increasing  doses,  one  daily,
and  improved.  At  the  fourth  dose,  which  contained  seventeen
grains,  there  occurred  great  anxiety,  immobility  and  stiffness  of
the  limbs,  ending  in  a  profuse  perspiration.  The  fever  and  all
the  nervous  symptoms  disappeared,  and  never  returned,  although
for  many  years  previously  he  had  from  time  to  time  been  subject
to  such  attacks  suddenly  occurring,  yet  unaccompanied  by  fever.

Its  tendency  to  cause  cramps  in  the  abdomen,  anxiety  and
pain  in  the  stomach,  I  availed  myself  of  in  a  dysenteric  fever
(without  purgings),  in  persons  living  in  the  same  house  with
dysenteric  patients.  In  these  cases  it  diminished  the  feeling  of
discomfort  in  the  limbs,  the  feverishness,  the  anxiety,  and  the
pressure  in  the  stomach ;  it  produced  the  same  good  results  in
some  of  the  patients,  but  as  they  had  simple  dysentery  without
diarrhcBay  it  made  the  evacuations  still  rarer,  from  its  tendency
to  cause  constipation.  The  signs  of  deranged  biliary  secretion
shoved  themiselves,  and  the  dysenteric  evacuations,  though  rarer,
were  accompanied  by  just  as  great  tenesmus  as  before,  and  were
of  as  bad  a  character.  The  symptom  of  loss  of  taste,  or  per-
verted taste,  remained.  Its  tendency  to  diminish  the  peristaltic
movements  was  therefore  disadvantageous  in  the  true  simple
dysentery.  In  diarrhoeas,  even  such  as  are  of  a  dysenteric
character,  it  will  be  more  serviceable,  at  least  as  a  palliative
remedy.  During  its  employment,  I  witnessed  twitching  move-
ments under  the  skin,  as  if  caused  by  live  animals,  in  the  limbs,
and  especially  in  the  abdominal  muscles.

St,  Igiuitliis'  heart  (ignalia  aniara)  has  been  observed  to  pro-
duce trembling  of  several  hours'  duration,  twitchings,  cramps,
irascibility,  sardonic  laughter,  giddiness,  cold  perspiration.  In
aimilar  cases  it  will  show  its  efficacy,  as  experience  has  paitly  de-
monstrated. It  produces  febrile  rigour,  and  (in  its  secondary  ac-
tion ?)  stiffness  of  the  limbs,  and  thus  it  has  cured,  by  similarity
of  action,  intermittent  fever,  which  would  not  yield  to  bark ;
probably  it  was  that  less  simple  form  of  intermittent  in  which
the  compUcation  consisted  of  excessive  sensitiveness  and  in-
creased iaTitabilityt(cspecially  of  the  prima)  vise).  But  the  other
symptoms  it  can  produce  must  be  more  accurately  observed,  be-
fore we  can  employ  it  in  those  cases  for  which  it  is  exactly  suited
from  similarity  of  symptoms.

The  purple  foxglove  {digitalis  purpurea)  causes  the most  ex-


280  SUQGESTIONS  FOB  AfiCEBTAIKIKa

oeasiye  disgust  at  food;  during  its  continued  use,  therefore,
ravenous  hunger  not  unfrequentlj  ensues.  It  causes  a  kind  of
mental  derangement,  which  is  not  easily  recognisable,  as  it  onlj
shows  itself  in  unmeaning  words,  refractory  disposition,  obsti-
nacy, cunning,  disobedience,  inclination  to  run  away,  &o.,  which
its  continued  use  frequently  prevents.  Now  as,  in  addition  to
these,  it  produces  in  its  direct  action  violent  headaches,  giddi-
ness, pain  in  the  stomach,  great  diminution  of  the  vital  powers,
sense  of  dissolution  and  the  near  approach  of  death,  a  diminu-
tion of  the  rapidity  of  the  heart's  beats  by  one  half,  and  reduc-
tion of  the  vital  temperature,  it  may  easily  be  guessed  in  what
kind  of  madness  it  will  be  of  service;  and  that  it  has  in  &ct
been  useful  in  some  kinds  of  this  disease,  many  observations
testify,  only  their  particular  symptoms  have  not  been  recorded.
In  the  glands  it  creates  an  itching  and  painfrd  sensation,  which
accounts  for  its  efficacy  in  glandular  swellings.

It  produces,  as  I  have  seen,  inflammation  of  the  Meibomian
glands,  and  is  a  certain  cure  for  such  inflammations.  Moreover,
as  it  appears  to  depress  the  circulation,  so  does  it  seem  to  excite
the  absorbent  vessels,  and  to  be  most  serviceable  where  both  are
too  torpid.  The  former  it  assists  by  virtue  of  similarity,  the  lat-
ter by  virtue  of  antagonism  of  action.  But  as  the  direct  action'
of  foxglove  persists  so  long  (there  are  examples  of  its  lasting
five  or  six  days),  it  may,  as  an  antagonistically  acting  remedy,
take  the  place  of  a  permanent  curative  agent.  The  last  observa-
tion is  in  reference  to  its  diuretic  property  in  dropsy ;  it  is  anta-
gonistic and  palliative,  but  nevertheless  enduring,  and  valuable
on  that  account  merely.

In  its  secondary  action  it  causes  a  small,  hard,  rapid  pulse ;
it  is  not  therefore  so  suitable  for  patients  who  have  a  similar
(febrile)  pulse,  but  rather  for  such  as  have  a  pulse  like  what  fox-
glove produces  in  its  direct  action — slow,  soft.  The  convulsions
it  causes  in  large  doses,  assign  it  a  place  among  the  anti-epileptio
remedies ;  probably  it  is  only  useful  in  epilepsy  under  certain
conditions,  to  be  determined  by  the  other  morbid  symptoms  it
produces.  During  its  use,  objects  not  unfrequently  appear  of
various  colours,  and  the  sight  becomes  obscured ;  it  will  remove
similar  affections  of  the  retina.  (Its  tendency  to  produce  diarr-
hoea, sometimes  so  adverse  to  the  cure,  is  counteracted,  as  I  have
have  ascertained,  by  the  addition  of  potash.

As  the  direct  action  of  foxglove  lasts  occasionally  several
days  (the  longer  its  use  is  continued,  the  longer  lasts  the  direct
action  of  each  dose ;  a  very  remarkable  fact,  not  to  be  lost  sight


THB  dTRATIYE  P0WKB8  OF  DBUOa  281


\


of  in  practice),  it  is  evident  how  erroneously  those  act,  who,  with
doses,  (the  action  of  the  first  not  having  expired  before  they
have  already  given  the  sixth  or  eighth),  and  thus  in  fact  they
give,  although  unwittingly,  an  enormous  quantity,  which  not
anfrequently  causes  death.*  A  dose  is  necessary  only  every
three,  or  at  most  every  two  days,  but  the  more  rarely  the  longer
it  has  been  used.  (During  the  continuance  of  its  direct  action,
caused  by  foxglove,  as  I  have  found,  to  an  almost  mortal
agony.)

The  pansy  vioht  {viola  tricolor)  at  first  increases  cutaneous
eruptions,  and  thus  shows  its  power  to  produce  skin  diseases,
and  consequently  to  cure  the  same  efl'ectually  and  permanently.

Ipecacuanha  is  used  with  advantage  in  affections  against  which
nature  herself  makes  some  eflForts,  but  is  too  powerless  to  eflFect
the  desired  object. In  these  ipecacuanha  presents  to  the  nerves
of  the  upper  orifice  of  the  stomach,  the  most  sensitive  part  of
the  organ  of  vitality,  a  substance  that  produces  a  most  unconge-
nial disgust,  nausea,  anxiety,  thus  acting  in  a  similar  manner  to
the  morbid  material  that  is  to  be  removed. Againsrt  this  double
attack,  nature  exerts  antagonlstioally  her  powers  with  stUl  greater
energy,  and  thus,  by  means  of  this  increased  exertion,  the  mor-
bid matter  is  the  more  easily  removed. Thus  fevers  are  brought
to  the  crisis,  stoppages  in  the  viscera  of  the  abdomen  and  of  the
cjjest,  and  in  the  womb,  put  in  motion,  miasmata  of  contagious
diseases  expelled  by  the  skin,  cramp  relieved  by  the  cramp  that
ipecacuanha  itself  produces,  their  tension  and  freedom  restored
to  vessels  disposed  to  hemorrhage  from  relaxation,  or  from  the
irritation  of  an  acrid  substance  deposited  in  them,  &c. But  most
distinctly  does  it  act  as  a  similarly  acting  remedy  to  the  disease
sought  to  be  cured,  in  cases  oi'  chronic  disposition  to  vomit  with-
out bringing  anything  away. Here  it  should  be  given  in  very
small  doses,  in  order  to  excite  frequent  nausea,  and  the  tendency
to  vomit  goes  oflf  more  and  more  permanently  at  each  dose,  than
it  would  with  any  palliative  remedy.

Some  benefit  may  be  anticipated  in  some  kinds  of  chronic  pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  &c.,  from  the  administration  of  the  rose-bay

'  A  womao  in  Ediubui^h  gut  for  three  successive  days,  each  day,  three  doees.  each
doM  ooosistiiig  of  only  two  grains  of  the  pulTerized  leaves  of  foxglove,  and  it  was  a
Qatter  of  surprise  that  she  died  from  such  small  doacs,  after  vomiting  for  six  daya.
It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  it  was  the  same  as  if  she  had  taken  eighteen
gmins  at  one  dene.


282  SUGGESTIONS  FOB  ASCSBTAIKINO

{nerium  oleander\  which  has  the  power  of  causing  palpitation,
anxiety,  and  fainting.  It  causes  swellings  of  the  abdomen  and
diminution  of  the  vital  temperature,  and  seems  to  be  a  most  powr
erful  vegetable.

The  morbid  symptoms  produced  by  the  nerium  antidysenierv'
cum  are  not  sufficiently  known  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  the
cause  of  its  real  remedial  powers ;  but  as  it  primarily  increases
the  stools,  it  apparently  subdues  diarrhoeas  as  a  similarly  acting
remedy.

The  bear''s  herry  {arbutus  uva  ursi)  has  actually,  without  pos-
sessing any  acridity  perceptible  to  the  senses,  not  unfrequently
increased  the  difficidty  of  passing  water,  and  the  involuntary
flow  of  urine,  by  some  power  peculiar  to  itself;  thereby  show-
ing that  it  has  a  tendency  to  produce  such  aiFections,  and  hence,
as  experience  also  testifies,  it  is  capable  of  curing  similar  disor^
ders  in  a  permanent  manner.

The  gohlerirjlowered  rhododendron  {rhododendron  chrysanthum)
shows,  by  the  burning,  formicating,  and  shooting  pains  it  pro-
duces in  the  parts  affected,  that  it  is  certainly  fitted  to  relieve^
by  similarity  of  action,  pains  in  the  joints  of  various  kinds,  as
experience  also  teaches.  It  causes  difficulty  of  breathing  and
cutaneous  eruptions,  and  thus  it  will  prove  useful  in  similar  dis-
orders, as  also  in  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  because  it  produces
lacrymation  and  itching  of  the  eyes.

The  marsh-tea  (ledum  palustre)  causes,  as  I  have  ascertained,
among  other  effects,  difficult,  painful  respiration  ;  this  account
for  its  efficacy  in  hooping  cough,  probably  also  in  morbid
asthma.  Will  it  not  be  useful  in  pleurisy,  as  its  power  of  so
greatly  diminishing  the  temperature  of  the  blood  (in  its  second-
ary action)  will  hasten  recovery  ?  It  causes  a  painful  shooting
sensation  in  all  parts  of  the  throat,  as  I  have  observed,  and
hence  its  uncommon  virtues  in  malignant  and  inflammatory
sore  throat.  Equally  specific  is,  as  I  have  noticed,  its  power  of
causing  troublesome  itching  in  the  skin,  and  hence  its  great
efficacy  in  chronic  skin  diseases.

The  anxiety  and  the  faiutings  it  occasions  may  prove  of  use
in  similar  cases.  As  a  transitory  and  antagonistically  acting
powerful  diuretic  and  diaphoretic  remedy,.it. may  cure  dropsies;
more  certainly  however,  acute,  than  chronic.

On  some  of  these  properties  depends  its  reputation  in  dysen-
tery. But  were  they  real  cases  of  dysentery,  or  some  of  those
painful  diarrhoeas  so  often  taken  for  it  ? In  the  latter  case  it


THE  CITRATIYE  P0WSB8  OF  DRT7GB.  288

may,  as  a  palliative  remedy,  certainly  hasten  the  cure,  and  even
help  to  complete  it;  but  in  true  uncomplicated  dysentery,  I
have  never  seen  it  of  any  use.  The  long-continued  weakness  it
occasions  was  against  its  being  used  for  a  length  of  time,  and  it
ameliorated  neither  the  tenesmus  nor  the  character  of  the  excre-
tions, though  these  became  more  rare.  The  symptoms  of  de-
ranged bUiary  secretion  were  rather  worse  during  its  use,  than
when  the  patients  were  left  without  medicine.  It  causes  a  pe-
culiar ill-humour,  headache,  and  mental  confusion;  the  lower
extremities  totter,  and  the  pupils  dilate.  (Do  both  the  latter '
symptoms,  or  merely  the  last,  belong  to  the  secondary  action
cmly  ?)  An  infusion  of  ten  grains  once  a  day  was  a.  sufficient
dose  for  a  child  six  years  old.

The  primary  direct  action  of  opium  {papaver  somniferum)  con-
sists in  transitory  elevation  of  the  vital  powei-s,  and  strengthen-
ing the  tone  of  the  blood-vessels  and  muscles,  especially  of  those
belonging  to  the  animal  and  vital  functions,  as  also  in  excitation
of  the  mental  organs — the  memory,  the  imagination,  and  the
organ  of  the  passions; — thus,  moderate  doses  are  followed  by  a
disposition  to  work,  sprightliness  in  conversation,  wit,  remem-
brance of  former  times,  amorousness,  &c. ;  large  doses  by  bold-
ness^ courage,  revenge,  inordinate  hiliarity,  lasciviousness ;  still
larger  doses  by  furious  madness,  convulsions.  The  greater  the
dose,  the  more  do  the  individuality,  the  freedom,  and  the  vol-
untary power  of  tlie  mind  sufter  in  sensations,  and  in  power  of
judgment  and  of  action.  Ilence,  inattention  to  external  disa-
greeable circumstances,  to  pain,  &c.  This  condition,  however,
does  not  last  long.  It  is  gradually  followed  by  loss  of  ideas,
the  pictures  of  fancy  fade  by  degrees,  there  supervene  relaxation
of  the  fibre,  sleep.  If  the  use  of  elevated  doses  is  continued,
the  consequences  (indirect  secondary  action)  are,  weakness,
deepliness,  listlessness,  grumbling,  discomfort,  sadness,  loss  of
memory  (insensibility,  imbecility),  until  a  new  excitation  by
opium,  or  something  similar,  is  produced.  In  the  direct  action,
the  irritability  of  the  fibre  seems  to  be  diminished  in  the  same
proportion  as  its  tone  is  increased ;  in  the  secondary  action,  the

latter  is  diminished,  the  former  increased.*  ^The  direct  action,
Btill  more  than  the  secondary  action,  prevents  the  mind  from

'  There  occurs  a  marked  sensitiveness,  especially  for  things  that  produce  disagreea*
Ue  effects,  for  fright,  grief^  fear,  for  inclement  weather,  ^c  If  the  mobility  of  the
fibre  which  occurs  secondarily  is  called  increased  irritability,  I  have  nothing  to  objed
Id  the  tenn ;  lis  sphere  of  action,  however,  is  but  small :  it  is  either  that  fhe  fibre  ii
too  relaxed,  and  cannot  contract  much,  or  that  it  is  in  a  too  ooDtracted  oooditioo,  end


284  SUGOESTIONS  FOB  ASGSBTAINIKa

taking  cognizance  of  sensations  (pain,  sorrow,  &c.),  and  henoe
its  great  pain  subduing  power.

(In  cases  where  only  the  direct  action  as  a  cordial  is  necessarji
it  will  be  requisite  to  repeat  the  administration  of  it  every  three
or  four  hours,  that  is,  each  time  before  the  relaxing  secondary
action,  which  so  much  increases  the  irritability,  ensues.  In  all
such  cases  it  acts  merely  antagonistically,  as  a  palliative  remedy.

Permanent  strengthening  powers  are  not  to  be  expected  from
it  used  in  this  manner,  least  of  all  in  chronic  weakness.  This,
however,  is  a  digression.)

But  if  it  is  wished  to  depress  permanently  the  tone  of  the
fibre,  (I  give  this  name  to  the  power  of  the  fibre  to  contract  and
relax  completely),  to  diminish  permanently  the  deficiency  of
irritability,  as  is  the  case  in  some  cases  of  mania,  in  such  circum-
stances we  may  employ  opium  with  success,  as  a  similarly  act-
ing remedy,  given  in  elevated  doses,  and  making  use  of  its  indi-
rect secondary  action.  We  must  consider  the  treatment  which
consists  in  giving  opium  in  true  inflammatory  diseases,  e.  g.
pleurisy,  to  be  according  to  this  principle.

In  such  cases,  a  dose  is  necessary  every  twelve  or  twenty-four
hours.

It  appears  that  this  indirect  secondary  action  has  been  made
use  of  on  the  principle  of  a  similarly  acting  remedy  ;  which,  as
far  as  I  am  aware,  is  not  the  case  with  any  other  medicine.
Opium  has,  for  instance,  been  given  with  the  greatest  success,
(not  in  true  venereal  diseases,  for  that  would  be  a  delusion,)  but
in  the  disastrous  efibcts  that  so  often  arise  from  the  abuse  of
mercury  in  syphilis,  which  are  sometimes  much  worse  than  the
syphilis  itself

Before  illustrating  this  employment  of  opium,  I  must  say
something  appropriate  to  the  subject,  concerning  the  nature  of
syphilis,  and  introduce  here  what  I  have  to  say  concerning
mercury.

Syphilis  depends  upon  a  virus,  which,  besides  other  peculi-
arities that  it  developes  in  the  human  body,  has  an  especial  ten-
dency to  produce  inflammatory  and  supj)urating  swellings  of  the
glands  (to  weaken  the  tone?),  to  make  the  mechanical  connex-
ion of  the  fibres  so  disposed  to  separation,  that  numerous
spreading  ulcers  arise,  whose  incurable  character  may  be  known

IB  relaxed  easily  indeed,  but  not  sufficiently,  consequently  is  incapable  of  making  ukj
powerful  eSSxxt  In  this  condition  of  the  fibre,  the  tendency  to  chronic  inflammatinn
it  unmistakable.


THE  CUBATIVE  POWERS  OF


DRubl  286


by  their  round  figure ;  and  lastly,  to  increase  the  irritability.
Now,  as  such  a  chronic  disease  can  only  be  cured  by  a  remedy
capable  of  developing  a  disease  of  similar  character,  no  more  effi-
cacious remedy  could  be  conceived  than  mercury.

The  most  remarkable  power  of  mercury  consists  in  this,  that
in  its  direct  action  it  irritates  the  glandular'system,  (and  leaves
behind  its  glandular  indurations  as  its  secondary  indirect  action,)
weakens  the  tone  of  the  fibres  and  their  connexion,  and  disposes
them  to  separation  in  such  a  manner,  that  a  number  of  spread-
ing ulcers  arise,  whose  incurable  nature  is  shown  by  their  round
form;  and  lastly,  increases  uncommonly  the  irritability  (and
sensibility). Experience  has  confirmed  it  as  a  specific ;  but  as
there  does  not  exist  any  remedy  similar  to  the  disease,  so  the
mercurial  disease  (the  changes  and  symptoms  it  usually  produ-
ces in  the  body)  is  still  very  different  from  the  nature  of  syphilis.
The  syphiltic  ulcers  are  confined  to  the  most  superficial  parts,
especially  the  deuteropathic  ones,  (the  protopathic  ulcers  increase
slowly  in  extent,)  they  secrete  a  viscid  fluid  in  place  of  pus,  their
borders  are  almost  level  with  the  skin  (except  the  protopathic
ones),  and  are  almost  quite  painless  (excepting  the  protopathic
ulcer,  that  arising  from  the  primary  infection,  and  the  suppura-
ting  inguinal gland). The  mercurial  ulcers  burrow  deeper,
^rapidly  increase  in  size,)  are  excessively  painful,  and  secrete
sometimes  an  acrid  thin  ichor ;  sometimes  they  are  covered
with  a  dirty  cheesy  coating,  tlieir  borders  also  become  everted.
The  glandular  swellings  of  syphilis  remain  but  for  a  few  days ;
they  are  either  rapidly  resolved,  or  the  gland  suppurates. The
glands  attacked  by  mercury  are  stimulated  to  increased  action
by  the  direct  action  of  this  metal,  (and  thus  glandular  swellings
from  other  causes  disappear  rapidly  under  its  use,)  or  they  are
left  in  the  state  of  cold  indurations  during  the  indirect  secondary
action. The  syphiltic  virus  produces  induration  of  the  perios-
teum of  those  bones  which  are  nearest  the  surface  and  least
covered  with  flesh ;  they  are  the  seat  of  excessive  pains. In  our
days  this  virus,  however,  never  produces  caries,  notwithstand-
mg  all  my  researches  to  discover  the  contrary. Mercury  de-
stroys the  connexion  of  the  solid  parts,  not  of  the  soft  parts
only,  but  also  of  the  bones ;  it  first  corrodes  the  most  spongy
and  concealed  bones,  and  this  caries  is  only  aggravated  the  more
rapidly  by  the  continued  use  of  the  metal. Wounds  which
have  arisen  from  external  violence  are  changed  by  the  use  of
mercury  into  old  ulcers,  difficult  of  cure ;  a  circumstance  that


286  BUGGESTIONS  FOB  ASGEBTAININO

does  not  occur  with  syphilis.  The  trembling,  so  remarkable  in
the  mercurial  disease,  does  not  occur  in  syphilis.  From  the  uae
of  mercury  there  ensues  a  slow,  very  debilitating  fever,  wiih
thirst,  and  great  and  rapid  emaciation.  The  emaciation  and
weakness  from  sj'^philis  come  on  slowly,  and  remain  within
moderate  limits.  Excessive  sensitiveness  and  sleeplessness  are
peculiar  to  the  mercurial  disease,  but  not  to  syphilis.  The  most
of  these  symptoms  seem  to  be  owing  mther  to  the  indirect
secondary  action,  than  to  the  direct  action  of  the  mercury.

I  have  been  so  circumstantial  on  this  subject,  because  it  ia
often  very  difficult^  for  the  practitioner  to  distinguish  the  chronic
mercurial  disease  from  the  symptoms  of  syphilis ;  and  thus  he
will  be  apt  to  consider  symptoms  as  belonging  to  that  disordeii
whilst  they  are  only  mercurial,  and  go  on  treating  them  with
mercury,  whereby  so  many  patients  are  destroyed ;  chiefly,  how-
ever, because  my  object  is  to  depict  the  mercurial  disease,  in
order  to  show  how  opium  can  cure  it,  by  -virtue  of  similarity
of  action.

Opium  raises  the  sinking  forces  of  patients  suffering  from  the
mercurial  disease,  and  allays  their  irritability,  when  its  direct
action  is  kept  up,  that  is,  when  it  is  given  at  least  every  eight
hours;  and  this  it  does  as  an  antagonistically -acting  rem^y.
This  happens,  however,  only  when  it  is  given  in  large  dose8|
proportioned  to  the  degree  of  weakness  and  irritability,  just  as
it  is  serviceable  only  in  large  and  oft-repeated  doses  in  the  ex-
cessive irritability  of  hysterical  and  hypochondriacal  patients
and  in  the  excessive  sensibility  of  exhausted  individuals.  The
normal  condition  of  the  body  seems  thereby  to  be  restored;  a
secret  metamorphosis  seems  to  take  place  in  the  organism,  and
the  mercurial  disease  is  geadually  conquered.  The  convalescent
patient  can  only  bear  smaller  and  smaller  doses.  Thus  the  mer-
curial disease  seems  to  be  vanquished  by  the  palliative  antago-
nistic power  of  the  opium ;  but  any  one  who  is  aware  of  the
almost  uneradicable  nature  of  the  mercurial  disease,  the  irresisti-
ble manner  in  which  it  destroys  and  dissolves  the  animal  frame
when  it  is  at  its  height,  will  be  convinced  that  a  mere  palliative
could  never  master  this  excessively  chronic  malady,  were  it  not
that  the  secondary  effects  of  opium  were  very  analogous  to  the
mercurial  disease,  and  that  these  tended  to  overcome  the  latter.

*  StoU  (Rat  M«d.  Part  iii,  p.  442,)  doubts  if  there  arc  certain  signs  of  a  peifecUj
eared  tiyphilitie  disease,  t.  «.,  he  himself  knew  not  the  signs  whereby  this  ilinpioo  k
diitingnirfisHe  from  the  merccuial


TBE  CUBATIYE  FOWSBS  OF  DRUGS.  287

The  seoondarj  effects  of  the  coDtinued  use  of  opium  in  large
doses,  increased  irritability,  weakness  of  the  tone,  easy  separa-
tion of  the  solids,  and  difficult  curability  of  wounds,  trembling,
emaciation  of  the  body,  drowsy  sleeplessness,  are  very  similar
to  the  symptoms  of  the  mercurial  disease;  and  only  in  this  do
they  differ,  that  those  of  mercury,  when  they  are  severe,  last  for
years,  often  for  a  lifetime  whilst  those  of  opium  last  but  hours
or  days.  Opium  must  be  used  for  a  long  time,  and  in  enormous
doses,  for  the  symptoms  of  its  secondary  action  to  last  for  weeks
or  longer.  These  brief  secondary  effects  of  opium,  whose  dura-
tion is  limited  to  a  short  time,  arc  thus  the  true  antidote  of  the
mercurial  secondary  effects  in  their  greatest  degree,  which  are
almost  unlimited  in  their  duration ;  from  them  alone,  almost,  can
one  expect  a  permanent,  true  recovery.  These  secondary  actions
can  develope  their  curative  power  during  the  whole  treatment,
in  the  interval  betwixt  the  repetition  of  the  doses  of  opium,  as
soon  as  the  first  direct  action  of  each  dose  is  passed,  and  when
its  use  is  discontinued.

Lead  produces,  in  its  primary  action  on  the  denuded  nerves
(belonging  to  muscular  action?)  a  violent  tearing  pain,  and
(thereby?)  relaxes  the  muscular  fibre  to  actual  paralysis;  it
becomes  pale  and  withered,  as  dissection  shows,  but  its  external
sensibility  still  remains,  though  in  a  diminished  degree.  Not  only
is  the  power  of  contraction  of  the  affected  fibres  diminished,  but
the  motion  that  still  remains  is  more  difficult  than  in  other  similar
relaxations,  fi'om  almost  total  loss  of  the  irritability.  ^  This,  how-
ever, is  observed  only  in  the  muscles  belonging  to  the  natural
and  animal  functions,  but  in  those  belonging  to  the  vital  func-
tions this  effect  occurs  without  pain  and  in  a  less  degree.  As
the  reciprocal  play  of  the  vascular  system  becomes  slower,  (a
hard,  slow  pulse,)  this  satisfactorily  explains  the  diminished
temperature  of  the  blood  attending  the  action  of  lead.

Mercury  also  diminishes  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  various
parts  of  the  muscular  fibres,  but  increases  their  susceptibility  for
the  stimulus,  so  as  to  impart  to  them  an  excessive  mobility.
Whether  this  effect  be  the  direct  or  the  indirect  secondary  action
it  Buffices^that  it  is  very  enduring ;  and  hence,  even  if  of  the
latter  character,  it  would  be  very  efficacious,  as  an  oppositely-

'  The  ooDYulfliye  vomiting  and  dysenteric  diarrbcea  which  sometimes  follow  the
■gestioD  of  large  quantities  of  lead,  must  be  explained  on  other  principles,  and  do
not  fidl  to  be  ooosiderod  here ;  neither  does  the  vomiting  that  ensues  from  lai^
doMi  of  opinm.


288  8U60ESTI0NS  FOR  ASCSRTAINIir0

acting  remedy  in  the  lead  disease ;  if  of  the  first  character,  how-
ever, it  will  act  as  a  similarly-acting  remedy.  Bubbed  in  ex-
ternally, as  well  as  given  internally,  mercury  has  an  almott
specific  influence  over  the  lead  disease.  Opium  increases  in  its
direct  action  the  contraction  of  the  muscular  fibre,  and  diminishes
its  irritability.  By  virtue  of  the  former  property,  it  acts  as  a
palliative  in  the  lead  disease ;  by  the  latter,  however,  perma-
nently, as  a  similarly-acting  remedy.

From  the  above  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  lead  disease,  it  will  be
seen  that  the  service  this  metal  (lead  has  afforded,  when  cau
tiously  used  in  diseases,  depends  entirely  on  its  antagonistic^
though  uncommonly  long-lasting,  action,  the  consideration  of
which  does  not  belong  to  this  Essay.

The  true  nature  of  the  action  of  arsenic  has  not  yet  been  ac-
curately investigated. Thus  much  I  have  myself  ascertained,
that  it  has  a  great  tendency  to  excite  that  spasm  in  the  blood-
vessels, and  the  shock  in  the  nervous  system,  called  febrile  rigour.
If  it  be  given  in  a  pretty  large  dose  (one-sixth  or  one  fifth  of  a
grain)  to  an  adult,  this  rigour  becomes  very  evident  This  tendency
makes  it  a  very  powerful  remedy  as  a  similarly-acting  medicine
in  intermittent  fever,  and  this  all  the  more,  as  it  possesses  the
power,  observed  by  me,  of  exciting  a  daily-recurring,  although
always  weaker,  paroxysm,  even  although  its  use  be  discontinued.
In  typical  diseases  of  all  kinds  (periodical  head-ache,  &c.),  this
type-exciting  property  of  arsenic  in  small  doses  (one-tenth  to
at  most  one-sixth  of  a  grain  in  solution)  becomes  valuable,  and
will,  I  venture  to  guess,  become  invaluable  to  our  perhaps  bolder,
more  observant,  and  more  cautious  successors. As  its  action
lasts  several  days,  so,  frequently-repeated  doses,  be  they  ever
so  small,  accumulate  in  the  body  to  an  enormous,  a  dangerous
dose. If,  then,  it  be  found  necessary  to  give  a  dose  daily,  each
successive  dose  should  be  at  least  a  third  smaller  than  the
previous  one. A  better  procedure  is,  when  we  have  to  treat
short  typical  diseases  with,  say,  two  days'  interval,  always  to
pass  over  the  following  fit  without  giving  any  arsenic,  and  another
dose  only  about  two  hours  before  the  third  fit It  will  be  best
to  act  so  even  in  the  case  of  quartan  fever,  and  only  commenoe
to  treat  the  series  of  the  intermediate  paroxysms  when  we
• have  attained  our  object  with  regard  to  the  first  series  of  parox-
ysms. (In  the  case  of  longer  intervals,  as  seven,  nine,  eleven,


THk  CUBATnrE  POWEBS  OF  DBUGS. 289

The  eontinued  iLse  of  oraenic  in  large  doses  gradaall  j  causes  a&'
almost  constant  febrile  state ;  it  will  thus,  as  indeed  experience
has,  to  a  certain  degree,  taught  us,  prove  useful  in  hectic  and'
and  remittent  fever,  as  a  similarly-acting  remedy ;  in  small  doses,
(about  one-twelfth  of  a  grain).  Such  a  continued  employment
of  arsenic,  however,  will  always  remain  a  masterpiece  of  art,  as*
it  possesses  a  great  disposition  to  diminish  the  vital  heat  and  the
tone  of  the  muscular  fibre.  (Hence  the  paralyses  from  a  strong
dose,  or  a  long-continued  and  incautious  employment  of  it)
These  latter  properties  will  enable  it  to  prove  of  service  as  an
antagonistic  remedy  in  pure  inflammatory  diseases.)  It  dimin-
ishes the  tone  of  the  muscular  fibre,  by  diminishing  the  propor-
tion and  cohesion  of  coagulable  lymph  in  the  blood,  as  I  have
convinced  myself  by  drawing  blood  from  persons  suffering  from
the  effects  of  arsenic,  more  especially  such  as  had  a  too  inspissated^
blood  before  the  use  of  this  metallic  acid.  But  not  only  does  k.
diminish  the  vital  heat,  and  the  tone  of  the  muscolarfibre,  but  also,;
as  I  think  I  have  fairly  proved  to  myself,  the  sensibility  of  the
nerves.  (Thus,  in  cases  of  maniacs,  with  tense  fibre,  andinspissatfed
blood,  a  small  dose  of  it  procures  quiet  sleep,  in  its  character  of  aii
antagonistically -acting  substance,  where  all  other  remedies  fail.
Persons  poisoned  by  arsenic  are  more  composed  about  their  state,.
than  might  be  expected.  Thus  it  generally  seems  to  kill  more  by
extinguishing  the  vital  power  and  sensibility,  thanby  its  corrosive
This  being  borne  in  mind,  the  rapid  decomposition  of  the  bodies
of  those  poisoned  by  arsenic,  like  cases  of  death  by  mortification,
will  be  readily  comprehended.)  It  weakens  the  absorbent
system,  a  circumstance  whence,  perhaps,  we  may  one  day  derive
some  curative  power  (as  a  similarly  or  as  an  antagonistically-
acting  remedy  ?),  but  which  must  be  always  a  powerful  ob-
jection to  its  long  continued  use.  I  would  direct  attention  to
its  peculiar  power  of  increasing  the  irritability  of  the  fibre,  es-
pecially of  the  system  p{  the  vital  functions.  Hence  cough,
and  hepce  the  above-mentioned  chronic  febrile  actions.

When  arsenic  is  used  for  a  length  of  time,  and  in  pretty  large
doses,-  it  seldom  fails,  especially  if  diaphoretics  and  a  heating
diet  be  used  simultaneously,  to  cause  some  chronic  cutaneous
disease  (at  least  desquamation  of^he  skin).  This  tendency  ren-
ders it  an  efficacious  remedy  in  the  hands  of  the  Indian  physi-
cian, in  that  frightful  skin  disease,  elephantiasis. Would  it  not

abo  be  serviceable  in  pellagra  ? If  it  be  truly  (as  isconfidenfllp

19


^  BUGOKSnONS  FOB  ASGBBTAI9IK&

affirmed)  of  servioe  in  lijdiopliobia,  it  nmst  act  by  yirtae  of  ita
power  to  dimiTiiBh  (the  influence  of  the  nerves  on)  the  attractioa
of  the  parts  of  the  muscular  fibre  and  its  tone,  as  also  the  senai-
bilitjr  of  the  nerves,  therefore  antagonisticallj.  It  produoea
acute,  continued  pains  in  the  joints,  as  I  have  seen.  I  shall  not
attempt  to  determine  how  we  may  avail  ourselves  of  this  pro*
perty  in  a  curative  point  of  view.

What  influence  the  arsenic  disease,  the  lead  disease,  and  the
inercurial  disease,  may  have  over  each  other,  and  if  the  one
may  be  destroyed  by  means  of  the  other,  future  observationa
can  alone  decide.

Should  the  accidents  produced  by  a  long-continued  use  of
arsenic  become  threatening  (besides  Uie  employment  of  sulphur-
etted hydrogen  in  drinks  and  baths  to  extirpate  what  still  re*
mains  of  the  substance  of  the  metal),  the  firee  use  of  opium  in
the  same  manner  as  in  the  mercurial  disease  (see  above)  Will  bq
qf  service.

«  I  revert  again  to  vegetable  substances ;  and  first,  I  shall  men-
tion a  plant,  which  in  violence  and  duration  of  action,  deserves
^  be  placed  alongside  the  mineral  poisons ;  I  allude  to  the  yew,
i^taaiis  bdccata).  Great  circumspection  must  be  employed  in  the
use  of  its  various  parts,  more  particularly  of  the  bark  of  the  tree
when  in  flower ;  the  cutaneous  eruptions,  with  signs  of  gangre-
nous decomposition  of  the  fibre,  which  sometimes  occur  several
weeks  after  the  last  dose,  the  ^tal  catastrophe  that  sometimes
takes  place  suddenly,  sometimes  several  weeks,  after  the  last
dose,  with  symptoms  of  mortification,  &c.,  teach  us  this.  It
produces,  it  appears,  a  certain  acridity  in  all  the  fluids,  and  an
inspissation  of  the  lymph ;  the  vessels  and  fibres  are  irritated,
and  yet  their  functions  are  more  impeded  than  fS^ilitated.  The.
scanty  evacuations,  accompanied  by  tenesmus,  the  dysuria,  the
viscid,  salt,  acrid  saliva,  the  viscid  foetid  sweat,  the  cough,  the
flying  acute  pains  in  the  limbs  after  perspiration,  the  podagra^
the  inflammatory  erysipelas,  the  pustules  on  the  skin,  the  itch-
ing and  redness  of  the  skin,  underneath  which  the  glands  liSi
the  artificial  jaundice,  the  horripilation,  the  continued  fever,
&C.,  it  produces,  are  all  proo&  of  this.  But  the  observatLooA
^re  not  accurate  enough  to  enable  us  to  determine  which  is  thei
primary,  which  the  secondary  action.  The  direct  action  seema^
to  continue  for  a  considerable  time.  A  lax,  unexcitable  state
of  the  fibres  and  vessels,  especially  of  those  belonging  to  the,
absorbent  system,  which  seem  partly  deprived  of  vital  power,.


TBJt  CURATiyX  POWXBS  OF  DRTT08.  29f

appean  to  be  its  seoondary  action.  Hence  the  perspiration,  the
flbw  of  saliva,  the  frequent  discharge  of  watery  nrine,  the
haBmoirhages  (a  dissolv^  state  of  the  red  parts  of  the  blood) ;
and  after  large  doses,  or  too  long-continued  employment,  the
diopsy,  the  obstinate  jaundice,  the  petechise,  the  gangrenous
decomposition  of  the  fluids.  Employed  cautiously  in  gradually*
increased  doses,  it  may,  as  indeed  experience  has  partiy  shown,
be  employed  with  lasting  advantage  in  a  similar  derangement
of  the  fluids,  and  in  a  similar  state  of  the  solids ;  in  a  word,  in
sfanilar  morbid  states  to  those  it  is  capable  of  producing.  In
induration  of  the  liver,  jaimdice,  and  glandular  swellings,  with
tense  fibre,  in  chronic  catarrh,  catarrh  of  the  bladder  (in  dysen-
tery, dysuria,  tumours,  with  tense  fibre?),  in  amenorrhoea  with
tense  fibre.  (On  account  of  its  long-enduring,  direct  action,  it
may  sometimes  be  of  permanent  service  as  an  antagonistically-
actmg  remedy  in  rachitis,  in  amenorrhoea  with  relaxation,  &c.
But  this  does  not  belong  to  our  subject)

The  monkshood  {acomium  napeUus)  excites  formicating,  also
aeate  tearing  pains  in  the  limbs,  in  the  chest,  in  the  jaws ;  it  is
a  prime  remedy  in  pains  of  the  limbs  of  all  kinds  (?) ;  it  will  be
servioeable  in  chronic  tooth-ache  of  a  rheumatic  character,  in
pleurodynia,  in  &ce-ache,  and  in  the  consequences  of  the  im-
plantation of  human  teeth.  It  causes  chilling  pressure  in  the
stomach,  occipital  head-ache,  shootings  in  the  kidneys,  exces-
sively painful  ophthalmia,  cutting  pains  in  the  tongue;  the
practitioner  will  be  able  to  employ  these  artificial  diseases  in
similar  natural  diseases.  It  has  a  peculiar  tendency  to  produce
giddiness,  feintings,  debility,  apoplexy,  and  transient  paralysis,
general  and  partial  paralysis,  hemiplegia,  paralysis  of  particular
limbs, — of  the  tongue,  of  the  anus,  of  the  bladder,  obscuration
of  vision  and  temporary  blindness,  and  singing  in  the  ears.  It
is  also  just  as  serviceable  in  general  and  partial  paralysis  of  the
parts  just  mentioned,  as  experience  has  in  a  great  measure
proved ; — as  a  similarly-acting  remedy,  it  has  in  several  cases
cured  incontinence  of  urine,  paralysis  of  the  tongue,  and  amau-
Toms,  as  also  paralysis  of  the  limbs.  In  curable  marasmus,  and
partial  atrophies,  as  a  remedy  capable  of  producing  similar
morbid  symptoms,  it  will  certainly  do  more  than  all  other
known  remedies.  Successful  cases  of  this  kind  are  on  record*
Almost  as  specifically  does  it  produce  convulsions,  general  as
well  as  partial,  of  tiie  facial  muscles,  of  the  muscles  of  the
lips  on  one  side,  of  the  muscles  of  the  throat  on  one  side


an  SUOaSSTIONS  FOB  ASCSETAIKIKO

of  the  ocular  muscles.  In  all  these  last  afiEections  it  will
prove  iiseful,  as  it  has  also  cured  epilepsies.  It  causes  asthma;
how,  then,  can  it  be  wondered  at,  Uiat  it  has  several  times
cured  different  sorts  of  asthma?  It  produces  itching,  formica-
tion in  the  skin,  desquamation,  reddish  eruption,  and  is  henoa.
so  useful  in  bad  cutaneous  affections  and  ulcers.  Its  pretended
efficacy  in  the  most  obstinate  venereal  sufferings,  was  probablj
only  founded  on  its  power  over  the  symptoms  of  the  mercury
that  had  been  previously  employed  in  that  disease ;  and  this
conclusion  is  justified  by  what  we  know  of  its  action.  It  ia
valuable  to  know  that  monkshood,  as  an  exciter  of  pain,  cuta-
neous affections,  swellings,  and  irritability, — ^in  a  word,  as  a
similarly-acting  remedy,  is  powerful  in  subduing  the  similar
mercurial  disease,  and  is  even  preferable  to  opium,  as  it  leaves
behind  it  no  debility.  Sometimes  it  causes  a  sensation  about
the  navel,  as  if  a  ball  rose  up  thence,  and  spread  a  cold  feeling
over  the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  head ;  this  would  lead  ua
to  use  it  in  similar  cases  of  hysteria.  In  the  secondary  action,
the  primary  coldness  in  the  head  seems  to  change  into  a  burn-
ing sensation.  In  its  primary  action  are  observed  general  cold*
ness,  slow  pulse,  retention  of  urine,  mania ;  in  its  secondary
action,  however,  an  intermitting,  small,  rapid  pulse,  general
perspiration,  flow  of  urine,  diarrhoea,  involuntary  faxjal  evacua-
tion, sleepy  intoxication.  (Like  several  other  plants  that  pro-
duce a  cooling  effect  in  their  primary  action,  it  resolves  glanda*
lar  swellings.)  The  mania  it  causes  is  a  gay  himiour  alternating
with  despair.  As  a  similarly-acting  remedy,  it  will  subdue
manias  of  that  sort  The  usual  duration  of  its  efficacy  is  firom
seven  to  eight  hours,  excepting  in  cases  of  serious  effects  from
very  large  doses.

The  black  heUebore  {heUeborus  niger)  causes,  if  used  for  a  long
time,  severe  head-aches,  (hence,  probably,  its  power  in  some
mental  affections,  also  in  chronic  head-aches,)  and  a  fever;
hence  its  power  in  quartan  fever,  and  hence  also,  partly,  its
efficacy  in  dropsies,  the  worst  kinds  of  which  are  always  accom-
panied by  remitting  fever,  and  wherein  it  is  so  useful^  aided  by
its  diuretic  power.  (Who  can  tell  whether  this  belongs  to  its
primary,  or,  as  I  am  inclined  to  think,  its  secondary  action  7
This  power  is  allied  to  its  property  of  exciting  to  activity  the
blood-vessels  of  the  abdomen,  rectum,  and  uterus.)  Its  power,
of  causing  a  constrictive,  suffocating  sensation  in  the  noflOi


rem  curative  powbbs  of  dbuob.  2M

kind  of  mental  disease).  The  frequency  with  which  it  is  oon*
founded  with  other  roots  is  the  reason  why  we  arc  only  in  pos-
session of  these  few  true  data  of  its  effects.

The  boring,  cutting  pain  that  the  internal  use  of  the  meadow
anemone  {anemone  pratensis)  causes  in  weak  eyes,  led  to  its  suc-
cessful employment  in  amaurosis,  cataract,  and  opacity  of  the
oomea.  The  cutting  headache  caused  by  the  internal  employ-
ment of  the  inflammable  crystalline  salt  obtained  by  distillation
with  water,  would  lead  us  to  employ  this  plant  in  a  similar
case.  Most  likely  it  is  on  this  account  that  it  once  cured  a  case
of  melancholia.

The  doue  gilUftower  {geum  urbanum\  besides  its  aromatic  qua-
lities, possesses  a  nausea-exciting  power,  which  always  causes  a
febrile  state  of  body,  and  hence  its  service  in  intermittent  fever^
when  used  as  an  aromatic  along  with  ipecacuanha.

The  principle  that  constitutes  the  medicinal  power  of  the  kernel
of  the  cherry  {prunus  cerastis),  of  the  sour  cherry  {prunus padu8\
ijiihepeach  {amygd/dus persica\  of  the  bitter  variety  of  the  aJr
mond  {amygdalus  comm^mis)  and  more  especially  of  the  leaves  of
the  cherry-laurel  {prunus  laurocerasus),  possesses  the  peculiar  pro-
perty of  increasing  the  vital  power  and  contractility  of  the  mus-
cular fibre  in  its  direct  action,  as  notably  as  it  depresses  both  in
its  secondary  action.  Moderately  large  doses  arc  followed  by
anxiety,  a  peculiar  cramp  of  the  stomach,  trismus,  rigidity  of  the
tongue,  opisthotonos,  alternately  with  clonic  cramps  of  various
kinds  and  degrees,  as  its  direct  action;*  the  irritability  is  gra-

'  If  it  is  sought  to  deny  the  primary  action  of  the  principle  of  bitter  almond,
vldcfa  I  haTe  represented  as  producing  the  phenomena  of  increased  power  of  coo-
tnctioD  in  the  muscular  fibre  and  exaltation  of  the  vital  power,  on  this  ground,  that
in  some  cases  of  monstrous  doses,  death  occurs  almost  instantaneously  without  any
perceptible  reaction  of  the  vital  power  or  pain,  as  great  a  mistake  would  be  made,
M  if  all  pain  should  be  denied  to  death  by  the  sword,  and  it  should  be  affirmed  that
tlie  stroke  of  the  sword  did  not  produce  a  peculiar  condition  different  Ifroni  tlie  death
that  followed  it  This  pain  will  be  just  as  intense,  although  perhaps  less  than  mo
meotary,  as  the  sensation  of  anxiety  and  torment  will  be  indcscrilAble,  which  may
and  must  follow  a  fatal  dose  of  cherry-laurel  water,  though  its  action  lasts  scarce  a
mmute.  This  is  proved  by  the  case  recorded  by  Madden,  of  excessive  anxiety  in  the
region  of  the  stomach  (the  probable  region  of  the  chief  organ  of  the  vital  power)  of  a
perMn  killed  in  a  few  minutes  by  a  large  dose  of  cherry-Iuurel  water.  That  in  this
brief  space  of  time,  the  whole  series  of  phenomena  that  follow  a  not  fatal  dose,  can-
not make  their  appearance,  is  easily  understood ;  yet  it  is  probable  that  changes
tare,  do  actually  take  place  in  the  animal  organism,  in  this  short  time  (until  a  few
BStants  before  death,  t,  e^  the  few  inf^tants  that  the  indirect  secondary  action  lasts.)
Hun,  electrical  phenomena  may  be  seen,  when  they  can  be  gradually  passed  before
the  eyea;  hut  in  the  lightning  rapidly  flashing  before  us,  we  scarce  can  teU  what  we
or  hear.


SM  SUGCUBSnONB  FOB  ASOBBTAUnOHk

dually  exhausted,'  and  in  the  secondary  action  the  oonl
of  the  muscular  fibre  and  the  vital  power  sink  in  the  same  degree
that  they  had  previously  been  exalted.  There  follow  cold,  re*
laxation,  paralysis, — which  also,  however,  soon  pass  ofE

(Cherry-laurel  water  has  now  and  then  been  used  as  a  domeslio
analeptic,  in  debility  of  the  stomach  and  body,  that  is,  as  aa
oppositely-acting  palliative,  and,  as  might  have  been  guessed,
with  bad  effect The  result  was  paralysis  and  apoplexy.)

More  remarkable,  and  peculiarly  belonging  to  our  subject,  k
the  curative  power  of  its  direct  action  (which  consists  in  a  kind
of  febrile  paroxysm)  in  intermittent  fever,  especially,  if  I  mistahe
not,  in  that  kind  of  intermittent  depending  on  a  too  great  oon-
tractility  of  the  muscular  fibre,  which  is  incurable  by  bark  al<nie.
Equally  efficacious  has  black  cherry  water  proved  in  the  0091*
vlioi^ofcluldreQ.  As  a  similarly  acting  remedy,  chenylani.!
water  will  prove  efficacious  in  diseases  from  too  tense  fibre,  (nt
generally  where  the  contractility  of  the  muscular  fibre  fiur  ex-
ceeds its  relaxing  power ;  in  hydrophobia,  in  tetanus,  in  the
spasmodic  closure  of  the  biliary  excretory  ducts  and  similar  tonie
spasmodic  affections,  in  some  manias,  &c,^  as  several  observatioBS
have  shown.  In  proper  inflammatory  diseases  it  also  desenres
attention,  where  it  would,  to  some  extent,  operate  as  a  similarly-
acting  remedy.  If  the  diuretic  property  observed  fix)m  the  bitter-
almond  principle  lies  in  its  indirect  secondary  action,  we  may
hope  much  fi-om  it  in  dropsy,  with  a  chronic  inflammatory  con-
dition of  the  blood.

The  power  of  the  bark  of  the  sour  chister-cherry  {pnmiu padui)
over  intermittent  fever  lies  likewise  in  the  bitter-almond  prin-
dple  it  contains,  by  means  of  which  it  comports  itself  as  a  simi-
larly-acting  remedy.

Of  the  sundew  {drosera  rotundifolia)  we  know  nothing  certain,
except  that  it  excites  cough,  and  hence  it  has  been  of  use  in  most
catarrhal  coughs,  as  also  in  the  influenza.

The  curative  principle  in  the  flowers  and  other  parts  of  the

^  A  email  lixard  {lacerta  agUi9\  that  bad  moved  about  pretty  npidly  for  a  mionte
ID  diluted  cberry-laurel-water,  I  placed  in  ooDoentrated  cherry-laurel  water.  Hm
motions  became  instantly  so  ezcessiyely  rapid,  that  the  eye  oould  scarcely  IbQov
them  for  some  seconds ;  then  there  occurred  one  or  two  slow  conTulsioos,  and  thai
total  loss  of  motion :  it  was  dead.

*  Tonic  (and  clonic)  spasms  without  an  inflammatory  state  of  the  blood,  and  wbMi
the  consciousness  is  little  aflbcted,  appear  to  be  the  peculiar  sphere  of  actkxi  of  tha
principle  of  bitter  almonds,  as  it»  as  fiur  as  I  know,  does  not  elevate  the  villi
tempenture^even  in  its  direet  actioo,  and  leayet  the  Moaitifa  tyiAaia  wnathctwt.


TBfe-  CnraULTITX  P0WXB8  OF  DBUQflL  SOS

Met  {foanivieuB  niger)^  appears  to  lie  in  its  primary  direct  aotioii
of  exalting  the  oontractiTe  power  of  the  mnscolar  fibres  belonging
ehieflj  to  the  natural  and  vital  functions,  and  of  raising  the
temperature  of  the  blood,  whilst,  in.its  indirect  secondary  actioni
it  brings  down  the  strength  of  the  muscular  fibre,  lowers  thd
temperature,  relaxes  the  vital  activity,  and  diminishes  sensatioii
itMl£  If  this  be  the  case,  as  I  think  it  is,  the  good  that  it  does
in  the  true  spasm  of  the  finest  extremities  of  the  arteries,  in
dineaaes  firom  a  chill,  catarrhs,  erysipelas,  is  in  virtue  of  its  simi*
iarity  of  action.  Have  not  the  elder  species  the  power  ot  pro-
doeiiig  transitory  erysipelatous  inflammation?

Various  kinds  of  sumach^  considered  to  be  poisonous,  e.  g.^  rkus
fodieana^  appear  to  possess  a  specific  tendency  to  produce  erysi*
pelatons  inflammation  of  the  skin  and  cutaneous  eruptions.  May
it  not  be  useful  in  chronic  erysipelas,  and  the  worst  kinds  of  skin
diseases?  When  its  action  is  too  violent,  it  is  checked  by  elder,
(a  similarly-acting  remedy  ?)

OaimphoT  in  large  doses  diminishes  the  sensibility  of  the  whole
aenrous  system;  the  influence  of  the,  as  it  were,  benumbed  vital
qpirits  (if  I  may  be  allowed  to  use  a  coarse  expression),  on  the
lanses  and  motion  is  suspended.  There  occurs  a  congestion  in
the  brain,  an  obscuration,  a  vertigo,  an  inability  to  bring  the
muades  imder  tiie  dominion  of  the  will,  an  incapacity  for  thought,
for  sensation,  for  memory.  The  contractile  power  of  the  mus-
eular  fibres,  especially  of  those  belonging  to  the  natural  and
vital  functions,  seems  to  sink  to  actual  paralysis ;  the  irritability
is  depressed  in  a  like  degree,  especially  that  of  the  extreme  ends
of  the  blood-vessels,*  that  of  the  larger  arteries  less,  and  still  less
that  of  the  heart  There  occur  coldness  of  the  external  parts,
■mall,  hard,  gradually  diminishing  pulse,  and  on  account  of  the
di£ferent  state  of  the  heart  from  that  of  the  extreme  ends  of  the
bloodvessels,  anxiety,  cold  sweat.  The  above  condition  of  the
fibre  causes  an  immobility  of  the  muscles,  e.  g.,  of  the  jaws,  of
the  anus,  of  the  neck,  that  resembles  a  tonic  spasm.  There  en-
sue deep  slow  breathing,  fainting.^  During  the  transition  to  the
secondary  action,  there  occur  convulsions,  madness,  vomiting,
trembling. In  the  indirect  secondary  action  itself,  the  awaken-

*- ■  —  - I I  I  I  _  -  -  ■ — ^

*  Hw  noTotu  power  and  its  condition  seems  to  have  most  influence  on  these,
lew  CD  the  larger  veMels,  least  of  all  on  the  heart

*  ▲  proo(  according  to  Oarminati,  that  Camphor,  far  from  extinguishing  the  irri-
Iriflitj,  oolj  suspends  it  so  long  as  the  muscles  are  in  connexion  with  the  benumhed
•lile  of  the  nenree— is,  that  when  all  sensation  b  extinguished  b/  means  of  camphor,
At  hMit^  if  cot  oot^  contmoes  to  beat  all  the  more  stronglj  for  hours  alterwank


S96  aUOaSSSlONS  fob  ASOSRTAimNA

ing  of  the  sensibilitj,  and  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expiesaon,
the  mobility  of  the  previously  benuiiibed  nervoius  spirit  fiiBt
commence;  the  almost  extinguished  mobility  of  the  extremities
of  the  arteries  is  restored,  the  heart  triuQiphs  oyer  the  previous
resistance.  The  previous  slow  pulsations  increase  in  velocity
and  in  fiilncss,  the  play  of  the  circulating  system  attains,  or  in
^ome  cases  (from  larger  doses  of  camphor,  from  plethora,  &c»)
surpasses,  its  former  state, — the  pulse  becomes  more  rapid,  and
more  full  The  more  motionless  the  bloodvessels  were  previr
ously,  the  more  active  do  they  now  become ;  the  temperature
of  the  whole  body  becomes  increased,  with  redness,  and  unifonn,
sometimes  profuse,  perspiration.  The  whole  process  is  ended  in
six,  eight,  ten,  twelve,  or  at  most  twenty-four  hours.  Of  all  the
muscular  fibres,  the  mobility  of  the  intestinal  canal  returns
latest  In  every  case  where  the  contractile  power  of  the  musr
cular  fibres  greatly  preponderates  over  their  power  .of  relaxation^
camphor,  as  an  antagonistically-acting  remedy,  procures  rapid
but  only  palliative  relief;  in  some  manias^  in  local  and  general
inflammations,  of  a  pure,  of  a  rheumatic,  and  of  an  erysipelatous
character,  and  in  diseases  arising  from  a  chilL

As  in  pure  malignant  typhus,  the  system  of  the  muscular
fibre,  the  sensitive  system,  and  the  depressed  vital  power,  prer
sents  something  analogous  to  the  direct  primary  action  of  cam*
phor,  it  operates  as  a  similarly-acting  remedy,  that  is,  perma*
nently  and  beneficially.  The  doses  must,  however,  be  suffi-
ciently large  to  produce  the  appearance  of  a  still  greater  insensi-
bility and  depression,  but  given  seldom,  only  about  every  thirty-
aix  or  forty-eight  hours.

If  camphor  actually  removes  the  strangury  caused  by  can?
tharides,  it  docs  this  as  a  similarly -acting  remedy,  for  it  also
causes  strangury.  The  bad  elTccts  of  drastic  purgatives  it  re-
jpaoves,  chiefiy  as  a  suspender  of  sensatiou,  and  a  relaxer  of  the
fibre  (consequently  an  antagonistic,  palliative,  but  here,  admira-
ble remedy).  In  the  bad  secondary  efiects  of  squill,  when  they
are  chronic — a  too  easily  excitable  action  of  the  contractile  and
relaxing  power  of  the  muscular  fibre — it  acts  only  as  a  pallii^
tive,  and  less  efficaciously,  unless  the  doses  be  frequently  re-
peated. The  same  may  be  said  with  regard  to  its  efiects  in  the
chronic  symptoms  caused  by  the  abuse  of  mercury.  As  a  simi-
larly-acting remedy,  it  is  eminently  serviceable  in  the  long-con-
tinued rigour  of  degenerated  (comatose)  intermittent  fevers,  as  an
adjunct  to  bark. Epilepsy  and  convulsions  dependent  on  relax-


TBS  CURATIVE  |»OWSB8  OF  DBUGa  297

ed  fibre  deprived  of  its  irritability,  are  rapidly  cured  by  the
fimilar  action  of  camphor.  It  is  an  approved  antidote  to  large
doses  of  opium,  in  which  it  is  chiefly  an  antagonistic  palliative,
but  efficacious  in  consequence  of  the  symptoms  being  but  tran-
sitory. In  like  manner,  opium  is,  as  I  have  ascertained,  an  ex-
cellent antidote  to  large  doses  of  camphor.  The  fi^rmer  raises
the  sunken  vital  power  and  diminished  vital  tem{)erature  caused
by  the  latter,  antagonistically,  but  in  this  case  effectually.  A
carious  phenomenon  is  the  action  of  coffee  in  relation  to  the  di-
rect action  of  large  doses  of  camphor ;  it  makes  the  stomach,
whose  irritability  was  suspended  spasmodically  mobile ;  there
occur  convulsions,  vomiting,  or  when  given  in  clysters,  rapid
^acuation ;  but  neither  does  the  vital  power  become  raised,  nor
do  the  nerves  become  relieved  from  their  stupified  state,  they
lather  become  more  stupified,  as  I  think  I  have  observed.  As
the  most  striking  effect  of  camphor  on  the  nerves  consists  in  this,
that  all  the  passions  are  lulled,  and  a  perfect  indifference  to  ex-
ternal things,  even  of  the  most  interesting  character,  occurs,  as
I  have  ascertained,  it  will  accol'dingly  be  of  service  as  a  similart-
ly-acting  remedy  in  manias,  whose  chief  symptom  is  apathy,
with  slow,  suppressed  pulse,  and  contracted  pupil, — also,  accord-
iDg  to  Auenbrugger,  reti'acted  testicles.  It  is  by  no  means  ad-
visable to  use  it  in  manias  of  every  description.  Used  internal-
ly, camphor  removes  acute  general  and  local  inflammations,  and
also  such  as  are  chronic,  in  a  few  hours ;  but  in  the  fpnner  case,
the  doses  must  be  very  often  repeated  to  admit  of  anything  ef-
ficacious being  performed,  L  e.,  always  a  new  dose  before  the
secondary  action  comes  on.  For  in  its  secondar)''  action,  cam-
phor does  but  the  more  strengthen  the  tendency  to  renewed  in-
flammation, makes  it  chronic,  and  predisposes  the  organism
chiefly  to  catarrhal  diseases,  and  the  bad  effects  of  a  chill.
Used  externally  for  a  length  of  time,  it  can  do  more  good,  and
its  bad  effects  may  be  easily  remedied  in  another  manner.

The  patrons  of  new  medicines  generally  commit  the  error  of
carefully  but  injudiciously  concealing  the  disagreeable  effects  of
the  medicines  they  take  under  their  protection.*  Were  it  not
for  this  suppression  of  the  truth,  we  might,  for  instance,  from
the  morbific  effects  the  bark  of  the  horse-chesimt  {aesculus  hip-


'  Thi»  wc  often  read,  that  this  or  that  powerful  mediciQe  has  cured  so  manj  hun-
dred ctses  of  the  worst  duwases,  without  causing  the  slightest  bad  effects.  If  this
IhC  be  oorroct^  we  may  certainly  infer  the  perfect  inefiicacy  of  the  drug.  The  mort
•erious  the  symptoms  it  causes,  the  more  important  is  it  for  the  practitioner.


SM  tUGOBSnOHB  fOK  ASCBRTAINIMQ

jM9CG»fonum)  is  able  to  produoe,  form  a  just*  estimate  of  itt
medicinal  powers,  and  determine  i^  for  instance,  it  is  soitabto
for  pure  intermittent  fever,  or  some  of  its  varieties ;  and  if  80^
which.  The  sole  phenomenon  we  know  belonging  to  it  is,  that
it  produces  a  constrictive  feeling  in  the  chest  It  will  accordii^
ly  be  foimd  useful  in  (periodical)  spasmodic  asthma.

The  symptoms  produced  on  man  by  the  phytohcca  decandra
medicinal  plant.  In  animals  it  causes  cough,  trembling,  convul-
sions.

As  the  bark  of  the  ehn  (ulmvs  campestris),  when  exhibited  inr
temally,  produces  at  the  commencement*  an  increase  of  cutar
neous  eruptions,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  it  has  a  tendency
to  produce  such  afifections  of  itself  consequently,  that  it  will
be  serviceable  in  them,  which  is  amply  proved  by  experience.

The  juice  of  hemp  leaves  {cannabis  scUiva)  is,  it  would  seem,  ft
narcotic,  similar  in  action  to  opium.  This  is  only  in  appear-
ance, however,  and  owing  to  the  imperfect  accoimts  we  have  of
its  pathogenetic  action.  I  am  much  mistaken  if  it  do  not  poa^
sess  differences  indicative  of  peculiar  medicinal  powers,  if  we
but  knew  it  sufficiently.  It  produces  dimness  of  vision ;  and
in  the  madness  caused  by  it  there  occur  many  phenomena,  genA-
rally  of  an  agreeable  character.

It  appears  as  if  saffron  {crocus  saMvus),  in  its  direct  actioDi
brought  down  the  circulation  and  vital  heat.  Slow  pulse,  pale
£EU^e,  vertigo,  exhaustion,  have  been  observed.  In  this  staged
most  probably  occur  the  melancholy  and  headache  that  have
been  observed  &om  its  action,  and  in  the  second  stage  (the  indi-
rect secondary  action),  occur  the  senseless,  extravagant  gaie^,
the  stupe£EU)tion  of  the  senses,  the  increased  action  in  the  arte-
ries and  heart,  and  lastly,  the  haemorrhage  which  have  been  ob-
served from  its  use.  For  this  reason  it  may  be  useful  in  restor-
ing flows  of  blood  that  have  been  checked,  as  a  similarly -acting
remedy,  as  its  power  of  increasing  the  circulation  occurs  first
in  the  secondary  action ;  consequently,  the  opposite  must  take
place  in  its  direct  action.  It  has  been  found  useful  as  a  similar-
ly-acting remedy  in  vertigo  and  headache,  with  slow  pulse. In

*  In  order  to  draw  a  fisiYourable  inductioo  firom  the  aggravaiiDg  action  of  a  dmg  hk
a  diseaae,  thii  aggrayatkn  must  occur  at  the  oommeucemeDt  of  its  use,  that  is,  in  ita
direct  action ;  in  socfa  cases  only  can  it  be  considered  a  similarly-acting  efficadooa
remedy.  The  morbid  aggravations  occurring  so  often  subsequently  (in  the  indiraflft
tecondary  atiliQii)  piova  the  oontxtiy  la  iU-choien  remedies


THE  OUBATITX  P0WSB8  OF  DBUGB.  299

aome  oaaeB  of  melancholia  with  alow  pulse,  and  in  amenorrhoea,
it  ^>pean  also  to  be  of  service  as  a  similarly-acting  remedy.
It  has  (in  its  direct  action)  produced  death  by  appoplexy,  and
IB  said  to  have  proved  efficacious  in  similar  affections  (probably
in  relaxed  organisms).  The  phenomena  of  its  secondary  action
point  to  much  increased  irritability  of  the  fibre,  hence  probably
the  cause  of  its  so  readily  producing  hysteria.

The  damd  {loUum  temtdentum)  is  such  a  powerfhl  plant,  that
be  who  knows  its  pathogenetic  action  must  congratulate  the  age
when,  for  the  benefit  of  humanity,  its  application  shall  be  known.
The  chief  phenomena  of  the  direct  action  of  the  seeds  are  cramps,
apparently  of  a  tonic  character  (a  kind  of  immobility),  with  re*
laacation  of  the  fibre  and  suspension  of  the  vital  spirits,  great
iiudety,  exhaustion,  coldness,  contraction  of  the  stomach,  dysp-
ncBa,  difficult  deglutition,  rigidity  of  the  tongue  pressive  head-
ache and  vertigo  (both  continue  longer  than  is  known  firom  any
other  drug,  in  the  greatest  degree,  for  several  days),  noises  in  the
ears,  sleeplessness,  insensibility,  or  weakness  of  the  external
senses,  red  &oe,  staring  eyes,  sparks  before  the  eyes.  In  the
tnuudtion  to  the  secondary  action,  the  cramps  become  clonic,
there  occur  stanmiering,  trembling,  vomiting,  diuresis,  and  (cold)
perspiration  (cutaneous  eruptions,  ulcers  on  the  skin  ?)  yawning
(another  kind  of  cramp),  weak  sight^  long  sleep.  In  practice,
cases  of  obstinate  vertigo  and  cephalalgia  present  themselves,
which  we  are  inclined  to  avoid  treating,  from  their  incurability.
The  darnel  appears  to  be  made  expressly  for  the  worst  of  such
cases,  probably  also  for  imbecility,  the  opprobium  of  medicine.
In  deafness  and  amaurosis  something  may  be  hoped  from  its  use.

SquiU  (sciUa  maritima)  appears  to  possess  an  acrid  principle
that  remains  long  in  the  body ;  the  mode  of  operation  of  which^
from  want  of  accurate  observation,  cannot  be  very  well  separa-
ted into  primary  and  secondary  action.  This  acrid  principle
possesses  a  tendency  to  diminish  for  a  long  period  the  capacity
of  the  blood  for  csJoric,  and  hence  to  establish  in  the  organism
a  disposition  to  chronic  inflammation.  Whether  this  power  can
be  applied  to  useful  purposes,  instead  of  being,  as  hitherto,  a
stumbling-block  to  the  use  of  the  drug  itself  I  am  unable,  on
iooount  of  the  obscurity  of  the  subject,  to  determine.  As,  how-
ever, this  power  must  certainly  have  its  limits,  at  least  in  the
oonmiencement)  it  has  only  an  acute  inflammatory  action,  and
afterwards,  especially  afl;er  long-continued  use,  leaves  behind  it
the  slow  chronic  inflammatory  action ;  so  it  seems  to  me  to  be


800  BUGOESnONB  FOB  ASClBTAlinKO

rather  indicated  in  pure  inflammations  with  tense  fibre,  when  itB
nse  is  otherwise  required,  than  in  a  cold  or  hectic  infiammatory
condition  of  the  fluids  and  mobility  of  the  fibre.  The  incom*
parable  aid  derived  from  squill  in  infiammation  of  the  lungs,  and
the  extraordinary  injury  infiicted  by  its  continued  employment
in  chronic  purulent  consumption  of  the  lungs,  as  also  in  pituitoiu
consumption,  prove  this  satisfactorily ;  there  is  no  question  here
of  palliative  relief.  This  acrid  principle  puts  the  mucous  glands
in  a  condition  to  secrete  a  thin,  instead  of  a  viscid  mucus,  as  ii
the  case  in  every  moderately  inflammatory  diathesis.  Squill
causes  a  great  degree  of  strangury,  shewing  thereby  that  it  must
be  very  useful  in  restoring  the  secretion  in  the  suppression  of
the  urine  accompanying  several  kinds  of  dropsy,  as  daily  expo*
rience  confirms.  Rapid,  acute  dropsical  swellings  appear  to  be
its  chief  sphere  of  action.  It  has  cured  some  kinds  of  tickling
cough,  because  it  can  of  itself  cause  cough.

That  most  incomparable  remedy,  white  hellebore  {verairum^
albmn\  produces  the  most  poisonous  efiects,  which  should  inspire
the  physician  who  aspires  to  perfection  with  caution,  and  the
hope  of  curing  some  of  the  most  troublesome  diseases  that  have
hitherto  usually  been  beyond  medical  aid.  It  produces  in  its
direct  action  a  kind  of  mania,  amounting  from  larger  doses  to
hopelessness  and  despair ;  small  doses  make  indifferent  things
appear  repulsive  to  the  imagination,  although  they  are  not  so  in
reality.  It  causes  in  its  direct  action,  a.  heat  of  the  whole  body;
6.  burning  in  different  external  parts,  e,  g.,  the  shoulder-blades,
the  face,  the  head ;  c.  inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  skin  of
the  face,  sometimes  (from  larger  doses)  of  the  whole  body ;  (L
cutaneous  eruptions,  desquamation  of  the  skin  ;  e.  a  formicating
sensation  in  the  hands  and  fingers,  tonic  cramps ;  /  constriction
of  the  gullet,  of  the  larynx,  sense  of  suffocation ;  g.  rigidity  of
the  tongue,  tough  mucus  in  the  mouth ;  h,  constriction  of  the
chest ;  t.  pleuritic  symptoms ;  k.  cramp  in  the  calves ;  L  an
anxious,  (gnawing  ?)  sensation  in  the  stomach,  nausea ;  m.  gripes,
and  cutting  pains  here  and  there  in  the  bowels ;  n.  great  general
anxiety ;  o.  vertigo ;  p,  head-ache  (confusion  of  the  head) ;  q,
violent  thirst.  On  passing  into -the  indirect  secondary  action^
the  tonic  cramps  resolve  themselves  into  clonic  cramps ;  there
occur,  r.  trembling ;  s,  stammering ;  t.  convulsions  of  the  eyes ;
u.  hiccough ;  v.  sneezing  (from  the  internal  use) ;  w.  vomiting
(when  at  its  height,  black,  bloody  vomiting) ;  x.  painful,  scanty
evacuations^  with  tenesmus ;  y.  local,  or  (firom  large  doses)  ge^


«HX  CUBATIYfi  POWXBS  OF  DBU6S.  SOt

neral  oonyukdons :  z,  oold  (from  large  doses,  bloody)  sweat ;  aa^
watery  diuresis ;  bb.  ptyalism ;  cc.  expectoration ;  dd.  general
coldness ;  ee.  marked  weakness ;  ff.  fainting  ;  gg.  long  profound
sleep. — Some  of  the  symptoms  of  its  direct  action,  I.  m.  n.  p.  q.^
wovQd  lead  us  to  use  it  in  dysenteric  fever,  if  not  in  dysentery.
The  mania  it  causes,  together  with  some  symptoms  of  its  direct
iction,  «./  g,  g.  h.  n.  j.,  would  lead  us  to  employ  it  in  hydro-
phobia, with  hopes  of  a  good  result.  A  dog  to  which  it  was
given  had  true  rabies,  lasting  eight  minutes.  The  ancients  speak
of  it  with  approbation  in  hydrophobia.  (In  tetanus?)  in  spas-
modic constriction  of  the  guDet,  and  in  spasmodic  asthma,  it  will
be  found  specific  on  account  of/  and  h.  It  will  prove  of  per-
manent advantage  in  chronic  cutaneous  diseases,  on  account  of
e.  and  d.  as  experience  has  already  shown  with  regard  to  herpes.
In  so-called  nervous  diseases,  when  they  are  dependent  on  tense
fibre  or  inflammatory  symptoms,  (a.  q.)  and  the  symptoms  in  other
respects  resemble  the  veratrum  disease,  it  will  be  of  benefit ;  so
also  in  manias  of  like  character. — The  landlord  of  a  country  inn,
a  man  of  firm  fibre,  robust  make,  red  blooming  countenance,  and
somewhat  prominent  eyes,  had  almost  every  morning,  soon  after
waking,  an  anxious  feeling  in  the  stomachic  region,  which  in  the
course  of  a  few  hours  involved  the  chest,  producing  constriction
there,  sometimes  amounting  to  complete  loss  of  breath ;  in  the
course  of  a  few  hours  the  affection  attacked  the  region  of  the
larynx,  and  suffocation  became  imminent  (swallowing  solids  or
flaids  being  impossible) ;  and  as  the  sun  declined  it  left  these
parts,  and  became  confined  to  the  head,  with  timorous,  despair-
ing, hopeless  suicidal  thoughts,  until  about  ten  o^clock,  when  he
fell  asleep,  and  all  the  morbid  symptoms  disappeared.  The  mania
resembling  that  peculiar  to  veratrum,  the  firm  fibre  of  the  pa-
three  grains  of  it  every  morning,  which  he  continued  for  four
weeks,  with  the  gradual  cessation  of  all  his  suffcriags;  his
malady  had  lasted  four  years  or  more. — A  woman,  thirty -five
years  of  age,  after  having  had  many  epileptic  attacks  during
her  pregnancies,  was  affected  a  few  days  aft^r  her  last  delivery,
with  furious  delirium  and  general  convulsions  of  the  limbs.  She
had  been  treated  for  ten  days  with  emetics  and  purgatives,  with-
out effect  At  midnight  every  night  she  was  attacked  by  fever,
with  great  restlessness,  during  which  she  tore  all  the  clothes  off
her  body,  especially  what  she  had  about  her  neck.  Cinchonai
hsrk  always  made  the  fever  a  few  hours  later,  and  increased  the


801  evQSEBFiom  rom  AscnerAnmre.

thitst  and  anxiety;  the  expreased  juice  of  Btramomtnn,  uaed  ao-
cording  to  Bergius'  method,  soon  quelled  the  convulsions,  and
produced  some  rational  hours,  in  which  it  was  ascertained  thail
her  worst  symptom  (except  the  fever)  was  the  suffocating  feeling
in  the  throat  and  chest,  besides  pain  in  all  her  limbs.  MorOi
however,  it  could  not  do ;  on  the  contrary,  its  continued  use
seemed  rather  to  increase  the  last  mentioned  serious  symptoms;
the  face  was  swollen,  the  anxiety  infinite,  the  fever  greater.
Emetics  did  no  good ;  opium  caused  sleeplessness,  increased  the
restlessness;  the  urine  was  dark -brown,  the  bowels  much  con-
stipated. Blood-letting,  which  was  evidently  not  adapted  to
this  case,  was,  moreover,  contra-indicated  by  the  excessive
weakness.  The  deliria  returned,  notwithstanding  the  extract  of
stramonium,  with  increased  convulsions  and  swelling  of  the
feet.  I  gave  her  in  the  forenoon  half  a  grain  of  veratrum  pow-
der, and  a  similar  dose  in  the  afternoon  at  two  o'clock.  Deliria
of  another  kind  made  their  appearance,  along  with  viscid  mucus
in  the  mouth,  but  no  fever  returned,  the  patient  slept,  andin  ihe
morning  passed  white  cloudy  urine.  She  was  well,  quiet  and
rational,  except  that  the  great  weakness  continued.  The  suffoca-
ting sensation  in  the  throat  was  gone,  the  swelling  of  the  &ce  fell,
as  also  that  of  the  feet,  but  the  following  evening,  without  her
having  taken  any  medicine,  there  occurred  a  constrictive  sensa*
tion  in  the  chest.  She  therefore  got  another  half  grain  of  vera-
trum tlie  following  afternoon;  this  was  followed  by  scarcely
perceptible  delirium,  tranquil  sleep,  in  the  morning  copious  dis-
charge of  urine  and  a  few  small  evacutions.  For  two  more
days  she  got  half  a  grain  of  veratrum  in  the  afternoon.  All
Jier  symptoms  disappeared,  the  fever  vanished,  and  the  weak-
ness yielded  to  a  good  regimen.

I  ^lall  on  a  subsequent  occasion^  record  a  case  of  spasmodic
colic  still  more  rapidly  cured  by  it.  As  a  producer  of  mania
and  spasms  it  has  shown  itself  useful  in  cases  of  persons  pos-
sessed. In  hysterical  and  hypochondriacal  attacks,  dependent
on  tense  fibre,  it  will  be  usefiil,  as  it  has  been  practically  proved*
Inflammation  of  the  limgs  will  find  in  it  a  powerftil  remedy.
The  duration  of  its  action  is  short;  limited  to  about  five,  at
most  eight  or  ten  hours,  inclusive  of  the  secondary  action ;  ex-
cept in  the  case  of  serious  effects  fix>m  large  doses.

SabadiUa  seed  causes  conftision  of  the  intellect  and  convulsions^
which  it  can  also  cure ;  the  peculiarities  of  its  action,  however^

>  SeeDO^artiGle.


THE  OUBATJYM POWBBS  OF  DBUGS. 80t

aie  not  yet  known.  It  also  oanses  a  creeping  sensation  through
all  the  limbs,  as  I  have  experienced,  and  is  said  to  produce  pain
m  the  stomach  and  nausea.

The  agaric  {pgaricua  muscariua)  produces,  as  far  as  I  can  as-
certain, a  furious  and  drunken  mania  (combined  with  revenge-
fiilf  bold  resolves,  disposition  to  make  verses,  to  prophesy,  &c)|
exaltation  of  the  strength,  trembling  and  convulsions,  in  its  pri-
mary direct  action ;  and  weariness,  sleep,  in  its  secondary  action.
It  has  therefore  been  employed  with  benefit  in  epilepsy  (caused
by  fiight),  combined  with  trembling.  It  will  remove  mental
affiections  and  possession,  similar  to  those  it  causes.  Its  direct
action  lasts  from  twelve  to  sixteen  hours.

The  nvtmeg  (myristica  aromatica)  diminishes  the  irritability  of
the  whole  body,  but  especially  that  of  the  prim®  vise,  for  a  con-
siderable time.  (Does  it  not  increase  the  contractile  power  of
the  muscular  fibre,  especially  of  the  primaa  vias,  and  diminish
its  capability  of  relaxing  ?)  In  large  doses  it  causes  an  absolute
inaenaihility  of  the  nervous  system,  obtuseness,  immobility,  loss
of  reason,  for  its  direct  action ;  headache  and  sleep  for  its  sec-
ondary action.  It  possesses  heating  properties.  May  it  not  be
QseftQ  in  imbecility,  combined  with  laxness  and  irritability  of  the
primae  vi»  7 — agidnst  the  first  as  a  similarly,  against  the  second
as  an  antagonistically-acting  remedy  ?  It  is  said  to  have  done
good  in  paralysis  of  the  gullet,  probably  as  a  similarly-actiDg
remedy.

Rhubarb  is  useful  in  diarrhoeas  without  faecal  evacuations,
even  in  the  smallest  doses,  more  in  consequence  of  its  tendency
to  promote  the  action  of  the  bowels,  than  on  account  of  its
astringent  power.

The  topical  pain-producing  applications,  as  catharides,  mus-
tard plasters,  grat^  horse-radish,  spurge-laurel  bark,  crushed
ranunculus  acris,  the  moxa,  allay  pain  often  permanently,  by
producing  artificially  pain  of  ano^er  kind.


CASE  OF  RAPIDLY  CURED  COLICODYNIA.'


L ^is,  a  compositor,  24  years  of  age,  lean,  of  a  pale  and

earthy  complexion,  had  worked  at  the  printing-press  a  year  and

^  FmuL  Hafriuid'*  Jwmal  dtr  praelMym  Atmfffktmiii. VoL  in.  1797.


8M  8UGOESTION8  FOB  ASCBBTAmilia

a  half  before  he  came  to  me,  and  then  for  the  first  time  sud-
denly felt  great  pain  in  the  left  side  which  obliged  him  to  keep
his  bed,  and  which  after  several  days  went  away  under  the  use
of  ordinary  medicines.  Ever  since  that,  however,  he  had  ex-
perienced a  dull  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  left  hypochondrium.
Some  months  afterwards,  when  he  had  overloaded  his  stomach
with  sweet  beer-soup  flavoured  with  caraway,  he  was  attacked
with  a  severe  colic,  the  violence  of  which  he  could  not  express^
but  at  the  same  time  could  not  say  whether  it  corresponded
with  the  colicodynia  which  succeeded  it.

The  attack  passed  off  this  time,  I  don't  know  how,  but  he
observed,  that  after  it  he  could  not  bear  certain  kinds  of  food.
The  mischief  increased  imobserved,  and  the  colicodynia  with
its  distinctive  symptoms  took  firm  root.

The  worst  kinds  of  food  for  him  were  carrots,  all  sorts  of  cab-
bajge,  especially  white  cabbage  and  sour-crout,  and  every  species
of  fruit,  but  pears  in  particular.

If  he  were  so  incautious  as  to  eat  any  of  these  things  within
eight  days  after  an  attack  which  had  been  brought  on  by  thenii
the  liability  was  so  increased  that  he  could  not  eat  even  »
morsel  of  a  pear,  for  example,  one  or  two  weeks  after  without
bringing  on  another  severe  attack.

The  course  of  a  severe  attack  was  as  follows.  Four  hours  or
four  hours  and  a  half  ailer  eating  of  such  food — having  previous-
ly felt  quite  well — a  certain  movement  was  felt  about  the
umbilical  region ;  then  there  took  place  suddenly,  always  at
the  same  place,  a  pinching  as  if  by  pincers,  but  attended  with
the  most  intolerable  pain  which  lasted  half  or  a  whole  minute^
and  each  time  suddenly  went  away  with  borborygmus  extend-
mg  to  the  right  groin — about  the  region  of  the  coecum.  When
the  attack  was  very  bad  the  pinching  came  back,  and  the
subsequent  borborygmus  more  and  more  fi^quently,  until  in
the  worst  attacks  they  were  almost  constant.  There  occurred
also  the  sensation  of  a  constriction  above  and  below,  so  that
flatus  could  pass  neither  upwards  nor  downwards.  The
uneasiness  and  pains  increased  from  hour  to  hour,  the  abdomen
swelled  and  became  painful  to  the  touch.  Along  with  all  this
suffering,  which  resembled  a  fever,  there  came  an  inclination  to
vomit,  with  sense  of  constriction  of  the  chest,  the  breathing  was
shorter  and  attended  with  more  and  more  difficulty,  cold  sweat
broke  out,  and  there  came  on  a  sort  of  stupefaction  with  total
exhaustion. At  this  period  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  swallow


GASK  or  RAPIDLY  CURSD  OOLIOODYKIA. 806

a  drop  of  liquid,  much  less  any  solid  food.  Thus  he  lay  stupi-
fied  and  unconscious,  with  swollen  face  and  protruded  eyes,  and
without  sleep  for  many  hours;  the  attack  of  spasmodic  colic
gradually  subsided  by  diminution  of  the  pain,  then  followed  some
escape  of  flatus  either  upwards  or  downwards,  and  so  the  attack
went  off^  (sometimes  only .  after  sixteen  or  twenty -four  houiB
from  its  conmiencement).  The  strength  only  returned  after  three
or  four  days,  and  thus  he  was  again  like  a  person  in  health,
without  any  other  uneasiness  except  the  dull  fixed  pain  before
oould  not  positively  say  whether  this  dull  pain  went  off  during
the  severe  attacks  or  not,  but  he  thought  it  did.

In  these  circumstances  he  could  not  retain  his  situation  at  the
printing-press;  he  became  a  compositor.  The  attacks  always
to  do  fK>  for  more  than  a  year  when  he  put  himself  under  my
care.

It  might  easily  be  supposed  that  the  attacks  arose  ftom  flatu-
lenoe ;  this  however  was  not  the  case.  He  could  take,  without
the  least  inconvenience,  a  good  meal  of  dry  peas,  lentils,  beans
or  potatoes,  and  he  was  obliged  to  do  so  moreover,  as  his  position
did  not  allow  him  the  opportunity  of  getting  much  else.

Or  it  might  be  supposed  to  arise  from  some  kind  of  fermenta-
tion in  the  primse  vi»,  or  from  some  idiosyncrasy  in  respect  to
sweet  things.  But  nothing  was  further  from  the  case.  He
could  take  cakes  baked  with  yeast,  and  sugar  and  milk  as  much
as  he  pleased,  even  to  satiety,  without  the  slightest  threatening,
of  colic,  although  the  first  attack,  seemed^  as  I  have  said,  to  be
oocaaioned  by  the  beer  soup.  ^

Or  could  an  injurious  acidity  have  occurred  within  the  four
hours  (for  the  attack  never  occurred  sooner,  after  partaking  of
the  above  things)?  This  was  not  the  cause.  Lemon-juice  and
rinegar  were  both  innocuous.  Neither  did  he  ever  vomit  sour
matter,  either  during  the  retching  that  occurred  with  the  attack
<ff  when  ordered  an  emetic.  None  of  the  absorbent  earths  or
alkalis  were  of  any  use  to  him,  whether  taken  during  or  before
die  attack.

A  physician  had  suspected  tape-worm,  and  subjected  him  to
Hermschwand^s  treatment,^  without  any  result.  Neither  before
aor  aft«r  he had  passed anything  which had the  smallest

' II  I  n  .  ^ — ^ ^  ^ — M-^^^^^^^

'  [H«nii8diwind*s  method  coaaisted  chiefly  in  the  emploTinent  of  the  powder  of
VktU-fem  root^  fbUowed  fay  purgatives,  principaUy  castor^oiL]
20


306  CASE  OF  RAPIDLY  CUBED  COLICODnOA.

resemblance  to  a  tape-worm  or  indeed  to  any  kind  of  worm  at
all.

When  he  came  to  me  the  idea  of  tape-worm  had  taken  so
tirm  a  hold  of  his  mind  that  I  was  obliged  to  order  him  all  that
was  peculiar  in  the  methods  of  Nuflfer*  and  of  Clossins.*  He
used  all  the  medicines  with  patience,  and  pressed  me  to  try  every
means  with  this  view.  Tartrate  of  antimony,  gamboge,  scam-
mony,  male-fern  (four  ounces  daily  for  four  hours  together)
charcoal,  artemesia  in  large  quantities,  colocynth  with  oils,  cas-
tor oil,  tin,  iron,  sabadilla,  sulphur,  petroleum,  camphor,
assafcetida,  and  laxative  salts — nothing  was  left  untried;  but
they  were  given,  as  I  have  said,  rather  on  account  of  his  urgent
request  than  to  satisfy  my  own  conviction,  for  besides  the  fiict
that  no  worms  were  ever  seen,  tHe  two  symptoms  which  I  have
so  often  observed  to  attend  worms  were  absent,  viz.,  the  deeply
wrinkled  countenance  and  the  sensation  of  a  cold  stream  winding
itself  towards  the  back  immediately  after  a  meal.
•  Immediately  after  the  sabadilla,  which  produced  a  creeping
sensation  like  ants  upon  the  skin  (formication)  and  a  heat  in  the
stomach  and  over  the  whole  body,  I  let  him  try  the  test  of  eating
a  piece  of  pear. It  appeared  indeed  as  if  the  attack  had  returned

quite  mildly,  but  afl«r  I  had  left  him  without  medicine  for  eight
days  and  again  tried  him  with  a  small  piece  of  pear,  the  ooUc
came  on  just  as  bad  as  ever.

I  have  forgotten  to  mention  that  I  had  already  previously
tried  all  sorts  of  powerful  so-called  antispasmodic  remedies  at
the  commencement  of  the  paroxysm.  Small  doses  of  ipecacuanha
taken  dry,  lukewarm  foot-baths  and  larger  baths,  opium  and
•ajeput  oil,  without  any  result,  even  without  any  palliative
effect.  I  only  sought  to  palliate  the  symptoms  at  that  time  in
order  that  he  might  continue  without  molestation  to  use  cinchona
bark  and  to  wash  with  cold  water,  to  get  the  better  of  his
weakness.

As  his  condition  required  immediate  help,  inasmuch  as  the
colicodynia  began  to  appear  even  upon  the  use  of  the  smallest
quantity  of  vegetable  food,  and  as  all  I  have  done  at  his  entreaty

>  [Madame  Nuffer's  method,  which  was  purchased  by  the  French  Oovanment  for
1 8  000  livres,  consiBted  mainlj  of  the  adminstratioD  of  the  powder  of  the  male-fern
root,  aooompanied  by  a  number  of  complex  directions  which  were  to  be  implicitly
followed  to  ensure  success.]

*  [CloBsius*  method  was  to  feed  the]  patient  during  four  weeks  on  salted  meat
cheese,  and  a  good  allowance  of  wine,  ^and  thereafter  to  giye  drastic  purgatiTW
coDsisting  chiefly  of  gamboge.]


CASE  OF  RAPIDLY  CURED  COLICODYNIA.  807

had  been  of  no  service  whatever,  I  determined  to  give  him  a

medicine  which  produced  very  similar  morbid  symptoms.  The"
similarity  of  the  griping  pain,  anxiety,  constriction  of  the  chest,
fever,  los^  of  strength,  &c.,  produced  by  veratrum  album  appear-
ed to  me  calculated  to  give  permanent  relief

I  gave  him  four  powders,  each  containing  four  grains,  and
told  him  to  take  one  powder  daily,  but  to  let  me  know  at  once
if  any  violent  symptoms  appeared. This  he  did  not  do. He
did  not  return  imtil  five  days  thereafter. His  unlimited  confi-
dence in  my  aid  had  nearly  played  him  an  awkward  trick. The
benefit  I  had  promised  from  the  powders  had  induced  him  to
take  two  instead  of  one  daily. After  the  second  powder,  with-
out his  having  eaten  anything  injurious,  there  began  an  attack
oolic,  or  something  very  like  it. This  did  not  prevent  him,  how-
ever, from  taking  the  third  and  fourth  powder  the  following  day
(taking  thus  sixteen  grains  in  rather  less  than  two  days),  upon
which,  this  artificial  colic,  if  I  may  so  speak,  increased  to  such
a  dreadftil  extent,  that,  to  use  his  own  expression,  he  wrestled
with  death,  covered  with  cold  sweat  and  almost  suffocated. He
had  required  the  remaining  three  days  to  recruit,  and  had  re-
tamed  for  fiirther  directions. I  reprimanded  him  for  his  impru-
dence, but  could  not  avoid  notwithstanding  comforting  him  with
the  prospect  of  a  good  issue. The  result  confirmed  it;  under
the  use  of  tolerably  good  diet  he  regained  his  strength,  and  he
has  not  had  for  half  a  year  even  a  threatening  of  an  attack,  al-
though from  time  to  time  lie  has  eaten  of  the  food  which  befon^
was  so  injurious  to  him,  but  in  moderation,  as  I  impressed  upon
him  he  should. Since  this  event  he  has  taken  no  more  medi-
cine, and  no  tapeworm  was  passed  after  the  use  of  the  veratrum.

The  dull  pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium  likewise  went  at  the
j^aine  time.


ARE  THE  OBSTACLES  TO  CERTAINTY  AND  SIMPLICITY
IN  PRACTICAL  MEDICINE  INSURMOUNTABLE  ?  »


Dr.  Herz's  essay  "  On  the  Medicinal  uses  of  the  Phellandriuin
'jquaticum,^^  &c.,  in  the  first  part  of  the  second  volume  of  the
Journal  der  practischen  Arzneykunde^  plunged  me  into  a  sort  of

*  From  Bu/elafuTi  ^humaldtr  practUe/un  Armeykundey  Vol.  iy.,  Part  iy.,page
lOe. 1797.


306 ABB  THS  OBSTACLES  TO  CEBTAINTY  AVD  SIMPLICITY'

melancholy,  which  only  by  dint  of  long  continued  r^eotioD
has  given  place  to  a  remote  but  lively  hope.

Here  one  of  the  most  thoughtful  physicians  of  our  timCi  afieir
twenty  years  of  active  practice,  finds  himself  obliged  repeatedly
to  make  the  open,  but  most  melancholy  acknowledgment :  (p.  40l)

"  That  we  can  lay  no  claim  to  the  attainment  of  the  ideal  of
simplicity  in  medical  treatment"

"That  the  hope  of  ever  arriving  at  perfect  omplicity  in
medical  practice,  cannot  be  otherwise  than  very  feeble"  (p.  47).

The  obstacles  to  pure  observation  of  the  effects  of  medidneB
in  the  various  diseases,  he  enumerates  with  most  overwhehning
fulness  of  detail,  and  there  he  leaves  us  alone  in  the  old  well-worn
path  of  imcertainty,  almost  without  a  cheering  glance  at  a  better
futurity,  a  simpler,  surer  method  of  cure ;  unless  we  are  to  reckon
his  very  complaints  as  foreshadowing  coming  improvements^
just  as  the  impassioned  warmth  of  the  sceptical  casuist  has  al-
ways appeared  to  me  a  proof  of  that  immortality  he  would  deny.

I  myself  felt  the  external  hindrances  to  our  art  more  than  I
could  have  wished;  they  continually  beset  my  sphere  of  acticm ;
and  I,  too,  long  considered  them  insurmountable,  and  had  almost
made  up  my  mind  to  despair,  and  to  esteem  my  profession  as
but  the  sport  of  inevitable  accident  and  insuperable  obstacles,
when  the  thought  arose  within  me,  "  are  not  we  physicians  pardy
to  blmrvefor  the  complexity  and  the  uncertainty  of  our  art  f  "

OBEDIENCE  OF  PATIENTS.

I  have  seen  medical  men  take  under  their  care  patients  who
had  only  half  confdence^  and  from  whose  demeanour  any  one
might  perceive  that  they  put  themselves  under  the  physician
whom  they  had  chosen,  not  from  any  enthusiastic  regard  fi>r
him,  nor  from  a  stnmg  desire  to  be  relieved  from  their  sufferings.
How  could  implicit  obedience  be  expected  from  such  persons?
And  even  when  they  spoke  of,  and  commended  in  common-
place terms,  strict  attention  to  the  physician's  orders,  could  he
tions, his  medicines  ? By  no  means !

DIET  AND  REGIMEN.

It  is  a  constant  complaint  of  physicians  that  patients  will  not
of  such  compliance  ?  and  how  impossible,  then,  is  it  to  determine
the  issue  of  a  disease,  or  the  effect  of  the  remedies  employed,
since  on  this  point  in  no  case  can  any  certainty  be  attained?  ^


.or  FEACTICAI^  MMDIOUSE  IKBUBMOUNTABUB  ?  S09

Paidon  me  1  We  may  be  perfecUj  sure  of  such  as  with  im-
plicit confidence  entrust  themselves  to  the  care  of  their  aknost
vorahipped  physician.  Of  course,  others  are  less  to  be  relied  upon.

Methinksi  however,  that  medical  men  when  thus  complaining,
do  not  draw  a  sufficient  distinction  between,  1st,  the  errors  of
diet  which  produced  and  kept  up  the  patient's  disease ;  2d,
their  ordinary  ind^erent  diet ;  and,  8d,  the  new  dietetic  regtdatiam
laid  down  by  the  physician.

I^  with  reqpect  to  the  first  of  these  (the  correction  of  the
enors  of  diet),  the  physician  thinks  that  he  does  not  possess
snfficieiit  authority  with  his  patient,  who  ¥rill  not  pay  strict  at-
tention to  rules,  radier  let  him  dismiss  such  fickle-minded  persons ;
better  no  patients  at  all  than  such  I

Who,  for  example,  would  undertake  to  cure  a  drunkard  of
induration  of  the  liver,  who  merely  consulted  'the  physician  en
paaaanif  beeause,  perhaps,  he  met  him  in  the  street ;  or  had  some
bosLness-matters  to  arrange  with  him ;  or,  because  the  physician
has  come  to  reside  in  the  neighbourhood ;  or  has  become  a  con-
nexion of  his;  or  for  some  other  trifling  reason,  but  not  from
having  implicit  confidence  in  his  skill  ?  What  immense  influence
ihe  medical  man  must  have  with  such  a  confirmed  debauchee,
to  &el  assured  that  he  will  pay  attention  to  his  orders,  and  daily
liiminiali  his  allowance  of  the  poisonous  liquor  I

A  patient  with  such  bad  habits,  must  show  by  some  considera-
ble sacrifice,  that  he  intends  to  submit  himself  entirely  to  the
will  of  the  physician.  The  physician  would  do  well  to  try  to
dissuade  him  from  submitting  to  treatment ;  to  represent  to  him,
in  strong  terms,  the  difficulties  which  his  ruinous  vice  throws  in
the  way,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  disease.  If  he  return  re-
peatedly, and  express  his  willingness  to  make  any  sacrifices,
then,  what  should  prevent  the  physician  trusting  him,  so  long
as  he  sees  indubitable  proo&  of  his  resolution?  If  he  cannot
withstand  temptation,  then  let  him  go  his  way ;  he  will,  at  any
rate,  not  bring  discredit  on  the  art,^  nor  disappoint  the  hopes  of
the  much-deceived  physician.

Are  there  not  enough  of  patients,  who,  when  solicitously  ad-
vised by  a  universally  esteemed  physician,  will,  for  example,
scrupulously  abstain  from  eating  pork  during  a  quartan  fever,
and  for  months  afterwards ;  who  will  carefully  avoid  potatoes,
if  they  are  asthmatic  or  leucophlegmatic ;  sedentary  occupations,
if  they  are  gouty ;  and  sour  wine,  if  sufiering  from  the  wasting
diseases  of  youth  brought  on  by  venereal  excesses?


310 ABS  THB  OBSTACLES  TO  CEBTAINTT  AND  8DIFLIGITY

In  the  case  of  a  woman  affected  with  a  nervous  disorder,
should  not  a  good  physician  be  able  to  effect  a  gradual  diminu-
tion in  the  quantity  of  coffee  taken ;  or,  if  otherwise,  will  he  not
be  able  to  perceive  that  she  will  not  follow  his  advice?  From
my  own  experience  I  can  say,  that  it  is  no  uncommon  circum*
stance  to  meet  with  both  these  cases ;  and  in  each  the  physician
may  reckon  with  certainty  on  his  observation.

If  we  go  to  work  in  this  manner,  we  shall  attain  to  a  high
degree  of  empirical  certainty.  Is  this  not  certainty  ?  Or  does
the  statesman,  the  teacher,  the  lawyer,  the  merchant,  the  general,
possess  any  other  than  empirical  certainties  ?  Or  is  there  any
other  positive  rule  to  guide  us,  in  any  imaginable  profession  in
which  the  free-will  of  man  is  involved  ?

But  is  the  ordinary  diet  of  those  classes  of  the  community
who  are  not  altogether  corrupted,  of  such  an  objectionable  na-
one  ?  This  is  one  of  the  rocks  on  which  so  many  physicians
split.  In  every  acute  or  chronic  disease  that  comes  under  their
notice,  they  earnestly  insist  on  a  very  complicated  artificial  system
of  diet,  withholding  many  things,  and  ordering  a  host  of  odiers.

Do  we  physicians,  however,  know  with  such  extreme  preci-
sion, the  effects  of  all  kinds  of  food,  as  to  be  able  with  certainty
to  say,  in  this  case  such  and  such  an  article  of  diet  is  to  be  tak-
en, and  this  and  that  other  to  be  avoided  I  How  does  expe-
rience refute  our  fancied  omniscience  !

For  what  a  length  of  time  did  our  forefathers  insist  in  their
so-called  acute  (putrid)  fevers  with  diminished  vital  power,  on
watery  drinks,  tea,  &c. ;  and  exclaimed  against  beer  and  wine
as  little  better  than  poison — which,  however,  the  patients  long
for  so  much,  and  which  is  now  the  main  support  of  our  practice !
How  long  did  we  forbid  fresh  meat  in  cases  of  haemorrhage  from
passive  plethora,  in  wasting  pulmonary  complaints,  in  scurvy,
and  in  most  other  chronic  non-gastric  diseases,  where  it  is  now
reckoned,  if  not  a  perfect  panacea,  at  any  rate  indispensable !
A  universal  diet,  like  a  universal  medicine,  is  an  idle  dream ;
.  but  speaking  generally,  nothing  is  more  wholesome  than  fruit
in  abundance,  and  green  vegetables  ad  libitum ;  and  yet  they  fre-
quently oppress  the  stomach  of  those  who  have  poverty  of  the
blood,  of  exhausted  persons,  and  those  suffering  from  the  effects
of  a  sedentary  life,  and  increase  in  them  the  disposition  to  acidity,
flatulence  and  diarrhoea  I  Boast  beef  and  raw  ham  are  consid-
ered more  difficult  of  digestion  for  a  relaxed  stomach  than  veal


nr  PRAoncAL  iubdicine  insurmountable  7 811

boiled  to  rags.  Cofiee  has  the  reputation  of  strengthening  and
assisting  digestion,  and  yet  it  only  hastens  the  expulsion  of  half-
digested  food  firom  the  bowels.  I  have  seen  children  deprived
of  the  breast-milk,  crammed  to  death  with  wafer-biscuits,  and
perishing  in  numbers  of  jaundice.  My  expostulations  on  the
indigestible  nature  of  this  unleavened  and  hard-baked  mass  of
dough,  were  of  no  avail  against  the  plausible  folly  of  my  col-
leagues— *'it  is  impossible  to  imagine  any  thing  lighter  (in
weight),  or  more  delicate  (to  the  touch)  I "

such  a  severe  diet  to  a  healthy  young  woman  after  a  favourable
first-labour,  that  she  was  on  the  eve  of  starvation.  She  held  up
for  some  days  under  this  water-gruel  diet — all  meat,  beer,  wine»
coffise,  bread,  butter,  nourishing  vegetables,  &c.,  were  denied
her ;  but  at  last  she  grew  excessively  weak,  complained  of  ago-
nising after-pains,  was  sleepless,  costive,  and,  in  short,  danger-
ously ill.  The  medical  attendant  attributed  all  this  to  some  in-
fraction of  his  dietetic  rules.  She  begged  to  be  allowed  some
coffee,  or  broth,  or  something  similar.  The  practitioner,  strong
in  his  principles,  was  inflexible :  Not  a  drop !  Driven  to  despe-
ration by  his  severity  and  her  hunger,  she  gave  way  to  her  inno-
cent longings,  drank  coffee,  and  ate  in  moderation  whatever  she
fiuicied.  The  practitioner  found  her,  on  his  next  visit,,  much  to
his  surpirse,  not  only  out  of  danger,  but  lively  and  refreshed ;
so  he  complacently  noted  down  in  his  memorandum-book
the  excellent  effects  of  slop-diet  in  the  treatment  of  lying-
in-women.  The  convalescent  took  good  care  not  to  hint  to  him
her  natural  transgression.  This  is  the  history  of  many,  even
published  observations !  Thus  the  disobedience  of  the  patient
not  unfrequently  saves  the  credit  of  the  physician.

Is  the  error  cakuh\  in  such  a  case,  the  fault  of  the  art  or  the
patient,  or  is  it  not  rather  the  fault  of  the  physician  ?

much  more  objectionable  than  the  accustomed  diet  of  his  patient ;
or,  at  least,  he  frequently  does  wrong  in  rejecting  the  latter  all
at  once.

As  the  physician  would  do  well,  in  order  to  observe  more
distinctly  and  simply  the  course  of  the  disease  and  the  effects  of
his  medicines,  not  to  give  any  orders  at  all  about  the  diet,  ex-
cept with  regard  to  articles  of  which  he  possesses  a  positive
knowledge,  and  these  will  be  but  few ;  he  would  also  be  consult-
ing the  good  of  his  patient  by  not  depriving  him  of  any  thing  which
long  habit  had  rendered  innocuous,  or  perhaps  indispensable.


812 ABX  THB  OBflTAOLKB  TO  CXBTAINTY  AHD  SIMFLICnT

A  country  midwife  fell  sick  of  a  gastric  fever.  I  purged  her.
I  ordered  her  for  drink,  water  and  weak  beer,  and  extreme
moderation  in  eating.  At  first,  things  went  on  very  well ;  but,
after  a  few  days,  a  new  continued  fever,  with  thirst,  wakeful-
ness, weariness,  confusion  of  ideas,  came  on  to  such  an  extent  as
to  render  her  state  dangerous.  I  left  none  of  the  ordinary  rem-
edies untried.  All  in  vain.  I  now  left  off  every  thing,  firom
the  sulphuric  acid  to  the  soup  (at  the  time  I  was  not  sufficiently
acquainted  with  the  properties  of  opium),  and  promised  to  pre-
danger  I  apprehended.  The  following  day  I  was  told  that  the
patient  was  recovering,  and  that  I  need  not  give  myself  any
further  trouble.  To  my  astonishment,  I  saw  her  pass  my  win-
dow, a  few  days  afterwards,  perfectly  recovered,  I  subsequently
learned,  that  when  I  had  discontinued  the  medicine,  a  quads:
had  been  called  in,  who  had  given  her  a  large  bottle  of  essence
of  wood,  his  universal  medicine,  and  told  her  to  take  so  many
drops  of  it  No  sooner  had  she  tasted  the  brandy  in  it  than  she
gained,  as  it  were,  new  life.  She  took  the  drops  by  iable-spoon-^
Jttls,  and,  after  a  good  sleep,  she  rose  completely  cured.

This  happened  when  I  first  began  practice,  else  I  should  have
ascertained  at  the  commencement  that,  when  in  health,  she
could  n9t  live  without  her  daily  dram,  consequently  could  not
recover  without  it.

It  is  far  less  frequently  necessary  than  most  physicians  think,
to  make  a  material  alteration  in  the  diet  of  patients  suffering
from  chronic  complaints,  at  least  in  ordinary  cases ;  in  acute
diseases,  the  awakened  instinct  of  the  patient  is  oft;en  considera-
bly wiser  than  the  physician  who  does  not  consult  nature  m
his  prescriptions.

I  do  not  now  allude  to  cures  effected  by  dietetic  rules  alone,
which,  if  simple,  are  not  to  be  despised,  and  which  are  very  ser-
viceable in  many  cases.  What  I  particularly  call  attention  to
is,  the  frequently  useless  change  of  diet,  when  treating  a  case
with  medicine,  whereby  the  simplest  method  of  treatment  is
rendered  complex,  and  a  composite  result  is  produced,  of  which
I  would  defy  (Edipus  himself  to  guess  what  part  was  owing  to
the  new  diet,  and  what  to  the  medicine.

We  must  certainly  prohibit  what  we  know  to  be  hurtftd  in
this  or  that  complaint ;  but  this  can  at  the  most  be  but  two  or
three  articles  of  diet  in  chronic  diseases ;  the  gradual  disuse  of
which  (for  sudden  suppression  is  always  dimgerous  in  such


or  FBAOnCAIr  ICSDICINE  INSUBMOUNTABLX  7  818

aflfootioDs),  oannot  produoe  an j  great  revolution  in  the  system ;
cannoty  thereifore,  have  much  effect  in  deranging  the  pure  action
of  the  medicine  we  are  using.

If  it  be  necessary  to  make  considerable  changes  in  the  diet  and
reffimenj  the  ingenious  physician  will  do  well  to  mark  what
the  mildest  medicina

A  deeply  rooted  scurvy  can  often  be  cured  by  the  united  ac-
tion of  warm  clothing,  dry  country  air,  moderate  exercise,
change  of  the  old  salted  meat  for  that  freshly  killed,  along  with
sour-crout,  cresses,  and  such  like  vegetables,  and  brisk  beer  for
drink.  What  would  be  the  use  of  medicine  in  such  a  case  ?  To
mask  the  good  effects  produced  by  the  change  of  diet  1  Scurvy
is  produced  by  a  system  of  diet  opposite  to  this,  therefore  it  may
be  cured  by  a  dietetic  course — the  reverse  of  that  which  pro-
duced it ;  at  any  rate,  we  may  wait  to  see  the  jesult  of  this
method,  before  we  begin  with  our  medicines.

Why  should  we  render  the  syphilitic  patient,  for  example,
worse  than  he  is  by  a  change  of  (Het,  generally  of  a  debilitating
nature  ?  We  cannot  cure  him  by  any  system  of  diet,  for  his
disease  is  not  produced  by  any  errors  of  the  sort.  Why  then,
should  we,  in  this  case,  make  any  change  f

Since  this  occurred  to  fny  mind,  I  have  cured  all  venereal  dis-
eases (excepting  gonorrhoea),  without  any  dietetic  restrictions,
merely  with  mercury  (and,  when  necessary,  opium) ;  the  metal
has  not  a  debilitated  constitution  to  act  upon,  and  my  patients
recovered  more  rapidly  than  those  of  my  colleagues.  I  also
knew  for  certain,  that  every  change  that  took  place,  either  for
the  better  or  the  worse,  was  owing  to  the  medicine.

An  old  colonel,  with  "fair  round  belly,"  and  apparently  fond
of  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  had  suffered  for  the  last  forty  years
firom  ulcers  almost  all  over  the  legs,  and  issues  on  the  thighs.
His  food  consisted  of  the  strongest  and  most  nutritive  materials
— he  drank  a  good  deal  of  spirits,  and,  for  several  years  past,  he
had  been  in  the  habit  of  taking  a  monthly  purge.  Otherwise,
he  was  vigorous.  I  allowed  the  issues  to  heal  up,  made  him
keep  his  legs  rolled  up  in  a  narrow  flannel  bandage,  and  im-
merse them  daily  a  few  minutes  m  cold  water,  and  afterwards
dress  them  with  a  weak  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate.  I  made
not  the  slightest  alteration  in  his  diet ;  I  even  did  not  forbid  the
soonthly  purge,  as  he  was  so  constantly  in  the  habit  of  taking  it
In  the  oouise  of  a  year  his  legs  gradually  healed,  and  his


814 ABS  THE  OBSTACLES  TO  CERTAINTY  AlTD  SDCPLICITY

vigour  rather  increased  tlian  diminished  in  this  his  seventy-third
year.  I  watched  him  for  two  years,  during  which  he  remained
perfectly  well,  and  I  have  since  had  good  accounts  of  his  health.
The  legs  have  always  continued  completely  healed.  Can  I  sup-
pose that  he  would  have  recovered  more  rapidly  or  permanently
had  I  deprived  him  of  his  eight  or  ten  dishes,  and  his  daily
allowance  of  liquors?  Had  I  changed  his  diet,  and  had  he
grown  worse,  would  I  have  known  whether  this  unfavourable
turn  proceeded  from  the  food  so  much  lauded  in  works  on  die-
tetics, but  so  different  to  what  he  had  been  accustomed  to,  or
from  my  external  applications,  for  I  gave  nothing  intemaUy  ?
It  would  have  been  easy  for  me  to  conform  to  the  schools,  and
sacrifice  my  patient  methodically  to  the  ordinary  dietetic  regu-
lations ;  but  how  could  I  at  the  same  time  abide  by  my  convic-
tion, my  conscience,  and  that  prime  guiding  principle  of  the
physician,  mnpUcity  !

I  have  no  intention  of  exalting  myself  at  the  expense  of  my
brethren,  when  I  acknowledge  that  I  have  cured  the  most  dif-
ficult chronic  diseases,  without  any  particular  change  of  diet.

I  consider  that  I  do  quite  enough  if  I  advise  moderation  in
all  things,  or  diminish  or  forbid  altogether  particular  articles  of
diet,  which  would  be  prejudicial  to  the  object  I  wish  to  accom-
plish; as,  for  example,  acids,  when  I  am  employing  stramo-
nium, belladonna,  foxglove,  monkshood,  or  henbane  (the  effects
of  these  medicines  being  entirely  counteracted  by  vegetable
coffee^  when  I  am  giving  opium.

Thus,  if  my  treatment  fail,  I  know  that  I  have  done  no  harm
by  an  artificial  system  of  diet  (how  much  that  is  dangerous  and
hypothetical  is  there  not  in  our  dietetic  regulations !),  I  know
it  is  owing  to  the  medicine  used  that  the  case  grew  worse,  or,  at
least,  did  not  improve.

If  amendment  ensue,  then  I  know  that  the  medicine  produced
it,  as  it  certainly  was  not  owing  to  any  change  in  the  diet.

Hippocrates,  himself,  if  I  recollect  right,  hints  at  something
similar  in  his  aphorisms,  when  he  says,  that  medicine  and  the
vis  naturce  produce  much  more  considerable  and  profound
changes  in  diseases  than  any  small  irregularity  in  diet.
.  How  near  was  this  great  man  to  the  philosopher's  stone  of
physicians — simplicity  I  and  to  think  that  after  more  than  two
thousand  years,  w:e  should  not  have  advanced  one  single  step
nearer  the  mark  I  on  the  contrary,  have  rather  receded  from  it !


IK  FBAOTICAL  MADICIKE  INSUBHOUNTABLX  ?  315

Did  he  only  write  books  ?  or  did  he  write  much  less  than  he
actually  cured  ? Did  he  do  this  so  circuitously  as  we  ?

It  was  owing  to  the  simplicity  of  his  treatment  of  diseases)
alone,  that  he  saw  all  that  he  did  see,  and  whereat  we  marvel.

CLIMATB, WEATHER, STATE  OF  THE  BAROMETER, ETC.

■

Should  we  abandon  ourselves  to  despair^  because  we  do  not  know,
to  a  nicety,  whai  is  the  exact  influence  which  a  slight  change  in  geo
graphical  position^  a  sTnaU  variation  of  the  hygrometer,  the  barome-
ter, the  anemometer,  the  thermometer,  dc,  exercises  upon  the  action
of  our  medicines  or  our  patients  ?

According  to  many  observations  of  the  first  medical  men,  it
is  not  so  very  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  pretty  accurate  general
knowledge  of  the  differences  produced  by  a  warmer  or  colder
climate  on  the  nature  and  treatment  of  or(£nary  diseases.  They
are,  for  the  most  part,  merely  differences  in  degree.  The  most
(^posite  climates  never  produce  a  completely  opposite  code  of
medical  laws.  Is  not  bark  as  efficacious  for  the  cure  of  pure
intermittent  fever  in  Mexico  as  in  Norway;  in  Batavia  and
Bengal  (the  only  difference  being  in  quantity),  as  in  Scotland  ?
The  venereal  disease  is  cured  in  China  by  mercury,  just  as  it  is
in  the  Antilles.  In  our  country,  we  have  inflammations  and
suppurations  of  the  liver  of  the  same  nature  as  in  the  tropics ;
although,  in  the  latter  regions,  they  are  twenty  times  as  nume-
rous as  here,  that  makes  not  the  slightest  difference  in  the  treat-
ment, as  in  both  situations  mercury  and  opiimi  (or  something
better  still)  are  serviceable.  Typhus,  and  similar  fevers,  are
here  as  there  fatal,  if  treated  by  bloodletting  and  nitre  (not,  in-
deed, so  rapidly  here  as  there) !  They  must  also  be  treated  in
our  country  with  bark  and  opium  (not,  indeed,  in  such  large
doses  as  there),  in  order  to  increase  the  strength.  These  varie-
ties of  climate  do  not  change  the  treatment  in  nature,  but  only
in  degree,  and  such  differences  are  determinable.

But  that  the  powers  given  by  nature  to  man  and  habit  will
triumph  over  all  variations  of  climate,  to  the  preservation  of
life  and  health,  is  proved  by  there  being  inhabitants  in  the
island  of  Terra  del  Fuego,  as  well  as  on  the  banks  of  the
Ganges,  in  Lapland,  as  well  as  Ethiopia,  in  the  seventieth  a^
well  as  the  third  degree  of  latitude.

And  are  we  so  ignorant  of  the  other  influences  which  the
nature  of  the  soil  and  country  have  upon  diseases;  so  very


316 ARE  THS  OBSTAOLES  TO  OEBTAIKTT  AHD  flEniVLICITT

ignorant  that  we  cannot  reckon  the  infinence  they  would  have
on  our  practice  ?  Do  we  know  nothing  of  the  different  effects
produced  by  a  residence  in  a  hilly  country  and  on  the  sea-coast^
on  haemoptysis  and  phthisis ;  notiiing  of  the  action  of  the  effla*
via  from  marshes  and  seething  intramural  grave-yards  in  the
production  of  intermittent  fever,  and  diseases  of  the  liver  and
lymphatic  system ;  nothing  of  the  power  of  pure  air  on  those
affected  with  rickets  and  those  debilitated  by  sedentary  occupa-
tions ;  nothing  of  the  advantages  of  a  level  country  over  con-
fined Alpine  valleys,  the  cradle  of  cretinism,  goitre,  and  idiocy ;
nothing  of  the  peculiar  power  of  certain  winds  and  seasons  in
the  production  of  inflammatory,  or  asthenic  diseases,  or  of  the
effect  of  a  low  state  of  the  barometer  on  the  apoplectic ;  nothing
of  the  influence  of  the  air  of  hospitals  in  the  production  of  gan-
grene and  typhus  ?

And  it  is  only  these,  and  similar  great  and  important  difiSsr-
ences,  which  exercise  a  marked  influence  on  health  and  life
itself,  which  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  in  our  treatment  of
diseases. We  do  know  them,  and  can  calculate  their  influence.

The  influence  of  the  finer  shades  of  these  differences  is  too
insignificant  to  prevent  us  treating  successfully  the  ordinary
diseases.  The  vital  power  and  the  proper  medicine  generally
obtain  the  victory  over  any  influence  which  such  very  fine
shades  of  differences  could  exert.

What  might  be  said  of  the  Creator,  who,  having  afflicted  the
inhabitants  of  this  earth  with  a  vast  host  of  diseases,  should  at
the  same  time  have  placed  an  inconceivable  number  of  obstacles
in  the  way  of  their  cure ;  to  discover  the  influence  of  each  of
which  would  defy  the  greatest  efforts  of  the  physician — a  know-
ledge of  which  in  their  full  extent  (if  they  were  of  such  great
importance)  could  not  be  attained  by  the  greatest  genius  ?

We  cure  diseases  in  pestilential  dungeons,  although  we  can-
not, at  the  same  time,  impart  to  the  patient  the  vigour  of  the
mountaineer.  Who  would  desire  us  to  transform  the  delicate
city  lady  into  the  buxom  peasant  girl  ?  We  remove,  however,
most  of  the  ailments  of  the  former.  The  sedentary  man  of
business  seeks  at  our  hands  only  tolerable  health,  for  the  nature
of  things  denies  us  the  power  of  giving  him  the  strength  of  the
blacksmith,  or  the  ravenous  appetite  of  the  porter.

"  But,"  objects  some  one,  "  look  what  a  perceptible  influence
a  slight  variation  of  the  temperature,  moisture,  or  relative  pro-
portion of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere,  a  slight


nr  PRAonoAL  msdiciki  insubmountable  ? 817

change  in  the  wind,  a  higher  or  lower  state  of  the  barometer,  a
greater  or  less  quantity  of  atmospherical  electricity,  and  a  thou-
sand  other  physical  powers,  small  though  they  may  be,  which
are  perhaps,  as  yet  unknown  to  us,  sometimes  have  upon  dis-
eases, at  least  upon  the  nervous,  hysterical,  hypochondriaca],
add  asthmatic  1"

Shall  I  speak  out  what  I  think  7  It  appears  to  me  much  lesH
[Hrofitable  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  (which  is  moreover  impos-
sible) all  the  degrees  and  varieties  of  the  influence  of  those  phy-
sical impressions,  when  they  approach  the  minute,  than  to  do
our  endeavour  to  fortify  the  sufferers  against  all  these  innume-
rable impressions,  by  implanting  in  them  a  certain  degree  of
strength,  whereby  their  system  will  be  enabled  to  resist  these,
and  many  other  still  unknown  physical  impressions ;  just  as  I
consider  it  much  more  practicable  to  dispel  the  morose  ideas  of
the  melancholic  by  medicine,  than  to  abolish  for  him  the  count-
less evils  of  the  physical  and  moral  world,  or  to  argue  him  out
of  his  &ncies.

Or  could  all  the  physical  and  moral  adverse  circumstances  of
the  atmosphere,  and  of  human  life,  be  more  effectually  pre-
vented exercising  their  pernicious  influence  on  the  gossamer
nervous  system  of  yon  nervous,  spasmodic,  chlorotic  girl,  did
wc,  with  angels'  understanding,  completely  investigate  and  ma-
turely weigh,  in  quality  and  quantity,  all  these  impulses  in
their  fiill  extent,  than  if  we  should  restore  her  monthly  periods?
I  do  not  believe  that  it  is  the  smallness  of  our  knowledge,
but  only  the  fiiulty  application  of  it,  that  hinders  us  from  ap-
proaching, in  medical  science,  nearer  to  certainty  and  sim-
plicity.

A  young  man  twenty  years  of  age,  the  son  of  an  oil  manu-
&cturer,  thin  and  weakly,  had  been  from  his  childhood  subject
to  a  spasmodic  asthma,  which  used  always  to  increase  from  the
commencement  of  autumn  until  the  depth  of  winter,  and  gradu-
ally decline  from  that  period  until  the  mild  weather  in  spring.
Every  year  he  had  grown  worse,  and  this  autumn  he  hoped
might  be  his  last. Already  (I  saw  him  first  at  Michaelmas)  the
attack  commenced  more  violently  than  the  last  year  at  this  time.
The  probable  issue  was  evident. Last  year,  and  for  years  past,
every  fall  of  the  barometer,  every  south-west,  and  more  particu-
larly north  wind,  every  approaching  Ml  of  snow,  every  storm
of  windy  had  brought  on  an  asthmatical  fit  of  hours  and  days  in
duration,  when  he  not  unfrequently  passed  the  night  with  both


818 ABE  THE  OBSTACLES  TO  CERTAINTY  AND  SIMPLICITY  J*

liands  grasping  the  table,  exerting  all  his  strength  to  draw  the
smallest  quantity  of  breath,  and  every  moment  in  dread  of  suf-
focation. The  intervals  between  such  fits  were  occupied  by
slighter  attacks,  brought  on  by  a  draught  of  air,  the  vapour
from  the  heated  oil-cakes,  dust,  a  cold  room,  or  smoke.  He
i()ld  me  of  these  symptoms  with  the  utmost  difficulty  of  utter-
ance, elevating  his  shoulders  to  draw  a  scanty  breath,  and  this
at  a  season  of  the  year  when  his  condition  was  as  yet  pretty
iDlerable.

I  could  expect  no  good  effects  from  a  change  of  place.  So  1
allowed  him  to  remain  in  his  father's  house,  exposed,  as  it  was
to  every  wind,  and  all  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather;
I  let  him  take  his  usual  diet ;  I  only  advised  that  his  &Te
should  be,  if  anything,  more  nutritious  than  otherwise ;  I  let
him  occupy  the  same  sleeping  apartment,  and  continue  his  work
in  the  oil  manufactory,  and,  as  far  as  his  strength  allowed,  en-
gage in  agricultural  employments.

The  first  medicine  I  administered  was  ipecacuhan,  in  {he
smallest  doses ;  they  produced  no  nausea,  neither  did  doses  of
live  grains;  the  latter  quantity  caused  purgation  and  relaxation
i>f  the  system.  The  submuriate  of  antimony  and  the  sulphate
i)f  copper,  in  quarter  of  a  grain  doses,  produced  no  better  re-
sults. Both  of  these  substances,  as  well  as  asarum  root,  each
used  singly,  caused  the  same  bad  effects.

I  shall  refrain  from  stating  what  other  medicines,  celebrated
in  asthma,  did  not  eflect ;  and  shall  only  mention  that  squills
and  bark,  each  employed  separately,  did — what  they  often  do —
they  increased  the  difficulty  of  breathing,  and  made  the  cough
more  frequent,  shorter  and  drier.

A  medicine  was  procured  which  could  produce  anxiety,  and
diminish  the  easy  action  of  the  bowels.  The  choice  fell  natu-
rally on  71UX  vomica.  Four  grains,  given  twice  daily,  removed
graduall y,  but  perceptibly,  the  constriction  of  the  chest ;  he  re-
mained free  from  the  spasmodic  asthmatic  attacks,  even  in  the
worst  autumn  weather — even  in  winter,  in  all  winds,  all  storms,
all  states  of  the  barometer,  all  humidity  of  the  atmosphere,  dur-
ing his  now  increased  domestic,  manufacturing,  and  travelling
business,  in  the  midst  of  the  oil  vapour,  and  that  without  any
important  change  in  his  diet,  or  any  in  his  place  of  abode.  He
had  been  in  the  habit,  when  there  was  but  small  prospect  of
cure,  of  rubbing  his  whole  body  every  night  with  a  woollen
clotih. Although  it  did  not  seem  to  do  any  good,  I  did  not  let


IN  PBAOnOAL  HSJDICIKE INSUBMOUNTABLB  ?  Sid

him  discontinue  it  while  taking  the  last  medicine,  as  he  had
been  so  long  accustomed  to  it.

He  now  slept  comfortably  at  night,  whereas  formerly  he  had
passed  the  whole  night  in  an  arm-chair,  bent  forwards,  or  lean-
ing against  the  wall,  or  coughing  without  intermission.  During
this  season,  which  had  threatened  to  be  so  dangerous  to  him,  he
gained  strength,  agility,  cheerfulness,  and  capacity  of  resisting
inclement  weather.  It  was  only  severe  attacks  of  cold  that
could  cause  the  slightest  return  of  asthma,  and  these  he  speedily
got  rid  of.

Besides  this  medicine,  nothing  at  all  was  employed.

Should  I,  instead  of  adopting  this  treatment,  have  observed
attentively  all  the  meteoric  changes,  and  scrupulously  calculated
their  effects  on  his  most  susceptible  frame?  And  had  I  been  able
to  do  this,  could  I  have  added  weight  to  the  diminished  atmos-
pheric pressure,  supplied  the  loss  of  atmospherical  electricity,
maintained  an  equilibrium  between  day  and  night,  dried  up
the  moisture  in  the  air,  changed  the  north  into  the  south  wind,
reined  in  the  storms,  and  warded  off  the  attraction  of  the  moon  ?
And  had  I  been  able  to  do  all  this,  should  I  have  better  attained
my  object?

MEDICINES.

Here  the  question  arises.  Is  it  well  to  mingle  many  kinds  oj-
medicines  together  in  one  prescription ;  to  order  batJis,  clysters^  ve-
iiesectianSy  blisters^  fomentations  and  inunctions  all  at  once^  or  one
after  tlie  other  in  rapid  succession^  if  we  wish  to  bring  Hw  science
of  medicine  to  perfection^  to  make  cures,  and  to  ascertain  for  certain
in  every  case  what  effect  the  medici7ies  employed  produced,  in  order
to  be  able  to  use  them  witli  like,  or  even  greater  success  in  similar
cases?

The  human  mind  is  incapable  of  grasping  more  than  one
subject  at  a  time — it  can  almost  never  assign  to  each  of  two
powers  acting  at  the  same  time  on  one  object  its  due  proportion
of  influence  in  bringing  about  the  result ;  how,  then,  can  we
ever  expect  to  bring  medical  science  to  a  greater  degree  of  cer-
tainty, if  we  deliberately  combine  a  large  number  of  different
powers  to  act  against  a  morbid  conditition  of  the  system,  while
we  are  often  ill  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  latter,  and
are  but  indifferently  conversant  with  the  separate  action  of  the
oomponent  parts  of  the  former,  much  less  with  their  combined
action?
Wlio  can  say  for  certain,  that  the  adjuvant  or  the  corrective


SSO ABB  THB  OB8TACLB8  TO  CESTAnffTT  ABD  SDIFLlCITr

in  the  complex  prescription  does  not  act  as  the  base,  or  that  the
exdpient  does  not  change  the  whole  character  of  the  mixture  ?
Does  the  principal  ingredient^  if  it  be  the  right  one^  stand  in  need
of  an  adjuvant?  Does  it  say  much  for  its  fitness  if  it  require
a  corrective?  or  why  does  it  require  the  aid  of  a  director?
"I  thought  I  would  complete  the  motley  list,  and  thereby
satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  school !''  exclaims  the  Doctor.

Does  opium  mingled  with  ipecacuan  cause  sleep,  because  the
excipient  in  the  recipe  has  been  invested  with  the  dignity  of
the  principal  ingredient  ?  Does  the  ipecacuan  here  perform  the
part  of  base,  adjuvant,  corrective,  director,  or  excipient?  Does

I  have  no  hesitation  in  asserting  that  whenever  two  medicines
are  mingled  together,  they  almost  never  produce  each  ilB  own
action  on  the  system,  but  one  almost  always  different  from  the
action  of  both  separately — an  intermediate  action,  a  neutral
action, — if  I  may  be  allowed  to  borrow  the  expression  from
chemical  language.

The  more  complex  our  receipts^  the  more  obscure  will  ii  he  m
medicine.

That  our  prescriptions  are  composed  of  a  smaller  number  of
ingredients  than  those  of  Amatus  Lusitanus,  avails  us  just  as
Uttle  as  it  availed  him  that  Andromachus  framed  still  more
complex  prescriptions  than  he.  Because  the  mixtures  of  both
these  worthies  are  more  complicated  than  our  own,  does  that
render  ours  simple  ?

Why  should  we  complain  that  our  science  is  obscure  and
intricate,  when  we  ourselves  are  the  producers  of  this  obscuritv
and  intricacy  ?  Formerly  I  was  infected  with  this  fever ;  the
schools  had  infected  me.  The  virus  clung  more  obstinately  to
me  before  it  came  to  a  critical  expulsion,  than  ever  did  the  virus
of  any  other  mental  disease.

Are  we  m  earnest  with  our  art  ?

Then  let  us  make  a  brotherly  compact,  and  all  agree  to  give
but  one  single,  simple  remedy  at  a  time,  for  every  single  dis*
ease,  without  making  much  alteration  in  the  mode  of  life  of  our
patients,  and  then  let  us  use  our  eyes  to  see  what  effect  this  or
that  medicine  has,  how  it  does  good,  or  how  it  fails. — ^Is  not  this  aa
simple  a  way  of  getting  over  the  difficulty  as  that  of  Columbus
with  the  egg?

a  number  of  complicated  combinations  of  medicines  fi>r  one  dis*


m

.^M9{gftliBin  QW  4«jX  tbw  with  HippoccatCB  to  treat  &e  wfaol«
tfmr^  of  ^  d]9QiMW  with  one  Of  two  dysters,  perhaps  a  littb
iif^yvf^l  mi  iiothiqg  e}fle  ?  Methinks  to  give  the  right,  not  the
qiMij-iiuziBd,  werie  the  stroke  of  art  I

Hippocrates  sought  the  simplest  from  out  an  entire  genus  <rf
ij^  tb^fO  fp^ipl^  diseases  he  gave  single  sim{de  remedies  fix>m
tljif  t]^  scanty  sto^ Thus  tie  was  enaUed  to  see  what  he

m» <P  4p  wM  )ui  did.

I  hPP^  i^  WjUl  AOt  be  considered  un&shionable  to  go  to  work
^{h  disease^  i^s  simply  as  did  this  truly  great  m^ft.

JkJDLj  one  who  should  see  me  give  one  m^cine  yesterday,
liigtbi^r  to-49y,  and  ja  third  diffiareot  from  either  to-morrow,
i:9iild  o]bpfirye ^hat  I  was  irresolute  in  my  practice^finr  I  pxa  but
a  weak  mortal) ;  but  should  he  see  me  combine  two  or  three
9l(kvst9mQepi|i0^epi;eflcriptioni(and  eaoe  now  this  has  sometimes  been
40P^X  ^®  would  lit  onQejaayi  "The  man  is  at  a  loss,  he  does  not
IjgjhlLy  know  what  he  wijil  be  at" — ^'^  He  is  wavering" — '^  Did
ll§  kMW  whudi  one  of  these  was  the  proper  remedy,  he  would
not  add  to  it  the  second,  and  still  less  the  third  I"

What  could  I  rejoin  ? Nothing.*

Should  any  one  ask  me  what  is  the  mode  of  action  of  bark  in
in  fH  known  diseases,  I  would  confess  that  I  know  but  little
oonoeming  it,  notwithstanding  the  number  of  times  I  have  used
it  alone  and  uncombined.  Should  any  one  ask  me,  however,
what  bark  would  do  if  combined  with  saltpetre,  or  still  more
widi  some  third  substance,  I  would  at  once  acknowledge  my
tienighted  ignorance,  and  would  bow  before  any  one  as  befo^
a  very  divinity  who  would  enlighten  me  on  the  subject

anything  but  a  single  medicine  at  once,  and  have  never  repeat*
ed  the  dose  until  the  action  of  the  former  one  had  ceased ;  a
venesectionalone — a  purgative  alone — and  always  a  simple,  never

'  lllf  HMMpi  which  has  be«n  looqueiitily  gixeo,  that  we  roquire,  by  pleasant  addi^

t^  to  tlpa  medjcfpe,^  render  it  more  agr^e^^  to  the  patieDit»  or  togire  it.anwiY

o^pvcniefli  form  for  admioistratioo,  and  conceal  the  disagreeable  tas^,  amell,  ap|l

€okor,  k  entvely  without  weight Qrown  up  patients,  whose  confidence  is  ready  in

OM  aoala  of. Ihe  balance  to  kick  the  beam  when  a  bitter,  nauseous  powder  is  placed  in

H^^ifl^M^^TB  V^  4C«nty  a/mpply  qf  that  quantity  fiv  my  taate. I  wonli

jflppion^MB  t9  ifym  needy  traders,  who,  /or  the  n^isaraible  f^  YiU  presccplbie  ti^

■oit  dainty  sweetmeats, and  are  willing  to  submit  to  alltheairs  and  *^»y*Kydiijyi|i

«f  tfMir  patients. We  all  know  how to  manage  children  in  radi case  without

Wtiq^  fbem.

SI


SSS  AXmDOTES  TO  SOKE

ft  compoTind  remedy,  and  never  a  second  until  I  had  got  a  clear
notion  of  the  operation  of  the  first  ?  Dare  I  confess,  that^  in  this
manner,  I  have  been  very  successful,  and  given  satis&ction  to  m j
patients,  and  seen  things  which  otherwise  I  never  would  have
seen?

Did  I  not  know  that  around  me  there  are  some  of  the  wxnrthi-
est  men,  who  in  simple  earnestness  are  striving  after  the  noblest
of  aims,  and  who  by  a  similar  method  of  treatment  have  cor-
roborated my  maxims,  assuredly  I  had  not  dared  to  confess  thia
heresy.  Had  I  been  in  Galileo's  place,  who  can  tell  but  that  I
might  have  abjured  the  idea  of  the  earth  revolving  round  the
aun!

But  the  dawn  begins  to  glimmer  in  the  horizon  I — ^who  can
tail  to  perceive  a  feeble  ray  of  it  in  our  Herz's  commentary  on
his  two  cases,  to  which  we  alluded  above?

What  would  he  not  now  give  that  in  both  instances  he  had
same  success  he  did  I  I,  for  my  part,  would  willingly  give  the
best^  the  most  satisfactory  of  sdl  my  observations  that  he  had
done  this.


ANTIDOTES  TO SOME  HEROIC  VEGETABLE  SUBSTAN-

CES.1


Cases  of  poisoning  often  put  the  practitioner  in  great  straits*
It  is  necessary  to  administer  the  specific  antidote  without  delay.
But  where  are  the  particular  antidotes  to  be  met  with  ?

From  the  time  of  Nicander  to  the  16th  century,  when,  if  I
mistake  not,  Pard  first  set  his  &ce  against  them,  grand  plans
were  formed  by  medical  men  for  discovering  nothing  less  than
an  universal  specific  for  every  thing  they  called  poison ;  and
they  included  under  the  denomination  of  poison,  even  the
plague,  philtres,  bewitchment,  and  the  bites  of  venomous  ani-
mals. This  extravagant  object  they  sought  to  obtain  by  equal-
ly extravagant  mixtures,  such  as  their  mithridate,  theriac,  phi-
Ionium,  diascordium,  &c.,  and  then  again,  there  was  a  time  when
all  these  unimportant  compounds  were  thought  to  be  surpassed
by  the  powerless  bezoar  and  the  electuary  of  jewels.  We  now
know  how  ridiculous  all  these  efforts  were.

*  From  HirfelanS9  Journal  der  pracL  Arsneykumde, VoL  ▼,  p.  1,  17M.


HXBOIO  VS6ITABLI  SUBSTANCB.  Sit

The  more  rational  spirit  of  modem  times  did  not,  howeyer,
oompletely  abandon  this  illusory  idea  of  the  possibility  an  oni-
Tersal  antidote'  for  all  poisons.  Among  other  things,  it  was
sought  for  in  yin^ar.  But  in  place  of  giving  us  a  fidthful  de-
tail  of  the  cases  in  which  it  was  truly  useful  and  those  in  which
it  did  no  good,  they  endeavoured  to  persuade  us  that  it  was
qpeoific  against  everything  that  bore  the  name  of  poison,  and
yet  it  is,  e.  g.^  of  no  use  in  poisoning  by  opium,  and  of  little  or
none  in  that  by  camphor.

Others  saw  in  milk  and  &tty  substances  a  supposed  universal
antidote  for  all  kinds  of  poisons,  but  no  good  can  be  effected  by
ihem,  except  in  cases  where  inflammatory  and  mechanically  ir-
ritating substances  have  been  swallowed.

Emetics  seemed  to  be  more  generally  useful  in  cases  where
poisons  had  been  swallowed ;  but  they  are  by  no  means  so  in
all  cases.  They  are  only  serviceable  when  the  quantity  of  in-
jurious matter,  that  has  been  swallowed  and  is  to  be  evacuated,
is  considerable  in  amount  Besides  their  unadvisableness  in  cases
of  poisoning  by  arsenic,  as  I  have  elsewhere^  shewn,  tiie  follow-
ing cases  will  suffice  to  dispel  the  illusion  of  their  being  tmiver-
sal  antidotes.

The  efforts  of  our  age  to  discovera  peculiar  antidote  for  eadi
individual  poison,  or  at  least  for  particular  classes  of  poisons,
are  not  to  be  mistaken,  and  I  give  in  my  adhesion  to  them.

Powerful,  heroic,  medicinal  substances,  without  which  the
medical  art  would  be  as  completely  paralysed  as  the  tnechanical
arts  would  be  without  steel  and  fire,  are  apt  to  give  rise  to  vio-
lent effects,  even  in  a  very  small  excess  of  dose,  in  certain  states
of  the  body,  as  also  in  idiosyncratic  or  otherwise  very  irritable
tabjects,  and  these  effects  the  physician  must  know  how  to  re-
move in  order  that  the  cause  he  advocates  may  not  suffer.

Antidote  to  camphor — opium. Antidote  to  opium — camphor,
1.  A  girl,  five  years  of  age,  had  swallowed  a  quantity  of

*  Tliere  are  at  least  four  kindi  of  antidotes  bj  meaoB  of  which  the  hurtfiil  substanc*
■ajbo—
I.  Removed:

1.  By  evacuatum  (vomiting,  purging,  excising  the  poisooous  bite).

2.  By  enveloping  (giving  suet  for  pieces  of  ghiss  that  have  been  swaUowtd).
VL  AUered:

1.  Chemically  (liver  of  sulphur  for  corrosive  sublimate).

2.  DynamieaUy  {%.  e.  their  potential  influeooe  on  the  living  fibre  remorad)

(Ooflbe  for  opium;.
^[UAeriUAfmUkvergiftwng, HSe.]


Mi  idnmftom  to  mmx

amnphor^  joalculated  ai  ftom  eight  to  ten  grmm.  Aho9tt  ten
wbrates  afierwards  abe  grev  pak,  became  oold,  Imt  lode  6Mdj
then  she  hoesmfb  &int,  apeechleas,  and  aenadeaik  Ija  a  jdioct
time  the  head  becaoae  drawn  to  the  right  ahonlder,  and  laamak
«fll  in  that  positioa ;  the  rest  of  the  body  was  lamp;  die  aenaaa
eKtingoiflhed.  OooaaionaUy  the  anna  vere  moved  iQ^oinnitiKiljc.
The  eyes  were  tamed  upwards.  These  waa  foam  at^he  nootfeu
The  tareathiiig  was  aoaroelj  peoeeptible.

Placed  in  a  warm  bed,  she  occasionallj  aeeiQed  toimoirer  Imth
mU  a  little.  Strong  ooiee  was  given  hi&r ;  but  ik&o&nfismi  the
eenseleaaneas  obvioualj  increafied.  Violent  voniiting  aet  ia,  j^lb^
camphor  was  in  part  ejected)  bait  no  relief  ensiaed  therefe>m,  th^
death-agony  seemed  to  ineuea^  always  more  and  mom.

I  poured  four  drops  of  tincture  of  opium  into  her  oaottidi,  but
eouM  not  observe  if  they  w&fe  swallowed,  but  as  I  iniagined  i
peroeired  some  signs  of  amendment  after  watching  careAiiiy  tar
aovne  minutes,  I  oont^ued  to  ply  h^  with  opium  by  the  moath|
anil  also  (aa  much  aeemed  to  flow  out  of  the  mo«th  again,  en
aoeount  of  the  inactivity  of  the  oesophagus)  by  dya^aca  of  water
mixe^  with  some  "drops  of  thebaic  tincture.

As  far  as  I  could  reckon,  she  might  have  taken  by  both
methods  nearly  two  grains  of  c^ium,  (a  quantity  that  under
olher  ciFCumsttuaees  would  certainly  have  killed  a  child  of  that
age)  when  she  recovered  perfectly  without  the  employment  of
any  other  remedy.

A  tranquil  sleep  of  some  hours,  accompanied  <by  general  per-
spiration, restored  ail  her  former  liveliness.

In  t^  case  it  was  remarkable  how  greatly  theooffee  inereaaad
the  too  powerftd  action  of  the  camphor.

In  other  cases  I  have  observed  that  these  two  substaneea

taken  soon  after  one  another,  or  together,  caused  a  great  and

rapid  tendenoy  to  vomit,  a  circumatance  tbat  jx^ht  parhape  be
turned  to  account  in  practice.

The  great  specific  power  of  opium  in  removing  so  speedily  the

^hmgerous  efiects  of  too  large  doses  of  camphor,  seems  to  justify

me  in  regarding  camphor ,  on  the  other  hand,  as  one  of  the  moat

powerful  watidoies  of  opiimif  as  Halle  also  observed  in  some  de-

glee. Andf  if  we  examine  the  affidr  acnnvsately,  did  Jaot  the

enormous  dose  of  opium  that  I  gave  in  the  above  case  become

innocuous  in  consequence  of  the  camphor  previously  swallowed.

Camphor  is  known,  from  the  observations  of  others,  as  an
antidote  to  cantharides  and  8gv/ifi$,


HSROld  VMRTABLS  S0BRANCB8.

AntSd&k  to  arnica — tiwMsrar.
%.  A  man  of  m  irritaUe  system,  in  the  prime  of  his  life  «nd
Mkenrae  healthy,  during  the  prevalenee  of  the  influenza  im
April  of  this  year,  took,  lor  a  headache  of  several  days  duift-
tmi,  oeoaaioDed  probably  by  this  epidemic,  six  grains  of  araiA
raoly  a  diose  that  he  deemed  inconsiderable,  as  he  had  previotii^
fy  taken  with  the  greatest  benefit,  for  autumnal  fevers,  firom  1&
to  17  grains  daily  and  even  twice  a  day.  After  the  lapse  of
about  eij^  minutes,  he  was  attacked  by  frightful  palpitation  of
die  hearty  which  at  length  became  so  violent  that  he  could  onkf
otter  a  few  words  with  great  difficulty.  His  look  was  staring
and  anxious.  A  general  coldness  pervaded  his  framte,  and  ver-
tigo almost  deprived  him  of  hearing  and  sight.  The  open  air
seemed  to  revive  him,  but  the  effect  was  not  lasting.  He  tried
to  promote  vomiting,  but  the  efforts  to  vomit  only  increased  his
slapefeotion,  his  anxiety,  and  his  vertigo. His  lower  jaw  fell

He  was  scarcely  able  to  indicate  his  desire  for  vinegar  (by  this
time  three  quarters  of  an  hour  had  elapsed).  Strong  wine-
vinegar  was  brought  him,  and  he  felt  revived.  He  drank  seve-
nl  ounees  at  once,  but  soon  perceived  that  he  experienced
most  relief  when  he  did  not  drink  a  draught  but  only  took  a
ttttte  eveiy  instant  In  the  course  of  half  an  hour  after  com-
menciiig  to  use  the  vinegar  he  was  restored  without  further
Inces  of  these  accidents.

If  there  be  any  remedy  that  we  require  to  regulate  carefully
by  the  actual  constitution  of  the  subject  whom  we  are  treating,
it  is  that  tremendous  irritant  arnica,  which  may  be  given  in  the
leucophlegmatic  cachexies  of  children  of  ten  years,  especially
in  autumnal  diseases  and  when  the  pulse  is  soft,  in  doses  of
tirelve  grains  without  the  slightest  bad  results ;  and  on  the  other
handf  in  certain  states  of  the  body  where  there  is  already  present
a  general  and  exalted  irritability,  eight  grains  of  it  in  a  dose
will  kill  the  strongest  man  in  a  few  hours,  as  I  have  known  to
occur  in  some  instances.

The  pathognomonic  discrimination  of  the  cases,  and  when  it
is  at  hand,  vinegar,,  will  in  future  prevent  such  accidents.

Antidote  to  cocculus  indicxis — camphor,
8.  A  druggist,  of  fine  sensibility  and  otherwise  healthy,  al-
though but  recently  convalescent  from  an  acute  disease,  some
years  ago  wished  to  ascertain  the  taste  of  the  cocculus  seed,  and
as  he  considered  it  a  powerful  substance  he  weighed  out  a  single
giainof  itybutdid  not  take  quite  the  half  of  this  into  his  mouth,
rolled  it  about  with  his  tongue  over  his  palate,  and  he  had  not


826  ASTn>0TB8  TO  80MX .

swallowed  it  two  seconds  when  he  was  seized  with  the  mo0l
dreadful  apprehensireness.  This  anxiety  increased  every  mo-
ment; he  became  cold  all  over;  his  limbs  became  stif^  as  if
paralyzed,  with  drawing  pains  in  their  bones  and  in  the  back.
The  symptoms  increased  from  hour  to  hour,  until,  after  the  lapse
of  six  hours,  the  anxiety,  the  stupe&ction,  the  senseless  stupidity,
and  the  immobility  had  risen  to  the  greatest  height,  with  fixed,
sullen  look,  ice-cold  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  the  hands,  and
great  repugnance  to  all  food  and  drink.  At  the  slightest  increase
or  decrease  of  the  temperature  of  the  air  (75°  Fahr.)  he  ex-
pressed his  displeasure ;  every  loud  word  put  him  in  a  passion.
All  that  he  could  still  say  was  that  his  brain  felt  as  if  constricted
by  a  ligature,  and  that  he  expected  speedy  dissolution.  He  gave
no  indication  of  inclination  to  vomit,  of  thirst,  or  of  any  other
want  in  the  world.  He  wished  to  sleep,  as  he  felt  a  great  incli-
nation to  do  so,  but  when  he  closed  his  eyes  he  immediately
started  up  again,  so  frightful,  he  asserted,  was  the  sensation  he
felt  in  his  brain  on  going  to  sleep,  like  the  most  hideous  dream.
The  pulse  was  very  small,  but  its  frequency  was  not  altered.

In  these  frightful  circumstances  I  was  called  in.  A  few  drops
of  thebaic  tincture  appeared  not  to  agree  with  him.  This  led
me  to  fix  upon  a  strong  camphor  emulsion,  which  I  administered
to  him,  a  tablespoonful  about  every  minute.  I  soon  observed  a
happy  change  in  his  expression,  and  after  he  had  thus  taken  fif-
teen grains  of  camphor,  his  consciousness  was  restored,  the
anxiety  gone,  the  heat  natural — in  something  less  than  an  hour.
He  perspired  a  little  during  the  night,  slept  pretty  well,  but  the
following  day  he  was  still  uncommonly  weak,  and  all  the  parts,
which  during  the  direct  action  of  the  cocculus  were  yesterday
painful  internally,  were  to-day  uncommonly  painftil  externally
to  the  slightest  touch.  The  bowels  remained  constipated  for
several  days.  It  is  very  probable  that  all  these  after-suflferings
could  have  been  prevented  if,  in  place  of  giving  fifteen  grains
of  camphor,  I  had  at  once  given  thirty.

During  the  increase  of  the  symptoms  from  the  cocculus,  he
a;ttempted  to  smoke  tobacco  with  considerable  aggravation;
they  also  increased  from  taking  coffee,  though  not  so  strikingly
as  from  the  other.

Antidote  to  gamboge  (and  other  drastic  gum-resins) — salt  of  tartar^

4.  I  saw  a  child  of  three  years  old  take  a  tincture  containing
two  grains  of  gamboge,  prepared  with  dissolved  salt  of  tartar,


HSBOIO  YIBGCTABLB  SUB8TANCB8.  827

.without  tke  slightest  sickness  or  evaeuation,  with  the  exception
of  an  uncommonly  profuse,  flow  of  urine.

AlWliAtt  probably  destroy  the  drastic  property  of  other  pur-
gative gum«>resins,  especially  if  the  latter  are  still  present  in  the
stomach,  but  not  as  in  the  other  cases  I  have  adduced,  dynami*
cally,  by  an  opposite  influence  upon  the  sensitive  and  irritable
fibre,  but  chemically,  by  decomposing  the  resin.

Antidote  to  dqtura  stramonium — vinegar  (and  citric  acid).

.  5.  In  a  woman  rather  advanced  in  life,  there  occurred  from
two  grains  of  the  eoctract  of  stramonium^  taken  in  two  doses
within  eight  hours,  stupe&ction,  anxiety,  convulsions  of  the  limbs
and  involuntary  weeping;  symptoms  that  were  frightfully  in-
creased by  partaking  of  cofiee.  They  rapidly  disappeared  after
taking  a  few  ounces  of  strong  vinegar.

Besides  vinegiur,  citric  acid  is  also  a  specific  antidote  to  strsr
monium,  as  I  have  shewn  in  another  place,  from  the  use  of
eunrants,  which  contain  the  latter,  and  I  am  very  much  mistaken
if  tiie  true  antidote  of  all  the  solana/xe  be  not  vinegar,  cUrvr
vAmaiicacid.

Antidote  to  ignalia — vinegar.

6.  A  paralytic  stiflhess  in  the  lower  limbs,  with  involuntary
twitchings  in  them,  great  anxiety,  coldness  of  the  whole  body,
wiUi  dilatability  of  the  pupil,  &c.,  were  the  symptoms  pro*
duced  in  a  youth  of  20  years,  by  an  over-dose  of  ignatia.
BBs  head  was  free,  his  consciousness  perfect ;  but  on  account  of
the  anxiety,  he  could  not  express  himself  properly.  Intelligence
of  a  somewhat  unpleasant  nature  aggravated  his  condition ;  the
same  was  the  case  with  coflFee  and  smoking  tobacco.

For  this  unpleasant  state  I  gave  some  camphor,  but  no  good
was  thereby  effected.  But  on  letting  him  drink  very  strong
vinegar,  eight  ounces  in  the  course  of  half  an  hour^he  was  restored
so  completely  that  the  same  afternoon  he  was  able  to  make  one
of  a  party  of  pleasure.

In  poisoning  with  nux  vomica  I  would  also  advise  vinegar,
as  it  is  nearly  allied  in  the  natural  order  of  botany  to  the  former.

Antidote  to  veratrum  album — coffee.

7.  I  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  restoring  two  children,  the
one  a  year  and  three  quarters  old,  the  other  five  years  old,  who
had  both  taken  white  hellebore  by  mistake,  the  former  four  grainy
the  latter  seven  grains.  Those  conversant  with  such  matters
will  consider  both  to  he  of  Hiemselves  fatal  doses,  and  as  long  as
no  antidote  is  known,  absolutely  &tal.


nS  'iM¥li)Oi*ils  itb  Midi

Bat  few  MBiitte  ^apMd  hOdfte^ gte^im  dttftgM  iNMf  iMbr-
aervable  in  both  childr6il.  Thej  be6wi6  quite  6Mi\3My  iM
dbtm,  fh^  eyes  p)rojecti%  like  ti  suffocating  peif&cni%  ItttriiidiyE
ran  ooAtinually  fircfm  tbeir  mouthy  and  thej  deeined  devoid  df
<Mi8ck>usne88,  when  I  saw  them  half  Ati  hour  aifker  the  adeidtifli

It  had!  ahreadj  been  tried  to  incite  iheni  lo  Toimt  bjr  xddAtt
of'  a  feather,  without  succedB,  indeed  ^th  aii  Itggi^tstiott  of
their  sjmptoms,  as  I  was  told.  Milk  administered  hf  dyster
and  poured  down  the  throat  in  large  quantities  had  had  no  efBdot^
except  the  production  of  seanty  vomiting,  which  did  no  good,
but  only  increased  the  faintness.

When  I  arrived  both  seemed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death.
Distorted,  projecting  eyes,  disfigured,  cold  countenanoe,  lax
muscles,  closed  jaws,  imperceptible  respiration.  Thein&at  was
the  worst

The  impending  death  by  apoplexy,  the  failing  irritability,  al
once  induced  me  to  combat  the  symptoms  if  possible  with  strong
6offee.  I  introduced,  as  far  as  the  clenched  jaws  would  allow
me,  the  warm  coffee  into  the  mouth,  but  I  chiefly  sought  to  give
it  in  large  quantity  by  means  of  the  enema.  It  was  successful.
In  the  course  of  an  hour  all  the  danger  was  gone.  The  heat,
ttie  consciousness,  the  respiration  returned.  A  sleep  of  several
hours,  during  which  the  breathing  was  slower  than  Usual,  re-
freshed them.  All  the  operations  of  the  animal  economy  were
again  almost  in  good  order.  But  the  children  remained  weak^
emaciated,  and  every  night  before  midnight  were  attacked  with
a  kind  of  fever,  that  threatened  to  prove  fetal  in  a  chronic  man-
ner. Peruvian  bark  given  for  a  fortnight,  however,  removed
this  sequela,  and  as  I  am  informed,  they  are  still  (a  year  and  a
half  have  since  elapsed)  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  health.

I  may  here  observe,  that  in  the  case  of  severe  poisonings  we
have  not  unfrequently  to  combat  a  remnant  of  chronic  affeotiona,
because  the  antidote  of  the  noxious  substance  even  though  it  be
specific,  only  acts  in  a  contrary  sense,  consequently,  belongs  to
the  class  of  palliatives  which  are  unable  to  remove  the  secondary
effects  of  the  poison  that  has  been  swallowed,  especially  if  it
has  had  time  to  make  some  inroads  on  the  system.  Moreover,
we  must  not  imagine  that  an  antidote  can  be  such  a  perfect
cOunterJ)oisou  of  the  poison  as  that  all  the  Symptotiis  of  ih0
tatter  shall  be  covet^  by  it,  as  two  triangles  with  equal  side!
khd  angles  cover  otie  another ;  nor  can  it,  consistently  with  all
analogy,  be  denied,  that  the  noxiouid  isubstance,  in  ooihbinatl6b


raEBOIO  YSe^ETABUi  SUBBTJUTCBS.  St9

Willi  an  antidote  ever  so  appropriate,  must  derelope  a  new  aotiori,
wfajeh  Miikl  iK>t  hare  h^n  anticipated  firom  each  singly,  and
wkieh  will  play  its  part  in  the  body  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time.
Tfan  after  poisoning  by  opiom,  which  has  been  removed  Jbijr
giving  a  considerable  quantity  of  coffee,  we  perceive  an  extra-
eiduMury  secretion  of  urine,  even  in  persons  in  whom  the  accus-
tomed coffee  did  not  produce  this  effect  of  itself;  and  a  grainof
(^mn  in  an  infiomon  of  from  one  to  one  a  half  ounce*  of  coffee,
taken  once  or  several  times  a  day,  gives  perhaps  the  most  sure
and  powerful  diuretic  that  the  medical  art  possesses.

Antidote  to  mezereum — camphor.

8.  An  otherwise  robust  man  took  mezereum  internally  for
some  complaints  that  he  had.  But  as  he  continued  the  use  of
this  drug  even  after  the  disappearance  of  these  complaints,  he
became  affected  with  intolerable  itching  over  the  whole  body,
which  did  not  allow  him  an  hour's  sleep.  He  discontinued  the
medicine,  came  to  me  thirty-six  hours  afterwards,  and  assured
me  that  he  could  no  longer  endure  the  itching,  which  increased
eveiy  hour — the  first  direct  action  of  mezereum  lasts  very  long.
I  gave  him  thirty  grains  of  camphor,  six  grains  to  be  taken
eveiy  six  hours,  and  before  he  had  taken  it  all,  his  itching  had
disappeared.


SOME  KINDS  OF  CONTINUED  AND  REMITTENT  FEVERS.*


The  actual  number  of  genera  and  sj^ecies  of  sporadic  and  epi-
demic fevers  is  probably  much  greater  than  is  laid  down  in  the
works  on  pathology  and  nosology.  Indeed  the  morbific  agen-
cies that  act  on  the  human  body  are  so  numerous,  their  intensity
and  duration  of  action  so  various,  that  the  diseases  they  give
rise  to  must  present  a  great  variety  of  character.

Although  the  great  epidemics  have  been  more  frequently  de*
diseases,  which  present  such  very  different  characters,  have  been
confounded  under  the  same  name,  so  that  I  may  be  permitted
to  inquire  if  they  are  not  quite  distinct.

Sporadic  fevers  are  still  more  diverse  and  still  less  known,
and  it  is  just  from  this  latter  cause,  and  in  conse(]ftience  of  theiif

'  Aooording  as  the  patient  was  more  or  less  accustomed  to  the  use  of  coffee.
^  Ynmfixiidm&sJaufnalderpracHteKmAnneyku^ Voir. 1V98.


880 SOKE  DNM  OF  OONTIirUKD  AKD  BXMHTEHT  FEYXUL

fteqnencv,  that  ihej  in  general  make  as  many  yictims  as  qui-
demic  fevers.  Sporadic  fevers  are  no  doabt  more  difficult  to
tions,  the  more  difficult  is  it  to  deduce  fix>m  them  a  specific
diaracter.

The  following  fects,  imperfect  though  they  be,  may  however
serve  as  a  contribution  to  the  history  of  these  fevers.

L  In  January  of  this  year,  a  kind  of  sporadic  fever,  apparently
more  of  a  continued  than  a  remittent  character,  at  least  in  its
first  stages,  prevailed  among  children.  In  spite  of  the  heat  of
skin,  the  patients  experienced  continual  rigours  and  great  lassi-
tude ;  the  memory  was  impaired.  The  respiration  was  excess-
ively short  and  spasmodic ;  some  of  them  had  a  troublesome
cough ;  the  urine  was  high-coloured,  and  sometimes  deposited  a
red  sediment ;  there  was  scarcely  any  trace  of  gastro-intestinal
derangement ;  there  was  an  evacuation  of  the  bowels  every  day,

almost  quite  regularly ;  the  brow  was  often  covered  with  oold
sweat

Evacuant  remedies  weakened  the  patients  without  producing
any  amelioration;  cinchona  bark  also  produced  an  injurious
effect  The  younger  the  children  the  worse  was  the  disease.
Many  sunk  beneath  it,  chiefly  those  in  whom  the  continued
fever  no  longer  presented,  towards  the  last,  marked  intermissions.

A  few  grains  of  arnica  root  produced  a  rapid  change.  Al-
though there  was  in  general  no  amelioration,  the  fever  which
till  then  had  appeared  to  assume  a  continued  character  changed
into  an  uninterrupted  series  of  paroxysms  of  intermittent  fever,
the  rigour  of  which  lasted  an  hour,  and  the  heat  (with  very  short
respiration)  a  little  longer,  terminating  in  general  perspiration.
On  the  cessation  of  the  perspiration  the  rigour  presented  itself
anew,  so  that  this  state  continued  day  and  night

On  the  one  hand  the  shortness  of  the  stages,  and  on  the  other
the  congested  state  of  the  chest,  the  dyspnoea  and  suffocating
cough,  contra-indicated  the  employment  of  cinchona.  &.  Iqna-
tiu£  heart,  on  the  contrary  produced  effects  that  were  truly  sur-
prising. I  gave  it  in  large  doses,  every  twelve  hours ;  to  chil-
dren from  nine  months  to  three  years  of  age,  from  ^  to  -f  of  a
grain ;  to  those  between  four  and  six  years,  from  one  grain  to
\\  grain ;  to  those  between  seven  and  twelve  years,  from  2  to
8  grains.  In  general  this  remedy  appears  to  be  more  suitable
than  cinchona  in  intermittent  fevers  characterised  chiefly  by  a
longer  duration  of  the  heat The  fever  terminated  at  the  end


801UE  KIHM  OP  OQNTIKUED  AND  REMITTKKT  FEYXBa 881

of  two  or  three  days  without  leaving  any  traces  or  any  weakness.
Ignatia  also  removed  completely,  or  nearly  so,  the  dyspnoea
and  suffocating  cough  in  those  that  presented  these  symptoms.
n.  In  the  commencement  of  March  of  the  same  year,  many
children,  my  own  among  the  rest,  were  attacked  by  a  fever
which  also  affected  adults,  though  to  a  much  less  extent  In
addition  to  the  actual  paroxysms  I  noticed  the  following  symp-
toms :  tension  and  pressure  in  the  forehead  just  above  the  orbit
<m  one  side,  extending  in  severe  cases  to  below  the  parietal  re*
gion ;  pressure  at  the  stomach  as  from  weight ;  tension  at  the
flcrobiculus  cordis  and  violent  tensive  pains  (colic)  round  the
navel,  accompanied  by  clay-coloured  diarrhoe,  the  stools  being
very  fetid,  or  by  consumption  alternating  with  fetid  flatus;
constant  coldness  of  the  limbs  without  rigour ;  humour  very  bad
(morose,  disagreeable);  rapid  emaciation  without  great  debility ;
absence  of  signs  of  derangement  of  the  bile  or  of  other  impuri-
ties in  the  first  passages,  at  least  in  the  stomach ;  tongue  clean,
moist,  rarely  covered  with  a  somewhat  whitish  fur ;  taste  in  the
mouth  natural,  sometimes  sour ;  feeling  of  tension  througbout
the  body,  pupils  slightly  contracted,  not  dilating  in  the  dark.

At  noon  precisely  the  paroxysms  were  always  renewed  with
a  very  distinct  rigour,  lassitude,  somnolence,  sopor,  and  lastly  the
cheeks  burning,  but  without  thirst.  Even  when  the  fits  were
not  very  severe  the  patienta  felt  an  unconquerable  aversion  for
all  kinds  of  food.

Exactly  at  midnight  a  slight  attack  of  a  similar  character
made  its  appearance :  the  patient  cried  out,  tossed  about  in  bed ;
the  limbs  were  cold.  There  was  rarely  at  night  general  perspi-
ration, after  which  all  the  symptoms  disappeared  until  the  fol-
lowing day ;  but  in  that  case  the  fever  reappeared  the  third
day,  and  so  it  went  on.

The  greatest  freedom  from  fever  was  found  in  the  morning.
When  the  patient  rose,  the  headache,  the  tension  throughout  the
body,  and  the  abdominal  pains  reappeared,  but  the  appetite  con-
tinued good ;  the  same  was  the  case  in  the  evening.

During  this  apparent  remission  the  patients  expressed  a  great
desire  to  eat  pork.  On  satisfying  this  desire  to  satiety,  there
occurred  more  relief  than  aggravation.

The  essential  nature  of  this  fever  appeared  to  consist  in  a
diminution  of  the  sensibility  and  a  kind  of  clonic  spasm  of  the
fibre.

The  fever  shewed  itself  in  the  greatest  intensity  when  the
wind  blew  a  long  time  &om  the  east.


Stt 8om  vxfDB  07  ocnrmrnED  Ain>  sncnMOPP  fivttft

'  It  was  not  dangerous,  bat  it  was  obstinate  and  troftblesOfi^.
; . Enietics  scarcely  produced  amelioration  fot  one  day;  not-
withstanding their  employment,  the  following  day  the  f9f«»
continued  its  nsual  course. Laxatires  and  the  remedies  nsHadly
employed  for  acridities  completely  failed.

Cinchona  and  ignatia,  given  in  small  or  large  doses,  ag^va-
ted  the  patient's  state.  Arnica,  though  it  palliated  the  bud
humour,  the  headache,  &0w,  had  only  an  antisymptomatic  efliM^
it  did  not  produce  permanent  amelioration.

The  immobility  of  the  pupil,  the  pressive,  tensive  pain  in  tifn
jcrobiculus  and  around  the  umbilicus,  together  with  the  geae^
sensation  of  tension  throughout  the  body ;  the  sopor,  the  i^
parently  insignificant  diminution  of  the  strength,  and  the  reli^
afforded  by  the  occasional  perspirations,  the  benefit  produced
by  the  ingestion  of  pork,  which  exercises  a  great  influence  on  tiiie
dOntractility  of  the  fibre,  and  finally  the  aggravation  occasion^
by  the  east  wind,  all  these  symptoms  led  me  to  regard  opium  as
the  remedy  indicated.  The  fetid  stools  and  flatus,  whilst  the
slomach  continued  in  a  normal  state,  contra-indicated  its  employ-
ment all  the  less  as  the  clay-colour  of  the  evacuations  betrayed
a  spasmodic  state  of  the  excretory  biliary  ducts.  I  accoindingly
give  this  remedy  in  the  morning  before  the  fit,  in  the  dose  of
%%h  of  a  grain  to  an  infant  of  five  years,  ^|,oths  of  a  grain  to  One
(rf  seven  and  another  of  eight  years,  'Iwths  of  a  grain  to  one  rf
ten  years.  I  took  myself  half  a  grain.  The  symptoms  disap-
)[>eared  completely  in  the  course  of  the  day.  Twelve  hours
afterwards,  in  the  evening,  I  gave  a  still  weaker  dose,  and  the
fever  did  not  return  either  the  following  day  or  on  any  subse-
quent day ;  the  constipation  likewise  ceased.  The  patients  were
eured.

III.  Ill  the  month  of  April  there  prevailed  an  influenza  essen-
tially different  from  that  which  had  been  obser>'ed  five  years
previously.  I  know  not  if  the  studies  that  were  made  of  it  at
that  time  were  correct,  or  if  I  am  mistaken  in  my  appreciation
of  the  disease.  I  shall  therefore  only  draw  attention  to  one  single
point  of  dissimilarity  and  leave  to  mV  readers  the  trouble  of
Comparing  the  others.

In  the  epidemic  of  1782  there  was  scarcely  a  third  or  even  a
fourth  of  the  inhabitants  who  were  not  attacked  by  a  fever  pre-
senting all  the  symptoms  of  a  catarrho-rheumatic  fever,  though
it  only  lasted  seven  days.  In  general  they  were  all  affected  in
the  same  degree ;  though  there  was  not  danger  except  to  debili-


aom.  JHNM  Of  QQUTi»v]si>  jlvo  BsicinsNT  nvna. SM.

ta^  sobjastfli  to  43id  people,  aAd  tbose  suffering  fiom  pulmonary
Pfttwuyxption.  In  the  influenza  of  the  present  jear,  on  the  con-
tsaiy,  nifie-tenUis  soarcely  had  Miything  more  than  slight  traces
of  the  malady,  without  fever;  the  other  tenth,  on  the  contrary,
were  attacked  by  fever,  and  danger  was  imminent

FatientB  who  had  none  of  the  febrile  symptoms  did  not  usually
$fgk  advice,  and  were  not  considered  to  be  affected  by  the  epi-
demic It  was  difficult  to  observe  them,  and  their  symptoxns
were  not  perceived  by  unobservant  medical  men.  All  their
fiiaotions  went  on  regularly ;  the  only  characteristic  symptoms
tbey  presented  were  drawing  and  paralytic  pains  in  some  part
of  the  body — some  had  them  in  the  nape,  others  only  in  the  ex*
t0mal  parts  of  the  neck,  or  only  in  one  half  of  tiie  chesty  ii^
others  they  were  confined  to  the  back,  one  arm,  a  thigh,  or  a
finr  fijagers.  These  fixed  pains  troubled  the  patients  for  weeks,
iiid  all  the  resources  of  domestic  medicine,  as  the  infusion  43f
dder-flowers,  the  juice  of  elder-berries,  fumigations  and  emetios,
were  of  no  use*  When,  on  the  contrary,  recourse  was  had  to
the  appropriate  remedy  for  influenza,  the  pains  ceased  quickly
w.  die  course  of  two  days  or  even  less.

Qdier  patients  had  pains  in  several  limbs  at  once,  accompanied
bj  fever.

Those  who  had  at  the  same  time  febnle  symptoms  experienced,
before  the  hot  stage,  for  several  hours,  and  even  for  some  days,
a  rigour  that  recurred  from  time  to  time,  that  was  aggravated  by
€9Mry  movement^  and  was  accompanied  by  ill-humour,  pxisiUajnimity
and  despair.  The  patients  complained  at  the  same  time  of  weight
in  the  head  and  dulness,  symptoms  which  they  did  not  consider
as  headaches,  and  a  difficulty  of  swallowing,  which  soon  shewed
ilaelf  on  the  external  parts  of  the  neck  and  on  the  nape,  or  which
ohaoged  into  insuflerable  tension  that  did  not  permit  of  the
slightest  motion  of  IJie  neck,  and  was  aggravated  by  the  touch.
\si  the  back  they  experienced  a  disagreeable  drawing ;  on  the
dieat  a  similar  very  painful  sensation,  and  throughout  the  body,
espeeially  in  the  thighs,  a  well  marked  paralytic  stiffiiess.  The
fiatients  Mt  the  sensation  of  laziness  and  lassitude  most  when
seated.

After  another  and  more  violent  rigour  (sometimes  accompanied
bj  very  great  anxiety  at  the  heart)  whidi  generally  appeared  in
ihe  evening,  and  in  bad  cases  sooner,  the  most  violent  tensive
and  preasive  headache  came  on  just  above  the  orbits  and,  is^
many  of  the  patients,  in  the^oooiput  also.  The  anxiety  inoieagoi,


884 80MX  KINDS  07  OONTmUSB  AKD  BBMimffT  tWHBUL

tbe  face  became  swollen,  the  eyes  red ;  added  to  these  was  a
violent  heat  which  lasted  six,  twelve  or  more  hours,  and  in
some  cases  till  death,  which  occurred  on  the  fpurth,  seventh  or
fifteenth  day.

In  the  mild  cases,  when  the  heat  diminished,  it  passed  every
day  (for  the  paroxysms  were  usually  quotidian,  towards  the
evening,  although  latterly  without  rigour)  after  midnight  into
general  diaphoresis,  often  characterized  by  an  excessive  fetori
and  which,  in  the  most  favourable  cases,  only  lasted  till  six
o'clock  in  the  morning,  but  beyond  that  time  in  the  bad  cases.
When  the  perspiration  was  not  very  copious,  and  when  it  ceased
at  the  time  first  mentioned,  there  ensued,  throughout  the  day,  a
great  amelioration  of  all  the  pains  and  the  headache ;  if,  on  the
.contrary,  it  lasted  longer  and  was  more  abundant,  there  occurred
more  disagreeable  affections ;  the  head  again  became  confused,
and  was  from  time  to  time  affected  by  pains ;  the^pains  on  the
external  parts  became  twice  or  even  four  times  more  severe
during  the  perspirations  that  occurred  by  day,  and  there  was
reason  to  dread  the  supervention  of  a  continued,  a  deadly  fever.

During  the  first  days  there  was  obstinate  constipation ;  in  the
most  severe  cases  there  was  suppression  of  the  urinary  secretion
that  continued  sometimes  even  till  death  ensued ;  in  these  cases
there  was  no  perspiration  during  the  greatest  severity  of  the
heat  of  body,  and  there  occurred  delirium  and  tossing  about,
premonitory  symptoms  of  approaching  death.  In  the  most  fii-
vourable  circumstances,  the  day  following  the  first  febrile  heat,
the  urine,  small  in  quantity,  was  of  a  greenish-black  colour^  opaque,
passing  the  following  days,  until  the  recovery  was  complete,
into  green  and  light  green.

In  the  worst  cases  the  tongue  was  dry  and  brown  to  its  very
point,  or  when  it  was  slightly  moist  it  was  brown  or  covered  by
a  black  coating,  and  it  was  yellow  in  the  less  serious  cases.  Not-
withstanding the  dryness  of  the  tongue,  the  thirst  was  not  great,
and  the  patients  generally  expressed  a  wish  for  acidulated  drinks,
rarely  for  pure  water.  When  amendment  ensued  they  asked
for  beer.  In  the  mildest  cases  they  felt  a  bitter  taste  on  the
tongue ;  in  less  favourable  circumstances  this  taste  was  very  dis-
agreeable ;  it  was  not  present  at  all  in  those  cases  that  presented
the  most  dangerous  character.  All  alleged  that  they  perceived
the  natural  taste  of  solid  and  liquid  food,  though  it  excited  the
greatest  repugnance  in  them.  The  first  stools  were  black,  fetid ;
afterwards  they  became  of  a  greenish-brown  oolour.


tOKB  KINDS  OY  CONTINUED  AND  BSMITTXNT  FXVSBa. 886

After  a  oonstipated  state  of  the  bowels  had  lasted  several  days,
there  generallj  oeourred  a  diarrhoea,  similar  to  that  attending
oolic,  with  aggravation  of  the  symptoms.

In  the  bad  cases,  there  was  sleeplessness  that  lasted  until  death
took  place ;  nothing  approaching  to  sleep  was  observed  except
a  sort  of  drowsiness,  that  lasted  a  few  minutes,  with  delirium  and
tossing.  As  the  disease  diminished,  the  patient  got  some  sleep
before  midnight ;  but  even  in  the  most  favourable  circumstanoea
it  only  lasted  until  three  o'clock.

The  most  troublesome  symptoms  were :  dejection  and  despair,
paralytic  stiffness,  drawing  and  tensive  pains  in  the  external
parts,  especially  in  the  tendinous  and  membranous  aponeuroses,
as  it  seemed,  and  in  the  periosteum  of  the  affected  parts ;  weight
i&  the  head,  alternating  with  tensive,  drawing  and  pressive  head-
ache, and  loss  of  memory.

The  character  of  the  adSTection  seemed  to  betray  pain  and  irri-
tation of  the  sensitive  fibre.  Cory  za,  properly  so  called,  never
occurred.  In  some  cases,  stitches  in  the  side  with  expectoration
of  blood  were  added  to  the  array  of  symptoms,  but  these  stitches
in  the  side  were  not  attributable  to  inflammation.

Sometimes  the  fever  was  accompanied  at  night  by  attacks  of
suffiocation.

There  was  never  either  swelling  or  redness  in  the  part,  even
in  cases  where  the  pain  was  excessive,  with  the  exception  of
some  cases  where  the  fingers  were  sensitive,  swollen  and  red ;
in  one  single  case  the  hepatic  region  was  tumefied.

The  most  annoying  drawing  headache  was  often  accompanied
by  nausea  that  lasted  several  hours,  by  faintness  and  rigours.  The
catamenia  were  generally  premature  and  degenerated  into  me-
trorrhagia.

The  most  powerful  emetics  did  not  cause  vomiting,  but  some-
times nausea,  that  lasted  for  whole  days,  alternating  with  syn-
cope ;  sometimes  a  single  abundant  stool  occurred,  with  aggra-
vation of  all  the  symptoms ;  or  again,  very  small  doses  of  these
emetics  brought  on  excessive  vomiting  for  several  hours,  as  oft;en
as  twenty  times,  and  in  severe  cases  even  thirty -six  times,  always
succeeded  by  obvious  aggravation.  (Sometimes  spontaneous  vo-
miting occurred  for  twenty-four  consecutive  hours,  and  the  dis-
ease went  off  entirely.)  If|  as  very  seldom  happened,  the
emetics  occasioned  moderate  vomiting,  the  matter  vomited  usa<
ally  consisted  of  a  black,  fetid  substance,  resembling  in  ap-
pearance the  grounds  of  coffee ;  and,  when  that  was  the  case,  all


tU flOMK  KIHDB  or  OOHTUTOKD  ASB  BnORiaT  11  MMWi

the  odier  sTmptonui  became  speedily  aggfa>yfUb»jL  All  atteiopto
i^ade  to  provoke  yomiting  bj  iickluig  the  booes  wilh  ift  feather
only  produced  loss  of  str^ogth  and  increase  of  thepem.

A  similar  effect  was  produced  by  every  kind  of  laxativt,  even
the  mildest  kinds,  especially  when  there  wi|s  [N!ffBent  ^  predie-
poaition  to  diarrhoea.  Thus  I  saw  four  grains  of  rhubarb  pinor
duce,  in  the  case  of  a  boy  of  eleven  yeaiv  of  age,  more  42iaD
fixrty  stools  in  the  course  <^  two  days,  and  increase  the  intew^
of  ^e  symptoms.  Many  patients  sank  beneath  th6  eoaet^
diaarrhcea.

When  diaphoretics,  which  were  emj^oyed  by  tha  pooiW
classes,  sometimes  produced  the  desired  effbct,  excessiye  pen^-
ration  came  on,  causing  an  aggravation  of  all  the  sy]Qapt<HDS.  Ib
jome  patients  an  abundant  uniform  transpiratioa  QU^pifeeted  i^
self  imtil  death.

Y^etable  acids,  which  were  employed  by  the  «iedjeal  prac-
titicmers  in  great  quantities,  occasioned  vomiting  and  diarrhm^
followed  by  aggravation.  Taken  by  the  potieiits  apcording  99
their  feelings  dictated,  they  seemed  to  refisesh  tjiem,  btt(  tj^ey
could  only  take  a  very  small  quaatily  at  a  time.  In  the  moat
-violent  attacks,  they  only  desired  to  moieten  tibeir  lips^  Hfid
found  themselves  refreshed  thereby.

Mineral  acids  seemed  not  to  be  useAil,

Venesection  was  hurtful  in  every  stage  of  the  diseasei  but
eq)ecially  when  the  fever  was  severe ;  death  then  often  ensued
about  the  fourth  day.  Even  when  the  fever  seemed  slight  at
ihe  commencement,  bleeding^  was  instantly  followed  by  fiiint-
dng,  prostration  of  strength,  increase  of  the  pauoi,  and  agc^vatioi?
^  the  disease.

Opium  subdued  the  heat  and  the  excessive  perspiraligiQi  f^
the  delirium  and  tiie  somnolezu;^ ;  but  it  increased  the  consti-
pation ;  in  geneml,  it  did  not  ei^fifn  tp  rcpipve  the  o^bMj  ^^'
JC^y.

Oamplior,  on  the  contrary,  surpassed  aU  ji^e  e^peptftt^pn^  AM
^uld  have  been  IcMined  of  it  j  \t  was  effiQfuuov,s,  ji^x^  Xj^J  a^Jj
jQiecific,  in  all  the  stages  of  the  disease,  aocompanie4  or  npt  by

*  The  loqal  practitionere  constaiiUj  had  reooune  to  bleediog ;  the j  thus  caiaed
die  death  of  many  patients.  U,  by  chance,  a  Tigorous  subject  surriyed  after  a  fawd
atroggle,  they  liaised  shouts  at  triumph,  and  psetended  diey-had  WTed  hkii  by  nrinns
j^f «  welUyned  Jbleediog,  or  hf  their  refiqlTeQts  f^  gYjUdwi/fl.  Qi^e  qf  thcHoafviBp
9Vik  under  a  fiimllAr  treatment  too  ejM^  followed  out,  though  ercay  dBbct  ^^d
Jl^aen  made  to  dissuade  him  froip  it


mmMiWiwuk  or  -ooiinDrvBD  abd  Rnfmmr  ravnod M7

fimTi  a^)e(aAlfy  whea^it  was  given  as  earlj aa poaaible and  in
lacga^loaear  A  large  ^nnmber  of  patients  reGoyeaeed  by  its  use
in  tfaeqMwe  <^  four  days^  in  spite  of  the  gravity  of  thecr
symptomsj  • '  ■

:  . At.the'oommenoeinent  I  was  very  eautions  in  its  use,  and  did
not  give  to  adults  above  from  fifteen  to  sixteen  grains  per  diem,
iBtabiond-milk ;  but  I  soon  perceived  Ibat  in  order  to  produce
a:jpeedy  J  recovery,  it  was  necessary  to  give,  even  to  we^k  sub-
jacfe^itkirty  grains,  and  to  more  robust  individuals^  forty  grains
m  the  twenty-four  hours.  The  fiivourable  resuH  was  never  long
delayed;  the  constipation 'Ceased;  the  bod,  or  at  least  the  bilious
taate^irapidly  went  ofi^  leather  with  the  nausea  and  diseom-
Art ;  'the  weight  and  pain  in  the  head  diminished  fipom  hourto
hour;  the  febrile  rigotir  was  smothered  in  its  birth;  the  heat
diminished,  and  in  those  cases  where  there  had  been  no  perspi*
nation,  orwhere  it  had' been  abundant^  there  occurred  a  general
tmild^iaphoTeflis,' with  diminution  of  all  the  drawing  tensive
;pains  in- the  external  parts.  The  strength  soon  returned,  along
^witli  appetite  and  sleep;  the  despondency  changed  into  strength
and  hcpe)  and  the  patient  recovered  his  health  without  a  draw-

-iMKSk-.--

.  I  am  afraid  that  this  rapid  disappearance  of  the  symptoms,
^tlie.yeUow,' brown,  or  black  coating  of  the  tongue,  the  nauseous
and  bitter  taste,  the  constipation,  and  the  sickness,  removed
•olten  within  the  twenty-four  hours  by  the  use  of  camphor  alone,
•given  in  large  doses,  will  not  please  the  orthodox  partisans  of
the  aaburral  school.  Nature,  to  be  sure,  often  refuses  to  conform
to  the  requirements  of  sj^tems:  the  more's  the  pity  for  the
dogmatic  physician  who  attempts  to  fight  against  her  I

When  I  had  been  summoned  in  time,  and  the  disease,  in  spite
of  the  gnmty  of  its  commencement,  had  radically  disappeared
ftt  the  end  of  four  days,  or  six  at  the  most,  there  did  not  remain
a  single  morbid  symptom,  not  even  lassitude.
J...  A  nervous  lady  of  great  spirit,  could  not  be  consoled  during
^tho  JS|8t  days  for  the  loss  of  her  betrothed,  whom  she  loved  ten-
derly 4  he- had  died  of  the  disease^  and  she  it  waes  who  had
tended  him. She  lost  her  appetite  and  refused  all  food. I  was
.petite,  but  I  refused  to  do  so  ^  she  was  threatened  with  an  attack
ofriBflujenBa,  and  I  merely  ordered  a  glass  of  wine  and  sought
U>.  raise  her  spirits.
.  Her  numerous  avocations,  BBd  still  more, :  her  inteUigeUt


8S8 SOIIB  KINDS  OF  CONTINUED  AND  BXMnTEBPT  WKTKBB.

mind  and  the  consoIa4ion8  of  her  firiends,  assuaged  ber  grief;
the  next  week  she  was  more  cahn,  felt  her  appetite  retamiiig,
and  obtained  a  little  rest  in  sleep. She  only  felt  some  vague
pains  in  the  bones,  for  which  she  neglected  to  consult  me. Fif>
teen  days  after  the  death  of  her  Mend  she  was  seized  with  a
febrile  rigour  that  lasted  ti¥o  hours,  and  with  all  the  signs  of
the  most  violent  form  of  the  prevailing  epidemic. As  regarded
her  disposition,  she  was  a  prey  to  the  most  profound  despair ;
day  and  night  she  only  spoke  of  her  lover,  calling  him  by  name,
and  promising  that  she  would  soon  join  him. Her  resdessness
was  excessive,  the  tongue  was  covered  with  a  black  coatiiig^
she  had  disagreeable  eructations,  with  bitter  taste  in  the  moatL
The  heat,  the  pains  in  the  neck  and  limbs,  the  violent  headache,
filled  me  with  well-grounded  apprehensions  as  to  the  result. I
two  days,  and  an  emetic,  in  consequence  of  the  persistence  of
the  eructations  and  the  bitter  taste. The  only  effect  the  emetic
had  was  to  cause  nausea,  which  lasted  several  hours ;  a  fresh
dose  of  camphor  was  given  to  remove  the  spasm,  and  then  she
had  slight  vomiting  of  mucus.  Still  she  felt  no  relief,  and  every
thing  seemed  to  prognosticate  a  &tal  termination. She  spoke
of  nothing  but  her  lover ;  her  whole  body  was  burning,  the
lace  puffed,  the  pulse  180. Thirty  grains  of  camphor  within  the
twenty -four  hours  produced  a  slight  moisture  of  the  skin,  and
diminished  the  heat  and  bitter  taste  of  the  mouth. The  follow-
ing day  she  got  thirty-six  grains,  and  the  day  after  forty ;  she
slept  quietly,  spoke  no  more  about  the  deceased,  felt  consoled,
and  regained  her  courage. She  got  up  and  asserted  that  she
felt  nothing  now  except  little  or  no  pain  in  the  head  and  limbs,
and  she  asked  for  something  to  eat Thirty  more  grains  of
camphor  given  on  the  two  following  days,  re-established  her
health  completely,  and  fix)m  that  time  she  was  able  to  resume
her  usual  occupations.

I  only  know  one  case  out  of  more  than  a  hundred  where  the
camphor  fiadled*  A  lady  of  rank,  very  hysterical,  subject  to
hysteria  firom  her  youth,  had  been  attacked  by  influenza.  She
had  taken  with  good  effects  twenty  grains  of  camphor  in  the
taken  in  the  space  of  twenty  hours,  against  some  inconveniences
that  remained.  She  immediately  experienced  profuse  perspira-
tion, which,  in  the  course  of  sixteen  hours,  increased  to  a  very
violent  degree,  with  intense  heat^  faintness  and  anxiety. The


son  KINDS  OP  COKTIKUED  AND  BEMITTENT  FXVEBS. 889

State  of  the  patient  was  very  serious,  but  half  a  grain  of  opium
aDayed  the  anxiety,  heat  and  sweaty  in  less  than  an  hour.  I
the  cure  was  complete.

The  nature  of  the  influenza  which  generally  goes  on  to  copious
evacuations  (and  on  the  other  hand,  sometimes  to  an  excessive
suppression  of  the  evacuations,)  in  this  case  resisted  its  own
speci&Cf  probably  in  consequence  of  having  undergone  a  modi-
fication from  the  hysterical  constitution  of  the  patient

Before  I  had  ascertained  all  the  efficacy  of  camphor  in  this
extraordinary  disease,  I  was  forced  to  content  myself  with
opium  and  cinchona;  the  first  during  the  hot  and  sweating
stages,  and  second  during  the  remission.  Troublesome  and  diffi-
cult as  were  these  cases,  nevertheless  the  employment  of  these
substances  sufficed  to  remove  (although  only  after  several  days)
the  coating  of  the  tongue  and  bitter  taste,  and  by  degrees  all  the
affection.  But  after  it  had  been  subdued,  the  convalescents
could  no  longer  bear  the  bark ;  no  sooner  was  it  taken  than  it
was  ejected.  In  the  epidemic  of  1782, 1  find  among  the  large
number  of  remedies  employed  by  physicians,  camphor  mentioned
iocidentally,  but  no  effect  superior  to  that  of  the  other  thera-
peutic agents  is  attributed  to  it

What  induces  me  to  believe  that  on  that  occasion  these  vari-
ous medicaments  were  employed  in  a  blind  and  arbitrary  manner,
is,  that  among  many  other  remedies  arnica*  is  equally  recom-
mended for  this  affection.  This  substance,  though  efficacious  in
many  other  diseases,  is  very  dangerous  in  this  one.  I  have  seen
a  robust  man  affected  with  influenza,  and  already  convalescent,
die  in  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours  and  a  half  with  all  the  signs
of  poisoning,  after  having  taken  eight  grains  of  arnica-root,  the
fisital  effects  of  which  shewed  themselves  by  coldness,  vertigo,
palpitations,  anxiety,  and  loss  of  voice.  Had  I  at  that  period
known  the  specific  remedy  for  this  kind  of  poisoning,  viz.,  vine-
gar, I  might  have  saved  this  patient's  life.  The  extract  of
aconite'  employed  in  the  same  way  in  this  epidemic,  is  equally
prejudicial.

This  last  influenza,  in  common  with  all  others,  as  I  have  had
opportunities  of  convincing  myself  presents  as  a  characteristic
fbkture  the  power  of  affecting  indiscriminately  all  persons,  what-
ever their  constitution  may  be,  a  power  which  the  plague  of  the

'  limguUi,  Dtu.  hUtor,  catarrh,  eptdan^  1782,  Helmstadt)  p.  15t.

*  C^cttp.l4i.


MQ 80K&  KINDS  OF  CQNTINUSI>  AND  RSKQTBVI^  nEWtt*

Levant  scarcely  possesses  in  such  a  high  degree. .  Most  epi-
demic diseases  attack  chiefly  persons  in  good  health;  but  there
are  persons  affected  with  chronic  diseases,  among  which  I  may
merely  mention  severe  nervous  affections  and  mental  alienation,
who  are  not  affected  by  them ;  or  if  so^  the  old  affection  is  sus-
pended in  its  course  and  the.  new  one  takes  possession  of  the
system ;  or  finally,  and  this  happens  tolerably  often,  the  first  is
cured  by  the  second.  It  is  not  so  with  influenza.  Not  only
does  it  attack  indiscriminately  all  individuals  affected  witli
chronic  maladies,  but  it  complicates  itself  with  them  and  tLggm-
vates  them.  It  is  when  it  remains  latent  itself  that  it  stirs  up
and  aggravates  any  ancient  disease  which  may  perhaps  have
slumbered  for  a  long  time,  and  the  chronic  symptoms  dius  ag-
gravated no  longer  yield  to  the  remedies  formerly  employed
with  success  against  them,  but  only  to  the  specific  for  the  ii^u-
enza.  It  reproduces  deafiiess,  ophthalmia,  cough,  asthma,  pains
in  various  parts,  especially  in  the  chest,  head,  viscera  or  limbs,
ancient  spasms,  hypochondriasis,  melancholia,  all  those  suffer-
ings that  had  long  been  cured ;  the  epidemic  constitution  and
the  presence  of  a  few  of  the  symptoms  of  influenza  alone  lead
us  to  recognise  the  existence  of  influenza,  masked  by  these
chronic  maladies.  Sometimes  it  has  occasioned  paralysis,  either
by  metastasis,  or  in  parts  previously  painful.

A  child  of  twelve  years  of  age,  in  a  district  where  this  epi-
demic was  raging,  was  seized  with  characteristic  tearing  pains
in  all  the  limbs,  with  tensive  headache  and  intolerable  pains  in
the  eyes.  Having  taken  a  chill,  all  the  signs  of  the  disease  dis-
appeared, but  the 'child  lost  its  sight.  The  pupils  were  much
dilated  and  unaffected  by  the  strongest  light.  The  employment
of  fifteen  grains  of  camphor  daily,  continued  for  a  fortnight,
rapidly  restored  vision  without  the  employment  of  any  other
remedy.

About  the  same  time  in  the  mother  of  this  child  there  was
reproduced  a  melancholia  with  despair  and  tendency  to  suicide,
a  disease  which  had  disappeared  several  year?  previpusly.  Be-
sides tensive  pains  in  the  head  and  anxiety  in  the  precordial
region,  she  complained  of  drawing  pains  in  the  lioabs.  Of  all
the  remedies  given,  camphor  chiefly  contributed  to  her  cure,

A  month  after  the  termination  of  the  epidemic  there  >yas  ob-
served a  chronic  remission  of  this  fever  haying  a  spoi;adic  char-
acter. It  had  this  peculiarity,  that  the  pains  experienced  by
individuals  in  whom  convalescence  had  set  in  after  the  influenza.


80KS  KINDB  OY^o6lrTlKU8D  JiaTD  BEmTTENT  FSVSBS. 841

reenrred  eHber  wtthotit  fever,  or  accompanied  by  a  kind  pf
istarmittent  fever,  witK  quotidian  or  tertian  type.  The  great
laasitiide,  the  prostration,  the  faintness  and  the  sweat,  charao-
tfltistic  of  influenza,  were  entirely  wanting.  The  heat  was
moderate,'  th^  ooM  all  the  more  obstinate,  though  not  inducing
much  shivering.

Gitlchonl^  but  still  better,  ignatia,  removed  the  febrile  symp-
taHDs^-but  the  pains  became  constant  Camphor  failed  com-
{dfltely ;  the  hdum  pcduatrCj  on  the  contrary,  in  doses  of  fh)m
ax  to  seven  grains,  three  times  a  day  for  adults,  produced  per-
manent relief.

In  some  obstinate  eases  I  was  forced  to  have  recourse  to  aop-
mte,  whieh  cured  them  rapidly.  I  am  sorry  that  I  only  had
an  opportunity  of  treating  a  small  number  of  those  cases  that
praKnted  themselves  at  the  end  of  the  epidemic,  so  that  I  am
anable  to  judge  if  this  plant,  whose  medicinal  properties  ftre
much  greater  than  those  of  ledum,  would  not  have  enabled  me
to  attain  my  object  much  more  rapidly  in  all  the  cases  that  pre-
lented  themselves  to  my  notice.


SOME  PERIODICAL  AND  HEBDOMADAL  DISEASES.'


L  A  young  man,  xecently  recovered  from  a  spasmodic  asth-
ma^  having  drunk  some  wine,  contrary  to.  the  dietetic  rules  I
had  laid  down  for  him,  was  heated  by  it  and  began  to  quarrel
and  fight  with  his  companions.  After  violent  muscular  exer-
tion he  was  seized  with  an  attack  of  asthma,  which  became
worse  and  worse,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  night  reached  its
greatest  intensity.  The  following  day  and  some  days  after-
wards he  felt  great  lassitude.  A  week  afterwards,  without  ap-
preciable cause,  a  similar  attack  came  on,  also  followed  by  las-
situde. From  that  time  the  fits,  together  with  the  consequent
weakness,  came  on  regularly  every  Monday  afternoon.  Eight
grains  of  St.  Ignatius'  bean  once  diminished  the  attack  in  a
marked  manner  and  the  weakness  did  not  occur ;  but  strangely
enough,  the  following  Monday  this  attack  came  on  again  with
lenewed  force. Cinchona-bark  given  the  following  Monday,  in

1  From  'Hufcbuid'd  Journal  dor  pract  A  rzneykunde. Vol  y.  PL  1 1798.


342  80HS  P£aiODICAJ«  ajsd


K


the  doae  of  half  a  drachm  in  the  moming  and  a  drabhm  after
dinner,  completely  suppressed  the  fit,  and  after  two  more  doeee
all  traces  of  the  affection  had  disappeared.

A  circumstance  worth  mentioning  is^  that  previously  the  cin-
chona had  always  failed  in  the  same  person  against  his  asthma
when  it  was  continued  and  not  periodical.

n.  A  lying-in  woman,  aged  40,  one  Sunday  met  with  a
severe  mortification,  when  confined  of  her  fifth  child.  Besides
other  disagreeable  symptoms,  there  came  on  a  sensation  of  for-
mication that  gradually  extended  from  the  sacrum  up  to  be*
twixt  the  scapulae,  so  tfiat  by  Friday  it  reached  the  nape.  A
sudden  stiffiiess  occurred  at  tliat  spot.  The  patient  experienced
at  the  same  time  a  violent  febrile  rigour  which  lasted  several
hours,  followed  by  diaphoresis  which  continued  till  late  at  night
and  terminated  in  profuse  sweat  The  following  day  she  com-
plained of  nothing  but  lassitude,  and  on  taking  the  least  repose,
even  if  seated,  she  had  general  sweat,  somewhat  cold,  during
the  whole  day.  A  disagreeable  sensation  of  formication,  ex-
tending firom  the  nape  to  above  the  occiput,  came  on  every
afternoon  and  lasted  till  bedtime.  There  was  no  bad  taste  in
the  mouth,  the  tongue  was  clean,  but  the  appetite  almost
absent.  From  that  period  the  same  fit  of  intermittent  fever,
characterized  by  the  same  symptoms  and  by  the  same  termina-
tion, occurred  on  the  Thursday  and  the  following  Thursdays
for  several  weeks.

When  the  patient  came  to  consult  me  she  concealed  the  ex-
citing cause  of  her  disease,  viz.,  the  mortification.  The  normal
taste  and  the  cleanness  of  the  tongue  contra-indicated  the  use  of
an  emetic.

There  was  evidently  in  this  case  an  intermittent  fever  with  a
quotidian  type,  and  another  with  a  hebdomadal  type.  The
employment  of  ignatia  continued  for  a  week,  until  the  Thurs-
day, entirely  removed  the  febrile  symptoms  affecting  the  head.
GKven  also  on  the  Thursday  the  hebdomadal  attack  far  fix>m
diminishing,  reappeared,  on  the  contrary,  with  more  violence,
but  was  not  followed  by  lassitude.  I  discontinued  the  treat-
ment during  the  subsequent  week;  indeed  all  the  corporeal
functions  were  performed  regularly,  the  febrile  commotion  in
the  evening  and  the  perspirations  by  day  had  disappeared,
gaiety,  appetite  and  sleep  were  restored.  From  that  time  I
administered  every  Thursday,  with  great  success,  a  suitable
dose  of  cinchona.  The  hebdomadal  fever  did  not  return  and
the  patient  was  cured.


HSBDOKADAL  DI8SA8I.  848

m.  A  very  hypochondriacal  man  auflfered  in  the  spring  of
last  year  from  a  periodical  hematuria,  the  type  6f  which  he
oould  nol  remember.  There  was  at  the  same  time  fever,  great
debility  and  sleeplessness.  He  had  a  relapse  of  his  disease  in
the  month  of  May  of  this  year.  I  combatted  the  accessory
febrile  symptoms  with  remedies  adapted  at  the  same  time  for
the  h»morrhage,  to  wit,  ipecacuanaha  given  oh  an  empty  sto*
mach  in  the  morning,  so  as  to  occasion  nausea  for  four  hours,
and  in  the  evening  sulphuric  acid.  The  accessory  febrile  symp-
toms sensibly  diminished,  but  the  hematuria  reappeared  the
fourth  day  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  immediately  after
awaking,  as  on  the  first  occasion,  and  twice  on  the  seventh  day
thereafter  at  the  same  hour.  Notwithstanding  all  the  preju-
dices against  the  employment  of  cinchona-bark  in  haemorrhages
I  gave  a  suitable  dose  of  it  eveiy  evening  before  going  to  bed,
fearing  to  miss  the  hour  in  the  morning  when  it  ought  to  be
given.

Not  knowing  if  the  fit^  in  place  of  offering  a  hebdomadal
type,  would  not  recur  eveiy  three  days  and  a  hal^  as  frequently
happens,  and  if  an  attack  might  not  be  expected  on  the  aft;er-
at  noon,  at  the  same  time  continuing  the  evening  dose.  But
before  the  patient  could  take  it^  an  attack  of  hematuria,  though
not  a  very  severe  onej  occurred  on  the  Thursday  morning  about
eight  o'clock.

I  had  thus  learned :  Ist,  that  the  curative  power  of  the  even-
ing dose  did  not  last  till  the  following  day ;  2d,  that  the  semi-
hebdomadal  type  was  not  bound  to  precisely  the  first  hour  of
the  second  half  of  the  fourth  day,  but  that  it  could  also  occur
at  the  regular  hour  of  the  hebdomadal  paroxysm.  I  conse-
quently altered  my  treatment :  I  thereafter  gave  every  morning
a  dose  of  cinchona,  taking  care  to  have  the  patient  awakened  an
hour  before  his  usual  time  of  waking,  at  six  o'clock,  permitting
him  either  to  go  asleep  again,  which  he  generally  did,  or  to  get
up.  In  the  course  of  a  fortnight  the  hematuria  was  quite
eared.

The  hebdomadal  type  which  diseases  smoetimes  observe,  re-
curring towards  the  middle  of  the  fourth  day,  (the  fourth  day  ?)
the  seventh,  fourteenth,  twenty-first,  thirty-first  days  (the  mid-
dle of  the  fourth  week),  &c.,  appears  to  differ  essentially  from
the  daily  aggravation  of  most  diseases  which  we  observe  to
take  place  in  the  evening,  and  from  the  types  of  quotidian,  ter-


tian:  ttid:  qiiflrten  lulenukteiilr&TaEni. :  *  BxperioAo&lMfrlkiij^ill'iii
thatStL  Ignativs'  bean, does  not. suit  the  ftrst  of  ikeMtTpoB^
wldoh.  i Beans : peosHar  to  hjnsterkal^ .liypookoiidriiGal  md^flpM*-
medio  diseases.  ' ■•-  .i>


I .  <  t


A PBEFAOEJ


I  have  translated  the  book  entitled  "  Thesaurus  Mediearninuml,
a  new  collection  of  medical  prescriptionsy  distributed  into  tweht
dosses,  and  aceompamed  wiA  pharrruju^eiU^

eochibiting  a  view  of  the  present  state  of  the  materia  medica  Ondproe^
tice  of  physicy  both  at  h&me  and  abrdad.  The  second  edition^  wiA
an  appendix  and  oAer  additions.  By  a  member  of  the  London
CoUege  of  Physicians.  London:  F.  Baldwin,  1794,  8vo.,"iiittio*
dueing  into  the  body  of  the  work  fbrmnlas  derived' 'from' the
London  and  Edinburgh  Pharmacopodias  and  from  Lewis,  a!td
adding  some  notes,  under  the  signature  of  Y.,  which  to  ^ome  of
my  readers 'may  facilitate  if  it  do  not  altogether  enable  them  t6
dispense  with  the  journey  to  Anticyra.

If,  as  the  preface  to  the  original  informs  me,  even  in' London,
medical  frankness  requires  the  sDgis  of  anonymousness,  in  order
to  escape  being  chid;  I  need  not  say  a  word  as  to  itd  expe*
diency  for  some  time  past  in  our  own  dear  fatherland !  If  I,
the  German  editor,  would  not  be  less  frank,  what  other  course
was  there  for  me  to  pursue  ?  However,  as  truth  can  neither  be
more  true  nor  less  true,  whether  it  be  said  by  a  rtian  with  ati
imposing  array  of  titles  or  by  one  perfectly  unknown  to  fame;
die  indulgent  reader  will  please  to  regard  merely  what  is  said.

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  original  is  one  of  the  most  re-*
eondite  collections  of  selected,  at  least  of  elegant  presfcriptions ;
but  it  will  also  be  observed  that  the  writer  of  the  notes  is  no
friend  to  compound  medicines.  But  how,  it  will  be  asked,  did
he  come  to  edit  this  work  ?  To  which  I  answer,  solely  for  th&t
very  reason  1  I  wished  to  shew  to  my  countrymen  that  the  very
best  prescriptions  have  a  hitch  somewhere,  arc  unnatural,  cdntradicloty-^
and  opposed  to  Hie  object  for  which  they  are  designed.'  This  is  s


-ft


'  The  work  to  which  this  is  prefixed  was  translated  bj  Hahnemanii,  and  pnMiihaji
anoajmouslj  in  the  year  1800,  under  the  title  of  ArzneUehtUz  odet'Smmhm^  §fh
itAA^Jtenpto,  ansdem  Bnglisdwn;  Leipzig,  bei  G.  PleiBcher.


tratli  that  should  be  proolaimed  from  the  hoHsetope  in  bur
pneeriptioQ-loving  times.  When  will  the  time  come  when  I
8haU  see  this  follj  eradicated?  When  will  the  physician  learn
that  the  cure  of  bifi  eases  requires  few,  quite  simple,  but  proper,
perfectly  femitable  remedies?  Will  they  for  ever  deserve  the
ridicale  of  such  as  Arcesilas?  Will  they  never  cease  to  mingle
together)  a:  heap  of  remedies  in  one  prescription,  each  of  which
{far  in  the  general  use  of  compounds  it  is  impossible  to  investigate
the  nature  of  the  several  ingredients)  remains  to  the  greatest
physician  often  but  an  imperfectly  known,  often  a  whole  un-
known, thing?  If  Jones,  in  London,  uses  every  year  three
humked  pounds  of  cinchona-bark,  what  accurate,  what  perfect
knowledge  do  we  obtwn  of  the  peculiar  mode  of  action  of  this
powerful  remedy?  Very  little  indeed  I  What  do  we  know  of
liie  pom  special  mode  of  action  of  that  powerful  substance,  mer-
eoiy,  the  monstrous  consumption  of  which  in  medical  practice
wouM  seem  to  imply  a  thorough  knowledge  of  its  relation  to
our  bodies?  Very  Utile!  Little  besides  the  empirical  apo-
thegm that  was  enunciated  300  years  ago:  ^4t  cures  the
venereal  disease,"  all  else  are  untrustworthy  fragments.  What
oertain  knowledge  do  we  possess  respecting  opium  that  could
iead  u»  to  such  a  frantic  abuse  of  it?  Little  or  nothing  of  a
eiire  character  I What  of  Camphor  ?  Scarcely  anything  I

Would  that  Arcesilas  were  still  alive  to  know  that  physicians
are  still  at  variance  as  to  whether  mercury  is  capable  of  produ-
cing a  change  in  the  strength,  mobility  and  sensibility  of  the
fibres  (and  in  the  pulse),  in  a  word,  can  cause  a  peculiar  kind
of  fever  or  no,  whether  bark  in  antipyretic,  merely  by  virtue  of
its  being  a  bitter  astringent  substance  like  a  mixture  of  gentian
and  polygonum,  or  by  some  peculiar  inherent  principle — whe-
ther opium  strengthens  or  weakens — whether  camphor  is  cooling
or  heating,  and  that  those  who  contend  for  the  one  opinion  as
well  as  those  who  defend  the  other,  have  both  forgotten  to  state
the  special  conditions  of  their  conclusions.  But  if  the  power  of
these  substances  of  every-day  use  be  so  undetermined,  how
much  less  known  must  not  those  of  rarer  use  be !

If  such  remarkable  obscurity  prevail  respecting  single  medi-
cinea,  to  what  a  zero  in  point  of  value  must  the  phenomena  rtink,
which  result  from  the  ordinary  tumultuous  employment  of  seve*
nriof  such  unknown  drugs  mixed  together^  in  diseases — in  diseases,
those  abnormal  states  of  the  human  body — ^the  most  intricate  of
aD  oiganissed  beings — ^that  are  in  truth  not  easily  cognizable  in


846  A  PKBFAOS.

individual  caaesl  It  is  as  though  one  should  throw  blindfold
a  handM  of  balls  of  various  sizes  upon  an  unknown  billiard
table  with  cushions  of  various  angles,  and  should  pretend  to
decide  beforehand  what  effect  thej  would  all  conjointlj  produoe^
what  direction  each  would  take,  and  what  position  they  would
finally  occupy  after  their  many  deflections  and  their  unforeseen
mutual  concussions  1  And  yet  the  results  of  all  mechanical
forces  are  much  more  easily  determined  than  those  of  dyna>
mic  forces.

''In  a  mixed  prescription  the  case  is  far  otherwise,"  methinki
I  hear  it  contended,  ''for  there  the  prescribing  physician  deter-
mines for  each  ingredient  the  part  it  shall  play  in  the  human
body :  this  one  shall  be  the  base,  this  other  the  adjuvant,  a  thii^
the  corrective,  that  one  the  director  and  this  one  the  exdpientl
It  is  my  sovereign  command  that  none  of  these  ingredients  ven-
ture to  quit  the  post  assigned  it  in  the  human  body  1 I  com-
mand that  the  corrective  be  not  backward  in  concealing  the
blimders  of  the  base,  that  it  cover  all  the  delinquencies  of  this
principal  ingredient  and  of  the  adjuvant,  and  direct  them  {<xt
the  best ; but  to  go  out  of  its  rank  and  situation  and  to  take
upon  itself  a  part  of  its  own  contrary  to  the  base,  I  hereby  posi-
tively forbid  it! Now,  adjuvant  I to  thee  I  assign  the  office
of  Mentor  to  my  base,  support  it  in  its  difficult  task ;  but  mind,
thou  art  only  to  take  it  by  the  arm,  but  not  to  do  anything  else
of  thine  own  accord,  or  dare  to  act  contrary  to  the  order  which
I  have  given  to  the  base  to  cause  a  certain  amount  of  vomiting;
but  thou  must  by  np  means  presume  in  thine  ignorance  to  un-
dertake any  expeditions  on  thine  own  account,  or  to  do  any-
thing different  &om  the  intention  of  the  base ;  thou  must,  thou^
thou  art  something  quite  different,  act  entirely  in  concert  with
it ;  that  I  command  thee  I I  assign  to  you  all  conjointly  the
highly  important  business  of  the  whole  expedition : see  that
you  expel  the  impure  humours  from  the  blood,  without  touch-
ing in  the  slightest  degree  the  good  ones ;  alter,  transform,  what
you  discover  to  be  in  improper  combination,  in  a  morbid  statew
Bemember  that  the  conmiission  to  alter  and  to  transform  gives
you  unlimited  authority  to  change,  God  knows  or  knows  not
what  (just  as  in  warlike  tactics  it  is  usual  for  the  general  to
possess  more  knowledge  than  his  sovereign  lord). You  are  to
diminish  the  irritability  of  the  muscular  fibre,  to  lessen  the  sen-
sibility of  the  nerves,  to  procure  sleep  and  rest Do  you  see  the
convulsions  in  yonder  arm  ? I  wish  them  to  be  quieted,  an4


▲  PBSFACS.  847

the  spasm  in  the  sphincter  muscle  of  the  bladder  to  be  removed  I
That  fellow  there  has  the  jaundice ;  I  command  jou  to  bleach
him  and  to  deobstruate  his  biliary  ducts,  whether  their  imper-
meable condition  be  owing  to  spasm  or  to  a  mechanical  obstacle,
or  to  some  degeneration  of  the  liver.  In  that  hysterical  woman,
and  in  those  old  skin  diseases,  all  my  long  years  of  treatment
and  my  employment  of  extracts  of  spring  herbs  have  proved
useless,  from  which  I  infer  that  there  are  obstructions  in  the  capil-
lary vessels  of  the  abdomen — ^my  &vourite  way  of  accoimting  for
morbid  affections.  Now  you,  most  worthy  base  I  were,  only  a  few
days  since  (and  that  is  a  great  thing  in  my  estimation),  accredited
to  me  in  one  of  the  latest  pamphlets  as  a  sure  deobstruent  I
therefore  give  you  a  commission  to  resolve  those  iudurations
(though  I  myse^  am  unacquainted  with  the  invisible  indurations
and  know  not  what  menstruum  can  dissolve  them,  what  liquifiier
can  meU  them,  or  whatever  else  the  comfortable  expressions  of
our  school  may  be) — enough,  you  will  know  quite  well  what  is
to  be  done  when  you  yourself  get  upon  the  spot. Sdmmering,
to  be  sure,  says  that  hard,  swollen  glands  do  not  consist  of  con-
staicted  vessels,  but  on  the  contrary  of  unnaturally  dilated  ves-
sels.  But  what  care  we  for  what  that  dreamer  says. We  physi-
cians have  been  in  the  habit  of  deobstruating  for  so  many  cen-
turies. Suffice  it  to  say,  I  command  you,  base  I to  deobstruate
for  me. See  yonder  typhus  patient,  my  dear  base  salpetre ! I
pray  you  to  advance  and  check  the  putrefSactive  process,  as  you
did  a  year  ago  to  my  pork  ham.  Do  not  attempt  to  excuse  your-
self by  alleging  that  hitherto  you  have  always  been  unfortunate
in  all  your  expeditions :  I  give  you  for  ally  the  sulphuric  acid,
to  support  you  in  all  your  attacks,  although  those  fantastic
chemists  would  try  to  persuade  us  that  you  do  not  agree  with  it,
that  neither  of  you  remain  what  you  were,  that  you  mutually
change  into  nitric  acid  and  sulphate  of  potash.  What  nonsense  I
just  as  if  such  a  thing  were  possible  without  the  permission  of
the  physician  who  presides  over  prescriptions  I Enough  that  I
command  you  to  extinguish  the  putrid  fever ;  for  that  purpose
you  have  received  from  me  your  diploma  of  base. Moreover,  I
put  at  your  service  a  troop  of  auxiliary,  corrective  and  directing
sabstances. — My  dear  base,  opium  I  here  I  have  an  obstinate,
painful  cough  to  combat. You,  who  have  received  from  the
Asclepiades  the  office  of  subduing  all  spasms  and  pains,  be  they
ever  so  different  in  character,  just  as  the  seven  planets  were
commissioned  in  the  almanacs  a  century  ago  to  preside  over


M6  A-norAos.

this  and  that  part  of  ont  body — to  yoa  I  give  the^totimMM
sanetioned  by  tradition.  But  I  have  been  infonned  ihatyov.
have  often  a  bad  propensity  to  constipate  the  bowels.  But  in
order  that  this  may  not  happen  I  give  you  as  auxiliarieB  tliife
and  that  laxative  ingredient,  and  that  your  action  -may  not  h6
disturbed  by  these,  is  your  own  look  out ;  why  else  should  I
constitute  you  the  base  I  Moreover  as  you  sometimes  oceamoD
heat,  and  are  given  to  check  exhalation,  I  give  you  camphor  ai
a  eorrective,  in  order  to  counteract  this  bad  habit  of  yoUnl
Some  one  lately  asserted  that  you  lost  all  your  prbpertieB  wheii
camphor  was  given  along  with  you.  But  do  not  let  that  lead
you  astray.  How  can  the  saddle-horse  allow  himself  to  be  ob-
structed by  the  draught  horse  ?  Each  of  you  must  d6  your  duty
as  it  is  indicated  for  you  in  the  authorized  Mateda  Medici{
whence  our  opinion  is  derived.  It  has  also  been  told  me  thiKi
the  stomach  is  deranged  by  you,  but  to  prevent  you  playing  this
trick  I  have  included  in  the  prescription  along  with  you  several
stomachic  remedies,  and  will  allow  a  cup  of  coffee  to  be  dnint
after  you  are  taken,  which  assists  digestion,  as  the  Writings  df
practitioners  allege — ^regardless  of  those  newfangled  persons  who
assert  of  it  that  it  destroys  your  J)ower :  but  you  must  not  allow
yourself  to  be  rendered  powerless ;  for  that  reason  I  have  ap-
pointed you  the  base."

And  thus,  as  though  they  were  independent  beings  endowed
with  free  volition,  each  ingredient  in  a  complete  prescription
has  its  task  allotted  to  it,  vel  tnviitssima  Minerva  Hygetaque,  in
many  other  respects  also.  For  there  are  many  learned  cond-
derations  in  a  regular  classical  prescription.  This  indication
and  that  one  must  be  fulfilled :  three,  four  and  more  symptoms
must  be  met  by  as  many  different  remedies.  Consider,  Arcesi-
las !  how  many  remedies  must  be  artistically  combined  in  ord^
to  make  the  attack  at  once  from  all  points.  Something  for  thd
tendency  to  vomit,  something  else  for  the  diarrhoea,  something
else  for  the  evening  fever  and  night-sweats,  and  as  the  patie)it  ia
so  weak,  tonic  medicines  must  be  added,  and  not  one  alone,  birt
several,  in  order  that  what  the  one  cannot  do  (which  we  donH
know)  the  other  may.

But  what  if  all  the  symptoms  proceeded  from  one  cause,  as  is  air
most  ahoays  the  case,  and  there  were  one  single  drug  that  ivould  meet
all  these  symptoms  f

"  That  would  be  a  very  different  thing.  But  it  would  be  in-
convenient to  search  for  such  a  one ;  we  put  in  one  presorip-


A  PBBPAOS.  8^

tknpt  BometbiBg  to  meet  every  indication,  and  thua  we  f alfil  the
fequiiementa  of  the  sohool."

.  But  do  you  thereby  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  art,  of  the
pfedoia8:hunian  life  ?
;  **  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."

But  do  ,you  seriously  believe  that  your  kotc/i-patch  will  do
what  you  ai^gn  to  each  of  its  ingredients,  just  as  if  they  were
thingB  that  did  not  mutually  react  upon  each  other,  that  did  not
influence  each  other,  or  that  would  refirain  from  doing  so  at  your
ooBimand?  Does  it  not  occur  to  you  that  two  dynamic  ageate
given  together  can  never  effect  that  which  both,  given  separately
at  different  times,  would  do — that  an  intermediate  action  must
easue  which  could  not  have  been  foreseen  beforehand — and  that
this  must  be  still  more  the  case  when  several  are  given  together  I
Who  oould  tell  beforehand  that  opium  given  along  with  co£Eee
would  in  most  cases  exert  merely  a  strong  diuretic  action  ?  who
oould  have  predicted  it  of  th^o  two  remedies  ?  Will  opium
still  stupify  if  ipecacuan  be  combined  with  it  ?  You  perceive
that  they  do  not  act  according  to  your  will,  nor  according  to
your  atonic  principles  I  The  combination  of  these  two  dyna-
mic powers  causes  anxiety  and  perspiration.

*•  But  tartar-emetic  will  be  more  apt  to  excite  vomiting,  if  on
account  of  the  weakness  of  the  stomach  I  combine  with  it  cin-
chona bark  ?"

Very  little  or  not  all,  my  short-sighted  friend !

"  Why  had  the  white  hellebore  so  little  effect  on  that  pa-
tient?"

Because  you  gave  at  the  same  time  a  clyster  of  chamomile!

*'  What  terrific  effects  ought  not  a  good  extract  of  stramonium
to  have !  according  to  medical  authors.  They  are  a  pack  of
liars  I  A  short  time  ago  I  gave  it  to  a  very  sensitive  patient  in
a  strong  dose  in  a  draught. It  had  no  effect,  not  the  slightest"

Probably  you  mixed  it  with  oxymcl  ?

"  Yes,  I  did !  But  what  harm  can  that  do  ?  It  was  only  the
ex^pient;  only  four  ounces."

Several  ounces  of  that  vegetable  acid  7 Well,  you  need  not
wonder  that  no  effect  was  produced. — Did  I  not  see  you  the
other  day  prascrilye  salt  of  tartar  mixed  with  gamboge? What
,  was  your  object  in  doing  so,  and  what  effect  had  the  powder?

'*  The  first  was  in  order  to  loosen  the  muous,  and  the  seoond
to  expel  the  worms  forcibly ;  but  to  my  astonishment  it  did  not
cause  a  single  evacuation  of  the  bowels."


3S0  FRAOMENTABT  OBSKBVATIONS  OK

That  does  not  surprise  me  I  Enow  that  two,  not  to  speak  of
three  or  more  substances,  when  mingled  together  do  not  piodooe
the  same  result  that  might  be  expected  from  them  if  given  m^
gly  and  at  different  times,  but  a  different  dynamical  intermediate
action,  whether  you  wish  it  or  no.  In  that  case  the  systematic
arrangement  of  your  ingredients  is  of  no  avail,  nor  the  part  you
allot  to  the  base  and  bases^  to  the  adjuvant  and  adjuvantSj  to  yoor
corrective^  director  and  exdpient  Nature  acts  according  to  eter-
nal laws,  without  asking  your  leave ;  she  loves  simplicity,  and
effects  much  with  one  remedy,  whilst  you  effect  litSe  with  many.
Seek  to  imitate  nature !

To  write  very  composite  recipes,  and  several  of  them  in  the
course  of  the  day,  is  the  climax  of  parempiricism ;  to  adminis-
ter quite  simple  remedies,  and  not  to  give  a  second  before  the
action  of  the  first  has  expired — ^this  and  this  alone  is  the  direct
way  into  the  inner  holy  place  of  art Make  your  choice  I


FRAGMENTARY  OBSERVATIONS  ON  BROWN'S
ELEMENTS  OF  MEDiaNE.'


In  section  xviii  he  politely  apologises  for  being  obliged  to
make  use  of  the  plirases,  dejicient,  exhaustedj  consumed^  aocumth
kUed^  superfluous  excitability,  owing  to  the  novelty  of  the  doctrine
and  the  poverty  of  common  language.  But  this  is  no  excuse
for  the  man  who  boasts  (cccxii)  of  having  now  reduced  the  art
of  medicine  to  an  exact  science  which  will  at  no  distant  day
receive  the  appellation  of  Doctrine  of  Nature  (note  to  dclxxvii),
and  of  being  the  first  who  has  made  it  a  demo7istra4ed  science  (see
end  of  the  Prefiioe).  He  who  would  teach  a  new  science  for
which  he  must  employ  new  ideas,  ought  to  employ  for  them
new,  appropriate,  imequivocal  terms,  or  make  use  of  the  old

*  From  HufelafuTt  Journal  der  pracL  Artneyhunde^  VoL  v.  Pt2,p.  62,1801.
[Hufeland  himflelf  pots  the  foUowing  note  to  this  masterly  criticism: — ^"Thew
observations  are  from  the  pen  of  one  of  the  most  distiDguished  of  Gennan  phTsidaai^
whoyhowever,  as  he  himself  expresses  it,  *  as  long  as  literary  chouanerie  makes  the
highways  unsafe,*  will  not  permit  his  name  to  appear,  which,  in  my  opinion,  is  a  good
plan,  in  cases  where  reason  aed  not  the  authority  of  names  are  to  decide.  I  mart^
however,  observe  thatthe  author  has  read  nothing  either  for  or  against  the  Branooian
system,  and  thereibre  we  may  be  all  the  more  certain  that  we  have  here  the  m^Nnqa*
diced  opinion  on  this  subject  of  a  practical  physician  of  matured  eiperienoe  and
reflection."


BBOWV'S  XLSMXNTS OF HEDIOINB.  861

woidSj  attaching  new  meanings  to  them,  for  the  new  expressionfi.
But  as  Brown  employs  the  old  expressions  unexplained  and''
without  attaching  to  them  new  meanings,  he  must  permit  the
reader  to  understand  them  in  their  old  si^iification,  and  when
we  read,  that  excitability^  a  certain  quantity  or  certain  energy  of
which  has  been  assigned  to  every  being  upon  the  commencement  of  its
living  state  (xyin.),  may  be  zoom  out  by  stimtUi  (CGClx)  and  yet
afierwards  be  dravmforih  by  new  stimuii^  he  must  not  be  offended
if  we  belieye  that  we  have  read  nonsense.

XXL  {,  f^  "  Emetics  and  purgatives,  fear,  grie^  &c.,  diminish
the  sum-total  of  excitement,  and  are  debilitating; — ^but  firom  no
other  reason,  not  because  they  are  other  than  stimulating  agents,
~they  are  stimulants  but  are  debilitating,  that  is,  weakly  stimu-
lant, owing  their  debility  (he  should  have  said,  dAilitating  power)
to  a  d^ree  of  stimulus  greatly  inferior  to  the  proper  one."

If  all  excitement,  all  the  conditions  of  life  and  health,  are
owing  to  stimulus,  and  to  no  other  cause  (xxii.)  no  stimulus  is
of  itself  capable  of  diminishing  the  excitement.  Either  the
external  condition  for  life  and  health  does  not  solely  depend
upon  what  is  termed  *' stimulus,"  or  if  it  do,  then  a  stimulus,  be
it  even  a  weak,  an  insufficient  one,  cannot  debilitate.  It  is  only
(but  Brown  does  not  make  this  proviso)  when  it  is  the  sole
stimulus  acting  upon  the  body  for  a  long  time,  all  other  greater
stimuli  being  in  the  meantime  excluded,  that  a  debilitating  effect
can  be  produced,  not^  however,  in  consequence  of  the  smallness
of  the  acting  stimulus,  but  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  the
greater  (accustomed)  stimuli.  K  it  were  otherwise,  a  man  in
good  health,  who  would  feel  still  more  enlivened  by  drinking
four  ounces  of  wine,  would  be  tremendously  debilitated  if  at
that  time  in  place  of  four  ounces  he  should  take  but  four  drops
in  his  mouth,  and  would  be  debilitated  four  times  as  much  if  he
took  only  one  drop.

An  addition  to  the  condition  of  life,  be  it  ever  so  small  (a  weak
simple  stimulus),  can  never  become  aminus^  can  never  debilitate.
I^  however,  it  do  debilitate  (as  purgatives,  fear,  grief,  and  so
forth  do),  whilst  the  sum-total  of  the  usual  means  requisite  for
sustaining  life  (heat,  food,  &c.)  remains  undiminished,  in  that
case  its  debilitating  power  must  be  owing  to  quite  a  different
cause  than  the  smallness  of  the  stimulating  power.

Who  can  fidl  to  perceive  the  justness  of  these  conclusions?

A  healthy,  excitable  girl,  in  the  fiill  possession  of  all  stimuli
lequiflite  for  health,  dies  instantaneoudy  on  suddenly  hearing


S62  FBAOMSNTABY  ojmsMYJtaofm  OB


tt


the  tragical  intelligence  that  her  lover  had  beenietdbbed.  rlf
this  was  merely  a  simple  but  only  a  small  stimulufl^  it  moat
haye^  been  just  a  small  addition  to  the  not  defective  nun  of  all
the  other  stimuli  How  could  this  small  addition  do  harm,  lioir
could  it  destroy  life,  and  that  instantaneously,  if  it  merely  acted
as  a  simple  stimulus  and  in  no  other  manner.

Who  can  Ml  to  perceive  the  correctness  of  these  inferenoesl

He  carries  out  his  delusion  so  fieur  as  to  assert  (xxi,  «),  that
"  fear  and  grief  are  only  lower  degrees  of  confidence  and  joyi7
Were  I  to  dare  to  make  such  allegations^  I  could  make  anything
out  of  everything,  for  it  is  very  easy  to  be  a  scholastic  aophisL
No,  my  dear  friend  I  there  are  two  scales ;  at  the  top  of  the  one
stands  indifference,  and  below  that  come  vexation,  grie;^  de^air.
The  other  scale  has  indifference  at  its  lowest:  par^  whence  it
mounts  up  to  confidence,  to  joy,  to  rapture.

If  it  is  allowed  to  Brown  to  infer  from  identity  of  effects,
identity  of  causes,  we  may  be. permitted  to  infer  &om  opposite
effects,  opposite  causes,  and  to  consider  cold  and  grief,  warmth
^^d  joj)  ^  opposite  powers  (because  they  exhibit  opposite
(effects),  yet  in  such  a  way  as  that  the  strengthening  property  cf
the  latter,  like  the  debilitating  property  of  the  form^  cannot
depend  on  their  common  attributes  as  stimuli,  but  must  depend
upon  attributes  that  in  the  former  are  of  a  directly  oppodite
nature  to  those  in  the  latter.

In  XX  and  xxi  Brown  reckons  poisons  and  typhus  contagioiis
among  the  above  powers  (whose  debilitating  power  depends  oa
the  smallness  of  the  stimulation  that  they  produce  on  the  body.

Well  now,  if  a  man  in  the  fuU  possession  of  all  the  bealth-
sustaining  external  stimuli  (the  sum-total  of  which  is  firom  8000
to  8010  daily)  should  choose,  after  drinking  his  last  glass  of
wine,  to  get  into  a  pit  filled  with  carbonic  acid,  and  if  ill  ten
minutes  thereafter  he  is  brought  out  dead,  irrecoverably  dead,
what  is  it  in  this  case  that  prevents  the  continusmce  of  life?  Is
it  the  addition  of  the  too  small  and  therefore  debilitating  stimulug
of  the  fixed  air  ?  Let  us  compute  the  sum  of  its  stimulatixig
energy  at  1,  or  if  you  will  a^  ^|i/»o.ooi>th,  in  th^it  case  the  sum  of
all  the  stimixli  that  have  acted  upon  him  during  the  lasli  twenty-
four  hours,  inclusive  of  the  carbonic  acid  ii^spired,  ^1  amount
to  8001  or  3000  M^AXMKoth.  He  has  been  acted  on  every  preoediog
day  by  as  many  (more  or  fewer)  stimuli,  there  has  occujgred  in
this  last  day  neither  diminution  nor  incre^a^  of  the  stjiiiuU  up
to  the  moment  of  his  death.  . .  What  th^ii  pjiev^nled:  him,  til


brown's  SLXICBNTS  OF lOEDICIKX.  858

It  is  evident  that  it  was  an  agent  that  proved  so  excessively  in-
jorions  to  him,  not  in  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  its  stimu-
lating energy,  but  on  account  of  its  enormous  power  of  quite  a
different  nature.

He  tries  to  get  over  the  difficulty  (xxi,  C)  by  saying  that  the
debilitating  stimuli  produce  their  debilitating  effects  partly  by
means  of  a  dtsagreeable  relation  to  the  excitability,  or  by  ikeir  caus-
ing a  disagreeable  sensation.  But  he  is  very  inconsistent  to  boast
in  one  page  that  he  has  reduced  physiology  and  pathology  to
one  or  two.  principles,  and  in  the  next  page  quasi  aliud  agendo,
to  put  a  couple  of  qualitates  occuUce  in  the  corner,  which,  in  case
of  necessity,  when  the  defects  of  the  vaunted  chief  supports  of
his  system  are  exposed,  he  may  bring  forward  as  already  es-
tabli^ed  principles,  and  attach  to  them,  according  to  his  fancy,
any  meaning  they  may  be  required  to  bear.  But  through  all
these  parts  assigned  to  auxiliaries,  accessory  springs  of  action,
and  accessory  agents,  the  boasted  simplicity  of  his  so-called
system  vanishes  into  nothing.  Now  all  the  specific  effects  of
poisonSi  contagions,  &c.,  when  it  suits  the  purpose  of  Brown  and
his  followers,  and  the  omnipotent  words,  '^  stimulants,  weakly
stimulant,"  will  not  do,  can  be  referred  to  "  a  discordant  combi-
nation of  powers,"  and  the  specific  remedial  powers  of  this  or
that  medicine,  sometimes  to  the  ^'  agreeable  relation  that  the
exciting  power  bears  to  the  excitability,"  sometimes  to  an
"agreeable  sensation;"  and  thus  his  retreat  is  covered  I  How
artful  I  but  at  the  same  time  how  disingenuous !

To  his  overstrained  objections  to  cold  in  asthenic  diseases —
(dcxcii)  "  In  diseases  of  great  and  direct  debility,  cold  must  be
most  carefully  avoided,  as  it  is  always  of  a  directly  debilitating
operation,  and  never  of  service  but  in  sthenic  diseases,  and  those
that  are  in  a  progress  to  indirect  debility" — which  is  repeatedly
alluded  to,  I  must  oppose  my  experience,  which  is  the  same  as
that  of  many  others,  that  during  many  years  when  I  was  still
ignorant  of  any  specific  remedies  for  old  chronic  diseases,  I  have
frequently  combatted  them  successfully  solely  with  cold  washing,
cold  foot-baths,  and  also  with  immersion  for  one  minute  at  a
time  in  water  of  from  50°  to  60°  Fahr.  One  case  however
among  many  others  is  so  remarkable  that  I  cannot  refrain  from
detailing  it  A  man  somewhat  advanced  in  years,  but  still
possessing  considerable  strength,  had  had  for  five  years  from
unknown  cause  a  paralytic  affection  of  his  left  arm.  The  move-
ments he  could  perform  with  it  were  very  weak  and  small,  and

23


854  FBAaMENTABY  OBSEBYATIOKS  OK

the  sensibility  of  it  also  was  much  diminished.  Once  upon  a
time  when  he  was  on  a  visit  to  a  relation,  and  there  was  no  one
to  fetch  the  fish  for  the  supper  out  of  a  frozen  tank,  he
gets  up  quietly,  breaks  the  ice,  leans  over  it  and  passes  near-
ly one  hour  with  both  anns  in  the  ice-cold  water  before  he
can  get  out  the  required  number  of  fish.  He  comes  and  brings
them  to  the  great  delight  of  his  host,  but  immediately  complains
of  pains  in  the  affected  arm,  which  in  the  course  of  a  few  houTB
inflames.  The  following  day  the  pain  and  inflammation  were
gone,  and  his  arm  had  acquired  its  healthy  sensibility  and  all
the  powers  of  health.  The  paralysis  was  cured  and  remained
30.  Should  he  have  remained  uncured  to  support  Brown's  erro-
neous maxims?

Brown,  like  all  short-sighted,  unpractical  physicians,  always
looked  only  to  the  primary  and  incipient  action  of  the  remedy,
but  not  to  the  after  effect,  which  is,  however,  the  chief  thing.

ccxcviii.  "In  spasms  and  convulsions,  in  the  internal,  in  lie
external  parts,  in  bleeding  discharges,  in  the  direfiil  delirium  of
fevers  and  other  very  violent  diseases,  in  asthenic  inflammation;
when  those  stimuli,  which  have  a  more  permanent  influence^
fail,  or  act  to  no  good  purpose ;  the  virtue  of  the  diffusible  sti-
mulants, the  principal  of  which  is  apiuniy  is  eminent."  What  a
general  way  of  speaking,  and  how  empirical !  What  an  im-
mense deal  the  man  can  do  with  opium !  I  only  wish  I  could
do  the  like.  To  cure  internal  and  external  spasms  with  opium
better  than  with  any  other  remedy,  any  one  else  would  find
somewhat  difficult.

ccxcix.  "When  the  action  of  all  the  other  powers  by  which
life  is  supported,  is  of  no  effect,  they  (that  is,  wine,  brandy,
opium)  turn  aside  the  instant  stroke  of  death."  No  one  took
them  more  copiously  and  more  variously  than  the  Master  who
wrote  this ;  how  is  it  that  they  did  not  turn  aside  the  stroke  of
death  from  himself  (at  his  moderate  age),  and  so  avert  the  stigma
from  his  doctrine?

ccci.  "A  higher  place  in  the  scale  is  claimed  by  musk,  volatile
alkali,  camphor; — ^however,  in  every  respect  the  preparations  of
opiimi  are  sufficient  for  most  purposes  of  high  stimulating."
According  to  this,  opium  ought  to  be  quite  adequate  for  the  cure
degree  of  debility,  as  poisonings  of  all  sorts,  &c.  In  that  case  it
would  be  a  real  panacea,  and  we  should  scarcely  require  any
other  remedy.  He  could  certainly  have  seen  and  treated  bat
few  chronic  diseases,  and  assuredly  no  cases  of  poisoning  with


brown's  slemekts  on  hedioinx.  856

white  hellebore,  arsenic,  &c.,  otherwise  he  would  not  have
asserted  snch  fiJsehooda

AxxK>rding  to  this  paragraph,  camphor  should  possess  the  same
powers  as  opium,  only  in  a  somewhat  less  degree ;  and  jet  €u:hial
experience  shows  that  their  effects  are  exactly  opposed ;  the  one
removes  the  effects  of  the  other.  How  little  Brown  knew  about
the  things  whereof  he  speaks  so  confidently !

oocn.  "In  diseases  depending  upon  great  debility  [conse-
quently according  to  him,  in  acute  typhus,  putrid  and  biHous
fevers,  the  Levantine  plague,  &c]  animal  soups  should  be  given."
But  animal  soups  are  utterly  abhorred  by  them ;  will  he  in  spite
of  the  disgust  they  occasion  force  them  upon  the  patients  ?  They
would  agree  with  them  admirably  I

ccciii.  In  the  case  of  a  convalescent  in  whom  stimulants  should
be  continued,  he  recommends  that  '"in  his  movements  he  should
first  use  gestation,'^  The  old  school,  profoundly  ignorant  of  na-
ture, with  whose  &bles  Brown,  the  reformer  of  medicine,  is  still
80  chokefull,  also  considered  riding  without  succussion  as  coming
onder  the  category  of  strengthening  remedies,  and  ranged  this
passive  motion  alongside  the  active  ones  (such  as  walking,  dig-
ging, and  other  manual  exercises),  and  yet  the  former  acts  anta-
gonistically to  the  latter,  and  is  antiphlogistic,  antisthenic,  debili-
tating (at  all  events  in  its  primary  effect),  greatly  diminishing
the  pulse,  causing  vomiting  and  nausea,  &c.  The  reader  will
easUy  perceive  how  opposed  this  is  to  truth  and  nature.

ccc?Vil,  ^,"  The  remedies  of  asthenic  diathesis,  to  whatever  part
rtiey  are  applied,  stimulate  that  part  more  than  any  other."  This
is  also  one  of  his  maxims  that  carries  us  away  by  its  god-like
simplicity.  Pity  that  it  is  fundamentally  fiJse — that  it  is  com-
pletely opposed  to  all  true  experience.  Tincture  of  opium  ap-
plied to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  causes  no  sensation  on  the  spot  to
which  it  is  applied,  but  speedily  relieves  hysterical  vomiting.
When  applied  there,  or  to  the  neck,  or  to  any  other  sensitive
part  of  the  body,  it  checks  (in  a  palliative  manner)  some  diar-
rhoeas, removes  the  apoplectic  death-like  coldness,  stiffness  and
unconsciousness  caused  by  large  doses  of  camphor,  the  abdominal
pains  produced  by  belladonna,  and  the  sopor  of  typhus,  though
at  the  seat  of  its  application  no  perceptible  change  is  observable.
And  I  could  adduce  a  hundred  other  examples  opposed  to  the
generality  of  the  maxim  **that  medicines  act  more  strongly  at
the  part  where  they  are  applied  than  elsewhere."  This  is  a  pure
invention  of  his  own.


366  nUOMSNTABY  OBSSBYATIOKB  09

oocvuL  "  Inanition  of  the  vesseLs  (penury  of  blood)  takes  place
in  asthenic  diseases  in  an  exact  proportion  to  ihdr  degree."  In
pestilential  typhus  fevers,  where  sometimes  only  a  few  hours
elapse  in  the  transition  from  health  to  death,  or  in  the  sudden
fiital  cases  caused  by  cherry-laurel  water,  by  carburetted  hydro-
gen, by  exposure  to  the  exhalations  from  cesspools,  by  the  yapour
of  charcoal,  by  carbonic  acid,  by  flight,  where  the  interval  be-
twixt health  and  death  often  scarcely  amounts  to  a  couple  of
minutes,  how  could  such  an  enormous  deficiency  of  blood  ^Hn  an
eocaci  proportion  to  the  degree  of  these  asthenic  diseases"  have
occurred  in  such  a  short  time  ?  Whither  has  the  blood  gone  7
It  would  be  ridiculous  to  expose  still  further  the  absurdity  of
this  assertion  on  which  he  prides  himself  so  much.

According  to  this  paragraph  he  considers  the  most  ^fficadous
remedy  for  asthenic  diseases  to  be  (artificial)  filling  of  the  vessels
with  blood  I  Just  as  if  healthy  blood  could  be  prepared  in  a
diseased  body,  just  as  if  blood  could  be  manufectured  all  at  onoe
by  means  ol  o^irl,  wine,  and  foiced-down  animal  soups,  in  saoh
diseases,  in  the  same  way  as  butter  is  made  in  a  chum,  or  beer
in  a  brewing  vat  I  What  sort  of  blood?  How  different  is
chlorotic  blood  fi*om  that  of  phthisical  subjects  1  Astparva  non
curat  phUosophus.

OCCix.  "When  the  excitability  is  worn  out  by  any  one  sti-
mulus,  any  new  stimulus  finds  excitability  and  draws  it  forth,
and  thereby  produces  a  further  variation  of  the  eflfect"  The  feot
is  no  doubt  true,  that  a  second  medicine  again  acts  when  the  one
just  given  no  longer  does  any  thing.  But  the  cause  of  this  phe-
nomenon, what  is  it  ?  It  is  impossible  that  it  can  be  as  Brown
says.

If  stimulants  do  not  differ  among  each  other  in  kindj  but  anfy
in  degree  and  strength  (an  unconditional  main  dogma  of  Brown's,
000X11,  cccxiii),  then  it  is  impossible  that  the  second  stimulant
could  act  anew,  after  the  first  stimulant  has  ceased  to  be  able  to
act  An  increased  dose  of  the  first  must  necessarily  effect  all
that  could  be  expected  fix)m  the  second  stimulant,  if  they  differed
fix>m  each  other  only  in  degree  and  strength ;  but  the  first,  even
when  given  in  a  stronger  dose,  now  does  nothing  more,  whereas
the  second  acts  anew,  consequently  they  cannot  differ  merely  in
degree,  they  must  differ  in  kind  (rnodo).  K  however,  this  be  the
case,  the  whole  Brunonian  system  fidls  to  the  ground.

Moreover,  how  can  the  second  stimulus  still  find  excitability
and  draw  it  forth,  as  he  here  asserts,  when  it  has  been  already


brown's  slemknts  of  msdiginb.  867

irom  out  by  the  first?  Whence  came  the  new  excitability  7
from  his  &ncy,  or  firom  the  resources  of  the  animal  economy,
whose  existence  he  will  not  acknowledge?  Tertium  non  datur.
If  it  oome  fix>m  the  latter  source,  then  indeed  it  may  sometimes
flow  more  slowly  and  with  greater  difficulty,  sometimes  too
quickly  and  impetuously.  But  then  the  second  and  only  re-
maining mainstay  of  his  system  breaks  down.  Behold  there  a
more  natural  origin  of  diseases,  which  these  words  of  his  betray
against  his  wilL  Had  he  wished  or  been  able  to  be  consistent^
he  would  not  have  ventured  to  touch  this  ticklish  point,  which
gives  him  a  slap  in  the  &ce.

That  all  this  nonsense  is  his  actual  meaning,  is  evident  from
the  following  assertions  in

Gccxii,  cccxiiL  "  The  effects  of  all  external  powers  upon  us
do  not  differ  among  themselves ;  they  produce  life,  activity,
health  and  disease,  by  the  same  operation,  by  the  same  stimulus.
Hence  it  follows  that  things  which  restore  health  cannot  act  other-
wise than  by  one  and  the  same  stimulus.^'

"Several  things  that  produce  the  same  effect  are  then  identical
with  each  other,  are  one  and  the  same  thing."

This  is  &Lr  from  being  the  case  when  the  action  is  complex;  for
even  according  to  Brown,  the  medicines  do  not  establish  health
in  the  system  so  very  immediately,  so  unconditionally,  so  inde*
pendently  of  the  corporeal  powers,  so  entirely  without  previous
reaction,  as  the  apple-tree  lets  the  apple  fhll  on  the  grass.

But  if  the  effect  be  brought  about  by  composite  actions,  the
prime  agent  on  which  the  action  depends  may  certainly  be  very
different

Windmills,  horse-power,  steam-engines  and  capstans  worked
by  men,  may  all  empty  a  reservoir  of  water;  the  dry  atmospheric
air  also  that  extends  over  the  reservoir  empties  it ;  but  does  it
therefore  follow  that  wind,  horses,  fire,  men  and  the  dry  atmos-
phere are  one  and  the  same  thing?  There  are  also  many  powers
that  exercise  a  double  action,  a  primary  and  a  secondary,  and
several  among  them  that  resemble  each  other  in  their  primary
action,  and  not  a  few  that  do  so  in  their  secondary  action.  If
then  the  careless  observer  looks  only  to  the  resemblance  of  ihe
primary  action  of  some  powers  (as  Brown  often  did),  or  only  to
their  secondary  actions,  or  to  similarity  of  actions,  be  th^  pri-
mary or  secondary,  he  may  often  be  misled  to  infer  an  identity  of
cause  from  some  similarity,  of  these  one-sided  actions,  as  usually
happened  to  Brown. In  making  deductions  from  similar  f^iae


368  FRAGKENTARY  OBSBBVATIONS  ON

premises,  I  might  with  equal  justice  say,  that  a  watery  yegetable
diet,  and  strong  animal  soups  were  one  and  the  same  thing,  for  they
both  (in  their  primary  action  on  the  body)  cause  satiety.  The  same
effects  have  the  same  cause,  therefore  watery  yegetable  nutriment
and  beef-tea  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  And  thus  the  fiJse
scholastic  deduction  is  made.

GCOXIY.  ''  In  asthenic  diseases  the  administration  first  of  dif-
fusible stimulants,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  back  the  appetite
[even  in  every  diseased  body  ?]  for  the  greatest  remedy,  food,  tm
well  as  keeping  the  food  on  the  stomach  and  assisting  in  the
digestion  of  it  [will  they  do  so  in  every  diseased  body?],  then
the  application  of  heat,  then  the  use  of  less  diffusible  and  more
durable  stimulants :  as  animal  food,  without  and  with  seasoning;
wine,  gestation,  gentle  exercise,  moderate  sleep,  pure  air,  exertion
of  mind,  [can  the  mind  of  one  affected  with  melancholia  be  ex-
erted?] exertion  in  passion  and  emotion,  [even  in  idiots  and
raving  maniacs?]  an  agreeable  exercise  of  the  senses;  all  those
reproduce  health,  by  no  other  operation  but  that  of  only  in-
creasing excitement."

This  then  sums  up  all  Brown's  therapeutics  for  diseases  o^
and  accompanied  by,  weakness  I  That  kind  nature  and  youth
will,  assisted  by  such  an  appropriate  regimen,  (for  it  is  nothing
more)  and  even  by  itself,  cure  diseases  having  far  other  pro-
ducing causes  than  deficiency  and  excess  of  excitability,  is  a
phenomenon  daily  witnessed  by  the  unprejudiced  observer,
which,  however,  must  be  explained  away  or  denied  by  Brown
in  order  to  support  his  scholastic  system.

But  without  reckoning  this  divine  power,  and  granting  that
all  these  diseases  depended  on  a  morbid  degree  of  excitability,
and  could  only  be  removed  by  the  remedies  indicated  by  him
(but  which  were  used  long  before  his  time),  what  becomes  of  the
myriads  of  diseases  that  cannot  be  cured  by  these  remedies  ?  It
^^ess  of  excitability.  All  that  we  want  is  that  he  should  cure
them.  We  shall  see  if  by  this  regimen,  the  large  number  of
mental  diseases,  the  epilepsies,  the  venereal  lues,  the  mercurial
NV^eting,  the  pellagra,  the  plica  polonica,  (I  reject  the  name  of
local  diseases,  the  refuge  of  the  Brunonians,  for  these  affections)
./ill  be  cured. Sic  Rhodus  I  hie  saUal

Or  will  this  regimen,  whose  curative  effect  cannot  be  looked
» »r  under  a  considerable  time,  cure  asthenia  which  often  kills
li«>althy  individuals  in  a  few  hours  or  even  minutes  (the  bad


BBOWK'S  ELSIUCNTS  OF  ICEDICINX.  869

kinds  of  lypliiis  fevers,  the  Levantine  plague,  apoplexy,  the  ac-
ddents  caused  bj  lanrocerasus,  azotic  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  car-
baretted  hydrogen,  veratrum  album,  arsenical  vapour,  &c.)?

DCLXXVII.  "  As  it  now  happens,  that  either  direct  or  indirect
debility  proves  hurtful,  hence  we  have  a  third  case  given,  where
we  have  to  combat  both  sorts  of  debility."

Who  could  have  believed  that  a  scholastic  pedant  who  plumes
himself  so  much  on  his  logical  forms,  who  reckons  for  us  in
figures  on  a  scale  of  his  own  exactly  the  degree  of  the  exciting
power  and  excitability,  would  have  so  far  forgotten  himself,  as
Master  Brown  does  here  at  the  end  of  his  immortal  work  ?  How!
both  kinds  of  debility  conspiring  to  make  one  disease  in  one
body?

In  the  first  place,  I  should  like  to  know,  as  he  (notes  to  XLVii
and  Lxxxii)  fixes  the  standard  of  health  at  40  degrees  of  ex-
citability— the  predisposition  to  direct  debility  in  the  degrees  be-
low 40  down  to  25, — complete  and  extreme  direct  debility  from
26  to  0, — ^the  predisposition  to  sthenia  in  the  degrees  from  40  to
56, — sthenia  itself  in  the  degrees  from  55  to  70, — and  indirect
debility  in  the  degrees  from  70  to  80; — I  should  like  to  know
in  what  part  of  this  scale  (which  he  is  so  proud  of)  he  could
place  the  mixed  form  of  debility  he  speaks  of,  by  what  figures
he  would  expound  this  supposed  excitability  ?  Here  he  says
nothing  about  the  figures  of  his  table,  which  he  is  so  fond  of
putting  forward  elsewhere.

Here  he  prudently  ignores  them  and  attempts  in  a  note,  by
means  of  mere  words,  I  know  not  whether  I  should  say  to  con-
ceal or  to  increase  the  hiatus.  He  brings  forward  many  exam-
ples where  in  one  disease  direct  debility  occurs  along  with  indi-
rect, indirect  with  direct  debility.  Granted  that  the  man  whom
he  there  supposes  to  be  afiected  with  typhus  had  got  thereby  a
direct  debility  of  10  (30  degrees  below  40)  that  is  40—30,  but
in  the  meantime,  by  means  of  great  corporeal  motion,  had  con-
tracted an  indirect  debility  of  70  (30  degrees  above  40)  that  is
40+30,  can  the  man  thereby  have  aggravated  his  state  and  be
now  labouring  under  indirect  and  at  the  same  time  direct  de-
Inlity  ?  K  Brown's  excitement  theory  be  not  entirely  false  and
his  scales  not  the  mere  offspring  of  his  fancy,  must  not  instanta-
neous health  or  the  degree  of  40  ensue,  since  40  minus  30  and
plus  30,  gives  40,  the  sum  of  excitability  ?

If  this  be  not  the  result  of  the  meeting  of  the  two  opposed
debilities,  I  should  like  to  know  what  it  is  then  ?  What  part  of
his  excitability-scale  is  not  already  occupied  ?


860  raAOKSNTABT  OBSKRYATlQJStB  OK

Either  there  is  not  a  spark  of  truth  in  his  excitement  theoiy
or  his  scale  of  excitability,  or  the  man  must,  although  already  af-
fected by  typhus,  be  instantly  restored  completely  to  health  or
nearly  so  by  the  added  corporeal  exertion,  according  to  Brown's
whole  theory  and  his  vaunted  scale.  But  i^  as  must  naturallj
happen,  the  man  visibly  aggravates  his  malady  by  this  &tigue^
as  Brown  himself  confesses,  this  circumstance  overthrows  his
whole  system.

If  the  extraordinary  accumulation  of  excitability  in  a  case  of
typhus,  imagined  by  Brown,  can  and  must  be  aggravated  by
corporeal  exertion,  as  experience  teaches  and  as  he  here  admits^
then  either  the  corporeal  motion  cannot  remove  the  excitability,
otherwise  in  this  case  health  would  ensue  or  almost  ensue,  or
there  can  be  in  typhus  no  accumulation  of  excitability.  Plus
and  minus  cannot  co-exist  without  mutually  annihilating  one
another.

It  is  impossible  that  a  state  of  accumulation  of  excitability
can  be  aggravated  by  a  power  that  diminishes  excitability  (ac-
cording to  his  whole  theory),  therefore  the  aggravation  that  en-
sues is  a  refiitation  of  his  whole  beautiful  excitement  theory  and
his  tabularly  expressed  accumulation  and  exhaustion  of  excita*
bility,  to  which,  according  tp  him,  all  the  conditions  of  life  may
be  referred.

Brown  gives  us  no  information  as  to  the  state  (and  degree)  in
which  we  must  suppose  the  excitability  to  exist  when  the  two
debilities  meet  together.  That  he  himself  did  not  know  how  to
conceive  this  state  is  obvious  firom  his  extraordinary  and  am-
biguous assertions  relative  to  this  point.

Thus,  as  the  direct  debility  of  the  man  affected  with  typhus
must  amount  to  at  least  70  degrees  of  accumulation  of  excita-
bility, to  what  height  did  the  degrees  rise  since  his  state  was  ag-
gravated by  corporeal  exertion  ?  The  degrees  of  the  accumula-
tion could  certainty  not  be  the  least  diminished,  otherwise  the
disease  had  not  been  aggravated,  at  all  events  it  had  been  trans-
formed into  a  sthenic  disease  (at  60) ;  the  state  must  then  have
sunk  suddenly  and  far  below  40  into  indirect  debility,  in  order
to  be  able  to  express  the  great  aggravation  that  has  ensued  at
least  by  the  degree  10.  In  the  former  case,  seeing  that  for  the
commencement  of  the  treatment  of  the  simple  direct  debility
its  cure  eight  drops  or  less ;  in  the  latter  case,  however,  as  he
orders  for  the  conmiencement  of  the  treatment  of  the  simple  in-


/


BSOWK'S 'SL£M£NTS  OF  MEDICINE.  361

direct  debility  150  drops,  he  must  for  a  worse  degree  have  ad-
ministered 200  drops  and  upwards.  But  no  I  his  vaunted  con-
sistency forsakes  him  here.

"When  the  affection,"  he  says  (dclxxxvi),  "  is  more  a  mix-
ture of  both  sorts  of  debility,  these  proportions  of  the  doses
must  be  blended  together."

Though  this  is  purposely  worded  so  as  to  be  incomprehensible,
it  can  only  have  this  one  meaning,  that  we  should  from  the  two
select  an  intermediate  number  betwixt  the  dose  increasing  from
a  few  drops  and  that  decreasing  from  many  drops.  Therefore  a
medium  proportion  betwixt  an  increasing  and  decreasing  pro-
gression. Very  strange  I  In  this  case,  from  the  beginning  to  the
end  (if  both  debilities  were  j)retty  equal  in  point  of  strength)  80
drops  should  be  given  uninterruptedly,  which  is  contrary  to  his
other  modes  of  treatment  and  opposed  to  the  nature  of  the  thing.
And  how  if  the  direct  debility  was  greater  than  the  indirect,  or
the  latter  greater  than  the  former,  what  state  is  present,  what  is
to  be  done  for  it  ?  He  himself  does  not  actually  know  what  he
should  direct  to  be  done  for  cases  which  he  can  make  clear  nei-
ther to  himself  nor  to  others,  and  what  would  he  advise  to  be
done  in  this  dilemma?  He  prudently  forbears  giving  any  de-
tailed information  on  the  subject,  and  merely  in  the  note  to
DCLXXVii  cunningly  says,  (possibly  in  order  to  escape  observa-
tion in  the  confusion?)  "  A  judicious  physician  will  find  plenty
of  scope  for  the  exercise  of  his  judgment  in  thase  mixed  states."
In  a  word,  he  leaves  us,  with  a  bow  to  the  reader,  in  the  lurch,
not  only  here  but  in  the  treatment  of  all  asHienias^  "  becaicse,^^  as
he  assures  us  in  this  paragraph,  "  there  is  scarcely  any  astJienic
disease  where  such  a  mixed  state  is  not  present,^ ^  So  almost  all
asthenic  diseases  consist  of  an  unknown  mixture  of  both  debili-
ties, whereof  he  knows  not  how  to  impart  any  information  in  re-
ference to  the  change  therefrom  resulting  in  the  body,  and  to  the
accompanying  state  of  excitement  and  excitability,  nor  to  give
us  any  advice  on  the  subject !  Heaven  help  us !  throughout  the
whole  transparent  work  he  has  dazzled  as  with  a  flaring  straw
fire,  here  it  sinks  down  into  ashes,  and  he  leaves  us,  with  a  smile,
surrounded  by  a  howling  wilderness  in  the  darkness  of  night


862  VIEW  OF  PB0FS8SI0KAL  LIBERALITY  AT  THS

VIEW  OF  PROFESSIONAL  LIBERALITY  AT  THE
COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY.'


I  do  not  here  refer  to  that  low,  envious  trading  spirit,  for
which  the  pressure  of  want  is  often  the  cause  that  can  best  be
pleaded  in  excuse ;  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  pro-
fessional jealousy  of  medical  men  among  themselves,  which  is
the  prevalent  custom  in  Germany  (in  the  southern  more  than
the  northern  parts),  a  helium  omnium  contra  omnes,  which  has
had  a  most  injurious  influence  on  the  prosperity  of  one  of  the
noblest  arts,  and  the  one  which  stands  most  in  need  of  im-
provement— ^medicine.  For  no  sooner  has  a  colleague  made  a
suggestion  that  must  be  for  the  general  good,  put  forward  a  per-
haps useful  proposition,  discovered  something  profitable,  than  in-
stantly the  professional  jealousy  of  his  colleagues  (with  very  few
exceptions)  falls  foul  of  him  in  order  to  bury  in  oblivion,  or  if
possible,  to  destroy  the  novelty  by  spoken  or  written  deprecia-
tions, insinuations,  sophistries,  or  even  injurious  aspersions,  and
all  because — it  did  not  originate  with  themselves?  Instead  of
seeing,  as  we  do  in  England  and  Scotland,  fraternal  meetings,
and  societies  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  animated  by  the  desire
to  promote  the  welfare  of  himianity,  and  investigating  medical
subjects  for  the  purpose  of  mutual  improvement  and  perfection,
without  party-spirit,  without  seeking  self-aggrandisement,  with-
out ministering  to  individual  vanity — we  see  the  German  medi-
cal men  (with  few  exceptions)  completely  divided  among
themselves,  each  acting  by  himself,  pro  modulo  ingenii,  occa-
sionally appropriating  the  useful  discoveries  of  others,  but  quite
silently,  without  betraying  by  the  slightest  sign  that  any  one
else  has  any  thing  to  recommend  him,  or  that  they  were  in-

'  From  the  Allgemeiner  Ameiger  d.  D.  No.  32.  1801.  [This  article  is  interest-
ing in  reference  to  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  Belladonna  as  a  prophylactic  for
scarlatina.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  the  first  instance  Hahnemann  did  not  reveal  the
name  of  the  remedy  he  employed  for  that  purpose,  which  may  possibly  aocount  in
some  deg^ree  for  the  unwillingness  of  his  colleagues  to  test  the  efficacy  of  the  remedy
he  furnished  with  them,  but  they  had  not  this  excuse  after  1801,  for  in  that  year  he
announced  the  prophylactic  to  be  belladonna,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  essay,  and
yet  many  years  elapsed  before  they  put  his  prophylactic  to  the  test,  whereby  ita
utility  was,  as  is  weU  known,  signally  verified  by  some  of  the  best  physicians  of  the
day.]

'  [May  these  remarks  of  the  illustrious  master  ever  be  remembered  by  American
physicians,  and  whenever  envy  or  other  unworthy  feelings  prompt  them  to  calumni-
ate  their  brethren,  may  this  lash  of  TTnhnAmnni>  fall  upon  their  unworthy  backa.]
—Am.P,


ooxiaNCEiCBirt  of  thb  nineteenth  centuby. 868

debted  for  anything  whatsoever  to  this  one  or  the  other.  Not
only  do  they  make  use  of  the  propositions  and  inventions  of
others  without  betraying  the  least  thankfulness,  but  they  often
throw  out  spiteful  insinuations  against  the  originator,  at  all
events  always  (few  are  the  exceptions!)  without  taking  any
public  part  in  promoting  and  perfecting  the  proposition  or  dis-
covery, particularly  if  it  proceed  from  a  German  physician ;  far
more  likely  are  they  to  do  so  if  it  belong  to  a  foreign  physician.
How  much  this  egotistical  professional  jealousy  prevents  the
shooting  forth  and  vigorous  growth  of  our  divine  healing  art,
which  is  still  in  the  condition  of  an  undeveloped  bud,  must  be
evident  to  every  non-professional  person.  Were  it  not  for  this
paltry  self-seeking  spirit,  of  a  truth  Germany  alone,  with  its
great  intellectual  t^ents,  could  affect  a  regeneration  of  the
great  art

How  spitefully  Wichmann  was  assailed  when  he  exposed  the
prevalent  fidlacies  respecting  diflBcult  teething!  How  infa-
mously the  same  clique  calumniated  that  imenvious  favourite  of
die  Asdepiadean  muse — Hufeland,  whose  soul  is  animated  by
truth  alone!  How  was  Tode,  how  was  Sommering  treated!
Were  the  men  that  could  act  in  this  manner  exclusively  devo-
ted to  the  beneficent  art  whose  aim  is  the  weal  of  humanity  ?

Ever  sadder,  ever  more  gloomy  are  the  prospects  of  the  de-
velopment of  our  art  in  the  new  century  ;  without  friendliness
and  good-fellowship  among  its  professors,  it  will  remain  but  a
bungling  art  for  another  century.

Let  it  not  be  retorted  that  there  now  exists,  at  least  among
the  followers  of  the  Brunonian  system,  an  esprit  de  corps.  The
rallying  motto  of  a  sectarian  name  is  incapable  of  exciting  to
sober,  calm  scientific  investigation ;  it  only  rouses  the  explosive
q>irit  of  accusations  of  heresy  to  a  fierce  volcanic  flame.  Truth
and  the  weal  of  humanity  should  be  the  only  motto  of  the  genu-
ine elucidators  of  the  art  and  the  watch- word  of  their  brotherly,
peaceful  bond  of  union,  without  slavish  adherence  to  any  secta-
rian leader,  if  we  would  not  see  the  little  good  that  we  know
completely  sacrificed  to  party-spirit  and  discord.  In  these
times^  when  accusations  of  heresy  are  so  rife,  the  most  important
question  that  is  ever  put  is,  "Art  thou  of  Paul,  art  thou  of  Ce-
phas or  Apollos  ?"  Would  it  not  be  far  better  to  say,  **  Brother !
what  is  the  peculiar  mode  of  action  of  cinchona  bark  on  the
healthy  individual  ?  so  that  we  may  at  length  learn  how  to  em-
ploy it  with  confidence  in  diseases,  seeing  that  we  have  hitherto


364 ynW  of  professional  libera  lity  at  the

blindly  wasted  many  thousand  hundred-weiglits  of  it^  at  one
time  doing  good,  at  another  harm,  without  knowing  what  it  was
we  did."  Would  it  not  be  better  to  say,  "Dear  colleague  I  let
us  together  investigate  and  observe  the  niiany  and  various  kinds
of  intermittent  fevers,  and  let  us  unite  in  laying  before  the
world  the  discoveries  we  thus  make,  as  to  wHch  kind  among
them  may  be,  caeteris  paribus,  always  cured  by  cinchona,  which
by  sal-ammoniac,  which  by  chamomile,  which  by  ignatia,  which
by  capsicum,  &c." — "  God  forbid  I  who  would  consent  to  such
kn  exposure  of  himself  as  to  confess  to  his  colleagues  or  to  the
public  that  he  did  know  everything?  Those  around  me  must
be  impressed  with  the  belief  that  I  am  infallible,  that  I  embrace
the  whole  sphere  of  the  art,  as  I  hold  a  ball  in  my  hand,  that
the  inmost  secrets  of  medical  science  lie  clearly  open  to  my  all-
seeing  eye,  like  the  sced-recepticle  of  an  apple  cut  through  the
middle.  I  dare  not  say  one  word  that  could  betray  that  some-
thing was  still  to  be  discovered  or  that  there  was  any  room  for
improvement.  But  the  notion  that  another  and  more  especially
a  German  colleague  could  teach  us  something  more,  or  could
make  any  fresh  discovery,  must  not  be  uttered,  must  be  to  the
beat  of  our  ability  scouted."

Such  is  the  spirit  that  has  prevailed  in  Germany  during  the
latter  half  until  the  end  of  the  bygone  century ;  the  bene&ctors
of  their  race,  and  with  them  the  good  spirit  that  inspired  them
with  aeal  for  the  common  weal,  were  sought  to  be  kept  down
and  set  aside.  Just  as  theological  polemics  have  never  produced
a  desire  for  truth,  a  perception  of  the  high  object  of  our  exist-
ence or  genuine  virtue  and  devotional  feeling — just  as  the  per-
sonal squabbles  of  literary  men  have  never  succeeded  in  devel-
oping the  love  of  art,  the  true  aesthetic  feeling,  enlightened  taste^
and  artistic  skill — in  like  manner  it  needs  no  great  sagacity  to
xmderstand  that  the  mutual  detractions  of  medical  men  can  have
no  other  result  but  the  depreciation  and  obscuration  of  their  art>
which  is,  without  that,  the  most  obscure  of  all  arts.

Honourable,  non-medical  friends,  endowed  with  a  desire  to
promote  the  well-being  of  mankind  and  who  have  had.  the  ad-
vantage of  a  scientific  education  I — the  energies  of  my  life,  which
have  been  devoted  to  promote  the  welfiire  of  the  community,
have  also  been  cramped  and  kept  under  by  this  unpatriotic
spirit  of  many  of  the  medical  men  of  Germany.

As  soon  as  I  stepped  forth  among  my  colleagues,  not  without
nearly  twenty  years  of  preparation,  not  without  many  long


OOMMXNOKMXNT  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTITBY. 386

yeaiB  of  Pjrthagoiean  silence,  to  contribute  here  and  there  some-
thing to  the  improvement  of  our  art,  I  found  that  I  had  lost  my
accustomed  peace  and  quietness,  and  had  fallen  among  a  crowd
of  profeasional  brethren,  who  (with  few  exceptions)  regard  noth-
ing impartially ;  I  was  maligned.  And  how  easy  it  is  to  perse*
cute,  to  malign  an  art,  which  has  hitherto  been  founded  on  ever-
changing  maxims,  in  which  by  the  force  of  authorities,  learned,
empty  terminology,  sophistry,  scholastic,  stereotyped  dogmas,
and  imaginary  experience,  black  was  made  to  appear  white,  just
as  any  one  pleased,  especially  where  the  judgment  was  perverted
by  depravity  of  heart,  egotism  and  illiberality.

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  truth  penetrates  even  through  the
thickest  clouds  of  prejudice,  but  the  often  too  tedious  conflict  of
the  opposing  elements  conveys  a  disagreeable,  a  discouraging
impression  to  the  mind.  Thus  at  the  commencement  of  my
career,  on  account  of  my  discovery  of  the  best  anti- venereal
medicine,  the  soluble  mercury,  I  was  abused  in  the  most  vulgar
manner  in  a  journal  notorious  for  its  outrageous  vituperations,
and  also  elsewhere,  but  the  common  experience  of  Europe  in  a
few  years  removed  the  slander  from  this  remedy  and  worthily
i^reciated  a  discovery  that  I  had  unselfishly  revealed  for  the
px)d  of  humanity,  in  order  to  make  amends  for  the  death  of
thousands  who  had  been  literally  dissolved  by  the  abuse  of  the
feebly  anti- venereal  preparations  of  corrosive  mercury.  The
same  thing  happened  when  I  was  afterwards  again  (to  pass  over
the  bad  reception  some  other  useful  truths  met  with)  abused  in
the  same  vituperative  journal  on  account  of  my  "  neio  principle^"
where  I  taught  a  mode  of  learning  to  look  at  diseases  from  a
point  of  view  that  directs  us  almost  unmistakeably  to  the  appro-
priate remedy  for  every  case — shewing  how  to  discover  from
the  positive  nature  of  medicinal  agents  the  diseases  for  which
they  are  suitable.  But  because  this  kind  of  system  differed  so-
much  from  the  ordinary  one,  because  it  was  so  simple,  so  unarti-
ficial  and  (purposely)  so  free  from  the  sacred  arabesques  of  the
learned  language  of  the  schools,  it  made  very  little  impression,
it  was  not  cultivated  by  German  medical  men,  but  was  sought
to  be  quietly  shelved  by  them.

Now,  once  more,  at  the  end  of  the  century  that  has  just
expired,  my  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  mankind  misled  me  to
announce  a  prophylactic  remedy  for  one  of  the  most  destructive
rf  children's  diseases,  scarlet-fever.  Scarcely  a  fourth  part  of  the


366  yiSW  OF  PROFESSIONAL  LIBERAUTT  AT  THK

warm  interest  shown  for  sucli  an  important  affair  discouraged
of  the  medicine  itselfj  in  order  to  satisfy  them,  in  case  my  book
sisted chiefly  of  physicians*  who  had  epidemics  of  scarlet-fever
in  their  neighbourhood.  At  least  thirty  of  these,  whom  I  beg-
ged by  letter  to  testify  to  the  truth,  and  to  publish  the  result
(be  it  what  it  might)  in  the  Reichs-Ameiger^  made  no  reply.

Two  others,  unsolicited  by  me,  Dr.  Jani  in  Gera  and  Dr.
Miiller  in  Plauen,  wrote  something  on  the  subject,  but,  good
heavens  I  in  what  a  spirit !  Is  this  the  way  ojie  colleague  treats
another  in  Grermany  ?  Is  an  affair  of  such  importance  for  man-
kind to  be  so  readily  dismissed?

After  the  latter  had  said  in  No.  215  of  the  R.A.,  1800,  "  that
in  the  epidemic  he  witnessed  no  child  took  scarlet-fever  who
had  used  this  medicine  for  two  or  three  weeks,"  he  repents  of
his  honesty  and  feels  himself  compelled  in  No.  239  "  to  deny
the  truth  of  his  former  declaration  (the  facts  brought  forward
by  himself!)  because  one  child  took  the  scarlet-fever.  This  case
proves  more  against  the  efficacy  of  the  remedy  than  500,  where
the  individuals  seem  to  have  been  protected  by  it,  prove  for  it"

What  monstrous  logic!  Mercury  is,  as  is  well  known,  the
best  and  sole  remedy  in  the  venereal  disease  ;  thousands  have
been  cured  by  its  means.  "  No,"  quoth  Bavins,  "  I  could  shew
you  at  least  twenty  cases  where  it  did  no  good.  Mercury  is  of
no  use ;  these  twenty  cases  certainly  prove  more  against  the
efficacy  of  the  remedy  than  your  thousands  of  successful  cases
prove  for  it.  Therefore  we  should  rather  let  ourselves  be  eaten
up  by  the  venereal  disease  than  have  it  cured  by  mercury,  be-
cause out  of  many  thousand  cases  there  are  twenty  where  it
does  no  good." — "  A  single  case  in  which  cinchona  bark  fedled
in  intermittent  fever  proves  more  for  the  worthlessness  of  this
bark  than  500  cases  in  which  it  was  efficacious  for  it."  What  a
deliriimi  of  logic !  The  good  Dr.  Miiller  has  once  upon  a  time
heard  of  the  deduction  a  minori  ad  vmjuSj  and  seeks  to  apply
that  here.  In  like  manner  the  wag  made  the  deduction  a  mi-
nori  ad  inajus  in  the  Miillerean  fashion :  "  Since  it  feels  hard  to
lie  upon  a  single  feather  on  the  bare  floor,  this  proves  more
against  the  softness  of  feathers  than  a  bed  filled  with  millions  of


'  A  good  many  private  indiyidoalB  got  the  medicine  sent  them ;  but  the
mendacious  ioBinuations  of  their  ordinary  medical  attendants  prevented  them  from
mning  their  children  by  its  means.


»^.i) • •  ^0(»J


OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CSNTUBT.  867


eider-featheiB  for  their  softness ;  I  will  therefore  never  more
deep  upon  feather-beds  after  having  lain  so  hard  upon  one

feather."

But  perhaps  Dr.  Muller  invented  this  pleasant  piece  of  sophis-
try only  in  order  to  eradicate  from  the  minds  of  the  uniniated,
by  one  (phDanthropic)  blow,  this  German  invention,  not  pro-
oeedingfrom  himsdfi  Be  it  so,  my  friend  I  But  have  you  any-
thing better  to  substitute  for  the  remedy  ?  Is  there  to  be  found
in  medical  writings  a  single  mode  of  treating  scarlet-fever  on
which  we  may  rely?  We  shall  not  say  a  word  about  a  pre-
ventive remedy.  According  to  the  directions  usually  given,
there  is  not  a  single  symptom  that  can  be  removed  without
several  worse  ones  being  excited.  It  may  be  said  of  the  old
mode  of  treatment  of  every  acute  disease :  ''  Witii  our  medicines
sad  without  our  medicines  the  primary  fever  goes  oflF  in  twenty-
one  days,  or  the  patient  dies  in  the  meantime,  he  might  not
have  died  had  he  not  taken  our  medicines."

Dr.  Jani,  on  the  other  hand,  says  in  No.  255,  that  his  scarlet-
fever  was  complicated  with  malignant  typhus-fever  and  acute
herpetic-fever,  and  very  rarely  ran  a  regular  course.

He  then  seeks  to  prove  "  that  my  preservative  does  not  pro-
tect unconditionally."  He  might  have  spared  himself  the  pains.
Ood  himself  cannot  create  a  remedy  that  sliall  be  unconditionally
ffficadouSj  that  wJien  used  wrongly^  at  an  inappropriate  time,  in  an
improper  place,  or  under  adverse  circumstances,  shall  yet  of  neces-
sity do  good.

"  After  it  became  universally  prevaleiit,  and  was  raging  among
them  like  an  evil  demon,  he  allowed  ten  families,  consisting  of
thirty-six  children,  to  use  my  remedy.  Three  children  in  one
&mily  were  attacked  by  scarlet  fever  whilst  using  it  (?).  Of
the  thirty  children  of  the  remaining  nine  families  who  used  it
for  a  month,  none  was  attacked  by  scarlet-fever.  But  as  far  as
fjffos  known  none  of  them  were  exposed  to  infection^

Therefore  it  was  no  merit  of  Hahnemann's  prophylactic  that
just  those  nine  families  with  their  thirty  children  remained  free
amidst  all  the  others.  This  miracle  is  owing  solely  to  the  fiust
that  they  were  not  exposed  to  infection  {scilicet)  at  a  period
when,  as  he  asserts,  scarlet-fever  was  universally  prevahnL
When  an  epidemic  of  scarlet-fever  (which  generally  does  not
wgne  two  out  of  a  hundred  children  in  the  place)  is  universally
prevalent,  does  the  mere  circumstance  "  of  not  having  been  ex-
posed to  the  infection  as  £»*  as  was  known"  suffice  to  preserve


868  VIEW  OP  PROFESSIONAL  LIBERALITT, ETC.

jBrom  infection  ?  Were  that  the  case,  it  were  impossible  that
any  epidemic  of  scarlet-fever  could  ever  arise,  because  no  child
of  sensible  or  at  least  of  timorous  parents  would  ever  be  know-
ingly exposed  to  infection  I

''  But  because  it  was  not  I,  but  another,  and  what  is  worse,  a
German  physician  who  discovered  the  remedy,  it  must  be
allowed  us,  in  order  that  the  honour  may  not  be  given  to  the
the  nine  families,  to  a  notoriously  inefficient  cause,  in  order
that  we  may  be  enabled  to  shelve  Hahnemann's  prophylactic
remedy  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  all-seeing  public"

Here  are  striking  features  of  the  professional  liberality  among
the  physicians  of  our  time !  Here  is  a  fine  specimen  of  zealous
endeavour  to  clear  up  the  truth,  of  warm  interest  in  promoting
an  affair  of  infinite  importance  to  humanity.

The  furtherance  of  every  means,  be  it  ever  so  small,  that  can
save  human  life,  that  can  bring  health  and  security  (a  Gtod  of
love  invented  this  blessed  and  most  wondrous  of  arts !)  should
be  a  sacred  object  to  the  true  physician ;  chance,  or  the  labour
of  a  physician,  has  discovered  this  one.  Away,  then,  with  all
grovelling  passions  at  the  altar  of  this  sublime  God-head,  whose
priests  we  are !

We  all  strive  after  a  common,  holy  object ;  but  it  is  not  easy
to  be  attained.  It  is  only  by  joining  hand  in  hand,  only  by  a
brotherly  union  of  our  powers,  only  by  a  mutual  intercommu-
nication and  a  common  dispassionate  development  of  all  our
knowledge,  views,  inventions  and  observations,  that  this  high

aim  can  be  attained : — the  perfecting  of  tfie  medical  art

«  «  «  «

But  why  the  most  trustworthy  remedy  sometimes  does  not
answer  in  our  private  practice — ^this  every  observant  physician
who  has  grown  gray  in  his  profession,  and  who  possesses  at  the
same  time  a  knowledge  of  mankind,  can  easily  account  for  firom
his  own  experience.  Hospital  patients,  whom  the  unprejudiced
clear-sighted  physician  never  loses  sight  of,  are  certainly  much
more  favourable  for  determining  the  truth,  though  even  with
them,  deceptions,  mistakes,  insufficiency,  and  a  thousand  other
opposing  accessory  circtmistances,  are  unavoidable.

But  how  we  may  fail  to  attain  our  object  in  private  practice,

particularly  as  regards  my  preservative,  and  how  failure  is  to

be  avoided,  I  shall  explain  in  my  forthcoming  little  work.
«  «  «  »

Physicians  of  Germany,  be  brothers,  be  fidr,  be  just  I


OUBB  AKD  PREVSNTION  OF  BOARLBT-FEYEB.  889


CX7RE  AND  PREVENTION  OF  SCARLET  FEVERS


PREFAOE.

Had  I  compiled  a  large  book  upon  scarlet  fever,  I  should
have  obtained,  through  the  usual  channels  of  publication,  at
least  as  much  in  the  way  of  honorarium  as  by  the  subscription
for  this  little  book.  But  as,  according  to  CaUimachus,  a  great
book  is  a  great  evil,  and  is  soon  laid  aside,  one  of  my  chief  aims,
to  wit,  to  excite  a  great  interest  in  a  subfect  of  so  much  importance
to  humanity  as  this  is^  in  order  dearly  to  ascertain  the  truth^  by
bringing  the  observations  of  many  to  bear  upon  it — could  not  have
been  fulfilled  so  well  by  the  l^ge  book  as  by  the  mode  I  have
adopted.

Up  to  this  period  it  is  impossible  that  the  corroboration  of
my  assertion  could  be  complete.  The  extract  of  belladonna,
lost  its  power  by  the  great  distances  it  was  sent,  and  by  the  long
period  it  had  been  kept.  Occasionally  it  fell  into  the  hands  of
some  who  had  neither  the  ability  nor  the  good  will  to  administer
its  solution  in  an  appropriate  manner.  The  precautions  laid
down  in  this  book  could  not  all  be  enumerated  in  a  small  paper
of  directions,  where  on  account  of  the  danger  of  misusing  the
medicine,  it  was  necessary  to  direct  that  only  the  very  small-
est dose  should  be  administered.  Moreover  it  is  probable,
that  the  tJiorough  admixture  of  the  few  drops  with  a  sufficient
quantity  of  the  fluid  in  which  it  should  be  taken,  was  generally
neglected ;  a  circumstance  the  neglect  of  which  makes  this  and
every  other  medicine  many  hundred  times  less  powerful  than
they  would  be  were  they  properly  combined  with  the  diluting
fluid.  The  hurry  and  inaccuracy  of  young  doctors  of  the  pre-
sent day  are  well  known,  and  we  know  also  how  little  depend-
ence we  can  place  on  our  private  patients.

In  addition,  very  inclement  toeatJierj  and  in  general  what  is  un-
derstood a  chill  (which  I  have  forgotten  to  allude  to  in  the  text),
present  obstacles,  by  no  means  slight  to  the  power  of  belladonna
as  a  preventative  of  scarlet-fever.  Children  should  be  carefully
preserved  from  it,  without  however  completely  excluding  them
fix>m  the  open  air,  and  if  this  precaution  be  neglected,  the  dose
of  the  remedy  should  at  all  events  be  increased.

There  may  also  be  many  other  circumstances  unknown  to  me

*  TfaoB  was  pobliBhed  as  a  pamphlet  at  Ootba»  in  1801.


870  OtJBB  AKD  FBETBNTIOK  OF  SCABIiBir-raFtt.

to  diminish  the  power  of  belladonna. The  philanthropic  phy-
sician ought  to  endeavour  to  discover  and  to  avoid  them.

It  is  only  in  accordance  with  my  well  known  maxim  (the
new  principle)  that  small-pox,  to  give  one  example  firom  among
many,  has  an  important  prophylactic  in  the  cow-pox,  which  is
an  exanthematous  disease,  whose  pustules  break  out  after  the
sixth  day  of  innoculation,  with  pain  and  swelling  of  the  axillaiy
glands,  pain  in  the  back  and  loins,  and  fever,  and  surrounded  by
an  erythematous  inflammation — that  is  to  say,  constituting  altoge-
ther a  disease  very  similar  to  variola.  And,  in  like  manner,  a
medicine  which  causes  symptoms  so  similar  to  those  of  the  inva*
sion  of  scarlet-fever,  as  belladonna  does,  must  be  one  of  the  beet
preventive  remedies  for  this  children's  pestilence.  It  should
however  be  put  to  the  test  with  candour,  carefulness  and  impar-
tiality— not  cursorily  or  hurriedly,  not  with  the  design  of  depre-
dating the  originator  of  it  at  the  expense  of  truth.

But  if  its  efficacious  prophylactic  power  has  incurred  and
may  still  incur  opposition  from  prejudiced,  ill-disposed,  weak-
minded  and  cursory  observers,  I  may  be  allowed  to  appeal
against  their  conduct  to  the  more  matured  investigation  of  the
clear-sighted,  dispassionate  portion  of  the  public,  and  to  trust  to
time  for  a  just  verdict.  I  should  esteem  myself  happy  if  I
should  see,  some  years  hence,  this  scourge  of  mankind  in  any
measure  diminished  by  my  labours.


CURE  AND  PREVENTION  OF  SCARLET  FEVER.

At  the  commencement  of  the  year  1799  small-pox  came  from
the  neighbourhood  of  Helmstadt  to  Konigslutter^  which  spread
slowly  around,  and  though  not  mild  in  character,  the  eruption
was  small,  warty  looking,  and  accompanied  with  serious  symp-
toms, especially  of  an  atonic  kind.  In  the  village  it  came  from,
the  scarlet  fever  was  prevalent  at  the  same  time,  and,  mixed  up
with  the  latter,  the  small-pox  made  its  appearance  in  Konigs-
lutter.  About  the  middle  of  the  year  the  small-pox  ceased
almost  entirely,  and  the  scarlet-fever  then  commenced  to  appear
alone  and  more  frequently.

HISTOBY  OP  THE  SCARLATINA  EPIDEMIC.

In  this  as  in  all  other  epidemics  the  scarlet-fever  shewed  itself
to  be  the  most  spreading  and  contagious  of  all  the  maladies

that  befid  children. If  a  single  child  was  affected  with  it,  not


*  [Wliera  H>linwnann  at  that  time  reoded]


CriTBX  Ain>  PBBVINTION  OF  8CARLST-FXTSB.  871

<me  of  its  brothers  and  sisters  remained  exempt^  nor  did  it  &il
to  eflfeot  other  children  who  came  too  close  to  die  patients,  or  to
things  that  had  come  in  contact  with  their  exhalations.*
Parents  above  thirty  years  of  age  who  are  in  the  midst  of  many
children  affected  with  scarlet  fever,  usually  in  dirty  damp  rooms,
get  now  and  then  in  place  of  the  general  eruption  a  very  painful
pustular  erysipelas  of  the  &ce,  or  the  peculiar  scarlatina  sore-
throat^-always  along  with  some  degree  of  fever.

In  its  main  symptoms  this  epidemic  of  scarlet-fever  resembled
the  scarlatina  of  Plenciz.^  In  some  families  the  disease  was  of
a  mild  form,  but  generally  it  was  of  a  bad  kind.

When  it  occurred  in  the  mild  form  it  generally  remained
mild  in  the  whole  family  living  together.  There  occurred  a
slight  feeling  of  weariness,  a  kind  of  faint-heartedness,  some
difficulty  of  swallowing,  some  fever,  red  face  and  hot  hands.
There  then  appeared,  usually  the  very  first  day,  alone  with
slight  itching,  the  spots  of  various  shape,  and  sometimes  paler,
sometimes  redder,  on  the  neck,  the  chest,  the  arms,  &c.,  which
disappeared  again  in  firom  three  to  four  days,  and  the  desquama-
tion that  followed  was  scarcely  observable  on  the  fingers,  and
almost  nowhere  else.  Towards  evening  only  the  patients  laid
down  in  bed  for  a  short  time,  but  the  rest  of  the  day  they  went
about.  The  sleep  was  pretty  tranquil,  the  bowels  usually  some-
what less  open  than  when  in  health,  the  appetite  usually  not
much  diminished.

Very  different  was  the  course  of  the  had  form  of  scarlet-fever
that  prevailed  in  most  families.  OeneraUy^  the  seventh  day  after
the  infection  had  been  communicated  it  broke  out  suddenly  and  un-
expectedly, without  any  previous  feeling  of  illness  seldom  was  it
that  horrible  dreams  on  the  previous  night  served  as  a  prelude  to
it  All  at  once  there  occurred  an  unusual  timidity  and  fearful-
nesSj  rigour  with  general  coldness,  especially  in  the  face,  the  hands
iind  the  feet,  violent  pressive  headache,  especially  in  the  forehead,
above  the  orbits. Pressure  in  the  hypochondria,  chiefly  in  the  region

*  Anxng  children  under  fifteen  years  of  age  that  may  be  exposed  to  contagion
B  epidemics  of  scarlatina,  hardly  one  in  a  thousand  escapes  the  disease,  though  they
may  only  be  a£Eected  by  the  specific  sore  Ihroat,  or  a  oombinatioQ  of  some  of  the  other
■ymptoms;  firom  fifteen  to  twenty  years  of  age  scarcely  one  in  five  hundred.,  is
spared ;  firom  twenty  to  thirty  years  the  infection  becomes  always  rarer.  It  is  very
seldom  that  persons  above  thirty  are  affected  by  the  perfect  scarlet-fever  exanthema,
aod  Hien  only  in  the  most  malignant  and  fiital  epidemica.

'  Opera  medieo-pkyiica, Tnust  iii,  Sect  iiLVindob.  1762.

that  oofrespood  with  his  are  in  the  usual  Roman  type.


872  OUBX  AND  PBEYENTIOK  OF  8GABLXlVnE?SB.

ofthestomach;  in  most  cases  there  occurs  a  very  tinea^pflct^
ofviclent  vomiting^  first  of  TnucuSj  then  ofbile^  Oien  of  water  recur-
ring at  intervals  of  &om  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours,  accompanied
by  an  ever  increasing  weakness  and  anxiety,  wHk  trembUng.  The
parotid  and  snIhmaociUiary  glands  sweU  and  become  hard  and  pom-
ful^  swallowing  becomes  very  difficult,  wUh  shooting  pains.  After
rigours  that  last  from  twelve  to  twenty  four  hours,  the  body  becomes
excessively  hot,  dccompanied  tvith  itching  burning,  the  head,  nedc,
hands  (forearms)  and  feet  (legs)  are  hottest,  and  swollen  so  as  to
present  a  shining  appea/rance,  which  lasts  to  the  end  of  the  disease}
{Almost  every  paroxysm  of  heat  terminates  in  profuse  sweat,  whiA,
however,  only  affects  the  rest  of  the  body,  but  not  the  head,  hands  and
feet,)  On  these  swollen  parts,  but  first  in  the  pit  of  the  throat,
then  on  the  arms  and  legs,  there  appear  about  the  second  day
variously  shaped  cinnabar  coloured  spots  of  various  sizes  that
readily  grow  pale  on  any  slight  (Mil;  these  spots  are  scarcely
raised  above  the  level  of  the  skin,  and  are  always  accompanied
by  smarting,  itching,  burning;  as  the  disease  advances  ih^
spread  out  into  a  connected,  but  less  vivid  redness.  On  the
•  outburst  of  the  eruption,  the  fever  does  not  diminish  ;  on  ffie  eon-
trary,  the  greater  the  redness  the  more  violent  is  the  fever.  In  the
meantime  the  sore-throat  increases,  swallowing  becomes  very
painful,  in  the  worst  cases  almost  impossible.  The  interior  of
the  mouth,  the  tongue  and  the  palate  are  inflamed,  very  painful,
raw,  arvd  as  if  ulcerated  all  over.  In  very  bad  cases  the  swelling
of  the  cervical  glands  almost  closes  the  jaws,  and  from  between
the  teeth,  which  can  be  but  slightly  separated^  there  flows  almost  in-
cessantly a  very  viscid  and  very  fetid  saliva,  which  can  scarcely
be  expelled  firom  the  mouth  in  consequence  of  the  tongue  being
BO  painj^.  In  like  manner,  in  the  worst  cases  the  lining  mem-
brane of  the  nose  is  ulcerated.  At  this  i>eriod  the  voice  be-
comes weak,  suppressed  and  unintelligible,  and  respiration  dif-
ficult. The  taste  in  the  mouth  is  putrid ;  the  stools,  which  are
usually  rarely  passed,  have  the  odour  of  assafcetida.  A  drawing
pain  in  the  back  and  cutting  bellyache  are  characteristic  symp-
toms, which,  together  with  pressive  headache,  in  bad  cases  per-
sist in  alternation  day  and  night,  but  in  less  dangerous  cases

^  The  Budden  disappearance  of  ifae  redness  with  the  fatal  termlnatian  without
obrious  cause  observed  in  some  of  the  epidemics  of  1800, 1  had  doI  ao  opportuDity
of  seeing.  Probablj  this  depended  on  a  pecoliar  complication,  and  I  am  not  aware
if  my  preserratiTe,  which  is  odIj  for  pure  scarlatina^  would  hare  the  poww  of  avert-


OUBS^  AND  raXVEHTION  OF  SCABLET^FSVKR.  87ft

<mly  recur  ifi  the  evening  after  mmset^  along  with  increase  of  a&x-
ietj  and  timidity.  In  the  yeiy  worst  cases  there  are  alternate
paroxjms  of  agonising  tossing  aboutj  raving,  groaning,  grinding
of  Ae  ieeth,  floceitationSj  general  or  partial  convulsions  and  coma-
tose stope&ction  or  sopor,  with  half-shnt  eyes  and  head  bent
baekuxMrds.  The  nrine,  which  is  light-coloui^  and  the  feces,
are  passed  involuntarily,  and  the  patient  sinks  down  to  the  bot*
torn  of  the  bed.  The  grumbling^  complaining  disposition  increases
firom  day  to  day.  The  smallest  quantity  of  food,  even  in  the
dighter  cases,  perceptibly  and  immediately  increases  the  anxiety,
mart  than  in  any  other  disease.

From  the  fourth  to  the  seventh  day,  if  death  do  not  ensue,
the  skin  rises  up,  or  rather  the  pores  of  the  skin  on  the  reddest
plaoes  become  elevated,  especially  about  the  neck  and  the  arms,  ^
in  small,  dose,  pointed  miliary  vesicles  (somewhat  resembling
goose's  skin),  which  at  first,  as  the  redness  of  the  rest  of  the
skin  declines,  appear  extremely  red,  but  afterwards,  or  when
cold  is  applied,  grow  pale  and  at  length  quite  white ;  they  are
howevOT  empty,  and  contain  no  fluid.

Neither  the  greater  intensity  nor  the  more  general  extension  of
the  redness  of  the  skin,  nor  yet  the  occurrence  of  these  empty
miliaiy  vesicles,  diminish  the  fever  after  the  manner  of  a  critical
eruption ;  the  former  indeed  is  rather  a  sign  of  an  increased
intensity  of  fever  which  can  only  subside  as  this  redness  decreases.

The  bad  form  of  scarlatina  lasts  from  nine  to  fourteen  days,
and  the  disgust  at  food  lasts  about  the  same  time.  As  the  appe-
tite  returns,  the  patient  first  wishes  for  firuit,  then  meat,  he
generally  prefers  pork.

As  the  convalescence  progresses,  there  is,  in  addition  to  the
uncommon  emaciation,  a  stiffness,  causing  the  patient  to  go  half
bent,  that  lasts  several  days,  sometimes  weeks ;  it  is  a  kind  of
eontraetion  of  the  joints,  especially  the  knees,  vrith  a  feeling  of  stiff
mess  m  the  abdomen.

During  the  fever,  blood-red  spots  now  and  then  appeared  on
the  sclerotic ;  in  some  the  cornea  of  one  or  both  eyes  was  com-
pletely obscured ;  others  (probably  badly  treated  patients)  were
rendered  imbecile.

At  length  the  epidermis  gradually  peels  off  on  the  places
where  the  redness  appeared,  and  even  where  there  was  only
burning  itching  without  subsequent  redness ;  on  the  hands  and
feet  it  comes  off  in  large  pieces,  like  pieces  of  a  torn  glove,  but
on  the  other  parts  only  in  larger  or  smaller  scales. In  one  case  ^


874 axms  and  pbevsntiok  of  bcablbt-tbtbr.

the  nails  of  the  fingers  and  toes  also  fell  oS.  The  fiilling  off  of
the  hair  only  commenced  some  weeks  or  months  after  the  fever;
in  one  case  it  went  the  length  of  total  baldness.

Among  the  after-sufferings  the  following  were  prominent:
long-continued  debility,  a  very  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  back,
as  if  it  were  asleep  (narcosis),  pressive  headache,  a  painful  sen-*
sation  of  constriction  in  the  abdomen  only  felt  on  bending  back-
wards, abscesses  in  the  interior  of  the  ear,  ulceration  of  the  lining
membrane  of  the  nose,  ulcerated  angles  of  the  mouth,  other^
spreading  ulcers  in  the  &ce  and  other  parts  of  the  body,  and
generally  a  great  tendency  of  the  whole  skin  to  ulceration
{unhealthy  skin  as  it  is  termed).  In  addition  to  the  above,  a  great
hurriedness  in  speaking  and  acting,  fits  of  sleepiness  by  day,
crying  out  in  sleep,  shuddering  in  the  evening,  puffiness  and
earthy  colour  of  the  countenance,^  swelling  of  the  hands,  feel
and  loins,  &c.

TREATMENT OF  SCARLETFEVEB.

Any  one  who  chooses  may  read  for  himself  in  the  works  of
the  various  authors  the  infinity  of  medicines  and  modes  of  treat-
ment invented  for  this  disease  (from  blood-letting  and  leeches
to  bark,  firora  gargles  and  clysters  to  blisters,  from  antispas-
modic, derivative,  antiseptic  to  refrigerant,  resolvent,  purgative,
involvent,  humectant>,  alexiteric,  incitant,  asthenic,  and  God
knows  what  other  ingenious  modes  of  treatment)  intended  to
meet  the  thousand  imaginary  indications.  Here  we  often  see
the  ne  plus  ultra  of  the  grossest  empiricism :  for  each  single
symptom  a  particular  remedy  in  the  motley,  mixed,  and  repeated
prescriptions ;  a  sight  that  cannot  fail  to  inspire  the  unprejudiced
observer  with  feelings  at  once  of  pity  and  indignation  I

For  my  own  part,  when  summoned  to  cases  of  the  fully  de-
veloped disease  (where  there  was  no  question  of  prevention  oi
suppressing  its  commencement),  I  found  I  had  to  combat  two
different  states  of  body  that  sometimes  rapidly  alternated  with
one  another,  each  of  which  was  composed  of  a  convolute  of
symptoms.

The  first :  the  burning  heat,  the  drowsy  stupe&ction,  the
agonising  tossing  about  with  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and  even  con-
vulsions, was  subdued  in  a  very  short  time  (at  most  an  hour)
by  a  very  small  quantity  of  opium,  either  externally  by  means

'  Neither  Plenciz  nor  I  obRerred  the  jaundice  symptomB  that  were  noticed  in  loine
of  the  epidemics  of  1800.


OinUI  AND  PBEVSNTIOK  OF  SGABJiST-FSYXB.  876

of  a  piece  of  paper  (according  to  the  size  of  the  child,  fix)m  a
half  to  a  whole  inch  in  length  and  breath)  moistened  with  strong
tincture  of  opium,  laid  upon  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  left
there  until  it  dries;'  or  if  there  is  no  vomiting,  interruiUy^  by
giving  a  small  quantity  of  a  solution  of  opium.

For  external  use  I  employed  a  tincture  formed  by  adding  one
part  of  finely  pulverised  crude  opium  to  twenty  parts  of  weak
alcohol,  letting  it  stand  in  a  cool  place  for  a  week,  and  shaking
it  occasionally  to  promote  the  solution.  For  internal  use,  I
take  a  drop  of  this  tincture  and  mix  it  intimately  with  500  dix^ps
of  diluted  alcohol,  and  one  drop  of  this  mixture  likewise  with
odier  500  drops  of  diluted  alcohol,  shaking  the  whole  welL  Of
this  diluted  tincture  of  opium  (which  contains  in  every  drop
one  five-millionth  part  of  a  grain  of  opium)  one  drop  given  in-
ternally was  amply  sufficient  in  the  case  of  a  child  oi  tour  years
ci  age,^  and  two  drops  in  that  of  a  child  of  ten  years,  to  remove
the  above  state.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  these  doses  oftener
than  every  four  or  eight  hours,  in  some  cases  not  more  than
every  twenty-four  hours,  and  that  sometimes  only  a  couple  of
times  throughout  the  whole  fever,  for  which  the  more  firequent
or  more  rare  occurrence  of  these  symptoms  must  be  our  guide.

Where  also,  during  the  further  progress  of  the  disease,  the
same  symptoms  appeared  accompanied  by  constipation  of  the
bowels,  opium  so  applied  externally,  or  given  internally  in  such
doses,^  never  fiuled  to  produce  the  desired  eflFect  The  result,
by  no  means  of  a  transient  character,  appeared  at  most  in  an
hour,  sometimes  witliin  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  just  as  rapid-
ly from  the  external  application  as  &om  the  internal  adminis-
tration.

Larger  doses  than  the  above,  occasion  raving,  hiccough,  unap
peasable  peevishness,  weeping,  &c. — an  array  of  factitious  sym]»
toms  which,  when  they  are  not  severe,  disapj^ear  spontaneous!;.

'  For  infimts  and  other  children  who  will  not  lie  still  kog  enough,  we  should  huli
(he  paper  on  with  the  point  of  the  finger  until  it  is  dry,  (which  requires  about  :i
minute)  and  then  we  should  throw  away  the  paper,  in  case  they  swallow  it.

*  For  younger  children  I  mixed  one  drop  of  this  with  ten  teaspoonfuls  of  watc*
and  gaTe  them,  according  to  their  age,  one,  two,  or  more  spoonfuls.

*  The  smallness  of  the  dose  in  which  the  medidne  that  acts  upon  the  whole  8\  -
tem  of  tlie  liTing  organism,  when  it  is  suitable  to  the  case,  produces  its  desired  efie<  .
is  incredible,  at  least  it  is  incredible  to  my  colleagues,  who  think  it  requisite  to  gi  .-
to  infants  at  the  breast  opium  in  half-grain  doses,  and  who  are  ready  enough  to  s
tribute  the  sudden  death  by  poisoning  that  often  ensues  to  a  multitude  of  otl..  r
causeB.  Tlie  drops  for  internal  use  must  be  intimately  mixed  with  from  one  to  flu
taUespooofiiLi  of  fluid  (water  or  beer)  just  before  they  are


876  CUBS  .AND  TBSVEKTIOK  or  SOASUlfP-WXfmL

in  a  few  hours,  or  may  be  more  speedily  remoyed  by  BmeDing
at  a  solution  of  camphor.

T?ie  second  morbid  condition  that  oocurs  in  the  course  of  this
disease :  the  increase  of  fever  towards  evening,  the  sleepless-
ness,  the  total  loss  of  appetite,  the  nausea,  the  intolerable  laoiy-
mose  peevishness,  the  groaning,  that  is,  the  state  where  opium
does  and  must  do  harm, — this  state  was  removed  in  a  few  qxiar-
ters  of  an  houf  by  ipecacuanha.

For  this  end,  immediately  on  the  occurrence  of  this  state^  or
during  its  persistence,  I  gave,  according  to  the  age  of  the  child,
ipecacuanha,  either  in  substance  in  the  dose  of  a  tenth  to  half  a
grain  in  fine  powder ;  or  I  employed  the  tincture  prepared  by
digesting  in  the  cold  for  some  days  one  part  of  the  powder  with
twenty  parts  of  alcohol,  of  this  one  drop  was  mixed  with  a  hun-
dred drops  of  weak  alcohol,  and  to  the  youngest  children  a
drop  of  this  last  was  given,  but  to  the  oldest  ones  ten  drops
were  given  for  a  dose.

I  found  these  two  remedies  as  indispensable  as  they  were  gen-
erally compUidy  sufficient^  not  only  to  ward  off  the  £Bital  termina-
tion, but  also  to  shorten,  diminish  and  alleviate  the  scarlet-fever.
I  cannot  imagine  a  more  suitable  mode  of  treatment,  so  rapid
and  certain  in  its  results  I  found  it

As  regards  moral  and  physical  accessory  dietetic  means  in  the
treatment  of  a  fully  developed  case  of  scarlet-fever,  I  would  ad-
vise that  we  should  try  to  dispel  all  fear  by  means  of  kind  and
cheering  words,  by  nice  little  presents,  by  holding  out  hopes  of
a  speedy  recovery — and  on  the  other  hand,  we  should  allow  the
patient  a  free  choice  of  all  hinds  of  drinks^  and  warmer  or  cooler
coverings  to  suit  his  feelings.  The^  patient's  own  feelings  are  a
much  surer  guide  than  all  the  maxims  of  the  schools.  We  must
only  take  care  kindly  to  keep  the  patient  from  taking  solid  nu-
triment too  soon,  or  in  too  great  quantity  during  his  convalesence.

PROTECTION  AGAINST  SCARLET-FEVER.

I.  Prcphykucis.

But  even  under  the  most  appropriate  and  certain  medical
treatment  of  developed  scarlatina  of  a  bad  type  there  is  always

^  Even  in  the  very  wont  cases  I  never  employed  either  gaiglea,  or  fomentations,

or  vesicatories,  or  sinapisms,  or  clysters,  or  venesections,  or  leeches. When  the  ur-

.':ent  fehrile  symptoms  in  their  whole  connexion  were  fuUy  met,  the  result  which  is

■'oifdy)  son^t  to  be  obtained  by  each  of  these  appliances  occurred  spootaneonsly.

he  illusory  and  meddling,  pedantic  oput  operatum  should,  in  this  enlighteDed  oen-

ary,  never  conttttate  the  Mef  bunnem  of  tiw  earnest  practitioDer.


CXrW  AND  FRiyENTION  OP  SCABLET-FKVKR.  877

risk  of  death,  of  the  most  miserable  death,  and  the  amount  of
the  countless  sufferings  of  the  patients  is  not  unirequently  so
great  that  a  philanthropist  must  wish  that  a  means  oould  be  dis-
covered by  which  those  in  health  might  be  protected  from  this
murderous  children's  pestilence,  and  be  rendered  secure  from  it,
more  especially  as  the  virus  is  so  extremely  communicable  that
it  inevitably  penetrates  to  the  most  carefully  guarded  children
of  the  great  ones  of  the  earth.  Who  can  deny  that  the  perfect
prevention  of  infection  fix)m  this  devastating  scourge,  and  the  dis-
covery of  a  means  whereby  this  divine  aim  may  be  surely  at-
tained, would  offer  infinite  advantages  over  any  mode  of  treat-
ment, be  it  of  the  most  incomparable  kind  soever?

The  remedy  capable  of  maintaining  the  healthy  uninfeciable  by  the
miasm  ofscarkUina,  I  was  so  fortunate  as  to  discover.  I  found
abo  that  the  same  remedy  given  at  the  period  when  the  symptoms  in-
dicative  of  the  invasion  of  the  disease  occurs^  stifles  the  fever  in  its
very  birth;  and,  moreover,  is  more  efficacious  than  other  known
medicaments  in  removing  the  greater  part  of  the  after-sufferings
following  scarlatina  that  has  run  its  natural  course,  which  are
often  worse  than  the  disease  itself.

I  shall  now  relate  the  mode  in  which  I  made  the  discovery  of
this  specific  preservative  remedy.

The  mother  of  a  large  family,  at  the  commencement  of  July,
1799,  when  the  scarlet-fever  was  most  prevalent  and  fatal,  had
got  a  new  counterpane  made  up  by  a  semptress,  who  (without
the  knowledge  of  the  former)  had  in  her  small  chamber  a  boy
just  recovering  of  scarlet-fever.  The  first  mentioned  woman  on
receiving  it,  examined  it  and  smelt  it  in  order  to  ascertain
whether  it  might  not  have  a  bad  smell  that  would  render  it
necessary  to  hang  it  in  the  open  air,  but  as  she  could  detect
nothing  of  the  sort,  she  laid  it  beside  her  on  the  pillow  of  the
sofe,  on  which  some  hours  later  she  lay  down  for  her  afternoon's
nap. — She  had  unconsciously,  in  this  way  only  (for  the  family
had  no  other  near  or  remote  connexion  with  scarlatina  patients),
imbibed  this  miasm. — A  week  subsequently  she  suddenly  fell
ill  of  a  bad  quinsy,  with  the  characteristic  shooting  pains  in
the  throat,  which  could  only  be  subdued  after  four  days  of
threatening  symptoms.

Several  days  thereafter,  her  daughter,  ten  years  of  age,  in-
fected most  probably  by  the  morbific  exhalations  of  the  mother
or  by  the  emanations  from  the  counterpane,  was  attacked  in  tiie
evening  by  severe  pressive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  biting  itch-


.  378  CUBX  AND  FBEYENTIOX  OF  SGABIiET-I^ByjOU

ing  on  the  body  and  head,  and  rigour  over  the  head  and  arms,
and  with  paralytic  stiffness  of  the  joints.  She  slept  very  rest-
lessly daring  the  night,  with  frightful  dreams  and  perspiration
all  over  the  body,  excepting  the  head.  I  found  her  in  the  morn-
ing with  pressive  headache,  dimness  of  vision,  slimy  tongue,
some  ptyalism,  the  submaxillary  glands  hard,  swollen,  painful  to
the  touch,  shooting  pains  in  the  throat  on  swallowing  and  at
other  times.  She  had  not  the  slightest  thirst,  her  pulse  was
quick  and  small,  breathing  hurried  and  anxious;  though  she
was  very  pale,  she  felt  hot  to  the  touch,  yet  complained  of  hor-
ripilation over  the  fitce  and  hairy  scalp ;  she  sat  leaning  some-
what forwards  in  order  to  avoid  the  shooting  in  the  abdomen
which  she  felt  most  acutely  when  stretching  or  bending  back  the
body ;  she  complained  of  a  paralytic  stiflSiess  of  the  limbs  with
an  air  of  the  most  dejected  pusillanimity,  and  shunned  all  con-
versation; "  she  felt,"  she  said,  "  as  if  she  could  only  speak  in  a
whisper."  Her  look  was  dull  and  yet  staring,  the  eyelids  inor-
dinately wide  open,  the  face  pale,  features  sunk.

Now  I  knew  only  too  well  that  the  ordinary  fevourite  reme-
dies,  as  in  many  other  cases,  so  also  in  scarlatina,  in  the  most  £ei-
vourable  cases  leave  everything  unchanged,  and  therefore  I  re-
solved in  this  case  of  scarlet-fever  just  in  the  act  of  breaking  out,
not  to  act  as  usual  in  reference  to  individual  symptoms,  but  if
possible  (in  accordance  with  my  new  synthetical  principle)  to
obtain  a  remedy  whose  peculiar  mode  of  action  was  calculated
to  produce  in  the  healthy  body  most  of  the  morbid  symptoms
which  I  observed  combined  in  this  disease.  My  memory  and  my
written  collection  of  the  peculiar  effects  of  some  medicines,  fur-
nished me  with  no  remedy  so  capable  of  producing  a  counter-
part of  the  symptoms  here  present,  as  belladonna.

It  alone  could  fulfil  most  of  the  indications  of  this  disease,
seeing  that  in  its  primary  action  it  has,  according  to  my  obser-
vations, a  tendency  to  excite  even  in  healthy  persons  great  de
jected  pusillanimity,  dull  staring  (stupid)  look,  with  inordinately
opened  eyelids,  obscuration  of  vision,  coldness  and  paleness  of
the  face,  want  of  thirst,  excessively  small,  rapid  pulse,  paralytic
immobility  of  the  limbs,  obstructed  swallowing,  with  shooting
pains  in  the  parotid  gland,  pressive  headache,  constrictive  pains
in  the  abdomen,  which  become  intolerable  in  any  other  posture
of  the  body  besides  bending  forwards,  rigour  and  heat  of  certain
parts  to  the  exclusion  of  others,  e.  ^.,  of  the  head  alone,  of  the
arms  alone,  &c. I^  thought  I,  this  was  a  case  of  approaching


CUB!  Ain>  PBSYBNTION  OF  SCABLST-rSVSB.  379

scarlet-fever,  as  I  considered  was  most  probable,  the  subsequent
effects  peculiar^  to  this  plant — ^its  power  to  produce  synochus^
with  erysipelatous  spots  on  the  skin,  sopor,  swollen,  hot  face,
&C. — could  not  feil  to^be  extremely  appropriate  to  the  symptoms
of  fully  developed  scarlatina.

I  therefore  gave  this  girl  of  ten  years  of  age,  who  was  already
affected  by  the  first  symptoms  of  scarlet-fever,  a  dose  of  this

medicine,  (*\4RA»th  part  of  a  grain  of  the  extract,  which,  ac-
cording to  my  subsequent  experience,  is  rather  too  large  a
dose.)^  She  remained  quietly  seated  all  day,  without  lying  down ;
the  heat  of  her  body  became  but  little  observable ;  she  drank
but  little ;  none  of  her  other  symptoms  increased  that  day  and
no  new  ones  occurred.  She  slept  pretty  quietly  during  the  night,
and  the  following  morning,  twenty  hours  after  taking  the  medi-
dnei  most  of  the  symptoms  had  disappeared  without  any  crisis,
the  sore  throat  alone  persisted,  but  with  diminished  severity,  un-
til evening,  when  it  too  went  off.  The  following  day  she  was
hvely,  ate  and  played  again,  and  complained  of  nothing.  I  now
gave  her  another  dose,  and  she  remained  well,  perfectly  well —
whilst  two  other  children  of  the  family  fell  ill  of  bad  scarlet-fe-
ver without  my  knowledge,  whom  I  could  only  treat  according
to  my  general  plan  detailed  above ;  I  gave  my  convalescent  a
smaller  dose  of  belladonna  every  three  or  four  days,  and  she  re-
mained in  perfect  health.

I  now  earnestly  desired  to  be  able  if  possible  to  preserve  the
other  five  children  of  the  family  perfectly  free  from  infection.
Their  removal  was  impossible  and  would  have  been  too  late.

I  reasoned  thus :  a  remedy  that  is  capable  of  quickly  checking
a  disease  in  its  onset,  must  be  its  best  preventive ;  and  the  fol-
lowing occurrence  strengthened  me  in  the  correctness  of  this
conclusion.  Some  weeks  previously,  three  children  of  another
fkmHj  lay  ill  of  a  very  bad  scarlet-fever ;  the  eldest  daughter
alone,  who,  up  to  that  period,  had  been  taking  belladonna  in-
ternally for  an  external  affection  on  the  joints  of  her  fingers,  to
my  great  astonishment  did  not  catch  the  fever,  although  during
the  prevalence  of  other  epidemics  she  had  always  been  the  first
to  take  them.

'  At  least,  if  given  for  a  preventive  object,  too  large  a  dose  for  a  child  of  this  age,
bat  probably  ezactlj  appropriate  for  the  so  far  advanced  symptoms  of  scarlet-fever,
but  this  I  do  not  know  for  certain.  I  cannot  therefore  advise  an  exact  imitation  of
tint  case,  but  yet  neither  can  I  advise  that  it  should  not  he  copied,  for  the  scarlet-fe-
Tcr  it  a  much  more  serious  evil  than  a  few  troublesome  symptoms  produced  by  a
■omewfaat  too  laige  dose  of  beUadonna.


380  OUBX  AND  PBBVENTION  OF  SGARUnSFXTUt

This  circumstance  completelj  confirmed  my  idea.  I  now  hed-
tAted  not  to  administer  to  the  other  five  children  of  this  nume-
rous femily  this  divine  remedy,  as  a  preservative,  in  veiy  small
doses,  and,  as  the  peculiar  action  of  this  plant  does  not  last
above  three  days,  I  repeated  the  dose  every  72  hours,  and  they
all  remained  perfectly  well  without  the  slightest  symptoms
throughout  the  whole  course  of  the  epidemic,  and  amid  the  most
virulent  scarlatina  emanations  from  their  sisters  who  lay  ill  with
the  disease.

In  the  mean  time  I  was  called  in  to  attend  in  another  feonilyi
where  the  eldest  son  was  ill  of  scarlet-fever.  I  found  him  in  the
height  of  the  fever,  and  with  the  eruption  on  the  chest  and
arms.  He  was  seriously  ill,  and  the  time  was  consequently  past
to  give  him  the  specific  prophylactic  remedy.  But  I  wished  to
keep  the  other  three  children  £ree  from  this  malignant  disease;
one  of  them  was  nine  months,  another  two  years,  and  the  third  four
years  of  age.  The  parents  did  what  I  ordered,  gave  each  of  the
children  the  requisite  quantity  of  belladonna  every  three  dayS|
and  had  the  happiness  to  preserve  these  three  children  fk^e
from  the  pestilential  disease,  free  fr^m  all  its  symptoms,  although
they  had  unrestricted  intercourse  with  their  sick  brother.

And  a  nimiber  of  other  opportunities  presented  themselves  to
me  where  this  specific  preventive  remedy  never  &iled.

In  order  to  prepare  this  remedy  for  preventing  the  infection
of  scarlet-fever,  we  take  a  handful  of  the  fresh  leaves  of  the
unld^  belladonna  {airopa  belladonna^  Linn.)  at  the  season  when
the  flowers  are  not  yet  blown ;  these  we  bruise  in  a  mortar  to  a
pap,  and  press  the  juice  through  linen,  and  immediately  (with-
out any  previous  purification)  spread  it  out  scarcely  as  thick  as
the  back  of  a  knife,  on  flat  porcelain  plates,  and  expose  it  to  a
draught  of  dry  air,  where  it  will  be  evaporated  in  the  course  of
a  few  hours.  We  stir  it  about  and  spread  it  again  with  the
spatula,  so  that  it  may  harden  in  a  uniform  manner  until  it  be-
comes so  dry  that  it  may  be  pulverized.  The  powder  is  to  be
kept  in  a  well  stopped  and  warmed  bottle.

K  we  now  wish  to  prepare  from  this  the  prophylactic  remedy,
we  dissolve  a  grain  of  this  powder  (prepared  from  well  preserved
belladonna  extract  evaporated  at  an  ordinary  temperature)  in

*  For  my  experimento  I  haye  only  employed  the  wild  belladoima  gathered  in  its
natural  habitat,  but  I  doubi  not  that  the  cultiyated  sort  will  display  the  same  powen^
f  it  be  grown  in  a  situation  yery  analogous  as  to  soiland  positioa  to  the  natural ooe^
yide  HahnemanrCt  Apotheker  Lexiean. Art  BeUadonna-tehlaf-beeryi.


CUBB  AHD  FBSYSNTIOK  OF  SCABLBT-FSYBB. 881

one  hundred  drops  of  oommon  distilled  water,  by  rubbing  it  up
in  a  small  mortar ;  we  pour  the  thick  solution  into  a  one-ounce
bottle,  and  rinse  the  mortar  and  the  pestle  with  three  hundred
drops  of  diluted  alcohol  (five  parts  of  water  to  one  of  spirit),  and
we  then  add  this  to  the  solution,  and  render  the  union  perfect,
by  diligently  shaking  the  liquid.  We  label  the  bottle  strong
tohxtiion  of  belladonna.  One  drop  of  this  is  intimately  mixed
with  three  hundred  drops  of  diluted  alcohol  by  shaking  it  for  a
minute,  and  this  is  marked  medium  solution  of  belladonna.  Of
this  second  mixture  one  drop  is  mixed  with  two  hundred  drops
of  the  diluted  alcohol,  by  shaking  for  a  minute,  and  marked
toeak  soluticn  of  belladonna;  and  this  is  our  prophylactic  remedy
fir  scarlet-fever,  each  drop  of  which  contains  Ihe  twenty-four
millionth  part  of  a  grain  of  the  dry  belladonna  juice.

Of  this  weak  solution  of  belladonna  we  give  to  those  not
iffiscted  with  dcarlet-fever,  with  the  intention  to  make  themunin-
faiabk  by  the  disease^ — to  a  child  one  year  old,  two  drops  (to  a
younger  child  one  drop),  to  one  two  years  old,  three — to  one
three  years  old,  four — ^to  a  child  four  years  old  (according  to  the
strength  of  his  constitution),  from  five  to  six, — ^to  a  five  years
dd  child,  from  six  to  seven, — to  a  six  years  old  child,  from  seven
to  eight, — to  a  seven  years  old  child,  from  nine  to  ten, — ^to  an
eight  years  old  child,  from  eleven  to  thirteen, — to  a  nine  years
old  child,  from  fourteen  to  sixteen  drops ;  and  with  each  suc-
cessive year  up  to  the  twentieth,  two  drops  more  (from  the
twentieth  to  the  thirtieth,  not  above  forty  drops) — a  dose  every
Beventy-two  hours  (well  stirred  for  a  minute  with  a  teaspoon  in
any  kind  of  drink)  as  long  as  the  epidemic  lasts,  and  four  (to
five)  weeks  thereafter.*

Should  the  epidemic  be  very  violent,  it  would  be  safer,  if  the
children  could  bear  it,  to  let  the  second  dose  be  taken  twenty-
fijUT  hours  after  the  first,  the  third  dose  thirty-six  hours  afl«r
the  second,  the  fourth  forty-eight  hours  after  the  third,  and
thereafter  to  let  the  subsequent  doses  be  taken  every  seventy-
two  hours  until  the  end,  in  order  that  the  system  may  not  at
first  be  taken  by  surprise  by  the  miasm.

This  course  of  m^cine  does  not  disturb  the  health  of  the
children.  They  may  and  indeed  ought  to  follow  the  mode  of
life  c^  healthy  individuals,  and  keep  to  their  usual  drinks,  food,


*  It  Metnt  to  me  tom«what  pcobaUe  that  a  mnilar  employmeot  of  **<>Wfiiiimna
would  alio  preaenre  firam  fiitfM^


882  CUBE  AND  FBEVENTIOK  OF  SCABLBT-nVlB.

iEmd  ordinary  recreation  and  exercise  in  the  open  air^  but  they
must  take  care  to  avoid  excess  in  any  of  these  things.

The  only  thing  I  must  prohibit  is  the  use  of  too  much  v^eta-
ble  acid,  of  sour  fruits,  of  vinegar,  &c.  The  action  of  belladonna
is  thereby  enormously  increased,  as  my  experience  (contrary
to  the  assertions  of  ancient  writers)  has  taught  me.

In  case  of  the  occurrence  of  such  a  case  of  the  injurious  and
too  violent  action  of  belladonna  (from  this  or  any  other  cause),
we  should  make  use  of  its  peculiar  (according  to  my  observa-
tions specific)  antidote,  opium,  externally  or  internally,  in  doees
similar  to  those  I  have  above  indicated,  for  the  external  or  in*
temal  treatment  of  natural  scarlatina.

There  are,  however,  cases  in  which  we  are  forced  to  give  the
above  doses  of  belladonna  oftener  than  every  seventy-two  hours.
A  delicate  girl,  three  years  of  age,  who  was  successfully  using  the
belladonna  as  a  preservative,  in  the  above  dose,  beside  her  sister
who  had  scarlet-fever,  bruised  her  hand  severely  one  day  with
the  door  of  the  room,  and  thereby  fell  into  a  mental  and  bodily
condition  so  favourable  to  the  reception  of  the  infection,  that,
notwithstanding  that  she  had  taken  the  prophylactic  the  day
before,  she  presented  in  a  few  hours  all  the  signs  of  approach-
ing scarlet-fever ;  but  two  drops  of  the  weak  solution  of  bella-
donna given  immediately  removed  these  symptoms  just  as
quickly,  without  any  ftirther  efiects.  From  that  time  forward
she  took  the  medicine  only  every  three  days  (as  previously),
and  she  remained  quite  free  fix)m  the  scarlet-fever  and  well.

We  would  therefore  do  w«ll  in  the  event  of  such  sudden  ac-
cession of  violent  menial  depressioris,  occasionally,  when  requisite,
to  give  one  or  two  extra  doses.  We  will  also  sometimes  meet
with  children  who  possess  naturally  such  timorous,  tranquil  dis-
positions, that  in  them  the  dose  above  indicated  for  children  of
their  age  will  not  suffice  to  protect  them  firom  scarlet-fever ;  the
physician  may  therefore  be  allowed  to  increase  it  somewhat,  and
to  stir  the  drops  up  with  somewhat  more  fluid,  and  for  a  minute
longer.  I  may  observe,  that  it  is  scarcely  credible  how  much
this  and  every  other  medicine  loses  in  power  (so  as  even  to  be
unserviceable  for  protecting  fix)m  scarlet-fever),  if  we  allow  it  to
be  licked  simply  and  unmixed  with  anything  from  a  spoon,  or
give  it  only  on  sugar,  or,  though  dropping  it  into  a  fluid,  ad-
minister it  without  stirring  it  well  up  with  it.  It  is  only  by
Btirring,  by  brisks  long-continued  stirring,  that  a  liquid  medicine
obtains  the  largest  number  of  points  of  contact  for  the  livinjg


OUBX  AKD  FREYSNTIOX  OF  SCABLET-FEVflB.  888

fibre,  thereby  alone  does  it  become  right  powerful.  But  the
well  stirred  dose  should  cot  be  allowed  to  stand  for  several
hours  before  it  is  administered.  Water,  beer,  milk,  and  all  such
excipient  fluids,  when  allowed  to  stand,  undergo  some  decom-
position, and  thereby  weaken  the  vegetable  medicinal  agent
mixed  with  them,  or  even  destroy  it  completely.

I  would,  moreover,  advise  that  the  medicine  bottle  should  be
locked  up  after  every  time  of  using  it.  I  once  saw  a  little  girl
of  four  years  old  fill  up  a  medicine  bottle  with  brandy,  whence,
as  she  confessed  to  me,  she  had  previously  drunk  out  all  the
medicine,  which  was  also  made  with  spirit  and  colourless.  She
had  mounted  on  the  table,  had  taken  the  bottle  down  fix)m  a
high  cupboard  in  the  wall,  and  was  about  to  fill  it  up  with
what  she  supposed  to  be  a  similar  fluid,  in  order  that  her  pa-
rents might  not  discover  what  she  had  done,  when  I  entered  the
room.

n.  Suppression  of  the  Scarlet-fever  in  its  first  germs.

Although  a  practitioner  will  seldom  be  so  fortunate  as  to  ac-
oomplish  this  extinction  of  the  fever  in  question  in  its  birth  by
means  of  belladonna,  because  it  is  not  usual  to  send  for  him  at
the  very  beginning  when  the  miasm  attempts  its  first  partial
onslaught,  and  when  uneasy  dreams,  paralytic  stiffness  of  the
limbs,  pressive  headache,  rigour  over  one  or  other  limb  and
over  the  head,  constitute  almost  the  only  symptoms  of  the  still
feeble  reaction  of  the  system,  yet  it  is  a  rejd  fact,  and,  according
to  my  by  no  means  small  experience,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  it
is  capable  of  extinguishing  the  approaching  fever  with  all  its
concomitant  symptoms  in  the  course  of  irom  twenty-four  to
forty-eight  hours,  and  of  restoring  the  previous  state  of  health
without  the  slightest  bad  consequences.  To  accomplish  this
object  I  found  it  best  in  this  case  to  administer  the  half  of  the
dose  recommended  above  as  a  preventative  every  three  hours,
until  all  the  symptoms  had  disappeared,  and  then  to  continue
giving  a  full  dose  only  every  seventy-two  hours  in  order  to  pro-
tect the  patient  from  all  further  infection.

I  have,  indeed,  even  in  cases  where  there  was  already  shoot-
ing pain  and  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  and  increased  heat
<tf  skin,^  that  is,  when  a  more  considerable  degree  of  natural  re-
action against  the  miasm  was  present,  always  succeeded  in
attaining  my  object  by  similar  doses  given  at  similar  intervals


*  But  without  increased  radneai.


S84 CUBE  AND  PREVENTION  OF  SCAELST-JEYKB.

of  time,  but  I  cannot  recommend  this  practice  to  any  practioner
who  is  not  a  most  accurate  observer,  because  should  he  chance
to  overlook  symptoms  of  a  more  advanced  stage  that  may  be
present,  it  mu^t  always  remain  a  doubtful  matter,  whether,  in
such  a  case,  by  the  addition  of  a  new  and  powerful  agent,  the
advanced  disease  would  be  suppressed  and  extinguished,  or  a
tumultuous  commotion  be  excited  in  the  diseased  system  with*
out  any  good  result.

But  least  of  all  is  it  probable  that  our  object  would  be  attained
by  giving  belladonna,  and  it  is  certainly  not  advisable  to  attempt  tuf,
if  there  are  present  greater  heat,  redness  of  face,  great  thirsty
inability  to  leave  the  bed,  vomiting  and  cinnabar-coloured  erup-
tion, in  other  words,  fully  developed  scarlatina.  It  does  not
seem  suited  for  administration  in  the  height  of  the  fever,  just  as
Peruvian  bark  cannot  be  given  in  the  middle  of  the  hot  stage  of
a  paroxysm  of  intermittent  fever  with  advantage  or  without
producing  a  bad  effect  on  the  system.

AFTER-S  UFFERINGS.

On  the  other  hand,  belladonna  displays  a  valuable  and  spe-
cific power  in  removing  the  after-sufferings  remaining  from
scarlet-fever — an  object  that  our  forefathers,  as  we  know,  vainly
strove  to  attain.  Most  medical  men  have  hitherto  regarded  the  con-
sequences  of  scarlatina  as  at  least  as  dangerous  as  tlie  fever  itself^
and  there  have  been  many  epidemics^  where  more  died  of  the  afbcr-
affections  than  of  the  fever.

The  puffiness  of  the  face,  the  swelling  of  the  hands  and  feet,
&c.,  the  cachexy,  the  slow  evening  fever  with  shuddering,  the
stifl&iess  of  the  limbs,  the  sense  of  constriction  of  the  abdomen
on  holding  the  body  erect,  the  formication  and  sleeping  {narcosis)
in  the  spine,  the  inflammation  of  the  glands,  the  suppuration
inside  the  •ars,  the  ulcers  on  the  face,  on  the  lining  membrane
of  the  nose,  at  the  angles  of  the  mouth,  &c.,  the  extraordinary
debility  of  the  whole  body,  the  sleepy,  dull  disposition,  alterna-
ting with  excessive  hurry  in  talking  and  acting,  the  calling  out
in  sleep,  the  pressive  headaches,  &c.,  will  be  specifically  and
rapidly  removed  by  the  same  doses  of  this  remedy  as  suffice  (v.
supra)  for  prophylactic  purposes,  or  accordingly  as  the  practi-
tioner judges  expedient  by  smaller  or  larger  doses  of  it  Some*
times  all  that  is  required  is  to  give  the  doses  somewhat  more
frequently.

It  is  only  in  some  particular  cases,  where  the  original  disease
was  very  violent,  and  advice  has  been  sought  for  the  after-


OBT  sn  rowxB  of  shall  doses  oe  mmcDSHL f886

mfferings  too  late,  that  I  have  witnessed  what  is  termed  the
uahealthj  ddii,  that  is,  the  tendency  to  a  solution  of  continuity
in  the  solid  parte,  to  ulceration,  sometimes  to  such  a  degree,  that
belladonna  is  no  longer  of  service.  In  such  and  other  similar
jCBoes  the  most  excellent  remedy  was  the  inspissated  juice  of  the
mabricaria  chamomiUoLy  dried  at  a  natural  temperature  in  the  air
—of  this  a  grain  was  first  of  all  dissolved  in  600  drops  of  water
and  mixed  intimately  with  500  drops  of  alcohol,  and  of  this
solution  one  drop  was  mixed  wiUi  800  drops  of  diluted
jloohol-^f  liiis  last  diluted  solution  one  drop  (Tii9<nr^h  of  a
grain  of  the  inspissated  juice)  was  given  every  day  to  a  child  of
a  &w  years  old,  two  drops  to  one  of  ten  years  of  age,  and  so
Ibrfii ;  the  medicine  being  well  mixed  with  any  liquid,  and  in  a
few  days  all  tendency  to  ulceration  of  the  skin  was  removed,
the  60-called  xmhealthy  skin  was  cured — a  disease  in  every  case
much  dreaded  by  every  medical  man  who  does  not  know  of  this
excellent  but  very  heroic  remedy.

The  sufEbcating  cough  lihat  sometimes  follows  the  disease  is
also  removed  by  chamomilla,  especially  if  there  is  at  the  same
time  a  tendency  to  flushing  of  the  face,  accompanied  by  horipi-
lation  over  the  limbs  or  back.


ON  THE

POTfER  OF  SMALL  DOSES  OF  MEDICINE  IN  GENERAL,

AND

OF  BELLADONNA  IN  PARTICITLAR.*


Ton  ask  me  urgently,  what  effect  can  ^  |ioo.ooo^  part  of  a  grain  of
Idladonna  have  ?  The  word  can  is  repugnant  to  me,  and  apt  to
lead  to  misconceptions.  Our  compendiuias  have  already  de-
cided what  medicines  and  certain  doses  of  them  can  do,  and
have  told  us  exactly  what  we  are  to  use ;  they  have  determined
these  matters  so  decidedly  that  we  might  consider  them  to  be
symbolic  books,  if  medical  dogmas  were  to  be  believed  as  articles
of  fidth.  But,  thank  God,  they  are  not  yet ;  it  is  well  known
that  our  materia  medicas  owe  their  origin  to  anything  but  pure
experience,  that  they  are  often  the  inanities  of  our  great-grand-
&11iers,  uninquiringly  repeated  by  their  great-grandsons.  Let
not^  then,  interrogate  the  compendiums,  let  us  ask  nature :

'  From  ffufeland'i  JawmaL YoL  yI  Ft.  2. 1801.
25


886  OK  THX  FOWEB  OF  SHALL  DOSES  OF  ICXDIODrB.

iffhat  effect  has  ^\ioo/KiotA  of  a  grain  of  leUadannat  But  even  in
this  shape  the  question  is  too  wide,  and  it  can  only  become  moie
definite  and  answerable  bj  stating  the  vbiy  yuomodOj  guando^
qmbus  auxiliis,

A  very  hard  dry  pill  of  extract  of  belladonna  produces  in  a
robust,  perfectly  healthy  countryman  or  labourer  usually  no  ^ect
But  from  this  it  by  no  means  follows  thatagrain  of  this  extract
would  be  a  proper,  or  too  weak  a  dose  for  this  or  a  similar  stout
man  if  he  was  ill,  or  if  the  grain  were  given  in  soliUion^ — certainly
not  I  On  this  point  let  tiie  pseudo-empiricism  of  Uie  oompeu-
diums  hold  its  tongue ;  let  us  hear  what  experience  says.  The
most  healthy  robust  thresher  will  be  affected  with  the  most
violent  and  dangerous  symptoms  from  one  grain  of  extract  of
belladonna,  if  this  grain  be  dissolved  thoroughly  in  mudi  (e.  g.
two  pounds  of)  water  by  rubbing,  the  mixture  (a  little  alcohol
being  added,  for  all  vegetable  solutions  are  rapidly  decomposed^)
made  very  intimate  by  shaking  the  fluid  in  a  bottle  for  five
minutes,  and  if  he  be  made  to  take  it  by  spoonfrds  within  six  or
eight  hours.  These  two  pounds  will  contain  about  10,000  drops.
Now  if  one  of  these  drops  be  mixed  with  other  2000  drops  (six
oz.)  of  water  (mixed  with  a  little  alcohol),  by  being  vigorously
shaken,  one  tea-spoonfdl  (about  twenty  drops)  of  this  mixture
given  every  two  hours,  will  produce  not  much  less  violent
symptoms  in  a  strong  man,  if  he  is  iU,  Such  a  dose  contains
about  the  millionth  part  of  a  grain.  A  few  tea-spoonsful  of
this  mixture,  will,  I  assert,  bring  him  to  the  brink  of  the  grave,
if  he  was  previously  regularly  ill,  and  if  his  disease  was  of  such
a  description  as  belladonna  is  suitable  for.

The  hard  grain-pill  finds  few  points  of  contact  in  the  healthy
body ;  it  slides  almost  completely  imdissolved  over  the  sur&ce
of  the  intestinal  canal  invested  with  a  layer  of  mucus,  until  it
(in  this  manner  itself  covered  with  mucus),  completely  buried  in
excrement,  is  speedily  expelled  in  the  natural  manner.

Very  different  is  it  with  a  solution,  and  particularly  with  a
thorough  solution. Let  this  be  as  weak  as  it  may,  in  its  passage

*  Plain  water  eyen  is  liable  to  constant  fermentation,  especially  when  yegvCable
substances  are  mingled  with  it,  and  these  loee  their  medicinal  power  in  a  few  boon.
Without  the  addition  of  a  little  spirit  we  cannot  preserve  them  half  a  day  m  tlitir
integrity.  Exposed  vegetable  juices  go  on  to  fermentation  a  minute  after  their  «z-
posure.  We  might  drink  a  large  quantity  of  hemlock  juice  without  injury  if  it  baa
stood  for  twenty-four  hours  in  a  moderate  temperature ;  it  then  is  changed  into  a
kind  of  vinegar.  To  some  vegetable  juices  I  have  had  to  add  one-third,  to  othera  aa
much  as  equal  parts  ot  spirits  of  wine,  in  order  to  prevent  their  fermeotatioik


OK  THE  FOWSB  07  SHALL  DOSES  OF  HEDIOimS.  887

through  the  stomach  it  comes  in  contact  with  many  more  points
of  the  living  fibre,  and  as  the  medicine  does  not  act  atomically
bat  only  dynamically,  it  excites  much  more  severe  symptoms
than  the  compact  pill,  containing  a  million  times  more  medicine
(that  rests  inactive),  is  capable  of  doing.

But  how  is  it,  I  am  asked,  that  excepting  yourself  no  other
pbymdan  has  ever  observed  that  remarkable  action  from  bella-
donna (and  other  medicines)  in  so  small  a  dose?  The  answer  is
not  difficult  In  the  first  place,  because  many  may  only  have
experimented  with  watery  solutions,  whose  medicinal  power,  as
above  stated,  is  gone  in  a  few  hours,  destroyed  by  the  internal
fisnnentation  of  the  water;  secondly,  because  many  physicians,
ignorant  of  the  purely  dynamical  action  of  medicines,  are  pre-
vented firom  instituting  any  experiments  of  this  nature  by  Uieir
invincible  prejudiced  incredulity ;  thirdly,  because  no  physician
designs  to  observe'  and  to  study  the  positive  and  absolute  efiects
of  medicines,  most  of  them  being  content  to  learn  by  rote  the
traditions  in  the  works  on  materia  medica,  in  other  words,  the
general,  often  imaginary,  use  of  the  medicines — ^^  belladonna  is
fif  tue  (and  is  of  no  use)  in  hydrophobia  " — "  is  of  use  (and  is  of
no  use)  in  cancer  of  the  yacc,"  &c.  "  We  don't  need  to  know  any
thing  more."  What  organs  it  deranges  functionally,  what  it
modifies  in  other  ways,  what  nerves  it  principally  benumbs  or
excites,  what  alterations  it  efiects  in  the  circulation  and  digestive
operations,  how  it  affects  the  mind,  how  the  disposition,  what
influence  it  exerts  over  some  secretions,  what  modification  the
muscular  fibre  receives  firom  it,  how  long  its  action  lasts,  and  by
what  means  it  is  rendered  powerless ;  all  this  the  ordinary  phy-
sician wishes  not  to  know,  and  therefore — he  does  not  know  it.
Such  being  his  ignorance,  he  often  regards  the  peculiar  efiects
of  small  doses  of  belladonna  as  natural  morbid  changes,  and
thus  he  will  never  know  what  small  doses,  not  to  speak  of  the
very  smallest  doses,  of  belladonna  do,  since  he  does  not  know
what  effects  belladonna  produces,  nor  does  he  desire  to  know
them.

To  the  ordinary  practitioner  it  is  incredible  that  a  given  per-
son, when  sick,  needs  only  to  take  a  millionth  part  of  the  same
drug  that  he  swallowed  when  well  without  it  having  any  par-
ticular effect,  in  order  to  be  violently  acted  on ;  and  yet  this  is
undeniably  the  case.  It  is  a  fact,  that  in  disease  the  preservative
power,  together  with  all  the  subordinate,  nameless  forces  (some
ii  them  almost  resemble  the  instinct  of  animals),  is  much  moi«


88S OK  THE  POWEB  OF  SMALL  DOSKS  07  JCXDIdmL

excitable  than  in  health,  when  the  reason  and  the  ^wep  of  the
animal  machine  being  in  their  complete  integrity  stand  in  no
need  of  such  anxious  guardians.  How  well  the  patient  distin-
jguishes  betwixt  drinks  that  will  do  him  good,  and  such  as  would
be  prejudicial  to  him  I  An  individual  affected  with  an  acute
fever,  smells  from  afar  the  approach  of  an  animal  soup,  to  which
his  now  wakeful,  still  unknown  life-preserving  &culty  evinces
the  greatest  repugnance.  He  would  vomit  violently  were  we
to  bring  it  too  near  him.

If  lemon-juice  is  good  for  him — see  I  at  the  very  mention  of
ity  his  countenance  expresses  pleasure  and  desire,  and  yet  when
he  was  well  how  indifferent  were  they  both  to  him !

In  a  word,  all  the  powers,  whose  very  names  we  are  ignorant
0^  which  have  reference  to  the  preservation  of  life  and  the
avoidance  of  destruction,  are  infinitely  more  excited  in  disease.
What  an  enormous  quantity  of  freshly  made  soup  it  would  take
to  excite  a  healthy  stomach  to  violent  vomiting  I  But  look,  the
patient  ill  of  an  acute  fever  does  not  require  a  drop  for  this
purpose ;  the  mere  smell  of  it,  perhaps  the  millionth  part  of  a
drop,  coming  in  contact  with  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  noee,
suffices  to  produce  this  result.

Will  medical  men  ever  learn,  how  smaU,  how  infinitely  small,
the  doses  of  medicines  may  be  in  order  to  affect  the  system
powerfully  when  it  is  in  a  morbid  state  ?  Yes,  they  affect  it
powerfully  when  they  are  chosen  improperly  ;  new  violent  symp-
toms are  added,  and  it  is  usual  to  say  (whether  correctly  or  not,
this  is  not  the  place  to  decide),  the  disease  has  undergone  an
aggravation.  They  affect  it  equally  powerfully  when  they  are
suitably  selected ;  the  most  serious  disease  often  yields  in  a  few
hours.  The  nearer  the  disease  approaches  the  acute  character,
the  smaller  are  the  doses  of  medicines  )  I  mean  of  the  best  se-
lected one)  it  requires  in  order  to  disappear.  Chronic  diseases
also  combined  with  debility  and  general  derangement  of  the
health,  do  not  require  larger  ones.  It  is  only  in  cases  where
'along  with  alocal  affection,  the  general  health  seems  to  be  good  that
we  mu3t  proceed  from  the  at  first  small  doses  to  larger  ones,
to  the  very  largest  however  in  those  cases  where  the  medicine
only  can  act  in  a  palliative  manner.

Those  who  are  satisfied  with  these  general  hints,  will  believe
me  when  I  assert,  that  I  have  removed  various  paralytic  affections
by  employing  for  some  weeks  a  quantity  of  diluted  solution  of
belladonna,  where  for  the  whole  treatment  not  quite  a  hundred-


Oir  A  PROPOSED  BXHEDf  FOB  HYDROPHOBIA.  8S9

tfaonfiandtli  part  of  a  grain  of  the  extract  of  belladonna  was
required,  and  that  I  have  cured  some  periodical  nervous  diseases,
tendency  to  boils,  &a,  by  not  quite  a  millionth  of  a  grain,  for
the  whole  treatment

If  the  appropriate  medicine  in  solution  is  efficacious  in  such  a'
small  dose,  as  it  assuredly  is — ^how  highly  important  on  the  other
hand  is  it,  that  in  the  event  of  the  remedy  being  improperly
sdected,  such  a  small  dose  can  seldom  excite  such  serious  symp-
toms (ordinarily  termed  aggravations  of  the  disease)  as  that  they"
shall  not  soon  disappear  spontaneously,  or  be  readily  removed*
by  some  trifling  antidote.


THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY THE RECOMMENDATION
OF A  REMEDY  FOR  THE  EFFECTS  OF  THE

BITE  OF  MAD  DOGS.*


Sdtce  the  most  remote  times  a  number  of  remedies  have  been
recommended  as  preventives  of  this  horrible  disease,  accompa-
nied by  numerous  certificates  to  attest  their  efficacy  for  several
geaerationa  The  arcanum  generously  purchased  some  years  ago
by  the  Prussian  government,  which  received  the  sanction  of  a
medical  commission  and  was  at  last  authoritively  disclosed — I
mean  the  worthless  electuary  of  the  7neh'e  majaUs  may  serve  as
a  specimen  of  all  the  rest.

All  were  at  length  found  to  be  valueless,  one  was  worth  just
as  much  as  another,  that  is  to  say,  worth  nothing  I  What  a
fearful  condition  to  find  one's  self  at  a  moment  of  such  imminent
danger  to  life,  left  in  the  lurch  by  a  remedy  publicly  and  uni-
versally vaunted  as  infallible !  The  drowning  man  clutches  at
the  rope  thrown  to  him — the  only  one  at  hand — ^it  breaks,  and
see,  he  sinks  to  rise  no  more  I

But  how  is  it  that  men  have  been  so  universally,  so  completely
deceived  in  all  these  nostrums  for  rabies  ?

Had  the  real  cause  of  the  deception  in  all  these  cases  been
known,  the  ir^i^^f  ^svi»i — assuredly  not  the  slightest  attention
would  have  been  paid  even  at  their  first  announcement  to  any
of  these  nostrums,  which  have  now  been  proved  to  be  powerless
— ^we  should,  on  the  other  hand,  have  long  since  discovered  a
true  remedy  for  the  disease.


From  the  B^eha-Anxeiger. Na  71,  1808.


890 ON  A  PB0P08SD  BBKEDT  FOB  HTBEOPHOBIA.

The  source  of  the  delusion  that  contributed  to  the  celebiit]r
of  all  the  nostrums  hitherto  advised,,  was  the  circumstance  that
is  was  deemed  sufficient  to  bring  forward  proo&  thai  the  remedy
in  question  preserved  from  hydrophobia  so  many  persons  who  had
been  bitten  by  supposed  mad  dogs.

But  of  ten  dogs  that  have  bitten  persons  and  animals,  and
which,  from  dread  of  injury,  people  are  more  disposed  to  consider
mad  than  not,  frequently  not  two  are  really  rabid.  But  it  is
yery  rare  that  any  one  takes  the  trouble  to  obtain  a  regular
verification  of  the  fact  of  their  being  really  rabid,  they  are  pur-
sued,  slaughtered,  and  all  the  ten  are  held  to  be  mad.  Whether
the  dog  really  had  the  disease,  remains  in  most  instances  unde-
cided and  improbable.

Now  out  of  a  hundred  persons  bitten,  who  can  prove  that  a
single  one  among  them  was  wounded  by  a  really  rabid  dog  ?

And  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  well  known  that  of  persons  bitten^
nay,  lacerated  by  dogs  really  mad^  it  is  very  far  from  the  case  thai
all  will  be  affected  by  hydrophobia.  Instances  are  known  of  twenty
persons  haying  been  bitten  by  a  rabid  dog,  of  whom  only  (me
or  two  were  seized  with  the  disease,  whilst  the  eighteen  or  nine-
teen used  no  medical  or  surgical  preventive  and  yet  retained
their  health,  (^ad  the  nostrum  been  given  to  these  latter
eighteen  or  nineteen,  many  would  have  sworn  that  the  remedy
had  destroyed  the  virus  and  preserved  them  from  the  disease.)

Both  these  circimistances — the  frequency  with  which  dogs  are
considered  and  killed  as  mad  (i.  e.,  the  rarity  of  really  mad  dogsj
and  the  rarity  of  the  inoculation  of  the  really  rabid  saliva,  have
furnished  the  material  for  the  thousand  empty  testimonials  as
to  the  prophylactic  power  of  those  vaunted  nostrums.  We
should  now,  however,  once  for  all  cease  to  pin  our  faith  on  such
remedies,  for  which  a  mere  (delusive)  prophylaetic  power  is
alleged ;  we  should  once  for  all  cease  to  grasp  at  shadows  in  an
affair  of  such  importance,  and  fraught  with  so  much  danger  to
mankind  I

If  the  vapour  of  nitric  acid,  in  a  state  of  ebullition^  were  not
at  the  same  time  one  of  the  most  trustworthy  remedies  for  the
jail-fever.  Smith  would  have  exerted  himself  in  vain  to  assert  its
prophylactic  power  for  the  contagion  of  this  typhoid  fever.

In  like  manner  there  cannot  be  smy  prophylactic  of  hydropho-
bia, that  does  not  prove  itself  to  be  at  the  same  time  a  really
efficacious  remedy  for  the  fuUy  developed  hydrophobia.

Let  us  begin  at  this  as  our  starting  point. Let  a  remedy  be


Oir  THB  EFFBOrS  OF  COFFXX.  891

dneoyered  that  liias  already  cured  at  least  ten  persons,  really
affeetod  with  hydrophobia,  without  exception  and  permanently ;
IhiB  will,  this  must  be,  likewise  the  best  prophylactic;  but  any
sabstance  that  cannot  stand  this  test,  can  never,  in  the  eyes  of
reason  and  experience,  be  considered  as  a  trustworthy  prophy-
lactic. Let  the  best  extinguisher  of  burning  wooden  buildings
be  discovered  (be  it  vitriol  or  potash)  and  this  will  also  be  the
best  preservative  of  wood  from  fire.

If  the  remedy  of  the  schoolmaster  of  Schoneiche,  announced
by  the  philanthropic  Wiesand  of  Pretzch,  had  only  made  a
commencement  such  as  I  have  indicated,  and  had  only  cured  two
persons  really  affected  with  hydrophobia,  his  secret  would  be
worth,  a  considerable  reward,  and  had  it  cured  a  number  without
ever  fidling,  his  reward  should  be  very  large  and  his  memory
diould  always  be  held  in  honour.  Then  we  should  at  lengUi
possess  a  genuine  remedy  for  one  of  the  most  fearftil  of  diseasea,,
hydrophobia.


ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  COFFEE.

FROM ORIGINAL  OBSERVATIONS.*


-  In  order  to  enjoy  a  healthy  and  long  life,  man  requires  foods
which  contain  nutritious,  but  no  irritating,  medicinal,  parts,  and
drinks  which  are  either  merely  diluent,  or  diluent  and  nutritious
at  the  same  time,  but  which  contain  no  medicinal  and  irritating
component  parts,  such  as  pure  spring  water  and  milk.

In  the  way  of  accessaries  to  stimulate  the  taste,  the  only  sub-
stances that  have  been  found  to  be  harmless  and  suitable  for  the
human  body  are  kitchen  salt,  sugar  and  vinegar,  all  three  in
small,  or  at  all  events,  moderate  quantities.

All  other  accessaries,  which  we  term  spices,  and  all  spirituous
and  fermented  liquors,  bear  a  greater  or  less  resemblance  to
medicines  in  their  nature.  The  nearer  they  resemble  medicines,
the  more  frequently  and  the  more  copiously  they  are  taken  into
our  bodies,  the  more  objectionable  are  they,  the  more  prejudicial
to  health  and  long  life.

Most  objectionable  of  all  is  the  frequent  use  of  purely  medici-
nal substances  of  great  power  as  articles  of  diet.

Among  the  ancients,  wine  was  the  only  purely  medicinal
drink,  but  the  wise  Greeks  and  Komans  at  least  never  drank
it  without  diluting  it  plentifully  with  water.

*  Leipsicl808.


39S'  oix  THB  EFFBORr  OF  comm

Li  modem  times  many  more  purely  medicinal  drinkB  andi

condiments  haVe  been  added  to  our  diet :  snnfiSng  and  smokiiiflr
tobaooo,  chewing  tobacco  and  hemp-leaves,  eating  opium  and

agaric,  drinking  brandy,  several  kinds  of  stimulating  and  medioi*
nal  beers,  tea'  and  coffise.

Medicinal  things  are  substances  that  do  not  nourish,  but  alter
the  healthy  condition  of  the  body;  any  alteration,  however,  ia
the  healthy  state  of  the  body  constitutes  a  kind  of  abnormal,
morbid  condition.^

Coffee  is  a  purely  medicinal  substance.

AUmedidL  have,  in  strong  doses,  a  noxioim  »stion  on  tl>»
sensations  of  the  healthy  individuaL  No  one  ever  smoked  to*
bacco  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  without  disgust ;  no  healthy
person  ever  drank  unsugared  black  coffee  for  the  first  time  m
his  life  with  gusto— a  hint  given  by  nature  to  shun  the  first
occasion  for  transgressing  the  laws  of  health,  and  not  to  trample
so  frivolously  under  our  feet  the  warning  instinct  implanted  in
us  for  the  preservation  of  our  life.

By  continuing  the  use  of  these  medicinal  articles  of  diet
(whereto  fashion  and  example  seduce  us),  habit  gradually  ex-
tinguishes the  noxious  impressions  that  they  at  first  made  upon
us ;  they  even  become  agreeable  to  us,  that  is  to  say,  the  dis-
agreeable impressions  their  ingestion  at  first  produced  do  not
strike  us  so  much  as  we  go  on  using  them,  and  their  apparentlj
agreeable  effects  upon  our  organs  of  sensation  gradually  become
necessary  to  us.  The  ordinary  run  of  mankind  esteems  even
fitctitious  wants  as  happiness,  and  gradually  associates  with
their  satisfaction  the  idea  of  relish.

Perhaps  also,  inasmuch  as  by  their  use  we  become  to  a  oer*
tain  degree  sickly,  our  instinct  tries  from  time  to  time  at  least
to  alleviate  this  indisposition  occasioned  by  the  continued  use
of  these  medicinal  articles  of  diet,  by  means  of  the  palliative  ze^
lief  which  they  are  capable  of  affordiog  to  the  malady  produced
from  time  to  time  by  themselves.

'  Chocolate  belongs  to  the  nutritious  articles,  when  it  is  not  too  highly  ^[liced:
otherwise  it  is  objectionable,  or  even  hurtful

'  In  proportion  as  the  substances  we  call  medicines  can  make  the  healthy  bod^
sick,  so  are  they  calculated  to  remove  the  abnormal  states  dangerous  to  life,  wfakk
go  by  the  name  of  diseases.  The  sole  end  of  medicines  consequently  is,  to  change
the  abnormal,  the  morbid  state,  that  is,  to  transform  it  into  health.  Used  by  them-
selves, and  when  no  disease  is  present,  they  are  absdutely  hurtful  things  for  bealtll
and  normal  life.  Their  frequent  use  as  articles  of  diet  deranges  the  harmonious  ooo-
cordance  of  our  organs,  undermines  health  and  shortens  life.  A  wholesome  mtdknm
for  a  healthy  individual  is  a  contradiction  of  terms.


ON  THK  S7FSCTB  OF  COFFSE.  89K

In  order  to  tmderstand  this  proposition,  we  mnst  take  into
consideration  the  fact  that  all  mec^cines  produce  in  the  hodj
conditions  the  opposite  of  one  another.  Their  commencing  ac'
iim  {primary  action)  is  the  direct  opposite  of  their  secondary
action^  that  is,  of  the  state  they  leave  behind  in  the  body  when
their  primary  action  has  ceased  some  hours.^

Most  medicines  produce,  both  in  their  primary  and  secondary
action,  disturbances  in  the  healthy  body  and  disagreeable  sen-
sations and  pains,  a  certain  set  of  these  in  their  primary  action
and  another  opposite  set  in  their  secondary  action,  and  even
flieir  prolonged  employment  excites  no  agreeable  effects  in  the
healthy  individual.

Only  the  few  medicinal  substances  that  the  refinement  of  a
sensuid  world  has  chosen  to  introduce  among  articles  of  diet,*
ftwrm  in  some  degree,  an  exception  to  this,  at  least  in  their  pri-
mary action.  They  possess  the  peculiar  property,  when  con-
tinued to  be  used  in  moderation,  to  create  in  their  primary  ac- .
tion  a  sort  of  artificial  exaltation  of  the  ordinary  state  of  health,
an  artificial  exaltation  of  the  life  and  almost  only  agreeable  sen-
sations, whilst  the  disagreeable  effects  their  secondary  action
tends  to  develop  remain  for  some  time  of  little  importance,  €t$
hng  as  Ae  individual  is  pretty  iveU  in  heaUhj  and  leads  in  othet
rtipects  a  healthy  and  natural  mode  of  life.

To  this  small  class  of  medicines  introduced  into  our  dietary
belongs  coffee,  with  its  partly  agreeable,  partly  disagreeable
effects,  both  of  which,  strange  though  it  may  appear,  are  but
litUe  known.

Its  irregular,  unrestricted  use  in  ordinary  life,  at  almost  all
times  of  the  day,  its  employment  in  such  various  strength  and
quantity,  its  preparation  under  the  most  dissimilar  conditions,
its  general  use  by  persons  of  the  most  various  ages  and  consti-
totions,  of  the  most  different  health  and  habits  of  life,  deprives
the  observer  of  all  means  of  seeing  its  action  aright,  and  makes
it  excessively  difiicult  to  ascertain  its  true  action,  and  thence  to
draw  pure  inferences.  So  a  disk  may  be  covered  with  the
dearest  characters  and  words,  but  all  will  be  unrecognizable  if
tbe  disk  be  whirled  round  with  great  rapidity ;  in  that  case
everything  runs  together,  even  to  the  eyes  of  the  most  sharp-
sighted.

1  For  iiwtancft,  to-daj  jalap  powder  purges,  aod  to-morrow  and  the  next  daj  tbera
tSkfWM  ooostipatioD.

*  Those  are,  as  before  said,  wine,  spirits,  opium,  tobacco,  tea,  coffee,  Ac.


8M  OK  THE  EFFECTS  OF  COFFEE.

It  is  only  by  accurate,  prolonged,  unprejudiced  ob8ervati0ii,
83  free  as  possible  from  all  source  of  deception^  and  by  carefully
tracing  back  the  phenomena  to  their  cause,  that  we  can  obtaiii
accurate  knowledge  respecting  the  most  important  of  all  beyer-
ages,  coffee.

Its  primary  action  is  in  general  a  more  or  less  agreeable  ex-
altation of  the  vital  activity ;  the  animal,  the  natural,  and  the
vital  functions  (as  they  are  called)  are  artificially  exalted  by  it
during  the  first  hours,  and  the  secondary  action  that  ensues
gradually  after  the  lapse  of  several  hours  is  the  opposite — dis-
agreeable feeling  of  existence,  a  lower  degree  of  vitality,  a  kind
of  paralysis  of  the  animal,  natural  and  vital  functions.^

When  a  person  unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  coffee  drinks  a
moderate  quantity,  or  one  accustomed  to  its  use  drinks  an  im-
moderate' quantity,  for  the  first  hours  the  self-consciousness,  the
feeling  of  his  existence,  of  his  life,  becomes  more  lively.  He
does  not  become  gradually  lost  in  the  surrounding  parts,  but
which  presents  the  appearance  of  a  well-defined  red  spot  The
forehead  ^ud  palms  of  the  hands  become  warm  and  moist  He
feels  warmer  than  before;  he  feels  agreeably,  yet  uneasily
warm.  There  occurs  a  kind  of  voluptuous  palpitation  of  the
heart,  somewhat  resembling  that  occurring  during  great  joy.
The  veins  of  the  hands  swell.  Externally  also  he  is  warmer  to
the  feel  than  natural,  but  this  warmth  never  comes  to  the
length  of  heat,  even  after  a  large  quantity  of  coffee  (it  sooner
turns  into  general  perspiration) ;  none  ever  become  burning
hot.

Presence  of  mind,  attention,  sympathy  b^fcome  more  active
than  in  the  healthy  natural  state.  All  external  objects  appear
to  excite  a  feeling  of  pleasure,  they  take  on,  if  I  may  be  allowed
the  expression,  a  joyous  varnish,  and  if  the  quantity  of  coffee

'  "  When  I  awake  in  the  moming,"*  writes  a  genteel,  consummate  oo£fee-driiildqg
ladj,  "  I  have  the  power  of  thinking,  and  the  activitj  of  an  oyster."

'  The  expressions  moderate  and  immoderate  must  only  be  understood  in  a  relatiTe
and  individual  sense ;  they  cannot  be  defined  by  fixed  magnitude  and  figures  of
nniversal  acceptation.  Thus  a  certain  prince,  H.  C  ▼.  C,  reared  in  luxury,  who  ia
now  dead,  required  for  an  allowance,  every  time  he  drank  coffee,  an  infusion  of  four-
teen ounces  of  the  roasted  bean,  whereas  we  meet  with  persons  who  are  rmj
strongly  affected  by  a  quarter  of  an  ounce.  Each  person  must  fix  his  own  standard
according  to  his  peculiar  corporeal  system.  One  can  bear  more  than  another.  Mon-
over  the  whole  series  of  agreeable  sjrmptoms  of  the  primary  action  of  coffee  I  hsTe
one  at  a  time,  some  in  one,  others  in  another,  in  this  one  more,  in  that  fewer.


ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  UUFFSX.  885

taken  was  very  great,  they  assume  an  almost  over-pleasing  lus-
tre.^ During  the  first  hours  the  coffee  drinker  smiles  contented
with  himself  and  with  all  external  objects,  and  this  property  it
was  that  mainly  tended  to  make  coffee  a  social  beverage.  All
the  agreeable  sensations  communicated  are  speedily  increased  to
enthuaasm  (though  only  for  a  short  time).  All  sorts  of  dis-
agreeable recollections,  or  disagreeable  natural  feelings  cease
during  this  kind  of  blessed  fever.

In  the  healthy  natural  states  of  the  human  being,  left  to
themselves,  disagreeable  sensations  must  alternate  with  agree-
able ones ;  this  is  the  wise  arrangement  of  our  nature.  During
the  primary  action  of  this  medicinal  beverage,  however,  all  is
delight,  and  even  those  corporeal  functions  which  in  the  natural
state  of  health  are  accompanied  by  an  unpleasant  sensation
ahnost  bordering  on  pain,  are  now  performed  with  extreme
ease,  almost  with  a  kind  of  pleasure.

In  the  first  moments  or  quarters  of  an  hour  after  awaking,
particularly  when  this  takes  place  earlier  than  usual,  every  one
who  is  not  living  completely  in  a  state  of  rude  nature,  has  a
disagreeable  feeling  of  not  thoroughly  awakened  consciousness,
of  confusion,  of  laziness,  and  want  of  pliancy  in  the  limbs ;  it  is
difficult  to  move  quickly,  reflection  is  a  labour.

But,  see,  coffee  removes  this  natural  disagreeable  sensation,
this  discomfort  of  the  mind  and  body,  almost  instantaneously ;
we  suddenly  become  completely  alive.

After  completing  our  day's  labour  we  must,  in  the  course  of
nature,  become  lazy ;  a  disagreeable  feeling  of  weight  and  weari-
ness in  our  bodily  and  mental  powers  make  us  ill-humoured
and  cross,  and  compels  us  to  give  ourselves  up  to  the  requisite
rest  and  sleep.

This  crossness  and  laziness,  this  disagreeable  weariness  of
mind  and  body  on  the  approach  of  natural  sleep,  rapidly  disap-
pears on  taking  this  medicinal  beverage,  and  a  dispersion  of
sleepiness,  a  factitious  liveliness,  a  wakefulness  in  defiance  of  na-
ture occurs.

If  the  quantity  of  coffee  taken  be  immoderately  great  and  the  body  very  ezd-
table  and  quite  unused  to  ooffee,  there  occurs  a  semilateral  headache,  from  the
iqpper  part  of  the  parietal  bone  to  the  base  of  the  brain.  The  cerebral  mem-
branes of  this  side  also  seem  to  be  painfully  sensitiTc.  The  hands  and  feet  become
cold;  CD  the  brow  and  palms  cold  sweat  appears.  The  disposition  becomes  irritable,
and  intolenint ;  no  one  can  do  anything  to  please  him.  He  is  anxious  and  trembling
reetlea^  weeps  almost  without  cause,  or  smiles  almost  involuntarily.  After  a  few
boon,  sleep  comes  on,  out  of  which  he  occasionally  starts  up  in  afiight  I  have  seen
this  lare  ittate  two  or  three  times.


S96  ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  COFFXX.

In  order  to  live  we  require  fixxi,  and  see  I  nature  compels  us
to  seek  it  and  replace  what  has  been  lost,  by  hunger,  or  gnawing
uncomfortable  sensation  in  the  stomach,  a  tormenting  longiiig
for  food,  a  quarrelsome  crossness,  chilliness,  exhaustion,  &c

Not  less  uncomfortable  is  the  feeling  of  thirst,  nor  is  it  less  U
wholesome  provision  of  nature.  Besides  the  longing  desire  for
liquids  which  our  body  needs  for  its  restoration,  we  are  tor-'
mented  by  a  dryness  of  the  throat  and  mouth,  a  dry  heat  of  the
whole  body,  that  to  a  certain  extent  impedes  the  respiration,  a
restlessness,  &c.

We  drink  coffee — and  see  I  we  feel  but  little  or  nothing  moie^
of  the  painful  sensations  of  hunger,  nor  of  the  anxious,  longing
sensation  of  thirst.  Genuine  coffee-drinkers,  especially  those
ladies  addicted  to  its  use,  who  are  deprived  of  the  opportunity
of  recovering  from  the  bad  effects  of  this  drink  by  oocai^onal  ex-;
ercise  in  the  open  air,  experience  little  or  nothing  more  of  the  real
sensations  of  hunger  and  thirst.  In  this  case  the  body  is  cheated
of  its  nutriment  and  drink,  and  the  cutaneous  vessels  are  at  the
same  time  unnaturally  forced  to  absorb  from  the  atmosphere  as
much  moisture  as  is  requisite  to  carry  on  the  frmctions  of  life;
Confirmed  coffee-drinkers  pass  much  more  urine  than  the  quan-
tity of  fluids  they  drink.  The  most  natural  demands  of  natui^
are  stifled.  (Thus  they  gradually  approach — thanks  be  to  the
divine  beverage  I  —to  the  condition  of  the  blessed  spirits  above;
a  true  commencement  of  beatification  here  below.)

The  all-bountiful  Preserver  of  all  living  beings,  made  the
healthy  man  feel  uncomfortable  on  taking  exercise  immediately
after  haviug  satisfied  his  appetite  with  food ;  this  uncomfortable
feeling  was  intended  to  compel  us  to  leave  off  our  business  and
to  rest  both  the  body  and  the  mind,  in  order  that  the  important
function  of  digestion  might  be  commenced  undisturbed  A  las-
situde of  body  and  mind,  a  constriction  in  the  region  of  the  sto^
mach,  a  kind  of  disagreeable  pressure,  a  fulness  and  tension  in  the
abdomen,  &c.,  on  taking  exercise,  remind  us  when  we  attempt  to
exert  our  energies  immediately  after  a  meal,  of  the  rest  that  is
now  required — and  if  we  attempt  to  exercise  our  thinking  Acui-
ty, there  occurs  a  lassitude  of  the  mental  powers,  a  dulness  of
the  head,  a  coldness  of  the  limbs,  accompanied  by  warmth  of
the  face ;  and  the  pressive  sensation  in  the  stomadi,  combined
with  a  disagreeable  sensation  of  tension  in  the  abdomen,  be>
comes  still  more  intolerable,  proving  that  exerting  the  mental
powers  at  the  conmiencement  of  the  process  of  digestion,  is  more
unnatural  and  more  hurtfiil  than  even  exertion  of  the  body.


ON  THE  SFFECTS  OF  COFFEX.  897

Coffee  puts  a  sudden  stop  to  this  lassitude  of  mind  and  body,
and  removes  the  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  abdomen  after  a
meal.  The  more  refined  gourmands  drink  it  immediately  after
dinner — and  they  obtain  this  unnatural  effect  in  a  high  degree.
They  become  gay,  and  feel  as  light  as  though  they  had  taken
lilile  or  nothing  into  their  stomach.

The  wise  Begulator  of  our  nature  has  also  sought  to  compel
US  by  disagreeable  sensations  to  evacuate  the  accumulated  excre-
ment. There  occurs  an  intolerable  anxiety  conjoined  with  a  no
leas  disagreeable  feeling  of  straining,  whereby  all  the  agreeable
sensations  of  life  are  put  a  stop  to,  and,  as  it  were,  swallowed
up  in  ity  until  the  evacuation  is  commenced.  It  is  a  necessaiy
part  of  our  nature  that  there  should  be  some  effort  in  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  excrements.

But  this  has  been  provided  against  by  the  refining  spirit  of
jOur  age,  which  has  sought  to  elude  this  law  of  nature  likewise.
In  order  artificially  to  promote  and  hasten  the  time  required  for
4igestion,  which  in  the  order  of  things  is  several  hours,  and  to
cpcape  the  anxious,  frequently  slowly  increasing  call  to  stool,
the  degenerate  mortals  of  our  times,  who  strain  aft;er  enjoyment
and  have  a  childish  dread  of  all  uncomfortable  sensations,  find
their  means  of  escape  in  coffee.

Our  intestines  excited  by  coffee  (in  its  primary  action)  to
more  rapid  peristaltic  movements,  force  their  contents  but  half
digested  more  quickly  towards  the  anus,  and  the  gourmand
imagines  he  has  discovered  a  splendid  digestive  agent.  But
the  liquid  chyme  which  serves  to  nourish  the  body,  can  in  this
short  time  neither  be  properly  altered  (digested)  in  the  stomach,
nor  sufficiently  taken  up  by  the  absorbents  in  the  intestinal
canal ;  hence  the  mass  passes  through  the  unnaturally  active
bowels,  without  parting  with  more  than  the  half  of  its  nutritious
particles  for  the  supply  of  the  body,  and  arrives  at  the  excre-
tory orifice  still  in  a  half-liquid  state.  Of  a  truth  a  most  excel-
lent digestive  agent,  far  surpassing  nature  I

Moreover,  during  the  evacuation  itself  the  anus  is  excited
by  the  primary  action  of  the  coffee  to  more  rapid  dilatation  and
oontraction,  and  the  fasces  pass  out  soft,  almost  without  effort^
and  more  fi:equently  than  in  the  case  of  healthy  individuals
who  do  not  partake  of  coffee.

These  and  other  natural  pains  and  disagreeable  sensations,
which  are  a  part  of  the  wise  ordering  of  our  nature,  are  dimi-
nished and  rendered  almost  unnoticeable  by  the  primary  action


398  ON  THE  EFFBCrrS  OF  COFFER

of  coffee— land  the  disastrous  effects  of  this  are  not  peiceiyed,
or  even  dreamt  of

Even  the  sexual  desire,  which  in  our  age  has  been  exalted
into  the  chief  of  all  pleasures,  is  excited  by  the  primary  actioa
of  coffee  more  than  by  any  other  artificial  means.  As  quick  as
lightning  there  arise  voluptuous  images  in  the  mind  firom  very
moderate  exciting  cause,  and  the  excitation  of  the  genitals  to
complete  ecstacy  become  the  work  of  a  few  seconds ;  the  ejacu-
lation of  the  semen  is  almost  irrestrainable.  The  sexual  desire
is  excited  by  coffee  from  ten  to  fifteen  years  too  soon,  in  the  ten-
derest,  immaturest  age  in  both  sexes ;  a  refinement^  that  has  the
most  perceptible  influence  on  our  morality.and  mortality — ^not
to  speak  of  the  earlier  impotence  that  follows  as  a  natural  con-
sequence therefrom.*

In  an  individual  of  very  irritable  temperament,  or  who  has
already  been  enervated  by  the  copious  use  of  coffee  and  a  se-
dentary life,  the  effects  I  have  mentioned  appear  in  a  still  moie
prominent  light.  Every  unprejudiced  person  must  perceive  in
the  corporeal  derangements  and  sensations  effected  by  co£fee,
something  unnatural,  an  over-stimulation.  An  excessive  sensi-
tiveness, or  a  gaiety  greatly  disproportioned  to  the  object  of  it^
a  tenderness  almost  partaking  of  a  convulsive  character,  an  inor-
dinate sorrowfulness,  a  wit  that  is  not  altogether  under  the
restraints  of  reason,  an  excessive  distortion  of  the  features  ap-
proaching to  caricature,  under  circumstances  where  a  mere
smile,  a  little  joke  a  slight  perplexity,  a  moderate  expression  of
grief  or  sympathy,  would  have  sufficed.

Even  the  muscles  of  the  rest  of  the  body  exhibit  an  imna-
tural  excessive  activity — all  is  life,  all  is  motion  (though  there
may  be  but  little  cause  for  it)  during  the  first  hour  after  partak-
ing of  strong,  or  (to  use  the  often  inaccurate  language  of  the
world)  good  coffee.  The  ideas  and  the  pictures  of  the  fimcy
flow  in  rapid  succession  and  in  a  continuous  stream  before  the
seat  of  the  imagination  and  sensation  in  the  brain — an  arti-
ficially accelerated,  artificially  exalted  life  1

'  Enjoyment  1  enjoyment !  is  the  cry  of  our  age — quicker,  uninterrupted  eqjoy-
ment  of  life  at  whatever  cost !  and  this  object  is  to  a  certain  degree  attained  by
means  of  this  beverage,  that  accelerates  and  squanders  the  vital  powen.

*  [Who,  among  all  the  medical  writers  of  this  period  (1808)  has  thought  lo  justly,
and  written  so  wisely,  as  Hahnemann  f  Who  among  his  ootempofaries  has  pramal-
gated  so  many  fJEurts  which  have  been  oonfirmed  by  modem  inveatigationa  aa  tfaa
founder  of  bonuBopathy  t] — Am,  P,


ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  COFFEE.  399

In  the  nataral  state  we  require  some  effort  to  remember  clearly
things  long  past';  immediately  after  taking  coffee  the  stores  of
memory  spring,  so  to  speak,  into  our  mouth — and  the  conse-
quence often  is  loquacity,  hurried  chattering,  and  letting  things
escape  from  our  lips  that  we  ought  not  to  have  spoken  about.

Moderation  and  purpose  are  entirely  wanting.  The  cold
considerate  earnestness  of  our  forefathers,  the  firm  stead&stness
of  will,  of  resolve,  and  of  judgment,  the  endurance  of  the  not
rapid  but  powerftil  movements  of  the  body,  adapted  to  the  ob-
ject in  view,  that  used  to  constitute  the  original  national  charao*
ter  of  the  Germans — ^the  whole  sublime  original  stamp  of  our
descent  disappears  before  this  medicinal  beverage,  and  changes
into  over-hasty  disclosures,  hurried  resolves,  immatured  judg-
ments, frivolity,  changeableness,  talkativeness,  irresolution,
flighty  mobility  of  the  muscles,  without  the  production  of  any
durable  impression,  and  theatrical  behaviour.^

I  well  know  that  in  order  to  revel  in  the  dreams  of  fency,  in
order  to  compose  frivolous  novels,  and  light,  playful  witticisms,
the  Gennan  must  drink  coffee — ^the  German  lady  requires  strong
coffee  in  order  to  sparkle  with  wit  and  sentiment  in  fashionable
dides.  The  ballet  dancer,  the  improvisator,  the  conjurer,  the
juggler,  the  sharper,  and  the  keeper  of  a  faro-bank,  all  require
coffee,  as  likewise  the  fiashionable  musician  for  his  giddy  rapidity
of  execution,  and  the  omnipresent  fashionable  physician,  to  en-
able him  to  rush  through  his  ninety  visits  in  a  forenoon.  Let  us
leave  to  these  people  their  imnatutal  stimulant,  together  with  its
evil  effects  to  their  own  health  and  the  welfare  of  mankind  1

But  this  much  is  at  least  certain, — the  most  refined  sensualist,
the  most  devoted  debauchee,  could  have  discovered  on  the  whole
sur&ce  of  the  globe  no  other  dietetic  medicinal  substance  besides
coffee^'  capable  of  changing  our  usual  feelings  for  some  hours
into  agreea))le  ones  only,  of  producing  in  us  for  some  hours,
rather  a  jovial,  even  a  petulant  gaiety,  a  livelier  wit,  an  exalted

*  Who  can  tell  what  eneryatiog  dietetic  practices  it  was  by  which  those  admirable
heroic  Tiitues  of  patriotism,  love  of  children,  inviolable  constancy,  unshakable  integ>
ritj,  and  strict  fulfilment  of  duties  (the  well-known  attributes  of  by-g^e  times)
fatre  in  our  days  almost  dwindled  down  into  paltry  egotism !  likewise  the  single
hflroic  Tirtiies  of  the  middle  ages  and  of  remote  antiquity,  the  antagonists  of  those
filtiiesy  are  now-a-days  (by  what  enervating  dietetic  practices  t)  split  up  into  petty
intrigiies,  ooocealed  trickeries  and  artifices,  and  distributed  over  myriads  of  individuals
—compelling  the  unoontaminated  person  to  exercise  much  caution  every  step  he
\akm  I  Which  is  the  more  injurious,  a  single  bomb-shell,  or  a  million  df  iDyinhle
hookup  distributed  every  where  to  catch  the  feet  of  the  unwazy  t
*  And  to  a  certain  extent  tea  also.


#00  ON  THE  £FFSCIS  OF  COFFU.

imagination  above  what  is  natural  to  our  temperament^  of  quick*
ening  the  movement  of  our  muscles  to  a  kind  of  trembling  acti-
vity, of  spurring  on  the  ordinary  quiet  pace  of  our  digestive  and
excretory  organs  to  double  velocity,  of  keeping  tl^e  sexual  prieio-
tice  in  an  almost  involuntary  state  of  excitation,  of  silencing  fhe
useful  pangs  of  hunger  and  thirst,  of  banishing  blessed  sleep
from  our  weary  limbs,  and  of  artificially  producing  in  them  even
a  kind  of  liveliness  when  the  whole  creation  of  our  hemisphere
fulfils  its  destiny  by  enjoying  refreshing  repose  in  the  silent  Up
of  night

Thus  we  despotically  overthrow  the  wise  arrangement  of  7is^
ture,  but  not  wUhout  injury  to  ourselDes  I

When  the  first  transient  effect  of  coffee  has  departed  after  a
few  hours,  there  follows  gradually  the  opposite  state,  the  secondary
action.  The  more  strildng  the  former  was,  so  much  the  mare
observable  and  disagreeable  is  the  latter.

All  persons  do  not  suffer  equally  from  the  abuse  of  a  medi-
cinal beverage  such  as  coffee  is.

Our  systems  are  so  admirably  arranged  that  tf  toe  live  agreeab^
to  nature  in  other  respects  a  few  errors  in  diet,  if  they  be  not  too
great,  are  tolerably  harmless.

Thus,  for  instance,  the  day-labourer  or  peasant  in  Germany
drinks  brandy,  which  is  so  pernicious  in  itself,  almost  every
morning ;  but  if  he  only  take  a  small  portion  at  a  time,  he  will
often  attain  a  pretty  considerable  age.  His  health  suffers  little.
The  excellence  of  hisX5onstitution  and  his  otherwise  healthy  mode
of  life  counteract  the  injurious  effects  of  his  dram  almost  without
letting  a  trace  appear.

Now,  if  instead  of  brandy  the  day-labourer  or  peasant  drink
a  couple  of  cups  of  weak  coffee,  the  same  thing  occurs.  His
robust  body,  the  vigorous  exercise  of  his  limbs,  and  the  quantity
of  fresh  air  he  inhales  every  day,  repel  the  hurtful  effects  of  his
beverage,  and  his  health  suffers  little  or  nothing  in  consequenoe.
But  the  bad  effects  of  coffee  become  much  more  perceptible
when  these  favourable  circumstances  are  not  present.

Man  can,  no  doubt,  enjoy  a  kind  of  health,  though  his  oooa*
pation  confines  him  to  the  house — or  even  to  one  room — even
though  he  has  to  live  a  very  sedentary  life  in  the  room,  and  his
body  is  delicately  constituted,  provided  he  live  in  other  respects
conformably  with  his  state.  Under  the  moderate  use  of  only
easily  digestible,  mild,  simple,  purely  nutritious,  almost  unspioed
food  and  drink,  along  with  a  prudent  moderation  of  the  paaaioDs


OV  THX  SFFSOIS  OF  COFFXX.  401

and  frequent  renewal  of  the  air  in  the  rooma,  even  women,
without  any  great  exercise,^  enjoy  a  kind  of  health  which  doubt*
las  can  be  readily  oompromified  by  external  causes,  but  which,
if  iheae  are  avoided,  may  still  be  termed  a  moderate  degree  of
health.  In  such  persons  the  action  of  all  morbific  substances,
that  is^  of  all  medicines,  is  much  more  striking  and  severe  than
in  robust  individuals  accustomed  to  labour  in  the  open  air,  who
are  able  to  bear  some  very  hurtful  things  without  particular
injury.

TluQse  weakly  dwellers  in  rooms  live  in  the  low  levd  of  their
health  but  half  a  life,  if  I  may  use  the  expression ;  all  their  sen-
sations, their  energy,  their  vital  functions,  are  somewhat  below
par,  and  they  eagerly  resort  to  a  beverage  that  so  power&lly
exalts  lor  some  hours  their  vital  energy  and  their  feeling  of  ex-
istence^ unconcerned  about  the  results  and  the  secondary  action
of  this  palliative.

This  secondary  action  resembles  their  state  before  partaking
of  the  coffee,  only  it  is  somewhat  stronger.

this  medicinal  beverage,  that  representation  of  artificially  exalted
vital  energy,  is  gone,  there  then  gradually  creeps  on  a  yawning
drowsiness  and  greater  inactivity  than  in  the  ordinary  state,  the
movements  of  the  body  become  more  difficult  than  formerly,  all
the  excessive  gaiety  of  the  previous  hours  changes  into  obtuseness
of  the  senses.  If,  during  the  first  hours  after  drinking  the  coffee,
the  digestion  and  the  expulsion  of  the  excrements  were  hastened,
now  the  flatus  becomes  painfully  incarcerated  in  the  intestines,
and  the  expulsion  of  the  faeces  becomes  more  difficult  and  slower
than  in  the  former  state.  If,  in  the  first  hours,  an  agreeable
warmth  pervaded  the  fiame,  this  fectitious  vital-spark  now  gra-
dually becomes  extinguished,  a  shivering  sensation  is  felt,  the
hands  and  feet  become  cold.  All  external  agents  appear  less
agreeable  than  before.  More  ill-humoured  than  ordinarily,  they
more  given  to  peevishness.  The  sexual  passion  which  was
by  the  coffee  in  the  first  hours  becomes  all  the  colder
and  more  obtuse.  A  kind  of  speedily  satiated  ravenous  hunger
takes  the  place  of  the  healthy  desire  for  nutriment,  and  yet  eat-
ing and  drinking  oppress  the  stomach  more  than  previously.
They  have  greater  difficulty  in  getting  to  sleep  than  formerly,
and  the  sleep  is  heavier  than  it  used  to  be  before  they  took


*  Under  sudi  circumstanoeft  pri&ociers  alio

2S


402  ON  THS  ETFECra  OF  COFFEJIL

ooffoe,  and  on  awaking  they  are  more  sleepj,  moreduKxnxragedy
more  melancholy  than  lusual.

But  look  I  all  these  evils  are  rapidly  driren  away  by  a  re-
newed applicatiou  to  this  hurtfal  palliative — a  new,  artificiallifb
oommences — only  it  has  a  somewhat  shorter  duratioa  than  the
first  time,  and  thus  its  repetition  becomes  ever  more  fiequendy
necessary,  or  the  beverage  most  always  be  made  stronger  in
order  to  enable  it  again  to  excite  life  for  a  &w  hoursr

By  such  means  the  body  of  the  person  whose  occupation  con-
fines him  to  his  room  degenerates  all  the  more.  TW  injurious
effSdcts  of  the  secondary  action  of  this  medicinal  drink  spread
fturther  around,  and  strike  their  roots  too  deeply  to  allow  of  their
being  again  effaced,  if  only  for  a  few  hours,  by  a  mere  repetition
d  the  same  palliative  more  frequently  or  in  stronger  doses.

The  skin  now  becomes  generally  more  sensitive  to  the  oold,
and  even  to  the  open  air  though  not  cold ;  the  digestion  becomes
obstructed,  the  bowels  become  constipated  for  several  days  at
a  time,  fiatulcnce  occasions  anxiety  and  causes  a  number  of  pain*
fill  sensations.  The  constipation  only  alternates  with  diarrhoea,
not  with  a  healthy  state  of  the  boweb.  Sleep  is  obtained  with
difficulty,  and  bears  more  resemblance  to  a  slumber  that  causes
no  refreshment  On  awaking  there  are  remarkable  confusion
of  the  bead,  half- waking  dreams,  slowness  of  recollecting  him-
self, helplessness  of  the  limbs,  and  a  kind  of  joylessncss  that
throws  a  dark  shade  over  all  God's  lovely  nature.  The  bene-
ficent emotions  of  the  hearty  warm  philanthropy,  gratitude,  com-
passion, heroism,  strength  and  nobility  of  the  mind,  and  joyous-
ness,  change  into  pusillanimity,  indifference,  insensible  hardness
of  heart,  variable  humour,  melancholy.

The  use  of  coffee  as  a  beverage  is  continued,  and  sensitiveness
alternates  ever  more  \rith  insensibility,  over-hasty  resolves  with
irresolution,  noisy  quarrelsomeness  ^^dth  cowardly  compliance^
affectation  of  friendship  ^yith  malicious  envy,  transient  rapture
with  joylessness,  grinning  smiling  with  inclination  to  shed  tears
— symptoms  of  constant  hovering  betwixt  excitement  and  de-
pression of  the  mind  and  the  body.

It  would  be  no  easy  task  for  me  to  indicate  all  the  nfuiladiesy
that  under  the  names  of  debility,  nervous  affections  and  cdironic
diseases,  prevail  anwng  the  coffee-drinking  set,  enervating  hu-
manity and  causing  degeneration  of  mind  and  body.

But  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  all  the  evil  results  I  have
named  occur  to  every  coffee  bibber  in  the  same  degree  I No,


ON  THE  KFFEGTS  OF  COFFlfil.  408

one  su£Feis  more  from  this,  another  from  that  symptom  of  the
secondary  action  of  coffee.  My  description  includes  the  whole
coffee-drinking  race ;  all  their  maladies  which  arise  from  this
source  I  have  arranged  together,  as  they  have  from  time  to  time
come  under  my  notice.

The  palliative  agreeable  sensation  which  the  coffee  distributes
for  some  hours  through  the  finest  iibres,  leaves  behind  it,  as  a
secondary  action,  an  extraordinary  susceptibility  to  painful  sen-
sationsi  which  always  becomes  greater  and  greater,  the  longer,
the  oflener,  the  stronger  and  the  greater  the  quantity  in  which
the  coffee  is  drunk.  Very  slight  things  (tliat  would  make  scarce-
ly any  impression  on  a  healthy  person  not  accustomed  to  the
use  of  coffee)  cause  in  the  coffee  diinkiug  lady  megrim,  a  frequent
often  intolerable  toothache,  which  comes  on,  chiefly  at  night,
with  redness  of  the  face  and  at  length  swelling  of  the  cheek — a
painful  drawing  and  tearing  in  dilforcnt  parts  of  the  body,  on
one  side  of  the  face,  or  at  one  time  in  one  limb,  at  another  in
another.^  The  body  has  a  special  tendency  to  erysipelas,  either
in  the  legs  (hence  the  frequency  of  old  ulcers  there)  or  (when
suckling)  in  the  mammas,  or  on  one  half  of  the  face.  Appre-
hensiveness  and  flying  heat  are  her  daily  complaints,  and  nervous
scmilateral  headache  her  property.^

>  Tbis  drawing  tearing  in  the  limbs  caused  by  cofToc  in  its  secondary  acticxi  and
when  its  use  is  persisted  in  for  a  long  tinie,  is  not  in  the  jointn,  but  from  one  joint  to
the  other.  It  appears  to  bo  more  in  the  Aedi  or  cellular  tisftuc  than  in  the  boneA,  is
unattended  by  swelling  or  other  abnormal  ap|)carancc,  and  there  is  scarcely  any
tenderness  oo  touching  the  part Our  nosulogisti  know  nothing  about  it

'  The  ni^rim  above  alluded  to,  which  only  uppcar^  after  tuome  exciting  cause,
overloading  of  the  stomach,  a  chill,  ix.,  generally  very  rapidly  and  at  all
of  the  day,  difr<>r9  entirely  from  the  so-called  nervous  hemicrania. The  latter
oocum  in  the  morning,  soon  or  inmiediately  after  waking,  and  increases  gradually.
The  pain  is  almost  intolerable,  often  of  a  burning  cliaracter,  the  external  coverings  of
the  skull  are  also  intolerably  sensitive  and  painful  on  the  least  touch. Body  and
nund  seem  both  to  be  insufferably  Bensitive. Apparently  destitute  of  all  strength,
cbey  seek  a  solitary  and  if  possible  dark  sp)t,  where,  in  order  to  avoid  the  daylight
they  pass  the  time  with  closed  eyes  in  a  kind  of  waking  bluniber,  u:»uaUy  on  a  couch
raided  in  the  back,  or  in  un  arm  cliair,  quite  motioidcss. Every  movement,  every  noise
increases  their  pains. They  avoid  speaking  themselves  and  listening  to  the  couver-
HiliuD  of  others. Tlieir  body  is  colder  than  usual,  though  without  rigour ;  the  hands
and  leet  in  porticidar  are  very  cold. Kverything  is  distasteful  to  them,  but  chiefly
eating  and  drinking,  for  an  incessant  nausea  hinders  them  from  taking  anything. In
bad  cases  the  nausea  amounts  to  vomiting  of  mucus,  but  the  headache  is  seldom
•iUevinlcd  thereby. The  bowels  are  constipated. This  heiKluche  alnitrnt  never  goes
(iff  until  evening  ;  in  very  bad  cu-es  I  have  ?ocn  it  1u.m.  iluriy-&ix  hours,  ho  tlmt  it  mily
Ji-apjxured  the following  evening, lu  sli^iiicr  case.->  iin  origiiml  producer,  uofiee,
iJiorteU;.^  its  duration  in  a  palliaiive  nmuuor,  but  it  e(.:niiiuiiicates  to  the  system  the


404  OK  THE  KFFSOTB  OF  GOFFKK.

From  moderate  errors  of  diet  and  disagreeable  mental  emotioiici
tiiere  oocor  painfol  affections  of  the  chest,  stomach  and  abdomen
(known  by  the  inaccurate  name  of  spasms) — ^the  catamenia  oome
on  with  pains,  are  not  regular,  or  the  discharge  is  less  oopionB
and  at  length  quite  scanty ;  it  is  watery  or  slimy ;  leucorrhoea
(generally  of  an  acrid  character)  prevails  almost  the  whole  time,
from  one  period  to  another,  or  completely  supersedes  the  men-
strual flux — coition  is  often  painful.  The  earthy,  yellowish  or
quite  pale  complexion,  the  dull  eye  surrounded^  by  blue  ringB,
the  blue  lips,  the  flaccid  muscular  tissue,  the  shrivelled  breasts,
are  the  external  signs  of  this  miserable  hidden  state.  Sometimes
the  abnost  suppressed  menses  alternate  with  serious  uterine  he-
morrhages. In  males  there  occur  painM  hemorrhoids  and  noc-
turnal emissions  of  semen.  In  both  sexes  the  sexual  power  be-
comes gradually  extinguished.  The  normal  exuberant  energy
of  the  embrace  of  a  healthy  couple  becomes  a  worthless  bagatelle.
Impotence  of  both  sexes  and  sterility,  inability  to  suckle  a  ohildf
ensue. — ^The  monster  of  nature,  that  hollow-eyed  ghost,  onanism,
is  generally  concealed  behind  the  coffee-table  (though  indul-
gence in  the  perusal  of  meretricious  novels,  over-exertion  of  the
mind,  bad  company  and  a  sedentary  life  in  close  apartments,
contribute  their  share).

As  an  inordinate  indulgence  in  coffee  has  for  its  secondary
effect  to  dispose  the  body  greatly  to  all  kinds  of  disagreeable
sensations  and  most  acute  pains,  it  will  be  readly  comprehended
how  it,  more  than  any  other  hurtful  substance  we  are  acquainted
with,  excites  a  great  tendency  to  caries  of  the  bones.  No  error
of  diet  causes  the  teeth  to  decay  more  easily  and  certainly  than
indulgence  in  coffee.  Coffee  alone  (with  the  exception  of  grief
aud  the  abuse  of  mercury)  destroys  the  teeth  in  the  shortest
space  of  time.'  The  confined  air  of  a  room  and  overloading
the  stomach  (especially  at  night)  contribute  their  share  to  this
effect  But  coffee  by  itself  is  quite  capable  of  destroying  in  a
short  space  of  time  tJiis  irreparable  ornament  of  the  mouth,  this
indispensable  accessory  organ  for  distinct  speech  and  fiir  the  in-
timate mixture  of  the  food  with  the  digestive  saliva,  or  at  least

teodeocy  to  produee  it  after  a  still  shorter  interroL  It  recnrsat  undetennioed  tiiiM^
crery  fortnig^t^  three,  four  weeks,  dbc  It  comes  oa  without  anj  exehiog  canss^qoito
unaqpectedlj;  eren  the  night  previouslj  the  patient  seldom  feels  anj  premooilarj
signs  of  the  nervous  headache  that  is  to  come  on  tlie  next  morning.

I  have  never  met  with  it  excepting  aitwng  regular  cuffee  drinherM.

I  tWiMmmmmt^i^^m  gQ  ^hjch  I  QMXi  dcpcnd  have  ooovinoed  me  of  this.


OH  TEX  XFFKOTS  OF  007FSX.  405

of  rendering  them  black  and  yellow. The  Ices  of  the  firont  (in*
dsor)  teeth  is  chiefly  due  to  tlie  abuse  of  cofifee.

If  I  except  the  true  spina  ventosa,  there  occurs  scarcely  a
sin^  case  of  caries  of  the  bones  in  children  (if  they  have  not
been  over-dosed  with  mercury)  &om  any  other  cause  than  from
ooflEee?  ^  Besides  these,  there  are  in  chUdren  other  deep-seated
flesh  abscesses  that  take  a  long  time  of  bursting  and  then  have
action  of  the  coffee.

As  a  rule,  coffee  acts  most  injuriously  on  children ;  the  more
tender  their  age,  the  worse  its  effects.  Although  it  is  incapable
of  itself  of  producing  true  rickets,  but  can  only  accelerate  them,
in  conjunction  with  their  special  exciting  cause  (food  composed
of  unfermented  vegetable  substances,  and  the  air  of  close,  damp
rooms),  yet  it  of  itself  excites  in  little  children,  even  when  their
other  food  is  wholesome  and  the  air  in  which  they  live  good,  a
kind  of  infimtile  hectic,  which  is  not  much  less  sad  in  its  results.
Their  oomplexion  becomes  pale,  their  muscles  quite  flaccid.  It
is  only  after  a  long  time  that  they  learn  to  walk  a  littie,  but  then
thdr  gait  is  uncertain,  they  easily  fidl,  and  wish  always  to  be
carried.  They  stammer  in  their  speech.  They  wish  for  a  great
variety  of  things,  but  relish  nothing  heartily.  The  drollery,  hap-
piness and  liveliness  that  characterize  the  age  of  childhood  are
changed  into  indolent  dejection ;  nothing  gives  them  pleasure,
nothing  makes  them  contented ;  they  enjoy  only  a  sort  of  half
lie£  They  are  very  easily  startied,  and  timid.  Diarrhoea  alter-
nates with  costiveness.  Viscid  mucus  rattles  in  ineir  chest  as
they  breathe,  especially  when  they  are  asleep,  which  no  amount
of  coughing  can  remove :  they  have  always  got  a  wheezing  at
the  chest.  Their  teeth  come  with  much  dii&culty  and  with  con-
vulsion fits;  they  are  very  imperfect,  and  fall  out  decayed  before
the  period  for  changing  them  arrives.  Mostly  every  evening,
just  before  bed-time  or  after  lying  down  in  bed,  they  get  redness
and  heat  on  one  or  both  cheeks.  They  sleep  very  imperfectly,
toss  about  at  night,  oflcn  want  to  drink ;  they  then  perspire,  not
only  on  the  forehead,  but  also  on  the  hairy  scalp,  particularly
at  the  back  of  the  head,  and  whine  and  moan  in  their  sleep.


ulcerations  of  the  bones,  which  lie  concealed  beneath  clcTated,  hard,  bluish-
red  swellings  of  the  soft  partfi,  exude  an  albuminous  looking  mucujs  mixed  with  some
cheese-Kke  matter.  It  has  wvrj  little  smelL  The  pains  of  tlie  affected  port  are  werj
thxfting  Id  their  character. The  rest  of  the  bud/  presents  a  pure  picture  of  tha


406  OV THE  EFFECTS  OF  COFFEE.

They  get  through  every  disease  with  difficulty,  and  their  leoo-
very  is  very  slow  and  imperfect

They  are  frequently  subject  to  a  chronic  inflammation  of  the
eyes,  not  unfrequently  accompanied  by  an  eruption  in  the  tauoe,
along  with  a  peculiar  relaxation  of  the  upper  eyelid,  which  pre-
vents them  raising  it,  even  when  the  redness  and  swelling  of
the  lids  are  but  moderate.  This  kind  of  ophthalmia,  that  often
lasts  for  several  years,  making  them  frequently  lie  upon  the  fece,
with  constant  peevishness  and  crying,  or  conceal  themselves  in
a  dark  place  where  they  remain  lying  or  sitting  in  a  stooping
posture ;  this  ophthalmia,  I  say,  chiefly  affects  the  cornea^  covers
it  with  red  vessels  and  at  last  vrith  dark  spots,  or  there  occur
phlyctenulre  and  little  ulcers  on  it,  that  often  eat  deeply  into  the
cornea  and  threaten  blindness.

This  ophthalmia  and  that  rattling  at  the  chest  and  the  other
take  nothing  but  their  mother's  milk,  if  the  mother  indulges  in
coffee  and  inhabits  a  close  room.  How  penetrating  must  not
the  hurtful  power  of  this  medicinal  beverage  be,  that  even  in-
fiuits  at  the  breast  suffer  from  it !

After  children,  coffee  acts,  as  I  have  said,  most  injuriously  on
the  female  sex,  and  on  literary  people  whose  occupation  is  se-
dentary, and  confines  them  to  their  rooms.  To  these  may  be^
added  workmen  engaged  in  a  sedentary  trade.

The  iMid  effects  of  coffee  are,  as  I  have  above  mentioned,  most
effectually  diminished  by  great  activity  and  exercise  in  the  open
air, — but  not  j)ermaneiitly  removed.

Some  imlividuals  also  find  out  as  if  by  instinct,  a  sort  of  anti-
dote to  coffee  in  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors.  It  is  impossible
to  deny  that  they  do  popsess  some  antidotal  jwwcrs.  These  are,
however,  mere  stimulants,  without  any  nutritive  quality ;  that
is  to  siiv,  they  are  likewise  medicinal  substances,  which,  when
daily  used  as  articles  of  diet,  produce  other  injurious  effects,  and
yet  are  unable  to  prevent  the  hurtful  action  of  the  coffee  from
taking  effect, — what  they  cause  are  artificial  ameliorations^  of
the  vital  functions,  followed  by  morbid  effects,  though  of  a  dif-
ferent, more  complex  nature.

Leaving  offthfC  use  of  coffee^  is  the  chief  remedy  for  these  insi-

-^ --  ■__  III-  '- — ^

*  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  do  aw.iy  with  on  inyotcnitc  bnlnt  of  n$tng  coffee. — I
fir-tt  viKlc^-ivour  U>  convince  my  pzitient:?  werioiHy  of  t)ic  nrgi'Kt  aiwl  iBtlispoiBiahU''
m.>c<^-Miy  of  (U*rcuntinuing  its  use. Truth  groumled  oaobviuuB  expeiimc4  •eUbivi


Oir  THE  BFPECTB  OF  COFFBE.  407

dions  and  deeply  penetrating  injurious  effects,  and  corpoTeal
exercise  in  the  open  air  tends  to  promote  the  subsequent  reco-
very. If  however  body  and  mind  be  sunk  too  low,  there  are
some  medicines  very  useful  for  that  state,  but  this  is  not  the
proper  pkce  to  enumerate  them,  as  I  am  not  at  present  writing
very  prejudicial,  and  when  I  shew  from  observations  and  ex-
perience of  many  years  that  it  relaxes  and  withers  the  energy
of  our  body  and  mind,  some  may  retort  u]X)n  me  the  appellation
^'medicinal  beverage,''  which  I  must  unlicsitxitingly  bestow  upon
coffee.

"  Medicines  are  surely  wholesome  things,^  says  the  aninitated.
They  are  so ;  but  only  under  certain  iDdis^wiisable  conditions.
It  is  only  when  the  medicine  is  suitable  for  the  case  that  it  is
wholesome  Now  no  medicine  is  suitable  for  health,  and  to
employ  a  medicine  as  a  beverage  in  tlic  ordiuary  healthy  state,
is  a  hurtful  procedure,  a  self  evident  contradiction-

I  prize  them  edicinal  powers  of  coi&c  when  it  is  appropriately
employed  as  a  medicine,  as  much  as  those  of  any  other  nicdica-

ftik  to  produce  eatviction — almost  never,  vlien  it  is  urged  from  the  philanthropie
bemrt  of  a  pbysidaii,  who,  ooovinced  himself  of  the  goodness  of  his  cause,  i»  thuroughlj
penetrated  by  the  truth  of  his  maximo.  Nothing  will  tlutii  prevent  their  reoeptioo,
fliere  is  no  question  of  nny  private  interest  on  tlie  part  of  the  doctor ;  aud  nothing
Vat  pure  gain  on  the  side  of  the  party  he  wirfies  to  -convince.

If  we  have  attained  iim  object  (whotlier  this  is  the  case  or  no,  he  who  has  a  knoW"
ledge  of  hmnon  uatiirc  can  ttfil  by  the  way  the  patient  receives  liis  advice),  we  may
advise  that  (he  quantity  of  coffee  talfcii  be  reduced  by  a  cup  every  thnje  or  ftiur  days,
mad  allow  the  hist  bre:ikfai<t-cup  to  be  continued  for  a  week  longer,  until  this  can
ciCher  be  kaft  off  at  oocc,or  it  may  be  continued  oo  every  alteniatc  day  for  another
vcek,  according  to  circumstances.

If  we  have  to  do  with  persons  on  wliom  wc  cau  rely,  tlie  affair  in  managed  in  the
eonne  of  four  weeks.  But  should  some  faint  licjirtetlncss  or  iiidccisioD  on  tlio  part  of
fliavea  to  ooffipe  make  its  nccompHMnnoiit  diffkuH,  or  should  the  weak  state  of  the
health  make  its  disoontinunDce  be  too  severely  felt,  we  wiHild  do  well  fnr  every  cap
-of  coffee  we  take  away,  to  allow  a  cup  of  tea  to  be  druak,  until  in  tlic  course  of  a
week  nothing  but  tea  (a  tiimilar  but  Lessor  evil)  is  drunk,  and  tliis,  as  it  has  not  had
ihne  to  become  a  habitual  beverage,  may  be  more  easily  diminished,  until  at  last
nothing  more  of  the  sort  is  taken^  bat  only  a  coiuplo  of  cups  of  warm  milk  for
hreakfiMt,  in  plaec  of  oofii'c  or  tea.

Whilfit  thus  bneaking  off  the  habit,  it  is  indispensable  tliat  the  body  be  refreshed
and  strengthened  by  daily  walks  in  the  op<'n  air,  by  amusements  of  an  innocejit
charater.  nn»l  by  ;ipprtj|iriafe  AmmI,  if  we  \vi«b  tli:i2  tlw  iiyiu<«>u»  effects  of  tlie  coffee
should  disnppcfir.  and  the  in;livirInAl  be  c<;nfiniici1  in  Ins  re^ohitidi  to  give  it  up.

Aivl  If  all  £««H.'«  oa  wvW.  ir  witl  iK»t  hv  a  biul  plan  for  tike  dtictor,  <»r  a  friend  in
hiM  i^tead,  tu  a><^ure  hinistrlf  Ironi  time  to  time  of  tlio  tiue  convulsion  of  Jiis  pa-
iient,  and  if  neee^aiy,  uphold  bUie.'olution  wJLt>n  t}xr  t^ucijof  exnmj>lo  in  compnny
aeeini  to  caiMs  it  to  vavei;


408  ON  THE  XTFSCTB  OF  OOFFKK.

ment  Thiaze  is  nought  saperfluons  in  God's  crestion ;  everf
ihing  is  created  for  the  weal  of  mankind,  particularly  the  moBt
powerftd  things,  to  which  class  coffee  belongs  in  an  especial  de^
gree. But  let  the  following  &cts  be  borne  in  mind.

Every  single  medicine  develops  in  the  healthy  human  body
some  special  alterations,  that  are  peculiar  to  itself  exclusively.
When  these  are  known,  and  when  the  medicine  is  employed  in
cases  of  disease  that  have  an  almost  exact  similarity  with  the
alteration  that  the  medicine  is  capable  of  itself  producing  (in  the
healthy  body),  a  radical  cure  takes  place.  This  employment  of
the  medicine  is  the  curative  one,  the  only  one  to  be  relied  on  in
chronic  diseases.

In  speaking  of  this  power  of  a  medicine  to  alter  the  human
body  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  itself,  I  allude  to  its  primary  or
initiatory  action.  I  have  said  above  that  the  primary  action  of
a  medicine  (for  some  hours  after  it  has  been  ts^en)  is  the  direct
opposite  of  its  secondary  action,  or  the  state  in  which  it  leaves
the  body  whenever  its  first  action  is  past

Now  if  the  primary  action  of  a  medicine  be  the  exact  opposite
of  the  morbid  condition  of  the  body  we  seek  to  cure,  its  employ-
ment is  paUuxtive.  Almost  instantaneous  amendment  ensues, —
but  a  few  hours  afterwards  the  malady  returns  and  attains  a
grater  height  than  it  had  before  the  employment  of  the  remedy,
the  secondary  action  of  the  medicine,  which  resembled  the  ori-
ginal disease,  aggravates  the  latter.  A  miserable  method  of
treatment  when  we  have  to  do  with  a  chronic  malady.

I  shall  give  an  example.  The  primary  action  of  opium  in
the  healthy  system  is  to  cause  a  stupiiying  snoring  sleep,  and
its  secondary  action — the  opposite — sleeplessness.  Now  if  the
physician  will  be  so  foolish  as  treat  a  morbid,  habitual  sleepless-
ness with  opium,  he  acts  in  a  palliative  manner.  The  stupid,
snoring,  unrefi-eshing  sleep  speedily  follows  the  ingestion  of  the
opium,  but  its  secondary  action,  as  I  have  stated,  is  sleeplessnessi
an  addition  to  his  already  habitual  sleeplessness,  which  is  now
accordingly  aggravated.  Twenty -four  hours  afterwards  the  pa-
tient sleeps  still  less  than  before  he  took  the  opium ;  a  stronger
dose  of  the  latter  must  now  be  given,  the  secondary  action  of
which  is  a  still  greater  sleeplessness,  that  is,  an  aggravation  of
the  malady,  which  the  foolish  man  imagined  he  was  curing.

In  like  manner,  coffee  proves  a  bad  palliative  remedy  when
it  is  used  as  a  medicinal  agent,  for  example,  in  cases  of  habitual


Oir  IS!  XFFEOTB  OF  OOFFUL  409

ocmsfcipalion  prooeeding  firom  inactivity  of  the  bowels^ — ^as  is
often  done  by  medical  men.  Its  primary  action  is,  as  I  have
before  stated,  the  reverse  of  this  state, — it  therefore  acts  here  as
a  palliative,  and  if  it  be  used  for  the  first  time,  or  only  on  rare
occasions,  it  speedily  produces  a  motion  of  the  bowels,  but  the
following  days,  under  the  secondary  action,  the  constipation  be*
comes  all  the  greater.  If  we  again  seek  to  remove  this  in  the
same  palliative  manner  by  means  of  coffee,  more  of  it  must  be
drunk,  or  it  must  be  made  stronger,  and  still  the  habitual  con*
stipation  is  not  thereby  eradicated,  for  it  always  returns  more
obstinately  on  the  recurrence  of  the  secondary  action  of  the
oofiee,  whenever  this  palliative  administration  of  the  coffee  is
discontinued,  or  stronger  and  more  frequent  potations  of  it  are
not  taken,  which  always  aggravate  the  disease  and  entail  other
maladies.

It  will  be  found  that  the  medical  excuses  offered  by  coffee*
drinkers  in  justification  of  this  habit  almost  all  rest  on  some
such  palliative  reUef  it  affords  them,  and  yet  nothing  is  more
certain  than  the  experience  that  a  long-continued  palliative  em*
ployment  of  a  drug  is  injurious,  but  the  palliative  employment
of  drags  as  articles  of  diet  is  the  most  injurious  of  all.

Therefore  when  I,  whilst  deprecating  its  abuse  as  an  every-
day beverage,  commend  the  great  medicinal  virtues  of  coffee,  I
do  the  latter  merely  in  reference  to  its  curative  employment  for
chronic  ailments  that  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  its  primary
action,'  and  in  reference  to  its  palliative  employment  in  acute
diseases  threatening  rapid  danger,  which  bear  a  great  resem-
blance to  the  secondary  effects  of  coffee.^  This  is  the  only
rational  and  wise  mode  of  employing  this  medicinal  beverage
which  is  abused  by  hundreds  of  millions  of  individuals  to  their

*  At  is  umallj  the  case  with  those  who  lead  a  sedenterj  life  in  their  room.

*  For  example  when,  in  a  person  unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  oofiee,  there  is  present
0k  oaj  be  a  habitual)  indisposition,  composed  of  a  frequent,  painless  evacuation  of
nft  fmca  and  frequent  inclination  to  go  to  stool,  an  unnatural  sleeplessness,  ezoes-
■T8  irrHabilitj  and  agility,  and  a  want  of  appetite  and  thirst,  but  without  any  dimi-
■ntioa  of  the  perception  of  the  flavour  of  food  and  drink,  in  such  a  case  coffee  will^
waai  effect  a  radical  cure  in  the  course  of  a  sliort  time.  In  like  manner  it  is,  in  the
fteqneoftly  dangerous  symptoms  brought  on  by  a  sudden,  great,  joyful  mental
<— y?tf«»^  the  most  suitable,  trustworthy,  curative  medicine,  and  also  in  a  certain  kind
of  Uboar-pains,  which  bear  much  resemblance  to  the  primary  effects  of  coffee.

*  Tlie  fidlowing  are  examples  of  the  excellent  palliative  employment  of  coffee  in
ifaranns  that  come  on  rapidly  and  require  speedy  relief :  sea-sickness,  poisoning  by
opinm  in  thoae  unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  coffee,  poisoning  by  vcratrum  album,  the
ipparent  death  of  drowned,  suffocated,  but  eapeciailly  of  frozen  persons,  as  I  have
fteqaently  had  the  satisfiictioo  of  witnessing.


410  iBSCULAPIUS  IK  TBS  BAIiAKOB.

hart,  is  understood  by  few,  but  whioh  is  extremelj  wholeaonie
when  used  in  its  proper  place.


iESCULAPIUS  IN  THE  BALANCE.'


Aiit  autem  tani  conjccturalis  cum  Bit  (praeeertim  quo  nunc  hftbetur  modo)  loenm
amplioruin  dedit  non  solum  errori  verum  etiani  imposturac. — Baoo  dz  Y
Attffin,  Scient,


After  I  had  discovered  the  weakness  and  errors  of  my  teachers
and  books,  I  sank  into  a  state  of  sorrowful  indignation,  which
had  nearly  altogether  disgusted  me  with  the  study  of  medicine.
1  was  on  the  point  of  concluding  that  the  whole  art  was  vain
and  incapable  of  imj)rovement.  I  gave  myself  up  to  solitaij'
reflection,  and  resolved  not  to  terminate  my  train  of  thought
until  I  had  arrived  at  a  definite  conclusion  on  the  subject.

Inhabitants  of  earth,  I  thought,  how  short  is  the  span  of  your
life  here  below !  with  how  iijany  difficulties  have  you  to  contend
at  every  step,  in  order  to  maintain  a  bare  existence,  if  you
would  avoid  the  by-paths  that  lead  astray  from  morality.  And
yet  what  avail  all  your  dear-bought,  dear- wrung  joys,  if  you  do
not  possess  health  ?

And  vet  how  often  is  this  disturbed — how  numerous  are  the
lesser  aud  greater  degrees  of  ill-health — how  innumerably  great
the  multitude  of  diseases,  weaknesses  and  pains,  which  bow  man
down  as  he  climbs  with  pain  and  toil  towards  his  aim,  and
which  terrify  and  endanger  his  existence,  even  when  he  is  sup-
porti^d  by  the  rewards  incident  to  fame,  or  reposes  in  the  lap  of
luxury.  And  yet,  oh  man!  how  lofty  is  thy  descent!  how
great  and  God-like  thy  destiny !  how  noble  the  object  of  thy
life  1  Art  tliou  not  destined  to  approach  by  the  ladder  of  hal-
lowed impressions,  ennobling  deeds,  all-penetrating  knowledge,
even  towards  the  great  Spirit  whom  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
universe  worship  ?  Can  that  Divine  Spirit  who  gave  thee  thy
soul,  and  winged  thee  for  such  high  entcr])rizes,  have  designed
that  you  should  be  h(dpU'.^di/  and  irrewfUuhly  oppressed  by  thoee
trivial  boclilv  ailments  which  we  call  diseases?

All,  no! The  Author  of  all  good,  when  he  allowed  diseases

'  Publi:«hcd  at  Loipzic  in  1805.


JBCVLAFIUS  IN  THE  BALANCE.  411

to  injure  his  ofbpring,  must  have  laid  down  a  means  by  which
those  torments  might  be  lessened  or  removed.  Let  ns  trace  the
impressions  of  this,  the  noblest  of  all  arts  which  lias  been  de-
voted to  the  use  of  perishing  mortals.  This  art  must  be  possible
— ^this  art  which  can  make  so  many  happy ;  it  must  not  only  be
possible,  but  already  exist.  Every  now  and  then  a  man  is  res-
cued, as  by  miracle,  from  some  fatal  disease !  Do  we  not  find
recorded  in  the  writings  of  physicians  of  all  ages,  cures  in  which
the  disturbance  of  the  health  was  so  great  that  no  other  termi-
nation than  a  miserable  death  seemed  possible?  Yet  such
cases  have  been  rapidly  and  effectually  cured,  and  perfect  health
restored.

But  how  seldom  have  these  brilliant  cures  been  eflxycted  when
they  were  not  rather  ascribable,  either  to  the  force  of  youth
over-mastering  the  disease,  or  to  the  unreckonod  influence  of
various  fortunate  circumstances,  than  to  the  medicines  employed.
But  even  were  the  number  of  such  perfect  cures  greater  than  I
observe  them  to  be,  does  it  follow  from  that  that  we  can  iniitnte
them  with  similarly  happy  results?  They  stand  isolated  in  the
history  of  the  human  race,  and  they  can  but  very  seldom,  if  at
all,  be  reproduced  as  they  were  at  first  occasionecl.  All  we  see
ifl^  that  great  cures  are  possible :  but  how  they  are  to  bo  effected,
what  the  power,  and  the  particular  circumstances  by  which  they
were  accomplished,  and  how  these  are  to  be  controlled  so  that
we  may  transfer  them  to  other  eases,  is  quite  beyond  our  ken.
Perhaps  the  art  of  healing  does  not  mhsiM  in  avrh  transferences.
This  much  is  certain  :  an  art  of  medicine  exists,  but  not  in  our
heads,  nor  in  our  symptoms.

"But,"  it  is  urged  in  reply,  "  are  not  people  cured  every  day
in  the  hands  of  thoughtful  ])hysicians,  even  of  very  ordinary
doctors, nay,  even  of  most  egregious  blockheads?*'

Certainly  they  are;  but  mark  what  happens.  The  majority
of  cases,  for  the  treatment  of  which  a  pliysician  is  called  in,  are
of  acute  diseases,  that  is,  aberrations  from  health  which  have
onlv  a  short  course  to  run  before  thev  terminate  either  in  re-

ml  .

covery  or  death.  If  the  i)atient  die,  the  physician  follows  his
remains  modestly  to  the  grave ;  if  he  recover,  then  must  his
natural  strength  have  been  sufficient  to  overcome  both  the  force
of  the  di.sease  and  the  usually  obstructing  action  of  the  drugs
he  took;  and  the  powers  of  nature  of\en  sulfiee  to  overcome
both.
Ill  epidemic  dysentery,  just  as  many  of  those  who  follow  the


412  JKCULAPIUS  IV  THE  HAT,AKflK.

indications  afforded  by  nature^  without  taking  any  medicine  ai
all,  recover,  as  of  those  who  are  treated  according  ip  the  method
of  Brown,  of  Stoll,  of  C.  L.  Hoffman,  of  Eichter;sif  Vogler,  or
by  any  other  system.  Many  die,  too,  both  of  those  treated  by
all  these  methods,  and  of  those  who  took  no  medicine ;  on  an
average  just  as  many  of  the  one  as  of  the  other. ..  And  yet  all
the  physicians  and  quacks  who  attended  those  y^o  recovered,
boasted  of  having  effected  a  cure  by  their  skill.  .^  What  is  the
inference  ?  Certainly  not  that  they  were  all  right /n  their  moda
of  treatment ;  but  perhaps,  that  they  were  all  equally  wrong.
What  presumption  for  each  to  claim,  as  he  did^  the  credit  of
curing  a  disease,  which  in  the  milder  cases  uniformly  recovered
of  itself,  if  gross  errors  in  diet  were  not  committed  I

It  were  easy  to  run  through  a  catalogue  of  similar  acute  dis-
eases, and  show  that  the  restoration  of  persons  wh^  in  the  same
disease  were  treated  on  wholly  opposite  principles  could  not  be
called  cure,  but  a  spontaneous  recovery.  ^

Until  you  can  say,  during  the  prevalence  of  an  ^idemic  dys-
entery for  example,  ^^  Fix  upon  those  patients  whom  you  mi
other  experienced  persons  consider  to  be  most  dangerously  ill|
and  these  I  will  cure,  and  cure  rapidly  and  withoi|^  bad  conae*
quences."  Until  you  can  say  this,  and  can  do  it,  you  ought  not
to  vaunt  that  you  can  cure  the  dysentery.  Your  cures  are
nothing  but  siwntaneous  recovery.  t,

Often — the  thought  is  saddening  1 — ^patients  recin^er  as  by  a
luiracle  when  the  multitude  of  anxiously  changed  and  often  re*
left  off  or  clandestinely  discontinued.  For  fear  of  giving  offence^
the  patients  frequently  conceal  what  they  have  done,  and  appear
before  the  public  as  if  they  had  been  cured  by  the  physician.
In  numerous  instances,  many  a  prostrate  patient  I^as  effected  a
miraculous  cure  upon  himself  not  only  by  refusing  the  phy-
sician^s  medicine,  but  by  secretly  transgressing  his  arti£cial  and
often  mischievous  system  of  diet,  in  obedience  to  his  own  caprice^
which  is  in  this  instance  an  imperious  instinct  impelling  him  to
commit  all  sorts  of  dietetic  paradoxes.  Pork,  sour-crout,  potato*
salad,  herring,  oysters,  eggs,  pastry,  brandy,  wine,  pjpinch,  coffee^
and  other  things  most  strongly  prohibited  by  the.  physician^
have  effected  the  most  rapid  cure  of  disease  in  patients,  who,  to
all  appearance,  would  have  hastened  to  their  grave  had  they

Of  such  a  kind  are  the  apparent  cures  of  acute  diseases. For


^nOULAFIUB  IN  THE  BALANCX.  418

those  benefidiil  and  nseftQ  regulations  for  the  arrest  of  pestilen-
tial epidemios,  by  catting  off  commnnication  with  the  affected
district,  by  separation  and  removal  of  the  sick  from  the  healthy ;
by  fbmigation  of  the  affected  abodes  and  fiimiture  with  nitric
and  muriatic  add,  &c.,  are  wise  police  regulations,  but  are  not
medicinal  cures.

In  the  infected  spots  themselves,  where  a  further  separation  of
the  inlected'^m  the  healthy  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  there  the
nullity  of  medicine  is  exhibited.  There  die  all,  if  one  may  be
allowed  the  expression,  who  can  die,  without  being  influenced
by  Galen,  Boerhave,  or  Brown,  and  those  only  who  are  not  ripe
&rdeath  recover.  Nurses,  physicians,  apothecaries,  and  surgeons,
are  all  alike  borne  to  their  grave.

At  the  same  time  it  is  undeniable,  that  even  in  such  calamities,
80  hnmiliating  to  the  pride  of  our  art,  occasional,  but  rare  cures
oocor,  effected  obviously  by  medicine,  of  so  striking  a  character,
that  one  is  astonished  at  so  daring  a  rescue  from  the  very  jaws
of  death ;  these  are  the  hints  afforded  by  the  Author  of  life,
"that  thebe  is  a  healing  art."

But  iow  did  it  act  here?  What  medicine  did  the  real  good?
What  were  the  minute  particulars  of  the  disease,  in  order  that
we  may  imitate  the  procedure  when  such  a  case  recurs  ?  Alas !
these  particulars  are  and  must  remain  unknown ;  the  case  was
either  not  particularly  observed  or  not  reported  with  sufficient
exactness.  And  the  medicine  ?  No ;  a  single  medicine  was
not  given ;  it  was,  as  all  learned  recipes  must  be,  an  elixir,  a
powder,  a  mixture,  &c.,  each  composed  of  a  number  of  medicinal
substances.  Heaven  knows  which  of  them  all  did  good. *  "The
patient  also  drank  an  inf\ision  of  a  variety  of  herbs ;  the  com-
{K)sition  of  this  I  do  not  recollect,  nor  does  the  patient  remember
the  precise  quantity  he  took."

How  can  any  one  imitate  such  an  experiment  in  an  apparently
similar  case,  since  neither  the  remedy  nor  the  case  are  accurately

^  Let  it  Dot  be  asserted  *'  that  all  the  substances  only  did  good  because  of  their
oombnuition,  that  nought  must  be  added  to  nothing  tiiken  from  it,  to  enable  us  to  re-
peat ihe  fiKt.** But  many  ingredients  are  never  of  equal  goodness  and  power  in  any
two  flipfnittfl*  ihopa,  not  even  in  the  same  shop  at  different  times. Even  the  same
nuiture  will  bo  different  in  the  same  shop  to-morrow  to  wliat  it  was  toniay,  according
It  one  ingredient  was  added  sooner  than  the  other,  more  fully  pulverized,  or  rubbed-
vpmonatroDgly  with  the  other  ingredients,  according  as  the  atmwpheric  temperature
was  lower  to-day,  to-morrow  higher,  the  ingredients  more  accurately  measured  to-day
ttan  to-morrow,  or  according  as  the  preparer  of  the  prescription  was  more  attentive
UhUj,  leea  to-mocrow ;  and  many  other  drcumstances  may  occur  to  roar  human
cafedatkni.


414  JE8CULAPIUS  IN  THE  BALANC&

known?  Hence  all  the  results  attempted  by  future  imitators
deceptive;  the  whole  fact  is  lost  for  posterity.  All  we  see  i^
that  cure  is  possible ;  but  how  is  it  to  be  effected,  and  how  an
indefinite  case  can  tend  to  perfect  the  art  of  medicine,  that  we
do  not  see.

"But,"  I  hear  exclaimed,  "you  must  not  be  too  severe  upoii
physicians,  who  are  but  men,  amid  the  hurry  and  bustle  which

"  In  chronic  diseases  he  will  come  off  more  triumphant ;  in
these  he  has  time  and  cool  blood  at  his  service  in  order  to  exhibit
openly  the  truth  of  his  art ;  and  in  despite  of  Moli^,  Patin,
AgL'ippa,  Yalesius,  Cardanus,  Eosseau  and  Arcesilas,  he  will  show
that  he  can  heal  not  only  tliose  who  would  get  well  of  themselves^
but  that  he  can  cure  what  he  will  and  what  he  is  asked  to  cure."
Would  to  Ileaven  it  were  so ! But  as  a  proof  that  physiciana
feel  themselves  very  weak  in  chronic  diseases,  they  avoid  the
treatment  of  them  as  much  as  possible. Let  a  physician  be
called  to  an  elderly  man,  paralyzed  for  some  years,  and  let  him
be  asked  to  exhibit  his  skill. Naturally  he  does  not  openly  avow
how  impotent  this  art  is  in  his  hands,  but  he  betakes  himself  to
some  by-way  of  escape — shrugs  his  shoulders— obser\'es  that
the  patient's  strength  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  undei^
the  treatment  (in  general,  a  very  exhausting,  debilitating  proce-
dure in  the  hands  of  ordinary  practitioners),  sj)eaks  with  a  com-
passionate air  of  the  unfavourable  season  and  inclement  weather,
which  must  lirst  be  over,  and  of  the  healing  herbs  of  spring,
which  must  be  waited  for  before  the  cure  can  be  attempted,  or
of  Ri^riic  far-distant  mineral  waters  where  such  cures  have  been
made,  and  whither,  if  his  life  be  spared,  the  patient  will  be  able
to  proceed  in  the  course  of  six  or  eight  months. In  the  mean-
time, not  to  expose  himself,  he  orders  something,  of  the  cflectB
of  which  he  is  not  sure ;  this  he  does  in  order  to  amuse  the
patient  and  to  make  a  little  money  out  of  him  at  the  same  time ;
but  certain  relief  he  cannot  give. At  one  time  he  wishes  to
remove  the asthenia  by  internal  or  external  stimulants; at
another  fortify  the  tone  of  the  muscular  fibre  with  a  multitude
of  bitter  extracts,*  whose  effects  he  kno\rs  not,  or  strengthen  the
digestive  apparatus  with  cinchona  bark ;  or  he  seeks  to  purify
and  cool  the  blood  by  a  decoction  of  equally  unknown  plants,

'  Wv  t>iU'n  H'ud  iu  the  hUtcxies  of  cases,  even  of  di^tinguL'ih<Kl  plivsioiAn<«.  sucli
«iU-ervu(k>us  ad  tLuc  **  I  n:>w  ^ave  the  patioDt  the  bitter  extracts'* — as  if  t]io  Utiur
Vf^ctablc  fruUntuiices  vera  uut  all  very  ▼.irious  in  tlieir  peculiar  actioi» !


JB0ULAPIU8  IN  THE  BALANCE.  415

or  by  means  of  saline,  metallic  and  vegetable  substance  of  prob-
lematic utility,  to  rasolve  and  dissipate  suspected  but  never  ob-
served obstructions  in  the  glands  and  minute  ves.sc1s  of  the
abdomen ;  or  by  means  of  purgatives  ho  thinks  to  ex]>el  certain
impurities  which  exist  only  in  his  imagination,  and  thereby
hasten  bya/tw  hours  the  sluggish  evacuations.  Now  he  directs
hischarge  against  the  principle  of  gout;  now  against  a  su})pressed
gonorrhoea ;  now  against  a  psoric  acridity,  anon  against  some
other  kind  of  acridity.  lie  elfects  a  change,  but  not  the  change
he  wished.  Gradually,  under  the  pretext  of  urgent  bu.siness,
the  physician  withdraws  from  the  patient,  couifortiiig  liimself
and  at  length  the  pati<Mit\s  friends  when  thi^y  press  him  for  his
i^nion,  that  in  such  cases  his  art  is  too  weak.

And  that  his  so  vaunted  art  is  too  weak,  on  tliis  comfortable,
soft  pillow  he  reposes  in  cases  of  gout,  consumption  ,  old  ulcers,
oontractions  and  so-called  dropsies,  cachexias  of  innumerable
varieties,  spasmodic  asthmas,  angina  pect«.>ris,  ]>ains,  spasms,
cutaneous  eruptions,  debility,  mental  affections  of  many  kinds,
and  I  know  not  how  many  other  chronic  diseases.

In  no  other  case  is  the  insuQiciency  of  our  ait  so  strongly  and
so  unpardonably  manifested  as  in  those  distressing  dis<.'ases  from
which  hardly  any  family  is  altogether  free  ;  hardly  any  in  which
some  one  of  the  circle  diX'S  not  secretly  sigh  over  ailments,  for
which  he  has  tried  the  so-called  skill  ori)liyMeiaiis  lar  and  near.
In  silence  the  alHicteJ  sutl'erer  steals  «.)U  his  nielaiieholy  way,
borne  down  with  miseral»le  sulUring,  and,  desjjairiiig  in  human
aid,  seeks  a  solace  in  religion.

•'Yes,"  I  hear  the  medical  seho<;l  whisj'er  with  a  s^vming
compassionate  shrug,  '*  Yes.  these  are  notoriously  incurable  evils:
our  books  tell  us  thev  are  incurable."  As  ii'  il  could  eum fort
the  million  of  sullerers  lo  be  told  of  the  vain  impotence  (»t'  ouv
art!  As  if  the  Creator  of  these  sullerers  iiad  not  j»rovided
remedies  for  tliem  also,  and  as  if  for  them  the  s(»uree  of  b«nin(l-
less  goodness  did  not  exist,  eom])ared  to  which  the  teudercst
mothers  love  is  tis  thick  clouds  beside  the  glorv  of  the  noon-
day sun !

"Yes,''  I  hear  the  school  continue  toapolui/i/.o,  '*  the  thousand
defects  in  our  civic  constitution,  the  artilieiah  eouiplieated  mode
of  life  so  far  removt^d  from,  nature,  the  chauieleon-like  luxury
enervating  and  deranging  our  natural  coiLstitutii>n,  are  answerable
for  the  incurable  chara<tter  of  all  the.se  evils.  (.)ur  art  is  tj[uite
excused  for  being  incapable  of  the  cure  ^A  .-a-,  li  casv.s.''

Can  you  then  believe  that  tlie  Preserver  ol'  our  uiee,  ihe  All-


416  .S0ULAPIU8  IN  THE  BALAITOB.

wise,  did  not  design  these  complexities  of  our  civic  oonstitatian
and  our  artificial  mode  of  life  to  increase  our  enjoyment  hera^
and  to  remove  misery  and  suffering?  What  extraordinary
kind  of  living  can  that  be  to  which  man  cannot  accustom  him*
self  without  any  great  disturbance  of  his  health  ?  The  fiU  of
the  seal  and  the  train-oil  eaten  with  bread  made  of  dried  fiih
bones  as  little  prevents  the  Greenlander  from  enjoying  heallii
in  general,  as  does  the  imvaried  milk-diet  of  the  shepherds  oa
the  Swiss  mountains,  the  purely  vegetable  food  of  the  poorar
Germans,  or  the  highly  animal  diet  of  the  wealthy  Englishman^
Does  not  the  Vienna  nobleman  accustom  himself  to  his  tweaty
or  thirty  covers,  and  does  he  not  enjoy  just  as  much  health  aa
the  Chinese  with  his  thin  rice  soup,  the  Saxon  miner  with  no-
thing but  potatoes,  the  South  Sea  Islander  with  his  roasted  bread-
fruit, and  the  Scottish  highlander  with  his  oatmeal  cakes?

T  am  ready  to  admit  that  the  contest  of  conflicting  passions
and  of  many  other  enjoyments,  the  luxurious  refinement^  and
the  absence  of  exercise  in  fresh  air  that  prevail  in  the  labyrinth*
ine  palaces  of  great  cities,  may  give  occasion  to  more  numercyoi
and  more  rare  diseases  than  the  simple  uniformity  that  obtains
iu  the  airy  hut  of  the  humble  villager.  But  that  does  not  nift>
terially  alter  the  matter.  For  our  medical  art  is  as  impotent
against  the  water  colic  of  the  peasant  of  lower  Saxony,  the
Tsonier  of  Hungary  and  Transylvania,  the  Radesygeoi  Norway,
the  Stbbem  of  Scotland,  the  Hotme  of  Lapland,  the  Pdagra  of
Lombardy,  the  Plica  Polonica  of  certain  Sclavonic  tribefl,  and
various  other  diseases  prevalent  among  the  simple  peasantry  of
various  countries,  as  it  is  against  the  more  aristocratic  disorders  of
high  life  in  our  large  towns.  Must  there  be  one  kind  of  medical
art  for  the  former,  and  another  for  the  latter:  or  if  it  were  only
once  discovered,  would  it  not  be  equally  applicable  to  both?
I  should  think  so  !

It  may  not  certainly  exist  in  our  books,  nor  yet  in  our  heads,
nor  be  taught  in  our  schools,  but  there  is  such  a  thing  for  aU
that;  it  is  a  possibility.

Occasionally  a  regular  brother  practitioner  stumbles  by  a  lucky
hit  upon  a  cure  which  astonishes  half  the  world  about  him,  and
not  less  himself;  but  among  the  many  medicines  he  employed
he  is  by  no  means  sure  which  did  good.  Not  less  frequently  does
the  neck-or-uothing  practitioner,  without  a  degree,  whom  the
world  calls  a  quack,  make  as  great  and  wonderful  a  cure.  Bnt
neither  he  nor  yet  his  worshipful  brother  practitioner  with  a


JBCVLAPinS  m  THE  BALAKCX.  417

diploma  knows  how  to  eliminate  the  evident  and  fruitful  truth
which  the  core  contains.  Neither  can  separate  and  record  the
medicine  which  certainly  was  of  use  out  of  the  mass  of  useless
«nd  ohstructing  ones  tbey  employed ;  neither  precisely  indicates
the  case  in  which  it  did  good,  and  in  which  it  will  certainly
benefit  again.  Neither,  knows  how  to  abstract  a  truth  which  will
hold  good  in  all  future  time,  an  appropriate,  certain,  unfailing
remedy  for  every  such  case  that  may  occur  hereafter.  His  ex-^
perience  in  this  case,  remarkable  though  it  seemed,  will  almost
never  be  of  service  to  him  in  any  other.  All  that  we  learn  is,
that  a  helpful  system  of  medicine  is  possible;  but  &om  these  and
a  hundred  other  cases  it  is  quite  manifest  that  as  yet  it  has  not
attained  the  rank  of  a  science,  that  even  the  way  has  yet  to  be
discoYered  how  such  a  science  is  to  be  learned  and  taught.  As
fiu"  as  we  are  concerned,  it  cannot  be  said  to  exist.

Meanwhile,  among  these  brilliant  but  rare  cures  there  are  many
(vulgarly  called  Pferdecuren  [horse  cures],  which,  however  great
the  noise  they  might  make,  are  not  of  a  character  to  be  imitated,
M&i  TnortaU^  madly  desperate  attempts  by  means  of  the  most
powerful  drugs  in  enormous  doses,  which  brought  the  patient
into  the  most  imminent  danger,  in  which  life  and  death  wrestled
for  the  mastery,  and  in  which  a  slight  unforeseen  preponderance
on  the  side  of  kind  nature  gave  the  fortunate  turn  to  the  case :
the  patient  recovered  himself  and  escaj^ed  from  the  very  jaws  of
death.

A  treatment  with  a  couple  of  scruples  of  jalap-resin  to  the
dose  is  by  no  means  inferior  in  severity  to  the  helleborism  of  the
ancient  Greek  and  Eoman  physicians.

Such  modes  of  treatment  are  not  very  unlike  murders,  the
result  alone  renders  them  uncriminal,  and  almost  imparts  to
them  the  lustre  of  a  good  action,  the  saving  of  a  life.  *

This  cannot  be  the  divine  art,  that  like  the  mighty  working  of
nature  should  effect  the  greatest  deeds  simply,  mildly,  and  un-
obeervably,  by  means  of  the  smallest  agencies.

The  ordinary  practice  of  the  majority  of  our  practitioners  in
Uieir  treatment  of  diseases  resembles  these  horrible  revolutionary
cures.  They  partially  attain  their  object,  but  in  a  hurtful  way.
Thus  they  have  to  treat,  for  example,  an  unknown  disease  ac-

'  Thu3  a  cruel  uniirjxir  vibratos  betwixt  tlic  scvilfiild  aiiJ  tho  tliruuu,  a  small  un-
fortunate accident  brings  hi«5  head  to  the  block,  ami  he  «lics  auiiiUt  the  curses  of  the
or  a  small  moment  of  luck  tliat  did  not  enter  into  his  calculations  puts  the
en  his  fattid,  and  the  same  nation  ialls  down  and  worships  him.
27


418  jkscxjImAfivb  in  the  balance.

oompanied  by  general  swelling.  On  account  of  tbe  swelling  it
is  in  their  eyes  a  disease  of  daily  occurrence ;  without  hesitaiti(m
they  call  it  dropsy  (just  as  if  a  single  symptom  constituted  tbe
essential  nature  of  the  whole  disease  I),  and  they  briskly  set  to
work  with  the  remark :  ^Hhe  water  must  be  drawn  off,  and  then
all  will  be  right."  Away  they  go  at  it,  attacking  it  with  a  fi^
quent  repetition  of  drastic  (so-called  hydragogue)  purgatives,  and,
see !  what  a  wonderful  event  takes  place — the  abdomen  faik,  the
arms,  the  legs  and  the  face  grow  quite  thin  I  ^^Look  what  I  can
do,  what  is  in  the  power  of  my  art;  this  most  serious  disease^
the  dropsy,  is  conquered!  with  only  this  slight  disadvantage,
that  a  new  disease,  which  nobody  anticipated,  is  come  in  its  plaoe
(property,  has  been  brought  on  by  the  excessive  purgation),  a
confounded  lientery,  which  we  must  now  combat  with  new
weapons."

Thus  the  worthy  man  comforts  hiniself  from  time  to  time,  and
yet  it  is  impossible  that  such  a  procedure  can  be  called  a  cur^
where  the  disease,  by  means  of  violent  unsuitable  medicines^
only  loses  a  portion  of  its  outward  form  and  gains  a  new  one ;
the  change  of  one  disease  for  another  is  not  a  cure*

The  more  I  examine  the  ordinary  cures,  the  more  I  am  con-
vinced, that  they  are  not  direct  transformations  of  the  disease
treated  into  health,  but  revolutionizings,  disturbances  of  the  order
of  things  by  medicines,  which,  without  being  actually  appro-
priate, possessed  power  enough  to  give  matters  another  (nK>rbid)
«hape. These  are  what  are  called  cures.

'^The  hysterical  ailments  of  yonder  lady  were  successfully  re-
moved by  me !"

No!  they  were  only  changed  into  a  metrorrhagia.  After  some
time  I  am  greeted  by  a  shout  of  triumph  :  "Excuse  me !  I  have
also  succeeded  in  putting  a  stop  to  the  uterine  hfemorrhage.'*

But  do  you  not  see  how,  on  the  other  hand,  the  skin  has  be-
come sallow,  the  white  of  the  eye  has  acquired  a  yellow  hue,
the  motions  have  become  greyish-white,  and  the  urine  orange-
coloured.

And  thus  the  so-called  cures  go  on  like  the  shifting  scenes  of
one  and  the  same  tragedy  I

The  most  successful  cases  among  them  arc  still  those  where
the  revolution  effected  by  the  drug  developes  a  new  disease  of
such  a  sort,  that  nature,  so  to  speak,  is  so  much  occupied  with
it  as  to  forget  the  old  original  disease  and  let  it  go  about  its
but^iness,  and  is  engaged  with  the  artificial  one  until  some  luckj


uBSOULAFIUS  IN  THE  BALANCE.  419

ciTcmiistanoe  liberates  it  from  the  latter.  There  are  several
kinds  of  such  lucky  circumstances.  The  leaving  off  of  the  me*
didne — ^youthful  vigour — the  commencement  of  the  menstrual
flow  or  its  cessation  at  the  proper  periods  of  life — a  fortunate
domestio  occurrence — or  (but  this  is  certainly  of  rare  occurrence,
still  it  sometimes  happens  like  a  ternion  in  the  game  of  lotto)
that  was  appropriate  and  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the
case— ^  in  i^l  these  instances  a  cure  may  occur.

In  like  manner,  mistakes  of  the  chemist  respecting  the  medi-
cines and  sig^  in  prescriptions  have  often  been  the  occasion  of
wonderful  cures.  But  are  such  circumstances  recommendations
for  the  (till  now)  most  uncertain  of  all  arts  ?  I  should  rather
think  not

By  treatment  the  ordinary  physician  often  understands  nothing
more  than  a  powerful,  violent  attack  upon  the  body  with  things
that  are  to  be  found  in  the  chemist's  shop,  with  an  alteration  of
the  diet,  sfcundnm  artem,  to  one  of  a  very  extraordinary,  very
meagre  character.  "The  patient  must  tirst  be  powerfully  afiect^
before  I  can  do  him  any  good ;  I  wish  I  could  but  once  get  him
regularly  laid  up  in  bed !"  But  that  the  transition  from  bed  to
the  straw  and  the  coffin  is  so  very  easy,  infinitely  easier  than  to
health,  he  says  nothing  about  that.

The  physician  of  the  stimulating  school  is  in  the  habit  of  pre-
scribing in  almost  every  case  an  exactly  opposite  diet  (such  is
the  custom  of  his  sect) :  ham,  strong  meat  soups,  brandy,  &c.,
often  in  cases  where  the  very  smell  of  meat  makes  the  patient
sick,  and  he  can  bear  nothing  but  cold  water ;  but  Jie  too  is  by
no  means  sparing  in  his  use  of  violent  remedies  in  enormous
doses.

The  schools  of  both  the  former  and  the  latter  class  authorise
a  revolutionary  procedure  of  this  sort :  "  No  child's  play  with
your  doses,''  say  they,  "go  boldly  and  energetically  to  work,
giving  them  strong,  as  strong  as  possible!"  And  they  are  right
if  treating  means  the  same  ihing  as  knocking  down.

How  does  it  happen  that,  in  the  thirty-live  centuries  since
ifisculapius  lived,  this  so  indispensable  art  of  medicine  has  made
so  little  progress?  What  was  the  obstacle  ?  for  what  the  phy-
sicians have  already  done  is  not  one  huTi<]ro<ith  part  of  what  they
might  and  ought  to  have  done.

All  niitions,  even  jemotcly  api)ro:icliing  a  state  of  civilization,
perceived,  from  the  first,  the  necessity  and  iiiestimable  value  of


420  jISOUlapius  in  ths  balanoi.

this  art;  they  lequired  its  praotioefix)in  a  caste  who  caQedtheoi'
selves  physicians.  These  affected,  in  almost  all  ageB,  when  they
came  in  contact  with  the  sick,  to  be  in  perfect  possession  of  this
art ;  but  among  themselves  they  sought  to  gloze  over  the  gaps
and  inconsistencies  of  their  knowledge  by  heaping  system  upon
system,  each  made  up  of  the  diversified  materials  of  conjectures,
opinions,  definitions,  postulates,  and  predicates,  linked  together
by  scholastic  syllogisms,  in  order  to  enable  each  leader  of  a  sect
to  boast  respecting  his  own  system,  that  here  he  had  built  a
temple  for  the  goddess  of  health — a  temple  worthy  of  her — in
which  the  inquirer  would  be  answered  by  pure  and  salutary
oracles.

It  was  only  the  most  ancient  times  that  formed  an  exception
to  this  rule.

We  were  never  nearer  the  discovery  of  the  science  of  medidne
than  in  the  time  of  Hippocrates.  This  attentive,  unsophisticated
diseases  before  him  accurately,  without  addition,  without  colour-
ing, without  speculation.^  In  the  faculty  of  pure  observation  he
has  been  surpassed  by  no  physician  that  has  followed  him.  Only
one  important  part  of  the  medical  art  was  this  fiivoured  son  of
nature  destitute  of,  else  had  he  been  completely  master  of  his
art;  the  knowledge  of  medicines  and  their  application.  But  he
did  not  affect  such  a  knowledge — ^he  acknowledged  his  deficiency
in  that  he  gave  almost  no  medicines  (because  he  knew  them  too
imperfectly),  and  trusted  almost  entirely  to  diet,

AH  succeeding  ages  degenerated  and  wandered  more  or  less
from  the  indicated  path,  the  later  sects  of  the  empirics — worthy
of  all  respect — ^and  to  a  certain  degree,  Aretaeus,*  excepted.

Sophistical  whimsicalities  were  pressed  into  the  service.  Some
sought  the  origin  of  disease  in  a  universal  hostile  principle,  in
some  poison  which  produced  all  maladies,  and  which  was  to  be
contended  with  and  destroyed.  Hence  the  universal  antidote
which  was  to  cure  all  diseases,  called  Uieriaca^  composed  of  an
innumerable  multitude  of  ingredients,  and  more  lately  the
mithridatium^  and  similar  compounds,  celebrated  from  the  time

*  The  Bpeculative  writings  tmder  his  name  are  not  his,  neither  are  the  three  iMt
hooHa  of  the  aphorisms.  The  want  of  the  Hippocratic  loQicisms,  the  absence  of
the  Tery  peculiar  language  of  this  man,  must  oonrince  any  one  of  this,  who  knova
any  thing  about  such  matters.

mated  together  in  complete  classes,  from  many  individual  cases  of  disease :  thk  Hip-
pocrataa  did  not  di\  birt  modem  pathologists  do  it


r


.SSOUIiAPIUS  IK  THE  BALANCE.  421

of  Nicander  down  almost  to  our  own  day.  From  these  ancient
times  came  the  unhappy  idea,  that  if  a  sufficient  number  of
drags  were  mixed  in  the  receipt,  it  could  scarcely  £ul  to  con*
tain  the  one  capable  of  triumphing  over  the  enemy  of  health —
while  all  the  time  the  action  of  each  individual  ingredient  was
little^  or  not  at  all  known.  And  to  this  practice  Galen,  Celsus,
the  later  Greek  and  Arabian  physicians,  and,  on  the  revival  of
the  study  of  medicine  in  Bologna,  Padua,  Seville,  and  Paris,  in
the  middle  ages,  the  schools  there  established,  and  aU  succeed-
ing ones,  have  adhered.

In  this  great  period  of  nearly  two  thousand  years,  was  the
pure  observation  of  disease  neglected.  The  wish  was  to  be
more  scientific,  and  to  discover  the  hidden  causes  of  diseases.
These  once  discovered,  then  it  were  an  easy  (?)  task  to  find  out
remedies  for  them.  Galen  devised  a  system  for  this  purpose,  his
four  qualities  with  their  different  degrees ;  and  until  the  last
hundred  and  fifty  years  his  system  was  worshipped  over  our
whole  hemisphere,  as  the  nonplus  tdtra  of  medical  truth.  But
these  phantoms  did  not  advance  the  practical  art  of  healing  by
a  hair's  breadth ;  it  rather  retrograded.

After  it  had  become  more  easy  to  communicate  thought,  to
obtain  a  name  by  writing  hypotheses,  and  when  the  writings  of
others  could  be  more  cheaply  read — in  a  word,  after  the  dis-
covery of  printing — the  systems  rapidly  increased,  and  they
have  crowded  one  on  another  up  to  our  own  day.  There  was
now  the  influence  of  the  stars,  now  that  of  evil  spirits  and
witchcraft ;  anon  came  the  alchymist  with  his  salt,  sulphur,  and
mercury ;  then  Silvius,  with  his  acids,  biles,  and  mucus ;  then
the  iatromathematicians  and  mechanical  sect,  who  explained
every  thing  by  tlie  shape  of  the  smallest  parts,  their  weight,
pressure,  friction,  &c. ;  to  these  succeeded  the  humoral  patholo-
gists, with  certain  acridities  of  the  fluids ;  then  the  tone  of  the
fibres  and  the  abnormal  state  of  the  nerves  was  insisted  on  by
the  solidists ;  then,  according  to  Eeil,  much  was  due  to  the  in-
ternal composition  and  form  of  the  most  minute  parts,  while  the
chemists  found  a  fruitful  cause  of  disease  in  the  development  of
various  gases.  How  Brown  explained  disease  with  his  theory
of  excitability,  and  how  he  wished  to  oiiil>race  the  whole  art
with  a  couple  of  postulates,  is  still  fresh  in  our  recollection  ;  to
say  nothing  of  the  ludicrously  loit\%  gigantic  undertaking  of  the
natural  philosophers !

Physicians  no  longer  tried  to  see  diseases  as  they  were ;  what


422  JBSCULAPIUS  IN  THB  BALAKCS.

they  saw  did  not  satisfy  them,  but  they  wished  by  a  priort  rea-
aoning  to  find  out  an  undisooverable  source  of  disease  in  regions
of  speculation  which  are  not  to  be  penetrated  by  terrestrial
mortal.  Our  system-builders  delighted  in  these  metaphysical
heights,  where  it  was  so  easy  to  win  territory;  for  in  the
boundless  region  of  speculation  every  one  becomes  a  ruler  who
can  most  effectually  elevate  himself  beyond  the  domain  of  the
senses.  The  superhuman  aspect  they  derived  from  the  erection
of  these  stupendous  castles  in  the  air  concealed  their  poverty  in
the  art  of  healing.

"  But,  since  the  discovery  of  printing,  the  preliminary  scieneeB
of  the  physician,  especially  natural  history  and  natural  philoso-
phy, and,  in  particular,  the  anatomy  of  the  human  body,  phy-
siology, and  botany,  have  greatly  advanced."

True :  but  it  is  worthy  of  the  deepest  reflection  how  it  comes
that  these  useful  sciences,  which  have  so  manifestly  increased
the  knowledge  of  the  physician,  have  contributed  so  little  to  the
improvement  of  his  art ;  their  direct  influence  is  most  insignifi-
cant, and  the  time  was  when  the  abuse  of  these  sciences  ob-
structed the  practical  art  of  healing.

Then  the  anatomist  took  upon  him  to  explain  the  functions
of  the  living  body  ;  and,  by  his  knowledge  of  the  position  of
the  internal  parts,  to  elucidate  even  the  phenomena  of  disease.
Then  were  the  membranes,  or  the  cellular  tissue  of  one  intestine^
continuations  of  the  membranes  or  cellular  tissue  of  another  or
of  a  third  intestine  ;  and  so,  according  to  them,  was  the  whole
mystery  of  the  metastasis  of  diseases  unravelled  to  a  hair.  14"
that  did  not  prove  sufficient,  they  were  not  long  in  discovering
some  nervous  filament  to  serve  as  a  bridge  for  the  transpor-
tation of  a  disease  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another,  or  some
other  unfruitful  speculations  of  the  same  kind.  After  the  ab-
sorbents were  discovered,  anatomy  immediately  took  upon  her-
self to  instruct  physicians  in  what  way  medicines  must  permeate
them,  in  order  to  get  to  that  spot  of  the  body  where  their  reme-
dial power  was  wanted ;  and  there  were  many  more  of  such
material  demonstrations  put  forward^  much  to  the  retardation
of  our  art.  It  often  reigned  despotically,  and  refused  to  ac-
knowledge every  physician  who  handled  his  scalpel  otherwise
than  according  to  the  mode  taught  in  the  schools — who  eould
not,  without  hesitation,  give  the  name  of  each  little  depression
on  the  sui'facc  of  a  bone,  who  could  not,  ou  the  instant^  give  thu


JBBOULAPIVS  IN*  THE  BALANCS.  423

<nigiii  and  infiertion  of  every  smallest  muscle  (whick  sometimes
<ml7  owed  its  individual  existence  to  the  scalpel).  The  exami-
Bation  of  a  physieiaa  for  a  degree  consisted  almost  solely  iu
aoatomy :  this  he  was  obliged  to  know  off  by  heart,  with  a
most  pedantic  precision ;  and  if  he  did  this,  then  he  was  pre-
pared to  practise.

Physiology,  until  Haller's  time,  looked  only  through  the
spectacles  of  hypothetical  couceits,  gross  me(Aianieal  explana*
tions,  and  pretensions  to  systems,  until  this  great  man  under*
took  the  task  of  founding  the  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  oi
the  human  body  upon  sensible  observation  and  truthful  experi-
ence alone.  Little  has  been  added  since  his  time,  except  so  far
as  newly-discovered  products,  newly-discovered  physical  pow-
ers and  law^  have  conspired  to  explain  the  constitution  of  our
frame.  But  from  these,  little  has  been  incontrovertibly  estab-
lished.

In  general,  natural  philosophy  often  offered  its  services,  some-
what presumptuously,  to  explain  the  phenomena  in  the  healthy
and  diseased  body.  Then  were  the  manifest  laws  which,  in  the
inorganic  world,  regulate  the  extrication,  confinement,  and  dif-
fiision  of  calorio,  and  the  phenomena  of  electricity  and  galvan-
ism, applied,  without  change  and  without  any  exception,  to  the
explanation  of  vital  operations ;  and  there  were  many  prema-
ture eonclusions  of  a  similar  kincL

But  none  of  the  preliminary  sciences  has  assumed  so  arrogant
a  plaae  as  chemistry.  It  is,  indeed,  a  Cict  that  chemistry  ex-
plains certain  appearances  of  the  healthy  as  well  as  tlie  disease<l
body,  and  is  a  guide  to  the  pre|>aration  of  various  medicines:
but  it  is  incredible  how  often  it  has  usairjved  the  riglit  of  ex-
plaining all  physiologieal  and  pathological  phenomena,  and
how  much  it  has  distinguished  itself  l)y  autliori.sing  this  or  tlud
medicine.  Gren,  TromsdorftJ  and  Lipliardt,  may  serve  as  warn-
ing  examples  of  this-

It  is,  I  repeat,  a  matter  for  more  serioiLS  reflection,  that  while
&ese  accessory  sciences  of  medicine  (in  themselves  most  com-
mendable) hax- e  advanced  within  these  last  ten  years  to  a  lieight
and  a  maturity  whicli  seems  not  to  be  capable  of  much  further
advancement,  yet,  notwithstanding,  they  Lave  had  no  inarke<i
benefkjial  influence  on  tiie  treatment  of  disease.

Let  us  consider  how  tliis  has  hapj)ened.

Anatomy  shews  us  the  outside  of  every  part  which  can  Ixt
iepanaied  with  the  kniie,  the  j^w.  or  bj  nmceration  ;  but  th^i^


4M  iBSCULAPIUS  IN  THS  BALANGl.

deep  internal  changes  it  does  not  enable  us  to  see;  even  when
we  examine  the  intestines,  still  it  is  only  a  view  of  the  outside
of  these  internal  surfsLces  that  we  obtain ;  and  even  were  we  to
open  live  animals,  or,  like  Herophilus,  of  cruel  memory,  disseot
men  alive,  so  little  could  we  penetrate  the  minute  structure  of
parts  lying  remote  &om  view,  that  even  the  most  inquisitiye
and  attentive  observer  would  relinquish  the  task  in  dissatisfibo-
tion.  Nor  do  yfe  make  much  greater  discoveries  with  the
microscope,  unless  the  refracting  power  favour  us  with  optioal
illusions.  We  see  only  the  outside  of  organs,  we  see  only  their
grosser  substance ;  but  into  the  innermost  depths  of  their  being,
and  into  the  connexion  of  their  secret  operations  no  mortal  eye
can  ever  pierce.

By  means  of  pure  observation  and  unprejudiced  reflection,  in
connexion  with  anatomy,  natural  philosophy,  and  chemistry^
we  have  a  considerable  store  of  very  probable  conclusions  re-.
garding  the  operations  and  vital  phenomena  of  the  himianbodj
{phy8iohgy\  because  the  phenomena  in  what  is  called  a  healthy
body  remain  pretty  constant,  and  hence  can  be  observed  fire-
quently  and,  for  the  purposes  of  comparison^  from  all  the  differ>
ent  ppints  of  view  afforded  by  the  various  branches  of  know-^
ledge  bearing  upon  them.  But  it  is  no  less  true,  than  striking
atad  humbling,  that  this  anthropological  or  physiological  know-
ledge begins  to  prove  of  no  use  as  soon  as  the  system  departa
from  its  state  of  health.  All  explanations  of  morbid  processes
from  what  we  know  of  healthy  ones,  are  deceptive,  approaching
more  or  less  to  what  is  untrue ;  at  all  events,  positive  proofe  of
the  reality  and  truth  of  these  transferred  explanations  are  unat-*
tainable ;  they  are  from  time  to  time  refuted  by  the  highest  of
all  tribunals — experience.  Just  because  an  explanation  answers
for  the  healthy  state  of  the  frame,  it  will  not  answer  for  the  dia-*
eased.  We  may  admit  it  or  not  as  we  please,  but  it  is  too  true,
that  in  the  moment  when  we  attempt  to  regard  the  state  of  the
disease  physiologically,  there  drops  before  our  previously  clear
light  of  physiology  a  thick  veil — a  partition  which  prevents  all
vision.  Our  physiological  skill  is  quite  at  fault  when  we  have
to  explain  the  phenomena  of  morbid  action.  There  is  almost  no
part  of  it  applicable  I  True,  we  can  give  a  sort  of  fBtr-fetched
explanation,  by  making  a  forced  transference  and  application  of
the  physiological  systems  to  pathological  phenomena ;  but  it  is
only  illusory  and  misleads  into  error.

Chemistry  should  never  attempt  to  offer  an  explanation  of  the.


JUGULAPIUS  IN  THE  BALANCE.  425

limonnal  performances  of  the  functions  in  the  diseased  body,
flince  it  is  so  unsaccessful  in  explaining  them  in  the  healthy
fltate.  When  it  predicts  what,  according  to  its  laws,  must  hap-
peOf  then  something  quite  different  takes  place ;  and  if  the  vi-
tdity  oyennasters  chemistry  in  the  healthy  body,  how  much
more  must  it  do  so  in  the  diseased,  which  is  exposed  to  the  in-
fluence of  so  many  more  unknown  forces.  And  just  as  little
should  chemistry  imdertake  to  give  a  decision  upon  the  suitable-
ness or  worthlessness  of  medicines,  for  it  is  altogether  out  of  its
^here  of  vision  to  determine  what  is  properly  healing  or  hurt-
fbl,  and  it  possesses  no  principle  and  no  standard  by  which
the  healing  eflicacy  of  medicines,  in  different  diseases,  can  be
measured  or  judged  of.

Thus  has  the  healing  artist  for  ever  stood  alone — I  might  say
fiirsaken — ^forsaken  by  all  his  renowned  auxiliary  sciences — for-
saken by  all  his  transcendental  explanations  and  speculative
sjrstems.  All  these  assistants  were  mute,  when,  for  example,
lie  stumbled  upon  an  intermittent  fever  which  would  not  yield
to  purgatives  and  cinchona  bark.

"  What  is  to  be  done  here  ?  what  is  with  sure  confidence  to  be
set  about  ?"  he  inquires  of  these  his  oracles. — Profound  silence.
— (And  thus  they  remain  silent  up  to  the  present  hour,  in  most
oases,  these  fine  oracles.)

He  reflects  upon  the  matter,  and  comes,  after  the  fashion  of
men,  to  the  foolish  notion,  that  his  uncertainty  what  to  do  here
arises  from  his  not  knowing  tlie  internal  nature  of  intermittent
fever. — ^He  searches  in  his  books,  in  some  twenty  of  the  most
celebrated  systematic  works,  and  finds  (unless  they  have  copied
from  one  another)  as  many  different  explanations  of  intermittent
fever  as  books  he  examines.  Which  of  them  is  he  to  take  for
his  guide  ? They  contradict  one  another.

By  this  road  he  finds  he  will  make  no  progress.

He  will  let  intermittent  fever  just  be  intermittent  fever,  and
turns  his  attention  solely  to  learn  what  medicines  the  experience
cf  bygone  ages  has  discovered  for  intermittent  fever,  besides
cinchona  bark  and  evacuants.  He  proceeds  to  search,  and  to
his  amazement  discovers  that  an  immense  number  of  medicines
have  been  celebrated  in  intermittent  fever.

Where  is  he  to  begin  ?  Which  medicine  is  he  to  give  first ;
which  next,  and  which  last  ?  He  looks  round  for  aid,  but  no
directing  angel  appears,  no  Hercules  in  hiuif^y,  no  heavenly  inspira-
tion whispers  in  his  ear  which  of  all  the  number  he  ought  to
select.


426  .SSCULAPIUS  IN  THE  BALAHGI.

What  is  more  natural,  what  more  appropriate  to  the  weaknes
of  man,  than  that  he  should  adopt  the  unhappj  resolution  (the
resolution  of  almost  all  ordinary  physicians  in  similar  cas^  1),
"  that  as  he  has  nothing  to  direct  his  choice  to  the  best,  he  had
better  give  a  number  of  the  most  celebrated  febrifuge  medicines
mixed  together  in  one  prescription.  How  will  he  ever  otherwise
get  to  the  end  of  the  long  list,  imless  he  take  several  at  a  time?
As  he  can  find  no  one  who  can  tell  him  if  there  is  any  differ-
ence in  the  actions  of  these  different  substances,  he  considers  it
better  to  mix  together  many  than  few  ;^  and  if  the  operation  of
each  of  these  different  ingredients  really  differs  fix>m  that  of  the
others,  it  would  certainly,  he  thinks,  be  better,  in  this  case,  to
collect  several  and  many  such  reputedly  antifebrile  substanoes
in  one  receipt."

"  Among  the  many  substances  in  his  elixirs,  pills,  electuarieSi
mixtures,  and  infusions,  surely  (thus  he  philosophizes)  there
must  be  one  which  will  do  good.  Perhaps  the  most  effectual
happens  also  to  be  the  freshest  and  most  powerful  medicine
therein ;  and  perhaps  the  substances  less  adapted  or  even  ob-
structive to  the  cure,  are  happily  the  weakest  in  yonder  chemist's
shop.  Perhaps !  yes  we  must  hope  for  the  best,  and  trust  to
good  luck! ''

Periculosae  p>lenum  opus  aleae  I  What  are  we  to  think  of  a
science,  the  operations  of  which  are  founded  upon  perhapses  and
blind  chance.

But  suppose  the  first  or  second,  or  all  the  trains  of  mixed
drugs  have  not  done  any  good,  then  I  must  ask,  whence  did
your  authors  derive  the  information,  that  A  or  B,  or  Y  or  Z,
was  useful  in  intermittent  fever  ?

"  It  stands  written  of  each  of  these  remedies  in  the  works  on
Materia  Medica."

But  whence  is  their  knowledge  obtained  ? Do  the  authors  of


'  The  learned  excuse  for  the  great  complexity  of  our  ordinarjjr  prescriptioos,  ''thai
most  of  the  ingredients  were  added  from  rational  reasons,  that  is  to  say,  oo  aoooool
of  the  particular  indications  in  each  case— and  that  regular  prescriptions  must  haT»
an  orthodox  form,  a  ban*  (fundamental  medicine),  a  corrective  (something  added  m
order  to  correct  the  faults  of  the  basis),  an  adjuvant  (an  auxiliary  substance  to  sap>
pqft  the  weakness  of  the  basis),  and  an  excipient  (a  substance  that  supplies  the  form
and  yehicle) — Is  partly  palpable  Bch(x>l-cunning,  like  the  latter  excuse — partly  fiuier,
like  tlie  former.  For  why  does)  Uie  opium  you  odd  not  cause  sleep,  why  do  your
additions  of  neutral  bolts  fail  to  op<:n  the  bowels,  and  your  aqua  sambuci  to  keep  the
skin  moitit  ?  Why  does  that  not  happen,  as  a  rule,  for  which  you  added  each  par-
ticular substance,  if  it  was  propprly  indicated  at*  you  allege  !


JBOULAPIUS  IN THE  BALANCS.  427

these  books  anywhere  assert  that  they  themselves  have  given
otch  of  these  substances  alone  and  uncombined  in  intermittent
fever?

"  Oh  no  I  Some  give  authorities,  or  quote  otlier  works  on
Materia  Medica ;  others  make  the  statement  without  any  refer-
ence to  its  source."

Turn  up  the  original  authorities !

"  The  most  of  these  have  been  convinced  not  by  personal  ex-
perience ;  they  again  refer  to  some  antiquated  works  on  Materia
Medica,  or  such  authorities  as  these :  Kay,  Tabcrnsemontanus,
Trajus,  Fucha,  Toumefort,  Bauhin,  and  Lange."

And  these?

"Some  of  them  refer  to  the  results  of  domestic  practice; —
peasants  and  uneducated  persons,  in  tliis  or  that  district,  have
found  this  or  that  medicine  useful  in  a  particular  case."

And  the  other  authorities  ?

"  Why,  they  aver  that  they  did  not  give  the  medicine  by  it-
self but,  as  it  became  learned  physicians  to  do,  combined  with
other  simples,  and  found  advantage  from  it.  Still  it  was  their
impression  that  it  was  this  drug,  and  not  the  other  sim})les,  that
was  of  service."

A  fine  thing  to  rely  on,  truly,  a  most  delightful  conviction,
grounded  upon  opinions  destitute  even  of  probability  !

In  one  word:  the  primary  origin  of  almost  all  authorities  for
the  action  of  a  simple  medicine  is  derived,  cither  from  the  con-
fused use  of  it,  in  combination  witli  other  drugs,  or  from  do-
mestic practice,  where  this  or  that  uni)rofessional  person  had
tried  it  with  success  in  this  or  that  disease  (iis  if  an  unprofes-
sional person  could  distinguish  one  disease  from  anotlicr).

Truly  this  is  a  most  unsatisfactory  and  turbid  source  for  our
proud  Materia  Medica.  For  if  some  of  the  common  people  had
not,  at  their  own  risk,  undertaken  experiments,  and  communicated
the  results  of  these,  we  should  not  have  known  even  the  little  we
do  at  present  about  the  action  of  most  medicines.  For,  with  the
exception  of  what  a  few  distinguished  men,  to  wit,  Conrad  Ges-
ner,  Stoerk,  Cullen,  Alexander,  Costc,  Willemct,  have  done,  by
administering  simple  medicines  alone  and  uncombined,  in  certain
diseases,  or  to  persons  in  liealth,  the  rest  is  nothing  but  opinion,
illusion,  deception.  Martin  Ilerz  thouglit  the  watcr-hcmlock
cured  phthisis,  although  he  gave  it  combined  with  various
other  drugs.*  On  the  other  hand,  to  nic  the  statement  of  Lange

'  ThU  is  the  general  but  most  unjustifiable  procedure  of  our  medical  practitioners:


428  iBScuLAPins  in  the  balabtcb.

(in  his  Med.  DomesL  Brunsv,)  is  of  much  greater  weight,  namely,
that  the  common  people  have  employed  it  uncombined  in  thifl
disease,  frequently  with  good  effect,  than  what  the  worthy  doc-
tor thought;  and  for  this  simple  reason,  because  he  gave  it  mixed
with  other  drugs,  while  the  others  gave  it  simply  by  itself

The  Materia  Medica  of  remote  antiquity  was  not  worse  ftir-
nished.  Its  sources  were  then  the  histories  of  cures  effected  by
simples,  recorded  in  the  votive  tablets;  and  Dioscorides  and
Pliny  have  manifestly  derived  their  account  of  the  operation  of
simple  medicines  from  the  rude  observations  of  the  common
people.  Thus,  after  the  lapse  of  a  couple  of  thousands  of  yearB,
we  are  not  a  step  advanced !  The  only  source  of  our  knowledge
of  the  powers  of  medicines,  how  troubled  is  it  I  and  the  learned
choir  of  physicians  in  this  enlightened  century,  contents  itself
with  it,  in  the  most  serious  contingency  of  mortals,  when  the
most  precious  of  earthly  possessions — ^life  and  health — ^are  at
stake  I No  wonder  that  the  consequences  are  what  they  are.

He  who,  afl«r  such  experience  of  the  past,  still  expects  that
the  art  of  medicine  will  ever  make  a  single  step  towards  perfeo-
tion  by  this  road,  to  such  a  one  nature  has  denied  all  capacity
of  distinguishing  between  the  probable  and  the  impossible.

To  fill  to  the  brim  the  measure  of  deception  and  misappre-
hension attending  the  administration  of  medicine  to  the  sick,
the  order  of  apothecaries  was  instituted, — a  guild  which  depends
for  existence  on  the  complicated  mixtures  of  drugs.  Never
will  the  complicated  formulas  cease  to  prevail,  as  long  as  the
powerful  order  of  apothecaries  maintains  its  great  influence.

Unlucky  period  of  the  media3val  age,  which  produced  a  Nico-
laus  the  ointmentmaker  (Myrepsus),  from  whose  work  the  Anti'
dotaria,  and  Codices  Medicamentarii  were  compiled  in  Italy  and
Paris ;  and  in  Germany,  at  first  in  Niirnberg,  about  the  middle
of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  first  DispemcUorium  was  written,
by  the  well-meant  zeal  of  the  youthful  Valerius  Cordus.  Before
these  unhappy  events  the  apothecaries  were  merely  unprivileged
venders  of  crude  drugs,  dealers  in  simples,  druggists ;  (at  the
utmost  they  might  have  some  theriac,  mithridate,  and  a  few
ointments,  plasters,  and  syrups,  of  the  Galenic  stamp,  ready  on
demand,  but  this  was  optional  on  their  part.) The  physician

in  an  artifltic  prescription !  **  No  prescription  can  properly  be  termed  such,**  aays
Hofrath  Gniner,  m  Yob  Art  of  Prescribing,  "  which  does  not  contain  sereral  ingre>
dieots  at  oooe  " — so,  in  order  to  tee  clearer,  you  had  better  put  out  your  eyes  I


JBOULAPIUS  IN  TH8  BALANCB.  429

bought  only  from  those  who  had  genuine  and  fi:esh  materials,
and  mixed  these  for  himself^  according  to  his  own  fancy ;  but
nobody  prevented  him  &om  giving  them  to  his  patients  in  their
simple  and  uncombined  state.

But  £rom  the  time  when  then  the  authorities  introduced  dis-
pensatories— that  is,  books  full  of  compound  medicines,  which
were  to  be  kept  ready  made — it  became  necessary  to  form  the
apothecaries  into  a  dose  corporation,  and  to  give  them  a  mo-
nopoly (on  condition  that  they  should  have  always  a  stock  of
ready  prepared  medicinal  mixtures),  whereby  their  number  was
fixed  and  limited,  in  order  that  there  should  not  be  too  many  of
them,  which  might  cause  these  costly  compounds  to  hang  upon
their  hands  and  become  spoiled.

It  is  true,  that  after  the  authorising  of  the  complicated  mix-
tores  in  dispensatories,  which  was  the  Urst  step  to  mischief,  had
been  taken,  the  second— the  granting  a  privilege  of  the  exclu-
sive sale  of  these  expensive  mixtures  to  apothecaries — was  nei-
ther an  xmexpected  nor  an  unjust  proceeeding;  but  had  the
public  approval  of  these  senseless  mixtures  not  preceded  it,  then
the  trade  in  single  medicinal  substances  would  have  remained
as  it  was  at  first;  and  there  would  have  been  no  need  of  apothe-
caries' privileges,  from  which  infinite  injury  has  gradually  ac-
crued to  the  healing  art.

The  earliest  dispensatories,  and  those  nearly  down  to  our
own  time,  called  each  compound  formula  by  an  alluring  name,
after  the  disease  which  it  was  to  remove,  and  after  each,  the
mendations of  its  virtues.  By  this  the  young  physician  was
led  to  employ  these  composititions  in  preference  to  the  simple
medicines,  especially  as  the  former  were  authorised  by  the  go-
vernment.

The  privileged  apothecaries  did  what  they  could  to  increase
the  number  of  these  formulas,  for  the  profit  derived,  from  these
mixtures  was  immensely  greater  than  would  have  been  derived
from  the  sale  of  the  simple  drugs  employed  in  their  composi-
tion ;  and  thus,  gradually,  the  small  octavo  dispensatory  of  Cor-
dus  grew  into  huge  folios  (the  Vienna,  Prague,  Augsburg,  Bran-
denburg, Wirtemburg,  &c.,  dispensatories).  And  now  there
was  no  known  disease  for  which  the  dispensatory  had  not  certain
ready-made  compounds,  or,  at  least,  the  formulas  for  them,  ac-
companied by  the  most  eulogistic  recommendations  of  them.
The  professor  of  the  healing  art  was  now  prepared,  when  he  had


^  .fiSOULAPIUS  IK  THE  BALAKCaS.

such  a  receipt-book  in  his  hand, — ^fuU  of  receipts  for  every  dis-
ease, sanctioned  by  the  highest  authorities  in  the  land !  Whst
does  he  want  more  to  make  him  perfect  as  a  healer  of  diaeane?
How  easy  has  the  great  art  been  made  to  him !

It  is  only  quite  lately  that  a  change  has  taken  place  in  the
matter.  The  formulas  in  the  dispensatory  have  been  shorn  of
their  auctioneering  titles,  and  the  number,  especially  of  those
which  were  to  be  kept  ready  compounded,  has  been  lessened*
StiU  plenty  magisterial  formnte  reilutin.

The  spirit  of  the  advancing  age  had  at  length  expunged  from
the  list  of  drugs  the  pearls  and  jewels,  the  costly  bezoar,  the
unicorn,  and  other  things  which  were  formerly  so  profitable  to
the  apothecaries ;  simple  processes  for  preparing  the  medicines
were  laid  down ;  no  one  now  required  alcohol  to  be  ten  times
rectified,  or  calomel  twelve  times  distilled ;  and  the  establish-
ment of  more  stringent  price-regulations  for  the  chemists  threat-
ened to  convert  their  hitherto  golden  shops  into  silver  ones,
when  things  unobservedly  took  a  turn  more  favourable  to  the
apothecary,  and  more  disastrous  to  the  art  of  medicine.

The  former  medicinal  laws*  had  already  begun  to  restrict  the
compounding  of  the  mixtures  to  the  apothecaries,  and  thus,  in
some  measure,,  to  impose  restrictions  on  the  physicians.  The
more  recent  statutes  completed  the  work,  by  preventing  physi-
cians from  converting  the  simple  drugs  into  compound  mixtures
for  themselves,  as  well  as  forbidding  them  to  give  any  medicine
directly  to  the  patients,  and,  as  the  expression  was,  "  to  dis-
pense."

Nothing  could  have  been  done  better  adapted  to  ruin  the
true  art  of  medicine.

Such  regulations  may  have  been  adopted  firom  one  of  three
reasons : —

Ist.  Was  it  owing  to  the  notorious  ignorance  of  the  physi-
cians of  the  present  day,  which  rendered  them  unable  to  prepare
a  tolerable  combination  of  drugs,  or  even  to  measure  out  the
simple  medicines,  that  they  were  prevented  from  executing  this
mechanical  operation  on  account  of  incompetence,  as  midwives
are  not  allowed  to  use  forceps  ?  If  this  was  the  case  (what  a
dreadful  supposition  !)  how  could  they  write  a  prescription,  that
is,  directions  for  combining  a  variety  of  substances  in  a  most
proper  manner,  if  they  themselves  were  not  masters  of  the  ope-
ration which  they  descHbed?

'  For  example,  the  CansHitUiorus  Jhrederiei  IL  Imperutorit.


jnOULAPIUS  IS  THE  BALANCE.  481

2d  Or  were  they  made  in  order  to  enrich  the  apothecaries,
whose  incomes  suffered  by  the  physicians  themselves  dispensing
tiieir  medicines  ?  If  the  whole  system  of  medicine  existed  for
the  benefit  of  the  apothecaries  alone, — if  people  fell  sick  solely
for  the  profit  of  apothecaries — if  learned  men  became  physi-
cians, not  so  much  for  the  purpose  of  curing  the  sick,  as  for  the
sake  of  assisting  the  apothecaries  to  make  their  fortunes — ^then
there  would  be  good  reasons  why  the  dispensing  of  medicines
was  forbidden  to  physicians,  and  a  monopoly  of  it  confirmed  to
the  apothecaries  alone.

8dL  Or  were  they  passed  for  the  benefit  of  patients  ?  One
would  suppose  that  medicinal  laws  would  be  made  chiefiy  for
the  benefit  of  the  sick  1  Let  us  see,  if  it  were  possible  that  pa-
tients could  be  benefitted  by  these  laws.

By  not  himself  dispensing,  the  physician  loses  all  dexterity,
all  practice  in  the  manipulations  necessary  for  the  compounding
together  of  various  substances  which  generally  act  chemically
on  each  other,  and  decompose  one  another  more  or  less  in  this
process  or  the  other.  He  gradually  becomes  less  experienced  in
this  art,  until  at  last  he  can  no  longer  give  any  detailed  and
consistent  directions  at  all,*  imtil  at  length  he  gives  directions
for  compounding  that  are  full  of  contradictions,  and  make  him
the  laughing-stock  of  the  apothecary.  He  is  now  completely  at
the  mercy  of  the  apothecary ;  and  the  doctor  and  patient  must
be  content  to  take  the  medicine  as  the  apothecary  or  his  assist-
ant (or  even  his  shop-boy)  pleases  to  compoimd  it.

If  the  physician  wants  to  order  equal  parts  of  myrrh  rubbed
up  with  camphor  in  the  form  of  powder,  he  very  likely  does  not
know,  from  his  want  of  acquaintance  with  phannaceutical  mani-
pulations, that  these  two  substances  never  can  form  a  powder ;
but  the  longer  these  two  dry  substances  arc  rubbed  together,  the
more  they  become  converted  into  a  greasy  mass,  a  kind  of  fluid.
Then  the  apothecary  either  sends  to  the  patient  this  soft  mash,
instead  of  a  powder,  with  a  sarcastic  observation,  much  to  the
annoyance  of  the  physician  ;  or  he  deceives  the  doctor,  to  keep
in  his  good  graces,  and  gives  the  patient  something  different

*  It  aoon  comes  to  this,  indeed  this  is  almost  universnlly  the  case ;  the  physidao
DO  loiter  attempts  to  invent  a  prescri})ti()n  for  himself,  be  must  copy  all  his  prescrip-
tiniB  from  some  well-known  prescription  manual,  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  of
committing  pharmaceutical  blunders  and  contradiction^*,  if  he  attempted  to  compos*
a  prescription  for  hunself.


482  J»0ULAPIU8  IN  THE  BALAKOH,

of  camplior.  Or  the  physioian,  perhaps,  writes  a  preBcription
for  haemoptysis,  consisting  of  alum  and  kitchen-salt  rubbed  to-
gether. Now,  although  each  of  these  substances,  separately,  is
dry,  yet  out  of  the  triturated  combination  no  powder  results,
but  a  flxiid,  which  the  physician,  not  himself  accustomed  to  dis-
pense, could  never  have  anticipated.  What  will  the  apothecary
do  in  a  case  like  this  7  He  must  either  annoy  or  deceive  the
writer  of  the  prescription.

Now,  can  these  and  a  thousand  other  similar  collisions  tend
to  the  welfare  of  the  patient  ?

Errors,  mistakes  of  every  kind,  which  the  apothecary  or  his
assistants  commit  in  the  preparation  of  the  compound,  through
ignorance,  hurry,  confusion,  inaccuracy,  or  deceit  from  interested
motives,  are,  to  the  man  of  science  and  knowledge,  who  wishes
to  test  such  a  combination,  a  problem,  which,  when  vegetable
substances  constitute  the  ingredients,  it  often  d^es  his  powers
to  solve, — ^how  much  more  so  for  a  physician  who  has  never
had  an  opportunity  of  acquiring  a  practical  knowledge  of  phar-
macy, or  of  compounding  the  medicines  liimself)  indeed  is  pro-
hibited fix>m  dping  so !  How  is  he  ever  to  discover  the  adulte-
rations or  the  mistakes  which  the  person  who  makes  up  his
prescription  may  have  committed  ?  If  he  cannot  detect  them,
which,  owing  to  such  limitations  of  his  knowledge,  is  very
probable,  what  mischief  must  and  does  thence  accrue  to  the
patient  I  If  he  cannot  detect  them,  what  an  object  of  ridicule
he  must  be,  when  his  back  is  turned,  to  the  apothecary's  shop-
boys!

By  forbidding  physicians  themselves  to  dispense,  the  apothe-
cary's income  is  secured  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner.  What
regulations  respecting  the  prices  of  drugs  can  check  his  over-
charges ?  And  even  if  the  prices  of  the  drugs  are  fixed  by  law,
his  conscience  often  does  not  prevent  him  from  employing  a
cheaper  substitute  {quid  pro  quo),  instead  of  the  expensive  one
of  deception  to  a  great  extent  This  practice  has  been  in  vogue
for  more  than  fifteen  hundred  years.  We  may  learn  something
of  this  sort  from  Galen's  little  book,  entitled  in^i  «yriC«AA«/Kfv«rf ;
and  the  multitude  of  books  which  treat  of  the  adulteration  of
drugs  and  deceptions  practised  by  the  apothecaries,  constitute  of
themselves  no  small  library.

How  well  adapted  is  the  whole  business  of  treatment  for  the
wel^e  of  the  sick  I


MBCVhAPlVa  IN  THE  BALANCE.  48S

''But  the  medicinal  regulations  do  not  provide  only  for  the
apothecary,  they  are  for  the  interest  of  the  physician  also  I  The
latter  gets  four-pence  for  every  prescription."

So,  the  same  for  a  prescription  which  he  copies  out  of  a  printed
Teeeipt  book  as  for  one  that  takes  him  an  hour  to  compose  I
Since  that  law  was  passed,  of  course  he  prefers  making  use
of  borrowed,  ready -written  (t.  e.)  unsuitable)  prescriptions ;  he
can  write  a  number  of  such  ones  in  the  course  of  a  forenoon —
but  he  must  write  a  great  many,  more  than  are  good  for  tfie  parent,
because  he  is  paid  by  the  number  of  his  prescriptions,  and  be-
cause be  requires  many  four-pences  in  order  to  live,  to  live  well,
to  Uye  in  style  I

Alas  I  we  may  bid  adieu  to  the  progress  of  the  art,  to  the
core  of  the  sick  I

Not  to  speak  of  the  degradation  to  a  learned  man,  to  an  artist
of  the  highest  rank,  as  the  physician  ought  to  be — to  be  paid  by
the  number  of  his  prescriptions  (like  the  copyist  by  the  number
of  the  sheets  he  copies),  or  by  the  number  of  his  courses  (like  a
common  messenger),  it  seems  to  me  that  the  result  is  not  com-
mensurate with  the  arrangement.  The  physician  becomes  a
mechanical  workman,  his  occupation  becomes  a  labour  that  re-
quires the  least  reflection  of  all  trades ;  he  writes  prescriptions
(it  matters  not  what)  for  whose  effect  he  is  not  answerable,  and
he  pockets  his  money.

How  can  he  be  made  responsible  for  the  result,  when  he  doei
not  prepare  the  medicine  himself?*  The  preparation  is  entrusted
by  tiie  state  to  another  (the  apothecary),  who  also  is  not  an-
swerable for  the  result  (except  in  the  case  of  palpable,  enormous
mistakes),  and  over  whom  we  have  no  control  with  respect  to
many  inaccuracies  in  the  preparation  of  compound  medicines,
for  after  the  mixture  is  made,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  in
many  cases  to  prove  that  which  ought  to  be  proved  against
him.

From  the  very  nature  of  the  thing — it  concerns  the  cure  of
the  noblest  of  created  beings,  it  concerns  the  saving  of  human
life,  the  most  difficult,  the  most  sublime,  the  most  important  of

'  Properly  speaking,  the  business  of  treatment  Is  a  kind  of  contract  which  the
pnticnt  makes  with  the  phifiician  alone ;  do  ut  faciat.  The  physician  solemnly  pro-
inii»e!«  to  give  his  aid  and  to  administer  efficacious  medicines  prepared  in  the  best  way
~ft  promise  which,  with  such  legal  arrangements,  lie  cannot  redeem,  and  which  can
ooly  be  performed  by  a  third  party,  the  apotliecary,  who  is  not  bound  by  any  con
tract  to  the  patient What  inconsistency  !

28


484  JBOULAFIUS  IN  THE  BALANGI.

all  imaginable  occupations ! — ^&om  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,
I  repeat,  the  physician  should  be  prohibited,  under  the  severest
penalties,  from  allowing  any  other  person  to  prepare  the  medi-
cines required  for  his  patients ;  he  should  be  required,  under  the
severest  penalties,  to  prepare  them  himself  so  that  he  may  bo
able  to  vouch  for  the  result.

But  that  it  should  be  forbidden  to  the  physician  to  prepare
his  own  instruments  for  the  saving  of  life — no  human  being
could  have  fallen  on  such  an  idea  a  priori

It  would  have  been  much  more  sensible  to  prohibit  authorita-
tively Titian,  Guido  Reni,  Michael  Angelo,  Baphael,  Gorreggio
or  Mengs  from  preparing  their  own  instruments  (their  expressive,
beautiful  and  durable  colours),  and  have  ordered  tiiem  to  pur-
chase them  in  some  shop  indicated  I  By  the  purchased  colours,
not  prepared  by  themselves,^  their  paintings,  is^r  from  being  the
inimitable  masterpieces  they  are,  would  have  been  ordinary
daubs  and  mere  market  goods.  And  even  had  they  all  become
mere  conmion  market  goods,  the  damage  would  not  have  been
so  great  as  if  the  life  of  even  the  meanest  slave  (for  he  too  is  a
man  I)  should  be  endangered  by  untrustworthy  health-instra*
ments  (medicines)  purchased  from  and  prepared  by  strangers.

Under  these  ragulations  should  there  happen  to  one  single
physician  who  should  wisely  wish  to  avoid  that  injudicious
mode  of  prescribing  multifarious  mixtures  of  medicines,  and  for
the  weal  of  his  patients  and  the  ftirtherance  of  his  art  should
would  be  abused  in  every  apothecary's  shop  until  he  abandoned
a  method  that  was  so  little  profitable  to  the  apothecary's  purse ;
he  must  take  his  choice  of  either  being  harrassed  to  death  or  of
abandoning  it  and  again  writing  compound  prescriptions.  In
this  case  what  course  would  ninly-nine  doctors  out  of  a  hundred
chose  ? Do  you  know  ? I  do !

Therefore  adieu  to  all  progress  in  our  art  I  Adieu  to  the
successful  treatment  of  the  sick  !

'  I  ncTer  knew  any  great  enamel-painter  who  did  not  reqnire  to  prepare  hia  own
colours,  if  he  wished  to  have  permanent,  brilliant  colours,  and  to  produce  master-pieces ;
if  he  be  forbidden  to  prepare  his  own  colours  he  will  not  be  aUe  to  furnish  any  b«i
wretdied  dauba.


TBI  XXDICINE  OF  SXPERIBMCB.  485


THE  MEDICINE  OF  EXPERIENCE.'


Man,  regarded  as  an  animal,  kas  been  created  more  helpless
than  all  other  animals. He  has  no  congenital  weapons  for  his
defence  like  the  bull,  no  speed  to  enable  him  to  flee  from  his
enemies  like  the  deer,  no  wings,  no  webbed  feet,  no  fins, — no
armour  impenetrable  to  violence  like  the  tortoise,  no  place  of
refuge  provided  by  nature  as  is  possessed  by  thousands  of  insects
and  worms  for  their  safety,  no  physical  provision  to  keep  the
enemy  at  bay,  such  as  render  the  hedgehog  and  torpedo  formi-
dable, no  sting  like  the  gadfly,  nor  poison-fang  like  the  viper ; —
to  all  the  attacks  of  hostile  animals  he  is  exposed  defenceless.
He  has,  moreover,  nothing  to  oppose  to  the  violence  of  the  ele*
meats  and  meteors. He  is  not  protected  finom  the  action  of  the
water  by  the  shining  hair  of  the  seal,  nor  by  the  close  oily  feathers
of  the  duck,  nor  by  the  smooth  shield  of  the  water  beetle ;  his
body,  but  a  slight  degree  lighter  than  the  water,  floats  more
helplessly  in  that  medium  than  that  of  any  quadruped,  and  is
in  danger  of  instant  death. He  is  not  protected  like  the  polar^
bear  or  eider-duck  by  a  covering  impenetrable  to  the  northern
blast. At  its  birth  the  lamb  knows  where  to  seek  its  mother's
udder,  but  the  helpless  babe  would  perish  if  its  mother's  breast
were  not  presented  to  it. Where  he  is  born  nature  nowhere
furnishes  his  food  ready  made,  as  she  provides  ants  for  the  arma-
dillo, caterpillars  for  the  ichneumon  fly,  or  the  open  petals  of
flowers  for  the  bee. Man  is  subject  to  a  far  larger  number  of
diseases  than  animals,  who  are  bom  with  a  secret  knowledge  of
the  remedial  means  for  these  invisible  enemies  of  life,  instinct,
which  man  possesses  not. Man  alone  painfully  escapes  from  his
mother's  womb,  soft,  tender,  naked,  defenceless,  helpless,  and
destitute  of  all  that  can  render  his  existence  sup{X)rtable,  desti-
tute of  all  wherewith  nature  richly  endows  the  worm  of  the
dust,  to  render  its  life  happy.

Where  is  the  benevolence  of  the  Creator,  that  could  have
disinherited  man,  and  him  alone  of  all  the  animals  of  the  earth,

of  the  bare  necessities  of  life  ?
Behold,  the  Eternal  Source  of  all  love  only  disinherited  man
.  of  the  animal  nature  in  order  to  endow  liirn  all  the  more  richly

with  that  spark  of  divinity — a  mind — wliicli  enables  man  to

•:li^;it  from  himself  the  satisfaction  of  all  Lis  requirements,  and  a

'  Publif<he(l  at  Berlin  in  1805


486  THK  MEDICINE  OF  EXPERISNOS.

full  measure  of  all  conceivable  benefits,  and  to  develop  from
himself  the  innumerable  advantages  that  exalt  the  children  of
this  earth  fer  above  every  other  living  thing — a  mind  thal^  inde-
structible itself,  is  capable  of  creating  for  its  tenement,  its  frail
animal  nature,  more  powerful  means  for  its  sustenance,  protection,
defence  and  comfort,  than  any  of  the  most  fevoured  creatures
can  boast  of  having  derived  directly  from  nature.

The  Father  of  mankind  has  chiefly  reckoned  on  this  &culty
of  the  human  mind  to  discover  remedial  agents,  for  his  protection
from  the  maladies  and  accidents  to  which  the  delicate  organism
of  man  is  exposed.

The  help  that  the  body  can  afford  itself  for  the  removal  of
diseases  is  but  small  and  very  limited,  so  that  the  human  mind
is  so  much  the  more  compelled  to  employ,  for  the  care  of  the
diseases  of  the  body,  remedial  powers  of  a  more  efficient  kind
than  it  has  seemed  good  in  the  Creator  to  implant  in  the  organic
tissues  alone.

What  crude  nature  presents  to  us  should  not  form  the  limit
for  the  relief  df  our  necessities ;  no,  our  mind  should  be  able  to
enlarge  her  resources  to  an  unlimited  degree  for  our  perfect
well-being.

Thus  the  Creator  presents  to  us  ears  of  com  from  the  bosom
of  the  earth,  not  to  be  chewed  and  swallowed  in  a  crude  and
unwholesome  state,  but  in  order  that  we  should  render  them
useful  as  nutriment  by  freeing  them  from  the  husk,  grinding  and
depriving  them  of  everything  of  an  injurious  and  medicinal
nature,  by  fermentation  and  the  heat  of  the  oven,  and  partaking
of  them  in  the  form  of  bread — a  preparation  of  an  innocuous
and  nutritious  character,  ennobled  by  the  perfecting  power  of
our  mind.  Since  the  creation  of  the  world  the  lightning's  flash
has  destroyed  animals  and  human  beings;  but  the  Author  of
the  universe  intended  that  the  mind  of  man  should  invent  some-
thing, as  has  actually  been  done  in  these  latter  days,  whereby
the  fire  of  heaven  should  be  prevented  from  touching  his  dwell-
ings— ^that  by  means  of  metallic  rods  boldly  reared  aloft  he
should  conduct  it  harmless  to  the  ground.  The  waves  of  the
angry  ocean  reared  mountains  high  threaten  to  overwhelm  his
frail  bark,  and  he  calms  them  by  pouring  oil  upon  them.

So  he  permits  the  other  powers  of  nature  to  act  imhindered
to  our  harm,  until  we  can  discover  something  that  can  secure  us
from  their  destructive  force,  and  harmlessly  avert  from  us  their
impressions.


THi  KKDICINE  OF  EXPERIENCE.  487

So  he  allows  the  inniimerable  array  of  diseases  to  assail  and
seize  upon  the  delicate  corporeal  frame,  threatening  it  with  death
and  destruction,  well  knowing  that  the  animal  part  of  onr  orga-
nism is  incapable,  in  most  cases,  of  victoriously  routing  the  enemy,
withoat  itself  suffering  much  loss  or  even  succumbing  in  the
struggle ; — the  remedial  resources  of  the  organism,  abandoned
to  itself  are  weak,  limited  and  insufficient  for  the  dispersion  of
diseases,  in  order  that  our  mind  may  employ  its  ennobling  faculty
in  this  case  also,  where  the  question  concerns  the  most  inestima-
ble of  all  earth's  goods,  health  and  life.

The  great  Instructor  of  mankind  did  not  intend  that  we  should
go  to  work  in  the  same  manner  as  nature ;  we  should  do  more
than  organic  nature,  but  not  in  the  same  manner,  not  with  the
same  means  as  she.  He  did  not  permit  us  to  creatie  a  horse ;
but  we  are  allowgd  to  construct  machines,  each  of  which  pos-
sesses more  power  than  a  hundred  horses,  and  is  much  more
obedient  to  our  will.  He  permitted  us  to  build  ships,  in  which,
secure  from  the  monsters  of  the  deep  and  the  fury  of  the  tem-
pest, and  furnished  with  all  the  comforts  of  the  mainland,  we
might  circumnavigate  the  world,  which  no  fish  could  do,  and
therefore  he  denied  to  our  body  the  piscine  fins,  branchiae  and
float,  that  were  inadequate  to  perform  this  feat.  He  denied  to
our  body  the  rustling  wings  of  the  mighty  condor,  but  on  the
other  hand,  he  allows  us  to  invent  machines  filled  with  light
gas,  that  with  silent  power  lifts  us  into  far  higher  regions  of  the
atmosphere  than  are  accessible  to  the  feathered  tenants  of  the
air.

So  also  he  suffers  us  not  to  employ  the  process  of  sphacelus,
as  the  human  corporeal  organism  does  for  itself,  in  order  to  re-
move a  shattered  limb,  but  he  placed  in  our  hand  the  sharp,
quickly-dividing  knife,  which  Faust  moistened  with  oil,  that  is
capable  of  performing  the  operation  with  less  pain,  less  fever,  and
much  less  danger  to  life. He  permits  us  not  to  make  use  of  the
so-called  crisis,  like  nature,  for  the  cure  of  a  number  of  fevers ;  we
cannot  imitate  her  critical  sweat,  her  critical  diuresis,  her  critical
abscesses  of  the  parotid  and  inguinal  glands,  her  critical  epistaxis,
but  he  enables  the  investigator  to  discover  remedies  wherewith
he  may  cure  the  fever  more  rapidly  than  the  corporeal  organism
is  capable  of  producing  crises,  and  to  cure  tlicin  more  certainly,
more  easily,  and  with  less  suiterinfr,  with  less  danger  to  life  and
fewer  after-sufferings,  than  unassisted  nature  can  do  by  means
of  crises.


488  TEX  lEXDIOINX  OF  XXPEBIIK0I.

I  am  therefore  astonished  that  the  art  of  medicine  has  soseldom
raised  itself  above  a  servile  imitation  of  thesq  crude  processes,
and  that  it  has  at  ahnost  all  periods  been  believed  that  hardly
anything  better  could  be  done  for  the  cure  of  diseases  than  to
copy  these  crises,  and  to  produce  evacuations  in  the  fi>rm  of
sweat,  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  diuresis,  venesections,  blisters  or  arti-
ficial sores.  (This  was  and  remained  the  most  favoured  method
of  treatment  from  the  earliest  times  till  now :  and  it  was  always
fidlen  back  upon,  when  other  modes  of  treatment  founded  on
ingenious  speculations  disappointed  the  hopes  they  had  raised.)
Just  as  if  these  imperfect  and  forced  imitations  were  the  same
thing  as  what  nature  effects  in  the  hidden  recesses  of  vitality,
by  her  own  spontaneous  efforts,  in  the  form  of  crises  I  Or  as  if
such  crises  were  the  best  possible  method  for  overcoming  the
disease,  and  were  not  rather  proofe  of  the  (designed)  imperfec-
tion and  therapeutical  powerlessness  of  our  unaided  nature!
Never,  never  was  it  potjsible  to  compel  these  spontaneous  en-
deavours of  the  organism  by  artificial  means)  the  very  notion
implies  a  contradiction),  never  was  it  the  Creator's  will  that  we
should  do  so.  His  design  was  that  we  should  bring  to  unlimited
perfection  our  whole  being,  as  also  our  corporeal  firame  and  the
cure  of  its  diseases.

This  design  has  hitherto  been  in  part  fulfilled  by  pure  surgery
alone. Instead  of  acting  like  unassisted  nature,  which  can  often
only  throw  off  a  splinter  of  bone  in  the  leg  by  inducing  a  fever
attended  by  danger  to  life,  and  a  suppuration  that  destroys  al-
most all  the  limb,  the  surgeon  is  able  by  a  judicious  division  of
the  irritable  int^uraents  to  extract  it  in  a  few  minutes  by  means
of  his  fingers,  without  occasioning  any  great  suffering,  without
any  considerable  bad  consequences,  and  almost  without  any  dimi-
nution of  the  strength.  A  debilitating  slow  fever,  accompanied  by
intolerable  pains  and  uninterrupted  torturing  to  death,  is  almost
the  sole  means  the  organism  can  oppose  to  a  large  stone  in  the
bladder ;  whereas  an  incision  made  by  a  practised  hand  frees
the  sufferer  from  it  oftdn  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  spares  him
many  years  of  torment,  and  rescues  him  from  a  miserable  death.
Or  ought  we  to  attempt  to  relieve  a  strangulated  hernia  by  an
imitation  of  the  mortification  and  suppuration,  which  are  the
only  means,  besides death that  nature  possesses  against  it?
Would  it  suffice  for  the  rescue  and  preservation  of  life,  did  we
not  know  of  any  other  mode  of  stopping  the  hemorrhage  from
a  wound  in  a  large  arterj^  than  by  causing  a  syncope  of  half«an-


VBK  XIDICIKE  OF  SXPSRISlfOB.  489

houi'f  doTatioiif  as  nature  does  7 Could  the  tourniquet,  bandage
and  compress  be  thereby  dispensed  with  7

It  has  always  been  a  matter  worthy  of  the  greatest  admira-
tion to  see  how  nature,  without  having  recourse  to  any  surgical
operaiion,  without  having  access  to  any  remedy  from  without,
does  often  when  left  quite  unassisted,  develop  from  itself  invisi-
ble operations  whereby  it  is  able, — often  it  is  true  in  a  very
tedious,  painftil  and  dangerous  manner — ^but  still  really  to  re*
move  diseases  and  affections  of  many  kinds.  But  she  does  not
do  these  for  our  imitation !  we  cannot  imitate  them,  we  ought
not  to  imitate  them,  for  there  are  infinitely  easier,  quicker  and
surer  remedial  means  which  the  inventive  faculty  implanted  in
our  mind  is  destined  to  discover,  in  order  to  sul^rve  the  ends
of  medicine,  that  most  essential  and  most  honourable  of  all
earthly  sciences.

AriAff  MhMyi  w^kl^n  km  Xiyt  «Kir^«cr«(.

Greg.  Mao.

Medicine  is  a  science  of  experience ;  its  object  is  to  eradicate
diseases  by  means  of  remedies.

The  knowledge  of  diseases,  the  knowledge  of  remedies,  and
the  knowledge  of  their  employment,  constitute  medicine.

As  the  wise  and  beneficent  Creator  has  permitted  those  innu-
merable states  of  the  human  body  differing  from  health,  which
we  term  diseases,  he  must  at  the  same  time  have  revealed  to  us
a  distinct  mode  whereby  we  may  obtain  a  knowledge  of  dis-
eases, that  shall  suffice  to  enable  us  to  employ  the  remedies
capable  of  subduing  them ;  he  must  have  shewn  to  us  an
equally  distinct  mode  whereb}'  we  may  discover  in  medicines
those  properties  that  render  them  suitable  for  the  cure  of  dis-
eases,— ^if  he  did  not  mean  to  leave  his  children  helpless,  or  to
require  of  them  what  was  beyond  their  power.

This  art,  so  indispensable  to  suffering  humanity,  cannot
therefore  remain  concealed  in  the  unfathomable  depths  of  ob-
scure speculation,  or  be  diffused  throughout  the  boundless  void
of  conjecture;  it  must  be  accessible.  r<?arZ//y  accessible  to  us,
within  the  sphere  of  vision  of  our  external  and  internal  ])ercep-
tive  faculties.

Two  thousand  years  were  wasted  by  physicians  in  endeavour-
ing to  discover  the  invisible  internal  changes  that  take  place  in


440  TH8  MBDICINE  OF  SXPERIEK08.

the  organism  in  diseases,  and  in  searching  for  their  proximate
causes  and  a  priori  nature,  because  they  imagined  that  they
could  not  cure  before  they  had  attained  to  this  impassible
knowledge.

If  the  fruitlessness  of  these  long-continued  endeavours  cannot
be  regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  impossibility  of  this  undertaking,
the  maxim  of  experience  that  they  were  ufinecessary  for  the
cure,  might  suffice  to  shew  its  impossibility.  For  the  great
Spirit  of  the  Universe,  the  most  consistent  of  all  beings,  lias
made  that  only  possible  which  is  necessary.

Although  we  never  can  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  the  internal
corporeal  changes  on  which  diseases  depend,  yet  the  observation
of  their  external  exciting  causes  has  its  uses.

No  alteration  occurs  without  a  cause.  Diseases  must  have
their  exciting  causes,  concealed  though  they  may  be  fix>m  us  in
the  greater  number  of  cases.

We  observe  a  few  diseases  that  always  arise  from  one  and  the
same  cause,  e.  g.,  the  miasmatic  maladies;  hydrophobia,  the
venereal  disease,  the  plague  of  the  Levant,  yellow  fever,  small-
pox, cow-pox,  the  measles  and  some  others,  which  bear  upon
them  the  distinctive  mark  of  always  remaining  diseases  of  a
peculiar  character;  and,  because  they  arise  from  a  contagious
principle  that  always  remains  the  same,  they  also  always  retain
the  same  character  and  pursue  the  same  course,  excepting  as
regards  some  accidental  concomitant  circumstances,  which  how-
ever do  not  alter  their  essential  character.

Probably  some  other  diseases,  which  we  cannot  shew  to  de-
pend on  a  peculiar  miasm,  as  gout,  marsh-ague,  and  several
other  diseases  that  occur  here  and  there  endemically,  besides  a
few  others,  also  arise  either  from  a  single  unvarying  cause,  or
from  the  confluence  of  several  definite  causes  that  are  liable  to
be  associated  and  that  are  always  the  same,  otherwise  they
would  not  produce  diseases  of  such  a  specific  kind,  and  would
not  occur  so  frequently.

These  few  diseases,  at  all  events  those  first  mentioned  (the
miasmatic),  we  may  therefore  term  specific,  and  when  necessary
bestow  on  them  distinctive  appellations.

If  a  remedy  have  been  discovered  for  one  of  these,  it  will
always  be  able  to  cure  it,  for  such  a  disease  always  remains
essentially  identical,  both  in  its  manifestations  (the  representa-
tives of  its  internal  nature)  and  in  its  cause.


THE  MEDICINE  OF  EXPEBIENGE.  441

All  the  other  innumerable  diseases  exhibit  such  a  difference
in  their  phenomena^  that  we  may  safely  assert  that  they  arise
firom  a  combination  of  several  dissimilar  causes  (varying  in
number  and  differing  in  nature  and  intensity).

The  number  of  words  that  may  be  constructed  from  an  alpha-
bet of  twenty-four  letters  may  be  calculated,  great  though  that
number  be;  but  who  can  calculate  the  number  of  those  dis-
similar diseases,  since  our  bodies  can  be  affected  by  innumerable
and  still  for  the  most  part  unknown  influences  of  external  agen-
des,  and  by  almost  as  many  forces  from  within.

All  things  that  are  capable  of  exercising  any  action  (and
their  number  is  incalculable'),  are  able  to  act  upon  and  to  pro-

'  Some  of  these  are,  e.  ^,  the  iDnumerable  varieties  of  odours,  the  more  or  less
DOiious  ezhalatioiis  from  organic  and  inorganic  substances,  the  yarious  gases  that
pfweiw  sadi  diflerent  irritating  properties,  that  act  upon  our  nerves  in  the  atmos-
phere, in  our  manufactories  and  in  our  dwellings,  or  rise  from  the  water,  the  earth,
animalB,  and  plants ; — deficiency  of  pure,  open  air,  the  indispensable  aliment  of  our
ritality,  ezoeas  or  deficiency  of  the  sun's  light,  excess  or  deficiency  of  both  kinds  of
eleetiicity,  differences  in  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  in  its  humidity  or  dryness,
the  stQl  unascertained  peculiarities  of  mountainous  regions  compared  with  low-lying
plams  and  deep  valleys ;  peculiarities  of  climate  or  situation  on  large  plains  and  on
desert*  .destitute  of  f^ants  or  water,  compared  with  the  sea,  with  marshy  districts^
liiU%  woods,  the  various  winds;  the  influence  of  very  changeable  or  too  uniform
weather,  the  influence  of  storms  and  other  meteoric  phenomena ;  too  great  heat  or
cold  of  the  air,  defect  or  excess  of  warmth  in  our  clothing,  in  our  rooms ;  the  coo-
strictioQ  of  various  parts  of  the  body  by  different  articles  of  dress ;  the  degree  of
coldnesB  or  heat  of  our  food  and  drink,  hunger  or  thirst,  excessive  quantities  of  food
or  drink,  their  noxious  or  medicinal  nature,  and  their  power  of  causing  changes  in  the
body,  which  are  inherent  in  some  (as  wine,  spirits,  beer  prepared  with  more  or  less
hurtful  plants,  drinks  containing  foreign  ingredients,  coffee,  tea,  exotic  and  indigenous
spioesi  and  highly  seasoned  viands,  sauces,  liqueurs,  chocolate  and  cakes,  the  un-
known, noxious  or  health-deranging  properties  of  some  vegetables  and  animals  when
UMd  as  food),  and  are  imparted  to  others  by  careless  preparation,  decomposition!
fidsificatioD  or  adulteration  (e.  g.  ill-fermented  and  imperfectly  baked  bread ;  under-
done animal  and  vegetable  viands,  or  other  articles  of  diet  spoilt  in  various  ways,
deoomposed,  mouldy  or  adulterated  for  the  sake  of  gain ;  liquid  and  solid  food  pre-
pared or  kept  in  metal  vessels ;  made  up,  drugged  wine ;  vinegar  sharpened  witii
acrid  substances ;  the  flesh  of  diseased  animals ;  flour  adulterated  with  gypsum  or
land ;  coni  mixed  with  injurious  seeds ;  vegetables  mixed  with  or  changed  for  dan-
gerous plants,  fit>m  malicious  motives,  ignorance  or  poverty) ;  want  of  cleanliness  of
the  body,  of  the  clothing,  of  the  dwelling,  hurtful  substances  which  get  into  the  food
during  its  preparation  and  keeping  firom  want  of  cleanliness  or  from  negligence ;  dust
of  various  unwholesome  kinds  arising  firom  the  substances  used  in  manufactories  and
workshops ;  the  neglect  of  various  police  arrangements  for  the  protection  of  the  weU-
being  of  the  community ;  excessive  weakening  of  our  corporeal  powers  ;  too  violent
active  or  passive  exercise ;  inordinate  excretions  fSrom  various  organs ;  abnormal  ex-
ertion of  certain  organs  of  the  senses ;  various  unnatural  positions  and  attitudes
attendant  on  different  kinds  of  work ;  neglect  of  the  employment  of  various  parts,  or
general  inactivity  of  the  body ;  irregularity  in  the  periods  devoted  to  rest,  meals  and


442  THX  XBDICOTE  OF  XXPBBIElfOA;

dace  changes  in  our  organism  which  is  intimately  connected
with  and  in  conflict  with  all  parts  of  the  universe — and  all  may
produce  different  effects  as  they  differ  among  themselves.

How  various  must  be  the  effects  of  the  action  of  these  agen-
cies, when  several  of  them  at  once  and  in  varied  order  and  in*
tensity  exercise  their  influence  on  our  bodies,  seeing  that  the
latter  are  also  so  variously  organized  and  present  such  diversi-
ties in  the  various  conditions  of  their  life,  that  no  one  human
being  exactly  resembles  another  in  any  conceivable  respect !

Hence  it  happens  that  with  the  exception  of  those  few  dis-
eases that  are  always  the  same,  all  others  are  dissimilar\  and
innumerabk,  and  so  different  that  each  of  them  occurs  scarcely
more  than  once  in  the  world,  and  each  case  of  disease  that  pre-
sents itself  must  be  regarded  (and  treated)  as  an  individual
malady  that  never  before  occurred  in  the  same  manner,  and
onder  the  same  circimistances  as  in  the  case  before  us,  and  will
never  again  happen  precisely  in  the  same  way  !^

labour ;  excess  or  deficiency  of  sleep ;  over-exertion  in  mental  employments  g«ne-
ndly,  or  in  such  as  especially  excite  or  fatigue  certain  fiiculties  of  the  mind,  or  which
are  of  an  injurious  and  forced  character ;  overpowering  or  enervating  pasaioos  pro-
duced by  certain  kinds  of  reading,  education,  bad  habits  and  employment ;  abufie  of
the  sexual  function ;  reproacbeb  of  the  conscience,  imoomfortable  domestic  affiun^
annoying  family  relations,  fear,  fright,  vexation,  Ac

^  To  this  head  belong  a  number  of  diseases  which,  owing  to  a  want  of  aocoracj  in
the  comparison  of  all  their  symptoms,  have  been  regarded  as  identical  malm^iiAf^^
merely  from  the  circumstance  of  some  one  striking  resemblance,  e.  g.,  dropsy,  aero*
fola,  wasting,  hypochondriasis,  rheumatism,  spasms,  and  so  forth.  The  very  circum-
ttance  that  in  one  case  one  mode  of  treatment  was  successful  that  was  of  no  avail  in
ten  others,  should  have  shewn  that  the  difference  was  not  properly  observed.  It
might,  it  is  true,  be  said  that  there  is  a  middle  sort  betwixt  those  specific  and  theae
dissimilar  diseases  of  a  mixed  character,  e.  g.,  tetanus,  prosopalgia,  diabetes,  poea
mooia,  phthisis,  cancer,  Ac^  and  that  although  a  g^eat  number  of  cases  of  eadi  of
these  diseases  present  dissimilar  characters,  and  therefore  require  a  different  treat-
ment, yet  some  cases  present  so  much  resemblance  among  themselves  in  their  symp-
toms and  mode  of  cure,  that  tlidy  should  be  considered  as  the  same  malady.  TIda
distinction,  however,  hxis  not  much  practical,  consequently  Uttle  real,  value,  for  wa
ooght  to  observe  and  investigate  accurately  each  case,  in  order  to  find  out  what  is  the
aoitable  remedy.  If  I  have  discovered  this,  it  is  a  matter  of  great  indifference  whether
I  then  become  aware  that  this  same  disease,  with  all  its  symptoms  and  with  tfia
aame  curative  indications,  has  presented  itself  to  me  before,  as  this  knowledge  coold
not  lead  me  to  any  other  or  better  mode  of  cure  (and  the  cnre  is  the  aim  of  all  kindt
of  diagnosis  of  disease)  than  to  the  efficacious  and  best  adapted  one.

*  How  were  it  possible  to  arrange  such  ineonjnngihilia  into  classes,  orders^  genera,
apecies,  varietien  and  sub  varieties,  like  organic  beings,  and  to  give  namet  to  socfa
atates  of  the  extremely  composite  psychico-corporeal  microcosm,  subject  as  it  is  to
auch  varied  irritations  by  such  innumerable  agencies,  states*  that  are  capable  of  aucb
an  infinity  of  modifications  and  shades  of  difference  I  The  millions  of  morbid  eaaea
that  occur  perhaps  but  once  in  the  world  require  no  names — ^we  only  require  to  em


m  xxDioms  of  xxpsbibnoi.  448

The  internal  essential  nature  of  every  malady,  of  every  indi-
vidual case  of  disease,  as  &r  as  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  it^
for  the  purpose  of  curing  it^  expresses  itself  by  the  symptoms,  as
they  present  themselves  to  the  investigations  of  the  true  observer
in  their  whole  extent,  connexion  and  succession.

When  the  physician  has  discovered  all  the  observable  symptoms
of  the  disease  that  exist,  he  has  discovered  the  disease  itself,  he
has  attained  the  complete  conception  of  it  requisite  to  enable  him
to  effect  a  cure.

In  order  to  be  able  to  perform  a  cure,  it  is  requisite  to  have  a
fiiithftd  picture  of  the  disease  with  all  its  manifestations,  and  in
addition,  when  this  can  be  discovered,  a  knowledge  of  its  pre-
disposing and  exciting  causes,^  jn  order,  after  effecting  the  cure
by  means  of  medicines,  to  enable  us  to  remove  these  also — ^by
means  of  an  improved  regimen — and  so  prevent  a  relapse.*

In  order  to  trace  the  picture  of  the  disease,  the  physician  re-
quires to  proceed  in  a  very  simple  manner.  All  that  he  needs
is  carefulness  in  observing  and  fidelity  in  copying.^  He  should
entirely  avoid  all  conjectures,  leading  questions  and  suggestions.

The  patient  relates  the  history  of  his  ailments,  those  about  him
hears,  feels,  Ac.,  all  that  there  is  of  an  altered  or  unusual  cha-
racter about  him,  and  notes  down  each  particular  in  its  order,
so  that  he  may  form  an  accurate  picture  of  the  disease.

The  chief  signs  are  those  symptoms  that  are  most  constant,

tfaem.  Diseases  have  been  associated  together  according  to  some  merely  external
ntemblaiioe,  or  from  some  similarity  of  cause  or  of  one  or  other  symptom,  in  order
that  they  might  be  treated  by  the  same  medicine,  with  a  small  outlay  of  trouble  I

'  In  like  manner  the  teacher  chiefly  requires  to  observe  the  actions  and  conduct  of
•D  midiscipUned  new  pupil,  in  order  to  lead  him  in  the  way  of  virtue  by  means  of
tiie  most  appropriate  tuition.  To  effect  this  reformation  it  is  not  necessary  either  that
he  aboald  know  the  ever  inscrutable  internal  organization  of  his  body,  or  that  he  should
be  able  to  inspect  the  equally  inscrutable  internal  operations  of  his  mind.  In  additioD
to  this  be  certainly  requires  to  know  (if  he  can  ascertain  it)  the  cause  of  his  moral
deteriormtion,  but  only  in  order  to  be  able  to  ward  it  off  from  him  in  future— and  so
prevent  a  relapse.

'  If  no  obvious  predisposing  and  exciting  causes  arc  perceptible,  whose  future
AYoiflaDOe  is  within  the  power  of  man,  then  all  our  aims  are  attained  by  effecting  the
leetoration  by  means  of  remedial  agents.  The  physician  must  neither  invent,  con-
jectnre,  nor  extort  from  the  patient  any  exciting  cause.

'  If  we  are  not  desirous  of  producing  a  likeness,  we  may  draw  a  dozen  faces  on  a
piece  of  paper  or  canvass  in  an  hour,  but  a  single  stiiking  portrait  requires  just  as
much  time  and  a  much  greater  power  of  observation  and  fidelity  in  the  repreaen-
tatioa


444  . THB  MEDICIKE  OF  EXPSBISNOB.

taost  sinking,  and  most  annoying  to  the  patient  The  pyhsidan
marks  them  down  as  the  strongest,  the  principal  features  of  the
picture.  The  most  singular,  most  uncommon  signs  famish  the
characteristic,  the  distinctive,  the  peculiar  features.

He  allows  the  patient  and  his  attendants  to  relate  all  they  have
to  say  without  interrupting  them,  and  he  notes  down  everything
attentively — he  then  again  inquires  what  were  and  still  are  the
most  constant,  frequent,  strongest  and  most  troublesome  of  the
sensations,  the  exact  course  of  the  symptoms,  the  exact  seat  of
his  sufferings,  and  bids  the  attendants  once  more  detail,  in  as
accurate  terms  as  they  are  able,  the  changes  they  have  observed
in  the  patient,  and  which  they  had  previously  mentioned.'

The  physician  thus  hears  a  second  time  what  he  had  formerly
noted  down.  If  the  expressions  correspond  with  what  was  al-
ready related,  they  may  be  considered  as  true,  as  the  voice  of
internal  conviction ;  if  they  do  not  correspond,  the  discrepancy
must  be  pointed  out  to  the  patient  or  those  about  him,  in  order
that  they  may  explain  which  of  the  two  descriptions  was  nearest
the  truth,  and  thus  what  required  confirmation  is  confirmed,
and  what  required  alteration  is  altered.*

If  the  picture  be  not  yet  complete,  if  there  be  parts  or  func-
tions of  the  body  regarding  whose  state  neither  the  patient  nor
his  attendants  have  said  any  thing,  the  physician  then  asks
what  they  can  remember  respecting  these  parts  or  functions,  but
he  should  frame  his  questions  in  general  terms,  so  as  to  cause
his  informant  to  give  the  special  details  in  his  own  words.^

'  The  physician  should  never  put  leading  questions  in  the  course  of  his  investiga-
tions. He  should  not  suggest  either  to  the  patient,  or  to  the  attendants,  the  symptomt
mislead  them  to  say  any  thing  that  may  be  untrue,  half-true,  or  different  finom  what
is  actually  the  case,  or,  in  order  to  please  the  physician,  to  reply  in  the  affirmatiTe
to  what  is  not  strictly  founded  on  truth,  for  in  this  way  a  fedse  idea  of  the
ease  and  an  unsuitable  mode  of  treatment  must  be  the  result*

The  greatest  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  the  accurate,  although  occasionally
what  coarst  expressions  of  the  patient  and  his  attendants,  respecting  his  ailmeDl&

*  We  cannot  rely  on  the  patient  or  his  attendants  possessing  such  an  accurate  me-
mory, that  after  a  short  interval  of  time  they  should  repeat  in  eanctly  the  same
form  and  manner  the  expressions  that  may  at  first  have  been  inaccurately  or  hastily
dioscn.  There  will  certainly  then  occur  variations,  which  must  be  pointed  out  to  them,
so  that  they  may  select  more  accurate  or  definite  expressions  in  the  descriptioo  of  their
fiensations  and  convictions.

*  For  example :  How  is  it  as  regards  the  fracal  evacuation  t — how  does  the  urine
flow  ?— how  is  it  with  the  sleep  by  day  and  by  night  I — how  is  his  disposition  I — how
the  thirst? — ^what  sort  of  taste  in  the  mouth t — ^what  kinds  of  food  and  drink  doea


TBM  XIDIOINS  OF  SXPSBISNOI.  445

Whea  the  patient  (for,  except  in  cases  of  feigned  diseases,
moBt  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  him  as  regards  his  sensations)
hBSy  by  these  spontaneous  or  almost  unprompted  details,  put
the  phjaician  in  possession  of  a  tolerablj  complete  picture  of
the  disease,  it  is  allowable  for  the  latter  to  institute  more  parti-
cular inquiries.^

The  answers  to  these  last  more  special  questions  however,
which  hare  somewhat  the  character  of  suggestions,  should  not
be  accepted  hj  the  physician  at  the  first  response  as  perfectly
true,  but  after  making  a  note  of  them  on  the  margin  he  should
make  fresh  inquiries  respecting  them,  in  a  different  manner  and
in  another  order,^  aiid'he  should  warn  the  patient  and  his  atten-
dants in  their  answers  to  make  accurate  replies,  and  to  make  no
additions,  but  merely  to  tell  the  exact  circumstances  of  the  case.

But  an  intelligent  patient  will  often  spare  the  physician  the
trouble  of  making  these  particular  inquiries,  and  in  his  account
of  the  history  of  his  disease,  will  usually  have  made  voluntary
mention  of  these  circumstances.

When  the  physician  has  completed  this  examination  he  notes
down  what  he  has  silently  observed  in  the  patient  during  his
visit,'  and  he  corrects  this  by  what  the  attendants  tell  him  how

he  reliflh  mosk^  ifbAt  agree  with  him  best  ?-has  each  of  them  its  natural  perfect  taste  I
— haft  he  any  thing  to  state  respecting  the  head,  the  limbe,  or  the  abdomen  ?  (be

>  For  example:  How  often  has  he  an  alvine  evacuation,  what  is  the  cluiractcr  of
it,  is  it  ■ccompanied  or  not  by  pains  ?  Is  the  sleep  profound  or  light  ? — He  then  asks
more  minutely,  e.  g^  are  the  sufferings  complained  of  persistent  or  remitting  ?  how
often  do  they  occur  t  only  in  the  room  ?  only  in  the  open  air  ?  only  during  rest  or
daring  motion  of  the  body  I  at  what  time  of  the  day  or  under  what  conditions  \  what
precedes,  what  accompanies,  and  what  follows  them  ? — And  finally,  he  addresses  quite
specific  questions :  Does  he  start  in  his  sleep  ?  does  he  groan  or  talk  in  his  ^leep !
what  does  be  talk  about  ?  was  the  whitish  evacuation  mucus  or  fseccs  ?  &c.

*  For  example :  How  he  behaved,  what  he  did  in  his  sleep  ?  what  the  motions
onisisted  off  does  the  symptom  only  occur  only  in  the  morning,  only  when  at  rest
when  lying)  or  when  sitting  f  what  happens  when  he  raises  himself  up  in  bed  ?  6[C

*  For  example:  If  the  patient  tossed  restlessly  about,  and  how  he  behaved;
wfasther  be  was  sulky  or  quarrelsome,  hasty  or  anxious,  unconscious,  comatose;
whether  he  spoke  in  a  low  voice,  or  incoherently  or  otherwise ;  what  kind  of  com-
plexioD  be  has,  what  appearance  the  eyes  present,  what  expression  of  countenance  is
shewn,  what  is  the  state  of  the  tongue,  the  breath,  the  smell  from  the  mouth,  or  the
hearing ;  how  much  the  pupils  are  dilated,  how  rapidly  and  to  what  extent  they  alter
jn  the  dark  and  light;  the  state  of  the  pulse,  of  the  abdomen,  of  the  skin  in  general,
or  ol  particular  portions  of  it  as  regards  moisture  and  temperature ;  whether  he  lies
with  his  head  thrown  back,  uncovered  or  closely  covered  up,  whether  he  liet*  only
oo  his  back,  with  his  mouth  open,  with  the  arms  above  the  head,  or  what  other  position
he  aseomes ;  with  what  amount  of  exertion  he  raises  himself  up ;  and  any  thing  elne
diai  may  strike  the  physidaD,  or  is  observable  by  hiuL


446  THE  MEDICINE  OF  EXPEBIEKOX.

much  of  this  was  or  was  not  nsiuJ  with  the  patient  in  his  days
of  health.

He  then  inquires  what  medicines,  domestic  remedies,  or
other  modes  of  treatment  have  been  employed  in  former  times,
and  what  have  recently  been  used, — ^and  especially  the  state  of
the  symptoms  before  the  use  or  after  the  discontinuance  of  all
medicine.  The  former  form  he  regards  as  the  original  state ;
the  latter  is  in  fistct  an  artificial  form  of  the  disease,  which  how-
ever he  must  sometimes  accept  and  treat  as  it  is,  if  there  is  any
pressing  emergency  in  the  case  that  will  not  admit  of  any  delay.
But  if  the  disease  is  of  a  chronic  character,  he  lets  the  patient
continue  some  days  without  taking  any  medicine,  to  allow  it  to
resume  its  original  form,  until  which  time  he  defers  his  more
particular  examination  of  the  morbid  symptoms,  in  order  that
he  may  direct  his  treatment  towards  the  persistent  and  unsophis-
ticated symptoms  of  the  chronic  malady,  but  not  towards  the
evanescent,  ungenuine,  accidental  symptoms,  produced  by  the
medicines  last  used — as  it  will  be  necessary  to  do  in  acute  dis»
eases  where  the  danger  is  urgent.

Finally,  the  physician*  makes  general  inquiries  as  to  any  ex-
citing causes  of  the  disease  that  may  be  knovm.  In  ten  cases
we  shall  not  find  one  where  the  patient  or  his  friends  can  assign
a  certain  cause.  If,  however,  there  have  happened  one  respect-
ing which  there  can  exist  no  dubiety,  it  generally  occurs  that
has  been  voluntarily  mentioned  by  them  at  the  commencement
of  their  account  of  the  disease.  If  it  is  necessary  to  make  in-
quiries respecting  it,  it  usually  happens  that  very  uncertain
information  is  elicited  on  this  head.*

I  except  those  causes  of  a  disgraceful^  character,  which  the
patient  or  his  friends  are  not  likely  to  mention,  at  all  eveilts  not
of  their  own  accord,  and  which,  consequently,  the  doctor  should
endeavour  to  find  out  by  dexterously  framing  his  questions,  or
by  private  inquiries. With  these  exceptions  it  is  a  hurtful,  or  at

'  Such  a  query  ahould  never  have  a  definite  character.  But  even  when  it  is  framed
quite  in  a  general  fashion  («.  g.  how  did  the  dioease  arise,  what  was  its  cause  \)  sucii  a
question  usually  only  incites  the  patient  and  his  friends  to  imagine  or  invent
probable  cause,  which  might  appear  probable  to  a  physician  who  does  not
great  knowledge  of  mankind,  and  90  deceive  him.

'  For  example :  meditated  suicide,  onanism,  excesses  in  wine,  spirits  or  food — m
annatural  debauchery — indulgence  in  meretricbus  reading ;  venereal  disease ;  morti-
fied pride ;  thwarted  revenge ;  childish  superstitious  fear ;  an  evil  consdence ;  un*
ha|>py  love  ;  jealousy ;  domestic  quarrels  and  grief  about  some  family  secret^  about
debts — straitened  circumstances,  hunger,  unwholesome  food,  ^


XEB  XEDIOINB  OF  BXPSBIEirGE.  447

all  eyents,  a  useless  task  to  endeavour  to  ferret  out  other  excit-
ing causes,  bj  means  of  suggestions,  especially  as  the  medicinal
art  knows  yery  few  of  these  (I  shall  mention  them  in  their
proper  places)  on  which  we  can  base  a  trustworthy  mode  of
treatment^  regardless  of  the  particular  signs  of  the  disease  they
have  induced.

By  exercising  all  this  zealous  care  the  physician  will  succeed
in  depicting  the  pure  picture  of  the  disease,  he  will  have  before
bim  the  disease  itself,  as  it  is  revealed  by  signs,  without  which
man,  who  knows  nothing  save  through  the  medium  of  hia
aenses,  could  never  discover  the  hidden  nature  of  any  thing,  and
just  as  little  could  he  discover  a  disease.

When  we  have  found  out  the  disease,  our  next  step  is  to
search  for  the  remedy.

Every  disease  is  owing  to  some  abnormal  irritation  of  a  pecu-
liar character,  which  deranges  the  functions  and  well-being  of
our  organs.

But  the  imity  of  the  life  of  our  organs  and  their  concurrence
to  one  common  end  does  not  permit  two  effects  produced  by
abnormal  general  irritation  to  exist  side  by  side  and  simultane-
ously in  the  human  body. Hence  our

If^irst  maxim  of  experience.

When  two  abnormal  general  irritations  act  simultaneously  on
the  body,  if  the  two  be  dissimilar^  then  the  action  of  the  one  (the
weaker)  irritation  will  be  suppressed  and  suspended  for  some
time  by  the  other  (the  stronger*) ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  our

Second  maxim  of  expcrie^ice.

When  the  two  irritations  greatly  resemble  each  ot/icr,  then  the
one  (the  weaker)  irritation,  together  with  its  effects,  will  be  com-

^  Tlie  maxim  of  experience  will  be  better  elucidated  by  another,  namely :  when
(as  is  the  case  with  palliatives)  the  general  (medicinal)  irritation  that  is  applied  is  the
exact  opponte  of  that  already  existing  in  the  body  (the  morbific  irritation),  the  latter
wiU  be  suppressed  and  suspended  with  remarkable  rapidity — but  when  the  general
(medidiia])  irritation  employccl  is  dissimilar  and  heterogenmia  to  that  already  present
in  the  body  (the  morbific  irritation)  in  every  other  respect  (as  is  the  case  in  merely
revolntioDary  modes  of  treatment,  by  revulsions  and  so-called  general  remedies),  the
morbific  irritation  will  only  be  suppressed  and  suspended,  provided  the  new  irritation
is  much  stronger  than  that  already  present  in  the  system, — and  only  rapidly  when
this  new  irritation  is  excessively  violent.

If  the  opposed,  heterogenous,  dissimilar  irritations  are  diseases,  of  pretty  much  the
flune  intensity,  as  however  is  rarely  the  case,  so  that  thoy  cannot  suspend  one  another
at  all,  or  not  for  any  length  of  time,  then  they  (when  uncurcd)  unite  to  form  a  single
^Moaflft  which  may  moreover  be  cured  as  a  single,  uniform  disease,  notwithstandkig
thai  this  kind  has  been  termed  complex  disease*.


4A8  THB  MfiDICINB  OF  SZPSSISNOX.

pletely  extinguished  and  annihtlaied  by  the  analogous  power  of
the  other  (the  stronger).

{Illustration  of  the  first  maocim,)  If  a  person  be  infected  at  the
game  time  by,  for  instance,  the  miasmata  of  measles  and  small-
pox (two  dissimilar  irritations),  and  if  the  measles  have  appeared
first,  it  immediately  disappears  on  the  day  of  the  eruption  of  the
smaU-pox,  and  it  is  only  after  the  latter  is  completely  gone  that
the  measles  again  returns  and  completes  its  natural  course.  The
red  rash  that  had  already  commenced  to  shew  itself  disappeared,
as  I  have  frequently  observed,  on  the  eruption  of  the  small-pox,
and  only  completed  its  course  when  the  small-pox  was  dried  up.'
According  to  Larrey,  the  plague  of  the  Levant  immediately  re-
miains  stationary  whenever  the  small-pox  begins  to  prevail,  but
again  returns  when  the  latter  ceases.

These  two  corporeal  irritations  are  of  a  heterogeneous  and
dissimilar  character,  and  the  one  is  therefore  suspended  by  the
other — ^but  only  for  a  short  time.

{Illustration  of  the  second  maxim,)  If  the  two  abnormal  cor-
poreal irritations  be  of  a  similar  nature,  then  the  weaker  will  be
entirely  removed  by  the  stronger,  so  that  only  one  (the  strongeir)
completes  its  action,  whilst  the  weaker  was  quite  annihilated
and  extinguished.  Thus  the  small-pox  becomes  an  eradicator
of  the  cow-pox ;  the  latter  is  inmiediately  interrupted  in  its
course  whenever  the  miasm  of  the  small-pox  that  was  previously
latent  in  the  system  breaks  out,  and  after  the  small-pox  has  run
its  course  the  cow-pox  does  not  again  appear.

The  cow-pox  miasm,  which  in  addition  to  its  well-known
effect  of  developing  the  cow-pock  with  its  course  of  two  weeks'
duration,  has  also  the  property  of  giving  rise  to  a  secondary
eruption  of  small  red  pimples  with  red  borders,  particularly  in
the  face  and  forearms  (and  under  certain  unknown  circumstan-
ces it  produces  this  effect  usually  soon  after  the  desiccation  of
the  pocks),  permanently  cures  other  cutaneous  eruptions  where-
with the  inoculated  person  was  already,  though  ever  so  long
before,  affected,  if  this  cutaneous  disease  was  only  tolerably  similar
to  that  cmv-pox  eocanthema,'^

^  I  saw  an  infection  of  the  epidemic  febrfle  swelling  of  the  parotid  gland  (mumps)
immediately  yield  when  the  protective  inoculation  of  the  small-pox  had  taken  effect,
and  it  was  only  after  the  lapse  of  fourteen  days,  when  the  areobur  redness  of  the  pocks
had  passed  away,  that  the  mumps  again  appeared  and  completed  its  regular  coarse
of  seven  days.

*  That  it  is  this  secoodaiy  eruption  (of  pimples),  or  even  the  mere  tendency  of  vac-
one  to  cause  this  accessory  eruption,  but  not  the  cow-pox  itself  which  cores  tboee


TSB  XEDICINE  OF  EXPSBIEKCE.  449

These  two  abnonnal  imtations  cannot  exist  simultaneonslj  in
the  same  body,  and  thus  the  morbific  irritation  that  appears  last
removes  that  which  previously  existed,  not  merely  for  a  short
time,  but  permanently,  in  consequence  of  being  analogous  to  the
latter ;  it  extinguishes,  annihilates  and  cures  it  completely.

It  is  the  same  thing  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  by  means  of
mediciHes.

If  the  itch  <rf  workers  in  wool  be  treated  by  strong  purgativesj
such  as  jalap,  it  gradually  yields  almost  completely,  as  long  as
the  purgatives  are  continued,  as  the  action  of  these  two  abnor-
mal imtations  cannot  co-exist  in  the  body;  but  as  soon  as  the
effect  of  the  curtificially  excited  irritation  ceases,  that  is  to  say,
whenever  the  purgatives  are  discontinued,  the  suspended  itch
returns  to  its  former  state,  because  a  dissimilar  irritation  does
not  remote  and  destroy  the  other,  but  only  suppresses  and  sus-
pends it  f<Hr  a  time.

But  if  we  introduce  into  a  body  affected  by  this  itch  a  new
irritant— -of  a  different  nature,  it  is  true,  but  still  of  a  very  similar
mode  of  action — as  for  example  the  calcareous  liver  of  sulphur,*
from  which  others  besides  myself  have  observed  an  eruption
produced  very  similar  in  character  to  this  itch,  then,  as  two
general  abnormal  irritations  cannot  co-exist  in  the  body,  the
former  yields  to  the  latter,  not  for  a  short  time  merely,  but  per-
manently, as  the  last  introduced  was  an  irritation  very  analogous
to  the  first;  that  is  to  say,  the  itch  of  the  wool- workers  is  really
cored  by  the  employment  of  the  calcareous  liver  of  sulphur
(and  for  the  same  reason  by  the  use  of  sulphur  powder  and  sul-
phureous baths).

Those  diseases  also  which  the  casual  observer  considers  as
merely  local  ^  are  either  suppressed  for  some  time  by  a  fresh  irri-

fM ■  - ' " ' ' • ~" ^^ ' ~~ ~ " ' -  ~

poAtular  exanthemata  is  evident  from  this,  that  tlicsc  exanthemata  remain  almost  un-
altered as  long  as  the  proper  cow-pox  is  running  itscoiu^e,  and  only  disappear  when
the  di«ea«e  oomes  to  the  period  correspondiog  to  the  occurrence  of  the  secondary
eroptioB  of  vaccinia,  that  is  to  say,  after  the  cow-pocks  arc  dried  up.  But  the  vaccine
dinftiwe  has  a  tendency  to  cause  not  only  that  secondary  eruption  of  discrete,  elevated
pimples,  but  also  another  accessory  eruption  in  the  form  of  confluent  miliary  (and  also
eroding)  tetters  (but  as  it  seems,  not  on  the  £ace,  forearms  and  legs),  and  it  is  also  ca-
pable of  caring  a  similar  cutaneous  afiTection.

*  The  baths  impregnated  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas  excite  the  same  itch-like
eruptioii,  in  the  flexures  of  the  joints  especially,  which  itdies  most  at  night,  and  they
tbere&nre  cure  the  itch  of  tlie  wool-workers  rapidly  and  radically.

*  The  uaity  of  the  life  of  all  organs,  and  their  eoncurrciice  to  one  oommon  end,  will
hardly  permit  of  a  disease  of  the  body  being  or  remaining  merely  localj  just  as  the
actkn  of  no  mediciDe  can  be  purely  local,  iu  such  a  manner  tlmt  the  rest  o(  the  body
flfaall  take  no  part  in  it It  certainly  takes  a  part,  although  in  a  somewhat  less  degree

29


450  THE  HKDICU^S  OF  HXPEBISNCK.

tation  applied  to  this  part,  where  the  two  irritatioBs  are  c^  dis-
similar or  opposite  tendency,  as,  for  example,  the  pain  of  a  burnt
hand  is  instantly  suppressed  and  suspended  by  dipping  it  in  oold
water,  as  long  as  the  immersion  is  continued,  but  it  immediately
recurs  with  renewed  violence  on  withdrawing  the  hand  fix)m  the
water — or  the  first  is  entirely  and  permanently  destroyed,  that
is  to  say,  completely  cured,  when  the  last  irritation  is  very  ana-
logous to  the  first.  Thus,  when  the  action  of  the  remedy,  c  jr.,
the  artificial  irritation  applied  to  the  burnt  hand,  is  of  a  different
nature,  it  is  true,  from  the  burning  irritation  of  the  fire,  but  of
a  very  similar  tendency,  as  is  the  case  with  highly  concentrated
alcohol,  which  when  applied  to  the  lips  produces  almost  the
same  sensation  as  that  caused  by  a  flame  approached  to  them,
then  the  burnt  skin,  if  it  be  constantly  kept  moistened  with  the
spirit,  is — in  bad  cases  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  in  slighter
ones  much  sooner — completely  restored  and  permanently  ctiied
of  the  pain  of  the  burn.  So  true  is  it  that  two  irritations,  even
when  they  are  local,  cannot  co-exist  in  the  body  without  the  one
suspending  the  other,  if  they  are  dissimilar,  or  the  one  removing
the  other,  if  the  added  one  have  a  very  similar  mode  of  actioii
and  tendency.

than  the  place  oq  which  the  socalled  local  affection  is  most  obTiouSi  or  to  which  Urn
so-called  local  medicine  is  applied. — Persons  who  suffer  from  herpes  arc,  acoordii^
to  Larrej,  exempted  from  the  infection  of  plague,  and  the  Europeans  in  Syria  who
have  issues  and  perpetual  blisters  remain  free  from  the  infection  of  the  Levantiiit
plague,  as  observed  in  our  o^d  time  by  Larrey  and  in  ancient  times  by  G.  F.  TiD
Hilden  and  F.  Plater.  So  far  are  herpetic  eruptions  and  artificial  external  ulott^
from  being  purely  local  affections,  that  when  they  are  present  the  system  is  not  sus-
ceptible of  such  a  violent  and  general  irritation  as  the  Levantine  plague.  But  it  is  only
during  the  continuance  of  this  corporeal  irritation,  which  is  dissimilar  to  that  it  wards
offy  and  no  looger,  that  it  can  prevent  its  occurrence.  Two  children  affected  witb
epilepsy  kept  free  from  this  disease  (the  epilepsy  was  suspended)  as  long  as  an  «ni|^
tioD  on  the  head  that  they  both  had  persisted ;  but  when  this  healed  up  the  epilepij
returned  (N.  Tulpius,  lib  L  obs.  8).  In  like  manner,  obviously  general  doeaset  of
the  body  have  been — not  cured,  but  suppressed  and  suspended  by  nature,  whidi  ii
powerleflB  to  cure  them,  by  means  of  torpid  ulcers  of  the  legs,  by  the  physiciaii  bj
means  of  issues,  because  both  issues  and  ulcers  of  the  legs,  if  they  have  existed  bobm
time,  are  abnormal  general  irritations  ;  but  the  attacks  of  apoplexy,  asthma,  A&,  recor
immediately  when  ihe  ulcers  of  the  legs  and  the  issues  heal  up.  An  epileptic  patient
remained  for  a  long  time  free  from  his  attacks,  as  long  as  the  issue  was  kept  cypei^
but  the  epilepsy  returned  immediately  and  in  a  worse  shape  than  before,  when  it
aUowed  to  close.  (Pechlinus,  Ohs.  phy%.  med.  lib.  ii,  obR.  80).  From  this  it  is
that  irritations  apparently  local,  when  they  have  existed  some  time,  usually  beoome
general  irritations  of  the  body,  and  if  they  are  sufficiently  intense,  can  either  suspeiid
or  cure  general  maladies  of  the  body,  according  as  the  two  opposed  irritationB  were
of  heterogeneous  or  of  analogous  character.


TBJt  XSDICINS  OF  £XP£BI£NC£.  401

In  order  therefore  to  be  able  to  cure^  we  shall  only  require  to
cppaae  to  the  existing  abnormal  irritation  of  the  disease  an  appro-
priaie  medicine^  that  is  to  say,  aiiother  Tnmbijk  power  whose  effect
is  very  similar  to  thai  the  disease  displays.

As  food  is  requisite  for  the  healthy  body,  so  medicines  have
been  found  efficacious  in  diseases ;  medicines,  fioweverj  are  never
in  themselves  and  unconditionally  wholesome,  but  only  relatively  so.

The  pure  aliments  of  food  and  drink  taken  until  hunger  and
thirst  abate,  support  our  strength,  by  replacing  the  parts  lost  in
the  vital  processes,  without  disturbing  the  functions  of  our  organs
or  impairing  the  health.

Those  substances  however  which  we  term  medicines  are  of  a
completely  opposite  nature.  They  afford  no  nourishment  They
are  abnormal  irritants,  only  fitted  for  altering  our  healthy  body,
disturbing  the  vitality  and  the  functions  of  the  organs,  and  ex-
citing disagreeable  sensations,  in  one  word,  making  the  healthy  ill.

There  is  no  medicinal  substance  whatsoever  that  does  not
pcfiseas  this  tendency,'  and  no  substance  is  medicinal  which  does
not  possess  it

It  is  only  hy  OUs  property  of  producing  in  Uie  heaUIiy  body  a  series
of  specific  morbid  symptoms,  that  medicines  can  cure  diseases,  that
is  to  aay^  remove  and  extinguish  the  morbid  irritation  by  a  suitable
counter-irritation.

Every  simple  medicinal  substance,  like  the  specific  morbific
miasmata  (small-pox,  measles,  the  venom  of  vipers,  the  saliva'  of
rabid  animals,  &c.),  causes  a  peculiar  specific  disease — a  series  of
determinate  sjrmptoms,  which  is  not  produced  precisely  in  the
same  way  by  any  other  medicine  in  the  world.

As  every  species  of  plant  differs  in  its  external  form,  in  its
peculiar  mode  of  existence,  in  its  taste,  smell,  &c.,  from  every
other  species  and  genus  of  plant — as  every  mineral  substance,
every  salt  differs  from  all  others  both  in  its  external  and  internal
physical  qualities,  so  do  they  all  differ  among  themselves  in

'  A  medidiie  which  given  to  a  healthy  individual  alone  aiid  UDcombinod,  in  8uffi-
CMDt  quaiitiiyy  causes  a  determinate  action,  a  certain  array  of  symptoms,  retains  the
imdeney  to  ezdte  the  same  even  in  the  very  smallest  dose.

Hie  heroic  medicines  exhibit  their  action  even  when  given  in  small  doses,  to
bealUiy  and  even  strong  individuals.  Those  that  bive  a  weaker  action  must  be  given
for  tiiese  experiments  in  very  considerable  doset>.  The  weakest  medicines  hdwever
only  shew  their  absolute  action  in  such  subject**  as  arc  free  from  disi'ase,  who  are
delicate,  irritable  and  sensitive  ; — in  diseases,  in  like  manner,  they  all  (the  weakest
•ft  well  as  the  strongest  medicines)  shew  their  absolute  actions,  but  so  intermingled
irith  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  that  only  a  very  experienced  experimenter  and
fine  observer  can  distinguish  them.


452  THE  HEDICnrE  OF  EXPERISXCB:

their  medicinal  properties,  that  is  to  say,  in  their  morbificpowers ;
each  of  the  substances  effects  an  alteration  in  our  state  c^  health
in  a  peculiar,  determinate  manner.

Most  substances  belonging  to  the  animal  and  regetaUe  king*
dorns,'  are  medicinal  in  their  raw  state.  Those  belonging  to  the
inineral  kingdom  are  so  both  in  their  crude  and  prepared  state.

Medicinal  substances  manifest  the  nature  of  their  pathoge*
netic  power,  and  their  absolute  true  action  on  the  healthy  hu-
man body,  in  the  purest  manner,  when  each  is  given  singly  and
uncombined.

Many  of  the  most  active  medicines  have  alrea^  occasionally
found  their  way  into  the  Imman  body,  and  the  accidents  they
have  given  rise  to  have  been  recorded.*

In  order  to  follow  still  farther  this  natural  guide  and  to  pen^
trate  more  profoundly  into  this  source  of  knowledge,  we  admi-
nister  these  medicines  experimentally,  the  weaker  as  well  as  the
stronger,  each  singly  and  uncombined,  to  healthy  individuals,
with  caution,  and  carefully  removing  all  accessory  circxnn»
stances  capable  of  exercising  an  influence,  we  note  down  the
symptoms  they  occasion  precisely  in  the  order  in  which  they
occur,  and  thus  we  obtain  the  pure  result  of  the  form  of  dis-
ease that  each  of  these  medicinal  substances  is  capable  of  pro^
ducing,  absolutely  and  by  itself,  in  the  human  body.'

*  Those  plants  and  animals  which  we  employ  as  food,  have  the  advaotage  of  ooo-
taining  a  greater  quantity  of  nutritious  partf<  than  the  others^  and  moreover,  their
medicinal  powers  in  their  raw  state  are  either  not  yery  great,  or  if  they  are  great  are
destroyed  and  diss^ted  by  drying  (as  in  the  case  of  ammroot),  by  ilie  ezpreasioo
of  the  noxious  juice  (as  in  the  case  of  the  cassaya),  by  fermeotatioi],  by  smokiqg  mkI
by  the  power  of  the  heat  in  roasting,  baking  and  boiling,  or  are  rendered  Bmoeoona
by  the  addition  of  salt^  sugar,  and  especially  of  vinegar  (io  sauces  and  salads).  If
we  allow  the  recent  expressed  juice  of  the  mast  deadly  plants  to  remain  only  for  m
single  day  in  some  warm  place,  ft  undergoes  the  complete  vinoos  fermentatioo  and
loses  much  of  its  medicinal  power ;  if  it  stands  several  days,  it  passes  throi:^  tfa*
acetous  fermentation,  whereby  it  loses  all  medicinal  power,  the  sediment  that  it  de-
posited from  it  is  then  perfectly  harmless,  and  is  similar  to  wheat  starch.

*  If  we  compare  the  occasional  happy  cores  effected  by  these  medicines,  the  most
prejudiced  person  meet  be  struck  witii  the  extraordimuy  resemblance  that  ezislii
between  the  symptoms  caused  by  the  medidnea  oo  the  healthy  body,  and  those
whereby  the  disease  it  cures  is  characterized.

'  In  order  to  ascertain  the  effects  of  less  powerfrd  medicines  in  this  manner,  we
must  give  only  one  pretty  strong  dose  to  the  temperate  healthy  person  who  is  the
subject  of  the  experiment,  and  it  is  best  to  give  it  in  solutioa  If  we  wish  to  aaoer-
tain  the  remaining  symptoms,  which  were  not  revealed  by  the  first  trial,  we  may  give
to  another  person,  or  to  the  same  individual,  but  only  then  after  the  lapse  of  serenl
days,  when  the  action  of  the  first  dose  is  fully  over,  a  similar  or  eveo  stroogtr  por-
tion, and  note  the  symptoma  of  irritation  thence  resulting  in  the  same  careful  and


THE  MEDICIKB  OF  SXFEBIENCX.  458

In  this  way  we  must  obtain  a  knowledge  of  a  sufficient  supply
of  artificial  morbific  agents  (medicines)  for  curative  implements,
80  that  we  may  be  able  to  make  a  selection  from  among  them.^

Now,  after  we  have  accurately  examined  the  disease  to  be
cured,  that  is  to  say^  noted  down  all  its  appreciable  phenomena
historically,  and  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur,  marking  par*
ticularly  die  more  severe  and  troublesome  chief  symptoms,  we
have  only  to  oppose  to  this  disease  another  disease  as  like  it  as
possible,  or,  in  other  words,  a  medicinal  irritation  analagous  to
the  existing  irritation  of  the  disease,  by  the  employment  of  a
medicine  which  possesses  the  power  of  exciting  as  nearly  as
possible  all  these  symptoms,  or  at  all  events,  the  greater  number
and  severest,  or  most  peculiar  of  them,  and  in  the  same  ordeTi
— ^in  order  to  cure  the  disease  we  wish  to  remove,  certainly,
quickly  and  permanently.

The  result  of  a  treatment  so  conformable  to  nature  may  be
confidently  depended  on,  it  is  so  perfectly,  without  exception,  cer-
tain, so  rapid  beyond  all  expectation,  that  no  method  of  treat-
ing diseases  can  shew  anything  at  all  like  it

But  here  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  consideration  the  immense
diCTerence,  that  can  never  be  sufficiently  estimated,  betwixt  the
positive  and  negative,  or  as  they  are  sometimes  termed,  the
ndical  ifwraiive)  and  the  palliative  modes  of  treatment

In  the  action  of  simple  medicines  on  the  healthy  human  body
there  occur  in  the  first  place  phenomena  and  symptoms,  which
may  be  termed  the  positive  disease,  to  be  expected  from  the
specific  action  of  the  medicinal  substance,  or  its  positive  primary
(first  and  principal)  eflTeet

When  this  is  past,  there  ensues,  in  hardly  appreciable  transi-

•oeptural  maimer.  For  medicines  that  arc  still  weaker  we  require,  in  addition  to  a
comiderable  doee,  individuals  ttiat  are,  it  is  true,  healthy,  but  of  very  irritable  delicate
eoiHtitatioos.  The  more  obvious  and  striking  symptoms  must  be  recorded  in  the
list,  thoM  that  are  of  a  dubious  character  should  be  marked  with  the  sign  of  dubiety,
tmtil  they  have  frequently  been  confirmed

Id  the  mTestigation  of  these  medicinal  symptoms,  all  Buggestioos  must  be  as  care-
fbDy  AToided,  as  has  been  recommended  for  the  investigation  of  tiie  symptoms  of
diseafte.  It  must  be  chiefly  the  mere  voluntary  relation  of  the  person  who  is  the
subject  of  the  experiment,  nothing  like  guess-work,  notliing  obtained  by  dint  of  crost
qnettlooing,  that  should  be  noted  down  as  truth,  and  still  less,  expressions  of  sensa-
that  hatve  previously  been  put  in  tSie  ejcperinientcr's  mouth.
But  haw,  even  in  diseases,  amid  the  symptoms  of  the  original  dlHease,  the  medi-
Bymptoms  may  be  discovered,  is  the  subject  f<)r  the  exercise  of  a  higher  order
fi#  inductive  minds,  and  must  be  left  to  niasters  only  in  the  art  of  observation.

'  iij  Drojpihemta  de  viribits  medicamtjUonun  are  something  of  this  kind.


464  THE  MEDICINE  OP  EXPERIENCE.

tions,^  the  exact  opposite  of  the  first  process  (especially  in  the
case  of  vegetable  medicines),  there  occur  the  exact  opposite
(negative)  symptoms  constituting  the  secondary  action.

Now,  if  in  the  treatment  of  a  disease  we  administer  those
medicines  whose  primary  symptoms,  or  those  of  its  positive  ac-
tion, present  the  greatest  similarity  to  the  phenomena  of  the
disease,  this  is  a  positive  or  curative  mode  of  treatment,  that  is  to
say,  there  occurs  what  must  take  place  according  to  my  second
maAn  of  experience,  rapid,  permanent  amelioration,  for  the
completion  of  which  the  remedy  must  be  given  in  smaller  and
smaller  doses,  repeated  at  longer  intervals,  to  prevent  the  occur-
rence of  a  relapse ;  if  the  first,  or  first  few  doses  have  not  aliea-
dy  sufficed  to  efiect  a  cure.^

Thus,  to  the  abnormal  irritation  present  in  the  body,  another
morbid  irritation  as  similar  to  it  as  possible  (by  means  of  the
medicine  that  acts  in  this  case  positively  with  its  primary  symp-
toms) is  opposed  in  such  a  degree  that  the  latter  preponderates
over  the  former,  and  (as  two  abnormal  irritations  cannot  exist
beside  each  other  in  the  human  body,  and  these  are  two  irrita-
tions of  the  same  kind)  the  ccnnplete  extinction  and  annihilatioii
of  the  former  is  efiected  by  the  latter.^

Here  a  new  disease  is  certainly  introduced  (by  the  ^ledicine)
into  the  system,  but  with  this  diflFerence  in  the  result,  that  the
original  one  is  extinguished  by  the  artificially  excited  one;  but
the  course  of  the  artificially  excited  one  (the  course  of  the  me-
dicinal symptoms),  that  has  thus  overcome  the  other,  expires  in
a  shorter  time  than  any  natural  disease,  be  it  ever  so  short.

It  is  astonishing  that,  when  the  positive  (curative)  medicine
employed  corresponds  very  exactly  in  its  primary  symptoms
with  those  of  the  disease  to  be  cured^  not  a  trace  of  the  secon-
dary symptoms  of  the  medicine  is  observable,  but  its  whole  ac-
tion ceases  just  at  the  time  when  we  might  expect  the  com*
mencement  of  the  negative  medicinal  symptoms. The  disease


'  So  that  ID  this  transition  stage  sympioms  of  the  first  order  still  alteraatc
jfjmptoms  of  the second,  until  the  second  order  attains  the  ascendancy  and  iq[>-
pears  pure  and  unmixed.

*  Hius,  when  a  pereoo  accustomed  to  drinking  brandj  has  heated  and  eiduuirted
himself  to  the  utmost  by  some  rapid,  violent  exertion,  (e.  g.  putting  out  a  fire  or
reaping  corn),  and  oomplaios  of  burning  heat,  the  most  violent  thirst  and  heavineaa
of  the  limbs,  a  single  mouthful  (half  an  ounce)  of  brandy  will  probably  in  leas  thao
half  an  hour,  remove  the  thirst,  heat,  and  heaviness  of  limbs,  and  make  him  quite
well,  because  brandy  given  to  healthy  persons  unaccustomed  to  its  use.  usually
causes  in  its  first  action  thirst,  heat  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.


THB  XIDICINE  OF  EXPERIENCE.  456

disappears  if  it  belong  to  acute  diseases  in  the  first  few  hours,
which  are  the  duration  allotted  by  nature  to  the  primary  medi-
cinal symptoms,  and  the  only  visible  result  is — ^recovery — a
real  dynamic  mutual  extinction.

In  ^e  best  cases  the  strength  returns  immediately,  and  the
lingering  period  of  convalescence  usual  under  other  modes  of
treatment  is  not  met  with.

Eqmally  astonishing  is  the  truth  that  there  is  no  medicinal
substance  which,  when  employed  in  a  curative  manner,  is  weaker
than  the  disease  for  which  it  is  adapted — no  morbid  irritation
for  which  the  medicinal  irritation  of  a  positive  and  extremely
analogous  nature  is  not  more  than  a  match.

If  we  have  not  only  selected  the  right  (positive)  remedy,  but
have  also  hit  upon  the  proper  dose  (and  for  a  curative  purpose
incredibly  small  doses  suffice),  the  remedy  produces  within  the
first  few  hours  after  the  dose  has  been  taken  a  kind  of  slight
aggravation  (this  seldom  lasts  so  long  as  three  hours),  which  the
patient  imagines  to  be  an  increase  of  his  disease,  but  which  is
notching  more  than  the  primary  symptoms  of  the  medicine,  which
are  somewhat  superior  in  intensity  to  the  disease,  and  which
ought  to  resemble  the  original  malady  so  closely  as  to  deceive
the  patient  himself  in  iiiQ  first  hour,  until  the  recovery  that  en*
sues  afler  a  few  hours  teaches  him  his  mistake.

In  t^is  case  the  cure  of  an  acute  disease  is  generally  accom-
plished by  the  first  dose.

I£J  however,  the  first  dose  of  the  perfectly  adapted  curative
medicine  was  not  somewhat  superior  to  the  disease,  and  if  that
peculiar  aggravation  did  not  occur  in  the  first  hour,  the  disease
is,  notwithstanding,  in  a  great  measure  extiDguished,  and  it
only  requires  a  few  and  always  smaller  doses  to  annihilate  it
ctompletelyJ

I^  under  these  circumstances,  iu  place  of  smaller  doses,  as
large  or  larger  ones  are  administered,  there  arise  (after  the  disap-
pearance of  the  ori^nal  disease)  pure  medicinal  symptoms,  a
kind  of  unnecessary  artificial  disease.^

'  In  the  more  special  part  I  eiudl  discuss  how  fjar  it  is  necessary  in  the  ti^atment
ai  efarotnc  (fiseases,  even  after  the  complete  restorabon  of  health,  to  continue  giving
for  some  moDths  longer  a  niuall  quantity  of  the  same  medicine  that  cured  the  disease,
hot  at  erer  longer  and  ktuger  intervals,  in  order  U)  eradicate  every  trace  of  the  chronie
disease  in  the  Ofrgaiiism  that  h;is  been  for  years  accustomed  to  its  prcsenca

'  Should  we  observe  Uiat  the  person  recovering  under  the  action  of  the  curative
medicine  requires  to  continue  taking  an  equally  large  or  even  larger  dose  in  order  to
faweat  a  rebipse,  this  is  a  positive  sign  thai  the  cause  that  has  produced  the  disease


456  THE  MEDIGINS  OF  EXPEBISNCB.

But  the  case  is  quite  different  with  palliative  treatment,  where
a  medicine  is  employed  whost  positive^  primary  action  is  the  opposite
of  the  disease.

Almost  immediately  after  the  administration  of  such  a  medicine
there  occurs  a  kind  of  alleviation,  an  almost  instantaneous  sup-
pression of  the  morbid  irritation  for  a  short  time/  as  in  the  case
cited  above  of  the  cold  water  applied  to  the  burnt  skin.  These
are  called  palliative  remedies.

They  prevent  the  impression  of  the  morbid  irritation  on  the
organism  only  as  long  as  their  primary  symptoms  last,  because
they  present  to  the  body  an  irritation  that  is  the  reverse  of  the
irritation  of  the  disease ;  thereafter  their  secondary  action  coin-
mences,  and  as  it  is  the  opposite  of  their  primary  action,  it  eoin-
cides  with  the  original  morbid  irritation  and  aggravates  it.»

During  the  secondary  action  of  the  palliative,  and  when  it  has
been  left  off,  the  disease  becomes  aggravated.  The  pain  of  the
burn  becomes  worse  when  the  hand  is  withdrawn  fix>m  the  cold
water  than  before  it  was  inmiersed.

As  in  the  (positive)  curative  mode  of  treatment  in  the  first


still  exists,  and  this  most  W  remoTed  to  render  the  recoyeiy  pennanent — an  error  of
diet  (abuse  of  tea,  coflfee,  wine,  spirits,  <&&),  or  some  other  pernicious  habit  [e.^.  pro-
longed suckling  of  delicate  females,  the  abuse  of  the  sexual  functioii,  sedentary  habits*
continued  quarrelling,  Ac]

^  See  the  first  maxim  of  eiqierienee  and  the  obsenratian  attached  to  iL

*  Ignorance  of  this  maxim  of  experience  was  the  cause  why  physiciaDs  haT«
hitherto  selected,  almost  exclusively,  palliative  remedies  for  the  treatment  of  diseases ;
the  flattering,  almost  instantaneously  ameliorating  action  that  first  ensued  deceived
them.  In  like  manner  the  parents  of  a  morally  diseased  (naughty)  child  deceive
themselves  when  they  imagine  that  a  sweet  cake  is  the  remedy  for  its  peevishness
and  rudeness.  It  certainly  grows  quiet  inunediately  after  receiving  the  first  cake»
but  on  the  pccasion  of  another  fit  of  wilfulness,  bawling  and  noi^  from  unrulioess^
the  palliative  cake  again  given  does  not  prove  so  efficacious ;  we  must  give  it  more
cake,  and  must  at  last  overload  it  with  cakes,  and  yet  at  last  this  produces  no  good
result  The  child  has,  on  the  contrary,  only  become  more  stubborn,  naughty  and
unruly/ in  consequence  of  the  palliative.  The  poor  parents  have  now  recourse  to
other  palliatives ;  toys,  new  clothes,  flattering  words — ^until  at  length  these  are  no
longer  of  any  avail,  and  graduaUy  induce  the  opposite  state,  an  increase  of  the  original
BQoral  disease  in  the  child  it  was  wished  to  cure,  namely,  confirmed  naughtinesa^
stubbornness,  wildnesa  It,  at  the  beginning  and  on  the  very  first  occasion  in  whidi
it  beat  or  scratched  its  brothers  or  sisters  or  attendants,  the  curative  agents  of  reprimand
and  the  rod  had  been  employed  in  adequately  strong  dose,  and  repeated  a  few  times
on  the  occasion  of  subsequent  (assuredly  slighter)  fits  of  passion,  they  would  not  have
failed  to  cure  the  malady  positively,  permanently  and  radically.  The  naughty  child
would,  it  is  true,  on  the  first  application  of  the  rod,  and  for  the  first  half  hour,  prove
somewhat  more  unruly,  bawl  and  cry  somewliat  louder^  but  it  w<iuld  subsequeotlj
become  all  the  more  quiet  and  docile.


THX  MSDICIKE  OF  EXPEBISNCS.  467

hour  a  slight  aggravation  usually  ensues,  followed  bj  an  amelio-
ration and  recovery  all  the  more  durable,  so  in  the  palliative
method  there  occurs  in  the  first  hour,  indeed  almost  instantane-
ously, a  (deceptive)  amelioration,  which,  however,  diminishes
firom  hour  to  hour,  until  the  period  of  the  primary,  and  in  this
case  palliative,  action  expires,  and  not  only  allows  the  disease  to
reappear  as  it  was  before  the  use  of  the  remedy,  but  somewhat
of  the  secondary  action  of  the  medicine  is  added,  which,  because
the  primary  action  of  the  remedy  was  the  opposite  of  the  disease,
now  becomes  the  very  reverse,  that  is  to  say,  a  state  analogous
to  the  disease.  This  state  is  an  increase,  an  aggravation  of  the
disease.

If  it  is  wished  to  repeat  the  palliative  aid,  the  former  dose
will  now  no  longer  suffice;  it  rtiust  be  increased,*  and  always
still  further  increased,  until  the  medicine  no  longer  produces
lehe^  or  until  the  accessory  eflTects,  whatever  these  may  be,  of
the  medicine  continued  in  ever  increased  doses,  arc  productive
of  bad  consequences,  that  forbid  its  further  employment,  bad  con-
sequences which,  when  they  have  attained  a  considerable  height^
suppress  the  original  malady  that  has  hitherto  been  treated  (in
conformity  with  the  first  maxim  of  experience),  and,  in  place
thereof,  another  new  and  at  least  as  troublesome  disease  appears.*

Thus,  for  instance,  a  chronic  sleeplessness  may  be  frequently
suppressed  for  a  considerable  time  by  means  of  daily  doses  of
opium  given  at  night,  because  its  (in  this  case  palliative)  prima-
ry action  is  soporific,  but  (in  consequence  of  its  secondary  ac-
tion being  sleeplessness,  accordingly  an  addition  to  the  original

'  In  addition  to  innumerable  other  confirmative  examples  see  J.  H,  Schulze's  Dits.

9«a  corporiM  humani  moment atuarum  altercUionum  spechnina  quacdam  ejrpenJurUur,

Halae,  1741,  §  18. Besides  the  increase  of  the  dose,  we  see  also  tliat  recourse  ia

had  to  a  frequent  change  of  palliatives,  at  least  in  those  chronic  diseases  for  which

there  are  many,  as^  for  example,  in  hysterical  fits. Tims  we  sec  the  changes  rung

•o  long  and  so  frequently  on  asafcetida, castor,  galbanum,  sngapenum,  hartshorn,

tincture  of  amber,  and  finally  opium  in  ever  increased  doses  (for  each  of  these  is  in

its  primary  action  only  the  probable  opposite  of  the  disease  and  not  its  analogue,

quently  only  the  first  two  or  three  doses  of  them  give  relief^  but  on  subsequent

they  produce  less  and  at  length  no  amelioration) — in  order  to  give  some

alleTiatiGO  as  long  as  that  can  be  done — until  the  store  of  palliatives  is  exhausted,  or

until  the  patient  is  tired  of  these  undurable  cures,  or  is  afflicted  with  a  new  disease

from  the  secondary  action  of  these  medicines,  which  now  requires  another  mode  of

treatment

*  If  we  are  ao  fortunate  as  to  succeed  in removing  this  disease  cause<l  by  the
psUiatiye,  the  first  original  one  generally  reap[)eiu's,  shewing  tliat  (according  to  the

firvt  maxim  of  experience)  it  lias  only  beeo  pushed  aside  and  suspended  by  the  newly

dereloped,  dissiinilarly  irritating  disease,  but  that  it  has  not  been  destroyed  or  cured


458  THE  MEDICINE  OF  EXPEBIENCE.

disease)  that  only  by  means  of  ever  increasing  doses,  until  an
intolerable  constipation,  an  anasarca,  an  asthma,  or  other  mala-
dy from  the  secondary  action  of  opium,  prohibits  its  further  em-
ployment.

If  however,  but  a  few  doses  of  the  palliative  medicine  be  em-
ployed for  a  habitual  malady,  and  then  discontinued  before  it
can  excite  an  important  accessory  aflFection,  it  is  then  speedily
and  clearly  apparent,  that  it  is  not  only  impotent  against  the
original  malady,  but  that  it  moreover  aggravated  the  latter  by
its  secondary  effects.  This  is  truly  but  negative  relief  K  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  chronic  agrypnia  sought  to  be  cured,  the
patient  only  obtained  too  little  sleep,  in  that  case  the  evening
dose  of  opium  will  certainly  immediately  cause  a  kind  of  sleeps
but  when  this  remedy,  which  here  acts  only  in  a  palliative  man*
ner,  is  discontinued  after  a  few  days,  the  patient  will  then  not
be  able  to  sleep  at  all.*

The  palliative  employment  of  medicines  is  only  useful  and
necessary  in  but  few  cases — chiefly  in  such  as  have  arisen  sud-
denly and  threaten  almost  immediate  danger !

Thus,  for  example,  in  apparent  death  from  freezing  (after
friction  to  the  skin  and  the  gradual  elevation  of  the  tempera-
ture) nothing  removes  more  quickly  the  want  of  irritability  in
the  muscular  fibre,  and  the  insensibility  of  the  nerves,  than  a
strong  infusion  of  coflfee,  which  in  its  primary  action  increases
the  mobility  of  the  fibre  and  the  sensibility  of  all  the  sensi-
tive parts  of  the  system ;  and  is  consequently  palliative  as  re-
gards the  case  before  us.  But  in  this  case  there  is  danger  in  de-
lay, and  yet  there  is  no  persistent  morbid  state  to  be  overcome,
but  whenever  sensation  and  irritability  are  again  excited  and
brought  into  action  even  by  a  palliative,  the  uninjured  organism
resumes  its  functions,  and  the  free  play  of  the  vital  processes

maintains  itself  again,  without  the  aid  of  any  further  medica-
tion.

In  like  manner,  cases  of  chronic  diseases  may  occur,  for


'  If  we  have  to  combat  a  case  of  excessive  sleepiness,  opium,  being  a
irritant,  very  analogous  in  its  primary  action  to  the  disease  before  us,  will  remove  H
in  the  very  smallest  dose,  and  if  some  of  the  other  primary  effects  of  this  medicaie
(e.  g.  snoring  in  a  state  of  comatose  sleep,  with  open  mouth,  half  shut  eyes,  with  the
pupiLs  directed  upwards,  talking  in  sleep,  want  of  recollection  on  awaking,  inabOiiy
to  recognise  those  around,  <&&,)  resemble  those  symptoms  present  in  the  diseasi!,  (as
is  nut  unfrequcDtly  the  case  in  typhoid  diseases)  the  oi  iginal  malady  is  overcome
rapidly  and  permanently,  and  without  any  after-symptom^  the  opinion  being  in  this
case  a  curative  and  positive  remedy.


rati  VEBICINE  OF  EXPEKIENCE.  459

—  I

ample,  lijsterical  convtilsions  or  asphyxias,  where  the  tempora-
ly  assistance  of  palKatives  (as  eau  de  luce,  burnt  feathers,  &c.,)
may  be  urgently  demanded,  in  order  to  restore  the  patient  to
his  nsnal  undangerous  morbid  state,  for  the  cure  of  which,  the
totally  diflferent  durable  aid  of  curative  medicines  is  required.

But  where  all  that  is  capable  of  being  affected  by  a  palliative
is  not  accomplished  in  a  few  hours,  the  bad  consequences  spoken
of  above  commence  to  make  their  appearance.

In  acute  diseases,  even  such  as  run  their  course  in  the  shortest
time,  we  would  better  consult  the  dignity  of  medicine  and  the
wel&re  of  our  patients,  by  treating  them  with  curative  (positive)
medicines.  They  will  thereby  be  overcome  more  certainly,  and
on  the  whole  more  rapidly,  and  loithout  afto'-complaints.

However,  the  bad  consequences  of  the  palliative^  in  slight
cases  of  acute  diseases  are  not  very  striking,  not  very  considerable.
The  chief  symptoms  disappear  in  a  great  measure  after  each  dose
of  the  palliative,  until  the  natural  course  of  the  disease  comes
to  an  end,  and  then  the  organism,  which  has  not  been  very  se-
riously deranged  during  the  short  time  by  the  secondary  effects
of  the  palliative,  again  resumes  its  sway,  and  gradually  over-
oomes  the  consequences  of  the  disease  itself,  together  with  the
after-sufferings  caused  by  the  medicine.

If,  however,  the  patient  recover  under  the  use  of  the  pallia-
tive, he  would  also  have  recovered  equally  well  and  in  the  same
gpace  of  time,  without  any  medicine  (for  palliatives  never  shorten
the  natural  courses  of  acute  diseases),  and  would  thereafter  more
readily  regain  his  strength  for  the  reasons  just  given.  The  only
ciicumstance  that  can  in  some  measure  recommend  the  physi-
cian who  practises  in  this  way,  namely,  that  the  troublesome
symptoms  are  occasionally  subdued  by  his  palliatives,  offers  to
&e  eyes  of  the  patient  and  his  fi-iends  some  apparent,  but  no
real  advantage  over  the  spontaneous  recovery  without  the  use  of
medicine.

Hence  the  curative  and  positive  treatment  possesses  even  in
diseases  of  a  rapid  course,  a  decided  advantage  over  all  pallia-
tive alleviations,  because  it  abridges  even  the  natural  periods  of
acute  diseases,  really  heals  them  before  the  time  for  completing
their  course  has  expired,  and  leaves  behind  no  after-sufferings,

*  This  drcomstanco  also  makes  palliatives  unserviceable,  that  each  of  them  is
woally  employed  to  subdue  a  single  symptom  only — the  remaining  symptoms  either
rest  untouched,  or  are  combatted  by  other  palliatives,  which  all  poi»ses8  accessory  ao-
tiooB  that  stand  in  the  way  of  recoyery.


460  THB  MEDICINE  OF  SXPERIEKCS.

I

/

provided  the  perfectly  suitable  curative  agent  has  been  selected.

It  might  be  objected  to  this  mode  of  treatment,  "that  physi-
cians from  the  earliest  periods  of  the  existence  of  the  medical
art,  have  (to  their  knowledge)  never  employed  it,  and  yet  have
cured  patients."

This  objection  is  only  apparent ;  for  ever  since  the  existence-
of  the  art  of  medicine,  there  have  been  patients  who  have  really
been  cured  quickly,  permanently,  and  manifestly  by  medicineSi
not  by  the  spontaneous  termination  of  the  course  of  acute  dis-
eases, not  in  the  course  of  time,  not  by  the  gradual  preponde^
ranee  of  the  energy  of  the  system,  but  have  been  restored  in
tion of  a  medicinal  agent,  although  this  was  unknown  to  the
physician.*

Occasionally,-  however,  physicians  suspected  that  it  was  that

'  III  order  to  determine  this,  we  must  select  the  cases  detailed  by  some  perfeetlj
truthful  and  accurate  observer,  where  some  disease  not  of  an  acute  character,  limitad
by  nature  to  a  certain  short  course,  but  some  long-lasting  disease,  was  cured  perm^
nently  and  without  any  sequelxe,not  by  a  mixture  of  all  sorts  of  different  drugs^bofc
by  a  single  medicinal  substance.  This  we  should  certainly  find  to  have  been  a  (cunh
tive)  medicine  very  analogous  in  its  primary  effects  to  the  disease.  Had  it  beeo  a
palliative,  given  in  ever  increasing  doses,  the  apparent  cure  would  not  have  been  paiw
manent,  or  at  least,  not  without  some  after-disease.  Unless  by  the  instrumentality  of
a  positive  (ciurative)  medicine,  no  rapid,  gentle,  permanent  cure  ever  took  place,  nor
in  the  nature  of  things,  could  it  ever  occur.

In  the  strikingly  rapid  and  permanent  cures  by  means  of  composite  prescriptioiiB
(if  indeed  tlie  mixture  of  several  drugs  of  unknown  properties,  in  order  to  accompUA
some  eijually  unknown  end,  deserves  a  scientific  notice),  we  shall  likewise  find  the
remedy  tliat  strongly  predominates  in  it  to  be  of  a  positive  character — or  the  mixture
constituted  a  medicine,  of  combined  interminable  action,  in  which  eadi  ingredient  ^Bd
not  perform  its  own  proper  function,  but  was  altered  in  its  action  by  the  others,  and
where  in  consequence  of  the  mutual  dynamic  neutralizations  that  oocurrod,  an  ua*
known  medicine  remained,  which  effected  in  this  case  what  no  mortal  can  divint
wherefore  it  did  it,  and  what,  for  a  variety  of  reasons  (dependent  on  the  frequently
different  strength  of  the  individual  drugs  m  different  laboratories,  on  the  mode  of
mixing  the  compound,  which  can  hardly  be  performed  in  exactly  the  same  way  ageing
and  on  the  constant  variety  that  exists  among  cases  of  nominally  the  same  diaeeee)
can  never  be  imitated  again ;  in  one  of  the  above  mentioned  peculiar  or  miaamatie
diseases  that  alwa^rs  remain  identical

*  Thus  Hippocrates,  or  the  author  of  the  book  entitled  TUpl  r&rotv  riip  mm*
l^Bof^ma;,  (Basil  1638,  frob.  pag.  72,  lin.  35.)  has  these  remarkable  words:  iikr^ifmm

vovciii  yifCTaij  Aat  ^lu  ru  Sftoia  irpoi^ift6fiC¥a  it  pocciwriatr  vyiit^o^^^^'  ***>'  «Tp«y|«iifflP
rJ  ditrd  notUi  ovk  io^ay^  Koi  iuicav  ri  dvrd  iravct*  trat/9j){  Kara  rd  dvro^  wercp  9i  ffrpayywvplf
vva r  ;^  'iir  •'**' yiwtrai nai iraicrai — ita r8  iftUiv  iftcrof  iravtrat. — In  like  manner, SOOM

later  physic  iuns  have  occasionally  noticed  that  the  power  of  rhubarb  in  producing
belly-ache  was  the  cause  of  its  colic-subduing  virtues,  and  that  in  the  emetic  property
of  ipecacuanha  lay  the  reason  why  it  checked  vomiting  in  small  doses.  Tliua  Dei->
barding  {Fph,  nai,  cur.,  cent  10,  obs.  76)  saw  that  an  infusion  of  senna-leayea^  which


THX  KEDICINE  OF  EXPEBIENCX.  461

property  of  medicines  (now  confirmed  by  innumerable  observa-
tions)— of  exciting  (positive)  symptoms  analogous  to  the  disease,
by  virtue  of  a  tendency  inherent  in  them — which  enabled  them
to  effect  real  cures.  But  this  ray  of  truth,  I  confess,  seldom
penetrated  the  spirit  of  our  schools,  enshrouded  as  they  were  in
a  doud  of  systems.

When  the  remedy  has  been  discovered  by  this  mode  of  pro-
cedure, so  conformable  to  nature,  there  still  remains  an  import-
ant point,  namely,  the  determination  of  the  dose.

A  medicine  of  a  positive  and  curative  character,  may,  without
any  feult  on  its  part,  do  just  the  opposite  to  what  it  ought,  if
given  in  too  large  a  dose ;  in  that  case  it  produces  a  greater  dis-
ease than  that  already  present.

If  we  keep  a  healthy  hand  in  cold  water  for  some  minutes,  we
experience  in  it  a  diminution  of  temperature,  cold ;  the  veins  be-
come invisible,  the  fleshy  parts  become  shrunken,  their  size  is
diminished,  the  skin  is  paler,  duller,  motion  is  more  difficult.
These  are  some  of  the  primary  effects  of  cold  water  on  the  healthy
body.  K  we  now  withdraw  the  hand  from  the  cold  water  and
dry  it,  no  long  time  will  elapse  before  the  opposite  state  ensues.
The  hand  becomes  warmer  than  the  other  (that  had  not  been
immersed),  we  notice  considerable  turgescence  of  the  soft  parts,
the  veins  swell,  the  skin  becomes  redder,  the  movements  more
free  and  powerful  than  in  the  other — a  kind  of  exalted  vitality.
This  is  the  secondary  or  consecutive  action  of  the  cold  water  on
the  healthy  body.

This  is,  moreover,  almost  the  greatest  dose  in  which  cold
water  can  be  employed  with  a  permanent  good  result,  as  a  posi-
tive (curative)  medicinal  agent  in  a  state  of  (j^ure)  debility  ana-
I  repeat,  the  "  greatest  dose  " ;  for  if  the  whole  body  should  be
exposed  to  the  action  of  this  agent,  and  if  the  cold  of  the  water
be  very  considerable,*  the  duration  of  its  application  must  at
least  be  very  much  shortened,  to  a  few  seconds  only,  in  order
to  reduce  the  dose  sufficiently.

But  if  the  dose  of  this  remedy  be  in  all  respects  much  in-
creased above  the  normal  amount,  the  morbid  symptoms  peculiar


oolic  in  healthy  persons,  cured  colics  in  adults  and  he  is  of  opinion  that  thia
most  be  caused  by  analogy  of  action.  I  need  not  dwell  on  the  propositions  of  others
(J.  D.  Major,  A.  Brcndelius,  A.  F.  Daukwerta,  <fec.)  to  cure  one  disease  by  means  of
mother  artificially  excited  disease.

*  In  A  greater  amount  of  debility  70°  may  be  proportionately  as  considerable  a
degree  of  cold  in  the  water,  as  60°  for  a  less  amount


46Si  THE  ICEDIGINE  OF  EXPSBIENCS.

to  the  primary  action  of  the  cold  water  increase  to  a  state  of
actual  disease,  which  the  weak  part  it  was  intended  to  cure  by
its  means  cannot  or  can  scarcely  remove  again.  K  the  dose  be
increased  still  more,  if  the  water  be  very  cold,*  if  the  sur£GM)e
exposed  to  the  water  be  larger'  and  the  duration  of  its  applica-
tion much  longer  than  it  ought  to  be  for  an  ordinary  curative
dose  of  this  agent,  ^  there  then  ensue  numbness  of  the  whole
limb,  cramp  of  the  muscles,  often  even  paralysis  ;*  and  if  the
whole  body  have  been  immersed  in  this  cold  water  for  an  hour
or  longer,  death  ensues,  or  at  least  the  apparent  death  from
freezing  in  healthy  individuals,  but  much  more  speedily  when
it  is  applied  to  feeble  individuals.

The  same  is  the  case  with  all  medicines,  even  with  iutemal
ones.

The  reaper  (unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  spirits)  exhausted  by
heat,  exertion  and  thirst,  who,  as  I  have  said  above,  is  restored
in  the  course  of  an  hour  by  a  small  dose,  a  single  mouthful  of
brandy  (whose  primary  action  shews  a  state  very  similar  to  thai
sought  to  be  combatted  in  the  present  instance),  would  hM  into
a  state  of  (probably  fatal)  sy  nochus,  if  under  these  circumstancee
he  wm:e  to  drink,  in  place  of  a  single  mouthful,  a  couple  of
pints  at  once ; — the  same  positive  remedial  agent,  only  in  an  ex-
cessive, injurious  dose.

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  this  injurious  effect  of  excessively
large  doses  appertains  only  to  medicinal  agents  applied  in  a
positive  (curative)  manner.  Equally  bad  results  ensue  from  ex-
cessive doses  of  palliatives, — for  medicines  are  substances  in
themselves  hurtful,  that  only  become  remedial  agents  by  the
adaptation  of  their  natural  pathogenetic  power  to  the  disease

»  For  example,  40*^  Fahr.

*  For  example,  the  entire  leg.
■  For  example,  two  hours.

*  There  are,  no  doubt,  exceptions  to  ^is,  where  advantage  has  foUowed  from  eat-
cessively  large  doses  of  the  positive  (curative)  medicinal  agent,  in  Certain  cases  tluU
occasionally  come  imder  the  observation  of  the  master  in  the  art  Thus  I  saw  Hm
remedial  power  of  the  primary  paralysing  action  of  a  very  large  dose  of  this
strikingly  illustrated  in  the  case  of  a  man  (in  Thuringia)  whose  right  arm  had
for  many  years  almost  completely  paralysed,  and  always  as  if  numb  and  odd.  In
the  Christmas  season  he  wished  to  get  some  fish  out  of  a  frosen  tank,  in  order  to  gm
a  treat  to  some  of  his  friends.  He  could  not  catch  them  with  his  left  arm  alone ;  he
required  to  employ  the  lame  arm  also,  which  was  not  capable  of  so  much  iiio>t«-
mcnt  Ue  might  have  been  engaged  with  it  in  the  ice<x>ld  water  for  upwards  of
half-an-hour.  The  consequence  of  this  was,  that  soon  afterwards  the  paralysed  arm
inflamed  and  sweUed,  but  in  a  few  days  it  got  quite  well  and  as  strong  as  the  other;
the  paralysis  was  permanently  cured.


THE  MEDICINE  OF  EXPERIENCE.  463

(positiyely  or  negatiyely)  analogous  to  them,  in  the  appropriate
dose.

Thus,  to  give  an  example  of  negative  (palliative)  medicines,
a  hand  very  much  benumbed  by  cold,  will  soon  be  restored  in
the  atmosphere  of  a  warm  room.^  This  moderate  degree  of
warmth  is  efficacious  in  this  case  as  an  agent  of  antagonistic
tendency  to  the  numbness  from  the  cold,  that  is  to  say,  as  a
palliative ;  but  its  employment  is  not  attended  with  any  particu-
lar bad  effects,  because  the  dose  is  not  too  strong  and  the  remedy
need  only  be  used  for  a  short  time,  in  order  to  remove  the  mode-
rate and  rapidly  produced  morbid  state  it  is  wished  to  cure.

But  let  the  hand  which  has  become  completely  benumbed  and
quite  insensible  from  the  cold  (frost-bitten),  be  quickly  immersed
for  an  hour  in  water  of  120®  Fahr.,  which  is  not  too  great  for  a
healthy  hand,  and  the  part  will  inevitably  die ;  the  hand  morti
ficB  and  &lls  o£

A  robust  man,  much  over-heated,  will  soon  recover  in  a
moderately  cool  atmosphere  (about  65^  Fahr.)  without  expe-
riencing any  appreciable  disadvantage  from  this  palliative ;  but
if  immediately  after  being  so  over- heated  he  has  to  stand  for  an
hour  in  a  cold  river  (wherein  he  might  probably  have  remained
without  any  bad  result  wh^n  not  in  a  state  of  heat),  he  will
dther  fall  down  dead,  or  be  effected  by  the  most  dangerous
typhus.

A  burnt  part  will  be  alleviated  in  a  palliative  manner  by  cool
water,  but  will  become  sphacelated  if  ice  be  applied  to  it.

And*  the  same  is  the  case  with  internal  remedies  also.  If  a
girl,  excessively  over-heated  by  dancing,  swallow  a  quantity  of
ice,  every  one  knows  what  usually  ensues, — and  yet  a  small
tablespoonful  of  cold  water  or  a  minute  quantity  of  ice  would
not  do  her  any  harm,  although  it  is  the  same  j)alliative,  only  in
a  smaller  dose.  But  she  would  be  certainly  and  permanently
cured,  even  though  excessively  over-heated,  if  she  were  to  chose
a  small,  appropriate  dose  of  a  remedy  whose  primary  effect  is
analogous  (curative)  to  the  state  she  is  in ;  for  instance,  if  she
should  drink  a  little  very  warm  tea  mixed  with  a  small  portion
of  heating  spirituous  liquor,-  (rum,  arrack  or  the  like),  in  a

'  For  example,  of  80o  Fahr.  at  a  distaDce  from  the  stove.

*  Ttia  latter  example  shews  at  the  same  time  the  correctness  of  the  maxim,  that

ivlioithe  morbid  state  is  in  an  extreme  degree,  and  we  have  (mly  a  few  hours  to  effect

tlie  cure,  the  employment  of  the  positive  (curative)  medicinal  agent  in  a  very  small

dose  is  infinitely  preferable  to  that  of  the  palliative,  even  thougli  the  latter  be  at  first

sdmimstered  in  a  very  small  quantity. Even  tiiould  the  latter  do  no  harm,  it  is  at


464  THB  KEDICIN5  OF  BXPSBIENG&

moderately  heated  room,  walking  quickly  about ; — ^but  a  large
glass  of  alcoholic  liquor  would,  on  the  other  hand,  throw  her
into  a  high  feyer.

None  but  the  careful  observer  can  have  any  idea  of  the  hei^it
to  which  the  sensitiveness  of  the  body  to  medicinal  irritations
is  increased  in  a  state  of  disease^  It  exceeds  all  belief  when
the  disease  has  attained  a  great  intensity.  An  insensible,  pros-
trated, comatose  typhus  patient,  unroused  by  any  shaking,  deaf
to  all  calling,  will  be  rapidly  restored  to  consciousness  by  the
smallest  dose  of  opium,  were  it  a  million  times  smaller  than  any

The  sensitiveness  of  the  highly  diseased  body  to  medicinal
irritations  increases  in  many  cases  to  such  a  degree,  that  pow-
ers commence  to  act  on  and  excite  him,  whose  very  existenoe
has  been  denied,  because  they  manifest  no  action  on  healthy
robust  bodies,  nor  in  many  diseases  for  which  they  are  not  suited.
As  an  example  of  this,  I  may  mentiom  the  heroic  power  of
animalism  (animal  magnetism),  or  that  immaterial  influence. of
one  living  body  upon  another  produced  by  certain  kinds  of
touching  or  approximation,  which  displays  such  an  energetio
action  on  very  sensitive,  delicately  formed  persons  of  both  sexes,
who  are  disposed  either  to  violent  mental  emotions  or  to  great
irritability  of  the  muscular  fibres.  This  animal  power  does  not
manifest  itself  at  all  between  two  robust  healthy  persons, — ^not
because  it  does  not  exist,  but  because,  according  to  the  wiae
purposes  of  God,  it  is  much  too  weak  to  shew  itself  betwixt
healthy  persons,  whereas  the  same  influence  (quite  imperceptible
when  applied  by  one  healthy  person  to  another)  often  acts  with
more  than  excessive  violence  in  those  states  of  morbid  sensibility
and  irritability, — just  as  very  small  doses  of  other  curative  medi-
'  cines  also  do  in  very  diseased  bodies.

It  is  analogous  to  the  Inedicinal  powers  of  the  application  i£
the  magnet  in  disease  and  the  contact  of  a  morbid  part  with  the
other  metals,  to  which  the  healthy  body  is  quite  insensible.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  as  true  as  it  is  wonderful,  that  even  the
most  robust  individuals,  when  affected  by  the  chronic  HiflA4fci|^
notwithstanding  their  corporeal  strength,  and  notwithstanding
that  they  can  bear  with  impunity  even  noxious  irritants  in  great

all  events  certain  that  it  docs  no  good,  'wbereas  the  smallest  dose  of  the  suitable
curative  ageot  can  save  life,  though  there  may  be  only  a  few  hours  for  the  perfixnumoe
of  the  cure.


THE  lUDIGINX  OF  XXFJBBIKNGX.  465

quantity  (excesses  in  food  aiid  alcoholic  liquors,  purgatives,
&c^) — jet  as  soon  as  the  medicinal  substance  positively  appro-
priate to  their  chronic  disease  is  administered  to  them,  they  ex*
perieace  from  the  smallest  possible  dose  as  great  an  impression
as  if  they  were  in&nts  at  the  breast

There  are  some  few  substances  employed  in  medicine  which  act
almost  solely  in  a  chemical  manner — some  which  condense  the
dead  fibres  as  well  as  the  living  (as  the  tannin  of  plants),  or
loosen  them  and  diminish  their  cohesion  or  their  tension  (as  the
fiitty  substances) — some  which  form  a  chemical  combination
with  hurtfiil  substances  in  the  body,  at  least  in  the  prima)  vise
(as  chalk  or  the  alkalies  which  combine  with  some  deleterious
metallic  oxydes  or  some  acrid  acid  in  the  stomach — sulphuretted
hydrogen  water  with  the  most  dangerous  metals  and  their  ox.
jdes);  others  which  decompose  them  (as  alkalies  or  liver  of
solphur  do  the  noxious  metallic  salts) ;  others  which  chemically
destroy  parts  of  the  body  (as  the  actual  cautery).  With  t/ie  ex-
eqption  of  these  few  things  and  the  almost  purely  mechanical
operations  of  surgery  on  the  body,  amputation  which  merely
shortens  the  limb,  and  blood-letting  which  merely  diminishes
the  amount  of  that  fluid,  together  with  some  meclianically  inju-
rious and  insoluble  substances  that  may  be  introduced  into  the
body — all  other  medicinal  substances  act  in  a  purely  dynamic
mauner^^  and  cure  without  causing  evacuations,  without  produc-
ing any  violent  or  even  perceptible  revolutions.

'  In  the  change  of  diseases  into  health,  as  rapid  and  direct  as  it  is  powerful
and  mild,  by  means  of  Uie  positive  (curatiTo)  and  dynamic  mode  of  treatment^  all
thone  aboonnal  assaults  on  the  organism  called  coostiiutional  remedies,  rcvulsioiis  and
eracaations,  aU  emetics,  purgatives,  diaphoretics,  and  so  forth,  arc  as  Ubclesh  as  thej
are  injurious  The  medicines  employed  for  their  production  accomplish  thevc  revolu-
tiooaiy,  duturbing,  violent  effects  chiefly  by  the  excessive  dosc*8  m  wliicli  they  an>
given  Hie  various  specific  medicuial  properties  of  tartar  emetic,  ip(H.*acuanha,
■Birum,  dee,  are  not  perceived  during  their  abuse  as  emeties  but  by  tliuse  properties
they  may  become  much  more  efficient  remedial  agents  when  used  m  small  doses.
Id  like  manner,  the  many  medicinal  virtues  of  those  substances  abused  as  purgatives
(for  which  object  the  true  physician  almost  never  or  very  rarely  requires  them)  are
deaigDod  for  far  more  useful  ends  than  they  have  hitherto  been  used  for.  It  is  only
iriiflB  they  are  given  in  excess  that  they  cause  that  tumultuous,  hurtful  efiect — and
almost  all  other  medicines  may  become  omcticR  snd  purgatives  if  admiuu:torc<l  in
orer-doses.  Thr  so-called  deranged  stomach,  the  so-adU'd  sigui^  of  fermenting,
impurities  in  the  primse  vise,  and  of  disorder  or  disturbance  of  the  bile,  such  ns
biUer  taste,  headache,  anorexia,  disgust,  nausea,  stoinach-adie,  and  conhtipatioii,  Uhuallv
indicate  a  treatment  totally  different  from  violent  emetics  and  purgatives ;  the  dtL
in  U$  wkole  extent  is  often  completely  removed  in  a  few  boon  by  a  couple  of

80


466  TB£  XKDICINE  OF XXFEBnOf  OB.

This  dynamic  action  of  medicines,  like  the  vitality  itoeli^  faj
means  of  which  it  is  reflected  upon  the  organisnii  is  almost
purely  spiritual  in  its  nature ;  that  of  medicines  used  in  a  posir
tive  (curative)  manner  is  so  most  strikingly  with  this  singular
peculiarity,  that  while  too  strong  doses  do  harm  and  ]»roduoe
considerable  disturbance  in  the  system,  a  small  dose,  and  even
the  sinaUest  possible  dose,  cannot  be  inefficacious,  if  the  remedy  be
only  otherwise  indicated.

Almost  the  sole  condition  necessary  for  the  full  and  Lelpfld
action  is  that  the  appropriate  remedy  should  come  in  contact
with  the  susceptible  living  fibre ;  but  it  is  of  little,  almost  of  no
importance  how  small  the  dose  is  which,  for  this  purposOi  10
brought  to  act  on  the  sensitive  parts  of  the  living  body*

If  a  certain  small  dose  of  a  diluted  tincture  of  opium  is  eapable
of  removing  a  certain  degree  of  unnatural  sleepiness,  the  hun*
dredth  or  even  the  thousandth  part  of  the  same  dose  of  such  a
solution  of  opium  suffices  almost  equally  well  for  the  same  end,
and  in  this  way  the  diminution  of  the  dose  may  be  carried
much  farther  without  the  excessively  minute  dose  ceasing  to
produce  the  same  curative  result  as  the  first ;  of  which  moie
will  be  said  in  the  special  part.

I  have  said  that  the  contact  of  the  medicinal  substance  with
the  living,  sensitive  fibre  is  almost  the  only  condition  for  its
action.  This  dynamic  property  is  so  pervading,  that  it  is  quite
immaterial  what  sensitive  part  of  the  body  is  touched  by  the
medicine  in  order  to  develope  its  whole  action,  provided  the
part  be  but  destitute  of  tlie  coarser  epidermis— immaterial
whether  the  dissolved  medicine  enter  the  stomach  or  merely
remain  in  the  mouth,  or  be  applied  to  a  wound  or  other  part  de-
prived of  skin.

If  there  be  no  fear  of  its  causing  any  evacuation  (a  peculiar
vital  process  of  the  living  organism,  which  possesses  a  peculiar
power  of  nullifying  and  destroying  the  dynamic  efficacy  of  the
medicines),  its  introduction  into  the  rectum  or  application  to  the
lining  membrane  of  the  nose,  fulfils  every  purpose,  e.  jr.,  in  the
case  of  a  medicine  which  has  the  power  of  curing  a  certain  pain
in  the  stomach,  a  particular  kind  of  headache,  or  a  kind  of  stitch

drops  of  Uie  appropriate  curative  medidiie,  and  all  those  tbreatening  symptooM  ai
once  dinppear,  without  eyacuatioDB  and  in  such  an  imperceptible  manner  that
knofWB  not  whither  they  have  gone.

It  is  only  when  substaucei  of  a  completely  indige8tit>le,  or  foreign  and  vi
oua  nature,  oppre«  the  stomach  and  bowels,  that  it  is  permitted  in  some  fpw
to  effect  their  expulsion  b>  such  evacuant  medicines.


THS  MEDICINE  OE  EXPERIENCE.  467

in  the  ade,  or  a  cramp  in  the  calves,  or  any  other  affection  oc*
enrring  in  some  part  that  stands  in  no  anatomical  connexion
with  the  place  to  which  the  medicine  is  applied.

It  is  only  the  thicker  epidermis  covering  the  external  surf^^
of  the  body  that  presents  some,  but  not  an  insurmountable  ob-
stacle to  the  action  of  medicines  on  the  sensitive  fibres  under-
neath it  They  still  act  through  it,  though  somewhat  less  pow-
erfully. Dry  preparations  of  the  medicine  in  powder  act  less
powerfully  through  it ;  its  solution  acts  more  powerfully,  and
still  more  so  if  it  be  applied  to  a  large  surface.

The  epidermis  is  however  thinner  on  some  parts,  and  conse-
quently the  action  is  easier  in  those  situations.  Among  these
tile  abdominal  region,  especially  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  in-
guinal regions  and  the  inner  surface  of  the  axilla,  the  bend  of
the  arxQi  the  inner  surface  of  the  wrist,  the  }.x>pli  eal  space,  &c.,
are  the  parts  most  sensitive  to  the  medicine.

Rubbing-in  the  medicines  faciliUites  their  action  chiefly  on
this  account,  that  the  friction  of  itself  renders  the  skin  more
sensitive,  and  the  fibres,  rendered  thereby  more  active  and  sus-
ceptible, more  apt  to  receive  the  impression  of  the  specific  medi
cinal  power,  which  radiates  thence  over  the  whole  organism.

If  the  groins  be  rubbed  with  a  dry  cloth  until  their  sensibili-
ty is  exalted,  and  the  ointment  of  the  black  oxydc  of  mercury
then  laid  upon  them,  the  elTect  is  the  same  as  though  we  had
rubbed  the  same  place  with  the  mercurial  ointment  itselj^  or  as
though  the  ointment  had  been  rubbed  in,  as  it  is  usually  incor-
rectly expressed.

The  peculiar  medicinal  power  of  the  remedy,  however,  re-
mains the  same,  whether  it  be  cmplo3^ed  outwardly  or  inwardly,
so  as  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  sensitive  fibres.

The  black  oxyde  of  mercury  taken  by  the  mouth  cures  vene-
real buboes  at  least  as  rapidly  and  certainly  as  the  rubbing-iu  of
Naples  ointment  upon  the  gioins.  A  loot-bath  of  a  weak  solu-
tion of  muriate  of  mercury  cures  ulcers  in  the  mouth  as  rapid-
ly and  certainly  as  its  internal  administration,  especially  if  the
part  that  is  to  be  bathed  be  previously  rubbed.  I'iuely  leviga-
ted cinchona  powder  applied  to  the  abdomen  cures  the  inter-
mittent fever  which  it  can  cure  by  internal  use.

But  as  the  diseased  organism  is  altogetlicr  much  more  sensi-
tive for  the  dynamic  power  of  all  medicines,  .so  also  is  the  skin
ot  (liiieaBed  persons.  A  moderate  quantity  of  tincture  of  ipe-
cacuanha applied  to  the  bend  of  the  arm  eftcctually  removes


468  THE  hkdiohtk  of  joLmsaastfiM^

tbe  teiulencj  to  vomit  in  very  sick  indiyidaals  (by  means  of  its
primary  power  to  excite  vomiting).

The  medicinal  power  of  heat  and  cold  alone  seems  not  to  be
so  exclusively  dynamic  as  that  of  other  medicinal  sabstanoeB*
Where  these  two  agents  are  employed  in  a  positive  manner,  the
smallest  possible  dose  of  them  does  not  suffice  to  prodaee  the
desired  effect.  When  it  is  requisite  to  obtain  relief  rapidly  ihej
both  have  to  be  employed  in  greater  intensity,  in  a  larger  dose
(up  to  a  certain  amount).  But  this  appearance  is  deceptive;
their  power  is  just  as  dynamically  medicinal  as  that  of  other
medicines,  and  the  difference  in  given  cases  depends  on  the
already  existing  habituation  of  our  body  to  certidn  doses  of  these
stimuli,  to  certain  degrees  of  heat  and  cold.  The  heat  and  cold
to  be  employed  in  a  medicinal  manner  must  surpass  this  aoGUS-
tomed  degree  by  a  little^  in  order  that  it  may  be  employed  in  a
positive  manner  with  success  (fxy  a  great  decUj  if  it  is  to  be  used
in  a  negative  or  palliative  manner).

The  temperature  of  blood-heat  is  for  most  people  in  our  di-
mate  higher  than  the  usual  degree  for  the  skin,  and  conse-
quently a  footbath  of  98^  to  99^  Fahr.  is  sufficiently  temperate
and  warm  enough  to  remove  positively  heat  in  the  head  (if  no
other  morbid  symptoms  are  present) ;  but  in  order  to  alleyiate
in  a  palliative  manner  the  inflammation  of  a  burnt  hand,  we  re-
quire to  use  water  considerably  colder  than  we  are  accustomed
to  bear  comfortably  in  healthy  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  water
should  be,  within  certain  limits,  so  much  the  colder  the  more
severe  the  inflammation  is.^

What  I  have  here  stated  respecting  the  somewhat  greater
dose  of  heat  and  cold  for  curative  purposes  applies  also  to  all
other  medicinal  agents  to  which  the  patient  has  already  been
accustomed.  Thus  for  medicinal  purposes  we  require  to  ad-
minister to  persons  hitherto  accustomed  to  their  use  doses  of
wine,  spirits,  opium,  coffee,  &c.,  large  in  proportion  to  the
amount  they  were  previously  accustomed  to.

Heat  and  cold,  together  with  electricity,  belong  to  the  most
diffusible  of  all  dynamic  medicinal  stimuli,  their  power  is  not

'  At  firat  we  require  for  this  paUiative  amelioration,  even  should  the  inflamma-
tion be  great)  only  a  cool  water  of  about  70**  Fahr^  but  from  hour  to  hour  xn  mmt
use  somewhat  colder  water ;  at  length  as  much  as  well-cold  (62^  Fahr.)  and  eren
beyond  that,  in  order  to  obtain  the  same  amount  of  relief  as  at  first  (and  provided  we
know  no  better  remedy).  We  must  from  time  to  time  mcrease  the  degree  of  cold,  am
is  required  in  the  internal  employment  of  other  palliative  meansi


nn  MjroiGiN£  op  kxpsbisxcs.  489

nor  amsted  by  the  epidermis,  probably  because  its
physical  property  serves  as  a  conductor  and  vehicle  for  their
medicinid  power,  and  thus  helps  to  distribute  thcnu  The  same
may  be  the  ease  with  regard  to  animalism  (animal  magnetism)
the  medicutal  action  of  the  magnet,  and  in  general  with  regard
to  the  power  of  the  external  contact  of  metals.  The  galvanie
power  is  somewhat  less  capable  of  penetrating  through  the  epi-
dermis.

If  we  observe  attentively  we  shall  perceive  that  wise  nature
produces  the  greatest  effects  with  simple,  often  with  small
means.  To  imitate  her  in  this  should  be  the  highest  aim  of  the
reflecting  mind.  But  the  greater  the  number  of  means  and  ap-
pliances we  heap  together  in  order  to  attain  a  single  object,  the
fiutiier  do  we  stray  from  the  precepts  of  our  great  instructresSi
and  the  more  miserable  will  be  our  work.

With  a  few  simple  means,  used  sin^y  one  after  the  other,
more  frequently  however  with  one  alone,  we  may  restore  to
normal  harmony  the  greatest  derangements  of  the  diseased
body,  we  may  change  the  most  chronic,  apparently  ioeurable
diaeaaes  (not  unfrequently  in  the  shortest  space  of  time)  into
health — ^whereas  we  may,  by  the  employment  of  a  heap  of  ill-
selected  and  composite  remedies,  see  the  most  insignificant
maladies  degenerate  into  the  greatest,  most  formidable,  and
most  incurable  diseases.

Which  of  these  two  methods  ^vill  the  jirofessor  of  the  healing
art  who  strives  after  perfection,  choose  7

A  angle  simple  remedy  is  always  ciileiilated  to  produce  the
most  benefieial  effects,  without  any  additional  means ;  pro\nded
it  be  the  best  selected,  the  most  appropriate,  and  in  the  proper
dose. It  is  never  requisite  to  mix  two  of  them  together.

We  administer  a  medicine  in  order  if  possible  to  remove  the
whole  disease  by  this  single  substance,  or  if  this  be  not  com-
pletely practicable,  to  observe  from  the  elleet  of  the  medicine
what  still  remains  to  be  cured.  One,  two,  or  at  most  three  sim-
ple medicines  are  sufficient  for  the  removal  of  the  greatest  dis-
ease, and  if  this  result  does  not  follow,  the  fault  lies  with  us ;  it
is  not  nature,  nor  the  disease,  that  is  to  blaiuc

If  we  wish  to  ©erceive  clcarlv  what  tlic  remedv  effects  in  a
disease,  and  what  still  remiains  to  be  doue,  we  must  only  give
one  single  simple  substance  at  a  time.  Every  addition  of  a
aecond  or  a  third  only  deranges  the  object  we  have  in  view,  and


470  TH£  MEDICIKR  OF  JBXPERIENGX.

when  we  wish  to  separate  the  effects  of  the  remedj  jrom  the
Bjmptoms  of  the  morbid  process  (seeing  that  at  the  most  we
may  indeed  be  able  to  know  the  symptoms  of  the  action  of  a
simple  medicine,  but  not  the  powers  of  a  mixture  of  drugs^  that
either  form  combinations  among,  or  are  decomposed  by,  one
another,  and  these  it  will  never  be  possible  for  us  to  know),  we
now  no  longer  see  what  portion  of  the  changes  that  have  takeu
guish which  of  the  changes  and  symptoms  that  have  occorred
are  derived  from  one,  which  from  another  ingredient  of  the
compound  remedy,  and  consequently  we  are  unable  to  deter-
mine which  of  the  ingredients  should  be  retained  and  which
discarded  during  the  subsequent  treatment, — nor  what  other
one  we  should  substitute  for  one  or  other  or  for  all  of  tbenu
In  such  a  treatment  none  of  the  phenomena  can  be  referred  to
its  true  cause.  Wherever  we  turn,  nought  but  uncertainty
and  obscurity  surrounds  us.

Most  simple  medicinal  substances  produce  in  the  healthy  hu-
man body  not  few,  but  on  the  contrary,  a  oonsideraUe  array  of
absolute  symptoms.  The  aj^ropiriate  remedy  can  consequently
frequently  contain  among  its  primary  effects  an  antitype  of  mos^
of  the  visible  symptc»ns  in  the  disease  to  be  cured  (besides
many  others  which  render  it  suitable  for  the  cure  of  other  dis-
eases).

Now  the  only  desirable  property  that  we  can  expect  a  medi-
cine to  possess,  is  this,  that  it  should  agree  with  the  disease — ^in
other  words,  that  it  should  be  capable  of  exciting  j)er  se  the
most  of  the  symptoms  observable  in  the  disease,  consequently^
when  ^nployed  antagonistically  as  a  medicine,  should  also  be
able  to  destroy  and  extinguish  the  same  symptoms  in  the  dis-
eased body.

We  see  that  a  single  simple  medicinal  substance  possesses  in
itself  this  property  in  its  full  extent,  if  it  have  been  carefully
selected  for  this  purpose.

It  is  therefore  never  necessary  to  administer  more  than  one
single  simple  medicinal  substance  at  once,  if  it  have  been  chosen
appropriately  to  the  case  of  disease.

It  is  also  very  probable,  indeed  certain,  that  of  the  several
medicines  in  a  mixture,  each  no  longer  acts  upon  the  disease  in
its  own  peculiar  way,  nor  can  it,  undisturbed  by  the  other  in-
gredients, exert  its  specific  effect, — but  one  acts  in  opposition  to
the  other  in  the  body,  alters  and  in  part  destroys  the  adioa  of


TBJB  XXDICINE  OF  EXPSBIENCE.  471

the  other,  ao  that  from  this  oombinatioa  of  several  powers  that
djnamicaUj  decompose  each  other  during  their  action  in  the
body,  an  intermediate  action  is  the  result,  which  we  cannot  de-
aie,  as  we  cannot  foreaee,  nor  even  form  a  conjecture  respect-

ingit^

In  the  action  of  mixtures  of  medicines  in  the  body,  there  oc-
curs what|  indeed,  must  occur  according  to  the  maxim  of  expe-
rience given  above  (viz. : — that  a  general  irritation  in  the  body
iemovea  another,  or  else  suppresses  it,  according  as  the  one  irri-
tation is  analagoua  or  antagonistic  to  the  other,  or  provided  the
one  be  much  more  intense  than  the  other) — the  actions  of  sev-
eral of  the  medicines  in  the  compouud  partially  destroy  one
another,'  and  only  the  remainder  of  the  action,  which  is  not
covered  by  any  antagonistic  irritation  in  the  mixture,  remains
to  oppose  the  disease ;  whether  this  be  suitable  or  no,  we  cannot
tell,  as  we  are  unable  to  calculate  what  actually  will  remain.

Now,  as  in  every  case,  only  a  single  simple  medicinal  sub-
stance is  necessary;  no  true  physician  would  ever  think  of  de^
grading  himself  and  his  art,  and  defeating  his  own  object,  by
giving  a  mixture  of  medicines.  It  will  ratlier  be  a  sign  that  he
in  certain  of  his  subject  if  we  find  him  prescribing  only  a  single
medicinal  substance,  which,  if  suitably  chosen,  cannot  &il  to
remove  the  disease  rapidly,  gently  and  j)erinancntly.

If  the  symptoms  be  but  slight  and  few  in  number,  it  is  an
unimportant  ailment  that  scarcely  requires  any  medicine,  and
may  be  removed  by  a  mere  alteration  of  diet  or  regimen.

But  if— as  rarely  happens — only  one  or  a  couple  of  severe
symptoms  be  observable,  then  the  cure  is  more  difficult  than  if
many  symptoms  were  present  In  that  case  the  medicine  first
tient is  incapable  of  describing  the  extent  of  his  ailments,  or
because  the  symptoms  themselves  are  somewhat  obscure  and
not  very  observable.

moBt^  two  doses  of  the  medicine  tliat  ap{)ears  to  be  the  most  ap-
propriate.

It  will  sometimes  happen  that  this  is  the  right  remedy. In

*  Thii  n  the  reason  why  the  frequently  enorni<mfl  dijues  of  heroic  med'ckics  of
TBiious  kinds  in  a  complex  prescription  are  often  taken  without  any  great  effect.  A
aiogle  uneaf  fthcsde  poweriul  iugrediejitdji  would  oft£U  occjijdoo  death  in  the  ha^e


472  THE  XEDICINB  OF  XZPKBIBNCaL

the  event  of  its  not  being  exactly  suitable,  which  is  most  oom-
monlj  the  case,  symptoms  not  hitherto  experienced  will  reyed
themselves,  or  symptoms  will  develop  themselves  more  fbDy,
that  the  patient  has  not  previously  noticed,  or  only  in  an  ind^
tinct  manner.

From  these  symptoms  which,  thongh  slight,  now  shew  them-
selves more  frequently  and  are  more  distinctly  perceptible,  W0
may  now  obtain  a  more  accurate  picture  of  the  disease,  where-
by we  may  be  enabled  to  discover  with  groater  and  even  the
greatest  certainty  the  most  appropriate  remedy  for  the  original
disease.

The  repetition  of  the  doses  of  a  medicine  is  regulated  by  tlie
duration  of  the  action  of  each  medicine.  If  the  remedy  acts  ia
a  positive  (curative)  manner,  the  amendment  is  still  perceptible
after  the  duration  of  its  action  has  expired,  and  then  another
dose  of  the  suitable  remedy  destroys  the  remainder  of  the  dis-
ease. The  good  work  will  not  be  interrupted  if  the  seoond
dose  be  not  given  before  the  lapse  of  some  hours  after  the  oes«
sation  of  the  action  of  the  remedy.  The  portion  of  the  disease
already  annihilated  cannot  in  the  mean  time  be  renewed ;  and
even  should  we  leave  the  patient  several  days  without  mediciiM^
the  amelioration  resulting  from  the  first  dose  of  the  curative
medicine  will  always  remain  manifest.

So  far  from  the  good  effect  being  delayed  by  not  repeating
the  dose  until  after  the  medicine  has  exhausted  its  action,  the
cure  may  on  the  contrary  be  frustrated  by  its  too  rapid  repeti-
tion  of  the  term  of  action  of  the  positive  medicine  is  to  be
regarded  as  an  augmentation  of  the  first  dose,  which  from  igno*
ranee  of  this  circumstance  may  thereby  be  increased  to  an  enor-
mous degree,  and  then  prove  hurtful  by  reason  of  its  excess^

I  have  already  stated  that  the  smallest  possible  dose  of  a  posi^
tively  acting  medicine  will  suffice  to  produce  its  full  effect.  I^
in  the  case  of  a  medicine  whose  action  lasts  a  long  time,  as  for
instance  digitalis  where  it  continues  to  the  seventh  day,  the
dose  be  repeated  frequently,  that  is  to  say,  throe  or  four  times
in  the  course  of  a  day,  the  actual  quantity  of  medicine  wiU,  be*
fore  the  seven  days  have  expired,  have  increased  twenty  or
thirty-fold,  and  thereby  become  extremely  violent'  and  injuri-

'  The  following  circamstunoe  mast  also  be  taken  into  coii«ideniti«k  We  cMumt
weU  t«U  how  it  happeon,  but  it  w  not  the  lew  tcue,  that  even  one  and  the  Mune


THB  KKDICIXE  OF  EXPERIENCE.  478

ous;  whereas  lihe  first  dose  (a  tweniieth  or  thirtieth  part)  would
bave  amply  sufficed  to  effect  a  cure  without  any  bad  conse-
quences.

After  the  expiry  of  the  term  of  action  of  the  first  dose  of  the
medicine  employed  in  a  curative  manner,  we  judge  whetlicr  it
will  be  useful  to  give  a  second  dose  of  the  same  remedy.  If
tlie  disease  have  diminished  in  almost  its  whole  extent,  not
merely  in  the  first  half-hour  after  taking  the  medicine,  but  later,
and  during  the  whole  duration  of  the  action  of  the  first  dose ;
and  if  this  diminution  have  increased  all  the  more,  the  nearer
the  period  of  the  action  of  the  remedy  approached  its  termina-
ti<m — or  even  if,  as  happens  in  very  chronic  diseases,  or  in  mala-
dies the  return  of  whose  paroxj^sm  could  not  have  been  expected
during  this  time,  no  perceptible  amelioration  of  the  disease  have
indeed  occurred,  but  yet  no  new  symptom  of  imjwrtance,  no
hitherto  unfelt  sufferhig  deserving  of  attention  have  apiKiared,
then  it  is  in  the  former  case  almost  invariably  certain,  and  in
die  latter  highly  probable,  that  the  medicine  was  the  curatively
helpful,  the  positively  appropriate  one,  and,  if  requisite,  ought
to  be  followed  up  by  a  second — and  finally  even,  after  the
fiiTGurable  termination  of  the  action  of  the  second,  by  a  third
do0e  if  it  be  necessary  and  the  disease  be  not  in  the  mean  time
eompletely  cured, — as  it  often  is,  in  the  case  of  acute  diseases,
by  the  very  first  dose.

If  the  medicine  we  have  chosen  for  the  positive  (curative)
treatment  excites  almost  no  sufferings  j)reviously  unfelt  by  the
patient,  produces  no  new  symptom,  it  is  the  appropriate  medi-
cament and  will  certainly  cure  the  original  malady,  even  though
the  patient  and  his  friends  should  not  admit  that  any  amend-
ment has  resulted  from  the  commencing  doses, — and  so  also
conversely,  if  the  amelioration  of  the  original  disease  tike  place
in  its  whole  extent  from  the  action  of  the  curative  medicine,
the  medicine  cannot  have  excited  any  serious  new  symptoms.

Every  aggravation,  as  it  is  called,  of  a  disease  that  occurs

gf  mediciiic,  which  wuuld  suffice  for  the  curu,  pn)viilcil  it  were  iiol  rf{>eatvd  l)cforo
the,  action  of  thu  remedy  had  cca.«i><l — acts  ton  titncR  ur  ]>owerfulIy,  if  the  dose  he
dirkled,  and  these  portions  taken  at  sliort  intervals  <lunn^  tlie  ccintinuancc  (if  the  ac-
taon  of  the  medicine  ;  for  example,  if  the  dose  of  ten  drops,  which  would  have  sul^
fioed  tor  the  cure,  he  divided  among  tlie  five  days  during  which  the  action  of  the
medicine  laate,  in  such  a  manner  as  that  one  drop  of  it  sliall  be  taken  twice  a-day,
at  the  end  of  the  five  days  the  wine  effect  is  not  produced  as  wouhl  liave  occurred
from  ten  drops  given  at  once  every  live  days,  but  a  f:^  more  |>owi'rful,  excessive,
violent  eSkd,  provided  that  the  medicine  was  a  curative  and  positive  antidote  to  the


474  THE  MSDICIN£  OF  SXPXBISNOK.

during  the  use  of  a  medicine  (in  doses  repeated  before  or  imme*
diatcly  after  the  expiry  of  its  term  of  action),  in  the  form  of
new  symptoms  not  hitherto  proper  to  the  disease,  is  owiiig
solely  to  the  medicine  employed  (if  it  do  not  occur  just  a  few
hours  before  inevitable  death,  if  there  have  taken  place  no  im-
portant error  of  regimen,  no  outbreak  of  violent  passions,  no
irresistible  evolution  of  the  course  of  nature  by  the  occurrenoe
or  cessation  of  the  menstrual  function,  by  puberty,  conoeptioDy
or  parturition) ;  these  symptoms  are  always  the  effect  of  the
medicine,  which,  oa  an  unsuitably  chosen  positive  remedy,  or  ae
a  negative  (palliative)  remedy,  either  ill-selected  or  given  for
too  long  a  time,  and  in  too  large  doses,  develops  them  by  its
peculiar  mode  of  action  to  the  torment  and  destruction  of  the
patient.

An  aggravation  of  the  disease  by  new,  violent  symptoms  dur-
ing the  ilrst  few  doses  of  a  curative  medicine  is  never  indicative
of  feebleness  of  the  dose  (never  requires  the  dose  to  be  increasedX
but  it  proves  the  total  unfitness  and  worthlessness  of  the  medi-
cine in  this  case  of  disease.

The  aggravation  just  alluded  to  by  violent,  new  symptoms
not  proper  to  the  disease,  bears  no  resemblance  to  the  increase
of  the  apparently  original  symptoms  of  the  disease  during  the
first  few  hours  after  the  administration  of  a  medicine  selected  in
a  positive  (curative)  manner,  which  I  formerly  spoke  o£  This
phenomenon  of  the  increase  of  what  seem  to  be  the  pure  symp-
toms of  the  disease,  but  which  are  actually  predominant  medici-
nal symptoms  resembling  those  of  the  disease,  indicates  merely
that  the  dose  of  the  appropriately  selected  curative  medicine  has
been  too  large — it  disappears,  if  the  dose  has  not  been  enor-
Inously  large,  after  the  lapse  of  two,  three,  or  at  most,  four  hours
after  its  administration,  and  makes  way  for  a  removal  of  the  dis-
ease that  will  be  all  the  more  durable,  generally  after  the  expiiy
of  the  tenn  of  the  action  of  the  first  dose  ;  so  that,  in  the  case
of  acute  affections,  a  second  dose  is  usually  unnecessary.

However,  there  is  no  iwsitive  remedy,  be  it  ever  so  well
selected,  which  shall  not  produce  one,  at  least  one  slight,  unusual
suffering,  a  slight  new  symptom,  during  its  employment,  in  veiy
irritable,  sensitive  patients, — for  it  is  almast  impossible  that
medicine  and  disease  should  correspond  as  accurately  in  their
symptoms  as  two  triangles  of  equal  angles  and  sides  resemUe
each  other.  But  this  unimix)rtant  difference  is  (in  favourable
cases)  more  than  sufficiently  compensated  by  the  inherent  energy


THK  JCSDICINE  OF  EXPERISNCX.  475

of  the  vitality,  and  iA  not  even  perceived  except  bj  patients  of
excessive  delicacy.

Should  a  patient  of  ordinary  sensibility  observe  during  the
duration  of  the  action  of  the  first  dose,  an  unusual  sensation,  and
should  the  original  disease  appear  at  the  same  time  to  decline,.
we  are  unable  to  determine  with  precision  (at  least  not  in  a  chronic
disease)  from  this  first  dose,  whether  or  no  the  medicine  selected
was  the  most  appropriate  curative  one.  The  eifects  of  a  second
dose  of  equal  strength,  given  after  the  first  has  exhausied  its
action,  can  alone  decide  this  point.  From  the  action  of  this,  if
the  medicine  was  not  perfectly  or  exceedingly  appropriate,  there
will  again  a^ppear  a  new  symptom  (but  not  often  the  same  tliat
was  observed  from  the  first  dose,  usually  another  one)  of  greater
intensity  (or  even  several  symptoms  of  a  like  character),  without
any  perceptible  progress  occurring  in  the  cure  of  the  disease  in
its  whole  extent ; — if)  however,  it  was  the  appropriate  positive
medicine,  this  second  dose  removes  almost  every  trace  of  a  new
symptom,  and  health  is  restored  with  still  greater  ra])idity,  and
without  the  supervention  of  any  new  ailment.

Should  there  occur  from  the  second  dose  also  some  new
symptom  of  considerable  severity,  and  should  it  not  be  ix)ssible
to  find  a  more  appropriate  medicine  (the  fault  of  which  may
however  lie  either  in  a  want  of  diligence  on  the  part  of  the
physician,  or  in  the  smallness  of  the  supply  of  medicines,  whose
absolute  effects  are  known)  in  the  case  of  chronic  diseases,  or
acute  diseases  that  do  not  run  a  very  rapid  course,  a  diminution
of  the  dose  will  cause  this  to  disappear,  and  the  cui*e  will  still
go  on,  though  somewhat  more  slowly.  (In  this  case  also  the
energy  of  the  vitality  aids  the  cure).

The  choice  of  the  medicine  is  not  inappropriate  if  the  chief
and  most  severe  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  covered  in  a  positive
manner  by  the  symptoms  of  the  primary  action  of  the  medicine,
while  some  of  the  more  moderate  and  slighter  morbid  symptoms
are  so  only  in  a  negative  (palliative)  manner.  The  true  curative
power  of  the  predominant  positive  action  of  the  remedy  takes
place  notwithstanding,  and  the  organism  regains  full  possession
of  health  without  accessory  sufferings  during  the  treatment,  and
without  secondary  ailments  thereafter.  It  is  not  yet  decided
whether  it  is  advantageous  in  such  a  case  to  increase  the  doses
of  the  medicine  during  the  continuance  of  its  employment.

If^  during  the  continued  employment  of  a  curative  medicine


476  THE  MSDICUnB  OF  EXPBRIBKCB.

without  increasing  the  doses  (in  a  chronic  disease,)  fresh  symp-
toms not  proper  to  the  disease  should,  in  the  course  of  tinier
present  themselves,  whereas  the  first  two  or  three  doses  actad
almost  without  any  disturbance,  we  must  not  seek  for  the  caoae
of  this  impediment  in  the  inappropriateness  of  the  medicine,  bol
in  the  regimen,  or  in  some  other  powerful  agency  from  without

If,  on  the  other  hand,  as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case  when
there  is  a  sufficient  supply  of  well  known  medicines,  a  positiYO
medicine  perfectly  appropriate  to  the  accurately  investigated  case
of  disease,  be  selected  and  administered  in  a  suitably  small  do86^
and  repeated  after  the  expiry  of  its  special  duration  of  action,
should  none  of  the  above  alluded  to  great  obstacles  come  inthe
way,  such  as  unavoidable  evolutions  of  nature,  violent  passions,
or  enormous  violations  of  regiminal  rules,  and  should  there  be
no  serious  disorganization  of  important  viscera,  the  cure  of  acute
and  chronic  diseases,  be  they  ever  so  threatening,  ever  so  serious,
and  of  ever  so  long  continuance,  takes  place  so  rapidly,  so  per-
fectly, and  so  imperceptibly,  that  the  patient  seems  to  be  trans-
formed almost  immediately  into  the  state  of  true  health,  as  if  by
a  new  creation.

The  influence  of  regimen  and  diet  on  the  cure  is  not  to  be
overlooked ;  but  the  physician  needs  to  exercise  a  supervision
over  them  only  in  chronic  diseases,  according  to  principles  which
I  shall  develop  in  the  special  part  of  my  work.  In  acute  dis-
eases, however  (except  in  the  state  of  complete  delirium),  the
delicate  and  infallible  tact  of  the  awakened  internal  sense  that
presides  over  the  maintenance  of  life,  speaks  so  clearly,  so  pre-
cisely, so  much  in  conformity  with  nature,  that  the  physician
needs  only  to  impress  on  the  friends  and  attendants  of  the  pa-
tient, not  to  oppose  in  any  way  this  voice  of  nature,  by  refusing
or  exceeding  its  demands,  or  by  an  injurious  officiousness  and
importunity.


OBJECTIONSTO  A  PROPOSED  SUBSTITUTE  FOR

CINCHONA  BARK,

AND  TO  SUCCEDANEA  IN  GENERAL.*


In  the  commercial  world  the  spirit  of  substitution  has  been
lately  boldly  stalking  abroad. A  large  number  of  substitutes

>  From  the  Reiclu-Anxeigtr,  No.  77»  1806.


OBJKCnOKS  TO  A  PROPOSED  SUBSTITITTE,  ETC.  477

for  coffee  liave  been  proposed  and  offered  at  low  prices — and  no
small  number  of  substitutes  for  hops  in  beer  liave  been  sought
for.

It  would  have  required  no  great  experience  to  perceive  a  priori
that  infusions  of  burnt  barley  would  taste  like  burnt  barley,  of
burnt  chicory-root  and  carrot  would  taste  like  burnt  chicory -root
and  carrot,  and  of  burnt  cypcrus  would  taste  like  burnt  cyperus,
and  that  each  would  act  in  its  own  peculiar  way  on  the  health
of  man,  but  that  none  of  them  would  cither  taste  like  coffee,  or
yet  be  capable  of  developing  on  the  human  organism  the  effects
to  be  anticipated  from  genuine  coffee.'

If  the  substitutes  for  coffee  had  injurious  effects  on  the  health,
yet  they  were  actually,  and  in  comparison  with  the  injurious
nature  of  coffee,  quite  inconsiderable,  for  before  being  used  as
drinks  these  substances  were  roasted,  and  thereby  deprived  of
the  greater  portion  of  their  power  of  deranging  the  health  of
the  body.

Much  more  important  and  more  objectionable  as  regards  the
health  were  the  substitutes  for  hops  in  beer,  which  have  been
proposed  and  recommended.  Notwithstanding  that  the  hop  is
undoubtedly  a  medicinal  substance,  and  that  the  daily  use  of  its
decoction  in  beer  must  affect  the  health,  yet  it  has  long  been
observed  that  this  bitter  substance  in  beer  (though  it  would  be
better  that  the  more  wholesome  unhoppcd  beer  made  from  air-
dried  malt,  were  generally  used,  esjx^cially  that  made  from  wheat)
agreed  better  than  any  other  with  our  constitutions,  and  if  only
a  moderate  quantity  of  it  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  beer,
it  appears  at  length  to  become  almost  quite  innocuous  to  us.

But  what  excuse  can  be  offered  for  forcing  us  to  use  in  our
daily  drink  completely  new  medicinal  substances,  such  as  worm-
wood, feverfew,  and  other  drugs  of  still  more  unknown  action,
as  psoralia,  &c.,  in  the  form  of  unchanged  vegetable  decoctions,
in  place  of  hops  in  beer  ?  What  pests  in  the  form  of  newly  de-
veloped chronic  diseases  are  we  not  thi-eatened  with,  which  must
in^libly  result  from  the  use  of  decociions  of  medicinal  herbs  in
such  quantities,  the  effects  of  which  on  the  human  body  are  quite
unknown  I^

*  This  mistake  had  however  an  accidental,  important  good  effect  on  all  the  inbabi-
taata  of  Europe :  since  then  8ome  millions  of  dollars  fewer  hare  leen  drawn  frnui
our  port  of  the  world,  and  the  vory  bad  effects  of  oyer  indulgence  in  genuine  ooffbe
00  the  health  and  the  morals,  have  been  diminished.

*  Medical  men  imagine,  it  is  true,  that  thej  know  the  effects  of,  e.  g^  wormvood


478 OBJECTIONS  TO  A  PROPOSED  SUBSTITUTS  VOB  CIKCHOlTAi

We  may  read  the  bad  effects  on  the  human  health  from  the
frequent  use,  e.  ff,,  of  wormwood,  in  Lange  {Domestica  hrunsv.,
p.  112),  and  in  Vicat  {Mat&re  med.,  p.  40).  The  bad  effects  of
the  other  substitutes  for  hops  are  not  so  easily  proved.

But  what  do  the  projectors  of  the  substitutes  for  hops  they
recommend  care  about  the  injury  they  do,  provided  they  only
taste  bitter !

It  is  fortunate  that  all  these  bitters,  which  the  true  physician
has  reason  to  suspect,  are,  when  used  in  the  preparation  of  beer,
suspected  also  by  the  drinkers,  and  are  usually  rejected  by  them
from  a  sort  of  instinct.

^p  ^P  ^P  ^r

Of  a  not  less  injurious  tendency  are  all  the  so-called  sucoedanea
for  powerfiil,  established  medicinal  substances,  particularly  fiwr
cinchona-bark.

I  have  nothing  more  to  say  respecting  Breit/ekPs  substituie  fit
cinchona  than  the  following :

1.  That  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  succedaneum  or  substitute
for  bark,  nor  is  it  possible  that  there  can  be ;

a.  Because  every  plant  has  its  own  peculiar  medicinal
mode  of  action  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  other  plant
in  the  world — and  no  other  plant  is  cinchona ;  therefore
it  stands  to  reason  that  cinchona  can  be  replaced  by  nothing
but  by  cinchona  itself.

As  little  as  a  willow,  an  ash,  or  a  horse-chesnut-tree,  cor*
responds  in  external  and  botanical  respects  with  a  cinchona
tree,  so  little  do  the  medicinal  powers  of  the  barks  of  said
trees  resemble  the  cinchona  bark.  In  like  manner  a  mix-
ture of  calmus,  gentian  and  gall-nuts  may  indeed  be  much
more  aromatic,  more  bitter  and  more  astringent  than  cin-
chona bark ;  but  it  can  never  be  cinchona  bark.

b.  Because  all  the  substitutes  for  cinchona  that  have
, hitherto  been  proposed,  inclusive  of  Breitfeld's,  were  only

useful  where  cinchona  would  have  been  of  no  use,  and  con-
sequently would  do  no  good  where  cinchona  is  indicated,
and  could  do  no  good — therefore  they  cannot  replace  the
latter.

and  feverfew.  They  ctxuudcr  them  as  absolutely  wholesome.  This  ia  howeTer  a
delusioiL  They  have  employed  both  these  snbstances  only  in  diseases  in  whidi  the
slow  recovery  was  dependent  often  on  quite  other  circumstances  than  the  mediciiiei
^ven ;  they  have  used  them  only  in  combination  with  other  drugs.  But  few  kiMiw
what  harm  these  herbs  car  io  to  the  human  body  when  given  singly  in  large  quan*


.A2n>  TO  SnOCEDANEA  IN  QENEBAL.  479

,  2.  That  Breitfald's  is  undeserving  of  consideration  because  it
is  oompoaed  of  several  vegetable  substances— a  circumstance
that^  owing  to  the  ever- varying  quality  of  the  different  ingredients,
the  different  modes  in  which  they  are  dried  and  preserved,  the
coarser  or  finer  pulverization  of  the  several  substances,  and  even
the  impossibility  of  mingling  them  always  in  the  same  manner,
must  always  give  a  different  product,  as  is  the  case  with  all  com*
pound  medicines.

3.  That  no  one  has  yet  determined  the  accessory  medicinal
effects  of  the  several  ingredients  of  his  mixture,  whereby  they
must  evidently  excite  an  accessory  action  different  from  that  of
(dnchona,  and  of  an  injurious  nature,  which  the  prescribing  phy-
sician can  not  take  into  calculation,  as  he  does  not  know  what  it  is.

«  ♦  ♦  ♦

Provided  the  cinchona  bark  be  not  employed  in  excessive
doses,  nor  given  repeatedly  where  it  can  be  dispensed  with,  nor
where  it  can  do  no  good,  nor  yet  where  it  must  do  much  and
often  irremediable  injury — not  one  tenth  part  of  the  valuable
bark  that  has  been  hitherto  wasted  will  be  required.  Then  it
¥ould  not  be  too  dear ;  then  the  two  millions  and  a  half  of  dol-
lars which  Europe  yearly  pays  to  South  America  for  bark  might
be  diminished  to  250,000,  and  if  we  were  wiser  physicians,  to
50,000  dollars,  to  the  great  advantage  of  our  patients.

Would  it  be  very  difficalt  to  cultivate  this  invaluable  tree  in
Europe,  seeing  that  it  grows  on  the  Andes  *  at  a  height  of  7692
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea  ?

In  conclusion  I  must  express  my  regret  that  Mr.  Breitfeld  has
not  devoted  his  well-meant  labours  to  a  less  thankless  subject.


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THK  SCARLET-FEVER.*


The  malignant  scarlet-fever  that  has  prevailed  in  (jcrmany  for
eight  years  and  proved  fatal  to  many  thousands  of  children  and
older  persons,  often  so  unexpectedly,  so  rapidly,  and  with  symp-
toms never  before  heard  of  under  such  circumstances,  this  mur-
derous disease,  termed  scarlet-fever  by  almost  every  one,  is  really
anything  but  scarlet-fever ;  it  is  a  new  disease  never  seen  in  Ger-

'  Properly  qwaking,  on  the  Cordillenu  de  lo9  ^/uir«»tlic  highest  range  of  moun-
tiiai  in  the  known  world,  which  includes  the  whole  western  side  of  South  America.
*  From  the  Allg.  Afuteig.  der  DaUtchm,  No  160. 1808.


480  OBSSBVATIONS ON  THE  SCABLST-FXYXR.

manj  before  the  year  1800,  whichy  on  account  of  the  red  rash
that  usuallj  accompanies  it,  might  be  termed  purpura  miliam^
and  which,  then  for  the  first  time^  spread  from  the  west,  over  Hesae^
Bamberg,  Beyrouth,  Thuringia  and  Yoigtland,  to  Saxony,  and
thence  since  that  time  has  extended  in  all  directions.

K  it  can  be  proved  that  this  is  a  new  disease  and  is  widely
different  firom  the  old  genuine  scarlet-fever  (which  old  people  can
still  very  well  remember  to  have  noticed  in  their  youth  in  them-
selves and  others),  we  can  very  weU  understand  how  it  happened,
that  the  medical  men  did  not  know  how  to  act  in  this  new  dis-
ease, and  that  at  first  all  who  were  likely  to  die,  slipped  through
their  hands ;  indeed  that  their  endeavours  did  more  harm  than
good,  as  they  were  always  under  the  delusion  that  they  had  to
do  with  the  old  genuine  scarlet-fever,  and  thus  they  were  misled
by  this  extraordinary  confounding  of  names  and  things,  to  treat
the  new  disease  in  the  same  way  as  they  had  been  used  to  treat
the  true  scarlet-fever  (by  means  of  keeping  the  patient  warm,
administering  elder-flower  tea,  &c.).  Such  a  mistake,  such  a
confounding  in  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  two  such  very  different
diseases,  must  naturally  have  a  very  unfortunate  result,  as  ex-
perience has  shewn  it  to  have  had  by  the  many  thousands  who
have  fallen  Anctims  to  this  new  disease.

This  disease  is  new  among  us,  I  repeat,  for  there  is  not  the
slightest  trace  of  such  a  purple  miliary  fever  having  ever  before
prevailed  in  Germany.

Salzmann,  was  a  white  miliary  fever— white  vesicles  on  a  white
skin — and  differed  from  our  new  miliary  fever  in  this,  that
ijhildren  and  old  people  were  almost  entirely  exempted  from  it,
and  it  chiefly  affected  youths  and  adults  between  twenty  and
forty  years  of  age;  sore  throat  was  very  rarely  met  with  in  it

years  ago,  consisted  of  a  white,  millet-seed  size  dexanthema,  and
only  aftected  lying-in  women  ;  probably  it  was  a  disease  brought
on  by  keeping  them  too  warm.

The  most  recent  miliary  epidemic  which  Briining  observed
thirty-six  years  ago,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Lower  Khine,
differs  also  from  our  new  disease  in  this,  that  children  of  five
years  and  under  generally  remained  free  from  it,  and  women
were  more  frequently  attacked  than  men, — that  it  had  its  critical
days,  and  wa^  likewise  a  white  miliary  rash,  resting  for  the  first
few  days  on  red  spots,  which  went  off  (jn  the  seventh  day,


(ansvATiONs  on  thx  scarlet-fxvibb.


481


Jeaying  the  white  miliary  rash  standing  from  three  to  seven
dajB  kmger  on  die  white  skin.

The  epidemics  that  bear  the  greatest  resemblanoe  to  our  pre-
sent poqde  miliary,  are  those  observed  by  David  Hamilton,  k>ng
ago  (1710)  in  Indk,  and  Charles  Allione  (in  1758)  in  Turin.

Otiier  observers  only  mention  having  occasionally  observed  a
miliary  fever  in  single  individuals,  which  were  usually  only
brought  on  by  the  use  of  heating)  diaphoretic  remedies,  espe*
by  them  in  a  most  vague  manner.

That  our  miliary  fever  is  new  and  very  different  from  the  true
aoarlet-fever,  the  following  comparison  will  shew.


Tkenme  red  miliary  fever
(vUoh  fir  flw  \M8t  eight  yean  has  been

odled  Bcariet-feyer)
ittMlBi  penoM  of  all  «ge8 ;


I  of  popk^jred  ( Jaoi),
«f  daik  red  qiots '  (yeigkig  on  brown),
vhibh  on  being  preaed  with  tho  finger
do  Mi  leave  a  white  spot  but  remain
mohanged,  of  a  dark  red  colour,  {


of  flharply  d^ned,  discrete  patches  of


always  thickly  studded  with  dark-red
ndiaiy  p^jp"^,  which  are  not  so  much
elefated  above  the  level  of  the  skin  as
•tack  deep  in  it,  yet  distinctly  percep-
tible to  both  the  eye  and  the  touch.  ^


The  old  genuine  teearlet-fner


attacks  only  children  until  their  12th
year  (Sim.  Schulze)— attacks  only  chil-
dren, almost  never  adults  (Plencix^  Sen-
nert);

the  redness  of  the  skin  is  an  erysipelatous
fire-coloored  redness  (Sennert]^— a  bright
scarlet  redness,  resembling  eiysipelas  in
colour  and  in  this,  that  it  immediately
disappears  on  pressure  with  the  finger
and  shews  a  white  spot,  which  however
immediately  resumes  its  red  colour  (Na-
vier) ;  the  redness  is  like  the  colour  of  a
boiled  lobster  {Act.  med  Berol.) ; — a  cin-
nabar redness  (Plcnciz).

The  smooth  shining  redness  of  the  skin
runs  imperceptibly  into  the  neighbourii^
white  parts,  in  uimoticeable  shades,  like
erysipelas,  and  is  never  well  defined ; —
it  becomes  from  time  to  time,  now  a  littli'
paler,  now  a  little  redder,  and  almost
every  instant  it  spreads  imperceptibly
farther,  and  then  retires  to  its  original
seat  (Navier).

None  of  the  above-mentioned  author»<
allude  to  miliary  elevations  of  the  bright
red  parts  of  the  skin ; — the  skin  of  the
reddened  parts  is-  quite  even  and  smooth
(Hulinemann) ; — the  red  ports  uf  the  skin
arc  quite  Rmouth  and  destitute  of  inequa-
lities or  elevations  (Plencii, Op,  iract.


we  may  unhesitatingly  call  it  purple  miliary  (puq>ura  milioris). Who
OQold  ffmfrnmd  this  dark  red  rash  with  tho  bright  fiery  colour  of  scarlet  cloth  ?

31


48Sr


ommii9Miojf(%  ON.  m  acijuuiiy:


Tliai  emnthtma  tMmdkM  m  an  i&d»«
tflKBMMit*  Bumimr.iiow  tUi,  now  tfalRt  paHi
of  the  bqciy— then  10  no  part  of  the  body
for  wfaiicfa  it  has  a  peculuur  affectioiv  or
to  wUch  it  attaches  itself  in  a  peculiar
manner  (StiegMtsX  Most  freqacntfy  the
fi^TOvite  spots  for  its  attad^  are  the  com-
entd  parts  and  flexures  of  the  j<HnU;
most  rarely  the  &ce.  The  rash  is  usually
scoompanied  by  swelling  (StiegUts;.


OluB  eanthematous  forer  ha»  sot  a
determined,  regular  course,  like  other
exanthematous  fevers  (Stieglits) ;— the
eruption  remains  here  and  there  for  an
indeterminate  period,  often  sereral
weeks;  tbere  is  no  fixed  period  for  its
departare*

TIm  red  luBaiy  rash  often  disappears
soddenly  at  indeterminate  times,  with
inereased  danger  to  Ufe,  usually  flawed
suddenly  by  death.


The  erupCkn  may  be  eopiouaor  al-
most not  at  all  present,  the  mOdness  or
malignancy  of  the  disease  not  depending
on  that  (StiegUts)L  Where  the  eruptioo
is  almost  imperceptible  the  danger  is
often  greatest^  the  ferer  most  malignant ;
— ^where  there  is  a  general  fiill  eruption^
the  disease  is  often  mild  and  sKgfat

It  is  oidy  the  dark  red  mffiary
patdies  that  perspire,  and  il  is  onfy
when  the  whole  body  k  covered  with  it
that  the  patient  perspires  all  over,  as  m
the  epidemic  at  .Wittenibeiip


iii^  pi  4a)>  md  tm  tihit  ^.mtfjM/mm^

difen/ivm  fiwy  kimd.  •f  mUiarjf  fmm
(Plendx,  t6,  pt  68).

TIms  rednesa  of  the  tme  aoariet-fofir
prefeis  attaekiag  flwt  the  mutunimA
but  sligli%  coreftd  paitf^  nkicb  swA
as  for  aathfr.  rednesa  extendi  At  ifit
the  redness  and  swelliog  occor  oiitka
fooe  (De  Qorter,  Fiends)— «i  first  id  tk»
fooe^  neck,  and  cheat  (Pfood^— iha  asfl^
let  redness  fiisl  appaan^.  with  tmn^
swdling,  on  the  fooe  (ne^  and  chaaQp^
the  hands^  and  the  outside  of  the  jfoai
and  from  these  parts  it  spraada  oat  is
a»  erysqjdatena  manoer  (is  liia  woak
cases)  all  orer  the  body  (Hahnemaao^

In  eyeiy  goMiine  scaiiat-fovier  tka
rednesa  appaaxa  on.  the  parts  mami
simultaneously  witk  the  fobrile  hai^
and  in  mild  casea  is  peiceptible  for  frovai
three  to  four  days  (Plendi^  Senneit),  ia
bad  cases,  seven  days  (Plenritj  aad
goes  off  by  beoomiqg  gradually  palar
tain  day  to  day.  The  parte  that  fiial
baaaaae  red,  heoome  font  pa&a  (PIsMi^

Heoe  of  the  above  aathoaa  anataa
mentian  of  the  suddeo  disappeaianaa  of
the  rednesa  of  true  searlet  fover  dusimi
the  fever.  After  the  gradaal  fodiiv  «f
the  redness  up  to  the  fixed  days  men-
tioned above,  there  ooctur  apyrexia  and
desquamation  (Sennert,  Pleoda,  De
Qorter,  Sim.  Schulae).  Even  after
death  the  hitherto  red  spots  remaio
cdoored  and  turn  violet  (Navier.

The  fuller  and  more  extended  tte
redness  of  true  scarlet-fever  i^  the  moie
malignant  is  the  fever  always  (Hahne-
mann).


If  one  of  the  reddened  parts  m  fme
scarlet-fever  perspire  durii^  the  dinriaa
(in  an  this  the  authors  I  have  meothxied
are  agreed),  if  the  skin  is  moist^it  Ssa»
only  OD  tiie  parts  that  are  not  yet  red-
dened No  erysipelas  perspires,  and  aa
little  does  the  scarlatina  redness.  It  ia
only  when  the  fever  comes  to  an  end,
and  the  redness  has  gradually  gene  oi(
that  Aere  eometimee  oonifageaenl  pep-


omaaofAxwm  on  tbb  sgablvmwxh.


48S


tlib  new  wSSbrj  disease,  fidsely  said
|0  be  scariei-iBFer,  which  first  appeared
about  die  middle  of  tbe  year  1800,*
aai^Ukff  evcty  nev  ^meflmce;  raged  as
a  nsiBt  iimtapsm  epidemic  where  it
ibat  appeand  (there  was  no  mUd  epi-
dsmie  of  It),  and  then  finom  time  to  time
iteuiiedfOlten  seteral  times  in  a  year  in
piMe  (net  unfrequently  at-
tha  ame  persona  a  eeoood  time),
dnring  the  fbni  years  still  attacked  se-
Tcral  fiunilifls  in  sDcceasion  ^  during  the
b^  years  did  not^  it  is  true,  cease
far  any  leoigth  of  time,  but  did  not  pre-
ml  qpita  epidoniica%  again,  but  rather
tttaeked  singlfr  fiimilies,  or  even  single
iadhridnals,  in  one  place  (though  it  was
Boftlosa  firtal)-  it  seeme  in  the  course  of
afcw  yiiin  to  have  a  tenden^  to  be-
eona  eartingnidied  completely,  like  the
ftq;lwii  BweattDg-sickness  at  the  com-
it  of  the  16th  centuiy.


Beddea  Ae  diaphareties,  elder-flower
tm,  dbe^  and  the  warm  beds  wherewith
it  was  aon^t  to  retain  the  eruption  on
the  skin  (usually  without  success),  pur-
gatives, especially  mercurial  medicines,
aas  said  to  bare  dene  good  in  this  ez-
anethemateui  fever ;  but  (MOfit/tf,  along
with  a  moderately  cool  regimen  saved  the
most,  it  were  foolish  to  judge  of  the
power  of  belladonna  from  its  administra-
tion  in  this  new  miliary  fever,  which,  as
we  see,  is  anything  but  scarlet-fever.


spiration,  and  thereafter  desquamatioQ
of  the  skin  (Sim.  Schulce),  and  the  dis-
ease may  also  go  off  without  any  pe^>
piratioo.— (^c/.  me<L  Berol.)

The  true  scarlet-fever  is  an  old  dis-
ease, which  has  been  accurately  observ-
ed for  two  cmturies  in  Germany  and
other  countries,  always  appeared  onljf
as  an  epidemic  and  pandemic,  alwayv
attacked  indiscriminately,  and  with
scarcely  any  exception,  every  child  that
had  not  had  the  disoise  (never  those
who  had  already  had  it),  seldom  prt'*
vailed  in  maUgoant,  often  in  mild,  some-
times in  perfectly  mild  epidemics  (Sy-
denham, De  Ckrter,  Nenter,  Junker),
searcely  proving  kUA.  to  one  child  in  a
thousand,  never,  or  very  seMom,  occnr-
red  sporadically,  and  the  reason  of  this
was,  that  as  it  almost  always  at-
tacked pandemically  all  children  who
had  not  previouriy  had  it,  there  weve
not  under  6  or  8  years  enough  subjeeta
to  infect  in  order  to  show  its  epidemic
character,  hence  it  almost  never  recurred
in  less  than  6,  8,  or  12  years,  and  on  ac-
count of  this  rarity  of  its  recurrence,  thf
oldest  practitioners  scarcely  ever  saw  it
ofteuer  than  three  times  in  their  lives^
and  it  was  quite  unknown  to  our  younger
practitioners.

In  this  old,  true  scarlet-fever,  beUa-
donna  is  useful,  both  as  a  prophyUcticb
and  as  a  remedy.


*  In  tlie  first  half  of  the  year  1800  true  scarlet-fever  still  prevailed,  and  a  couple
cf  months  thereafter  the  new  miliaiy  fever  made  its  appearance.


484 ON  THS  PRESENT  WANT  OF  FOBXiaK  KIDICINEeL


ON  THE  PKESENT  WANT  OF  FOREIGN  MEDICINES.'


The  loud  complaints  that  are  uttered  respecting  the  want  of
foreign  medicines,  and  recently  the  lamentation  on  this  subjeet
(in  No.  176  of  the  All  Am,)  from  our  esteemed  philanthropic
Faust,  went  to  my  heart,  particularly  as  I  recently  got  fixwa  one
of  the  most  celebrated  laboratories  in  one  of  the  most  famed
cities  in  Germany,  in  place  of  choicest,  best  myrrh  which  I  had
ordered,  lumps  of  a  gum-resin  having  somewhat  the  appearance
of  myrrh,  but  which,  on  being  pulverized,  had  a  most  nauseous
odour,  apparently  the  product  of  some  unknown  umbelliferooft
plant,  and  which  was  anything  but  myrrh.

*'  What  will  be  the  result  of  this  blockade  of  Europe,  what
the  end  of  this  deficiency  of  the  most  indispensable  foreign
drugs?"  anxiously  exclaim  both  physicians  and  patients — "par-
ticularly as  the  most  sagacious  men  consider  the  substitution  of
one  medicine  for  another  to  be  a  lamentable  mistake,  as  no  sub-
stance in  nature  possesses  the  same  qualities  as  any  other,  nor  is
it  possible  that  it  can,  for  they  are  characteristically  different  in
externals,  and  as  veal  cannot  turn  into  mutton  or  pork,  neither
can  quitch-grass  be  transformed  into  sarsaparilla."

Of  a  truth,  this  daily  increasing  deficiency  of  foreign  drugs
seems  likely  to  become  a  great,  an  inconceivably  great  want.

We  should  no  doubt  find  the  warehouses  of  the  druggists  and
apothecaries  as  well  and  constantly  filled  as  before,  notwithstand-
ing that  there  is  a  real  deficiency  of  most  of  the  exotica,  and  a
manifest  want  of  foreign  medicinal  products,  but — only  with
goods  which,  thanks  to  the  known  abilities  of  the  adulterators,
with  the  exception  of  an  external  resemblance,  possess  little  or
nothing  of  the  actual  nature  of  the  genuine  drugs,  carefully
stored  in  jars,  chests,  and  boxes,  whereon  the  honourable  name
has  been  for  a  long  time  painted  in  durable  oil-colours,  to  gua-
rantee the  genuineness  of  their  contents !  But  good  heavens  I
what  a  quid  pro  quo  will  the  connoisseur  find  in  them !  Every
philanthropist  must  shudder  at  the  effects  such  fabrications  must
produce  on  the  sick.

It  is  not  far  from  the  truth  to  say,  that  the  connoisseur  can  no
longer  meet  with  any  genuine  extra-European  medicines.

*  From  the  Allgemeiner  Ameiff^r  der  Deutsehen,  No.  207. 1898.


OV  TBB  PBB8XKT  WANT  OF  FOREIGN  MEDICINSS. 485

This  want  is  great  and  incalculable,  but  I  feel  almost  disposed
to  assert  that  it  is  a  just  judgment  of  God  for  the  incredible
abuse  that  has  heretofore  been  made  of  these  drugs.  It  may
readily  happen  to  the  spendthrift  that  he  may  suffer  from  want,
and  that  justly.

When  we  consider  how  many  pounds  of  cinchona  alone  any
physician  in  laige  practice  has  hitherto  used  in  his  practice  (it  is
notorious  that  a  London  medical  man  used  500  pounds  annually),
and  how  large  the  number  of  physicians  is  who  give  large  quan-
tities of  medicine,  we  are  horrified  at  the  quantities  of  foreign
drags  hitherto  consumed.

But,  gracious  God  1  was  this  not  an  abuse  of  thy  noble  gifts  7
Was  the  large  number  of  draughts,  teas,  mixtures,  electuaries,
drops,  powders,  pills,  administered  at  short  intervals  by  table-
spoonfuls  and  tea-spoonfuls,  often  alternated  with  one  another
several  times  a  day^  and  the  first  one  scarcely  tasted,  put  aside,
and  replaced  (or  rather  supplanted)  by  two  or  three  other  drugs
— ^was  the  enormous  quantity  of  drugs  employed  for  fumigations,
dry  and  humid  applications,  half  and  whole  baths,  clysters,  &c.
— ^was  all  this  not  an  abuse  of  the  noble,  precious  products  of
foreign  countries  brought  from  such  great  distances  ?

If  it  could  be  proved  that  such  a  multitude  of  drugs  was  ne-
cessary and  indispensable  for  the  patients'  relief,  then  it  would
be  quite  a  different  thing.  In  that  case  the  blame  would  rest
with  the  Buler  of  the  earth,  who  seeing  we  require  so  much,
ought  to  have  supplied  these  our  necessities  by  making  them
grow  in  larger  quantities  on  our  hazel-trees,  willows,  in  our
meadows,  woods  and  on  every  hedge.

But  all  honour  be  to  Him,  the  wise  Preserver  of  mankind !
Such  an  expenditure,  such  a  waste  of  exotic  and  indigenous
drugs  was  never  required  in  order  to  cure  the  sick.  It  was  not
merely  a  waste  (for  in  that  case  it  would  simply  have  been
analogous  to  lighting  our  pipe  with  a  bank  note) — no,  it  was
an  actual  sin  against  true  art  and  against  the  welfare  of  sick
humamty.

Do  not  the  poor,  who  use  no  medicine  at  all,  often  recover
much  sooner  from  the  same  kind  of  disease  than  the  well-to-do
patient,  who  has  his  shelves  filled  with  large  bottles  of  medi-
cbe?  The  latter  often  remains  much  longer  poorly  after  his
treatment  is  finished,  and  must  often  go  from  one  watering  place
to  another  in  order  to  get  free  from  the  after-sufferings  left  in
him  by  the  monstrous  quantity  of  powerful  drugs  he  took.


486 OBf  fTHB  FBB8BNT  WANT  Or  FDBnOHf  JIBBIOINn.

wbich  were  nsaally  totally  ina^^nropriate  und  eonfleqnentlj
hurtful  in  their  character.

It  must  some  time  or  other  be  loudl j  and  openlj  dedai^ ;
and  so  let  it  now  be  loudly  and  unreservedly  proclaimed  before
the  whole  world,  that  the  medical  art  stands  in  need  tifa  Amreiu^
T^rmfrom  head  to  foot  What  ought  not  to  be  done  has  been
done,  and  what  is  of  the  utmost  importance  has  been  totsUy
joverlooked.  The  evil  has  become  so  crying  thai  llie  wdl-
meaning  mildness  of  a  John  Huss  no  longer  avails,  but  the  fieij
seal  of  a  rock-firm  Martin  Luther  is  needed  to  sweep  away  dM^
monstrous  leaven.

There  is  no  science,  no  art,  not  even  any  miserable  bandioraft,
that  has  kept  pace  so  little  with  the  progress  of  the  age;  no  art
has  remained  so  fixed  in  its  original  imperfection  as  the  medical
art.

Medical  men  followed  at  one  time  this  fashioB,  at  asiotlrer  a
difEerent  one,  now  this  school,  now  that^  and  when  tiie  mcie
modem  method  appeared  unserviceable  they  sought  to  revive
some  ancient  one  (that  had  formerly  shewn  itself  worthless).
Iheir  treatment  tvas  never  founded  vpen  eonvietums^  hut  dwag^
upon  opinions^  each  of  which  was  ingenious  and  learned  in  pro-
portion as  it  was  valueless,  so  that  we  are  now  arrived  at  this
point,  that  we  have  the  unhappy  liberty  of  h<^)elessly  selectuig
any  one  of  the  many  methods,  all  of  which  halt  in  an  almost
equally  grievous  manner,  but  we  have  actually  no  fixed  stand-
BxA  for  treatment,  no  fixed  principles  of  practice  that  are  ac-
knowledged to  be  the  best.  Every  physician  acts  according  aa
he  has  been  taught  by  his  school  or  as  his  fancy  dictates,  and
each  finds,  in  the  inexhaustible  magazine  d  opinions,  authori-
ties to  whom  he  can  appeal.

The  method  of  treating  most  diseases  by  scouring  out  the
stomach  and  bowels ; — ^the  method  of  treatment  which  aims  its
medicinal  darts  at  imaginary  acridities  and  impurities  in  the
blood  and  other  humours,  at  cancerous,  rachitic,  scrofUlotts^
gouty,  herpetic  and  scorbutic  acridities ; — ^the  method  of  treat-
ment that  presupposes  in  most  diseases  a  species  of  fundamental
morbid  action,  such  as  dentition,  or  derangements  of  the  biliary
system,  or  haemorrhoids,  or  infarctus,  or  obstruction  in  the  me-
senteric glands,  or  worms,  and  directs  the  treatment  against
these ; — ^the  method  which  imagines  it  has  always  to  do  with
debility,  and  oonceives  it  is  bound  to  stimulate  and  re«stimulate
(which  they  call  strengthen)  \ — the  method  which  regards  the


.  OS  THX  PRKlBffT  If  ANT  OF  FOBEIOK  MEDICINES. 487

diaeaaed  body  as  ■%  meve  chemically  decomposed  mass  whicli
mut  be  Mstoied  to  the  proper  chemical  condition  by  chemical
^trogenowa, oxygenous, hydrogenous) re-agents; — another
aaelfaod  that  supposes  diseases  to  have  no  other  original  cause
but  moooflities — another  &at  sees  only  inspissation  of  the  juices
*--^«DDtbdr  that  sees  nought  but  acids — and  yet  another  that
^lunkB  it  has  only  to  combat  putridity ; — ^the  method  that  ima-
.^inea  it  must  act  iqwciaUy  and  can  act  absolutely  on  the  skin,
4ha  bitaiii,  the  liver,  the  kidneys,  or  some  other  single  organ ; —
4be  method  ikmX  conceives  it  must  search  for  and  treat  <Mily
apasm  or  peralysus  in  diseases,  only  a  derangement  of  the  anti-
quated junctkmes  ncUuraks^  vtiaks,  antmafes,  or  the  revival  of
this  doctrine,  the  derangement  of  the  irritalnlity,  the  sensibility,
or  the  Teproduotive  fitculty; — the  method  that  proposes  to
"direct  its  attention  to  the  supposed  remote  exciting  causes  of
in  diseases,  in  order  to  be  able  to  discard  those  that  do  harm
•and  TOtain  those  that  seem  to  be  of  use  {ajuvanUbns  et  nocerUi-
^iiif);— 4he  method  that,  according  to  the  mere  names  that  the
^diseaae  befisre  them  seems  to  have  in  books,  goes  to  work  with
presenptions  got  out  of  the  self-same  books ; — ^the  method  that
merely  attends  to  particular  symptoms  in  diseases  in  order  to
BupppssB  these  by  some  palliative  antidote  {contmria\ — and  that
method  tiiat  boasts  of  being  able  to  subdue  the  disease  by  assist-
ing and  promoting  the  efforts  of  nature  and  the  natural  crises ;
— ail  these  modes  of  treatment,  many  directly  opposite  to  one
another,  have  each  their  authorities  and  illustrious  supporters  ;
but  nowhere  do  wc  find  a  universally  applicable,  efficacious
standard  of  treatment  accredited  in  all  ages.

Imagine  the  embarrassment  in  which  a  physician  must  be
placed  when  he  comes  to  the  sick-bed,  as  to  whether  he  should
follow  this  method  or  the  other,  in  what  perplexity  he  must  be
when  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  mode  of  treatment  avails
him ;  how  he,  misled  now  by  this,  now  by  that  view,  feels  him-
ifisrmula,  again  to  abandon  them  and  administer  something  to-
tally different,  and  finding  that  none  will  suit  the  case,  he
thinks  to  eflGact,  by  the  strength  of  the  doses  of  the  most  power-
fill  and  costly  medicines,  that  cure  which  he  knows  not  (nor
any  of  his  colleagues  either)  how  to  bring  about  mildly  by
means  of  small,  rare  doses  of  the  simple  but  appropriate  medi-
cine. All  this  he  does  the  more  readily  seeing  that  the  pre-


48B  OK  THB  YALUS  OF  THX

vailing  system  derived  &om  England  commands  Iiim  to  aasaO
his  poor  patients  with  large,  with  enormous  doses  of  the  most
active  medicines.  He  is  thus  in  the  habit  ot  forcing  the  disease
to  take  itself  off  by  administering  repeated,  firequenlly  alternated
and  varied  mixtures  of  large  doses  of  very  powerful,  expensive
medicines.  The  disease  no  doubt  is  removed,  it  yields  to  the
force  brought  against  it ;  but  if  death  be  not  the  result,  iheie
arise  other  diseases,,  new  maladies,  that  entail  the  neoessily  of  a
long,  expensive  after-treatment,  because  all  these  numerooi^
dear,  strong  drugs  were  for  the  most  part  unsuitable^  were  not
accurately  adapted  to  the  cure  of  disease  in  all  its  partSw •

Thus  the  ruination  of  human  health  goes  hand  in  hand  with
the  lavish  waste  of  so  many  costly  foreign  drugs — ^the  way  of
destruction  I  This  was  assuredly  not  the  intentk>n  of  the  all*
bountiful,  wise  Creator,  who  in  nature  effects  many  and  great
and  multi&rious  objects  with  few,  simple  means,  and  a{^)arenily
inaignificant  appliances,  and  has  certainly  so  ordained  the  medi.
dnes  he  created,  that  each  should  have  its  own  mmiutably  fixed
uses,  ite  certain,  imvarying  curative  power,  with  which  it  should
be  able  to  effect,  in  excessively  small  doses,  many  and  great
things  for  the  weal  of  (God-bdoved)  man,  if  we,  instead  of  ii^
terminably  talking  and  writing  mere  empty  conjectures  and
hypotheses,  would  but  endeavour  to  become  better  and  more
accurately  acquainted  with  it.  Dioci  et  scUvavi  antmatn.  Lei
OS  become  better,  and  all  will  soon  go  better.


ON THE VALUE OF THE SPECULATIVE SYSTEHS OF

MEDICmE,

ESPECIALLY  AS  VIEWED  IN  CONNEXION  WITH  THB  USUAI^
METHODS  OF  PRACTICE  WITH  WHICH  THEY  HAYfi

BEEN  ASSOCIATED.*

Although  it  has  ever  been  man's  endeavour  to  discover  and
explain  the  connexion  of  the  various  constituents  of  the  living
body,  and  the  manner  of  their  reaction  upon  each  other,  and
upon  external  forces ;  to  tell  how  they  give  rise  to  those  living
instruments  (organs)  which  are  requisite  to  the  maintenance  of
of  life ;  and  how,  out  of  the  necessary  organs,  a  self-contained

>  From  the  ^/fswm.  ^fw.  <l^  DeWtcAas  N«L  268. 180&


SPBGULAnyS  8Y8TBMS  OF  MXDICINE.  489

irIiold-~a  liying  healthful  individual — is  formed  and  upheld ;  it
has  been  found  impossible,  though  it  has  been  often  tried,  to
explain  these,  either  on  the  principles  of  mechanics,  or  physics,
or  chemistiy,  or  the  laws  of  liquid  and  solid  bodies  in  the  inor-
ganic world ;  or  by  gravitation  or  friction,  or  by  impulse,  or
via  mertuBj  or  by  the  laws  of  the  attraction  and  cohesion  of  seve-
ral similar  bodies  touching  each  other  at  many  points,  or  the
repulsion  of  dissimilar ;  nor  has  it  been  explained  by  the  forms
of  the  individual  elementary  substances  which  compose  man's
or  spherical,  or  spiral,  or  capiUary,  or  as  rough  or  smooth,
angular  or  hooked ;  or  by  the  laws  of  elasticity,  of  the  contrac-
tive and  expansive  power  of  inorganic  substances,  or  of  the  dif-
fusion of  light  and  production  of  heat,  or  of  magnetic,  electric,
or  galvanic  phenomena,  or  by  the  mode  of  operation  of  sub-
Btanoes  containing  oxygen,  hydrogen,  carbon,  or  azote,  or  of
the  acids,  earths,  or  metals,  or  of  gelatin,  albumen,  starch,  glu-
ten, or  sugar.

But  though  all  the  component  parts  of  the  human  frame  are
to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  nature,  they  act  together  in  their
organic  union,  to  the  full  development  of  life,  and  the  discharge
of  the  other  functions  of  man,  in  so  peculiar  and  anomalous  a
manner  (which  can  only  be  defined  by  the  term  vitaliti/)^  that
this  peculiar  (vital)  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another  and  the
external  world,  cannot  be  judged  of  or  explained  by  any  other
rule  than  that  which  itself  supplies ;  therefore,  by  none  of  the
known  laws  of  mechanics,  statics,  or  chemistry.  All  those
theories,  to  which  age  after  age  has  given  birth,  when  brought
in  contact  with  simple  experience,  and  tried  by  an  impartial
test,  have  ever  been  found  to  be  far-fetched  and  unfounded.

Yet,  in  spite  (^  the  uniform  disappointment  of  these  innume-
rable attempts,  tnc  physiologists  and  pathologists  would  still  re-
turn to  the  old  leaven ;  not  because  they  saw  any  likelihood  of
these  hypotheses  leading  to  useful  discoveries  in  the  art  of
healing,  but  because  t/iey  placed  the  essence  of  the  medical  artj  and
their  oum  chief  pride,  in  explaining  much  even  of  the  inexplicable.
They  imagined  it  impossible  to  treat  scientifically  the  abnormal
states  of  the  human  body  (diseases),  without  possessing  a  tangi-
6fe  idea  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  normal  and  abnormal
conditions  of  the  human  frame.

This  was  the  first  and  great  delusion  they  practij^ed  on  them-
selves and  on  the  world. This  was  the  unhappy  conceit  which,


•firom  Galen's  days  down  to  our  own,  made  tke  medical  ait  -a
stage  for  the  display  of  the  most  &ntastio^  oftein  most  aelf-ceft-
tradictory,  hypotheses,  explanations,  demonstratioBS,  oonjeetaxies,
dogmas,  and  systems,  whose  evil  oonaequences  afe  not  to  he
overlooked.  Even  the  student  was  taught  to  think  he  was  mas-
ter of  the  art  of  discovering  and  removing  disease,  wh^  lie
had  stuffed  his  head  with  these  baseless  hypotheses,  which
seemed  made  for  the  express  purpose  of  distracting  his  .braias,
and  leading  him  as  far  as  possible  away  firom  a  true  oonoe|itiim
of  disease  and  its  cure.

From  time  to  time,  it  is  true,  an  accumulation  of  &cts,  often
of  a  nature  to  arrest  the  least  attentive  observer,  foroed  on  men
the  conviction  that  the  doctrine  of  the  structure  and  functioBflof
the  human  body  in  the  healthy  state  (physiology),  and  of  the
inward  changes  consequent  on  die  generation  of  disease  (patho-
logy) which  deduces  them  fix>m  atomical  and  ch^nioal  princi-
ples, is  an  erroneous  one ;  but  in  avoiding  this  error, — still  mis-
led by  the  vain  fancy  that  the  business  of  the  medicmai  prqfiBssimi
ivas  to  exphxdn  every  thtng^ — ^they  fell  into  the  opposite,  but  not
less  dangerous  evil  of  superstition.

At  one  time,  men  created  for  themselves  an  imaginary  incor-
poreal something,  which  guided  and  ruled  the  whole  system  in
its  vicissitudes  of  health  and  disease  (Van  Helmont's  ArchoBus^
Stahl's  Animal  Soul);  at  another,  they  flattered  themselves  they
had  discovered  the  secret  of  physical  constitutions  and  t^npeim-
ments,  as  well  as  the  origin  of  particular  diseases  and  epidemics,
in  the  constellations  of  the  stars,  in  an  influence  emanating  from
the  heavenly  bodies,  many  millions  of  miles  distant ; — or  {ac
cording  to  the  modem  wide-spread  notion,  based  on  ancient  ab.
surdities),  the  human  body,  in  agreement  with  the  old  mystic
number  three,  developed  itself  in  triplicity,  mjesented  a  minia-
ture of  the  universe  (microcosm,  macrocosm),  and  thus,  by
means  of  our  knowledge  of  the  great  whole,  miserably  defecttve
as  it  is,  was  to  be  explained  to  a  hair's-breadth.  That  which
had  baffled  clear  chemistry  ^id  physics,  dim,  self-unintelligible
mysticism  and  frenzied  fancy  were  to  bring  to  light:  old  aetio-
logy was  to  explain  what  puzzled  modem  natural  philosophy.

Thus  did  the  leaders  of  the  medical  sects  and  their  foUowera,
ivhenever  they  sought  to  analyse  health  and  disease  and  its  cure,
deviate  more  or  less  widely  from  the  truth ;  and  the  only  use  of
piles  of  folios,  quartos,  and  octavos,  which  cost  a  lamentable  ex-
penditure of  time  and  energy,  is  to  frighten  us  from  indulging


BPECvhunvx  iSTaanBXB  of  ioedicine.  401

in  A  like  expknation^maBia,  and  teach  us  that  all  such  immense
«xeitioii8  are  nothing  but  pernicious  folly.

But  if  these  phjaological  refinements  and  pathological  would-
be  ezplanationfl^  as  regards  their  proper  object,  the  cure  of  dis-
ease,  are  rather  prejudicial  than  helpful,  as  no  unprejudiced  per-
0OD  will  deny,  of  what  possible  use  are  they?

**  Surely  the  physician,"  I  £Euicy  I  hear  one  exclaim,  '*  requires
A  theory  at  onoe  for  a  clue,  a  'Uiread  on  which  to  string  his  ideas
and  systematic  practice,  and  a  line  to  direct  him  at  the  sick-bed.
Every  artist^  who  is  not  a  mere  mechanic,  must  desire  to  have
aome  Gonnexioin  of  ideas  in  his  mind  as  he  works,  concerning
ihe  oharaeter  of  the  object  on  which  he  is  to  labour,  and  the  na-
ture of  the  condition  into  which  he  is  to  mould  it."

Tme^  I  r^y ;  but  this  clue  must  neither  be  a  flimsy  cobweb
nor  a  fidse  g^de :  for  then  it  were  worse  than  none.

The  materials  of  the  mechanical  workman,  indeed,  have
I^ysicid  and  chemical  properties,  and  can  only  be  fitly  and  fully
employed  by  one  who  is  well  acquainted  witJi  these  properties.

But  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  treatment  of  objects  whose
essential  nature  consists  in  vital  operations — the  treatment,
namely,  of  the  living  human  frame,  to  bring  it  fix)m  an  unhealthy
to  a  healthy  condition  (which  is  therapeutics),  and  the  discipline
of  the  human  mind  to  develope  and  exalt  it  (which  is  ediuxUion).
In  both  cases,  the  matter  on  which  we  work  is  not  to  be  regarded
and  treated  according  to  physical  and  chemical  laws  like  the  me-
tals of  the  metallurgist^  the  wood  of  the  turner,  or  the  cloth  and
eolours  of  the  dyer.

It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  either  physician  or  teacher,
when  caring  for  mind  or  body,  should  require  such  foreknowledge
of  his  subject-matter  as  shidl  lead  him  by  the  hand,  as  it  were,
to  the  completion  of  his  work,  as,  perhaps,  a  knowledge  of  the
jdiysical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  materials  helps  and  con-
ducts the  metallurgist,  the  tanner,  and  other  such  craftsmen,  to
Ae  perfection  of  theirs.  The  vocation  of  both  those  others
demuids  quite  another  kind  of  knowledge,  just  as  their  object,
a  living  individual,  is  quite  diiFerent.

Nor  are  they  at  all  more  assisted  by  metaphysical,  mystical,
-ind  supernatural  peculations,  which  idle  and  self^suificiont  vi-
jionaries  have  devised  respecting  the  inner  absolute  essential
•nature  of  the  animal  organism ;  respecting  life,  irritability,
sensibility  and  reproduction,  and  the  essential  nature  of  the
mind.


492  ON  THE  YALITE  OF  THB

Which,  indeed,  of  the  ontologioal  systems  regarding  the  (nn-
discoverable)  nature  of  the  human  soul  promises  to  afford  any
aid  to  the  teacher  in  the  execution  of  his  noble  office?  He
might  well  lose  himself  in  the  interminable  labyrinth  of  ab-
stract speculations  on  the  ego  and  the  non-egoj  on  the  essences  of
the  soul,  &c.,  which  extravagant  self-conceit  has  in  all  ages
wrung  from  the  racked  brains  of  hosts  of  sophists;  but  no
advantage  that  will  reward  his  pains  will  he  draw  from  these
transcendental  subtleties.  It  has  not  been  given  to  mortal  man
to  reason  a  priori  on  the  nature  of  his  own  soul.

The  wise  teacher  is  aware  of  this ;  he  spares  hinself  this  fruit-
less trouble,  and,  in  aiming  at  as  wide  an  acquaintance  as  possible
with  his  subject-matter,  confines  himself  to  the  a  posteriori^  to
that  which  the  mind's  own  acts  have  revealed  concerning  itself,  to  em-
pirical psychology.  More  on  this  subject  in  this  stage  of  being
he  cannot,  more  he  need  not,  know.

Just  so  is  it  with  the  physician.  That  which  binds  in  so
wonderful  an  oi^anization  the  (may  be  originally  chemical)  con-
stituents  of  the  human  frame  in  life — ^which  causes  them,  in
spite  of  these  their  original  nature,  to  act  in  quite  an  unmechani-
cal  and  unchemical  manner— which  excites  and  impels  them,
when  thus  combined,  to  such  automatic  performances  (which  do
not  obey  any  of  the  known  laws  of  mechanics,  and  differ  from
every  chemical  process,  and  all  physical  phenomena) ;  this  funda-
mental force  does  not  reveal  itself  as  a  distinct  entity ;  it  can
only  be  dimly  surmised  from  afar,  and  is  for  ever  concealed
from  all  inquiry  and  observation.  No  man  is  acquainted  with
the  substratum  of  vitality,  or  the  a  priori  hidden  arrangement
of  the  living  organization — no  mortal  can  ever  dive  into  it,  nor
can  human  speech,  either  in  prose  or  verse,  even  fiuntly  shadow
it  forth :  the  attempt  ends  in  fiction  and  sheer  nonsense.

Throughout  the  course  of  the  two  thousand  years  and  upwards
in  which  men  have  prided  themselves  on  the  cultivation  of
philosophy  and  medical  science,  no  single  step,  not  the  smallest^
has  been  made  towards  an  a  priori  knowledge  of  the  vitality  of
the  bodily  frame  or  of  the  intellectual  energy  (the  soul)  which
actuates  it.  All  that  inflated  bombast,  passing  for  demonstration,
abounding  in  words,  but  void  of  sense — ^all  the  antics  and  cur-
vets of  the  sophists,  about  indiscoverable  things,  are  ever  vain,
and  to  the  modest  spirit  of  the  true  philosopher  perfectly  in-
sufferable.

We  cannot  even  conceive  a  path  that  should  lead  us  to  such
knowledge.


SPECULAXiyS  8Y8TBMS  OF  KEBICINE.  49S

No  not  a  glimpse  shall  irail  mortality  ever  obtain  of  that  which
lies  deep  hidden  in  the  sacred  recesses  of  the  Divine  Creating
Mind,  fiir,  immeasurably  &r,  beyond  the  grasp  of  human  com-
prehension 1

All,  therefore,  that  the  physician  can  know  regarding  his
subject-matter,  vital  organization,  and  all  that  concerns  him  to
know,  is  summed  up  in  that  which  the  wisest  among  us,  such  as
Haller,  Blumenbach,  Wrisberg,  comprehended  and  taught  under
the  term  physiology,  and  which  we  might  designate  the  empiri'
eal  knowledge  of  vitality^  viz. ;  what  the  appreciable  plienomena
are  which  occur  in  the  heaJthy  human  body^  and  what  their  connex-
ion ie  ;  the  inscrutable  how  tliey  occur,  remaining  entirely  excluded.
I  pass  on  to  pathology,  a  science  in  which  that  same  love  of
system  which  has  crazed  the  brains  of  the  metaphysical  physio-
logists, has  caused  a  like  misapplication  of  intellect  in  the  at-
tempt to  search  into  the  essential  nature  of  diseases,  that  where-
by affections  of  the  system  become  manifest  diseases.  This  they
t^m  the  doctrine  of  proximate^  internal  causes.

No  mortal  can  form  a  clear  conception  of  what  is  here  aimed
at,  to  say  nothing  of  the  impossibility  of  any  created  intelli-
gence, even  in  imagination,  finding  a  road  to  an  intimate  view
of  what  constitutes  the  essence  of  disease ;  and  yet  hosts  of  so-
phists with  important  looks,  have  affected  to  play  the  seer^s  part
in  the  matter.

After  humoral  pathology  (that  conceit,  which  took  especially
with  the  vulgar,  of  considering  the  diseased  body  as  a  vessel  full
of  impurities  of  all  sorts,  and  <jf  acidities  with  Greek  epithets,
which  were  supposed  to  cause  the  obstruction  and  vitiation  of
the  fluids  and  solids,  putrefaction,  fever,  everything,  in  short,
whereof  the  patient  complained,  and  which  they  fancied  they
oould  overcome  by  sweetening,  diluting,  purifying,  loosening,
thickening,  cooling,  and  evacuating  measures)  had,  now  under
a  gross,  now  under  a  more  refined  form,  lasted  through  many
ages,  with  occasional  interludes  of  many  lesser  and  greater
systems — (to  wit,  the  iatro-mechanical  system,  the  system  which
derives  disease  from  the  original  form  of  the  parts,  that  which
solids  and  nerves,  the  iatro-chemical  system,  &c.)  the  seer  Brown
appeared,  who,  as  though  he  had  explored  the  pent  secrets  of
Nature,  stepped  forward  with  amazing  assurance,  assumed  one
primary  principle  of  life  (excitability),  and  would  liave  it  to  be
quantitively  increased  and  diminished  in  diseases,  accumulated


4fi4j  ON  THB  YALUS  OF  THK

asid  exhausted,  made  no  aoconnt  of  any  othfir  aoone  of  diseaMi
and  persisted  in  coDsidering  all  disease  from  the  point  of  view
of  want  or  excess  of  energy.  He  gained  the  adherenoe  of  tiui
whole  German  medical  world,  a  sure  proof  that  their  previous
medical  notions  had  never  convinced  and  satisfied  their  mindS|
and  had  only  floated  before  them  in  dim  and  flickering  forma.
They  caught  eagerly  at  this  onesidedness,  which  they  penuaded
themselves  into  believing  was  genuine  simplicity.  All  ike  othoF
fundamental,  vital  forces  which  were  supposable  enough  (though,
at  the  same  time,  little  serviceable  to  a  true  view  and  cure),  they
gladly  cast  aside,  out  of  love  to  his  subtle  doctrine,  and  foufld
it  highly  convenient  to  be  pretty  nearly  exempted  fipom  all  fiir^
ther  thought  on  disease  or  its  cure.  All  they  had  now  to  do^
was  arbitrarily  to  determine,  with  a  little  help  from  the  imagi*
nation,  the  degree  of  excitability  in  diseases  according  to  th»
scale  of  their  master,  in  order,  by  sedative  or  exciting  measoretf
— ^for  all  remedies,  according  to  his  new  classificatievi,  were  at
once  divided  thus — to  screw  up  or  let  down  the  degree  of  exci-
tability assumed  in  each  case.  And  what  was  after  all,  this  his
onesided  excitability  ?  Coidd  he  attach  any  d^nite  and  intelli*
gible  idea  to  it?  Did  he  not  overwhelm  us  with  a  flood  of
words  destitute  of  any  clear  meaning  ?  Did  he  not  draw  us  infa^
a  treatment  of  disease,  which,  while  it  answers  in  but  few  in-
stances, and  then  imperfectly,  could  not  but  in  the  preponderar
ting  remainder  give  rise  to  an  aggravation  or  speedy  death  ?

The  transcendental  school  repudiated  the  idea  of  having  but
one  fundamental,  vital  force.  The  reign  of  dualism  commenced.
Now  we  were  fooled  by  the  natural  philosophers.  For  of  sock
seers  there  was  no  lack ;  each  fell  on  a  new  aspect  of  things-—
each  wove  a  different  system,  having  nothing  in  common  but
the  morbid  propensity,  by  inward  self-contemplation  not  only
to  give  an  exact  a  priori  account  of  the  nature  and  universal
constitution  of  things,  but,  moreover,  to  look  on  themselves  as
the  authors  of  the  whole,  and,  according  to  their  own  &shion,  to
construct  it  for  and  out  of  themselves.  Every  hint  they  deemed
themselves  to  have  gathered  on  life  in  the  abstract,  aad  the  eth
sential  nature  of  man  was — like  their  whole  conception — so  un-
intelligible,  so  hollow  i^d  unmeaning,  that  no  clear  sense  could
be  drawn  from  it  Human  speech,  which  is  only  fitted  to  eon*
vey  the  impressions  of  sense,  and  the  ideas  immediately  flowing
from  them — generalizations,  each  one  of  which  is  easily  insulat-
ed into  concrete  examples,  and  thus  brought  home  and  typified


SPXCULATIVE  SYSTEMS  OF  XBDICINX.  i/M

to  the  flenae-HrefiiBed  to  embodjr  their  ocmoeits,  tkeir  extrayagaat'
fmiastio  yiaioiis ;  and,  therefore,  they  had  to  babble  them  forth
in  new-fiingled,  highsounding  words,  superlnnarj  collocationBy
eooentric  rhapsodies,  and  unheard-of  phrases  without  any  sense,
and  got  involved  in  such  gossamer  subtleties,  that  one  felt  at  a
loss  to  know  which  was  the  most  appropriate — a  satire  on  such
a  xmsdirection  of  mental  energy,  or  an  elegy  on  its  ill  success.
We  have  to  thank  the  natural  philosophers  for  the  disorder  and
dislocation  of  many  a  young  doctor's  understanding.  Moreover,
their  self-conceit  was  yet  too  much  inflated  for  them  to  bring
finrward  many  views  on  diseases  or  their  cure,  except  what  they
now  and  then  put  forth  on  their  dualism,  their  polarization,  and
rqiresentation,  their  reflex,  their  differentizing,  and  indifferent!*
zmg,  their  potentizing  and  depotentizing.  This  natural  philo-
sophy stiU  lives  and  flourishes  in  a  forced  animation  of  matter,
and  in  ecstatie  hallucinations  concerning  the  modelling  and  or-
dmng  of  the  world  and  its  epitome — man.  Incorporeal  and
ethereal,  it  still  soars  aloft  beyond  our  solar  system,  beyond  the
bounds  of  the  actual ;  and  does  not  seem  likely  yet  awhile  to
dasoend  from  its  super-sublime  elevation  to  the  lowly  sphere  of
practice  (the  cure  of  man^s  diseases),  nor  indeed — so  far  has  it
uferBtrained  its  power— to  be  able  to  do  so.

Bat  lately  there  has  shot  out  a  branch  from  this  tree,  that
seemed  to  have  more  reference  to  the  medical  art.  This  new
doctrine,  to  give  us  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  disease,  be-
thought itself  of  serving  up  afresh  the  old  functionesy  animaUs^
naturaleSy  vitales^  though  under  new  names.  But  what  imaginable
expedient  have  they  for  ascertaining  Uie  exact  degree  in  which  the
sensilHlity,  irritability,  or  reproduction,  they  themselves  (arbi-
trwrily)  d^t  out  to  each  of  the  organs,  are,  in  individual  cases,
increased,  diminished,  or  changed  in  quality — ^to  wldch  of  these,
preferably  to  the  rest — and  (for  there  is  scarcely  an  organ  in  the
human  frame  to  which  any  one  of  these  three  properties  can  be
denied)  what  is  the  part  played  by  each  organ  with  reference  to
these  Aree  great  divisions  in  any  given  case  of  disease,  and  what
intimate  and  absolute  condition  of  the  whole  system  thence
arises,  whence  it  may  be  clearly  seen  what  is  the  appropriate,
and  in  every  respect  suitable,  remedy  ?  What  an  unsolvable
problem  I  And  yet  its  solution  is  indispensable  to  the  practitioner,
if  he  is  to  make  any  use  of  the  system.* And — lest  we  should,

*  11^  indeed,  this  laying  down  of  three  prime  organic  functions,  means  nothing
than  aa  approzimattve  view,  on  wtich  nothing  is  intended  to  be  boilt^  and  least


496  ON  THB  YALUS  OF  TH£

after  all,  be  only  quibbling  about  words — ^what  do  these  three
words,  sensibility,  irritability,  and  reproduction,  precisely  stand
for,  in  concrete  ideas?

How  impossible  is  it  by  all  these  barren  aprioria  to  obtain
such  a  just  view  of  the  different  mala(}ies  as  shall  point  out  the
remedy  suited  to  each— the  sole  genuine  aim  of  the  healing  art  I
How  can  one  justify  to  a  sound  judgment  the  seeking  to  make
these  speculative  subtleties,  which  can  never  be  made  concnrete
and  applicable,  the  chief  study  of  the  practical  physician?

It  is  one  of  the  regulations  that  most  clearly  mark  the  wisdom
of  the  all-consistent,  all-merciful  Creator,  that  what  would  be
useless  to  man  has  been  rendered  impossible  to  him.

The  teacher  is  well  aware,  that  as  he  is  shut  out  from  an  on-
tological  acquaintance  with  the  absolute  nature  of  the  soul  (since
it  would  profit  him  nothing),  besides  empirical  psychology,  he
needs  to  know  nothing  but  the  practical  aberrations  of  the
human  mind  and  heart,  and  the  methods  whereby  to  lead  each
misguided  wanderer  back  to  the  paths  of  virtue — to  carry  his
noble  work  to  its  highest  perfection.

Socrates,  the  instructor  of  men,  with  his  practical  knowledge
of  mankind,  his  delicate  moral  sense,  and  fine  perception  of  what
makes  the  true  happiness  of  man,  needed  but  a  historical  know-
ledge of  the  faults  of  those  with  whom  he  had  to  do,  in  order,
by  the  application  of  the  fittest  arguments,  and  his  own  better
example,  to  allure  thera  back  to  virtue.  He  was  informed  of
Aristodemus  that  he  slighted  the  Deity ;  he  gathered  fix>m  some
of  his  expressions  the  symptoms  of  this  perversion  of  mind,  and
the  particular  prejudices  that  held  him  back  from  religious  feel
ing ;  and  this  sufficed  him  to  teach  him  better,  and  to  elicit  from
his  own  confessions,  the  arguments  that  were  to  shut  him  up  to
reverence  for  the  Deity.  Assuredly  he  needed  not  to  institute
any  researches  on  the  essence  of  the  human  mind,  or  the  nxeta-
physical  nature  of  this  or  that  delinquency  of  heart  to  attain  the
godlike  aim.

And^  in  like  manner,  besides  a  historical  acquaintance  imth  the
constitution  of  the  human  frarrve  in  a  healthy  state,  the  physician
Tieeds  biU  in  the  same  way  to  know  the  symptoms  of  the  particular
malady  (further,  indeed,  he  cannot  explore,  as  it  would  serve  him
nothing),  in  order  to  remove  it,  supposing  he  tJien  knows  the  righi
remedy.

cl  all,  medical  practice^  b  this  case,  I  can  find  no  fiiult  with  this  antiquated  Bcbemc;
^bidi  simply,  m  a  vttfw,is  rational  and  hannlesB  enough,  though  of  no  practical  utility


SPfiCULATiyK  SYSTEMS  OF  KEDIGIKX.  497

Or^afier  all,  is  this  all  a  mistake,  and  does  the  design  and  dig-
nity of  the  medical  art  lie  rather  in  vapoury  theorizing,  than  in
ddll  in  oaring  diseases?  Then,  indeed,  those  word-mongers,
who  neither  do  nor  cure,  must  bear  away  the  palm  I

Yet|  if  these  metaphysical  speculations  and  systems  concerning
the  essential  nature  of  disease  (supposing  they  possessed  some,
though  it  were  the  veriest  shadow  of  probability)  were  of  some,
the  least  possible  value  to  the  physician,  (and  some  value,  me-
thinksi  that|  after  all,  must  surely  possess,  which  has  been  the
cause  of  ap  much  ado),  then  we  cannot  but  conclude  that  this
race  of  system-framers  and  system-followers  must,  at  any  rate,
form  the  better  and  more  successful  practitioners,  since  they  are
possessed  of  that  which — to  believe  them — is  the  true  and  only
solid  basis  of  the  art  of  medicine  I

But  alas  I  it  is  these  very  men  who  refute,  at  the  sick-bed,
their  own  bragging  boast  of  being  the  confidants  of  Nature ;  it
is  these  very  men  who  are  the  most  helpless,  when  they  are  not
the  most  disastrous,  practitioners.

Not  a  single  founder  or  follower  of  any  of  the  many  medical
systems  could  or  (if  he  could,  as  now  and  then,  perhaps,  he
might)  would  dare  to  carry  out  his  system  faithfully  and  vigor-
ously into .  practice,  without  doing  the  greatest  injury  to  his
patients ;  so  that  they  would  have  been  far  better  off  wanting
medical  aid  altogether.*  They  were  obliged,  if  they  did  not
wish  to  see  all  die  before  them,  either  to  betake  themselves  to
the  do-nothing  (expectant  system ;  or,  contrary  to  the  professed
tenets  of  their  school,  to  return  secretly  to  the  least  harmless
expedients  of  earlier  times,  the  revulsive,  purgative,  and  pallia-
tive measures  of  humoralism  and  suburralism.

But  we  need  not  very  particularly  examine  their  method  to
perceive,  that,  at  any  rate,  it  did  not  take  its  rise  in  true  philo-
sophy, nor  lift  its  aspirations  to  tlie  lofty  heights  of  reason  and
consistency.

One  might  have  expected,  that,  in  the  cure  of  disorders  which,
in  their  own  opinion,  they  had  right  learnedly  defined  vL  priori^
and  reduced  to  most  simple  principles,  they  would  only  have  each
time  employed  a  single  simple  medicine  (and  watched  its  effect,)  a
substance  whose  action  was  quite  known  to  them  in  exteiiso^  the
best  known,  most  appropriate,  only  applicable — according  to  the

'  I  mAy  refer,  in  place  of  anj  other  of  the  thousaiKl  well-known  instanoea*  to  that
initarKiiis  instance  of  the  Brunonian  treatment,  in  the  case  of  one  of  the  sons  of  tlie
noowntd  Peter  Fnuik,  of  Vienna.
32


498  OK  THE  VALUE  OF  THE

general  ruTe  binding  on  all :  what  may  be  effected  by  a  simple
remedy  one  sbould  not  seek  to  attain  by  means  of  oompomid
ones:  quod  potest  fieri  per  paiuxij  Ac.

But  nothing  was  &rther  from  tbeir  thon^ts.  In  the  main
thing,  the  application  of  the  beautiful  simple  theory — in  practice
•— ^they  kept  faithfully  to  the  old  beaten  track  (though  with  the
constant  addition  of  the  newest,  most  fashionable  remedies),  a
plain  proof  that  their  system  was  framed  for  show — for  a  make-
believe,  and  not  for  use.

In  direct  opposition  to  plain  ccHnmon  sense,  they  attack  disease
by  complex  mixtures  of  medicines,  none  of  which  they  are  more
than  superficially  acquainted  with,  and  of  these  medicinal  pots
pourris  they  often  give  several  together,  and  many  in  one  day :
"hand  leve  obstaculum  penitiori  virium  in  medicamentis  cogni-
tioni  objicit,  quod  rarissime  simplicia,  sed  utplurimum  composita^
nee  haec  soUtj  sed  aliorum  usu  interpolata  usurpentwrr^

Such  a  mode  of  proceeding,  of  itself,  knocks  all  the  pretensions
to  philosophical  simplicity  and  consistency  of  these  Orpriorists  [a
priori  men]  on  the  head.  No  single  physician  on  the  &ce  of  the
globe,  neither  the  framer  of  the  system  nor  his  followers,  uses  a
simple  unmixed  medicamant,  and  then  waits  till  its  action  is
exhausted  before  giving  another !

Even  supposing  the  virtues  of  each  single  medicine  were
exactly  known,  this  employment  of  the  many-mixed,  this  pell-
mell  adminstration  of  several  substances  at  once,  each  of  which
must  have  a  different  action,  would  in  itself  be  highly  absurd,
and  produce  a  blind  and  confused  practice.  For  how  complicated
must  the  interaction  be  of  so  many  ingredients ;  how  impossible
to  trace  back  the  combined  effect  on  the  patient  to  them  each
individually,  in  order,  in  the  subsequent  treatment,  to  omit  or
diminish  the  one  and  increase  the  other  I  But  this  will  not  do
with  these  hotch-potch  doses ;  they  produce,  thus  united,  such
a  resultant,  that  no  one  can  tell  what  is  owing  to  this  or  the  other
ingredient  in  the  combined  effect.  No  one  can  tell  which
ingredient  vitiated  the  action  in  such  and  such  a  manner,  or
which  altogether  antagonized  the  other,  and  neutralized  its
effect.

But  the  case  is  worse  still,  and  the  proceeding  more  reprehen-
sible, when  we  consider  that  the  action  of  each,  or,  at  any  rate,
of  the  most  of  these  substances  thus  huddled  together,  is  indi-
vidually great  and  yet  unascertained.

>  Ft.  Hoflhiaim,  Med.  Rat,,  toL  iii,  ■.  ii,  c.  87,  §  10.


SPSGULAnYE  SYSTEMS  OF  MBDICINS.  499

Now,  to  mix  in  a  prescription  a  number  of  such  strong  disor-
dering substances,  whose  separate  action  is  often  unknown,  and
only  guessed  and  arbitrarily  assumed,  and  then  forthwith,  at  a
venture,  to  administ^this  mixture,  and  many  more  besides,  thick
upon  one  another,  wijbhout  letting  a  single  one  do  its  work  out
upon  the  patient,  whose  complaint  and  abnormal  state  of  body
has  only  been  viewed  through  illusive  theories,  and  through  the
spedtBcies  of  manu&ctured  systems — if  this  is  medical  art^  if
this  is  not  hurtful  irrationality,  I  do  not  know  what  we  are  to
nndeistand  by  an  art^  nor  what  is  hurtful  or  irrational.

It  is  usual  at  this  point,  for  want  of  anything  else  to  say,  to
excuse  one's  self  by  saying, ''  the  several  ingredients  in  a  pre*
scriptioa  are  to  be  chosen  with  reference  to  the  various  aspects
of  tiie  (hypothetically  assumed)  inward  condition  of  the  body,
oi^  indeed,  of  the  symptoms."

Just  as  if  one  single  simple  substance,  if  it  were  but  rightly
kiown,  might  not  conform  to  several,  many,  all  of  the  (un-ideal)
aapeets  of  the  complaint, — as  if  all  the  nimieroiis  symptoms
could  be  covered  by  a  medley,  whose  ingredients,  so  unknown
in  their  action,  in  combination  counteract  and,  in  an  unforeseen
manner,  vitiate  and  neutralize  each  other  I

This  motley  mixing  system  is  nothing  but  a  convenient  shift
for  one  who,  having  but  a  slender  acquaintance  with  the  proper-
ties of  a  single  substance,  flatters  himself,  though  he  cannot  find
any  one  simple  suitable  remedy  to  remove  the  complaint,  that
by  heaping  «  great  many  together  there  may  be  one  amongst
them  that  by  a  happy  chance  shall  hit  the  mark.

Whether  this  mode  of  treatment  be  successful,  or  the  reverse
in  neither  case  is  any  thing  to  be  learnt  from  it,  nor  can  it  cause
the  medical  art  to  make  a  hair's-breadth  of  progress.

Has  there  been  a  change  for  the  better — to  which  of  the  ingre-
dients of  the  medley,  or  the  many  successive  medleys,  treading
on  each  other's  heels,  is  it  owing?  This  must  ever  remain  a
problem.

"  All  you  have  to  do,  in  a  similar  case,  is  to  repeat  the  same
mixture,  or  succession  of  mixtures,  in  the  same  order."

Fond  fool !  The  case  exactly  coinciding  with  that  will  never
occur — can  never  occur  again,  ,

Moreover,  it  is  always  difficult  to  prepare  mixtures  a  second
time  precisely  the  same  as  the  first,  and  how  much  more  so  when
a  long  interval  intervenes.  The  same  recipe  often  brings  out  a
very  dissimilar  compound,  when  it  is  given  to  several  apotheca<»


600  09  THX  YALVm  OT  THS

caries  at  the  same  time  to  make  up.  This  lesolts  firora  many
caxises.

It  is  not  likely,  either,  often  to  happen  that  the  patient  will
take  these  mixtures,  not  imfrequend j  disgusting  both  to  taste
quite  sure  that  he  has  even  tasted  this  or  that  nauseous  dose,  and
Uiat  he  has  not  substituted  for  it  a  less  disagreeable  donieatio
remedy,  to  which  his  improvement  is  due  ?

And  now,  on  the  contrary  supposition,  that  he  is  no  better  for
the  medley  dose,  or  even  somewhat  worse,  which  ingredient^
among  so  many,  is  to  be  blamed  for  this  result,  that  it  may  be
omitted  in  the  recipe  on  a  future  occasion  ?

^That  is  what  no  one  can  tell,  so  it  is  better  never  to  repeat
the  whole  mixture."

I  should  regret  much  thus  to  throw  away  the  gold  with  the
dross.  Have  I  not  happily  cured  the  disease  by  the  employment
of  a  singjie  ingredient,  which  I  picked  out  firom  the  prescriplioo
of  my  predecessor,  which  had  long  been  used  with  bad  effeola^
because  I  knew  that  it  must  be  the  only  efficacious  one  for  tlie
case  before  me  7

viting  often  to  the  eye,  the  smell,  and  the  taste— of  drugs,  not
one  of  which  is  righUf  known  in  itself  or  in  connexion  with
jthe  rest!

Am  I  told  '^  The  properties  of  the  medicines  are  not  unknown  ^7
;  I  ask '  Are  the  half-dozen  words  which  the  Materia  Medica
contains  regarding  each  to  be  called  information,  exact  informa*
tion'^  Often  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  list  of  names  of  diseases,
in  all  of  which  the  substance  in  question  is  said  to  have  been
ufieful  (fiequently  a  long  list,  so  that  the  falsehood  is  manifest.*)
Names  of  diseases,  did  I  say  ?  Heaven  knows  to  what  states  dt
,  body  these  names  were  given,  and  what  wisdom  presided  over
the  ussigning  of  them  I


*  Bow  booeitlj  our  FViedrich  Hoftnui  9feak»  no  Urn
"  QiKmagii  m  artis  cxercitio  alic  est,  TerM  ci  noo  ficto*  medioMBciitaraii,  pto

tain  direna  oorpirQin  et  morboniBi  nUioBC,  jwm  mtimius  Boase,  eo  au^li  otifst
,  doleaduiii,  immo  miraBduii  eai,  quod,  ■  dieer*  Iktt»  quod  rts  est,  perpmmcm  md
,.  remediat<{wwnm  virtutes  et  opentiGOcs  ccrto  ac  recie  panpcctac,  Md  pleimeqne
atque  ezpectatknem,  canatif  fimstrenter,  qma  9erm§  pkarmacorum  fmemiimim
Dtmocriii  fumm  ymifeo  mikue  ImiUent  /— paoca  certe  superaint,  quae  fidae  ti
nrtatiB.  plunmm  wen  mBdk,  mitpecU,  M^^  (JVAi  rol,  t  iii,  t.  ii,  cl  S,  1 1.)

*  JM^dbofwdangcraMaiesadifalMhoodil *>  In  oqUo  mcndaciD  majui  «l  {Mrim-
^Jtum^qoam  in  medko.** {FKn^i^at  iV'at  Uk  ff»c.  1.)


SPKCULATiyS  SYflTXMS  OF  MEDICINE.  501

And  whence  do  these  medical  authorities  draw  their  data?
Surely  not  firom  an  immediate  revelation  ?  In  truth,  one  would
jjmost  be  induced  to  believe  they  must  have  flowed  to  them
firom  a  direct  inspiration,  for  they  cannot  be  derived  firom  the
practiee  of  the  physicians,  who,  it  is  well  known,  hold  it  beneath
p^bing  more,  in  a  disease,  and  would  let  the  patient  die,  and
the  medical  art  ever  remain  as  a  no-art,  sooner  than  part  with
their  learned  prerogative  of  prescribing  artisticaUy  campauikded
receipts.

As,  therefore,  the  authorities  in  materia  mediea,  if  I  may  speak
out  a  little,  cannot  have  obtained  the  greater  part  of  their  data
as  to  the  supposed  virtues  of  the  pure,  simple  medicinal  sub-
stance fixMn  the  experience  >  of  learned  physicians,  since  scarcely


>  AlthoBgjh  it  18  eertain  tbat  the  Katena  Medica  can  aud  must  be  ike  daoghter  of
«iperieiiee,  yet  eren  it  kat  giren  way  to  arbitiwj  opbions,  ideal  and  dreamj  hypo-
tfiMt,  and  has  allowed  itself  to  be  moulded  to-day  into  one  (atm,  aud  on  the  morrow
falD  a  new  liann,  exactly  as  the  dominant  medical  system  for  the  time  being  com-
■T-**^  The  remedies  employed  by  the  ancients,  as  oUxipkaurmaetLt  eepkaOc^
Jipieniem^  •tfmntf,  had  afterwards  to  undertake  the  ofioe  of  antispasmodic  and  anti-
nenroiis  remedieflL  When  the  prerailiag  system  assumed  tension  and  laxity  of  the
fibres  as  te  finrndatioB  of  disease,  the  Tery  same  medicines  ^^eh  had  hitherto  per-
Ibimed  a  different  pari  were  foived  to  be  twisted  into  one  of  these  two  direetions.  Bat
did  iSbe  raigaing  syitem  require  blood  c-lpanmng  or  morbid-acridity-destroying  means,
than  the  quondam  tonica,  or  iedantia^  or  dtapharetioa^  tr  eeeoproUca^  or  diurfiiea^
veve  quiddy  transformed  into  mundifieantitL^  anttKorbutic^  anii»eropk%dtma,  anii-
pkoriea,  At,  Ilien,  when  Brown  needed  for  his  system  only  wUmulating  and  dehUi-
imiing  nmedisi,  those  very  remedies  which  formerly  had  been  marshalled  under  many
other  titles,  are  immediately  enlisted  in  the  two  new  regiments,  and  at  wiU  drafted
into  one  or  the  other ;  and  as  he  more  particularly  required  diffuniU  and  permanent
«timnU,  unfettered  fimcj  was  not  long  at  a  loss— medicines  were  speedily  raised  to
tme  or  IIm  other  rank,  just  as  if  one  had  but  to  utter  the  fiat,  and  the  substances
coold  not  dioose  but  obey  the  commands  of  the  exalted  man,  at  his  pleasure  to  enter
«Q  one  or  the  other  function.  Just  as  if  the  primary  action  of  cindbona  would  spread
more  slowly  through  the  system,  or  its  secondary  action  last  much  longer  than  that
of  the  equally  little  understood  opium !  As  matters  till  then  had  stood,  the  system
•laker  had  only  to  dictate  which  new  port  this  or  the  other  medicine  had  to  assume.
whether  it  was  to  be  an  invertent^  a  revertent,  or  a  torpen*  (Darwin);  and,  see,  it  most
aafier  itself  to  be  so  employed,  until  for  the  behoof  of  a  new  system,  it  is  christeoed
anew,  and  is  as  peremptorily  required  to  discharge  another  offioe.

"But  if  you  refer  the  action  of  the  medicines  to  their  chemical  bases,  as  the  rery
newest  system  does,"  I  hear  some  one  reply,  **  then,  assuredly,  you  wiU  act  conform-
ably to  nature."  In  this  way  some  medicioes  are  (as  arbitrarily  as  before)  reckoned
carbooaoeoas  and  others  hydro<;cneou9,  and  to  each  of  these  suinmarily-cKTided  classes
paenKar  (fictitious)  modes  of  action  de^spotically  asHigned.  But  cabbage,  roast-beet
and  wfaeatcn  cakes,  contain  also  plenty  of  nitrogen,  carbon  or  hydrogen — ^where  then
do  we  «fiflCover  in  them  those  properties  which  were  so  liberally  allotted  to  these
dementary  substances  f

Wkai  u  to  become  of  an  art  (to  which  the  charge  of  human  life  has  been  committed)
if/amey  amd  caprice  are  to  have  the  upper  hand  in  it/


602  Off  TEX  TALUE  ^F  TBX

an  Jibing  of  the  kind  is  to  be  obtained  from  them,  wbenee  da
they  get  it  ?

Most  of  the  imputed  virtues  of  the  simple  drugs  haye,  in  tlie
first  place,  obtained  a  footing  in  domestic  practice,  and  been
brought  into  vogue  bj  the  vulgar  and  non-professional,  who  often
cannot  judge  of  the  genuineness  of  the  medicine;  oiften  do  not
give  it  the  right  nan>e ;  least  of  all,  can  correctly  determine  ibe
state  of  the  body  in  which  it  is  said  to  have  been  useful.  I
say  ^^d,"  for  even  with  them,  if  needs  be,  now  this  now  ihal^
family  recipe  has  been  outwardly  or  inwardly  applied ;  so  that
at  last  it  is  impossible  to  say  whAt  has  really  been  beneficial,
granting  the  complaint  itself  has  bee^  perfectly  reoogniaed,
which,  however,  by  such  observers,  it  never  is.

Barren  infcHmation  of  this  sort  was  collected  by  the  old  herba-
lists, Matthioli,  Tabemoemontanus,  Qesner,  Fuchsy  Lonicer,  Ray,
Toumefort,  Bock,  Lobel,  Thumeisser,  Clusius,  Bauhin,  Ac,  vcly
briefly,  superficially,  and  confusedly,  and  interwoven  with  base-
less and  superstitious  conjectures,  intermingled  with  that  which
the  unciting  Dioscorides  had  in  a  similar  manner  collected ;  and
from  this  unsifted  catalogue  was  our  reamed-looking  Materia
Afedtca  supplied. One  authority  cc^ied  another,  down  to  our

own  times. Such  is  its  not  very  authentic  origin/

■■  ^—^"^ ~"^""^"^

'  How  uniiiquiriDglj  our  writers  on  materia  medica  have  adopted  the  itatemettt^
proceeding  firom  these  hnpure  souroes  is  evident^  amoog  other  things^  from  tlda»  tkat
tkey  enumerate  among  the  virtues  of  crude  medicines  such  as  w«re  originaUy-  de-
rived fipom  the  mere  suppositions  of  our  superstitious  forefathers^  who  had  chHdIsUj
enough  asserted  certain  medicinal  substances  to  be  the  remedies  of  certain
merely  on  account  oi  some  external  resemblance  of  those  medicines  with
appreciable  by  the  senses  in  tliose  diseases  (aiffnature),  or  whose  efficacy  rested  oiiiy
on  the  authority  of  old  women's  tale8y.or  was  deduced  from  certain  of  their  properties
that  had  no  essential  connexion  with  their  fiibulous  medicinal  powers.  Thos  the  nieta
of  the  orchis  and  of  the  talocp^  merely  because,  on  aoootuit  of  their  rescmUanoe  in
shape  to  a  pair  of  testicles,  the  ancients  perceived  in  this  an  augury  of  their  utiBty
in  aiding  tho  sexual  function,  are  still  said  to  be  analeptics  and  aphrodisiacs.  IVe
kypericum  is  still  esteemed  as  a  vulnerary,  because  the  ancients  stamped  it  with  this
character  on  account  of  the  trifling  circumstance  that  its  yellow  flowers,  when  nibbed
betwixt  the  fingers,  give  out  a  Uood-red  juioe^  which  procured  lor  it  the  name  of
Johv^B  (Uood.  Whence  do  the  ehelidonium^  the  berberis^bark  and  the  turmerie  derive
the  reputation  they  enjoy  in  our  Materia  Mcdica  as  remedies  for  the  jaundice,  Vol
irom  this,  f Jiat  formerly  it  was  imagined  that  the  yellow  milk  of  the  first  and  the
yellow  colour  contained  in  the  two  last  was  a  sure  sign  (signature)  that  they  nuai
be  useful  in  a  yellow  disease !  And  iriience  does  ehelidonivm  in  particular  get  ite
name  and  its  &bled  efficacy  in  dimness  of  vision,  if  not  finom  the  old  story  that  the
swallows  restore  the  sight  of  their  young  ones  by  means  of  this  plant !  The  tastelese
dragwi$-biood  is  still,  merely  on  account  of  its  name  and  blood  red  colour,  said  to  be
good  for  bleeding  gvana  and  hamorrfaages  I Ranunculus  Jkaria  and  scrophulurim


8PSCUULTIYS  SYSTEMS  OF  MEDICIKX.  508

The  few  books  that  form  an  exoeption  to  this  (Bergius  and
CuUen),  are  all  the  more  meagre  in  data  respecting  the  proper-
ties of  the  medicine ;  consequently,  as  they  for  the  most  part,
the  latter  especially,  reject  the  vague  and  doubtful,  we  can  g^
KUk  positive  knowledge  from  them.

One  enly  among  thousands,  Murray,  gives  the  cases  in  which
the  medicines  were  used.  But  on  this  point  the  authorities  gene-
rally clash  with  one  another,  one  affirming  one  thing  and
another  another,  and  so  the  decision  still  remains  frequently
quite  doubtfiiL  In  many  of  the  cases  he  lamented  -  oh  that  he
bad  done  so  in  most  of  the  cases  I — that  the  medicine  was  not
en^j^doyed  alone,  but  in  combination  with  several  others,  so  that
we  are  once  more  plunged  into  darkness.

The  authorities  cited  even  here  leave  the  reader  often  in  doubt
as  to  the  nature  and  exact  constitution  of  the  disease  in  which
they  employed  the  remedy.


■ra  «id  to  be  vaeful  for  piles,  merelj  because  the  roots  of  both  these  vege-
tables pfeaent  a  knotty  appearance  similar  to  the  hemorrhoidal  tumours.  Maddtr
obtained  its  reputation  as  an  emenagogue  on  account  of  it8  containing  a  dark  red  oo-
lour;  snd  because  animals,  when  fed  upon  it,  hare  the  red  colouring  matter  deposited
IB  their  booes,  therefore  it  is  celebrated  in  the  Materia  Medica  as  especially  useful
m  disgSBBi  of  the  bones  1  Saponaria  is  still  always  celebrated  in  our  books  as  a
fifaaUe  solvent  and  detei)gent  medicine,  because  the  decoction  of  its  root,  when
beaten  np,  forms  a  froth  like  a  solution  of  Roap,  although  otherwise  it  is  totally  dif-
ferent in  Its  natm«  from  soap,  and  it  loses  ite  frothing  property  not  like  the  latter  by
Uw  addition  of  acid,  but  on  the  contrary  but  adding  alkali  to  it.  And  does  soap  it-
self derive  its  reputation  for  dissolving  obstructions  and  indurations  in  the  body,  from
any  other  source  except  from  the  conceit,  that  as  in  houseliold  operations  and  chemical
msnipnlations  it  exercises  a  solvent  property,  it  must  do  the  same  in  the  living  or-
gnisni  idsot  Because  the  cabinet-makers  make  use  of  three  coloured  wood?  in  their
tods  under  the  eommon  name  of  Sanded  wood*,  they  must  therefore  enjoy  in  me-
dicine a  eommon  power  (in  the  so-called  blood  purifying  drinks),  although  the  yellow
(and  white)  kind  (MatUalum  album)  is  obtained  from  a  totally  different  tree  from  the
red  kind  (pterocarpu*  tanialiHWt)^  and  causes  very  violent  and  serious  effects,  of  which,
however  the  materia  medica  knows  nothing.  Because  the  bark  of  einchona  tastes
bitter  and  astringent,  therefore  the  bitter  and  astringent  barks  of  the  tuk,  horU'
<kianutf  wUloWf  «&c.,  were  considered  to  possess  the  same  action  as  cinchona  bark,-^
just  as  fliough  the  taste  could  determine  the  action  I  Because  some  plants  have  a
bitter  taste,  especially  gentiana  centaureum,  called  /el  terrae,  for  that  reason  only
pnetitioDers  were  convinced  tliat  they  could  act  as  substitutes  for  tlie  bile!  From  the
circnmstance  c^  the  root  of  tiie  carex  arenaria  possessing  an  external  resemblance  to
mnapariUa  root^  it  was  inferred  that  the  fii>rmer  mu^t  possess  the  same  properties  as
the  latter.  Therapeutists  have  attributed  to  the  stellated  afii**'  the  same  cx{)ectorant
qualities  as  ore  possessed  by  anise  seedls,  merely  because  the  Latter  have  a  resem-
Uance  in  ta^  and  smell  to  the  seed  capsules  of  the  former,  and  yet  some  parts  of
the  tree  {ilicemn  auiiotuim)  that  bears  these  capsules  Is  used  in  the  Philippine  islands
u  a  poison  for  suicidal  purposes. — This  is  what  I  cull  a  plulos(»phicai  and  experimental
origin  oi  the  materia  medica !


604  ON  THE  VALUE  OF  THE,  ftC.

How  little  the  greater  number  of  these  observers  are  to  be
relied  on,  is  evident,  were  it  only  firom  this,  that  they  common-
ly assert,  that  ^'  the  remedy  in  their  hands  had  never  been  detri-
mental, never  done  the  least  harm,  even  when  it  had  done  no
good  f  for  every  powerful  medicine  must  invariably  do  injury
where  it  fails  to  do  good ;  a  proposition  which  does  not  admit  of
a  smgk  exoeption. Behold  again,  then,  manifest  untriith  I

But  what  is  the  anxious  reader  to  learn  even  from  this  sole
critically  sifting  and  best  of  all  materia  mediciMs  f  Certainly  lit-
tle of  a  positive  character  I — ^little  of  a  positive  character  con-
cerning the  only  implements  of  healing ! Bighteous  heaven  I

(Consider  how  uncertain  must  be  the  use  of  drugs  so  extreme-
ly imperfectly  known,  against  diseases  which  are  as  diverse  as
the  clouds  in  the  sky,  whose  recognition,  even  by  the  best  of
methods,  is  tedious,  and  whose  number  is  legion  I

Nay  more.  Consider  how  extremely  precarious^  I  might  say^
blind,  that  practice  must  be,  where  states  of  disease  misviewed
through  the  coloured  medium  of  ideal  systems^  are  attacked  by
means  of  many  such  almost  unknown  medicines,  mingled  to-
gether in  such  a  prescription,  or  in  many  such  I On  this  I  let

the  curtain  drop.  —

«  «  «  «

Thus  we  find,  spite  of  the  well  nigh  uninterrupted  revolutions
of  the  physiological,  pathological,  and  therapeutic  theories,
during  two  thousand  years  and  more,  according  to  mechanica],
atomical,  chemical,  ideal,  pneumatical,  and  mystical  theories,
and  owing  to  this  infantile  state  of  knowledge  as  to  the  real
properties  of  simple  medicines,— we  still  find— even  in  this  cen-
tury which  in  every  other  respect  is  hastening  towards  perfee-
tion — we  still  Jind^  I  repeat,  Ijhat  only  a  very  small  proportion  of
human  ailments  can  in  such  a  manner  be  removed  as  shall  leave
the  physician  the  merit  of  having  been  the  undoubted  author
of  the  cure.  £ither  the  remaining  maladies  remained  as  un-
cured  as  before  the  days  of  Galen,  or,  thanks  to  medical  prac-
tice, in  the  room  of  the  original  ones  there  have  arisen  new  dis-
tempers of  a  diflferent  aspect :  or  the  energy  of  the  still  vigor-
ous life,  backed  usually  by  the  secret  disease  of  drugs,  itself  got
the  better,  in  the  course  of  time,  of  the  disease  that  oppressed
it ;  or  single  symptoms,  hitherto  stubborn,  yielded  to  some  lucky
accident,  wherein  no  one  could  trace  the  connexion  of  cause
and  effect ;  or  else  the  unfuling  termination  of  all  earthly  woea
stepped  in  to  settle  the  matter.


OK  BUBSTITirrXS  FOB  FOBEION  DRUGS.  506

Sach  is  the  fearful  but  too  true  condition  of  the  medical  art
Iiitherto,  which  under  the  treacherous  promise  of  recovery  and
health,  has  been  gnawing  at  the  life  of  so  many  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  earth.

Oh  1  that  it  were  mine  to  direct  the  better  portion  of  the  medi-
cal world,  who  can  feel  for  the  suflferings  of  our  brethren  of
mankind,  and  long  to  know  how  they  may  relieve  them,  to  those
purer  principles  which  lead  directly  to  the  desired  goal !

Infiuny  be  the  award  of  history  to  him  who  by  deceit  and
fiction,  maims  this  art  of  ours,  which  is  intended  to  succour  the
wretched!

All-compensating,  divine  self-approval,  and  an  unfading  civic
crown  to  him  who  helps  to  make  our  art  more  beneficial  to  man-
kind!


ON  SUBSTITUTES  FOR  FOREIGN  DRUGS,

AKD  ON  THE  BECKNT  ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  MEDICAL  FACUL
TT  IN  VIENNA  BELATIVE  TO  THE  SUPERFLUOUSNESS  OF  THE
LATTEB.^

When  the  imperial  government  of  Austria  exerts  itself  to
supply  the  want  of  foreign  drugs  that  is  to  be  feared  by  indige-
nous substitutes,  the  intention  is  certainly  patriotic ;  but  when
the  medical  Faculty  thereupon  utters  an  oracular  deliverance  as
to  which  of  the  foreign  drugs  are  quite  superfluous,  which  may
be  in  some  measure  dispensed  with,  and  which  are  quite  indis-
pensable, it  is  in  many  points  decidedly  wrong.

The  utility  or  superfluousness  of  a  medicine  is  not  a  thing  to
be  decreed  by  any  medical  faculty,  just  as  it  was  absurd  of  the
Parisian  parliament  to  take  upon  itself  to  forbid  the  use  of  an-
timony as  a  medicine  in  1566,  and  by  a  contrary  edict  to  allow
of  its  employment  in  1669.  Neither  parliament  nor  faculty  can
do  such  a  thing.  The  art  of  healing  the  sick  remains  a  free  art,
which  can  make  use  of  all  substances  in  the  whole  of  the  great
kingdom  of  nature,  without  any  exception,  for  the  relief  of  the
flick.

Let  us  only  teach  physicians  jmnctples  of  universal  applicabili-
fy,  according  to  which  the  powers  of  drugs  may  be  ascertained
and  tested  with  certainty,  as  to  what  each  is  incontrovertibly
Tiseful  and  suitable  for,  to  what  cases  of  disease  each  is  unex-

'  From  Uie  Allgemeintr  Anzciger  dtr  Ihuticfien,  J^o.  821. 1808.


606  OK  SUBSTirUTES  FOE  FORBIGN  DBnO&

ceptionably  adapted,  and  what  is  the  proper  dose;  and  then
each  physician  would  naturally  only  make  use  of  those,  which
are  most  certainly  the  most  suitable  for  each  case  of  disease  and
the  most  serviceable,  whether  they  come  fix)m  the  east  or  from
the  west,*  or  are  found  at  home, — and  then  he  would,  from  his
own  perfect  conviction,  and  from  irrefragable  reasons,  of  hik  own
accord  leave  many  foreign  drugs  totally  unemployed  in  his
practice,  or  only  use  them  in  a  few  well  defined  cases.

But  we  are  by  a  long  way  not  so  far  advanced  as  thi&  No
principles  are  yet  universally  recognized,  according  to  which
the  curative  powers  of  medicines  (even  of  such  as  have  never
yet  been  employed  at  the  sick-bed),  can  with  certainty  be  aacer*
tained,  a  priori,  without  first  subjecting  them  to  the  infinitely
tedious  process  of  testing  them  in  hap-hazard  fashion  at  the  sick'
bed,  which  is  almost  never  convincing,  and  is  usually  attended
with  injurious  efiects.  This  obscure  mode  ah  effectu  in  Tnorhis^
whereby  little  or  nothing  is  determined,  has,  moreover,  the  cniel
and  unpardonable  disadvantage,  that  the  individual,  naturally
so  irritable  in  disease,  is  readily  aggravated  by  so  many  blindly
instituted  experiments,  and  may  even  fall  a  victim  to  thenii
especially  since  the  recent  fashion  of  prescribing  large  doees  of
powerful  medicines  has  been  adopted.

But  as  long  as  the  former  better  way  is  not  established  in  the
state,  and  the  latter  mode  only  is  so,  which  has  been  from  the
beginning  acknowledged  to  be  unserviceable  and  insufficient —
so  long  will  contradictory  opinions  of  physicians  relative  to  the
curative  powers  of  the  different  medicines  continue ;  none  will
be  able  to  convince  the  other  of  the  fallacy  of  his  opinion,  none
will  be  able  to  bring  forward  irrefragable  proofs  of  the  correctneBS
of  his  own  views.  Almost  every  one  entertains  a  diflferent  ides
respecting  the  power  of  this  medicine  and  of  that,  and  no  one
can  shew  any  proofs  for  his  particular  opinion. ,

*  But  if  from  the  obstructioD  of  our  muritime  commerce  he  is  deprived  of  tliit
medicine  or  the  other,  he  is  naturally  deprived  of  what  he  can  no  longer  ofaiaii^  aad
to  he  does  what  he  can  in  diseases  with  those  medicines  that  are  still  at  his  ogbi-
mand,  which  he  mutt  alto  know  accurately  at  retpectt  their  internal  properiin  and
powert.  But  if  he  can  obtain  them,  then  no  Faculty  in  the  world  has  any  right  to
prohibit  him  using  them,  or  decree  their  r^ection.  But  if  a  F^iculty  eao  sAms  am
tatitfactory  groundt,  e.  g.,  that  pearls  are  exactly  the  same  substance  as  musde  and
oyster  shells,  in  that  case  no  sensible  physician  who  it  convinced  of  the  fact  will  em*
ploy  the  costly  pearls,  but  will  voluntarily  use  in  place  of  them,  oyster  and  mascle
shells.  The  identity  of  salts,  eartlis,  and  metals  may,  however,  be  asobrtained  by
well-known  chemical  principles,  but  the  curative  powers  of  vegetable  medicines  do
not  depend  upon  their  chemically  cognisable  constituents,  but  upon  priodplea  of
quite  a  different  sort^  which  have  not  yet  been  asoertained


OK  SUBOTITTTTES  FOR  FORSIOK  DBUOS.  607

So  also  the  present  declaration  of  the  fiicultj  is  nothing  more
than  the  private  opinion  of  certain  individuals  as  to  what  they
consider  to  be  the  probable  properties  of  the  medicines  in  ques-
tion, founded  upon  what  they  have  heard  or  read  somewhere
about  them,  or  upon  what  each  may  have  experienced  in  his
individual  practice,  wherefrom  they  pretend  to  guess  that  such
and  such  is  the  case.

In  order  that  a  judgment  should  be  valid  much  more  is  re-
quired,  generally  recognised  principles  are  requisite,  to  which
^  judicial  court  may  be  able  to  appeal.  If  it  can  shew  none,
then  its  judgment  must  be  merely  a  collective  individual
<qnnion,  principally  of  those  colleges  that  act  as  spokesmen,
which  can  no  more  be  considered  absolute  truth,  than  the  pri-
vate opinion  of  any  well  educated  physician  in  the  country.
The  majority  of  votes  cannot  in  this  instance  determine  the
standard,  as  many  may  form  erroneous  conclusions  as  well  as
one,  as  long  as  no  recognised  principle  proves  the  basis  of  their
verdict  (So,  a  few  years  ago,  many  thousand  physicians  thought
and  maintained  that  Brown's  doctrine  was  the  only  true  one,
and  yet  they  all  were  mistaken.)

If  a  medicine  appears  to  one  or  several  practitioners  never  to
be  useful  in  the  disease  for  which  it  has  been  recommended  by
others,  no  inference  can  be  drawn  firom  this  circumstance.  For
it  remains  to  be  seen, — 1,  whether  it  was  in  each  case  exactly  the
Bime  disease  that  had  been  treated  by  its  eulogist  (nature  presents
an  infinite  variety  of  diseases,  that  are  often  confounded  with
one  another ;  it  is  excessively  rare  that  exactly  the  same  disease
is  met  with  twice) ;  2,  whether  it  was  exactly  the  same  drug  (the
practitioner  often  is  ignorant  of  the  signs  that  mark  the  genuine-
ness of  the  drug) ;  3,  whether  the  medicine  was  always  given
in  these  experiments  singly  and  alone,  or  in  combination  with
things  that  were  capable  of  altering  its  efficacy ;  (as  long  as  phy*
Bicians  do  not  treat  a  determinate  disease  with  a  single  unmixed
medicinal  substance,  but,  as  is  done  by  them  all,  mingle  it  with
other  powerful  drugs,  so  long  it  is  impossible  to  draw  any,  not
'  even  a  probable  conclusion  from  all  their  assertions  relative  to
the  curative  powers  of  this  or  that  medicament;  they  all  prove
noAing  at  all) ;  4,  whether  the  medicine  was  given  in  the  most
appropriate  dose  ;  (have  not  the  doses  of  most  medicines  been
lutherto  left  to  mere  caprice !  Must  there  not,  from  the  very
nature  of  such  powerful  substances,  be  a  point  over  and  under


608  ON  SUBSTITUTIBS  FOB  FORXIOK  DBUfiUI.

account  of  its  very  quantity — producing  this  or  that  effeot^
failing  to  produce  such  effect?)  5,  whether  it  was  given  at  ap
per  or  improper  period  of  the  disease ;  6,  whether  the  (dB
nasty  tasting,  nasty  smelling),  medicine  was  taken  at  all,
taken  only  in  part,  or  not  at  all ;  7,  whether  some  importi
external  influences,  or  some  circumstances  peculiar  to  the  o
stitution  of  the  patient  promoted  the  recovery,  and  various  oil
considerations.

In  like  manner,  one  or  several  physicians  may  imagine  Hi
they  have  repeatedly  cured  the  same  disease  with  a  certain  mc
cine,  and  yet  notwithstanding  their  honesty,  this  may  beuntr
If  we  carefully  investigate  the  above  points,  we  shall  invarial
find  that  there  is  some  element  of  inaccuracy,  either  that  1
cases  of  disease  were  different,  or  that  the  medicine  was  gii
either  not  alone,  but  in  combination  with  other  powerful  druga^
very  soon  after  some  other  medicines.  One  or  other  of  tb
imperfections,  usually  both,  occur  almost  always  in  the  ti«
ment,  whether  the  result  was  successful  or  the  reverse.

Where  then  shall  we  be  able  to  find  a  series  of  pure  obser
tions  in  the  practice,  that  shall  be  able  to  establish  the  curat
powers  of  a  single  medicine  on  sure  principles? And  ;
the  Vienna  Medical  Faculty  in  the  first  division  of  its  resolutio
decrees  that  not  only  the  semen  cince,  but  colocynth,  copaivaA
8am,  qiccuisia,  sabadiUa,  sassafras,  senega,  and  even  cascarilla  .
quite  superfluous. And  yet  but  lately,  the  far-famed Hofc
Hecker,  of  Berlin,  asserted  in  a  voluminous  essay  published
Allg.  Anzeiger  der  D,  {No,  221),  **  that  cascarilla  is  not  only  equa
curative  virtues  to  cinchona  bark,  but  is  much  superior  to  :
I  say  asserted,  for  in  a  thousand  words  he  did  nothing  more  tl
what  the  Faculty  did  in  two  words ;  he  only  asserted,  but  pro
nothing. He  does  not  adduce  a  single  case  {and  coxddiiot  add
one)  in  which  cascarilla  had  been  used  alone  in  ague,  still  1
does  he  shew,  in  which  of  the  infinitely  numerous  varieties
ague,  cascarilla  proved  serviceable,  when  given  purely  and  alo
in  order  that  we  may  see  whether  it  was  certainly  and  rea
alone  useful  in  the  same  cases  in  which  cinchona  is,  or  whetl
in  other  cases  also,  where  the  latter  is  of  no  use,  or  perhi
might  be  useful  only  in  certain  other  (what  ?)  cases  of  ague,  1
just  not  such  ones  as  cinchona  is  alone  suitable  for. He  h
consequently,  just  as  all  the  rest  of  the  herd  of  our  medical  J
thors  are  in  the  habit  of  doing,  deduced  with  much  prolixit
that  he  has  asserted,  and  not  that  he  has  proved  and  made  1
matter  clear ; — transeat  cum  ca^tsris.


09  SUBSTITUTES  FOR  FOREIGN  DBUOS.  509

Now  as  both  parties,  the  Vienna  Faculty  and  Hofrath  Hecker,
80  flaily  oontradict  each  other,  which  is  in  the  right '/

Unhappy  aart,  in  which  such  direct  contradictions  are  possible  I
What  incalculable  evil  may  not  daily  and  hourly  be  poured
fi}rth  on  suffering  humanity  from  thy  cornucopia,  which  is
is  Yast  as  the  whole  range  of  opinions !

The  Faculty  rejects  this  first  class  as  quite  superfluous,  ''  be-
cause either  they  are  powerless  (that  they  cannot  say  of  the
substances  named)  or  any  physician  can  substitute  for  them
indigenous  drugs,  their  well  known  succedanea."  What  are
these  indigenous  succedanea ;  why  does  not  the  Faculty  name
them?  It  says  they  are  well  known.  But  how  can  such  suc-
cedanea be  known  when  they  are  simply  impossihle  f

Among  vegetable  drugs  there  are  no  true  succedanea,  there
can  be  none. The  powers  of  each  of  these  medicinal  substances
locurately  speaking  (and  what  friend  to  humanity  would  not  try
to  be  accurate  when  dealing  with  substances  on  which  depend  the
siokness  and  health,  the  pains,  the  death  and  the  life  of  suffer-
ing mankind?)  are  so  multifarious,  so  peculiar,  so  different
firom  those  of  any  other  drug,  that  a  vegetable  medicinal  substance
can  only  be  replaced  by  itself,  that  is  by  a  plant  of  exactly  the
same  genus  and  species. There  are,  no  doubt,  substances  which
liave  one  property  or  another  in  common  with  that  which  it  is
required  to  replace. But  what  becomes  of  the  many  other  pro-
perties that  each  possesses  jtxr{///arZy  by  itself?

He  who  is  ignorant  of  the  whole  range  of  properties  of  the
one  drug,  and  likewise  of  the  individual  powers  of  the  other
^vrhich  is  to  be  used  as  its  substitute,  will  certainly  find  it  an  easy
xnatter  to  substitute  the  one  for  the  other  I Ilcncc  wo  see  that
apothecaries,  because  they  have  no  more  than  a  superficial  ac-
quaintance with  the  one  and  the  other  drug,  in  respect  to  their
power  of  altering  the  organism,  find  it  so  easy  when  their  own
interests  are  concerned,  to  substitute  the  one  for  the  other  in
making  up  their  prescriptions. — Poor  patients ! — **  We  believe,"
80  the  apothecaries  have  always  said  in  their  hearts,  ''that
turpentine  is  the  same  as  copaiba — we  believe  that  gentian  is  as
good  as  quassia ;  therefore  let  us  substitute  the  one  for  the  other."
Iff  as  we  know  but  too  well^  in  the  whole  range  of  medicine^  conjee^
twrecannsurp  the  place  of  conviction,  if  this  be  a  mere  matter  of  belief
and  guess-work^  in  that  case  the  conscience  of  such  persons  is  no
doubt  satisfied, — before  the  medical  authorities,  before  the  world,
—but  is  it  so  likewise  before  the  omnicient  Deity  to  whom


;


610  OK  SUBSTITUTES  FOB  FOBSIGN  PBUGS.

human  life  is  so  precious,  who  endowed  medicines  with  their
inconceivable  variety  of  wonderful  properties  and  virtues^  in
order  that  man  should  investigate  them  and  apply  them  for  the
relief  of  his  brethren  ?

Hear  it,  our  wiser,  more  conscientious  posterity !  now-a-dayB
the  substitution  of  one  medicine  for  another,  and  the  whole  doc-
trine of  succedanea,  which  has  hitherto  constituted  the  pcartk
hmtteuse  of  the  apothecary  system,  has  even  received  the  sanc-
tion of  Faculties ;  different  medicinal  substances  are  decreed  hj
high  medical  authorities  to  be  all  the  same,  to  possess  the  same
action,  not  the  hundredth  part  of  whose  true,  peculiar  powen
have  hitherto  been  known  I

Hear  it,  our  wiser,  more  conscientious  posterity !  to  our  ooon-
try  practitioners,  who  have  never  been  held  to  be  too  richly  en-
dowed with  knowledge,  the  talent  for  careful  discrimination,  and
a  clear  spirit  of  observation,  now  there  is  preached  an  indiffiar-
entism,  right  welcome  to  their  habitual  indolence,  in  the  choioe
of  remedies  (those  important  instruments  of  life  and  death),  an
indifierentism  the  grave  of  all  philosophy,  of  all  conscientious
discrimination,  of  all  accurate,  genuine,  estimation  of  things  I

Avaunt  thou  medical  art,  still  in  the  babbling  infancy  thai
confounds  all  things  with  one  another  I  Whilst  thou  still  slum-
berest  in  thy  cradle,  all  around  thee  the  impulse  to  well-directed
activity  has  long  since  been  awakened,  and  has  escaped  from  the
trammels  of  ignorant  credulity.  Each  of  the  devoted  disciples
of  the  new  school  investigates  the  differences  and  the  specific
properties  of  the  things  that  belong  to  his  own  department;
calmly  and  on  irrefragable  principles  decides  upon  the  rank  that
belongs  to  each,  and  assigns  to  it  the  accurately  defined  bounda-
ries of  its  proper  sphere ;  in  order  that  out  of  all  this  indivi-
dualization a  philosophically  arranged  whole  may  proceed,  in
order  that,  consistent,  incontrovertible,  appropriate,  living  truth
mskj  thence  arise.

And  yet  thou  still  continuest  to  sleep  ?  Hitherto  crammed  to
satiety  with  the  sweet  baby -food  of  hypotheses  and  pleasant  fig-
ments, and  stunted  in  thy  growth  by  the  eternal  swaddling
clothes  of  authorities  that  discountenance  all  investigations  and
stifle  all  liberty  of  thought^  thou  hast  not  yet,  dear  medicine  of
the  past,  entered  the  ranks  of  the  progressive  arts,  nor  assumed
the  decisive  language  of  the  other  manly  studies  I

The  deep  earnest  spirit  of  our  age  demands  that  the  difier-
ences  of  things  and  of  their  properties  should  be  ascertained  in  a


XJBTTKB  UPON  THS  KECESSITY,  &C.  511

more  aocurate  and  minute  manner  before  we  can  venture  to  in.
stitate  oompariaons  between  them,  not  to  speak  of  decreeing  the
substitution  of  one  for  another.  When  we  shall  have  investi-
gated the  general  array  of  the  properties  and  most  of  the  powers
of  eveiy  single  medicinal  substance,  which  produce  such  various
effects  on  the  human  organism,  and  when  we  shall  have  them
displayed  plainly  and  in  their  rich  completeness  before  our
▼iew, — ^then,  and  not  till  then,  may  we  be  permitted  to  make
a  relative  estimate  of  the  nature  and  properties  of  the  va-
rious BubBtances^  and  to  institute  comparisons  between  the  cu-
latiye  powers  of  the  ^different  medicines ; — to  do  this  sooner
▼ere  presumption,  that  could  not  even  be  excused  by  the  plea
of  ignorance.

Suooedanea  of  the  medicines  that  are  not  chemical,  but  that
act  specifically,  which  shall  be  jper/ec^  substitutes  for  others,  there
aie  not  and  cannot  be,  for  one  medicine  is  not  the  same  as  ano-
ther,— and  Buccedanea  that  shall  be  partial  and  half-and-half
substitutes  for  others  (if  such  were  necessary),  cannot  be  found
until  the  medicinal  properties  of  the  several  drugs  accurately
and  eompktely  displayed  before  the  eyes  of  the  world,  are  avail-
Able  for  the  purpose  of  instituting  a  perfect  comparison  among
them.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  will  it  be  possible  to  pronounco
Incontrovertible,  irrefragable  judgments  and  verdicts.


:£XTRACT  PROM  A  LETTER  TO  A  PHYSICIAN OF  HIGH  STANDING

ON  THE  GRLVT  NECESSITY  OF  A  REGENERATION  OF

MEDICINL^

Dearest  Friend,

It  is  not  in  order  to  *  *  *  you,  no !  it  is  on  ac-
count of  your  intrinsic  excellence  and  the  irrisistible  attraction
your  excellent  heart  has  for  me,  that  I  must  give  myself  the
pleasure  of  exposing  to  you  my  whole  course  of  thought  and
oonviction,  which  I  have  long  felt  a  desire  to  do  publicly.

For  eighteen  years  I  have  departed  from  the  beaten  track  in
medicine.  It  was  painful  to  me  to  grope  in  the  dark,  guided
wdy  by  our  books  in  the  treatment  of  the  sick, — to  })rescribc,
Mording  to  this  or  that  {fanciful)  view  of  the  nature  of  die-
ttttes,  substances  that  only  owed  to  mere  opinion  their  place  in

*  Frum  tlie  Aiigettu  Ameiger  d.  1)^  No.  843.  1808.  •  [The  physician  to  whom  thi?
ktter  was  addressed  is  the  celebrated  Hufeland,  with  whom  Hahnemann  was  long
on  tcfins  of  intimate  friendship.]


612  LETTER  UPOK  THE  NECESSITT

the  materia  medica;  I  had  conscientious  scruples  about  treating
unknown  morbid  states  in  my  suffering  fellow-creatures  with
these  unknown^  medicines,  which,  being  powerful  substances^
may,  if  they  were  not  exactly  suitable  (and  how  could  the  phyin-
cian  know  whether  they  were  suitable  or  not,  seeing  that  their
peculiar,  special  actions  were  not  yet  elucidated)  easily  change
life  into  death,  or  produce  new  affections  and  chronic  ailments^
which  are  often  much  more  difficult  to  remoye  than  the  original
disease.  To  become  in  this  way  a  murderer,  or  aggravator  of
the  sufferings  of  my  brethren  of  mankind,  was  to  me  a  fearful
thought, — so  fearful  and  distressing  was  it,  that  shortly  after  my
marriage  I  completely  abandoned  practice  and  scarcely  treated
any  one  for  fear  of  doing  him  harm,  and — as  you  know — occu-
pied myself  solely  with  chemistry  and  literary  labours.

But  children  were  born  to  me,  several  children,  and  in  course
of  time  serious  diseases  occurred,  which,  because  they  afflicted
and  endangered  the  lives  of  my  children — my  flesh  and  blood —
caused  my  conscience  to  reproach  me  still  more  loudly,  that  I
had  no  means  on  which  I  could  rely  for  affording  them  relie£

But  whence  could  I  obtain  aid,  certain^  positive  aid,  with  our
doctrine  of  the  powers  of  medicinal  substances  founded  merely
on  vague  observations,  often  only  on  fanciful  conjecture,  and
with  the  infinite  number  of  arbitrary  views  respecting  disease  in
which  our  pathological  works  abound  ? — a  labyrinth  in  which
he  only  can  preserve  his  tranquillity  who  accepts  as  gospel  those
assertions  relative  to  the  curative  powers  of  medicines  because
they  are  repeated  in  a  hundred  books,  and  who  receives,  with-
out  investigation,  as  oracles,  the  arbitrary  definitions  of  diseases
given  in  pathological  works,  and  their  pretended  treatment  ac-
his  treatment,  not  to  his  own  practice  of  shooting  blindfold  at
the  mark, — who  does  not  attribute  the  aggravation  and  prolong-
ation of  the  acute  diseases  he  treats  and  their  degeneration  into
chronic  maladies,  and  the  general  fruitfulness  of  his  efforts  when
he  has  to  treat  diseases  of  long  standing,  to  the  uncertainty  and


*  Respecting  many  medidDes  we  have  aumbere  of  oontndictoiy  opiniaiM,
have  been  repeatedly  refuted  by  experience,  and  a  great  array  of  pbyiical,  ^^^^^i^X
and  natural  historical  information ;  but  our  books  afford  us  no  instruction  as  to  wlal
are  the  exact  cases  of  disease  forwhich  they  are  adapted  and  in  which  they  may  be
confidently  relied  on  as  curative  agents.  They  are  almost  entirely  unknown  in  a  spe-
cial medicinAl  point  of  view.


OF  A  BSOSNERATIOK  OF  UKDICVXJL  513

ease and  all,  solely  to  the  incurableness  of  the  disease,  to  the
disobedience  of  the  patient,  and  to  other  insignificant  circom-
stances,  and  so  accommodating  and  obtuse  is  his  conscience,  that
he  satisfies  himself  with  these  excuses,  though  they  are  in  many
ways  delusive,  and  can  never  avail  before  an  omniscient  God ;
and  thus  he  goes  on  treating  diseases  (which  he  sees  through  his
systematic  spectacles)  with  medicinal  substances  that  are  far
fiom  being  without  influence  on  life  and  death,  but  of  whose
powers  nothing  is  known.

Where  shall  I  look  for  aid,  sure  aid?  sighed  the  disconsolate
fiither  on  hearing  the  moaning  of  his  dear,  inexpressibly  dear,
sick  children.  The  darkness  of  night  and  the  dreariness  of  a
desert  all  around  me ;  no  prospect  of  relief  for  my  oppressed
paternal  heart  1

In  an  eight  years^  practice,  pursued  with  conscientious  atten-
tbn,  I  had  learned  the  delusive  nature  of  the  ordinary  methods
of  treatment,  and  from  sad  experience  I  knew  right  well  how  far
Aq  methods  of  Sydenham  and  Frederick  HoJBfmann,  of  Boer-
haave  and  Gaubius,  of  StoU,  Quarin,  Cullen,  and  De  Haen,
were  capable  of  curing.

"  But  perhaps  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  this  art  as  great  men
have  asserted,  that  it  is  incapable  of  attaining  any  greater  cer-
tainty."

"  Shameful,  blasphemous  thought,"  I  exclaimed. — What,  shall
it  be  said  that  the  infinite  wisdom  of  the  eternal  Spirit  that  ani-
mates the  universe  could  not  produce  remedies  to  allay  the  suf-
ferings of  the  diseases  it  allows  to  arise  ?  The  all-loving  paternal
gcxxiness  of  Him  whom  no  name  worthily  designates,  who  richly
si^plies  all  wants,  even  the  scarcely  conceivable  ones  of  the
insect  in  the  dust,  imperceptible  by  reason  of  its  minuteness  to
the  keenest  mortal  eye,  and  who  dispenses  throughout  all  creation
life  and  happiness  in  rich  abundance — shall  it  be  said  that  He
was  capable  of  the  tyranny  of  not  permitting  that  man,  made  in
His  own  image,  should,  even  by  the  efforts  of  his  penetrating
mind,  that  has  been  breathed  into  him  from  above,  find  out  the
way  to  discover  remedies  in  the  stupendous  kingdom  of  created
things,  which  should  be  able  to  deliver  his  brethren  of  mankind
from  their  sufierings  often  worse  than  death  itself  ?  Shall  He,
the  Father  of  all,  behold  with  indifference  the  martyrdom  of
his  best-loved  creatures  by  disease,  and  yet  have  rendered  it

impossible  to  the  genius  of  man,  to  which  all  else  is  possible,  to

83


614  LXlTJilK  DTOK  TEOB  IfBCSBBnhr

find  any  method,  amy  eastfy  swre^  fyrugtworthy  method,  wlifartiy
they  may  see  diseases  in  their  proper  point  of  view  and  wheteby
they  may  interrogate  medicines  as  to  their  special  tises^  as  to
what  they  are  reoSy,  surely,  smd poeitivdy  serviceable  for?

Sooner  than  admit  this  blasphemous  thought,  I  would  huft
abjured  all  the  medical  systems  in  the  world  I

Not  there  is  a  Ood,  a  good  Ood,  who  is  all  goodness  and  wis-
dom !  and  as  surely  as  this  is  the  case  must  there  be  a  way  ol
his  creation  whereby  diseases  may  be  seen  in  the  right  point  iA
view,  and  be  cured  with  certainty,  a  way  not  hidden  in  endless
abstractions  and  fantastic  speculations  I

But  why  was  it  never  discovered  in  the  two  or  two  and  a
half  thousand  years  during  which  there  have  been  men  who
called  themselves  physicians?

Doubtless  because  it  was  too  easy — because  like  the  mMxiy^m
in  the  choice  of  the  youthful  Hercules,  it  was  quite  simple,  and
neither  capable  nor  standing  in  need  of  being  decked  in  any  oi
the  tawdry  tinsel  of  subtle  sophistries  and  brilliant  hypotheses.

Well,  thought  I,  as  there  mtist  a  sure  and  trustworthy  method
of  treatment,  as  certainly  as  God  is  the  wisest  and  most  benefr
cent  of  beings,  I  shall  seek  it  no  longer  in  the  thorny  thicket  <rf
outological  explanations,  in  arbitrary  opinions,  though  these
might  be  capable  of  being  arranged  into  a  splendid  system,  nor
in  the  authoritative  declarations  of  celebrated  men — no,  let  me
seek  it  where  it  lies  nearest  at  hand,  and  where  it  has  hitherto
been  passed  over  by  all,  because  it  did  not  seem  sufficiently  re-
condite nor  sufficiently  learned,  and  was  not  hung  with  laurels
for  those  who  displayed  most  talent  for  constructing  systems,  finr
scholastic  speculations  and  transcendental  abstractions.  It  only
sufficed  for  me,  whose  conscience  was  not  of  that  ordinary  prac-
tical character  that  it  would  allow  me  to  deliver  up  to  death  my
children  who  were  in  danger,  in  order  to  please  any  system,  any
leader  of  a  party  whatsoever.  Accordingly  I  have  made  no  osten*
tatious  parade  of  my  simple  little  book  {Medicine  (^Experience*)
that  teaches  this  method,  quite  contented  with  having  found  it
myself,  contented  with  having,  in  the  simple  style  that  belongs
to  truth,  revealed  it  to  my  brethren,  as  far  as  it  was  possible  lodo
so  by  writing,  that  is,  withoxd  demonstration  at  the  sick-bed  m  on
hospital.

*'  How,  then,  canst  thou  '* — (this  was  the  mode  of  reasoning

'  [yideaiite%p.497.]


OF  X  RBGENGRATIOK  OF  XSDICINS.  SIS

by  wluch  I  ooounenced  to  find  my  way) — '^  ascertain  what  mor^
bid  states  medidaes  have  been  created  &xr?  (can  this  be  done  by
^aperimenta  per  tnoties  m  diaenxs  themselves  f  Alasl  the  two
Ihousand  five  hundred  years  during  which  this  way  alone  has
been  followed,  shew  that  it  is  beset  with  innumerable,  insur^
mountable  illusions,  and  never  leads  to  certainty^

"  Thorn  must,"  thought  I,  ^*  observe  how  medicines  act  on  the
human  body,  when  it  is  in  the  tranquil  state  of  health.  The
ahemtioDS  that  medicines  pixxluce  in  the  healthy  bod^',  do  not
ocGur  in  vain,  they  must  signify  somethings  else  why  should
they  occur  ?  What  if  these  clianges  have  an  important,  an  ex-
tremely important  signification^  What  if  this  be  the  only
utterance  whereby  these  substances  can  impart  information  to
the  observer  respecting  the  end  of  their  being;  what  if  the
changes  and  sensations  which  each  medicine  produces  in  the
healthy  human  organism,  be  the  only  comprehensible  language
by  which — ^if  they  be  not  smothered  by  severe  symptoms  of
soma  ezistiiig  disease — it  can  distinctly  discourse  to  the  unpreju>
diced  observer  respecting  its  specific  tendencies,  respecting  its
peculiar,  pure,  positive  power,  by  means  of  which  it  is  capable
of  e&cting  alterations  in  the  body,  that  is,  of  deranging  the
healthy  oiganism,  and — where  it  can  cure— ^f  changing  into
health  the  organism  that  has  been  deranged  by  dLsease  I"  This
was  what  I  thought.

I  carried  my  reflections  farther,  "  How  else  could  medicines
effect  what  they  do  in  diseases  than  by  means  of  this  power  of
theirs  to  alter  the  healthy  body  ?" — wliicli  is  most  certainly  dif-
ferent in  every  diffensnt  mineral  substance,  and  consequently
presents  in  each  a  different  series  of  phenomena,  accidents,  and
aensationa') Certainly,  in  this  way  alone  can  they  cure.

But  if  medicinal  substances  effect  what  they  do  in  diseases,
Wy  by  means  of  the  power  |:)eculiar  to  each  of  them  of  altering
the  healthy  body ;  it  follows  that  the  medicine,  among  whose
symptoms  those  characteristic  of  a  given  case  of  disease  occur
in  the  most  complete  manner,  must  most  certainly  have  the  power
of  curing  that  disease ;  and  in  like  manner  that  morbid  state

'  Kftch  one  of  the  many  thousand  genera  of  plants  must  possess  a  different  medi-
cmI  flctkiD ;  in  truth,  even  the  several  species  must  differ  from  each  otlicr  in  this
ntpeet,lbr  their  permaoeut  differences  of  appearance  announce  them  as  things  dif-
fering  in  kiad.  Here,  then,  we  have  fulness  and  abundance,  here  we  luive  a  diviuelj
rich  store  of  curative  powers !  Take  comfort^  sick  humanity  I  What  are  still  required
tar  ywir  relief  are,  free  sagacious  men,  who  have  the  strength  to  emancipate  them-
lehraa  firaia  the  strong  alave-ehains  of  ancient  prejudice  and  theories.


610  LETTER  UPON  THE  JTBCBaSITr

whicb  a  certain  medicinal  agent  i»  capable  ot  caring,  nrast  eor-
respond  to  the  symptoms  this  medicinal  9ub8t4ince  is  capaUe  <^
producing  in  the  healthj  human  body  I  In  a  word,  medicineft
must  only  have  the  power  of  curing  diseases  similap  to  those
they  produce  in  the  healthy  body,  and  only  manifest  sueh  mor>
bid  actions  as  they  are  capable  of  curing  in  diseases  I

'*If  I  am  not  deceived*' — ^I  thought  further — '^such  is  really
the  case  ^  otherwise  how  was  it  that  those  violent  tertian  and
quotidian  fevers,  which  I  completely  cured  four  and  six  weeks
ago  without  knowing  how  the  cure  was  effected,  by  means  of  a
few  drops  of  cinchona  tincture,  should  present  almost  exactly
the  same  array  of  symptoms,  which  I  observed  in  myself  yester^
day  and  to-day^  after  gradually  taking,  while  in  perfect  healthy
four  drachms  of  good  cinchona  bark,  by  way  of  experiment?'*

I  now  commenced  to  make  a  collection  of  the  morbid  pheno-
mena which  different  observers  had  firom  time  to  time  notioed
as  produced  by  medicines  introduced  into  the  stomachs  of  healthy
individuals,  and  which  they  had  casually  recorded  in  their  works.
But  as  the  number  of  these  was  not  great,  I  set  myself  diligently
to  work  to  test  several  medicinal  substances  on  the  healthy  body,'
and  see,  the  carefully  observed  symptoms  they  produced  corres-
ponded wonderfully  with  the  symptoms  of  the  morbid  states
they  could  cure  easily  and  permanently.

Now,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  avoid  regarding  as  incontro-
vertible the  maxim  that  disease  was  not  to  be  made  the  subject
of  ontological  and^  fanciful  speculation  as  though  its  cure  were
an  eternal  enigma,  but  that  it  was  only  necessary  that  every
disease  should  present  itself  to  the  practitioner  as  a  series  or
group  of  particular  symptoms,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  infallibly
extinguish  and  cure  it  by  means  of  a  medicinal  substance,  capa-
ble of  producing  of  itself  the  same  morbid  symptoms  in  the
healthy  body  (provided  always  that  the  patient  avoids  every
ascertainable  external  cause  of  this  disease,  in  order  that  the  cure
should  be  permanent).

I  perceived  that  this  view  of  diseases-r-regarding  them  always
according  to  the  sum  of  all  the  symptoms  presented  by  each
individual  case — was  the  anly  right  one,  and  the  only  one  availa-
ble for  the  curative  treatment,  and  that  the  forms  of  disease

'  The  results  I  had  collected  four  years  ago,  will  be  found  in  my  book :  FragmenU
de  virilnu  medieatnentarum  potitivit  the  in  9ano  corpore  hurnano  obtervatit,  lipme
apud  Barth,  1806.


OF  A  SSaBNEEATION  OF  XSDKXNE.  5iT

up  t>f  fragments  of  dissimilar  diseases)  would  in  fdtuie  be  unable
to  oonoeal  fiom  us  the  true  aspects  of  the  maladj  as  nature  pre-
sents it  to  us  at  the  sick-bed —that  the  therapeutic  doctrines  of
the  numerous  systems,  abouixling  as  they  do  in  imaginary  cura-
tive indieations  and  arbitrary  modes  of  treatment,  couLd  not
henceforth  mislead  the  conscientious  practitioner,  and  that  no
metaphyseal  and  scholastic  speculation  respecting  the  first  hid-
den cause  of  diseases  (that  &vourite  plaything  of  rationalism)
which  can  never  be  ascertained  by  mortal  reason,  would  hence-
forth render  it  necessary  to  invent  any  chimerical  mode  of
treatment

I  perceived  that  the  only  health4)ringing  way,  without  any
admixtose  of  human  inventions^  without  any  display  of  learning;
was  discovered.

But  it  had  not  yet  been  trodden  1'  I  had  to  ti^ad  it  alone^
depending  on  my  own  powers,  on  my  own  resources;  I  did  so
with  confidence  and  with  success.

''Take  the  medicines  according  to  the  symptoms  caieful  and
repeated  observation  has  shewn  they  produce  in  the  healthy
body,  and  administer  them  in  every  case  of  disease  that  presents
a  group  of  symptoms  comprised  in  the  array  of  symptoms  the
medicine  to  be  employed  is  capable  of  producing  on  the  healthy
body ;  thus  will  you  cure  the  disease  surely  and  easily.  Or,  in
other  words,  find  out  which  medicine  contains  most  perfectly
among  the  symptoms  usually  produced  by  it  in  the  healthy  body
the  sum  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  before  jou ;  and  this
medicine  will  eflfect  a  certain,  permanent,  and  easy  cure.
•  This  law,  dictated  to  me  by  nature  herselJ^  I  hav^e  now  fol-
lowed for  many  years,  >vithout  ever  having  had  occasion  to  have
leoourse  to  any  one  of  tlie  ordinary  methods  of  medical  practice.
For  twelve  years  I  have  used  no  purgatives  for  bile  or  mucus,
no  cooling  drinks,  no  so-called  solvents  or  dcobstruenta,  no  ge-
neral antispasmodics,  sedatives,  or  narcotics,  no  general  stimu-
lants or  tonics,  no  general  diuretics  or  diaphoretics,  no  rubefa-
cients or  vesicatories,  no  leeches  or  cupping-glasses,  no  issues,
peutics of  any  system  whatever,  to  fulfil  indications  of  cure  thej
have  themselves  invented-  I  practised  solely  in  accordance  with
the  above  law  of  nature,  and  in  no  single  instance  did  I  deviate
firom  it

And  with  what  result?  As  might  have  been  expected,  tJie
mtisfaction  I  have  derived  from  this  mode  of  treatment  £  would  noi
txduLngefoT  any  of  the  most  coveted  of  eartldy  goods.


In  tbe  eoorse  of  tlibese  inTestigations  and  obserratioiiB,  wUdi
occupied  manj  yearsy  I  made  the  iiew  and  important  disooveiT;
that  medicines  in  acting  on  the  healthy  body^  exhibit  two  modes
of  action  and  two  series*  of  symptoms  entirely  opposite  one  to
another,  the  first  immediately  or  soon  after  their  ingestion  (or
shortly  after  contact  with  the  senti«[it  living  fibre  of  any  part  of
the  body) — and  the  secondy.  the  very  opposite^  soon  after  the  dig*
appearance  of  the  first ; — that  moreover,  when  the  medicinea
correspond  to  the  case  of  disease  befi^re  us  in  regard  to  tVeao
first,  primary  (medicinal)  symptoms,  or,  in  other  words,  when
most  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  we  hare  to  combat  are  to
be  met  with  among  those  which  the  medicine  selected  tends  to
develop  in  the  first  hours  of  its  action  on  the  healthy  subject  (in
such  a  manner  as  that  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  and  the  pri*
mary  symptoms  of  the  medicine  shall  present  the  greatest  poe-
nble  similarity  to  one  another),  then,  and  then  only,  will  mper^
tnaneni  cure  result;  the  morbifioirritation  present  being, as  it  were^
overcome,  displaced  and  extinguished  by  another  very  amilar
irritation — produced  by  the  medicine — in  an  extremdy,  incre-
dibly short  time.  This  I  termed  the  curative  (radical)  method
of  treatment  (which  produces  permanent  health,  most  certainly^
and  without  any  after-sufferings.)

On  the  other  hand  I  perceived, — what  was  now  easy  to  be
foreseen, — that  by  adopting  an  opposite  method,  that  is  to  say,  if
(according  to  the  ordinary  mode  of  procedure,  contraria  centra-
riis  citrantur)  the  primary  action  of  the  medicine  we  employ  be
just  the  opposite  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  (for  instance,  if
we  give  opium  for  habitual  sleeplessness  or  chronic  diarrbcea,
wine  for  debility,  or  purgatives  for  chronic  constipation),  only  a
palliative  relief,  only  an  amelioration  for  a  few  hours  will  be  the
result,  for,  after  these  few  hours  have  passed,  the  period  for  the
second  stage  of  the  medicinal  action  comes  on,  which  is  the  con*
trary  of  the  first  action  and  the  analogue  of  the  morbid  state  it
is  sought  to  cure — consequently,  it  causes  an  addition  to  the  dis-
ease and  an  aggravation  of  it.

In  the  ordinary  practice,  whenever  symptoms  are  attacked
with  medicines,'  this  is  always  done,  according  to  the  prindples
of  art  now  laid  down,  only  in  this  palliative  manner. The

'  For  ID  additioD  to  the  systein  of  alleriatlog  BjmpionM^,  tkere  ai»  m  th#  oiJiiiiy
practice  manj  others,  if  posoible  still  more  arbitrary,  and  still  more  vn•nl^K^  modaa
€f  trcotcQient.


OF  ▲  BXaENERAION  OF.  ICEDIGUirX.  519

mfldiejil  art  aa  hitherto  practiced,  knows  not  the  curative  treat-
ment pointed  out  above.

:  But  this  discovery  of  mine  is  so  important,  that  if  it  were
known  and  acted  upon,  experience  would  teach  every  one  that
it  is  only  by  the  curative  employment  of  medicines  (sijnilia
wndUbus)  that  a  permanent  cure — this  is  especially  observable
in  the  case  of  chronic  diseases — can  be  obtained  by  the  smallest
dosea  in  a  short  time ;  whereas  the  ordinary  palliative  method,
according  to  which  every  physician  without  exception  on  the
fiioe  of  the  globe,  is  accustomed  to  combat  symptoms  (if  any
contrarid  whatsoever  can  be  found),  can  only  alleviate  them  for
a&w  hours,  and  must  permit  the  malady,  after  the  expiry  of
tfiese  &w  hours,  to  shoot  forth  more  raukly  than  before,  unless
the  physician — as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case — ^prolong  the  joke
fi>r  a  few  days  by  giving  frequently  repeated  and  always  stronger
doBOBL  But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  by  such  large  doses  of  the
—not  curative  and  homoeopathieally  adapted — medicine,  and
■by  the  aeeondary  action  of  these  large  doses,  he  creates  new
morbid  states,  which  are  often  more  difficult  to  cure  than  the
original  malady,  and  which  often  enough  terminate  in  death.

It  muflt  be  plain  to  all,  without  furtiier  demonstration  on  my
part,  that  it  is  impossible  this  hurtful  palliative  system  of  treat-
ment can  avail  in  the  case  of  chronic  diseases,  or  restore  unal-
loyed health  to  those  suffering  from  them;  and  this  is  what  ex-
perience also  teaches  us,  namely,  that  by  no  system  of  treatment
hitherto  pursued  could  chronic  maladies  be  removed  in  a  short
time  and  health  be  restored ;  though  occasionally,  after  a  long
period  of  time,  such  a  happy  event  might  be  brought  about,  and
health  be  restored  by  the  spontaneous  efforts  of  nature,  by  some
by  some  mineral  water  also  accidentally  suitable  to  the  an^^  or
by  other  fortuitous  circumstances.

Besides  inflicting  often  irreparable  injury  on  the  health  of
man,  the  palliative  system  wiistes  an  incredible  quantity  of
expensive  drugs,  because  they  must  be  given  in  large,  often
monstrous  quantities,  to  the  patients,  \t%,  order  to  effect  some,
though  but  apparent  good  results.  Thus  we  see  Jones  of  Lon-
don requiring  three  hundred  pounds  of  cinchona  bark  per  an-
num, and  other  physicians  using  several  pounds  of  opium  a-piece
in  the  course  of  the  year.

Precisely  the  contrary  is  the  case  with  the  physician  who
treats  according  to  the  curative  method As  he  only  needs  the


6S0  LETTER  UPON  THE  KECESSTTr

smallest,  but  analogous  medicinal  irritation,  in  order  to  extihgoiBh
speedily  an  analogous  morbid  irritation,  his  requirements  in  the
way  of  good  drugs  (even  such  as  are  most  constantly  used)  ate
so  small  that  I  hesitate  to  make  even  a  probable  estimate  of
them,  in  order  not  to  excite  incredulity ;  so  small  that  the  block*
ade  of  Europe  may  be  kept  up  for  a  long  time  to  come  so  ftr  as
he  is  concerned.

By  pursuing  this  method  of  treatment,  which  differs  fiom  all
others,  which  is  indeed  almost  their  exact  opposite  in  every  le*
spect,  the  curative  phjrsician  radically  cures  with  amazing  opr-
tainty,  and  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time,  even  dironio
diseases  of  the  most  ancient  date,  provided  among  the  reme*
dies  he  is  intimately'  acquainted  with  there  exists  a  suitable  ona

If  the  principal,  the  sole  mission  of  the  physician  be,  as  I  be*
lieve  it  is,  the  cure  of  diseases^  the  deliverance  of  our  brethren  of
mankind  from  those  innumerable  tortures  that  disturb  the  tran<^
quil  enjoyment  of  life,  that  often  make  existence  unbearable^  or
expose  it  to  danger,  and  that  even  obstruct  the  functions  of  the
mind ;  how  can  he,  if  a  sensitive  heart  still  beats  within  him,
or  if  in  his  bosom  there  glows  a  spark  of  that  holy  fire  tlial
warms  and  incites  the  true  man  to  aspirations  for  the  good  of
humanity — how  can  he  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  choose  this
better,  this  much  more  efficacious  method  of  treatment,  and  to
trample  under  foot  the  delusions  of  all  former  medical  sphools^
even  should  they  be  three  thousand  years  old  ?  They  have  ne-
ver yet  taught  iis  how  to  cure  our  fellow-men*  in  a  manner
that  shall  satisfy  our  conscience,  but  only  how  we  may  present
to  the  people  an  appearance  of  learned  wisdom  and  deep  pene*

'  Of  medicinefl  whose  action  has  been  accurately  ascertaioed  I  possess  now  almoiil
thirty,  and  of  such  as  are  pretty  well  kziuwn,  about  the  same  number,  without  rei^
oBing  these  with  which  I  am  not  entirely  unacquainted.  Entirely  unaided,  it  wooUl
be  impossible  for  me  to  make  up  for  all  that  has  been  neglected  by  my  (Hredi
in  my  short  life»  tliough  I  have  never  allowed  even  the  usual  pleasures  of
to  interfere  with  my  work.  I  would,  ere  this,  have  communicated  to  the  world  thft
large  number  of  medicines  whose  properties  I  have  investigated  since  1801^  and
hare  published  the  whole  in  German,  were  it  not  that  the  pubhsber  of  the  Fragw^mdm
^  hegged  me  to  delay  duin^  so  on  account  of  the  bodness  of  the  times.

*  The  little  of  a  positive  character  to  he  found  amid  ihe  enormous  mass  of  medicil
writii^s,  consists  in  the  accidentally  discovered  mode  of  cure  of  two  or  three  disemft
which  always  arise  from  identical  miasmata ;  these  are,  the  autumnal  marsh  agiM^
the  lueH>  venerea,  and  the  iteh  of  workers  in  wool ;  to  these  must  be  added  that  motl
fortunate  discovery,  the  protection  from  variola  by  means  of  vaccinatioD.  And  theM
three  or  four  cures  take  place  only  according  to  my  principle  mmilia  timilibmiL
Nothing  more  of  a  positive  character  can  be  exhibited  in  the  whole  medical  art  m
the  tiine  of  Hippocrates ;  the  cure  of  all  other  diseases  remained  unknown.


OF  A  RSOS17ERATION  OF  MEDICINE.  621

tration.  To  the  weak-minded  alone,  injurious  delusions  and
prejudices  are  holy  and  inviolable  from  the  circumstance  of  their
having  been  once  established  in  the  world — because  they  are
grown  over  with  the  moss  of  antiquity ;  the  truly  wise  man  on
the  contrary,  joyfiiUy  crushes  delusion  and  prejudice  beneath
his  powerful  tread,  in  order  to  clear  the  ground  for  the  altar  of
everlasting  truth,  which  needs  not  the  rust  of  antiquity  to  serve
as  a  guarantee  of  its  genuineness,  nor  the  charm  of  novelty  or
of  &shion,  nor  any  voluminous,  verbose  system  to  make  it  com-
prehensible to  us,  nor  the  sanction  of  imposing  authorities,  but
which,  eloquent  with  the  voice  of  God,  speaks  aloud,  in  accents
never  to  be  forgotten,  to  the  inmost  heart  of  every  unpreju-
diced man.

It  was  requisite  that  some  one  should  at  length  beat  the  way,
and  this  I  did.

The  way  now  lies  open.  Every  attentive,  zealous  and  conscien-
tious physician  may  freely  tread  it.

What  though  this  way,  which  alone  leads  with  certainty  and
safety  to  the  goal  of  health,  and  which  I,  setting  aside  all  current
prejudice,  discovered  by  a  calm  observation  of  nature,  is  directly
opposed  to  all  the  dogmas  of  our  medical  schools,  just  as  the
tiieses  which  Luther  of  yore  courageously  posted  on  the  door  of
the  Schlosskirche  of  Wittenberg  were  opposed  to  the  mind-
enslaving  hierarchy — the  fault  lies  neither  with  Luther's  truths
nor  mine.  Neither  he  nor  I  deserved  the  venom  of  the  pre-
judiced.

"  Refiite,"  I  cry  to  my  contemporaries,  "  refute  these  truths  if
you  can,  by  pointing  out  a  still  more  efficacious,  sure  and  agree-
able mode  of  treatment  than  mine — and  do  not  combat  them
with  mere  words,  of  which  we  have  already  too  many.

"  But  should  experience  shew  you,  as  it  has  me,  that  mine  is
the  best,  then  make  use  of  it  for  the  benefit,  for  the  deliverance
of  humanity,  and  give  God  the  glory  I"

But  you,  my  dearest  friend !  endowed  with  the  mild  spirit  of
a  Melancthon,  that  would  fain  unite  all  opposing  parties,  bear
with  me, — since  illusion  will  not  amalgamate  ■\\ath  truth,  bear
with  the  pure-minded  seeker  after  truth,  who  is  inflexible  in  his
convictions,  incorruptible  by  the  false  doctrines  and  illusions  of
systems,  even  though  you  may  not  venture  to  take  a  bold  glance
into  the  reddening  dawn,  that  must  inevitably  usher  in  the  long
wifihed-for  day.


(22  OBSSBYATION8  OK  THB

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  THREE  CURRENT  METHODS  OF

TREATMENT.^


There  have  been  till  now  but  three  current  modes  of  treatmenl
(the  treatment  of  diseases  having  apparently  not  yet  been  ^
covered,)  viz:  the  treatment  of  the  name,  t/ie  treatment  of  the  symp
torn,  and  the  treatment  of  tlie  cause.

TREATMENT  OF  THE  NAMK
Interchangeable  remedies^  compound  prescriptions.

The  method  which  from  the  remotest  time  has  always  finuicl
the  most  partisans,  which  is  the  most  convenient  of  all,  is  tlif
treatment  of  the  name.  "  If  the  patient  has  the  gout^  give  hina
sulphuric  acid ;  the  remedy  for  rheumatism  is  mercury ;  cin-
chona is  good  for  ague,  simaruba  for  dysentery,  squills  for  dropflj/
Here  the  mere  name  of  the  supposed  disease  is  sufficient  to  de
termine  the  parempiric  ^  for  a  remedy  which  crude,  indiscrimi'
Bating  experience  has  sometimes  found  useful  in  diseases  thai
have  been  superficially  termed  gout,  rheumatism,  ague,  dysentery,
distinguished  from  similar  affections.

From  the  very  frequent  cases  of  the  failure  of  this  quaddab
sort  of  practice,  which  is  so  repulsive  to  me  that  I  cannot  dwell
long  upon  it,  some  well-intentioned  adherents  of  this  method
were  from  time  to  time  induced  to  seek  for  several  remedies  foi
each  name  of  a  disease ;  the  rude  experience  of  domestic  practice,
the  oracles  of  old  herbalist  books,  or  fantastic  speculation  (sig-
nature), were  the  gross  sources  whence  these  remedies  flowed
in  abundance.

This  was  the  plan  pursued :  "  If  A  should  not  answer,  try  B^
and  if  this  will  not  do,  a  choice  lies  among  C,  1),  E,  F,  G ;  I  have
often  found  H  and  K  of  service ;  others  recommend  most  highly
J  and  L,  and  I  know  some  who  cannot  sufficiently  praise  M,  U
and  Z,  whilst  others  extol  N,  R  and  T.  S  and  X  also  are  said
not  to  be  bad  in  this  disease.  Some  English  physician  recently
recommended  Q  in  preference  to  all  others  in  this  affection ;  I
certainly  would  be  inclined  to  give  it  a  trial."

"  How  frequently  have  I  formerly  cured  ague  with  cinchona^"
says  another  practitioner,  "  and  yet  of  late  years  I  have  met  with

*  From  UufflandM  Journal  of  Practical  Medicine,  vol  xi,  pt  4. 1809.

*  Parewpiricitm  maj  stand  fur  the  evil  demon,  empiricitm  fur  tho  good  genial  ol
•zpeiience.


THBBK  CUBBSNT  KSTHOD8  OY TBEATMENT. 628

aome  cases  where  I  could  do  nothing  with  it.  One  of  these,  in
which  bark  had  long  been  used  in  vain,  I  might  almost  say  with
injury  to  the  patient,  an  old  woman  in  the  neighbourhood  cured
with  chamomile  tea.  One  of  my  colleagues  cut  short  two  cases
of  ague  with  a  few  emetics,  in  which  neither  chamomile  tea  nor
bark  in  the  largest  doses  was  of  the  slightest  service.  I  tried
this  method  in  cases  where  neither  of  the  two  latter  medicines
did  good,  but  the  emetics  did  no  good  in  them ;  I  bethought
myself  of  giving  sal-ammoniac,  and  to  my  astonishment  the  pa-
tients recovered.  Yet  have  I  met  with  cases  where,  after  bark,
chamomile  and  emetics  were  tried  in  vain,  sal-ammoniac  also
was  of  no  use.  Just  about  that  time  I  read  that  gentian  and
sometimes  nux  vomica  were  useful  in  ague.  I  tried  them.  The
former  answered  in  two  cases,  the  latter  in  three,  where  neither
gentian  nor  the  other  medicines  were  useful.  Belladonna  is  also
said  to  have  cured  certainly  and  thoroughly  some  agues  where  all
other  remedies  have  been  fruitless;  and  some  assert  they  have  met
.with  the  same  result  from  the  use  of  James'  powder  and  calomel.
The  bark  of  mahogany  and  that  of  the  horse-chesnut  have  also
been  lauded ;  but  I  don't  believe  they  have  much  power,  I  can't
tell  why.  We  all  know  what  good  eflfects  opium  oft^n  has.
Beoently  I  was  much  struck  with  a  case  of  quartan  ague,  that
had  tormented  a  robust  peasant  for  a  year  and  a  half,  in  spite  of
the  employment  of  every  conceivable  remedy ;  to  my  astonish-
ment it  yielded  to  a  few  drops  of  tincture  of  ignatia,  sent  to  him
by  a  foreign  professor.  And,  between  you  and  me,  I  must  give
credit  to  our  hangman  for  having  occasionally  effected  radical
cures  of  agues  that  were  ineffectually  treated  by  myself  and  my
colleagues  with  the  above  remedies,  by  means  of  some  red  drops,
which  I  am  credibly  informed  contained  arsenic,  although  he
caused  with  it  in  some  cases  chronic  complaints,  dropsy  and  even
death. So  obstinate  and  capricious  are  agues  sometimes!"

My  friend,  do  you  never  suspect  that  all  these  were  different
kinds  of  agues,  or  rather  intermittent  diseases  differing  completely
from  one  another  ?  If  it  were  possible  that  an  ague  could  be  so
capricious  and  obstinate,  wherefore  did  it  yield  so  readily  to  one
remedy  ?  Do  you  not  suspect  that  there  may  be  more  than  one,
that  there  may  be  perhaps  twenty  different  kinds  of  intermittent
fever,  which  parcmpirical  imbecility  has  included  under  one
head,  has  asserted  all  to  belong  to  a  single  species  (intermittent
fever),  and  has  sought  to  combat  all  with  a  single  remedy,  where-
as each  requires  its  peculiar  remedy,  without  thereby  deserving
to  be  called  capricious  or  obstinate.


524  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THt

'^Ah !  but  the  practical  physician  has  neither  the  inclination
nor  the  time  to  draw  such  fine  distinctions  betwixt  similar  diseases
and  to  assign  to  each  its  appropriate  remedy.  If  the  patient
tells  us  he  has  intermittent  fever,  I  and  my  colleagues  give  him**
(you  fool  I  do  you  not  wish  to  become  a  bit  wiser  ?)  "  at  first  an
emetic  or  two ;  if  that  does  no  good,  or  does  harm,  we  then  give
him  cinchona ;  if  that  does  not  cure  in  large  doses,  neither  the
common  sort  nor  the  royal  bark,  we  then  give — "

Just  so ;  you  blindly  give  one  after  the  other  until  you  hit
upon  the  right  one.  But  you  can  only  go  on  with  your  experi-
ments as  long  as  the  patience,  the  purse,  or  the  life  of  your  pa-
tient lasts  I Your  obedient  servant,  doctor !

And  thus  there  arose  long  lists  of  simple  drugs  (mterchangeable
remedies,  succedaneums)  which  were  all,  without  distinction,  said
to  be  serviceable  for  one  disease.

Out  of  these  lists  of  the  names  of  drugs,  the  more  elegant
physicians,  to  give  themselves  an  air  of  rationality  whilst  they
were  guilty  of  the  grossest  parempiricism,  constructed  their  com-
pound prescriptions, — ^three,  four  or  six  ague  remedies,  five,  six
or  eight  dropsy  remedies,  all  jumbled  together,  drawn  at  hap-
hazard from  the  list,  which  were  recorded  in  their  manuals  under
the  name  "Intermittent  fever,"  *'Dropsy,"  and  used  in  practice
by  coupling  them  with  some  kind  of  spirit,  syrup,  &c.  In  this
case,  too,  the  mere  name  of  the  disease  was  combatted,  but,  by
your  leave,  reader,  much  more  methodically!  with  several
weapons  at  a  time.  "  If  one  ingredient  in  the  mixture  does  not
do  any  good,  then  the  second  and  the  third,  or  if  all  these  strings
break,  the  fourth,  the  sixth,  the  eighth,  tenth,  fifteenth,  must
effect  the  desired  object."  Thenceforth  no  one  would  look  so
no  prescription  was  given  that  did  not  contain  a  hotch-potch  of
simple  drugs ;  and  that  not  for  investigated,  definite  diseases,

'  If  Brown  could  liave  the  merit,  though  himself  a  practical  physidan,  of  hariog
lifted  for  us  the  curtain  which  conceals  the  secret  workings  of  the  organism  from  oar
art^  yet  this  merit  is  reduced  to  a  nullity  by  that  general,  injurious  and  moet
neons  maxim  of  his  (EUmenU  of  Medicine^  §  xcii) :  **  The  cure  of  any  disease  of
siderable  violence,  and  scarce  of  any  at  all,  is  never  to  be  entrusted  to  any  one  r»-
mcdy;  the  use  of  several  remedies  is  preferable  to  that  of  one  ** — a  precept  that  woaU
alone  prove  his  incapacity  as  a  teacher  of  medicine.  Nothing  is  less  known  or  \tm
investigated  in  nature  than  the  powers  of  medicinal  substances,  our  weapon*  !  Haw
can  we  learn  them  otber^'ise  than  by  using  them  singly  I  Or  is  a  single  drug,  if  it
be  the  proper  one,  less  powerful  to  remove  a  single  disease  than  a  mixture  of  serenl
that  counteract  each  other^s  action  \


THBBS  cn^£2rr  methods  of  tbeatment. 625

but  for  mere  names  of  diseases  I Parempiricism  could  not  ascend
higher,  common  sense  could  not  descend  lower.

TREATMENT  OF  THE  SYMPTOM.

Oeneral  indications  ;  general  remedies. Routine  remedies.

The  impossibility  of  discovering  sure  remedies  for  vague
names  of  diseases,  induced  now  and  then  more  conscientious  phy-
sicians to  distinguish  diseases  more  accurately.  Those  that  were
evidently  dissimilar  were  separated,  the  simUarities  of  many  of
them  were  investigated^  and  those  that  were  considered  to  be
connected  were  imited  in  classes,  orders,  and  species,  &c.,  ^iccor-
ding  to  the  similarity  of  their  exciting  causes,  the  functions  that
were  deranged,  the  identity  of  their  seat  in  the  body,  the  pecu-
liar tone  of  the  fibres,  and  some  conmion  symptoms.

By  means  of  this  historical  view  of  the  apparent  relations  and
differences,  they  sought  to  make  us  better  acquainted  with  the
nature  of  flie  innumerable  diseases,  and  to  persuade  us  that  then
we  knew  enough  about  them,  to  enable  us  to  cure  them  after
that.  Some  resorted  to  generalizing  (the  ordinary  pathologists),
others  to  subdividing  (the  nosologists).

But  this  labour  (and  that  at  the  hands  of  men  like  Rudolph
Augustin  Vogel  or  Wichmann)  was  only  successful  in  so  far  as
it  had  reference  to  the  description  of  the  course  of  some  epidemic
diseases  that  frequently  recurred  in  pretty  well  defined  charac-
ters, and  to  the  description  of  endemic  diseases  of  a  fixed  stamp,
and  of  diseases  whose  cause  was  evident  (the  symptoms  produ-
ced by  some  poisons — lead,  charcoal- vapour — or  infection  by
some  miasms  that  never  altered  their  character  much — sjrphilis,
itch).  Still  in  all  these,  indescribable  varieties  occur,  which  often
alter  the  whole  affair.

(For  as  all  other  diseases,  whatever  be  their  outward  resem-
blance— ^for  example,  the  dropsies  and  tumours,  the  chronic  skin
diseases  and  ulcers,  the  abnormal  fiuxes  of  blood  and  mucus,  the
iofinite  varieties  of  pains,  the  hectic  fevers,  the  spasms,  the  so-
caUed  nervous  affections,  &c. — present  such  innimierable  diffe-
rences among  themselves  in  their  other  symptoms,  that  everj'
smgle  case  of  disease  must  as  a  general  rule  be  regarded  as  quite
distinct  fix>m  all  the  rest,  as  a  peculiar  individvxility^  it  is  evident
that  any  general  descriptions  of  them  in  entire  classes  must  not
only  be  superfluous  but  must  lead  to  error.)

However,  I  forbear  at  present  from  attempting  to  estimate
their  services  to  our  art,  and  shall  only  observe  that  the  patho-
logical and  nosological  investigators  who  possessed  this  kind  of


530  OBSEBTATtOKS  OK  THX

historical  knowledge  were  not  much  happier^  in  their  treatmeol
than  those  who  treated  mere  names  of  diseases.

These  in  particular  were  the  persons  who  (in  combination  with
the  therapeutists  by  profession),  as  a  forlorn  hope,  invented  the
make-shift  of  decyphering  the  appropriate  remedy  from  the  de-
scription of  the  disease,  of  devising  for  diseases  arranged  in  ranla
and  orders  some  general  plan  of  treatment  that  should  be  suitable
ifor  every  one  of  them,  that  is  to  say,  the  method  of  treataieat
according  to  general  indications,  the  method  of  treatment  bj
means  of  so-called  general  remedies,  "The  indications  of  impu^
rities  in  the  alimentary  canal  demand  evacuations  upwards  and
downwards,  heat  demands  cooling  medicines,  fluxes  demand
astringents,  putridity  antiseptics,  pains  sedatives,  weakness  tonioa^
spasms  antispasmodics,  constipation  purgatives,  dysuria  diuretieSi
a  dry  skin  diaphoretics."  Under  the  guidance,  of  the  frequently
misunderstood  results  of  experience  the  evacuants,  the  coolio^
remedies,  the  astringents,  the  antiseptics,  the  sedatives^  the
tonics,  the  antispasmodics,  the  purgatives,  the  diuretics,  ud
the  diaphoretics  were  devised,  and  here  was  at  once  a  oonh
plete  system  of  therapeutics,  for  the  over-completeness  ot
which  some  other  classes  of  remedies  were  invented  for  symp*
toms  that  were  often  but  the  offspringof  fancy,  such  as  indsivefl^
solvents,  diluents,  &c.

I  know  not  which  parempiricism  is  preferable  to  the  other,
whether  the  treatment  of  the  name  of  the  disease,  or  the  treat-
ment of  the  name  of  particular  symptoms.  Suffice  it  to  say,
that  this  method  had  much  greater  attractions  for  the  super*
ficially  instructed,  much  greater  than  most  of  the  other  methods
with  a  trace  of  rationality  in  them,  hence  it  was  that  most  gen-
erally pursued  by  those  who  wished  to  be  considered  really
learned  physicians  of  a  better  stamp  than  the  common  herd.
Of  all  the  false  methods  of  treatment  it  will  undoubtedly  have
the  longest  run,  because  it  does  not  necessitate  much  care  nor
much  thought It  is  undoubtedly  very  agreeable  for  the  phy*


'  Even  the  model  of  grapbio  descriptioD,  eyen  the  most  natural  picture  of  the
coDstanteslof  all  dineases,  thom  of  an  endemic  character,  never  guides  us  to  the
medy ; — ^the  most  accurate  amount  of  pellagra,  yaws,  sibbens,  pian,  ringworm,  tataifir,
water-kulk,  plica  polonica,  Ac^  throws  no  light  on  tho  specific  remedy  that  ii  ca-
pable of  removing  each  of  these  maladies  quickly,  easily,  and  radieaUy ;  thb  re-
mains still  concealed  from  our  eyes  in  the  bosom  of  nature.  What  hint^  thcii,eQald
be  derived  for  the  appropriate  remedy  from  the  general  description  of  those  diinaies
whose  character  was  less  constant^  which  presented  more  varieties  among  each  otfMr»
and  were  more  vaguet


TERES  CTTARBNT  METHODS  OF  TREATMENT.  627

flieiaii  to  fed  himself  so  powerful,  or  at  all  events  to  appear  to
be  able  to  promote  perspiration  here,  urine  there,  to  lull  pain
here,  to  excite  there,  to  bind  here,  to  loosen  there,  to  incise
here^  to  expel  there,  to  strengthen  here,  to  cool  there,  to  check
spasms  here^  and  putridity  there,  to  accomplish  all  that  he  com-
mands his  cohorts  of  medicines  to  do.  How  often  the  practi-
tioner  cannot  do  all  this,  how  often  he  finds  himself  deceived
in  his  expectations  relative  to  the  medicines  which  have  been
stamped  as  general  remedies  by  his  teachers,  he  knows  full  well
himself

But  admitting  there  were  such  general  remedies  that  would
here  and  thwe  certainly  promote  perspiration,  assuredly  cause
a  flow  of  urine,  strikingly  soothe  pain,  infallibly  strengthen,
andeniably  resolve,  loosen,  purge,  and  cause  vomiting,  power-
fiilly  act  upon  the  secretion  of  mucus,  in  every  case  cool,  allay
every  spasm,  and  check  every  inordinate  discharge,  unhesita-
tmgly  transfer  congestions  from  a  more  to  a  less  important  seat,
will  all  this,  supposing  it  went  on  ever  so  beautifully,  cure  the
disease?  Oh,  no!  in  most  cases  not.  Something  striking  has
been  performed^  but  health  has  not  been  restored^  and  that  was
what  had  to  be  done.

At  one  time  the  physician  soothes  with  his  opium  for  a  few
hours  cough  and  pains  in  the  chest ;  after  sixteen  hours,  how-
ever, the  painful  cough  increases  to  a  still  more  frightful  extent
— ^he  produces  a  stupified  sleep  with  it,  but  the  patient  is  not
refreshed  thereby,  his  sleeplessness  and  anxiety  become  all  the
greater.  The  physician  does  not  care  for  this ;  he  increases  the
dose  of  his  palliative,  or  he  is  contented  with  having  shewn  his
power  to  allay  cough  and  to  cause  sleep,  though  the  patient  is
made  worse  thereby,  though  he  should  even  die.  Fiat  justitia
Hpereat  Tnundus,

Here  is  a  case  of  dropsy ;  very  little  urine  is  passed.  Our
doctor  wiU  promote  its  flow,  llis  squill  stands  at  the  head  of
his  diuretic  picquet.  Beautiful  I  it  instantly  causes  a  great  flow
of  urine,  but  on  continuing  its  use,  alas  I  always  less  and  less
▼ater  comes.  Symptoms  of  atonic  inflammation  and  mortifi-
cation ensue,  the  anorexia,  debility  and  restlessness  increase
with  the  swelling.  Then  if  nothing  more  will  avail,  he  allows
the  patient  to  die  quietly,  after  having  shewn  that  he  has  the
power  of  causing  a  flow  of  urine  for  some  days.

Squill  has  been  used  many  thousands  of  times  as  a  diuretic
(during  all  the  ages  it  has  been  employed  it  was  never  observed


528  0BSSBYATI0N8  ON  THX

that  it  was  only  diuretic  in  a  palliative  sense)  and  yet  how  sel-
dom has  dropsy  been  cured  by  it  I  only  when  a  kind  of  sup*
pressed  menstruation  was  the  cause.

The  physician  who  is  consulted  diagnoses  this  malady  to  be
gastric;  he  purges,  and  re-purges.  But  behold  the  fever  in-
creases, the  taste  becomes  more  disagreeable,  the  breath  and  the
excrements  more  fetid,  the  sclerotic  yellower,  the  tongue  more
furred  and  browner,  the  ideas  get  confused,  the  lips  tremblOi
stupifying  slumber  takes  the  place  of  sleep,  &c.  He  is  sorry  to
see  his  patient  hurrying  on  towards  his  grave,  but  he  is  happy
that  he  possessed  the  power  of  energetically  purging  away  the
impurities.  What  is  the  matter  with  you?  "I  put  myself  in
a  violent  passion,  my  head  is  like  to  burst,  I  have  spasms  in
my  stomach,  the  bile  rises  incessantly  into  my  mouth."  Yon
will,  perhaps,  take  a  bilious  fever,  take  this  emetic  immediately.
Look  I  he  throws  up  bile,  he  vomits  again  and  again,  he  wiU
vomit  up  his  very  inside — the  night  of  death  obscures  his  sights
whilst  he  is  bathed  in  cold  perspiration.  "I  have  done  my
duty,"  says  the  doctor  to  himself;  "  I  have  done  all  I  could  to
clear  away  the  bad  bile.''

And  thus  it  is  with  the  whole  array  of  general  remedies
The  respectable  doctor  does  much,  only  not  what  he  ought;—
he  produces  remarkable  effects,  but  very  seldom  health.

Thousand-fold  experience  could  teach  him,  if  he  would  but
let  himself  be  taught,  that  in  dropsy  he  only  requires  to  remove
the  morbid  disposition,  in  order  to  see  the  water  disappear  by
ways  which  nature  knows  best  how  to  choose  for  herself, — but
that  his  designed  removal  of  the  water  by  the  urinary  organs^
or  by  stool,  effects  a  cure  as  seldom  as  tapping  it  off  with  the
trocar ;  when  a  cure  docs  ensue,  it  must  be  because  the  diuretic
remedy  was  accidentally  at  the  same  time  the  proper  remedy
for  the  disease  upon  which  that  kind  of  dropsy  depended.

Thousand-fold  experience  could  teach  him,  if  he  would  bnt
let  himself  be  taught,  that  no  pain  can  be  removed  permanent^
and  advantageously  to  the  patient  except  by  a  remedy  thiU
affords  relief  to  the  fundamental  disease;  that,  consequently,
opium  very  rarely  allays  pains  permanently  mith  desirable  resuIUj
and  only  when  it  is  the  true  remedy  for  the  disease  on  which
they  depended.

That  opium  is  often  the  best  remedy  in  diseases  most  free
from  pain,  and  attended  with  the  greatest  amount  of  sopor,  that
he  does  not  and  will  not  know. He  is  proud  of  his  power  of


THBIE  OUBBSNT  XETHODB  OF  TBKATXENT. 629

piUiating;  and  of  being  able  to  allay  pains  for  a  few  hours ;  but
the  after-effieota — thej  do  not  trouble  him.  Nil  nisi  quod  ante
pedes  est

Where  the  short-sighted  individual  thought  that  it  was  abso-
lutely necessary  to  remove  bucketfuls  of  fetid  mucus  and  excre-
ment by  means  of  all  sorts  of  emetics  and  purgatives,  in  order
to  preserve  life,  in  such  a  case  a  single  drop  of  the  tincture  of
arnica  root  will  often  remove,  in  the  course  of  a  couple  of  hours,
all  the  fever,  all  the  bilious  taste,  all  the  tormina,  the  tongue
becomes  dean,  and  the  strength  is  restored  before  night.  Short-
sighted being!

But  the  poisonous  bile,  stirred  up  by  rage  and  passion,  how
can  it  be  subdued  without  causing  it  to  be  vomited  clean  away?
My  short-sighted  firiend !  a  single  dose,  an  almost  imperceptibly
small  quantity  of  the  right  medicine^  will,  without  any  evacuor
(m  t^bilsj  have  restored  all  to  the  right  state  before  the  second
day  dawns.  The  patient  has  not  died  as  he  would  have  done
a^  your  emetic ;  he  has  recovered.

How  often  are  blood-letting  and  nitre  abused,  to  combat
qrmptoms  of  heat  I  Lay  aside  your  life-shortening,  temporizing
remedies,  remove  the  disease  on  which  the  accelerated  pulse  de*
ponds,  by  the  appropriate  remedy,  and  the  heat  ceases  of  its
own  accord.  But  I  perceive  you  are  not  concerned  about  the
core  of  the  disease,  to  subdue  the  heat  is  your  object.  Then
nther  open  one  of  the  large  arteries  until  the  last  drop  of  blood
is  drained  off,  you  will  thereby  attain  your  object  more  surely
and  more  completely  I

And  thus  it  is  always  with  your  favourite  general  remedies.
They  render  you  the  service  of  sometimes  shewing  you  to  be  a
mighty  physician.  Only  it  is  a  pity  that  the  patient  who  per-
adventure  recovers  (slowly  and  painfully  enough  1)  seldom,  sel-
dom owes  his  recovery  to  Hiem.

But  the  general  remedies  just  as  often  do  not  perfonn  the
eflSects  they  desire.  Only  look,  how  their  antiphlogistic  reme-
dies often  actually  increase  the  inflammation,  how  their  tonics
increase  the  weakness,  their  purgatives  the  symptoms  of  impu-
rities in  the  alimentary  canal,  their  solvents  the  quantity  of
mucus  and  the  hardness  of  the  abdomen,  their  sedatives  the
pains,  their  derivatives  the  congestions,  their  diaphoretics  the
dryness  of  the  skin,  their  diuretics  the  want  of  urine  and
oodemal


* J'Vfq'n-n<1v  t^«.'  <•>'»}  »*l  «?!' rl. :«*.:••■  ."l*


680  OBSXRVATIOKS  ON  TBI

And  if  they  sometimes  sucooed  in  checking  this  or  that
symptom  for  a  time,  or  in  efFecting  this  or  that  striking  evacoa^
tion,  how  comes  it  that  the  disease  notwithstanding  sometiiiMS
assumes  a  worse  turn  ?  Am  I  right  in  asserting  thai  Aey  were
not  the  proper  remedies  for  the  disease  f

In  like  manner,  the  poor  fellow  unable  to  swim,  strugg^
away  witJi  awkward  partial  movements  of  his  arms  and  \eg^  to
sink  all  the  more  certainly  to  the  bottom.

In  ordinary  everyday  practice,  however,  it  is  not  required
Uiat  we  should  trouble  ourselves  with  anxiously  attending  to
single .  symptoms.  '*  When  once  we  have  got  over  the  first
irksome  years  incidental  to  young  beginners — ^years  they  un-
doubtedly are  of  irksomeness  and  care,  when  we  are  still  anx-
ious to  discover  the  adequate,  the  helpful,  the  best  for  our  pa-
tients, and  when  the  tender  conscience  of  youth  gives  us  much
trouble — ^when  once  we  have  got  over  these  pedantic  years,  and
have  got  some  way  into  the  period  of  divine  routine,  then  it  is
a  real  pleasure  to  be  a  practical  physician.  Then  we  have  only
to  assume  a  dignified  mode  of  carrying  the  head,  speak  in  a
tenor  voice  so  as  to  inspire  respect,  give  great  importance  to  the
movements  of  the  three  first  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  and  pre-
sent a  certain  authoritative  something  in  the  whole  manage-
ment of  the  voice  and  attitudes  of  the  body,  in  order  to  be  aUe
to  exercise  perfectly  in  all  its  details,  the  golden  art  of  the
savoirfaire  of  the  routine  physician.  Of  course  the  smallest  de-
tails of  the  attire  of  the  equipage,  of  the  furniture,  and  of  the
array  of  servants,  must  all  be  in  harmonious  keeping.

"  If  our  whole  thinking  power  and  memory  during  the  four-
and-twenty  hours  of  each  day  are  completely  absorbed  in  such
matters,  this  renders  us  all  the  more  successful  as  physidana.
Our  whole  practice,  be  it  said  betwixt  ourselves,  consists  in  two
or  three  innocuous  mixtures,  well  known  to  the  chemist,  in  as
many  compound  powders  adapted  for  all  cases,  in  an  expensive
dnciura  nervino-roborans,  a  few  juleps,  and  a  couple  of  formulaa
for  pills,  either  for  acting  on  the  blood  or  the  bowels  {tioatrums
and  roiUine  remedies  if  you  will),  and  with  these  we  get  on  capi-
tally. My  steaming  horses  ratUe  up  to  N.'s  door,  I  descend  fit>m
my  carriage  assisted  by  the  respectful  domestic,  with  belpfiil
speed,  but  with  an  air  of  deep  thought  and  dignified  mien.  The
attendants  of  the  patient  throw  open  both  wings  of  the  door  of
the  sick-room.  In  silence  and  with  abased  head  stand  esteem,
confidence,  and  semi-devotion  in  a  row,  to  allow  the  deliverer  to


THBKE  CUBBKirr  MBTHODS  OV  TREATMENT.  681


ipproach  die  siok  bed. '  How  did  you  sleep  last  night,  my  good
fUend? — ^your  tongue!— your  pulse  1 The  powders  ordered
18  to  be  taken  alternately  with  the  pills  indicated  below,  followed
by  the  julep  every  half-hour.' Taking  a  pinch  of  snuff  with  an
air  of  profound  gravity,  seizing  my  hat  and  stick  and  making  a
practised  bow,  the  degree  of  which  is  regulated  for  every  one  in
particular  according  to  his  supposed  importance  or  rank,  this
constitutes  the  whole  of  the  important  comedy  (shall  I  coll  it
business  ?)  for  which  we  are  paid  as  a  consultation,  and  which  we
rq)eat  as  often  per  diem  as  the  serious  looks  of  the  surrounding
fiiends  seem  to  render  it  necessary ;  for  they  are  the  barometer
of  the  danger,  since  we  have  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  as-
certain it  for  ourselves  in  all  our  cases." And  how  many  visits
of  this  sort  do  you  pay  in  one  day  ? '*  Do  you  imagine,  you
nmpleton,  that  I  can  keep  up  my  establishment  with  less  than
Beveral  dozens  of  visits  in  a  forenoon  ?" — What  Ilcrculean  men-
tal labour  I — "  Ha !  ha  I  ha !  to  scribble  down  on  a  long  strip  of
piper  one  of  the  eight  or  ten  routine  prescriptions  that  I  can
reckon  up  on  my  fingers,  and  can  seize  on  in  the  dark  without  a
moment's  thought,  the  first,  the  best  that  occurs  to  mc  at  the
moment^  without  the  least  reflection ;  do  you  call  that  mental
labour  ? It  is  a  much  more  difficult  matter  for  me  to  find  a  pair
of  handsome  bays  to  supply  the  place  of  my  used-up  afternoon
horsesi  hoe  opus,  hie  labor  I

"  I  have  just  now  also  much  difficulty  in  thinking  of  the  appro-
priate dishes  for  the  sixth  entrde  of  the  entertainment  we  are  to
give  to  morrow  fortniglit,  so  that  it  may  be  distinguished  for  its
rarity  in  respect  of  the  season  of  the  year,  for  its  suitable  ele-
gance, and  for  its  brilliant  tastefulness.  Et  hoc  ojm^  et  hie  labor  /"
The  so-called  favourite  remedies  are  in  great  vogue ;  without
being  able  to  give  the  slightest  reason  for  so  doing,  one  physician
of  the  ordinary  stamp  will  mix  with  every  prescription,  prepared
muscle-shells,  a  second  always  manages  to  introduce  magnesia,  a
third  invariably  adds  spiritus  mindereri,  a  fourth  can  scarcely
write  a  prescription  from  which  purified  nitre  is  excluded,  a  fifth
brings  into  all  his  prescriptions  the  ins])issated  juice  of  the  root
of  triticum  repens,  a  sixth  thinks  he  cannot  give  the  extract  of
dandelion  often  enough,  a  seventh  seasons  every  draught  with
opium,  and  an  eighth  endeavours  to  bring  in  cinchona  every  where,
whether  it  is  suitable  or  not,  and  so  it  goes  on.  Most  every -day  phy-
ociana  have,  they  know  nut  why,  their  favourite  remedies. Anj  •


982  OBSBRYATIONB  OK  THK

thing  more  indolent  and  par-empirical  cannot  be  imagined.  How
should  all  the  conntless  array  of  infinitely  various  diseases,  each
of  which  demands  a  peculiar  mode  of  treatment,  always  acoom-
modate  themselves  to  one  and  the  same  remedy,  which  the  doe-
tor  may  happen  to  have  taken  under  his  sublime  protection?
Sooner  might  a  cabinet-minister  be  chosen  from  mere  caprice^
and  it  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  subjects  of  the  prince  will
be  sufficiently  obedient  and  intelligent  as  to  make  harmony  of
the  false  gamut

To  stake  constantly  on  the  drawing  of  one  and  the  sam^.
number  always  betrays  a  bad  lotto-player. He  must  certainl]^
occasionally  win,  but  how  much,  or  rather  how  little  can  he  win
And  does  he  not  continually  lose,  these  few  miserable
excepted,  by  not  winning? Does  he  not  render  himself  ridicu-
lous to  all  the  world?

TREATMENT  OP  THE  CAUSE.

Treatment  foiinded  on  the  internal  essence  of  the  difease.

In  a  practically  useful  point  of  view  we  may  divide  diseases
in  general  into  two  classes ;  diseases  having  a  visible,  simply
maierial  cause,  and  diseases  having  an  immaterial  dynamic
cause.

The  first  class,  Hie  diseases  having  an  obvious^  simple^  material
cause,  such  as  a  splinter  stuck  in  the  finger,  a  stone  swallowed^
a  concretion  in  the  biliary  ducts  or  the  bladder,  an  accumula-
tion of  plum-stones  in  the  coocum,  an  acrid  acid  in  the  stomach,
a  fragment  of  the  skull  pressing  on  the  brain,  a  too-prolonged
frenum  to  the  tongue,  &c.,  are  much  less  numerous  than  the  dis-
eases of  the  second  class.

The  indication  for  treatment  is  obvious.  All  are  agreed  that
it  consists  in  the  removal  of  the  material  cause,  be  that  mechani-
cal, be  it  merely  chemical,  or  a  mixture  of  both.  This  generally
suffices  to  effijct  a  cure,  provided  no  considerable  destruction  of
the  organ  has  occiirred.

Its  consideration  does  not  concern  us  at  present.

We  shall  occupy  ourselves  with  the  mode  of  curing  the  second
class  of  diseases,  the  countless  array  of  all  other  diseases  properly
so  called,  of  an  acute,  sub-acute,  and  chronic  character,  together
with  the  numerous  ailments,  indispositions,  and  abnormal  states,
having  an  immaterial  dynamic  cause.

It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  seek  for  the
exciting  causes  of  the  phenomena  he  sees  about  him,  and  henoe
^e  see,  that  no  sooner  does  a  disease  show  itself  than  every  one


TERES  .OUSaSNT  KETH0D8  OF  TREATMENT.  683

oooni»6B  kunaelf  with  attributing  it  to  some  fiouroe,  that  which
fleems  to  him  to  be  the  most  likely  one.  But  we  should  be
gFBRtly  mistaken  ii^  from  this  irresistible  propensity  to  seek  a
cause  for  an  effect|  we  should  infer  a  necessity  for  such  know-
ledge in  order  to  effect  a  cure.

For  very  few  diseases  of  the  latter  class  do  we  know  the
dynamic  cause  even  by  name,  of  none  do  we  know  the  nature.
lato  the  secrets  of  nature  no  created  mind  can  penetrate.  And
yet  as  regards  diseases,  it  is  imagined  that  both  can  be  known.
The  ordinary  physician  has  this  in  common  with  the  generaUtj
of  people^  that  he  imagines  he  can  assign  an  exciting  cause  for
every  perceptible  alteration  in  the  health,  and  those  physicians
who  were  apparently  the  wisest,  imagined  that  they  could  pene-
trate even  to  the  internal  essence  of  diseases,  and  that  they  were
thweby  enabled  to  cure  them.

Owing  to  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,  it  is  impossible  that
the  eaaeutial  nature  of  most  of  the  dynamic  causes  derived  from
vithoui  can  ever  be  ascertained.

How  much  have  not  some  attempted  to  demonstrate  to  us
fespec&ng  the  influence  of  the  seasons  and  of  the  various  states
of  the  weather,  as  exciting  causes  of  diseases !  We  were  told  of
the  variations  in  the  thermometer  and  barometer,  the  various
winds,  and  the  alternations  of  moisture  and  drj^ncss  of  the  atmos-
(dieiie  for  a  whole  year,  or  at  least  for  several  months,  before
the  oecorrenoe  of  an  epidemic,  and  the  murderous  disease  was
attributed  quite  off-hand  and  without  much  consideration  to  the
weather  that  prevailed  during  all  that  long  period,  just  as  if  the
disease  could  be  derived  from  the  state  of  the  weather,  or  as  if
chey  bore  the  relation  to  one  another  of  cause  and  effect  But
granting  that  there  was  something  in  this,  at  least  in  the  varia-
tions of  the  seasons,  as  the  cause,  or  at  least  partly  the  cause  of
particular  kinds  of  diseases,  how  little  comfort  can  the  physician
derive  from  these  unalteritUe  accompaniments  of  the  world's
course,  how  little  assistance  do  they  render  him  in  proving  the  in-
dications from  which  lie  can  bid  deflanee  to  the  epidemic  actually
prevailing  I  Were  the  season  of  the  year  and  the  previous  state
of  the  weather  really  the  cause  of  the  prevailing  distemper,  it
wovld  avail  him  little  or  nothing  to  know  this,  seeing  that  from
this  cause  the  speciiic  remedy  for  the  pestilence  cannot  be  de-
duced, cannot  be  decyphered.

Fright,  fear,  horror,  anger,  vexation,  a  chill,  &c.,  are  impres-
aona  that  do  not  present  themselves  in  a  concrete  form,  that
cannot  be  subjected  to  physical  investigation.


584  OBSERVATIONS  OUT  TEE

w

How  and  to  what  extent  thede  impressions  derange  thelraman
system,  what  especial  kind  of  disease  they  produce  in  it,  is  so
entirely  unknown  to  ns,  that  we  obtain  not  the  slightest  hint
for  the  treatment  of  the  diseases  they  give  rise  to,  by  being  in*
formed  of  the  names  of  their  probable  source — ^fright^  fear,
yexation,  anger,  &c.  The  most  abstract  investigation  into  the
metaphysical  nature  of  fright  affords  the  physician  no  instmo-
tion  relative  to  the  proper  treatment  of  its  effects,  never  ex-
presses the  name  of  the  appropriate  remedy  of  the  acute  symp-
toms arising  from  fright — the  name  of  opium.  This  is  not  the
place  to  indicate  the  shorter,  more  natural  way  by  which  this
remedy  has  been  discovered  for  these  accidents.

It  is  very  easy  to  say,  that  we  may  attribute  itch  to  the  itch
miasm,  the  venereal  disease  to  the  venereal  miasm,  variola  to  the
variolous  miasm,  ague  to  the  marsh  miasm.  By  pronouncing
these  names  not  the  slightest  advance  is  made  to  obtaining  a
more  accurate  knowledge  of  these  diseases,  nor  yet  to  their  ap-
propriate treatment.  The  morbific  miasms  are  as  thoroogfalj
unknown  to  us  as  regards  their  internal  nature,  as  the  diseases
themselves  they  produce.  Their  essential  nature  is  quite  beyond
the  reach  of  our  senses,  and  their  true  remedies  will  never  be
learned  from  what  the  schools  can  teach  us  regarding  their  ex-
citing causas.  All  that  has  been  discovered  relative  to  their
remedies  has  been  discovered  by  mere  accident,  by  unpremedi-
tated experience.  But  the  way  to  seek  for  them  purposely  and
to  find  them  will  never  be  deducible  from  aught  we  can  ascer-
tain respecting  the  internal  cause  of  the  disease.

What  amount  of  knowledge  respecting  the  cause  and  essential
nature  of  endemic  diseases  would  suffice  to  reveal  to  us  their  true
remedies  ?  For  us  weak  mortals  there  will  ever  remain  an  im-
passable gulf  betwixt  such  a  fancied  knowledge  and  the  remedy.
Beason  will  never  discover  a  logical  connexion  betwixt  the  two!
Were  even  a  God  to  enlighten  us  in  regard  to  the  invisible  al-
terations produced  in  the  interior  of  the  minuest  portions  of  our
body  by  the  miasm  of  that  most  tedious,  periodical  endemic  dis-
ease that  prevails  in  a  portion  of  Lunenburg  and  Brunswick —
the  waier-kulk  (water-colic)  as  it  is  termed,  which  the  eye  of  the
practised  anatomist  cannot  discover,  and  were  our  mind,  that  is
cognizant  only  of  seiisuous  impressions  capable  of  understanding
such  transcendental  instruction,  this  intuitive  knowledge  would
never  guide  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  only  specific  and  in&llible
remedy — ^the  verairum  album. But  this  is  not  the  place  to  shew


TEBME CURBBNT  HBTHODS  OF  TBSATKEMT. 685

the  ahorter,  more  natural  way  in  which  the  remedy  for  this  dia-
ease  may  be  sought  and  found.

Neither  the  name  of  goitre,  nor  its  probable  cause  (a  residence
in  mountain  valleys)  whispers  to  our  mind  the  name  of  its  re-
medy which  was  revealed  by  mere  accident—the  burnt  sponge.
Why  then  should  toe  falsely  and  proudly  pretend  tiiat  we  can  cure
imasesfrom  our  knowledge  of  their  dynamic  causes  f

For  tiie  accidents  and  diseases  produced  by  commercial  and
pharmaceutic  poisons  the  appropriate  remedies  have  partially
been  discovered,  but  it  was  neither  speculative  investigation
into  the  internal  nature  of  these  diseases  nor  physico-chemical
analysis  of  their  cause — ^the  poisons — ^that  taught  us  these  spe-
cific antidotes,  but  a  much  shorter  procedure,  and  one  much  more
consonant  with  nature.  It  is  not  very  long  since  these  hurtful
aabatances  were  attempted  to  be  removed,  often  with  very  un-
happy results,  by  emetics,  diluent  drinks  or  purgatives,  as  if  they
oppressed  the  stomach  and  bowels  in  a  merely  mechanical  man-
•  ner.  Now,  we  know  how  to  combat  many  of  them  like  morbific
causes  of  the  second  class,  of  dynamic  nature,  by  their  appro*
priate  antidotes.  They  effect  an  alteration  of  the  whole  system
in  a  peculiar,  to  us  unknown  manner,  and  their  effects  can  never
be  cored  like  mere  local  mechanical  irritations,  as  was  formerly
imagined.

Others  went  much  more  learnedly  to  work,  and  divided  them,
in  an  entirely  apodictie  manner,  just  as  though  they  had  been
inspired  thereto  by  a  God,  into  acrids,  narcotics,  narcotico-acrids,
&a,  and  agreeably  to  this  arbitrary  classification,  dictated  their
remedies  in  an  equally  arbitrary  manner ; — a  true  2>icture  of  the
Viode  of  procedure  of  the  schools^  classifying  natural  diseases^  and  as-
signing  t/ie  remedies  for  them  !  Arbitrariness,  conceited  arbitrari-
ness, and  self-satisfied  pride  I

Thus  belladonna  and  nux  vomica  were,  with  arbitrary  des-
potism, ranked  among  the  narcotic  poisons,  and  the  vegetable
acids,  lemon  juice  and  vinegar,  were  cavalierly  ap];)ointed  their
antidotes.  Unfortunately  for  them,  their  assumed  omniscience
could  here  be  put  to  an  infallible  test,  and  their  error  detected
in  the  very  act.  It  was  proved  that  vegetable  acids  were  the
very  substances  that  most  aggravated  the  symptoms.  And  so  it
taiU  usually  be  found,  that  Oic  very  opposite  of  what  Ouiy  assert  is
often  the  truth,

Sed  saeculorum  commenta  delei  dies.

It  never  could  have  entered  into  the  imagination  of  this  church


636'  OBSKBYAnONB  OK  THS

beyond  whose  pale  there  is  no  salvation,  to  aaedgn  opium  as  tiie
antidote  of  the  one,  camphor  as  that  of  the  other  of  these  ix>wer-
fill  substances,  as  experience  has  shewn  to  be  the  case.

But  they  were  not  content  with  dragging  in  as  it  were  by  the
ears,  or  inventing  external  causes  for  diseases,  or  with  arbitnrily
attributing  to  them  some  peculiar  nature,  and,  I  cannot  say
searching  for  (for  one  can  only  search  for  a  thing  when  there  ara
well-grounded  traces  and  indications  of  its  existence),  but  imther
imagining  and  inventing  remedies  directed  against  this  supposed
nature.  They  went  still  more  learnedly  to  work,  and  oonoooted
in  their  brains  all  sorts  of  internal  causes  of  diseases.

The  ambitious  notion  that  they  were  capable  of  referring  moat
diseases  to  one  or  a  couple  of  internal  causes,  now  became  the
origin  of  the  many  sects  among  physicians,  each  suooessive  one
of  which  was  more  fantastic  than  its  predecessor.

One  of  these,  and  that  not  the  wOrst,  expressed  the  in  scHiie
degree  special  life  and  the  peculiarities  and  particular  actiona  of*
each  individual  organ,  by  the  figurative  name  of  an  Art^asus^  %
kind  of  particular  spirit  of  this  or  that  part,  and  imagined  that
when  this  or  that  part  suffered  they  required  to  soothe  its  parti*
oular  ArchcmSy  and  give  its  thoughts  another  direction.  It  ap»
pears  to  me  that  they  meant  to  make  a  confession  of  the  inoom*
prehensibility  of  all  the  phenomena  of  disease,  and  a  confession
of  their  inability  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  these  supernatural
things.

Others  thoughts  to  persuade  us  that  a  predominance  of  acid
nothing  but  alkalies.  An  attempt  to  ally  itself  with  them  waa
made  by  the  old  sect  which  referred  all  kinds  of  acute  diseases^
especially  the  epidemic  maladies,  to  a  common  poison  whic^
they  contended  often  developed  itself  in  the  interior  of  the  body,
and  sought  for  the  antidote  of  this  poison,  which  they  believed
to  be  the  general  excitant  of  most  diseases,  in  absorbent  alkaline
earths,  but  especially  in  the  stony  concretions  found  in  the
stomach  of  an  antelope  (bezoar)  and  in  the  most  heating  spices
mixed  with  opium  (mithridate,  theriac,  philonium,  &a).  Their
abuse  of  the  earthy  powders  has  extended  down  to  modem  times,
and  their  evil  demon,  the  empirical  universal  abuse  of  opium,
has  now  possessed  some  sects  of  the  present  time,  who  have
thought  of  other  reasons  for  their  misapplication  of  this  remedy
tor  special  cases  as  a  positively  universal  remedy.

C  L.  Hoffmann  imagined  that  he  had  an  equal  right  to  .aei


THBXX  CUBBINT  MKTHODS  OF  TBEATKENT. 687

ibrtli  as  a  aniversal  truth  hia  own  particular  notion  that  almost
all  diseases  arose  from  a  kind  of  putridity,  and  were  to  be  cured
with  remedies  which  his  school  denominates  antiseptics.

No  one  will  question  his  right  any  more  than  they  will  that
of  the  other  leaders  of  sects,  who  perceived  in  diseases  nothing
bat  acridities  in  the  blood;  demonstrated  these  for  our  edification
bj  &r  fetched,  scholastic  arguments,  and  in  an  off-hand  manner
«t  ooce  invented  the  remedies  for  the  black  bile,  for  the  psoric,
irthritic,  scrofulous,  rachitic,  muriatic  and  God  knows  what
other  kinds  of  imaginary  acridities,  until  the  modems,  unmind*
fill  of  the  medio  tutissimua,  founded  a  religion  equally  exaggerated
in  the  opposite  direction,  in  which  the  fluids  were  entirely  ban-
ished from  the  list  of  morbific  causes,  and  the  production  of
disease  was  attributed  to  the  solids  alone.

headed fellow  and  now  by  that,  at  one  time  to  this,  at  another  to
that  cause.  All  this  time  they  remained  in  quiet  possession,
«id  never  suffered  themselves  to  be  disturbed.

Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  on  the  whole  more  diseases  were
«Qred  by  one  sect  than  by  another. To  excogitate  causes  of  dia-
bases, speculative  modes  of  their  production,  and  to  found  systems
thereon,  were  wbat  was  aimed  at;  but  not  to  cure  them. The
'former  undertaking  exalts  the  artist  much  nearer  the  stars  than
the  latter,  and  thus  diseases  remained  just  as  before,  uucured,
except  such  of  them  as  would  get  as  well  of  their  own  accord|
that  is,  under  any  arbitrary  treatment  whatsoever.

The  doctrine  of  bad  humours  long  enchained  mankind,  the
dominion  of  acridities  and  perverted  juices  long  prevailed.  But
as  the  specific  anti-acridity  remedies  could  not  so  readily  be
found  out,  the  whole  joke  usually  and  principally  consisted  in
producing  evacuations.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  en^pirical
hazard, which  the  humoral  physician  commanded  to  enter  the
blood,  to  sweeten  it,  to  correct  it,  and  to  expel  by  sweat  and
arine  the  impure  parts  of  it  separated  from  the  good  portion  as
if  by  magic,  the  principal  manoeuvre  of  the  humoral  school  con-
sisted in  the  evacuation  of  the  bad  blood  (bleeding  mania)  and
in  the  expulsion  of  the  impure  fluids  by  the  mouth  and  anus
(sterooralism,  saburralism.)

How  ?  did  they  pretend  to  let  out  the  impure  blood  only  ?
What  magician's  hand  could  separate,  as  through  a  sieve,  the  de-
praved from  the  good  blood  within  the  blood-vessels,  so  that


588  »  OBSERYATIONS  ON  THX

odIj  the  bad  would  be  drawn  off  and  the  good  remain  7  What
head  is  so  rudely  organized  as  to  believe  that  thej  could  effaci
this?  Sufficient  for  them  that  streams  of  blood  ytere  apilt^  of
that  vital  fluid  for  which  even  Moses  shewed  so  much  reqpect^
and  that  justly.

The  more  refined  humoralists,  in  addition  to  the  impurities  in
the  blood,  alleged  besides,  the  existence  of  a  pretended,  almoBt
universal  plethora,  as  an  excuse  for  their  frightful,  mensilMi
blood-lettings ;  they  also  gave  out  that  these  acted  derivatively,
fects  to  them.  They  acted,  as  we  see,  like  other  sects,  quite  a^
bitrarily,  but  obviously  with  an  endeavour  (not  indeed  to  cun^
that  would  be  vulgar,  no  I)  to  give  to  their  arbitrary  procedures
the  highest  possible  colouring  of  rationality.

Seasons  equally  excellent,  aims  equally  sage,  had  the  humoial-
saburral  physicians  for  their  innumerable  emetics  and  their
strong  and  mild  purgatives.  '^  Consider  the  quantity  of  impa-
rities that  are  thereby  purged  from  the  blood,  only  look  at  the
contents  of  the  chamber  utensil  1  When  all  that  has  been  re-
moved, then  the  body  will  be  purified  from  all  bad  humoon.
Consider,  moreover,  what  a  quantity  of  impurities  must  daily
remain  and  collect  in  the  body  from  the  food  and  drink  we  take
in ; — it  must  be  purged  away,  and  that  repeatedly,  if  we  do  nod
wish  the  patient  to  die.  Observe  also  how  most  patients  com*
plain  of  tense  or  at  all  events  painful  abdomen,  or  at  least  of  on-
naturally  shaped  hypochondria,  furred  tongue  and  bad  taste;
who  can  fail  to  perceive  from  these  signs  that  the  germs  of  all
fevers,  the  actual  cause  of  all  diseases,  lie  in  the  impurities  of
the  first  passages?  Yes,  we  must  certainly  purge,  and  that  fre-
quently and  strongly,  in  order  to  bring  away  the  material  cause
of  the.disease.  The  excellence  of  our  method  is  shewn  by  thia^
that  we  arc  in  high  estimation  as  skilful  physicians.  The  pa-
tient feels  that  he  gets  a  good  equivalent  for  his  money,  he  pc^
ceives  how  the  medicine  acts  on  his  body,  and  he  sees  with  lus
own  eyes  the  impurities  that  are  expelled  from  him  I  Who  can
deny  that  all  this  speaks  to  the  convictions  of  the  people,  who
can  doubt  that  our  church  alone  holds  the  true  faith  ?"

"  I  cannot  quite  agree  \vith  you,  brother,"  says  another  branch
bile.  I  maintain  that  they  all  depend  upon  the  phlegm  in  the
first  passages.  The  phlegm  must  be  energetically  cut  into,  dili-
gently dissolved ;  the  phlegm,  I  say,  must  be  properly  purged


THBIS  CUBBXNT  METHODS  OF  TREATMENT. 689

ftwaj,  in  Older  to  extirpate  the  disease  by  the  roots.  All  your
bilious  and  putrid  fevers  are  masked  pituitous  fevers,  all  con-
eeivable  diseases  now-a-days  depend  upon  phlegm,  and  if  pa*
tienta  treated  according  to  our  method  are  long  in  recovering,
we  yet  can  boast  of  our  system  that  it  is  radical  and  lucrative."
•  Thus  would  Blennophilos  (in  the  style  of  his  whole  art)  des-
cant still  more  discursively  upon  the  advantages  of  his  system,
whilst  Eucholos,  greatly  displeased  at  hearing  the  bile  denied  to
be  the  universal  cause  of  diseases,  could  not  refrain  from  making
an  equally  vigorous  speech  in  defence  of  bile,  which  demands  a
general  employment  of  emetics  and  purgatives.  *'  Bile,  bile
must  be  expelled,"  was  the  conclusion  of  his  philippic,  "dili-
gently and  imiversally,  upwards  and  downwards  must  it  be  ex-
peUed,  for  it  is  the  originating  cause  of  all  diseases  I"

Accordingly  the  poor  world  was  for  more  than  half  a  century
properly  cleared  out  upwards  and  downwards,  so  that  any  one
must  have  thought  that  it  was  thoroughly  cleansed  of  all  impu-
rities. All  a  mistake,  said  Kiimpf  they  are  not  nearly  enough
dissolved  and  purged,  at  least  they  have  not  had  half  enough  of
the  only  efBicacious  process  from  below.  The  source  of  all  dis-
eases has  been  sought  for  in  an  entirely  wrong  place.  Whence
proceed  the  many  hundreds  of  hypochondriacal  and  hysterical
nervous  diseases,  the  hitherto  mysterious  chronic  diseases  of  the
better  classes,  whence  all  the  pulmonary,  hepatic,  splenic,  cuta-
neous and  cephalic  diseases,  and  I  may  say  all  other  diseases,
whence  do  they  aU  proceed  if  not  from  infarctus  and  lodgments
m  the  abdomen  ?  By  means  of  solvent  clysters  in  hundreds
must  these  be  dissolved  and  purged  away  if  we  wish  to  avert
death.  Heavens !  how  purblind  the  world  has  been  not  to  have
discovered  before  now,  this  the  only  possible  remedy  for  the
only  possible  cause  of  all  diseases!  And  verily,  there  could
scarcely  be  a  more  lucrative  method  for  the  practitioner ;  by  no
other  could  he  so  beautifully  get  over  the  difficulties  of  his  indi-
cations as  by  this,  by  which,  without  requiring  to  give  any  fur-
ther reason,  holding  up  the  fearful  talisman  of  infarctus  in  order
to  work  uncontrolled  in  the  dark,  beyond  the  ken  of  the  com-
mon sense  of  the  uninitiated,  and  with  the  hocus-pocus  of  seve-
ral hundred  clysters  (composed  of  a  number  of  unintelligible
ingredients)  he  could — how  wonderful  I — ^briug  bodily  to  light
the  dreaded  infarctus  in  all  its  hideous  deformity.  Making
omelettes  in  a  hat  is  child's  play  to  this.

If,  sighed  Tyro,  I  only  knew  all  the  external  signs  by  which


540  0BSEBYATI0N8  ON  THS

lodgments  could  be  diagnosed  in  any  human  being,  If  I  only
knew  what  in&rctua  really  is,  what  part  of  the  intestines  (of  so
many,  of  almost  all  persons  I)  is  constituted  so  torpid,  as  to  hai^
bour  in  such  an  imperceptible  manner  these  Protean  massea^
and  what  causes  their  greyish  colours,  their  various  shapes,  C(m«
sistences,  and  odours,  as  they  are  to  be  found  arranged  in  a  tabu-
lar form  in  Ejimprs  work  I  The  difficulties  of  the  subjeet
make  me  quite  ill  I  since  there  arc  no  sure  external  signs  of  their
existence,  who  can  tell  whether  some  such  horrors  do  not  luik
in  my  own  entrails  I

Grieve  not,  dear  Tyro  I  that  your  five  senses  are  inadequate
to  enable  you  to  discover  all  tUs.  The  game  of  in£Eurctus  and
infarctus-clysters  is  already  played  out.  It  was  only  a  financial
manaeuvre,  if  it  was  not  a  pious  self-deception  of  the  inventor.
By  a  succession  of  clysters  we  may  make  the  bowels  of  even
the  healthiest  peasant  into  an  organ  for  the  production  of  unna>
tural  faeces,  of  masses  of  mucus  of  every  variety  of  form  and
colour.

Other  modem  visionaries  attributed  almost  all  diseases  they
could  not  cure  to  a  step-sister  of  the  infarctus,  I  mean  to  o\h
struction  in  the  minutest  vessels  of  the  abdomen.  They  have
not  mentioned  any  signs  by  which  this  may  with  certainty  be
recognised.  Here,  therefore,  was  another  subject  of  panic  ter-
ror for  the  poor  easily  frightened  patients,  another  rich  draught
of  fish  in  the  dark!  But  be  comforted!  They  immediately
discovered  in  their  nightcap  the  most  eftcctual  remedies  for  it
The  vast  number  of  mineral  waters  and  baths  that  still  continue
daily  to  gush  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  earth  to  the  great  ad-
vantage of  the  presiding  physicians  of  each  watering-placOi
which,  like  the  waters  of  Bethesda,  are  good  (we  know  not
how)  for  all  conceivable  maladies,  must  consequently  be  alao
capable  of  clearing  away  the  obstructions  of  the  finest  vessels
of  the  abdomen  and  of  the  mesenteric  glands — id  quod  erat  cfe-
monstrandum.  Moreover,  the  saponaria,  the  taraxacum,  the
antimonial  medicines,  especially  the  antimonial  soaps,  invented
in  defiance  of  all  chemistry,  as  they  become  spoilt  in  an  hour,
soap  itself,  ox-gall,  the  triticum  repens,  and  above  all,  ye,  our
more  than  harrow  and  plough,  noble  neutral  salts,  known  to  us
at  least  by  name  I What  can  resist  your  solvent  powers  I

Bravely  spoken  I

But  have  you  ever  witnessed,  whether  and  how  they  perform
this  solvent  action? What  divine  revelation  has  pointed  them


THRXX  CUBBENT  XETHOBS  07  TBEATMEKT. 641

oot  to  yoa  as  aolrent  remedies,  since  experience  teaches  nothing
thereof  to  our  senses,  can  shew  no  proofs  of  it — since  all  is  hid-
den firom  our  view?  Are  you  convinced  of  the  existence  of
your  imaginary  obstructions  7  Are  you  aware  that  Sommering
found  the  enlarged  glands,  which  you  consider  obstructed,  ac-
tually the  most  pervious  to  injections  of  mercury  ?  Do  you
know  that  when  you  successfully  employed  muriate  of  baryta,
or  muriate  of  lime  in  some  cases  of  scrofulous  disease,  you  did
not  dissolve,  as  you  fondly  dreamt,  but  only  separated  the  sac*
charine  acid  in  them,  discovered  by  Fischer,  which  was  the
cause  of  the  tumefaction  in  the  glands?  Where,  now,  are  your
obstructions  ?  Of  what  value  are  your  solvent  remedies,  seeing
that  there  is  nothing  to  dissolve  ?

But  whence  proceed  the  great  number  of  children's  diseases,
that  carry  off  one-half  of  all  that  are  bom,  before  their  fifth
year? One  replies,  "I  consider  the  process  of  dentition  as  al*
most  the  sole  cause  of  the  diseases  and  the  mortality  of  children.
We  shall  find,  if  we  view  the  matter  aright,  that  from  the  very
flzst  weeks  of  their  existence  they  begin  to  suffer  from  this
troublesome  teething,  and  thus  it  goes  on  for  several  years.
The  poor  creatures  are  always  engaged  in  this  teething  process,
some  one  tooth  or  other  is  always  attempting  to  come  through'.
Hence  we  refer  all  their  whining,  their  capricious  tempers,  their
working  with  the  fingers  in  the  mouth,  their  pallor,  their  bowel-
oomplaints,  their  enlarged  abdomens,  their  starting  in  their
deep,  their  restlessness,  their  turning  and  twisting,  their  con-
vulsions, all  their  febrile  symptoms,  in  short,  everything  that
can  happen  to  them,  if  wc  are  unable  to  cure  it,  not  to  our
ignorance,  by  no  means ! — ^but  to  one  sole  cause,  that  is  as  in-
'  evitable  as  the  Turkish  fate. The  parents  have  nothing  to
blame  us  for. For  if  the  dear  child  gets  some  well-known  dis-
ease, hooping-ct)ugh,  measles,  small-pox,  &c.,  and  dies  of  it,  we
always  have  the  capital  excuse,  that  the  process  of  dentition  had
Bomething  to  do  with  it. We  have  the  same  excuse  when  sec-
ondary diseases  occur  afler  these  maladies,  as  marasmus,  cough,
diarrhoea,  ophthalmia,  deafness,  ulcers  of  this  or  the  other  part
For  all  these  tedious  convalescences  no  one  is  ever  to  blame,
the  troublesome  dentition  is  alone  in  fault. God  bless  that
man  who  invented  this  difficult  teething! For,  thank  heaven  I
it  always  gives  us  something  to  do  with  children  I Only  it  is
shocking  that  the  stupid  peasant  children  get  their  rows  of
white  teeth  with  no  bad  symptoms,  quite  unawares,  as  it  were,


64S  OBSEBYATIOKS  ON  THS

without  any  aid  from  ua,  or,  indeed,  any  medical  assistaiioa.
For  it  might  so  happen  that  the  families  that  employ  us  mighl
fall  upon  the  horrible  idea,  that  kind  nature  knows  how  to
bring  through  the  teeth  without  the  aid  of  man,  and  can  m>
tually  place  them  quite  silently  in  the  mouth,  like  rows  of
pearls,  if  the  awkward  officiousness  of  medical  men,  and  %
town-life,  that  great.producer  of  children's  diseases,  did  not  hia-
der  her," —

This  opinion  is  flatly  contradicted  by  a  colleague,  who,  with
the  usual  exaggeration,  attributes  the  whole  array  of  children's
diseases  to  no  other  cause  but  worms.  He  carries  this  delusLon
so  &r  as  to  attribute  a  number  of  epidemic  fevers  prevalent
among  children  solely  to  worms,  '^  because  they  so  often  pas
worms  when  affected  by  them.''  I  am  very  much  astonish-
ed that  he  does  not  begin  to  seek  the  exciting  cause  of  small*
pox,  measles,  and  scarlet-fever  in  intestinal  worms  only,  for  in
them  also  worms  often  are  expelled  (in  consequence  of  matten
repugnant  to  them  being  present  in  the  bowels).  If  he  cures
children's  diseases  by  means  of  iron,  semen  contra,  jalap^powder
or  calomel,  and  worms  have  thereby  been  expelled,  in  that  case
the  disease,  according  to  his  notion  (/allasia  causae,  ncn  causae
ut  causae)  must  have  been  produced  by  worms,  and  this  even  if
no  worms  but  only  mucus  is  passed  (purging  with  jalap  and
calomel  always  causes  a  discharge  of  mucus).  -  That  must  un-
doubtedly have  been  worm-mucus,  he  alleges. — What  peculiar
kind  of  mucus  have  the  lumbrici,  that  it  can  be  distinguished
from  all  other  kinds  of  mucus  ?  And  the  seeds  of  the  Persian
artemesia,  jalap,  iron,  and  calomel,  can  they  cure  no  other  dis-
eases besides  those  that  arise  from  worms?  With  regard  to  the
first,  experience  has  shewn  me  that  it  can,  and  as  for  the  others
the  whole  medical  world  is  convinced  that  they  can.

And  are  you  sure  that  your  worm-symptoms,  a  distended  ab-
domen, bulimy  alternating  with  anorexia,  itching  of  the  nose,
blue  rings  surrounding  the  eyes,  dilated  pupils,  &c,  and  even
the  discharge  of  lumbrici,  arc  incontestible  symptoms  of  vermi-
cular disease  7  May  they  not  rather  be  symptoms  of  a  state  of
ill-health  co-existing  along  with  an  accumulation  of  lumbricii
which  may  be  the  cause  and  not  the  effect  of  the  collection  of
worms  ?  Does  not  this  ill-health  persist  even  after  the  expul-
sion of  many  worms,  does  not  this  cachexy  often  last  till  death,
and  yet  sometimes  no  worms  may  be  discovered  on  dissection  ?

Should  the  intestines  sometimes  be  found  to  be  perforated


THBSS  CUBBXNT  METHODS  OF  TBSATME17T. 648

md  should  we  assume  that  these  creatures  have  themselves
eflEected  the  perforation  (and  not  rather  have  merely  crept
through  it),  it  seems  to  be  so  foreign  to  their  nature  thus  to  bore  •
through  their  place  of  abode,  that  we  often  find  them  quietly
remaining  in  liie  intestines  of  robust  children  up  to  the  period
of  manhood,  frequently  in  considerable  numbers,  without  causing
my  inconvenience,  and  apparently  doing  nothing  so  unnatural
IS  perforating  the  bowels  unless  they  are  excessively  irritated  by
some  totally  different  disease  of  the  child  (which  ought  to  have
been  removed  in  time  by  other  remedies).

"  Away  with  such  gross  exciting-causes  of  diseases !"  exclaims
the  solidist  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  term,  ^^  such  doctrines  are
not  suited  to  our  metaphysical  age  I Nervous  debility  is  alone
the  cause  of  most  of  the  diseases  of  our  degenerated  race  now-a^
days. Nervous  debility  and  relaxed  tone  of  the  fibre,  nothing
else. All  the  diseases  of  our  time  may  be  referred  to  this  \\ —
.And  the  remedies  for  this  nervous  debility,  that  excludes  all
other  causes? Tell  us,  my  friend,  what  are  they  ? — "  What  else
except  those  incomparable  remedies,  cinchona  bark,  steel,  and
^lihe  bitter  extracts?" — And  how  so? — "Why,  look  you,  that
mvery  thing  that  is  bitter,  as  GuUen  has  justly  remarked,  acts  as
a  tonic;  whatever  corrugates  the  tongue,  like  the  salts  of  iron,
must  strengthen  the  fibre,  and  what  can  resist  baik,  with  which
we  can  tan  hides  ? Now  we  have  almost  nothing  else  to  do  in
diseases  than  to  remove  the  nervous  debility  and  to  raise  the  tone
of  the  fibre,  consequently  these  medicines  fulfil  all  our  ends." —
This  would  be  all  very  fine  if  it  were  all  true. If  only  the  in-
numerable varieties  of  diseases  did  not  produce  innumerable  vari-
eties in  the  functions  and  states  of  the  soUdum  livum,  which
short-sightedness  alone  could  dream  of  comprehending  in  a  single
word  I If  you  only  knew  the  infinite  varieties  of  the  eftects  of
the  various  bitter  substances  I If  cinchona-bark  only  ceased  to
be  a  powerful  remedy  when  all  its  tanning  properties  were  ex-
tracted from  it  by  means  of  lime-water ! If  you  could  but
attribute  all  the  various  effects  of  iron  to  its  astringent  pro-
perty!

"  Even  these  causes  of  diseases,"  I  he^r  some  one  say,  "  are  not
subtle  enough  for  our  superfine  decennium,  but  as  regards  the
mode  of  treatment,  that  smells  strongly  of  crude  notions.  Far
more  subtle  is  the  nature  of  diseases,  far  more  subtle  let  their
mode  of  treatment  be !  Nothing  less  forms  the  basis  of  both
than  substrata  of  the  various  gases.  The  new  system  of  chem-
istry alone  opens  the  portals  of  life.


Mi  OBSEBVATIONS  OK  THB

"  Enow,  that  all  the  derangements  that  occur  in  otir  fanofaoai
arise  from  a  deficiency  or  excess  of  oxygen,  of  caloric,  of  hydro*
'  gen,  of  azote,  or  of  phosphorus,  consequently  that  they  can
only  be  cured  by  superoxydating  or  disoxydating,  by  superoa-
lonfying  or  decalorifying,  by  supcrhydrogenizing  or  dehydio>
genizing,  by  superazotizing  and  disazotizing,  by  superphospho-
rizing  or  dephosphorizing  remedies."

This  sounds  very  finely  in  theory  and  reads  well  on  paper;  it
is  also  in  the  spirit  of  the  prevailing  ideas.  But  for  every
of  disease  I  should  require  the  supernatural  existence  of  a
to  make  for  me  all  these  generalities  concrete,  in  every  case  to
reveal  to  me  whether  the  disease  depends  on  deficiency  or  ex-
cess of  azote,  oxygen,  &c.,  and  what  the  chemical  antidotes  of
this  particular  chemical  state  are,  for  these  subjects  may  indeed
be  speculatively  excogitated  with  some  semblance  of  probability^
but  being  mere  products  of  reason  are  not  cognizable  by  the
senses  in  individual  cases.  Every  assertion  that  has  same  truth  at
bottom  (all  medical  systems  contain  a  portion  of  truth)  is  not  ef
practical  utility,

"  We  must  go  still  higher,"  insists  a  celebrated  teacher  of
dynamology,  who  has  been  reared  on  the  ethereal  milk  of
critical  philosophy,  "we  must  mount  up  to  the  original  source
of  diseases.  Hie  altered  composition  and  form  ofmaUer,^  This  on-
tological  maxim,  however  near  to  the  truth  it  may  appear  a
priori  to  the  thinker  conversant  with  natural  science  in  general^
and  with  the  probable  arrangement  of  our  organism,  is  entirely
useless  to  the  practitioner ;  it  cannot  be  applied  to  the  treatment
of  individual  diseases.  In  like  manner,  what  Bruce  says  about
the  remotest  source  of  the  Nile  is  of  no  practical  utility  at  its  Delta.
Still  this  teacher  of  natural  science  has  approximated  much
more  closely  than  we  might  have  expected  to  what  pure  expe-
rience teaches,  in  his  special  views  relative  to  diseases,  and  par-
ticularly fevers,  and  given  much  less  scope  to  mere  probabilities
than  his  dogmatical  and  credulous  predecessors.  Though  a  love
of  system  guides  all  his  steps,  he  always  honestly  points  out
where  his  deductions  run  counter  to  the  maxims  of  experienoei
and  has  a  wise  respect  for  the  latter.  The  medical  thinker  may
educate  himself  under  him,  but  when  he  is  at  the  sick-bed,  let
him  not  forget  that  these  views  are  mere  individual  ideas,  mere
hints,  and  that  from  them  no  remedial  means  can  be  deduced*

The  view  of  the  medical  art  that  Wilmans  presents  to  the  re-
flecting physician  seems  to  be  that  most  consistent  with  nature


[three  CITBBJBNT  METHODS  OF  TREATMENT.  546

of  all  others,  but  if  we  would  not  wander  from  the  right  way,
we  must  confine  ourselves  to  his  preliminary  observations.

The  schools  have  already  adopted  his  classifications.  All
ipeculations  in  medicine,  that  proceed  from  pure  empiricism,
lead  to  particulars  and  not  to  the  philosopher's  stone,  if  I  may
be  aUowed  to  borrow  a  metaphor  from  a  false  art

In  dialectic  sophistries,  in  bold  assertions,  (in  shameless  self-
praise),  and  in  disregard  of  the  infinite  multiplicity  of  nature,
manifested  in  the  varieties  presented  by  diseases  and  by  their
remedies,  all  known  founders  of  medical  sects  were,  however,
&r  surpassed  by  that  deceiving  parempiric.  Brown,  who,  though
not  himself  engaged  in  the  treatment  of  diseases,  limited  all
poaaible  curative  considerations  to  exciting  and  diminishing  ex-
citement, and  presented  to  the  eyes  of  the  world  the  greatest  of
all  medical  absurdities,  ''  that  there  can  only  be  two  or  three
riiwenfleH,  which  are  distinguished  from  each  other  by  no  other
<iiffer6nce  besides  a  plus  and  minus  of  excitement,  and  a  corres*
jK>nding  accumulation  of  excitability." The  therapeutics  adapted
to  this  notion  were  easily  supplied :  ''  seek  for  stimulating  sub-
stances and  for  such  as  are  as  little  stimulant*  as  possible ;  these
«re  the  true  remedies.'^ And  for  the  first  of  these  objects  I
should  imagine,  one  or  two  drugs  would  amply  suffice. Had
he  wished  to  avoid  contradictions,  he  should  only  have  named
one  of  the  volatile  and  one  of  the  fixed  stimuli  inslar  omntum^
and  not  several ;  for  if  one  can  effect  every  thing,  what  is  the
object  of  having  several  ?

Perhaps,  however,  he  felt  the  untenableness  of  his  simplifica-
tions, perhaps  he  himself  had  experienced  that  the  drunkard
oould  not  exchange  his  brandy  for  musk  or  camphor.  In  order
to  complete  his  edifice,  he  must  have  ignored  even  patent  facts
and  daily  exj)erience.

But  I  need  not  enter  into  all  the  contradictions  he  must  have
bit  within  himself,  nor  what  it  cost  him  to  deny  the  most  pal-
pable facts,  in  order  to  become  the  founder  of  a  bran-new,  im-
heard-of  sect;  suffice  it  to  say,  no  medical  sectarian,  apparently^
knew  less  about  nature  than  he,  but  none  understood  better


'  It  surprises  me  that  his  adherents  have  of  their  own  accord  substituted  ao  ezpla-
natioD  of  the  latter  substances,  which  was  not  that  of  their  master,  and  could  not  be
his,  if  he  wished  to  be  coiuustcnt  He  nowhere  makes  mention  of  remedies  tii^
•bstnict  stimulation,  ilis  stheuia-lessening  substances  were  such  as  debihtated
lolely  by  the  smalluess  of  tlicir  stimulus  {Mlements  of  Medicine^  g  xo,  edii).

a5


6i$  OBSEBYATIONS  OK  THS

than  he,  by  means  of  illusory  syllogistic  ratiocination,  to  ele-
vate a  few  true  (and  from  the  novel  point  of  view  in  which
he  placed  them,  apparently  new)  maxims  into  the  only  ones,  to
weave  over  all  defects  ty  his  obscurity  of  stating  them,  and  to
assert  so  despotically  the  superiority  of  his  subtle  mind  in  seeiir
larizing  all  other  incontrovertible  trutha  Probably  he  would
himself  have  confessed  that  he  had  made  fools  of  the  world,  had
his  excessive  use  of  his  diffusible  stimuli  allowed  him  to  live
longer.

There  is  no  absurdity  that  has  not  already  been  maintained
by  some  sophist,  and  in  all  ages  the  mania  for  simplification  ham
been  the  chief  stalking  horse  of  system  manufactures  of  the  firat
rank.

Thus  one  in  his  theories  asserted  that  the  world  was  formed
exclusively  by  fire,  another  that  it  was  produced  by  water
only ; — a  third  contended  that  all  living  beings  were  formed
ginary vertebrae ;  thus  the  Alchemists  forced  the  infinite  multi-
plicity of  chemical  substances  into  the  triangle,  salt,  sulphur
and  mercury.  What  cared  they  for  the  numerous  varieties  of
metals?  They  prided  themselves  on  dictatorially  fixing  the
number  of  metals  at  seven,  and  these  they  fidsely  and  boldly
referred  to  a  single  original  substance,  their  metal-seed.  Whi^
else  was  it  but  proud  simplifying  mania,  to  decree  our  little  ter-
restrial  globe  to  be  the  end  and  centre  of  all  creation,  and  to
imagine  the  thirty  thousand  suns  scattered  throughout  space  to
be  scarcely  more  than  lamps  for  its  illumination  ?

Still,  I  feel  provoked  at  the  wiseacre  who  sought  to  measure
the  great  science  of  medicine  with  a  span,  himself  acquainted
with  hardly  any  otber  diseases  than  perhaps  the  gout,*  a  few
rheumatisms,  some  catarrhs,  some  haemorrhages,  and  the  malig-
nant croup.

From  his  theoretical  sins,  of  which  I  must  not  speak  in  this
place,  I  revert  to  those  immediately  concerning  the  treatment  of
diseases.

There  never  was  a  doctrine  so  calculated  to  mislead  the  prac-
tical physician,  nor  one  so  dangerous  for  the  beginner.

According  to  him  we  must  not  trust  any  thing  to  the  powers  of

'  It  is  remarkable  how  BrowD  treats  of  gout  with  disproportionate  prolizitj',  I
migfat  almost  say  pragmatically  (§  dci,  et  seq.),  whilst  he  has  scarcely  a  couple  oT
empty,  superficial  words  to  say  about  other  special  diseases  of  the  greatest  unpor-'


THBBB  OUBBSNT  METHODS  OF  TREATXEMT. 647

nAtare  (zcv.),  we  must  never  rest  with  our  remedies,  we  must
always  either  stimulate  or  debilitate.  What  a  calumniation  of
natore,  what  a  dangerous  insinuation  for  the  ordinary  half-
instructed  practitioner,  already  too  officious !  What  a  ministra-
tion to  his  pride  to  be  deemed  the  lord  and  master  of  nature  I

"  We  should  never  use  one  single  remedy  alone,  but  always
several  at  once  in  every  disease'^ !  (xcii.)  This  is  the  true  sign
of  a  spurious  system  of  medicine.  Quackery  goes  always  hand
in  hand  with  complex  mixtures  of  medicines,  and  he  who  can
inculcate  (not  merely  permit)  such  a  system,  is  toto  codo  removed
from  the  simple  ways  of  nature  and  her  rule,  to  effect  many  ob-
jects by  one  single  means.  This  single  axiom,  invented  for  the
purpose  of  confusing  men's  minds  and  making  a  mystification
of  treatment,  must  already  have  cost  many  their  lives.

Henmkes  no  distinction  betwixt  palliative  and  curative  reme-
dies. Like  a  bungler,  he  always  recommends  only  such  as  are
of  a  palliative  character,'  which,  by  an  action  the  direct  opposite
of  the  state  of  the  malady  (i^xxiii,  lxiv),  at  first  subdues  the
symptoms  (for  a  few  hours),  to  leave  afterwards  a  state  the  op-
posite of  that  produced  by  the  temporary  remedy.  Thus  opium
is  his  true  panacea  in  all  diseases  arising  from,  and  attended  by
debility.  What  a  climax  of  parempiricism  and  what  a  mistake
— to  recommend  a  medicine  as  a  general  strengthener  which
after  the  lapse  of  a  few  hours,  during  which  it  excites  the  strength,
subsequently  allows  it  to  sink  all  the  deeper,  deeper  than  before
its  employment,  to  prevent  which  stronger  and  ever  stronger
doses  must  be  given !  And  what  experienced  practitioner  is
ignorant  of  the  effects  resulting  from  a  continued  employment
of  opium  in  elevated  doses.  This  drug  that  strengthens  only  in
a  palliative  manner,  but  that  is,  more  than  any  other  remedy,  in
its  after-effects  weakening  and  productive  of  an  increased  sensi-
tiveness to  pain.  Brown  could  recommend  universally  and  with-
out any  limitation  as  the  universal  and  appropriate  remedy  for  all
sorts  of  diseases,  whose  character  is  weakness,  even  such  as  are
of  a  most  obstinate  and  chronic  character  (ccci,  ccxcvili).  He
who  fails  to  perceive  in  all  tliis  the  perfect  picture  of  a  parcm-
piric  has  lost  the  use  of  his  eyes.  It  is  only  in  the  special  and
very  rare  cases  in  which  opium  is  at  the  same  time  the  specific

'  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  great  Taluc  of  palliatives.  For  sudden  accidents  that
Imitc  a  tendency  to  run  a  rapid  course,  they  are  not  only  often  quite  sufficient,  but
tfen  possess  advantages  where  aid  must  not^be  delayed  on  hour  or  even  a  minute
Id  va/Ai  cases  and  in  tuck  aUmc  are  they  usefoL


548'  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THB

remedy  for  the  disease,  that  it  cannot  debilitate,  and  when  it  is'
employed  in  very  small  doses  as  a  palliative  in  robust  oonstita*'
tions  and  along  with  strengthening  regimen,  it  apparently  doe0
not  weaken.  This  is  the  source  of  the  delusion.  But  of  really
curative  drugs,  the  true  weapons  of  the  true  physician, — ^whi<^'
remove  the  disease  permanently  and  radically^  by  first  exciting  an
affection  similar  to  the  disease  present, — of  these  he  says  never*
a  word,  he  does  not  even  know  their  names.  He  that  knowB
them  I  term  a  restorer,  a  discoverer  of  the  medical  art,  as  he
calls  himself.  Thus  he  had  hot  the  most  distant  idea — to  give  a
single  example — that  a  burnt  finger  may  be  held  for  a  long  time
in  cold  water  before  it  (when  taken  out  and  dried)  shall  cause.
no  more  pain— indeed  vesication  occurs  all  the  more  certainly
if  so-called  antiphlogistic,  debilitating  remedies  be  applied  to  thift
local  infiammation.  He  has  not  the  least  idea  that  the  opposite
of  all  this  occurs  if  the  burnt  finger  be  held  in  alcohol.^  Where
now  are  your  palliative  anti-sthenic,  where  your  palliative  anli-
asthenic  remedies  ? How  liar  they  are  behind  I

What  true,  experienced  physician  knows  not  the  palliative
debilitating  power  of  cold  and  of  cold  water?  Brown  had  no
need  to  put  forward  as  a  novelty  the  debilitating  property  of
cold  and  of  the  cold  bath.  But  when  he  announces  it  to  be  a
positively  debilitating  thing,  he  shews  that  he  does  not  know  it,
just  as  he  views  many  other  things  in  a  false  manner.  It  is  only
for  the  moment  during  its  application  fchat  it  debilitates  (pallia-
tively),  whilst  in  its  subsequent  eftects  it  manifests  itself  as  one
of  the  most  excellent  of  strengthening  remedies  (as  a  curative
and  permanently  remedial  means).  The  greatest  weakness  of  a
limb,  a  frost-bite,  is  confessedly  cured  by  nothing  more  quickly
than  by  cold  water.  This  may  stand  for  one  of  the  thousands
of  instances  of  the  curati vely  strengthening  effects  of  cold  water.

He  knows  no  other  cause  of  diseases  besides  either  a  too  vio-
lent excitement  by  means  of  stimuli  (sthenia),  the  continued
action  of  which  causes  indirect  weakness,  or  too  little  excitement
by  means  of  too  weak  stimuli  (direct  debility).  The  former  in-
cludes all  purely  inflammatory  diseases,  and  the  latter  all  other
diseases  that  bear  the  stamp  of  debility.  The  former  are  cured
by  venesections,  cold,  water-drinking,  4Scc.,  the  latter  by  heat,


'  Look  at  the  reaper  excessively  heated  by  working  in  the  heat  of  the  sun ;  with
what  does  he  allay  his  tlurst  most  certainly  and  most  effectually,  with  what  can  be
do  this  better  than  with  a  little  brandy.  Brown's  antisthenic  palliatives^  cold  water,
Ac,  could  scarcely  refresh  him  for  an  instant.


THREE  CUSSEXT  METHODS  OF  TREATMENT. 649

•

80ups,  wine^  brandy,  and  particularly  opium.  In  this  manner
all  the  countless  diseases,  varying  infinitely  in  kind,  are  cured
by  him  (on  paper)  or  directed  to  be  cured.  The  crudest  parem-
piricism,  the  most  audacious  ignorance,  could  not  go  further  than
this.  According  to  this  all  epilepsies,^  all  dropsies,  all  endemic
diseases,  all  melancholias,  are  to  be  certainly  cured  by  opium,
brandy,  heat  and  beef  tea !  lias  any  one  ever  experienced  a
oertain,  radically  good  result  from  such  treatment  in  such  dis-
eases? Is  he  making  game  of  us?  Docs  he  want  to  consign
oompletely  to  the  tomb  the  medical  art,  sunk  as  it  already  is  down
.to  the  administration  of  a  few  routine  drugs  ?

But  no  I  he  is  in  the  highest  degree  rational.  He  permits  no
treatment  to  be  undertaken  before  ascertaining  all  the  inimical
influences  that  have  preceded  the  disease,  whether  they  could
(Let  in  a  too  exciting  or  in  a  debilitating  manner,  and  from  these
alone  he  will  allow  the  nature  of  the  disease  and  its  treatment
can  be  determined  (but  always  only  for  two  objects,  viz.,  whether
we  should  debilitate  or  strengthen).  But  the  very  circumstance
of  his  making  this  investigation  the  only  indispensable  indication,
betrays  that  he  has  treated  disease  in  his  study  only,  that  he
9peaks  as  a  blind  man  would  do  about  colours.  In  all  the  cases
of  sudden  disease  and  such  as  occur  among  the  common  people,
who  could  ascertain  in  every  instance  and  in  the  most  exact
manner,  before  commencing  the  treatment  of  any  disease,  what
was  the  kind  of  injurious  agency  (as  Brown  aflccts  to  discover
in  every  case)  had  occurred  long  before ;  whether  the  malady
was  preceded  entirely  or  only  in  some  degree  by  an  excess  of
stimuli,  or  entirely  or  only  in  siMiie  degree  by  too  weak  stimuli,
or  in  how  far  it  was  preceded  by  greater  stimuli  mingled  with
deficiency  of  stimuli  (and  in  what  proportion?);  whether  a
sthenia  has  changed  into  an  indirect  or  direct  debility,  or  the
latter  into  the  former,  or  whether  one  sort  of  asthenia  has  eon-
joined  with  another,  and  (what  nonsense!)  brought  about  a
mixed  state,  in  which  the  excitability  of  eighty  degrees,  that  divine
revelation  to  the  inspired  Brown,  is  exhausted  or  accumulated  ?
Who  can  always  institute  a  comparison  between  the  strength  of
these  noxious  influences  and  the  sum  total  of  excitability  aj?.
signed  to  the  individual,  modified  as  it  is  said  to  be  by  age,  sex,
constitution,  climate,  country,  &c.?  What  experienced  practitioner
can  assert  that  a  tenth  part  of  his  i)atients  or  tlie  friends  of  his

*  He  knows  of  no  epilepsy  with  excess  of  jjcood  blood,  no  stlienicdropf^y,  no  sthenic
hfimorriuiges,  no  asthenic  catarrhs,  though  nature  knows  them  and  not  unfrequcntly
pnoduces  them.


560  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THS

patients  could,  would  or  should  give  accurate  information  on  all
these  hyberbolical  or  hair-splitting  questions,  give  a  detail  of  all
previous  agreeable  or  disagreeable  mental  emotions,  of  the  im*
pressions  of  the  various  degrees  of  temperature  to  which  ihej
may  have  been  exposed  throughout  a  considerable  lapse  of  time^
of  the  exposures  to  too  much  or  too  little  sunlight  (a  stimulus
of  no  mean  intensity !)  or  to  a  more  or  less  dry,  moist,  impure  or
pure  air  for  some  considerable  period,  of  the  divers  kinds  of
more  or  less  nutritive,  sapid,  seasoned  or  unseasoned  articles  of
food  that  may  have  been  indulged  in,  the  quantity  of  more  or
less  strong,  vinous  or  watery  drinks  that  may  have  been  taken,  the
frequency  of  indulgence  in  venereal  excitement,  the  d^ree  and
quantity  of  exercise  that  has  been  taken,  the  nature  of  the
amount,  the  degree  and  the  frequency  of  all  previous  mental
excitement  by  means  of  reading,  conversation,  amusement,  mumc^
&c.?  And  even  supposing  among  many  fitmilies  one  coidd  be
found  who  after  some  weeks  of  interrogation  (for  it  is  impossible
that  such  a  variety  of  questions  could  be  asked  in  one  day)  was
able  and  willing  (supposing  the  greater  part  had  not  been  already
forgotten)  to  answer  the  most  of  these  questions,  how  painfiillyi
how  fruitlessly  I  may  say,  must  not  the  poor  doctor  rack  his
brains,  in  order  to  estimate  and  compare  these  hundreds  of  thou*
sands  of  various  influences,  to  calculate  their  exact  effect  on  the
patient  whose  excitability  was  at  first  so  and  so  much,  to  estimate
the  resulting  sum  total,  and  to  discover  the  amount  in  Brunonian
degrees  of  the  excess  of  the  noxious  powers  of  over-stimulation
over  those  of  the  deficiency  of  excitement,  of  the  excess  of  the
powers  of  the  latter  over  those  of  the  former,  and  all  this  in
connexion  with  the  particular  subject  before  him  !  No  single
circumstance  of  importance  must  remain  unascertained,  or  be
left  out  of  the  list,  or  be  omitted  in  the  calculation,  neither  must
the  lesser  circumstances  (which  constitute  something  considerable
by  virtue  of  their  number)  be  forgotten,  unascertained,  omitted
or  unestimated,  otherwise  the  whole  reckoning  will  turn  out  false  I
I  need  scarcely  remark,  how  vain,  how  impossible,  how  sense-
less, such  a  mode  of  procedure  (which,  according  to  Brown's
maxims,  §  xi,  xii,  Lxxviii,  c,  &c.,  cannot  be  pushed  too  far,  see-
ing that  all  the  investigation  of  disease  depends  on  it)  must
be  in  every-day  practice — what  an  enormous  amount  of  trouble
and  time  must  be  expended  in  the  investigation  and  considera-
tion, before  the  treatment  of  a  single  case  can  be  commenced;
and  in  the  time  thereby  lost  the  disease  must  unobservedly  pass
into  another  stage,  if  it  do  not  in  the  interim  terminate  in  death.


THB»  CUBBENT  METHODS  OF  TRXATXSNT 661

A  wnBdenJtioiva  BrunoniaQ  would  probably  never  arrive  at  the
period  when  he  would  eommence  the  treatment^  with  all  this  in-
vestigation and  effort  to  form  a  just  estimate.  And  after  all,
nothing  more  would  have  been  ascertained  but  the  point  le*
specting  the  sthenia  on  which  the  disease  depends,  or  respecting
the  direct  or  indirect  debility  I  Is  this  the  only  thing  we  require
to  know  in  order  to  effect  acure  ?  Well  then,  know  that  debility
is  present  in  all  endemic  diseases.  Now,  quick  ?  cure  me  all  the
countries  affected  with  ringworm,  pellagra,  plica  polonica,  sibbensi
yaws,  pian,  water-colic,  &c.  Do  you  want  nothing  but  fixed  and
diffusible  stimuli  ?  Here  you  have  opium,  caloric,  brandy,  bark,
beef-tea. — Cure  me  them  quickly  I

God  help  us  I  what  a  mass  of  nonsense  a  single  unpractical
book-maker  can  rake  together  and  inflict  on  weak  lamb-like
mortality,  in  defiance  of  all  common  sense  I

But  let  us  do  him  justice  I  whilst  we  see  that  the  glory  which
was  to  constitute  the  apotheosis  of  this  original  head  vanishes,
whilst  the  Titan  who  sought  aimlessly  to  heap  Pelion  on  Ossa,
quietly  descends  from  the  rank  of  heroes — whilst  we  see  that
his  colossal  plan  to  turn  everything  topsy-turvy  in  the  domain
cf  JEsculapius  is  dashed  to  pieces,  and  that  the  myriads  of  spe-
cial diseases  cannot  be  referred  by  him  to  one  or  two  causes,  kx
what  is  the  same  thing,  be  decreed  by  him  to  consist  of
two  or  three  similar  diseases  only  varying  in  degree,  nor
their  infinite  variety  be  cured  by  two  or  three  stimulants
or  non-stimulants; — whilst  we  consign  all  these  arabesque
eccentricities  to  the  domain  of  fable,  let  us  not  forget  to  do
liim  the  justice  to  acknowledge  that  with  a  powerful  arm
lie  dispersed  the  whole  gang  of  humoral,  acridity,  and  sa-
hurral  physicians,  who  with  lancet,  tepid  drinks,  miserable  diet,
emetics,  purgatives,  and  all  the  nameless  varieties  of  solvents,
threatened  to  destroy  our  generation,  or  at  least  to  deteriorate
it  radically,  and  reduce  it  to  the  lowest  possible  condition, — that
he  reduced  the  nimiber  of  diseases  requiring  antiphlogistic  treat-
ment to  three  per  cent  of  their  former  amount  (§  ccccxciii),
that  he  determined  more  accurately  the  influence  of  the  six  so-
called  non-natural  things  on  our  health,  that  he  refuted  the  ima-
ginary advantage  of  vegetable  over  animal  diet,  to  the  advantage
of  mankind ; — that  he  restored  to  the  rank  of  a  medicinal  agent
a  judicious  diet,  and  that  he  reintroduced  the  old  distinction
between  diseases  from  defect  of  stimulus  and  those  from  excess
of  stimulus,  and  taught  with  some  degree  of  truth,  the  difference
of  their  treatment  in  a  general  way.


562 TO  A  OANDIDATS  FOB  TEX DEOBSX  OP  IL  D.

This  may  reconcile  us  with  his  manes  I

His  disciples,  proudly  wrapt  in  the  mantle  of  their  Elijah,
,  support  his  doctrine  utcunque  with  much  noise  (the  sign  of  a  not
very  good  cause),  deafen  us  with  the  Brunonian  cant  about  de-
grees of  excitability,  which  they  consider  to  be  exalted  and
depressed  by  previous  noxious  agencies  just  as  they  please,
prate  about  simple  and  compound,  direct  and  indirect  debility,
about  diotheses  and  predispositions  as  (imaginary)  distinguishing
(Signs  of  the  general  from  the  local  diseases,  about  (pretended)
,  diffusible  and  fixed  stimuli — and  treat  their  patients  right  and
,left  with  compulsory  soups,  wine  and  opium;  they  are  bec<Hiie
sufl&ciently  cunning  to  engraft  from  vulgar  medicine  what  ia  re-
quisite and  indispensable,  and  when  beef-tea,  rum  and  opium  do
not  suffice,  they  employ  the  excellent  bark  (which  their  master
decried)  in  intermittent  fever  (protesting  all  the  while  that  they
use  it  only  in  its  quality  of  a  fixed  stimulus),  and  turpentine  oil
in  dropsy,  but  under  cover  of  the  Brunonian  explanatory  for-
mula :  ^'  that  turpentine  possesses  the  exact  degree  of  stimulant
power  necessary  in  this  case."  Thus  have  I  seen  the  devout
monks  in  a  monastery  dine  upon  partridges  on  a  Friday,  but
not  before  the  prior  had  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  theni|
accompanied  by  the  transmuting  blessing— ^^^iscis  /


TO  A  CANDIDATE  FOR  THE  DEGREE  OF  M.  D.'


I  have  read  your  notes  of  the  lectures  on  therapeutics  of  your
celebrated  professor.  You  are  quite  right  to  leam  all  these
things,  and  to  take  notes  of  them.  We  ought  to  know  what  our
predecessors  and  contemporaries  have  imagined.  In  like  man-
ner I  often  allow  my  patients  to  tell  me  what  they  think  their
disease  is  and  what  it  proceeds  from,  what  sort  of  witchcraft
produced  it  and  what  were  the  sympathetic  remedies  and  foolish
means  they  have  used  for  it.  I  like  to  know  what  sort  of  ideas
people  form  of  things.  The  same  with  you  in  your  college,
where  you  leam  the  fables  those  people  who  imagine  themselves
to  be  sagacious  physicians  have  invented  respecting  all  those
things  which  they  do  not  understand,  and  which  no  one  in  the
world  can  know  a  priori.  Of  course  there  will  be  many  extra-
ordinary freaks  of  imagination  and  daring  maxims  that  find  no

*  From  the  AUgem,  Anuig,  der  Deufchm,  Na  227.  1809.


TOA  OANBIDATE  JTOB  THI  DEQBXB  OF  K.  D.  658

ixnrroboration  in  nature,  and  much  more  learned  stufi^  which  at
■bH  events  Bounds  very  profound  and  wise,  because  it  is  paraded
in  grand,  florid  and  metaphorical  language, — there  the  oxygen
and  hydrogen  poles  in  the  human  body,  intensified  factors,  the
ganglionic  system,  the  centre  of  vegetative  life,  a  peculiar  irritable
or  a  totally  distinct  sensitive  system  within  us,  must  play  parts
in  the  comedy  we  have  ourselves  invented.  Beautiful  shadows
on  the  wall !  But  when  they  come  to  the  bedside  of  the  patient,
one  will  see  a  synochus  systeinatis  irritahilis,  where  the  other,  who
has  been  taught  by  the  self-same  master,  firmly  and  obstinately
asserts  he  finds  the  exact  opposite,  for  the  signs  of  the  one  and
of  the  other  as  taught  ex  cathedra  are  as  non -essential  and  unde-
oiaLve  as  they  are  vague  and  indeterminate.  Now  should  it  so
happen  that  one  of  them  has  divined  the  real  meaning  of  the
-Bystem-monger,  what  advantage  does  the  healing  art  thereby
gain?  None  at  all  I  No  subtle  theorizing  respecting  the  essen.
tial  nature  of  fever  ever  points  directly  to  what  should  and  must
be  useful  for  it.  The  theoretical  house  of  cards  stands  quite
isolated  in  its  imposing  majesty,  but  is  hollow  aud  empty  within,
and  does  not  even  contain  an  indication  for  the  appropriate  re-
medy for  the  disease,  the  inspired  revelation  of  whose  essential
nature  is  here  solemnly  announced.  0  quanta  species^  cerdbnim
noihabetl  The  whole  jingle  of  theoretical  flourishes  is  far  from
being  of  the  same  use  to  the  directions  ai)pended  to  it  as  to  what
is  to  be  used  in  the  disease,  that  the  premises  are  to  the  deduc-
tion in  a  logical  syllogism — no !  they  more  nearly  resemble  the
sound  of  the  trumpet  and  drum  in  the  street  wherewith  the
mountebank  seeks  to  announce  the  quid  lyro  quo  which  he  pro-
poses to  juggle  before  his  delighted  spectators  in  the  afternoon.
For  see,  what  the  professor  imagines  to  be  of  service  in  this  case
or  the  other  is  just  as  arbitrary,  has  no  firm  foundation,  and  is
not  the  result  of  experience,  but  is  inferred  pom  die  most  super-
fidal  view  of  the  case,  and  mily  asserted  witli  the  satisfactory
«irrW  *pm.  For  a  single  genus  of  fevers  there  will  be  found  al-
most the  whole  materia  medica :  give  the  patient,  gentlemen,
draughts  of  -bitter  and  aromatic  plants  (does  this  mean  that  we
are  to  give  colocynth,  squills,  ignatia,  nux  vomica,  aloes  ?  also
yellow  sandal- wood,  dittany,  abelmochus  seeds,  rose-wood?),  or
saccharine  oils  in  tea  (including  the  oil  of  laurocerasus  and  the
distilled  oil  of  bitter  almonds  ?).

The  whole  concern  with  its  many  definitions  of  fever  and  its
superfine  pedantry  in  pulse-feeling — which  every  one  finds  to


554  TO  A  CANDIDATE  JTOB  THX  DSQBXB  OF  X.  IK

vary  almost  every  hour,  and  wliich  feels  different  at  every  mo-
dification  of  the  patient's  temper — all  these  are  no  doubt  glitter-
ing things,  but  they  are  at  the  same  time  utterly  vain,  affording
no  comfort  and  no  assistance,  obscuring  our  vision  like  a  mist
when  we  seek  to  cure  our  patients.  On  account  of  the  learned
mist  which  obscures  and  does  not  illuminate,  we  neither  perceive
the  true  state  of  the  patient,  nor  that  wherewith  we  might  afford
him  relief

Only  ask  yourseli^  if  you  knew  all  that  off  by  heart,  would
you  be  able  by  means  of  it  to  form  an  accurate  conception  of
the  disease,  and  could  it  aid  you  to  cure  the  disease  ?  No  doubt
you  would  be  able  to  treat  it  with  all  the  array  of  proposed  re*
medics,  but  whether  one  of  these  is  the  best  and  most  suitable^
and  which  among  them  it  is  that  solely  and  especially  can  and
must  be  of  service,  that  you  will  not  laiow;  the  professor  him!*
self  does  not  know  it,  otherwise  be  would  only  have  mentioned
this  sole  best  and  most  suitable  remedy,  and  no  other.  Wlien
the  therapeutic  professor  can  put  toge^er  a  number  of  general
artistic  floweiy,  phrases  respecting  things  that  none  can  faiow,
and  can  dash  a  learned-looking  varnish  over  the  hypothesia  of
his  own  invention,  the  whole  affair  appears  to  be  all  right ;  but
when  he  attempts  to  apply  it  to  the  relief  of  disease — ^the  proper
object  of  the  medical  art — ^his  learned,  theoretical  apparatus
leaves  him  in  the  lurch ;  he  then  runs  over,  in  a  purely  empiri*
cal  manner,  just  like  the  most  unreflecting,  routine  practitioner,
a  number  of  names  of  medicines — "  there,  make  what  you  can
of  that !  you  may  put  all  the  names  together  into  a  bag,  and
according  to  your  fancy  draw  out  one  or  several,  it  is  quite  im-
material, you  may  use  this  one  or  that  one  I ''  Here,  where  the
question  is  to  afford  relief,  we  find  the  most  stupid  sincretiflm
and  empiricism,  and  there,  where  theorizing  is  the  question,  we
find  the  most  sublime,  mystical,  and  incomprehensible  phrases
in  use,  as  elevated  as  if  they  had  been  solemnly  delivered  by  a
divinely  inspired  oracle  fh)m  the  cave  beneath  the  tripod  of  the
Delphian  Apollo.  But  cease  to  entertain  a  reverential  awe  tcft
these  magic  mutterings;  they  are  mere  empty  sounds  that  have
no  connexion  with  the  simple,  certain  and  rapid  delivery  of  your
fellow-creatures  from  the  pangs  of  disease ;  they  are  but  sound*
ing  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.  [•]

'  [Let  the  students  of  oar  modern  medical  colleges^  ponder  weU  npoo  theM
just  remarks,  and  ascertain  if  thej  are  not  applicable  to  the  scfaooli  of  oar  owi
oouotrj.] Am.  P.


OK  THB  PRSVAILINa  FSTSB.  566


ON  THE  PREVAILING  FEVER.^


The  medical  men  of  the  present  time,  by  regarding  the  fever
that  has  prevailed  for  a  year  past  in  Germany,  and  indeed
throughout  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  as  a  common  ague  or  in^
termittent  fever  of  some  other  ordinary  kind,  and  by  treating  it
as  such  (every  one  knows  with  how  little  success  I)  have  given
a  fresh  proof  of  the  imperfection  of  the  ordinary  medical  art,  I
might  idmost  say  of  its  absolute  futility.

When  one  thing  expresses  itself  differently  from  another,
and  exhibits  different  properties  and  actions,  it  requires  very
litde  discriminating  skill  to  regard  it  as  a  thing  of  a  different
character  I  And  when  one  disease  shews  itself  in  its  course,  its
symptoms  and  all  its  phenomena  quite  different  from  another
well  known  disease,  surely  every  person  endowed  with  ordina-
ry reason  must  perceive  that  the  former  must  be  another,  a
peculiar  disease,  differing  completely  from  the  one  already
known ;  and,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  to  be  treated  quite
difiisrently,  and  entirely  according  to  its  peculiar  properties.

Not  so  our  dear  ordinary  system  of  medicine,  whose  maxim
seems  to  be  to  leave  every  thing  in  the  old  way,  to  take  every-
thing quite  easily,  and  to  spare  ourselves  as  much  reflection  as
possible.  Our  ordinary  medical  system,  I  say,  felt  no  hesita-
tion in  declaring  this  new  peculiar  fever  to  be  an  ague  and  (what
diould  prevent  it?)  treating  it  accordingly.  For  mark!  dear
reader,  the  medical  art  has  but  a  single  intermittent  lever,  what
is  called  ague  in  the  books ;  therefore  there  must  be  in  nature
no  other  typical  fever. Quasi  vero.

And  thus  the  misunderstood  fever  at  present  prevailing  is
treated  by  practitioners  like  the  ordinary  ague  that  occurs  in
autumn  and  in  marshy  districts, — right  away  with  emetics  and
purgatives,  with  sal-ammoniac  (opium),  millefoil,  buckbean,
centoary,  and  cinchona  bark,  which  has  been  considered  as  al-
most omnipotent.  By  means  of  the  first  mentioned,  the  (imagi-
nary) febrile  matter  was  to  be  dissolved,  or  expelled,  but  by  the
last  the  type  was  to  be  extinguished.  But  what  was  the  effect
of  this  general  plan  of  o^x^ration  (which  was  long  since  intro-
duced for  the  ordinary  autumnal  marsh  intermittent  fever)  when

■^^M^M^— ^^wi III .mm ■ ■  - ■  —  ■■  ^ -  —  ' ■-  I I ^  »  — ., ,■ - .,  ■■■  I  II  ■  ■^

*  From  the  AUgtm,  Am,  der  DeiU^ehen,  Ka  261.  1809


55$  ON  THE  FBSYAIUNa  EBYSB.

employed  against  the  misunderstood  fever  at  present  prevailing?
I  appeal  to  the  experience  of  all  countries  where  it  has  raged,
if  it  was  not  attended  with  bad  eflFects,  if  it  was  not  often  the
case  that  more  disease  (even  death)  and  long-lasting  indisposi*
tion  were  not  often  thereby  promoted,  than  would  have  been
the  case  without  all  those  unsuitable  medicines,  and  actoallj
was  the  case  among  poor  people  who  used  none  of  them?

These  substances,  and  particularly  the  bark  given  in  large
quantities,  certainly  sometimes  suppressed  the  paroxysms  (when
they  did  not  change  the  fever  into  an  acute  rapidly  fatal  one)
for  a  longer  or  shorter  time, — ^but  they  did  not  thereby  gen-
erally restore  the  patients  to  health ;  they  generally  became  in
other  respects  worse,  they  became  subject  to  very  painful  local
diseases  in  place  of  the  suppressed  paroxysms,  or  they  lan-
guished with  nervous  symptoms  and  wasting  affections,  which
were  worse  than  the  typical  fever  itself.

These  dangerous  mistakes  were  in  the  first  place  owing  to
this,  that  practitioners  as  usual  did  not  distinguish  the  disease,
did  not  examine  what  particular,  peculiar  symptoms  were
proper  to  this  prevailing  fever  as  distinguished  from  all  other
kinds  of  intermittent  fevers,  whereby  it  was  rendered  quite  a
distinct,  peculiar  disease;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that  they
did  not  know  how  to  discover  the  peculiar,  specifically  suitable
remedy  for  this  peculiar  fever.

Can  that  be  termed  a  medical  art  which  has  no  power  to  per-
form its  two  sole  duties — the  discriminating  observation  of  dis-
eases, and  the  discovery  of  the  appropriate,  specific  remedy  ?

In  ordinary  diseases  which  (God  be  praised !)  tend  to  get  well
of  themselves,  the  ordinary  practice  of  medicine  can  contrive  to
conceal  its  incfliciency  and  hurtfulness — there  it  can,  to  use  its
own  language,  dissolve,  purge,  depress,  stimulate,  and  do  what-
ever else  it  will  with  remedies,  that  the  most  unreflecting  caprice
suggests  to  it ; — some  persons  certainly  get  well  under  the  treat-
ment, let  the  doctor  act  as  madly  as  he  pleases.  Good  consti-
tutions oflen  even  then  gain  tlie  victory  (not  unfrequently  with
the  aid  of  throwing  away  unsuitable,  injurious  medicinal  mix-
tures) not  only  over  the  disease  itself,  but  aUo  over  the  newly
added  malady — over  the  blind  treatment  of  the  unknown  dis-
ease by  means  of  inappropriate,  therefore  hurtful  medicines,  and
out  of  the  number  of  those  that  die  no  one  can  tell  how  many
who  had  originally  a  moderate  attack  of  the  disease  succumbed
solely  in  consequence  of  the  interference  oi  the  art.J


OK  THE  PREVAILIXG  FEVER.  567

But  in  the  diseases  that  do  not-  soon  go  ofif  spontaneously,
that  "will  not  allow  themselves  so  complaisantly  to  be  overcome
by  the  dear  vw  medicairix  naturce — such  as  the  fever  at  present
laging — ^in  them  it  will  be  quite  obvious  that  the  ordinary
medical  art  is  not  very  far  from  being  a  scientifically  propped-
ap  monster  and  a  misleading  phantom,  and  its  practice  with
few  exceptions  a  futile  injurious  procedure.  Ahnost  all  its
efforts'  tend  but  to  aggravate  (when  the  reverse  does  not  hap-
pen, as  it  does  sometimes,  in  consequence  of  the  accidental  and
hicky  admixture  of  some  addition  to  the  methodical  medicinal
compound)  or  to  excite  new  maladies,  often  not  less  to  be
dreaded  than  the  original  disease.  Thus,  in  the  present  instance,
by  the  injudicious  suppression  of  the  paroxysms  of  the  prevail-
ing fever  there  are  produced  a  continued  morbid,  chronic  fe-
brile state,  periodical  spasmodic  nervous  affections,  asthma,  stiff-
ness of  the  joints,  swelling  of  the  glands,  constant  or  periodical
discharges  of  blood,  or  long  continued  suppression  of  the  men-
ses, but  particularly  excessively  painful  local  diseases,  and
many  other  wasting  affections,  which  no  sensible  person  can
tenna  cure.

as  they  present  themselves,  when  it  has  not  been  altered  by  drugs^
and  then  I  shall  shew  what  medicines  must  be  suitable  for  it,
a&rd,  relief,  and  restore  health. —

A  difference  of  sex,  of  constitution,  of  age  and  of  the  imme-
diate exciting  cause  (whether  it  was  anger,  grief,  a  fright,  ex-
cess in  sensual  indulgence,  a  debauch,  &c.,  that  first  caused  the
fever  to  break  out), — also,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  climate  and
the  state  of  the  weather,  sometimes  occasion  at  first  some  vai'i-
ety  in  the  course  and  form  of  the  fever.  But  the  following  is
its  general  course.

Often  for  several  days  or  weeks  before  it  breaks  out  there
are  observed,  headache  in  the  evening,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
and  heaviness  in  the  legs.

1.  In  bad  cases  the  fever  commences  as  a  continued  one,  and
goes  on  without  intermission  in  almost  equal  violence  day  and
night,  constituting,  as  it  were,  a  single  paroxysm,  which  ends,
if  inadequately  treated,  the  ninth,  eleventh  or  fourteenth  day
with  death— or  it  subsides  (and  this  it  is  very  ai)t  to  do)  into  a
continued  chronic  state,  wherein  certain  sulferings  are  more
tsevere  at  one  time  of  the  day  than  at  another ;

2.  Or  it  resolves  itself  (either  spontaneously  or  by  the  com-


558  OK  TUB  FREYAILINa  FSYSB.

mencement  of  appropriate  treatment)  into  tertian  or  quotidian
fits.  The  remissions,  however,  do  not  in  the  most  cases  consti*
tute  a  genuine  intermission,  not  a  state  of  absolute  freedom  jGrom
disease ;  a  few  or  many  of  the  sufferings  persist  (though  in  a
less  degree)  and  the  fever  is  therefore  only  to  be  regarded  as  a
remittent  one,  which  is  especially  the  case  in  its  worse  formfli
the  paroxysms  of  which  do  not  terminate  under  eight,  twelve^
sixteen,  and  even  twenty-four  hours.

(It  is  only  a  very  small  minority  of  these  fevers  that  have
true  intermissions,  but,  notwithstanding  this,  their  nature  is  the
same,  and  they  require  the  same  mode  of  treatment.)

In  both  kinds,  which  often  pass  into  one  another,  the  skiver^
ing  or  rigour  (which  sometimes  passes  into  violent  shaking  and
chattering  of  the  teeth)  is  not  (as  it  is  in  ordinary  agues)  accom-
panied  by  real  external  coldness,  but  it  is  a  merely  internal
shuddering  sensation  of  cold  (internal  rigour),  during  which  the
patient  is  hot  (in  some  cases  only  naturally  warm)  to  the  touch
all  over,  but  chiefly  so  on  the  hands  and  feet.

This  cold  stage  commences  with  thirst,  vertigo,  and  a  draw-
ing tearing  (mixed  with  shooting)  from  the  legs  upwards,  which,
when  it  according  to  the  patient^s  sensation,  gets  up  into  the
liead,  produces  heat  of  the  head,  headache,  nausea,  &a

In  the  continued  kind  the  sensation  of  flying  heat  in  the  head
alternates  almost  unremittingly  with  rigour ;  often  both  are  pre-
sent at  once  (the  patients  complain  of  **  internal  rigour,  and  of
their  head  being  at  the  same  time  so  warm  that  the  heat  mounts
up  into  their  head,  with  nausea").  At  the  same  time  the  pa-
tients feel  hot  all  over  the  body,  without  themselves  being
aware  that  they  are  so,  on  the  contrary,  they  wish  the  room  to
be  strongly  heated,  wrap  themselves  closely  up,  and  only  com-
plain of  the  so-called  flying  heat  rising  up  into  the  head.

In  the  chronic,  degenerated  kind  of  the  continued  fever,  the
rigours  with  external  heat  of  the  body  and  of  the  hands  are  not
unfrequently  conjoined  with  actual  coldness  of  the  feet,  then
the  patients  complain  that  after  going  to  bed  at  night  they  can-
not get  warm,  whereas  when  they  waken  in  the  morning  they
feel  so  hot

As  a  rule,  the  rigours  in  the  continued  variety  come  on  from
very  slight  causes,  on  getting  up,  even  on  sitting  up  in  bed  and
on  the  slightest  movement,  often  even  every  time  the  patient
drinks,  even  warm  beverages.

In  the  paroxysms  of  the  remitting^sort  also,  the  so-called  heat


OK  THX  PBSYAILINa  FEVIB.  669

18,  aocording  to  the  patient's  description,  generally  only  a  feel-
ing of  fstrong  wannth  rising  to  the  head,  often  accompanied  by
burning  in  the  eyes  and  redness  of  the  &ce  (this  is  the  only
heat  they  feel,  not  that  of  the  rest  of  the  body),  with  which  is
conjoined  a  series  of  other  affections  of  the  sensibility  and  irri-
tability, which  together  constitute  the  so-called  hot  stage.

The  most  frequent  complaint  is  the  headache^  which  they
shootings,  also  as  a  bursting  pain,  often  also  as  a  digging  in  the
bndn  and  as  if  it  would  be  forced  out  superiorly,  whereby  a
throbbing  in  the  occiput  not  unfrequently  supervenes,  which
deprives  them  of  consciousness,  or  jerks  in  the  head  from  before
backwards.  They  have  this  headache  even  while  l}ring,  but  on
rimng  up,  or  even  moving  the  head,  either  the  shoots  or  the
blows  (jerks)  in  the  head  increase  to  an  intolerable  degree.

Patients  c^  a  different  constitution  complain,  instead  of  this
lieadache,  that  their  head  feels  so  heavy,  so  stupid,  so  dizzy,
that  they  are  so  forgetful  and  intoxicated,  that  every  thing  ap-
pears to  them  wrong,  that  there  is  hissing  and  roaring  in  the
Inain.  This  state  in  the  hot  stage  often  turns  into  real  uncon-
eciousness  and  loss  of  reason,  that  oft;en  lasts  many  hours  and
even  degenerates  into  violent  mania  and  raving  madness.

But  an  equally  frequent  symptom  in  the  hot  stage  is  the
cmxiety  (generally  combined  with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and
sweat  on  the  brow),  which  often  rises  to  the  most  fearful  height,
during  which  the  patients  complain  that  they  cannot  control
themselves,  and  not  unfrequently  in  these  dreadful  moments
they  commit  suicide,  either  by  strangling  or  hanging  them-
fldves.

In  the  continued  variety  of  this  fever,  this  anxiety  usually
becomes  aggravated  after  midnight,  especially  after  three  o'clock,
when  the  patient  cannot  endure  to  remain  in  bed,  but  must  walk
about,  until  they  sink  down  exhausted.  In  this  kind  of  fever
the  kind  of  pain  which  the  patient  experiences  during  the  day
is  at  the  same  time  aggravated  so  as  to  be  intolerable,  whether
it  be  in  the  head,  the  chest,  one  of  the  limbs,  the  uterus,  the
Tuinary  organs  or  elsewhere.  In  the  slighter  degrees  of  this  con-
tinued fever  there  occur  after  midnight,  half  remembered,  anx-
ious phantasies,  deliria,  tossing  about  of  the  body  and  limbs.

The  disposition  of  our  fever-patients  is  also  very  much  affected
by  precordial  anxiety  even  when  no  fit  is  present.  They  are
timorous  and  easily  vexed  by  trifles,  and,  according  to  their


660  ON  THE  PBEVAILIKO  FBTSB.

temperament,  either  very  dismal  and  full  of  fears  of  impending
death,  or  intolerant,  impatient  and  weary  of  life,  occasionally  so
much  so  as  to  induce  them  to  commit  suicide.

A  third  symptom  occurring  along  with  the  hot  stage  of  the
paroxysms  is  nausea,  a/adnt/eeling^  such  as  is  apt  to  accompany
horrible  pain,  which  often  tends  to  increase  into  retching,  tot
several  hours,  and  vomiting  of  sour,  bitter  or  watery  fluid.

In  the  continued  kind  the  nausea  often  often  comes  on  in
conjunction  with  the  anxiety,  vertigo,  £Euntness  and  trembling.
Even  when  no  actual  retching  is  present  the  patient  has  a  con*
stant  feeling  in  his  stomach  as  if  he  could  vomit  incessantly.

The  vertigo  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  symptoms  of  this  fever*
It  oftien  comes  on  at  the  comimencement  of  the  rigour,  on  aay
slight  movement,  and  is  accompanied  by  the  nausea,  the  noiae
in  the  ears,  the  obscuration  of  the  vision  and  the  ftuntness.  Tha
patients  feel  as  if  they  would  fall  rather  sideways  and  forwaids
than  backwards.  In  the  chroi;iic  continued  variety  the  vertiiio'
happens  chiefly  ia  the  morning.  ^  ^^

Not  less  characteristic  of  this  fever  and  a  very  firequent  phe-
nomenon is  the  trembling^  especially  of  the  limbs,  which  some--
times  occurs  alone,  sometimes  conjoined  with  the  anxiety,  the
heat  of  head,  the  attacks  of  faiutness  and  vertigo,  and  also  with
the  sickness.  Most  frequently  of  all,  the  trembling  shews  itself
at  the  commencement  of  the  hot  stage.  In  the  chronic,  con-
tinued variety  it  sometimes  becomes  the  most  prominent  symp-
tom, and  then  attacks  only  one  limb  at  a  time ;  it  occasionally
appears  only  when  lying  down,  and  not  at  all  when  moving.

The  paroxysms  of  some  children  are  ushered  in  with  clonic
spasms  and  epileptic  convulsions;  seldom  are  they  mere  tonic  con-
tinued flexures  of  their  limbs  at  the  commencement  of  the  heat

The  perspiration  (which  usually  smells  sour  or  sourish)  usually
occurs  in  the  paroxysms  of  the  remittent  kind,  not,  as  is  the  caae
in  the  autumnal  intermittent  fever,  during  the  heat,  but  (very
characteristically)  afterwards,  often  only  some,  several  or  even
many  hours  afterwards,  *  often  also  not  until  the  patients  get  up,
or  move  about,  or  when  they  fall  asleep  some  hours  afi»r  the
heat  In  the  mean  time  the  worst  symptoms  of  the  fits,  the  pre-
cordial anxiety,  the  pains  of  the  head  and  other  parts,  the  weight
and  stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  the  loss  of  reason,  &c,  go  o£^
but  usually  not  until  the  perspiration  comes  on,  however  long  it

Qeaerallj  the  flow  of^urine  remains  suppreaaed  just  as  long.


09  1SB FBEYAIIiUra  FSYEB.  5^1

may  delay.^  I&  the  chroDic  ooutinued  variety  of  this  fever,  the
pmspiration  comes  on  when  moving  slightly,  even  when  eating,
but  especially  on  the  recurrence  of  the  pains,  and  whenever  ih^
patients  go  to  bed  and  cover  themselves  up.  During  the  slightest
deep  most  of  them  become  immediately  covered  with  perspira-
tion.

In  the  kind  of  fever  consisting  of  repeated  paroxysms,  thef
Airst  fix)m  the  very  commencement  of  the  fit,  even  before  it
oomes  on,  until  the  end,  is  unquenchable,  but  though  the  patients
drink  very  often,  they  take  but  little  at  a  time,  for  every  liquid
becomes  repulsive  to  them  the  moment  they  partake  of  it ;  there
abo  often  occurs  immediately  after  drinking  either  shuddering
or  nausea  and  retching ;  this  kind  of  thirst  is  also  not  unfrequent
daring  the  remissions.  If  the  fever  assumes  the  chronic  type,
there  sometimes  occurs  complete  adypsia,  though  not  often.

Along  with  the  sinking  feeling  and  retching  sickness  there  is
eoi^oined  disgust  at  all  kinds  of  food,  chiefly  at  meat,  butter,  &c
Even  when,  in  the  fevers  that  pass  into  the  chronic  form,  food
and  drink  begins  to  taste  tolerably,  there  still  occurs  after  it  i^
partaken  o^  sinking  and  nausea — or  anxiety,  as  if  from  difficulty
of  breathing  so  that  there  is  a  desire  felt  to  open  the  doors  and
windows  In  the  chronic  continued  fever,  periods  of  annorexia
and  bulimy  sometimes  occur  alternately.

On  taking  any  food,  the  sense  of  taste  appears  as  ifextmguished\
fix>d  tastes,  even  during  the  remission,  just  like  hay  or  straw ;
but  immediately  afler  partaking  of  it  the  mouth  becomes  com-
pletely filled  with  a  bitterness  like  gall,  just  like  after  vomiting
from  taking  an  emetic ;  and  there  occur  nausea,  or  bitter  or
sourish-bitter  eructations.  In  some  there  occur  even  whilst  eat-
ings especially  eating  bread,  bitterness  in  the  mouth.  More
laiely  does  it  happen  that  there  is  constant  bitterness  of  the
mouth,  and  in  that  case  the  bitterness  is  much  increased  after
every  meaL  At  the  commencement  of  a  paroxysm  the  bitter  or
Utter-sour  ^nctations  are  of  frequent  occurrence.

The  usual  sensation  in  the  mouth  is  dryness  of  the  fauces  with
fedingof  mucixs  upon  the  tongue,  not  un  frequently  combined
with  a  feeling  of  rawness  in  the  fauces.  Frequently,  after  awak-.
ing  in  the  morning,  the  taste  in  the  mouth  is  bitter,  rarely  like
that  of  rotten  eggs.

'  lliere  are  some  of  these  fercrs  vhere  penpiratioQ  never  eDsues,  ooljr  durii^  Xtm
mnstj  there  may  be  a  little  on  the  head  -,  in  these  cases  the  perspiratioa  is  »ome»
replaced  by  clonic  spasms.
2Q


662  ON  THE  PBEYAILIKO  FXYSB.'

The"urine  is  generally  dark  and  of  a  greenish-brown  colour.

There  often  appear  burning  itching  eruptions  all  over  the
body,  or  on  different  parts  of  it ;  sometimes  a  very  frequently
occurring  cough.

The  sleepiness  by  day  in  the  continued  kind  of  this  fever  is
great  Even  in  the  morning  soon  after  awaking,  whether  they
are  seated  or  standing,  their  eyes  often  close,  fi^quently  in  the
act  of  talking.

Very  characteristic  of  all  the  states  of  this  fever  is  the  m-
iolera7ice  of  movement  or  of  muscular  exertion.  Immediately  on
the  occurrence  of  a  fit  their  limbs  appear  stiff,  as  if  paralysed;
they  must  instantly  lie  down,  and  even  when  lying  they  feel  as
if  paralysed.  If  the  patients  get  up  during  the  heat,  then  shud-
dering  occurs,  not  unfrequently  with  sudden  chilling  of  the  hands
and  feet,  they  feel  sinking,  the  vision  becomes  obscured,  a
feintness  supervenes.  Also  when  the  paroxysm  is  not  upon
them,  the  least  movement  deprives  them  in  a  few  moments  of
all  strength.  Trembling,  vertigo,  nausea,  obscuration  of  vision^
roaring  in  the  ears  and  fainting,  these  S3rmptoms  so  characteristic
of  our  fevers,  frequently  come  on  on  the  least  movement,  and
the  strongest  men  ofl;en  fall  to  the  ground  before  we  are  aware
of  it.  Also  in  the  intermission  and  in  the  chronic  continued
state,  the  patients  cannot  bear  to  stand  even  for  a  short  time ;
obscuration  of  vision  and  vertigo,  shortness  of  breath,  and  even
feinting,  are  the  result.  All  the  pains  they  usually  suffer  are
especially  increased  by  movement  of  the  body,  or  of  single  limbs.
On  putting  their  foot  to  the  ground  they  feel  the  shock  in  their
head,  or  shootings  go  through  it.

All  the  symptoms  are  alleviated  by  lying.

But  still  more  injurious  to  them  in  every  condition  of  this
fever  is  movement  in  tfie  open  air;  this  deprives  them  suddenly
of  strength,  produces  in  them  either  shuddering  and  rigour  (fbl.
lowed  by  perspiration)  or  shortness  of  breath,  or  drawing  in  the
limbs,  or  increased  tearing  shooting  headaches ;  at  the  same  time
it  diminishes  the  dizziness,  maziness  and  intoxicated  feeling  in
the  head,  which  however  soon  recur  on  coming  back  into  the
room.  A  kind  of  pressive  pain  in  the  chest,  or  rather  in  the  scro
bictdus  cordis^  with  sense  of  suffocation ,  is  a  not  unusual  symptom
at  the  commencement  of  and  during  the  heat ;  it  often  occurs
simultaneously  with  the  precordial  anxiety.  Pain,  like  rawness
in  the  chest,  is  far  from  being  rare,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of
drawing  pains  in  t/ie  back,  as  if  from  a  strain.


OSr  THX  PBEVAILIKO  FEYER.  56S

This  fever  seems  sometimes  to  cease  suddenly  of  its  own  ac-
cord, bat  more  frequentl j  by  the  use  of  some  medicines  unsuit-
able for  it,  especiallj  cinchona-bark ;  but  on  the  other  hand,
fliere  occur  at  the  same  time  vicarious  affections,  periodical  ner-
TDUB  maladies,  suppression  of  the  menses,  or  periodical,  very
painful  discharge  of  coagulated  blood  and  mucus  from  the  womb
or  urinary  organs,  or  anus,  and  other  intolerable  painful  local
affections,  and  even  aberrations  of  the  mind. In  proof  of  their
origin  and  that  they  are  only  degenerated  and  masked  forms  of
this  fever,  there  remain  several  of  the  above-named  characteristic
affections  peculiar  to  this  fever,  and  the  vicarious  maladies  them-
selves become  aggravated  at  certain  times  of  the  day. The  ag-
gravations usually  occur  from  four  o'clock  in  the  ailemoon  until
three  or  four  oVlock  in  the  morning  in  some,  but  in  others  from
three  in  the  morning  until  four  in  the  afternoon. The  other
twelve  hours  are  much  more  endurable.

For  these  vicarious  maladies  (masked  fever)  the  only  efficacious
medicines  are  those  that  are  capable  of  curing  the  original  fever.

Nothing  can  do  good  and  restore  health  but  the  medicines  spe-
dally  suitable  (specific)  for  this  fever,  that  is,  such  as  are  capable
of  exciting  similar  symptoms  in  the  healthy  human  body.

Let  my  readers  endeavour  to  find  out  in  Hahnemann's  Frag-
menia  de  viribiis  niedicarnentorum  positivis  what  medicine  it  is
that  causes  the  following  symptoms  characteristic  of  this  fever :
Rigiditas  artuum — juncturarum  mobilitas  diminuta — torpor  om-
nium membrorum — instabilitas,  infirmitas  pedum,  genuum —
lassitude  ingens — ^tremor — tremor  pedis  alterutrius  et  genuum —
lapsus  virium  subitus — syncope — gravitas  capitis  cbriosa,  verti-
.  ginosa— ebriosa  capitis  obtenebratio — vertigo  cum  scotomia —
nisus  in  decubitum — impotcntia  caput  erigendi,  in  dorso  recli-
nati  ob  vertiginem  et  scotomiam — respiratio  extra  lectum  angus-
ta,  difficilis;  in  lecto  justa — dolor  pectoris  respirationem  suffo-
cana — anxictas  ingens — palpi  tatio — anxietas  autochiriae  cupida
—mortis  timor — mortem  instare  putat — anxietas  diaphoresin
gignens,  ad  minimum  frontis — post  anxietatem  nausea,  vomitu-
ritio— deliquescentia  cordis — horripilatio  primo,  turn  calor  ango-
rem  creans — ^horrescentia — genae  calidae  cum  horrore  intemo —
fiiciei  caloris  sensus  cum  horrore  corporis  caeteri — calor  intemus
capitis  cum  frigorc  corporis — ardor  in  oculis  sine  inflammatione
— ialor  cum  Iccti  appetcntia — dilaccrans  capitis  dolor  eundo
auctus — pulsationcs  vel  ictus  aliqui  in  capite — aero  libero  auctus
capitis  dolor  et  crurum  lassitudo— anorexia  cibi — anorexia
maxime  panis — regurgitatio  amari  et  acidi  saporis — impatientia


6M^  ON  THS  FREVAILINa  FSVOI*

panronim  malorum — payor — phantasiae  npctumae  aemi-yigBeB
— ^phantasiae  delirae  terribiles — eruptio  miliaiis  ardenti  prorieaA
-Mdens  pruritus  per  totum  corpus.

The  seed*  which  is  capable  of  producing  these  symptomai  ii
of  all  known  vegetable  medicines  the  only  one  that  is  sJso  Cfi^
ble  of  curing  a  great  part  of  this  prevalent  fever  in  a  short  tsne^
that  is,  of  transforming  it  into  health.'  but  this  is  only  to  ba
done  by  giviDg  at  fiiBt  about  every  fourth  daj,  afterwank  eveiy
sixth  or  eighth  day,  a  very  small  dose  of  it.  The  smallest  par*
tide  of  it  in  powder,  or  a  small  portion  of  a  drop  of  a  solution
of  it^  every  drop  of  which  contains  a  trillionth  of  a  grain  of  Hm
seed,  is  an  amply  sufficient  dose  and  suited  for  the  puxpoee;  no
other  medicine,  of  course,  being  used  intercurrently,  either  in-
wardly or  outwardly.

It  will,  however,  be  noticed,  that  in  the  enumeration  of  the
symptoms  of  our  fever  there  are  some  not  perfectly  contained
in  this  plant,  consequently  which  cannot  be  perfectly  covered
by  it,  and  this  is  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the  wont
iform  of  this  fever.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  mineral '  which,  in  its  extraor*
din'ary  action  on  the  human  body,  is  capable  of  excitmg  thoee
symptoms  which  make  up  our  fever,  in  a  much  more  perfect
manner,  and  consequently  of  curing  it  with  much  greater  cer-
tainty and  completeness,  particularly  those  kinds  in  which  every
action  is  followed  immediately  by  shuddering  or  nausea,  or  bit-
ter taste ;  in  which  the  taste  of  food  and  drink  is  extinguished,
but  still  there  is  no  constant  bad  or  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
and  in  which  only  whilst  eating  or  soon  thereafter  there  occurs
some  bitterness  in  the  mouth  for  a  short  time ;  in  which  vertigo,
nausea,  trembling,  and  rapid  sinking  of  the  strength  increase  to
the  greatest  degree ;  in  which  drink  is  often  desired,  but  litde
is  drunk  at  a  time ;  in  which  perspiration  only  occurs  some  time
after  the  heat,  or  not  at  all ;  in  which  paralysis  of  the  irritable
or  sensitive  fibre  prevails,  and  pains  of  the  most  intolerable
kind  unite,  are  conjoined  with  great  anxiety  of  heart ;  for  all
these  symptoms  are  completely  contained  in  the  sphere  of  action
of  this  mineral  on  the  human  body,  therefore  it  can  cure  these
when  it  is  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  it  can  cure  the  greatest
and  worst  portion  of  our  fevers  quickly,  easily,  and  with  the
greatest  certainty.

'  [StrycfaiMM  nuz  yomioL]

*  Especially  when  the  abldi^  of  the  forces  is  not  so  strikii^,  the  food  stifl  tastes
Mturallj,  and  there  is  odj  a  oootinual  biU^  teste  in  the  mouth.
(Aneaiciim  ilUni


OF  TBR  PSSVAILma  FBYXB.  595

But  what  do  I  say  ?  Has  not  this  mineral  almost  irretrievabl  j
incurred  the  ban  of  the  medical  art?  But  what  cares  the  free
investigator  of  truth,  who  only  sees  in  the  whole  kingdom  of
nature  the  &therly  love  of  God  dispensing  blessings  with  a
libeiral  hand?  Nothing  is  unconditionally  to  be  rejected ;  every-
thing is  a  beneficent  gift  of  God ;  and  among  God's  good  gifb,
"tiie  greatest  are  just  those  that  are  injurious  to  the  world  in  iho
hands  of  fools ;  they  were  only  created  for  the  use  of  the  wise,
who  alone  are  capable  of  employing  them  for  the  weal  of  man-
kind, and  to  the  glory  of  the  beneficent  Deity.

How  can  it  be  imputed  to  the  very  powerful  medicinal  sub-
stances as  a  &ult,  that  when  given  in  our  gross  medicinal
weights,  in  drachms,  scruples  and  grains,  they  are  still  much  too
large  for  wholesome  use  ?  so  that  the  ordinary  drachm,  scruple
ind  grain  practitioners,  must  almost  abandon  their  employment
in  consequence  of  their  enormous  powerfulness,  whilst  the
snuJlest  quantity  which  these  shortsighted  beings  can  think  of
employing  must  still  be  something  that  they  can  measure  in
ihetr  medicine  scales.

But  if  a  tenth  part  of  a  grain  of  this  mineral  was  still  often
found  to  be  dangerous,  in  other  words,  too  powerful,  what  was
to  have  prevented  physicians,  if  they  had  but  but  reflected  a
iitde,  from  trying  whether  a  thousandth,  a  millionth  of  a  grain,
or  still  less,  was  not  a  moderate  dose,  and  if  even  such  a  small
fragment  of  a  grain  was  found  to  be  too  gross  a  dose  of  this
meet  powerful  of  all  medicinal  agents  (as  it  is  in  feet),  what
should  have  prevented  them  from  diminishing  this  fractional
quantity  still  more,  until  they  found  that  a  sextillionth  of  a
grain  in  solution  becomes  a  mild  and  yet  sufficiently  powerftd
^  our  case  specifically  curative)  dose,  when  administered  every
five  to  ten  days?  Here  also,  of  course,  it  must  be  employed
nngly  and  alone,  and  without  the  administration  of  any  inter-
oiBTent  medicine  whatever.

In  the  immoderate  perspirations  in  the  worst  kind  of  the
fever,  and  in  the  continued  unconsciousness  when  a  remedy  is
fequired,  camphor  affords  speedy  relief,  but  only  in  a  palliative
Bmnner;  it  cannot  be  continued  without  injury,  nor  used  as  a
permanent  remedy.  The  excessive  perspirations  which  it  here
suddenly  diminishes,  it  is  capable  of  exciting  itself  in  the  healthy
body,  but  only  in  its  secondary  action ;  hence  its  employment
in  this  case  is  only  palliative.


666  AIGKS  OF  THE  TIMES  Vf  THS

SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES  IN  THE  ORDINARY  SYSTEM

OF  MEDICINE.*


Art  of  physic  is  a  most  appropriate  name  for  designating.the
practice  hitherto  pursued  by  physicians,  of  whom  we  might  say
that  they  (in  place  of  healing)  only  physic,  that  is,  give  medicines
— ^it  matters  not  what — in  diseases.

Such  a  procedure  can  never,  until  it  alters  for  the  better,  be
termed  healing  art

But  that  this  drugging  business  has  not  altered  up  to  this
time,  and  gives  no  sign  of  wishing  to  alter  and  better  itseli^  we
learn  from  innumerable  circumstances  occurring  every  day,  and
also  fix)m  the  following :

Who  would  have  believed  that  in  the  nineteenth  century  a
physician  with  a  real  degree  in  a  university  toum  (Dr.  Becker  of
Leipsic)  could  give  a  commission  to  another  regular  physiciaii
in  a  university  town  (Dr.  Nothlich  of  Jena)  for  the  sale  of  his
quack  medicines,^  and  coxdd  puff  off  his  rubbish  as  infidlible  in
these  terms :  they  effect  a  certain  cure,  kc.  This  has  been  done
in  No.  293  of  this  journal.

A  quack  nostrum  is  a  medicinal  agent  prepared  in  a  certain
invariable  manner  for  public  sale,  which  is  puffed  off  as  effica-
cious for  several  named  diseases,  or  for  one  disease,  whose  name
includes  several  morbid  states,  differing  from  each  other,  each
of  which  will  require  for  its  cure  an  essentially  different  pecu-
liar remedy.

Such  are  Dr.  Becker's  dental  medicines,  offered  for  sale  by
Dr.  Nothlich.

Now,  who  would  have  believed  that  a  physician  would  have
publicly  advertised  a  spirit  for  the  toothache  as  certain  to  cure  f
Mark,  one  and  the  same  spirit  as  certainly  efficacious  for  the
innumerable  array  of  the  very  different  kinds  of  pains  in  the
teeth  I

When  the  toothache  does  not  arise  from  the  effects  of  an  ex*
ternal  injury  immediately  preceding  it  (for  then  only  is  the
toothache  merely  local  and  idiopathic), — its  aching  always  re-
presents only  the  chief  symptom  of  a  malady  of  very  various
character  distributed  throughout  the  whole  system,  arising  from

'  From  the  Allgenmner  Ameiytr  4er  Deuiicken,  No.  826. 1809.

*  Essence  for  scurvy  of  the  teeth,  tioctore  for  caries  of  the  teeth,  tooth-powder  and
■pint  ior  toothache.


OBDIKARY  SYSTEM  OF  HEDICINB.  567

sadi  tfainga  as  suckling  a  ohild  too  losg,  abuse  of  the  sexual  func-
tion, of  spirituous  liquors,  of  ooffee  or  tea,  from  fright,  from
anger,  from  grie^  from  too  violent  exercises  and  overheating  of
the  body,  or  &om  &tigue,  from  a  chiU,  from  over-exertion  of
the  mind,  from  a  sedentary  life,  iVom  working  among  warm
damps  things,  &c

The  toothache  is  as  various  in  character  as  are  the  internal
maladies  that  produce  it  Hence  as  those  diflferent  kinds  of  in-
ternal malady  cannot  be  removed  by  one  and  the  same  medica-
ment|  neither  can  the  varieties  of  toothache  depending  upon
them.

Hence  one  medicine  is  useful  only  in  one  kind,  another  in
another  kind  of  toothache ; — one*  is  only  of  service  in  those

toothaches  that  occur  in  fits,  most  violently  at  night,  with  red-
ness of  the  cheek,  that  during  the  fit  seem  to  be  quite  unbeara-
Ue,  that  do  not  effect  any  one  tooth  in  particular,  tliat  in  their
slightest  degree  consists  of  formicating  pecking  pains,  when
more  severe  cause  a  tearing  pain,  and  in  their  greatest  severity
occasion  a  shooting  pain  extending  often  into  the  ear,  that  most
frequently  come  on  soon  after  eating  and  drinking,  are  some-
what relieved  by  the  application  of  the  finger  that  has  been
dipped  in  water,  but  are  much  increased  by  drinking  cold  things,
and  that  generally  leave  a  swelling  of  the  cheek.  This  kind
affects  persons  of  capricious  disposition  who  are  very  much  dis?
posed  to  anger,  and  have  been  rendered  irritable  by  means  of
coffee.

Quite  another  medicine'  is  of  service  in  those  cases  where  the
pain  in  the  gum  is  of  a  gnawing,  fine  shooting  character,  but
that  in  the  nerve  of  the  tooth  is  drawing,  jerking  (as  if  the  nerve
were  violently  drawn  and  suddenly  let  loose  again)  with  chilly
feeling,  combined  with  paleness  of  the  face,  occuring  most  fi:e-
quently  in  the  evening,  more  rarely  in  the  morning,  increased
by  a  warm  room  and  the  heat  of  the  bed,  relieved  by  cool  air
blowing  upon  it,  not  increased  by  chewing,  but  brought  on  by
the  use  of  the  toothpick.  It  effects  persons  of  mild,  quiet  dis-
position, disposed  to  shed  tears.

Another  totally  different,  peculiar  medicine^  is  required  for
the  cure  of  that  toothache  that  only  effects  a  hollow  carious
tooth,  with  a  drawing,  boring  pain  as  if  it  were  being  forced  out
of  its  socket,  and  single,  rare,  coarse  shoots,  which  cause  a  shock


'  Chiiinoinilla.  *  Pulsatilla.  '  Nuz  Yomica.


5M  SIGN  OB"  THS  TniEBj  OC.

through  the  whole  body,  with  painful,  frequently  mipputating
awelling  (epulis)  in  the  gum.  It  generally  comes  on  quite  early
in  the  morning  in  bed,  does  not  permit  of  chewing,  is  generally
renewed  and  aggravated  most  by  opening  the  mouth  in  the  open
air,  and  by  exertion  of  the  mind  in  reading  or  reflecting.  It
usually  attacks  only  persons  of  hasty  choleric  temper,  who  reil-
der  themselves  irritable  by  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors  and
coflfee,  and  are  not  much  in  the  open  air.

Besides  these  three  most  common  kinds  of  toothache  l3iere  are
many  other  not  rare  kinds,  one  of  which  only  occurs  in  tile
morning  on  the  partaking  of  warm  fluids,  another  where  tlie
tooth  only  pains  whilst  chewing,  still  another  which  oidy  affects
the  front  teeth  with  obtuse  pain,  another  where  the  tooth
aches  chiefly  when  touched  which  causes  a  pressive  tbrobbing
pain,  again  another  all  the  carious  teeth  at  once,  where  the  gums  are
swollen  and  painfully  sensitive  to  the  touch,  whilst  single  jeifa
dart  through  the  periosteum  of  the  jaw,  which,  in  its  slighter
form,  consists  of  jerking  pressure,  but  in  its  more  severe  form
of  a  digging  tearing  pain  and  burning  stitches,  and  along  with
which  the  incisor  teeth  are  often  painful  on  respiring  througli
the  mouth,  and  yet  another  kind  that  occurs  only  from  cdH
air,  mostly  in  the  morning,  with  rush  of  blood  to  the  interior  of
the  head,  that  makes  the  tooth  loose  with  a  formicating  pain  in
it,  and  on  chewing  there  occurs  a  sensation  as  if  it  would  fiill
out,  whilst  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  tearing  pain  in  the  gmn.

When  the  state  of  the  system  otherwise  indicates  them,  hyos-
tyamus  is  the  sole,  peculiar  remedy  of  the  last  form  of  tooth-
ache, and  the  north  pole  of  the  magnet  the  sole  remedy  for  the
second  last  one :  but  both  these  remedies  are  unserviceable  in
all  other  kinds  of  toothache,  which,  as  peculiar  diseases  of  differ-
ent kinds,  require  for  their  certain  permanent  cure  each  its  own
peculiar  appropriate  remedy,  but  they  are  aggravated  or  render-
ed more  lasting  by  every  other  medicine  not  specifically  suitable
for  them.

I  say  remedy^  and  do  not  thereby  imply  any  palliative,  whidi
merely  deadens  the  pjiin  somewhat  for  one  or  more  quarters  of
an  hour,  only  to  return  subsequently  all  the  more  severely,  and
with  fresh  annoying  symptoms  in  its  train,  but  I  imply  a  medi-
^nal  agent  which  is  quite  appropriate  to  the  disease,  and  com-
pletely eradicates  and  removes  the  pain  in  the  course  of  a  few
hours,  so  that  for  a  long  time,  often  as  long  as  life  lasts,  it  does
not  again  occur. Of  such  a  character  must  the  medicines  be,


XEDICAL  HISTOBIOAL  DISSEBTATIOK, ETC.  500

each  of  wbicli  is  certainly  and  permanently  curative  for  a  par-
ticular  kind  of  tootliache,  and  at  the  same  time  for  the  internal
maladj  of  the  system  on  which  it  depends.

What  a  self-deception,  then,  it  i^,  which  can  only  be  excused
ly  the  plea  of  total  ignorance^  for  a  physician,  without  knowing
the  many  essentially  different  kinds  of  toothache,  to  imagine
'that  there  is  hut  one  iootfiache,  and  that  but  a  single  tootkache-
fnedidne  is  required  (and  that  /its  oum) — and  thus  by  means  of
opium  (the  chief  ingredient  of  all  nostrums  for  the  toothache)
he  only  sometimes,  and  for  a  short  time,  deadens  the  general
sensibility,  whilst  he  creates  many  new  sufferings — and  yet  in
his  puffing  advertisement  he  dares  to  assert,  that  his  spirit  is  a
certain  remedy  for  the  toothache  I

What  a  palpable  falsehood  this  is,  for  it  is  impossible  that
essentially  different  diseases  (in  the  very  nature  of  things)  can
he  cured  by  one  and  the  same  medicine,  and  every  medicine
which  does  not  do  good,  that  is,  which  is  unsuitable,  does  harm.


MEDICAL  HISTORICAL  DISSERTATION  ON  THE  HELLEBORISM

OF  THE  ANCIENT&'


INTRODUCnOK.

1.  It  is  my  intention  to  speak  of  the  helleborism  of  the  an-
cients, that  very  celebrated  operation  by  which  the  ancient
physicians  were  accustomed  to  treat  with  great  daring  the
gteater  number  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  most  obstinate  char-
acter by  a  medicament  of  excessive  violence,  the  veratrum
oBum^  and  not  unfrequently  effected,  as  if  by  a  miracle,  a  radi^
Cat  cure.  This  ancient  method  is  most  worthy  of  attention,  and
the  more  so  as  in  our  days  the  use  of  this  grand  remedy  has
been  more  completely  abandoned,  both  in  general  and  in  par-
ticular in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,  so  neglected  by

*  [Hie  original  of  this,  which  ia  in  the  Latin  language,  and  is  the  thesis  presented
}tj  HahDemano  to  the  Leipsic  Faculty  of  Medicine  in  order  to  obtain  the  license  to
practioe,  bears  the  following  title,  Diatertatio  hi8t4»ico-fnedicade  helleborUmo  vetenon,
Lipdoft  XDooozn.  I  have  thought  it  best  to  translate  it,  because  the  Latin  language
k  10  little  cultivated  now  among  medical  men,  that  ihe  original  would  be  but  litUe
nad  by  them,  and  this  essay  is  too  yaluable  to  be  cast  aside  unread,  if  we  would
wi^  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  learning  and  genius  of  Hahnemann.]


670  KXDIGAL  HISTOBICAL  DISSKRTATIOK

modem  physicians  who  are  in  the  habit  of  giving  any  medicme
for  any  chronic  disease.*

2.  In  this  essay  we  shall  proceed  in  the  following  order :  fint^
we  shall  inquire  into  the  antiquity  of  this  drug  and  its  primitive
employment;  then  we  shall  examine  if  our  veratrum  is  the
same  plant  that  the  ancients  used  for  the  production  of  hellebo-
rism ;  then  we  shall  indicate  the  places  which  were  celebrated
for  the  growth  of  the  best  kinds  of  this  plant,  and  the  signs  by
which  its  good  quality  was  distinguished ;  and  finally,  we  shall
speak  of  the  employment  of  veratrum,  both  in  general,  in  ordi*
nary  cases,  and  for  the  great  treatment,  the  helleborism  itself
The  period  when  its  employment  was  first  introduced,  that  in
which  its  use  was  abandoned,  the  most  favourable  season  for
the  treatment,  the  circumstances  that  contra-indicated  its  uae^
the  maladies  that  demanded  helleborism,  then  the  prelioiinaij
treatment  to  which  the  patient  was  subjected,  the  preparation  of
the  medicament,  its  form,  its  dose,  the  substances  that  were  com*
the  veratrum,  the  remedies  used  to  obviate  and  correct  the  evilB
and  dangers  that  usually  accompanied  its  use,  in  order  to  ensure
a  safe  and  perfect  cure ;  such  are  the  subjects  that  will  come
under  our  attention.  In  conclusion,  we  shall  briefly  mention
the  employment  of  the  lieUeborxis  niger  among  the  ancients.

8.  In  my  researches  into  this  ancient  mode  of  treating  die*
eases,  I  shall  proceed  only  up  to  the  middle  ages,  I  shall  leave
it  to  others  to  treat  of  the  employment  of  veratrum  album  and
helleborus  nigcr  in  modem  times.

Earliest  medicinal  employment  ofheUebore.

4.  In  the  remotest  periods  of  Grecian  history,  the  people,  lo*
bust  in  body  but  of  uncultivated  mind,  when  oppressed  by
calamities  or  afflicted  by  diseases,  trembling  with  a  vain  and
childish  superstitious  dread  of  the  anger  of  the  gods  and  with
a  fear  of  demons,  were  less  solicitious  about  warding  off  evils
than  about  ascertaining  the  will  of  the  gods  with  respect  to  the

'  Thus  Ernst  Horn,  Medical  Vice-Director  of  the  Charity  hospital,  and  Professor  of
Physic  at  the  Medioo-Chirurgical  College  of  Berlin,  asserts  (Anfangtgrunde  der
Klinik,  pt,  il  ch.  7)  that  he  knows  of  only  one  treatment  for  all  chronic  dii
whatsoeyer,  which  is  to  remove  the  debility  by  any  excitant,  it  matteri  not  wkat^  tlM
indications  for  the  use  of  which  are  left  almost  to  chance  (t.  e.  no  account  being  taken
of  the  specific  quality  of  such  medicine,  and  of  the  immense  yariety  of  chronic  <&>
eases.)  This  is  the  manner  in  which  the  rational  physicians  of  our  days  baye  mingldd
together  and  confounded  mcdicmea  and  diseases,  and  whilst  they  pretend  to  find  ai
every  mfdidne  a  remedy  for  every  disease,  they  actually  cure  none  at  aU.


OK  THS  HSLLKfiOBISM  OF  THS  ASCIENT8.  671

mae  of  the  evil  or  their  future  fiite,  and  only  demanded  of  phj-
ficiaiiB  vaticinations  and  prognostications  respecting  the  periods
of  the  criseS)  the  convalescence  or  death — in  those  times  I  saj,
physicians  were  looked  upon  rather  as  augurs  than  as  practical
tartainers  of  health,  that  is  to  say,  as  men  who  removed  dis-
eases  by  means  of  remedies.

6.  At  that  time  the  art  of  medicine  could  scarcely  be  said  to
ezist^  the  number  of  medicaments  was  most  insignificant

6.  Among  this  small  number  of  medicines  however,  veratrum
album  is  found,  and  occupies  the  first  rank,  thus  being  one  of
the  most  ancient  as  well  as  efficacious  of  remedies.

7.  Thus,  about  the  year  1500  before  our  era,  a  certain  Me-
lampus,  son  of  Amithaon,  a  most  celebrated  augur  and  physician,
first  at  Pylos,  then  among  the  Argivans,  is  said  to  have  cured
the  daughters  of  Proetus,  king  of  the  Argivans,  who  in  conse-
quence of  remaining  unmarried,^  were  seized  with  an  amorous
fiiior^  and  affected  by  a  wandering  mania  ]^  they  were  cured
chiefly  by  means  of  veratrum  alburn,^  given  in  the  milk  of  goats
&d  upon  veratrum,  which  Melampus  had  observed  to  produce
purgative  effects  on  these  animals.^  From  this  circumstance
the  great  feune  of  this  plant  is  derived.

8.  In  later  times,  it  was  stated  by  a  certain  interpolator  of
Theophrastus^  History  ofplants^^  repeated  in  the  self-same  words
by  Rufus  the  Ephesian,'  and  Diascorides,^  that  this  cure  effected
by  Melampus  was  due  to  the  hellebonis  niger,  hence  this  plant
was  denominated  Melampodium.  But  that  this  is  an  error'  we
shall  shew  in  a  few  words.

9.  I  shall  not  waste  time  by  citing  in  corroboration  the  testi-

Appdodor^  Biblioth.  Lib.  ii,  cap.  2.
'  ATicenna,  Libi  ii,  de  medicamentit  gimplicibut.  Artie.  Charbak,  (in  Oper.  Roim%
IHSi  kL  p.  269)  corroborates  thin  in  these  words : —

'  Tliey  wandered  through  the  woods  like  cattla

*  Galen,  in  the  book  de  atra  bile,  cap.  7.

*  0.  Plinii  sec.  Jliat.  nat^  lib.  zzt,  cap.  6,  sec  24.  He  seems  to  indicate  that
Mdampus  fed  the  goats  upon  veratrum  album  (in  order  to  render  their  milk  medicinal
fcr  the  treatment),  this  we  may  infer  from  what  he  adds :  **  nigro  (ellcboro)  equi,
bof«t»  tues  necantur,  itaque  cavcnt  id  ;  cimi  candido  vescantur."

*  See  below  in  the  note  to  §  17.

*  Jn  Oribasii,  Collectorum  medicinalium  (Vcnet  op.  Aid  8),  lib.  vii,  cap.  27,  p.
261.

"  MaUr.  Ifed,  lib.  iy,  cap.  151.

*  TUs  has  ahready  been  suspected  by  J.  H.  Shulzo.  Vi  his  JHu.  de  EUebaritmu
p.  8,4.  (Halae,  1717,  4).


59^  IdCBICAL  HISTOBICAL  DISSEBTATION

Jhonj  of  fierodoftus,  wliotn  Sprengel,  otlierwise  a  most  w^(^h^
ilnthoritj  in  medical  history,  affirms,  thougli  erroneously,^  t6
liave  attributed  the  cure  of  the  daughters  of  Proetus  to  veraintim
album.

10.  Suffice  to  say,  that  in  the  earliest  period  of  Cheoigii
history  no  other  evacuant  medicine  seems  to  have  been  knoiiti
to  the  physicians,  who  Were  still  tyros  in  their  art,  and  therefore
that  none  other  could  have  been  used  by  Melampus  for  ihm
treatment  except  this  plant,  which  is  now  termed  veratram
album,  and  that  it  was  termed  by  them  hellebore,  x«^'^;of\  thei^
by  denoting  that  it  was  their  sole  and  well  known  eveunMmi
(purgative.)^

11.  But  in  process  of  time,  a&d  if  I  am  not  deceived,  soon  aAor
the  time  of  Hippocrates  the  son  of  Heraclides,  another  evacuant
medicine  having  been  discovered,  the  physicians  of  that  tidle
seem  to  have  applied  to  this  new  purgative  plant  the  name  'that
had  been  used  for  the  most  ancient  and  hitherto  unique  purgih
tive  (JieUebore),  adding  by  way  of  distinction  the  word  black,  as
though  they  should  say  purgans  (helleborum)'  nignnn.  AA
thus  in  all  probability  tiie  appellation  black  hellebore  arose,  as  in-
dicating the  later  discovered  plant

12.  That  such  was  actually  the  cose,  appears  from  this :  tliat
no  writer  is  found  prior  to  the  100th  Olympiad,  who  makis
mention  of  black  hellebore,  because  it  had  not  yet  been  dis-
covered, or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  it  had  not  yet  come
into  use  ;*  there  is  no  writer,  about  and  before  that  time,  wfco


*  Oethichte  itr  Armeikunde^  pt  i,  p.  121.  The  posnge  of  Herodotas
he  cites  (lib,  ix,  cap  88)  iajB  nothing;  but  that  Melampus  was  offered  a  reward  fa^
the  Argivans  to  cure  the  Ar^van  women  who  were  affected  with  maaim,  that  he
dwiiaiided  the  half  of  the  kingdom  for  bis  remuneration,  and  that  he  at  length  ob>
tained  it  Herodotus  does  not  saj  a  word  about  the  remedj  used  by  MeUmpoi  m
the  treatment

*  The  word  Jleikbare,  the  name  of  the  sole  and  universany  known  emetk,  reeeircd
bj  use  such  an  extended  signification  that  it  was  applied  to  the  operatioQ  itaeIC  and
•ometimee signifies  vomUing. Thus  Hippocrates (sect, iv, aph. 18)  «f^ t»^

*  HelltboruB  aud  ffelleborttm  are  used  indifferently.

*  The  Praenoiionei  Coacae  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  are  so  fuH  of  arcfaaimi.
and  written  in  such  a  hard,  rough  and  abrupt  style,  that  Grimm  in  the  index  to  hii
German  verBion  (voL  ii,  p.  686)  suggest*  that  tliey  were  probably  the  writingi
which,  long  before  the  time  of  HippD^ratei,  were  preserved  in  the  temple  of
.^Bsculapius  at  Co&  In  this  very  andeut  monument  of  the  art  of  medicine,  there  is  t^
quent  mention  made  of  iXACipor,  as  the  root  tliat  causes  eyacuation  by  Tomiting  (▼•»•
trum  album), — but  in  none  of  these  placesii  do  we  find  black  hellebore  spoken  ol^  be-
cause, most  hkely,  it  had  not  at  that  time  been  discovered  (as  we  shall  shew  heraafter


OK  VBM  HfiLLSBORISM  OF  THE  ANGI£NTS.  q73

^pplits  to  the  plant  which  was  the  only  one  employed  by  the
ancients  fix  evacuating  (vomiting),  anything  but  the  bane  tenn,
hellebore.'

13.  Thus,  as  I  have  stated  in  a  note,  the  very  ancient  authors
of  the  Praenotumes  coacae,  and  also  Ctesias,^  who  was  almost  con-
temporaneous with  Hippocrates,  when  they  are  evidently  speak-
ing of  the  veratrum  album,  make  use  of  the  bare  term  hellebore
only.  Moreover,  in  the  genuine  writings  of  Hippocrates  ^  there
]■  not  a  single  passage  where  he  uses  the  word  i>^6*(^  without
meaning  the  veratrum  album,  and  none  in  which  he  adds  the
word  Afsac^  for  this  simple  reason,  that  there  was  as  yet  no  oc-
casion for  applying  this  distinctive  epithet  to  the  plant  which
was  the  only  evacuant  at  that  period,  the  black  hellebore  not
hAviug  been  discovered,  or  no  name  having  yet  been  given  to  it.
In  his  genuine  writings  the  expression  f  AAfC«^«f  ^i a««  is  never
used,  as  I  shall  shew  hereafter.

14.  Even  in  the  times  shortly  posterior  to  the  age  of  Hippo-
emtes,  (as  we  see  in  the  pseudo-Hippocratic  writings  of  his  sons
and  disciples),  though  mention  is  made  of  l}i>X%fT  /k/a««,  still
the  most  ancient  veratrum  is  always  only  alluded  to  under  the
uaple  appellation  of  heUebore.

is.  It  is  indeed  certain,  that  in  almost  all  human  affairs,  the
ffimiiive  thing  is  denoted  specially  by  the  simple  word,  whilst
the  derived  smd  compound  name  is  applied  to  a  thing  that  is  simi-
lar, bat  that  has  been  discovered  later;  and  is,  consequently.
fieic;er  than  to  which  the  simple  word  is  applied.

16.  Hence  it  is  obvious  that  in  the  earlier  times  of  Greece
diere  was  but  one  single  hellebore  (and  that  the  veratrum  album) ;
aad.that  if  the  so-called  black  hellebore,  after  Hippocrates'  time,
became  known,  the  word  "black"  was  added  to  it,  but  it  was


treating  of  the  heUeborua  nigcr),  nor  U  the  word  XtvxdT  ever  found  a  ded  Ui
fJOUii^,  that  bemg  the  only  one  known.

'  Thus  Qalen  (in  Connncut  adllippocr.,  Sccty,  aph.  l)Bay8:  IWiBopoy  XtvKdv  dvXCir
M«0t  CMfi^civ  iXhSipoVf  otJy,  (oaiTip  rdv  fiiXava^  fitra  zftoaO^Kris;  **  thcy  (the  ancients)  Were
leemtonicd  to  caH (the  white)  hellebore  by  tliat  simple  word  and  not  with  any
addition,  as  they  did  the  black  hellebore."

*  A  fragment  oi  Ctesias  in  Oribasii.  CoUfet^lib,  yiii, cap. 8.

•  Sect  It,  aphor.13, 14, 16, 16.--Sectv,aphor.l.--lnthc  book,  d!c/rac/wrt#  (op.  edit.
Chail  t.  xil  p.  208  and  267),  and  in  the  book,  de  articulin,  (ibid.  p.  434) — These  two
bm  ks  arc  both  genuine  writings  of  Hippocrates  or  of  his  grandfather,  and  are
written  in  the  same  unadorned  style.  As  regards  the  latter  book  (which  is  merely  a
oootinuation  of  the  book  de  fiocturU^aH  Oalcn  has  demonstrated  in  hid  preface  to  the
bo^  de  articulia)  Ctesias  the  Coan,  refuses  to  admit  it  as  a  work  of  his  relatiye
Hippocrates  (a  lucid  testimony  to  the  genuineness  of  the  book),  as  Galen  also  relate!
(Comment  iy.  in  lib.  iff  ^rficu/ix,  Op.  edit  chartzii,p.  462).


574  XXDICAL  HISTOBICAL  DI8BKBTATI0K

not  tin  after  tHe  lapse  of  a  considerable  time,  and  after  the  blade
hellebore  had  long  been  in  nse  that  the  original  hellebore  oould
and  did  receive  the  addition  of  xtwr.^

17.  Another  proof  of  the  greater  antiquity  of  the  (white)
hellebore  is,  that  in  times  now  remote  (when  the  more  reoent
origin  of  the  black  hellebore  could  not  be  unknown)  an  author
worthy  of  all  confidence,  Theophrastus  the  Eresian,  distinctly
refers  Melampus'  cure  to  the  veratrum  album,  when  he  saySi
>that  it  could  not  have  been  effected  by  the  use  of  the  black
hellebore,  which  is  deleterious  to  most  animals,  in  consequenoe
of  which  they  will  not  toucj;i  it,  but  rather  by  that  of  the
veratrum  album,  which  the  sheep  (and  also  the  goats)  eat,  and
thereby  purge  •themselves,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  its
medicinal  power :  «»«if  i7»  i\  ri*  ^f  ftixtam^  says  he,'  »m  Oinr^vr,  mi

fimir^  MM  vr,  iio  *m  •iii  vi/uvim  r«tfr«v-  r«f  Aivx^f  tt  fifttrimrm  w^iSmrmf


'  The  primitlTe  significatioo  of  the  word  heUtbore  in  the  age  of  Hippocrmtet
■ome  time  afterwards,  remained  so  strongly  impressed  on  the  memoty  of  all  w1k>
flourished,  that  the  physicians  of  that  age  (t.  e.  the  immediate  suocessors  and  diaripiti
of  Hippocrates,  in  the  Writmgs  termed  psendo-Hippocratic)  although  they
to  give  the  name  of  black  hellebore  to  the  new  plant,  always  continued  to
the  first  one  by  the  simple  word  iXXittp-Jr,  nor  did  it  ever  occur  to  them  to  distiqgadh
bj  any  adjective  that  med  e'  e  which  had  hitherto  been  the  role  and  was  the  moet  ">rifiit
evacuant  Had  the  black  hellebore  been  discovered  before  the  time  of  Hippocrates  and
had  it  long  been  employed  (concurrently  with  veratrum  album)  the  simple  appella-
tion of  the  primitive  hellebore  would  have  long  since  become  obsolete^  and  they  woold
have  been  forced  immediately  after  Hippocrates  to  employ  the  distinctive  appellatni
**vhite'*'  but  at  that  time  this  appellation  had  not  come  into  use,  and  was  only  oom*
menced  a  centuiy  later,  after  the  black  hellebore  had  already  been  employed  tur  op*
wards  of  half  a  century.  Indeed  Theophrastus  the  Eresian  (about  the  year  880  befort
our  era)  in  his  hUtory  ofplantt  often  denominates  it  by  the  single  word,  but  i
he  calls  it  i\\i$opuf  Actrxdr.  In  like  manner  it  is  called  Arvcdr  in  the  apoayjdial  <
tinuation  or  the  book  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  De  vietu  acutorum^  oommeociqg  frooi
the  words :  KavcoT  ii  ya^ — (Op^  t.  xi,  p.  176)by  an  anonymous  author  (one  of  the  empiri.
cal  sect  rendered  famous  by  Scrapion  of  Alexandria),  who  in  all  probability  oompoaed
the  appendix  about  two  centuries  after  Hippocrates.  At  length  in  more
times  the  veratrum  is  more  often  mentioned  with  the  distinctive  adjective,
the  name  of  iWlSjpof  Xevc^r  and  that  the  more  frequently  as  the  use  of  the  heUt-
boms  niger  became  more  common.

*  Theophrastus,  JIUt.  plant,  ed  Stapelii,  lib.  x.  cap,  il (In  this  edition
other  marks  of  haste  and  error,  the  fourth  and  fifUi  books  are  condensed  into
the  numerical/  ordar  of  the  subsequent  books  is  consequently  designated  bj  low
numbers  than  they  ought,  thus  that  which  ought  to  be  the  tenth  and  last  is
termed  the  ninth.)

*  In  ancient  times  this  word  wp6$ara  was  used  to  signify  aU  sorts  of  cattle,
sheep  and  goats,  as  Oalen  teaches  us  (Comment,  i,  ad  Hippocr.  lib.  do  articuli%  mL
Chart  t.  xii,  p.  806).

*  The  appendix  to  this  sentence  iu  tlie  tame  chapter  of  TlieophraBtas— cdUSm  U


ON  THB  HXLLXBORISII  OF  THE  ANOISKTS.  575

18.  This  passage  agrees  with  the  words  of  Pliny :  "  alteram
genus  (hellebori,  Melampodem)  invenisse  tradunt,  capras  purgari
paste  illo  amimadvertentem,  datoque  lacte  earum  sanasse
Ph>etLdas  fiirentes,'''  (although  a  little  further  on  he  again  refers
the  plant  of  Melampus  to  helleborus  niger,  led  into  error  probably
by  his  compiling  habits.)

19.  The  observations  of  Theophrastus  are  corroborated  by
this  passage  of  Haller :  "  Not  only  do  mules  freely  eat  of  this
plant^  but  even  the  cattle  feed  in  spring  on  the  tender  leaves  of
the  veratrum  album,  whereby  they  purge  themselves,  but  when
the  leaves  become  more  expanded  they  cease  eating  them,  imtil
the  tender  leaves  again  appear  the  foUowing  spriiig."* Pallas'

Tl»  fika^i  riMT  iff  rod  rtftivTc^  mc  dvr«p4yror  McAo^v^ior,  »$>  Utlv9^  wptorov  rcfMyr»f'
idlafj^ivtfi  Ik  vol  ior  mvru  tal  wfoSara^  ovptmfSorrif  rtva  httiiOiPf  ffcU  ci'r  JAX« il irAciv
Xf^nw — h  said  to  be  a  gpurious  painage  iotroduced  hy  some  sciolist. For  it  is
cwitimdicted  bj  what  Theophrastus  says  before,  yix.,  that  hellebore  is  abhorred  hf
Mm#  and  that  it  kills  them. But  if  by  the  word  KaBalpowri  is  to  be  understood  not
a  medidnal  purgation  but  a  sort  of  bath  by  aspersion  only — this  would  suffice  to
imfce  us  reject  the  passage  as  spurioun,  for  it  is  an  expression  unworthy  of  such  an
ifaatrioas  man  (Tlieophrastus)  and  repugnant  to  common  sense,  as  must  be  evident
to  every  reader. Tlie  origin  of  this  old  woman's  tale  is  hereby  reTcaled,and  it  is
f^  that  Biaekfoai  (McXcj/nrovr)  could  not  possibly  have  employed  for  the  cure  any
other  than  black  (fiiXar)  hellebore. Certainly  a  most  extraordinary  sort  of  argument  I
Ais  clumsily  attached  patch,  is  then  to  be  rejected,  it  smells  of  the  mysticism  of  the
Therapeutists,  who  piqued  themselves  on  treating  diseases  by  prayers  and  incanta-
tioDB. This  school  flourished  at  Alexandria  a  century  and  a  half  before  our  era  (two
ceBtarifli  after  Theophrastus),  just  at  the  time  when  the  rivalry  of  the  Kings  of
ftiypt  and  Pergamus  about  their  libraries  encouraged  by  hopes  of  gain  the  interpo-
ktors  of  books  and  the  Diascevastas  of  manuscripts,  to  manufacture  whole  books,  or
to  insert  or  add  supposititious  parts  to  genuine  works,  in  order  that  they  might  appear
more  eomplete  (see  Galen,  Comment,  ii,  in  lib.  iii,  Fpidan.  p.  411. — Comment,  uin
Ub.  dia  not.  ham.  p.  127,  and  his  pre&ce  to  Comment,  ii,  of  the  tame  book,  p.  128.)

llierefore  (it  may  be  said  en  passant)  it  appears  more  than  pn)bable,not  only  that
the  whole  ninth  chapter  (of  the  tentli  book  of  Theophrastus*)  History  of  Plants)  is
wpanooB,  but  that  it  proceeds  from  the  pen  of  tlie  some  interpolator.  For  the  fiilsifier
not  ooly  relates,  but  actually  approves  and  commends  the  ridiculous  superstitions  and
DHigieBl  incantations  of  the  doctrines  of  his  own  time  (which  could  never  have  entered
into  the  imagination  of  Theophrastus,  who  was  imbued  with  the  philosophy  of
Aristotle,  and  of  the  author  of  the  Moral  Character)^  which  proceeded  from  the  fertile
hakm  of  the  Therapeutists,  who  were  nourished  on  the  absurdities  of  the  East  In
&ct  the  whole  style  of  the  passage  is  that  of  this  stomp  of  mea  Moreover,  the  end
of  the  eighth  chapter  is  connected  with  the  beginning  of  the  tenth  much  more
matmaUy  and  loffieallt/,  and  passes  into  it,  as  it  were,  in  a  continuous  stream,  if  we
expunge  that  jejune  ninth  chapter,  so  unworthy  of  Theophrastus,  the  production  of  a
perrerted  mind,  stuffed  full  of  magic,  incantations,  and  divinations.

■  Butor.  no/vr.,  Kb.  xxv,  sect  21.

*  HiMt.  stirp.  Uelv.  N.  1204 ;  and  in  Yicat's  Matitre  medicate  tir^e  de  ffalleri  hist.
tHrp. Berne,  1776.  8.

*  Russisehe  Reise. Vol  IL 190.


6Zfi  ICiSPICAL  HISTORICAL  DISSJEBTATIQ;Ef

also  asserts  that  in  Bussia  the  horses  eat  the  joiing  leaves  of  tlie
veratrum  album,  without  any  other  effect  than  the  producti<m
of  looseness  of  the  bowels.

20.  But  the  chief  thing,  and  that  on  which  the  whole  aflSkir
turns,  is  that  goats  feed  upon  the  veratrum,  which  Lucretiua'
testifies  to  when  he  dings :

**  IVa«toi«a  Dobit  TcrMfarmii  est  Acre  ^PeBemuu,
Ai  otfrit  adipei  et  cdtozmcibai  anget"


21.  But  the  most  lucid  testimony  to  this  &ct  is  furnished  faj
Galen,  a  most  weighty  authority  on  the  subject  of  the  history  of
medicine  among  the  ancients,  and  an  author  worthy  of  all  oon*
fidence.  He  speaks  of  the  treatment  we  have  related  as  of  a
thing  very  generally  known  and  admitting  oi  no  doubt.  "  Un-
til now,"  he  says,'  "  physicians  have  attempted  to  cure  melan-
cholia by  means  of  vomiting  produced  by  veratruni  album.
Indeed  none  who  is  acquainted  with  Greek  literature  oouM
have  failed  to  read  or  hear  of  the  story  of  the  maniacal  dang-
lers of  Proetus  who  were  cured  by  Melampus  by  means  of  tlut
evacuant ;  from  which  circumstance  this  evacualion  (viz.  hdle*
borism)  remained  celebrated  for  two  or  three  centuries  and
more,  but  during  that  time  all  physicians  have  employed  this
medicine  (veratrum  album)."

From  the  description  given  hj  the  ancients  of  the  tvhite  heUebcre  docB
it  follow  Oiat  it  is  the  same  plant  cw  our  veratrum  album  t

22.  But  we  must  inquire  further  if  the  (white)  hellebore^  uaed
by  the  ancients  for  helleborism,  is  indeed  the  veratrum  aOmmf
or  not

23.  And  first  let  us  look  at  the  description*  of  this  plant  left
us  by  Theophrastus,  who  was  an  intelligent  and  learned  nattir
ralist,  which  it  is  to  be  regretted  is  so  shorty  and  buried  as  ii

were  in  a  corrupted  text

« ■  I < III ■  ■ . ■  . ■ .  ■  I  ■■  - I I  .  II

*  In  bis  Oarmen  de  tt^mra  rtrum^  lib.  iv»  v.  642. Tbis  oelebratod  poet  floaaihfld
a  oeotury  before  our  era.

firrr'd€JiKoip0if  rikr  Hf ocrov  ^iryaripar  fiavtiwasr  V9d  MfXa^n^oT  i^B^wai  gaSmpBcSmmf  vlvi^Pi
tofTt  oi  wp6  itOMooitav  Irwf  i)  rfitucSaiutv  dXXi  in\i  wXuoitutv  ivi^^ov  r^F  ««Mf«cwr  '■f'V

*  Cornelius  CeUus  already  employed  thb  name  in  bis  JUbri  dt  Mudicimtk

*  Uut,plint.  Ubi  Zy  cap.  11.^


OK  THX  aSLLSBOBIBM  OF  THB  AKCUSSHS.  ^77

24.  He  treats  of  both  kinds  of  hellebore  in  one  and  the  same
chapter.  *'  The  hellebores,"  he  says,  ^'  both  the  black  and  the
white  species,  bear  a  common  equivocal  name,  but  authors  differ
respecting  their  form  and  appearance.  Some  say  they  are  simi-
lar, except  as  to  colour,  which  in  the  root  of  one  is  white,  in
that  of  the  other  black,  but  the  leaves  of  the  black  kind  resem-
ble in  colour  those  of  the  laurel,  whilst  those  of  the  white  kind
resemble  in  colour  the  leaves  of  the 'pear-tree."  Then  there
follows  a  most  corrupted  text:  •l  i  •»9  i/MUr  xiyfrtr^  rnMt

ti^irr*?  ifuit9  T^  w  f«^l9x«r,  ^x«r  i;t*'  si'^wir,  &c.  The  first
words  of  this  sentence  have  been  very  properly  changed  by
Scaliger  and  the  editor  Stapel  into  u  P  ku/Auur  ?JyfTtr,  in  order
that  they  should  present  a  kind  of  opposition  to  the  words  in
the  principal  period :  •i  tuf  y»^  i/Mtar  ihm.  As  regards  the  rest
of  the  sentence,  Mivx^f  t\  &c.,  these  writers,  in  other  respects
?ery  sagacious,  suppose  it  to  allude  solely  to  the  black  helle-
bore, and  do  not  think  that  in  this  description  Theophrastus
e?er  refers  to  the  white,  but  in  this  they  greatly  err,  for  some
of  these  words  refer  to  the  black,  others  to  the  white ;  moreover
it  is  impossible  but  that  Theophrastus  must  allude  in  this  place
to  the  white,  because  throughout  the  chapter  he  continually
the  one  after  the  other  in  such  a  manner  as  to  demonstrate  the
distinction  between  them,  and  wherein  they  differ  in  their  vari-
ous parts.  Therefore  if  he  wished  to  be  consistent  it  was  neces-
sary that  he  should  in  this  place  insert  some  description  of  the

25.  The  following  is  the  mode  in  which  it  seems  to  me  pos-
sible to  restore  the  words,  mutilated  as  they  have  been  by  the
injury  of  time,  and  mixed  up  among  each  other  in  a  most  con-
fused manner :  ^  t'  itff*Mn§^  Aiy^fxir,  rottitlt  ^«tc7»  t!  fm  tv?  /u^^«f

P^tiXl^  Ttpttfti  ^jAA«f  irXaTurxtrrpv^  f«^wr  i^'f  tvfuufictr,

26.  Indeed  it  is  the  veratrum  album  only  whose  stem,  with  its
attached  flowers,  could  be  likened  to  the  flowery  stem  of  the
asphodel  (which  Theophrastus  himself,  lib.  viii,  cap.  12,  calls
mwiigix»9  3):  certainly  not  the  helleborus  niger,  which  has  almost

'  1  haTe  only  added  thefte  two  words ;  the  remainder  of  the  text  of  llieophnwtiM
I  have  preserved  in  iU  integ^ty,  only  somewhat  changing  the  order  of  the  wurda

*  Tliem  three  words  have  very  properly  been  supplied  by  Scaliger.

*  idiyi9T»¥  a  iravTuv  (the  bulbous  plante)  h  dv^^T,  v  yif  ipBiptnr  ^yivr*r. Id

37


678  XSDICAL  HISTORICAL  DI86XBTATIOK

no  stem.  But  as  regards  the  character  of  this  stem, ''  which
singly  from  the  root,  and  in  which  moreover  the  leaves  glow
alternately  ^  from  protuberances,"  Theophrastus  speaks  of  it
under  the  general  term  ferulaceus  [like  a  ferule]  or  «^m  ff
wm^imi  (see  lib.  vii,  cap.  2,  where  he  applies  this  character  cajJiTgrfj/
to  the  hellebore^  that  is  to  say,  to  the  white  hellebore.)  This  is  the
character  that  specially  distinguishes  the  stem  of  the  veratnmi
album,  and  is  not  at  all  applicable  to  the  helloborus  uiger,  whidi
has  hardly  any  stem.

27.  Therefore  we  see  that  Theophrastus  writes  in  this  manner:
^'  Those  who  allege  that  they  (the  white  and  black  hellebore)  are
white  hellebore  reseinbles  (in  its  florescence)  that  of  the  asphodel^  and
(on  account  of  the  single  stem  that  ascends  from  its  root,  and  the
disposition  of  its  leaves)  has  the  appearance  of  a  ferule;  butAe
Uack  hellebore,  on  the  contrary^  Jias  a  very  shoj't  stem^  large  leauOf
divided  into  broad  hbes^^  &c.

28.  To  this  rather  superficial  description  of  Theophrastus^  let
us  add  the  brief  one  of  Dioscorides,  whereby  it  will  be  better
apparent,  that  by  their  white  hellebore  the  ancients  understood
nothing  else  than  veratrum  album,  and  that  all  the  signs  thej
mention  as  proper  to  it  prove  it  to  be  the  very  same  plant.

29.  The  words ^  that  bear  upon  our  subject  are: 'EWCiffr

%mX»9  wt^t^X»t^»fUUfj  «ri  mfltrmi  ^n^muTitir  fil^ati  i  iwtiTt  wXXmi^  Xgtrrm
««-«  xt^tOJov  fiM^%Z  »«i  i^tfulfcwfj  iiirt^t)  x^0/ufcJ«v  rvftirtPvxvlmt, These

words,  with  a  slight  change,  putting,  for  example,  *«>•?  after  wtft-
f  A#i{«ViM»,  will  read  thus :  ^'The  white  hellebore  has  leaves  resembling
those  of  the  greater  plan  tain  ^  a  stalk  a  palm  in  height^  enveloped  th

Iflie  mnnner  Dioacoride*  (lib.  ii,  cap.  199,)  gires  to  the  stem  of  the  asphodel,  with  ill
ilowerB,  the  name  of  "dydipiK'^r":  dv^cXor— f^*^*' — 'av^^c — ^ctcr  tx*^^^  h^  U^
IrOfr^,  KaXovnt¥0¥  ivBiputov.

*  Not  oppOMtcly. Td  rapOifCMilcr, he  pays,  /lo^ov^avXor — &\a9TA¥U  St  r^cXXAf  H

—4  DkXlSipor  (<rai  &  dv0rpirer.) ffUt.pl.,  lib.  7,  C.  2.

*  Materia  Med.,  lib.iT,c  160;  written  as  it  would  seem  before  Plmy^s
Natural  HitAory ;  the  latter  translates  and  copien  whole  pasra^^  from
without  ever  mentioning  his  name,  shewing  a  kind  of  envy  and  rivalry  by  no
rare  anumti  contemporaries,

*  Murray  (Apparat.  Mcdicam.,  toI.  ▼,  p.  149)  doubts  whether  (he  pUntain  of  te
ancients  was  Uie  same  as  ours,  but  he  is  wrong  to  do  so.  for  that  by  the  word  mnm
fflouu9  Dioscorides  really  implies  our  greater />/an^aiii,  is  obvious  from  several  tha^:
first,  because  the  title  of  the  chapter  thai  treats  of  amoglouu*  (Dios.  MaU  Med^  6b>
ii,  c.  158)  is,  in  some  ancient  numuscripts,  vrpt]  «iproyXcjatf on  lww\tv^9^  i  «,  on  fjU
4Bven-ner9ed plantain  (and  UuU  is  precisely  the  number  of  nerves  the  leaf  of  the  i


OV  THS  HSLLKBOBISM  OF  THK  ANCIKNTB.  579

coats '  (the  sheatlis  of  the  leaves),  and  hollow  when  it  commenceg
to  dry.  Its  roots  are  numerouSj  delicate  (the  fibrils),  Jix^  to  a  small
and  oblong  bulb  lihe  an  onion. •

80.  If  he  says  that  the  stalk  is  only  a  palm  in  height,  whilst

in  reality  it  often  attains  the  height  of  a  cubit  and  two  cubits,

this  error  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  writers  from  whom  he  has

oompHed. He  himself  being  a  Cilician,  does  not  seem  to  have

known  the  plant  from  actual  inspection,  because  (•  AiirxW  •Xiymx»i

^itrmt^  as  Theophrastus  in  his  Hist.  Plants  lib.  x,  c.  11,  calls  it)

it  grows  in  but  few  parts  of  Greece. For  the  same  reason,  viz.,

not  having  himself  seen  the  plant,  he  does  not  give  an  accurate

dflBcription  of  the  colour  of  the  leaves. Moreover,  it  grows,  as

he  says,  in  mountainous  districts,  not  j»  r^«xf  <^<  (in  rugged  places),

bat  in  the  alpine  and  subalpine  meadows  and  moist  plains.*

51.  The  description  which  the  ancients  have  left  us  of  the
white  hellebore,  though  very  superficial,  still  proves  clearly  that
it  is  the  same  plant  as  our  vcratrum  album,  although  the  ancient
loose  and  superficial  manner.

52.  To  the  above  we  may  add  the  very  weighty  authority  of
der the  name  of  (jdAjl  ^J^^^,  by  which  very  name,  as  Forskal
in  eye-witness  testifies,  the  veratrum  album  is  still  called  in
those  regions.'

88.  But  the  most  important  argument  to  prove  the  identity
of  the  white  hellebore  of  the  ancients  with  our  veratrum  album,
itill  remains,  viz. —

17ie  effects  of  both  are  not  only  similar  hut  absoliUely  identical.

84.  Among  those  who  doubt  if  the  plant  which  the  most  an-
cient Greeks  designated  by  the  single  word  iAA/C«^«r,  but  after-

plintaiii  poMCoaeo) :  second,  because  tbc  Arabic  vereion  of  Avicenna  {Lib.  de  Simp/.
MMhttm.  Art  Charbak-Abiadh,  OpertL,  Komae  1698,  foL  cit.)  expresses  the  word
ipg^X^mvuT  by  Ju^JI  ikfirm  ^  —^  ^^rd  which  to  this  day,  m  Arabic,  signifie»
our  j^^"*^in  as  Forskal  testifies,  who  saw  it  Plant,  Aegypt.  et  Arab.,  p.  hai,\  and  who
himtelf  giTes  it  that  name.

'  Jacqaioin,  in  his  description  of  veratram  album,  Flora  Austriaea,  phdo  185.
pt.  18,  aaya,  "almost  all  the  stem  is  enveloped  in  the  sheaths  of  the  leaves.

*  Tlie  description  of  Pliny  Hi^t  Nat.^  lib  25,  sect  21)  is  evidently  tak^  from  that
uf  Theophrastus  and  Dioscorides  (thus,  for  instance,  he  attributes  to  the  white  helle-
bore the  leaves  of  wild  beet — bfta  ineipiens,  as  he  calls  it — thus  rendering  the  vnrXoi
if^l99  of  Dioscorides),  it  is  therefore  not  much  to  be  relied  on.

*  Materia  Mediea  Kahirini^  in  the  appendix  to  Dtteript.  Anim,  in  itkm^  an'««.
to/i,  HafiD.  17*76, 4,  p.  162.


689  •WBDICAL  SISTOBICAIi  PSSB&BTAimK

wards  termed  white  heUeboref  was  actually  our  veratuxm  allmiiif
the  most  distiDguished  is  a  man  who  formerly  rendered  .gn9$
service  to  the  materia  medica,^ohn  Andrew  Murray/  who  omn-
plains  ^^thai  the  arguments  to  prove  t/iat  it  is  the  same  j4a$U
soiight/or  rather  in  the  sinularity  of  its  effects,  which  may  he  ik
tical  in  many  different  planis,  than  in  the  description  of  the  plttt^
which  is  very  imperfect.''

85.  As  to  what  relates  to  the  descriptioi^  and  deliiieatioB'.qf
the  plant  by  the  ancients,  we  have  already  seen  that  it  ia  noit
absolutely  imperfect.

86.  But  with  respect  to  that  doctrine  (the  unhappy  aanio^^
alas  I  of  siiccedanea  and  substitutes) — ^^  that  no  plant  posieiMB
peculiar  properties  of  its  own,  but  that  a  host  of  different  planto
produce  the  same  effects  on  the  human  body,  which  are  thera^
fore,  vague  and  uncertain,''  here  this  man,  groat  and  distinguUi*
ed  as  he  was,  errs  in  common  with  most  of  the  physiciaiis  gf
this  age.

87.  For  the  great  Creator  of  the  universe  has  implanted  in
every  medicament  a  constant  rule  of  action  ;  to  each  he  has  gLVW
peculiar,  specific,  certain  powers,  which  are  of  the  most  constant
and  unvarying  character,  although,  unfortunately,  medical  men
have  not  investigated,  and  have  almost  entirely  neglected  them
hitherto.  The  properties  that  existed  in  a  medicament  a  thou*
sand  years  ago  are  the  same  as  they  now  possess,  and  as  they
will  possess  for  ever.

38.  But  I  would  a«k,  what  reason  have  you  for  afRrming  so
confidently,  that  many  diftbrent  plants  have  the  same  effects,
when  it  is  well  known  that  the  peculiar  and  positive  effects  of
all  medicines  have  been  so  little  investigated  by  medical  men,
that  they  are  almost  unknown  to  them,  and  it  seems  as  though
they  thought  their  ignorance  on  this  subject  to  be  something
quite  legitimate  and  meritorious?  How  do  they  know  then,
tliat  many  plants  possess  the  name  properties?  In  place  of  de-
voting themselves  to  experimental  investigation  tliey  delude
themselves  with  their  vain  conceits  and  preconceived  opinioaa

39.  No  one  species  of  plants  has  the  same  external  form  and
appearance  as  another,  and  in  like  manner,  each  possesses  a  cer-
tain peculiar  power  proper  to  itselfj  which  is  not  to  be  found  in
any  other  species  of  the  same  genus,  and  still  less  in  any  other


*  Appar.  medicam. YoL  v,  p.  149. CL  Salinasius  alvo  (in  Rxtreit,  4e
.Miia  kylta  iairieme^  2Vaj.  ad  Rhen, 1689  foL)  thinks  that  "  the  h«)kbar« of  the  w-
^Dts  is  lost  and  does  not  exist  among  us."


ov  noB  B8L£EB0BiBi(  OF  TBA  ANcaaom.  581

jvntM. As  die  external  appearance  differs,  so  also  does  the  in-
ternal medicinal  power  1

40.  This  peculiar  and  specific  jpower  of  acting  on  the  system,
which  the  great  Creator  has  implanted  in  every  medicine,  is
proved  to  be  of  such  a  constant  character  that  it  cannot  Ve
doubted — ^that  thi^  oxi^Jt  of  copper^  jEbr  example,  when  taken  in-
ternally, excited  many  thousands  ol  years  ago,  when  it  wuii
iliMi  diaoovered,  the  same  anxious  vomiting  which  it  caused
eighteen  centuries  ago,^  and  the  same  which  it  causes  to  day, —
that  the  oxyk  of  kad  and  cerussa^  when  applied  externally,
shewed  in  the  earliest  times  the  same  refrigerating  qualities,  and
Ae'  same  power  of  constricting  the  pores  of  the  skin,'  that  it
manifests  at  the  present  day, — that  the  cantharis  taken  by  the
moiith  caused  in  ancient  times  the  same  dysuria,  the  same  hema-
turia, the  same  dysenteric  aftection  of  the  bowels,^  that  it  does
atfW, — ^that  opium  exhibited  in  the  most  remote  times  the  same
specific  quality,  that,  taken  in  a  large  dose,  it  caused  the  skme
proBtration,  with  chilliness  of  the  external  parts  of  the  body,^
IB  it  does  to-day ;  and  so  with  all  other  medicaments.

41.  From  the  collection  of  the  peculiar  and  specific  powers  of
any  medicine  observed  from  its  use  in  ancient  times,  are  we  not
justified  in  inferring,  that  a  medicine  which  in  our  own  days
produces  the  same  effects  on  the  human  body  must  be  identical
with  the  ancient  one  7  There  is  certainly  nothing  that  should
prevent  us  coming  to  this  conclusion.

42.  I  may  here  be  permitted  to  compare  the  properties  of  the
white  hellebore  of  the  ancients  with  those  of  our  own  veratrum
ubum.


4S.  T%e  properties  of  the  white  hrlle-
Amv  ct  chtened  by  th§  aneient  phyn-


At  flnt  there  oocure  heat  of  the  throat


7%«  properties  of  the  veratrum  alhum  at
ol^served  by  more  modem  phyeieians*

Internal  heatfwith  dislike  to  drinki.*
■id  rtortiagh.*  Burning  about  the  precordial  regioa^

■  DiOM.  Mat,  Med,  lib.  y^  cap.  87.

*  AfHyiiv  fx»  ^vrrcr^y,  i^^aoriKhv — Dioec,  Mat,  Med,^  lib.  t,  cap^  108.
A«r««^«iei* iroXAoirir  ii  ai/«i  npoitvrat  6i  ovpa>y' ^iptrmi  i'  airoif  gmrik  KoiXiav  i/uum
n^f  M  imtwrtpiKup. — Dioec,  ^i^fi  cap*  i-

«Vft


*  Anif  Dot  in  Orihas.,  ColUet,,  hb.  viii,

aifLl.  pi  Its.


•  S.  Grasslus,  Mi§e.  Nat  Cur,,  dec  i,
an.  4,  p.  98.

'  J.  de  Muralto,  Mite.  NaL  Cttr,,  dec.
ii,  an.  S,  p.  240.


WDICAL  mSTOSlCAL  DISBKBTAXfCMr


Many  are  wfoetii^d}

AlUr  TioleDt  and  ineflfectiial  efforts  to
▼omit^  mtffbeation;*  the  face  ewellfl,  the
eyes  are  promineDt,  the  tongue  protru-
ded from  the  mouth.

If  Tomitmg  comes  on  late,  atranguia*
tion,* The  face  excessiyely  red.

Ihe  parts  belonging  to  respiration
are  constricted,  with  great  difficulty  of
breathiqg.*


Often  deprived  of  their  voice.*
Loss  of  the  voice  and  the  senses.*


Gnashing  of  the  teeth;  the  mind
deranged.^
Delirium.*


Heat  of  the  toi«iM  and  tipost'

Heat  of  the  fiuioea.*

InflammatiOQ  in  ihe  intarior  ai  dbt
mouth.'

ConstrictioQ  of  the  tfarwi*

StrangulatioD  of  the  fiuioea.'
*  StnmgulatioD  about  the  throal'

Strangulation,  spasn^  eonstrieliQB  cif
the  throaC

Swelling  of  the  Gesophagai^  with  dna^
of  suffocation.'

Loss  of  breath.'

As  if  strangled,  they  are  ingveai
ger  of  sufibcatioo.''

Inspiration  veiy  labonrad  and
cult"

Stammeripg."

Loss  of  voice."

Loss  of  vision."

Almost  complete  kiss  at  ihe

DeliriunL**


>  Ctesias,  apud  Orib.,  loc  at

*  Herodotus,  in  Oribi,  OolUcL,  Ub.  viii,
cap.  7,  p.  284.

'  Antyllus,  loa  cit

*  Herodotus,  loc.  cit

*  Antyllus,  loc  dt,  p.  280.
'  Antyllu8»  loc.  dt,  p.  281.

*  Herodotus,  loc.  dt
'  Antyllus,  loc.  dt


81
268.


816.


685


C.  Gesner,  J^  iM,  p.  69l
Beigius,  Mat,  Med,  p.  87S.
Greding,  VemtuehU  8€kri/Um,pp^
36.
Winter,  in  Break  Sammd^  1724,  fi


Lorry,  de  MelanehoL,  n.  pp.  $1%


J.  de  Muralto,  loc  dt

Reimann,  HreaL  SanunL,  1724,  p^


0.  Gesner,  loc.  dt

P.  Forestus,  L  xviii,  oba.  44.

>•  I^  Scholdus,  ap.  P.  Schenk,  lib  ^
obs.  178.

"  Benivenius,  ap.  Schenk,  loc.  cttoh^
174.

"  S.  Grassius,  loc  dt

"  Bddder,  in  Alberti  Jwrianr,  Mad,
obs.  16.

^  O.  Borrichius,  Acta  Mafn^  t  vi,  p^
146.

"  Vicat^  PlanUi  venen.  de  U  Smam,
p.  167.

**  S.  Grassius,  loc  dt ;  Greding;  loe*
it.,  pp.  86,  41,  42,  48, 49, 61,  54,  66,  M,
86.


ON  nX  HKLL1B0RI8M  OF  THE  AXOOHn.


Jm  Alniosk  9T&CJ  caM  hiocougfa;  io
wmitj  the  month  quivera  and  twitches.'

Omtliimil  and  Tiolent  hioooiigb.*

Hnaciilar  oootractioM  (cramp),  etpe-
fUlj  in  the  mnaeles  of  the  calvea,  thigbe,
Md^  eitwinitiea  of  the  feet»  and  chiefly
iilheteiid^''

AIk>  m  tfie  mmdea  of  mastioatiao.*

As  if  8tnuDigled,he  fidls  down  with  his
Ml  dindM  like  a  strangled  Tietim.*

Fhisintioo  of  the  strength.*

Um  of  oonscioamesft*


TrrnsHive  vomiting.*


Hieooogh.*

Hiooongh  for  half  an  hour.*

Hiccough  all  day."

Spasm.*

Cramp  of  the  calves.*

Spams  in  the  hand%  in  the  lingers.*

Attempts  to  yomit^  with  trismns.*


Ezcessiye  weakness.*

Pulse  almost  extinct,  impereeptihle.*

Threatening  of  syneope.**

Loss  of  consciousness  ^

Enormous  efibrts  to  vomit^  eren  to
syncope."

Enormous,  horrible,  seTore,  most  vio-
lent Tomiting.*


44.  In  the  face  of  such  a  remarkable  resemblance  of  the

Bymptoms  caused  by  these  two  plants,  who  can  deny  that  the

Very  same  plant  which  now  grows  in  our  gardens  was  that

Whkh  the  ancients  made  use  of  for  the  production  of  hellebor-

lam? Where,  I  ask,  can  another  plant  be  found  which  shall

shew  these  same  peculiar  effects  on  the  human  body  that  are

produced  by  the  (white)  hellebore  of  the  ancients,  and  our

Tenitrum  album  ? The  external  character  of  the  plant  resem-


that  given  to  it  by  the  Bomans,*  it  has  the  same  properties  now


*  AntyUus,  kxx  cit,  pp.  281,  282.

*  Antyllus,  loc.  cit,  p.  282.

*  The  seoGod  day  after  taking  the
hellebore.

*  AntyUus,  loc.  cit^  p.  282.

*  Herodotus,  loc.  dt

*  AntyUus,  loc.  dt,  p.  278.
^  AntyUus,  loc.  dt

'  AntyUtts,  loc.  dt,  p.  283.


*  Oomelins  Cekus,  who  wrote  in  the
slwivfs  tfmkB  of  it  under  the  name  of


*  J.  de  Muralto,  loo.  dt;  Smyth,  in
Medic.  Cmnmunie^  toL  i,  p.  207.

*  C.  Gesncr,  loc.  dt

*  Orediiig,  loc.  dt,  p.  48.

*  J.  de  Muralto,  loc.  dt

*  ReimauD,  loc.  dt ;  Lorry,  loc.  dt

*  Oreding,  loc.  dt,  pp.  62, 71.
"*  Oreding,  loc  dt^  pp.  82,  88.

*  Benevenius,  Smith,  Vicat^  loc:  at

*  Yicat,  Rddder,  loa  dt
"  Lorry,  loc  dt
"  Forestus,  loc  dt

Greding,  loc  dt,  p.  68.

Many  obsenrations  of  Forestus,  Lor-
ry, Yicat,  loc  dt,  and  Lentilius,  i/tsc
Not.  Cur.,  dec  iii,  an.  1,  app.  p.  130,  and
Ettmaller,  Oper.,  torn,  ii,  pt.  2,  p.  485.

time  of  Augustus  in  his  books  on  nu^Ait-in^
aiitwm.


n
It


9M  icBDicAL  BmnoBiaiL  DfiunsiTimr

as  formerly,  there  is  the  same  danger  attending  its  use  now.  as
formerly,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  same  plant

Parts  of  Oreece  where  the  best  grew,

46.  The  white  hellebore  grew  in  &w  parts  of  Greece,  and^aa
I  have  above  stated,  in  the  moist  plains  of  high  mduntainea*
regions.  In  the  most  remote  times  Theophrastus  approved
most  of  that  which  grew  most  abundantly  in  the  Oeta  hiUa  neat
Pylaea  in  Pyra;*  then  that  of  Pontus ;  then  that  &om  Elaaa;
and  lastly,  that  which  grew  in  the  bay  of  Malia;'  he  diai^
proves  of  those  from  Parnassus  and  Aetolia  as  being  hard  and
dangerous  in  their  effects.

46.  In  later  times  the  two  towns  of  Anticyra  were  celebrated
for  their  white  hellebore,  namely,  the  town  of  Anticyra  on
the  Phocian  coast,^  where  the  helleborian  medicine  was  beat
prepared  for  medicinal  use,  and  the  other  town  of  the  same
name  in  the  gulf  of  Malia  near  Mount  Oeta,  and  not  far  fiEom
Thermopylae,  which  attained  much  celebrity  on  acoouni  of  the
excellence  of  the  hellebore  that  came  from  this  part.^

47.  It  is  probable  that  the  hellebore  did  not  grow  naturaDy
in  the  country  about  the  Phocian  Anticyra,  because  the  range
of  Mount  Oeta  did  not  extend  that  length,^  but  that  it


'  Pyra  was  a  plain  near  Pylaea  in  the  chain  of  Mount  Oeta  (whidi,  rumitDg
TheiTOopylae  to  the  Arabraeian  gnl^  extended  as  fiur  as  Doris)  whure  Hercnlat  ii
said  to  have  burned  himself  on  a  funeral  pile  (Pliny,  Hut.  fuit,  libi  zizt.  capt.  11)  Ii
order  to  obtain  the  honour  of  being  received  among  the  gods.

*  In  Stapel's  edition  of  Theophrastus  the  reading  /lamraXcwrirs'  (AXffi^or)  is  irnm§»
There  was  no  place  of  that  name  in  Greece  (for  it  could  not  be  referred  to  the  rirar
|fftam>1iii.  in  Crete) ;  the  Massaliotic  country  was  situated  oo  the  frontiera  of  Ghuil,  of
which  there  can  be  no  question  here.  We  should  read  /iaXib>r«r,  from  the  countij
about  the  gulf  of  Malia,  where  excellent  hellebore  was  procured,  as  Strabo  testifier
The  derivation  of  KSXiros-  /faXtumr  is  from  the  ancient  but  destroyed  city  M«>ia  jgil
as  viMXicurijr  is  derived  fit>m  ffureXfo,  or  /laevaXiwrifs-  from  /ia<rv«Xi'a,  as  Strabo  leDs  w
{Oeogr.,  lib.  iv,  270),  a  Phocian  colony  in  Gaul,  now  called  Marteillet.

'  Situated  between  the  town  of  Crissa  and  Marathon  (and  the  Pfaarygfaui  prooMi^
tory)  (Strabo,  Gfoffr.,  lib  ix.  edit  Amst.  p.  640,  collated  with  p.  647),  but  in  D^Aa-
ville's  map  it  is  placed  wrong.

*  Strabo  ( Oeopr^  lib.  ix,  p.  640)— Etra  (after  the  gulf  of  Crissa) ' Avrf««^  (b  Fhocis)

l^aSvo^or  ^9  «<*^  rdr^aXiaardr  cdXffoy,  cac  riiw  'Otrqv  '  Koi  6h  ^a<rii»,  i<tX  rdv  iXXff  ipsy  ^feyisi
rdv  dvrxtur,  ivravBa  6i  OKtva^ceOat  /^(Xrior,  m|  fti  roiro  dwo6nfu7p  6ti^  iroXXvvr  K«Mf«fMr

ri»  tfirafor  IXUijoor., In  like  manner  Stephanus,  the  Bysantioe,  (Libr.  it  «rM«t)

•ays :  'Avr<ic«^i  vtfXcir  ^,  h  /<'«  ^Mrii^rt  4  ^  '»  M^Xicitfcr  *  ivra«9a  ^1 r#v  i\XiS%fm
fttaSmt  row  ivrttw.

*  The  nature  of  the  country  about  Phocian  Anticyra,  which  Pausantaa  {Ormt^

'  —was  such,  that  the  blaok  hellaborv  might  grow  there  ipswlawwsljfy  faai  wA


OH  1^  ^iitm!rjM.mw%Ttuni  qK  THE  ANdXlTrS.  6l85


diher  farongbt  finom  there  or  cultivated  by  the  inhabitantB  ia
guEdens^  and  proved  to  them  a  souree  of  profit  In  the  time  of
Fliny^  the  white  hellebore  used  still  to  be  cultivated  in  the
island  of  Thasos.

48.  In  the  time  of  Rufus,  a  Galatian  white  hellebore  used  to
be  sold,  which,  however,  he  condemns  as  being  very  bad.^  Pliny
pronounces  the  hellebore  of  Parnassus  to  be  the  fourth  best^
ind  says  it  used  to  be  adulterated  with  the  Aetolian.'  Diosco*
rides  tells  us  that  the  veratrum  of  Galatia  and  Cappadooia  was
vhite  and  resembled  a  rush,  and  that  it  possessed  a  greater  su£>
&CBting  power  ;^  il  does  not  appear  to  have  been  disliked  in
his  time.  After  the  timQ  of  Dioscorides,  the  Galatian  veratrum.
•ommenoed  to  be  reckoned  one  of  the  good  kinds,  the  Sicilian
kind  then  also  got  into  notice ;  but  it  was  not  considered  so
good.'  Thus  in  the  course  of  time  several  kinds  of  white  helle-
bore, some  from  one  country  and  some  from  another,  were  con-
lidered  good  and  sought  after,  and  less  care  than  previously
vaa  exercised  in  their  selection.

Signs  of  its  good  quality.

49.  The  ancient  physicians  selected  for  employment  those
fibres  of  the  roots  that  were  moderately  rigid,*  friable,  soon
causing  sneezing  when  brought  near  the  nose,'  fleshy,  of  equal
thickness  throughout,^  and  they  rejected  those  that  were  too
pointed^  like  the  fibrils  of  a  rush,  and  from  which,  when  broken,
dust  escaped,  (for  this  was  a  sign  that  the  root  was  old).  They
ought  to  have  a  narrow  medulla  and  taste  moderately  hot.

tirum  album  the  most  accurate  is  Aetius  (who  seems  to  have

ikb  TOBtnmi  album ;  the  yeratrum  of  Phocian  Anticyra  must  therefore  either  have
been  brought  from  Doris,  where  it  grows  and  where  mouut  Oeta  extendi,  or  culti-
Tftledfai  the  garden.

*  MuL  not,  lib.  xiv,  cap.  16.

*  See  a  fragment  in  Oribiuii  Collect^  lib  Tii,  cap.  27,  pi  249.
'  MUL  tuMi^  lib  zxz,  sect  21.

«  MmL  Med,  Ubi  iv,  cap.  160.

*  See  a  fragment  in  Orihaaii  Collect^  lib.  yili,  cap.  i.  p.  271.

'  DkMDoridet,  in  the  pUu»  already  cited,  has :  /ucrpiur  rrra/iiMr,  or  as  other  maaa*
•eripti  have  it:  rfrarcM^qr,  which  Sarrazin  renders  moderately  extended;  but  this  n
eertemlj  an  obscure  if  not  a  iklse  reading.  Rasarius  after  Archigenes  (ap.  Onbmt^
L  CL  libi  Till,  €.  2)  more  clearly  renders  this  quality  of  the  good  fibres  by  the  leffm
hpidL AStius  likewise  makes  use  of  the  term :  vo^v  rtrav:

*  Havodotui^  apud  Ort6Mi  CidUet^  libc  Tiii,  cap^  4,  p.  27«.
'  Hiiwlotiw,  loo  cii


686  XXDIGAL  HISTOBIGAL  DIBBEBTATlOar

drawn  his  description  from  Posidonius) ;  these  are
^The  best  hellebore  is  that  which,  from  one  root,  sends  toA
many  fibres,  which  are  shorty  rigid,  not  rough,  nor  thin  at  their
ends,  nor  ending  in  a  point  like  the  tail  of  a  mouse,  veiy  wUlt
internally,  but  externally  of  a  yellowish  colour,  heavy,  having
a  friable  medulla  not  so  soft  as  to  be  able  to  be  bent,  but  apl  to
break  across,  and  when  broken,  diffusing  around  a  sort  of  smoky
and  pure  cloud  (i^  however,  they  emit  dust,  this  is  a  sign  of  tlM
oldness  of  the  hellebore).  Good  hellebore  has  at  first  a  sweetish*
taste,  which  then  becomes  acrid  for  a  short  time,  and  afterwards
excites  a  great  heat  in  the  mouth,  causes  a  great  flow  of  saliva
and  deranges  the  stomach."^

61.  Others  condemn  that  kind  which  produces  a  copious  ti<sfW
of  saliva,  because  it  causes  too  easily  the  strangulating  sensatioa
in  the  throat;  but  they  are  wrong,  for  this  is  only  a  sign  of  ike
greater  medicinal  virtue  of  the  hellebore,  and  indicates  that  a
smaller  dose  of  it  should  be  given.

62.  The  earliest  physicians  preferred  that  which  was  gathered
during  the  wheat  harvest,  but  Aetius  rightly  gives  the  preference
to  that  which  has  been  collected  in  the  spring,  for  at  that
of  the  year  the  plant  still  contains  all  its  juices.'

Medicinal  uses  of  Veratrum  alburrL

63.  The  ancient  physicians  used  veratrum  album  in  two
ferent  ways — first,  the  ordinary  use  for  obtaining  speedy  and
obvious  effect ;  the  second,  the  grand  cure  for  inveterate  chronic
diseases,  the  latter  they  termed  helUhorism,

64.  In  general  the  ancient  physicians  employed  the  veratrum
album  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  vomiting,  and  the  helleboruc
niger  for  purging.* Throughout  the  writings  of  the  most  ancient

'  Archigeoes  (loc.  dt,  liU  viii,  cap.  2,  p.  272,)  also  says:  **aU  kinds  of  hellebia*
have  a  sweetish  taste.

*  AStius  (lib.  iii,  cap.  126,  ed.  Aid.) :  Kfari«ror  lyyUofo^  hdvi  ftir  ff^tir  Hn  wMik

Ixunf  «af^i?  Ka\  ra%ra  VfUKfk  uai  rirwa Koi  dpv^a  (read  l^wwtf)  ««}  «<«  «v»X4yvrr«  tSf

ij^»¥rm  tiBfrnnra  (read  cvOpmrrov)  9^  KU^T6^t9«i  iia  /laXaWnrr*,  iWk  varayr^^Mra  vcvX^Jli*,
«««y«3^r  ri  bfT^  ^povm  m^tij^owrm  r«{  ivUwra^  vat  rovr*  tmB^f^'  ri  yhf  nvtfrwiiT^'^^^M^
hikwl  Ti¥  iWlBjpor'  h  il  iyQis"  ^•^unnfitWi  wpwrov  flv  yXwrtfnrrof-  tffmmtv  wa^j^ttf  A^
U  i^ii6rnT9r  0pay(ti9f'  /i(rA  M  r*ir*  vvpciwtr  i^x^P^  i/miet  «c^  r6  vrA/ui  «al  witkm  Mym
»»X4r,  K*l  Ti¥  9r6fim)(9p  ivmrpiwn.

*  Loe.  cit  AcT  A  i^r  d»mXS0$»t  fv  i\\i$9f9^  In  rfr  /<(iir  iynp^p^^^W'

*  See  Aretaeaa,  Curat  ekronie,  m^rb^  lib.  ii.  cap,  18,  p.  lM,edit  BoerfaaTiL — Flaji
(lib.  26,  sect  22)  says :  -*  Nigrum  purgat  per  infenia,  candidum  autem  per  fmuitui
In  like  manner  Buftis  (loc  dt,  libi  vii,  cap.  26,  p.  250)  and  many  others  teatify  to  tlio
MiDO  effect;  but  the  thing  speaks  for  itself  in  all  the  vritingsof  the  MCMMt  pl^yir


OH  THS  HKLLSB0RI8K  OF  THE  AKCnENTS.  687

phyaicianB,  vhen  they  speak  of  purgmg  upwards,^  they  always
dlude  to  the  veratrum^lbum,  even  though  the  word  "  hellebore*^
18  not  added ;  but  when  they  speak  of  purging  downwards  either
the  Uack  hdlebore  is  understood,  or  they  mention  the  name  of
dba  purgative  to  be  administered.  But  in  the  latter  times'  the
nmedy  used  to  produce  the  one  or  the  other  operation  is  not
vnderatood,  but  usuidly  mentioned  expressly.

Ofiht  ksser  treatment  with  veratrum  album,  without  jprtparaJtory

treatment  of  the  patient

65.  The  earliest  physicians  seem  to  have  employed  this  medi*
cine,  without  previous  preparation  of  the  patient,  in  ordinary  and
•oate  diseases  when  they  wished  to  procure  evacuation  upwards,
as  they  termed  it,  that  is,  vomiting.

66.  Hippocrates  used  to  give  the  veratrum  album  at  once,
and  without  preliminary  treatment  of  the  patient  in  urgent
eases,'  and  whenever  he  wished  to  evacuate  quickly  by  vomiting.

67.  The  symptoms  which  he  considered  to  indicate  veratrum
were — want  of  appetite,  corroding  sensation  in  the  stomach,  ver*
tigo  with  obscuration  of  sight  and  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
without  fever  ;^  in  general  he  ordered  it  to  be  given  in  cases
where  the  pains  and  morbid  symptoms  were  in  the  upper  part
of  the  body,  and  when  the  other  symptoms  seemed  to  demand
evacuation.^


One  oolj,  the  author  of  the  pHeodo-Hippocratic  book  J)e  afectilnu  intemU
(Opim  Hippocr^  edit  Foesii,  seek,  r,  p.  118),  orders  (if  the  text  be  genuine)  the
UaA  hellebore  to  be  used  for  promoting  enuiuation  upwards,  but  he  has  found  no
jmitatarB  among  all  the  physicians  of  antiquity.

'  Thua  before,  during  and  immediately  after  the  time  of  Hippocntes  the  words
IXXil«f«r  And  vomiting  were  synonymous  terms.  Therefore  the  Latin  versions  of  the
Onek  medical  writings  are  wrong,  when  the  question  is  concerning  the  evacuation
hf  veratrnm  album  (which  was  always  by  vomiting)  to  render  the  work  Ka0m(ptt¥  bj
"pmr^rt,^  because  the  Roman  physicians  never  employed  this  word  alone  (t. «,
without  the  addition  of  **per  tuperiora  ")  to  express  '*  t4>  excite  vomiting,''  or  to  e?ao-
by  vomiting,"  although  the  Greeks  could  employ  ««9at(Kiy  alone  to  cxprew


*  From  and  a  little  before  our  era.

*  See  the  book  De  Fraeturis  (ed.  Chart  t  xii,  p.  208).  Ho  there  says:  I/»im»
AXfgjf  w  «ivcVk«»  aiBfiiupowt  7^  rp  vorcptp ;  in  this  pkce  he  speaks  of  the  employment
if  vmiting  by  hellebore  in  order  to  guard  m&  rapidly  as  possible  against  swellings
IrianoB,  acute  fever  and  sphacelus  from  a  bruise  in  the  sensitive  parts  in  the  vieini^
of  the  calcaneum.  This  recommendation  he  confirms  in  another  place  (sect  iv,  apk.
10)  where  he  lays :  foffL^ttiuw Ip  rfvt  Xiirr i^iviffiv  4pyf  avO^^rpey  ;|^pori(civ yflf  iv

*  Seet  iv,  aphor.  17.

*  Sect  iv,  apbor.  18.


08ft  ]aa>KAL  HISTORICAL  ]>IB8IBTArattV

68.  In  this  jnanner  his  sucoesscxv  up  to  the  time  of  Oalen  of^
dinarily  ^nployed  the  y^iitrum  in  ordei^to  oanse  yomiting,  m
we  find  in  the  peeudo-Hippocratic  and  other  writizigi.

58.  That  the  yeratrum  was  then  giyen  in  a  smaller  and
in  a  yery  small  dose  is  a  mere  eonjecture,  for  Hippocratx
where  makes  mention  of  the  dose.  It  was  only  at  a  later  perioA
that  physicians  mentioned  the  dose  of  yeratrum  album  wfaiek
they  employed  for  common  use,  as  well  as  for  the  production
of  helleborism.

60.  As  the  earliest  physicians  up  to  the  time  of  Hippocrates
iseither  knew  nor  employed  any  oUier  emetic  besides  yerattom
albnm ;  when  they  wished  to  eyacuate  upwards,  they  could  onlj
make  use  of  this  medicine  for  obtaining  prompt  and  immediate
relief  by  diminishing  the  dose  ;^  they  would  haye  to  ^ii^iHffh
the  dose  whether  of  the  crude  root,  or  of  the  inftision,  or  of  the
deooeUon.

61.  Those  physieians  who  immediately  followed  Hif^poeratiei^
in  order  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  yeratrum  in  its  ordinary  em-
pfeyment,  imagined  yarioua  ways  of  administering  it  witbool
giying  it  by  the  mouth,  a  mode  of  administration  yery  repiig>
nant  to  the  dogmatic  sehool  of  that  age,  which  was  more  intenl
on  theorizing  upon  the  nature  of  things  than  on  practising  ra-
tionally.*

62.  Accordingly,  Plistonicus  and  Dieuches,  followers  of  this
sect,'  as  also  Diocles  (who  flourished  thirty  years  before  them)
stroye  to  excite  mild  yomiting  by  means  of  this  medicine  intro*
duoed  as  a  suppository  by  the  anus,  or  as  a  pessary  by  the
yulva,  or  employed  as  an  epithem.*

63.  But  the  principal  mode  of  mitigating  the  effects  of  helle-

'  TliiB  nulder  trtednent  by  diminif^wd  doee«  seems  to  be  alluded  to  faj  H^»po-
entee  bimeelf  in  the  following  pkoe  {De  fineluriM.  Openiin  edit^  CbaiL  torn,  si  pw
9i7):  AXi#<ipnr  /i«X4««dv  iriwiM  xf9  «A64fKpo»r;  the  eTpresskm  Ya>$mMir  ■  alight  ■
applied  to  hellebore  would  seem  to  indicate  a  smaller  dose  of  it  Alto  in  anoUier
place  (/>e  Artie^  torn,  xii,  p.  S62j  I^pH  xai  tiiinsroT  h^  iftinp  iwd  w^ffo^ffi  H  th»
perwQ  vomit  easily,  he  should  get  a  slight  emetic  (**  which  does  no!  fT*»fim4
too  mscfa,"  according  to  Galen's  explanation^

*  MneaitbeuB  (one  of  this  sect  who  lived  about  820  yean  R  C.)  shews  eome
of  this  kind.  Tlte  following  are  his  words  (in  Oriba».  Collect,  lib.  viii.  capb  •);
"There is  great  danger  attending  the  drinking  of  helleboio ;  for  either  the  patient  m
restored  immediately  to  health,  or  he  is  subject  to  mudi  and  long-continued  suffiBriqg;
remedies  of  this  sort  should  not  there jbre  be  given  unless  all  the  safer  modea  of  trvai-
jnent  have  been  exhausted.**

'  Ck>ntemporaries  of  Mnesithens.

*  As  Bufus  mentions  (apud  OriboM^  L  c  lib  vii,  cap.  27,  p.  266).


OK  mn  HKUEBOBISM  OF  THE  J^OIBNTS.  889

bore  wast  that  invented  by  Philotimas,*  a  pliysican  of  the  same
Bchool,  and  contemporary  of  the  above,  which  was  adopted  by
aU  the  practitioners  of  the  succeeding  ages.  When  it  was  drsired
to  produce  a  milder  and  more  expeditious  vomiting,  he  intro*
doced  A  root  of  veratrum  album  into  a  radish,^  and  (as  we  are
ipfiarmed  by  the  physicians  who  immediately  followed  him>
having  extracted  the  veratrum  the  following  day,  he  gave  the
Adi^h  thus  impregnated  with  the  medicinal  power  of  the  vera-
trum to  be  eaten  either  alone  or  with  oxymel.*  '*  By  this  means,''
ajfl  Rufus,  "  vomiting  was  most  rapidly  excited,  which  would
not  have  occurred  so  successfully  by  the  employment  of  helle-
bore alone."

64.  Bufus  likewise  mentions  that  in  his  timo  evacuations  up-
wards  were  produced  by  employing  footballs  of  hellebore.*

65.  For  the  same  object  llerodotus,  a  pneumatic  physidau
oontemporaiy  of  Bufus,  gave  two  spoonfuls  of  the  decoction  of
hellebore  to  those  who  did  not  require  violent  evacuation.^

66.  On  the  other  hand  Galen,  who  gave  hellebore  with  con-
siderable timidity,  ingenuously  confesses,  ^^  that  it  seemed  to  him
dangerous''  to  give  the  veratrum  album  to  sick  persons  in  his
time  without  preparing  them  for  it,  as  their  juices,  which  had
been  rendered  viscid  by  idleness  and  luxury,  required  first  to  be
purified."

67.  Antyllus  gave  to  old  men,  children,  &c.,  a  small  quan-
tity of  the  infusion  of  hellebore."

68.  But  I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  the  more  important  treat-
ment of  chronic  diseases  by  means  of  veratrum  album,  to  which
the  ancients  gave  the  name  of


Rufufl,  L  c.

•  AStius  (as  we  leam  from  Antyllus  and  Po9i<lonina)  gives  the  following  prescrip-
tioo: — ^^Siz  drachms  of  the  fibres  of  the  root  of  ycratrum  are  to  be  inserted  into  a
ndisli  which  has  been  pierced  with  a  reed,  tlie  following  day  they  are  to  be  takeo
oat,  care  being  taken  not  to  leave  any  of  the  bark  of  the  veratrum  inside ;  the  radish
ia  to  be  cut  in  pieces  and  then  eaten  along  with  oxymel.**— (lib,  iil  c.  120).

•  Loc.  at.  ITie  same  method  is  recommended  by  Pliny  (7/»V.  nat.  lib.  xxv.,  sec.
f4)  and  Galen  (lib.  i,  de  method.  mcd.y  ad  Ghiuc.  cap.  12).  It  is,  however  easy  to  per*
Mre  that  from  such  a  process  it  is  impossible  tlmt  the  medicine  can  always  be  the
Mme,  or  in  the  same  quantity,  as  Murrray  observes  {Apparat  med,  tom.  v.  p.  158)

*  Bufus,  loc.  cit

*  In  OriboB.y  loc.  rit,  lib.  viil  cap.  8,  p.  276.

'  T^  Toiwvv  iii6yai  iAXiSopov  iviv  rov  irpoiiairnaat^  (n^a\eoiiv, Ac, Sce Galen, CotH*

ipim/.  ii,  in  Hippocrat  lib.  de  frarturis,  (edit  Chart  t  xii,  p.  203).
'  In  Oribat^  L  c  lib.  viii,  cap.  6,  p.  217.


690  XXDICAL  mSTOBICAL  DISSKBTATIOK

Bellebarism.^

69.  Serious  and  inveterate  diseases  in  general  the
physicians  endeavoured  to  cure  bj  means  of  large  doses  of  vc-
ratrum,  but  they  shewed  a  great  deal  of  caution  and  care  in
their  employmont  of  it,  partly  because  they  sought  to  overcome
a  disease,  as  they  imagined,  by  a  medicine  of  a  more  violent
character^  than  the  disease  itself;  partly  because  they  sought
to  produce  the  least  possible  amount  of  inconvenience  from
its  use.

70.  In  the  earliest  times,  physicians  knew  of  no  other  medi-
cine for  combatting  chronic  diseases,  with  the  exception  of  a
few,  except  the  veratrum  album,  to  which,  when  all  common  re-
sources had  failed,  they  resorted  as  to  an  anchor  of  safety.

71.  "The  white  hellebore,"  says  Aretaeus,'  "is  the  most  effi-
cacious, not  only  of  the  emetics,  but  also  of  all  evacuant  medi-
cines, not  indeed  by  the  quantity  and  variety  of  the  excretions
it  occasions  (for  cholera  does  the  same),  nor  yet  by  the  intensity
and  violence  of  the  vomitings  (in  this  it  is  surpassed  by  sea-
sickness), but  by  the  quality  and  remarkable  power  with  which
it  restores  the  sick  to  health  by  means  of  a  slight  and  far  fix>m
violent  evacuation.  It  is  moreover  the  sole  remedy  of  all  chronic
diseases  which  have  already  taken  deep  root  in  the  constitution,  if
other  remedies  fail.  It  resembles  the  power  of  fire ;  and  what  is
effected  by  the  combustion  of  fire,  that  hellebore  does  still  more

*  We  find  the  word  lX\t$)pi^etv  lued  by  the  anonjmouA  continuer  of  the  Hippor
cratic  book,  De  dlaeta  acut,  (rdit  Chart,  t  zL  p.  166),  and  the  author  of  the  Mith
book,  De  JSpid.  (1.  c.  t.  ix.  p.  860) ;  in  these  places  it  refers  to  the  use  of  heUebora  m
diseases  as  an  emetic ;  but  the  substantive  iX\t6>pt<ritdi,  referring  to  the  grand  con
was  first  employed  by  Aretaeus  {de  euratione  diutumorum  morbonan^  lib.  ii,  cape  18)
and  Liter,  Caelius  Aurclianus  {Chronic.  lib.i,  cap.  4),  in  his  barbarous  language  im-
properly applies  the  term  heUeboritmits  to  the  decoction  of  veratrum,

*  Galen  explains  the  operation  of  the  larger  doses  of  hellebore  in  a  much  too
mechanical  and  gro«is  manner  when  (in  his  Comment,  i,  on  the  Epidem,  vu  of  Hippocr.
he  says — "  If  the  disease  is  of  very  long  standing  and  cannot  be  eradicated  as  uitk  m
lever,  we  employ  the  veratrum  album,**  {IWcSnpi^nv  ftlv  iSuf  vHvv  xp*'^*'  I  ^^  *^«ri
cai  itf  3v  litoi  TIT  t^o^XtliT  itSntPov,  iif  ravra  yhp  i\^66ot>t  j^ptantSa),

*  '£>ri  h  UvkCt  (i  XA<^'»iror)  ei«  Ifttrnpiutv  (conjecture  of  Wigan  for  Ifur^i^p  of  the

tezt)iytfvtr,  iXXi  xal  (vfindrrotv  onu9  Kadaprfipitov  i  iwarturansr^  ov  r<o  vXffiti  Ktii  r§  mirtXIf
rnr  UlcpiaiitT*  r6U  yap  rat  X'^h^  'p4"^'<('  *^^  ivrdcn  iroi  0iy  r^vt  M  roTn  i^iviot  *  tf  r49i
yip  vavrfti  cai  ^  iXoffffa  xpiaaop'  dXXd  iwafti  xal  iroi6rirt  ovrt  ^avXi}*  Tpircp  iytiaT  ro^  mif^wrmi
To2lci,  naX  Iw'  dXiy^  Kadapvty  Koi  hrl  cpiKpfl  hriirt,  'A,rhp  koI  icivrtav  tQv  ;^r(c«r  y»6#Mr  4r!
^i^mv  iipvfiiyu)¥f  ffv  dnavifjc^  rA  Xoiirik  ixta^  r6it  fto^pov  Irirvptow'  wvpi  fccXor  y^,  if  ^^yc^y
XnxSf  IXXiiopoTt  Kai  o,  ri  ittp  irdp  ipya^trai  }KKaiov  radit  xXiov  iXXiiap^^  ciaw  wmptMm^
wplienif  cfirraiay  ftiv  U  dvmrvoias;  i(  d'^po(>ir  Si  evxpoltiv  mU  jiwd  wgtXtrt^Ft  fW«prfiyjr.  (/Jlf
^yrat,  ekronic,  lib.  ii,  capi  10,  ecL  Boerii.,  p.  186.)^


09.  TBM  HSLLSBOBIfiM  OF  THE  ANOISirra.  691

oompletely  in  the  interior  of  the  body,  giving  to  the  asthmaii-
ml  an  easy  respiration,  to  the  pale  faced  a  florid  complexion,
and  to  the  emaciated  a  robust  body."

When  hdUborism  began  to  he  practised^  and  how  hng  its  use  tvas

continued.

72.  Before  the  age  of  Hippocrates  many  physicians  were
afraid  to  employ  this  *'  grand  cure/'  because  they  were  ignorant
of  the  doses  and  of  the  caution  necessary  to  be  employed  in  the
use  of  Hellebore ;  those  who  used  it,  however,  not  unfrequently
did  harm  by  their  rude  mode  of  exhibiting  it.

78.  This  we  learn  from  Ctesias,  a  physician  of  the  Gnidian
school,  a  relation  and  almost  a  contemporary  of  Hippocrates,
hat  a  little  his  junior :  "  In  the  times  of  my  father  and  grand-
fiither/'' says  he,  "no  physician  administered  heUebore,  for
they  knew  not  the  proper  mode  of  administering  it,  nor  the
proper  dose  in  which  it  should  be  given.  It,  however,  they
sometimes  gave  a  patient  a  draught  of  hellebore,  they  warned
bim  that  he  ran  a  great  risk.  Of  those  who  took  it  many  were
loffocated,  few  benefitted.  But  now  we  see  it  given  with  per-
fsct  safety.

74.  After  the  authors  of  the  Praenotiones  Coacae,  Hippocrates
lumsel^  who  flourished  about  the  year  436  B.  c,  employed
helleborism  boldly,  and  taught  the  precautions  it  was  requisite
to  take  in  its  use,  but  as  was  his  wont,  in  very  few  words,  which
I  shall  quote  when  I  come  to  treat  of  the  mode  of  employing  it.

75.  In  later  times  helleborism  underwent  various  changes
of  fortune.  For  the  medical  sects  that  arose  after  the  time  oi
Hippocrates,  applied  their  minds  more  to  obtain  a  paltry  re-
nown for  vain  speculations  and  theoretic  subtleties,  than  to  the
careful  treatment  of  diseases ;  therefore  in  consequence  of  their
ignorance  or  neglect  of  the  precautions  requisite  in  employing
hellebore,  the  use  of  this  root  came  to  be  regarded  as  dangerous
and  fell  into  disrepute.^

76.  Still  it  was  employed  by  many  physicians  of  those  times,
as  may  be  learned  from  the  writings  that  were  given  out  under
the  name  of  Hippocrates  (called  pseudo-Hippocratic).^

'  Id  a  frogmcat  prcserred  by  Oribasius,  Collect^  lib.  yiii,  cap.  viii,  p.  285.

'  See  above,  in  Uie  note  to  g  61,  the  obeervatioa  of  31ne8itheus,  the  dogmatic
pliysician.

*  See  the  apocrjphal  continuation  of  Hippocrates'  book,  De  victu  acut,  (edit.  Chail.
t  zi,  pp.  166,  176,  180),— as  also  the  peeudo-Hippocratic  buoka,  D$  Morb,  p^puU,


fin  ICKDICAL  HISTORICAL  DSBBBVAVfOir.

77.  But  it  was  principally  the  Anttcyran  pbyaidaBS  of  tMt
period  who  practiged  helleborism,  tx  profesao^  if  I  may  be  aUow«4
to  use  the  expression,  and  they  pursued  it  Tigoroosly  for  aovvnl
centuries.  A  great  number  of  sick  persons  from  other  countries
who  had  been  given  up  by  other  physicians,  travelled  to  bcrib
Anticyras  (towns,  as  I  before  stated,  in  great  repute  for  thii
treatment),  in  order  to  be  cured  of  the  most  protracted  and  aeii-
ous  diseases  by  means  of  the  potent  employment  of  heUeboilk

78.  Afterwards  Themison^^  founder  of  the  methodic  mq^
began  to  recommend  this  mode  of  treatment  by  means  of  laige
doses  of  veratrum,^  but  his  books  on  chronic  diseases^  have  ban
lost

79.  CJomelius  Celsus,^  who  followed  him,  says  very  little  ia
his  writings  respectii^  the  use  of  veratrum  album,  but  he  maa^
tions  it  incidentally ;  it  is  doubtful  if  he  employed  it  himsel£

80.  Thereafter  Aretaeus  of  Cappadocia,  a  man  gifted  with  the
genius  of  Hippocrates,  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Domitiaa,
.wrote  a  good  deal  of  useful  matter  relative  to  helleb<»iBm.

81.  Then  Rufiis  (apparently  the  Ephesian^)  and  the  pneumatic
physicians,  Ilerodotus  and  ^Vrchigeues,  who  flourished  at  the
close  of  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  made  great  efforts
to  propagate  and  teach  the  use  of  hellebore,  as  the  fragments  of
their  writings  preserved  by  Oribasius  clearly  testify.

82.  But  not  long  after  them  appeared  Claudius  Galen*  of
Pergamus,  founder  of  a  sect,  the  torch  and  trumpet  of  general
therapeutics,  a  man  more  desirous  of  inventing  a  subtle  system
than  of  consulting  experience.  Disdaining  to  learn  the  powers
of  medicines  by  instituting  experiments,  he  gave  the  bad  example
of  generalizing  and  framing  hypotheses.^ He  neglected  the  em.


ttipedaUy  the  fifth  (which  was  moat  probably  writteo  by  a  Coon  phyaciaa,
by  the  soq  of  Diaoo),  the  sixth  (probably  written  by  TheMaliu),  and  the
(written  by  several  handB)— and  linolly,  the  books  Dt  affectianilmt  and  De  mfi'rm'i
itfeeiihuM,  tn  many  places.

'  About  Uie  vear  63  bl  c.

'  Fliny,  Hitt,  naivr^  lib.  xzv,  sect.  53.

*  Quoted  by  Caeliiu  Aurelianus  (Thrd  PoMcofium.  lib.  i,  cap.  1).

*  In  the  commencement  of  our  cnu

*  That  the  fragments  quoted  by  Oribasius  are  from  the  works  of  Rufos  of  EpliHOi
seems  to  be  borne  out  by  this,  that  a  part  of  them  is  to  be  frand  in  a  manoMripl
cwmtaining  the  anatomical  works  of  Rufus  of  Ephesus,  translated  into  lAtiD  if
J.  P.  Grassus,  in  the  Prineipet  artit  Jfediau  of  Henr.  Stephanos,  1667,  toL  p.  ISt.

*  This,  the  ii^rcatest  celebrity  in  the  medical  schools,  and  almost  the  only  authonily
for  thirteen  centuries,  flourislied  at  Rome  after  the  middle  of  the  second  century  ii


Ha  indicated  all  the  powen  and  qualitiei|af  all  8un|^  medicaincBti^  not  bf  Oh


OH  THE  HCLLKBORIBM  OF  THS  ANCIENTS.  598

plc^rment  of  veratrutn  album,  or  rather  he  dreaded  it  In  very
few  places  of  his  most  copious  writings  (which  certainly  prove
the  fecundity  and  subtlety  of  his  mind)  is  mention  made  of  this
celebrated  medicine.  To  be  sure,  in  his  book,  Quos  purgare
npoiHeat^  he  repeats,  principally  from  Hippocrates  and  Rufus,  the
preliminary  precautions  and  rules  for  the  employment  of  helle-
bosism,  but  he  adds  nothing  of  his  own  which  would  lead  us  to
infer  that  he  approved  of  it  himself;  on  the  contrary,  he  says:
"We  have  sometimes  given  in  oxymel,  radishes  in  which  the
fibres  of  white  hellebore  had  been  left  for  twenty-four  hours,  in
order  to  excite  gentle  vomiting  by  this  means*' ;  which  is  as  much
as  to  say,  that  he  did  not  employ  the  grand  cure,  but  only  some-
time] used  the  gentle  method  of  Philotimus.  He  elsewhere '
lecommends  the  same  gentle  use  of  veratrum.  Moreover,  in  his
commentaries  on  the  Hippocratic  writings  he  now  and  then  says
something  about  hellebore  in  a  superficial  and  imperfect  manner,
thereby  shewing  that  he  had  a  great  objection  to  the  serious  em-
ployment of  this  root.  Thus  when  Hippocrates '  orders,  for  a
Qontusion  of  the  heel  got  by  leaping  from  a  height,  apparently
for  the  purpose  of  preventing  tetanus  and  gangrene,  hellebore
to  be  given,  that  same  day  or  the  next,  before  the  fever  comes
on,  or  when  it  is  slight  or  not  continued,  Galen  confesses  that
"he  would  not  dare  to  give  hellebore,  even  if  there  was  no
fever,"  ^  so  far  was  he  from  making  use  of  the  helleborism  of  the
early  physicians.

83.  I  know  not  whether  it  was  the  mere  example  of  Galen,  or
the  dogmatic  style  of  his  writings  which  were  repeated  literally
in  all  medical  writings  as  though  they  had  been  the  oracles  of
an  infallible  God,  or  if  it  was  from  other  causes,  that  the  physi-
cians who  immediately  followed  *  him  almost  entirely  neglected
helleborism ;  thus  much  however  is  certain,  that  for  almost  two
centuries  it  was  very  little  used,  until  a man  distinguished

periinents  upon  tlic  human  body,  but  by  mere  conjecture :  thus  ho  arbitrarily  pUced
both  the  hellebore!*  in  thr.  third  ordt^r  of  hot  and  dry  tubntancet  (in  the  11th  book  De
MMtpl.  med.facultate,  t,  xiii,  p.  17S),  whereas  it  is  impoesible  that  tliese  two  medi-
einea,  which  have  a  totally  opposite  medical  action  on  the  human  bo<ly,  can  be  of  the
mmm  quality.

'  In  the  first  book  of  the  Method,  medend.  ad  Glauoonem,  cap.  12.

*  Or  his  grandfather,  who  by  some  is  thought  to  be  the  author  of  the  books  D§
fraeiurU  and  De  artieulii.

'  Ufwir  ^  ovS'  ampirut  roXftuftcp  iiiikat  {iXXii'pop).  Comment,  u,  in  librum  Bt  Fmc-
turit  (edit.  dt.  torn,  idi,  p.  2<M).

*  Caetius  Aurelianui^,  who  8eems  to  have  been  a  contemporary  of  Galen,  and  not
to  have  lived  after  him,  recommends  the  employment  of  bellebofism  in  epilepsy  (L  c>
lib.  i,  capi  4)l His  dialect  is  African,  not  pure  Roman,  but  rude  and  rough.

88


694  XKDICAL  HmrOBICAL  BIBBEBTATIOV

equally  in  medicine  and  in  snrgerj,  Antillus,^  paid  bo  mncli  at-
tention to  this  mode  of  treatment  that  he  is  justly  regarded  as
the  greatest  authority  in  laying  down  the  precautions  it  inas  le-
quisite  to  use  in  the  employment  of  this  means.

84.  Shortly  after  him  Posidonius,  a  physician  of  no  mban  re-
putation, as  may  be  seen  from  the  firagments  of  his  writings  pre-
•served  by  Aetiua,  rivalled  Antyllus  in  the  attention  he  devoted
io  helleborism.'

85.  Thereafter  the  grand  cure  by  hellebore  again  declined
sensibly  and  fell  into  disuse.  In  fact  Oribasius,  about  the  year
862,  in  his  Colkcta,  dedicated  to  the  emperor  Julian  (called  the
apostate),  has  brought  together  many  observations  of  the  andeats
on  the  subject  of  Kelleborism,  but  where  he  ought  to  hav^^ven
instructions  concerning  it  himself  (in  the  Synopsis  to  his  son
Eustathius),  he  does  not  say  a  word  about  it.

86.  But  in  the  following  century  Asclepiodotus,  abandoning
in  a  great  measure  the  doctrines  of  his  fanatical  preceptor  Ja-
sobus  Psychrestus  (about  the  year  460),  revived  the  practice  of
helleborism,  which  had  long  been  neglected  and  discontinued,
and  gained  great  reputation  by  his  wonderful  cures  of  very  ob-
stinate tod  serious  diseases  by  means  of  this  medicine.^  But  of
all  the  physicians  of  antiquity  he  was  the  last  .who  practised  this
way,  for  after  him  the  employment  of  helleborism  fell  into  ob-
livion, nor  was  it  afterwards  restored  by  any  of  the  Arabian
physicians,.*

'  This  author  flourished  about  the  year  880  of  our  era ;  fragments  of  his  wri&g^
have  been  pre!ier\'ed  by  OribAsius^and  Adtius;  Sprengel  has  puUished  a  sepaiat*
edition  of  them.

'  That  he  wrote  in  the  time  of  Oribosius,  and  some  time  before  him  (about  thp
year  860),  is  apparent  from  this,  tliat  Oribasius  in  his  chapter  on  epilepsy  (Synoftit,
dooius'  method  of  treating  this  di;«ease,  which  Aetius  {Xetrab.  ii,  Serm.  ii,  cap  IS)
call  ros8idoniuR,  though  the  etymology  of  the  word,  as  well  as  the  Aldine  editkn  d
tlie  Greek  text,  and  Photius  also-^p.  565 — all  make  the  woni  Yloau&tavioT)  must  not
be  confounded  wiih  the  more  ancient  philosopher  of  the  same  name,  whom  Stzab)
calls  iha  friend  of  Ptolemy  (Geogr.,  lib.  xi,  p.  491).

•  'AffuXrjTjrf^artfS row  XtvKv^  iWtSiftov  wdXat  Ttjv^piiffitf  riToXwXwar— ««rd$"  dvMo/rvn,

Kai  ii  avrov  dvuirovs-  v6covf  iaaaro  (Photii  Mvou'^i^Xor,  p.  1064,  ttdit.  Schotti,  RothoOUlgi

1663,  foL)

*  Mesne,  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of  the  caliph  Al  Rashid,  about  the  ytax
800,  a  man  of  such  celebrity  that  he  was  termed  the  evangelist  of  physidaos,  cflio-
tributed  much  to  tJie  almost  complete  abandonment  of  tlie  use  of  veratrum  album-
In  his  book  De  Simpl.,  cap.  80,  he  aays,  "There  are  two  kinds^of  heUcbure,  the  while


OV  IBS  HBLLKB0SI8X  OF  THX  ASCSXSTB.  695

87.  So  alflo  A^tius  the  Amidenian,  who  about  the  year  645  ^
arranged  in  sixteen  books,  with  mach  order  and  clear  method,
all  the  writings  of  the  ancients  on  the  treatment  of  diseases  that
remained,  carefully  extracts  from  Antyllus  and  Posidonius  what
lelafeeB  to helleborism,  but  adds  nothing  from  his  Own  ex-

■

penenoe.

88.  In  like  manner  Alexander  of  Tralles,  who  composed  twelve
books  in  the  Greek  language  on  the  art  of  medicine,  about  the
year  655,  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  was  so  prejudiced,  like  the
vast  of  his  contemporaneous  colleagues,^  against  the  use  of  'this
root,  that  he  greatly  prefers  the  Armenian  stone  (fossil  oxyde
of  oopper)  to  veratrum  album,  ''as  an  evacuant  medicine  without
the  hfiom  and  danger  that  attend  the  employment  of.  veratrum
album," »

89.  Afterwards  indeed  Paulus  of  Aegina,  who  wrote  his  seven
iorily  the  mode  of  practising  helleborism  among  the  ancients,
bat  as  fiur  as  can  be  understood  he  does  not  seem  to  have  em-
jdoyed  it  himself.^

90.  Finally  Johannes,  the  son  of  Zacharias,  sumamed  Actua
liusi^  only  makes  mention  of  veratrum  album  incidentally ,<*  and
only  after  the  description  of  others.

f^ihe  seasons  of  the  year^  tlie  diseases^  and  the  subjects  in  which  tfit
aticients  considered  heUeborism  suitahle  or  unsuitable,

91.  The  earliest  physicians  considered  the  spring  the  most
aoitable  season  for  the  evacuations  by  hellebore,  next  to  that  the
autumn,  and  if  a  choice  were  capable  of  being  made  betwixt
winter  and  summer,  they  preferred  the  latter  for  the  evacuations,
upwards,  the  former  for  those  downwards."

aod  the  black ;  the  latter  is  more  wholcaome  than  the  wliite,  wRn^  produces  humI
terrible  symptoms."  7

'  T\m  learned  Dr.  Carl  Weigcl  {Aetianarum  exfreitationem  tpeeimen^  I-JpSy  1791.
i,  p.  8)  profves  that  AStius  floiirirthe<l  about  the  jcarH  640  and  650,  but  that  Alexander
of  Tndles  u  to  be  referred  to  the  sixth  decenium  of  that  century.

*  J.  Friend  {HiM..  de  la  med^  t  i,  p.  160)  sayn  :  "Ce  medicament,  si  renomm6  parnii
Ifli  andens,  etait  (du  temps  d'Alcxandrc  de  Tralles)  dtjik  devenu  tontk-fait  hor^
d'osage.**

'  Book  i,  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  De  mehncholicit.

*  lib.  vii,  cap.  10.

*  From  a  passage  in  Myrcpsus,  who  wrote  about  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  oeDtiAy
quoted  troxn  Actuarins,  it  Heems  that  the  latter  could  not  liare  flpuridhed  after  the

1S80  (see  Freind,  loc  cit,  p.  468, 464).

*  Mttkiod,  med^  libr.  t,  cap.  8.

*  H^jpocr.,  sect  iv.  aph.  4  and  6.


066  MXDICAL  HISTOBIOAL  DiaBKBTATlOXr

92.  The  J  prohibited  the  employment  of  helleboriam  i&  asthnuM^
cooghs,  and  internal  ulcers  (snch  as  pulmonary  oonsumptiaa '
and  suppuration  of  the  liver) ;  also  in  cases  of  hemoptysis^  ervi
when  the  patient  seemed  to  be  in  good  healthy  they  feared  kil
its  use  should  occasion  the  rupture  of  a  blood-vessel  in  the  longi^
especially  of  those  who  were  thin,  had  a  narrow  chest,  and  a  long
neck,  i  e.  were  of  a  phthisical  habit  (for  persons  of  that  desoripi
tion  have  generally  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  breathe  with  difficaUy,
and  are  harrassed  by  cough^) ;  also  in  diseases  of  the  throat  and
neck,  in  the  pain  at  the  opening  into  the  stomach  of  those  wlifl
had  a  difficulty  of  vomiting,^  also  of  lientery,^  in  oommendng
amaurosis,  in  aifections  of  the  head  that  were  accompanied  by
violent  pains  at  intervals,  with  redness  of  the  &ce  and  congeation
of  the  vessels ;  and  lastly,  in  the  hysterical  suffocation.^

93.  It  was  not  allowed  to  use  it  in  any  febrile  disease,  except
some  cases  of  quartan  ague.^

94.  Moreover,  the  vomitings  provoked  by  hellebore  wero  aiH
thought  to  be  suitable  for  obese  persons,^  nor  for  the  plethoxi^'
nor  for  those  subject  to  syncope.

95.  It  was  with  difficulty  borne  by  persons  of  a  timid  oi
pusillanimous  disposition;  this  treatment  requires  a  grealM
amount  of  fortitude  than  almost  any  other  thing ;  wherefore  it
was  not  considered  suitable  for  women,  or  old  men  or  children.

96.  It  was  chiefly  employed  in  di^ases  of  long-standing  with-
out fever,  in  insanity,*®  melancholia,  "in  inveterate  pains  of  the


*  Hippocr^  Beet,  ir,  aph.  8. — Rufus  quoted  by  Oribaaiufi,  Collect^  lib,  fii,  capi  My  p

'  Rufua,  L  c,  p.  246.

*  Rufua,  L  c,  pp.  244, 245.

*  Hippocr.  L  c^  aph.  12.

*  AStiufs  quoting  from  Antyllos  and  Po9idoniiiA,  lib,  iii,  cap.  1S1.

*  Oalen,  lib.  L,  De  method,  med.  ad  Glauconem,  cap.  12. — Rufu^  L  c,  cap.  121.

^  Rufus,  L  c,  p.  245. — Hippocrates  seems  to  me  to  allude  to  this  when  he  mp
(oect.  iv.,  aph.  16):  'EXXff  ipir  intKifdwo^  raiai  ras"  vapxcLT  vydasr  (as  thougfa  he  had  laid
'*  fleshy  persons ")  t-jfcwn^airaa^dv  yao  c^^juci, — ^whercforc  tnr  this  same  reavoD  be
fjiders  (sect  ir.,  aph.  6)  thin  pertons  to  be  evacuated  upwards:  tovt  /<r^ra^f — S»»

*  Adtius,  lib.  iil  cap,  124.

*  Rufiis,  L  c,  p.  245.

**  0.  CeUus,  De  medicina,  lib.  il,  cap.  13,  with  whom  all  ancient  mcdkal  aolbon


"  Aretaeus,  Curat,  diut-t  lib.  i.,  cap.  5. — Oalen,  De  atra  bile,  cap.  7.  Piny,  Bid,
HoL,  liU  xzY.,  sect  94. — **  Rfficacius  elleborum,*'  he  says,  *'  ad  romttioDea  et  ad  biUm
nigram  cztrahendanL**


OK  ns  HBLLIBOBISIC  OF  THK  AKGUMtS.  697

fnt  and  liips^  pains  of  the  joints,  *  the  commencement  of  the
goat,*  epilepsy,'  spasms  of  the  facial  muscles,^  laziness  of  the
mind,*  loss  of  conscionsness  (apoplexy),  vertigo  which  caused
oonfbision  of  the  head,  (fanatics,^)  inveterate  paralysis,^  obsti-
nate headache,*  lethargy,  vertigo,  white  leprosy,*  and  elephan*
tiasis'^  and  other  cutaneous  diseases;  also  in  baldness,  falling  out
of  the  beard,  nightmare,  devel(^)ed  hydrophobia,*'  renal  calculi.

*  RnfiH,  I  c^  p.  26u. A^tius  L  c,  cap.  ISl.

*  Aretaeii^  Curai,dtut.  1th. iL,  cap.  12,  xaX  y^  r«<rc  vc^ypicoiffi  iX>i^for  r^  ^<ya  «<or  .

*  CSelsufl^  L  &— and  Caelius  AureliaDua,  Tard.  pou ,  lib.  I,  cap.  4,  §108 — 111.
«  OelMH,  lib.  iy^  cap.  2.

.'  U  was  not  onlj  employed  lor  mental  imbecility,  but  remarkable  to  relate,  it
m  alio  iBied  ftir  healthy  iiidinduala  giveo  to  literary  studies  io  order  to  sharpen
tfanr  intelltKt^  as  Pliny  inlunns  us  {Hitt.  %at^  lib.  xxr.,  sect  21):  **  Ad  penridoida
aerim^*'  he  says,  **  quae  commentabantur,  saepius  sumptitabatur  veratrum  f  as  an
emnple,  I  may  mention  the  case  of  Cameades  the  Academician,  who  (see  A.  Gel-
fia^  ATodL  AU-^  lib.  zrii.,  cap.  15)  *'Bcri«turu8  adrersus  Stoid  Zenonis  libros  superiorm
coiporis  ellebtVD  candido  purgavit"  The  same  Cameades,  we  are  told  by  Valerius
Minmiis  (lib.  tul,  cap.  7),  "  cum  Chrysippo  disputaturus  helleboro  se  ante  purgabat
id  exprimeodum  ingenium  suum  attcnthis  ot  illius  refellendnm  acrius.**  It  is  to  this
coqiloyment  of  Yeratrum  album  for  the  purpose  of  sharpening  the  intellect  that
Loeiinof  Samoeata- refers  (jSi'imf  rpi<rir,  Op.,  torn.  L,  p.  664,  edit  Reitzii):  o^^JXir,
jwMbf  M^v,  |r  ^%  rpir  Iftiiir  rH  imiapov  wiyr — *'  thou  const  not  become  wiM  unless
thon  ikric€  usest  hellebore  f  and  in  like  manner  Horace,  by  the  wordi» :  **  Tribus  Au-
tiepia  insanabile  caput,"  means  to  ridicule  a  dullard  wliose  stupidity  could  not  be  re-
BSfed  by  three  courses  of  hellebore.

So  frequent  and  so  well  known  was  the  treatment  of  mental  infinnities  by  helle-
bore at  Anticyra  in  ancient  times  that  the  name  of  this  town  was  often  used  to  de-
note the  process  of  helleborism  itself  and  the  word  Anticyra  was  used  when  helle>
borion  and  hellebore  were  meant  Hence  that  sarcasm  which  Horace  directs  againf>t
toamn  (Sb.  ii^  Sat,  iii.,  y.  82,  88):—

^  Daado  est  elleboii  malto  pan  maxima  aTarin ;

**  Nesclo  an  Anticyram  ratio  illit  dettinet  omnem  **—
ie.  I  should  think  that  all  the  hellebore  that  con  be  found  should  be  devoted  to  the
treatment  of  misers.
Feraius  also  says  (8aL  iv.,  ▼.  16)—

**■  Antlcyrae  mellor  •orbere  merscas,"

it  were  better  that  thou  shouldst  swallow  pure  hellebore. — ^This  is  an  imitation  of
Hoimoe  {£put.  ii.,  y.  137  )—

^  Expulit  elleboro  morbum  bilemque  moraco.^

*Rufbi,L  e.

^  ACtius,  I.  c.,cap.  12. Gael  Aurelianus,  L  c,  lib.  ii,  cap.  1.

*  Rufus,  L  c Aretaeus,  Cur.  diut^  lib.  I,  cap.  2.
*Rnfu^lc.

»  Pliny,  L  a,  lib.  xxv.,  sect  24.

"  Rufus,  I.  c,  p.  268, "  It  cauacs,"  he  says,  **  those  who  already  haye  a  dread  of"  wa-
ter, to  dread  it  no  longer ;  and  th»  fact  was  anciently  known  to  the  peasants  who,,
when  their  dogs  became  affected  by  the  disease,  purged  them  with  hellebore,  and
fltia  led  physicians  sometime  after  to  giye  hellebore  to  a  man  affected  with  the


598  XlBDICAL  H18TOBI0AL  DISSKBXATIOir

ancient  crudities,^  the  coeliac  disease,^  leucopUegmasia,  diseaaes
of  the  spleen,^  struma,^  concealed  cancer,  though  it  seems  to
have  been  less  suitable  for  the  ulcers  themselves  ;*  in  a  word,
in  an  almost  innumerable  multitude,  of  diseases.^

97.  In  a  disease  which  from  its  nature  is  of  a  chronic  charac-
ter, it  was  considered  much  better  to  administer  the  veratrum  in
the  commencement  of  the  malady  before  it  had  acquired  greater
power,  because  most  such  diseases  became  firom  long  habit  in
the  course  of  time  unconquerable.'

98.  But  in  the  case  of  diseases  consisting  of  periodical  attacks
and  intermissions,  it  was  not  thought  advisable  to  employ  the
medicament  where  the  paroxysms  recurred  at  short  intervals,
but  only  where  the  intervals  were  longer.  In  diseases,  how*
ever,  which  presented  great  and  regular  intermissions,  it  was
deemed  expedient  to  commence  the  treatment  a  long  time  be-
fore the  attack,  but  if  the  intermissions  were  short  and  irregu-
lar,  the  hellebore  was  to  be  had  recourse  to  after  the  termina*
tion  of  an  attack,  especially  in  epilepsy  .•

Preparatory  treatment  for  IieUebormn,

99.  When  it  was  deemed  necessary  to  employ  the  veratimn,

the  patient  was  put  on  a  regulated  diet,  which  was  in  general,
according  to  the  advice  of  Hippocrates,^  for  those  who  vomited
unt^i  difficulty  that  they  should  before  taking  the  medicine  have
their  bodies  moistened  by  plenty  of  nourishment  and  repose
(the  pseudo-IIippocratic  books,  particularly  the  sixth  book  of
Epidemic  di.seases,  add,  **by  the  bath.'')  The  doctrine  of  the
later  physicians  was — Uiat  they  should  be  made  to  practise  artijkial
vomiting,

100.  Even  those  who  vomited  easily  were  ordered  to  vomit
three  times  before  they  commenced  the  great  medication ;  fiist^
after  supper ;»<>  secondly,  when  their  stomacb  was  empty;  and

*  Rufus,  L  c. — Pliny,  1.  c

*  Celsus,  L  c,  lib.  iv.,  cap.  16. — Aretaeus,  Cur.  diiU.,  lib.  2,  cap.  7.

*  Rufus,  1.  c.,  p.  264.

*  Celsus,  lib.  v.,  cap.  28,  §  7.

*  Rufus,  L  c

*  Agtius  (quoting  Antyllus  and  Posidonius),  1.  c,  cap.  121:  rtf  6i  i^a^iOftch  Uo*

'  Rufus,  1.  c,  p.  264.
■  Rufus,  L  a,  p.  265.

*  Sect,  iv.,  aph.  13. — Also  Celsus,  libr.  ii.,  cap.  16.

^  After  supper,  and  also  when  fasting  or  coming  out  of  the  bath,  the  patients  piv-


OK  TH£  HXLLSBOBISM  OF  THE  ANGIXNT8.  699

Ittdj,  after  having  partaken  of  radishes^  (or  origanum,  or  hys-
sop, or  rue*). — Others  ordered  the  patients  to  vomit  three  times
immediately  after  supper  ;3  and  tlien  to  wait  two  or  three  days
before  drinking  the  hellebore.

101.  But  those  who  were  known  to  vomit  with  difficulty,
weie  prepared  a  long  time  previously,  as  long  as  three  weeks,^
and  on  repeated  occasions  (e.  g,  every  third  or  fourth  day)  were
sobjected  to  vomiting,^  in  such  a  manner  that  the  patient  should
be  made  to  vomit  more  frequently  the  nearer  the  time  ap-
proached for  taking  the  medicine,  attention  being  paid  to  the
strength  of  the  body  in  order  that  he  should  not  be  weakened
more  than  necessary  by  these,  for  this  treatment  requires  more
than  any  other  thing,  strength  on  the  part  of  the  patient.^

102.  Therefore  betwixt  the  several  vomitings  three  or  four
days  were  allowed  to  elapse,  during  which  the  body  was  re»
freshed  by  food  easy  of  digestion,  by  repose,  and  by  amusement
of  the  mind.

lOS.  After  the  last  vomiting,  one  or  two  days^  intervened
before  the  patient  took  the  veratrum,  during  which  time  the
bowels  were  opened  by  means  of  a  clyster,"  baths  were  used,
and  a  spare  diet

Mode  itf  exhibiting  the  veratrum  album  far  the  purpose  of  inducing

helleborism,

104.  There  were  three  general  methods  of  administering  ve-
ratrum ;  in  infusion,  in  decoction,  and  in  substance.

105.  The  kind  that  was  preferred^  was  that  iu  which  the  root

foked  fomiting,  either  hj  tickling  the  fkuces  with  their  fiiigero,  or  with  a  feather
dqpped  in  oil

'  From  a  pound  to  a  pound  and  a  half  of  pungent  radishes  were  eaten  after  a  mo-
derate meal  with  water  for  drink ;  tlic  patient  then  waited  a  whole  hour  until  nausea
andemetatioos  commenced ;  then  by  means  of  the  finger  or  a  feather  introduced  into
Ifaa  Cuices  he  provoked  vomitmg,  and  this  was  called  vomiting  from  radisket,  Arcfai-
^tom,  dted  by  Oribasius,  L  c^  lib.  viii^  cap.  L,  p.  270.

'  *  Herbs  lightly  boiled  should  be  eaten."  Rufus  quoted  by  Adtiu%  lib.  iii ,  cap.
119.

*  AStius  lib.  iii.,  cap.  1 27.

*  Archigenes,  L  c,  p.  267.

*  To  those  that  vomited  with  great  difficulty,  the  most  that  used  to  be  ordered  was
generally  four  Fomiting.^  after  supper,  and  two  after  radishes.  Archigenes,  L  c,  pp.
2S7— 271.

*  Rufiifl,  L  c,  p.  266.

^  Ardiigeiies,  t  c,  p.  268.

'  Archigenes,  L  c. — A^tius,  lib.  iil,  cap.  127.

*Rafufl^Lc.,pL266.


600  .  JUDICAL  HI8T0BICAL  DI88EBTATI0H

was  cut  with  scissors^  into  ooarae  particles,  resembling  our  coanser '
kinds  of  groats  (which  the  ancients  caUed  bruised  polenta)^  or
of  the  form  and  size  of  sesame-seeds.^  The  coarser  particles
were  selected  when  it  was  wished  to  produce  milder  vomiting,'
but  care  was  taken  that  they  should  be  of  equal  size,  and  not
mixed  up  with  the  finer  dust,  lest  the  vomiting  that  ensued
should  occur  at  unequal  periods.*

106.  Some  gave  as  the  largest  dose  to  robust  patients  two
drachms  and  a  half  {-—  180  of  our  grains)  of  this  granulated
preparation  ;*  others  only  gave  two  drachms*  (=  144  grains)  as
the  largest  dose,  ten  oboli  (=  120  grains)  as  the  moderate  dose,
and  eight  oboli  (=  96  grains)  as  the  smallest  dose.  It  was  ^ven
either  in  water,  or  in  wine,  or  in  raisin  wine,'  or  in  decoction  of
lentils ;  but  to  persons  out  of  their  mind  it  was  given  (in  order
that  they  might  not  be  aware  that  they  were  taking  it)  in  broth,*
or  in  oxjrmel,*  or  in  pills.  »^

107.  This  most  simple  preparation  of  veratrum  album  caused
vomiting  more  rapidly  than  the  others,  and  for  the  most  part  b
less  than  two  hours  brought  up  the  bile  and  the  pituita  without
much  disturbance,  1^  then,  after  the  medicine  itself  had  been
ejected  by  the  vomiting,  the  evacuation  ceased  in  from  four  to
five  hours.''

'  In  a  passiige  in  Antyllus  presenred  by  Aetias  (lib.  iu.,cap.  128),  this preparatiijo

of  the  root  is  termed  rptXiardv  (ciU  toith  wcUwrt). Orib;wiu9  quotes  the  same  pasaagi^

{Collect.  I  8,  cap. 6,  p.  277);  but  Rasarius  renders  it  incorrectly,"  in  ranienta  den-


more  at  leng^th :  rh  Kao<pri  Xa6hv  rl/tvi  \f/a\iSi  tir  dXftrutifi{  of  the  size  of  groated  wheit)

^yi07  Ji  wtrvfHjSti. He  orders  these  partidet  cut  by  the  seiMwrs  to  the  tiie  of  groaii

to  be  wiped  with  a  cloth,  in  order  to  remove  the  small  dust,  and  thus  prevent  suflbca-

tioo. Archigenes  (L  c.  p.  272)  recommends  that  the  coarse  fibres  of  the  hellebore

should  have  one  or  two  longitudinal  incisions  made  in  them  before  being  cut  in
pieces.

'  Paulus  Acgincta,  lib.  vii.,  cap.  10.

•  Rufus,  1.  c,  p.  266.  These  coarser  particles  oflFered  fewer  points  of  contact  to  the
lining  membrane  of  the  stomach,  so  that  the  largest  dose  of  this  preparation  was  coo
sidered  no  more  than  equal  to  a  smaller  dose  of  the  fine  powder;  moreover  tfaii
larger  size  of  the  particles  prevented  their  descent  into  the  intestines,  and  the  pro-
duction of  purging  downwards.

*  Arehigenes,  I.  c,  p.  272.

*  Aetius  (quoting  Antyllus  and  Posidonius),  L  s.,  cap.  181.

•  Arehigenes,  in  Oribasius,  lib.  viii,  cap.  2,  p.  278.
^  Wine  prepared  from  the  dried  grapes.

•  Arehigenes,  1.  c

*  Composed  of  honey  and  vinegar.

^  Arehigenes,  L  a,  p.  276. The  finest  powder  was  employed  for  the  pilU
** '  Avtv  voWo^  airapaYfoxif  Antyllus,  in  Aetius,  L  c,  cap.  128.
"  Antyllus  in  Oribas.,  !•  c,  p.  277,  and  in  Aetius,  1  c,  cap.  128.


OK  TBI  HSLLKBOBISM  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  801

108.  Another  mode  was  to  bruise  the  root  in  a  mortar,  and  to
separate  the  very  fine  dust  by  means  of  a  very  close  sieve.'  To
the  lx)lder  patients  the  coarser  powder^  was  given  in  the  dose  of
a  drachm  and  two  oboli  (=  96  grains).  This  preparation  con-
fessedly acted  slower,^  vomiting  often  occurring  only  after  four
or  five  hours,  but  it  brought  away  all  the  bile  and  pituita,
certainly  not  without  the  risk  of  causing  spasms  (cramps)^  and
too  violent  vomiting,  on  account  of  the  too  great  abundance  of
the  evacuation,  but  it  was  useful  in  various  ways.

109.  For  the  most  part  the  fibres  of  the  roots  were  bruised  up
along  with  the  medulla,  but  sometimes  the  most  fleshy  fibres
were  moistened  with  a  sponge,  and  the  swollen  bark  split  up
longitudinally  with  a  needle ;  after  drying  it  again  in  the  shade
it  was  bruised,  and  thereby,  it  was  thought,  a  more  efficacious
medicine  was  obtained.^

110.  The  infusion  of  veratrum  album  was  also  employed.
Five  drachms  (=  310  gr.)  of  the  cut  particles  of  the  root  were
macerated  for  the  space  of  three  days®  in  half  a  hemina  (=  5  oz.
8  drs.y  of  rain  water ;  the  liquor  was  then  strained  and  admi-
nistered warm  to  old  persons,  children,®  and  hectic  subjects.*

111.  Others  considered  the  decoction  the  most  certain  prepa-
ration,'® and  they  prepared  it  in  the  following  way :  one  pound
(==  14  4-5  oz.)  of  veratrum,  cut  into  small  pieces  with  scissors,*'

'  The  finest  powder  being  thus  removed  was  made  into  pills  with  thickened  hooej
(Aittiia,  L  G^  cap.  131) ;  96  grains  of  these  pills  were  given  when  it  was  deemed
requisite  to  emj^oy  this  form.

*  AitioB,  1.  c,  cap.  181.— To  the  insane  this  coarser  powder  was  given  generally  in
cukes  or  broth,  in  order  to  deceive  them  (Archigcnes,  L  c,  p.  274).

*  Adtius,  L  c,  cap  128.

*  £vy»Xiri}r,  AStius,  L  c

*  Pliny,  Ilitt.  nat^  lib.  xxv,  sect  21. — Archigenes,  1.  c,  p.  272.

*  This  long  maceration  in  water  greatly  diminished  the  power  of  the  veratrum,  for
■n  parts  of  plants  when  mixed  with  water  undergo  fermentation,  and  the  longer  this
maceration  and  infusion  are  continued  the  more  are  the  medicinal  powers  weakened,
milesB  spirituous  fluids,  obtained  by  the  distillation  of  fermented  vegetable  substances,
are  added,  which,  however,  the  ancients  were  not  possessed  of  The  root  of  veratrum
album,  imlebs  thoroughly  dried,  is  more  prone  to  the  decomposition  of  its  constituent
parts  than  the  roots  of  otlier  plants ;  its  powder  is  particularly  apt  to  become  mouldy
and  to  ferment,  unless  perfectly  dried.  Mouldiness  very  quickly  destroys  almost  idl
the  medicinal  power  of  plants.

"*  Massarius,  De  ponderibua  et  metuuris,  Tiguri,  8,  1584,  lib.  iii,  cap.  14.
'  Antyllus,  in  Oribasius,  L  c,  p.  277  ;  in  Agtius,  lib.  iii,  cap.  129.

*  A§tius,  1.  c

*•  Herodotus,  L  c,  p.  276.

"  *E\paXt(Tnivv,  AdtiuB,  1.  c,  cap.  129.


602  .  KKDIGAL  HISTOBICAL  DISSEBTATIOK .

was  macerated  for  three  days  in  six  heminas  (z=  64  4-5  oz.  of
water,  and  then  boiled  down  over  a  slow  fire  to  one-third  less ;
the  root  was  then  removed,  and  to  the  liquor  two  heminas
(=  21  3-5  oz.)  of  honey*  was  added  to  thicken  it,*  so  that  it
should  not  spoil, '  or,  according  to  Archigenes,*  to  make  it  of
the  consistence  of  an  electuary.  Archigencs  gave  to  a  person
prepared  for  the  helleborism  a  small  mystrum*  {=  260  to  288
of  our  grains)  of  this  syrup  for  a  dose ;  Herodotus  gave  to  robust
subjects  one  mystrum,  but  to  those  who  did  not  require  to  be
evacuated  two  spoonfuls  (=  144  grains).^  Others  gave  the
decoction  inspissated  with  a  third  of  honey,  in  the  dose  of  a
large  spoonful'  (108  gr.),  to  be  licked  up  by  Ae  patient,  whereby
they  aflSrmed  that  the  occurrence  of  spasms  and  of  excessive
evacuation  was  avoided.®  Others  formed  the  inspissated  decoc-
tion into  pills,  which  they  gave  principally  to  insane  persons  in
order  to  deceive  them.*

Substances  that  were  mixed  with  the  veratrum. Sesamcides.

112.  But  the  ancient  physicians  did  not  always  employ  such
a  (dimple  method  of  administering  the  veratrum  album.  Some
added  to  the  infusion  origanum,  or  absinthum,  or  natrum,  others
mixed  it  with  tliapsia,'®  and  others  with  the  wild  grape."

113.  But  the  principal  thing  that  wajs  mingled  with  the  medi-
cine white  hellebore  was  a  certain  kind  of  seed  called  sesamoideSj
in  consequence  of  their  (oval)  form  bearing  a  resemblance  to  the
seeds  of  the  same;*^  they  were  also  called  Anticyran  hellebore  or

Anticyricon,  not  because  the  plant  that  furnished  the  sesamoid

'  XArchi^^cnes,  1  c.,  adds  double  the  quantity  of  hooej  (^  43  1-6  os  )

'  Tliis  long  boiling  and  in<pts6atinn  diminished  not  a  little  the  strength  of  the
medicine,  so  that  the  dose^  of  this  inspi^^satcd  preparation,  though  not  soudl  in  bulk,
were  actually  of  but  little  strength.

*  Herodotus,  L  c^  p.  276.

*  In  Oribaeius,  lib.  viii,  cap.  2.

*  See  Massarius,  L  c,  lib.  iii,  cap.  SO,  81,  compared  with  ci^.  2. — ^The  ootyle  oon-
tained  15  3-6  of  our  ounces  of  honey ;  the  large  Attic  wMfttrum  oootained  an  eighteenth
part  of  the  cotvle,  the  tmall  myslram  on  the  other  hand  only  a  tweotj-fourih  part

*  In  GribasiuB,  L  c,  p.  276.
^  MasHirius,  1.  c,  cap.  38.

*  Aitiua,  Lc,  cap.  130.

'  Ardiigenea,  L  c.,  p.  276.
**  The  root  of  the  Tkapna  Aicltpium,  Una
**  The  seed  of  the  Delphinium  ttaphiwagria^  Linn.

"  "  Oranum  sesamae  (sc.  simile).** Pliny,  Uiai,  nat^  hb.  zzii,  sect  64. Alao
rides,  lib.  iT,  capi  162 :  ni^^a  if^tiw  v^wi^t^


ON  THE  HSlJiEBORISM  OF  TBR  ASOIXSTS.  608  ■

seed  liad  any  resemblanoe  to  the  white  hellebore,  but  partly
because  this  seed  excited  vomiting'  like  hellebore,  partly  because
to  those  undergoing  helleborism^  it  was  given  at  Antioyra  in
Fhocis,^  in  order  to  prevent  the  suffocation  arising  from  the  use
of  the  veratrum  album,  ^ — at  least  so  the  Anticyrans  persuaded
themselves  and  others.

114.  Anticyra  in  Phocis,  was,  as  I  have  said,  very  celebrated
iu  ancient  times  for  the  treatment  by  hellebore,  the  best  prepar
ration  of  veratrum  album  for  the  production  of  helleborism  being
made  there,  wherefore,  as  Strabo  relates,^  a  large  number  of
persons  resorted  thither  for  the  sake  of  the  treatment  There
grew  moreover  in  Phocis  a  remedy  resembling  sesame,  with
which  they  prepared  the  hellebore  of  Oeta.  Thus  Pliny  says:
"in  Anticyra  insula — ibi  enim  tutis^ime  sumitur  elleborus,
quoniam  sesamoides  admiscent."®

115.  Sometimes,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  vomiting,  the
sesamoides  were  given  alone,  in  the  dose  of  one  drachm  (72
grains/,  rubbed  up  with  oxymel ;  when  it  was  intended  to  cause
helleborism,  one-tliird  part  of  these  seeds  was  added  to  the  dose

of  veratrum.*

116.  In  the  earliest  times,*  this  seed  which  it  was  usual  to

mix  with  the  veratrum  album  for  the  production  of  helleborism,

'  AiA  rd  KaOa(fet¥  miro9  rd  cxipjta  irapax^netur  iXXcfdpw,  Galen,  De  tinipl,  mecLfOiC^
mxTiii,cap.l8,  §11.

'  A<ft  r6  itiXncdat  Iv  rair  taBipctct rut  \c9ku  i^\iS6pto, DkMCOlides,  lib  iv,  cap.  10S.

■  Strabo.  L  c.

*  ^nffa^oniis'^—^vftiiiaYsrai — i\Xt6  ipoivtv^  irml  ticaov  xviytu  See  tbe  continuatioQ  of  the
book  De  vietu  acutontm  {Opera  Hippoerat.  et  Giileni^  edit  Chart,  t  xi,  p.  182.)

*A(«k  ToiTQ  dvoiiifttiv  Ssvpi  iriXAiidr  KaOap9t<i>S'  «<>(  ^t^avtiaF  x^'*^*  yivtvQat  yAp  ri
0^gmfQtiiT  ^lif/iaicov  iw  r$  ^k%k^^  /mt'  o^  aKtv<i^kaBai  roy  tiraXov  iXXiiopovm  {Geogr^  lib*
iz»  pi  640.)

'  HiM.  nai^  lib.  zxv,  sect  21.  Plinj  is  however  wrong  in  here  stating  Phodaa
Anticyra  to  be  an  island^  for  it  was  situate-d  on  the  continent,  half  a  mile  from  the
iti  ntoation.  Liyy  also  te8tif.es  to  the  same  when  he  says  (lib  xr?i,  cap.  26)  **  breve
Una  iter  eo  (Anticyram) — ab  Naupacto  est"

^  Pliny,  lib.  xxii,  sect  64. — The  pseudo  Hippocratic  continuer  of  the  book  2>«  Diatia
mmUfrum  (edit  Chart  t.  zi,  p.  182)  orders  a  large  dose:  9n<raiioti6it  &^ta  «a0«i^r  i»

vivif  q^tuXtov  ifaxftfii  b  ffradftdt  (a  drachni  and  a  half)  i(  d^VftiXiTa  rtrfuitfiivov

'  The  same  continuer  of  the  book  De  diaei.  acut^  loc  cit — Dioscorides  teaches  a
more  definite  proportion  (lib.  iv,  cap.  152) :  *'  As  much  of  the  seed  as  can  be  hdd
with  three  fingers,  with  an  obolus  and  a  half  (— •  eighteen  grains)  of  veratrum  album

in  hydromel.''

*  This  word  does  not  occur  in  the  genuine  writings  of  Hippocrates.  The  first  that
mention8  it  is  Diocles  (who  flourished  twenty  years  after  Hippocrates'  death),  see  the
dictionary  of  Erotianus  {Op.  Hipp,  et  OaUniy  edit  Chart  t  ii,  p.  188).


901  XSDIOAL  HISTORICAL  DIS8KBTATI0K

was  called  by  simple  term  sesamoid,  but  subsequently  it  was
called  ff^recU  sesamoid,  not  on  account  of  the  size  of  the  plant^  but
evidently  because  it  was  used  in  the  great  cure  (helleborism),
and  because  it  was  considered  superior  to  another  seed  of  the
same  name,*  but  chiefly  in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  a  certain
white  sesamoid,  which  was  called  the  ^nalfi  sesomoid,

117.  It  is  not  certainly  known  what  plant  this  emetic  eeed
sesamoid  belonged  to,  which  in  those  days  was  mixed  with  the
veratrum  album,  chiefly  at  Anticyra^  of  Phocis,  in  order  to  di-
minish the  suflFocation.  Theophrastus  says:  the  seed  of  a  small
plant,  Jielleborine,  is  to  be  mixed  with  hellebore  when  that  is  ad-
ministered, in  order  to  facilitate  its  emetic  action.*  The  name
helkborine  was  probably  given  to  it  because  it  resembled  the
hellebore  in  its  emetic  action,  and  its  seed  seems  to  have  been
the  same  as  what  was  afterwards  termed  (great)  sesamoid.  The
plant  whence  this  was  derived  bore  a  great  outward  resemblance
to  erigeron  or  senecio/  with  its  white  flowers,  slender  root  and
bitter  seed.

118.  We  might,  then,  say  with  great  plausibility,  that  this
was  the  seed  of  some  species  of  erigeron  (acris?  graveolens?
viscosus?)  seeing  that  our  erigeron  acris  is  highly  emetic,  as
Stedman^s  observations"  demonstrate,  who  saw  violent  vomiting
ensue  merely  from  the  application  of  the  recent  plant  to  the
skin.  Cullen'  also  observes,  that  the  common  people  make  use
of  this  plant  as  a  powerful  emetic.  If  this  be  so,  how  powerful
the  seed^  must  have  been  when  taken  in  the  form  of  potion  and
brought  in  contact  with  the  nerves  of  the  stomach,  seeing  that

'  Id  the  time  of  Theophrastus  {Niti.  plant,  lib.  z,  cap.  11),  the  seed  of  the  black
beUebore  also  bore  the  name  of  sesamoid,  and  this,  as  Rufus  (in  Oribos.  Collect^  UK
▼iifCap.  27,  p.  261)  alleges,  resembles  the  seed  of  the  cnicus  (carthamus)  and  tak€0
Sb  the  doee  of  two  drachms  it  purges  doumwardi  more  violently  than  the  root  liaM'^
DioKorides  asserts  the  same  thing:  iv  xaX  airiv {kookov  tov  lX\ii6p0v  ftiX^vt)  c«X«9#ir  *2
i¥  'Arrtxvpa  aivafiottHf. (lib,  iv,  cap.  161).

*  The  seed  of  an  unknown  plant,  the  dose  of  which,  in  order  to  produce  purging
downwards,  Dioscorides  (lib.iv,  cap.  168)  and  Rufus  (I  c,  p.  266)  fix  at  half  an  aceta-
bulmn  (a  measure  that  can  hold  nine  of  our  drachms).

*  Hence  the  reason  why  this  sesamoid  was  termed  Aniicyrieon  (Pliny,  L  e.\  and
at  Anticyra  itself  it  was  even  called  keUebcre^  though  this  was  an  abuse  of  terms ;  bj
•trangers  it  was  termed  Antuyran  hellebore. See  Galen,  Defaeult.  nmpi^  lib.  riil

j[,cap.  11.

*  Rufus,  I  c,  p.  260. — Pliny.  1.  c,  **  caetera,**  he  says,  *"  simile  erigerooti  berbaa."  In
like  manner  Diosoorides  says  (I  c,  cap.  162):  htttv  h  w6a  ^lyipom-i.

*  Edinburgh  Medical  Ettayg,  vol.  ii,  art.  6.

*  Materia  Medico,  toL  ii


09  THX  HSLLEB0BI8M  OF  TH£  AKGIENTS.  806

in  general  the  whole  power  of  the  plant  is  concentrated  in  the
aeeda,  as  is  seen,  for  instance,  in  the  seeds  of  the  oonium  maon-
latam,  and  of  the  helleborus  niger.

Begimen  to  he  employed  to  assist  the  emetic  action  of  the  veratnim

album,

119.  As  soon  as  the  patient  had  drunk  the  veratrum,  cold
water  was  given  him  to  rinse  his  mouth,  and  perfumes  were  em-
ployed to  remove  and  avert  a  premature  nausea.*

120.  If  the  strength  admitted  of  it  the  patients  were  desired
to  remain  seated ;  if  they  were  weak  they  were  made  to  lie
down  on  a  bed  on  the  ground,  for  two  or  three  hours,  to  smell
peifomes,  and  to  rinse  their  mouth  with  cold  water.  It  was
sought  to  amuse  them  with  some  entertaining  story  ;  their  limbs
were  rubbed  and  ligatures  were  applied  to  them ;  they  were  ad-
vised to  keep  quiet,  lest  the  medicine  should  be  ejected  by
vomiting  sooner  than  it  ought.

121.  After  two  or  three  hours  they  were  placed  in  a  suspended
or  elevated  bed  and  swung  about,  and  thus  allowed  to  vomit

122.  At  first,  the  patients  in  whom  the  emetic  action  went  on
properly,  felt  heat  in  the  fauces  and  oesophagus ;  then  the  saliva
flowed  copiously  into  the  mouth,  and  was  often  ejected  by  spit-
ting. Aiter  the  lapse  of  some  time  they  vomited  part  of  the  food
that  had  been  taken  before,  and  part  of  the  medicine,  along
with  pituita.  This  was  repeated  after  some  time ;  and  after
they  had  ejected  the  medicine  and  the  food,  they  vomited  first
pituita  with  a  small  portion  of  bile,  then  pituita  with  a  large
proportion  of  bile,  and  finally,  pure  bile.  During  that  time  they
had  slight  hiccough,  very  red  face,  swollen  veins,  small  and
quick  pulse.

123.  When  the  vomiting  went  on  right,  the  countenance  re-
sumed its  proper  colour,  the  pulse  became  larger,  the  hiccough
ceased.  They  now  vomited  gradually  at  longer  intervals.^  The
bowels  were  frequently  moved,  although  the  evacuation  in  other
respects  might  have  been  moderate.^

124.  If  the  hiccough  was  excessively  troublesome  during  the

'  Vomiting  "which  occurreti  too  soon  (before  two  hours)  waff  generally  considered
to  be  inefficacious  for  the  removal  of  the  disease,  and  it  was  observed  that  where  it
occurred  too  late  (commencing  only  after  four  or  five  hours)  it  produced  great  dkm^
tntioD  of  tlie  strength  and  terrible  symptoms.

*  Antyllus,  in  Oribasiu<s  Collects  lib.  viii,  cap.  6,  pp.  277  278.

*  A<(tiu8y  L  c.


<MW  HSDICAL  mSTOmCAL  DISSKRTAnOK

eT;fteuatk>ii^  melicrat,^  in  wliicli  me  had  been  boiled,  ^^as  givm
them  to  diink.  and  thereafter  a  little  warm  water,  which  thqr
w«nt  made  to  vomit  again.'  The  body  waa  rubbed  oyer  wHh
o&l.  ai'id.  ai^or  the  lapse  of  two  hours,  thej  were  made  to  take  a
a2>d  appropriate  food  waa  supplied  to  them.*


Strwviirf  i^mph-iyed  m  cases  where  the  vomiting  did  not  take  place

properly.^

\^\  II  order  to  remove  the  obstacles  to  the  right  performanoe
<i  tho  rtv:iiiT3nxr,  the  following  things  were  always  in  readiness :
a  hich  a:nd  swinging  hammock  and  a  bed  with  a  soft  mattresBi'
^s^-ffiiiWL  j\>=*ca,*  and  melicrats  prepared  in  various  ways,  one  of
wiiicJi  conmined  decoction  of  hyssop,  another  origanum,  another
TOO*  anotlier  thyme ;  there  were  also  oils,  diluted  infusion  of  ve-
rfetram  album,  cupping  glasses,  little  wedges,  a  feather,  gloye
lingers,  clysters,  fomentations,  wine,  Ac

126.  If  Ote  patients  were  seized  wUh  vomiting  sooner  than  they
^*»ighty  and  there  was  reason  to  fear  lest  the  medicine  should  be
rejected  before  any  advantage  could  be  derived  fiom  it,  cold
water  was  given  to  rinse  their  mouths  with  incessantly,  and  if
this  did  not  allay  the  premature  vomiting,  diluted  vinegar  was
employed,  the  limbs  were  l)ound  with  ligatures,  and  frictions
were  applied  to  them  ;  they  were  directed  to  keep  in  their  mouths
something  seasoned  with  kitchen  salt,  to  keep  silence,  not  to
move,  but  to  sit  upright

^  127.  If  by  thege  means  the  inclination  to  vomit  was  not
stopped,  cupping-glasses  well  heated  were  applied  to  the  back
and  scrobioulus  cordis,  and  a  small  quantity  of  hot  water  was
given  the  patients  to  drink  occasionally ;  if  however  this  did
not  allay  the  desire  to  vomit,  a  small  quantity  of  the  juice  or
decoction  of  wormwood  was  given.  Two  or  three  of  these
remedies  always  sufficed  to  arrest  this  inclination  to  vomit  and
to  overcome  the  aversion  of  the  stomach.

128.  On  the  other  hand,  if  tfie  vomiting  ukls  too  long  delayed^
and  the  patients  did  not  commence  to  evacuate  ^  thd  propep

time,  some  gave  the  patient  to  drink  warm  hon^  and  water  in

- --'

'  Honied  water.

*  By  putting  the  finger  into  the  &aoet.
'  Antylliu^Lc

*  Chiefly  from  the  inptructioq  of  Antyllns,  b  OribMras,  L  c

*  Aetiu8,lih.  !i,cap.  182.

*  Vinegar  diluted  with  water


OK  THB  HSLLEBOBISM  OF  THS  AKOIENTS.  607

which  rue  had  been  boiled,  or  oil  mixed  >vilh  vater*  {hydrelaeum),
others  placed  the  patient  on  an  elevated  couch,  the  head  direet^
downwards,  and  made  him  put  his  finger  into  his  mouth  and
irritate  the  uvula  and  tonsils,  so  as  to  excite  vomiting.  More-
over he  was  told  to  flex  and  extend  alternately  his  back  and  legs
as  much  as  possible,  and  to  beat  with  his  fists  on  the  abdomen.

129.  If  the  evacuation  could  not  be  obtained  bj  these  means,
Ae  patient  was  placed  in  the  suspended  hammock  and  swung
about,'  he  was  at  the  same  time  exhorted  or  ordered  to  endea-
vour to  vomit  by  introducing  into  his  mouth  his  fingers  covered
with  some  nauseous  oU  or  with  a  solution  of  scammony.

180.  If  even  this  would  not  do,  eight  or  ten  feathers  firom  a
goose's  tail,  dipped  in  some  nauseous  oil  (oil  of  iris  or  of
cypress^),  or  fingers  of  a  glove  made  of  soft  leather,  twelve
finger-breadths  long,  stuffed  in  firont  with  wool  and  smeared
with  some  ointment,  were  introduced  into  the  fences,*  and  in
this  way  nausea  and  vomiting  were  excited.

Treatment  of  the  bad  and  serious  symptoms  occasioned  by  the  action

of  veratrum.

131.  Those  who  are  in  danger  of  suffocation  after  they  have
drunk  veratrum,  have  a  moderate  flow  of  saliva,  and,  in  spite  of
the  most  violent  effort  to  vomit  that  arises,  do  not  bring  any-
thing off  their  stomach ;  their  face  swells,  the  eyes  project,  the
respiratory  organs  are  constricted,  with  the  greatest  difficulty  of
breathing;  in  some  the  tongue  is  projected  and  the  whole  body
covered  with  profuse  perspiration ;  in  others  the  jaws  are  closed,
with  chattering  of  the  teeth,  and  the  mind  becomes  affected.*

182.  This  feeling  of  strangulation,  which  usually  occurs  in
those  who  vomit  with  difliculty,  was  allayed  by  the  continual
drinking  of  melicrat  in  which  rue  had  been  boiled  or  some  other
of  those  substances  which  have  already  been  mentioned  as  use-
ful in  the  irritation  of  the  stomach.

'  AStioB,  L  c.,  cap.  138»  where  Cornarius  has  erroneously  translated  the  words
}[fMt^999in  Kodipvcutj  hj  petseverante  votnitUf  in  place  ofcunctante  vomihi.

'  Hippocrates  forbids  those  who  have  taketo  veratrum  to  indulge  in  sleep  or
repoee ;  he  orders  that  they  shall  be  made  to  move  aboift  continually. — '£ir^i>  itin

Tit  iWiftpoVj  v^df  filtf  rht  Ktvijctai  rdv  abi^aruiv  ftaXXov  ayCiVj  rpoi  Si  rod;  vvvovi  ca2  fiii
KtrtiffiaSj  fiacov'  6n^oi  it  Kai  4  vavriXti;,  S  ri  xivTieif  ra  ciofiara  rapdacet  (sect.  iv,  apboT.  14).
-^•'Eirqy  ^ovXn  judXAov  ayciv  rdv  iWiSopop^  Ktvst  rd  aufta  (8ect'iv»  aphor,  16).

*  Oil  rendered  very  fragrant  by  boiling  in  it  the  budii  of  the  cypress  (an  Egyptian
tree).

*  Antyllus,  L  c^  pp.  278—280

*  Herodotus,  in  Oribos.,  L  c,  p.  288.


008  MEDICAL  HISTOBIOAL  DI8BEBTATI0K

138.  I^  however  this  aflfection  was  of  a  very  urgent  characteri
three  or  four  cupfuls*  of  the  diluted  helleborine  medicine^  w«re
given,  which,  possessing  the  same  properties  as  the  veratrum
already  taken  would  best  procure  the  emetic  action.  Other
substances  called  emetics  were  prohibited,  as  they  are  of  a  differ-
ent quality,  and  only  irritate  the  stomach  without  expelling  the
veratrum  taken  as  first^

184.  If  none  of  these  remedies  succeeded  in  removing  the  dan-
ger of  impending  suiSbcation,  the  bowels  were  acted  on  by  a  very
acrid  clyster,  in  order  to  give  some  relief  to  this  symptom  and
to  afford  time  to  obtain  other  remedies.  Then  the  patient  was
made  to  swallow  three  oboli  (36  grains)  of  galbanum,  or  to  drink
three  cupfuls  of  very  old  urine,  these  being  considered  useful
for  removing  suffocation.*

135.  But  if  this  also  failed  to  relieve  the  suffocation,  a  power*
ful  sternutatory  was  applied  to  the  nostrils,  the  patient  was  assi-
duously swung  about  in  the  suspended  hammock,  and  his  &uce8
irritated  by  the  introduction  of  feathers.

136.  If  there  occurred  loss  of  voice  and  consciousness^  the  little
wedges  were  introduced  betwixt  the  teeth  of  the  patient  on  both
sides,  and  feathers  or  the  glove-finger  introduced  into  the  fiiuces  in
order  to  excite  vomiting  and  remove  the  affection.  Sneezing
was  excited  by  means  of  the  powder  of  veratrum  itself  (or  of
euphorbium) ;  and  it  not  unfrequently  happened  that  on  sneez-
ing a  mass  of  pituita  was  expelled,  which  in  consequence  of  re-
maining too  long  in  the  stomach  had  caused  the  suffocation  and
loss  of  breath.

137.  When  this  means  failed,  the  patient  was  laid  upon  a
linen  cloth,  which  was  held  up  by  stout  young  men,  and  the
patient  at  one  time  thrown  up  into  the  air,  and  at  another
swung  from  side  to  side.  If  all  these  commotions  and  succus*
sions  failed  to  restore  him  to  consciousness,  it  was  thought  there
was  no  other  remedy  for  bringing  him  back  to  life.^

138.  The  hiccough  that  occurred  to  every  one  who  took  vera-
trum was  not  interfered  with  if  it  was  slight  and  at  long  intervals ;
it  was  considered  to  be  useful  in  exciting  the  stomach to

'  The  cup  (cjathtu))  contained  twelve  drachmes  (—14  2-5ths  of  our  drachms),  see
MassariuB,  L  c^  p.  43.

*  The  infusion  or  decoction  of  yeratum  album.

'  An  ingenious  idea  and  mode  of  practice,  and  perfectly  comformable  to  nature.

*  Autjlluis  l,a

*  Adtiui*,  lib.iii,  cap.  182.

*  A  saturated  infusion  of  coffee  would  be  useful  here.


OK  tm  HBLLBBOBSX  OF  THE  AKCmTIB.  000

action.'  But  when  it  was  very  severe,  and  if  the  mouth  was
afboted  with  vibration  and  twitching,  meliorat  in  which  rue  was

189.  If  this  did  no  good,  a  sternutatory  was  employed,  and
if  the  affection  still  persisted,  cupping-glasses  were  applied  the
whole  length  of  the  spine,  ligatures  were  applied  to  the  limbs,
and  they  were  heated  either  by  fermentations  or  by  putting
tiiem  in  warm  water.  It  was  endeavoured  to  frighten  or  insult
the  patient,  or  he  was  ordered  to  keep  in  his  breath  a  long  time,  or
to  inspire  and  expire  very  slowly.'

140.  For  those  symptoms  that  occurred  as  fi^uently  as  the
hiccough,  the  musmlar  contraction  and  the  crampj  chiefly  in  the
legs,  in  the  thighs,  in  the  arms  and  muscles  of  mastication^  also
in  the  extremities  of  the  feet  and  hands,  if  they  were  violent  it
was  sought  to  allay  them  by  plentiful  inunctions,  by  the  appli-
cation of  heat,  by  frictions  and  fomentations  of  the  affected  parts,
by  strongly  compressing  the  muscles  with  the  hands,  and  by
giving  castoreum  internally.

141.  Moreover  if  the  vomiting  was  abundant,  as  it  often  was
in  many  of  those  who  laboured  under  cramp,  this  affection  was
Qsually  removed  by  baths  fr^uently  repeated.^

142.  The  vomiting,  if  excessive,  was  allayed  by  the  administra-
tion of  the  hottest  drinks,  by  ligature  of  the  limbs,  and  violent
frictions,  also  by  the  application  of  cupping  glasses  now  to  the
hypochondria,  now  to  the  back,  and  then  tearing  them  forcibly
away.  It  is  stated  that  wormwood  given  in  drink  was  excellent
for  stopping  the  vomiting.  But  if  the  vomiting  persisted,  medi-
cines to  cause  sleep  were  employed,  as  it  was  believed  that  sleep
had  the  power  of  stopping  the  excretions.*

143.  For  the  loss  of  strength  that  ensued  recourse  was  had  to
food  and  wine,  and  if  the  patient  had  been  excessively  evacuated
he  was  revived  by  the  administration  of  bread  soaked  in  old
wine  diluted,  or  in  omphacomeL*


»  Aiityllu8»Lcp.281.

*  AntylluB,  L  c^  pp.  281,  282.

*  Antyllufl,  i  a,  pp.  282,  288.

*  AntylluB,  1.  c,  and  A@tiu8,L  c,  cap.  184. Hippocrates  also  (sect  iy,  aph.  16.)
adrised  repose  and  sleep,  in  order  to  arrest  the  eyacuation  caused  by  hellebcnre :  htit*

*  Hooey,  mixed  with  the  juice  of  unripe  grapes,  was  termed  ompkaeanul.

39


610  \  MEDICAL  HISTORICAL  DISSEBTAXXOIT

CJonchmon.

144.  Such  was  the  mode  of  producing  hcUeborism  employed
bj  the  ancients,  which  was  more  dangerous  in  appearance  than
in  reality,  as  most  of  the  earliest  physicians  assert.  For  besidee
the  passage^  in  Aretaeus,  a  very  distinguished  physician,  which
I  formerly^  quoted  as  authoritative,  we  find  the  following  in
Rufus '?  '*  The  administration  of  hellebore  seems  to  have  been  a
very  serious  matter,  wherefore  it  is  that  many  medical  men  and
patients  eschewed  the  employment  of  this  medicament ;  but  he
who  is  acquainted  with  the  whole  art  and  apparatus  of  helle-
borism,  and  administers  veratrum,  wiU  find  that  there  is  nothing
more  convenient  than  this  medicine,  that  it  is  an  exceUent  re*
medy  for  procuring  evacuations,  and  that  it  can  scarcely  do  any
harm."  The  testimony  of  Pliny  agrees  with  this,  where  he
speaks  concerning  his  own  time  thus :  ^'  In  former  times  it  (vera-
trum) was  considered  a  terrible  remedy,  but  latterly  it  was  so
conmionly  used,  that  many  engaged  in  study  were  in  the  habit
of  taking  it  frequently  in  order  to  facilitate  dieir  comprehension
of  their  studies."*

145.  It  is  not,  however,  my  intention  to  reconmiend  to  my
fellow-men  that  Herculean  treatment  by  which,  under  the  name
of  helleborism,  the  ancients  attempted  to  remove  so  many  and
such  serious  diseases,  by  giving  large  doses  of  veratrum  album,
and  whereby  they  ofien  succeeded  in  doing  so  in  a  most  mira-
culous manner,  for  I  know  not  if  it  could  be  reconciled  with  our
habits  and  modes  of  treatment.  No  one  is  better  aware  than
myself  of  the  force  of  habit  and  of  its  influence  on  the  art  of
healing  itself  (which  however  from  its  very  nature  ought  to  be
quite  free).  If  it  did  not  reign  despotically  over  the  medical
art,  it  is  very  possible  that  the  treatment  with  veratrum  with
some  modifications  might  be  now-a-days  turned  to  great  advan-
tage in  relieving  some  of  the  worst  and  most  inveterate  ot  the
diseases  to  which  man  is  liable.

146.  This  much  is  certain,  that  the  same  diseases  may  be
eradicated  with  much  milder  and  even  with  the  very  smallest
doses  of  veratrum,  provided  the  medicine  is  exactly  suitable  to
the  disease,  nor  could  the  ancients  have  cured  by  helleborism


ahron,  curat^  ii,  cap.  10.
'  In  §  71.

'  In  Oribftsius,  L  c,  p.  268.
*  IJi9t.  naU  lib.  xxv,  sect.  21.


ON  THE  HELLEBORISM  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  611

any  other  diseases  besides  those  for  which  veratrum  was  gene
rally  and,  in  any  dose  whatever  (provided  it  were  not  too  strong),
adapted.

147.  This,  indeed,  is  evident  fix>m  this  passage  from  the
ancients*  "  It  is  not  the  vomiting  whereby  the  veratrum  album
is  of  use  in  chronic  diseases,  for  many  have  taken  and  digested
veratrum  with  hardly  any  purgation,  and  yet  have  experienced
not  less  benefit  from  its  use  than  those  who  had  been  evacuated
by  this  medicine.''

148.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  therefore,  that  all  those  chronic  dis-
eases for  which  this  medicine  is  from  its  nature  the  most  appro-
priate and,  indeed,  the  only  *  remedy,  should  be  left  uncured  by
modem  physicians,  owing  to  the  aversion  to  employ  veratrum,
which,  however,  may  be  given  in  such  minute  doses,  that  whilst
they  are  powerful  enough  for  any  disease,  be  it  ever  so  chronic,
they  are  incapable  of  causing  any  bad  effects  worth  mentioning
on  the  human  body.

OF  THE  BLACK  HELLEBORE.

149.  This  medicine  is  termed  hlack  on  account  of  the  black
colour  of  its  roots  externally,  which  in  the  veratrum  (white  helle-*
bore)  are  extremely  white.  It  remains  for  me  to  make  a  few
remarks  upon  it,  partly  on  account  of  its  name,  partly  because
the  physicians  of  Anticyra  who,  as  a  rule,  devoted  themselves  to
the  practice  of  helleborism,  were  accustomed  to  employ  the  black
hellebore  also  as  an  auxiliary  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases*

160.  In  the  time  of  Hippocrates  the  black  hellebore  was  scarce-
ly or  not  at  all  known,  or  at  least  not  yet  designated  by  this
name ;  for  neither  in  his  genuine  writings  nor  in  those  of  hig
predecessors  or  of  his  grandfather  {Praenotiones  Qxicae,  and  the
books  De  Fracturis  and  De  articulw)  is  any  mention  whatever
made  of  this  plant  or  of  this  name.

151.  The  only  place  where  this  name  occurs  {De  victu  acuLj
t  xi,  p.  44),  although  no  one  has  ever  doubted  that  Hippocrates
was  its  author,  is  certainly  not  a  genuine  work  of  his.^

'  IIoAXol  \a$6»rti  row  iWiSjpov  xai  Kcxf/avrsf  avrdp  iKaBap&titrav  ftlv  ov6iv  oAa>f ,  <u(//cA^t|<ra»
a  9Ul¥  9rroy  rdw  KadapBjfTuv. — (Aotius,  quoting  from  Antyllud  and  Posidonicus,  lib.  iiL
eap.  122.

'  For  as  every  disease  differs  from  every  other  in  such  a  manner  a?  to  demand  a
*pecial  medidneappropriate  to  its  nature,  to  bo  selected  carefully  from  the  great
store  of  the  most  diverse  medicines,  by  which  alone  it  can  be  cured  quickly,  safely,
and  permanently,  so  all  the  other  remedies  less  adapted  to  the  disease  present,  are
either  useless,  or  contrary,  or  hurtful.

>  It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  book  under  the  title  of  D«  victus  ratione  in


612  MEDICAL  HISTOBIGAL  DISSKBTATIOir

152.  It  follows  of  necessity,  therefore,  that  this  new  plant  (the
black  hellebore)  which  was  employed  as  a  purgative,  was  eiUier
discovered  or  named  *  some  time  after  Hippocrates ;  for  it  is
both  mentioned  in  the  pseudo-Hippocratic  writings  of  those  phy-
'  Theophraatus  with  the  addition  of  the  word  "/»ia««  "  to  distinguish
it  from  the  original  hellebore  (veratrum  album)  which  for  so
many  ages,  until  the  discovery  of  this  new  plant,  had  been  the

morbi*  acutit,  which  has  generaUy  been  alleged  to  be  Hippocatic,  was  written  hj
three  or  four  diHerent  authors.  The  first  part  was  by  Hippocrates  Himf^if^  fg^  ^
called  Liber  de  Ptisana  (see  Athenaei  Dipnosoph.,  lib.  il  p.  67,  also  Caelius  Aureliaoni
and  Plinj)  and  it  contained  nothing  except  the  use  of  ptisan  ("nihil  cootiDabat  vm
ptisanae  usum**—aee  Plia,  Hist  fiat^  lib.  zriii,  sect  16,  and  lib.  zzii,  sect  66).  TU
book  seems  to  have  begun  at  the  words :  SokUi  61  fiol  ^la  ypo^c  tiwat  (L  c,  pc  7)
and  to  have  gone  on  to  the  words :  <irpi^<u(  5so>^cay,  but  no  fiArther.  What  foUowt
immediately,  from  the  words:  it  ir\np9^(JL  c^  pp.  $6 — 116)  is  doubtless  an

addition  (in  whicli  the  discourse  concerning  ptisan  is  suddenly  broken  off)  apparantlT
by  the  same  author  who  wrote  the  prologue  to  the  beginning  of  the  book  upoo
ptisan. This  addition  certainly  contains  many  excellent  obaervations  respectiiv  ths
diet  in  acute  diseases,  but  it  is  plain  they  are  of  a  more  recent  date ;  for  here  (L  e,
p.  42)  we  observe  a  scrupulous  selection  of  **  the  internal  vein  in  the  flexure  of  ths
elbow  to  be  opened  in  pleurisy ,**  and  in  that  part  of  the  text  (p.  44)  which  particu-
larly engages  our  attention  at  present,  not  only  are  black  hellebore  and  peplium  rs-
commended  as  purgatives,  and  a  subtle  distinction  made  between  the  effects  of  eacb
but  several  aromatic  seeds  are  added  to  the  formula  of  the  purgative  medicine  oo
account  of  their  pleasant  odour,  an  artificial  luxury  only  met  with  in  more  recsot
times,  as  history  teaches  us. Moreover,  in  this  place  (p.  44,  also  p.  8)  many  other
cathartics  (aAXa  voXAa  rc>  orqXdrwy)  are  alluded  to,  which  could  not  have  been  done
before  the  time  of  the  reign  of  the  Ptolemies ;  for  it  was  only  then  that  in  ooosequence
of  commerce  having  extended  to  near  and  distant  nations,  the  number  of  medidnas
was  increased,  kings  themselves  having  in  those  days  (within  300  years  before  oar
era)  devoted  themselves  to  the  study  of  medicine. As  to  the  peplium  which  is  alluded
to  here,  it  was  not,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  known  to  Theophrastus  a  hundred  yean
after  Hippocrates ;  and  this  spurious  addition  to  the  book  on  ptisan  could  not  have
been  written  at  that  time  for  this  reason,  that  the  peplium  is  mentioned  along  with
the  black  hellebore. This  is,  moreover,  confirmed  by  the  resemblance  this  i^itjco
bears  to  the  first  book  J)e  mulierum  morbia which  is  certainly  peeudo-EUppocntic.
The  author  of  this  book  (probably  the  same  person)  expresses  the  same  idea  in  the
same  words:  irinXtov  <^va<Zif  dvai  Karap^fifTtKdv. — Finally,  they  reproadies  and  vitu-
peration addressed  to  other  medical  men,  because  the  employed  too  few  medicaieflL
the  acrimonious  partisanship  for  a  particular  sect,  the  abstruse  ratiocinations  cooeeni-
ing  the  nature  of  things,  the  later  dogmas  respecting  the  artificial  clasaificatiaD  of  dk-
eases  and  their  names,  the  scrupulous  selection  of  some  particular  vein  to  be  opened
in  a  certain  disease, — all  these  things,  which  are  vehemently  discussed  by  the  anooy-
mous  author  of  the  afore-mentioned  prologue  and  addition  to  the  book  on  ptisttL  are
nowhere  to  be  found  in  the  genuine  writings  of  Hippocrates.

*  Perhaps  Hippocrates  himself  had  already  begun  to  employ  this  plant  (as  seems
to  be  implied  towards  the  end  of  his  hook  J)e  vulnnibui  capitis^  t.  xii,  p.  128:  rvrtT*

Xpfl  Tfiv  Karto  KotXlitP  ivoxad^ai  ^apftdKio^  5,  ri  j^oXtiir ^Y'h  )>  ^^^  if  80  t/  had  noi  VH  ft'

ceived  its  distinctive  appellation.


OK  TfiB  HSLLSBORISK  OF  TUE  ANCIENTS.  6lS

only  evacuant  medicine,  and  which  therefore,  as  might  be  ex-
pected, was  known  by  the  simple  name  only.*

158.  But  it  remains  to  be  inquired  whether  or  not  the  black
hellebore  of  the  ancients  is  the  same  as  our  helleborus  niger.
And  this  is  a  question  of  no  small  difficulty  to  decide  if  we  stick
to  Sarrazin's  text'  of  Dioscorides,  which  is  that  commonly  fol-
lowed; but  if  we  bring  to  our  aid  the  different  readings  of  dif-
ferent manuscripts,  and  examine  the  thing  critically,  it  appears
from  the  text  thus  restored  that  it  is  the  same  plant  as  our  own ;
it  would  then  read  thus :  *'E;cf  i  it  rm  ^Jaa*  x^*%  wXmrmt^  wp§9^

tfu^fff^  iXmrvfti  ii^ — %m:  ir»Xvr^iiiTTt^m^  xm  fu XtifT^^a  »m  cl«rtr^«;(^t**
tfttiXti  P^»)^t*  tifh  it  Afvx«  iftwi^^vifm,  rtu  i\  Txilfutrt  ^•^•siJv,^  W  (f
9&T€»  xm^iAi  Mnx^  ifUtH' — fZ'^t  i*  iieuTi  XS'wrm^  /uXmfMj  •Itfti  iwi  r<f«f

jupmxitv  M^ftf*,M§vi  il^rnftif»tj  £f  jukI  n  ^^jT*-/*. that  is  to  say,  "  its

leaves  are  green,  like  those  of  the  plane-tree,  but  less,  more  di-
vided, blacker,  and  slightly  rough,  the  stalk  short,  the  flowers
white,  purpled,  like  a  rose;  the  seed  resembles  that  of  the  car-
thamus; — the  roots  are  small  below,  black,  depending  from  a
head  like  an  onion,  and  these  are  the  parts  used  in  medicine."

154.  With  this  restoration  of  the  text  it  will  be  seen  that
Dioscorides'  description  of  the  plant  corresponds  pretty  strongly
to  our  helleborus  niger.  For  our  hellebore  has  also  rosaceous
flowers  with  white  petals,  the  external  surface  of  which  is  cov-
ered with  red  coloured  spots,  like  little  clouds,  which  grow  pur-

*  See  above  §  10—16.

*  Materia Med^Vh.  iv,  cap.  161.

'  Hie  words  wpdv  r&  rod  v^povSvMov  which  exist  in  the  ordinary  text  may  be  left
oofc;  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  some  manuscripts.

*  Samzin's  text  has  r^ax^t ;  but  with  Serapion  {J)e  Simpl )  we  may  read  ^pa^yt^
fir  the  stalk  of  hellebore,  if  it  have  any,  is  very  short,  but  not  rough.

*  I  have  restored  the  word  poim^ri^  which  is  to  be  found  in  some  manuscripts  in
place  of  fforpvbiSiit  which  we  find  in  Sarrazin's  text,  but  which  has  no  sense.  In
this  rendering,  ^oiottSfit  1  am  fully  borne  out  by  Avicenna's  Arabic  version  of  tiiis  pas-
sage, (lib.  ii, De medieamentU simpl.  Art.  Charbak  Aawati:  j J»J|  &JuCP  i<(>  Kajw<J
that  is:  "similar  in  its  form  to  a  rose."  That  the  word  0orpvtaSn,  on  tlie  conteiry
was  not  to  be  found  originally  in  the  text,  appears  from  this,  that  it  does  not  exist  in
a  certain  edition  of  the  book,  as  the  marginal  notes  of  Sarrazin  attest;  that  it  got
bto  the  text  at  a  very  early  period  (perhaps  from  some  marginal  correction  which
was  intended  to  supply  the  word  /loSoiiSi)  that  had  been  almost  ef&ccd  by  the  in*
Jury  of  time)  may  be  suspected  from  the  same  place  in  Avicenna,  who  immediately
afterwards  adds  the  version  of  this  spurious  word  0oTpvu>in  (which  has  no  sense  if  it
refer  to  the  flowers),  and  renders  it  "  the  fruit  of  the  botry,"  following  some  copy  of
IMoeoorides  which  he  employed,  and  "vv  Inch  witliout  doubt  had  received  from  the
margin  into  the  text,  in  place  of  the  genuine  l>0iott6n„  that  unmeaning  substitute


614  HSDICAL  HISTORICAL  PI8SSBTATI0N

pie  as  the  flowering  advances.  Bellon  moreover  asserts  that  he
has  found  on  Mount  Olympus  the  helleborus  niger  with  reddish
flowers.'

better  (according  to  Scaliger's  and  my  own  reading^),  in  these

words : T£  fuXtiuv  lut  kavX*? — fi^»X»*  r^«i^»j  pixXti9  i\  wXmrirxt'Tm^
fi4X«r  <;^«f iv/A9Xt(, t00tf(  it i»  r%%  fiQm  nprn/uf09  rt  xmi tittynipvXkm
w)iXvffi^%9 i*  tZ  fuiXm  rmi Atwrmi xtu  >^9otiM'<. That is  tO say :

"  the  stalk  is  .very  short,  the  leaf  rather  large  and  divided  into
broad  lobes,  attached  to  the  root  itself,  and  spread  upon  the
ground ;  the  roots  are  numerous,  small,  and  are  the  parts  made
use  of."  Scaliger,  however,  in  place  of  «-A«Tj«xjrr#»,  proposes
to  read  irXitrtturxtTw^  probably  following  Pliny  ;*  but  he  has  no
reason  for  doing  so,  for  it  is  quite  right  as  it  stands,  and  is  analo-
gous to  the  Greek  compounds  wXmtuku^wHj  irA«rtt»«f^#$,  Trxmro^vxxH^,
&c.,  and  the  leaves  of  the  black  hellebore  have  in  reality  thai
form.

156.  Finally,  that  the  plant  of  the  ancients  is  indubitably  the
same  as  our  own  is  not  less  shewn  by  this,  that  Avicenna
(>^l  (3j  j^^  and  that  Forskal,  an  eye  witness,  testifies  that

in  the  East  the  helleborus  niger  goes  by  the  same  name  to  this
day.^

157.  "It  grows,'*  says  Dioscorides,  "in  rough,  elevated  and
dry  places,  and  that  which  grows  in  those  places  is  esteemed
the  best;  such  is  the  case  with  the  black  hellebore  of  Anticyra,*
and  it  is  the  best.''  He  also  praises  that  which  grew  in  Helicon,
Parnassus,  and  Aetolia,  but  prefers  the  Heliconian.  Theophras-
tus likewise  prefers  this  to  the  others ;  he  mentions  that  it  grows
also  in  Boeotia,  in  Euboea,  and  in  many  other  places. Rufus'

'  Petri  Bellonii,  Ohservat.  sing,  et  memorab.  rerum  in  Oraecia,  Afia,  dx^  per
Clusium,  Antwerp,  1689-8.

*  Jliif.  plants  ^h.  x,  cap.  11.

'  See  above  where  I  have  criticised  the  text  of  Theophrastus,  in  referenoe  to
Teratrum  album,  g  24 — 27.

*  "  Platano  similia"  says  Pliny,  Hut.nat^  lib.  xx>',  sect.  21.

*  See  Mat.  Med.  Kahirina,  in  the  Appendix  to  Detieript  animalitan  in  itinert
onentaliy  p.  152.

(Oraeciae  deter .,  Hanovioc,  1613,  p.  682):  rh  H  Spn  rd  iirlp WvrU^pw  vtr^iiSn  n

ayf  wrij  Ktii  iy  avroi^  yvtrni  ft'iXitrra  o  iX'^iStfitT' " "£»' ft****  l*-^"T '^^'i y«i«rr^i ira^jp«iiv,

Pausanius.

In  Oribttsius,  L  c,  p.  249.


ON  THE  HXLLSB0RI8H  OF  THE  AN0IBKT8.  615

also  oommends  that  which  grew  in  Lycestes,  and  above  the
Aflcanian  marsh.  ^

158.  According  to  Dioscorides,  the  preferable  roots  are  those
which  have  swollen  and  fleshy  fibres,  a  small  medulla,  and  an
acrid  burning  taste.

159.  The  ancients  believed  that  it  purged  by  stool  without
difficulty  the  black  and  the  yellow  bile,  as  also  the  pituita,^  and
that  it  was  also  useful  in  intermittent  fevers.'  They  gave  it  in
chronic  and  hemicranial  headache,  in  mania,^  in  melancholia,^
in  dropsy  without  fever,*  in  epilepsy,'  in  paralysis,^  in  long-
standing gout,"  in  diseases  of  the  joints,"  in  inflammation  of  the
liver,***  in  chronic  jaundice,"  in  old  aftections  of  the  trachea. '*'*
Aretaeus'3  gave  black  hellebore  in  oxymel  at  the  commence-
ment of  lethargy,  in  order  to  cause  moderate  purging.

160.  K  they  wished  to  purge  strongly,  they  administered  u
drachm  (=72  gr.)  of  the  root,  if  mildly,  three  oboli,**  (= thirty
six  gr.  or  four  oboli  (= forty-eight  gr.)  either  in  melicrat  or  in
decoction  of  lentils,  or  in  broth.  They  mingled  with  it  scam-
mony  or  salt.***  Others  gave  two  drachms  of  the  powder  of  the
dry  root  by  itself^  in  sweet  wine,  or  in  oxymel,  or  in  decoction
of  lentils,  or  in  ptisan,  i«  or  in  chicken  broth,  if  they  wished  to
purge  gently ;  but  if  they  wished  to  cause  a  severe  purgation,
they  gave  one  drachm  of  the  root  mixed  with  three  oboli  of
scammony."

161.  It  was  used  externally  in  obscuration  of  the  eyes;**  in
difficulty  of  hearing  it  was  introduced  into  the  ears  and  kept
there  for  two  or  three  days  ;^*  it  was  applied  to  swellings  on  the

'  Adtius,  lib.  iii,  cap.  27.  Freind  {Histoire  de  la  medecine,  ii,  p.  167)  ia  wrong  iii
mying  that  Johannes  Actuarius  -was  the  first  to  allege  that  the  hellebore  (the  black
one,  tor  it  is  this  that  Actuarius  is  speaking  of  in  the  place  referred  to)  acts  without
difficulty ;  for  none  of  the  ancient  physicians  (if  except  that  insignificant  Arabinii
aathor,  Ayenxoer)  considered  it  dangerous.

•  Aetius,  L  c.

'  Rufcus  L  c.,p.  261 — A^ttus,  Lc

•  Dioscorides,  lib.  ir,  cap.  151. — CcUus,  lib.  ii,cap.  12  :  '^veratrum  nigrum  aut  atra
bile  vezatis,  aut  cum  tri^tatia  insanientibus,  aut  iis,  quorum  nervi  parte  aliqua  resoluti
sont"

•  Pliny,  L  c,  lib.  xxv. sect  22. — Actuarius,  Method,  medend,  lib.  t,  cap.  8.

•  Dioecor.,  1.  c.  "  Curat.  Acut^  lib.  i,  cap.  2.
'  Diosoor.,  L  c — Pliny,  1.  c  "  Diosicor.,  1.  c

•  Pliny,  L  c.  »•  PUny,  I.  c.

•  Dioscor.,  1.  c. — Pliny,  La  "  Decoction  of  pearl-barley.
*•  Com  Celsus,  l.c,  lib.  iv,  cap.  8.  "  Rufu-*,  1.  c.  p  261.

"  A«liu3  1.  c.  "  Pliny,  L  c

"  PUuliis  AegTneta,lib.  vii,  cap.  4.  "  Diuscor,  1.  c


616  XEDICAL  mSTOBICAL  DI88EBTATI0K.

neck;'  it  entered  inlo  the  composition  of  an  ointmenty  with
which  the  parts  affected  with  scabies  were  covered  ;^  it  was  bj^
[died,  mixed  with  vinegar,  to  vitiligo,  impetigo,  and  lepra  ;^  it
was  boiled  with  vinegar  to  make  a  gargle  for  toothache  ;*  it  was
applied  to  the  abdomen  of  dropsical  persons,  made  up  with  flour
and  wine,^  and  finally  it  was  used  externally  for  callous  fistulous
openings  for  two  or  three  days.®

162.  The  seed,  which  is  a  more  violent  purgative  than  the
root  (and  went  by  the  name  of  sesamaidesy  was  given  for  the
same  purposes,  but  in  a  smaller  dose  than  two  drachms,  in
melicrat.®

168.  The  black  hellebore,  with  which  the  ancient  physioiana
cured  many  chronic  diseases,  has  also  &llen  into  disuse  in  our
times  (or  other  plants  have  been  substituted  for  it),  although  it
is  certain  that  it  is  an  excellent  and  highly  estimable  medicine,
if  it  be  exactly  suitable  and  appropriate  to  the  disease  for  which
it  is  administered.


ANALYSIS

or  TRB  B88AT  ON

THE  HELLEBORISM  OF  THE  ANCIENTS.


Introduction,  §  1.

Earliest  medicinal  employment  of  hellebore,  §  4.

From  the  description  given  by  the  ancients  of  the  white  hellebore,  does  it  foUov
that  it  is  the  same  plant  as  our  yeratrum  album  f  §  22.

The  efifects  of  both  are  not  only  similar,  but  absolutely  identical,  §  34.

Pftrts  of  Greece  wliere  the  best  hellebore  grew,  §  45.

Signs  of  its  good  quality,  §  49.

Medicinal  uses  of  yeratrum  album,  §  68.

Of  the  lesser  treatment  with  yeratrum  album,  without  preparatory  treatmeni  of
the  patient^  §  S6.

Helleborism,  §  69.

When  helleborism  began  to  be  practised,  and  how  long  its  use  was  oootiDiied,
§72.

Of  the  seasons  of  the  year,  the  diseases  and  the  subjects  to  which  th«  ancients  cou-
Hidered  helleborism  suitable  or  unsuitable,  §  91.

Preparatory  treatment  for  helleboriam,  §  99.

Mode  of  exhibiting  the  yeratrum  album  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  hclleborismf
§104.

*  Pliny,  L  c.  •  Dioscor,  L  c.

*  Dioscor^  L  c  •  Dioscor.,  L  c — Galen,  L  c.

*  Dioscor.,  I  c.  '  See  aboye,  note  to  g  116.

*  Dioscor,  L  c— Pliny  1.  c.-^alen,  Dt *  Rufus,  L  c,  p.  251.

Simpl.  med/ae.,  lib.  yl


HOH(EOPATHIC  DOCTBINE  OF  MEBICIKE.  617

SnbBtanoeB  tbat  were  mixed  with  the  yeratrum ;  sesamoides,  §  112.
Eegimen  to  be  employed  to  assist  the  emetic  action  of  the  yeratmm  album,  §  119*
Reme&8  employed  in  cases  where  the  yomitiog  did  not  take  place  properly,  §  186.
T^«tttmflBt  ot  the  b^  and  seriouB  symptoms  occasioned  by  the  action  of  veratnln,
|1«L
Condaabn,  §  144.
Of  the  black  hellebore,  g  149.


SPffilT  OF  THE  HOM(EOPATHIC  DOCTRINE  OF  MEDICINE. '

It  is  impossible  to  divine  the  internal  essential  nature  of  dis-
eases and  the  changes  they  effect  in  the  hidden  parts  of  the  body«
and  it  is  absurd  to  frame  a  system  of  treatment  on  such  hypo-
thetical surmises  and  assumptions :  it  is  impossible  to  divine  the
medicinal  properties  of  remedies  from  any  chemical  theories  ox
from  their  smell,  colour  or  taste,  and  it  is  absurd  to  attempt,
from  such  hypothetical  surmises  and  assumptions,  to  apply  to
the  treatment  of  diseases  these  substances,  which  are  so  hurtful
when  wrongly  administered.  And  even  were  such  practice  ever
80  customary  and  ever  so  generally  in  use,  were  it  even  the  only
one  in  vogue  for  thousands  of  years,  it  would  nevertheless  continue
to  be  a  senseless  and  pernicious  practice  to  found  on  empty  sur-
mises an  idea  of  the  morbid  condition  of  the  interior,  and  to  attempt
to  combat  this  with  equally  imaginary  properties  of  medicines.

Appreciable,  distinctly  appreciable  to  our  senses  must  that  be,
which  is  to  be  removed  in  each  disease  in  order  to  transform  it-
into  health,  and  ^ght  clearly  must  each  remedy  express  what  it
can  positively  cure,  if  medical  art  shall  cease  to  be  a  wanton
game  of  hazard  with  human  life,  and  shaU  commence  to  be  the
sure  deliverer  from  diseases.

I  shall  show  what  there  is  undeniably  curable  in  diseases,  and
how  the  curative  properties  of  medicines  are  to  be  distinctly
perceived  and  applied  to  treatment.

^p  ^p  ^p  ^p

What  life  is  can  only  be  known  empirically  from  its  phenomena
and  manifestations,  but  no  conception  of  it  can  be  formed  by  any^
metaphysical  speculations  a  priori;  what  life  is,  in  its  actual  es*
sential  nature,  can  never  be  ascertained  nor  even  guessed  at,  by

mortals.

~  ...  -

>  This  eesay  appeared  in  a  journal  twenty  years  ago,  in  those  momentous  days
(March  1813)  when  the  Germans  had  no  leisure  to  read  and  still  less  to  reflect  upon
scientific  matters.  The  consequence  of  this  was  that  these  words  were  not  listened
ta  It  may  now  have  more  chance  of  being  perused,  particularly  in  its  present  len
hnperfect  form.  i^Reine  Artneimittdlekre,  2terThL 1838.)


618  SPIRIT  OF  THK

To  the  explanation  of  human  life,  as  also  its  two-fold  oonditionSi
health  and  disease,  the  principles  by  which  we  explain  other
phenomena  are  quite  inapplicable.  With  nought  in  the  woild
can  we  compare  it  save  with  itself  alone ;  neither  with  a  piece
of  clockwork  nor  with  an  hydraulic  machine,  nor  with  chemical
processes,  nor  with  decompositions  and  recpmpositions  of  gaaea,
nor  yet  with  a  galvanic  battery,  in  short  with  nothing  destitute  of
life.  Human  life  is  in  no  respect  regulated  by  purely  physical  laws,
which  only  obtain  among  inorganic  substances.  The  material  sub*
stances  ofwhich  the  human  organism  is  composed  no  longer  follow,
in  this  vital  combination,  the  laws  to  which  material  substances
in  the  inanimate  condition  are  subject ;  they  are  regulated  by  the
laws  peculiar  to  vitality  alone,  they  are  themselves  animated
just  as  the  whole  system  is  animated.  Here  a  nameless  funda-
mental power  reigns  omnipotent,  which  suspends  all  the  tendency
of  the  component  parts  of  the  body  to  obey  the  laws  of  gravitt^
tion,  of  momentum,  of  the  vis  inerticBf  of  fermentation,  of  putre^
fection,  &c.,  and  brings  them  under  the  wonderful  laws  of  life
alone, — in  other  words,  maintains  them  in  the  condition  of  sensi'
biliiy  and  activity  necessary  to  the  preservation  of  the  living  whole^
a  condition  almost  spiritually  dynamic.

Now  as  the  condition  of  the  organism  and  its  healthy  state
depend  solely  on  the  state  of  the  life  which  animates  it,  in  like
manner  it  follows  that  the  altered  state,  which  we  term  disease,
consists  in  a  condition  altered  originally  only  in  its  vital  sensibi-
lities and  functions,  irrespective  of  all  chemical  or  mechanical
principles ;  in  short  it  must  consist  in  an  altered  dynamical  con-
dition, a  changed  mode  of  being,  whereby  a  change  in  the  pro-
perties of  the  material  component  parts  of  the  body  is  afterwards
effected,  which  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  morbidly  altered
condition  of  the  living  whole  in  every  individual  case.

Moreover  the  influence  of  morbific  injurious  agencies,  which
for  the  most  part  excite  from  without  the  various  maladies  in
us,  is  generally  so  invisible  and  so  immaterial,  *  that  it  is  im-
'possible  that  it  can  immediately  either  mechanically  disturb  or
derange  the  component  parts  of  our  body  in  their  arrangement
and  substance,  or  infuse  any  pernicious  acrid  fluid  into  our  blood*
vessels  whereby  the  mass  of  our  humours  can  be  chemically  al-
tered and  destroyed — an  inadmissible, improbable, gross  in-

'  With  the  exception  of  a  few  surreal  affections  and  the  disagreeable  effeeti
produced  by  indigestible  foreign  substances,  which  sometiiues  find  their  way  into
the  intestinal  canal


HOX(EOPATHIO  DOCTBINE  OF  MEDICINE.  619

rention  of  mechanical  minds.  The  exciting  causes  of  disease
lather  act  bj  means  of  their  special  properties  on  the  state  of  our
life  (on  our  health),  only  in  a  dynamic  manner,  very  similar  to  a
apiritual  manner,  and  inasmuch  as  they  first  derange  the  organs
of  the  higher  rank  and  of  the  vital  force,  there  occurs  fix)m  this
state  of  derangement,  from  this  dynamic  alteration  of  the  living
whole,  an  altered  sensation  (uneasinesJ^  pains)  and  an  altered
activity  (abnormal  functions)  of  each  individual  organ  and  of  all
of  them  collectively,  whereby  there  must  also  of  necessity  second-
arily occur  alteration  of  the  juices  in  our  vessels  and  secretion
of  abnormal  matters,  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  altered
vital  character,  which  now  differs  from  the  healthy  state.

These  abnormal  matters  that  shew  themselves  in  diseases  are
consequently  merely  products  of  the  disease  itself,  which,  as
long  as  the  malady  retains  its  present  character,  must  of  necessity
be  secreted,  and  thus  constitute  a  portion  of  the  morbid  signs
(symptoms) ;  they  are  merely  effects,  and  therefore  manifestations
of  the  existing  internal  ill-health,  and  they  do  certainly  not  react
(although  they  often  contain  the  infecting  principle  for  other,
healthy  individuals)  upon  the  diseased  body  that  produced  them,
as  disease-exciting  or  maintaining  substances,  that  is,  as  material
morbific  causes,^  just  as  a  person  cannot  infect  other  parts  of  his
own  body  at  the  same  time  with  the  virus  from  his  own  chancre
or  with  the  gonorrhoeal  matter  from  his  own  urethra,  or  increase
his  disease  therewith,  or  as  a  viper  cannot  inflict  on  itself  a  fatal
bite  with  its  own  poison.^

Hence  it  i3  obvious  that  the  diseases  excited  by  the  dynamic
and  special  influence  of  morbific  injurious  agents  can  be  origin-
ally only  dynamical  (caused  almost  solely  by  a  spiritual  process)
derangements  of  the  vital  character  of  our  organism.^

^  Hence  by  clearing  away  and  mechanically  removing  these  abnormal  matters
acridities  and  morbid  organizations,  their  source,  the  disease  itself,  can  just  as  little
be  cured  as  a  curyza  can  be  shortened  or  cured  by  blowing  the  nose  frequently,  as
frequently  as  possible ;  it  lasts  not  a  day  longer  than  its  proper  course,  although  the
nose  should  not  be  cleansed  by  blowing  it  at  alL

*  [These  statements  are  not  strictly  correct,  at  least  as  regards  the  chancrous  and
gonorrhoeal  matters,  for  it  is  well  known  that  chancres  may  be  produced  on  different
pirts  of  the  body  of  an  individual  by  inoculation  from  his  own  chancre,  and  the
gononrhceal  process  may  be  excited  in  the  eye  by  the  incautious  application  of  the
discharge  to  that  organ  by  the  patient  himself]

*  [Unfortunately  for  this  vital  or  dynamic  theory  of  Hahnemann,  the  examples  he
has  cited  absolutely  dUprove  his  position  in  regard  to  dynamic  or  spiritual  causes  of
disease.  Since  this  essay  was  written,  Ricord  has  immortalized  himself  by  demon-
strating  that  the  virus  of  chancres  and  the  matter  of  gonorrhceas,  are  both  capable  of


620  SPIRIT  OF  TH8

We  readily  perceive  that  these  dynamic  derangements  ot  the
vital  character  of  our  organism  which  we  term  diseases,  since
they  are  nothing  else  than  altered  sensations  and  functions,  can
also  express  themselves  by  nothing  but  by  an  aggregate  of
symptoms,  and  only  as  such  are  they  cognizable  to  our  observ-
ing powers.

Now  as  in  a  profession  of  such  importance  to  human  life  as
medicine  is,  nothing  but  the  state  of  the  diseased  body  plainly
cognizable  by  our  perceptive  faculties  can  be  recognized  as  the
object  to  be  cured,  and  ought  to  guide  our  steps  (to  chose  con-
jectures and  undemonstrable  hypotheses  as  our  guide  would  be
dangerous  folly,  nay,  crime  and  treason  against  humanity),  it
follows,  that  since  diseases,  as  dynamic  derangements  of  the
vital  character,  express  themselves  solely  by  alterations  of
the  sensations  and  functions  of  our  organism,  that  is,  sohly  by  an
aggregate  of  cognizable  symptoms,  this  alone  can  be  the  objed
of  treatment  in  every  case  of  disease.  For  on  the  removal  of  aU
morbid  symptoms  nothing  remains  bid  health.

Now  b€K^use  diseases  are  only  dynamic  derangements  of
our  health  and  vital  character,  they  cannot  be  removed  by  man
otherwise  than  by  means  of  agents  and  powers  which  also  are
capable  of  producing  dynamical  derangements  of  the  human
health,  that  is  to  say,  diseases  are  cured  virtually  and  dynamically
by  medicines.*

reacting,  and  of  reproducing  the^  diseasea  upon  the  bodies  from  whence  thej  M
taken.  It  is  now  a  general  practice  among  surgeons,  when  a  suspicioos  ulcer  is  pr»
sented  to  them,  to  innoculate  another  part  of  the  same  individual  with  the  matter,  lor
the  purpose  of  ascertainbg  whether  a  chancre  can  be  reproduced.  This  test  is  now
deemed  conclusive.  In  these  instances,  surely  no  dynamic  or  spiritual  influences  cio
be  recognized  as  causes  of  the  maladies  under  consideration,  but  manifestly  the  o^
tual  contact  of  morbid  material  substances  with  other  healthy  material  stmctmnaiL
We  cannot,  therefore,  with  any  degree  of  propriety  term  these  causes  or  their  efieete
upon  the  organism,  either  dynamic  or  vital  Hahnemann  labours  under  a  nmilar  er-
ror, in  regard  to  the  bites  of  vipers,  as  it  is  well  known  at  present,  that  when  rerf
much  emraged,  certain  reptiles  destroy  themselves  by  their  own  bitesw]  Am.  P.

'  Not  by  means  of  the  pretended  solvent  or  medianically  dispersing,  dearing-oal^
and  expulsive  powers  of  medicinal  substances,  not  by  means  of  a  (bkx>d-p>iirifyiii|{^
homour-correcting)  power  they  possess  of  electively  excreting  fimded  morbific  prio-
ries, not  by  means  of  any  antiseptic  power  they  contain  (as  is  effected  in  dead,  pa*
trifying  flesh),  not  by  any  chemical  or  physical  action  of  any  other  imaginable  sort,  m
happens  in  dead  material  things,  as  has  hitherto  been  fidsely  imagined  and  dreamt  faj
the  various  medical  schools.

The  more  modem  schools  have  indeed  begun  m  some  degree  to  regard  diseases  aa
dynamic  derangements,  and  also  intended  in  a  certain  manner  to  remove  them  dyna>
mically  by  medicines,  but  inasmuch  as  they  have  failed  to  perceive  that  the  senaibie,
and  reproductive  acthrify  of  life  is  ta  modo  et  qualitate  sosceptible  of  an


HOM(EOFATHI0  DOCTRIKB  OF  MEDICINE.  621

These  active  substances  and  powers  (medicines)  which  we
have  at  oxir  service,  eflFect  the  cure  of  diseaj&es  by  means  of  the
same  dynamic  power  of  altering  the  actual  state  of  health,  by
means  of  the  same  power  of  deranging  the  vital  character  of
our  organism  in  respect  of  its  sensations  and  ftmctions,  by  which
they  are  able  to  effect  also  the  healthy  individual,  to  produce  in
him  dynamic  changes  and  certain  morbid  symptoms,  the  know-
ledge of  which,  as  we  shall  see,  affords  us  the  most  trustworthy
information  concerning  the  morbid  states  that  can  be  most  cer-
tainly cured  by  each  particular  medicine.  Hence  nothing  in
the  world  can  accomplish  a  cure,  no  substance,  no  power  effect
a  change  in  the  human  organism  of  such  a  character  as  that  the
disease  shall  yield  to  it,  except  an  agent  capable  of  absolutely
(dynamically)  deranging  the  human  health,  consequently  also
of  morbidly  altering  its  healthy  state.*

On  the  other  hand,  however,  there  is  also  no  agent,  no  power
m  nature  capable  of  morbidly  affecting  the  healthy  individual,
which  does  not  at  the  same  time  possess  the  faculty  of  curing
certain  morbid  states.

Now,  as  the  power  of  curing  diseases,  as  also  of  morbidly
affecting  the  healthy,  is  met  with  in  inseparable  combination  in
all  medicines,  and  as  both  these  properties  evidently  spring  from
one  and  the  same  source,  namely  from  their  power  of  dynami-
cally deranging  human  health,  and  as  it  is  hence  impossible
that  they  can  act  according  to  a  different  inherent  natural  law
in  the  sick  to  that  according  to  which  they  act  on  the  healthy,
it  follows  that  it  must  be  the  same  power  of  the  medicine  that
Qures  the  disease  in  the  sick  as  gives  rise  to  the  morbid  symp-
toms in  the  healthy.*

Hence  also  we  shall  find  that  the  curative  potency  of  medi-
cines, and  that  which  each  of  them  is  able  to  effect  in  diseases,
expresses  itself  in  the  other  mode  in  the  world  so  surely  and
palpably,  and  cannot  be  ascertained  by  us  by  any  purer  and

nitj  of  changes,  and  to  regard  the  iimumerable  yarieties  of  morbid  Bigns  that  (infinity
of  internal  alterations  only  cognizable  by  us  in  their  reflex)  for  what  they  actually  are,
the  only  undeceptive  object  for  treatment,  but  as  they  only  hypothetiodly  recogniie
an  abnormal  increase  and  decrease  of  their  dimensions  quoad  quantitatem,  and  in  an
eqvalljf  arbitrary  manner  confide  to  the  medicines  they  employ  the  task  of  changing
to  the  normal  state  this  one-sided  increase  and  decrease,  and  thereby  curing  them ;
they  thus  have  before  their  view  nothing  but  chimeras,  both  of  the  object  to  be  cured
and  of  the  action  of  the  medicine.

*  Ckxisequenily  no  substance,  for  example,  that  is  purely  nutritious.  ,

*  The  different  result  in  those  two  cases  b  owing  solely  to  the  differeooe  of  thft  ob-
ject that  has  to  be  altered.


628  SPIRIT  OF  THS

more  perfect  manner  than  by  the  morbid  phenomena  and  symp-
toms (the  kinds  of  artificial  diseases)  which  the  medidnes  deve*
lop  in  the  healthy  individuals.  For  if  we  only  have  before  us  a
register  of  the  peculiar  (artificial)  morbid  symptoms  produced
by  the  various  medicines  on  healthy  individuals,  we  only  require
a  series  of  pure  experiments  to  decide  what  medicinal  symptoms
will  always  rapidly  and  permanently  cure  and  remove  oertain
symptoms  of  disease,  in  order  to  know,  in  every  case  beforehand|
which  of  all  the  difierent  medicines  known  and  thoroughly
tested  as  to  their  peculiar  symptoms  must  be  the  most  certain  re-
medy in  every  case  of  disease.*


'  Simple,  true  and  natural  as  tbts  maxim  is,  so  much  so  that  one  Would  have  ii
gmed  it  would  long  since  have  been  adopted  as  the  rule  finr  ascertaining  the  curatif*
powers  of  drugs,  it  is  yet  a  &ct  that  it  has  hitherto  been  far  from  being  reoogniiedL
During  the  many  thousands  of  years  over  which  history  extends^  no  one  fell  upoD
this  natural  method  of  ascertaining  the  curative  powers  of  medicine  a  priori  and  b«*
fore  their  application  to  diseases.  In  all  ages  up  to  the  present  times  ii  was  nm^
gined  that  the  curative  powers  of  medicines  could  be  learned  in  no  other  way  thaa
from  the  result  of  their  employment  in  diseases  themselves  (ab  uiu  in  morfrti);  it
was  sought  to  learn  them  from  those  cases  where  a  oertain  medicine  (more  fireqaeatlf
a  combination  of  various  medicines)  had  been  found  serviceable  in  a  particalar  am
of  disease.  But  even  from  the  efficacious  result  of  one  single  medicine  given  in  hi
case  in  which  that  medicine  would  again  prove  serviceable,  because  (with  the  ex-
ception-of  diseases  caused  by  miasms  of  a  fixed  character,  as  small-pox,  meaalet,
syphilis,  itch,  <&&,  and  those  arising  fix>m  various  injurious  agencies  that  always  le*
main  the  same,  as  rheumatic  gautf  (be),  all  other  cases  of  disease  are  mere  individo-
alities,  that  is  to  say,  all  present  themselves  in  nature  with  different  oombinatioos  of
symptoms,  have  never  before  occurred,  and  can  never  again  occur  in  exactly  the  same
manner ;  consequently  a  remedy  in  one  case  can  never  allow  us  to  infer  its  efficaej
in  another  (different)  case.  The  forced  arrangement  of  these  cases  of  disease  (whidi
nature  in  her  wisdom  produces  in  endless  variety)  under  certain  nosological  heads^  m
is  arbitrarily  done  by  pathology,  is  a  human  performance  without  reaUty,  which  leads
to  constant  fallacies  and  to  the  confounding  together  of  very  different  states.

Equally  deceptive  and  untrustworthy,  although  in  all  ages  generally  introduced,  it
the  determination  of  the  general  (curative)  actions  of  medicines  from  special
in  diseases,  where  in  the  materia  medica — when,  for  example,  here  and  there,  in
cases  of  disease  during  the  use  of  a  medicine  (generally  mixed  up  with  othefs)
there  occurred  a  more  copious  secretion  of  urine,  perspiration,  the  irruption  of  the
catamenia,  cessation  of  convulsions,  a  kind  of  sleep,  expectoration,  Ac^ — the  medi-
others  in  the  mixture  the  effect  produced)  was  instantly  elevated  to  the  rank  of  a  diu-
retic, a  diaphoretic,  an  emmenagogue,  an  antispasmodic,  a  soporific,  an  expectoraal^
and  thereby  not  only  was  a  fiEdlacium  causffi  committed  by  confounding  the  word
during  with  6y,  but  quite  a  false  conclusion  was  drawn  a  partimlari  ad  univertaUfkk
opposition  to  all  the  laws  of  reason,  and  indeed  the  oooditiunul  was  mode  unoondi-
tiouaL  For  a  subfttance  that  does  not  in  every  cose  of  disease  promote  urine  and  per-
spiration, that  does  not  in  every  instance  bring  on  the  catenieuia  and  sleep,  that  does
not  subdue  all  convulsions,  and  cause  every  cough  to  come  to  expectoratioD,  canDot


HOH(EOPATHIG  DOCTRINE  OF  MEDICINE.  623

If  then  we  ask  experience  what  artificial  diseases  (observed
to  be  produced  by  medicines)  can  be  beneficially  employed
against,  certain  natural  morbid  states ;  if  we  ask  it  whether  the
ehange  to  health  (cure)  may  be  expected  to  ensue  most  certainly
and  in  the  most  permanent  manner :

1.  by  the  use  of  such  medicines  as  are  capable  of  producing  in
the  healthy  body  a  different  (allopathic)  affection  from  that  ex-
hibited by  the  disease  to  be  cured,

2.  or  by  the  employment  of  such  as  are  capable  of  exciting  in
the  healthy  individual  an  opposite  (enantiopathic,  antipathic)  state
to  that  of  the  case  to  be  cured,

S.  or  by  the  adminstration  of  such  medicines  as  can  cause  a
rimHar  (homoeopathic)  state  to  the  natural  disease  before  us  (for
these  are  the  only  three  possible  modes  of  employing  them),  ex-
perience speaks  indubitably  for  the  last  method.

But  it  is  moreover  self-evident  that  medicines  which  act  fie-
krogeneously  and  aUopaihically^  which  tend  to  develop  in  the
healthy  subject  different  symptoms  from  those  presented  by  the
disease  to  be  cured,  from  the  very  nature  of  things  can  never
be  suitable  and  ef&cacious  in  this  case,  but  they  must  act  awry,
otherwise  every  disease  must  necessarily  be  cured  in  a  rapid,
certain  and  permanent  manner  by  any  medicine  whatsoever,  be
its  action  ever  so  different  Now  as  every  medicine  possesses  an
action  different  from  that  of  every  other,  and  as,  according  to
eternal  natural  laws,  every  disease  causes  a  derangement  of  the
human  health  different  from  that  caused  by  all  other  diseases,
this  proposition  contains  a  self-evident  contradiction  {contradic-
ti>  in  adJ€cto\  and  is  self-demonstrative  of  the  impossibility  oi  a
good  result,  since  every  given  change  can  only  be  effected
by  an  adequate  cause,  but  not  per  quamlibet  cati^am.  And
daily  experience  also  proves  that  the  ordinary  practice  of
prescribing  complex  recipes  containing  a  variety  of  unknown
medicines  in  diseases,  does  indeed  do  many  things,  but  very
rarely  cures.

The  second  mode  of  treating  diseases  by  medicines  is  the
employment  of  an  agent  capable  of  altering  the  existing  derange-
ment of  the  health  (the  disease,  or  most  prominent  morbid

be  said  bj  a  penwn  of  sound  reason  to  be  unconditioually  and  absolutely  diuretic
diaphoretic,  emmenagogue,  soporific,  antispasmodic,  and  expectorant  ?  Indeed  it  ia
impoesible  that  in  the  complex  phenomena  of  our  health,  in  the  multifarious  combina-
tkxis  of  different  symptoms  presented  by  tlie  inuuaierablo  varieties  of  human  dis-
eases, the  employment  of  a  roiuedy  cou  exhibit  it^  pure,  origitiaL  medicinal  eticct,  and
eXMctly  thodo  derangements  of  oar  healtli  that  we  might  expect  Croiu  it.  These  cai»
unly  b shewn  by  meilicines  given  to  persons  m  licalth.


624  8PIBIT  OF  THE

symptom)  in  an  enantiopathic^  antipathic^  or  contrary  manner  (a
medicine  employed  paUiatively).  Such  an  employment,  as  will
be  readily  seen,  cannot  affect  a  permanent  cure  of  the  diseasei
because  the  malady  must  soon  afterwards  recur,  and  that  in  an
aggravated  degree.  The  process  that  takes  place  is  as  follows:
According  to  a  wonderful  provision  of  nature,  organized  living
beings  are  not .  regulated  by  the  laws  of  imorganized  (dead)
physical  matter,  they  do  not  receive  the  influence  of  external
agents,  like  the  latter,  in  a  passive  manner,  but  strive  to  oppose
a  contrary  action  to  them.*  The  living  human  body  does* indeed
allow  itself  to  be  in  the  first  instance  changed  by  the  action  of
physical  agents;  but  this  change  is  not  in  it  as  in  inorganic
substances,  permanent  ( — as  it  ought  necessarily  to  be  if  the
medicinal  agent  acting  in  a  contrary  manner  to  the  disease  should
have  a  permanent  effect,  and  be  of  durable  benefit — ) :  on  the
contrary,  the  living  human  organism  strives  to  develop  by
antagonism,^  the  exact  opposite  of  the  affection  first  produced  in
it  from  without, — as  for  instance,  a  hand  kept  long  enough  in
ice-cold  water,  after  being  \idthdrawn  does  not  remain  cold,  nor


'  The  expressed,  green  juice  of  plants,  which  is  in  that  state  do  longer  living,
spread  upon  linen  cloth  and  exposed  to  tlie  sun^s  light,  soon  loses  its  ooloor  and
becomes  completely  decomposed,  whereas  the  living  plant  that  has  been  kept  in  a
cellar  deprived  of  light  and  thereby  blenched,  soon  recovers  its  full  green  odoa^
when  exposed  to  the  same  sun's  light  A  root  dug  up  and  dried  (dead),  if  buried  in
a  warm  and  damp  soil,  rapidly  undergoes  complete  decomposition  and  destmckiaB^
whilst  a  living  root  in  the  same  warm  damp  soil  sends  forth  gay  sprouts — Foaming
malt-beer  in  full  fermentation  rapidly  turns  to  vinegar  when  exposed  to  a  tempem-
ture  of  96°  Falir.  in  a  vessel,  but  in  the  healthy  human  stomach  at  the  same  tempera,
ture  the  fermentation  ceases,  and  it  soon  becomes  conrerted  into  a  mild  notritioQi
juice. — Half-decomposed  and  stroog^melling  game,  as  also  beef  and  other  flesh  meMt^
partaken  of  by  a  healthy  individual,  furnish  excrement  with  the  least  amount  of
odour ;  whereas  dnchona-bark,  which  is  calculated  powerfully  to  check  deoompon-
(ion  in  lifeless  animal  substances,  is  acted  against  by  the  intestines  in  sudi  a  "i^im^
tiiat  the  most  fetid  flatus  is  developed. — Mild  carbonate  of  lime  removes  aU  adds
firom  inorganic  matter,  but  when  taken  into  the  healthy  stomach  soar  perBpiratko
usually  ensues. — Whilst  the  dead  animal  fibre  is  preserved  by  nothing  more  certainly
and  powerfully  than  by  tannin,  clean  ulcers  in  a  living  individual,  when  tbej  are
frequently  dressed  with  tannin,  become  unclean,  green  and  putrid.  A  band  plunged
into  warm  water  becomes  subsequently  colder  than  the  hand  that  has  not  beeo  m
treated,  and  it  becomes  colder  in  proportion  as  the  water  was  hotter.

*  This  is  the  law  of  nature,  in  obedience  to  which,  the  employment  of  every  medi-
cine produces  at  first  certain  dynamic  changes  and  morbid  symptoms  in  the  1Mb%
human  body  {primary  or  Jir$t  action  of  the  medicinet)^  but  on  the  other  hand,  bj
means  of  a  peculiar  antagonism  (which  may  in  many  instances  be  termed  the  sdl^
sustaining  effort),  produces  a  state  the  very  opposite  of  the  first  (the  weamdarf  or
a/tfr  action),  as  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  narcotic  substances,  insenaibililj  is
produced  in  the  primary  action,  sensitiveness  to  pain  in  the  seooodary.


HOXCBOPATHIO  DOOTRmS  OF  HEDICINS.  626

merely  assume  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding  atmosplierei
as  a  stone  (dead)  ball  would  do,  or  even  resume  the  temperature
of  the  rest  of  the  body,  no !  the  colder  the  water  of  the  bath  was,
and  the  longer  it  acted  on  the  healthy  skin  of  the  hand,  the
more  inflamed  and  hotter  does  the  latter  afterwards  become.

Therefore  it  cannot  but  happen  that  a  medicine  having  an
action  opposite  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  will  reverse  the
morbid  symptoms  for  but  a  very  short  time,^  but  must  soon  give
place  to  Ae  antagonism  pervading  the  living  body,  which  pro-
duces an  opposite  state,  that  is  to  say,  a  state  the  direct  contrary
of  that  transient  delusive  state  of  the  health  effected  by  the
palliative  (one  corresponding  to  the  original  malady),  which
constitutes  an  actual  addition  to  the  now  recurring,  uneradicated,
primary  affection,  and  is  consequently  an  increased  degree  of
the  original  disease.  And  thus  the  malady  is  always  certainly
aggravated  after  the  palliative— -the  medicine  that  acts  in  an
opposite  and  enantiopathic  manner — ^has  exhausted  its  action.''

In  chronic  diseases, — the  true  touch-stone  of  a  genuine  healing
ait, — ^the  injurious  character  of  the  antagonistically-acting
(palliative)  remedy  oft;en  displays  itself  in  a  high  degree,  since
fix>m  its  repeated  exhibition  in  order  that  it  should  merely
produce  its  delusive  effect  (a  very  transient  semblance  of  health)
it  must  be  administered  in  larger  and  ever  larger  doses,  which
are  oft;en  productive  of  serious  danger  to  life,  or  even  of  actual
death.'

There  remains  therefore,  only  a  third  mode  of  employing
medicines  in  order  to  effect  a  really  beneficial  result,  to  wit,  by

*  At  A  burnt  hand  remains  cold  and  painless  not  much  longer  than  whilst  it  remains
in  the  oold  water,  hut  afterwards  feels  the  pain  of  the  bum  much  more  severely.

'  *  llias  the  pain  of  a  burnt  hand  is  subdued  by  cold  water  quickly,  it  is  true,  but
only  lor  a  few  minutes,  afterwards  however,  the  pain  of  the  bum  and  the  inflamma-
tion become  worse  than  they  were  previously  (the  inflammation  or  secondary  action
of  the  cold  water  makes  an  addition  to  the  original  inflaonmation  of  the  bum,  which
is  not  to  be  eradicated  by  cold  water).  Tlie  troublesome  fulness  of  the  abdomen  in
Cises  of  habitual  constipation,  appears  to  be  removed,  as  if  magicaUy,  by  the  action
of  a  purgative,  but  the  very  next  day  the  painful  fulness  returns  together  with  the
cooiAtpation,  and  becomes  worse  afterwards  than  before.  The  stupified  sleep  caused
bj  opimn  is  succeeded  by  a  more  sleepless  night  than  ever. — But  that  the  state  that
•obeeqoently  oocors  is  a  true  aggravation,  is  rendered  evident  by  this,  that  if  we

again  to  employ  the  palliative  {e,  g,  opium  for  habitual  sleeplessness  or  chronie
of  the  bowels),  it  must  be  given  in  a  stronger  dose,  €u  if  for  a  more  severe

in  order  that  it  should  produce  its  delusive  amelioration  for  even  as  short  a
period  as  before.

*  Ab  for  instance,  where  opium  b  repeated  ki  always  stronger  doses  for  the  sup-
of  urgent  symptoms  of  a  chronic  disease.

40


^26  SFIBIT  OF  THB

employing  in  every  case  sucli  a  one  as  tends  to  excite  of  itself
an  artificial,  morbid  affection  in  the  organism  similar  (homoeo-
pathic), best  if  very  similar^  to  the  actual  case  of  disease.

That  this  mode  of  employing  medicines  is  and  must  of  neces-
sity be  the  only  best  method,  can  easily  be  proved  by  reasoning,
as  it  has  also  already  been  confirmed  both  by  innumerable
experiences  of  physicians  who  practise  according  to  my  doctrines,
and  by  ordinary  experience.'

It  will,  therefore,  not  be  difficult  to  perceive  what  are  the
laws  of  nature  according  to  which  the  only  appropriate  cure  of
diseases,  the  homoeopathic,  -takes  place,  and  must  necessarily
take  place.

'  I  may  adduce  merely  a  few  examples  from  daily  ezperience ;  thus,  the  buraiii^
pain  produced  by  the  contact  of  bofling  water  on  the  akin,  is  orerpowered  Hid
destroyed,  as  in  the  case  of  cooks  by  approaching  the  moderately  burnt  hand  to  tht
fire,  or  by  bathing  it  uninterruptedly  with  heated  alcohol  (or  turpentine),  wfakfa
causes  a  still  more  intense  burning  sensatioa This  infidlihle  mode  of  treatment  b
practised  and  found  to  be  corroborated  by  yamishers  and  others  engaged  in  flimilar
occupations. The  burning  pain  produced  by  these  strong  spirits  and  their  dented
temperature,  then  remains  dhne  present,  and  that  for  but  a  few  minutes^  whUst  tht
^xganism,  honuBopathically  freed  by  them  from  the  inflammation  occasioiied  by  tht
bum,  soon  restores  the  injury  of  the  skin  and  forms  a  new  epidermis  throQgfa  which
the  spirit  can  no  longer  penetrate. And  thus,  in  the  cowm  of  a  few  Aovrs,  the  injoij
caused  by  the  bum  is  cured  by  a  remedy  that  occasions  a  similar  burning  pain
(heated  fdcohol  or  turpentine),  whereas  if  treated  with  the  ordinary  cooling  paUiatiire
remedies  and  salves,  it  is  transformed  into  a  bad  ulcer  and  usually  cootinuea  to
suppurate  for  many  weeks  or  months  with  great  pain. Practised  dancers  know  from
old  experience  that  those  who  are  extremely  heated  by  dancing  are  very  modi
relieved  for  the  first  moment  by  stripping  themselves  and  drinking  very  oM  water,
but  thereafter  infallibly  incur  a  fiital  disease,  and  they  do  not  allow  persons  exoesaTely
heated  to  cool  themselves  by  exposive  to  the  open  air  or  by  taking  off  their  clntfvet,
but  wisely  administer  a  liquor  whose  nature  is  to  heat  the  blood,  such  as  punch  or
hot  tea  mixed  with  rum  or  arrack,  and  in  this  manner,  walking  at  the  same  tune
gently  up  and  down  the  room,  they  rapidly  lose  the  violent  febrile  state  indcioed  by
the  dance. In  like  manner  no  old  experienced  reaper,  after  inordinate  exertion  in
the  heat  of  the  sun,  would  drink  anything  in  order  to  cool  himself  bat  a  glass  of
brandy ;  and  before  an  hour  has  elapsed,  his  thirst  and  heat  are  gone  and  he  fe^
quite  well Ko  experienced  person  would  put  a  frost-bitten  limb  into  warm  water,
or  seek  to  restore  it  by  approaching  it  to  the  fire  or  a  heated  stove ;  a]>|dyii^  to  it
snow,  or  robbing  it  with  ice-cold  water,  is  the  well-known  homoBopathic  remedy  for
it. The  illness  occasioned  by  excessive  joy  (Cwtastic  gaiety,  trembling  rnntlfinwuisi
and  uneasiness,  palpitation  of  the  heart,  sleeplessness)  is  rapidly  and  permanent^
removed  by  coffee,  which  causes  a  similar  morbid  affection  in  persons  unaocnstomed
to  its  use. And  in  like  manner  there  are  many  daily-occurring  oonfirmatiaDs  of  the
great  truth,  that  nature  intends  that  men  should  be  cured  of  their  loDg^atanding
diseases  by  means  of  similar  affections  of  short  duration. Nations,  fior  centuries
sunk  in  listless  apathy  and  serfdom,  raised  their  spirit^  felt  their  dignity  as  men,  and
again  became  free,  after  having  been  ignominiously  trodden  in  the  dust  1^  the  western
tyrant


HOHCBOFATHIC  DOCTRINE  OF  ICEDICINE.  027

The  first  of  these  xmmistakeable  laws  of  nature  is :  the  living
crganiam  is  incomparably  less  capable  of  being  affected  by  natural
diseaaeSj  than  by  medicines.

A  multitude  of  disease-exciting  causes  act  daily  and  hourly
upon  us,  but  they  are  incapable  of  deranging  the  equilibrium  of
the  health,  or  of  making  the  healthy  sick ;  the  activity  of  the
life-susiaining  power  within  us  usually  withstands  the  most  of
them,  the  individual  remains  healthy.  It  is  only  when  these
external  inimical  agencies  assail  us  in  a  very  aggravated  degree,
and  we  are  especially  exposed  to  their  influence,  that  we  get  ill,
but  even  then  we  only  become  seriously  ill  when  our  organism
has  a  particularly  affectable,  weak  side  (predisposition),  that
makes  it  more  disposed  to  be  aflFected  by  the  (simple  or  com-
pound) morbific  cause  in  question,  and  to  be  deranged  in  its
bealth*

If  the  inimical  agents  in  nature  that  are  partly  physical  and
partly  psychical,  which  are  termed  morbific  injurious  agents,
possessed  an  xmconditional  power  of  deranging  the  human
health,  they  would,  as  they  are  universally  distributed,  not  leave
any  one  in  good  health ;  every  one  would  become  ill,  and  we
should  never  be  able  to  obtain  an  idea  of  health. But  as,  taken
on  the  whole,  diseases  are  only  exceptional  states  of  the  human
health,  and  it  is  necessary  that  such  a  number  of  circumstances
and  conditions,  both  as  regards  the  morbific  agents  and  the
individual  to  be  affected  with  disease,  should  conjoin  before  a
disease  is  produced  by  its  exciting  causes,  it  follows,  that  t/he
individual  is  so  little  liable  to  be  affected  by  such  injurious  agencies^
that  they  can  never  unconditionally  make  him  ill,  and  that  the  human
organism  is  capable  of  being  deranged  to  disease  by  them  only  by
means  of  a  particular  predisposition?

But  it  is  far  otherwise  with  the  artificial  dynamic  agents
which  we  term  medicines.  Every  true  medicine,  namely,  acts
at  aU  times,  under  all  circumstances,  on  every  living,  animated
body,  and  excites  in  it  the  symptoms  peculiar  to  it  (even  in  a
perceptible  form  if  the  dose  be  large  enough)  so  that  evidently
every  living  human  organism  must  always  and  inevitably  be  affect^
by  Uie  medicinal  disease  and  infected  so  to  speak,  which,  as  Ls  well
loiown,  is  not  the  case  with  respect  to  medicines.^

*  [Inniimerable  £Eu;t8,  of  daily  occurrence,  eatablish  the  truth  of  this  important
remark.] — Am.  P.

*  Even  the  pestilential  diseaAes  do  not  effect  every  one  uncooditiooally,  and  the
oiber  dJaeates  leave  many  more  individuals  unaffected,  even  when  all  are  exposed  to


828  SPIBIT  OF  THE

All  experienoe  proves  incontestablj,  that  the  human  body  is
much  more  apt  and  disposed  to  be  affected  bj  mediciDal  agents
and  to  have  its  health  deranged  by  them,  than  by  the  m<MrlHfic
injurious  agencies  and  contagious  miasms,  or,  what  is  the  same
tMng,  that  the  medicinal  powers  possess  an  absolute  power  of
deranging  human  health,  whereas  the  morbific  agencies  possess
only  a  very  conditional  power,  vastly  inferior  to  the  former.

To  this  circumstance  is  owing  the  possibility  of  the  core  of
diseases  by  medicines  generally  (that  is  to  say,  we  see,  that  in
the  diseased  organism  the  morbid  afiection  may  be  eflbced,  if  it
be  subjected  to  the  appropriate  alteration  by  means  of  medicine) ;
but  in  order  that  the  cure  should  take  place,  the  second  natural
law  should  also  be  fulfilled,  to  wit,  a  stronger  dynamic  affection
permanently  extinguishes  the  weaker  in  tfie  living  organising  provid-
ed the  former  be  similar  in  kind  to  the  latter ;  for  the  dynamic
alteration  of  the  health  to  be  anticipated  fix>m  the  medicine
should,  as  I  think  I  have  proved,  neither  differ  in  kind  from  or  be
allopathic  to  the  morbid  derangement,  in  order  that,  as  happens
in  the  ordinary  mode  of  practice,  a  still  greater  derangement
may  not  ensue,  nor  should  it  be  opposite  to  it,  in  order  that  a
merely  palliative  delusive  amelioration  may  not  ensue,  to  be
followed  by  an  inevitable  aggravation  of  the  original  malady,
but  the  medicine  must  have  been  proved  by  observations  to
possess  the  tendency  to  develop  of  itself  a  state  of  health  similar
to  the  disease  (be  able  to  excite  similar  symptoms  in  the  healthy
body),  in  order  to  be  a  remedy  of  permanent  efficacy.

Now,  as  the  dynamic  affections  of  the  organism  (caused  by
disease  or  by  medicine)  are  only  cognizable  by  the  phenomena
of  altered  function  and  altered  sensation,  and  consequently  the
similarity  of  its  dynamic  affections  to  one  another  can  only  ex-
press themselves  by  similarity  of  symptoms ;  but  as  the  organism
(as  being  much  more  liable  to  be  deranged  by  medicine  than  by
disease)  must  be  more  susceptible  to  the  medicinal  affection,  that
is  to  say,  must  be  more  disposed  to  allow  itself  to  be  influenced
and  deranged  by  medicine  than  by  the  similar  morbid  affection,
it  follows  undeniably,  that  it  will  be  freed  from  the  morbid
affection  if  we  allow  a  medicine  to  act  on  it,  which,  while  differ-
ing* in  its  nature  from  the  disease,  resembles  it  very  closely  in

changes  of  the  weather,  the  eeasons,  and  to  the  infloeiioes  of  many  other  n^oriooi  im-


'  Without  this  diflerenoe  in  the  nature  of  the  morbid  wffwtwn  from  tiMt  of  the
medkinal  affection,  a  core  were  impo«ihle;  if  the  two  were  noi  marelj  of  a  nmilar.


HOHCBOPATHIC  DOCTBINE  OF  MIDICIKS.  629

fflxnilaiity  of  symptoms,  that  is  to  say,  is  homoeopathic ;  for  the
organism,  as  a  living,  individual  unity,  cannot  receive  two  simi-
lar dynamic  affections  at  the  same  time,  without  the  weaker
yielding  to  the  stronger  similar  one,  consequently,  as  it  is  more
disposed  to  be  more  strongly  affected  by  the  one  (the  medicinal
affection),  the  other,  similar,  weaker  one  (the  morbid  affection)
must  necessarily  give  way,  whereupon  it  is  cured.

Let  it  not  be  imagined  that  the  living  organism,  if  a  new
similar  affection  be  communited  to  it  when  diseased  by  a  dose
of  homoeopathic  medicine,  will  be  thereby  more  seriously  de«
ranged,  that  is,  burdened  with  an  addition  to  its  sufferings,  just
as  a  leaden  plate  already  pressed  upon  by  an  iron  weight  is  still
more  severely  bruised  by  placing  a  stone  in  addition  upon  if,  or
a  piece  of  copper  heated  by  friction  must  become  still  hotter  by
pouring  on  it  water  at  a  more  elevated  temperature.  No,  our
living  organism  does  not  behave  passively,  it  is  not  regulated  by
the  laws  that  govern  dead  matter ;  it  reacts  by  vital  antagonism,
BO  as  to  surrender  itself  as  an  individual  living  whole  to  its
morbid  derangement,  and  to  allow  that  to  be  extinguished
widiin  it,  when  a  stronger  affection  of  a  similar  kind,  produced
in  it  by  homoeopathic  medicine,  takes  possession  of  it.

Such  a  spiritually  reacting  being  is  our  living,  human  organ-
ism, which  with  automatic  power  expels  from  itself  a  weaker
derangement  (disease),  whenever  the  stronger  power  of  the
homoeopathic  medicine  produces  in  it  another  but  very  similar
a£Eection,  or  in  other  words,  which,  on  account  of  the  unity  of
its  life,  cannot  suffer  at  the  same  time  from  two  similar  general
derangements,  but  must  discard  the  primary  dynamic  affection
(disease),  whenever  it  is  acted  on  by  a  second  dynamic  power
(medicine)  more  capable  of  deranging  it,  that  has- a  great  resem-
blance to  the  former  in  its  power  of  affecting  the  health  (its
^mptoms). Something  similar  takes  place  in  the  human  mind.*

bat  of  the  same  nature,  consequently  identical,  then  no  result  (or  only  an  aggravation
of  the  malady)  would  ensue ;  as  for  example,  if  we  were  to  touch  a  chancre  with  other
dHUiGroiiB  poison,  a  cure  would  never  result  therefrom.

'  For  example :  a  girl  plunged  into  grief  by  the  death  of  her  companion,  if  taken
to  tee  a  &mily  where  the  poor,  half-naked  children  have  just  lost  their  fiither,  their
fole  BOpport,  does  not  become  more  sorrowful  from  witnessing  this  touching  scene,  but
k  thereby  consoled  for  her  own  smaller  misfortune ;  she  is  cured  of  her  grief  for  her
friend,  because  the  unity  of  her  mind  cannot  be  affected  by  two  similar  passions  at
oooe,  and  the  one  passion  must  be  extinguished  when  a  nmilar  but  stronger  passion
takes  possession  of  her  mind,  and  acts  as  a  homoeopathic  remedy  in  extinguishing
the  first  But  the  girl  would  not  be  tranquillixcd  and  cured  of  her  grief  for  the  loss
of  her  companion,  if  her  mother  were  angrily  to  scold  her  (heteroyencnous,  allopatbic^


630  SPIRIT  OF  THE

But  as  the  human  organism  even  in  health  is  more  capable  of
being  affected  by  medicine  than  by  disease,  as  I  have  shewn
above,  so  when  it  is  diseased,  it  is  beyond  comparison  more
affectable  by  homceopathic  medicine  than  by  any  other  (whether
allopathic  or  enantiopathic),  and  indeed  it  is  affectahle  m  the
highest  degree^  since,  as  it  is  ali^eady  disposed  and  excited  by  the
disease  to  certain  symptoms,  it  most  now  be  more  liable  to  be
deranged  to  similar  symptoms  (by  the  homoeopathic  mediciiie)
— just  as  similar  mental  affections  render  the  mind  much  more
sensitive  to  similar  emotions — ;  hence  only  the  smallest  dose  of
them  is  necessary  and  vseful  for  their  core,  for  altering  the  dia-
eased  organism  into  the  similar  medicinal  disease,  and  a  greater
one  is  not  necessary  on  this  aocoimt  also,  because  the  spiiitoal
power  of  the  medicine  does  not  in  this  instance  accomplish  its
object  by  means  of  quantity,  but  by  potentiality  and  quality
(dynamic  fitness,  homoeopathy), — ^and  it  is  not  useful  that  it
should  be  greater^  but  on  the  contrary  injurious^  because  whilst
the  larger  dose,  on  the  one  hand,  does  not  dynamically  over-
power  the  morbid  affection  more  certainly  than  the  smallest
dose  of  the  most  appropriate  medicine,  on  the  other  hand  it  im*
poses  a  complex  medicinal  disease  in  its  place,  which  is  always
a  malady,  though  it  runs  its  course  in  a  shorter  time.

Hence  the  organism  will  be  powerfully  atfected  and  possessed
by  the  potency  of  even  a  very  small  dose  of  a  medicinal  sub-
stance, which,  by  its  tendency  to  excite  similar  symptoms,  can
outweigh  and  extinguish  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  of  the
disease ;  it  becomes,  as  I  have  said,  free  troxn  the  morbid  affec-
tion at  the  very  instant  that  it  is  taken  possession  of  by  the
medicinal  affection,  by  which  it  is  immeasurably  more  liable  to
be  altered.

Now  as  medicinal  agents  do  of  themselves,  even  in  larger
doses,  only  keep  the  healthy  organism  for  a  few  days  under
their  influence,  it  will  readily  be  conceived  that  a  small  dose,

agency),  but  on  the  contrary,  her  mind  would  be  still  more  distresaed  by  thb  atta^
of  grief  of  another  kind ;  and  in  like  manner  the  sorrowing  girl,  if  we  were  to  euae
an  apparent  but  only  palliative  alleviation  of  her  grieC  by  means  of  a  gay  entertam-
ment,  would  subsequently  in  her  solitude  sink  into  still  more  profound  sadneat^  and
would  weep  much  more  inteasely  than  previously  for  the  death  of  her  friend  (becaow
this  affection  would  here  be  only  of  an  opposite,  enantiopathic  character).

And  as  it  is  here  in  psychical  life,  so  it  is  in  the  fiirmer  case  in  organic  life.  Tlie
unity  of  our  life  cannot  occupy  itself  with,  and  take  in  two  general  dynamic  afiectiooi
of  the  same  kind  at  once ;  for  if  the  (>ocond  be  a  similar  one,  the  first  is  displaced  by
it,  whenever  the  organism  is  more  affected  by  the  last


HOH(BOFATHIO  DOOTRIKS  OF  MSDICINS.  681

and  in  acute  diseases  a  yery  small  dose  of  them  (sncli  as  they
must  evidently  be  in  homoeopathic  treatment),  can.  only  affect
the  system  for  a  short  time,  the  smallest  doses  however,  in
acute  diseases,  only  for  a  few  hours,  for  then  the  medicinal
affection  substituted  for  the  disease  passes  unobservedly  and
very  rapidly  into  pure  health.

The  nature  of  living  organisms  seems  not  to  act  otherwise  in
the  permanent  cure  of  diseases  by  means  of  medicines  than  in
aooordance  with  these,  its  manifest  laws,  and  thus  indeed  it  acts,
if  we  may  use  the  expression,  according  to  mathematical  laws.
T^hen  is  no  case  of  dynamic  disease  in  Ae  world  (excepting  the
deadi  struggle,  and  when  it  comes  under  this  category,  extreme
old  age  and  the  destruction  of  some  indispensable  viscus  or
member),  whose  symptoms  can  be  met  toith  in  great  similarity
among  the  positive  effects  of  a  medicine,  which  will  not  be  rapidly
and  permanently  cured  by  this  medicine.  The  diseased  individual
ean  be  freed  from  his  malady  in  no  more  easy,  rapid,  certain,
reliable  and  permanent  manner,  by  any  conceivable  mode  of
Heatment,'  than  by  means  of  the  homoeopathic  medicine  in  a
small  dose.


TREATMENT  OF  THE  TYPHUS  OR  HOSPITAL  FEVER  AT

PRESENT  PREVAILING.^

As  all  ordinary  modes  of  treatment  with  emetics,  blood-let-
ting, acetate  of  ammonia,  elder-flower  tea,  juniper  juice,  cold
and  warm  baths,  naphtha,  musk,  opium,  camphor  and  cinchona
bark  did  so  much  havoc  in  this  disease,  and  the  somewhat  more
appropriate  remedies,  chamomile,  serpentaria,  valerian,  and  mu»
riatic  acid  were  but  indifferent  comforters,  moved  by  purely

'  Byen  those  strikiDg  cures  occurring  in  rare  instances  in  ordinaiy  practice  take
place  only  by  means  of  a  homoBopathically  appropriate  medicine,  which  forms  the
chief  agent  in  the  receipt,  into  which  it  may  have  been  accidentally  introduced.  Fhy-
•idauB  hitherto  could  not  have  ekoten  the  medicines  homoeopathically  for  diseases,  tm
IIm  positive  effects  of  the  medicines  (those  resulting  from  their  administnition  to
healthy  persons)  have  not  been  investigated  by  them,  and  accordingly  remain  un-
Imown  to  them ;  and  even  those  which  have  been  known  otherwise  than  by  my  wri*
tingB,  were  not  regarded  by  them  as  serviceable  for  treatment, — and  moreover,  the
relation  of  the  effects  of  medicines  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  they  resemble  (Uie
homoeopathic  law  of  cure),  which  is  requisite  in  order  lo  effect  radical  cures,  was  un-
known to  them.

*  From  the  Allgem.  Anzeig.  der  Leuttehen,  No.  6,  1814.


882  TBBATKBier  OF  THE  TYPHUS

philanthropic  motiyeS)  I  here  propose  an  efficacious  mode  of
treatment,  in  order  to  preserve  perhaps  from  death  by  this  pes-
tilence the  remaining  victims,  if  ordinary  prejudices  do  not  pre-
vent its  employment.

This  fever  has  two  principal  stages.  In  the  first  period  (which
is  all  the  shorter  the  worse  the  disease  is  to  be)  there  are  pre-
sent, full,  increased  sensation  of  the  pains  usually  present,  with
intolerable  bad  humour,  sensation  of  heat  in  the  body,  and  espe-
cially in  the  head,  dry  feeling  or  actual  dryness  in  the  moiUh,
causing  constant  thirst,  bruised  feeling  in  the  limbs,  restlessnesSi
&c. ;  but  in  the  second  period^  that  of  the  delirium  (a  metastasis
of  the  whole  disease  u]x>n  the  mental  organs)  no  complaint  is
made  of  all  those  symptoms — the  patient  is  hot,  does  not  desire
to  drink,  he  knows  not  whether  to  take  this  or  that,  he  does
not  know  those  about  him,  or  he  abuses  them,  he  makes  irrele*
vant  answers,  talks  nonsense  with  his  eyes  open,  does  foolish
things,  wishes  to  run  away,  cries  aloud  or  whines,  without  being
able  to  say  why  he  does  so,  has  a  rattling  in  the  throat,  the
countenance  is  distorted,  the  eyes  squinting,  he  plays  with  his
hands,  behaves  like  a  madman,  passes  the  excrements  uncon-
sciously, &c.

In  the  first  period  of  the  pains  and  consciousness,  two  vege-
table substances  are  of  use  and  generally  quite  remove  the  dis-
ease at  its  commencement — the  bryonia  alba  and  the  rhiu  Uxd"
codendron.

We  take  a  drachm  of  the  powdered  root  of  bryona,  shake  it
up  with  ten  drachms  of  alcohol  and  allow  it  to  stand  for  mx
hours  so  as  to  extract  all  its  medicinal  power.  In  the  mean-
time we  pour  six  drachms  of  the  strongest  pure  alcohol  into
each  of  twelve  bottles,  which  should  be  of  such  a  size  that  this
quantity  does  not  fill  them  completely,  and  then  we  number
them.  Into  the  first  of  these  bottles,  marked  No.  1,  we  drop  a
single  drop  of  the  tincture  prepared  as  above,  and  shake  it
strongly  for  three  minutes;  then  from  this  bottle  No.  1,  we
drop  a  single  drop  into  bottle  No.  2,  and  shake  it  strongly  for
the  same  length  of  time  ;  then  again,  from  this  we  drop  a  sin^e
drop  into  bottle  No.  3,  and  thus  we  go  on  until  each  bottle  has
received  a  drop  from  the  preceding  one,  so  that  bottle  No.  12,
is  impregnated  with  a  drop  from  No.  11,  and  thereafter,  like  all
the  preceding  ones,  is  strongly  shaken  for  three  minutes.

It  is  this  last  bottle,  No.  12,  which  contains  the  bryonia
tincture  in  the  suitable  dilution,  and  which  may  be  successfully
employed  in  the  first  stage  of  the  disease.


HOBPTFAL  RYKR  AT  PRESENT  PBSYAILINa.  688

li^  for  instanoe,  the  patient  complains  of  dizziness,  shooting  (or
jerking-tearing)  paxTis  in  the  head,  throat,  chest,  a;bdomen,  <bc.,
which  are  felt  partumlarly  on  moving  the  part — ^in  addition  to  the
otiier  sjnnptoms,  the  hemorrhages,  the  vomiting,  the  heat,  the
thirsty  the  noctiumal  restlessness,  &c.,  we  give  him  on  a  piece  of
sugar  a  single  drop  from  bottle  No.  12,  in  the  morning,  in
preference  to  any  other  time,  for  the  fever  tends  to  increase  to-
wards night  Improvement  takes  place  in  the  course  of  four  and
twenty  hours,  and  as  long  as  the  improvement  goes  on,  we  give
him  no  other  medicine,  nor  even  repeat  the  same  (Hie ;  for  none
of  the  medicines  here  recommended  can  be  used  oftener  than
once  (in  the  dose  of  a  drop) — seldom  can  they  be  given  a  second
time  with  advantage.

In  this  interval,  until  it  is  time  for  giving  the  second  medi-
cine, we  may,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  patient  for
medicine  and  to  quiet  his  mind,  give  him  something  innocuous,
e.  y.  a  few  tea-spoonfuls  of  raspberry  juice  in  the  course  of  the
day,  or  a  few  powders  of  milk-sugar.

If  now,  the  amendment  produced  by  the  single  dose  of  bry-
onia  goes  off  in  the  course  of  two,  three,  or  four  days,  that  is  to
say,  if  the  patient  then  complains  of  sJiooting  pains  in  one  or  other
part  of  the  body^  whilst  the  part  is  at  rest;  if  the  prostration  and
anorexia  are  greater,  if  there  is  harassing  cough  or  such  a  de*
faiUty  of  certain  parts  as  to  threaten  paralysis,  we  give  a  single
drop  of  the  tincture  of  rhus  toxicodendron,  prepared  in  the
same  way  as  the  above  and  diluted  to  the  same  degree,  so  that
one  drop  of  the  tincture  prepared  with  a  drachm  of  the  powder
of  the  leaves  and  ten  drachms  of  alcohol,  is  added  to  a  botUe
containing  six  drachms  of  strong  alcohol  and  mixed  by  being
shaken  strongly,  and  from  this  one  drop  is  added  to  a  second
bottle  and  so  on,  until  the  last  of  the  twelve  botties  has  been
impregnated  by  a  drop  from  No.  11,  and,  like  all  the  previous
ones,  has  been  strongly  shaken,  just  as  was  the  case  in  preparing
the  diluted  tincture  of  bryonia.

Of  this  highly  diluted  tincture  of  rhus  toxicodendron  we  give
occur  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  attack,  we  give,  at  its  very
eommencement,  a  single  drop  from  bottle  No.  12,  on  sugar,  and
no  more,  nor  any  other  medicine  as  long  as  the  improvement  is
manifest  and  continued,  unless  it  be  (on  the  days  when  he  is
getting  no  medicine)  some  of  the  above  mentioned  innocuous
substances.


684  TBSAnfBKT  OF  THS  TTPHUSy  ftc

Neither  of  the  medicines  can  be  used  in  a  lower  dilution  or  in
a  larger  dose ;  they  are  too  strong.

No  domestic  remedies  of  any  kind,  perfumes,  pure  wine,  herb-
teas,  clysters,  fomentations  or  the  like  should  be  used  any  more
than  other  medicines,  if  we  wish  the  case  to  turn  out  sucoesa*
fully.  We  should  only  put  upon  the  patient  the  amount  of
bed-clothes  he  feels  agreeable,  and  keep  him  neither  too  warm
nor  too  cool,  and  we  should  let  him  drink  or  eat  what  he  has
a  fancy  for ;  he  never  wishes  for  anything  that  will  not  do  him-
good.

The  whole  disease  will  generally  be  removed  by  a  single  drop
of  the  second  or  of  the  first  medicine  (according  as  the  one  or
the  other  is  indicated,  without  the  addition  of  any  other).  JBui
rhus  is  suitable  mare  frequently  than  bryonia^  and  hence  can  be  more
frequently  used  at  first  and  alone^

If,  notwithstanding,  the  disease  should  pass  into  the  aboTO-
meets  all  the  indications  of  the  case.

A  tincture  &om  the  leaves  of  this  plant  should  be  prepared,
(the  extracts  of  it  are  generally  of  indefinite  strength  or  quite
through  eight  bottles,  and  a  single  drop  from  the  last  bottle.  No.
8,  given  upon  sugar,  and  during  the  following  days  of  ameliora-
of  medicine,  for  then  reason,  strength,  tranquillity,  appetite,  Ac.
usually  return  completely,  although  they  might  have  seemed
to  be  almost  entirely  lost,  and  the  patient  an  inevitable  prey  of
death.

This  medicine  also  should  not  be  given  oftener  than  one
single  time ;  a  single  drop  of  the  tincture  diluted  in  this  manner
almost  always  suffices.

Nothing  particular  need  be  administered  for  local  infiamma-
tions  or  swellings,  nor  yet  for  eruptions,  twitchings,  long-con-
tinned  constipation,  diarrhoea,  anorexia,  vomiting,  hemorrhages
or  cough  that  occur  in  this  disease.  Those  symptoms  which
arise  fi'om  the  main  disease  also  go  off  simultaneously  with  its
disappearance,  under  the  use  of  the  remedies  I  have  directed  to
be  given.

But  there  sometimes  occurs  a  third  state,  a  sort  of  lethargy  of
the  internal  common  sensorium,  a  kind  of  half-paralysis  of  the
mental  organs.  The  patient  remains  indolently  lying,  without
sleeping  or  speaking ;  he  scarcely  answers  whatever  we  may  do


ON  THB  TBEATMENT  OF  BUBN8.  685

to  induce  Iiim  to  do  so,  lie  appears  to  hear  without  understand-
ing what  is  said  or  without  iJlowing  it  to  make  any  impression
on  him  (the  few  words  he  says  he  whispered  but  not  irrelevant) ;
he  appears  to  feel  almost  nothing,  and  to  be  almost  immoveablei
and  yet  not  quite  paralysed.

In  this  case  a  remedy  is  useful  that  previously  used  to  be  em*
ployed  in  large  doses  for  purposes  not  very  clearly  defined;
I  mean  Xhe  sweet  spirit  of  nitre.  It  must  be  so  old,  that  is  to  sayi
80  thoioughly  sweetened  that  it  no  longer  reddens  the  cork  of
the  bottle.  (It  then  contains  in  a  concrete  form,  nitrous  oxide,
respecting  whose  powjer  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Beddoes  give  us
important  hints).

One  drop  of  this  is  to  be  shaken  up  with  an  ounce  of  water,
and  given  by  tea-spoonfuls  so  as  to  be  consumed  in  the  four  and
twenty  hours.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  this  state  passes  into
health  and  activity.^


ON  THE  TREATMENT  OF  BDRNS.^


It  18  to  be  regretted  that  Professor  Dzondi,  of  Halle,  should
have  recommended  as  the  only  sure,  efficacious  and  best  remedy
for  bums,  a  means  of  the  injurious  nature  of  which  all  who
have  much  to  do  with  fire  are  perfectly  convinced.  Has  he  then
instituted  comparative  experiments  with  all  remedies  recom-
mended for  this  purpose,  that  he  can  now  with  any  degree  of
truth  vaimt  his  cold  water  as  being  the  only  sure,  the  best
remedy  ?  In  such  injuries  the  question  is,  not  what  shall  give  re-
Uef  for  the  first  few  moments,  but  what  shall  most  speedily  render
the  burnt  skin  entirely  destitute  of  pain  and  heal  it.  This  can
only  be  determined  by  comparative  experiments,  not  by  specu-
lation. But  it  has  already  been  settled  by  observations,  which
may  easily  be  repeated,  that  it  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  cold  waier

>  [In  the  introduction  of  the  proving  of  rhuB  toxicodendron  (R.  A.  Bl  Is  pt.  ii,  p^
S58),  Hahnemann  refers  with  satis&cUon  to  his  success  in  the  treatment  of  this  epi>
demic  of  typhus. — "  Of  188  patients  whom  I  treated  for  this  affection  in  Leipzic,  I
did  not  lose  one,  which  excited  a  great  sensation  among  the  members  of  the  Ruadaa
Qoremment  then  occupying  Dresden,  but  was  taken  no  notice  of  by  the  medical  aii>
tboritiea."]

*  From  the  Allg.  Anz.  d.  D^  No.  166,  181 6.  In  reply  to  Professor  Dsondi*s  recom-
mepdatJon  of  cold  water  in  the  same  journal,  Na  lOi.


686  OK  THE  TREATMENT  OF  BUBITO.

that  heals  bums  most  rapidly. For  with  the  true  physidon  the
object  should  be  to  heal,  not  to  relieve  for  a  few  moments.

Slight  bums — ^for  example,  when  a  hand  has  been  scalded
with  hot-water  of  from  180^  to  190°  Fahr.— heal  without  any
application,  in  the  course  of  from  twenty-four  to  forty-eighi
hours ;  but  they  take  a  somewhat  longer  time  to  do  so  if  we
employ  cold  water  in  order  to  give  relief  at  first  For  such  alight
injuries  hardly  any  remedy  is  requisite,  least  of  all  one  like  cold
water,  which  delays  the  cure.  But  for  large  severe  bums,  the
best  remedies  are  not  so  generally  known,  and  the  public  re-
quires some  instruction  on  that  subject ;  it  is  in  these  that  cold
water  especially  shews  itself  to  be  the  most  wretched  palliative
and  in  some  cases  the  most  dangerous  remedy  that  can  be  con*
cdved.  Comparative  experiments  and  obee^ations  will,  1 1«-
peat,  convince  every  one  most  conclusively,  that  the  exact
opposite  of  cold  water  is  the  best  remedy  for  severe  bums
Thus  the  experienced  cook,  who  from  the  nature  of  his  occupa-
tion must  so  often  happen  to  bum  himself  and  must  conse-
quently have  learned  by  experience  the  remedy  for  bums,  never
puts  his  hand  that  he  has  burnt  with  boiling  soup  or  grease  into
a  jug  of  cold  water  (he  knows  from  experience  the  bad  conse-
quences of  so  doing),  no,  he  holds  the  burnt  spot  so  near  to  the
hot  glow  of  the  incandescent  coals,  that  the  burning  pain  is
thereby  at  first  increased,  and  he  holds  it  for  some  time  in  this
situation,  until,  namely,  the  burning  pain  becomes  considerably
diminished  and  almost  entirely  removed  in  this  high  tempera-
ture. He  knows,  if  he  does  so,  that  the  epidermis  will  not  even
rise  and  form  a  blister,  not  to  speak  of  the  skin  suppurating
but  that,  on  the  contrary,  after  thus  bringing  his  hand  near  the
fire,  the  redness  of  the  burnt  spot,  together  with  the  pain,  will
often  disappear  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  it  is  healed  all  at  oncei
quickly  and  without  any  after-sufferings,  though  the  remedy  was
at  first  disagreeable.  To  this  method  he  gives  decidedly  the
preference,  because  he  knows  from  experience  that  the  use  of
cold  water,  which  at  first  procures  for  him  a  delusive  alleviation,
will  be  followed  by  blisters  and  suppuration  of  the  part,  lasting
for  days  and  weeks.

The  maker  of  lackered  ware  and  other  workmen  who  use  in
their  business  alcohol  and  etherial  oils,  and  who  have  to  do  with
boiling  linseed  oil,  know  from  experience  that  the  most  rapid
and  pennanent  way  to  cure  the  most  severe  bums  and  to  get  rid
of  the  pain,  is  to  apply  to  them  the  best  alcohol  and  oil  of  tur-


OK  THS  TBEATMSNT  OF  BUBKS.  687

pen^e,  substanoes  which  on  a  sensitiye  skin  (as  that  of  the
mouth,  the  noee,  the  eyes)  cause  a  pain  of  burning  like  fire,  but
in  oases  of  burning  of  the  skin  (the  slightest,  more  severe,  and
even  the  most  serious  ones)  act  as  a  most  incomparable^  remedy.
True,  they  know  not  the  rationale  of  this  cure — ^they  only  say,
^One  bad  thing  must  drive  out  another  ";  but  this  they  know
tram  multiplied  experience, — ^that  nothing  will  make  the  burnt
spot  painless  and  cause  it  to  heal  without  suppurating,  except
rectified  alcohol  and  oil  of  turpentine.

Does  Professor  Dzondi  imagine  that  it  would  never  have  oo.
oarred  to  these  workmen  to  use  cold  water  as  a  palliative  reme*
dy  immediately  after  burning  themselves  ?  Any  child  who  had
burnt  itself  would  in  its  alarm  fly  to  cold  water ;  it  would  not
require  any  advice  to  do  so ;  but  the  workman  has  repeatedly
tried  it  to  his  own  injury,  and  experience,  which  in  such  cases
is  always  purchased  at  die  expense  of  one's  own  suffering,  has
taught  and  convinced  him  that  the  very  opposite  of  cold  water
is  the  surest,  quickest  and  truest  remedy  for  even  the  worst
bums:  he  has  been  rendered  wise  by  experience,  and  in  all
cases  he  greatly  prefers  the  remedy  which  at  first  causes  pain
(alcohol,  oil  of  turpentine)  to  that  which  deludes  by  instanta-
neous relief  to  the  pain  (cold  water).

Let  Pro:^essor  Dzondi  only  make  upon  himself,  as  he  offers  to
do,  one  pure  comparative  experiment,  and  he  will  be  convinced
that  he  has  made  a  grievous  mistake  in  recommending  cold  wa-
ter as  the  only  sure  and  best  remedy  for  buma

Let  him  plunge  both  his  healthy  hands  at  the  same  instant
into  a  vessel  full  of  boiling  water,  and  retain  them  there  for
from  two  to  three  seconds  only,  and  withdraw  them  both  at  the
same  time :  they  will,  as  may  easily  be  imagined,  be  both  equal-
ly severely  scalded,  and  as  the  hands  belong  to  one  and  the
same  body,  if  one  hand  be  treated  with  cold  water  and  the  other
with  alcohol  or  oil  of  turpentine,  the  experiment  will  fiirmsh  a
pure  comparison  and  convincing  result.  This  case  will  not  ad-
mit of  the  excuse  offered  in  that  of  the  burns  of  two  different
individuals,  where  the  bad  consequences  that  always  result  when
impure  humours,  bad  constitution,  or  some  other  difference  in
the  one  so  treated  to  the  one  that  has  been  much  more  easily
cured  by  alcohol.  No,  let  one  and  the  same  individual  (best  of
ei\  the  professor  himself,  in  order  to  convince  him),  scald  both

^Homoeopathic.


088  OK  THE  TBEATMGBNT  OF  BITBK8.

his  hands  in  the  most  equal  manner  before  competent  witnesBeOi
and  then  plunge  one  hand  (which  we  shall  call  A)  into  his  cold
water  as  often  and  as  long  as  he  pleases,  but  let  him  hold  the
other  hand  (which  we  shall  call  6)  uninterruptedly  in  a  yeflsel
full  of  warmed  alcohol,  keeping  the  (covered)  vessel  oonstantlj
warm.  In  this  the  burning  pain  of  the  hand  B  rises  in  a  few
seconds  to  double  its  intensity,  but  thereafter  it  will  go  on  dimi-
nishing, and  in  three,  six,  twelve,  or  at  most  twenty-four  houn
(according  to  the  degree  of  the  bum)  it  will  be  completely  and
for  ever  removed,  but  the  hand,  without  the  production  of  any
blister,  far  less  of  suppuration,  will  become  covered  with  a
brown,  hard,  painless  epidermis,  which  peels  off  in  a  few  days^

and  appears  fresh  and  healthy,  clad  in  its  new  skin.

But  the  hand  A,  which  the  Professor  plunges  into  cold  water
as  often  and  as  long  as  he  pleases,  does  not  experience  the  pri-
mary increase  of  pain  felt  by  the  hand  B ;  on  the  contrary,  the
first  instant  it  is  as  if  in  heaven ;  all  the  pain  of  the  bum  is  as
if  vanished,  but — aft«r  a  few  minutes  it  recommences  and  in-
creases, and  soon  becomes  intolerably  severe,  if  cold  water  be
not  again  used  for  it,  when  the  pains  are  likewise  in  the  first  in-
stants as  if  extinguished ;  this  amelioration,  however,  also  lasts
but  a  few  minutes ;  they  then  return  even  in  this  colder  water,
and  in  a  short  time  increase  to  greater  and  greater  intensity.
If  he  now  puts  his  severely  burnt  hand  into  the  coldest  snow
water,  he  runs  the  risk  of  sphacelus,  and  yet  afl«r  a  few  honn
he  can  find  no  relief  from  the  pains  in  water  that  is  less  cold.  If
he  now  withdraws  his  ill-treated  hand  from  the  water,  the  pain,
instead  of  being  less  than  it  was  immediately  after  the  scald,  is
four  and  six  times  greater  than  it  was  at  first ;  the  hand  be-
comes excessively  inflamed,  and  swells  up  to  a  great  extent  with
blisters,  and  he  may  now  apply  cold  water,  or  saturnine  lotion,
lead  ointment,  hemp-seed  oil,  or  any  other  of  the  ordinary  re-
medies he  likes ;  the  hand  A,  treated  in  this  manner,  inevitably
turns  into  a  suppurating  ulcer,  which,  treated  with  these  ordi-
nary so-called  cooling  and  soothing  remedies,  at  length  heals  up^
aft<er  many  weeks  or  even  months  (solely  by  the  natural  powers
of  his  body),  with  hideously  deformed  cicatrices  and  tedioufli
agonizing  pains.

This  is  what  experience  teaches  us  with  respect  to  bums  of
any  severity.

If  Professor  Dzondi  imagines  he  knows  better  than  is  here
stated,  if  he  believes  he  is  certain  of  the  sole  curative  power  of


Oir  THE  TRBATMENT  OF  BURNS.  689

cold  water,  which  he  lauds  so  much,  in  aU  degrees  of  bumsj  then
he  may  confidently  undertake  to  institute  the  above  decisive,
purely  comparative  experiment  before  competent  witnesses.  It
is  only  by  such  an  experiment  that  truth  will  be  brought  to  light.
What  risk  does  he  run  if  his  cold  water  will  procure  as  rapid
relief  for  the  hand  A  as  the  warm  alcohol  will  for  the  hand  B?

But  no  I  I  pity  the  poor  hand ;  I  know  very  well  how  it  would
be  I  Let  the  Professor,  if  he  is  not  quite  so  sure  of  the  efficacy  of
cold  water  in  severe  bums,  perform  but  a  small  portion  of  this
experiment,  let  him  dip  only  two  fingers  of  each  hand  into  boil-
ing water  for  two  or  three  seconds,  and  let  him  treat  the  fingers
this  little  comparative  experiment  will  teach  him  how  wrong  he
was  to  recommend  to  the  public  as  the  only,  best  and  efficacious
remedy  in  all  degrees  of  bums,  cold  water,  an  agent  which,
though  it  is  uncommonly  soothing  in  the  commencement,  is
subsequently  so  treacherous,  so  extremely  noxious.  For  severe
bums  he  could  not  advise  any  thing  more  injurious  than  cold
water  (except  perhaps  the  ointments  and  oils  ordinarily  used  for
bums),  and  in  slighter  cases  where  no  blister  would  rise  if  left
alone,  blisters  come  on  when  they  are  treated  with  the  palliative
cold  water.

In  the  meantime,  before  Professor  Dzondi  can  make  known
the  result  of  this  decisive  experiment  upon  himself  it  may  be
useful  for  the  public  to  know,  that  one  of  the  greatest  surgeons
of  our  times,  Benjamin  Bell*  of  England,  instituted  a  similar
experiment  for  the  instruction  of  the  world,  which  was  almost
as  pure  as  the  one  I  have  proposed.  He  made  a  lady  who  had
scalded  both  arms,  apply  to  the  one  oil  of  turpentine,  and
plunge  the  other  into  cold  water.  The  first  arm  was  well  in  an
hour — ^but  the  other  continued  painful  for  six  hours;  if  she
withdrew  it  an  instant  firom  the  water  she  experienced  in  it
more  intense  paio,  and  it  required  a  much  longer  time  for  its
cure  than  the  first.*  He  therefore  recommends,  as  A.  H.  Eichter '
had  already  done,  the  application  of  brandy,*  he  also  advises

*■  Heister  already  knew  and  had  reoommended  the  treatment  of  burns  by  oil  of
tnrpentiDe,  which  has  recently  created  so  much  sensation  in  England:  "expeditum
quoque  hie  esse  solet  terebinthinae  oleum ;  siquidem  opportune  ac  saepius  oorpori
iUmatur."

*  See  Phytisch'Medie.  Journal^  herausgegeben  yon  Efihn,  Leipzig,  1801,  Jun,
8.428.

'  Anafangigr,  d.  Wundarz^  Bd.  i.

*  Hie  strongest  alcohol  heated  is  much  more  excellent  in  bums  of  yarious  parts,


610  OK  TBS  TBSATMBNT  OF  BUBNa

that  the  part  be  kept  constantly  moistened  with  it*  Kentish*
also  greatly  prefers^  and  that  very  properly,  ibe  qpiiitooos  re-
medies to  all  others.  I  shall  not  adduce  the  experience  confir>
matory  to  this  I  have  myself  had.

From  all  this  it  appears  that  Professor  Dzondi  has  made  a
mistake,  and  that  cold  water,  far  from  being  a  curative  agent,  is^
on  the  contrary,  an  obstacle  to  the  cure  of  idight  bumS|  and  oc-
casions a  great  aggravation  of  more  serious  ones,  that  in  the
highest  degree  of  such  lesions,  it  even  exposes  the  part  to  the
ri^  of  sphacelus,  if  the  temperature  of  ^e  water  applied  be
very  low  (just  as  warm  applications  are  apt  to  cause  mortificar
tion  of  frost-bitten  limbs),  and  that  on  the  other  hand,  warm
alcohol  and  oil  of  turpentine  are  inestimable,  wonderfully  rapid,
perfectly  efficacious,  and  genudne  remedies  for  bums^  just  as  snow
is  for  frost-bitten  limbs.

The  adherents  of  the  old  system  of  medicine  ought  not  longer
to  strive  against  the  irresistible  efforts  towards  improvement
and  perfection  that  characterizes  the  spirit  of  the  age.  They
must  see  that  it  is  of  no  use  doing  so.  The  accumulated  lumber
of  their  eternal  palliatives,  with  their  bad  results,  stands  revealed
in  its  nothingness  before  the  light  of  truth  and  pure  experienca

I  know  very  well  that  the  doctor  insinuates  himself  uncom>
monly  into  the  affections  of  his  patient,  if  he  procures  him  a
momentary  heavenly  relief  by  plunging  the  seriously  burnt
part  into  cold  water,  unmindful  of  the  evil  consequences  result-
ing therefrom,  but  his  conscience  would  give  him  a  much  higher
reward  than  such  a  deluded  patient  ever  can,  if  he  would  give
the  preference  to  the  treatment  with  heated  alcohol  (or  oil  of  tur-
pentine), which  is  only  painfiil  in  the  first  moments,  over  all
traditional  pernicious  palliatives  (cold  water,  saturnine  lotioni%
bum  salves,  oils,  &c.) ;  if  he  could  be  taught  by  experience  and
pure  comparative  experiments,  that  by  the  former  means  alone
is  all  danger  of  mortification  guarded  against,  and  that  the  pa-
tient is  thereby  cured  and  relieved  of  all  his  sufferings^  often  m


eren  where  the  epidermis  has  oorae  off;  bat  in  scalds  of  the  whole  body  (pram

DO  ooe  ever  recovered  under  the  osual  mode  of  treatment  with  cold  water,  sattmiine

lotions,  bum-salves,  or  oils,  all  died  generally  within  (bur  days),  we  must  oontenti

selves  with  ordinary  spirits  made  very  warm,  or  at  least  commence  the

for  the  first  hours  with  this,  and  consitantly  renew  this  warm  application,  keepii^  te

jKitient  warmly  wrapped  up  in  bed. Of  all  conceivable  modes  of  treatment  tl^  ii

the  best

'  Benjamin  Bell's  Syttem  of  Sttryeryt  Vol.  v.

>  On  JBunu,  London,  1797.


ON  THE  TBEATM£NT  OF  BURNH.  641

kas  than  a  hundredth  part  of  the  time  required  for  the  cure  by  cold
water,  saturnine  lotions,  salves  and  oils.

So  also  the  girl  heated  by  dancing  to  the  highest  degree  of
fever,  and  tormented  by  uncontrollable  thirst,  finds  the  greater,
refreshment  for  the  first  few  moments  from  exposure  to  a  draught
of  air,  and  from  drinking  a  glass  of  ice  cold  water,  until  she  is
taught  by  the  speedy  occurrence  of  a  dangerous  or  even  fatal  ill-
neas,  that  it  is  not  what  affords  us  the  greatest  gratification  for
the  first  few  moments  that  is  for  our  real  wel&re,  but  that,  like
the  pleasant  cup  of  sin,  it  is  fraught  with  evil,  often  with  ruin
and  death.


ADDITION  TO  THE  FOREGOING  ARTICLE.^

When  ancient  errors  that  should  justly  sink  into  oblivion  are
attempted  to  be  palmed  off  upon  the  world  anew,  he  who  knows
better  ought  not  to  neglect  to  publish  his  convictions,  and  there-
by to  consign  the  pernicious  error  to  its  proper  ignominious
place,  and  to  exalt  ike  true  and  the  salutary  to  its  right  position
for  the  wel&re  of  mankind.  It  was  this  idea  that  guided  me  in
No,  166  of  this  Journal,*  where  I  displayed  the  inestimable
advantages  of  warm  spirituous  fluids  for  the  rapid  and  perma-
nent healing  of  extensive  bums,  over  cold  water,  which  only
alleviates  for  an  instant,  but  whose  results  are  extremely  per-
nicious.

The  most  convincing  tests  of  the  relative  value  of  these  two
opposite  methods,  viz.,  the  curative  (the  really.healing)  method,
(ihe  employment  of  warm  spirituous  fiuids,  such  as  alcohol  or
oil  of  turpentine),  and  the  palliative  (alleviating)  method,  (the
use  of  cold  water,  &c.),  are  furnished  firstly^  by  pure  compara-
tive experiments,  where  bums  of  two  limbs  of  the  same  body
are  simultaneously  treated,  the  one  by  the  one  method,  the  other
by  the  other ;  secondly^  by  the  expressed  convictions  of  the  most
unprejudiced  and  honourable  physicians.  One  single  such  autho-
rity, who,  knowing  the  worthlessness  as  facts  of  the  favourite
pre-conceived  notions  of  the  age,  dispossesses  his  mind  of  them,
and,  rejecting  the  old  pernicious  errors  from  genuine  conviction,  is
not  afraid  to  claim  ibr  truth  its  merited  station,  is  worth  thou-
sands of  prejudiced  upholders  and  combatants  for  the  opposite.

Thousands  of  over  hasty  advocates  of  the  pernicious  employ-

*  From  the  Allgtm.  Anzeiger  der  DeuUchen, Na  204. 1816.

•  [Sec  above.]

41


d42  ON  THE  TBSATMSNT  OF  BUlUfa

ment  of  cold  water  in  serious  burns,  mnst  hold  their  peace  be-
fore the  expressed  convictions  of  that  most  upright  of  practical
physicians,  Thomas  Sydenham,  who  despising  the  prejudioed
opinion  that  has  prevailed  universally  from  Galen's  time  till
now,  marbi  corUrariis  curerUur  (therefore  cold  water  for  buma)^
and  influenced  by  his  convictions  and  by  truth  alone,  thus  ex*
presses  himself:^  As  an  application  in  bumti^  alcohol  bears  the  bett
from  aU  other  remedies  that  have  ever  been  discovered^  for  it  effecti
a  most  rapid  cure.  Lint  dipped  in  alcohol  and  applied,  imme*
diately  after  the  injury,  to  any  part  of  the  body  that  shidl  have
been  scalded  with  hot  water  or  singed  by  gunpowder,  will
do  this,  provided  that  as  long  as  the  pain  lasts  the  spirit  be  re-
newed ;  after  that,  only  twice  a-day  will  suffice."  Let  him  who
can  prove  this  to  be  &lse  come  forward !

Or,  who  can  contradict  one  of  the  best  and  most  enlightened
practical  surgeons  of  our  time,  Benjamin  Bell,  when  fix>m  hia
extensive  experience  he  alleges :  ^  "  One  of  the  best  appUoatiom
to  every  bum  of  this  kind  is  strong  brandy^  or  any  other  ardenl
spirit;  it  seems  to  induce  a  momentary  additional  pain,  but  thia
soon  subsides  and  is  succeeded  by  an  agreeable  soothing  aena*-
tion.  It  proves  most  effectual  when  the  parts  can  be  kept  im-
mersed in  it ;  but  where  this  cannot  be  done,  they  should  be
kept  constantly  moist  with  pieces  of  old  linen  soaked  in  spirits.^

Kentish,  who,  as  a  practitioner  in  Newcastle,  had  to  treat  the
workmen  who  were  often  fearfully  burnt  in  the  coal  pits,  conai-
ders  very  carefiilly  in  his  book^  all  the  claims  preferred  in  fii-
vour  of  cold  water  and  all  other  cooling  remedies  for  bum8,and
he  finds  as  the  result  of  all  his  experience,  contrary  to  the  great
prejudice  he  felt  in  favour  of  these  long  used  things,  that  under
their  use  no  single  person  who  had  got  a  severe  bum  on  a  great
part  of  his  body  ever  recovered,  but  that  all  were  cured  who

'  Opera.  Lipeiae,  1695,  p.  848,  (Edit  Syd  Soc.  p.  255).  "  Amlrastis  extos  (Mfano-
vendus),  quo  casu  omiiibtiB  remedik,  quotqnot  adhoc  inTenta  liiere,  hie  liquor  (qiiritai
vini)  fiicile  paliiuun  praeriiutk  cum  curatiooem  quam  dto  abeolvat ; — uempe  ii  UaUtk
spiritu  vim  imbuta  partibus  ab  aqua  ferrente,  pulvere  pyris,  yel  simili  laests,  quam
primum  hoc  iufligitur  malum,  applicentur,  eademque  dicto  spirttu  made&eta  tubindt
repetantur,  donee  dolor  ab  igne  peoitus  eTanuerit^  et  postea  scdnm  bit  in  die."  That
cold  eztenial  applications  to  burnt  parte  render  tbem  liable,  to  inoreaae  of  pain%  tfattk
fiucfa  parts  soon  become  altogether  painless  from  the  application  of  exteriMd  beat  m
he  had  often  witnessed,  is  testified  by  the  great  obeerver,  John  Hunter,  in  hit  wotk
On  the  blood  and  in/Uanmationf  p.  218.

•  SytUin  of  Surgery 1 3rd  Edit  Vol  v.

'  On  Burnt,  London  and  Newcastle,  1797,  two  Essays


09  THE  TREATMENT  OF  BURN3.  64S

were  treated  by  the  speediest  possible  application  and  frequent
renewal  of  hot  turpentine.

But  no  proof  for  the  truth  of  this  can  be  so  strong  as  that
which  is  afforded  by  oomparatiye  experiments  performed  simul-
taneously on  one  and  the  same  body.  In  my  former  paper  I
cii^  the  case  of  a  lady  who  got  both  her  arms  burnt,  one  of
which  was  treated  by  Bell  with  cold  water,  but  the  otlier  was
kept  covered  with  oU  of  turpentine ;  in  the  first  the  pains  per^
sisted  for  a  much  longer  time  and  a  much  greater  period  was  re-
quired for  the  cure  than  in  the  last,  which  was  treated  with  the
volatile  oiL

Another  experiment  of  not  less  convincing  character  is  related
by  John  Anderson.^  A  lady  scalded  her  face  and  right  arm
with  boiling  grease ;  the  fiwe  was  very  red,  very  much  scalded,
and  the  seat  of  violent  pains;  the  arm  she  had  plunged  into  a
jug  full  of  cold  water.  In  the  course  of  a  few  minutes  oil  of
turpentine  was  applied  to  the  &ce.  For  her  arm  she  desired  to
continue  the  use  of  the  cold  water  for  some  hours,  because  it
had  formerly  been  of  service  to  her  in  bums  (she  could  not  say
whether  those  had  been  more  severe  or  less  so  than  the  present
one).  In  the  course  of  seven  hours  her  &ce  looked  much  better
and  was  relieved.  In  the  meantime  she  had  oflen  renewed  the
cold  water  for  the  arm,  but  whenever  she  withdrew  it  she  com*
plained  of  much  pain,  and  in  truth  the  inflammation  in  it  had  in^
ereaaed,  ThefoUoumig  morning  I  found  that  she  had  suffered  greai
pain  in  the  arm  during  the  night ;  the  inflammxition  had  extended
above  the  elhow^  several  large  blisters  had  risen^  and  thick  eschars
hadjbrmedon  the  arm  and  hand.  The  face  on  t/ie  contrary  was
oomptetdy  free  from  pain^  had  no  blisters,  and  only  a  little  of  the
q>idermis  had  become  detached.  The  arm  had  to  be  dressed
for  a  fortnight  with  emollient  remedies  before  it  was  cured."

Who  can  read  these  honest  observations  of  illustrious  men
without  being  satisfied  of  the  much  superior  healing  power  of
the  application  of  spirituous  fluids  to  that  of  cold  water,  which
affords  a  delusive  alleviation,  but  delays  the  cure  ?

I  shall  not,  therefore,  adduce  my  own  very  extensive  expe-
rience to  the  same  effect  Were  I  even  to  add  a  hundred  such
comparative  observations,  could  they  prove  more  plainly,  strong-
ly, and  convincingly  than  is  done  by  these  two  cases,  that  (warm)
spirituous  fluids  possess  an  inestimable  advantage  over  the  tran-
siently alleviating  cold  water  in  the  case  of  severe  bums  ?


'  JCeiUish*$  Beccnd  U9ay  en  tntrnM,  p.  48.


644  ON  THE  TBBATMENT  OF  BUENB.

How  instructing  and  consoling,  then,  for  mankind  is  the  truth
that  is  to  be  deduced  from  these  facts :  that  for  aerious  and  for
the  most  severe  injuries  from  burning^  thotigh  cold  water  is  very  hurt'
Mfor  them,  spirituous  applications  {warm  alcohol  or  oil  of  twrpa^
tine)  are  highly  beneficial  and  capable  of  saving  many  lives.

These  proofe  will  serve  to  guide  the  great  numbers  of  man-
kind who  require  help,  to  the  only  eflTectual  method,  to  the  only
health  bringing  (sanative)  remedy,  without  which,  in  the  case  of
extensive  burns  (that  is  where  the  greater  part  of  the  sur&ce  of
the  body  has  been  scalded  or  burnt),  delivery  from  death  and
recovery  is  perfectly  impossible,  and  has  never  been  witneased.

This  one  single,  and,  as  I  have  imagined,  not  unworthy  object
of  my  essay,  was  evidently  not  perceived  by  Professor  Dzondi,
as  is  proved  by  his  violent  letters  to  me ;  he  only  perceives  in
my  remarks  an  attack  upon  his  opinion.  It  is  a  matter  of  veiy
little  interest  to  me  to  find  that  cold  water  which  has  already
been  recommended  ninety-nine  times  by  others  for  bums,  from
a  predilection  in  &vour  of  this  palliative  whose  effects  are  so  in*
jurious,  is  now  served  up  to  us  again  for  the  hundredth  time^
and  I  should  feel  ashamed  to  make  use  of  a  Journal  so  useful  in
promoting  the  happiness  of  the  people  as  this  is,  for  the  pap-
poses  of  merely  personal  recrimination  and  discussion.  More-
over, as  in  the  article  I  allude  to  I  advised  him  to  convince  him-
self of  the  truth  of  my  assertions  by  an  experiment  upon  him-
self, my  object  was  thereby  to  inform  every  one  of  the  conditions
necessary  to  be  observed  in  order  to  constitute  a  really  con-
vincing pure  experiment  of  this  kind.

I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  expose  the  disadvantage
of  cold  water  (and  other  ordinary  palliatives)  in  the  treatment
of  serious  bums,  and  call  the  attention  of  the  public  to  the  only
effectual  remedies,  warm  spirituous  fluids,  in  order  that  they
may  avail  themselves  of  them  in  the  hour  of  need.  This  is  not
any  mere  idea  of  my  own,  but  it  has  been  clearly  graved  and  irre-
frogably  demonstrated  by  the  observations  of  the  most  honour-
able and  illustrious  men  of  our  profession  (Sydenham,  Ileister,
B.  Bell,  J.  Himter,  Kentish),  and  especially  by  the  convincing
comparative  experiments  of  Bell  and  Anderson.

I  shall  only  observe  further,  that  the  burnt  parts  must  be  kept
moistened  uninterrujitedly  with  the  warm  spirituous  fluid,  e,  g,
warm  alcohol,  for  which  end  the  linen  rags  soaked  in  it  should
first  be  simply  laid  upon  the  injured  parts,  and  theu,  in  order  to
prevent  evaporation,  and  to  keep  all  warm,  covered  with  pieces


ON  THB  TREATKE^TT  OF  BURNS.  645

of  woollen  cloth  or  sheepskin.  If  a  very  large  portion  of  the
sor&ce  of  the  body  is  burnt,  then  some  one  will  be  obliged  to
devote  himself  entirely  and  constantly  to  the  external  care  of
the  patient,  removing  the  pieces  of  cloth  or  skin  one  by  one,
and  pouring  with  a  spoon  warm  alcohol  (or  oil  of  turpentine)
over  the  linen  rags  upon  the  skin  (without  removing  them),  then
as  aoon  as  they  are  dry,  covering  up  the  part  and  going  on  to
others,  so  that  when  the  last  part  has  been  moistened  and  co-
vered up,  it  is  time  to  commence  again  with  the  first  part|
which,  in  the  case  of  such  a  volatile  fluid  as  warm  alcohol,  has
in  the  meantime  generally  become  dry.  This  process  must  be
continued  day  and  night  unremittingly,  for  which  purpose  the
person  engaged  in  performing  it  must  be  changed  every  two
hours  for  a  fresh  one.  The  chief  benefit,  especially  in  severe
and  very  serious  injuries  from  burns,  depends  on  what  is  done
within  the  first  twenty-four  hours,  or  in  the  worst  cases,  the  first
forty -eight  hours,  that  is,  until  all  trace  of  the  pain  of  the  burn
is  permanently  removed.  A  basin  should  be  at  hand  containing
very  hot  water,  which  should  be  frequently  renewed,  in  which
some  vessels  full  of  alcohol  should  stand,  of  which  the  attend-
ant takes  out  the  warmest  for  the  purpose  of  wetting  the  rags,
whilst  the  rest  stand  in  the  basin  in  order  to  remain  sufficiently
warm,  so  that  there  never  shall  be  a  want  of  warm  alcohol  for
the  purpose  of  pouring  on  the  rags.  If  the  parts  of  the  body
on  which  the  patient  is  obliged  to  lie  are  also  burnt,  the  raga,
dipped  in  warm  alcohol,  should  be  applied  to  them  at  the  com-
mencement, and  a  layer  of  water-proof  cloth  spread  underneath;
these  parts  can  subsequently  be  wetted  from  above  without
being  removed.  If  the  greater  part  of  the  body  is  burnt,  the
first  application  must  only  consist  of  warm  brandy,  in  order  to
spare  the  first  shock  to  the  patient,  which  is  the  worst,  the  se-
cond wetting  should  be  performed  with  stronger  alcohol,  and  af-
terwards the  very  strongest  alcohol  may  be  used.  And  as  this
operation  must  be  continued  uninterruptedly  during  the  night,
the  precaution  must  be  used  of  keeping  the  candle  (or  lantern)
at  a  good  distance,  otherwise  the  warm  spirituous  vapour  rising
from  the  skin  might  readily  catch  fire,  and  prove  destructive  to
the  patient

If  the  burn  has  been  effected  with  gunpowder,  the  small  black
particles  should  not  be  picked  out  of  the  skin  before  all  traces
of  the  pain  of  the  burn  are  permanently  removed.


M6  OV  THS  VSNSBXAL  DISEASE

OX  THE  VENEREAL  DISEASE  AND  ITS  ORDINARY  IMPROPER

TREATMENT.!


As  long  as  the  defects  of  the  constitutions  of  countries  put
difficulties  in  the  way  of  matrimony,  as  long  as  celibacy  shall
be  considered  £E^hionable  and  marriage  as  a  political  yoke,  in
place  of  being  regarded  as  the  most  honourable  connexion  of  the
two  sexes  for  their  mutual  moral  and  physical  perfection,  but
especially  for  the  development  of  the  really  human  and  of  the
divine  and  immortal  in  them ;  as  long  as  the  notable  difference
of  both  sexes  shall  be  viewed  merely  as  an  object  of  sensuality,
and  nothing  more  dignified  is  seen  in  a  union  with  the  opposite
sex  than  a  mere  animal  copulation,  and  not  a  mutual  communi-
cation and  fusion  of  the  excellencies  of  both  to  constitute  a  more
noble  whole,  so  long  will  the  all-powerful  and  sexual  passion
thus  unnaturally  separated  from  moral  duty  seek  its  gratifica-
tion in  the  arms  of  common  prostitution,  and  as  a  necessary  con-
sequence not  fail  to  contract  the  destructive  lues,  and  so  long  is
the  extinction  of  such  a  communicable  virus  not  to  be  thought
of

It  is  the  duty  of  the  physician  to  cure  patients  ill  of  this  dis-
ease who  trust  themselves  to  hin  care,  as  the  object  of  medicine
(like  that  of  legislation)  is  not  so  much  the  prevention  of  the
evils  incident  to  himianity  as  the  correction  of  those  which  exist
Medicine  should  therefore  prove  itself  to  be  really  the  helpful
art  it  professes  to  be  in  this  disgraceful  and  destructive  malady,
if  it  would  act  up  to  its  pretensions.  Its  services  should  be
rendered  with  all  the  more  facility  and  certainty  in  this  case,  as
the  venereal  disease  is  one  of  those  happy  few  that  remain
always  the  same  with  respect  both  to  their  origin  and  nature
(and  consequently  cannot  be  mistaken  at  its  commencement),
and  the  specific  remedy  for  which  {mercury)  was  discovered  by
a  lucky  hit  in  domestic  practice  shortly  after  the  invasion  of  the
disease,  now  323  years  ago.  We  might  therefore  have  expected
that  physicians  would  at  all  events  in  this  disease  have  acted
judiciously,  and  in  this  long  period  of  time  have  learned  the
way  to  cure  this  disease  radically,  easily  and  permanently,
although  their  treatment  of  all  other  diseases  might  have  re-
mained, as  indeed  it  has,  mere  subjective  and  objective  delusion;
w^hich  might  to  a  certain  extent  be  excused,  since  almost  all

>  From  the  AliffrmL  Anx,  d.  />.,  Na  211, 1816.


AND  ITS  OBDIKABT  XMPBOPSB  TBSATMENT.  617

otiher  diaeaaes  differ  so  widely  firom  each  other  and  among  them-
selves, and  the  appropriate  remedy  for  each  several  case  re-
mained an  eternal  problem  until  homoeopathy  solved  it

Bat  no !  physicians  have  mistaken  even  this  so  easily  cogniz-
able venereal  disease,  and  a  fallacious  and  pernicious  treatment
of  it  is  the  consequence  of  this  mistake.  Up  to  this  hour  almost
all  the  physicians  of  the  habitable  globe,  in  Pekin  as  in  Paris
and  Philadelphia,  in  London  as  in  Vienna,  in  Petersburg  as  in
Berlin,  have  bungled  the  venereal  disease  from  its  commencement,
and  have  regarded  the  local  removal  of  the  chancre  as  the  main  point
of  the  treatment  of  syphilis^  and  the  simultaneous  employment  of
fnercury  as  a  mere  accessory  ;  and  it  is  publicly  taught  that  if  the
chancre  have  existed  but  for  a  few  days,  its  mere  local  destruc-
tion is  all  the  treatment  required.*  And  yet  there  can  be  noth-
ing more  inappropriate,  nothing  more  pernicious  than  this
procedure.

I  shall  in  the  first  place  show  its  inappropriateness.  The
analogy  with  other  miasmatic  exanthematous  diseases  would
lead  us  to  infer  that  the  venereal  disease  arises  only  by  infection
by  means  of  corporeal  contact.  Now  all  infectious  diseases  have
this  character  in  common,  that  on  the  part  of  the  body  where
the  virus  was  first  applied,  at  finst  no  alteration  is  perceptible,
although  the  inoculation  may  have  taken  place.  If  we  scrape  off
the  epidermis  on  a  child's  arm  till  we  come  to  the  sensitive  cutis
vera,  and  rub  thereon  either  the  matter  of  small-pox  or  the
lymph  of  cow-pox,  for  the  first  five  days  there  will  be  no  change
at  all  perceptible  on  this  spot ;  it  is  only  afi;er  the  fourth  day  in
the  case  of  cow-pox  inoculation,  and  much  later  in  that  of
small-pox  inoculation,  that  a  change  begins  to  appear  on  the
inoculated  spot,  and  it  is  only  on  the  seventh  day  Uiat  the  per-
fisct  cow-pox  vesicle  is  formed  on  this  spot,  amid  febrile  symp-
toms, and  the  small-pox  pustule  on  the  twelfth  or  fourteenth
day. Neither  of  them  appears  before  the  internal infection  and

^^t^^m.^ »  ■  ..III  ■!■■■■  ■■»  »  .  ■  I  ■_-■,■  m^  ■■  I  ^■^^■^ ■  MMIIMMMM..  ■  ■  ^W^Nl^M

*  Tlie  boldest  propoimders  of  this  erroDeous  doctrine  were  Qirtaouer  and  A.  F.
Becker.  The  former  says  {Treatise  on  the  venereal  dieeaee,  G5ttingen,  1808,  pi  216),
"Beoent  dmocres  must  be  only  locally  cored,  burnt  or  driren  off  The  poison  must
be  destroyed  at  the  commencement  on  its  seat,  for  then  it  has  not  yet  had  time  to
be  ab8orbed"(l) — and  Hecker  roundly  atverts  {On  Ike  venereal  dUeate^  2d  editico
pi  67),  **  In  the  chancre  the  poison  lies  as  it  were  out  of  the  system,**  **  therefore  it
yields  (pb  180)  to  a  mere  external  treatment  (by  desiocatiYe  and  corrosiTe  remedies)
wUhamianyill  effeeii*  (f),  and  if  it  date  from  not  more  than  twelve  days  (p.  182),  it
mart  "only  be  treated  with  external,  local  means.**  Almost  all  other  authors  incline
to  the  same  opinion,  though  they  do  not  express  themselves  so  distinctly — Hunter,
Bell  Schwediaur,  dc


648  OK  THE  VENKREAL  DISEASE

flevelopment  of  this  disease  is  completed  in  the  s^tem.  So  it  is  with
the  measles  and  other  acute  exanthematous  diseases :  namdjf^
the  part  whereon  the  infecting  virus  was  first  brought  does  not  pnh
duce  the  eruption  peculiar  to  each  disease^  before  the  whole  orgammk
has  undergone  a  change  and  is  completely  infected.  And  on  the
other  hand,  the  perfect  production  of  the  specific  eruption  is  an
infallible  proof  of  the  completed  internal  infection  and  developmaU
of  the  miasmatic  disease  in  every  case.  The  cow-pox  prevaik
throughout  the  body  as  soon  as  the  cow-pox  vesicle  is  produced
in  its  perfect  form  with  its  red,  hard  areola,  at  the  part  wheie
it  was  first  introduced,  and  so  it  is  with  other  inoculable  diseases.
But  ^m  the  moment  when  the  miasm  has  taken,  and  the  whole
living  organism  has  become  aware  of  (has  perceived)  the  pre-
sence of  its  action,  the  poison  is  no  longer  only  local  at  the  point
of  inoculation ;  a  complete  infection  would  still  occur,  even
though  the  seat  of  inoculation  should  be  cut  out.  At  the  very
moment  when  the  inoculation  has  taken,  the  first  general  attadc
on  the  system  has  occurred,  and  the  full  development  of  the
disease  is  in  all  probability  not  to  be  avoided  by  the  destmcticm
of  the  inoculated  part.

In  the  case  of  the  bite  of  the  mad  dog,  where  the  system  was
predisposed  to  be  afiected  by  the  miasm,'  we  possess  undeniable
observations  to  show  that  even  cutting  out^  and  removing  the
bitten  part  does  not  aflbrd  any  protection  fix)m  the  oocurrenoe
of  hydrophobia.

Small-pox  would  still  be  developed,  even  though  at  the  mo-
ment the  inoculation  was  efiected  the  inoculated  part  were  cut
out.

So  far  is  the  miasm  from  remaining  local  when  once  it  has
been  inoculated  in  the  body.  When  that  has  taken  place,  the
complete  infection  of  the  whole  system  and  the  gnuiual  dfr
velopment  of  the  miasmatic  disease  in  the  interior  cannot  be
prevented  by  any  local  treatment

But  the  disease  can  only  be  considered  as  completely  de-

'  Fur  in  many  of  those  bitten  by  the  rabid  dog  the  poison  does  not  infect ;  of
twenty  persons  bitten,  usnally  from  eighteen  to  nineteen  escape  without  injury,  ewm
though  they  do  not  use  any  antidote  whatever.  Hence  the  undeserved  reoommctt-
dation  of  so  many  pretended  preyentitive  remedies ;  they  may  all  easOy  protect,  if
the  poison  ha^t  not  taken  in  those  bitten,  as  u  so  often  the  case.

*  A  girl  of  eight  yenr^  ol<l,  in  Scotland,  was  bit  by  n  mod  dog  on  the  21«»t  of  March,
1792;  a  siir«;eon  iinmciiintoly  cut  tlic  piece  cleimout  (kept  it  suppurating  and  gave
mercury  till  slight  snlivaiion  was  produced),  and,  notwitlistanding,  hydropholMi
liroke  out,  and  death  followed  the  fortieth  diiy  after  tlie  bite. — TTie  new  Lohdam
Medical  Juumai,  VoL  u.


AND  ITS  ORDINABT  IMPROPER  TRBATKSNT. 649

Teloped  in  the  whole  organism  when  the  perfect  pock  has  ap*
peared  on  the  seat  of  inoculation.

Thus  the  miasmatic  exanthematous  diseases  indicate  their
completion  in  the  interior  by  the  occurrence  of  one  or  more
shut  boils  of  smaller  or  greater  size.

Thus  the  pustula  maligna  appears  on  the  part  that  has  been
touched  (some  four  days  previously)  by  the  blood  of  a  cow
which  has  died  of  malignant  anthrax,  and  in  like  manner  the
oow-pock  or  small-pock  appears  generally  and  primanly  on  the
part  inoculated  or  its  vicinity,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  the
itoh  of  wool-manufacturers.

The  last-named  disease  belongs  to  the  chronic  exanthematous
dkeases  (like  the  venereal  disease),  and  in  it  nature  also  pro*
duoes  the  itch  vesicles,  at  first  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  part
that  was  originally  touched  by  the  itch-virus,  e.  ^.,  betwixt  the
fingers  and  on  the  wrist,  if  the  hands  (palms)  were  first  infected
As  soon  as  the  itch  vesicles  have  made  their  appearance  this  is
a  sign  that  the  internal  itch-disease  is  already  AiUy  developed.
For  at  first  there  is  actually  no  morbid  change  observable  on
the  infected  part,  no  itching,  no  itch-vesicles. Usually  from
nine  to  twelve  or  fourteen  days  after  the  application  of  the  itch-
virus  there  occurs,  along  with  a  slight  fever,  which  is  not  no-
ticed by  many  persons,  the  eruption  of  the  first  itch  vesicle —
nature  requires  this  time,  in  order  to  complete  the  full  infection,
that  is  to  say,  the  development  of  the  itch-disease  in  the  interior
thioughout  the  organism. The  itch-vesicles  that  now  appear
are  hence  no  mere  local  malady,  but  a  proof  of  the  completion
of  the  internal  disease. The  itch-miasm,  as  soon  as  it  has  con-
taminated the  hand,  remains  no  longer  local  the  instant  it  has
caused  inoculation,  but  proceeds  to  alter  the  interior  of  the
organism  and  to  develop  itself  into  this  peculiar  disease  until
the  entire  infection  is  accomplished,  and  then  only  (after  several
days)  does  the  eruption  produced  by  the  internal  malady  appear
on  the  skin,  and  that  at  first  in  the  vicinity  of  the  original  point
of  infection. These  itch-vesicles  are  an  abnormal  organ  pro-
duced by  the  inner  organism  upon  the  skin,  designed  by  nature
to  be  the  external  substitute  of  the  internal  disease,  to  take  the
latter  upon  itself,  to  absorb  it  as  it  were,  and  so  to  keep  it  sub-
dued, slumbering  and  latent. That  this  is  the  case  is  evident
from  this,  that  so  long  as  the  vesicles  remain  on  the  skin  and
continue  to  itch  and  discharge,  the  internal  disease  cannot  make
its  appearance,  and  from  this  also,  that  whenever  it  is  partially


650  ON  THX  YXNXBEAL  DIBllfll

destroyed  on  the  skin,  without  an j  pierions  core  being  eflfected
of  the  internal  itch  disease  (especiallj  if  it  be  of  someirhflft  long
standing  and  have  attained  to  anj  extent)  by  means  of  the  in*
temal  employment  of  its  specific  remedy,  sn^Aur^  this  internal
disease  then  bursts  forth  rapidly,  often  in  a  fiightfiil  nuumerf  in
the  form  of  phthisis,  asthma,  insanity,  dropsy,  apoplexy,  amau-
rosis, paralysis,  and  it  not  unfrequently  occasions  sadden  deatb.

A  very  similar  proc^bss  is  observed  in  the  case  of  the  venereal
disease.  On  the  spot  where  the  venereal  vims  was  first  nibbed
in  (e.  g.  during  an  impure  coitus),  fi>r  the  first  daySi  in  like
manner,  nothing  morbid  is  observable.  The  vims  has  indeed
first  come  in  contact  with  the  living  fibres  at  that  part^  bat  at
the  moment  that  the  inoculation  has  taken  place,  that  is^  when
the  living  body  has  felt  (perceived)  the  presence  and  action  of
the  poison,  that  same  moment  it  is  no  longer  only  local,  it  is
already  the  property  of  the  whole  orgamsm.  From  that  instant
the  specific  (venereal)  alteration  in  the  interior  advances  on-
wards until  the  venereal  disease  has  completely  developed  itself
in  the  interior,  and  it  is  only  then,  that  nature,  oppressed  bj
the  internal  malady,  produces  the  abnormal  organ,  ike  cAonei^
which  it  has  formed  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  in  subjectiott
the  internal  disease,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  part  primarily
infected.'  In  the  neighbourhood,  I  say,  for  it  does  not  always
arise  on  the  seat  of  the  primary  application  of  the  yiras^  it
sometimes  appears  on  the  scrotum,  &c.,  sometimes,  though  more
rarely,  only  in  the  groin,  in  the  form  of  inguinal  bubo,  which  is
also  a  kind  of  chancre.

In  order  to  subdue  and  form  a  substitute  for  the  internal
venereal  constitutional  disease,  nature  produces  the  chancre;
for  as  I  have  seen,  chancres  remaining  untouched  for  as  long  as
two  or  three  years  (certainly  enlarging  gradually  in  that  time)^
do  not  permit  the  more  general  venereal  disease  to  break  oat
As  long  as  the  chancre  remains  uninterfered  with,  no  venereal
affection,  no  symptoms  of  syphilis  are  to  be  met  with  on  any
other  part  of  the  body.

It  is  very  probable  that  the  infection  during  impure  centos
takes  place  in  the  first  seconds,  and  then  no  washing  or  deans-
iDg  of  the  genitals  is  of  any  avail,  nature  from  that  time  pro-
ceeds uninterruptedly  in  her  course,  altering  the  whole  internal
organism  in  the  manner  peculiar  to  this  disease. But  from  the

*  At  first  m  a  Teside,  whidi  increaees  in  a  few  lioun  and  growa  into  an  nkflr
vUha  haidbaae.


jUTD  m  OBDINABY  IXPBOPEB  TBIATXKNT.  861

moment  of  the  primary  local  infection,  nature  requires  in  our
daySy  aeyeral,  usuallj  seven,  ten  or  fourteen  days,  not  unfire-
quently  three  weeks,  there  are  even  some  instances  of  its  requi-
ring five,  six,  seven  or  eight  weeks  before  it  has  completed  the
development  of  the  venereal  malady  in  the  interior,  and  it  is
only  then,  as  a  sign  of  the  completed  internal  general  venereal
diHease,  that  the  chancre  appears  on  the  skin,  and  this  chancre,
the  evidence  of  the  now  internal  affection,  is  designed  by  nature
to  assume,  as  it  were,  the  palliative  office  of  substitution,  reliev-
ing and  keeping  in  subjection  the  latter.

For  the  fbst  thirty  or  forty  years  after  the  occurrence  of  the
venereal  disease,  that  is,  from  Uie  year  1493  until  the  first  third
of  the  following  century,  this  infecting  virus  was  much  worse
than  it  is  now ;  nature  then  strove  much  longer  before  it  allowed
the  completion  of  the  general  internal  disease  in  the  organism ;
often  several  months  elapsed  after  the  local  infection  before  the
chancre  then  burst  forth.  At  that  time  too,  the  opposing
action  of  the  body  and  the  general  ill  state  of  health  before  its
i^ppearance,  as  the  signs  of  the  development*of  the  venereal  dis-
ease going  on  in  the  interior,  were  much  more  distinct  and  strik-
ing^ than  now-a-days,  when  the  infecting  virus  is  much  milder.
The  venereal  disease  pursues  the  same  course  even  yet,  for
ainoe  that  period  it  has  only  decreased  in  violence,  but  its  na-
ture is  not  altered.  Even  at  the  present  day  there  is,  immedi-
ately after  the  infection,  absolutely  nothing  abnormal  to  be  per-
oeiTOd  on  the  spot :  the  change  only  goes  on  in  the  interior,  and
a  general  feeling  of  illness  is  felt  by  sensitive  individuals  for
some  days  or  weeks,  until  the  thorough  alteration  of  the  organ-
iam  is  effected  by  the  venereal  poison,  and  it  is  only  aft;er  this
that  the  chancre  is  produced  by  nature  on  the  suitable  spot,  and
IS  the  in&llible  sign  of  the  perfect  development  of  the  venereal
disease  in  the  entire  organism,  and  the  silencer  of  the  internal
malady.  Aft;er  the  breaking  out  of  the  chancre  the  previous
feelings  of  debility  and  fisitigue,  the  dulness  of  the  sensorium

'  Ptainig  (wer  the  testimoDy  of  several  physicuns  of  that  time,  such  as  0.  Torella,
K.lfMa,  A.  Ferro,  P.  Hanschard,  I  would  merely  refer  to  the  description  in  Luinni
OdUtHo  9eripL  de  morho  ffollieo,  Venet  1666,  i  i,  given  by  R  Fraacatorius  at  p.
ISS  and  178,  and  by  Fallopius  at  p.  667,  of  the  sufferings  of  those  then  infected  be-
§an  the  outbreak  of  the  chancre  (then  called  earies\  and  it  is  astonishing  to  find
How  generally  ill  and  miserable  the  infected  crawled  about  for  months,  without  the
■Kgfatfet  change  being  observable  on  their  genital  organs,  until  at  length  after  the
iitenial  development  of  the  venereal  disease  was  completed,  the  chancre  buret  firth
k  fuU  liiiy,  and  the  general  state  of  ill  health  moderated,  and,  as  it  were,  retired.


9oZ  OK  THE  VEKEBEAL  DISKASS

roz^irjine,  the  depresrion  ot  the  spirits,  the  earthr  oomplexion
with  rjiue  borders  round  the  eves,  &c.,  go  off  The  internal
vener«^  disease  then  remains  as  it  were  enohiiined  (latent)  and
concealed,  and  can  never  break  out  as  syphilis,  as  long  as  its
external  substitute  and  silencer  remains  uninterfered  frith  on
its  sear:  but  when  the  in-dwelling  venereal  disease  is  oom-
pletel  V  destroyed  and  cured  by  the  sole  internal  employment  of
the  best  mercurial  preparation,  then  the  chancre  heals  up  of
itself  without  the  aid  of  the  slightest  external  remedy :  if  how-
ever it  iij  driven  off  bv  external  means,  without  curio?  the  in-
temal  malady,  the  latter  inevitably  bursts  forth  in  the  fonn  of
syphilis.

From  a  consideration  of  this  mode  of  the  production  and  of
this  nature  of  the  venereal  disease,  and  of  this  true  signification
of  the  chancre,  which  are  founded  on  incontrovertible  observa-
tions, what  plan  of  treatment  of  this  disease  would  suggest  itself
to  any  person  endowed  with  common  sense?  Certainly  none
other — for  I  have  a  high  idea  of  sound  unprejudiced  common
sense — than  the  following:  "  Treat  the  venereal  affection  of  the
whok  system  hy  €ie  htsi  internal  remetly  until  it  is  completely  eradi"
cated^  that  is  to  say^  until  the  thoroughly  cured  organism  no  longer
requires  any  viru1/*,nt  chancre^  arty  external  silencer  and  substitute
for  the  now  nnnihihUid  internal  venereal  disease,  and  from  Oie
period  of  the  completed  internal  cure,  it  must  become  a  healthy  ulcer^
without  any  assistance/rom  ivithout,  and  rapidly  heal  up  of  its  oi/*n  at'
cord,  v:it/iout  leaving  Miind  the  slightest  ty-are  of  its  previous  existence,^*

Thus,  I  imagined,  plain  common  sense  would  advise  and  car^
fiilly  warn  against  meddling  witK  the  chancre  by  any  local  ap-
plication, either  before  or  during  the  internal  treatment,  that
might  cause  its  premature  disappearance,  for  it  is  the  only  certain
sign  of  the  indwelling  venereal  disease,  and  it  only  can,  by  its
persistence,  infallibly  demonstrate  to  the  patient  and  to  the  phy-
sician, that  the  cure  of  the  disease  throughout  the  organism  is
not  completed,  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  by  its  perfect  sp<mtaneous
healing  under  the  internal  exhibition  of  mercury  (without  the
employment  of  any  sort  of  external  remedy),  it  gives  the  most
iir^ragable  proof  that  the  cure  is  completed,  and  that  nature

^  ft  m  wnrtfay  of  remaric  that  any^  chancre  btimt  off  ^withuut  Uic  preliminary  cam
gf  iha  ■dftnal  diMaae^  alwaiva  Immm  behind  it  a  certain  amount  of  redne*M  and
aa  Ibqg  aa  th«  atarior  is  not  dentniyud ;  a  bubo  must  tb«

»  of  wibetitutioD,  and  keeps  the  uiterml


AND  ITS  OBDDTABY  IUPBOFEB  TBSATMSNT.  858

no  longer  lequirea  this  subetitutive  organ  for  an  in-dwelling  ve-
neieal  malady,  since  it  has  been  completely  healed  and  annihi-
lated by  the  medicine  given  internally.

But  as  experience  moreover  incontrovertibly  teaches  us,  that
when  the  chancre  is  driven  off  by  local  means,  and  nature  is
thus  deprived  of  the  silencer  and  substitute  of  the  internal  ve-
leieal  disease  by  external  desiccative  or  corrosive  applications,
it  then  invariably  happens  that  either  an  inguinal  bubo  soon
oeours,  or  after  a  few  months  the  general  venereal  disease  (sy-
philis) breaks  out;  we  might  have  imagined,  that  physicians
would  have  had  the  sense  to  perceive  the  importance  oi  pre*
serving  the  chancre  inviolate,  and  without  disturbing  it  by  any
external  remedy  whatsoever,  have  made  it  their  duty  to  employ
only  internal  treatment,  with  the  best  antivenereal  medicine,
nntil  the  system  was  completely  cured  of  this  disease.

But  no  I — In  spite  of  all  these  loud  speaking  fsu^ts,  proving
the  true  nature  and  signification  of  the  chancre,  almost  all  the
physicians  and  surgeons  of  the  habitable  globe  have  gone  on
ngarding  it  as  a  purely  local  and  at  first  insignificant  ulcer  con-
fined  to  the  outer  surface  of  the  skin,  and  have  exerted  them-
selves to  dry  it  up  and  destroy  it  by  local  means  as  rapidly  as
possible,  and  have  even  considered  this  destruction  of  the  chancre
as  the  chief  object  of  their  treatment,  just  as  though  the  venereal
disease  proceeded  from  it  (the  chancre)  as  its  source,  just  as  if  the
ohancre  were  the  originator  and  producer  of  the  venereal  dis-
ease ;  whereas  it  is  only  an  evidence  of  the  fully  developed  in-
ternal malady,  which  they  might  have  inferred  from  this,  that
the  consequence  of  the  local  destruction  of  a  chancre  *  performed
ever  so  early,  and  even  on  the  very  first  day  of  its  appearance,
was  always  a  subsequent  breaking  out  of  syphilis ;  and  they
might  also  have  learned  this  from  the  incontrovertible  experience,
that  not  a  single  patient  escapes  syphilis  if  his  chancre  have  been
only  locally  destroyed.^

*  John  Hunter's  TreatUe  on  the  venereal  diteoMe^  p.  661 — 558  (Leipzic  edition).

*  Hunter,  op.dt,  681.  **Not  one  patient  oat  of  fifty  will  escape  syphilis  if  the
diaDcre  be  only  locally  destroyed." — So  says  Fabre  also  {LettreSf  supplement  a  son
tnUi  de$  maladieg  venerienneB,  Paris,  1786) — **  A  chancre  always  causes  syphilis  if
It  be  only  treated  with  eztcmal  remedies."  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  these  local
Inrltatiing  oorrosiye  remedies  caused  a  recession  of  the  virus  from  the  chancre  into  the
inlerior  of  the  body,  and  thus  produced  the  syphilis.  Nol  a  chancre  destroyed  locallr
vittKNit  employing  any  irritant  remedies,  produces  the  same  result ''Petit  (so

Flabve,  loc.  eit)  excised  a  portion  of  the  nympb»  of  a  woman  on  which  some
i  bad  existed  for  some  days ;  the  wound  healed,  it  is  true,  but  the  syphtm


664  ON  THE  YEVEBfiAL  DISEASE

Now,  as  the  in-dwelling  venereal  malady  can  never  break  out
as  long  as  the  chancre,  undisturbed  by  external  applications,  re-
mains on  its  seat  (however  long  it  remains  there)  and  as  the  ve-
nereal disease  at  every  period,  whether  it  has  broken  out  as
syphilis  or  betrays  its  hidden  existence  merely  by  the  presence
of  the  chancre  (or  the  bubo)  can  only  be  radically  cured  *  by  the
use  of  (the  best  preparation  of)  mercury  (when  the  chancre  heals
up  spontaneously  without  the  aid  of  external  Temedies)  I  would
ask  if  it  be  not  very  foolish,  nay,  sinful,  to  destroy  the  chancre
by  external  desiccative  and  corrosive  applications,  seeing  that
thereby,  not  only  is  no  part  of  the  venereal  disease  removed,  but
we  deprive  ourselves  of  this  conclusive  sign  of  a  perfect  or  im*
perfect  cure,  which  should  be  our  guide  during  an  internal  mer-
curial treatment :  nay,  more,  what  is  much  worse,  we  even  cause
the  outbreak  of  the  syphilis,  which  had  hitherto  continued  to  Ue
latent  and  enchained  in  the  interior,  and  as  long  as  the  chancie
existed  could  never  burst  forth,  but  would  have  been  for  erer
healed  and  destroyed  had  we  medicinally  treated  the  diseaae
solely  by  the  use  of  the  internal  remedy,  whilst  the  chancre  still
existed  until  its  cure  was  completed,  that  is  to  say,  until  Ae
chancre  had  disappeared  without  the  aid  of  an  external  remedy  I

"But,"  say  these  medical  men,  "we  give  mercury  internally
whilst  we  dry  up  or  bum  off  the  chancre."  '

I  would  ask — ^in  a  sufficient  or  insufficient  manner?  (It must
have  been  insufficient  if  the  syphilis,  as  usually  happens,  breaks
out  afterwards.)

"  Oh,  we  give  it  in  a  sufficient  manner,"  they  reply.

Possibly:  but  how  can  they  tell  during  their  treatment  whether
their  internally  administered  mercury  sufficed  for  the  cure,  as  it
is  only  the  healing  of  the  chancre  that  has  remained  untouched|
under  the  influence  of  internal  remedies  alone,  that  can  give  us
the  sole  certain  proof  thereof ;  but  the  chancre  has  been  burnt
off  by  them  before  or  during  the  treatment.


broke  out  notwithsUndiiig."  And  this  might  naturally  have  been  expected,  as  the
venereal  duease  exists  completelj  in  the  body  before  the  cfaaaoe  appear^  and  ii
only  prevented  bursting  forth  by  the  presence  of  the  chancre  on  the  skin.

'  Fritie  On  ike  venereal  dUeaae,  Berlin,  1790,  and  SauL  Hahnemann,  /mfmcrtaa
for  eurgeoM  reepeeUng  venereal  dUeaeee. Leipaig,  1789,  g  278—284,  290— 29S,  614,
686,  [vide  antea,  p.  72,  et  seq.]  wherewith,  although  they  contradict  tbemselTee^  tlie
other  better  writers  agree,  as  Schwediaur,  Hunter,  BelL

'  The  worst  kind  of  physicians  advise  nothing  more  to  be  done  than  destroy  ii^  the
chancre,  e,  g.  Girtanner,  Dreaiiee  on  the  venereal  dUeaee, Oftttii^fen,  1808,  p.  215,
Hecker,  On  the  venereal  dieeaee.  2d  edit  pp.  67, 180, 182.


AND  ITS  OBDIHABT  DfPBOPSB  TREATMENT.  656

Had  their  employment  of  meroury  sufficed  for  the  perfect  core
of  the  interoal  venereal  disease,  they  had  not  needed  to  bum  off
the  chancre,  this  would  and  must  have  disappeared  ^  at  the  same
time  that  the  internal  malady  was  eradicated  without  the  simul-
taneous employment  of  any  external  remedy  whatever  I

But  it  is  just  because  they  know  that  their  internal  treatment
does  not  suffice  for  the  extirpation  of  the  internal  malady,  oon*
sequently  also  not. for  the  spontaneous  healing  of  the  chancre;
it  is  just  for  Uus  reason,  that  they  bum  off  the  chancre  to  give
their  treatment  the  superficial  appearance  of  having  cured  every-
thing (the  poor  patient  is  deceived ;  he  cannot  help  believing
himself  to  be  cured) ;  they  give  at  the  same  time — ^if  diey  wish  to
do  the  thing  thoroughly — mercury  internally  without  knowing
(ance  the  chancre,  the  guiding  sign,  is  gone)  how  much  or  how
long  they  require  to  give  it, '  and  this  they  do  under  the  idea
that  even  though  the  patient  may  not  be  thereby  thoroughly
emedy  they  have  at  least  advanced  the  treatment  of  the  disease
as  fiur  as  it  will  go.

But  this  is  a  mere  delusion.  For  they  torment  the  patient  by
boming  off  his  chancre,  which  is  of  no  use,  but  is  of  the  greatest
injury,  as  it  is  certainly  followed  by  the  breaking  out  of  syphilis,
and  they  at  the  same  time  harass  him  by  giving  him  an  inde-
finite quantity  of  meroury  by  the  mouth  without  avail.  For  the
venereid  disease  cannot  be  half  or  three  quarters  cured ;  it  must
either  be  quite  cured  (and  in  that  case  not  a  trace  of  it  is  left),
or  it  is  not  at  all  cured ;  even  though  it  be  treated  until  it  is  al-
most cured  (but  not  perfectly  eradicated)  it  is  no^  o^  aU  cured;
what  has  been  done  for  it  is  equivalent  to  nothing,  for  in  the
course  of  time  it  in£EJlibly  spreads  round  about  again  and  reaches

'  See  Fritie  and  Hahnemann,  op.  cU.

*  Thidj  often  attempt  to  justify  thcmselTes  by  saying  that  thoy  pushed  the  inteniAl
•dnUDistratioo  of  mercury  until  the  appearance  of  the  mercurial  fever,  whereby  thej
obtained  a  certainty  of  cure  being  effected.  But  what  do  they  usually  call  mercurial
farcr  t  Something  that  is  not  the  least  like  it,  and  that  affords  no  proof  whatever  of
an  internal  cure;  looseness  and  falling  out  of  the  teeth,  ulceration  of  the  mouth,
swelling  of  the  cheek  and  neck,  violent  pains  in  the  belly,  salivation  f  No  I  not  every
violeDt  assault  with  useless  mercurial  preparations  as  is  now  the  fiishion  (calomel
with  or  without  opium)  can  deserve  that  appellation ;  these  remedies  very  seldom
pfodnoe  that  peculiar  febrile  state  which  can  still  serve  as  the  sign  of  the  internal
core,  when  some  mischievous  hand  has  burnt  off  the  still  more  convincing  chancre.
U  it  only  the  purest,  moat  perfect,  and  hence  most  efficacious  sesquiozyde  of  mercury
that  produces  it  in  venereal  dUeases,  whereby  the  chancre  (if  it  be  still  present)
spoDtaiieously  heals  witliout  the  aid  of  an  external  remedy,  shewing  that  the  internal
diseaae  has  been  completely  eradicated.


656  OK  THE  YENBXAL  DISSAflB

the  same  extent  and  again  plants  itself  just  as  finnlj  as  if  nothing
at  all  had  been  done  for  it

Therefore  what  is  the  certain  consequence  of  this  local  drjing-
up  and  often  very  tedious,  often  very  painful  burning  off  of  the
chancre,  whereby  a  portion  of  the  genital  organ  is  destroyed,
and  of  the  blind  employment  of  internal  mercurial  remedies?
That  the  patient  is  deceived  into  believing  himself  cured,  and
that  his  lesser  evil  (chancre  with  latent  internal  venereal  disease)
is  changed  into  a  greater  I  Now,  either  a  bubo  (a  now  much
more  troublesome  substitute  for  the  indwelling  venereal  diseaae)
or  (where  no  bubo  has  appeared,  or  if  it  have,  has  been  driven
off  again)  after  a  few  (3,  4,  6,  9)  months  syphilis  breaks  forth.

And  i^  after  it  has  broken  out,  (as  it  inevitably  must  if  the
patients  were  not  assailed  with  unhelpful  mercurial  preparations
so  violently  that  there  was  a  struggle  betwixt  life  and  death,
when  if  they  did  not  go  the  way  of  all  flesh,  some  few  of  them
were  thereby  freed  from  their  tvenereal  disease)  the  physician  be
asked  if  the  ulcers  on  the  tonsils,  the  bluish  pimples  on  the  fiMse,
extending  even  into  the  hairy  scalp,  the  round  copper-coloured
spots  on  the  skin,  &c.  be  not  remains  of  the  venereal  disease
that  was  thought  to  be  cured,  he  usually  seeks  to  get  out  of  the
scrape  by  alleging:  "That  he  certainly  had  thoroughly  cured
him  on  the  former  occasion,  there  was  then  nothing  more  to  be
seen  about  him"  (he  had  burnt  off  the  chancre  and  removed
from  sight  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  indwelling  disease ;
this  he  calls  a  cure)— "the  patient  must  certainly  have  caught  a
fresh  infection  during  these  four,  siic,  or  nine  months,  whence
this  venereal  ulceration  of  the  throat,  &c.  has  arisen."

Thus  the  poor  betrayed  sufferers  must^  in  addition  to  their
misfortune,  bear  the  doctor's  disgrace,  because  they  knew  not
how  syphilis  can  and  must  arise.

It  can  only  proceed  from  the  uncured  indwelling  venereal
disease,  whose  external  substitute  and  suppresser  (the  chancre,
which,  as  long  as  it  exists  imdisturbed,  prevents  the  outbreak  oif
the  syphilis)  has  been  destroyed  locally  by  the  physician,  and  can
consequently  no  longer  hinder  its  outbreak ;  and  even  though
our  patient  may  be  conscious  of  having  had  several  suspicious
connexions  since  the  removal  of  his  former  chancre,  but  got  no
chancre  therefrom,  yet  he  has  not  been  infected  anew,  and  the
syphilis  that  lias  broken  out  must  be  derived  indisputably  from
the  chancre  that  was  formerly  burnt  oS,  consequently  from  the
bad  treatment  of  his  former  venereal  disease. For  it  has  never


AND  ITB  ORDINABY  IMPBOPEB  TBSATMENT. 667

oocorred  that  syphilis  has  been  produced  without  a  previous
(destroyed)  chancre,  Hhere  is  no  authentic  instance  on  record  of
such  a  case  having  happened.

Did  the  patients,  whose  syphilitic  symptoms  the  physician
attributes  to  a  new  infection,  know  this,  they  having  in  the
meantime  contracted  no  fresh  chancre  (which  has  been  driven
away),  they  would  know  how  to  reply  to  the  physician  when  he
trial  to  transfer  his  disgrace  upon  them,  whose  treatment  he
hae  bungled.

But  as  patients  ai^  ignorant  on  this  subject,  they  alone  have
to  bear  the  injury  and  the  disgrace ;  the  doctor  subjects  them  to
a  new  course  of  mercury,  and  if  this  be  not  pushed  by  him  to  a
much  more  violent  and  serious  extent  than  the  former  one
during  the  destruction  of  the  chancre  was — if,  I  say,  the  patient
be  not  assailed  imtil  his  life  is  endangered  with  the  ordinary  un-
serviceable mercurial  preparations,  a  radical  cure  of  the  disease
will  not  be  effected  even  with  this  second  course ;  the  patient
gjBtB  rid  of  his  ulcers  in  the  throat  for  example  (for  each  of  the
primazy  symptoms  of  syphilis  is  easily  removed  even  by  small
quantities  of  a  bad  mercurial  remedy,  whereby  the  disease  is
not  radically  cured)  but  after  a  few,  or  after  many  months,  a
new  syphilitic  symptom  appears  in  their  stead — and  after  a  third
and  a  fourth  similar,  imperfect  mercurial  treatment,  a  third  and
a  fourth  affection  appear  in  succession,  and  at  length  the  affec-
tions  of  the  joints  and  the  agonizing  nocturnal  pains  in  the  bones^
for  which  the  useless  mercurials,  decoctions  of  woods  and  baths
are  no  longer  of  any  avail ;  and  the  patient  is  left  in  the  lurch,
that  is  to  say,  to  suffer  his  tortures.

Thus,  from  an  insignificant  primary  malady  (for  the  original
venereal  disease  still  accompanied  by  chancre  may  be  readily
cured  by  the  internal  use  of  the  best  mercurial  preparations),
there  arises  a  sucession  of  sufferings  and  morbid  alterations  of
many  years'  duration,  often  on  account  of  the  health-destroying
treatments  attended  with  danger  to  life,  and  all  this— ^om  t/ie  crigi-
n(Ulo<xddestnu:tiono/  ^ecAancre  which  was  designed  by  the  bene-
ficent Creator  to  be  the  constant  preventive  of  the  breaking  forth
of  the  syphilitic  malady  and  the  sure  monitor  of  the  physician
as  to  whether  the  internal  treatment  is  complete  (if  it  heals  up
of  itself),  or  the  disease  is  not  yet  radically  cured  (if  it  remains
unaltered  on  its  seat).

*  Hunter,  op.  cit  p.  487,  Bays :  **  Probably  not  in  one  case  out  of  5  0,"  i.  e,
in  DO  caae.

42


658  ON  THE  Y£KKBJEAL  DISIA81,  4a

It  is  only  by  the  discretion  of  the  patients  themselTeB  that
physicians  can  ultimately  be  improved.  Let  eyery  one  that  is
infected  immediately  dismiss  the  physician  who  wishes  to  com-
mence the  distructive  plan  with  him,  of  treating  the  chancre  by
local  remedies,  though  he  bestow  on  the  remedy  he  would  em-
ploy externally  the  mildest  and  most  seductive  of  names,  eren
though  he  should  call  it  cooling,  sedative,  alleviating,  emollient^
relaxing,  descutient,  purifying  or  healing ;  all  these  fine  appella*
tions  serve  but  to  disguise  the  enemy.  The  chancre,  being  the
most  important  witness  of  what  takes  place  within,  must  on  no
account  be  touched  or  treated  with  any  kind  of  external  zeme-
dies  by  whatevemames  they  may.  be  called.^  The  patient  ought
only  to  be  allowed  to  wash  the  genitals  occasionally  with  tepid
river- water  or  warm  cow's  milk.

-  On  the  contrary,  let  him  choose  a  physician,  who,  fidly  alive
to  the  extreme  importance  of  the  chancre,  leaves  this  quite
alone,  and  understands  how  to  conduct  the  internal  treatment
alone  in  a  masterly  way ;  that  is  to  say,  eradicate  it  by  means
of  the  best  mercurial  preparation  that  is  capable  of  doing  ao^
given  internally  without  the  production  of  salivation,  in  such  a
manner  that  the  chancre  heals  up  of  its  own  accord,  without
the  aid  of  the  slightest  external  remedy.

'^en  and  then  only  can  the  patient  be  sure  that  his  disease  is
cured.

The  best  mercurial  preparation  for  effecting  this,  is  the  dark-
coloured  pure  sesquioxide  of  mercury,  of  which  a  small  portion
rubbed  with  a  drop  of  water  on  the  palm  of  the  hand  by  means
of  the  point  of  the  finger,  nms  into  minute  globules  of  metallic
mercury  which  are  observable  either  with  the  naked  eye  or  with
a  lens.  My  mode  of  preparing  it  will  be  found  in  many  books.
This  only  is  the  most  innocuous  and  most  powerful  preparation
wherewith  the  venereal  disease  of  all  degrees  may  be  cured,

'  And  should  the  patent  have  allowed  himself  to  be  seduced  and  have  pennitted
the  external  driving  off  of  his  chancre,  and  should  there  arise,  as  usoaUy  happens^  in
the  place  of  it  a  bubo,  let  him  remember  that  this  has  the  same  Mgnifi<»Bi>5^  j^  1^
chancre,  and  is  a  substitute  lor  the  internal  malady,  and  that  if  allowed  to  stay  there
undisturbed  it  also  prevents  the  outbreak  of  the  syphilis.  Therefore  he  sbouid  not
allow  this  at  least  to  be  driven  off  by  external  remedies  (inunctions  of  the  blue  ouit.
ment  beneath  the  bubo,  called  /nc/toiu,  and  the  application  of  matfy  other  tha»
which  physicians  term  resolving  the  bubo),  for  after  a  few  months  the  syphilb  fiiUowB
inevitably ;  but  he  should  rather  let  himself  be  only  treated  by  the  best  memirial
preparation,  only  inwardly,  until  the  bubo,  without  the  aid  of  external  remedies  and
without  fnctioDs,  disappears  spontaneously  when  the  internal  malady  is  cured  ;  and
it  is  only  thus  tliatbe  can  be  certain  of  his  complete  recovery.


HOTA  BKNS  FOB  XT  BBYHWBBS.  059

without  aaUration,  if  the  general  state  of  the  patient's  health  be
not  very  much  broken  up  and  weakened.

I^  however,  the  patient  have  been  mistreated  by  a  physician
by  having  his  chancre  or  the  subsequent  bubo  driven  off  by  ex-
ternal remedies,  and  the  syphilis  have  consequently  broken  out ;
if  it  be  already  present,  after  several  long-continued,  fruitless
treatments  with  bad  mercurial  preparations,  in  a  high  degree,
the  general  health  that  has  been  ruined  by  such  violent  treat-
ment must  first  be  restored,  and  the  accesssory  ailments  usually
present  must  first  be  removed  before  the  master  in  his  art  can
employ  even  the  best  mercurial  preparation  to  effect  the  perfect
core.

In  such  master-pieces  of  treatment,  where  the  malady  has
taken  such  deep  roots,  and  the  chancre  having  been  previously
driven  off  serves  no  more  as  a  loadstar ;  there  is  nothing  to
shew  that  the  treatment  has  accomplished  a  perfect  cure,  but
the  closest  observation  for  the  arrival  of  the  period,  when,  after
the  complete  restoration  of  the  patient,  some  fresh  symptoms
present  themselves  that  are  only  peculiar  to  the  action  of  mer-
cury, but  which  are  quite  new  to  the  patient  in  the  course  of
his  venereal  complaint,  and  have  scah^ly  ever  been  experi*
enced  before,  but  among  which  neither  salivation,  nor  toothache,
nor  ulcers  of  the  mouth,  nor  pains  in  the  bowels,  nor  diarrhoea
are  to  be  found.


NOTA  BENE  FOR  MY  REVIEWERS.'


I  have  read  several  false  criticisms  on  the  second  part  of  my
Pure  Materia  Medtca^  especially  on  the  essay  at  the  beginning  of
it,  entitled  '*  Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic*  Medical  Doctrine."

'  From  the  8d  Part  of  the  Beine  Arzneimittellehref  dated  February,  1817.

•  What  an  immense  amount  of  learning  do  not  my  critics  display  1  I  shall  only
allude  to  those  who  write- and  print  twmopathie  and  homopatky  in  a  place  of  hommh
pathie  and  homeopathy,  thereby  betraying  that  they  are  not  aware  of  the  immense
^BfiiBreDoe  betwixt  &/idr  and  5/ioiey,  but  consider  the  two  to  be  synoDymona.  Did  they
ten  never  hear  a  word  about  what  the  whole  world  knows,  how  the  infinite  difference
betwixt  &fiM6(rio(  and  huoiovvfi  once  split  the  whole  Christian  Church  into  two  paitr,
impoMible  to  be  re.united  ?  Do  they  not  understand  enough  Greek  to  know  that
(aloiie  and  in  combination)  o/idy  means  ccmimm,  identical,  the  tatne  (e.  p.  tU  hjidv  Xix't
inpoSalvot,  Iliad  3.)  but  that  H^ioiov  only  means  similar,  retemhling  the  object,  bui
never  reaching  it  in  regard  to  nature  and  kind,  never  becoming  identical  with  it  f

The  bom«Bopathic  doctrine  never  pretended  to  core  a  disease  by  the  eame,  the


800  NOTA  BSNS  FOB  KT  BSVIXWXBa

Now  I  could  easily  settle  them  here  after  the  traditional  man-
ner of  writers,  and  expose  them  in  all  their  nakedness.  But  I
shall  not  do  so.  I  do  not  wish  to  burden  myself  with  the  sin
of  immortalizing  these  follies  and  their  perpetrators,  and  piefisr
not  to  reveal  the  weaknesses  of  my  contemporaries  to  an
assuredly  more  discerning  posterity.

I  shall  only  say  tliis  much  in  a  general  way.

Perversions  of  words  and  sense,  incomprehensible  palaver,
which  is  meant  to  appear  learned,  abuse  and  theoretical  scepti-
cal shakings  of  the  head,  instead  of  practical  demonstrations  of
the  contrary,  seem  to  me  to  be  weapons  of  too  absurd  a  character
to  use  against  a  fact  such  as  homoeopathy  is ;  they  remind  me
of  the  little  figures  which  mischievous  boys  make  with  gun-
powder and  set  on  fire  in  order  to  tease  people-— the  things  can
only  fizz  and  splutter,  but  are  not  very  effective,  are  on  the
whole  very  miserable  affairs.

By  such  tricks,  the  pitiful  character  of  which  recoils  on  their
authors,  homoeopathy  cannot  be  blown  up.

My  respected  bretiiren  on  the  opposition  benches,  I  can  give
you  better  advice  as  to  how  you  should  set  about  overthrowing*
if  possible,  this  doctrine;  which  threatens  to  stifle  your  art,  that
is  founded  on  mere  assumption,  and  to  bring  ruin  upon  all  your
therapeutic  lumber. Listen  to  me  I

Your  attempts  against  the  systematic  exposition  of  the
doctrine,  entitled  the  "Spirit  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical
Doctrine,"  have  as  you  perceive,  proved  unsuccessful.  You  had
better  leave  it  alone  1  Spirits  such  as  this  is,  are  no  subjects  for
joking  with.  It  is  said  there  are  spirits  whose  appearance  has
left  behind  a  life-long  disquiet  in  the  conscience  of  the  wicked
and  of  those  who  act  contrary  to  their  knowledge  of  what  is
right  and  which  nightly  torment  them,  for  their  neglect  of


identical  power  by  whicli  the  disease  was  produced — this  has  been  impressed  npoD
the  unreasonable  opponents  often  enough,  but,  as  it  seems,  in  vain  ;~iio  I  it  only  eure>
in  the  mode  most  consonant  to  nature,  by  means  of  a  power  never  exactly  oofrea
ponding  to,  never  the  tame  as  the  cause  of  the  disease,  but  by  means  of  a  medicm
that  possesses  the  peculiar  power  of  being  able  to  produce  a  nmilar  morbid  slata

( 'fimtuv  waBos,)

Cannot  those  persons  feel  the  difference  betwixt  **  identical^  (the  same)  and
**9imilarr  Are  they  all  homopathieaUy  labouring  imder  the  same  malady  of  stu-
pidity {  Should  not  any  ome  toko  ventwru  to  ttep  forward  09  a  reviewer  of  the  **  Spirit
of  tbs  HomcBopathio  Medical  Doctrine"  have  at  least  a  rudimentary  idea  of  the
meaning  of  the  word  **  Horn :  op  thy,**


KOTA  BENB  FOR  IfT  BEYIEWSRS.  661

acknowledged  and  jet  neglected  duties  I  Mark  this;  otherwise
you  may  not  be  able  to  silence  the  judge  wit^n  jou,  which  has
wakened  to  speak  to  you  in  unmistakeable  accents !

No  I  there  is  another  and  an  infallible  method  of  overthrowing
this  doctrine,  if  that  is  possible  to  be  done.

This  doctrine  appeals  not  only  chiefly,  but  solely  to  the  verdict
of  experience— "repeat  the  experiments,"  it  cries  aloud,  **  repeat
ihem  careAiUy  and  accurately,  and  you  will  find  the  doctrine
confirmed  at  every  step  " — and  it  does  what  no  medical  doctrine,
no  system  of  physic,  no  so-called  therapeutics  ever  did  or  could
do,  it  insists  upon  being  "judged  by  the  result."

Here,  then,  we  have  homoeopathy  just  where  we  wished  to
have  it;  here  we  can  (come  on,  dear  gentlemen,  all  will  go  on
nicely)  give  it  the  death  blow  from  this  side.

Take  one  case  of  disease  after  another,  note  it  down  according
to  the  directions  given  in  the  Organon,  specially  in  respect  of
all  its  discernible  symptoms,  in  so  exact  a  manner  that  the
founder  of  homoeopathy  himself  shall  be  unable  to  find  &ult
with  the  minuteness  of  the  report  (of  course  any  case  selected
must  be  one  for  which  a  homoeopathic  medicine  is  to  be  found
amongst  those  medicines  whose  peculiar  symptoms  are  known)
and  administer  the  most  appropriate  homoeopathic  medicinal
substance  that  can  be  discovered,  pure  and  unmixed,  for  the
case  of  disease  in  question,  in  a  dose  as  small  as  this  doctrine
directs;  but,  as  is  expressly  insisted  on,  taking  care  to  remove  all
other  kinds  ofmedimial  influences  from  tlie  patient^  and  if  it  do  not
give  relief,  speedy,  mild  and  permanent  relief,  then,  by  a  publi-
cation of  the  duly  attested  history  of  the  treatment  according  to
the  principles  of  the  homoeopathic  system  strictly  followed  out,  you
will  be  able  to  give  a  public  refutation  of  this  doctrine  which  so
seriously  threatens  the  old  darkness.

But  I  pray  you  to  beware  of  playing  false  in  the  matter  I — all
roguery  comes  to  light  and  leaves  an  unfavourable  stigma  behind  it
as  a  warning,^

K  then,  following  your  conscientious  example,  every  other
equally  conscientious  and  careful  medical  experimentalist  meets

*  As  a  warning  example  in  point,  I  would  refer  to  the  notorioiis  (exquisitelj  re-
corded) Ustory  of  a  disease  which  Kotzebue  was  said  to  have  had,  and  of  which  be
was  Baid  to  be  miraculously  cured  by  means  of  the  excitement  theory  method.  It
was,  however,  as  was  poon  phewn  a  pure  invention ;  invented  in  order  to  serve  the
purp<ifie:9  of  the  excitement-theory  of  that  time,  and  the  disgrace  of  the  deception  i^
still  and  will  ever  be  attached  to  the  name  of  its  author.


602  SOTA  BKHS  FOB  XT  BXTJEWMSOL

with  the  same  result — ifaU  thai  Ae  homoeopathic  doctrine  pnmi$e$
fnym  being  faitl^uUy  followed  out  does  not  take  place — then  homodo-
pathj  is  as  good  as  lost,  it  is  all  up  with  homiBopakhj  if  it  does
not  i^w  itself  efficacious,  remarkably  efficacioas.

Or,  gentlemen  on  the  opposition  oorporaticm  benches,  do  joa
know  any  other  and  more  potent  method  for  suppressing  this
accursed  doctrine,  with  its  truths^  that  cut  into  the  very  soul  <^
the  dogmatists  of  ancient  and  modem  times,  well-armed  though
they  be — ig^iea  inest  ilUs  via  et  coeUstis  origo — which,  as  it  is
asserted  for  certain,  only  needs  to  appeal  to  impartiality  and
sound  human  reason,  in  order  to  find  an  entrance  into  the  unoor-
rupted  understanding,  and  can  point  to  the  in£dlibly  beneficial
effects  that  result  fix)m  a  fidthM  following  out  of  its  precepts^
and  is  thus  enabled  to  triumph  certainly  over  all  obduracy  ;—

'  Hie  tmth  of  this,  the  ool j  ratiooal  doctrine  of  medicine,  mart  seiae  npoo  tbi
ooDTictioDs  of  these  gentlemen  if  they  ponessod  but  a  spariL  of  reason,  and  it  iSA  ao
to  a  certain  extent^  as  we  maj  obsenre  here  and  fliere  in  their  writings,  from  flw
piteoas  lamentations  caused  hj  their  appniienskin  of  the  speedy  overthrow  of  tht
antiquated  edifice  of  their  oorporatioQ.

But,  see,  they  feel  their  brains  so  stofEed  foil  of  the  hondred  tbnnsand  fiuadfal
ideas,  insane  maTims,  systems  and  dogmas  and  the  load  of  ereilasting  practical
trash,  they  are  no  longer  capable  of  laying  aside  this  useless  fufuiUire,  in  order  tea,
with  freedom  of  mind  to  practise  impartially  a  system  so  simple  as  hooMBopathy  k,
for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  They  feel  theoiselves,  I  say,  so  incapable  of  doing  this^
that  the  ill-humour  this  causes  distorts  not  only  their  mind,  but  also  their  leatare%
and  can  only  find  vent  in  impotent  abuse  of  the  better  way  that  they  can  nerer
attain.

I  am  almost  sorry  for  them ;  for  the  old  frlsehoods  so  often  paraded  before  then
as  truths  hover  incessantly  before  their  memory  as  though  they  stall  were  trutfaa;
the  fictions  presented  to  them  as  articles  of  fiiith,  and  testified  to  by  illustrious  and
great  names,  have  been  so  often  dunned  as  important  and  proper  things  into  their
ears,  that  they  continue  still  to  resound  there ;  the  illusory  doctrinal  maxims  and  the
suppositions,  a  priori  explanations,  definitions  and  distinctions  of  the  schoola,  oOered
to  them  as  axioms,  have  been  so  often  read  by  them  again  and  again  in  print,  and
custom  has  habituated  their  whole  mode  of  operations  to  such  an  easy-going  routaoe
readiness,  that  they  are  unable  any  longer  to  resist  the  pressure  of  those  accustomed
things  that  have  become  their  second  nature,  and  they  must,  in  spite  of  themselres^
continue  to  think  and  act  in  the  same  way — (at  the  very  first  view  of  the  patient
some  particular  anatomical  seat  in  the  body  occurs  to  them  as  the  undoubted  seat  of
the  disease,  some  nosological  name  for  the  disease  presses  itself  upon  them,  they
already  feel  at  their  finger  ends  the  elegant  compound  prescription,  which  they  wiU
dash  off  upon  the  nearest  piece  of  paper) — so  that  even  if  they  wished  seriously  to
reform  and  lead  a  new  medical  life  in  simplicity  and  in  truth,  wcirthy  of  the  Allseo*
ing  Maker  of  our  mind  that  he  has  created  to  enable  U9  to  administer  to  the  relief  of
sick  and  sufiering  humanity,  tkey  are  note  incapable  of  doing  $0.

Such  is  the  character  of  the  self-styled  critic*  of  the  refiinned  system  of  medicine
and  their  aiders  and  abettors ;  how  can  their  rriticiKnis  be  other  than  they  are  i  God
have  mercy  on  their  poor  souls  I


IfOTA  BXNB  FOB  KT  BSVnBWSBS.  688

do  yon,  gentlemen,  I  repeat,  know  any  more  effectual  mode  ol'
Buppieflsing  this  doctrine  7

YesI  apparently  you  think  you  do.

Continue  then  to  exalt  the  common-place  twaddle  of  your
school  to  the  very  heavens  with  the  most  fulsome  praise,  and  to
pervert  and  ridicule  with  your  evil  mind  what  your  ignorance
does  not  pervert ;  continue  to  calumniate,  to  abuse,  to  revile  :—
and  the  unprejudiced  will  be  able  plainly  to  comprehend  on
whose  side  truth  lies.

The  improved  (homoeopathic)  medical  doctrine  will  stand  out
in  more  prominent  relief  and  appear  to  greater  advantage
against  the  ibil  of  this  nonsense,  and  ( — ^for  who  can  entertain  a
doubt  respecting  the  feeling  for  truth  inherent  in  the  better  part
of  mankind? — )  will  dispel  the  nocturnal  darkness  of  antiquated
stupidities,  for  it  teaches  how  to  afford  certain  benefit  in  diseases,
where  hitherto  mere  incomprehensible  learned  palaver,  at  the
bed-side  of  the  late  lamented,  sought  in  vain  to  hide  the  damage
done  by  pint  and  quart  bottles  full  of  unsuitable  mixtures  of
nnknown,  life-destroying  drugs.

And  what  do  you  say  when  you  see  the  author  and  first
teacher  of  homoeopathy,  together  with  his  genuine  disciples,
oure  without  suffering  and  permanently,  a  much  greater  propor*
tion  of  patients,  and  such  as  are  suffering  from  the  worst,  the
most  tedious  complaints,  with  few,  mild  tasteless  medicines?
Can  your  so-called  art  do  the  like?  Does  not  such  a  result
laugh  to  scorn  your  miserable  theoretical  scepticism,  and  the
impotent  routine  of  your  cut-and-dry  system  ?

If  you  really  wish  to  do  as  well,  imitate  the  homoeopathic
practice  rationally  and  honestly  I

If  you  do  not  wish  this — well  then,  harp  away — we  will  not
prevent  you — harp  away  on  your  comfortless  path  of  blind  and
servile  obedience  in  the  dark  midnight  of  fanciful  systems,  se-
duced hither  and  thither  by  the  will-o'-the-wisps  of  your  vene-
rated authorities,  who,  when  you  really  stand  in  need  of  aid,
leave  you  in  the  lurch — dazzle  your  sight  and  disappear.

And  if  your  unfortimate  j)ractice,  from  which  that  which  you
intended,  wished  and  promised,  does  not  occur,  accumulates
within  you  a  store  of  spiteful  bile,  which  seeks  to  dissipate  itself
in  calumniating  your  betters — well  then,  continue  to  call  the
grapes  up  yonder,  which  party-pride,  confusion  of  intellect,
weakness  or  indolence  prevents  your  reaching,  sour,  and  leave
them  to  be  gathered  by  more  worthy  persons.


684  EXAMINATION  OF  THR  80UR088  OF  THE

Continue,  if  it  pleases  yon,  enviously  to  slander  the  sublime
art,  but  know  that  envy  gnaws  in  vain  at  adamantine  truth,  and
only  consumes  the  marrow  of  the  bones  of  its  possesaor.*


EXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOURCES  OF  THE  COMMON  MATERIA

MEDICA.^


Next  to  a  knowledge  of  what  there  is  to  cure  in  each  particu-
lar case  which  presents  itself  for  treatment,  there  can  be  no
more  necessary  knowledge  for  a  practical  physician,  than  an
acquaintance  with  the  curative  implements^  to  know,  namely,
what  each  of  the  remedies  can  certainly  cure.

Twenty-three  centuries  have  been  spent  in  fruitless  labour  to
discover  the  way  by  which  the  end  of  this  knowledge  may  be
reached ;  and  not  a  step  has  been  gained  by  all  the  efforts.

Had  the  millions  of  physicians  .who  during  this  long  space  of
time  occupied  themselves  with  the  subject,  only  discovered  the
way  to  the  knowledge  of  how  this  end  (the  discovery  of  the  healing
properties  of  each  medicine)  was  to  he  attained^  then  had  much,
almost  everything  been  accomplished ;  for  then  would  this  way
have  been  capable  of  being  pursued,  and  the  zeal  and  exertions
of  the  better  class  of  physicians  must  have  soon  won  a  consider-
able territory  of  knowledge,  so  that  what  still  remained  to  be
investigated  would  also  soon  have  been  within  our  grasp.

But  observe,  that  not  one,  as  yet,  ever  trod  the  patB  that  surely
and  certainly  leads  to  this  end.  All  the  paths  hitherto  trodden
were,  consequently,  as  one  century  was  forced  to  say  of  those
of  another,  mere  ways  of  error.  These  we  shall  examine  some-
what more  closely.

The  Jirst  source  of  the  Materia  Medica  hitherto  extant  is  mere
guess  work  and  fiction,  which  attempts  to  set  forth  the  general
therapeutic  virtues  of  drugs.

Exactly  as  the  text  ran  in  Dioscorides,  seventeen  centuries
ago:  this  or  that  substance  is  resolving,  dissipating,  diueretic,
diaphoretic,  eminenagogue,  antispasmodic,  caihartic,  &c., — so  runs
it  now  in  most  recent  works  on  Materia  Medica.  The  same  de-
scription of  the  general  virtues  of  particular  drugs,  whidi  do  not
turn  out  true ;  the  same  general  assertions,  which  did  not  hoid

*  Av'»va  i3e.roir,  AesclivL,  JiStfiien.,  829.
'  From  the  Beine  ArmeimiUelUhre^  part  iil


COmOK MATERIA  MBDICUL  605

good  when  put  to  the  trial  at  the  sick-bed.  Experience  declaredly
that  such  a  medicine  very  seldom  performs,  in  the  human  bodj,
what  these  books  allege  respecting  its  general  therapeutic
virtues ;  and  that  when  it  does,  this  happens  either  fix>m  other
causes,  or  it  is  a  merely  palliative  passing  effect  (primary  action),
which  is  certainly  followed  by  the  opposite,  to  the  greater  detri-
ment of  the  patient

If  a  medicine  prized  for  its  diuretic,  diaphoretic,  or  emmena-
gogue  qualities,  when  given  by  itself  alone,  had,  m  special  ctr-
cumsianceSj  and  in  one  out  of  many  cases,  seemed  to  have  had
this  effect,  should  it,  on  this  account,  be  pronounced  as  abso*
lutely  possessing  these  qualities,  that  is,  would  it  deserve  the
title  of  an  unconditional  diaphoretic,  emmenagogue,  or  diuretic?
In  that  case,  we  should  dignify  with  the  name  of  an  honest  man,
one  who  only  occasionally  acted  honestly ;  and  on  one  who
only  lied  on  rare  occasions,  we  should  bestow  the  honourable
name  of  a  truthftil  man,  a  man  of  his  word  I

Are  our  conceptions  to  be  thus  perverted  and  reversed?

But  these  rare  instances  do  not  prove  that  a  certain  effect  will
take  place  even  in  rare  cases ;  for  not  in  one  case  out  of  a.  hun-
dred were  the  substances  given  alone,  but  almost  always  in  com-
"bination  with  other  medicines.

How  few  physicians  are  there  who  have  given  a  patient  but
one  single  simple  substance  at  a  time,  and  waited  for  its  sole
operation,  avoiding  altogether  the  concomitant  use  of  all  other
medicinal  substances  I  It  is  nothing  but  a  mixture  of  various
medicines  that  ordinary  practitioners  employ  I  And  if  they
ever  give  a  simple  substance,  for  example,  in  powder,  they  are
sure  to  order  also  some  herbal  infusion  (another  kind  of  medi-
cine), or  medicated  clyster,  or  embrocation,  or  fomentation  of
some  other  kind  of  herbs,  to  be  used  along  with  it.  They  never
act  otherwise.  This  inherent  vice  clings  like  pitch  to  the  ordinary
practitioner^  so  that  he  never  can  rid  himself  ofiL  He  is  in  straits
before  and  behind,  and  he  cannot  rest,  and  is  not  at  ease,  if  this
bargain.

And  for  this  they  have  plenty  of  excuses.

They  maintain  that  this  or  that  medicine  (of  the  peculiar  and
pure  effects  of  which,  however,  they  know  nothing)  is  the  prin-
cipal ingredient  of  their  compound  prescription,  and  that  all  the
effects  must  be  attributed  to  it.  The  other  substances  were
added  for  different  objects,  some  to  aid  their  principal  ingredient,


M5 XXAHIHATION  OF  THX  80UBCB  OP  THX

Bonie  to  oonect  it,  others  to  direct  it  to  this  or  that  pait  of  the
body,  or  to  give  it  the  necessary  instmctioiis  <m  its  paasags
(their  own  peculiar  operation  being  all  the  time  nnknown);  wm
i£  the  drugs  were  intelligent  beings,  endowed  with  well-diqpoaed
wills  and  complaisant  obedience,  so  that  they  wonld  prodnee
jnst  that  efSdci  in  the  body  which  the  doctor  ordered  them,  and
not  a  particle  more !

Bat  do  these  accessory  snbstances  cease,  on  your  command,
to  confuse  and  to  counteract,  with  their  own  peculiar  and  oif*
known  medicinal  influence,  the  action  of  your  principal,  and  to
produce,  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  laws  of  their  own  inh€S^
ent  nature,  effects  which  cannot  be  surmised  or  predicted,  and
can  only  be  discovered  and  brought  to  our  knowledge  by  pnie
experiment?

Is  it  not  foolish  to  estimate  the  effect  of  on^  force,  while  other
forces  of  another  kind  were  in  action,  which  often  contnbnted
mainly,  though  in  common  with  the  rest,  to  produce  the  leBuH?

It  would  not  be  more  absurd  if  some  one  were  to  try  to  per*
auade  us  that  he  had  discovered  a  good  article  of  nutriment  in
kitchen  salt;  that  he  had  ordered  it  to  a  man  half-starved,
and  that  he  had  no  sooner  eaten  of  it  than  he  was  invigorated,
satiated,  and  strengthened,  as  if  by  miracle ;  that  the  ounce  of
conmion  salt  was  the  basis  and  chief  ingredient  of  the  nutri-
dissolved,  lege  artis^  in  quantum  satis  of  boiling  water  as  the
excipient  and  vehicle,  then  he  had  added  as  a  corrective,  a
good  lump  of  butter,  and,  as  an  adjuvant,  a  pound  of  fine
cut  rye-bread.  This  mixture  (soup),  after  being  properly  stirred,
he  caused  to  be  taken  at  once  by  the  Seanished  patient,  and
by  it  his  hunger  was  completely  appeased ; — aU  die  latter  in-
gredients were  merely  accessaries  in  the  prescription,  the  chief
as  the  basis  of  the  whole  receipt ;  and  see  I — ^in  his  hands  it
had,  when  prepared  accurately  according  to  these  directions,
always  exhibited  the  most  beneficial  results.

I^  in  the  kitchen  Materia  Medica,  the  virtues,  of  saturans^
analepticum^  restaurans^  reficiens^  nutriens  should,  firom  these  cir-
not  be  more  childish  and  absurd  than  the  conduct  of  the
physician  who  should  arbitrarily  ordain  one  substance  to  be
the  basis  of  his  diuretic^  then  add  two,  three,  or  four  other
powerful  (unknown)  medicinal  substances  (with  the  sage  object,


COMMOK  MATSBIA  MEDIOA.  667

forsooth^  of  serving  as  corrigens^  dirigens,  adjuvans^  excipiens\

ftnd  order  the  patdent  to  walk  up  and  down  the  room  while

taking  the  mixture,  drinking  in  the  meantime  largely  of  warm

Back-whey,  made  of  Bhine-wine  well  sweetened  with  sugar,  and

then  publish  triumphantly  the  extraordinary  success  of  the  basis


UBuaL" In  his  ^yes  the  added  substances  and  the  regimen  are

mere  unimportant  accessaries,  and  innocent  of  the  result,  in


has  constituted  the  chief  ingredient  in  the  receipt,  and  in  which

(he  knows  not  why)  he  takes  the  deepest  interest,  and  whose

fsune  h^wishes  to  extend,  the  sole  honour  of  the  effects  produced.

Thus  it  naturally  happens,  when,  by  such  arbitrary  and  wilM

praise  of  a  medicine  which  some  one  has  taken  a  fancy  to,  and
to  whidx  he  was  determined  to  attribute  some  definite  curative

property,  the  undeserved  and  surreptitious  attributes  of  diuretic^

emmenagogue^  resolvent^  sudorific^  expectorant^  antispasmodic^  are

insoibed  in  the  willing  Materia  Medica,  where  they  afterwards

figure  as  truths,  deluding  those  that  trust  to  it.

Thus  this  rare  effect  must  be  attributed  to  the  action  of  all
these  medicines  which  were  used  at  once  I  How  small  a  part  of
the  uncertain  credit  of  being  a  diuretic,  diaphoretic  or  emmena-
gogue,  or  any  other  sort  of  medicine,  fidls  to  the  share  of  each
individual  ingredient  in  the  receipt  I

to  them  by  Dioscorides,  and  re-echoed  by  his  successors,  which
occupy  the  greatest  share  in  Materia  Medicas  even  of  our  own
day,  as,  for  instance,  that  this  or  that  medicine  was  diuretic,  di-
aphoretic, purgative,  expectorant,  or  a  purifier  of  the  blood  and
humours,  are  quite  unfounded.^

The  assertion  that  this  or  that  medicine  is  resolvent,  discutient,
an  exalter  or  depresser  of  sensibility,  irritability,  or  the  repro-

^  When  no  other  virtue  could  be  attributed  to  a  medicine,  it  must  be  at  leaet  aa
€9Qeuant :  evacuant  in  some  way  or  other ;  for,  without  an  eyacuation — ^without  an
cracuation  of  the  morbific  matter  which  their  grossly  material  cooceptioiis  of  diseast
led  them  to  seek  in  all  diseases,  they  could  not  imagine  that  a  medicine  could  aflSect
a  cure.  Since,  then,  the  generation  and  existence  of  a  disease  was  due  to  this  hypo-
tiietical  morbific  matter,  they  bethought  themselves  of  all  the  conceivable  exits  firom
file  body  by  which  this  desperate  matter  could  be  driven  out  by  medicines ;  and  the
medicine  had  to  do  them  the  fovour,  to  take  upon  itself  the  cffice  of  expelling  this
imaginary  morbid  matter  from  the  numerous  vessels  and  fluids,  and  of  clearing  it
away  by  means  of  the  urine,  sweat,  expectoration,  or  alvine  discharge.  These  were
the  principal  effects  they  hoped  and  expected  firom  their  remedies :  this  was  the  pari
all  the  medicines  in  the  Materia  Medica  had  to  play.


068  SXAMINATION  OF  THE  SOUBOXS OF  THE

ductive  function,  rests  upon  baseless  hypothetical  assumptions
alone.  It  was  in  itself  a  false  and  hypothetical  assumption^  des-
titute of  proof  and  of  reality,  that  it  was  necessary  direeily  to
perform  these  operations  in  diseases  at  all.  How  then,  in  the
selves nugatory  virtues  to  individual  medicines,  without  proof)
irrespective  altogether  of  the  fact  they  were  i^ost  never  pre-
others  ? Thus  every  such  assertion  is  a  palpable  lie.

What  was  ever  seen  dissolved  or  resolved  in  the  interior  of  the
human  body  by  medicines?  By  what  fistcts  was  such  a  power
of  dissolving  living  parts  of  the  organism  proved  to  be  possible
by  drugs  ?  Why  is  irrefragable  evidence  of  the  manifestation
of  this  power  by  some  substance  not  brought  forward  ?  Or
why,  since  it  is  impossible  to  observe  such  mechanical  and  chemir
eal  effects  of  a  drug  in  the  undiscovered  and  undiscoverable  pene-
tralia of  the  organism,  has  not  a  sense  of  shame  restrained  men
from  publishing  such  inventions  as  truths  and  dogmas,  and,
with  unblushing  brow,  falsely  ascribing  such  actions  to  medi-
cines, since  error  in  the  most  serious  and  important  of  all  earthly
vocations,  the  healing  of  the  sick,  must  have  the  most  grievous
consequences ;  and  falsehood  here  is  the  greatest  crime,  being
nothing  less  than  high  treason  against  humanity  ?

And  what  is  there,  even  in  the  hidden  internal  parts  of  the
living  body,  to  dissolve  or  dissipate,  which  the  human  organ-
ism, when  acted  on  by  medicine  proper  for  its  recovery,  cannot
itself,  when  necessary,  dissolve  ?

Is  there  anything  actually  present  in  the  body  to  be  dissolved
from  without,  as  the  opinion  implies  ?  Has  not  our  Sdramering
proved  that  the  swollen  glands,  which  had  always  hitherto  been
considered  to  be  obstructed,  had,  on  the  contrary  their  vessels
greatly  dilated.  Has  it  not  been  established  by  experiment  on
healthy  peasants,  that  by  the  persevering  use  of  Kampf 's  clys-
ters there  may  be  produced  in  and  evacuated  from  their  bowels
the  same  abominable  evacuations  which  Kiimpf,  on  hypothetical
grounds,  assumed  to  exist  in  the  body  of  almost  all  patients
affected  by  chronic  disease,  in  the  form  of  stoppage,  infarctus,
and  accumulations ;  although  he  had  at  first,  by  his  compound
herbal  decoction,  administered  in  the  form  of  several  hundred
clysters,  brought  on  the  imnatural  condition  of  the  bowels  which
produced  these  secretions,  and  then  got  them  evacu.ated,  to  the
horror  of  all  beholders ;  and,  unfortunately,  the  rest  of  the  pro-


COMJCOK  MATSBIA  KBDIOA.  669

&Bsion  were  almost  without  exception  his  followers,  and  in  their
mind's  eye  they  now  saw  in  almost  all  patients  nothing  but  ob-
structions of  the  smallest  vessels  of  the  abdomen,  infarctus  and
accumulations,  took  the  senseless  herb-mixture  of  Kampf  to  be
really  dissolving  and  dissipating,  and  clystered  the  poor  patientSy
for  the  sake  of  an  hypothesis,  with  the  greatest  vigour  and  per*
severence,  almost  to  death,  so  much  so  that  it  was  a  sin  and  a
shame.

'  Now,  supposing  that  these  imaginary  cases  were  indeed
real,  and  that  there  could  be  something  to  dissolve  and  dissipate
in  the  diseased  human  body,  who  has  ever  seen  this  dissolution
or  dissipation  effected  by  the  direct  action  of  the  medicine  when
the  patient  recovers,  so  that  the  vital  force,  which  before  presid-
ed over  all  the  operations  of  the  organism,  had  remained,  in
this  instance,  a  passive  spectator,  and  had  allowed  the  medicine
to  work^  unaided,  upon  the  supposed  obstructed  and  indurated
parts,  as  a  tanner  operates  on  his  hides?

By  means  of  calomel,  according  to  the  history  of  a  case,'  a
chronic  vomiting  that  occurred  after  meals  was  removed.  The
cause  of  this  vomiting  was  represented  as  nothing  less  than  an
induration  of  the  stomach  and  pylorus ;  this  the  narrator  of  the
case  avers  with  the  greatest  effrontery,  without  adducing  the
slightest  evidence  in  support  of  his  position,  only  that  he  might
attribute  in  this  manner  an  unconditional  resolvent  power  to
calomel,  and  assume  the  honour  to  himself  of  curing  a  disease
which  is  as  rare  as  it  is  incurable.  Another  writer,^  rants  in  the
same  imaginative  strain  about  pressure  on  the  stomach,  cramps
in  the  stomach,  eructation  and  vomiting  in  his  patient  being  due
to  some  organic  disease  of  the  stomach,  scirrhus,  indurations  and
tumours,  and  believes  that  as  these  were  removed  by  drinking
for  a  length  of  time  decoction  of  triiicum  repens  (and  at  the  same
time  preserving  a  well-regulated  diet  and  regimen?),  that  he
has  fully  established  that  this  herb  can  cure  scirrhus  of  the
stomach,  of  the  existence  of  which  in  his  case  there  was  not  the
slightest  proof  But  pressure  of  the  stomach,  eructation,  and
vomiting  after  meals,  even  when  of  long  standing,  are  by  no
means  rare  maladies,  and  are  often  easily  curable  by  an  im
proved  diet  and  regimen,  and,  alone,  aflbrd  no  proof  of  indura-
tion or  scirrhus  of  the  stomach  or  pylorus. This  disease  is  ac-


liufflandi  Journal,  1815,  Decx,  pi  121.
'  Id  UufelandiyfounuU,  1813, p.  68.


670  XXAMINATIOK  OF  THB  80UBCB  OF  THB

oompanied  by  much  fncre  serious  symptoms  than  preasuiey  emo-
tation,  and  mere  vomiting  are.

This  is  however  the  highly  commendable  way  in  wbidi  a
medicine  is  raised  to  the  nndeserv ed  honour  of  being  a  resolving^
dissipating,  &c.  remedy,  namely,  by  blind  conjectore  and  bold
assumption  of  the  presence  of  an  important  internal  maladji
never  seen  or  capable  of  being  proved  to  be  there. '

in  the  materia  medica,  has,  it  is  alleged,  a  sure  foundation,  viaL,
their  sensible  properties^  from  which  their  action  may  be  inferred.
We  shall  see,  however,  what  a  turbid  source  this  is.

I  shall  spare  the  ordinary  medical  school  the  humiliation  of
reminding  it  of  the  folly  of  those  ancient  physicians  who,  deter-
mining the  medicinal  powers  of  crude  drugs  from  their  siffnaturtf
that  is,  from  their  colour  and  form,  gave  the  testicle-shaped
Orchis-root  in  order  to  restore  manly  vigour;  the  phaMus  wi-
tumeric  the  power  of  curing  jaundice,  and  considered  hypericum
perforatum^  whose  yellow  flowers  on  being  crushed  yield  a  red
juice  {SL  JohrHs  blood)  useful  in  haemorrhnges  and  wounds,  &a;
but  I  shall  refrain  from  taunting  the  physicians  of  the  present
day  \nih  these  absurdities,  although  traces  of  them  are  to  be
met  with  in  the  most  modem  treatises  on  materia  medica.

I  shall  only  allude  to  what  is  scarcely  less  foolish,  to  wit,  the
attempts,  even  of  those  of  our  own  times,  to  guess  the  powers
of  medicines  from  their  smell  and  taste.

They  pretended,  by  dint  of  tasting  and  smelling  at  drugs,  to
find  out  what  effect  they  would  have  on  the  human  body ;  and
for  this  they  invented  some  general  therapeutical  expressions.

All  plants  that  had  a  bitter  taste  should  and  must  (so  they
decreed)  have  one  and  the  same  action,  solely  because  they  tasted
hitter.

But  what  a  variety  even  of  bitter  tastes  there  are !  Does  this
variety  not  indicate  a  corresponding  variety  of  action.

But  how  does  the  bitter  taste  obtain  the  honour  awarded  to  it
by  the  Materia  Medica  and  practical  physicians^  that  it  is  a
proof  of  the  so^xUkd  stomachic  and  tonic  powers  of  drugs,  and  an
evidence  of  their  similar  and  identical  action,  so  that,  according
to  this  arbitrary  axiom,  all  the  amara  possess  no  other  medicinal
action  but  this  alone  f

Although  some  of  them  have,  besides,  the  peculiar  power  of
producing  nausea,  disgust^  oppression  of  the  stomach  and  enu>


COXXOK  MATERIA  HSDIOA.  671

tations  in  healthy  individuals,  and  consequently  of  curing,*  ho-
moeopathically,  an  affection  of  a  similar  nature,  yet  each  of  them
possesses  peculiar  medicinal  powers  quite  different  from  these,
which  have  hitherto  been  unnoticed,  but  which  are  often  more
things  without  any  distinction,  the  one  in  place  of  the  other,  as
if  they  all  acted  in  the  same  manner,  or  thoughtlessly  to  mix
them  together  in  one  prescription,  and  under  the  name  of  bitten
(eaOracta  amara)  to  administer  them,  as  if  they  were  indubitably
identical  medicines,  haying  only  the  power  of  strengthening  and
improving  fche  stomach,  betrays  the  most  wretched,  rudest
routinisml

And  i^  as  this  dictatorial  maxim  of  the  authorities  in  materia
medica  and  therapeutics  would  have  us  believe,  the  bitterness
alone  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  everything  tiiat  tastes  bitter
(amara/)  is  absolutely  and  solely  strengthening, .and  improves
the  digestion,  then  must  colocyntk,  squHb,  boletus  laricis,  the
thick-barked,  much-abused  angustura,  eupcUoriumy  mponaria^
myrica  gale^  lupina^  lactuca  mrosa,  prussic  acid,  and  upas-poison^
all  be  entitied,  as  bitters,  to  rank  among  the  tonic,  stomachic
medicines.

From  this  any  one  may  easUy  see  how  irrational  and  arbitoary
the  maxims  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica  are,  how  near  they
are  to  downright  £Edsehoods  I  And  to  make  fiilsehoods  the  basis
of  our  system  of  treating  the  sick-what  a  crime!

Cinchona  was  found  to  have  a  bitter  and  astringent  taste.
This  was  quite  enough  for  them  in  order  to  judge  of  its  inward
powers ;  but  now  all  bitter  and  astringent  tasting  substances  and
barks  must  possess  the  same  medicinal  powers  as  cinchona  bark.
Thus  was  the  action  of  medicines  on  the  human  frame  deter*
mined,  in  the  materia  medica,  in  the  most  unthinking  and  hasty
manner  from  their  taste  alone  I  And  yet  it  must  and  ever  will
bo  fidse,  that  willow-bark,  or  a  mixture  of  aloes  and  gall-nuts,
have  the  same  medicinal  properties  as  cinchona  bark.  How
many  such  Chimin  factitios,  which  were  to  answer  all  the  purposes
of  the  true  cinchona  bark,  have  been  publicly  recommended  by
celebrated  physicians,  manufactured  and  sold,  and  administered
with  the  greatest  confidence  to  their  patients  by  other  physicians  I
Thus,  the  life  and  health  of  human  beings  were  made  depen-
dent on  the  opinion  of  a  few  blockheads,  and  whatever  entered
their  precious  brains  went  to  swell  the  materia  medica.


678  EXAXINAnOK  OF  THE  8OUB0B  OP  THE

In  the  same  xnaDner  a  number  of  inconceivably  diwimihr
Bmells  were  jumbled  together  in  one  category,  and  all  chrigtened
aromatks^  in  order  that  under  this  name  a  similar  m<Miirinal  ao*
tion  might  conveniently  be  invented  for  them.  Thus  they  wera^
without  the  slightest  hesitation  or  consideration,  one  and  all
pronounced  to  be  exaUers  of  the  forces  (excitants),  strengthenen
if  the  nervesj  deobstruents,  &c.

Thus  the  most  imperfect,  the  most  deceptive  of  all  the  aenaeB
of  civilized  man,  that  of  smell,*  which  admits  of  the  ezpreasicxi
by  words  of  so  few  perceptions  of  sensible  differenoes — this
should  suffice  to  determine  the  dynamic  properties  of  a  medicine
in  the  human  organism,  whilst  all  our  senses  iQgetheri  employ*
ed  with  the  utmost  care,  in  the  examination  of  a  medicinal  sub-
stance with  regard  to  its  external  froperties^  do  not  give  us  any,
not  even  the  ^ghtest  information  respecting  this  most  important
of  all  secrets,  the  internal  immaterial  power  possessed  by  n^
tural  substances  to  alter  the  health  of  human  beings ;  in  other
words,  respecting  their  true  medicinal  and  healing  power,  which
is  so  extremely  different  in  every  active  substance,  firom  that  ni
eiv&rj  other,  and  which  can  only  be  observed  when  it  is  taken
internally,  and  acts  upon  the  vital  functions  of  the  organism  1

Must  mavflower,  mint,  angelica,  arnica,  sassafras,  serpentaria,
sandal,  coriander,  chamomile,  rosemary,  necessarily  have  the
same  medicinal  action,  because  forsooth,  it  pleases  the  olfftctoiy
organ  of  the  respectable  teachers  of  materia  medica*to  discover
that  they  all  have  an  aromatic  smell  ?

Can  a  materia  medica  composed  of  such  a  jumble  of  fliggimiUr
medicines,  all  highly  important,  from  the  very  variety  of  their
action,  shew  aught  else  than  intemperate  presumption  and  dis-
honest, ignorant  self-complacency?

No  art,  be  it  ever  so  mean,  has  been  guilty  of  such  wanton
fictions  ^-ith  respect  to  the  uses  and  powers  of  its  materials  and
tools.  The  agent  to  be  employed  was,  at  all  events,  always  tried
upon  smaller  parts  of  the  object  it  was  intended  to  work  upon,
in  order  to  ascertain  what  alterations  it  was  capable  of  effecting,
beibre  it  was  employed  on  a  large  scale  in  the  precious  work,
where  an  error  might  be  productive  of  serious  injury.  The
cotton  bleacher  tried  the  effects  of  chlorine,  which  is  so  destruc-
tive to  vegetable  matters,  in  the  first  instance  on  a  small  portion

'  Preciwly  the  ino«t  powtrfiil  nwdidDes,  beUadoona,  digitalit^  tmrter  emccic;
Die,  4»^  hare  little  or  no  bmelL


GOKMON  MATERIA  XSDIGA.  678

of  clotb,  and  thereby  avoided  exposing  all  his  stock  of  goods
to  danger.  The  shoemaker  had  previously  convinced  himsell
of  the  properties  of  the  hempen  thread,  that  it  was  stronger  in
the  fibre,  ^t  when  it  was  exposed  to  damp,  it  filled  the  hole»
in  the  leather  by  its  expansion  more  completely,  and  resisted  pu*
trefiiction  more  powerfully  than  flax,  before  he  preferred  it  to
the  latter  for  stitdiing  all  his  shoes ;  and  that,  after  all,  was  but
cobbler's  work !

But  in  the  arrogant  medicine  of  the  common  stamp,  the  medi-
cines— ^the  tools  of  the  healing  art — are  employed  without  the
least  hesitation  in  the  most  important  work  which  one  man  can
perform  for  his  brother  man — ^a  work  whereon  life  and  death|
nay,  sometimes  the  weal  or  wo  of  whole  femilies  and  their  de-
scendants depends,  namely,  the  treatment  of  disease ;  and  the
acquaintance  with  thes^  remedies  being  derived  solely  from
their  deceptive  outward  appearance,  and  from  the  preconceived
notions  and  desultory  classifications  of  teachers  of  materia
medica,  there  is  the  greatest  danger  of  deception,  of  error,  and
of  fitlsehood.  But  even  then,  as  if  to  conceal  the  effect  of  each
individual  one,  several  remedies  are  given  mixed  together  in
one  prescription,  with  no  anxiety  as  to  the  inevitable  result  I

So  much  for  the  unfounded  allegations  respecting  the  general
therapeutic  virtues  of  the  several  medicines  in  the  materia  me-
dica, which  are  all  elevated  to  dogmas,  on  a  foundation  of  blind
guess-work,  preconceived  ideas,  extraordinary  notions  and  pre-
sumptuous fiction.  So  much  for  this  second  impure  source  of
the  materia  medica,  as  it  is  called,  hitherto  in  use  I

Chemistry^  also,  has  taken  upon  itself  to  disclose  a  source  at
which  the  general^  therapeutic  properties  of  drugs  are  to  be  as-
certained. But  we  shall  soon  see  the  impurity  of  this  third
source  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica.

Attempts  were  made  a  century  ago  by  Geofirey,  but  still  more
fi^uent  have  such  attempts  been  made  since  medicine  became
an  art,  to  discover,  by  means  of  chemistry,  the  properties  of  re-
medies which  could  not  be  known  in  any  other  way.

I  shall  say  nothing  about  the  merely  theoretical  fidlacies  of

Baume,  Steftens,  and  Burdach,  whereby  the  medicinal  properties

of  medicines  were  arbitrarily  declared  to  reside  in  their  gaseouF

and  certain  other  chemical  constituents  alone,  and  at  the  same

time  it  was  assumed,  without  the  slightest  grounds,  (m  mere  con'

jecture,  that  these  hypothetical  elementary  constituents  possessed

43


^  674  EXAMIXATIOK  OF  THE  80UBC£S  OF  THE

certain  medicinal  powers ;  so  that  it  was  really  amusing  to  see
the  fecility  and  rapidity  with  which  those  gentlemen  could  cre-
ate the  medicinal  properties  of  every  remedy  out  of  nothing.
As  nature,  trials  on  the  living  human  organism,  observations
and  experience  were  all  despised,  and  mere  fimcy,  expert
fingers  and  overweening  confidence  were  alone  employed,  it  is
easy  to  conceive  that  the  whole  afifair  was  very  soon  settled.

No !  I  allude  to  the  earnest  aspirations,  and  the  honest  exer-
tions of  those  of  the  present  day,  to  arrive,  by  means  of  vegeta-
ble and  animal  chemistry,  at  a  knowledge  of  the  real  pure
action  of  medicines  on  the  human  frame,  in  which|  as  was  deeply
felt,  the  materia  medica  up  to  that  period  was  miserably  deficient
True  it  is  that  Chemistry — ^that  art  which  reveals  to  us  such
astonishing  miracles,  appeared  to  be  a  much  more  Ukdy  source
for  obtaining  information  with  respect  to  the  properties  of
drugs,  than  all  the  idle  dreams,  and  learned  salti  viortali  of  an-
cient and  modern  times,  which  we  have  just  been  considering  ;
and  many  were  infatuated  with  this  expectation^  yet,  chiefly
such  as  either  did  not  understand  chemistry  (and  sought  much
more  fix)m  it  than  it  could  give  or  possessed),  or  knew  nothing
about  medicine  and  its  requirements,  or  were  ignorant  of  both
the  one  and  the  other.

Animal  chemistry  can  merely  separate  from  animal  substances
such  inanimate  matters  as  shew  a  different  chemical  action  with
chemical  rc-agents. But  it  is  not  these  component  parts  of  ani-
mal tissues,  separated  by  auimal  chemistry,  on  which  the  medi-
cines act  when  they  derange  the  health,  or  cure  tlie  diseases  of
the  living  organism,  either  tlirougli  their  elementary  part^,  as
the  chemist  would  have  us  believe,  or  directly  upon  them.
The  fibrine,  coagulable  lymph,  gelatine,  organic  acids,  salts  and
earths,  separated  from  muscular  substances  by  chemical  opera-
tions, dill'er  toto  oj^lo  from  the  living  muscle,  endowed  with  irri-
tability in  its  perfect  organized  state  in  the  healthy  and  disea^iied
individual;  the  matters  separated  from  it  have  not  the  most
distant  resemblance  to  the  living  muscle. What  information
respecting  the  nature  of  the  living  organism,  or  the  changes
which  the  difterent  medicines  are  capable  of  effecting  on  it
when  alive,  can  be  derived  from  these  separated  inanimate  por-
tions? Or  is  the  process  of  digestion  (that  wonderful  transmu-
tation of  the  most  dissimilar  kinds  of  food  for  the  purpose  of
promoting  the  perfect  development  of  the  living  individual  in
all  the  variety  of  his  organs  and  humours)  rendered  in  the


OOVMOK  MATERIA  1C8DICA.  675

slightest  d^ree  comprehensible  from  the  discovery  of  a  little
soda  and  phosphatic  salt  in  the  gastric  juice?  Can  even  the
material,  not  to  speak  of  the  dynamic,  cause  of  a  morbid  diges-
tion or  nutrition  be  understood  by  what  chemistry  finds  in  the
gastric  juice,  so  that  a  sure  method  of  treatment  could  be  found-
ed thereon?  Nothing  could  be  more  futile  than  any  expecta-
tion of  this  kind.

In  like  manner,  in  the  chemical  constituents  shewn  by  vege-
table chemistry  to  exist  in  plants,  even  in  such  as  possess  the
most  powerful  medicinal  properties,  there  is  nothing  either  tc>
smell  or  taste  which  can  express  or  reveal  those  so  varied  ac-
tions, which,  experience  shews  us,  each  of  these  medicinal  sub-
stances is  capable  of  performing,  in  altering  the  state  of  an  indi-
vidual, whether  in  health  or  disease.

The  water  or  oil,  distilled  from  the  plants  or  the  resin  ob-
tained from  it,  is  certainly  not  its  active  principle ;  this  only
resided,  invisible  to  the  eye.  in  those  parts  now  extracted  from
it — ^the  resin,  the  oil,  the  distilled  water ;  and  is  in  itself  per-
fectly imperceptible  to  our  senses.  Its  effects  are  manifested  to
our  senses  only  when  this  distilled  water,  this  oil,  this  resin,  or,
still  better,  the  plant  itself  is  taken  by  the  living  individual,
and  when  they  act  dynamically  on  the  susceptible  spiritual-ani-
mal organism,  in  a  spiritual  manner.

Moreover,  what  medicinal  action  do  the  other  parts  which
chemistry  extracts  from  plants  indicate,  the  vegetable  fibrine,
the  earths,  the  salts,  the  gums,  the  albumen,  &a,  which,  with
few  exceptions,  are  found  almost  uniformly  in  all  plants,  even
those  most  opposite  in  their  medicinal  effects  ?  Will  the  small
quantity  of  oxalate  of  lime  which  chemistry  shews  us  to  exist
in  rhubEurb-root,  account  for  this  medicine  producing  in  healthy
individuals  such  a  morbidly  altered  sleep,  and  such  a  curious
heat  of  the  body  without  thirst,  and  for  its  curing  similar  mor-
bid states  ?

What  information  can  all  these  parts,  though  analysed  ever
so  carefully  by  chemistry,  give  us,  relative  to  the  power  of  each
individual  plant,  virtually  to  alter  the  health  of  the  living  hu-
man organism  in  the  most  peculiar  and  various  manners  ?

The  chemist,  Gren,  who  knew  nothing  about  medicine,  in  his
Pharmacology,  which  is  full  of  the  most  reckless  assertions,
thus  holds  forth  to  physicians :  "  The  knowledge  of  the  princi-
ples contained  in  medicines,  which  chemistry  gives  us^  can
alone  determine  the  efficacy  of  remedies."


676  EXAMIVATIOK  OF  THX  SOUBCXS  OF  THS

Knowledge  indeed!  And  what  knowledge  does  chemistry
give  us  with  respect  to  the  inanimate,  speechless,  component
parts  of  medibines?  Answer:  It  merely  teaches  their  chemical
signification,  it  teaches  us  that  they  act  so  and  so  with  chemical
re-agents,  and  hence  are  called  gum,  resin,  albumen,  mucus,
earths  and  salts  of  one  kind  or  another ; — ^matters  of  vastly  lit*
tie  importance  to  the  physician.  These  appellations  tell  us  no-
thing of  the  changes  in  the  sensations  of  the  living  man  which
may  be  effected  by  the  plant  or  mineral,  each  differing  from
the  other  in  its  peculiar  invisible,  internal,  essential  nature;
and  yet^  forsooth,  the  whole  healing  art  depends  on  Ais  alone  I
The  manifestations  of  the  active  spirit  of  each  individual  reme-
dial agent  during  its  medicinal  employment  on  human  beings^
can  alone  inform  the  physician  of  the  sphere  of  action  of  the
medicine,  as  regards  its  curative  power.  The  name  of  each  of
its  chemical  constituents,  which  in  most  plants  are  almost  iden-
tical, teaches  him  nothing  on  this  point

That  calomel,  for  example,  consists  of  from  six  to  eight  parts
of  mercury,  united  by  sublimation  to  one  of  muriatic  acid — that
when  rubbed  up  with  lime-water,  it  becomes  black,  chemistry
can  teach  us ;  but  that  this  preparation  can  cause  in  the  human
being  the  well-known  salivation  with  its  peculiar  odour,  of  this
(rhemistry,  as  chemistry^  knows  nothing ;  this  no  chemistry  can
teach  us.  This  dynamic  relation  of  calomel  to  the  human
organism  can  only  be  learned  from  experience,  derived  from  its
medicinal  employment,  and  from  its  internal  administration,
when  it  acts  dynamically  and  specifically  on  the  living  organ-
ism: and  thus  it  is  only  actual  experiment  and  observation
relative  to  the  action  of  medicinal  substances  on  the  living  hu.
man  subject  that  can  determine  their  dynamical  relation  to  the
organism,  in  other  words,  their  medicinal  properties;  but  this
chemistry,  in  whose  operations  merely  inorganic  substances  are
brought  to  act  upon  one  another,  can  never  do.

Chemistry  can  indeed  give  us  the  useless  information,  that
the  leaves  of  belladonna  are  very  similar  in  their  chemical  com-
position to  cabbage  and  to  a  great  many  other  vegetables,  as
they  contain  albumen,  gelatine,  extractive  matter,  green  resin,
vegetable  acid,  potash,  calcareous  and  siliceous  earths,  &c. ;  but
if,  us  Gren  asserts,  the  knowledge  of  the  principal  constituents,
so  far  as  they  are  known  to  cbeinihtry  by  means  of  its  re-agents^
that  is,  chemically,  suflices  to  determine  the  medicinal  proper-
ties of  substances,  it  follows  that  a  dish  of  belladonna  must  be


COMMON  KATSBIA  HEDIGA.  677

JQSt  as  wholesome  and  innocent  an  article  food  as  one  of  cab-
bage. Is  that  what  the  chemist  means  ?  And  yet  the  chemis-
try which  presumes  to  determine  the  medicinal  properties  of
natural  sabstances  from  their  chemical  composition,  cannot
avoid  asserting  that  the  same  medicinal  powers  are  possessed
by  substances  which  are  proved  by  analysis  to  consist  of  the
same  constituents ;  it  cannot  consequently  help  declaring  cab-
bage and  belladonna  to  be  equally  innocent  vegetables,  or
equally  poisonous  plants ;  thereby  sliewing,  as  clear  as  day,  the
absurdity  of  its  presumption,  and  its  incompetence  to  judge  of
the  medicinal  powers  of  natural  substances.

Do  Gren  and  his  followers  not  perceive  that  chemistry  can
only  give  chemical  information  with  respect  to  the  presence  of
this  or  that  material  component  part  of  any  physical  body,  and
that  these  are  consequently  to  chemistry  merely  chemical  sub-
stances? Chemical  analysis  can  tell  us  their  action  with  chemi-
cal re-agents,  and  this  in  its  proper  domain ;  but  it  can' shew  us
neither  in  its  dissolving  nor  digesting  alembics,  neither  in  its
retorts  nor  yet  in  its  receivers,  what  dynamical  changes  any
single  medicine,  when  brought  in  contact  with  the  living  organ-
ism, can  produce.

Each  science  can  only  judge  and  throw  light  on  subjects
within  its  own  department;  it  is  folly  to  expect  from  one
science  information  upon  matters  belonging  to  other  sciences.

The  science  of  hydrostatics  enables  us  to  determine  with  pre-
cision the  specific  gravity  of  fine  silver  in  comparison  with  that
of  fine  gold ;  but  it  presumes  not  to  fix  the  difierent  commercial
value  of  the  one  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  other.  Whether
gold  have  twelve,  thirteen,  or  fourteen  times  the  value  of  its
weight  of  silver  in  Europe  or  in  China,  hydrostatics  can  never
tell ;  it  is  only  the  scarcity  of  and  the  demand  for  the  one  or
the  other,  that  can  determine  their  relative  mercantile  value.

In  like  manner,  indispensable  as  a  knowledge  of  the  particiihir
fonn  of  pUints  is  to  the  true  farmer,  and  Hie  power  of  distinguish-
img  them  by  their  external  appearance^  which  constitutes  botany^
yet  botany  will  never  teach  him  whether  a  given  plant  is  suit-
able or  the  reverse  as  for  his  sheep  or  swine,  nor  will  it  inform
him  what  grain  or  what  root  is  best  for  making  his  horse
strong,  or  for  fattening  his  ox ;  tiie  botanical  systems  of  neither
Toumefort,  nor  Haller,  nor  Linnaeus,  nor  Jussieu,  can  tell  him
this ;  pure,  careful,  coniparative  tiials  and  experiments  on  X\\v
different  animals  themselves  can  alone  give  him  the  requisites
information.


678  EXAMINATION  OF  THK  8DUBCB  OT  THK

Each  science  can  decide  on  such  mattera  only  aa  are  toiMn  0$
awn  province.

What  does  chemiBtrj  find  in  the  native  magnet  and  the  arti-
ticial  magnetic  rod?  In  the  former  it  disooveis  nothing  but  m
rich  iron  ore,  intimately  combined  with  silica  and  a  small  quan-
tity of  manganese ;  in  the  latter,  nothing  but  pore  iron.  No
chemical  re-agent  can  discover,  by  the  most  minute  chemical
analysis,  the  slightest  trace  of  the  mighty  magnetic  power  in
either  the  one  or  the  other.

But  another  science,  natural  philosophy,  shews  in  its  experi-
ments the  presence  of  this  wonderful  power  in  the  native  mag^
net  and  magnetized  steel,  as  also  its  physical  relation  to  the  ex-
ternal world,  its  power  of  attracting  iron  (nickel,  cobalt),  the
direction  of  one  end  of  the  magnetic  needle  towards  the  north,
its  deviation  from  the  north  pole  in  different  decenniums  and  in
diSferent  regions  of  the  globe,  at  one  time  towards  the  west,  at
another  towards  the  east,  and  the  variety  in  its  dip  in  diflfereni
d^rees  of  latitude.

IBfThe  science  of  natural  philosophy,  then,  is  capable  of  telling
d(Hnething  more  respecting  the  magnet,  and  of  discovering  moie
of  its  powers,  than  chemistrj  can,  namely,  its  magnetic  power
in  a  natural  philosophical  point  of  view.

But  the  knowl^e  of  what  is  worth  knowing  about  the  mag-
net, is  not  exhausted  by  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy;
neither  of  these  two  sciences  can  detect  anything  in  it  beyond
what  belongs  to  their  own  province.  Neither  the  range  of  the
chemical  nor  that  of  the  physical  sciences  can  inform  us^  what
mighty,  what  peculiar,  what  characteristic  effects  the  magnetie
power  is  capable  of  producing  on  the  health  of  the  human  body,
when  brought  into  contact  with  it,  and  what  curative  powers
peculiar  to  itself  it  possesses  in  diseases  in  which  it  is  suitable;
o{  this  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy  are  equaUy  ignorant ;
this  subject  they  must  both  abandon  to  the  experiments  and  ob-
2>ervations  of  the  physician.

Now,  as  no  science  can  pretend  to  that  which  can  only  be  ex-
plained bv  another  science,  without  rendering  itself  ridiculoosi
I  hope  that  medical  men  will  gradually  have  the  sense  to  see
that  the  proper  province  of  chemistry  is  merely  to  separate  the
ohemical  constituents  of  substances  from  each  other,  and  to
•M>iubine  iheiu  together  ag:tin.  (thfts  ononlniy  ucfitu'ctii  aid  to  phar^
.H^'xif) ;  I  hope  that  they  will  comniecce  to  see  that  medicines
«l«i  m»t  exist  tor  chemistry  as  medicines^  (i.  e^  powers  capable  of


OOXXOK  ICATSBIA  XXDICA.  679

d  jnamically  altering  the  health  of  an  individual),  but  merely  in
80  far  as  they  are  chemical  substances  (i.  e.,  in  so  &r  as  their
component  parts  are  to  be  regarded  in  a  chemical  light) ;  that
chemistry,  consequently,  can  only  give  chemical  information
with  respect  to  medicinal  substances,  but  cannot  tell  what  spirit*
ual,  dynamical  changes  they  are  capable  of  effecting  in  the
health  of  the  human  being,  nor  what  medicinal  and  curative
powers  each  particular  drug  possesses,  and  is  capable  of  exer^
cising  in  the  living  organism.

Finally,  from  Hie  fourth  impure  source  flowed  the  clinical  and
special  therapeutic  indications  for  employment  {ab  usu  in  morbis),
into  the  ordinary  materia  medica.

This,  the  most  common  of  all  the  sources  of  the  materia
medica,  whence  a  knowledge  of  the  curative  powers  of  medi-
cines was  sought  to  be  obtained,  is  what  is  termed  the  practice
of  physic,  namely,  the  employment  of  medicines  in  actual  diseases^
whereby  it  was  imagined  that  information  would  be  obtained
with  respect  to  the  diseases  in  which  this  and  those  in  which
that  remedy  was  efficacious.

This  source  has  been  resorted  to  from  the  very  beginning  of
the  medical  art,  but  has,  from  time  to  time,  been  relinquished,
in  order  to  try  and  hit  upon  some  more  profitable  mine  for  the
knowledge  required  but  it  was  always  had  recourse  to  again,  as
it  (jpppeared  the  most  natural  method  of  learning  the  action  of
medicines,  and  their  exact  uses.

Let  us  grant,  for  a  moment,  that  this  were  the  true  way  to
discover  their  curative  virtues ;  one  would,  at  least,  have  ex-
pected that  these  experiments  at  the  sick-bed  would  have  been
made  with  single,  simple  drugs  only ;  because,  by  mixing  seve-
ral together,  it  would  never  be  known  to  which  among  them
we  meet  with  few  or  no  cases  in  which  this  so  natural  idea  was
ever  carried  into  execution,  viz.,  to  give  only  one  medicine  at
once  in  a  disease,  in  order  to  be  certain  whether  it  could  pro-
duce a  perfect  cure  in  that  disease.

It  accordingly  happened,  that,  in  almost  every  instance,  a
mixture  of  medicines  was  employed  in  diseases ;  and  thus  it  could
never  be  ascertained  y?>r  certain,  when  the  treatment  was  success-
flil,  to  which  ingredient  of  the  mixture  the  favourable  result  was
due ;  in  a  word,  nothing  at  all  was  learned.  If,  on  the  contra-
ry, this  medicinal  mixture  proved  of  no  avail,  or,  as  usually
happened,  did  harm,  just  as  little  could  it  be  learned,  from  this


KXAMINATION  OF  THK  fiOUBflSS  OF  THE

result,  to  which  of  all  the  medicines  the  bad  result  was  attribu*
table.

I  know  not  whether  it  was  an  affectation  of  learning  which
induced  physicians  always  to  administer  medicines  mixed  to-
gether in  prescriptions  as  they  are  called,  or  whether  it  was  their
anxiety  which  made  them  &ncy  that  a  single  remedy  was  too
powerless  and  was  not  sufficient  to  cure  the  disease.  Be  this  as
it  may,  the  folly  of  prescribing  several  remedies  together  has
prevailed  from  the  remotest  antiquity ;  and  immediately  after
Hippocrates'  time  diseases  were  treated  with  a  mixture  of  medi-
cines, instead  of  with  one  single  medicine.  Among  the  many
writings  falsely  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  of  which  the  greater
part  were  written  under  his  name,  shortly  after  his  death,  prin-
cipally by  his  two  sons,  Draco  and  Thessalus,  as  also  by  their
sons,  Hippocrates  the  third  and  fourth,  and  among  those  works
fabricated  by  the  Alexandrians  Artemidorus  Capiton  and  his
kinsman  Dioscorides,  in  the  name  of  Hippocrates,  there  is  not
one  practical  treatise  in  which  the  prescriptions  for  diseases  do
not  consist  of  several  medicines,  just  as  in  the  prescriptions  of
their  immediate  followers,  those  of  more  modern  times,  and
those  of  the  physicians  of  the  present  day.

But  that  from  the  employment  of  mixed  prescriptions,  it  can-
not be  ascertained  what  each  individual  remedy  is  capable  of
effecting  in  diseases,  consequently,  that  no  materia  medica  can
be  founded  thereon,  was  first  commenced  to  be  perceived  by
physicians  of  later  times,  whereon  several  zealously  set  about
prescribing  in  a  simple  manner,  in  order  to  ascertain  experi-
mentally in  what  diseases  this  or  that  medicine  was  efficacious.
They  also  published  cures  which  were  said  to  have  been  effected
by  a  single  simple  remedy.

But  how  was  the  execution  of  this  apparently  rational  idea
carried  out  ? We  shall  see.

In  order  to  do  so,  I  shall  just  run  over  what  is  to  be  found
on  this  subject  in  the  three  volumes  of  Ilufeland's  Journal  for
1813,  1814  and  1815,  and  shall  shew  that  the  power  of  curing
such  and  such  diseases  has  merely  been  attributed  to  single
drugs,  without  their  having  been  employed  simply  and  alone.'

*  It  is  true  ooe  angle  indiTidual  in  aU  these  three  Tolumes,  Eb«fs,  institiited  es-
periinenta  with  ooe  single  remedy  only,  in  various  diseasen  {HuftlaiMt*  Jo»rmtd^
September  an<l  October  1818.) — With  aintenic  ulmie.  But  wliat  M»rt  uf  cxpcrinioot^  ?
Such  OH  oi»uld  tliruw  no  light  (hi  the  curative  |M)\vcri  of  this  s^ubhtuiice.  In  the  HfnA
place,  the  cases  of  intermittent  fever  in  whidi  he  employed  arsenic  were  not  minutoly
and  then  the  dose  was  such  that  it  must  have  dune  much  man  harm  than


OOMXOV  MATXRIA  MXDIOA.  681

Oonsequently,  this  is  a  new  piece  of  fallacy  in  the  place  of  the
old  one  with  its  acknowledged  composite  prescriptions.

That  ulceration  of  the  lungs  has  been  cured  by  pheUandriwn
aqwUkvm  is  pretended  to  be  shewn  in  the  history  of  a  case
(Hn^Jand^B  Joumcd^  August,  1818),  whereby  it  appears  (p.  110)
that  tus9cUigOj  senega  and  Iceland  moss  were  used  at  the  same
time.  With  what  right  can  the  advocate  for  this  mode  of  treat-
ment (which  was  so  complex)  exclaim,  in  conclusion : — *^  I  am
(xmvinced  that  the  man  owes  the  recovery  of  his  health  to  this
remedy  ahne  "  t

JSkuJi  was  the  sort  of  convictions  that  were  produced  by  the  im-
ces in  the  materia  medica !

In  like  manner  {ibid,,  February,  1813),  a  case  of  inveterate
syphilis,  which  would  not  yield  to  various  mercurial  prepara-
tions, (it  was,  in  fact,  a  mercurial  disease  I)  was  cured  in  four
weeks  by  ammonia^  along  with  which  nothing,  actually  nothing,
was  employed— except  camphor  and  opium  I — Is  that  nothing  ?

An  epilepsy  {ibid,,  1813,  March)  was  cured  in  14  months  by
valerian  alone,  nothing  else  being  used  at  the  same  time — but
oleum  tartari  per  deliquium,  tinctura  cohcynthidis^  and  baths  of
accTus  calamus^  mint,  and  other  aromatic  substances  (pp.  52,  68).
Is  that  nothing?

In  another  case  of  epilepsy  {ibid,,  p.  57)  velerian  alone  effected
a  cure,  but  there  were  employed,  besides,  an  ounce  and  a  half
ci pomegranate  leaves. Is  (hat  notliing  ?

good.  However,  hk  candid  acknowledgmeDt  of  the  harm  it  did  ii  infinitely  more
praiseworthy  than  the  many  allegec]  cases  of  cure  recorded  by  others,  in  which
anenic  in  the  Urgest  doses  %»  taid  to  have  done  nothing  but  good,  and  never  the
least  harm.  Ebers  affirms  that  the  doses  he  administered  were  so  smaU,  that,  in
most  cases,  they  did  not  amount  to  one  grain.  To  one  patient  he  only  gave  2'9thB
of  a  grain  within  the  24  hours  (p.  56),  and  her  life  was  put  in  danger,  whereby  it
may  be  perceived  that  even  this  minute  dose  is  capable  of  producing  the  most  fearful
eflbcts.  /Tonet^fy-observing  physicians  have  long  known  this ;  but  Ebers,  led  astray
by  the  materia  medica,  fancied  that  2-9th8  of  a  grain  in  24  hours  was  a  very  small
dose  of  arsenic.  Pure  experience  tells  us  it  is  a  manstroug^  a  most  unJuttifitUUe  dom
m  dUeaaet  I  When  was  it  ever  shewn  that  arsenic  should  be  employed  in  doses  of  a
grain,  or  even  of  a  tenth  of  a  grain,  in  diseasei  f  Many  experiments  with  small  and
ttill  smaller  doses  (more  and  more  diluted  solutions)  have  shewn,  that  one  drop
vlucfa  mntains  the  dedllionth  of  a  grain  of  arsenic  in  solutiun,  is,  in  many  cases,  much
f09  tirong  a  dose,  even  when  arsenic  is  exactly  suited  for  the  case  of  disease.  Had
he  known  this  he  would  not  have  been  astonished  that  his  2-9ths  of  a  grain  put  hb
patient's  life  in  peril  Thufs  from  these  trials,  whicli  are  otherwise  evidently  ver}'
hfloest,  nothing  can  be  leamt>  not  even  what  arsenic  cannot  curt;  for  the  moostroos
doaet  effectually  prevented  any  good  effect  Ihxn  taking  place.


882  SXAXINATIOV  OF  THS  BOUBCMB  OF  THE

MadnesBy  with  nymphomanict,  is  said  to  have  been  eared  by
arinking  cold  water  ahne  {xbifL^  1814,  Jan).  But  infusion  cf  vor
Urian  and  tinchira  chiruB  WhyttU  (p  12)  were  very  pmdantly
administered  along  with  it,  in  order  that  the  action  of  the  oold
water  should  be  so  oompletely  masked  as  to  be  unieoognisable;
and  the  same  happened  in  the  case  of  another  patient,  who  used
these  powerful  adjuvants  only  less  frequently  (p.  16).

Tymon  {ihid.^  1814,  Aug.  p.  88)  professes  to  have  foond  fttei^
ing  to  syncope  a  specific  in  hydrophobia.  But,  see  1  he  gives  aft
the  same  time  800  drops  of  laudanum^  in  clysters,  every  two  hours^
and  rubs  in  a  drachm  of  mercurial  ointment  every  three  houre*
Does  this  prove  venesection  to  be  the  only  true  remedy  for  hydro-
phobia t

In  like  manner  (ihid.^  1814,  April)  a  venesection,  followed  by
an  hour  of  syncope,  is  said  to  have  cured,  solely  and  specifically,
a  case  of  hydrophobia ;  at  the  same  time  (p.  102),  however,
there  were  only  administered  strong  doses  ofopium^  Jameses  poiuh
der^  and  calomel  till  scUivation  was  produced Is  that  nothing?

If  the  case  (ti«.,  1816,  July,  p.  8—16)  is  to  be  a  proof  of  the
elBScacy  of  bleeding  to  sjmcope  in  already  developed  hydropho-
bia, as  the  author  would  have  it,  canJOwavks  should  not  have
applied,  and  still  less  should  mercurial  ointment  have  been  rubbed
in  every  two  hours,  and  large  doses  of  calomel  and  opium  given
until  violent  salivation  supervened.  It  is  ludicrous  when  the
author  adds  (p.  20)  that  '^  the  calomel  was  scarcely  necessary."

This  art  of  surreptitiously  obtaining  for  a  &vourite  remedy  the
merit  of  a  cure,  when  the  other  equally  powerful  drugs  em-
ployed might  at  all  events  claim  a  sh£u*c,  is  an  established  custom
with  ordinary  physicians ;  it  being  particularly  requested  that
the  courteous  reader  will  shut  his  eyes,  and  allow  the  author  to
designate  all  the  secondary  means  employed  inactive.

A  case  of  tetanus  is  reported  {ibid,,  1814,  Sept,  p.  119)  to
have  been  cured  by  cold  water  effusion  ahne.  It  is  true  opium
was  at  the  same  time  employed ;  '*  as,  lunuever^  the  patient  himself
attributed  the  amendment  to  the  effusion  alone,  to  the  effiision  should
the  cure  be  ascnbed"  This  is  what  I  call  a  pure  source  at  which
to  learn  the  virtues  of  drugs !

In  a  similar  manner  (ibid,  1815,  Sept,  p.  128)  the  healing
power  of  potash  in  croup  is  established  ;*  but  along  with  it  were

'  One  case,  in  which  potash  is  said  to  have  been  efficacious  when  administered
akne  was  that  of  a  child  in  the  country,  which  the  author  did  not  ^ee,  and  which,
fttim  the  descriptioo  akme,  he  $uipteted  to  be  thb  disease.


OOHXON  MATERIA  KXDIOA.  688

uiaed  other  yeary  powerful  substances ;  for  example,  at  the  oom-
mmioemeiit  of  the  (supposed  ?)  disease  two  children  were  relieved
bj  salt  of  tartar  in  an  mjusim  of  senega  root.  Is  what  properly
one^  the  potash  ?  According  to  what  hitherto  unheard-of  sys^
tern  of  logic?

In  like  manner,  graphites  {ibid,^  1816,  Nov.,  p.  40)  is  said  to
have  cqred  a  large  number  of  old  fistulous  ulcers,  and  yet  corro^
five  subKnuUe  was  in  the  mixture  I  The  explanation  in  the  note,
that  sublimate  had  already  been  tried  in  vain,  is  of  no  avail
here :  it  was  not  given  aJcne^  but  in  combination  with  opium,  a
quantity  of  decoctions  of  various  wpods^  and  the  fitvourite  china
Jbctitia;  it  was  consequently  greatly  or  completely  destroyed
by  the  astringent  parts  of  these  accessory  medicines,  just  as
other  metallic  salts  are  thereby  destroyed  and  decomposed,  and
consequently  it  could  not  develop  its  curative  powers  in  such  a
mixture.  Still  less  can  the  apology,  in  the  same  note,  for  the
addition  of  the  mercurial  to  the  graphites  be  received,  "  that  the
sublimate  was  merely  to  serve  as  an  adjuvant  here."  Were  this
the  £Etct,  then  must  medicines  act  agreeably  to  the  commands  ci
the  prescribing  physician,  not  according  to  their  natural  powers,
no  1  they  must  do  exactly  neither  more  nor  less  than  what  the
physician  commanded  and  permitted  them  to  do.  Can  arro-
gance and  presumption  be  carried  fieurtherthan  this?  What
man  of  sound  intellect  can  attribute  such  slavish  obedience  to
medicinal  substances,  which  act  according  to  eternal  laws  ?  Did
the  author  wish  to  see  whether  graphites  could  prove  efficacious
by  itself  and  to  convince  his  readers  of  this,  he  ought  to  have
given  it  alone:  but  if  he  add  to  the  graphites  corrosive  subli-
mate, this  must  perform  what  corrosive  sublimate  can  and  from
its  very  nature  musty  not  what  the  prescribing  physician  pleases
that  it  shall  or  shall  not  do.  Here  again  we  have  a  case  from
which  nothing  can  be  learnt  Graphites  is  represented  as  having
alone  proved  serviceable,  and  yet  that  tremendously  powerftd
medicinal  substance,  corrosive  sublimate,  was  used  along  with  it.

The  cure  of  a  case  of  fixmd  pulmonary  consumption  by  means  of
duxrcoal  powder  is,  if  possible,  still  more  unfounded.  Here
the  limewood  charcoal  was  never  employed  cdone,  but  always  in
eofgumction  with  foxglove.  So  then  the  foxglove  in  the  mixture
has  no  action  ?  None  at  all  ?  and  yet  a  medicine  of  such  mighty
power!  Do  the  authors  of  such  observations  deceive  them-
selves, or  do  they  mean  to  make  game  of  us?


684  SZAMnCATIOK  OF  TEE  SOUBCB  Or  THE

Angelica  root  is  said  (tMi.,  1816,  April,  p.  19)  to  have  cmed
a  drapMy^  properly  speaking  an  unknown  case  of  disease  with
swelling.  {The  quid-pro-quo-^wisig  pathology  collects  together
all  diseases  having  the  most  distant  resemblance  in  this  respeol
under  the  name  of  "  dropsy  J*)  But  no  1  iincturt  {^opiunij  neiher^
and,  finally,  calamus,  were  used  in  addition  to  the  tincture  of
angelica.  Can  any  rational  man  lay  to  the  account  of  the  angeli-
ca alone  the  issue  of  this  case?

No  one  will  deny  that  the  mineral  water  of  Driburg  has  g^real
medicinal  powers ;  but  when  the  cures  related  in  Hvifdamd^t
must  declare  these  statementB  to  be  Mae,  as  so  many  other  strong
medicines  were  used  along  with  it\  nor  can  the  pretended  cure  of
a  case  of  cramp  in  the  stomach  with  frequent  vomiting  by  this
water  (p.  85  to  98),  nor  that  of  hypochondriasis  and  hysteria  (p.
94  to  97),  prove  anything  in  fitvourof  the  Driburg  water,  partly
on  account  of  the  ambiguity  and  vagueness  of  these  two  names
of  diseases,  but  principally  on  account  of  the  constant  employ*
ment  of  other  medicines  at  the  same  time.  Were  we  to  reoeive
these  cases  as  proo&  of  the  efficacy  of  the  mineral  water,  we
might,  with  equal  justice,  give  to  a  single  man  the  credit  of
having  alone  lifted  a  large  rock,  without  reckoning  his  many
active  co-operators  and  the  helpful  machines  employed.  It
by  all  in  conjunction.

These  are  a  few  samples  from  among  the  multitude  I  might
adduce  from  the  writings  of  the  more  modem  physicians,  sam-
ples of  nominally  simple  treatment  of  diseases,  each  of  which
was  said  to  have  been  cured  with  one  single  remedy — in  order
to  obtain  at  last  a  knowledge  of  its  true  powers, — ^but  along
with  which  there  was  always  employed  some  medicine  or  other
more  powerful  than  itself;  and  although  the  physidan  should
protest  ever  so  vehemently  that  **  that  one  medicine"  to  which
he  would  fain  attach  all  the  glory  of  the  cure,  '*  ahne  did  iiy  he
this  remedy  alone," ''  to  it  alone  he  entrusted  Ae  cure, "  ''he  only  em-
ployed the  second  medicincas  an  adjuvant,"  or,  "it  had  once  befine
been  employed  without  effect;"  yet  all  these  shufflings  will  not
avail  to  persuade  a  rational  man  that  the  cure  was  owing  to
that  medicine  alone  to  which  the  partiality  of  the  physician
would  award  the  honour  ot*  the  cure,  if  any  other— even  one
single  other  remedy — ^have  been  used  in  the  treatment It  must


€X>XMON  MATERIA  MSDIOA.  686

erer  lenudn  nntrae  that  the  cure  is  due  to  this  rejnedj  alone ;
powmr  to  this  remedy,  on  the  authority  of  such  an  impure  ob-
server as  this,  propagates  &lsehoods  which  must  inevitably  be
firaught  with  the  most  unhappy  consequences  to  humanity.

I  will  not  deny  that  the  cures  of  which  I  have  just  adduced
examples  did  appro<ich  towards  simplicity.  They  certainly
oame  nearer,  much  nearer  to  the  treatment  of  a  disease  with  one
single  remedy  (without  which  mode  of  proceeding  we  can  never
be  sure  that  the  medicine  was  the  real  instrument  in  effecting
the  cure),  than  those  of  ordinary  routine  practitioners,  who
make  it  a  glory  to  adminster  to  their  patients  several  complex
or  two  fresh  mixtures.

But  to  have  approached  merely  nearer  to  the  adminstration.of
single  remedies  implies  that  the  true  mark  has  been  actually
and  completely  missed.  Were  it  not  so,  then  might  we  congrm-
tolate  a  person  on  his  good  fortune  whose  number  in  the  lottery
differed  by  a  single  cipher  from  that  which  won  the  highest
prize;  or  a  sportsman  whose  shot  has  gone  within  a  hair's
breath  of  his  game ;  or  a  shipwrecked  mariner  who  would  have
escaped  shipwreck  had  he  been  a  single  finger's  breadth  fitrther
from  the  &tal  rock.

What  credence  do  the  assertions  in  the  ordinary  materia
medica  deserve  with  respect  to  the  virtues  of  drugs  ah  xjlsu  in
morins  f  What  shall  we  say  to  the  alleged  powers  of  drugs  in
this  or  that  disease,  when  we  know  that  the  materia  medica  has
obtained  its  information  thereupon  from  such  observations;
sometimes  indeed  merely  from  the  titles  of  the  recorded  obser-
vations of  physicians  who  scarcely  ever  treated  with  one  single
remedy,  but  generally  with  a  mixture  of  drugs,  whereby  as
much  uncertainty  existed  as  to  which  among  them  the  result
the  materia  medica  to  simple  medicinal  substances,  seeing  that
these  were  almost  never  employed  singly  ?  We  can  say  naught
but  this :  among  a  thousand  such  allegations  and  commendations,
scarcely  one  deserves  credence,  whether  they  refer  to  general
therapeutical,  or  to  clinical  or  special  therapeutical  matters.
substance  which  was  never  tested  pui-ely^  that  is,  unless  along  with


tf66  SXAIOKATIOK  Or  THE  SOUBCOBB  OF  THE

othersj  consequently  migkL  as  well  have  been  never  ieskd  at  afl^  u  Ie>
&s  guilty  ofdeoeption  cmdfal&dwod,  .

*<  What  if  all  phjsiciaDS  were  to  agree  from  this  tiine  heooe-
only  one  single  simple  medicine?  Would  we  noft^  by  tUi
means,  ascertain  wbat  each  medicine  is  capable  of  coiingr'

This  will  never  happen  as  long  as  a  Hufeland  livesi,  who  ooii-
Biders  the  statements  of  the  ordinary  materia  medica  tboo^
derived  &om  the  impurest  sources,  to  be  truths,  and  aerkNiBly
defends  the  employment  of  a  mixture  of  many  medicines  in  dis-
eases, imagining  that  '*  one  medicine  cannot  suffice  for  all  the
indications  in  a  disease;  several  must  be  given  at  once^  in  older
to  meet  the  several  indicaticma."

This  statement,  as  pernicious  as  it  is  well  mean^  rests  upon
two  perfectly  erroneous  premises,  the  firsts  whereby  it  is  taken
for  granted  '*  that  the  baseless  declarations  with  respect  to  the
virtues  of  simple  drugs  in  practical  works,  and  in  the  materia
medica  compiled  firom  them,  are  weU  founded ;  and  consequently,
that  they  were  recUly  capable  of  meeting  the  indications  preaenled
shewn,  and  shall  again  shew,  is  Mae) ; — the  seamcL  "  that  several
several  indications  in  a  disease,  for  this  reason,  because  a  single
medicine  can  do  little  more  than  respond  to  a  single  indication,
but  not  to  several  or  many."

But  what  does  the  ordinary  materia  medica  know  about  the
vast  sphere  of  action  of  a  simple  medicinal  substance,  that  ma-
teria medica  which,  from  impure  observations  of  the  result  of
the  employment  of  severed  medicines  in  one  disease,  attributes  to
to  a  simple  ingredient  of  the  mixture ;  which  never  subjected
the  powers  of  a  simple  medicinal  substance  to  a  pure  trial,  that
is,  on  a  healthy  individual  not  affected  with  any  symptoms  of
disease  ?  Does  that  mixture  of  fidsehood  and  truth  which  the
pound  medicines,  in  diseases  of  which  merely  the  pathological
name,  but  no  accurate  description  is  given, — does  this  comprise
the  whole  extent  of  the  sphere  of  action  which  the  Almigh^
has  bestowed  on  his  instruments  of  cure?  No!  He  has  im-
planted in  his  healing  instruments  undiscovered  (but  certainly
discoverable)  miracles  of  his  wisdom  and  goodness,  in  order  that
they  may  prove  beneficial  and  helpful  to  his  beloved  duldien


OOXXOK  MATBBIA  XEDIOA.  687

of  mankind,  in  a  &r  greater  measure  than  was  ever  dreamt  of
by  the  short-sighted  materia  medica  of  the  old  school.

But  though  it  is  certain  that  a  single  medicine  at  once  is
always  sufficient  for  the  rational  and  appropriate  treatment  of  a
disease,  I  am  far  from  advising  the  medical  world,  on  that  account^
in  order  to  ascertain  what  medicine  is  useful  in  this,  what  in  that,
disease^  so  that  thereupon  a  materia  medica,  or  treatise  on  the
virtues  of  drugs  ab  usu  in  morbis,  should  be  formed.

Far  be  it  from  me  to  advise  anything  of  the  kind,  notwith-
standing that  this  idea  might  seem,  and  has  seemed,  to  ordinary
physicians,  to  promise  the  best  results.

Nol  not  the  slightest  useful  addition  can  be  either  now  or
ever  made  to  our  knowledge  of  the  powers  of  drugs,  with  re-
gard to  their  f4sus  in  morbus,  from  observations  on  cases  of  dis-
ease even  with  single  medicines.

This  were  just  as  foul  a  source  as  all  the  others  above  men-
tioned, hitherto  employed.  No  useful  truth,  with  respect  to  the
curative  powers  of  each  individual  medicine,  could  flow  from  it

I  shall  explain  myself

Such  a  mode  of  testing  medicines  in  diseases  were  only  possi-
ble in  two  ways.  Either  a  single  drug  must  be  tried  in  all  dis*
eases,  in  order  to  ascertain  in  which  of  them  it  is  efficacious ;  or
all  drugs  must  be  tried  in  a  particular  disease,  in  order  to  ascer-
tain which  remedy  can  cure  it  most  certainly  and  most  perfectly.

And,  first,  with  regard  to  the  latter  of  these  ways ;  and  from
it  DMiy  be  inferred  what  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  former.

By  an  infinite  number  of  trials  of  all  imaginable  simple
substances  used  in  domestic  practice,  in  a  weU-defined  disease,
which  shaU  constantly  present  the  sam^  characters,  a  true,  certainly
efficacious,  specific  remedy  for  the  greater  number  of  individuals
and  their  friends  suffering  from  the  same  disease  might  certainly
be  discovered,  though  only  casu  fortuito.

But  who  knows  how  many  centuries  the  inhabitants  of
deep  valleys  were  forced  to  suffer  from  their  goitres  before
accident,  aAer  thousands  of  drugs  and  domestic  nostnmis  had
been  tried  in  vain,  put  it  into  the  head  of  an  individual,  that
roasted  sponge  was  the  best  thing  for  it;  at  all  events  it  was
not  until  the  thirteenth  century  that  Arnault  of  Villeneuve
notices  its  power  of  curing  goitre.


688  KXAMiNATioir  or  thi  soubcbs  of  thx

It  is  well  known  that  for  many  years  after  its  first  inYasion,
the  venerecd  disease  was  treated  in  a  most  imsucoessful  manner
by  the  physicians  of  the  schools,  by  starvation,  by  purgatives,
and  other  useless  remedies,  which  had  been  employed  to  com-
bat the  Arabian  leprosy,  until  at  last,  after  many  attempts  and
repeated  trials  of  an  innumerable  multitude  of  things  by  em-
pirical physicians  on  many  thousands  of  patients  who  sought
their  aid,  rnercury  was  hit  upon,  and  proved  itself  specific  in
this  dreadful  scourge,  in  spite  of  all  the  violent  theoretical  op-
position of  the  pedantic  physicians  of  the  Arabian  school.

The  intermittent  fever  endemic  in  the  marshy  regions  of  South
America,  which  has  a  great  resemblance  to  our  own  marsh  ague^
had  long  been  treated  by  the  Peruvians,  probably  after  innu-
merable trials  of  other  drugs,  with  cinchona  bark^  which  they
found  to  be  the  most  efficacious  remedy,  and  which  was  first
made  known  by  them  as  a  febrifuge  to  Europeans  in  the  year
1688.

The  bad  consequences  resulting  firom  blows,  fidls,  bruises  and
strains  were  long  endured,  ere  chance  revealed  to  the  labouring
classes  who  principally  suffered  from  such  accidents,  the  specific
virtues  of  arnica  in  such  cases ;  at  least  Franz  Joel  was  the
first  who,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  makes  mention  of  its  virtues,
and,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  they  were  more  particularly
generally  recognised.

Thus,  after  thousands  upon  thousands  of  blind  trials  with  in*
numerable  substances  upon,  perhaps,  millions  of  individuals,  the
suitable,  the  specific  remedy  is  at  last  discovered  by  accident  In
order  to  discover  the  remedies  for  the  few  maladies  mentioned
above,  there  was  no  necessity  for  the  employment  on  the  part
of  indolent  man,  of  that  reason  and  mature  knowledge  which
the  Almighty  has  given  to  him,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  free
himself  from  those  inevitable  natural  and  other  evils  involv-
ing his  health — ^the  vast  multitude  of  diseases; — in  fact,  no
true  medical  knowledge  at  all  was  required.  Mere  experiment*
ing  with  all  imaginable  substances  which  might  come  into  the
head  or  hands  was  undoubtedly  sujfficient  (to  be  sure  after  the
lapse  of  perhaps  hundreds  of  years)  to  enable  him  to  discovery
by  accident,  a  suitable  remedy,  which  never  afterwards  belied
its  specific  power.

These  few  specifics  in  tJiese  few  diseases  constitute  all  the  truth
tcfiic/i  is  contained  in  the  volumifious  materia  medica  in  common  use;


OOimON  MATIBIA  IfSDIOA.  689

and  these  ttre,  for  the  most  part,  I  may  say,  almost  entirely,
derived  from  domestic  practice.

"But  if  specific  remedies,  which  were  always  serviceable  in
Hie  above  diseases,  were  discovered  in  this  way,  why  could  not
8ome  remedies  against  all  the  remaining  innumerable  diseases
be  difloovered  by  similar  experiments?"

Because  all  other  diseases  only  present  themselves  as  indivi-
dual cases  of  disease  differing  from  each  other,  or  as  epidemics
which  have  never  been  seen  before^  and  will  never  be  seen  again
in  exactly  the  same  form.  The  constant  specific  remedies  in
these  few  diseases  were  capable  of  being  discovered  by  means
of  trying  every  imaginable  medicinal  substance,  only  because
the  thing  to  be  cured,  the  disease^  was  of  a  constant  chamcter; —
they  are  diseases  which  always  remain  the  same ;  some  are  pro»
duoed  by  a  miasm  which  continues  the  same  through  all  generations,
such  as  the  venereal  disease ;  others  have  the  same  exciting  causes,
18  the  ague  of  marshy  districts,  the  goitre  of  the  inhabitants  of
deep  valleys  and  their  outlets,  and  the  bruises  caused  by  falls
and  blows.

Had  it  been  possible,  by  blind  trials  of  all  imaginable  sub-
stances, to  discover  accidentally  the  suitable  (specific)  remedy
for  each  of  the  innumerable  other  diseases,  then  must  they  all
have  been  as  constant  in  their  nature,  have  appeared  always  in
the  same  manner  and  in  the  same  form,  have  shewn  themselves
to  be  always  as  identical  in  their  character,  as  those  few  diseases
we  have  mentioned.

Only  for  a  want  of  a  constant  character  can  ive  suppose  a  supply
of  a  cofistant  character.

That  it  was  requisite,  in  order  to  find  out  empirically  the
proper  remedy,  that  all  diseases,  for  which  the  specific  was  sought
should  be  identical  and  preserve  an  invariable  fixed  character,
appears  not  only  to  have  been  surmised,  but  to  have  been  deeply
felt  by  the  medical  community  of  the  old  school.  They  imagined
that  they  must  represent  to  themselves  the  various  diseases  of
humanity  in  certain  fixed  forms,  before  they  could  hope  to  dis-
cover for  each  a  suitable,  trustworthy  remedy,  and  this  (as  they
knew  no  other  better — scientific — way  of  finding  the  fitting  me-
dicine in  diseases)  by  means  of  experimenting  on  them  with  all
possible  drugs, — ^a  method  which  had  succeeded  so  well  in  the
few  fixed  diseases  above  alluded  to.

This  undertaking,  to  arrange  all  other  diseases  in  a  certain
44


990  BXAldNATIOK  OF  THS  dOCSCBS  OF  THI

£xed  classification,  appeared  to  them  at  first  certainljVeiy  plau-
sible and  practicable.

In  order  to  set  about  it,  they  conceived  the  idea  of  considering
all  those  from  among  the  vast  array  of  diseases,  which  bore  any
resemblance  to  each  other,  as  one  and  the  same  disease ;  and
having  provided  them  with  a  name,  and  given  them  a  place  in
their  nosological  works,  they  were  not  deterred,  by  the  constantly
occurring  differences  in  their  appearance,  from  declaring  them
to  be  definite  forms  of  disease,  which  they  must  always  have
before  them,  in  order  thereby  to  be  able  to  discover,  as  they
flattered  themselves,  a  particular  i^medy  for  this  disease.

Thus  they  collected  the  infinite  variety  of  diseases  into  a  few
arbitrarily  formed  classes  of  diseases,  without  reflecting  that  na-
ture is  immutable,  whatever  false  notions  men  may  form  of  her.
In  like  manner,  the  polyhedrical  kaleidoscope  held  before  the
eye  arranges  in  one  illusory  picture  a  number  of  external  veiy
different  objects,  but  if  we  look  behind  it  into  nature,  we  dis-
cover a  great  variety  of  dissimilar  elements.

It  is  no  excuse  to  say  that  this  arbitrary  and  unnatural  amal-
gamation of  diseases  of  nominally  constant  character  was  framed
with  the  good  intention  of  thus  discovering  for  each  separately
a  sure  remedy,  by  means  of  trying  on  them  the  large  number  of
known  drugs,  or  by  accident.  As  was  to  have  been  expected^  there
were  found  in  this  way  no  sure  remedial  agents  for  these  arti-
ficially classified  diseases;  for  we  cannot  imagine  any  leal
weapons  to  combat  figments  and  phantoms  of  the  imagination !

All  the  uses  and  virtues^  therefore^  which  the  Tnateria  medioa
kinds  of  diseases,  cannot  maJce  the  slightest  pretence  to  certainty.

What  advantage  has  been  gained  in  so  many  centuries,  with
all  the  host  of  new  and  old  medicines,  over  the  artificial  noso-
logical classes  of  diseases,  and  names  of  diseases  ?  What  remedies
have  been  found  that  can  be  relied  on?  It  is  not  now  as  it  was
long  ago, — ^2800  years  ago,— that  by  the  employment  of  all  the
vanous  drugs  in  the  innumerable  cases  of  disease  which  occur
in  nature,  some  are,  it  is  true,  much  altered,  generally,  however,
for  the  worse,  and  but  few  are  cured  by  them  ?  And  was  it
possible,  even  in  this  enormous  space  of  time,  that  it  could  be
otherwise,  that  it  could  be  improved,  as  long  as  the  old  system
remained  as  it  was,  with  its  imaginary  thing  to  be  cured^  and  fma-
fjinary  mrtues  of  the  instruments  for  effecting  the  cure,  and  its
ignorance  of  their  true,  pure  action? How  could  reidly  useful


OOXXON  MATSBIA  XXDIOA.  691

traihs  spring  fix>m  the  employment  of  the  latter  against  the
former  7

Let  it  not  be  alleged,  "  that  not  unfrequently  many  a  severe
disease — which  some  called  by  one,  others  by  a  dinerent  patho-
logical name— ^was  cured  as  if  by  miracle,  by  a  simple  domestic
remedy,  or  by  some  medicine  or  prescription  which  accidentally
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  physician."

No  doubt  this  sometimes  happened ;  no  well-informed  man
would  deny  it  But  from  this  we  can  leam  nothing  but  what
we  all  know  already,  "that  medicines  can  cure  diseases;"  but
from  these  casus  fortaiti  nothing  is  to  be  learnt ;  as  yet  they  oc-
cupy an  isolated  position  in  history,  altogether  useless  for  prac-
tice.

Our  congratulations  must  only  be  bestowed  on  the  sufferer  who
reaped  advantage  from  this  rare  godsend,  and  was  cured  quickly
(and  lastingly  ?)  by  tlus  accidental  remedy.  But  from  this  won-
derful cure  nothing  at  all  is  learned ;  not  the  slightest  addition
has  thereby  been  made  to  the  resources  of  the  healing  art.

On  the  contrary,  these  very  chance  causes  ofa/ccidental  cures,  when
Ihey  have  occurred  to  physicians,  have  done  most  to  fill  the  materia
medica  luith/alse  seductive  declarations  respecting  the  curative  actions
{^particular  Tnedicines  ab  usu  in  morbis.

case  of  disease  correctly,  and,  indeed,  considers  the  circumstan-
tial description  of  a  case  of  disease  in  all  its  symptoms  as  useless,
if  he  cannot  bestow  on  it  a  pathological  name  (the  illusory  re-
presentation of  a  disease  above  alluded  to),  so  he  does  not  &il  to
apply  some  illusory  pathological  name  to  his  chance  case,  which,
together  with  his  prescription,  or  the  single  remedy  in  the  mix-
into  the  materia  medica,  which,  moreover,  is  incapable  of  making
use  of  anything  but  mere  pathological  names  of  diseases  in  its
.  account  of  the  uses  of  medicines.

He  who,  thereafler,  is  inclined  to  regard  a  case  occurring  to
himself  as  the  same  pathological  species  of  disease  (and  why
should  he  not?  the  schools  teach  him  to  do  so),  has  nothing  to
do  but  to  resort  immediately  to  this  magnificent  receipt,  this
splendid  specific,  at  the  bidding  of  its  first  recommender,  or  by
the  advice  of  the  materia  medica.  But  he  certainly  has,  under
the  same  illusory  pathological  name,  a  case  before  him  vastly
different  in  the  detail  of  its  symptoms,  and  hence  happens  what
was  inevitable,  the  medicine  does  no  good ;  it  does  harm,  as
might  have  been  anticipated.


692  XXAXINATIOK  OF  THJB  SOUBOKS  OF  THS

This  is  the  impure^  this  is  the  unhaJhwed  source  ofaU  Ae  deda-
rations  respecting  the  curative  virtues  of  medicines  ab  usu  in  morbis
in  the  ordinary  viateria  medico^ wherisby  every  imiUUar  w  led

astray. '

Had  the  so-called  observers — what  thej  almdst  never  did —
communicated  to  the  world  those  cases  of  lucky  chance  cureSi  <miy
describing  minutely  the  case  of  diseasCi  ufith  all  its  symptoms^  and
mentioning  the  remedy  employed,  they  had  at  least  written
truth ;  and  the  materia  medica  (iBnding  no  pathologitial  name
attached)  had  not  been  able  to  glean  any  liesfiom  them. They
had,  I  say,  written  truth,  which,  however,  would  only  have  been
useful  in  one  single  way,  namely,  to  teach  every  fiiture  physician
the  exact  case  of  disease  beyond  which  the  remedy,  in  order  to
prove  useful,  shoidd  not  be  employed;  and  thus  no  fidse,  and
consequently  unsuccessftil,  imitatkni  would  have  occurred.  From
such  an  accurate  description  it  woidd  have  been  evident  to  all
future  physicians  that  Uie  same,  the  exact  same^  case  of  diaeaae
never  recurs  in  nature,  consequently  could  never  again  be  cored
miraculously.

Thus  we  would  have  been  spared  all  the  many  hundred  delu-
sive accounts  of  the  curative  actions  of  particular  drugs  in  the
ordinary  materia  medica,  whose  truthfulness  and  honesty  has
hitherto  consisted,  and  still  consists,  in  this,  that  it  has  fatthfuOy
re-echoed  whatever  authors  have  chosen  to  invent  with  respect  to  the
general  tfierapeutical  virtues  of  drugs,  aivd  has  accepted^  as  genuine
coin,  their  alleged  special  therapeutic  powers  ab  usu  in  morbis,
ascertained  from  accidental  cases  qfcut^  by  associating  the  spe-
cific pathological  name  of  a  disease  bestowed  on  his  case  by  the
so-called  observer,  with,  as  the  curative  power,  the  presumed
single  medicine  to  which,  among  all  the  drugs  employed  in  the
compound  prescription,  the  physician  chose  principally,  if  not

So  turbid  and  impure  are  Oie  sources  of  the  ordinary  jnaieria
ivedica,  and  so  null  and  void  its  contents  I

Vfhat  a  liealing  art,  with  such  ill-understood  medicines  /
From  the  circumstance  that  constant  remedies  have  already
been  discovered  for  those  diseases,  few  though  they  be,^  which
have  a  constant  character,  one  might  infer,  that  for  all


*  To  be  mire  this  was  only  effected  by  blind  trial*  of  aU  imagimible  dn^ ;  lor
hitherto  a  scientific  mode  of  makii^  such  discoveries  has  been  entirely
medicine.  !


OOXXOK  KATEBIA  MSDICA.  698

of  a  constant  oharacter^  constant  (specific)  remedies  might  be
founcL

And  aoooidingly,  since  the  only  trustworthy  way,  the  homceo-
pathic,  has  been  pursued  with  honesty  and  zeal,  the  specific  re-
medies  for  sevend  of  the  other  constant  diseases  have  already
been  discovered.^

In  order  to  treat  successfully  the  other  cases  of  disease  occur-
ring  in  man,  and  which,  be  they  acute  or  chronic,  differ  so  vastly
among  each  other,  if  they  cannot  be  referred  to  some  primary
disease  which  is  constant  in  its  character,  they  must  each  be
regarded  as  peculiar  diseases,  and  a  medicine  which  in  its  pure

*  In  this  homoBopftthic  way,  from  a  oonaideratioo  of  the  symptoms  of  the  smooth
SMrbt/NMT,  with  bright  erjaipelatoiis  redness  of  the  skin,  whidi  formerly  prevailed
iD  Sorope  from  time  to  time,  as  a  contagioiw  epidemic  (but  has  been  alinost  iotallj
tappbated  by  the  purpwra  mUiariM,  which,  in  1800,  came  from  the  Netherlands  into
oar  ooontry,  and  has  been  improperly  confounded  with  BcarUifever,  by  physician^
ifho  knew  not  the  latter  disease),  I  found  the  specific  curative  and  prophylactic  re*
mady  hr  tfab  tme,  smooth  scarlet-fever  in  the  smallest  doses  of  belladonna^  which  hat
the  power  of  producing  a  very  similar  fever,  with  a  similar  lobster-red  colour  of  the
skin*

Soi,  also,  from  a  thorough  consideration  of  the  symptoms  presented  by  ihe  purpura
siltttfrtt  just  mentioned,  in  the  particular  character  of  its  purely  inflammatory  fever
witk  ai^toiaing  anxiety  and  restlessness,  I  found  that  aconite  must  be  the  specific  re*
mady  (oooaaionally  alternately  with  raw  ooflfee) ;  and  experience  has  confirmed  tha
tmth  of  the  remark.

Hie  symptoms  of  eroup  are  to  be  found  in  the  pure  materia  med^ca,  among  the
symptoms  produced  by  burnt  tponge  and  hepar  eulphurU ;  and  see!  these  two
jlteraately,  and  in  the  smallest  doso,  core  this  frightful  disease  of  children,  as  I  fini
dboovered.

No  known  medicine  is  so  capable  of  producing  a  state  mmilar  to  that  of  the  epidemic
hooping-cough  as  the  tundew ;  and  this  disease,  which,  notwithstanding  all  the
emtioiis  of  allopathic  physicians,  either  becomes  chronic  or  terminates  fatally,  is  cured
in  a  iiw  days  in  a  certain  and  safe  manner,  as  I  first  shewed,  by  the  smallest  portion
of  a  drop  of  the  dedllionth  dilution  of  the  juice  of  droeera  rotundifolia.

What  physician  before  me,  and  before  the  publication  of  the  **  Pure  MaUria  Me-
dUOf"  was  able  to  cure  radically  the  constitutional  and  local  sycosic  condyloma  >n]S
disease  t  They  were  content  with  removing  the  morbid  growths  by  the  cautery,  ;he
knife,  or  the  ligature,  as  often  as  they  appeared  externally,  but  none  succeeded  in
euring  the  disease.  The  symptoms  of  tkt^a  oeeidentalis  taught  me,  however,  that
it  must  cure  this  disease ;  and,  behold  1  a  very  rmall  dose  of  its  highly  diluted  juice
actually  cures  the  internal  disease,  so  that  the  external  growths  vanish  also,  bhewing
iht  core  to  be  radical

With  an  infinity  of  empirically  chosen  drugs  the  allopathist  attacks  the  autumnal
dysentery,  but  with  what  miserable  success  I  The  symptoms  of  corroHve  9ublinuit$,
however  (vide  the  "  Pure  Materia  Jfedica  "),  resemble  so  cluiely  those  of  tliis  diseaM;,
that  this  medicine  must  be  its  specific  remedy  ;  and  experience  convinced  me,  many
years  since,  that  a  single  dose,  consisting  of  a  6niall  portion  of  a  drop  of  the  trillionth
dilution  of  mereuriut  eublifnatus  corroHvw  is  sufficient  to  produce  a  rapid  and  ann-
plete  cure.


694  KXAMIKATIOK  OF  THI  SOUBCBS  OT  THB, ko.

effects  on  the  healthy  body  shews  symptoms  similar  to  those  of
the  case  before  us,  must  be  administered.

This  improved  healing  art,  i.  e.,  the  homoeopathic^  draws  not
its  knowledge  from  those  impure  sources  of  Ae  materia  medica
hitherto  in  use,  pursues  not  that  antiquated,  dreamy,  fidse  path
we  have  just  pointed  out,  but  follows  the  way  consonant  with
nature.  It  administers  no  medicines  to  combat  the  diseases  of
mankind  before  testing  their  pure  effects ;  that  is,  observing  what
changes  they  can  produce  in  the  health  of  a  healthy  man — this
is  pure  materia  medica.

Thus  alone  can  the  power  of  medicines  on  the  human  health
be  known ;  thus  alone  can  their  true  importance,  the  peculiar
action  of  each  drug,  be  exhibited  clearly  and  manifestly,  without
any  fallacy,  any  deception,  independent  of  all  speculation ;  in
their  symptoms  thus  ascertained,  all  their  curative  elements  lie
disclosed ;  and  among  them  may  be  found  a  signalization  of  all
the  cases  of  disease  which  each  fitting  (specific)  remedy  is  capable
of  curing.

According  to  this  improved  system  of  medicine,  cases  of  dis-
ease, in  all  their  endless  variety  of  appearance  (if  they  cannot
be  traced  back  to  some  more  profoundly  rooted  primary  disease
of  constant  character),  must  be  regarded  in  every  instance  as
new,  and  never  before  seen ;  they  must  be  noted,exactly  as  they
present  themselves,  with  all  the  symptoms,  accidents  and  altered
sensations  discoverable  in  them ;  and  a  remedy  must  be  selected
which,  as  has  been  shewn  by  previous  experiments  of  its  action
on  perfect  health,  is  capable  of  producing  symptoms,  accidents,
and  altered  sensations  most  similar  to  those  of  the  case  under
treatment ;  and  such  a  medicine,  given  in  a  very  small  dose,
cures,  as  experience  teaches,  much  better  and  more  perfectly  than
any  other  method  of  treatment.

This  doctrine  of  the  pure  effects  of  medicines  promises  no  de-
lusive, fabulous  remedies  for  names  of  diseases,  imagines  no  ge-
neral therapeutic  virtues  of  drugs,  but  unostentatiously  possesses
the  elements  of  cure  for  diseases  accurately  known  (that  is,  in-
vestigated in  all  their  symptoms ;  and  he  who  will  take  the
trouble  to  choose  the  remedy  for  a  disease  by  the  rule  of  the
most  perfect  similarity  will  ever  find  in  it  a  pure  inexhaustible
source  whence  he  may  derive  the  means  for  saving  the  lives  of
his  fellow-men.

LEiPtpio,  April,  1817;  and
CdTHKN,  January,  1825.


ON  THB  UKCHARITABLENES3  TOWABDS  SUICIDX. 696

OK

THE  UNCHARITABLENESS  TOWARDS  SmCIDE&*


The  propensity  to  self-destruction  always  depends  upon  a
disease  which  is  to  a  certain  extent  endemic  in  England,  but  in
many  other  countries  it  prevailed  epidemically,  so  to  speak,
more  some  time  since  than  now,  but  it  by  no  means  affect^  the
very  worst  characters,  but  often  otherwise  honest,  well-con-
ducted individuals.  It  is  generally  the  friends  of  the  individual
— ^who  do  not  pay  attention  to  his  corporeal  disease,  that  often
passes  rapidly  into  this  mental  disease — and  his  medical  atten*
dants,  who  know  not  how  to  cure  the  suicidal-malady,  that  are
to  blame  for  the  catastrophe.

By  their  unsteady,  shy,  anxious  look,  by  the  despondency
they  display  in  their  words  and  deeds,  by  their  restlessness,  that
increases  at  certain  times  of  the  day,  by  their  avoidance  of  things
that  were  formerly  most  agreeable  to  them,  and  sometimes  by
their  inconsolable  lamentations  over  some  slight  corporeal  ail-
ments, the  patients  betray  their  internal  malady.  This  most
unnatural  of  all  human  purposes,  this  disorder  of  the  mind  that
renders  them  weary  of  life,  might  always  be  with  certainty
cored  if  the  medicinal  powers  of  pure  gold  for  the  cure  of  this
sad  condition  were  known.  The  smallest  dose  of  pulverized
gold  attenuated  to  the  billionth  degree,  or  the  smallest  part  of
a  drop  of  an  equally  diluted  solution  of  pure  gold,  which  may
be  mixed  in  his  drink  without  his  knowledge,  immediately  and
permanently  removes  tliis  fearful  state  of  the  (body  and)  mind,
and  the  unfortunate  being  is  saved.


ON

THE  TREATMENT  OF  THE  PURPURA  MILIARia^


Almost  all  of  those,  without  exception,  who  are  affected  by  the
red  miliary  fever  (falsely  called  scarlet-fever)  that  is  oflen  so  fatal,
will  not  only  be  rescued  from  death,  but  also  cured  in  a  few


*  From  the  AUgffn.  Ameig  der  DeniBrhtn^  No.  144. 1819.

*  From  the  A 11  gem.  Anseig.  der  De\it§chen,  No.  26. 1 82 1


696  Oir  BISFENSING  BT  THE  PHTBICUJr.

days  by  aconite  given  alternately  with  tincture  of  raw  coffee.
The  expressed  juice  of  the  fresh  aconite-plant  should  be  mixed
with  equal  parts  of  alcohol,  and  diluted  with  a  hundred  times
its  quantity  of  alcohol,  until  the  last  dilution  is  in  the  octillionth
degree.  Of  this  a  small  portion  of  a  drop  is  to  be  given  for  a
dose  when  there  is  mcrtaaing  resihsmeas^  anxiety  and  heat  ef  the
bodj/j  all  acids  being  careftilly  avoided;  and  tohen  there  are
mtreasing  pains  (in  the  head,  throat,  &c)  combined  with  a  dispo-
sition to  weepj  a  small  portion  of  a  drop  of  the  tincture  of  raw
coffee  diluted  to  the  millionth  degree.

The  one  will  usually  be  necessary  when  the  other  has  acted
for  from  sixteen  to  twenty-four  hours.^ Not  oftener.

Besides  this  nothing  should  be  done  or  given  to  the  patient —
no  venesection,  no  leeches,  no  calomel,  no  purgative,  no  cooling
or  diaphoretic  medicine  or  herb-tea,  no  water  compresses,  no
baths,  no  clysters,  no  gargles,  no  vesicatories  or  sinapisms*

The  patients  should  be  kept  in  a  moderately  warm  room,  and
allowed  to  adapt  their  bed  coverings  to  their  own  feelings,  and
to  drink  whatever  they  like,  warm  or  cold,  only  nothing  acid

during  the  action  of  aconite.

•  •  «  •

But  even  should  these  remedies  be  prepared  and  administered
as  directed,  where  is  the  practitioner  who  would  refrain  fix>m
giving  something  or  another  from  his  routine  system,  thus  ren-
dering the  treatment  nugatory  ?


ON

PREPARATION  AND  DISPENSING  OF  MEDICLNES  BY  THE

HOMEOPATHIC  PHYSICUN.

I.  Representation  to  a  person  high  in  authority.'

*'  Nan  debet  cui  plus  licet  quod  minas  est  nno  lioere."

Ulpian,  lib.  27,  ad  Sabinum.

The  complaint  of  the  Leipzic  apothecaries  "  that  by  dispensing
my  medicines  I  encroach  upon  their  privileges,"  is  untenable  for
the  following  reasona

'  ["  Every  twelve,  sixteen  or  twenty-fuur  hours,  mcoording  as  tbe  one  or  the  other  w
in  licHted." '  (R.  A.  M.  L.,  ItUrod  to  BelL,  pt  i,  p.  16.)]

^  Written  in  1830.  fir^t  published  in  Stapfs  <xtlU*ction  in  1829.  [The  subject  of
thkt  mid  the  two  following  esisays  is  mvt  of  so  much  interest  to  the  English  homcBo*
pHthist  as  bis  right  to  prepare  and  dispense  his  own  medidiies  has  nerer  yet  beeo


L  BBFBS8XNTATI0N  TO  A  HIGH  OITIOUL.  697

Mj  system  of  medicine  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  ordi*
nary  medical  art,  but  is  in  every  respect  its  exact  opposite.  It
is  a  novum  quid^  to  which  the  standard  of  measurement  hitherto
applicable  to  the  dispensing  of  medicines  is  completely  unsuit*
able.

The  old  S3rstem  makes  use  of  complex  miictures  of  medicineif
each  ooniaining  several  ingredients  in  considerable  quantity.  The
oompounding  of  these  prescriptions,  which  in  general  consist  of
several  medicinal  substances,  demands  skilful,  often  laborious
work  and  time,  neither  of  which  the  ordinary  practitioner  can
devote  to  this  purpose,  as  he  is  occupied  with  visiting  his
patiente,  and  does  not  possess  the  skUl  required  for  compounding
these  various,  often  heterogeneous,  substances,  and  therefore
must  be  glad  to  have  at  hand  an  assistant  in  the  apothecary,
who  relieves  him  of  the  toilsome,  time-wasting  preparation  of
the  medicines ;  in  a  word,  who  undertakes  for  him  the  dispensing
business.  For  where  the  laws  relative  to  medical  affairs  speak
of  preparing  the  medicines^  and  of  dispensing^  they  always  and
invariably  imply  thereby  the  compounding  of  several  medicinal
substances  in  one  formvXa  or  prescription.  Nor  can  the  state
medicinal  regulations  imply  anything  else  thereby,  for  hitherto
all  the  prescriptions  of  doctors  for  their  patients  have  been  as  a
rule  compound  recipes,  that  is,  consisting  of  several  medicinal
ingredients  mixed  together;  and  up  to  the  present  day  the  treat-
ment of  patients,  as  taught  in  our  universities,  colleges  and
hospitals,  consists  solely  in  urriting  prescriptions,  which  are  direo*
tions  to  the  apothecary  relative  to  the  different  medicines  he  is
to  bring  together  in  one  formula,  for  hitherto  patients  as  a  rule
have  only  been  treated  with  compound  prescriptions,  the  com-
pounding and  mixture  of  which  was  entirely  left  to  the
apothecary.

Tbia  right  to  prepare  compound  medicinal  formulas  for  the
physician  was  conceded  to  the  privileged  apothecary  by  the  laws
relating  to  medicine  solely  on  this  account,  that  none  unconver-
sant  with  this  work  or  having  a  bad  stock  of  medicines  might
make  a  bungle  of  the  prescriptions,  because  the  physician  who

questioiied,  but  the  papen  themselyes  are  well  worth  perusal,  and  oould  not  have
been  with  propriety  omitted  from  this  collection,  llie  tirst  is  a  remonstniice
addratsed  to  the  chief  magistrate,  in  reply  to  an  aocosation,  brought  aganist  him  by  the
TiPipric  apothecaries,  of  dispensing  his  own  medicines.]

'  When  the  medicinal  laws  speak  of  simple  remedies,  they  make  use  of  the  words
timplieia  and  tpecie*^  and  by  the  expression,  medieint9  and  medicamMnUt  they  always
mean  eomp€fm%d  mediciiiea.


698  oir  DisPBiraiNa  by  ths  phtbiouk^i

is  engaged  in  practice  would  have  often  neither  the  skill  to  make
these  often  elaborate  mixtures  himself,  nor  the  great  time  often
requisite  to  devote  to  their  preparation.

All  the  royal  mandates  of  this  kind  refer  to  this  dispensing
and  preparation  of  drugs  {compound  medicinal  Jbrmtdas)  which
ezclusiyelj  appertains  to  the  privileged  apothecaries.

But  their  exclusive  privilege  is  entirely  limited  to  this^  but  does
not  refer  to  the  sale  of  the  simplida  (simple  drugs)  otherwise
there  could  exist  no  druggists  in  the  kingdom,  for  thej  are  not
prevented  by  any  law  at  present  ftom  selling  simples  to  every
one.

The  only  right  and  privil^e  belonging  to  the  apothecary,
exclusively  to  mcJoe  up  the  mixtures  ordered  in  prescriptions  oontainr
ing  several  medicinal  ingredients  is  not  in  the  slightest  degree  inter-
fered with  by  the  new  method  of  treatment  called  homoeopathy,
the  exact  opposite  of  the  ordinary  medical  art  hitherto  practised,
for  this  new  system  has  no  prescriptions  that  it  could  give  to
the  apothecary,  has  no  compound  remedies,  but  gives  for  e^ezy
case  of  disease  only  one  single,  simple  m^icinal  substance,  in
an  unmedicinal  vehicle,  therefore  it  does  not  compound^  and
consequentiy,  does  not  dispense.  Its  practice  is,  therefore,  not
included  in  the  prohibition  to  dispense  contained  in  the  laws
regarding  medicine.

Now,  as  every  art  admits  of  improvements  in  the  course  of
ages,  which  must  be  welcome  to  every  civilized  state,  the  medical
art  also  can  and  must  advance  farther  on  the  way  to  perfection.
If,  then,  by  the  ordination  by  an  All-wise  Providence  there
arise  the  art  of  curing  diseases  (more  easily,  surely  and  perma-
nently) without  compound  remedies,  without  mixtures  of  medi-
cines, and  if  there  be  now  physicians  who  know  how  to  treat
every  disease  efficaciously  by  means  of  one  single,  simple  remedy
(simplex),  this  cannot  be  prevented  by  any  privilege  referring
to  the  preparation  of  compound  prescriptions ;  the  new  healing
art  advancing  nearer  to  perfection  cannot  thereby  be  obstructed
in  its  beneficent  progress,  for  it  is  open  to  the  physician  for  the
purpose  of  curing  diseases  to  make  use  of  every  simple  power
in  nature  which  is  best  adapted  to  this  end ;  for  example,  the
employment  by  himself  of  electricity,  of  galvanism,  of  the
magnet,  and  so  likewise  of  every  kind  of  simple  agent;  and  in
this  the  scientific  physician  has  never  yet  been,  and  can  never
be,  fettered  by  any  regulations  of  medical  police.

For  where  in  a  syllable  to  be  found  in  all  the  royal  ordinances


I.  B1FRB81NTATI0K TO  A  HIGH  OFFICIAL.  699

relating  to  medicine  that  distinctly  forbids  physicians  to  admin-
ister simplicia  with  their  own  hands  to  the  patients?

And  as  long  as  no  such  distinct  prohibition  for  the  practi-
tioner exists  in  the  laws,  as  long  as  no  privilege  granted  to  the
apothecaries  refers  to  their  exclusive  administration  of  the  smt"
plicia^  as  long  as  it  is  allowed  to  the  ignorant  dealers  in  roots  and
herbs  in  the  weekly  market  to  sell  for  money  to  those  who  seek
their  aid,  simplicia^  medicinal  roots  and  herbs,  so  long  must  it  be
allowed  to  the  scientific  physician  skilled  in  all  the  knowledge  of
nature,  its  forms,  and  its  phenomena,  and  entrusted  with  the
care  of  human  maladies,  to  administer  gratuitously  to  his  patient
the  simple  remedy  which  he  considers  will  prove  most  efficacious
for  the  disease,^  Ats,  as  I  shall  shew,  cannot  be  done  by  the  apor
ikecary.

Such  is  exactly  the  case  with  the  new  method  of  treatment  of
which  I  am  the  founder,  which  is  something  quite  different  from
the  ordinary  mode  of  treatment.  In  my  treatise  upon  the  ho-
moeopathic system,  all  prescriptions^  all  compound  medicinal  m^x*
medicine  at  a  time  is  to  be  given  in  every  case  of  disease,'  and
I  never  treat  a  patient  in  any  other  way  than  this.

According  to  this  improved  method  of  treatment,  I  require
for  the  cure  of  even  severe  diseases,  that  have  hitherto  been
considered  incurable,  only  the  smallest  possible  doses  of  simple
substances,  either  solutions  of  some  minerals  and  metals  in  pure
alcohol  without  the  addition  of  any  acid  (preparations  that  are
known  to  me  alone,  but  not  to  any  chemists,  consequently,  not
to  any  apothecary)  or  equally  small  doses  of  vegetable  and  ani-
mal substances — always  only  one  dose  of  a  single,  simple  medi-
cament— doses  which  are  so  small  that  they  are  quite  undetect-
able by  the  senses,  and  by  every  conceivable  chemical  analysis,
in  their  ordinary  unmedicinal  vehicle  (sugar  of  milk).

This  inconceivable  minuteness  of  the  doses  of  simple  medici-
nal substances  in  this  new  system  of  medicine  quite  sets  aside
all  possible  suspicion  of  a  hurtful  size  of  the  dose  of  simple  me-
dicine given  to  the  patient.

Incapable  of  being  taught  that  the  great  curative  power  of
such  small  doses  of  simple  medicines,  that  shews  itself  in  the
beneficial  effects  of  their  administration,  depends  upon  a  plan  of


'  See  the  Organon  of  Medicine,  2d  edit  1819,  §  297,  298,  299— [Wde  fifth  edition,
272,  278, 274.]


700  Oir  DI8FSNBIKG  BT  THB  PHTHIOIiJf.

sdection  for  the  cases  of  disease  for  which  they  are  adapted
hitherto  unknown  and  peculiar  to  the  homoeopathic  art^  whereof
the  ordinary  system  of  medicine  never  dreams^  the  apothecary
ridicules  the  nullity  of  such  small  doses,  since  all  his  senses,  as
well  as  the  best  chemical  analysis,  cannot  enable  him  to  deteol
any  niedicinal  substance  in  the  vehicle  (sugar  of  milk).

I^  then,  even  the  apothecary,  with  all  his  jealous  animosi^
against  the  new  healing  art,  cannot  detect  anything  medicinal  or
poisonous  in  the  remedies  of  the  genuine  homoeopathic  physi-
cian, nor  anything  that  could  appear  medicinal,  not  to  mention
too  strong  or  injurious,  how  completely  satisfied  may  the  go-
vernment which  is  concerned  for  the  wel&re  and  health  of  the
community  be  with  respect  to  the  effects  of  such  efficacious  re*
medies  given  in  such  small,  such  inconceivable  doses,  as  those
homoeopathy  administers  to  its  patients !  It  may  be  infinitely
more  satisfied  than  with  respect  to  the  trade  of  the  apothecary,
where  the  very  same  medicines  which  the  homoeopathic  physician
employs  in  such  inconceivably  small  doses  are  unhesitatingly
sold  by  the  apothecary  in  quantities  upwards  of  a  million  times
greater,  to  every  one  (citizen  or  peasant),  to  persons  who  do  not
know  what  damage  these  things  may  do  when  employed  im-
properly ;  his  only  limitation  being  that  he  shall  not  sell  arse-
nic, corrosive  sublimate,  opium,  and  a  few  other  things,  to
strangers.

I  take  leave  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  medical  police  of
the  state  to  this  subject

Moreover,  the  homoeopathic  physician  cannot  employ  the
apothecary  as  an  assistant  in  the  practice  of  his  new  art  The
medicinal  doses  of  such  a  physician  are  so  minute,  so  impercep-
tible, that  if  the  apothecary  had  to  put  it  into  the  vehicle  al-
luded to  according  to  the  directions  of  the  physician  (which  the
physician  himself  can  do  in  a  minute  without  waste  of  time),
the  homoeopathic  physician,  if  he  did  not  himself  see  the  ope-
ration performed,  could  not,  either  by  the  aid  of  his  senses  or
by  that  of  chemistry,  determine  whether  the  apothecary  gave
the  medicine  he  ordered,  or  some  other,  or  none  at  all.

This  impossibility  on  the  part  of  the  homoeopathic  physician,
to  exercise  control  over  such  an  act  of  the  apothecary,  renders
it  impossible  for  the  physician  of  the  new  school  to  avail  him-
self in  his  treatment  of  an  assistant,  be  he  who  he  may.  In  this
case  he  can  trust  to  himself  only ;  he  alone  can  know  what  he
has  himself  done.


I.  BXPBISSNTATION TO  ▲  HIGH  OFFIOUL.  701

And  jet  this  unoommon  minuteDess  of  the  dose  of  all  dyna-
mically-acting medicines  is  indispensably  necessary  in  this  new
art,  which  is  excellent  for  the  treatment  of  every  disease,  but
which  iB'tndispevisabk  for  the  cure  of  the  serious  chronic  diseases
which  have  hitherto  been  abandoned  as  inisurable,  and  it  is  jq
indispensably  necessary,  that  the  cure  of  these  diseases  is  impos-
sible without  that  minuteness  of  dose.

Now  if  the  spirit  of  the  laws  relating  to  medicine  is  really  di-
rected chiefly  and  before  everything  else  to  the  salus  jmbHca^
and  if  the  diiseases  most  worthy  of  commiseration  and  hitherto
abandoned  as  incurable  can  only  be  transformed  into  health  by
means  of  this  new  method,  as,  for  instance,  the  cases  I  have
cured  testify,  which  have  roused  to  bitterness  the  envy  of  many
of  the  ordinary  practitioners,  then  it  surely  cannot  be  doubted
that  the  sanitary  police  will  prefer  the  welfare  of  the  suffering
public  to  all  unfounded  private  claims,  and  will  afford  its  pro-
tection to  the  new  efficacious  healing  art,  but  that  it  will  not
lorce  upon  the  new  system  as  its  assistant  the  art  of  the  apothe-
cary, which  was  originally  instituted  for  preparing  the  medicinal
miscJtwrea  of  the  ordinary  system,  from  prescriptions  containing
many  strong  ingredients ;  such  an  act  could  only  be  obstruodve
and  never  advantageous  to  homoeopathy.

I  am  correct  in  ^ying,  '^  unfounded  private  claims,"  and  I
add  that  these  claims  are  *'  insignificant  and  unmeaning."  For
how  much  would  an  apothecary  be  entitled  to  if  (as  the  homoeo-
pathic physician  himself  does  without  waste  of  time)  to  the  ve-
hicle of  three  grains  of  sugar  of  milk  he  were  to  add,  for  ex-
ample, one  drop  of  an  alcoholic  solution  of  a  grain  of  tin,  rhu-
barb or  cinchona  bark,  diluted  to  more  than  the  millionth  de-
gree ?  According  to  aU  scales  of  apothecaries'  charges  hitherto
framed,  which  are  all  calculated  only  according  to  the  weight  of
the  ingredients  of  the  ordinary  formulas,  and  the  trouble  (which
does  not  exist  in  the  new  system)  of  compounding  the  ingre-
dients, for  making  up  any  such  homoeopathic  prescription,  I
say,  he  is  entitled  to  just — nothing.

If  then  for  the  preparation  of  homoeopathic  medicine  he  were
entitled  to  nothing,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  if  the  Leipzic  apothe-
caries stUl  persist  with  their  untenable  proposition,  there  may
be  some  secret  motive  at  work  which  determines  them  to  force
their  services,  contrary  to  their  interests,  on  the  homoeopathic
physician.  I  would  fidn  hope  that  this  is  not  done  with  the  in-
tention of  throwing  an  insuperable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the


702  OK  BISPSNSIKG  BT  THS  PHTSIOIAK.

recently  developed  and  highly  important  new  healing  art,  for
which  nothing  can  be  a  substitute^  as  some  of  the  practitioners
who  are  envious  of  its  success  would  seem  to  wish.

The  true  homoeopathic  physician,  moreover,  does  not  in  the
least  infringe  on  the  rights  of  the  apothecary  as  a  dealer  in
drugs,  for  he  cannot  charge  the  patient  anything  for  such  an  in-
conceivably small  dose  of  the  simple  medicine  which  no  chemi-
cal analysis  can  detect  in  the  vehide ;  he  can  only,  as  is  proper,
be  paid  for  the  trouble  he  expends  in  investigating  the  morbid
state,  and  in  choosing  the  most  efficacious  remedy,  which  is
much  greater  in  this  new  beneficent  system  of  medicine  than
nnder  the  old  system.

Now,  as  the  new  system  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  me*
thod  of  treatment  hitherto  practised,  which  consists  in  the  giving
of  compound  prescriptions,  for  the  preparation  of  which  the
apothecaries  are  alone  privileged ;  as  the  new  system  bears  no
resemblance  to  this,  seeing  that  it  never  treats  with  mixtures  of
ponderous,  massive  doses  of  medicines,  but  with  inexpressibly
small  and  subtle  doses  of  always  smiple  medicines  pr^Mired  in  a
manner  which  is  in  some  respects  not  attainable  by  the  apothe-
caries, regarding  which,  consequently,  the  art  of  the  apothecary
with  its  old  privileges,  can  have  no  privilege  ;*  I  therefore  make
the  following  suggestion  with  all  respect,  but  with  a  thorough
conviction  of  its  justice:

**  To  keep  the  Leipzic  apothecaries  within  the  limits  of  their
privileges,  and  to  notify  to  them  that  their  rights  do  not  extend
to  a  new  method  of  treatment  which  has  never  before  been  prac-
ticed, which,  far  from  dispensing,  that  is,  making  up  prescrip-
tions of  the  ordinary  kind  composed  of  several  powerful  medi-
cines (the  preparation  of  which  belongs  of  right  to  the  apothe-
cary), or  requiring  them  for  its  treatment,  on  the  contrary,  only
requires  inexpressibly  small  doses  of  simple  medicines  (which
the  apothecary  laughs  at),  consequently,  only  simpUcia^  which  no
ruler  ever  yet  forbade  scientific  physicians  to  administer  to  their
patients,  and  which  consequently  are,  as  we  may  naturally  sup-
pose, not  prohibited  in  any  regulations  of  medical  police."

*  Pure  human  reaaoo  is  the  roice  of  Gkxl  I  No  goyernment  erer  yet  pennitted
the  sock-mill  to  extend  it«  right  of  monopoly  to  the  pereon  who  can  extract — what
the  mill  cannot  do--pure  starch  from  wheat  without  the  employment  of  any  machine
(the  starch-maker) ;  no  government  ever  allowed  the  old  privileges  of  the  art  of
printing  to  bterfere  with  the  development  of  divine  lithpgraphy,  which  also  multi-
plies  a  thousand  fold  thoughts  upon  paper,  and  does  this  modi  more  rapidly  and
easily  hut  without  the  artificial  compoeitioo  of  mastive  types.


n.  THX  HOlKBOPATHISr  AND  LAWS  ON  DISPENSING. 706

This  concession  I  look  forward  to  with  all  the  more  confi-
dence and  tranquillity,  seeing  that  this  new  system  has,  on  ac-
count of  its  inmiense  importance,  already  gained  a  public  cha-
racter, and  already  in  all  countries  where  German  is  spoken,
men  are  arising  who  know  how  to  estimate  it  as  a  great  benefit
for  suffering  himianity.

Finally^  as  regards  what  relates  to  my  disciples,^  I  must  state
that  I  am  in  no  way  connected  with  them,  and  as  the  subject  is
quite  irrelevant  I  shall  refirain  from  touching  on  it.  I  do  not
consider  any  as  my  followers,  who,  in  addition  to  leading  an  ir-
reproachable, perfectly  moral  life,  does  not  practise  the  new  art
in  such  a  manner,  that  the  remedy  he  administers  to  the  patient
in  a  non-medicinal  vehicle  (sugar  of  milk  or  diluted  alcohol)
contains  such  a  small  subtle  dose  of  the  medicine,  that  neither
the  senses  nor  chemical  analysis  can  detect  the  smallest  abso-
lutely hurtful  medicinal  substance,  indeed  not  the  slightest  trace
of  any  thing  medicinal  at  all,  which  pre-supposes  a  minuteness
of  dose  that  must  indubitably  dispel  all  anxiety  from  all  officers
of  state  who  have  to  do  with  medical  police.^


a— THE  HOMCEOPATHIO  PHYSICIAN  IS  PREVENTED  BY  NO  EXIST-
ING LAWS  RELATING  TO  MEDICINE  FROM  HIMSELF  ADMINI-
NISTERING  HIS  MEDICINES  TO  HIS  PATIENTa'

J  No  homoeopathic  physician  dispenses ;  according  to  the  prin-
ciples of  his  art  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  dispense.

To  dispense  means  to  mix  together  and  to  compound  several
medicins^  substances,  as  the  apothecary  does.

At  the  period  when  the  word  "  dispense  "  was  first  used  in  a
medical  sense,  the  pharmacopoeias  under  the  name  of  dtspensor
toria,  contained  only  compound  medicinal  formulas,  as,  for  ex-
ample, the  first  dispensatorium  that  appeared  in  Germany,  pub-
lished at  Niimberg  in  1651.

>  ["Id  the  very  bitterjand  abusive  complaiot  of  the  apothecaries,  which  was
drawn  up  by  a  Leipzig  advocate,**)say8  Stapi^  **  malicious  iuaiouataoDs  were  made  re-
garding Hahnemann's  disciples.**]

*  ["And  what,"  exclaims  StapC  was  the  result  of  this  representatioD  which
Hahnemann  addressed  to  a  high  personage  in  the  state,  in  consequence  of  a  com-
plaint made  against  him,  b^  the  Leipzig  apothecaries  regarding  the  dispensing  his
own  medicines  ? — The  fatherland  lost  thereby  one  of  its  most  illustrious  sons !  *

'  Sent  to  tlie  Authorities  of  State  in  1821,  first  published  in  Stapf's  Collection
ID  1»2V.


704  ON  DI8PSNSING  BY  THE  PHTBIGUJN.

At  the  same  time,  the  laws  regarding  medical  affairs  ordered
that  the  apothecary  alone,  and  no  one  else,  should  oompoiind
the  various  kinds  of  medicine  according  to  the  formulas  c^  such
a  book  (dispensalorium),  or,  according  to  the  prescription  of  the
physician,  into  a  uniform  mixture  (to  dispense)  for  the  treat-
ment of  the  sick.

In  that  alone  consisted,  and  still  consists,  the  apothecaries'  pri-
vilege, and  no  apothecary  has  any  other  privilege.

The  laws  regulating  medicine  give  to  these  mixtures  of  me-
dicines the  names  of  medicines,  medicaments^  and  composiia^  but
the  several  medicinal  substances  and  ingredients  they  do  not
term  either  medicines  or  medicaments,  but  simpUda  and  species.

When  therefore,  the  medicinal  regulations  forbid  tjxe  phy-
sician to  administer  himself  medicines  and  medicaments  to  his
patients,  in  other  words,  to  dispense,  they  cannot  thereby  mean
any  thing  else  than  to  prevent  him  compounding  medidnal
mixtures  from  various  medicinal  ingredients ;  but  they  nowhere
forbid  him  giving  simpUcia  to  his  patients.

They  also  forbid  the  apothecaries  to  dispense  of  themselves,
or  to  make  up  and  give  out  medicinal  mixtures  (medicaments)
for  patients,  without  the  physician^s  prescription.  Hence  the
apothecary  dare  not  prepare  for  patients  without  the  doctor's
prescription  any  medicines  (composita,  medicinal  mixtures,  me-
dicaments), but  he  is  permitted  to  sell  to  any  one  simple  medi-
cinal substances  (excepting  those  that  act  too  violently  in  large
dose),  without  the  doctor's  prescription ;  whence  we  perceive
that  the  giving  the  simplicia  cannot  constitute  dispensing,  other-
wise the  apothecary  would  not  be  permitted  to  sell  the  simplicia.

But  it  is  only  permitted  to  the  apothecary  to  sell  simple  medi-
cinal substances;  he  has  no  privilege  for  this  sale;  otherwise
there  would  be  no  druggists,  who,  also  sell  simple  medicinal
substances  to  every  one.

Therefore  the  apothecary  is  not  justified  in  preventing  the
physician  from  administering,  himseli^  a  simple  medicinal  sub-
stance to  his  patients.

The  medicinal  regulations  never  call  the  common  sale  by  the
apothecary  dispensing,  consequently  it  cannot  be  said  of  the  phy-
sician who  administers  a  simple  medicinal  susbtance  for  the  relief
of  his  patients,  that  he  dispenses,  because  he  does  not  compound
for  them  any  so-called  medicines  and  medicaments,  in  the  legal
sense,  that  is,  any  composita  consisting  of  several  ingredients.  In
his  unprivileged  sale  the  apothecary  gives  to  any  one  for  money


IL  THB  HOHCaOPATHiaT  AND  THE  LAWS  ON  DISPENSING. 706

not  only  the  crude  simple  medicinal  substance,  but  also  the  sim-
ple preparations  therefrom :  he  gives  the  buyers  tincture  of  rhu-
barb, anise  sugar,  peppermint  lozenges,  &c.,  without  let  or  hin-
drance, rightly  ttJcing  for  granted  that  the  alcohol  used  in
preparing  the  tincture  and  the  sugar  in  the  lozenges  are  not  to
be  looked  upon  as  medicinal  substances,  but  as  unmedicinal  ve-
hicles, in  the  former  case  for  the  rhubarb,  in  the  latter  for  the
anise  or  peppermint  oil,  consequently,  that  these  simple  prepa-
rations are  not  to  be  regarded  as  medicinal  mixtures,  nor  their
sale  as  dispensing.

But  to  be  consistent,  tie  must  allow  that  when  the  physician  gives
a  simple  medicinal  svistance  mixed  with  sugar  to  his  paMents,  ^is
aiso  cannot  he  considered  dispensing.

Hitherto,  however,  this  has  almost  never  been  the  case.

From  the  most  remote  periods  physicians  were  traditional^
directed  by  their  teachers,  by  their  colleges  for  instruction  in
the  art  of  prescribing,  in  their  hospitals,  and  by  their  medical
authorities,  to  treat  their  patients  by  prescribing  medicines  (com-
posita)  in  receipts  fix)m  the  apothecary's  shop,  and  the  apothe-
caries were  directed  to  compound  ^ose  medicinal  mixtures
called  medicines  and  medicaments  par  exceUence,  fix)m  a  variety
of  ingredients  in  considerable  quantities,  which  was  called
dispensing.

But  there  unexpectedly  arose — since  all  that  is  imperfect  in
the  world  gradually  advances  inevitably  towards  its  perfection
— an  entirely  new  system  of  medicine,  called  by  its  foimder
Homoeopatht/y  and  taught  in  the  book  entitled  Organon  of  Medi-
cine. This  system  of  medicine,  which,  as  the  book  teaches,  is
much  more  consonant  to  nature,  and  as  its  results  shew,  is  much
more  successftd,  is  the  direct  opposite  of  the  ordinary  treatment.
According  to  this  new  system,  medicinal  substances  are  era-
ployed  for  diseases  in  which  the  ordinary  method  gave  exactly
the  opposite,  but  these  were  never  given  as  in  the  ordinary
method,  in  mixtures,  but  a  single  medicinal  substance  (simplex)
only  was  always  given  for  each  case  of  disease,  and  that  in  such
an  extremely  small  dose,  that  the  ordinary  physician  of  the  old
school  and  the  apothecary  regard  it  as  an  unimportant  nothing,
for  the  former  was  accustomed  to  employ  in  treatment  only  large
doses  of  medicine,  but  with  entirely  opposite  aims,  which  could
not  do  much  good ;  and  the  latter  was  accustomed  to  comjiound
only  large  doses  of  several  medicinal  ingredients,  and  to  trans-
form them  into  medicaments. Whilst,  for  instance,  the  ordinary

45


7fll6: ■ :  > ;0H  PISBBNSINO  BY  THE  PHYSICUK.

phyoicHaB  esnplojm  the  tineture  of  rhubarb  in  drachm  doaes,  in-
trodjciced  into  a  formula  along  with  other  medicinea,  for  the  pur-
pose:  of ,  causing  \pt^^in^,  the  homoeopathic  physician  gives  a
smfkU  part  of  a  drop  of  the  quadrillionth  dilution,  and  for  the
very  opposite  object, 'namely  for  the  cure  of  morbid  diarrhaas^
opitun,  often  in  vain,  whilst  the  homoeopathic  physician  employs
this  same  tincture  of  opium  more  appropriately  for  the  opposite  .
state,  and  permanently  removes  continued  constipation  with  a
small  part  of  a  drop  of  the  billionth  dilution.

With  this  new,  much  more  beneficent  healing  art,  the  homoeo-
pathic physician  does  not  interfere  with  any  apothecary's
privilege,  nor  does  he  break  any  existing  medicinal  regulation-

No  medicinal  law  has  ever  alleged  that  the  physician  must
not  give  to  his  patient  a  single  medicinal  substance.

No  privilege  gives  to  the  apothecary  the  exclusive  right  that
Ive  (done  shall  sell,  unhindered,  to  every  one,  simple  medicinal
substances  in  large  quantities,  at  hap-hazard  (often  to  the  great
injury  of  the  patient),  whilst  the  physician  dare  not  give  to  his
patients,  with  a  scientific  purpose,  the  same  simple  medicinal
substances  in  such  small  doses  that  the  patient  can  only  pay  for
the  physician's  skill,  not  for  the  remedy,  because  the  latter,  on
account  of  its  minuteness,  has  no  commercial  value,  but  on  ac-
count of  this  incredible  minuteness,  must  be  given  by  the  phy-
sician himself,  and  cannot  be  left  to  any  assistant.

According  to  the  principles  of  his  lurt,  which  prove  the  em-
ployment of  any  mixture  of  medicines  whatever  for  the  cure  of
disease  as  contrary  to  sound  reason^^  it  is  impossible  that  the
homoeopathic  physician  can  ever  administer  a  medicinal  mixture
to  his  patients,  consequently  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  dis-
pense, and  so  encroach  upon  the  apothecary's  privilege.


HI. How MAT HOMCROPATHY BB MOST CKRTAIlfLT KRADICATSD  ?^

In  no  way  more  certainly  than  by  the  authoritive  command-
ment, "  Thou  shalt  not  dispensed  I  have  only  a  few  observations
to  make  on  this  subject.  Although  it  were  undoubtedly  desira-
ble that  there  was  a  method  of  more  certainly  curing  the  sick  than
can  be  done  by  the  ordinary  system  of  treatment,  yet  homcpopa.

>  Organon  of  Medicine,  %  297-299,  [yide  last  edition,  g  272.  2741.
*  From  the  AUgem,  Ameig,  der  DtuUcKen,  No.  227. 1825.


in.  HOW  MAY  HOMCBOPATHT  BE  ERADICATED?  707

thy  granting  it  fulfilled  this  desirable  end,  could  not  be  tolerated, —

First,  because  from  its  practice  the  apothecaries  would  suffer
80  much ;

Second,  because  the  large  number  of  physicians  instructed
according  to  the  old  system  would  see  themselves  too  strikingly
placed  in  the  shade  if  homoeopathic  treatment  in  their  neigh-
bourhood did  much  more  than  die  prevailing  system  of  medicine,
was  able  to  do.

These  two  classes  of  professional  men  endangered  by  homceo*
pathy,  the  apothecaries  and  the  physicians  who  practise  and
teach  the  old  system  of  medicine,  have  consequently  done  all
they  could  in  order  to  prejudice  the  public  against  this  treat-
ment ;  they  have  tried  to  ridicule  it,  to  malign  it,  and  publicly
to  insult  its  practitioners  in  every  way.

^ut  as  the  &me  of  several  remarkable  homoeopathic  cures  of
diseases,  hitherto  incurable,  spread  among  the  public,  and  the
latter,  as  it  always  does,  paid  more  attention  to  the  facts  than  to
the  calumnies  respecting  the  new  art  by  its  opponents,  a  differ-
ent plan  was  had  recourse  to.  Those  who  sought  relief  for  their
maladies  at  length  no  longer  paid  any  attention  t^  the  invectives
and  pasquils,  anonymous  and  otherwise,  that  appeared  in  the
journals  that  lent  themselves  to  this  purpose,  they  did  not  re-
gard the  bitter  attacks  in  Jorg's  Oritische  He/te,  nor  Heinroth's
theoretical  sophisms  in  his  Anti-organoTij  nor  Kieser's  nor  Spren-
gel's  writings — they  looked  to  what  had  actually  been  effected
here  and  there,  and  in  many  places,  and  embraced  with  increas-
ing fervour  the  new  healing  art  that  did  such  great  things.

All  these  manoeuvres  did  homoeopathy  no  harm ;  they  were
unable  to  effect  its  suppression  in  the  slightest  degree.  It  raises
its  head  more  joyfully  than  ever.  Accordingly  some  persons
gifted  with  a  greater  amount  of  worldly  wisdom  have  already
abandoned  these  useless  counter-mines,  and  have  hit  upon  the
happier  expedient  of  endeavouring  to  obtain  its  suppression  by  the
laws  of  the  land,  in  order  thereby  to  annihilate  it

It  is  a  main  point  for  the  homoeopathic  physician,  in  order
that  he  may  undertake  and  accomplish  the  cure  of  serious  dis-
eases with  certainty,  that  he  should  himself  select  his  remedies,
prepare  them  himself^  and  administer  them  to  the  patient  with
his  own  hand,  otherwise  he  is  as  little  able  to  effect  anything
certain  and  excellent  of  its  kind  as  the  caligrapher  would  be  if
he  were  not  allowed  to  select  his  own  quills  and  cut  them  him-
self or  the  painter  if  he  were  forbidden  to  prepare  iais  own


708  ON  DISPENSINa  BY  THE  PHY8ICIAK.

colours,  and  was  obliged  to  get  every  tint  he  used  prepared  by
a  colour-mixing  institution  established  by  govermnent.

As  little  would  the  homoeopathic  physician  be  able  to  perform
a  masterpiece  of  a  cure,  indeed  he  would  not  be  able  to  cure  at
all,  if  he  were  prevented  preparing  his  own  curative  agents^
the  preparation  of  which  demands  so  much  care  and  such  ex-
treme delicacy,  but  must  let  them  be  made  by  the  apothecary,
whose  chief  endeavour  is  and  must  be  to  annihilate  a  system  of
treatment  that  is  exciting  such  attention,  which  not  only  is  un-
profitable to  him,  but  as  it  undeniably  demands  infinitely  fewer
drugs  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  greatest  cures,  must  one
day  open  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  render  his  business,  which
is  only  profitable  by  the  amount  of  drugs  disposed  of  to  patients,
useless.

Thus  the  homoeopathist  would  naturally  not  be  able  to  dia.
any  good  with  his  medicines  prepared  by  the  apothecary,  heaven
only  knows  howl  for  no  supervision  can  be  exercised  ovar
him  (seeing  that  one  white  powder  of  sugar  of  milk  looks,  tastes^
smells  and  reacts  chemically  exactly  like  another,  whether  it
contain  nothing  #r  whether  it  contain  the  minute  homoeopathio
medicine  or  some  medicine  quite  different),  and  he  must  natural-
ly cease  to  be  a  homoeopathic  practitioner  if  he  were  to  be  pro-
hibited and  forbidden  by  law  to  prepare  his  own  remedies.

This  it  is  that  the  institute  of  apothecaries  and  those  physi-
cians brought  up  in  the  old  system  who  are  not  able  to  equal
the  horaoDopatbists  in  their  cures,  so  earnestly  desire  for  the  new
school,  in  order  to  destroy  the  practice  of  the  homcBopathists,
consequently  homoeopathy  itself  and  they  are,  as  we  hear,
attaining  their  object,  inasmuch  as  they  prosecute  legally  the
homoeopathists  who  give  their  own  medicines  to  their  patients,
on  the  strength  of  the  laws  that  forbid  the  physician  to  dispense
his  own  medicines ;  they  avail  themselves  of  the  worldly  arm
of  the  judge  to  paralyse  for  ever  the  hand  of  the  homoeopathist.
In  this  they  were  an  dare  successful,  for  the  judge,  as  a  man
not  belonging  to  the  profession,  acting  upon  the  maxim  cuUibet
in  arte  sua  credendum,  imagines  he  must  listen  to  the  opinion  of
the  medical  authorities  on  the  subject,  and  make  their  reasons
and  deliverances  his  oum.  It  is  only  a  pity  that  in  this  case  he
does  not  hear  the  calm,  well-weighed  allegations  of  impartiality,
but  only  the  embittered,  fiery  zeal  of  the  adverse  medical  authori-
ties, consisting  of  doctors  deeply  imbued  with  the  learning  of
the  past,  whose  traditional  high  position,  together  with  that  of


m.  HOW  HAT  HOMCBOPATHY  BE  BRADIOATED?  709

their  antiquated  school,  must,  as  they  are  aware,  decline  if  homceo-
pathists  be  at  liberty  to  exercise  their  art  freely.  This  adverse
party  will  undoubtedly  win  the  day  if  the  judge  does  not  per-
oeive  partizanship  in  their  so-called  estimation  of  homoeopathy,
or  if  he  attends  to  the  interested  insinuations  of  his  family  phy-
sician, who  as  a  physician  of  the  old  school  trembling  for  the
renown  of  the  time-honoured  faculty,  takes  great  pains  to  join
in  the  cry  of  the  complainants  and  of  the  medical  authorities,
**  Crucify  him,  crucify  him ! "

If  the  judge,  I  repeat,  do  not  estimate  all  this  partizan  talk  at
its  true  value,  and  do  not  himself  fulfil  the  sacred  duty  of  a  wise
impartial  appUcatio  legis  ad  facia^  do  not  himself  examine  the
law  and  its  exact  meaning  with  impartiality,  then  it  is  all  tip
with  the  poor  homcEopathists, — ^he  will  be  condemned,  as  a  dis-
penser, of  having  infringed  upon  the  apothecaries'  privilege,
and  he  will  be  compelled  to  abandon  his  profession.  Such  a
verdict  is  as  laudable  as  that  of  the  town  magistrate,  who,  when
his  friends  the  inn-keepers  of  the  place,  endowed  with  the  ex-
clusive right  to  feed  guests  with  dishes  made  in  their  kitchens,
brought  an  accusation  against  a  man,  ''  that  he*  had  encroached
upon  their  privilege  and  fed  persons,"  condemned  the  latter  to
punishment  and  the  costs,  in  spite  of  all  the  representations  of
this  benefisK^tor  to  the  effect,  "  that  there  was  a  great  difference
betwixt  the  way  he  fed  and  that  in  which  the  inn-keepers  fed^
and  that  though  the  latter  might  have  the  exclusive  right  to
dispense  their  composite  dishes,  and  to  set  them  before  their
guests  for  money,  yet  that  he  had  merely,  during  a  period
of  general  scarcity,  distributed  gratuitously  to  those  who  required
it  only  simple  articles  of  food,  namely,  bread  to  him  who  stood
in  need  of  bread,  meat  to  him  who  wanted  meat,  or  uncooked
vegetables  to  him  for  whom  they  were  suitable."

The  homoeopathic  physician  is  in  the  position  of  this  benefec-
tor.  In  the  midst  of  the  dearth  of  relief  for  diseases,  where
allopathy  is  of  no  use,  he  administers  simple  things,  to  cure  one
thing  this,  to  cure  another  that,  whatever  is  most  suitable  for
each,  and  this  he  does  gratuitously.

On  the  other  hand  the  apothecaries'  privilege  runs  as  follows :
"that  no  one  shall  prepare  medicines  or  medicaments^  that  is,
dispense  them,  except  the  apothecary,  from  the  prescription  of
the  physician — therefore  that  the  physician  shall  not  dispense
medicines,  nor  the  apothecary  prepare  (dispense)  medicine  of
his  own  accord  for  patients,  without  the  prescription  of  a  legally
qualified  physician."^


710  ON  DISPENSING  BT  THB  PHTBICUM.

But  the  words  medicine  and  medkament  are  tiAwr  emplojed  in
any  laws  relative  to  medicine,  except  as  signifying  a  medicinal
mixture  composed  of  several  medicinal  ingredienffi,  and  the  prtpara-
Hon  of  this  ahne  is  exclusively  entrusted  to  the  privil^ed  apoihe-
cary,  who  is  to  prepare  it  according  to  the  presaiption  of  a
Intimate  physician,  that  is,  to  dispense ;  and  in  like  nuinner
medicinal  ingredients  in  his  recipe  which  are  to  be  mixed
together  by  the  apothecary.  Thus  Professor  Gruner  in  the
prefiu^  to  his  Art  of  prescribing,  says  expressly,  that  a  prescrip-
tion must  consist  of  several  medicinal  ingredients  to  be  united
together,  for  a  single  medicinal  substance  written  down  does  not
constitute  a  prescription, — and  for  this  reason  every  candidate
for  a  medical  degree  must  shew  by  his  certificates  that  he  has
attended  the  lectures  of  a  professor  on  the  art  of  prescribing,  and
in  order  to  shew  that  he  is  thorough  master  of  it|  so  as  tobe  aUe
to  write  prescriptions  for  a  patient  to  be  made  up  at  the  labora-
tory, he  must  at  the  bidding  of  the  examine  write  extempore
prescriptions  for  any  diseases  named  to  him ;  otherwise  (and  if
he  gives  expression  to  his  thought  that  diseases  may  also  be
cured  with  simple  things)  he  will  be  rejected,  <u  has  happened
more  than  once.

Thus  it  is  certain  that  according  to  law  the  prescription  must
direct  several  medicinal  ingredients  to  be  united  together,  so  as
that  they  shall  constitute  one  medicament,  in  the  dispensing  of
which  the  apothecary's  privilege  solely  and  alone  consists.

On  the  other  hand,  the  homoeopathic  physician  gives  his
patient  notldng  hut  one  simple  substance,  he  never  mixes  several
together,  nor  can  he  do  so  consistently  with  his  doctrine  and  his
conviction,  consequently  he  cannot  employ  in  treatment  any
mixed  by  the  apothecary.  It  is  therefore  impossible  that  he  can
encroach  on  the  business  of  compounding  medicines,  in  which  alone
the  apothecary's  privilege  consists,  if  fie  always  gives  his  patient  only
a  simple  medicinal  substance.  Then  who  could  accuse  the  homoeo-
pathic physician  of  interfering  with  the  right  appertaining  to
the  apothecary  exclusively  of  preparing  medicinal  mixtures
(medicines,  medicaments),  seeing  that  he  has  no  medicinal  ingre-
dients to  mix,  and  that  he  mixes  none  himself  consequently  he
does  not  dispense  ?

Simple  medicinal  substances  {species,  simplicia)  are  not  termed
medicines  or  medicaments  by  the  medicinal  laws  of  any  land,  on
the  Cs^ntrary  these  terms  are  used  in  contradistinction  to  one


lU.  HOW  XAY  HOMCBOPATHT  BB  BBAfi^ATSD  ?  711

another.  Medicines  or  mecUcanienta  are,  in  the  ^kii)er.«nd'  spirit
of  these  laws,  ofUy  compounds  and  miociuTyss  <>f'  ieverM^^fiiMdi^^
ingredients  prepared  from  the  physician^  s  preseriptum  bfthje*apot^-
cary^  and  mingled  together  into  a  com|)<>M!fe.  ti^AoJb(caQed^-b}r4he
laws  medicine  and  medicamefnt\  whioh  is  flufficfenil^^  olmotiiB
from  this,  that  the  same  medicinal  laws  that  (y>nfer^h^;f>r»iiife-
gium  excbmvum  on  the  apothecary,  whereby  heoMainstiieng^t
to  prepare  medicinal  mixtures  according  to  the  {)hysi^ii%^'^-
scription,  that  is,  to  dispense  medicines  {medicameni^faiA^iie^ctby
he  is  at  the  same  time  forbidden  to  dispense*  tT^edfioeriiM^^  V^thcMt
the  physician's  prescription,  <that  is,  to  prepare^his  own  ^leoord
mixtures  of  several  medicinal  ingredients  for  tfaepublib^4hai1;he
same  medicinal  laws,  I  say,  allow  himtodealinsimple^n^AiciBal
substances,  to  sell  to  any  one  that  asks  for*  them^Hrhubi|rb,
cinchona  bark,  jalap,  aloes,  castor,  asafcetida,- viklerian,'^'imd^  all
other  simpUda  and  species  that  are  not  dangerous-in  smaQ  -qiMir-
tities — ^whence  it  is  obvious  that  the  laws  which -foytidth^^^X)-
thecary  to  dispense  medicines  of  his  own  accoid,'  do /not  under*
stand  by  the  term  ^^  medicines^^  {medicaments),  simple  slifoetancep,
and  do  not  consider  that  the  giving  of  sirnple^  n/iiedicmal^thfihgi
should  be  regarded  as  dispensing  medicinesi-otherwiiae  tb^
would  not  have  allowed  the  apothecary  to  spti;  them.  -They,
however,  universally  allow  the  apothecary  to  <id  this  -a^a-regu^
lar  retail  seller  of  drugs,  just  as  they  appoint  &e  druggists  ^
wholesale  dealer  in  drugs.  . ^  .^  .  j ...  -  ^  •'

But  i^  in  order  to  suppress  the  homoeopathic  phyjjibian,  pof^
secuted  as  he  is  by  the  old  school  of  medicine  fti^  ih^  apo!die*>
caries^seeing  that  he  cannot  be  accused  of  practisii&g.  the  ^x>*
thecaries'  business  of  mixing  medicines  (di8pensing)~^it  is  sought
to  indict  him  as  a  seller  of  simplicia — an  accusation  that  could
not  be  brought  under  the  category  of  the  prohibited  dispensing
(compounding  simplicia  into  a  medicament) — be  it  known  that
the  homoBopathic  physician  does  not  get  paid  by  the  patient  for
his  simple  remedy  (for  medicines  and  medicaments  in  the  sense  of
the  medicinal  laws  they  are  not,  as  we  have  shewn),  nor  can  he
be  paid  for  them,  as  they  are  so  minute,  so  inconceivably  deli-
cate, that  it  is  impossible  to  attach  a  commercial  value  to  them
on  account  of  their  incalculable  minuteness  I  No!  he  does  not  get
paid  for  diem,  he  can  only  justly  demand  for  his  skill  and  trouble
the  fee  that  cannot  be  refused  to  any  legitimate  physician.

But  in  order  to  prevent  his  escape  if  possible,  the  apothecaries
and  allopathic  physicians  sophistically  allege,  "  that  the  homoeo-
path also  makes  up  mixtures,  and  thereby  encroaches  on  the


712  CONTRAST  OF  THB  OLD  AND  THB  KXW

apothecary's  privilege,  seeing  that  he  umtes  his  medicinal  sub-
stance (simple  though  it  be)  with  sugar  of  milk."  But  sugar  of
milk  is  not  a  medicinal  ingredient,  it  is  a  mere  vehicle  and
recipient  for  the  simple  medicinal  substance  of  the  homceopathic
practitioner,  just  like  the  cane  sugar  in  peppermint  lozenges,  in
anise-sugar,  in  sugared  worm-seeds  and  many  other  similar  non-
medicinal  things  prepared  and  sold  by  the  apothecary  to  the
public,  which  no  medicinal  regulations  forbid  hJTn  to  sell  on  the
ground  of  their  being  mixtures  of  medicines  or  their  sale  coming
under  the  head  of  dispensing,  and  which,  in  spite  of  the  sugar
in  them  as  a  vehicle,  remain  simple  things  {simpUcui.)

Or  shall  the  apothecary  alone  be  allowed  to  give  to  the  public
a  medicinal  substance  mingled  with  sugar,  but  when  the  scientific
physician  does  the  same  for  the  purpose  of  curing  disease,  shall
it  be  forbidden,  not  allowed,  punishable  ?  Is  there  a  judge  who
could  pronounce  such  a  sentence  ?

And  is  there  a  judge,  who,  after  a  careful  consideration  of  the
above  truthful  representation,  could,  with  the  slightest  semblance
of  justice,  so  misapprehend  and  distort  our  medicinal  regulations
that  lay  down  so  clearly  and  so  accurately  the  definition  of
dispensing  medicines,  as  to  interpret  them  to  condemn  the
homoeopathic  physician,  who  gives  his  simple  substance  (never
any  mixtures)  gratuitously  in  order  to  relieve  his  patient,  of  dis-
pensing and  infringing  on  the  apothecaries'  privilege  (which
only  refers  to  the  compounding  of  medicaments  consisting  of
several  ingredients)  ?  Could  any  impartial  judge  help  acquitting
him  according  to  the  letter  of  these  plain  and  unanimous  laws?

Let  any  one  point  out  to  us  a  single  passage  in  any  code  of  medi-
cinal laws  which  forbids  Vie  legitimate  physician  to  administer  a
simple  medicinal  substance  in  order  to  relieve  his  paiient  1


COXTRAST  OF  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW  SYSTEMS  OF

MEDICINE.^


As  long  as  accurate  observation,  unwearied  research,  and
careful  comparison  have  failed  to  demonstrate  really  constant
original  ty]>es  of  disease  for  the  amazing  number  of  morbid
phoiiDinena  and  ca^cs  of  disease  occurring  in  the  human  subject,
which  nature  appears  to  produce  in  endless  variety  and  very

'  Prom  the  RexM  Arzneimitte/Uhre,  part  iv,  2d  edit 1825.


SYSTEMS  or  MEDIGIKS.  71S

dissimilar  to  one  another,  so  long  will  it  be  manifest  that  every
single  morbid  phenomenon  must  be  homoaopathicallj  treated,
just  as  it  presents  itself,  according  to  the  array  of  symptoms  that
nhcw  themselves  in  every  case,  by  which  means  however  they
will  all  be  infinitely  better  removed  than  by  all  the  routine
treatment  that  has  hitherto  prevailed  in  ordinary  practice.

The  adherents  of  the  old  school  of  medicine  imagined  that
they  would  best  succeed  with  the  treatment  of  that  great  variety
of  morbid,  phenomena,  if  they  arbitrarily  drew  up  upon  paper  a
list  of  types  of  disease,  which  should  represent  and  include
within  them  all  the  cases  of  disease  that  were  met  with  at  the
dek-bed.  They  gave  the  name  of  pathology  to  this  work  of
diirirs.

Seeing  the  impossibility  of  efficaciously  treating  every  case  of
dbease  according  to  its  individuality,  they  imagined  that  their
bnsiness  was  to  select  from  the  apparently  infinite  variety  of
different  morbid  phenomena  which  nature  displays,  a  number
of  diseased  states,  all  resembling  each  other  in  having  some  par-
tiealar  prominent  symptom  in  common,  as  fundamental  forms,
and,  having  assigned  to  them  general  symptoms  that  were  of
not  unjfrequent  occurrence  in  diseases  and  bestowed  on  them
special  names,  to  give  them  out  for  constant,  distinct  diseases,
^t  always  remained  the  same.  The  collection  of  these  forms
of  disease  manufactured  by  themselves,  they  asserted  to  consti-
tute the  whole  range  of  the  world  of  disease,  in  other  words,
paiholoffy,  in  order  that  they  might  be  able  to  lay  down  special  modes
fif  treatment  for  these  their  imaginary  morbid  pictures,  and  this
constituted  the  science  of  therapeutics.

Thus  they  made  a  virtue  of  necessity,  but  they  did  not  con-
sider the  evil  that  must  arise  from  this  perversion  of  nature,
ihey  did  not  reflect  that  this  arbitrary  procedure  that  did  vio-
lence to  nature,  after  having  grown  old  by  being  propagated
through  thousands  of  years,  would  at  length  come  to  be  regarded
88  a  symbolical,  unimprovable  work.*

The  physician  who  was  called  in  to  a  case,  to  determine,  as
the  rules  of  his  art  enjoined,  the  nosological  name  of  the  disease

*  It  ifl  only  a  pity  that  this  fond  dream  is  dispelled  when  we  look  at  the  Yarions
ifilemfl  of  pathology  with  their  different  names  and  diaHimilar  descriptions  of  diseafle»
jA^ai  we  look  at  the  hundred  and  fifty  definitions  of  feyer,  and  the  yery  yanons
modes  of  treatment  in  the  many  works  on  therapeutics,  which  all  lay  equal  daim  to
idUlibility.  Which  of  all  of  them  is  right  f  Is  not  the  unnatural,  unreal,  apocry-
phal character  of  all  apparent  f


712  GONTRABT  OF  THB  010)  AND  THK  HIW

apothecary's  privilege,  seeing  that  he  umtes  his  medicinal  sab-
stance  (simple  though  it  be)  with  sugar  of  milk."  But  sugar  of
xnilk  is  not  a  medicinal  ingredient,  it  is  a  mere  vehicle  and
recipient  for  the  simple  medicinal  substance  of  the  homcBopathic
practitioner,  just  like  the  cane  sugar  in  peppermint  lozenges,  in
anise-sugar,  in  sugared  worm-seeds  and  many  other  similar  non-
medicinal  things  prepared  and  sold  by  the  apothecary  to  the
public,  which  no  medicinal  regulations  forbid  him  to  sell  on  the
ground  of  their  being  mixtures  of  medicines  or  their  sale  coming
under  the  head  of  dispensing,  and  which,  in  spite  of  the  sugar
in  them  as  a  vehicle,  remain  simple  things  {simpUcia.)

Or  shall  the  apothecary  alone  be  allowed  to  give  to  the  public
a  medicinal  substance  mingled  with  sugar,  but  when  the  scientific
physician  does  the  same  for  the  purpose  of  curing  disease,  shall
it  be  forbidden,  not  allowed,  punishable?  Is  there  a  judge  who
could  pronounce  such  a  sentence  ?

And  is  there  a  judge,  who,  after  a  careful  consideration  of  the
above  truthful  representation,  could,  with  the  slightest  semblance
of  justice,  so  misapprehend  and  distort  our  medicinal  regulations
that  lay  down  so  clearly  and  so  accurately  the  definition  of
dispensing  medicines,  as  to  interpret  them  to  condemn  the
homoeopathic  physician,  who  gives  his  simple  substance  (never
any  mixtures)  gratuitously  in  order  to  relieve  his  patient,  of  dis-
pensing and  infringing  on  the  apothecaries'  privilege  (which
only  refers  to  the  compounding  of  medicaments  consisting  of
several  ingredients)  ?  Could  any  impartial  judge  help  acquitting
him  according  to  the  letter  of  these  plain  and  unanimous  laws?

Let  any  one  point  out  to  us  a  single  passage  in  any  code  of  medir
cinal  laws  whicJi  forbids  the  legitimate  physician  to  administer  a
simple  medicinal  substance  in  order  to  relieve  his  patient  I


CONTRAST  OF  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW  SYSTEMS  OF

MEDICINFJ


As  long  as  accurate  observation,  unwearied  research,  and
careful  comparison  have  failed  to  demonstrate  really  constant
original  tyjx^  of  disease  for  the  amazing  number  of  morbid
phenomena  and  cases  of  disease  occurring  in  the  human  subject,
which  nature  appears  to  produce  in  endless  variety  and  very

'  From  the  RetM  ArmeimitielUhre,  part  iv,  2d  edit 1826.


SYSTEMS  or  ICSDIGIKS.  71S

Hi»rinti1ft.T  to  one  another,  so  long  will  it  be  manifest  that  every
single  morbid  phenomenon  must  be  homoeopathically  treated,
just  as  it  presents  itselJ^  according  to  the  array  of  symptoms  that
shew  themselves  in  every  case,  by  which  means  however  they
will  all  be  infinitely  better  removed  than  by  all  the  routine
treatment  that  has  hitherto  prevailed  in  ordinary  practice.

The  adherents  of  the  old  school  of  medicine  imagined  that
they  would  best  succeed  with  the  treatment  of  that  great  variety
of  morbid,  phenomena,  if  they  arbitrarily  drew  up  upon  paper  a
list  of  types  of  disease,  which  should  represent  and  include
within  them  all  the  cases  of  disease  that  were  met  with  at  the
8iek*bed.  They  gave  the  name  of  pathology  to  this  work  of
theirs.

Seeing  the  impossibility  of  efficaciously  treating  every  case  of
disease  according  to  its  individuality,  they  imagined  that  their
business  was  to  select  from  the  apparently  infinite  variety  of
different  morbid  phenomena  which  nature  displays,  a  number
of  diseased  states,  all  resembling  each  other  in  having  some  par-
ticular prominent  symptom  in  common,  as  fundamental  forms,
and,  having  assigned  to  them  general  symptoms  that  were  of
not  unfirequent  occurrence  in  diseases  and  bestowed  on  them
special  names,  to  give  them  out  for  constant,  distinct  diseases,
that  always  remained  the  same.  The  collection  of  these  forms
of  disease  manufactured  by  themselves,  they  asserted  to  consti-
tute the  whole  range  of  the  world  of  disease,  in  other  words,
pathology^  in  order  that  they  might  he  able  to  lay  down  special  modes
of  treatment  for  these  their  imaginary  morbid  pictures^  and  this
constituted  the  science  of  iherapeutics.

Thus  they  made  a  virtue  of  necessity,  but  they  did  not  con-
sider the  evil  that  must  arise  from  this  perversion  of  nature,
they  did  not  reflect  that  this  arbitrary  procedure  that  did  vio-
lence to  nature,  after  having  grown  old  by  being  propagated
through  thousands  of  years,  would  at  length  come  to  be  regarded
as  a  symbolical,  unimprovable  work.*

The  physician  who  was  called  in  to  a  case,  to  determine,  as
the  rules  of  his  art  enjoined,  the  nosological  name  of  the  disease

'  It  ifl  only  a  pitj  that  this  fond  dream  is  dispelled  when  we  look  at  the  Tariow
•jBtema  of  pathology  with  their  different  names  and  diaHimilar  descriptions  of  disease^
when  we  look  at  the  hundred  and  fifty  definitions  of  feTer,  and  the  Tery  yariow
modes  of  treatment  in  the  many  works  on  therapeutics,  which  all  lay  equal  claim  to
infiillibility.  Which  of  all  of  them  is  right  f  Is  not  the  unnatural,  imreal,  apooy-
phal  character  of  all  apparent  t


714  OOHTRABT  OF  THE  OLD  AHD  WKW

his  patient  laboured  under,  must  take  for  granted,  in  referenoe  to
ing to  this  form  of  dis^ise,  that  they  are  merely  accidentally
absent  in  his  patient,  that  they  might  Yerj  weU  be  there,  although
they  are  not — ^the  remaining  often  very  nnmerons  and  serious
sufferings  and  symptoms  which  the  patient  was  really  affected
with,  but  which  do  not  occur  in  the  definition  of  the  nosological
name  in  the  pathological  work,  he  must^  so  the  roles  of  his  art
required,  regard  as  unessential,  as  accidental,  as  unimportanti
as  wild,  exuberant  of&hoots,  so  to  speak, — symptoms  of  symp-
toms— ^which  he  need  not  pay  attention  to. .

It  was  only  by  such  extraordinaiy  capricious  adding-to  the
actual  morbid  state,  and  equally  capricious  paring-down  of  it^
that  the  adherent  of  the  arbitrary  old  school  succeeded  in  con*
cocting  the  list  of  diseases,  recorded  in  nosological  works,  and
in  practice  demonstrating  that  his  patient  laboured  under  one
of  the  diseases  in  this  nosological  system,  of  which  nature  never
thought  when  she  made  him  ilL

'*  What  do  we  care,"  say  the  medical  teadiers  and  their  booka^
*^  what  do  we  care  about  the  presence  of  many  other  diverae
symptoms  that  are  observable  in  the  case  of  disease  before  us,
or  the  absence  of  those  that  are  wanting  ?  The  physician  should
pay  no  attention  to  such  empirical  trifles;  his  practical  tact,  the
penetrating  glance  of  his  mental  eye^  into  the  hidden  nature  of
the  malady,  enables  him  to  determine  at  the  very  first  sight  rf
the  patient  what  is  the  matter  with  him,  what  pathological  form
of  disease  he  has  to  do  with,  and  what  name  he  has  to  give  it,
and  his  therapeutic  knowledge  teaches  him  what  prescription  he
must  order  for  it"

Thus  then  were  prepared  from  that  human  piece  of  manufiM>-
ture  termed  pathology  those  deceptive  pictures  of  disease  which
were  transferred  lege  artis  to  the  patient,  and  fiJsely  attributed
to  him,  and  this  it  was  that  rendei^  it  so  easy  for  the  physician
to  recal  to  his  memory  without  hesitation  a  couple  of  prescrip-
tions which  the  clinical  therapeutics  (of  the  prescription  pocket-
book)  had  in  readiness  for  this  name.


*  What  booest  man  not  endowed  with  ckunroyanoe  ooold  boast  of  poapcawng  a
mental  eye  which  ahould  enable  him  to  penetrate  throogh  fle^  and  bone  into  d»t
hidden  essential  nature  of  things  that  the  Creator  of  mankind  alone  anderatands,  of
which  mortal  man  would  hare  no  conception,  lor  whidi  he  would  have  no  wcrd%  if
it  were  laid  open  to  him  t  Does  not  sik^  pretension  reach  the  climax  of  boastfiil
charlatanerj  and  mendadotis  delusion  ?


SYSTEKS  OF  KSDICIKIL  716

But  how  did  the  prescriptions  for  these  names  of  diseases
originate?  Were  they  communicated  by  some  divine  revelation  ?

brated practitioner  for  some  case  or  other  of  disease  to  which  he
has  arbitmrily  given  this  nosological  name,  which  formulas
consist  of  a  variety  of  ingredients,  knovm  to  him  no  doubt  by
name^  that  came  into  his  head  and  were  put  by  him  into  an
elegant  form  by  the  aid  of  that  important  art  which  is  called  the
art  of  prescribing  {ars  formulas  condnnandi  recteque  concipiendi)^
whereby  the  requirements  of  chemical  skill  and  pharmaceutical
observance  were  attended  to,  if  not  the  welfare  of  the  patient ;
—one  or  several  receipts  of  this  kind  for  the  given  case,  under
the  use  of  which  the  patient  at  least  did  not  die,  but — ^thanks  to
heaven  and  his  good  constitution  I — gradually  recovered.  These
are  therefore  receipts  taken  from  the  writings  of  illustrious
practitioners;  or  they  are  formulas  which,  at  the  request  of
some  publisher  who  well  knew  how  capitally  prescription-
manuals  sell,  were  fabricated  in  a  garret,  off-hand,  for  the  patho-
logical names,  by  some  willing  soul  in  his  pay,  who  was  well
skilled  in  the  ars  formulas  condnnandi^  and  who  was  guided  in
his  labour  by  the  account  of  the  virtues  that  the  lying  works  on
Materia  Medica  have  liberally  attributed  to  the  several  medi-
cinal substances.

But  if  the  physician  found  the  disease  in  his  patient  too  un-
£ke  any  of  the  pathological  forms  of  disease  to  permit  him  to
give  it  a  definite  name  of  this  sort,  it  was  admissible  for  him,
according  to  his  books,  to  assume  for  the  malady  a  more  remote
and  concealed  origin,  in  order  to  establish  a  treatment  thereupon
(on  this  assumption).  Thus,  supposing  the  patient  at  some
former  period  had  sufiered  from  pain  (no  matter  what  kind)  in
pressed hemorrhoids —if  he  had  had  a  tense  abdomen,  mucuous
excrements,  anorexia  alternating  with  bulimia,  or  even  only  itch-
ing in  the  nose,  his  disease  was  called  a  worm  disease ;  or  if  he  had
occasionally  had  pains  (no  matter  what  kind)  in  the  limbs,  his
disease  was  pronounced  to  be  concealed  or  immature  gout,  and
against  this  fancied  internal  morbific  cause  the  treatment  was
directed.  If  there  were  attacks  of  pain  in  the  abdomen,  spasm
must  be  to  blame  for  them ;  if  there  were  frequent  determina-
tion of  blood  to  the  face,  or  if  the  nose  bled,  the  patient  was  de-
cidedly too  full-blooded ;  if  the  patient  grew  very  thin  during
the  treatment,  as  he  naturally  would,  marasmus  had  to  be  com-


716  OONTRAST  OF  THE  OLD  AND  NEW

hatted ;  if  he  was  at  the  same  time  of  a  very  sensitive  dispositioii,
nervous  wealcness  was  the  enemy  to  be  attacked;  if  he  suffered
fix>m  cough,  then  concealed  catarrh  or  a  tendency  to  phthisis
was  in  the  back  ground ;  if  the  patient  sometimes  felt  pains  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  or  even  only  in  the  right  shoulder,
it  was  undoubtedly  concealed  inflammation  or  hidden  in*
duration  of  the  liver  that  was  to  be  taken  into  considera-
tion. An  old  cutaneous  disease  or  an  ulcer  on  the  1^  mosti
in  order  that  the  treatment  should  be  directed  against  it,  be  at-
tributed either  to  some  herpetic  humour  or  to  some  serofulous
the  cancerous  virus.  After  having  in  vain  treated  first  this
then  the  other  &ncied  hidden  morbid  state  according  to  the
directions  of  the  clinical  books,  and  after  all  the  mineral  waten^
which  are  said  to  be  useful  in  some  indefinite  manner  for  every  thing^
had  been  visited,  nothing  else  remained  but  to  view  the  case  as
one  of  in£eux^tus  of  the  abdomen  and  obstruction  of  the  minntd
vessels  of  that  part  according  to  the  idea  of  the  formerly  cele-
brated Kamp^  and  torture  the  patient,  in  KampPs  &shion,  with
injections  into  the  colon  of  hundreds  of  his  absurd  mixtures  of
vegetable  decoctions,  until  he  had  got  enough  of  them.

In  consequence  of  the  ease  with  which  conclusions  relative  to
the  essentia  nature  of  diseases  were  come  to,  there  could,  thank
heaven !  never  be  any  lack  of  plans  of  treatment  whereby  the
days  of  suffering  of  the  patient  might  be  fiilly  occupied  (for  there
are  prescriptions  in  plenty  for  all  names  of  diseases),  as  long  as
his  purse,  his  patience,  or  his  life  lasted.

"  But  no!  we  can  go  to  work  in  a  more  learned  and  sagacious
manner,  and  investigate  and  conjecture  upon  the  maladies  that
afflict  mankind  in  the  depths  and  concealment  of  abstract  views
of  life,  as  to  whether,  in  the  case  before  us,  the  arterial,  the
venous  or  the  nervous  system,  the  sensibility,  the  irritability  or
the  reproductive  ftmction  suffer  qnantitively  more  or  less  (for  we
purposely  avoid  considering  the  infinite  variety  of  gualitivt
affections  fix)m  which  these  three  expressions  of  vitality  may
suffer,  in  order  not  to  burthen  ourselves  to  a  still  greater  ex-
tent with  the  labour  of  research  and  conjecture) ;  we  merely  makt
a  guess  as  to  whether  these  three  expressions  of  vitality  are  in  a
state  either  of  excessive  depression  or  excessive  exaltation.  If
we  are  of  opinion  that  the  first,  second  or  third  of  them  is  suf-
fering from  one  or  other  of  these  states  of  too  high  or  too  low,
we  may  boldly  proceed  to  manoeuvre  against  it^  according  to  the


grSTSlCS  OF  KSDICIKE.  717

plan  of  the  new  iatro-chemical  sect,  whicli  found  out,  Hhat
nitrogen,  hydrogen  and  carbon  alone  constituted  the  souls  of
medicinea,  that  is,  the  only  active  and  curative  thing  in  them ;
that,  moreover,  carbon,  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  could  at  pleasure
regulate  and  screw  up  or  screw  down  (potentize  and  depotentize)
the  irritability,  the  sensibility  and  the  reproductive  function,
consequently  (if  the  premises  are  correct)  the  whole  vitality,
and  therefore  they  were  capable  of  curing  all  diseases.' — "Kb
only  a  pity  that  they  are  not  yet  agreed  as  to  whether  external
agents  act  by  means  of  their  similarity  or  their  contrariety  to  the
oompotent  parts  of  our  organism!"

But  in  order  that  medicines  should  really  contain  these  elemen-
tary principles,  which,  as  £eu:  as  was  known,  they  had  not  hitherto
them  at  the  desk,  and,  in  a  system  of  materia  medica  specially
created  for  this  purpose,  it  was  decreed  how  much  carbon,  nitro-
gen and  hydrogen  each  medicinal  substance  should  henceforth
contain.

Could  medical  caprice  go  further,  or  trifle  more  sinfully  with
human  life?

But  how  long  shall  this  irresponsible  playing  with  human
life  still' last  ?

After  three  and  twenty  centuries  of  such  a  criminal  mode  of
procedure,  now  that  the  whole  human  race  seems  to  be  awaking
in  order  powerfully  to  vindicate  its  rights,  shall  not  the  day
begin  to  dawn  for  the  deliverance  of  suffering  humanity  which
has  hitherto  been  racked  with  diseases,  and  in  addition  tortured
with  medicines  administered  without  rhyme  or  reason,  and  with-
out  limit  as  to  number  and  quantity,  for  phantoms  of  diseases,
in  conformity  with  the  wildest  notions  of  physicians  proud  of
the  antiquity  of  their  sect  ?

Shall  the  pernicious  ji^lery  of  routine  treatment  still  con-
tinue to  exist?

Shall  the  entreaty  of  the  patient^  to  listen  to  the  account  of
his  sufferings,  vainly  resound  through  the  air  unheard  by  his
brethren  of  mankind,  without  exciting  the  helpful  attention  of
any  human  heart?

Or  can  the  so  remarkably  different  complaints  and  sufferings
of  each  single  patient  indicate  anything  else  than  the  peculiarity
of  his  disease?  If  not,  what  can  this  distinct  voice  of  nature,
which  expresses  itself  in  terms  so  appropriate  to  the  various
symptoms  of  the  patient,  what  can  it  mean  if  not  to  render  his


718  CONTBAST  OF  THB  OLD  AMD  THS  NSW

morbid  state  as  cognizable  as  possible  to  the  sympathizing  and
attentive  physician,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  distinguish  the
very  minutest  shades  of  difference  of  this  case  firom  every  other?

Would  beneficient  nature,  that  makes  such  efforts  for  our  pre-
servation, by  her  extremely  wise,  simple,  and  wonderful  arrange-
ment for  enabling  the  patient  to  reveal  to  the  observer,  by  words
and  signs,  the  great  variety  of  his  altered  sensations  and  morbid
actions,  have  enabled  him  to  do  this  so  utterly  in  vain  and  with-
out object,  and  not  in  order  to  furnish  a  clear  and  accurate  de-
scription of  his  morbid  state  in  the  only  conceivable  manner  so
as  not  to  lead  the  practitioner  astray  7  The  disease,  being  but  a
peculiar  condition,  cannot  speak,  cannot  tell  its  own  story ;  the
patient  suffering  from  it  can  alone  render  an  account  of  his  dis-
ease by  the  various  signs  of  his  disordered  health,  the  ailments
he  feels,  the  symptoms  he  can  complain  o^  and  by  the  altera-
tions in  him  that  are  perceptible  to  the  senses.  But  the  pseudo-
wisdom  of  the  ordinary  physicians  thinks  all  this  scarcely  worth
listening  to ;  and  even  if  they  listen  to  it,  they  allege  that  it  is
of  no  importance,  that  it  is  empirical  and  expressed  in  a  very
tmleamed  manner  by  nature,  that  it  does  not  coincide  with  what
their  pathological  books  teach  them  and  is,  therefore,  not^avail
able  for  their  purpose,  but  in  place  thereof  they  put  forward  a
figment  of  their  learned  reveries  as  the  picture  of  the  internal
(never  ascertainable)  state  of  the  disease,  in  their  folly  substitute
this  delusive  pathological  picture  for  the  individual  state  of  each
case  of  disease  as  nature  faithfully  delineates  it,  and  direct  their
medicinal  weapons  against  this  trumped-up  phantom  of  their
imagination,  the  production  of  what  they  call  their  practical  tact.

And  what  are  these  weapons  of  theirs  ?  Large  doses  of  medi-
cines ;  that  is,  be  it  observed,  powerful  substances,  which,  where
they  do  no  good,  must  and  really  do  injure  the  patient  (seeing
that  the  peculiar  and  sole  nature  of  all  medicines  in  the  world
consists  in  their  capability,  when  brought  in  contact  with  the
living  sensitive  body,  of  morbidly  deranging  it,  each  in  its  own
peculiar  way),  which  must  accordingly  make  the  patient  worse,
if  they  have  not  been  selected  for  remedial  purposes  with  the
utmost  care  that  their  peculiar  properties  shall  be  adapted  to  the
morbid  state !  These  medicinal  substances,  which  m  tiiemselves
are  injurious^  often  very  injurimis  (and  only  useful  in  the  cases  for
which  they  are  suitable)  and  which  are  unknown  in  regard  to
their  peculiar,  true  action,  were  so  blindly  resorted  to,  or  in
obedience  to  the  mandates  of  the  mendacious  book  called  ma-


STSTSMS  OF  MEDICIKS.  719

teria  medica,  mingled  together  (if  the  mixture  was  not  taken
ready-made  from  the  reoeip^book)  as  though  they  were  drawn
at  hap-hazard  from  the  wheel  of  fortune  or  rather  misfortune,
taith  no  correct  knowledge  or  rather  no  knowledge  at  all  of  their  true^
peculiar  effisctSj  and  they  served  but  to  increase  the  tortures  of
the  patient  already  suffering  from  his  disease,  with  this  barbar-
0118  oUa-podrida  fuU  of  disgusting  smells  and  tastes  (one  spoon-
fbl  to  be  taken  every  hour!).  Was  such  a  procedure  beneficial
to  him  ?  oh  Gt)d  I  no,  prejudicial  to  him.  The  usual  result  of
Buoh  an  unnatural  and  Mae  mode  of  treatment  pursued  during
every  hour  of  the  day,  must  be  visible  aggravation  of  his  state,
aggravation  which  the  ignorant  patient  is  made  to  believe  is  the
malignant  nature  of  his  disease.  Poor,  unhappy  wretch  I  what
else  than  to  make  bad  worse  can  be  done  by  such  powerful
noxious  substances  raked  together,  according  to  the  whims  of
the  prevalent  medical  school,  taken  at  blind  hazard  and  admin-
istered in  an  inappropriate  place  ?

And  in  this  homicidal  manner  have  practitioners  gone  on
acting  in  despite  of  the  truth  that  speaks  trumpet-tongued  for
our  information,  because,  since  the  remotest  times,  it  has  been
the  habit  with  their  profession  to  torture  methodically  suffering
humanity  in  this  unnatural  manner  for  their  money — ^to  their
iiyuryl

What  human  heart  in  whom  the  smallest  spark  of  the  G-od-
implanted  monitor,  conscience,  still  exists,  but  must  shudder  at
such  abominable  behaviour  ?

In  vaiu,  in  vain  dost  thou  seek  to  silence  the  audible,  terrible
voice  of  the  incorruptible  judge  in  thy  conscience,  of  that  sacred
tnbunal  of  God's  justice  that  holds  its  seat  in  thy  bosom,  by  the
miserable  excuse  that  others  do  so  likewise,  and  that  such  has
been  the  practice  since  the  most  remote  ages ;  in  vain  dost  thou
seek  to  stifle  its  still  small  voice  by  atheistical  ridicule,  wild
pleasures,  and  goblets  of  reason-obscuring,  intoxicating  drinks.
The  Holy  One,  the  Almighty  lives,  and  eternal  unchangeable
justice  lives  with  him.

*  *  ♦  «

Now,  as  the  internal  operations  and  processes  of  the  living
human  organism  cannot  be  inspected,  and,  as  long  as  we  are
merely  men  and  not  God,  cannot  be  perfectly  known  to  us,  either
in  the  healthy  or  yet  in  the  diseased  state,  and  on  that  very  ac-
count all  deductions  from  the  exterior  respecting  the  interior  are
deceptive,  and  as  the  knowledge  of  disease  can  be  neither  a


720 CONTRAST  OF  XHX  OLD  AND  THE  NEW

metaphysical  problem  nor  the  product  of  fimtaslic  specolatioiiY
but  is  an  af&ir  of  pure  experience  by  the  aenaee,  becauae  diaeMe
as  a  manifestation  can  only  be  apprehended  by  obserrsdon ;
therefore  every  unprejudiced  person  must  at  once  peroeiYe  thal^
as  careful  observation  finds  every  individual  case  of  <iiwHM»  to
differ  firom  every  other,^  no  name  borrowed  fix>m  a  pathological
system  of  m^m's  fiibrication  which  fidsely  alleges  diaeaaes  to
possess  constant  unvarying  characters^  should  be  attached  to
morbid  states^  which  in  reality  differ  so  much  among  themselvesy
and  that  there  can  scarcely  be  any  hypothetical  rq^reaentatioii
which  we  can  form  to  ourselves  respecting  any  one  disease,  that
shall  not  be  imaginary,  delusive  and  xmtrue.

Diseases  are  nothing  more  than  alterations  of  die  healthy,  le-
gular  state  of  health,  and  as  an  alteration  of  thia  sort  conaisla
merely  in  the  occurrence  of  many  accidents,  morlMd  symptoma
and  perceptible  divergences  from  the  former  healthy  state,  aee-
ing  that  after  the  removal  of  all  these  aoddents  and  aymptoma
nothing  but  health  can  remain ;  so  there  can  be  for  the  physician
no  other  true  view  of  diseases  which  shall  enable  him  to  discover
what  should  be  the  aim  of  his  treatment,  and  what  there  is  to  be
cured,  save  and  except  what  is  peroeiTed  by  the  aenaes  of  the
observable  alterations  of  health  in  the  patient

The  honest  physician,  therefore,  whose  conscience  forbids  him
with  superficial  haste  to  invent  a  delusive  picture  of  the  malady
to  be  cured,  or  to  consider  it  as  one  of  the  forms  of  disease  al-
ready existing  in  pathological  works ;  whose  earnest  desire  it  is,
in  one  word,  to  investigate  the  peculiar  charact^  of  the  disease
before  him,  in  order  to  be  able  to  restore  the  patient  with  cer>
tainty, — the  honest  physician,  I  say,  will  observe  his  patient
minutely,  with  all  his  senses,  will  make  the  patient  and  his  at^
tendants  detail  all  his  sufferings  and  sjrmptoms,  and  will  care-
fully note  them  down  without  adding  anything  to  or  taking
anything  firom  them ;  he  will  thus  have  a  Mthfid  genuine  picture
of  the  disease,  and  along  with  that  an  accurate  knowledge  of  all
there  is  in  it  to  be  cured  and  removed ;  he  will.then  have  a  true
knowledge  of  the  disease.

Now  as  diseases  can  be  nothing  more  than  alterations  of  the
healthy,  regular  state  of  health,  and  as  every  alteration  of  the
health  of  a  healthy  person  is  disease,  therefore  cure  can  be  no-

*  With  the  exoeptkn  of  such  diseaaes  as  are  caaaed  bj  a  miasm  of  ooDslaDt
character,  or  by  ao  always  idenrtca]  cause.


SYSTEMS  OF  MBDICINB.  721

thing  than  transformation  of  the  irregular  state  of  health  into
the  regular  and  healthy  state.

If^  then,  as  cannot  be  denied,  medicines  are  the  agents  for
earing  diseases,  they  must  possess  the  power  of  effecting  an  al-
teration in  the  state  of  health.

Now  as  there  can  be  no  other  alteration  of  the  sound  state  of
health  than  this,  that  the  healthy  person  shall  become  sick,
therefore  medicines,  inasmuch  as  tliey  possess  the  power  of  heal-
ing, consequently  of  altering  the  health  of  man,  the  healthy  as
well  as  the  sick,  must,  in  their  action  upon  the  healthy,  produce
many  symptoms,  morbid  sufferings,  and  divergences  from  the
healthy  state.

Now  admitting,  what  likewise  cannot  be  denied,  that,  in  order
to  cure,  the  main  business  of  the  physician  consists  in  knowing
beforehand  the  medicine  from  which  a  cure  is  most  certainly  to
be  expected,  he  must,  seeing  that  a  cure  by  medicines  takes  place
only  by  reason  of  an  alteration  effected  in  the  state  of  the  health,
at)oye  all  things  know  beforehand,  what  alterations  in  man's
health  the  several  medicines  can  effect,  before  he  selects  one  of
them  for  administration,  if  he  do  not  wish  to  be  guilty  of  a  cri-
minal  inconsiderateness,  and  an  unpardonable  attack  upon  human
life ; — ^for  if  every  powerftd  medicine  can  make  the  healthy  sick,
an  ignorantly  selected,  consequently  an  unsuitable,  medicine
must  necessarily  render  the  patient  worse  than  he  was.

The  most  zealous  efforts  of  one  who  devotes  himself  to  the
eore  of  diseases  (a  physician),  must  hence  before  all  things,  be
directed  to  obtain  a  foreknowledge  of  those  properties  and  ac-
tions of  medicines  by  means  of  which  he  may  effect  the  cure  or
amelioration  of  every  individual  case  of  disease  with  the  greatest
oertainty,  that  is  to  say,  he  must,  before  commencing  the  prac-
tice of  physic,  have  previously  obtained  a  thorough  knowledge
of  the  peculiar  alterations  in  the  health  of  man  the  several  me-
dicines are  capable  of  effecting,  in  order  to  be  able  to  select,  in
every  case  of  disease,  the  health-altering  medicine  most  suitable
for  Meeting  a  cure.

Now  it  is  impossible  that  the  alterations  in  man's  health  which
medicines  are  capable  of  producing,  can  be  known  and  observed
more  purely,  certainly  and  completely,  by  any  other  method  in
the  world,  than  by  the  action  of  medicines  upon  healthy  indivi-
duals ;  indeed  there  is  no  other  way  besides  this  conceivable,
in  which  it  were  possible  to  obtain  experience  that  shall  be  at  all

of  an  accurate  character  respecting  the  real  alterations  they  are

46


722  OONTBAST  OF  THE  OLD  AND  THE  KXW

capable  of  effecting  in  man's  health.  For  the  ictioa  they  shew
with  chemical  re-agents,  reveals  only  chemical  properties^  which
are  no  clue  to  their  power  over  the  living  human  organism.  The
alterations  they  produce  when  given  to  animalsi  only  teach  wha(
they  can  do  to  them  each  according  to  its  natuiei  but  not  what
they  would  effect  on  man,  endowed  as  he  is  with  an  organization
of  a  perfectly  different  character,  and  with  very  different  poweia
both  of  mind  and  body.  Even  when  given  in  human  diaeaaea
in  order  to  ascertain  their  effects,  the  peculiar  symptoms  which
were  solely  due  to  the  medicine  can  never  be  distinctly  reoognisedy
never  accurately  distinguished,  amid  the  tumult  of  the  morbid
symptoms  already  present,  so  as  to  admit,  of  our  asoertaining
which  of  the  changes  effected  were  owing  to  the  medicine,  which
to  the  disease.  Hence  not  the  slightest  claim  to  a  knowledge
of  the  true,  pure  action  of  the  various  medicines  can  be  made  by
the  ordinary  materia,  medica,  which  has  scraped  together  its
£Eibles  respecting  the  virtues  of  drugs,  from  the  confused  use  of
mixed  medicaments  in  diseases,  its  descriptions  of  which  are  often
not  more  lucid  than  the  pathological  names  bestowed  upon  them.

The  simple  natural  way  alone  remains  for  us,  in  order  to  aa-
certain  clearly,  purely  and  with  certainty,  the  powers  of  medi*
cines  upon  man,  that  is,  the  alterations  they  are  capable  of
effecting  on  his  health — the  only  genuine  and  simple  natural
way,  viz.,  to  administer  the  medicines  to  healthy  individuals
who  are  attentive  enough  to  notice  upon  themselves  what  each
individual  medicine  is  capable  of  producing  in  and  on  them  of
a  peculiar  morbid  and  altered  character,  and  to  make  a  careftil
record  of  the  complaints,  symptoms  and  alterations  in  their  cor*
poreal  and  mental  state  produced  by  its  administration,  as  the
peculiar  alterations  of  man^s  health  this  medicine  may  henceforth
be  expected  to  produce ;  for  whilst  the  action  of  a  medicine
lasts  (provided  violent  moral  emotions  and  other  injurious  in*
fluences  from  without  do  not  intervene)  all  the  symptoms  that
occur  in  a  healthy  individual  must  be  the  effects  of  the  medicinCi
seeing  that  its  influence  alone  dominates  over  our  state  of  health
at  that  period.

The  physician  must  possess  the  most  perfect  knowledge  pos-
sible of  the  pure  alterations  in  the  health  produced  on  the  healthy
human  body  by  the  greatest  possible  number  of  single  medicineSi
before  he  ventures  to  undertake  the  most  important  of  all  voca-
tions, namely,  the  administration  of  medicines  to  a  sick  person
for  his  disease,  to  a  suffering  fellow-creature  who  appeals  to  our


SYSTSMS  OF  MEDICIKB.  723

most  sacred  sense  of  duty  to  relieve  him,  who  demands  all  our
compassion  and  all  our  zeal,  to  enable  us  to  rescue  him,  for  these
medicines  if  given  improperly  are  firightful  substances,  and  are
attended  with  injurious  effects,  and  not  un£requently  with  danger
to  life.

In  this  way  alone  will  the  upright  physician  act  in  the  most
important  matter  of  conscience  that  can  be,  in  gaining  a  know*
ledge  of  the  pure  effects  of  medicines,  and  in  investigating  the
ease  of  disease  committed  to  his  care,  according  to  the  distinct
indication  and  obvious  requirements  of  nature,  and  in  this  way
alone  will  he  act  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  nature  and
conscience,  even  though  he  know  not  as  yet  what  morbid  symp^
toms,  artificially  produced  by  medicine  on  the  healthy  individual,
nature  has  destined  for  the  eradication  of  any  given  symptom
in  natural  diseases.

'  This  problem  he  cannot  solve  by  any  speculative  a  priori  re-
aeareh,  nor  by  any  fantastic  reveries — ^no  I  he  can  only  solve
this  problem  also,  by  experiment,  observation,  and  experience.

Now  it  13  not  merely  one  single  observation,  but  all  experi-
ments and  observations  careftdly  conducted  demonstrate  in  the
most  convincing  manner  (to  every  sensible  individual  who  will
be  convinced)  that  among  medicines  tested  as  to  their  pure
effects,  that  one  alone,  which  can  produce  in  the  healthy  indi-
vidual a  similar  morbid  state,  is  capable  of  transforming  a  given
case  of  disease,  rapidly,  gently,  and  permanently  into  heal^
indeed^  tliat  such  a  medicine  mill  never  fail  to  cure  die  disease,  Tne
place  of  the  natural  disease  in  the  organism  is  occupied  by  the
artificial  somewhat  stronger  medicinal  disease,  which  now  alone
oecupies  the  vitality,  and  in  consequence  of  the  minuteness  of
the  dose  of  the  medicine  which  produced  it,  runs  but  a  brief
course  before  being  extinguished,  and  the  body  is  then  left  with-
out disease,  that  is,  quite  well  and  (homoeopathically)  cured.

If  then,  beneficent  nature  shews  us,  in  the  homoeopathic
method  of  treatment,  the  only  sure  and  infallible  way  by  which
we  can  remove  easily  and  permanently  the  totality  of  the  symp-
toms in  a  patient,  that  is,  his  whole  morbid  state,'  and  by  which
we  are  able  to  make  him  well  at  will ;  if  every  instance  of  treat-
ment conducted  on  this  plan  shews  lis  the  most  un&iling  cure ;
who  could  remain  so  perverse,  and  neglect  to  such  a  degree  the
good  of  himself  and  of  humanity,  as  to  refuse  to  tread  in  this

'  After  the  removal  of  all  his  ailmeote,  BymptomB  and  the  morbid  changes  in
his  feelingd,  can  anything  besides  health  remain  t


7j(4  THS  MSDICAL  OBSIBYEB.

jMuii  of  truth  and  nature,  bat  stick  to  the  indefensible,  antiquated,
porelj  imaginaiy  phantoms  of  diseases  and  modes  of  treatment^
xo  theminalion  of  the  sick?

I  know  full  well  that  it  requires  heroic  courage  in  order  to
cure  oorselyes  of  prejudices  grown  almost  into  mental  infirmitiefli
whidi  have  become  sacred  to  us  on  account  of  their  hoaiy  age,
and  that  it  demands  a  Tcrj  uncommon  strength  of  mind  to
eradica&e  from  our  memory  all  the  absurdities  that  have  been
imprinted  upon  our  jouthful  susceptibilities  as  oracular  detir-
etances^  and  to  exchange  them  for  new  truths.

Ru  Ae  oat-foariind  wiih  which  a  consciousness  ofading  rigid
c  :nnw  uv  f'fxar^  Aeje  vidUnifSS  over  ourselves  a  thousand-fMI

Do  old,  antiquated  untruths  become  anything  better--do  they
becocue  truths — by  reason  of  their  hoary  antiquity?  Is  not
truth  eternal,  thoi^  it  may  have  been  discovered  only  an  hour
igo  ?  Do^  the  novelty  of  its  discovery  render  it  an  untruth?
Waes  there  ever  a  discovery  or  a  truth  that  was  not  at  first
novel?


THE MEDICAL OBSERVERS
(a  fragment.)


lu  order  to  be  able  to  observe  well,  the  medical  practitioner
ivquiivs  to  possess,  what  is  not  to  be  met  with  among  ordinary
phv^oians  even  in  a  moderate  degree,  the  capacity  and  habit  of
av^cing  cjirefuUy  and  correctly  the  phenomena  that  take  place
tu  natural  diseases,  as  well  as  those  that  occur  in  the  mo^
^vl  slates  artificially  excited  by  medicines,  when  they  are  tested
^^^  appropriate  and  natural  expressions.

lu  or\ler  accurately  to  perceive  what  is  to  be  observed  in  pa-
^g^l»^  wo  should  direct  all  our  thoughts  upon  the  matter  we
^x^  in  hand,  come  out  of  ourselves,  as  it  were,  and  attach  our
l^t«k  A^  to  speak,  with  all  our  powers  of  concentration  upon
j^  #  \>l\Wr  that  nothing  that  is  actually  present,  that  has  to  do

«  fhNutlw/MMtf  ^rm«Mii<<€^Mre,ptiT,2iidedit 1886.


THB  HBDICAL  OBSBBYSR.  726

with  the  subject,  and  that  can  be  ascertained  by  the  senses,  may
escape  us.

Poetic  &ncy,  &ntastic  wit  and  speculation,  must  for  a  while  be
Buspended,  and  all  overstrained  reasoning,  forced  interpretation
and  tendency  to  explain  away  things,  must  be  suppressed.  The
duty  of  the  observer  is  then  only  to  take  notice  of  the  pheno-
mena and  their  course;  his  attention  should  be  on  the  watch,
not  only  that  nothing  actually  present  escape  his  observation,
but  that  also  what  he  observes  be  imderstood  exactly  as  it  is.

This  capability  of  observing  accurately  is  never  quite  an  in-
nate &culty ;  it  must  be  chiefly  acquired  by  practice,  by  refin-
ing and  regulating  the  perceptions  of  the  senses,  that  is  to
say,  by  exercising  a  severe  criticism  in  regard  to  the  rapid  im-
presdons  we  obtain  of  external  objects,  and  at  the  same  time  the
necessary  coolness,  calmness  and  firmness  of  judgment  must  be
preserved,  together  with  a  constant  distrust  of  our  own  powers
of  apprehension.

The  vast  importance  of  our  subject  should  make  us  direct  the
energies  of  our  body  and  mind  towards  the  observation ;  and
great  patience,  supported  by  the  power  of  the  will,  must  sustain
U0  in  this  direction  until  the  completion  of  the  observation.

To  educate  us  for  the  acquirement  of  this  &culty,  an  acquain-
tance with  the  best  writings  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  is  useful,
in  order  to  enable  us  to  attain  directness  in  thinking  and  in
feeling,  as  also  appropriateness  and  simplicity  of  expressing  our
sensations ;  the  art  of  drawing  jfrom  nature  is  also  useful,  as  it
sharpens  and  practises  our  eye,  and  thereby  also  our  other
senses,  teaching  us  to  form  a  true  conception  of  objects,  and  to
represent  what  we  observe,  truly  and  purely,  without  any  addi-
tion from  the  fancy.  A  knowledge  of  mathematics  also  gives  us
the  requisite  severity  in  forming  a  judgment.

Thus  equipped,  the  medical  observer  cannot  fail  to  accomplish
his  object,  especially  if  he  has  constantly  before  his  eyes  the
exalted  dignity  of  his  calling — as  the  representative  of  the  all-
bountiful  Father  and  Preserver,  to  minister  to  His  beloved  hu-
man creatures,  by  renovating  their  systems  when  ravaged  by
disease.  He  knows  that  observations  of  medical  subjects  must
be  made  in  a  sincere  and  holy  spirit,  as  if  under  the  eye  of  the
all-seeing  God,  the  Judge  of  our  secret  thoughts,  and  must  be
recorded  so  as  to  satisfy  an  upright  conscience,  in  order  that
they  may  be  communicated  to  the  world,  in  the  consciousness
that  no  earthly  good  is  more  worthy  of  our  zealous  exertions


720  THE  MEDICAL  OBSSBVBBb

than  the  preseryation  of  the  life  and  health  of  our  fellow-
creatures.

The  best  opportunity  for  exerciaing  and  perfecting  our  ohBerr-
ing  fecultj,  is  afforded  by  instituting  experiments  with  medi-
cines upon  ourselves.  Whilst  avoiding  all  foreign  medicinal
influences  and  disturbing  mental  impressions  in  this  important
operation,  the  experimenter,  after  he  has  taken  the  medicine,
has  all  his  attention  strained  towards  all  the  alterations  of  health
that  take  place  on  and  within  him,  in  order  to  observe  and  cor-
rectly to  record  them,  with  ever- wakeful  feelings,  and  his  senses
ever  on  the  watch.

By  continuing  this  careful  investigation  of  all  the  changes
that  occur  within  and  upon  himself  the  experimenter  attains
the  capability  of  observing  all  the  sensations,  be  they  ever  so
complex,  that  he  experiences  from  the  medicine  he  is  testing,
and  all,  even  the  finest  shades  of  alteration  of  his  health,  and  of
recording  iu  suitable  and  adequate  expressions  his  distinct  con-
ception of  them.

Here  alone  is  it  possible  for  the  beginner  to  make  pure,  cor-
rect and  undisturbed  observations,  for  he  knows  that  he  will  not
deceive  himself  there  is  no  one  to  tell  him  aught  that  is  untrue,
and  he  himself  feels,  sees  and  notices  what  takes  place  in  and
upon  him.  He  will  thus  acquire  practice  to  enable  him  to  make
equally  accurate  observations  on  others  also.

By  means  of  these  pure  and  accurate  investigations,  we  shall
be  made  aware  that  all  the  symptomatology  hitherto  existing  in
the  ordinary  system  of  medicine,  was  only  a  very  superficial
affair,  and  that  nature  is  wont  to  disorder  man  in  his  health  and
in  all  his  sensations  and  functions  by  disease  or  medicine  in  such
infinitely  various  and  dissimilar  manners,  that  a  single  word  or
bid sensations  and  symptoms  which  are  often  of  such  a  complex
character,  if  we  wish  to  portray  really,  truly,  and  perfectly  the
alterations  in  the  health  we  meet  with.

No  portrait  painter  was  ever  so  careless  as  to  pay  no  attention
to  the  marked  peculiarity  in  the  features  of  the  person  he  wished
to  make  a  likeness  of,  or  to  consider  it  sufficient  to  make  any
sort  of  a  pair  of  round  holes  below  the  forehead  by  way  of
eyes,  between  them  to  draw  a  long-shaped  thing  directed  down-
wards, always  of  the  same  shape,  by  way  of  a  nose,  and  beneath
this  to  put  a  slit  going  across  (he  face,  that  should  stand  for  the
mouth  of  this  or  of  any  other  person ;  no  painter,  I  say,  ever


THE  MEDICAL  OBSEBVSR.  787

vent  about  delineating  human  faces  in  such  a  rude  and  slovenly
manner ;  no  naturalist  ever  went  to  work  in  this  fashion  in  de-
oeribing  any  natural  production ;  such  was  never  the  way  in
which  any  zoologist,  botanist,  or  mineralogist  acted.

It  was  only  the  semiology  of  ordinary  medicine  that  went  to
work,  in  such  a  manner,  when  describing  morbid  phenomena.
The  sensations  that  differ  so  vastly  among  each  other,  and  the
innumerable  varieties  of  the  sufferings  of  the  many  different
their  divergences  and  varieties,  according  to  their  peculiaritieai
the  complexity  of  the  pains  composed  of  various  Idnds  of  sen-
sations, their  deglrees  and  shades,  so  far  was  the  description  from
being  accurate  or  complete,  that  we  find  all  these  infinite  varie-
ties of  sufferings  huddled  together  under  a  few  bare,  unmean-
ing, general  terms,  such  as  perspiration,  heat,  fever,  headache,
9ore-throat,  croup,  asthma,  cough,  chest-complaints,  stitch  in  the
side,  belly-ache,  want  of  appetite,  dyspepsia,  hachache,  coxalgia^
hcemorrhqidal  sufferings,  urinary  disorders,  pains  in  the  limbs,  (call-
ed according  to  fismcy,  gouty  or  rheumatic),  skin  diseases,  spa^sms^
convulsoins,  &c  With  such  superficial  expressions^  the  innu-
merable varieties  of  sufferings  of  patients  were  knocked  off  in
the  so-called  observations,  so  that — with  the  exception  of  some
one  or  other  severe,  striking  symptom  in  this  or  that  case  of
like  another  as  the  spots  on  a  die,  or  as  the  various  pictures  of
the  dauber  resemble  one  another  in  flatness  and  want  of
character.

The  most  important  of  all  human  vocations,  I  mean  the  obser*
vation  of  the  sick,  and  of  the  infinite  varieties  of  their  disordered
state  of  health,  can  only  be  pursued  in  such  a  superficial  and
careless  manner  by  those  who  despise  mankind,  for  in  this  way
there  is  no  question  either  of  distinguishing  the  peculiariti^
of  the  morbid  states,  nor  of  selecting  the  only  appropriate  re-
medy for  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case.

The  conscientious  physician  who  earnestly  endeavours  to  ap-
prehend in  its  peculiarity  the  disease  to  be  cured,  in  order  to  be
able  to  oppose  to  it  the  appropriate  remedy,  will  go  much  more
carefully  to  work  in  his  endeavour  to  distinguish  what  there  is
to  be  observed ;  language  will  scarcely  suffice  to  enable  him  to
express  by  appropriate  words  the  innumerable  varieties  of  the
symptoms  in  the  morbid  state  ;  no  sensation,  be  it  ever  so  pecu-
liar, will  escape  him,  which  was  occasioned  in  his  feelings  by


728 HOW  CAK  SMALL  DOBES  OF  JLSTKSVATKD  UEDHCafE

the  medicine  he  tested  on  himself;  he  will  endeayoar  to  convey
an  idea  of  it  in  language  by  the  most  appropriate  exju-easion,
in  order  to  be  able  in  his  practice  to  match  the  accurate  deUnei^
tion  of  the  morbid  picture  with  the  similarly  acting  medidnei
whereby  alone,  as  he  knows,  can  a  cure  be  effected.

So  true  it  is  that  the  careful  observer  alone  can  become  atrue
healer  of  diseases.


HOW  CAN  SMALL  DOSES  OF  SUCH  VERY  ATTENUATED  MEDI-
CIXE  AS  HOMEOPATHY  EMPLOYS  STHX  POSSESS  GREAT
POWER  ?•


This  question  is  asked  not  only  by  the  ordinary  allopathio
physician,  who  thinks  he  cannot  go  fisur  enough  widi  the  huge
mcBopathy  also  ignorantly  puts  the  same  question.

To  doubt,  if  it  be  possible  that  they  can  have  the  requisite
power,  seems  to  be  of  itself  very  foolish,  because  they  are  ac-
tually seen  to  act  so  powerfully,  and  manifestly  to  compass  the
object  intended,  and  this  they  may  be  seen  to  do  daily.

And  what  actually  takes  place  must  at  least  be  possible !

But  even  when  the  hostile  scoffers  can  no  longer  deny  the
effect  that  lies  before  their  very  eyes,  they  seek,  by  means  of
£Use  analogies,  to  represent  what  is  actually  occurring,  if  not  as
impossible,  at  least  as  ridiculous.

"  K  a  drop  of  such  highly  attenuated  medicine,"  so  they  talk,
"can  still  act,  then  the  water  of  the  lake  of  Greneva,  into  which
a  drop  of  some  strong  medicine  has  &llen,  must  display  as  mxich
curative  power  in  each  of  its  separate  drops,  indeed  much  more,
seeing  that  in  the  homoeopathic  attenuations  a  much  greater  pro-
portion of  attenuating  fluid  is  used."

The  answer  to  this  is,  that  in  the  preparation  of  the  homoeo-
pathic medicinal  attenuations,  a  small  portion  of  medicine  is
not  merely  added  to  an  enormous  quantity  of  non-medicinal
fluid,  or  only  slightly  mingled  with  it,  as  in  the  above  compa-
rison, which  has  been  devised  in  order  to  bring  ridicule  upon
the  affair,  but  by  the  sHcrn.<<ion  and  triturattoi^  there  ensues  not

'  Frmn  ttMt  Rtine  AnauimUielUkrr,  pL  ri,  l«t.  edit  1827.


Aa  HOMCBOPATHT  XICFLOTB  STILL  POiSBBSS  GBBAT  POWISR. 726

only  the  moet  intimate  mixture,  but  at  the  same  time — and  this
is  ^e  most  important  circimistance — ^there  ensues  such  a  great^
and  hitherto  unknown  and  undreamt  of  change,  by  the  deve-
lopement  and  liberation  of  the  dynamic  powers  of  the  medicinal
substance  so  treated,  as  to  excite  astonishment.

In  the  above  thoughtlessly  adduced  comparison,  however,  by
the  dropping  of  one  drop  of  medicine  into  such  a  great  lake,
there  can  be  no  question  of  even  its  superficial  admixture  with
all  parts  of  a  body  of  water  of  such  extent,  so  as  that  every
part  shall  contain  an  equal  portion  of  the  drop  of  medicine.

There  is  not  the  slightest  question  of  an  intimate  mixture  in
such  a  case.

Even  only  a  moderately  large  quantity  of  water,  for  instance,
a  hogshead  of  water,  if  we  attempted  to  impregnate  it  in  its  en-
tirety^ in  a  mass,  with  a  drop  of  medicine,  could  never,  after  any
length  of  time,  or  by  any  imaginable  stirring  about,  be  equally
mixed — ^not  to  mention  that  the  constant  internal  changes  and
nninterrupted  chemical  decomposition  of  the  component  parts
of  the  water,  would  have  destroyed  and  annihilated  the  medi-
cinal power  of  a  drop  of  vegetable  tincture  in  the  course  of  a
few  hours.

In  like  manner,  a  hundred  weight  of  flour  taken  as  one  whols
massj  can  by  no  mechanical  contrivance  be  mixed  so  equally
with  a  grain  of  medicine  as  that  each  grain  of  flour  shall  obtain
an  equal  portion  of  the  medicinal  powder.

In  the  homoeopathic  pharmaceutical  operations,  on  the  con-
trary, (admitting  they  consisted  merely  of  a  common  mixture,
which  they  do  not),  as  only  a  small  quantity  of  the  attenuating
fluid  is  taken  at  a  time  (a  drop  of  medicinal  tincture  shaken  up
along  with  100  drops  of  alcohol),  there  ensues  a  imion  and  equal
distribution  in  a  few  seconds.

But  the  mode  of  attenuating  practised  in  homoeopathy  effects
not  only  an  equal  distribution  of  the  medicinal  drop  through-
out a  great  proportional  quantity  of  unmedicinal  fluid  (which  is
out  of  the  question  in  the  above  absurd  comparison),  but  it  also
happens — and  this  is  of  infinitely  greater  importance — ^that  by
the  syjccussicni,  and  trituration  employed,  a  change  is  effected  in
tJie  mixture,  which  is  so  incredibly  great  and  so  inconceivably
curative,  that  this  development  of  the  spiritual  power  of  medi*
oines  to  such  a  height  by  means  of  the  multiplied  and  continued
trituration  and  succussion  of  a  small  portion  of  medicinal  sub-
stance with  ever  more  and  more  dry  or  fluid  unmedicinal  sub-


780 '<  HOW  (UOr  SHALL DOBBS  OF  A!lTBinLfcJB»  lUUMgllia

ftances,  deserves  inoontestaUy  to  be  reckoned  amoffig  Ae  greaiai
discoveries  of  this  age.

The  physical  ohanges  and  developiiient  of  power  that  may  be
produced  by  tritunUion  £rom  sabstances  in  nature,  which  we
call  matter,  have  hitherto  only  been  surmised  from  some  cir*
oumstances — ^but  the  extraordinary  effects  in  the  way  of  de-
veloping and  exciting  the  dynamic  forces  of  medunnes  it  oaa
produce,  have  never  been  dreamt  o£

Now  with  respect  to  the  development  of  physical  forces  from
material  substances  by  triturcUion,  this  is  a  very  wonderful  subr
ject. »

It  is  only  the  ignorant  vulgar  that  still  look  upoti  matter  as  a
dead  mass,  for  from  its  interior  can  be  elicited  incredible  and
hitherto  unsuspected  powers.

All  new  discoveries  of  this  sc^  are  usually  met  by  denial
and  incredulity  from  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  who  have  nei-
ther adequate  acquaintance  with  phy&dcal  phenomena  nor  with
the  causes  of  these  phenomena,  nor  the  capacity  to  observe  for
themselves,  and  to  reflect  upon  what  they  perceive.  They  see,
for  example,  that  when  a  piece  of  steel  is  strongly  and  rapidly
rubbed  against  a  hard  stone  (agate,  flint),  an  operation  that  is
termed  striking  fire,  incandescent  sparks  fly  off  (and  kindle  the
tinder  or  punk  they  fallen):  but  how  few  among  them  have
careftilly  observed  and  reflected  upon  what  really  takes  place
there.  All  of  them,  or  at  least  almost  all,  go  on  thoughtlessly
lighting  their  tinder,  and  almost  no  one  perceives,  what  a
miracle,  what  a  great  natural  phenomenon  thereby  takes  place.
When  sparks  are  thus  struck  with  sufficient  force,  and  caught  on
a  sheet  of  white  paper,  then  we  may  see,  either  with  the  naked
eye  or  by  means  of  a  lens,  usually  small  pellets  of  steel  lying
there,  which  have  been  detached  in  a  state  of  fusion  from  the
surface  of  the  steel  by  the  smart  collision  with  the  flint,  and  have
£Edlen  in  an  incandescent  state,  like  small  fire  balls,  in  the  form
of  sparks,  upon  the  paper,  where  they  cooled.

How  I  can  the  violent  friction  of  the  flint  and  steel  (in  the
operation  of  striking  fire)  cause  such  a  degree  of  heat  as  to  fuse
steel  into  little  balls. Does  it  not  require  a  heat  of  at  least

'  [What  follows  appeared  in  1826,  in  tbe  Aliff.  Am.  d.  D^  No.  194,  and  was  intend-
ed as  a  reply  to  a  oarrsfpondent  of  that  Jonmal,  who  endeaToared  to  show  tbe  oo-
thingnesH  of  hoDMBopathy  by  some  of  those  calculations  respecting  the  minoteoess  ol
the  dose,  which  to  this  day  constitute  the  stereotyped  arguments  of  the  opponents
of  the  system.  In  the  i2.  ^  M.  L.  this  is  abridged,  I  have  restored  it  to  iis  original
fonn.]


As  HOXCBOFiTHT  EXPLOTS  flTiLL  poesmaRSiT  PO^mR.  781

8000^  of  Fahrenheit's  thermometer  in  order  to  melt  steel?
Whence  comes  this  tremendous  heat?  Not  out  of  the  air,  for
this  phenomenon  takes  place  just  as  well  in  the  vacuum  of  the
air-pump  I  therefore  it  must  colne  from  the  substances  that  art
rubbed  together ;  which  is  the  &ct

But  does  the  ordinary  individual  really  believe  that  the  cold
steel  which  he  draws  thoughtlessly  from  his  pocket  to  light  his
tinder,  contains  hidden  within  it  (in  a  latent,  confined,  undev^*
loped  state)  an  inexhaustible  store  of  caloric,  which  the  blow
only  develops,  and  as  it  were,  wakes  into  activity  ?  No,  he  does
not  believe  it,  he  has  never  reflected,  and  never  vriU  reflect,  upon
the  phenomena  of  nature.  .  And  yet  it  is  so.  And  yet  his  steel,
which  when  at  rest  is  cold,  contains-^whether  he  believe  it  or
no — an  inexhaustible  store  of  caloric,  which  can  only  be  released
hj  friction.  An  inexhaustible  store  of  caloric,  I  repeat,  which
is  not  calculable  by  the  cyphers  of  any  of  tiiose  arithmeticians
who  seek  to  limit  nature  and  render  her  contemptible,  by
applying  their  multiplication  table  to  the  phenomena  of  her
illimitable  forces.  The  great  natural  philosopher,  ^unt  Bum*
ford,^  teaches  us  how  to  heat  our  rooms  solely  by  the  xapid  mo*
tion  of  two  plates  of  metal  rubbing  against  one  another,  without
the  employment  of  any  ordinary  combustible  material  whatever*
No  further  proof  is  required  to  convince  the  reflective  that  xof
tural  bodies,  and  especially  metals,  contain  an  inexhaustible
store  of  caloric  concealed  within  them,  which  however  can  be
called  into  life  only  by  means  of  friction.

The  effect  oi  friction  is  so  great,  that  not  only  the  physical
properties,  such  as  caloric,  odour,'  &c.,  are  thereby  called  into
life  and  developed  by  it,  but  also  the  dynamic  medicinal  powers
of  natural  substances  are  tiiereby  developed  to  an  incredible
degree,  afcxt  that  has  hitherto  escaped  observation.  The  founder  of
the  homoeopathic  system  was  the  first  who  made  this  great,  this
extraordinary  discovery,  that  the  properties  of  crude  medicinal
substances  gain>  when  they  are  fluid  by  repeated  succussion  with
immedicinal  fluids,  and  when  they  are  dry  by  frequent  conti-
nued trituration  with  unmedicinal  powders,  such  an  increase  of
medicinal  power,  that  when  these  processes  are  carried  very  fiur,

>  Count  Rumford's  treaUso  oa  caloric  fills  the  first  diviuoo  of  the  4th  VoL  of  hia
works,  which  have  been  published  by  the  Weinuur  Induttris-Comptoir.

'  Hom^  ivory,  booe,  the  calcareous  stone  impregnated  with  petroleum,  Ac^  have  of
themselves  no  smell,  but  when  filed  or  rubbed  they  not  only  emit  an  odour  but  aa
eztrexiicly  fetid  one,  hence  the  last-mentioned  substance  has  obtained  the  name  of
Stinkstone,  though  when  not  rubbed  it  has  no  smelL


782 HOW  OAK  SMALL  DOSES  OF  ATTSKUATED  XXBIOHnB

•ven  substances  in  wHich  for  centuries  no  medicinal  power  has
been  observed  in  their  crude  state,  display  under  this  manipu-
lation a  power  of  acting  on  the  health  of  man  that  is  quite
astonishing.

Thus  pure  gold,  silver  and  platina  have  no  action  on  the  hu*
man  health  in  their  solid  state^ — and  the  same  is  the  case  with
y^etable  charcoal  in  its  crude  state.  Several  grains  of  gold
leai^  silver  leaf  or  charcoal  may  be  taken  by  the  most  sensitive
person  without  his  perceiving  any  medicinal  action  from  it  All
these  substances  present  themselves  to  us  in  a  state  of  suspended
animation  as  &r  as  regards  their  medicinal  action.  But  if  a
grain  of  gold  leaf  be  triturated  strongly  for  an  hour  in  a  por-
celain mortar  with  one  hundred  grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  the
powder  that  results  (the  first  trituration)  possesses  a  considera-
ble  amount  of  medicinal  power.  If  a  grain  of  this  powder  be
triturated  as  strongly  and  as  long  with  another  hundred  grains
of  sugar  of  milk,  the  preparation  attains  a  much  greater  medi*
einal  power,  and  if  this  process  be  continued,  and  a  grain  of  the
previous  trituration  be  rubbed  up  as  strongly  and  for  as  long  a
time,  each  time  with  a  fresh  hundred  grains  of  sugar  of  milk
until,  after  fifteen  such  triturations,  the  quintillionth  attenuadon
of  the  original  grain  of  gold  leaf  is  obtained,  then  the  last  at*
t^nuations  do  not  display  a  weaker,  but  on  the  contrary,  the
most  penetrating,  the  greatest  medicinal  power  of  the  whole  of
the  attenuations.  A  single  grain  of  the  last  (quintillionth)  at-
tenuation put  into  a  small,  clean  phial,  will  restore  a  morbidly
desponding  individual,  with  a  constant  inclination  to  commit
suicide,  in  less  than  an  hour  to  a  peaceftd  state  of  mind,  to  love
of  life,  to  happiness,  and  horror  of  his  contemplated  act,  if  he
perform  but  a  single  olfaction  in  the  phial,  or  put  on  his  tongue
a  quantity  of  this  powder  no  bigger  than  a  grain  of  sand.^

'  [In  ooDDexioo  with  thid  subject  I  may  be  permitted  to  adduce  a  few  puints  bearing
OD  the  questioD  of  the  dose  of  paid.  In  the  first  place  we  learn  from  the  4th  part  of
the  R,  A.  M.  L.  and  the  Chr.  Kr.  that  this  substance  was  proved  upon  healthj  indi-
viduals in  doses  of  from  100  to  200  grains  of  the  first  trituration  (one  to  two  grains
of  pure  gold).  Then,  with  respect  to  the  doses  to  be  administered  in  disease,  we  find
it  stated  in  the  introduction  to  gald  in  the  second  edition  of  both  these  works  (pob*
lished  respectively  in  1825  and  1835,  probably  a  repetition  of  what  appeared  in  the
1st  edition  of  the  R,  A.  M.  L^  published  about  1820)  that  Hahnemann  had  cored
several  {mehre)  individuals  suffering  from  suicidal  melancholia  with  from  S-lOOtlis  to
9-lOOths  of  a  grain  of  gold  for  the  whole  treatment  He  also  mentions  in  these
places  that  he  had  found  a  smaller  quantity,  viz :  l<10000th  part  of  a  grain  of  gold
not  less  powerful,  especially  in  caries  of  the  nasal  and  palatial  bones,  from  the  abunc
of  mercurials. In  the  essay  of  which  our  text  is  a  translation  (published  in  1625)  be


AS  HOHCBOPAXHY  SMPLOTS  8TILL  POSSESS  GBSAT  POWSB. 788

From  this  we  perceive  that  the  preparations  of  medicinal  sub-
stances of  trituraiion,  the  fSEtrther  the  development  of  their  pow-
ers is  thereby  brought  and  the  more  perfectly  capable  they  are
thereby  rendered  for  displaying  their  power,  become  capable  of
answering  the  homoeopathic  purpose  in  proportionately  smaller
quantities  and  doses.

Medicinal  substances  are  not  dead  masses  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  term,  on  the  contrary,  their  true  essential  nature  is
only  dynamically  spiritual — ^is  pure  force,  which  may  be  in-
creased in  potency  by  that  most  wonderftd  process  of  trituration
(and  sixcussion)  according  to  the  homoeopathic  method,  almost
to  an  infinite  degree.

In  the  same  way  liquid  medicines  do  not  become  by  their
greater  and  greater  attenuation,  weaker  in  power  but  always
more  potent  and  penetrating.  For  homoeopathic  purposes  this
dilution  is  performed  by  well  shaking  a  drop  of  the  medicine
with  a  hundred  drops  of  a  non-medicinal  fluid ;  fix)m  the  bottle
so  shaken  a  drop  is  taken  and  shaken  up  in  the  same  manner
with  another  hundred  drops  of  immedicinal  fluid,  and  so  on.
This  result,  so  incomprehensible  to  the  man  of  figures,  goes  86
&r  that  we  must  set  bounds  to  the  succussion  process,  in  order
that  the  degree  of  attenuation  be  not  over-balanced  by  the  in-
creased potency  of  the  medicine,  and  in  that  way  the  highest
attenuations  become  too  active.  If  we  wish,  for  example,  to
attenuate  a  drop  of  the  juice  of  sundew^  to  the  dedUiontii,  but
idiake  each  of  the  bottles  with  twenty  or  more  succussions  from
a  powerful  arm,  in  the  hand  of  which  the  bottle  is  held,  in  that
case  this  medicine,  which  I  have  discovered  to  be  the  specific
remedy  for  the  firightful  epidemic  hooping-cough  of  children,  will
have  become  so  powerful  in  the  fifteenth  attenuation  (spintuali-
zation)  that  a  drop  of  it  given  in  a  tea-spoonful  of  water  would
endanger  the  life  of  such  a  child ;  whereas  if  each  dilution-bot-

ftties  that  a  qaintillionth  (16th  dilutioo)  was  the  prqwratioD  he  then  generally  used ;
in  the  aame  essay  as  it  i4>pean  in  the  6th  part  of  the  R,  A.  M,  L^  (pobUshed  in  1827),
and  in  the  introduction  to  goldin  the  It,  A.  M,  L.,  (published  in  1826),  he  reoom*
iqiiids  a  quadrillionth  of  a  grain  (12th  dilation)  for  a  dose.  In  the  Chr,  Kr^  (pub-
lished in  1886)  he  of  course  adrises  the  dedllionth  (30th  dilution)  to  be  given  in
every  case.  The  following,  then,  was  the  state  of  Hahnemann's  practice  in  reference
to  the  dose  of  this  remedy  at  different  periods.  About  1820,  1st  or  2d  attenua-
tion  ;  in  1826,  12th  or  16th  attenuation;  in  1827, 12th  attenuatioo;  in  1886,  80th
attaouation.]

*  Dro9era  roi%tndifolui,  a  plant,  which,  along  with  its  Tarious  spedes^  grows  on
moist  meadow-grofBid,  aiid'is  Tery  oomoos  to  iheep


784  HOW  cAir  aiCALL  doses  or  attxnuatbd  mmdicssEj  kc.

tie  were  shaken  but  twice  (with  two  strokes  of  the  arm)  and
prepared  in  this  manner  up  to  the  decillionth  attenuation,  a  su-
gar globule  the  size  of  a  poppy  seed  moistened  with  the  last  at-
tenuation cures  this  terrible  disease  with  this  single  dose  without
endangering  the  health  of  the  child  in  the  slightest  degree.^

But  these  homoeopathic  medicinal  attenuations  ( — pity  there  is
no  more  appropriate  word  in  any  language  to  express  what  takes
place  in  the  process,  as  this  phenomenon  was  never  heard  of
before  its  discovery — }  these  attenuations  are  so  £Bur  fix)m  being
diminutions  of  the  medidnal  power  of  this  grain  or  drop  of  the
crude  medicinal  substance  keeping  pace  with  its  extreme  fiuo-
tional  diminution  as  expressed  by  figures,  that,  on  the  contrary,
experience  shews  them  to  be  raUier  an  actual  exaltation  of  the
m^cinal  power,  a  real  spiritualization  of  the  dynamic  property,
a  true,  astonishing  unveiling  and  vivifying  of  the  medicinal
spirit

But  there  are  various  reasons  why  the  sceptic  ridicules  these
homoeopathic  attenuations.  Itrst,  because  he  is  ignorant  that
by  means  of  such  triturations  the  internal  medicinal  power  is
wonderMly  developed,  and  is  as  it  were  liberated  from  its  ma-
terial bonds,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  operate  more  penetratingly
and  more  freely  upon  the  human  organism ;  secondly^  because
his  purely  arithmetical  mind  believes  that  it  sees  here  only  an
instance  of  enormous  subdivision,  a  mere  mcUerial  division  and
cUminiUion,  wherein  every  part  must  be  less  than  the  whole — as
every  child  knows;  but  he  does  not  observe,  that  in  these  spirit-
ualizations  of  the  internal  medicinal  power,  the  material  recep-
tacle of  these  natural  forces,  the  palpable  ponderable  matter,  is
not  to  be  taken  into  consideration  at  all;  thirdly^  because  the
sceptic  has  no  experience  relative  to  the  action  of  preparations
of  such  exalted  medicinal  power.

li^  then,  he  who  pretends  to  be  a  seeker  after  truth  will  not
search  for  it  where  it  is  to  be  found,  namely,  in  experience,  he
will  certainly  fail  to  discover  it ;  he  vdll  never  find  it  by  arith-
metical calculations.

>  [In  the  vereioo  of  this  passage  as  it  stands  in  the  i?.  A.  M.  L^^be  decilliooth  al
tenuation  prepared  with  twenty  soccussioas  to  each  bottle  is  spoken  of  as  endanger
ing  the  life  of  the  hooping-ooogh  patient,  and  from  this  drcmnstance  and  the  &ct  that
it  is  uot  stated  that  such  a  preparation  did  endanger  the  life  of  any  patient,  but  only
that  it  would  {wQrde)  endanger  it,  we  are,  I  think,  justified  in  inferring  that  Hahne-
mann did  not  actually  ob^erre  any  such  case,  but  that  be  merely  supposed  that  it
would  occur,  which  his  theoty  of  the  increase  of  potency  in  bomoBopathic  medica-
loents  by  the  pruceeees  of  trituratiefi  and  snocokiwo  wouid  lead  him  tu  do'J


ON  THE  DCPBSGNATION  OF  GLOBULES  WITH  MEDICINE.  735

ON  THE  IMPREGJfATION  OF  THE  GLOBULES  WITH

MEDICINE.*


If  we  add  to  the  mode  of  procedure  recommended  by  the
esteemed  author  of  this  letter,  that  the  globules,  from  5  to  600
of  which  should  be  in  each  little  bottle,  and  fill  it  only  about
half  full,  should  be  moistened  with  fix)m  three  to  four  drops  of
the  alcoholic  medicinal  dilution,  and  not  shaken  in  the  corked
up  bottle,  but  rather  stirred  about  in  it  with  a  silver  or  glass
pin,  and  the  bottle  kept  uncorked  until  by  the  evaporation  of
the  alcohol  they  become  dry  and  no  longer  adhere  to  each
other,  so  that  each  globule  may  be  taken  out  separately ;  in  this
way  the  homoeopathist  possesses  indisputably  the  most  conve-
nient process  for  having  his  medicines  always  of  the  same  good
guality  and  ready  for  immediate  use.

The  medicated  alcohol  that  evaporates  whilst  the  globules  are
thus  stirred  for  about  an  hour,  is  no  loss  for  the  globules  that
that  are  thus  dried  in  the  bottle,  seeing  that,  strictly  speaking,
for  the  purpose  of  moistening  600  of  the  smallest  globules  a
single  drop  would  sufl&ce,  and  consequently  in  this  desiccation
by  the  evaporation  of  the  superfluous  medicated  alcohol,  they
do  not  undergo  any  diminution  whatsoever  of  their  medicinal
power,  as  I  have  been  superabundantly  convinced  by  employ-
ing them  in  practice.

With  this  little  alteration  the  process  recommended  by  my
esteemed  and  patriotic  correspondent  deserves  the  thanks  of
every  homoeopathic  practitioner,  for  it  is  the  most  perfect  that
has  been  proposed,  as  my  own  experience  convinces  me.

It  is  only  in  this  form  that  the  homoeopathic  medicines  can
be  sent  to  the  most  distant  parts  without  any  alteration  of  their
powers,  which  is  impossible  to  be  done  in  their  fluid  form ;  for
in  that  case  the  medicinal  fluid,  which  has  already  been  suffi-
ciently potentized  during  their  preparation  (by  two  successions
at  each  dilution),  receives  an  enormous  number  of  additional

'  From  the  Arekiv  der  Aom.  Heilk^  Vol  yiii,  pt  2,  p.  162.  1829.  [This  article
ftppean  as  a  note  appended  to  a  oommunicatkn  from  M.  Korsakofi^  a  RuBslaii
iMmkBopathic  dilettante,  suggesting  the  use  of  little  tubes  for  holding  the  globules
ready  made,  such  as  tho»e  at  present  in  almost  universal  use  for  pocket  cases.  He
proposed  that  the  globules  should  be  saturated  by  pouring  upon  them  two  or  three
dropd  of  the  medicinal  dUutioo,  and  shaking  the  bottle  seTeral  times  etroi^ly.J


7S6  allopathy:

successions  during  the  transport,  and  they  are  so  highly  poten-
tized  during  a  long  journey,  that  on  their  arriyal  tiiey  are
scarcely  fit  for  use,  at  least  not  for  susceptible  patients,  on
account  of  their  excessive  strength,  as  many  obeervaticHis  go
to  prove.

The  manu&cture  of  little  bottles  from  glass  tubes  by  means
of  the  blow-pipe,  as  our  author  directs,  is  a  real  improve-
ment, as  they  can  be  prepared  in  this  way  much  more  easily,
neatly  and  completely  (with  scarcely  any  constriction  of  the
neck)  than  they  can  be  obtained  in  ordinary  glass  manu&ctories.'


ALLOPATHY:

A  WOBD  OP  WARNING  TO  ALL  SICK  PEBSONS.*


Allopathy,  or  the  method  of  treatment  of  the  old  school  of
medicine,  boasts,  that  for  two  and  a  half  milleniums  it  has  pos-
sessed the  art  of  removing  the  cause  of  the  diseases  entrusted  to  it^
and  thus — ^in  opposition  to  homoeopathy,  which  cannot  do  this —
ikat  it  alone  effects  cures  of  the  cause^  and  heals  in  a  rational
manner.

I^  however,  the  allopathists  would  remove  the  cause  of
chronic  diseases,  which  constitute  much  the  greater  number  of
all  diseases,  it  must  previously  be  known  to  them.  But  it  has
in  all  ages  been  completely  unknoum  to  them,  and  they  went
alpaost  beside  themselves,  when  the  new  discoveries  of  homoeo-
pathy shewed  them  that  all  chronic  diseases  depend  solely  and
alone  upon  three  chronic  miasma,  whereof  the  whole  of  the  old
school  of  medicine  had  not  hitherto  the  most  distant  idea.

*  [Hahnemann,  as  we  learn  from  his  writings,  used  globoles  of  Tarioos  ^^^^
seed  ;  he  states  them  to  be  of  the  weight  of  800  (Introd.  to  Betladonna  and  to  Aco-
nite, R,  A.  M.  jL,  pt  L)  or  200  {Chr.  Kr.  pt  i,  p.  188)  to  the  grain,  and  be  says  that
1000,  many  more  than  lOOO^i^.  A.  M.  X.,  loc  dt)  or  800  (OrgaikOf^  §  odzzzv,  note)
of  them  are  sufficiently  moistened  by  one  drop  of  alooboL  Those  for  olfiustioii  he
usually  states  to  be  (»f  the  siie  of  a  mustard  seed  (Or^ttnon,  p.  9,  note) ;  and  he
elsewhere  {Organon,  §  oclxxxriii,  note)  states  that  10,  20,  or  100  may  weig^  a  grain
These  globules  were  to  be  made  by  the  oonfectioDer  of  sugar  (Or^ofum,  g  oclzzzr.
note,  Chr.  Kr^  pt  i,  p.  187X  and  his  latest  mode  of  moistening  them  was  to  put  them
into  a  small  glass  or  porcelain  cup,  to  pour  upon  them  a  few  drops  of  the  medidna]
dilution,  to  let  them  stand  thus  a  minute,  and  then  to  empty  them  out  on  blottii^
paper,  so  as  to  dry  them  before  puttii^  them  into  a  bottle  for  future  use.]

*  Published  as  a  pamphlet Leipsic^  1881.


A  WORD  OF  WARinKG  TO  ALL  SICK  PEBSONa  7B^

Now,  as  during  all  this  long  period  they  knew  not  the  origi-
nating cause  of  all  chronic  diseases,  it  follows  that  hitherto  they
have  treated  away  at  an  unreal  cause,  that  therefore  they  could
not  remove  the  fundamental  cause  which  was  unknown  to  them,
and  consequently,  that  they  could  not  really  cure  chronic
diseases.

The  resuU  also  proved  this ;  for  if  we  except  the  diseases  de-
rived solely  from  the  venereal  chancre-miasm,  in  which  mer-
cury, which  had  been  empirically  discovered  by  non-medical
persons,  was  no  doubt  efficacious,  the  whole  array  of  physicians
of  the  old  school,  with  all  their  medicinal  apparatus,  could  cer-
tainly aggravate  all  other  chronic  maladies,  and  make  them  in-
curable, but  they  were  incompetent  to  restore  to  health  one
dironio  patient  For,  by  the  force  of  medicine  to  transfer  the
patient  from  one  chronic  disease  into  another  and  worse
malady  of  different  appearance,  and  then,  as  is  usually  done,  ta
imagine  that  this  took  place  accidentally,  and  that  the  physician
was  perfectly  innocent  of  the  appearance  of  this  new  sad  state,
is  to  delude  one's  seli^  and  cannot  be  termed  curing,  nor  restor-
ing to  health,  but  deceiving  and  ruining  the  patient

The  physician  of  the  old  school  erroneously  alleged  the  vari-
ous, often  purely  imaginary,  characters  and  phenomena  of
chronic  diseases,  to  be  their  cai^sc  (whereas  they  are  but  the  pro-
ducts and  expressions  of  that  cause),  and  they  treated  now  for  a
chiU,  catarrh  and  rheumatism,  anon  for  the  gout,  congestion  in
the  portal  system,  haamorrhoids,  obstructions  in  the  lymphatic
vessels,  indurations,  morbid  matters  in  the  juices,  impurities,,
excess  of  pituita  in  the  primsd  visB,  weakness  of  the  stomach
and  digestive  organs,  nervous  debility,  spasm,  plethora,  chronic
inflammation,  swelling,  and  so  on.  They  imagined  these  con-
ditions to  be  the  cause  (causa)  of  the  chronic  diseases,  which  had
to  be  removed,  and  the  diminution  or  suppression  of  these  by
means  of  the  treatment  hitherto  prevalent  to  be  cures  of  the
cause.

But  when  by  the  force  of  their  medicines  they  succeeded  in
diminishing  or  dispelling  one  of  these  characters  or  states,  there
naturally  always  came  in  its  stead  another  morbid  phenomenon
(another  product  of  the  original  cause).  How  then  could  the
first  state  have  been  the  fundamental  cause  when  its  removal
was  followed  by  no  true  cure,  no  restoration  of  health — when
in  place  of  the  one  that  had  been  driven  away,  another  morbid

phenomenon  and  that  always  of  a  worse  kind,  made  its  appear-

47


738  ALLOPATHY :

ance?  Whence  was  originaUy  derived  the  apparent  morbid
character  and  its  attendant  phenomena?  whence  proceeded  the
patient's  liability  to  get  cold,  catarrh,  rheumatism,  gout,  conges-
tion of  the  portal  system,  hemorrhoids,  obstruction  in  the
lymphatic  vessels,  indurations,  mucosities  and  impurities  in  the
prima3  viao,  the  apparent  acridity  in  the  blood,  the  weakness  of
the  stomach  and  digestive  organs,  the  febrile  state,  the  nervous
debility,  spasm,  plethora,  chronic  inflammation,  swelling,  aod
so  forth  ?  Whence  did  these  actually  and  originaUy  come,  since
they  are  nothing  more  than  single  glimpses  of  the  probable
chjuwjter  of  the  disease,  and  only  single  expressions  (symptoms)
of  the  undwelling  malady,  the  combatting  of  a  single  one  of
which  (under  the  false  title  of  cause)  with  medicines,  is  truly
nothing  else  than  (blameworthy)  symptomatic  treatment^  which
these  gentlemen  with  unwarrantable  pretension  allege  to  be
rational  treatment  of  tlie  cause  f  But  what,  then,  was  the  proper
and  real  original  cause  of  these  varying,  secondary  maladies  and
phenomena,  whose  removal  would  constitute  a  irue  causal  trtai-
menti  a  radical^  permanent  cure^  a  real  rational  mode  of  practice?
Of  all  the  many  thousands  of  physicians  of  the  old  school,  none
knew  it,  nor  will  they  now  deign  to  leam^  it  from  homoeopathy,
but  yet  to  this  day  they  assert  that  their  bimgling  treatment
which  never  conduces  to  the  advantage,  but  invariably  to  the
aggravation  of  the  chronic  diseases,  is  rational  treatment.

A  more  ludicrous  pretension,  and,  as  the  universal,  ine\'itable
result  teaches,  one  more  fraught  with  injurious  consequences  to
humanity,  there  never  has  been  I  In  the  first  place,  as  regards
their  treatment  of  diseases  of  a  rapid  course  (acute  diseases),
experience  shews,  that  patients  affected  with  such  maladies,  who,
without  any  allopathic  interference,  were  left  entirely  to  their
unaided  vital  force,  recovered  on  an  average  much  sooner  and
much  more  certainly  than  when  they  gave  themselves  up  to  the
treatment  of  the  old  school  of  medicine,  under  which  many  died
whO;  without  its  unhelpful  operations,  would  have  lived,  and
after  which  many  long  remained  in  a  wretched  state,  and
usually  at  last  died  miserably  of  the  consequences  of  the  fine
treatment,  who  without  these  medicinal  onslaughts  on  their
lives,  would  much  sooner  have  recovered  and  would  much  more
certainly  have  been  preserved.

The  reason  of  this  was,  that  allopathy  attributed  a  false


'  Is  it  much  less  shameful  Dot  to  know  a  thing,  than  to  refuM  to  learn  it  I


▲  WORD  or  WARNING  TO  ALL  SICK  PERSONS.  789

oharacter  to  the  acute  diseases  it  had  to  cure,  in  order  that  they
might  conform  to  the  plan  of  treatment  once  adopted  for  them.
Thus  we  see  that  in  inflammations  of  the  lungs  and  acute  pleu-
risy, the  allopathists  pre-supposed  an  excess  of  blood  (plethora),
of  inflammatory  blood,  as  the  fundamental  cause,  and  they  did
nothing  but  diaw  off  blood,  and  go  on  drawing  off  blood,  from
the  veins,  when— as  homoeopathy  teaches  and  practises — they
ought  merely  to  have  removed  the]  morbid  irritation  of  the
arterial  system  by  means  of  the  few  internal  medicines  suited
for  allaying  it  (and  eradicating  all  the  inflammatory  character
of  the  blood),  in  order  to  extinguish  the  entire,  seemingly  fatal
disease  in  a  few  hours,  without  it  being  at  all  requisite,  accord-
ii^  to  their  old  destructive  routine  treatment,  by  venesections
and  leeches,  to  rob  the  patient  of  this  innocent,  indispensable
life's-juice,  and,  consequently,  of  all  his  strength,  which  after
this  mistreatment  he  could  either,  as  was  most  usual,  never
r^ain,  or  only  after  a  long  indisposition.

It  is  incomprehensible  how  the  allopaths  can  consider  it  a
great  sin,  if,  in  inflammatory  diseases,  e.  g.,  pleurisy  and  inflam-
mation of  the  lungs,  blood  be  not  drawn  of^  and  that  repeatedly
and  in  large  quantity,  as  they  most  injuriously,  according  to
their  stiff  observances  and  agreeably  to  their  art  which  has
grown  grey  in  gross  material  ilbtions,  make  it  an  invariable  rule
to  do,  and  would  wish  to  make  it  the  same  for  better  physicians.

But  if  this  is  an  efficacious  sort  of  method,  how  can  they  recon-
die  it  with  the  &ct  that  of  all  that  die  in  a  year,  a  sixth  part  oi
the  whole  number  dies  under  them  of  inflammatory  affections,
as  their  own  tables  prove  I  Not  one  twelfth  of  these  would  have
died  had  they  not  Mien  into  such  sanguinary  hands,  had  they
been  btUkft  to  nature^  and  kept  away  &om  that  old  pernicious
art

Hundreds  and  thousands  more  die  miserably  every  year — ^the
most  promising  youths  of  the  country,  in  the  bloom  of  their  age
— of  wasting,  consumption  and  suppuration  of  Ihe  lungs !  You
have  their  death  on  your  consciences  I  for  is  there  one  among
you  that  has  not  laid  the  seeds  for  it  by  your  fine  mode  of  treat-
ment, by  your  senseless  bloodletting  and  your  antiphlogistic
appliances  in  a  previous  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  which  must
thereby  infallibly  turn  into  pulmonary  consumption,  and  prove
fatal?  This  irrational,  antipathic,  barbarous  mode  of  treating
inflanunation  of  the  lungs  by  numerous  venesections,  leeches
and  debilitating  substances  (termed  by  you  antiphlogistics),


74tt  AldJOTAJHT:

yf  1^  lcflti»  (ikenraae  lerer),  genenkl  Bw«illn]^  <iLiJW  i .
ai]f»fni»sfek«D  of  tbe  liU3^!  Tmlj  an  exoelkm.  piiuimtBC
^^oncrtlr  dMaxnrisqi  vbailw&le  the  flower  of  m«nt  m\ !
OftD  i^bai  be  cnXksd  evtiing,  eosixig  xstioDBlh'.  tfOBtaHHi  of

Qs  tbe  oliier  band,  ao  pstaeot  eared  by  bamoBcniirr  ii
nlib  v^xyidesf ol  rafttditj)  from  eren  tbe  moit
taon  i^  line  loxi^  viU  be  Icmnd  vbo  died  tberooGftr  of
mA  ffopgfmtafjn  of  liie  lun^  ibr  it  com  tbe  flBemm^:
ftial  iauflajnwartaopg  of  tbe  laii0  in  tbk  war  anlv.
liie  dnjo^eroos  sKflidd  ecmmKition  of  tbe  eiieiibaiiip
tose(l»er  wltb  the  wxomfunymg  paans,  by  meuff  of  b  isv*
bttt  appropruit^  internal  Tnodirinail  agents,  often  -witbiii  ilt
twentj'IciQr  boQia,  and  allova  tbe  patient^B  strengtb  ii>
tinaifeetod  by  avoiding  all  eracnatiotiB  of  blood  md  mD
litttting  antiphlogistic  remedief ;  Ibr  it  knows  idua  "die  ;pinB-
<;iaiia  of  tbe  aj>cient  icbool  do  not  jet  know,  and,  bIb!  do  na
widb  to  know,  tbat  violent  acate  inflammatiane  of  "Ae  cbeB  |bb£
of  otber  parta)  aie  nothing  but  exploaiana  of  an  fnraiittii  iiiaiiw
miaam  (paora)  that  liea  bid  in  tbe  inteiior  (no  one  fmt  ±nac
pHora  ever  geta  inflaiaination  of  the  limgE!)  and  it  know?  boir
thai,  after  isubiuing  the  inflamm&torr  exchezneni  of  xbf;  cmnilft-
tion,  it  ha«  to  take  care  that  the  psora  be  cured  wii^om  los  -d
time  by  meanis  of  appropriate  antipgonc  medicineB,  bo  xhai  t
iihall  not  e0tabli)$h  itJi  Heat  in  the  luugs  which  ii  can  bc*  eamk
<Jej$troy ;  and  thu»  the  homoeopathic  curer  of  the  acnle  puhnauaiT
infiammatir/n  may  all  the  more  readily  aooomplish,  sinoe  be  bv
not  waited  the  vital  forces  (so  indispensable  for  p^^ducing  ibe
re-action  to  the  autipsoric  remedy  to  be  employed)  bj  taj^pn^
uff  the  blood  and  by  anti jmthic  cooling  remedies,  as  u  mva'raih
'U/fvt  by  Qvt  aWypatliist.

Moreover  the  allopathist  does  not  treat  the  oti^r  diseases  of
ra|iid  course  (acute)  according  to  their  several  pecoliaritaes,  ae
the  homwopathist  does,  but  he  treats  them  aooording  to  the
pathological  denomination  introduced  in  the  old  schoo),  upon
one  and  the  same  plan  of  treatment  that  has  once  been  laid
down  in  the  book.  Thus  all  epidemic  intermittent  fevers,  diffier
they  ever  so  much  among  each  other,  are  not  cured  by  him
with  tbe  medicine  specifically  adapted  for  each  individual  inter
mittent  ^  it  are  invariably  merely  sujypressed  by  strong,

tl^  doses  of  cinchona  bark,  repeated  often  for


▲  WORD  OF  WARNING  TO  ALL  SICK  PERSONS.  741

weeks  together;  ttie  patient^  fiotvever,  does  not  get  weU;  by  this
process  he  indeed  loses  all  the  alternations  of  rigour  and  heat
(this  they  call  getting  well),  but  he  becomes  more  ill,  in  another
way  than  he  was  while  he  still  had  the  fever,  with  the  insidious
bark  disease  which  has  been  forced  upon  him,  and  which  often
lasts  for  years.

And  in  like  manner  these  physicians,  who  arrogate  to  them-
selves the  title  of  rational  practitioners,  have  in  their  books  ready-
made,  fixed  names  for  the  acute  diseases  that. attack  mankind,
either  singly  (sporadic)  or  generally  prevalent  (epidemic)  or
infectious  (contagious),  and  for  each  name  they  are  pleased  to
bestow  on  the  prevailing  disease  they  have  also  a  certain  defined
plan  of  treatment  (only  varied  from  time  to  time  to  suit  the
&shion),  which  this  fever,  that  is  oft^n  quite  unknown  or  that
iias  never  appeared  in  the  same  form,  must  be  content  with,
whether  it  do  good  or  harm.  Those  whom  a  giant's  constitu-
tion does  not  help  through  must  infallibly  succumb  under  such
treatment.

Very  differently  does  the  homoBopathist  act :  he  judges  of  the
prevailing  disease  according  to  its  peculiarities  and  phenomena
(its  individuality)  without  suffering  himself  to  be  led  astray  to  a
wrong  mode  of  treatment  by  any  pathological  systematic  nomen-
clature, and  by  attention  to  the  present  state,  complaints  and
ailments  of  the  patient,  he  generally,  by  means  of  the  suitable
(specific)  remedy,  brings  about  the  desired  recovery.

But  I  must  return  to  the  immeasurably  more  numerous,  long-
lasting  (chronic)  diseases  of  mankind,  which,  under  the  old
system  of  physic,  have  hitherto  made  the  world  a  very  vale  of
tears,  in  order  to  shew  how  infinitely  inferior,  in  such  diseases
also,  the  injurious  Allopathy  is  to  the  beneficent  Homoeopathy.

Without  knowing  (from  the  earliest  time  till  now)  the  true
and  only  cause  of  chronic  diseases,  Allopathy  violently  attacks
the  patients  with  a  number  of  medicines  given  in  large  doses  in
rapid  succession,  often  continued  for  a  long  time,  in  order —
agreeably  to  the  misapplied  saying  of  the  conmion  people,  "  much
helps  much  " — to  conquer  the  disease  by  physical  force.  And
by  the  power  of  what  medicines  do  they  seek  to  accomplish
this?  By  such  as  (although  the  old  school  physicians  alas  I  know
it  not)  invariably  have  powers  of  quite  a  different  kind,  and
produce  effects  on  the  human  health  of  quite  another  character
than  what  are  suitable  for  the  cure  of  the  disease.


7^  ALLOPATHY :

Hence  the  inedicineB  they  usuallj  employ  in  these  diseases
are  appropriately  termed  aUopatfUe  («ax«S«,  aUenOf  ad  rem  turn
pertinenliay  unsuitable)^  and  their  mode  of  treatment  is  justly
denominated  Allopathy.

But  how  did  it  happen  that  they  could  make  use  of  such
inappropriate  («aa«7«)  medicines,  to  the  injury  of  they  patients?
Evidently  firom  no  evil  design;  but  from  iffnorance  I  They  employ
them  b^sause  they  know  not  their  r^  properties  and  real
effects  upon  the  human  body;  and  nK^reover,  because  it  is  a
custom  introduced  among  them  to  administer  them  in  such
diseases,  because  it  stands  so  printed  in  their  books,  and  because
when  they  were  students  it  was  long  so  taught  them  ex  ea Aedm.

But  how  did  it  happen  that  in  the  employment  of  these  me*
dicmes  among  patiente  during  the  many  centuries  that  this  system
of  medicine  has  existed,  they  should  not  gradually  have  noted
in  these  medicinal  substances  what  peculiarities  each  individually
possessed,  and  what  were  the  effects  of  each  upon  the  health  of
man,  so  that  at  length  they  might  have  so  gathered  what  each
was  adapted  to  as  a  curative  agent  ?

To  this  it  will  suffice  to  reply,  that  these  physicians  of  the  old
school  possessed  and  do  still  possess  a  most  approved  method  of
guarding  and  preserving  themselves  from  the  knowledge  of  the
peculiar  mode  of  action  of  each  individual  medicine,  and  thereby
rendering  it  imperceptible  to  their  eyes  and  observation.

Every  one  of  their  young  physicians,  namely,  on  undergoing
his  examination  for  the  high  degree  of  Doctor  of  their  art,  must
prove  by  the  certificates  of  the  professors  that  he  has  diligently
attended  the  lectures  on  the  art  of  prescribing^  and  must  by  the
extempore  writing  of  prescriptions,  that  is  to  say,  of  recipes
composed  of  several  different  medicinal  substances  for  the  names  of
diseases  given  him  by  the  examiner  (like  contifinti),  demonstrate
that  he  is  perfect  master  of  the  noble  art,  essential  to  allopathy,  of
always  prescribing  for  the  patient,  lege  artis,  several  medicinal  in-
gredientSj  mingled  in  one  prescription,  and,  consequently,  of  care-
fully and  entirely  eschewing  the  employment  of  a  single  simple
medicinal  substance.

Thus  even  to  this  day  every  prescription  composed  of  several
out  dispute  an  allopathist,  one  of  the  many  thousands  belonging
to  the  unimprovable  old  school  of  physic !

Here  1  would  ask  my  readers  on  their  consciences  to  tell  me,
how  it  were  possible  that  these  physicians, although  during


A  WORD  OP  WARNINa  TO  ALL  SICK  PEBSONa  74ft

these  many  centuries  their  numbers  must  amoimt  to  millions,
could  detect  and  learn  the  peculiar  properties  of  each  of  the
single  medicinal  substances  while  constantly  using  such  mix*
tures  of  drugs?

If  we  should  give  one  of  the  mixtures  according  to  their  pre-
scription even  to  a  quite  healthy  person,  quite  free  from  all
morbid  symptoms,  would  we  from  the  effects  that  result  from
such  a  mixture,  even  though  it  should  consist  but  of  two  *  differ*
ent  ingredients,  ever  be  able  to  decide  with  certainty  which  of  the
affects  that  ensue  are  to  be  attributed  to  the  one,  which  to  the
other  ingredient  ? Never  1 — in  all  eternity,  never !

Now,  as  even  in  trying  a  mixture  of  only  two  different  medi-
cinal substances  upon  a  healthy  person^  we  can  never  satisfactorily
observe  the  special  effects  of  a  single  one  of  the  two  upon  the
human  health — since  the  mixture  can  only  manifest  a  middle
action  of  both  the  two  together ;  how,  I  should  like  to  know,
can  it  be  otherwise  than  quite  impossible  to  distinguish  the  pe-
culiar powers  and  special  action  of  each  of  the  several  ingre-
dients in  an  artistic  prescription,  when  it  is  given  to  patients,
that  is  to  say,  to  persons  already  suffering  from  a  number  of
alterations  of  health  ?

Who  can  fail  to  perceive  from  all  this,  that,  besides  that  the
physicians  of  the  old  school  never  seriously  set  about  making
experiments  with  simple  medicines  on  healthy  individuals — who
can  fail  to  perceive,  I  say,  that  they  all^  from  the  remotest  times
until  noWy  must  remain  up  to  the  present  day  perfectly  and  thorovghly
ignorant  of  the  countless^  special^  pure,  real  effects  and  powers  of
eoich  individual  medicine^  consequently  of  all  medicinal  substances  (if
we  except  the  few  most  palpable  phenomena  of  many  medicines,
that  they  display  even  when  mixed,  and  that  cannot  remain

^-^^— I  I I ■  I ■  II  J  J  , _  I  ■  Mil  ■  -^m ~~t

'  AooordiDg  to  that  old  so-called  art  of  mudicine,  eo  repugnant  to  oommoD  senae^
there  should  be  more  than  two,  at  least  three,  different  things  in  an  artistical  pre*
QM  of  such  prescriptions  foe  diseases,  may  be  deprived  of  all  chance  uf  ascertaining
which  of  the  difiiarent  ingredients  was  useful  or  which  did  harm,  and  may  also  never
Me  or  be  taught  by  experience  what  particular  effects  each  of  (he  several  ingredienta
of  the  prescription,  each  simple  medicinal  substance  therein  produces  on  the  human
health,  in  order  to  be  able  to  employ  it  with  certainty  in  diseapes.  Thus  a  bad  job
always  betrays  itself  by  this,  that  its  author  seeks  to  keep  us  in  the  dark.  When,
however,  now  and  then  the  conscience  of  the  good  gentlemen  was  troublesome,  when
of  late  a  ray  of  the  homosopathic  truth  struck  upon  their  eyes,  we  have  seen  theot
put  but  two  ingredients  in  their  prescriptions,  while  they  asserted  that  they  now
eternity,  never  1


744  ALLOPATHY :

concealed  even  from  ordinary  persons,  e.  9.,  that  senna-leaves
porge,  opium  stupifies,  mercury  causes  saliyation,  ipecacuanha
excites  vomiting,  cinchona  bark  suppresses  the  type  of  inter
mittent  fevers,  and  a  few  more  of  the  same  kind.)
.  Thts^  therefore^  is  an  art  the  professors  0/ which  have  and  with  90
have  no  knoiuledge  ofaM  their  tools  I

Among  the  very  meanest  of  arts  there  does  not  exist  one  such
as  this  I  The  medical  art  of  the  old  school  alone  gives  an  un-
heard of  example  of  the  kind !

And  yet  these  gentlemen  boast  so  loudly,  notwithstanding
their  incredible  irrationality,  of  being  the  only  rational  physi-
cians, and,  in  complete  ignorance  of  the  original  cause  of  all  the
innumerable  chronic  diseases  not  of  a  venereal  character,  of
alone  being  able  to  perform  cures  of  the  cause  I  Perform  them
— ^with  what  ?  With  tools  whose  pure  actions  are  quite  unknown
from  a  special  knowledge  of  which  they  have  introduced  into
their  system,  as  I  have  shewn,  the  most  effectual  arrangements
for  preserving  themselves  ?

Was  there  ever  a  more  ridiculous  pretension?  a  more  re-
cherche piece  of  stupidity  ?  a  more  complete  negation  of  a  cura-
tive system  ?

Of  this  stamp,  dear  sick  people,  are  all  the  ordinary  physicians.
Of  such  alone  do  the  medical  authorities  of  all  civilized  lands
consist.  These  alone  sit  on  the  medical  jur  gment-seat,  and  con-
demn all  that  is  better,  w^hich,  whatever  advantage  it  may  be
of  to  mankind,  is  opposed  to  their  antiquated  system  I  *  These
alone  are  the  superintendents  and  directors  of  the  countless  hos-
pitals and  infirmaries,  filled  with  hundreds  and  thousands  of
patients  pining  in  vain  for  health  I  Of  such  alone  are  the  body
physicians  of  princes  and  ministers  of  state.  Of  such  only  are
the  ordinary  profeasors  of  medicine  in  all  universities !  With
such  routine  practitioners  alone,  of  great  and  small  degree,  do
our  towns  swarm,  from  the  celebrities  who  knock  up  two  pairs
of  horses  daily  in  swift-rolling  gilded  chariots  in  order  to  pay
visits  a  couple  of  minutes'  duration  to  sixty,  eighty,  or  more
patients,  down  to  the  crowd  of  low  practitioners,  who,  in  worn-

^^^— — — ^"  ■  I  ■■  »■  ^^^^^  11  I  1 ■ ■■»  ■-■  »^w^—i ^1^  ■  ■ ■ ■  ■  ■■■!-■■  .11  I  I  ■  ■  M  I  — ^^fc^

'  What  woDder  i»  it  that  they,  with  insolent  pride  in  their  principles  transmitted
to  them  from  the  dark  middle  ages,  zealously  strive  to  suppress,  by  the  worldly  ann
of  the  lawj^ivcr  whose  favoured  huuse-physicianit  they  are,  the  new  medical  art«
which  by  its  deeds  of  cure  surpasses  all  their  lut^llcol  ^romiies,  and  leaves  their  anti-
quated system  of  treatment  fxt  behind !


A  WOBD  OF  WABKDIO  TO  ALL  SICK  PEBSONS.  746

Out  clothes,  must  exert  their  legs  to  pester  their  patients  with
fiequent  visits  and  numerous  prescriptions,  with  but  scanty  re-
numeration  for  their  fruitless  and  hiurtful  efforts,  which  are  cer-
tainly much  better  paid  in  the  case  of  the  high  and  mighty  ones
of  their  tribe.

If  this  innumerable  host  of  doctors  of  the  old  school  were
fnereij  useless,  and  merely  not  profitable  to  their  patients,  even
that  would  be  bad  enough ;  but  they  are  unspeakably  hurtful
and  ruinous  to  sick  mankind.  Without  knowing  it,  without  for
an  instant  dreaming  of  it — without  even  willing  it,  they  produce
incalculable  mischief  (although  in  chronic  diseases  this  is  not  so
obvious)  by  their  furious  assaults  upon  the  patients  with  large
doses  of  powerful,  almost  invariably  unsuitable  drugs,  which
they  continue  often  for  a  great  length  of  time,  repeating  them
daily  (often,  indeed,  several  times  a-day),  and  when  this  na-
turally does  no  good,  they  continue  them  in  increasing  quan-
tities, and  thus  they  not  unfirequently  pimish  the  patient  without
cessation  for  years,  now  with  this  and  now  with  that  powerful
medicinal  mixture,  unless  they  procure  for  him  (and  for  them-
selves too)  a  kind  of  respite  in  the  fine  season,  which  they  term
the  bath-season)  by  sending  him  to  some  mineral  water  or  other,
or  still  better  to  two  in  succession,  which  may  just  then  happen
to  be  the  most  feshionable,  ordering  him  either  to  swallow  daily
no  inconsiderable  quantity,  or  to  take  daily  at  least  one  bath  of
several  minutes'  duration,  for  weeks  together.  And  yet  each
draught  of  a  mineral  water,  and  each  bath  of  it  that  is  taken  is
a  strong  dose  of  a  strong  medicine  !

What  will  the  reflecting  public  say  when  they  learn  that  the
physicians  of  the  old  school  of  medicine  have  never  in  twenty-
five  centuries  learned  to  know,  that  every  medicinal  substance,
almost  without  exception,  taken  in  one  single  dose,  requires  se-
veral daySj  sometimes  even  weeks  to  expend  its  full  action  on
the  human  body,  as  innumerable  careful  observations,  expe-
riences, and  experiments  have  taught  and  satisfactorily  proved
to  the  accurate  observer  of  nature,  the  homoeopathic  physician  ?
What  will  the  hitherto  deluded  world  say  to  this,  that  the  phy-
sicians of  the  old  school,  as  a  proof  that  they  yet  know  nothing
respecting  this  most  indispensable  truth,  still  go  on  to  this  day,
giving  their  drugs  to  patients  day  after  day  in  several  doses  a-
day,  each  dose  of  which  is  disturbed  in  its  action  by  the  one  that
speedily  follows  it,  so  that  from  their  ignorance  no  dose  is  al-
lowed one  hundredth  part  of  the  time  requii'cd  for  the  comple-


746  ALLOPATHY :

I

tion  of  its  action — an  oyer-loading  of  the  body  outside  and  in
with  the  same  medicinal  mixtoi^Twhere&om  only  injoiy  to  the
health  can  be  effected,  but  never  anything  good,  appropriate^
beneficial  I

The  refiective,  unprejudiced  reader  wUl  find  a  difficulty  in
solving  the  riddle  of  how  in  all  the  world  the  great  crowd  of
physicians  could  for  so  many  centuries  stick  to  such  a  disastrouB
treatment  of  chronic  patients?

The  ordinary  hurtful  mode  of  treatment  of  the  old  school
physicians  here  alluded  to  would  be  incredible,  did  it  not  with
them  depend  on  the  grossest  ignorance  of  the  true  process  of
nature,  I  mean  of  what  experience  shews  to  be  the  relation  be-
tween the  substances  called  medicines  and  the  human  body,  that
is  to  say,  did  it  not  depend  even  at  the  present  day  on  the
wretched  indefensible  superstition  of  these  men  (call^  phyai*
cians),  thai  drugs,  even  in  large,  oft-repeated  andincreased  doaeSj  are
one  and  all  per  se  and  absolutely  ir^aU  cases  wholesome  things.

The  smallest  approach  to  accuracy  in  observation,  had  they
been  capable  of  it,  would  have  convinced  them  that  this  was
radically  false,  and  that  the  reverse  of  it  only  was  true,  namely :
thai  all  things  thai  can  he  termed  medicinal  are,  per  se,  hurtfvi
substances,  injurious  in  general  to  the  heaiUh  of  man,  which  can  only
become  wholesome  where  ecuch  exactly  corresponds  in  its  injurious
power  to  the  case  of  disease  specially  adapted  for  it,  and  where  it  is
given  in  appropriate  dose  and  at  theproper  time.

This  truth,  so  indispensable  to  enable  us  to  cure,  I  was  the
first  to  declare  to  the  world.  The  allopathists,  taken  by  surprise,
seemed  at  first  to  admit  it,  just  as  if  they  had  long  been  fiuniliar
with  it ;  but  the  result  shewed  that  they  still  remained  enchained
in  their  own  blindness,  and  that  this  heaven-bom  truth  could
find  no  entrance  into  their  mechanical  heads.

Had  it  been  otherwise,  it  had  been  impossible  that  they  could
persist  to  the  present  day  in  their  quackish  treatment  of  chronic
diseases,  without  endeavouring  to  ascertain  the  peculiar  powers
of  each  several  medicine  in  altering  man's  health,  in  cramming
their  chronic  patients,  to  their  destruction,  with  a  variety  of
these  unknown  drugs  in  admixture,  in  giving  large,  frequent
and  generally  increasing  doses  of  these  important  substances,
continued  for  a  great  length  of  time,  happen  what  might,  if  they
had  known  or  appreciated  and  kept  in  view  this  incontrovertible
truth :  that  medicines  are  in  themselves  hurtful  substances,  in-
jurious in  general  to  the  health  of  man,  and  can  only  prove


A  WOBD  OP  WAENING  TO  ALL  SICK  PERSONS.  747

beneficial  where  each  exactly  oorresponds  in  its  injurious  effects
to  a  case  of  disease  specially  adapted  to  it,  and  where  they  are
given  in  appropriate  dose  and  at  the  right  time.

The  mischievous  effects  to  chronic  patients  that  lie  in  this
their  blind  treatment,  in  this  overloading  of  them  with  strong
unknown  drugs,  will  be  perfectly  obvious  to  every  reflecting,
unprejudiced  person,  who  knows  that  every  medicine  is  a  disease^
creating  substance^  consequently  every  powerful  medicine  taken  day
after  day  in  several  and  increasing  doses  will  in&llibly  make
any,  even  healthy  persons,  ill, — at  first  obviously  and  perceptibly
00,  but  when  longer  continued  their  hurtful  action  is  less  appa-
rent,* btit  all  the  more  profoundly  penetrating^  and  productive  of
permanent  injury,  in  this  way,  because  the  ever  active-life-
sustaining  power  silently  endeavours  to  ward  off  the  injury  with
which  these  frequent  assaults  threaten  life  itself,  by  internal
eounter-operations  by  means  of  the  construction  of  invisible  pro-
tections and  barriers  against  the  life-invadiug  medicinal  enemy,
— ^by  the  formation  of  morbid  alterations  in  the  organs,  in  order
to  exalt  the  function  of  one,  and  render  it  intolerably  sensitive
and  hence  painful,  and  the  others  again  insensible  and  even  in-
durated,  whilst  it  deprives  the  other  parts  (that  in  their  healthy
i^te  were  easily  excited  to  action)  of  their  irritability,  or  even
paralyses  them ;  in  short  it  brings  about  as  many  corporeal  and
mental  morbid  alterations  as  were  requisite  for  warding  off  the
danger  to  life  from  the  hostile  attacks  of  the  constantly  reiter-
ated medicinal  doses ;  that  is  to  say,  it  effects  in  secret  innimier-
able  disorganizations  and  abnormal  organizations,  so  that  a  per*
sistent  permanent  derangement  of  the  health  of  the  body  and
mind  is  the  consequence, — ^for  which  there  cannot  be  a  more
appropriate  appellation  than  cYiiomc  medicinal  disease — an  inter*
nal  and  external  crippling  of  the  health,  whereby,  if  the  power-
fill  drug  have  only  been  used  some  months,  the  nature  of  the
individual  is  so  permanently  altered  that  even  should  all  medi-
cine thereafter  be  discontinued,  and  the  system  be  subjected  to
no  further  loss  of  humours  and  forces,  yet  this  morbid  metamor-
phosis in  the  interior  cannot  be  again  removed  nor  re-tnms*
formed  into  health  and  the  normal  condition  by  the  vital  force

under  two  or  three  years.

'  -

I  *  Least  of  all  perceptible  if  the  dosea  be  not  increased,  in  which  caae  the  allopa-
thic physician  seeks  to  persuade  himself  and  his  patient  by  saying,  *'his  nature  has
become  habituated  to  this  medicine,  therefore  the  dose  of  it  must  be  increased," — a
radically  wrong  notion,  leading  to  the  patienCs  mm  1


748  ALLOPATHY :

Thus,  for  instance,  the  vital  force  of  our  organism,  that  is
always  exercising  a  preservative  function,  protects  the  sensitive
parts  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  of  the  pavier  (as  also  of  the  work-
er among  fire,  the  glassblower  and  the  like)  against  the  scratch-
ing and  lacerating  sharp  angles*  and  points  of  the  paving  stoneS)
with  a  hard,  homy  covering,  to  protect  the  skin  with  its  nerves^
blood-vessels  and  muscles,  from  being  wounded  or  destoyed.  But
should  the  man  fix>m  this  time  forth  cease  to  handle  rough  stones,
and  take  nothing  but  soft  things  in  his  hands,  at  least  a  year
must  elapse  ere  the  vital  force  (for  no  surgical  or  other  art  can
do  this)  brings  about  the  removal  of  this  homy  skin,  which  was
formerly  constructed  by  it  on  the  workman's  hands^  for  their
protection  against  the  continued  action  of  the  rough  stones.

Equally  protective  does  our  preservative  power  exert  itself  to
rescue  life  at  least,  if  it  can  do  no  more,  by  the  formation  of  or*
ganic  and  dynamic  barriers  in  the  interior,  against  the  injurious
and  inimical  assaults  of  long-continued  doses  of  strong  allo-
pathic medicines,  that  is,  by  the  establishment  of  permanent  al-
terations of  our  organisms,  which  always  form  a  persistent  medi-
cinal disease  that  often  lasts  for  years,  that  is  not  capable  of
being  cured  and  removed  by  any  human  art,  and  that  can  only
be  changed  back  again  to  the  normal  state  in  several  years  by
the  vital  force  itself  provided  all  medicines  are  discontinued  and
the  requisite  strength  of  constitution  still  remains.

If,  therefore,  a  psoric  patient  suffering  from  chronic  non- vene-
real affections,  in  place  of  being  cured  homoeopathically  in  a
gentle,  rapid  and  permanent  manner,  is  assailed  by  physicians
of  the  old  school  by  the  long-continued  use  of  a  variety  of  strong
drug?,  incapable  of  removing  the  chronic  miasm,  as  the  allo-
pathic medicines  are,  and,  as  usually  happens,  given  in  increas-
ing doses  during  a  long  period,  as  is  the  case  in  all  their  ordina-
ry modes  of  treatment,  we  may  readily  conceive  into  what  a
sad  and  at  length  incurable  state  he  must  fall  by  such  senseless
attacks  on  his  system,  and  how  relentlessly  he  must  be  assailed
in  order  that,  without  the  very  slightest  diminution  of  his  origi-
nal psoric  malady,  permanent  organic  malformations  and  changes
of  the  finest,  most  delicate  parts  of  the  organism,  of  those  parts
most  indispensible  for  life  and  well-being,  may  be  developed,
and,  as  a  consequence  of  them,  new,  permanent  bark,  opium,
mercurial,  iodine,  prussic-acid,  arsenical,  valerian,  foxglove,  and
other  nameless  chronic  medicinal  diseases,  which  all  unite  and
become  fused  (complicated)  into  one  many-headed,  intolerable


A  WORD  OF  WARimrO  TO  ALL  SICK  PERSONS.  749

monster  of  disease,  for  which  there  is  and  can  be  no  remedy  on
earth,  no  antidote,  no  restorative  medicines  in  nature.

I^  in  addition  to  such  bungling  treatment  to  which  the  name
of  rational  is  applied,  powerful  debilitating  practices  are  employ-
ed, as  is  usually  the  case  when  the  old  school  physician  ima-
gines the  disease  to  lie  in  some  corruption  of  the  blood  (dyscra-
da)  that  must  be  removed,  or  in  fiill-bloodedness  (plethora),
(such  treatment  he  terms  treatment  of  the  cause),  and  he  henoe
from  time  to  time  taps  off  the  blood  (wherein  the  life  of  man
chiefly  resides)  by  venesections  and  leeches,  or  reduces  the  sys-
tem by  repeated  warm  baths,  or  when  he,  in  his  efforts  for  years
to  expel  an  imaginary  morbific  substance  (the  favourite  matter
of  the  material  mind  of  allopathic  physicians),  robs  the  diseased
body  and  utterly  wastes  its  most  nutritive  juices  with  so-called
mild,  blood-purifying  (?)  laxatives,  then  these  insidious  medi-
cinal diseases  produced  secundum  artem  by  such  admirable
modes  of  treatment,  become,  on  account  of  this  pitiless  robbery
of  the  vital  force,  so  incurable,  that  recovery  is  not  to  be  thought
of,  and  a  miserable  death  can  alone  releal^e  the  patient  from  the
maltreatment  of  his  physicians  and  firom  his  nameless  torments.

Be  not  too  anxious,  I  advise  you,  to  insist  on  the  dissection
of  the  corpses  of  those  you  have  done  to  death  I  You  would
not  do  it  did  you  know  what  you  thereby  revealed  to  him  who
knows  the  truth  I  Besides  some  rare  congenital  malformations,
and  perchance  some  results  of  the  deceased's  dissipation,  what
of  an  abnormal  character  do  you  encounter,  that  is  not  chiefly
the  product  of  your  injurious  operations,  of  your  medical  igno-
rance and  your  therapeudc  sins  of  omission  and  commission  ?
There  is  displayed  not  what  vxis  present  before  your  treatment,  as
you  would  fain  persuade  the  relatives,  hut  what  was  produced  by
your  treatment — the  incurability  of  the  deceased  was  rwt  before  but
after  your  treatment.  It  avails  you  nothing,  that  you  thereby
gladly  take  the  opportunity  of  making  a  display  of  your  subtle
anatomical  terminological  learning,  neither  can  it  be  concealed
from  those  who  have  any  knowledge,  that  this  is  no  test  of  abili-
ty to  cure.  The  result  of  such  autopsies  is  not  the  enriching  of
pathological  anatomy,  but  the  revelation  of  hideous  therapeutic
anatomy,  to  your  disgrace — in  spite  of  all  your  plausible  sophis-
tries!

But  even  should  these  last  mentioned  debilitating  processes

in  the  treatment  of  chronic  (psoric)  diseases  have  been  avoided,
yet  the  most  perfect^  imaginable  healing  art  can  never  remove


760  ALLOPATHT :

these  chronic  mediciiial  diseases  produced  firom  bad  treatment  by
the  long-continued  use  of  large  doses  of  strong  medicines  un-
suitable for  the  disease,  nor  indeed  those  that  are  developed  by
a  single  simple  medicament  employed  for  a  length  of  time  in
frequent)  large  doses;  for*  where  are  remedies  to  be  found  that
can  undo  the  organic  mischief  that  has  been  affected  ?  But  stUl
less  can  antidotes  be  thought  of  for  persistent  (chronic)  maladies^
the  consequence  of  medicinal  mixtures.  It  is  manifestly  impos-
sible for  the  very  best  healing  art  to  remove  such  vital  injuries^
for  as  certainly  as  the  preservative  power  alone  can  produce  in
us  organic  permanent  malformations  and  alterations  for  our  pro
tection  and  delivery,  be  it  from  the  chronic  miasms^  or  the  in-
imical attacks  of  large,  long-continued  doses  of  the  strong,  im-
suitable  medicines  of  the  ^opathists,  so  certain  is  it  that  this
life-preserving  power  alone  can  again  remove  these  malforma-
tions and  alterations  in  our  internal  parts  that  were  first  pro-
duced by  itself,  and  restore  again  the  normal  state,  but  it  can
only  do  this  after  years,  and  provided  the  vital  forces  still
suffice.  *

It  only  in  the  case  of  a  very  robust,  undebilitated,  youthful
constitution,  and  under  other  &vourable  circumstances,  that  it  is
possible  for  the  vital  force  (alone),  gradually  (in  two,  three,  four
years)  to  remove  the  organic  degenerations  which  itself  toil-
somely erected  to  ward  off  the  attacks  of  inimical  medicinal
forces,  and  to  restore  the  healthy  state,  provided  the  psora  that
still  remains  at  the  root  of  the  evil  be  at  the  same  time  homoeo-
pathically  cured,  for  this  can  never  be  overcome,  never  extin-
guished by  our  vital  force  alone,  and  still  less  by  the  senseless
bungling  treatment  of  allopathy  that  plumes  itself  upon  its
superlative  wisdom.

But  if  the  patient  be  already  advanced  in  years,  if  his  spirits
be  depressed  by  sorrow,  vexation,  fear  or  want,  or  if  in  addition
he  has  been  weakened  by  venesections,  leechings,  purgations
and  the  like,  he  can  look  for  nothing  with  certainty  but  the  sure
advance  of  death — ^the  inevitable  lot  of  those  who  can  boast  of
having  employed  many  of  the  most  distinguished  physicians  of
the  old  school  and  a  variety  of  the  mineral  waters,  foolishly


f ; : : ; : -~

'  Those  intemal  malformations,  abDormal  organizations  and  disorganicatiaiis  pro-
duced by  nature  for  our  protection  against  the  yiolenoe  of  chronic  miasmatic  disease
(psora),  it  can  most  rapidly  remove  and  reconstruct  with  the  assistance  of  the  cure  of
the  psora  by  homceopathy,  but  those  caused  by  the  ii\juriou8  misuse  of  medicines,  it
has  much  more  difficulty  in  curing.


A  WORD  OF  WARNING  TO  ALL  SICK  PERSONS.  751

Subjectively  it  may  be  a  more  cruel  deed  to  stab  one's  enemy
in  the  back  firom  revenge,  but  objectively  it  is  more  cruel  to  un-
dennine  the  system  of  a  patient  who  sought  our  aid,  and  who
might  easily  and  certainly  have  been  relieved  from  his  natural
disease  by  the  appropriate  remedies,  so  that  life  at  length  be-
comes intolerable  to  him,  by  secret  instruments  of  destruction
(wrong  medicines,  in  scarcely  legible  prescriptions,  forced  upon
him  for  half  or  whole  years  together,  in  several,  often  increasing,
doses  daily),  so  that  he  must  hopelessly  and  irremediably  drag
out  his  wretched  existence  in  constant  misery,  without  having
the  power  to  die,  and  envying  the  poniarded  Ck)rsican  his  rapid
death.

At  the  contemplation  of  this  heart-breaking  fact,  of  how  dif-
ficult is  it  for  a  patient  to  escape  &om  the  destructive  hands  of
those  quacks  who  foolishly  pride  themselves  on  their  old  Mse
art,  and  make  a  mighty  display  of  incomprehensible  pedantry,
who  lie  in  wait  for  customers  in  order  to  entice  them  into  their
toils  by  all  manner  of  quaddsh  expedients,  I  cannot  forbear  firom
aftectionately  beseeching  my  modest  colleagues,  the  important,
philanthrophic  homoeopathists  (0/  TnuUa  mecum pejoraqud pasai
durale  et  vosmet  rebus  servate  secundis/)  to  suffer  for  a  short
time  the  unmerited  pressure  firom  above,  but  in  the  meantime
not  to  waste  our  divine  art,  so  infidlibly  serviceable  in  natural
unspoiled  diseases,  on  those  irremedial  patients  who  have  been
destroyed  to  their  very  inmost  marrow,  not  to  receive  at  any
price  those  patients  who  have  been  injured  to  the  verge  of  in-
curability by  the  allopathic  exterminating  art,  nor,  by  \mder*
taking  such  impossibilities,  to  expose  themselves  to  the  scornful
laughter  of  the  renowned  physicians  of  the  old  school,  who
have  already  taken  the  greatest  pains  to  make  them  utterly  in-
curable for  hard  cash.  First  let  them  be  again  restored  by  these
high-titled  destroyers  of  health  to  the  former  state  of  natural
disease  they  were  in  before  these  medical  onslaughts  on  their
life  were  perpetrated,  if  they  are  able  to  do  it  1

On  the  contrary  I  beseech  my  homoeopathic  colleagues  to  be
contented  for  the  present  with  patients  who  have  not  been  de-
stroyed by  the  physicians  of  the  old  school,  even  though  they
be  the  poorest  among  the  people,  and  laden  with  the  most  severe,
chronic,  natural  diseases,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  the  smallest
remuneration  for  their  labour,  if  these  poor  people  can  prove  to
them  that  their  poverty  has  prevented  them  applying  to  other
(allopathic)  physicians,  and  consequently  being  ruined  by  im-


762  ALLOPATHY :

proper  drugs.  Though  their  income  may  be  small  they  will  yet
have  the  unspeakable  joy  of  certainly  and  rapidly  re-establish-
ing their  patients'  health,  and  thus  putting  flaunting  allopathy
to  shame,  which  is  incapable  of  curing,  but  can  only  aggravate
diseases  and  render  them  incurable  with  a  wilderness  of  drugs —
as  a  warning  to  the  befooled  publia  The  homoeopathic  medi-
cal art  can  alone  transform  into  health,  as  if  by  magic,  all
natural  diseases  not  ruined  by  allopathic  art,  provided  there  re-
main a  tolerable  amoimt  of  vital  force,  and  this  it  does  with-
out prating  about  rationality  and  treatment  of  the  cause.

Before  homoeopathy,  that  gentle,  safe  healing  art  so  consonant
with  nature,  was  discovered,  no  well  disposed  and  honest  phi-
lanthropist could  forbear  pitying  the  innumerable  crowd  of  the
old-school  physicians,  as  they  groped  about  in  midnight  dark-
ness with  their  dreadfully  learned  ignorance,  whilst  their  zeal
in  treating  natural  diseases,  in  place  of  serving  to  benefit  them
or  bringing  about  the  desired  cure,  only  ruined  them  or  render-
ed them  incurable. For  who  among  them  could  unravel  the
confusion  of  so  many  (wouldbe  profoundly  learned)  baseleas
hypothetical  doctrines  and  unnatural  therapeutic  maxims  and
modes  of  treatment  with  drugs  whose  peculiar  action  was  un-
known, given  in  senseless  mixtures  and  repeated  large  doses  ? —
who  among  them  could  separate  the  fidse  from  the  true,  and  re-
duce their  mode  of  practice  to  a  method  of  treatment  that  should
be  consonant  with  nature,  and  lastingly  beneficial  ? They  were
then  fully  as  much  to  be  pitied  as  those  patients  whom  they
injured  and  continue  to  injure  to  an  infinite  degree  with  their
antiquated  unimproved  method. But  since  the  light  of  the
doctrine  that  is  alone  consonant  with  nature,  of  restoring  health
and  well-being  rapidly  and  certainly  in  unspoiled,  natural  dis-
eases by  small  quantities  of  properly  prepared,  mild  specific
medicines,  has  appeared,  and  has  shone  throughout  Europe  in
marvellous  deeds,  those  who  paid  no  regard  to  it  but  condemn-
ed and  persecuted  it  are  not  to  be  pitied ;  they  deserve  for  their
obstinate  adherence  to  their  antiquated  homicidal  mode  of  treat-
ment naught  but  contempt  and  abhorrence,  and  unprejuclicod
history  will  brand  their names  with  a  stigma  on  account  of
their  scornful  rejection  of  the  real  aid  which  they  might  have
afforded  their  much-to-be-pitied  patients,  had  they  not  impious-
ly closed  their  eyes  and  ears  against  the  beneficent  truth  1


OVBB  ASD  PBBVBirriOK  OF  THK  ASIATIC  CHOLERA. 768


CAUSE  USD  PREVENTM  OF  THE  ASIATIC  CHOLERA.'


jPreliminary.

A  receipt  has  been  given  to  the  world,  which  proved  so  effi-
cacious in  IHinaburg  in  the  Asiatic  cholera,  that  of  ten  patients
but  one  died.  The  chief  ingredient  is  camphor^  which  is  in
ten  times  the  proportion  of  the  other  ingredients.  But  not  a
tenth — ^nay,  not  one  in  a  hundred  of  the  patients  would  have
died  had  the  other  ingredients,  which  were  but  injurious  and
obstructing,  and  the  venesection  been  left  out,  and  the  camphor
been  given  alone,  and  always  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  dis-
eaae^  for  it  is  only  when  given  abme,  and  at  the  first  invasion  of  the
dia^zae  that  it  is  so  marveUously  usefuL  But  if  physicians  come,
as  usual,  too  late  to  the  patient,  when  the  fevourable  time  for  em-
ploying the  camphor  is  past,  and  the  second  stage  has  already
set  in,  when  camphor  is  useless,  then  they  may  use  it  in  vain ;
Aeir  patients  will  die  under  its  employment  Hence  every  one,
the  instant  any  of  his  friends  take  ill  of  cholera,  must  himself
immediately  treat  them  with  camphor^  and  not  wait  for  medical
aid,  which,  even  if  it  were  good,  would  generally  come  too  late.
I  have  received  many  communications  from  Hungary  from  non-
medical persons,  who  have  restored  their  friends,  as  if  by  magic,
by  giving  camphor  the  instant  they  became  ill

Where  the  cholera  first  appears,  it  usually  comes  on  in  the
commencement  in  its  first  stage  (with  tonic  spasmodic  charac-
ter) ;  the  strength  of  the  patient  suddenly  sinks,  he  cannot  stand
upright,  his  expression  is  altered,  the  eyes  sunk  in,  the  face
bluish  and  icy  cold,  as  also  the  hands,  with  coldness  of  the  rest
of  the  body ;  hopeless  discouragement  and  anxiety,  with  dread
of  sufibcation,  is  visible  in  his  looks;  half  stupifled  and  insen-
sible, he  moans  or  cries  in  a  hollow,  hoarse  tone  of  voice,  with-
out making  ^ny  distinct  complaints,  except  when  asked ;  burn-
ing in  the  stomach  and  gullet,  and  cramp-pain  in  the  calves  and
other  muscles ;  on  touching  the  precordial  region  he  cries  out ;
he  has  no  thirst,. no  sickness,  no  vomiting  or  purging.

lu  the  first  stage  camphor  gives  rapid  relief  but  the  patient's
friends  must  themselves  employ  it,  as  this  stage  soon  ends  either
in  death  or  in  the  second  stage,  which  is  more  difiicult  to  be

*  From  the  Archiv.f,  horn,  Heilk^  yd.  zi,  1881.
• 48


754  CURB  AND  PBEVEKTION  OF  THK  ASUXIQ CHOLERA.

cured,  and  not  with  camphor.  In  the  first  stage  accordingly,  the
patient  must  get,  as  often  as  possible  (at  least  every  five  minutes)
a  drop  of  spirit  of  camphor  (made  with  one  ounce  of  camphor
to  twelve  of  alcohol),  on  a  lump  of  sugar  or  in  a  spoonful  of
water.  Some  spirit  of  camphor  must  be  taken  in  the  hollow  of
the  hand  and  rubbed  into  the  skin  of  the  arms,  legs,  and  chest
of  the  patient ;  he  may  also  get  a  clyster  of  half-a-pint  of
warm  water,  mingled  with  two  full  t^easpoonfuls  of  spirit  of
camphor,  and  &om  time  to  time  some  camphor  may  be  allowed
to  evaporate  on  a  hot  iron,  so  that  if  the  mouth  should  be  closed
by  trismus,  and  he  can  swallow  nothing,  he  may  draw  in  enough
of  camphor  vapour  with  his  breath.

The  quicker  all  this  is  done  at  the  first  onset  of  the  first  stage
of  the  disease,  the  more  rapidly  and  certainly  will  the  patient
recover;  ofbeu  in  a  couple  of  hours,'  warmth,  strength,  con-
sciousness, rest  and  sleep  return,  and  he  is  saved.

If  this  period  of  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  so  favour-
able to  recovery  and  speedy  cure,  by  the  above  indicated  em-
ployment of  camphor,  has  been  neglected,  then  things  look
worse ;  then  camphor  is  no  longer  serviceable.  There  are  more-
over cases  of  cholera,  especially  in  northern  regions,  where  this
first  stage,  with  its  tonic  spasmodic  character,  is  hardly  observ-
able, and  the  disease  passes  instantly  into  the  second  stage  of
clonic  spasmodic  character ;  frequent  evacuation  of  watery  fluid,
mixed  with  whitish,  yellowish,  or  reddish  flakes,  and,  along
with  insatiable  thirst  and  loud  rumbling  in  the  belly,  violent
vomiting  of  large  quantities  of  the  same  fluid,  with  increased
agitation,  groaning  and  yawning,  icy  coldness  of  the  whole  body,
even  of  the  tongue,  and  marbled  blue  appearance  of  the  arms,
hands  and  face,  with  flxed  sunken  eyes,  diminution  of  all  the
senses,  slow  puJse,  excessively  painful  cramp  in  the  calves,  and
spasms  of  the  limbs.  In  such  cases  the  administiation  of  a  drop
of  camphor  spirit  every  five  minutes,  must  only  be  continued  so
long  as  decided  benelit  is  observable  (which  with  a  remedy  of
such  rapid  action  as  camphor,  manifests  itself  within  a  quarter
of  an  hour).  If  in  such  cases  decided  benefit  is  not  soon  per-
ceived, then  no  time  must  be  lost  in  administering  the  remedy
for  the  second  stage.


*  Tbere  were  casoB  of  patients  for  whom  camphor  had  not  been  employed,  who
hail  apparently  died  in  the  fir^t  stage  and  were  laid  out  for  dead,  in  whom  a  finger
was  rieeii  lo  move  ;  in  these  some  caniphor-.spirit  mLxed  with  oil  and  introduced  inu>
the  moutli,  recalled  tie  appaiently  dead  again  to  life.


CUBB  AND  P&SY£NTION  OF  TH£  AaiATIC  CHOLERA. 755

The  patieDt  is  to  get  one  or  two  globules  of  the  finest  prepa-
ration of  copper^  (prepared  fix>m  metallic  copper  in  the  mode
thus  cuprum  ^^  X,  moistened  with  water,  and  introduced  into
his  mouth  every  hour  or  every  half-hour,  until  the  vomiting  and
purging  diminish,  and  warmth  and  rest  are  restored.  But  noth-
ing else  at  all  must  be  given  beside ;  no  other  medicine,  no  herb
tea,  no  baths,  no  blisters,  no  fumigation,  no  venesection,  &c.,
otherwise  the  remedy  will  be  of  no  avail.  Similar  good  effects
result  from  the  administration  of  as  small  a  portion  of  white
hellebore  {veratrum  dlhum^  ^°®  X) ;  but  the  preparation  of  copper
is  much  to  be  preferred,  and  is  more  serviceable,  and  sometimes
a  single  dose  is  sufficient,  which  is  allowed  to  act  without  a
second  being  given,  as  long  as  the  patient's  state  goes  on
improving.*

The  wishes  of  the  patient  of  all  kinds  are  only  to  be  indulged
in  moderation.  Sometimes,  when  aid  is  delayed  many  hours,
or  other  and  improper  remedies  have  been  administered,  the  pa-
tient fiJls  into  a  sort  of  typhoid  state,  with  delirium.  In  this
case,  bryonia  ^  X,  alternately  with  rhus  tax.  ^  X,  proves  of
eminent  service.

The  above  preparation  of  copper,  together  with  good  and
moderate  diet,  and  proper  attention  to  cleanliness,  is  the  most
certain  preventive  and  protective  remedy ;  those  in  health  should
take,  once  every  week,  a  small  globule  of  it  {cupr.  ®  X)  in  the
morning  &sting,  and  not  drink  anything  immediately  after-
wards, but  this  should  not  be  done  until  the  cholera  is  in  the
locality  itself,  or  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  health  of  the  indi-
vidual will  not  be  in  the  least  disturbed  by  this  dose.  I  shall
not,  but  any  other  homoeopathic  practitioner  may,  tell  where
the  above  medicines  may  be  procured,  excepting  the  camphor,
which,  like  the  alcohol,  may  be  had  at  every  chemist's  shop.

Camphor  cannot  preserve  those  in  health  from  cholera,  but

>  If  the  dear  and  scarce  (frequently  fiilsified)  cajeput  oil  be  actuallj  so  serviceable
in  the  Asiatic  cholera  that  out  of  ten  scarcely  one  died,  it  must  owe  this  quality  to
its  camphor-like  property  (it  may  almost  be  regarded  as  a  fluid  camphor)  and  to  the
circumstance,  that  from  the  copper  vessels  in  which  it  is  imported  ftom  the  Eai>t
Indies,  it  takes  up  some  portion  of  copper,  and  hence,  in  its  unpurified  state,  it  is  of
a  blue-greenish  colour.  It  has,  moreover,  been  found  in  Hungaiy,  that  those  who
wore  next  the  skin  of  their  body  a  plate  of  copper,  were  exempt  from  infection ;  as
trustworthy  intelligence  from  that  country  informs  me.

*  Similar  afifections  resulting  from  immoderate  repletions  of  the  stomach,  with
indigestible  nutriment,  are  best  removed  by  a  few  cups  of  strong  oofibe.


756  OK  TEX  XODX  OF  PBOPAGATIOK[

only  the  above  preparation  of  copper ;  but  when  the  latter  is
taken  the  vaponr  of  camphor  mnst  be  avoided,  as  it  suspends  the
action  of  the  copper.*

CoiTBEK,  lOtb  SepCcmber,  18S1.


APPEAL  TO  THIKKINO  PHILANTHB0PIST8  RSSPECTDrO

THE  MODE  OF  PROPAGATION  OF  THE  ASIATIC  CHOLERA.*

Two  opinions,  exactly  opposed  to  each  other  prevail  on  this
59ubject.  One  party  considers  the  pestilence  as  only  epidemic,  of
atmospheric-telluric  nature,  just  as  though  it  were  merely  spread
through  the  air,  from  which  there  would  in  that  case  be  no  pro-
tection. The  other  party  denies  this,  and  holds  it  to  be  commu-
nicable  by  contagion  only,  and  propagated  from  one  individual
to  another.

Of  these  two  opinions  one  only  can  be  the  right  one,  and  that
which  is  found  to  be  the  correct  one  will,  like  all  truths,  exer-
cise a  great  influence  on  the  welfare  of  mankind.

The  first  has  the  most  obstinate  defenders,  who  adduce  the
fact  that  when  the  cholera  has  broken  out  at  one  extremity  of
the  town,  it  may  the  very  next  morning  be  raging  at  the  other
extremity,  consequently  the  infection  can  only  be  present  in  the
air;  and  that  they  (the  physicians)  are  in  their  own  persons
proofe  of  the  non-contagious  character  of  cholera,  seeing  that
they  generally  remain  unaffected  by  it  and  in  good  health,
although  they  are  daily  in  personal  communication  with  those
dying  of  cholera,  and  have  even  tasted  the  matter  they  ejected
and  the  blood  out  of  their  veins,  lain  down  in  their  beds,  and


>  [In  the  first  VoL  of  the  Bibl.  Homctopatkique  we  find  Um  ibUowitig  eztraet  of
m  letter  from  Hahnemaiui  to  the  Editor :

**  Cupntm  as  a  prophylactic  against  cholera,  has  generallj  ^ewn  itself  eflVcadoos
wherever  it  has  been  employed,  and  where  its  action  has  not  been  disturbed  by  gnMS
dietetic  iaults,  or  by  the  ^mell  of  camphor  (whidi  is  its  antidote).  The  best  booicBopa-
thic  practitiooers  hare  also  found  it  indispeuNblc  m  the  second  stage  of  the  fiihy
developed  disease,  alternated,  if  the  symptoms  nidicate  this,  with  vtratntm  albmm,  X.
1  have  also  advised  the  alternation  of  these  two  substances  from  week  to  week  as  a
|>rcventive  against  the  disease.

**  I  learn  from  authentic  sources  that  at  Vienna,  Berlin  and  Magdeburg,  tbowandt
«»f  fiuuiUes  by  following  my  instructions  respecting  the  treatment  by  camphor,  have
«.  urcd,  often  in  icM  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  those  of  their  members  who  were
uttiickcd  by  the  epidemic,  and  that  so  efTectuuUy,  that  their  neighbours  knew  nothing
alx^ut  it,  and  etill  less  their  medical  attendimts,  who  oppu!<e  with  all  their  might  thii>
treuUiit'Ut,  HO  f^iniple,  bo  mpid,  and  90  amttantly  certain  in  iU  effcU,"]

'  PublUhed  as  a  pamphlet Leipzic,  1881.


OF  THB  ASIATIC  CHOLERA.  707

BO  forth.  This  foolhardj,  disgusting  procedure  they  allege  to
be  the  eay)€rime7Uum  crucis^  that  is  to  say,  an  incontrovertible
proof  of  the  non-contagious  nature  of  cholera,  that  it  is  not
propagated  by  contact,  but  is  present  in  the  atmosphere,  and  for
this  reason  attacks  individuals  in  widely  distant  places.

A  fearfully  pernicious  and  totally  false  assertion  I

Were  it  the  &ct  that  this  pestilential  disease  was  uniformly
distribured  throughout  the  atmosphere,  like  the  influenza  that
recently  spread  over  all  Europe,  then  the  many  cases  reported
by  all  the  public  journals  would  be  quite  inexplicable,  where
small  towns  and  villages  in  the  vicinity  of  the  murderously  preva-
lent cholera,  which,  by  the  unanimous  efforts  of  all  their  in-
habitants, kept  themselves  strictly  isolated,  like  a  besieged  for-
tress, and  which  refused  to  admit  a  single  person  from  without
— inexplicable,  I  repeat,  would  be  the  perfect  exemption  of  such
places  from  the  ravages  of  the  cholera.  This  plague  raged
fiercely  over  an  extensive  tract  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga,  but
in  the  very  middle  of  it,  Sarepta,  which  had  strictly  and  un-
deviatingly  kept  itself  secluded,  remained  perfectly  free  from
the  cholera,  and  up  to  a  recent  period  none  of  the  villages
around  Vienna,  where  the  plague  daily  carries  off  a  large  num.
ber  of  victims,  were  invaded  by  cholera,  the  peasants  of  these
villages  having  all  sworn  to  kill  any  one  who  ventured  near
them,  and  even  to  refuse  to  permit  any  of  the  inhabitants  who
had  gone  out  of  the  villages  to  re-enter  them.  How  could
their  exemption  have  been  possible  had  the  cholera  been  distri-
buted throughout  the  atmosphere !  And  how  easy  it  is  to  com-
prehend their  freedom  from  it,  seeing  that  they  held  aloof  from
contact  with  infected  individuals.

The  course  followed  by  the  cholera  in  every  place  it  traversed
was  almost  uniformly  this :  that  its  fury  shewed  itself  most  viru-
lently and  most  rapidly  fetal  at  the  commencement  of  its  inva-
sion (evidently  solely  because  at  that  time  the  miasm  encoun-
tered none  but  unprepared  systems,  for  which  even  the  slightest
cholera  miasm  was  something  quite  novel,  never  before  expe-
rienced, and  consequently  extremely  infectious);  hence  it  then
infected  persons  most  frequently  and  most  fatally.

Thereafter  the  cases  increased,  and  with  them  at  the  same
time,  by  the  communication  of  the  inhabitants  among  each
other,  the  quantity  of  diluted  miasm,  whereby  a  kind  of  local
sphere  of  cholera-miasm  exhalation  was  formed  in  the  town,  to
which  the  more  or  leas  robust  individuals  had  an  oppDitunity  of


758  ON  THE  MODE  OF  PROPAGATION'

becoming  gradually  accustomed  and  hardened  against  it,  so  that
by  degrees  always  fewer  inhabitants  were  attacked  by  it  and
could  be  severely  aflFected  by  it  (the  cholera  was  then  said  to  take
on  a  milder  character),  undl  at  last  all  the  inhabitants  were  al-
most  uniformly  indurated  against  it,  and  thus  the  epidemic  was
extinguished  in  this  town.

Did  the  miasm  only  exist  in  the  general  atmosphere,  the  cases
oould  not  be  less  numerous  at  last  than  they  were  at  the  com-
mencement, for  the  same  cause  (said  to  be  the  general  atmos-
pheric constitution)  must  have  remained  identical  in  its  effects.

The  only  fact  brought  forward  by  Hufeland  against  my  proofi
(viz.,  that  on  board  an  English  ship  in  the  open  sea,  about  the
latitude  of  Biga,  that  had  had  no  (?)  communication  with  the
town,  two  sailors  were  suddenly  seized  with  the  cholera)  proves
nothing,  for  it  is  not  known  how  near  the  ship  came  to  the  in-
fected town,  Riga,  so  that  the  sphere  of  the  miasm-exhalation
from  the  town,  although  diluted,  might  yet  have  reached  and
infected  the  sailors,  who  were  still  unused  to  the  miasm,  especial-
'y  if  they,as  is  often  the  case,  were  rendered  more  susceptible  to
it  from  intemperance.

The  most  striking  examples  of  infection  and  rapid  spread  of
cholera  take  place,  as  is  well  known,  and  as  the  public  journals
likewise  inform  us,  in  this  way :  On  board  ships — in  those
confined  spaces,  filled  with  mouldy  watery  vapours,  the  cholera-
miasm  finds  a  favourable  element  for  its  multiplication,  and
grows  into  an  enormously  increased  brood  of  those  excessively
minute,  invisible,  living  creatures,  so  inimical  to  human  life,  of
which  the  contagious  matter  of  the  cholera  most  probably  con-
sists— on  board  these  ships,  I  say,  this  concentrated  aggravat-
ed miasm  kills  several  of  the  crew ;  the  others,  however,  being
frequently  exposed  to  the  danger  of  infection  and  thus  gradually
habituated  to  it,  at  length  become  fortified  against  it,  and  no
longer  liable  to  be  infected.  These  individuals,  apparently  in
good  health,  go  ashore,  and  are  received  by  the  inhabitants
without  hesitation  into  their  cottages,  and  ere  they  have  time  to
give  an  account  of  those  who  have  died  of  the  pestilence  on
board  the  ship,  those  who  have  approached  nearest  to  them  are
suddently  carried  oflF  by  the  cholera.  The  cause  of  this  is  un-
doubtedly the  invisible  cloud  that  hovers  closely  around  the
sailors  who  have  remained  free  from  the  disease,  and  which  is
composed  of  probably  millions  of  those  miasmatic  animated
beings,  which,  at  first  developed  on  the  bnad  marshy  banks  of  the


07  THE  ASIATIC  CHOLERA.  769

tepid  Ganges,  always  searching  out  in  preference  the  hnman
being  to  his  destruction  and  attaching  themselves  closely  to  him,
when  transferred  to  distant  and  even  colder  regions  become
habituated  to  these  also,  without  any  diminution  either  of  their
unhappy  fertility  or  of  their  fatal  d»9tructiveness.

Closely  but  invisibly  environed  by  this  pestiferous,  infectious
matter,  against  which,  however,  as  has  been  observed,  his  own
individual  system  is,  as  it  were,  fortified  by  the  loDg  resistance
of  his  vital  force  to  its  action,  and  by  being  gradually  habituate
ed  to  the  inimical  influence  surrounding  him,  such  a  sailor  (fly-
ing fix>m  the  corpses  of  his  companions  on  board)  has  often  gone
ashore  apparently  innocuous  and  well,  and  behold !  the  inhabi-
tants who  hospitably  entertained  him,  and  first  of  all  those  who
came  into  immediate  contact  with  him,  quite  unused  to  the
miasm,  are  first  most  rapidly  and  most  certainly  attacked  with*
out  any  warning,  and  killed  by  the  cholera,  whilst  of  those  who
are  more  remote,  such  only  as  are  unnerved  by  their  bad  habits
of  life  are  liable  to  take  the  infection.  Those  who  are  not  de  •
bilitated,  and  who  have  kept  at  some  distance  from  the  stranger
who  is  surrounded  by  the  cholera  miasm,  sufSsred  only  a  slight
attack  from  the  miasmatic  exhalation  hovering  about  in  a  more
diluted  form ;  their  vital  force  could  easily  ward  off  the  weaker
attack  and  master  it,  and  when  they  subsequently  came  nearer
it  their  system  had  by  this  time  become  somewhat  habituated
to  the  miasm,  retained  the  mastery  over  it,  and  even  when  these
persons  at  length  approached  nearer  or  quite  close  to  the  infected
stranger,  their  vital  force  had  thus  gradually  become  so  fortified
against  it,  that  they  could  hold  intercourse  with  him  with  per-
fect impunity,  having  now  become  completely  uninfectable  by
the  contagious  principle  of  the  cholera.  It  is  a  wonderfully
benevolent  arrangement  of  Qtod  that  has  made  it  possible  for
man  to  fortify  himself  against,  and  render  himself  unsusceptable
to,  the  most  deadly  distempers,  and  especially  the  most  fatal  of
them  all,  the  infectious  principal  of  cholera,  if  he  gradually
approaches  it  ever  nearer  and  nearer,  allowing  intervals  of  time
to  elapse  in  order  to  recover  himself,  provided  always  he  have
an  undebilitated  body.

When  first  called  to  a  cholera  patient,  the  physician,  some-
what timid  as  yet,  as  is  but  reasonable,  either  tarries  at  first  in
the  antechamber  (in  the  weaker  atmosphere  of  the  miasmatic
exhalation)  or  if  he  enter  the  patient's  room  prefers  keeping
at  some  distance,  or  standing  at  the  door,  orders  the  nurse  in


760  OK  THS  MODE  OF  PBOFA0ATIOK

attendance  to  do  this  or  the  other  to  the  patient,  he  then  prudent-
ly soon  takes  his  departure  promising  to  return  again  shortly ;
in  the  meantime  he  either  goes  about  a  little  in  the  open  air,  or
goes  home  and  has  some  refreshment  His  vital  force,  which
at  the  first  short  visit  at  some  distance  from  the  patient,  was
only  moderately  assailed  by  the  diluted  miasm,  recovers  itself
completely  in  the  meantime  by  this  recreation,  and  when  he
again  comes  into  the  patient's  room  and  approaches  somewhat
nearer  to  the  patient,  it  soon  by  practice  comes  to  resist  more
powerfully  the  more  concentrated  infectious  atmosphere  that
exists  closer  to  the  patient,  until  at  length,  from  frequent  visits
and  a  nearer  approach  to  the  patient,  it  attains  a  mastery  over
the  assaults  of  the  miasm,  so  that  at  last  the  physician  is  com-
pletely hardened  against  even  the  most  poisonous  cholera
miasm  at  the  bedside,  and  rendered  quite  uninfectable  by  this
pestilence ;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  the  nurse  who  goes  as
cautiously  and  gradually  to  work.

Both  the  one  and  the  other  then  boast,  because  they  can  come
into  immediate  contact  with  the  patient  without  any  fear  and
without  any  ill  consequences,  that  they  know  better  than  to  call
the  disease  contagious ;  it  is  not^  they  say,  the  least  catohing.
This  presumptuous,  inconsiderate,  and  perfectly  untrue  assertion
has  already  cost  thousands  their  lives,  who  in  their  ignorance,  and
quite  unprepared,  either  approached  the  cholera  patient  suddenly
or  came  in  contact  with  these  cholera  physicians  (who  do  not  treat
with  camphor)  or  the  nurses.  For  such  physicians  and  nurses,
fortified  in  this  manner  against  the  miasm,  now  take  away  with
them  in  their  clothes,  in  their  skin,  in  their  hair,  probably  also
in  their  breath,  the  invisible  (probably  animated)  and  per-
petually reproductive  contagious  matter  surrounding  the  cholera
patient  they  have  just  visited,  and  this' contagious  matter  they
unconsciously  and  unsuspectingly  carry  along  with  them  through-
out the  town  and  to  their  acquaintances,  whom  it  unexpectedly
and  infallibly  infects,  without  the  slightest  suspicion  on  their
part  of  its  source.

Thus  the  cholera  physicians  and  nurses  are  Vie  most  certain  and
frequent  propagators  and  cominunicators  of  contagion  far  and
wide;  andyet  amazement  is  expressed,  even  in  the  public  journals,
how  the  infection  can  spread  so  rapidly  the  very  first  day,  from
the  first  cholera  patient  at  the  one  end  of  the  town  to  persons^
at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  who  had  not  come  near  the
imtient!

And  thus  the  flame  for  the  sacrifice  of  innocent  persons  breaks


OF  THl  ASIATIG  CHOLSRA.  761

ont  in  all  comers  and  ends  of  the  town,  lighted  up  by  the  sparks
of  the  black  death  scattered  in  every  direction  by  physicians
and  their  assistants  I  Every  one  readily  opens  the  door  to  these
plague-propagators ;  allows  them  to  sit  down  beside  him,  putting
implicit  fidth  in  their  confidently  declared  assurance :  *'  that  it
is  ridiculous  to  cfiU  the  cholera  contagious,  as  the  cholera  pesti-
lence is  only  diffused  epidemically  through  the  air,  and  cannot,
therefore,  be  infectious" — and  see  I  the  poor  cajoled  creatures
are  rewarded  for  their  hospitality  with  the  most  miserable
death.

To  the  very  highest  people  of  the  town  and  of  the  court  the
oholera  angel  of  death  obtains  access,  in  the  person  of  the  physi-
cian who  gives  this  evil  counsel,  enveloped  by  the  fresh  miasm ;
and  no  one  detects  the  concealed,  invisible,  but,  for  that  reason,
all  the  more  dangerous  enemy.

Wherever  such  physicians  and  such  nurses  go  (for  what  all-
seeing  eye  could  perceive  this  invisible  danger  on  these  healthy
miasm-bearers?^wherever  they  go,  their  presence  communi-
cates the  spark,  and  mortal  sickness  bursts  forth  everywhere,
and  the  pestilence  depopulates  whole  towns  and  countries  I

If  physicians  would  but  take  warning,  and,  rendered  unin^
fectable  by  taking  a  few  drops  of  camphorated  spirit,  approach
(ever  so  quickly)  the  cholera  patient,  in  order  to  treat  him  at
the  commencement  of  his  sickening  ^dth  this  medicine  {purCj
unadulterated  camphorated  spirit)  which  alone  is  efficacious,  and
which  most  certainly  destroys  the  miasm  about  the  patient,  by
giving  him,  as  I  have  taught,*  every  five  minutes  one  drop  of  it,
and  in  the  interval  assiduously  rubbing  him  on  the  head,  neck,
chest,  and  abdomen  with  the  same  medicine  poured  into  the
hollow  of  the  hand,  until  all  his  giddy  faint  powerlessness,  his
suffocative  anxiety,  and  the  icy-coldness  of  his  body  has  disap-
pea«Ki,  and  given  place  to  reViving  animation,  tnmquiUity  rf
mind,  and  complete  return  of  the  vital  warmth — if  they  would
but  do  this,  then  cv^ry  patient  would  not  only  be  infaUihly  re-
stored within  a  couple  of  hours  (as  the  most  undeniable  facts
and  instances  prove),  but  by  the  cure  of  the  disease  with  pure
camphor,  they  would  at  the  same  time  eradicate  and  annihilate
the  miasm  (that  probably  consists  of  inniunerable,  invisible
living  beings)  in  and  about  the  patient,  about  themselves,  even
in  the  clothes,  the  linen,  the  bed  of  the  patient  (for  these  all

-  Citre  and  Prevention  of  the  Aiiatie  Cholera, — [See  preoediz^  article.]


702  ON  THS  MODS  OF  PBOPA0ATIOKy  &C.

would  be  penetrated  by  the  yaponr  of  the  camphor  if  it  were
employed  in  this  way)  in  the  very  furniture  and  walls  of  the.
apartment  also,  and  they  themselves  (the  physicians  uid  nurses)
would  then  cany  oS  none  of  the  contagious  principle  with
them,  and  could  no  longer  infect  persons  throughout  the  town**

But  these  physicians,  as  we  see,  despise  this;  they  prefer
going  on  killing  their  patients  in  crowds  by  pouring  into  them
large  quantities  of  aqua-fortis  and  opiimi,  by  blood-letting,  and
so  forth,  or  giving  the  camphor  mixed  with  so  many  obstructing
and  injurious  matters,  that  it  can  scarcely  do  any  good,  solely
to  avoid  giving  the  simple,  pure  (efficacious)  solution  of  camphor,
because  the  reformer  of  the  old  injurious  system  of  treatment
(the  only  one  they  know),  because  /,  from  conviction,  recom*
mended  it  in  the  most  urgent  manner  in  all  countries  of  Europe^
They  seem  to  prefer  delivering  over  all  mankind  to  the  grave-
digger,  to  listening  to  the  good  counsel  of  the  new  purified
hewing  art

But  who  can  prevent  them  acting  so,  as  they  alone  poasess
the  power  in  the  state  to  suppress  what  is  good?

However,  bountiftd  Providence  has  provided  a  beneficent
remedy  for  this  state  of  things  (for  these  physicians  are  protected,
even  in  their  ill-deeds,  by  antiquated  injurious  laws).

Thus,  the  cholera  is  most  surely  and  easily  and  almost  mira-
culously curable,  but  only  in  the  first  couple  of  hours  from  the
commencement  of  the  sickening,  by  means  of  the  employment
of  pure  camphor,  and  that  before  the  physicians  in  larger  towns
that  are  summoned  can  attend.  But  on  their  arrival  they  may
even  then,  by  the  employment  of  unadulterated  camphor-spirit^
if  not  cure  the  cholera  completely  (for  the  lapse  of  a  few  hours
generally  makes  it  too  late  to  do  so)  yet  annihilate  the  whole  of
the  contagious  principle  of  this  pestilence  on  and  about  the
patient,  and  adhering  to  themselves  and  the  bystanders,  and
cease  to  convey  the  miasm  with  them  to  other  parts  of  the  town.
Hence  the  families  of  non-medical  persons,  by  means  of  this
employment  of  camphor,  cure  the  members  of  their  fisunilies  by
thousands  in  secret  (the  higher  classes  alone,  must,  on  account  of
their  station,  be  under  the  necessity  of  calling  in  the  physician,

*  The  sprinkling  of  suspected  strangers  on  their  arrival,  and  of  suspected  goods
and  letters  with  camphor  spirit^  would  most  certainly  destroy  the  cholera  miasmi  ia
them.  Not  a  single  fad  goes  to  prove  that  chlorine  annihilatPB  the  miasm  of  cholera ;
it  can  only  destroy  odorous  effluvia.  But  the  contagious  matter  of  the  Asiatic  cho-
lera is  fitf  from  being  an  odorous  effluvium.  What  good  then  do  the  fumigations
with  chlorine^  which  is  here  perfectly  useless^  and  only  hurtful  to  man*s  healths


BXMARKS  OK  THB  SXTRXMS  AITBNUATION  OF,  &C. 768

who,  in  defiance  of  the  philanihropio  refonner  of  the  healing
art,  and  his  efficacious  system  of  treatment,  not  nn£requentlj,
with  his  improper  remedies,  dispatches  them  to  Orcus).

It  18  members  of  a  family  alone  that  can  most  certainly  and  easily
mutually  cure  each  other  imth  camphor  spirit^  because  they  are  able
instantaneously  to  aid  those  taken  iU.

Will  physicians  ever  come  to  comprehend  what  is  essential,
and  what  will  at  once  put  a  stop  to  the  devastation  and  depopa-
lation  of  two  quarters  of  the  globe?

Dixi  et  nlTEvi  anrniam !
OOTHBr,  the  24th  October,  18B1.


REMARKS  ON  THE  EXTREME  ATTENUATION  OF  HOMCEO-

PATHIC  MEDICINES.^

L  The  essay  of  this  intelligent  and  unwearied  and  honourable
investigator  and  promoter  of  our  art,  incontestably  corroborates
the  following  truths  that  some  observations  of  my  own  had
already  hinted  at,  viz.,  1,  that  the  development  of  the  powers  of
medicinal  substances  by  the  process  peculiar  to  homcBopathy,
may  be  assumed  to  be  almost  iUimiUMe ;  2,  that  the  higher  their
dynamization  (dematerialization)  is  carried,  the  more  penetrating
and  rapid  does  their  operation  become ;  8,  that,  however,  their
efiEects  pass  off  so  much  the  more  speedily.

All  this  is  in  strict  accordance  with  my  own  experiments,
though  I  have  not  carried  (hem  so  far ;  one  of  them  I  may  only
allude  to,  namely,  that  once  having  prepared  a  dynamized
attenuation  of  sulphur  up  to  XXX  (90th  dilution),  I  administered
a  drop  of  it  on  sugar  to  an  aged,  unmarried  lady,  who  was  sub-
ject to  rare  epileptic  attacks  (one  every  9,  12,  14  months),  and

'  [These  remarks  occur  io  the  form  of  postscripts  appended  toa  paper  by  Qraf  voo
Kofsakofi^  published  ia  the  11th  and  again  in  the  12th  VoL  of  the  Archiv,  /.  honu
Seilk.  In  this  paper  the  author  mentions  that  he  bad  diluted  medicines  up  to  the
160th,  1000th  and  1500th  attenuation,  and  that  he  had  found  them  even  at  that
degree  of  dilutioo  quite  efficadous.  He  starts  the  idea  that  poanbly  the  material
<fif]8k»  of  the  medicinal  substance  attains  its  limit  at  the  third  or  sixth  dilution,  and
that  the  subsequent  attenuations  obtain  their  medicinal  properties  bj  a  kind  of  infee-
tko  or  communication  of  the  medicinal  power,  after  the  manner  of  contagious  diseases^
to  the  non-medicinal  vehicle ;  and  in  corroboration  of  this  notion  he  relates  seyeral
experiments,  in  which  he  says  he  communicated  medicinal  pr(^)erties  to  laige  quan-
tities of  unmedicated  globules,  by  shaking  them  up  with  one  dry  medicated  globule.
He  likewise  remarks  that  by  diluting  medicines  highly,  and  by  employing  such
infMted  globules,  the  force  of  the  primary  action  of  the  medicines,  or  their  tendency
to  produce  homcBopatluc  aggrayations,  declines  whilst  the  reactioo  of  the  oiganism,
or  the  cnratiTe  action  of  the  mediciiie,  coatiaxulXij  inoeases.]


764 BEHABSB  OSr  THB  EXTBXHX  ATTINUATIOK  OF

within  an  hour  afterwards  she  had  an  epileptic  fit,  and  since
then  she  has  remained  quite  free  fix>m  them.

The  opponents  of  homoeopathy,  obstinately  attached  to  their
old  system,  who  seem  to  have  made  a  resolution  not  to  allow
themselves  to  be  convinced  of  this  wonderfril  development  of
the  powers  of  crude  medicinal  substances,  which  however  mani-
fests itself  to  every  unprejudiced  person  who  honestly  puts  the
matter  to  the  test,  and  which  gives  to  the  practice  of  homoM>-
pathy  that  tranquillizing  certainty  and  trustworthiness  in  the
treatment  of  diseases  with  highly  dynamized  attenuations  of
medicines  in  the  smallest  doses,  whereby  it  vastly  surpasses
every  other  method  of  treatment, — our  opponents,  I  say,  on
being  informed  of  these  extended  experiments  and  observations
of  the  author  of  this  treatise,  who  has  rendered  such  service  to
our  art,  can  do  nothing  more  than,  as  they  have  hitherto  done,
remain  standing  in  amazement  below  the  steps  of  the  outer-court
to  the  sanctuary  of  these  health-bringing  truths,  and  announce
by  a  sceptical  smile  their  inability  to  avail  themselves  of  these
beneficent  revelations  of  the  nature  of  things  for  the  welfiure  of
their  patients.  They  wore  the  same  sceptical  smile  when  I  some
thirty  and  odd  years  ago  pointed  out  the  efficacy  of  the  millionth
part  of  a  grain  of  belladonna  in  scarlet-fever ;  they  can  now  also
do  nothing  more  when  they  read  of  the  dematerialization  of
sulphur  up  to  the  thousandth  potency,  that  it  still  displays  a
powerful  medicinal  action  on  the  human  body.  Their  Boeotian
smiling  however  will  not  stay  the  ef^le-flight  of  the  new  bene-
ficent healing-art,  and  in  the  meaiUime  they  remain  as  they
deserve  to  do,  deprived  of  its  blessings.*

However,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  chief  use  of  these
experiments,  was  to  demonstrate  how  high  medicinal  attenua-
tions might  be  potentized  without  their  action  on  man's  state  of
health  being  reduced  to  nothing,  and  for  this,  these  experiments
are  invaluable ;  but  for  the  homoeopathic  treatment  of  patients
it  is  advisable,  in  preparing  all  kinds  of  medicines,  not  to  go
higher  than  the  deciUionth  attenuation  and  dynamization  (X),

'  Ooe  might  applj  to  thete  geotlemen  GoetWt  words:

**  Damn  erkenn'  ich  die  gelehrtOD  Hemn !
Was  ihr  iiicht  tastet,  steht  euch  MeOen  fern;
Was  ihr  oicht  fiisst,  das  fehit  euch  gam  and  gar;
Was  ihr  nicht  rechnet,  glaubt  ihr,  sei  nicht  wahr ;
Was  ihr  nicht  wagt^  hat  fOr  euch  keiu  Gewicht ;
Was  ihr  nicht  mflnzt,  das,  mcint  ihr,  gcltc  nicht."

{Faust,  2ter  TbeiL)


,  HOH(EOPATHIC  KEBICHnES.  766

in  order  that  homodopathio  physicians  may  be  able  to  assure
themselves  of  uniform  results  in  their  practice.'

IL  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  the  carefully  discriminating
Graf  von  Korsakoff  can  regard  the  subdivision  and  dynamization
peculiar  to  homoeopathy  as  complete  at  the  millipnth  and  bil-
lionth development  [8d  and  6th  dilution],  and  incapable  of  any
further  disembodiment  and  spiritualization  of  the^r  medicinal
powers  to  an  even  greater  degree  by  further  trituration  of  the
dry  and  further  succussion  of  the  fluid  attenuations — the  occur-
renoe  of  which  cannot  be  doubted — or  that  he  actually  looks
upon  them  as  weaker,  as  he  seems  to  imply.  Who  can  say  that
in  the  millionth  or  billionth  development  the  small  particles  of
the  medicinal  substances  have  arrived  at  the  state  of  atoms  not
susceptible  of  further  division,  of  whose  nature  we  can  form  not
the  slightest  conception?  For  if  the  living  human  organism  ,
shews  an  ever  stronger  reaction  to  the  more  highly  dynamized
attenuations  when  they  are  used  medicinally  (as  experience
teaches,  and  as  the  author  himself  admits),  it  follows  that  such
higher  medicinal  preparations  must  be  regarded  as  stronger,
inasmuch  as  there  can  be  no  standard  for  measuring  the  degree
of  dynamic  potency  of  a  medicine,  except  the  degree  of  the
reaction  of  the  vital  foroe  against  it.

Thus  much,  however,  is  deducible  from  his  experiments,  that,
since  a  single  dry  globule  imbibed  with  a  high  medicinal  dy-
namization, communicates  to  18,500  unmedicated  globules,  with

which  it  is  shaken  for  five  minutes,  medicinal  power  fully  equal
to  what  it  possesses  itself  without  suffering  any  diminution  of
power  itself  it  seems  that  this  marvellous  communication  takes

^  [In  1829  he  wrote  to  Dr.  Schrater  that  (^BrU,  Jour,  of  Horn,,  Vol  r,  p.  898)  :
"  I  do  not  approve  of  jour  dynamiring  the  medicmee  higher  (m  ibr  instanoe,  up  to
XII  and  XX,  (86th  and  60th  dttutioDs]).  There  must  be  some  cod  to  the  thing,  it
.  cannot  go  on  to  infinity.  By  laying  it  down  as  a  rule  that  all  homcBopathic  remedies
be  attenuated  and  dynamized  up  to  X  [80th  dil.],  we  have  a  unifonn  mode  of  proce-
it,  as  they  and  we  operate  with  the  same  tools.  In  one  word,  we  would  do  wdl  to
go  forward  uninterruptedly  in  the  beaten  path.  Then  our  enemies  will  not  be  able
to  reproach  us  with  having  nothing  fixed — no  normal  standard."  In  1888  he  speaks
more  fiivourably  of  the  higher  attenuations,  such  as  the  60th,  160th,  and  800th  dilu-
tions {Orpafumt  %  coLxzxvn,  2d  note,)  ascribing  to  them  a  more  rapid  and  penetra-
ting, but  likewise  a  shorter  actioiL  Again  in  1888  {Chr,  Kr^  part  v,  prefiioe),  he
speaks  approvingly  of  the  60th  dilution.  As  a  rule,  he  seems  to  have  used  chiefly
the  80th  dilution,  still  we  find  from  the  cases  sent  to  Dr.  Bflnninghausen,  which  I
give  fiurther  on,  that  he  occasionally  gave  other  preparations,  and  in  the  letter  of
which  a  &c-6imile  is  given  in  this  work,  he  desires  Dr.  Lehmann  to  send  him  the  8d
trituration  of  certain  medicines,  whether  for  therapeutic  use  or  for  further  dilution  it
is  impossible  to  say.]


766  CASSS  TLLXJBTRATPnt  OF

«

place  by  means  of  proximity  and  contact,  and  is  a  sort  of  infec-
tion, bearing  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  infection  of  healthy
^rsons  by  a  contagion  brought  near  or  in  contact  with  them —
a  perfectly  novel,  ingenious  and  probable  idea,  for  which  we  aie
indebted  to  the  Grirf.

The  conununication  or  infection  appears  to  take  place  by
means  of  the  power  which  is  perpetually  spreading  around,  like
an  exhalation  or  emanation  fix)m  such  bodies,  even  though  they
are  dry,  just  like  those  globules  the  size  of  a  mustard  seed  that
had  previously  been  moistened  with  a  fluid  medicine  which  we
employ  for  the  cure  of  patients  by  ol£Biction.  A  globule  of  this
kind,  e.  ^.,  of  staphisagria  X,  which,  in  the  course  of  twentj
years,  had  been  smelt  several  hundreds  of  times  after  opening
the  bottle  in  which  it  was,  for  a  certain  symptom  that  always
recurred  of  the  same  character,  possesses  at  this  hour  medicinal
power  of  equal  strength  as  at  &rat,  which  could  not  be  the  case
did  it  not  continually  exhale  its  medicinal  power  in  an  inexhaust-
ible manner.

The  supposition  of  our  author  that  dry  globules  that  have
been  impregnated  with  a  certain  degree  of  development  of
power  can  be  further  dynamized  and  their  medicinal  power  in-
creased in  their  bottles  by  shaking,  or  carrying  about  in  the
pocket,  like  medicinal  fluids  further  shaken,  is  not  boi^e  out  bj
any  fact,  and  will  appear  to  me  incredible  until  it  \a  supported
by  proper  experimental  proofs.

On  the  whole  we  owe  many  thanks  to  this  ingenious  and  in-
defatigable investigator  for  his  present  valuable  communication.

C&ru£N,  80th  May,  1882.


OASES  ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  HOMffiOPATflIC  PRACTICFJ

Many  persons  of  my  acquaintance  but  half  converted  to  hc-
moeopathy  have  begged  of  me  from  time  to  time  to  publish  still
more  exact  directions  as  to  how  this  doctrine  may  be  actually
applied  in  practice,  and  how  we  are  to  proceed.  I  am  astonished
that  after  the  very  peculiar  directions  contained  in  the  Organon
of  medicine  more  special  instruction  can  be  wished  for.

I  am  also  asked,  "  How  are  we  to  examine  the  disease  in  every

'  From  the  Heine  ArzneitniiUUehre,  pt  ii,  3d.  edit  1838.  [The  cases  here  given
originally  appeared  about  1817  in  the  first  editioo  of  the  R.  A.  M.  L^  but  the  notes
and  most  of  the  preliminary  matter  are  of  the  date  we  have  given,  and  we  may  there-
fore consider  the  whole  to  represent  Hahnemann's  opinion  and  pnctioe,  wHh  the  6Z-
eeptioQ  of  the  dose  in  these  two  cases,  of  the  latter  period.]


HOMCEOPATHIC  PBAOTICE.  767

particular  case  ?'' As  if  special  enough  directions  were  not  to
be  found  in  the  book  just  mentioned.

As  in  homcBopathy  the  treatment  is  not  directed  towards  any
supposed  or  illusory  internal  causes  of  disease,  nor  yet  towards
any  names  of  diseases  invented  by  man  which  do  not  exist  in
nature,  and  as  every  case  of  non-miasmatic  disease  is  a  distinct
individuality,  independent,  peculiar,  diifering  in  nature  from  all
others,  never  compounded  of  a  hypothetical  arrangement  of
symptoms,  so  no  particular  directions  can  be  laid  down  for  them
(no  schema,  no  table),  except  that  the  physician,  in  order  to
efi^t  a  cure,  must  oppose  to  every  aggregate  of  morbid  symp-
toms in  a  case  a  group  of  similar  ntedicinal  symptoms  as  exact
as  it  is  to  be  met  with  in  any  single  known  medicine,  for  this
doctrine  cannot  admit  of  more  than  a  single  medicinal  substance
(whose  effects  have  been  accurately  tested)  to  be  given  at  once
(see  Organon  of  medicine^  %  271,  272).

Now  we  can  neither  enumerate  all  the  possible  aggregates  of
symptoms  of  all  concrete  cases  of  disease,  nor  indicate  a  prwri
the  homoeopathic  medicines  for  these  (a  priori  undefinable)  pos-
sibilities. For  every  individual  given  case  (and  every  case  is  an
individuality,  differing  from  all  others)  the  homoeopathic  medical
practitioner  must  himself  find  them,  and  for  this  end  he  must
be  acquainted  with  the  medicines  that  have  till  now  been  in-
vestigated in  respect  of  their  positive  action,  or  consult  them  for
every  case  of  disease ;  but  besides  this  he  must  do  his  endeavour
to  prove  on  himself  or  on  other  healthy  individuals  medicines
that  have  not  yet  been  investigated  as  regards  the  morbid  al-
terations they  are  capable  of  producing,  in  order  thereby  to  in-
crease our  store  ofhiomn  remedial  agents,*  so  that  the  choice  of
a  remedy  for  every  one  of  the  infinite  variety  of  cases  of  disease
(for  the  combatting  of  which  we  can  never  possess  enough  of
suitable  tools  and  weapons)  may  become  all  the  more  easy  and
accurate.

That  man  is  far  from  being  animated  with  the  true  spirit  of
the  homoeopathic  system,  is  no  true  disciple  of  this  beneficent
doctrine^  who  makes  the  slightest  objections  to  institute  on  him-
self careful  experiments  for  the  investigation  of  the  peculiar
effects  of  the  medicines  which  have  remained  unknown  for  2600
years,  without  which  investigation  (and  imless  their  pure  patho-

'  Before  the  diBOoyery  of  Homceopathy,  mediciiial  subBtaoces  were  known  only  in
respect  to  their  natural  history,  and  besides  their  names  nothing  was  known  re^^uxl-
ing  them  bat  their  presumed  qnalitieB,  wfaioh  were  either  imaginary  or  altogether
fiOee.


768  CASM8  JLLVSOLATPrm  ow

genetic  action  on  the  lieahhy  indiyidiial  bss  pfevioofll j  been
aBcertained)  all  treatment  of  diaease  moat  cootinae  to  be  not  only
a£x>liah,  bnt  even  a  criminal  operation,  a  dangeiona  attack  upon
homan  life.

It  is  aomewbat  too  much  to  expect  ns  to  work  merelv  for  the
benefit  of  snch  self-interested  individoals  as  will  contribute  no-
thing to  the  complete  and  indiq)enaable  building  np  of  the  in-
dispensable edifice,  who  only  seek  to  make  money  by  what  has
been  discovered  and  investigated  by  the  laboors  of  othersi  and
to  famish  themselves  with  the  means  of  squandering  the  income
derived  firom  the  ci^ital  of  science,  to  the  accnmolation  of  which
they  do  not  evince  the  slightest  inclination  to  contributeL

All  who  feel  a  tme  desire  to  asnst  in  elucidating  the  peculiar
effects  of  medicines— onr  sole  instroments,  the  knowledge  of
which  has  for  so  many  centuries  remained  uninvestigated,  and
which  is  yet  so  indispensable  for  enabling  us  to  cure  the  sick,
will  find  the  directions  how  these  pure  ejq)erim^itB  with  medi*
ones  should  be  conducted  in  the  Org^non  qfrnedictne^  §  118 — 142.

In  addition  to  what  has  been  there  started  I  shall  only  add,
that  as  the  experimenter  cannot,  any  more  than  any  other  human
beinj^  be  absolutely  and  perfectly  healthy,  he  must,  should  sli^t
ailments  to  which  he  was  liable  appear  during  these  provings  of
the  powers  of  medicines,  place  these  between  brackets,  thereby
indicating  that  they  are  not  confirm^  or  dubious.  But  this
will  not  often  happen,  seeing  that  during  the  action  upon  a  pre-
viously healthy  person  of  a  sufficiently  strong  dose  of  the  me-
dicine, he  is  under  the  influence  of  the  medicine  alone,  and  it  is
seldom  that  any  other  symptom  can  shew  itself  during  the  first
days  but  what  must  be  the  effect  of  the  medicine.  Further,  that
in  order  to  investigate  the  symptoms  of  medicines  for  chronic
diseases,  for  example,  in  order  to  develop  the  cutaneous  diseases,
abnormal  growths  and  so  forth,  to  be  expected  from  the  medi-
cine, we  must  not  be  contented  with  taking  one  or  two  doses  of
it  only,  but  we  must  continue  its  use  for  several  days,  to  the
amount  of  two  adequate  doses  daily,  that  is  to  say,  of  sufficient
size  to  cause  us  to  perceive  its  action,  whilst  at  the  same  time
we  continue  to  observe  the  diet  and  r^imen  indicated  in  the
work  alluded  to.

The  mode  of  preparing  the  medicinal  substances  for  use  in
homoeopathic  treatment  will  be  found  in  the  Organon  of  medicine,
§  267 — 271,  and  also  in  the  Chronic  disecises. I  would  only  ob-
serve here,  that  for  the  proving  of  medicines  on  healthy  indivi
duals,  dilutions  and  dynamizations  are  to  be  employed  as  high


HOKCKOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  7«»

as  are  used  for  the  treatment  of  disease,  namely,  globules  mois-
tened with  the  decillionth  development  of  power.

The  request  of  some  friends,  halting  half-way  on  the  road  to
this  method  of  treatment,  to  detail  some  examples  of  this  treat-
ment, is  difficult  to  comply  with,  and  no  great  advantage  can
attend  a  compliance  with  it.  Every  cured  case  of  disease  shews
only  how  that  case  has  been  treated.  The  internal  process  of
the  treatment  depends  always  on  those  principles  which  are  al-
ready known,  and  they  cannot  be  rendered  concrete  and  defi-
nitely fixed  for  each  individual  case,  nor  can  they  become  at  all
more  distinct  from  the  history  of  a  single  cure  than  they  pre-
viously were  when  these  principles  were  enunciated.  Every
case  of  non-miasmatic  disease  is  peculiar  and  special,  and  it  is
the  special  in  it  that  distinguishes  it  from  every  other  case,  that
pertains  to  it  alone,  but  that  cannot  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  treat-
cated case  of  disease  consisting  of  many  symptoms,  in  such  a
pragmatical  manner  that  the  reasons  that  influence  us  in  the
choice  of  the  remedy  shall  be  clearly  revealed,  this  demands  de-
tails laborious  at  once  for  the  recorder  and  for  the  reader.

In  order,  however,  to  comply  with  the  desires  of  my  friends
in  this  also,  I  may  here  detail  two  of  the  slightest  cases  of  ho-
moeopathic treatment.

Sch — ,  a  washerwoman,  somewhat  above  40  years  old,  had
been  more  than  three  weeks  unable  to  pursue  her  avocations,
when  she  consulted  me  on  the  1st  September,  1815.

1.  On  any  movement,  especially  at  every  step,  and  worst  on
making  a  fklse  step,  she  has  a  shoot  in  the  scrobiculus  cordis,
that  comes,  as  she  avers,  every  time  from  the  left  side.

2.  When  she  lies  she  feels  quite  well,  then  she  has  no  pain
anywhere,  neither  in  the  side  nor  in  the  scrobiculus.

S.  She  cannot  sleep  after  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.

4.  She  relishes  her  food,  but  when  she  has  ate  a  little  she  feels
sick.

5.  Then  the  water  collects  in  her  mouth  and  runs  out  of  it,
like  the  water-brash.

6.  She  has  frequently  empty  eructations  after  every  meal.

7.  Her  temper  is  passionate,  disposed  to  anger. — ^Whenever
the  pain  is  severe  she  is  covered  with  perspiration. — The  cata-
menia  were  quite  regular  a  fortnight  since.

In  other  respects  her  health  is  good.

Now,  as  regards  Symptom  1^  beBadonnOj  chiruiy  and  rhv$  tooci-
49


770  CASKS  ILLUSTBAHTX  OT

eodendrtm  cause  sHootmgs  in  the  scrobicnliifl,  but  none  of  them
<mZy  on  motion^  as  is  the  case  here.  Pulsatilla  (see  Sjmp.  387)
oertainly  causes  shootings  in  the  scrobiculus  on  TnaVing  a  BeJse
step,  but  only  as  a  rare  alternating  action,  and  has  neither  the
same  digestive  derangements  as  occur  here  at  4  compared  with
6  and  6,  nor  the  same  state  of  the  disposition.

Bryonia  alone  has  among  its  chief  alternating  actions,  as  die
whole  list  of  its  symptoms  demonstrates,  pains  from  nwvemefU
and  especially  shooting  pains,  as  also  stitches  beneath  the  slemum
(in  the  scrobiculus)  on  raising  the  arm  (448),  and  on  making  a
fidse  step  it  occasions  shooting  in  other  parts  (520,  574).

The  negative  symptom  2  met  with  here  answers  espedaUy  to
hryonia  (558?);  few  medicines  (with  the  exception,  perhaps,  ci
ntix  vomica  and  rhus  toxicodendron  in  their  alternating  acticHi —
neither  of  which,  however,  are  suitable  for  the  other  symptoms)
shew  a  complete  relief  to  pains  during  rest  and  when  lying;
bryonta  does,  however,  in  an  especial  manner  (558,  and  many
other  bryonia-symptoms).

Symptom  3  is  met  with  in  several  medicines,  and  also  in
bryonia  (694).

Symptom  4  is  certaiQly,  as  fiu*  as  r^ards  ''  sickness  after  eat-
ing," met  with  in  several  other  medicines  {ignatia,  nux  vomica,
mercurius^  ferrum^  belladonna^  Pulsatilla,  caniharis),  but  neither  so
constantly  and  usually,  nor  with  relish  for  food,  as  in  bryoi\ia

(279).

As  regards  Symptom  5  several  medicines  certainly  cause  a
flow  of  saliva  like  water-brash,  just  as  well  as  bryonia  (282) ;  the
others,  however,  do  not  produce  the  remaining  symptoms  in  a
very  similar  manner.  Hence  bryonia  is  to  be  preferred  to  them
in  this  point.

Empty  eructation  (of  wind  only)  after  eating  (Symptom  6)  is
found  iu  few  medicines,  and  in  none  so  constantly,  so  usually,
and  to  such  a  great  degree,  as  in  bryonia  i^bb,  239).

To  7. — One  of  the  chief  symptoms  in  diseases  (see  Organon
of  Medicine,  %  213)  is  the  "  state  of  the  disposition,"  and  as  bry-
onia (778)  causes  this  symptom  also  in  an  exactly  similar  man-
ner— bryonia  is  for  all  these  reasons  to  be  preferred  in  this  case
to  all  other  medicines  as  the  homoeopathic  remedy.

Now,  as  this  woman  was  very  robust,  and  the  force  of  the  dis-
ease must  accordingly  have  been  very  considerable,  to  prevent
her  by  its  pain  firom  doing  any  work,  and  as  her  vital  forces,  as
has  been  observed,  were  not  consensually  affected,  I  gave  her
one  of  the  strongest  homosopathic  doses,  a  full  drop  of  the  pure


HOXCBOPATHIC  PRACnCK.  771

jttioeof  bryonia  root^*  to  be  taken  immediately,  and  bade  her
come  to  me  again  in  48  hours.  I  told  my  firiend  E.,  who  was
present,  that  within  that  time  the  woman  would  be  quite  cured,
but  he,  being  but  half  a  convert  to  homoeopathy,  expressed  his
doubts  about  it  Two  days  afterwards  he  came  again  to  ascer^
tain  the  result,  but  the  woman  did  not  return  then,  and,  in  fact,
never  came  back  again.  I  could  only  allay  the  impatience  of  my
fiiend  by  telling  him  her  name  and  that  of  the  village  where
she  lived,  about  three  miles  off,  and  advising  him  to  seek  her
out  and  ascertain  for  himself  how  she  was.  This  he  did,  and
her  answer  was :  "  What  was  the  use  of  my  going  back?  The
very  next  day  I  was  quite  well,  and  could  again  commence  my
washing,  and  the  day  following  I  was  as  well  as  I  am  still.  I
am  extremely  obliged  to  the  doctor,  but  the  like  of  us  have  no
time  to  leave  off  our  work ;  and  for  three  weeks  previously  my
illness  prevented  me  earning  anything."

W — e,  a  weakly,  pale  man  of  42  years,  who  was  constantly
kept  by  his  business  at  his  desk,  came  to  me  on  the  27th  De-
cember, 1816,  having  been  already  ill  five  days.

1.  The  first  evening  he  became,  without  manifest  cause,  sick
and  giddy,  with  much  eructation.

2.  The  following  night  (about  2  a.  m.)  sour  vomiting.
8.  The  subsequent  nights  severe  eructation.

4.  To-day  also  sick  eructation  of  fetid  and  sourish  taste.
6.  He  felt  as  if  the  food  lay  crude  and undigested in  his,
stomach.

6.  In  his  head  he  felt  vacant,  hollow  and  confused,  and  as  if
sensitive  therein.

7.  The  least  noise  was  painful  to  him.

8.  He  is  of  a  mild,  soft,  patient  disposition.
Here  I  may  observe : —

To  1.  That  several  medicines  cause  vertigo  with  nausea,  as^
well  as  Pulsatilla  (3),  which  produces  its  vertigo  in  the  evening  also
(7),  a  circumstance  that  has  been  observed  fix)m  very  few  others..
To  2.  Stramonium  and  nux  vomica  cause  vomiting  of  sour  and
sour-smelling  mucus,  but,  as  fisir  as  is  known,  not  at  night
Valerian  and  cocculus  cause  vomiting  at  night,  but  not  of  sour
stuff. Iron  alone  causes  vomiting  at  night  (61,  62),  and  can

'  AccordiDg  to  the  most  recent  deyeloptnent  of  our  new  system  the  ingestioD  of  a
single,  minutest  globule,  moistened  with  the  dedllionth  (x)  potential  deyelopment
would  haye  been  quite  adequate  to  effect  an  equally  rapid  and  complete  reooyery  •
indeed,  equally  certain  would  haye  been  the  mere  oUactioo  of  a  globule  the  aiie  of  a
mustard  seed  moistened  with  the  same  dynamization,  so  that  the  drop  of  pure  juiot
gtyen  by  me  m  the  abore  case  toa  robust  person,  should  not  be  imitated.


772  CASKS  ILl^ySTBATIYK, &C.

also  cause  sour  vomiting  (66),  but  not  the  other  symptoms
observed  here.

Pulsatilla^  however,  causes  not  only  sour  vomiting  in  the  eve-
ning (349,  356)  and  nocturnal  vomiting  in  genjeral,  but  also  the
other  s3^mptoms  of  this  case  not  found  among  those  of  iroiu

To  3.  Nocturnal  eructations  is  peculiar  io  jpulsatiUa  (296, 297).

To  4.  Feted,  putrid  (249)  and  sour  eructations  (301,  302)  aj-e
peculiar  to  pulsatiUa,

To  5.  The  sensation  of  indigestion  of  the  food  in  the  stomach
is  produced  by  few  medicines,  and  by  none  in  such  a  perfect  and
striking  manner  as  hj  puUatiUa  (321,  322,  827).

To  6.  With  the  exception  of  ignatia  (2)  which,  however,  can-
not produce  the  other  ailments,  the  same  state  is  only  produced
hy  puhatllla  (39  compared  with  40,  81).

To  7.  Pulsatilla  produces  the  same  state  (995),  and  it  also
causes  over-sensitiveness  of  other  organs  of  the  senses,  for  ex-
ample, of  the  sight  (107).  And  although  intolerance  of  noise  is
also  met  with  in  nux  vomi4:a^  ignatia,  and  aconite,  yet  these  me-
dicines are  not  homoeopathic  to  the  other  symptoms  and  still
less  do  they  possess  symptom  8,  the  mild  character  of  the  dis-
position, which,  as  stated  in  the  preface  to  pubaiillaj  is  particu-
larly indicative  of  this  plant.

This  patient,  therefore,  could  not  be  cured  by  anything  in  a
more  easy,  certain  and  permanent  manner  than  by  pubatilla,
which  was  accordingly  given  to  him  immediately,  but  on  account
of  his  weakly  and  delicate  state  only  in  a  ver^^  minute  dose,  i  c,
half-a-drop  of  the  quadrillionth  of  a  strong  drop  of  pulsatilla.*
This  was  done  in  the  evening.

The  next  day  he  was  free  from  all  ailments,  his  digestion  wa*^
restored,  and  a  week  thereafter,  as  I  was  told  by  him,  he
remained  free  from  complaint  and  quite  well.

The  investigation  in  such  a  slight  case  of  diseas^e,  and  the
choice  of  the  homa'opathic  remedj'  lor  it,  is  very  speedily  eflected
by  the  practitioner  who  has  had  only  a  little  experience  in  it,
and  who  either  has  the  s^-mptoms  of  the  medicine  in  his  memory,
or  who  knows  where  to  lind  them  readily ;  but  to  give  in  writiug
all  the  roiisons  y/ro  and  con  (which  would  be  perceived  by  the
mind  in  a  few  seconds)  gives  rise,  as  we  see,  to  tedious  prolixity.

For  the  convenience  of  treatment,  we  require  merely  to  indi-

*  According  to  our  present  kiK»wleii^^  and  c  xjxTit  nc\  the  ^anie  oljeot  would  have
U'tfU  attained  by  takuig  <«e  of  tbe  smallest  jrli.bulos  «if  pul^atiUa  x  (decillicaith
p.»u,*iK\v  and  with  equal  ceruunty  a  pinglc  ol&cti'ii  of  a  g%.»bulo  the  sire  of  a  mustard
6eod  cf  the  mme  potency  of  pulaatilli.


TWO  CASES  PROM  HAHNEMAKN'S  NOTE  BOOK.  773

cate  for  each  symptom  all  the  medicines  which  can  produce  the
same  symptoms  by  a  few  letters  {e.  g,,  Ferr.,  Chin.,  Rheum,  Puis.),
'  and  also  to  bear  in  mind  the  circumstances  under  which  they
occur,  that  have  a  determining  influence  on  our  choice  and  iii
the  same  way  with  all  the  other  symptoms,  by  what  medicine
each  is  excited,  and  from  the  list  so  prepared  we  shall  be  able
to  perceive  which  of  the  medicines  homoeopathically  covers  the
most  of  the  symptoms  present,  especially  the  most  peculiar  and
characteristic  ones, — and  this  is  the  remedy  sought  for.


TWO  GASES  FROM  HAHNEMANN'S  NOTE  BOOK.^

Case  I.

Julie  M.  a  country  girl ;  14  years  old ;  not  yet  menstruated.
12th  September,  1842.  A  month  previously  she  had  slept  in
the  sun.  Four  days  after  this  sleeping  in  the  sun,  the  frightful
idea  took  possession  of  her  that  she  saw  a  wolf,  and  six  days
thereafter  she  felt  as  if  she  had  received  a  great  blow  on  the
head.  She  now  spoke  irrationally ;  became  as  if  mad ;  wept
much ;  had  sometimes  difficulty  in  breathing ;  spat  white  mucus ;
could  not  tell  any  of  her  sensations.

She  got  Belladonnaj^  weakened  dynamization,  in  seven  table-
spoonfuls  of  water ;  of  this,  after  it  was  shaken,  a  tablespoonful
in  a  glass  of  water,  and  after  stirring  this,  one  teaspoonful  to  be
taken  in  the  morning.

16th. — Somewhat  quieter ;  she  can  blow  her  nose,  which  she
was  unable  to  do  during  her  madness ;  she  still  talks  as  much
nonsense,  but  docs  not  make  so  many  grimaces  while  talking.
She  wept  much  last  night.  Good  motion.  Tolerable  sleep.
She  is  still  very  restless,  but  was  more  so  before  the  Belladonna.
The  white  of  the  eye  full  of  red  vessels.  She  seems  to  have  a
pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck.

From  the  glass  in  which  one  tablespoonful  was  stirred,  one
teaspoonful  is  to  be  taken  and  stirred  in  a  second  glassful  of
water,  and  of  this  from  two  to  four  teaspoonfuls  (increasing  the
dose  daily  by  one  teaspoonful)  are  to  be  taken  in  the  morning.

20th. — Much  better ;  speaks  more  rationally ;  works  a  little ;
recognises  and  names  me  ;  and  wishes  to  kiss  a  lady  present
She  now  begins  to  shew  her  amorous  propensities ;  is  easily  put

'  Communicated  by  letter,  dated  24th  April,  1S43,  to  Dr.  Von  Bdoninghausen,  and
published  in  the  Neues  Archivj  Vol.  i. 1844.

*  [Dr.  R  tells  w  that  whenever  the  dilutioii  is  mi  iodieated,  it  is  imdentood  thai
the  60th  dilution  was  administered.]


774  TWO  cim  vbok

mapMrion,  and  takes  tfaingi  in  bad  pari;  aleepa  weD;
▼erj  often;  beoomes  angrjaboot  a  trifle;  eats  more  than  naoal;
wben  die  comes  to  her  senses  she  fikea  to  play,  but  only  jnst  as
a  little  child  would.

BeOadannOj  ag^oboleof  ahig^ier  potencjr:  seren  tabie^XMin-
Ibis  shaken  in  two  passes,  6  teaspoonfidsfiom  theseeond^aas
eailj  in  the  morning.'

28tL—  On  the  22d,  23d  and  24,  very  much  excited  daj  and
ni^ ;  great  lasdTioasnesB  in  her  acticms  and  wovds ;  she  polls
np  her  dothes  and  seeks  to  tonch  the  genitals  of  ochen ;  she
leadil J  gets  into  a  rage  and  beats  every  one.

HyoKyamuB  X%  seven  tableqKxynfblSy  hc^  one  table^xwofid
in  one  tnmblerfhl  of  water ;  in  the  morning  a  teaqxxmfoL

5th  October.  Forfiyedaysshe  would  eat  nothing;  complains
of  belly*ache;  for  the  last  few  days  leas  malicious  and  leas  las-
drions;  stools  rather  loose;  itching  all  over  the  body,  especial-
ly on  her  genitals ;  deep,  good.

Sacch.  Lactis  for  seven  days,  in  seven  tableqxwnfiils,  Ac

10th. — On  the  7th,  fit  of  excessive  anger;  she  aoo^t  to  strike
every  one.  The  next  day,  the  8th,  attack  of  fiight  and  fear,  d-
most  like  the  commencement  of  her  illness  (fear  of  an  imagina-
ry wolf;)  fear  lest  she  should  be  burnt  Since  then  she  has  be-
come quiet,  and  talks  rationally  and  nothing  indecent  for  the
last  two  days.

Scuxh,  Lcuctis,  kc.

14th. — Quite  good  and  sensible.

18th. — The  same,  but  severe  headache ;  inclination  to  deep
by  day :  not  so  cheerful.

New  sulphur  (new  dynamization  of  the  smallest  material  por-
tion) one  globule  in  three  tumblers ;  in  the  morning  one  tea-
q)oonful.

22d. — Very  well ;  very  little  headache.

Sulphur^  the  next  dynamization  in  two  tumblers.

She  went  on  with  the  sulphur  occasionally  imtil  November,
at  which  time  she  was  and  still  remains  a  healthy,  rationd,
amiable  girL

Case  IL

O — ^t,  an  actor,  33  years  old,  married.  14th  January,  1843.
For  several  years  he  had  been  frequently  subject  to  sore  throat,

*  [The  meaninfl^  of  tbew  directioiif>,  which  ki  not  verr  ohTioQ^  wems  to  be  that  the
globule  shall  be  dif^olreJ  id  fieven  tablespoonfuU  of  water,  and  of  this  a  tablespauo
lol  is  to  be  stirred  iu  a  Mxxad  tiiniiJw  of  water,  aud  ir «au  iIms  secund  glaaa  a  t«a-
^KXNifiil  is  to  be  giTen  fur  ax  suoces^ve  moniiiig&J


HAHNXXAim'S  KOn  BOOK.  775

as  also  now  for  a  montH  past.  The  previous  sore  throat  had
lasted  six  weeks.  On  swallowing  his  saliva,  a  pricking  sensa-
tion ;  feeling  of  contraction  and  excoriation.

When  he  has  not  the  sore  throat  he  suffers  from  a  pressure  in
the  anus,  with  violent  excoriative  pains ;  the  anus  is  then  in*
flamed,  swollen  and  constricted ;  it  is  only  with  a  great  effort
that  he  can  then  pass  his  &ces,  when  the  swollen  hemorrhoidal
vessels  protude.

On  the  15th  January,  he  took,  in  the  morning  before  break-
fsist  a  teaspoonful  of  a  solution  of  one  globule  of  belladonna  X^
then  the  lowest  dynamization,  dissolved  in  seven  tablespoonfuls
of  water,  of  which  a  tablespoonM  was  well  stirred  up  in  a  tum-
blerful of  water.

15th. — ^In  the  evening  aggravation  of  the  sore  throat

16th. — Sore  throat  gone,  but  the  affection  of  the  anus  returned
flammation, swelling,  throbbing  pain  and  constriction ; — also  in
the  evening  a  painful  motion.

He  confessed  having  had  a  chancre  eight  years  previously,
which  had  been,  as  usual,  destroyed  by  caustics,  after  which  all
the  above  affections  had  appeared.

18th. — Merc,  viv,  one  globule  of  the  lowest  new  djmamization
I,  (which  contains  a  vastiy  smaller  amount  of  matter  than  the
usual  kind),  prepared  in  the  same  manner,  and  to  be  taken  in
the  same  way  as  the  belladonna  (the  bottle  being  shaken  each
time),  one  spoonful  in  a  tumberful  of  water  well  stirred.

2()th. — Almost  no  sore  throat  Anus  better,  but  he  still  feels
there  excoriation  pain  after  a  motion ;  he  has  however  no  more
throbbing,  no  more  swelling  of  the  anus,  and  no  inflammation ;
anus  less  contracted.

One  globule  of  mere.  viv.  (^\q)  the  second  dynamization  of  the
same  kind ;  prepared  in  the  same  way,  and  taken  in  the  morning.

25th. — Throat  almost  quite  well ;  but  in  the  anus,  raw  pain
and  severe  shootings;  great  pain  in  the  anus  aft^r  a  motion ;  still
some  contraction  of  it  and  heat

SOth. — In  the  aft;emoon,  the  last  dose  (one  teaspoonful)*  On
the  28th  the  anus  was  better;  sore  throat  returned;  pretty  se-
vere excoriation  pain  in  the  throat.

On  globule  in  milk-sugar  for  seven  days ;  prepared  and  taken
in  the  same  manner.

7th  February. — Severe  ulcerative  pain  in  the  threat.  Belly-
ache, but  good  stools ;  several  in  succession,  with  great  thirst
In  the  anus  all  is  right


776  TWO  CAS88  FBOH  HAHHEHAKN'S  HOTE  BOOK.

Hulphur  \  in  seven  tablespoonftils,  as  above.

18th. — Had  ulcerative  pain  in  the  throat,  especially  on  swal-
lowing his  saliva,  of  which  he  has  now  a  large  quantity,  espe-
cially copious  on  the  11th  and  12th.  Severe  contraction  of  the
anus,  especially  since  yesterday.

He  now  smelt  here  merc,^  and  got  to  take  as  before  tmtc.  v,  'j^,
one  globule  in  seven  tablespoonfuls  of  water,  and  half  a  spoonftil
of  brandy.

20th.— Throat  better  since  the  18th ;  he  has  suffered  much
with  the  anus ;  the  motion  causes  pain  when  it  is  passing ;  less
thirst

Milk-sugar  in  seven  tablespoonfuls.

3d  March. — ^No  more  sore  throat  On  going  to  stool  a  blood-
less hsemorrhoidal  knot  comes  down  (formerly  this  was  accom-
panied with  burning  and  raw  pain),  now  with  merely  itching  on
the  spot.

To  smell  acid,  nitri.  and  then  to  have  milk-sugar  in  seve

Almost  no  more  pain  after  a  motion ;  yesterday  some  blood
along  with  the  motion  (an  old  symptom).  Throat  well ;  only  a
little  sensitive  when  drinking  cold  water.

Olfaction  of  ocic?.  nitri,  (olfaction  is  performed  by  opening
small  bottle  containing  an  ounce  of  alcohol  or  brandy  where
one  globule  is  dissolved,  and  smelt  for  an  instant  or  two.

He  remained  permanently  cured.*

*  [The  following  account  of  an  illness  with  wbich  Hahnemann  was  attacked,  which
he  gives  in  a  letter  to  the  same  correspondent,  dated  28th  April,  1833,  will  be  read
with  interest

"Although  I  kept  myself  very  calm,  yet  the  annoyance  I  received  from  ♦  ♦  ♦  ♦  ♦
may  have  contributed  to  bring  upon  me  the  suffocative  catarrh,  that  for  seven  dajn
before  and  14  days  after  the  10th  of  April  [Hahnenuiun*s  birthday],  threatened  to
choke  me,  with  instantaneous  attacks  of  intolerable  itching  in  the  glottis,  that  would
have  caused  spasmodic  cough,  had  it  not  deprived  mo  of  breath  altogether ;  irritation
of  the  fauces  with  the  finger,  so  as  to  cause  sickness,  was  the  only  thing  that  restored
the  breathing,  and  that  but  slowly ;  there  were  besides  other  severe  symptoms — ^very
great  shortness  of  breath  (without  constriction  of  the  chest),  total  loss  of  ap|)etite  for
food  and  drink,  disgust  at  tobacco,  bruised  feeling  and  weariness  of  all  the  limbs,
constant  drowsiness,  inability  to  do  the  least  work,  presentiment  of  death,  Ac  The
whole,  neighbourhood  proved  their  great  affection  for  me  by  sending  so  frequently  to
inquire  how  I  was,  that  I  felt  quite  ashamed.  It  is  only  within  these  four  days  that
I  have  felt  myself  out  of  danger ;  I  obtained  relief  by  two  olfactions,  of  ci^.  er.  X**
first,  and  then  of  calc;  amhra  too  was  of  use.  And  so  the  Great  Protector  of  all
that  \f>  true  and  g<.K)d  will  grant  me  as  much  more  life  upon  this  earth  as  seemcth  good
to  hid  wisdoiiL  ]


GENERAL INDEX.


Abscess  of  periniBinB,  S2 ;  of  labi%  S6 ;
of  antrum,  148

Absorption  of  goDorrboMl  matter,  18.

Aocideotal  discoyeries  of  medidnal  pow-
en,687.

AeonitCy  pathogenetic  effects  oi,  291 ;  the-
rapeutic uses  o^  291 ;  in  purpura  mi-
liiuis,  482,  693.

Aoticms  of  medNmefl,  jninuuy  and  ae-
ooodarj,  266.

Acute  diseases^  terminate  in  recovery  or
death,  411 ;  allopathic  treatment  o(
T88.

Adulteratiaas  of  drugs,  484^

iEfiouLAPius  in  the  baUnca,  410.

AetctUu8  in  asthma,  297.

^a^AwM,pathogenetic  effects  o(  271;  in
imbecility,  271.

Jff^ariciu,  pathogenetic  and  tiierapeutic
ft&cts  o(,  803.

Aggravations,  medicinal,  473, 474.

Agues,  remedies  in,  260 ;  different  kinds
0^628.

Air,  things  that  spoil  the,  176.

Allopathy,  on,  736;  derivation  of  the.
word,  742.

Alterative  treatment  of  syphilis,  112.

Ammonia^  in  gooorrhosa,  23 ;  in  syphilis,
12a

Anatomical  school,  the,  422.

Anatomy,  uses  o^  to  medicine  428.

Atumane^  pathogenetic  and  therapeutic
effects  o(  293.

Animal  fnagnetUm,  therapeutic  uses  o(
464.

Animal  requirements,  on  the  satisfaction
of  our,  227.

Animals,  dead  bodies  o^  should  be  buried,
226 ;  6i^>eriments  on,  value  to  thera-
peutics, 265,  721.

Anticyra,  celebrated  for  its  white  helle-
bore, 584 ;  and  for  its  black,  613 ;  some-
times implied  hellebore^  596.

Antidote  for  poison,  there  is  no  universal,
828.

Antidotes  to  some  drugs,  322

ApothecariuH,  attack  on  Hahnemann  by
the,  696;  privileges  of  the,  698,  710.

Apothecary  system,  origin  of  the,  429.


Arnica,  in  giddhiess,  268 ;  pathogenetic
effects  of;  268 ;  in  dysentery,  269 ;  dose
of,  for  children,  269 ;  in  glandular  swel-
lings, 269;  vinegar  the  antidote  to,
826  ;  case  of  poisoning  by,  826 ;  in  coo-
tmued  fever,  880;  bad  efiects  o(  in  a
febrile  influenza,  889.

AneniCf  pathogenetk  effiscts  ct,  288 ;  the-
rapeutio  uses  of,  288 ;  in  hych^pbobia,
289 ;  in  a  febrile  disease,  6  64k
Asthma,  case  of  spasmodic,  817.

Attenuaticm  of  medicine,  on  the  ettreme,
768;  Korsakoff's  ideas  respecting,
763  ;  disapproval  of  excessive,  764,

Attenuations  used  by  HAHKEXAxii  at  dif-
ferent periods,  765.

Balaanu  in  gonorrhcsa,  26.

Barik,  in  syphilis,  118 ;  production  of  ague
by,  267,  616 ;  enormous  consumption
o^  846, 478,  486,  519.

Batha  in  gonorriiGea,  28.

Bed-sores,  prevention  ot  207w

BeUodonHa,  in  hydrophobia,  161,  278  ;
pathogenetic  effects  o^  278 ;  therapeu-
tic uses  o^  278 ;  duration  of  action  o^
276 ;  history  of  the  discovery  of  its
prophylactic  power  in  scarlet-fever,
878 ;  dose  ot,  in  scarle^fever,  879 ;
preparations  of;  880 ;  dose  of;  as  a  pro-
phyhictic,  881 ;  action  of;  increased  fay
adds,  382  ;  probably  prophylactio  of
measles,  882;  in  the  first  stages  of
scarlet-fever,  888 ;  oontra-indicatiolB
for  its  use,  884 ;  on  the  power  of  small
doses  of;  886:  in  scarlet-fsver,  488,
698.

Bklloste's  pills,  114*

Bite  of  mad  dogs,  1 68.

Bitters,  observations  on,  671.

Black's  mercurial  preparation,  3, 118.

Bleeding,  in  syphilis,  126 ;  bad  efiecta  oC
687.

Botanical  affinities  of  plants  no  guide  to
their  therapeutic  action,  257.

Bougies,  in  stricture,  49 ;  elastic,  49 ;  best
shape  o^  60 ;  bom,  62 ;  medicated,  62.

Brandy  in  lying-in  women,  176.

Brown's  Elements  of  Medicine,  obBwa>
tiiQDS  on,  860,  646.


T78


OSHXBAL  INDEX.


•S2 ;  fjiiiptooM  it  ii  iDdkated  lor,  MS ;
B  the  tji^oid  ferer,  fdloving  dieted
766.

Biiboei»76;  non-Teoereal,  80;  ordmuy
UmtmoA  oC  80;  treatmeoi  ci,  84 ;
opening  oC  86 ;  in  infimta,  146.

Boriftb  in  cfamtlieB,  erib  ol^  S82.

Bnnia,  treatmoit  oC  460, 466,  648,  626,
626, 6U ;  Dunx  oo,  666 ;  bud  effBcto
of  eoU  water  in,  666;  koi  tpiriU  and
turpentine  in,  686 ;  Bbuaxdi  Bbll  oo,
666,  642;  Bmbib  on,  686;  KxmBH
00,640^642;  8ti«hhamoo,642;  A«-
1IB80H  on,  648.

Bntdiei's  AapB,  on  the  cuurtmclion  o^
226.

Obbinet-makefB,  defonnttj  o^  18L

CtOomel  m  typtaH^  110.

Cmmphar,  m  MOiraiiQn,  128;  pnthoge-
netic  effects  oi,  296 ;  thenpeotie  nsea
oC  296;  the  antidote  to  opium,  828 ;
caeeofpniwniiy  by,  828 ;  the  antidote
to  eantharis  and  9quiU,  824 ;  the  anti-
dote to  coeeulut,  826  :  the  antidote  to
megereum,  829 ;  in  febrile  infhimia,
886;  in  the  firtt  stage  of  cbolera,  768;
fomigatioDS  in  cholera,  764 ;  prophy-
lactic and  curatiye  of  dK>lera,  762.

CakolatioDs  of  the  quantity  of  medicine,
in  bomoBopathic  doses,  728.

Candles,  danger  of  many  lighted,  177.

Candidate  for  the  degree  of  II  D.,  to  a,
662.

Oemnabie,  pathogenetic  effects  o(  298.

CantharU  in  gleet,  42.

Caries,  Tenereal,  188.

Oises  of  chancre  in  a  woman,  70 ;  of  sy-
philitic phthisis,  96  ;  of  syphilis,  186 ;
of  mercurial  disease,  149 ;  of  oolico-
dynia,  804 ;  of  spasmodic  asthma,  817 ;
of  continued  fever,  380 ;  of  remittent
ieyer,  381 ;  of  febrile  influenza,  882;
of  periodical  and  hebdomadal  diseases,
841 ;  of  hebdomadal  hematuria,  842  ;
of  paralysiB  cured  by  cold,  368,  462  ;
of  scarlet-feyer  that  led  to  the  disco-
yery  of  prophylactic,  876 ;  of  scarlet-
feyer,  881 ;  illustrative  of  homcsopathic
practice,  760 ;  of  gastrodynia  cured  by
brtfimia,  770  ;  of  gastric  derangement
cured  hj  puUatilloy  771 ;  of  nympho-
mania cored  by  belladonna  and  kyoe-
cfumui,  778 ;  of  venereal  sore  throat


md aHorein aDoa curau,  lyy
wmlpkmr  and  nitrie  meid,  774 ;  ofaofib-
calive  catMih  cored  faj  eojfim,  eal-
tarea  and  aai6ra^  776.

Caaea,  node  of  taking  down,  448.

Oatanh,  caae  of  saflbcatiye^  776.

Ganse,  treatment  Of  the,  682.

OHMfietin  atrietore,  68.

Gotainty  in  medical  ptaetiee,  807.

Cesspools,  oGoatmctioD  of ,  220 ;
oi;22a

OaBc  iriiy  eateo  by  pregnant
186.

OAaMoaitila,  pathogcnetie  efleeta  oC  267;
in  the  after-eaffermga  of  acaikt-fevcr,
886;  in  toofthacfae,  667.

Chaiicra,66  ;  evil  of  baraii^  01^69,647:
in  the  female,  68, 70;  felse,  71

Charooal  fires^  miwholeoomenesa  oC  179,

Chemistiy,  valoe  oC  to  thetrnpeatiei^  249,
424,  648,  678.

Ckm'r}f4mtrd  water,  pathogenetic  eftcti
of;  298;  therapeutic  one  of;  294.

ChlorosiB  combined  witii  syphOia,  126.

Cholera,  Asiatic,  core  and  preyention  oC
768 ;  eompAor  in  the  first  stage  o^  768 ;
etqmtm  m  the  second  stage  ct,  766 ;
verairum  album  in,  765 ;  ce^jeput  oil,
in,  766 ;  copper plaiee  in,  755 ;  bryonia
and  rhut  for  the  consecutive  fever  ci,
766 ;  preventives  for,  755 ;  success  of
honuEopatfaic  treatment  of;  756 ;  mode
of  propagation  o^  756  ;  proofii  of  its
contagiousness,  757  ;  miasm,  probably
consisting  of  animated  beings,  757 ;
mode  of  becoming  habituated  to^  759  ;
camphor,  prophylactic  and  curative  ci,
761 ;  chlorine  not  destructive  to,  762.

Chordee,  14 ;  dironic,  87.

Chronic  diseases,  insufficiency  of  the  old
system  in,  414 ;  the  test  of  a  system
of medicine,  625; allopathic  treat-
ment o^  741.
Cieuta,  pathogenetic  effects  of,  271.
Cinchona,m  a  hebdomadal  discaae,  841 ;
enormous  consumption  of;  845,  478,
485,  519; external  employment  o^
467;  on  a  proposed  substitute  for,
476 ;  habitat  of;  479.
dtrie  acid  the  antidote  to  ttramonium,
827.

Climate,  815.

Clinical  experience  as  a  meanf<  of  ascer-
I taining  the  powers  of  drugs,  679,  687.


osNSRAL  nmix.


779


OocetUtu,  pathogenetic  eflEbete  of  271 ;  in
malignant  typhus,  271 ;  camphor  the
antidote  to,  825 ;  case  of  pownning
bj,  826.

OooxBuaN  on  the  seat  of  gonorrhooa,  11.

Coddling,  bad  effects  oi^  191.

Cofft€^  cure  of  uterine  hemorrhage  by,
186;  injurious  e£kcts  of,  on  children,
282, 406  ;  pathogenetic  effects  of,  271 ;
therapeutic  uses  oj^  271;  antidote  to
opium,  272 ;  bad  effects  of,  in  nervous
patients,  810 ;  increases  the  action  of
camphor t  824 ;  the  antidote  to  vera
trrnn,  827;  on  the  effects  oi^  891;
purely  a  medicinal  substance,  892;
primary  action  ol^  898;  headache
caused  by,  896,  408 ;  bad  effects  o^
899 ;  secondary  action  o^  401 ;  re-
moval of  bad  effects  ot,  406 ;  medi-
cinal uses  o^  407  ;  palliative  action  o(
408 ;  in  purpura  miliaris,  696.

Cold  and  heat,  medicinal  action  oi^  468.

Colioodynia,  case  o(  306.

Condylomata,  venereal,  73.

Confectionery,  unwholesomeneas  of^  288.

Oonium,  pathogenetic  effects  o(,  270 ;  in
indurated  glands,  270 ;  in  cancer,  270 ;

Contrast  of  the  old  and  new  systems,
712.

Corpse-washers,  use  ci,  222.

Commve  wMimate,  in  syphilis,  108 ;  in
dysentery,  698.

Cow-pox,  course  o^  647.

OrocttSy  pathogenetic  and  therapeutic
action  of,  298.

Croup,  Immt  sponge  in,  698.

Curative  mode  of  treatment,  the,  468,
618.

Cure,  requisites  to  effect  a,  448.

Cures,  on  wonderful,  417.

Dead,  inspection  of  the,  222.

Debility,  on  direct  and  indirect,  869.

Diet,  in  gonorrhoBa,  21 ;  during  mercurial
treatment,  182 ;  conversation  with  my
brother  on,  182;  and  regimen,  808,
476 ;  prevailing  errors  respecting,  810 ;
bad  effects  of  a  too  rigid,  810 ;  Hif-
Poc&ATES  on,  814.

Dietetic  regulations  cannot  be  too  sim-
ple, 314.

Dietetics,  absurdities  of  modem,  182.

Digitalis,  pathogenetic  effects  ol,  279;
therapeutic  uses  o(  280 ;  long  lasting
action  o(  280.


Dihients  in  gODonhcBa,  22.

Disease,  good  moral  effects  of,  182 ;  in-
creased susceptibility  to  the  action  ol
medicines  in,  464 ;  definition  ol.  720.

Diseases,  slight,  do  not  require  medidae,
471 ;  with  lew  symptoms,  treatment
of;  471.

Dispensatories,  origin  oi^  429.

Dispensing  by  physicians,  enactments
against,  480.

Dispensmg  medicines,  on,  696;  what
constitutes,  697,  708.

Dissecting  rooms,  pracautions  respecting,
228.

Ditches,  dangers  attending  the  diyiiig
up  o^  218.

Doses,  minuteness  of  the  homcBopathic,
699;  to  be  used  in  all  cases  of  disease,
764 ;  disapproval  of  excessive  atten-
uation of  the,  766;  to  be  used  in
proving  drugs,  768.

Drotera,  in  catarrh  and  cough,  294';  in
hooping  cough,  698 ;  mcrease  of  power
oi^  by  excessive  suocussion,  788.

Dry  gonorrhoea,  18, 80.

Jhd&xmara,  in  syphilis,  1 18 ;  pathogene-
tic effects  o^  272 ;  therapeutic  uses
oi;  272.

Dynamic  action  of  medicines,  466.

Dysentery,  commve  tublimOU  in,  698.

DzoNDi,  Professor,  on  bums,  636.

EUctrieUy,  medicinal  effects  of;  468.

Empyema  cured  by  a  sword  thrust,  18L

Enantiopathic  system,  261,  624.

Epidemics,  protection  from  infection  by,
166 ;  prevention  o^  212.

Erysipelas  combined  with  syphilis,  126.

EuLxa's  proficiency  in  mathematics  pro-
moted by  his  blindness,  182.

Examinations  for  the  doctor's  degree,
nature  of  the,  742.

Exciting  causes  of  disease,  440.

Experience}  the  medicine  of,  486.

Experiments  on  the  human  body  with
drugs,  268.

External  appearance  of  plants,  value  of
to  therapeutics,  264.

Famine  a  source  of  pestOenoe,  224.

Favourite  remedies,  581.

Fever,  mercurial,  62,  188,  666 ;  phuM
for  eradicating  a,  208;  on  the  treat-
ment of  a,  666,  631.

Fevers,  on  continued  and  remitteDt»  829.


780


aiBKBBAL  mVESu


FieldJiospitda,  on  llie  ^xnfltraBtkn  o(

•Fig-wartai  78.

ffuh-markets,  on  tho  C(n8tnietiono(  226.

Ilowen  m  a  room,  evils  o(  176.

Food  neoeflsaij  toman,  on  Uie,  89L

Foreign  drugs,  scarcity  of^  484 ;  on  sub-
stitntes  for,  506.

FBEDxaiGK  HAHMSMAirN,  Dotioe  df  286.

Friction,  effects  of,  on  steel,  780.

FUctioos,  mercurial,  106.

Friend  of  health,  the,  156.

Frost-bite,  treatment  oi,  468.

Fruit,  danger  of  exhalations  from,  177.

FomigationB,  mercorial,  106;  uaeleas-
nees  o^  178.

Galen's  Bystem,  421,  692.

^kmtboge,  carbonate  of  potash  the  anti-
dote o^  826.

Gangrene  of  prepuce,  67.

Gastric  derangement  cured  hypvUatilla,
•771.

Gastrodjnia  cured  by  6ryofMa,  770k

General  remedies,  525,  664.

Oeum  in  intermittent,  298.

GiETANNBR  oo  Venereal  disease,  6  et  teq.

Glands,  effects  of  pressure  on  enlarged,
175.

Gleets  89.

Globules,  on  the  medication  of^  736 ;  va-
rious sises  used  by  Hahnkhann,  786.

Oold,  in  suicidal  mania,  695,  7tS2;  pow-
ers developed  in,  by  trituration,  782 ;
doses  of,  employed  by  Hahnemann,
782.

GoDorrhcea,  in  the  male,  11 ;  in  tiie  male,
treatrr  ent  o^  20 ;  a  local  disease,  23  ;
in  the  female,  S3 ;  in  the  female  treat-
ment o^  86 ;  secondary,  in  the  male,
89 ;  secondary,  in  the  female,  44w

Good  in  hurtful  things,  180i

Gourmand,  picture  oi  a,  228.

Gout  combined  with  syphilis,  126.

Grave,  fatal  results  from  opening  a,  222.

Gttaiae  in  syphilis,  117.

Hahnemann's  discoveries,  reception  they
met  with  from  the  profession,  866.

Hahnemann's  son,  notice  of,  235.

Hallee,  his  services  to  medicine,  423 ;
on  veratrum,  576.

Hardening  the  bxly,  on,  191.

Health,  things  capable  of  deranging  the,
441.

Heat  and  cold,  medicinal  action  o(  468.


IfdUbcre,  bUnk,  dato^oD  of,  611 ;  onr
hdUhomu  nigtr,  618 ;  medicmal  effects
o(  615 ;  seeds  o(  616,

Hellebore^  white^  our  verairvm  albtan,
676;  symptoms  produced  by,  661;
habitat  of,  684;  best  kind  k,  564;
best  season  for  collecting,  686 ;  medi-
cinal  uses  of^  686 ;  mode  of  admhiis-
tration  of,  689,  690 ;  sabetanees  mixed
with,  602;  doseof;600.

Helleborism  of  the  andeots,  417 ;  diMer-
tatioQ  OQ  the,  669;  when  it  waa  prac-
ticed, 691 ;  ancient  aathors  on,  691 ;
seasons  for  practising,  596 ;  diseases
contra-indici^ing  it^696;  diseases  for
wfaieh  it  was  indicated,  696 ;  prepara-
tory treatment  for,  698.

Hellebonu  niger^  pathogenetic  effects  of,
292;  therapeutic  Oses  of,  292.

Hematnria,  case  of  hebdomadal,  848»

Hemlotk  in  syphilis,  120.

He  par  ndphurU,  for  the  bad  effeds  of
mercury,  162 ;  in  itch,  449  ;  in  cronp,
698.

HippooaATSS,  dietetios  of  814;  tfanple
practice  o^  821,  420;  homcBopatfaic
principle  enundatod  by  460.

Hoffmann's  theory  of  disease,  636.

Homoeopathic  doctrine,  spirit  of  the,  617.

Homoeopathic  principle,  ancient  bints
respecting  the,  460.

Homceoputhic  system,  first  enunciation
of  the,  265 ;  explanation  of  the,  626.

Homoeopathy,  Hahnemann's  account  of
his  discovery  of^  512;  derivation  of
the  word,  659  ;  and  homopathy,  diffar-
ence  between,  659 ;  mode  of  disprov-
ing, if  false,  660 ;  discovery  of  speci-
fics by,  692 ;  how  it  may  be  eradi-
cated, 706.

Hooping-cough,  drosera  in,  698.

Hospital,  on  the  construction  of  a  fever,
205 ;  fever,  treatment  of;  631.

HuFELAND,  his  Opinion  of  Hahnemann,
850;  letter  to,  511;  an  opponent  to
simplicity  in  medicine,  686.

Humidity,  bad effects  of,  on  children,

230.

Humoral  pathology,  587.

Hunter  8  experiments  with  gonorrfaopa,
20 ;  mode  of  treating  stricture,  52, 63.

Hurtful  things,  good  in,  180.

Hydrocyanic  acid,  pathogenetic  efiects
of,  298.


OBNXBAL INDKX.


781


Hydrophobic  tympUnm  o(  168;  BO0-
trums  for,  169,  389;  beUathnna  in,
161,  278;  hyoacjfomui  in,  161;  caaea
o^  161 ;  chronic,  162 ;  pioportioii  of
bitten  persons  affected  bj,  162,  890;
arsenic  in,  289 ;  not  preyented  by  ex-
cising the  bitten  part,  648.

HyQ9cyamu8^  in  h7dr(^)bobiA,  161 ;  pa-
thogenetio  e£Eect8  o^  276 ;  therapeatie
iiaes  o(  276;  duration  of  action  oi^
276;  in  toothache,  668;  in  ^phua»
684.

IgnaHa^  pathogenetic  effects  o^  27.9;
therapeutic  uses  (d^  279 ;  viMgotr  the
antidote  to,  827 ;  caae  of  poiaoning
by,  827  ;  in  continued  fever,  880.

Infimts,  syphilis  in,  144.

Infection,  protection  against,  167.

Influenza,  an  epidemic  of  febrile,  882b

Injections,  in  gonorrhcaa,  21,  26,  86 ;  in
gleet,  43

Inoculation  of  gonorrbooal  matter;  21.

Inaane,  on  the  treatment  of  the,  248.

Insanity,  action  of  tobacco  in,  277.

Instinct  of  the  atomach  in  'n^lfn'Wft,  887.

Inundations,  treatment  of^  218.

Ipecacuanha^  therapeutic  uaeao^  281;
in  scarlet  fever,  876 ;  external  use  oC
467.

Irritations,  incompatibility  of  two  simi-
lar, 447«

Itch,  venereal,  92;  treatment  o(  449;
infection  by,  649.

Joiners,  deformity  o^  181.

ILkmpf's  clysters,  689,  668.

Kkyskk's  drag^  in  syphilia,  114.

Kitchen  materia  medica,  666.

Klock£mbring,  insanity  ot,  248 ;  cunoya
preacriptioQ  fer  hia  ovn  malady  by,
246.

Korsakoff,  his  tubes  fer  globule^  786 ;
his  mode  of  saturatix^  globules^  786 ;
his  ideas  Tespecting  the  transmissioD
of  medicinal  pover.  708.

KoTZEBUB,  satire  o(  against  KuHnoDf-
BUNo,  248 ;  pretended  Goie  o(  661.

Lanes,  evils  o^  226.

Lead^  pathogenetic  effects  o(  287.

Lb  Daean^s  bougies,  62.

Ledutn^  in  syphilis,  118;  pathogenetic
effects  oi^  282;  therapeutic  uses  o(
282;  doseo^  288;  in  a  febrile  influe-
ensa,841.

Liberality,  oa  profwaiona],  862.


Liberthusm,  fi^y  o(  329.
Lifrhtaing,  cure  of  paralysis  by,  18L
LimMoater  in  gononrboBa,  21,  86.
Lijuurdi  insdrrfaous  taatide,  89;  iB.8f<»

phUi8,12a
Lobeliain  syphilis,  118.
Xo/tum  temuUntunif  pathogenetic  effaote

o(  299 ;  therapeutic  uses  of;  299.
Lues  venerea,  88.
Lunar  causiie  in  stricture,  62.
LuTHxa,  comparison  of  Habnxkavn  wklv

621.
Lying  in  state,  evils  o1^  222.
Magnet,  norik  pole  of  the^  in  toothachab

«6a
Man,  on  the  reason  of;  486.
Manufectoriea,  regulations  for,  226.
Marshes,  on  the  drying  up  oC  217.
Masked  syphilis,  90.
Materia  medica,  aouBces  of  the  commoOt

426,  601, 664.
Medical  observer,  qualification  fer  a,  724.
Medicinal  agents  absolute  in  their  power,

627.
Medicinal  diseases,  production  o(  747;

incurability  of  some,  749.
Medicinal  substances  used  as  food,  891.
Medicine  of  experience,  436.
Medicine,  on  the  necessity  of  aregenenb-

tion,  611.
Medicines,  on  the  administration  of;  819 ;

primary  and  secondary  actions  o(  898;


601,  664 ;  not  unconditionally  whdba-

some,  407,  461 ;  on  the  pathogenetie

effects  o^  461 ;  mode  of  aacertaining

their  powers,  462,  721 ;  thdr  curative

powers,  on  what  dependent  I  621;th9

homoBopathic  practitioner  has  a  tiijaX

to  administer  bis  own,  704
MaLAMTOs,  empbymant  of  wfuirum  bj,

67L
Mklanctbok,  Hutbland  compared  wifti

621.
Mercurial  fever,  62, 188,  666.
Merewrkd  oifUment,  102; uncertainly

o(  108 ;  on  the  rubbing  in  of,  467.
Mercurial  preparationa^  98.
Mercurial  trc»tment^  on  the  cvdinaiy,

664.
Mercurioui  §olubili8,  preparation  q(  9i

161 ;  in  syphilis,  181,  666,  668.
Mercury,  to  obtain  pure,  4;  effects  of

tbo.aboM.o^  189.;  antidatfi  to thaof


782


OXHSBAL  INDSX.


fecto  ci,  161 ;  oompand  with  ijpht-

h^fS6;  patbogenetie  eflecteoi;287;

kk  the  Uad  dJaeme,  288;  conflicting

opiniooB  respectiiig  the  actioQ  (<  848;

best  prepftimtiao  o^  888,  868.
ifemmtm,  therapeutic  uses  <<  484.
Methods  of  treatii^  diaeaae,  488,  62S.
Mezertttm^  in  sjphilia, 118;  eamfkmr

the  antidote  io^  829 ;  caae  of  poiaoD-

ing  by,  829.
Milttary  ferer,  diflRerent from acaiiet-

ferer,  480;  symptoms  oC  480,  896 ;

treatment  of;  896.
MUUf^liwn,  in  hemorrhage,  289.
IGzed  method  of  treating  syphilis,  118.
Moderatioo,  advantages  ci,  28a
MoMtare,  bad  cfieeto  oC  178.
Horbific  agents  noi  absolute  in  their

power.  827.
Hame,  treatment  of  the,  622.
Kasal  bones,  venereal  affections,  oi;97.
Hbtore,  healing  power  oi,  488.
Haftnre's  processes  of  healing  disease  noi

worthy  of  imitation,  488.
Hervons  debility^  on,  643.
KnOral  ao/Zt,  in  gonorrfaoBa,  26.
Kight  stools  in  a  room,  danger  oC  178.
mtraU  ofmercyrjf  in  syphilis,  118.
JfUre  in  gonorrhcBa,  26.
A^itre,  tpiriU  of,  in  typhus,  636.
Nodes,  venereal,  187.
KoD-mercurial  remedies  Cor  syphilis,  116.
Hon  venereal  gomonhflBa,  20.
Nostrums,  for  hydrophobia,  169.  889;

for  toothache,  666.
Nota  bene  for  the  reviewers,  669.
Hursery,  picture  of  an  unhealthy,  230.
NtOmeg,  pathogenetic  eflfecto  oi,  808;

therapeutic  uses  of,  303.
Nux  wwnico, pathogenetic  effects,  oi;  278;
therapeutic  usee  of,  278;  in  a  case  of
spasmodic  asthma,  318 ;  in  a  febrile
disease,  664;  in  toothache,  667.
Nymphomania,  case  of;  761.
Obedieuce  of  patients,  308.
Old  clothes,  regulations  Cor  dealers  in,

213.
Oleander,  in  palpitation,  282.

Onydkia,  venereal,  92.

Ophthalmia,  gonorrfwBal,  16,  32.

Ofivwi,  pathogenetic  effects  of;  2?3;
palliative  use  of;  283 ;  in  mania,  288 ;
^  the  mercurial  disease,  286;  the
fg^BAM  to  c— ifAor,  828;  in  remil-


I


I


tent  feren,  882 ;  in  aariet-ferer,  874:
in  sleepiness,  488.
Ordinary  treatment,  exposure  of  ^

827, 662, 884.
pALUks  on  AcXMorv,  676.
Pklliative  mode  of  treatment,  on  the,

466,619,624.
Pklliativai^  disadvantages  oC  287,  488;

when  they  are  to  be  used,  468.
P^>er-mills,rqgnlationB  lespecting,  218.
Panlysia,  case  oC  cured  bycold,  868,482.
Paimpfaymusis,  86.
PmriMt  in  cramps»  271.
PUhoiogy,  uses  d;  to  medicine,  498;

definition  oi;7l8.
Periodical  diseases^  cases  oC  841.
PncmL's  poetical  talent  jncremsd  by

MindnesB,  182.
Pmup^s  bougies^  62.
Philosophy,  old  womenTs,  174^
Phimosis,  64 ;  chronic,  70.
Fhthifls,  venereal,  96.
Physical  properties  of  planls»  valne  o<  to

therapeutics,  264.
Physician  on  thecfaoieeof  afinnily,  288;

qualifications  of  a  good,  240.
Physicians,  portraits  of  &ahionable,  288,

629.
Physiology,  uses  o(  to  medicine,  424.
Phtson  and  Sogeatu,  dialogue  between,

200.
Fkytalaeea,  pathogenetic  effects  of,  298.
Pimples,  venereal,  92.
PixirK's  mucilaginous  mercury,  114.
Pldtt  on  hellebore^  676.
Post-mortem  evaminatifsw^  what  they

teach,  749.
Foioih  in  gonorrhoBa,  36.
Prefiice  to  the  Thesaurus  medicamimmi,

344.
Preputial  gonorrhcea,  18.
Prescriptions,  absurdity  of  complex,  320,
846,412,  426,  498,  624,  742;  apolcjgy
for complex, 321,  426, 623, 686;
source  of;  716.
Preservative  operations  of  nature,  748.
Principle,  on  a  new  therapeutic,  249.
l^rinciples  of  medicines,  supposed  active,

716.
PrisoDB,  arrangement  of,  212.
Privies,  clearing  out  o^  220.
Prophylactic  for  scarlet  fever,  Jahi  on.
366 ; McxLLxa  on  the,  367 ;  histofr
of  the  discovery  of  the,  874.


aXKERAL  IKDRZ.


788


FhMtrito  gliiid,iiidi]ratioo  ofthe^  54
Ptotectioa  agaioBt  infeeCiaii,  l&l,
Proring  of  medidiiefl,  obligatorj  oo  all,

768;  dilutioiis  to  be  iwed  in  the,  768.
Plroiimftta  Tenereal  sjmptooii^  90.
PnmtM  padu§  in  agae,  294.
Pftychiod  hamoBopathy,  629. .
Ptyaliam  from  mercmial  ointment,  104.
PuUatilla,  in  toothache,  667  ;  in  a  case

of  gastric  derangement,  772.
Purgatives  in  goDorrfaoBa,  26 ;  injnrioiiB

effects  of;  189 ;  on  the  treatment  by,

688.

Purpura  miliaris,  symptoms  o(  481, 696 »
aeanite  in,  488,  698,  696 ;  cofee  in,
696;  treatment  oC  696.

Pmtula  maligna,  infection  by,  649.

Rabies  canina,  168.

Bag  gatherers,  regulations  respecting,

212.
Bed  preeipittUe  in  stricture,  62.

Refutation  of  Baowx's  doctrines,  860.

Regimen  and  diet  in  disease,  476.

Regimen  iar  patients  subject  to  helle-
borism,  605.

Repetition  of  the  dose,  on  the,  472.

Reviewers,  nota  bene  ibr  my,  659.

Rhagades.  venereal,  91.

jRhododendron,  pathogenetic  eflfocts  o(
282 ;  therapeutic  uses  of;  282.

Bkubarb  in  diarrhoea,  808.

Bhus  radieans  in  erysipelas,  295.

Bkue  toxicodendrcnit  in  typhus,  684 ;  pre-
paration o^  686 ;  in  the  typhoid  fever
following  dudera,  755.

Rumford's  mode  of  heating  houses,  781.

SabadiUa,  pathogenetic  eflecta  oi;  802.

Salivation,  prevention  ot,  127.

8ambueu8j  patliog^etic  effects  of;  295 ;
therapeutic  uses  of;  295.

Sartaparilla  in  syphilis,  118.

Scarlet  fever,  announcement  of  a  pro-
phylactic for,  866;  prophylactic  for,
the  reception  it  got,  865 ;  on  the  cure
and  prevention  of,  869 ;  history  of  an
epidemic  of;  870 ;  persons  chiefly  lia-
ble to  871 ;  Ple.ncu's  description  of,
871 ;  symptoms  of,  871,  481 ;  treat-
ment of,  874 ;  opium  in,  875 ;  ipeea-
euMana  in,  876;  diet  in,  876;  pro-
phylaiis  of,  876 ;  history  of  the  dis-
covery of  the  prophylaotie  llor,  877 ;


sappreBsion  of  the  first  germs  o(  by  6sl-
iadonna,  888 ;  treatment  of  the  after
Bofleriqgsof;  884;  observations  on  the,
479 ;  oomparisoQ  of;  with  purpura  mi-
liaris,  481 ;  beUndannm  in,  488,  698.

Schools,  promotion  of  infectious  diseases
by,  226.

Sdurriius  of  the  prepuce,  71.

Scorbutus  combined  with  syphilis,  126.

Scrofula  combined  with  syphilis,  126.

Seat  of  goDorrhcea,  12.

Sensible  properties  of  medicines  as  a
source  of  the  knowledge  of  their  the-
rapeutic action  of;  254, 670.

SequelsB  of  gonorrhoBa,  87.

Sesamoides,  602

Ships,  regulations  for,  219;  diet  for,  219  ;
ventilation  of;  220.

Show,  worth  of  outward,  200.

Sick,  the  visiter  of  the,  164.

Signature  of  medicines,  502,  670.

Signs  of  the  times  in  medicine,  566.

Simplicity  of  medical  practice,  oo,  807.

Single  remedies  should  be  given  al  m
time,  820,  848,  469.

Small  doses,  on  the  power  o(  885,  728.

Small-poz,  communicated  by  Ibul  linen,
208 ;  and  cow-pox  incompatible,  448.

Smell,  therapeutic  action  of  drugs  judg^
ed  of  by  their,  672.

SooEATis  and  Phtson,  a  dialogue,  20a

iSo/ofium  fu^mim,  pathogenetic  efliBcts  oC
272;  therapeutic  uses  o^  278.

Scdvent  remedies,  oo,  540.

Sore-throat,  a  stocking  in,  175.

Sources  of  the  common  nmteria  medioa,
664.

Spanish  collar,  65.

Speculative  systems  of  medidne,  value
of;  488.

Spirit  of  the  homoeopathic  doctrine,  617

Spoilt  food,  sale  o^  226.

8guill,  pathogenetic  effects  o(  299 ;  the-
rapeutic uses  of;  800.

Stimulants,  reooarks  on,  854.

Stomach,  instinct  of  the,  182.

Stoves,  proper  regulation  oi,  179.

Stramonium,  Klookenbedco's  prescrip-
tion of,  246 ;  pathogenetic  effects  of,
276 ;  therapeutic  uses  o^  277 ;  vine-
gar the  antidote  to^  827 ;  case  of  poi-
soning by,  827.

Strangury,  chronic^  87.

Stricture  of  the  tnethiB,46;  pmiilmr.


7U


GSNXBAL  INDEX.


47 ;  spannodic^  48, 68 ;  from  flricqhM^
68.

Subetitutes,  objections  to,  476,  606,  68a

Saoeuaaioo,  effectB  o^  728.

Suicidal  mania,  gold  in,  696, 782^

Suicides,  on  the  uncharitable  feeling  to*
wards,  696.

Sword-thrust)  cure  of  empyema  by  a,  181.

Sycosis,  thtya  in,  698.

Symptoms,  treatment  o^  417, 626 ;  dis*
eases  only  discoveraUe  by  an  obeer*
nation  of  the,  448.

Syphilis,  87,  284 ;  diagnosis  of.  87 ;  pro-
duced by  destroying  the  chancre,  668.

Syphon,  Hahnemann's  injecting,  for  go-
norrhoea. 21.

Systems  of  medicine,  yarioos,  421.

Tailfiring,  removal  of  de£Drmity  by,  180.
Taste,  therapeutic  action  of  dn^  judged

uf  by  their,  670.
Teething  diseases,  remarks  on,  284, 641 .
Testicle,  swelled,  31 ;  induration  of^  88.
ToKOPUBAOTUS  on  hellebore^  674.
TTieories  on  Medicine,  value  o^  490.
Thuja  in  syoosis,  698.
TobaccOj  pathogenetic effectn  of)  277  ;

therapeutic  u«)9  of,  277.
Tonsillar  ulcers,  venereal,  98.
T<M)tbache,  nostrums  fur,  666 ;  treatment

of;  667.
Town-walls  prejudicial  to  health,  224.
Trees,  unwholesomeness  of)  178.
Tripper,  origin  of  tlie  word,  11.
Trituration,  efiEects  of;  728.
Typhus  £e?er,  odour  of  the  miasm  oi,
207 ;  treatment  of;  631.

Uoat's  mercurial  preparation,  2.
Ulcers  of  the  urethra,  17 ;  venereal,  91.


Uterine  hemorrhage  cored  by  coffee^  1 86.
Uva  wn  in  urinaiy  •^fr^npft  282.

Valerian  in  irritability,  269.
Vaugirard,  tieatment  of  syphilitic  iofiuita

at,  146.
Venereal  disease,  infection  by,  660.
Venereal  diseases,  treatise  on,  1 ;  obeer-

vatiooson,  646.
Venereal  sure-throat  and  fiasuie  in  the

anus,  case  of;  776.
Venesections  in  gonorrhoea,  24.
Veratrwn  album,  pathogenetic  o^  800,
681 ;  then4)eutic  uses  o^  800; inacaae
of  colicodynia,  306 ;  coffee  the  antidote
to,  827,  Cl08 ; cases  of  poisoning,  by,
327 ;  in  the  water-colic,  634 ;  the  ishUe
hellebore  of  the  andents,  676 ;  treat-
ment of  bad  effects  of;  607 ;  in  cholera,
766.
Vienna  Faculty,  absurd  decrees  of;  606.
Vinegar  not  a  universal  antidote.  323 ;
the  antidote  to  anUcOy  826  ;  the  anti-
dote to  sframomtoTi,  827;  the  antidote
to  ignatia,  827.
Viola  in  skin  diseases,  281.
Visiter  of  the  sick,  the,  164.
Wallachs,  their  treatment  of  syphilis.

107.
Walnut'htuks  in  syphilis,  118.
Wann  baths  in  gonorrhoea,  24.
Warts,  venereal,  78,  136t
Water,  supply  of  to  towns,  218.
Water-cohc,  veratrum  in,  634.
Weather,  influence  of,  on  disease,  316
Workhouses,  regulations  for,  817.
Worm  diseases,  on  so-called,  642.
Wounds  in  syphilitic  subjects,  88.
Yew,  pathogenetic  effects  of;  290 ;  thera-
peutic uses  of;  290.


LANB  MEDICAL.  LlBRiRY

To  avoid  One.  this  book  should  be  returned
an  or  belore  the  date  laat  aiaiuped  below.


DEC!»  W?


"wFORB,  CftUF  94305


X568  Halinemann, Samuel,  i

L6d  The  leaser  writings  of

18S2 SBBuel  Ualinemann, ""O"


13260


jAjli^iShJr.


mjj


:em^zi:::-^
