Organon of Medicine (Sixth Edition)
Samuel Hahnemann
Organon of Medicine, sixth edition. Completed in manuscript 1842; first German edition 1921; English translation by William Boericke, 1922.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/organon-of-medicine-6th-edition-completed-1842-german-edition-published-1921-eng).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ray
é


I


{iby


di tae
pate


Ms


a


Bis


4


ry


vie


%,
fh n q 4188,


AS


cate


oN


elas


ite fe G aiip Nae
De i Aone ae
Hh tal aa ail iaed
K da.
fs


na gk


Spt Ay ae
Pi B73


MLL


CLOI
ssoisuo’) sIyIedoDWOT YsHIIG 941 JO [IIUNOD
sy3 ysnosy}
UOTIVIDOSSY [VIIPIW Ys WL


uoTILyJoUDgG Weshq s3UT


in 2019 with funding from
Wellcome Library


SAMUEL HAHNEMANS,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE


BY


SAMUEL HAHNEMANN «<<


Aude Sapere


SIXTH EDITION


AFTER HAHNEMANN’S OWN WRITTEN REVISION FOR THE SIXTH EDITION


TRANSLATED WITH PREFACE


BY


WILLIAM BOERICKE, M.D.


INTRODUCTION BY JAMES KRAUSS, MD. ,


PHILADELPHIA:


BOERICKE & TAFEL


1922


CDV 12)


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.


The sixth edition of the “Organon” as left by Hahne-
mann ready for publication, was found to be an inter-
leaved copy of the fifth, the last German Edition, pub-
lished in 1833. In his eighty-sixth year, while in active
practice in Paris he completed the thorough revision of
it by carefully going over paragraph by paragraph, mak-
ing changes, erasures, annotations and additions.

Hahnemann himself had apprized several friends of
the preparation of another edition of his great work as
is evident among others from a letter to Boenninghausen,
his most appreciative follower and intimate friend. Writ-
ing to him from Paris, he states: “I am at work on the
sixth edition of the ‘Organon,’ to which 1 devote several
hours on Sundays and Thursdays, all the other time
being required for treatment of patients who come to my
rooms.” And to his publisher, Mr. Schaub, in Dussel-
dorf, he wrote in a letter dated Paris, February 20, 1842:
“T have now, after eighteen months of work, finished the
sixth edition of my ‘Organon,’ the most nearly perfect
of all.” He further expressed the wish to have it printed
in the best possible style as regards paper, perfectly new
type and in short desired its appearance to be unexcep-
tionally fine as it would most likely be the last. These
wishes of the venerable author have been carried out per-
fectly by the present publishers.

All these annotations, changes, and additions I have
carefully translated from the original copy in my pos-
session. Hahnemann made these in his own wonderfully
small, clear handwriting, perfectly preserved during all


4 TRANSLATORS PREFACE


these years and as legible today as when first written.
For those extensive parts in which he made no changes
whatever, including his long Introduction, I have adopted
Dr. Dudgeon’s fine translation of the fifth edition, which
has the distinction of perfect English with a remarkable,
faithful adherence to the peculiar Hahnemannian style
and setting.

The following are some of the more important changes
noted in this final edition.

In a long footnote to Paragraph 11 he gives a consid-
eration of the important question: What is Dynamic In-
fluence—Dynamis—and in Paragraphs 22 and 29 will
be found his last views on the life principle, which term
he uses throughout, preferably to vital force as in former
editions.

Paragraphs 52 to 56 have been wholly rewritten and
long footnotes are added to Paragraphs 60-74. Again,
Paragraph 148 1s practically wholly new and concerns it-
self with the origin of disease, denying a Materia pec-
cans, as the prime etiological factor.

Of greatest importance are Paragraphs 246-248 in re-
gard to dosage in the treatment of chronic diseases. He
there departs from the single dose and advises repetition
of dosage but in different-potencies. Paragraphs 269-
272 are devoted to technical directions for the prepara-
tions of homeceopathic medicines especially according to
his latest views.

The vexed question of double remedies other than
chemical compounds is fully and definitely settled in
Paragraph 273 and all doubts as to the impropriety of
such procedure removed.


TRANSLATORS PREFACE 5


Wholly new is the footnote to Paragraph 282 and of
greatest importance. Here his treatment of the chronic
diseases under psora, syphilis, and sycosis departs abso-
lutely from that advised in former editions. He now
advises to commence treatment with large doses of their
specific remedies early and if necessary, several times
daily and gradually ascend to higher degrees of dynamiza-
tion. In the treatment of figwarts the local application is
considered necessary with the internal use of the remedy.

The book as now presented is Hahnemann’s last word
concerning the principles advanced by him in the first
and subsequent editions, illuminated and enlarged by his
Veasme xpermence im nienliter paltsol Mis tdedical career In
the treatment of both acute and chronic diseases. His-
torically, the book in its sixth edition is of the greatest
interest and importance, completing as it does the mar-
velous array of Hahnemann’s philosophic insight into the
practice of medicine. Hahnemann’s “Organon” is the high
water mark of medical philosophy, the practical interpre-
tation of which produces a veritable mountain of light and
will guide the physician by means of the Law of Cure
to a new world in therapeutics.

This edition is favored with an introduction by Dr.
James Krauss, of Boston, the learned and scholarly stu-
dent of Hahnemann, to whom I herewith desire to ex-
press my grateful appreciation for both the introduction
and other valuable aid.


VRE, BOPRICKE,


San Francisco, December, 1921.


INTRODUCTION


(To Doctor Boericke’s translation of the sixth edition of
Hahnemann’s “Organon.” )


The excellence of the Dudgeon translation into English
of the fifth German edition of Hahnemann’s “Organon”
is thoroughly maintained throughout this English trans-
lation of the sixth German edition by Doctor William
Boericke, to whom the medical profession 1s under a dou-
ble debt for rescuing this last authentic work of Hahne-
mann from possible loss and for putting it into good,
clear, unparaphrased English. Twice, this manuscript of
Hahnemann was in danger of being lost, once during
the siege of Paris in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-
71, and once in the military over-running of Westphalia
during the World War of 1914-18. Doctor Boericke was
the main instrument for procuring this last medical
manuscript of Hahnemann for the medical world.

Everything that Hahnemann ever wrote is of historic
medical interest, for notwithstanding all attempts of ignor-
ant, prejudiced, time-serving so-called medical historians
to detract from Hahnemann his historic importance for
medicine, Hahnemann remains one of the four epochal
figures in the history of the practice of medicine. Hip-
pocrates, the Observer, introduced the art of clinical ob-
servation as the necessary basis for pathologic diagnosis.
Galen, the Disseminator, spread with powerful authority
the teachings of Hippocrates over the medical world.
Paracelsus, the Assailer, introduced chemical as well as
physical analysis into the practice of medicine. Hahne-
mann, the Experimenter, discovered the symptomatic


(6)


INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION 7


source of both pathologic and therapeutic diagnosis and
thereby made the practice of medicine ‘scientific.

In the scientific practice of medicine, we examine every
patient suffering from any of the topic, plastic, trophic
and toxic diseases to which man is subject, in order to
obtain all the signs and symptoms of his disease, all his
disease effects for pathologic and therapeutic diagnosis
and prognosis. We examine by observing the pathologic
and comparing it with the physiologic for diagnostic in-
terpretation, prognostic predication, and therapeutic ap-
plication. We diagnose by classifying the pathologic con-
dition with similar pathologic conditions. We diagnose
the anatomic seat, the where, that is, the organs and the
parts of the organs affected. We diagnose the physiologic
process, the what, that is, the course of inflammations,
exudations, degenerations, necroses, atrophies, hyper-
trophies, aplasias, hyperplasias. We diagnose the etiologic
factor, the how, that is, developmental, traumatic, infec-
tious antecedents of predisposition and excitation. We
diagnose the therapeutic application, the end, that is, the
remedial treatment for cure and palliation, and the pro-
phylactic treatment for hygiene and sanitation.

The treatment of patients, subject to malformations,
malpositions, malnutritions, injuries, foreign bodies, trau-
matic and infection inflammations, new formations, is
effected with medical, surgical, hygienic means, or a com-
bination of all these in a given patient. Surgery may
remove or palliate effects of anatomic excesses, defects,
perversions. Food, water, air, heat and cold, light and
electricity, exercise and work, massage and suggestion, as
well as glands to replace glands, vaccines to call out anti-
bodies and sera to supply antibodies may remedy or pal-


8 INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION


late effects of physiologic excesses, deficiencies, perver-
sions, may restore hygiene and establish sanitation. Medi-
cine, in the form of medicinal substances, may remedy
or palhate effects of etiologic excesses, defects, perver-
sions, effects which are not remedied or remediable, pal-
liated or palliable by surgery, hygienic or quasi-hygienic
measures.

tt is impossible to know all the antecedents causative
of disease consequents. Tolle catusam is easier said than
done. How, then, shall we remove or palliate these ef-
fects by medical substances? Here, Hahnemann steps in
to say, for the first time in all history: Remove the effects
and you remove the disease, the cause of the effects. Ces-
sat effectus cessat causa. Empiric medicine guesses, rec-
ommends, tries, hits and misses, misses and hits again.
Scientific medicine does not guess. Scientific medicine,
like any other scientific art, compares effects, sensations
and motions with corresponding effects, corresponding)
sensations and motions. Only the mountebanks in medi-
cine decry methods of comparison as unscientific. All
that we can humanly do, and scientifically do do, is to ob-
serve and classify, to compare and infer. Hahnemann
says, we must apply medicinal substances on the basis
of knowledge of their actual effects. Since it is impos-
sible to know all the antecedents causative of disease con-
sequents, we must treat the disease effects. which we do
know by medicinal effects which we have ascertained and
know. Disease effects are removed by the application of
medicines having corresponding medicinal effects. If the
disease effects are removed in toto, we have a cure. If
the disease effects are removed in part, we have pallia-
tion. Scientific comparison of disease effects and medicinal


INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION Q


effects for application leads to the diagnostic inferences of
scientific medicine, makes scientific medicine possible.

In 1790, Hahnemann made his celebrated experiment
with china. From that time to 1839, that is, in the course
of about fifty years, he experimented with ninety-nine
drugs and recorded his observations of their actions on
the human body. This record, found in his “Fragmenta
de Viribus Medicamentorum Positivis,”’ “Materia Medica
Pura” and “Chronic Diseases” is the largest, the most ac-
curate and the most fertile of all investigations into
medicinal action made by any single observer, before or
since Hahnemann, throughout the annals of medical his-
LOIN

Hahnemann was, in all essentials, a flawless experi-
menter. He took four drachms of china twice a day.
He had paroxysms of chill and fever. In his practice
as a physician he had seen similar paroxysms of chill
and fever. He had cured them with china, the Peruvian
bark. No longer might it be said that Peruvian bark
cures paroxysms of chill and fever because it is a bitter or
astringent drug. The true inference stood out boidly.
Peruvian bark cures paroxysms of chills and fever be-
cause Peruvian bark produces paroxysms of chills and
fever. The necessity for the methodical discovery of the
medicinal properties of drugs was made apparent. He
who says that Hahnemann should not have experimented
on himself but on dogs, or cats, or rats, or mice, has
not yet entered the school of scientific logic. Disease
manifests itself not merely by objective signs of sensory
impression, but also by subjective symptoms of motor
expression. Can the human experimenter record the sub-
jective feelings of dogs, and cats, and rats, and mice when


10 INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION


the dogs, and cats, and rats, and mice cannot communicate
to his understanding their subjective feelings? There are
no two human beings entirely the same in health and
disease. Are dogs, or cats, or mice, or rats more nearly
like to human beings than human beings are like to one
another ?

The routine experimenter, or so-called experimenter,
experiments as though experiments were ends in them-
selves. This is the reason for the sterility of most public
and private experimental stations. The experimenter ex-
periments, but does not know why he experiments. The
moral justification may be that he experiments because
he is paid to experiment; but where is the scientific justi-
fication? Hahnemann had scientific justification for his
experiments. That is the reason why his experiments
WeremmOL sre tille:

Experimentation is for one of two purposes, observa-
tion for induction, or verification of inductions. Experi-
mentation is analysis, deduction, analytic deduction. We
deduce from objects of nature, man or drug, properties
in contrast with other properties. We observe by con-
trast. Observation is comparison, weighing, judging of
contrasts. We compare for correspondence. We classify
by resemblance. Classification is synthesis, induction, syn-
thetic induction. We classify, conceive for reflection,
thought, judgment. We think for expression. We for-
mulate our propositions for verification. We verify by
experimentation, by analytic deduction, the formulated
propositions of science, of scientific inductions.

Hahnemann experimented for observation. He per-
ceived in himself the symptomatic effects of Peruvian
bark as similar to the symptomatic effects of intermittent


INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION It It


fever he had removed in others with Peruvian bark.
Who can say that china, taken into the healthy human
body, will not produce signs, objective symptoms and
feelings, subjective symptoms similar to those of inter-
mittent fever? Hahnemann had the contrast of health
without the drug and disease with the drug within him-
self. He was not a sterile observer. Perception led at
once to conception. Hahnemann conceived the sympto-
matic affinity oforugs for tissues, the symptomsimularity
of drugs and tissues as essential for the medical treatment
of medically curable diseases. If ever there was a clear
scientific induction from scientific observation, it was this
induction of Hahnemann’s symptomsimilarity of drugs
and tissues, which he denominated homceopathy, and for
the elucidation of which he wrote his “Organon of Medi-
cine” in 1810, and re-wrote it consecutively in 1819, 1824,
1829, 1833, and finally annotated and emended the 1833
edition for this sixth, his last edition, in 1842.

Was he in error? Was he premature with his concep-
tion? Hahnemann was not one of those so-called scien-
tists who collect and catalogue their perceptual facts with
no more scientific imagination than is exercised by cata-
loguers of libraries and collectors of taxes. Science is
verified or verifiable knowledge produced by conception
of percepts, induction of deducts. For scientific imagina-
tion, conceptuation from perception, not many percepts
are needed. Was Pythagoras in error because, perceiving
mast and sails before perceiving the hull of a ship: on
the horizon, he conceived that the earth is round? Was
his conception premature, untrue, because everybody ex-
cept Aristotle for nearly two thousand years maintained
that the earth is flat, because it took nearly two thousand


12 INTRODUCTION TO THE Si BeeDi tion


years before Columbus began and Magellan finished the
rounding of the earth?

Hahnemann himself saw to it that there was no error
in his induction. He was his own Columbus, his own Ma-
gellan. Hahnemann treated, with his own hands, his
own medically curable patients and taught other medical
men to treat their own medically curable patients by the
method of symptomsimilarity he had conceived. In 1797,
he used veratrum album for colic, and nux vomica for
asthma, and cured the multitudinous medically curable
patients that came to him from his sojourn in Konigs-
lutter to his last abiding place in Paris by this method of
symptomsimilarity, the central method of scientific medi-
cal therapeutics. His were truly scientific verifications.
Those that doubt this really do not doubt. They know
not what they doubt. The verifications of Hahnemann
convince those who have intellectual integrity for scten-
tific conviction, who will not sacrifice their intellectual in-
tegrity to the idols of the day, who will repeat Hahne-
mann’s experimental verifications of his scientific obser-
vations and inductions as they should be repeated. Any
other method than to take into the healthy body four
drachms of china twice a day to prove or to disprove the
symptomsimilarity of china and intermittent fever is not
a scientific experiment for the observation of Hahne-
mann, that there is symptomsimilarity between china and
intermittent fever. Any other method than to administer
china tO patients suffering trom amterminent fever to
prove or to disprove the method of symptomsimilarity in
dosage smaller than that used for exciting the healthy
body into disease action similar to that of intermittent
fever is not a scientific experimental verification of the


TROD WCTION TOV te six tt EDITION 13


induction of Hahnemann, that symptomsimilarity is the
curative method of medically curable diseases. Those
that pursue other methods have not even the frogs’ legs
of Aristophanes to stand upon. Pasteur, perceiving that
Jenner’s milder cowpox prevented the appearance of the
severer smallpox, conceived the prophylactic treatment
of infectious diseases by milder vaccinations with the
virus exciting a given infection. How did Pasteur prove
his conception? He took a number of sheep; vaccinated
some of the sheep with a milder prophylactic dose of
SMritaccsnvindse tenmamected inte all tie sheep anita x
virus in larger dosage sufficient to excite anthrax; all
those sheep he had vaccinated previously with the milder
prophylactic anthrax virus lived without anthrax; those
not vaccinated prophylactically died with anthrax. Pas-
teur, like the elder and greater Hahnemann, was a scien-
tific experimenter, not a would-be experimenter.

The era of scientific medical experimentation begins with
Hahnemann and nobody else. Scientific to the core, Hah-
nemann experimented scientifically for scientific observa-
tion. Alert with intellectual power, he conceived his in-
duction scientifically from scientific observation. Uncom-
promisingly scientific for experimental verification, he
verified his induction scientifically for all time on his
patients and made his method of symptomsimilarity for
all time the central curative method of scientific medical
therapeutics. For over a hundred years this method has
been consciously and unconsciously followed by the medi-
cal profession. The results substantiate Hahnemann’s
contentions. There is no greater achievement than to
have scientific truth, pass it on, have succeeding genera-
tions follow it and express it. Hahnemann’s “Organon


14 INTRODUCTION TO THE SIXTH EDITION


of Medicine” goes out to teach symptomsimilarity as the
experimental basis of pathologic and therapeutic diag-
nosis, as the echte Heilweg of scientific medicine.


JAMES KRAUSS, M.D.


Boston, September 30, 1921.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE
SIXTH EDITION.?*


In order to give a general notion of the treatment of
diseases pursued by the old school of medicine (allo-
pathy) it may be observed that it presupposes the existence
sometimes of excess of blood (plethora—which 1s never
present), sometimes of morbid matters and acridities ;
hence it taps off the life’s blood and exerts itself either
to clear away the imaginary disease-matter or to conduct
it elsewhere (by emetics, purgatives, sialogogues, diapho-
retics, diuretics, drawing plasters, setons, issues, etc.), in
the vain belief that the disease will thereby be weakened
and materially eradicated; in place of which the patient’s
sufferings are thereby increased, and by such and other
painful appliances the forces and nutritious juices indis-
pensable to the curative process are abstracted from the
organism. It assails the body with large doses of power-


* Tn Hahnemann’s manuscript copy, he has a note in French
which, translated is as follows:

Medicine as commonly practised (allopathy) knows no
treatment except to draw from diseases the injurious materials
which are assumed to be their cause. The blood of the patient is
made to flow mercilessly by bleedings, leeches, cuppings, scarifi-
cations, to diminish an assumed plethora which never exists as
in well women a few days before their menses, an accumulation
of blood the loss of which is of no appreciable consequence,
while the loss of blood with merely assumed plethora destroys
life. Medicine as commonly practised seeks to evacuate the
contents of the stomach and sweep the intestines clear of the
materials assumed to originate diseases.


(15)


16 AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION


ful medicines, often repeated in rapid succession for a
long time, whose long-enduring, not infrequently fright-
ful effects it knows not, and which it, purposely it would
almost seem, makes unrecognisable by the commingling
of several such unknown substances in one prescription,
and by their long-continued employment it develops in
the body new and often ineradicable medicinal diseases.
Whenever it can, it employs, in order to keep in
favor with its patient,’ remedies that immediately sup-
press and hide the morbid symptoms by opposition (con-
traria contrartis) for a short time (palliatives), but that
leave the cause for these symptoms (the disease itself)
strengthened and aggravated. It considers affections
on the exterior of the body as purely local and existing
there independently, and vainly supposes that it has
cured them when it has driven them away by means of
external remedies, so that the internal affection is thereby
compelled to break out on a nobler and more important
part. When it knows not what else to do for the disease
which will not yield or which grows worse, the old school
of medicine undertakes to change it into something else,
it knows not what, by means of an alterative,—for exam-
ple, by the life-undermining calomel, corrosive sublimate
and other mercurial preparations in large doses.

It seems that the unhallowed principal business of
the old school of medicine (allopathy) is to render in-


*For the same object the experienced allopath delights to in-
vent a fixed name, by preference a Greek one, for the malady,
in order to make the patient believe that he has long known this
disease as an old acquaintance, and hence is the fittest person
EOeirendt


AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION 7


curable if not fatal the majority of diseases, those made
chronic through ignorance by continually weakening and
tormenting the already debilitated patient by the further
addition of new destructive drug diseases. When this per-
nicious practice has become a habit and one is rendered
insensible to the admonitions of conscience, this becomes a
very easy business indeed.

And yet for all these mischievous operations the ordi-
nary physician of the old school can assign his reasons,
which, however, rest only on foregone conclusions of his
books and teachers, and on the authority of this or that
distinguished physician of the old school. Even the most
opposite and the most senseless modes of treatment find
there their defence, their authority—let their disastrous
effects speak ever so loudly against them. It is only under
the old physician who has been at last gradually con-
vinced, after many years of misdeeds, of the mischievous
nature of his so-called art, and who no longer treats even
the severest diseases with anything stronger than plan-
tain water mixed with strawberry syrup (7. e., with noth-
ing), that the smallest number are injured and die.

This non-healing art, which for many centuries has
been firmly established in full possession of the power to
dispose of the life and death of patients according to its
own good will and pleasure, and in that period has
shortened the lives of ten times as many human beings as
the most destructive wars, and rendered many millions of
patients more diseased and wretched than they were ori-
ginally—this allopathy, I have, in the introduction to
the former editions of this book, considered more in de-
tail. Now I shall consider only its exact opposite, the true
healing art, discovered by me and now somewhat more


18 AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION


perfected. Examples are given to prove that striking
cures performed in former times were always due to
remedies basically homceopathic and found by the physi-
cian accidentally and contrary to the then prevailing
methods of therapeutics.

As regards the latter (homceopathy) it is quite other-
wise. It can easily convince every reflecting person that
the diseases of man are not caused by any substance, any
acridity, that is to say, any disease-matter, but that they
are solely spirit-like (dynamic) derangements of the
spirit-like power (the vital principle) that animates the
human body. Homeceopathy knows that a cure can only
take place by the reaction of the vital force against the
rightly chosen remedy that has been ingested, and that
the cure will be certain and rapid in proportion to the
strength with which the vital force still prevails in the
patient. Hence homoeopathy avoids everything im the
slightest degree enfeebling,? and as much as possible every
excitation of pain, for pain also diminishes the strength,
and hence it employs for the cure ONLY those medicines
whose power for altering and deranging (dynamically)
the health it knows accurately, and from these it selects
one whose pathogenetic power (its medicinal disease) is


*Homeeopathy sheds not a drop of blood, administers no
emetics, purgatives, laxatives or diaphoretics, drives off no ex-
known mineral baths or medicated clysters, applies no Spanish
flies or mustard plasters, no setons, no issues, excites no ptyalism,
burns not with moxa or red-hot iron to the very bone, and so
forth, but gives with its own hand its own preparations of simple
uncompounded medicines, which it is accurately acquainted with,
never subdues pain by opium, etc.


AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION 9;


capable of removing the natural disease in question by
similarity (stmilia similibus), and this it administers to
the patient in simple form, but in rare and minute doses
so small that, without occasioning pain or weakening,
they just suffice to remove the natural malady whence
this result: that without weakening, injuring or torturing
him in the very least, the natural disease is extinguished,
and the patient, even whilst he is getting better, gains in
strength and thus is cured—an apparently easy but
actually troublesome and difficult business, and one re-
quiring much thought, but which restores the patient
without suffering in a short time to perfect health—and
thus it is a salutary and blessed business.

Thus homeceopathy is a perfectly simple system of
medicine, remaining always fixed in its principles as in
its practice, which, like the doctrine whereon it is based,
if rightly apprehended will be found to be complete (and
therefore serviceable). What is clearly pure in doctrine
and practice should be self-evident, and all backward
sliding to the pernicious routinism of the old school that
is as much its antithesis as night is to day, should cease
to vaunt itself with the honorable name of Homceopathy.


SURE EAT NE VCANIN:


Kothen, March 28, 1833.
Confirmed Paris, 184—*


> Hahnemann did not put in his manuscript the exact date,
leaving this probably until the book would go to the printer, but
Dr. Haehl suggests February, 1842, as the date according to a


manuscript copy made by Madame Hahnemann.
Wma. B.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.


Examples of accidental homceopathic cures.

Non-medical persons have also found the treatment on the
principle of similarity of action to be the only efficacious
mode.


Even some physicians of an earlier period suspected that this
was the most excellent mode of treatment.


TEXT OF THE ORGANON.


§ 1, 2. The sole mission of the physician is to cure rapidly,
gently, permanently.
Note.—Not to construct theoretical systems, nor to
attempt to explain phenomena.

3, 4. He must investigate what is to be cured in disease and
know what is curative in the various medicines, in order
to be able to adapt the latter to the former, and must
also understand how to preserve the health of human
beings.

5. Attention to exciting and fundamental causes and other
circumstances, as helps to cure.

6. For the physician, the disease consists only of the totality
of its symptoms.

Note.—The old school’s futile attempts to discover
the essential nature of disease (prima causa).

7, Whilst paying attention to those circumstances (§5) the
physician needs only to remove the totality of the symp-
toms in order to cure the disease.

Note 1.—The cause that manifestly produces and
maintains the disease should be removed.

Note 2.—The symptomatic palliative mode of treat-
ment directed towards a single symptom is to be re-
jected.


(20)


Sic:


IO.


Jhhe


12,


Uo


14.


WS


16.


wy,


18.


CONTENTS 21


If all the symptoms be eradicated, the disease is always
cured internally also.
Note.—This is stupidly denied by the old school.


. During health a spiritual power (autocracy, vital force)


animates the organism and keeps it in harmonious
order.

Without this animating, spirit-like power the organism
is dead.

In disease, the vital force only is primarily morbidly de-
ranged, and expresses its sufferings (the internal change)
by abnormal sensations and functions of the organism.

Explanation of the word Dynamis.


By the disappearance of the totality of the symptoms by
the cure, the affection of the vital force, that is to say,
the whole internal and external morbid state is also.
removed.

Note.—It is unnecessary for the cure to know how
the vital force produces the symptoms.
To regard those diseases that are not surgical as a pecu-
liar distinct thing residing in the human frame is an
absurdity which has rendered allopathy so pernicious.
Everything of a morbid nature that is curable makes
itself known to the physician by disease-symptoms.
The affection of the diseased vital force and the disease-
symptoms thereby produced constitute an inseparable
whole—they are one and the same.
It is only by the spiritual influences of morbific noxe
that our spirit-like vital force can become ill; and in
like manner, only by the spirit-like (dynamic) operation
of medicines that it can be again restored to health.
The practitioner, therefore, only needs to take away the
totality of the disease-signs, and he has removed the
entire disease.

Notes 1, 2.—Illustrative examples.
The totality of the symptoms is the only indication, the
only guide to the selection of a remedy,


22 CONTENTS


§ 19. The alteration of the state of the health in diseases (the
disease-symptoms) cannot be cured by the medicines
otherwise than in so far as the latter have the power
of also producing alterations in man’s health.

20. This power of medicines to alter the state of the health
can only be ascertained by their effects on (healthy)
persons.

21. The morbid symptoms that medicines produce in healthy
individuals are the only thing wherefrom we can learn
their disease-curing power.

22. If experience should show that by medicines that mani-
fest simular symptoms to the disease the latter would be
most certainly and permanently cured, we must select
for the cure medicines with similar symptoms; but
should it show that the disease is most certainly and
permanently cured by opposite medicinal symptoms, we
must choose for the cure medicines with opposite symp-
toms.

Nore—The employment of medicines whose
symptoms have no actual (pathological) relation to
the symptoms of the disease, but which act on the
body in a different manner, characterise the allopathic
method, which is to be rejected.

23. By opposite medicinal symptoms (antipathic treatment)
persisting disease symptoms are not cured.

24, 25. The other remaining method of treatment, the
homeopathic, by means of medicines with similar symp-
toms, is the only one that experience shows to be always
salutary.

26. This is dependent on the therapeutic law of nature that a
weaker dynamic affection in the living organism is per-
manently extinguished by one that is very similar to and
stronger than it, only differing from it in kind.

Note.—This applies both to physical affections and
moral maladies.

27. The curative power of medicines, therefore, depends on
the symptoms they have similar to the disease.


CONTENTS 28


§ 28, 29. Attempt to explain this therapeutic law of nature.
30-33. The human body is much more disposed to let its


state of health be altered by medicinal forces than by
natural disease.


34, 35. The correctness of the homceopathic therapeutic law


30


oF


38


39


is shown in the want of success attending every homceo-
pathic treatment of a long-standing disease, and in this
also, that two natural diseases meeting together in the
body, if they be dissimilar to each other, do not remove
or cure one another.


. I. The older disease existing in the body, if it be equally


as strong or stronger, keeps away from the patient a
new dissimilar disease.


. Thus under unhomceopathic treatment that is not vio-


lent, chronic diseases remain as they were.


. II. Or a new, stronger disease, attacking an individual


already ill, suppresses only, as long as it lasts, the old
disease that is dissimilar to it, already present in the
body, but never removes it.


. It is just in this way that violent treatment with allo-


pathic drugs does not cure a chronic disease, but sup-
presses it only as long as the action of the powerful
medicines, which are unable to excite any symptoms
similar to the disease, lasts; after that, the chronic dis-
ease makes its appearance as bad as or worse than before.


40. III. Or the new disease, after having long acted on the


4I


body, joins the old one that is dissimilar to it, and thence
arises a double (complex) disease; neither of these two
dissimilar diseases removes the other.


. Although in the course of nature, it is not seldom that


two dissimilar diseases meet in the same organism but
this happens much more frequently in the ordinary prac-
long-continued employment of powerful, inappropriate
(allopathic) medicine, associates itself with the old
natural disease, which is dissimilar to (and therefore
not curable by) the former, and the chronic patient now
becomes doubly diseased.


24


CONTENTS


§ 42. These diseases that thus complicate one another take, on


account of their dissimilarity, each the place in the or-
ganism suited for it.


43, 44. But quite otherwise is it on the accession of a


stronger disease to a pre-existing one similar to it; in
that case the latter will be removed and cured by the
former.


45. Explanation of this phenomenon.


46. Instances of chronic diseases being cured by the acci-


dental accession of another similar but stronger disease.


47-49. In cases where diseases come together in the course of


50.


cme


52)


53.


54.


oo


“e


nature, it is only one that displays similar symptoms that
can remove and cure the other, a dissimilar disease can
never do this; this should teach the physician what kind
of medicines he can certainly cure with, namely, with
homeceopathic ones alone.


Nature has but few diseases to send to the homeopathic
relief of other diseases, and these its remedial agents are
accompanied by many inconveniences.


On the other hand, the physician has innumerable rem-
edial agents, possessing great advantages over those.


There are but two chief methods of cure, the homceo-
pathic and the allopathic, which are exact opposites, they
cannot approach each other or unite.


The homceopathic is based on an infallible law of nature
and proves itself as the only excellent one.


The allopathic appeared in many very differing systems
following each other, all terming themselves rational
methods of cure. This method saw in diseases only
morbid matter which were classified and created a
Materia Medica based on conjectures and compound
prescriptions.


50. The allopathic physicians possess in their hurtful

method of treatment nothing but palliatives which still

may retain the confidence of patients.
Note.—Isopathy.


aC
60.


61.


62.


G3.


CONTENTS 25


. The antipathic or enantiopathic or palliative method treats


a single symptom of a disease with a remedy of opposite
action, contraria contrarits, Examples


. This antipathic procedure is not defective merely because


it is directed against a single symptom of the disease
only, but also because in persisting ailments, after it
produces a short apparent amelioration, real aggravation
ensues.

Note—Testimonies of authors to the truth of this.
Injurious effects of some antipathic modes of treatment.
Increasing the dose at every repetition of a palliative
never cures a chronic affection, but does still more
elmore


Whence physicians ought to have inferred the utility
of an opposite and only good mode of treatment, to
wit, the homceopathic.


The reason of the injurious nature of the palliative, and
of the sole efficacy of the homceopathic employment of
medicines,


Depends upon the difference between the primary action
that takes place under the influence of every medicine,
and the reaction or secondary action subsequently
effected by the living organism (the vital force).


. Explanation of the primary and secondary actions.
) Bxamples er both.


5. From the smallest homceopathic doses of medicine em-


ployed in treatment, the secondary action of the vital
force merely shows itself in the restoration of the bal-
aneenomwhea lin,


. These truths explain the salutary character of the homceo-


pathic treatment, as also the perversity of the antipathic
(palliative) method.

Notr.—Cases in which the antipathic employment of
medicines is alone admissible.


. How is the efficacy of the homceopathic system proved by


these truths ?


26
§ 60.


73-


74.


SG.


CONTE As


How is the hurtfulness of the antipathic treatment proved
by these truths?

Note 1.—Opposite sensations do not neutralise each
other in the human sensorium; they are not, therefore,
like opposite substances in chemistry.

Note 2.—Illustrative example.


. Short summary of the homceopathic system of medicine.
. The three points necessary for curing: (1) the investi-


gation of the disease; (2) the investigation of the ef-
fects of the medicines, and (3) their appropriate em-
ployment.


. General survey of diseases—acute, chronic.


Acute diseases that attack single individuals, sporadic, epi-
demic, acute miasms.

The worst kinds of chronic diseases are those produced
by the unskilfulness of allopathic physicians. The most
allopathic debilitating treatment of Brousseau.


75. These are the most incurable.
76. It is only when the vital force is still sufficiently power-


ful, that the injury can then be repaired, often only after
a long time, if the original disease be at the same time
homeeopathically eradicated.


. Diseases inappropriately named chronic.
8. Chronic diseases proper; they all arise from chronic


miasms.


. Syphilis and sycosis.


81. Psora; it is the mother of all true chronic diseases
except the syphilitic and sycotic.
Note.—Names of diseases in the ordinary pathology.


. Among the more specific remedies discovered for these


chronic miasms, especially for psora, the selection of
those for the cure of each individual case of chronic
disease is to be conducted all the more carefully.
Requisites for apprehending the picture of the disease.


&4-99. Instructions to the physician for investigating and trac-


ing the picture of the disease.


100-102. Investigation of the epidemic diseases in particular.


CONTENTS By


§ 103. In like manner must the fundamental cause of (non-
syphilitic) chronic diseases be investigated and the
great entire picture of psora be displayed.

104. Utility of noting down in writing the picture of the dis-
ease, for the purpose of curing, and in the progress
of the treatment.

Note.—How the old school physicians go about the
investigation of the morbid state.

105-114. Preliminaries to be attended to in investigating the
pure effects of medicines on healthy individuals. Pri-
mary action. Secondary action.

115. Alternating actions of medicines.

116, 117. Idiosyncrasies.

118, 119. The action of every medicine differs from that of
every other.

Note.—There can be no such things as surrogates.

120. Every medicine, therefore, must be carefully proved to
ascertain the peculiarity of its special effects.

121-140. Mode of proceeding when we make trial of them on
other persons.

141. The experiments of the healthy physician with medi-

cines upon himself are the best.

142. The investigation of the pure effects of medicines in
diseases is difficult.

143-145. Only from such investigations of the pure effects
of medicines on healthy persons can a real materia
medica be formed.

146. The most appropriate therapeutic employment of medi-
cines known in their pure effects.

147. The medicine most homceopathically corresponding is the
most suitable, is the specific remedy.


148. Explanation of how a homeeopathic cure is probably ef-
fected.


149. The homeopathic cure of a disease that has occurred
quickly is quickly effected; that of chronic diseases,
however, demands proportionally more time.


Notre.—Difference betwixt pure homceopathists and the
mongrel sect.


28 CONTENTS


§ 150. Slight ailments.

151. Important diseases have a number of symptoms.

152. For those with numerous striking symptoms a homco-
pathic remedy can be more certainly found.

153. What kind of symptoms ought one chiefly to attend to in
the choice of.a remedy?

154. A remedy as homceopathic as it is possible to be cures
without much disturbance.

155. Cause of the freedom from disturbance of such cures.

156. Cause of the slight exceptions to this.

157-100. The medicinal disease very similar, but somewhat
superior in strength, to the original disease, termed also
homeopathic aggravation.

161. In chronic (psoric) diseases the homceopathic aggrava-
tions from (antipsoric) homceopathic medicines occur
during a period of several days, from time to time.

162-171. Rules for treatment when the supply of known medi-
cines is too small to allow a perfect homceopathic rem-
edy to be discoverd.

172-184. Rules for the treatment of diseases with too few
symptoms: one-sided diseases.

185-203. Treatment of diseases with local symptoms; their
external treatment is always injurious.

204, 205. All chronic affections and diseases properly so
called (that are not merely produced and maintained by
a bad mode of living) must be cured only from within,
by the homceopathic medicines appropriate for the miasm
that lies at their root. _

206. Preliminary investigation of the miasm that lies at their
root, of the simple miasm or its complications with a
second (or even with a third).

207. Inquiry into the treatments previously employed.

208, 209. The other preliminary inquiries necessary for the ap-
prehension of the morbid picture of the chronic disease.

210-230. Treatment of the so-called mental or emotional dis-
casess

231, 232. The intermittent and alternating diseases.


CONTENTS 29


§ 233, 234. The periodical intermittent diseases.

235-244. The intermittent fevers.

245-251. Mode of using the remedies.

Note.—Repetition of the doses according to the lat-
est experience.

252-256. Signs. of commencing improvement.

257, 258. False predilection for favourite remedies and un-
justifiable aversion to other medicines.

259-261. Regimen in chronic diseases.

Note.—Injurious things in the habits of life.

262, 263. Diet in acute diseases.

264-266. Selection of the most energetic, most genuine medi-
cines. :

Note.—Change effected in some substances in their
preparation for food.

267. Preparation of the most powerful and most durable forms
of medicines from fresh plants.

268. Dry vegetable substances.

Note.—Preparation of powders so that they shall
keep.

269-271. The mode of preparing crude medicinal substances.
peculiar to homceopathy, so as to develop their curative
powers to the utmost.

272-274. Only one, single simple medicine should be given to
the patient at one time.

275-283. Strength of the doses for homceopathic use—how it
may be increased or diminished. Danger of too large
doses.

284. What parts of the body are more or less susceptible to
the influence of the medicines?

285. External application of remedies. Mineral baths.

285. Eleciricity. Galvanism.

287. Mineral magnet.

288, 289. Animal magnetism. Mesmerism.

290. Massage.

291. Water. Baths as remedial agents according to their
temperature.


INTRODUCTION.


Review of the therapeutics, allopathy and palliative treat-
ment that have. hitherto been practiced in the old
school of medicine.


As long as men have existed they have been liable,
individually or collectively, to diseases from physical
or moral causes. In a rude state of nature but few
remedial agents were required, as the simple mode of
living admitted of but few diseases; with the civilization
of mankind in the state, on the contrary, the occasions
of diseases and the necessity for medical aid increased
in equal proportion. But ever since that time (soon after
Hippocrates, therefore, for 2500 years) men have oc-
cupied themselves with the treatment of the ever increas-
ing multiplicity of diseases, who, led astray by their van-
ity, sought by reasoning and guessing to excogitate the
mode of furnishing this aid. Innumerable and dissimilar
ideas respecting the nature of diseases and their reme-
dies sprang from so many dissimilar brains, and the theo-
retical views these gave rise to the so-called systems, each
of which was at variance with the rest and self-contradic-
tory. Each of these subtile expositions at first threw the
readers into stupefied amazement at the incomprehensible
wisdom contained in it, and attracted to the system-mon-
ger a number of followers, who re-echoed his unnatural
sophistry, to none of whom, however, was it of the slight-
est use in enabling them to cure better, until a new system,
often diametrically opposed to the first, thrust that aside,
and in its turn gained a short-lived renown. None of
them, however, was in consonance with nature and ex-


(30)


INTRODUCTION | BE


perience; they were mere theoretical webs, woven by
cunning intellects out of pretended consequences, which
could not be made use of in practice, in the treatment at
the sick-bed, on account of their excessive subtilty and
repugnance to nature, and only served for empty dis-
putations.

Simultaneously, but quite independent of all these
theories, there sprung up a mode of treatment with mix-
tures of unknown medicinal substances for forms of dis-
ease arbitrarily set up, and directed towards some ma-
terial object completely at variance with nature and exper-
ience, hence, as may be supposed, with a bad result—
such is old medicine, allopathy as it is termed.

Without disparaging the services which many physi-
cians have rendered to the sciences auxiliary to medicine,
to natural philosophy and chemistry, to natural history in
its various branches, and to that of man in particular, to
anthropology, physiology and anatomy, etc., I shall occupy
myself here with the practical part of medicine only, with
the healing art itself, in order to show how it is that
diseases have hitherto been so imperfectly treated. Far
beneath my notice is that mechanical routine of treating
precious human life according to the prescription man-
uals, the continual publication of which shows, alas! how
frequently they are still used. I pass it by unnoticed,
as a despicable practice of the lowest class of ordinary
practitioners. J speak merely of the medical art as
hitherto practiced, which, pluming itself on its antiquity,
imagines itself to possess a scientific character.

The partisans of the old school of medicine flattered
themselves that they could justly claim for it alone the
title of “rational medicine,” because they alone sought


32 INTRODUCTION


for and strove to remove the cause of disease, and fol-
lowed the method employed by nature in diseases,
Tolle causam! they cried incessantly. But they went
no further than this empty exclamation. They only
fancied that they could discover the cause of disease;
they did not discover it, however, as it is not perceptible
and not discoverable. For as far the greatest number
of diseases are of dynamic (spiritual) origin and dynamic
(spiritual) nature, their cause is therefore not perceptible
to the senses; so they exerted themselves to imagine one,
and from a survey of the parts of the normal, inanimate
human body (anatomy), compared with the visible changes
of the same internal parts in persons who had died of
diseases (pathological anatomy), as also from what they
could deduce from a comparison of the phenomena and
functions in healthy life (physiology) with their endless
alterations in the innumerable morbid states (pathology,
semeiotics), to draw conclusions relative to the invisible
process whereby the changes which take place in the
inward being of man in diseases are affected—a dim pic-
ture of the imagination, which theoretical medicine re-
garded as its prima causa morbi,;+ and thus it was at


*It would have been much more consonant with sound human
reason and with the nature of things, had they, in order to be
able to cure a disease, regarded the originating cause as the
causa morbi, and endeavored to discover that, and thus been
enabled successfully to employ the mode of treatment which had
shown itself useful in maladies having the same exciting cause,
in those also of a similar origin, as, for example, the same mer-
cury is efficacious in an ulcer of the glans after impure coitus,
as in all previous venereal chancres—if, I say, they had discov-


INTRODUCTION ao


one and the same time the proximate cause of the disease,
and the internal essence of the disease, the disease itself
—although, as sound human reason teaches us, the cause
of a thing or of an event, can never be at the same time
the thing or the event itself. How could they then, with-
out deceiving themselves, consider this imperceptible in-
for it medicines whose curative powers were likewise
generally unknown to them, and even give several such
unknown medicines mixed together in what are termed
prescriptions?

But this sublime problem, the discovery, namely, a
priori, of an internal invisible cause of disease, resolved
itself, at least with the more astute physicians of the old


ered the exciting cause of all other (non-venereal) chronic dis-
eases to be an infection at one period or another with the itch
miasm (psora), and had found for all these a common method
of treatment, regard being had for the peculiarities of each
individual case, whereby all and each of these chronic diseases
might have been cured, then might they with justice have
boasted that in the treatment of chronic diseases they had in view
the only available and useful causa morborum chronicorum (non
venereorum), and with this as a basis they might have treated
such diseases with the best results. But during these many
centuries they were unable to cure the millions of chronic dis-
eases, because they knew not their origin in the psoric miasm
(which was first discovered and afterwards provided with a
suitable plan of treatment by homceopathy), and yet they vaunted
that they alone kept in view the prima causa of these diseases
in their treatment, and that they alone treated rationally, although
they had not the slightest conception of the only useful knowl-
edge of their psoric origin and consequently mey bungled the
treatment of all chronic diseases!


34 INTRODUCTION


school, into a search, under the guidance of the symptoms
it is true, for what might be supposed to be the probable
general character of the case of disease before them ;?
whether it was spasm, or debility, or paralysis, or fever,
or inflammation, or induration, or obstruction of this or
that part, or excess of blood (plethora), deficiency or ex-
cess of oxygen, carbon, hydrogen or nitrogen in the
juices, exaltation or depression of the functions of the
arterial, venous or capillary system, change in the rela-
tive proportion of the factors of sensibility, irritability or
reproduction ?—conjectures that have been dignified by
the followers of the old school with the title of causal in-
dication, and considered to be the only possible rationality
in medicine; but which were assumptions, too fallacious
and hypothetical to prove of any practical utility—incapa-
ble, even had they been well grounded, of indicating the
most appropriate remedy for a case of disease; flattering
indeed, to the vanity of the learned theorist, but usually
leading astray when used as guides to practice, and
wherein there was evidenced more of ostentation than of
an earnest search for the curative indication.

And how often has it happened that, for example,
spasm or paralysis seemed to be in one part of the or-
ganism, while in another part inflammation was appar-
ently present!


* Every physician who treats disease according to such gen-
eral character however he may affect to claim the name of
homceopathist, is and ever will remain in fact a generalising allo-
path, for without the most minute individualisation, homceo-
pathy is not conceivable.


INTRODUCTION 35


Or, on the other hand, whence are the certain remedies
for each of these pretended general characters to be
derived? Those that would certainly be of benefit could
be none other than the specific medicines, that is, those
whose action is homogeneous * to the morbid irritation;
whose employment, however, is denounced and forbid-
den‘ by the old school as highly injurious, because ob-
servation has shown that in consequence of the receptivity
for homogeneous irritation being so highly increased in
diseases, such medicines in the usual large doses are
dangerous to life. The old school never dreamt of
smaller, and of extremely small doses. Accordingly no
attempt was made to cure, in the direct (the most nat-
ural) way, by means of homogeneous, specific medicines ;
nor could it be done, as the effects of most of medicines
were, and continued to remain, unknown, and even had
they been known it would have been impossible to hit on
the right medicine with such generalizing views as were
entertained.

However, perceiving that it was more consistent with
reason to seek for another path, a straight one if pos-


* Homeopathic.

*“Where experience showed the curative power of homco-
pathically acting remedies, whose mode of action could not be
explained, the difficulty was avoided by calling them specific, and
further investigation was stifled by this actually unmeaning
word. The homogeneous excitant remedies, the specific (homceo-
pathic), medicines, however, had long previously been prohibited
as of very injurious influence.”’—Rau, On the Value of the
Homeopathic Method of Treatment, Heidelberg, 1824; pp. IoI,


102.


36 INTRODUCTION


sible, rather than to take circuitous courses, the old
school of medicine believed it might cure diseases in a di-
rect manner by the removal of the (imaginary) material
cause of disease—for to physicians of the ordinary school,
while investigating and forming a judgment upon a dis-
ease, and not less while seeking for the curative indication,
it was next to impossible to divest themselves of these
materialistic ideas, and to regard the nature of the spirit-
ual-corporeal organism as such a highly potentialized en-
tity, that its sensational and functional vital changes,
which are called diseases, must be produced and effected
chiefly, if not solely, by dynamic (spiritual) - influences,
and could not be effected in any other way.

The old school regarded all those matters which were
altered by the disease, those abnormal matters that oc-
curred in congestions, as well as those that were excreted,
as disease-producers, or at least on account of their sup-
posed reacting power, as disease maintainers, and this
latter notion prevails to this day.

Hence they dreamed of effecting causal cures by en-
deavoring to remove these imaginary and presumed ma-
terial causes of the disease. Hence their assiduous
evacuation of the bile by vomiting in bilious fevers; their
emetics in cases of so-called stomach derangements ;° their


*In a case of sudden derangement of the stomach, with con-
stant disgusting eructations with the taste of the vitiated food,
generally accompanied by depression of spirits, cold hands and
feet, etc., the ordinary physician has hitherto been in the habit
of attacking only the degenerated contents of the stomach; a
powerful emetic should clean it out completely. This object
was generally attained by tartar emetic, with or without ipecacu-


INTRODUCTION Qy


diligent purging away of the mucus, the lumbrici and
the ascarides in children who are pale-faced and who


anha. Does the patient, however, immediately after this become
well, brisk and cheerful? Oh, no! Such a derangement of the
stomach is usually of dynamic origin, caused by mental dis-
turbance (grief, fright, vexation), a chill, over-exertion of the
mind or body immediately after eating, often after even a
moderate meal. Those two remedies are not suitable for re-
moving this dynamic derangement, and just as little is the revo-
lutionary vomiting they produce. Moreover, tartar emetic and
ipecacuanha, from their other peculiar pathogenetic powers, prove
of further injury to the patient’s health, and derange the biliary
secretion; so that if the patient be not very robust, he must
feel il] for several days from the effects of this pretended causal
treatment, notwithstanding all this violent expulsion of the whole
contents of the stomach. If the patient, however, in place of
taking such violent and always (#) hurtful evacuant drugs, smeil
only a single time at a globule the size of a mustard seed, moist-
ened with highly diluted pulsatilla juice, whereby the derangement
of his health in general and of his stomach in particular will cer-
tainly be removed, in two hours he is quite well; and if the eructa-
tion recur once more, it consists of tasteless and inodorous air;
the contents of the stomach cease to be vitiated, and at the next
meal he has regained his full usual appetite; he is quite well and
lively. This is true causal medication; the former is only an
imaginary one and has an injurious effect on the patient.

Even a stomach overloaded with indigestible food never re-
quires a medicinal emetic. In such a case nature is competent to
rid herself of the excess in the best way through the cesophagus,
by means of nausea, sickness and spontaneous vomiting, assisted,
it may be, by mechanical irritation of the palate and fauces, and
by this means the accessory medicinal effects of the emetic drugs
are avoided; a small quantity of coffee expedites the passage
downwards of what remains in the stomach.

But if, after excessive overloading of the stomach, the irritabil-
ity of the stomach is not sufficient to promote spontaneous vomit-


38 INTRODUCTION


suffer from ravenous appetite, bellyache, and enlarged
abdomen ;* their venesections in cases of hemorrhage ;*


ing, or is lost altogether, so that the tendency thereto is extin-
guished, while there are at the same time great pains in the epigas-
trium, in such a paralyzed state of the stomach, an emetic med-
icine would only have the effect of producing a dangerous or fatal
inflammation of the intestines; where a small quantity of strong
infusion of coffee, frequently administered, would dynamically
exalt the sunken irritability of the stomach, and put it in a condi-
tion to expel its contents, be they ever so great, either upwards or
downwards. So here also the pretended causal treatment is out
of place.

Even the acrid gastric acid, to eructations of which patients
with chronic diseases are not infrequently subject, may be today
violently evacuated by means of an emetic, with great suffering,
and yet all in vain, for tomorrow or some days later it is replaced
by similar acrid gastric acid, and then usually in larger quantities ;
whereas it goes away by itself when its dynamic cause is removed
by a very small dose of a high dilution of sulphuric acid, or still
better, if it is of frequent recurrence, by the employment of min- —
utest doses of antipsoric remedies corresponding in similarity to
the rest of the symptoms also. And of a similar character are
many of the pretended causal cures of the old-school physicians,
whose main effort it is, by means of tedious operations, trouble-
some to themselves and injurious to their patients, to clear away
the material product of the dynamic derangement; whereas if
they perceived the dynamic source of the affection, and annihilated
it and its products homceopathically, they would thereby effect a
rational cure.

° Conditions dependent solely on a psoric taint, and easily cur-
able by mild (dynamic) antipsoric remedies without emetics or
purgatives.

" Notwithstanding that almost all morbid haemorrhages depend
on a dynamic derangement of the vital force (state of health),
yet the old-school physicians consider their cause to be excess of
blood, and cannot refrain from bleeding in order to draw off the


INTRODUCTION 39


and more especially all their varieties of blood-iettings,®
their main remedy in inflammations, which they now,
following the example of a _ well-known bloodthirsty
Parisian physician (as a flock of sheep follow the bell-
wether even into the butcher’s slaughter-house), imagine
to encounter in almost every morbidly affected part of


supposed superabundance of this vital fluid; the palpable evil con-
sequences of which procedure, however, such as prostration of
the strength, and the tendency, or actual transition, to the typhoid
are then often unable to overcome—in fine, they imagine, even
when the patient does not recover, that their treatment has been in
conformity with their axiom, causam tolle, and that, according
to their mode of speaking, they have done everything in their
power for the patient, let the result be what it may.


® Although there probably never was a drop of blood too
much in the living human body, yet the old-school practitioners
consider an imaginary excess of blood as the main material cause
of all hzmorrhages and inflammations, which they must re-
move and drain off by venesections, cupping and leeches. This
they hold to be a rational mode of treatment, causal medication.
In general inflammatory fevers, in acute pleurisy, they even re-
gard the coagulable lymph in the blood—the buffy coat, as it is
termed--as the materia peccans, which they endeavor to get rid
of, if possible, by repeated venesections, notwithstanding that this
coat often becomes more consistent and thicker at every repeti-
tion of the bloodletting. They thus often bleed the patient nearly
to death, when the inflammatory fever will not subside, in order
to remove this buffy coat or the imaginary plethora, without
suspecting that the inflammatory blood is only the product of
the acute fever, of the morbid, immaterial (dynamic) inflamma-
tory irritation, and that the latter is the sole cause of the great
disturbance in the vascular system, and may be removed by the
smallest dose of a homogeneous (homceopathic) medicine, as,


ran@) INTRODUCTION


the body, and feel themselves, bound to remove by the ap-
plication of often a fatal number of leeches. They be-
lieve that by so doing they obey the true causal indica-
tions, and treat disease in a rational manner. The adher-
ents of the old school, moreover, believe that by putting a
ligature on polypi, by cutting out, or artificially exciting
suppuration by means of local irritants in indolent gland-


for instance, by a small globule of the decillion-fold dilution of
aconite juice, with abstinence from vegetable acids, so that the
most violent pleuritic fever, with all its alarming concomitants,
is changed into health and cured, without the least abstraction of
blood and without any antiphlogistic remedy, in a few at the
most in twenty-four—hours (a small quantity of blood drawn
from a vein by the way of experiment then shows no traces of
buffy coat); whereas another patient similarly affected, and
treated on the rational principles of the old school, if, after
repeated bleedings, with great difficulty and unspeakable suffer-
ings he escape for the nonce with life, he often has still many
months to drag through before he can support his emaciated body
on his legs, if in the mean time (as often happens from such
maltreatment) he be not carried off by typhoid fever, leucophleg-
masia or pulmonary phthisis.

Anyone who has felt the tranquil pulse of a man an hour
before the occurrence of the rigor that always precedes an at-
tack of acute pleurisy, will not be able to restrain his amaze-
ment if told two hours later, after the hot stage has commenced,
that the enormous plethora present urgently requires repeated
venesections, and will naturally inquire by what magic power
could the pounds of blood that must now be drawn off have
been conjured into the blood-vessels of this man within these
two hours, which but two hours previously he had felt beating
in such a tranquil manner? Not a single drachm more of blood
can now be circulating in those vessels than existed when he was
in good health, not yet two hours ago!


INTRODUCTION 4I


ular swellings, by enucleating encysted tumors (steatoma
and meliceria) by their operations for aneurysm and
lacrymal and anal fistula, by removing with the knife
scirrhous tumors of the breast, by amputating a limb


Accordingly the allopathic physician with his venesections
draws from the patient laboring under acute fever no oppres-
sive stuperabundance of blood, as that cannot possibly be pres-
ent; he only robs him of what is indispensable to life and re-
covery, the normal quantity of blood and consequently of strength
—a great loss which no physician’s power can replace!—and yet
he vainly imagines that he has conducted the treatment in con-
formity to his (misunderstood) axiom, causam tolle; whereas it
is impossible that the causa morbi in this case can be an excess
of blood, which is not present; but the sole true causa morbi was
a morbid, dynamical, inflammatory irritation of the circulatory
system, as is proved by the rapid and permanent cure of this
and every similar case of general inflammatory fever by one or
two inconceivably minute doses of aconite juice, which removes
such an irritation homceopathically.

The old school errs equally in the treatment of local inflam-
mations with its topical bloodlettings, more especially with the
quantities of leeches which are now applied according to the mani-
acal principles of Broussais. The palliative amelioration that at
first ensues from the treatment is far from being crowned by a
rapid and perfect cure; on the contrary, the weak and ailing
state of the parts thus treated (frequently also of the whole
body), which always remains, sufficiently shows the error that
is committed in attributing the local inflammation to a local
plethora, and how sad are the consequences of such abstractions
of blood; whereas this purely dynamic, apparently local, inflam-
matory irritation, can be rapidly and permanently removed by an
equally small dose of aconite, or, according to circumstances, of
belladonna, and the whole disease annihilated and cured, without
such unjustifiable shedding of blood.


42 INTRODUCTION


affected with necrosis, etc., they cure the patient radi-
cally, and that their treatment is directed against the cause
of the disease; and they also think, when they employ
their repellent remedies, dry up old running ulcers in the
legs with astringent applications of oxide of lead, cop-
per or zinc (aided always by the simultaneous adminis-
tration of purgatives, which merely debilitate, but have no:
effect on the fundamental dyscrasia), cauterize chancres,
destroy condylomata locally, drive off itch from the skin
with ointments of sulphur, oxide of lead, mercury or
zinc, suppress ophthalmiz with solutions of lead or
zinc, and drive away tearing pains from the limbs by
means of opodeldoc, hartshorn liniment or fumigations
with cinnabar or amber; in every case they think they
have removed the affection, conquered the disease, and
pursued a rational treatment directed towards the cause.
But what is the result? The metastatic affections that
sooner or later, but inevitably appear, caused by this
mode of treatment (but which they pretend are entirely
new diseases), which are always worse than the original
malady, sufficiently prove their error, and might and
should open their eyes to the deeper-seated, immaterial
nature of the disease, and its dynamic (spirit-like) origin,
which can only be removed by dynamic means.

A. favorite idea of the ordinary school of medicine,
until recent (would that I could not say the most recent!)
times, was that of morbific matters (and acridities) in
diseases, excessively subtile though they might be thought
to’ be, which must be expelled from the blood-vessels and
lymphatics, through the exhalents, skin, urinary apparatus
or salivary glands, through the tracheal and bronchial
glands in the form of expectoration, from the stomach


INTRODUCTION 43


and bowels by vomiting and purging, in order that the
body might be freed from the material cause that pro-
duced the disease, and a radical causal treatment be
thus carried out.

By cutting holes in the diseased body, which were con-
verted into chronic ulcers kept up for years by the intro-
duction of foreign substances (issues, setons), they
sought to draw off the materia peccans from the (always
only dynamically) diseased body, just as one lets a dirty
fluid run out of a barrel through the tap-hole. By means
also of perpetual fly-blisters and the application of meze-
reum, they thought to draw away the bad humors and
to cleanse the diseased body from all morbific matters—
but they only weakened it, so as generally to render it
incurable, by all these senseless unnatural processes.

I admit that it was more convenient for the weakness
of humanity to assume that, in the diseases they were
called on to cure, there existed some morbific material of
which the mind might form a conception (more par-
ticularly as the patients readily lent themselves to such
a notion), because in that case the practitioner had noth-
ing further to care about than to procure a good sup-
ply of remedies for purifying the blood and humors, ex-
citing diuresis and diaphoresis, promoting expectoration,
and scouring out the stomach and bowels. Hence, in all
the works on Materia Medica, from Dioscorides down to
the latest books on this subject, there is almost nothing
said about the special peculiar action of individual med-
icines; but, besides on account of their supposed utility
in various nosological names of diseases, it is merely
stated whether they are diuretic, diaphoretic, expectorant
or emmenagogue, and more particularly whether they pro-


44 INTRODUCTION


duce evacuation of the stomach and bowels upwards or
downwards; because all the aspirations and efforts of the
practitioner have ever been chiefly directed to cause the
expulsion of a material morbific matter, and of sundry
(fictitious) acridities, which it was imagined were the
cause of diseases.

These were, however, all idle dreams, unfounded as-
sumptions and hypotheses, cunningly devised for the con-
venience of therapeutics, as it was expected the easiest
way of performing a cure would be to remove the ma-
terial morbific matters (si modo essent!).

But the essential nature of diseases and their cure
will not adapt themselves to such fantasies, nor to the
convenience of medical men; to humor such stupid base-
less hypotheses diseases will not cease to be (spiritual)
dynamic derangements of our spirit-like vital principle in
sensations and functions, that 1s to say, immaterial de-
rangements of our state of health.

The causes of our maladies cannot be material, since
the least foreign material substance,® however mild it may
appear to us, if introduced into our blood-vessels, is
promptly ejected by the vital force, as though it were a
poison; or when this does not happen, death ensues. If


*Life was endangered by injecting a little pure water into
a vein. (Vide Mullen, quoted by Birch in the History of the
Royal Society.)

Atmospheric air injected into the blood-vessels caused death.
(Vide J. M. Voigt, Magazin fiir den neuesten Zustand der Natur-
kunde, i, iii, p. 25.)

Even the mildest fluids introduced into the veins endangered
life. (Vide Autenreith, Physiologie, 11, § 784.)


INTRODUCTION 45


even the minutest splinter penetrates a sensitive part of
our organism, the vital principle everywhere present in
our body never rests until it is removed by pain, fever,
suppuration or gangrene. And can it be supposed that
in a case of cutaneous disease of twenty years’ standing,
for instance, this indefatigably active vital principle will
quietly endure the presence of such an injurious foreign,
material exanthematous substance, such as a herpetic, a
scrofulous, a gouty acridity, etc., in the fluids of the
body? Did any nosologist ever see with corporeal eyes
such a morbific matter, to warrant him in speaking so
confidently about it, and in founding a system of medical
treatment upon it? Has any one ever succeeded in dis-
playing to view the matter of gout or the poison of scrof-
(atl

Even when the application of a material substance to
the skin, or to a wound, has propagated diseases by in-
fection, who can prove (what is so often maintained in
works on pathology) that some material portion of this
substance has penetrated into our fluids or been ab-
sorbed? *® The most careful and prompt washing of the
genitals does not protect the system from infection with
the venereal chancrous disease. The slightest breath of
air emanating from the body of a person affected with
smallpox will suffice to produce this horrible disease in
a healthy child.


“A girl in Glasgow, eight years of age, having been bit by a
mad dog, the surgeon immediately cut the piece clean out, and yet
thirty-six days afterwards she was seized with hydrophobia,
which killed her in two days. (Med. Comment. of Edinb.,
Decu2 vols 11,1703. )


40 INTRODUCTION


What ponderable quantity of material substance could
have been absorbed into the fluids, in order to develop,
in the first of these instances, a tedious dyscrasia (syphi-
lis), which when uncured is only extinguished with the
remotest period of life, with death; in the last, a disease
(smallpox) accompanied by almost general suppuration,"*
and often rapidly fatal? In these and all similar cases
is it possible to entertain the idea of a material morbific
matter being introduced into the blood? A letter written


“In order to account for the large quantity of putrid excre-
mentitious matter and feetid discharge often met with in dis-
eases, and to be able to represent them as the material substance
that excites and keeps up disease—although, when infection oc-
curs, nothing perceptible in the shape of miasm, nothing material,
could have penetrated into the body—recourse was had to the
hypothesis, that the matter of infection, be it ever so minute, acts
in the body like a ferment, bringing the fluids into a like state
of corruption, and thus changing them into a similar morbific
ferment which constantly increases with the disease and keeps it
up. But by what all-potent and all-wise purifying draughts will
you purge and cleanse the human fluids from this ever reproduc-
ive ferment, from this mass of imaginary morbific matter, and
that so perfectly, that there shall not remain a particle of such
morbific ferment, which, according to this hypothesis, must ever
again, as at first, transform and corrupt the fluids to new mor-
bific matter? Were that so it would evidently be impossible to
cure these diseases in your way!—See how all hypotheses, be
they ever so ingeniously framed, lead to the most palpable ab-
surdities when they are not founded on truth!—The most deeply
rooted syphilis may be cured, after the removal of the psora with
which it is often complicated, by one or two small doses of the
decillionfold diluted and potentised solution of mercury, whereby
the general syphilitic taint of the fluids is forever (dynamically)
annihilated and removed.


INTRODUCTION : AG


in the sick-room at a great distance has often communi-
cated the same contagious disease to the person who read
it. In this instance, can the notion of a material morbific
matter having penetrated into the fluids be admitted? But
what need is there of all such proofs? How often has it
happened that an irritating word has brought on a dan-
gerous bilious fever; a superstitious prediction of death
has caused the fatal catastrophe at the very time an-
nounced; the abrupt communication of sad or exces-
sively joyful news has occasioned sudden death? In these
cases, where is the material morbific principle that entered
in substance into the body, there to produce and keep up
the disease, and without the material expulsion and ejec-
tion of which a radical cure were impossible?

The champions of this clumsy doctrine of morbific
matters ought to be ashamed that they have so incon-
siderately overlooked and failed to appreciate the spiritual
nature of life, and the spiritual dynamic power of the ex-
citing causes of diseases, and that they have thereby
degraded themselves into mere scavenger-doctors, who,
in their efforts to expel from the diseased body morbific
matters that never existed, in place of curing, destroy life.

Are, then, the foul, often disgusting excretions which
occur in diseases the actual matter that produces and
keeps them up??? Are they not rather always excre-
tory products of the disease itself, that is, of the life
which is only dynamically deranged and disordered?


“Were this the case, the most inveterate coryza should be
certainly and rapidly cured by merely blowing and wiping the
nose carefully.


48 INTRODUCTION


With such false and materialistic views concerning the
origin and essential nature of diseases, it was certainly
not to be wondered at that in all ages the main endeavor
of the most obscure, as well as of the most distinguished
practitioners, and even of the inventors of the sublimest
medical systems, was always only to separate and expel
an imaginary morbific matter, and the indication most
frequently laid down was to break up and put in mo-
tion this morbific matter, to effect its expulsion by saliva-
tion, expectoration, diaphoresis and diuresis, to purify
the blood from (acridities and impurities) morbific mat-
ters, which never existed, by means of the intelligence of
sundry obedient decoctions of root and plants; to draw
off mechanically the imaginary matter of disease by se-
tons, by issues, by portions of the skin kept open and
discharging by means of perpetual blisters or mezereum
bark, but chiefly to expel and purge away the materia
peccans, or the injurious matters as they were termed,
through the intestines, by means of laxative and purgative
medicines, which, in order to give them a more profound
meaning and a more prepossessing appearance, were
fondly denominated dissolvents and mild aperients—all
so many arrangements for the expulsion of inimical
morbific matters, which never could be, and never were
instrumental in the production and maintenance of the
diseases of the human organism, animated as it is by a
spiritual principle—of diseases which never were any-
thing else than spiritual dynamic derangements of the
life altered in its sensations and functions.

Let it be granted now, what cannot be doubted, that
no diseases—if they do not result from the introduction
of perfectly indigestible or otherwise injurious substances


INTRODUCTION 49


into the stomach, or into other orifices or cavities of the
body, or from foreign bodies penetrating the skin, etc—
that no disease, in a word, is caused by any material sub-
stance, but that every one is only and always a peculiar,
virtual, dynamic derangement of the health; how injudi-
cious, in that case, must not a method of treatment di-
rected towards the expulsion 1° of that imaginary material


* There is a semblance of necessity in the expulsion by pur-
gatives of worms, in so-called vermicular diseases. But even this
semblance is false. A few lumbrici may be found in some
children; in many there exist ascarides. But the presence of
these is always dependent on a general taint of the constitu-
tion (the psoric), joined to an unhealthy mode of living. Let the
latter be improved, and the former cured homceopathically, which
is most easily effected at this age, and none of the worms re-
main, and children cured in this manner are never troubled with
them more; whereas after mere purgatives, even when combined
with cina seeds, they soon reappear in quantifies.

“But the tapeworm,” methinks I hear some one exclaim, “every
effort should be made to expel that monster, which was created
for the torment of mankind.”

Yes, sometimes it is expelled; but at the cost of what after-
sufferings, and with what danger to life! I should not like to
have on my conscience the deaths of so many hundreds of human
beings as have fallen sacrifices to the horribly violent purgatives,
directed against the tapeworm, or the many years of. indisposi-
tion of those who have escaped being purged to death. And how
often does it happen that after all this health-and-life-destroying
purgative treatment, frequently continued for several years, the
animal is not expelled, or if so, that it is again produced!

What if there is not the slightest necessity for all these vio-
lent, cruel, and dangerous efforts to expel and kill the worm?

The various species of tapeworm are only found along with
the psoric taint, and always disappear when that is cured. But


50 INTRODUCTION


substance appear to every rational man, since no good,
but only monstrous harm, can result from its employ-


ment in the principal diseases of mankind, namely, those
of a chronic character!


In short, the degenerated substances and impurities
that appear in diseases are, undeniably, nothing more


even before the cure is accomplished, they live—the patient en-
joying tolerable health the while—not exactly in the intestines,
but in the residue of the food, the excrement of the bowels, as
in their proper element, quite quietly, and without causing the
least disturbance, and find in the excrement what suffices for their
nourishment; they then do not touch the walls of the intestine,
and are perfectly harmless. But if the patient happen to be af-
fected with an acute disease of any kind, then the contents of the
bowels become intolerable to the animal; it twists about, comes
in contact with, and irritates the sensitive walls of the intes-
tines, causing a peculiar kind of spasmodic colic, which increases
materially the sufferings of the patient. (So also the foetus in
the womb becomes restless, turns about and kicks, only when
the mother is ill; but when she is well, it swims quiet in its
proper fluid without causing her any suffering.)

It is worthy of remark, that the morbid symptoms of patients
suffering from tapeworm are generally of such a kind, that they
are rapidly relieved (homceopathicaliy) by the smallest dose of
tincture of male-fern root; so that the ill-health of the patient,
which causes this parasitic animal to be restless, is thereby for the
time removed; the tapeworm then feels at ease, and lives on
quietly in the excrement of the bowels, without particularly dis-
tressing the patient or his intestines, until the antipsoric treat-
ment is so far advanced that the worm, after the eradication of
the psora, finds the contents of the bowels no longer suitable for
its support, and therefore spontaneously disappears, for ever
from the now cured patient, without the least purgative medi-
cine.


INTRODUCTION 51


than products of the disease of the abnormally deranged
organism, which are expelled by the latter, often violently
enough—often much too violently—without requiring the
aid of the evacuating art, and fresh products are always
developed as long as it labors under that disease. These
matters the true physician regards as actual symptoms of
the disease, and they aid him to discover the nature of
the disease, and to form an accurate portrait of it, so as
to enable him to cure it with a similar medicinal morbific
agent.

But the more modern adherents of the old school do
not wish it to be supposed, that in their treatment they
aim at the expulsion of material morbific substances.
They allege that their multifarious evacuant processes are
a mode of treatment by derivation, wherein they follow
the example of nature which, in her efforts to assist the
diseased organism, resolves fever by perspiration and
diuresis, pleurisy by epistaxis, sweat and mucous expec-
toration—other diseases by vomiting, diarrhoea and bleed-
ing from the anus, articular pains by suppurating ulcers
on the legs, cynanche tonsillaris by salivation, etc., or re-
moves them by metastases and abscesses which she de-
velops in parts at a distance from the seat ot the disease.

Hence they thought the best thing to do was to imitate
nature, by also going to work in the treatment of most
diseases in a circuitous manner like the diseased vital
force when left to itself, and thus in an indirect manner,"


“In place of extinguishing the disease rapidly, without ex-
haustion of the strength and without going about the bush, with
homogeneous, dynamic medicinal agents acting directly on the
diseased points of the organism, as homceopathy does.


52 INTRODUCTION


by means of stronger heterogeneous irritants applied to
organs remote from the seat of disease, and totally dis-
similar to the affected tissues, they produce evacuations,
and generally kept them up, in order to draw, as it were,
the disease thither.

This derivation, as it is called, was and continues to be
one of the principal modes of treatment of the old school
of medicine.

In this imitation of the self-aiding operation of na-
ture, as some call it, they endeavored to excite, by force,
new symptoms in the tissues that are least diseased and
best able to bear the medicinal disease, which should
draw away? the primary disease under the semblance
of crises and under the form of excretions, in order to
admit of a gradual lysis by the curative powers of na-
dene |


* Just as if anything immaterial could be drawn away! So
that here too was the notion of a substance and a morbific mat-
ter, excessively subtile though it might be supposed to be!


*Tt is only the slighter and acute diseases that tend, when
the natural period of their course has expired, to terminate
quietly in resolution, as it is called, with or without the employ-
ment of not very aggressive allopathic remedies; the vital force,
having regained its powers, then gradually substitutes the normal
condition for the derangement of the health that has now ceased
to exist. But in severe acute and in chronic diseases which con-
stitute by far the greater portion of all human ailments, crude
nature and the old school are equally powerless; in these, neither
the vital force, with its self-aiding faculty, nor allopathy in imi-
tation of it, can affect a lysis, but at the most a mere temporary
truce, during which the enemy fortifies himself, in order, sooner
or later, to recommence the attack with still greater violence.


INTRODUCTION 53


This they accomplished by means of diaphoretic and
diuretic remedies, blood-lettings, setons. and issues, but
chiefly by irritant drugs to cause evacuation of the ali-
mentary canal, sometimes upwards by means of emetics,
sometimes (and this was the favorite plan) downwards
by means of purgatives, which were termed aperient and
dissolvent ** remedies.

To assist this derivative method they employed the
allied treatment by counter-irritants; woolen garments
to the bare skin, foot-baths, nauseants, inflicting on the
stomach and bowels the pangs of hunger (the hunger-
treatment), substances to cause pain, inflammation, and
suppuration in near or distant parts, as the application
of horseradish, mustard plasters, cantharides, blisters,
mezereum, setons, issues, tartar-emetic ointment, moxa,
actual cautery, acupuncture, etc.; here also following the
example of crude unassisted nature, which endeavors to
free herself from the dynamic disease (in the case of a
chronic disease, unavailingly) by exciting pain in distant
parts of the body, by metastases and abscesses, by erup-
tions and suppurating ulcers.

It was evidently no rational principle, but merely imita-
tion, with the view of making practice easy, that seduced
the old school into those unhelpful and injurious indirect
modes of treatment, the derivative as well as the counter-
irritant; that led them to this inefficacious, debilitating
and hurtful practice of apparently ameliorating diseases


* An expression which likewise betrays that they imagined
and presupposed a morbific substance, which had to be dissolved


and expelled.


54 INTRODUCTION


for a short time, or removing them in such a manner
that another and a worse disease was roused up to occupy
the place of the first. Such a destructive plan cannot
certainly be termed curing.

They merely followed the example of crude instinctive
nature in her efforts, which are barely ** successful even


* Tn the ordinary school of medicine, the efforts made by na-
ture for the relief of the organism in diseases where no medicine
was given, were regarded as models of treatment worthy of imi-
tation. But this was a great error. The pitiable and highly im-
perfect efforts of the vital force to relieve itself in acute diseases
is a spectacle that should excite our compassion, and command
the aid of all the powers of our rational mind, to terminate
the self-inflicted torture by a real cure. If nature is uwun-
able to cure homceopathically a disease already existing in the or-
ganism, by the production of another fresh malady similar to it
($$ 43-46), which very rarely lies in her power (§ 50), and if
to the organism alone is left the task of overcoming, by its
own forces without external aid, a disease newly contracted (in
cases of chronic miasms its power of resistance is quite ineffica-
cious), we then witness nought but painful, often dangerous, ef-
forts of nature to save the individual at whatever cost, which
often terminate in extinction of the earthly existence, in death.

Little as we mortals know of the operations that take place in
the interior economy in health—which must be hidden from us
as certainly as they are patent to the eye of the all-seeing Creator
and Preserver of his creatures—just as little can we perceive the
operations that go on in the interior in disturbed conditions of
life, in diseases. The internal operations in diseases are mani-
fested only by the visible changes, the sufferings and the symp-
toms, whereby alone our life betrays the inward disturbance; so
that in no given case can we ascertain which of the morbid
symptoms are caused by the primary action of the morbific agent,
which by the reaction of the vital force for its own relief.


INTRODUCTION 55


in the slighter cases of acute disease; they merely imi-
tated the unreasoning life-preserving power when left to
itself in diseases, which, entirely dependent as it is upon
the organic laws of the body, is only capable of acting in
conformity with these laws, and is not guided by reason
and reflection—they copied nature, which cannot, like an
intelligent surgeon, bring together the gaping lips of a
wound and by their union effect a cure; which knows not
how to straighten and adjust the broken ends of a bone


Both are inextricably mixed up together before our eyes, and
only present to us an outwardly reflected picture of the entire
internal malady, for the fruitless efforts of unassisted vitality
to terminate the sufferings are themselves sufferings of the
whole organism. Hence, even in those evacuations termed crises,
which nature generally produces at the termination of diseases
which run a rapid course, there is frequently more of suffering
than of efficacious relief.

What the vital force does in these so-called crises, and how
it does it, remains a mystery to us, like all the internal operations
of the organic vital economy. One thing, however, is certain:
that in all these efforts more or less of the affected parts are sac-
rificed and destroyed in order to save the rest. These self-aiding
operations of the vital force for the removal of an acute disease,
performed only in obedience to the laws of organic life and not
guided by the reflection of an intellect, are mostly but a species
of allopathy; in order to relieve the primarily affected organ by a
crisis, an increased, often violent, activity is excited in the ex-
cretory organs, to draw away the disease from the former to
the latter; there ensue vomitings, purgings, diuresis, diaphoresis,
abscesses, etc., in order, by this irritation of distant parts, to ef-
fect a sort of derivation from the primarily diseased part, and the
dynamically affected nervous power seems to unload itself in the
material product.


56 INTRODUCTION


lying far apart and exuding much (often an excess of)
new osseous matter; which cannot put a ligature on a
wounded artery, but in its energy causes the patient to
bleed to death; which does not understand how to re-
place a dislocated shoulder, but by the swelling it oc-
casions round about it soon presents an obstacle to reduc-
tion; which, in order to remove a foreign body from the
cornea, destroys the whole eye by suppuration; which,
with all its efforts, can only liberate a strangulated hernia
by gangrene of the bowel and death; and which, by the
metaschematisms it produces in dynamic diseases, often
renders them much worse than they were originally. But
more, this irrational vital force recewes into our body,
without hesitation, the greatest plagues of our terrestrial
existence, the spark that kindles the countless diseases be-
neath which tortured mankind has groaned for hundreds
and thousands of years, the chronic miasms—psora,
syphilis, sycosis—not one of which can it diminish in the
slightest degree far less expel single-handed from the or-
ganism; on the contrary, it allows them to rankle therein,


It is only by the destruction and sacrifice of a portion of the
organism itself that unaided nature can save the patient in acute
diseases, and, if death do not ensue, restore, though only slowly
and imperfectly, the harmony of life—health.

The great weakness of the parts which had been exposed to the
disease, and even of the whole body, the emaciation, etc., remain-
ing after spontaneous cures, are convincing proofs of this.

In short, the whole operation of the self-aiding power of the
organism when attacked by diseases displays to the observer
nothing but suffering—nothing that he could or ought to imitate
if he wishes to cure disease in a truly artistic manner.


INTRODUCTION ey


until often after a long life of misery, death at last closes
the eyes of the sufferer.

In such an important affair as that ai healing, which
demands so much intelligence, reflection and judgment,
how could the old school, which arrogates to itself the
title of rational, choose as its best instructor, as its guide
to be blindly followed, the unintelligent vital force, in-
considerately copy its indirect and revolutionary opera-
tions in diseases, imagining these to be the non plus
ultra, the best conceivable, when that greatest gift of God,
reflective reason and unfettered judgment, was given us
to enable us infinitely to surpass it in salutary help to suf-
fering humanity?

When the old school practitioners, thoughtlessly imi-
tating the crude, senseless, automatic vital energy, with
their counter-irritant and derivative methods of treat-
ment—by far their most usual plans—attack innocent parts
and organs of the body, either inflicting on them excru-
ciating pains, or, as is most frequently done, compelling
them to perform evacuations, whereby strength and fluids
are wasted, their object is to direct the morbid vital ac-
tion in the primarily affected parts away to those arti-
ficially attacked, and thus to effect the cure of the natural
disease indirectly, by the production of a disease, much
greater in intensity and of quite a different kind, in the
healthy parts of the body, consequently by a circuitous
way, at the cost of much loss of strength, and usually of
great sufferings to the patient.’


* Daily experience shows the sad effects of this manceuvre in
chronic diseases. Anything but a cure is effected. Who would


58 INTRODUCTION


The disease, if it be acute, and consequently naturally
of but short duration, may certainly disappear, even dur-
ing these heterogeneous attacks on distant and dissimilar
parts—but it is not cured. There is nothing that can
merit the honorable name of cure in this revolutionary
treatment, which has no direct, immediate, pathological
relation to the tissues primarily affected. Often, indeed,
without these serious attacks on the rest of the organism,
would the acute disease have ceased of itself, sooner most
likely, with fewer subsequent sufferings and less sacri-
fice of strength. But neither the mode of operation of
the crude natural forces, nor the allopathic copy of
that, can for a moment be compared to the dynamic
‘(homeeopathic) treatment, which sustains the strength,
while it extinguishes the disease in a direct and rapid
manner.


ever call that a victory if, in place of attacking the enemy in
front in a hand-to-hand fight, and by his destruction terminating
at once his hostile assaults, we should, in a cowardly manner
and behind his back, lay an embargo on everything, cut off his
supplies, burn down everything for a great way round him? By
so doing we would at length deprive him of all courage to re-
sist, but our object is not gained, the enemy is far from being
destroyed,—he is still there, and when he can again procure pro-
visions and supplies, he once more rears his head, more exas-
perated than before—the enemy, I repeat, is far from being de-
stroyed, but the poor innocent country is so completely ruined
that it will be long before it can recover itself. In like manner
acts allopathy in chronic diseases, when, by its indirect attacks
on innocent parts at a distance from the seat of the disease, in-
stead of effecting a cure, it destroys the organism. Such is the
result of its hurtful operations!


INTRODUCTION 59


In far the greatest number of cases of disease, how-
ever—I mean those of a chronic nature—these perturbing,
debilitating, indirect modes of treatment of the old
school are scarcely ever of the slightest use. They sus-
pend, for a few days only, some troublesome symptom or
other, which, however, returns when the system has
become accustomed to the distant irritation, and the dis-
ease recurs worse than before, because by the antago-
nistic pains °° and the injudicious evacuations the vital
powers have been depressed.

Whilst most physicians of the old school, imitating in
a general manner the efforts of crude, unaided nature for
its own relief, carried out in their practice these deriva-
tions of merely hypothetical utility, just as they judged
expedient (guided by some imaginary indication) ; others,
aiming at a higher object, undertook designedly to pro-
mote the efforts of the vital force to aid itself by evacua-
tions and antagonistic metastases, as seen in diseases, and
by way of lending it a helping hand, to increase still more
these derivations and evacuations; and they believed
that by this hurtful procedure they were acting duce
natura, and might justly claim the title of minister nature.


eee


* What good results have ever ensued from those feetid arti-
ficial ulcers, so much in vogue, called issues? If even during the
first week or two, whilst they still cause pain, they appear some-
what to check by antagonism a chronic disease, yet by and by,
when the body has become accustomed to the pain, they have no
other effect than that of weakening the patient and giving still
greater scope to the chronic affection. Or does anyone imagine,
in this nineteenth century, that they serve as an outlet for the
escape of the materia peccans? It almost appears as if this were
the case!


60 INTRODUCTION


As the evacuations effected by the natural powers of the
patient in chronic diseases are not infrequently the pre-
cursors of alleviations—though only of a temporary char-
acter—of troublesome symptoms, violent pains, paralyses,
spasms, etc., so the old school imagined these derivations
to be the true way of curing diseases, and endeavored
to promote, maintain and even increase such evacuations.
But they did not perceive that all these evacuations and
excretions (pseudo-crises) produced by nature when left
to herself were, in chronic diseases, only palliative, tran-
sient alleviations, which, far from contributing to a real
cure, on the contrary, rather aggravate the original,
internal dyscrasia, by the waste of strength and juices
they occasioned. No one ever saw a chronic patient re-
cover his health permanently by such efforts of crude na-
ture, nor any chronic disease cured by such evacuations
effected by the organism.”4 On the contrary, in such cases
the original dyscrasia is always perceptibly aggravated,
after alleviations, whose duration always becomes shorter
and shorter; the bad attacks recur more frequently and
more severely in spite of the continuation of the evacua-
tions. In like manner, on the occurrence of symptoms ex-
cited by an internal chronic affection that threaten to de-
stroy life, when nature, left to its own resources, cannot
help herself in any other way than by the production of
external local symptoms, in order to avert the danger from
parts indispensable to life and direct it to tissues of less
vital importance (metastasis), these operations of the
energetic but unintelligent, unreasoning and improvident


** Equally inefficacious are those produced artificially.


INTRODUCTION OL


vital force conduce to anything but genuine relief or re-
covery; they only silence in a palliative manner, for a
short time, the dangerous internal affection, at the cost
of a large portion of the humours and of the strength,
without diminishing the original disease by a hair’s
breadth ; they can, at the most, only retard the fatal ter-
mination which is inevitable without true homceopathic
treatment.

The allopathy of the old school not only greatly over-
rated these efforts of the crude automatic power of
nature, but completely misjudged them, falsely considered
them to be truly curative, and endeavored to increase
and promote them, vainly imagining that thereby they
might perhaps succeed in annihilating and radically cur-
ing the whole disease. When, in chronic diseases, the
vital force seemed to silence this or that troublesome
symptom of the internal affection by the production, for
example, of some humid cutaneous eruption, then the
servant of the crude power of nature (minister nature)
applied to the discharging surface a cantharides plaster
or an exutory (mezereum), in order, duce natura, to draw
still more moisture from the skin, and thus to promote
and to assist nature’s object—the cure (by the removal of
the morbific matter from the body?) ; but when the effect
of the remedy was too violent, the eczema already of long
standing, and the system too irritable, he increased the
external affection to a great degree without the slightest
advantage, to the original disease, and aggravated the
pains, which deprived the patient of sleep and depressed
his strength (and sometimes even developed a malignant
febrile erysipelas) ; or if the effect upon the local affec-


62 INTRODUCTION


tion (still recent, perhaps) was of milder character, he
thereby repelled from its seat, by a species of ill-applied
external homceopathy, the local symptom which had been
established by nature on the skin for the relief of the
internal disease, thus renewing the more dangerous inter-
nal malady, and by this repulsion of the local symptom
compelling the vital force to effect a transference of a
worse form of morbid action to other and more important
parts; the patient became affected with dangerous oph-
thalmia, or deafness, or spasms of the stomach, or epileptic
convulsions, or attacks of asthma or apoplexy, or mental
derangement, etc., in place of the repelled local disease.”

When the diseased natural force propelled blood into
the veins of the rectum or anus (blind hemorrhoids), the
mimster nature, under the same delusive idea of assisting
the vital force in its curative efforts, applied leeches, often
in large numbers, in order to give an outlet to the blood
there—with but brief, often scarcely noteworthy, relief,
but thereby weakening the body and occasioning still
greater congestions in those parts, without the slightest
diminution of the original disease.

In almost all cases in which the diseased vital force
endeavored to subdue the violence of a dangerous inter-
nal malady by evacuating blood by means of vomiting,
coughing, etc., the old school physician, duce natura, made
haste to assist these supposed salutary efforts of nature,
and performed a copious venesection, which was invari-


* Natural effects of the repulsion of these local symptoms—
effects that are often regarded by the allopathic physician as
fresh diseases of quite a different kind.


INTRODUCTION Be


ably productive of injurious consequences and palpable
weakening of the body. .

In cases of frequently occurring chronic nausea, he
produced, with the view of furthering the intentions of
nature, copious evacuations of the stomach, by means of
powerful emetics—never with a good result, often with
bad, not infrequently dangerous and even fatal con-
sequences,

The vital force, in order to relieve the internal malady,
sometimes produces indolent enlargements of the external
glands, and he thinks to forward the intentions of nature,
in his assumed character of her servant, when, by the use
of all sorts of heating embrocations and plasters, he causes
them to inflame, so that, when the abscess is ripe, he
may incise it and let out the bad morbific matter (?).
Experience has shown, hundreds of times, that lasting
evil almost invariably results from such a plan.

And having often noticed slight amelioration of the
severe symptoms of chronic diseases to result from spon-
taneous night sweats or frequent liquid stools, he imagines
himself bound to obey these hints of nature (duce natura),
and to promote them, by instituting and maintaining a
complete course of sweating treatment or by the employ-
ment of so-called gentle laxatives for years, in order to
promote and increase these efforts of nature (of the vital
force of the unintelligent organism), which he thinks tend
to the cure of the whole chronic affection, and thus to
free the patient more speedily and certainly from his
disease (the matter of his disease?).

But he thereby always produces quite the contrary
result: aggravation of the original disease.


64. INTRODUCTION


In conformity with this preconceived but unfounded
idea, the old school physician goes on thus promoting 7°
the efforts of the diseased vital force and increasing those
derivations and evacuations in the patient which never
lead to the desired end, but are always disastrous, without
being aware that all the local affections, evacuations, and
seemingly derivative efforts, set up and continued by the
unintelligent vital force when left to its own resources, for


In direct opposition to this treatment, the old school not in-
frequently indulged themselves in the very reverse of this: thus,
when the efforts of the vital force for the relief of the internal
disease by evacuations and the production of local symptoms on
the exterior of the body became troublesome, they capriciously
suppressed them by their repercutients and repellents; they sub-
dued chronic pains, sleeplessness and diarrhoea of long standing
by doses of opium pushed to a dangerous extent; vomitings by
effervescent saline draughts; fcetid perspiration of the feet by
cold footbaths and astringent applications; eruptions on the skin
by preparations of lead and zinc; they checked uterine haemor-
rhage by injections of vinegar; colliquative perspiration by alum;
nocturnal seminal emissions by the free use of camphor; fre-
quent attacks of flushes of heat in the body and face by nitre,
vegetable acids and sulphuric acid; bleeding of the nose by plug-
ging the nostrils with dossils of lint soaked in alcohol or astrin-
gent fluids; they dried up discharging ulcers on the legs, estab-
lished by the vital power for the relief of great internal suffering,
with the oxides of lead and zinc, etc., with what sad results ex-
perience has shown in thousands of cases.

With tongue and with pen the old school physician brags that
he is a rational practitioner, and that he investigates the cause of
the disease so as always to make radical cures; but behold, his
treatment is directed, in these cases, against a single symptom
only, and always with injurious consequences to his patient.


INTRODUCTION 65


the relief of the original chronic disease, are actually the
disease itself, the phenomena of the whole disease, for the
totality of which, properly speaking, the only efficacious
remedy, and the one, moreover, that will act in the most
direct manner, is a homceopathic medicine, chosen on ac-
count of its similarity of action.

As everything that crude nature does to relieve itself
in diseases, in those of an acute, but especially those of a
chronic kind, is extremely imperfect and even actual
disease, it may easily be conceived that the promotion by
artificial means of this imperfection and disease must do
still more harm; at least, it cannot improve the efforts of
nature for its own relief, even in acute diseases, because
medical art is not in a condition to follow the hidden paths
by which the vital force effects its crises, but attempts to
produce them from without, by violent means, which are
still less beneficial than what the instinctive vital force
left to its own resources does, but on the other hand are
more perturbing and debilitating. For even the incom-
plete amelioration resulting from the natural derivations
and crises cannot be obtained in a similar manner by allo-
pathy ; with all its endeavors it cannot procure anything
like even that pitiful relief the vital force left to itself is
able to afford.

It has been attempted to produce, by means of scarify-
ing instruments, a bleeding at the nose, in imitation of
that sometimes occurring naturally, in order to mitigate,
for example, the attacks of a chronic headache. By this
means a large quantity of blood could be made to flow
from the nostrils and weaken the patient, but the relief
afforded was either nil, or much less than the instinctive


660 INTRODUCTION


vital force would procure at another time, when, of its
own accord, it would cause but a few drops to flow.

A so-called critical perspiration or diarrhcea, produced
by the ever active vital force after a sudden indisposition,
excited by anger, fright, a sprain or a chill, will be much
more successful, at least for the time, in relieving the
acute disease, than all the sudorific or purgative drugs in
the pharmacopceia, which only make the patient worse, as
daily experience shows.

But the vital force, which of itself can only act
according to the physical constitution of our organism,
and is not guided by reason, knowledge and reflection,
was not given to man to be regarded as the best possible
curative agent to restore those lamentable deviations
from health to the normal condition, and still less that
physicians should slavishly imitate its imperfect morbid
efforts (to free itself from disease), and that with opera-
tions incontestably more inappropriate and severe than its
own, and thereby conveniently spare themselves the
expenditure of reasoning, reflection and judgment req-
uisite for the discovery and for the practice of the
noblest of human arts—the true healing art—while
they allege their bad copy of the spontaneous efforts of
doubtful utility made by the crude natural force for its
relief, to be the healing art, the rational healing art!

What sensible man would imitate the efforts of the
organism for its own preservation? These efforts are
in reality the disease itself, and the morbidly affected
vital force is the producer of the visible disease! It
must, therefore, necessarily follow that all artificial
imitation, and likewise the suppression of these efforts,


INTRODUCTION 67


must either increase the disease or render it dangerous
by their suppression, and both of these allopathy does;
these are its pernicious operations which it alleges to be
the healing art, the rational healing art!

No! that exquisite power innate in the human being,
designed to direct in the most perfect manner the opera-
tions of life while tt is in health, equally present in all
parts of the organism, in the fibres of sensibility as well
as in those of irritability, the unwearying spring of all
the normal natural functions of the body, was not created
for the purpose of affording itself aid in diseases, not for
the purpose of exercising a healing art worthy of imita-
tion. No! the true healing ari ts that reflective work, the
attribute of the ligher powers of human intellect, of un-
fettered judgment and of reason selecting and determining
on principle in order to effect an alteration im the instinc-
tive, irrational and unintelligent, but energetic automatic
vital force, when tt has been diverted by disease into ab-
normal action, and by means of a similar affection devel-
oped by a homeopathically chosen remedy, to excite in tt a
medicinal disease somewhat greater in degree, so that the
natural morbid affection can no longer act upon the vital
force, which thus, freed from the natural disease, has now
only the similar, somewhat stronger, medicinal morbid
affection to contend with, against which it now directs its
whole energy and which tt soon overpowers, whereby the
vital force ts liberated and enabled to return to the normal
standard of health and to its proper function, “the main-
tenance of the life and healih of the orgamsm,”’ without
having suffered, during this change, any painful or de-
bilitating attacks. Homeopathy teaches us how to effect
this,


68 INTRODUCTION


Under the methods of treatment of the old school I
have just detailed, no small number of patients certainly
got rid of their diseases, but not of those of a chronic
(non-venereal) character; only such as were acute and
unattended with danger; and even these they were only
freed from by such circuitous and tedious ways, and
often so incompletely, that the results of the treatment
could never be termed "ctiressetected by saneentlemant.
Acute diseases of a not very dangerous kind were, by
venesections or suppression of one of the chief symptoms
through the instrumentality of an enantiopathic palliative
remedy (contraria contraris), kept under, or by means of
counter-irritant and derivative (antagonistic and revul-
sive) remedies, applied to other than the diseased spots,
suspended, until the natural time for the duration of the
short malady had expired. These methods were, conse-
quently, indirect, and attended with loss of strength and
humours, so much so that in patients so treated the
greatest and most important measures for the complete
removal of the disease and for the restoration of the lost
strength and humours remained to be performed by
Nature herself—by the life-preserving power which, be-
sides the removal of the natural acute disease, had also
to combat the effects of improper treatment, and thus it
was able, in cases unattended by danger, gradually to
restore the normal relation of the functions by means of
its own energy, but often in a tedious, imperfect and
painful manner.

It remains a very doubtful question whether the
natural process of recovery in acute diseases is really at
all shortened or facilitated by this interference of the old


INTRODUCTION 69


school, as the latter cannot act otherwise than the vital
force, namely, indirectly ; but its derivative and counter-
irritant treatment is much more injurious and much more
debilitating.

The old school has yet another method of treatment,
which is termed the stimulating and strengthening sys-
tem ** (by excitantia, nervina, tonica, confortantia, robo-
rantia). It is astonishing how it can boast of this
method.

Has it ever succeeded in removing the physical weak-
ness so often engendered and kept up or increased by a
chronic disease with its prescriptions of etheric Rhine-
wine or fiery Tokay? The strength gradually sank un-
der this treatment, and all the lower, the greater the
quantity of wine the patient was persuaded to drink,
because the source of weakness, the chronic disease,
was not cured by it, because artificial stimulation is fol-
lowed by relaxation in the reaction of the vital force.

Or did its cinchona bark, or its amara, so misunder-
stood, so multifarious in their modes of action, and pro-
ductive of quite different kinds of injury, give strength
in these frequently occurring cases? Did. not these vege-
table substances, said to be tonic and strengthening un-
der all circumstances, as also the preparations of iron,
often add to the old disease new sufferings, by virtue of
their peculiar pathogenetic effects, without relieving the
weakness proceeding from an unknown disease of long
standing?


“It is, properly speaking, enantiopathic, and I shall again re-
fer to it in the text of the Organon (§ 59).


70 INTRODUCTION


Has any one ever succeeded in diminishing in the very
least the duration of the incipient paralysis of an arm or
a leg, so often arising from a chronic dyscrasia, by means
of the so-called wnguenta nervina or any other spirituous
or balsamic embrocations, without curing the dyscrasia
itself. Or have electric or galvanic shocks ever been at-
tended with any other result in such cases, than a gradu-
ally increasing, and finally absolute, paralysis, and
extinction of all muscular and nervous irritability in the
affected limbs? ?°

Did not the renowned excitantia and aphrodisiaca, am-
bergris, lacerta scincus, cantharides tincture, truffles, car-
damoms, cinnamon and vanilla invariably bring about
complete impotence when used for the purpose of restor-
ing the gradually declining sexual power (which always
depended on an unobserved chronic miasm) ?

How can credit be taken for the production of a stimu-
lation and invigoration of but a few hours’ duration,
when the result that must follow and which is permanent
—according to the laws of all palliative action—is a di-
rectly opposite state, the rendering of the disease incur-
able?

The little good that the excitantia and roborantia did
for recovery from acute diseases (treated according to the


Those affected with hardness of hearing were relieved by
moderate shocks from the voltaic pile of the apothecary of
Jever only for a few hours—these moderate shocks soon lost
their power. In order to produce the same result he had to
make them stronger; until these stronger shocks had no effect;
the very strongest would then at first excite the patients’ hear-
ing for a short time, but at length left them quite deaf.


INTRODUCTION vie!


old method) was a thousand times outweighed by their
ill effects in chronic maladies.

When physicians of the old school do not know what
to do in a chronic disease, they treat it blindly with their
so-called alterative remedies (alterantia) ; among which
the horrible mercurialia (calomel, corrosive sublimate and
mercurial ointment) occupy the foremost place—which
they allow to act in such large quantities and for so long
a time on the diseased body (in non-venereal diseases!)
that at last the health is by their destructive effects com-
pletely undermined. They thus certainly produce great
alterations, but invariably such as are not beneficial, and
they always utterly ruin the health by their improper
administration of this excessively injurious metal.

(which, as a homceopathic febrifuge, is only specific in
true marsh ague, accompanied with psora), for all epi-
demic intermittent fevers, which are often distributed
over large tracts of country, the old school practitioners
palpably manifest their stupidity, for these diseases assume
a different character almost every year and hence de-
mand for their cure, almost always, a different homceo-
pathic remedy, by means of one or a few very small doses
of which they may always be radically cured in a few
days. Now, because these epidemic fevers have peri-
odical attacks (typuzs) and the adherents of the old school
see nothing in all intermittent fevers, but their typus
[periodicity|, and neither know nor care to know any
other febrifuge but cinchona, these routine practitioners
imagine if they can but suppress the typus of the epidemic
intermittent fever with enormous doses of cinchona and
its costly alkaloid, quinine (an event which the unintelli-


WZ INTRODUCTION


gent, but, in this instance, more sensible vital force en-
deavors to prevent often for months), that they have
cured this epidemic ague. But the deluded patient, after
such a suppression of the periodicity (typus) of his fever,
imvariably becomes worse than he was during the fever
itself; with sallow complexion, dyspnoea, constriction in
the hypochondria, disordered bowels, unhealthy appetite,
broken sleep, feeble and desponding, often with great
swelling of the legs, of the abdomen and even of the
face and hands, he creeps out of the hospital, dismissed
as cured, and long years of homceopathic treatment are
not infrequently required, merely to rescue from death,
let alone to cure and restore to health, such a profoundly
injured (cured?), artificially cachectic patient.

The old school is happy when it can convert the dull
stupor that occurs in typhus fevers, by means of valerian,
which in this case acts antipathically, into a kind of liveli-
ness of a few hours’ duration; but as this does not con-
tinue, and to force a repetition of the animation ever in-
creasing doses of valerian are requisite, it is not long
before the largest doses cease to have the desired effect.
But as this palliative is only stimulant in its primary
action, in its after effects the vital force is paralysed, and
such a patient is certain of a speedy death from this
rational treatment of the old school; none can escape.
And yet the adherents of this routine art could not per-
ceive that by these proceedings they most certainly killed
of the disease.

A palliative of a still more horrible character for chronic
patients is the digitalis purpurea, with which the old school
practitioners imagine they do such excellent service, when


INTRODUCTION Ie


by means of it, they compel the quick, irritated pulse in
chronic diseases (purely symptomatic!) to become slower.
True it is that this dreadful remedy, which is in such
cases employed enantiopathically, strikingly diminishes
the frequency of the quick, irritated pulse, and greatly
reduces the number of the arterial pulsations, for a few
hours after the first dose; but the pulse soon becomes
more rapid than before. In order again to diminish in
some degree its frequency the dose is increased, and it
has the effect, but for a still shorter period, until even
these and still larger palliative doses cease to reduce the
pulse, which at length, in the secondary action of the
foxglove which can no longer be restrained, becomes much
more rapid than it was before the use of this drug,—it
then becomes uncountable; sleep, appetite and strength
are lost—death is imminent; not one of the patients so
treated escapes alive, unless to be a prey to incurable
Gisaimiiy | =°

Such was the treatment pursued by the allopathist.
The patients, therefore, were obliged to yield to the sad
necessity, because they could obtain no better aid from
other allopathists, who had gained their knowledge from
the same deceitful books.

As the fundamental cause of chronic (non-venereal)
diseases, together with the remedies for them, remained


* And yet Hufeland, the chief of this old school (v. Homéo-
pathie, p. 22), extols with much satisfaction the employment of
digitalis in such cases, in these words: “None will deny’ (ex-
perience invariably does so!) “that too great rapidity of the
circulation can be removed (?) by digitalis.’ Permanently re-
moved? and by a heroic enantiopathic remedy? Poor Hufeland!


Gal INTRODUCTION


unknown to these practitioners, who vainly boasted of
their causal medication and of their diagnosis being di-
rected to the investigation of the genesis of diseases ;*
how could they hope to cure the immense numbers of
chronic diseases by their indirect treatments, which were
but hurtful imitations of the unintelligent vital force for
its own relief, that never were intended to be models for
practice ?

The presumed character of the affection they regarded
as the cause of the disease, and hence they directed their
pretended causal treatment against spasm, inflammation
(plethora), fever, general and partial debility, mucus,
putridity, obstructions, etc., which they thought to remove
by means of their antispasmodic, antiphlogistic, tonic,
stimulant, antiseptic, dissolvent, resolvent, derivative,
evacuant, antagonistic remedies (of which they only pos-
sessed a superficial knowledge).

But from such general indications really serviceable
medicines could not be discovered, most assuredly not in
the materia medica of the old school, which, as I have
elsewhere shown,”® is founded mainly on conjecture and
false deductions ab usu in morbis, mixed up with false-
hood and fraud.


7 Which Hufeland in his pamphlet, Die Homdopathie, page 20,
makes a futile attempt to appropriate for his old pseudo-art. For
since, as is well known, previous to the appearance of my book
(Chronic Diseases), the 2500-years-old allopathy knew nothing
about the source of most chronic diseases (psora), must it not
have attributed a false source (genests) to such maladies?


* See essay in the first volume of the Materia Medica Pura
(English edit.), “Sources of the Common Materia Medica.”


INTRODUCTION 75


With equal rashness they attacked those still more
hypothetical so-called indications—deficiency or excess
of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, or hydrogen in the fluids,
exaltation or diminution of the irritability, sensibility and
reproduction, derangements of the arterial, venous and
capillary systems, asthenia, etc., without knowing a single
remedy for effecting objects so visionary. All this was
pure ostentation. It was a mode of treatment that did
no good to the patients.


But all semblance of appropriate treatment of diseases
was completely lost by a practice, introduced in the
earliest times, and even made into a rule: I mean the
mixture in a prescription of various medicinal substances,
whose real action was, almost without an exception, un-
known, and which, without any one exception, invariably
differed so much among each other. One medicine (the
sphere of whose medicinal effects was unknown) was
placed foremost, as the principal remedy (basis), and
was designed to subdue what the physician deemed the
chief character of the disease, to this was added some
other drug (equally unknown as regards the sphere of
its medicinal action) for the removal of some accessory
symptom, or to strengthen the action of the first
(adjuvans ) ; and besides these, yet another (likewise un-
known as to the sphere of its medicinal powers), a pre-
tended corrective remedy (corrigens); these were all
mixed together (boiled, infused)—and along with them,
some medicinal syrup, or distilled medicinal water, also
with different properties, would be included in the for-
mula, and it was supposed that each of the ingredients
of this mixture would perform, in the diseased body, the


70 INTRODUCTION


out suffering itself to be disturbed or led astray by
the other things mixed up along with it; which, how-
ever, could not in reason be expected. One ingredient
suspended wholly or partially the action of another, or
communicated to it and to the others a mode of action
and operation not anticipated nor conjecturable, so that
it was impossible the expected effect could be obtained;
there frequently occurred a new morbid derangement,
which, from the incomprehensible changes imparted to
substances by their admixture, was not and could not
have been foreseen, which escaped observation amid the
tumultuous symptoms of the disease, and which became
permanent from a lengthened employment of the pre-
scription—accordingly an artificial disease was added to
and complicated the original disease, causing an aggrava-
tion of the latter—or if the prescription were not often
repeated, but superseded by one or more new prescrip-
tions, composed of other ingredients, given in rapid suc-
cession, then the very least that could happen was a
farther depression of the strength, for the substances
administered in that way neither had, nor could have
had, any direct pathological relation to the original
malady, but only attacked, in a useless and injurious
manner, parts that were least implicated in the disease.


The mixture of several medicines, even if the effects
of each single medicine on the human body were accur-
ately known (—the prescription writer, however, often
knows not the thousandth part of their effects—), the
association, in one prescription, of several such ingredi-
ents, I repeat, many of which are themselves of a very
compound nature, and the peculiar action of any one of
which is as good as unknown, although in reality it al-


INTRODUCTION 7,


ways differs greatly from that of the others, and the
administration of this incomprehensible mixture to the
patient in large and frequently repeated does, in order
therewith to obtain some purposed, certain, curative
effect, is a piece of folly repugnant to every reflecting
and unprejudiced person.?®


*® The absurdity of medicinal mixtures was perceived even by
adherents of the old school of medicine, although they still con-
tinued to follow this slovenly plan in their own practice, con-
trary to their convictions. Thus Marcus Herz (in Hufeland’s
Journal, ii, p. 33) reveals the pricks of his conscience in the fol-
lowing words: “When we wish to remove the inflammatory state,
we do not employ either nitre or sal-ammoniac or vegetable acids
alone, but we usually mix several, and often but too many, so-
called anti-phlogistics together, or give them in the same case in
close succession. If we have to combat putridity, we are not
content to look for the attainment of our object from the ad-
ministrations of large doses of one of the known antiseptic medi-
cines, such as cinchona bark, mineral acids, arnica, serpentaria,
etc., alone; we prefer associating several of them together, and
count upon their community of action; or from our uncertainty as
to whose action is the most suitable for the case in question, we
throw together a number of different substances, and almost
leave it to chance to effect the end we have in view, by means
of one of them. Thus we seldom excite perspiration, purify the
blood (?), overcome obstructions (?), promote expectoration, or
even evacuate the prime viz, by a single remedy; our prescrip-
tions for these objects are always composite, almost never simple
and pure, consequently neither are our observations in reference
to the actions of each individual substance contained in them. To
be sure, we learnedly institute certain grades. of rank among the
remedies in our formulas; on the one to which we particularly
commission the action, we confer the title of base (basis), the
others we call helpers, supporters (adjuvantia), correctives (cor-


78 INTRODUCTION


The result naturally belies every expectation that had
been formed. There certainly ensue changes and results,
but none of an appropriate character, none beneficial—
all injurious, destructive!

I should like to see any one who would call the pur-
blind inroads of such prescriptions on the diseased human
body a cure!

It is only by guiding what still remains of the vital
principle in the patient to the proper performance of its
functions, by means of a suitable medicine, that a cure
can be expected, but not by enervating the body to death,
secundum artem,; and yet the old.school knows not what
else to do with patients suffering from chronic diseases,
than to attack the sufferers with drugs that do nothing


rigentia), etc. But this classification is evidently almost entirely
arbitrary. The helpers and supporters have just as much part in
the whole action as the chief ingredient, although, from want of
a standard of measurement, we are unable to determine the degree
of their participation in the result. In like manner the influence of
the correctives on the powers of the other ingredients cannot be
quite indifferent; they must increase or diminish them, or give
them quite another direction; and hence we must always regard
the salutary (?) change which we effect, by means of such a pre-
scription, as the result of all its ingredients collectively, and
we can never obtain from its action a pure experience of the in-
dividual efficacy of any single ingredient of which it is composed.
In fact, our knowledge of what is essential to be known respect-
ing all our remedies, as also respecting the perhaps hundred-fold
relationship among each other into which they enter when com-
bined, ts far too little to be relied upon to enable us to tell with
certainty the degree and extent of the action of a substance,
seemingly ever so unimportant, when introduced into the human
body in combination with other substances.”


INTRODUCTION v2)


but torture them, waste their strength and fluids, and
shorten their lives! Can it be said to save whilst it
destroys? Does it deserve any other name than that of
a mischievous [non-healing] art? It acts, lege artis, in
the most inappropriate manner, and it does (it would
almost seem purposely) addota that is to say, the very
opposite of what it should do. Can it be commended?
Can it be any longer tolerated?

In recent times the old school practitioners have quite
surpassed themselves in their cruelty towards their sick
fellow-creatures, and in the unsuitableness of their opera-
tions, as every unprejudiced observer must admit, and as
even physicians of their own school have been forced, by
the pricks of their conscience (like Kriiger Hansen), to
confess before the world.

It was high time for the wise and benevolent Creator
and Preserver of mankind to put a stop to these abom-
inations, to command a cessation of these tortures, and to
reveal a healing art the very opposite of all this, which
should not waste the vital juices and powers by emetics,
perennial scourings out of the bowels, warm baths, dia-
phoretics or salivation; nor shed the life’s blood, nor
torment and weaken with painful appliances; nor, in
place of curing patients, suffering from diseases, render
them incurable by the addition of new, chronic medicinal
maladies by means of the prolonged use of wrong, power-
ful medicines of unknown properties; nor yoke the horse
behind the cart, by giving strong palliatives, according
to the old favorite axiom, contraria contrariis curentur ;
nor, in short, in place of lending the patient aid, to guide
him in the way to death, as is done by the merciless


reve) INTRODUCTION


routine practitioner ;—but which, on the contrary, should
spare the patient’s strength as much as possible, and
should, rapidly and mildly, effect an unalloyed and per-.
manent cure, and restore to health by means of smallest
doses of few simple medicines carefully selected accord-
ing to their proved effects, by the only therapeutic law
conformable to nature: similia similibus curentur. It
was high time that he should permit the discovery of
homeeopathy.

By observation, reflection and experience, 1 discovered
that, contrary to the old allopathic method, the true, the
proper, the best mode of treatment is contained in the
maxim: To cure mildly, rapidly, certainly, and perma-
nently, choose, in every case of disease, a medicine which
can itself produce an affection similar (Omotov maBos) to
that sought to be cured!

Hitherto no one has ever taught this homceopathic mode
of cure, no one has carried tt out in practice. But if the
truth is only to be found in this method, as I can prove
it to be, we might expect that, even though it remained
unperceived for thousands of years, distinct traces of it
would yet be discovered in every age.*°

And such is the fact. In all ages, the patients who
have been really, rapidly, permanently and obviously


* For truth is co-eternal with the all-wise, benevolent Deity.
It may long escape the observation of man, until the time fore-
ordained by Providence arrives, when its rays shall irresistibly
break through the clouds of prejudice and usher in the dawn of a
day which shall shine with a bright and inextinguishable light for
the weal of the human race.


INTRODUCTION SI


cured by medicines, and who did not merely recover by
some fortuitous circumstance, or by the acute disease
having run its allotted course, or by the powers of the
system having, in the course of time, gradually attained
the preponderance, under allopathic and antagonistic
treatment—for being cured in a direct manner differs
vastly from recovering in an indirect manner—such pa-
tients have been cured solely (although without the
knowledge of the physician) by means of a (homceo-
pathic) medicine which possessed the power of producing
a similar morbid state.

Even in real cures by means of mixtures of medicines
—which were excessively rare—it will be found that the
remedy whose action predominated was always of a
homceopathic character,

But this is observed much more strikingly in cases
where physicians sometimes effected a rapid cure with
one simple medicinal substance, contrary to the usual
custom, that admitted of none but mixtures of medicines
in the form of a prescription. There we see, to our
astonishment, that this always occurred by means of a
medicine that is itself capable of producing an affection
similar to the case of disease, although the physicians
themselves knew not what they were doing, and acted in
forgetfulness of the contrary doctrines of their own
that which they should have employed according to the
traditional therapeutics, and it was only in consequence
of so doing that the patients were rapidly cured.

If we deduct the cases in which the specific remedy
for a disease of never varying character has been made
known to physicians of the ordinary school (not by their


82 INTRODUCTION


own investigation, but) by the empirical practice of the
common people, wherewith they are enabled to effect a
direct cure, as for instance, of the venereal chancrous
disease with mercury; of the morbid state resulting from
contusions with arnica; of marsh ague with cinchona
bark; of recent cases of itch with flowers of sulphur, etc.
—if we deduct these, we find, that without almost any
exception, all the other treatment of the old school phy-
sician, in chronic diseases, consists in debilitating, teasing
and tormenting the already afflicted patient, to the
aggravation of his disease and to his destruction, with a
great display of dignified gravity on the part of the
doctor and at a ruinous expense to the patient.

Blind experience sometimes led them to a homceopathic
mode of treatment,*? and yet they did not perceive the


* Thus they imagined they could drive out through the skin
the sudatory matter which they believed to stagnate there after a
chill, if they gave the patient to drink, during the cold stage of
the catarrhal fever, an infusion of elder flowers, which is capable
of removing such a fever and curing the patient by its peculiar
similarity of action (homeopathically), and this it does most
promptly and effectually, without causing perspiration, if but a
small quantity of this infusion, and nothing else, be taken. To
hard, acute swellings, in which the excessive violence of the in-
flammation prevents their suppuration and causes intolerable pains,
they apply very warm poultices, frequently renewed, and behold!
the inflammation and the pains diminish rapidly, while the ab-
scess is rapidly formed, as is known by the yellowish shining eleva-
tion and the perceptible softening. In this case they imagine
that the hardness has been softened by the moisture of the poul-
tice, whereas it is chiefly by the greater heat of the poultices that
the excess of inflammation has been homeceopathically subdued, and
the rapid suppuration been enabled to take place.—Why do they


INTRODUCTION 83


law of nature in obedience to which cures so effected did
and must ensue. .

Hence it is highly important, for the weal of mankind,
to ascertain what really took place in these extremely
rave but singularly salutary treatments. The answer we
obtain to this question is of the utmost significance.


employ with benefit in many ophthalmiz St. Yve’s salve, the chief
ingredient of which is red oxide of mercury, which can produce
inflammation of the eyes, if anything can? Is it hard to see that
they here act homceopathically?>—Or why should a little parsley
juice produce such evident relief in those cases (by no means
rare), where there are anxious, often ineffectual, efforts to urinate
in little children, and in ordinary gonorrhcea, which is well known
by the very painful, frequent and almost ineffectual attempts to
make water, if the fresh juice of this plant had not the power
of causing, in healthy persons, a painful, almost fruitless, urging
to urinate, consequently cures homceopathically? Wié6ith the pim-
pernal root, which causes great secretion of mucus in the bronchia
and fauces, they successfully combated the so-called mucous an-
gina—and quelled some kinds of metrorrhagia with the leaves of
savine, which can itself cause metorrhagia, without perceiving the
homeceopathic curative law. In cases of constipation from incar-
cerated hernia and in ileus many medical men found the consti-
pating opium, in small doses, to be the most excellent and certain
remedy, without having the most distant idea of the homco-
pathic therapeutic law exemplified in this case. They cured non-
venereal ulcers of the fauces with small doses of mercury, whicli
is homceopathic to such states—stopped some diarrhceas with small
doses of the purgative rhubarb—cured hydrophobia with bella-
donna, that causes a similar affection, and removed, as if by
magic, the dangerous comatose state in acute fevers with a small
dose of the heating, stupefying opium; and yet they abuse homceo-
pathy, and persecute it with a fury that can only arise from the
stings of an evil conscience in a heart incapable of improvement.


84 INTRODUCTION


They were never performed in any other manner than
by means of medicines of homceopathic power, that is to
say, capable of producing a disease similar to the morbid
state sought to be cured; the cures were effected rapidly
of which made use of them as it were by accident, and
even in opposition to the doctrines of all previous sys-
tems and therapeutics (often without rightly knowing
what they were doing and why they did it), and thus,
against their will, they practically confirmed the necessity
of the only therapeutic law consonant to nature, that of
homceopathy—a therapeutic law, which, despite the many
facts and innumerable hints that pointed to it, no physi-
cians of past epochs have exerted themselves to discover,
blinded as they all have been by medical prejudices.

For even the domestic practice of the non-medical
classes of the community endowed with sound observant
faculties has many times proved this mode of treatment
to be the surest, the most radical and the least fallacious
Iie ieretiees

In recent cases of frost-bitten limbs frozen sour crout
is applied or frictions of snow are used.*?


* It is on such examples of domestic practice that Mr. M. Lux
founds his so-called mode of cure by identicals and idem, which
he calls Jsopathy, which some eccentric-minded persons have al-
ready adopted as the non plus ultra of a therapeutic method,
without knowing how they could carry it out.

But if we examine these instances attentively we find that they
do not bear out these views.

The purely physical powers differ in the nature of their action
on the living organism from those of a dynamic medicinal kind.

Heat or cold of the air that surrounds us, or of the water, or


INTRODUCTION 85


The experienced cook holds his hand, which he has
scalded, at a certain distance from the fire, and does not


of our food and drink, occasion (as heat and cold) of themselves
no absolute injury to a healthy body; heat and cold are in their
alternations essential to the maintenance of healthy life, conse-
quently they are not of themselves medicine. Heat and cold, there-
fore, act as curative agents in affections of the body, not by virtue
of their essential nature (not, therefore, as cold and heat per se,
not as things hurtful in themselves, as are the drugs, rhubarb,
china, etc., even in the smallest doses), but only by virtue of their
greater or smaller quantity, that is, according to their degrees of
temperature, just as (to take an example from purely physical
powers) a great weight of lead will bruise my hand painfully, not
by virtue of its essential nature as lead, for a thin plate of lead
would not bruise me, but in consequence of its quantity and mas-
sive weight.

If, then, cold or heat be serviceable in bodily ailments like
frost-bites or burns, they are so solely on account of their de-
gree of temperature, just as they only inflict injury on the healthy
body by their extreme degrees of temperature.

Thus we find in these examples of successful domestic prac-
tice, that it is not the prolonged application of the degree of cold
in which the limb was frozen that restores it isopathically Cit
would thereby be rendered quite lifeless and dead), but a degree
of cold that only approximates to that (homeopathy), and which
gradually rises to a comfortable temperature, as frozen sour
crout laid upon the frost-bitten hand in the temperature of -the
room soon melts, gradually growing warmer from 32° or 33°
(Fahr.) to the temperature of the room, supposing that to be
only 55°, and thus the limb is recovered by physical homceopathy.
In like manner, a hand scalded with boiling water would not be
cured tsopatiically by the application of boiling water, but only
by a somewhat lower temperature, as, for example, by holding it in
a vessel containing a fluid heated to 160°, which becomes every
minute less hot, and finally descends to the temperature of the


86 INTRODUCTION


heed the increase of pain that takes place at first, as he
knows from experience that he can thereby in a very


room, whereupon the scalded part is restored by homeopathy.
Water in the act of freezing cannot draw out the frost isopathi-
cally from potatoes and apples, but this is effected by water only
near the freezing-point.

So, to give another example from physical action, the injury
resulting from a blow on the forehead with a hard substance (a
painful lump) is soon diminished in pain and swelling by pressing
on the spot for a considerable time with the ball of the thumb,
strongly at first, and then gradually less forcibly, homceopathically,
but not by an equally hard blow with an equally hard body, which
would increase the evil isopathically.

The examples of cures by isopathy given in the book alluded to
—muscular contractions in human beings and spinal paralysis in a
dog, which had been caused by a chill, being rapidly cured by cold
bathing—these events are falsely explained by isopathy. What are
called sufferings from a chill are only nominally connected with
cold, and often arise, in the bodies of those predisposed to them,
even from a draught of wind which was not at all cold. More-
over, the manifold effects of a cold bath on the living organism, in
health and in disease, cannot be reduced to such a simple formula
as to warrant the construction of a system of such pretentions!
That serpents’ bites, as is there stated, are most certainly cured by
portions of the serpents, must remain a mere fable of a former
age, until such an improbable assertion is authenticated by indubit-
able observations and experience, which it certainly never will be.
That, in fine, the saliva of a mad dog given to a patient laboring
under hydrophobia (in Russia), is said to have cured him—that
“is said’ would not seduce any conscientious physician to imitate
such a hazardous experiment, or to construct a so-called isopathic
system, so dangerous and so highly improbable in its extended ap-
plication, as has been done (not by the modest author of the
pamphlet entitled The Isopathy of Contagions, Letpzic: Koll-
mann, but) by its eccentric supporters, especially Dr. Gross (v.
Alg. hom. Ztg., ii, p. 72), who vaunts this isopathy (@qualia


INTRODUCTION 37


short time, often in a few minutes, convert the burnt
part into healthy painless skin.**

Other intelligent non-medical persons, as, for example,
the manufacturers of lackered ware, apply to a part
scalded with the hot varnish a substance that causes a
similar burning sensation, such as strong heated spirits
of wine,** or oil of turpentine,*® and by that means cure


equalibus) as the only proper therapeutic rule, and sees nothing
in the similia similibus but an indifferent substitute for it; un-
gratefully enough, as he is entirely indebted to the similia simili-
bus for all his fame and fortune.

So also Fernelius (Therap., lib. vi, cap. 20) considers that the
best remedy for a burnt part is to bring it near the fire, whereby
the pain is removed. John Hunter (On the Blood, Inflammation,
etc., p. 218) mentions the great injury that results from treating
burns with cold water, and gives a decided preference to approach-
ing them to the fire, guided in this not by the traditional medical
inflammation, but by experience, which teaches that the application
of a similar heat (similia similibus) is the most salutary.

*8 Sydenham (Opera, p. 271 [edit. Syd. Soc., p. 601]) says the
spirits of wine, repeatedly applied, is preferable to all other rem-
edies in burns. Benjamin Bell, too (System of Surgery, 3rd edit.,
1789), acknowledges that experience shows that homceopathic rem-
edies only are efficacious. He says: “One of the best applications
to every burn of this kind is strong brandy or any other ardent
spirit ; it seems to induce a momentary additional pain (see below,
$157), but this soon subsides, and is succeeded by an agreeable
soothing sensation. It proves most effectual when the parts can
be kept immersed in it; but where this cannot be done, they should
be kept constantly moist with pieces of old linen soaked in spirits.”
To this I may add that warm, and indeed, very warm, alcohol is
much more rapidly and much more certainly efficacious, for it is
much more homeopathic than when not heated. And all experience
confirms this in a most astonishing manner.

% Edward Kentish, having to treat the workers in coal pits, who
were so often dreadfully burnt by the explosion of fire-damp, ap-


88 INTRODUCTION


themselves in the course of a few hours, whereas cooling
salves, as they are well aware, would not effect a cure


plied heated oil of turpentine or alcohol, as the best remedy in
the most extensive and severest burns (Second Essay on Burns;
London, 1798). No treatment can be more homceopathic than this
nor is any more efficacious.

The estimable and experienced Heister (/ustitut. Chirurg., Tom.
i, p. 33) confirms this from his own observation and extols the
application of turpentine oil, of alcohol and of very hot poultices
for this end, as hot as ever they can be borne.

But the amazing superiority of the application to burns of these
remedies, which possess the power of exciting burning sensation
and heat (and are consequently homeopathic), over palliative re-
frigerant remedies, is most incontestably shown by pure experi-
mentation, in which the two opposite methods of treatment are
employed for the sake of comparison, in burns of equal intensity
in the same body.

Thus Benjamin Bell (in Kithn’s Phys. Med. Journ., Leipzic,
1801, Jun., p. 428), in the case of a lady who had scalded both
arms, caused one to be covered with oi] of turpentine, and made
her plunge the other into cold water. In half an hour the first
arm was well, but the other continued to be painful for six hours
longer; when it was withdrawn one instant from the water she
experienced much greater pain in it, and it required a much longer
time than the first for tts cure.

John Anderson (Kentish, op. cit., p. 43) treated in a similar
manner a lady who had scalded herself with boiling grease. “The
face which was very red and scalded and excessively painful was,
a few minutes after the accident, covered with otl of turpentine;
her arms she had, of her own accord, plunged into cold water,
with which she desired to treat it for some hours. In the course
of seven hours her face looked much better, and the pain was re-
lieved. She had frequently renewed the cold water for the arm,
but whenever she withdrew it she complained of much pain, and,
in truth, the inflammation in it had increased. The following
morning I found that she had had during the night great pain


INTRODUCTION 89


in as many months, and cold water ** would but make
matters worse. |

The old experienced reaper, although he may not be
in the habit of drinking brandy, will not touch cold water
(contraria contrariis) when he has worked himself into
a violent feverish state in the heat of the sun—he knows
the danger of such a proceeding—but he takes a small
quantity of a heating liquor, a mouthful of brandy; ex-
perience, the teacher of truth, has convinced him of the
great superiority and efficacy of this homceopathic
procedure, whereby his heat and fatigue are speedily
removed.*?

There have occasionally been physicians who vaguely
surmised that medicines cure analogous morbid states by


in the arm; the inflammation had extended above the elbow; sev-
eral large blisters had risen, and thick eschars had formed on the
arm and hand; a warm poultice was then applied. The face
was completely free from pain, but emollient applications had to
be used for the arm for a fortnight longer, before it was cured.”

Who can fail to perceive in this instance the infinite superiority
of the (homeopathic) treatment by means of remedies of similar
action, over the wretched treatment by opposites (contraria con-
trariis) of the antiquated ordinary school of medicine!

** John Hunter (loc. cit.) is not singular in asserting the great
injury done by treating burns with cold water. W. Fabricius of
Hilden, also (De Combustionibus libellus, Basil, 1607, cap. 5, p.
11), alleges that cold applications in burns are highly injurious and
productive of the most serious consequences; inflammation, sup-
puration and sometimes mortification are caused by them.

Zimmerman (Ueber die Erfahrung, ii, p. 318) informs us that
the inhabitants of hot countries act in the same manner, with the
best results, and that, after being very much heated, they swallow
a small quantity of some spirituous liquor.


GO INTRODUCTION


the power they possess of producing analogous morbid
symptoms.*®

Thus the author of the book: wept tomwy Kar advbpw-
mov, *® which is among the writings attributed to Hip-
pocrates, has the following remarkable words: dca ta Op-
dta vovaos yiverat, Kat did TA Opota Tpoahepomeva eK VOTE-
vyToV vyLtaivovTaL,—Ola TO éuéery EueTos Taveras.

Later physicians have also felt and expressed the truth
of the homceopathic method of cure. Thus, for instance,
Boulduc *° perceived that the purgative property of rhu-
barb was the cause of its power to allay diarrheea.

Detharding * guessed that the infusion of senna leaves
relieved colic in adults by virtue of its analogous action
in causing colic in healthy persons.

Bertholon *2 confesses that in diseases electricity di-
minishes and removes pain very similar to that which
itself produces.

Thoury ** testifies that positive electricity possesses the
power of quickening the pulse, but when that is already
morbidly accelerated it diminishes its frequency.


* TI do not bring forward the following passages from authors
who had a presentiment of homceopathy as proofs in support of
this doctrine, which is firmly established by its own intrinsic
merits, but in order to avoid the imputation of having suppressed
these foreshadowings with the view of claiming for myself the
priority of the idea.

® Basil, Froben., 1538, p. 72.

*° Mémoirs de Académie Royale, 1710.

“ph, Nat. Cur, cent, x ons. 70,

” Medicin. Electrisitat., 11, pp. 15 and 282.

“Mémoir lu a? Académie de Caen.


INTRODUCTION QI


Von Stoerk #4 makes the following suggestion: “If
stramonium disorders the mind and produces mania in
healthy persons, ought we not to try if in cases of in-
sanity it cannot restore reason by producing a revolution
imeune ideas ©

But a Danish army physician, of the name of Stahl,“
has expressed his conviction on this point in the most
unequivocal terms. “The rule generally acted on in
medicine,” says he, “to treat by means of oppositely act-
ing remedies (contraria contrartis), is quite false and
the reverse of what ought to be; I am, on the contrary,
convinced that diseases will yield to, and be cured by,
remedies that produce a similar affection (similia simui-
libus),—burns by exposure to the fire, frost-bitten limbs
by the application of snow and the coldest water, inflam-
mation and bruises by distilled spirits ; and in like manner
I have treated a tendency to acidity of the stomach by a
very small dose of sulphuric acid with the most success-
ful result, in cases where a number of absorbent remedies
had been fruitlessly employed.”

How near was the great truth sometimes of being
apprehended! But it was dismissed with a mere passing
thought, and thus the indispensable change of the anti-
quated medical treatment of disease, of the improper
therapeutic system hitherto in vogue, into a real, true,
and certain healing art, remained to be accomplished in
our own times.


* Libell. de Stram., p. 8.

“In Jo. Hammelii, Commentatio de Arthritide tam tartarca,
quam scorbutica, seu podagra et scorbuto, Budinge, 1738, viii, pp.
40-42.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE.


Si


The physician’s high and only mission is to restore the
sick to health, to cure, as it is termed.’


§ 2.


The highest ideal of cure is rapid, gentle and perma-
nent restoration of the health, or removal and annihila-
tion of the disease in its whole extent, in the shortest,
most reliable, and most harmless way, on easily com-
prehensible principles.


S ob


If the physician clearly perceives what is to be cured
in diseases, that is to say, in every individual case of
disease (knowledge of disease, indication), if he clearly


* His mission is not, however, to construct so-called systems, by
interweaving empty speculations and hypotheses concerning the
internal essential nature of the vital processes and the mode in
which diseases originate in the invisible interior of the organism,
(whereon so many physicians have hitherto ambitiously wasted
their talents and their time); nor is it to attempt to give count-
less explanations regarding the phenomena in diseases and their
proximate cause (which must ever remain concealed), wrapped
in unintelligible words and an inflated abstract mode of expression,


(92)


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 93


perceives what is curative in medicines, that is to say,
in each individual medicine (knowledge of medicinal
powers), and if he knows how to adapt, according to
clearly defined principles, what is curative in medicines
to what he has discovered to be undoubtedly morbid in
the patient, so that the recovery must ensue—to adapt
it, as well in respect to the suitability of the medicine
most appropriate according to its mode of action to the
case before him (choice of the remedy, the medicine
indicated), as also in respect to the exact mode of prep-
aration and quantity of it required (proper dose), and
the proper period for repeating the dose ;—if, finally, he
knows the obstacles to recovery in each case and is aware
how to remove them, so that the restoration may be
permanent: then he understands how to treat judiciously
and rationally, and he is a true practioner of the
healing art.


84.


He is likewise a preserver of health if he knows the
things that derange health and cause disease, and how
to remove them from persons in health.


which should sound very learned in order to astonish the ignor-
ant—whilst sick humanity sighs in vain for aid. Of such learned
reveries (to which the name of theoretic medicine is given, and for
which special professorships are instituted) we have had quite
enough, and it is now high time that all who call themselves phy-
sicians should at length cease to deceive suffering mankind with
mere talk, and begin now, instead, for once to act, that is, really to
help and to cure.


94 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


Sais


Useful to the physician in assisting him to cure are
the particulars of the most probable exciting cause of ©
the acute disease, as also the most significant points in
the whole history of the chronic disease, to enable him to
discover its fusdamental cause, which is generally due to
a chronic miasm. In these investigations, the ascertain-
able physical constitution of the patient (especially when
the disease is chronic), his moral and intellectual char-
acter, his occupation, mode of living and habits, his social
and domestic relations, his age, sexual function, etc., are
to be taken into consideration.


§ 6,


The unprejudiced observer—well aware of the futility
of transcendental speculations which can receive no con-
firmation from experience—be his powers of penetration
ever so great, takes note of nothing in every individual
disease, except the changes in the health of the body and
of the mind (morbid phenomena, accidents, symptonts)
which can be perceived externally by means of the senses;
that is to say, he notices only the deviations from the
former healthy state of the now diseased individual,
which are felt by the patient himself, remarked by those
around him and observed by the physician. All these
perceptible signs represent the disease in its whole extent,
that is, together they form the true and only conceivable
portrait of the disease.®


71 know not, therefore, how it was possible for physicians at
the sick-bed to allow themselves to suppose that, without most


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 95


§ 7.


Now, as in a disease, from which no manifest exciting
or maintaining cause (causa occasionalis) has to be re-
moved,®? we can perceive nothing but the morbid symp-
toms, it must (regard being had to the possibility of a
miasin, and attention paid to the accessory circumstances,
85) be the symptoms alone by which the disease


carefully attending to the symptoms and being guided by them in
the treatment, they ought to seek and could discover, only in the
hidden and unknown interior, what there was to be cured in the
disease, arrogantly and ludicrously pretending that they could,
without paying much attention to the symptoms, discover the alter-
ation that had occurred in the invisible interior, and set it to
rights with (unknown!) medicines, and that such a procedure as
this could alone be called radical and rational treatment.

Is not, then, that which is cognizable by the senses in diseases
through the phenomena it displays, the disease itself in the eyes
of the physician, since he never can see the spiritual being that
produces the disease, the vital force? nor is it necessary that he
should see it, but only that he should ascertain its morbid actions,
in order that he may thereby be enabled to cure the disease. What
else will the old school search for in the hidden interior of the or-
ganism, as a prima causa morbi, whilst they reject as an object of
cure and contemptuously despise the sensible and manifest repre-
sentation of the disease, the symptoms, that so plainly address
themselves to us? What else do they wish to cure in diseases,
but these?


* It is not necessary to say that every intelligent physician would
first remove this where it exists; the indisposition thereupon gener-
ally ceases spontaneously. He will remove from the room strong-
smelling flowers, which have a tendency to cause syncope and
hysterical sufferings; extract from the cornea the foreign body
that excites inflammation of the eye; loosen the over-tight band-


96 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


demands and points to the remedy suited to relieve it—
and, moreover, the totality of these its symptoms, of this
outwardly reflected picture of the internal essence of the
disease, that 1s, of the affection of the vital force, must
be the principal, or the sole means, whereby the disease
can make known what remedy it requires—the only thing
that can determine the choice of the most appropriate
remedy—and thus, in a word, the totality * of the symp-
toms must be the principal, indeed the only thing the
physician has to take note of in every case of disease and
to remove by means of his art, in order that the disease
shall be cured and transformed into health.


age on a wounded limb that threatens to cause mortification, and
apply a more suitable one; lay bare and put a ligature on the
wounded artery that produces fainting; endeavor to promote the
expulsion by vomiting of belladonna berries, etc., that may have
been swallowed; extract foreign substances that may have got into
the orifices of the body (the nose, gullet, ears, urethra, rectum,
vagina) ; crush the vesical calculus; open the imperforate anus of
the new-born infant, etc.


*In all times, the old school physicians, not knowing how else
to give relief, have sought to combat and if possible to suppress
by medicines, here and there, a single symptom from among a
number in diseases—a one-sided procedure, which, under the name
of symptomatic treatment, has justly excited universal contempt,
because by it, not only was nothing gained, but much harm was
inflicted. A single one of the symptoms present is no more the
disease itself than a single foot is the man himself. This pro-
cedure was so much the more reprehensible, that such a single
symptom was only treated by an antagonistic remedy (therefore
only in an enantiopathic and palliative manner), whereby, after a
slight alleviation, it was subsequently only rendered all the worse.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 97
§ 38.


It is not conceivable, nor can it be proved by any
experience in the world, that, after removal of all the
symptoms of the disease and of the entire collection of
the perceptible phenomena, there should or could remain
anything else besides health, or that the morbid altera-
tion in the interior could remain uneradicated.’


§ 9.


In the healthy condition of man, the spiritual vital
force (autocracy), the dynamis that animates the ma-
terial body (organism), rules with unbounded sway, and


* When a patient has been cured of his disease by a true phy-
sician, in such a manner that no trace of the disease, no morbid
symptom, remains, and all the signs of health have permanently
returned, how can anyone, without offering an insult to common
sense, affirm in such an individual the whole bodily disease still
remains in the interior? And yet the chief of the old school,
Hufeland, asserts this in the following words: “Homceopathy can
remove the symptoms, but the disease remains.” (Vide Homdéo-
pathie, p. 27, 1, 19.) This he maintains partly from mortification
at the progress made by homeopathy to the benefit of mankind,
partly because he still holds thoroughly material notions respect-
ing disease, which he is still unable to regard as a state of being
of the organism wherein it is dynamically altered by the morbidly
deranged vital force, as an altered state of health, but he views
the disease as a something material, which, after the cure is com-
pleted, may still remain lurking in some corner in the interior of
the body, in order, some day during the most vigorous health,
to burst forth at its pleasure with its material presence! So
dreadful is still the blindness of the old pathology! No wonder


08 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


retains all the parts of the organism in admirable, har-
monious, vital operation, as regards both sensations and
functions, so that our indwelling, reason-gifted mind
can freely employ this living, healthy instrument for the
higher purposes of our existence.


§ 10.


The material organism, without the vital force, is
capable of no sensation, no function, no self preserva-
tion; °it derives all sensation and performs all the func-
tions of life solely by means of the immaterial being (the
vital principle) which animates the’ material organism in
health and in disease.


eine


When a person falls ill, it is only this spiritual, self-
acting (automatic) vital force, everywhere present in his
organism, that is primarily deranged by the dynamic*
influence upon it of a morbific agent inimical to life; it
is only the vital principle, deranged to such an abnormal
state, that can furnish the organism with its disagreeable
sensations, and incline it to the irregular processes which


that it could only produce a system of therapeutics which is solely
occupied with scouring out the poor patient.

*It is dead, and now only subject to the power of the external
physical world; it decays, and is again resolved into its chemical
constituents.


*Materia peccans!


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 99


we call disease; for, as a power invisible in itself, and
only cognizable by its effects on the organism, its morbid
derangement only makes itself known by the manifesta-
tion of disease in the sensations and functions of those
parts of the organism exposed to the senses of the
observer and physician, that is, by morbid symptoms, and
in no other way can it make itself known.’


Ss


It is the morbidly affected vital energy alone that pro-


“What is dynamic influence,—dynamic power? Our earth, by
virtue of a hidden invisible energy, carries the moon around her in
twenty-eight days and several hours, and the moon alternately, in
definite fixed hours (deducting certain differences which occur
with the full and the new moon) raises our northern seas to
flood tide and again correspondingly lowers them to ebb. Appar-
ently this takes place not through material agencies, not through
mechanical contrivances, as are used for products of human labor;
and so we see numerous other events about us as results of the
action of one substance on another substance without being able
to recognize a sensible connection between cause and effect. Only
the cultured, practised in comparison and deduction, can form for
himself a kind of supra-sensual idea sufficient to keep all that is
material or mechanical in his thoughts from such concepts. He
calls such effects dynamic, virtual, that is, such as result from
absolute, specific, pure energy and action of the one substance upon
the other substance.

For instance, the dynamic effect of the sick-making influences
upon healthy man, as well as the dynamic energy of the medicines
upon the principle of life in the restoration of health is nothing
else than infection and so not in any way material, not in any
way mechanical. Just as the energy of a magnet attracting a piece


IOO ORGANON OF MEDICINE


of iron or steel is not material, not mechanical. One sees that the
piece of iron is attracted by one pole of the magnet, but how it is
done is not seen. This invisible energy of the magnet does not
require mechanical (material) auxiliary means, hook or lever, to
attract the iron. The magnet draws to itself and this acts upon
the piece of iron or upon a steel needle by means of a purely
immaterial, invisible, conceptual, inherent energy, that is, dynamic-
ally, and communicates to the steel needle the magnetic energy
equally invisibly (dynamically). The steel needle becomes itself
magnetic, even at a distance when the magnet does not touch it,
and magnetises other steel needles with the same magnetic prop-
erty (dynamically) with which it had been endowed previously
by the magnetic rod, just as a child with small-pox or measles
communicates to a near, untouched healthy child in an invisible
manner (dynamically) the small-pox or measles, that is, infects
it at a distance without anything material from the infective child
going or capable of going to the one to be infected. A purely
specific, conceptual influence communicated to the near child small-
pox or measles in the same way as the magnet communicated to
the near needle the magnetic property.

In a similar way, the effect of medicines upon living man is to
be judged. Substances, which are used as medicines, are medi-
cines only in so far as they possess each its own specific energy
to alter the well-being of man through dynamic, conceptual in-
fluence, by means of the living sensory fibre, upon the conceptual,
controlling principle of life. The medicinal property of those
material substances which we call medicines proper, relates only
to their energy to call out alterations in the well-being of animal
life. Only upon this conceptual principle of life, depends their
medicinal health-altering, conceptual (dynamic) influence. Just as
the nearness of a magnetic pole can communicate only magnetic
energy to the steel (namely, by a kind of infection) but cannot
communicate other properties (for instance, more hardness or
ductility, etc.). And thus every special medicinal substance
alters through a kind of infection, that well-being of man in a
peculiar manner exclusively its own and not in a manner peculiar
to another medicine, as certainly as the nearness of the child ill


ORGANON OF MEDICINE IOL


with small-pox will communicate to a healthy child only small-
pox and not measles. These medicines act upon our well-being
wholly without communication of material parts of the medic-
inal substances, thus dynamically, as if through infection. Far
more healing energy is expressed in a case in point by the small-
est dose of the best dynamized medicines, in which there can
be, according to calculation, only so little of material substance
that its minuteness cannot be thought and conceived by the best
arithmetical mind, than by large doses of the same medicine in
substance. That smallest dose can therefore contain almost en-
tirely only the pure, freely-developed, conceptual medicinal en-
ergy, and bring about only dynamically such great effects as
ean never be reached by the crude medicinal substance itself taken
in large doses.

It is not in the corporeal atoms of these highly dynamized
medicines, nor their physical or mathematical surfaces (with
which the higher energies of the dynamized medicines are being
interpreted but vainly as still sufficiently material) that the
medicinal energy is found. More likely, there lies invisible in
the moistened globule or in its solution, an unveiled, liberated,
specific, medicinal force contained in the medicinal substance
which acts dynamically by contact with the living animal fibre
upon the whole organism (without communicating to it anything
material however highly attenuated) and acts more strongly the
more free and more immaterial the energy has become through
the dynamization.

Is it then so utterly impossible for our age celebrated for its
wealth in clear thinkers to think of dynamic energy as something
non-corporeal, since we see daily phenomena which cannot be
explained in any other manner? If one looks upon something
nauseous and becomes inclined to vomit, did a material emetic
come into his stomach which compels him to this anti-peristaltic
movement? Was it not solely the dynamic effect of the nause-
ating aspect upon his imagination? And if one raises his arm,
does it occur through a material visible instrument? a lever? Is
it not solely the conceptual dynamic energy of his will which
raises it?


102 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


duces diseases,* so that the morbid phenomena perceptible
to our senses express at the same time all the internal
change, that is to say, the whole morbid derangement of
the internal dynamis; in a word, they reveal the whole
disease; also, the disappearance under treatment of all
the morbid phenomena and of all the morbid alterations
that differ from the healthy vital operations, certainly
affects and necessarily implies the restoration of the in-
tegrity of the vital force and, therefore, the recovered
health of the whole organism.


Se


Therefore disease (that does not come within the
province of manual surgery) considered, as it is by the
allopathists, as a thing separate from the living whole,
from the organism and its animating vital force, and
hidden in the interior, be it of ever so subtle a character,
is an absurdity, that could only be imagined by minds
of a materialistic stamp, and has for thousands of years
given to the prevailing system of medicine all those per-
nicious impulses that have made it a truly mischievous
[non-healing] art.


* How the vital force causes the organism to display morbid
phenomena, that is, how it produces disease, it would be of no
practical utility to the physician to know, and will forever re-
main concealed from him; only what it is necessary for him to
know of the disease and what is fully sufficient for enabling him
to cure it, has the Lord of life revealed to his senses.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE TO03


§ 14.


There is, in the interior of man, nothing morbid that
is curable and no visible morbid alteration that is curable
which does not make itself known to the accurately
observing physician by means of morbid signs and
symptoms—an arrangement in perfect conformity with
the infinite goodness of the all-wise Preserver of human
life, |


Sis


The affection of the morbidly deranged, spirit-like
dynamis (vital force) that animates our body in the in-
visible interior, and the totality of the outwardly cog-
nizable symptoms produced by it in the organism and
representing the existing malady, constitute a whole;
they are one and the same. The organism is indeed the
material instrument of the life, but it is not conceivable
without the animation imparted to it by the instinctively
perceiving and regulating dynamis, just as the vital force
is not conceivable without the organism, consequently
the two together constitute a unity, although in thought
our mind separates this unity into two distinct concep-
tions for the sake of easy comprehension.


S 16.


Our vital force, as a spirit-like dynamis, cannot be
attacked and affected by injurious influences on the
healthy organism caused by the external inimical forces
that disturb the harmonious play of life, otherwise than


I04 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


in a spirit-like (dynamic) way, and in like manner, all
such morbid derangements (diseases) cannot be removed
from it by the physician in any other way than by the
spirit-like (dynamic ® virtual) alternative powers of the
serviceable medicines acting upon our spirit-like vital
force, which perceives them through the medium of the
sentient faculty of the nerves everywhere present in the
organism, so that it is only by their dynamic action on
the vital force that remedies are able to re-establish and
do actually re-establish health and vital harmony, after
the changes in the health of the patient cognizable by our
senses (the totality of the symptoms) have revealed the
disease to the carefully observing and investigating phy-
sician as fully as was requsite in order to enable him to
Cure it


S AE


Now, as in the cure effected by the removal of the
whole of the perceptible signs and symptoms of the dis-
ease the internal alternation of the vital principle to which
the disease is due—consequently the whole of the disease
—is at the same time removed,?® it follows that the


°Most severe disease may be produced by sufficient disturb-
ance of the vital force through the imagination and also cured
by the same means.

7 A warning dream, a superstitious fancy, or a solemn predic-
tion that death would occur at a certain day or at a certain hour,
has not unfrequently produced all the signs of commencing and
increasing disease, of approaching death and death itself at the
hour announced, which could not happen without the simultane-
ous production of the inward change (corresponding to the state


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 105


physician has only to remove the whole of the symptoms
in order, at the same time, to abrogate and annihilate the
internal change, that is to say, the morbid derangement
of the vital force—consequently the totality of the dis-
ease, the disease itself1* But when the disease is an-
nihilated, health is restored, and this is the highest,
the sole aim of the physician who knows the true object
of his mission, which consists not in learned-sounding
prating, but in giving aid to the sick.


§ 18.


From this indubitable truth, that besides the totality of
the symptoms, with consideration of the accompanying


observed externally); and hence in such cases all the morbid
signs indicative of approaching death have frequently been dis-
sipated by an identical cause, by some cunning deception or per-
suasion to a belief in the contrary, and health suddenly restored,
which could not have happened without the removal, by means
of this moral remedy, of the internal and external morbid change
that threatened death.


-“ Jt is only thus that God, the Preserver of mankind, could
reveal His wisdom and goodness in reference to the cure of the
diseases to which man is liable here below, by showing to the
physician what he had to remove in diseases in order to annihi-
late them and thus re-establish health. But what would we think
of His wisdom and goodness if He had shrouded in mysterious
obscurity that which was to be cured in diseases (as is asserted
by the dominant school of medicine, which affects to possess a
supernatural insight into the inner nature of things), and shut it
up in the hidden interior, and thus rendered it impossible for man
to know the malady accurately, consequently impossible for him
(omcure 17


106 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


modalities (§ 5) nothing can by any means be
discovered in diseases wherewith they could express their
need of aid, it follows undeniably that the sum of all the
symptoms and conditions in each individual case of dis-
ease must be the sole indication, the sole guide to direct
us in the choice of a remedy.


§ 19.


Now, as diseases are nothing more than alterations in
the state of health of the healthy individual which express
themselves by morbid signs, and the cure is also only
possible by a change to the healthy condition of the state
of health of the diseased individual, it is very evident
that medicines could never cure diseases if they did not
possess the power of altering man’s state of health which
depends on sensations and functions; indeed, that their
curative power must be owing solely to this power they
possess of altering man’s state of health.


S20)


This spirit-like power to alter man’s state of health
which lies hidden in the inner nature of medicines can
in itself never be discovered by us by a mere effort of
reason; it is only by experience of the phenomena it
displays when acting on the state of health of man that
we can become clearly cognizant of it.


See


Now, as it is undeniable that the curative principle in
medicines is not in itself perceptible, and as in pure ex-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 107


periments with medicines conducted by the most accurate
observers, nothing can be observed that can constitute
them medicines or remedies except that power of causing’
distinct alterations in the state of health of the human
body, and particularly in that of the healthy individual,
and of exciting in him various definite morbid symptoms ;
so it follows that when medicines act as remedies, they
can only bring their curative property into play by means
of this their power of altering man’s state of health by
the production of peculiar symptoms; and that, there-
fore, we have only to rely on the morbid phenomena
which the medicines produce in the healthy body as the
sole possible revelation of their in-dwelling curative
power, in order to learn what disease-producing power,
and at the same time what disease-curing power, each
individual medicine possesses.


Se22


But as nothing is to be observed in diseases that must
be removed in order to change them into health besides
the totality of their signs and symptoms, and likewise
medicines can show nothing curative besides their ten-
dency to produce morbid symptoms in healthy persons
and to remove them in diseased persons; it follows, on
the one hand, that medicines only become remedies and
capable of annihilating diseases, because the medicinal
substance, by exciting certain effects and symptoms, that
is to say, by producing a certain artificial morbid state,
removes and abrogates the symptoms already present, to
wit, the natural morbid state we wish to cure. On the


108 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


other hand, it follows that, for the totality of the symp-
toms of the disease to be cured, that medicine must be
sought which (according as experience shall prove
whether the morbid symptoms are most readily, certainly,
and permanently removed and changed into health by
similar or opposite medicinal symptoms }*) proved to have


* The other possible mode of employing medicines for dis-
eases besides these two is the allopathic method, in which medi-
cines are given, whose symptoms have no direct pathological rela-
tion to the morbid state, neither similar nor opposite, but quite
heterogeneous to the symptoms of the disease. This procedure
plays, as I have shown elsewhere, an irresponsible murderous
game with the life of the patient by means of dangerous, vio-
lent medicines, whose action is unknown and which are chosen
on mere conjectures and given in large and frequent doses.
Again, by means of painful operations, intended to lead the dis-
ease to other regions and taking the strength and vital juices of
the patient, through evacuations above and below, sweat or sali-
vation, but especially through squandering the irreplaceable blood,
as is done by the reigning routine practice, used blindly and re-
lentlessly, usually with the pretext that the physician should imi-
tate and further the sick nature in its efforts to help itself, with-
out considering how irrational it is, to imitate and further these
very imperfect, mostly inappropriate efforts of the instinctive
unintelligent vital energy which is implanted in our organism, so
long as it is healthy to carry on life in harmonious develop-
ment, but not to heal itself in disease. For, were it possessed of
such a model ability, it would never have allowed the organism
to get sick. When made ill by noxious agents, our life princi-
ple cannot do anything else than express its depression caused
by disturbance of the regularity of its life, by symptoms, by
means of which the intelligent physician is asked for aid. If
this is not given, it strives to save by increasing the ailment,
especially through violent evacuations, no matter what this en-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 109g


the greatest tendency to produce similar or opposite
symptoms.


§ 23.


All pure experience, however, and all accurate research
convince us that persistent symptoms of disease are far
from being removed and annihilated by opposite symp-
toms of medicines (as in the antipathic, enantiopathic
or palliative method), that, on the contrary, after tran-
sient, apparent alleviation, they break forth again, only
with increased intensity, and become manifestly aggra-


vated (see § 58-62 and 69).


§ 24.


There remains, therefore, no other mode of employing
medicines in diseases that promises to be of service be-
sides the homceopathic, by means of which we seek, for
the totality of the symptoms of the case of disease, a
medicine which among all medicines (whose pathogenetic
effects are known from having been tested in healthy
individuals) has the power and the tendency to produce
an artificial morbid state most similar to that of the case
of disease in question.


tails, often with the largest sacrifices or destruction of life
itself.

For purposes of cure, the morbidly depressed vital energy
possesses so little ability worthy of imitation since all changes
and symptoms produced by it in the organism are the disease
itself. What intelligent physician would want to imitate it with
the intention to heal if he did not thereby sacrifice his patient?


Lr@ ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 25.


Now, however, in all careful trials, pure experience,**
the sole and infallible oracle of the healing art,
teaches us that actually that medicine which, in its
action on the healthy human body, has demonstrated its
power of producing the greatest number of symptoms
similar to those observable in the case of disease under
treatment, does also, in doses of suitable potency and
attenuation, rapidly, radically and permanently remove
the totality of the symptoms of this morbid state, that is
to say (§ 6-16), the whole disease present, and
change it into health; and that all medicines cure, with-
out exception, those diseases whose symptoms most
nearly resemble their own, and leave none of them
uncured.


“TI do not mean that sort of experience of which the ordi-
nary practitioners of the old school boast, after they have for
years worked away with a lot of complex prescriptions on a
number of diseases which they never carefully investigated, but
which, faithful to the tenets of their school, they considered as
that they could detect in them some imaginary morbific matter,
mality. They always saw something in them, but knew not what
it was they saw, and they got results, from the complex forces
acting on an unknown cbject, that no human being but only a
God could have unravelled—results from which nothing can be
learned, no experience gained. Fifty years’ experience of this
sort is like fifty years of looking into a kaleidoscope filled with
unknown colored objects, and perpetually turning round; thou-
sands of ever-changing figures and no accounting for them!


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Iter
§ 20.


This depends on the following homceopathic law of
nature which was sometimes, indeed, vaguely stirmised
but not hitherto fully recognized, and to which is due
every real cure that has ever taken place:

A weaker dynamic affection is permanently extin-
guished in the living organism by a stronger one, if the
latter (whilst differing in kind) is very simular to the
former in its mamfestations.**


“Thus are cured both physical affections and moral mala-
dies. How is it that in the early dawn the brilliant Jupiter
vanishes from the gaze of the beholder? By a stronger very
similar power acting on his optic nerve, the brightness of ap-
proaching day!—In situations replete with fcetid odors, where-
with is it usual to soothe effectually the offended olfactory
nerves? With snuff, that affects the sense of smell in a similar
but stronger manner! No music, no sugared cake, which act on
the nerves of other senses, can cure this olfactory disgust. How
does the soldier cunningly stifle the piteous cries of him who
runs the gauntlet from the ears of the compassionate bystanders?
By the shrill notes of the fife commingled with the roll of the
noisy drum! And the distant roar of the enemy’s cannon that
inspires his army with fear? By the loud boom of the big
drum! for neither the one nor the other would the distribu-
tion of a brilliant piece of uniform nor a reprimand to the regi-
ment suffice.—In like manner, mourning and sorrow will be ef-
faced from the mind by the account of another and still greater
cause for sorrow happening to another, even though it be a mere
fiction. The injurious consequences of too great joy will be re-
moved by drinking coffee, which produces an excessively joyous
state of mind. Nations like the Germans, who have for cen-
turies been gradually sinking deeper and deeper in soulless apa-
thy and degrading serfdom, must first be trodden still deeper


I1I2 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S27,


The curative power of medicines, therefore, depends
on their symptoms, similar to the disease but superior to
it in strength (§ 12-26), so that each individual
case of disease is most surely, radically, rapidly and per-
manently annihilated and removed only by a medicine
capable of producing (in the human system) in the most
similar and complete manner the totality of its symptoms,
which at the same time are stronger than the disease.


§ 28.


As this natural law of cure manifests itself in every
pure experiment and every true observation in the world,
the fact is consequently established; it matters little
what may be the scientific explanation of how it takes
place; and I do not attach much importance to the at-
tempts made to explain it. But the following view seems
to commend itself as the most probable one, as it is
founded on premises derived from experience.


§ 209.


As every disease (not entirely surgical) consists only
in a special, morbid, dynamic alteration of our vital
energy (of the principle of life) manifested in sensation


in the dust by the Western Conqueror, until their situation be-
came intolerable; their mean opinion of themselves was thereby
overstrained and removed; they again became alive to their
dignity as men, and then, for the first time, they raised their
heads as Germans.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 113


and motion, so in every homceopathic cure this principle
of life dynamically altered by natural disease is seized
through the administration of a medicinal potency
selected exactly according to symptom-similarity by a
somewhat stronger, similar artificial disease-manifesta-
tion. By this the feeling of the natural (weaker) dy-
namic disease-manifestation ceases and disappears. This
disease-manifestation no longer exists for the principle
of life which is now occupied and governed merely by
the stronger, artificial disease-manifestation. This arti-
ficial disease-manifestation has soon spent its force and
leaves the patient free from disease, cured. The dynamis,
thus freed, can now continue to carry life on in health.
This most highly probable process rests upon the follow-
ing propositions.


on20.


The human body appears to admit of being much
more powerfully affected in its health by medicines
(partly because we have the regulation of the dose in
our own power) than by natural morbid stimuli—for
natural diseases are cured and overcome by suitable

edicines.?®


* The short duration of the action of the artificial morbific
forces, which we term medicines, makes it possible that, al-
though they are stronger than the natural diseases, they can yet
be much more easily overcome by the vital force than can the
weaker natural diseases, which, solely in consequence of the
longer, generally lifelong, duration of their action (psora, syph-
ilis, sycosis), can never be vanquished and extinguished by it


II4 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


Se3t.


The inimical forces, partly psychical, partly physical,
to which our terrestrial existence is exposed, which are
termed morbific noxious agents, do not possess the power
of morbidly deranging the health of man uncondition-
ally © but we are made ill by them only when our
organism is sufficiently disposed and susceptible to the
attack of the morbific cause that may be present, and to
be altered in its health, deranged and made to undergo
abnormal sensations and functions—hence they do not
produce disease in every one nor at all times.


See


But it is quite otherwise with the artificial morbific
agents which we term medicines. Every real medicine,
namely, acts at all times, under all circumstances, on
every living human being, and produces in him its pecu-
liar symptoms (distinctly perceptible, if the dose be large


alone, until the physician affects the vital force in a stronger
manner by an agent that produces a disease very similar, but
stronger, to wit a homceopathic medicine. The cures of diseases
of many years’ duration (§ 46), by the occurrence of smallpox
and measles (both of which run a course of only a few weeks),
are processes of a similar character.


7©\WWhen I call disease a derangement of man’s state of health,
I am far from wishing thereby to give a hyperphysical explana-
tion of the internal nature of diseases generally, or of any case
of disease in particular. It is only intended by this expression
to intimate, what it can be proved diseases are not and cannot be,
that they are not mechanical or chemical alterations of the


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Ir5


enough), so that evidently every living human organism
is liable to be affected, and, as it were, inoculated with
the medicinal disease at all times, and absolutely (uncon-
ditionally), which, as before said, is by no means the
case with the natural diseases.


§ 33.


In accordance with this fact, it is undeniably shown
by all experience’ that the living human organism is
much more disposed and has a greater liability to be
acted on, and to have its health deranged by medicinal
powers, than by morbific noxious agents and infectious
miasms, or, in other words, that the morbific noxtous
agents possess a power of morbidly deranging man’s
health that 1s subordinate and conditional, often very
conditional; whilst medicinal agents have an absolute un-
conditional power, greatly superior to the former.


material substance of the body, and not dependent on a mate-
rial morbific substance, but that they are merely spirit-like
(conceptual) dynamic derangements of the life.


"A striking fact in corroboration of this is, that whilst previ-
eusly to the year 1801, when the smooth scarlatina of Sydenham
still occasionally prevailed epidemically among children, it at-
tacked without exception all children who had escaped it in a
former epidemic; in a similar epidemic which I witnessed in
Konigslutter, on the contrary, all the children who took in time
a very small dose of belladonna remained unaffected by this
highly infectious infantile disease. If medicines can protect from
a disease that is raging around, they must possess a vastly su-
perior power of affecting our vital force. .


116 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 34.


The greater strength of the artificial diseases produ-
cible by medicines is, however, not the sole cause of
their power to cure natural diseases. In order that they
may effect a cure, it is before all things requisite that
they should be capable of producing in the human body
an artificial disease as similar as possible to the disease
to be cured, which, with somewhat increased power,
transforms to a very similar morbid state the instinctive
life principle, which in itself is incapable of any reflec-
tion or act of memory. It not only obscures, but ex-
tinguishes and thereby annihilates the derangement caused
by the natural disease. This is so true, that no pre-
viously existing disease can be cured, even by Nature
herself, by the accession of a new dissimilar disease, be
it ever so strong, and just as little can it be cured by
medical treatment with drugs which are incapable of
producing a similar morbid condition in the healthy body.


§ 35.


In order to illustrate this, we shall consider in three
different cases, as well what happens in nature when two
dissimilar natural diseases meet together in one person,
as also the result of the ordinary medical treatment of
diseases with unsuitable allopathic drugs, which are in-
capable of producing an artificial morbid condition sim-
ilar to the disease to be cured, whereby it will appear
that even Nature herself is unable to remove a dissimilar
disease already present by one that is unhomceopathic,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE II7


even though it be stronger, and just as little is the un-
homeeopathic employment of even the strongest medicines
ever capable of curing any disease whatsoever.


S 36.


I. If the two dissimilar diseases meeting together in
the human being be of equal strength, or still more if
the older one be the stronger, the new disease will be
repelled by the old one from the body and not allowed to
affect it. A patient suffering from a severe chronic dis-
ease will not be infected by a moderate autumnal dysen-
tery or other epidemic disease. The plague of the
Levant, according to Larry,'® does not break out where
scurvy is prevalent, and persons suffering from eczema
are not infected by it. Rachitis, Jenner alleges, prevents
vaccination from taking effect. Those suffering from
pulmonary consumption are not liable to be attacked by
epidemic fevers of a not very violent character, accord-
ing to Von Hildenbrand,


§ 37.


So, also, under ordinary medical treatment, an old
chronic disease remains uncured and unaltered if it is
treated according to the common allopathic method, that
is to say, with medicines that are incapable of producing
in healthy individuals a state of health similar to the


* “Mémoires et Observations,” in the Description de l’ Egypte,
tom. 1.


118 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


disease, even though the treatment should last for years
and is not of too violent character.*® This is daily wit-
nessed in practice, it is therefore unnecessary to give any
illustrative examples.


§ 38.


II. Or the new dissimilar disease 1s the stronger. In
this case the disease under which the patient originally
labored, being the weaker, will be kept back and sus-
pended by the accession of the stronger one, until the
latter shall have run its course or been cured, and then
the old one reappears uncured. ‘Two children affected
with a kind of epilepsy remained free from epileptic
attacks after infection with ringworm (tinea); but as
soon as the eruption on the head was gone the epilepsy
returned just as before, as Tulpius?° observed. The
itch, as Schopf ** saw, disappeared on the occurrence of
the scurvy, but after the cure of the latter it again broke
out. So also the pulmonary phthisis remained sta-
tionary when the patient was attacked by a violent
typhus, but went on again after the latter had run its
course.”* If mania occur in a consumptive patient, the


* But if treated with violent allopathic remedies, other dis-
eases will be formed in its place which are more difficult and
dangerous to life.

“OUS., libeis obs, &.

*In Hufeland’s Journal, xv, 2.


” Chevalier, in Hufeland’s Newesten Annalen der franzdsichen
Heilkunde, ii, p. 192.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE IIg


phthisis with all its symptoms is removed by the former ;
but if that go off, the phthisis returns immediately and
proves fatal.°* When measles and smallpox are prev-
alent at the same time, and both attack the same child,
the measles that had already broken out is generally
checked by the smallpox that came somewhat later; nor
does the measles resume its course until after the cure
of the smallpox; but it not infrequently happens that
the inoculated smallpox is suspended for four days by
the supervention of the measles, as observed by Manget,”*
after the desquamation of which the smallpox com-
pletes its course. Even when the inoculation of the
smallpox had taken effect for six days, and the measles
then broke out, the inflammation of the inoculation re-
mained stationary and the smallpox did not ensue until
the measles had completed its regular course of seven
days.2> In an epidemic of measles, that disease attacked
many individuals on the fourth or fifth day after the
inoculation of smallpox and prevented the development
of the smallpox until it had completed its own course,
whereupon the smallpox appeared and proceeded regu-
larly to its termination.** The true, smooth, erysipela-
tous-looking scarlatina of Sydenham,?’ with sore throat,


* Mania phthisi superveniens eam cum omnibus suis phenom-
enis auffert, verum mox redit phthisis et occidit, abeunte mania.
Reil Memorab., fasc. iii, v, p. 171.

*Tn the Edinb. Med. Comment., pt. 1, I.

* John Hunter, On the Venereal Disease, p. 5.

® Rainey, in the Edinb. Med. Comment., iii, p. 480.

fering greatly from the purpura (or Roodvonk), which is often


I20 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


was checked on the fourth day by the eruption of cow-
pox, which ran its regular course, and not till it was
ended did the scarlatina again establish itself; but on
another occasion, as both diseases seem to be of equal
strength, the cow-pox was suspended on the eighth day
by the supervention of the true, smooth scarlatina of
Sydenham, and the red areola of the former disappeared
until the scarlatina was gone, whereon the cow-pox im-
mediately resumed its course, and went on to its regular
termination.2® The measles suspended the cow-pox; on
the eighth day, when the cow-pox had nearly attained
its climax, the measles broke out; the cow-pox now
remained stationary, and did not resume and complete
its course until the desquamation of the measles had
taken place, so that on the sixteenth day it presented the
appearance it otherwise would have shown on the tenth
day, as Kortum observed.?®

Even after the measles had broken out the cow-pox
inoculation took effect, but did not run its course until
the measles had disappeared, as Kortum likewise wit-
nessed.*°

I myself saw the mumps (angina parotidea) imme-
diately disappear when the cow-pox inoculation had
taken effect and had nearly attained its height; it was


erroneously denominated scarlet fever. It is only of late years
that the two, which were originally very different diseases, have
come to resemble each other in their symptoms.

* Jenner, in Medicinische Annalen, August, 1800, p. 747.

“In Hufeland’s Journal der praktischen Areneikunde, xx, 3,
p. 50.

tel eno:.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE I21


not until the complete termination of the cow-pox and
the disappearance of its red areola that this febrile
tumefaction of the parotid and submaxillary glands,
that is caused by a peculiar miasm, reappeared and ran
its regular course of seven days.

And thus it is with all dissimilar diseases; the stronger
suspends the weaker (when they do not complicate one
another, which is seldom the case with acute diseases),
but they never cure one another.


Smee


Now the adherents of the ordinary school of medicine
saw all this for so many centuries; they saw that Nature
herself cannot cure any disease by the accession of
another, be it ever so strong, if the new disease be
dissimilar to that already present in the body. What
shall we think of them, that they nevertheless went on
treating chronic diseases with allopathic remedies,
namely, with medicines and prescriptions capable of pro-
ducing God knows what morbid state—almost invariably,
“however, one dissimilar to the disease to be cured? And
even though physicians did not hitherto observe nature
attentively, the miserable results of their treatment should
have taught them that they were pursuing an inappro-
priate, a false path. Did they not perceive when they
employed, as was their custom, an aggressive allopathic
treatment in a chronic disease, that thereby they only
created an artificial disease dissimilar to the original one,
which, as long as it was kept up, merely held in abey-
ance, merely suppressed, merely suspended the original
disease, which latter, however, always returned, and


I22 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


must return, as soon as the diminished strength of the
patient no longer admitted of a continuance of the allo-
pathic attacks on the life? Thus the itch exanthema
certainly disappears very soon from the skin under the
employment of violent purgatives, frequently repeated ;
but when the patient can no longer stand the factitious
(dissimilar) disease of the bowels, and can take no more
purgatives, then either the cutaneous eruption breaks out
as before, or the internal psora displays itself in some
bad symptom, and the patient, in addition to his un-
diminished original disease, has to endure the misery
of a painful ruined digestion and impaired strength to
boot. So, also, when the ordinary physicians keep up
artificial ulcerations of the skin and issues on the exterior
of the body, with the view of thereby eradicating a
chronic disease, they can NEVER attain their object by so
doing, they can NEVER cure them by that means, as such
artificial cutaneous ulcers are quite alien and allopathic
to the internal affection; but inasmuch as the irritation
produced by several tissues is at least sometimes a
stronger (dissimilar) disease than the indwelling malady,
the latter is thereby sometimes silenced and suspended
for a week or two. But it is only suspended, and that
for a very short time, whilst the patient’s powers are
gradually worn out. Epilepsy, suppressed for many
years by means of issues, invariably recurred, and in an
aggravated form, when they were allowed to heal up,
as Pechlin ** and others testify. But purgatives for itch,
and issues for epilepsy, cannot be more heterogeneous,


™ Obs. phys. med., lib. ii, obs. 30.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 123


more dissimilar deranging agents—cannot be more allo-
pathic, more exhausting modes of treatment—than are
the customary prescriptions, composed of unknown in-
gredients, used in ordinary practice for the other name-
less, innumerable forms of disease. These likewise do
nothing but debilitate, and only suppress or suspend the
malady for a short time without being able to cure it,
and when used for a long time always add a new morbid
state to the old disease.


§ 40.


Ill. Or the new disease, after having long acted on
the organism, at length joins the old one that is dissim-
ilar to it, and forms with it a complex disease, so that
each of them occupies a particular locality in the organ-
ism, namely, the organs peculiarly adapted for it, and,
as it were, only the place specially belonging to it, whilst
it leaves the rest to the other disease that is dissimilar
to it. Thus a syphilitic patient may become psoric, and
vice versa. As two diseases dissimilar to each other,
they cannot remove, cannot cure one another. At first
the venereal symptoms are kept in abeyance and sus-
pended when the psoric eruption begins to appear; in
course of time, however (as the syphilis is at least as
strong as the psora), the two join together,®? that is,


. ’ From careful experiments and cures of complex diseases of
this kind, I am now firmly convinced that no real amalgamation of
the two takes place, but that in such cases the one exists in the
organism besides the other only, each in the part that are
adapted for it, and their cure will be completely effected by a


lz ORGANON OF MEDICINE


each involves those parts of the organism only which
are most adapted for it, and the patient is thereby ren-
dered more diseased and more difficult to cure.

When two dissimilar acute infectious diseases meet,
as, for example, smallpox and measles, the one usually
suspends the other, as has been before observed; yet
there have also been severe epidemics of this kind,
where, in rare cases, two dissimilar acute diseases oc-
curred simultaneously in one and the same body, and
for a short time combined, as it were, with each other.
During an epidemic, in which smallpox and measles were
prevalent at the same time, among three hundred cases
(in which these diseases: avoided or suspended one an-
other, and the measles attacked patients twenty days
after the smallpox broke out, the smallpox, however,
from seventeen to eighteen days after the appearance of
the measles, so that the first disease had previously com-
pleted its regular course) there was yet one single case
in which P. Russell *? met with both these dissimilar
diseases in one person at the same time. Rainey ** wit-
nessed the simultaneous occurrence of smallpox and
measles in two girls. J. Maurice,®® in his whole practice,
only observed two such cases. Similar cases are to be


judicious alternation of the best mercurial preparation, with the
remedies specific for the psora, each given in the most suitable
dose and form.

% Vide Transactions of a Society for the Improvement of Med.
and Chir. Knowledge, it.

*In Edinb. Med. Comment., iii, p. 480.

*In Med. and Phys. Journ., 1805.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 125


oS


found in Ettmiiller’s*® works, and in the writings of a
few others.

Zencker *’ saw cow-pox run its regular course along
with measles and along with purpura.

The cow-pox went on its course undisturbed during a
mercurial treatment for syphilis, as Jenner saw.


§ 41.


Much more frequent than the natural diseases associ-
ating with and complicating one another in the same
body are the morbid complications which the inappro-
priate medical treatment (the allopathic method) is
apt to produce by the long-continued employment of
unsuitable drugs. To the natural disease, which it is
proposed to cure, there are then added, by the constant
repetition of the unsuitable medicinal agent, the new,
often very tedious, morbid conditions corresponding to
the nature of this agent; these gradually coa-
lesce with and complicate the chronic malady which
is dissimilar to them (which they were unable to cure
by similarity of action, that is, homceopathically), adding
to the old disease a new, dissimilar, artificial malady of
a chronic nature, and thus give the patient a double in
place of a single disease, that is to say, render him much
worse and more difficult to cure, often quite incurable.
Many of the cases for which advice is asked in medical
journals, as also the records of other cases in medical


Opera il p. cap. 10)


"In Hufeland’s Journal, xvii.


126 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


writings, attest the truth of this. Of a similar character
are the frequent cases in which the venereal chancrous
disease, complicated especially with psora or with the
dyscrasia of condylomatous gonorrhcea, is not cured by
long-continued or frequently repeated treatment with
large doses of unsuitable mercurial preparations, but
assumes its place in the organism beside the chronic
mercurial affection *§ that has been in the meantime
gradually developed, and thus along with it often forms
a hideous monster of complicated disease (under the
general name of masked venereal disease), which then,
when not quite incurable, can only be transformed into
health with the greatest difficulty.


§ 42.


Nature herself permits, as has been stated, in some
cases, the simultaneous occurrence of two (indeed, of
three) natural diseases in one and the same body. This
complication, however, it must be remarked, happens
only in the case of two dissimilar diseases, which accord-
ing to the eternal laws of nature do not remove, do not
annihilate and cannot cure one another, but, as it seems,
both (or all three) remain, as it were, separate in the


* For mercury, besides the morbid symptoms which by virtue
of similarity can cure the venereal disease homceopathically, has
among its effects many others unlike those of syphilis, for in-
stance, swelling and ulceration of bones, which, if it be employed
in large doses, cause new maladies and commit great ravages in
the body, especially when complicated with psora, as is so fre-
quently the case.


ORGRNON OF NEDICINIE 127


organism, and each takes possession of the parts and
systems peculiarly appropriate to it, which, on account
of the want of resemblance of these maladies to each
other, can very well happen without disparagement to
the unity of life.


§ 43.


Totally different, however, is the result when two
simular diseases meet together in the organism, that is to
say, when to the disease already present a stronger
similar one is added. In such cases we see how a cure
can be effected by the operations of nature, and we get
a lesson as to how man ought to cure.


8 44.


Two similar diseases can neither (as is asserted of
dissimilar diseases in I) repel one another, nor (as has
been shown of dissimilar diseases in II) suspend one
another, so that the old one shall return after the new
one has run its course; and just as little can two similar
diseases (as has been demonstrated in III respecting
dissimilar affections) exist beside each other in the same
organism, or together form a double complex disease.


Ss 415.


No! two diseases, differing, it is true, in kind,* but
very similar in their phenomena and effects and in the


*Vide, supra, § 26, note.


128 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


sufferings and symptoms they severally produce, invari-
ably annihilate one another whenever they meet together
in the organism; the stronger disease, namely, annihilates
the weaker, and that for this simple reason, because the
stronger morbific power when it invades the system, by
reason of its similarity of action involves precisely the
same parts of the organism that were previously affected
by the weaker morbid irritation, which, consequently, can
no longer act on these parts, but is extinguished ;°° or (in
other words), the new similar but stronger morbific
potency controls the feelings of the patient and hence
the life principle on account of its peculiarity, can no
longer feel the weaker similar which becomes extin-
guished—exists no longer—for it was never anything
material, but a dynamic—spirit-like—(conceptual) affec-
tion. The life principle henceforth is affected only and
this but temporarily by the new, similar but stronger
morbific potency.


§ AO,


Many examples might be adduced of diseases which,
in the course of nature, have been homceopathically cured
by other diseases presenting similar symptoms, were it
not necessary, as our object is to speak about something
determinate and indubitable, to confine our attention
solely to those (few) diseases which are invariably the


* Just as the image of a lamp’s flame is rapidly overpowered
and effaced from our retina by the stronger sunbeam impinging
on the eye.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 129


same, arise from a fixed miasm, and hence merit a dis-
tinct name.

Among these the smallpox, so dreaded on account of
the great number of its serious symptoms, occupies a
prominent position, and it has removed and cured a
number of maladies with similar symptoms,

How frequently does smallpox produce violent ophthal-
mia, sometimes even causing blindness! And see! by its
inoculation Dezoteux *° cured a chronic ophthalmia per-
manently, and Leroy ** another.

An amaurosis of two years’ duration, consequent on
suppressed scald-head, was perfectly cured by it, accord-
ing to Klein.*?

tlow often does smallpox cause deafness and dyspneea!
And both these chronic diseases it removed on reaching
its acme, as J. Fr. Closs * observed.

Swelling of the testicle, even of a very severe char-
acter, is a frequent symptom of smallpox, and on this
account it was enabled, as Klein ** observed, to cure, by
virtue of similarity, a large hard swelling of the left
testicle, consequent on a bruise. And another observer *
saw a similar swelling of the testicle cured by it.

Among the troublesome symptoms of smallpox is a
dysenteric state of the bowels; and it subdued, as Fr.


” Traité de linoculation, p. 180.

“ Heilkunde fiir Miitter, p. 384.

” Interpres clinicus, p. 293.

“Neue Heilart der Kinderpocken, Ulm, 1760, p. 68; and
Specim., obs. No. 18.

OD, cit.

"iNou. Act. Nal. cur. vol 1, Obs. 22,


130 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


Wendt ** observed, a case of dysentery, as a similar
morbific agent,

Smallpox coming on after vaccination, as well on ac-
count of its greater strength as its great similarity, at
once removes entirely the cow-pox homeeopathically, and
does not permit it to come to maturity; but, on the other
hand, the cow-pox when near maturity does, on account
of its great similarity, homceopathically diminish very
much the supervening smallpox and make it much
milder,*7 as Muhry ** and many others testify.

The inoculated cow-pox, whose lymph, besides the
protective matter, contains the contagion of a general
cutaneous eruption of another nature, consisting of
usually small, dry (rarely large, pustular) pimples, rest-
ing on a small red areola, frequently conjoined with
round red cutaneous spots and often accompanied by the
most violent itching, which rash appears in not a few
children several days before, more frequently, however,
after the red areola of the cow-pock, and goes off in a
few days, leaving behind small, red, hard spots on the
skin ;—the inoculated cow-pox, I say, after it has taken
cures perfectly and permanently, in a homceopathic


*S Nachricht von dem Krankeninstitut su Erlangen, 1783.

* This seems to be the reason for this beneficial remarkable fact
namely that since the general distribution of Jenner’s Cow Pox
vaccination, human smallpox never again appeared as epidemically
or virulently as 40-50 years before when one city visited lost at
least one-half and often three-quarters of its children by death
of this miserable pestilence.


* Willan, Ueber die Kuhpockenimpfung, aus dem Engl., mit
Zusdtzen G. P. Mihry, Gottingen, 1808.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE eile


manner, by the similarity of this accessory miasm, ana-
logous cutaneous eruptions of children, often of very
long standing and of a very troublesome character, as a
number of observers assert.*®

The cow-pox, a peculiar symptom of which is to cause
tumefaction of the arm,®® cured, after it broke out, a
swollen half-paralyzed arm.”

The fever accompanying cow-pox, which occurs at the
time of the production of the red areola, cured homceo-
pathically intermittent fever in two individuals, as the
younger Hardege ** reports, confirming what J. Hunter
had already observed, that two fevers (similar diseases)
cannot co-exist in the same body.

The measles bears a strong resemblance in the character
of its fever and cough to the whooping-cough, and hence
it was that Bosquillon °* noticed, in an epidemic where
both these affections prevailed, that many children who
then took measles remained free from whooping-cough.
They would all have been protected from, and rendered
incapable of being infected by, the whooping-cough in
that and all subsequent epidemics, by the measles, if the


” Especially Clavier, Hurel and Desmormeaux, in the Bulletin
des sciences médicales, publié par les membres du comité central
de la Soc. de Médecine du Departement de [ Eure, 1808; also in
the Journal de médicine continué, vol. xv, p. 200.

°° Balhorn, in Hufeland’s Journal, to, ii.

Stevenson, in Duncan’s Annals of Medicine, lustr. 2, vol. i,
Ote2 2 6...0,

"In Hufeland’s Journal, xxiii.

*® On the Venereal Disease, p. 4.

* Cullen’s Elements of Practical Medicine, pt. 2, 1, 3, ch. vii.


132 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


whooping-cough were not a disease that has only a
partial similarity to the measles, that is to say, if it had
also a cutaneous eruption similar to what the latter pos-
sesses. As it is, however, the measles can but preserve
a large number from whooping-cough, and that only in
the epidemic prevailing at the time.

If, however, the measles come in contact with a disease
resembling it in its chief symptom, the eruption, it can
indisputably remove, and effect a homceopathic cure of
the latter. Thus a chronic herpetic eruption was en-
tirely and permanently (homeceopathically) cured *> by
the breaking out of the measles, as Kortum °® observed.
An excessively burning miliary rash on the face, neck,
and arms, that had lasted six years, and was aggravated
by every change of weather, on the invasion of measles
assumed the form of a swelling of the surface of the
skin; after the measles had run its course the exanthem
was cured, and returned no more.’


§ 47.


Nothing could teach the physician in a plainer and
more convincing manner than the above what kind of
artificial morbific agent (medicine) he ought to choose
in order to cure in a sure, rapid and permanent manner,
conformably with the process that takes place in nature.


* Or at least that symptom was removed.
%In Hufeland’s Journal, xx, 3, p. 50.
* Rau, Ueber d. Werth des hom. Heilv., Heidelb., 1824, p. 85.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE ess


§ 48.


Neither in the course of nature, as we see from all the
above examples, nor by the physician’s art, can an exist-
ing affection or malady in any one instance be removed
by a dissimilar morbific agent, be it ever so strong, but
solely by one that is similar in symptoms and is some-
what stronger, according to eternal, irrevocable laws
of nature, which have not hitherto been recognized.


§ 49.


We should have been able to meet with many more
real, natural homceopathic cures of this kind if, on the
one hand, the attention of observers had been more
directed to them, and, on the other hand, if nature had
not been so deficient in helpful homceopathic diseases.


§ 50.


Mighty Nature herself has, as we see, at her command,
as instruments for effecting homceopathic cures, little
besides the miasmatic diseases of constant character (the
itch), measles and smalipox,®* morbific agents which,®® as
remedies, are either more dangerous to life and more to
be dreaded than the disease they are to cure, or of such
a kind (like the itch) that, after they have effected the


* And the exanthematous contagious principle present in the
cow-pox lymph.


° Namely, smallpox and measies.


134 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


cure, they themselves require curing, in order to be
eradicated in their turn—both circumstances that make
their employment, as homceopathic remedies, difficult,
uncertain and dangerous. And how few diseases are
there to which man is subject that find their similar
remedy in smallpox, measles or itch! Hence, in the
course of nature, very few maladies can be cured by
these uncertain and hazardous homceopathic remedies,
and the cure by their instrumentality is also attended
with danger and much difficulty, for this reason, that the
doses of these morbific powers cannot be diminished
according to circumstances, as doses of medicine can;
but the patient afflicted with an analogous malady of
long standing must be subjected to the entire dangerous
and tedious disease, to the entire disease of smallpox,
measles (or itch), which in its turn has to be cured.
And yet, as is seen, we can point to some striking
homceopathic cures effected by this lucky concurrence,
all so many incontrovertible proofs of the great, the sole
therapeutic law of nature that obtains in them: Cure by
symptom similarity!


§ 51.


This therapeutic law is rendered obvious to all intel-
ligent minds by these facts, and they are amply suff-
cient for this end. But, on the other hand, see what
advantages man has over crude Nature in her happy-go-
lucky operations. How many thousands more of homceo-
pathic morbific agents has not man at his disposal for the
relief of his suffering fellow-creatures in the medicinal
substances universally distributed throughout creation!


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 135


In them he has producers of disease of all possible varie-
ties of action, for all the innumerable, for all conceivable
and inconceivable natural diseases, to which they can
render homeceopathic aid—morbific agents (medicinal
substances), whose power, when their remedial employ-
ment is completed, being overcome by the vital force,
disappears spontaneously without requiring a second
course of treatment for its extirpation, like the itch—
artificial morbific agents, which the physician can atten-
uate, subdivide and potentize almost to an infinite extent,
and the dose of which he can diminish to such a degree
that they shall remain only slightly stronger than the
similar natural disease they are employed to cure; so that
in this incomparable method of cure, there is no necessity
for any violent attack upon the organism for the eradi-
cation of even an inveterate disease of old standing; the
cure by this method takes place by only a gentle, im-
perceptible and yet often rapid transition from the tor-
menting natural disease to the desired state of permanent
health.


§ 52.


There are but two principle methods of cure: the one
based only on accurate observation of nature, on careful
experimentation and pure experience, the homceopathic
(before we never designedly used) and a second which
does not do this, the heteropathic or allopathic. Each
opposes the other, and only he who does not know either
can hold the delusion that they can ever approach each
other or even become united, or to make himself so
ridiculous as to practice at one time homceopathically at


136 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


another allopathically, according to the pleasure of the
patient ; a practice which may be called criminal treason
against divine homceopathy.


§ 53.


The true mild cures take place only according to the
homceopathic method, which, as we have found (§ 7-25)
by experience and deduction, is unquestionably the proper
one by which through art the quickest, most certain and
most permanent cures are obtained since this healing art
rests upon an eternal infallible law of nature.

The pure homceopathic healing art is the only correct
method, the one possible to human art, the straightest
way to cure, as certain as that there is but one straight
line between two given points.


§ 54.


The allopathic method of treatment utilized many
things against disease, but usually only improper ones
(alloca) and ruled for ages in different forms called
systems. Every one of these, following each other from
time to time and differing greatly each from the other,
honored itself with the name of Rational Medicine.®

Every builder of such a system cherished the haughty
estimation of himself that he was able to penetrate into


” As if in the establishment of a science, based only on obser-
vation of nature and pure experiment and experience idle specu-
lation and scholastic vaporings could have a place.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 1b ee


the inner nature of life of the healthy as well as of the
sick and clearly to recognize it and accordingly gave the
prescription zich noxious matter * should be banished
from the sick man, and how to banish it in order to re-
store him to health, all this according to empty assump-
tions and arbitrary suppositions without honestly
questioning nature and listening without prejudice to the
voice of experience. Diseases were held to be conditions
that reappeared pretty much in the same manner. Most
systems gave, therefore, names to their imagined disease
pictures and classified them,.every system differently.
to cure these abnormal conditions. (Hence the numerous
text books on Materia Medica.*)


§ 55.


Soon, however, the public became convinced that the
sufferings of the sick increased and heightened with the
introduction of every one of these systems and methods


“Up to the most recent times what is curable in sickness was
supposed to be a material that had to be removed since no one
could conceive of a dynamic effect (§11 note) of morbific agen-
cies, such as medicines exercise upon the life of the animal or-
ganism.

? To fill the measure of self infatuation to overflowing here
were mixed (very learnedly) constantly more, indeed, many dif-
ferent medicines in so-called prescriptions to be administered in
frequent and large doses and thereby tht precious, easily-de-
stroyed human life was endangered in the hands of these per-
verted ones. Especially so with seton, venesection, emetics,
purgatives, plasters, fontanelles and cauterization.


me.” ORGANON OF MEDICINE


of cure if followed exactly. Long ago these allopathic
physicians would have been left had it not been for the
palliative relief obtained at times from empirically dis-
covered remedies whose almost instantaneous flattering
action is apparent to the patient and this to some extent
served to keep up their credit.


§ 56.


By means of this palliative (antipathic, enantipathic)
method, introduced according to Galen’s teaching “Con-
traria contrariis” for seventeen centuries, the physicians
hitherto could hope to win confidence while they deluded
with almost instantaneous amelioration. But how funda-
mentally unhelpful and hurtful this method of treatment
is (in diseases not running a rapid course) we shall see
in what follows. It is certainly the only one of the modes
of treatment adopted by the allopaths that had any mani-
fest relation to a portion of the sufferings caused by the
natural disease; but what kind of relation? Of a truth
the very one (the exact contrary of the right one) that
ought carefully to be avoided if we would not delude and
make a mockery of the patient affected with a chronic
disease.®*


“A third mode of employing medicines in diseases has been
attempted to be created by means of Isopathy, as it is called—
that is to say, a method of curing a given disease by the same
contagious principle that produces it. But even granting this
could be done, yet, after all, seeing that the virus is given to the
patient highly potenized, and, consequently, in an altered condi-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 390


§ 57.


In order to carry into practice this antipathic method,
the ordinary physician gives, for a single troublesome
symptom from among the many other symptoms of the
disease which he passes by unheeded, a medicine con-
cerning which it is known that it produces the exact op-
posite of the morbid symptom sought to be subdued,
from which he can expect the speediest (palliative)


tion, the cure is effected only by opposing a simillimaum to a simil-
limum.

To attempt to cure by means of the very same morbific potency
(per Idem) contradicts all normal human understanding and
hence all experience. Those who first brought Isopathy to
notice, probably thought of the benefit which mankind received
from cowpox vaccination by which the vaccinated individual is
protected against future smallpox infection and as it were cured
in advance. But both, cowpox and smallpox are only similar,
in no way the same disease. In many respects they differ,
namely in the more rapid course and mildness of cowpox and
especially in this, that it is never contagious to man by mere
nearness. Universal vaccination put an end to all epidemics of
that deadly fearful smallpox to such an extent that the present
generation does no longer possess a clear conception of the for-
mer frightful smallpox plague.

Moreover, in this way, undoubtedly, certain diseases peculiar
to animals may give us remedies and medicinal potencies for
very similar important human diseases and thus happily enlarge
our stock of homceopathic remedies.

But to use a human morbific matter (a Psorin taken from the
itch in man) as a remedy for the same human itch or for evils
arisen therefrom is ——?

Nothing can result from this but trouble and aggravation of
the disease.


140 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


relief. He gives large doses of opium, for pains of all
sorts, because this drug soon benumbs the sensibility,
and administers the same remedy for diarrhoeas, because
it speedily puts a stop to the peristaltic motion of the
intestinal canal and makes it insensible; and also for
sleeplessness, because opium rapidly produces a stupefied,
comatose sleep; he gives purgatives when the patient has
suffered long from constipation and costiveness; he
causes the burnt hand to be plunged into cold water,
which, from its low degree of temperature, seems in-
stantaneously to remove the burning pain, as if by magic;
he puts the patient who complains of chilliness and
deficiency of vital heat into warm baths, which warm
him immediately; he makes him who is suffering from
prolonged debility drink wine, whereby he is instantly
enlivened and refreshed; and in like manner he employs
other opposite (antipathic) remedial means, but he has
very few besides those just mentioned, as it is only of
very few substances that some peculiar (primary) action
is known to the ordinary medical school.


§ 58.


If, in estimating the value of this mode of employing
medicines, we should even pass over the circumstance
that it is an extremely faulty symptomatic treatment (v.
note to § 7), wherein the practitioner devotes his attention
in a merely one-sided manner to a single symptom, con-
sequently to only a small part of the whole, whereby
relief for the totality of the disease, which is what the
patient desires, cannot evidently be expected,—we must,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE ae


on the other hand, demand of experience if, in one single
case where such antipathic employment of medicine was
made use of in a chronic or persisting affection, after
the transient amelioration there did not ensue an in-
creased aggravation of the symptom which was subdued
at first in a palliative manner, an aggravation, indeed, of
the whole disease? And every attentive observer will
agree that, after such short antipathic amelioration,
aggravation follows in every case without exception,
although the ordinary physician is in the habit of giving
his patient another explanation of this subsequent aggra-
ease, now for the first time showing itself, or to the
GCCNi rence or Culte a Mew disease.


* Little as physicians have hitherto been in the habit of ob-
serving accurately, the aggravation that so certainly follows such
palliative treatment could not altogether escape their notice. A
striking example of this is to be found in J. H. Schulze’s Diss.
qua corporis humani momentanearum alterationum specimina
quedam expenduntur, Hale, 1741, $28. Willis bears testimony to
something similar (Pharm. rat., §7, cap. i, p. 208) : “Opiata dolores
atrocissimos plerumque sedant atque indolentiam—procurant,
eamque—aliquamdiu et pro stato quodam tempore continuant, quo
spatio elapso dolores mox recrudescunt et brevi ad solitam fero-
ciam augentur.” And also at page 205: “Exactis opii viribus
illico redeunt tormina, nec atrocitatem suam remittunt, nisi dum
ab eodem pharmaco rursus incantuntur.” In like manner J.
Hunter (On the Venereal Disease, p. 13) says that wine and
cordials given to the weak increase the action without giving real
strength, and the powers of the body are afterwards sunk pro-
portionally as they have been raised, by which nothing can be
gained, but a great deal may be lost.


T42 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 59.


Important symptoms of persistent diseases have never
yet been treated with such palliative, antagonistic reme-
dies, without the opposite state, a relapse—indeed, a
palpable aggravation of the malady—occurring a few
hours afterwards. For a persistent tendency to sleepi-
primary action is to enliven; and when it had exhausted
its action the day-somnolence increased—for frequent
waking at night he gave in the evening, without heeding
the other symptoms of the disease, opium, which by
virtue of its primary action produced the same night
(stupefied, dull) sleep, but the subsequent nights were
still more sleepless than before—to chronic diarrhceas
he opposed, without regarding the other morbid signs,
the same opium, whose primary action is to constipate
the bowels, and after a transient stoppage of the diarrhcea
it subsequently became all the worse—violent and fre-
quently recurring pains of all kinds he could suppress
with opium for but a short time; they then always re-
turned in greater, often intolerable severity, or some
much worse affection came in their stead. For nocturnal
cough of long standing the ordinary physician knew no
better than to administer opium, whose primary action
is to suppress every irritation ; the cough would then per-
haps cease the first night, but during the subsequent
nights it would be still more severe, and if it were again
and again suppressed by this palliative in increased doses,
fever and nocturnal perspiration were added to the dis-
ease—weakness of the bladder, with consequent retention
of urine, was sought to be conquered by the antipathic


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 143


work of cantharides to stimulate the urinary passages,
whereby evacuation of the urine was certainly at first
effected, but thereafter the bladder becomes less capable
of stimulation and less able to contract, and paralysis of
the bladder is imminent—with large doses of purgative
drugs and laxative salts, which excite the bowels to fre-
quent evacuation, it was sought to remove a chronic
tendency to constipation, but in the secondary action the
bowels became still more confined ;— the ordinary phy-
sician seeks to remove chronic debility by the administra-
tion of wine, which, however, stimulates only in its
primary action, and hence the forces sink all the lower
in the secondary action ;—by bitter substances and heat-
ing condiments he tries to strengthen and warm the
chronically weak and cold stomach, but in the secondary
action of these palliatives, which are stimulating in their
primary action only, the stomach becomes yet more in-
active ;—long-standing deficiency of vital heat and chilly
disposition ought surely to yield to prescriptions of warm
baths, but still more weak, cold, and chilly do the patients
subsequently become ;—severely burnt parts feel instan-
taneous alleviation from the application of cold water,
but the burning pain afterwards increases to an incredible
degree, and the inflammation spreads and rises to a still
greater height ;°*—by means of the sternutatory rem-
edies that provoke a secretion of mucus, coryza with
stoppage of the nose of long standing is sought to be
removed, but it escapes observation that the disease is
aggravated all the more by these antagonistic remedies
(in their secondary action), and the nose becomes still


ge


** Vide Introduction.


144 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


more stopped ;—by electricity and galvanism, which in
their primary action greatly stimulate muscular action,
chronically weak and almost paralytic limbs were soon
excited to more active movements, but the consequence
(the secondary action) was complete deadening of all
muscular irritability and complete paralysis ;—by vene-
sections it was attempted to remove chronic determina-
tion of blood to the head, but they were always followed
by greater ‘congestion ;—ordinary medical practitioners
know nothing better with which to treat the paralytic
torpor of the corporeal and mental organs, conjoined
with unconsciousness, which prevails in many kinds of
typhus, than with large doses of valerian, because this
is one of the most powerful medicinal agents for causing
animation and increasing the motor faculty; in their
ignorance, however, they knew not that this action is only
a primary action, and that the organism, after that is
passed, most certainly falls back, in the secondary (an-
tagonistic) action, into still greater stupor and immobil-
ity, that is to say, into paralysis of the mental and
corporeal organs (and death) ; they did not see, that the
very diseases they supplied most plentifully with valerian,
which is in such cases an oppositely acting, antipathic
remedy, most infallibly terminated fatally. The old
school physician rejoices ® that he is able to reduce for
several hours the velocity of the small rapid pulse in
cachectic patients with the very first dose of uncombined
purple foxglove (which in its primary action makes the
pulse slower) ; its rapidity, however, soon returns; re-
peated, and now increased doses effect an ever smaller


* Vide Hufeland, in his pamphlet, die Homdopatie, p. 20.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE IA45


diminution of its rapidity, and at length none at all—
indeed—in the secondary action the pulse becomes un-
countable; sleep, appetite and strength depart, and a
speedy death is invariably the result, or else insanity
ensues. How often, in one word, the disease is aggra-
vated, or something even worse is effected by the sec-
ondary action of such antagonistic (antipathic) remedies,
the old school with its false theories does not perceive,
but experience teaches it in a terrible manner.


§ 60.


li these ill-effects are produced, as may very naturally
be expected from the antipathic employment of medi-
cines, the ordinary physician imagines he can get over
the difficulty by giving, at each renewed aggravation, a
stronger dose of the remedy, whereby an equally tran-
sient suppression °* is effected ; and as there then is a still


* All usual palliatives given for the suffering of the sick have
(as is seen here) as after effects an increase of the same suffer-
ing and the older physicians had to repeat them in ever stronger
doses in order to achieve a similar modification, which, however,
was never permanent and never sufficient to prevent an increased
recurrence of the ailment. But Broussau, who twenty-five years
before contented against the senseless mixing of different drugs
in prescriptions and thereby ended its reign in France, (for which
mankind is grateful to him) introduced his so-called physiolog-
ical system (without taking note of the homceopathic method
then already established), a method of treatment, while effec-
tively lessening and permanently preventing the return of all the
sufferings, was applicable to all diseases of mankind; a thing
that the palliatives then in use were not capable of affecting.

Being unable to heal disease with mild innocent remedies and


146 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


greater necessity for giving ever-increasing quantities
of the palliative there ensues either another more serious


thus establish health, Brousseau found the easier way to quiet the .
sufferings of patients more and more at the cost of their life
and at last to extinguish life wholly—a method of treatment that,
alas, seemed sufficient to his contemporaries. In the degree that
the patient retains his strength will his ailments be apparent and
the more intensely will he feel his pains. He moans and groans
and cries out and calls for help more and more vociferously so
that the physician cannot come any too soon to give relief.
Brousseau needed only to depress the vital force, to lessen it
more and more and behold, the more frequently the patient was
bled, the more leeches and cupping glasses sucked out the vital
fluid (for the innocent irreplaceable blood was according to him
responsible for almost all ailments). In the same proportion
the patient lost strength to feel pain or to express his aggra-
vated condition by violent complaint and gestures. The patient
appears more quiet in proportion as he grows weaker, the by-
standers rejoice in his apparent improvement, ready to return to
the same measures on the renewal of his sufferings—be they
spasms, suffocation, fears or pain, for they had so beautifully
quieted him before and gave promise of further ease. In dis-
eases of long duration and when the patient retained some
strength, he was deprived of food, put on a “hunger diet,” in
order to depress life so much more successfully and inhibit the
restless states. The debilitated patient feels unable to protest
against further similar measures of blood-letting leeches, vesi-
cation, warm baths and so forth to refuse their employment.
That death must follow such frequently repeated reduction and
exhaustion of the vital energy is not noticed by the patient, al-
ready robbed of all consciousness, and the relatives, blinded by
the improvement even of the last sufferings of the patient by
means of blood letting and warm baths, cannot understand and
are surprised when the patient quietly slips away.

“But God knows the patient on his bed of sickness was not


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Vay


disease or frequently incurability, even danger of life and
death itself, but never a cure of a disease of considerable
or of long standing.


treated with violence, for the prick of a small lancet is not
really painful and the gum Arabic solution (Eau de Gourme,
almost the only medicine that Brousseau used) was mild in
taste and without apparent action—the bite of the leeches in-
significant and the blood letting by the physician done quietly
while the lukewarm baths could only soothe, hence the disease
from the very start must have been fatal, so that the patient,
notwithstanding all efforts of the physician, had to leave the
earth.” In this way the relatives, and especially the heirs of the
dear departed, consoled themselves.

The physicians in Europe and elsewhere accepted this con-
ventent treatment of all diseases according to a single rule, since
it saved them from all further thinking (the most laborious of
all work under the sun). They only had to take care “to as-
suage the pangs of conscience and console themselves that they
were not the originators of this system and this method of
treatment, that all the other thousands of Brousseauists did the
same and that possibly everything would cease with death any-
way as was taught by their master.” In this way many thou-
sand physicians were miserably misled to shed (with cold
heart) the warm blood of their patients that were capable of
cure and thereby rob millions of men gradually of their life ac-
cording to Brousseau’s method, more than fell on Napoleon’s
battlefields. Was it perhaps necessary by the disposition of God
for that system of Brousseau which destroyed medically the life
of curable patients to precede homceopathy in order to open the
eyes of the world to the only true science and art of medicine,
homeopathy, in which all curable patients find health and new
life when this most difficult of all arts is practised by an in-
defatigable discriminating physician in a pure and conscientious
manner ?


148 ORGANON OF MEDICINE
Seem.


Had physicians been capable of reflecting on the sad
results of the antagonistic employment of medicines, they
had long since discovered the grand truth, THAT THE
TRUE RADICAL HEALING ART MUST BE FOUND IN THE
EXACT OPPOSITE OF SUCH AN ANTIPATHIC TREATMENT
OF THE SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE; they would have become
convinced, that as a medicinal action antagonistic to the
symptoms of the disease (an antipathically employed
medicine) is followed by only transient relief, and after
that is passed, by invariable aggravation, the converse
of that procedure, the homeopathic employment of medi-
cmes according to similarity of symptoms, must effect a
permanent and perfect cure, if at the same time the oppo-
site of their large doses, the most minute doses, are
exhibited. But neither the obvious aggravation that
ensued from their antipathic treatment, nor the fact that
no physician ever effected a permanent cure of diseases
of considerable or of long standing unless some homceo-
pathic medicinal agent was accidentally a chief ingredient
in his prescription, nor yet the circumstance that all the
rapid and perfect cures that nature ever performed
(§ 46), were always effected by the supervention upon
the old disease of one of a similar character, ever taught
them, during such a long series of centuries, this truth,
the knowledge of which can alone conduce to the benefit
OW ee Sk


© 62


But on what this pernicious result of the palliative,
antipathic treatment and the efficacy of the reverse, the


ORGANON OF MEDICINE I49


homceopathic treatment, depend, is explained by the fol-
lowing facts, deduced from manifold observations, which
no one before me perceived, though they are so very
palpable and so very evident, and are of such infinite
importance to the healing art.


Soke


Every agent that acts upon the vitality, every medi-
cine, deranges more or less the vital force, and causes
a certain alteration in the health of the individual for a
longer or a shorter period. This is termed primary
action. Although a product of the medicinal and vital
powers conjointly, it is principally due to the former
power. To its action our vital force endeavors to oppose
its own energy. This resistent action is a property, is
indeed an automatic action of our life-preserving power,
which goes by the name of secondary action or cownter-
action.


S02)


During the primary action of the artificial morbific
agents (medicines) on our healthy body, as seen in the
following examples, our vital force seems to conduct
itself merely in a passive (receptive) manner, and ap-
pears, so to say, compelled to permit the impressions of
the artificial power acting from without to take place in
it and thereby alter its state of health; it then, however,
appears to rouse itself again, as it were, and to develop
(A) the exact opposite condition of health (counter-
action, secondary action) to this effect (primary action)


150 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


produced upon it, if there be such an opposite, and that
in as great a degree as was the effect (primary action)
of the artificial morbific or medicinal agent on it, and
proportionate to its own energy ;—or (B) if there be not
in nature a state exactly the opposite of the primary
action, it appears to endeavor to indifferentiate itself,
that is, to make its superior power available in the ex-
tinction of the change wrought in it from without (by
the medicine), in the place of which it substitutes its
normal state (secondary action, curative action).


§ 65.


Examples of (A) are familiar to all. A hand bathed
in hot water is at first much warmer than the other hand
that has not been so treated (primary action) ; but when
it is withdrawn from the hot water and again thoroughly
dried, it becomes in a short time cold, and at length
much colder than the other (secondary action). A per-
son heated by violent exercise (primary action) is after-
wards affected with chilliness and shivering (secondary
action). ‘To one who was yesterday heated by drinking
much wine (primary action), today every breath of air
feels too cold (counter-action of the organism, secondary
action). An arm that has been kept long in very cold
water is at first much paler and colder (primary action)
than the other; but removed from the cold water and
dried, it subsequently becomes not only warmer than
the other, but even hot, red and inflamed (secondary
action, reaction of the vital force). Excessive vivacity
follows the use of strong coffee (primary action), but
sluggishness and drowsiness remain for a long time


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Y51


afterwards (reaction, secondary action), if this be not
always again removed for a short time by imbibing fresh
supplies of coffee (palliative). After the profound
stupefied sleep caused by opium (primary action), the
following night will be all the more sleepless (reaction,
secondary action). After the constipation produced by
opium (primary action), diarrhoea ensues (secondary


action) ; and after purgation with medicines that irritate
the bowels, constipation of several days’ duration ensues


(secondary action). And in like manner it always hap-
pens, after the primary action of a medicine that pro-
duces in large doses a great change in the health of a
healthy person, that its exact opposite, when, as has been
observed, there is actually such a thing, is produced in
the secondary action by our vital force.


§ 66.


An obvious antagonistic secondary action, however, is,
as may readily be conceived, not to be noticed from the
action of quite minute homceopathic doses of the derang-
ing agents on the healthy body. A’ small dose of every
one of them certainly produces a primary action that is
perceptible to a sufficiently attentive observer; but the
living organism employs against it only so much reaction
(secondary action) as is necessary for the restoration of
the normal condition.


SOF.


These incontrovertible truths, which spontaneously offer
themselves to our notice in nature and experience, explain


152 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


to us the beneficial action that takes place under homceo-
pathic treatment; whilst, on the other hand, they demon-
strate the perversity of the antipathic and palliative treat-
ment of diseases with antagonistically acting medicines.®


“Only in the most urgent cases, where danger to life and im-
minent death allow no time for the action of a homceopathic rem-
edy—not hours, sometimes not even quarter-hours, and scarcely
minutes—in sudden accidents occurring to previously healthy
individuals—for example, in asphyxia and suspended animation
from lightning, from suffocation, freezing, drowning, etc.—is it
admissible and judicious, at all events as a preliminary measure,
to stimulate the irritability and sensibility (the physical life)
with a palliative, as, for instance, with gentle electrical shocks,
with clysters of strong coffee, with a stimulating odor, gradual
application of heat, etc. When this stimulation is effected, the
play of the vital organs again goes on in its former healthy man-
ner, for there is here no disease* to be removed, but merely an
obstruction and suppression of the healthy vital force. To this
category belong various antidotes to sudden poisonings: alkalies
for mineral acids, hepar sulphuris for metallic poisons, coffee
and camphor (and ipecacuanha) for poisoning by opium, etc.

It does not follow that a homceopathic medicine has been ill
selected for a case of disease because some of the medicinal
symptoms are only antipathic to some of the less important and
minor symptoms of the disease; if only the others, the stronger,
well-marked (characteristic), and peculiar symptoms of the dis-
ease are covered and matched by the same medicine with simi-
larity of symptoms—that is to say, overpowered, destroyed and
extinguished ; the few opposite symptoms also disappear of them-
selves after the expiry of the term of action of the medicament,
without retarding the cure in the least.


* And yet the new sect that mixes the two systems appeals
(though in vain) to this observation, in order that they may


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 153


§ 68.


In homeopathic cures experience teaches us that from
the uncommonly small doses of medicine (§§ 275-287) re-
quired in this method of treatment, which are just suf-
ficient, by the similarity of their symptoms, to overpower
and remove from the sensation of the life principle the
similar natural disease, there certainly remains, after the
Gestrilctomee: tiemlabici. at enisiea celiaim amount Of
medicinal disease alone in the organism, but, on account of
the extraordinary minuteness of the dose, it is so transient,
so slight, and disappears so rapidly of its own accord, that
the vital force has no need to employ, against this small
artificial derangement of its health, any more considerable
reaction than will suffice to elevate its present state of
health up to the healthy point—that is, than will suffice to
effect complete recovery, for which, after the extinction
of the previous morbid derangement but little effort is re-


aquired (§ 64, B).


S 60.


In the antipathic (palliative) mode of treatment, how-
ever, precisely the reverse of this takes place. The medic-
inal symptom which the physician opposes to the disease


have an excuse for encountering everywhere such exceptions to
the general rule in diseases, and to justify their convenient em-
ployment of allopathic palliatives, and of other injurious allo-
pathic trash besides, solely for the sake of sparing themselves
the trouble of seeking for the suitable homceopathic remedy for
each case of disease—and thus conveniently appear as homceo-
pathic physicians, without being such. But their performances
are on a par with the system they pursue; they are corrupting.


154. ORGANON OF MEDICINE


symptom (for example, the insensibility and stupefaction
caused by opium in its primary action to acute pain) is
certainly not alien, not wholly allopathic to the latter;
there is a manifest relation of the medicinal symptom to
the disease symptom, but it is the reverse of what should
be; it is here intended that the annihilation of the disease
symptom shall be effected by an opposite medicinal symp-
tom, which is nevertheless impossible. No doubt the anti-
pathically chosen medicine touches precisely the same
diseased point in the organism as the homceopathic med-
icine chosen on account of the similar affection it pro-
duces; but the former covers but lightly the opposite
symptom of the disease only as an opposite, and makes it
unobservable to our life principle for a short time only,
so that in the first period of the action of the antagonis-
tic palliative the vital force perceives nothing disagreeable
from either of the two (neither from the disease symp-
tom nor from the medicinal symptom), as they seem
both to have mutually removed and dynamically neutral-
ized one another as it were (for example, the stupefying
power of opium does this to the pain). In the first min-
utes the vital force feels quite well, and perceives neither
the stupefaction of the opium nor the pain of the disease.
But as the antagonistic medicinal symptom cannot (as in
the homceopathic treatment) occupy the place of the
morbid derangement present in the organism in the sen-
sation of the life principle as a simular, stronger (artificial )
disease, and cannot, therefore like a homceopathic medi-
cine, affect the vital force with a similar artificial disease,
so as to be able to step into the place of the original
natural morbid derangement, the palliative medicine must,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE T55


as a thing totally differing from, and the opposite of the
disease derangement, leave the latter uneradicated; it
renders it, as before said, by a semblance of dynamic
neutralization,®* at first unfelt by the vital force, but, like
every medicinal disease, it is soon spontaneously extin-
guished, and not only leaves the disease behind, just as
it was, but compels the vital force (as it must, like all
palliatives, be given in large doses in order to effect the
apparent removal) to produce an opposite condition (§§
63, 64) to this palliative medicine, the reverse of the medi-
cinal action, consequently the analogue of the still present,
undestroyed, natural morbid derangement, which is nec-
essarily strengthened and increased ® by this addition


* In the living human being no permanent neutralization of
contrary or antagonistic sensations can take place, as happens
with substances of opposite qualities in the chemical laboratory,
where, for instance, sulphuric acid and potash unite to form a
perfectly different substance, a neutral salt, which is now no
longer either acid or alkali, and is not decomposed even by heat.
Such amalgamations and thorough combinations to form some-
thing permanently neutral and indifferent do not, as has been
said, ever take place with respect to dynamic impressions of an
antagonistic nature in our sensific apparatus. Only a semblance
of neutralization and mutual removal occurs in such cases at
first, but the antagonistic sensations do not permanently remove
one another. The tears of the mourner will be dried for but a
short time by a laughable play; the jokes are, however, soon for-
gotten, and his tears then flow still more abundantly than before.


® Plain as this proposition is, it has been misunderstood, and
in opposition to it some have asserted “that the palliative in its
secondary action, which would then be similar to the disease
present, must be capable of curing just as well as a homceopathic
medicine does by its primary action.” But they did not reflect


156 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


(reaction against the palliative) produced by the vital
force. The disease symptom (this single part of the
disease) consequently becomes worse after the term of the
action of the palliative has expired; worse in proportion
to the magnitude of the dose of the palliative. Accord-
ingly (to keep to the same example) the larger the dose
of opium given to allay the pain, so much the more does
the pain increase beyond its original intensity as soon as
the opium has exhausted its action.”


8 70.


From what has been already adduced we cannot fail
to draw the following inferences:

That everything of a really morbid character and
which ought to be cured that the physician can
discover in diseases consists solely of the suffer-
ings of the patient, and the sensible alterations in


that the secondary action is not a product of the medicine, but
invariably of the antagonistically acting vital force of the organ-
ism; that therefore this secondary action resulting from the
vital force on the employment of a palliative is a state similar
to the symptoms of the disease which the palliative left uneradi-
cated, and which the reaction of the vital force against the pal-
liative consequently increased still more.


“As when in a dark dungeon, where the prisoner could with
difficulty recognize objects close to him, alcohol is suddenly
lighted, everything is instantly illuminated in a most consolatory
manner to the unhappy wretch; but when it is extinguished, the
brighter the flame was previously the blacker is the night which
now envelopes him, and renders everything about him much
more difficult to be seen than before.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 157


his health, in a word, solely of the totality of the
symptoms, by means of which the disease demands
the medicine requisite for its relief; whilst, on the
other hand, every internal cause attributed to it,
every occult quality or imaginary material mor-
bific principle, is nothing but an idle dream;

That this derangement of the state of health, which
we term disease, can only be converted into health
by another revolution effected in the state of health
by means of medicines, whose sole curative power,
consequently, can only consist in altering man’s
state of health—that is to say, in a peculiar ex-
citation of morbid symptoms, and is learned with
most distinctness and purity by testing them on
the healthy body;

That, according to all experience, a natural disease
can never be cured by medicines that possess the
power of producing in the healthy individual an
alien morbid state (dissimilar morbid symptoms)
differing from that of the disease to be cured
(never, therefore, by an allopathic mode of: treat-
ment), and that even in nature no cure ever takes
place in which an inherent disease is removed,
annihilated and cured by the addition of another
disease dissimilar to it, be the new one ever so
strong ;

That, moreover, all experience proves that, by
means of medicines which have a tendency to
produce in the healthy individual an artificial
morbid symptom, antagonistic to the single symp-
tom of disease sought to be cured, the cure of a


158 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


long-standing affection will never be effected, but
merely a very transient alleviation, always fol-
lowed by its aggravation; and that, in a word, this
antipathic and merely palliative treatment in long-
standing diseases of a serious character is abso-
lutely inefficacious ;

That, however, the third and only other possible
mode of treatment (the homa@opathic), in which
there is employed for the totality of the symptoms
of a natural disease a medicine capable of pro-
ducing the most similar symptoms possible in the
healthy individual, given in suitable dose, is the
only efficacious remedial method whereby dis-
eases, which are purely dynamic deranging irri-
tations of the vital force, are overpowered, and
being thus easily, perfectly and permanently ex-
tinguished, must necessarily cease to exist. This
is brought about by means of the stronger similar
deranging irritations of the homceopathic medi-
cine in the sensation of the life principle. For this
mode of procedure we have the example of un-
fettered Nature herself, when to an old disease
there is added a new one similar to the first,
whereby the new one is rapidly and forever an-
nihilated and cured.


§ 71.


As it is now no Icnger a matter of doubt that the
diseases of mankind consist merely of groups of certain
symptoms, and may be annihilated and transformed into


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 159


health by medicinal substances, but only by such as are
capable of artificially producing similar morbid symptoms
(and such is the process in all genuine cures), hence
the operation of curing is comprised in the three follow-
ing points:


I. How is the physician to ascertain what is neces-
sary to be known in order to cure the disease?


II. How is he to gain a knowledge of the instru-
ments adapted for the cure of the natural disease,
the pathogenetic powers of the medicines?


IlI, What is the most suitable method of employ-
ing these artificial morbific agents (medicines)
for the cure of natural disease?


§ 72.


With respect to the first point, the following will serve
as a general preliminary view. The diseases to which
man is liable are either rapid morbid processes of the
abnormally deranged vital force, which have a tendency
to finish their course more or less quickly, but always in
a moderate time—these are termed acute diseases ;—or
they are diseases of such a character that, with small,
often imperceptible beginnings, dynamically derange the
living organism, each in its own peculiar manner, and
cause it gradually to deviate from the heaithy condition,
in such a way that the automatic life energy, called vital
force, whose office is to preserve the health, only opposes
to them at the commencement and during their progress
imperfect, unsuitable, useless resistance, but is unable of


160 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


itself to extinguish them, but must helplessly suffer (them
to spread and) itself to be ever more and more abnor-
mally deranged, until at length the organism is destroyed ;
these are terined chronic diseases. They are caused by
dynamic infection with a chronic miasm.


S76.


As regards acute diseases, they are either of such a
kind as attack human beings individually, the exciting
cause being injurious influences to which they were parti-
cularly exposed. Excesses in food, or an insufficient
supply of it, severe physical impressions, chills, over-
heatings, dissipation, strains, etc., or physical irritations,
mental emotions, and the like, are exciting causes of such
acute febrile affections; in reality, however, they are gen-
erally only a transient explosion of latent psora, which
spontaneously returns to its dormant state if the acute
diseases were not of too violent a character and were
SOc wblaliac, Ole Winey cre Ou Site 2 [eine ac Aine
several persons at the same time, here and there (spora-
dically), by means of meteoric or telluric influences and
injurious agents, the susceptibility for being morbidly
affected by which is possessed by only a few persons at
one time. Allied to these are those diseases in which
many persons are attacked with very similar sufferings
from the same cause (epidemically) ; these diseases gen-
erally become infectious (contagious) when they prevail
among thickly congregated masses of human _ beings,
Thence arise fevers,” in each instance of a peculiar


™ The homeceopathic physician, who does not entertain the fore-
gone conclusions devised by the ordinary school (who have fixed


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 161


nature, and, because the cases of disease have an identical
origin, they set up in all those they affect an identical
morbid process, which when left to itself terminates in a
moderate period of time in death or recovery. The
calamities of war, inundations and famine are not infre-
quently their exciting causes and producers—sometimes
they are peculiar acute nuasms which recur in the same
manner (hence known by some traditional name), which
either attack persons but once in a lifetime, as the small-
pox, measles, whooping-cough, the ancient, smooth, bright
red scarlet fever * of Sydenham, the mumps, etc., or such
as recur frequently in pretty much the same manner, the
plague of the Levant, the yellow fever of the sea-coast,
the Asiatic cholera, etc.


upon a few names of such fevers, besides which mighty nature
dare not produce any others, so as to admit of their treating
these diseases according to some fixed method), does not ack-
nowledge the names gaol fever, bilious fever, typhus fever, putrid
fever, nervous fever or mucous fever, but treats them each ac-
cording to their several peculiarities.

@ Subsequently to the year 1801 a kind of purpura miliaris
(roodvonk), which came from the West, was by physicians con-
founded with the scarlet fever, notwithstanding that they exhib-
ited totally different symptoms, that the latter found its pro-
phylactic and curative remedy in belladonna, the former in aco-
nite, and that the former was generally merely sporadic, while
the latter was invariably epidemic. Of late years it seems as
if the two occasionally joined to form an eruptive fever of a
peculiar kind, for which neither the one nor yet the other remedy,
alone, will be found to be exactly homceopathic.


162 . ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 74.


Among chronic diseases we must still, alas! reckon
those so commonly met with, artificially produced in
allopathic treatment by the prolonged use of violent
heroic medicines in large and increasing doses, by the
abuse of calomel, corrosive sublimate, mercurial oint-
ment, nitrate of silver, iodine and its ointments, opium,
valerian, cinchona bark and quinine, foxglove, prussic
acid, sulphur and sulphuric acid, perennial purgatives,’®
venesections, shedding streams of blood, leeches, issues,
setons, etc., whereby the vital energy is sometimes weak-
ened to an unmerciful extent, sometimes, if it do not
succumb, gradually abnormally deranged (by each sub-
stance in a peculiar manner) in such a way that, in
order to maintain life against these inimical and destruc-
tive attacks, it must produce a revolution in the organ-
ism, and either deprive some part of its irritability and
sensibility, or exalt these to an excessive degree, cause
dilatation or contraction, relaxation or induration or
even total destruction of certain parts, and develop faulty
organic alterations here and there in the interior or the
exterior (cripple the body internally or externally), in
order to preserve the organism from complete destruc-
tion of life by the ever-renewed, hostile assaults of such
destructive forces.”


The only possible case of plethora shows itself with the
healthy woman, several days before her monthly period, with a
feeling of a certain fulness of womb and breasts, but without
inflammation.

* Among all imaginable methods for the relief of sickness, no
greater allopathic, irrational or inappropriate one can be thought


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 103


8 75.


These inroads on human health effected by the allo-
pathic non-healing art (more particularly in recent times)
are of all chronic diseases the most deplorable, the most


of than this Brousseauic, debilitating treatment by means of vene-
section and hunger diet, which, for many years, has spread over
a large part of the earth. No intelligent man can see in it any-
thing medical, or medicinally helpful, where as real medicines,
even if chosen blindly and administered to a patient, may at
times prove of benefit in a given case of sickness because they
may accidentally have been homceopathic to the case. But from
venesection, healthy common sense can expect nothing more than
certain lessening and shortening of life. It is a sorrowful and
wholly groundless fallacy that most and indeed all diseases de-
pend on local inflammation. Even for true local inflammation,
the most certain and quickest cure is found in medicines capa-
ble of taking away dynamically the arterial irritation upon which
the inflammation is based and this without the least loss of
fluids and strength. Local venesections, even from the affected
part, only tend to increase renewed inflammation of these parts.
And precisely so it is generally inappropriate, aye, murderous
to take away many pounds of blood from the veins in inflamma-
tory fevers, when a few appropriate medicines would dispel
this irritated arterial state, driving the hitherto quiet blood to-
gether with the disease in a few hours without the least loss of
fluids and strength. Such great loss of blood is evidently irre-
placeable for the remaining continuance of life, since the organs
intented by the Creator for bloodmaking have thereby become so
weakened that while they may manufacture blood in the same
quantity but not again of the same good quality. And how im-
possible is it for this imagined plethora to have been produced
in such remarkable rapidity and so to drain it off by frequent
venesections when yet an hour before the pulse of this heated
patient (before the fever and chill stage) was so quiet. No


164 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


incurable; and I regret to add that it is apparently im-
possible to discover or to hit upon any remedies for
their cure when they have reached any considerable
height.


§ 76.


Only for natural diseases has the beneficent Deity
granted us, in Homoeopathy, the means of affording
relief ; but those devastations and maimings of the human
organism exteriorly and interiorly, effected by years
frequently, of the unsparing exercise of a false art,” with


man, no sick person has ever foo much blood or too much
strength. On the contrary, every sick man lacks strength, other-
wise his vital energy would have prevented the development of
the disease. Thus it is irrational and cruel to add to this weak-
ened patient, a greater, indeed the most serious source of de-
bility that can be imagined. It is a murderous malpractice irra-
tional and crue! based on a wholly groundless and absurd the-
ory instead of taking away his disease which is ever dynamic
and only to be removed by dynamic potencies.


® Tf the patient at length succumbs, the practiser of such a
treatment is in the habit of pointing out to the sorrowing rela-
tives, at the post-mortem examination, these internal organic dis-
figurements, which are due to his pseudo-art, but which he artfully
maintains to be the original incurable disease (see my book, Die
Alléopathie, ein Wort der Warnung an Kranke jeder Art, Leip-
zig, bei Baumgartner [translated in Lesser Writings]). Those
deceitful records, the illustrated works on pathological anatomy,
exhibit the products of such lamentable bungling. Deceased peo-
ple from the country and those from the poor of cities who have
died without such bungling with hurtful measures are not opened
up through pathological anatomy as a rule. Such corruption
and deformities would not be found in their corpses. From this


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 165


its hurtful drugs and treatment, must be remedied by the
vital force itself (appropriate aid being given for the
eradication of any chronic miasm that may happen to be
lurking in the background), if it has not already been
too much weakened by such mischievous acts, and can
devote several years to this huge operation undisturbed.
A human healing art, for the restoration to the normal
state of those innumerable abnormal conditions so often
produced by the allopathic non-healing art, there is
not and cannot be.


SFE


Those diseases are inappropriately named chronic
which persons incur who expose themselves continually
to avoidable noxious influences, who are in the habit of
indulging in injurious liquors or aliments, are addicted to
dissipation of many kinds which undermine the health,
who undergo prolonged abstinence from things that are
necessary for the support of life, who reside in unhealthy
localities, especially marshy districts, who are housed in
cellars or other confined dwellings, who are deprived of
exercise or of open air, who ruin their health by over-
exertion of body or mind, who live in a constant state of
worry, etc. These states of ill-health, which persons bring
upon themselves disappear spontaneously, provided no
chronic miasm lurks in the body, under an improved mode
of living, and they cannot be called chronic diseases.


fact can be judged the value of the evidence drawn from these
beautiful illustrations as well as of the honesty of these authors
and book makers.


166 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 78.


The true natural chronic diseases are those that arise
from a chronic miasm, which when left to themselves,
and unchecked by the employment of those remedies that
are specific for them, always go on increasing and growing
worse, notwithstanding the best mental and corporeal
regimen, and torment the patient to the end of his life
with ever aggravated sufferings. These, excepting those
produced by medical malpractice (§ 74), are the most
numerous and greatest scourges of the human race; for
the most robust constitution, the best regulated mode of
living and the most vigorous energy of the vital force
are insufficient for their eradication.”


§ 79.


Hitherto syphilis alone has been to some extent known
as such a chronic miasmatic disease, which when uncured
ceases only with the termination of life. Sycosis (the
condylomatous disease), equally ineradicable by the vitat


“During the flourishing years of youth and with the com-
mencement of regular menstruation joined to a mode of life
beneficial to soul, heart and body, they remain unrecognized for
years. Those afflicted appear in perfect health to their relatives
and acquaintances and the disease that was received by infection
or inheritance seems to have wholly disappeared. But in later
years, after adverse events and conditions of life, they are sure
to appear anew and develop the more rapidly and assume a
more serious character in proportion as the vital principle has be-
come disturbed by debilitating passions, worry and care, but
especially when disordered by inappropriate medicinal treatment.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Whey


force without proper medicinal treatment, was not re-
cognized as a chronic miasmatic disease of a peculiar
character, which it nevertheless undoubtedly is, and
physicians imagined they had cured it when they had
destroyed the growths upon the skin, but the persist-
ing dyscrasia occasioned by it escaped their observa-
tion,


S 8o.


Incalculably greater and more important than the two
chronic miasms just named, however, is the chronic miasm
of psora, which, whilst those two reveal their specific
internal dyscrasia, the one by the venereal chancre, the
other by the cauliflower-like growths, does also, after
the completion of the internal infection of the whole
organism, announce by a peculiar cutaneous eruption,
sometimes consisting only of a few vesicles accompanied
by intolerable voluptuous tickling itching (and a peculiar
odor), the monstrous internal chronic miasm—the psora,
the only real fundamental cause and producer of all the
other numerous, I may say innumerable, forms of disease,”


“T spent twelve years in investigating the source of this in-
credibly large number of chronic affections, in ascertaining and
collecting certain proofs of this great truth, which had remained
unknown to all former or contemporary observers, and in dis-
covering at the same time the principal (antipsoric) remedies,
which collectively are nearly a match for this thousand-headed
monster of disease in all its different developments and forms.
I have published my observations on this subject in the book
entitled The Chronic Diseases (4 vols., Dresden, Arnold. [2nd
edit., Dusseldorf, Schaub.]) before I had obtained this know!-


168 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


which, under the names of nervous debility, hysteria,
hypochondriasis, mania, melancholia, imbecility, madness,
epilepsy and convulsions of all sorts, softening of the
bones (rachitis), scoliosis and cyphosis, caries, cancer,
fungus hematodes, neoplasms, gout, hemorrhoids, jaun-
dice, cyanosis, dropsy, amenorrhcea, hemorrhage from the
stomach, nose, lungs, ‘bladder and womb, of asthma
and ulceration of the lungs, of impotence and barrenness,
of megrim, deafness, cataract, amaurosis, urinary calculus,
paralysis, defects of the senses and pains of thousands
of kinds, etc., figure in systematic works on pathology as
peculiar, independent diseases.


edge I could only teach how to treat the whole number of chronic
diseases as isolated, individual maladies, with those medicinal
substances whose pure effects had been tested on healthy persons
up to that period, so that every case of chronic disease was
treated by my disciples according to the group of symptoms it
presented, just like an idiopathic disease, and it was often so far
cured that sick mankind rejoiced at the extensive remedial trea-
sures already amassed by the new healing art. How much
greater cause is there now for rejoicing that the desired goal
has been so much more nearly attained, inasmuch as the recently
discovered and far more specific homceopathic remedies for
chronic affections arising from psora (properly termed anti-
psoric remedies) and the special instructions for their prepara-
tion and employment have been published; and from among
them the true physician can now select for his curative agents
those whose medicinal symptoms correspond in the most similar
(homceopathic) manner to the chronic disease he has to cure;
and thus, by the employment of (antipsoric) medicines more
suitable for this miasm, he is enabled to render more essential
service and almost invariably to effect a perfect cure.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 169
§ 81.


The fact that this extremely ancient infecting agent
has gradually passed, in some hundreds of generations,
through many millions of human organisms and has thus
attained an incredible development, renders it in some
meastire conceivable how it can now display such innu-
merable morbid forms in the great family of mankind,
particularly when we consider what a number of circum-
stances ‘* contribute to the production of these great va-
rieties of chronic diseases (secondary symptoms of psora),
besides the indescribable diversity of men in respect of
their congenital corporeal constitutions, so that it is no
wonder if such a variety of injurious agencies acting
from within and from without and sometimes continually,
on such a variety of organisms permeated with the psoric
miasm, should produce an innumerable variety of de-
fects, injuries, derangements and sufferings, which have
hitherto been treated of in the old pathological works,”


* Some of these causes that exercise a modifying influence on
the transformation of psora into chronic diseases manifestly de-
pend sometimes on the climate and the peculiar physical charac-
ter of the place of abode, sometimes on the very great varieties
in the physical and mental training of youth, both of which may
have been neglected, delayed or carried to excess, or on their
abuse in the business or conditions of life, in the matter of
diet and regimen, passions, manners, habits and customs of vari-
ous kinds.


™ How many improper ambiguous names do not these works
contain, under each of which are included excessively different
morbid conditions, which often resemble each other in one sin-
gle symptom only, as ague, jaundice, dropsy, consumption, leucor-


170 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


under a number of special names, as diseases of an inde-
pendent character.


rhea, hemorrhoids, rheumatism, apoplexy, convulsions, hysteria,
hypochrondriasis, melancholia, mania, quinsy, palsy, etc., which
are represented as diseases of a fixed and unvarying character,
and are treated, on account of their name, according to a deter-
minate plan! How can the bestowal of such a name justify an
identical medical treatment? And if the treatment is not always
to be the same, why make use of an identical name which postu-
lates an identity of treatment? “Nihil sane in artem medicam
pestiferum magis unquam irrepsit malum, quam generalia qued-
am nomina morbis imponere iisque aptare velle generalem quan-
dam medicinam,” says Huxham, a man as clear-signted as he
was estimable on account of his conscientiousness (Op. phys.
med., tom. i.). And in like manner Fritze laments (Annalen, i,
p. 80) “that essentially different diseases are designated by the
same name.” Even those epidemic diseases, which undoubtedly
may be propagated in every separate epidemic by a peculiar con-
tagious principle which remains unknown to us, are designated,
in the old school of medicine, by particular names, just as 1f they
were well-known fixed diseases that invariably recurred under
the same form, as hospital fever, gaol fever, camp fever, putrid
fever, bilious fever, nervous fever, mucous fever, although each
epidemic of such roving fevers exhibits itself at every occur-
rence as another, a mew disease, such as it has never before ap-
peared in exactly the same form, differing very much, in every
instance, in its course, as well as in many of its most striking
symptoms and its whole appearance. Each is so far dissimilar
to all previous epidemics, whatever names they may bear, that it
would be a dereliction of all logical accuracy in our ideas of
things were we to give to these maladies, that differ so much
among themselves, one of those names we meet with in patho-
logical writings, and treat them all medicinally in conformity
with this misused name. The candid Sydenham alone perceived
this, when he (Obs. med., cap. ii, De morb. epid.) insists upon the
necessity of not considering any epidemic disease as having oc-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE I71T


§ 82.


Although, by the discovery of that great source of
chronic diseases, as also by the discovery of the specific


curred before and treating it in the same way as another, since
all that occur successively, be they ever so numerous, differ from
one another: “Nihil quicquam (opinor,) animum universe qua
patet medicine pomceria perlustrantem, tanta admiratione per-
cellet, quam discolor illa et sui plane dissimilis morborum Epi-
demicorum facies; non tam qua varias ejusdem anni tempes-
tates, quam qua discrepantes diversorum ab invicem annorum
constitutiones referunt, ab iisque dependent. Que tam aperta
predictorum morborum diversitas tum propriis ac sibi peculiar-
ibus symptomatis, tum etiam medendi ratione, quam hi ab illis
disparem prorsus sibi vendicant, satis illucescit. Ex quibus con-
stat morbus hosce, ut ut externa quadantenus specie, et sympto-
matis aliquot utrisque pariter supervenientibus, convenire paulo
incautioribus videantur, re tamen ipsa (si bene adverteris ani-
mum,) alienze admodum esse indolis, et distare ut era lupinis.”

From all this it is clear that these useless and misused names
of diseases ought to have no influence on the practice of the
true physician, who knows that he has to judge of and to cure
diseases, not according to the similarity of the name of a single
one of their symptoms, but according to the totality of the signs
of the individual state of each particular patient, whose affec-
tion it is his duty carefully to investigate, but never to give a
hypothetical guess at it.

If, however, it is deemed necessary sometimes to make use of
names of diseases, in order, when talking about a patient to ordi-
nary persons, to render ourselves intelligible in few words, we
ought only to employ them as collective names, and tell them, e. g.,
the patient has a kind of St. Vitus’s dance, a kind of dropsy, a
kind of typhus, a kind of ague; but (in order to do away once
for all with the mistaken notions these names give rise to) we
should never say he has the St. Vitus’s dance, the typhus, the
dropsy, the ague, as there are certainly no diseases of these and
similar names of fixed unvarying character.


172 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


homeopathic remedies for the psora, medicine has ad-
vanced some steps nearer to a knowledge of the nature
of the majority of diseases it has to cure, yet, for
settling the indication in each case of chronic (psoric)
disease he is called on to cure, the duty of a careful
apprehension of its ascertainable symptoms and character-
istics is as indispensable for the homceopathic physician
as it was before that discovery, as no real cure of this or
of other diseases can take place without a strict particular
treatment (individualization) of each case of disease—
only that in this investigation some difference is to be
made when the affection is an acute and rapidly developed
disease, and when it is a chronic one; seeing that, in acute
disease, the chief symptoms strike us and become evident
to the senses more quickly, and hence much less time is
requisite for tracing the picture of the disease and much
fewer questions are required to be asked,®° as almost
everything is self-evident, than in a chronic disease which
has been gradually progressing for several years, in which
the symptoms are much more difficult to be ascertained.


§ 83.


This individualizing examination of a case of disease,
for which I shall only give in this place general direc-
tions, of which the practitioner will bear in mind only
what is applicable for each individual case, demands of
the physician nothing but freedom from prejudice and


Fence the following directions for investigating the symp-
toms are only partially applicable for acute diseases.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 173


sound senses, attention in observing and fidelity in trac-
ing the picture of the disease.


8 84.


The patient details the history of his sufferings; those
about him tell what they heard him complain of, how
he has behaved and what they have noticed in him;
the physician sees, hears, and remarks by his other
senses what there is of an altered or unusual character
about him. He writes down accurately all that the
patient and his friends have told him in the very expres-
sions used by them. Keeping silence himself, he allows
them to say all they have to say, and refrains from inter-
rupting them ** unless they wander off to other matters.
The physician advises them at the beginning of the exam-
ination to speak slowly, in order that he may take down
in writing the important parts of what the speakers say.


8 85.


He begins a fresh line with every new circumstance
mentioned by the patient or his friends, so that the symp-
toms shall be all ranged separately one below the other.
He can thus add to any one, that may at first have been
related in too vague a manner, but subsequently more
explicitly explained.


1 Every interruption breaks the train of thought of the nar-
rators, and all they would have said at first does not again occur
to them in precisely the same manner after that.


174 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 86.


When the narrators have finished what they would say
of their own accord, the physician then reverts to each
particular symptom and elicits more precise information
respecting it in the following manner; he reads over the
symptoms as they were related to him one by one, and
about each of them he inquires for further particulars:
e. g., at what period did this symptom occur? Was it
previous to taking the medicine he had hitherto been
using? Whilst taking the medicine? Or only some
days after leaving off the medicine? What kind of
pain, what sensation exactly, was it that occurred on this
spot? Where was the precise spot? Did the pain occur
in fits and by itself, at various times? Or was it con-
tinued, without intermission? How long did it last?
At what time of the day or night, and in what position
of the body was it worst, or ceased entirely? What was
the exact nature of this or that event or circumstance


§ 87.


And thus the physician obtains more precise informa-
tion respecting each particular detail, but without ever
framing his questions so as to suggest the answer to the
patient,®? so that he shall only have to answer yes or


® For instance, the physician should not ask, Was not this or
that circumstance present? He should never be guilty of mak-
ing such suggestions, which tend to seduce the patient into giving
a false answer and a false account of his symptoms.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE TS


no; else he will be misled to answer in the affirmative
or negative something untrue, half true, or not strictly
correct, either from indolence or in order to please his
interrogator, from which a false picture of the disease
and an unsuitable mode of treatment must result.


§ 88.


If in these voluntary details nothing has been men-
tioned respecting several facts or functions of the body
or his mental state, the physician asks what more can he
told in regard to these parts and these functions, or the
state of his disposition or mind ;** but in doing this he
only makes use of general expressions, in order that his
informants may be obliged to enter into special details
concerning them,


S 8g.


When the patient (for it is on him we have chiefly to
rely for a description of his sensations, except in the case
of feigned diseases) has by these details, given of his own


* Tor example, what is the character of his stools? How does
he pass his water? How is it with his day and night sleep?
What is the state of his disposition, his humor, his memory?
How about the thirst? What sort of taste has he in his mouth?
What kinds of food and drink are most relished? What are
most repugnant to him? Has each its full natural taste, or
some other unusual taste? How does he feel after eating or
drinking? Has he anything to tell about the head, the limbs,
or the abdomen?


176 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


accord and in answer to inquiries, furnished the requisite
information and traced a tolerably perfect picture of the
disease, the physician is at liberty and obliged (if he
feels he has not yet gained all the informaton he needs):
to ask more precise, more special questions.**


For example, how often are his bowels moved? What 1s
the exact character of the stools? Did the whitish evacuation
consist of mucus or faeces? Had he or had he not pains during
the evacuation? What was their exact character, and where
were they seated? What did the patient vomit? Is the bad
taste in the mouth putrid, or bitter, or sour, or what? before or
after eating, or during the repast? At what period of the day
was it worst? What is the taste of what is eructated? Does
the urine only become turbid on standing, or is it turbid when
first discharged? What is its color when first emitted? Of
what color is the sediment? How does he behave during sleep?
Does he whine, moan, talk or cry out in his sleep? Does he
start during sleep? Does he snore during inspiration, or during
expiration? Does he lie only on his back, or on which side?
Does he cover himself well up, or can he not bear the clothes
on him? Does he easily awake, or does he sleep too soundly?
How does he feel immediately after waking from sleep? How
often does this or that symptom occur? what is the cause that
produces it each time it occurs? does it come on whilst sitting,
lying, standing, or when in motion? only when fasting, or in
the morning, or only in the evening, or only after a meal, or
when does it usually appear? When did the rigor come on?
was it merely a chilly sensation, or was he actually cold at the
same time? if so, in what parts? or while feeling chilly, was he
actually warm to the touch? was it merely a sensation of cold,
without shivering? was he hot without redness of the face?
what parts of him were hot to the touch? or did he complain
of heat without being hot to the touch? How long did the
chilliness last? how long the hot stage? When did the thirst


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 7,


§ 90.


When the physician has finished writing down these
particulars, he then makes a note of what he himself
observes in the patient,** and ascertains how much of that
was peculiar to the patient in his healthy state.


come on—during the cold stage? during the heat? or previous
to it? or subsequently to it? How great was the thirst, and
what was the beverage desired? When did the sweat come on—
at the beginning or the end of the heat? or how many hours
after the heat? when asleep or when awake? How great was
the sweat? was it warm or cold? on what parts? how did it smell?
What does he complain of before or during the cold stage?
what during the hot stage? what after it? what during or after
the sweating stage?

In women, note the character of menstruation and other dis-
charges, etc.


* For example, how the patient behaved during the visit—
whether he was morose, quarrelsome, hasty, lachrymose, anxious,
despairing or sad, or hopeful, calm, etc. Whether he was in a
drowsy state or in any way dull of comprehension; whether he
spoke hoarsely, or in a low tone, or incoherently, or how other-
wise did he talk? what was the color of his face and eyes, and
of his skin generally? what degree of liveliness and power was
there in his expression and eyes? what was the state of his
tongue, his breathing, the smell from his mouth, and his hear-
ing? were his pupils dilated or contracted? how rapidiy and to
what extent did they alter in the dark and in the light? what
was the character of the pulse? what the condition of the abdo-
men? how moist or hot, how cold or dry to the touch, was the
skin of this or that part, or generally? whether he lay with head
thrown back, with mouth half or wholly open, with the arms
placed above the head, on his back, or in what other position?
what effort did he make to raise himself? and anything else in
him that may strike the physician as being remarkable.


178 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S Ol.


The symptoms and feelings of the patient during a
previous course of medicine do not furnish the pure
picture of the disease; but, on the other hand, those
symptoms and ailments which he suffered from before the
use of the medicines, or after they had been discontinued
for several days, give the true fundamental idea of the
original form of the disease, and these especially the
physician must take note of. When the disease is of a
chronic character, and the patient has been taking medi-
cine up to the time he is seen, the physician may with
advantage leave him some days quite without medicine,
or in the meantime administer something of an unimedic-
inal nature and defer to a subsequent period the more
precise scrutiny of the morbid symptoms, in order to be
able to grasp in their purity the permanent uncontaminated
symptoms of the old affection and to form a faithful
picture of the disease.


§ 92.


But if it be a disease of a rapid course, and if its
serious character admit of no delay, the physician must
content himself with observing the morbid condition,
altered though it may be by medicines, if he cannot
ascertain what symptoms were present before the employ-
ment of the medicines,—in order that he may at least
form a just apprehension of the complete picture of the
disease in its actual condition, that is to say, of the con-
joint malady formed by the medicinal and _ original
diseases, which from the use of inappropriate drugs is


ORGANON OF MEDICINE E79


generally more serious and dangerous than was the orig-
inal disease, and hence demands prompt and efficient aid;
and by thus tracing out the complete picture of the disease
he will be enabled to combat it with a suitable homco-
pathic remedy, so that the patient shall not fall a sacrifice
to the injurious drugs he has swallowed.


§ 93.


If the disease has been brought on a short time, or, in
the case of a chronic affection, a considerable time pre-
viously, by some obvious cause, then the patient—or his
friends when questioned privately—will mention it either
spontaneously or when carefully interrogated.*®


§ 94.


While inquiring into the state of chronic diseases, the
particular circumstances of the patient with regard to his


*° Any causes of a disgraceful character, which the patient or
his friends do not like to confess, at least not voluntarily, the
physician must endeavor to elicit by skilfully framing his ques-
tions, or by private information. To these belong poisoning or
attempted suicide, onanism, indulgence in ordinary or unnatural
debauchery, excesses in wine, cordials, punch and other ardent
beverages, or coffee,—over-indulgence in eating generally, or in
some particular food of a hurtful character,—infection with
venereal disease or itch, unfortunate love, jealousy, domestic in-
felicity, worry, grief on account of some family misfortune, ill-
usage, balked revenge, injured pride, embarrassment of a pe-
cuniary nature, superstitious fear,—hunger,—or an imperfection
in the private parts, a rupture, a prolapsus, and so forth.


180 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


ordinary occupations, his usual mode of living and diet,
his domestic situation, and so forth, must be well con-
sidered and scrutinized, to ascertain what there is in them
that may tend to produce or to maintain disease, in order
that by their removal the recovery may be promoted.‘


§ 95.


In chronic diseases the investigation of the signs of
disease above mentioned, and of all others, must be pur-
sued as carefully and circumstantially as possible, and
the most minute peculiarities must be attended to, partly
because in these diseases they are the most characteristic
and least resemble those of acute diseases, and if a cure
is to be affected they cannot be too accurately noted;
partly because the patients become so used to their long
sufferings that they pay little or no heed to the lesser
accessory symptoms, which are often very pregnant with


In chronic diseases of females it is specially necessary to pay
attention to pregnancy, sterility, sexual desire, accouchements,
miscarriages, suckling, and the state of the menstrual discharge.
With respect to the last-named more particularly, we should not
neglect to ascertain if it recurs at too short intervals, or is de-
layed beyond the proper time, how many days it lasts, whether
its flow is continuous or interrupted, what is its general quan-
tity, how dark is its color, whether there is leucorrhcea before
its appearance or after its termination, but especially by what
bodily or mental ailments, what sensations and pains, it is pre-
ceded, accompanied or followed; if here is leucorrhcea, what is
its nature, what sensations attend its flow, in what quantity it is,
and what are the conditions and occasions under which it occurs?


ORGANON OF MEDICINE ISI


meaning (characteristic )—often very useful in determin-
ing the choice of the remedy—and regard them almost as
a necessary part of their condition, almost as health, the
real feeling of which they have well-nigh forgotten in their
sometimes fifteen or twenty years of suffering, and they
can scarcely bring themselves to believe that these acces-
sory symptoms, these greater or lesser deviations from the
healthy state, can have any connection with their principal


malady.


§ 90.


Besides this, patients themselves differ so much in
their dispositions, that some, especially the so-called
hypochondriacs and other persons of great sensitiveness
and impatient of suffering, portray their symptoms in too
vivid colors and, in order to induce the physician to give


sions.”


* A pure fabrication of symptoms and sufferings will never be
met with in hypochondriacs, even in the most impatient of them—
a comparison of the sufferings they complain of at various
times when the physician gives them nothing at all, or some-
thing quite unmedicinal, proves this plainly;—but we must de-
strong character of their expressions to their excessive sensi-
bility, in which case this very exaggeration of their expressions
when talking of their ailments becomes of itself an important
symptom in the list of features of which the portrait of the dis-
ease is composed. The case is different with insane persons and


rascally feigners of disease.


182 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 97.


Other individuals of an opposite character, however,
partly from indolence, partly from false modesty, partly
from a kind of mildness of disposition or weakness of
mind, refrain from mentioning a number of their symp-
them to be of no consequence.


§ 98.


Now, as certainly as we should listen particularly to
the patient’s description of his sufferings and sensations,
and attach credence especially to his own expressions
wherewith he endeavors to make us understand his ail-
ments—because in the mouths of his friends and attend-
ants they are usually altered and erroneously stated—
so certainly, on the other hand, in all diseases, but espe-
cially in the chronic ones, the investigation of the true,
complete picture and its peculiarities demands especial
circumspection, tact, knowledge of human nature, caution
in conducting the inquiry and patience in an eminent
degree. .


§ 99.


On the whole, the investigation of acute diseases, or
of such as have existed but a short time, is much the
easiest for the physician, because all the phenomena and
deviations from the health that has been but recently
lost are still fresh in the memory of the patient and his
friends, still continue to be novel and striking. The


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 183


physician certainly requires to know everything in such
cases also; but he has much less to inquire into; they
are for the most part spontaneously detailed to him.


S 100.


In investigating the totality of the symptoms of. epi-
demic and sporadic diseases it is quite immaterial
whether or not something similar has ever appeared in the
world before under the same or any other name. The
novelty or peculiarity of a disease of that kind makes no
difference either in the mode of examining or of treating
it, as the physician must any way regard the pure
picture of every prevailing disease as if it were something’
new and unknown, and investigate it thoroughly for
itself, if he desire to practice medicine in a real and
radical manner, never substituting conjecture for actual
observation, never taking for granted that the case of
disease before him is already wholly or partially known,
but always carefully examining it in all its phases; and
this mode of procedure is all the more requisite in such
cases, as a careful examination, will show that every pre-
vailing disease is in many respects a phenomenon of a
unique character, differing vastly from all previous epi-
demics, to which certain names have been falsely ap-
plied—with the exception of those epidemics resulting
from a contagious principle that always remains the same,
such as small pox, measles, etc.


SOE


It may easily happen that in the first case of an epi-
demic disease that presents itself to the physician’s notice


184 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


he does not at once obtain a knowledge of its complete pic-
ture, as it is only by a close observation of several cases
of every such collective disease that he can become con-
versant with the totality of its signs and symptoms. The
carefully observing physician can, however, from the
examination of even the first and second patients, often
arrive so nearly at a knowledge of the true state as to
have in his mind a characteristic portrait of it, and even
to succeed in finding a suitable, homceopathically adapted
remedy for it.


§ 102.


In the course of writing down the symptoms of
several cases of this kind the sketch of the disease pic-
ture becomes ever more and more complete, not more
spun out and verbose, but more significant (more char-
acteristic), and including more of the peculiarities of
this collective disease; on the one hand, the general
symptoms (¢. g., loss of appetite, sleeplessness, etc.) be-
come precisely defined as to their peculiarities ; and on the
other, the more marked and special symptoms which are
peculiar to but few diseases and of rarer occurrence, at
least in the same combination, become prominent and con-
stitute what is characteristic of this malady.®® All those af-


*° The physician who has already, in the first cases, been able
to choose a remedy approximating to the homeceopathic specific,
will, from the subsequent cases, be enabled either to verify the
suitablesness of the medicine chosen, or to discover a more ap-
propriate, the most appropriate homceopathic remedy.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 185


fected with the disease prevailing at a given time have
certainly contracted it from one and the same source and
hence are suffering from the same disease; but the whole
extent of stich an epidemic disease and the totality of its
symptoms (the knowledge whereof, which is essential
for enabling us to choose the most suitable homceopathic
remedy for this array of symptoms, is obtained by a
complete survey of the morbid picture) cannot be learned
from one single patient, but is only to be perfectly de-
duced (abstracted) and ascertained from the sufferings
of several patients of different constitutions.


SOR.


In the same manner as has here been taught relative
to the epidemic diseases, which are generally of an acute
character, the miasmatic chronic maladies, which, as I
have shown, always remain the same in their essential
nature, especially the psora, must be investigated, as
to the whole sphere of their symptoms, in a much more
minute manner than has ever been done before, for in
them also one patient only exhibits a portion of their
symptoms, a second, a third, and so on, present some
other symptoms, which also are but a (dissevered, as it
were) portion of the totality of the symptoms which con-
stitute the entire extent of this malady, so that the whole
array of the symptoms belonging to such a miasmatic,
chronic disease, and especially to the psora, can only be
ascertained from the observation of very many single
patients affected with such a chronic disease, and with-
out a complete survey and collective picture of these


186 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


symptoms the medicines capable of curing the whole
malady homceopathically (to wit, the antipsorics) cannot
be discovered ; and these medicines are, at the same time,
the true remedies of the several patients suffering from
such chronic affections.


S 104i,


When the totality of the symptoms that specially mark
and distinguish the case of disease or, in other words,
when the picture of the disease, whatever be its kind, is
once accurately sketched,*° the most difficult part of the


® The old school physician gave himself very little trouble in
this matter in his mode of treatment. He would not listen to
any minute detail of all the circumstances of his case by the
patient; indeed, he frequently cut him short in his relation of his
sufferings, in order that he might not be delayed in the rapid
writing of his prescription, composed of a variety of ingredi-
ents unknown to him in their true effects. No allopathic phy-
sician, as has been said, sought to learn all the minute circum-
stances of the patient’s case, and still less did he make a note in
writing of them. On seeing the patient again several days after-
wards, he recollected nothing concerning the few details he had
heard at the first visit (having in the meantime seen so many
other patients laboring under different affections); he had al-
lowed everything to go in at one ear and out at the other. At
subsequent visits he only asked a few general questions, went
through the ceremony of feeling the pulse at the wrist, looked at
the tongue, and at the same moment wrote another prescription,
on equally irrational principles, or ordered the first one to be
continued (in considerable quantities several times a day), and,
with a graceful bow, he hurried off to the fiftieth or sixtieth
patient he had to visit, in this thoughtless way, in the course of


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 169


task is accomplished. The physician has then the
picture of the disease, especially if it be a chronic one,
always before him to guide him in his treatment ; he can in-
vestigate it in all its parts and can pick out the character-
istic symptoms, in order to oppose to these, that is to say,
to the whole malady itself, a very similar artificial mor-
bific force, in the shape of a homeeopathically chosen
medicinal substance, selected from the lists of symptoms
of all the medicines whose pure effects have been ascer-
tained. And when, during the treatment, he wishes to
ascertain what has been the effect of the medicine, and
what change has taken place in the patient’s state, at
this fresh examination of the patient he only needs to
strike out of the list of the symptoms noted down at the
first visit those that have become ameliorated, to mark
what still remain, and add any new symptoms that may
have supervened.


S 105.


The second poimt of the business of a true physician
relates to acquiring a knowledge of the instruments
intended for the cure of the natural diseases, investigating


that forenoon. The profession which of all others requires ac-
tually the most reflection, a conscientious, careful examination of
the state of each individual patient and a special treatment
founded thereon, was conducted in this manner by persons who
called themselves physicians, rational practitioners. The result,
as might naturally be expected, was almost invariably bad; and
yet patients had to go to them for advice, partly because there
were none better to be had, partly for fashion’s sake.


188 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


the pathogenetic power of the medicines, in order, when
called on to cure, to be able to select from among them
one, from the list of whose symptoms an artificial disease
may be constructed, as similar as possible to the totality
of the principal symptoms of the natural disease sought
tO We cubece


§ 106.


The whole pathogenetic effects of the several medicines
must be known; that is to say, all the morbid symptoms
and alterations in the health that each of them is spe-
cially capable of developing in the healthy individual must
first have been observed as far as possible before we can
hope to be able to find among them, and to select, suit-
able homceopathic remedies for most of the natural dis-
eases.


SIO


If, in order to ascertain this, medicines be given to
sick persons, only, even though they be administered
singly and alone, then little or nothing precise is seen of
their true effects, as those peculiar alterations of the
health to be expected from the medicine are mixed up
‘with the symptoms of the disease and can seldom be
distinctly observed.


8 108.


There is, therefore, no other possible way in which the
peculiar effects of medicines on the health of individuals


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 1&9


can be accurately ascertained—there is no sure, no more
natural way of accomplishing this object, than to admin-
ister the several medicines experimentally, in moderate
doses, to healthy persons, in order to ascertain what
changes, symptoms and signs of their influence each
individually produces on the health of the body and of
the mind; that is to say, what disease elements they are
able and tend to produce,®! since, as has been demon-
strated (§§ 24-27), all the curative power of medicines
lies in this power they possess of changing the state of
man’s health, and is revealed by observation of the latter.


§ 109.


I was the first that opened up this path, which I have
pursued with a perseverance that could only arise and be
kept up by a perfect conviction of the great truth, fraught


* Not one single physician, as far as I know, during the previ-
ous two thousand five hundred years, thought of this so natural.
so absolutely necessary and only genuine mode of testing medi-
cines for their pure and peculiar effects in deranging the health
of man, in order to learn what morbid state each medicine is
capable of curing, except the great and immortal Albrecht von
Haller. He alone, besides myself, saw the necessity of this (wide
the Preface to the Pharmacopwia Helvet., Basil, 1771, fol., p. 12):
Nempe primum in corpore sano medela tentanda est, sine pere-
grina ulla miscela; odoreque et sapore ejus exploratis, exigua
illius dosis ingerenda et ad omnes, quz inde contingunt, affec-
tiones, quis pulsus, qui calor, que respiratio, quenam excretiones,
attendendum. Inde ad ductum phenomenorum, in sano obvior-
um, transeas ad experimenta in corpore egroto,” etc. But no one,
not a single physician, attended to or followed up this invalua-
ble hint.


Igo ORGANON OF MEDICINE


with such blessings to humanity, that it is only by the
homeceopathic employment of medicines * that the certain
cure of human maladies is possible.*?


S) IIe)


I saw, moreover, that the morbid lesions which previous
authors had observed to result from medicinal substances


“It is impossible that there can be another true, best method
of curing dynamic diseases (1. e., all diseases not strictly surgi-
cal) besides homceopathy, just as it is impossible to draw more
than one straight line betwixt two given points. He who imag-
ines that there are other modes of curing diseases besides it
could not have appreciated homceopathy fundamentally nor prac-
tised it with sufficient care, nor could he ever have seen or read
cases of properly performed homeeopathic cures; nor, on the
other hand, could he have’ discerned the baselessness of all allo-
pathic modes of treating diseases and their bad or even dreadful
effects, if, with such lax indifference, he places the only true
healing art on an equality with those hurtful methods of treat-
ment, or alleges the latter to be auxiliaries to homceopathy which
it could not do without! My true, conscientious followers, the
pure homeceopathists, with their successful, almost never-failing
treatment, might teach these persons better.


* The first fruits of these labors, as perfect as they could be
at that time, I recorded in the Fragmenta de viribus medicamen-
torumu positivis, sive in sano corpore humano observatis, pts. 1,
il, Lipsize, 8) 1e05, ap. J: AC Barth the more mathtesth is tere
Reine Argneinuttellehre, I Th., dritte Ausg.; II Th., dritte Ausg.,
1833; III Th., zweite Ausg., 1825; IV Th., zw. Ausg., 1825; V
Th., zw. Ausg., 1826; VI Th., zw. Ausg., 1827 [English transla-
tion, Materia Medica Pura, vols. i and ii]; and in the second,
third, and fourth parts of Die chronischen Krankheiten, 1828,
1830, Dresden bei Arnold [2nd edit., with a fifth part, Dusseldorf
bei Schaub, 1835, 1830].


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 191


when taken into the stomach of healthy persons, either
in large doses given by mistake or in order to pro-
duce death in themselves or others,, or under other
circumstances, accorded very much with my own observa-
tions when experimenting with the same substances on
myself and other healthy individuals. These authors
give details of what occurred as histories of poisoning’
and as proofs of the pernicious effects of these powerful
substances, chiefly in order to warn others from their
use; partly also for the sake of exalting their own skill,
when, under the use of the remedies they employed
to combat these dangerous accidents, health gradually re-
turned; but partly also, when the persons so affected died
under their treatment, in order to seek their own justifi-
cation in the dangerous character of these substances,
which they then termed poisons. None of these ob-
servers ever dreamed that the symptoms they recorded
merely as proofs of the noxious and poisonous character
of these substances were sure revelations of the power of
these drugs to extinguish curatively similar symptoms
occurring in natural diseases, that these their patho-
genetic phenomena were intimations of their homceopathic
curative action, and that the only possible way to ascer-
tain their medicinal powers is to observe those changes
of health medicines are capable of producing in the
healthy organism; for the pure, peculiar powers of medi-
cines available for the cure of disease are to be learned
neither by any ingenious a@ priori speculations, nor by
the smell, taste or appearance of the drugs, nor by their
chemical analysis, nor yet by the employment of several
of them at one time in a mixture (prescription) in dis-
eases; it was never suspected that these histories of


192 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


medicinal diseases would one day furnish the first rudi-
ments of the true, pure materia medica, which from the
earliest times until now has consisted solely of false con-
jectures and fictions of the imagination—that is to say,
did met exist atall2=


Se


The agreement of my observations on the pure effects
of medicines with these older ones—although they were
recorded without reference to any therapeutic object—and
the very concordance of these accounts with others of the
same kind by different authors must easily convince us
that medicinal substances act in the morbid changes they
produce in the healthy human body according to fixed,
eternal laws of nature, and by virtue of these are enabled
to produce certain, reliable disease symptoms each accord-
img to its own pecuhar character.


S12.


In those older prescriptions of the often dangerous
effects of medicines ingested in excessively large doses
we notice certain states that were produced, not at the
commencement, but towards the termination of these sad
events, and which were of an exactly opposite nature to


* See what I have said on this subject in the “Examination of
the Sources of the Ordinary Materia Medica,” prefixed to the
third part of my Reine Arzneimittellehre [translated in the Ma-
teria Medica Pura, vol. ii].


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 193


those that first appeared. These symptoms, the very
reverse of the primary action (§ 63) or proper action of
the medicines on the vital force, are the reaction of the
vital force of the organism, its secondary action (§§ 62-
67), of which, however, there is seldom or hardly ever
the ieast trace from experiments with moderate doses on
healthy bodies, and from small doses none whatever.
In the homeceopathic curative operation the living organ-
ism reacts from these only so much as is requisite to
raise the health again to the normal healthy state (§ 67).


Se


The only exceptions to this are the narcotic medicines.
As they, in their primary action, take away sometimes
the sensibility and sensation, sometimes the irritability,
it frequently happens that in their secondary action, even
from moderate experimental doses on healthy bodies, an
increased sensibility (and a greater irritability) is ob-
servable.


SrA,


With the exception of these narcotic substances, in ex-
periments with moderate doses of medicine on healthy
bodies, we observe only their primary action, 7. e., those
symptoms wherewith the medicine deranges the health ot
the human being and develops in him a morbid state of


longer or shorter duration.


194 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


Seis:


Among these symptoms, there occur in the case of
some medicines not a few which are partially, or under
certain conditions, directly opposite to other symptoms
that have previously or subsequently appeared, but
which are not therefore to be regarded as actual second-
ary action or the mere reaction of the vital force, but
which only represent the alternating state of the various
paroxysms of the primary action; they are termed alter-
nating actions.


§ 116,


Some symptoms are produced by the medicines more
frequently—that is to say, in many individuals, others


more rarely or in few persons, some only in very few
healthy bodies.


Sey


To the latter category belong the so-called idiosyn-
crasies, by which are meant peculiar corporeal constitu-
tions which, although otherwise healthy, possess a dis-
position to be brought into a more or less morbid state
by certain things which seem to produce no impression
and no change in many other individuals.’ But this


* Some few persons are apt to faint from the smell of roses
and to fall into many other morbid, and sometimes dangerous
states from partaking of mussels, crabs or the roe of the bar-
bel, from touching the leaves of some kinds of sumach, etc.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 195


inability to make an impression on every one is only
apparent. For as two things are required for the pro-
duction of these as well as all other morbid alterations in
the health of man—to wit, the inherent power of the
influencing substance, and the capability of the vital force
that animates the organism to be influenced by it—the
obvious derangements of health in the so-called idio-
syncrasies cannot be laid to the account of these pecu-
these things that produce them, in which must lie the
power of making the same impressions on all human
bodies, yet in such a manner that but a small number of
healthy constitutions have a tendency to allow themselves
to be brought into such an obvious morbid condition by
them. That these agents do actually make this impres-
sion on every healthy body is shown by this, that when
employed as remedies they render effectual homceopathic
service °° to all sick persons for morbid symptoms simi-
lar to those they seem to be only capable of producing
in so-called idiosyncratic individuals.


Sahin


Every medicine exhibits peculiar actions on the
human frame, which are not produced in exactly the


* Thus the Princess Maria Porphyroghnita restored her
brother, the Emperor Alexius, who suffered from faintings, by
sprinkling him with rose water in the presence of his aunt Eu-
doxia (Hist. byg. Alexias, lib. xv, p. 503, ed. Posser) ; and Hors-
tius (Oper., ii, p. 59) saw great benefit from rose vinegar in cases


of syncope.


196 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


same manner by any other medicinal substance of a
different kind.**


§ 110.


As certainly as every species of plant differs in its
external form, mode of life and growth, in its taste and
smell from every other species and genus of plant, as cer-
tainly as every mineral and salt differs from all others, in
its external as well as its internal physical and chemical
properties (which alone should have sufficed to prevent
any confounding of one with another), so certainly do
they all differ and diverge among themselves in their
pathogenetic—consequently also in their therapeutic—
effects.°° Each of these substances produces alterations


This fact was also perceived by the estimable A. v. Haller,
who says (Preface to his Hist. stirp. helv.): “Latet immensa
virium diversitas in iis ipsis plantis, quarum facies externas du-
dum novimus, animas quasi et quodcunque celestius habent, non-
dum perspeximus.”


* Anyone who has a thorough knowledge of, and can appreci-
ate the remarkable difference of, effects on the health of man of
every single substance from those of every other, will readily
perceive that among them there can be, in a medical point of view,
no eqttivalent remedies whatever, no surrogates. Only those who
do not know the pure, positive effects of the different medicines
can be so foolish as to try to persuade us that one can serve in
the stead of the other, and can in the same disease prove just as
serviceable as the other. Thus do ignorant children confound
the most essentially different things, because they scarcely know
their external appearances, far less their real value, their true
importance and their very dissimilar inherent properties.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 197


in the health of human beings in a peculiar, different, yet
determinate manner, so as to preclude the possibility of
confounding one with another.*®


” Tf this be pure truth, as it undoubtedly is, then no physician
who would not be regarded as devoid of reason, and who wouid
not act contrary to the dictates of his conscience, the sole arbiter
of real worth, can employ in the treatment of diseases any medic-
inal substance but one with whose real significance he is thor-
oughly and perfectly conversant, 7. e., whose positive action on
the health of healthy individuals he has so accurately tested that
he knows for certain that it is capable of producing a very simi-
lar morbid state, more similar than any other medicine with
which he is perfectly acquainted, to that presented by the case of
disease he intends to cure by means of it; for, as has been shown
above, neither man, nor mighty Nature herself, can effect a per-
fect, rapid and permanent cure otherwise than with a homco-
pathic remedy. Henceforth no true physician can abstain from
making such experiment, in order to obtain this most necessary
and only knowledge of the medicines that are essential to cure,
this knowledge which has hitherto been neglected by the physi-
cians in all ages. In all former ages—posterity will scarcely be-
lieve it—-physicians have hitherto contented themselves with
blindly prescribing for diseases medicines whose value was un-
known, and which had never been tested relative to their highly
important, very various, pure dynamic action on the health of
man; and, moreover, they mingled several of these unknown
medicines that differed so vastly among each other in one
formula, and left it to chance to determine what effect should
thereby be produced on the patient. This is just as if a madman
should force his way into the workshop of an artisan, seize upon
handfuls of very different tools, with the uses of all of which
he is quite unacquainted, in order, as he imagines, to work at
the objects of art he sees around him. I need hardly remark
that these would be destroyed, I may say utterly ruined, by his
senseless operations.


198 ORGANON OF MEDICINE
& 120)


Therefore medicines, on which depend man’s life and
death, disease and health, must be thoroughly and most
carefully distinguished from one another, and for this
purpose tested by careful, pure experiments on the
healthy body for the purpose of ascertaining their
powers and real effects, in order to obtain an accurate
knowledge of them, and to enable us to avoid any mis-
take in their employment in diseases, for it is only by
correct selection of them that the greatest of all earthly
blessings, the health of the body and of the mind, can be
rapidly and permanently restored.


See


In proving medicines to ascertain their effects on the
healthy body, it must be borne in mind that the strong,
heroic substances, as they are termed, are liable even in
small doses to produce changes in the health even of
robust persons. Those of milder power must be given
for these experiments in more considerable quantities ;
in order to observe the action of the very weakest, how-
ever, the subjects of experiment should be persons free
from disease, and who are delicate, irritable and sensi-
tive.


Se


In these experiments—on which depends the exacti-
tude of the whole medical art, and the weal of all future
generations of mankind—no other medicines should be


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 199


employed except stich as are perfectly well known, and
of whose purity, genuineness and energy we are thor-
oughly assured.


S Tee


Each of these medicines must be taken in a perfectly
simple, unadulterated form; the indigenous plants in
the form of freshly expressed juice, mixed with a little
alcohol to prevent it spoiling ; exotic vegetable substances,
however, in the form of powder, or tincture prepared
with alcohol when they were in the fresh state, and after-
wards mingled with a certain proportion of water; salts
and gums, however, should be dissolved in water just
before being taken. If the plant can only be procured
in its dry state, and if its powers are naturally weak, in
that case there may be used for the experiment an infu-
sion of it, made by cutting the herb into small pieces and
pouring boiling water on it, so as to extract its medicinal
parts; immediately after its preparation it must be swal-
lowed whilst still warm, as all expressed vegetable juices
and all aqueous infusions of herbs, without the addition
of spirit, pass rapidly into fermentation and decomposi-
tion, whereby all their medicinal properties are lost.


See


For these experiments every medicinal substance
must be employed quite alone and perfectly pure, with-
out the admixture of any foreign substance, and without


200 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


taking anything else of a medicinal nature the same day,
nor yet on the subsequent days, nor during all the time
we wish to observe the effects of the medicine.


S 2s,


During all the time the experiment lasts the diet
must be strictly regulated; it should be as much as
possible destitute of spices, of a purely nutritious and
simple character, green vegetables,‘ roots and all salads
and herb soups (which, even when most carefully pre-
pared, possess some disturbing medicinal qualities) should
be avoided. The drinks are to be those usually partaken
of, as little stimulating as possible.*%


te


Smo:


The person who is proving the medicine must be pre-
eminently trustworthy and conscientious and during
the whole time of the experiment avoid all over-exertion
of mind and body, all sorts of dissipation and disturbing
passions; he should have no urgent business to distract


* Young green peas, green French beans, boiled potatoes and


in- all cases carrots are allowable, as the least medicinal vegeta-
bles.


** The subject of experiment must either be not in the habit of
taking pure wine, brandy, coffee or tea, or he must have totally
abstained for a considerable time previously from the use of
these injurious beverages, some of which are stimulating, others
medicinal. .


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 201


his attention; he must devote himself to careful self-
observation and not be disturbed whilst so engaged; his
body must be in what is for him a good state of health,
and he must possess a sufficient amount of intelligence
rate terms.


Nate 7:


The medicines must be tested on both males and
females, in order also to reveal the alterations of the
health they produce in the sexual sphere.


§ 128.


The most recent observations have shown that medic-
inal substances, when taken in their crude state by the
experimenter for the purpose of testing their peculiar
effects, do not exhibit nearly the full amount of the
powers that lie hidden in them which they do when they
are taken for the same object in high dilutions poten-
tized by proper trituration and succussion, by which
simple operations the powers which in their crude state
lay hidden, and as it were dormant, are developed and
roused into activity to an incredible extent. In this
manner we now find it best to investigate the medicinal
powers even of such substances as are deemed weak, and
the plan we adopt is to give to the experimenter, on an
empty stomach, daily from four to six very small globules
of the thirtieth potency of such a substance, moistened


202 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


with a little water or dissolved in more or less water and
thoroughly mixed, and let him continue this for several
days.


S120.


li the elects Ghat vrestit irommesici asde@ses arcs nut
slight, a few more globules may be taken daily, until they
become more distinct and stronger and the alterations of
the health more conspicuous; for all persons are not
effected by a medicine in an equally great degree; on the
contrary, there is a vast variety in this respect, so that
sometimes an apparently weak individual may be scarcely
at all affected by moderate doses of a medicine known to
be of a powerful character, whilst he is strongly enough
acted on by others of a much weaker kind. And,
on the other hand, there are very robust persons who
experience very considerable morbid symptoms from an
apparently mild medicine and only slighter symptoms
from stronger drugs. Now, as this cannot be known
beforehand, it is advisable to commence in every instance
with a small dose of the drug and, where suitable and
requisite, to increase the dose more and more from day
to day.


§ 130.


If, at the very commencement, the first dose admin-
istered shall have been sufficiently strong, this advantage
is gained, that the experimenter learns the order of suc-
cession of the symptoms and can note down accurately
the period at which each occurs, which is very useful in


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 203


leading to a knowledge of the genius of the medicine, for
then the order of the primary actions, as also that of the
alternating actions, is observed in the most unambiguous
manner. A very moderate dose even, often suffices for
the experiment, provided only the experimenter is
endowed with sufficiently delicate sensitiveness, and is
very attentive to his sensations. The duration of the
action of a drug can only be ascertained by a compari-
son of several experiments.


Seal:


If, however, in order to ascertain anything at all, the
same medicine must be given to the same person to test
for several successive days in ever-increasing doses, we
thereby learn, no doubt, the various morbid states this
medicine is capable of producing in a general manner,
but we do not ascertain their order of succession; and the
subsequent dose often removes, curatively, some one or
other of the symptoms caused by the previous dose, or
develops in its stead an opposite state; such symptoms
should be inclosed in brackets, to mark their ambiguity,
until subsequent purer experiments show whether they
are the reaction of the organism and secondary action or
an alternating action of this medicine.


Se


But when the object is, without reference to the
sequential order of the phenomena and the duration of
the action of the drug, only to ascertain the symptoms


204 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


themselves, especially those of a weak medicinal substance,
in that case the preferable course to pursue is to give it
for several successive days, increasing the dose every
day. In this manner the action of an unknown medi-
cine, even of the mildest nature, will be revealed, espe-
cially if tested on sensitive persons.


§ 133.


On experiencing any particular sensation from the
medicine, it is useful, indeed necessary, in order to deter-
mine the exact character of the symptom, to assume
various positions while it lasts, and to observe whether,
by moving the part affected, by walking in the room or
the open air, by standing, sitting or lying the symptom
is increased, diminished or removed, and whether it
returns on again assuming the position in which it was
first observed,—whether it is altered by eating or drink-
ing, or by any other condition, or by speaking, coughing,
sneezing or any other action of the body, and at the same
time to note at what time of the day or night it usually
occurs in the most marked manner, whereby what is
peculiar to and characteristic of each symptom will
become apparent.


§ 134.

All external influences, and more especially medicines,
possess the property of producing in the health of the
living organism a particular kind of alteration peculiar
to themselves; but all the symptoms peculiar to a medi-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 205


cine do not appear in one person, nor all at once, nor in
the same experiment, but some occur in one person
chiefly at one time, others again during a second or third
trial; in another person some other symptoms appear,
but in such a manner that probably some of the phenom-
ena are observed in the fourth, eighth or tenth person
which had already appeared in the second, sixth or ninth
person, and so forth; moreover, they may not recur at
the same hour.


§ 135.


The whole of the elements of disease a medicine is
capable of producing can only be brought to anything
like completeness by numerous observations on suitable
persons of both sexes and of various constitutions. We
can only be assured that a medicine has been thoroughly
proved in regard to the morbid states it can produce—
that is to say, in regard to its pure powers of altering the
health of man—when subsequent experimenters can
notice little of a novel character from its action, and
almost always only the same symptoms as had been
already observed by others.


SEO


Although, as has been said, a medicine, on being’
proved on healthy subjects cannot develop in one person
all the alterations of health it is capable of causing, but
can only do this when given to many different individuals,
varying in their corporeal and mental constitution, yet


206 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


the tendency to excite all these symptoms in every
human being exists in it [§ 117], according to an eternal
and immutable law of nature, by virtue of which all its
effects, even those that are but rarely developed in the
healthy person, are brought into operation in the case of
every individual if administered to him when he is in a
morbid state presenting similar symptoms; it then, even
in the smallest dose, being homeeopathically selected,
silently produces in the patient an artificial state closely
resembling the natural disease, which rapidly and per-
manently [homeeopathically] frees and cures him of his
original malady.


§ 137.


The more moderate, within certain limits, the doses of
the medicine used for such experiments are—provided we
endeavor to facilitate the observation by the selection of
a person who is a lover of truth, temperate in all respects,
of delicate feelings and who can direct the most minute
attention to his sensations—so much the more distinctly
are the primary effects developed, and only these, which
are most worth knowing, occur without any admixture
of secondary effects or reactions of the vital force.
When, however, excessively large doses are used there
occur at the same time not only a number of secondary
effects among the symptoms, but the primary effects also
come on in such hurried confusion and with such impet-
uosity that nothing can be accurately observed; let alone
the danger attending them, which no one who has any


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 207


regard for his fellow-creatures, and who looks on the
meanest of mankind as his brother, will deem an indif-
ferent manner.


Seis


All the sufferings, accidents and changes of the health
of the experimenter during the action of a medicine (pro-
vided the above conditions [$$ 124-127] essential to a
good and pure experiment are complied with) are solely
derived from this medicine, and must be regarded and
registered as belonging peculiarly to this medicine, as
symptoms of this medicine, even though the experimenter
had observed, a considerable time previously, the spon-
taneous occurrence of similar phenomena in himself.
The reappearance of these during the trial of the medi-
cine only shows that this individual is by virtue of his
peculiar constitution, particularly disposed to have such
symptoms excited in him. In this case they are the
effect of the medicine; the symptoms do not arise spon-
taneously while the medicine that has been taken is
exercising an influence over the health of the whole
system, but are produced by the medicine.


§ 139.


When the physician does not make the trial of the
medicine on himself, but gives it to another person, the
latter must note down distinctly the sensations, suffer-
ings, accidents and changes of health he experiences at


208 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


the time of their occurrence, mentioning the time after
the ingestion of the drug when each symptom arose and,
if it lasts long, the period of its duration. The physician
looks over the report in the presence of the experimenter
immediately after the experiment is concluded, or if
the trial lasts several days he does this every day, in
order, whilst everything is still fresh in his memory, to
question him about the exact nature of every one of these
circumstances, and to write down the more precise
details so elicited, or to make such alterations as the
experimenter may suggest.’


§ 140.


If the person cannot write, the physician must be
informed by him every day of what has occurred to him,
and how it took place. What is noted down as authentic
information on this point, however, must be chiefly the
voluntary narration of the person who makes the ex-
periment, nothing conjectural and as little as possible
derived from answers to leading questions should be
admitted; everything must be ascertained with the same
caution as I have counselled above (§§ 84-99) for thie
investigation of the phenomena and for tracing the pic-
ture of natural diseases.


2 We who makes known to the medical world the results of
such experiments becomes thereby responsible for the trust-
worthiness of the person experimented on and his statements,
and justly so, as the weal of suffering humanity is here at stake.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 209


SUA


But the best provings of the pure effects of simple
medicines in altering the human health, and of the arti-
ficial diseases and symptoms they are capable of devel-
oping in the healthy individual, are those which the
healthy, unprejudiced and sensitive physician institutes
on himself with all the caution and care here enjoined.
He knows with the greatest certainty the things he has
experienced in his own person.’


7 Those trials made by the physician on himself have for him
other and inestimable advantages. In the first place, the great
truth that the medicinal virtue of all drugs, whereon depends
their curative power, lies in the changes of health he has him-
self undergone from the medicines he has proved, and the mor-
bid states he has himself experienced from them, becomes for
him an incontrovertible fact. Again, by such noteworthy observa-
tions on himself he will be brought to understand his own sen-
sations, his mode of thinking and his disposition (the foundation
of all true wisdom  ‘yv& ceavroy ), and he will be also trained
to be, what every physician ought to be, a good observer. All
our observations on others are not nearly so interesting as those
made on ourselves. The observer of others must always dread
lest the experimenter did not feel exactly what he said, or lest
pressions. He must always remain in doubt whether he has not
been deceived, at least to some extent. These obstacles to the
knowledge of the truth, which can never be thoroughly sur-
mounted in our investigations of the artificial morbid symptoms
that occur in others from the ingestion of medicines, cease en-
tirely when we make the trials on ourselves. He who makes
these trials on himself knows for certain what he has felt, and
each trial is a new inducement for him to investigate the powers
of other medicines. He thus becomes more and more practised


210 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 142.


But how some symptoms? of the simple medicine
employed for a curative purpose can be distinguished
amongst the symptoms of the original malady, even in
diseases, especially in those of a chronic character that
usually remain unaltered, is a subject appertaining to the
higher art of judgment, and must be left exclusively to
masters in observation.


§ 143.


If we have thus tested on the healthy individual a
considerable number of simple medicines and carefully


in the art of observing, of such importance to the physician, by
continuing to observe himself, the one on whom he can most
rely and who will never deceive him; and this he will do all the
more zealously as these experiments on himself promise to give
him a reliable knowledge of the true value and significance of
the instruments of cure that are still to a great degree unknown
to our art. Let it not be imagined that such slight indispositions
caused by taking medicines for the purpose of proving them can
be in the main injurious to the health. Experience shows on the
contrary, that the organism of the prover becomes, by these fre-
quent attacks on his health, all the more expert in repelling all
external influences inimical to his frame and all artificial and
natural morbific noxious agents, and becomes more hardened to
resist everything of an injurious character, by means of these
moderate experiments on his own person with medicines. His
health becomes more unalterable; he becomes more robust, as
all experience shows.

™ Symptoms which, during the whole course of the disease,
might have been observed only a long time previously, or never
before, consequently new ones, belonging to the medicine.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 211


and faithfully registered all the disease elements and
symptoms they are capable of developing as artificial
disease-producers, then only have we a true materia
medica—a collection of real, pure, reliable*® modes of
action of simple medicinal substances, a volume of the
book of nature, wherein is recorded a considerable array
of the peculiar changes of the health and symptoms
ascertained to belong to each of the powerful medicines,
as they were revealed to the attention of the observer, in
which the likeness of the (homceopathic) disease ele-
ments of many natural diseases to be hereafter cured by
them are present, which, in a word, contain artificial
morbid states, that furnish for the similar natural mor-
bid states the only true, homeceopathic, that is to say,
specific, therapeutic instruments for effecting their cer-
tain and permanent cure.


§ 144.


From such a materia medica everything that is con-
jectural all that is mere assertion or imaginary should
be strictly excluded; everything should be the pure
language of nature carefully and honestly interrogated.


* Latterly it has been the habit to entrust the proving of medi-
cines to unknown persons at a distance, who were paid for their
work, and the information so obtained was printed. But by so do-
ing, the work which is of all others the most important, which
is to form the basis of the only true healing art, and which
demands the greatest moral certainty and trustworthiness, seems
to me, I regret to say, to become doubtful and uncertain in its
results and to lose all value.


212 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 145.


Of a truth it is only by a very considerable store
of medicines accurately known in respect of these
their pure modes of action in altering the health of
man that we can be placed in a position to discover a
homceopathic remedy, a suitable artificial (curative)
morbific analogue for each of the infinitely numerous
morbid states in nature, for every malady in the world.?°
In the meantime, even now—thanks to the truthful
character of the symptoms, and to the abundance of
disease elements which every one of the powerful medic-
inal substances has already shown in its action on the
healthy body—but few diseases remain, for which a tol-
erably suitable homceopathic remedy may-not be met with
among those now proved as to their pure action,?°”
which without much disturbance, restores health in a
gentle, sure and permanent manner—infiitely more
surely and safely than can be effected by all the general


7° At first, about forty years ago, I was the only person who
made the proving of the pure powers of medicines the most im-
portant of his occupations. Since then I have been assisted in
this by some young men, who instituted experiments on them-
selves, and whose observations I have critically revised. Follow-
ing these some genuine work of this kind was done by a few
others. But what shall we not be able to effect in the way of
curing in the whole extent of the infinitely large domain of dis-
ease, when numbers of accurate and trustworthy observers shail
have rendered their services in enriching this, the only true ma-
teria medica, by careful experiments on themselves! The healing
art will then come near the mathematical sciences in certainty.


7 See the second note to § 100.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE ‘213


and special therapeutics of the old allopathic medical art
with its unknown composite remedies, which do but alter
and aggravate but cannot cure chronic diseases, and
rather retard than promote recovery from acute diseases
and frequently endanger life.


§ 146.


The third point of the business of a true physician
relates to the judicious employment of the artificial mor-
bific agents (medicines) that have been proved on healthy
individuals to ascertain their pure action, i order to
effect the homeopathic cure of natural diseases.


§ 147.


Whichever of these medicines that have been investi-
gated as to their power of altering man’s health we find
to contain in the symptoms observed from its use the
greatest similarity to the totality of the symptoms of a
given natural disease, this medicine will and must be
the most suitable, the most certain homceopathic remedy
for the disease; in it is found the specific remedy of this
case of disease.


§ 148,


The natural disease is never to be considered as a
noxious material situated somewhere within the interior
or exterior of man (§§ 11-13) but as one produced by an
inimical spirit-like (conceptual) agency which, like a kind


214 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


of infection (note to § 11) disturbs in its instinctive exist-
ence of the spirit-like (conceptual) principle of life within
the organism torturing it as an evil spirit and compelling
it to produce certain ailments and disorders in the regular’
course of its life. These are known as symptoms (disease).
If, now, the influence of this inimical agency that not
only caused but strives to continue this disorder, be taken
away as is done when the physician administers an arti-
ficial potency, capable of altering the life principle in
the most similar manner (a homeceopathic medicine)
which exceeds in energy even in the smallest dose the
similar natural disease ($§ 33, 279), then the influence of
the original noxious morbid agent on the life principle
is lost during the action of this stronger similar artificial
disease. Thence the evil no longer exists for the life
principle—it is destroyed. If, as has been said, the
selected homceopathic remedy is administered properly,
then the acute natural disease which is to be overruled
if recently developed, will disappear unperceptibly in a
few hours.

An older, more chronic disease will yield somewhat
later together with all traces of discomfort, by the use
of several doses of the same more highly potentized rem-
edy or after careful selection *°° of one or another more


** But this laborious, sometimes very laborious, search for and
selection of the homceopathic remedy most suitable in every re-
spect to each morbid state, is an operation which, notwithstand-
ing all the admirable books for facilitating it, still demands the
study of the original sources themselves, and at the same time
a great amount of circumspection and serious deliberation, which
have their best reward in the consciousness of having faithfully


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 215


similar homceopathic medicine. Health, recovery, fol-
low in imperceptible, often rapid transitions. The life


discharged our duty. How could his laborious, care-demanding
task, by which alone the best way of curing diseases is rendered
possible, please the gentlemen of the new mongrel sect, who
assume the honorable name of homceopathists, and even seem
to employ medicines in form and appearance homeceopathic, but
determined upon by them anyhow (quidquid in buccam venit),
and who, when the unsuitable remedy does not immediately give
relief, in place of laying the blame on their unpardonable ignor-
ance and laxity in performing the most important and serious of
of great imperfection (if the truth be told, its imperfection con-
sists in this, that the most suitable homceopathic remedy for
each morbid condition does not spontaneously fly into their
mouths like roasted pigeons, without any trouble on their own
part). They know, however, from frequent practice, how to
make up for the inefficiency of the scarcely half homceopathic
remedy by the employment of allopathic means, that come much
more handy to them, among which one or more dozens of leeches
applied to the affected part, or little harmless venesections to the
extent of eight ounces, and so forth, play an important part; and
should the patient, in spite of all this, recover, they extol their
venesections, leeches, etc., alleging that, had it not been for
these, the patient would not have been pulled through, and they
give us to understand, in no doubtful language, that these opera-
tions, derived without much exercise of genius from the per-
nicious routine of the old school, in reality contributed the best
share towards the cure. But if the patient die under the treat-
ment, as not unfrequently happens, they seek to console the
friends by saying that “they themselves were witnesses that
everything conceivable had been done for the lamented deceased.”
Who would do this frivolous and pernicious tribe the honor to
call them, after the name of the very laborious but salutary art,
homeopathic physicians? May the just recompense await them,
that, when taken ill, they may be treated in the same manner !


216 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


principle is freed again and capable of resuming the life
of the organism in health as before and strength returns.


§ 149.


Diseases of long standing (and especially such as are
of a complicated character) require for their cure a pro-
portionately longer time. More especially do the chronic
medicinal dyscrasia so often produced by allopathic
bungling along with the natural disease left uncured by
it, require a much longer time for their recovery ; often,
indeed, are they incurable, in consequence of the shame-
ful robbery of the patient’s strength and juices (venesec-
tions, purgatives, etc.), on account of long continued
use of large doses of violently acting remedies given on
the basis of empty, false theories for alleged usefulness
in cases of disease appearing similar, also in prescribing
unsuitable mineral baths, etc., the principal feat per-
formed by allopathy in its so-called methods of treat-
ment.


§ 150.


If a patient complain of one or more trivial symptoms,
that have been only observed a short time previously, the
physician should not regard this as a fully developed dis-
ease that requires serious medical aid. A slight altera-
tion in the diet and regimen will usually suffice to dispel
such an indisposition.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 217
§ 151.


But if the patient complain of a few violent sufferings,
the physician will usually find, on investigation, several
other symptoms besides, although of a slighter character,
which furnish a complete picture of the disease.


S 12.


The worse the acute disease is, of so much the more
numerous and striking symptoms is it generally composed,
but with so much the more certainty may a suitable
remedy for it be found, if there be a sufficient number of
medicines known, with respect to their positive action,
to choose from. Among the lists of symptoms of many
medicines it will not be difficult to find one from whose
separate disease elements an antitype of curative artificial
disease, very like the totality of the symptoms of the
natural disease, may be constructed, and such a medicine
is the desired remedy.


§ 153.


In this search for a homeeopathic specific remedy, that
is to say, in this comparison of the collective symptoms
of the natural disease with the list of symptoms of known
medicines, in order to find among these an artificial mor-
bific agent corresponding by similarity to the disease to
be cured, the more striking, singular, uncommon and


218 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


peculiar (characteristic) signs and symptoms?” of the
case of disease are chiefly and most solely to be kept in
view; for it is more particularly these that very similar
ones in the list of symptoms of the selected medicine
must correspond to, in order to constitute it the most
suitable for effecting the cure. The more general and
undefined symptoms: loss of appetite, headache, debility,
restless sleep, discomfort, and so forth, demand but lit-
tle attention when of that vague and indefinite character,
toms of such a general nature are observed in almost
every disease and from almost every drug.


§ 154.


If the antitype constructed from the list of symptoms
of the most suitable medicine contain those peculiar, un-
common, singular and distinguishing (characteristic)
symptoms, which are to be met with in the disease to be
cured in the greatest number and in the greatest simi-
larity, this medicine is the most appropriate homceopathic
specific remedy for this morbid state; the disease, if it
be not one of very long standing, will generally be
removed and extinguished by the first dose of it, without
any considerable disturbance.


1° Dr, von Bonninghausen, by the publication of the charac-
teristic symptoms of homceopathic medicines and his Repertory
has rendered a great service to Homeopathy as well as Dr. J. H.
G. Jahr in his hand-book of principal symptoms.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 219


§ 155.


I say without any considerable disturbance. For in
the employment of this most appropriate homceopathic
remedy it is only the symptoms of the medicine that
correspond to the symptoms of the disease that are called
into play, the former occupying the place of the latter
(weaker) in the organism, 7. e., in the sensations of the
life principle, and thereby annihilating them by over-
powering them; but the other symptoms of the homceo-
pathic medicine, which are often very numerous, being
in no way applicable to the case of disease in question,
are not called into play at all. The patient, growing
hourly better, feels almost nothing of them at all, because
the excessively minute dose requisite for homceopathic
use is much too weak to produce the other symptoms of
the medicine that are not homceopathic to the case, in
those parts of the body that are free from disease and
consequently can allow only the homceopathic symptoms
to act on the parts of the organism that are already most
irritated and excited by the similar symptoms of the
disease, in order that the sick life principle may react
only to a similar but stronger medicinal disease, whereby
the original malady is extinguished.


§ 150.


There is, however, almost no homceopathic medicine,
be it ever so suitably chosen, that, especially if it should:
be given in an insufficiently minute dose, will not pro-
duce, in very irritable and sensitive patients, at least one


220 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


trifling, unusual disturbance, some slight new symptom
whilst its action lasts; for it is next to impossible that
medicine and disease should cover one another symp-
tomatically as exactly as two triangles with equal sides
and equal angles. But this (in ordinary circumstances)
unimportant difference will be easily done away with by
the potential activity (energy) of the living organism,
and is not perceptible by patients not excessively deli-
cate; the restoration goes forward, notwithstanding, to
the goal of perfect recovery, if it be not prevented by
the action of heterogeneous medicinal influences upon
the patient, by errors of regimen or by excitement of the
passions.


§ 157.


But though it is certain that a homecopathically se-
lected remedy does, by reason of its appropriateness and
the minuteness of the dose, gently remove and annihilate
the acute disease analogous to it, without manifesting its
other unhomceopathic symptoms, that is to say, without
the production of new, serious disturbances, yet it usu-
ally, immediately after ingestion—for the first hour, or
for a few hours—causes a kind of slight aggravation
when the dose has not been sufficiently small and (where.
the dose has been somewhat too large, however, for a
considerable number of hours), which has so much re-
semblance to the original disease that it seems to the
patient to be an aggravation of his own disease. But it is,
in reality, nothing more than an extremely similar
medicinal disease, somewhat exceeding in strength the
original affection.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 221


© 156.


This slight homeopathic aggravation during the first
hours—a very good prognostic that the acute disease
will most probably yield to the first dose—is quite as it
ought to be, as the medicinal disease must naturally be
somewhat stronger than the malady to be cured if it is
to overpower and extinguish the latter, just as a natural
disease can remove and annihilate another one similar to
it only when it is stronger than the latter (§§ 43-48).


§ 159.


The smaller the dose of the homceopathic remedy is in
the treatment of acute diseases so much the slighter and
shorter is this apparent increase of the disease during the
first hours.


§ 160.


But as the dose of a homceopathic remedy can scarcely
ever be made so small that it shall not be able to relieve,
overpower, indeed completely cure and annihilate the
uncomplicated natural disease of not long standing that
is analogous to it ($ 249, note), we can understand why
a dose of an appropriate homceopathic medicine, not the
very smallest possible, does always, during the first hour
after its ingestion, produce a perceptible homceopathic
aggravation of this kind.1?°


*° This exaltation of the medicinal symptoms over those dis-
ease symptoms analogous to them, which looks like an aggrava-
tion, has been observed by other physicians also, when by acci-


222 ORGANON OF MEDICINE
Se1Gle


When I here limit the so-called homceopathic aggrava-
tion, or rather the primary action of the homceopathic
medicine that seems to increase somewhat the symptoms
of the original disease, to the first or few first hours,
this is certainly true with respect to diseases of a more
acute character and of recent origin; but where medi-
cines of long action have to combat a malady of consid-
erable or of very long standing, where no such apparent
increase of the original disease ought to appear during
treatment and it does not so appear if the accurately


dent they employed a homceopathic remedy. When a patient
suffering from itch complains of an increase of the eruption
after sulphur, his physician who knows not the cause of this,
consoles him with the assurance that the itch must first come out
properly before it can be cured; he knows not, however, that
this is a sulphur eruption, that assumes the appearance of an in-
crease of the itch.

“The facial eruption which the wola tricolor cured was ag-
gravated by it at the commencement of its action,” Leroy tells us
(Heilk. fiir Miitter, p. 406), but he knew not that the apparent
aggravation was owing to the somewhat too large dose of the
remedy, which in this instance was to a certain extent homco-
pathic. Lysons says (Med. Transact., vol ii, London, 1772), “The
bark of the elm cures most certainly those skin diseases which
it increases at the beginning of its action.” Had he not given
the bark in the monstrous doses usual in the allopathic system,
but in the quite small doses requisite when the medicine shows
similarity of symptoms, that is to say, when it is used homceo-
pathically, he would have effected a cure without, or almost with-
out, seeing this apparent increase of the disease (homceopathic
aggravation).


i 4 ae ime tice a Gr ivnePn Cf Ung poe
Boe Say ahaa bifcw bone Gh fate Pt Vows,
agape LF See Ty ye es Ss hag cp Hse 5 IG ncgm ie
Vf wf wef) worm Ce a entice anf
weg | Or alma C rafefrhyn Sobmss ) probes f

Pescy ee Brai/Sty nn. he


c ees 5


Cr /*Gfem oe “gw A oe ait datas ones «hy


“eau ted dehy ep hla Roe: : agin aie
Ease CGE MM Logunine pune Cangnee Leahey Ving
eo i Gee US ee + Som Kin Corer a


REPRODUCTION OF HAHNEMANN’S HANDWRITING, TAKEN FROM
THE MANUSCRIPT OF THE SIXTH EDITION OF THE ORGANON.


209

re
‘auf die erste oder /ersten Stunden setze, so ist. diefs
allerdings bei den mehr acuten,: seit Kurzem ent-
standenen Uebeln der F all. 3 Wo aber Arzneien yon


langer Wir Sale ell: alte @ | sebr alles Siech-


8, 10 Tagen von Zeit zu Zeit ei ne Erstwir-
kungen der Argnaimcinige solche Ayécheinende Sym-


ptomen- Hrhohungen des urs en Uebels (von
einer oder ellichen Stu orkommen,
wahrend in den Zwischenstunden Besseruny des Gan-
zen sichtbar : | jeser wenigen lage
erfo] ngen

er Arznei fast ungetriibt noch mehre Tage hindurch,


§. - 1162. or eee,

Zuweilen trifft gj ibpebaic der ageh. ma fs: si-
gen Zahl genau nach ihrer wahren, rei-
nen Wirkung gekannter Arzneien, dafs
nur eit Theil von den Symptomen der zu heilen-
den Krankheit in der Symptomenreihe der noch am
besten passenden Arznei angetroffen wird, folglich


eee f


j t
4) ie Wirkung derjenigen Arzneien, denen an sich


auch die langste % Rarkungsdaner ren ist, in acuten Krank-


nellsten in en acutesten —


so lang oeeerd ist’ S¢ doch in (aus Psora entstandnen)
chronischen Kran nd daher kommt es, dafs die
antipsorischen ne solche homdopathische


und igéverschiednen Stunden der ersten 8, 10 Tage mer-
ker’ lassen,
O


REPRODUCTION OF A PAGE OF THE REVISED COPY, SHOWING NUMEROUS
CORRECTIONS AND CHANGES MADE BY HAHNEMANN,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 223


chosen medicine was given in proper small, gradually
higher doses, each somewhat modified with renewed
dynamization (§ 247). Such increase of the original
symptoms of a chronic disease can appear only at the
end of treatment when the cure is almost or quite fin-
ished.


§ 162


It sometimes happens, owing to the moderate number
of medicines yet known with respect to thew true, pure
action, that but a portion of the symptoms of the dis-
ease under treatment is to be met with in the list of
symptoms of the most appropriate medicine, consequently
this imperfect medicinal morbific agent must be employed
for lack of a more perfect one.


SWB


In this case we cannot indeed expect from this medi-
cine a complete, undisturbed cure; for during its use some
symptoms appear which were not previously observable
in the disease, accessory symptoms of the not perfectly
appropriate remedy. ‘This does by no means prevent a
considerable part of the disease (the symptoms of the
disease that resemble those of the medicine) from being
eradicated by this medicine thereby establishing a fair
commencement of the cure, but still this does not tale
place without those accessory symptoms, which are,
however, always moderate when the dose of the medicine
is sufficiently minute.


224. ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 164.


The small number of homceopathic symptoms present
in the best selected medicine is no obstacle to the cure
in cases where these few medicinal symptoms are chiefiy
of an uncommon kind and such as are peculiarly distinc-
tive (characteristic) of the disease; the cure takes place
under such circumstances without any particular disturb-
ance.


§ 165.


If, however, among the symptoms of the remedy
selected, there be none that accurately resemble the
distinctive (characteristic), peculiar, uncommon symp-
toms of the case of disease, and if the remedy correspond
definite states (nausea, debility, headache, and so forth),
and if there be among the known medicines none more
homeeopathically appropriate, in that case the physician
cannot promise himself any immediate favorable result
from the employment of this unhomceopathic medicine.


§ 166.


Such a case is, however, very rare, owing to the
increased number of medicines whose pure effects are
now known, and the bad effects resulting from it, when
they do occur, are diminished whenever a subsequent
medicine, of more accurate resemblance, can be selected.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 225


S67,


Thus if there occur, during the use of this imperfectly
homeceopathic remedy first employed, accessory symp-
toms of some moment, then, in the case of acute dis-
eases, we do not allow this first dose to exhaust its
action, nor leave the patient to the full duration of the
action of the remedy, but we investigate afresh the mor-
bid state in its now altered condition, and add the re-
mainder of the original symptoms to those newly devel-
oped in tracing a new picture of the disease.


§ 168.


We shall then be able much more readily to discover,
among the known medicines, an analogue to the morbid
state before us, a single dose of which, if it do not
entirely destroy the disease, will advance it considerably
on the way to be cured. And thus we go on, if even
this medicine be not quite sufficient to effect the restora-
tion of health, examining again and again the morbid
state that still remains, and selecting a homceopathic
medicine as suitable as possible for it, until our object,
namely, putting the patient in the possession of perfect
health, is accomplished.


SIG).


If, on the first examination of a disease and the first
selection of a medicine, we should find that the totality of
the symptoms of the disease would not be effectually


226 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


covered by the disease elements of a single medicine—
owing to the insufficient number of known medicines—
but that two medicines contend for the perference in
point of appropriateness, one of which is more homceo-
pathically suitable for one part, the other for another
part of the symptoms of the disease, it is not advisable,
after the employment of the more suitable of the two
medicines, to administer the other without fresh examina-
tion, and much less to give both together (§ 272, note)
for the medicine that seemed to be the next best would
not, under the change of circumstances that has in the
meantime taken place, be suitable for the rest of the
symptoms that then remain; in which case, consequently,
a more appropriate homceopathic remedy must be
selected in place of the second medicine for the set of
symptoms as they appear on a new inspection.


Sa 70:


Hence in this as in every case where a change of the
morbid state has occurred, the remaining set of symp-
toms now present must be inquired into, and (without
paying any attention to the medicine which at first ap-
peared to be the next in point of suitableness) another
homceopathic medicine, as: appropriate as possible to the
new state now before us, must be selected. If it should
so happen, as is not often the case, that the medicine
which at first appeared to be the next best seems still
to be well adapted for the morbid state that remains, so
much the more will it merit our confidence, and deserve
to be employed in preference to another.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 227


SAE


In non-venereal chronic diseases, those most com-
monly, therefore, that arise from psora, we often require,
in order to effect a cure, to give several antipsoric reme-
dies in succession, every successive one being homco-
pathically chosen in consonance with the group of symp-
toms remaining after completion of the action of the
previous remedy.


1G.


A similar difficulty in the way of the cure occurs from
the symptoms of the disease being too few—a circum-
stance that deserves our careful attention, for by its
removal almost all the difficulties that can lie in the way
of this most perfect of all possible modes of treatment
(except that its apparatus of known homeopathic medi-
cines is still incomplete) are removed.


S LR


The only diseases that seem to have but few symp-
toms, and on that account to be less amenable to cure,
are those which may be termed one-sided, because they
display only one or two principal symptoms which ob-
scure almost all the others. They belong chiefly to the
class of chronic diseases.


§ 174.


Their principal symptom may be either an internal
complaint (e. g., a headache of many years’ duration, a


228 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


diarrhcea of long standing, an ancient cardialgia, etc.),
or it may be an affection more of an external kind. Dis-
eases of the latter character are generally distinguished
by the name of local maladies.


§ 175.


In one-sided diseases of the first kind it is often to be
attributed to the medical observer’s want of discern-
ment that he does not fully discover the symptoms
actually present which would enable him to complete the
sketch of the portrait of the disease.


“mi 70:


There are, however, still a few diseases, which, after
the most careful initial examination (§§ 84-98),
present but one or two severe, violent symptoms, while
all the others are but indistinctly perceptible.


3 a.


In order to meet most successfully such a case as this,
which is of very rare occurrence, we are in the first
place to select, guided by these few symptoms, the medi-
cine which in our judgment is the most homceopathically
indicated.


Sze.


It will, no doubt, sometimes happen that this medicine,
selected in strict observance of the homceopathic law,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 229


furnishes the similar artificial disease suited for the
annihilation of the malady present; and this is much more
likely to happen when these few morbid symptoms are
very striking, decided, uncommon and peculiarly dis-
tinctive (characteristic).


S170:


More frequently, however, the medicine first chosen in
such a case will be only partially, that is to say, not
exactly suitable, as there was no considerable number of
symptoms to guide to an accurate selection.


§ 180.


In this case the medicine, which has been chosen as
well as was possible, but which, for the reason above
stated, is only imperfectly homeoeopathic, will, in its
action upon the disease that is only partially analogous
to it—just as in the case mentioned above (§ 162,
et seq.), where the limited number of homceopathic rem-
edies renders the selection imperfect—produce accessory
symptoms, and several phenomena from its own array
of symptoms are mixed up with the patient’s state of
health, which are, however, at the same time, symptoms
of the disease ttself, although they may have been hith-
erto never or very rarely perceived; some symptoms
which the patient had never previously experienced ap-
pear, or others he had only felt indistinctly become more
pronounced.


230 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 181.


Let it not be objected that the accessory phenomena
and new symptoms of this disease that now appear should
be laid to the account of the medicament just employed.
They owe their origin to it" certainly, but they are
always only symptoms of such a nature as this disease
was itself capable of producing in this organism, and
which were summoned forth and induced to make their
appearance by the medicine given, owing to its power to
cause similar symptoms. In a word, we have to regard
the whole collection of symptoms now perceptible as
belonging to the disease itself, as the actual existing con-
dition, and to direct our further treatment accordingly.


Slee,


Thus the imperfect selection of the medicament, which
was in this case almost inevitable owing to the too lim-
ited number of the symptoms present, serves to com-
plete the display of the symptoms of the disease, and in
this way facilitates the discovery of a second, more
accurately suitable, homceopathic medicine.


Sse.


Whenever, therefore, the dose of the first medicine
ceases to have a beneficial effect (if the newly developed


1 When they were not caused by an important error in regi-
men, a violent emotion, or a tumultuous revolution in the or-
ganism, such as the occurrence or cessation of the menses, con-
ception, childbirth, and so forth.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 231


symptoms do not, by reason of their gravity, demand
more speedy aid—which, however, from the minuteness
of the dose of homceopathic medicine, and in very chronic
diseases, is excessively rare), a new examination of the
disease must be instituted, the status morbi as it now is
must be noted down, and a second homceopathic remedy
selected in accordance with it, which shall exactly suit
the present state, and one which shall be all the more
appropriate can then be found, as the group of symptoms
has become larger and more complete.'””


§ 184.


In like manner, after each new dose of medicine has
exhausted its action, when it is no longer suitable and
helpful, the state of the disease that still remains is to
be noted anew with respect to its remaining symptoms,
and another homceopathic remedy sought for, as suit-
able as possible for the group of symptoms now ob-
served, and so on until the recovery is complete.


™ Tn cases where the patient (which, however, happens ex-
cessively seldom in chronic, but not infrequently in acute, dis-
eases) feels very ill, although his symptoms are very indistinct,
so that this state may be attributed more to the benumbed state
of the nerves, which does not permit the patient’s pains and
sufferings to be distinctly perceived, this torpor of the internal
sensibility is removed by opium, and in its secondary action the
symptoms of the disease become distinctly apparent.


232 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 185.


Among the one-sided diseases an important place is
occupied by the so-called local maladies, by which term
is signified those changes and ailments that appear on
the external parts of the body. Till now the idea prev-
alent in the schools was that these parts were alone
morbidly affected, and that the rest of the body did not
participate in the disease—a theoretical, absurd doctrine,
which has led to the most disastrous medical treatment.


§ 186.


Those so-calied local maladies which have been pro-
duced a short time previously, solely by an external
lesion, still appear at first sight to deserve the name of
local diseases. But’ then the lesion must be very trivial,
and in that case it would be of no great moment. For in
the case of injuries accruing to the body from without,
if they be at all severe, the whole living organism sym-
Pathizes; ihereroceur tévctectc. he (reatmentwor stich
diseases is relegated to surgery; but this is right only
in so far as the affected parts require mechanical aid,
whereby the external obstacles to the cure, which can
only be expected to take place by the agency of the vital
force, may be removed by mechanical means, e. g., by the
reduction of dislocations, by needles and bandages to
bring together the lips of wounds, by mechanical pressure
to still the flow of blood from open arteries, by the ex-
traction of foreign bodies that have penetrated into the
living parts, by making an opening into a cavity of the
body in order to remove an irritating substance or to


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 223


procure the evacuation of effusions or collections of fluids,
by bringing into apposition the broken extremities of a
fractured bone and retaining them in exact contact by
an appropriate bandage, etc. But when in such injuries
the whole living organism requires, as it always does,
active dynamic aid to put it in a position to accomplish
the work of healing, e. g., when the violent fever result-
ing from extensive contusions, lacerated muscles, ten-
dons and blood-vessels requires to be removed by medi-
cine given internally, or when the external pain of scalded
or burnt parts needs to be homceopathically subdued,
then the services of the dynamic physician and his help-
ful homceopathy come into requisition.


Se


But those affections, alterations and ailments appear-
ing on the external parts that do not arise from any
external injury or that have only some slight external
wound for their immediate exciting cause, are produced
in quite another manner; their source lies in some in-
ternal malady. To consider them as mere local affec-
tions, and at the same time to treat them only, or almost
only, as it were surgically, with topical application or
other similar remedies—as the old school have done
from the remotest ages—is as absurd as it is pernicious
in its results.


§ 188,


These affections were considered to be merely topical,
and were therefore called local diseases, as if they were


234 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


maladies exclusively limited to those parts wherein the
organism took little or no part, or affections of these par-
ticular visible parts of which the rest of the living
organism, so to speak, knew nothing.


§ 1809.


And yet very little reflection will suffice to convince us
that no external malady (not occasioned by some import-
ant injury from without) can arise, persist or even grow
worse without some internal cause, without the co-opera-
tion of the whole organism, which must consequently be
in a diseased state. It could not make its appearance at
all without the consent of the whole of the rest of the
health, and without the participation of the rest of the
living whole (of the vital force that pervades all the
other sensitive and irritable parts of the organism) ;
indeed, it is impossible to conceive its production without
the instrumentality of the whole (deranged) life; so inti-
mately are all parts of the organism connected together
to form an indivisible whole in sensations and functions.
No eruption on the lips, no whitlow can occur without
previous and simultaneous internal ill-health.


ST EOe:


All true medical treatment of a disease on the external
parts of the body that has occurred from little or no


“One of the many great and pernicious blunders of the old
school.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 235


injury from without must, therefore, be directed against
the whole, must effect the annihilation and cure of the
general malady by means of internal remedies, if it is
wished that the treatment should be judicious, sure, effi-
cacious and radical.


Selon


This is confirmed in the most unambiguous manner by
experience, which shows in all cases that every powerful
internal medicine immediately after its ingestion causes
important changes in the general health of such a
patient, and particularly in the affected external parts
(which the ordinary medical school regards as quite
isolated), even in a so-called local disease of the most
external parts of the body, and the change it produces
is most salutary, being the restoration to health of the
entire body, along with the disappearance of the external
affection (without the aid of any external remedy), pro-
vided the internal remedy directed towards the whole
state was suitably chosen in a homceopathic sense.


Sen@2.


This is best effected when, in the investigation of the
case of disease, along with the exact character of the
local affection, all the changes, sufferings and symptoms
observable in the patient’s health, and which may have
been previously noticed when no medicines had been
used, are taken in conjunction to form a complete picture


236 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


of the disease before searching among the medicines,
whose peculiar pathogenetic effects are known, for a
remedy corresponding to the totality of the symptoms,
so that the selection mav be truly homceopathic.


§ 193.


By means of this medicine, employed only internally
the general morbid state of the body is removed along
with the local affection, and the latter is cured at the
same time as the former, proving that the local affec-
tion depended solely on a disease of the rest of the body,
and should only be regarded as an inseparable part of
the whole, as one of the most considerable and striking
symptoms of the whole disease.


§ 194.


It is not useful, either in acute local diseases of recent
origin or in local affections that have already existed a
long time, to rub in or apply externally to the spot an
external remedy, even though it be the specific and,
when used internally, salutary by reason of its homceo-
pathicity, even although it should be at the same time
administered internally; for the acute topical affections
(e. g., inflammations of individual parts, erysipelas, etc.),
which have not been caused by external injury of pro-
portionate violence, but by dynamic or internal causes,
yield most surely to internal remedies homceopathically
adapted to the perceptible state of the health present in
the exterior and interior, selected from the general store
of proved medicines, and generally without any other


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 237,


aid; but if these diseases do not yield to them completely,
and if there still remain in the affected spot and in the
whole state, notwithstanding good regimen, a relic of
disease which the vital force is not competent to restore
to the normal state, then the acute disease was (as not
infrequently happens) a product of psora which had
hitherto remained latent in the interior, but has now
burst forth and is on the point of developing into a pal-
pable chronic disease.


8 195.


In order to effect a radical cure in such cases, which
are by no means rare, after the acute state has pretty
well subsided, an appropriate antipsoric treatment (as
is taught in my work on Chronic Diseases) must then
be directed against the symptoms that still remain and
the morbid state of health to which the patient was
previously subject. In chronic local maladies that are
not obviously venereal, the antipsoric internal treatment
is, moreover, alone requisite.


S 1096.


It might, indeed, seem as though the cure of such
diseases would be hastened by employing the medicinal
substance which is known to be truly homeceopathic to
the totality of the symptoms, not only internally, but
also externally, because the action of a medicine applied
to the seat of the local affection might effect a more
fapid) change im it.


238 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S07,


This treatment, however, is quite inadmissible, not
only for the local symptoms arising from the miasm of
psora, but also and especially for those originating in the
miasm of syphilis or sycosis, for the simultaneous local
application, along with the internal employment, of the
remedy in diseases whose chief symptom is a constant
local affection, has this great disadvantage, that, by such
a topical application, this chief symptom (local affec-
tion)* will usually be annihilated sooner than the inter-
nal disease, and we shall now be deceived by the sem-
blance of a perfect cure; or at least it will be difficult,
and in some cases impossible, to determine, from the
premature disappearance of the local symptom, if the
general disease is destroyed by the simultaneous employ-
ment of the internal medicine.


§ 108.


The mere topical employment of medicines, that are
powerful for cure when given internally, to the local
symptoms of chronic miasmatic diseases is for the same
reason quite inadmissible; for if the local affection of the
chronic disease be only removed locally and in a one-
sided manner, the internal treatment indispensable for
the complete restoration of the health remains in dubious
obscurity; the chief symptom (the local affection) is


™4 Recent itch eruption, chancre, condyloma, as I have indi-
cated in my book on Chronic Diseases.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 239


gone, and there remain only the other, less distinguish-
able symptoms, which are less constant and less persist-
ent than the local affection, and frequently not suffi-
ciently peculiar and too slightly characteristic to display
after that, a picture of the disease in clear and peculiar
outlines.


§ 199.


If the remedy perfectly homceopathic to the disease
had not yet been discovered ™ at the time when the local
symptoms were destroyed by a corrosive or desiccative
external remedy or by the knife, then the case becomes
much more difficult on account of the too indefinite (un-
characteristic) and inconstant appearance of the remain-
ing symptoms; for what might have contributed most to
determine the selection of the most suitable remedy, and
its internal employment until the disease should have
been completely annihilated, namely, the external prin-
cipal symptom, has been removed from our observation.


§ 200.


Had it still been present to guide the internal treat-
ment, the homceopathic remedy for the whole disease
might have been discovered, and had that been found,
the persistence of the local affection during its internal
employment would have shown that the cure was not yet


u5 As was the case before my time with the remedies for the
condylomatous disease (and the antipsoric medicines).


240 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


completed; but were it cured on its seat, this would be
a convincing proof that the disease was completely era-
dicated, and the desired recovery from the entire dis-
ease was fully accomplished—an inestimable, indispen-
sable advantage to reach a perfect cure.


S Boi,


It is evident that man’s vital force, when encum-
bered with a chronic disease which it is unable to over-
come by its own powers instinctively, adopts the plan
of developing a local malady on some external part,
solely for this object, that by making and keeping in a
diseased state this part which is not indispensable to hu-
man life, it may thereby silence the internal disease,
which otherwise threatens to destroy the vital organs
(and to deprive the patient of life), and that it may
thereby, so to speak, transfer the internal disease to the
vicarious local affection and, as it were, draw it thither.
The presence of the local affection thus silences, for a
time, the internal disease, though without being able
either to cure it or to diminish it materially.1° The local


“6 The issues of the old-school practitioners do something sim-
ilar; as artificial ulcers on external parts, they silence some in-
ternal chronic diseases, but only for a very short time, as long
as they cause a painful irritation to which the sick organism is
not used, without being able to cure them; but, on the other
hand, they weaken and destroy the generai health much more
than is done by most of the metastases effected by the instinctive


vital force.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 241


affection, however, is never anything else than a part of
the general disease, but a part of it increased all in one
direction by the organic vital force, and transferred to
a less dangerous (external) part of the body, in order to
allay the internal ailment. But (as has been said) by
this local symptom that silences the internal disease, so
far from anything being gained by the vital force
towards diminishing or curing the whole malady, the
internal disease, on the contrary, continues, in spite of
it, gradually to increase and Nature is constrained to
enlarge and aggravate the local symptom always more
and more, in order that it may still suffice as a substi-
tute for the increased internal disease and may still keep
it under. Old ulcers on the legs get worse as long as
the internal psora is uncured, the chancre enlarges as
long as the internal syphilis remains uncured, the fig
warts increase and grow while the sycosis is not cured
whereby the latter is rendered more and more difficult
to cure, just as the general internal disease continues to
increase as time goes on.


S20


If the old-school physician should now destroy the
local symptom by the topical application of external
remedies, under the belief that he thereby cures the
whole disease, Nature makes up for its loss by rousing
the internal malady and the other symptoms that pre-
viously existed in a latent state side by side with the
local affection; that is to say, she increases the internal
disease. When this occurs it is usual to say, though


242 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


incorrectly, that the local affection has been driven back
into the system or upon the nerves by the external
remedies.


S Zoe.


Every external treatment of such local symptoms, the
object of which is to remove them from the surface of
the body, whilst the internal miasmatic disease is left
uncured, as, for instance, driving off the skin the psoric
eruption by all sorts of ointments, burning away the
chancre by caustics and destroying the condylomata on
their seat by the knife, the ligature or the actual cautery ;
this pernicious external mode of treatment, hitherto so
universally practised, has been the most prolific source
of all the innumerable named or unnamed chronic mala-
dies under which mankind groans; it is one of the most
criminal procedures the medical world can be guilty of,
and yet it has hitherto been the one generally adopted,
and taught from the professional chairs as the only
Ole


Sere


If we deduct all chronic affections, ailments and dis-
eases that depend on a persistent unhealthy mode of


“For any medicines that might at the same time be given in-
ternally served but to aggravate the malady, as these remedies
possessed no specific power of curing the whole disease, but as-
sailed the organism, weakened it and inflicted on it, in addition,
other chronic medicinal diseases.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 243


living (§ 77), as also those innumerable medicinal mala-
dies (v. § 74) caused by the irrational, persistent, harass-
ing and pernicious treatment of diseases often only of
trivial character by physicians of the old school, most
the remainder of chronic diseases result from the devel-
opment of these three chronic miasms, internal syphilis,
internal sycosis, but chiefly and in infinitely greater pro-
portion, internal psora. Each of these infections was
already in possession of the whole organism, and had
penetrated it in all directions before the appearance of
the primary, vicarious local symptom of each of them
(in the case of psora the scabious eruption, in syphilis
the chancre or the bubo, and in sycosis the condylomata)
that prevented their outburst; and these chronic mias-
matic diseases, if deprived of their local symptom, are
inevitably destined by mighty Nature sooner or later to
become developed and to burst forth, and thereby propa-
gate all the nameless misery, the incredible number of
chronic diseases which have plagued mankind for hun-
dreds and thousands of years, none of which would so
frequently have come into existence had physicians
striven in a rational manner to cure radically and to
extinguish in the organism these three miasms without
employing local remedies for their corresponding exter-
nal symptoms, relying solely on the proper internal
homceopathic remedies for each. (See note to § 282.)


§ 204.


The homceopathic physician never treats one of these
primary symptoms of chronic miasms, nor yet one of


244 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


their secondary affections that result from their further
development, by local remedies (neither by those exter-
nal agents that act dynamically,“* nor yet by those that
act mechanically), but he cures, in cases where the one
or the other appears, only the great miasm on which they
depend, whereupon its primary, as also its secondary
symptoms disappear spontaneously; but as this was not
the mode pursued by the old-school practitioners who


“8T cannot therefore advise, for instance, the local extirpation
of the so-called cancer of the lips and face (the product of
highly developed psora, not infrequently in conjunction with
syphilis) by means of the arsenical remedy of Frére Cosme,
not only because it is excessively painful and often fails, but
more for this reason, because, if this dynamic remedy should
indeed succeed in freeing the affected part of the body from the
malignant ulcer locally, the basic malady is thereby not dim-
inished in the slightest, the preserving vital force is therefore
necessitated to transfer the field of operation of the great in-
ternal malady to some more important part (as it does in every
case of metastasis), and the consequence is blindness, deafness,
insanity, suffocative asthma, dropsy, apoplexy, etc. But this am-
biguous local liberation of the part from the malignant ulcer by
the topical arsenical remedy only succeeds, after all, in those cases
where the ulcer has not yet attained any great size, and when
the vital force is still very energetic; but it is just in such a
state of things that the complete internal cure of the whole orig-
inal disease is also till practicable.

The result is the same without previous cure of the inner
miasm when cancer of the face or breast is removed by the
knife alone and when encysted ttimors are enucleated; some-
thing worse ensues, or at any rate death is hastened. This has
been the case times without number, but the old school still goes
blindly on in the same way in every new case, with the same dis-
astrous results.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 245


preceded him in the treatment of the case, the homceo-
pathic physician generally, alas! finds that the primary
symptoms **° have already been destroyed by them by
means of external remedies, and that he has now to do
more with the secondary ones, 7. ¢., the affections result-
ing from the breaking forth and development of these
inherent miasms, but especially with the chronic dis-
eases evolved from internal psora, the internal treatment
of which, as far as a single physician can elucidate it by
many years of reflection, observation and experience, I
have endeavored to point out in my work on Chronic
Diseases, to which I must refer the reader.


§ 2006.


Before commencing the treatment of a chronic dis-
ease, it is necessary to make the most careful investiga-
tion’??° as to whether the patient has had a venereal


“° Itch eruption, chancre (bubo), condylomata.


*° In investigations of this nature we must not allow ourselves
to be deceived by the assertions of the patients or their friends,
who frequently assign as the cause of chronic, even of the
severest and most inveterate diseases, either a cold caught (a
thorough wetting, drinking cold water after being heated) many
years ago, or a former fright, a sprain, a vexation (sometimes
even a bewitchment), etc. These causes are much too insignifi-
cant to develop a chronic disease im a healthy body, to keep it
up for years, and to aggravate it year by year, as is the case
with all chronic diseases from developed psora. Causes of a
much more important character than these remembered noxious
influences must lie at the root of the initiation and progress of
a serious, obstinate disease of long standing; the assigned causes
could only rouse into activity the latent chronic miasm.


246 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


infection (or an infection with condylomatous gonor-
rhea) ; for then the treatment must be directed towards
this alone, when only the signs of syphilis (or of the
rarer condylomatous disease) are present, but this dis-
ease is very seldom met with alone nowadays. If such
infection have previously occurred, this must also be
borne in mind in the treatment of those cases in which
psora is present, because in them the latter is complicated
with the former, as is always the case when the symp-
toms are not those of pure syphilis; for when the physi-
cian thinks he has a case of old venereal disease before
him, he has always, or almost always, to treat a syphilitic
affection accompanied mostly by (complicated with)
psora for the internal itch dyscrasia (the psora) is far
the most frequent fundamental cause of chronic dts-
eases. At times, both miasms may be complicated also
with sycosis in chronically diseased organisms, or, as 1s
much more frequently the case, psora is the sole funda-
mental cause of all other chronic maladies, whatever
names they may bear, which are, moreover, so often bun-
gled, increased and dishgured to a monstrous extent by
allopathic unskilfulness.


S207,


When the above information has been gained, it still
remains for the homceopathic physician to ascertain what
kinds of allopathic treatment had up to that date been
adopted for the chronic disease, what perturbing medi-
cines had been chiefly and most frequently employed, also
what mineral baths had been used and what effects these


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 247


had produced, in order to understand in some measure
the degeneration of the disease from its original state,
and, where possible, to correct in part these pernicious
artificial operations, or to enable him to avoid the em-
ployment. of medicines that have already been improperly
used,


§ 208.


The age of the patient, his mode of living and diet,
his occupation, his domestic position, his social relations
and so forth must next be taken into consideration, in
order to ascertain whether these things have tended to
increase his malady, or in how far they may favor or
hinder the treatment. In like manner the state of his
disposition and mind must be attended to, to learn
whether that presents any obstacle to the treatment, or
requires to be directed, encouraged or modified.


§ 200.


After this is done, the physician should endeavor in
repeated conversations with the patient to trace the
picture of his disease as completely as possible, according
to the directions given above, in order to be able to
elucidate the most striking and peculiar (characteristic)
symptoms, in accordance with which he selects the first
antipsoric or other remedy having the greatest sympto-
matic resemblance, for the commencement of the treat-
ment, and so forth.


248 ORGANON OF MEDICINE
SEZ:


Of psoric origin are almost all those diseases that I
have above termed one-sided, which appear to be more
difficult to cure in consequence of this one-sidedness, all
their other morbid symptoms disappearing, as it were,
before the single, great, prominent symptom. Of this
character are what are termed mental diseases. They
do not, however, constitute a class of disease sharply
separated from all others, since in all other so-called
corporeal diseases the condition of the disposition and
mind is always altered ;*** and in all cases of disease we
are called on to cure the state of the patient’s disposi-
tion is to be particularly noted, along with the totality of


*! How often, for instance, do we not meet with a mild, soft
disposition in patients who have for years been afflicted with the
most painful diseases, so that the physician feels constrained to
esteem and compassionate the sufferer! But if he subdue the
disease and restore the patient to health—as is frequently done
in homeopathic practice—he is often astonished and horrified at
the frightful alteration in his disposition. He often witnesses
the occurrence of ingratitude, cruelty, refined malice and propen-
sities most disgraceful and degrading to humanity, which were
precisely the qualities possessed by the patient before he grew
ante

Those who were patient when well often become obstinate,
violent, hasty, or even intolerate and capricious, or impatient or
desponding when ill; those formerly chaste and modest often
become lascivious and shameless. A clear-headed person not in-
frequently becomes obtuse of intellect, while one ordinarily
weak-minded becomes more prudent and thoughtful; and a man
slow to make up his mind sometimes acquires great presence of
mind and quickness of resolve, etc.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 249


the symptoms, if we would trace an accurate picture of
the disease, in order to be able therefrom to treat it
homceopathically with success.


Sei ie


This holds good to such an extent, that the state of
the disposition of the patient often chiefly determines the
selection of the homceopathic remedy, as being a decidedly
characteristic symptom which can least of all remain
concealed from the accurately observing physician.


Sr 22e


The Creator of therapeutic agents has also had par-
ticular regard to this main feature of all diseases, the
altered state of the disposition and mind, for there is
no powerful medicinal substance in the world which does
not very notably alter the state of the disposition and
mind in the healthy individual who tests it, and every
medicine does so in a different manner.


§ 213.


We shall, therefore, never be able to cure conform-
ably to nature—that is to say, homceopathically—if we
do not, in every case of disease, even in such as are acute,
observe, along with the other symptoms, those relating
to the changes in the state of the mind and disposition,
and if we do not select, for the patient’s relief, from


250 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


among the medicines a disease-force which in addition
to the similarity of its other symptoms to those of the
disease, is also capable of producing a similar state of
the disposition and mind.?””


S22:


The instructions I have to give relative to the cure of
mental diseases may be confined to a very few remarks,
as they are to be cured in the same way as all other
diseases, namely, by a remedy which shows, by the
symptoms it causes in the body and mind of a healthy
individual, a power of producing a morbid state as simi-
lar as possible to the case of disease before us, and in
no other way can they be cured.


§ 215.


Almost all the so-called mental and emotional diseases
are nothing more than corporeal diseases in which the
symptom of derangement of the mind and disposition
peculiar to each of them is increased, whilst the corporeal


Thus aconite will seldom or never effect either a rapid or
permanent cure in a patient of a quiet, calm, equable disposition ;
and just as little will nux vomica be serviceable where the dis-
position is mild and phlegmatic, pulsatilla where it is happy,
gay and obstinate, or ignatia where it is imperturbable and dis-
posed neither to be frightened nor vexed


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 251


symptoms decline (more or less rapidly), till it at length
attains the most striking one-sidedness, almost as though
it were a local disease in the invisible subtle organ of
the mind or disposition.


S 2G.


The cases are not rare in which a so-called corporeal
disease that threatens to be fatal—a suppuration of the
lungs, or the deterioration of some other important
viscus, or some other disease of acute character, e. g.,
in childbed, etc—becomes transformed into insanity, into
a kind of melancholia or into mania by a rapid increase
of the psychical symptoms that were previously present,
whereupon the corporeal symptoms lose all their danger;
these latter improve almost to perfect health, or rather
they decrease to such a degree that their obscured pres-
ence can only be detected by the observation of a physi-
cian gifted with perseverance and penetration. In this
manner they become transformed into a one-sided and,
as it were, a local disease, in which the symptom of the
mental disturbance, which was at first but slight, in-
creases so as to be the chief symptom, and in a great
measure occupies the place of the other (corporeal)
symptoms, whose intensity it subdues in a palliative
manner, so that, in short, the affections of the grosser
corporeal organs become, as it were, transferred and
conducted to the almost spiritual mental and emotional
organs, which the anatomist has never yet and never
will reach with his scalpel.


252 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


e207.


In these diseases we must be very careful to make
ourselves acquainted with the whole of the phenomena,
both those belonging to the corporeal symptoms, and
also, and indeed particularly, those appertaining to the
accurate apprehension of the precise character of the
chief symptom of the peculiar and always predominat-
ing state of the mind and disposition, in order to dis-
cover, for the purpose of extinguishing the entire dis-
ease, among the remedies whose pure effects are known,
a homceopathic medicinal pathogenetic force—that is to
say, a remedy which in its list of symptoms displays,
with the greatest possible similarity, not only the corpo-
real morbid symptoms present in the case of disease
before us, but also especially this mental and emotional
state.


S72ilo:


To this collection of symptoms belongs in the first
place the accurate description of all the phenomena of
the previous so-called corporeal disease, before it degen-
erated into a one-sided increase of the psychical symp-
tom, and became a disease of the mind and disposition.
This may be learned from the report of the patient’s
friends.


S 2109.


A comparison of these previous symptoms of the cor-
poreal disease with the traces of them that still remain,


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 253


though they have become less perceptible (but which
even now sometimes become prominent, when a lucid
interval and a transient alleviation of the psychical dis-
ease occurs), will serve to prove them to be still present,
though obscured.


S220.


By adding to this the state of the mind and disposition
accurately observed by the patient’s friends and by the
physician himself, we have thus constructed the complete
picture of the disease, for which, in order to effect the
homeoeopathic cure of the disease, a medicine capable of
producing strikingly similar symptoms, and especially an
analogous disorder of the mind, must be sought for
among the antipsoric remedies, if the psychical disease
have already lasted some time.


S221,


If, however, insanity or mania (caused by fright,
vexation, the abuse of spirituous liquors, etc.) have
suddenly broken out as an acute disease in the patient’s
ordinary calm state, although it almost always arises
from internal psora, like a flame bursting forth from it,
yet when it occurs in this acute manner it should not be
immediately treated with antipsorics, but in the first
place with remedies indicated for it out of the other class
of proved medicaments (e@. g., aconite, belladonna, stra-
monium, hyoscyamus, mercury, etc.) in highly potent-
ized, minute, homceopathic doses, in order to subdue it


254 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


so far that the psora shall for the time revert to its
former latent state, wherein the patient appears as if
quite well.


S222)


But such a patient, who has recovered from an acute
mental or emotional disease by the use of these non-
antipsoric medicines, should never be regarded as cured;
on the contrary, no time should be lost in attempting to
free him completely,’?* by means of a prolonged anti-
psoric treatment, from the chronic miasm of the psora,
which, it is true, has now become once more latent but
is quite ready to break out anew; if this be done, there
is no fear of another similar attack, if he attend faith-


”3Tt very rarely happens that a mental or emotional disease of
long standing ceases spontaneously (for the internal dyscrasia
transfers itself again to the grosser corporeal organs); such are
the few cases met with now and then, where a former inmate of
a madhouse has been dismissed apparently recovered. Hitherto,
moreover, all madhouses have continued to be chokefull, so
that the multitude of other insane persons who seek for ad-
mission into such institutions could scarcely find room in them
unless some of the insane in the house died. Not one is ever
really and permanently cured in them! A convincing proof,
among many others, of the complete nullity of the non-healing
art hitherto practised, which has been ridicuously honored by
allopathic ostentation with the title of rational medicine. How
often, on the other hand, has not the true healing art, genuine,
pure homceopathy, been able to restore such unfortunate beings
to the possession of their mental and corporeal health, and to
give them back again to their delighted friends and to the world!


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 255


S228.


But if the antipsoric treatment be omitted, then we
may almost assuredly expect, from a much slighter cause
than brought on the first attack of the insanity, the
speedy occurrence of a new and more lasting and severe
fit, during which the psora usually develops itself com-
pletely, and passes into either a periodic or continued
mental derangement, which is then more difficult to be
cured by antipsorics.


C224.


If the mental disease be not quite developed, and if
it be still somewhat doubtful whether it really arose
from a corporeal affection, or did not rather result from
faults of education, bad practices, corrupt morals, neglect
of the mind, superstition or ignorance; the mode of de-
ciding this point will be, that if it proceed from one or
other of the latter causes it will diminish and be im-
proved by sensible friendly exhortations, consolatory
arguments, serious representations and sensible advice;
whereas a real moral or mental malady, depending on
bodily disease, would be speedily aggravated by such a
course, the melancholic would become still more de-
jected, querulous, inconsolable and reserved, the spiteful
maniac would thereby become still more exasperated, and
the chattering fool would become manifestly more fool-
feme*-


™ Tt would seem as though the mind, in these cases, felt with
uneasiness and grief the truth of these rational representations


256 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S225)


There are, however, as has just been stated, certainly
a few emotional diseases which have not merely been
developed into that form out of corporeal diseases, but
which, in an inverse manner, the body being but slightly
indisposed, originate and are kept up by emotional
causes, such as continued anxiety, worry, vexation,
wrongs and the frequent occurrence of great fear and
fright. This kind of emotional diseases in time destroys
the corporeal health, often to a great degree.


§ 226.


It is only such emotional diseases as these, which were
first engendered and subsequently kept up by the mind
itself, that, while they are yet recent and before they have
made very great inroads on the corporeal state, may, by
means of psychical remedies, such as a display of confi-
dence, friendly exhortations, sensible advice, and often
by a well-disguised deception, be rapidly changed into a
healthy state of the mind (and with appropriate diet
and regimen, seemingly into a healthy state of the body
also).


and acted upon the body as if it wished to restore the lost har-
mony, but that the body, by means of its disease, reacted upon
the organs of the mind and disposition and put them in still
greater disorder by a fresh transference of its sufferings on to
them.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 257


S 227) |
But the fundamental cause in these cases also is a
psoric miasm, which was only not yet quite near its full
development, and for security’s sake, the seemingly cured
patient should be subjected to a radical antipsoric treat-
ment, in order that he may not again as might easily
occur, fall into a similar state of mental disease.


S 228;


In mental and emotional diseases resulting from
corporeal maladies, which can only be cured by homceo-
pathic antipsoric medicine conjoined with carefully regu-
lated mode of life, an appropriate psychical behavior
towards the patient on the part of those about him and
of the physician must be scrupulously observed, by way
of an auxiliary mental regimen. To furious mania we
must oppose calm intrepidity and cool, firm resolution—
to doleful, querulous lamentation, a mute display of
commiseration in looks and gestures—to senseless chat-
tering, a silence not wholly inattentive—to disgusting
and abominable conduct and to conversation of a simi-
lar character, total inattention. We must merely en-
deavor to prevent the destruction and injury of sur-
rounding objects, without reproaching the patient for his
acts, and everything must be arranged in such a way that
the necessity for any corporeal punishments and _tor-
tures 725 whatever may be avoided. This is so much the


% Tt is impossible not to marvel at the hard-heartedness and
indiscretion of the medical men in many establishments for


258 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


more easily effected, because in the administration of
the medicine—the only circumstance in which the em-
ployment of coercion could be justified—in the homceo-
pathic system the small doses of the appropriate medi-
cine never offend the taste, and may consequently be
given to the patient without his knowledge in his drink,
so that all compulsion is unnecessary.


S 229.


On the other hand, contradiction, eager explanations,
rude corrections and invectives, as also weak, timorous
yielding, are quite out of place with such patients; they
are equally pernicious modes of treating mental and
emotional maladies. But such patients are most of all
exasperated and their complaint aggravated by con-
tumely, fraud, and deceptions that they can detect. The


patients of this kind, who, without attempting to discover the
true and only efficacious mode of curing such diseases, which
is by homceopathic medicinal (antipsoric) means, content them-
selves with torturing these most pitiable of all human beings with
the most violent blows and other painful torments. By this
unconscientious and revolting procedure they debase themselves
beneath the level of the turnkeys in a house of correction, for
the latter inflict such chastisements as the duty devolving on
their office, and on criminals only, whilst the former appear, from
a humiliating consciousness of their uselessness as physicians,
only to vent their spite at the supposed incurability of mental
diseases in harshness towards the pitiable, innocent sufferers,
for they are too ignorant to be of any use and too indolent to
adopt a judicious mode of treatment.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE | 259


physician and keeper must always pretend to believe them
to be possessed of reason.

All kinds of external disturbing influences on their
senses and disposition should be if possible removed;
there are no amusements for their clouded spirit, no
salutary distractions, no means of instruction, no sooth-
ing effects from conversation, books or other things for
the soul that pines or frets in the chains of the diseased
body, no invigoration for it, but the cure; it is only when
the bodily health is changed for the better that tran-
quillity and comfort again beam upon their mind.1?°


§ 230.


If the antipsoric remedies selected for each particular
case of mental or emotional disease (there are incredi-
bly numerous varieties of them) be quite homceopathi-
cally suited for the faithfully traced picture of the mor-
bid state, which, if there be a sufficient number of this
kind of medicines known in respect of their pure effects,
is ascertained by an indefatigable search for the most
appropriate homceopathic remedy all the more easily, as
the emotional and mental state, constituting the princi-
pal symptom of such a patient, is so unmistakably per-
ceptible,—then the most striking improvement in no
very long time, which could not be brought about by
physicking the patient to death with the largest oft-


*° The treatment of the violent insane maniac and melancholic
can take place only in an institution specially arranged for their
treatment but not within the family circle of the patient.


260 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


repeated doses of all other unsuitable (allopathic)
medicines. Indeed, I can confidently assert, from great
experience, that the vast superiority of the homceopathic
system over all other conceivable methods of the treat-
ment is nowhere displayed in a more triumphant light
than in mental and emotional diseases of long standing,
which originally sprang from corporeal maladies or were
developed simultaneously with them.


S22


The intermittent diseases deserve a special considera-
tion, as well those that recur at certain periods—like the
great number of intermittent fevers, and the apparently
non-febrile affections that recur at intervals like inter-
mittent fevers—as also those in which certain morbid
states alternate at uncertain intervals with morbid states
of a different kind.


§ 232.


These latter, alternating diseases, are also very
numerous,??” but all belong to the class of chronic dis-


“7 Two or three states may alternate with one another. Thus,
for instance, in the case of double alternating diseases, certain
pains may occur persistently in the legs, etc., immediately on the
disappearance of a kind of ophthalmia, which latter again appears
as soon as the pain in the limbs has gone off for the time—
convulsions and spasms may alternate immediately with any
other affection of the body or some part of it—in a case of
threefold alternating states in a common indisposition, periods of


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 261


eases; they are generally a manifestation of developed
psora alone, sometimes, but seldom, complicated with a
syphilitic miasm, and therefore in the former case may
be cured by antipsoric medicines; in the latter, however,
in alternation with antisyphilitics as taught in my work
on the Chronic Diseases.


§ 233.


The typical intermittent diseases are those where a
morbid state of unvarying character returns at a tolerably
fixed period, whilst the patient is apparently in good
health, and takes its departure at an equally fixed period;
this is observed in those apparently non-febrile morbid
states that come and go in a periodical manner (at


apparent increase of health and unusual exaltation of the cor-
poreal and mental powers (extravagant gaiety, extraordinary ac-
tivity of the body, excess of comfortable feeling, inordinate ap-
petite, etc.) may occur, after which, and quite unexpectedly,
gloomy, melancholy humor, intolerable hypochondriacal de-
rangement of the disposition, with disorder of several of the
vital operations, the digestion, sleep, etc., appear, which again,
and just as suddenly, give place to the habitual moderate ill-
health; and so also several and very various alternating states.
When the new state makes its appearance, there is often no per-
ceptible trace of the former one. In other cases only slight traces
of the former alternating state remain when the new one occurs;
few of the symptoms of the first state remain on the appear-
ance and during the continuance of the second. Sometimes the
morbid alternating states are quite of opposite natures, as for
instance, melancholy periodically alternating with gay insanity
or frenzy.


262 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


certain times), as well as in those of a febrile character,
to wit, the numerous varieties of intermittent fevers.


§ 234.


Those apparently non-febrile, typical, periodically re-
curring morbid states just alluded to observed in one
single patient at a time (they do not usually appear
sporadically or epidemically) always belong to the
chronic diseases, mostly to those that are purely psoric,
are but seldom complicated with syphilis, and are suc-
cessfully treated by the same means; yet it is some-
times necessary to employ as an intermediate remedy
a small dose of a potentized solution of cinchona bark,
in order to extinguish completely their intermittent type.


S865.


With regard to the intermittent fevers,’® that prevail
sporadically or epidemically (not those endemically


“8 The pathology hitherto in vogue, which is still in the stage
of irrational infancy, recognizes but one single intermittent
fever, which it likewise termed ague, and admits of no varieties
but such as are constituted by the different intervals at which the
paroxysms recur, quotidian, tertian, quartan, etc. But there are
much more important differences among them than what are
marked by the periods of their recurrence; there are innumer-
able varieties of these fevers, some of which cannot even be
denominated ague, as their fits consist solely of heat; others,
again, are characterised by cold alone, with or without subse-
quent perspiration; yet others which exhibit general coldness of
the surface, with a sensation of heat on the patient’s part, or


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 263


located in marshy districts), we often find every parox-
ysm likewise composed of two opposite alternating


whilst the body feels externally hot, the patient feels cold;
others, again, in which one paroxysm consists entirely of a rigor
or simple chilliness, followed by an interval of health, while the
next consists of heat alone, followed or not by perspiration;
others, again, in which the heat comes first, and the cold stage
not till that is gone; others, again, wherein after a cold or hot
stage apyrexia ensues, and then perspiration comes on like a sec-
ond fit, often many hours subsequently; others, again, in which
no perspiration at all comes on, and yet others in which the
whole attack consists of perspiration alone, without any cold or
hot stage, or in which the perspiration is only present during the
heat; and there are innumerable other differences, especially in
regard to the accessory symptoms, such as headache of a peculiar
kind, bad taste in the mouth, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, want of
or excessive thirst, peculiar pains in the body or limbs, disturbed
sleep, deliria, alterations of temper, spasms, etc., before, during
or after the cold stage, before, during or after the hot stage, be-
fore, during, or after the sweating stage, and countless other varie-
ties. All these are manifestly intermittent fevers of very dif-
ferent kinds, each of which, as might naturally be supposed, re-
quires a special (homeopathic) treatment. It must be confessed
that they can almost all be suppressed (as is often done) by
enormous doses of bark and of its pharmaceutical preparation,
the sulphate of quinine; that is to say, their periodical recur-
rence (their typus) may be extinguished by it, but the patients
who suffered from intermittent fevers for which cinchona bark
is not suitable, as is the case with all those epidemic intermittent
fevers that traverse whole countries and even mountainous dis-
tricts, are not restored to health by the extinction of the typus;
on the contrary, they now remain ill in another manner, and
worse, often much worse, than before; they are affected by
peculiar, chronic bark dyscrasias, and can scarcely be restored
to health even by a prolonged treatment by the true system of
medicine—and yet that is what is called curing, forsooth!


264 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


states (cold, heat—heat, cold), more frequently still of
three (cold, heat, sweat). Therefore the remedy
selected for them from the general class of proved (com-
mon, not antipsoric) medicines must either (and reme-
dies of this sort are the surest) be able likewise to pro-
duce in the healthy body two (or all three) similar alter-
nating states, or else must correspond by similarity of
symptoms, in the most homceopathic manner possible,
to the strongest, best marked, and most peculiar alter-
nating state (either to the cold stage, or to the hot stage,
or to the sweating stage, each with its accessory symp-
toms, according as the one or other alternating state is
the strongest and most peculiar); but the symptoms of
the patient’s health during the intervals when he is free
from fever must be the chief guide to the most appropri-
ate homeeopathic remedy.'”°


S280),


The most appropriate and efficacious time for admin-
istering the medicine in these cases is immediately or
very soon after the termination of the paroxysm, as soon
as the patient has in some degree recovered from its


*° Dr. von Bonninghausen, who has rendered more services to
our beneficent system of medicine than any other of my disciples,
has best elucidated this subject, which demands so much care,
and has facilitated the choice of the efficient remedy for the
various epidemics of fever, in his work entitled Versuch einer
homéopathischen Therapie der Wechselfieber, 1833, Miinster bei
Regensberg.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 265


effects; it has then time to effect all the changes in the
organism requisite for the restoration of health, without
any great disturbance or violent commotion; whereas
the action of a medicine, be it ever so specifically appro-
priate, if given immediately before the paroxysm, coin-
cides with the natural recurrence of the disease and
causes such a reaction in the organism, such a violent
contention, that an attack of that nature produces at the
very least a great loss of strength, if it do not endanger
life.°° But if the medicine be given immediately after
the termination of the fit, that is to say, at the period
when the apyretic interval has commenced and a long
time before there are any preparations for the next
paroxysm, then the vital force of the organism is in the
best possible condition to allow itself to be quietly altered
by the remedy, and thus restored to the healthy state.


§ 237.


But if the stage of apyrexia be very short, as happens
in some very bad fevers, or if it be disturbed by some
of the after sufferings of the previous paroxysm, the
dose of the homceopathic medicine should be adminis-
tered when the perspiration begins to abate, or the other
subsequent phenomena of the expiring paroxysm begin
to diminish.


*° This is observed in the fatal cases, by no means rare, in
which a moderate dose of opium given during the cold stage
quickly deprived the patients of life.


266 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


Sates


Not infrequently, the suitable medicine has with a
single dose destroyed several attacks and brought about
the return of health, but in the majority of cases, an-
other dose must be administered after each attack.
Better still, however, when the character of the symp-
toms has not changed, doses of the same medicine given
according to the newer discovery of repetition of doses
(see note to § 270), may be given without difficulty by
dynamizing each successive dose with 10-12 succussions
of the vial containing the medicinal substance. Never-
theless, there are at times cases, though seldom, where
the intermittent fever returns after several days’ well
being. This return of the same fever after a healthy
interval is only possible when the noxious principle that
first caused the fever, is still acting upon the convales-
cent, as is the case in marshy regions. Here a perma-
nent restoration can often take place only by getting
away from this causative factor, as is possible by seeking
a mountainous retreat, if the cause was a marshy fever.


§ 239.


As almost every medicine causes in its pure action a
special peculiar fever, and even a kind of intermittent
fever with its alternating states, differing from all other
fevers that are caused by other medicines, homceopathic
remedies may be found in the extensive domain of medi-
cines for all the numerous varieties of natural intermit-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE Prey |


tent fevers and, for a great many of such fevers, even
in the moderate collection of medicines already proved on
the healthy individual.


& 240,


But if the remedy found to be the homceopathic specific
for a prevalent epidemic of intermittent fever do not
Ciliect a Periect cllre i seme One or oiler patient, if it be
not the influence of a marshy district that prevents the
cure, it must always be the psoric miasm in the back-
ground, in which case antipsoric medicines must be em-
ployed until complete relief is obtained.


S240


Epidemics of intermittent fever in situations where
none are endemic, are of the nature of chronic diseases,
composed of single acute paroxysms; each single epi-
demy is of a peculiar, uniform character common to all
the individuals attacked, and when this character is found
in the totality of the symptoms common to all, it guides
us to the discovery of the homceopathic (specific) rem-
edy suitable for all the cases, which is almost univer-
sally serviceable in those patients who enjoyed tolerable
health before the occurrence of the epidemy, that is to
say, who were not chronic sufferers from developed


psora.


268 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S242.


If, however, in such an epidemic intermittent fever
the first paroxysms have been left uncured, or if the
patients have been weakened by improper allopathic
treatment; then the inherent psora that exists, alas! in so
many persons, although in a latent state, becomes devel-
oped, takes on the type of the intermittent fever, and to
all appearances continues to play the part of the epi-
demic intermittent fever, so that the medicine, which
would have been useful in the first paroxysms (rarely
an antipsoric), is now no longer suitable and cannot be
of any service. We have now to do with a psoric inter-
mittent fever only, and this will generally be subdued


by minute and rarely repeated doses of sulphur or hepar
sulphuris in a high potency.


§ 243.


In those often very pernicious intermittent fevers
which attack a single person, not residing in a marshy
district, we must also at first, as in the case of acute dis-
eases generally, which they resemble in respect to their
psoric origin, employ for some days, to render what
service it may, a homceopathic remedy selected for the
special case from the other class of proved (not anti-
psoric) medicines; but if, notwithstanding this proced-
ure the recovery is deferred, we know that we have
to do with psora on the point of its development, and
that in this case antipsoric medicines alone can effect
ae pa@icat merne.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 269


§ 244.


The intermittent fevers endemic in marshy districts
and tracts of country frequently exposed to inundations,
give a great deal of work to physicians of the old school,
and yet a healthy man may in his youth become habitu-
ated even to marshy districts and remain in good health,
provided he preserves a faultless regimen and his system
is not lowered by want, fatigue or pernicious passions.
The intermittent fevers endemic there would at the most
only attack him on his first arrival; but one or two very
small doses of a highly potentized solution of cinchona
bark would, conjointly with the well-regulated mode of
living just alluded to, speedily free him from the disease.
But persons who, while taking sufficient corporeal exer-
cise and pursuing a healthy system of intellectual occupa-
tions and bodily regimen, cannot be cured of marsh inter-
mittent fever by one or a few of such small doses of
cinchona—in such persons psora, striving to develop’
itself, always lies at the root of their malady, and their
intermittent fever cannot be cured in the marshy district
without antipsoric treatment.13! It sometimes happens
that when these patients exchange, without delay, the
marshy district for one that is dry and mountainous,
recovery apparently ensues (the fever leaves them) if


131 Targe, oft-repeated doses of cinchona bark, as also con-
centrated cinchonic remedies, such as the sulphate of quinine,
have certainly the power of freeing such patients from the peri-
odical fits of the marsh ague; but those thus deceived into the
belief that they are cured remain diseased in another way, fre-
quently with an incurable Quinin intoxication. (See § 276 note.)


270 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


they be not yet deeply sunk in disease, that is to say, if
the psora was not completely developed in them and can
consequently return to its latent state; but they will never
regain perfect health without antipsoric treatment.


§ 245.


Tlaving thus seen what attention should, in the homceo-
pathic treatment, be paid to the chief varieties of diseases
and to the peculiar circumstances connected with them,
we now pass on to what we have to say respecting the
remedies and the mode of employing them, together with
the regimen to be observed during their use.


§ 246.


Every perceptibly progressive and strikingly increas-
ing amelioration during treatment is a condition which,
as long as it lasts, completely precludes every repetition
of the administration of any medicine whatsoever, be-
cause all the good the medicine taken continues to effect
is now hastening towards its completion. This is not
infrequently the case in acute diseases, but in more chronic
diseases, on the other hand, a single dose of an appropri-
ately selected homceopathic remedy will at times complete
even with but slowly progressive improvement and give
the help which such a remedy in such a case can accom-
plish naturally within 40, 50, 60, 100 days. This is,
however, but rarely the case; and besides, it must be a
matter of great importance to the physician as well as to
the patient that were it possible, this period should be


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 271


diminished to one-half, one-quarter, and even still less,
so that a much more rapid cure might be obtained. And
this may be very happily affected, as recent and oft-
repeated observations have taught me under the following
conditions: firstly, if the medicine selected with the utmost
care was perfectly homceopathic; secondly, if it is highly
potentized, dissolved in water and given in proper small
dose that experience has taught as the most suitable in
definite intervals for the quickest accomplishment of the
cure but with the precaution, that the degree of every
dose deviate somewhat from the preceding and following
in order that the vital principle which is to be altered to
a similar medicinal disease be not aroused to un-
toward reactions and revolt as is always the case
with unmodified and especially rapidly repeated doses.


§ 247.


It is impractical to repeat the same unchanged dose of
a remedy once, not to mention its frequent repetition


? What I said in the fifth edition of the Organon, in a long
note to this paragraph in order to prevent these undesirable
reactions of the vital energy, was all that the experience I then
had justified. But during the last four or five years, however,
all these difficulties are wholly solved by my new altered but
perfected method. The same carefully selected medi-
cine may now be given daily and for months, if necessary in
this way, namely, after the lower degree of potency has been
used for one or two weeks in the treatment of chronic disease,
advance is made in the same way to higher degrees, (beginning
according to the new dynamization method, taught herewith with
the use of the lowest degrees).


272 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


(and at short inervals in order not to delay the cure).
The vital principle does not accept such unchanged
doses without resistance, that is, without other symptoms
of the medicine to manifest themselves than those simi-
lar to the disease to be cured, because the former dose
has already accomplished the expected change in the
vital principle and a second dynamically wholly similar,
unchanged dose of the same medicine no longer finds,
therefore, the same conditions of the vital force. The
patient may indeed be made sick in another way by re-
ceiving other such unchanged doses, even sicker than he
was, for now only those symptoms of the given remedy
remain active which were not homceopathic to the orig-
inal disease, hence no step towards cure can follow, only
a true aggravation of the condition of the patient. But
if the succeeding dose is changed slightly every time,
namely potentized somewhat higher (pp. 269-270) ) then
the vital principle may be altered without difficulty by
the same medicine (the sensation of natural disease di-
minishing) and thus the cure brought nearer.***


*3'We ought not even with the best chosen homceopathic med-
icine, for instance one pellet of the same potency that was bene-
ficial at first, to let the patient have a second or third dose,
taken dry. In the same way, if the medicine was dissolved in
water and the first dose proved beneficial, a second or third and
even smaller dose from the bottle standing undisturbed, even in
intervals of a few days, would prove no longer beneficial, even
though the original preparation had been potentized with ten suc-
cussions or as I suggested later with but two succussions in
order to obviate this disadvantage and this according to above
reasons. But through modification of every dose in its dynamiza-
tion degree, as I herewith teach, there exists no offense, even if


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 278


§ 248.


For this purpose, we potentize anew the medicinal
solution *** (with perhaps 8, 10, 12 succussions) from
which we give the patient one or (increasingly) several
teaspoonful doses, in long lasting diseases daily or
every second day, in acute diseases every two to six hours
and in very urgent cases every hour or oftener. Thus in


the doses be repeated more frequently, even if the medicine be
ever so highly potentized with ever so many succussions. It almost
seems as if the best selected homceopathic remedy could best
extract the morbid disorder from the vital force and in chronic
diseases to extinguish the same only if applied in several dif-
ferent forms.


™ Made in 40, 30, 20, 15 or 8 tablespoonfuls of water with
the addition of some alcohol or a piece of charcoal in order to
preserve it. If charcoal is used, it is suspended by means of a
thread in the vial and is taken out when the vial is succussed.
The solution of the medicinal globule (and it is rarely necessary
to use more than one globule) of a thoroughly potentized medi-
cine in a large quantity of water can be obviated by making a
solution in only 7-8 tablespoonfuls of water and after thorough
succussion of the vial take from it one tablespoonful and put it
in a glass of water (containing about 7 to 8 spoonfuls), this
stirred thoroughly and then give a dose to the patient. If he
is unusually excited and sensitive, a teaspoonful of this solution
may be put in a second glass of water, thoroughly stirred and
teaspoonful doses or more be given. There are patients of so
great sensitiveness that a third or fourth glass, similarly prepared,
may be necessary. Each such prepared glass must be made fresh
daily. The globule of the high potency is best crushed in a few
grains of sugar of milk which the patient can put in the vial and
be dissolved in the requisite quantity of water.


274 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


chronic diseases, every correctly chosen homeopathic
medicine, even those whose action is of long duration,
may be repeated daily for months with ever increasing
success. If the solution is used up (in seven to fifteen
days) it is necessary to add to the next solution of the
same medicine if still indicated one or (though rarely)
several pellets of a higher potency with which we con-
tinue so long as the patient experiences continued im-
provement without encountering one or another com-
plaint that he never had before in his life. For if this
happens, if the balance of the disease appears in a group
of altered symptoms then another, one more homeopath-
cally related medicine must be chosen in place of the last
and administered in the same repeated doses, mindful,
however, of modifying the solution of every dose with
thorough vigorous succussions, thus changing its degree
of potency and increasing it somewhat. On the other
hand, should there appear during almost daily repetition
of the well indicated homceopathic remedy, towards the
end of the treatment of a chronic disease, so-called (§ 161)
homeopathic aggravations by which the balance of the
morbid symptoms seem to again increase somewhat (the
medicinal disease, similar to the original, now alone persist-
ently manifests itself). The doses in that case must then
be reduced still further and repeated in longer intervals
and possibly stopped several days, in order to see if the
convalescence need no further medicinal aid. The appar-
ent symptoms (Schein-Symptome) caused by the excess
of the homceopathic medicine will soon disappear and
leave undisturbed health in its wake. If only a small
vial say a dram of dilute alcohol is used in the treat-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 275


ment, in which is contained and dissolved through suc-
cussion one globule of the medicine which is to be used
by olfaction every two, three or four days, this also must
be thoroughly succussed eight to ten times before each


Olraction:


§ 249.


in the course of its action, produces new and trouble-
some symptoms not appertaining to the disease to be
cured, is not capable of effecting real improvement,’*°
and cannot be considered as homeeopathically selected ;
it must, therefore, either, if the aggravation be consider-
able, be first partially neutralized as soon as possible by
an antidote before giving the next remedy chosen more
accurately according to similarity of action; or if the


*° As all experience shows that the dose of the specially suited
homceopathic medicine can scarcely be prepared too small to effect
perceptible amelioration in the disease for which it is appropriate
(§§ 275-278), we should act injudiciously and hurtfully were we
when no improvement, or some, though it be even slight, aggrava-
tion ensties, to repeat or even increase the dose of the same med-
icine, as is done in the old system, under the delusion that it was
not efficacious on account of its small quantity (its too small dose).
Every aggravation by the production of new symptoms—when
nothing untoward has occurred in the mental or physical regimen
—imvariably proves unsuitableness on the part of the medicine
‘formerly given in the case of disease before us, but never indi-
cates that the dose has been too weak.


276 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


troublesome symptoms be not very violent, the next
remedy must be given immediately, in order to take the
place of the improperly selected one.**®


S ZA0.


When, to the observant practitioner who accurately
investigates the state of the disease, it is evident, in
urgent cases after the lapse of only six, eight or twelve
hours that he has made a bad selection in the medi-
cine last given, in that the patient’s state is growing
perceptibly, however slightly, worse from hour to hour,
by the occurrence of new symptoms and sufferings, it is
not only allowable for him, but it is his duty to remedy
his mistake, by the selection and administration of a
homceopathic medicine not merely tolerably suitable, but
the most appropriate possible for the existing state of the
disease (§ 167).


S AE


There are some medicines (e. g., ignatia, also bryonia
and rhus, and sometimes belladonna) whose power of
altering man’s health consists chiefly in alternating
actions—a kind of primary-action symptoms that are in


*° The well informed and conscientiously careful physician. will
never be in a position to require an antidote in his practice if he
will begin, as he should, to give the selected medicine in the small-
est possible dose. A like minute dose of a better chosen remedy
will re-establish order throughout.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 277,


part opposed to each other. Should the practitioner find,
on prescribing one of these, selected on strict homceo-
pathic principles, that no improvement follows, he will in
most cases soon effect his object by giving (in acute dis-
eases, even within a few hours) a fresh and equally small
dose of the same medicine.**”


S252.


But should we find, during the employment of the
other medicines in chronic (psoric) diseases, that the best
selected homceopathic (antipsoric) medicine in the suit-
able (minutest) dose does not effect an improvement, this
is a sure sign that the cause that keeps up the disease still
persists, and that there is some circumstance in the mode
of life of the patient or in the situation in which he is
placed, that must be removed in order that a permanent
cure may ensue.


§ 253.


Among the signs that, in all diseases, especially in
such as are of an acute nature, inform us of a slight
commencement of amelioration or aggravation that is not
perceptible to every one, the state of mind and the whole
demeanor of the patient are the most certain and in-
structive. In the case of ever so slight an improvement


“Tenatia” (in the first volume of the Materia Medica Pura).


278 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


we observe a greater degree of comfort, increased calm-
ness and freedom of the mind, higher spirits—a kind of
return of the natural state. In the case of ever so small
a commencement of aggravation we have, on the con-
trary, the exact opposite of this: a constrained, helpless,
pitiable state of the disposition, of the mind, of the whole
demeanor, and of all gestures, postures and actions, which
may be easily perceived on close observation, but cannot


§ 254.


The other new or increased symptoms, or, on the con-
trary, the diminution of the original ones without any
addition of new ones, will soon dispel all doubts from
the mind of the attentively observing and investigating


*8-The signs of improvement in the disposition and mind, how-
ever, may be expected only soon after the medicine has been taken
when the dose has been sufficiently nunute (1. e., as small as pos-
sible), an unnecessarily larger dose of even the most suitable ho-
mceopathic medicine acts too violently, and at first produces too
great and too lasting a disturbance of the mind and disposition to
allow us soon to perceive the improvement in them. I must here
observe that this so essential rule is chiefly transgressed by pre-
sumptuous tyros in homceopathy, and by physicians who are con-
verted to homceopathy from the ranks of the old school. From old
prejudices these persons abhor the smallest doses of the lowest
dilutions of medicine in such cases, and hence they fail to experi-
ence the great advantages and blessings of that mode of proceeding
which a thousandfold experience has. shown to be the most salu-
tary; they cannot effect all that homceopathy is capable of doing,
and hence they have no claim to be considered its adherents.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE | 279


practitioner with regard to the aggravation or ameliora-
tion; though there are among patients persons who are
either incapable of giving an account of this ameliora-
tion or aggravation, or are unwilling to confess it.


§ 255.


But even with such individuals we may convince our-
selves on this point by going with them through all the
symptoms enumerated in our notes of the disease one by
one, and finding that they complain of no new unusual
symptoms in addition to these, and that none of the old
symptoms are worse. If this be the case, and if an im-
provement in the disposition and mind have already been
observed, the medicine must have effected positive diminu-
tion of the disease, or, if sufficient time have not yet
elapsed for this, it will soon effect it. If, now, the im-
provement delay too long in making its appearance, this
depends either on some error of conduct on the part of
the patient, or on other interfering circumstances.


§ 256.


On the other hand, if the patient mention the occur-
rence of some fresh accidents and symptoms of import-
ance—signs that the medicine chosen has not been strictly
homceopathic—even though he should good-naturedly
assure us that he feels better, as is not infrequently the
case in phthisical patients with lung abscess, we must
not believe this assurance, but regard his state as aggra-
vated as it will soon be perfectly apparent it 1s.


280 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 257.


The true physician will take care to avoid making
favorite remedies of medicines, the employment of which
he has, by chance, perhaps found often useful, and which
he has had opportunities of using with good effect. If
he do so, some remedies of rarer use, which would have
been more homeeopathically suitable, consequently more
serviceable, will often be neglected.


§ 258.


The true practitioner, moreover, will not in his prac-
tice with mistrustful weakness neglect the employment of
those remedies that he may now and then have employed
with bad effects, owing to an erroneous selection (from
his own fault, therefore), or avoid them for other (false)
reasons, as that they were unhomceopathic for the case
of disease before him; he must bear in mind the truth,
that of medicinal agents that one alone invariably deserves
the preference in every case of disease which corresponds
most accurately by similarity to the totality of the char-
acteristic symptoms, and that no paltry prejudices should
interfere with this serious choice.


§ 250.


Considering the minuteness of the doses necessary and
proper in homceopathic treatment, we can easily under-
stand that during the treatment everything must be
removed from the diet and regimen which can have any


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 281


medicinal action, in order that the small dose may not
be overwhelmed and extinguished or disturbed by any
foreign medicinal irritant.?*® .


§ 260.


Hence the careful investigation into such obstacles to
cure is so much the more necessary in the case of patients
affected by chronic diseases, as their diseases are usually
aggravated by such noxious influences and other disease-
causing errors in the diet and regimen, which often
pass unnoticed.’*°


*° The softest tones of a distant flute that in the still midnight
hours would inspire a tender heart with exalted feelings and dis-
solve it in religious ecstasy, are inaudible and powerless amid dis-
cordant cries and the noise of day.


Coffee; fine Chinese and other herb teas; beer prepared with
medicinal vegetable substances unsuitable for the patient’s state;
so-called fine liquors made with medicinal spices; all kinds of
punch; spiced chocolate; odorous waters and perfumes of many
kinds ; strong-scented flowers in the apartment; tooth powders and
essences and perfumed sachets compounded of drugs; highly
spiced dishes and sauces; spiced cakes and ices; crude medicinal
vegetables for soups; dishes of herbs, roots and stalks of plants pos-
sessing medicinal qualities; asparagus with long green tips, hops,
and all vegetables possessing medicinal properties, celery, onions:
old cheese, and meats that are in a state of decomposition, or that
possess medicinal properties (as the flesh and fat of pork, ducks
and geese, or veal that is too young and sour viands), ought just
as certainly to be kept from patients as they should avoid all
excesses in food, and in the use of sugar and salt, as also
spirituous drinks, undiluted with water, heated rooms, woolen
clothing next the skin, a sedentary life in close apartments, or the


282 ORGANON OF MEDICINE
S_ AOI


The most appropriate regimen during the employment
of medicine in chronic diseases consists in the removal
of such obstacles to recovery, and in supplying where
necessary the reverse: innocent moral and _ intellectual
recreation, active exercise in the open air in almost all
kinds of weather (daily walks, slight manual labor),
suitable, nutritious, unmedicinal food and drink, etc.


S 262.


In acute diseases, on the other hand—except in cases
of mental alienation—the subtle, unerring internal sense
of the awakened life-preserving faculty determines so
clearly and precisely, that the physician only requires to
counsel the friends and attendants to put no obstacles in
the way of this voice of nature by refusing anything the


frequent indulgence in mere passive exercise (such as riding, driv-
ing or swinging), prolonged suckling, taking a long siesta in a
recumbent posture in bed, sitting up long at night, uncleanliness,
unnatural debauchery, enervation by reading obscene books, read-
ing while lying down, Onanism or imperfect or suppressed inter-
course in order to prevent conception, subjects of anger, grief, or
vexation, a passion for play, over-exertion of mind or body,
especially after meals, dwelling in marshy districts, damp rooms,
penurious living, etc. All these things must be as far as possible
avoided or removed, in order that the cure may not be obstructed
or rendered impossible. Some of my disciples seem needlessly to
increase the difficulties of the patient’s dietary by forbidding the
use of many more, tolerably indifferent things, which is not to be
commended.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 283


patient urgently desires in the way of food, or by trying
to persuade him to partake of anything injurious.


SAG


The desire of the patient affected by an acute disease
with regard to food and drink is certainly chiefly for
things that give palliative relief; they are, however, not
strictly speaking of a medicinal character, and merely
supply a sort of want. The slight hindrances that the
gratification of this desire, within moderate bounds, could
oppose to the radical removal of the disease 14! will be
amply counteracted and overcome by the power of the
homceopathically suited medicine and the vital force set
free by it, as also by the refreshment that follows from
taking what has been so ardently longed for. In like
manner, in acute diseases the temperature of the room
and the heat or coolness of the bed-coverings must also
be arranged entirely in conformity with the patient’s
wish. He must be kept free from all over-exertion of
mind and exciting emotions.


§ 264.


The true physician must be provided with genuine
medicines of unimpaired strength, so that he may be able


** This is, however, rare. Thus, for instance, in pure inflam-
matory diseases, where aconite is so indispensable, whose action
would be destroyed by partaking of vegetable acids, the desire of
the patient is almost always for pure cold water only.


284 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


to rely upon their therapeutic powers; he must be able,
himself, to judge of their genuineness.


§ 265.


It should be a matter of conscience with him to be
thoroughly convinced in every case that the patient
always takes the right medicine and therefore he must
give the patient the correctly chosen medicine prepared,
moreover, by himself.


§ 266.


Substances belonging to the animal and vegetable
kingdom possess their medicinal qualities most per-
fectly in their raw state.**?


“ All crude animal and vegetable substances have a greater or
less amount of medicinal power, and are capable of altering man’s
health, each in its own peculiar way. Those plants and animals
sused by the most enlightened nations as food have this advantage
over all others, that they contain a larger amount of nutritious
constituents; and they differ from the others in this that their
medicinal powers in their raw state are either not very great in
themselves, or are diminished by the culinary processes they are
subjected to: in cooking for domestic use, by the expression of the
pernicious juice (like the cassava root of South America), by fer-
mentation (of the rye-flour in the dough for making bread, sour-
crout prepared without vinegar and pickled gherkins), by smok-
ing and by the action of heat (in boiling, stewing, toasting, roast-
ing, baking), whereby the medicinal parts of many of these
substances are in part destroyed and dissipated. By the addition
of salt (pickling) and vinegar (sauces, salads) animal and vege-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 285


§ 267.


We gain possession of the powers of indigenous plants
and of such as may be had in a fresh state in the most
complete and certain manner by mixing their freshly
expressed juice immediately with equal parts of spirits of
wine of a strength sufficient to burn in a lamp. After
this has stood a day and a night in a close stoppered
bottle and deposited the fibrinous and albuminous matters,
the clear superincumbent fluid is then to be decanted off
for medicinal use.*? All fermentation of the vegetable


table substances certainly lose much of their injurious medicinal
qualities, but other disadvantages result from these additions.

But even those plants that possess most medicinal power lose
that in part or completely by such processes. By perfect dessica-
tion all the roots of the various kinds of iris, of the horseradish,
of the different species of arum and of the peonies lose almost all
their medicinal virtue. The juice of the most virulent plants often
becomes an inert, pitch-like mass, from the heat employed in
preparing the ordinary extracts. By merely standing a long time,
the expressed juice of the most deadly plants becomes quite power-
less; even at a moderate atmospheric temperature it rapidly takes
on the vinous fermentation (and thereby loses much of its medic-
inal power), and immediately thereafter the acetous and putrid
fermentation, whereby it is deprived of all its peculiar medicinal
properties; the fecula that is then deposited, if well washed, is
quite innocuous, like ordinary starch. By the transudation that
takes place when a number of green plants are laid one above the
other, the greatest part of their medicinal properties is lost.


™ Buchholz (Taschenb. f. Scheidek. u. Apoth. a. d. J., 1815,
Weimar, Abth. 1, vi) assures his readers (and his reviewer in
the Leipziger Literaturzeitung, 1816, No. 82, does not contradict
him) that for this excellent mode of preparing medicines we
have to thank the campaign in Russia, whence it was (in 1812)


286 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


juice will be at once checked by the spirits of wine mixed
with it and rendered impossible for the future, and the
entire medicinal power of the vegetable juice is thus re-
tained (perfect and uninjured) for ever by keeping the
preparation in well-corked bottles further protected with


wax to prevent evaporation and excluded from the sun’s
eink


imported into Germany. According to the noble practice of
many Germans to be unjust towards their own countrymen, he
conceals the fact that this discovery and those directions, which
he quotes in my very words from thé first edition of the
Organon of Rational Medicine, § 230 and note, proceed from
me, and that I first published them to the world two years
before the Russian campaign (the Organon appeared in 1810).
Some folks would rather assign the origin of a discovery to
the deserts of Asia than to a German to whom the honor
belongs. O tempora! O mores!

Alcohol has certainly been sometimes before this used for
mixing with vegetable juices, ¢. g., to preserve them some time
before making extracts of them, but never with the view of
administering them in this form.


“4 Although equal parts of alcohol and freshly expressed
juice are usually the most suitable proportion for affecting the
deposition of the fibrinous and albuminous matters, yet for
plants that contain much thick mucus (e. g., Symphytum offi-
cinale, Viola tricolor, etc.), or an excess of albumen (e. g.,
ZEthusa cynapium, Solanum nigrum, etc.), a double proportion
of alcohol is generally required for this object. Plants that are
veiy deficient in juice, as Oleander, Buxus, Taxus, Ledum,
Sabina, etc., must first be pounded up alone into a moist, fine
mass and then stirred up with a double quantity of alcohol, in
order that the juice may combine with it, and being thus ex-
tracted by the alcohol, may be pressed out; these latter may also
when dried be brought with milk-sugar to the millionfold tritur-
ation, and then be further diluted and potentized (v. § 271).


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 257
§ 268.


The other exotic plants, barks, seeds and roots that
cannot be obtained in the fresh state the sensible prac-
titioner will never take in the pulverized form on trust,
but will first convince himself of their genuineness in their
crude, entire state before making any medicinal employ-
imMettrOngi neni: 9


Tn order to preserve them in the form of powder, a pre-
caution is requisite that has hitherto been usually neglected by
druggists, and hence powders even of well-dried animal and
vegetable substances could not be preserved uninjured even in
well-corked bottles. The entire crude vegetable substances,
though perfectly dry, yet contain, as an indispensable condition
of the cohesion of their texture, a certain quantity of moisture,
which does not indeed prevent the unpulverized drug from
remaining in as dry a state as is requisite to preserve it from
corruption, but which is quite too much for the finely pulverized
state. The animal or vegetable substance which in its entire
state was perfectly dry, furnishes therefore, when finely pul-
verized, a somewhat moist powder, which, without rapidly be-
coming spoilt and mouldy, can yet not be preserved in corked
bottles if not previously freed from this superfluous moisture.
This is best effected by spreading out the powder in a flat tin
saucer with a raised edge, which floats in a vessel full of boil-
ing water (7. e., a water-bath), and, by means of stirring it
about, drying it to such a degree that all the small atoms of it
(no longer stick together in lumps, but) like dry, fine sand, are
easily separated from each other, and are readily converted into.
dust. In this dry state the fine powders may be kept forever
uninjured in well-corked and sealed bottles, in all their original
complete medicinal power, without ever being injured by mites or
mould; and they are best preserved when the bottles are kept
protected from the daylight (in covered boxes, chests, cases).
If not shut up in air-tight vessels, and not preserved from the


288 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


S260!


The homeeopathic system of medicine develops for its
special use, to a hitherto unheard-of degree, the inner
medicinal powers of the crude substances by means of a
process peculiar to it and which has hitherto never been
tried, whereby only they all become immeasurably and
penetratingly efficacious 14° and remedial, even those that
in the crude state give no evidence of the slightest medic-
mal power on the human body.

This remarkable change in the qualities of natural
bodies develops the latent, hitherto unperceived, as if slum-


access of. the light of the sun and day, all animal and vegetable
substances in time gradually lose their medicinal power more
and more, even in the entire state, but still more in the form of
powder.


“§ Long before this discovery of mine, experience had taught
several changes which could be brought about in different nat-
ural substances by means of friction, for instance, warmth, heat,
fire, development of odor in odorless bodies, magnetization of
steel, and so forth. But all these properties produced by fric-
tion were related only to physical and inanimate things, whereag
it is a law of nature according to which physiological and
pathogenic changes take place in the body’s condition by means
of forces capable of changing the crude material of drugs, even
in such as had never shown any medicinal properties. This is
brought about by trituration and succussion, but under the con-
dition of employing an indifferent vehicle in certain proportions.
This wonderful physical and especially physiological and patho-
genic law of nature had not been discovered before my time.
No wonder then, that the present students of nature and phy-
sicians (so far unknowing) cannot have faith in the magical
curative powers of the minute doses of medicines prepared
according to homeopathic rules (dynamized).


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 289


bering 147 hidden, dynamic (§ 11) powers which influence
the life principle, change the well-being of animal life.14*
This is effected by mechanical action upon their smallest
particles by means of rubbing and shaking and through
the addition of an indifferent substance, dry or fluid, are


*7'The same thing is seen in a bar of iron and steel where a
slumbering trace of latent magnetic force cannot but be recog-
nized in their interior. Both, after their completion by means
of the forge stand upright, repulse the north pole of a magnetic
needle with the lower end and attract the South pole, while the
upper end shows itself as the south pole of the magnetic needle.
But this is only a latent force; not even the finest iron particles
can be drawn magnetically or held on either end of such a bar.

Only after this bar of steel is dynamizged, rubbing it with a
dull file in one direction, will it become a true active powerful
magnet, one able to attract iron and steel to itself and impart
to another bar of steel by mere contact and even some distance
away, magnetic power and this in a higher degree the more it
has been rubbed. In the same way will triturating a medicinal
substance and shaking of its solution (dynamization, potentia-
tion) develop the medicinal powers hidden within and manifest
them more and more or if one may say so, spiritualizes the
material substance itself,

*8 On this account it refers only to the increase and stronger
development of their power to cause changes in the health of
animals and men if these natural substances in this improved
state, are brought very near to the living sensitive fibre or come
in contact with it (by means of intake or olfaction). Just as a
magnetic bar especially if its magnetic force is increased (dy-
namized) can show magnetic power only in a needle of steel
whose pole is near or touches it. The steel itself remains un-
changed in the remaining chemical and physical properties and
can bring about no changes in other metals (for instance, in
brass), just as little as dynamized medicines can have any action


upon lifeless things.


290 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


separated from each other. This process is called dyna-
mizing, potentizing (development of medicinal power) and
the products are dynamizations '*° or potencies in different
degrees.


2 7ley


In order to best obtain this development of power, a
small part of the substance to be dynamized, say one grain,
is triturated for three hours with three times one hundred
below *®° up to the one-millionth part in powder
form. For reasons given below (b) one grain


* We hear daily how homceopathic medicinal potencies are
called mere dilutions, when they are the very opposite, 7. ¢., a
true opening up of the natural substances bringing to light and
revealing the hidden specific medicinal powers contained within
and brought forth by rubbing and shaking. The aid of a
chosen, unmedicinal medium of attenuation is but a secondary
condition.

Simple dilution, for instance, the solution of a grain of salt
will become water, the grain of salt will disappear in the dilu-
tion with much water and will never develop into medicinal salt
which by means of our well prepared dynamization, is raised to
most marvelous power.

9 One-third of one hundred grains sugar of milk is put in a
glazed porcelain mortar, the bottom dulled previously by rubbing
it with fine, moist sand. Upon this powder is put one grain of
the powdered drug to be triturated (one drop of quicksilver,
petroleum, etc.). The sugar of milk used for dynamization
must be of that special pure quality that is crystallized on strings
and comes to us in the shape of long bars. For a moment the
medicine and powder are mixed with a porcelain spatula and
triturated rather strongly, six to seven minutes, with the pestle
rubbed dull, then the mass is scraped from the bottom of the


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 291


of this powder is dissolved in 500 drops of a mix-
ture of one part of alcohol and four parts of distilled
water, of which one drop is put in a vial. To this are


mortar and from the pestle for three to four minutes, in order
to make it homogeneous. This is followed by triturating it in
the same way 6-7 minutes without adding anything more and
again scraping 3-4 minutes from what adhered to the mortar
and pestle. The second third of the sugar of milk is now
added, mixed with the spatula and again triturated 6-7 minutes,
followed by the scraping for 3-4 minutes and trituration with-
out further addition for 6-7 minutes. The last third of sugar
of milk is then added, mixed with the spatula and triturated
as before 6-7 minutes with most careful scraping together. The
powder thus prepared is put in a vial, well corked, protected
from direct sunlight to which the name of the substance and
the designation of the first product marked too is given. In
order to raise this product to ro000, one grain of the powdered
too is mixed with the third part of 100 grains of powdered
sugar of milk and then proceed as before, but every third must
be carefully triturated twice thoroughly each time for 6-7 min-
utes and scraped together 3-4 minutes before the second and
last third of sugar of milk is added. After each third, the
same procedure is taken. When all is finished, the powder is
put in a well corked vial and labeled ra-a0s. If now, one grain
of this last powder is taken in the same way, the 1/1,000,000, 7. e.,
(1), each grain containing 1/1,000,000 the original substance.
Accordingly, such a trituration of the three degrees requires six
times six to seven minutes for triturating and six times 3-4
minutes for scraping, thus one hour for every degree. After
one hour such trituration of the first degree, each grain will
contain 1/000; of the second 1/10,0000; and in the third 1/1,000,000
of the drug used.* Mortar, pestle and spatula must be cleaned


*These are the three degrees of the dry powder trituration,
which, if carried out correctly, will effect a good beginning for
the dynamization of the medicinal substance.


202 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


added 100 drops of pure alcohol 151 and given one hun-
dred strong succussions with the hand against a hard but
elastic body.**? This is the medicine in the first degree of
dynamization with which small sugar globules ** may then
be moistened 7** and quickly spread on blotting paper to
dry and kept in a well-corked vial with the sign of (1)
degree of potency. Only one*® globule of this is taken


well before they are used for another medicine. Washed first
with warm water and dried, both mortar and pestle, as well as
spatula are then put in a kettle of boiling water for half an
hour. Precaution might be used to such an extent as to put
these utensils on a coal fire exposed to a glowing heat.


*2 The vial used for potentizing is filled two-thirds full.
*? Perhaps on a leather bound book.


*° They are prepared under supervision by the confectioner
from starch and sugar and the small globules freed from fine
dusty parts by passing them through a sieve. Then they are
put through a strainer that will permit only 100 to pass through
weighing one grain, the most serviceable size for the needs of a
homceopathic physician.

** A small cylindrical vessel shaped like a thimble, made of
glass, porcelain or silver, with a small opening at the bottom in
which the globules are put to be medicated. They are moistened
with some of the dynamized medicinal alcohol, stirred and
poured out on blotting paper, in order to dry them quickly.


“ According to first directions, one drop of the liquid of a
lower potency was to be taken to 100 drops of alcohol for
higher potentiation. This proportion of the medicine of
attenuation to the medicine that is to be dynamized (100:1) was
found altogether too limited to develop thoroughly and to a
high degree the power of the medicine by means of a number


ORGANON OF MEDICINE | 32


for further dynamization, put in a second new vial
(with a drop of water in order to dissolve it) and then


of such succussions without specially using great force of which
wearisome experiments have convinced me.

But if only one such globule be taken, of which 100 weigh
one grain, and dynamize it with 100 drops of alcohol, the pro-
portion of 1 to 50,000 and even greater will be had, for 500
such globules can hardly absorb one drop, for their saturation.
With this disproportionate higher ratio between medicine and
diluting medium many succussive strokes of the vial filed two-
thirds with alcohol can produce a much greater development of
power. But with so small a diluting medium as 100 to 1 of the
medicine, if many succussions by means of a powerful machine
are forced into it, medicines are then developed which, especially
in the higher degrees of dynamization, act almost immediately,
but with furious, even dangerous, violence, especially in weakly
patients, without having a lasting, mild reaction of the vital
produces medicines of highest development of power and
mildest action, which, however, if well chosen, touches all
suffering parts curatively.* In acute fevers, the small doses of
the lowest dynamization degrees of these thus perfected medicinal
preparations, even of medicines of long continued action (for
instance, belladonna) may be repeated in short intervals. In the
treatment of chronic disceases, it is best to begin with the lowest
degrees of dynamization and when necessary advance to higher,
ever more powerful but mildly acting degrees.


*In very rare cases, notwithstanding almost full recovery of
health and with good vital strength, an old annoying local
trouble continuing undisturbed it is wholly permitted and even
indispensably necessary, to administer in increasing doses the
homeopathic remedy that has proved itself efficacious but
potentized to a very high degree by means of many succussions
by hand. Such a local disease will often then disappear in a
wonderful way.


294 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


with 100 drops of good alcohol and dynamized in the
same way with 100 powerful succussions.

With this alcoholic medicinal fluid globules are again
moistened, spread upon blotting paper and dried quickly,
put into a well-stoppered vial and protected from heat and
stin light and given the sign (II) of the second potency.
And in this way the process is continued until the twenty-
ninth is reached. Then with roo drops of alcohol by means
of 100 succussions, an alcoholic medicinal fluid is formed
with which the thirtieth dynamization degree is given to
properly moistened and dried sugar globules.

By means of this manipulation of crude drugs are pro-
duced preparations which only in this way reach the full
capacity to forcibly influence the suffering parts of the
sick organism. In this way, by means of a similar arti-
ficial morbid affection, the influence of the natural disease
on the life principle present within is neutralized. By
means of this mechanical procedure, provided it is carried
out regularly according to the above teaching, a change
is effected in the given drug, which in its crude state shows
itself only as material, at times as unmedicinal material
but by means of such higher and higher dynamization, it
is changed and subtilized at last into spirit-like °° medici-


** This assertion will not appear improbable, if one considers
that by means of this method of dynamization (the prepara-
tions thus produced, I have found after many laborious ex-
periments and counter-experiments, to be the most powerful
and at the same time mildest in action, 1. ¢., as the most per-
fected) the material part of the medicine is lessened with each
degree of dynamization 50,000 times and yet incredibly increased
in power, so that the further dynamization of 125 and 18 ciphers


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 205


nal power, which, indeed, in itself does not fall within our
senses but for which the medicinally prepared globule,
dry, but more so when dissolved in water, becomes the
carrier, and in this condition, manifests the healing power
of this invisible force in the sick body.


§ 271.


If the physician prepares his homceopathic medicines
himself, as he should reasonably do in order to save
men from sickness,’ he may use the fresh plant itself,
as but little of the crude article is required, if he does not
need the expressed juice perhaps for purposes of healing.
He takes a few grains in a mortar and with 100 grains
sugar of milk three distinct times brings them to the one-


reaches only the third degree of dynamization. The thirtieth
thus progressively prepared would give a fraction almost im-
possible to be expressed in numbers. It becomes uncommonly
evident that the material part by means of such dynamization
(development of its true, inner medicinal essence) will ultimately
dissolve into its individual spirit-like, (conceptual) essence. In
its crude state therefore, it may be considered to consist really
only of this undeveloped conceptual essence.

*T Until the State, in the future, after having attained insight
into the indispensability of perfectly prepared homceopathic
medicines, will have them manufactured by a competent im-
partial person, in order to give them free of charge to homceo-
pathic physicians trained in homceopathic hospitals, who have
been examined theoretically and practically, and thus legally
qualified. The physician may then become convinced of these
divine tools for purposes of healing, but also to give them free
of charge to his patients—rich and poor.


296 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


millionth trituration ($270) before further potentizing of
a small portion of this by means of shaking is undertaken,
a procedure to be observed also with the rest of crude
drugs of either dry or oily nature.


See


Such a globule,’ placed dry upon the tongue, 1s one of
the smallest doses for a moderate recent case of illness.
Here but few nerves are touched by the medicine. A simi-
lar globule, crushed with some sugar of milk and dissolved
in a good deal of water (§ 247) and stirred well before
every administration will produce a far more powerful
medicine for the use of several days. Every dose, no mat-
ter how minute, touches, on the contrary, many nerves.


2273.


In no case under treatment is it necessary and therefore
not permissible to administer to a patient more than one
single, simple medicinal substance at one time. It is incon-
ceivable how the slightest doubt could exist as to whether
it was more consistent with nature and more rational to


“$8 These globules (§ 270) retain their medicinal virtue for
many years, if protected against sunlight and heat.

*° Two substances, opposite to each other, united into neutral
Natrum and middle salts by chemical affinity in unchangeable
proportions, as well as sulphuretted metals found in the earth
and those produced by technical art in constant combining pro-


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 207


ease or a mixture of several differently acting drugs. It is
absolutely not allowed in homceopathy, the one true, simple
and natural art of healing, to give the patient at one time
two different medicinal substances.


§ 274.


As the true physician finds in simple medicines, admin-
istered singly and uncombined, all that he can possibly
desire (artificial disease-forces which are able by homceo-
pathic power completely to overpower, extinguish, and
permanently cure natural diseases), he will, mindful of
the wise maxim that “it is wrong to attempt to employ
complex means when simple means suffice,” never think
of giving as a remedy any but a single, simple medicinal
substance; for these reasons also, because even though
the simple medicines were thoroughly proved with respect
to their pure peculiar effects on the unimpaired healthy


portions of sulphur and alkaline salts and earths, for instance
(natrum sulph. and calcarea sulph.) as well as those ethers
produced by distillation of alcohol and acids may together with
phosphorus be considered as simple medicinal substances by the
homeeopathic physician and used for patients. On the other
hand, those extracts obtained by means of acids of the so-called
alkaloids of plants, are exposed to great variety in their prepara-
tion (for instance, chinin, strychnine, morphine), and can, there-
fore, not be accepted by the homeopathic physician as simple
medicines, always the same, especially as he possesses, in the
plants themselves, in their natural state (Peruvian bark, nux
vomica, opium) every quality necessary for healing. Moreover,
the alkaloids are not the only constituents of the plants.


298 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


state of man, it is yet impossible to foresee how two and
more medicinal substances might, when compounded, hin-
der and alter each other’s actions on the human body;
and because, on the other hand, a simple medicinal sub-
stance when used in diseases, the totality of whose symp-
toms is accurately known, renders efficient aid by itself
alone, if it be homceopathically selected; and supposing
the worst case to happen, that it was not chosen in strict
conformity to similarity of symptoms, and therefore does
no good, it is yet so far useful that it promotes our
knowledge of therapeutic agents, because, by the new
symptoms excited by it in such a case, those symptoms
which this medicinal substance had already shown in
experiments, on the healthy human body are con-
firmed, an advantage that is lost by the employment of all
compound remedies.1°


§ 275.


The suitableness of a medicine for any given case of
disease does not depend on its accurate homceopathic
selection alone, but likewise on the proper size, or rather
smallness, of the dose. If we give too strong a dose of a
medicine which may have been even quite homceopathically
chosen for the morbid state before us, it must, notwith-


*° When the rational physician has chosen the perfectly
homceopathic medicine for the well-considered case of disease
and administered it internally, he will leave to irrational allo-
pathic routine the practice of giving drinks or fomentations of
different plants, of injecting medicated glysters and of rubbing
in this or the other ointment.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 299


standing the inherent beneficial character of its nature,
prove injurious by its mere magnitude, and by the un-
necessary, too strong impression which, by virtue of its
homeeopathic similarity of action, it makes upon the vital
force which it attacks and, through the vital force, upon
those parts of the organism which are the most sensitive,
and are already most affected by the natural disease.


S72 7G:


For this reason, a medicine, even though it may be
homeeopathically suited to the case of disease, does harm
in every dose that is too large, and in strong doses it does
more harm the greater its homceopathicity and the higher
the potency 161 selected, and it does much more injury than
any equally large dose of a medicine that is unhomceo-
pathic and in no respect adapted to the morbid state (allo-
pathic).

Too large doses of an accurately chosen homceopathic
medicine, and especially when frequently repeated, bring’
about much trouble as a rule. They put the patient not
seldom in danger of life or make his disease almost incur-
able. They do indeed extinguish the natural disease so


* The praise bestowed of late years by some few homceo-
pathists on the larger doses is owing to this, either that they
chose low dynamizations of the medicine to be administered (as
I myself used to do twenty years ago, from not knowing any
better), or that the medicines selected were not homceopathic
and imperfectly prepared by their manufacturers.


300 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


far as the sensation of the life principle is concerned and
the patient no longer suffers from the original disease from
the moment the too strong dose of the homceopathic medi-
cine acted upon him but he is in consequence more ill with
the similar but more violent medicinal disease which is
most difficult to destroy.?®


§ 277.


For the same reason, and because a medicine, provided
the dose of it was sufficiently small, is all the more salu-
tary and almost marvellously efficacious the more accu-
rately homeceopathic its selection has been, a medicine


*? Thus, by the continuous use of aggressive allopathic large
doses of mercurials against syphilis develop almost incurable
mercurial maladies, when yet one or several doses of a mild but
active mercurial preparation would certainly have radically
cured in a few days the whole venereal disease, together with
the chancre, provided it had not been destroyed by external
measures (as is always done by allopathy). In the same way,
the allopath gives Peruvian bark and quinine in intermittent
fever daily in very large doses, where they are correctly indi-
cated and where one very small dose of a highly potentized
China would unfailingly help (in marsh intermittents and even
in persons who were not affected by any evident psoric disease).
A chronic China malady (coupled at the same time with the
development of psora) is produced, which, if it does not grad-
ually kill the patient by damaging the internal important vital
organs, especially spleen and liver, will put him, nevertheless,
suffering for years in a sad state of health. A homceopathic
antidote for such a misfortune produced by abuse of large
doses of homceopathic remedies is hardly conceivable.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 301


whose selection has been accurately homceopathic must
be all the more salutary the more its dose is reduced to
the degree of minuteness appropriate for a gentle re-
medial effect.


§ 278.


Here the question arises, what is this most suitable
degree of minuteness for sure and gentle remedial effect;
how small, in other words, must be the dose of each indi-
vidual medicine, homceopathically selected for a case of
disease, to effect the best cure? To solve this problem,
and to determine for every particular medicine, what dose
of it will suffice for homceopathic therapeutic purposes
and yet be so minute that the gentlest and most rapid
cure may be thereby obtained—to solve this problem is, as
may easily be conceived, not the work of theoretical
speculation; not by fine-spun reasoning, not by specious
sophistry, can we expect to obtain the solution of this
problem. It is just as impossible as to tabulate in ad-
vance all imaginable cases. Pure experiment, careful
observation of the sensitiveness of each patient, and accu-
rate experience can alone determine this in each indi-
vidual case, and it were absurd to adduce the large doses
of unsuitable (allopathic) medicines of the old system,
which do not touch the diseased side of the organism
homeeopathically, but only attack the parts unaffected by
the disease, in opposition to what pure experience pro-
nounces respecting the smallness of the doses required
for homceopathic cures.


302 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 270.


This pure experience shows UNIVERSALLY, that if the
disease do not manifestly depend on a considerable
deterioration of an important viscus (even though it
belong to the chronic and complicated diseases), and if
during the treatment all other alien medicinal influences
are kept away from the patient, the dose of the homeo-
pathically selected and highly potentized remedy for the
beginning of treatment of an important, especially chronic
disease can never be prepared so small that it shall not
be stronger than the natural disease and shall not be
able to overpower it, at least in part and extinguish it
from the sensation of the principle of life and thus make
a beginning of a cure.


§ 280.


The dose of the medicine that continues serviceable
without producing new troublesome symptoms is to be
continued while gradually ascending, so long as the
patient with general improvement, begins to feel in a mild
degree the return of one or several old original com-
plaints. This indicates an approaching cure through a
gradual ascending of the moderate doses modified each
time by succussion (§ 247). It indicates that the vital
principle no longer needs to be affected by the similar
medicinal disease in order to lose the sensation of the
natural disease (§ 148). It indicates that the life princi-
ple now free from the natural disease begins to suffer
only something of the medicinal disease hitherto known as
homeopathic aggravation.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 203
S 2a


In order to be convinced of this, the patient is left
without any medicine for eight, ten or fifteen days, mean-
while giving him only some powders of sugar of milk.
If the few last complaints are due to the medicine simu-
lating the former original disease symptoms, then these
complaints will disappear in a few days or hours. If
during these days without medicine, while continuing
good hygienic regulations nothing more of the original
disease is seen, he 1s probably cured. But if in the later
days traces of the former morbid symptoms should show
themselves, they are remnants of the original disease not
wholly extinguished, which must be treated with renewed
higher potencies of the remedy as directed before. If a
cure is to follow, the first small doses must likewise be
again gradually raised higher, but less and more slowly
in patients where considerable irritability is evident than
in those of less susceptibility, where the advance to higher
dosage may be more rapid. There are patients whose
impressionability compared to that of the unsusceptible
ones is like the ratio as 1000 to 1. ,


SS),


It would be a certain sign that the doses were alto-
gether too large, if during treatment, especially in chronic
diseases, the first dose should bring forth a so-called
homeopathic aggravation, that is, a marked increase of
the original morbid symptoms first discovered and in the


304 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


same way every repeated dose (p. 247) however modi-
fied somewhat by shaking before its administration (i. e.,
more highly dynamized) .1®


*8-The rule to commence the homceopathic treatment of
chronic diseases with the smallest possible doses and only grad-
ually to augment them is subject to a notable exception in the
treatment of the three great miasms while they still effloresce
on the skin, « e., recently erupted itch, the untouched chancre
(on the sexual organs, labia, mouth or lips, and so forth), and
the figwarts. These not only tolerate, but indeed require, from
the very beginning large doses of their specific remedies of ever
higher and higher degrees of dynamization daily (possibly also!
several times daily). If this course be pursued, there is no
danger to be feared as is the case in the treatment of diseases
hidden within, that the excessive dose while it extinguishes the
disease, initiates and by continued usage possibly produces a
chronic medicinal disease. During external manifestations of
these three miasms this is not the case; for from the daily
progress of their treatment it can be observed and judged to
what degree the large dose withdraws the sensation of the dis-
ease from the vital principle day by day; for none of these
three can be cured without giving the physician the conviction
through their disappearance that there is no longer any further
need of these medicines.

Since diseases in general are but dynamic attacks upon the
life principle and nothing material—no materia peccans—as their
basis (as the oid school in its delusion has fabulated for a thou-
sand years and treated the sick accordingly to their ruin) there
is also in these cases nothing material to take away, nothing to
smear away, to burn or tie or cut away, without making the
patient endlessly sicker and more incurable (Chron. Dis. Part
1), than he was before local treatment of these three miasms
was instituted. The dynamic, inimical principle exerting its
influence upon the vital energy is the essence of these external
signs of the inner malignant miasms that can be extinguished


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 305


§ 283.


In order to work wholly according to nature, the true
pathic medicine most suitable in all respects in so small a
dose on account of this alone. For should he be misled by
human weakness to employ an unsuitable medicine, the
disadvantage of its wrong relation to the disease would
be so small that the patient could through his own vital
powers and by means of early opposition (p. 249) of the
correctly chosen remedy according to symptom similarity
(and this also in the smallest dose) rapidly extinguish
and repair it.


§ 284.


Besides the tongue, mouth and stomach, which
are most commonly affected by the administration of
medicine, the nose and respiratory organs are receptive


solely by the action of a homceopathic medicine upon the vital
principle which affects it in a similar but stronger manner and
thus extracts the sensation of internal and external spirit-like
(conceptual) disease enemy in such a way that it no longer
exists for the life principle (for the organism) and thus releases
the patient of his illness and he is cured.

Experience, however, teaches that the itch, plus its external
manifestations, as well as the chancre, together with the inner
venereal miasm, can and must be cured only by means of
specific medicines taken internally. But the figwarts, if they
have existed for some time without treatment, have need for
their perfect cure, the external application of their specific
medicines as well as their internal use at the same time.


306 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


of the action of medicines in fluid form by means of
olfaction and inhalation through the mouth. But the
whole remaining skin of the body clothed with epidermis,
is adapted to the action of medicinal solutions, especially
if the inunction is connected with simultaneous internal
administration.’**


O2265)


In this way, the cure of very old diseases may be
furthered by the physician applying externally, rubbing
it in the back, arms, extremities, the same medicine he


**The power of medicines acting upon the infant through the
milk of the mother or wet nurse is wonderfully helpful. Every
disease in a child yields to the rightly chosen homeceopathic
medicines given in moderate doses to the nursing mother and
so administered, is more easily and certainly utilized by these
new world-citizens than is possible in later years. Since most
infants usually have imparted to them psora through the milk
of the nurse, if they do not already possess it through heredity
from the mother, they may be at the same time protected
antipsorically by means of the milk of the nurse rendered
medicinally in this manner. But the case of mothers in their
(first) pregnancy by means of a mild antipsoric treatment,
especially with sulphur dynamizations prepared according to the
directions in this edition (p. 270), is indispensable in order to
destroy the psora—that producer of most chronic diseases—
which is given them hereditarily; destroy it both within them-
selves and in the feetus, thereby protecting posterity in advance.
This is true of pregnant women thus treated; they have given
birth to children usually more healthy and stronger, to the
astonishment of everybody. A new confirmation of the great
truth of the psora theory discovered by me.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 307


gives internally and which showed itself curatively. In
doing so, he must avoid parts subject to pain or spasm
or skin eruption.?®


*° From this fact may be explained those marvelous cures,
however infrequent, where chronic deformed patients, whose
skin nevertheless was sound and clean, were cured quickly and
permanently after a few baths whose medicinal constituents
(by chance) were homeceopathically related. On the other hand,
the mineral baths very often brought on increased injury with
patients, whose eruptions on the skin were suppressed. After
a brief period of well-being, the life principle allowed the
inner, uncured malady to appear elsewhere, more important for
life and health,

At times instead, the ocular nerve would become paralyzed
and produce amaurosis, sometimes the crystaline lens would
become clouded, hearing lost, mania or suffocating asthma would
follow or an apoplexy would end the sufferings of the deluded
patient. 5

A fundamental principle of the homceopathic physician (which
distinguishes him from every physician of all older schools) is
this, that he never employs for any patient a medicine, whose
effects on the healthy human has not previously been carefully
for the sick on mere conjecture of some possible usefulness
for some similar disease or from hearsay “that a remedy has
helped in such and such a disease’—such conscienceless venture
the philanthropic homceopathist will leave to the allopath. A
genuine physician and practitioner of our art will therefore
never send the sick to any of the numerous mineral baths, be-
cause almost all are unknown so far as their accurate, positive
effects on the healthy human organism is concerned, and when
misused, must be counted among the most violent and dangerous
drugs. In this way, out of a thousand sent to the most cele-
brated of these baths by ignorant physicians allopathically un- .
cured and blindly sent there perhaps one or two are cured by


308 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


§ 286.


The dynamic force of mineral magnets, electricity and
galvanism act no less powerfully upon our life principle
and they are not less homceopathic than the properly so-
called medicines which neutralize disease by taking them
through the mouth, or by rubbing them on the skin or
by olfaction. There may be diseases, especially dis-
eases of sensibility and irritability, abnormal sensations,
and involuntary muscular movements which may be
cured by those means. But the more certain way of
applying the last two as well as that of the so-called
electro-magnetic machine lies still very much in the dark
to make homceopathic use of them. So far both elec-
tricity and Galvanism have been used only for palliation
to the great damage of the sick. The positive, pure
action of both upon the healthy human body have until
the present time been but little tested.


chance more often return only apparently cured and the miracle
is proclaimed aloud. Hundreds, meanwhile sneak quietly away,
more or less worse and the rest remain to prepare themselves
for their eternal resting place, a fact that is verified by the
presence of numerous well-filled graveyards surrounding the
most celebrated of these spas.*


*A true homceopathic physician, one who never acts without
correct fundamental principles, never gambles with the life of
the sick entrusted to him as in a lottery where the winner is in
the ratio of I to 500 or I000 (blanks here consisting of aggrava-
tion or death), will never expose any one of his patients to such
danger and send him for good luck to a mineral bath, as is
done so frequently by allopaths in order to get rid of the sick
in an acceptable manner spoiled by him or others.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 309


§ 287.


The powers of the magnet for healing purposes can
be employed with more certainty according to the posi-
tive effects detailed in the Materia Medica Pura under
north and south pole of a powerful magnetic bar.
Though both poles are alike powerful, they ‘nevertheless
oppose each other in the manner of their respective
action. The doses may be modified by the length of
time of contact with one or the other pole, according as
the symptoms of either north or south pole are indicated.
As antidote to a too violent action the application of a
plate of polished zinc will suffice.


§ 288.


I find it yet necessary to allude here to animal magnet-
ism, as it is termed, or rather Mesmerism (as it should
be called in deference to Mesmer, its first founder) which
differs so much in its nature from all other therapeutic
agents. This curative force, often so stupidly denied
and disdained for a century, acts in different ways. It
is a marvelous, priceless gift of God to mankind by
means of which the strong will of a well intentioned per-
son upon a sick one by contact and even without this and
even at some distance, can bring the vital energy of the
healthy mesmeriser endowed with this power into another
person dynamically (just as one of the poles of a pow-
erful magnetic rod upon a bar of steel).

It acts in part by replacing in the sick whose vital
force within the organism is deficient here and there, in


e150) ORGANON OF MEDICINE


part also in other parts where the vital force has accumu-
lated too much and keeps up irritating nervous disorders
it turns it aside, diminishes and distributes it equally and
in general extinguishes the morbid condition of the life
principle of the patient and substitutes in its place the
normal of the mesmerist acting powerfully upon him, for
instance, old ulcers, amaurosis, paralysis of single organs
and so forth. Many rapid apparent cures performed in all
ages, by mesmerizers endowed with great natural power,
belong to this class. The effect of communicated human
power upon the whole human organism was most bril-
liantly shown, in the resuscitation of persons who had
lain some time apparently dead, by the most powerful
sympathetic will of a man in full vigor of vital energy,*®*
and of this kind of resurrection history records many
undeniable examples.

If the mesmerizing person of either sex capable at
the same time of a good-natured enthusiasm (even its
degeneration into bigotry, fanaticism, mysticism or phil-
anthropic dreaming) will be empowered all the more
with this philanthropic self-sacrificing performance to
direct exclusively the power of his commanding good


Especially of one of such persons, of whom there are not
many, who, along with great kindness of disposition and perfect
bodily powers, possesses but a very moderate desire for sexual
intercourse, which it would give him very little trouble wholly to
suppress, in whom, consequently, all the fine vital spirits that
would otherwise be employed in the preparation of the semen,
are ready to be communicated to others, by touching them and
powerfully exerting the will. Some powerful mesmerisers, with
whom I have become acquainted, had all this peculiar character.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 311


will to the recipient requiring his help and at the same
time to concentrate these, he may at times perform appar-
ent miracles.


§ 280.


All the above-mentioned methods of practising mes-
merism depend upon an influx of more or less vital force
into the patient, and hence are termed positive mesmer-
ism.**7 An opposite mode of employing mesmerism,
however, as it produces just the contrary effect, deserves
to be termed negative mesmerism. To this belong the
passes which are used to rouse from the somnambulic
sleep, as also all the manual processes known by the
names of sootiing and ventilating. This discharge by
means of negative mesmerism of the vital force accumu-
lated to excess in individual parts of the system of unde-
bilitated persons is most surely and simply performed by
making a very rapid motion of the flat extended hand,
held parallel to, and about an inch distant from the body,


17 When I here speak of the decided and certain curative
power of positive mesmerism, I most assuredly do not mean
that abuse of it, where, by repeated passes of this kind, con-
tinued for half an hour or a whole hour at a time, and, even
day after day, performed on weak, nervous patients, that
monstrous revolution of the whole human system is effected
which is termed somnambulism, wherein the human being is
travished from the world of sense and seems to belong more to
the world of spirits—a highly unnatural and dangerous state,
by means of which it has not infrequently been attempted to


cure chronic diseases.


312 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


from the top of the head to the tips of the toes.1% The
more rapidly this pass is made, so much the more effectu-
ally will the discharge be effected. Thus, for instance,
in the case where a previously healthy woman,** from
the sudden suppression of her catamenia by a violent
mental shock, lies to all appearance dead, the vital force
which is probably accumulated in the precordial region,
will, by such a rapid negative pass, be discharged and its
equilibrium throughout the whole organism restored, so
that the resuscitation generally follows immediately.17° In
like manner, a gentle, less rapid, negative pass diminishes
the excessive restlessness and sleeplessness accompanied
with anxiety sometimes produced in very irritable per-
sons by a too powerful positive pass, etc.


*8 Tt is a well known rule that a person who is either to be
positively or negatively mesmerised, should not wear silk on
any part of the body.

*° Tlence a negative pass, especially if it be very rapid, is
extremely injurious to a delicate person affected with a chronic
ailment and deficient in vital force.


7 A strong country lad, ten years of age, received in the
morning, on account of slight indisposition, from a professed
female mesmeriser, several very powerful passes with the points
of both thumbs, from the pit of the stomach along the lower
edge of the ribs, and he instantly grew deathly pale, and fell
into such a state of unconsciousness and immobility that no
effort could arouse him, and he was almost given up for dead.
I made his eldest brother give him a very rapid negative pass
from the crown of the head over the body to the feet, and in
one instant he recovered his consciousness and became lively
and well.


ORGANON OF MEDICINE 313


§ 290.


Here belongs also the so-called massage of a vigorous
good-natured person given to a chronic invalid, who,
though cured, still suffers from loss of flesh, weakness of
digestion and lack of sleep due to slow convalescence.
The muscles of the limbs, breast and back, separately
grasped and moderately pressed and kneaded arouse the
life principle to reach and restore the tone of the muscles
and blood and lymph vessels. The mesmeric influence
of this procedure is the chief feature and it must not be
used to excess in patients still hypersensitive.


§ 201.


Baths of pure water prove themselves partly pallia-
tive, partly as homceopathic serviceable aids in restor-
ing health in acute diseases as well as in convalescence
of cured chronic patients with proper consideration of
the conditions of the convalescent and the temperature
of the bath, its duration and repetition. But even if
well applied, they bring only physically beneficial
changes in the sick body, in themselves they are no true
medicine. The lukewarm baths at 25 to 27° R. serve to
arouse the slumbering sensibility of fibre in the apparent
dead (frozen, drowned, suffocated) which benumbed the
sensation of the nerves. Though only palliative, still
they often prove themselves sufficiently active, especially
when given in conjunction with coffee and rubbing with
the hands. They may give homeopathic aid in cases
where the irritability is very unevenly distributed and


314 ORGANON OF MEDICINE


accumulated too unevenly in some organs as is the case
in certain hysteric spasms and infantile convulsions. In
the same way, cold baths 10 to 6° R. in persons cured
medically of chronic diseases and with deficiency of vital
heat, act as an homceopathic aid. By instantaneous and
later with repeated immersions they act as a palliative re-
storative of the tone of the exhausted fibre. For this
purpose, such baths are to be used for more than momen-
tary duration, rather for minutes and of gradually low-
ered temperature, they are a palliative, which, since it
acts only physically has no connection with the disad-
vantage of a reverse action to be feared afterwards, as
takes place with dynamic medicinal palliatives.


>


shit


us


‘eo


Mayw S
Mead ¢
ery
7S .


ar


ae
2 rae
Sorel ” acy
' %e es
ee sy She NY r 2 ae rae ae
AANA we Ree cigs es
WAS LS p
as oes SN
Syd
xe
~ RS
org ene
= Bs
bd = A
i rie
oy Ss
Ses
x “Sh. aie
=
~
* a>
.
SS: =
sh oe
. mach eS
: ek
_s . ee
“ak : - = & TRY, J hae
Sra Pls - 3 i
SS St ag eS cai:


©
'


fo
ue


c
4A


a


yp


ois a
Bot “egy ON ASL AAS, Ps
Se els Ste Gos, ae oe
See Dea etn oy fy
= aren y Sey Soest: i he Ge
ASR TNE NS i areeey Oey ee 2
we ud SRC YY ete ™ at
wud, ate op yn sere t ae
ates | ob. Pear - =
a Sig 3S eet Ret SNS
Wes Sy. Sas arty a es
a a sh ee ey, Rey AoA Se ae
eRe eet RNS % ey .
Tee, th ay * UO ke
eR SENET ge ei, OE
BALE ES e
BCR : :
est papa) Ky. ee
, i x


ear
ee
be
eat


er

Hi a,

ake
8,


Se
Sans .
a eo.
= ee re ra
a


re


‘s


= oN Pe ae

ee ae a Se
g5 SPX .g hee

S SUP

w,

y=


Pike tal


Doe mve
