Organon of Medicine
Samuel Hahnemann (trans. Charles Dudgeon), 1849
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Hahnemann's Organon (Dudgeon's 1849 English translation) — the founding text of homeopathy: 'like cures like' and the minimum dose, from the source. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b21307957). This 1849 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

1


KING’S

College

LONDON

Ti?r-</-!d  Poj)

Library

i7u9


201174441  4


kings  college  LONDON


. /Ar.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


in  2015


' Cl  m


Melani’’  Uahui


OEGANON  OF  MEDICINE,

BY

SAMUEL  HAHNEMAN]^.

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FIFTH  GERMAN  EDITION

By

R.  E.  DUDGEON,  M.D.

Aude  sapere.


LONDON:

W.  HEADLAND,  15,  PRINCES  STREET,
HANOVER  SQUARE.


1849.


London ; W.  Davy  & Son,  Printers,  8,  Gilbert  Street,  Oxford  Street.


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE.  *


The  immortal  work  that  contains  the  full  ex-
position of  that  glorious  and  beneficent  system  of
medicine,  destined,  probably  at  no  very  distant
date,  to  supersede  entirely  all  other  systems  and
modes  of  treatment,  whose  every  page  abounds
in  profound  and  original  thought,  and  which  in
this  the  last  edition  that  underwent  the  Master’s
supervision,  contains  the  principles  of  his  doc-
trine in  their  most  perfect  and  matured  state,
needs  not  the  recommendation  of  overstrained
eulogy,  and  requires  no  introductory  essay  nor
explanatory  notes.  Perfect  and  complete  in  it-
self, it  leaves  no  point  of  doctrine  unexplained,
no  technical  detail  untouched,  no  adverse  argu-
ment unanswered.  A critical  essay  might  indeed

• a 2


ii  translator’s  preface.

be  written  to  indicate  and  perhaps  to  refute  the
Author’s  peculiar  physiological  notions,  hut  these
may  readily  be  gathered  from  a careful  perusal
of  the  text,  and  their  subversion  would  in  no
way  affect  the  value  of  the  therapeutic  principles
and  practice  inculcated.

To  dwell  upon  them,  therefore,  in  this  place,
were  superfluous,  but  I may  be  permitted  to  say
a few  words  respecting  my  own  share  in  the
following  pages  ; I refer  to  the  translation.

Convinced  that  what  the  English  student  of
Homoeopathy  required  was  an  exact  reproduction
of  the  Founder’s  great  work,  I have  conscien-
tiously endeavoured  to  render  my  translation  as
literal  as  possible,  and  as  far  as  the  different
genius  of  the  two  languages  admitted  of  it,  I
have  retained  the  same  expressions,  figures  of
speech,  and  even  the  somewhat  cumbrous  and
tautological  style  of  the  original,  no  doubt  to
the  horror  of  the  mere  philological  dilettante,
should  this  book  unfortunately  happen  to  fall
into  the  hands  of  such  a person,  but  to  the
satisfaction  of  the  earnest  student,  who  would


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.


iii

doubtless  consent  to  dispense  with  the  amenities
of  rhetorical  grace  for  the  conviction  that  the
exact  meaning  of  the  Author  has  nowhere  been
sacrificed  to  any  fancied  elegance  of  style  or
expression.*

The  notes  I have  introduced,  distinguished  by
being  enclosed  within  brackets  [ ],  refer  almost
entirely  to  the  views  and  practice  of  the  Author
subsequent  to  the  puhhcation  of  this  last  edition,
and  will  he  found  interesting  as  they  exhibit  con-
siderable differences  from  those  in  the  text,  and
would  in  all  likehhood  have  been  substituted  for
these  by  Hahnemann  had  he  hved  to  publish
a sixth  edition  of  his  work.


* In  some  cases  I have  taken,  what  many  may  think  unwarrantable
liberties  with  the  mother  tongue  in  the  creation  and  new  adaptation
of  several  words  not  usually  met  with  in  ordinary,  hut  common
enough  in  homoeopathic  writings.  These  are  chiefly : dynamize,
potentize  ( dynamisiren,  potenziren),  dynamization  ( Dynamisation,
Potenzirung),  potency  (Potenz)  in  the  sense  of  a potent  agent.  If  it
he  objected  that  these  are  not  English  words,  it  may  he  replied  that
neither  are  they  German,  but  were  originally  coined  by  Hahnemann,
to  express  what  there  were  no  precise  words  for  in  his  o^vn  tongue,
and  what  our  own  is  equally  deflcient  in,  as  faithful  translators,  there-
fore, there  is  nothing  for  us,  but  to  anglicize  them  as  best  we  may.


IV


translator’s  preface.


By  an  accidental  coincidence  the  day  on  which
I have  completed  the  translation  of  his  master-
piece, brings  round  the  ninety-fifth  anniversary
of  the  birth  of  this  extraordmary  Reformer  of
the  medical  art.  The  advanced  age  to  which  he
lived  (he  died  but  six  years  since)  made  it  almost
seem  as  if  the  Sage  of  a former  epoch  was  privi-
leged himself  to  hand  down  to  posterity  the
discoveries  he  had  made  in  a previous  century
for  the  benefit  of  all  succeeding  ages.  The
truth,  wliich  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  Organon
attained  its  perfect  development,  first  feebly
dawned  upon  his  mind  in  1790,  and  six  years
later  he  recorded  these  imperfect  ghmmerings
of  the  pure  light  in  the  periodical  medical
Journal  of  his  friend  Hufeland;*  in  1805  ap-
peared his  “Medicine  of  Experience,”!  wherein
the  great  principle  is  more  boldly  enunciated.
The  whole  doctrine,  systematized  and  illustrated,


* Essay  on  a new  principle,  &c.,  translated  in  the  volume  published
by  the  British  Homceopathic  Association  for  1848.

f Translated  inVols.  I and  II  of  the  British  Jotirnal  of  Homoeo-
pathy.


translator’s  preface.


V


was  given  to  the  world  in  1810,  in  the  first
edition  of  tliis  work,  under  the  title  of  “ Organon
of  rational  medicine;”  a second  edition  with  the
title  significantly  abbreviated  into  “ Organon  of
medicine”  appeared  in  1819,  a third  improved
and  enlarged  one  in  1824,  a fourth*  also  en-
larged in  1829,  and  this,  the  fifth  edition  with
numerous  alterations  and  additions,  in  1833.
These  dates  shew  the  slow  and  gradual  growth
of  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  in  the  Discoverer’s
mind,  and  give  us  the  assurance  that  in  the
present  work  every  point  and  feature  of  the  new
system  has  been  carefully  weighed,  and  as  far  as
possible,  experimentally  proved,  by  the.  cautious
and  accurately  observing  Father  of  Modern
Medicine.

The  portrait  which  accompanies  this  volume
is  engraved  from  a picture  painted  by  the  talented
Mine.  Hahnemann  shortly  before  her  husband’s
decease,  and  is  acknowledged  to  be  an  excellent


* An  English  translation  of  this,  by  Mr.  Devrient,  was  published
in  1833.


VI


translatob’s  preface.


likeness,  by  those,  who,  from  close  intimacy  with
the  illustrious  original,  ought  to  he  the  best
judges.

R.  E.  D.

London,
loth  April,  1849.


PREFACE


• TO  THE  FIFTH  EDITION.


In  order  to  give  a general  notion  of  the  treatment  of
diseases  pursued  by  the  old  school  of  medicine  (Allo-
pathy), I may  observe,  that  it  presupposes  the  existence
sometimes  of  excess  of  blood  [plethora — which  is  never
present)^  sometimes  of  morbid  matters  and  acridities,
hence  it  taps  off  the  life’s  blood  and  exerts  itself
either  to  clear  away  the  imaginary  morbid  matter,
or  to  conduct  it  elsewhere  (by  emetics,  purgatives,
sialagogues,  diaphoretics,  diuretics,  drawing  plasters,
setons,  issues,  &c.),  in  the  vain  belief  that  the  dis-
ease will  thereby  be  weakened  and  substantially  eradi-
cated, in  place  of  which,  the  patient’s  sufferings  are
thereby  increased,  and  by  such  and  other  painful  appli-
ances the  forces  and  nutritious  juices,  indispensable  to
the  curative  process,  are  abstracted  from  the  organism.


Vlll


PREFACE  TO


It  assails  the  body  with  large  doses  of  powerful  medi-
cines, often  repeated  in  rapid  succession  for  a long
time,  whose  long-enduring,  not  unfrequently  frightful
effects  it  knows  not,  and  which  it,  purposely  it  would
almost  seem,  makes  unrecognisable  by  the  com-
mingling of  several  such  unknown  substances  in  one
prescription,  and  by  their  long-continued  employment,
it  develops  in  the  body  new  and  often-  ineradicable
medicinal  diseases.  Whenever  it  can,  too,  it  employs,
in  order  to  keep  in  favour  with  its  patient,*  remedies
that  immediately  suppress  and  hide  the  morbid  symp-
toms by  opposition  {contraria  contrariis)  for  a short  time
(palliative  treatment),  but  that  leave  the  disposition
to  these  symptoms  (the  disease  itself)  strengthened
and  aggravated.  It  considers  the  affection  on  the
exterior  of  the  body  as  purely  local  and  existing
there  independently,  and  vainly  supposes  that  it  has
cured  it,  when  it  has  driven  it  away  by  means  of
external  remedies,  so  that  the  internal  affection  is
thereby  compelled  to  break  out  on  a nobler  and  more
important  part.  When  it  knows  not  what  else  to  try

* For  the  same  object  the  practised  Allopath  delights  to  invent  a
fixed  name,  by  preference  a Greek  one,  for  the  malady,  in  order
to  make  the  patient  believe  that  he  has  long  known  this  disease  like
an  old  acquaintance,  and  hence  is  the  fittest  j)erson  to  cure  it.


THE  FIFTH  EDITION.


IX


with  the  disease  which  will  not  yield  or  which  grows
worse,  the  old  school  of  medicine  undertakes  to
change  it  at  random,  by  means  of  an  alterative,  for  ex-
ample, by  the  life-undermining  calomel,  corrosive
sublimate  and  other  mercurial  preparations  in  large
doses.

To  render  (through  ignorance),  if  not  fatal,  at
all  events  incurable,  the  vast  majority  (^yiooths)  of
all  diseases,  those  of  a chronic  character,  by  con-
tinually weakening  and  tormenting  the  debilitated
patient,  already  suffering  without  that  from  his  disease,
and  by  adding  new  destructive  drug  diseases,  this
distinctly  seems  to  be  the  unhallowed  main  busi-
ness of  the  old  school  of  medicine  (Allopathy) — and
a very  easy  business  it  is,  when  once  one  has  become
familiar  with  this  pernicious  practice  and  is  sufficiently
insensible  to  the  stings  of  conscience !

And  yet  for  all  these  mischievous  operations  the
ordinary  physician  of  the  old  school  can  assign  his
reasons,  which  however  rest  only  on  the  foregone  con-
clusions of  his  books  and  teachers,  and  on  the  authority
of  this  or  that  distinguished  physician  of  the  old
school.  Even  the  most  opposite  and  the  most  sense-
less modes  of  treatment  find  there  their  defence,  their
authority — let  their  injurious  effects  speak  ever  so


X


PREFACE  TO


loudly  against  them.  It  is  under  the  old  physician
who  has  been  at  last  gradually  convinced  of  the  mis-
chievous nature  of  his  so-called  art,  after  many  years
of  misdeeds,  and  who  only  continues  to  treat  the
severest  diseases  with  strawberry  syrup  mixed  with
plantain  water  (^.  e.  with  nothing)*  that  the  smallest
number  are  injured  and  die.’

This  non-healing  art,  which  for  many  centuries  has
been  in  full  possession  of  the  power  to  dispose  of
the  life  and  death  of  patients  according  to  its  own
good  will  and  pleasure,  and  in  that  period  has  short-
ened the  lives  of  ten  times  as  many  human  beings  as
the  most  destructive  wars,  and  rendered  many  millions
of  patients  more  diseased  and  wretched  than  they
were  originally — this  Allopathy,  I shall  first  expose
somewhat  more  minutely,  before  teaching  in  detail  its
exact  opposite,  the  newly-discovered,  true  healing  art.

With  regard  to  the  latter  (Homoeopathy)  it  is  quite
otherwise.  It  can  easily  convince  every  reflecting
person  that  the  diseases  of  man  depend  on  no  sub-
stance, no  acridity,  that  is,  no  material  principle  of
disease,  but  that  they  are  solely  spiritual  (dynamic)
derangements  of  the  spiritual  power  that  animates  the
human  body  (the  vital  force).  Homoeopathy  knows
that  a cure  can  only  take  place  by  the  reaction  of  the


THE  FIFTH  EDITION.


XI


vital  force  against  the  rightly  chosen  remedy  that  has
been  administered,  and  that  the  cure  will  be  certain  and
rapid  in  proportion  to  the  strength  with  which  the  vital
force  still  prevails  in  the  patient.  Hence  Homoeopathy
avoids  everything  in  the  slightest  degree  enfeebling and
as  much  as  possible  every  excitation  of  pain,  for  pain
also  diminishes  the  strength,  and  hence  it  employs
for  the  cure  only  those  medicines  whose  effects
in  altering  and  deranging  (dynamically)  the  health,
it  knows  accurately,  and  from  these  it  selects  one
whose  health  altering  power  (its  medicinal  disease)
is  capable  of  removing  the  natural  disease  in  question
by  similarity  {similia  similibus),  and  this  it  administers
to  the  patient  simply  and  alone,  but  in  rare  and
minute  doses  (so  small,  that  without  occasioning  pain,
or  weakening,  they  just  suffice  to  remove  the  natural
malady  by  means  of  the  reacting  energy  of  the  vital


* Homoeopathy  sheds  not  a drop  of  hlood,  administers  no  emetics,
purgatives,  laxatives  or  diaphoretics,  drives  off  no  external  affection
hy  external  means,  prescribes  no  warm  haths  nor  medicated  clysters,
applies  no  Spanish  flies  nor  mustard  plasters,  no  setons,  no  issues,
creates  no  ptyalism,  burns  not  with  moxa  nor  red  hot  iron  to  the
very  bone,  and  the  like,  but  gives  with  its  own  hand  its  own  prepa-
rations of  simple,  uncompounded  medicines  which  it  is  accurately
acquainted  with,  never  subdues  pain  by  opium,  &c.


Xll


PREFACE  TO


force),  with  this  result,  that  without  weakening,  in-
juring or  torturing  him  in  the  very  least,  the  natural
disease  is  extinguished,  and  the  patient,  even  whilst
his  cure  is  going  on,  gains  in  strength,  and  thus  is
cured — an  apparently  easy,  hut  actually  troublesome
and  difficult  business  and  one  requiring  much  thought,
but  which  restores  the  patient  to  perfect  health,  with-
out suffering  and  in  a short  time — and  thus  it  is  a salu-
tary and  blessed  business.

Thus  Homoeopathy  is  a perfectly  simple  system  of
medicine,  remaining  always  fixed  in  its  principles  as
in  its  practice,  which,  like  the  doctrine  whereon  it  is
based,  if  rightly  apprehended  will  be  found  to  be  so
exclusive  (and  in  that  way  only,  serviceable),  that  as
the  doctrine  is  pure,  so  must  the  practice  be  also,"  and
all  backward  straying  * to  the  pernicious  routine  of
the  old  school  (whose  opposite  it  is,  as  day  is  to  night)


* I am  therefore  sorry  that  I once  gave  the  advice  savouring  of
Allopathy,  to  apply  to  the  back  in  psoric  diseases  a resinous  plaster
to  cause  itching,  and  to  employ  the  finest  electrical  sparks  in  paralytic
alfections.  For  as  both  these  appliances  have  seldom  proved  of
service,  and  have  burnished  the  bastard  homoeopathists  with  an  excuse
for  their  allopathic  transgressions,  I am  grieved  I should  ever  have
proposed  them,  and  / hereby  solemnly  retract  them — for  this  reason
also,  that,  since  then,  our  homoeopathic  system  has  advanced  so  near
to  perfection  that  they  are  now  no  longer  required.


THE  FIFTH  EDITION.


Xlll


is  totally  impossible,  otherwise  it  ceases  to  deserve
the  honourable  name  of  Homoeopathy.

That  some  erring  physicians  who  would  wish  to
be  considered  Homoeopathists,  engraft  some,  to  them
more  convenient,  allopathic  bad  practices  upon  their
nominally  homoeopathic  treatment,  is  owing  to  igno-
rance of  the  doctrine,  laziness,  contempt  for  suffering
humanity,  and  ridiculous  conceit,  and,  in  addition  to
unpardonable  negligence  in  searching  for  the  best
homoeopathic  specific  for  each  case  of  disease,  has
often  a base  love  of  gain  and  other  dishonourable
motives  for  its  spring — and  for  its  result  1 that  they
cannot  cure  all  important  and  serious  diseases  (which
pure  and  careful  Homoeopathy  can),  and  that  they
send  many  of  their  patients  to  that  place  whence  no
one  returns,  whilst  the  friends  console  themselves
with  the  reflexion,  that  everything  (including  every
hurtful  allopathic  process!)  has  been  done  for  the
departed.

Samuel  Hahnemann.


Coethen,  2^th  March,  1833.


■Jr^-


'->V  J .


-■>  V'vV^'  ■ <-


yy^'


\i^  ii^  H>'''v'*'''  'T


:'-vV-:  •A  «iiii*i>


>'-'-fp  * Tu


• rf  >1  r#.-V


.0  S«)V  '

•0^  y.i.x.. . iilft’'!i^.^''  . V •■  ’^i'  ;'■  -.


'


...  •;.  ''.-;;?j|fffnl'5ffc'.0f/»rliO«S-  . > t.

.WDifc  •.) ,dut4i  i»ii  • K-'irfjJM


'5j.-^t'  ■!


jiM  rmnitKi


'x  x yi  y :.[(■■  yrut’i'i  ■ i.«nf  •

C \ • . .*  .^  ' 'ipjilli..  ■ ; ; ‘',4;


^ ->V
'>  ' .


<■•  • 4*


,t!L»..


-H’TJI  J'


‘ 1 1


•Iff,


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION,

PA.aB

Review  of  the  medication,  allopathy,  and  palliative  treatment  that
have  prevailed  to  the  present  time  in  the  old  school  of  medicine  . . 1

Examples  of  homoeopathic  cures  performed  unwittingly  hy  physicians

■ of  the  old  school  of  medicine 57

Non-medical  persons  also  have  found  the  treatment  on  the  principle

of  similarity  of  action  to  be  the  only  efficacious  mode  97

Note. — Isopathy 100

Some  physicians  of  an  earlier  period  even,  suspected  that  this  was  the
most  excellent  mode  of  treatment 106

TEXT  OF  THE  ORGANON  109


§ i,  ii.  The  sole  mission  of  the  physician  is  to  cure  rapidly,  gently,  per-
manently ; -

Note. — not  to  construct  theoretical  systems,  nor  to  make  attempts  to  explain
phenomena.

iii,  iv.  He  must  investigate  what  is  to  he  cured  in  diseases,  and  know
what  is  curative  in  the  various  medicines,  in  order  to  be  able  to
adapt  the  latter  to  the  former,  and  must  also  understand  how  to
preserve  the  health  of  men.

v.  Attention  to  exciting  and  fundamental  causes  and  other  circum-

stances, as  auxiliaries  to  treatment.

vi.  For  the  physician,  the  disease  consists  only  of  the  totality  of  its

symptoms.

Note. — The  old  school’s  vain  attempts  to  discover  the  essential  nature  of
disease  {prima  causa).

vii.  Whilst  paying  attention  to  those  circumstances  (§  v.)  the  physician

needs  only  to  remove  the  totality  of  the  symptoms,  in  order  to
cure  the  disease.

Note  1. — The  cause  that  manifestly  produces  and  maintains  the^disease  shoiUd
be  removed.

Note  2. — Impropriety  of  the  symptomatic  palUative  mode  of  treatment  directed
towards  a single  symptom.

b


XVI


CONTENTS.


§ viii.  If  all  the  symptoms  be  eradicated,  the  disease  is  always  cured
internally  also.

Note. — This  is  stupidly  denied  by  the  old  school.

ix.  During  health  a spiritual  power  (autocracy,  vital  force)  animates
the  organism  and  keeps  it  in  harmonious  order.

X.  Without  this  animating,  spiritual  power  the  organism  is  dead.

xi.  In  disease,  the  vital  force  only  is  primarily  morbidly  deranged,  and

expresses  its  sufferings  (the  internal  change)  by  abnormal  sensations
and  functions  of  the  organism.

Note. — It  is  unnecessary  for  the  treatment  to  know  how  the  vital  force  pro-
duces the  symptoms.

xii.  By  the  disappearance  of  the  sum  total  of  the  symptoms  by  the  cure,

the  whole  affection  of  the  vital  force,  that  is  to  say,  the  whole
internal  and  external  morbid  state  is  also  removed.

xiii.  To  regard  those  diseases  that  are  not  surgical  as  a peculiar  distinct
thing  residing  in  the  human  frame  is  an  absurdity  which  has  ren-
dered allopathy  so 'pernicious.

xiv.  Everything  of  a morbid  nature  that  is  curable  makes  itself  known
to  the  physician  by  symptoms  of  disease.

XV.  The  affection  of  the  diseased  vital  force  and  the  symptoms  of  disease
thereby  produced  constitute  an  inseparable  whole — they  are  one
and  the  same.

xvi.  It  is  only  by  the  spiritual  influences  of  morbific  noxious  agents  that
our  spiritual  vital  force  can  become  ill,  and  in  like  manner,  only  by
the  spiritual  (dynamic)  operation  of  medicines  that  it  can  be  again
restored  to  health.

xvii.  The  practitioner,  therefore,  only  needs  to  take  away  the  totality  of
the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  he  has  removed  the  entire  disease.

Note  1,  2. — Illustrative  examples.

xviii.  The  collection  of  symptoms  is  the  only  indication,  the  only  guide
to  the  selection  of  a remedy.

xix.  The  alteration  of  the  health  in  diseases  (the  symptoms  of  the  disease)
cannot  be  cured  by  the  medicines  otherwise,  than  in  so  far  as  the
latter  have  the  power  of  also  producing  alterations  in  man’s  health.

XX.  This  power  of  medicines  to  alter  the  health  can  only  be  ascertained
in  their  operations  on  (healthy)  persons.

xxi.  The  morbid  symptoms  that  medicines  produce  in  healthy  individuals,
are  the  only  thing  wherefrom  we  can  learn  their  power  to  cure
disease.


CONTENTS.


XVI 1


xxii.  If  experience  should  shew,  that  by  medicines  that  possess  similar
symptoms  to  the  disease  the  latter  would  be  most  certainly  and
permanently  cured,  we  must  select  for  the  cure  medicines  with
similar  symptoms — but  should  it  shew,  that  the  disease  is  most
certainly  and  peraanently  cured  by  opposite  medicinal  symptoms,
we  must  choose  for  the  cure  medicines  with  opposite  symptoms.

Note, — The  employment  of  medicines,  whose  symptoms  have  no  real  (patho-
logical) relation  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  but  which  act  on  the  body  in  a
different  manner,  is  the  allopathic  method,  which  is  to  be  rejected,

xxiii.  By  opposite  medicinal  symptoms  (antipathic  treatment ) persisting
symptoms  of  disease  are  not  cured.

xxiv,  XXV.  The  other  remaining  method  of  treatment,  the  homoeopathic,
by  means  of  medicines  with  similar  symptoms,  is  the  only  one  that
experience  shews  to  be  always  serviceable,
xxvi.  This  is  dependent  on  the  therapeutic  law  of  nature,  that  a weak
dynamic  affection  in  the  living  organism  is  permanently  extin-
guished by  one  that  is  very  similar  to  and  stronger  than  it,  only
differing  from  it  in  kind.

Note. — This  applies  both  to  physical  affections  and  moral  maladies.

xxvii.  The  curative  power  of  medicines,  therefore,  depends  on  the  symp-
toms they  have  similar  to  the  disease,
xxviii,  xxix.  Attempt  to  explain  this  therapeutic  law  of  nature.

Note  1. — Illustrations  of  it.

[Note  2. — Later  notions  on  the  same  subject.]

XXX — xxxiii.  The  human  body  is  much  more  disposed  to  let  its  health  be
altered  by  medicinal  powers  than  by  natural  disease,
xxxiv,  XXXV.  The  correctness  of  the  homoeopathic  therapeutic  law  is
shewn  in  the  want  of  success  attending  every  unhomceopathic  treat-
ment of  a long-standing  disease,  and  in  this  also,  that  two  natural
diseases  meeting  together  in  the  body,  if  they  be  dissimilar  to  each
other,  do  not  remove  nor  cure  one  another,
xxxvi.  I.  The  older  disease  existing  in  the  body,  if  it  be  equally  strong
or  stronger,  keeps  away  from  the  patient  a new,  dissimilar  disease,
xxxvii.  Thus,  under  unhomceopathic  treatment  that  is  not  violent,
chronic  diseases  remain  as  they  were,
xxxviii.  II.  Or  a new,  stronger  disease,  attacking  an  individual  already
ill,  suppresses,  only  as  long  as  it  lasts,  the  old  disease  that  is  dis-
similar to  it  and  akeady  existing  in  the  body,  but  never  re-
moves it.


XVlll


CONTENTS.


§ xxxix.  It  is  just  in  this  way  that  violent  treatment  with  allopathic  drugs
does  not  cure  a chronic  disease,  but  suppresses  it  only  during  the
influence  of  the  powerful  medicines,  which  are  unable  to  excite  any
symptom  similar  to  the  disease ; after  that,  the  chronic  disease
makes  it  appearance  as  bad  or  worse  than  before.

xl.  III.  Or  the  new  disease,  after  having  long  acted  on  the  body,  joins
the  old  one  that  is  dissimilar  to  it,  and  thence  arises  a double
(complex)  disease ; neither  of  these  two  dissimilar  diseases  removes
the  other.

xli.  Much  more  frequently,  than  in  the  course  of  nature,  an  artificial
disease  caused  by  the  long  continued  employment  of  powerful,  in-
appropriate (allopathic)  medicine  in  ordinary  practice,  associates
itself  with  the  old  natural  disease,  which  is  dissimilar  to  (and  there-
fore not  curable  by)  the  former,  and  the  chronic  patient  now
becomes  doubly  diseased.

xlii.  These  diseases  that  thus  complicate  one  another,  take,  on  account
of  their  dissimilarity,  each  the  place  in  the  organism  suited  for  it.

xliii,  xliv.  But  quite  otherwise  is  it  on  the  accession  of  a stronger  disease
to  a preexisting  one  similar  to  it ; in  that  case  the  latter  will  be
removed  and  cured  by  the  former.

xlv.  Explanation  of  this  phenomenon.

xlvi.  Instances  of  chronic  diseases  being  cured  by  the  accidental  ac-
cession of  another,  similar,  but  stronger  disease.

xlvii — xlix.  From  the  concurrence  of  diseases,  even  in  the  ordinary  course
of  nature,  it  is  only  one  that  displays  similar  symptoms  that  can
remove  and  cure  the  other,  a dissimilar  disease  can  never  do  this ;
this  will  instruct  the  physician  what  kind  of  medicines  he  can  cer-
tainly cure  with,  namely,  with  homoeopathic  ones  alone.

1.  N ature  has  but  few  diseases  to  send  to  the  homoeopathic  relief  of  other
diseases,  and  these  its  remedial  agents  are  accompanied  by  many
inconveniences.

li.  On  the  other  hand,  the  physician  has  innumerable  remedial  agents,
possessing  great  advantages  over  those.

Hi.  From  what  takes  place  in  nature,  the  physician  may  learn  never  to
treat  diseases  with  other  than  homoeopathically  selected  medicines,
whereby  he  will  be  able  to  cure  them,  v'hich  he  never  could  do
with  heterogeneous  (allopathic)  remedies,  that  never  cure,  but  only
destroy  the  patient.


CONTENTS.


XIX


§ liii,  liv.  There  are  hut  three  possible  inodes  of  employing  medicines
against  diseases :

1 , the  homoeopathic,  which  alone  is  efficacious ;

Iv.  2.  the  allopathic,  or  heteropathic ;

Ivi.  3.  the  antipathic  (enantiopathic),  which  is  merely  palliative.

Note. — Remarks  on  Isopathy,  as  it  is  termed.

Ivii.  The  method  of  treatment  in  which  a remedy  which  displays  an
opposite  action  {contraria  contrariis)  is  prescribed  for  a single
symptom  of  the  disease.

Iviii.  This  antipathic  procedure  is  not  defective  merely  because  it  is
directed  against  a single  symptom  of  the  disease  only,  hut  also,
because  in  persisting  ailments,  after  it  produces  a short  apparent
amelioration,  real  aggravation  ensues.

Note. — Testimonies  of  authors  to  the  truth  of  this.

lix.  Injurious  effects  of  some  antipathic  modes  of  treatment.

lx.  Increasing  the  dose  at  every  repetition  of  a palliative  never  cures  a
chronic  affection,  hut  occasions  still  greater  evil,

Ixi.  whence  physicians  ought  to  have  inferred  the  utility  of  an  opposite
way  to  cure,  the  only  good  one,  to  wit,  the  homoeopathic.

Ixii.  The  reason  of  the  injurious  nature  of  the. palliative,  and  of  the  sole
efficacy  of  the  homoeopathic  employment  of  medicines

Ixiii.  depends  upon  the  difference  between  the  primary  action  that
takes  place  from  the  influence  of  every  medicine,  and  the  reaction
or  secondary  action  subsequently  effected  by  the  organism  (the
vital  force).

Ixiv.  Explanation  of  the  primary  and  secondary  actions.

Ixv.  Examples  of  both.

Ixvi.  From  the  smallest  homoeopathic  doses  of  medicine  employed  in
treatment,  the  secondary  action  of  the  vital  force  merely  shews
itself  in  the  restoration  of  the  balance  of  health.

Ixvii.  From  these  truths,  the  salutary  character  of  the  homoeopathic
treatment,  as  also  the  perverted  nature  of  the  antipathic  (palliative)
system  are  evident.

Note. — Cases  in  which  the  antipathic  employment  of  medicines  is  alone  useful,

Ixviii.  How  is  the  efficacy  of  the  homoeopathic  system  proved  by  these
truths  ?

Ixix.  How  is  the  injurious  character  of  the  antipathic  treatment  proved
by  these  truths  ?

Note  1. — Opposite  sensations  do  not  neutralize  each  other  in  the  human
sensorium,  they  are  not,  therefore,  like  opposite  substances  in  chemistry.

Note  8. — Illustrative  example.


XX


CONTENTS,


§ Ixx.  Short  summary  of  the  homoeopathic  system  of  medicine.

Ixxi.  The  three  points  necessary  for  curing ; 1 . to  ascertain  the  disease ;
2.  to  ascertain  the  effects  of  the  medicines ; and,  3.  their  appro-
priate employment.

Ixxii.  General  survey  of  diseases — acute,  chronic.

Ixxiii.  Acute  diseases  that  attack  single  individuals,  sporadic,  epidemic,
acute  miasms.

Ixxiv.  The  veorst  kind  of  chronic  diseases  are  those  produced  by  the
unskilfulness  of  allopathic  physicians.

Ixxv.  These  are  the  most  incurable.

Ixxvi.  It  is  only  when  the  vital  force  is  still  sufficiently  powerful,  that
the  injury  can  then  be  repaired,  often  only  after  a long  time,  if  the
original  disease  be  at  the  same  time  homoeopathically  eradicated.

Ixxvii.  Diseases  inappropriately  named  chronic.

Ixxviii.  Chronic  diseases  proper ; they  aU  arise  from  chronic  miasms.

Ixxix.  Syphilis  and  sycosis.  • *

Ixxx,  Ixxxi.  Psora  ; it  is  the  mother  of  all  true  chronic  diseases,  except
the  syphilitic  and  sycotic.

Note.— Names  of  diseases  in  the  ordinary  patholog^y.

Ixxxii.  Among  the  more  specific  remedies  for  these  chronic  miasms,
especially  for  psora,  the  selection  of  those  for  the  cure  of  each  indi-
vidual case  of  chronic  disease  is  to  be  conducted  all  the  more
carefully.

Ixxxiii.  Qualifications  for  apprehending  the  picture  of  the  disease.

Ixxxiv — xeix.  Instructions  to  the  physician  for  investigating  and  tracing
the  picture  of  the  disease.

c — cii.  Investigation  of  the  epidemic  diseases  in  particular.

ciii.  In  like  manner  must  the  fundamental  cause  of  (non-syphilitic)
chronic  diseases  be  investigated  and  the  great  entire  picture  of  psora
be  displayed.

civ.  Utility  of  noting  down  in  writing  the  picture  of  the  disease,  for  the
purpose  of  curing,  and  in  the  progress  of  the  treatment.

Note. — How  the  old  school  physicians  go  about  the  investigation  of  the
morbid  state.

cv — cxiv.  Preliminaries  to  be  attended  to  in  investigating  the  pure  effects
of  medicines  on  healthy  individuals.  Primary  action.  Secondary
action.

cxv.  Alternating  actions  of  medicines.

cxvi,  cxvii.  Idiosyncrasies.


CONTENTS.


XXI


§ cxviii,  cxix.  The  action  of  every  medicine  differs  from  that  of  every
other.

Note. — There  can  be  no  such  things  as  surrogates.

cxx.  Every  medicine,  therefore,  must  be  carefully  proved  to  ascertain
the  peculiarity  of  its  special  effects.

cxxi — cxl.  Mode  of  proceeding,  when  we  make  trial  of  them  on  other
persons.

cxli.  The  experiments  of  the  healthy  physician  with  medicines  upon
himself  are  the  best.

cxlii.  The  investigation  of  the  pure  effects  of  medicines  in  diseases  is
difficult.

cxliii — cxlv.  From  such  investigations  of  the  pure  effects  of  medicines  on
healthy  persons,  only,  can  a real  materia  medica  be  formed.

cxlvi.  The  most  appropriate  therapeutic  employment  of  medicines  known
according  to  their  pure  effects.

cxlvii.  The  medicine  most  homoeopathically  corresponding  is  the  most
suitable,  is  the  specific  remedy.

cxlviii.  Explanation  of  how  a homoeopathic  cure  is  probably  effected.

cxlix.  The  homoeopathic  cure  of  a disease  that  has  occurred  suddenly  is
quickly  effected ; that  of  chronic  diseases,  however,  demands  pro-
portionally more  time.

Note. — Difference  betwixt  pure  homoeopatbists  and  the  mongrel  sect.

cl.  Slight  ailments.

cli.  Important  diseases  have  a number  of  symptoms.

clii.  For  those  with  numerous  striking  symptoms  a homoeopathic  remedy
can  be  more  certainly  found.

cliii.  What  kind  of  symptoms  ought  one  chiefly  to  attend  to  in  the  choice
of  a remedy  ?

cliv.  A remedy  as  homoeopathic  as  it  is  possible  to  be,  cures  without
much  disturbance.

civ.  Cause  of  the  freedom  from  disturbance  of  such  cures.

clvi.  Cause  of  the  slight  exceptions  to  this.

clvii — clx.  The  medicinal  disease  very  similar,  but  somewhat  superior
in  strength,  to  the  original  disease,  termed  also  homoeopathic
aggravation.

clxi.  In  chronic  (psoric)  diseases,  the  homoeopathic  aggravations  from
(antipsoric)  homoeopathic  medicines  occur  during  a period  of
several  days,  from  time  to  time.


XXll


CONTENTS,


§ clxii — clxxi.  Rules  for  treatment,  when  the  supply  of  known  medicines
is  too  small  to  allow  a perfect  homoeopathic  remedy  to  be  dis-
covered.

clxxii — clxxxiv.  Rules  for  the  treatment  of  diseases  with  too  few  symp-
toms : one-sided  diseases.

clxxxv — cciii.  Treatment  of  diseases  with  local  symptoms ; their  external
treatment  is  always  injurious.

cciv,  ccv.  All  chronic  affections  and  diseases  properly  so  called  (that  are
not  merely  produced  and  maintained  by  a bad  mode  of  living),
must  be  cm’ed  only  from  within,  by  the  homoeopathic  medicines
appropriate  for  the  miasm  that  lies  at  their  root,
ccvi.  Preliminary  investigation  of  the  miasm  that  lies  at  their  root,  of
the  simple  miasm,  or  its  complications  with  a second  (or  even
with  a third).

ccvii.  Enquiry  into  the  treatments  previously  employed,
ccviii,  ccix.  The  other  preliminary  enquiries  necessary  for  the  apprehen-
sion of  the  morbid  picture  of  the  chronic  disease,
ccx — ccxxx.  Treatment  of  the  so-called  mental  or  moral  diseases,
ccxxxi,  ccxxxii.  The  intermittent  and  alternating  diseases,
ccxxxiii,  ccxxxiv.  The  periodical  intermittent  diseases,
ccxxxv — ccxliv.  The  intermittent  fevers,
ccxlv — ccli.  Mode  of  using  the  remedies.

Note. — Eepetition  of  the  doses.  [Later  instructions  and  experience  on  this
point.]

cciii — cclvi.  Signs  of  commencing  improvement.

cclvii,  cclviii.  False  predilection  for  favourite  remedies  and  improper
aversion  to  other  medicines,
cclix — cclxi.  Regimen  in  chronic  diseases.

Note. — Injurious  things  in  the  habits  of  life,
cclxii,  cclxiii.  Diet  in  acute  diseases.

cclxiv — cclxvi.  Selection  of  the  most  energetic,  most  genuine  medicines.

Note. — Change  effected  on  some  substances  in  their  preparation  for  food,
cclxvii.  Preparation  of  the  most  powerful  and  most  durable  forms  of
medicines  from  plants  that  can  be  obtained  fresh,
cclxviii.  Dry  vegetable  substances.

Note. — Preparation  of  powders,  so  that  they  shall  keep,
cclxix — cclxxi.  The  mode  of  preparing  crude  medicinal  substances,
peculiar  to  homoeopathy,  so  as  to  develop  their  curative  powers  to
the  utmost.

[Note. — Later  technical  improvements.]


CONTENTS.


xxni


§ cclxxii— cclxxiv.  Only  one  single,  simple  medicine  should  be  given  to
the  patient  at  one  time.

cclxxv — cclxxxvii.  Strength  of  the  doses  for  homoeopathic  use — how
they  may  be  increased  or  diminished.  Their  dynamization.

cclxxxviii — ccxcii.  What  parts  of  the  body  are  more  or  less  susceptible
to  the  influence  of  the  medicines  ?

Note. — Advantages  of  the  olfaction  of  highly  potentized  medicines  over  every
other  method  of  taking  them.

ccxciii,  ccxciv.  Animal  magnetism  (mesmerism).  Its  positive  and  nega-
tive employment.


C


INTRODUCTION.


Review  of  the  medication,  allopathy,  and  palliative
treatment  that  have  prevailed  to  the  present  time  in
the  old  school  of  medicine.

As  long  as  men  have  existed  they  have  been  liable,
individually  or  collectively,  to  diseases  from  physical
or  moral  causes.  In  a rude  state  of  nature  but  few
remedial  agents  were  required,  as  the  simple  mode  of
living  admitted  of  but  few  diseases ; with  the  civili-
zation of  mankind  in  the  state,  on  the  contrary,  the
occasions  of  disease  and  the  necessity  for  medical  aid
increased  in  equal  proportion.  But  ever  since  that
time  (soon  after  Hippocrates,  therefore  for  2500  years)
men  have  occupied  themselves  with  the  treatment  of
the  ever  increasing  multiplicity  of  diseases,  who,  led
astray  by  their  vanity,  sought  by  reasoning  and
guessing  to  excogitate  the  mode  of  furnishing  this
aid.  Innumerable  and  dissimilar  ideas  respecting
the  nature  of  diseases  and  their  remedies  sprang  from
so  many  dissimilar  brains,  and  the  theoretical  views
these  gave  rise  to,  they  called  (structures)  systems.


B


2


INTRODUCTION.


each,  of  which  was  at  variance  with  the  rest  and
self-contradictory.  Each  of  these  subtile  expositions
at  first  threw  the  readers  into  stupified  amazement  at
the  incomprehensible  wisdom  contained  in  it,  and
attracted  to  the  system-monger  a number  of  followers,
who  re-echoed  his  unnatural  sophistry,  to  none  of
whom,  however,  was  it  of  the  slightest  use  in  enabling
them  to  cure  better,  until  a new  system,  often  dia-
metrically opposed  to  the  first,  thrust  that  aside,  and
in  its  turn  gained  a shortlived  renown.  None  of  them,
however,  was  in  consonance  with  nature  and  ex-
perience; they  were  mere  theoretical  webs,  constructed
by  cunning  intellects  out  of  pretended  consequences,
which  could  not  be  made  use  of  in  practice,  in  the
treatment  at  the  sick-bed,  on  account  of  their  exces-
sive subtilty  and  repugnance  to  nature,  and  only
served  for  empty  disputations.

Simultaneously,  but  quite  independent  of  all  these
theories,  there  sprung  up  a mode  of  treatment  Avith
mixtures  of  unknoAvn  medicinal  substances,  against
forms  of  disease  arbitrarily  set  up,  and  directed  to-
wards some  material  object,  completely  at  variance
with  nature  and  experience,  hence,  as  may  be  sup-
posed, with  a bad  result — such  is  old  medicine.
Allopathy  as  it  is  termed.

Without  disparaging  the  services  which  many
physicians  have  rendered  to  the  sciences  auxiliary  to
medicine,  to  natural  philosoy»hy  and  chemistry,  to
natural  history  in  its  various  branches,  and  to  that
of  man  in  particular,  anthropology,  physiology  and


INTRODUCTION,


3


anatomy,  &c.,  I shall  occupy  myself  here  with  the
practical  part  of  medicine  only,  with  the  healing  art
itself,  in  order  to  shew  how  it  is  that  diseases  have
hitherto  been  so  imperfectly  treated.  Far  beneath
my  notice  is  that  mechanical  routine  of  treating
precious  human  life  according  to  prescription  manuals,
the  continual  publication  of  which  shews,  alas ! how
frequently  they  are  still  used.  I pass  it  by  unnoticed,
as  a scandal  to  the  practitioners  of  the  ordinary  school.
I speak  merely  of  the  medical  art  as  hitherto  practised,
which,  presuming  on  its  antiquity,  imagines  itself  to
possess  a scientific  character.

The  partisans  of  the  old  school  of  medicine  flattered
themselves  that  they  could  justly  claim  for  it  alone
the  title  of  “ rational  medicine"  because  they  alone
sought  for,  and  strove  to  remove  the  cause  of  disease,
and  were  guided  hy  nature  in  the  treatment  of  diseases.

Tolle  causaml  they  cried  incessantly.  But  they  went
no  farther  than  this  empty  exclamation.  They  only  fan-
cied that  they  could  discover  the  cause  of  disease;  they
did  not  discover  it,  however,  as  it  is  not  perceptible,
and  not  discoverable.  For  as  far  the  greatest  number
of  diseases  are  of  dynamic  (spiritual)  origin  and
dynamic  (spiritual)  nature,  their  cause  is  therefore  not
perceptible  to  the  senses ; so  they  exerted  themselves
to  imagine  one,  and  from  a survey  of  the  parts  of  the
normal,  inanimate  human  body  (anatomy),  compared
with  the  visible  changes  of  the  same  internal  parts
in  persons  who  had  died  of  diseases  (pathological

B 2


4


INTRODUCTION.


anatomy),  as  also  from  what  they  could  deduce  from
a comparison  of  the  phenomena  and  functions  in
healthy  life  (physiology)  with  their  endless  alterations
in  the  innumerable  morbid  states  (pathology,  semeio-
tics),  to  draw  conclusions  relative  to  the  invisible
process  whereby  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the
inward  being  of  man  in  diseases  are  effected — a dim
picture  of  the  imagination,  which  theoretical  medicine
regarded  as  its  'prima  causa  morhi}  and  thus  it  was  at


^ It  would  have  been  much  more  consonant  with  sane  human
reason  and  with  the  nature  of  things,  had  they,  in  order  to  be  able
to  cure  a disease,  regarded  the  exciting  cause  as  the  causa  morhi,
and  endeavoured  to  discover  that,  and  thus  been  enabled  success-
fully to  employ  the  mode  of  treatment  which  had  shewn  itself  usehd
in  maladies  having  the  same  exciting  cause,  in  those  also  of  a similar
oi’igin,  as  for  example,  the  same  mercury  is  efficacious  in  an  ulcer
of  the  glans  after  impure  coitus,  as  in  aU  previous  venereal  chancres — •
if,  I say,  they  had  discovered  the  exciting  cause  of  all  other  (non-
venereal)  chronic  diseases  to  be  an  infection  at  one  period  or  another
with  the  itch  miasm  (psora),  and  had  found  for  all  these  a common
method  of  treatment,  regard  being  had  for  the  peculiarities  of  each
individual  case,  whereby  all  and  each  of  these  chronic  diseases
might  have  been  cured,  then  might  they  with  justice  have  boasted
that  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  they  had  in  view  the  otily
available  and  useful  causa  morhorum  chronicorum  {non  venereoruni),
and  with  this  as  a basis  they  might  have  treated  such  diseases  with
the  best  results.  But  during  these  many  centuries  they  were  unable
to  cure  the  millions  of  chronic  diseases,  because  they  knew  not  then-
origin  in  the  psoric  miasm  (which  was  fii'st  discovered  and  after-
wards provided  with  a suitable  plan  of  treatment  by  homoeopatliy),
and  yet  they  vaunted  that  they  alone  kept  in  view  the  prima  causa


INTRODUCTION.


5


one  and  the  same  time  the  proximate  cause  of  the  disease,
and  the  internal  essence  of  the  disease,  the  disease
itself — although,  according  to  the  principles  of  sane
human  reason,  the  cause  of  a thing  or  of  an  event,
can  never  be  at  the  same  time  the  thing  or  the  event
itself  How  could  they  then,  without  deceiving  them-
selves, consider  this  imperceptible  internal  essence  as
the  object  to  be  treated,  and  prescribe  medicines  for
it,  whose  curative  powers  were  likewise  generally
unknown  to  them,  and  even  give  several  such  un-
known medicines  mixed  together  in  what  are  termed
prescriptions  %

But  this  sublime  problem,  the  discovery,  namely,
a priori,  of  an  internal  invisible  cause  of  disease,
resolved  itself,  at  least  with  the  more  astute  physicians
of  the  old  school,  into  a search,  under  the  guidance
of  the  symptoms  it  is  true,  as  to  what  might  be
held  to  be  the  probable  general  character  of  the  case
of  disease  before  them ; ^ whether  it  was  spasm,  or
debility,  or  paralysis,  or  fever,  or  inflammation,  or


of  these  diseases  in  their  treatment,  and  that  they  alone  treated
rationally,  although  they  had  not  the  slightest  conception  of  the  only
useful  knowledge  of  their  psoric  origin,  and  consequently  they  bungled
the  treatment  of  all  chronic  diseases !

^ Every  physician  who  treats  disease  according  to  such  general
characters,  however  he  may  affect  to  claim  the  name  of  homceopa-
thist,  is  and  ever  will  remain  in  fact  a generalizing  allopath,  for
without  the  most  minute  individualization,  homoeopathy  is  not  con-
ceivable.


6


INTRODUCTION.


induration,  or  obstruction  of  this  or  that  part,  or  ex-
cess of  blood  (plethora),  deficiency  or  excess  of  oxygen,
carbon,  hydrogen,  or  nitrogen  in  the  juices,  exaltation
or  depression  of  the  functions  of  the  arterial,  venous,
or  capillary  system,  change  in  the  relative  propor-
tion of  the  factors  of  sensibility,  irritability,  or  repro-
duction!— conjectures  that  have  been  dignified  by
the  followers  of  the  old  school  with  the  title  of  causal
indication,  and  considered  to  be  the  only  possible
rationality  in  medicine ; but  which  were  assump-
tions, too  fallacious  and  hypothetical,  to  prove  of
any  practical  utility — incapable,  even  had  they  been
well  grounded,  of  indicating  the  most  appropriate
remedy  for  a case  of  disease ; flattering,  indeed,
to  the  vanity  of  the  learned  theorist,  but  usually
leading  astray  when  used  as  guides  to  practice,  and
wherein  there  was  evidenced  more  of  ostentation  than
of  an  earnest  search  for  the  curative  indication.

And  how  often  has  it  happened  that,  for  example,
spasm  or  paralysis  seemed  to  be  in  one  part  of  the
organism,  while  in  another  part  inflammation  was
apparently  present.

Or,  on  the  other  hand,  whence  are  the  certain  re-
medies for  each  of  these  pretended  general  characters
to  be  derived!  Those  that  would  certainly  be  of  benefit
could  be  none  other  than  the  specific  medicines,  that
is,  those  whose  action  is  analogous  ^ to  the  morbid


Now  termed  liomoeopathic.


INTRODUCTION.


7


irritation ; whose  employment,  however,  is  denounced
and  forbidden^  by  the  old  school  as  highly  injurious,
because  observation  has  shewn  that  in  consequence
of  the  receptivity  for  homogeneous  irritation  being  so
highly  increased  in  diseases,  such  medicines  in  the
usual  large  doses  are  dangerous  to  life.  The  old
school  never  dreamt  of  smaller,  and  of  extremely  small
doses.  Accordingly  no  attempt  was  made  to  cure  in
the  direct  (the  most  natural)  way,  by  means  of  homo-
geneous, specific  medicines ; nor  could  it  be  done,  as
the  efiects  of  most  medicines  were,  and  continued  to
remain,  unknown,  and  even  had  they  been  known,
it  would  have  been  impossible  to  hit  on  the  right
medicine,  with  such  generalizing  views  as  were  enter-
tained.

However,  perceiving  that  it  was  more  consistent
with  reason  to  seek  out  a straight  path,  where  that
was  possible,  than  to  take  a circuitous  course,  the  old
school  of  medicine  believed  it  might  cure  diseases  in
a direct  manner,  by  the  removal  of  the  (imaginary)
material  cause  of  disease — for  to  physicians  of  the  ordi-


' “Where  experience  shewed  the  cui'ative  power  of  homoeopathi-
cally  acting  remedies,  whose  mode  of  action  could  not  be  explained,
the  difficulty  was  avoided  by  calling  it  specific,  and  further  investiga-
tion was  stifled  by  this  actually  unmeaning  word.  The  homogeneous
excitant  remedies,  the  true  specific  (homoeopathic)  agents,  however,
had  long  previously  been  pi'ohibited  as  of  very  injurious  influence.”
— Ratj,  On  the  value  of  the  Homoeopathic  method  of  treatment.
Heidelberg,  1824,  pp.  101,  102.


8


INTRODUCTION.


nary  school,  while  investigating  and  forming  a judg-
ment upon  a disease,  and  not  less  while  seeking  for  the
curative  indication,  it  was  next  to  impossible  to  divest
themselves  of  these  material  ideas,  and  to  regard  the
nature  of  the  spiritual-corporeal  organism,  as  a being  so
highly  potentialized,  that  its  vital  changes  of  sensations
and  functions,  which  are  called  diseases,  must  be  pro-
duced and  effected  chiefly,  if  not  solely,  by  dynamic
(spiritual)  influences,  and  could  not  be  effected  in  any
other  way.

The  old  school  regarded  all  those  matters  which
were  altered  by  the  disease,  those  that  manifested
themselves  in  congestions,  as  well  as  those  abnormal
matters  that  were  excreted,  as  the  exciters  of  disease,
or  at  least,  on  account  of  their  supposed  reacting
power,  as  the  maintainers  of  disease,  and  this  latter
notion  prevails  to  this  day.

Hence  they  dreamed  of  effecting  causal  cures,  by
endeavouring  to  remove  these  imaginary  and  pre-
sumed material  causes  of  the  disease.  Hence  their
assiduous  evacuation  of  the  bile  by  vomiting,  in  bilious
fevers ; ^ their  emetics  in  cases  of  so-called  disordered
stomach ; ^ their  diligence  in  purging  away  the  mucus.


^ The  estimable  Dr.  Rau  {loc.  cit.  p.  176),  at  a time  when  not
perfectly  conversant  with  homoeopathy,  hut  fii-mly  convinced  of  the
dynamic  cause  of  these  fevers,  cured  them  without  employing  any
evacuating  remedy,  by  means  of  one  or  two  small  doses  of  homoeo-
pathic remedies,  two  very  remarkable  cases  of  which  he  relates
in  his  hook.

^ In  a case  of  sudden  derangement  of  the  stomach,  with  constant


INTRODUCTION.


9


the  lumbrici  and  the  ascarides  where  there  are  pale-


disgusting  eructations  with  the  taste  of  the  undigested  food,  generally
accompanied  hy  depression  of  spirits,  cold  hands  and  feet,  &c.,  the
ordinaiy  physician  has  hitherto  heen  in  the  habit  of  attacking  the
degenerated  contents  of  the  stomach  : a powerful  emetic  should

clean  it  out  completely.  This  object  was  generally  attamed  by
tartar  emetic,  with  or  without  ipecacuanha.  Does  the  patient,  how-
ever, immediately  after  this  become  well,  brisk  and  cheerful  ? Oh
no ! Such  a derangement  of  the  stomach  is  usually  of  dynamic
origin,  caused  hy  mental  disturbance  (grief,  terror,  anger),  a chUl,
exertion  of  the  mind  or  body  immediately  after  eating,  often  after
even  a moderate  meal.  Those  two  remedies  are  not  suitable  for
removing  this  dynamic  derangement,  and  just  as  little  is  the  revolu-
tionary vomiting  they  produce.  Moreover,  tartar  emetic  and  ipeca-
cuanha, from  their  other  peculiar'  pathogenetic  powers,  will  prove  of
further  injury  to  the  patient’s  health,  and  derange  the  biliary
secretion ; so  that  if  the  patient  be  not  very  robust,  he  must  feel  ill  for
several  days  from  the  effects  of  this  causal  treatment,  notwithstanding
all  this  violent  expulsion  of  the  whole  contents  of  the  stomach.  If
the  patient,  however,  in  place  of  taking  such  violent  and  always
hurtful  evacuant  drugs,  smell  only  a single  time  at  a globule  the  size
of  a mustard  seed,  moistened  with  a high  dilution  of  pulsatilla  juice,
whereby  the  derangement  of  his  health  in  general,  and  of  his  stomach
in  particular,  will  certainly  he  removed,  in  two  hours  he  is  quite
well ; and  if  the  eructation  recur  once  more,  it  consists  of  tasteless
and  inodorous  ah' ; the  contents  of  the  stomach  cease  to  be  vitiated,
and  at  the  next  meal  he  has  regained  his  full  usual  appetite ; he
is  quite  well  and  brisk.  This  is  true  causal  medication ; the
former  is  only  an  imaginary  one  and  an  injurious  infliction  on  the
patient.

Even  a stomach  overloaded  with  indigestible  food,  never  requh'es  a
medicinal  emetic.  In  such  a case  nature  is  competent  to  rid  herself
of  the  excess  in  the  best  way  through  the  cesophagus,  by  means  of


10


INTRODUCTION.


ness  of  the  countenance,  ravenous  appetite,  belly-ache,


nausea  and  spontaneous  vomiting,  assisted,  it  may  be,  by  mechanical
initation  of  the  palate  and  fauces,  and  by  this  means  the  accessory
medicinal  effects  of  the  emetic  drugs  are  avoided ; a small  quantity
of  coffee  expedites  the  passage  downwards  of  what  remains  m the
stomach.

But  if,  after  excessive  overloading  of  the  stomach,  the  irritability
of  the  stomach  is  not  sufficient  to  promote  spontaneous  vomiting,  or
is  lost  altogether,  so  that  the  tendency  thereto  is  extinguished,  while
there  are  at  the  same  time  great  pains  in  the  epigastrium,  in  such  a
paralysed  state  of  the  stomach,  an  emetic  medicine  would  only  have
the  effect  of  producing  a dangerous  or  fatal  inflammation  of  the
intestines ; whereas  a small  quantity  of  strong  infusion  of  coffee,
frequently  administered,  would  dynamically  exalt  the  sunken  irrita-
bility of  the  stomach,  and  put  it  in  a condition  to  expel  its  contents,
be  they  ever  so  great,  either  upwards  or  downwards.  So  here  also
the  pretended  causal  treatment  is  out  of  place.

Even  the  acrid  gastric  acidity,  to  eructations  of  which  patients
with  chronic  diseases  are  not  unfrequently  subject,  may  be  to-day
violently  evacuated  by  means  of  an  emetic,  with  great  suffering,  and
yet  all  in  vain,  for  to-morrow  or  the  day  following  it  is  replaced  by
similar  acrid  gastric  acidity,  and  then  usually  in  larger  quantities ;
whereas  it  goes  away  by  itself  when  its  dynamic  origin  is  removed
by  a very  small  dose  of  a high  dilution  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  still
bdtter,  if  it  is  of  frequent  recurrence,  by  the  employment  of  minutest
doses  of  antipsoric  remedies  corresponding  by  similarity  to  the  rest
of  the  symptoms  also.  And  of  a similar  character  are  many  of  the
pretended  causal  cures  of  the  old  school  j^hysicians,  whose  main  effort
it  is,  by  means  of  tedious  operations,  troublesome  to  themselves,  and
injurious  to  then'  patients,  to  clear  away  the  material  product  of  the
dynamic  derangement,  without  perceivmg  the  dynamic  source  of  the
affection,  and  amiihilating  it  and  its  products  homoeopathically,  there-
by effecting  a rational  cure.


INTRODUCTION.


11


and  enlarged  abdomen  in  children;^  their  venesections
in  cases  of  haemorrhage  and  more  especially  all  their
varieties  of  blood-lettings,^  their  main  remedy  in  in-
flammations, which  they  now,  following  the  precepts
of  a well  known  blood-thirsty  Parisian  physician


^ Conditions  dependent  solely  on  a psoric  taint,  and  easily  curable
by  mild  (dynamic)  antipsoric  remedies  without  emetics  or  purgatives.

^ Notwithstanding  that  almost  all  morbid  hremorrhages  depend  on  a
dynamic  derangement  of  the  vital  force,  yet  the  old  school  physicians
consider  its  cause  to  be  excess  of  blood,  and  cannot  refrain  from
drawing  off  the  supposed  superabundance  of  this  vital  fluid ; the
palpable  evil  consequences  of  which  procedure,  however,  such  as
prostration  of  the  strength,  and  the  tendency,  or  actual  transition,  to
the  typhoid  state,  they  ascribe  to  the  malignancy  of  the  disease,
which  they  are  then  often  unable  to  ocercome — in  flne,  they  imagine,
even  when  the  patient  does  not  recover,  that  their  treatment  has
been  in  conformity  with  them  axiom,  causani  tolle,  and  that,  accord-
ing to  their  mode  of  speaking,  they  have  done  everything  in  their
power  for  the  patient,  let  the  result  be  what  it  may.

^ Although  there  probably  never  was  a di'op  of  blood  too  much  in
the  living  human  body,  yet  the  old  school  practitioners  consider  an
imaginary  excess  of  blood  as  the  main  material  cause  of  aU  hsemorr-
hages  and  mflammations,  which  they  should  remove  and  dram  off  by
venesections,  cupping,  and  leeches.  This  they  hold  to  be  a rational
mode  of  treatment,  causal  medication.  In  general  inflammatory  fevers,
in  acute  pleurisy,  they  even  regard  the  coagulable  lymph  in  the
blood — the  buffy  coat,  as  it  is  termed — as  the  materia  peccans,  which
they  endeavour  to  get  rid  of,  if  possible,  by  repeated  venesections,
notwithstanding  that  this  coat  often  becomes  more  consistent  and
thicker  at  civery  repetition  of  the  bloodletting.  They  thus  often
bleed  the  patient  nearly  to  death,  when  the  inflammatory  fever  will
not  subside,  in  order  to  remove  this  buffy  coat,  or  the  imaginary
plethora,  without  suspecting  that  the  inflammatory  blood  is  only  the


12


INTRODUCTION.


(as  a flock  of  sheep  follow  the  bell-wether  even  into
the  butcher’s  slaughter  house,)  imagine  to  encounter
in  every  morbidly  affected  part  of  the  body,  and  feel


product  of  the  acute  fever,  of  the  morbid,  immaterial  (dynamic)
inflammatory  irritation,  and  that  the  latter  is  the  sole  cause  of  the
gi'eat  disturbance  in  the  vascular  system,  and  may  be  removed  by
the  smallest  dose  of  a homogeneous  (homoeopathic)  medicine,  as  for
instance  by  a small  globule  of  the  decillionth  dilution  of  aconite
juice,  with  abstinence  from  vegetable  acids,  so  that  the  most  violent
pleuritic  fever,  with  all  its  alarming  concomitants,  is  changed  into
health  and  cured,  without  the  least  abstraction  of  hlood  and  loithout
any  antiphlogistic  remedy,  in  a few — at  the  most  in  tioenty-four
hours;  (a  small  quantity  of  blood  drawn  from  a vein  by  way  of
experiment  then  shews  no  traces  of  huffy  coat ;)  whereas  another
patient  similarly  affected,  and  treated  on  the  rational  principles  of
the  old  school,  if,  after  repeated  bleedings,  with  great  difflculty  and
unspeakable  sufierings  he  escape  for  the  nonce  with  life,  he  often
has  stOl  many  months  to  drag  through,  before  he  can  support  his
emaciated  body  on  his  legs,  if  in  the  mean  time,  (as  often  happens
from  such  maltreatment,)  he  be  not  carried  off  by  typhus  fever,
leucophlegmasia,  or  pulmonary  phthisis.

Any  one  who  has  felt  the  tranquil  pulse  of  a man  an  hour  before
the  occm'rence  of  the  shivering  that  always  precedes  an  attack  of
acute  pleurisy,  will  not  he  able  to  restrain  his  amazement  if  told  two
hom’s  later,  after  the  hot  stage  has  commenced,  that  the  enormous
plethora  present  urgently  requires  repeated  venesections,  and  will
natm-ally  inquire,  by  what  magic  power  could  the  pounds  of  blood
that  must  now  be  drawn  off,  have  been  conjured  into  the  bloodvessels
of  this  man  within  these  two  hours,  which  but  two  hours  previously
he  had  felt  beating  in  such  a tranquil  manner  ? Not  a single  ounce
more  of  blood  can  now  be  circulating  in  those  vessels  than  existed
when  he  was  in  good  health  two  hours  ago !

Accordingly  the  allopathic  physician  with  his  venesections  draws


INTRODUCTION.


13


themselves  bound  to  remove  by  the  application  of
often  a fatal  number  of  leeches.  They  imagine  that
by  so  doing  they  obey  the  causal  indication,  and
treat  disease  in  a rational  manner.  The  adherents  of
the  old  school  moreover,  believe,  that  by  putting  a


from  the  patient  labouring  under  acute  fever  no  oppressive  super-
abundance of  blood,  as  that  cannot  possibly  be  present;  he  only
robs  bim  of  what  is  indispensable  to  life  and  recovery,  the  normal
quantity  of  blood  and  consequently  of  strength — a gi’eat  loss  which
no  physician’s  power  can  replace  ! — and  yet  he  vainly  imagines  that
he  has  conducted  the  treatment  in  conformity  to  his  (misunderstood)
axiom,  causam  tolle,  whereas  it  is  impossible  that  the  causa  morhi
in  this  case  can  be  an  excess  of  blood,  which  is  not  present ; but
the  sole  true  causa  morhi  was  a morbid,  dynamical,  inflammatory
irritation  of  the  cu-culating  system,  as  is  proved  by  the  rapid  and
permanent  cm:e  of  this  and  every  similar  case  of  general  inflamma-
tory fever  by  one  or  two  inconceivably  minute  doses  of  aconite  juice,
which  removes  such  an  irritation  homoeopathically.

The  old  school  errs  equally  in  the  treatment  of  local  inflammations
with  its  topical  bloodlettings,  more  especially  with  the  quantities  of
leeches  which  are  now  applied  according  to  the  maniacal  principles
of  Broussais.  The  palliative  amelioration  that  at  first  ensues  from
the  treatment  is  far  from  being  crowned  by  a rapid  and  perfect
cure ; on  the  contrary,  the  weak  and  crazy  state  of  the  parts  thus
treated  (frequently  also  of  the  whole  body),  which  always  remains,
sufficiently  shews  the  error  that  is  committed,  in  attributing  the  local
inflammation  to  a local  plethora,  and  the  sad  consequences  of  such
abstractions  of  blood ; whereas  this  pm-ely  dynamic,  though  appa-
rently local,  inflammatory  irritation,  can  be  rapidly  and  permanently
destroyed,  by  an  equally  small  dose  of  aconite,  or,  according  to  cir-
cumstances, of  belladonna,  and  the  whole  disease  removed  and  cured,
without  such  unjustifiable  shedding  of  blood.


14


INTRODUCTION.


ligature  on  polypi,  by  cutting  out,  or  exciting  sup-
puration by  means  of  local  irritants  in,  indolent
glandular  swellings,  by  dissecting  out  encysted  tu-
mours (steatoma  and  meliceria),  by  their  operations
for  aneurysm,  and  lacrymal  and  anal  fistula,  by  re-
moving with  the  knife  scirrhous  tumours  of  the  breast,
by  amputating  a limb  affected  with  necrosis,  &c.,  they
cure  the  patient  radically,  and  that  their  treatment  is
directed  against  the  cause  of  the  disease ; and  they
also  think,  when  they  employ  their  repellent  remedies,
dry  up  old  running  ulcers  in  the  legs  with  astringent
applications  of  lead,  copper,  or  oxyde  of  zinc,  (aided
always,  by  the  simultaneous  administration  of  purga-
tives, which  merely  debilitate,  but  have  no  effect  on
the  primary  dyscrasia,)  cauterize  chancres,  destroy
condylomata  locally,  drive  off  itch  from  the  sldn  with
sulphur,  lead,  mercurial  or  oxyde  of  zinc  ointment,
suppress  ophthalmiee  with  solutions  of  lead  or  zinc,
and  drive  away  dragging  pains  from  the  limbs  by
means  of  opodeldoc,  hartshorn  liniment,  or  fumigations
with  cinnabar  or  amber ; in  every  case  they  think  they
have  removed  the  affection,  conquered  the  disease,  and
conducted  a rational  treatment  directed  towards  the
cause.  But  what  is  the  result?  the  new  forms  of  disease
that  sooner  or  later,  but  inevitably  appear,  caused  by
this  mode  of  treatment  (but  which  they  pretend  are
entirely  new  diseases,)  ivhich  are  always  worse  than  the
original  affections,  sufficiently  prove  the  error  of  their
notions,  and  might  and  should  open  their  eyes  to  the


INTRODUCTION.


15


deeper  seated,  immaterial  nature  of  the  disease,  and
its  dynamic  (spiritual)  origin,  which  can  only  be
removed  by  dynamic  means.

A favourite  idea  of  the  ordinary  school  of  medicine,
until  recent  (would  that  I could  not  say  the  most
recent)  times,  was  that  of  morbific  matters  (and
acridities),  excessively  subtile  though  they  might  be
thought  to  be,  in  diseases,  which,,  must  be  expelled
from  the  blood-vessels  and  lymphatics,  through  the
exhalents,  skin,  urinary  apparatus,  or  salivary  glands,
through  the  tracheal  and  bronchial  glands  in  the
form  of  expectoration,  from  the  stomach  and  bowels
by  vomiting  and  purging,  in  order  that  the  body
might  be  freed  from  the  material  cause  that  produced
the  disease,  and  a radical  causal  cure  be  thereby
etfected.

By  cutting  holes  in  the  diseased  body,  which  were
for  years  converted  into  chronic  ulcers  by  the  intro-
duction of  foreign  substances  (issues,  setons),  they
sought  to  draw  ofi"  the-  materia  peccans  from  the
(always  only  dynamically)  diseased  body,  just  as  one
lets  a dirty  fiuid  run  out  of  a barrel  through  the
tap-hole.  By  means  also  of  perpetual  blisters  and  the
application  of  mezereum,  they  thought  to  draw  away
the  bad  humours,  and  to  cleanse  the  diseased  body  from
all  morbific  matters — but  they  only  weakened  it,  so  as
generally  to  render  it  incurable,  by  all  these  senseless
unnatural  processes.

I admit  that  it  was  more  convenient  for  the  weak-


16


INTRODUCTION.


ness  of  humanity  to  assume,  that  in  the  diseases  they
were  called  on  to  cure,  there  existed  some  morbific
material  of  which  the  mind  might  form  a concep-
tion (more  particularly  as  the  patients  readily  lent
themselves  to  such  a notion),  because  in  that  case,
the  practitioner  had  nothing  further  to  care  about,
than  to  procure  a good  supply  of  remedies,  capable  of
purifying  the  blood  and  humours,  of  exciting  diuresis
and  diaphoresis,  of  promoting  expectoration,  and  of
scouring  out  the  stomach  and  bowels.  Hence  in  all
the  works  on  Materia  3Iedica,  from  Dioscorides  down
to  the  latest  books  on  this  subject,  there  is  almost
nothing  said  about  the  special  peculiar  action  of  indi-
vidual medicines ; but,  besides  an  account  of  their  sup-
posed utility  in  various  nosological  names  of  diseases,
it  is  merely  stated,  whether  they  promote  the  secretion
of  urine,  perspiration,  expectoration,  or  menstruation,
and  more  particularly  whether  they  produce  evacuation
of  the  stomach  and  bowels  upwards  or  downwards  ;
because  all  the  aspirations  and  efibrts  of  the  practi-
tioner have  ever  been  chiefiy  directed  to  cause  the
expulsion  of  a material  morbific  matter,  and  of
sundry  (fictitious)  acridities,  on  which  it  was  imagined
diseases  depended.

These  were,  however,  all  idle  dreams,  unfounded
assumptions  and  hypotheses,  cunningly  devised  for  the
convenience  of  therapeutics,  as  it  was  expected  the
easiest  way  of  performing  a cure  would  be  to  remove
the  material  morbific  matters  (si  modo  essent !).

But  the  essential  nature  of  diseases  and  their  cure


INTRODUCTION.


17


will  not  adapt  themselves  to  such  fantasies,  nor  to  the
convenience  of  medical  men ; to  humour  such  stupid,
baseless  hypotheses,  diseases  will  not  cease  to  he
(spiritual)  dynamic  derangements  of  our  spiritual  vital
principle  in  sensations  and  functions,  that  is,  immaterial
derangements  of  the  state  of  health.

The  causes  of  our  maladies  cannot  be  material,
since  the  least  foreign  material  substance,^  however
mild  it  may  appear  to  us,  is  suddenly  repelled,  like
a poison,  by  the  vital  force,  or  when  this  does  not
happen,  death  is  the  consequence.  If  even  the  minu-
test splinter  penetrates  a sensitive  part  of  our  organism,
the  vital  principle  every  where  present  in  our  body  rests
not  before  it  is  removed  by  pain,  fever,  suppuration,  or
gangrene.  And  can  it  be  supposed  that  in  a case  of
cutaneous  disease  of  twenty  years’  standing,  for  in-
stance, this  indefatigably  active  vital  principle  will
quietly  endure  the  presence  of  such  an  injurious
foreign  substance,  as  must  be  a material  exanthematic
principle,  an  herpetic,  a scrofulous,  a gouty  acridity,
&c.,  in  the  fluids  of  the  body"?  Did  any  nosologist
ever  see  with  corporeal  eyes  such  a morbiflc  matter,  to
warrant  him  in  speaking  so  confidently  about  it,  and

^ Life  was  endangered  by  injecting  a little  pure  water  into  a vein.
(Vide  Mullen,  quoted  by  Birch  in  the  History  of  the  Royal  Society.)

Atmospheric  air  injected  into  the  bloodvessels  caused  death.
(Vide  J.  H.  Voigt,  Magazin  fur  den  neuesten  Zustand  der  Natur-
kunde,  I.  iii.  p.  25.)

Even  the  mildest  fluids  introduced  into  the  veins  endangered  life.
(Vide  Autenrieth,  Physiologie,  II.  § 784.)

C


18


INTRODUCTION.


in  constructing  a system  of  medical  treatment  upon  it "?
Has  any  one  ever  succeeded  in  displaying  to  view  the
matter  of  gout  or  the  poison  of  scrofula  1

Even  when  the  application  of  a material  substance
to  the  skin,  or  to  a Avound,  has  propagated  diseases
by  inoculation,  who  can  prove,  what  is  so  often  main-
tained in  works  on  pathology,  that  some  material
portion  of  this  substance  has  penetrated  into  our  fluids
or  been  absorbed!^  The  most  careful  and  prompt
washing  of  the  genitals  does  not  protect  the  system
from  inoculation  with  the  venereal  chancrous  disease.
The  slightest  breath  of  air  wafted  from  the  body  of  a
person  afiected  with  small-pox,  sutflces  to  produce
this  horrible  disease  in  a healthy  child.

What  ponderable  quantity  of  material  substance
could  have  been  absorbed  into  the  fluids,  in  order  to
develope,  in  the  flrst  of  these  instances,  a tedious  dys-
crasia  (syphilis),  which  when  uncured  is  only  extin-
guished with  the  remotest  period  of  life,  with  death ;
in  the  last,  a disease  (small-pox)  accompanied  by  almost
general  suppuration,^  and  often  rapidly  fatal  % In  these


* A girl  in  Glasgow,  8 years  of  age,  having  been  bit  by  a mad
dog,  the  surgeon  immediately  cut  the  piece  clean  out,  and  yet  thirty-
six  days  afterwards  she  was  seized  with  hydrophobia,  which  killed
her  in  two  days.  {Med.  Comment,  of  Edinb.,  Dec.  2,  vol.  ii.  1793.)

^ In  order  to  account  for  the  large  quantity  of  putrid  excremen-
titious  matter  and  foetid  discharge  often  met  with  in  diseases,  and  to
be  able  to  represent  them  as  the  material  substance  that  excites  and
keeps  up  disease — although,  when  infection  occurs,  nothing  percep-
tible in  the  way  of  miasm,  nothing  material,  could  have  penetrated


INTRODUCTION.


19


and  all  similar  cases  is  it  possible  to  entertain  the  idea
of  a material  morbific  matter  being  introduced  into  the
blood A letter  written  in  the  sick  room  at  a great
distance,  has  often  communicated  the  same  contagious
disease  to  the  person  who  read  it.  In  this  instance,
can  the  notion  of  a material  morbific  matter  having
penetrated  into  the  fluids  be  admitted"?  But  why
should  I give  such  proofs  as  these  ? How  often  has
it  happened  that  an  irritating  word  has  brought  on  a
dangerous  bilious  fever;  a superstitious  prediction  of
death  caused  the  fatal  catastrophe  at  the  very  time
announced;  melancholy  or  excessively  joyful  news
occasioned  sudden  death  ? In  these  cases,  where  is
the  material  morbific  agent,  that  should  have  entered

into  the  body — recourse  was  had  to  the  hypothesis,  that  the  matter
of  infection,  be  it  ever  so  minute,  acts  in  the  body  like  a ferment,
bringing  the  fluids  into  a like  state  of  corruption,  and  thus  changing
them  into  a similar  morbific  ferment,  which  constantly  increases
with  the  disease  and  keeps  it  up.  But  by  what  aU-potent  and
all-wise  purifying  draughts  will  you  purge  and  cleanse  the  hmnan
fluids  from  this  ever  reproductive  ferment,  from  this  mass  of  ima-
ginary morbific  matter,  and  that  so  perfectly,  that  there  shall  not
remain  a particle  of  such  a morbific  ferment,  which,  according  to
this  hypothesis,  must  ever  again,  as  at  first,  transform  and  corrupt
the  fluids  to  new  morbific  matter  ? It  would  evidently  be  impossible
to  cure  these  diseases,  in  the  way  you  propose ! — See  how  all  hypo-
theses, be  they  ever  so  ingeniously  framed,  lead  to  the  most  palpable
contradictions  when  they  are  not  founded  on  truth  ! — The  most
deeply  rooted  syphilis  may  be  cured,  after  the  removal  of  the  psora
with  which  it  is  often  complicated,  by  one  or  two  small  doses  of  the
decillionth  dilution  of  mercury,  whereby  the  general  syphilitic  taint
of  the  fluids  is  forever  (dynamically)  aimihilated  and  removed.

c 2


20


INTRODUCTION.


in  substance  into  the  body,  there  to  excite  and  keep
up  the  disease,  and  without  the  material  expulsion
and  eduction  of  which,  a radical  cure  were  impos-
sible 1

The  champions  of  this  clumsy  doctrine  of  morbific
matters,  ought  to  be  ashamed  that  they  have  so
inconsiderately  overlooked  and  failed  to  appreciate
the  spiritual  nature  of  life,  and  the  spiritual  dynamic
power  of  the  exciting  causes  of  diseases,  and  that  they
have  thereby  degraded  themselves  into  very  scavenger-
doctors,  who,  in  their  efforts  to  expel  from  the  diseased
body  morbific  matters  that  never  existed,  in  place  of
curing,  destroy  life.

Are,  then,  the  excretions  which  occur  in  diseases
and  which  are  often  so  disgusting,  the  actual  matter
that  excites  and  keeps  them  upl^  Are  they  not
rather,  always  excretory  products  of  the  disease  itself,
that  is,  of  the  purely  dynamic  derangement  and  dis-
turbance of  the  life  ?

With  such  false  and  material  views  concerning  the
origin  and  essential  nature  of  diseases,  it  was  certainly
not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  in  all  ages,  the  main
endeavour  of  the  most  obscure,  as  well  as  of  the  most
distinguished  practitioners,  and  even  of  the  inventors
of  the  sublimest  medical  systems,  was  always  only  to
separate  and  expel  an  imaginary  morbific  matter,


^ Were  this  the  case,  the  most  inveterate  coryza  should  be  cer-
tainly and  rapidly  cured  by  merely  blowing  and  wiping  the  nose
carefully.


INTRODUCTION.


21


and  the  indication  most  frequently  established,  was
to  break  up  and  put  in  motion  this  morbific  matter,
to  effect  its  expulsion  by  salivation,  expectoration,
diaphoresis  and  diuresis;  to  purify  the  blood  from
(acridities  and  impurities)  morbific  matters,  which
never  existed,  by  means  of  the  intelligence  of  sundry
obedient  decoctions  of  roots  and  plants ; to  draw  off
mechanically  the  imaginary  matter  of  disease  by
setons,  by  issues,  by  portions  of  the  skin  kept  open
and  discharging  by  means  of  perpetual  blisters  or
mezereum  bark,  but  chiefly  to  expel  and  purge
away  the  materia  peccans,  or  the  injurious  matters
as  they  were  termed,  through  the  intestines,  by
means  of  laxative  and  purgative  medicines,  which  in
order  to  give  them  a more  profound  meaning  and  a
more  prepossessing  appearance  were  fondly  denomi-
nated dissolvents  and  mild  aperients — all,  so  many
arrangements  for  the  expulsion  of  inimical  morbific
matters,  which  never  could  be,  and  never  were  instru-
mental in  the  production  and  maintenance  of  the
diseases  of  the  human  organism,  animated  as  it  is  by
a spiritual  principle — of  diseases,  which  never  were
anything  else  than  spiritual  dynamic  derangements
of  the  hfe  in  sensations  and  functions.

Let  it  be  granted  now,  what  cannot  be  doubted,
that  no  diseases — if  they  do  not  result  from  the  intro-
duction of  perfectly  indigestible  or  otherwise  injurious
substances  into  the  stomach,  or  into  other  orifices  or
cavities  of  the  body,  or  from  foreign  bodies  penetrating
the  skin,  &o.* — that  no  disease,  in  a word,  is  caused  by


22


INTRODUCTION.


any  material  substance,  but  that  every  one  is  only  and
always  a peculiar,  virtual,  dynamic  derangement  of  the
health;  how  injudicious,  in  that  case,  must  not  a
method  of  treatment  directed  towards  the  expulsion^


^ There  is  a semblance  of  necessity  in  the  expulsion  by  purgatives
of  worms,  in  so-called  vermicular  diseases.  But  even  this  appearance
is  false.  A few  lumbrici  may  be  found  in  some  children ; in  many
there  exist  ascarides.  But  the  presence  of  these  is  always  de-
pendent on  a general  taint  of  the  constitution  (the  psoric),  joined  to
an  unhealthy  mode  of  living.  Let  the  latter  be  improved,  and  the
former  cured  homoeopathically,  which  is  most  easily  effected  at  this
age,  and  none  of  the  worms  remain,  and  children  cured  in  this
manner  are  never  troubled  with  them  more ; whereas  after  mere
purgatives,  even  when  combined  with  cina  seeds,  they  soon  reappear
in  quantities.

“But  the  tape-worm,”  methinks  I hear  some  one  exclaim;  “ every
effort  should  be  made  to  expel  that  monster,  which  was  created  for
the  torment  of  mankind.”

Yes,  sometimes  it  is  expelled;  but  at  the  cost  of  what  after  suffer-
ings, and  with  what  danger  to  life  ! I should  not  like  to  have  on  my
conscience  the  deaths  of  so  many  hundreds  of  human  beings  as  have
fallen  sacrifices  to  the  horribly  violent  pm’gatives  directed  against
the  tape-worm,  or  the  many  years  of  indisposition  of  those  who  have
escaped  being  purged  to  death.  And  how  often  does  it  happen
that  after  all  this  health  and  life  destroying  purgative  treatment,
continued  for  several  years,  the  animal  is  not  expelled,  or  if  so,  that
it  is  again  produced  !

What  if  there  is  not  the  slightest  necessity  for  all  these  violent,
cruel,  and  dangerous  efforts  to  expel  and  kill  the  worm  ?

The  various  species  of  tape-worm  are  only  found  along  with  the
psoric  taint,  and  always  disappear  when  that  is  cured.  But  even
before  the  cure  is  accomplished,  they  live — the  patient  enjoying
tolerable  health  the  while — not  exactly  in  the  intestines,  but  in  the


INTRODUCTION.


23


of  that  imaginary  material  substance,  appear  to  every
rational  man,  since  no  good,  but  only  monstrous  harm,
can  result  from  its  employment  in  the  principal  diseases
of  mankind,  namely,  those  of  a chronic  character !

In  short,  those  degenerated  substances  and  im-
purities that  appear  in  diseases  are,  undeniably,
nothing  more  than  products  of  the  disease  of  the
abnormally  deranged  organism,  which  are  expelled
by  the  latter,  often  violently  enough — often  much  too

residue  of  the  food,  the  excrement  of  the  bowels,  as  in  their  proper
element,  quite  quietly,  and  without  causing  the  least  disturbance,
and  find  in  the  excrement  what  suffices  for  their  nourishment ;
they  then  do  not  touch  the  walls  of  the  intestine,  and  are  perfectly
harmless.  But  if  the  patient  happen  to  he  affected  with  an  acute
disease  of  any  kind,  then  the  contents  of  the  bowels  become  in-
tolerable to  the  animal ; it  twists  about  and  instates  the  sensitive
walls  of  the  intestines,  causing  a peculiar  kind  of  spasmodic  colic,
which  increases  materially  the  sufferings  of  the  patient.  (So  also  the
foetus  in  the  womb  becomes  restless,  turns  about  and  kicks,  only
when  the  mother  is  ill ; but  when  she  is  well,  it  swims  quietly  in  its
proper  fluid  without  causing  her  any  suffering.)

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  morbid  symptoms  of  patients
suffering  from  tape-worm  are  generally  of  such  a kind,  that  they  are
rapidly  relieved  (homoeopathically)  by  the  smallest  dose  of  tincture
of  male-fern  root ; so  that  the  peculiar  condition  of  the  patient,
which  causes  this  parasitic  animal  to  be  restless,  is  thereby  at  once
removed ; the  tape-worm  then  feels  at  ease,  and  lives  on  quietly  in
the  excrement  of  the  bowels,  without  particularly  disturbing  the
patient  or  his  intestines,  until  the  antipsoric  treatment  is  so  far
advanced  that  the  worm,  after  the  eradication  of  the  psora,  finds  the
contents  of  the  bowels  no  longer  suitable  for  its  support,  and  there-
fore spontaneously  disappears  forever  from  the  now  cured  patient,
without  the  least  purgative  medicine.


24


INTKODUCTION.


violently — without  requiring  the  aid  of  the  evacuating
art,  and  fresh  products  are  always  developed  as  long
as  it  labours  under  that  disease.  These  matters  the
true  physician  regards  as  actual  symptoms  of  the
disease,  and  they  aid  him  to  discover  the  nature  of
the  disease,  and  to  form  an  accurate  portrait  of  it,  so
as  to  enable  him  to  cure  it  with  a similar,  medicinal
morbific  potency.

But  the  more  modern  adherents  of  the  old  school,
do  not  wish  it  to  be  supposed,  that  in  their  treatment
they  aim  at  the  expulsion  of  material  morbific  sub-
stances. They  allege  that  their  multifarious  evacuant
processes  are  a mode  of  treatment  by  derivation,
wherein  they  follow  the  example  of  nature’s  efibrts
to  assist  the  diseased  organism,  which  resolves  fever
by  perspiration  and  diuresis,  pleurisy  by  epistaxis,
sweat  and  mucous  expectoration  — other  diseases
by  vomiting,  purging  and  bleeding  'from  the  anus,
articular  pains  by  ulcers  on  the  legs,  cynanche  tonsil-
laris by  salivation.  See.,  or  removes  them  by  metas-
tases  and  abscesses  which  it  developes  in  parts  at
a distance  from  the  seat  of  the  disease. —

Hence  they  thought,  the  best  thing  to  do  was  to
imitate  nature,  by  also  going  to  work  in  the  treatment
of  most  diseases  in  a circuitous  manner,  like  the
diseased  vital  force  when  left  to  itself,  and  thus  in  an
indirect  manner,^  by  means  of  stronger  heterogeneous


In  place  of  extinguishing  the  disease  rapidly,  without  exhaustion


INTRODUCTION.


25


irritants  applied  to  organs  remote  from  the  seat  of
disease,  and  totally  dissimilar  to  the  atfected  tissues,
they  produced  evacuations,  and  generally  kept  them
up,  in  order  to  lead,  as  it  were,  the  disease  thither.

This  derivation,  as  it  is  called,  was,  and  continues  to
he,  one  of  the  principal  modes  of  treatment  of  the  old
school  of  medicine.

In  this  imitation  of  the  self-aiding  power  of  nature,
as  some  call  it,  they  endeavoured  to  excite,  by  force,
new  symptoms  in  the  tissues  that  are  least  diseased
and  best  able  to  bear  the  medicinal  disease,  which
should  lead  away^  the  primary  disease  under  the
semblance  of  crises  and  under  the  form  of  excretions,
in  order  to  admit  of  a gradual  lysis  by  the  curative
powers  of  nature.^


of  the  strength  and  without  going  about  the  bush,  with  homogeneous,
dynamic  medicinal  powers,  brought  to  act  directly  on  the  exact
diseased  spot  of  the  organism,  as  homoeopathy  does.

^ Just  as  if  anything  immaterial  could  be  led  away ! So  that  here
too  was  the  notion  of  a material  and  a morbific  matter,  excessively
subtile  though  it  might  he  supposed  to  he !

^ It  is  only  the  slighter  acute  diseases  that  are  wont,  when  the
natural  period  of  theh  course  has  exphed,  to  terminate  quietly  in
resolution,  as  it  is  called,  with  or  without  the  employment  of  not
veiy  powerful  allopathic  remedies ; the  vital  force  having  regained
its  powers,  then  gradually  substitutes  the  normal  condition  for  the
derangement  of  the  health  that  has  now  ceased  to  exist.  But  in
severe  acute  and  in  chronic  diseases,  which  constitute  by  far  the
greater  portion  of  all  human  ailments,  crude  nature  and  the  old
school  are  equally  powerless ; in  these,  neither  the  vital  force,  with
its  self-aiding  faculty,  nor  allopathy  in  imitation  of  it,  can  effect  a


26


INTRODUCTION.


This  they  accomplished  by  means  of  diaphoretic
and  diuretic  remedies,  blood-lettings,  setons  and  issues,
hut  chiefly  by  irritant  drugs  to  cause  evacuation  of
the  alimentary  canal,  sometimes  upwards  by  means  of
emetics,  sometimes  (and  this  was  the  favourite  plan)
downwards  by  means  of  purgatives,  which  were  termed
aperient  and  dissolvent^  remedies.

To  assist  this  derivative  method  they  employed  the
allied  system  of  antagonistic  irritant  agents  ; woollen
garments  to  the  hare  skin,  foot-baths,  nauseants,  inflic-
ting on  the  stomach  and  bowels  the  pangs  of  hunger
(the  hunger-treatment),  substances  to  cause  pain,
inflammation  and  suppuration  in  near  or  distant  parts,
as  the  application  of  horseradish,  mustard  plasters,
cantharides  blisters,  mezereum,  setons,  issues,  tartar-
emetic  ointment,  moxa,  actual  cautery,  acupuncture,
&c. ; here  also,  following  the  example  of  crude  un-
assisted nature,  which  endeavours  to  free  herself
from  the  dynamic  disease  (in  the  case  of  a chronic
disease,  unavailingly),  by  exciting  pain  in  distant
parts  of  the  body,  by  metastases  and  abscesses,  by
eruptions  and  suppurating  ulcers.

It  was  evidently  no  rational  principle,  but  merely
imitation  which  promised  to  simplify  practice,  that

lysis — but  at  the  most  a mere  temporaiy  truce,  during  which  the
enemy  fortifies  himself,  in  order,  sooner  or  later,  to  recommence  the
attack  with  still  greater  violence.

^ An  expression  which  likewise  betrays  that  they  imagined  and
presupposed  a morbific  substance,  which  had  to  be  dissolved  and
expelled.


INTRODUCTION.


27


seduced  the  old  school  into  those  unhelpful  and
injurious  indirect  modes  of  treatment,  the  derivative
as  well  as  the  antagonistic;  that  led  them  to  this
plan  of  practice  so  inefficacious,  so  debihtating,  and
so  hurtful,  of  apparently  ameliorating  diseases  for  a
short  time,  or  removing  them  in  such  a manner  that
another  and  a worse  disease  was  roused  up  to  occupy
the  place  of  the  first.  Such  a destructive  plan  cannot
certainly  be  termed  curing.

They  merely  followed  the  example  of  crude  instinc-
tive nature  in  her  efforts,  which  are  barely^  suc-
cessful even  in  the  slighter  cases  of  acute  disease;


^ In  the  ordinary  school  of  medicine,  the  efforts  made  by  natm'e  for
the  relief  of  the  organism  in  diseases  where  no  medicine  was  given,
were  regarded  as  models  of  treatment  worthy  of  imitation.  But  this
ivas  a great  error.  The  pitiable  and  highly  imperfect  efforts  of  the
vital  force  to  relieve  itself  in  acute  diseases,  is  a spectacle  that  should
excite  our  compassion,  and  command  the  aid  of  all  the  powers  of  our
rational  mind,  to  terminate  the  self-inflicted  torture,  by  a real  cure.
If  nature  is  unable  to  cure  homcEopathicaUy  a disease  ah’eady  exist-
ing in  the  organism,  by  the  production  of  another  fresh  malady
similar  to  it  (§  xliii. — xlvi.),  which  very  rarely  lies  in  her  power  (§  1.),
and  if  to  the  organism  alone  is  left  the  task  of  overcoming,  by  its
oAvn  forces  and  without  external  aid,  a disease  newly  contracted
(in  cases  of  chronic  miasms  its  power  of  resistance  is  quite  ineffica-
cious), we  then  witness  nought  but  painful,  often  dangerous  efforts
of  nature,  to  save  the  mdividual  at  whatever  cost,  which  often
terminate  in  extinction  of  the  earthly  existence,  in  death.

Little  as  we  mortals  know  of  the  operations  that  take  place  in
the  interior  economy  in  health — which  must  be  hidden  from  us  as
certainly  as  they  are  patent  to  the  eye  of  the  all-seeing  Creator  and
Preserver  of  his  creatm'es — just  as  little  can  we  perceive  the  opera-


28


INTRODUCTION.


they  merely  imitated  the  unreasoning  life-preserving
power  when  left  to  itself  in  diseases,  which,  depending
entirely  upon  the  organic  laws  of  the  body,  is  only


tions  that  go  on  in  the  interior  in  disturbed  conditions  of  life,  in
diseases.  The  internal  operations  in  diseases  are  manifested  only  by
the  visible  changes,  the  sufferings,  and  the  symptoms,  whereby
alone  our  life  betrays  the  inward  disturbance ; so  that  in  no  given
case  can  we  ascertain  which  of  the  morbid  symptoms  are  caused  by
the  primaiy  action  of  the  morbific  agent,  which  by  the  reaction  of
the  vital  force  for  its  own  relief.  Both  are  inextricably  mixed  up
together  before  our  eyes,  and  only  present  to  us  an  outwardly
refiected  picture  of  the  enthe  internal  malady,  for  the  fruitless  efforts
of  unassisted  vitality  to  termuiate  the  sufferings,  are  themselves
sufferings  of  the  whole  organism.  Hence,  even  in  those  evacuations
termed  crises,  which  nature  generally  produces  at  the  termination  of
diseases  which  have  run  a rapid  course,  there  is  frequently  more  of
suffering  than  of  efficacious  relief.

What  the  vital  force  does  in  these  so-called  crises,  and  hoiv  it
does  it,  remains  a mystery  to  us,  like  all  the  internal  operations  of
the  organic  economy  of  life.  One  thing,  however,  is  certain : that
in  all  these  efforts  more  or  less  of  the  affected  parts  are  sacrificed
and  destroyed  in  order  to  save  the  rest.  These  self-aiding  operations
of  the  vital  force  for  the  removal  of  an  acute  disease,  performed  only
in  obedience  to  the  laws  of  organic  life  and  not  guided  by  the
reffexion  of  an  intellect,  are  at  the  most  but  a species  of  allopathy ;
in  order  to  relieve  the  primarily  affected  organ  by  a crisis,  an
increased,  often  violent,  activity  is  excited  in  the  surrounding  organs,
to  lead  away  the  disease  from  the  former  to  the  latter ; then  ensue
vomitings,  purgings,  diuresis,  diaphoresis,  abscesses,  &c.,  in  order,  by
this  hritation  of  distant  parts,  to  effect  a sort  of  derivation  from  the
primarily  diseased  parts,  and  the  dynamically  affected  nervous  power
seems  to  expend  itself  in  the  material  product.

It  is  only  by  the  destruction  and  sacrifice  of  a portion  of  the


INTRODUCTION.


29


capable  of  acting  in  conformity  with  these  laws,  and
cannot  be  guided  by  reason  and  reflexion — they
copied  nature,  which  cannot,  like  an  intelligent  sur-
geon, bring  together  the  gaping  lips  of  a wound  and
by  their  union  effect  a cure ; which  knows  not  how
to  straighten  and  adjust  the  broken  ends  of  a bone
lying  far  apart  and  exuding  much  (often  an  excess  of)
new  osseous  matter;  which  cannot  put  a ligature
on  a wounded  artery,  but  in  its  energy  causes  the
patient  to  bleed  to  death ; which  does  not  understand
how  to  reduce  a dislocated  shoulder,  but  by  the  swell-
ing it  occasions  round  about  it  soon  presents  an  obstacle
to  reduction ; which,  in  order  to  remove  a foreign
body  from  the  cornea,  destroys  the  whole  eye  by  sup-
puration which,  with  all  its  efforts,  can  only  liberate
a strangulated  hernia  by  gangrene  of  the  bowel  and
death,  and  which,  by  the  metastases  it  produces  in
dynamic  diseases,  often  renders  them  much  worse
than  they  were  originally.  But  more,  this  irrational
vital  force  receives  into  our  body,  without  hesitation^  the


organism  itself  that  unaided  nature  can  save  the  patient  in  acute
diseases,  and,  if  death  do  not  ensue,  restore,  though  only  slowly  and
imperfectly,  the  harmony  of  life — health.

The  great  weakness  of  the  parts  which  had  been  exposed  to  the
disease,  and  even  of  the  whole  hody,  the  emaciation,  &c.  remaining
after  spontaneous  cures,  are  convincing  proofs  of  this.

In  short,  the  whole  operations  of  the  self-aiding  power  of  the
organism  when  attacked  hy  diseases,  displays  to  the  ohseiwer  nothing
but  suffering — nothing  that  he  could  or  ought  to  imitate  if  he  wishes
to  cure  disease  in  a truly  artistical  manner.


30


INTRODUCTION,


greatest  plagues  of  our  terrestrial  existence,  the  spark
that  kindles  the  countless  diseases  beneath  which
tortured  mankind  has  groaned  for  hundreds  and  thou-
sands of  years,  the  chronic  miasms — psora,  syphilis,
sycosis — not  one  of  these  can  it  modify  in  the  slightest
degree,  far  less  expel  it  single-handed  from  the  or-
ganism; on  the  contrary,  it  allows  them  to  rankle
therein,  until,  often  after  a long  life  of  misery,  death
at  last  closes  the  eyes  of  the  sufferer.

In  such  an  important  affair  as  that  of  healing,
which  demands  so  much  intelligence,  reflexion  and
judgment,  how  could  the  old  school,  which  arrogates
to  itself  the  title  of  rational,  choose  as  its  best  in-
structor, as  its  guide  to  he  blindly  followed,  the  unin-
telligent vital  force,  inconsiderately  copy  its  indirect
and  revolutionary  operations  in  diseases,  imagining
these  to  be  the  ne  plus  ultra,  the  best  conceivable,
when  that  greatest  gift  of  God,  reflective  reason
and  unfettered  judgment,  was  given  us,  to  enable  us
inflnitely  to  surpass  its  performances,  for  the  beneflt
of  humanity!

When  the  old  school  practitioners,  thoughtlessly
imitating  the  crude,  senseless,  automatic  vital  force,
with  their  antagonistic  and  derivative  methods  of
treatment — by  far  their  most  usual  plans — attack  in-
nocent parts  and  organs  of  the  body,  either  inflicting
on  them  excruciating  pains,  or,  as  is  most  frequently
done,  compelling  them  to  perform  evacuations,  where-
by strength  and  fluids  are  wasted,  their  object  is  to
direct  the  morbid  vital  action  in  the  primarily  affected


INTRODUCTION.


31


parts  away  to  those  artificially  attacked,  and  thus  to
effect  the  cure  of  the  natural  disease  indirectly,  hy  the
production  of  a disease^  much  greater  in  intensity  and  of
quite  a different  kind^  in  the  more  healthy  parts  of  the
body,  consequently  by  a circuitous  way,  at  the  cost  of
much  loss  of  strength,  and  usually  of  great  sufferings
to  the  patient.^

The  disease,  if  it  be  acute,  and  consequently
naturally  of  but  short  duration,  may  certainly  dis-
appear, even  during  these  heterogeneous  attacks  on
distant  and  dissimilar  parts — but  cured  it  was  not.
There  is  nothing  that  can  merit  the  honourable  name
of  cure  in  this  revolutionary  treatment,  which  has
no  direct,  immediate,  pathological  relation  to  the


^ Daily  experience  shews  the  sad  effects  of  this  • manoeuvre  in
chronic  diseases.  Anything  hut  a cure  is  effected.  Who  would  ever
call  that  a victory,  if,  in  place  of  attacking  the  enemy  in  front  in  a hand
to  hand  fight,  and  by  his  destruction  terminating  at  once  his  hostile
assaults,  we  should,  in  a cowardly  manner  and  behind  his  hack,  lay
an  embargo  on  everything,  cut  off  his  supplies,  brnm  down  every
thing  for  a great  way  round  him  ? By  so  doing  we  would  at  length
deprive  him  of  all  courage  to  resist,  but  our  object  is  not  gained,
the  enemy  is  far  from  being  destroyed, — he  is  still  there,  and  when
he  can  again  procure  provisions  and  supplies,  he  once  more  rears  his
head,  more  exasperated  than  before — the  enemy,  I repeat,  is  far
from  being  destroyed,  hut  the  poor  innocent  country  is  so  completely
ruined  that  it  will  he  long  before  it  can  recover  itself.  In  like
manner  acts  allopathy  in  chronic  diseases,  when,  by  its  indmect
attacks  on  innocent  parts  at  a distance  from  the  seat  of  the  disease,
instead  of  effecting  a cure,  it  destroys  the  organism.  Such  is  the
result  of  its  hurtful  operations  !


32


INTRODUCTION.


tissues  primarily  affected.  Often,  indeed,  without
these  serious  attacks  on  the  rest  of  the  organism,
would  the  acute  disease  have  ceased  of  itself,  sooner
most  likely,  with  fewer  secondary  sufferings,. and  less
sacrifice  of  strength.  But  neither  the  mode  of  opera-
tion of  the  crude  natural  forces,  nor  the  allopathic
copy  of  that,  can  for  a moment  be  compared  to  the
dynamic  (homoeopathic)  treatment,  which  sustains
the  strength,  while  it  extinguishes  the  disease  in  a
direct  and  rapid  manner.

In  far  the  greatest  number  of  cases  of  disease
however,  I mean  those  of  a chronic  nature,  these
stormy,  debilitating,  indirect  modes  of  treatment  of
the  old  school,  are  scarcely  ever  of  the  slightest  use.
They  suspend  for  a few  days  only,  some  trouble-
some symptom  or  other,  which  however  returns  when
the  system  has  become  accustomed  to  the  distant
irritation,  and  the  disease  recurs  worse  than  before,
because  by  the  antagonistic  pains ^ and  the  injudicious
evacuations,  the  vital  powers  have  been  depressed.


^ What  good  results  have  ever  ensued  from  those  fcetid  artificial
ulcers,  so  much  in  vogue,  called  issues  ? If  even  during  the  first
week  or  two,  whilst  they  still  cause  pain,  they  appear  somewhat  to
check  hy  antagonism  a chronic  disease,  yet  hy  and  bye,  when  the
body  has  become  accustomed  to  the  pain,  they  have  no  other  effect
than  that  of  weakening  the  patient  and  gmng  still  greater  scope  to
the  chi'onic  aflection.  Or  does  any  one  imaguie,  in  this  nineteenth
centuiy,  that  they  serve  as  a tap-hole  for  the  escape  of  the  materia
peccans  ? It  almost  appears  as  if  this  were  the  case  !


INTRODUCTION.


33


Whilst  most  physicians  of  the  old  school,  imitating
in  a general  manner  the  efforts  of  crude,  unaided
nature  for  its  own  relief,  carried  out  in  their  practice
these  derivations  of  merely  hypothetical  utility,  just
as  they  judged  expedient  (guided  in  their  judgment
by  some  imaginary  indication) ; others,  aiming  at  a
higher  object,  undertook  designedly  to  promote  the
efforts  of  the  vital  force  to  aid  itself  hy  evacuations  and
antagonistic  metastases,  as  seen  in  diseases,  and  by
way  of  lending  it  a helping  hand,  to  increase  still
more  these  derivations  and  evacuations;  and  they
believed,  that  by  this  mode  of  operation,  they  were
acting  duce  natura,  and  might  justly  claim  the  title
of  ministri  natures.

, As  the  evacuations  effected  by  nature  in  chronic
diseases  are  not  unfrequently  the  precursors  of  alle-
viations— though  only  of  a temporary  character — of
troublesome  symptoms,  violent  pains,  paralyses,  spasms,
&c.,  so  the  old  school  imagined  these  derivations  to
be  the  true  way  of  curing  diseases,  and  endeavoured
to  promote,  maintain,  and  even  increase  such  evacua-
tions. But  they  did  not  perceive  that  all  these
evacuations  and  effusions  (pseudo-crises)  produced  by
nature  when  left  to  herself,  were  in  chronic  diseases
productive  only  of  palliative,  transient  alleviation,
which,  far  from  contributing  to  a real  cure,  on  the
contrary,  rather  aggravated  the  primary,  internal
malady,  by  the  waste  of  strength  and  fluids  they
occasioned.  N o one  ever  saw  a chronic  patient  recover
his  health  permanently  by  such  efforts  of  crude  nature.


D


34


INTRODUCTION.


nor  any  chronic  disease  cured  by  such  evacuations
effected  by  the  organism.^  On  the  contrary,  in  such
cases  the  primary  malady  is  always  perceptibly  aggra-
vated, after  short  alleviations,  whose  duration  always
becomes  shorter  and  shorter ; the  bad  attacks  rucur
more  frequently  and  more  severely  in  spite  of  the
persistence  of  the  evacuations. — In  like  manner,  on
the  occurrence  of  symptoms  excited  by  an  internal
chronic  affection,  that  threaten  to  destroy  life,  when
nature,  left  to  its  own  resources,  cannot  succour  the
organism  in  any  other  way  than  by  the  production  of
external  local  symptoms,  in  order  to  avert  the  danger
from  parts  indispensable  to  life,  and  direct  it  to  tissues
of  less  vital  importance  (metastasis) ; these  operations
of  the  energetic  but  senseless,  unreasoning  and  im-  .
provident  vital  force  conduce  to  anything  but  genuine
relief,  or  a cure;  they  only  silence  for  a short  time,  and
in  a palliative  manner,  the  dangerous  internal  affec-
tion, at  the  cost  of  a large  portion  of  the  humours  and
of  the  strength,  without  diminishing  the  primary
disease  by  a hair’s  breadth ; they  can,  at  the  most,
only  retard  the  fatal  termination  which  is  inevitable
without  true  homoeopathic  treatment.

The  allopathy  of  the  old  school  not  only  greatly
overrated  these  efforts  of  the  crude  automatic  power
of  nature,  but  completely  misinterpreted  them,  falsely
considered  them  to  be  truly  curative,  and  endeavoured
to  increase  and  promote  them,  vainly  imagining,  that


Equallj^  inefficacious  are  those  produced  artificially.


INTRODUCTION.


35


thereby  they  might  perhaps  succeed  in  annihilating
and  radically  curing  the  whole  disease.  When,  in
chronic  diseases,  the  vital  force  seemed  to  silence
this  or  that  troublesome  symptom  of  the  internal
affection,  by  the  production,  for  example,  of  some
humid  cutaneous  eruption,  then  the  servant  of  the
crude  power  of  nature  {minister  nature)  applied  to
the  discharging  surface  a cantharides  plaster  or  an
exutory  (mezereum),  in  order,  duce  natura,  to  draw
still  more  moisture  from  the  skin,  and  thus  to  promote
and  to  assist  nature’s  object — the  cure  (by  the  removal
of  the  morbific  matter  from  the  body?);  hut  when
the  effect  of  the  remedy  was  too  violent,  the  exan-
thema already  of  long  standing,  and  the  system  too
irritable,  he  increased  the  external  affection  to  a
great  amount,  without  the  slightest  advantage  to  the
original  disease,  and  aggravated  the  pains,  which
deprived  the  patient  of  sleep  and  depressed  his
strength  (and  sometimes  even  developed  a malignant
febrile  erysipelas);  or  if  the  effect  upon  the  local  affec-
tion (still  recent,  perhaps,)  was  of  a milder  character,
he  thereby  repelled  from  its  seat,  by  a species  of
ill-applied  external  homoeopathy,  the  local  symptom
which  had  been  established  by  nature  for  the  relief
of  the  internal  disease,  thus  renewing  the  more  dan-
gerous internal  malady,  and  by  this  repulsion  of  the
local  symptom,  compelling  the  vital  force  to  effect  a
transference  of  a worse  form  of  morbid  action  to
other  and  more  important  parts ; the  patient  became
affected  with  dangerous  ophthalmia,  or  deafness,  or

D 2


36


INTRODUCTION.


spasms  of  the  stomach,  or  epileptic  convulsions,  or
attacks  of  asthma  or  apoplexy,  or  mental  derange-
ment, &c.,  in  place  of  the  repelled  local  disease.’

When  the  diseased  natural  force  propelled  blood
into  the  veins  of  the  rectum  or  anus  (blind  hsemorr-
hoids),  the  minister  nature,  under  the  same  delusive
idea  of  assisting  the  vital  force  in  its  curative  efforts,
applied  leeches,  often  in  large  numbers,  in  order  to
give  an  outlet  to  the  blood  there — mth  hut  brief,
often  scarcely  noteworthy,  relief,  but  thereby  weaken-
ing the  body,  and  occasioning  still  greater  congestions
in  those  parts,  without  the  slightest  diminution  of
the  primary  disease.

In  almost  all  cases,  in  which  the  diseased  vital  force
endeavoured  to  subdue  the  violence  of  a dangerous
internal  malady  by  evacuating  blood,  by  means  of
vomiting,  coughing,  &c.,  the  old  school  physician,
duce  natura,  made  haste  to  assist  these  supposed
curative  efforts  of  nature,  and  performed  a copious
venesection,  which  was  invariably  productive  of  in-
jurious consequences  and  palpable  weakening  of  the
body.

In  cases  of  frequently  occurring  chronic  nausea,  he
produced,  with  the  view  of  furthering  the  intentions
of  nature,  copious  evacuations  of  the  stomach,  by


^ Natural  effects  of  the  repulsion  of  these  local  symptoms — effects
that  are  often  regarded  by  the  allopathic  physician  as  fresh  diseases
of  quite  a different  kind.


INTRODUCTION.


37


means  of  powerful  emetics — never  with  a good  result,
often  with  bad,  not  unfrequently  dangerous,  and
even  fatal  consequences.

The  vital  force,  in  order  to  relieve  the  internal
malady,  sometimes  produces  indolent  enlargements
of  the  external  glands,  and  he  thinks  to  forward  the
intentions  of  nature,  in  his  assumed  character  of  her
servant,  if,  by  the  use  of  all  sorts  of  heating  embroca-
tions and  plasters,  he  causes  them  to  inflame,  so  that,
when  the  abscess  is  ripe,  he  may  incise  it  and  let  out
the  bad  morbific  matter  (I).  Experience  has  shewn,
hundreds  of  times,  what  lasting  evil  almost  invariably
results  from  such  a plan.

And  having  often  noticed  slight  amelioration  of  the
severe  symptoms  of  chronic  diseases,  to  result  from
spontaneous  night  sweats,  or  frequent  liquid  stools,
he  imagines  himself  bound  to  obey  these  hints  of
nature  {duce  natura),  and  to  promote  them,  by  insti-
tuting and  maintaining  a complete  course  of  sweating
treatment,  or  by  the  employment  of  so-called  gentle
laxatives  for  years,  in  order  to  promote  and  increase
these  efforts  of  nature  (of  the  vital  force  of  the  sense-
less organism),  which  he  thinks  tend  to  the  cure  of
the  whole  chronic  affection,  and  thus  to  emancipate
the  patient  more  speedily  and  certainly  from  his
disease  (the  matter  of  his  disease”?).

But  he  thereby  always  produces  quite  the  contrary
result : aggravation  of  the  primary  disease.

In  conformity  with  this  preconceived  but  unfounded


38


INTRODUCTION,


idea,  the  old  school  physician  goes  on  thus  promoting^
the  efforts  of  the  diseased  vital  force,  and  increasing
those  derivations  and  evacuations  in  the  patient,  which
wcver  lead  to  the  desired  end,  but  are  ahvays  disastrous,
without  being  aware  that  all  the  local  affections,
evacuations,  and  apparent  derivative  efforts,  set  up
and  continued  by  the  senseless  vital  force,  for  the
relief  of  the  primary  chronic  disease,  are  actually  the

^ In  direct  opposition  to  this  treatment,  the  old  school  not  un-
frequently  indulged  themselves  in  the  very  reverse  of  this ; thus,
when  the  efforts  of  the  vital  force  for  the  relief  of  the  internal
disease,  by  evacuations  and  the  production  of  local  symptoms  on  the
exterior  of  the  body,  became  troublesome,  they  capriciously  sup-
pressed them  by  their  repercutients  and  repellents,  they  subdued
chronic  pains,  sleeplessness,  and  diarrhoea  of  long  standing,  by  doses
of  opium  pushed  to  a dangerous  extent;  vomitings,  by  effervescent
saline  draughts;  foetid  perspiration  of  the  feet,  by  cold  footbaths  and
astringent  applications ; eruptions  on  the  skin,  by  preparations  of  lead
and  zinc;  they  checked  uterine  haemorrhage  by  injections  of  vinegar;
colliquative  perspiration,  by  alum;  nocturnal  seminal  emissions,  by  the
free  use  of  camphor;  frequent  attacks  of  flushes  of  heat  in  the  body  and
face,  by  nitre,  vegetable  acids  and  sulphuric  acid ; bleeding  of  the  nose,
by  plugging  the  nostrils  with  dossils  of  lint  soaked  in  alcohol  or
astringent  fluids ; they  dried  up  discharging  ulcers  on  the  legs,  esta-
blished by  the  vital  power  for  the  relief  of  great  internal  suffering,
with  the  oxydes  of  lead  and  zinc,  &c.,  with  what  sad  results  ex-
perience has  shewn  in  thousands  of  cases.

With  tongue  and  with  pen  the  old  school  physician  brags  that
he  is  a rational  practitioner,  and  that  he  investigates  the  cause  of  the
disease,  so  as  always  to  make  radical  cures ; but  behold,  his  treat-
ment is  directed,  in  these  cases,  against  a single  symptom  only,  and
always  with  injurious  consequences  to  his  patient.


INTRODUCTION.


39


disease  itself,  the  phenomena  of  the  whole  disease,
for  the  totality  of  which,  properly  speaking,  the  only
efficacious  remedy,  and  the  one,  moreover,  that  will
act  in  the  most  direct  manner,  is  a homoeopathic
medicine,  chosen  on  account  of  its  similarity  of  action.

As  everything  that  crude  nature  does  to  relieve
itself  in  diseases,  in  those  of  an  acute,  but  especially
those  of  a chronic  kind,  is  extremely  imperfect  and
even  actual  disease,  it  may  easily  be  conceived,  that
the  promotion  by  artificial  means  of  this  imperfection
and  disease,  must  do  still  more  harm ; at  least,  it  can-
not improve  the  efibrts  of  nature  for  its  own  relief,
even  in  acute  diseases,  because  medical  art  is  not
in  a condition  to  follow  the  hidden  paths  by  which
the  vital  force  effects  its  crises,  but  attempts  to  pro-
duce them  from  without,  by  violent  means,  which  are
still  less  beneficial  than  what  the  instinctive  vital
force  left  to  its  own  resources  does,  but  on  the  other
hand  are  more  disturbing  and  debilitating.  For  even
the  imperfect  amelioration  resulting  from  the  natural
derivations  and  crises  cannot  be  obtained  in  a similar
manner  by  allopathy ; with  all  its  endeavours  it  can-
not procure  anything  like  even  that  pitiful  relief  the
vital  force  left  to  itself  is  able  to  afibrd.

It  has  been  attempted  to  produce,  by  means  of
scarifying  instruments,  a bleeding  at  the  nose,  in
imitation  of  that  sometimes  occurring  naturally,  in
order  to  mitigate,  for  example,  the  attacks  of  a chronic
headache.  By  this  means  a large  quantity  of  blood
could  be  made  to  flow  from  the  nostrils  and  weaken


40


INTRODUCTION.


the  patient,  but  the  relief  atforded  was  either  nil,  or
much  less  than  the  instinctive  vital  force  would  pro-
cure at  another  time,  when,  of  its  own  accord,  it  would
let  hut  a few  drops  flow.

A so-called  critical  perspiration  or  diarrhoea,  pro-
duced by  the  ever  active  vital  force  after  a sudden
indisposition,  from  anger,  fright,  a sprain,  or  a chill,
will  be  much  more  successful,  at  least  for  the  time,
in  relieving  the  acute  disease,  than  all  the  sudorific
or  purgative  drugs  in  the  pharmacopoeia,  which  only
make  the  patient  worse,  as  daily  experience  shews.

But  the  vital  force,  which  of  itself  can  only  act
according  to  the  physical  constitution  of  our  organism,
and  is  not  guided  by  reason,  knowledge  and  reflexion,
was  not  given  to  man  to  be  regarded  as  the  best
possible  curative  agent  to  restore  those  lamentable
deviations  from  health  to  the  normal  condition,  and
still  less  that  physicians  should  slavishly  imitate  its
imperfect  morbid  efforts  (to  free  itself  from  disease),
and  that  with  operations  incontestably  more  injurious
and  severe  than  its  own,  and  thereby  conveniently
spare  themselves  the  expenditure  of  reasoning,  re-
flexion and  judgment  requisite  for  the  discovery  and
for  the  practice  of  the  noblest  of  human  arts — -the
true  art  of  healing — while  they  allege  their  bad  copy
of  the  spontaneous  efforts  of  doubtful  utility  made  by
the  crude  natural  force  for  its  relief,  to  be  the  healing
art,  the  rational  healing  art !

What  sensible  man  would  imitate  the  efforts  of  the
organism  for  its  own  preservation  ? These  efforts  are


INTRODUCTION.


41


in  reality  the  disease  itself,  and  the  morbidly  affected
vital  force  is  the  producer  of  the  visible  disease ! It
must,  therefore,  necessarily  follow,  that  all  artificial
imitation,  and  likewise  the  suppression  of  these  efforts,
must  either  increase  the  disease,  or  render  it  dangerous
by  their  suppression,  and  both  of  these  allopathy  does;
these  are  its  pernicious  operations,  which  it  alleges  to
be  the  healing  art,  the  rational  healing  art !

No ! that  exquisite  power  innate  in  the  human
being,  designed  to  direct  with  consummate  skill  the
operations  of  life  during  health,  equally  present  in  all
parts  of  the  organism,  in  the  fibres  of  sensibility,  as
well  as  in  those  of  irritability,  the  unwearied  spring
of  all  the  normal  natural  functions  of  the  body,  was
not  created  for  the  purpose  of  affording  itself  aid  in
diseases,  not  for  the  purpose  of  exercising  a healing  art
worthy  of  imitation — No ! true  medicine  is  that  reflec-
tive  art,  the  'province  of  the  higher  poivers  of  human
intellect,  of  unfettered  judgment,  and  of  reason  selecting
and  determining  according  to  the  strict  rules  of  logical
induction,  'wherehg  the  physician  is  enabled  to  effect  a
change  in  the  instinctive,  irrational  and  senseless,  hut
energetic,  automatic  vital  force,  when  it  has  been  diverted
by  disease  into  abnormal  action,  and  by  means  of  a
similar  affection  developed  by  a homoeopathically  chosen
remedy,  to  excite  in  it  a medicinal  disease  somewhat
greater  in  degree,  so  that  the  natural  morbid  affection
can  no  longer  act  upon  the  vital  force,  which  thus,  freed
from  the  natural  disease,  has  now  only  the  similar,
somewhat  stronger,  medicinal,  morbid  affection  to  contend


42


INTRODUCTION.


with,  against  which  it  now  directs  its  whole  energy,  and
which  it  soon  overpowers,  whereby  the  vital  force  is
liberated,  and  enabled  to  return  to  the  normal  standard
of  health,  and  to  its  proper  function,  '•'■the  maintainance
of  the  life  and  health  of  the  organism,''  without  having
suffered,  during  this  change,  any  painful  or  debilitating
attacks.  Homoeopathy  teaches  us  how  to  effect  this.

Under  the  methods  of  treatment  of  the  old  school
I have  just  detailed,  no  small  number  of  patients
certainly  got  rid  of  their  diseases,  but  not  of  those  of
a chronic  (non- venereal)  character;  only  such  as  were
acute  and  unattended  with  danger ; and  even  these
they  were  only  freed  from,  by  such  circuitous  and
tedious  ways,  and  often  so  incompletely,  that  the
results  of  the  treatment  could  never  be  termed  cures
effected  by  a gentle  art.  Acute  diseases  of  a not
very  dangerous  kind  were,  by  venesections,  or  sup-
pression of  one  of  the  chief  symptoms  through  the
instrumentality  of  an  enantiopathic  palliative  remedy
{contraria  contrarits)  kept  under,  or  by  means  of
counter-irritant  and  derivative  (antagonistic  and  re-
vulsive) remedies,  applied  to  other  than  the  diseased
spots,  suspended,  until  the  natural  time  for  the  dura-
tion of  the  short  malady  had  expired.  These  methods
were,  consequently,  indirect,  and  attended  with  loss  of
strength  and  humours,  so  much  so,  that  in  patients
so  treated,  the  greatest  and  most  important  measures
for  the  complete  removal  of  the  disease  and  for  the
restoration  of  the  lost  strength  and  humours,  remained


INTRODUCTION.


43


to  be  performed  by  nature  herself — by  the  life-preser-
ving power,  which,  besides  the  removal  of  the  natural
acute  disease,  had  also  to  combat  the  effects  of  im-
proper treatment,  and  thus  it  was  able,  in  cases
unattended  by  danger,  gradually  to  restore  the  normal
relation  of  the  functions,  by  means  of  its  own  energy,
but  often  in  a tedious,  imperfect  and  painful  manner.

It  remains  a very  doubtful  question,  whether  the
natural  process  of  recovery  in  acute  diseases  is  at  all
shortened  or  facilitated  by  this  interference  of  the  old
school,  as  the  latter  cannot  act  otherwise  than  the
vital  force,  namely,  indirectly ; but  its  derivative  and
antagonistic  treatment  is  much  more  aggressive  and
much  more  debilitating.

The  old  school  has  yet  another  method  of  treat-
ment, which  is  termed  the  stimulating  and  strengthen-
ing system,^  (by  eoccitantia,  nervina,  tonica,  cotifortantia,
rohorantia).  It  is  astonishing  how  it  can  boast  of  this
method.

Has  it  ever  succeeded  in  remoHng,  as  it  has  so
often  attempted  to  do,  the  physical  weakness  engen-
dered and  kept  up  or  increased  by  a chronic  disease,
with  its  prescriptions  of  etherial  Hhine-wine,  or  fiery
Tokay  1 The  forces  gradually  sank  under  this  treat-
ment, and  all  the  lower,  the  greater  the  quantity  of
wine  the  patient  was  counselled  to  drink,  because  the


* It  is,  properly  speaking,  enantiopathic,  and  I shall  again  refer  to
it  in  the  text  of  the  Organon  (§  lix.).


44


INTRODUCTION.


source  of  the  weakness,,  the  chronic  disease,  was  not
cured  by  it,  because  artificial  stimulation  is  followed
by  relaxation,  in  the  reaction  of  the  vital  force.

Or  did  its  cinchona  bark,  or  its  amara,  so  misun-
derstood, so  multifarious  in  their  modes  of  action,
and  productive  of  quite  a different  kind  of  injury,
give  strength  in  these  frequently  occurring  cases  1
Did  not  these  vegetable  substances,  said  to  be  tonic
and  strengthening  under  all  circumstances,  as  well  as
the  preparations  of  steel,  often  add  to  the  old  disease
new  sufferings,  by  virtue  of  their  peculiar  pathogenetic
effects,  without  relieving  the  weakness,  which  de-
pended on  an  unknown  disease  of  long  standing  %

Has  any  one  ever  succeeded  in  diminishing  in  the
very  least,  the  duration  of  the  incipient  paralysis  of  an
arm  or  a leg  arising  from  a chronic  disease,  without
curing  the  disease  itself,  by  means  of  the  so-called
unguenta  nervina^  or  any  other  spirituous  or  balsamic
embrocations'?  Or  have  electric  or  galvanic  shocks
ever  been  attended  with  any  other  result  in  such
cases,  than  a gradually  increasing,  and  finally  absolute,
paralysis,  and  extinction  of  all  muscular  and  nervous
irritability,  in  such  limbs  ? ^


* Those  affected  Avith  hai’dness  of  hearing  were  relieved  by
moderate  shocks  from  the  voltaic  pile  of  the  apothecary  of  Jever,
only  for  a few  hours — these  moderate  shocks  soon  lost  their  power.
In  order  to  produce  the  same  result  he  had  to  make  them  stronger ;
until  these  stronger  shocks  had  no  effect ; the  very  strongest  would
then  at  first  excite  the  patients’  hearing  for  a short  time,  but  at
length  left  them  quite  deaf.


INTRODUCTION.


45


Did  not  the  renowned  eoccitantia  and  aphrodisiaca,
ambergris,  scincus,  cantharides  tincture,  truffles,  car-
damoms, cinnamon  and  vanilla,  invariably  bring  about
complete  impotence  in  the  gradually  declining  sexual
power,  (which  always  depended  on  an  unobserved
chronic  miasm)  1

How  can  credit  be  taken  for  the  production  of  a
stimulation  and  invigoration  of  but  a few  hours’  dura-
tion, when  the  result  that  must  follow,  and  which  is
permanent — according  to  the  laws  of  all  palliative
action — is  a directly  opposite  state,  the  rendering  of
the  disease  incurable  1

The  little  good  that  the  eoccitantia  and  roborantia
did  in  assisting  in  the  recovery  from  acute  diseases
(treated  according  to  the  old  method),  was  a thou-
sand times  outweighed  by  their  ill  effects  in  chronic
maladies.

When  physicians  of  the  old  school  know  not  what
they  ought  to  do  in  a chronic  disease,  they  blindly
attack  it  with  their  so-called  alterative  remedies
(alterantia),  and  among  these  the  frightful  merctirialia
(calomel,  corrosive  sublimate,  and  mercurial  ointment)
occupy  the  foremost  place — which  they  allow  to  act
in  such  large  quantities,  and  for  so  long  a time,  so
destructively  on  the  diseased  body  (in  non-venereal
diseases !),  that  at  last  the  health  is  completely  mi-
dermined.  They  thus  certainly  produce  great  altera-
tions, but  invariably  such  as  are  not  beneficial,  and


46


INTRODUCTION.


they  always  utterly  ruin  the  health  by  their  improper
administration  of  this  excessively  injurious  metal.

When  the  old  school  practitioners  prescribe,  in
large  doses,  cinchona  hark  (which,  as  a homoeopathic
febrifuge,  is  only  specific  in  trne  marsh  ague,  uncom-
plicated with  psora),  for  all  epidemic  intermittent
fevers,  which  are  often  distributed  over  large  tracts  of
country,  they  palpably  manifest  their  imprudence,  for
those  diseases  assume  a different  character  almost
every  year,  and  hence  demand  for  their  cure,  almost
always,  a different  homoeopathic  remedy,  by  means  of
one,  or  a few  very  small  doses  of  which,  they  may
always  be  radically  cured  in  a few  days.  Now,
because  these  epidemic  fevers  have  periodical  attacks
(typus)  and  the  adherents  of  the  old  school  see
nothing  in  all  intermittent  fevers  but  their  typus
[periodicity],  and  neither  know,  nor  care  to  know,
any  other  febrifuge  but  cinchona,  these  routine  prac-
titioners imagine,  if  they  can  but  suppress  the  typus
of  the  epidemic  intermittent  fever,  with  enormous
doses  of  cinchona  and  its  costly  alcaloid,  quinine,
(an  event  which  the  unintelligent,  but  in  this  instance
more  sensible,  vital  force  endeavours  to  prevent  often
for  months),  that  they  have  cured  this  epidemic  ague.
But  the  deluded  patient,  after  such  a suppression
of  the  periodicity  (typus)  of  his  fever,  invariably
becomes  worse  than  he  was  during  the  fever  itself :
with  sallow  complexion,  dyspnoea,  constriction  in  the
hypochondria,  disordered  bowels,  unhealthy  appetite.


INTRODUCTION,


47


broken  sleep,  feeble  and  desponding,  often  with  great
swelling  of  the  legs,  of  the  abdomen,  and  even  of  the
face  and  hands,  he  creeps  out  of  the  hospital,  dismissed
as  cured,  and  long  years  of  homoeopathic  treatment
are  not  unfrequently  required,  merely  to  rescue  from
death,  not  to  say  to  cure,  and  restore  to  health,  such
a profoundly  injured  (cured  1),  artificially  cachectic
patient.

The  old  school  is  happy  when  it  can  convert  the
dull  stupor  that  occurs  in  typhus  fevers,  by  means  of
valerian,  which  in  this  case  acts  antipathically,  into  a
kind  of  liveliness  of  a few  hours’  duration ; but  as
this  does  not  continue,  and  to  force  a repetition  of
the  animation,  ever  increasing  doses  of  valerian  are
requisite,  it  is  not  long  before  the  largest  doses  cease
to  have  the  desired  effect.  But  as  this  palliative  is
only  stimulant  in  its  primary  action,  in  its  secondary
action  the  vital  force  is  paralysed,  and  such  a patient
is  certain  of  a speedy  death  from  this  rational  treat-
ment of  the  old  school ; none  can  escape.  And  yet
the  adherents  of  this  routine  art  could  not  perceive
that  by  these  proceedings  they  most  certainly  killed
their  patients ; they  ascribed  the  death  to  the  malig-
nancy of  the  disease.

A palliative  of  a still  more  horrible  character  for
chronic  patients,  is  the  digitalis  purpurea,  with  which
the  old  school  practitioners  imagine  they  do  such
excellent  service,  when  they  endeavour,  by  means  of
it,  to  bring  down  the  quick,  irritated  pulse  (purely
symptomatic !)  in  chronic  diseases.  True  it  is,  that


48


INTRODUCTION.


this  monstrous  remedy,  which  is  in  such  cases  em-
ployed enantiopathically,  strikingly  diminishes  the
frequency  of  the  quick,  irritated  pulse,  and  greatly
reduces  the  strength  of  the  arterial  pulsations,  for  a
few  hours,  after  the  first  dose;  but  the  pulse  soon
becomes  more  rapid  than  before.  In  order  again  to
diminish  in  some  degree  its  frequency,  the  dose  is
increased,  and  it  has  the  effect,  but  for  a still  shorter
period,  until  even  these  and  still  larger  palliative
doses  cease  to  reduce  the  pulse,  which  at  length,  in
the  secondary  action  of  the  foxglove  which  can  no
longer  be  restrained,  becomes  much  more  rapid  than
it  was  before  the  use  of  the  drug, — it  then  becomes
uncountable  ; sleep,  appetite,  and  all  strength  are  lost
— death  is  imminent;  and  not  one  of  the  patients  so
treated  escapes  alive,  unless  to  be  a prey  to  incurable
insanity ! ^

Such  was  the  treatment  pursued  by  the  allopathist.
The  patients,  therefore,  were  obliged  to  yield  to  the
sad  necessity,  because  they  could  obtain  no  better
aid  from  other  allopathists,  who  had  gained  their
knowledge  from  the  same  deceitful  books.


* And  yet  Hufeland,  the  chief  of  this  old  school  (v.  Homoopathie,
p.  22),  extols  with  much  satisfaction  the  employment  of  digitalis  in
such  cases,  in  these  Avords:  “None  Avill  deny”  (experience  invariably
does  so!)  “that  too  great  rapidity  of  the  circulation  can  he  removed  (?)
by  digitalis.”  Permanently  removed  ? and  by  a heroic  enantiopathic
remedy  ? Poor  Hufeland !


INTRODUCTION.


49


As  the  fundamental  cause  of  chronic  (non-venereal)
diseases,  together  with  the  remedies  for  them,  remained
unknown  to  these  practitioners,  who  vainly  boasted
of  their  causal  medication,  and  of  their  diagnosis
being  directed  to  the  investigation  of  the  genesis  of
diseases;^  how  could  they  hope  to  remove  the  im-
mense numbers  of  chronic  diseases,  by  their  indirect
modes  of  treatment,  which  were  but  hurtful  imita-
tions of  the  processes  of  the  irrational  vital  force  for
its  own  relief,  that  never  were  intended  to  be  models
for  practice  1

The  presumed  character  of  the  affection,  they  re-
garded as  the  cause  of  the  disease,  and  hence  they
directed  their  pretended  causal  treatment  against
spasm,  inflammation  (plethora),  fever,  general  and
partial  debility,  mucus,  putridity,  obstructions,  &c.,
which  they  thought  to  remove  by  means  of  their  anti-
spasmodic,  antiphlogistic,  tonic,  stimulant,  antiseptic,
dissolvent,  resolvent,  derivative,  evacuant,  antagonistic
remedies  (of  which  they  only  possessed  a superficial
knowledge).

But  from  indications  of  such  a vague  character,
really  serviceable  medicines  could  not  be  discovered,
most  assuredly  not  in  the  materia  medica  of  the


^ Which  Hufeland  in  his  pamphlet,  Die  Homoopathie  (p.  20),
makes  a futile  attempt  to  appropriate  for  his  old  pseudo-art.  For
since,  as  is  well  known,  previous  to  the  appearance  of  my  book
{Chronic  Diseases),  the  2500-years-old  allopathy  knew  nothing
about  the  source  of  most  chronic  diseases  (psora),  must  it  not  have
attributed  a false  source  {genesis)  to  sucb  maladies?

E


50


INTRODUCTION.


old  school,  which,  as  I have  elsewhere  shewn,^  is
founded  mainly  on  conjecture  and  false  deductions
ah  usii  in  morhis,  mixed  up  with  falsehood  and  fraud.

With  equal  rashness  they  attacked  those  still  more
hypothetical  so-called  indications — deficiency  or  excess
of  oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbon,  or  hydrogen  in  the  fluids,
exaltation  or  diminution  of  the  irritability,  sensibility,
and  reproduction,  derangements  of  the  arterial,  venous,
and  capillary  systems,  asthenia,  &c.,  without  knowing
a single  remedy  for  efiecting  objects  so  visionary.
All  this  was  pure  ostentation.  It  was  a mode  of
treatment — that  did  no  good  to  the  patients.

But  all  semblance  of  appropriate  treatment  of
diseases  was  completely  lost,  by  a practice,  introduced
in  the  earliest  times,  and  even  made  into  a rule : I mean
the  mixture,  in  a prescription,  of  various  medicinal
substances,  whose  real  action  was,  almost  without  an
exception,  unknown,  and  which,  without  any  one  ex-
ception, invariably  differed  so  much  among  each
other.  One  medicine  (the  sphere  of  whose  medicinal
effects  was  unknown)  was  placed  foremost,  as  the
principal  remedy  (basis),  and  was  designed  to  subdue,
what  the  physician  deemed  the  chief  character  of  the
disease ; to  this  was  added  some  other  drug  (equally
unknown  as  regards  the  sphere  of  its  medicinal  action),
for  the  removal  of  some  particular  accessory  symptom,
or  to  strengthen  the  action  of  the  first  (adjuvans);

' Introduction  to  the  thii’d  part  of  the  Pure  Materia  Medica  :
“ Sources  of  the  common  Materia  Medica.”  [Translated  in  the
British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  vol.  iii.]


INTRODUCTION.


51


and  besides  these,  yet  another,  (likewise  unknown  as
to  the  sphere  of  its  medicinal  powers),  a pretended
corrective  remedy  (corrigens);  these  were  all  mixed
together  (boiled,  infused) — and  along  with  them,  some
medicinal  syrup,  or  distilled  medicinal  water,  also  with
different  properties,  would  be  included  in  the  formula,
and  it  was  supposed,  that  each  of  the  ingredients
of  this  mixture  would  perform,  in  the  diseased  body,
the  part  allotted  to  it  by  the  prescriber’s  imagination,
without  suffering  itself  to  be  disturbed  or  led  astray
by  the  other  things  mixed  up  along  with  it ; which,
however,  could  not  in  reason  be  expected.  One
ingredient  suspended  wholly  or  partially  the  action
of  another,  or  communicated  to  it  and  to  the  others,
a mode  of  action  and  operation  never  anticipated
nor  calculated  on,  so  that  it  was  impossible  the
expected  effect  could  be  obtained;  there  frequently
occurred  a new  morbid  derangement,  which,  from  the
incomprehensible  changes  imparted  to  substances  by
their  admixture,  was  not  and  could  not  have  been
foreseen,  which  escaped  observation  amid  the  tumul-
tuous symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  which  became
permanent  from  a lengthened  employment  of  the
prescription — accordingly  an  artificial  disease  was
added  to  and  complicated  the  original  disease,  causing
an  aggravation  of  the  latter — or  if  the  prescrip-
tion was  not  often  repeated,  but  superseded  by
one  or  more  new  prescriptions,  composed  of  other
ingredients,  given  in  rapid  succession,  then  the  very
least  that  could  happen  was  a farther  depression  of

E 2


52


INTRODUCTION.


the  strength,  for  the  substances  administered  in  that
way  neither  had,  nor  could  have  had,  any  direct
pathological  relation  to  the  original  malady,  but  only
attacked,  in  a useless  and  injurious  manner,  parts
that  were  least  implicated  in  the  disease.

The  mixture  of  several  medicines,  even  if  the
effects  of  each  single  medicine  on  the  human  body
were  accurately  known  ( — the  prescription  writer,
however,  often  knows  not  the  thousandth  part  of  their
effects — ),  the  association  in  one  formula,  of  several
such  ingredients,  I repeat,  many  of  which  are  them-
selves of  a very  compound  nature,  and  the  pecuhar
action  of  any  one  of  which  is  as  good  as  unknown,
although  in  reality  it  always  differs  from  that  of  the
others,  and  the  administration  of  this  incomprehen-
sible mixture  to  the  patient  in  large  and  frequently
repeated  doses,  in  order  therewith  to  obtain  some
purposed,  certain,  curative  effect,  is  a piece  of  folly
evident  to  every  reflecting  and  unprejudiced  person.^


^ The  absurdity  of  medicinal  mixtm'es  has  been  perceived  even  by
adherents  of  the  old  school  of  medicine,  although  they  stUl  continued
to  follow  this  slovenly  plan  in  their  own  practice,  contraiy  to  them
convictions.  Thus  Marcus  Herz  (in  Hufeland's  Journal,  ii.  p.  33),
reveals  the  pricks  of  his  conscience  in  the  following  words :
“When  we  wish  to  remove  the  inflammatory  state,  we  do  not
employ  either  nitre  or  sal-ammoniac  or  vegetable  acids  alone,  but  we
usually  mix  several,  and  often  but  too  many,  so-called  antiplilogistics
together,  or  give  them  in  the  same  case  in  close  succession.  If  we  have
to  combat  putridity,  we  are  not  content  to  look  for  the  attainment  of
our  object  from  the  administration  of  large  doses  of  one  of  the  kno-wn


INTRODUCTION.


53


The  result  naturally  belies  every  expectation  that
had  been  formed.  There  certainly  ensue  changes
and  results,  but  none  of  an  appropriate  character,
none  beneficial — all  injurious,  destructive !


antiseptic  medicines,  cinchona  bark,  mineral  acids,  arnica,  serpentaria,
&c.,  alone ; we  prefer  associating  several  of  them  together,  and  count
upon  their  community  of  action;  or  from  our  uncertainty  as  to
whose  action  is  the  most  suitable  for  the  case  in  question,  we  throw
together  a number  of  different  substances,  and  almost  leave  it  to
chance  to  effect  the  end  we  have  in  view,  by  means  of  one  of  them.
Thus  we  seldom  excite  perspiration,  purify  the  blood  (?),  overcome
obstructions  (?),  promote  expectoration,  or  even  evacuate  the  primse
vise,  by  a single  remedy;  our  prescriptions  for  these  objects  are
always  composite,  almost  never  simple  and  pure,  consequently  neither
are  our  observations  in  reference  to  the  actions  of  each  individual
substance  contained  in  them.  To  be  sure,  we  learnedly  institute
certain  grades  of  rank  among  the  remedies  in  our  formulas;  on  the
one  to  which  we  particularly  commission  the  action,  we  confer  the
title  of  base  (basis),  the  others  we  call  helpers,  supporters  (adjuvantia),
correctives  (corrigentia),  &c.  But  this  classification  is  evidently
almost  entirely  arbitrary.  The  helpers  and  supporters  have  just  as
much  part  in  the  whole  action  as  the  chief  ingredient,  although,  from
want  of  a standard  of  measurement,  we  are  unable  to  determine  the
degree  of  their  participation  in  the  result.  In  hke  manner  the
influence  of  the  correctives  on  the  powers  of  the  other  ingredients
cannot  he  quite  indifferent ; they  must  increase  or  depress  them,  or  give
them  quite  another  dfiection ; and  hence  we  must  always  regard  the
salutary  (?)  change  which  we  effect,  by  means  of  such  a prescription,
as  the  result  of  all  its  ingredients  collectively,  and  we  can  never
obtain  from  its  action,  a pure  observation  of  the  individual  efficacy  of
any  single  ingredient  of  which  it  is  composed.  In  fact,  our  know-
ledge of  ivhat  is  essential  to  be  known  respecting  all  our  remedies,  as
also  respecting  the  perhaps  hundredfold  relationships  among  each


54


INTRODUCTION.


I should  like  to  see  any  one  who  would  call  the
blind  inroads  of  such  prescriptions  on  the  diseased
human  body,  a cure !

It  is  only  by  guiding  what  still  remains  of  the
vital  principle  in  the  patient,  to  the  proper  perform-
ance of  its  functions,  by  means  of  a suitable  medicine,
that  a cure  can  he  expected,  but  not  by  enervating
the  body  to  death,  secundum  artem ; and  yet  the  old
school  knows  not  what  else  to  do  with  patients
suffering  from  chronic  diseases,  than  to  attack  the
sufferers  with  drugs  that  do  nothing  but  torture
them,  waste  their  strength  and  fluids,  and  shorten
their  lives ! Can  it  be  said  to  save  whilst  it  destroys  1
Does  it  deserve  any  other  name  than  that  of  a mis-
chievous [non-healing]  art?  It  acts,  le^e  artis,  in  the
most  inappropriate  manner,  and  it  does  (it  would
almost  seem  purposely)  oKkoTa,  that  is  to  say,  the  very
opposite  of  what  it  should  do.  Can  it  be  commended'?
Can  it  be  any  longer  tolerated  ?

In  recent  times,  the  old  school  practitioners  have
quite  surpassed  themselves  in  their  cruelty  towards
their  sick  fellow  creatures,  and  in  the  unsuitableness
of  their  operations,  as  every  unprejudiced  observer
must  admit,  and  as  even  physicians  of  their  own
school  have  been  forced,  by  the  pricks  of  their  con-


other  into  which  they  enter  when  combined,  is  far  too  little  to  be  relied
upon,  to  enable  %is  to  tell  luith  certainty,  the  deyree  and  extent  of
the  action  of  a suhstance,  seeminyly  ever  so  unimportant,  lohen
introduced  into  the  human  body  in  combination  ivith  other  substaticesi"


INTRODUCTION.


55


science  (like  Kruger  Hansen),  to  confess  before  the
world.

It  was  high  time  for  the  wise  and  benevolent
Creator  and  Preserver  of  mankind  to  put  a stop  to
this  abomination,  to  command  a cessation  of  these
tortures,  and  to  reveal  a healing  art  the  very  opposite
of  this,  which  should  not  waste  the  vital  juices  and
powers  by  emetics,  perennial  scourings  out  of  the
bowels,  warm  baths,  diaphoretics,  or  salivation ; nor
shed  the  life’s  blood,  nor  torment  and  weaken  with
painful  appliances;  nor,  in  place  of  curing  patients
suffering  from  diseases,  render  them  incurable  by
the  addition  of  new,  chronic,  medicinal  maladies,  by
means  of  the  long  continued  use  of  wrong,  powerful
medicines  of  unknown  properties ; nor  yoke  the
horse  behind  the  cart,  by  giving  strong  palliatives,
according  to  the  old  favourite  axiom,  contraria  con-
trariis  curentur;  nor,  in  short,  in  place  of  lending  the
patient  aid,  to  guide  him  in  the  way  to  death,  as
is  done  by  the  merciless  routine  practitioner; — but
which,  on  the  contrary,  should  spare  the  patient’s
strength  as  much  as  possible,  and  should,  rapidly
and  mildly,  effect  an  unalloyed  and  permanent  cure,
by  means  of  smallest  doses  of  simple  medicines  well
considered,  and  selected  according  to  their  proved
effects,  by  the  only  therapeutic  law  conformable  to
nature : similia  similihus  curentur.  It  was  high  time
that  He  should  permit  the  discovery  of  Homoeo-
pathy.


56


INTRODUCTION.


By  observation,  reflexion,  and  experiment,  I dis-
covered, that,  in  opposition  to  the  old  allopathic
method,  the  true,  the  proper,  the  best  mode  of  treat-
ment, is  contained  in  the  maxim:  To  effect  a mild,
rapid,  certain,  and  permanent  cure,  choose,  in  every  case
of  disease,  a medicine  which  can  itself  produce  an
affection  similar  (oixoiov  to  that  sought  to  he  cured!

Hitherto  no  one  has  ever  taught  this  homoeopathic
mode  of  cure,  no  one  has  practised  it.  But  if  the
truth  is  only  to  be  found  in  this  method,  as  I can
prove  it  to  be,  we  might  expect  that,  even  though  it
remained  unperceived  for  thousands  of  years,  distinct
traces  of  it  would  yet  be  discovered  in  every  age.'

And  such  is  the  fact.  In  all  ages,  the  patients  who
have  been  really,  rapidly,  permanently,  and  evidently
cured  hy  medicines,  and  who  did  not  merely  recover
by  some  fortuitous  circumstance,  or  by  the  acute
disease  having  run  its  allotted  course,  or  by  the
powers  of  the  system  having,  in  the  course  of  time,
gradually  attained  the  preponderance,  under  allo-
pathic and  antagonistic  treatment — for  being  cured
in  a direct  manner  differs  vastly  from  recovering  in
an  indirect  manner — such  patients  have  been  cured
solely,  (although  without  the  knowledge  of  the  physi-

* For  truth  is  co-eternal  with  the  all-wise,  benevolent  Deity.  It
may  long  escape  the  observation  of  man,  uirtil  the  time  fore-ordained
by  Providence  arrives,  when  its  rays  shall  irresistibly  break  through
the  clouds  of  prejudice,  and  usher  in  the  dawn  of  a day,  which  shall
shine  with  a bright  and  unfading  light  for  the  weal  of  the  human


race.


INTRODUCTION.


57


cian,)  by  means  of  a (homoeopathic)  medicine,  which
possessed  the  power  of  producing  a similar  morbid
state.

Even  in  cases  of  real  cure  by  means  of  mixtures  of
medicines — which  were  excessively  rare — it  will  be
found,  that  the  remedy  whose  action  predominated,
was  always  of  a homoeopathic  character.

But  this  is  observed  much  more  strikingly  in  cases
where  physicians  sometimes  effected  a rapid  cure
with  one  simple  medicinal  substance,  contrary  to  the
usual  custom,  that  admitted  of  none  but  mixtures  of
medicines  in  the  form  of  a prescription.  There  we
see,  to  our  astonishment,  that  this  always  occurred
by  means  of  a medicine  that  is  itself  capable  of  pro-
ducing an  affection  similar  to  the  case  of  disease  that
was  cured,  although  the  physicians  themselves  knew
not  what  they  were  doing,  and  acted  in  forgetfulness
of  the  contrary  doctrines  of  their  own  school.  They
prescribed  a medicine  the  very  reverse  of  that  which
they  should  have  employed  according  to  the  laws  of
traditional  therapeutics,  and  it  was  only  in  consequence
of  so  doing  that  the  patients  were  rapidly  cured.

I shall  here  relate  some  examples  of  these  homoeo-
pathic cures,  which  find  a clear  and  precise  interpre-
tation in  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  now  discovered
and  acknowledged,  but  which  we  are  by  no  means
to  regard  as  arguments  in  favour  of  the  latter,  because
it  stands  firm  without  the  aid  of  any  such  support.^


If,  in  the  cases  which  will  be  cited  here,  the  doses  of  medicine


58


INTEODUCTION.


The  author  of  the  treatise  on  epidemic  diseases
(attributed  to  Hippocrates^),  mentions  a case
of  cholera  morhus  that  resisted  every  remedy,  and
which  he  cured  by  means  of  white  hellebore  alone,
which,  however,  excites  cholera  of  itself,  as  witnessed
by  Forest,  Ledelius,  Reimann,  and  many  others.^

The  English  sweating  sickness  which  first  appeared
in  the  year  1485,  and  which,  more  murderous  than
the  plague  itself,  carried  off  in  the  commencement,
(as  testified  by  Willis)  ninety-nine  patients  out  of  a
hundred,  could  not  be  subdued,  until  physicians  had


exceeded  those  which  the  safe  homoeopathic  doctrine  prescribes,
they  were,  of  course  very  naturally  attended  with  the  same  degree
of  danger  which  usually  results  from  aU  homoeopathic  agents  when
administered  in  large  doses.  However,  it  often  happens,  from
various  causes  which  cannot  at  all  times  be  discovered,  that  even
very  large  doses  of  homoeopathic  medicines  effect  a cure,  without
causing  any  notable  injury,  either  from  the  vegetable  substance
having  lost  a part  of  its  strength,  or  because  abundant  evacuations
ensued  which  destroyed  the  greater  part  of  the  effects  of  the  re-
medy; or,  finally,  because  the  stomach  had  received  at  the  same
time  other  substances,  which,  acting  as  an  antidote,  lessened  the
strength  of  the  dose.

^ At  the  commencement  of  lib.  5.

* P.  Forestus,  xviii.  obs.  44. — Ledelius,  Misc.  nat.  cur.  dec.  iii.
ann.  i.  obs.  65. — Reimann,  Bresl.  Samml.  1724,  p.  535.  In  this,
and  in  aU  the  examples  that  follow,  I have  purposely  abstained  from
reporting  either  my  own  observations  or  those  of  my  pupils,  upon  the
special  effects  of  each  individual  medicine,  but  merely  those  of  the
physicians  of  times  past.  My  object  for  acting  in  this  manner,  is  to
shew  that  the  art  of  curing  homceopathically  might  have  been  dis-
covered before  my  time.


INTRODUCTION.


59


learned  to  administer  sudorijics  to  their  patients.  After
that,  as  Sennert^  observes,  few  persons  died  of  it.

A case  of  dysentery  which  had  lasted  several  years,
threatening  the  patient  with  inevitable  death,  and  for
which  every  other  medicine  had  been  tried  without
success,  was,  to  Fischer’s^  (but  not  my)  great  surprise,
cured  in  a speedy  and  permanent  manner  by  a pur-
gative administered  by  an  empiric.

Murray,  (whom  I select  from  numerous  other  autho-
rities,) informs  us,  as  does  also  daily  experience,  that
among  the  symptoms  produced  by  the  use  of  tobacco,
those  of  vertigo,  nausea,  and  anxiety  are  the  principal.
Now  Diemerbroeck,^  when  attacked  with  those  very
symptoms  of  vertigo,  nausea,  and  anxiety,  in  the
course  of  his  close  attendance  on  the  victims  of
epidemic  diseases  in  Holland,  removed  them  by  smo-
king tobacco.

The  hurtful  effects  which  some  writers  (among
others  Georgi)^  ascribe  to  the  use  of  the  agaricus
muscarius,  by  the  inhabitants  of  Kamtschatka,  and
which  consist  of  tremors,  convulsions,  and  epilepsy,
became  a salutary  remedy  in  the  hands  of  C.  G.
Whistling,^  who  used  this  fungus  with  success  in  cases
of  convulsions  accompanied  with  tremor ; likewise  in


' De  Febribus,  iv.  cap.  15.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal  fin-  praktische  Heilkunde,  vol.x.  iv.  p.  127.
® Treatise  on  Pest.  Amsterdam,  1665,  p.  273.

* Beschreibung  aller  Nationen  des  russischen  Reichs,  pp.  78,
267,  281,  321,  329,  352.

® Diss  de  Vii't.  Agaric.  Muse.  Jena,  1718,  p.  13.


60


INTRODUCTION,


those  of  J.  C.  Bernhardt/  who  used  it  with  success
in  a species  of  epilepsy.

The  remark  made  by  Murray/  that  oil  of  aniseed
allays  pains  of  the  stomach  and  flatulent  colic  caused
by  purgatives,  ought  not  to  surprise  us,  knowing  that
J,  P.  Albrecht^  has  observed  pains  in  the  stomach
produced  by  this  substance,  and  P.  Forest^  violent
colic  likewise  caused  by  its  administration.

If  F.  Hoffmann  praises  the  efficacy  of  millefoil  in
various  cases  of  hemorrhage ; if  G.  E.  Stahl,  Buch-
wald  and  Loseke  have  found  this  plant  useful  in  ex-
cessive hemorrhoidal  flue ; if  Quarin  and  the  editors
of  the  Breslauer  Sammlungen  speak  of  the  cure  it
has  effected  of  hemoptysis ; and  finally,  if  Thomasius
(according  to  Haller)  has  used  it  successfully  in
uterine  hemorrhage ; these  cures  are  evidently  owing
to  the  power  possessed  by  the  plant,  of  exciting
intestinal  hemorrhage  and  hematuria^  as  observed  by
G.  Hoffmann,^  and  more  especially  of  producing
epistaxis^  as  confirmed  by  Boeder.®

Scovolo,^  among  many  others,  cured  a case  where
the  urinary  discharge  was  puriform,  by  arbutus  uva


^ Chym.  Vers,  und  Erfahrungen,  Leipsic,  1754,  obs.  5,  p.  324.
Gruner,  DeVmbus  Agar.  Muse.  Jena,  1778,  p.  13.

^ Appar.  Medic.,  1,  p.  429,  430.

® Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  ii.  ann.  8,  obs.  169.

* Observat.  et  Curationes,  lib.  21.

® De  Medicam.  Officin.  Leyden,  1738.

® Cynosura  Mat.  Med.  Cont.,  p.  552.

’ In  Girardi,  de  uva  ursi.  Padua,  1764.


INTKODUCTION.


61


ursi ; which  never  could  have  been  performed,  if  this
plant  had  not  the  property  of  exciting  heat  in  the
urethra  with  discharge  of  mucous  urine,  as  seen  by
Sauvagesd

And  though  the  frequent  experience  of  Storck,
Marges,  Plan  chon,  du  Monceau,  F.  C.  Junker,  Schinz,
Ehrmann,  and  others  had  not  already  established  the
fact,  that  colchicum  autumnale  cures  a species  of
dropsy,  still  this  power  was  to  have  been  expected
from  it,  from  the  peculiar  property  it  possesses  of
diminishmg  the  urinary  secretion,  and  of  exciting  at  the
same  time  a continual  desire  to  pass  water.  It  likewise
causes  the  flow  of  a small  quantity  of  urine  of  a flery
red  colour,  as  witnessed  by  Storck^  and  de  Berge^.
The  cure  of  an  asthma  attended  with  hypochondriasis
efiected  by  Goritz^  by  means  of  colchicum,  and  that
of  an  asthma  complicated  with  hydrothorax,  per-
formed by  Storck®  with  the  same  substance,  were
evidently  owing  to  the  homoeopathic  property  which
it  possesses,  of  exciting  asthma  and  dyspnoea,  as  wit-
nessed by  de  Berge.®

Muralto’  saw  what  we  may  witness  every  day,  viz:


* Nosolog.,  iii.  p.  200.

^ Libellus  de  Colchico.  Vienna,  1763,  p.  12.

® Journal  de  Medecine,  22.

‘ A.  E.  Buchner,  Miscell.  Phys.  Med.  Mathem.  Ann.  1728,  Jul.
pp.  1212,  1213.  Erfurt,*  1732.

®Ibid.  cas.  11,  13.

® Ibid.  loc.  cit.

^ Misc.  Nat.  Cur.  dec.  ii.  ann.  7,  obs.  112.


62


INTRODUCTIOlSr.


that  jalap,  besides  creating  gripes  in  the  belly,  also
causes  great  uneasiness  and  agitation.  Every  physician
acquainted  mth  the  facts  upon  which  homoeopathy
rests,  will  find  it  perfectly  natural,  that  the  power
so  justly  ascribed  to  this  medicine  by  G.  W.Wedel,^
of  allaying  the  gripes  which  are  so  frequent  in  young
children,  and  of  procuring  them  tranquil  repose,
arises  from  homoeopathic  influence.

It  is  also  known  and  has  been  attested  by  Murray,
Hillary  and  Spielmann,  that  senna  occasions  a kind
of  colic,  and  produces,  according  to  C.  Hoffmann^  and
F.  Hoffmann,^  flatulency  and  turgescence  of  the  blood  j
ordinary  causes  of  insomnolency.  It  was  this  inherent
homoeopathic  property  of  senna,  which  enabled  Det-
harding^  to  cure  with  its  aid,  patients  afflicted  with
violent  colic  and  insomnolency.

Storck,  who  had  so  intimate  a knowledge  of  medi-
cines, was  on  the  point  of  discovering  that  the  bad
effects  of  the  dictamnus,  which  he  observed  sometimes
to  provoke  a mucous  discharge  from  the  vagina j arose
from  the  very  same  properties  in  this  root  which
enabled  him  to  cure  a leucorrhoea  of  long  standing.’


' Opiolog.,  lib.  1,  p.  1,  cap.  2,  p.  38.

^ De  Medicin.  Officin.,  lib.  1,  cap.  36.

® Diss  de  Manna,  p.  16.

^ Murray,  loc.  cit.  ii.  p.  507.

“ Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent.  10,  obs.  76.

® Lib.  de  Flamin.  Jovis.  Vienna,  1769,  cap.  2.
' Ibid.  cap.  9.


INTRODUCTION.


63


Storck  should,  moreover,  not  have  been  astonished
that  he  was  able  to  cure  a general  chronic  eruption
(humid,  phagedenic  and  psoric)  with  clematis,^  having
himself  ascertained^  that  this -plant  has  the  power  of
producing  a psoric  eruption  over  the  whole  body.

If,  as  Murray  asserts,^  euphrasia  cures  lippitudo  and
a certain  form  of  ophthalmia,  how  could  it  otherwise
produce  this  effect,  but  by  the  faculty  it  possesses
of  exciting  a kind  of  inflammation  in  the  eyes,  as
has  been  remarked  by  Lobeliusl^

According  to  J.  H.  Lange,®  nutmeg  has  been  found
efficacious  in  hysterical  fainting  fits.  The  sole  natural
cause  of  this  phenomenon  is  homoeopathic,  and  can
be  attributed  to  no  other  circumstance,  but  that  the
nutmeg,  when  given  in  strong  doses  to  a person  in
health,  produces,  as  stated  by  J.  Schmid®  and  Cullen,’
suspension  of  the  senses  and  general  insensibility.

The  old  practice  of  applying  rose-water  externally
in  ophthalmic  diseases,  looks  like  a tacit  avowal,  that
there  exists  in  the  leaves  of  the  rose,  some  curative
power  for  diseases  of  the  eye.  This  is  founded  upon
the  homoeopathic  virtue  which  the  rose  possesses,  of
exciting  a species  of  ophthalmia  in  persons  who  are


' Op.  cit.,  cap.  13.

2 Ibid.  p.  33.

^ Appar.  Medic.,  xi.  p.  221,  2nd  edit.

^ Stirp.  Adversai'.,  p.  219.

® Domest.  Brunsvic.,  p.  136.

® Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  ii.  ann.  2,  obs.  20.
’ Materia  medica,  ii,  p.  233.


64


INTRODUCTION.


in  health,  an  effect  which  Echtius,^  Ledelins,^  and
Ran,®  actually  saw  it  produce.

If,  as  asserted  by  Pet.  Rossi,^  Van  Mons,®  J.  Monti,®
Sybel,’  and  others,  the  poison  sumach  has  the  faculty
of  producing  pimples  which  gradually  cover  the  entire
body,  it  may  be  easily  perceived  how  this  plant  is
capable  of  effecting  a homoeopathic  cure  of  various
kinds  of  herpetic  eruptions,  which  it  really  has  done,
according  to  information  furnished  by  Dufresnoy  and
Van  Mons.  What  could  have  bestowed  upon  the
poison  sumach  (as  in  a case  cited  by  Alderson,®)
the  power  of  curing  a paralysis  of  the  lower  extremi-
ties, attended  with  weakness  of  the  intellectual  organs,
if  it  did  not,  of  itself,  evidently  possess  the  faculty  of
depressing  the  muscular  powers  and  of  acting  on  the
imagination  of  the  patient  to  such  a degree,  as  to
make  him  believe  that  he  is  at  the  point  of  death,  as
in  a case  witnessed  by  Zadig.®

Dulcamara,  according  to  Carrere,^®  has  cured  the

' In  Adami,  Vita  Medic,  p.  72.

^ Misc.  Nat.  Cui’ios.,  dec.  ii.  ann.  2,  obs.  140.

® Ran,  liber  den  Werth  des  homoop.  Heilverfahrens,  p.  73.

* Observ.  de  Nonnullis  Plantis,  quae  pro  venenatis  habentur.  Pisis,
1667.

® In  Dufresnoy,  Des  proprietes  de  la  plante  appelee  rhus  radicans.

p.  206.

® Acta  Instit.  Bonon.  sc.  et  art.  iii.  165.

^ In  Med.  Annalen,  1811,  July.

® In  Samml.  aus.  Abb.  f.  pr.  Aerzte,  xviii.  1.

® In  Hufeland’s  Journal  der  prakt.  Heilk.  v.  p.  3.

Carrere,  (and  Starcke,)  Abhandl.  iiber  die  Eigenschaften  des
Nachtscbattens  oder  Bittersiisses.  Jena,  1786,  pp.  20 — 23.


INTRODUCTION.


65


most  violent  diseases  caused  by  a chill,  which  could
result  from  no  other  cause  but  that  this  herb,  in
cold  and  damp  weather,  frequently  produces  similar
affections  to  those  which  arise  from  a chill,  as  Carrere
himself  has  observed,^  and  likewise  Starcke.^  Fritze^
saw  dulcamara  produce  convulsions,  and  De  Haen^
witnessed  the  very  same  effects  attended  with  delirium;
on  the  other  hand,  convulsions  attended  with  delirium,
have  yielded  to  small  doses  of  dulcamara  administered
by  the  last  mentioned  physician.® — It  were  vain  to
seek  amid  the  vast  domain  of  hypotheses  the  cause
that  renders  dulcamara  so  efficacious  in  a species  of
herpes,  as  witnessed  by  Carrere,®  Fouquet,’  and  Pou-
part.®  Nature,  which  requires  the  aid  of  homoeopathy
to  perform  a safe  cure,  sufficiently  explains  the
cause,  in  the  faculty  possessed  by  dulcamara,  of  pro-
ducing a certain  species  of  herpes.  Carrere  saw  the
use  of  this  plant  excite  herpetic  eruptions  which


* Carrere  (and  Starcke),  Abhandl.  iiber  die  Eigenschaften  des
Nachtscbattens  oder  Bittersiisses.  Jena,  1786,  pp.  20 — 23.

^ In  Carrere,  ibid.  p.  140,  249.

® Annalen  des  kliniscben  Instituts,  iii.  p.  45.

^ Ratio  Medendi.  Tom.  iv.  p.  228.

® Ibid.,  where  he  says:  “ Dulco-amaree  stipites  majori  dosi  con-
vulsiones  et  deliria  excitant,  moderata  vero  spasmos,  con\Tilsionesque
solvunt.”  How  near  was  De  Haen  to  the  discovery  of  the  thera-
peutic law  most  in  conformity  to  nature  !

® Ratio  Medendi.  Tom.  iv.  p.  92.

’’  In  Razoux,  Tables  Nosologiques.

* Traite  des  Dartres.  Paris,  1782,  pp.  184,  192.

F


66


INTRODUCTION.


covered  the  entire  body  during  a fortnight ; ^ and.  on
another  occasion  where  it  produced  the  same  on  the
hands, ^ and  a third  time  where  it  fixed  itself  on  the
labia  pudendi.^

Rucker^  saw  the  solanum  nigrum  produce  swelling
of  the  entire  body.  This  is  the  reason  that  Gatacker^
and  Cirillo®  succeeded  in  curing  with  its  aid,  (homoeo-
pathically)  a species  of  dropsy.

Boerhaave,^  Sydenham,®  and  Badclitfe®  cured  an-
other species  of  dropsy  with  the  aid  of  the  sambucus
niger,  because,  as  Haller^®  informs  us,  this  plant  causes
an  (edematous  swelling  when  applied  externally.

De  Haen,“  Sarcone,^^  and  Pringle,^®  have  rendered
due  homage  to  truth  and  experience  by  declaring
openly  that  they  cured  pleurisy  Avith  the  scilla  mari-
tima,  a root  which,  on  account  of  its  excessive  acrid
properties,  ought  to  be  forbidden  in  a disease  of  this


* Traite  des  Dartres.  Paris,  1782,  j).  96.

“ Ibid.  p.  96.

^ Ibid.  p.  164.

^ Commerc.  Liter.  Noric.  1731,  p.  372.

° Versuche  & Bemerk.  der.  Ediiib.  Gesellscliaft,  Altenburg,  1762,
vii.  pp.  95,  98.

® Consult.  Medichi.  Tom.  iii.  Naples,  1738.  4to.

^ Historia  Plantarum.  P.  I.  p.  207.

® Opera,  p.  496.

® In  Haller,  Arzneimittellehre,  p.  349.

In  Vicat,  Plantes  veiieneuses,  p.  125.

“ Ratio  Medendi,  P.  I.  p.  13.

History  of  Diseases  in  Naples,  vol.  i.  p.  175.

Obs.  on  the  Diseases  of  the  Army,  ed.  7,  p.  143.


INTRODUCTION.


67


nature,  where,  according  to  the  received  method,
only  sedative,  relaxing,  and  cooling  remedies  are  ad-
missible. The  disease  in  question  subsided,  never-
theless, under  the  influence  of  squill  on  homoeopathic
principles;  for  T.  C.  Wagner^  formerly  saw  the  action
of  this  plant  alone  produce  pleurisy  and  inflammation
of  the  lungs.

A great  many  practitioners,  D.  Criiger,  E.ay,  Kell-
ner, Kaaw  Boerhaave,  and  others,^  have  observed
that  datura  stramonium  excites  a singular  kind  of
delirium  and  convulsions.  It  is  precisely  this  faculty
that  enabled  physicians  to  cure  with  its  aid  demono-
mania ^ (fantastic  madness  attended  with  spasms  of
the  limbs)  and  other  convulsions,  as  was  done  by
Sidren^  and  Wedenberg.^  If,  in  the  hands  of  Sidren®
it  cured  two  cases  of  chorea,  one  of  which  had  been
occasioned  by  fright,  and  the  other  by  mercurial
vapour,  it  was  because  it  possessed  the  faculty  of  ex-
citing involuntary  movements  of  the  limbs,  as  observed
by  Kaaw  Boerhaave,  and  Lobstein.  Numerous  ob-
servations, and  among  others  those  made  by  Schenk,
have  shewn  us  that  it  can  destroy  consciousness  and


^ Observationes  Clinicse.  Lubec,  1737.

^ C.  Criiger,  in  Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  iii.  ann.  2,  obs.  88. — Boer-
haave, Impetum  Faciens.  Leyden,  1745,  p.  282. — Kellner,  in  the
Bresl.  Samml.  172.

® Veckoskrift  for  Laekare,  vi.  p.  40  et  seq.

^ Diss.  de  Stramonii  usu  in  Mails  Convulsivis.  Upsala,  1793.

® Diss.  de  Stramonii  usu.  Upsala,  1773.

® Diss.  Morborum  Casus,  spec.  i.  Upsala,  1785.

F 2


68


INTRODUCTION.


memory  in  a very  short  time ; therefore,  it  ought
not  to  surprise  us  if,  according  to  the  testimony  of
Sauvages  and  Schinz,  it  possesses  the  faculty  of
curing  weakness  of  memory.  By  the  same  rule,
Schmalz  ^ succeeded  in  curing  with  the  aid  of  this
plant  a case  of  melancholy,  alternating  with  madness,
because,  according  to  Acosta,^  it  has  the  power  of
exciting  similar  alternating  mental  affections  when
administered  to  a person  in  health.

Percival,  Stahl,  Quarin,^  and  many  other  physicians,
have  observed  that  cinchona  occasions  oppression  of
the  stomach.  Some  (Morton,  Friborg,  Bauer,  and
Quarin)  have  seen  this  substance  produce  vomiting
and  diarrhoea;  others  (D.  Criiger  and  Morton),  syn-
cope; oihexs,  great  debility;  others  (Thomson,  Bichard,
Stahl,  and  C.  E.  Fisher),  a kind  of  jaundice ; others
(Quarin  and  Fischer),  bitterness  of  the  mouth;  and
yet  others,  tension  of  the  abdomen.  And  it  is  precisely
when  these  complicated  evils  occur  in  intermittent
fevers  that  Torti  and  Cleghorn  recommend  the  use  of
cinchona  alone.  The  advantageous  effects  of  this
bark  in  cases  of  exhaustion,  indigestion,  and  loss  of
appetite,  resulting  from  acute  fevers  (particularly
when  the  latter  have  been  treated  by  venesection,
evacuants,  and  debilitants),  depend  on  the  faculty
which  it  possesses  of  depressing  excessively  the  vital


' Chii’.  und  Medic.  Vorfalle,  Leipzick,  1781,  p.  178.
* In  P.  Schenck,  lib.  1,  obs.  139.

^ Quoted  in  my  Mat.  med.,  iii.


INTRODUCTION.


69


powers,  producing  mental  and  bodily  exhaustion,  in-
digestion, and  loss  of  appetite,  as  observed  by  Clegborn,
Friborg,  Criiger,  Fomberg,  Stahl,  Thomson,  and
others.^

How  would  it  have  been  possible  to  stop  hsemorr-
hages  with  ipecacuanha,  as  effected  more  than  once
by  Baghvi,  Barbeyrac,  Gianella,  Dalberg,  Bergius,
and  others,  if  this  medicine  did  not  of  itself  possess
the  faculty  of  exciting  haemorrhage  1 — as  Murray,
Scott,  and  GeoflFroy^  have  witnessed.  How  could  it
be  so  efficacious  in  asthma,  and  particularly  in  spas-
modic asthma,  as  it  is  described  to  have  been  by
Akenside,^  Meyer  Bang,^  Stoll,®  Fouquet,’  and  Banoe,®
if  it  did  not  of  itself  produce  (without  exciting  any
evacuation)  asthma,  and  spasmodic  asthma  in  particular,
as  Murray,®  Geoffrey,^®  and  Scott have  observed  it  to
do  1 Could  any  clearer  hints  be  given  that  medicines
ought  to  be  applied  to  the  cure  of  diseases  according
to  the  morbid  effects  which  they  produce  1


^ Vide  my  Mat.  med.,  iii.

^ Ibid.  pp.  259 — 264.

® Medic.  Transact.  I.  No.  7,  p.  39.

^ Diss  de  Ipecac,  refracta  dosi  usu,  p.  34.

° Praxis  Medica,  p.  346.

® Prselectiones,  p.  221.

’’  Journal  de  Medecine.  Tom.  62,  p.  137.

® In  Act.  Reg.  Soc.  Med.  Hafn.,  ii.  p.  163,  iii.  p.  361.
® Medic.  Pract.  Bibl.,  p.  237.

**  Traite  de  la  matiere  medicale,  ii.  p.  157.

In  Med.  Comment,  of  Edinb.,  iv.  p.  74.


TO


INTRODUCTION.


It  would  be  impossible  to  conceive  why  ignatia
could  be  so  efficacious  in  convulsions  as  we  are  assured
it  is  by  Hermann,^  Valentin,^  and  an  anonymous
writer,^  if  it  did  not  possess  the  power  of  exciting
similar  convulsions,  as  witnessed  by  Bergius,^  Camelli,^
and  Durius.®

Persons  who  have  received  a blow  or  a contusion
feel  pains  in  the  side,  a desire  to  vomit,  lancinating
and  burning  pain  in  the  hypochondria,  all  of  which
are  accompanied  with  anxiety,  tremors,  and  involun-
tary starts,  similar  to  those  produced  by  an  electric
shock,  formication  in  the  parts  that  have  received
the  injury,  &c.  As  the  arnica  montana  produces
similar  symptoms,  according  to  the  observations  of
Meza,  Vicat,  Crichton,  Collins,  Aaskow,  Stoll,  and
J.  C.  Lange,’  it  may  be  easily  conceived  that  this
plant  will  cure  the  effects  of  a blow,  fall,  or  contusion,
as  is  familiar  to  the  experience  of  a host  of  physicians,
and  even  of  whole  nations,  for  centuries  past.

Among  the'  effects  which  belladonna  excites  when
administered  to  a person  in  sound  health,  are  symp-
toms which,  taken  collectively,  present  an  image


^ Cynosura  Mat.  med.,  ii.  p.  231.

^ Hist.  Simplic.  Reform,  p.  194,  § 4.

® In  Act.  BeroL,  dec.  ii.  vol.  x.  p.  12.

* Materia  Medica,  p.  150.

* Philos.  Trans,  vol.  xxi.  No.  250.
Miscell.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  iii.  aim.  9,  10.

^ Vide  my  Materia  medica,  i.


INTRODUCTION.


71


greatly  resembling  that  species  of  hydrophobia  caused
by  the  bite  of  a mad  dog,  a disease  which  Mayerne,^
Miinch,**^  Buchholz,^  and  Neimike,^  cured  in  a perfect
manner  with  this  plant,  homceopathically.^  The  patient
in  min  endeavours  to  sleep,  the  respiration  is  embar-
rassed, he  is  consumed  by  a burning  thirst  attended
with  anxiety ; the  moment  any  liquids  are  presented  to
him  he  rejects  them  with  violence;  his  countenance
becomes  red,  his  eyes  fixed  and  sparkling  (as  observed
by  F.  C.  Grimm);  he  experiences  a feeling  of  suffocation
while  drinking  (according  to  E,  Camerarius  and
Sauter);  for  the  most  part  he  is  incapable  of  swallow-
ing anything  (as  affirmed  by  May,  Lottinger,  Sicelius,
Buchave,  D’Hermont,  Manetti,  Vicat,  and  Cullen);


* Praxeos  in  Morbis  Internis  Syntagma  Alterum.  Vienna,  1697,

p.  136.

^ Beobachtungen  bei  angewendeter  Belladonne  bei  den  Menschen.
Stendal,  1789.

^ Heilsame  Wirkungen  der  Belladonne  in  ausgebrochener  Wuth.
Erfurt,  1785.

^ In  J.  H.  Munch’s  Beobachtungen.  Th.  i.  p.  74.

° If  Belladonna  has  frequently  failed  m cases  of  decided  rabies,  we
ought  to  remember  that  it  cannot  cure  in  such  instances  but  by  its
faculty  of  producing  effects  similar  to  those  of  the  malady  itself,  and
that,  consequently,  it  ought  not  to  be  administered  but  in  the  smallest
possible  doses,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  Organon  (§  cclxxv. — cclxxxiii.).
In  general  it  has  been  administered  in  very  large  doses,  so  that  the
patients  necessarily  died,  not  of  the  disease,  but  of  the  remedy.
However,  it  is  probable  that  there  is  more  than  one  degree  or
species  of  hydrophobia  and  rabies,  and  consequently  the  most  suit-
able homoeopathic  remedy  is  sometimes  hyoscyamus,  and  sometimes
stramonium,  according  as  the  symptoms  vary.


72


INTRODUCTION.


he  is  alternately  actuated  hy  terror  and  a desire  to  bite
those  about  him  (as  seen  by  Sauter,  Dumoulin,  Buchave,
and  Mardorf) ; he  spits  everywhere  around  him  (accord-
ing to  Sauter);  he  endeavours  to  make  his  escape  (as  we
are  informed  by  Dumoulin,  E.  Gmelin,  and  Buc’hoz);
and  there  is  continual  moving  about  of  the  body  (as
witnessed  by  Boucher,  E.  Gmelin,  and.  Sauter.)^
Belladonna  has  also  effected  the  cure  of  different
kinds  of  madness  and  melancholy,  as  in  the  cases
reported  by  Evers,  Schmucker,  Schmalz,  and  the  two
Miinchs,  and  many  others,  because  it  possesses  the
faculty  of  producing  different  kinds  of  insanity,  like
those  noted  by  Bau,  Grimm,  Hasenest,  Mardorf,
Hoyeri,  Dillenius,  and  others.^  Henning,®  after  vainly
endeavouring,  during  three  months,  to  cure  a case  of
amaurosis  with  coloured  spots  before  the  eyes,  by  a
variety  of  medicines,  was  at  length  struck  with  the
idea  that  this  malady  might  perhaps  be  occasioned
by  gout,  although  the  patient  had  never  experienced
the  slightest  attack ; and  upon  this  supposition  he
was  by  chance  induced  to  prescribe  belladonna,^
which  effected  a speedy  cure  without  any  inconve-
nience. He  would  undoubtedly  have  made  choice  of


’ Vide  my  Materia  medica,  vol.  i.

^ Referred  to  in  my  Materia  medica,  vol.  i.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xxv.  4,  pp.  70,  74.

^ Mere  conjecture  alone  has  led  physicians  to  rank  belladonna
among  the  remedies  for  gout.  The  disease  which  can,  with  pro-
priety, he  denominated  gout,  never  wiU  nor  can  be  cured  by
belladonna.


INTRODUCTION.


73


this  medicine  at  the  commencement,  had  he  known
that  it  was  not  possible  to  perform  a cure  but  by  the
aid  of  a remedy  which  produces  symptoms  similar  to
those  of  the  disease  itself ; and  that,  according  to  the
infallible  law  of  nature,  belladonna  could  not  fail
to  cure  this  case  homoeopathically,  since,  by  the  tes-
timony of  Sauter  ^ and  Buchholz,®  it  excites  a species
of  amaurosis  with  coloured  spots  before  the  eyes.

Hyoscyamus  has  cured  spasms  which  strongly
resembled  epilepsy,  as  witnessed  by  Mayerne,^  Storck,
Collin,  and  others.  It  produces  this  effect  by  the
very  same  power  whereby  it  excites  convulsions  similar
to  those  of  epilepsy,  as  observed  in  the  writings  of
E.  Camerarius,  C.  Seliger,  Hiinerwolf,  A.  Hamilton,
Planchon,  Acosta,  and  others.^

Fothergill,®  Storck,  Hellwick,  and  Ofterdinger,
have  used  hyoscyamus  with  success  in  certain  kinds
of  mental  derangement.  But  the  use  of  it  would
have  been  attended  with  equal  success  in  the  hands
of  many  other  physicians,  had  they  confined  it  to  the
cure  of  that  species  of  mental  alienation  which  hyos-
cyamus is  capable  of  producing  in  its  primary  action,
viz.  a kind  of  stupefaction,  that  Van  Helmont,Wedel,
J.  F.  Gmelin,  Laserre,  Hiinerwolf,  A.  Hamilton,


^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xi.

^ Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  252.

® Prax.  ^led.,  p.  23.

^ Vide  my  Materia  medica,  vol.  iv.

’ Memoirs  of  Med.  Soc.  of  London,  i.  pp.  310,  314.


74


INTRODUCTION.


Kiernander,  J.  Stedmann,  Tozetti,  J.  Faber,  and
Wendt,  saw  produced  by  tbe  action  of  this  plant.  ^

By  taking  the  effects  of  hyoscyamus  collectively,
which  the  latter  observers  have  seen  it  produce,  they
present  a picture  of  hysteria  of  considerable  severity.
Accordingly  we  find  in  J.  A.  P.  Gessner,  Storck,  and
in  the  Act.  Nat.  Cur.^  that  a case  of  hysteria  which
bore  great  resemblance  to  the  above-mentioned  was
cured  by  the  use  of  this  plant.

Schenkbecher  ^ would  never  have  succeeded  in
curing  a vertigo  of  twenty  years’  standing,  if  this
plant  did  not  possess,  in  a very  high  degree,  the  power
of  creating  generally  an  analogous  state,  as  attested
by  Fliinerwolf,  Blom,  Navier,  Planchon,  Sloane,  Sted-
mann, Greding,  Wepfer,  Vicat,  and  Bernigau.^

A man,  who  became  deranged  through  jealousy,
was  for  a long  time  tormented  by  Mayer  Abramson®
with  remedies  that  produced  no  effect  on  him,  when,
under  the  name  of  a soporific,  he  one  day  administered
hyoscyamus,  which  cured  him  speedily.  Had  he  known
that  this  plant  jealousy  and  madness  in  persons

who  are  in  health,®  and  had  he  been  acquainted  with


* See  my  Materia  medica,  iv.

2 IV.  obs.  8.

® Von  der  Kinkina,  Schierling,  Bilsenkraut,  &c.  Riga,  1769,

p.  162.

^ Vide  my  Materia  medica,  vol.  iv.

® In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xix.  II.  p.  60.

“ Vide  my  Materia  med.,  vol.  iv.


INTRODUCTION.


75


the  homoeopathic  law,  (the  only  natural  basis  of  thera-
peutics), he  wmuld  have  been  able  to  administer  hyos-
cyamus  from  the  very  commencement  with  perfect
confidence,  and  thus  have  avoided  fatiguing  the
patient  with  remedies  which  (not  being  homoeopathic)
could  be  of  no  manner  of  service  to  him.

The  mixed  prescriptions  which  were  employed  for
a long  time  with  the  greatest  success  by  Hecker  ^ in
a case  of  spasmodic  constriction  of  the  eyelids,  would
have  proved  ineffectual,  if  some  happy  chance  had
not  included  hyoscyamus,  which,  according  to  Wep-
fer,®  excites  a similar  affection  in  persons  who  are  in
sound  health.

Neither  did  Withering^  succeed  in  curing  a spas-
modic constriction  of  the  pharynx,  with  inability  to
swallow,  until  he  administered  hyoscyamus,  whose
special  action  consists  of  causing  a spasmodic  constric-
tion of  the  throat,  with  inability  to  swallow,  an  effect
which  Tozetti,  Hamilton,  Bernigau,  Sauvages,  and
Hiinerwolf^  have  seen  it  produce  in  a very  high
degree.

How  could  camphor  produce  such  salutary  effects
as  the  veracious  Huxham^  says  it  does,  in  the  so-
called  slow  nervous  fevers,  where  the  temperature  of


^ Hufeland’s  Joui’nal,  i.  p.  354.

^ De  Cicuta  Aquatica.  Basil,  1716,  p.  320.

^ Edinb.  Med.  Comment.  Dec.  ii.  b.  vi.  p.  263.
^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  vol.  iv.

* Opera,  t.  i.  p.  172,  t.  ii.  p.  84.


76


INTRODUCTION.


the  body  is  lowered,  where  the  sensibility  is  depressed,
and  the  vital  powers  greatly  diminished,  if  the  result
of  its  immediate  action  upon  the  body  were  not  to
produce  a state  similar  in  every  respect  to  the  latter,  as
observed  by  G.  Alexander,  Cullen,  and  F.  HoffmannF
Spirituous  wines  administered  in  small  doses  have
cured,  homoeopathically,  fevers  that  were  purely  in-
flammatory. C.  Crivellati,®  H.  Augenius,^  A.  Mun-
della,^  and  two  anonymous  writers,®  have  afforded  us
the  proofs.  Asclepiades®  on  one  occasion  cured  an
inflammation  of  the  brain  by  administering  a small
quantity  of  wine.  A case  of  feverish  delirium  attended
with  stertorous  breathing,  similar  to  that  state  of
deep  intoxication  which  wine  produces,  was  cured  in
a single  night  by  wine  which  Fademacher’  adminis-
tered to  the  patient.  Can  any  one  deny  the  power  of
a medicinal  irritation  analogous  to  the  disease  itself
[similia  similihus)  in  either  of  these  cases  %

A strong  infusion  of  tea  produces  anxiety  and  pal-
pitation of  the  heart  in  persons  who  are  not  in  the
habit  of  drinking  it ; on  the  other  hand,  if  taken  in
small  doses,  it  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  such  symp-


^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  yoI.  iv.

^ Trattato  dell’  uso  e mode  di  dare  il  vino  nelle  febri  acute.  Rome,
1600.

® Epist.  t.  ii.  lib.  2,  ep.  8.

‘ Epist.  xiv.  Basil,  1588.

® Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  ii.  ann.  2,  obs.  53.  Gazette  de  Sante,  1738.
® Ccel.  Aurelianus,  Acut.  lib.  i.  c.  16.

’ In  Hufeland’e  Journal,  xvi.  I.  p.  92.


INTRODUCTION.


77


toms  when  produced  by  other  causes,  as  testified  by
G.  L.  Kau,^

A case  resembling  the  agonies  of  death,  in  which
the  patient  was  convulsed  to  such  a degree  as  to
deprive  him  of  his  senses,  alternating  with  attacks
of  spasmodic  breathing,  sometimes  also  sobbing  and
stertorous  respiration,  with  icy  coldness  of  the  face
and  body,  lividity  of  the  feet  and  hands,  and  feeble-
ness of  the  pulse,  a state  perfectly  analogous  to
the  whole  of  the  symptoms  which  Schweikert  and
others  saw  produced  by  the  use  of  opium, y was  at
first  treated  unsuccessfully  by  Stiitz,^  with  ammonia,
hut  afterwards  cured  in  a speedy  and  permanent
manner  by  opium.  In  this  instance,  could  any  one
fail  to  discover  the  homoeopathic  principle  made  use
of  without  the  knowledge  of  the  person  who  employed
it'?  According  to  Vicat,  J.  C.  Grimm,  and  others,^
opium  also  produces  a powerful  and  almost  irresistible
tendency  to  sleep,  accompanied  by  profuse  perspiration
and  delirium.  This  was  the  reason  why  Osthoff  ® was
afraid  to  administer  it  in  a case  of  epidemic  fever
which  exhibited  similar  symptoms,  for  the  principles
of  the  system  which  he  pursued,  prohibited  the  use


* Ueber  den  Werth  des  homdopathischen  Heilv.  Heidelberg,
1824,  p.  72.

^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  vol.  i.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  x.  IV.

^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  vol.  i.

® In  the  Salzburg  Med.  Chirurg.  Journal,  1805,  iii.  p.  110.


78


INTRODUCTION.


of  it  under  such  circumstances.  (Poor  system  !)  How-
ever, after  having  exhausted  in  vain  all  the  known
remedies  and  seeing  his  patient  at  the  point  of  death,
he  resolved,  at  all  hazards,  to  administer  a small
quantity  of  opium,  whose  effects  proved  salutary,  as
they  always  must,  when  given  according  to  the
unerring  law  of  homoeopathy.

J T li D d ^ also  avowed  opium  lemoves  a sense

vveigtit  in  the  head,  with  heat  of  skin  and  difficulty
of  perspiring ; it  relieves  the  head,  destroys  the  burn-
ing febrile  heat,  softens  the  skin,  and  bathes  its  surface
in  a profuse  perspiration.  But  Lind  was  not  aware
that  this  salutary  effect  of  opium  is  (contrary  to  the
axioms  of  the  medical  schools)  owing  to  the  circum-
stance of  its  producing  analogous  morbid  symptoms,
when  administered  to  a person  in  health.  There
have,  nevertheless,  been  physicians  here  and  there,
across  whose  minds  this  truth  has  passed  like  a flash
of  lightning  without  ever  giving  birth  to  a suspicion
of  the  laws  of  homoeopathy.  For  example,  Alston^
says  that  opium  is  a remedy  that  excites  heat,
notwithstanding  which,  it  certainly  diminishes  heat
where  it  already  exists.  De  la  Guerene^  administered
opium  in  a case  of  fever  attended  with  violent  head-
ache, tension  and  hardness  of  the  pulse,  dryness  and


* Versuch  iiber  die  Krankheiten  denen  die  Eiu'opaer  in  heissen
Klimaten  unterworfen  sind.  Riga,  1773.

^ In  Edinb.  Versuchen,  v.  p.  I.  art.  12.

® In  Rdmer’s  Annalen  der  Arzneimittellehre  I.  ii.  p.  6.


INTRODUCTION.


79


roughness  of  the  skin,  burning  heat,  and  hence
difficult  and  debilitating  perspirations,  the  exhalation
of  which  was  constantly  interrupted  by  the  extreme
agitation  of  the  patient.  This  remedy  was  successful,
because  opium  possesses  the  faculty  of  creating  a
feverish  state  in  healthy  persons,  which  is  perfectly
analogous,  as  stated  by  many  observers,^  and  of  which
he  was  ignorant.  In  a fever  attended  with  coma,
where  the  patient  lay  extended,  deprived  of  speech,
the  eyes  open,  the  limbs  stiff,  the  pulse  small  and
intermittent,  the  respiration  disturbed  and  stertorous,
(all  of  which  are  symptoms  perfectly  similar  to  those
which  opium  excites,  according  to  the  report  of
Delacroix,  Rademacher,  Crumpe,  Pyl,  Vicat,  Sau-
vages,  and  many  others,)^  this  was  the  only  substance
which  C.  L.  Hoffmann^  saw  produce  any  good  effects,
which  ivere  naturally  the  result  of  a homoeopathic  action.
Wirthenson,^  Sydenham,^  and  Marcus,®  have  even
succeeded  in  curing  lethargic  fevers  with  opium.  A
case  of  lethargy  of  which  De  Meza'’'  effected  a cure,
would  yield  only  to  this  substance,  which,  in  such
cases,  acts  homoeopathically,  since  it  possesses  the
power  of  producing  lethargy.


^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  vol.  i.

" Ibid.

® Von  Scharbock,  Lustseuche,  &c.  Miinster,  1787,  p.  295.
^ Opii  vires  fibras  cordis  delibitare,  &c.  Munster,  1775.

® Opera,  jd.  654.

® Magazin  fiir  Therapie,  I.  i.  p.  7.

’’  Act.  reg.  soc.  med.  Hafn.  iii.  p.  202.


80


INTRODUCTION,


C.  C.  Matthai/  in  an  obstinate  case  of  nervous
disease,  where  the  principal  symptoms  were  insen-
sibility and  numbness  of  the  arms,  legs,  and  belly,
after  having  for  a long  time  treated  it  with  inappro-
priate, that  is  to  say,  non-homoeopathic  remedies,  at
length  effected  a cure  by  opium,  which,  according  to
Stiitz,  J.  Young,  and  others,^  excites  similar  symptoms
of  a more  intense  nature,  and  which,  as  every  one
must  perceive,  only  succeeded  on  this  occasion  on
homoeopathic  principles.  The  cure  of  a case  of
lethargy,  which  had  already  existed  several  days,  and
which  Hufeland  performed  by  the  use  of  opium,^  by
what  other  law  could  this  have  been  effected,  if  not
by  that  of  homoeopathy,  which  has  remained  unknown
till  the  present  time?  In  that  peculiar  species  of
epilepsy  which  never  manifests  itself  but  during  sleep,
De  Haen  discovered  that  it  was  not  a sleep  at  all,
but  a lethargic  stupor,  with  stertorous  respiration,,
perfectly  similar  to  that  which  opium  produces  in
persons  who  are  in  health ; it  was  by  means  of  opium
alone  that  he  transformed  it  into  a natural  and
healthy  sleep,  while  at  the  same  time  he  delivered
the  patient  of  his  epilepsy.^

How  is  it  possible  that  opium,  which  of  all  vege-


' In  Struve’s  Triumph  der  Heilk.,  hi.
^ See  my  Mat.  med.,  vol.  i.

® In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xii.  I.

^ Ratio  Medendi,  v.  p.  126.


INTRODUCTION.


SI


table  substances  is  the  one  whose  administration  in
small  doses  produces  the  most  powerful  and  obstinate
constipation,  should,  notwithstanding,  be  the  most
efficient  remedy  in  cases  of  constipation,  which  en-
danger life,  were  it  not  in  virtue  of  the  homoeopathic
law  so  little  known — that  is  to  say,  if  nature  had  not
decreed  that  medicines  should  subdue  natural  diseases
by  a special  action  belonging  to  them,  which  consists
in  producing  an  analogous  affection  1 Opium,  whose
primary  effects  are  so  powerful  in  constipating  the
bowels,  was  discovered  by  Tralles^  to  be  the  only  cure
in  a case  of  ileus,  which  he  had  till  then,  treated
ineffectually  with  evacuants  and  other  remedies.
Lentilius^  and  G.  W.  Wedel,^  Wirthenson,  Bell,
Heister,  and  Bichter,^  have  also  confirmed  the  efficacy
of  opium,  even  when  administered  alone  in  this
disease.  The  candid  Bohn  was  likewise  convinced
by  experience  that  nothing  but  opiates  would  act  as
purgatives  in  the  colic  called  miserere;^  and  the
celebrated  F.  Hoffmann,  in  the  most  dangerous  cases
of  this  nature,  placed  his  sole  reliance  on  opium  com-
bined in  the  anodyne  liquor  called  after  his  name.®


^ Opii  usus  et  abusus.  Sect.  ii.  p.  260.

^ Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  iii.  ann.  i.  app.  p.  131.

® Opiologia,  p.  120.

* Anfangsgriinde  der  Wundarzneikunde,  V.  § 328. — Chronische
Krankheiten.  Berlin,  1816,  ii.  p.  220.

® De  Officio  Medici.

* Medicin.  rat.  system.  T.  iv.  P.  II.  p.  297.


G


82


INTRODUCTION.


All  the  theories  contained  in  the  two  hundred  thou-
sand volumes  that  have  been  written  on  medicine,
in  entire  ignorance  of  the  therapeutic  law  of  homoeo-
pathy, would  they  he  able  to  furnish  us  with  a
rational  explanation  of  this  and  so  many  other  similar
facts'?  Have  their  doctrines  conducted  us  to  the
discovery  of  this  law  of  nature  so  clearly  manifested
in  every  perfect,  speedy,  and  permanent  cure — in
other  words,  have  they  taught  us  that  when  we  use
medicines  in  the  treatment  of  diseases,  it  is  necessary
to  take  for  a guide  the  resemblance  of  their  effects
upon  a person  in  health,  to  the  symptoms  of  those
very  diseases  we  seek  to  cure "?

E,ave^  and  Wedekind^  have  suppressed  uterine
hgemorrhage  with  the  aid  of  savine,  which,  as  every
one  knows,  causes  uterine  hcemorrhage^  and  conse-
quently abortion,  in  women  who  are  in  health.
Could  any  one,  in  this  case,  fail  to  perceive  the
homoeopathic  law  which  ordains  that  we  should  cure
similia  similibus  ?

In  that  species  of  spasmodic  asthma  designated  by
the  name  of  Millar’s  asthma,  how  could  musk  act
almost  specifically,  if  it  did  not  of  itself  produce  fits
of  spasmodic  constriction  of  the  chest  without  cough,
as  observed  by  F.  Hoffmann?^

Could  vaccination  protect  us  from  the  small-pox


* Beobachtungen  und  Schliisse,  ii.  p.  7.
“ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  x.  I.  p.  77.

’ Med.  ration,  system,  iii.  p.  92.


INTRODUCTION.


83


otherwise  than  homoeopathically  ] Without  mention-
ing any  other  traits  of  close  resemblance  which  often
exist  between  these  two  maladies,  they  have  this  in
common — they  generally  appear  but  once  during  the
course  of  a person’s  life ; they  leave  behind  cicatrices
equally  deep ; they  both  occasion  tumefaction  of  the
axillary  glands ; fevers  that  are  analogous ; an  in-
flamed areola  round  each  pock ; and  Anally,  opthal-
mia  and  convulsions.

The  cow-pox  would  even  destroy  the  small-pox  on
its  first  appearance,  that  is  to  say,  it  would  cure  this
malady  when  already  present,  if  the  small-pox  were
not  stronger  than  it.  To  produce  this  efiect,  then,
it  only  wants  that  excess  of  power  which  according
to  the  law  of  nature  ought  to  accompany  the  homoeo-
pathic resemblance,  in  order  to  efiect  a cure  (§  clviii).
Vaccination,  considered  as  a homoeopathic  remedy,
cannot,  therefore,  prove  efiicacious  except  when  em-
ployed previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  small-pox,
which  is  the  stronger  of  the  two.

When  so  employed  it  excites  a disease  very  analo-
gous (and  consequently,  homoeopathic)  to  the  small-
pox, after  whose  course,  the  human  body,  which,
as  usual,  can  only  be  attacked  once  with  a disease
of  this  nature,  is  henceforward  protected  against  a
similar  contagion.’


^ This  mode  of  homoeopathic  cure  in  antecessum  (which  is  called
preservation  or  prophylaxis)  also  appears  possible  in  many  other
cases.  For  example,  by  carrying  on  our  persons  sulphur,  we  think

G 2


84


INTRODUCTION.


It  is  well  known  that  retention  of  urine  with  in-
effectual efforts  to  urinate,  is  one  of  the  most  common
and  painful  evils  which  the  use  of  cantharides  pro-
duces. This  point  has  been  sufficiently  established
by  J.  Camerarius,  Baccius,  Van  Hilden,  Forest,  J.
Lanzoni,  Van  der  Wiel,  and  Werlhoffi^  Cantharides
administered  internally,  and  with  caution,  ought  con-
sequently to  be  a very  salutary  homoeopathic  remedy
in  similar  cases  of  painful  dysuria.  And  this  is  in
reality  the  case.  For,  without  enumerating  all  the
Greek  physicians  who  instead  of  our  cantharides
made  use  of  meloe  cichorii,  Fabricius  ah  Aquapendente,
Capo  di  Vacca,  Riedlin,  Th.  Bartholin,^  Young,^
Smith,^  Raymond,’’  De  Meza,®  Brisbane,’^  and  others,
performed  perfect  cures  of  very  painful  ischuria  that
was  not  dependent  upon  any  mechanical  obstacle,
with  cantharides.  Huxham  has  seen  this  remedy
produce  the  best  effects  in  cases  of  the  same  nature ;
he  praises  it  highly,  and  would  willingly  have  made


we  are  preserved  from  the  itch  which  is  so  common  among  wool-
workers  ; and  by  taking  the  smallest  possible  dose  of  belladonna,  that
we  are  protected  from  scarlet  fever.

^ See  my  Fragmenta  de  viribus  medicamentorum  positivis.  Leipsic,
1805.  i.  p.  83.

^ Epist.  4,  p.  345.

® Phil.  Trans.  No.  280.

^ Medic.  Communications,  ii.  p.  505.

* In  Auserlesene  Abhandl.  fiir  pract.  Aerzte.,  hi.  p.  460.

® Act.  reg.  soc.  med.  Hafn.  ii.  p.  302.

’’  Auserlesene  Falle.  Altenburg,  1777.


INTRODUCTION,


85


use  of  it  had  not  the  precepts  of  the  old  school  of
medicine  (which,  deeming  itself  wiser  than  nature
herself,  prescribes  in  such  cases  sedative  and  relaxing
remedies)  prevented  him,  contrary  to  his  own  con-
viction, from  using  a remedy  which,  in  such  cases,  is
specific  or  homoeopathic.^  In  cases  of  recent  inflam-
matory gonorrhoea,  where  Sachs  von ' Lewenheim,
Hannaeus,  Bartholin,  Lister,  Mead,  and  particularly
Werlhoff,  administered  cantharides  in  very  small
doses  with  perfect  success,  this  substance  manifestly
removed  the  most  severe  symptoms  of  the  commencing
disease.^

It  produced  this  effect  by  virtue  of  the  faculty  it
possesses  (according  to  the  testimony  of  almost  every
observer)  of  exciting  painful  micturition,  scalding
urine,  inflammation  of  the  urethra  (Wendt),  and  even,
when  applied  externally,  a species  of  inflammatory
gonorrhoea  (Wichmann).^


* Opera,  edit.  Reichel,  t.  ii.  p.  124.

^ I say  “ the  most  severe  symptoms  of  the  commencing  disease,”
because  the  subsequent  treatment  demands  other  considerations;
for,  although  there  may  have  been  cases  of  gonorrhoea  so  slight  as
to  disappear  very  soon  of  themselves,  and  almost  without  any  assist-
ance whatever,  still  there  are  others  of  a graver  nature,  especially
that  which  is  become  so  common  since  the  time  of  the  French
campaigns,  which  might  be  tei’med  gonorrhoea  sycotica,  and  which  is
communicated  by  coition  like  the  chancrous  disease,  although  of  a
very  different  nature.

® Auswahl  aus  den  Niirnberger  gelehrten  Unterhaltungen,  i.  p.
249,  note.


86


INTRODUCTION,


The  administration  of  sulphur  internally,  very  often
occasions,  in  persons  of  an  irritable  disposition,  tenes-
mus attended  with  vomiting  and  griping,  as  attested
by  Walther.^  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  property  which
sulphur  possesses,  that  physicians  have  been  able^  to
cure  with  its  aid,  dysentery  and  hsemorrhoidal  diseases
attended  with  tenesmus,  as  observed  by  Werlhoff,^
and  according  to  Kave,^  hsemorrhoidal  colics.

It  is  well  known  that  the  waters  at  Toeplitz,  like
all  other  warm  sulphurous  mineral  waters,  cause  the
appearance  of  an  exanthema  which  strongly  resembles
the  itch  so  prevalent  among  persons  employed  in
wool-working.  It  is  precisely  this  homoeopathic  virtue
which  they  possess  that  removes  various  kinds  of
psoric  eruptions.  Can  there  be  any  thing  more
suffocating  than  sulphurous  fumes?  Yet  it  is  the
vapour  arising  from  the  combustion  of  sulphur  that
Bucquet^  discovered  to  be  the  best  means  of  reani-
mating persons  in  a state  of  asphyxia  produced  by
another  cause.

From  the  writings  of  Beddoes  and  others,  we  learn
that  the  English  physicians  found  nitric  acid  of  great
utility  in  salivation  and  ulceration  of  the  mouth
occasioned  by  the  use  of  mercury.  This  acid  could


’ Progr.  de  Sulphui’e  et  Marte,  Lips.  1743,  p.  5,
^ Medic.  National-Zeitung,  1798,  p.  153.

® Observat.  de  Febribus,  p.  3,  § 6.

‘ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  vii.  II.  p.  168.

’ Edinb.  Med.  Comment.,  ix.


INTRODUCTION.


87


never  have  proved  useful  in  such  cases  if  it  did  not
of  itself  excite  salivation  and  ulceration  of  the  mouth.
To  produce  these  effects,  it  is  only  necessary  to  bathe
the  surface  of  the  body  with  it,  as  Scott^  and  Blair^
observed,  and  the  same  will  occur  if  it  be  administered
internally,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Aloyn,^
Luke,^  I.  Ferriar,®  and  G.  Kelly.®

Fritze’  saw  a species  of  tetanus  produced  by  a bath
impregnated  with  carbonate  of  potash,  and  A.  von
Humboldt®  by  the  application  of  a solution  of  salt
of  tartar  increased  the  irritability  of  the  muscles  to
such  a degree  as  to  excite  tetanic  convulsions.  The
curative  power  which  caustic  potash  exercises  in  all
kinds  of  tetanus,  in  which  Stiitz  and  others  have
found  it  so  useful,  could  it  be  accounted  for  in  a more
simple  or  rational  manner  than  by  the  faculty  which
this  alkali  possesses  of  producing  homoeopathic  effects'?

Arsenic,  whose  effects  are  so  powerful  upon  the
human  economy  that  we  cannot  decide  whether  it  is
more  hurtful  in  the  hands  of  the  rash  than  it  is
salutary  in  those  of  the  prudent, — arsenic  could  never


* In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  iv.  p.  353.

^ Neueste  Erfahrungen.  Glogau,  1801.

® In  the  Memoires  de  la  Soc.  Med.  d’emulation,  i.  p.  195.

* In  Beddoes.

® In  the  Sammlung  auserles.  Abhandl.  fiir  pract.  Aerzte,  xix.  ii.

® Ihid.  xix.  I.  p.  116.

’’  In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xii.  I.  p.  116.

® Versuch  xiber  die  gereizte  Muskel-und  Nervenfaser.  Posen  and
Berlin,  1797.


88


INTRODUCTION.


have  effected  so  many  remarkable  cures  of  cancer  in
the  face,  as  witnessed  by  numerous  physicians,  among
whom  I will  only  cite  Fallopius,^  Bernhardt,®  and
Bonnow,®  if  this  metallic  oxide  did  not  possess  the
homoeopathic  power  of  producing  in  healthy  persons,
very  painful  tubercles  which  are  cured  with  difficulty,
as  witnessed  by  Amatus  Lusitanus ; ^ very  deep  and
malignant  ulcerations,  according  to  the  testimony  of
Heinreich^  and  Knape;®  and  cancerous  ulcers,  as
testified  by  Heinze.’’^  The  ancients  would  not  have
been  unanimous  in  the  praise  which  they  bestowed
on  the  magnetic  arsenical  plaster  of  Angelas  Sala®
against  pestilential  buboes  and  carbuncles,  if  arsenic
did  not,  according  to  the  report  of  Degner®  and
Pfann,^®  give  rise  to  inflammatory  tumours  which
quickly  turn  to  gangrene,  and  to  carbuncles  or  malig-
nant pustules,  as  observed  by  Verzascha“  and  Pfann.^®


* De  ulceribus  et  tumoribus,  lib.  2.  Venice,  1563.

“ In  the  Journal  de  MMecine,  chirurg.  et  pharm.,  Ivii.  March,
1782.

® Konigl.  vetensk.  acad.  Handl.,  f.  a.  1776.

^ Obs.  et  cur.  Cent.  ii.  cur.  34.

* Act.  nat.  cur.,  ii.  obs.  10.

® Annalen  der  Staatsarzneikunde,  i.  1.

’’  In  Hufeland’s  Journal  for  September,  1813,  p.  48.

® Anatom.  Vitrioli,  tr.  ii.  in  Opera  med.  chym.  Frankfort,  1647,
pp.  381,  463.

® Act.  nat.  cur.,  vi.

Annalen  der  Staatsarzneikunde,  loc.  cit.

” Obs.  med.  cent.  Basil,  1677,  obs.  66.

Samml.  merkwiird.  Falle.  Nuremberg,  1750,  pp.  119,  130.


INTRODUCTION.


89


And  whence  could  arise  that  curative  power  which  it
exhibits  in  certain  species  of  intermittent  fevers  (a
virtue  attested  by  so  many  thousands  of  examples,  but
in  the  practical  application  of  which,  sufficient  precau-
tion has  not  yet  been  observed,  and  which  virtue  was
asserted  centuries  ago  by  Nicholas  Myrepsus  and
subsequently  placed  beyond  a doubt  by  the  testimony
of  Slevogt,  Molitor,  Jacobi,  J.  C.  Bernhardt,  Jiingken,
Fauve,  Brera,  Darwin,  May,  Jackson  and  Fowler,)
if  it  did  not  proceed  from  its  peculiar  faculty  of  exciting
fever,  as  almost  every  observer  of  the  evils  resulting
from  this  substance  has  remarked,  particularly  Amatus
Lusitanus,  Degner,  Buchholz,  Heun  and  KnapeF
We  may  confidently  believe  E.  Alexander,^  when  he
tells  us  that  arsenic  is  a sovereign  remedy  in  cases  of
angina  pectoris,  since  Tachenius,  Guilbert,  Preussius,
Thilenius  and  Pyl  have  seen  it  give  rise  to  very  great
oppression  of  the  chest,  Gresselius,®  to  a dyspnoea
almost  amounting  to  suffocation  ; and  Majault^  in  par-
ticular, saw  it  produce  sudden  attacks  of  asthma  excited
hy  walking,  attended  with  great  depression  of  the  vital
powers.

The  convulsions  which  are  caused  by  the  adminis-
tration of  copper,  and  those  observed  by  Tondi,  Barn-
say,  Fabas,  Pyl,  and  Cosmier,  as  proceeding  from  the


' See  my  Materia  medica,  vol.  ii.

^ Med.  comm,  of  Edinb.,  dec.  ii.  t.  i.  p.  85.

^ Misc.  Nat.  Cur.,  dec.  i.  ann.  2,  p.  149.

‘ In  the  Sammlung  auserles.  Abhandl.  fui’  Aerzte,  vii.  1.


90


INTRODUCTION.


use  of  aliments  impregnated  with  copper ; the  reiter-
ated attacks  of  epilepsy  which  J.  Lazerme^  saw  result
from  the  accidental  introduction  of  a copper  coin  into
the  stomach,  and  which  PfundeP  saw  produced  by
the  ingestion  of  a compound  of  sal-ammoniac  and
copper  into  the  digestive  canal,  sufficiently  explain,
to  those  physicians  who  will  take  the  trouble  to
reflect  upon  it,  how  copper  has  been  able  to  cure
cases  of  chorea,  as  reported  by  E..  Willan,^  Walcker,^
Theussink,®  and  Delarive,®  and  why  preparations  of
copper  have  so  frequently  effected  the  cure  of  epilepsy,
as  attested  by  Batty,  Baumes,  Bierling,  Boerhaave,
Causland,  Cullen,  Duncan,  Feuerstein,  Hevetius,  Lieb,
Magennis,  C.  F.  Michaelis,  Beil,  Bussell,  Stisser,
Thilenius,  Weissmann,  Weizenbreyer,  Whithers  and
others.

If  Poterius,  Wepfer,  F.  Hoffmann,  B.  A.  Vogel,
Thierry,  and  Albrecht,  have  cured  a species  of
phthisis,  hectic  fever,  chronic  catarrh,  and  mucous
asthma,  with  tin,  it  is  because  this  metal  possesses
the  faculty  of  producing  a species  of  phthisis,  as
Stahl ’’’  has  observed.  And  how  could  it  cure  pains


' De  morbis  internis  capitis.  Amsterdam,  1748,  p.  253.

* In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  ii.  p.  264 ; and  according  to  the  testi-
mony of  Burdach,  in  his  System  of  Medicine,  i.  Leip.  1807,  p.  284.
® Sammlung.  auserles.  Abhandl.,  xii.  p.  62.

^ Ibid.  xi.  iii.  p.  672.

® Waarnemingen,  No.  18.

® In  Kiihn’s  phys.  med.  Journal,  January,  1800,  p.  58.

Mat.  med.  Cap.  6,  p.  83.


INTRODUCTION.


91


of  the  stomach,  as  Geischlager  says  it  does,  if  it  was
not  capable  of  exciting  a similar  malady"?  Geischlager
himself,^  and  Stahl  ® before  him,  have  proved  that  it
does  possess  this  power.

The  evil  effects  of  lead,  which  produces  the  most
obstinate  constipation,  and  even  the  iliac  passion  (as
Thunberg,  Wilson,  Luzuriaga,  and  others  inform  us),
do  they  not  also  give  us  to  understand  that  this
metal  possesses  likewise  the  virtue  of  curing  these
two  affections?  Like  every  other  medicine,  it  ought
to  subdue  and  cure  in  a permanent  manner  the
natural  diseases  which  bear  a resemblance  to  those
which  it  engenders,  by  means  of  the  faculty  which  it
possesses  of  exciting  morbid  symptoms.  Angelus
Sala  ^ cured  a species  of  ileus,  and  J.  Agricola  ^ an-
other kind  of  constipation  which  endangered  the  life
of  the  patient,  by  administering  lead  internally.  The
saturnine  pills  with  which  many  physicians  (Chirac,
Van  Helmont,  Naudeau,  Pererius,  Pivinus,  Sydenham,
Zacutus  Lusitanus,  Block,  and  others)  cured  the  iliac
passion  and  obstinate  constipation,  did  not  operate
merely  in  a mechanical  manner  by  reason  of  their
weight;  for,  if  such  had  been  the  cause  of  their
elRcacy,  gold,  whose  weight  is  greater  than  that  of
lead,  would  have  been  preferable  in  such  a case ;


^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  January,  1800,  p.  58.

^ Mat.  med.  loc.  cit.

^ Opera,  p.  213.

‘ Comment,  in  J.  Poppii  chym.  med.  Lips.  1638,  p.  223.


92


INTRODUCTION.


but  the  pills  acted  specially  as  a saturnine  internal
remedy,  and  cured  liomoeopathically.  If  Otto  Tache-
nius  and  Saxtorpb  formerly  cured  cases  of  obstinate
hypochondriasis  ivith  the  aid  of  lead,  we  ought  to
bear  in  mind  that  this  metal  tends  of  itself  to  excite
hypochondriasis,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  description
Lazuriaga  gives  of  its  ill  effects.^

We  ought  not  to  be  surprised  that  Marcus^  speedily
cured  an  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  tongue  and  of
the  pharynx  with  a remedy  {mercury)  which,  accord-
ing to  the  daily  experience  of  physicians,  has  a speciflc
tendency  to  produce  inflammation  and  tumefaction  of
the  internal  parts  of  the  mouth,  phenomena  to  which
it  gives  rise  when  merely  applied  to  the  surface  of
the  body  in  the  form  of  ointment  or  plaster,  as
witnessed  by  Degner,^  Frieze,^  Alberti,®  Engel,®  and
many  others.  The  weakening  of  the  intellectual  facul-
ties (Swediaur imhecility  (Degner®),  and  mental  alien-
ation (Larry®),  which  have  been  seen  to  result  from
the  use  of  mercury,  joined  to  the  almost  specific


^ Recueil  period,  de  litterature,  i.  p.  20.

^ Magazin  II.  ii.

® Act.  Nat.  Cur.  vi.  App.

* Geschichte  und  Versuche  einer  chirurg.  Gesellschaft.  Copen-
hagen, 1774.

® Jurlsprudentia  Medica,  v.  p.  600.

® Specimina  Medica.  Berlin,  1781,  p.  99.

^ Traite  des  Malad.  verier,  ii.  p.  368.

® Loc.  cit.

® Memoii'es  et  Observations  in  the  Description  de  I’Egypt.  Torn.  i.


INTRODUCTION.


93


faculty,  which  this  metal  is  known  to  possess,  of
exciting  salivation,  explain  how  G.  Perfect^  was
enabled,  by  the  use  of  mercury,  to  cure,  in  a perma-
nent manner,  a case  of  melancholia  alternating  with
increased  secretion  of  saliva.  How  does  it  happen
that  preparations  of  mercury  proved  so  successful  in
the  hands  of  Seelig,®  in  the  treatment  of  angina
accompanied  with  purpura;  in  those  of  Hamilton,^
Hoffmann, Marcus,®  Rush,®  Golden, Bailey,  and
Michaelis,®  in  the  treatment  of  other  kinds  of  quinsy!
It  is  evidently  because  this  metal  is  capable  of  pro-
ducing a species  of  angina  of  the  worst  description.®
It  was  certainly  by  homoeopathic  means  that  Sauter


^ Annalen  einer  Anstalt  fiir  Wahnsinnige.  Hanover,  1804.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xvi.  I.  p.  24.

® Edinb.  med.  comment.,  ix.  I.  p.  8.

* Medic.  Wochenblatt,  1787,  No.  1.

® Magazin  fiir  Specielle  Therapie,  ii.  p.  334.

® Medic.  Inquir.  and  Observ.,  No.  6.

’’  Medic.  Observ.  and  Inquir.,  1,  No.  19,  p.  211.

® In  Richter’s  Chii’urg.  Biblioth.,  v.  pp.  737,  739.

” Physicians  have  likewise  endeavoured  to  cure  the  croup  by
means  of  mercuiy ; but  they  generally  failed  in  the  attempt,  because
this  metal  cannot  produce  (of  itself),  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
trachea,  a change  similar  to  that  particular  modification  which  this
disease  engenders.  Sulphuret  of  calcium,  which  excites  cough  by
impeding  respiration,  and  especially  the  tincture  of  burnt  sponge,
act  more  homoeopathicaUy  in  their  special  efi’ects,  and  are  conse-
quently much  more  efficacious,  particularly  when  administered  in  the
smallest  possible  doses.

In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xii.  II.


94


INTRODUCTION.


cured  an  ulcerous  inflammation  of  the  mouth,  accom-
panied with  aphthae  and  foetor  of  the  breath  similar
to  that  which  occurs  in  salivation,  when  he  prescribed
a solution  of  corrosive  sublimate  as  a gargle,  and
that  Block  ^ removed  aphthae  by  the  use  of  mercurial
preparations,  since,  among  other  ulcerations  of  the
mouth,  this  substance  particularly  produces  a species
of  aphthce,  as  we  are  informed  by  SchlegeP  and
Th.  Acrey  % ®

Hecker^  used  various  medicinal  compounds  suc-
cessfully in  a case  of  caries  occurring  after  small-pox.
Fortunately,  a portion  of  mercury  was  contained  in
each  of  these  mixtures,  to  which  it  may  be  imagined
that  this  malady  will  yield  (homceopathically),  because
mercury  is  one  of  the  few  medicinal  agents  which
can  produce  caries,  as  proved  by  the  many  excessive
mercurial  courses  used  for  the  cure  of  syphilis  or
even  of  other  diseases,  among  which  are  those  detailed
by  G.  P.  Michaelis.^  This  metal,  which  becomes  so
formidable  when  its  use  is  prolonged,  on  account  of
the  caries  of  which  it  then  becomes  the  exciting
cause,  exercises,  notwithstanding,  a very  salutary
homoeopathic  influence  in  the  caries  which  follows
mechanical  injuries  of  the  bones,  some  very  remark-


* Medic.  Bemerkungen,  p.  161.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  vii.  IV.

® Lond.  Med.  Journal,  1788.

* In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  i.  p.  362.
° Ibid.  June,  1809,  vi.  p.  57.


INTRODUCTION.


95


able  instances  of  which  have  been  transmitted  to  us
by  J.  Schegel/  Jordens,®  and  J.  M.  Miiller.^  The
cure  of  caries  (not  venereal)  of  another  kind,  which
has  likewise  been  effected  by  means  of  mercury  by
J.  F.  G.  Neu^  and  J.  D.  Metzger,^  furnishes  a fresh
proof  of  the  homoeopathic  curative  virtue  with  which
this  substance  is  endowed.

In  perusing  the  works  which  have  been  published
on  the  subject  of  medical  electricity,  it  is  surprising
to  see  what  analogy  exists  between  the  morbid  symp-
toms sometimes  produced  by  this  agent,  and  the
natural  diseases  which  it  has  cured  homceopathically
in  a durable  manner.  Innumerable  are  the  authors
who  have  observed  that  acceleration  of  the  pulse  is
among  the  primary  effects  of  positive  electricity ; but
Sauvages,®  Delas,’  and  Barillon,®  have  seen  febrile
paroxysms  excited  by  electricity.  The  faculty  it  has
of  producing  fever  is  the  cause  to  which  we  may
attribute  the  circumstance  of  Gardini,®  Wilkinson,^®


^ Hufeland’s  Journal,  v.  pp.  605,  610.

2 Ibid.  X.  II.

® Obs.  Med.  Chirur.  ii.  cas.  10.

^ Diss.  Med.  Pract.  Goettingse,  1776.

® Adversaria.  P.  II.  sect.  4.

® In  Bertholon  de  St.  Lazare,  Medicinische  Electrisitat,  von  Kiihn.
Leip.  1788,  t.  i.  pp.  239,  240.

^ Ibid.  p.  232.

« Ibid.  p.  233.

» Ibid.  p.  232.

Ibid.  p.  251.


96


INTRODUCTION.


Syme,^  and  Wesley,^  curing  tertian  fever  with  it
alone,  and  likewise  the  removal  of  quartan  fevers  by
ZetzeP  and  Willermoz.*  It  is  also  known  that  elec-
tricity occasions  a contraction  of  the  muscles  which
resembles  a convulsive  movement.  De  Sans®  was  even
enabled  to  excite  continued  convulsions  in  the  arm  of
a young  girl  as  often  as  he  pleased  to  make  the
experiment.  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  power  which
electricity  develops,  that  De  Sans  ® and  Franklin  ’ ap-
plied it  successfully  in  convulsions,  and  that  Theden  ®
cured  with  its  aid  a little  girl,  ten  years  of  age,  who
had  lost  her  speech  and  partially  the  use  of  her
left  arm,  by  lightning,  and  yet  was  subject  to  a
constant  involuntary  movement  of  the  arms  and
legs,  accompanied  by  a spasmodic  contraction  of  the
fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Electricity  likewise  produces
a kind  of  sciatica,  as  observed  by  Jallobert®  and
another : it  has  also  cured  this  affection  by  similarity

of  effect  (homoeopathically),  as  confirmed  by  Hiort-

1

^ In  Bertholon  de  St.  Lazare,  Medicinische  Electrisitat,  von  Kiihn.
Leip.  1788,  t.  i.  pp.  250.

^ Ibid.  p.  249.

® Ibid.  p.  52.

^ Ibid.  p.  250.  “

® Ibid.  p.  274.

® Ibid.

’’  Recueil  sur  I’electr.  medic,  ii.  p.  386.

® Neue  Bemerkungen  und  Erfahrungen,  iii.

® Experiences  et  Observations  sur  I’electricite.

’“Philos.  Trans,  vol.  63.


INTRODUCTION.


97


berg,  Lovet,  Arrigoni,  Daboueix,  Manduyt,  Syme,
and  Wesley.  Several  physicians  have  cured  a species
of  ophthalmia  by  electricity,  that  is  to  say,  by
means  of  the  power  which  it  possesses  of  exciting
inflammation  of  the  eyes^  as  observed  by  P.  Dickson  ^
and  Bertholon.^  Finally,  it  has,  in  the  hands  of
Fushel  cured  varices;  and  it  owes  this  sanative  virtue
to  the  faculty  which  Jallobert  ^ ascribes  to  it  of  pro-
ducing varicose  tumours.

Albers  relates,  that  a warm  bath  at  one  hundred
degrees  of  the  thermometer  of  Fahrenheit,  greatly
reduced  the  burning  heat  of  an  acute  fever  in  which
the  pulse  beat  one  hundred  and  thirty  per  minute,
and  that  it  reduced  the  pulsations  to  one  hundred
and  ten.  Loffler  found  hot  fomentations  very  useful
in  encephalitis  occasioned  by  insolation  or  the  action
of  the  heat  of  stoves,^  and  Callisen^  regards  affusions
of  warm  water  on  the  head  as  the  most  efficacious  of
all  remedies  in  cases  of  inflammation  of  the  brain.

If  we  deduct  the  cases  in  which  the  specific  remedy
for  a disease  of  never  varying  character  has  been
revealed  to  physicians  of  the  ordinary  school  (not
by  their  own  investigation,  but)  hy  the  empirical
practice  of  the  common  people,  wherewith  they  are

^ Bertholon,  Loc.  cit.,  p.  466.

2 Ibid.,  ii.  p.  296.

" Ibid.

* In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  iii.  p.  690.

® Act.  soc.  med.  Hafn.  iv.  p.  419.

H


98


INTRODUCTION.


enabled  to  effect  a direct  cure,  as  for  instance,  of  the
venereal  disease,  with  mercury ; of  the  morbid  state
resulting  from  contusions,  with  arnica ; of  marsh
ague,  with  cinchona  bark ; of  recent  cases  of  itch,
with  flowers  of  sulphur,  &c. — if  we  deduct  these,  we
find,  that  without  almost  any  exception,  all  the  other
treatment  of  the  old  school  physician,  in  chronic
diseases,  consists  in  debilitating,  teazing,  and  tor-
menting the  already  afflicted  patient,  to  the  aggrava-
tion of  his  disease  and  to  his  destruction,  Avith  a great
display  of  dignified  gravity  on  the  part  of  the  doctor,
and  at  a ruinous  expense  to  the  patient.

Blind  experiment  sometimes  led  them  to  a homoeo-
pathic mode  of  treatment,’^  and  yet  they  did  not


* Thus  they  imagined  they  could  drive  out  the  persph-atioii
through  the  skin,  which  they  believed  to  stagnate  there  after  a chill,
if  they  gave  the  patient  to  drink,  during  the  cold  stage  of  the  catarrhal
fever,  an  infusion  of  elder  flowers,  which  is  capable  of  removmg
such  a fever,  and  curing  the  patient  by  its  peculiar  similarity
of  action  (homcBopathically),  and  this  it  does  most  promptly  and
effectually,  without  causing  perspiration,  if  but  a small  quantity  of
this  infusion,  and  nothmg  else,  be  taken.  To  hard,  acute  swellings,
in  which  the  excessive  violence  of  the  inflammation  prevents  their
suppuration,  and  causes  intolerable  pains,  they  apply  very  warm  poul-
tices, frequently  renewed,  and  behold ! the  inflammation  and  the  pains
diminish  rapidly,  while  the  abscess  is  rapidly  formed,  as  is  known
by  the  yellowish  shining  elevation  and  the  perceptible  fluctuation.
In  this  case  they  imagine  that  the  hardness  has  been  softened  by  the
moisture  of  the  poultice,  whereas  it  is  chiefly  by  the  greater  warmth
of  the  poultice  that  the  excess  of  inflammation  has  been  homoeopa-
thically  subdued,  and  the  rapid  suppuration  been  enabled  to  take


INTRODUCTION.


99


perceive  the  law  of  nature,  in  obedience  to  which,
cures  so  effected  did  and  must  ensue.

Hence  it  is  extremely  important,  for  the  weal  of  man-
kind, to  ascertain  how  these  cures,  as  rare  in  their
occurrence  as  they  are  remarkable  in  their  beneficial
results,  really  took  place.


place. — Wherefore  do  they  employ  with  success,  in  many  ophthal-
mise,  St.  Yve’s  salve,  the  chief  ingredient  of  which  is  red  oxj^de  of
mercury,  which  can  produce  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  if  anything
can  ? Is  it  hard  to  see  that  they  here  act  homoeopathically  ? — Or
why  should  a little  parsley  juice  produce  such  evident  relief  in  those
cases  (by  no  means  rare),  where  there  are  anxious,  vain  eflbrts  to
urinate  in  little  children,  and  in  ordinary  gonorrhoea,  which  is  well
known  by  the  very  painful,  frequent,  and  almost  ineflfectual  attempts  to
make  water,  if  the  fresh  juice  of  this  plant  had  not  the  power  of
causing,  in  healthy  persons,  a painful,  almost  fruitless,  call  to  urinate,
and  so  cured  homoeopathically? — With  the  pimpernel  root,  which
causes  great  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  bronchia  and  fauces,  they  suc-
cessfully combated  the  so-called  mucous  angina — and  quelled  some
kinds  of  metrorrhagia  with  savine,  which  can  itself  cause  metrorr-
hagia, without  perceiving  the  homoeopathic  curative  law. — In  cases
of  constipation  from  strangulated  hernia  and  in  ileus,  many  medical
men  found  the  constipating  opium,  in  small  doses,  to  be  the  most
excellent  and  certain  remedy,  without  having  the  most  distant  idea
of  the  homoeopathic  curative  law  so  obvious  in  this  case. — They
cured  non-venereal  ulcers  of  the  fauces  with  small  doses  of  mercury,
which  is  homoeopathic  to  such  states — stopped  some  diarrhoeas  with
small  doses  of  the  purgative  rhubarb  — cured  hydrophobia  with
belladonna,  that  causes  a similar  affection,  and  removed,  as  if  by
magic,  the  dangerous  comatose  state  in  acute  fevers,  with  a small
dose  of  the  heating,  stupefying  opium ; and  yet  they  abuse  homoeo-
pathy, and  persecute  it  with  a fury  that  can  only  arise  from  the
stings  of  an  evil  conscience  in  a heart  incapable  of  improvement.

H 2


100


INTRODUCTION.


The  solution  we  obtain  of  this  question  is  of  the
utmost  significance.  It  is,  that  these  cures  never  were
efiected  in  any  other  manner  than  by  means  of  medi-
cines of  homoeopathic  power,  that  is  to  say,  capable  of
producing  a morbid  state  similar  to  that  sought  to  be
cured ; they  were  efiected  rapidly  and  permanently  by
medicines,  the  medical  prescribers  of  which  made  use
of  them  as  it  were  by  accident,  and  even  in  opposition
to  the  doctrines  of  all  previous  systems  and  therapeu-
tics (often  without  rightly  knowing  what  they  were
doing  and  why  they  did  it),  and  thus,  against  their
will,  they  practically  confirmed  the  necessity  of  the  only
therapeutic  law  consonant  to  nature,  that  of  Homoeo-
pathy— a therapeutic  law,  which,  despite  the  many
facts  and  innumerable  hints  that  pointed  to  it,  no
medical  epoch  hitherto  has  exerted  itself  to  discover,
blinded  as  they  all  have  been  by  medical  prejudices.

For  even  the  domestic  practice  of  the  non-medical
classes  of  the  community,  endowed  with  proper
observant  faculties,  has  many  times  proved  this  mode
of  cure  to  be  the  surest,  the  most  radical,  and  the
least  fallacious  in  practice.

In  recent  cases  of  frost-bitten  limbs,  frozen  sour
crout  is  applied,  or  frictions  of  snow  are  used.^


* It  is  on  such  examples  of  domestic  practice  that  Mr.  M.  Lux
founds  his  so-called  mode  of  cure  by  identicals  and  idem,  which  he
calls  Isopathy,  which  some  eccentric  minded  persons  have  already
adopted  as  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  a healing  art,  without  knowing  how
they  can  carry  it  out  in  practice.


INTRODUCTION.


101


The  experienced  cook  holds  his  hand,  which  he  has
scalded,  at  a certain  distance  from  the  fire,  and  does


But  if  we  examine  these  instances  attentively,  we  find  that  they
do  not  bear  out  these  views.

The  purely  physical  powers  differ  in  the  natm'e  of  their  action  on
the  living  organism,  from  those  of  a dynamic  medicinal  kind.

Heat  or  cold  of  the  air  that  surrounds  us,  or  of  the  water,  or
of  our  food  and  drink,  occasion  {as  heat  and  cold)  of  themselves  no
absolute  injury  to  a healthy  body;  heat  and  cold  are  in  their
alternations  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  healthy  life,  consequently
they  are  not  of  themselves  medicine.  Heat  and  cold,  therefore,  act
as  curative  agents  in  affections  of  the  body,  not  by  virtue  of  their
essential  nature  (not,  therefore,  as  heat  and  cold  per  se,  not  as  things
hurtful  in  themselves,  as  are  the  drugs,  rhubarb,  china,  &c.,  even  in
the  smallest  doses),  hut  onlp  by  virtue  of  their  greater  or  smaller
quantity,  that  is,  according  to  their  degrees  of  temperature,  just  as
(to  take  an  example  from  mere  physical  powers)  a great  weight  of
lead  will  bruise  my  hand  painfully,  not  by  vu'tue  of  its  essential
natm-e  as  lead,  for  a thin  plate  of  lead  would  not  bruise  me,  hut  in
consequence  of  its  quantity  and  massive  weight.

If,  then,  cold  or  heat  he  serviceable  in  bodily  ailments  like  frost-
bites or  burns,  they  are  so  solely  on  account  of  their  degree  of
temperature,  just  as  they  only  inflict  injury  on  the  healthy  body  by
their  extreme  degrees  of  temperature.

Thus  we  And  in  these  examples  of  successful  domestic  practice,
that  it  is  not  the  prolonged  application  of  the  degree  of  cold  in
which  the  limb  was  frozen  that  restores  it  isopathically  (it  would
thereby  be  rendered  quite  lifeless  and  dead),  but  a degree  of  cold  that
only  approximates  to  that  {Jiomceopathy),  and  which  gradually  rises  to
a comfortable  temperature,  as  frozen  som'  crout  laid  upon  the  frost-
bitten hand,  in  the  temperature  of  the  room,  soon  melts,  gradually
growing  warmer  from  32°  or  33°  (Fahr.)  to  the  temperature  of  the
room,  supposing  that  to  be  only  55°,  and  thus  the  limb  is  recovered


102


INTRODUCTION.


not  heed  the  increase  of  pain  that  takes  place  at  first,
as  he  knows  from  experience  that  he  can  thereby  in


by  physical  homoeopathy.  In  like  manner,  a hand  scalded  with
boiling  water  would  not  be  isopathically  cured  by  the  application  of
boiling  water,  but  only  by  a somewhat  lower  temperature,  as,  for
example,  by  holding  it  in  a vessel  containing  a fluid  heated  to  160°,
which  becomes  every  minute  less  hot,  and  finally  descends  to  the
temperature  of  the  room,  whereupon  the  scalded  part  is  restored  by
homosopathy.  Water  in  the  act  of  freezing  cannot  isopathically
draw  out  the  frost  from  potatoes  and  apples,  but  this  is  effected  by
water  only  near  the  freezing  point.

So,  to  give  another  example  from  physical  action,  the  injmy
resulting  from  a blow  on  the  forehead  with  a hard  substance
(a  painful  tumour)  is  soon  diminished  in  pain  and  swelling  by
pressing  on  the  spot  for  a considerable  time  with  the  ball  of  the
thumb,  strongly  at  first,  and  then  gradually  less  forcibly,  homoeo-
pathically,  but  not  by  an  equally  hard  blow  with  an  equally  hard
body,  which  would  increase  the  evil  isopathically.

The  examples  of  cures  by  isopathy  given  in  the  book  alluded
to — muscular  contractions  in  human  beings,  and  spinal  paralysis  in
a dog,  which  had  been  caused  by  a chill,  being  rapidly  cured  by
cold  bathing — these  events  are  falsely  explamed  by  isopathy.  What
are  called  sufferings  from  a chill,  are  only  nominally  connected  with
cold,  and  often  arise,  in  the  bodies  of  those  predisposed  to  them,
even  from  a draught  of  wind  which  was  not  at  all  cold. ' Moreover,
the  manifold  effects  of  a cold  bath  on  the  living  organism,  in  health
and  in  disease,  cannot  be  reduced  to  such  a simple  formula  as  to
warrant  the  construction  of  a system  of  such  pretensions  I That
serpents’  bites,  as  is  there  stated,  are  most  certainly  cm’ed  by  portions
of  the  serpents,  must  remain  a mere  fable  of  a former  age,  until
such  an  improbable  assertion  is  authenticated  by  indubitable  obser-
vation and  experience,  which  it  certainly  never  will  be.  That,  in
fine,  the  saliva  of  a mad  dog  given  to  a patient  laboiuing  under


INTRODUCTION.


103


a very  short  time,  often  in  a few  minutes,  convert  the
burnt  part  into  healthy  painless  skin.^

Other  intelligent  non-medical  persons,  as,  for  ex-
ample, the  manufacturers  of  lackered-ware,  apply
to  a part  scalded  with  the  hot  varnish  a similar
substance,  that  causes  of  itself  a hurning  sensation,
such  as  strong,  heated  spirits  of  wine^  or  oil  of  tur-


hydrophobia  (in  Russia),  is  said  to  have  cured  him — that  “is  said"
would  not  seduce  any  conscientious  physician  to  imitate  such  a
hazardous  experiment,  to  construct  a so-called  isopathic  system,  so
dangerous,  and  so  highly  improbable  in  its  extended  application,  as
has  been  done  (not  by  the  modest  author  of  the  pamphlet  entitled
“ The  Isopathy  of  Contagions,  Leipzic : Kollmann,”  but)  by  its
eccentric  supporters,  especially  Dr.  Gross  (v.  Ally.  horn.  Ztg.  ii.
p.  72),  who  vaunts  this  isopathy  {mqualia  aqualibus)  as  the  only
proper  theraj^eutic  rule,  and  sees  nothing  in  the  similia  similibus  but
an  indifferent  substitute  for  it;  ungratefully  enough,  as  he  is  entii'ely
indebted  to  the  similia  similibus  for  all  his  fame  and  fortune.

* So  also  Fernelius  {Therap,  lib.  vi.  cap.  20)  considers  that  the
best  cure  for  a burnt  part  is  to  bring  it  near  the  fire,  whereby  the
pain  is  removed.  John  Hunter  {On  the  Blood,  Inflammation,  ^c.
p.  218)  mentions  the  great  injury  that  results  fi'om  treating  burns
with  cold  water,  and  gives  a decided  preference  to  approaching
them  to  the  fire, — guided  in  this,  not  by  the  traditional  medical
doctrines  which  {contraria  contrariis)  prescribe  cooling  things  for
inflammation,  but  by  experience,  which  teaches  that  a similar  appli-
cation of  heat  {similia  similibus)  is  the  most  salutary.

^ Sydenham  {Opera,  p.  271  [edit.  Syd.  Soc.  p.  601])  says  that
spirits  of  wine,  repeatedly  applied,  is  preferable  to  all  other  remedies
in  bums.  Benjamin  Bell,  too  {System  of  Surgery,  third,  edit.  1789),
acknowledges  that  experience  shows  that  homoeopathic  remedies
only  are  efficacious.  He  says : “ One  of  the  best  applications  to


104


INTRODUCTION.


fentine^  and  by  that  means  cure  themselves  in  the
course  of  a few  hours,  whereas  cooling  salves,  as  they  are


every  bui'n  of  this  kind  is  strong  brandy  or  any  other  ardent  spirit ;
it  serves  to  induce  a momentary  additional  pain  (see  below,  § clvii.),
but  this  soon  subsides,  and  is  succeeded  by  an  agreeable  soothing
sensation.  It  proves  most  effectual  when  the  parts  can  be  kejjt
immersed  in  it ; but  where  this  cannot  be  done,  they  should  be  kept
constantly  moist  with  pieces  of  old  linen  soaked  in  spirits.”  To  this
I may  add,  that  warm,  and  indeed  very  warm,  alcohol  is  much  more
rapidly  and  much  more  certainly  efficacious,  for  it  is  much  more
homoeopathic  than  when  not  heated.  And  all  experience  confirms
this  in  a most  astonishing  manner.

^ Edward  Kentish,  having  to  treat  the  workers  in  coal  pits,  who
were  so  often  dreadfully  burnt  by  the  explosion  of  fire-damp,  applied
heated  oil  of  turpentine,  or  alcohol,  as  the  best  remedies  in  the  most
extensive  and  severest  burns.  {Second  Essay  on  Burns.  London,
1798.)  No  treatment  can  be  more  homoeopathic  than  this,  nor  is
any  more  efficacious.

The  estimable  and  experienced  Heister  {Institut.  Chirurg.  tom  i.
p.  33)  confirms  this  from  his  own  observation,  and  extols  the  applica-
tion of  turpentine  oil,  of  alcohol,  and  of  very  hot  poultices,  for  this
end,  as  hot  as  ever  they  can  be  borne.

But  the  amazing  superiority  of  the  application  to  bums  of  these
remedies,  which  possess  the  power  of  exciting  burning  sensation  and
heat  (and  are  consequently  homoeopathic),  over  palliative  refrigerent
remedies,  is  most  incontestibly  shewn  by  pure  experimentation,  in
which  the  two  opposite  methods  of  treatment  are  employed  for  the
sake  of  comparison,  in  burns  of  similar  intensity,  in  the  same  body.

Thus,  John  Bell  (in  Kuhn's  phys.  med.  Jour.  Leipzic,  1801,
Jun.  p.  428),  in  the  case  of  a lady  who  had  scalded  both  arms,
caused  one  to  be  covered  with  oil  of  turpentine,  and  made  her  plunge
the  other  into  cold  water.  In  half  an  hour  the  fii'st  arm  was  %vell,
but  the  other  continued  to  be  painful  for  six  hours  longer ; when  it
was  withdrawn  one  instant  from  the  water,  slie  experienced  much


INTRODUCTION.


105


well  aware,  would  not  effect  a cure  in  as  many  months,
and  cold  water ^ would  but  make  matters  worse.

The  old  experienced  reaper,  although  he  may  not
he  in  the  habit  of  drinking  brandy,  will  not  touch
cold  water  {contraria  contrariis)  when  he  has  worked


greater  pain  in  it,  and  it  required  a much  longer  time  than  the  first
for  its  cure.

John  Anderson  {Kentish,  op.  cit.  p.  43)  treated  in  a similat  manner
a lady  who  had  scalded  herself  with  boiling  grease.  “ The  face,
which  was  very  red  and  scalded,  and  excessively  painful,  was,  a few
minutes  after  the  accident,  covered  with  oil  of  turpentine ; her  arm
she  had,  of  her  own  accord,  plunged  into  cold  water,  with  which  she
desued  to  treat  it  for  some  hours.  In  the  course  of  seven  hours  her
face  looked  much  better,  and  the  pain  was  relieved.  She  had
frequently  renewed  the  cold  water  for  the  arm,  but  whenever  she
withdi’ew  it  she  complained  of  much  pain,  and  in  truth  the  inflam-
mation in  it  had  much  increased.  The  following  morning  I found
that  she  had  had,  during  the  night,  great  pain  in  the  arm ; the
inflammation  had  extended  above  the  elbow ; several  large  blisters
had  burst,  and  thick  eschars  had  formed  on  the  arm  and  hand ; a
warm  poultice  was  then  applied.  The  face  was  completely  free
from  pain,  hut  emollient  applications  had  to  be  used  for  the  arm  for
a fortnight  longer,  before  it  was  cured.”

Who  can  fail  to  perceive  in  this  instance  the  infinite  superiority  of
the  (homoeopathic)  treatment  hy  means  of  remedies  of  similar  action,
over  the  ivretched  treatment  hy  opposites  (contraria  contrariis)  of  the
antiquated  ordinary  school  of  medicine  !

* John  Hunter  {loc.  cit.')  is  not  singular  in  asserting  the  great
injury  done  by  treating  bm'ns  with  cold  water.  W.  Fabricius  of  Hilden ,
also  {De  Comhustionibus  libellus.  Basil,  1607,  cap.  5,  p.  11),
alleges  that  cold  applications  are  highly  injtu'ious,  and  productive  of
the  most  serious  consequences  ; inflammation,  suppuration,  and
sometimes  mortification,  are  caused  by  them.


106


INTRODUCTION.


himself  into  a violent  feverish  state  in  the  heat  of  the
sun — he  knows  the  danger  of  such  a proceeding —
hut  he  takes  a small  quantity  of  a heating  liquor,  a
mouthful  of  brandy ; experience,  the  teacher  of  truth,
has  convinced  him  of  the  great  superiority  and  ethcacy
of  this  homoeopathic  procedure,  whereby  his  heat  and
fatigue  are  speedily  removed.^

There  have  ever  been  occasionally  physicians,  who
vaguely  surmised  that  medicines  cure  analogous  mor-
bid states  by  the  power  they  possess  of  producing
analogous  morbid  symptoms.^

Thus  the  author  of  the  book : totwv  rm  vlut  «v-

SfWTTOv,^  which  is  among  the  writings  attributed  to
Hippocrates,  has  the  following  remarkable  words :
hk  rk  o[j^oici  vovaog  yivsTUt,  y.ui  lik  Tk  ojxota  %^0(r(ps^6^avci  e’jt
voGSvvrm  vyLamvTcu , — hk  to  ajj^isiv  ststos  %civeTui. —

Later  physicians  have  also  felt  and  expressed  the
truth  of  the  homoeopathic  method  of  cure.  Thus,  for


‘ Zimmermann  {Ueber  die  Erfahrung,  ii.  p.  318)  informs  us  that
the  inhabitants  of  hot  countries  act  in  the  same  manner,  with  the
best  results,  and  that,  after  being  very  much  heated,  they  swallow  a
small  quantity  of  some  spirituous  liquor.

^ I do  not  bring  forward  the  following  passages  from  authors  who
had  a presentiment  of  homoeopathy,  as  proofs  in  support  of  this
doctrine,  which  is  firmly  established  on  its  own  merits,  but  in  order
to  avoid  the  imputation  of  having  suppressed  these  foreshadowings
with  the  view  of  securing  for  myself  the  merit  of  the  priority  of  the
idea.

® Basil.  Frohen.  1538,  p.  72.


INTRODUCTION.


107


instance,  Boulduc'  perceived  that  the  purgative  pro-
perty of  rhubarb  was  the  cause  of  its  power  to  remove
diarrhcea.

Detharding^  guessed  that  the  infusion  of  senna
leaves  relieved  colic  in  adults,  by  virtue  of  its  analo-
gous action  in  causing  colic  in  healthy  persons.

Bertholon^  confesses  that  in  diseases  electricity
diminishes  and  removes  pain  very  similar  to  that
which  itself  produces.

Thoury^  testifies  that  positive  electricity  possesses
the  power  of  quickening  the  pulse,  but  when  that  is
already  morbidly  accelerated,  it  diminishes  its  fre-
quency.

Von  Storck®  makes  the  following  suggestion:  “If
stramonium  disorders  the  mind  and  produces  mania
in  healthy  persons,  ought  we  not  to  try  if  in  cases  of
insanity  it  cannot  restore  reason,  by  producing  a
revolution  in  the  ideas  1 ”

But  a Danish  army-physician,  of  the  name  of  Stahl,®
has  expressed  his  conviction  on  this  point  in  the  most
unequivocal  terms.  “ The  rule  generally  acted  on  in
medicine,”  says  he,  “ to  treat  by  means  of  oppositely
acting  remedies  {contraria  contrariis)  is  quite  false,


* Memoii-es  de  I’Academie  Royale,  1710.

^ Eph.  Nat.  Cur.,  cent.  x.  obs.  76.

® Medicin.  Electrisitat,  ii.  pp.  15  and  282.

^ Memoire  lu  a 1’ Academic  de  Caen.

® Lebell.  de  Stram.  p.  8.

® In  Jo.  Hammelii  Commentatio  de  Arthritide  tarn  tartarea,  quani
scorbutica,  seu  podagra  et  scorbuto.  Budingse,  1738,  viii.  pp.  40 — 42.


108


INTRODUCTION.


and  the  reverse  of  what  ought  to  be ; I am,  on  the
contrary,  convinced  that  diseases  will  yield  to  and  be
cured  by  remedies  that  produce  a similar  affection
(similia  similibus), — burns,  by  exposure  to  the  fire,
frost-bitten  limbs,  by  the  application  of  snow  and  the
coldest  water,  inflammation  and  bruises,  by  distilled
spirits ; and  in  like  manner  I have  treated  a tendency
to  acidity  of  the  stomach,  by  a very  small  dose  of
sulphuric  acid,  with  the  most  successful  result,  in
cases  where  a number  of  absorbent  remedies  had  been
fruitlessly  employed.”

How  near  was  the  great  truth  sometimes  of  being
apprehended!  But  it  was  dismissed  with  a mere
passing  thought,  and  thus  the  indispensable  change
of  the  antiquated  medical  treatment  of  disease,  of  the
improper  therapeutic  system  hitherto  in  vogue,  into
a real,  true  and  certain  healing  art,  remained  to  be
accomplished  in  our  own  times.


109


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§!•

The  physician’s  high  and  only  mission  is  to  restore
the  sick  to  health,  to  cure,  as  it  is  termed.^

§11.

The  perfection  of  a cure  is  rapid,  gentle  and  per-
manent restoration  of  the  health,  or  removal  and
annihilation  of  the  disease  in  its  whole  extent,  in  the
shortest,  safest  and  most  harmless  way,  on  easily
comprehensible  principles.


His  mission  is  not,  however^  to  construct  so-called  systems,  by
interweaving  empty  ideas  and  hypotheses  concerning  the  internal
vital  processes,  and  consequently  the  actual  mode  in  which  diseases
are  produced  in  the  interior  of  the  organism  (whereon  so  many
physicians  have  hitherto  ambitiously  wasted  their  talents  and
their  time) ; nor  is  it  to  attempt  to  give  countless  explanations
regarding  the  phenomena  in  diseases  and  their  proximate  cause
(which  must  ever  remain  concealed),  wrapped  in  unintelligible
words  and  an  inflated  abstract  mode  of  expression,  which  should


110


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ III-

If  the  physician  clearly  perceives  what  is  to  be
cured  in  diseases,  that  is  to  say,  in  every  individual
case  of  disease  (knowledge  of  disease,  indication),  if  he
clearly  perceives  what  is  curative  in  medicines,  that
is  to  say,  in  each  individual  medicine  (knowledge  of
medicinal  powers),  and  if  he  knows  how  to  apply,
according  to  clearly  defined  principles,  what  is  curative
in  medicines,  to  what  he  has  discovered  to  be  un-
doubtedly morbid  in  the  patient,  so  that  recovery
must  ensue — to  apply  it,  as  well  in  respect  to  the
suitability  of  the  medicine  most  adapted  from  its
mode  of  action  to  the  case  before  him  (choice  of  the
remedy,  the  medicine  indicated),  as  also  in  respect  to
the  exact  mode  of  preparation  and  quantity  of  it
required  (proper  dose),  and  to  the  proper  period  for
repeating  the  dose : — if,  finally,  he  knows  the  obstacles
to  recovery  in  each  case,  and  is  aware  how  to  remove
them,  so  that  the  restoration  may  be  permanent : then
he  understands  how  to  treat  judiciously  and  rationally,
and  he  is  a true  practitioner  of  the  healing  art.


sound  very  learned,  in  order  to  amaze  the  ignorant — whilst  sick
humanity  sighs  in  vain  for  aid.  Of  such  learned  reveries  (to  which
the  name  of  theoretic  medicine  is  given,  and  for  which  peculiar  pro-
fessorships are  instituted)  we  have  had  quite  enough,  and  it  is  now
high  time  that  all  who  call  themselves  physicians  should  at  length
cease  to  deceive  suffering  mankind  with  mere  talk,  and  begin  now.
Instead,  for  once  to  act,  that  is,  really  to  aid  and  to  cure.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


111


§IV.

He  is  likewise  a preserver  of  health,  if  he  knows
the  things  that  derange  health  and  cause  disease,  and
how  to  remove  them  from  persons  in  health.

§ V.

Useful  to  the  physician  in  assisting  him  to  cure,
are  the  particulars  of  the  most  probable  exciting
cause  of  the  acute  disease,  as  also  the  most  significant
points  in  the  whole  history  of  the  chronic  disease,  to
enable  him  to  discover  its  fundamental  cause,  which
generally  depends  on  a chronic  miasm.  In  these
investigations,  the  apparent  physical  constitution  of
the  patient  (especially  when  the  disease  is  chronic),
his  moral  and  intellectual  character,  his  occupation,
mode  of  living  and  habits,  his  social  and  domestic
relations,  his  age,  sexual  function,  &c.,  are  to  be
taken  into  consideration.

§VI.

The  unprejudiced  observer — well  aware  of  the
nullity  of  transcendental  speculations,  which  can
receive  no  confirmation  from  experience  — let  his
powers  of  penetration  be  ever  so  great,  takes  note  of
nothing  in  every  individual  disease,  except  the  changes
in  the  health  of  the  body  and  of  the  mind  {morhid
phenomena,  accidents,  symptoms,)  which  can  be  per-
ceived externally  by  means  of  the  senses,  that  is  to
say,  he  notices  only  the  deviations  from  the  former
healthy  state  of  the  now  diseased  individual,  which


112


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


are  felt  by  the  patient  himself,  remarked  by  those
around  him,  and  observed  by  the  physician.  All
these  perceptible  signs  represent  the  disease  in  its
■whole  extent,  that  is,  together  they  form  the  true  and
only  conceivable  portrait  of  the  disease.^


* I know  not,  therefore,  how  it  was  possible  for  physicians  at  the
sick-bed  to  allow  themselves  to  suppose,  that  without  most  carefully
attending  to  the  symptoms,  and  being  guided  by  them  in  the  treat-
ment, they  ought  to  seek  and  could  discover,  only  in  the  hidden  and
unknown  interior,  what  there  was  to  he  cured  in  the  disease,  under
the  arrogant  and  ludicrous  pretext  that  they  could,  without  payhig
much  attention  to  the  symptoms,  discover  the  alteration  that  had-
occurred  in  the  invisible  interior,  and  set  it  to  rights  with  (imknown!)
medicines,  and  that  such  a procedure  as  this  could  alone  be  called
radical  and  rational  treatment.

Is  not,  then,  that  which  is  cognizable  by  the  senses  in  diseases
through  the  phenomena  it  displays,  the  disease  itself  in  the  eyes  of
the  physician,  since  he  never  can  see  the  spiritual  being  that  pro-
duces the  disease,  the  vital  force  ? nor  is  it  necessary  that  he  should
see  it,  hut  only  that  he  should  ascertain  its  morbid  actions,  in  order
that  he  may  thereby  he  enabled  to  cure  the  disease.  What  else  will
the  old  school  search  for  in  the  hidden  interior  of  the  organism,  as  a
prinia  causi  morbi,  whilst  they  reject  as  an  object  of  cure,  and
proudly  despise,  the  sensible  and  manifest  representation  of  the
disease,  the  symptoms,  that  so  plainly  address  themselves  to  us  ?
What  else  do  they  wish  to  cure  in  diseases,  but  these  ? *

* “ The  physician  whose  researches  are  directed  towards  the  hidden
relations  in  the  interior  of  the  organism,  may  daily  err ; but  the  homoeo-
pathist  who  grasps  with  requisite  carefulness  the  whole  group  of  symptoms,
possesses  a sure  guide,  and  if  he  succeed  in  removing  the  whole  group  of
symptoms,  he  has  likewise  most  assuredly  destroyed  the  inteimal,  hidden
cause  of  the  disease.”  (Rau,  op.  cit,  p.  103).


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


113


§VIL

Now,  as  in  a disease,  from  which  no  manifest
exciting  or  maintaining  cause  {causa  occasionalis')  is
to  be  removed,^  we  can  perceive  nothing  but  the
morbid  symptoms,  it  must  (regard  being  had  to  the
possibility  of  a miasm,  and  attention  paid  to  the  acces-
sory circumstances,  § v)  be  the  symptoms  alone,  by
which  the  disease  demands  and  points  to  the  remedy
suited  to  relieve  it — and,  moreover,  the  totality  of
these  its  symptoms,  of  this  outwardly  reflected  picture
of  the  internal  essence  of  the  disease,  that  is,  of  the
affection  of  the  vital  force,  must  be  the  principal,  or
the  sole  means,  whereby  the  disease  can  make  known
what  remedy  it  requires — the  only  thing  that  can
determine  the  choice  of  the  most  appropriate  curative
agent — and  thus,  in  a word,  the  totality^  of  the


* It  is  not  necessaiy  to  say  that  every  intelligejit  physician  would  at
once  remove  this  where  it  exists ; the  indisposition  thereupon  generally
ceases  spontaneously.  He  will  remove  from  the  room  strong  smelling
flowers,  which  have  a tendency  to  cause  syncope  and  hysterical  suffer-
ings ; extract  from  the  cornea  the  foreign  body  that  excites  inflam-
mation of  the  eye ; loosen  the  over-tight  bandage  on  a wounded  limb,
and  apply  a more  suitable  one ; lay  bare,  and  put  a ligature  on  the
wounded  artery  that  produces  fainting ; endeavour  to  promote  the
expulsion  by  vomiting  of  belladonna  berries  and  the  like,  that  may
have  been  swallowed ; extract  foreign  substances  that  may  have  got
into  the  orifices  of  the  body  (the  nose,  gullet,  ears,  urethra,  rectum,
vagina) ; crush  the  vesical  calculus ; open  the  imperforate  anus  of
the  new  born  infant,  &c.

^ In  all  times,  the  old  school  physicians,  not  knowing  how  else  to


I


114


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


symptoms  must  be  the  principal,  the  sole  thing,  the
physician  has  to  take  note  of  in  every  case  of  disease,
and  to  remove  by  means  of  his  art,  in  order  to  cure
and  transform  it  into  health,

§ VIII.

It  is  not  conceivable,  nor  can  it  be  proved  by  any
experience  in  the  world,  that,  after  removal  of  all  the
morbid  symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  of  the  entire
collection  of  the  perceptible  morbid  phenomena,  there
should  or  could  remain  any  thing  else  besides  health,
or  that  the  morbid  alterations  in  the  interior  could
remain  uneradicated.^


give  relief,  have  sought  to  combat,  and  if  possible  to  suppress,  by
medicines,  here  and  there,  a single  symptom  from  among  a number,
in  diseases — a one-sided  procedure,  which,  under  the  name  of  symp-
tomatic treatment,  has  justly  excited  universal  contempt,  because  by
it,  not  only  was  nothing  gained,  hut  much  harm  was  effected.  A
single  one  of  the  symptoms  present  is  no  more  the  disease  itself
than  a single  foot  is  the  man  himself.  This  procedure  was  so  much
the  more  reprehensible,  that  such  a single  symptom  was  only  treated
by  an  antagonistic  remedy  (therefore  only  in  an  enantiopathic  and
palliative  manner),  whereby,  after  a slight  alleviation,  it  was  subse-
quently only  rendered  all  the  worse.

^ When  a patient  has  been  cured  of  his  disease  by  a true
physician,  in  such  a manner  that  no  trace  of  the  disease,  no  morbid
symptom,  remains,  and  all  the  signs  of  health  have  permanently
returned,  how  can  any  one,  without  offering  an  insult  to  common
sense,  affirm  that  in  such  an  individual  the  whole  disease  still  re-
mains bodily  in  the  interior?  And  yet  the  chief  of  the  old  school,
Hufcland,  asserts  this  in  the  following  words : “ Homoeopathy  can


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


115


§IX.

In  the  healthy  condition  of  man,  the  spiritual  vital
force  (autocracy),  the  dynamis  that  animates  the
material  body  (organism)  rules  with  unbounded  sway,
and  retains  all  the  parts  of  the  organism  in  admirable,
harmonious,  vital  operation,  with  respect  to  both
sensations  and  functions,  so  that  our  in-dwelling,
reason-gifted  mind  can  employ  this  living,  healthy
machine  for  the  higher  purposes  of  our  existence.

§x.

The  material  organism,  without  the  vital  force,  is
capable  of  no  sensation,  no  function,  no  self-preser-
vation ; ^ it  derives  all  sensation  and  performs  all  the


remove  the  symptoms,  but  the  disease  remains.”  (Vide  Homoo-
pathie,  p.  27,  c.  19.)  This  he  maintains,  partly  from  mortification  at
the  progress  made  by  homoeopathy  to  the  benefit  of  mankind,  partly
because  he  still  holds  thoroughly  material  notions  respecting  disease,
which  he  is  still  unable  to  regard  as  a state  of  being  of  the  organism,
wherein  it  is  dynamically  altered  by  the  morbidly  deranged  vital
force,  hut  he  views  the  disease  as  a something  material,  which,  after
the  cure  is  completed,  may  still  remain  lurking  in  some  corner  in
the  interior  of  the  body,  in  order,  some  day  during  the  most  vigorous
health,  to  hurst  forth,  at  its  pleasure,  with  its  material  presence !
So  dreadful  is  still  the  blindness  of  the  old  school  pathology ! No
wonder  that  it  could  only  produce  a system  of  therapeutics,  which  is
solely  occupied  with  scouring  out  the  poor  patient.

^ It  is  dead,  and  now  only  subject  to  the  power  of  the  external
physical  world ; it  decays,  and  is  again  resolved  into  its  chemical
constituents.

I 2


116


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


functions  of  life  solely  by  means  of  the  immaterial
being  (the  vital  force)  which  animates  the  material
organism  in  health  and  in  disease.

§XI.

When  a person  falls  ill,  it’  is  only  this  spiritual,
self-acting  (automatic)  vital  force,  every  where  pre-
sent in  his  organism,  that  is  primarily  deranged
by  the  dynamic  influence  upon  it  of  a morbiflc
agent  inimical  to  life ; it  is  only  the  vital  force,
deranged  to  such  an  abnormal  state,  that  can  fur-
nish the  organism  with  its  disagreeable  sensations,
and  incline  it  to  the  irregular  functions,  which  we
call  disease ; for,  as  a power  invisible  in  itself,  and
only  cognizable  by  its  actions  in  the  organism,  its
morbid  derangement  only  makes  itself  known,  by  the
expression  of  disease  in  the  sensations  and  functions
of  those  parts  of  the  organism  exposed  to  the  senses  of
the  observer  and  physician,  that  is,  by  morbid  symp-
toms, and  in  no  other  way  can  it  make  itself  known.

§XII.

It  is  the  morbidly  affected  vital  force  alone  that
produces  diseases,^  so  that  the  morbid  phenomena


' How  the  vital  force  causes  the  organism  to  display  morhid
phenomena,  that  is,  how  it  produces  disease,  it  would  be  of  no  prac-
tical utility  to  the  physician  to  know,  and  therefore  it  will  forever
remain  concealed  from  him ; only  what  it  is  necessary  for  him  to
know  of  the  disease,  and  what  is  fully  sufficient  for  enabling  him  to
cure  it,  has  the  Lord  of  life  revealed  to  his  senses.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


117


perceptible  to  our  senses  express  at  the  same  time  all
the  internal  change,  that  is,  the  morbid  derangement
of  the  internal  dynamis,  in  a word,  they  reveal  the
whole  disease;  consequently,  also,  the  disappearance
by  treatment  of  all  the  morbid  phenomena,  and  of  all
the  morbid  alterations  that  differ  from  the  healthy
vital  operations,  as  certainly  occasions,  and  necessarily
implies,  the  restoration  of  the  integrity  of  the  vital
force,  and,  therefore,  the  recovered  health  of  the
whole  organism.


§ XIII.

Therefore  disease  (that  does  not  come  within  the
province  of  manual  surgery)  considered,  as  it  is  by
the  allopathists,  as  a thing  separate  from  the  living
whole,  from  the  organism  and  its  vivifying  vital  force,
and  hidden  in  the  interior,  be  it  of  ever  so  subtile  a
character,  is  an  absurdity,  that  could  only  be  imagined
by  minds  of  a material  stamp,  and  has  for  thousands
of  years  given  to  the  prevailing  system  of  medicine
all  those  pernicious  impulses  that  have  made  it  a truly
mischievous  [non-healing]  art.

§ XIV-

There  is,  in  the  interior  of  man,  nothing  morbid
that  is  curable,  and  no  invisible  morbid  alteration
that  is  curable,  which  does  not  make  itself  known  to
the  accurately  observing  physician,  by  means  of  mor-
bid signs  and  symptoms — an  arrangement  in  perfect


118


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


conformity  with  the  infinite  goodness  of  the  all-wise
Preserver  of  human  life.

§XV.

The  affection  of  the  morbidly  deranged,  spiritual
dynamis  (vital  force)  that  animates  our  body,  in  the
invisible  interior,  and  the  sum  total  of  the  outwardly
cognizable  symptoms  produced  by  it  in  the  organism
and  representing  the  existing  malady,  constitute  a
whole ; they  are  one  and  the  same.  The  organism  is
indeed  the  material  machine  to  the  life,  but  it  is  not
conceivable  without  the  animation  imparted  to  it  by
the  instinctively  perceiving  and  regulating  vital  force
(just  as  the  vital  force  is  not  conceivable  without  the
organism),  consequently  the  two  together  constitute
a unity,  although  in  thought  our  mind  separates  this
unity  into  two  distinct  ideas,  for  the  sake  of  facilitating
the  apprehension  of  it.

§ XVI.

Our  vital  force,  as  a spiritual  dynamis,  cannot  be
attacked  and  affected  by  injurious  operations  on  the
healthy  organism  from  external  inimical  influences,
that  disturb  the  harmonious  play  of  life,  otherwise
than  in  a spiritual  (dynamic)  manner,  and  in  hke
manner,  all  such  morbid  derangements  (the  diseases)
cannot  be  removed  from  it  by  the  physician,  in
any  other  way,  than  by  the  spiritual  (dynamic,
virtual)  alterative  powers  of  the  suitable  medicines
acting  upon  our  spiritual  vital  force,  which  per-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


119


ceives  them  through  the  medium  of  the  sentient
faculty  of  the  nerves  every  where  present  in  the
organism,  so  that  it  is  only  by  their  dynamic  action
on  the  vital  force,  that  curative  agents  are  able  to
re-establish,  and  do  actually  re-establish,  health  and
vital  harmony,  after  the  changes  in  the  health  of
the  patient  cognizable  by  our  senses  (the  sum  total
of  the  symptoms)  had  revealed  the  disease  to  the
carefully  observing  and  investigating  physician,  as
fully  as  was  requisite,  in  order  to  enable  him  to
cure  it.

§ XVII.

Now,  as  in  the  cure  effected  by  the  removal  of  the
whole  of  the  perceptible  signs  and  symptoms  of  the
disease,  the  internal  alteration  of  the  vital  force  on
which  the  disease  depends — consequently  the  sum
total  of  the  disease — is  at  the  same  time  removed,^  it


^ A warning  dream,  a superstitious  fancy,  or  a solemn  prediction
that  death  would  occur  at  a certain  day  or  at  a certain  hour,  has  not
unfrequently  produced  aU  the  signs  of  commencing  and  increasing
disease,  of  approaching  death,  and  death  itself,  at  the  hour  an-
nounced, which  could  not  happen  without  the  simultaneous  produc-
tion of  the  inward  change  (corresponding  to  the  state  observed
externally) ; and  hence  in  such  cases,  from  the  same  cause,  all  the
morbid  signs  indicative  of  approaching  death  have  frequently  been
dissipated  by  some  cunning  deception,  or  persuasion  to  a belief  in
the  contrary,  and  health  suddenly  restored,  which  could  not  have
happened  without  the  removal,  by  means  of  tliis  moral  curative  agent,
of  the  intei’nal  and  external  morbid  change  that  threatened  death.


120


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


follows,  that  the  physician  has  only  to  remove  the
whole  of  the  symptoms,  in  order,  at  the  same  time,  to
abrogate  and  to  annihilate  the  internal  change,  that
is,  the  morbid  derangement  of  the  vital  force — con-
sequently the  sum  total  of  the  disease,  the  disease
itself}  But  the  annihilated  disease  is  restored  health,
the  highest,  the  sole  aim  of  the  physician  who  knows
the  true  object  of  his  mission,  which  consists  not  in
learned-sounding  prating,  but  in  giving  aid  to  the
sick.

§ XVIII,

From  this  indubitable  truth,  that  besides  the  col-
lective symptoms,  nothing  can  be  discovered  in  any
way,  in  diseases,  wherewith  they  could  express  their
need  of  aid,  it  undeniably  follows,  that  the  sum  of
all  the  symptoms  in  each  individual  case  of  disease
must  be  the  sole  indication.,  the  sole  guide  to  direct  us
in  the  choice  of  a curative  remedy.


* It  is  only  thus  that  God,  the  Preseiu'er  of  mankind,  could  reveal
His  wisdom  and  goodness  in  reference  to  the  cure  of  the  diseases  to
which  man  is  liable  here  below,  by  shewing  to  the  physician  what  he
had  to  remove  in  diseases,  in  order  to  annihilate  them,  and  re-establish
health.  But  what  would  we  think  of  His  wisdom  and  goodness,  if  He
had  shrouded  in  mysterious  obscurity  that  which  was  to  be  cured  in
diseases  (as  is  asserted  by  the  prevailing  school  of  medicine,  which
affects  to  possess  a supernatural  insight  into  the  inner  nature  of
things),  and  shut  it  up  in  the  hidden  interior,  and  thus  rendered  it
impossible  for  man  to  know  the  malady  accurately,  consequently
impossible  for  him  to  cure  it?


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


121


§ XIX.

Now,  as  diseases  are  nothing  more  than  alterations
in  the  health  of  the  healthy  individual,  which  express
themselves  hy  morbid  signs,  and  the  cure  is  also
only  possible  by  a change  of  the  health  of  the  diseased
individual  to  the  healthy  condition,  it  is  very  evident,
that  medicines  could  never  cure  diseases,  if  they  did
not  possess  the  power  of  altering  man’s  health,  which
consists  in  sensations  and  functions;  indeed,  that
their  curative  power  must  be  owing  solely  to  this
power  they  possess  of  altering  man’s  health.

§ XX.

This  spiritual  power  capable  of  altering  man’s
health  (and  hence  of  curing  diseases)  which  lies  hid
in  the  inner  nature  of  medicines,  is  not  of  itself  dis-
coverable by  us,  in  any  way,  by  a mere  effort  of
reason ; it  is  only  by  experience  of  the  phenomena  it
displays  when  acting  on  the  health  of  man  that  it
can  be  learned,  and  that  distinctly.

§XXI.

Now,  as  the  curative  principle  in  medicines  is  not
in  itself  perceptible,  as  cannot  be  denied,  and  in  pure
experiments  with  medicines,  conducted  by  the  most
accurate  observers,  nothing  can  be  observed  that  can
constitute  them  medicines  or  curative  agents,  except
that  power  of  causing  distinct  alterations  in  the
health  of  the  human  body,  and  particularly  in  that  of


122


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


the  healthy  individual,  and  of  exciting  in  him  certain
fixed  morbid  symptoms;  so  it  follows,  that  when
medicines  act  as  curative  agents,  they  can  only  bring
their  curative  property  into  play  by  means  of  this
their  power  of  altering  man’s  health,  by  the  pro-
duction of  peculiar  symptoms ; and  that,  therefore,
we  have  only  to  trust  to  the  morbid  phenomena
which  the  medicines  produce  in  the  healthy  body,  as
the  only  possible  revelation  of  their  in-dwelling  cura-
tive power,  in  order  to  learn,  what  disease-producing
power,  and,  at  the  same  time,  what  disease-curing
power  each  individual  medicine  possesses.

§ XXII.

But  as  nothing  is  to  be  observed  in  diseases  that
ought  to  be  removed  in  order  to  change  them  into
health,  besides  the  sum  of  their  signs  and  symptoms,
and  likewise  medicines  can  shew  nothing  curative,
besides  their  tendency  to  produce  morbid  symptoms
in  healthy  persons,  and  to  remove  them  in  diseased
persons ; it  follows,  on  the  one  hand,  that  medicines
only  become  curative  agents,  and  have  the  power  of
annihilating  diseases,  in  that  the  medicinal  substance,
by  exciting  certain  etfects  and  symptoms,  that  is,  by
producing  a certain  artificial  morbid  state,  removes
and  destroys  the  symptoms  already  present,  that  is  to
say,  the  natural  morbid  state  that  is  to  be  cured —
on  the  other  hand,  it  follows,  that  for  the  sum  of  the
symptoms  of  the  disease  to  be  cured,  a medicine  must
be  sought,  which  (according  as  experience  shall  prove


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


123


whether  the  morbid  symptoms  are  most  readily,
certainly  and  permanently  removed  and  changed  into
health  by  similar  or  opposite  medicinal  symptoms,^)
has  a tendency  to  produce  similar  or  opposite  symp-
toms.

§ XXIII.

All  pure  experience,  however,  and  all  accurate
research,  convince  us,  that  persisting  symptoms  of
disease  are  so  far  from  being  removed  and  annihilated


^ The  other  possible  mode  of  employing  medicines  for  diseases,
besides  these  two  (the  allopathic  method'),  in  which  medicines  are
given,  whose  symptoms  have  no  direct  pathological  relation  to  the
morbid  state,  consequently  are  neither  similar  nor  opposite,  but
quite  heterogeneous  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  is,  as  I have
shewn  above,  in  the  Introduction  (^Review  of  the  medication,  allo-
pathy, and  palliative  treatment,  that  have  prevailed  to  the  present
time  in  the  old  school  of  medicine),  merely  an  imperfect  and  injurious
imitation  of  the  highly  imperfect  efforts  of  the  irrational,  m,erely
instinctive  vital  force,  which,  lohen  made  ill  hy  injurious  agencies,
strives  to  save  itself  at  lohatever  sacrifice,  hy  the  production  and
continuance  of  morbid  states  in  the  organism — an  imitation,  conse-
quently, of  the  crude  vital  force,  which  was  placed  in  our  organism,
and  so  constituted  as  to  preserve  our  life  in  health,  in  the  most
beautiful  harmony ; but  when  deranged  by  disease,  to  admit  of  being
again  changed  to  health  (homcEopathically)  by  the  intelligent  physician,
but  not  to  cure  itself,  for  which  the  little  power  it  possesses  is  so  far
from  being  a pattern  to  be  copied,  that  all  the  changes  and  symptoms
it  produces  in  the  (morbidly  deranged)  organism,  are  just  the  disease
itself.  But  this  injudicious  system  of  medication  of  the  old  school
of  medicine  can  no  more  be  passed  by  unnoticed,  than  can  history
omit  to  record  the  thousands  of  years  of  oppression  to  which  mankind
have  been  subjected  under  the  irrational,  despotic  governments.


124


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


by  opposite  symptoms  of  medicines,  (as  in  the  anti-
pathic, enantiopathic,  ox  palliative  method,)  that  on  the
contrary,  after  transient,  apparent  alleviation,  they
break  forth  again,  only  with  increased  intensity,  and
become  manifestly  aggravated  (§  Iviii — Ixii  and  Ixix).

§ XXIV.

There  remains,  therefore,  no  other  mode  of  employ-
ing medicines  in  diseases  that  promises  to  be  of
service,  than  the  homoeopathic,  by  the  instrumentality
of  which  a medicine  must  be  sought  for  the  collective
symptoms  of  the  case  of  disease,  which  among  all  the
medicines  (whose  pathogenetic  etfects  are  known  from
having  been  tested  in  healthy  individuals),  has  the
power  and  the  tendency  to  produce  an  artificial
morbid  state,  most  similar  to  that  of  the  case  of
disease  in  question.

§ XXV.

Now,  however,  in  all  careful  researches,  pure  ex-
perience,^ the  only,  the  infallible  oracle  of  medicine.


* I do  not  mean  that  sort  of  experience  of  which  the  ordinary
practitioners  of  the  old  school  boast,  after  they  have  for  years  worked
away  with  a heap  of  complicated  prescriptions  at  a number  of
diseases  which  they  never  carefully  investigated,  but  which,  faithful
to  the  tenets  of  their  school,  they  considered  as  already  described  in
systematic  pathology,  and  dreamed  that  they  could  perceive  in  them
some  imaginary  morbific  matter,  or  ascribed  to  them  some  other  hypo-
thetical, internal  abnormal  circumstance.  They  always  saw  something-
in  them,  but  knew  not  what  it  was  they  saw,  and  they  got  results.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


125


teaches  us,  that  actually  that  medicine,  which,  in  its
action  on  the  healthy  human  body,  has  demonstrated
its  power  of  producing  the  greatest  number  of  symp-
toms similar  to  those  observable  in  the  case  of  disease
under  treatment,  does  also,  in  doses  of  suitable  potency
and  attenuation,  rapidly,  radically  and  permanently
remove  the  collective  symptoms  of  this  morbid  state,
that  is  (§  vi — xvi),  the  whole  disease  present,  and
change  it  into  health,  and  that  all  medicines  cure
those  diseases  whose  symptoms  most  nearly  resemble
their  own,  without  exception,  and  leave  none  of  them
uncured.

§ XXVI.

This  depends  on  the  following  homoeopathic  law  of
nature,  some  vague  presentiment  of  which  has  indeed
occasionally  been  entertained,  but  which,  until  now,
has  not  been  acknowledged,  and  on  which  depends
every  real  cure  that  has  ever  taken  place :

A weaker  dynamic  affection  is  permanently  extin-
guished in  the  living  organism  ly  a stronger  one^  if  the
latter  ( whilst  differing  in  kind ) is  similar  to  the  former
in  its  manifestations}


from  theii'  complex  forces  acting  on  an  unknown  object,  that  no
human  being,  but  only  a God,  could  have  unriddled — ^results  from
which  nothing  can  be  learned,  no  experience  gained.  Fifty  years’
experience  of  this  sort  is  like  fifty  years  of  looking  into  a kalei-
doscope filled  with  unknown  gaudy  objects,  and  perpetually  turning
round ; thousands  of  ever-changing  figures,  and  no  clue  gained  to
enable  us  to  determine  what  appearance  future  changes  wiU  assume  !

’ Thus  are  cured  both  physical  affections  and  moral  maladies.


126


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ XXVII.

The  curative  power  of  medicines,  therefore,  depends
on  their  symptoms,  similar  to  the  disease  but  superior
to  it  in  strength  (§  xii — xxvi),  so  that  each  individual
case  of  disease  is  most  certainly,  radically,  rapidly  and
permanently  annihilated  and  destroyed,  only  by  a


How  is  it  that  in  the  early  dawn  the  brilliant  Jupiter  vanishes  from
the  gaze  of  the  beholder  ? By  a stronger  very  similar  power  acting
on  his  optic  nerve,  the  brightness  of  approaching  day ! — In  situations
replete  with  foetid  odours,  wherewith  is  it  usual  to  soothe  etfectually
the  offended  olfactory  nerves  ? With  snuff,  that  affects  the  sense  of
smell  in  a similar,  but  stronger  manner ! No  music,  no  sugared
cake,  which  act  on  the  nerves  of  other  senses,  can  cure  this  nausea
caused  by  the  disgusting  odour. — How  does  the  warrior  cuimingly
banish  the  piteous  cries  of  him  who  runs  the  gauntlet,  from  the  ears
of  the  compassionate  bystanders  ? By  the  shrill  notes  of  the  fife,
commingled  with  the  roll  of  the  noisy  drum  ! And  the  distant  roar
of  the  enemy’s  cannon,  that  inspires  his  army  with  fear  ? By  the
mimic  thunder  of  the  big  drum  ! For  neither  the  one  nor  the  other
would  the  distribution  of  a brilliant  piece  of  uniform,  nor  a reprimand
to  the  regiment  suffice. — In  hke  manner,  mourning  and  sorrow  will  be
effaced  from  the  mind,  by  the  account  of  another  and  still  greater
cause  for  sorrow  happening  to  another,  even  though  it  be  a mere
fiction.  The  injurious  consequences  of  too  great  joy,  will  be  re-
moved by  drinking  coffee,  which  produces  an  excessively  joyous
state  of  mind. — Nations,  like  the  Germans,  who  have  for  centuries
been  gradually  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  in  soulless  apathy  and
degrading  serfdom,  must  first  be  trodden  stQl  deeper  in  the  dust  by
the  Western  Conqueror,  until  their  situation  became  intolerable  ;
their  mean  opinion  of  themselves  was  thereby  overstrained  and
removed;  they  again  became  alive  to  their  dignity  as  men,  and  then,
for  the  first  time,  they  raised  their  heads  as  Germans.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


127


medicine  capable  of  exciting  (in  the  health  of  a
human  being)  in  the  most  similar  and  complete
manner,  the  totality  of  its  symptoms,  which  at  the
same  time  are  stronger  than  the  disease.

§ XXVIII.

As  this  therapeutic  law  of  nature  is  verified  by
every  pure  experiment  and  every  true  observation  in
the  world,  and  the  fact  is  consequently  established,
it  matters  little  respecting  the  scientific  explanation
of  the  manner  in  which  it  takes  place;  and  I do  not
attach  much  importance  to  the  attempts  made  to
explain  it.  The  following,  however,  seems  to  be
the  most  probable  view,  as  its  premises  all  rest  on
experience.

§ XXIX.

As  every  disease  ( not  strictly  surgical ) depends  only
on  a peculiar  morhid  derangement  of  our  vital  force  in
sensations  and  functions,  when  a homoeopathic  cure  of
the  vital  force  deranged  hy  the  natural  disease  is  accom-
plished hy  the  administration  of  a medicinal  potency
selected  on  account  of  an  accurate  similarity  of  symptoms,
a somewhat  stronger  hut  similar,  artificial  morhid  affection
is  h'ought  into  contact  with,  and  as  it  were,  pushed  into
the  place  of  the  weaker,  similar,  natural  morhid  irritation,
against  which,  the  instinctive  vital  force  now  merely
( though  in  a stronger  degree ) medicinally  diseased,  is
then  compelled  to  direct  an  increased  amount  of  energy.


128


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


hut,  on  account  of  the  shorter  duration  of  the  action^  of  the
medicinal  potency  that  now  morbidly  affects  it,  the  vital
force  soon  overcomes  this,  and  as  it  was  in  the  first
instance  relieved  from  the  material  morbid  affection,  so
it  is  now  at  last  freed  from  the  artificial  ( the  medicinal )
one,  and  hence  is  enabled  again  to  carry  on  healthily
the  vital  operations  of  the  organism.^  This  highly
probable  explanation  of  the  process  rests  on  the
following  axioms.


^ The  short  duration  of  the  action  of  the  potencies  that  excite
artificial  diseases,  which  we  term  medicines,  makes  it  possible,
that,  although  they  are  at  the  same  time  stronger  than  the  natinral
disease,  they  can  yet  he  much  more  easily  overcome  by  the  vital
force,  than  can  the  Aveaker  natural  diseases,  which,  solely  in  conse-
quence of  the  longer,  generally  life-long,  duration  of  their  action
(psora,  syphilis,  sycosis),  can  never  be  vanquished  and  extinguished
by  it  alone,  until  the  physician  affects  the  vital  force  in  a stronger
manner  by  a potency  that  produces  a disease  very  similar,  hut
stronger,  to  wit,  a homoeopathic  medicine,  which,  when  given  (or
smelt),  is,  as  it  were,  forced  upon  the  unconscious,  instinctive  vital
force,  and  substituted  in  the  place  of  the  former  natural  morbid
affection,  by  which  means  the  vital  force  then  remains  merely  medi-
cinally ill,  but  only  for  a short  time,  because  the  action  of  the
medicine  (the  time  in  Avhich  the  medicinal  disease  excited  by  it  runs
its  course)  does  not  last  long.  The  cures  of  diseases  of  many  years’
duration  (§  xlvi),  by  the  occm'rence  of  small-pox  and  measles  (both
of  which  run  a course  of  only  a few  Aveeks),  are  processes  of  a
similar  character.

^ [Some  years  later,  Hahnemann  thought  fit  to  offer  a difierent
explanation  of  the  mode  in  which  the  homoeopathic  remedy  effects
the  cure  of  a disease,  which  would  .have  probably  been  the  one  he
would  have  adopted,  had  he  lived  to  publish  another  edition  of  this
Avork,  and  Avhich  I think  it  right  to  insert  in  this  place,  not  because  the


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


129


§ XXX.

The  human  body  appears  to  admit  of  being  much
more  powerfully  affected  in  its  health  by  medicines
(partly  because  we  have  the  regulation  of  the  dose  in
our  own  power),  than  by  natural  morbific  irritations
— ^for  natural  diseases  are  cured  and  overcome  by
suitable  medicines.


truth  of  the  grand  therapeutic  axiom  we  owe  to  his  genius,  can  be  at
all  affected  by  the  validity  of  his  explanation  of  it,  hut  in  order  that
the  reader  may  have  the  very  latest  ideas  of  the  illustrious  founder  of
homoeopathy  on  the  subject.

“ It  is  xmdeniable,”  says  he,  “ that  om’  vital  force  is  unable,
without  the  assistance  of  true  curative  agents,  administered  by
human  skill,  to  combat  even  inconsiderable  acute  diseases  (if  even  it
do  not  succumb  to  them),  and  to  re-estabhsh  a sort  of  health,  without
sacrificing  a portion  (often  a large  portion)  of  the  fluid  and  solid
parts  of  the  organism,  as  I have  elsewhere  (vide  antea.  Introduction,
p.  28)  shewn.  How  it  affects  this,  will  remain  forever  unknown  to
us ; so  much,  however,  is  certain,  that  it  cannot  overcome  even  these
diseases  in  a direct  manner,  nor  without  such  sacrifices.  The  chronic
diseases  of  miasmatic  origin,  it  cannot  cure  by  itself,  even  Avith  such
losses,  and  restore  real  health.  But  equally  certain  is  it,  that  when,
by  the  true  (homoeopathic)  healing  art,  guided  by  human  wisdom,  it
is  put  in  a position  to  overpower  and  to  subdue  (to  cure)  diseases
with  Avhich  it  is  attacked,  as  well  those  of  an  acute  as  those  of  a
chronic  miasmatic  character,  directly  and  without  such  sacrifices,
without  loss  to  the  organism  and  to  life,  it  is  always  the  vital  force
that  conquers,  just  as  the  native  army  which  drives  the  enemy  out
of  the  country  must  be  called  the  conqueror,  although  it  was  assisted
by  foreign  auxiliary  troops.  It  is  the  organic  vital  force  of  our
bodies  which  itself  cures  natural  diseases  of  all  kinds,  in  a direct
manner  and  without  such  sacrifices,  Avhenever,  by  means  of  the


K


130


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ XXXI.

The  inimical  potencies,  partly  psychical,  partly
physical,  to  which  our  terrestrial  existence  is  exposed,
which  are  termed  morbid  noxious  agents,  do  not


proper  (homoeopathic)  medicines,  it  is  placed  in  a position  to  con-
quer, which  indeed  it  never  could  do  without  the  auxiliaiy  power,
without  this  aid  ; for  our  organic  vital  force,  by  itself,  only  suffices
to  preserve  the  vital  operations  in  their  good  order  as  long  as  the
individual  is  not  morbidly  deranged  by  the  inimical  influence  of
morbific  potencies.

“ By  itself,  it  is  not  a match  for  the  latter ; it  opposes  them  with
a power  scarcely  equal  to  that  which  the  inimical  influence  exerts
upon  it,  and  that  with  various  indications  of  sufiering  on  its  own
part  (which  we  term  symptoms  of  disease),  but  by  its  own  power  it
could  never  overcome  the  chronic-disease  enemy,  as  it  cannot  conquer
even  acute  diseases  without  considerable  loss  of  portions  of  the
organism,  if  it  were  to  remain  without  assistance  from  without,  by
means  of  real  remedial  aid,  to  furnish  which,  the  Preseiwer  of  human
life  has  commissioned  the  intelligent  physician.

“ With  a scarcely  equal  opposing  power,  I repeat,  the  vital  force
advances  against  the  hostile  disease,  and  yet  no  enemy  can  be  over-
come, except  by  a superior  power.

“ The  homoeopathic  medicine  alone  can  supply  the  vital  principle
with  this  superior  power.

“ Of  itself,  this  principle  that  animates  us,  this  vital  force,  merely
organic,  only  designed  for  maintaining  undisturbed  health,  opposes
to  the  advancing  hostile  disease,  only  a weak  resistance,  and  as  the
disease  progresses  and  increases  in  intensity,  a greater  resistance,
but  (at  best)  one  that  is  only  equal  to  the  hostile  attack,  in  delicate
patients  not  even  equal,  often  only  weaker ; for  offering  an  over-
powering, an  unhurtful  opposition,  it  is  not  capable,  not  intended,
not  created.

“ But  if,  by  means  of  the  action  upon  it  by  homoeopathic  medi-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


131


possess  the  power  of  morbidly  deranging  the  health
of  man  unconditionally;’^  but  we  are  made  ill  by
them  only  when  our  organism  is  sufficiently  dis-


cines,  we  physicians  can  represent  and  oppose  to  this  instinctive
vital  force,  its  enemy  the  disease,  as  it  were,  increased  — how-
ever little  increased  — and  if  in  this  manner  we  magnify  to  the
perception  of  the  vital  principle,  the  picture  of  its  enemy  the
disease,  by  homoeopathic  medicines  that  produce  an  imitation  of  the
original  disease  of  illusive  resemblance  to  it,  we  thereby,  by  degrees,
cause  and  compel  this  instinctive  vital  force,  gradually  to  increase  its
energy,  and  to  go  on  always  increasing  it  more  and  more,  rmtil  at
length  it  becomes  much  stronger  than  the  original  disease  was,  so
that  it  can  again  become  the  autocrat  in  its  own  organism,  can  agam
take  the  reins,  and  dii’ect  the  organism  on  the  way  to  health,  whilst
in  the  mean  time,  the  apparent  increase  of  the  disease,  produced  by
the  homoeopathic  medicines,  disappears  spontaneously,  whereon  we,
witnessing  the  re-established  preponderance  of  the  vital  power,  that
is  to  say,  the  re-established  health,  cease  to  administer  these
remedies.

“ Incredibly  great  is  the  fund  of  the  sphitual  vital  principle  im-
parted to  man  by  the  infinitely  benevolent  Creator,  if  we  physicians
did  hut  know  how  to  keep  it  right  in  days  of  health  by  a properly
regulated  wholesome  regimen,  and  in  diseases  to  summon  it  forth,
and  stimulate  it  up  to  the  proper  mark  by  pm-e  homoeopathic  treat-
ment.” {J)ie  chronischen  Krankeiten,  second  edition,  Pt.  IV.  p.  iv.
Diisseldorf,  1838.)]

' When  I call  disease  a derangement  of  man’s  state  of  health,  I
am  far  from  wishing  thereby  to  give  a hyperphysical  explanation  of
the  internal  nature  of  diseases  generally,  or  of  any  case  of  disease  in
particular.  It  is  only  intended  by  this  expression  to  intimate,  what
it  can  be  proved  diseases  are  not  and  cannot  he,  that  they  are  not
mechanical  or  chemical  alterations  of  the  material  substance  of  the
body,  and  not  dependent  on  a material  morbific  principle — hut  that
they  are  merely  spiritual  dynamic  derangements  of  the  life.

K 2


132


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


posed  and  susceptible  to  the  attack  of  the  morbific
cause  that  may  be  present,  and  to  be  altered  in  its
health,  deranged  and  made  to  undergo  abnormal  sen-
sations and  functions — Whence  they  do  not  produce
disease  in  every  one,  nor  at  all  times.

§ XXXII.

But  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  artificial  morbific
potencies,  which  we  term  medicines.  Every  real
medicine,  namely,  acts  at  all  times,  under  all  circum-
stances, on  every  living  human  being,  and  produces
in  him  the  symptoms  peculiar  to  it  (distinctly  percep-
tible, if  the  dose  be  large  enough),  so  that,  evidently,
every  living  human  organism  is  liable  to  be  affected,
and,  as  it  were,  inoculated  with  the  medicinal  disease
at  any  time,  and  absolutely  (^unconditionally),  which,
as  before  said,  is  by  no  means  the  case  with  the
natural  diseases.


§ XXXIII.

In  accordance  with  this  fact,  it  is  undeniably  shewn
by  all  experience,^  that  the  living  human  organism  is


^ A striking  fact  in  corroboration  of  this  is,  that  previously  to  the
year  1801,  when  the  smooth  scarlatina  of  Sydenham  still  prevailed
epidemically  among  children,  and  attacked,  without  exception,  all
children  who  had  escaped  it  in  a former  epidemic;  in  a similar
epidemic  which  I witnessed  in  Konigslutter,  on  the  contrary,  all  the
children  who  took  in  time  a very  small  dose  of  belladonna,  remained
unaffected  by  this  highly  infectious  infantile  disease.  If  medicines
can  protect  from  a disease  that  is  raging  around,  they  must  possess
a vastly  superior  power  of  affecting  our  vital  force.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


133


much  more  disposed,  and  has  a greater  tendency  to
be  excited,  and  to  have  its  health  deranged  by
medicinal  powers,  than  by  morbific  noxious  agencies
and  infectious  miasms,  or  in  other  words,  that  the
morbific  noxious  agencies  possess  a power  of  morbidly
deranging  man's  health  that  is  subordinate  and  condi-
tional^ often  very  conditional,  whilst  medicinal  potencies
have  an  absolute  unconditional  power,  greatly  superior
to  the  former.


§ XXXIV.

The  greater  strength  of  the  artificial  diseases  pro-
ducible by  medicines,  is,  however,  not  the  sole  cause
of  their  power  to  cure  natural  diseases.  In  order
that  they  may  effect  a cure,  it  is  before  all  things
requisite  that  they  should  be  capable  of  producing  in
the  human  body  an  artificial  disease  as  similar  as
possible  to  the  disease  to  be  cured,  in  order,  by  means
of  this  similarity,  conjoined  with  the  somewhat  greater
strength,  to  substitute  themselves  for  the  natural
morbid  affection,  and  thereby  deprive  the  latter  of  aU
influence  upon  the  vital  force.  This  is  so  true,  that
no  previously  existing  disease  can  be  cured,  even  by
nature  herself,  by  the  accession  of  a new  dissimilar
disease,  be  it  ever  so  strong,  and  just  as  little  can  it
be  cured  by  medical  treatment  with  drugs  which  are
incapable  of  producing  a similar  morbid  condition  in
the  healthy  body.


134


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ XXXV.

In  order  to  illustrate  this,  we  shall  consider  in  three
different  cases,  as  well  what  happens  in  nature  when
two  dissimilar  natural  diseases  meet  together  in  one
person,  as  also  the  result  of  the  ordinary  medical
treatment  of  diseases  with  unsuitable  allopathic  drugs,
which  are  incapable  of  producing  an  artificial  morbid
condition  similar  to  the  disease  to  be  cured,  whereby
it  will  appear  that  even  nature  is  unable  to  remove
a dissimilar  disease  already  present  by  one  that  is
unhomcEopathic,  even  though  it  be  stronger,  and  as
little  is  the  unhomoeopathic  employment  of  even
the  strongest  medicines  ever  capable  of  curing  any
disease  whatsoever.

§ XXXVI.

I. — If  the  two  dissimilar  diseases  meeting  together
in  the  human  being,  be  of  equal  strength,  or  still  more
if  the  older  one  he  the  stronger^  the  new  disease  will  be
repelled  by  the  old  one  from  the  body  and  not  allowed
to  affect  it.  A patient  suffering  from  a severe  chronic
disease  Avill  not  be  infected  by  a moderate  autumnal
dysentery  or  other  epidemic. — The  plague  of  the
Levant,  according  to  Larrey,^  does  not  break  out
where  scurvy  is  prevalent,  and  persons  suffering  from
herpetic  eruptions  are  not  infected  by  it.  Rachitis,
Jenner  alleges,  prevents  vaccination  from  taldng  effect.


Memoires  et  Observations,  in  the  Description  de  I’Egypte.  Tom.  i.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


135


Those  suffering  from  pulmonary  consumption  are  not
liable  to  be  attacked  by  epidemic  fevers  of  a not  very
violent  character,  according  to  Von  Hildenbrand.

§ XXXVII.

And  in  like  manner,  under  ordinary  medical  treat-
ment, an  old  chronic  disease  remains  uncured  and  as
it  was,  if  it  is  treated  not  violently  according  to  the
common  allopathic  method,  that  is,  with  medicines
that  are  incapable  of  producing  in  healthy  individuals
a state  of  health  similar  to  the  disease,  even  though
the  treatment  should  last  for  years.  This  is  daily
witnessed  in  practice,  it  is  therefore  unnecessary  to
give  any  illustrative  examples.

§ XXXVIII.

II. — Or  the  new  dissimilar  disease  is  the  stronger.
In  this  case  the  disease  under  which  the  patient
originally  laboured,  will,  as  the  weaker,  be  kept  back
and  suspended  by  the  accession  of  the  stronger  one,
until  the  latter  shall  have  run  its  course  or  been
cured,  and  then  the  old  one  again  makes  it  appearance,
uncured.  Two  children  affected  with  a kind  of  epilepsy
remained  free  from  epileptic  attacks  after  infection
with  ring-worm  (tinea);  but  as  soon  as  the  eruption
on  the  head  was  gone,  the  epilepsy  returned  just  as
before,  as  Tulpius^  observed.  The  itch,  as  Schopf^


^ Obs.,  lib.  i.  obs.  8.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xv.  II.


136


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


saw,  disappeared  on  the  occurrence  of  the  scurvy,  hut
after  the  cure  of  the  latter  it  again  broke  out.  So
also  the  pulmonary  phthisis  remained  stationary,
when  the  patient  was  attacked  by  a violent  typhus,
hut  went  on  again  after  the  latter  had  run  its  course.^
If  mania  occur  in  a consumptive  patient,  the  phthisis
with  all  its  symptoms  is  removed  by  the  former,
but  if  that  go  off,  the  phthisis  returns  immediately
and  proves  fatal.^  When  measles  and  small-pox  are
prevalent  at  the  same  time,  and  both  attack  the  same
child,  the  measles  that  had  already  broken  out  are
generally  checked  by  the  small-pox  that  came  some-
what later;  nor  do  the  measles  resume  their  course
until  after  the  cure  of  the  small-pox ; but  it  not
unfrequently  happens  that  the  inoculated  small-pox
is  suspended  for  four  days  by  the  supervention  of  the
measles,  as  observed  by  Manget,^  after  the  desquama-
tion of  which,  the  small-pox  completes  its  course.
Even  when  the  inoculation  of  the  small-pox  had  taken
effect  for  six  days,  and  the  measles  then  broke  out,
the  inflammation  of  the  inoculation  remained  sta-
tionary, and  the  small-pox  did  not  ensue  until  the
measles  had  completed  their  regular  course  of  seven


* Chevaliei",  in  Hufeland’s  neuesten  Aiinalen  der  franzdsischen
Heilkunde,  ii.  p.  192.

^ Mania  phthisi  superveniens  earn  cum  omnibus  suis  phsenomenis
auffert,  verum  mox  redit  phthisis  et  occidit,  abeunte  mania.  Reil,
Memorah.  Fasc.  iii.  v.  p.  171.

* In  the  Edinb.  Med.  Comment.,  Pt.  I.  i.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


137


days.^  In  an  epidemic  of  measles,  that  disease  attacked
many  individuals  on  the  fourth  or  fifth  day  after  the
inoculation  of  small-pox,  and  prevented  the  develop-
ment of  the  small-pox,  until  it  had  completed  its  own
course,  whereupon  the  small-pox  ensued  and  pro-
ceeded regularly  to  its  termination.^  The  true,  smooth,
erysipelatous-looking  scarlatina  of  Sydenham,^  with
sore-throat,  was  checked  on  the  fourth  day  by  the  occur-
rence of  cow-pox,  which  ran  its  regular  course,  and  not
till  it  was  ended  did  the  scarlatina  again  appear;  but  on
another  occasion,  as  both  diseases  seem  to  be  of  equal
strength,  the  cow-pox  was  suspended  on  the  eighth
day  by  the  supervention  of  the  true,  smooth  scarlatina
of  Sydenham,  and  the  red  areola  of  the  former  dis-
appeared, until  the  scarlatina  was  gone,  whereon  the
cow-pox  immediately  resumed  its  course,  and  went  on
to  its  regular  termination.^  The  measles  suspended
the  cow-pox:  on  the  eighth  day,  when  the  cow-pox
had  nearly  attained  its  climax,  the  measles  broke
out,  the  cow-pox  now  remained  stationary,  and  did
not  resume  and  complete  its  course  until  the  des-
quamation of  the  measles  had  taken  place,  so  that


' John  Hunter,  On  the  Venereal  Disease,  p.  3.

^ Rainey,  in  the  Edinh.  Med.  Comment.,  iii.  p.  480.

^ Very  accurately  described  by  Withering  and  Plenciz,  but  differing
greatly  from  the  purpura  (or  Roodvonk),  which  is  often  erroneously
denominated  scarlet  fever.  It  is  only  of  late  years  that  the  two,
which  were  originally  very  different  diseases,  have  come  to  resemble
each  other  in  them  symptoms.

‘ Jenner,  in  Medicmische  Aimalen,  1800.  August,  p.  747.


138


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


on  the  seventeenth  day  it  presented  the  appearance
it  otherwise  would  have  shewn  on  the  tenth  day,  as
Kortum  observed.^

Even  after  the  measles  had  broken  out,  the  cow-
pox  inoculation  took  elFect,  but  did  not  run  its  course
until  the  measles  were  gone,  as  Kortum  likewise
witnessed.^

I myself  saw  the  mumps  [angina  parotidea)  imme-
diately disappear  when  the  cow-pox  inoculation  had
taken  effect  and  had  nearly  attained  its  height;  it
was  not  until  the  complete  termination  of  the  cow-
pox,  and  the  disappearance  of  its  red  areola,  that  this
febrile  parotid  and  submaxillary  glandular  swelling
that  is  caused  by  a peculiar  miasm,  reappeared  and
completed  its  regular  course  of  seven  days.

And  thus  it  is  with  all  dissimilar  diseases,  the  stronger
suspends  the  weaker  (when  they  do  not  become  com-
plicated with  each  other,  which  is  seldom  the  case
with  acute  diseases),  hut  the  one  never  cures  the  other,

§ XXXIX.

Now  the  adherents  of  the  ordinary  school  of  medi-
cine saw  all  this  for  so  many  centuries ; they  saw  that
nature  herself  could  not  cure  any  disease  by  the
accession  of  another,  he  it  ever  so  strong,  if  the  new
disease  he  dissimilar  to  that  already  present  in  the
body.  What  shall  we  think  of  them,  that  they


' In  Hufeland’s  Journal  der  practischen  Arzneikunde,  xx.  III.  p.  50.
^ Loc.  cit.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


139


nevertheless  went  on  treating  chronic  diseases  with
allopathic  appliances,  namely,  with  medicines  and
prescriptions  capable  of  producing,  God  knows  what
morbid  state — almost  invariably,  however,  one  dis-
similar to  the  disease  to  he  cured  ? And  even  though
physicians  did  not  hitherto  observe  nature  attentively,
the  miserable  results  of  their  treatment  should  have
taught  them  that  they  were  pursuing  a false  path,
that  could  not  lead  to  the  end  desired.  Did  they
not  perceive  when  they  employed,  as  was  their
custom,  an  aggressive,  allopathic  treatment  in  a
chronic  disease,  that  thereby  they  only  created  an
artificial  disease  dissimilar  to  the  original  one,  which,
as  long  as  it  was  kept  up,  merely  held  in  abeyance,
merely  suppressed,  merely  suspended  the  original
disease,  which  latter,  however,  always  returned,  and
must  return,  as  soon  as  the  diminished  strength
of  the  patient  no  longer  admitted  of  a continuance
of  the  allopathic  attacks  on  the  life  1 Thus  the
itch  exanthema  certainly  disappears  very  soon  from
the  skin,  under  the  employment  of  violent  purga-
tives, frequently  repeated ; but  when  the  patient  can
no  longer  stand  the  factitious  (^dissimilar)  disease  of
the  bowels,  and  can  take  no  more  purgatives,  then,
either  the  cutaneous  eruption  breaks  out  as  before,
or  the  internal  psora  displays  itself  in  some  bad
symptom,  and  the  patient,  in  addition  to  his  undi-
minished, original  disease,  has  to  endure  the  misery
of  a ruined  digestion  and  impaired  strength  to  boot.
So  also,  when  the  ordinary  physicians  keep  up  arti-


140


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


ficial  ulcerations  of  the  skin  and  issues  on  the  exterior
of  the  body,  with  the  view  of  thereby  eradicating  a
chronic  disease,  they  can  never  attain  their  object
by  so  doing,  they  can  never  cure  them  by  that  means,
as  such  artificial  cutaneous  ulcers  are  quite  alien  and
allopathic  to  the  internal  afiection ; but  inasmuch  as
the  irritation  produced  by  several  issues  is,  at  least
sometimes,  a stronger  [dissimilar)  disease  than  the
in-dwelling  malady,  the  latter  is  thereby  sometimes
silenced  and  suspended  for  a week  or  two.  But  it  is
only  suspended,  and  that  for  a very  short  time,  and
whilst  the  patient  is  thereby  gradually  enervated.
Epilepsy,  suppressed  for  many  years  by  means  of  issues,
invariably  recurred,  and  in  an  aggravated  form,  when
they  were  allowed  to  heal  up,  as  Pechlin^  and  others
testify.  But  purgatives  for  itch,  and  issues  for  epilepsy,
cannot  be  more  heterogeneous,  more  dissimilar  deran-
ging potencies — cannot  be  more  allopathic,  more
aggressive  remedial  agents — than  are  the  ordinary
prescriptions,  composed  of  unknown  ingredients,  used
in  ordinary  practice  for  the  other  nameless,  innume-
rable forms  of  disease.  These  likewise  do  nothing  but
debilitate,  and  only  suppress  or  suspend  the  malady
for  a short  time  without  being  able  to  cure  it,  and
when  used  for  a long  time  always  add  a new  morbid
state  to  the  old  disease.


* Obs.  phys.  med.,  lib.  2,  obs.  30.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


141


§XL.

III. — Or  the  new  disease,  after  having  long  acted
on  the  organism,  at  length  joins  the  old  one  that  is
dissimilar  to  it,  and  forms  with  it  a com'plex  disease,
so  that  each  of  them  occupies  a particular  locality  in
the  organism,  namely,  the  organs  peculiarly  adapted
for  it,  and  as  it  were,  the  place  specially  belonging  to
it,  whilst  it  leaves  the  rest  to  the  other  disease  that  is
dissimilar  to  it.  Thus  a syphilitic  patient  may  be-
come affected  with  scabies,  and  vice  versa.  As  two
diseases  dissimilar  to  each  other,  they  cannot  remove,
cannot  cure  one  another.  At  first  the  venereal  symp-
toms are  kept  in  abeyance  and  suspended,  when  the  _
scabious  eruption  begins  to  appear ; in  course  of  time,
however,  (as  the  syphilis  is  at  least  as  strong  as  the
itch)  the  two  join  together,’  that  is,  each  involves
those  parts  of  the  organism  only  which  are  adapted
for  it,  and  the  patient  is  thereby  rendered  more
diseased  and  more  difficult  to  cure.

When  two  dissimilar  acute  infectious  diseases  meet,
as,  for  example,  small-pox  and  measles,  the  one
usually  suspends  the  other,  as  has  been  before  ob-


^ From  careful  experiments  and  cases  of  complex  diseases  of  this
kind,  I am  now  fii-mly  convinced  that  no  real  amalgamation  of  the
two  takes  place,  hut  that  in  such  cases  the  one  exists  in  the  organism
heside  the  other  only,  each  in  the  parts  that  are  adapted  for  it,  and
their  cure  will  he  best  effected  by  a judicious  alternation  of  the  best
mercurial  preparation,  with  the  remedies  specific  for  the  itch,  each
given  in  the  most  suitable  dose  and  form.


142


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


served;  yet  there  have  also  been  severe  epidemic
diseases  .of  this  kind,  where,  in  rare  cases,  two  dis-
similar acute  diseases  occurred  simultaneously  in  one
and  the  same  body,  and  for  a short  time  combined,
as  it  were,  with  each  other.  During  an  epidemic,  in
which  small-pox  and  measles  were  prevalent  at  the
same  time,  among  three  hundred  cases  (in  which
these  diseases  avoided  or  suspended  one  another,  and
the  measles  attacked  patients  twenty  days  after  the
small-pox  broke  out,  the  small-pox,  however,  from
seventeen  to  eighteen  days  after  the  appearance  of
the  measles,  so  that  the  first  disease  had  previously
completed  its  regular  course,)  there  was  yet  one
single  case  in  which  P.  RusselP  met  with  both  these
dissimilar  diseases  in  one  person  at  the  same  time.
Rainey®  witnessed  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of
small-pox  and  measles  in  two  girls.  J.  Maurice,^  in
his  whole  practice  only  observed  two  such  cases.
Similar  cases  are  to  be  found  in  Ettmiiller’s^  works,
and  in  the  writings  of  a few  others.

Zencker^  saw  cow-pox  run  its  regular  course  along
with  measles  and  along  with  purpura.

The  cow-pox  went  on  its  course  undisturbed  during
a mercurial  treatment  for  syphilis,  as  Jenner  saw.


‘ Vide  Transactions  of  a Society  for  the  Improvement  of  Med.  and
Chir.  Knowledge,  ii.

^ In  the  Edinb.  med.  comment.,  iii.  p.  480.

® In  Med.  and  Phys.  Joiirn.  1805.

* Operiv,  ii.  P.  I.  cap.  10.

* In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xvii.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


143


§ XLL

Much  more  frequent  than  the  complex  diseases
resulting  from  the  association  of  natural  diseases  in
the  same  body,  are  the  morbid  complications  result-
ing from  the  art  of  the  ordinary  practitioner,  which
the  inappropriate  medical  treatment  (the  allopathic
method)  is  in  the  habit  of  producing,  by  the  long
continued  employment  of  unsuitable  drugs.  To  the
natural  disease,  which  it  is  intended  to  cure,  there
are  then  added,  by  the  constant  repetition  of  the
inappropriate  medicinal  agent,  the  new,  often  very
tedious,  morbid  conditions,  which  might  be  antici-
pated from  the  peculiar  powers  of  the  drug;  these
gradually  coalesce  with,  and  complicate,  the  chronic
malady  which  is  dissimilar  to  them  (which  they  were
unable  to  cure  by  similarity  of  action,  that  is,  homoeo-
pathically),  adding  to  the  old  disease  a new,  dissimilar,
artificial  malady  of  a chronic  nature,  and  thus  give
the  patient  a double,  in  place  of  a single,  disease,  that
is  to  say,  render  him  much  worse,  and  more  dilRcult
to  cure,  often  quite  incurable.  Many  of  the  cases  in
which  medical  men  are  consulted,  and  which  are
recorded  in  their  journals,  as  also  other  histories  of
cases  detailed  in  medical  writings,  attest  the  truth  of
this.  Of  a similar  character  are  the  frequent  cases
in  which  the  venereal  chancrous  disease,  complicated
especially  with  psora,  or  even  with  the  dyscrasia  of
condylomatous  gonorrhoea,  is  not  cured  by  long  con-
tinued or  frequently  repeated  treatment  with  large


144


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


doses  of  unsuitable  mercurial  preparations,  but  as-
sumes its  place  in  the  organism  beside  the  chronic
mercurial  affection  ^ that  has  been  in  the  meantime
gradually  developed,  and  thus  along  with  it  often
forms  a hideous  monster  of  complicated  disease  (under
the  general  name  of  masked  venereal  disease),  which
then,  when  not  quite  incurable,  is  only  transformed
into  health  with  the  greatest  dithculty.

§ XLII.

Nature  herself  permits,  as  has  been  stated,  in  some
cases,  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of  two,  even  of
three,  natural  diseases  in  one  and  the  same  body.
This  complication,  however,  it  must  be  remarked,
happens  only  in  the  case  of  two  dissimilar  diseases,
which  by  the  eternal  laws  of  nature  do  not  destroy
each  other,  do  not  annihilate  and  cannot  cure  one
another,  but,  as  it  seems,  both  (or  all  three)  remain,
as  it  were,  separate  in  the  organism,  and  each
takes  possession  of  the  parts  and  systems  peculiarly
appropriate  to  it,  which,  on  account  of  the  want  of
resemblance  of  these  maladies  to  each  other,  can
very  well  happen  without  disparagement  to  the  unity
of  life.


* For  mercury,  besides  the  morbid  symptoms  ■which  by  virtue  of
similarity  can  cure  the  venereal  disease  homoeopathically,  has  among
its  effects  many  others,  unlike  those  of  syphilis,  "which,  if  it  be  em-
ployed in  large  doses,  cause  new  maladies  and  great  destruction  of
parts,  especially  in  the  complication  with  psora  that  is  so  frequent.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


145


§ XLIII.

Totally  different,  however,  is  the  result  when  two
similar  diseases  meet  together  in  the  organism,  that
is  to  say,  when  to  the  disease  already  present,  a
stronger,  similar  one  is  added.  In  such  cases  we  see
how  a cure  can  be  effected  by  the  operations  of  nature,
and  we  get  a lesson  as  to  how  we  ought  to  cure.

§ XLIV.

Two  diseases  thus  similar  to  each  other  can  neither
(as  is  asserted  of  dissimilar  diseases,  in  I),  repel
one  another,  nor  (as  has  been  shewn  of  dissimilar
diseases,  in  condition  II,)  suspend  one  another,  so
that  the  old  one  shall  return  after  the  new  one  has
run  its  course,  and  just  as  little  can  the  two  similar
diseases  (as  has  been  demonstrated  in  III,  respecting
dissimilar  affections)  exist  beside  each  other  in  the
organism,  or  together  form  a double  complex  disease.

§ XLV.

No!  invariably,  and  in  every  case,  do  two  diseases,
differing,  certainly,  in  kind,^  but  very  similar  in
their  phenomena  and  effects,  and  in  the  sufferings
and  symptoms  they  severally  produce,  annihilate  one
another,  whenever  they  meet  together  in  the  organism;
the  stronger  disease,  namely,  annihilates  the  weaker,
and  that  for  this  simple  reason,  because  the  stronger
morbific  potency,  when  it  appears,  does,  on  account  of


Vide  supra,  § xxvi — note.


L


146


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


its  similarity  of  action,  involve  exactly  the  same  parts
of  the  organism  that  were  hitherto  atfected  by  the
weaker  morbid  irritation,  which  consequently  can  no
longer  influence  the  system,  but  is  extinguished  or
(in  other  words)  because,  whenever  the  vital  force,
deranged  by  the  primary  disease,  is  attacked  by  the
new,  very  similar,  hut  stronger,  dynamic  morbiflc
potency,  it  therefore  remains  afiected  by  the  latter
alone,  whereby  the  former,  similar,  hut  weaker  disease
must,  as  a mere  dynamic  power  without  material
substratum,  cease  to  exercise  any  further  morbid
influence  on  the  vital  force,  consequently  it  must
cease  to  exist.

§ XLVI.

I might  adduce  many  examples  of  diseases  which,
in  the  course  of  nature,  have  been  homoeopathically
cured  by  other  diseases  with  similar  symptoms,  were
it  not  necessary,  as  my  object  is  to  speak  about
something  determinate  and  indubitable,  to  confine
attention  solely  to  those  (few)  diseases  which  are
invariably  the  same,  arise  from  a fixed  miasm,  and
hence  merit  a distinct  name.

Among  these  the  small-pox,  so  dreaded  on  account
of  the  great  number  and  severity  of  its  symptoms,  occu-
pies a prominent  position,  and  it  has  removed  and
cured  a number  of  afiiections  with  similar  symptoms.

' Just  as  the  image  of  the  lamp’s  flame  is  rapidly  overpowered
and  effaced  from  our  retina  hy  the  stronger  sunbeam  impinging  on
the  eye.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


147


How  frequently  does  small-pox  produce  violent
ophthalmia,  terminating  even  in  blindness ; and  see !
by  its  inoculation  Dezoteux^  cured  a chronic  oph-
thalmia permanently,  and  Leroy®  another.

An  amaurosis  of  two  years’  duration,  consequent
on  suppressed  tinea,  was  perfectly  cured  by  it,  accor-
ding to  Klein.®

How  often  does  not  small-pox  cause  deafness
and  dyspnoea!  And  both  these  chronic  diseases  it
removed  on  reaching  its  acme,  as  J.  Fr.  Gloss  ^ ob-
served.

Swelling  of  the  testicle,  even  of  a very  severe
character,  is  a frequent  symptom  of  small-pox,  and
on  this  account  it  was  enabled,  as  Klein®  observed,
to  cure,  by  virtue  of  similarity,  a large  hard  swelling
of  the  left  testicle,  that  had  arisen  from  a bruise.
And  another  observer®  saw  a similar  swelling  of  the
testicle  cured  by  it.

Among  the  troublesome  symptoms  of  small-pox
is  a dysenteric  state  of  the  bowels,  and  it  subdued,  as
Fr.  Wendt  ^ observed,  a case  of  dysentery,  as  a similar
morbific  potency.


^ Traite  de  I’inoculation,  p.  189.

^ Heilkunde  fiir  Mutter,  p.  384.

® Interpres  clinicus,  p.  293.

^ Neue  Heilart  der  Kinderpocken,  Ulm,  1769,  p.  68 ; and
Specim.,  obs.  No.  18.

® Op.  cit.

® Nov.  Act.  Nat.  cur.,  vol.  i.  obs.  22.

^ Nachricht  von  dem  Krankeninstitut  zu  Erlangen,  1783.

L 2


148


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


Small-pox  coming  on  after  vaccination,  as  well  on
account  of  its  greater  strength  as  its  great  similarity,
immediately  removes  entirely  the  cow-pox  homoeo-
pathically,  and  does  not  permit  it  to  come  to  maturity;
but  on  the  other  hand,  the  cow-pox  when  near  ma-
turity does,  on  account  of  its  great  similarity,  homceo-
pathically  diminish  very  much  the  supervening  small-
pox, and  make  it  much  milder,  as  Miihry^  and  many
others  testify.

The  inoculated  cow-pox,  whose  lymph,  besides
the  protective  matter,  contains  the  contagion  of  a
general  cutaneous  eruption  of  another  nature,  con-
sisting of  usually  small,  dry  (rarely  large,  pustular)
pimples,  resting  on  a small  red  areola,  frequently
conjoined  with  round  red  cutaneous  spots,  and  often
accompanied  by  the  most  violent  itching,  which  rash
appears  in  not  a few  children  several  days  before,
more  frequently,  however,  after  the  red  areola  of  the
cow-pock,  and  goes  off  in  a few  days,  leaving  behind
small,  red,  hard  spots  on  the  skin;  the  inoculated
cow-pox,  I say,  after  it  has  taken,  cures  perfectly  and
permanently,  in  a homoeopathic  manner,  by  the  simi-
larity of  this  accessory  miasm,  analogous  cutaneous
eruptions  of  children,  often  of  very  long  standing  and
of  a very  troublesome  character,  as  a number  of
observers^  bear  witness.


^ In  Robert  Willan  on  V accination.

^ Especially  Clavier,  Hurel,  and  Desormeaux,  in  the  Bulletin  des
sciences  medicales,  public  par  les  inembres  du  comite  central  de  la


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.  149

The  cow-pox,  a peculiar  symptom  of  which  is  to
cause  tumefaction  of  the  arm,^  cured,  after  it  broke
out,  a swollen  half-paralysed  arm.^

The  fever  accompanying  cow-pox,  which  occurs  at
the  time  of  the  production  of  the  red  areola,  cured
homceopathically  an  intermittent  fever  in  two  indi-
viduals, as  the  younger  Hardege®  reports,  confirming
what  J.  Hunter^  had  already  observed,  that  two  fevers
(similar  diseases)  cannot  co-exist  in  the  same  body.^


soc.  de  medecine  du  departement  de  I’Eure,  1808.  Also  in  the
Journal  de  medecine  continue,  vol.  xv.  p.  206.

^ Balhorn,  in  Hufeland’s  Journal,  x.  II.

* Stevenson,  in  Duncan’s  Annals  of  Medicine,  lustr.  II.  vol.  i.
pt.  II.  No.  9.

^ In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  xxiii.

* On  the  Venereal  Disease,  p.  4.

® The  examples  adduced  in  this  place,  in  the  former  editions  of  the
Organon  except  the  last,  of  chronic  maladies  cured  by  the  itch,  can,
according  to  the  discoveries  and  explanations  I have  given  in  the  first
part  of  my  book  on  Chronic  Diseases,  be  looked  upon  as  only  in  a cer-
tain degree  homoeopathic  cures.  The  great  mf^adies  which  thereby
disappeared  (sufibcative  asthma  and  pulmonary  phthisis  of  many
years’  standing)  were  themselves,  originally,  of  psoric  origin,  widely
spread,  life-threatening  symptoms  of  an  ancient  psora  that  had  been
fully  developed  in  the  interior  of  the  system,  which  was  again  trans-
formed into  the  simple  form  of  the  primitive  itch  disease,  by  the
cutaneous  eruption  resulting  from  the  new  infection  (as  always
happens  in  such  cases),  whereby  the  old  malady  and  the  dangerous
symptoms  were  made  to  disappear.  Such  a transformation  into  the
primitive  form  is  therefore  only  to  be  considered  as  a hommopathic
curative  agent  of  these  extensive  symptoms  of  highly  developed
psora,  in  so  far  as  the  new  infection  puts  the  patient  in  a much  more


150


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


The  measles  bears  a strong  resemblance  in  the
character  of  its  fever  and  cough  to  the  hooping-
cough,  and  hence  it  was  that  Bosquillon^  noticed  in
an  epidemic  where  both  these  affections  prevailed,  that
many  children  who  then  took  measles  remained  free
from  hooping-cough  during  that  epidemic.  They  would
all  have  been  protected  from,  and  rendered  incapable
of  being  infected  by,  the  hooping-cough  in  that  and  all
subsequent  epidemics,  by  the  measles,  if  the  hooping-
cough  were  not  a disease  that  has  only  a partial  simi-
larity to  the  measles,  that  is  to  say,  if  it  had  also  a
cutaneous  eruption  similar  to  what  the  latter  possesses.
As  it  is,  however,  the  measles  can  but  preserve  a large
number  from  hooping-cough,  and  that  only  in  the
epidemic  prevailing  at  the  time.

If,  however,  the  measles  come  in  contact  with  a
disease  resembling  it  in  its  chief  symptom,  the  erup-
tion, it  can  indisputably  remove,  and  effect  a homoeo-
pathic cure  of  the  latter.  Thus,  a chronic  herpetic
eruption  was  entirely  and  permanently  (homoeopathi-
cally)  cured  ® by  the  breaking  out  of  the  measles,  as
Kortum  ^ observed.  An  excessively  burning  miliary
rash  on  the  face,  neck,  and  arms,  that  had  lasted
six  years,  and  was  aggravated  by  every  change  of


favourable  condition  to  be  cui-ed  of  the  Avhole  psora,  by  antipsoric
medicines.

* Cullen’s  Elements  of  Practical  Medicine,  P.  II.  1 — 3,  ch.  vii.

^ Or  at  least  that  symptom  was  removed.

® In  Hufeland’s  Journal,  XX.  Hi.  p.  50.


OEGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


151


weather,  under  the  influence  of  measles,  assumed  the
form  of  a swelling  of  the  surface  of  the  skin ; after
the  measles  had  run  its  course,  the  rash  was  cured,
and  returned  no  more.^

§ XLVII.

Nothing  could  teach  the  physician  in  a plainer  and
more  convincing  manner  than  the  above,  what  kind
of  artificial  morbific  potency  (medicine)  he  ought  to
choose,  in  order  to  cure  in  a sure,  rapid,  and  perma-
nent manner,  agreeably  to  the  process  that  takes
place  in  nature.


§ XLVIII.

Neither  in  the  course  of  nature,  as  we  see  from
all  the  above  examples,  nor  by  the  physician’s  skill,
can  an  existing  affection  or  malady  in  any  one
instance  be  removed  by  a dissimilar  morbific  potency,
be  it  ever  so  strong,  hut  solely  hy  one  that  is  similar
in  symptoms,  and  is  somewhat  stronger,  according  to
eternal,  unchangeable  laws  of  nature,  which  have  not
hitherto  been  recognised.

§ XLIX.

We  should  have  been  able  to  meet  with  many
more  true,  natural  homoeopathic  cures  of  this  kind,
if,  on  the  one  hand,  the  attention  of  observers  had


* Rau,  iiber  d.  Werth  des  horn.  Heilv.  Heidelb.  1&24,  p.  36.


152


ORGANON  or  MEDICINE.


been  more  directed  to  them,  and,  on  the  other,
nature  had  not  been  so  deficient  in  homoeopathic
auxiliary  diseases.

§ L.

Mighty  nature  herself  has,  as  we  see,  at  her  com-
mand, as  instruments  for  effecting  homoeopathic  cures,
little  more  than  the  fixed  miasmatic  diseases,  (the
itch,)  measles,  and  smallpox,^  which,^  as  curative
agents,  are  either  more  dangerous  to  life  and  of  a
more  frightful  character  than  the  disease  they  are  to
cure,  or  of  such  a kind  (like  the  itch),  that  after  they
have  effected  the  cure,  they  themselves  require  curing,
in  order  to  be  eradicated  in  their  turn ; both  circum-
stances that  make  their  employment,  as  homoeopathic
remedial  agents,  difficult,  uncertain,  and  dangerous.
And  how  few  diseases  are  there,  to  which  man  is
subject,  that  find  their  analogous  remedial  agent  in
smallpox,  measles,  and  itch ! In  the  course  of  nature,
therefore,  but  few  maladies  can  be  cured  by  these  un-
certain and  hazardous  homoeopathic  remedial  agents,
and  the  cure  by  their  instrumentality  is  also  at-
tended with  danger  and  much  difficulty,  for  this
reason,  that  the  doses  of  these  morbific  powers  can
not  be  diminished  according  to  circumstances,  as
can  be  done  with  doses  of  medicine ; but  for  the  cure


* And  the  exanthematous  contagious  principle  present  in  the
cow-pox  lymph.

^ Namely,  smallpox  and  measles.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


153


of  a patient  atilicted  with  an  analogous  malady  of  long
standing,  he  must  be  subjected  to  the  entire  dan-
gerous and  troublesome  disease,  to  the  entire  small-
pox, measles  (and  itch)  disease.  And  yet,  as  is  seen,
we  can  point  to  some  beautiful  homoeopathic  cures,
effected  by  this  lucky  concurrence,  all  so  many  incon-
trovertible proofs  of  the  great,  the  sole  therapeutic
law  of  nature  that  obtains  in  them : Cure  hy  similarity
of  symptoms !

§ LI.

By  these  instances,  this  therapeutic  law  is  rendered
obvious  to  all  intelligent  minds,  and  they  are  amply
sufficient  for  this  end.  But  on  the  other  hand,  see
what  advantages  man  has  over  crude  nature  in  her
uncertain  operations!  How  many  thousands  more  of
morbific  potencies  has  not  man  at  his  disposal  for  his
suffering  fellow  mortals,  in  the  medicinal  substances
imiversally  distributed  throughout  creation ! In  them
he  has  producers  of  disease  of  all  possible  variety  of
action,  for  all  the  innumerable,  for  all  conceivable
and  inconceivable  natural  diseases,  to  which  they
can  render  homoeopathic  aid  — morbific  potencies
(medicinal  substances),  whose  power,  when  their
therapeutic  employment  is  completed,  being  overcome
by  the  vital  force,  disappears  spontaneously,  without
requiring  a second  course  of  treatment  for  its  extirpa-
tion, like  the  itch — artificial  morbific  potencies,  which
the  physician  can  attenuate,  subdivide,  and  dynamize,
almost  to  an  infinite  extent,  and  the  dose  of  which  he


154


ORGA.NON  OF  MEDICINE.


can  diminish  to  such  a degree,  that  they  shall  only
remain  the  least  degree  stronger  than  the  similar
natural  disease  they  are  intended  to  cure ; so  that,  in
this  incomparable  method  of  cure,  there  is  no  necessity
for  any  violent  attack  upon  the  organism,  even  for
the  eradication  of  an  ancient,  inveterate  disease;  this
method  of  cure  takes  place  with  only  a gentle,  un-
noticeable,  and  yet  often  rapid  transition  from  the
tormenting  natural  disease  to  the  desirable  state  of
permanent  health.

§

Surely  no  intelligent  physician,  after  these  ex-
amples, as  clear  as  daylight,  can  still  go  on  in  the  old,
ordinary  system  of  medicine,  attacking  the  body  in
its  least  diseased  parts  with  (allopathic)  medicines
that  have  no  direct,  pathological  (homoeopathic)  re-
lation to  the  disease  to  be  cured,  with  purgatives,
counter-irritants,  derivatives,  &c.,^  and  thus,  at  a
sacrifice  of  the  patient’s  strength,  inducing  a morbid
state  quite  heterogeneous  and  dissimilar  to  the  original
one,  to  the  ruin  of  his  constitution,  by  large  doses  of
mixtures  of  medicines  chiefly  of  unknown  qualities,
the  employment  of  which  can  have  no  other  result,
as  is  demonstrated  by  the  eternal  laws  of  nature  in
the  above,  and  all  other  cases  in  the  world,  in  which


’ Vide  supra  in  the  Introduction : “ A review  of  the  medication,
&c.;”  and  my  book,  “Die  Alldopathie,  ein  Wort  der  Warnung  fiir
Kranke  jeder  Art,”  Leipzig,  bei  Baumgartner.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


155


a disease  dissimilar  to  the  other  occurs  in  the  human
organism,  than  that  a cure  is  never  thereby  effected  in
diseases,  hut  an  aggravation  is  the  invariable  conse-
quence,— this  procedure,  therefore,  can  have  no  other
result,  than  that  either  (because,  according  to  the
process  of  nature  in  I,  the  older  disease  in  the  body
repels  the  dissimilar  one,  wherewith  the  patient  is
assailed)  the  natural  disease  remains  as  it  was,  under
mild  allopathic  treatment,  be  it  ever  so  long  con-
tinued, the  patient  being  thereby  weakened,  or
(because,  according  to  the  process  of  nature  in  II,
the  new  and  stronger  disease  merely  obscures  and
suspends  for  a short  time  the  original  weaker  dis-
similar one)  by  the  violent  attack  on  the  body  with
strong  allopathic  drugs,  the  original  disease  seems  to
yield  for  a time,  to  return  in,  at  least,  all  its  former
strength,  or  (because,  according  to  the  process  of
nature  in  III,  two  dissimilar  diseases,  when  both  are
of  a chronic  character  and  of  equal  strength,  take  up
a position  beside  one  another  in  the  organism  and
complicate  each  other)  in  those  cases  in  which  the
physician  employs  for  a long  time  morbific  potencies
opposite  and  dissimilar  to  the  natural  chronic  disease,
and  allopathic  medicines  in  large  doses,  such  allopa-
thic treatment,  without  ever  being  able  to  remove
and  to  cure  the  original  (dissimilar)  chronic  disease,
only  developes  new  artificial  diseases  beside  it ; and,
as  daily  experience  shows,  only  renders  the  patient
much  worse  and  more  incurable  than  before.


156


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ LIIL

True,  mild  cures  take  place,  as.  is  evident,  only  in
a homoeopatkic  way,  a way,  which,  as  we  have  also
shewn  above  (§  vii — xxv),  in  a different  manner,  by
experience  and  deductions,  is  also  the  true  and  the
only  one  whereby  diseases  may  he  most  surely,  rapidly
and  permanently  extinguished  by  art,  for  this  mode
of  cure  is  founded  on  an  eternal  infalhble  law  of
nature.

§LIV.

This,  the  homoeopathic  way,  must,  moreover,  as
observed  above  (§  xliii — xlix)  be  the  only  proper  one,
because  of  the  three  possible  modes  of  applying
medicines  in  diseases,  it  is  the  only  direct  way  to  a
mild,  sure,  permanent  cure,  without  injury  to  another
part,  and  without  weakening  the  patient.  The  pure
homoeopathic  mode  of  cure  is  the  only  proper  way,
the  only  direct  way,  the  only  way  possible  to  human
skill,  as  certainly  as  only  one  straight  line  can  be
drawn  betwixt  two  given  points.

§LV.

The  second  mode  of  employing  medicines  in  diseases,
the  allopathic  or  heteropathic^  which,  without  any
pathological  reference  to  what  is  actually  diseased  in
the  body,  attacks  the  parts  most  exempt  from  the
disease,  in  order  to  lead  away  the  disease  through
them,  and  thus  to  expel  it,  as  is  imagined,  has
hitherto  been  the  most  general  method.  I have


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


157


treated  of  it  above  in  the  Introduction/  and  shall  not
dwell  longer  on  it.

§LVI.

The  third  method  that  still  remains  to  be  con-
sidered® of  employing  medicines  in  diseases,  which  is
the  only  other  possible  one,  besides  the  other  two  just
alluded  to,  is  the  antipathic  {enantiopathic)  or  pallia-
tive method,  wherewith  the  physician  could  hitherto
appear  to  be  most  useful,  and  hoped  most  certainly
to  gain  his  patient’s  confidence,  by  deluding  him  with
momentary  amelioration.  But  I shall  now  proceed
to  shew  how  inefiicacious  and  how  injurious  this  third
and  sole  remaining  way  was,  in  diseases  of  a not  very
rapid  course.  It  is  certainly  the  only  one  of  the
modes  of  treatment  adopted  by  the  allopaths,  that
had  any  manifest  reference  to  a portion  of  the  afiec-
tions  caused  by  the  natural  disease ; but  what  kind
of  reference'?  Of  a truth  the  very  one  (the  exact
contrary  of  the  right  one)  that  ought  most  to  have
been  avoided,  if  we  would  not  delude  and  make


^ Review  of  the  medication,  &c.

^ A fourth  mode  of  employing  medicines  in  diseases  has  been
attempted  to  be  created  by  means  of  Isopathy,  as  it  is  called — that  is
to  say,  a method  of  curing  a given  disease  by  the  same  contagious
principle  that  produces  it.  But  even  granting  this  could  be  done,  which
would  certainly  be  a most  valuable  discovery,  yet,  after  all,  seeing
that  the  miasm  is  given  to  the  patient  highly  dynamized,  and  thereby,
consequently,  to  a certain  degree  in  an  altered  condition,  the  cure  is
effected  only  by  opposing  a simillirmini  to  a simillimum.


158


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


a mockery  of  the  patient  affected  with  a chronic
disease.


§ LVII.

In  order  to  carry  into  practice  this  antipathic
method,  the  ordinary  physician  gives,  for  a single
troublesome  symptom,  from  among  the  many  other
symptoms  of  the  disease  which  he  passes  by  unheeded,
a medicine  concerning  which  it  is  well  known  that  it
produces  the  exact  opposite  of  the  morbid  symptom
sought  to  be  subdued,  from  which,  agreeably  to  the
fifteen-centuries-old  traditional  rule  of  the  antiquated
medical  school  {contraria  contrariis)  he  can  expect
the  speediest  (palliative)  aid.  He  gives  large  doses
of  opium  for  pains  of  all  sorts,  because  this  drug  soon
benumbs  the  sensibility,  and  administers  the  same
remedy  for  diarrhoeas,  because  it  speedily  puts  a stop
to  the  peristaltic  motion  of  the  intestinal  canal,
and  makes  it  insensible;  and  also  in  sleeplessness,
because  opium  rapidly  produces  a stupefied,  comatose
sleep;  he  gives  purgatives  when  the  patient  has
suffered  long  from  constipation  and  costiveness ; he
causes  the  burnt  hand  to  be  plunged  into  cold  water,
which,  from  its  low  degree  of  temperature,  seems
instantaneously  to  remove  the  burning  pain,  as  if  by
magic ; he  puts  the  patient  who  complains  of  chil-
liness and  deficiency  of  vital  heat  into  warm  baths,
which  warm  him  immediately,  and  he  makes  him
who  is  weakened  by  a long  illness  drink  wine,
whereby  he  is  instantly  enlivened  and  revived ; and


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


159


in  like  manner  he  employs  some  other  opposite  (anti-
pathic) remedial  means,  but  he  has  very  few,  except
those  just  mentioned,  as  it  is  only  of  very  few  sub-
stances that  some  peculiar  (primary)  action  is  known
to  the  ordinary  medical  art.

§ LVIII.

If,  in  estimating  the  value  of  this  mode  of  employ-
ing medicines,  we  should  even  pass  over  the  circum-
stance, that  it  is  an  extremely  defective  symptomatic
treatment  (v.  note  to  § vii.),  wherein  the  practitioner
devotes  his  attention  in  a merely  one-sided  manner  to
a single  symptom,  consequently  to  only  a small  part
of  the  whole,  whereby  relief  for  the  totality  of  the
disease,  which  can  alone  be  the  wish  of  the  patient,
cannot  evidently  be  expected, — we  must,  on  the
other  hand,  demand  of  experience,  if,  in  one  single
case  where  such  antipathic  employment  of  medicine
was  made  use  of  in  a chronic  or  persisting  affection,
after  the  transient  amelioration,  there  did  not  ensue
an  increased  aggravation  of  the  symptom,  which  was
subdued  at  first  in  a palliative  manner,  an  aggravation,
indeed,  of  the  whole  disease!  And  every  attentive
observer  will  agree  in  this,  that,  after  such  short  anti-
pathic amelioration,  aggravation  follows  in  every  case
without  exception,  although  the  ordinary  physician  is
in  the  habit  of  giving  his  patient  another  explanation
of  this  subsequent  aggravation,  and  ascribes  it  to
malignancy  of  the  original  disease,  now  for  the  first


160


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


time  shewing  itself,  or  to  the  occurrence  of  quite  a
new  disease.^

§LIX.

Important  symptoms  of  persistent  diseases  have
never  yet  been  treated  with  such  palliative,  antagon-
istic remedies,  without  a relapse,  indeed  a palpable
aggravation  of  such  maladies,  occurring  a few  hours
afterwards.  For  a chronic  tendency  to  sleepiness
during  the  day,  the  physician  prescribed  coffee,  whose
primary  action  is  to  enliven,  and  when  it  had  ex-
hausted its  action  the  day-somnolence  increased ; —
for  frequent  waking  at  night,  he  gave  in  the  evening,
without  heeding  the  other  symptoms  of  the  disease.


^ Little  as  physicians  have  hitherto  been  in  the  habit  of  observing
accurately,  the  aggravation  that  so  certainly  follows  such  palliative
treatment  could  not  altogether  escape  their  notice.  A striking  example
of  this  is  to  he  found  in  J.  H.  Schulze’s  Diss.  qua  corporis  humani
momentanearum  alterationum  specimina  quaedam  expenduntur,  Halse,
1741,  § 28.  Willis  bears  testimony  to  something  similar,  Pharm.
rat.  § 7,  cap.  i.  p.  298  : “ Opiata  dolores  atrocissimos  plerumque
sedant  atque  indolentiam — procurant,  eamque — aliquamdiu  et  px'o
stato  quodam  tempore  continuant,  quo  spatio  elapso  dolores  mox
recrudescunt  et  brevi  ad  solitam  ferociam  augentur.”  And  also  at
page  295  : “ Exactis  opii  viribus  illico  redeunt  tormina,  nec  atroci-
tatem  suam  remittunt,  nisi  dum  ah  eodem  pharmaco  rursus  incan-
tuntur.”  In  like  manner  J.  Hunter  (On  the  Venereal  Disease,  p.  13)
says,  that  wine  and  cordials  increase  the  action,  without  giving
real  strength,  and  the  powers  of  the  body  are  afterwards  sunk
proportionally  as  they  have  been  raised,  by  which  nothing  can  be
gained,  hut  a great  deal  may  be  lost.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


161


opium,  which  by  virtue  of  its  primary  action  pro-
duced the  same  night  (stupefied,  dull)  sleep,  but
the  subsequent  nights  were  still  more  sleepless  than
before ; — to  chronic  diarrhoeas,  he  opposed,  without
regarding  the  other  morbid  signs,  the  same  opium,
whose  primary  action  is  to  constipate  the  bowels,
and  after  a transient  stoppage  of  the  diarrhoea,
it  subsequently  became  all  the  worse ; — violent  and
frequently  recurring  pains  of  all  kinds  he  could
subdue  with  opium  for  but  a short  time,  they  then
always  returned  in  greater,  often  intolerable,  severity,
or  some  much  worse  afi"ection  came  in  their  stead. —
For  nocturnal  cough  of  long  standing,  the  ordinary
physician  knew  no  better  than  to  administer  opium,
whose  primary  action  is  to  suppress  every  irritation,
the  cough  would  then  perhaps  cease  the  first  night,
but  during  the  subsequent  nights  it  would  be  still
more  severe,  and  if  it  were  again  and  again  suppressed
by  this  palliative  in  increased  doses,  fever  and  noc-
turnal perspiration  were  added  to  the  disease ; —
weakness  of  the  bladder,  with  consequent  retention
of  urine,  was  sought  to  be  conquered  by  the  anti-
pathic power  of  cantharides  to  irritate  the  urinary
passages,  whereby  evacuation  of  the  urine  was  cer-
tainly at  first  effected,  but  thereafter  the  bladder
becomes  more  irritable  and  unable  to  contract,  and
paralysis  of  the  bladder  is  imminent; — with  large
doses  of  purgative  drugs  and  laxative  salts,  which
excite  the  bowels  to  frequent  evacuation,  it  was
sought  to  remove  a chronic  tendency  to  constipation.


M


162


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


but  in  the  secondary  action  the  bowels  became  still
more  confined ; — the  ordinary  physician  seeks  to  re-
move chronic  debility  by  the  administration  of  wine,
which,  however,  stimulates  only  in  its  primary  action,
and  hence  the  forces  sink  all  the  lower  in  the
secondary  action ; — by  bitter  substances  and  condi-
ments he  tries  to  strengthen  and  warm  the  chronically
weak  and  cold  stomach,  but  in  the  secondary  action
of  these  palliatives,  which  are  stimulating  in  their
primary  action  only,  the  stomach  becomes  yet  more
inactive ; — long  standing  deficiency  of  vital  heat  and
chilly  disposition  ought  surely  to  yield  to  prescriptions
of  warm  baths,  but  still  more  weak,  cold  and  chilly
do  the  patients  subsequently  become ; — severely
burnt  parts  feel  instantaneous  alleviation  from  the
application  of  cold  water,  but  the  burning  pain  after-
wards increases  to  an  incredible  degree,  and  the
infiammation  spreads  and  rises  to  a still  greater
height ; ^ — by  means  of  the  sternutatory  remedies  that
provoke  a secretion  of  mucus,  coryza  with  stoppage  of
the  nose  of  long  standing,  is  sought  to  be  removed,  but
it  escapes  observation,  that  the  disease  is  aggravated
all  the  more  by  these  antagonistic  remedies  (in  their
secondary  action),  and  the  nose  becomes  still  more
stopped ; — by  electricity  and  galvanism,  which  in
their  primary  action  greatly  stimulate  muscular  action,
chronically  weak  and  almost  paralytic  limbs  were  soon
excited  to  more  active  movements,  but  the  conse-


Yide  Introduction,  p.  101,  note.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


163


quence  (the  secondary  action)  was  complete  deadening
of  all  muscular  irritability  and  perfect  paralysis; — by
venesections,  it  was  attempted  to  remove  chronic  de-
termination of  blood  to  the  head,  but  they  were  always
followed  by  greater  congestion; — ordinary  medical
practitioners  know  nothing  better  with  which  to  treat
the  paralytic  torpor  of  the  corporeal  and  mental  organs,
conjoined  with  unconsciousness,  which  prevails  in
many  kinds  of  typhus,  than  with  large  doses  of  valerian,
because  this  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  medicinal
agents  for  causing  animation  and  increasing  the
motive  faculty;  in  their  ignorance,  however,  they
knew  not  that  this  action  is  only  a primary  action,
and  that  the  organism,  after  that  is  passed,  most
certainly  falls  back,  in  the  secondary  (antagonistic)
action,  into  still  greater  stupor  and  immobility,  that
is  to  say,  into  paralysis  of  the  mental  and  corporeal
organs  (and  death) ; they  did  not  see,  that  the  very
diseases  they  supplied  most  plentifully  with  valerian,
which  is  in  such  cases  an  oppositely  acting,  antipathic
remedy,  most  infallibly  terminated  fatally. — The  old
school  physician  rejoices^  that  he  is  able  to  reduce  for
several  hours  the  velocity  of  the  small  rapid  pulse  in
cachectic  patients  with  the  very  first  dose  of  uncom-
bined purple  fox-glove  (which  in  its  primary  action
makes  the  pulse  slower),  its  rapidity,  however,  soon
returns ; repeated,  and  now  increased  doses,  effect  an
ever  smaller  diminution  of  its  rapidity,  and  at  length


' Vide  Hufeland,  in  his  pamphlet,  Die  Honidopathie,  p.  20.

M 2


]64


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


none  at  all,  indeed  in  the  secondary  action,  the  pulse
becomes  uncountable;  sleep,  appetite  and  strength
depart,  and  a speedy  death  is  invariably  the  result,  or
else  insanity  ensues.  How  often,  in  one  word,  the
disease  is  aggravated,  or  something  even  worse  is
effected,  by  the  secondary  action  of  such  antagonistic
(antipathic)  remedies,  the  old  school  with  its  false
theories  does  not  perceive,  but  experience  teaches  it
in  a terrible  manner.

§ LX.

If  these  ill  effects  are  produced,  as  may  very
naturally  be  expected  from  the  antipathic  employ-
ment of  medicines,  the  ordinary  physician  imagines  he
can  get  over  the  difficulty,  by  giving,  at  each  renewed
aggravation,  an  increased  dose  of  the  remedy,  whereby
an  equally  transient  suppression  is  effected ; and  as
there  then  is  a still  greater  necessity  for  giving  ever
increasing  quantities  of  the  palliative,  there  ensues
either  another  more  serious  disease,  or  frequently
even  danger  to  life  and  death  itself,  hut  never  a cure
of  a disease  of  considerable  or  of  long  standing.

§LXI.

Had  physicians  been  capable  of  reflecting  on  the  sad
results  of  the  antagonistic  employment  of  medicines^  they
had  long  since  discovered  the  grand  truth,  that  the

TRUE  RADICAL  HEALING  ART  MUST  CONSIST  IN  THE
EXACT  OPPOSITE  OF  SUCH  AN  ANTIPATHIC  TREATMENT
OF  THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  DISEASE;  tliey  would  have  be-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


165


come  convinced,  that  as  a medicinal  action  antagonistic
to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  (an  antipathically
employed  medicine)  is  followed  by  only  transient
relief,  and  after  that  is  passed,  by  invariable  aggrava-
tion, the  converse  of  that  procedure,  the  homoeopathic
employment  of  medicines  according  to  similarity  of
symptoms,  must  effect  a permanent  and  perfect  cure,
when  at  the  same  time  the  opposite  of  their  large
doses,  the  most  minute  doses,  are  exhibited.  But
neither  the  obvious  aggravation  that  ensued  from
their  antipathic  treatment,  nor  the  fact  that  no
physician  ever  effected  a permanent  cure  of  diseases
of  considerable  or  of  long  standing,  unless  some
homoeopathic  medicinal  agent  was  accidentally  a
chief  ingredient  in  his  prescription,  nor  yet  the  cir-
cumstance that  all  the  rapid  and  perfect  cures  that
nature  ever  performed  (§  xlvi.),  were  always  effected
by  the  supervention  upon  the  old  disease  of  one  of  a
similar  character,  ever  taught  them,  during  such  a
long  series  of  centuries,  this  truth,  the  knowledge  of
which  can  alone  conduce  to  the  benefit  of  the  sick.

§ LXII.

But  on  what  this  ruinous  result  of  the  palliative,  an-
tipathic treatment,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  reverse,  the
homoeopathic  treatment,  depend,  the  following  facts,
deduced  from  manifold  observations,  which  no  one
before  me  perceived,  though  they  are  so  very  palpable
and  so  very  evident,  and  are  of  such  infinite  import-
ance to  the  healing  art.


166


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ LXIII.

Every  agent  that  acts  upon  the  vitality,  every  medi-
cine produces  more  or  less  change  in  the  vital  force,
and  causes  a certain  alteration  in  the  health  of  the
individual  for  a longer  or  a shorter  period.  This  is
termed  primary  action.  Although  a product  of  the
medicinal  and  vital  powers  conjointly,  it  belongs
principally  to  the  influencing  power.  To  this  in-
fluence our  vital  force  endeavours  to  oppose  its  own
energy.  This  reaction  belongs  to  our  preserving
vital  force,  of  which  it  is  an  automatic  action,  and  it
is  termed  secondary  action  or  counter-action.

§ LXIV.

During  the  primary  action  of  the  artiflcial  morbific
potencies  (medicines)  on  our  healthy  body,  our  vital
force  seems  to  conduct  itself  merely  in  a susceptible
(receptive,  as  it  were  passive)  manner,  and  appears,
so  to  say,  compelled  to  permit  the  impressions  of  the
artificial  power  acting  from  without,  to  take  place  in
it,  and  thereby  alter  its  state  of  health ; it  then,  how-
ever, appears  to  rouse  itself  again  to  action,  and  to
develope  (a),  the  exact  opposite  condition  (^counter-
action, secondary  action)  to  this  efiect  produced  upon
it  (the  primary  action),  if  there  is  an  opposite  to  it,
and  that  in  as  great  a degree  as  was  the  effect  (primary
action)  of  the  artificial  morbific  or  medicinal  potency
on  it,  and  in  proportion  to  its  own  energy ; — or  (h),
when  there  is  not  in  nature  a state  exactly  the  oppo-
site of  the  primary  action,  it  appears  to  endeavour  to


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


167


recover  its  lost  balance,  that  is,  to  make  its  superior
power  available  in  the  extinction  of  the  change
wrought  in  it  from  without  (by  the  medicine),  in  the
place  of  which  it  substitutes  its  normal  state  [secondary
action^  curative  action).

§ LXV.

Examples  of  (a)  are  frequent  enough.  A hand
bathed  in  hot  water  is  at  first  much  warmer  than  the
other  hand  that  has  not  been  so  treated  (primary
action),  but  when  it  is  withdraAvn  from  the  hot  water
and  again  perfectly  dried,  it  becomes  in  a short  time
cold,  and  at  length  much  colder  than  the  other
(secondary  action),  A person  heated  by  violent  exer-
cise (primary  action),  is  afterwards  afiected  with
chilliness  and  shivering  (secondary  action).  To  one
who  was  yesterday  heated  by  drinking  much  wine
(primary  action),  to-day  every  breath  of  air  feels  too
cold  (counter-action  of  the  organism,  secondary  ac-
tion), An  arm  that  has  been  kept  long  in  very  cold
water  is  at  first  much  paler  and  colder  (primary
action)  than  the  other ; but  removed  from  the  cold
water,  and  dried,  it  subsequently  becomes  not  only
warmer  than  the  other,  but  even  hot,  red  and  inflamed
(secondary  action,  reaction  of  the  vital  force.)  Exces-
sive liveliness  follows  the  use  of  strong  cofiee  (primary
action),  but  torpor  and  drowsiness  remain  for  a long
time  afterwards  (reaction,  secondary  action),  if  this
be  not  always  again  removed  for  a short  time  by
imbibing  fresh  supplies  of  cofiee  (palliative).  After


168


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


the  deep  stupefied  sleep  caused  by  opium  (primary
action),  the  following  night  will  be  still  more  sleep-
less (re-action,  secondary  action).  After  the  constipa-
tion produced  by  opium  (primary  action),  diarrhoea
ensues  (secondary  action);  and  after  purgation  with
medicines  that  irritate  the  bowels,  constipation  and
costiveness  of  several  days’  duration  ensue  (secondary
action).  And  in  like  manner,  it  always  happens  after
the  primary  action  of  a potency  that  produces  in
large  doses  a great  change  in  the  health  of  a healthy
person,  that  its  exact  opposite,  when,  as  has  been
observed,  there  is  positively  such  a thing,  is  produced
in  the  secondary  action  by  our  vital  force.

§ LXVI.

An  obvious  antagonistic  secondary  action,  however,
is,  as  may  readily  be  conceived,  not  to  be  noticed
from  the  action  of  quite  minute  homoeopathic  doses
of  the  deranging  potencies  on  the  healthy  body.  A
small  dose  of  every  one  of  them  certainly  produces
a primary  action  that  is  perceptible  to  a sufficiently
attentive  observer ; but  the  living  organism  employs
against  it  only  so  much  counter-action  (secondary
action)  as  is  necessary  for  the  restoration  of  the
normal  condition.


§ LXVII.

These  incontrovertible  truths  which  offer  them-
selves to  our  notice  in  nature  and  experience,  explain
to  us  the  beneficial  action  that  takes  place  under


ORGANON  or  MEDICINE.


169


homoeopathic  treatment,  whilst  on  the  other  hand
they  demonstrate  how  wrong  the  antipathic  and
palliative  treatment  of  diseases  with  antagonistically
acting  medicines,  is.^

^ Only  in  the  most  urgent  cases,  -where  danger  to  life  and  im-
minent death  allow  no  time  for  the  action  of  a homcEopathic  remedy —
not  hours,  sometimes  not  even  quarter-hours,  and  scarcely  minutes
— in  sudden  accidents  occurring  to  previously  healthy  individuals,
for  example,  in  asphyxia  and  suspended  animation  from  lightning,
from  suffocation,  freezing,  dro%vning,  &c., — is  it  admissible  and  judi-
cious as  a preliminary  measure  to  stimulate  the  imtability  and
sensibility  (the  physical  life)  with  a palliative,  as  for  instance,  with
mild  electrical  shocks,  with  clysters  of  strong  coffee,  with  a stimula-
ting odour,  gradual  application  of  heat,  &c.  When  this  stimulation
is  effected,  the  play  of  the  vital  organs  again  goes  on  in  its  former
healthy  manner,  for  there  is  here  no  disease *  * to  be  removed,  but
merely  an  obstruction  and  suppression  of  the  vital  force  which  in
itself  is  healthy.  To  this  category  belong  various  antidotes  to  sudden
poisonings : alkalies  for  mineral  acids,  hepar  sulphuris  for  metallic
poisons,  coffee  and  camphor  (and  ipecacuanha)  for  poisoning  by
opium,  &c.

It  does  not  follow  that  a homoeopathic  medicine  has  been  ill
selected  for  a case  of  disease,  because  some  of  the  medicinal  symp-
toms merely  are  antipathic  to  some  of  the  less  important  and  minor
symptoms  of  the  disease ; if  only  the  others,  the  stronger,  well

* And  yet  the  new  sect  that  mixes  the  two  systems,  appeals  (though  in
vain)  to  this  observation,  in  order  that  they  may  have  an  excuse  for
encountering  everywhere  such  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  in  diseases,
and  to  justify  their  convenient  employment  of  allopathic  palliatives,  and
of  other  injurious  allopathic  trash  besides,  solely  for  the  sake  of  sparing
themselves  the  trouble  of  seeking  for  the  suitable  homoeopathic  remedy
for  each  case  of  disease — I might  almost  say,  for  the  sake  of  sparing  them-
selves the  trouble  of  being  homoeopathic  physicians,  and  yet  wishing  to
appear  as  such.  But  their  performances  are  on  a par  with  the  system  they
pursue;  they  arc  nothing  to  boast  of.


170


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


§ LXVIII.

In  homoeopathic  cures  they  shew  us,  that  from
the  uncommonly  small  doses  of  medicine  (§  cclxxv
— cclxxxvii)  required  in  this  system  of  medicine,
which  are  just  sufficient,  by  their  similarity  of
symptoms,  to  overpower  and  displace  the  similar
natural  disease,  there  certainly  remains,  after  the
destruction  of  the  latter,  at  first  a certain  amount  of
medicinal  disease  alone  in  the  organism,  but,  on
account  of  the  extraordinary  minuteness  of  the  dose,
it  is  so  transient,  so  slight,  and  disappears  so  rapidly
of  its  own  accord,  that  the  vital  force  has  no  occasion
to  employ,  against  this  small  artificial  derangement
of  its  health,  any  more  considerable  counter-action
than  will  suffice  to  elevate  its  present  state  of  health
up  to  the  healthy  point,  that  is,  than  will  suffice  to
efiect  complete  recovery,  for  which,  after  the  extinc-
tion of  the  previous  morbid  derangement,  but  little
effort  is  required  (§  Ixv.  h).

§ LXIX.

In  the  antipathic  (palliative)  mode  of  treatment,
however,  precisely  the  reverse  of  this  takes  place.


marked  (characteidstic)  and  peculiar  symptoms  of  the  disease  are
covered  and  matched,  by  the  same  medicinal  substance,  with  simi-
larity of  symptoms,  that  is  to  say,  overpowered,  destroyed,  and
extinguished;  the  few  opposite  symptoms  also  disappear  of  them-
selves after  the  expiiy  of  the  term  of  action  of  the  medicament,
without  retarding  the  cure  in  the  least.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


171


The  medicinal  symptom  which  the  physician  opposes
to  the  symptom  of  the  disease  (for  example,  the
insensibility  and  stupefaction  caused  by  opium  in  its
primary  action,  against  acute  pain)  is  certainly  not
foreign,  not  allopathic  to  the  latter,  there  is  a manifest
relation  of  the  medicinal  symptom  to  the  symptom  of
the  disease,  but  it  is  the  I'everse  of  what  should  be;  it  is
here  intended,  that  the  annihilation  of  the  symptom
of  the  disease  shall  take  place  by  an  opposite  medicinal
symptom,  which  is  impossible.  The  antipathically
chosen  medicine  certainly  touches  the  diseased  point
in  the  organism,  as  certainly  as  does  the  homoeopathic
medicine  chosen  on  account  of  the  similar  affection  it
produces ; but  the  former  covers  the  opposite  symptom
of  the  disease  only  as  an  opposite,  and  merely  makes
it  unobservable  for  a short  time,  so  that  in  the  first
period  of  the  action  of  the  antagonistic  palliative,
the  vital  force  perceives  nothing  disagreeable  from
either  of  the  two  (neither  from  the  symptom  of  the
disease  nor  from  that  of  the  medicine),  as  they  seem
both  to  have  mutually  removed,  and  dynamically
neutralized  one  another  as  it  were  (for  example,  the
stupefying  power  of  opium  does  this  to  the  pain).  In
the  first  minutes  the  vital  force  feels  quite  well,  and
perceives  neither  the  stupefaction  of  the  opium,  nor
the  pain  of  the  disease.  But  as  the  antagonistic
medicinal  symptom  cannot  (as  in  the  homoeopathic
system)  occupy  the  place  of  the  morbid  derangement
present  in  the  organism,  as  a similar,  stronger  (arti-
ficial) disease,  and  cannot,  therefore,  like  a homoeo-


172


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


pathic  medicine,  affect  the  vital  force  with  a similar
artificial  disease,  so  as  to  he  able  to  step  into  the
place  of  the  natural  morbid  derangement  present,
the  palliative  medicine  must,  as  a thing  totally  differ-
ing from,  and  opposed  to,  the  morbid  derangement,
leave  the  latter  uneradicated ; it  renders  it,  as  before
said,  by  a semblance  of  dynamic  neutralization,^  at
first  unfelt,  but,  like  every  medicinal  disease,  it  is  soon
spontaneously  extinguished,  and  not  only  leaves  the
disease  behind,  just  as  it  was,  but  soon  compels  the
vital  force  (as  it  must,  like  all  palliatives,  be  given  in
large  doses,  in  order  to  effect  the  apparent  removal)
to  produce  an  opposite  condition  (§  Ixiii — Ixv)  to
this  palliative  medicine,  the  reverse  of  the  medicinal
action,  consequently  the  analogue  of  the  still  present,
undestroyed,  natural  morbid  derangement,  which  is


' In  the  living  human  being,  no  permanent  neutralization  of  con-
trary or  antagonistic  sensations  can  take  place,  as  happens  with
substances  of  opposite  qualities  in  the  chemical  laboratory,  where,
for  instance,  sulphuric  acid  and  potash  unite  to  form  a perfectly
different  substance,  a neutral  salt,  which  is  now  no  longer  either  acid
or  alkali,  and  is  not  decomposed  even  by  heat.  Such  amalgamations
and  thorough  combinations  to  form  something  permanently  neutral
and  indifferent,  do  not,  as  has  been  said,  ever  take  place  from
dynamic  impressions  of  an  antagonistic  nature  in  our  sensific  appa-
ratus. Only  a semblance  of  neutralization  and  mutual  removal
occurs  in  such  cases  at  first,  but  the  antagonistic  sensations  do  not
permanently  remove  one  another.  The  tears  of  the  sorrowful  will
be  dried  for  hut  a short  time  by  a laughable  play;  the  jokes  are,
however,  soon  forgotten,  and  his  tears  then  flow  still  more  abundantly.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


173


necessarily  strengthened  and  increased^  by  the  ad-
dition (reaction  against  the  palliative)  furnished  by
the  vital  force.  The  morbid  symptom  (this  single
part  of  the  disease)  consequently  becomes  worse  after
the  term  of  the  action  of  the  palliative  has  expired;
worse  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  dose  of  the
palliative.  Accordingly  (to  keep  to  the  same  ex-
ample) the  larger  the  dose  of  opium  given  to  allay
the  pain,  so  much  the  more  does  the  pain  increase
above  its  original  intensity,  as  soon  as  the  opium
has  exhausted  its  action.^


^ Plain  as  this  is,  it  has  been  misunderstood,  and  in  opposition  to
this  maxim  some  have  asserted,  “ that  the  palliative  in  its  secondary
action,  which  would  then  he  similar  to  the  disease  present,  must  be
capable  of  curing  just  as  well  as  a homoeopathic  medicine  does  by
its  primai'y  action.”  But  they  did  not  reflect,  that  the  secondary
action  is  not  a product  of  the  medicine,  but  invariably  of  the  anta-
gonistically acting  vital  force  of  the  organism ; that  therefore  this
secondary  action  resulting  from  the  vital  force  on  the  employment  of
a palliative,  is  a state  similar  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  which
the  palliative  left  uneradicated,  and  which  the  reaction  of  the  vital
force  against  the  palliative  consequently  increased  still  more.

“ As  when  in  a dark  dungeon,  where  the  prisoner  could  with
difficulty  recognize  objects  close  to  him,  alcohol  is  suddenly  lighted,
everything  is  instantly  illuminated  in  a most  cheerful  manner  to  the
unhappy  wretch ; but  when  it  is  extinguished,  the  brighter  the
flame  was  previously,  the  blacker  is  the  night  which  now  envelops
him,  and  renders  everything  about  him  much  more  difficult  to  be
seen  than  before.


174


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ LXX.

From  what  has  been  already  adduced,  we  cannot  -
fail  to  draw  the  following  inferences :

That  every  thing  of  a really  morbid  character
and  which  ought  to  be  cured,  that  the  physi-
cian can  discover  in  diseases,  consists  solely  in
the  sulferings  of  the  patient,  and  the  sensible
alterations  in  his  health,  in  a word,  solely
in  the  sum  total  of  the  symptoms,  by  means
of  which  the  disease  demands  the  medicine
requisite  for  its  relief,  whilst  on  the  other
hand,  every  internal  cause  assigned  to  it,
every  occult  quality  or  imaginary  material
morbific  principle,  is  nothing  but  an  empty
dream  ;

That  this  derangement  of  the  health,  which  we
term  disease,  can  only  be  converted  into  health
by  another  revolution  in  the  health  by  means
of  medicines,  whose  sole  curative  power,  con-
sequently, can  only  consist  in  deranging  man’s
health,  that  is  to  say,  in  a peculiar  excitation
of  morbid  symptoms,  and  is  learned  with  most
distinctness  and  purity  by  testing  them  on
healthy  individuals ;

That,  according  to  all  experience,  a natural
disease  can  never  be  cured  by  medicines  that
possess  the  power  of  producing  in  the  healthy
individual  an  alien  morbid  state  (dissimilar
morbid  symptoms)  differing  from  that  of  the


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


175


disease  to  be  cured  (never,  therefore,  by  an
allopathic  mode  of  treatment)  and  that  even
in  nature  no  cure  ever  takes  place,  in  which
an  inherent  disease  is  removed,  annihilated
and  cured  by  the  accession  of  another  disease
dissimilar  to  it,  be  the  new  one  ever  so  strong ;

That,  moreover,  all  experience  proves,  that,  by
means  of  medicines  which  have  a tendency  to
produce  in  the  healthy  individual  an  artificial
morbid  symptom,  antagonistic  to  the  single
symptom  of  disease  sought  to  be  cured,  the
cure  of  a long  standing  affection  will  never  be
effected,  but  merely  a very  transient  allevia-
tion, always  followed  by  aggravation;  and
that,  in  a word,  this  antipathic  and  merely
palliative  mode  of  treatment  in  long  standing
diseases  of  a serious  character  is  quite  in-
capable of  effecting  the  desired  object;

That,  however,  the  third  and  only  other  possible
mode  of  treatment  (the  homoeopathic),  in  which
there  is  employed  for  the  totality  of  the  symp-
toms of  the  natural  disease,  a medicine  capable
of  producing  the  most  similar  symptoms  pos-
sible in  the  healthy  individual,  is  the  only
efficacious  method  of  treatment,  whereby  dis-
eases, as  mere  dynamic  derangements  of  the
vital  force,  are  overpowered,  and  being  thus
easily,  perfectly  and  permanently  extinguished,
must  necessarily  cease  to  exist — and  for  this
mode  of  procedure  we  have  the  example  of


176


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


unfettered  nature  herself,  when  to  an  old
disease  there  is  added  a new  one  similar  to
the  first,  whereby  the  old  one  is  rapidly  and
forever  annihilated  and  cured.

§ LXXI.

As  it  is  now  no  longer  a matter  of  doubt,  that  the
diseases  of  mankind  consist  merely  in  groups  of
certain  symptoms,  and  may  be  annihilated  and  trans-
formed into  health  (wherein  consists  the  actual  process
of  every  genuine  cure)  by  medicinal  substances,  but
only  by  such  as  are  capable  of  producing  artificially,
morbid  symptoms  similar  to  their  own,  it  follows
that  the  operation  of  curing  will  be  confined  to  a
consideration  of  the  three  following  points :

I.  — How  is  the  physician  to  ascertain  what  is
necessary  to  be  known  in  order  to  cure  the
disease  1

II.  — How  is  he  to  gain  a knowledge  of  the  in-
struments adapted  for  the  cure  of  the  natural
disease,  the  pathogenetic  powers  of  the  medi-
cines ■?

III.  — How  is  he  to  employ  most  appropriately,
these  artificial  morbific  potencies  (medicines)
for  the  cure  of  diseases  1

§ LXXH.

With  respect  to  the  first  point,  the  following  will
serve  as  a general  preliminary  view.  The  diseases
to  which  man  is  liable  are  partly  rapid  morbid  pro-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


17T


cesses  of  the  abnormally  deranged  vital  force,  which
are  disposed  to  finish  their  course  more  or  less  quickly,
but  always  in  a moderate  time — they  are  termed  acute
diseases — ; and  partly  diseases  of  such  a character,
that,  with  small,  often  imperceptible  beginnings,  dyna-
mically derange  the  living  organism,  each  in  its  own
peculiar  manner,  and  cause  it  gradually  to  deviate
from  the  healthy  condition,  in  such  a way,  that  the
automatic  vital  energy,  called  vital  force,  whose  office
is  to  preserve  the  health,  only  opposes  to  them  at  the
commencement,  as  during  their  progress,  imperfect,
unsuitable,  useless  resistance,  but  is  unable,  of  itself,
to  extinguish  them,  but  must  helplessly  allow  (them
to  spread  and)  itself  to  be  ever  more  and  more
abnormally  deranged,  until  at  length  the  organism  is
destroyed;  these  are  termed  chronic  diseases.  They
arise  from  infection  with  a chronic  miasm.

§ LXXIII.

As  regards  acute  diseases,  they  are  partly  of  such
a kind  as  attack  human  beings  individually,  the
exciting  cause  being  injurious  agencies  to  which  they
were  particularly  exposed.  Excesses  in  food,  or  an
insufficient  supply  of  it,  severe  physical  impressions,
chills,  over-heatings,  dissipation,  strains,  &c.,  or
psychical  irritations,  mental  emotions,  and  the  like,
are  exciting  causes  of  such  acute  febrile  affections  ;
in  reality,  however,  they  are  generally  only  a transient
explosion  of  latent  psora,  which  spontaneously  re-
turns to  its  dormant  state,  if  the  acute  diseases  were


178


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


not  of  too  violent  a character  and  were  soon  quelled
— and  they  are  partly  of  such  a kind  as  attack  several
persons  at  the  same  time,  here  and  there  [sporadically),
by  means  of  meteoric  or  telluric  influences  and  in-
jurious agents,  for  being  morbidly  affected  by  which,
only  a few  persons  at  a time  possess  the  susceptibility.
Allied  to  these  are  those  diseases  wherein  many
persons  are  attacked  with  very  similar  sufferings
from  the  same  cause  [epidemically),  these  diseases
generally  become  infectious  [contagious)  when  they
prevail  among  thickly  congregated  masses  of  human
beings.  Thence  arise  fevers,^  in  each  instance  of
a peculiar  nature,  and  because  the  cases  of  disease
are  derived  from  the  same  origin,  they  invariably
produce  in  those  they  affect  an  identical  morbid
process,  which  when  left  to  itself  terminates  in  a
moderate  period  of  time  in  death  or  recovery.  The
ravages  of  war,  inundations  and  famine  are  not  un-
frequently  their  exciting  causes  and  producers — some-
times they  are  peculiar  acute  miasms  which  recur  in
the  same  manner  (hence  known  by  some  traditional
name),  which  either  attack  persons  but  once  in  a life-


' The  homoeopathic  physician,  who  does  not  entertain  the  foregone
conclusions  devised  by  the  ordinary  school  (who  have  fixed  upon  a
few  names  of  such  fevers,  beyond  which  mighty  nature  dare  not
produce  any  others,  so  as  to  admit  of  their  treating  these  diseases
according  to  some  fixed  method),  does  not  acknowledge  the  names
gaol  fever,  bilious  fever,  typhus  fever,  putrid  fever,  nervous  fever,
or  mucous  fever,  but  treats  them  each  according  to  their  several
peculiarities.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


179


time,  as  the  small-pox,  measles,  hooping-cough,  the
ancient  smooth,  bright  red  scarlet-fever^  of  Sydenham,
the  mumps,  &c.,  or  such  as  recur  frequently,  in
pretty  much  the  same  manner,  the  plague  of  the
Levant,  the  yellow-fever  of  the  sea-coast,  the  Asiatic
cholera,  &c.


§ LXXIV.

Among  chronic  diseases  we  must  still  alas ! reckon
those  so  commonly  met  with,  artificially  produced  in
allopathic  treatment  by  the  prolonged  use  of  violent
heroic  medicines  in  large  and  increasing  doses,  by  the
abuse  of  calomel,  corrosive  sublimate,  mercurial  oint-
ment, nitrate  of  silver,  iodine  and  its  ointments,  opium,
valerian,  cinchona  bark  and  quinine,  foxglove,  prussic
acid,  sulphur  and  sulphuric  acid,  perennial  purgatives,
venesections,  leeches,  issues,  setons,  &c.,  wherewith
the  vital  force  is  sometimes  weakened  to  an  un-
merciful extent,  sometimes,  if  it  do  not  succumb,
gradually  abnormally  deranged  (by  each  substance  in


' Subsequently  to  the  year  1801  a kind  of  purpura  miliaris  {rood-
vonk),  which  came  from  the  West,  was  by  physicians  confounded
with  the  scarlet  fever,  notwithstanding  that  they  exhibited  totally
different  symptoms,  that  the  latter  found  its  prophylactic  and  curative
remedy  in  belladonna,  the  former  in  aconite,  and  that  the  former
was  generally  merely  sporadic,  while  the  latter  was  invariably
epidemic.  Of  late  years,  it  seems  as  if  the  two  occasionally  joined
to  form  an  eruptive  fever  of  a peculiar  kind,  for  which  neither  the
one  nor  yet  the  other  remedy,  alone,  will  be  found  to  be  exactly
homoeopathic.

N 2


180


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


a peculiar  manner)  in  such  a way,  that,  in  order  to
preserve  life  in  action  from  these  inimical  and  destruc-
tive attacks,  it  must  produce  a revolution  in  the
organism,  and  either  deprive  some  part  or  other  of
its  irritability  or  sensibility,  or  exalt  these  to  an
excessive  degree,  cause  dilatation  or  contraction,  re-
laxation or  induration,  or  even  total  annihilation  of
certain  parts,  and  develope  organic  imperfections  here
and  there  in  the  interior  or  the  exterior,^  (cripple  the
body  internally  or  externally)  in  order  to  preserve
the  organism  from  complete  destruction  of  life,  by
the  ever-renewed,  hostile  assaults  of  such  ruinous
potencies.

§ LXXV.

These  inroads  on  human  health  effected  by  the
allopathic  non-healing  art  (more  particularly  in  recent
times)  are  of  all  chronic  diseases  the  most  deplorable,
the  most  incurable,  and  I regret  to  add,  that  it  is
apparently  impossible  to  discover  or  to  hit  upon  any
remedies  for  their  cure,  when  they  have  reached  any
considerable  height.


* If  the  patient  at  length  succumbs,  the  practiser  of  such  a treat-
ment is  in  the  habit  of  pointing  out  to  the  sorrowing  relatives,  at  the
post  mortem  examination,  these  internal  organic  changes,  which  have
to  thank  his  pseudo-art  for  their  origin,  but  which  he  artfully  main-
tains to  be  the  original  incui’able  disease  (See  my  book.  Die  Alloo-
pathie,  ein  Wort  der  Warming  an  Kranke  jeder  Art,  Leipzig,  bei
Baumgartner) . Those  deceitful  records,  the  illustrated  works  on  patho-
logical anatomy,  exhibit  the  products  of  such  lamentable  bungling.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


181


§ LXXVI.

Only  for  natural  diseases,  has  the  beneficent  Deity
granted  us,  in  Homoeopathy,  the  means  of  affording
relief — but  those  devastations  and  maimings  of  the
human  organism  in  its  exterior  and  interior,  rudely
effected  by  years,  frequently,  of  the  unsparing  exercise
of  a false  art,  with  its  injurious  drugs  and  modes
of  treatment,  must  he  remedied  hy  the  vital  force  itself
(appropriate  aid  being  given  for  the  eradication  of
any  chronic  miasm  that  may  happen  to  be  lurking  in
the  hack-ground),  if  it  have  not  already  been  too
much  weakened,  and  can  devote  several  years  to  this
huge  operation,  undisturbed.  A human  healing  art
for  the  restoration  to  the  normal  state  of  those  in-
numerable abnormal  conditions  so  often  produced  by
the  allopathic  non-healing  art,  there  is  not  and  can-
not be.

§ LXXVII.

Those  diseases  are  inappropriately  named  chronic,
which  persons  incur  who  expose  themselves  con-
tinually to  avoidable  noxious  agencies,  who  are  in
the  habit  of  indulging  in  injurious  liquors  or  aliments,
are  addicted  to  dissipation  of  many  kinds,  which
undermine  the  health,  who  constantly  abstain  from
things  that  are  necessary  for  the  support  of  life,  who
reside  in  unhealthy  localities,  especially  marshy  dis-
tricts, are  domiciled  in  cellars  or  other  confined  dwell-
ings, who  are  deprived  of  exercise  in  the  open  air,
who  ruin  their  health  by  excessive  exertion  of  body


182


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


or  mind,  who  are  constantly  exposed  to  annoyance,
&c.  These  states  of  ill-health  which  persons  bring
upon  themselves,  disappear  spontaneously,  if  a chronic
miasm  do  not  exist  in  the  body,  when  the  mode  of
living  is  improved,  and  they  cannot  be  called  chronic
diseases.

§ LXXVIII.

The  true  natural  chronic  diseases  are  those  that
arise  from  a chronic  miasm,  which  when  left  to  them-
selves, and  unchecked  by  the  employment  of  those
remedies  that  are  specific  for  them,  always  go  on
increasing  and  growing  worse,  notwithstanding  the
best  mental  and  corporeal  regimen,  and  torment  the
patient  to  the  end  of  his  life  with  ever  aggravated
sufferings.  These  are  the  most  numerous  and  greatest
tormentors  of  the  human  race,  for  the  most  robust
constitution,  the  best  regulated  mode  of  living,  and
the  most  vigorous  energy  of  the  vital  force  are  in-
sufficient for  their  eradication.

§ LXXIX.

Hitherto  syphilis  alone  has  been  known  as  in  some
degree  a chronic  miasmatic  disease,  which  when  un-
cured is  only  extinguished  with  the  termination  of
life.  Sycosis  (the  condylomatous  disease),  equally
ineradicable  by  the  vital  force,  without  proper  medi-
cinal treatment,  was  not  recognized  as  a chronic
miasmatic  disease  of  a peculiar  character,  which  it
nevertheless  undoubtedly  is,  and  physicians  imagined


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


183


they  had  cured  it  when  they  had  destroyed  the
growths  upon  the  skin,  but  the  persisting  dyscrasia
occasioned  by  it  escaped  their  observation.

§ LXXX.

Incalculably  greater  and  more  important  than
the  two  just  named,  however,  is  the  chronic  miasm
of  psora,  which,  whilst  those  two  give  indications
of  their  specific  internal  dyscrasia,  the  one  by  the
venereal  chancre,  the  other  by  the  caulifiower-like
growths,  does  also,  after  the  completion  of  the  internal
infection  of  the  whole  organism,  announce  by  a
peculiar  cutaneous  eruption,  sometimes  consisting
only  of  a few  vesicles,  accompanied  by  intolerable
voluptuous  tickling  itching  (and  a peculiar  odour),
the  monstrous  internal  chronic  miasm — the  psora,  the
only  real  fundamental  cause  and  producer  of  all  the
other  numerous,  I may  say  innumerable,  forms  of
disease,^  which,  under  the  names  of  nervous  debility.


' I spent  twelve  years  in  investigating  the  source  of  this  incredibly
large  number  of  chronic  affections,  in  ascertaining  and  collecting
certain  proofs  of  this  great  truth,  which  had  remained  unkno’wn  to
all  former  or  contemporary  observers,  and  in  discovering  at  the
same  time  the  principal  (antipsoric)  remedies,  which  collectively  are
nearly  a match  for  this  thousand-headed  monster  of  disease,  in  all
its  different  developments  and  forms.  I have  registered  my  ex-
perience on  this  subject  in  the  book  entitled  The  Chronic  Diseases
(4  vols. ; Dresden,  Arnold.  [2nd  edit.  Diisseldorf,  Schaub.])  Before
I had  obtained  this  knowledge,  I could  only  teach  how  to  treat  the


184


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


hysteria,  hypochondriasis,  mania,  melancholia,  im-
becility, madness,  epilepsy,  and  convulsions  of  all
sorts,  of  softening  of  the  bones  (rachitis)  scoliosis  and
cyphosis,  caries,  cancer,  fungus  hsematodes,  malignant
organic  growths,  gout,  haemorrhoids,  jaundice,  cya-
nosis, dropsy,  amenorrhoea,  haemorrhage  from  the
stomach,  nose,  lungs,  bladder,  and  womb,  of  asthma
and  ulceration  of  the  lungs,  of  impotence  and  barren-
ness, of  megrim,  deafness,  cataract,  amaurosis,  urinary
calculus,  paralysis,  defects  of  the  senses,  and  pains  of
thousands  of  kinds,  &c.,  figure  in  systematic  works
on  pathology  as  peculiar  independent  diseases.


whole  number  of  chronic  diseases,  as  separate,  single  individuals,
with  those  medicinal  substances  whose  pure  effects  had  been  tested
on  healthy  persons  up  to  that  period,  so  that  every  case  of  chronic
disease  was  treated  by  my  disciples  according  to  the  group  of  symp-
toms it  presented,  just  like  a disease  having  a peculiar  character  of
its  o^vn,  and  was  so  far  cured,  that  sick  mankind  rejoiced  at  the
extensive  remedial  treasures  already  amassed  by  the  new  healing  art.
How  much  greater  cause  is  there  now  for  rejoicing,  that  the  desired
goal  has  been  so  much  more  nearly  attained,  inasmuch  as  the  recently
discovered  and  far  more  specific  homoeopathic  remedies  for  chi'onic
affections  arising  from  psora  (which  should  properly  be  termed  anti-
psoric  remedies),  and  the  special  instructions  for  their  preparation  and
employment,  have  been  published,  and  from  among  them  the  true
physician  can  now  select  for  his  curative  agents,  those  whose  medi-
cinal symptoms  correspond  in  the  most  similar  (homceopathic)
manner  to  the  chronic  diseases  he  has  to  cure,  and  thus,  from  the
employment  of  medicines  more  suitable  to  this  miasm,  he  is  enabled
to  he  of  more  essential  service,  and  almost  invariably  to  effect  perfect


cures.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


185


§ LXXXI.

The  fact  that  this  extremely  ancient  infecting  agent
has  gradually  passed,  in  several  hundreds  of  genera-
tions, through  many  millions  of  human  organisms,  and
has  thus  attained  an  incredible  development,  renders  it
in  some  measure  conceivable,  how  it  can  now  display
such  innumerable  morbid  forms  in  the  great  family
of  mankind,  particularly  when  we  consider  what  a
number  of  circumstances  ^ are  wont  to  contribute  to
the  production  of  this  great  variety  of  chronic  diseases
(secondary  symptoms  of  psora),  in  addition  to  the
indescribable  diversity  of  men  in  respect  of  their
congenital  corporeal  constitutions,  so  that  it  is  no
wonder  if  such  a variety  of  injurious  agencies,  acting
from  within  and  from  without,  and  sometimes  con-
tinually, on  such  a variety  of  organisms  impregnated
with  the  psoric  miasm,  should  produce  an  innumer-
able variety  of  defects,  injuries,  derangements  and
sufferings,  which  have  hitherto  been  treated  of  in  the


* Some  of  these  causes  that  exercise  a modifying  influence  on  the
transformation  of  psora  into  chronic  diseases,  manifestly  depend,
sometimes  on  the  climate  and  the  peculiar  physical  character  of  the
place  of  abode,  sometimes  on  the  very  great  varieties  in  the  corporeal
and  mental  education  of  the  youth,  both  of  which  may  have  been
neglected,  delayed,  or  carried  to  too  great  an  extent,  or  on  improper
employment  or  cunumstances  of  life,  dietetic  regimen,  passions,
manners,  habits  and  customs  of  various  kinds.


186


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


old  pathological  works/  under  a number  of  special
names,  as  diseases  of  an  independent  character.

§ LXXXII.

Although,  by  the  discovery  of  that  great  source  of
chronic  diseases,  as  also  by  the  discovery  of  the
specific  homoeopathic  remedies  for  the  psora,  medicine


' How  many  improper,  ambiguous  names  do  not  these  works  con-
tain, under  each  of  which  is  included  excessively  different  morhid
conditions,  which  often  resemble  each  another  in  one  symptom  only,
as,  ague,  jaundice,  dropsy,  consumption,  leucorrhoea,  hcemorrhoids,
rheumatism,  apoplexy,  convulsions,  hysteria,  hypochondriasis,  melan-
cholia, mania,  qxiinsy,  palsy,  &c,,  which  are  represented  as  diseases
of  a fixed  and  unvarying  character,  and  are  treated,  from  their  name,
according  to  a detenninate  plan ! How  can  a fixed  plan  of  medical
treatment  for  a mere  name  of  disease  be  justified  ? And  if  the  treat-
ment is  not  always  to  he  the  same,  why  make  use  of  an  identical
name  which  presupposes  an  identity  of  treatment  ? “ Nihil  sane  in

artem  medicam  pestiferum  magis  unquam  hrepsit  malum,  quam
generalia  quaedam  nomina  morbis  imponere  iisque  aptare  velle  gene-
ralem  quandam  medicinam,”  says  Huxham,  a man  as  enlightened  as
he  was  estimable  on  account  of  his  conscientiousness  i,Op.  phys.  med.,
tom.  i.).  And  in  like  manner  Fritze  laments  {Annalen,  i.  p.  80)
“ that  essentially  different  diseases  are  designated  by  the  same
name.”  Even  those  epidemic  diseases,  which  certainly  may  be
propagated  in  every  separate  epidemic  by  a pecuhar  contagious  prin-
ciple which  remains  unknown  to  us,  are  designated,  in  the  old  school
of  medicine,  by  particular  names,  just  as  if  they  were  well-known
fixed  diseases,  that  invariably  recuri'ed  under  the  same  form,  as,
hospital  fever,  gaol  fever,  camp  fever,  putrid  fever,  hilious  fever,
nervous  fever,  mucous  fever,  although  each  epidemic  of  such  en'atic


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


187


has  advanced  some  steps  nearer  to  the  knowledge  of
the  nature  of  the  majority  of  diseases  it  has  to  cure,
yet  for  constructing  the  indication  in  each  case  of


fevers  exhibits  itself  at  every  occurrence  as  another,  a new  disease,
such  as  it  has  never  exactly  been  before,  differing  very  much,  in
every  instance,  in  its  course,  as  well  as  in  several  of  its  most  striking
symptoms  and  its  whole  appearance.  Each  is  so  far  dissimilar  to  all
previous  epidemics,  whatever  names  they  may  hear,  that  it  would  be
a dereliction  of  all  logical  accuracy  in  our  ideas  of  things,  were  we
to  give  to  these  maladies,  that  differ  so  much  among  themselves,  one
of  those  names  introduced  into  pathological  writings,  and  treat  them
all  medicinally  in  conformity  with  this  misused  name.  The  candid
Sydenham  alone  perceived  this,  when  he  {Ohs.  med.  cap.  2,  De
morb.  epid.)  insists  upon  the  necessity  of  not  considering  any
disease  as  having  occurred  before,  and  treating  it  in  the  same  way  as
another,  as  all  that  occur  successively,  be  they  ever  so  numerous,
differ  among  each  other : “ Nihil  quicquam  (opinor,)  animum

universae  qua  patet  medicinae  pomoeria  perlustrantem,  tanta  admira-
tione  percellet,  quam  discolor  ilia  et  sui  plane  dissimilis  morhorum
Epidemicorum  facies ; non  tarn  qua  varias  ejusdem  anni  tempestates,
quam  qua  discrepantes  diversorura  ah  invicem  annorum  constitutiones
referunt,  ah  iisque  dependent.  Quae  tarn  aperto  praedictorum  mor-
borum  diversitas  turn  propriis  ac  sihi  peculiaribus  symptomatis,  turn
etiam  medendi  ratione  quam  hi  ah  illis  disparem  prorsus  sihi  vendi-
cant,  satis  illucescit.  Ex  quibus  constat  morbus  hosce,  ut  ut  externa
quadantenus  specie,  et  symptomatis  aliquot  utrisque  pariter  super-
venientibus,  convenire  paulo  incautioribus  videantur,  re  tamen  ipsa
(si  bene  adverteris  animum,)  alienae  admodum  esse  indolis,  et  distare
ut  aera  lupinis.”

From  all  this,  it  is  clear  that  these  useless  and  misused  names  of
diseases  ought  to  have  no  influence  on  the  practice  of  the  true
physician,  who  knows  that  he  has  to  judge  of  and  to  cure  diseases,
not  according  to  the  similarity  of  the  name  of  a single  one  of  their


188


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


chronic  (psoric)  disease,  the  duty  of  a careful  appre-
hension of  its  discoverable  symptoms  and  characteris-
tics is  as  indispensable  for  the  homoeopathic  physician,
as  it  was  before  that  discovery,  as  no  real  cure  of
this,  or  of  other  diseases  can  take  place  without  a
strict  particular  treatment  (individualization)  of  each
case  of  disease — only,  that  in  this  investigation  some
ditference  is  to  be  observed  when  the  atfection  is  an
acute  and  rapidly  developed  disease,  and  when  it  is  a
chronic  one ; as  in  acute  disease,  the  chief  symptoms
occur  more  rapidly,  and  become  evident  to  the  senses,
and  hence  much  less  time  is  requisite  for  tracing  the
picture  of  the  disease,  and  much  fewer  questions  are
required  to  be  asked, ^ as  almost  every  thing  is  ap-
parent, than  in  a chronic  disease  which  has  been


symptoms,  but  according  to  the  sum  total  of  all  the  signs  of  the
individual  state  of  each  particular  patient,  whose  affection  it  is  his
duty  carefully  to  investigate,  but  never  to  give  a hypothetical  guess
at  it.

If,  however,  it  is  deemed  necessary  sometimes  to  make  use  of
names  of  diseases,  in  order,  when  talking  about  a patient  to  ordinary
persons,  to  render  ourselves  intelligible  in  few  words,  we  ought  only
to  employ  them  as  collective  names,  and  tell  them,  e.  g.,  the  patient
has  a hind  of  St.  Vitus’  dance,  a hind  of  dropsy,  a hind  of  typhus,
a hind  of  ague ; but  (in  order  to  do  away  at  once  with  the  mistaken
notions  these  names  give  rise  to)  we  should  never  say  he  has  the  St.
Vitus’  dance,  the  typhus,  the  dropsy,  the  ague,  as  there  are  certainly
no  diseases  of  these  and  similar  names,  of  fixed,  unvarying  character.

^ Hence  the  following  directions  for  investigating  the  symptoms
are  only  partially  applicable  for  acute  diseases.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


189


gradually  advancing  for  several  years,  in  which  the
symptoms  are  much  more  dithcult  to  be  ascertained.

§ LXXXIII.

This  individualizing  examination  of  a case  of
disease,  for  which  I only  give  in  this  place  general
directions,  of  which  the  practitioner  will  bear  in  mind
only  what  is  applicable  for  each  individual  case,
demands  of  the  physician  nothing  but  an  unprejudiced
judgment  and  sound  sense,  attention  in  observing  and
fidelity  in  tracing  the  picture  of  the  disease.

§ LXXXIV.

The  patient  details  the  history  of  his  sufierings;
those  about  him  give  an  account  of  his  complaints,
his  conduct,  and  what  they  have  noticed  in  him ; the
physician  sees,  hears  and  remarks  by  his  other  senses
what  there  is  of  an  altered  or  unusual  character  about
him.  He  writes  down  accurately  all  that  the  patient
and  his  friends  have  told  him  in  the  very  expres-
sions used  by  them.  Silently,  and  if  possible,  without
interrupting  them,®  he  lets  them  say  all  they  have
to  observe,  when  they  do  not  wander  to  other  sub-
jects. The  physician  advises  them  at  the  commence-


^ Every  interruption  breaks  the  train  of  thought  of  the  narrators,
and  all  they  would  have  said  at  first  does  not  again  occur  to  them  in
precisely  the  same  manner  after  that.


190


ORGANON  OF  MRDICINE.


merit  to  speak  slowly,  in  order  that  he  may  take
down  in  writing  the  important  parts  of  what  the
speakers  say.

§ LXXXV.

He  begins  a fresh  line  with  every  new  circum-
stance mentioned  by  the  patient  or  his  friends,  so  that
the  symptoms  shall  be  all  ranged  separately  one
below  the  other.  He  can  thus  add  to  any  one,  that
may  at  first  have  been  related  in  too  vague  a manner,
but  subsequently  more  explicitly  detailed.

§ LXXXVI.

When  the  narrators  have  finished  what  they  would
say  of  their  own  accord,  the  physician  then  reverts  to
each  particular  symptom,  and  elicits  more  precise
information  respecting  it  in  the  following  manner:  he
reads  over  the  symptoms  as  they  were  related  to  him
one  by  one,  and  about  each  of  them  he  enquires
particularly:  e.g.  at  what  period  did  this  symptom
occur!  At  a period  previous  to  taking  the  medicine
he  was  hitherto  using  % Whilst  taking  the  medicine  !
Or  only  some  days  after  leaving  off  the  medicine!
What  kind  of  pain,  what  sensation  exactly,  was  it,
that  occurred  on  this  spot!  Where  was  the  exact
spot!  Did  the  pain  occur  in  fits  and  by  itself,  at
various  times!  Or  was  it  continued,  without  inter-
mission ! How  long  did  it  last ! At  what  time  of
the  day  or  night,  and  in  what  portion  of  the  body


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


191


was  it  worst,  or  did  it  cease  entirely'?  What  was  the
exact  nature  of  this  or  that  symptom  or  circumstance
mentioned — described  in  plain  words  ?

§ LXXXVII.

And  thus  the  physician  obtains  more  precise  infor-
mation respecting  each  particular  detail,  but  without
ever  framing  his  questions  so  as  to  suggest  the  answer
to  the  patient,^  so  that  he  shall  only  have  to  answer
yes  or  no ; else  he  will  be  misled  to  answer  in  the
affirmative  or  negative  something  untrue,  half  true,
or  not  strictly  correct,  either  from  indolence  or  in
order  to  please  his  interrogator,  from  which  a false
picture  of  the  disease  and  an  unsuitable  mode  of
treatment  must  result.

§ LXXXVIII.

If  in  these  voluntary  details  nothing  has  been  men-
tioned respecting  several  parts  or  functions  of  the
body,  or  respecting  the  mental  state,  the  physician
asks  what  more  can  be  told  in  regard  to  these  parts
and  these  functions  or  mental  state,®  but  in  doing  this


^ For  instance,  the  physician  should  not  ask,  Was  not  this  or  that
circumstance  present  ? He  should  never  be  guilty  of  making  such
suggestions,  which  tend  to  seduce  the  patient  into  giving  a false
answer  and  a false  account  of  his  symptoms.

^ For  example : How  is  it  with  the  motions  ? How  is  it  with  the
urinary  dischai'ge  ? How  with  the  sleep,  by  day,  by  night  ? In
what  state  are  his  disposition,  his  humour,  his  intellectual  faculties  ?
How  is  it  with  the  thirst  ? What  sort  of  taste  has  he  in  his  mouth  ?


192


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


he  only  makes  use  of  general  expressions,  in  order
that  his  informants  may  be  obliged  to  enter  into
special  details  concerning  them.

§ LXXXIX.

When  the  patient  (for  with  regard  to  his  sensations,
it  is  to  him  we  are  to  give  most  credit,  except  in
the  case  of  feigned  diseases)  has  by  these  details
furnished  voluntarily  and  at  the  mere  enquiry  of  the
interrogator,  the  requisite  information,  and  traced
a tolerably  perfect  picture  of  the  disease  for  the
physician,  the  latter  is  at  liberty,  and  obliged  (if  he
feels  he  has  not  yet  gained  all  the  requisite  infor-
mation) to  ask  more  precise,  more  special  questions.^


What  aliments  and  drinks  does  he  most  affect?  What  are  most
repugnant  to  him  ? Has  each  its  full  natural  taste,  or  some  other
unusual  taste  ? How  does  he  feel  after  eating  or  drinking  ? Is  there
anything  else  to  be  told  about  the  head,  the  limbs,  or  the  abdomen?

^ For  example  ; How  often  are  his  bowels  moved  ? What  is  the
exact  character  of  the  motions  ? Did  the  whitish  evacuation  consist
of  mucus  or  fseces?  Had  he  or  had  he  not  pains  during  the  evacua-
tion ? What  was  then'  exact  character,  and  where  were  they  seated  ?
What  did  the  patient  vomit  ? Is  the  bad  taste  in  the  mouth  putrid,
or  bitter,  or  sour,  or  what,  before  or  after  eating,  or  during  the
repast  ? At  what  period  of  the  day  was  it  worst  ? What  is  the  taste
of  what  is  eructated  ? Does  the  urine  become  tui'bid  on  standing,
or  is  it  turbid  when  fii'st  discharged  ? What  is  its  colour  when  first
emitted  ? Of  what  colour  is  the  sediment  ? How  does  he  conduct
himself  during  sleep  ? does  he  whine,  moan,  talk  or  cry  out  in  his
sleep  ? does  he  start  during  sleep  ? does  he  snore  during  inspiration,
or  during  expiration  ? Does  he  lie  only  on  his  back,  or  on  Avhich  side  ?


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


193


§XC.

When  the  physician  has  finished  writing  down
these  particulars,  he  then  makes  a note  of  what  he
himself  observes  in  the  patient,^  and  ascertains  how
much  of  that  was  peculiar  to  the  patient  in  his
healthy  state.

Does  he  cover  himself  \vell  up,  or  can  he  not  bear  the  clothes  on
him  ? Does  he  easily  awake,  or  does  he  sleep  too  soundly  ? How
does  he  feel  immediately  after  waking  from  sleep  ? How  often  does
this  or  that  symptom  occur?  what  is  the  cause  that  produces  it  each
time  it  occurs  ? does  it  come  on  whilst  sitting,  lying,  standing,  or
when  in  motion  ? only  when  fasting,  or  in  the  moming,  or  only  in
the  evening,  or  only  after  a meal,  or  when  does  it  usually  appear  ? —
When  did  the  rigor  come  on  ? was  it  merely  a chilly  sensation,  or
was  he  actually  cold  at  the  same  time  ? if  so,  in  what  parts  ? or
while  feeling  chilly,  was  he  actually  warm  to  the  touch  ? was  it
merely  a sensation  of  cold,  without  shivering  ? was  he  hot,  without
redness  of  the  face  ? what  parts  of  him  were  hot  to  the  touch  ?
or  did  he  complain  of  heat,  without  being  hot  to  the  touch  ? how
long  did  the  rigor  last  ? how  long  the  hot  stage  ? — When  did  the
thirst  come  on?  during  the  cold  stage?  during  the  heat?  or  previous
to  it  ? or  subsequently  to  it  ? How  great  was  the  thirst,  and  what  was
the  beverage  desired  ? — When  did  the  sweat  come  on  ? at  the  beginning
or  the  end  of  the  heat  ? or  how  many  hours  after  the  heat  ? when
asleep  or  when  awake  ? how  great  was  the  sweat  ? warm  or  cold  ?
on  what  parts  ? of  what  smell  ? — What  does  he  complain  of  before  or
during  the  cold  stage  ? what  during  the  hot  stage  ? what  after  it  ?
what  during  or  after  the  sweating  stage  ? &c.

* For  example : How  the  patient  behaved  during  the  visit  ? whether
he  was  morose,  quarrelsome,  hurried,  disposed  to  weep,  anxious,
despairing  or  sad,  or  hopeful,  calm,  &c.  ? Whether  he  was  in  a
state  of  stupor,  or  unconscious?  whether  he  spoke  hoarsely,  or  in  a
low  tone,  or  incoherently,  or  how  otherwise  did  he  talk  ? what  was


o


194


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ XCI.

The  symptoms  and  feelings  of  the  patient,  during
a previous  course  of  medicine,  do  not  furnish  the  pure
picture  of  the  disease ; but,  on  the  other  hand,
those  symptoms  and  ailments  which  he  sutfered  from
before  the  use  of  the  medicines,  or  several  days  after
they  had  been  discontinued,  give  the  true  fundamental
idea  of  the  original  form  of  the  disease,  and  these
especially  the  physician  must  take  note  of.  When
the  disease  is  of  a chronic  character,  and  the  patient
has  been  taking  medicine  up  to  the  time  he  is  seen,
the  physician  may  with  advantage  leave  him  some
days  quite  without  medicine,  or  in  the  meantime
administer  something  of  an  unmedicinal  nature,  and
defer  to  a subsequent  period  the  more  precise  scrutiny
of  the  morbid  symptoms,  in  order  to  be  able  to  grasp
in  their  purity  the  permanent,  unadulterated  symp-
toms of  the  old  affection,  and  to  form  a faithful
picture  of  the  disease.

the  colour  of  his  face  and  eyes,  and  of  his  skin  generally?  what
degree  of  liveliness  and  power  was  there  in  his  expression  and  eyes?
what  was  the  state  of  his  tongue,  his  breathing,  the  smell  from  his
mouth,  or  his  hearing?  how  much  the  pupils  were  dilated  or  con-
tracted? how  rapidly  and  to  what  extent  they  altered  in  the  dark
and  in  the  light  ? what  was  the  state  of  the  pulse  ? what  that  of  the
abdomen  ? how  moist  or  hot,  how  cold  or  dry  to  the  touch,  was  the
skin  of  this  or  that  part,  or  generally  ? whether  he  lay  with  head
thrown  back,  with  mouth  half  or  wholly  open,  with  the  arms  placed
above  the  head,  on  his  back,  or  in  what  other  position  ? what  effort
did  he  make  to  raise  himself?  and  anything  else  in  him  that  may
strike  the  physician  as  being  remarkable.


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


195


§ XCII.

But  if  it  be  a disease  of  a rapid  course,  and  if  its
serious  character  admit  of  no  delay,  the  physician
must  content  himself  with  observing  the  morbid  con-
dition, altered  though  it  may  be  by  medicines,  if  he
cannot  ascertain  what  symptoms  were  present  before
the  employment  of  the  medicines, — in  order  that  he
may,  at  least,  form  a just  apprehension  of  the  com-
plete picture  of  the  disease  in  its  actual  condition,
that  is  to  say,  of  the  conjoint  malady  formed  by  the
medicinal  and  original  diseases,  which  from  the  use
of  inappropriate  drugs,  is  generally  more  serious  and
dangerous  than  was  the  original  disease,  and  hence
demands  prompt  and  efficient  aid ; and  by  thus  tracing
out  the  complete  picture  of  the  disease  he  will  be
enabled  to  combat  it  with  a suitable  homoeopathic
remedy,  so  that  the  patient  shall  not  fall  a sacrifice
to  the  injurious  drugs  he  has  swallowed.

§ XCIII.

If  the  disease  have  been  brought  on  a short  time,  or
in  the  case  of  a chronic  affection,  a considerable  time
previously,  by  some  obvious  cause,  then  the  patient —
or  his  friends  when  questioned  privately — will  men-
tion it  either  spontaneously  or  when  carefully  inter-
rogated.^


* Any  causes  of  a disgraceful  character,  which  the  patient  or  his
friends  do  not  like  to  confess,  at  least  not  voluntarily,  the  physician
must  endeavour  to  learn  by  skilfully  framing  his  questions,  or  by

o 2


196


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ XCIV.

While  enquiring  into  the  state  of  chronic  diseases,
the  particular  circumstances  of  the  patient  with
regard  to  his  ordinary  occupations,  his  usual  mode  of
living  and  diet,  his  domestic  situation,  and  so  forth,
must  he  well  considered  and  scrutinized,  to  ascertain
what  there  is  in  them  that  may  tend  to  produce  or  to
maintain  disease,  in  order  that  by  their  removal  the
recovery  may  he  promoted.^


private  information.  To  these  belong,  poisoning  or  attempted  suicide,
onanism,  indulgence  in  ordinary  or  unnatural  debaUcheiy,  excesses
in  wine,  cordials,  punch,  and  other  ardent  beverages,  or  coffee, —
over-indulgence  in  eating  generally,  or  in  some  particular  food  of  a
hurtful  character, — infections  with  syphilis  or  itch,  unfortunate  love,
jealousy,  domestic  infelicity,  vexation,  grief  at  some  family  mis-
fortune, ill-usage,  suppressed  revenge,  injured  pride,  embarrassment
of  a pecuniary  nature, — superstitious  fear, — hunger, — or  an  imper-
fection in  the  private  parts,  a rupture,  a prolapsus,  and  so  forth.

* In  chronic  diseases  of  females  it  is  especially  necessary  to  pay
attention  to  pregnancy,  sterility,  sexual  desire,  accouchements,  mis-
carriages, suckling,  and  the  state  of  the  menstrual  discharge.  With
respect  to  the  latter,  more  particularly,  we  should  not  neglect  to
ascertain  if  it  recurs  at  too  short  intervals,  or  is  delayed  beyond  the
proper  time,  how  many  days  it  lasts,  whether  its  flow  is  continuous
or  interrupted,  what  is  its  general  quantity,  how  dark  is  its  colour,
whether  there  is  leucorrhcna  (whites)  before  its  appearance  or  after
its  termination,  but  especially  by  what  bodily  and  mental  ailments,
what  sensations  and  pains,  it  is  preceded,  accomjianied  or  followed ;
if  there  is  leucorrhoea,  what  is  its  nature,  what  sensations  attend  its
flow,  in  what  quantity  it  is,  and  what  are  the  conditions  and  causes
under  which  it  occurs  ?


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


197


§ xcv.

The  investigation  of  the  signs  of  disease  above
mentioned,  and  of  all  others,  must  be  pursued  in  the
case  of  chronic  diseases  as  carefully  and  circum-
stantially as  possible,  and  the  most  minute  peculiarities
must  be  attended  to,  partly  because  in  these  diseases
they  are  the  most  characteristic  and  least  resemble
those  of  acute  diseases,  and  if  a cure  is  to  be  effected
they  cannot  be  too  accurately  noted ; partly  because
the  patients  become  so  used  to  their  long  sufferings,
that  they  pay  little  or  no  heed  to  the  lesser  accessory
symptoms,  which  are  often  very  pregnant  with  mean-
ing (characteristic) — often  very  useful  in  determining
the  choice  of  the  remedy — and  regard  them  almost
as  a necessary  part  of  their  condition,  almost  as
health,  the  real  feeling  of  which  they  have  well  nigh
forgot  in  their  sometimes  fifteen  or  twenty  years  of
suffering,  and  they  can  scarcely  bring  themselves  to
believe  that  these  accessory  symptoms,  these  greater
or  lesser  deviations  from  the  healthy  state,  can  have
any  connexion  with  their  principal  malady.

§XCVI.

Besides  this,  patients  themselves  differ  so  much  in
their  dispositions,  that  some,  especially  the  so-called
hypochondriacs  and  other  persons  of  great  sensitive-
ness and  impatient  of  suffering,  portray  their  symp-
toms in  too  vivid  colours,  and,  in  order  to  induce  the


198


ORGANON  or  MEDICINE.


physician  to  give  them  relief,  describe  their  ailments
in  exaggerated  expressions.^

§ XCVII.

Other  individuals  of  an  opposite  character,  how-
ever, partly  from  indolence,  partly  from  false  modesty,
partly  from  a kind  of  mildness  of  disposition  or  weak-
ness of  mind,  refrain  from  mentioning  a number  of
their  symptoms,  describe  them  in  vague  terms,  or
allege  some  of  them  to  be  of  no  moment.

§ XCVIII.

Now,  as  certainly  as  we  should  listen  particularly
to  the  patient’s  description  of  his  sufferings  and  sen-
sations, and  attach  credence  especially  to  his  own
expressions,  wherewith  he  endeavours  to  make  us
understand  his  ailments, — because  in  the  mouths  of
his  friends  and  attendants  they  are  usually  altered
and  erroneously  stated, — so  certainly,  on  the  other


* A pure  fabrication  of  symptoms  and  sufferings  will  never  be  met
with  in  hypochondriacs,  even  m the  most  impatient  of  them, — •
a comparison  of  the  sufferings  they  complain  of  at  various  times
when  the  physician  gives  them  nothing  at  all,  or  something  quite
unmedicinal,  proves  this  plainly ; — but  we  must  deduct  something  from
their  exaggeration,  at  all  events  lay  the  strong  character  of  thek
expressions  to  the  account  of  their  excessive  sensibility,  in  which
case  this  very  exaggeration  of  then-  expressions  when  talking  of
their  ailments,  becomes  of  itself  an  important  symptom  in  the  list  of
features  of  which  the  portrait  of  the  disease  is  composed.  The  case’
is  different  with  insane  persons  and  wilful  feigners  of  disease.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


199


hand,  in  all  diseases,  but  especially  in  the  chronic
ones,  the  investigation  of  their  true,  complete  picture
and  its  peculiarities,  demands  peculiar  circumspection,
tact,  knowledge  of  human  nature,  caution  in  conduct-
ing the  inquiry,  and  patience  in  an  eminent  degree.

§ XCIX.

On  the  whole,  the  investigation  of  acute  diseases,
or  of  such  as  have  existed  but  a short  time,  is  much
the  easiest  for  the  physician,  because  all  the  phe-
nomena and  deviations  from  the  health  that  has  been
but  recently  lost,  are  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the
patient  and  his  Mends,  still  continue  to  be  novel  and
striking.  The  physician  certainly  requires  to  know
everything  in  such  cases  also ; but  he  has  much  less
to  inquire  into;  they  are  for  the  most  part  spon-
taneously detailed  to  him.

§C.

In  investigating  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  of
epidemic  and  sporadic  diseases,  it  is  very  immaterial
whether  something  similar  ever  appeared  in  the
world  before,  under  the  same  name.  The  novelty
or  peculiarity  of  a disease  of  that  kind  makes  no
difference  either  in  the  mode  of  examining  or  of
treating  it,  as  the  physician  must,  under  all  circum-
stances, view  the  pure  picture  of  every  prevalent
disease  as  if  it  were  something  new  and  unknown,
and  investigate  it  thoroughly  for  itself,  if  he  desires
to  practise  medicine  in  a real  and  radical  manner,


200


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


never  substituting  conjecture  for  actual  observation,
never  taking  for  granted  that  the  ■ case  of  disease
before  him  is  already  wholly  or  partially  known,  but
always  carefully  examining  it  in  all  its  phases ; and
this  mode  of  procedure  is  all  the  more  requisite  in
such  cases,  as  a careful  examination  will  shew  that
every  prevailing  disease  is  in  many  respects  a phe-
nomenon of  a peculiar  character,  differing  vastly  from
all  previous  epidemics,  improperly  denominated  by
the  same  appellation; — with  the  exception  of  those
epidemics  resulting  from  a contagious  principle  that
always  remains  the  same,  such  as  small-pox,  measles,
and  the  like.

§ Cl.

It  may  happen  that  in  the  first  case  of  an  epidemic
disease  that  presents  itself  to  the  physician’s  notice,
he  does  not  at  once  obtain  a knowledge  of  its  com-
plete picture,  as  it  is  only  by  a close  observation  of
several  cases  of  such  collective  diseases,  that  he  can
become  conversant  with  the  totality  of  their  signs  and
symptoms.  The  carefully  observing  physician  can,
however,  from  the  examination  of  the  first  one  or  two
patients,  often  arrive  so  nearly  at  a knowledge  of  the
true  state,  as  to  be  able  to  form  an  idea  of  its  charac-
teristic features — and  even  then  discover  a suitable,
homoeopathically  adapted  remedy  for  it.

§CII.

In  the  course  of  writing  down  the  symptoms  of
several  cases  of  this  kind,  the  sketch  of  the  morbid


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


201


picture  becomes  ever  more  and  more  complete,  not
more  extended  and  spun  out,  but  more  significant
(more  characteristic),  and  more  comprehensive  with
respect  to  the  peculiarities  of  this  collective  disease ;
on  the  one  hand,  the  general  symptoms  {e.g,  loss  of
appetite,  sleeplessness,  &c.)  become  particularly  and
exactly  defined,  and  on  the  other,  the  more  marked
and  special  symptoms  which  are  peculiar  to  but  few
diseases  and  of  rarer  occurrence,  at  least  in  the  same
combination,  become  prominent,  and  constitute  what  is
characteristic  of  this  malady.^  All  those  affected  with
the  disease  prevailing  at  a given  time,  have  certainly
contracted  it  from  one  and  the  same  source,  and  hence
are  suffering  from  the  same  disease ; but  the  whole
extent  of  such  an  epidemic  disease,  and  the  totality
of  its  symptoms  (the  knowledge  whereof,  which  is
essential  for  enabling  us  to  choose  the  most  suitable
homoeopathic  remedy  for  this  collection  of  symptoms,
is  obtained  by  a complete  survey  of  the  morbid
picture)  cannot  be  learned  from  one  single  patient,
but  is  only  to  be  perfectly  deduced  (abstracted)  and
ascertained  from  the  sufferings  of  several  patients  of
different  constitutions.


§ cm.

In  the  same  manner  as  has  here  been  taught  rela-
tive to  the  epidemic  diseases,  which  are  generally  of


* The  physician  who  has  already,  in  the  first  cases,  been  able  to
choose  a remedy  approximating  to  the  homoeopathic  specific,  will.


202


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


an  acute  character,  the  miasmatic  chronic  maladies,
that  always  remain  the  same  in  their  essential  nature,
and  especially  the  psora,  had  to  be  investigated  by
me  as  to  the  whole  sphere  of  their  symptoms,  in  a
much  more  minute  manner  than  had  ever  been  done
before,  for  in  them  also  one  patient  only  exhibits  a
portion  of  their  symptoms,  a second,  a third,  and  so
on,  suffer  from  some  other  symptoms,  which  also  are
but  a (dissevered,  as  it  were)  portion  of  the  totality
of  the  symptoms  which  altogether  constitute  the
entire  extent  of  the  same  malady,  so  that  the  sum
total  of  all  the  symptoms  belonging  to  such  a mias-
matic, chronic  disease,  and  especially  to  the  psora,
can  only  be  ascertained  from  the  observation  of
very  many  single  patients  affected  with  such  chronic
diseases,  and  without  a complete  survey  and  collective
picture  of  these  symptoms,  the  medicines  capable  of
curing  the  whole  malady  homoeopathically  (to  wit,  the
antipsorics)  cannot  be  learned,  and  these  medicines
are,  at  the  same  time,  the  true  remedies  of  the  several
patients  suffering  from  the  same  chronic  affections.

§ CIV.

When  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  that  chiefly
mark  and  distinguish  the  case  of  disease,  or,  in  other
words,  when  the  picture  of  the  disease,  whatever  be


from  the  subsequent  cases,  be  enabled  either  to  verify  the  suitable-
ness of  the  medicine  chosen,  or  to  discover  a more  appropriate,  the
most  appropriate  homosopathic  remedy.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


203


its  kind,  is  once  accurately  sketched,^  the  most  diffi-
cult part  of  the  task  is  accomplished.  The  physician
has  then  laid  the  foundation  of  his  treatment,  especially
in  the  case  of  the  chronic  disease ; he  has  it  always
before  him,  can  examine  it  in  all  its  parts,  and  can
pick  out  the  characteristic  symptoms,  in  order  to

^ The  old  school  physician  gave  himself  veiy  little  trouble  in
this  matter,  in  his  mode  of  treatment.  He  would  not  listen  to  any
minute  detail  of  all  the  cu’cumstances  of  his  case,  by  the  patient ;
indeed  he  frequently  cut  him  short  in  his  relation  of  his  sufferings,
in  order  that  he  might  not  be  disturbed  in  the  rapid  writing  of
his  prescription,  composed  of  a variety  of  ingredients  unknown  to
him  in  their  true  effects.  No  allopathic  physician,  as  has  been  said,
sought  to  learn  all  the  minute  circumstances'  of  the  patient’s  case,
and  still  less  did  he  make  a note  in  luriting  of  them.  On  seeing  the
patient  again  several  days  afterwards,  he  recollected  nothing  con-
cernmg  the  few  details  he  had  heard  at  the  first  visit  (having  in  the
mean  time  seen  so  many  other  patients  affected  with  various  diseases) ;
he  had  allowed  eveiything  to  go  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other.
At  subsequent  visits  he  only  asked  a few  general  questions,  went
tlu'ough  the  ceremony  of  feeling  the  pulse  at  the  wrist,  looked  at  the
tongue,  and  at  the  same  moment  ■wrote  another  prescription,  on
equally  irrational  principles,  or  ordered  the  first  one  to  be  continued
(in  considerable  quantities,  several  times  a day),  and,  with  a graceful
bow,  he  hurried  off  to  the  fiftieth  or  sixtieth  patient  he  had  to  visit,
in  this  thoughtless  way,  in  the  course  of  that  forenoon.  The  pro-
fession which  of  all  others  requmes  actually,  the  most  refiexion,  a
conscientious,  careful  examination  of  the  state  of  each  individual
patient,  and  a special  treatment  founded  thereon,  was  conducted  in
this  manner  by  persons  who  called  themselves  physicians,  rational
practitioners.  The  result,  as  might  naturally  be  expected,  was
almost  invariably  bad ; and  yet  patients  were  found  to  repair  to
them  for  advice,  partly  because  there  rvere  none  better  to  be  had,
partly  for  fashion’s  sake.


204


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


oppose  to  these,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  whole  malady
itself,  a very  similar,  artificial  morbific  agent,  in  the
shape  of  a homceopathically  chosen  medicinal  sub-
stance, selected  from  the  lists  of  symptoms  of  all  the
medicines  whose  pure  effects  have  been  ascertained.
And  when,  during  the  treatment,  he  wishes  to  learn
the  effect  of  the  medicine,  and  the  change  that  has
taken  place  in  the  patient’s  state,  in  this  new  diag-
nostic investigation,  he  only  needs  to  strike  out  of
the  original  enumeration  of  the  symptoms  he  had  at
first  noted  down,  those  that  have  become  ameliorated,
and  to  mark  what  still  remain,  or  add  any  new  symp-
toms that  may  have  supervened.

§CV.

The  second  point  in  the  vocation  of  the  true  physi-
cian relates  to  ascertaining  the  instruments  fitted  for
the  cure  of  the  natural  diseases,  the  investigation  of
the  pathogenetic  power  of  medicines,  in  order,  when
called  on  to  cure,  to  be  able  to  select  from  among
them  one,  from  the  list  of  whose  symptoms  an  artificial
disease  may  be  constructed,  as  similar  as  possible  to
the  totality  of  the  principal  symptoms  of  the  natural
disease  to  be  cured.


§ CVI.

The  whole  pathogenetic  power  of  the  several
medicines  must  be  known,  that  is  to  say,  all  the
morbid  symptoms  and  alterations  in  the  health,  that
each  of  them  is  specially  capable  of  developing  in  the


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


205


healthy  individual,  must  first  have  been  observed  as
far  as  possible,  before  we  can  hope  to  be  able  to  find
among  them,  and  to  select,  suitable  homoeopathic
remedies  for  the  greater  number  of  natural  diseases.

§ evil.

If,  in  order  to  ascertain  this,  medicines  be  given  to
sick  persons  only,  even  though  they  be  administered
singly  and  alone,  then  little  or  nothing  of  a decided
character  is  seen  of  their  pure  effects,  as  those  peculiar
alterations  of  the  health,  to  be  expected  from  the
medicine,  are  mixed  up  with  the  symptoms  of  the
disease,  and  can  seldom  be  distinctly  observed.

§ CVIII.

There  is  therefore  no  other  possible  way,  in  which
the  peculiar  effects  of  medicines  on  the  health  of
individuals  can  be  infallibly  ascertained — there  is  no
sure,  no  more  natural  way  of  accomplishing  this
object,  than  to  administer  the  several  medicines,
experimentally,  in  small  doses,  to  healthy  persons,  in
order  to  ascertain  what  changes,  symptoms,  and  signs
of  their  influence,  each  individually  produces  on  the
health  of  the  body  and  of  the  mind,  that  is  to  say,  what
elements  of  disease  they  are  able  and  tend  to  produce,^

^ No  single  physician,  as  far  as  I know,  duiing  the  previous  two
thousand  five  hundred  years,  thought  of  this  so  natural,  so  absolutely
necessary,  and  only  genuine  mode  of  testing  medicines  for  their  pure,
and  peculiar  efiPects  in  altering  the  health  of  man,  in  order  to  learn
what  morbid  state  each  medicine  is  capable  of  curing,  except  the


206


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


since,  as  has  been  demonstrated  (§  xxiv — xxvii)  all
the  curative  power  of  medicines  is  this  power  they
possess  of  changing  the  state  of  man’s  health,  and  is
ascertained  by  observation  of  the  latter.

§ CIX.

I was  the  first  that  opened  up  this  path,  which  I
have  pursued  with  a perseverance  that  could  only
arise  and  be  kept  up  by  a perfect  conviction  of  the
great  truth,  fraught  with  such  blessings  to  humanity,
that  it  is  only  by  the  homoeopathic  employment  of
medicines,’^  that  the  certain  cure  of  human  maladies
is  possible.^


great  and  immortal  Albrecht  von  Haller.  He  alone,  besides  myself,
saw  the  necessity  of  this  {vide  the  Preface  to  the  Pharmacopoea
Helvet.  Basil.,  1771,  fol.  p.  12):  “Nempe  primum  in  corpore  sano
medela  tentanda  est,  sine  peregrina  ulla  miscela;  odoreque  et  sapore
ejns  exploratis,  exigua  illius  dosis  ingerenda  et  ad  omnes,  quae  inde
contingunt,  affectiones,  quis  pulsus,  qui  calor,  quae  respiratio,
quaenam  excretiones,  attendendum.  Inde  ad  ductum  phaenome-
norum,  in  sano  obviorum,  transeas  ad  experimenta  in  corpore  aegroto,
etc.”  But  no  one,  not  a single  physician  attended  to  or  followed  up
this  invaluable  hint.

‘ It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  another  true,  best  method  of
curing  dynamic  diseases  {i.  e.  all  diseases  not  strictly  surgical),
besides  homoeopathy,  just  as  it  is  impossible  to  draw  more  than  one
straight  line  betwixt  two  given  points.  He  who  imagines  that  there
are  other  modes  of  curing  diseases  besides  it,  could  not  have
appreciated  the  fundamental  character  of  homoeopathy  nor  practised
it  with  sufficient  care,  nor  could  he  ever  have  seen  or  read  cases  of
properly  performed  homoeopathic  cimes,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,
could  he  have  discerned  the  baselessness  of  all  allopathic  modes  of


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


207


§CX.

I saw,  moreover,  that  the  morbid  lesions  which
previous  authors  had  observed  to  result  from  medi-
cinal substances  when  taken  into  the  stomach  of
healthy  persons,  either  by  mistake  or  in  order  to  pro-
duce death,  or  from  some  other  cause,  accorded  very
much  with  my  own  observations  when  experimenting
with  the  same  substances  on  myself  and  other  healthy
individuals.  These  authors  give  details  of  what  oc-
curred as  histories  of  poisoning,  and  as  proofs  of  the
pernicious  etfects  of  these  powerful  substances,  chiefly
in  order  to  warn  others  from  their  use,  partly  also  for
the  sake  of  exalting  their  own  skill,  when  under  the
use  of  the  remedies  they  employed  to  combat  these


treating  diseases  and  their  bad  or  even  di’eadful  effects,  if,  with  such
lax  indifference,  he  places  the  only  true  healing  art  on  an  equality
with  those  hurtful  methods  of  treatment,  or  alleges  them  to  be
auxiharies  to  homoeopathy  which  it  could  not  dispense  with ! My
true,  conscientious . followers,  the  pure  homoeopathists,  with  their
successful,  almost  never-failing,  treatment,  might  teach  these  persons
better.

^ The  fii’st  fruits  of  these  labours,  as  perfect  as  they  could  be  at
that  time,  I recorded  in  the  Fragmenta  de  virihus  medicamentorum
positivis,  sive  in  sano  corpora  humano  ohservatis.  Ft.  I,  II,  Lipsise,
8.  1805,  ap.  J.  A.  Barth  ; the  more  mature  fruits  in  the  Reine
Arzneimittellehre.  I.  Th.,  dritte  Ausg.  II.  Th.,  diitte  Ausg.  1833.
III.  Th.,  zweite  Ausg.  1825.  IV.  Th.,  zw.  Ausg.  1825.  V.  Th.,
zw.  Ausg.  1826.  VI.  Th.,  zw.  Ausg.  1827;  and  in  the  second,
third  and  fourth  parts  of  Die  chronischen  Kranhheiten  1828,  1830,
Dresden  bei  Arnold.  [2nd  edit,  with  a fifth  part,  Dusseldorf  bei
Schaub.  1835,  1839.]


208


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


dangerous  accidents,  health  was  gradually  restored ;
but  partly  also,  in  the  cases  when  persons  so  alfected
died  under  their  treatment,  in  order  to  seek  their  own
justification  in  the  dangerous  character  of  these  sub-
stances which  they  then  termed  poisons.  None  of
these  observers  ever  dreamed  that  the  symptoms  they
recorded  merely  as  proofs  of  the  noxious  and  poison-
ous character  of  these  substances,  were  sure  revelations
of  the  power  of  these  drugs  to  extinguish  curatively
similar  symptoms  occurring  in  natural  diseases,  that
these  their  jiathogenetic  phenomena  were  intimations
of  their  homoeopathic  curative  action,  and  that  the
only  possible  way  to  ascertain  their  medicinal  powers,
is  to  observe  these  changes  of  health  medicines  are
capable  of  producing  in  the  healthy  organism;  for
the  pure,  peculiar  powers  of  medicines  available  for
the  cure  of  disease  are  to  be  learned  neither  by  any
ingenious  a priori  speculations,  nor  by  the  smell,  taste
or  appearance  of  the  drugs,  nor  by  their  chemical
analysis,  nor  yet  by  the  employment  of  several  of
them  at  one  time  in  a mixture  (prescription)  in
diseases ; it  was  little  suspected  that  these  histories
of  medicinal  diseases  would  one  day  furnish  the  first
rudiments  of  the  true,  pure  materia  medica,  which
from  the  earliest  times  until  now  has  consisted  solely
of  false  conjectures  and  inventions,  that  is  to  say,  did
not  exist  at  all.^


* See  what  I have  said  on  this  subject  in  the  “ Examination  of  tlie
sources  of  the  ordinary  Materia  Medica,”  prefixed  to  the  tim'd  part


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


209


§ CXI.

TKe  agreement  of  my  observations  on  the  pure  effects
of  medicines  with  these  older  ones — although  they
were  recorded  without  reference  to  any  therapeutic
object — and  even  the  concordance  of  these  accounts
with  others  of  the  same  kind  by  different  authors,
must  at  once  convince  us  that  medicinal  substances
act,  in  the  morbid  changes  they  produce  in  the  healthy
human  body,  according  to  fixed,  eternal  laws  of  nature,
and  by  virtue  of  these  are  enabled  to  produce  certain,
trustworthy  morbid  symptoms,  each  according  to  its  own
peculiar  character.

§ CXII.

In  those  older  descriptions  of  the  often  dangerous
effects  of  medicines  ingested  in  such  excessively  large
doses,  we  notice  certain  states  that  were  produced,
not  at  the  commencement  but  towards  the  termination
of  those  sad  events,  and  which  were  of  an  exactly
opposite  nature  to  those  that  first  appeared.  These
symptoms,  the  very  reverse  of  the  primary  action
(§  Ixiii)  or  proper  action  of  the  medicines  on  the  vital
force,  are  the  re-action  of  the  vital  force  of  the
organism,  its  secondary  action  (§  Ixii — Ixvii)  of  which
there  is  seldom  or  never  the  least  trace  from  experi-
ments with  moderate  doses  on  healthy  bodies,  and
from  small  doses  none  whatever.  In  the  homoeo-


of  my  Heine  Arzneimiitellelire.  [Translated  in  the  Brit.  Jour,  of
Homoeopathy,  vol.  vi.  pp.  261,  424.]


P


210


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


pathic  curative  operation  the  living  organism  makes
only  as  much  reaction  as  is  requisite  to  raise  the
health  again  to  the  normal  healthy  state  (§  Ixvii).

§ CXIII.

The  only  exceptions  to  this  are  the  narcotic  medi-
cines. As  they,  in  their  primary  action,  sometimes
destroy  the  sensibility  and  sensation,  sometimes  the
irritability,  it  frequently  happens  that  in  their  secon-
dary action^  even  from  moderate  experimental  doses
on  healthy  bodies,  an  increased  sensibility  (and  a
greater  irritability)  is  observable.

§ CXIV.

With  the  exception  of  these  narcotic  substances,
in  experiments  with  moderate  doses  of  medicine  on
healthy  bodies,  we  observe  only  their  primary  action,

e.  those  symptoms  wherewith  the  medicine  alters
the  health  of  the  human  being  and  develops  in  him
a morbid  state  of  longer  or  shorter  duration.

8 CXV.

• o

Among  these  symptoms,  there  occur  in  the  case  of
some  medicines,  not  a few  which  are  partially,  or  in
certain  accessory  circumstances,  directly  opposite  to
other  symptoms  that  have  previously  appeared  or  may
afterwards  appear,  but  which  are  not,  therefore,  to
be  regarded  as  actual  secondary  action,  or  the  pure
reaction  of  the  vital  force,  but  which  only  represent


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


211


the  alternating  condition  of  the  various  paroxysms  of
action  of  the  primary  action ; they  are  termed  alter-
nating actions.

§ CXVI.

Some  symptoms  are  produced  more  frequently,
that  is  to  say,  in  many  individuals,  others  more
rarely  or  in  few  persons,  some  only  in  very  few
healthy  organisms.

§ CXVII.

To  the  latter  class  belong  the  so-called  idiosyncrasies,
by  which  are  meant  peculiar  corporeal  constitutions,
which,  although  otherwise  healthy,  possess  a disposition
to  be  brought  into  a more  or  less  morbid  state,^  by
certain  things  which  seem  to  produce  no  impression
and  no  change  in  many  other  individuals.  But  this
inability  to  make  an  impression  on  every  one  is  only
apparent.  For  as  two  things  are  required  for  the
production  of  these  as  well  as  all  other  morbid  altera-
tions in  the  health  of  man,  to  wit,  the  inherent  power
of  the  influencing  substance,  and  the  capability  of  the
vital  force  that  animates  the  organism  to  be  afi’ected
by  it,  the  obvious  derangements  of  health  in  the  so-
called  idiosyncrasies  cannot  be  laid  to  the  account  of


‘ Some  few  persons  are  apt  to  faint  from  the  smell  of  roses,  and
to  fall  into  many  other  morbid,  and  sometimes  dangerous  states  from
partaking  of  muscles,  crabs,  or  the  spawn  of  the  barbel,  from  touch-
ing the  leaves  of  some  kinds  of  sumach,  &c.

p 2


212


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


these  peculiar  constitutions  alone,  but  they  must  be
also  ascribed  to  these  things  that  produce  them,  in
which  must  lie  the  power  of  making  the  same  im-
pressions on  all  human  bodies,  yet  in  such  a manner,
that  but  a small  number  of  healthy  constitutions  have
a tendency  to  allow  themselves  to  be  brought  into
such  an  obvious  morbid  condition  by  them.  That
these  potencies  do  actually  make  this  impression  on
every  healthy  body,  is  shewn  by  this,  that  they  render
effectual  homoeopathic  service  as  remedial  agents,^  to
all  sick  persons,  for  morbid  symptoms  similar  to  those
they  are  capable  of  producing  (though  apparently
only  in  so-called  idiosyncratic  individuals).

§ CXVIII.

Every  medicine  exhibits  peculiar  actions  on  the
human  frame,  which  are  not  produced  in  exactly
the  same  manner  by  any  other  medicinal  substance
of  a different  kind.^


' Thus  the  Princess  Maria  Porphyrogenita  cured  her  brotlier  tlie
Emperor  Alexius,  who  suffered  from  faintings,  hy  sprinkling  him
with  rose-water  (to  tSiv  poStvv  o-ToXa^/ra)  in  the  presence  of  his  aunt
Eudoxia  {Hist.  hyz.  Alexias,  lib.  15,  p.  503,  ed.  Posser)  and  Horstius
{Oper.  iii.  p.  54)  saw  much  utility  from  rose-vinegar  in  cases  of
syncope.

^ This  fact  was  also  perceived  by  the  estimable  A.  v.  Haller,  who
says  (Preface  to  his  Hist,  stirp.  helv.)  : “ latet  immensa  virium
diversitas  in  iis  ipsis  plantis,  quarum  facies  externas  dudum  novimus,
animas  quasi  et  quodcunque  caelestius  habent,  nondum  perspexi-


]nus.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


213


§ CXIX.

As  certainly  as  every  species  of  plant  differs,  in  its
external  form,  mode  of  life  and  growth,  in  its  taste
and  smell,  from  every  other  species  and  genus  of
plant,  as  certainly  as  every  mineral  and  every  salt
differ  from  all  others,  as  well  in  their  external,  as  in
their  internal  and  chemical  properties  (which  alone
should  have  sufficed  to  prevent  all  confounding  of  one
with  another),  so  certainly  do  they  all  differ  and
diverge  among  themselves  in  their  pathogenetic —
consequently  also  in  their  therapeutic — effects.^  Each
of  these  substances  produces  alterations  in  the  health
of  human  beings  in  a peculiar,  different,  yet  deter-
minate manner,  so  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of
confounding  one  with  the  other. ^


' Anyone  who  has  a thorough  knowledge  of,  and  can  justly  estimate
the  remarkable  manner  in  which  the  effects  on  the  health  of  man  of
every  single  substance  differ  from  those  of  every  other,  will  readily
perceive  that  among  them  there  can  be,  in  a medicinal  point  of  view,
no  synonymous  remedies  whatever,  no  surrogates.  It  is  only  one
who  does  not  know  the  pure,  positive  effects  of  the  different  medi-
cines, that  can  be  so  foolish  as  to  endeavour  to  persuade  us,  that  one
can  serve  in  the  stead  of  the  other,  a-nd  can,  in  the  same  disease,
prove  just  as  serviceable  as  the  other.  Thus  do  ignorant  children
confound  the  most  essentially  different  things,  because  they  scarcely
know  their  external  appearances,  far  less  their  value,  their  true
importance,  and  their  very  dissimilar  inherent  properties.

^ If  this  be  pure  truth,  as  it  most  certainly  is,  then  no  physician,
who  would  not  be  regarded  as  devoid  of  reason,  and  who  would  not
act  contrary  to  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  the  sole  arbiter  of  real
worth,  can  henceforth  employ  in  the  treatment  of  diseases,  any


214


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CXX.

Therefore  medicines,  on  which  depend  man’s  life
and  death,  disease  and  health,  must  be  thoroughly  and
most  carefully  distinguished  from  one 'another,  and
for  this  purpose  tested  by  careful  experiments,  for  the
purpose  of  ascertaining  their  powers  and  real  effects


medicinal  substances  but  those  with  whose  real  value  he  is  thoroughly
and  perfectly  conversant,  i.  e.  whose  positive  action  on  the  health
of  healthy  individuals  he  has  so  accurately  tested,  that  he  knows
for  certain,  that  they  are  capable  of  producing  a very  similar  morbid
state,  more  similar  than  any  other  medicine  with  which  he  is  com-
pletely acquainted,  to  that  presented  by  the  case  of  disease  he  intends
to  cure  by  means  of  it — for,  as  has  been  shewn  above,  neither
man,  nor  mighty  nature  herself,  can  effect  a perfect,  raj^id  and  per-
manent cure,  otherwise  than  with  a homoeopathic  remedy.  Hence-
forth no  true  physician  can  abstain  from  making  such  experiments,
in  order  to  obtain  this  most  necessary  and  only  knowledge  of  the
medicines  that  are  essential  to  cure,  this  knowledge  which  has
hitherto  been  neglected  by  the  physicians  of  every  age.  All  former
ages — posterity  will  scarcely  believe  it — have  hitherto  contented
themselves  with  blindly  prescribing  for  diseases,  medicines  whose
value  was  unknown,  and  which  had  never  heen  tested  relative  to
their  highly  important,  veiy  various,  pure,  dynamic  action  on  the
health  of  man  ; and,  moreover,-  they  mingled  several  of  those  j^owers
that  differed  so  vastly  among  each  other,  in  one  formula,  and  left  it
to  chance  to  determine  what  effect  should  thereby  be  produced  on
tlie  patient.  This  is  just  as  if  a madman  should  force  his  way  into
the  workshop  of  an  artisan,  seize  upon  handfuls  of  very  different
tools,  toith  the  uses  of  all  of  which  he  is  quite  unacquainted,  in  order,
as  he  imagines,  to  wmrk  at  the  objects  of  art  he  sees  ai’ound  him;
I need  hardly  remark  that  these  would  be  destroyed,  I may  say,
utterly  ruined,  by  his  senseless  operations.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


215


on  the  healthy  body,  in  order  to  obtain  an  accurate
knowledge  of  them,  and  to  enable  us  to  avoid  any
mistake  in  their  employment  in  diseases,  for  it  is
only  by  a correct  choice  of  them  that  the  greatest  of
all  earthly  blessings,  the  health  of  the  body  and  of  the
mind,  can  be  rapidly  and  permanently  restored.

§ CXXI.

In  proving  medicines  to  ascertain  their  effects  on
the  healthy  body,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the
strong,  heroic  substances,  as  they  are  termed,  are
liable  to  produce  changes  in  the  health  even  of  robust
persons,  and  even  in  small  doses.  Those  of  milder
power  must  be  given  in  these  experiments  in  more
considerable  quantities;  in  order  to  observe  the  action
of  the  very  weakest,  however,  the  subjects  of  experi-
ment should  be  persons  free  from  disease,  and  who
are  delicate,  irritable  and  sensitive.

§ CXXII.

In  these  experiments — on  which  depend  the  exac-
titude of  the  whole  medical  art,  and  the  weal  of  all
future  generations  of  mankind — no  other  medicines
should  be  employed,  except  such  as  are  perfectly  well
known,  and  of  whose  purity,  genuineness  and  energy
we  are  thoroughly  assured.

§CXXIII.

Each  of  these  medicines  must  be  taken  in  a perfectly
simple,  unadulterated  form ; the  indigenous  plants  in


216


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


the  form  of  freshly  expressed  juice,  mixed  with  a
little  alcohol,  to  prevent  it  spoiling ; exotic  vegetable
substances,  however,  in  the  form  of  powder,  or  tincture
prepared  with  alcohol  when  they  were  in  the  fresh
state,  and  afterwards  mingled  with  a certain  proportion
of  water;  salts  and  gums,  however,  should  be  dissolved
in  water  just  before  being  taken.  If  the  plant  can
only  be  procured  in  its  dry  state,  and  if  its  powers  are
naturally  weak,  in  that  case  there  may  be  used  for  the
experiment,  an  infusion  of  it,  made  by  cutting  the
herb  into  small  pieces  and  pouring  boiling  water  on  it,
so  as  to  extract  its  medicinal  qualities ; immediately
after  its  preparation  it  must  be  .swallowed  whilst  still
warm,  as  all  extracted  vegetable  juices  and  all  aqueous
infusions  of  herbs,  without  the.  addition  of  spirit,  pass
rapidly  into  fermentation  and  decomposition ; whereby
all  their  medicinal  properties  are  lost.

§ CXXIV.

For  these  experiments,  every  medicinal  substance
must  be  employed  quite  alone  and  perfectly  pure,
without  the  admixture  of  any  foreign  substance,  and
without  taking  any  thing  else  of  a medicinal  nature
the  same  day,  nor  yet  on  the  subsequent  days,  nor
during  all  the  time  we  wish  to  observe  the  effects  of
the  medicine.

§ cxxv.

During  all  the  time  the  experiment  lasts  the  diet
must  be  strictly  regulated ; it  should  be  as  much  as


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


217


possible  destitute  of  spices,  of  a purely  nutritious  and
simple  character,  green  vegetables,^  roots,  and  all
salads  and  herb  soups,  (which  all,  even  when  prepared
for  table,  possess  some  disturbing  medicinal  qualities)
should  he  avoided.  The  drinks  are  to  be  those
usually  partaken  of,  as  little  stimulating  as  possible.^

§ CXXVI.

The  person  who  is  proving  the  medicine,  must
during  the  whole  time  of  the  experiment  avoid  all
excessive  exertion  of  mind  and  body,  all  sorts  of
dissipation,  and  disturbing  passions ; he  should  have
no  urgent  business  to  prevent  him  making  his  ohser-
vations  with  due  attention ; he  must  do  his  best  to
direct  most  particular  attention  towards  himself,  and
not  be  disturbed  whilst  so  doing ; his  body  must  be
in  what  is  for  him  a good  state  of  health,  and  he
must  possess  a sufficient  amount  of  intelligence  to  be
able  to  express  and  describe  his  sensations  in  accurate
terms.

§ CXXVII.

The  medicines  must  be  tested  on  both  males  and
females,  in  order  to  reveal  the  alterations  of  the  health
they  produce,  in  reference  to  the  sexual  system.


* Young  green  peas,  green  French  beans,  and  in  all  cases  carrots
are  allowable,  as  the  least  medicinal  vegetables.

^ The  subject  of  experiment  must  either  be  not  in  the  habit  of
taking  pure  wine,  brandy,  coffee  or  tea,  or  he  must  have  totally
abstained  for  a considerable  time  previously  from  the  use  of  these
injurious  beverages,  some  of  which  are  stimulating,  others  medicinal.


218


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CXXVIII.

The  most  recent  observations  have  shewn,  that
medicinal  substances  when  taken  in  their  crude
state  by  the  experimenter  for  the  purpose  of  testing
their  peculiar  effects,  do  not  exhibit  nearly  the  full
amount  of  the  powers  that  lie  hidden  in  them,  which
they  do  when  potentized  by  proper  trituration  and
succussion,  and  then  taken  for  the  same  object,  by
which  simple  operations,  the  powers  which  in  their
crude  state  lay  hidden,  and  as  it  were,  dormant,  are
developed  to  an  incredible  extent  and  roused  into
activity.  In  this  manner  we  now  find  it  best  to
investigate  the  medicinal  powers  even  of  such  sub-
stances as  are  deemed  weak,  and  the  plan  we  adopt
is  to  give  to  the  experimenter,  on  an  empty  stomach,
daily  from  four  to  six  very  small  globules  of  the  thir-
tieth dilution  of  such  a substance,  moistened  with  a
little  water,  and  let  him  continue  this  for  several  days.

§ CXXIX.

If  the  effects  that  result  from  such  a dose  are  but
slight,  a few  more  globules,  daily,  may  be  taken,
until  they  become  more  distinct  and  stronger  and  the
alterations  of  the  health  more  apparent ; for  aU  per-
sons are  not  affected  by  a medicine  in  an  equally
great  degree ; on  the  contrary,  there  is  a vast  variety
on  this  point,  so  that  an  apparently  weak  individual
may  be  scarcely  at  all  affected  by  moderate  doses  of
a medicine  known  to  be  of  a powerful  character,
whilst  he  is  violently  enough  acted  on  by  many  others


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


219


of  a much  weaker  nature.  And-,  moreover,  there  are
very  robust  persons  who  experience  very  considerable
morbid  symptoms  from  an  apparently  mild  medicine,
and  only  slighter  symptoms  from  stronger  drugs.
Now  as  this  cannot  be.  known  beforehand,  it  is  advi-
sable to  commence  in  every  instance  with  a small
dose  of  the  drug,  and  where  suitable  and'  necessary,
to  increase  the  dose  more  and  more  from  day  to  day.

§ cxxx.

If,  at  the  very  commencement,  the  first  dose  ad-
ministered shall  have  been  sutficiently  strong,  this
advantage  is  gained,  that  the  experimenter  learns  the
order  of  succession  of  the  symptoms,  and  can  note
accurately  the  period  at  which  each  occurs,  which  is
very  useful  in  leading  to  a knowledge  of  the  genius  of
the  medicine,  for  then  the  order  of  the  primary  actions,
as  also  that  of  the  alternating  actions,  is  observed
in  the  most  unambiguous  manner.  A very  moderate
dose  even,  often  sufiices  for  the  experiment,  provided
the  experimenter  he  only  endowed  with  feelings  of
sufficient  delicacy,  and  be  very  attentive  to  his  sensa-
tions. The  duration  of  the  action  of  a drug  can  only
be  ascertained  by  comparing  several  experiments.

§ CXXXI.

If,  however,  in  order  to  ascertain  anything  at  all,
the  same  medicine  must  be  given  to  the  same  person
to  test  for  several  successive  days  in  ever  increasing
doses,  we  thereby  learn,  no  doubt,  the-  various  morbid


220


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


states  that  this  medicine  is  capable  of  producing  in
a general  manner,  but  we  do  not  ascertain  their  order
of  succession,  and  the  subsequent  dose  often  removes,
curatively,  some  one  or  other  of  the  symptoms  caused
by  the  previous  dose,  or  develops  in  its  stead  an  op-
posite state, — such  symptoms  should  be  enclosed  in
brackets,  to  mark  their  ambiguity,  until  succeeding,
purer  experiments  shew  whether  they  are  the  re-
action of  the  organism  and  secondary  action,  or  an
alternating  action  of  this  medicine.

§ CXXXII.

But  when  the  object  is,  without  reference  to  the
sequential  order  of  the  phenomena,  and  the  duration
of  the  action  of  the  drug,  only  to  ascertain  the  symp-
toms themselves,  especially  those  of  a weak  medicinal
substance,  in  that  case  the  preferable  course  to  pursue,
is  to  give  it  every  day  in  increasing  doses.  In  this
manner  the  action  of  an  unknown  medicine,  even  of
the  mildest  nature,  will  be  revealed,  especially  if  tested
on  sensitive  persons.

§ CXXXIII.

On  experiencing  any  particular  sensation  from  the
medicine,  it  is  useful,  indeed  necessary,  in  order  to
determine  the  exact  character  of  the  symptom,  to
assume  various  positions  while  it  lasts,  and  to  observe
whether,  by  moving  the  part  affected,  by  walking'  in
the  room  or  the  open  air,  by  standing,  sitting  or  lying,
the  symptom  is  increased,  diminished,  or  removed,


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


221


and  whether  it  returns  on  again  assuming  the  position
in  which  it  was  first  observed, — whether  it  is  altered
by  eating  or  drinking,  or  by  any  other  condition,  or
by  speaking,  coughing,  sneezing,  or  any  other  action
of  the  body,  and  at  the  same  time  to  note  at  what
time  of  the  day  or  night  it  usually  occurs  in  the  most
marked  manner,  whereby  what  is  peculiar  to,  and
characteristic  of  each  symptom  will  become  apparent.

§ CXXXIV.

All  external  potencies,  and  more  especially  medi-
cines, possess  the  property  of  producing  in  the  health
of  the  human  organism  a particular  kind  of  alteration
peculiar  to  themselves ; but  all  the  symptoms  peculiar
to  a medicine  do  not  appear  in  one  person,  nor  all  at
once,  nor  in  the  same  experiment,  but  some  occur  in
one  person  chiefly  at  one  time,  others  again  during
a second  or  third  trial,  in  another  person  some  other
symptoms  appear,  but  in  such  a manner,  that  probably
some  of  the  phenomena  are  observed  in  the  fourth,
eighth  or  tenth  person,  which  had  already  appeared  in
the  second,  sixth  or  ninth  person,  and  so  forth ; more-
over, they  may  not  recur  at  the  same  hour.

§ cxxxv.

The  sum  total  of  all  the  elements  of  disease  a medi-
cine is  capable  of  producing,  can  only  be  brought  to
anything  like  perfection,  by  numerous  observations  on


222  ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.

suitable  persons  of-  both  sexes,  and  of  various  con-
stitutions. We  can  only  be  assured  that  a medicine
has  been  thoroughly  proved  in  regard  to  the  morbid
states  it  can  produce,  that  is  to  say,  in  regard  to  its
pure  powers  of  altering  the  health  of  man,  when  sub-
sequent experimenters  can  notice  little  of  a novel
character  from  its  action,  and  almost  always  perceive
in  their  own  persons  only  the  same  symptoms  as  had
been  already  observed  by  others.

§ CXXXVI.

(Although,  as  has  been  said,  a medicine,  on  being
proved  on  healthy  subjects,  cannot  develop  in  one
person  all  the  alterations  of  health  it  is  capable  of
causing,  but  can  only  do  this  when  given  to  many
different  individuals,  varying  in  their  corporeal  and
mental  constitution,  yet  the  disposition  (tendency)  to
excite  all  these  symptoms  in  every  human  being,
exists  in  it  (§  cxvii),  according  to  an  eternal  and
immutable  law  of  nature,  agreeably  to  which  all  its
actions,  even  those  that  are  but  rarely  developed  in  the
healthy  person,  are  brought  into  operation  in  the  case
of  every  individual,  if  administered  to  him  when  he
is  in  a morbid  state  presenting  similar  symptoms;
it  then,  even  in  the  smallest  dose,  if  homoeopathically
selected,  silently  produces  in  the  patient  an  artificial
state  closely  resembling  the  natural  disease,  which
rapidly  and  permanently  (homoeopathically)  frees  and
cures  him  of  his  original  malady.)


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


223


§ CXXXVII.

The  more  moderate,  within  certain  limits,  the  doses
of  the  medicine  used  for  such  experiments — provided
we  endeavour  to  facilitate  the  observation  by  the
selection  of  a person  who  is  a lover  of  truth,  temperate
in  all  respects,  of  delicate  feelings,  and  who  can  direct
the  most  minute  attention  to  his  sensations — so  much
the  more  distinctly  are  the  primary  actions  developed,
and  these,  which  are  most  worth  knowing,  occur
alone,  without  any  admixture  of  secondary  actions  or
reactions  of  the  vital  force.  When  excessively  large
doses  are  used,  on  the  other  hand,  there  occur  not
only  a number  of  secondary  actions  among  the  symp-
toms, but  the  primary  actions  also  come  on  in  such
hurried  confusion  and  with  such  impetuosity,  that
nothing  can  be  accurately  observed;  let  alone  the
danger  attending  them,  which  no  one  who  has  any
regard  for  his  fellow-creatures,  and  who  looks  on  the
meanest  of  mankind  as  a brother,  will  deem  an  in-
different matter.


§ CXXXVIII.

All  the  sufferings,  accidents  and  changes  of  the
health  of  the  experimenter  during  the  action  of  a
medicine  (provided  the  above  conditions — § cxxiv —
cxxvii — essential  to  a good  and  pure  experiment,  be
complied  with)  are  solely  derived  from  this  medicine,
and  must  be  regarded  and  registered  as  belonging


224


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


peculiarly  to  this  medicine,  as  symptoms  of  this
medicine,  even  though  the  experimenter  had  ob-
served, a considerable  time  previously,  the  spontaneous
occurrence  of  similar  phenomena  in  himself.  The
reappearance  of  these  during  the  trial  of  the  medicine
only  shews,  that  the  individual  is,  by  virtue  of  his
peculiar  constitution,  particularly  disposed  to  have
such  symptoms  excited  in  him.  In  the  case  before
us  they  are  the  effect  of  the  medicine ; the  symptoms
do  not  arise  spontaneously  as  long  as  the  medicine
that  has  been  taken  is  exercising  an  influence  over
the  health,  but  are  produced  by  the  medicine.


§ CXXXIX.

When  the  physician  does  not  make  the  trial  of  the
medicine  on  himself,  but  gives  it  to  another  person,
the  latter  must  note  down  distinctly  the  sensations,
sufferings,  accidents,  and  changes  of  health  he  expe-
riences, at  the  time  of  their  occurrence,  mentioning
the  time  after  the  ingestion  of  the  drug  when  each
symptom  arose,  and,  if  it  lasted  long,  the  period  of
its  duration. — The  physician  looks  over  the  report  in
the  presence  of  the  experimenter  immediately  after
the  experiment  is  concluded,  or  if  the  trial  lasts
several  days,  he  does  this  every  day,  in  order,  whilst
everything  is  still  fresh  in  his  memory,  to  enquire  of
him  the  exact  nature  of  everyone  of  these  circum-
stances, and  to  fill  up  the  report  with  the  more


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


225


minute  details  so  acquired,  or  to  make  such  alterations
in  it  as  the  experimenter  may  suggest.^

§ CXL.

If  the  person  cannot  write,  the  physician  must
learn  from  him  every  day  what  has  occurred  to  him
and  how  it  took  place.  What  is  noted  down  as
authentic  information  on  this  point,  however,  must
be  chiefly  the  voluntary  narrative  of  the  person  who
makes  the  experiment,  nothing  conjectural,  and  as
little  as  possible  derived  from  answers  to  leading
questions  should  be  admitted,  everything  must  be
ascertained  with  the  same  caution  as  I have  counselled
above  (§  Ixxxiv — xcix)  for  the  investigation  of  the
phenomena  and  for  tracing  the  picture  of  natural
diseases.

§ CXLI.

But  the  best  provings  of  the  pure  effects  of  simple
medicines  in  altering  the  human  health,  and  of  the
artificial  diseases  and  symptoms  they  are  capable  of
developing  in  the  healthy  individual,  are  those  which
the  healthy,  unprejudiced  and  sensitive  physician
institutes  on  himself  with  all  the  caution  and  care


^ He  who  makes  known  to  the  medical  world  the  results  of  such
experiments,  becomes  thereby  responsible  for  the  trustworthmess  of
the  person  experimented  on  and  his  statements,  and  justly  so,  as  the
weal  of  suffering  humanity  is  here  at  stake.


a


226


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


here  enjoined.  He  knows  with  the  greatest  amount
of  certainty  what  he  has  observed  on  himself.^


* These  trials,  made  by  the  physician  on  himself,  have  for  him
other  and  inestimable  advantages.  In  the  first  place,  the  great  truth,
that  the  medicinal  virtue  of  all  drugs,  whereon  depends  their  curative
power,  lies  in  the  changes  of  health  such  as  those  he  has  himself
undergone  from  the  medicines  he  has  proved,  and  the  morbid  states
like  those  he  has  himself  experienced  from  them,  attains  in  his  mmd
the  certainty  of  an  incontrovertible  fact.  Again,  by  such  remarkable
observations  on  himself,  he  will  be  brought  to  understand  his  own
sensations,  his  mode  of  thinking,  and  his  disposition  (the  foundation
of  all  true  wisdom  : r^vlhOi  aeaviov),  and  he  will  be  also  trained  to  be,
what  every  physician  ought  to  be,  a good  observer.  AU  our  ohser-
servations  on  others  are  not  nearly  so  attractive  as  those  made  on
ourselves.  The  observer  of  others  must  always  dread,  lest  the
experimenter  did  not  feel  exactly  what  he  said,  or  lest  he  did  not
describe  his  sensations  with  the  most  appropriate  expressions.  He
must  always  remain  in  doubt  whether  or  no  the  experimenter  was
deceived,  at  least  to  some  extent.  These  obstacles  to  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,  which  can  never  be  thoroughly  surmounted  in  our
investigations  of  the  artificial  morbid  symptoms  that  occur  in  others
from  the  ingestion  of  medicines,  cease  entfiely  when  we  make  the
trials  on  ourselves.  He  who  makes  these  trials  on  himself,  knows
for  certain  what  he  has  felt,  and  each  of  these  trials  on  himself  is  a
new  inducement  for  him  to  investigate  the  powers  of  other  medi-
cines; and  he  thus  becomes  more  and  more  practised  m the  aid  of
observing,  of  such  importance  to  the  physician,  by  continuing  to
observe  himself,  the  one  on  whom  he  can  most  rely,  and  who  will
never  deceive  him,  and  this  he  will  do  all  the  more  zealously,  as  these
experiments  on  himself  promise  to  give  hun  a knowledge  of  the  true
value  and  importance  of  the  instruments  that  are  yet  in  a certain  sense
awanting  for  effecting  cures.  Let  it  not  he  imagined  that  such  slight
indispositions  caused  by  taking  medicines  for  the  purpose  of  proving


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


227


§ CXLII.

But  how  some  symptoms^  of  the  simple  medicine
employed  for  a curative  purpose,  can  he  discovered
even  amid  the  symptoms  of  the  original  malady  in
diseases,  especially  in  those  of  a chronic  character
that  usually  remain  unaltered,  is  a subject  for  the
exercise  of  the  higher  order  of  inductive  minds,  and
must  be  left  solely  to  masters  in  observation.

§ CXLIII.

If  we  have  thus  tested  on  the  healthy  individual  a
considerable  number  of  simple  medicines,  and  carefully
and  faithfully  registered  all  the  elements  of  disease
and  symptoms  they  are  capable  of  producing  as  arti-
ficial morbific  potencies,  then  only  have  we  a true
materia  medica — a collection  of  real,  pure,  faithfuP


them  can  be  in  the  main  injurious  to  the  health.  Experience  shews,
on  the  contrary,  that  the  organism  of  the  experimenter  becomes,  by
these  frequent  attacks  on  his  health,  all  the  more  expert  in  repelling
all  external  influences  inimical  to  his  frame,  and  all  artiflcial  and
natural  morbiflc  noxious  agents,  and  becomes  more  hardened  to  resist
everything  of  an  injurious  character,  by  means  of  these  moderate
experiments  on  his  own  person  with  medicines.  His  health  becomes
more  unalterable ; he  becomes  more  robust,  as  all  experience  shews.

^ Symptoms  which,  dui'ing  the  whole  course  of  the  disease,  might
have  been  observed  only  a long  time  previously,  or  never  before,
consequently  new  ones,  belonging  to  the  medicines.

^ Latterly  it  has  been  the  habit  to  entrust  the  proving  of  medicines
to  unknown  persons  at  a distance,  who  were  paid  for  their  work,  and
the  information  so  obtained  was  printed.  But  by  so  doing,  the

Q 2


228


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


effects  of  simple  medicinal  substances,  a volume  of
the  book  of  nature,  wherein  is  recorded  a considerable
array  of  the  peculiar  changes  of  the  health  and  symp-
toms effected  by  each  of  the  powerful  medicines  thus
investigated,  as  they  were  revealed  to  the  attention
of  the  observer,  in  which  the  likeness  of  the  (homoeo-
pathic) morbid  elements  of  many  natural  diseases  to
be  hereafter  cured  by  them  are  present,  which,  in
a word,  contain  artificial  morbid  states,  that  furnish
for  the  similar  natural  morbid  states  the  only  true,
homoeopathic,  that  is  to  say,  specific,  therapeutic
instruments  for  effecting  certain  and  permanent  cure.

§ CXLIV.

From  such  a materia  medica  everything  that  is
conjectural,  all  that  is  mere  assertion,  or  imaginary,
should  be  strictly  excluded ; everything  should  be
the  pure  language  of  nature  carefully  and  honestly
interrogated.

§ CXLV.

Of  a truth,  it  is  only  by  a very  considerable  store
of  medicines  accurately  known  in  respect  of  these  their
pure  modes  of  action  in  altering  the  health  of  man.


operation  which  is  of  all  others  the  most  important,  which  is  to  form
the  basis  of  the  only  true  healing  art,  and  which  demands  the
greatest  moral  certainty  and  trustworthiness,  seems  to  me,  I regret
to.  say,  to  become  doubtful  and  uncertain  m its  results,  and  to  lose
all  its  value.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


229


that  we  can  be  placed  in  a position  to  discover  a
homoeopathic  remedy,  a suitable  analogue  of  an  arti-
ficial morbific  (curative)  agent  for  each  of  the  infinitely
numerous  morbid  states  in  nature,  for  every  malady
in  the  world.  ^ In  the  meantime,  even  now — thanks
to  the  truth  of  the  symptoms,  and  to  the  abundance
of  elements  of  disease  which  every  one  of  the  powerful
medicinal  substances  has  already  shewn  in  its  action  on
the  healthy  body — but  few  diseases  remain,  for  which
a pretty  suitable  homoeopathic  remedy  may  not  be  met
with  among  those  now  proved  in  regard  to  their  pure
action,®  which,  without  particular  disturbance,  restores
health  in  a gentle,  sure  and  permanent  manner —
infinitely  more  surely  and  safely  than  can  be  effected
by  all  the  general  and  special  therapeutics  of  the  old
allopathic  medical  art  with  its  unknown,  composite
remedies,  which  do  but  alter  and  aggravate  chronic
diseases,  but  cannot  cure  them,  and  rather  retard  than
promote  recovery  from  acute  diseases.


' At  first  I was  the  only  person  who  made  the  proving  of  the  pure
powers  of  medicines  the  most  important  of  his  occupations.  Since
then  I have  been  assisted  in  this  by  some  young  men,  who  instituted
experiments  on  themselves,  and  whose  observations  I have  critically
revised.  But  what  shall  we  not  be  able  to  effect  in  the  way  of
curing,  in  the  vast  extent  of  the  infinitely  large  domam  of  disease,
when  numbers  of  accurate  and  trustworthy  observers  shall  have
rendered  then-  services  in  enriching  this,  the  only  true  materia
medica,  by  careful  experiments  on  themselves ! The  aid  of  healing
will  then  come  near  the  mathematical  sciences  in  certainty.

^ See  the  third  note  to  § cix.


230


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CXLVI.

The  third  point  of  the  vocation  of  a true  physician
relates  to  the  judicious  employment  of  the  artificial
morbific  potencies  (medicines)  that  have  been  proved  on
healthy  individuals  to  ascertain  their  pure  action,  in
order  to  effect  the  homoeopathic  cure  of  natural  diseases.

§ CXLVII.

Whichever  of  these  medicines  that  have  been  in-
vestigated relative  to  their  power  of  altering  man’s
health,  we  find  to  contain  in  the  symptoms  observed
from  its  use,  the  greatest  similarity  to  the  collective
symptoms  of  a given  natural  disease,  this  medicine
will  and  must  be  its  most  suitable,  its  most  certain
homoeopathic  remedy;  in  it  is  found  the  specific
remedy  of  this  case  of  disease.

§ CXLVIII.

A medicinal  substance  so  discovered,  which  has  the
power  and  the  tendency  to  produce  symptoms  the
most  similar  possible  to  the  disease  to  be  cured,  con-
sequently a similar  artificial  disease,  given  in  a suit-
able dose,  affects,  in  its  dynamic  action  on  the
morbidly  deranged  vital  force  of  the  individual,  those
very  parts  and  points  in  the  organism  hitherto  suffer-
ing from  the  natural  disease,  and  produces  in  them  its
own  artificial  disease,  which  on  account  of  its  great
similarity  and  preponderating  strength,  occupies  the
place  more  particularly  of  the  natural  morbid  derange-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


231


ment  hitherto  present,  so  that  the  instinctive,  auto-
matic vital  force  is  from  that  time  forward  no  longer
atfected  by  the  natural  disease,  but  solely  by  the
stronger,  similar  medicinal  disease,  which  in  its  turn,
on  account  of  the  small  dose  of  the  remedy,  being,
like  every  moderate  medicinal  disease,  overcome  by
the  increased  energy  of  the  vital  force,  soon  spon-
taneously disappears,  leaving  the  body  free  from  all
disease,  that  is  to  say,  healthy  and  permanently  cured.

§ CXLIX.

When  the  appropriately  selected  ^ homoeopathic
remedy  has  been  thus  rightly  employed,  the  acute
disease  it  was  designed  to  subdue,  even  though  it  be  of


^ But  this  laborious,  sometimes  very  laborious  search  for  and
selection  of  the  homoeopathic  remedy  most  suitable  in  every  respect
to  each  morbid  state,  is  an  operation  which,  notwithstanding  all  the
laudable  books  for  facilitating  it,  still  demands  the  study  of  the
original  somxes  themselves,  and  at  the  same  time  a great  amount  of
circumspection  and  serious  deliberation,  which  have  their  best  reward
in  the  consciousness  of  having  faithfully  discharged  our  duty.  How
could  this  laborious,  careful  task,  which  alone  can  render  possible
the  most  effectual  cure  .of  diseases,  please  the  gentlemen  belonging
to  the  new  mongrel  sect,  who  assume  the  honourable  name  of  homoeo-
pathists,  and  even  seem  to  employ  medicines  in  foiin  and  appearance
homoeopathic,  but  used  by  them  without  the  slightest  deliberation
{quidquid  in  buccam  venit),  and  who,  Avhen  the  unsuitable  remedy
does  not  immediately  give  relief,  in  place  of  laying  the  blame  on
then'  unpardonable  indolence  and  laxity  in  performing  the  most  im-
portant and  serious  of  all  hmnan  affaks,  ascribe  it  to  homoeopathy,
which  they  accuse  of  great  imperfection  (if  the  truth  be  told,  its


232


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


a bad  character  and  accompanied  by  many  sufferings,
subsides  in  an  unobservable  manner,  in  a few  hours
if  it  be  of  recent  date,  in  a few  days  if  it  be  of  some-
what longer  standing,  with  all  traces  of  indisposition,
and  nothing  or  almost  nothing  more  of  the  artificial
medicinal  disease  is  observed ; there  occurs,  by  rapid,
imperceptible  transitions,  nothing  but  restored  health,
recovery;  diseases  of  long  standing  (and  especially
such  as  are  of  a complicated  character)  require  for
their  cure  a proportionately  longer  time.  More  espe-


imperfection  consists  in  this,  that  the  most  suitable  homoeopathic
remedy  for  each  morbid  condition,  does  not  spontaneously  fly  into
then’  mouths  like  roasted  pigeons,  without  any  trouble  on  theh  own
part)  ? They  know,  however,  from  frequent  practice,  how  to  make
up  for  the  inefficiency  of  the  scarcely  half  homoeopathic  remedy,  by
the  employment  of  allopathic  means,  that  come  much  more  handy  to
them,  among  which  one  or  more  dozens  of  leeches  apphed  to  the
affected  part,  or  little,  harmless  venesections  to  the  extent  of  eight
ounces,  and  so  forth,  act  an  important  flgm’e ; and  should  the  patient,
in  spite  of  all  this,  recover,  they  extol  then-  venesections,  leeches,  &c.,
alleging,  that  had  it  not  been  for  these,  the  patient  would  not  have
been  brought  through,  and  they  give  us  to  understand,  in  no  doubtful
language,  that  these  operations,  derived,  without  much  exercise  of
genius,  from  the  pernicious  routine  of  the  old  school,  in  reality  con-
tributed the  best  share  towards  the  cm-e  ; hut  if  the  patient  die
under  the  treatment,  as  not  unfrequently  happens,  they  seek  to
console  the  friends  by  saying  that  “ they  themselves  were  witnesses
that  everything  conceivable  had  been  done  for  the  lamented  deceased.”
Who  woifld  do  this  frivolous  and  pernicious  tribe  the  honour  to  call
them  after  the  name  of  the  veiy  laborious,  but  salutaiy  aid,  homoeo-
pathic jihysicians  ? May  the  just  recompense  await  them,  that,  when
taken  ill,  they  may  be  treated  in  the  same  manner !


ORGANON  OP  MEDICINE.


233


cially  do  the  chronic  medicinal  maladies  so  often
produced  by  allopathic  bungling,  along  with  the
natural  disease  left  uncured  by  it,  require  a much
longer  time  for  their  recovery ; often  indeed  are  they
incurable,  in  consequence  of  the  shameful  robbery  of
the  patient’s  strength  and  juices,  the  principal  feat
performed  by  allopathy  in  its  so-called  cures.

§CL.

If  a patient  complain  of  one  or  two  trivial  symp-
toms, that  have  been  only  observed  a short  time'
previously,  the  physician  should  not  regard  this  as  a
fully  developed  disease  that  requires  serious  medical
aid.  A slight  alteration  in  the  diet  and  regimen  will
usually  suffice  to  dispel  such  an  indisposition.

§ CLI.

But  if  the  patient  complain  of  a few  violent  suffer-
ings, the  physician  will  usually  find,  on  investigation,
several  other  symptoms  besides,  although  of  a slighter
character,  which  furnish  a complete  picture  of  the
disease.

§ CLII.

The  worse  the  acute  disease  is,  of  so  much  the
more  numerous  and  striking  symptoms  is  it  composed,
but  with  so  much  the  more  certainty  may  a suitable
remedy  for  it  be  found,  if  there  be  a sufficient  number
of  medicines  known,  with  respect  to  their  positive
action,  to  choose  from.  Among  the  lists  of  symptoms


234


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


of  many  medicines,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  find  a
medicine  from  whose  separate  elements  of  disease  an
antitype  of  curative  artificial  disease,  very  like  the  sum
total  of  the  symptoms  of  the  natural  disease,  may  be
constructed,  and  such  a medicine  is  the  desirable
remedy.

§ CLIII.

In  this  search  for  a homoeopathic  specific  remedy,
that  is  to  say,  in  this  comparison  of  the  collective  symp-
toms of  the  natural  disease  with  the  lists  of  symptoms
of  known  medicines,  in  order  to  find  among  these  an
artificial  morbific  potency  corresponding  by  similarity
to  the  disease  to  be  cured,  the  more  striking^  singular,
uncommon,  (characteristic)  signs  and  symp-

toms of  the  case  of  disease,  are  chiefly  and  almost
solely  to  be  kept  in  view ; for  it  is  more  particularly
these  that  very  similar  ones  in  the  list  of  symptoms  of
the  medicine  sought  for  must  correspond  to,  in  order  to
constitute  that  medicine  the  most  suitable  for  effect-
ing the  cure.  The  more  general  and  undefined
symptoms,  loss  of  appetite,  headache,  debility,  restless


^ Dr.  von  Bonninghausen,  who  has  already  distinguished  himself  by
his  labours  in  connexion  with  the  new  system  of  medicine,  has  lately
added  to  his  merit  by  displaymg  the  characteristic  symptoms,  more
particularly  of  the  antipsoric  medicines,  in  his  valuable  little  book,
Uehersicht  der  Hauptwirkungs-Sphdre  der  antips.  Arz.,  Munster,
bei  Coppenrath,  1833,  and  in  the  appendix  thereto  (containing  the
antisyphilitic  and  antisycotic  medicines)  at-  the  end  of  the  second
edition  of  his  Systematisch-alphabetisches  Repertorium  der  antipsori-
schen  Arzneien,  hei  Coppenrath  hi  Munster.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


235


sleep,  discomfort,  and  so  forth,  demand  but  little
attention  when  of  that  vague  and  indefinite  character,
if  they  cannot  be  more  accurately  described,  as  symp-
toms of  such  a general  nature  are  observed  in  almost
every  disease  and  from  almost  every  drug.

§ CLIV.

If  the  antitype  composed  from  the  list  of  symptoms
of  the  most  suitable  medicine  contain  those  peculiar,
uncommon,  singular,  and  distinguishing  (character-
istic) symptoms,  which  are  to  be  met  with  in  the
disease  to  be  cured,  in  the  greatest  number  and  in
the  greatest  similarity,  this  medicine  is  the  most  ap-
propriate homoeopathic  specific  remedy  for  this  morbid
state ; the  disease,  if  it  be  not  one  of  very  long  stand-
ing, will  generally  be  removed  and  extinguished  by  the
first  dose  of  it,  without  any  considerable  disturbance.

§ CLV.

I say  without  any  considerable  disturbance.  For,  in
the  employment  of  this  most  appropriate  homoeopa-
thic remedy  it  is  only  the  symptoms  of  the  medicine
that  correspond  to  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  that
are  called  into  play,  the  former  occupying  the  place
of  the  latter  (weaker)  in  the  organism,  and  thereby
annihilating  them  by  superiority  of  power ; but  the
other  symptoms  of  the  homoeopathic  medicine,  which
are  often  very  numerous,  being  in  no  way  applicable
to  the  case  of  disease  in  question,  do  not  appear  at
all.  The  patient  growing  hourly  better,  feels  almost


236


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


nothing  of  them  at  all,  because  the  excessively  minute
dose  requisite  for  homoeopathic  use  is  much  too  weak
to  produce  the  other  symptoms  of  the  medicine  that
are  not  homoeopathic  to  the  case,  in  those  parts  of
the  body  that  are  free  from  disease,  and  consequently
can  allow  only  the  homoeopathic  symptoms  to  act  on
the  parts  of  the  organism  that  are  already  most  irri-
tated and  excited  by  the  similar  symptoms  of  the
disease,  thus  changing  the  natural  morbid  affection
of  the  vital  force  into  a similar,  but  stronger,  medicinal
disease,  whereby  the  original  malady  is  extinguished.

§ CLVI.

There  is,  however,  almost  no  homoeopathic  medi-
cinal substance,  be  it  ever  so  suitably  chosen,  that,
especially  if  it  should  be  given  in  an  insufficiently
minute  dose,  will  not  produce,  in  very  irritable  and
sensitive  patients,  at  least  one  trifling,  unusual  dis-
turbance, some  slight,  new  symptom,  whilst  its  action
lasts,  for  it  is  next  to  impossible  that  medicine  and
disease  should  cover  one  another  as  exactly  as  two
triangles  with  equal  sides  and  equal  angles.  But
this  (in  a good  case)  unimportant  difi’erence  will  be
easily  done  away  with  by  the  power  of  action  (energy)
of  the  living  organism,  and  is  not  perceptible  to
patients  not  extremely  delicate ; the  restoration  goes
forwards,  notwithstanding,  to  the  goal  of  perfect  re-
covery, if  it  be  not  prevented  by  the  action  of  hetero-
geneous medicinal  influences  upon  the  patient,  by
errors  of  regimen  or  by  passions.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


237


§ CLVII.

But  though  it  is  certain  that  a homoeopathically
selected  remedy  does,  by  reason  of  its  appropriateness
and  the  minuteness  of  the  dose,  gently  remove  and
annihilate  the  acute  disease  analogous  to  it,  without
giving  expression  to  its  other,  unhomoeopathic  symp-
toms, that  is  to  say,  without  the  production  of  new,
serious  disturbances,  yet  it  usually,  immediately  after
ingestion — for  the  first  hour,  or  for  a few  hours —
causes  a kind  of  slight  aggravation  (where  the  dose
has  been  somewhat  too  large,  however,  for  a con-
siderable number  of  hours),  which  has  so  much
resemblance  to  the  original  disease,  that  it  seems  to
the  patient  to  be  an  aggravation  of  his  disease.  But  it
is,  in  reality,  nothing  more  than  an  extremely  similar
medicinal  disease,  somewhat  exceeding  in  strength
the  original  affection.

§ CLVIII.

This  slight  homoeopathic  aggravation  during  the
first  hours  — a very  good  prognostication  that  the
acute  disease  will  most  probably  yield  to  the  first
dose — is  quite  as  it  ought  to  be,  as  the  medicinal
disease  must  naturally  be  somewhat  stronger  than
the  malady  to  be  cured,  if  it  is  to  overpower  and
extinguish  the  latter,  just  as  a natural  disease  can
remove  and  annihilate  another  one  similar  to  it,  only
when  it  is  stronger  than  the  latter  (§  xliii — xlviii).


238


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CLIX.

The  smaller  the  dose  of  the  homceopathic  remedy
is,  so  much  the  slighter  and  shorter  is  this  apparent
increase  of  the  disease  during  the  first  hours.

§ CLX.

But  as  the  dose  of  a homoeopathic  remedy  can
scarcely  ever  he  made  so  small  that  it  shall  not  be
able  to  relieve,  overpower,  indeed  completely  cure
and  annihiliate  the  pure  natural  disease,  of  not  very
long  standing,  that  is  analogous  to  it  (§  ccxlix,  note),
we  can  understand  why  a dose  of  an  appropriate
homoeopathic  medicine,  not  the  very  smallest  pos-
sible, does  always,  during  the  first  hour  after  its
ingestion,  produce  a perceptible  homoeopathic  aggra-
vation of  this  kind.^


’ This  exaltation  of  the  symptoms  of  the  medicine  over  those
symptoms  of  the  disease  analogous  to  them,  which  looks  like  an
aggravation,  has  been  observed  by  other  physicians  also,  wh^n
chance  threw  in  their  way  a homoeopathic  remedy.  When  a patient
suffering  from  itch  complains  of  an  increase  of  the  eruption  after
sulphur,  his  physician,  who  knows  not  the  cause  of  this,  consoles
him  with  the  assurance,  that  the  itch  must  first  come  out  properly
before  it  can  be  cured ; he  knows  not,  however,  that  this  is  a sulphur
eruption,  that  assumes  the  appearance  of  an  increase  of  the  itch.

“ The  facial  eruption  which  the  viola  tricolor  cured,  aggravated  it
at  the  commencement  of  its  action,”  Leroy  assures  us  {Heilk.  fur
Mutter,  p.  406),  but  he  knew  not  that  the  apparent  aggravation
was  owing  to  the  somewhat  too  large  dose  of  the  remedy,  which  in
this  instance  was  to  a certain  extent  homoeopathic.  Lysons  says
{Med.  Transact,  vol.  ii,  London,  1772),  “The  bark  of  the  elm


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


239


§ CLXI.

When  I here  limit  the  so-called  homoeopathic
aggravation,  or  rather  the  primary  action  of  the
homoeopathic  medicine  that  seems  to  increase  in  some
degree  the  symptoms  of  the  original  disease,  to  the
first,  or  few  first  hours,  this  is  certainly  true  with
respect  to  diseases  of  a more  acute  character  and  of
recent  origin;^  but  where  medicines  of  long  action
have  to  combat  a malady  of  considerable  or  of  very
long  standing,  where  one  dose,  consequently,  must
continue  to  act  for  many  days,  we  then  see,  during
the  first  six,  eight,  or  ten  days,  occasionally  some
such  primary  actions  of  the  medicine,  some  such
apparent  increase  of  the  symptoms  of  the  original
disease  (lasting  for  one  or  several  hours)  make  their
appearance,  whilst  in  the  intervening  hours  ameliora-
tion of  the  whole  malady  is  perceptible.  After  the


cures  most  certainly  those  skin  diseases  which  it  increases  at  the
beginning  of  its  action.”  Had  he  not  given  the  bark  in  the  mon-
strous doses  usual  in  the  allopathic  system,  but  in  the  quite  small
doses  requisite  when  there  is  a similarity  of  symptoms  in  the  medi- *  *
cine,  that  is  to  say,  when  it  is  used  homoeopathically,  he  would  have
effected  a cure  without,  or  almost  without,  seeing  this  apparent
increase  of  the  disease  (homoeopathic  aggravation).

* If  the  action  of  those  medicines  to  which  the  very  longest  dura-
tion of  action  is  proper,  quickly  expires  in  acute  diseases — most
jquickly  in  those  that  are  most  acute, — it  is  proportionately  long
lasting  in  chronic  diseases  (of  psoric  origin),  and  hence  it  happens
that  the  antipsoric  medicines  often  do  not  shew  any  such  homoeo-
pathic aggravation  in  the  first  hours,  whilst  they  do  so  afterwards
and  during  various  hours,  for  the  first  eight  or  ten  days.


240


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


lapse  of  these  few  days,  the  amelioration  resulting
from  such  primary  action  of  the  medicine  proceeds
almost  uninterruptedly  for  several  days  longer.

§ CLXII.

It  sometimes  happens,  owing  to  the  very  moderate
number  of  medicines  yet  knoivn  with  respect  to  their
true,  pure  action,  that  but  a portion  of  the  symptoms
of  the  disease  to  be  cured  are  to  he  met  with  in  the
list  of  symptoms  of  the  most  appropriate  medicine,
consequently  this  imperfect  medicinal  morbific  agent-
must  be  employed  for  lack  of  a more  perfect  one.

§ CLXIII.

In  this  case  we  cannot  indeed  expect  from  this
medicine  a complete,  untroubled  cure;  for,  during  its
use,  some  symptoms  appear  which  were  not  previously
observable  in  the  disease,  accessory  symptoms  of  the
not  perfectly  appropriate  remedy.  This  does  by  no
means  prevent  a considerable  part  of  the  disease  (the
symptoms  of  the  disease  that  resemble  those  of  the
medicine)  from  being  eradicated  by  this  medicine,
thereby  establishing  a fair  commencement  of  the
cure,  but  still  this  does  not  take  place  without  those
accessory  symptoms,  which  are,  however,  always
moderate  when  the  dose  of  the  medicine  is  sufficiently
minute.

§ CLXIV.

The  small  number  of  homoeopathic  symptoms  pre-
sent in  the  best  selected  medicine,  is  no  obstacle  to


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


241


the  cure,  in  cases  where  these  few  medicinal  symptoms
ivere  chiefly  of  an  uncommon  kind^  and  such  as  were
peculiarly  distinctive  (characteristic)  of  the  disease;
the  cure  takes  place  under  such  circumstances,  with-
out any  particular  disturbance.

§ CLXV.

If,  however,  among  the  symptoms  of  the  remedy
selected,  there  be  none  that  accurately  resemble  the
distinctive  (characteristic),  peculiar,  uncommon  symp-
toms of  the  case  of  disease,  and  if  the  remedy  cor-
respond to  the  disease  only  in  the  general,  vaguely
described,  indefinite  states  (nausea,  debility,  head-
ache, and  so  forth),  and  if  there  be  among  the  known
medicines  none  more  homoeopathically  appropriate,
in  that  case  the  physician  cannot  promise  himself
any  immediate  favourable  result  from  the  employ-
ment of  this  unhomceopathic  medicine.

§ CLXVI.

Such  a case  is,  however,  very  rare,  owing  to  the
increased  number  of  medicines  known  now-a-days
with  regard  to  their  pure  effects,  and  the  bad  effects
resulting  from  it,  when  it  does  occur,  are  diminished
whenever  a subsequent  medicine,  of  more  accurate
resemblance,  can  be  selected.

§ CLXVII.

Thus,  if  there  occur,  during  the  use  of  this  imper-
fectly homoeopathic  remedy  first  employed,  accessory

R


242


ORGANON-  OF  MEDICINE,


symptoms  of  some  moment,  then,  in  the  case  of  acute
diseases,  we  do  not  alloiv  this  first  dose  to  act  com-
pletely out,  nor  leave  the  patient  to  the  full  duration
of  the  effects  of  the  remedy,  but  we  investigate  afresh
the  morbid  state  in  its  present  altered  condition,  and
add  the  remainder  of  the  original  symptoms  to  those
newly  developed,  in  tracing  a new  picture  of  the
disease.

§ CLXVIII.

We  shall  then  be  able  much  more  readily  to  dis-
cover, among  the  known  medicines,  one  analogous  to
the  morbid  state  before  us,  a single  dose  of  which,  if
it  do  not  entirely  destroy  the  disease,  will  advance  it
considerably  on  the  way  to  be  cured  And  thus  we
go  on,  if  even  this  medicine  be  not  quite  sufficient  to
effect  the  restoration  of  health,  examining  again  and
again  the  morbid  state  that  still  remains,  and  select-
ing a homoeopathic  medicine  as  suitable  as ' possible
for  it,  until  our  object,  namely,  putting  the  patient  in
the  possession  of  perfect  health,  is  accomplished.

§ CLXIX.

If,  on  the  first  examination  of  a disease,  and  the
first  selection  of  a medicine,  we  should  find  that  ’the
collective  symptoms  of  the  disease  would  not  be  suffi-
ciently covered  by  the  elements  of  disease  of  a single
medicine — owing  to  the  insufficient  number  of  known
medicines, — but  that  two  medicines  contend  for  the
preference  in  point  of  appropriateness,  one  of  which
is  more  homoeopathically  suitable  for  one  part,  the


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


243


other  for  another  part  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,
it  is  not  advisable,  after  the  employment  of  the  more
suitable  of  two  medicines,  to  administer  the  other
without  examination,  for  the  medicine  that  seemed
to  be  the  next  best,  would  not,  under  the  change  of
circumstances  that  has  in  the  mean  time  taken  place,
be  suitable  for  the  rest  of  the  symptoms  that  then
remain,  in  which  case,  consequently,  a more  appro-
priate homoeopathic  remedy  ought  to  be  selected  in
place  of  the  second  medicine,  for  the  set  of  symptoms
as  they  appear  on  a new  inspection.

§ CLXX.

Hence,  in  this  as  in  every  case  where  a change  of
the  morbid  state  has  occurred,  the  remaining  set  of
symptoms  that  is  present  must  be  enquired  into,
and  (without  paying  any  attention  to  the  medicine
which  at  first  appeared  to  be  the  next  in  point  of  suit-
ableness) a homoeopathic  medicine,  as  appropriate  as
possible  to  the  new  state  now  before  us,  must  be
selected  anew.  If  it  should  so  happen,  as  is  not  often
the  case,  that  the  medicine  which  at  first  appeared  to
be  the  next  best,  seems  still  to  be  well  adapted  for  the
morbid  state  that  remains,  so  much  the  more  will  it
merit  our  confidence,  and  deserve  to  be  employed  in
preference  to  another.

§ CLXXI.

In  non-venereal  chronic  diseases,  those  therefore
that  arise  from  psora,  we  often  require,  in  order  to

R 2


244


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


effect  a cure,  to  give  several  antipsoric  remedies  in  suc-
cession, every  successive  one  being  homoeopathically
chosen  in  consonance  with  the  group  of  symptoms
we  find  to  remain  after  the  expiry  of  the  action  of
the  previous  remedy  (which  may  have  been  employed
in  a single  dose  or  in  several  successive  doses).

§ CLXXII.

A similar  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  cure,  occurs
from  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  being  too  small  in
number^  a circumstance  that  deserves  our  careful
attention,  for  by  its  removal,  almost  all  the  difficul-
ties that  can  lie  in  the  way  of  this  most  perfect  of  all
possible  modes  of  treatment  (except  that  its  apparatus
of  known  homoeopathic  medicines  is  still  incomplete),
are  removed.

§ CLXXIII.

The  only  diseases  that  seem  to  have  but  few  symp-
toms, and  on  that  account  to  be  less  amenable  to  cure,
are  those  which  may  be  termed  one-sided,  because  but
one  or  two  principal  symptoms  are  prominent  in
them,  and  these  throw  almost  all  the  others  into  the
shade.  They  belong  chiefly  to  the  class  of  chronic
diseases.

§ CLXXIV.

Their  principal  symptom  may  be  either  an  internal
complaint  {e.g.  a headache  of  many  years’  duration,  a
diarrhoea  of  long  standing,  an  ancient  cardialgia,  &c.),
or  it  may  be  an  affection,  more  of  an  external  kind.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


245


Diseases  of  the  latter  character  are  generally  distin-
guished by  the  name  of  local  maladies.

§ CLXXV.

In  one-sided  diseases  of  the  first  kind,  it  is  often
to  be  attributed  to  the  medical  observer’s  want  of
attention,  that  he  does  not  trace  out  thoroughly  the
symptoms  which  are  present  to  complete  the  sketch
of  the  portrait  of  the  disease.

§ CLXXVI.

There  are,  however,  still  a few  diseases,  which,
after  the  most  careful  examination,  at  first  (§  Ixxxiv
— xcviii)  present  but  one  or  two  severe,  violent  symp-
toms, while  all  the  others  are  but  indistinctly  ex-
hibited.

§ CLXXVII.

In  order  to  meet  most  successfully  such  a case  as
this.,  which  is  of  very  rare  occurrence,  we  are  in  the
first  place  to  select,  guided  by  those  few  symptoms,
the  homoeopathic  remedy  which  appears  to  be  most
suitable.

§ CLXXVIII.

It  will,  no  doubt,  sometimes  happen  that  this
medicine,  selected  in  strict  observance  of  the  homoeo-
pathic law,  furnishes  the  similar  artificial  disease
suited  for  the  annihilation  of  the  malady  present,  and
this  is  much  more  likely  to  happen  when  these  few


246


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


morbid  symptoms  are  very  striking,  decided,  uncom-
mon, and  peculiarly  distinctive  (characteristic).

§ CLXXIX.

More  frequently,  however,  the  medicine  first  chosen
in  such  a case,  will  be  only  partially,  that  is  to  say,
not  exactly  suitable,  as  there  was  no  considerable
number  of  symptoms  to  guide  to  an  accurate  selection.

§ CLXXX.  •

In  this  case,  the  medicine,  which  has  been  chosen
as  well  as  was  possible,  but  which,  from  the  foregoing
reason,  is  only  imperfectly  homoeopathic,  will,  in
its  action  upon  the  disease  that  is  only  partially
analogous  to  it — ^just  as  takes  place  in  the  case  men-
tioned above  (§  clxii,  et  seq.),  where  the  limited
number  of  homoeopathic  remedies  renders  the.  selec-
tion imperfect  — produce  accessory  symptoms,  and
several  phenomena  from  its  own  array  of  symptoms
are  mixed  up  with  the  patient’s  state  of  health,  which
are,  however,  at  the  same  time,  symptoms  of  the  disease
itself,  although  they  may  have  heen  hitherto  never  or
very  rarely  felt;  sufierings  appear  or  are  developed  in
a greater  degree,  which  the  patient  shortly  before
had  never  or  only  very  indistinctly  been  conscious  of.

§ CLXXXI.

Let  it  not  be  objected  that  the  accessory  affections
and  new  symptoms  of  this  disease,  that  now  appear,
should  be  laid  to  the  account  of  the  medicament  just


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


247


employed.  They  are  derived  from  it'  certainly,  but
they  are  always  only  symptoms  of  such  a nature  as
this  disease  was  itself  capable  of  producing  in  this
organism,  and  which  were  summoned  forth  and  in-
duced to  make  their  appearance,  by  the  medicine
given — by  reason  of  its  power  to  cause  similar  symp-
toms. In  a word,  we  have  to  regard  the  whole  col-
lection of  symptoms  now  perceptible,  as  belonging  to
the  disease  itself,  as  the  real  existing  condition,  and
to  direct  our  further  treatment  accordingly.

§ CLXXXII.

Thus  the  imperfect  selection  of  the  medicament,
which  was  in  this  case  almost  inevitable,  in  conse-
quence of  the  too  limited  number  of  the  symptoms
present,  serves  to  complete  the  display  of  the  symp-
toms of  the  disease,  and  in  this  way  facilitates  the
discovery  of  a second,  more  accurately  suitable,  homoeo-
pathic medicine,

§ CLXXXIII.

Whenever,  therefore,  the  dose  of  the  first  medicine
ceases  to  have  a beneficial  effect  (if  the  newly  de-
veloped symptoms  do  not,  by  reason  of  their  violence,
demand  more  speedy  aid — which,  however,  ffom  the


* When  they  were  not  caused  by  an  important  error  in  regimen,
a violent  emotion,  or  a tumultuous  revolution  in  the  organism,  such
as  the  occurrence  or  cessation  of  the  menses,  conception,  child-birth,
and  so  forth.


248


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


minuteness  of  the  dose  of  homoeopathic  medicine,  and
in  very  chronic  diseases,  is  excessively  rare),  a new  ex-
amination of  the  disease  must  be  instituted,  the  status
morbi,  as  it  now  is,  must  be  noted  down,  and  a second
homoeopathic  remedy  selected  in  accordance  with  it,
which  shall  exactly  suit  the  present  state,  and  one
which  shall  be  all  the  more  appropriate  can  then  be
found,  as  the  group  of  symptoms  has  become  larger
and ’more  complete.^

§ CLXXXIV.

In  like  manner,  after  each  new  dose  of  medicine
has  exhausted  its  action,  the  state  of  the  disease  that
still  remains  is  to  be  traced  anew  by  the  remain-
ing symptoms,  and  another  homoeopathic  remedy
sought  for,  as  suitable  as  possible  for  the  group  of
symptoms  now  observed,  and  so  on  until  the  recovery
is  complete.

§ CLXXXV.

Among  the  one-sided  diseases,  an  important  place
is  occupied  by  the  so-called  local  maladies,  by  which


^ In  cases  where  the  patient  (which,  however,  occurs  excessively
seldom  in  chronic,  but  not  unfrequently  in  acute  diseases)  feels  very
ill,  although  his  symptoms  are  very  indistinct,  so  that  this  state  may
be  attributed  more  to  the  benumbed  state  of  the  nerves,  which  does
not  permit  the  patient’s  pains  and  sufferings  to  be  distinctly  per-
ceived, this  torpor  of  the  internal  sensific  nerves  is  removed  by
opium,  and  in  its  secondary  action  the  symptoms  of  the  disease
become  distinctly  apparent.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


249


term  is  signified  those  changes  and  affections  that
appear  on  the  external  parts  of  the  body,  which,  as
has  hitherto  been  taught,  were  alone  morbidly  afiiected,
without  any  participation  on  the  part  of  the  rest  of
the  body — a theoretical,  absurd  assertion,  which  has
led  to  the  most  disastrous  medical  treatment.

§ CLXXXVI.

Those  so-called  local  maladies  which  have  been
produced  a short  time  previously,  solely  by  an  external
injury,  still  appear  at  first  to  deserve  the  name  of
local  diseases.  But  then  the  injury  must  be  very
trivial,  and  in  that  case  it  would  be  of  no  great
moment.  For  injuries  accruing  to  the  body  from
without,  if  they  be  of  any  considerable  degree,  cause
the  whole  living  organism  to  sympathize ; there  occur
fever,  &c.  The  treatment  of  such  diseases  is  assigned
to  surgery ; but  this  is  only  right,  in  so  far  as  the
affected  parts  require  mechanical  aid,  whereby  the
external  obstacles  to  the  cure,  which  can  be  expected
,to  take  place  by  the  agency  of  the  vital  force  alone,
may  be  removed  by  mechanical  means,  e.g.  by  the
reduction  of  dislocations,  by  bandages  to  bring  to-
gether the  lips  of  wounds,  by  the  extraction  of  foreign
bodies  that  have  penetrated  into  the  living  parts,  by
making  an  opening  into  a cavity  of  the  body  in  order
to  remove  an  irritating  substance,  or  to  procure  the
evacuation  of  effusions  or  collections  of  fluids,  by
bringing  into  apposition  the  broken  extremities  of  a
fractured  bone,  and  retaining  them  in  suitable  contact


250


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


by  an  appropriate  bandage,  &c.  But  when  in  such
injuries  the  whole  living  organism  requires,  as  it
always  does,  active  dynamic  aid,  to  put  it  in  a position
to  accomplish  the  work  of  healing,  e.g.  when  the
violent  fever  resulting  from  extensive  contusions,
lacerated  muscles,  tendons  and  blood-vessels,  requires
to  be  removed  by  medicine  given  internally,  or  when
the  external  pain  of  scalded  or  corroded  parts  needs
to  be  homoeopathically  subdued,  then  the  services  of
the  dynamic  physician  and  his  homoeopathic  aid  come
into  requisition.


§ CLXXXVII.

But  those  affections,  alterations  and  symptoms
appearing  on  the  external  parts,  that  do  not  arise
from  any  external  injury,  or  that  have  only  some
slight  external  wound  for  their  immediate  exciting
cause,  are  produced  in  quite  another  manner ; their
source  lies  in  some  internal  malady.  To  consider
them  as  mere  local  affections,  and  at  the  same  time
to  treat  them,  only  or  almost  only,  with  local  applica-
tions, as  it  were,  surgically,  as  the  old  school  have
done  from  the  remotest  ages,  were  as  absurd  as  it
were  dangerous  in  its  results.

§ CLXXXVIII.

These  affections  were  considered  to  be  merely  local,
and  were  therefore  called  local  diseases,  as  if  they
were  maladies  exclusively  limited  to  those  parts.


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


251


wherein  the  organism  took  little  or  no  part,  or  affec-
tions of  these  particular  visible  parts,  of  which  the  rest
of  the  living  organism,  so  to  speak,  knew  nothing.^

§ CLXXXIX.

And  yet  very  little  reflexion  will  suffice  to  convince
us  that  no  external  malady  (not  occasioned  by  some
particular  external  injury)  can,  without  some  internal
cause,  without  the  co-operation  of  the  whole  organism
(which  must  consequently  be  in  a diseased  state)
arise,  remain  in  its  place,  or  even  grow  worse.  It
could  not  make  its  appearance  at  all,  without  the
accord  of  the  whole  health,  and  without  the  parti-
cipation of  the  rest  of  the  living  whole  (of  the  vital
force  that  pervades  all  the  other  sensitive  and  irritable
parts  of  the  organism);  indeed,  it  is  impossible  to
conceive  its  production  without  the  instrumentality
of  the  whole  (deranged)  life ; so  intimately  are  all
parts  of  the  organism  connected  together  to  form  an
inseparable  whole  in  sensations  and  functions.  No
eruption  on  the  lips,  no  whitlow  can  occur  without
previous  and  simultaneous  internal  ill-health.

§ cxc.

All  true  medical  treatment  of  a disease  on  the
external  parts  of  the  body  that  has  occurred  from


One  of  the  many  pernicious,  capital  mistakes  of  the  old  school.


252


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


little  or  no  injury  from  without,  must,  therefore,  be
directed  to  the  whole,  to  the  annihilation  and  cure  of
the  general  affection,  by  means  of  internal  remedies,
if  it  is  wished  that  the  treatment  be  judicious,  safe,
efficacious  and  radical.

§ CXCI.

This  is  confirmed  in  the  most  unambiguous  manner
by  experience,  which  shews  in  all  cases,  that  every
powerful  internal  medicine  immediately  after  its  in-
gestion causes  important  changes,  as  in  the  rest  of  the
state  of  such  a patient,  so  particularly  in  the  affected
external  parts  (which  to  ordinary  medical  science
seem  to  be  quite  isolated),  even  in  a so-called  local
disease  of  the  most  external  parts  of  the  body,  and  the
change  it  produces  is  of  the  most  salutary  character,
the. recovery  of  the  entire  system,  along  with  the
disappearance  of  the  external  affection  (without  the
aid  of  any  external  remedy),  provided  the  internal
remedy  directed  towards  the  whole  state  was  suitably
chosen  in  a homoeopathic  point  of  view.

§ CXCII.

This  is  best  effected  when,  in  the  investigation  of
the  case  of  disease,  along  with  the  exact  character  of
the  local  affection,  all  the  changes,  sufferings  and
symptoms  observable  in  the  patient’s  health,  and
which  may  have  been  previously  noticed,  when  no
medicines  had  been  used,  are  taken  in  conjunction,
to  form  a complete  picture  ,of  the  disease,  before


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


253


searching  among  the  medicines  known  with  regard
to  their  peculiar  pathogenetic  effects  for  a remedy
corresponding  to  this  collection  of  symptoms,  in  order
that  the  selection  may  be  accurately  homoeopathic.

§ CXCIII.

By  means  of  this  medicine,  administered  only  inter-
nally (and  if  the  disease  be  but  of  recent  origin,  often
by  the  very  first  dose  of  it),  the  general  morbid  state
of  the  body  is  removed  along  with  the  local  affection,
and  the  latter  cured  at  the  same  time  as  the  former,
proving  that  the  local  affection  depended  solely  and
alone  on  a disease  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  should
only  be  looked  upon  as  an  inseparable  part  of  the
whole,  as  one  of  the  most  considerable  and  striking
symptoms  of  the  whole  disease.

§ CXCIV.

It  is  not  useful,  either  in  acute  local  diseases  of
recent  origin,  or  in  local  affections  that  have  already
existed  a long  time,  to  rub  in  or  apply  externally  to
the  spot,  an  external  remedy,  even  though  it  be  the
specific,  and,  when  used  internally,  salutary  by  reason
of  its  homoeopathicity,  even  although  it  should  be  at
the  same  time  administered  internally ; for  the  acute
topical  affections  {e.g.  inflammations  of  individual
parts,  erysipelas,  &c.)  which  have  not  been  caused
by  external  injury  of  proportionate  violence,  but  by
dynamic  or  internal  causes,  yield  most  surely  to
internal  remedies  homoeopathically  adapted  to  the


254


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


perceptible  state  of  the  health  present  in  the  exterior
and  interior,  selected  from  the  general  store  of  proved
medicines,^  and  generally  without  any  other  aid ; hut
if  these  diseases  do  not  yield  to  them  completely,  and
if  there  still  remain  in  the  affected  spot  and  in  the
whole  state,  notwithstanding  good  regimen,  a relic  of
the  disease  which  the  vital  force  is  not  in  a position
to  restore  to  the  normal  state,  then  the  acute  disease
was  (as  not  unfrequently  happens)  a product  of  psora
which  had  hitherto  remained  latent  in  the  interior,
but  has  now  burst  forth  and  is  on  the  point  of
developing  itself  into  a manifest,  chronic  disease.

§ cxcv.

In  order  to  effect  a radical  cure  in  such  cases,
which  are  by  no  means  rare,  after  the  acute  state  has
been  tolerably  removed,  an  appropriate  antipsoric
treatment  (as  is  taught  in  my  work  on  Chronic
Diseases)  must  then  be  directed  against  the  symptoms
that  still  remain,  together  with  the  morbid  state  of
health  to  which  the  patient  was  previously  subject.
In  chronic  local  maladies,  that  are  not  evidently
venereal,  the  antipsoric  internal  treatment  is,  more-
over, alone  requisite.

• § CXCVI.

It  might  indeed  seem,  as  though  the  cure  of  such
diseases  would  be  hastened,  by  employing  the  medi-


’ As  for  instance,  aconite,  rhus,  belladonna,  mercury,  and  so  forth.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


255


cinal  substance  Avhich  is  known  to  be  truly  homoeo-
pathic to  the  whole  symptoms  collectively,  not  only
internally  but  externally,  because  the  action  of  a
medicine  applied  to  the  very  seat  of  the  local  atfection
might  etfect  a more  rapid  change  in  it.

§ CXCVII.

This  treatment,  however,  is  quite  inadmissible,  not
only  for  the  local  symptoms  arising  from  the  miasm
of  psora,  but  also  and  especially  for  those  originating
in  the  miasm  of  syphilis,  or  sycosis,  for  the  simultaneous
local  application,  along  with  the  internal  employment,  of
the  remedy  in  diseases  whose  chief  symptom  is  a con-
stant local  affection,  has  this  great  disadvantage,
that,  by  such  a local  application,  this  chief  symptom
(local  affection)^  will  usually  be  annihilated  sooner
than  the  internal  disease,  and  we  shall  now  be
deceived  by  the  semblance  of  a perfect  cure,  or  at
least,  it  will  be  difficult,  and  in  some  cases  impossible,
to  determine,  from  the  premature  disappearance  of
the  local  symptom,  if  the  general  disease  is  destroyed
by  the  simultaneous  employment  of  the  internal
medicine.

§ CXCVIII.

The  merely  local  application  of  medicines  that  are
powerful  for  cure  when  given  internally,  to  the  local


Recent  itch  eruption,  chancre,  sycosis.


256


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


symptoms  of  chronic  miasmatic  diseases  is  for  the  same
reason  quite  inadmissible ; for  if  the  local  affection  of
the  chronic  disease  be  only  removed  locally  and  in  a
one-sided  manner,  the  internal  treatment  indispensable
for  the  complete  restoration  of  the  health  remains  in
dubious  obscurity ; the  chief  symptom  (the  local  affec-
tion) is  gone,  and  there  remain  only  the  other,  less
distinguishable  symptoms,  which  are  less  constant
and  less  persistent  than  the  local  affection,  and  fre-
quently not  sufficiently  peculiar,  and  too  slightly
characteristic  to  display,  after  that,  a picture  of  the
disease  in  clear  and  perfect  outlines.

§ CXCIX.

If  the  remedy  perfectly  homoeopathic  to  the  disease
had  not  yet  been  discovered,^  at  the  time  when  the
local  symptoms  were  destroyed  by  a corrosive  or
dessicative  external  remedy,  or  by  the  knife,  then
the  case  becomes  much  more  difficult  on  account  of
the  too  indefinite  (uncharacteristic)  and  inconstant
appearance  of  the  remaining  symptoms,  for  what
might  have  contributed  most  to  determine  the  selec-
tion of  the  most  suitable  remedy,  and  its  internal
employment  until  the  disease  should  have  been  com-
pletely annihilated,  namely  the  external  principal
symptom,  has  been  removed  from  our  observation.


^ As  was  the  case  before  my  time  with  the  remedies  for  the  sycotic
disease  (and  the  antipsoric  medicines).


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


257


§ cc.

Had  it  still  been  present  to  guide  the  internal
treatment,  the  homoeopathic  remedy  for  the  whole
disease  might  have  been  discovered,  and  had  that
been  found,  the  persistence  of  the  local  affection
during  its  internal  employment  would  have  shewn
that  the  cure  was  not  yet  completed ; but  were  it
cured  on  its  seat,  this  would  be  a convincing  proof
that  the  disease  was  completely  eradicated,  and  the
recovery  from  the  entire  disease  had  proceeded  to  the
desired  extent.  An  inestimable,  indispensable  advan-
tage.

§ CCI.

It  is  evident,  that  man’s  vital  force  when  encum-
bered with  a chronic  disease  which  it  is  unable  to
overcome  by  its  own  powers,  adopts  the  plan  of
developing  a local  malady  on  some  external  part,
solely  for  this  object,  that  by  making  and  keeping  in
a diseased  state  this  part  which  is  not  indispensable
to  human  life,  it  may  thereby  silence  the  internal
disease,  which  otherwise  threatens  to  destroy  the
vital  organs  (and  to  deprive  the  patient  of  life),  and
that  it  may  thereby,  so  to  speak,  transfer  the  internal
disease  to  the  vicarious  local  affection,  and,  as  it
were,  lead  it  thither.  The  presence  of  the  local  affec-
tion thus  silences,  for  a time,  the  internal  disease,
though  without  being  able  either  to  cure  it  or  to
diminish  it  materially.^  The  local  affection,  how-

' The  issues  of  the  old-school  practitioners  do  something  similar;
as  artificial  ulcers  on  external  parts,  they  silence  some  internal  .chronic

S


258


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


ever,  is  never  anything  else  than  a part  of  the
general  disease,  but  a part  of  it  increased  all  in  one
direction  by  the  organic  vital  force,  and  transferred
to  a less  dangerous  (external)  part  of  the  body,  in
order  to  allay  the  internal  ailment.  But  (as  has  been
said)  by  this  local  symptom  that  silences  the  internal
disease,  so  far  from  anything  being  gained  by  the
vital  force  towards  diminishing  or  curing  the  whole
malady,  the  internal  disease,  on  the  contrary,  con-
tinues, in  spite  of  it,  gradually  to  increase,  and  nature
is  constrained  to  enlarge  and  aggravate  the  local  symp-
tom always  more  and  more,  in  order  that  it  may  still
suffice  as  a substitute  for  the  increased  internal  disease,
and  may  still  keep  it  under.  Old  ulcers  on  the  legs
get  worse  whilst  the  internal  psora  is  uncured,  the
chancre  enlarges  whilst  the  internal  syphilis  is  still
uneradicated,  in  proportion  as  the  general  internal
disease  increases  with  the  lapse  of  time.

§ CCII.

If  the  old-school  physician  should  now  destroy  the
local  symptom  by  the  local  use  of  external  remedies,
under  the  belief  that  he  thereby  cures  the  whole
disease,  nature  makes  up  for  its  loss  by  rousing  the  in-
ternal malady,  and  the  other  symptoms  that  previously
existed  in  a latent  state  along  with  the  local  affection,
that  is  to  say,  by  increasing  the  internal  disease — in

diseases,  but  only  for  a very  short  time,  without  being  able  to  cure
them;  but  on  the  other  hand  they  weaken  and  destroy  the  general
health  much  more  than  is  done  by  most  of  the  metastases  effected  by
the  instinctive  vital  force.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


259


which  case  it  is  usual  to  say,  though  incorrectly,  that
the  local  symptom  has  been  driven  hack,  into  the
system,  or  upon  the  nerves,  by  the  external  remedies.

§ CCIII.

Every  external  treatment  of  such  local  symptoms,
the  object  of  which  is  to  remove  them  from  the  surface
of  the  body,  whilst  the  internal  miasmatic  disease  is
left  uncured,  as,  for  instance,  driving  off  the  skin  the
eruption  of  itch  by  all  sorts  of  ointments,  burning
away  the  chancre  externally,  and  destroying  the
condylomata  by  the  knife,  the  ligature,  or  the  actual
cautery,  this  pernicious  external  mode  of  treatment
hitherto  so  usual,  has  been  the  most  prolific  source
of  all  the  innumerable  named  or  unnamed  chronic
maladies  under  which  mankind  groans ; it  is  one  of
the  most  criminal  procedures  the  medical  world  can
be  guilty  of,  and  yet  it  has  hitherto  been  the  one
• generally  adopted,  and  taught  from  the  professorial
chair  as  the  only  one.^

§ CCIV.

If  we  deduct  all  chronic  alfections,  ailments  and
diseases,  that  depend  on  a habitual  unhealthy  mode  of
living,  as  also  those  innumerable  medicinal  maladies
(y.  § Ixxiv)  that  arise  from  the  irrational,  continued.


^ For  any  medicines  that  might  at  the  same  time  he  given  inter-
nally, served  but  to  aggravate  the  malady,  as  these  remedies  possessed
no  specific,  therapeutic  powers  for  the  totality  of  the  disease,  but
assailed  the  organism,  weakened  it,  and  inflicted  on  it,  in  addition,
other  chronic  medicinal  diseases.

s 2


260


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


harrassing  and  pernicious  treatment  of  often  incon-
siderable diseases  by  physicians  of  the  old  school,
all  the  remainder,  without  exception,  result  from  the
development  of  these  three  chronic  miasms,  internal
syphilis,  internal  sycosis,  but  chiefly,  and  in  infinitely
greater  proportion,  internal  psora,  each  of  which
was  already  in  possession  of  the  whole  organism,
before  the  primary,  vicarious  local  system  of  each  of
them  (in  the  case  of  psora  the  scabious  eruption,  in
syphilis  the  chancre  or  the  bubo,  and  in  sycosis  the
condylomata)  that  prevented  them  spreading  inter-
nally, made  its  appearance ; and  these  chronic  mias-
matic diseases,  if  deprived  of  their  local  symptom,  are
inevitably  destined  by  mighty  nature  sooner  or  later
to  become  developed  and  to  burst  forth,  and  thence
propagate  all  the  nameless  misery,  the  incredible
number  of  chronic  diseases,  which  have  plagued
mankind  for  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years,  none
of  which  would  so  frequently  have  existed,  had’
physicians  striven  in  a rational  manner  to  cure  radi-
cally, and  to  extinguish  in  the  organism  these  three
miasms,  by  the  internal  homoeopathic  medicines  suited
for  each  of  them,  without  applying  topical  remedies
to  their  external  symptoms.

§ ccv.

The  homoeopathic  physician  never  treats  one  of
these  primary  symptoms  of  chronic  miasms,  nor  yet
one  of  their  secondary  affections  that  result  from  their
further  development,  by  local  remedies  (neither  by


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


261


those  external  agents  that  act  dynamically,^  nor  yet
by  those  that  act  mechanically),  but  he  cures,  in  cases
where  the  one  or  the  other  appears,  only  the  great
miasm  on  which  they  depend,  whereupon  its  primary,
as  also  its  secondary  symptoms  disappear  spontane-
ously; but  as  this  was  not  the  mode  pursued  by
the  homoeopathic  physician’s  predecessors,  and  as  he
generally,  alas  ! finds  the  primary  symptoms^  already
destroyed  externally  by  the  ordinary  practitioners,  he

^ I cannot  therefore  advise,  for  instance,  the  local  extu'pation  of
the  so-called  cancer  of  the  lips  or  face  (the  product  of  highly  devel-
oped psora?)  by  means  of  the  arsenical  paste,  not  only  because  it  is
excessively  painful,  and  often  fads,  but  more  for  this  reason,  because,
if  this  dynamic  remedy  should  indeed  succeed  in  freeing  the  affected
part  of  the  body  from  the  malignant  ulcer,  locally,  the  fundamental
malady  is  thereby  irot  diminished  in  the  slightest,  the  preserving  vital
force  is  therefore  necessitated  to  transfer  the  field  of  operation  for  the
great  internal  malady  to  some  more  important  part  (as  it  does  in  every
case  of  metaschematism),  and  the  consequence  is  blindness,  deafness,
insanity,  suffocative  asthma,  dropsy,  apoplexy,  and  so  forth.  But  this
ambiguous,  local  liberation  of  the  part  from  the  malignant  ulcer,  by
the  topical  arsenical  remedy,  only  succeeds,  after  all,  in  those  cases
where  the  ulcer  has  not  yet  attained  any  great  size,  and  when  the
vital  force  is  still  very  energetic ; but  it  is  just  in  such  a state  of
things  that  the  complete  cure  of  the  whole  original  disease  is  also
still  practicable.

The  result  is  the  same  when  cancer  of  the  face  or  breast  is  re-
moved by  the  knife  alone,  and  when  encysted  tumours  are  extirpated ;
something  worse  ensues,  or  at  any  rate  death  is  hastened.  This  has
been  the  case  times  without  number,  hut  the  old  school  still  goes
blindly  on  in  the  same  way  in  every  new  case,  with  equal  want  of
success.

^ Itch  eruption,  chancre  (bubo),  condyloniata.


262


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


has  now  more  to  do  with  the  secondary  ones,  i.  e.
the  affections  resulting  from  the  breaking  forth  and
development  of  these  inherent  miasms,  but  especially
with  the  chronic  diseases  produced  by  internal  psora,
the  internal  treatment  of  which,  as  far  as  a single
physician  can  elucidate  it  by  many  years  of  reflexion,
observation  and  experience,  I have  endeavoured  to
point  out  in  my  work  on  Chronic  Diseases^  to  which
I must  refer  the  reader.

§ CCVI.

Before  commencing  the  treatment  of  a chronic
disease,  the  most  careful  investigation^  must  neces-
sarily be  made,  as  to  whether  the  patient  has  had  a
venereal  infection  (or  an  infection  with  condylomatous
gonorrhoea);  for  the  treatment  must  be  directed  to-
wards this,  when  signs  of  syphilis  only  (or  of  the  rare


' In  investigations  of  this  nature  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to
he  deceived  by  the  assertions  of  the  patients  or  theii’  friends,  who
frequently  assign  as  the  cause  of  chronic,  even  of  the  greatest  and
most  chronic  diseases,  either  a cold  caught  (a  thorough  wetting,
drinking  cold  water  after  being  heated)  many  years  ago,  or  a former
fright,  a sprain,  a vexation  (sometimes  even  a bewitchment),  &c.,
these  causes  are  much  too  insignificant  to  develop  a chronic  disease
in  a healthy  frame,  to  keep  it  up  for  years,  and  to  aggravate  it  year  by
year,  as  is  the  case  with  all  chronic  diseases  from  developed  psora.
Causes  of  a much  more  imiJortant  character  than  these  remembered
noxious  influences,  must  lie  at  the  root  of  the  commencement  and
progress  of  a considerable,  obstinate  disease  of  long  standing;  the
assigned  causes  could  only  rouse  into  activity  the  latent  chronic


miasm.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


263


condylomatous  disease)  are  present,  but  this  disease
is  but  rarely  met  Avith  alone  now-a-days.  If  such
infection  have  previously  occurred,  regard  must  also
be  paid  to  it  in  the  treatment  of  those  cases  in  which
psora  is  present,  because  in  them  the  latter  is  compli-
cated with  the  former,  as  is  always  the  case  when  the
symptoms  of  syphilis  are  not  pure ; for  when  the
physician  thinks  he  has  a case  of  old  venereal  disease
before  him,  he  has  always,  or  almost  always,  to  treat
one  accompanied  by  (complicated  AAuth)  psora,  chiefly,
for  the  internal  itch  malady  (the  psora)  is  far  the
most  frequent  (most  certain)  fundamental  cause  of
chronic  diseases,  either  united  (complicated)  with
syphilis  (or  even  with  sycosis),  if  the  latter  infections
have  avowedly  occurred,  or,  as  is  much  more  frequently
the  case,  psora  is  the  sole  fundamental  cause  of  all
the  other  chronic  maladies,  whatever  names  they  may
bear,  which  are,  moreover,  so  often  bungled,  increased
to  a monstrous  extent  and  disfigured  by  allopathic
unskilfulness.


§ CCVII.

When  the  above  information  has  been  gained,  it
still  remains  for  the  homoeopathic  physician  to  ascer-
tain: what  were  the  allopathic  modes  of  treatment
that  had  up  to  that  date  been  adopted  towards  the
patient  affected  by  the  chronic  disease,  what  powerful  •
medicines  had  been  chiefly  and  most  frequently  em-
ployed, also  what  mineral  baths  had  been  used  and
their  effects,  in  order  to  understand,  in  some  measure,


264


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


the  degeneration  of  the  disease  from  its  original  state,
and  where  possible,  to  correct  in  part  these  pernicious
artificial  operations,  or  to  enable  him  to  avoid  the
medicines  that  have  already  been  improperly  used.

§ CCVIII.

The  age  of  the  patient,  his  mode  of  living  and
diet,  his  occupation,  his  domestic  position,  his  social
relations  and  so  forth,  must  next  be  taken  into  con-
sideration, in  order  to  ascertain  whether  these  things
tend  to  increase  his  malady,  or  in  how  far  they  may
favour  or  obstruct  the  treatment.  In  like  manner
the  state  of  his  disposition  and  mind  must  be  attended
to,  to  learn  whether  that  presents  any  obstacle  to
the  treatment,  or  requires  some  psychical  training,
encouragement  or  modification.

§ CCIX.

After  this  is  done,  the  physician  endeavours  in
various  conversations  with  the  patient  to  trace  the
picture  of  his  disease  as  completely  as  possible,  accor-
ding to  the  directions  given  above,  in  order  to  be  able
to  distinguish  the  most  striking  and  peculiar  (charac-
teristic) symptoms,  in  accordance  with  which  he
selects  the  first  antipsoric  or  other  remedy  having  the
greatest  symptomatic  resemblance,  for  tlie  commence-
ment of  the  treatment,  and  so  forth.

§ ccx.

Psora  lies  at  the  root  of  almost  all  those  diseases,
that  I have  above  termed  one-sided,  which  appear  to


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


265


be  more  difficult  to  cure  in  consequence  of  this  one-
sidedness, all  their  other  morbid  symptoms  disappear-
ing, as  it  were,  before  their  single,  great,  prominent
symptom.  Of  this  character  are  what  are  termed
mental  diseases.  They  do  not,  however,  constitute  a
class  of  disease  distinctly  separated  from  all  others,
since  in  all  the  other  so-called  corporeal  diseases,  the
condition  of  the  disposition  and  mind  is  always
altered,^  and  in  all  cases  of  disease  we  are  called  on
to  cure,  the  state  of  the  patient’s  disposition  is  to  be
especially  noted,  along  with  the  collective  symptoms,
if  we  would  trace  an  accurate  picture  of  dhe  disease,
in  order  to  be  able  therefrom  to  treat  it  homoco-
pathically  with  success.


^ How  often,  for  instance,  do  we  not  meet  with  a mild,  soft  dispo-
sition in  patients  who  have  for  year's  been  afflicted  with  the  most
painful  diseases,  so  that  the  physician  feels  constrained  to  esteem
and  compassionate  the  sufferer.  But  if  he  subdue  the  disease  and
restore  the  patient  to  health — as  is  frequently  done  in  homoeopathic
practice — he  is  often  astonished  and  horrified  at  the  frightful  altera-
tion in  his  disposition.  He  often  witnesses  the  occurrence  of  in-
gratitude, cruelty,  refined  malice,  and  propensities  most  disgraceful
and  degrading  to  humanity,  which  were  exactly  the  qualities  possessed
by  the  patient  before  he  grew  ill.

Those  who  were  patient  when  well,  often  become  obstinate,  violent,
hasty,  or  even  intolerant  and  capricious,  or  impatient  or  desponding;
those  formerly  chaste  and  modest  often  become  lascivious  and  im-
modest. A clear-headed  person  not  unfrequently  becomes  obtuse  of
intellect,  while  one  ordinarily  weak-minded  becomes  more  sage  and
thoughtful ; and  a man  slow  to  make  U23  his  mind,  sometimes  acquires
great  presence  of  mind  and  quickness  of  resolve,  &c.


266


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCXI.

This  holds  good  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  state
of  the  disposition  of  the  patient  often  gives  the  chief
bias  to  the  selection  of  the  homoeopathic  remedy,  as
it  often  consists  in  symptoms  of  marked  peculiarity,
which,  amidst  all  those  present,  can  least  remain  con-
cealed from  the  accurately  observing  physician.

§ CCXII.

The  Creator  of  therapeutic  agents  has  also  bestowed
particular  attention  on  this  main  feature  of  all  diseases,
the  altered  state  of  the  disposition  and  mind,  for
there  is  no  powerful  medicinal  substance  in  the  world
which  does  not  very  perceptibly  alter  the  state  of  the
disposition  and  mind  in  the  healthy  individual  who
tests  it,  and  every  medicine  does  so  in  a ditferent
manner.

§ CCXIII.

We  shall,  therefore,  never  be  able  to  cure  conform-
ably to  nature,  that  is  to  say,  homceopathically,  if  we
do  not,  in  every  case  of  disease,  even  in  such  as  are
acute,  observe,  along  with  the  other  symptoms,  those
relating  to  the  changes  in  the  state  of  the  mind  and
disposition,  and  if  we  do  not  select,  for  the  patient’s
relief,  from  among  the  remedies,  such  a morbific
agent,  as,  in  addition  to  the  similarity  of  its  other
symptoms  to  those  of  the  disease,  is  also  capable  of
producing  a similar  state  of  the  disposition  and  mind.^


Thus,  aconite  will  seldom  oi-  never  effect  either  a rapid  or  per-


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


267


§ CCXIV.

The  instructions  I can  give  relative  to  the  cure  of
mental  diseases,  may  be  confined  to  a very  few  re-
marks, as  they  must  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as
all  other  diseases,  namely,  by  a remedy  which  shews,
in  the  symptoms  it  causes  in  the  body  and  mind  of  a
healthy  individual,  a power  of  producing  a morbid
state  as  similar  as  possible  to  the  case  of  disease
before  us,  and  in  no  other  way  can  they  be  cured.

§ ccxv.

The  so-called  mental  and  moral  diseases  are  all
almost  nothing  more  than  corporeal  diseases,  in  which
the  peculiar  symptom  of  the  derangement  of  the
mind  and  disposition  of  each  of  them,  is  increased,  the
corporeal  symptoms  declining  (more  or  less  rapidly)
the  while — till  it  at  length  attains  the  most  striking
one-sidedness,  almost  as  if  it  were  a local  disease  in
the  invisible,  subtile  organ  of  the  mind  or  disposition.

§ CCXVI.

The  cases  are  not  rare  in  which  a so-called  corporeal
disease  that  threatens  to  be  fatal — a suppuration  of
the  lungs,  or  the  destruction  of  some  other  important
viscus,  or  some  other  ardent  (acute)  disease,  e.g.  in


manent  cure  in  a patient  of  a calm,  equable  disposition,  and  just  as
little  will  nux  vomica  be  serviceable  where  the  disposition  is  mild
and  phlegmatic,  pulsatilla  where  it  is  happy,  gay,  and  obstinate,  or
ignatia  where  it  is  imperturbable  and  disposed  neither  to  be  frightened
nor  vexed.


268


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


child-bed,  &c. — becomes  transformed  into  insanity,  a
kind  of  melancholia  or  mania,  by  a rapid  increase  of
the  mental  symptoms  that  were  previously  present,
whereby  the  corporeal  symptoms  lose  all  their  danger;
these  latter  improve  almost  to  perfect  health,  or  rather
they  decrease  to  such  a degree,  that  their  obscure
presence  can  only  be  detected  by  the  constant  and
minute  observation  of  the  physician.  In  this  manner
it  becomes  transformed  into  a one-sided,  and  as  it  were
a local  disease,  in  which  the  symptom  of  the  mental
disturbance,  which  was  at  first  but  slight,  increases  so
as  to  he  the  chief  symptom,  and  in  a great  measure
occupies  the  place  of  the  other  (corporeal)  symptoms,
Avhose  violence  it  subdues  in  a palliative  manner,  so
that,  in  a word,  the  afiections  of  the  grosser  corporeal
organs  become,  as  it  were,  transferred  and  led  away
to  the  almost  spiritual,  mental  and  moral  organs,
which  have  never  yet  been,  and  never  will  be  reached
by  the  dissecting  scalpel.

§ CCXVII.

Great  care  must  be  exercised  in  investigating,  in
these  diseases,  the  entire  collection  of  phenomena,
relative  both  to  the  corporeal  symptoms,  and  also,
and  indeed  particularly,  relative  to  the  accurate  ap-
prehension of  the  exact  peculiarity  (character)  of  the
chief  symptom,  of  the  special,  and  always  prominent
state  of  the  mind  and  disposition,  in  order  to  discover,
for  the  extinction  of  the  entire  disease,  among  the
remedies  known  in  respect  of  their  pure  effects,  a


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


269


homoeopathic  medicinal  morbific  agent,  a remedy,
which  among  its  symptoms  displays,  with  the  greatest
possible  similarity,  not  only  the  corporeal  morbid
symptoms  present  in  the  case  of  disease  before  us,
but  also  especially  its  mental  and  moral  state.

§ CCXVIII.

To  this  collection  of  symptoms  belongs  in  the  first
place  the  accurate  description  of  all  the  phenomena
of  the  previous  so-called  corporeal  disease,  before  it
degenerated  into  a one-sided  increase  of  the  moral
symptom,  before  it  became  a disease  of  the  mind  and
disposition.  This  may  be  learned  from  the  report  of
the  patient’s  friends.

§ CCXIX.

A comparison  of  these  previous  symptoms  of  the
corporeal  disease  with  the  traces  of  them  that  still
remain,  though  they  have  become  less  perceptible
(but  which  even  now  sometimes  become  prominent,
when  a lucid  interval  and  a transient  alleviation  of
the  mental  disease  occurs)  will  serve  to  demonstrate
them  to  be  still  present,  though  concealed.

§ ccxx.

By  adding  to  this  the  state  of  the  mind  and  dis-
position accurately  observed  by  the  patient’s  friends
and  by  the  physician  himself,  we  have  thus  the
complete  picture  of  the  disease  set  together,  for  which,
in  order  to  effect  the  homoeopathic  cure  of  the  disease,


270


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


a medicine  capable  of  producing  symptoms  strikingly
similar,  and  especially  a similar  disturbance  of  the
mind,  must  be  sought  for  among  the  antipsoric
remedies,  if  the  mental  disease  have  already  lasted
some  time.

§ CCXXI.

If,  however,  insanity  or  mania  (caused  by  fright,
vexation,  the  abuse  of  spirituous  liquors,  &c.)  have
suddenly  broken  out  as  an  acute  disease,  in  the
patient’s  ordinary  calm  state,  although  it  almost
always  arises  from  internal  psora,  like  a flame  burst-
ing forth  from  it,  yet  when  it  occurs  in  this  acute
manner  it  should  not  be  immediately  treated  with
antipsorics,  but  in  the  first  place  with  remedies  in-
dicated for  it  out  of  the  other  class  of  proved  medi-
caments (e.^.  aconite,  belladonna,  stramonium,  hyos-
cyamus,  mercury,  «&:c.)  in  highly  potentized,  minute,
homoeopathic  doses,  in  order  to  subdue  it  so  far,
that  the  psora  shall  for  the  time  revert  to  its  former
latent  state,  wherein  the  patient  appears  as  if  quite
well.

§ CCXXII.

But  such  a patient,  who  has  recovered  from  an
acute  mental  or  moral  disease  by  the  use  of  these
non-antipsoric  medicines,  should  never  be  regarded  as
cured;  on  the  contrary,  no  time  should  be  lost  in
freeing  him  completely,^  by  means  of  a prolonged


^ It  very  rarely  happens  that  a disease  of  the  mind  or  disposition,
which  has  already  lasted  a considerable  time,  ceases  of  itself  (by


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


271


antipsoric  treatment,  from  the  chronic  miasm  of  the
psora,  which,  it  is  true,  has  now  become  once  more
latent,  but  is  quite  ready  to  break  out  anew ; if  this
is  done,  there  is  no  fear  of  another  similar  attack,  if
he  attend  faithfully  to  the  diet  and  regimen  prescribed
for  him.

§ CCXXIII.

But  if  the  antipsoric  treatment  be  neglected,  then
we  may  almost  assuredly  expect,  from  a much  slighter
cause  than  brought  on  the  first  attack  of  the  insanity,
the  speedy  occurrence  of  a new  and  more  lasting  and-
severe  fit,  during  which  the  psora  is  apt  to  develop
itself  completely,  and  passes  into  either  a periodic  or
continued  mental  derangement,  which  is  then  more
difficult  to  be  cured  by  antipsorics.


the  internal  disease  transferring  itself  again  upon  the  grosser  cor-
poreal organs) ; such  are  the  few  cases  met  with  now  and  then,
where  a former  inmate  of  a madhouse  has  been  dismissed  apparently
recovered.  Hitherto  all  mad-houses  have  continued  to  be  choke-
full,  so  that  the  number  of  other  insane  persons  who  seek  for
admission  into  such  institutions  could  scarcely  find  room  in  them,
unless  some  of  the  insane  in  the  house  died.  Not  one  of  them  is
ever  really  and  permanently  cured  in  them!  A convincing  proof,
among  many  others,  of  the  complete  nullity  of  the  non-healing  art
hitherto  practised,  which  has  been  ridiculously  honomred  by  allo-
pathic ostentation  with  the  title  of  rational  medicine.  How  often,
on  the  other  hand,  has  not  the  true  healing  ai't,  genuine,  pure  homoeo-
pathy, been  able  to  restore  such  unfortunate  beings  to  the  possession
of  their  mental  and  corporeal  health,  and  to  give  them  back  again  to
their  delighted  friends  and  to  the  world !


272


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCXXIV.

If  the  mental  disease  be  not  quite  developed,  and
if  it  be  still  somewhat  doubtful,  whether  it  really
arose  from  a corporeal  affection,  or  did  not  rather
result  from  faults  of  education,  bad  practices,  corrupt
morals,  neglect  of  the  mind,  superstition  or  ignorance ;
the  mode  of  deciding  this  point  will  be,  that  if  it
proceed  from  one  or  other  of  the  latter  causes  it  will
yield  and  grow  better  by  rational,  friendly  exhor-
tations, consolatory  motives,  serious  representations
and  sensible  advice,  whereas  a real  moral  or  mental
disease,  depending  on  corporeal  disease,  would  be
speedily  aggravated  by  such  a course,  the  melancholic
would  become  still  more  dejected,  querulous,  incon-
solable and  retiring,  as  also  the  spiteful  maniac  would
thereby  become  still  more  exasperated,  and  the  chat-
tering fool  would  become  manifestly  more  foolish.^

§ ccxxv.

There  are,  however,  as  has  just  been  stated,  cer-
tainly a few  mental  diseases  which  have  not  merely
grown  out  of  corporeal  diseases,  but  which,  in  an
inverse  manner,  the  body  being  but  slightly  indis-
posed, arise  and  continue  in  the  mind,  from  continued


' It  would  seem  as  though  the  mind,  in  these  cases,  felt  with
uneasiness  and  grief  the  truth  of  these  rational  representations,  and
acted  upon  the  body,  as  if  it  wished  to  restore  the  lost  harmony,  but
that  the  body,  by  means  of  its  disease,  reacted  upon  the  organs  of
the  mind  and  disposition,  and  put  them  in  still  greater  commotion,
by  a fresh  transference  of  its  sufferings  on  to  them.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


273


anxiety,  grief,  vexation,  wrongs,  and  the  frequent
occurrence  of  great  fear  and  fright.  This  kind  of
mental  diseases  in  time  destroys  the  corporeal  health,
often  in  a great  degree.

§ CCXXVI.

It  is  only  such  mental  diseases  as  these,  which  were
first  engendered  and  subsequently  kept  up  by  the
mind  itself,  that,  while  they  are  yet  recent  and  before
they  have  made  very  great  inroads  on  the  corporeal
state,  may,  by  means  of  psychical  remedies,  such  as
a display  of  confidence,  friendly  exhortations,  sen-
sible advice,  and  often  a well-disguised  deception,  be
changed  into  a healthy  state  of  the  mind,  (and  with
appropriate  diet  and  regimen,  seemingly  into  a healthy
state  of  the  body  also).

§ CCXXVII.

But  in  these  cases  also,  a psoric  miasm  lies  at  the
root  of  the  affection,  which  was  only  not  yet  quite
ready  for  its  full  development,  and  for  the  sake  of
security  it  would  be  advisable  to  subject  the  re-
covered patient  to  a radical,  antipsoric  treatment,  in
order  that  he  may  not  again,  as  might  easily  occur,
contract  a similar  mental  disease.

§ CCXXVIII.

In  diseases  of  the  mind  and  disposition  resulting
from  corporeal  maladies,  which  can  only  be  cured  by
homoeopathic  antipsoric  medicine,  along  with  scru-

T


274


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


pulously  suitable  regimen,  an  appropriate  psychical
deportment  towards  the  patient  on  the  part  of  his
friends  and  physician,  by  way  of  an  auxiliary  mental
regimen,  must  be  most  carefully  observed!  To  furious
mania  we  must  oppose  calm  intrepidity,  and  cool,
firm  resolution — to  doleful,  querulous  lamentation,  a
mute  expression  of  commiseration — to  senseless  chat-
tering, a silence  not  wholly  inattentive, — to  disgusting
and  abominable  behaviour,  and  to  conversation  of
a similar  character,  total  inattention.  We  must
merely  endeavour  to  prevent  the  destruction  and
injury  of  external  objects,  without  reproaching  the
patient  for  his  acts,  and  everything  must  be  arranged
in  such  a way  that  the  necessity  for  any  corporal
punishments  and  tortures^  whatever,  may  be  done


^ It  is  impossible  not  to  marvel  at  the  hard-heartedness  and  indis-
cretion of  the  medical  men  in  many  establishments  for  patients  of
this  kind,  not  only  in  England,  hut  also  in  Germany,  who,  without
attempting  to  discover  the  true  and  only  efficacious  mode  of  curing
such  diseases,  which  is  by  homoeopathic  medicinal  (antipsoric)  means,
content  themselves  with  torturing  those  most  pitiable  of  all  human
beings,  with  the  most  violent  blows  and  other  painful  torments.  By
this  unconscientious  and  revolting  procedure  they  debase  themselves
beneath  the  level  of  the  turnkeys  in  a house  of  correction,  for  the
latter  inflict  such  chastisements  as  the  duty  devolving  on  theii’  office,
and  on  criminals  only,  whilst  the  former  appear,  from  a humiliating
consciousness  of  their  uselessness  as  physicians,  only  to  vent  their

[*  The  cruel  and  irrational  system  of  treating  the  unfortunate  insane  by
restraint  and  coercion  is  now  nearly  obsolete  in  England,  but  that  it  still
prevails  in  some  parts  of  Germany,  those  who  have  visited  that  den  of
wretchedness,  the  Eisen  Thiirm  of  Vienna,  can  testify.]


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


275


away  with.  This  is  so  much  the  more  easily  effected,
as  in  the  administration  of  the  medicine — the  only
circumstance  in  which  the  employment  of  coercion
could  be  justified — in  the  homoeopathic  system,  the
small  doses  of  the  appropriate  medicine  never  offend
the  taste,  and  may  consequently  be  given  to  the
patient  without  his  knowledge  in  his  drink,  in  which
case  there  is  no  necessity  to  employ  any  compulsory
measures.

. § CCXXIX.

On  the  other  hand,  contradiction,  eager  explana-
tions, rude  corrections  and  invectives,  as  also  weak,
timorous  yielding  are  quite  out  of  place  with  such
patients,  they  are  equally  pernicious  modes  of  treating
mental  maladies.  But  such  patients  are  most  of  all
exasperated  and  their  complaint  aggravated  by  con-
tumely, fraud,  and  deceptions  that,  they  can  detect.
The  physician  and  keeper  must  always  appear  as  if  they
believed  them  to  he  possessed  of  their  reason.

All  kinds  of  external  disturbing  infiuences  on  their
senses  and  disposition  should  be  if  possible  removed:
there  are  no  amusements  for  their  clouded  spirit,  no
salutary  distractions,  no  means  of  instruction,  no
soothing  effects  from  conversation,  books  or  other


spite  at  the  apparent  incurability  of  mental  diseases,  in  harshness
towards  the  pitiable,  innocent  sufferers,  for  they  are  too  ignorant  to
be  of  any  use,  and  too  indolent  to  adopt  a judicious  mode  of  treat-
ment.

T 2


276


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


things,  for  their  mind  that  pines  or  frets  in  the
chains  of  the  diseased  body,  no  invigqration  for  it,  but
the  cure ; it  is  only  when  the  bodily  health  is  changed
for  the  better,  that  tranquillity  and  comfort  again
beam  upon  their  mind.

§ ccxxx.

If  the  antipsoric  remedies  selected  for  each  par-
ticular case  of  mental  disease  ( — there  are  incredibly
numerous  varieties  of  them — ) be  quite  homceopathi-
cally  suited  for  the  faithfully  traced  picture  of  the
morbid  state,  which,  if  there  be  a sufficient  num-
ber of  this  kind  of  medicines  known  in  respect  of
their  pure  eifects,  is  ascertained,  by  an  indefatigable
search  for  the  most  appropriate  homoeopathic  remedy
all  the  more  easily,  as  the  moral  and  mental  state,
constituting  the  principal  symptom  of  such  a patient,
is  so  unmistakeably  perceptible — , then  the  smallest
possible  doses  are  often  sufficient  to  effect  the  most
striking  improvement  in  no  very  long  time,  which
could  not  be  brought  about  by  physicking  the  patient
to  death  with  the  largest,  oft-repeated  doses  of  all
other  unsuitable  (allopathic)  medicines.  Indeed,  I can
confidently  assert  from  great  experience,  that  the  vast
superiority  of  the  homoeopathic  system  over  all  other
conceivable  methods  of  treatment,  is  nowhere  displayed
in  a more  triumphant  light  than  in  mental  diseases
of  long  standing,  which  originally  sprang  from  cor-
poreal maladies  or  were  developed  simultaneously
with  them.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


277


§ CCXXXI.

The  intermittent  diseases  deserve  a special  con-
sideration, as  well  those  that  recur  at  certain  periods
— as  the  great  number  of  intermittent  fevers,  and  the
apparently  non-febrile  affections  that  recur  at  intervals
like  intermittent  fevers — as  also  those,  in  which  cer-
tain morbid  states  alternate  at  uncertain  intervals
with  morbid  states  of  a different  kind.

§ CCXXXII.

These  latter,  alternating  diseases,  are  also  very
numerous,^  but  all  belong  to  the  class  of  chronic
diseases;  they  are  generally  a manifestation  of  de-


’ Two  or  three  states  may  alternate  with  one  another.  Thus,  for
instance,  in  the  case  of  a double  alternating  disease,  certain  pauis
may  occur  unremittingly  in  the  legs,  &c.,  immediately  on  the  disap-
pearance of  a kind  of  ophthalmia,  which  latter  again  appears  as  soon
•as  the  pain  in  the  limbs  has  gone  off  for  the  time — convulsions  and
spasms  may  alternate  immediately  with  any  other  affection  of  the
body  or  some  part  of  it — an  instance  of  a threefold  alternating
disease  may  occur  in  an  ordinary  indisposition,  where  a period
of  apparent  increase  of  health,  with  unusual  exaltation  of  the
corporeal  and  mental  powers  (extravagant  gaiety,  extraordinary
activity  of  the  body,  excess  of  comfortable  feeling,  inordinate  appetite,
&c.)  may  occur,  after  which,  and  quite  as  unexpectedly,  gloomy,
melancholy  humour,  intolerable,  hypochondriacal  ill-temper,  with
derangement  of  several  of  the  vital  operations,  the  digestion,  sleep,
&c.,  appear,  which  again,  and  just  as  suddenly,  give  place  to  the
moderate  ill-health  of  ordinary  times,  and  in  this  way  several  and
very  various  alternating  states  may  occur.  When  the  ne\v  state
makes  its  appearance,  there  is  often  no  trace  of  the  former  one.  In


278


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


veloped  psora  alone,  sometimes,  but  seldom,  compli-
cated with  a syphilitic  miasm,  and  therefore  in  the
former  case  may  be  cured  by  antipsoric  medicines,  in
the  latter,  however,  with  antisyphilitics  in  alternation,
as  directed  in  my  work  on  the  Chronic  Diseases.

§ CCXXXIII.

The  periodical  intermittent  diseases.,  are  those  where
a morbid  state  of  unvarying  character  returns  after
a pretty  determinate  period,  whilst  the  patient  is
apparently  in  good  health,  and  takes  its  departure
in  an  equally  determinate  period ; this  is  observed  in
those  apparently  non-febrile  morbid  states  that  come
and  go  in  a periodical  manner  (at  certain  times),  as
well  as  in  those  of  a febrile  character — the  numerous
varieties  of  intermittent  fevers.

§ CCXXXIV.

Those  apparently  non-febrile  morbid  states  just'
alluded  to,  that  recur  periodically  in  one  patient  at
fixed  times  ( — they  do  not  usually  appear  sporadically
or  epidemically — ) always  belong  to  the  chronic
diseases,  mostly  to  those  that  are  purely  psoric,  are


other  cases,  but  few  traces  of  the  former  alternating  state  are  present
when  the  new  one  occurs ; few  of  the  symptoms  of  the  first  state
remain  on  the  appearance  and  during  the  continuance  of  the  second.
Sometimes  the  morbid  alternating  states  are  quite  of  opposite  natures,
as,  for  instance,  melancholy  alternating  at  intervals  with  gay  insanity
or  frenzy.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


279


but  seldom  complicated  with  syphilis,  and  are  suc-
cessfully treated  by  the  same  means ; yet  it  is  some-
times necessary  to  employ  as  an  intermediate  remedy,
a small  dose  of  a potentized  solution  of  cinchona
bark,  in  order  to  extinguish  completely  their  inter-
mittent type.

§ ccxxxv.

With  regard  to  the  intermittent  fevers^  that  prevail
sporadically  or  epidemically  (not  those  that  are  en-
demically  established  in  marshy  districts)  we  often


' The  pathology  that  has  hitherto  existed,  and  which  has  never
advanced  beyond  the  period  of  irrational  infancy,  recognises  but  one,
single  intermittent  fever,  which  it  likewise  termed  ague,  and  takes
notice  of  no  varieties  but  what  are  dependent  on  the  intervals  at
which  the  paroxysms  recur,  quotidian,  tertian,  quartan,  &c.  But
there  are  much  more  important  differences  among  them  than  what
are  marked  by  the  periods  of  their  recurrence ; there  are  innumerable
varieties  of  these  fevers,  some  of  which  cannot  even  he  denominated
ague,  as  their  fits  consist  solely  of  heat;  others,  again,  are  charac-
terized by  cold  alone,  with  or  without  subsequent  perspiration ; yet
others  which  exhibit  general  coldness  of  the  surface,  with  a sensation
of  heat  on  the  patient’s  part,  or  whilst  the  body  feels  externally  hot,
the  patient  feels  cold ; others  again,  in  which  one  paroxysm  consists
entu'ely  of  a rigor  or  simple  cold,  followed  by  an  interval  of  health,
while  the  next  consists  of  heat  alone,  followed  or  not  by  perspiration ;
others  again,  in  which  the  heat  comes  first,  and  the  cold  stage  not
till  that  is  gone ; others  again,  wherein  after  a cold  and  hot  stage
apyrexia  ensues,  and  then  perspiration  comes  on  like  a second  fit,
often  many  hom’s  subsequently ; others  again,  in  which  no  perspira-
tion at  all  comes  on,  and  yet  others  in  which  the  whole  attack
consists  of  perspiration  alone,  without  any  cold  or  hot  stage,  or  in


280


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


find  every  paroxysm  composed,  as  it  were,  of  two
opposite  alternating  states  (cold,  heat — heat,  cold),
more  frequently  still  of  three  (cold,  heat,  sweat).
Therefore  the  remedy  selected  for  them  from  the
general  class  of  (common,  not  antipsoric)  medicines
that  have  been  proved,  must  either  (and  this  is  the
most  to  be  relied  on)  be  able  likewise  to  produce  in
the  healthy  body  two  (or  all  three)  similar  alternating


which  the  perspiration  is  only  present  during  the  heat;  and  there
are  innumerable  other  differences,  especially  in  regard  to  the  acces-
sory symptoms,  the  peculiar  headache,  the  bad  taste  in  the  mouth,
the  nausea,  the  vomiting,  the  diarrhcea,  the  want  of  or  excessive
thirst,  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  pains  in  the  body  or  limbs,  the
sleep,  the  deliria,  the  moral  affections,  the  spasms,  &c.,  before,  during
or  after  the  cold  stage,  before,  during  or  after  the  hot  stage,  before,
during  or  after  the  sweating  stage,  and  countless  other  varieties.
All  these  are  manifestly  intermittent  fevers  of  veiy  different  kinds,
each  of  which,  as  might  naturally  be  supposed,  requires  a special
(homoeopathic)  treatment.  It  must  be  confessed  that  they  can  almost
all  be  suppressed  (as  is  often  done)  by  large,  monstrous  doses  of
bark,  and  of  its  pharmaceutical  preparation,  the  sulphate  of  quinine,
that  is  to  say,  their  periodical  recurrence  (their  type)  may  be
extinguished  by  it,  although  often  only  after  increased  and  fre-
quently repeated  doses,  but  the  patients  who  suffered  from  inter-
mittent fevers,  for  which  cinchona  bark  is  not  suitable,  as  is  the
case  with  all  those  epidemic  intermittent  fevers  that  traverse  whole
countries  and  even  mountainous  districts,  are  not  restored  to  health
by  the  extinction  of  the  type ; on  the  contrar)',  they  now  remain
ill  in  another  manner,  and  worse,  often  much  worse  than  before ; they
are  affected  by  peculiar,  chronic,  bark-diseases,  and  can  scarcely
be  restored  to  health,  after  a long  time,  even  by  the  true  system
of  medicine  ; and  yet  that  is  what  is  called  curing,  forsooth !


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


281


states,  or  else  must  correspond  by  similarity  of  symp-
toms, in  the  most  homoeopathic  manner  possible,
to  the  strongest,  best-marked,  and  most  peculiar
alternating  state  (either  to  the  cold  stage  with  its
accessory  symptoms,  or  to  the  hot  stage  with  its  acces-
sory symptoms,  or  to  the  sweating  stage  with  its
accessory  symptoms,  according  as  the  one  or  other
alternating  state  is  the  strongest  and  most  peculiar) ;
but  still  the  symptoms  of  the  patient’s  health  during
the  intervals  when  he  is  free  from  pain,  must  be  the
chief  guide  to  the  most  appropriate  homoeopathic
remedy.^

§ CCXXXVI.

The  most  appropriate  and  effectual  time  for  admi-
nistering the  medicine  in  these  cases  is  immediately
or  very  soon  after  the  termination  of  the  paroxysm,
as  soon  as  the  patient  has  in  some  degree  recovered
from  its  effects ; it  has  then  time  to  effect  all  the
changes  in  the  organism  requisite  for  the  restoration
of  health,  without  any  great  disturbance  or  violent
convulsion ; whereas  the  action  of  a medicine,  be  it
ever  so  specifically  appropriate,  if  given  immediately
before  the  paroxysm,  coincides  with  the  natural  re-


^ Dr.  von.  Bonninghausen,  who  has  rendered  more  services  to  our
beneficent  system  of  medicine  than  any  other  of  my  disciples,  has
best  elucidated  this  subject  which  demands  so  much  care,  and  has
facilitated  the  choice  of  the  efficient  remedy  for  the  various  epidemics
of  fever,  in  his  work  entitled  Versuch  einer  homoopathischen  Therapie
der  Wechselfieher,  1833,  Munster  bei  Regensberg.


282


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


currence  of  the  disease,  and  causes  such  a reaction  in
the  organism,  such  a violent  contention,  that  an  attack
of  that  nature  produces  at  the  very  least  a great  loss
of  strength,  if  it  do  not  endanger  life.^  But  if  the
medicine  be  given  immediately  after  the  termination
of  the  fit,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  period  when  the  non-
febrile  interval  has  commenced,  and  a long  time  be-
fore there  are  any  preparations  for  the  next  paroxysm,
then  the  vital  force  is  in  the  best  possible  condition
to  allow  itself  to  be  quietly  altered  by  the  remedy,
and  thus  restored  to  the  healthy  state.

§ CCXXXVII.

But  if  the  period  of  the  apyrexia  be  very  short,
as  happens  in  some  very  bad  fevers,  or  if  it  be  dis-
turbed by  some  of  the  after-sufferings  of  the  previous
paroxysm,  the  homoeopathic  medicine  should  be  ad-
ministered when  the  perspiration  begins  to  abate,
or  the  other  secondary  phenomena  of  the  expiring
paroxysm  begin  to  diminish.

§ CCXXXVIII.

It  is  only  when  the  suitable  medicine  has  with  a
single  dose  destroyed  several  fits  and  manifest  health
has  ensued,  but  after  some  time  premonitory  indica-


* This  is  observed  in  the  fatal  cases  by  no  means  rare  in  which  a
moderate  dose  of  opium  given  during  the  cold  stage,  quickly  deprived
the  patients  of  life.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


283


tions  of  a new  paroxysm  appear,  only  then  can  and
must  the  same  medicine  be  given  again,  provided
always  the  collective  symptoms  are  still  the  same.
This  recurrence  of  the  same  fever  after  an  interval  of
health,  is,  however,  only  possible,  when  the  noxious
influence  that  first  excited  the  intermittent  fever  still
continues  to  act  upon  the  convalescent,  as  happens  in
marshy  districts,  in  which  case,  a permanent  recovery
is  often  only  possible  by  the  removal  of  this  exciting
cause  (as,  for  instance,  a residence  in  a mountainous
country,  if  the  case  was  one  of  marsh  intermittent
fever).

§ CCXXXIX.

As  almost  every  medicine  causes  in  its  pure  action
a special,  peculiar  fever,  and  even  a kind  of  inter-
mittent fever  with  its  alternating  states,  difiering
from  all  other  fevers  that  are  caused  by  other  medi-
cines, there  exist  in  the  extensive  domain  of  medicines,
homoeopathic  remedies  for  all  the  numerous  varieties
of  intermittent  fevers,  and  for  a great  many  of  such
fevers,  even  in  the  moderate  collection  of  medicines
already  proved  on  the  healthy  individual.

§ CCXL.

But  if  the  remedy  found  to  be  the  homoeopathic
specific  for  a reigning  epidemic  of  intermittent  fever,
do  not  effect  a perfect  cure  in  one  or  more  patients,
if  it  be  not  the  influence  of  a marshy  district  that
prevents  the  cure,  it  must  always  be  the  psoric  miasm


284


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


in  the  back  ground,  in  which  case  antipsoric  medi-
cines must  he  employed  until  complete  relief  is
obtained.

§ CCXLI.

Epidemic  intermittent  fevers,  in  situations  where
none  are  endemic,  are  of  the  nature  of  chronic
diseases,  composed  of  single  acute  paroxysms ; each
single  epidemy  is  of  a peculiar,  uniform  character,
common  to  the  individuals  attacked,  and  when  this
character  is  found  from  the  totality  of  the  symptoms
common  to  all,  it  guides  us  to  the  discovery  of  the
homoeopathic  (specific)  remedy  suitable  for  all  the
cases,  which  is  almost  universally  serviceable  in  those
patients  who  enjoyed  tolerable  health  before  the
occurrence  of  the  epidemy,  that  is  to  say,  who  were
not  chronic  sufierers  from  developed  psora.

§ CCXLII.

If,  however,  the  first  paroxysms  of  such  an  epidemic
intermittent  fever  have  been  left  uncured,  or  if  the
patients  have  been  weakened  by  improper  allopathic
treatment ; then  the  inherent  psora  that  exists,  alas  !
in  so  many  persons,  although  in  a latent  state,  be-
comes developed,  takes  on  the  type  of  intermittent
fever,  and  to  all  appearance  continues  to  act  the  part
of  the  epidemic  intermittent  fever,  so  that  the  medi-
cine, which  would  have  been  useful  in  the  first
paroxysms  (rarely  an  antipsoric)  is  now  no  longer
suitable,  and  cannot  be  of  any  service.  We  have  now


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


285


to  do  with  a psoric  intermittent  fever  only,  and  this
will  generally  be  subdued  by  minute  and  rarely
repeated  doses  of  sulphur  or  hepar  sulphuris  in  a high
potency.

§ CCXLIII.

In  those,  often  very  malignant  intermittent  fevers,
which  attack  a single  person,  not  residing  in  a marshy
district,  we  must  also  at  first,  as  in  the  case  of  those
acute  diseases,  generally,  which  they  resemble  in
respect  to  their  psoric  origin,  employ  for  some  days,
to  render  what  service  it  may,  a homoeopathic  remedy
selected  for  the  special  case,  from  the  other  class  of
proved  (not  antipsoric)  medicines ; but  if,  notwith-
standing this  procedure,  the  recovery  is  deferred,  we
know  that  we  have  to  do  with  psora  on  the  point
of  its  development,  and  that  in  this  case  antipsoric
medicines  alone  can  afford  radical  relief.

§ CCXLIV.

The  intermittent  fevers  endemic  in  marshy  districts
and  tracts  of  country  frequently  exposed  to  inunda-
tions, give  a great  deal  of  work  to  physicians  of  the
old  school,  and  yet  a healthy  man  may  in  his  youth
become  habituated  to  even  marshy  districts,  and  re-
main in  good  health,  if  he  preserve  a faultless  regimen,
and  be  not  depressed  by  want,  fatigue,  or  pernicious
passions.  The  intermittent  fevers  endemic  there,
would  at  the  most  only  attack  him  on  his  first  arrival;
hut  one  or  two  very  small  doses  of  a highly  potentized


286


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


solution  of  cinchona  bark,  would,  conjointly  with  the
well-regulated  mode  of  living  just  alluded  to,  speedily
free  him  from  the  disease.  But  persons,  who  while
taking  sufficient  corporeal  exercise,  and  pursuing  a
healthy  system  of  intellectual  occupations  and  bodily
regimen,  cannot  be  cured  of  marsh  intermittent  fever
by  one  or  a few  of  such  small  doses  of  cinchona — in
such  persons,  there  always  lies  at  the  root  of  their
malady,  psora  striving  to  develop  itself,  and  their
intermittent  fever  cannot  be  cured  in  the  marshy
district  without  antipsoric  treatment.^  It  sometimes
happens  that  when  these  patients  exchange,  without
delay,  the  marshy  district  for  one  that  is  dry  and
mountainous,  recovery  apparently  ensues  (the  fever
leaves  them)  if  they  be  not  deeply  sunk  in  disease,
that  is  to  say,  if  the  psora  was  not  completely  de-
veloped in  them,  and  can  consequently  return  to  its
latent  state ; but  they  will  never  regain  perfect  health
without  antipsoric  treatment.

§ CCXLV.

Having  now  seen  what  attention  should,  in  the
homoeopathic  treatment,  be  paid  to  the  chief  varieties
of  diseases,  and  the  peculiar  circumstances  connected


^ Large,  oft-repeated  doses  of  cinchona  bark,  as  also  concentrated
cinchonic  remedies,  such  as  the  sulphate  of  quinine,  have  certainly
the  power  of  freeing  such  patients  from  the  periodical  fits  of  the
marsh  ague ; but  those  thus  deceived  into  the  belief  that  they  are
cured,  remain  diseased  in  another  way,  without  antipsoric  aid.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


287


with  them,  we  now  pass  on  to  what  we  have  to  say
respecting  the  remedies  and  the  mode  of  employing  them,
together  with  the  diet  and  regimen  to  he  observed  during
their  use.

Every  perceptibly  progressive  and  strikingly  in-
creasing amelioration  in  a rapid  (acute)  or  stationary
(chronic)  disease,  is  a condition,  which,  as  long  as  it
lasts,  completely  precludes  every  repetition  of  the
administration  of  any  medicine  whatsoever,  because
all  the  good  the  medicine  taken  continues  to  effect,
is  now  hastening  towards  its  completion.  Every  new
dose  of  any  medicine  whatsoever,  even  of  the  one  last
administered,  that  has  hitherto  shewn  itself  to  be
salutary,  would  in  this  case  disturb  the  work  of
amelioration.


§ CCXLVI.

On  the  other  hand,  the  slowly  progressive  amelio-
ration consequent  on  a very  minute  dose,  whose
selection  has  been  accurately  homoeopathic,  when  it
has  met  with  no  obstruction  to  the  duration  of  its
action,  sometimes  accomplishes  all  the  good  the
remedy  in  question  is  capable  from  its  nature  of  per-
forming in  a given  case,  in  periods  of  forty,  fifty,  or
a hundred  days.  This  is,  however,  but  rarely  the
case,  and  besides,  it  must  be  a matter  of  great  impor-
tance to  the  physician  as  well  as  to  the  patient,  that
were  it  possible,  this  period  should  be  diminished  to
one  half,  one  quarter,  and  even  still  less,  so  that  a
much  more  rapid  cure  might  be  obtained.  And  this


288


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


may  be  very  happily  effected,  as  recent,  and  oft-
repeated  observations  have  shewn,  under  these  con-
ditions: firstly,  if  the  medicine  selected  with  the
utmost  care  was  perfectly  homoeopathic — secondly,  if
it  was  given  in  the  minutest  dose,  so  as  to  produce
the  least  possible  commotion  in  the  vital  force,  and
yet  sufficient  to  effect  the  necessary  revolution  in  it ;
and  thirdly,  if  this  minutest,  powerful  dose  of  the
best  selected  medicine  he  repeated  at  suitable  inter-
vals^ which  experience  shall  have  pronounced  to  be


* In  the  former  editions  of  the  Organon,  I have  advised  that  a
single  dose  of  a well-selected  homoeopathic  medicine  should  always
he  allowed  first  fully  to  expend  its  action,  before  a neAV  medicine  is
given  or  the  same  one  repeated — a doctrine  which  was  the  result  of
the  positive  experience,  that  neither  hy  a larger  dose  of  the  remedy
whieh  may  have  been  well  chosen  (as  has  been  again  recently  pro-
posed, but  which  would  be,  as  it  were,  a retrograde  movement),  nor,
what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  by  several  small  doses  of  it,  given
in  quick  succession,  can  the  greatest  possible  good  he  effected  in  the
cure  of  diseases,  more  especially  of  chronic  ones,  and  the  reason  of
this  is,  that  by  such  a procedure  the  vital  force  does  not  quickly
accommodate  itself  to  the  change  from  its  derangement  hy  the
natural  disease  into  the  similar  medicinal  disease,  but  is  usually  so
violently  excited  and  convulsed  by  a larger  dose,  or  also  by  smaller
doses  of  even  a homoeopathically  chosen  remedy,  given  rapidly  one
after  the  other,  that  in  most  cases  its  re-action  will  be  anything  but
salutary,  and  will  do  more  harm  than  good.  As  long  as  no  more
efiicacious  mode  of  proceeding  than  that  then  taught  by  me  was
discovered,  the  safe  philanthropic  maxim  of  si  non  juvat,  modo  ne
noceat,  rendered  it  imperative  for  the  homoeopathic  practitioner  Avho
held  the  weal  of  mankind  to  be  his  highest  object,  to  alloAV,  as
a general  rule  in  diseases,  hut  a single  dose,  and  that  the  very


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


289


the  best  adapted  for  accelerating  the  cure  to  the
utmost  extent,  yet  without  the  vital  force  which  it  is

smallest,  of  the  carefully  selected  remedy,  to  act  at  once  upon  the
patient,  and  moreover  to  exhaust  its  action.  The  very  smallest,  I
repeat,  for  it  holds  good,  and  will  continue  to  hold  good  as  a homoeo-
pathic therapeutic  maxim,  not  to  he  refuted  by  any  experience  in
the  world,  that  the  best  dose  of  the  properly  selected  remedy  is
always  the  very  smallest  one  in  one  of  the  high  dynamizations  (X),
as  well  for  chronic  as  for  acute  diseases — a truth  that  is  the  ines-
timable property  of  pure  homoeopathy,  and  which,  as  long  as  allopathy
(and  the  new  mongrel-system,  made  up  of  a mixture  of  allopathic  and
homoeopathic  processes,  is  not  much  better)  continues  to  gnaw  like
a cancer  at  the  life  of  sick  human  beings,  and  to  ruin  them  by  large
and  ever  larger  doses  of  drugs,  will  keep  pure  homoeopathy  separated
from  these  spmdous  arts  as  by  an  impassable  gulf.

On  the  other  hand,  however,  practice  shews  us  that  though  a
single  one  of  those  small  doses  may  suffice  to  accomplish  almost  all
that  it  was  possible  for  this  medicine  to  do  on  the  occasion,  in  some,
and  especially  in  slight  cases  of  disease,  particularly  in  those  of  young
children  and  very  delicate  and  excitable  adults,  yet  that  in  many,
indeed  in  most  cases,  not  only  of  very  chronic  diseases,  that  have
already  made  great  progress,  and  have  frequently  been  aggravated
by  a previous  employment  of  inappropriate  medicines,  but  also  of
serious  acute  diseases,  one  such  smallest  dose  of  medicine  in  our
highly  potentized  preparation  is  evidently  insufficient  to  effect  all
the  cm'ative  action  that  might  be  expected  from  the  same  medicine,
for  it  may  unquestionably  he  requisite  to  admuiister  several  of
them,  in  order  that  the  vital  force  may  be  pathogenetically  altered  to
such  a degree,  and  its  salutary  reaction  stimulated  to  such  a height,
as  to  enable  it  completely  to  extinguish,  by  its  reaction,  the  whole
of  that  portion  of  the  original  disease,  that  it  lay  in  the  power  of  the
well  selected  homoeopathic  remedy  to  eradicate  ; the  best  chosen
medicine  in  such  a small  dose,  given  but  once,  might  certainly  he  of
some  service,  hut  would  not  be  nearly  sufficient.


U


290


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


sought  to  influence  to  the  production  of  a similar
medicinal  disease,  being  able  to  feel  itself  stimulated
and  convulsed  to  contrarious  reactions.


But  the  careful  homoeopathic  physician  would  not  venture  soon  to
repeat  the  same  dose  of  the  same  remedy  again  and  again,  as  from
such  a practice  he  has  frequently  experienced  no  advantage,  and
most  frequently,  on  close  observation,  disadvantage.  He  generally
witnessed  aggravation,  from  even  the  smallest  dose  of  the  most  suitable
remedy,  which  he  had  given  one  day,  when  repeated  the  next  day
and  the  next.

Now,  in  cases  where  he  was  convinced  of  the  correctness  of  his
choice  of  the  homoeopathic  medicine,  in  order  to  obtain  more  benefit
for  the  patient,  than  he  was  able  to  get  hitherto,  from  prescribing  a
single  small  dose,  the  idea  often  naturally  struck  him,  to  increase  the
dose,  since,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  one  single  dose  only  should
be  given,  and,  for  instance,  in  place  of  giving  a single  very  minute
globule  moistened  with  the  medicine  in  the  highest  dynamization,  to
administer  six,  seven  or  eight  of  them,  and  even  a half  or  a whole  drop.
But  the  result  was  almost  always  less  favourable  than  it  should  have
been ; it  was  often  actually  unfavourable,  often  even  very  bad, — an
injury,  that  in  a patient  so  ti-eated,  it  is  difficult  to  repair.

The  difficulty  in  this  case  is  not  solved  by  giving,  instead,  lower
dynamizations  of  the  remedy  in  a large  dose.

Thus,  increasing  the  strength  of  the  single  doses  of  the  homoeo-
pathic medicine  with  the  view  of  effecting  the  degree  of  pathogenetic
excitation  of  the  vital  force  necessary  to  produce  salutary  reaction,
fails  altogether,  as  experience  teaches,  in  accomplishing  the  desu'ed
object.  The  vital  force  is  thereby  too  violently  and  too  suddenly
assailed  and  convulsed,  to  allow  it  time  to  exercise  a gradual,  equable,
salutary  reaction,  to  adapt  itself  to  the  modificatiorr  effected  in  it,
hence  it  strives  to  repel,  as  if  it  were  an  enemy,  the  medicinal
influence  attacking  it  hr  excess,  by  means  of  vomiting,  diarrhoea,
fever,  perspiration,  and  so  forth,  and  thus,  in  a great  measure,  it


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


291


§ CCXLVII.

Under  these  conditions,  the  smallest  doses  of  the
best-selected  homoeopathic  medicines  may  be  repeated

diverts  and  renders  nugatoiy  the  aim  of  the  incautious  physician ; —
little  or  no  good  towards  curing  the  disease  will  he  thereby  accom-
plished, on  the  contraiy,  the  patient  will  he  thereby  perceptibly
weakened,  and,  for  a long  time,  the  administration  of  even  the  smallest
dose  of  the  same  remedy  must  not  he  thought  of,  if  we  would  not
wish  to  injure  the  patient.

But  it  happens,  moreover,  that  a number  of  the  smallest  doses
given  for  the  same  object  in  quick  succession,  accumulate  in  the
organism  into  a kind  of  excessively  large  dose,  with  (a  few  rare  cases
excepted)  similar  bad  results ; in  this  case,  the  vital  force  not  being
able  to  recover  itself  betwixt  every  dose,  though  it  be  but  small,
becomes  oppressed  and  overwhelmed,  and  thus,  being  incapable  of
reacting  in  a salutary  manner,  it  is  necessitated  passively  to  allow
the  extension  of  the  over-strong  medicinal  disease  that  has  thus
been  forced  upon  it,  just  in  the  same  manner,  as  we  may  every
day  observe  from  the  allopathic  abuse  of  large  accumulating  doses  of
one  and  the  same  medicine,  to  the  lasting  injury  of  the  patient.

Now,  therefore,  in  order,  whilst  avoiding  the  erroneous  method  I
have  here  pointed  out,  to  attain  the  desked  object  more  certainly  than
hitherto,  and  to  administer  the  medicine  selected  in  such  a manner
that  it  must  exercise  all  its  efficacy  without  injury  to  the  patient,
that  it  may  effect  all  the  good  it  is  capable  of  performing  in  a given
case  of  disease,  I have  of  late  years  adopted  a peculiar  method.

I perceived,  that  in  order  to  discover  this  true  middle  path,  we
must  be  guided  at  once  by  the  nature  of  the  different  medicinal
substances,  and  also  by  the  corporeal  constitution  of  the  patient  and
the  magnitude  of  his  disease, — to  give  an  example  from  the  use  of
sulphur  in  chi-onic  (psoric)  diseases, — the  smallest  dose  of  it  {tinct.
sulph.  X”)  can  seldom  be  repeated  with  advantage  even  in  robust
patients  and  when  psora  is  developed,  oftener  than  every  seven  days,

u 2


292


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


with  the  best,  often  with  incredible  results,  at  inter-
vals of  fourteen,  twelve,  ten,  eight,  seven  days,  and


a period  of  time  which  must  be  proportionally  lengthened  when  we
have  to  treat  weaker  and  more  excitable  patients  of  this  kind,  when
we  would  do  well  to  give  such  a dose  only  every  nine,  twelve,  or
fourteen  days,  which  should  be  repeated  until  the  medicine  ceases  to
be  efficacious.  We  thus  find  (to  abide  by  the  instance  of  sulphur),
that  in  psoric  diseases  seldom  fewer  than  four,  often  however  six,
eight,  and  even  ten  such  doses  (tinct.  sulph.  X”)  are  required  to  be
successively  administered  at  these  intervals,  for  the  complete  anni-
hilation of  the  whole  portion  of  the  chi'onic  disease  that  is  eradicable
by  sulphur, — provided  always,  there  had  been  no  previous  allopathic
abuse  of  sulphur  in  the  case.  Thus,  even  a (primary)  itch  eruption
of  recent  origin,  though  it  may  have  spread  all  over  the  hody,  may  he
perfectly  cured,  in  persons  that  are  not  too  weakly,  hy  a dose  of  tinct.
sulph.  X®  given  every  seven  days,  in  the  course  of  from  ten  to  twelve
weeks  (accordingly  with  ten  or  twelve  such  globules),  so  that  it  will
seldom  be  necessary  to  aid  the  cure  with  a few  doses  of  carh.  veg.  X®
(also  given  at  the  rate  of  one  dose  in  the  week),  without  the  slightest
external  treatment,  besides  frequent  changes  of  linen  and  good  regimen.

When  for  other  diseases  also,  we  may  consider  it  requisite,  as  far
as  we  can  calculate,  to  give  eight,  nine,  or  ten  doses  of  tinct.  sulph.
(at  X®),  it  is  yet  more  expedient  in  such  a case,  instead  of  giving
them  in  uninterrupted  succession,  to  interpose  after  every,  or  every
second  or  third  dose,  a dose  of  another  medicine,  which  in  this  case
is  next  in  point  of  homoeopathic  suitableness  to  sulphur  (usually  hep.
sulph.),  and  to  allow  this  likewise  to  act  for  eight,  nine,  twelve  or
fourteen  days,  before  again  commencing  a course  of  three  doses  of
sulphur.

But  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  the  vital  force  makes  opposition
to  the  quiet  action  upon  itself  of  several  doses  of  sulphur,  even  when
given  at  the  above  intervals,  and  though  they  may  be  quite  requisite
to  effect  the  cure,  and  this  opposition  it  reveals  by  some,  though


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


293


where  rapidity  is  requisite,  in  chronic  diseases  resem-
bling cases  of  acute  disease,  at  still  shorter  intervals.


moderate  sulphur  symptoms,  which  it  permits  to  come  to  light  in
the  patient  during  the  treatment.  In  such  cases  it  is  sometimes
advisable  to  administer  a small  dose  of  nux  vom.  X®,  allowing  it  to
act  for  eight  or  ten  days,  in  order  to  dispose  the  system  again  to
allow  succeeding  doses  of  the  sulphm'  to  act  quickly  and  effectually
upon  it.  In  those  cases  for  which  it  is  adapted,  puls.  X®  is  preferable.

But  the  vital  force  shews  itself  most  indisposed  to  allow  the  salu-
tary action  upon  it  of  the  sulphur  which  is  highly  indicated,  and
even  shews  manifest  aggravation  of  the  chronic  disease,  though  the
sulphur  be  given  in  the  very  smallest  dose,  though  only  a globule  of
the  size  of  a mustard  seed  moistened  with  tinct.  sulph.  X®  be  smelt,
if  the  sulphur  have  formerly  (it  may  be  years  since)  been  abused,
by  being  given  allopathically  in  large  doses.  This  is  one  of  the
lamentable  chcumstances  that  renders  the  best  medical  treatment  of
chronic  diseases  almost  impossible,  among  the  many  that  the  ordinary
bungling  of  chronic  diseases  by  the  old  school  would  leave  us  nothing
to  do  but  to  deplore,  were  there  not  some  mode  of  getting  over  the
difficulty.

In  such  cases  we  have  only  to  let  the  patient  smell  a single  time
strongly  at  a globule  the  size  of  a mustard  seed  moistened  with
mercur.  metall.  X,  and  allow  this  olfaction  to  act  for  about  nine  days,
in  order  to  make  the  vital  force  again  disposed  to  permit  the  sulphur
(at  least  the  olfaction  of  tinct.  sulph.  X®)  to  exercise  a beneficial
infiuence  on  itself — a discoveiy  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  Dr.
Griesselich  of  Carlsruhe.

Of  the  other  antipsoric  remedies  (except  perhaps  phosph.  X)  it  is
requisite  to  administer  fewer  doses  at  similar  intervals  (of  sepia  and
sil.  at  longer  intervals  without  any  intermediate  remedy,  where  they
are  homceopathicaUy  mdicated),  in  order  to  attain  the  object,  of
eradicating,  in  a given  case,  aU  that  is  cui-able  by  the  remedy  in-
dicated. Hep.  sulph.  calc.  X can  rarely  be  taken  or  smelt  at  shorter
intervals  than  every  foiu'teen  or  fifteen  days.


294


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


but  in  acute  diseases  at  very  much  shorter  periods, —
every  twenty-four,  twelve,  eight,  four  hours,  in  the


Before  making  such  a repetition  of  the  dose,  the  physician  must
of  course  be  convinced  that  his  selection  is  truly  homoeopathic.

In  acute  diseases,  the  time  for  repeating  the  fitly  chosen  medicine
is  regulated  by  the  greater  or  less  rapidity  of  the  course  of  the
disease  vre  have  to  combat,  so  that,  when  necessary,  it  should  he
repeated  after  twenty-four,  sixteen,  twelve,  eight,  fom:,  and  even
fewer  hom'S,  if  the  medicine  continues  to  prove  beneficial,  without  in-
terruption— without  producing  new  symptoms,' — hut  is  not  sufficiently
rapid  in  its  action  for  the  excessively  quick  and  dangerous  course  of
the  acute  disease,  so  that  in  the  most  speedily  fatal  disease  we  know,
in  the  cholera,  at  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  one  or  two
drops  of  a weak  solution  of  camphor  must  be  given  evei'y  five
minutes,  in  order  to  procure  speedy  and  certain  relief,  and  in  the
more  developed'cholera,  doses  of  cuprum,  veratrum,  phosphorus,  &c.
(X®),  frequently  every  two  or  three  hours,  and  also  arsenic,  carho
vegetahilis,  &c.,  at  similar  intervals.

In  the  treatment  of  so-called  typhus  fevers  and  other  continued
fevers,  the  repetition,  in  smallest  doses,  of  the  medicine  that  proves
itself  of  service,  must  be  regulated  by  the  above  directions.

In  pure  syphilitic  diseases  I have  generally  found  a single  dose  of
metallic  mercury  (X®)  sufficient ; and  yet  not  imfrequently  two  or
three  such  doses  were  requisite,  given  at  inteiwals  of  six  or  eight
days,  when  the  very  least  complication  with  psora  was  perceptible.

In  cases  where  some  particular  medicine  is  urgently  indicated,  but
where  the  patient  is  very  excitable  and  weak,  a more  efficient  and
certain  procedure,  than  giving  substantial,  though  ever  so  small
doses  of  the  highly  potentized  medicine,  is  a single  olfaction  of  a diy
globule  the  size  of  a mustard  seed  that  has  been  impregnated  with
the  same  medicine  ; this  is  effected  by  holding  the  mouth  of  the
phial  that  contains  it,  first  in  one  and  then  (if  it  is  wished  to  give  a
stronger  dose)  in  the  other  nostril,  and  making  a momentary  inspiration ;
the  action  of  this  medicine  thus  administered,  lasts  just  as  long  as


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


295


very  acutest,  every  hour,  up  to  as  often  as  every  five
minutes — in  every  case  in  proportion  to  the  more  or


that  of  the  medicine  that  has  been  taken  in  substance,  hence  even
this  olfaction  ought  not  to  be  repeated  at  shorter  intervals.

[It  is  important  and  interesting  to  the  homoeopathic  practitioner  to
know  the  latest  practice  of  Hahnemann  with  respect  to  the  adnunis-
tration  and  repetition  of  the  medicine,  therefore  I have  no  hesitation
in  giving  in  this  place  his  observations  on  the  subject,  prefixed  to
the  third  part  of  the  second  edition  of  his  work  on  Chronic  Diseases,
published  in  1837.

“ Since  I last  addressed  the  public  on  the  subject  of  our  system  of
medicine,  I have  had  opportunities  of  making  observations,  among
other  things,  on  the  best  possible  mode  of  regulating  the  doses  for
the  patients,  and  I here  communicate  what  I have  found  to  be  the
best  plan  in  this  respect.

“ If  a small  globule  of  one  of  the  highest  dynamizations  of  a medi-
cine laid  dry  on  the  tongue,  or  moderate  olfaction  in  a phial  contain-
ing one  or  several  of  such  globules,  shew  itself  to  be  the  smallest,
weakest  dose,  of  the  shortest  duration  of  action  (though  there  are  plenty
of  patients  of  such  an  excitable  nature  as  to  be  affected  thereby,  to  a
sufficient  extent  for  the  cure  of  slight  acute  diseases,  for  which  the
remedy  has  been  hommopathically  selected),  we  can  easily  understand,
that  the  incredible  variety  in  patients  as  regards  then  excitability,
then  age,  then  mental  and  corporeal  development,  then  vital  force,
and  especially  the  nature  of  their  disease  (which  in  one  case  may  be
natural  and  simple  and  of  recent  origin,  in  another  natural,  simple
and  of  long  standing,  in  another  complicated — the  union  of  several
miasms — , in  another,  and  this  is  the  commonest  and  worst  case,
ruined  by  wrong  medicinal  treatment  and  burdened  with  medicmal
diseases)  demands  a great  variety  in  their  featment,  as  also  in  the
regulation  of  the  doses  of  medicine  suitable  for  them.

“ I must  limit  myself  in  this  place  to  the  latter  subject  only,  as


296


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


less  rapid  course  of  the  disease  or  action  of  the
medicine  employed,  as  is  more  distinctly  explained  in
the  subjoined  note.


the  others  must  be  left  to  the  accuracy,  diligence  and  judgment  of
the  practitioner  who  is  competent  and  master  of  his  art,  and  cannot  he
arranged  in  tables  for  the  benefit  of  the  incompetent  or  neglectful.

“ Experience  has  taught  me,  as  it  has  also,  doubtless,  the  best  of  my
followers,  that  it  is  more  useful,  in  diseases  of  any  importance  (the.
most  acute  not  excepted,  and  all  the  more  in  the  subacute,  chronic,
and  the  most  chronic)  to  give  to  the  patient  the  powerful  homoeopa-
thic medicinal  globule  or  globules,  in  solution  only,  and  this  solution
in  divided  doses,  for  example,  a solution  formed  with  from  seven  to
twenty  tablespoonfuls  of  Avater,  without  any  addition,  given  to  the
patient  in  acute  and  very  acute  diseases,  every  six,  four  or  two  hours,
and  when  the  danger  is  veiy  great,  even  eveiy  hour,  or  every  half-hour,
a tablespoonful  at  a time,  or  in  the  case  of  delicate  persons  and  chil-
dren, only  a small  part  of  a tablespoonful  (one  or  two  tea-spoonfuls).

“ In  chronic  diseases  I found  it  best  to  allow  a dose  (to  Avit,  a
spoonful)  of  such  a solution  of  the  appropriate  medicine  to  be  taken
not  seldomer  than  every  two  days,  but  more  generally  every  day.

“ But  as  Avater  (even  Avhen  distilled)  begins  to  spoil  after  a fcAV
days,  Avhereby  also  the  poAver  of  the  small  quantity  of  medicine  it
contains  is  destroyed,  the  addition  of  a small  quantity  of  spirits  of
Avine  Avas  requisite,  or  Avhere  this  Avas  impracticable  or  could  not  be
borne,  I alloAved,  instead,  a few  small  bits  of  hard  Avood  chai'coal  to
be  put  in  the  Avatery  solution,  Avhereby  my  object  Avas  accomplished,
only  in  the  latter  case  the  fluid  becomes  after  a feAV  days  discoloured
black,  from  the  shaking,  Avhich  is  necessary  before  taking  each  dose,
as  will  presently  be  seen.

“ Before  going  farther,  I must  make  the  important  obsei'A^ation,
that  our  vital  principle  does  not  Avell  admit  of  the  same  unaltered
dose  of  medicine  being  given  to  the  patient,  e\en  tAvice,  still  less
several  times  in  succession.  For  then,  either  the  good  eflects  of  the


ORGANOJ?  OF  MEDICINE.


297


§ CCXLVIII.

The  dose  of  the  same  medicine  may  be  repeated
several  times,  according  to  circumstances,  but  only  so


former  dose  will  be  partly  clone  away  with,  or  there  appear  new
symptoms  and  sufferings  dependent  on  the  medicine,  and  that  were
not  formerly  present  in  the  disease,  which  obstruct  the  cure ; in  a
word,  the  medicine,  though  it  may  have  been  chosen  accurately
homoeopathic,  acts  awry,  and  attains  the  end  in  view  either  imper-
fectly or  not  at  all.  Hence  the  many  contradictions  of  homoeopathists
among  themselves  in  respect  to  the  repetition  of  the  dose.

“ But  if,  for  the  repeated  administration  of  one  and  the  same
medicine  (which  is  indispensahle  to  obtain  the  cure  of  a great  chronic
disease),  the  dose  be  each  time  changed  and  modified,  although  but
slightly  so,  in  its  degree  of  dynamization,  the  vital  force  of  the  patient
receives  quietly  and  as  it  were  willingly,  the  same  medicine,  even
at  short  intervals,  an  incredible  number  of  times,  with  the  best  result,
and  each  time  to  the  increased  advantage  of  the  patient.

“ This  alteration  of  the  degree  of  dynamization  by  a little,  may  be
effected  by  shaking  the  phial  in  which  is  the  solution  of  the  single
globule  (or  several  of  them),  with  five  or  six  smart  jerks  of  the  arm,
before  each  time  of  taking  it.

“When  the  physician  has  allowed  the  several  tablespoonfuls  of
such  a solution  to  be  used  successively  in  this  manner  (yet  so,  that
when  the  remedy  has  one  day  produced  too  powerful  an  action  he
lets  the  dose  be  omitted  for  a day),  he  then,  if  the  medicine  contmues
to  shew  itself  useful,  takes  one  or  two  globules  of  the  same  medicme
of  a lower  potency  (e.  y.  if  he  have  previously  employed  the  thirtieth
dilution,  he  now  uses  one  or  two  globules  of  the  twenty-fourth),
dissolves  it  in  almost  the  same  number  of  tablespoonfuls  of  water,  by
means  of  shaking  the  bottle,  again  adds  a little  spirits  of  wine  or  a
few  pieces  of  charcoal,  and  allows  this  solution  to  be  used  to  the
end,  in  the  same  way,  or  at  longer  intervals,  and  even  somewhat  less
at  a time,  but  each  time  only  after  five  or  six  times,  shaking  it,  as


298


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


long  as  until  either  recovery  ensues,  or  the  same
remedy  ceases  to  do  good  and  the  rest  of  the  disease


long  as  the  remedy  continues  to  effect  Improvement  and  no  new
symptoms  of  the  medicine  (never  experienced  by  other  patients)
ajjpear,  in  which  case  another  medicine  must  be  employed.  But  if
only  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  appear,  but  increase  considerably
under  the  continued  and  even  moderated  use  of  the  medicine,  then  is
it  time  to  discontinue  it  for  one  or  two  weeks  or  even  longer,  and
we  may  expect  to  see  striking  improvement  from  it.^'

“ If,  after  such  a portion  has  been  taken  and  the  same  medicine  is
still  found  to  be  necessary,  the  physician  wish  to  prepare  a fresh
portion  of  the  same  degree  of  potency  for  the  patient,  it  is  requisite
to  shake  the  new  solution,  as  at  first,  as  many  times  as  the  number  of
succussions  given  to  the  former  one  amount  to,  and  a few  times
more,  before  the  patient  takes  the  first  dose  of  it ; at  the  subsequent
doses,  however,  only  five  or  six  times  again.

“ In  this  manner  the  homoeopathic  physician  will  obtain  all  the


* “ In  the  treatment  of  cases  of  acute  disease,  the  homoeopathic  physi-
cian goes  to  work  in  a similar  manner.  He  dissolves  one  or  two  globules
of  the  highly  potentized,  well-selected  medicine,  in  seven,  ten,  or  fifteen
tablespoonfuls  of  water  (without  any  addition)  by  shaking  the  bottle,
and  lets  the  patient,  according  as  the  disease  is  more  or  less  acute,  more
or  less  dangerous,  take  a whole  or  half  tablespoonful,  every  half,  whole,
or  every  two,  three,  four  or  six  hours  (after  well  shaking  the  bottle  each
time),  or  when  it  is  a child,  he  gives  it  still  seldomer.  If  the  physician
observe  the  occurrence  of  no  new  symptoms,  he  goes  on  with  it  in  these
intervals,  until  the  symptoms  at  first  present  begin  to  increase ; then  he
gives  it  more  rarely  and  in  smaller  doses.

“ In  the  cholera,  as  is  well  known,  the  suitable  remedy  should  be  given
frequently,  at  much  shorter  intervals.

“ Children  should  get  these  solutions  always  only  out  of  their  ordinary
drinking  mugs ; a table  or  teaspoon  for  drinking  with  is  something
quite  unusual  and  suspicious  to  them,  and  for  that  reason  they  reject  this
tasteless  liquid.  Some  sugar  may  he  added  to  it  for  them.”


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


299


presenting  a different  group  of  symptoms,  demands  a
different  homoeopathic  medicine.


benefit  from  a well  selected  medicine  which  he  could  expect  to  derive
for  this  chronic  disease,  by  means  of  giving  it  by  the  mouth.

“ But  if  the  diseased  organism  be  acted  on  by  the  physician  with
the  same  medicine,  at  the  same  time,  on  other  sensitive  parts  besides
the  nerves  of  the  mouth  and  alimentaiy  canal,  if,  I say,  the  same
medicine  which  is  found  salutary,  be  at  the  same  time  rubbed  in
externally  in  an  aqueous  solution  (even  in  but  a small  quantity)  on
one  or  more  parts  of  the  body  which  are  most  free  from  morbid
affections  [e.  g.  on  an  arm,  or  a leg  or  a thigh,  that  is  affected  by  no
skin  disease,  pains  nor  cramps),  by  this  means  the  salutary  action
will  be  much  increased ; the  limbs  to  be  rubbed  in  this  manner  may
be  moreover  changed.  In  this  way  the  physician  gains  much  more
advantage  from  the  homoeopathicaUy  suited  medicine  for  the  patient
affected  by  a chronic  disease,  and  can  cure  him  much  more  rapidly
than  by  merely  administering  it  by  the  mouth.

“ This  mode  of  employing  the  medicine  (that  has  been  found
useful  internally)  by  rubbing  it  into  the  skin  of  the  sm’face  of  the
body,  which  has  been  very  much  tested  by  me  and  is  uncommonly
efficacious,  and  is  even  accompanied  with  the  most  strikingly  happy
results,  explains  those  rare  mnaculous  cures,  in  which  patients  with
a sound  skin,  who  had  long  been  cripples,  recovered  rapidly  and  for
ever,  by  bathing  a few  times  in  a mineral  Avater  the  medicinal  con-
stituents of  Avhich  were  probably  homoeopathicaUy  suited  for  their
chronic  disease.'*

* “On  the  other  hand  they  were  proportionately  injurious  in  patients
who  suffered  from  ulcers  and  cutaneous  eruptions,  which,  as  happens  from
other  external  remedies,  they  repelled  from  the  skin,  whereupon,  after  a
transient  restoration  of  the  patient’s  vital  force,  the  internal,  uncured
disease  settled  in  another  part  of  the  body  much  more  important  for  life
and  health,  so  that  in  place  of  these  affections,  e.  g.  the  crystalline  lens
grew  opaque,  the  optic  nerve  became  paralysed,  the  hearing  was  lost,
pains  of  countless  kinds  tormented  the  patient,  his  intellectual  organs


300


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCXLIX.

Every  medicine  prescribed  for  a case  of  disease,
wliich,  in  the  course  of  its  action,  produces  new  and


“ The  limb  to  be  subjected  to  friction  for  this  purpose,  must,  as
has  been  said,  be  free  from  cutaneous  disease ; moreover,  in  order  to
permit  the  occurrence  of  some  change  and  alternation,  if  several
limbs  are  free  from  cutaneous  diseases,  one  limb  after  another,  alter-
nately, on  different  days  (best  on  the  days  when  no  internal  medicine
is  taken)  should  be  rubbed,  by  means  of  the  hand,  with  a small
quantity  of  the  medicinal  solution,  until  it  becomes  dry.  For  this
object  also  the  bottle  must  previously  have  been  shaken  five  or  six
times.

“ But  convenient  though  this  mode  of  procedure  be,  and  certainly
though  it  expedite  very  much  the  cure  of  chronic,  diseases,  I have
yet  often  found  that  the  larger  quantity  of  spu'its  of  wine,  or  the  many
small  pieces  of  charcoal  it  was  requisite  to  add  to  the  watery  solution
in  order  to  keep  it  sweet  in  warm  weather,  were  always  repulsive  to
some  patients.

“ I have,  therefore,  of  late  found  the  foUowmg  mode  of  operation
preferable  for  careful  patients.  From  a mixture  composed  of  about
five  tablespoonfuls  of  pure  water  and  as  many  of  French  brandy —
which  should  be  kept  in  readiness  in  a stoppered  bottle — two,  three
or  four  hundred  drops  (according  as  the  medicinal  solution  should  he
stronger  or  weaker)  should  he  dropped  into  a phial  which  it  should
fill  about  half  full,  wherein  the  small  powder,  or  the  medicinal  globule
or  globules  lie,  this  should  be  corked  up  and  shaken  until  the  medi-
cine is  dissolved.  Of  this,  one,  two,  tlnee,  or  according  as  we  find

suffered,  the  disposition  became  troubled,  spasmodic  asthma  threatened  to
suffocate  him,  a fit  of  apoplexy  carried  him  off,  or  some  other  dangerous
or  intolerable  ailment  appeared  in  their  stead.  Hence  the  rubbing  in  of
the  homoeopathic,  internal  medicine  should  never  be  employed  on  spots
that  are  affected  by  an  external  disease.”


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


301


troublesome  symptoms  not  appertaining  to  the  disease


the  irritability  and  vital  powers  of  the  patient,  a few  drops  more,
should  be  dropped  into  a cup  containing  a tablespoonful  of  water,
which  should  be  briskly  sthred  and  given  to  the  patient,  and  where
greater  caution  is  requisite,  but  the  half  of  it  should  be  given,  and
a similar  half  spoonful  may  veiy  well  be  used  for  rubbing  in,  in  the
way  described.

“ On  the  days  when  the  latter  only  is  employed,  the  small  drop
phial  must  be  each  time  shaken  strongly  five  or  six  times,  as  when  the
medicine  is  used  internally,  and  the  medicinal  drop  or  drops  in  the
tahlespoonful  of  water  should  likewise  be  well  stkred  up  in  the  cup.

“ It  is  better,  instead  of  a cup,  to  use  a phial  in  which  is  a table-
spoonful  of  water,  and  to  drop  the  requu'ed  number  of  drops  of
medicine  into  it,  which  is  then  in  like  manner  to  be  shaken  five  or
six  times,  and  the  whole  or  half  of  it  drunk.

“ In  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  it  is  often  more  useful  that
the  ingestion,  and  also  the  rubbing  in,  should  he  done  in  the  evening
shortly  before  going  to  bed,  for  then  there  is  less  chance  of  any  dis-
turbance from  without  than  when  it  is  performed  in  the  morning.

“ As  long  as  I gave  the  medicines  imdivided,  each  all  at  once  in  a
little  water,  I found  that  potentizing  the  dilution  bottles  with  ten
succussions  caused  too  strong  action  (their  medicinal  powers  were  too
highly  developed),  and  hence  I advised  but  two  shakes  to  be  given.
But  since  a few  years,  as  I can  now  distribute  each  dose  of  medicine,
in  an  indestructible  solution,  over  fifteen,  twenty,  thirty  days,  and  even
a longer  period,  no  potentizing  of  the  dilution  phials  is  too  strong
for  me,  and  I again  prepare  each  with  ten  jerks  of  the  arm.  I must,
therefore,  herewith  retract  what  I said  three  years  since  in  the  first
part  of  this  work,  p.  186.

“ In  cases  where,  along  with  extreme  weakness,  there  was  great
irritability  on  the  part  of  the  patient,  and  only  smelling  at  a phial
in  which  were  a few  small  globules  of  the  required  medicine,  was
admissible,  when  it  was  necessary  to  continue  the  medicine  for
several  days,  I let  the  patient  smell  daily  in  a different  phial  contain-


302


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


to  be  cured,  is  not  capable  of  effecting  real  improve-


ing  globules  of  the  same  medicine,  but  every  time  in  a lower  degree
of  potency,  once  or  twice  with  each  nostril  according  as  I wished  to
make  a smaller  or  a greater  impression.”

In  a letter  from  Dr.  Croserio,  of  Paris,  to  Dr.  v.  Bdnninghausen,  of
Munster,  {JV.  Archiv,  i.  2,  p.  31,)  there  are  a few  particulars  respecting
the  practice  of  Hahnemann  up  to  the  period  of  his  decease,  of  which
the  writer  assm’es  us  he  was  often  a witness.

“ Hahnemann,”  he  Avrites,  “ always  made  use  of  the  well-knoAvn
small  globules,  which  were  generally  impregnated  with  the  thirtieth
dilution,  both  for  acute  and  chronic  diseases.  Of  these  globules  he
du'ected  one,  or  at  most  two,  to  be  dissolved  in  a caraffe  contain-
ing from  eight  to  fifteen  tablespoonfuls  of  water,  and  a half  or  a whole
tablespoonful  of  French  brandy.  One  tablespoonful  only  of  this
solution  was  put  in  a tumbler  of  water,  and  this  last  the  patient  took
by  teaspoonfuls,  on  the  first  day  one  teaspoonful,  on  the  second  two,
on  the  third  three,  and  so  on,  a spoonful  more  daily  until  he  felt  some
effect.  He  then  diminished  the  dose,  or  discontinued  the  medicine
entu'ely.  In  other  cases  he  caused  a spoonful  of  the  first  tumbler  to
be  poured  into  a second  tumbler  of  Avater,  in  others,  from  this  last
into  a third,  and  so  on  to  a sixth  tumbler,  and  directed  a teaspoonful
to  be  taken  from  the  last  tumbler  only,  when  he  had  to  do  with  very
irritable  subjects.  The  cases  were  rare  in  which  he  allowed  a table
or  teaspoonful  to  be  taken  daily  from  the  first  solution  made  with  from
eight  to  fifteen  tablespoonfuls  of  water.  If  he  gave  a powder  to  be
taken  at  once  in  a spoonful  of  water,  that  was  ahvays  only  milk-sugar.
He  never  prescribed  two  different  remedies  to  be  taken  alternately,
or  one  after  the  other ; he  would  ahvays  first  learn  the  effects  of  one
remedy  before  he  gave  another,  even  in  patients  who  were  treated
by  him  at  tAVO  hundred  leagues  distance.  Neither  did  he  change  the
medicines.  Even  in  acute  diseases  it  Avas  rare  for  him  to  give  more
than  one  spoonful  once  in  the  tAventy-four  hours.  But  on  the  other
hand,  in  order  to  quiet  the  patient  or  his  friends,  he  gave  frequent
doses  of  plain  milk-sugar.  Hahnemann  appeared  in  the  latter  years


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


308


ment,^  and  cannot  be  considered  as  homoeopathically
selected,  it  must,  therefore,  either,  if  the  aggravation
be  considerable,  be  first  neutralized  in  part,  as  soon
as  possible,  by  an  antidote,  before  giving  the  next
remedy  chosen  from  a more  accurate  similarity  of
action,  or  if  the  troublesome  symptoms  be  not  very
violent,  the  next  remedy  must  be  given  immediately,
in  order  to  take  the  place  of  the  ill-selected  one.

of  his  practice  to  employ  his  whole  dexterity  in  diminishing  the
dose  more  and  more.  Hence  he  latterly  employed  olfaction  veiy
fi'equently.  For  this  end  he  put  one  or  two  globules  in  a small  medi-
cine pliial  containing  two  draclims  of  alcohol  mixed  with  an  equal
quantity  of  water,  which  he  caused  to  he  inhaled  once  or  twice  with
each  nostril,  never  oftener.  My  own  wife  was  cured  by  him  in  this
manner  of  a violent  pleurisy  in  the  course  of  five  hours.  In  chronic
diseases,  happen  what  might,  he  never  allowed  this  olfaction  to  be
repeated  oftener  than  once  a week,  and  he  gave  besides  for  internal
use  nothing  but  plain  milk-sugar,  and  in  this  manner  he  efiected  the
most  marvellous  cures,  even  in  cases  in  which  the  rest  of  us  had  been
able  to  do  nothing.”]

* As  aU  experience  shews  that  the  dose  of  the  specifically  suited
homoeopathic  medicine  can  scarcely  be  prepared  too  small,  to  effect
perceptible  amelioration  in  the  disease  for  which  it  is  appropriate
(§  clx,  cclxxix),  we  should  act  injudiciously  and  hurtfuUy,  were  we,
when  no  improvement,  or  some,  though  it  be  even  slight,  aggi-avation
ensues,  to  repeat  or  even  to  increase  the  dose  of  the  same  medicme,
as  is  done  in  the  old  system,  under  the  delusion  that  it  was  not  effica-
cious on  account  of  its  small  quantity  (its  too  small  dose).  Every
aggravation  by  the  production  of  neiv  symptoms — when  notliing  un-
toward has  occurred  in  the  mental  or  physical  regimen — invariably
proves  unsuitableness  on  the  part  of  the  medicine  formerly  given  in
the  case  of  disease  before  us,  but  never  indicates  that  the  dose  has
been  too  xveah.


304


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCL.

When,  to  the  quick-sighted  practitioner  who  accu-
rately investigates  the  state  of  the  disease,  it  is  evident,
in  urgent  cases  after  the  lapse  of  as  few  as  six,  eight,
or  twelve  hours,  that  he  has  made  a bad  selection  in
the  medicine  last  given,  in  that  the  patient’s  state  is
growing  perceptibly,  however  slightly,  worse,  from
hour  to  hour,  by  the  occurrence  of  new  symptoms  and
sufferings,  it  is  not  only  allowable  for  him,  but  it  is
his  duty  to  remedy  his  mistake,  by  the  selection  and
administration  of  a homoeopathic  medicine  not  only
tolerably  suitable,  but  the  most  appropriate  possible
for  the  existing  state  of  the  disease  (§  clxvii).

§ CCLI.

There  are  some  medicines  (e.  g.  ignatia,  also  bryonia
and  rhus,  and  sometimes  belladonna)  whose  power  of
altering  man’s  health  consists  chiefly  in  alternating
actions — a kind  of  primary-action  symptoms  that  are
in  part  opposed  to  each  other.  Should  the  practi-
tioner find,  on  prescribing  one  of  these,  selected  on
strict  homoeopathic  principles,  that  no  improvement
follows,  he  will  in  most  cases  soon  effect  his  object  by
giving  (in  acute  diseases,  even  a few  hours  after-
wards) a fresh  and  equally  small  dose  of  the  same
medicine.^


* As  I have  more  particularly  described  in  the  introduction  to
Ignatia  (in  the  second  part  of  the  reine  Arzneimittellehre).


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


305


§ CCLII.

But  should  we  find  during  the  employment  of  the
other  medicines  in  chronic  (psoric)  diseases,  that  the
best  selected  homoeopathic  (antipsoric)  medicine  in
the  suitable  (minutest)  dose,  does  not  effect  an  im-
provement, this  is  a sure  sign,  that  the  cause  that
keeps  up  the  disease  still  persists,  and  that  there  is
some  circumstance  in  the  regimen  of  the  patient,  or
in  the  situation  in  which  he  is  placed,  that  must  be
removed,  in  order  that  a permanent  cure  may  ensue.

§ CCLIII.

Among  the  signs,  that,  in  all  diseases,  especially
in  such  as  are  of  an  acute  nature,  inform  us  of  a
slight  commencement  of  amelioration  or  aggravation
that  is  not  perceptible  to  the  casual  observer,  the
state  of  the  disposition  and  of  the  whole  demeanour
of  the  patient  is  the  most  certain  and  instructive.  In
the  case  of  ever  so  slight  an  improvement  we  observe,
a greater  degree  of  comfort,  increased  calmness  and
freedom  of  the  mind,  higher  spirits — a kind  of  return
of  the  natural  state.  In  the  case  of  ever  so  small  a
commencement  of  aggravation  we  have,  on  the  con-
trary, the  exact  opposite  of  this ; a constrained,  help-
less, pitiable  state  of  the  disposition,  of  the  mind,  of
the  whole  demeanour,  and  of  all  gestures,  postures
and  actions,  which  may  be  easily  perceived  on  close
observation,  but  is  not  to  be  described  in  words. ^


* The  signs  of  improvement  in  the  disposition  and  mind,  however.


X


306


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCLIV.

The  other  fresh  or  increased  symptoms,  or  on  the
contrary,  the  diminution  of  the  original  ones  without
any  addition  of  new  ones,  will  soon  dismiss  all  doubts
from  the  mind  of  the  attentively  observing  and  inves-
tigating practitioner,  relative  to  the  aggravation  or
amelioration ; though  there  are  among  patients  per-
sons who  are  either  incapable  of  giving  an  account
of  this  amelioration  or  aggravation,  or  are  not  disposed
to  confess  it.

§ CCLV.

But  even  with  such  individuals  we  may  convince
ourselves  on  this  point,  by  going  with  them  through
all  the  symptoms  registered  in  the  picture  of  the
disease  one  by  one,  and  finding  that  they  complain  of


are  only  perceptible  soon  after  the  medicine  has  been  taken,  when
the.  dose  has  been  sufficiently  minute  {i.  e.  as  small  as  possible) ; an
unnecessarily  larger  dose  of  even  an  accurately  homoeopathic  medi-
cine, acts  too  violently,  and  at  first  produces  too  great  and  too  lasting
a disturbance  of  the  mind  and  disposition,  to  allow  us  soon  to  per-
ceive the  improvement  in  them.  I must  here  observe  that  this  so
essential  rule  is  chiefly  transgressed  by  presumptuous  tyros  in  homoeo-
pathy and  by  physicians  who  ai'e  converted  to  homoeopathy  from  the
ranks  of  the  old  school.  From  old  prejudices  these  persons  abhor
the  smallest  doses  of  the  highest  dilutions  of  medicine,  in  such  cases,
and  hence  they  fail  to  experience  the  great  advantages  and  blessings
of  that  mode  of  proceeding  which  a thousandfold  experien.ce  has
shewn  to  be  the  most  salutary ; they  cannot  effect  all  that  homoeo-
pathy is  capable  of  doing,  and  hence  they  have  no  claim  to  be
considered  its  adherents.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


307


no  new  unusual  symptoms  in  addition  to  these,  and
that  none  of  the  old  symptoms  are  worse.  If  this  be
the  case,  and  if  an  improvement  in  the  disposition  and
mind  have  already  been  observed,  the  medicine  must
have  effected  positive  diminution  of  the  disease,  or,  if
sufficient  time  have  not  yet  elapsed  for  this,  it  will
soon  effect  it.  Now,  supposing  the  remedy  is  perfectly
appropriate,  if  the  improvement  delay  too  long  in
making  its  appearance,  this  depends  either  on  some
error  of  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  patient,  or  on  the
homoeopathic  aggravation  produced  by  the  medicine
lasting  too  long  (§  clvii),  consequently  on  the  dose
not  being  small  enough.

§ CCLVI.

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  patient  mention  the
occurrence  of  some  fresh  accidents  and  symptoms  of
importance — signs  that  the  medicine  has  not  been
homoeopathically  chosen — even  though  he  should
good-naturedly  assure  us  that  he  feels  better,  we  must
not  believe  this  assurance,  but  regard  his  state  as
aggravated,  as  it  will  soon  be  perfectly  apparent  it  is.

§ CCLVII.

The  true  physician  will  take  care  to  avoid  making
favourite  remedies  of  medicines,  the  employment  of
which  he  has,  by  chance,  perhaps,  found  oftener
useful,  and  which  he  has  had  opportunities  of  using
with  good  effect.  If  he  do  so,  some  remedies  of  rarer

X 2


308


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


use,  which  would  have  been  more  homoeopathically
suitable,  consequently  more  serviceable,  will  be  neg-
lected.

§ CCLVIII.

The  true  practitioner,  moreover,  will  not  with
mistrustful  weakness  neglect  the  employment  of  those
remedies  that  he  may  now  and  then  have  employed
with  disadvantage,  owing  to  an  erroneous  selection
(from  his  own  fault,  therefore),  or  avoid  them  for
other  (false)  reasons,  as  that  they  were  unhomoeo-
pathic  for  the  case  of  disease  before  him ; he  must
bear  in  mind  the  truth,  that  of  medicinal  agents  that
one  alone  invariably  deserves  the  preference,  in  every
case  of  disease,  which  corresponds  most  accurately,  by
similarity,  to  the  whole  collection  of  the  characteristic
symptoms,  and  that  no  petty  prejudices  should  inter-
fere with  this  serious  choice.

§ CCLIX.

Considering  the  minuteness  of  the  doses  necessary
and  proper  in  homoeopathic  treatment,  we  may  easily
understand  that,  during  the  treatment,  everything
must  be  removed  from  the  diet  and  regimen  which  can
have  any  medicinal  action,  in  order  that  the  small
dose  may  not  be  overwhelmed  and  extinguished  or
disturbed  by  any  foreign  medicinal  irritant.^

' The  softest  tones  of  a distant  flute  that  in  the  still  midnight
hours  would  raise  a tender  heart  to  superhuman  feelings  and  dissolve
it  in  religious  ecstacy,  are  inaudible  and  powerless  amid  discordant
cries  and  the  noise  of  day.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


309


§ CCLX.

Hence  the  careful  investigation  into  such  obstacles
to  cure  is  so  much  the  more  necessary  in  the  case  of
patients  affected  by  chronic  diseases,  as  their  disease
is  usually  aggravated  by  such  noxious  influences,  and
other  frequently  unnoticed  errors  in  the  regimen,
which 'are  productive  of  morbid  effects.^


* Coffee ; fine  Chinese  and  other  herb-teas ; beer  prepared  with
medicinal  vegetable,  substances  unsuitable  for  the  patient’s  state  ;
so-called  fine  liqueurs  made  with  medicinal  spices ; all  kinds  of
punch ; spiced  chocolate ; odorous  waters  and  perfumeries  of  many
kinds ; strong  scented  fiowers  in  the  apartment ; tooth  powders  and
essences  and  perfumed  sachets  composed  of  drugs;  highly  spiced
dishes  and  sauces ; spiced  cakes  and  ices ; raw  medicinal  vegetables
for  soups ; dishes  of  herbs,  roots  and  stalks  of  plants  possessing
medicinal  qualities ; old  cheese,  and  meats  that  are  in  a state  of
decomposition,  or  that  possess  medicinal  properties  (as  the  flesh  and
fat  of  pork,  ducks  and  geese,  or  veal  that  is  too  young  and  som*
viands),  ought  just  as  certainly  to  be  kept  from  patients  as  they
should  avoid  all  excesses  in  food,  and  in  the  use  of  sugar  and  salt,  as
also  spirituous  di'inks,  heated  rooms,  woollen  clothing  next  the  skin
(which  should  be  exchanged  in  warm  weather  only,  first  for  cotton
then  for  linen  garments),  sedentary  modes  of  living  in  close  apai't-
ments,  or  the  frequent  indulgence  of  mere  passive  exercise  (by  riding,
driving  or  swinging),  prolonged  suckling,  sleeping  long  after  dinner
in  a recumbent  posture  (in  bed),  sitting  up  long  at  night,  unnatural
debauchery,  enervation  by  readmg  obscene  books,  subjects  of  anger,
grief  or  vexation,  a passion  for  play,  excessive  exertion  of  mind  or
body,  dwelling  in  marshy  districts,  damp  rooms,  penurious  living,
and  so  forth.  All  these  things  must  be  as  far  as  possible  avoided  or
removed,  in  order  that  the  cure  may  not  be  obstructed  or  rendered


310


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCLXI.

The  most  appropriate  regimen  during  the  employ-
ment of  medicine  in  chronic  diseases  consists  in  the
removal  of  such  obstacles  to  recovery,  and  in  supply-
ing where  necessary  the  reverse  : innocent  moral  and
intellectual  recreation,  active  exercise  in  the  open
air  in  almost  all  kinds  of  weather  (daily  walks,  slight
manual  labour)  suitable,  unmedicinal  food  and  drink,
and  so  forth.

§ CCLXII.

In  acute  diseases,  on  the  other  hand — except  in
cases  of  mental  alienation — the  subtile,  infallible,
internal  sense  of  the  awakened  life-preserving  faculty
determines  so  clearly  and  precisely,  that  the  physician
only  requires  to  counsel  the  friends  and  attendants  to
put  no  obstacles  in  the  way  of  this  voice  of  nature,  by
a refusal  of  anything  the  -patient  urgently  desires  in
the  way  of  food,  or  by  asking  and  persuading  him
to  partake  of  anything  injurious.

§ CCLXIII.

The  desire  of  the  patient  affected  by  an  acute
disease  with  regard  to  food  and  drink,  is  certainly
chiefly  for  things  that  give  palliative  relief;  they  are.


impossible.  Some  of  my  disciples  seem  needlessly  to  increase  the
difficulties  of  the  patient’s  dietaiy  by  forbidding  the  use  of  many
more,  tolerably  indifferent  things,  which  is  not  to  be  commended.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


311


however,  not  strictly  speaking  of  a medicinal  character,
and  merely  supply  a sort  of  want.  The  slight  hin-
drances that  the  gratification  of  this  desire,  within
moderate  hounds,  could  oppose  to  the  radical  removal
of  the  disease,  will  be  amply  counteracted  and  over-
come by  the  power  of  the  homceopathically  suited
medicine  and  the  vital  force  set  free  by  it,  as  also  by
the  refreshment  that  follows  from  taking  what  has
been  so  ardently  longed  for.  In  like  manner,  in  acute
diseases,  the  temperature  of  the  room  and  the  heat
or  coolness  of  the  coverings  must  also  be  arranged
entirely  in  conformity  with  the  patient’s  wish.

§ CCLXIV.

The  true  physician  must  have  the  most  energetic,
most  genuine  medicines  at  hand,  if  he  would  be  able
to  rely  upon  their  therapeutic  powers,  he  must  be
able,  himself,  to  judge  of  their  genuineness.

§ CCLXV.

It  should  be  a matter  of  conscience  with  him,  to  be
thoroughly  convinced  in  every  case,  that  the  patient
takes  the  right  medicine  every  time.

§ CCLXVI.

Substances  belonging  to  the  animal  and  vegetable
kingdoms  are  most  medicinal  in  their  raw  state.  ^


1 All  raw  animal  and  vegetable  substances  have  a greater  or  less
amount  of  medicinal  power,  and  are  capable  of  altering  man’s  health,
each  m its  owp  peculiar  way.  Those  plants  and  animals  used  by  the


312


OllGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCLXVII.

We  gain  possession  of  the  powers  of  indigenous
plants  and  of  such  as  may  be  had  in  a fresh  state  in


most  enlightened  nations  as  food,  have  this  advantage  over  all  others,
that  they  contain  a larger  amount  of  nutritious  parts,  and  they  differ
from  the  others  in  this,  that  then-  medicinal  powers  in  their  raw  state
are  either  not  very  great  in  themselves,  or  are  diminished  by  culinary
and  domestic  preparation,  by  the  expression  of  their  pernicious  juices
(hke  the  cassava  root  of  South  America),  by  fermentation  (of  the
rye-flour  in  the  dough  for  making  bread — sour  crout  prepared  with-
out vinegar,  and  sour  gherkins),  by  smoking  and  by  the  power  of
heat  (in  boiling,  stewing,  toasting,  roasting,  baking),  whereby  the
medicinal  parts  of  many  of  these  substances  are  in  part  desti’oyed
and  dissipated.  By  the  addition  of  salt  (picklmg)  and  vinegar
(sauces,  salads),  animal  and  vegetable  substances  certainly  lose  much
of  their  injurious  medicinal  qualities,,  but  other  disadvantages  result
from  these  additions.

But  even  those  plants  that  possess  most  medicinal  power,  lose  that
in  part  or  completely  by  such  processes.  By  perfect  desiccation,  all
tlie  roots  of  the  various  kinds  of  iris,  of  the  horseradish,  of  the'
different  species  of  arum  and  of  the  peonies,  lose  almost  all  their
medicinal  virtue.  The  juice  of  the  most  virulent  plants  often  be-
comes an  inert,  pitch-like  mass,  from  the  heat  employed  in  preparing
the  ordinary  extracts.  By  merely  standing  a long  time,  the  expressed
juice  of  the  most  deadly  plants  becomes  quite  powerless ; even  at  a
moderate  atmospheric  temperature  it  rapidly  takes  on  the  vinous
fermentation  (and  thereby  loses  much  of  its  'medicinal  power),  and
immediately  thereafter  the  acetous  and  putrid  fermentation,  whereby
it  is  deprived  of  all  its  peculiar  medicinal  properties,  the  fecula  that
is  then  deposited,  if  well  washed  is  quite  innocuous,  like  ordinaiy
starch.  By  the  transudation  that  takes  place  when  a number  of
green  plants  are  laid  one  above  the  other,  the  greatest  part  of  then'
medicinal  properties  is  lost.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


313


the  most  complete  and  certain  manner,  by  mixing
their  freshly  expressed  juice  immediately  with  equal
parts  of  spirits  of  wine,  of  a strength  sufficient  to  burn
in  a lamp.  After  this  has  stood  a day  and  a night  in
a close  stoppered  bottle,  and  deposited  the  fibrinous
and  albuminous  matters,  the  clear  superincumbent
fluid  is  then  to  be  decanted  off  for  medicinal  use.^
All  fermentation  of  the  vegetable  juice  will  be  at  once
checked  by  the  spirits  of  wine  mixed  with  it,  and
rendered  impossible  for  the  future,  and  the  entire
medicinal  power  is  thus  retained  (perfect  and  unin-
jured) forever,  by  keeping  the  preparation  in  well
corked  bottles  and  excluded  from  the  sun’s  light.^

' Buchholz  {Taschenb.  f.  Scheidek.  u.  Apoth.  a.  d.  J.  1815.
Weimar,  Abth.  I.  vi.)  assures  his  readers  (and  his  reviewer  in  the
Leipziger  Liter aturzeitung , 1816,  No.  82,  does  not  contradict  him),
that  for  this  excellent  mode  of  preparing  medicines  we  have  to  thank
the  campaign,  in  Russia,  whence  it  was  (in  1812)  imported  into
Germany.  According  to  the  noble  practice  of  Germans  to  be  unjust
towai’ds  their  own  countrymen,  he  conceals  the  fact,  that  this  dis-
covery and  those  directions,  which  he  quotes  in  my  very  words  from
the  first  edition  of  the  Organon  of  rational  medicine,  § ccxxx  and
note,  proceed  from  me,  and  that  I first  published  them  to  the  world
two  years'  before  the  Russian  campaign  (the  Organon  appeared  m
1810).  Some  folks  would  rather  assign  the  origin  of  a discovery  to
the  deserts  of  Asia,  than  to  a German  to  whom  the  honour  belongs.
O tempora ! O mores  !

Alcohol  has  certainly  been  sometimes  before  this  used  for  mixing
with  vegetable  juices,  e.  g.  to  preserve  them  some  time  before  making
extracts  of  them,  but  never  with  the  view  of  administering  them  in
this  form.

' Although  equal  parts  of  alcohol  and  freshly  expressed  juice  are


314


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ GCLXVIII.

The  other  exotic  plants,  barks,  seeds  and  roots  that
cannot  be  obtained  in  the  fresh  state,  the  sensible
practitioner  will  never  take  in  the  pulverized  form  on
trust,  but  will  first  convince  himself  of  their  genuine-
ness in  their  crude,  entire  state,  before  making  tho
slightest  medicinal  employment  of  them.^


usually  the  most  suitable  proportion  for  effecting  the  deposition  of
the  fibrinous  and  albuminous  matters,  yet  for  plants  that  contain
much  thick  mucus  (e.  g.  symphytum  officinale,  viola  tricolor,  &c.)  or
an  excess  of  albumen  (e.  g.  sethusa  cynapium,  solanum  nigrum,  &c.),
a double  proportion  of  alcohol  is  generally  required  for  this  end.
Plants  that 'are  very  deficient  in  juice,  as  oleander,  buxus,  taxus,
edum,  sabina,  &c.  must  first  be  pounded  up  alone  into  a moist,  fine
mass,  and  then  stirred  up  with  a double  quantity  of  alcohol,  in  order
that  the  juice  may  combine  with  it,  and  being  thus  extracted  by  the
alcohol,  may  be  pressed  out ; these  latter  may  also  when  dried  be
brought  with  milk-sugar  to  the  millionfold  trituration,  and  then  be
further  diluted  and  potentized  (v.  § cclxxi).

^ In  order  to  preserve  them  in  the  form  of  powder,  a precaution  is
requisite  that  has  hitherto  been  not  usually  known  in  laboratories,
and  hence  powders,  even  well-dried  animal  and  vegetable  substances,
could  not  be  preserved  uninjured,-  even  in  weU-corked  bottles.  The
entire  crude  vegetable  substances,  though  perfectly  dry,  yet  contain,
as  an  indispensable  condition  of  the  cohesion  of  their  texture,  a
certain  quantity  of  moisture  which  does  not  indeed  prevent  the  un-
pulverized drug  from  remaining  in  as  dry  a state  as  is  requisite  to
preserve  it  from  corruption,  but  which  is  quite  too  much  for  the
finely  pulverized  state.  The  animal  or  vegetable  substance  which
in  its  entu’e  state  was  perfectly  dry,  furnishes  therefore,  when  finely
pulverized,  a somewhat  moist  powder,  which,  without  rapidly  be-
coming spoilt  and  mouldy,  can  yet  not  be  preserved  in  corked  bottles


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


315


§ CCLXIX.

The  homoeopathic  system  of  medicine  develops  for
its  use,  to  an  unheard  of  degree,  the  spiritual  medicinal
powers  of  the  crude  substances  by  means  of  a process
peculiar  to  it,  and  which  has  hitherto  never  been
tried,  whereby  only  they  all  become  penetratingly
efficacious  and  serviceable,  even  those  that  in  the
crude  state  gave  no  evidence  of  the  slightest  medicinal
power  on  the  human  body.

§ CCLXX.

Thus  two  drops  of  the  fresh  vegetable  juice  mingled
with  equal  parts  of  alcohol  are  diluted  with  ninety-
eight  drops  of  alcohol  and  potentized  by  means  of  two
succussions,  whereby  the  first  development  of  power


if  not  previously  freed  from  this  superfluous  moisture.  This  is  best
efiected  by  spreading  out  the  powder  m a flat  tin  saucer  with  a
raised  edge,  which  floats  m a vessel  full  of  boiling  water  (f.  e.  a
water  bath),  and,  by  means  of  stu'ring  it  about,  drying  it  to  such  a
degree,  that  all  the  small  atoms  of  it  (no  longer  stick  together  in
lumps,  but)  like  .dry,  fine  sand,  ai'e  easily  separated  from  each  other
and  are  readily  converted  into  dust.  In  this  dry  state,  the  fine
powders  may  he  kept  forever  uninjm’ed,  in  well  corked  and  sealed
bottles,  in  all  then  original  complete  medicinal  power,  without  ever
being  injured  by  mites  or  mould  ; and  they  ai’e  best  preserved  when  the
bottles  are  kept  protected  from  the  daylight  (in  covered  boxes,  chests,
cases).  If  not  shut  up  in  air-tight  vessels,  and  not  preserved  from
the  access  of  the  light  of  the  sun  and  day,  all  animal  and  vegetable
substances  in  time  gradually  lose  their  medicinal  power  more  and
more,  even  in  the  entire  state,  hut  still  more  in  the  form  of  powder.


316


OBGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


is  formed,  and  this  process  is  repeated  through  twenty-
nine  more  phials,  each  of  which  is  filled  three  quarters
full  with  ninety-nine  drops  of  alcohol,  and  each  suc-
ceeding phial  is  to  be  provided  with  one  drop  from
the  preceding  phial  (which  has  already  been  shaken
twice)  and  is  in  its  turn  shaken,^  and  in  the  .same


^ In  order  to  preserve  a fixed  and  measured  standard  for  develop-
ing the  power  of  liquid  medicines,  multiplied  experience  and  careful
observation  have  led  me  to  adopt  two  succussions  for  each  phial,  in
preference  to  the  greater  number  formerly  employed  (by  which  the
medicines  were  too  highly  potentized). — There  are,  however,  homoeo-
pathists  who  carry  about  with  them  on  their  visits  to  patients  the
homoeopathic  medicines  in  the  fluid  state,  and  who  yet  assert  that
they  do  not  become  more  highly  potentized  in  the  course  of  time,
but  they  thereby  shew  them  want  of  ability  to  observe  correctly.  I
dissolved  a grain  of  soda  in  an  ounce  of  water  mixed  with  alcohol,
in  a phial,  which  was  thereby  filled  two-thirds  full,  and  shook  this
solution  continuously  for  half  an  hour,  and  this  was  in  dynamization
and  energy  equal  to  the  thirtieth  development  of  power.

[Hahnemann’s  latest  recorded  notions  respecting  dynamization,  as
we  find  them  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Chronic  Diseases,  part,  v,
merit  insertion  in  this  place,  and  it  will  be  seen  dhat'  in  his  later
years  he  modified  considerably  the  opinions  he  has,  in  various  places
throughout  the  Organon,  expressed  on  the  subject.

“ Actual  dilutions,”  he  says,  “ are  almost  wholly  confined  to  sapid
and  coloured  objects.  A solution  of  salt  or  hitter  substances  becomes
always  more  tasteless  the  more  water  is  mixed  with  it,  and  at  length
loses  almost  all  taste,  though  we  may  shake  it  as  much  as  we  please
— and  in  like  manner  a solution  of  a coloured  substance  becomes,  by
the  admixtm'e  of  more  and  more  water,  at  last  almost  quite  colour-
less, and  gains  no  increase  of  colour  by  any  imaginable  shaking.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


317


manner  at  last  the  thirtieth  development  of  power
(potentized  decillionth  dilution  X)  which  is  the  one
most  generally  used.


“ These  ai'e  and  continue  to  be  true  attenuations  or  dilutions,  but
. not  dynamizations.

“ Homoeopathic  dynamizations  are  real  awakenings  of  the  medicinal
properties  that  lie  dormant  in  natural  bodies  during  theu’  crude  state,
which  then  become  capable  of  acting  in  almost  a spiidtual  manner
upon  our  life,  that  is  to  say  on  our  percipient  (sensible)  and  excitable
(u'ritable)  fibres.  These  developments  of  properties  (dynamizations)
in  crude  medicinal  substances,  which  were  unknown  before  my  time,
are  accomplished,  as  I first  taught,  by  the  trituration  of  dry  substances
in  a mortar,  but  by  the  succussion  of  liquid  substances,  which  is  nothing
less  than  a trituration  of  them.  These  preparations,  therefore,  cannot
have  the  term  ‘ dilutions  ’ applied  to  them,  although  every  prei^aration
of  the  sort,  in  order  to  potentize  it  higher,  that  is  to  say,  in  order  to
awaken  and  develop  still  farther  the  medicinal  properties  that  still  lie
latent  in  it,  must  first  be  again  yet  more  attenuated,  to  allow  the  tritu-
ration or  succussion  to  penetrate  more  deeply  into  the  essential  nature
of  the  medicinal  substance,  and  thus  to  liberate  and  bring  to  light  the
more  subtile  part  of  the  medicinal  power  that  lies  still  deeper,  which
were  impossible  to  be  effected  by  the  greatest  amount  of  tritm-ation
and  succussion  of  substances  in  a concentrated  state.

“We  frequently  read  in  homoeopathic  writings,  that  some  one  or
other  found  no  effect  from  this  or  that  high  (dilution)  dynamization
of  a medicine  in  a certain  case  of  disease,  but  that  a lower  one  ren-
dered the  desired  service — whilst  others  saw  more  success  attendmg
higher  ones.  But  the  cause  of  the  great  difference  in  the  results  is
not  investigated.  What  is  to  prevent  the  preparer  of  homoeopathic
medicines  (this  should  always  be  the  homoeopathic  practitioner
himself;  the  weapons  he  uses  against  diseases,  he  should  himself
forge,  he  should  himself  whet),  what  is  to  prevent  him,  in  order  that
he  may  obtain  powerful  dynamizations,  in  place  of  giving  a few


318


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCLXXI.

All  other  substances  adapted  for  medicinal  use —
except  sulphur,  which  has  of  late  years  been  only
employed  in  the  form  of  a highly-diluted  (X)  tincture
— , as : pure  or  oxydized  and  sulphuretted  metals  and
other  minerals,  petroleum,  phosphorus,  as  also  parts
and  juices  of  plants  that  can  only  be  obtained  in  the
dry  state,  animal  substances,  neutral  salts,  &c.,  all
these  are  first  to  be  potentized  by  trituration  for  three


slovenly  shakes  (whereby  little  more  than  dilutions  are  produced,
which  they  ought  not  to  be),  giving,  for  the  preparation  of  each
potency,  to  every  phial  which  contains  one  drop  of  the  lower  potency
to  ninety-nine  drops  of  alcohol,  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  and  even  more
sti’ong  succussions,  performed  against  some  hard  elastic  body.

“ The  perfection  of  our,  the  only  healing  art,  and  the  weal  of  the
patients,  appear  well  to  deserve  that  the  physician  take  the  requisite
pains  to  procure  for  his  medicines  the  proper,  the  greatest  possible
efficacy.

“ Thus  we  obtain,  even  in  the  fiftieth  potency  (the  new  wise-
acres have  hitherto  ridiculed  the  thhtieth  potency,  and  made  use  of
the  lower,  little  developed,  massive  medicinal  preparations  in  large
doses,  whereby,  however,  they  were  not  able  to  effect  what  our
system  ean  do),  each  lower  one  of  which  has  been  dynamized  \vith
an  equal  number  of  succussions,  medicines  of  the  most  penetrating
efficacy,  so  that  each  of  the  minutest  globules  impi'egnated  with  it,
dissolved  in  much  water,  can  be  taken  in  small  portions,  and  must
be  so  taken  in  order  not  to  produce  too  violent  effects  in  sensitive
patients,  not  to  mention  that  such  a mode  of  preparation  develops
almost  all  the  properties  that  lie  hid  in  the  essential  nature  of  the
medicinal  substance,  which  thereby  alone  can  attain  any  activity.
Paris,  19th  December,  1838.”]


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


319


hours,  up  to  the  millionfold  pulverulent  attenuation,
and  of  this  one  grain  is  to  be  dissolved,  and  brought
to  the  thirtieth  development  of  power  by  means  of
twenty-seven  attenuating  phials,  in  the  same  manner
as  the  vegetable  juices.^

§ CCLXXII.

In  no  case  is  it  requisite  to  administer  more  than
one  single,  simple  medicinal  substance  at  one  time.®

§ CCLXXIII.

It  is  not  conceivable,  how  the  slightest  dubiety
could  exist  as  to  whether  it  was  more  consistent  with
nature  and  more  rational  to  prescribe  a single,  well-
known  medicine  at  one  time  in  a disease,  or  a mixture
of  several  ditferently  acting  drugs.

§ CCLXXIV.

As  the  true  physician  finds  in  simple  medicines
administered  singly  and  uncombined,  all  that  he  can
possibly  desire,  (artificial  morbific  agents  which  are


* As  is  still  more  circumstantially  detailed  in  the  prefaces  to  the
medicines  in  the  thii'd  edition  of  the  second  part  of  the  Pure  materia
medica  [and  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Chronic  Diseases,  pt.  L]

^ Some  homceopathists  have  made  the  experiment,  in  cases  where
they  deemed  one  remedy  suitable  for  one  portion  of  the  symptoms  of
a case  of  disease,  and  a second  for  another  portion,  of  administering
both  remedies  at  once  or  almost  at  once ; hut  I eaimestly  deprecate
such  hazardous  experiments,  that  can  never  be  necessary,  though
they  may  sometimes  seem  to  be  of  use.


320


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


able  by  homoeopathic  power  completely  to  overpower,
extinguish  and  permanently  to  cure  natural  diseases,)
he  will,  mindful  of  the  wise  maxim : “ that  it  is  wrong
to  attempt  to  effect  anything  with  compound  means
that  may  be  effected  by  simple  means  ; ” never  think
of  giving  as  a remedy  any  but  a single,  simple  medi-
cinal substance,  for  these  reasons  also,  because  even
though  the  simple  medicines  were  thoroughly  proved
with  respect  to  their  pure  peculiar  effects  on  the
unalloyed  healthy  state  of  man,  it  is  yet  impossible  to
foresee  how  two  and  more  medicinal  substances  might,
when  compounded,  obstruct  and  alter  each  other’s
actions  on  the  human  body,  and  because,  on  the  other
hand,  a simple  medicinal  substance  when  used  in
diseases,  the  totality  of  whose  symptoms  is  accurately
known,  renders  ethcient  aid  by  itself  alone,  if  It  were
homoeopathically  selected,  and  supposing  the  worst
case  to  happen,  that  it  was  not  chosen  in  strict  con-
formity to  similarity  of  symptoms,  and,  therefore,  does
no  good,  it  is  yet  so  far  useful,  that  it  promotes  our
knowledge  of  therapeutic  agents,  because  by  the  new
symptoms  excited  by  it  in  such  a case,  those  symptoms
which  this  medicinal  substance  had  already  shewn  in
experiments  on  the  healthy  human  body,  are  con-
firmed ; an  advantage  that  is  lost  by  the  employment
of  all  compound  remedies,^


* When  the  rational  physician  has  chosen  the  perfectly  homoeo-
pathic medicine  for  the  well-considered  case  of  disease,  and  adminis-
tered it  internally,  he  will  leave  enthely  to  UTational  allopathic


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


321


§ CCLXXV.

The  suitableness  of  a medicine  for  any  given  case
of  disease  does  not  depend  on  its  accurate  homoeo-
pathic selection  alone,  but  likewise  on  the  proper
size,  or  rather  smallness,  of  the  dose.  If  we  give  too
strong  a dose  of  a medicine  which  may  have  been  even
quite  homceopathically  chosen  for  the  morbid  state
before  us,  it  must,  notwithstanding  the  inherent  bene-
ficial character  of  its  nature,  prove  injurious  by  its
mere  magnitude,  and  by  the  unnecessary,  excessive
impression  it  makes  upon  the  vital  force  which  it
convulses,  and,  through  the  vital  force,  upon  those
parts  of  the  organism  which  are  the  most  sensitive
and  are  already  most  afiected  by  the  natural  disease,
by  virtue  of  its  homoeopathic  similarity  of  action.

§ CCLXXVI.

For  this  reason,  a medicine,  even  though  it  may  be
homceopathically  suited  to  the  case  of  disease,  does
harm,  in  every  dose  that  is  too  large,  the  more  harm
the  larger  the  dose,  and  by  the  magnitude  of  the  dose
it  does  more  harm  the  greater  its  homceopathicity
and  the  higher  the  potency^  selected,  and  it  does


routine  the  practice  of  giving  drinks  composed  of  other  medicinal
substances,  of  applying  compresses  of  herbs,  or  fomentations  with
various  plants,  of  injecting  medicated  glysters,  and  of  rubbing-in  this
or  the  other  ointment.

* The  praise  bestowed,  of  late,  years,  by  some  few  homceopathists,
on  the  larger  doses,  depends  on  this,  either  that  they  chose  low

Y


322


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


much  more  injury  than  any  equally  large  dose  of  a
medicine  that  was  unhomoeopathic,  and  in  no  respect
suitable  (allopathic)  to  the  morbid  state ; for  in  the
former  case  the  so-called  homoeopathic  aggravation
(§  clvii — clx),  that  is  to  say,  the  very  analogous  medi-
cinal disease  produced  by  the  vital  force,  convulsed
by  the  excessively  large  dose  of  medicine,  in  the
parts  of  the  organism  that  are  most  suffering  and
most  irritated  by  the  original  disease — which  medi-
cinal disease  had  it  been  of  appropriate  intensity  would
have  gently  effected  a cure — rises  to  an  injurious
height ; ^ the  patient,  to  be  sure,  no  longer  suffers  from
the  original  disease,  for  that  has  been  homoeopathically
eradicated,  hut  he  suffers  all  the  more  from  the
excessive  medicinal  disease,  and  from  useless  exhaus-
tion of  his  strength.

§ CCLXXVII.

For  the  same  reason,  and  because  a medicine,
provided  the  dose  of  it  was  sufficiently  small,  is  all
the  more  salutary,  and  almost  miraculously  efficacious,
the  more  homoeopathically  it  has  been  chosen,  a
medicine  whose  selection  has  been  accurately  homoeo-
pathic, must  be  all  the  more  salutary  the  more  its
dose  is  reduced  to  the  degree  of  minuteness  adapted
for  affording  relief  in  a gentle  manner.


dynamizations  of  the  medicine  to  be  administei'ed,  as  I myself  used
to  do  twenty  years  ago,  from  not  knowing  any  better,  or  that  the
medicines  selected  were  not  perfectly  homoeopathic.

* See  note  to  § ccxlvi.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


323


§ CCLXXVIII.

Here  the  question  arises,  what  is  this  most  suit-
able degree  of  minuteness  for  affording  certain  and
gentle  relief ; how  small,  in  other  words,  must  be  the
dose  of  each  individual  medicine,  homoeopathically
selected  for  a case  of  disease,  to  effect  the  best  cure  1
To  solve  this  problem,  and  to  determine  for  every
particular  medicine,  what  dose  of  it  will  suffice  for
homoeopathic  therapeutic  purposes,  and  yet  be  suffi-
ciently minute  that  the  gentlest  and  most  rapid
cure  may  be  thereby  obtained — to  solve  this  problem,
is,  as  may  easily  be  conceived,  not  the  work  of
theoretical  speculation ; not  from  fine-spun  reasoning,
not  from  specious  sophistry  can  the  solution  of  this
problem  be  expected.  Pure  experiment,  careful  ob-
servation, and  accurate  experience  can  alone  determine
this,  and  it  were  absurd  to  adduce  the  large  doses  of
unsuitable  (^allopathic)  medicines  of  the  old  system,
which  do  not  touch  the  diseased  side  of  the  organism
homoeopathically,  but  only  attack  the  parts  unaffected
by  the  disease,  in  opposition  to  what  pure  experience
pronounces  respecting  the  requisite  smallness  of  the
doses  for  effecting  homoeopathic  cures.

§ CCLXXIX.

This  pure  experience  shews  invariably,  that,  if
the  disease  do  not  evidently  depend  on  a considerable
deterioration  of  an  important  viscus  (even  though  it
belong  to  the  chronic  and  complex  diseases),  and  if,
during  the  treatment,  all  other  foreign  medicinal

Y 2


324


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


influences  are  kept  away  from  the  patient — the  dose
of  the  homoeopathically  selected  remedy  can  never  he
prepared  so  small  that  it  shall  not  he  stronger  than  the
natural  disease^  and  shall  not  he  able  to  overpoiver,
extinguish  and  cure  it,  at  least  in  part,  as  long  as  it  is
capable  of  causing  some,  though  hut  a slight  prepon-
derance of  its  own  symptoms  over  those  of  the  disease
resembling  it  (slight  homoeopathic  aggravation,  § clvii
— clx),  immediately  after  its  ingestion.

§ CCLXXX.

This  incontrovertible  axiom  of  experience  is  the
standard  of  measurement  by  which  the  doses  of  all
homoeopathic  medicines,  without  exception,  are  to  he
reduced  to  such  an  extent  that,  after  their  ingestion,  they
shall  excite  a scarcely  observable  homoeopathic  aggra-
vation, let  the  diminution  of  the  dose  go  ever  so  far,
and  appear  ever  so  incredible  to  the  material  ideas
of  common-place  physicians ; ^ their  idle  declamations
must  cease  before  the  dicta  of  infallible  experience.


* Let  them  learn  from  the  mathematicians,  how  true  it  is,  that  a
substance  divided  into  ever  so  many  parts  must  contain  in  its  smallest
conceivable  parts  always  stUl  somewhat  of  this  substance,  and  that
the  smallest  conceivable  part  does  not  cease  to  be  some  of  this  sub-
stance, and  cannot  possibly  become  nothing ; — let  them,  if  they  are
capable  of  being  taught,  hear  from  natural  philosophers,  that  there
are  enormously  powerful  things  (potencies),  which  are  perfectly
destitute  of  weight,  as  for  example,  caloric,  hght,  &c.,  consequently
infinitely  lighter  than  the  medicinal  contents  of  the  smallest  doses
used  in  homoeopathy; — let  them,  if  they  can,  weigh  the  u’ritating


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


325


§ CCLXXXI.

Every  patient  is,  especially  in  his  diseased  point,
capable  of  being  changed  in  an  incredible  degree,  by
medicinal  agents  corresponding  by  similarity  of  action,
and  there  is  no  person,  be  he  ever  so  robust,  and


words  that  bring  on  a bilious  fever,  or  the  mournful  intelligence
respecting  her  only  son,  that  kiUs  the  mother ; — let  them  touch,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  a magnet  capable  of  lifting  a hundred  pounds
weight,  and  learn  from  the  pain  it  excites,  that  even  imponderable
agents  can  produce  the  most  violent  medicinal  effects  upon  man ; —
and  let  the  weak  ones  among  them  allow  the  pit  of  their  stomach  to
be  slightly  touched  by  the  thumb’s  point  of  a strong-willed  mesmeriser
for  a few  minutes,  and  the  disagreeable  sensations  they  then  suffer
wHl  make  them  repent  of  attempting  to  set  limits  to  the  boundless
activity  of  nature ; the  weak-minded  beings !

If  the  allopathist  who  is  trying  the  homoeopathic  system,  imagine
he  cannot  bring  himself  to  give  such  small  and  highly  attenuated
doses,  let  him  only  ask  himself,  what  risk  he  runs  by  so  doing  ? If
the  scepticism,  which  holds  what  is  ponderable  only  to  be  real,  and  all
that  is  imponderable  to  be  nothing,  be  right,  nothing  worse  could
result  from  a dose  that  appears  to  liim  to  be  nothing,  than  that  no
effect  ensued — and  consequently  this  would  be  always  much  more
innocent  than  what  must  result  from  his  too  large  doses  of  allopathic
medicine.  Why  will  he  place  more  reliance  on  his  inexperience,
coupled  with  prejudice,  than  on  an  experience  of  many  years  borne
out  by  facts  ? And  moreover,  the  homoeopathic  medicine  becomes
potentized  at  every  division  and  diminution  by  trituration  or  succus-
sion ! — a development  of  the  inherent  powers  of  medicinal  substances,
which  was  never  dreamed  of  before  my  time,  and  which  is  of  so
powerful  a character,  that  of  late  years  I have  been  compelled  by
convincing  experience  to  reduce  the  ten  succussions  formerly  directed
to  be  given  after  each  attenuation,  to  two.


326


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


even  though  he  be  affected  only  with  a chronic,  or
so-called  local  disease,  who  will  not  soon  experience
the  desired  change  in  the  affected  part,  if  he  take
the  salutary,  homoeopathically  suited  medicine  in  the
smallest  conceivable  dose,  who,  in  a word,  will  not
thereby  be  much  more  altered  in  his  health,  than  a
healthy  infant  of  hut  a day  old  would  he.  How
unmeaning  and  ridiculous  is  mere  theoretical  scepticism
in  opposition  to  this  unerring,  infallible  experimental
proof !

§ CCLXXXII.

The  smallest  possible  dose  of  homoeopathic  medi-
cine, capable  only  of  producing  the  very  slightest
homoeopathic  aggravation,  will,  because  it  has  the
power  of  exciting  symptoms  hearing  the  greatest
possible  resemblance  to  the  original  disease  (but  yet
stronger  even  in  the  minute  dose),  attack  principally
and  almost  solely  the  parts  in  the  organism  that  are
already  affected,  highly  irritated,  and  rendered  exces-
sively susceptible  to  an  irritation  of  such  a similar
character,  and  will  alter  the  vital  force  that  reigns
in  them  to  a state  of  very  similar  artificial  disease,
somewhat  greater  in  degree  than  the  natural  one
was,  and  which  will  usurp  the  place  of  the  latter  (the
original  disease),  so  that  the  animated  organism  now
suffers  from  the  artificial  medicinal  disease  alone,
which,  from  its  nature,  and  in  consequence  of  the
minuteness  of  the  dose,  will  soon  be  extinguished  by
the  vital  force  that  is  striving  to  return  to  the  normal


OKGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


327


state,  and  (if  the  disease  were  merely  an  acute  one)'
the  body  is  left  perfectly  free  from  disease,  that  is  to
say,  quite  well.


§ CCLXXXIII.

Now,  in  order  to  act  really  in  conformity  with
nature,  the  true  physician  will  prescribe  his  well-
selected  homoeopathic  medicine  only  in  exactly  as
small  a dose  as  will  just  sutfice  to  overpower  and
annihilate  the  disease  before  him — in  a dose  of  such
smallness,  that  if  human  weakness  should  betray  him
into  administering  a less  appropriate  medicine,  the
injury  accruing  from  its  nature  being  unsuited  to
the  disease,  will  be  diminished  to  a mere  trifle,  and
this  injury  effected  by  the  smallest  possible  dose  is,
moreover,  much  too  slight,  that  it  may  not  be  im-
mediately extinguished  and  repaired  by  the  natural
power  of  life,  and  by  speedily  opposing  to  it  a remedy
more  suitably  selected  according  to  similarity  of  action
and  given  also  in  the  smallest  dose.

§ CCLXXXIV.

The  action  of  a dose,  moreover,  does  not  diminish
in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  material  medicinal  contents
of  the  dilutions  used  in  homoeopathic  practice.  Eight
drops  of  the  tincture  of  a medicinal  substance  for
a dose  do  not  produce  /bur  times  as  much  effect  on
the  human  body  as  two  drops,  but  only  about  twice
the  effect  that  is  produced  by  two  drops  to  the  dose.
In  like  manner,  one  drop  of  a mixture  of.  a drop  of


328


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


'the  tincture  with  ten  drops  of  some  unmedicinal  fluid,
when  taken,  will  not  produce  ten  times  more  effect
than  a drop  of  a mixture  ten  times  more  attenuated,
but  only  about  (scarcely)  twice  as  strong  an  efiect,  and
so  on,  in  the  same  ratio — so  that  a drop  of  the
highest  dilution  must,  and  really  does,  display  still
a very  considerable  action.^

§ CCLXXXV.

The  diminution  of  the  dose  essential  for  homoeo-
pathic use,  will  also  be  promoted  by  diminishing  its
volume,  so  that,  if,  instead  of  a drop  of  a medicinal
dilution,  we  take  but  quite  a small  part^  of  such  a


* Supposing  one  drop  of  a mixture  that  contains  '/joth  of  a grain  of


medicine  produces  an  effect — a,

one  drop  of  a diluted  mixture  containing  Yiooth  of  a grain  of  the

medicine  will  only  produce  an  effect =

if  it  contain  yio,oootti  of  3-  grain  of  medicine," about  . . . ■ ~
if  it  contain  Yioo.ooo.ooot^  of  a grain  of  medicine,  it  will  produce  an
effect = “/si


and  thus  it  goes  on,  the  volume  of  the  doses  being  equal,  with  every
(perhaps  more  than)  quadratic  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  medi-
cine, the  action  on  the  human  body  wiU  be  diminished  each  time  to
only  about  one  half.  I have  very  often  seen  a drop  of  the  decillioiith
dilution  of  tincture  of  nux  vomica  produce  pretty  nearly  just  half  as
much  effect  as  a drop  of  the  quintilUonth  dilution,  under  the  same
circumstances  and  in  the  same  individual.

“For  this  purpose  it  is  most  convenient  to  employ  fine  sugar
globules  of  the  size  of  poppy  seeds,  one  of  which  imbibed  Avith  the
medicine  and  put  into  the  dispensing  vehicle  constitutes  a medicinal
dose,  which  contains  about  the  three-hundredth  part  of  a drop,  for


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


329


dropj  for  a dose,  the  object  of  diminishing  the  effect
still  further  will  be  very  effectually  attained ; and  that
this  will  be  the  case  may  be  readily  conceived  for  this
reason,  because  with  the  smaller  volume  of  the  dose,
but  few  nerves  of  the  living  organism  can  be  touched,
whereby  the  power  of  the  medicine  is  certainly  also
communicated  to  the  whole  organism,  but  it  is  a
weaker  power.

§ CCLXXXVI.

For  the  same  reason,  the  effect  of  a homoeopathic
dose  of  medicine  increases,  the  greater  the  quantity  of
liquid  in  which  it  is  dissolved  when  administered  to
the  patient,  although  the  actual  amount  of  medicine
remains  the  same.  For  in  this  case,  when  the  medi-
cine is  taken,  it  comes  in  contact  with  a much  larger
surface  of  sensitive  nerves  susceptible  of  the  medicinal
action.  Although  theorists  may  imagine  they  can
observe  a weakening  of  the  action  of  a dose  of  medi-
cine by  its  dilution  with  a large  quantity  of  liquid,
experience  asserts  exactly  the  opposite,  at  all  events,
in  the  homoeopathic  employment  of  medicines.'


three  hundred  such  small  globules  will  be  adequately  moistened  by
one  drop  of  alcohol.  The  dose  is  vastly  diminished  by  laying  one
such  globule  alone  upon  the  tongue  and  giving  nothing  to  drink.
If  it  he  necessary,  in  the  case  of  a very  sensitive  patient,  to  employ
the  smallest  possible  dose  and  to  bring  about  the  most  rapid  result,
one  single  olfaction  merely  will  suffice  (see  note  to  § cclxxxviii).

* It  is  only  the  most  simple  of  aU  excitants,  wine  and  alcohol,
that  have  their  heating  and  intoxicating  action  diminished  by  dilution
with  much  water.


330


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCLXXXVII.

But  there  is  a vast  difference  in  respect  to  the  in-
crease of  action  resulting  from  the  mixture  of  the
dose  of  medicine  with  a large  quantity  of  liquid
before  its  ingestion,  betwixt  this  mixture  of  the
medicine  with  a certain  quantity  of  liquid  in  a
mere  superficial  and  imperfect  manner,  and  doing
this  so  uniformly  and  intimately^  that  the  smallest

By  the  word  intimately  I mean  this : that  when,  for  instance,
the  drop  of  a medicinal  fluid  has  heen  shaken  up  once  with  one
hundred  drops  of  spirits  of  wine,  that  is  to  say,  the  phial  containing
both,  held  in  the  hand,  has  been  rapidly  moved  from  above  down-
wards with  a single  smart  jerk  of  the  arm,  there  certainly  ensues  a
thorough  mixture  of  the  whole,  but  with  two,  three,  ten  and  more
such  strokes,  this  mixtm’e  becomes  much  more  intimate,  tha*t  is  to
say,  the  medicinal  power  becomes  much  more  potentized,  and  the
spirit  of  this  medicine,  so  to  speak,  becomes  much  more  unfolded,
developed  and  rendered  much  more  penetrating  in  its  action  on  the
nerves.  If,  then,  the  object  we  wish  to  attain  in  making  the  high
dilutions  be  the  necessary  diminution  of  the  doses,  for  the  purpose  of
moderating  their  powers  upon  the  organism,  we  would  do  well  to
give  no  more  than  two  such  succussion-jerks  to  each  of  the  twenty
or  thirty  dilution  phials,  and  thus  to  develop  the  medicinal  power  in
but  a moderate  degree.  It  is  also  advisable,  in  attenuating  the
medicine  in  the  state’  of  dry  powder  by  trituration  in  a porcelain
mortar,  to  keep  within  certain  limits,  and,  for  example,  to  tritmate
strongly  for  an  hour  only  one  grain  of  the  crude  entire  medicinal
substance,  mixed  with  the  flrst  hundred  grains  of  milk-sugar,  and
to  triturate  a grain  of  this  mixtm’e  with  another  hundred  grains
of  milk-sugar  (to  the  yio.ooot^  attenuation)  likewise  only  for  one  hour,
and  to  make  the  thud  attenuation  (to  yi, 000,000)  also  by  one  hour  of
strong  trituration  of  a grain  of  the  previous  mixtm’e  with  one  hundred
grains  of  milk  sugar,  in  order  to  bring  the  medicine  to  such  an


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


331


portion  of  the  diluted  fluid  shall  have  received  pro-
portionally the  same  quantity  of  medicine  as  all  the
rest ; for  in  the  latter  case  the  mixture  has  gained
much  more  medicinal  .power  than  in  the  former.
From  this  every  one  will  be  able  to  draw  his  own
inferences,  as  to  how  homoeopathic  medicinal  doses
should  be  prepared  if  it  is  wished  to  diminish  their
medicinal  action  as  much  as  possible,  in  order  to  suit
the  most  sensitive  patients,^

§ CCLXXXVIII.

The  action  of  medicines  in  the  liquid  form^  upon
the  living  human  body  takes  place  in  such  a penetra-
ting manner,  spreads  out  from  the  point  of  the  sensitive


attenuation  that  its  development  of  power  shall  remain  moderate.  A
more  exact  description  of  this  process  will  he  found  in  the  prefaces  of
the  thud  edition  of  the  second  part  of  the  Pure  Materia  Medica,
1833  [and  in  the  first  part  of  the  second  edition  of  the  Chronic
Diseases,  1835].

^ The  higher  we  cany  the  attenuations  accompanied  by  dynamiza-
tion'(hy  two  succussion-strokes),  with  so  much  the  more  rapid  and
penetrating  action  does  the  preparation  seem  to  afiect  the  vital  force
and  to  alter  the  health,  with  hut  slight  diminution  of  strength  even
when  this  operation  is  carried  veiy  far, — in  place,  as  is  usual  (and
generally  sufficient)  to  X,  when  it  is  carried  up  to  XX,  L,  C,  and
higher ; only  that  then  the  action  always  appears  to  last  a shorter  time.

^ It  is  especially  in  the  form  of  vapour,  by  smelling  and  inhaling
the  medicinal  aura  that  is  always  emanating  from  a globule,  impreg-
nated with  a medicinal  fluid  in  a high  development  of  power,  and
placed,  dry,  in  a small  phial,  that  the  homoeopathic  remedies  act  most
surely  and  most  powerfully.  The  homoeopathic  physician  allows  the
patient  to  hold  the  open  mouth  of  the  phial  first  in  one  nostril,  and  in


332


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


fibres  provided  with  nerves  whereto  the  medicine  was
first  applied,  with  such  inconceivable  rapidity  and  so


the  act  of  insphation,  inhale  the  air  otit  of  it,  and  then,  if  it  is  wished
to  give  a stronger  dose,  smell  in  the  same  manner  with  the  other
nostril,  more  or  less  strongly,  accordmg  to  the  strength  it  is  intended
the  dose  should  be;  he  then  corks  up  the  phial  and  replaces  it  in  his
pocket  case,  to  prevent  any  misuse  of  it,  and  unless  he  ivish  it,  he
has  no  occasion  for  an  apothecary’ s assistance  in  his  practice.  A
globule,  of  which  ten,  twenty  or  one  hundred  weigh  a grain,  impreg-
nated with  the  thirtieth  potentized  dilution,  and  then  dried,  retains
for  this  purpose  all  its  power  undiminished  for  at  least  eighteen  or
twenty  years  (my  experience  extends  this  length  of  time),  even
though  the  phial  be  opened  a thousand  times  during  that  period,  if  it
be  but  protected  from  heat  and  the  sun’s  light.  Should  both  nostrils
be  stopped  up  by  coryza  or  polypus,  the  patient  should  inhale  by
the  mouth,  holding  the  orifice  of  the  phial  betwixt  his  lips.  In  little
children  it  may  be  applied  close  to  their  nostrils  whilst  they  are
asleep,  with  the  certainty  of  producing  an  effect.  The  medicinal
aura  thus  inhaled  comes  in  contact  with  the  nerves  seated  in  the
walls  of  the  spacious  cavities  it  traverses  VTithout  obstruction,  and
thus  produces  a salutary  influence  on  the  vital  force,  in  the  mildest
yet  most  powerful  manner,  and  this  is  much  preferable  to  every  other
mode  of  administering  the  medicament  in  substance  by  the  mouth.
All  that  homcEopathy  is  at  all  capable  of  curing  (and  what  can  it  not
cure  beyond  the  domain  of  mere  manual  surgical  aflections  ?)  among
excessively  chronic  diseases  that  have  not  been  quite  ruined  by  allo-
pathy, as  also  among  acute  diseases,  will  be  most  safely  and  certainly
cured  by  this  mode  of  olfaction.  I can  scaixely  name  one  in  a
hundred  out  of  the  many  patients  that  have  sought  the  advice  of
myself  and  my  assistant,  dmring  the  past  year,  whose  chronic  or
acute  disease  we  have  not  treated  with  the  most  happy  results,  solely
by  means  of  this  olfaction ; dm’ing  the  latter  half  of  this  year,  more-
over, I have  become  convinced  (of  what  I never  could  previously


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE,


333


universally  through  all  parts  of  the  living  body,  that
this  action  of  the  medicine  must  be  denominated  a
spiritual  (a  dynamic,  virtual)  action.

§ CCLXXXIX.

Every  part  of  our  body  that  possesses  the  sense  of
toucli,  is  also  capable  of  receiving  the  influence
of  medicines,  and  of  propagating  their  power  to  all
other  parts.^

§ ccxc.

Besides  the  stomach,  the  tongue  and  the  mouth
are  the  parts  most  susceptible  to  the  medicinal  in-
fluences ; but  the  interior  of  the  nose  is  more  espe-
cially so,*  and  the  rectum,  the  genitals,  as  also  all
particularly  sensitive  parts  of  the  body  are  almost
equally  capable  of  receiving  the  medicinal  action,
hence  also,  parts  that  are  destitute  of  skin,  wounded
or  ulcerated  spots  permit  the  powers  of  medicines  to
exercise  almost  as  penetrating  an  action  upon  the
organism,  as  if  the  medicine  had  been  taken  by  the
mouth,  or  rather  by  olfaction  and  inhalation.


have  believed)  that  by  this  mode  of  olfaction  the  power  of  the  medi-
cine is  exercised  upon  the  patient  in,  at  least,  the  same  degree  of
strength,  and  that  more  quietly  and  yet  just  as  long,  as  when  the  dose
of  medicine  is  taken  by  the  mouth,  and  that,  consequently,  the  intervals
at  which  the  olfaction  should  be  repeated  should  not  he  shorter,
than  in  the  ingestion  of  the  material  dose  by  the  mouth.

^ A patient  even  destitute  of  the  sense  of  smell  may  expect  an
equally  perfect  action  and  cure  from  the  medicine  by  olfaction.


334


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


§ CCXCI.

Even  those  organs  which  have  lost  their  peculiar
sense,  e.g.  a tongue  and  palate  that  have  lost  the
faculty  of  tasting,  or  a nose  that  has  lost  the  faculty
of  smelling,  impart  the  power  of  the  medicine  that
acts  immediately  on  them  alone,  in  undiminished
perfection  to  all  the  other  organs  of  the  body.

§ CCXCII.

Even  the  external  surface  of  the  body,  covered  as  it
is  with  skin  and  epidermis,  is  not  unfitted  for  receiving
the  impression  of  the  powers  of  medicine^,  especially
when  they  are  used  in  a liquid  state,  but  the  most
sensitive  parts  are  also  the  most  susceptible.^

§ CCXCIII.

It  only  now  remains  for  me  to  touch  upon  the
subject  of  animal  magnetism,  as  it  is  termed,  or  rather


^ Rubbing-in  appears  to  favour  the  action  of  the  medicines  only  in
this  way,  that  the  friction  makes  the  skin  more  sensitive,  and  the
living  fibres  thereby  more  capable  of  feeling,  as  it  were,  the  medicinal
power,  and  of  communicating  to  the  whole  organism  this  health-affecting
sensation.  The  previous  employment  of  friction  to  the  inside  of  the
thigh  makes  the  mere  laying  on  of  the  mercurial  ointment  afterwards
quite  as  powerfully  medicinal,  as  if  the  ointment  itself  had  been
ruhbed  upon  that  part,  a process  which  is  termed  ruhhing-in,  but  it
is  very  doubtful  whether  or  no  the  metal  itself  can  penetrate  in  sub-
stance into  the  interior  of  the  body,  or  be  taken  up  by  the  ahsorhent
vessels  by  means  of  this  so-called  rubhing-in.  Homoeopathy,  how-
ever, never  requires  for  its  cures  the  ruhhing-in  of  any  medicine,  nor
does  it  need  any  mercurial  ointment.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


335


of  mesmerism  (as  it  should  be  called,  out  of  gratitude
to  Mesmer  its  first  founder),  which  differs  so  much  in
its  nature  from  all  other  therapeutic  agents.  This
curative  power,  often  so  stupidly  denied,  which  streams
upon  a patient  by  the  contact  of  a well-intentioned
person  powerfully  exerting  his  will,  either  acts  homoeo-
pathically,  by  the  production  of  symptoms  similar  to
those  of  the  diseased  state  to  be  cured,  and  for  this
purpose  a single  pass  made,  without  much  exertion  of
the  will,  with  the  palm  of  the  hand,  carried  not  too
closely  from  the  top  of  the  head  downwards  over  the
body  to  the  points  of  the  toes,^  is  serviceable  in,  e.g.
uterine  hsemorrhages,  even  in  the  last  stage  when
death  seems  approaching;  or  it  is  useful  in  distributing
the  vital  force  uniformly  throughout  the  organism,
when  it  is  in  abnormal  excess  in  one  part  and  deficient
in  other  parts,  e.g.  in  congestion  of  blood  to  the


' The  smallest  homoeopathic  dose,  which,  however,  often  effects
wonders  when  used  on  proper  occasions.  Imperfect  homoeopathists,
who  think  themselves  monstrously  clever,  not  unfrequently  deluge
their  patients  in  difficult  diseases  with  doses  of  different  medicines,
given  rapidly  one  after  the  other,  which,  although  they  may  have
been  homoeopathically  selected  and  given  in  highly  potentized  dilu-
tions, bring  the  patients  into  such  an  over-excited  state,  that  life  and
death  are  struggling  for  the  masteiy,  and  the  least  additional  quantity
of  medicine  would  infallibly  kill  them.  In  this  case  a gentle  mesmeric
pass  and  the  frequent  application,  for  a short  time,  of  the  hand  of  a
well-intentioned  person  to  the  part  that  is  particularly  affected,  pro-
duces the  harmonious  uniform  distribution  of  the  vital  force  through-
out the  organism,  and  thereby  brings  about  rest,  sleep  and  recoveiy.


336


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


head,  and  sleepless  anxious  restlessness  of  weakly
persons,  &c.,  by  means  of  a similar,  single,  but  some-
what stronger  pass;  or  for  immediately  communicating
the  full  complement  of  the  vital  force  to  some  one
weakened  part,  or  to  the  whole  organism, — an  object
that  cannot  be  attained  so  certainly  and  with  so  little
interference  with  the  other  medicinal  treatment  by
any  other  agent  besides  mesmerism.  If  it  is  wished  to
supply  a single  part  with  the  vital  force,  this  is
elfected  by  concentrating  a very  powerful  and  well-
intentioned  will  for  the  purpose,  and  placing  the
hands  or  points  of  the  fingers  on  the  chronically
weakened  parts,  whither  an  internal  chronic  disease
has  transferred  its  important  local  symptom,  as,  for
example,  in  the  case  of  old  ulcers,  amaurosis,  paralysis
of  certain  limbs,  &c.^  Many  rapid  apparent  cures
performed  in  all  ages,  by  mesmerisers  endowed
with  great  natural  power,  belong  to  this  class.
The  effect  of  communicated  human  power  upon
the  whole  human  organism  was  most  brilliantly
shewn,  in  the  resuscitation  of  persons  who  had  lain


^ Although  by  this  redintegration  of  the  vital  force,  which  ought
to  he  repeated  from  time  to  time,  no  permanent  cure  can  he  effected
in  cases  where,  as  has  been  above  taught,  a general  internal  disease
lies  at  the  root  of  the  old  local  affection,  as  it  always  does,  yet  this
positive  strengthening  and  immediate  satm-ation  with  vital  force
(which  no  more  belongs  to  the  categoiy  of  palliatives  than  does
eating  and  drinking  when  hunger  and  thirst  are  present)  is  no  mean
auxiliary  to  the  actual  treatment  of  the  whole  disease  by  homoeopathic
medicines.


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


337


some  time  apparently  dead,  by  the  most  powerful,
benevolent  will  of  a man  in  the  full  vigour  of  vital
force,'  and  of  this  kind  of  resurrection  history  records
many  undeniable  examples.

§ CCXCIV.

All  the  above-mentioned  methods  of  practising
mesmerism  depend  upon  an  influx  of  more  or  less
vital  force  into  the  patient,  and  hence  are  termed
positive  mesmerism.^  An  opposite  mode  of  employing
mesmerism,  however,  as  it  produces  just  the  contrary
effect,  deserves  to  be  termed  negative  mesmerism.
To  this  belong  the  passes  which  are  used  to  rouse


* Especially  of  one  of  those  men,  of  whom  there  are  not  many,
Avho,  along  with  great  goodness  of  disposition  and  perfect  bodily
powers,  possess  hut  a very  moderate  desire  for  sexual  intercourse,
which  it  would  give  them  very  little  trouble  wholly  to  suppress,  in
whom,  consequently,  all  the  fine  vital  spirits  that  would  otherwise  he
employed  in  the  preparation  of  the  semen,  are  ready  to  be  communi-
cated to  other  individuals,  by  touching  them  and  powerfully  exerting
the  will.  Some  of  these  powerful  mesmerisers,  with  whom  I have
become  acquainted,  had  all  this  peculiar  character.

“ When  I here  speak  of  the  decided  and  certain  curative  power  of
positive  mesmerism,  I most  assuredly  do  not  mean  that  abuse  of  it,,
where,  by  repeated  passes  of  this  kind,  continued  for  half  an  hour  or
a whole  hour  at  a time,  and  even  day  after  day,  performed  on  iveak,
nervous  patients,  that  monstrous  revolution  of  the  whole  human
system  is  effected,  which  is  termed  somnambulism,  wherein  the
human  being  is  ravished  from  the  world  of  sense  and  seems  to
belong  more  to  the  world  of  spirits — a highly  unnatural  and  dan-
gerous state,  by  means  of  which  it  has  not  unfrequently  been
attenqjted  lo  cure  chronic  diseases.


338


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


from  the  state  of  somnambulism,  as  also  all  the  manual
processes  known  by  the  names  of  soothing  and  venti-
lating. This  discharge  of  the  vital  force  accumulated
to  excess  in  individual  parts  of  the  system  of  unde-
bilitated persons  by  means  of  negative  mesmerism,  is
most  surely  and  simply  performed  by  making  a very
rapid  motion  of  the  flat  extended  hand,  held  parallel
to,  and  about  an  inch  distant  from  the  body,  from  the
top  of  the  head  to  the  points  of  the  toes.^  The  more
rapidly  this  pass  is  made,  so  much  the  more  effectually
will  the  discharge  he  effected.  Thus,  for  instance,  in
the  case  where  a previously  healthy  woman, ^ from  the
sudden  suppression  of  her  catamenia  by  a violent
mental  shock,  lies  to  all  appearance  dead,  the  vital
force  which  is  probably  accumulated  in  the  precordial
region,  will,  by  such  a rapid  negative  pass,  be  dis-
charged, and  its  equilibrium  throughout  the  whole
organism  restored,  so  that  the  resuscitation  follows
immediately.^  InTike  manner,  a gentle,  less  rapid,

' It  is  a well  known  rule  that  a person  who  is  either  to  he  posi-
tively or  negatively  mesmerised,  should  not  wear  silk  on  any  part  of
the  body.

• ^ Hence  a negative  pass,  especially  if  it  he  very  rapid,  is  extremely
injurious  to  a delicate  person  affected  with  a chronic  ailment  and
deficient  in  vital  force.

^ A strong  country  lad,  ten  years  of  age,  received  in  the  morning,
on  account  of  slight  indisposition,  from  a professed  female  mesmeriser,
several  very  powerful  passes  with  the  points  of  the  thumbs,  from  the
pit  of  the  stomach  along  the  lower  edge  of  the  ribs,  and  he  instantly
grew  deathly  pale,  and  fell  into  such  a state  of  unconsciousness  and
immobility,  that  no  effort  could  arouse  him,  and  he  was  almost  given


ORGANON  OF  MEDICINE.


339


negative  pass  diminishes  the  excessive  restlessness
and  sleeplessness  accompanied  with  anxiety  sometimes
produced  in  very  irritable  persons  by  a too  powerful
positive  pass,'  &c.


up  for  dead.  I made  his  eldest  brother  give  him  a very  rapid
negative  pass  from  the  crown  of  the  head  over  the  body  to  the  feet,
and  in  one  instant  he  recovered  his  consciousness,  became  lively  and
well.


THE  END.


COERIGENDA.

Page  133,  lines  3 and  5j/o?*  agencies,  read  agents.

. Page  206,  note,  line  6, /or  qui  calor,  read  quis  calor.

While  these  sheets  were  passing  through  the  press,  the  translator’s  time
and  attention  were  much  occupied  by  other  matters ; this  must  be  his
apology  for  the  following  errata,  which  he  requests  the  reader  to  correct.

■Page  14,  line  5 from  top, /or  aneimysm,  read  ancmusm.

Page  107,  line  3 from  bottom, /or  Lebell.,  read  Libell.

Page  165,  line  5 from  bottom,  after  depend,  insert  is  shewn  by.

Page  243,  Ene  3 from  top,  for  of  two  medicines,  read  of  the  two
medicines.


W.  Davy  & Son,  Pkinters,  8,  Gilberx  Street,  Oxtord  Street.


0,


'■  A:


/


,-y


PREPARING  FOR  THE  PRESS.

SYSTEMATIC  ARRANGEMENT  AND  ANALYSIS

OF  THE

PURE  EFFECTS  OF  ALL  HOMOEOPATHIC  REMEDIES.

Part.  I. — Containing  the  Moral,  Mental,  and  Head  Symptoms.

By  R.  E.  Dudgeon,  M.D.

Published  by  the  Honueopathic  Publishing  Society — Hon.  Sec.,  Dr.  C.  B.  Ker,
Cambray,  Cheltenham.

ALSO,

HAHNEMANN’S  LESSER  WRITINGS.

Collected  and  Edited  by  R.  E.  Dudgeon,  M.D.

London: — W.  Headland,  15,  Princes-street,  Hanover-square.

ALSO,

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  CHOLERA  OF  1848^9.

By  J.  Rutherfurd  Russell,  M.D.

London: — W.  Headland,  15,  Princes-street,  Hanover-square.

'Price  Four  Shillings  and  Sixpence.

INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  HOMEOPATHY.

Edited  by  Dr.  Drysdale  and  Dr.  Russell.

London: — W.  Headland,  15,  Princes-street,  Hanover-square.  '

ELEMENTS  OF  GENERAL  PATHOLOGY.

By  the  late  Dr.  John  Fletcher,

Edited  by  Dr.  Drysdale  and  Dr.  Russell.

Edinburgh : — Maclachlan  and  Stewart.


THE  BEITISH  JOUENAL  OF  HOKEOPATHY.

Published  Quarterly,  price  Four  Shillings.

Edited  by  Dr.  Drysdale,  Dr.  Russell,  and  Dr.  Dudgeon.

Six  Volumes  have  already  appeared — price  of  each  Vol.,  Sixteen  Shillings.
• London : — S.  Highley,  32,  Fleet-street.


1


WILLIAM  HEADLAND,

15,  PRINCES.  STREET,  HANOVER  SQUARE


From  whom  may  be  had  all  the  Homoeopathic  Medicines,  prepai’ed
with  the  greatest  care,  and  by  himself  solely,  which  have  long
enjoyed  the  confidence  of  Homoeopathic  Practitioners  at  home  and
abroad.

Cases  neatly  fitted  up  with  medicines  corresponding  to  all  the
Domestic  Works,  constantly  on  hand.  Tinctm-e  of  Arnica,  of  Rhus,
of  Calendula,  Arnica  Opodeldoc,  Homoeopathic  Pomatum,  and
Homoeopathic  Toothpowder,  Cocoa  and  Chocolate.


HOMCEOPATHIC  WORKS,

PUBLISHED  BY

William  Headland,  15,  Princes  Street,  Hanover  Square.


ALIQUIS.  A letter  illustrating  the  illustrations  of  the  fraud  and  folly  of
Homoeopathy.  By  Jonathan  Toogood.  Price  Is.

ARNICA  AND  RHUS ; with  directions  for  their  use  in  Mechanical
Injui'ies  and  in  other  atFections.  Price  Is.

BLACK,  (F.,  M.D.)  The  Homoeopathic  Treatment  of  Cholera.  8vo.
1847.  Is.

CHEPMELL,  (E.  C.,  M.D.)  Homoeopathic  Guide,  with  twelve  reme-
dies. Is.

DUDGEON,  (R.  E.,  M.D.)  The. Homoeopathic  Treatment  and  Preven-
tion of  the  Asiatic  Cholera.  Is.  Qd.

EDINBURGH.  A Report  of  the  Homoeopathic  Treatment  of  Asiatic
Cholera.  Zd.

GUINNESS,  (A.,  M.D.)  A Lecture  on  Homoeopathy.  Qd.


HAMILTON,  (E.,  M.D.)  A short  history  of  the  Cholera,  with  hints  as

to  its  prevention  by  Homoeopathic  treatment.  &d.

HOMOEOPATHIC  MANUAL ; containing  hints  for  domestic  practice.

Is.

KIDD,  (J.,  M.R.C.S.)  Homoeopathy  in  Acute  Diseases.  Is.
MANUAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  COOKERY,  by  the  Wife  of  a
Homceopathie  Physician.  3s.  6d.

NORTON,  (J.E.,  M.D.)  A brief  attempt  to  shew  the  truth  and  value  of

Homoeopathy.  2d.

IN  THE  PRESS.

A PRACTICAL  COMPANION  TO  HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.
THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  USE  OF  THE  HUMAN  HAIR.

By  Dr.  G.  Calvert  Holland.


In  addition  to  the  above  Works,  of  which  he  is  the  Publisher,  Mr.  Headland
has  also  on  hand  a variety  of  books  of  Homoeopathic  literature,  among  which  are —

BELLUOMINI,  (J.,  M.D.)  Scarlatina;  its  Treatment  Homoeo-
pathically.  8v.  Is.  London,  1843.

BCENNINGHAUSEN.  Manual  of  Homceopathic  Therapeutics,
. intended  as  a Guide  to  the  Study  of  Materia  Medica  Pura.  Translated,
with  Additions,  by  T.  Laurie,  M.D.  8vo.  1848.  12s.

BLACK.  A Treatise  on  the  Principles  of  Homceopathy.  8vo.
London,  1842.  9s.

CHEPMELL.  A Domestic  Homceopathy,  Restricted  to  its  Legi-
timate Sphere  of  Practice  ; together  with  Rules  for  Diet  and  Regimen.
18mo.  London,  1848.  4s.  6d.

CURIE,  (P.  F.,  M.D.)  Practice  of  Homceopathy.  1 vol.  8vo.  6s.
London,  1838.

Domestic  Homceopathy.  5s.

Principles  of  Homoeopathy.  1 vol.  8vo.  5s.  London,  1837.

DUNSFORD,  (HARRIS.)  The  Pathogenetic  Effects  of  some
OF  THE  Principal  Hom(eopathic  Remedies.  8vo.  9s.  London.  1838.


The  Peactical  Advantages  of  Homceopathy,  illustrated  by
numerous  Cases.  Dedicated,  by  permission  to  Her  Majesty,  Queen  Adelaide.

1 vol.  8vo.  8s.  boards.  1841.

EVEREST,  (T.  R.)  A Popular  View  of  Homceopathy  ; exhibit-
ing the  Present  State  of  the  Science.  2nd  Edition,  amended  and  much
enlarged.  8vo.  6s.  London,  1836.

A Letter  addressed  to  the  Medical  Practitioners  of  Great  Britain  on
the  Subject  of  Homoeopathy.  8vo.  Is.  6d.  London,  1834.

GUNTHER.  New  Manual  of  Homoeopathic  Veterinary  Medi-
cine; or,  the  Homceopathic  Treatment  of  the  Horse,  the  Ox,  the  Dog,  and
other  Domestic  Animals.  Translated  from  the  3rd  German  Edition,  with
considerable  Additions  and  Improvements.  Post  8vo.  10s.  6cl.  cloth.  Lon-
don, 1847.

JAHR.  Manual  of  Homceopathic  Medicine.  In  2 Parts.  Part  1. —
Materia  Medica.  Part  II. — Therapeutical  and  Symptomatological
Repository.  Translated  from  the  4th  Edition,  and  Edited,  with  Additions,
by  P.  F.  Curie,  M.D.  2 vols.  8vo.  11.  12s.  London,  1847.

HAMILTON.  A Guide  to  the  Practic?e  of  Homceopathy.
Translated  and  compiled,  in  alphabetical  order,  from  the  German  of  RuofF,
Haas,  and  Ruckert,  with  Additions.  12mo.  5s.  Leipzig,  1844.

HAYLE.  An  Address  on  the  Homceopathic  System  of  Medi-
cine. 8vo.  Is.  1843.

HERING  (of  Philadelphia).  The  Homceopathist  ; or  Domestic  Phy-
sician. 2nd  Edition.  12mo.  7s.  London,  1845.

LAURIE  (M.D.)  Homceopathic  Domestic  Medicine.  4th  Edition, _
12mo.  12s.  London,  1847.

Elements  of  Homceopathic  Practice  of  Physic.  8vo.  I6s.


Epitome  of  the  Homceopathic  Domestic  Medicine.  12mo.  5s.
NEWMAN  (GEORGE.)  Homceopathic  Family  Assistant.  Second
Edition.  1847.  5s.

A Concise  Exposition  of  Homceopathy  ; its  Principles  and  Prac-
tice, with  an  Appendix.  Is.  6d.

SIMPSON  (M.D.)  Practical  View  of  Homceopathy.  8vo.
10s.  6il.  London,  1836.

SAMPSON,  (M.  B.)  The  Progress  of  Homoeopathy.  5s.


YELDHAM,  (S.,  M.R.C.S.)  Homoeopathy  in  Acute  Diseases. ^^..  6c(.


1847.


Truths  and  their  Reception  considered  in  relation


to  the  doctrine  of  Homoeopathy.  5s.  6d.


T'  .


. »,■-■/''■  - ' ->>

V'.  ••■•?•••».


;'i»l7VZ' ».


.-.VSJ


■


' ifi  '.'


'^f»;>is  ‘-li.*  tXO  tH.'"'

‘ , ■ .tKIOJ.  .tIS’I*.' v>  ■'^"  CV"»  ?:■  ' 'f'


■

•»


, '■-•.ty.-’i  .thfK'V’.-'  ;■


i


■ i’'

,J|j^  «

Jij'i'v-  . ’ Z •:i^'  V ■ -. I, ri  ‘"'

' ‘ ■''  . ..  . ^

''  .4*  . .U'-rt(v8  iijpr-^'  'M,,?/

V.  (i  />o  .»vV|t>^Si»T  ^ yv-jrWiAV/


•f’  \ ,/  Mn  ,.a,


..VI  .'‘.'Vi  i-‘  ,'«V:


. r/  i>>'i'  .'',;c


elS'i  ,^i''Lr'


. '',i?f --.’i


;X.i  ' -r;i.^K'


-j;^'


■l'


:i,  • - ' i Itt-i.

, , * ’ *»>3  pi^'

i*  .4'>,  p” '■‘•^ijosoaioi'-i


