The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, Vol. I
Samuel Hahnemann
The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, vol. I. Translated by Charles J. Hempel. Philadelphia: Dobson, 1845.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b29326515_0001).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

\\\X


)-  ,
0


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2017  with  funding  from
. Wellcome  Library


/

I


4


\


I


N.


✓


i


V


V


I


THE


CHRONIC  DISEASES:

THEIR

SPECIFIC  NATURE


HOMOEOPATHIC  TREATMENT.

B Y

Dr.  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.


TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED

B Y

CHARLES  J.  HEMPEL,  M.D.


WITH  A PREFACE

By  CONSTANTINE  HERING,  M.D.


NE  W-YORK:

WM.  RADDE,  3 2 2 BROADWAY,


18  4 5


^rCul

A


a


4j\

A


\

^ISTOFUCA*-  |


Entered  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1845,  ij
WILLIAM  R A D D E ,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  th®  District  Coart  for  the  Southern  District  of  New-York.


H.  1UDWI8,  P B I N T 3 St,

70  & 73,  Veaey-streat.


TO  T H K


HOMOEOPATHIC  PHYSICIANS


O F

THESE  UNITED  STATES,


This  is  the  first  English  translation  which  has  ever  appeared
of  Hahnemann’s  Chronic  Diseases.  It  is  needless  to  inquire
why  this  admirable  volume  which  incloses  so  many  important
truths,  the  proper  knowledge  and  appreciation  of  which  is  in-
dispensable to  the  homoeopathic  practitioner,  should  never  have
before  appeared  in  an  English  dress.  As  this  omission  cannot
have  originated  in  indifference  on  the  part  of  Hahnemann’s  dis-
ciples, the  presumption  is  either  that  those  few  homoeopathic
physicians  who  are  really  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Hahnemann’s
doctrine,  have  been  prevented  by  the  pressure  of  business  from
undertaking  the  translation  of  this  work,  or  else,  that  they  were
not  sufficiently  conversant  with  both  the  German  and  the  En-
glish languages,  to  accomplish  such  a translation  to  their  perfect
satisfaction.

But  for  the  admirable  truths  which  Hahnemann  points  out  in
this  volume,  it  probably  would  never  be  read  in  German.  Hahne-
mann’s phraseology  is  so  involved,  and  bears  so  little  resemblance
to  the  usual  modes  of  constructing  periods,  either  in  German  or


iv


translator’s  preface.


any  other  language,  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  furnish  a bare
translation  of  Hahnemann’s  writings.  There  is  but  one  way
of  turning  them  into  another  language  ; this  is,  first,  to  master
the  sense  of  a period,  and  afterwards  to  embody  it  in  the  foreign
tongue  in  a free  manner.  This  is  the  course  which  I have  pur-
sued in  translating  this  volume.  I have  not  translated  words
but  ideas.  And  the  ideas  I have  rendered  fully  and  faithfully  :
on  this  head  I challenge  criticism.

Of  the  merits  of  Hahnemann’s  theory  of  chronic  diseases,  I
have  nothing  to  say.  It  is  not  received  with  the  same  unbound-
ed confidence  by  all  homoeopathic  practitioners  ; but  I venture  to
say  that  its  general  principles  are  fully  admitted  by  all  those  who
have  a true  perception  of  the  spirit  of  the  homoeopathic  doctrine.

It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  should
be  fully  understood  as  long  as  our  knowledge  of  the  nature  and
operations  of  the  vital  principle  is  deficient.  Hahnemann’s  con-
ception of  the  action  of  the  homoeopathic  drug  was  altogether
vague,  incomplete,  and  even  erroneous.  My  own  conception  of
the  homoeopathic  doctrine  I have  brought  before  the  profession
in  my  inaugural  thesis.  It  is  substantially  as  follows  ; and  I
wish  it  to  be  understood  that  I give  it  not  as  a mere  speculation,
but  as  a demonstration , so  far,  that  is  to  say,  as  any  physical
truth  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge*

Inductive  reasoning  leads  us  necessarily  to  the  admission  of
two  orders  of  creative  forces,  one  of  which  may  be  designated
by  the  term  harmonic , the  other  by  the  term  subversive.  The
harmonic  forces,  by  their  action  upon  matter,  produce  those  sub-
stances, animals,  plants,  and  minerals,  which  are  necessary  to
the  development  of  the  harmonious  or  healthy  organism  ; the
subversive  forces,  on  the  contrary,  are  those  forces  which  pro-
duce the  substances  adapted  to  the  organism  in  disturbance,  and
destined  to  restore  it  to  its  original  conditions  of  health.  Both
those  forces,  by  their  action  upon  matter,  embody  themselves  in


translator’s  preface.


y


visible  forms,  each  form  representing-  or  typifying  a peculiar  va-
riety of  those  forces.  The  types  or  results  which  those  forces
create  by  their  action  upon  matter,  are  united  to  those  forces  by
that  same  indivisible  bond  which  unites  the  effect  to  its  cause.

The  idea  of  a machine,  and  the  machine  itself,  though  they
seem  to  be  two  distinct  thing's,  are  nevertheless  united  to  each
other  in  such  an  indivisible  manner  as  to  make  it  utterly  impossi-
ble to  think  of  one  separately  from  the  other.  The  idea  will
at  once  call  up  the  machine,  and  on  viewing  the  machine,  you
are  involuntarily  reminded  of  the  idea.  The  existence  of  a bond
uniting  effects  to  their  causes,  cannot  be  denied,  although  the  na-
ture of  that  bond  may  be  totally  unknown.

So  far  I have  shown  the  existence  of  subversive  creative  forces
and  their  subversive  results,  these  latter  being  indivisibly  united  to
the  former.  These  results  are  the  natural  bases,  or  forms,  or  or-
ders of  existence  of  those  forces.  The  embodying  of  those
forces  in  their  natural  physical  forms  is  effected  according  to  or-
der. But  it  often  happens  that  those  forces,  instead  of  acting
upon  or  embodying  themselves  in  matter,  act  upon,  and  try  to
embody  themselves  in  the  animal  organism.  They  then  endea-
vour to  adapt  the  animal  organism  to  their  own  nature.  This
adaptation  can  only  be  completed  by  first  destroying  the  organ-
ism, converting  it  to  formless  matter,,  and  then  impressing  upon
this  formless  matter  their  own  creative  energy.

It  is  evident  that  the  animal  organism  is  not  the  type  or  natu-
ral order  of  existence  of  those  subversive  forces.  Hence  there
is  no  bond  of  union  between  these  forces  and  the  organism,  and
it  must  be  possible  to  separate  them.  As  the  invasion  of  the
organism  by  those  forces  and  their  attempts  at  adapting  the  or-
ganism to  themselves  constitute  disease,  so  does  the  separation
of  those  forces  from  the  organism  constitute  the  cure  of  that  disease.
The  question  then  is,  how  are  those  forces  to  be  separated  from
the  organism  1


yi


translator’s  preface.


The  answer  to  this  question  is  perfectly  simple  and  self-evi-
dent. We  introduce  into  the  organism  the  natural  types  or  forms
of  existence  of  that  variety  of  subversive  forces  which  has  in-
vaded the  organism.  These  types  being  united  to  the  forces  by
that  indivisible  bond  which  I have  shown  to  exist  between  effects
and  their  causes,  the  disease  will,  of  its  own  accord,  and  with
readiness,  leave  the  organism  which  is  not  its  natural  product  or
type,  and  embody  itself  in  its  natural  type  which  is  the  medici-
nal substance.  How  this  embodying  takes  place  is  to  be  shown
by  the  farther  progress  of  science.  It  is  probable  that  the  typi-
cal substance  acts  upon  the  subversive  force  with  a power  of  at-
traction. The  subversive  force  flows  into  or  converges  in  the  me-
dicinal substance  which  is  its  type.  In  the  same  way  do  the
sun’s  rays  converge  in  the  focus  of  a burning-glass,  does  the
magnetic  sphere  of  this  globe  converge  in  the  point  of  a needle
and  its  attractive  force  act  upon  the  smallest  molecule.  In  order
to  find  out  what  medicinal  substance  is  typical  of  any  given  va-
riety of  the  subversive  forces,  we  must,  in  the  first  place  try  to
discover  the  symptoms  of  the  diseases  which  are  embodied  in  the
various  medicinal  substances.  For  this  purpose  we  try  them
upon  the  healthy  organism.  The  symptoms  which  are  thus
evoked  in  the  organism  are  indications  of  the  effects  which  a
certain  order  of  subversive  forces  is  capable  of  producing  in  the
organism.  To  the  medicinal  substances  producing  those  symp-
toms, this  certain  order  of  subversive  forces  is  therefore  related  as
causes  are  to  their  effects,  and  as  soon  as  they  are  brought  in  con-
tact with  each  other,  they  become  indissolubly  united,  the  disease
becomes  a mere  material  point,  and  is  separated  from  the  organ-
ism in  perfect  freedom,  and  what  is  essential,  in  perfect  order.

So  far  my  conception  of  the  homoeopathic  doctrine,  in  its
general  nature  at  least,  amounts  to  a demonstration.  But  now
the  question  occurs  : by  what  process,  in  what  manner  does  the
invasion  of  the  organism  by  the  subversive  forces  take  place  and


translator’s  preface.  vii

is  disease  constituted  1 Here,  I confess,  science  leaves  us  al-
together, and  any  attempt  at  solving  this  problem,  must  neces-
sarily be  speculative  reasoning.

One  thing  however  is  yet  sufficiently  dear;  it  is  this,  that  the
human  organism  cannot  be  invaded  by  disease  unless  it  has  first
undergone  a process  of  adaptation  to  the  nature  of  a certain
order  of  the  subversive  forces.  An  indigestion,  for  instance,  can
only  take  place,  when  the  original  harmony  or  equilibrium  of  the
organism  has  been  interfered  with  by  substances  having  been
introduced  which  are  not  adapted  to  the  organism,  or  by  those
substances  having  been  introduced  in  too  large  a quantity  or  at
improper  hours.  What  is  termed  indigestion,  is  therefore  the
effects  of  a peculiar  order  of  subversive  forces  acting  upon  the
organism  existing  in  a peculiar  state  of  preparatory  adaptation.
It  is  so  with  every  other  disease.  Disease  is  the  totality  of  the
effects  by  vjkich  we  recognise  or  'perceive  the  action  of  a peculiar
order  of  subversive  forces  upon  an  organism  which  has  been  ex-
ceptionally or  specially  adapted  to,  or  prepared  for  their  reception.

Hahnemann’s  theory  of  Chronic  diseases  corresponds  exactly
with  my  conception  of  the  homoeopathic  doctrine.  The  itch-
vesicle,  the  chancre,  and  the  cauliflower  excrescence,  are  vicarious
embodiments  of  some  internal  disease,  in  a similar  way  as  the
homoeopathic  medicinal  substance  is  the  external  visible  type
or  embodiment  of  the  internally  acting  subversive  forces.  There
is  this  difference  between  that  vicarious  embodiment  of  the  in-
ternal disease  and  the  homoeopathic  type,  that  the  latter  may  be
introduced  into  the  organism  and  be  again,  by  its  own  choice,
separated  from  it  together  with  the  disease,  whereas  the  vi-
carious embodiment  of  the  internal  disease  is  the  measure  of  the
degree  and  mode  of  adaptation  which  the  subversive  forces
have  accomplished  in  the  organism.  Hence  the  vicarious  em-
bodiment or  symptom  is  a mere  palliative,  whereas  the  ho-
moeopathic type  has  a curative  effect.


Vlll


translator’s  preface.


Hahnemann’s  theory  of  Chronic  diseases  strikes  a death-blow
at  those  violent  modes  of  invading  the  living  organism,  which
are  practised  by  the  allcecpathic  physicians.  The  contents  or
the  secretions  of  an  organ  are  exactly  proportionate  to,  or  are  the
exact  measure  of  the  peculiar  state  of  vitality  of  the  organ.  If
the  organ  be  invaded  by  subversive  forces,  those  contents  or  se-
cretions indicate  the  degree  of  adaptation  existing  between  the
subversive  forces  and  the  organ.  Those  contents  act  as  pal-
liatives inasmuch  as  they  appease  to  a certain  extent  the  fury  of
the  invading  forces.  To  deprive  those  forces  of  results  which
they  claim  as  their  legitimate  property,  would  be  to  excite  them
into  a more  violent  action  and  to  cause  them  to  attack  the  more
delicate  parts  of  the  organism.  I have  explained  this  view  more
fully  in  my  inaugural  thesis  and  in  my  note  on  blood-letting.
Alloeopathic  physicians  and  people  generally  are  inclined  to
believe  that  retching  indicating  a desire  of  vomiting,  or  that  te-
nesmus indicating  a desire  of  going  to  stool,  the  system,  in  both
these  instances,  may  be  and  ought  to  be  relieved  by  an  emetic
or  a cathartic.  To  administer  these  violent  remedial  agents,  is
a foolish  mode  of  relieving  the  system.  Spontaneous  vomiting
or  a spontaneous  evacuation  of  the  intestines  may  afford  relief,
because  they  are  the  natural  terminations  of  a morbid  develop-
ment ; but  those  artificial  evacuations,  though  they  may,  for  ob-
vious reasons,  by  establishing  a.  momentary  counter-irritation
for  example,  be  momentarily  followed  by  a semblance  of  relief,
are  not  natural  terminations  of  a morbid  process,  but  they  are
concussions  of  the  system  taking  place  independently  of  the  ex-
isting invasion  of  the  organism  by  the  subversive  forces.  Retch-
ing and  tenesmus  simply  show  that  the  subversive  forces  have
not  yet  succeeded  in  adapting  the  organism  to  their  own  action,
and  that,  so  far  from  favouring  this  action  by  artificial  means,
the  organism  may  be  the  more  easily  disembarressed  from  it  by
the  homoeopathic  type.


translator’s  preface.


ix

The  conception  which  I have  offered  of  the  homoeopathic  doc-
trine explains  to  a certain  extent  the  rationale  of  the  peculiar
pathic remedial  agents.  The  medicinal  substances  are  material
forms  in  which  the  subversive  forces  have  embodied  their  essence
or  spirit.  That  essence  exists  therefore  in  its  fulness,  though  in
a latent  condition,  in  the  medicinal  substances.  Now,  in  order
that  points  of  contact,  of  attractive  affinity,  may  be  established
between  the  homoeopathic  type  and  the  subversive  forces  which
have  invaded  the  organism,  it  becomes  first  necessary  that  the
medicinal  substance  should,  from  its  material  nature,  be  raised
to  what  Hahnemann  terms  a semi-vital  or  spiritualized  con-
dition. We  know  of  no  better  mode  to  obtain  this  result  than
the  mode  of  trituration  proposed  by  Hahnemann.  To  excite  the
latent  life  or  heat-principle  of  any  known  substance  we  resort  to
friction.  We  draw  fire  from  wood  by  rubbing  one  piece  against
another.  By  friction  we  excite  sparks  from  pebbles.  By  fric-
tion we  excite  the  electric  fluid.  If  any  one  knows  a better
mode  than  Hahnemann’s  of  spiritualizing  the  typical  forms  of
the  forces  productive  of  disease,  let  him  propose  it.  The  sub-
sequent process  of  shaking  is  evidently  analogous  to  the  process
of  trituration.  I believe,  although  I can  only  give  this  as  a
mere  speculation,  that  the  homoeopathic  preparation,  be  it  ad-
ministered in  the  form  of  a globule,  powder,  or  drop,  introduces
into  the  organism  an  intermediate  sphere  of  a semi-spiritual  and
semi-material  nature,  that  the  subversive  forces  flow  into  or  con-
verge in  that  sphere  by  virtue  of  its  attractive  spiritual  power,
and  become  gradually  materialized  by  uniting  themselves  with
the  material  nature  of  the  sphere  ; after  this  process  of  material-
isation is  completed,  the  subversive  forces  leave  the  organism,
together  with  their  type,  in  perfect  freedom,  and,  as  1 said  above,
in  perfect  order .

It  is  evident  from  what  I have  here  advanced  that  the  attractive


X


translator’s  prepack.


spiritual  force  of  the  homoeopathic  preparation  increases  in  pro-
portion as  the  process  of  trituration  is  carried  up  to  a higher  de-
gree. Nevertheless  there  must  be  a limit  beyond  which  the
attractive  spiritual  force  of  the  intermediate  sphere  may  cease  to
act,  on  account  of  being  raised  above  the  spheres  from  which
the  subversive  forces  themselves  emanate.  The  great  difficulty,
it  seems  to  me,  is,  to  discover  the  point,  where  the  attractive
force  of  the  homoeopathic  type  will  exercise  its  due  influence
over  the  subversive  forces  in  the  organism.  Can  this  focus  of
attraction  be  determined  by  experiment  1 Does  it  depend  upon
the  nature  of  the  medicinal  substance  1 Does  it  depend  upon
the  order  in  which  the  subversive  forces  creative  of  disease,  are
related  to  or  super-imposed  upon  each  other  1 Until  questions
like  these  shall  have  been  solved,  we  shall  have  to  depend
greatly  upon  experience  and  careful  observation  for  the  de-
termination of  the  most  adequate  degree  of  potency,  in  which
homoeopathic  preparations  should  be  exhibited  in  any  given  form
of  disease.

And  we  shall  have  especially  to  depend  upon  the  word  of  the
master.

The  recklessness  with  which  many  homoeopathic  practitioners
use  either  low  or  high  potencies,  and  administer  large  or  small
doses,  one,  two,  or  three  drops,  just  as  it  comes,  or  twelve,  eigh-
teen, or  twenty  globules  just  as  they  happen  to  drop  out  of  the
vial,  is  altogether  unpardonable,  and  a species  of  quackery  sui
generis .

There  are  even  homoeopathic  physicians  who  practise  upon
the  principle  that,  if  they  do  not  know  what  remedy  is  homoeo-
pathic to  a disease,  they  give  the  remedy  which  they  suppose  to
be  homoeopathic,  in  a quantity  sufficient  to  make  an  impression
upon  the  system.  Such  horrible  delusions  can  never  blind  the
minds  of  those  who  feel  the  homoeopathic  doctrine  in  their  souls.

I intended  to  have  here  instituted  a sort  of  inquiry  into  the


translator’s  preface.


XI


scientific  character  of  Hahneman’s  theory  of  the  chronic  miasm
The  results  of  my  inquiry  I shall  communicate  on  some  other
occasion.  Such  an  inquiry  is  necessarily  connected  with  an
inquiry  into  the  whole  physiological  and  psychological  nature  of
man,  and  this  preface  is  already  too  long  to  admit  of  any  more
space  being  devoted  to  farther  considerations.  I therefore  take
leave  of  the  reader,  and  trust,  that  this  little  volume  may
prove  acceptable  to  the  veneration  which  he  doubtless  feels  for
the  great  author  of  homoeopathy.


New-Ygrk,  April,  1845.


Charles  J«  Hempel,  M.D.


Mr.  Radde  takes  this  opportunity  of  informing  the  Profession,  and  those
persons  generally  who  are  friendly  to  Homoeopathy,  that  the  publication  of
the  present  volume  will  be  immediately  succeeded  by  that  of  the  anti-psoric
remedies,  the  first  series  of  which,  comprising  “ agaricus  muscarius,  am-
monium carbonicum,  ammonium  muriaticum,  anacardium,  baryta,  borax,
calcarea  carbonica,”  is  now  in  the  press,  and  will  be  for  sale  at  Mr.  Radde’s
book-store  on  the  15th  of  June  next.

The  anti-psoric  remedies  acquire  an  additional  interest  from  the  fact  that
Hahnemann  himself  has  pointed  out  the  diseases  in  which  every  anti-psoric
remedy  has  been  found  most  eminently  useful.

On  the  first  of  August  next  will  appear  the  first  series  of  the  remedies
constituting  Hahnemann’s  Materia  Medica  Pura.  This  series  will  comprise
belladonna,  pulsatilla,  and  arnica.  If  it  is  at  all  probable  that  the  expenses
of  the  publication  of  this  great  work  will  be  covered,  no  efforts  will  be
spared  to  secure  it  as  speedy  a termination  as  is  consistent  with  the  great
care  which  the  translation  of  Hahnemann’s  writings  demands.  Every  ad-
mirer of  Honrceopathy  should  possess  himself  of  Hahnemann’s  materia
medica,  as  the  greatest  monument  of  his  genius  and  perseverance.

The  translation  of  this  work  will  be  achieved  by  Dr.  Hempel,  who  is  in-
timately acquainted  with  all  the  idioms  and  peculiarities  of  the  German
language,  and  will  give  a correct  translation  of  every  symptom  contained  in
Hahnemann’s  Materia  Medica.  No  one  but  a German  scholar  is  competent
to  translate  homoeopathic  works  from  the  German.

All  those  who  feel  disposed  to  procure  Hahnemann’s  great  wrork,  are  re-
spectfully requested  to  signify  their  intentions  to  Mr.  Radde,  so  that  he  may
be  able  to  calculate  the  probable  chances  of  his  enterprise,  and  carry  it  out
with  proportionate  energy.

Every  series,  of  about  200  pages  each,  w ill  be  paid  for  in  proportion  as  it
leaves  the  press.


W.  Radde  takes  also’ this  opportunity  to  inform  the  Physicians  and  the
Friends  of  Hahnemann’s  System,  that  he  is  the  sole  Agent  for  the  Central
Homoeopathic  Pharmacy  at  Leipzig  in  the  United  States,  and  that  he  has
always  on  hand  a good  Assortment  of

HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICINES

in  their  different  preparations,  as  Essences  (Tinctures)  Triturations  and
Dilutions,  put  up  in  cases  containing  415  vials,  with  tinctures  and  tritura-
tions; ditto  with  175;  ditto  cases  containing  144  vials,  with  low  Dilutions
and  medicated  pellets.  Cases  containing  from  27  to  400  vials,  with  pellets
medicated  with  different  (low  and  high)  dilutions.  Boxes  wuth  60-80  vials
containing  medicated  pellets.  Double  and  single  leather  pocket-cases  of
Medicines  for  Physicians.  Boxes  for  family  use  from  three  to  six  dollars.
Also  all  Isopathic  Remedies.  Refined  Sugar  of  Milk,  pure  globules,  vials,
corks,  diet  papers,  labels,  homoeopathic  chocolate,  &c.,  &c.


DR.  HERING’S  PREFACE.

i

{The  following  article  has  been  kindly  furnished  by  Dr.  HerIn#
of  Philadelphia , in  German.  The  Editor  is  responsible  for  the
translation.')


Hahnemann’s  work  on  chronic  diseases  may  be  considered  a
continuation  of  his  organon ; the  medicines  which  will  follow
the  present  volume  may  therefore  be  considered  a continuation
of  his  materia  medica  pura.  As  the  principles  and  rules  of
general  therapeutics  have  been  developed  in  the  organon,  so  does
Hahnemann  develop,  in  the  present  treatise,  the  principles  and
rules  which  ought  to  prevail  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,
whose  name  is  “ legion.”  In  the  materia  medica  pura  Hahne-
that  he  tried  upon  healthy  persons,  are  capable  of  producing ;
the  present  treatise,  on  the  contrary,  will  be  succeeded  by  an
account  of  those  remedies,  which  Hahnemann  especially  em-
ployed in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,  and  which  he  therefore
called  “ anti-psorics.”  In  the  organon  Hahnemann  tries  to  es-
tablish the  fact  that  the  principle  “ similia  similibus  curantur”
is  the  supreme  rule  in  every  true  method  of  cure,  and  he  shows
how  this  rule  is  to  be  followed  in  the  treatment  of  disease  ;
whereas  in  his  treatise  on  the  chronic  diseases,  which  is  based
upon  the  organon  and  does  not,  in  the  least,  modify  or  alter  its
teachings,  Hahnemann  shows  that  most  chronic  diseases,  ori-
ginating in  a common  source  and  being  related  amongst  each
other,  a special  class  of  remedies  designated  by  Hahnemann  “ anti-
psorics,”  should  be  used  in  the  treatment  of  those  diseases.
This  common  source  of  most  chronic  diseases,  according  to
Hahnemann,  is  Psora.

The  shallow  opponents  of  Homoeopathy — and  we  never  had
any  other  ! — pounced  upon  the  theory  of  the  psoric  miasm  with
a view  of  attacking  it  with  their  hollow  and  unmeaning  sarcasms.
Making  Psora  to  be  identical  with  itch,  they  sneeringly  pre-
tended that  according  to  Hahnemann’s  doctrine  the  itch  was  the


2


DR.  HERING’S  PREFACE.


primitive  evil,  and  that  this  doctrine  was  akin  to  the  doctrine  of
the  original  sin  recognised  by  the  Christian  Faith.*


* Note  of  the  Editor  : I beg  pardon  of  my  distinguished  and
learned  friend  for  annexing  a few  remarks  to  this  passage.  In  doing
so  I merely  anticipate  what  I intend  to  express  more  fully  on  this  sub-
ject some  other  occasion.

As  it  would  be  absurd  for  a philosophical  Christian  to  reject  the
doctrine  of  original  sin,  so  it  is  absurd  for  any  one  who  professes  to
have  a clear  perception  of  Homoeopathy,  to  reject  the  doctrine  of  an
hereditary  morbific  miasm.  Both  these  doctrines  must  stand  and  fall
together  ; and,  as  truth  is  one  and  indivisible,  they  both  hold  and  illus-
trate each  other.  If  we  admit  with  Rousseau  that  every  thing  which
leaves  the  hand  of  God,  is  perfectly  holy,  then  the  first  created  man
must  have  been  perfectly  pure,  and  must  have  appeared  in  the  image
and  likeness  of  his  maker.  It  seems  to  me  absurd  to  suppose  that
something  perfectly  pure  can,  of  itself,  by  its  own  free  and  orderly  de-
velopment, produce  things  impure  and  evil.  We  do  not  know  how  far
God  permitted  an  adaptation  to  evil  to  co-exist  in  the  first  man  to-
gether with  an  adaptation  to  goodness.  But  this  we  certainly  know
that  evil  fruits  must  be  the  result  of  evil  forces.  In  a certain  moment
man,  or  God  through  man,  permitted  the  adaptation  to  evil  to  prevail  in
his  nature  ; and  instaneously  the  forces  of  evil,  be  they  called  serpent,
devil,  or  otherwise,  invaded  man’s  nature,  engrafted  themselves  upon
it,  and  have,  up  to  this  moment,  perpetuated  their  existence  in  it.
This  is  relatively  speaking,  a fall,  although,  this  fall,  having  been  the
first  necessary  phasis  of  human  development,  it  may,  in  reality,  be  con-
sidered a progress.  Man’s  destiny  consists  in  reuniting  himself  again
with  the  Divine  Life  through  the  universal  expansion  of  all  the  faculties
of  his  soul,  and  the  realization  of  all  the  celestial  harmonies  the  germs
of  which  God  had  deposited  in  his  nature  and  towards  the  construction
of  which  science  and  art  will  furnish  him  the  means.  The  principle
of  division  or  dissolution  which  man  had  suffered  to  be  introduced  into
his  spiritual  nature,  must  necessarily  have  embodied  itself  in  a cor-
responding principle  in  the  material  organism.  It  is  this  principle  which
Hahnemann  calls  Psora.  In  proportion  as  man’s  spiritual  nature  be-
comes developed  and  purified,  this  psoric  miasm  will  be  diminished,  and
will  finally  be  completely  removed  from  the  life  of  humanity.  This
complete  physical  regeneration  of  human  nature  will  necessarily  be
attended  with  great  changes  in  all  the  external  relations  of  man,  edu-
cation, mode  of  labouring,  living,  etc.,  etc.

The  principle  of  division  or  dissolution  existing  in  the  human  organ-


dr.  Bering’s  preface.


3


With  the  same  impudence  with  which  they  had,  on  former
occasions,  asserted,  that  Hahnemann  rejects  all  pathology  in  his
organon,  they  now  asserted  that  he  himself  advanced  a patholo-
gical hypothesis,  and  “ that  the  true  which  it  contained  was  not
new,  nor  the  new  true.”

Equitable  judges  will  not  fail  to  recognise  in  this  treatise  on
chronic  diseases  the  same  carefulness  of  study  and  observation
which  the  great  author  of  Homoeopathy  has  shown  in  all  his
other  writings.  Hahnemann  had  no  other  object  in  view  except
to  cure.  All  the  energies  of  his  great  soul  were  directed  to  this
one  end.  His  object  was  not  to  overthrow  pathology,  although
the  pathology  of  his  time  has  been  set  aside  as  a heap  of  foolish
speculations,  and  has  been  replaced  by  other  systems,  that  may
perhaps  suffer  the  same  fate  in  fifty  years  ; he  merely  contended
against  the  foolish  and  presumptuous  application  of  pathological
hypotheses  to  the  treatment  of  disease.  He  rejected  and  overthrew
the  foolish  belief  which  had  been  driven  like  a rusty  nail,  into
the  minds  of  the  Profession  and,  by  their  instrumentality,  into
the  minds  of  the  people,  that  the  remedies  should  be  given
against  a name,  against  an  imaginary  disease,  and  that  the  name
of  this  imaginary  disease  indicated  the  remedy.  Up  to  this  day
physicians  have  been  engaged  in  accrediting  that  superstition.
Whence  should  otherwise  spring  the  desire  which  so  many
patients  manifest,  of  inquiring  into  the  name  of  the  disease,  as  if
a knowledge  of  that  name  were  sufficient  to  discover  the  true
remedy  against  the  disease.  Many  patients  are  disconsolate
when  the  doctor  cannot  tell  them  what  is  the  matter  with  them.
Do  we  gain  anything  by  being  able  to  say  that  the  disease  is
rheumatism,  dyspepsia,  liver-complaint  1 Does  it  avail  the
patient  any  to  be  able  to  repeat  his  doctor’s  ipse  dixit  “ that


ism  as  an  established  and  constituted  fact,  does  not  preclude  the  possi-
bility of  this  organism  being  invaded  by  acute  miasms.  The  psoric
principle  marks  the  general  adaptation  to  evil,  recognised  and  inherently
received  by  the  human  organism  ; acute  diseases  are  violent  and  sud-
den invasions  of  the  organism  by  the  forces  of  evil — which  I have
named  subversive  forces  in  my  preface.  Those  sudden  invasions
could  never  have  taken  place  without  man  having  first  admitted  the
psoric  principle  to  be  constitutional  in  Ins  organism.


DR.  HERING’S  PREFACE.


he  is  bilious,  nervous,  etc.  V'  Do  these  words  mean  any  thing
definite  1 Are  there  yet  physicians  foolish  enough  to  believe
that  their  speculative  explanations  mean  any  thing  1 Does  not.
every  body  acknowledge  that  they  are  mere  ignes  fatui  flitting
to  and  fro  upon  the  quagmire  of  the  old  decayed  systems  of  pa-
thology  1

Assuredly,  a physician  of  modern  date,  who  has  not  remained
altogether  ignorant,  would  be  ashamed  of  assuring  his  patients
with  the  air  of  a deep  thinker,  that  one  has  a disease  of  the  spine,
another  consumption,  a third  a uterine  affection,  etc.  Every
tyro  in  pathology  knows  that  all  this  means  nothing  definite,
and  that  it  is  only  to  very  ignorant  persons  that  such  assertions
can  be  given  as  science.  Every  tyro  knows  that  the  question  is,
to  find  out  what  are  the  symptoms  and  the  nature  of  that  disease
of  the  spine  or  the  uterus.  It  is  moreover  known  that  this  more
precise  knowledge  is  necessary  as  respects  prognosis,  and  for  the
purpose  of  regulating  the  mode  of  life  of  the  patient ; but  it  is
also  settled  that  to  know  merely  the  variety,  to  which  the  disease
belongs,  is  not  sufficient  to  cure  it.  All  the  successful  and
celebrated  practitioners  of  the  old  school  have  been  such  as
have  constantly  modified  and  individualized  the  treatment  of  dis-
ease. This  is  all  that  Hahnemann  has  tried  to  accomplish  ;
with  this  difference  that  he  has  individualized  every  case  of
disease  with  much  more  precision  than  any  of  the  older  phy-
sicians had  done.  Hahnemann  had  courage  enough,  at  once  to
face  the  contradictions  which  constantly  existed  between  prac-
tice and  theory  ; he  declared  that  the  speculative  knowledge  of
physicians  was  merely  learned  dust  which  they  were  in  the
habit  of  throwing  into  people’s  eyes  for  the  purpose  of  blinding
them  and  inducing  them  to  consider  the  ignorance  of  the  doctors
and  the  insufficiency  of  their  knowledge  as  something  respectable.
Hahnemann  dared  to  lay  down  this  maxim  : that,  in  treating
disease,  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  its  name.

Hahnemann  teaches  that  the  remedies  should  be  chosen  ac-
cording to  the  symptoms  of  the  patient.  The  physician  should
be  governed  by  what  is  certain  and  safe,  not  by  that  which  is
more  or  less  uncertain  and  unsafe,  and  which  is  changed  accord-
ing to  fashion.  Both  in  the  organon  and  in  his  treatise  on  the
chronic  diseases,  Hahnemann  insists  upon  the  remedies  being
chosen  in  accordance  with  the  symptoms.


DR.  HERING’S  PREFACE.


5


It  is  not  an  easy  matter  to  choose  a remedy  according1  to  symp-
toms. This  may  be  inferred  from  the  manner  in  which  tyros
in  homoeopathy  and  physicians  of  the  old  school  who  come  over
to  us,  go  to  work.  They  constantly  rely  upon  names,  giving  a
certain  remedy  in  scarlet  fever,  because  some  one  else  had  found
it  useful  ; or  a certain  remedy  in  pulmonary  inflammation,  be-
cause it  had  been  successfully  exhibited  upon  a former  occasion;
whereas  Hahnemann  teaches  that,  because  a remedy  has  helped
before,  this  is  no  reason  why  it  should  help  again  in  a similar
disease.  The  symptoms  and  not  the  name  are  to  point  out  the
remedy.  This  is  also  the  case  in  chronic  diseases.  In  the  treat-
ment of  chronic  diseases  Hahnemann  has  been  taught  by  expe-
rience to  give  preference  to  the  anti-psoric  remedies.  This  pre-
ference is  not  theoretical,  and  is  constantly  subordinate  to  the
general  principle.

Hahnemann  has  never  said  that  the  principal  constituents  of
mountains,  which  are  the  most  important  materials  in  nature —
the  metals,  for  instance — are  the  most  important  remedies  for  the
cure  of  the  most  universal  diseases.  However,  he  has  pointed  out
the  oxydes  or  salts  of  ammonium,  potassium,  sodium,  calcium,
aluminium,  magnesium,  as  the  most  important  anti-psoric  reme-
dies. Hahnemann  has  said  nowhere  that  the  most  important
metalloids  constitute  the  most  important  remedial  agents,  al-
though he  has  introduced  sulphur,  phosphorus,  silicea,  chlorine,
and  iodine,  in  one  form  or  another,  as  anti-psoric  remedies.  In
selecting  a remedy  Hahnemann  has  never  been  guided  by  theo-
ries, but  always  by  experience.  He  chose  his  remedies  agree-
ably to  the  symptoms  which  they  had  produced  upon  healthy
persons,  looking  at  the  same  time  to  their  remedial  virtues  hav-
ing been  tested  by  practice.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  gene-
ral views  which  have  been  expressed  just  now  did  not  prevent
him  from  admitting  as  chief  anti-psorics  borax  and  ammonium,
carbonicum,  anacardium  and  clematis.

Why,  it  may  be  asked,  has  a great  number  of  homoeopathic
physicians,  neither  recognised  Hahnemann’s  theory  of  psora,
nor  the  specific  character  of  the  anti-psoric  remedies'?  Why
have  some  even  gone  so  far  as  to  set  the  theory  sneeringly  aside,
and  to  decry  the  anti-psorics  as  less  trustworthy  than  the  other
remedies  I

For  the  same  reason  that  the  astronomical  discoveries  of  our


s


dr.  Bering’s  preface.


Herschel  are  doubted  by  people  who  have  no  faith  in  the  dis-
coverer, and  are  not  able  to  verify  his  discoveries.  To  do  this,
knowledge,  instruments,  talent,  care,  perseverance,  opportuni-
ties, and  many  other  things  are  required.  Not  one  of  all  these
requisites  can  be  found  with  those  who  are  mere  dabblers  in
practice,  scribbling  authors  opposing  their  own  opinions  and
imaginations  to  facts  and  observation.

Or,  for  the  same  reason  that  Ehrenberg’s  discoveries  cannot
be  appreciated  by  those  who  have  either  no  microscope,  or  who
have  one  which  is  not  good,  or  who  have  a microscope  without
understanding  the  difficult  art  of  using  it;  or  else  who  know
how  to  use  it,  but  do  not  use  it  with  the  same  exactness  and
carefulness  as  Ehrenberg,  who  discovered  in  the  chalk-dust  of
visiting  cards  the  shells  of  new  species  of  animals,  by  simply
making  the  cards  transparent  by  means  of  the  oil  of  turpen-
tine.

Or  lastly,  for  the  simple  reason  that  physicians  find  it  more
easy  to  write  something  for  print,  than  to  observe  nature  ; that
it  is  more  easy  to  impose  upon  people  than  to  cure  the  sick,  and
because  the  greater  number  of  physicians  is  affected  with  the
delusion  that  things  which  they  do  not  see,  do  not  exist.

If  such  physicians  succeed  in  effecting  a cure,  they  are  at  once
ready  to  boast  of  their  exploits,  whereas  the  cure  was  due  to
Hahnemann’s  doctrine,  to  the  remedies  which  he  has  discovered,
to  the  researches  of  other  physicians,  to  their  instructions  or  ex-
ample, or  to  so-called  chance.  But  if  they  do  not  succeed,
they  impute  their  failure  to  anything  but  themselves  : it  is  ho-
moeopathy that  is  deficient ; this  or  that  rule  is  not  correct ; the
materia  medica  is  at  fault;  or,  if  something  in  Hahnemann’s
system  does  not  suit  them,  they  are  prone  to  say  that  they  have
never  seen  this  or  that,  that  they  cannot  agree  with  it.  And  in
talking  in  this  way,  they  really  imagine  to  have  said  something
against  the  matter  itself.

Upon  the  same  ground  that  Hahnemann  carefully  distinguished
from  the  disease  the  symptoms  which  owed  their  existence  to
dietetic  transgressions,  or  to  medicinal  aggravations  ; upon  the
same  grounds  that  he  acknowledged  as  standing  and  independent
diseases  the  acute  miasms,  known  as  purpura,  measles,  scarlatina,
small  pox,  hooping  cough,  etc.,  or  that  he  distinguished  the  vene-
real miasm  into  syphilis  and  sycosis,  we  may  afterwards,  if  ex-


DR.  HERING’S  PREFACE,


7


perience  should  demand  it,  subdivide  psora  into  several  species
and  varieties.  This  is  no  objection  to  Hahnemann’s  theory.
Hahnemann  has  taken  the  first  great  step  without  denying  the
faculty  of  progressive  development  inherent  in  his  system.  But
let  improvements  be  made  in  such  a way  as  to  became  useful,
not  prejudicial,  to  the  patients.  We  ought  to  raise  our  super-
structure upon  Hahnemann’s  own  ground,  in  the  direction  which
he  has  first  imparted  to  his  doctrine.

Although  it  matters  little  what  opinions  the  respective  disci-
ples of  Hahnemann  hold  relatively  to  the  theory  of  psora , I will
nevertheless,  communicate  a short  extract  from  my  essay,
“ Guide  to  the  Progressive  Development  of  Homoeopathy.”

“ As  acute  diseases  terminate  in  an  eruption  upon  the  skin,
which  divides,  dries  up,  and  then  passes  off,  so  it  is  with
many  chronic  diseases.  All  diseases  diminish  in  intensity,
improve,  and  are  cured  by  the  internal  organism  freeing  itself
from  them  little  by  little ; the  internal  disease  approaches
more  and  more  to  the  external  tissues,  until  it  finally  arrives  at
the  skin.

“ Every  homoeopathic  physician  must  have  observed  that  the
improvement  in  pain  takes  place  from  above  downward  ; and  in
diseases,  from  within  outward.  This  is  the  reason  why  chronic
diseases,  if  they  are  thoroughly  cured,  always  terminate  in  some
cutaneous  eruption,  which  differs  according  to  the  different  con-
stitutions of  the  patients.  This  cutaneous  eruption  may  be  even
perceived  when  a cure  is  impossible,  and  even  when  the  reme-
dies have  been  improperly  chosen.  The  skin  being  the  outer-
most surface  of  the  body,  it  receives  upon  itself  the  extreme  ter-
mination of  the  disease.  This  cutaneous  eruption  is  not  a mere
morbid  secretion  having  been  chemically  separated  from  the  in-
ternal organism  in  the  form  of  a gas,  a liquid,  or  a solid  ; it  is
the  whole  of  the  morbid  action  which  is  pressed  from  within
outward,  and  it  is  characteristic  of  a thorough  and  really  curative
treatment.  The  morbid  action  of  the  internal  organism  may  con-
tinue either  entirely,  or  more  or  less  in  spite  of  this  cutaneous
eruption.  Nevertheless,  this  eruption  always  is  a favourable
symptom ; it  alleviates  the  sufferings  of  the  patient,  and  gene-
rally prevents  a more  dangerous  affection.

“ The  thorough  cure  of  a widely  ramified  chronic  disease  in
the  organism  is  indicated  by  the  most  important  organs  being


8


DR.  HERING’s  PREFACE.


first  relieved  ; the  affection  passes  off  in  the  order  in  which  the
organs  had  been  affected,  the  more  important  being  relieved  first,
the  less  important  next,  and  the  skin  last.

“ Even  the  superficial  observer  will  not  fail  in  recognising
this  law  of  order.  An  improvement  which  takes  place  in  a dif-
ferent order  can  never  be  relied  upon.  A fit  of  hysteria  may
terminate  in  a flow  of  urine  ; other  fits  may  either  terminate  in
the  same  way,  or  in  hemorrhage  ; the  next  succeeding  fit  shows
how  little  the  affection  had  been  cured.  The  disease  may  take
a different  turn,  it  may  change  its  form,  and,  in  this  new  form,
it  may  be  less  troublesome;  but  the  general  state  of  the  organ-
ism will  suffer  in  consequence  of  this  transformation.

“ Hence  it  is  that  Hahnemann  inculcates  with  so  much  care
the  important  rule  to  attend  to  the  moral  symptoms,  and  to  judge
of  the  degree  of  homoeopathic  adaptation,  existing  between  the
remedy  and  the  disease,  by  the  improvement  which  takes  place
in  the  moral  condition,  and  the  general  well-being  of  the  pa-
tient.

“ The  law  of  order  wThich  we  have  pointed  out  above,  accounts
for  the  numerous  cutaneous  eruptions  consequent  upon  homoeo-
pathic treatment,  even  where  they  never  had  been  seen  before  ;
it  accounts  for  the  obstinacy  with  which  many  kinds  of  herpes
and  ulcers  remain  upon  the  skin,  whereas  others  are  dissipated
like  snow.  Those  which  remain,  do  remain  because  the  internal
disease  is  yet  existing.  This  law  of  order  also  accounts  for  the
insufficiency  of  violent  sweats,  when  the  internal  disease  is  not
yet  disposed  to  leave  its  hiding-place.  It  lastly  accounts  for
one  cutaneous  affection  beings  substituted  for  another.”
t “ This  transformation  of  the  internal  affection  of  such  parts  of
the  organism  as  are  essential  to  important  functions,  to  a cutane-
ous affection — a transformation  which  is  entirely  different  from
the  violent  change  effected  by  means  of  Autenrieth's  ointment,
ammonium,  croton-oil,  cantharides,  mustard,  etc. — is  chiefly
effected  by  the  anti-psoric  remedies.

“ Other  remedies  may  sometimes  effect  that  transformation,
even  the  use  of  water,  change  of  climate,  of  occupation,  etc  ;
but  it  is  more  safely,  more  mildly  and  more  thoroughly  effected
by  the  anti-psoric  remedies.”

This  latter  is  altogether  an  individual  opinion  ; others  may
have  different  opinions  relative  to  the  same  subject;  this  needs


DR-  HERING’s  PREFACE.


9


not  to  prevent  us  from  aiming-  all  of  us  at  the  same  end,  side  by-
side,  in  perfect  harmony.

But  alas  ! the  rules  which  the  experienced  founder  of  Ho-
moeopathy lays  down  in  the  subsequent  work  with  so  much  em-
phasis, are  not  always  practised,  and  therefore,  cannot  be  ap-
preciated. Many  oppose  them  ; cures  which  otherwise  might
be  speedy  and  certain,  are  delayed  ; much  injury  is  being  done
by  the  wiseacres  who  intrude  themselves  into  our  literature
and  mix  with  it  as  chaff  with  the  wheat.  On  all  this  we  may
console  ourselves  with  the  expectation  that  also  in  the  his-
tory of  Science  there  will  be  those  great  days  of  harvest,
when  the  tares  shall  be  gathered  in  bundles  and  thrown  into  the
fire.

It  is  the  duty  of  all  of  us  to  go  farther  in  the  theory  and  prac-
tice of  Homoeopathy  than  Hahnemann  has  done.  We  ought  to
seek  the  truth  which  is  before  us  and  forsake  the  errors  of  the
past.  But  wo  unto  him  who,  on  that  account,  should  personally
attack  the  author  of  our  doctrine  ; he  would  burthen  himself
with  infamy.  Hahnemann  was  a great  savant,  inquirer,  and  dis-
coverer ; he  was  as  true  a man,  without  falsity,  candid  and  open
as  a child,  and  inspired  with  pure  benevolence  and  with  a holy
zeal  for  science.

When  at  last  the  fatal  hour  had  struck  for  the  sublime  old
man  who  had  preserved  his  vigour  almost  to  his  last  moments,
then  it  was  that  the  heart  of  his  consort  who  had  made  his  last
years  the  brightest  of  his  life,  was  on  the  point  of  breaking.
Many  of  us,  seeing  those  who  are  dearest  to  us  engaged  in  the
death-struggle,  would  exclaim  : why  should’ st  thou  suffer  so
much ! So  too  exclaimed  Hahnemann’s  consort : “ Why

should’st  thou  who  hast  alleviated  so  much  suffering,  suffer  in  thy
last  hour  I This  is  unjust.  Providence  should  have  allotted  to
thee  a painless  death.”

Then  he  raised  his  voice  as  he  had  often  done  when  he  ex-
horted his  disciples  to  hold  fast  to  the  great  principles  of  Ho-
maeopathy.  “ Why  should  I have  been  thus  distinguished  I
Each  of  us  should  here  attend  to  the  duties  which  God  has  im-
posed upon  him.  Although  men  may  distinguish  a more  or  less,
yet  no  one  has  any  merit.  God  owes  nothing  to  me,  I to  him
all.”

With  these  words  he  took  leave  of  the  world,  of  his  friends,


10


DR.  HERING’S  PREFAC  .


and  his  foes.  And  here  we  take  leave  of  you,  reader,  whether
our  friend  or  our  opponent.

To  him  who  believes  that  there  may  yet  be  truths  which  he
does  not  know  and  which  he  desires  to  know,  will  be  pointed  out
such  paths  as  will  lead  him  to  the  light  he  needs.  If  he  who
has  sincere  benevolence  and  wishes  to  work  for  the  benefit  of
all,  be  considered  by  Providence  a fit  instrument  for  the  accom-
plishment of  the  divine  will,  he  will  be  called  upon  to  fulfil
his  mission  and  will  be  led  to  truth  evermore.

It  is  the  spirit  of  Truth  that  tries  to  unite  us  all ; but  the
father  of  Lies  keeps  us  separate  and  divided.

C.  H g.

Philadelphia,  April  22,  1845.


PREFACE

TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION,  182  8,


If  I did  not  know,  for  what  object  I exist  upon
earth — “to  make  myself  as  good  as  possible,  and  to
improve  things  and  men  around  me  to  the  best  of  my
ability,” — I should  have  to  consider  myself  deficient  in
worldly  wisdom  for  promulgating,  before  my  death,
an  art  whose  sole  possessor  I was,  and  which,  being
kept  secret,  might  have  become  a source  of  perma-
nently increasing  profit  to  me.

In  communicating  these  great  discoveries  to  the  pub-
lic, I cannot  help  entertaining  doubts  as  to  the  good
will  of  my  cotemporaries  to  appreciate  the  justness  of
my  doctrines.  Will  they  be  practised  with  care,  and
yield  to  suffering  humanity  the  benefit  which  must
necessarily  be  derived  from  their  conscientious  applica-
tion ; or  will  my  cotemporaries,  intimidated  by  the
unheard-of  newness  of  my  discoveries,  prefer  leaving
them  unexamined,  unimitated,  and  therefore  suffer  them
to  remain  useless  ?

I have  no  reason  to  expect  that  these  communica-
tions will  fare  better  than  my  previous  publications  on
general  Homoeopathy.  The  power  of  small  and  highly
diluted  doses  was  doubted ; their  greater  fitness  for
effecting  a homoeopathic  cure  and  the  higher  develop-
ment of  their  dynamic  action  were  overlooked  ; and
despite  of  the  warning  trials  which  enabled  me  to  re-
commend small  doses  as  the  most  appropriate  for  the


12


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


cure  of  disease,  my  faithful  assurances  and  reasonings
were  disdained,  and  medical  men  continued  for  years
to  jeopardize  the  lives  of  their  patients  by  large  doses,
and  were  therefore  deprived  of  an  opportunity  of  wit-
nessing the  happy  results  of  the  homoeopathic  treat-
ment, as  was  indeed  my  own  case  before  I had  adopted
the  rule  of  administering  small  doses.

What  would  they  have  risked,  if  they  had  first  fol-
lowed my  indications  and  had  employed  small  doses  ?
The  worst  which  could  have  befallen  them,  was,  that
these  doses  would  be  of  no  avail.  It  was  impossible
that  they  should  do  any  harm.  But  instead  of  exhibit-
ing small  doses,  they  employed,  from  a want  of  sense,
and  of  their  own  accord,  large  doses  for  homoeopathic
use,  thus  exposing  the  lives  of  their  patients  and  arriving
at  truth  by  that  circuitous  rout  which  I had  travelled
upon  before  them  with  trembling  hesitation,  but  the  end
of  which  I had  just  reached  with  success.  Neverthe-
less, after  having  done  much  mischief,  and  having  squan-
dered the  best  period  of  their  lives,  they  were  obliged,
when  they  were  really  desirous  of  curing  disease,  to
resort  to  the  only  true  method  which  I had  demonstra-
ted to  them  a long  while  ago.

Would  that  they  acted  more  discreetly  in  regard  to
the  discovery  which  I promulgate  in  this  volume  !

And  suppose  they  do  not  act  so, — in  that  case,  a more
conscientious  and  more  intelligent  posterity  will  have
the  advantage,  by  faithfully  and  correctly  applying  the
principles  developed  in  these  pages,  freeing  humanity
from  the  innumerable  sufferings  which  nameless  chronic
diseases  have  heaped  upon  the  poor  patients  from  time
immemorial,  and  thus  conferring  upon  them  a blessing
which  the  previously  taught  doctrines  of  homoeopathy
had  not  been  able  to  realize*


OF  THE  NATURE  OF  CHRONIC  DISEASES.


The  faithfully  practised  precepts  of  the  homoeopathic
method  of  cure,  as  it  is  taught  in  my  own  writings  and
those  of  my  disciples,  have  hitherto  manifested  to  all
men,  and  in  a very  striking  and  decisive  manner,  their
natural  advantage  over  the  allceopalhic  method,  both  in
regard  to  acute  diseases  as  well  as  epidemics  and  spo-
radic fevers.

Venereal  diseases  have  been  likewise  cured  more
safely,  more  conveniently,  more  thoroughly  and  without
any  secondary  ailments,  by  the  homoeopathic  practice  ;
for  it  eradicates  the  internal  disease  and  cures  it  from
within,  by  the  best  specific  remedy,  without  either  dis-
turbing or  destroying  the  local  affection.

But  there  remained  the  chronic  diseases  which  afflict
humanity,  and  the  number  of  which  continued  to  be  im-
mensely large.

The  manner  in  which  those  diseases  had  been  treated
by  alloeopathic  physicians,  has  only  served  to  increase
the  sufferings  of  such  patients.  By  employing  a quantity
of  disgusting  mixtures,  compounded  by  the  apothecary
out  of  large  doses  of  violent  medicinal  substances,  whose
separate  effects  were  unknown,  or  by  using  all  sorts
of  baths,  violent  diaphoretics  or  expectorants,  pretended
anodynes  and  sedatives,  clysters,  ointments,  fomentations,
fumigations,  vesicatories,  cauteries,  fontanelles,  and  es-
pecially those  everlasting  purgatives,  leeches,  bloodlet-
tings, and  methods  of  starvation,  and  the  various  other
fashionable  medicinal  torments,  the  disease  was  either
made  worse,  and  the  vital  energies,  despite  of  the  inter-
mediate use  of  pretended  tonics,  were  more  and  more
diminished  ; or  else,  in  case  a striking  change  had  been
obtained,  another  nameless  medicinal  disease,  being

1


14


much  worse  and  much  more  incurable  than  the  original
natural  disease,  was  substituted  in  the  place  of  the  pre-
vious disturbance  ; whilst  the  physician  consoled  the
patient  by  saying,  that  u the  old  disease  had  been  hap-
pily removed  ; that  unfortunately  a new  disease  had  in-
deed made  its  appearance,  but  that  he  was  confident  he
Avould  conquer  this  new  disease  as  successfully  as  the
former.”  And  in  this  way  nothing  was  done  except  to
modify  the  forms  of  the  same  disease,  to  increase  it  by
the  additional  sufferings  consequent  upon  the  use  of  im-
proper and  noxious  medicines,  until  the  complaints  of
the  poor  patient  ceased  with  his  last  breath,  and  the  re-
latives were  consoled  by  the  delusive  excuse,  “ that
every  known  remedy  had  been  employed  in  the  case  of
the  deceased.”

How  different  is  God’s  great  gift,  homoeopathy  ! In
these  cases  of  chronic  disease  to  which  I have  just  al-
luded, and  provided  the  patients  had  not  been  too  much
ruined  by  the  allceopathic  practice,  (as  was  unfortunately
too  often  the  case  where  some  money  was  to  be  made
out  of  the  patient,)  the  homoeopathic  practitioners,  by
practising  the  precepts  contained  in  the  writings  which
I had  then  published,  and  by  following  the  advice  which
I had  given  on  former  occasions,  both  in  lectures  and
conversations,  did  infinitely  more  good  by  their  treat-
ment than  all  the  previously  known  so-called  methods
of  cure  had  been  able  to  accomplish.

By  following  the  method  which  I had  recommended,
and  which  is  much  more  conformable  to  nature,  the  ho-
moeopathic practitioners,  having  in  the  first  place  in-
quired into  and  noted  down  all  the  perceptible  symp-
toms of  the  disease,  were  able  to  remove  it  by  means
of  the’smallest  dose  of  a remedy  which  had  been  care-
fully selected  among  the  most  appropriate  homoeopathic
drugs,  whose  genuine  and  true  action  had  been  ascer-
tained up  to  that  moment.  The  improvement  which
was  obtained  by  the  homoeopathic  practitioner,  exceeded
all  that  allceopathic  doctors  had  ever  been  able  to  ac-
complish by  some  luckily  successful  inroad  upon  their
medicine-chests  ; for  the  cure  was  often  accomplished


15


in  a very  short  time,  the  patient  never  was  deprived  of
his  strength,  as  is  always  the  case  by  the  alloeopathic
method  of  care,  and  he  was  again  enabled  to  enjoy  his
life.

The  disease  yielded  in  a great  measure  to  a very
small  dose  of  that  remedy  which  had  been  found  capa-
ble of  producing  upon  a healthy  person  the  existing  se-
ries of  morbid  symptoms  ; and  if  the  disease  was  not
too  old,  and  had  not  been  too  extensively  mismanaged
by  alloeopathic  practice,  the  improvement  often  lasted
for  a good  while  ; so  that  mankind  might  already  deem
themselves  fortunate  on  account  of  this  aid,  and  very
often  did  so.  The  patient  who  had  been  thus  treated,
might  have  considered  himself  almost  cured,  and  verv
often  did  consider  himself  so,  when  he  made  just  allow-
ances for  the  difficulties  of  his  condition  previous  to  the
homoeopathic  treatment,  and  compared  it  with  the  im-
proved state  of  health  which  he  now  enjoyed/

But,  in  case  the  apparently  cured  disease  resulted
from  a more  extensively  developed  psora,  then  a few
excesses  at  table,  a cold,  the  approach  of  unusually
rough,  damp  or  stormy  weather,  sometimes  even  the
fall  season,  though  mild,  but  especially  winter  and  a
winterly  spring,  a violent  bodily  or  mental  effort,  a con-
cussion of  the  system  consequent  upon  great  external


* The  cures  here  referred  to  concern  diseases  from  an  im-
perfectly developed  psora.  In  the  treatment  of  those  dis-
eases my  followers  did  not  employ  the  remedies  which  were
afterwards  found  to  be  the  principal  antipsorics— -they  were
not  known  then  ; — the  treatment  was  carried  on  by  means  of
those  drugs  the  pathogenetic  effects  of  which  upon  the  healthy
system  corresponded  most  accurately  to  the  existing  symptoms,
and  had  power  to  remove  them  for  a time.  By  means  of  these
remedies  the  outbreaking  psora  was  reduced  back  again  to  its
latent  condition ; and,  in  this  way,  a sort  of  cure  was  effected,
which  gave  often,  for  many  years,  great  bodily  comfort  to  young
vigorous  persons,  who  must,  on  that  account,  have  appeared
really  cured  to  a superficial  observer.  But  the  remedies  which
were  known  at  that  time,  were  then  and  are  now  insufficient  for
the  complete  cure  of  those  chronic  diseases  where  the  psoric
poison  has  established  its  full  action.


16


injuries,  or  some  melancholy,  heart-breaking  event,  fre-
quent fright,  deep  sorrow  and  grief,  or  continual  chagrin,
were  often  sufficient  in  an  enfeebled  system,  to  cause
one  or  more  of  the  former  ailments  to  reappear  after
they  had  been  conquered  for  a time  *,  and  then  they
were  often  accompanied  with  a series  of  new  symptoms,
which  may  not  have  denoted  any  more  danger  than  the
former  symptoms  did  that  had  yielded  to  the  homoeo
pathic  treatment,  but  which  were  just  as  difficult  to  cure,
and  therefore  so  much  more  inveterate.  Against  these
new  symptoms  the  homoeopathic  physician  employe
again,  with  tolerable  success,  the  remedy  which  acted
most  h o moeopathicall y among  the  then  known  drugs,  and
the  condition  of  the  patient  was  again  improved  for  a
time.  In  case  the  primitive  symptoms  which  had  been
cured  once  already  homoeopathically,  reappeared  in  con-
sequence  of  one  of  the  above  mentioned  causes,  the
remedy  which  had  been  first  employed,  helped  again,
though  less  perfectly;  and  still  less  so,  on  being  given  a
third  time.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  remedy
which  had  appeared  most  homoeopathic  often  produced
new  symptoms,  and,  despite  of  a correct  mode  of  life  on
the  part  of  the  patient,  they  yielded  but  scantily  and  im-
perfectly to  the  best  adapted  remedies,  and  often  even
remained  when  the  cure  was  checked  by  the  above  men-
tioned external  influences.

Sometimes  the  chronic  malady  was  arrested  m a re-
markable manner,  for  a shorter  or  longer  period,  by  the  oc-
currence of  agreeable  circumstances,  by  some  fortunate
improvement  in  the  affairs  of  the  patient  a pleasant  jour
ney,  a favourable  season,  and  dry  uniform  weather  ; in
this  case  the  homoeopathic  physician  had  a right  to  consi-
der the  patient  almost  cured,  and  the  patient  did  consider
himself  so,  provided  he  was  willing  to  overlook  moderate
ailments.  However,  this  favourable  cessation  of  the
disease  never  lasted  long,  and  the  return,  especially  the
frequent  return  of  the  disease,  which  induced  a repeated
exhibition  of  the  same  remedial  agents,  weakened  their
power  in  a proportionate  degree,  notwithstanding  they
had  been  selected  with  the  greatest  care  according  to


17


their  homoeopathic  nature,  and  exhibited  in  the  smallest
and  most  appropriate  doses.  They  finally  acted  only  as
mere  palliatives.  Generally,  however,  after  the  phy-
sician had  repeatedly  tried  to  conquer  the  disease,  which
reappeared  again  and  again  in  a modified  form,  and  in
spite  of  a correct  mode  of  life  and  perfect  obedience  on
the  part  of  the  patient,  there  remained  morbid  symptoms
which  the  then  known  numerous  homoeopathic  remedies
were  unable  to  extirpate,  and  often  even  to  diminish.
These  symptoms  increasing  in  intensity,  and  becoming
more  and  more  dangerous  by  their  progressive  develop-
ment, the  homoeopathic  physician  lost  all  power  of
checking  the  onward  course  of  the  disease.

This  result  occurred  in  the  treatment  of  all  great,
chronic,  non-venereal  maladies,  even  when  it  appeared  to
be  conducted  according  to  the  precepts  of  homoeopathy,
as  far  as  it  was  then  known.  First,  the  treatment  was
satisfactory,  then  it  became  less  favourable,  and  finally
hopeless.

‘Despite  of  these  failures,  the  doctrine  itself  has  then
been,  and  will  ever  be  founded  upon  the  unshakeable  pil-
lars of  truth.  Facts  have  confirmed  its  excellence,  yea,
if  this  may  be  said  of  human  things,  its  infallibility.

The  homoeopathic  doctrine  was  the  only  and  first  doc-
trine which  made  us  acquainted  with  the  proper  treat-
ment of  the  great,  standing,  idiopathic  diseases,  the  old
scarlatina  of  Sydenham,  the  modern  purple-rash,  hoop-
ing-cough, croup,  sycosis,  dysentery  ; even  acute  pleu-
ritis  and  epidemic  typhus  are  promptly  cured  by  a few
small  doses  of  carefully  selected  homoeopathic  remedies.

What  then  was  the  reason  why  the  continued  homoeo-
pathic treatment  of  the  non-venereal  chronic  diseases
should  have  been  so  unsuccessful?  Why  should  homoeo-
pathy have  failed  in  thousands  of  cases  to  cure  such
chronic  ailments  thoroughly  and  forever?

These  failures  were  perhaps  owing  to  the  small  num-
ber of  the  homoeopathic  medicines  whose  pure  action
had  been  ascertained.

The  followers  of  homoeopathy  were  satisfied  with
this  excuse.  But  the  founder  of  homoeopathy  rejected


18


it  as  a mere  subterfuge.-  For,  the  yearly  increase  of
powerful  homoeopathic  remedies  left  the  treatment  of
chronic  non-venereal  diseases  in  the  dark,  whereas  acute
diseases,  provided  they  were  not  fatal  from  their  begin-
ning, were  not  only  considerably  alleviated  by  correctly
chosen  homoeopathic  remedies,  but  even  promptly  and
thoroughly  cured  by  means  of  the  vis  medicatrix  of  the
organism.

Why  should  this  vis  medicatrix  of  the  organism,
whose  object  is  to  restore  the  integrity  of  the  organism,
and  to  be  mdefatigably  active  in  completing  the  recovery
from  virulent  acute  diseases,  have  been  insufficient  to
effect  a durable  cure  of  those  chronic  maladies,  even
when  it  was  aided  by  those  homoeopathic  remedies,  the
symptoms  of  which  corresponded  most  accurately  to
those  of  the  disease  ?

In  trying  to  answer  this  question,  I was  led  to  the  dis-
covery of  the  nature  of  chronic  diseases.

Ever  since  the  years  1816  and  1817,  I had  been  em-
ployed day  and  night,  to  discover  the  reason  why  the
homoeopathic  remedies  which  were  then  known,  did  not
effect  a true  cure  of  the  above  named  chronic  diseases.
I tried  to  obtain  a more  correct,  and,  if  possible,  a com-
pletely correct  idea  of  the  true  nature  of  those  thousands
of  chronic  ailments  which  remained  uncured  in  spite
of  the  incontrovertible  truth  of  the  homoeopathic  doc-
trine ; when,  behold  ! the  Giver  of  all  good  permitted
me,  about  that  time,  to  solve  the  sublime  problem  for
the  benefit  of  mankind,  after  unceasing  meditation,  in-
defatigable research,  careful  observations  and  the  most
accurate  experiments.*


* I kept  my  great  efforts  secret  both  from  the  public,  and
from  my  disciples,  not  on  account  of  the  ingratitude  which
I have  frequently  experienced — for  I heed  neither  the  ingratitude
nor  the  persecutions  that  I meet  upon  my  path,  which,  weari-
some as  it  is,  is  nevertheless  not  without  pleasure  on  account  of
the  great  end  to  be  attained.  I never  spoke  of  my  exertions,
because  it  is  improper,  and  even  dangerous,  to  speak  of  things
that  are  hut  half  accomplished.  Not  till  the  year  1827  did  1
communicate  the  most  important  part  of  my  discoveries  relative


19


I observed  that  the  non-venereal  chronic  diseases,  even
after  having  been  repeatedly  and  successfully  removed
by  the  then  known  homoeopathic  remedies,  continually
reappeared  in  a more  or  less  modified  form,  and  with  a
yearly  increase  of  disagreeable  symptoms.  This  proved
to  me  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  which  appeared  to
constitute  the  ostensible  disease,  ought  not  to  be  re-
garded as  the  whole  boundaries  of  the  disease — other-
wise the  disease  would  have  been  completely  and  per-
manently cured  by  homoeopathic  drugs,  which  was  not
the  case, — but  that  this  ostensible  disease  was  a mere
fragment  of  a much  more  deep-seated,  primitive  evil,  the
great  extent  of  which  might  be  inferred  from  the  new
symptoms  which  continued  to  appear  from  time  to  time.
This  showed  me  that  the  homoeopathic  practitioner  ought
not  to  treat  diseases  of  this  kind  as  separate  and  com-
pletely developed  maladies,  nor  that  he  ought  to  expect
such  a permanent  cure  of  these  diseases  as  would  pre-
vent them  from  appearing  again  in  the  system,  either  in
their  original  or  in  a modified  and  often  more  disagree-
able form.  I became  convinced  that  the  first  condition
of  finding  out  one  or  more  homoeopathic  medicines  which
should  cover  all  the  symptoms  characterising  the  whole
disturbance,  was,  to  discover  all  the  ailments  and  symp-
toms inherent  in  the  unknown  primitive  malady.  The
medicines  being  found  out,  the  physician  would  then  be
able  to  conquer  and  completely  to  extinguish  the  whole
disease,  together  with  its  successively  appearing  groups
of  symptoms.

This  primitive  disease  evidently  owed  its  existence
to  some  chronic  miasm.  For  as  soon  as  it  had  reached
a certain  height,  it  never  yielded  to  the  simple  ac  lion
of  a robust  constitution,  or  to  the  best  regulated  die  t or


to  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  to  two  of  my  most  deserving1
disciples,  both  for  their  own  benefit  and  that  of  their  patients.  I
did  so  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  of  seeing  my  discoveries  lost
for  mankind.  Having  reached  my  73rd  year,  it  was  not  im-
probable, that  I should  have  been  called  into  eternity  before
having  completed  my  work.


20


mode  of  life  ; on  the  contrary,  it  grew  worse  from  year
to  year,  to  the  end  of  life,  gradually  assuming  different
and  more  dangerous  symptoms/  This  is  the  case
with  every  chronic,  miasmatic  disease, — for  instance,
the  venereal  bubo,  when  it  has  become  a syphilitic  dis-
ease on  account  of  its  not  having  been  cured  from  within
by  mercury,  its  specific.  Syphilis  never  becomes  extinct
of  itself;  in  spite  of  the  best  mode  of  life  and  the  ro-
bustest  constitution,  it  increases  from  year  to  year,  and
assumes  new  and  more  dangerous  symptoms  to  the  end
of  life.

I had  reached  this  point,  when  my  investigations  and
observations  upon  non-venereal  chronic  patients  led  me  at
once  to  perceive  that  a previously  existing  itch,  which
they  often  confessed  to  have  had,  was  the  cause  why
many  diseases  that  appeared  to  be  separate  and  coherent
maladies,  should  not  be  cured  by  homoeopathic  treat-
ment. All  the  subsequent  sufferings  were  dated  from
the  time  when  the  psoric  eruption  had  manifested  itself.
In  many  of  these  chronic  patients,  who  were  unwilling
to  confess  having  had  the  itch,  or  who  had  been  too
careless  to  heed  it,  or  had  no  recollection  of  it,  I often
discovered,  by  careful  inquiries,  that  vestiges  of  the  itch
had  shown  themselves  upon  their  bodies  from  time  to
time,  in  the  shape  of  small  pustules  or  herpes,  etc.,  as  so
many  infallible  symptoms  of  the  chronic  contagion.

These  circumstances,  coupled  with  the  fact,  that
psoric  eruptions  which  had  been  removed  by  evil  prac-
tices or  by  some  other  cause,  were  evidently  followed
in  otherwise  healthy  persons  by  chronic  ailments  having
the  like  or  similar  symptoms — as  had  been  observed


* Phthisis  often  passed  into  frenzy,  drying-up  ulcers  into
dropsy  or  apoplexy,  intermittent  fever  into  asthma,  affections  of
the  abdomen  into  pains  in  the  joints  or  paralysis,  influenza  into
hemorrhage,  etc.  It  was  not  difficult  to  perceive  that  the  new
symptoms  were  founded  in  the  existing  primitive  malady,  and
could  only  be  parts  of  a much  more  extensive  disease.


21


both  by  other  physicians,*  and  myself)  in  an  infinite  tttiffl*
her  of  cases— left  me  no  doubt  about  the  internal  ene-
my which  I had  to  combat  in  my  medical  treatment.

This  internal  enemy  I shall  designate  by  the  general
term  psora.  It  is  an  internal  disease) — a sort  of  internal
itch) — and  may  exist  either  with  or  without  an  eruption
upon  the  skin.  Little  by  little  I discovered  more  ade-
quate remedies  against  this  internal  disease,  from  which
sprang  so  many  sufferings.  From  the  relief  which  I
obtained  by  their  employment  in  cases  where  the  pa-
tient had  no  recollection  of  the  itch,  I inferred  that  they
resulted  from  a 'psora  which  had  been  communicated  to
the  patient  in  the  cradle,  or  in  some  other  way,  of  which
he  had  no  recollection.  By  carefully  inquiring  of  the
parents  or  old  relatives,  I discovered  that  my  suspicion
was  well  founded.

Investigating  with  the  utmost  care  the  curative  power
of  the  antipsoric  remedies  which  had  been  discovered
for  the  last  eleven  years,-  I became  more  and  more  con-
vinced that  the  milder  as  well  as  the  more  extensive,
and  even  the  most  inveterate  chronic  diseases,  owe  their
existence  to  the  psoric  miasm.

I found  that  thousands  of  tedious  ailments,  which  we
find  enumerated  in  our  pathological  works  under  dis-
tinct names,  originate,*  with  a few  exceptions,  in  this
widely  ramified  psora. . Such  diseases  are  most  of  those
eruptions  upon  the  skin  which  have  been  distinguished
with  so  much  care,  and  separately  denominated  by  Wil-
lan  ; almost  all  adventitious  formations,  from  the  com-
mon even  up  to  the  largest  sarcomatous  tumours,  from
the  deformities  of  the  finger-nails  up  to  ramollisse-
ment  of  the  bones  and  curvatures  of  the  spine,  and  seve-
ral other  diseases  of  this  kind,  in  early  as  well  as  a more
advanced  age  ; frequent  epistaxis,  varices  of  the  veins
of  the  rectum  and.  the  anus,  blind  or  flowing  hemor-
rhoids, hemoptysis,  hematemesis,  hematuria,  amenor-


* More  recently,  especially,  by  von  Autenrieth , (see  Tlibin-
ger  Blatter  fur  Naturwissenschaft  und  Arzneikunde,  sec.  vol.,
sec.  part.)

1*


22


riioea,  menorrhagia  ; night-sweats  and  diairhoea  of  seve-
ral years  standing  ; parchment-like  dryness  of  the  skin,
permanent  constipation  and  difficult  evacuation  of  the
bowels  5 long-continued  local  pains  ; convulsions  having
occurred  again  and  again  for  a number  of  years  ; chronic
ulcers  and  inflammations  j sarcomatous  enlargement  of
the  adipose  tissue  as  well  as  emaciation  ; sur-excitation  as
well  as  weakness  of  the  different  senses  ; excessive  as
well  as  extinguished  sexual  desire  ; diseases  of  both  the
mind  and  the  soul  from  imbecility  up  to  ecstasy,  from
melancholy  up  to  frenzy  ; swoons,  vertigo,  the  so-called
diseases  of  the  heart,  abdominal  complaints,  and  the  dif-
ferent forms  of  hysteria  and  hypochondria-  Careful
observations,  comparisons  and  experiments  in  latter
years  have  revealed  to  me  the  fact,  that  the  tedious  ail-
ments of  both  the  body  and  the  soul,  (provided  they  do
not  belong  to  the  class  of  syphilis  or  sycosis,)  which
differ  so  much  from  each  other  in  their  principal  symp-
toms, as  well  as  in  the  different  patients,  are  all  of  them
nothing  but  partial  manifestations  of  one  primitive  chro-
nic psoric  miasm,  in  which  they  all  originate,  and  whose
innumerable  symptoms  form  but  one  integral  disease,
and  ought,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  and  treated  as  parts
of  one  and  the  same  disturbance.  Of  this  nature  are
the  great  epidemic  typhus  fevers,  like  that  of  1813.
One  patient  exhibits  but  a few  symptoms  of  the  epide-
mic, a second  patient  a few  others,  a third  and  a fourth
again  other  symptoms  inherent  in  that  disease,  all  of
these  different  symptoms  constituting  the  same  pestilen-
tial fever,  and  in  their  integrality,  exhibiting  the  com-
plete image  of  the  disease.  A few  homoeopathic  reme-
dies* will  cure  such  a typhus  in  every  patient  infected
with  the  disease,  though  each  patient  may  exhibit  dif-
ferent symptoms,  and  may  seem  to  be  afflicted  with  a
different  malady.f

This  is,  upon  a larger  scale , the  case  with  psora,  this


* In  the  typhus  fever  of  1813,  bryonia  and  rhus  toxicoden-
dron were  the  specific  remedies  for  all  patients.

f See  Organon  of  the  healing  art,  fifth  edition,  1834,  § 100,
etc.


23


fountain-head  of  so  many  chronic  ailments,  each  of  which
appears  to  be  essentially  different  from  the  other.  But
this  difference  does  not  exist,  as  may  be  inferred  from
the  fact,  that  the  various  successively  appearing  symp-
toms constituting  those  ailments  belong  to  many  of  them
in  common,  and  may  be  cured  by  the  same  remedies.

I have  already  mentioned  that  all  chronic  diseases  of
mankind — even  those  which  are  left  to  themselves  with-
out having  been  made  worse  by  wrong  treatment — are
so  inveterate  immediately  after  they  have  become  devel-
oped in  the  system,  that,  unless  they  are  thoroughly  cured
by  art,  they  continue  to  increase  in  intensity  until  the
moment  of  death.  They  never  disappear  of  themselves,
nor  can  they  be  diminished,  much  less  conquered  or
extinguished,  by  the  most  vigorous  constitution,  or  the
most  regular  mode  of  life  and  strictest  diet.  All  chronic
diseases,  therefore,  originate  and  are  based  upon  fixed
chronic  miasms,  which  enable  their  parasitical  ramifica-
tions to  spread  through  the  human  organism  and  to  grow
without  end.

In  Europe,  as  well  as  in  the  other  continents,  we  have
been  able  to  discover  but  three  psoric  miasms  which
cause  diseases  manifesting  themselves  by  local  symp-
toms, and  in  which  most  chronic  ailments  originate.
These  miasms  are  syphilis , (which  I have  also  termed
the  venereal  chancre,)  sycosis , and  then  psora , which
forms  the  basis  of  the  ilch.  The  last  being  the  most
important,  I shall  speak  of  it  first.

Though  this  psora  is  the  oldest , most  universal  and
most  pernicious  chronic  miasmatic  disease,  yet  it  has
been  misapprehended  more  than  any  other.  For  thou-
sands of  years  it  has  disfigured  and  tortured  mankind  ;
and,  during  the  last  centuries,  it  has  become  the  cause  of
those  thousands  of  incredibly  different,  acute  as  well  as
chronic,  non-venereal  diseases,  with  which  the  civilized
portion  of  mankind  becomes  more  and  more  infected
upon  the  whole  inhabited  globe.*


* Note  of  the  translator. — This  statement  about  the  pro-
gressive increase  of  disease  is  erroneous,  though  it. does  by  no
means  invalidate  the  general  truth  of  the  principle.  Professor


24


Psora  is  the  oldest  miasmatic  chronic  disease  known.
The  oldest  history  of  the  oldest  nations  does  not  reach
its  origin.

Psora  is  just  as  tedious  as  syphilis  and  sycosis , and
is,  moreover,  hydra-lieaded.  Unless  it  is  thoroughly
cured,  it  lasts  until  the  last  breath  of  the  longest  life  ; not
even  the  robustest  constitution,  by  its  own  unaided  ef-
forts, is  able  to  annihilate  and  to  extinguish  psora.

In  the  many  thousands  of  years  since  it  has  visited  man-
kind, the  multitude  of  its  morbid  symptoms  has  increased
to  such  an  extent,* *  that  its  secondary  symptoms  have  be-
come innumerable.  All  natural  chronic  ailments  now
existing,  which  have  not  been  produced  by  bad  medical
treatment,  or  by  the  fumes  of  quicksilver,  lead,  arsenic,
etc.,  in  the  workshops,  and  which  we  find  arrayed  in  the
usual  treatises  on  pathology  as  distinctly  bounded  and
separately  named  diseases,  originate  in  psora  as  their
fountain-head.  The  diseases  originating  in  syphilis,  and
those  rare  ones  resulting  from  sycosis,  do  not  come  under
this  remark.


Marx,  of  Goettingen,  in  his  treatise  of  the  statistics  of  disease,
which  has  been  translated  into  English  by  Doctor  W.  If.  Willis,
has  conclusively  shown,  that  disease  has  been  decreasing  from
age  to  age,  and  that  there  is  much  less  of  it  now  than  there  ever
was  before.  The  reason  why  even  such  men  as  Hahnemann
believe  in  a progressing  increase  of  disease,  may  perhaps  be
this,  that  there  is  yet  an  immeasurable  quantity  of  disease  exist-
ing around  us,  and  that  we  imagine  the  existence  of  so  much
disease  impossible,  unless  it  be  the  result  of  a constantly  increas-
ing accumulation.

* Note  of  the  translator. — Hahnemann  thinks  that  this
extension  of  the  manifestations  of  psora  may  be  explained  by
this  miasm  spreading  through  so  many  organisms.  Hahne-
mann’s statement  may  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  psoric  miasm
has  increased  in  intensity.  This  is  not  so.  By  spreading
through  millions  of  organisms,  the  psoric  miasm  has  become
divided,  and  its  intensity  is,  therefore,  less.  Division  implies
diminution — increase  in  extent,  but  decrease  in  quality  or  degree.
It  is  assuredly  true  that  the  psoric  miasm  must  have  infected  all
the  progressive  manifestations  of  man’s  inherent  vital  energies,
and  even  of  the  soul’s  vitality,  but  making  allowance  for  this
loss,  there  must  yet  be  left  a balance  in  favour  of  the  opposing
orces,  otherwise  life  would  gradually  become  extinct.


25


According  lo  the  most  ancient  historical  writings  which
we  possess,  psora  existed  already  almost  fully  developed
in  the  earliest  ages  of  mankind.  Several  varieties  of  psora
have  already  been  delineated  by  Moses*  3400  years  ago.
At  that  time,  however,  and  always  afterwards,  among  the
Israelites,  psora  appears  to  have  especially  infected  the
external  parts  of  the  body.  This  was  also  the  ease
among  the  Greek  barbarians,  then  among  the  Arabs,  and
finally  in  the  uncivilized  Europe  of  the  middle  ages.  It
is  not  my  object  to  relate  here  the  different  names  by
which  the  various  nations  have  designated  the  more  or
less  malignant  varieties  of  leprosy?  (external  symptoms
of  psora,)  by  which  the  external  parts  of  the  body  become
variously  disfigured.  Names  are  of  no  consequence
here,  since  the  essence  of  this  miasmatic  itch  is  every
where  the  same.

In  the  middle  ages  Europe  was  visited  for  several
centuries  by  the  frightful  psora  of  the  occidental  coun-
tries, in  the  shape  of  a malignant  erysipelas,  called  St.
Anthony’s  Fire.  In  the  thirteenth  century  it  assumed
again  the  form  of  leprosy  ; the  crusaders  brought  this
latter  disease  along  with  them.  By  this  means  leprosy
spread  in  Europe  more  than  it  ever  had  done  before,  for
in  the  year  1226  there  were  in  France  about  2000
houses  for  the  reception  of  leprous  patients.  Neverthe-

* In  the  13th  chapter  of  the  third  book,  and  also  in  the
21st  chapter,  20th  verse  of  the  same  book,  where  Moses  speaks
of  the  defects  which  priests  destined  to  do  the  offering  ought  not
to  have,  the  malignant  itch  is  designated  by  the  term  £“[3  ;

T T

the  Alexandrian  translators  render  this  by  4wpa  ciypla,  the  Vul-
gate by  scabies  jugis.  The  interpreter  of  the  Talmud,  Jona-
than, defines  it  a dry  itch  spread  over  the  body  ; and,  according
to  him,  the  expression  used  by  Moses  represents  lichen ,

herpes.  (See  Rosenmiiller;  scholia  in  Levit..  P.  II.,  edit,  sec.,
page  124.)  The  interpreters  of  the  so-called  English  bible-work
agree  with  this  definition.  Calmet  says  that  “ leprosy  is  like  an
inveterate  itch,  with  vehement  itching.”

The  ancients  also  mention  the  voluptuous  itching,  which  has
constantly  been  peculiar  to  and  characteristic  of  the  eruption  of
the  itch.  The  scratching  is  followed  by  the  painful  burning.
Plato- calls  the  itch  yrvxvraxp op.  Cicero  speaks  of  the  dulcedv
of  scabies.


26


less,  psora,  spreading  farther  and  farther  in  the  form  of
a horrible  eruption  upon  the  skin,  found  at  least  some
external  alleviation  in  those  means  of  cleanliness  which
the  crusaders  had  brought  along  with  them  from  the
Last,  such  as  (cotton  ? linen  7)  shirts  which  had  been
unknown  in  Europe  heretofore,  and  the  frequent  use
ol  warm  baths.  These  means,  together  with  an  increas-
ing refinement  and  more  select  nourishment,  succeeded,
in  a couple  of  centuries,  in  diminishing  the  disgusting
appearance  of  psora  so  as  to  reduce  the  disease,  to-
wards the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  to  the  ordinary
eruption  of  the  itch.  But  alas!  about  this  time,  in  the
year  1493,  syphilis , the  second  miasmatic  chronic  dis-
ease, began  to  raise  its  fearful  head.

The  psoric  eruption  which  appeared  after  infection  had
taken  place,  and  which,  in  civilized  countries,  had  been
reduced  to  a simple  manifestation  of  the  common  itch,
was  easily  driven  from  the  skin  by  all  sorts  of  contrivan-
ces. By  means  of  baths,  lotions,  sulphur  ointments,
preparations  of  lead,  copper,  zinc,  and  mercury,  of  which
the  middle  and  higher  classes  availed  themselves,  the
psoric  eruption  was  often,  and  is  now  so  quickly  sup-
pressed, that  it  remained  often  unknown  whether  a child
or  a full-grown  person,  in  those  classes,  liad  been  infect-
ed with  the  itch.

But  the  cause  of  humanity  was  not  improved  by
these  proceedings  ; on  the  contrary,  in  many  respects  it
grew  worse.  During  the  centuries  when  the  psoric
eruption  was  first  known  in  the  form  of  leprosy,  the
patients,  though  they  suffered  much  in  consequence
of  lancinating  pains  in  the  tumours  and  scabs,  and  the
vehement  itching  all  around,  enjoyed  nevertheless  a fair
share  of  general  health.  For,  the  obstinately  lasting  erup-
tion upon  the  skin  served  as  a substitute  for  the  internal
psora;  and,  what  is  more,  the  horrible  and  disgusting
appearance  of  leprous  patients  made  such  an  impres-
sion upon  all  healthy  persons  that  they  were  frightened
away  already  at  a distance  ; in  this  way  the  leprous
patients  being  kept  apart  from  human  society  in  sepa-
rate houses,  the  contagion  remained  limited  and  was,
comparatively  speaking,  rare.


n


t


The  milder  forms  of  psora  which  appeared  again,  a$
has  been  mentioned  before,  during  the  14th  and  15th
centuries,  in  the  shape  of  the  itch,  infected  a far  greater
number  than  the  leprous  patients  were  able  to  do,  whose
frightful  appearance  caused  them  to  be  carefully  avoided
by  every  body.  The  itch  vesicles  do  scarcely  appear,
and  may  be  easily  kept  concealed  ; but  being  constant-
ly scratched  open  in  consequence  of  the  intolerable  itch-
ing, and  the  fluid  being  spread  over  the  skin  and  those
things  which  had  been  touched  by  such  patients,  the
infection,  being  concealed,  takes  place  the  more  easily,
and  certainly,  and  affects  a greater  number.

In  this  way  psora  has  become  the  most  contagions
and  the  most  universal  of  the  chronic  miasms.

This  miasm  has  generally  already  been  communica-
ted before  the  patient  uses  some  external  remedy  (lead-
water,  mercurial  ointment)  against  the  eruption.  Often
he  does  not  even  admit  having  had  the  itch ; perhaps
he  did  not  know  it;  and  it  even  happens  that  the  physi-
cian or  the  surgeon  are  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the
eruption  which  is  repelled  by  lead-water,  &c.

It  may  be  easily  conceived  that,  among  persons  of  the
inferior  classes,  who  suffer  the  eruption  to  grow  upon  the
skin  until  they  become  objects  of  horror  to  their  fellow
beings,  the  infection  must  have  been  widely  spread  by
such  patients  before  they  do  something  towards  remov-
ing the  eruption.

The  more  concealed  and  proportionately  easier  and
more  frequent  infection  of  the  itch  is  not  the  only  disad-
vantage which  has  resulted  for  mankind  from  the  pscric
miasm  having  been  reduced  from  leprosy  to  the  com-
mon itch.  There  is  another  disadvantage,  which  is
this,  that  the  essence  of  this  reduced  psora  is  unchang-
ed, that  it  is  equally  formidable  as  before,  and  that,  be-
ing more  easily  repelled  from  the  skin,  it  appears  so
much  more  imperceptibly  upon  the  inner  surfaces  ; the
chief  symptom,  which  is  the  external  eruption,  having
been  suppressed,*  it  produces  an  innumerable  quantity


* The  itch  may  not  only  be  removed  by  the  evil  prac-
tice of  physicians  and  quacks ; it  often  leaves  the  skin  of


of  secondary  chronic  ailments.  Physicians  lose  sight
of  the  origin  of  that  host  of  secondary  morbid  symp*


itself,  as  may  be  seen  below  from  the  observations  of  older  phy-
sicians, in  Nos.  0,  17,  26,  36,  50,  58,  61,  64,  65.  In  this  respect
syphilis  and  sycosis  have  an  advantage  over  psora.  In  syphilis
tve  have  the  chancre  or  bubo,  and  in  sycosis  the  cauliflower  ex-
crescence, which  never  leave  the  external  parts,  until  they  have
either  been  destroyed  by  external  applications  or  else  have  been
removed  by  a rational  cure,  together  with  the  whole  of  the  inter-
nal disease.  Hence  syphilis , and  the  secondary  symptoms  of
sycosis , arc  impossible  as  long  as  the  chancre  or  the  cauliflower
excrescence  are  not  violently  removed  from  the  external  parts.
Both  chancre  and  cauliflower  excrescence  are  external,  unchange-
able local  substitutes  for  the  internal  disease,  leaving  it  latent  to
the  end  of  life,  and  enabling  the  practitioner  to  cure  the  internal
disease  by  the  appropriate  internal  remedies,  which  ought  to  be
continued  until  the  local  substitutes  have  disappeared  without
any  external  applications.  As  soon  as  this  shall  have  taken
place,  both  syphilis  and  sycosis  are  thoroughly  cured.

In  the  last  three  centuries,  the  psoric  miasm,  Which  now  mani-
fests itself  in  the  shape  of  the  common  itch,  has  been  losing  this
benign  character.  Tim  itch  does  not  remain  Upon  the  skin  as  con-
stantly and  invariably  as  either  chancre  or  cauliflower  excrescence.
Although  the  eruption  is  often  removed  by  the  evil  practice  of  phy-
sicians and  quacks,  by  desiccating  washes,  by  salves  of  sulphur,
drastic  purgatives  or  cupping,  yet  it  often  disappears  of  itself
as  it  is  called,  without  any  known  cause.  It  often  disappears
in  consequence  of  an  untoward  physical  or  moral  impression,
violent  fright,  permanent  chagrin,  deep  grief,  violent  catarrh,
cold  air,  (as  may  be  seen  below,  No.  67,)  cold,  tepid  and  warm
mineral  and  river  baths,  a fever  which  may  have  resulted  from
any  cause,  or  some  other  acute  disease,  (small-pox,  see  No.  39,)
continuous  diarrhoea,  or  perhaps  a peculiar  want  of  action  in  the
skin;  in  all  these  cases  the  consequences  are  just  as  bad  as  if
the  eruption  had  been  removed  by  irrational  medical  treatment.
The  secondary  symptoms  of  the  internal  psora , and  some  one  of
the  innumerable  chronic  diseases  which  owe  their  existence  'to
this  cause,  break  out  sooner  or  later  after  the  external  eruption
has  disappeared  by  any  of  the  above  named  causes.

Nevertheless  it  ought  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  psoric  miasm,
as  manifested  by  the  milder  eruption,  is  essentially  different
from  the  ancient  leprosy.  Recent  leprosy  was,  in  old  times,
often  removed  from  the  skin  by  cold  bathing,  frequent  ablutions
in  rivers,  warm  mineral  baths,  (see  No.  35  ;)  but  the  old  physi-
cians heeded  the  evil  consequences  of  such  a treatment  no  more
than  the  modern  do  the  acute  affections  and  the  lingering  mala-
dies  which  constantly  appear  as  results  of  the  internal  psora,
after  the  voluntary  or  violent  removal  of  the  external  eruption.


29


toms  ; they  are  unable  to  discover  it,  and  the  secondary
disease  is  just  as  incurable  as  had  been  the  original  ma-
lady with  its  eruption  existing  upon  the  skin.  This
had,  in  fact,  never  been  thoroughly  cured,  as  experience
showed,  but  had  constantly  been  made  worse  by  a quan-
tity of  false  remedies.

At  the  time  when  the  psoric  poison  was  }'Cl  reduced
to  its  formidable  external  substitute,  leprosy,  there  were
much  less  nervous  affections,  painful  ailments,  spasms^
cancerous  ulcers,  adventitious  formations,  weaknesses,
paralyses,  consumptions,  and  degenerations  of  either
body  or  soul,  than  there  are  now.  These  have  especi-
ally appeared  in  the  last  three  centuries  from  the  above
named  causes.*

Psora  became  therefore  the  common  mother  of  most
chronic  diseases.

It  may  be  said  that  at  least  seven  eighths  of  the  pre-
sently existing  chronic  maladies  originate  in  the  reck-
less suppression  of  the  chief  external  symptom  of
psora , which  acts  as  a substitute  for  the  internal  disease.
The  remaining  eighth  originates  in  syphilis  or  sycosis ,
or  in  a complication  of  both  miasms,  or,  what  is  very
rare,  in  all  three  combined.  Syphilis  may  be  easily
cured  by  the  smallest  dose  of  the  best  mercurial  prepa-
ration, and  sycosis  by  a few  doses  of  thuya  employed  in
alternation  with  nitric  acid.  The  cure  of  these  mias-


* The  increased  irritability  of  the  muscular  fibre  and  the  ner-
vous excitability  consequent  upon  the  use  of  coffee  and  Chinese
tea,  which  has  become  so  universal  for  the  last  two  hundred
years,  have  given  the  past  generation  an  additional  impulse  to-
wards a multitude  of  chronic  sufferings,  and  have  helped  the
psora  to  spread  itself  more  and  more.  I,  least  of  all,  have  a
right  to  deny  this,  as  I have  shown,  perhaps  too  strongly,  in  my
little  work  on  the  effects  of  coffee , (Leipsic,  1803,)  what  a large
share  this  beverage  has  in  the  bodily  and  spiritual  ailments  of
mankind.  At  that  time  I had  not  yet  discovered  the  principal
source  of  most  chronic  diseases,  which  is  psora.  Coffee  and
tea  are  palliatives  for  several  psoric  symptoms.  Psora  could
not  have  produced  such  inveterate  chronic  ailments,  if  if  had  not
been  aided  by  the  immoderate  use  of  coffee  and  tea.


30


rnatic  diseases  is  only  then  difficult  and  tedious  when
they  are  complicated  with  psora.  Psora  is  most  easily
overlooked  and  misapprehended,  and  is,  for  this  reason,
treated  in  the  worst  and  most  pernicious  manner.

Modern  physicians,  even  the  most  distinguished,  with-
out excepting  almost  any,  either  teacher  or  author,  have
established  the  rule,  and  have  given  it  almost  as  an  in-
fallible proposition,  “ that  every  psoric  eruption  is  a mere
local  affection  of  the  skin,  with  which  the  organism  has
nothing  to  do  ; that  the  eruption  may  be  unhesitatingly
removed  by  sulphur  ointments,  by  the  more  active  oint-
ment of  Jasser,  b}^  sulphur  fumigations,  by  solutions  of
lead  or  zinc,  but  most  speedily  by  mercurial  prepara-
tions ; that  health  is  restored  as  soon  as  the  external
eruption  has  been  removed  ; that  it  is  indeed  true  that,
by  neglecting  the  eruption  and  leaving  it  upon  the  skin,
the  morbid  matter  may  be  finally  absorbed  into  the  hu-
mours ; that  it  may  deteriorate  the  blood,  and  ruin  the
general  health  ; that  these  perverted  humours  may  how-
ever be  easily  removed  out  of  the  system  by  purgatives
and  bloodlettings  ; but  that  all  these  secondary  diseases  •
may  be  entirely  avoided  by  speedily  removing  the  erup-
tion from  the  skin.”  There  never  was  taught  a doctrine
which  has  been  more  fraught  with  evil  consequences
for  mankind.

Such  horrible  untruths  were  not  only  taught  formerly,
but  they  are  taught  and  even  practised  in  our  days.  In
the  most  celebrated  civil  and  military  hospitals  of  the
most  enlightened  countries  and  cities,  and  also  among
private  patients  of  all  classes,  in  prisons  and  orphan  asy-
lums, in  short,  all  those  who  are  affected  with  the  itch,
are  ordered,  by  common  as  well  as  distinguished  physi-
cians, to  use  external  applications  for  the  purpose  of  re-
moving the  eruption  the  sooner  the  better,*  (as  they


* These  gentlemen,  agreeably  to  the  fanciful  notion  which
they  have  fashioned  of  the  nature  of  this  important  disease,  as-
sert that,  in  this  case,  the  psoric  miasm  has  not  had  time  to  be
absorbed  into  the  humours  and  to  deteriorate  them.  But  sup-
pose the  first  little  itch  vesicle,  the  voluptuous  itching  of  which
excites  a continual  desire  for  scratching,  which  is  followed  by


31


imagine;)  they  may  use  perhaps  large  quantities  of
flowers  of  sulphur  internally,  and  some  strong  purga-
tives, with  a view,  as  they  suppose,  of  cleansing  the
system.  This  being  done,  they  impudently  assert  that
the  disease  is  cured,  and  the  patients  are  dismissed *  *
without  the  least  regard  for  the  secondary  ailments
which  will  certainly  sooner  or  later  manifest  themselves
as  results  of  the  psoric  reaction.!

The  deceived  and  unfortunate  patients  sooner  or
later  return  to  the  hospital,  affected  with  the  unavoidable
consequences  of  the  former  treatment,  such  as  swellings,
obstinate  pain  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  hypochon-
dria, hysteria,  gout,  consumption,  tubercular  phthisis,
spasmodic  asthma,  blindness,  deafness,  paralysis,  car-
cinoma of  the  bones,  cancerous  ulcers,  spasms,  hemor-
rhage, diseases  of  the  mind  and  the  soul,  etc.  These  are


the  burning-  pain,  should  prove,  as  we  shall  see  below,  that  the
psoric  disease  was  already  formed  and  completely  developed  in
the  inmost  depths  of  the  org-anism  1 What  is  to  be  done,  if
every  removal  of  the  eruption  by  external  applications,  so  far
from  diminishing-  the  violence  of  the  internal  malady,  forces  it,
as  is  shown  by  thousands  of  facts,  to  break  forth  either  in  a vast
number  of  acute  affections,  or  else  gradually  to  ramify  into  a
host  of  chronic  ailments,  that  torture  mankind  and  paralyse  their
strength  1 Can  these  be  cured  by  the  ordinary  methods  1 Ex-
perience shows  that  they  cannot.

* It  sometimes  happens  that  in  vigorous  patients  affected
with  the  itch,  the  eruption  which  had  been  removed  by  salves
and  purgatives,  is  brought  out  again  by  the  vital  power,  (whose
instinctive  wisdom,  being  based  upon  a natural  law,  is  superior
to  the  understanding  of  its  destroyers.)  The  patient  then  re-
turns to  the  hospital,  and  the  treatment  by  ointments  and  washes
of  zinc  or  lead  in  solution  is  renewed.  To  my  knowledge,  this
pernicious  removal  of  the  eruption  by  external  applications  has
been  repeated  three  times  in  succession  in  military  hospitals  by
senseless  and  homicidal  quacks,  their  excuse  being  that  the
patient  had  caught  the  itch  at  three  different  periods,  which  is
impossible.

f I wrote  this  .six  years  ago  ; hut  even  at  this  moment  the
same  criminal  doctrines  are  taught  by  physicians  of  the  old
school.  In  this  most  important  of  all  medical  interests,  they
have  neither  become  wiser  nor  more  charitable  by  one  hair’s
breadth.


if


32


considered  new  diseases,  and,  without  suspecting  their
origin,  treated  according  to  the  usual  routine  of  thera-
peutics. But  the  remedies  are  directed  against  phan-
toms, imaginary  causes,  until,  after  many  years  of  in-
creasing suffering,  death  ensues,  and  frees  the  patients
from  the  hands  of  the  doctor/

In  the  treatment  of  psora  the  older  physicians  were
much  more  conscientious  than  modern  doctors  are,  and
they  were  much  more  enlightened  observers.  Their
practice  was  based  upon  experience,  which  showed  them
that  the  removal  of  the  psoric  eruption  from  the  skin  by
external  applications  was  followed  by  innumerable  ail-
ments, and  the  most  grievous  chronic  maladies.  Hence
they  concluded  that  every  case  of  itch  originated  in
some  internal  disease,  which  they  endeavoured  to  cure,
as  well  as  possible,  by  an  innumerable  quantity  of  their
therapeutic  agents.  Of  course,  their  endeavours  were
fruitless,  for  they  were  ignorant  of  the  only  true  method
of  curing  psoric  diseases,  which  it  was  reserved  for
homoeopathy  to  reveal  to  the  world.  Nevertheless,
their  efforts  being  aimed  at  removing  the  internal  dis-
ease, which  had  given  origin  to  the  eruption  upon  the
skin,  they  deserve  much  praise.  In  this  respect  the
older  physicians  differ  from  the  modern,  whose  chief  ob-
ject is  to  remove  the  itch  from  the  skin  as  though  it
were  a mere  cutaneous  disease,  without  dreaming  of
the  subsequent  injuries  which  the  older  physicians  have,
in  a thousand  instances,  exhibited  in  their  works  as
warning  examples.


* I3y  a kind  of  accident  the  patients  were  sometimes  directed
to  use  sulphur  baths.  But  this  direction  was  given  without  the
doctor  knowing  why  he  gave  it;  it  was  mere  empiricism,  for
he  gave  this  direction  because  he  had  exhausted  his  whole  stock
baths  the  chronic  disease  often  disappeared  for  a time,  but  af-
terwards returned  either  with  the  same  or  analogous  symptoms  ;
in  this  case  it  was  useless  to  resort  again  to  the  bath,  because
the  cure  of  psora  which  has  ceased  to  be  latent,  requires  a much
more  adequate  treatment  than  the  brutal  use  of  sulphur  baths
can  afford.


33


Bui  the  remarks  of  these  honest  practitioners  are  too
, striking  to-  be  left  unnoticed,  or  to  be  treated  with  con-
tempt.

I shall  subjoin  here  some  of  the  innumerable  cases
of  malpractice  in  the  treatment  of  the  itch,  which  the
older  physicians  have  left  us,  and  which  will  be  found
sufficient,  though  I might  double  the  number  by  quoting
the  cases  which  I have  witnessed  myself,  to  prove  that
the  internal  psora  breaks  forth  with  a perfect  rage  when-
ever it  has  been  deprived  of  its  external  substitute,  the
cutaneous  eruption.  Would  that  the  physician  might
learn  from  these  cases  that  all  his  efforts  should  be  di
reeled  against  the  internal  disease,  and  that  an  adequate
cure  of  this  disease  will  not  only  cause  the  cutaneous
eruption  completely  to  disappear,  but  will  prevent,  and,
in  case  they  should  already  exist,  will  cure  all  the  se-
condary chronic  ailments  consequent  upon  psoric  reac-
tion, and  undermining  the  patient’s  life  to  his  last  mo-
ment.

These  ailments,  either  acute  or  chronic, — the  latter
being  the  more  important,— by  which  a suppression  of
the  cutaneous  eruption  acting  as  a substitute  for  the  in-
ternal disease,  is  unavoidably  followed — this  mode  of  sup-
pressing the  eruption  being  falsely  called,  “ repelling  the
itch  into  the  system  ” — are  as  various  as  the  peculiari-
ties of  the  different  constitutions,  and  the  different  modes
in  which  they  are  affected  by  external  influences.

A short  review  of  the  evil  consequences  resulting
from  the  suppression  of  the  cutaneous  eruption  of  the
itch,  may  be  found  in  a dissertation  “ De  Damno  ex
Scabie  Repulsa,  Hal.  1750,”  p.  15  — 18,  by  the  experi-
enced and  honest  Lewis  Christian  Juncker.  He  ob-
served that  in  young  people  of  a sanguine  temperament,
this  suppression  was  followed  by  tubercular  phthisis  ;
and  that  generally,  in  persons  of  a sanguine  tempera-
ment, it  was  followed  by  hemorrhoids,  colic,  with  bloody
stools,  and  gravel  ; in  persons  of  a sanguine-choleric
temperament,  by  swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  stiffen-
ing of  the  joints,  and  malignant  ulcers,  (called  in  German,
Todtenbrueche ;)  in  fat  persons,  by  a suffocating  ca-


34


tarrli  and  tabes  mucosa,  inflammatory  fever,  acute  pleu-
risy and  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  He  says  that  in
opening  the  bodies  of  such  patients,  the  lungs  have  bben
found  indurated  and  interspersed  with  sacculated  cavi-
ties full  of  pus  ; that  other  indurations  have  likewise
been  discovered,  together  with  swelling  of  the  bones,
and  ulcers  ; that  in  persons  of  a phlegmatic  tempera-
ment, this  suppression  of  the  cutaneous  eruption  pro-
duced in  most  cases  dropsy ; that  the  menses  were  de-
layed, and  that  they  were  changed  to  hemoptysis  in
case  the  eruption  had  been  suppressed  during  their
flow  ; that  persons  of  a melancholy  temperament  be-
came sometimes  deranged,  and  that  in  pregnant  women,
having  this  temperament,  the  foetus  was  killed  ; that  the
suppression  of  the  eruption  sometimes  caused  sterility  ;*
that  the  secretion  of  milk  in  nursing  women  was  arrest-
ed ; that  the  menses  ceased  to  flow  before  women  had
attained  the  proper  age  j and  that  in  older  women  the
uterus  became  affected  with  carcinoma,  accompanied
with  deep-seated,  burning  pains,  and  general  emaciation.

His  experience  has  been  frequently  confirmed  by  the
observations  of  others.t  From  this  suppression  of  the
cutaneous  eruption  of  the  itch  have  resulted :


* A pregnant  Jewess  had  the  itch  upon  her  hands ; she  re-
moved it  in  the  eighth  month  of  her  pregnancy,  in  order  not  to
show  it  during  the  period  of  her  delivery.  She  was  delivered
three  days  after  the  suppression  of  the  eruption.  The  lochial
discharge  was  arrested,  and  she  had  an  acute  fever.  It  was  now
seven  years  since  she  had  been  sterile  and  afflicted  with  leucor-
rhoea.  Having  become  poor,  she  was  obliged  to  go  a great  dis-
tance barefooted  ; this  brought  the  itch  out  again;  leucorrheea
and  the  hysteric  affection  disappeared,  she  became  again  preg-
nant, and  was  delivered  of  a healthy  child. — (Juncker,  ibidem.)

f In  preparing  the  first  edition  of  my  Chronic  Diseases,  I was
yet  unacquainted  with  Autenrieth' s Essays  for  the  Practice  of
Medicine,  based  upon  observations  made  in  the  clinical  hospitals
of  Tubingen,  1808.  His  remarks  on  the  diseases  consequent
upon  the  suppression  of  the  itch  by  external  applications,  con-
firm perfectly  all  that  I had  already  found  in  hundred  other  au-
thors. He  too  has  observed  that  this  suppression  is  succeeded
by  ulcers  on  the  feet,  pulmonary  consumption,  chlorosis,  men-
strual irregularities,  white-swelling  in  the  knee,  dropsy  of  the


I


35

Asthma  * — F.  H.  L.  Muzell,  Walirnehmungen,  se-
cond collection,  8th  case  ;*  J.  Fr.  Gmelin  in  Gessners
Collection  of  Beobachtungen,  v.,  p.  21  ;* 1 2 3  Zieger,  Diss.
cle  Scabie  Artificiali,  Lips.  1758,  p.  32  ;3  Stanmen7
Diss.  de  Causis  Cur  Imprimis  Plebs  Scabie  Laboret,
Helmst.  1792,  p.  26  ;4  Pelargus  (Storch)  Obs.  Clin.


joints,  epilepsy,  amaurosis  with  obscured  cornea,  glaucoma,
(opacity  of  the  crystaline  lens,)  with  complete  amaurosis,  men-
tal derangement,  paralysis,  apoplexy,  torticollis,  etc.  Me  attri-
butes all  these  diseases  (though  incorrectly)  to  the  use  of  oint-
ments. But  the  slow  removal  of  the  itch,  which  he  proposes  to
effect  with  hepar  sulphuris  and  salves,  is  not  a whit  better  ; it
is  likewise  a mere  local  suppression  of  the  disease.  He  says
that  “ it  is  ridiculous  to  undertake  to  cure  the  itch  internally.’ *
This  shows  that  he  knows  nothing  about  the  proper  treatment  of
the  itch.  It  is  indeed  absurd  to  undertake  to  cure  the  internal
psoric  disease  completely  and  thoroughly,  by  any  other  but  in-
ternal remedies.

* Note  of  the  translator. — Hahnemann  quotes  a vast
number  of  authors  who  have  furnished  cases  of  the  evil  conse-
quences of  the  suppression  of  itch.  For  the  sake  of  brevity,  I
have  omitted  the  names  of  these  authors,  together  with  the  in-
dication of  their  works  and  the  cases  quoted,  leaving  only  those
authors  whose  cases  have  been  extracted  by  Hahnemann  in  full.

(1)  A man,  30  or  40  years  old,  had  been  affected  with  the
itch  a long  time  ago,  which  had  been  removed  by  ointments'.
Ever  since  then  he  became  more  and  more  asthmatic.  Breath-
ing became  finally  very  short  and  painful,  even  when  he  was
perfectly  quiet.  In  breathing  there  was  a sibilant  sound,  but  lit-
tle cough.  He  was  directed  to  take  an  injection  of  squills,  10
grains,  and  the  same  drug  internally  in  the  form  of  a powder.  3
grains.  But,  by  a mistake,  he  swallowed  the  16  grains.  He
was  in  danger  of  losing  his  life.  He  had  immense  nausea  and
retching.  But  the  itch  coming  out  again  in  abundance  on  his
hands,  feet,  and  on  the  whole  body,  the  asthma  disappeared  at
once.

(2)  The  vehement  asthma  was  combined  with  general  swell-
ing and  fever.

(3)  A man  of  32  years  had  the  itch  removed  by  sulphur  oint-
ment, in  consequence  of  which  he  suffered  the  most  violent
asthma  for  eleven  months.  The  eruption  was  at  last  restored  on
the  23rd  day.

(4)  A student  caught  the  itch  when  he  was  about  going  to  a
dance.  To  be  able' to  do  this,  he  had  the  itch  removed  as  soon
as  possible  by  a sulphur  ointment.  Soon  after  he  was  attacked


36


year  1722,  page  435  to  438  ;* * * * 5  Breslauer  Sammlungen,
of  the  year  1727,  p.  293  ;6  Riedlin,  father,  Obs.  Cent.
II.,  obs.  90.  Augsburg,  1691. 7 8

Catarrh  with  suffocation . — Ehrenf.  Hagendorn,  Hist.
Med.  Phys.  Cent.  I.,  Hist.  8,  9 ; 3 Pelargus,  Al.  Loc.
Jahrgang,  1723,  p.  15. 9


with  such  a vehement  asthma  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
take  breath  except  with  his  head  raised  ; during  the  attack  he

was  almost  suffocating.  After  having  thus  wrestled  with  death
for  an  hour,  he  threw  up  little  pieces  of  a cartilaginous  sub-
stance ; this  gave  him  some  ease  for  a time.  Having  returned

to  Osterode,  his  home,  he  suffered  for  two  years  of  this  disease.
The  attack  came  on  at  least  ten  times  each  day.  His  physician,

Beireis,  was  not  even  able  to  give  him  the  slightest  relief.

(5)  A boy  of  13  years  had  been  affected  with  tenia  ever  since
his  childhood.  His  mother  having  removed  it  by  an  ointment,
he  had  8 or  10  days  afterwards  a violent  attack  of  asthma  and
of  acute  pain  in  the  limbs,  back  and  knee,  which  only  disap-
peared a month  after,  when  the  itch  broke  out  all  over  his  body.

(6)  Tenia  capitis  was  cured  in  a little  girl  by  purgatives  and
other  internal  remedies.  The  child  was  then  attacked  with
dyspnoea,  cough  and  great  lassitude.  The  child  speedily  re-
covered his  health  as  soon  as  the  remedies  were  discontinued,
and  the  tenia  disappeared.

(7)  A boy  of  five  years  had  the  itch.  It  was  removed  by  an
ointment,  whereupon  he  was  seized  with  great  melancholy  and
cough.

(8)  Tenia  capitis  having  been  removed  by  the  application  of
almond  oil,  there  came  on  great  weariness  in  all  the  limbs,  head-
ache on  one  side,  want  of  appetite,  asthma,  waking  up  in  the
night  from  an  attack  of  catarrhal  suffocation,  violent  rhonchus
and  sibilus  in  the  chest,  convulsive  torsions  of  the  limbs,  as
though  he  were  in  articulo  mortis,  and  hematuria.  Upon  the
tenia  reappearing,  he  recovered  from  all  these  ailments.

A girl  of  three  years  old  had  been  affected  with  the  itch  for
some  weeks,  which  was  removed  by  an  ointment.  The  next
day  the  child  was  attacked  with  a suffocating  catarrh,  rhonchus,
dumbness,  coldness  of  the  whole  body  ; she  recovered  as  soon
as  the  itch  came  out  again.

(9)  A girl  of  12  years  old  had  her  itch  removed  by  an  oint-
ment, whereupon  she  was  attacked  with  an  acute  fever,  hooping-
cough,  asthma  and  swelling,  and  aftenvards  pleurisy.  Six  days
later  she  took  some  internal  medicine  containing  sulphur.  This
brought  the  itch  out  again,  and,  wfith  the  exception  of  her  swell-
ing, all  her  ailments  disappeared.  However,  after  the  lapse  of
24  days  the  itch  dried  up  again,  which  wTas  followed  by  inflam-
mation of  the  chest,  pleurisy  and  vomiting.


37


Asthmatic  Suffocations • — -Willi.  Fabr.  v.  Hilden,
Obs.  Cent.  III.  obs.  39  ;'°  Ph.  R.  Vicat,  Obs.  pract.
obs.  35.  Vitoduri,  1780;* 11  J.  J.  Waldschmid,  Opera,
244. 12

Asthma , with  swelling  all  over  the  body — Pelargus,
Aliis  Loc.  Jahrgang,  17*23,  p.  504  ;13  Riedlin,  lather,
Aliis  Loc.  Obs.  91. 14

Asthma , with  dropsy  of  the  chest. — Morgagni,  de
sed.  et  Caus.  Morb.  XV L art.  34  Hagendorn,  Al.  Loc.
Cent.  II.  Hist.  15.16

Pleurisy  and  inflammation  of  the  chest. — -Pelargus,
Al.  Loc.  p.  10  ;17  the  same,  Jahrgang,  1721,  p.  23  and

(10)  In  a man  of  20  years,  dyspnoea  came  on  after  the  removal
of  the  itch  ; it  was  so  violent  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to
breathe,  in  consequence  of  which  he  died  of  suffocation.

(11)  A young  man  of  19  years  had  a moist  herpes  on  the  left
upper  arm,  which  was  removed  by  a great  many  external  appli-
cations. Soon  after  he  was  attacked  with  a periodically  return-
ing asthma,  which  became  almost  suffocating  in  consequence  of
a long  journey  in  the  heat  of  the  summer;  the  face  was  tume-
fied, blue-red,  and  the  pulse  feeble  and  unequal.

(12)  Immediately  after  the  removal  of  the  itch,  the  patient  was
attacked  with  dyspnoea,  and  died  of  suffocation.

(13)  A girl  of  5 years  had  had,  for  some  time,  large  itch  vesi-
cles on  her  hands,  which  had  dried  of  themselves.  Shortly  after
she  was  seized  with  short  breathing,  and  became  sleepy  and  ex-
hausted ; on  the  following  day  the  asthma  continued  and  her
abdomen  became  distended.

(14)  A countryman  of  50  years  had  been  affected  with  the
itch  for  a long  time.  He  had  it  removed  by  some  external  ap-
plication, whereupon  there  was  difficult  breathing,  want  of  appe-
tite and  swelling  of  the  whole  body.

(15)  A girl  of  Bologna,  on  removing  the  itch  by  an  ointment,
had  a most  violent  attack  of  asthma  without  fever.  After  two
bloodlettings  she  became  so  exhausted  and  the  asthma  increased
to  such  an  extent,  that  she  died  the  day  after.  The  whole  chesty
as  well  as  the  cavity  of  the  pericardium,  were  full  of  bluish  water.

(16)  A girl  of  9 years,  whose  tenia  had  been  removed,  was  at-
tacked with  a lingering  fever,  swelling  all  over  the  body  and
difficult  breathing  ; she  recovered  after  the  tenia  had  reappeared.

(17)  A man  of  46  years  removed  his  itch  by  sulphur  ointment.
Thereupon  he  was  seized  with  inflammation  of  the  chest,  bloody
expectoration  and  great  anguish.  The  day  after,  heat  and  an-
guish became  almost  intolerable ; the  pain  in  the  chest  increased
on  the  third  day.  Then  sweat  broke  out.  After  the  lapse  of  a

2


38


114, 18  and  Jalirgang,  1723,  p.  29, 79  and  Jahrgang,  1722,
p.  459  Jerzembsky,  Diss.  Scabies  Salubris  in  H yell  ope,
Hake,  1777  ;21  Karl  Wenzel,  die  Nachkrankheilen  von
Zuriickgetretener  Kratze,  Bamb,  1826,  p.  49.  ^ ^

Pleurisy  and  cough . — Pelargus,  Jabrg.  1722,  p.  79.
Violent  cough .- — Mundertmark,  p.  23«23
Hemoptysis.

Hemoptysis  and  consumption.  Chn.  Max.  opener,
Diss.  de  Hffgro  Febri  Maligna,  Phthisi  Complicate  La-
borante,  Giess.,  1699  f Sicelius,  Praxis  Casual.  Exerc.
III.  cas.  I.  Francf.  and  Lips.,  1743  V M orgagni,  XXI  a
art.  32  ;26  Unzers,  Arzt,  CCC.  p.  508. 7


fortnight  the  itch  had  broken  out  again,  and  he  felt  relieved.  He
had  a°relapse,  the  itch  dried  in  again,  and  he  died  13  days  alter.

(18)  A thin  man  died  of  inflammation  of  the  chest  and  other
ailments,  20  days  after  the  itch  had  been  removed.

(19)  A boy  of  7 years,  whose  tenia  and  itch  dried  away  Irom

the  skin,  died,  after  the  lapse  of  4 days,  of  an  acute  lever  accom-
panied with  asthma  and  expectoration.  > ,

(20)  A young  man  who  removed  his  itch  by  means  ol  a lead-

ointment,  died  in  4 days  of  a disease  of  the  chest.

(21)  Anasarca  was  quickly  relieved  by  the  itch  breaking  out
again.  Being  suppressed  again  in  consequence  ol  a violent  cold,
pleurisy  came  on  and  death  ensued  in  3 days.

(22) ' A country  lad  Was  attacked  with  an  acute  fever,  pleurisy,
dyspnoea,  etc.,  in  consequence  of  having  had  the  itch  suppressed
by  sulphur  ointment  6 weeks  before  those  diseases.  .

(23)  A hoy  of  13  years,  in  whom  the  itch  dried  m,  had
cough  and  stitches  'in  the  chest.  These  symptoms  disap-
peared after  the  itch  had  come  out  again.

(23*)  A man  of  36  years  had  the  itch  removed  16  months

a<ro  by  an  ointment  of  lead  and  mercury  p ever  since  then  he  suf-
fered of  a convulsive  cough,  combined  with  great  anguish.

(24)  A young  man  of  18  years  had  the  itch  removed  by  a biack
ooking  wash.  A few  days  after,  he  was  seized  w ith  chills

and  heat,  weariness,  anguish,  headache,  nausea,  violent  thirst,
couo-h,  difficult  breathing ; he  spit  blood  in  coughing,  he  began
to  talk  delirious,  his  face  became  dead-coloured  and  emaciatec ,
the  urine  looked  blood-red,  without  sediment.

(25)  In  a young  man  of  18  years,  whose  itch  had  been  re-
moved by  a mercurial  ointment.  .

(26)  The-  itch  disappeared  of  itself,  and  was  succeeded  by  a
lingering  fever  and  fatal  expectoration  of  pus  ; the  left  lung  was

found  full  of  pus.  . . . . . .

(27)  A robust-looking  candidate  for  the  ministry,  wishing  to


%


39


Collection  of  pus  in  the  chest.— F.  A.  Waitz,  Med.
Chin  Aufsatze,  Th.  I.,  p.  114,  U5.38

Sacculated  hags  full  of  pus  in  the  intestines.— Schu-
bert, Diss.de  Scab.  Hum.  Lips.,  1779,  p.  23.29

Great  degeneration  of  a large  portion  of  the  intes -
tines.— -j.  H,  Schulze,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  Tom.  L,  obs.
23 1 .30

Degeneration  of  the  brain. — Bonet,  Sepulchretum
Anat.,  sect.  IV.,  obs.  I.,  § 1,3!  and  § 2. 33
Hydrocephalus.

Ulcers  upon  the  stomach. — L.  Chn.  Juncker,  Diss  de
Scabie  Repulsa,  Hal.  1 750,  p.  1 6.33

Sphacelus  of  the  stomach  and,  duodenum. — Hundert-
mark,  p.  29. 34


free  himself  from  his  old  itch  on  account  of  being  obliged  to  preach
in  a few  days,  covered  himself  with  an  itch-ointment  in  the  morn-
ing. In  a few  hours  he  was  attacked  with  anxiety,  short  breath-
ing, and  tenesmus,  and  died  immediately  after  noon  ; on  open-
ing the  body  the  whole  lungs  Were  seen  filled  with  liquid  pus.

(28)  Empyema  consequent  upon  repelled  itch,  which  had
come  out  a few  years  ago,  especially  in  the  months  of  March
and  April.

A young  man,  heedless  of  the  warning  of  the  excellent
physician  and  professor,  Krause,  died  of  constipation  in  conse-
quence of  having  used  a sulphur  ointment  against  the  itch  which
had  broke . out  again  upon  his  skin.  Collections  of  pus  were
found  in  his  intestines.

(30)  The  diaphragm  and  liver  were  also  diseased.

(31)  A little  prince  of  two  years  had  tenia  removed  by  oint-
ments. After  his  death  much  bloody  water  was  found  under  the
skull.

(32)  In  a woman  who  died  on  account  of  having  used  a wash
for  the  removal  of  tenia,  one  half  of  the  brain  was  found  putre-
fied and  filled  with  yellow  pus.

(33)  A rich  man  of  a cholerico-sanguine  temperament,  had  a
gouty  affection  of  the  abdomen,  and  pain  like  that  consequent
upon  stone.  He  removed  the  gout  by  all  sorts  of  remedies.
After  this  the  itch  broke  out.  The  eruption  having  been  remov-
ed, an  ulcer  formed  on  the  stomach,  which  causecThis  death,  as
was^made  evident  by  a post-mortem  examination.

(34)  A boy  of  seven  weeks,  and  a young  man  of  18  years,  died
all  on  a sudden  in  consequence  of  the  itch  having  been  removed
by  sulphur  ointment.  In  the  body  of  the  former  the  upper  portion
of  the  stomach  immediately  below  the  orifice,  and  in  the  latter


40


General  dropsy  d5  Dropsy  of  the  chest.  Swelling
of  the  scrotum , (in  boys.)  Red  swelling  of  the  whole
body.

Jaundice . Swelling  of  the  parotid  glands.  Swelling
of  the  cervical  glands. — Pelargus,  Jahrg.  1723,  p.  593  f
Unzer,  Arzl,  Th.  VI.,  St.  30 1.37

Obscuration  of  the  eyes  and  presbyopia. — Fr.  Hoff-
mann, Consult.  Med.  I.,  cas.  50.3"


that  portion  of  the  duodenum  into  which  the  ductus  choledochus
communis  and  the  pancreatic  duct  open,  were  found  destroyed
by  sphacelus.  A similarly  fatal  mortification  of  the  stomach
occurred  in  a journeyman.  See  Morgagni,  LV.,  art.  11.

(35)  Innumerable  cases  of  such  dropsy  may  be  found  in  a vast
number  of  authors,  among  whom  I shall  simply  refer  to  J.  D.
Fick,  Exercit.  Med.  de  Scabie  Retropulsa,  Hal.  1710,  § 6.  He
mentions  a case  of  itch  that,  having  been  suppressed  by  mercu-
rial ointment,  produced  dropsy.  This  was  only  alleviated  by  the
reappearance  of  the  dropsy.

The  author  of  Epidemion,  which  is  attributed  to  Hippocrates,
has  been' the  first  to  mention,  in  No.  4,  of  the  fifth  book,  the  sad
result  which  has  been  alluded  to  in  the  preceding  paragraph.
An  Athenian  was  seized  with  a violently  itching  eruption,  which
was  not  unlike  the  eruption  of  lepra,  and  which  extended  over
the  whole  body,  and  especially  the  genital  organs.  The  erup-
tion having  been  suppressed  by  warm  baths  upon  the  island  of
Melos,  the  patient  died  of  subsequent  dropsy.

(36)  A boy  of  8 or  9 years  had  tenia,  which  was  suppressed
by  ointment.  There  was  much  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,
which  made  the  neck  crooked  and  stiff.

(37)  A youth  of  14  years  had  the  itch  in  June,  1761.  It  was
suppressed  by  means  of  a gray  ointment.  In  consequence  of
this  suppression,  his  parotid  glands  swelled  considerably.  The
swelling  of  the  left  disappeared  of  itself,  but  the  right  became
enormously  enlarged,  and,  towards  August,  painful.  All  the
cervical  glands  were  swollen.  The  large  ones  on  the  outside
felt  hard  and  knotty  ; but  on  the  inside  there  was  an  obtuse  pain,
especially  during  night ; moreover,  he  suffered  of  difficult  breath-
ing and  swallowing.  All  attempts  at  causing  the  glands  to  sup-
purate, remained  fruitless  ; they  grew  so  large  that  the  patient
finally  died  of  suffocation  in  the  year  1762.

(38)  A girl  of  13  years  was  attacked  with  the  itch,  especially
in  the  joints,  upon  the  face  and  the  pudenda.  The  itch  having
been  suppressed  by  means  of  zinc  and  sulphur  ointments,  the
girl’s  sight  became  affected.  She  saw  dark  bodies  floating  before
her  face,  wlficli  might  also  have  been  seen  floating  in  the  aque-


41


Inflammation  of  the  eyes. — Kallmann,  in  Konigl.  Ve?t-
enskaps  Handl.  f.  A.  X.  8.  21 0.39

Lenticular  cataract. — Chr.  Gottlieb  Ludwig,  Advers.
Med.,  Tom.  II.  S.  157.40

Complete  amaurosis—  Northof,  Diss.  de  Scabie,  Got-
ting.  1792,  8.  10  ;41  Chr.  G.  Ludwig  ;43  Fabricius  ab
Hilden,  Cent.  II.,  obs.  39.43

Deaf  ness.  Inflammation  of  the  bowels.  Hemorrhoids.
—Acta  Helvet.  V.  S.  192  ;44  Daniel,  Syst.  ^Egrit.  II..  S.
24  5. 45  3

Abdominal  complaints. — Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Kat.
'Syst.  III.,  8.  177.46

Diabetes , (suppression  of  urine.) — Morgagni,  XLI.,
art.  2. 47


ous  humour  of  the  anterior  chamber.  She  was  unable  to  per-
ceive little  objects  unless  she  used  spectacles.  The  pupils  were
dilated.

(39)  A girl  had  a violent  eruption  of  the  itch  on  her  legs,  to-
gether with  large  ulcers  in  the  bent  of  the  knee.  Being  attacked
y ith  the  small-pox,  the  itch  was  suppressed.  This  suppression
induced  a moist  inflammation  of  the  white  of  the  eye  and  the  eye-
lids, which  lasted  for  two  years,  and  was  accompanied  with  itch-
ing and  suppuration  of  the  lids,  and  a sensation  of  dark  bodies
floating  before  the  eyes.  After  this  she  put  on  for  three
days  woollen  stockings  having  been  worn  by  a child  affected
with  the  itch.  On  the  third  day  a fever  broke  out,  with  dry
cough,  dyspnoea,  and  an  inclination  to  vomit.  Next  day  the
fever  and  the  symptoms  in  the  chest  abated.  Sweat  broke  out,
which  increased  until  erysipelas  appeared  on  both  legs,  which
became  tiue  itch  on  the  day  following.  The  eyes  improved.

(40)  A man  of  robust  constitution,  whose  itch  had  been  sup-
pressed by  ointment,  was  seized  with  cataract.

(41)  Suppression  of  the  itch  caused  amaurosis,  which  disap-
peared when  the  eruption  broke  out  again.

(42)  A robust  man,  whose  itch  had  been  suppressed,  was  at-
tacked with  complete  amaurosis  and  remained  blind  up  to  an  ad-
vanced acre.

(43)  Complete  amaurosis  from  a similar  cause  with  terrible
headache.

(44)  Hemorrhoid-s  re-appeared  every  month.

(45)  Suppression  of  the  itch  was  followed  by  a loss  of  blood
of  eight  pounds  within  a few  hours,  colic,  fever,  etc.

(46)  Suppression  of  the  itch  was  followed  by  the  most  vio-
lent colic,  pain  in  the  left  lumbar  region,  uneasiness,  lingering
fever,  anxiety,  and  obstinate  constipation.

(47)  In  a young  peasant,  suppression  of  the  itch  was  followed


42


Erysipelas . — Unzer,  Arzt,  Th.  V.  p.  301. 43
Discharges  of  acrid  pus.  Ulcers — Unzer,  Arzt,

Th.  V.  p.  30 i ;49  Pelargus,  Jahrg.  1723,  p.  673  f
Breslauer  Samml.  1727,  p.  107  ;61  Muzell,  Wahrnehm.
JJ.  cas.  6 f Riediin,  son,  Cent.  obs.  3S.53

Cancer  of  the  bones.  Osteosarcoma  of  the  knee.
Pain  in  the  bones.  Rachitis  and  emaciation  in  children .
Fever. — Ramazzini,  Const.  Epid.  Urbis,  II.  No.  32,
1691  ;64  J.  C.  Carl,  in  Act.  Nat.  Cur.,  VI.  obs.  16.56


by  suppression  of  the  urine,  vomiting,  and  sometimes  a pain  in
the  left  loin.  Afterwards  there  was  an  occasional  flow  of  urine,
but  in  a small  quantity  and  painful.  The  urine  was  dark  red.
They  tried  in  vain  to  evacuate  the  bladder  by  means  of  a cathe-
ter. At  last  his  whole  body  was  distended  ; slow  difficult
breathing  came  on,  and  he  died  twenty-one  days  after  the  sup-
pression of  the  itch.  The  bladder  contained  two  pounds  of  dark
red  urine  ; and  the  abdominal  cavity  contained  water  which,  when
kept  for  some  time  over  the  fire,  formed  a thick  substance  like  the
white  of  an  egg.

(48)  A man  having  suppressed  his  itch  by  mercurial  ointment,
he  had  an  erysipelatous  inflammation  on  the  neck,  which  ended
his  life  in  five  weeks.

(49)  A woman  having  used  mercurial  ointment  against  the
itch,  she  had  an  eruption  all  over  the  body,  which  caused  whole
pieces  of  flesh  to  rot  away,  and  ended  her  life  in  a few  days
amidst  violent  pain.

(50)  A young  man  of  16  years  having  lost  his  itch,  which  he
had  had  for  some  time,  ulcers  broke  out  on  the  legs.

(51)  A man  of  50  years  having  suppressed  his  itch,  he  had
tearing  pains  for  five  weeks  in  the  left  axilla,  after  which  seve-
ral ulcers  were  forming  in  the  pit.

(52)  A quack  gave  a student  an  ointment  against  the  itch.
It  disappeared,  but  an  ulcer  formed  in  the  mouth,  which  could
not  be  cured.

(53)  A student  who  had  been  afflicted  with  the  itch,  suppress-
ed it  by  an  ointment.  The  suppression  was  followed  by  ul-
cers on  the  arms  and  legs,  with  glandular  swellings  in  the
axilla.  The  ulcers  having  been  cured  by  external  remedies,  he
was  attacked  with  asthma,  then  with  dropsy,  and  he  finally  died.

(54)  Many  observations  may  be  made  when  the  suppression
of  the  itch  was  followed  by  fever  and  blackish  urine,  and  when,
after  the  reappearance  of  the  itch,  the  fever  disappeared  and  the
urine  resumed  its  healthy  colour.

(55)  A man  and  a woman  had  the  itch  upon  their  hands  for
many  years.  Each  suppression  of  the  itch  was  followed  by  an


43


Fever* — Reil,  Memorab.  Fasc.  lILp.  169  ;66  Pelargus,
Jahrg.  1721,  p.  276/“  and  the  same,  Jahrg.  1723  ;58
Schiller,  Hiss.  de  Scabie  Humida.  Erford,  1747,  p.
44  f’  J.  J,  Fick,  Exercitatio  Med.  de  Scabie  Retropulsa,
Hal.  1710,  § 2 ;60  Pelargus,  Jahrg.  1722,  p.  122  ;61  also
Jahrg.  1723  p.  14  f2  C.  G.  Ludwig,  Advers.  Med.,  II.,  p.
157  to  160  ;63  Morgagni,  X.,  art.  9, 64  XII.,  art.  31,65
XXXVIII.  art.  22, 66  LV.,  art.  3.67


attack  of  fever,  which  ceased  as  soon  as  the  itch  reappeared.
The  itch  was  only  found  upon  a small  portion  of  their  bodies,
nor  was  it  ever  suppressed  by  external  remedies.

(56)  Scabies  a febre  suborta  supprimitur,  remota  febre  redit.

(57)  A boy  of  9 years,  whose  tenia  had  been  suppressed  by
ointments,  had  a violent  attack  of  fever.

(58)  A child  of  one  year  had  for  some  time  tenia  and  an
eruption  upon  the  face,  which  disappeared.  A little  while  after,
the  child  was  seized  with  heat,  couo-h  and  diarrhoea.  Health
was  restored,  wdien  the  tenia  reappeared.

(59)  A woman  of  43  years  suppressed  the  dry  itch,  with
which  she  had  been  afflicted  for  a long  time,  by  an  ointment  of
mercury  and  sulphur.  The  suppression  was  followed  by  pain
below  the  ribs  of  the  right  side,  weariness  in  all  her  limbs,  heat
and  feverish  irritation.  After  having  used  diaphoretics  for  six
days,  large  itch  vesicles  broke  out  over  her  whole  body.

(60)  Two  young  men,  who  were  brothers,  suppressed  the  itch
by  the  same  remedy.  They  lost  all  appetite,  were  attacked  with
dry  cough,  lingering  fever,  emaciation,  and  stupor,  and  would
have  died,  if  the  eruption  had  not  come  out  again.

(61)  A child  of  three  years  was  afflicted  with  tenia,  which
disappeared  of  itself.  This  was  followed  by  inflammation  of
the  chest,  cough,  and  weariness.  When  the  eruption  came  out
again,  the  child  recovered.

(62)  A journeyman  purser,  who  was  told  to  make  some  kind
of  embroidery,  freed  himself  from  his  itch  by  lead  ointment.
The  itch  had  scarcely  died  away,  when  he  was  seized  with
chills,  heat,  asthma,  and  rattling  cough,  which  caused  his  death
by  suffocating  him  on  the  fourth  day.

(63)  A man  of  30  years,  of  a healthy  and  robust  constitution,

was  affected  with  the  itch.  He  removed  it,  and  was  ‘afterwards
attacked  with  catarrhal  fever  and  an  immense  sweat,  from  which
he  recovered  very  slowly.  All  on  a sudden  he  was  again  at-
tacked with  another  fever  without  any  perceptible  cause.  The
attacks  began  with  anxiety  and  headache,  and  continued  increas-
ed) See  page  44.  (66)  See  page  44.

(65)  Ibid  (67)  Ibid.


Fever. — Hochsteltcr,  Obs.  Med.  Dec.  VIII..  cas.  8 ]m
Wehle,  Diss.  Nullam  Medicinam  Interdum  esse  Op-
timam,  Witemb.  1754  ;69  Fick.  § 1 Amatus,  Lusit.


ing  with  heat,  quick  pulse  and  morning  sweat.  These  symp-
toms were  combined  with  great  sinking  of  strength,  talking  de-
lirious, anxious  tossing  about  and  groaning,  breathing  with  suf-
focation. In  spite  of  all  medicines,  the  disease  ended  in  death.

(64)  The  spontaneous  suppression  of  the  itch  in  a boy  was
succeeded  by  fever.  The  itch  coming  out  again,  the  fever  dis-
appeared. 13 ut  the  child  grew  thin,  and  the  itch  dried  in  a se-
cond time;  diarrhoea,  convulsions,  and  soon  after,  death,  were
the  consequences  of  this  suppression.

(65)  The  itch  disappeared  of  itself ; this  was  followed  by  a
lingering  fever,  expectoration  of  pus,  and  at  last  death.  The
left  lung  was  found  full  of  pus.

(66)  A woman  of  30  years  had  for  a long  time  pain  in  the
joints  and  a considerable  eruption  of  itch  ; she  removed  it  by  an
ointment.  This  was  followed  by  fever,  with  violent  heat,  thirst
and  violent  headache,  combined  with  talking  delirious,  immense
asthma,  tumefaction  of  the  body,  and  great  distention  of  the  ab-
domen. Six  days  after  the  breaking  out  of  the  fever  she  was
dead.  The  abdomen  contained  only  much  air;  the  stomach,
which  was  replete  with  air,  lilted  up  half  of  the  abdomen.

(67)  A man  whose  tenia  had  been  suppressed  by  cold,  was
seized  with  a malignant  fever  and  vomiting,  eight  days  after  the
suppression ; at  last  hiccup  came  on  and  the  patient  died  on  the
ninth  day.

In  the  same  article,  Morgagni  quotes  the  case  of  a man  afifect-
ted  with  porrigo  on  the  arms  and  other  parts,  which  he  removed
by  means  of  a shirt  fumigated  with  sulphur.  He  was  immedi-
ately seized  with  drawing  pains  in  the  whole  body,  and  fever,
which  prevented  him  from  resting  in  the  night,  or  from  stirring
from  his  place  in  day  time.  Tongue  and  fauces  were  also  af-
fected with  the  malady.  With  much  trouble  the  eruption  was
brought  out  again  upon  the  skin,  and  he  recovered.

(68)  Suppression  of  the  itch  was  followed  by  a malignant
fever  and  opisthotonos.

(69)  In  a young  merchant,  the  suppression  of  the  itch  was
suddenly  followed  by  such  a hoarseness  that  he  was  unable  to
utter  a loud  syllable  ; this  was  followed  by  dry  asthma,  loathing
of  food,  violent  cough,  which  tormented  him,  especially  during
the  night,  and  robbed  him  of  sleep  ; excessive  and  badly  smelling
night  sweats,  and  finally  death,  in  spite  of  all  medical  treatment.

(70)  A mayor  of  sixty  years  had  the  itch,  which  caused  him
much  suffering,  especially  in  the  night.  He  used  many  reme-
dies against,  it  in  vain.  A mendicant  at  last  taught  him  a remedy


45


Cent,  IL,  Curat.  33  ;71  Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.  System.
T.  III.  p.  175. 73

Tertian. — Pelargus,  Jahrg.,  1722,  p.  103,  compare
with  p.  79.7,1

Quartan.— Fr.  Hoffmann,  Med.  Rat.  Syst.,  III.,  p.
175. 74

Vertigo  and  total  sinking  of  strength , Epileptic
vertigo .- — Fr.  Hoffmann,  Consult.  Med.  I.,  cas.  12.76
Epilepsy  with  vertigo.- — Fr.  Hoffmann,  p.  30. 76


said  to  be  infallible,  composed  of  the  Olium  lauro-cerasi,
flowers  of  sulphur  and  lard.  This  caused  the  eruption  to  disap’
pear  ; but  immediately  after,  he  was  seized  with  violent  chills,
then  heat  over  the  whole  body,  vehement  thirst,  panting-  breath-
ing-, sleeplessness,  violent  trembling  in  the  whole  body,  and
great  lassitude ; he  expired  on  the  fourth  day.

(71)  Suppression  produced  frenzy,  and  a fever,  resulting  in
death.

(72)  Suppression  of  the  itch  is  generally  followed  by  acute
fevers  and  great  sinking  of  strength.  In  a case  of  suppressed
itch  the  fever  had  lasted  seven  days  ; after  this  period  the  erup-
tion came  out  again,  and  the  fever  disappeared.

(73)  A boy  of  fifteen  years,  who  took  a purge  against  tenia,
was  attacked  with  pain  in  the  back,  cutting  pain  during  mictu-
rition, and  afterwards  a tertian  fever ; the  disease  was  of  long
standing,  and  the  purge  administered  by  Pelargus.

(74)  “ Old  people  are  mostly  affected  with  dry  itch.  The
suppression  of  this  kind  of  itch  is  generally  followed  by  a quar-
tan fever,  which  ceases  the  moment  the  itch  comes  out  a train.”

7 o

(75)  A count  of  57  years  had  been  affected  with  dry  itch  for
three  years.  The  itch  having  been  suppressed,  he  apparently
enjoyed  good  health  for  two  years,  with  the  exception  of  attacks
of  vertigo,  which  increased  to  such  an  extent  that  on  one  occa-
sion he  would  have  fallen  to  the  floor  if  he  had  not  been  caught.
This  occurred  after  a meal.  He  was  covered  with  a cold  clam-
my sweat,  his  limbs  trembled,  all  the  parts  of  the  body  had  the
appearance  of  being  dead  ; he  frequently  vomited  sour  substan-
ces. The  attack  came  on  a second  time  six  weeks  after.  It
then  came  on  every  month  for  three  months  in  succession.  He
retained  his  senses,  but  the  attacks  were  followed  by  heaviness
in  the  head  and  a sort  of  stupefaction  such  as  is  consequent
upon  intoxication.  At  last  the  attack  came  on  every  day,  al-
though the  violence  of  the  attacks  had  abated.  He  was  not  per-
mitted to  read,  or  to  think  ; to  turn  quickly,  or  to  stoop  ; he  was
also  affected  with  sadness,  sighing,  and  melancholy  thoughts.

(76)  A woman  of  36  years  had  used  mercurial  ointment  for

2*


46


Convulsions » — Welle,  Diss.  Nullam  Medicinam  in*
terdum  esse  Optimam,  Viteb .,  1754,  $ 13,  14  ;77  Si-
celius,  Decas  Casuum  I.  cas*  5 ;78  Pelargus,  Jahrsr.
1723,  p.  545.79


the  suppression  of  the  itch  ; the  consequence  was  that  her  men-
ses became  irregular,  and  were  often  interrupted  for  ten  or  fif-
teen weeks;  moreover  she  was  constipated.  Four  years  ago,
being  pregnant,  she  was  seized  with  vertigo  ; while  standing  or
Walking  she  fell  to  the  floor  when  an  attack  came  on.  In  the
sitting  position  she  retained  her  senses  during  an  attack  ; she
was  able  to  speak,  to  eat,  and  to  drink.  When  the  attack  came
on  there  was  a sensation  of  crawling  and  formication  in  the  left
foot,  which  terminated  in  the  foot  being  violently  raised  up  and
down.  The  attacks  gradually  deprived  her  of  her  senses,  and
on  a journey,  in  a carriage,  she  was  attacked  with  real  epilepsy,
which  returned  three  times  during  the  winter.  During  these  at-
tacks  she  was  unable  to  speak  ; the  thumbs  were  not  clenched,
but  there  was  foam  at  the  mouth.  The  sensation  of  formication
in  the  left  foot  announced  the  attack ; when  this  sensation  had
reached  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  fit  came  on.  A woman  re-
moved this  epilepsy  by  means  of  five  powders;  after  this  the
vertigo  reappeared  with  much  greater  violence  than  before : this
too  began  with  a sensation  of  crawling  in  the  left  foot,  which
rose  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; this  sensation  was  combined
with  great  anxiety  and  fear,  as  though  she  fell  from  a height;
she  then  became  speechless,  lost  her  senses,  and  the  limbs  were
convulsively  agitated.  Even  between  the  attacks  her  feet  now
are  extremely  painful  to  the  slightest  touch,  like  boils.  More-
over, she  has  a violent  pain  and  heat  in  the  head,  and  her  mem-
ory is  gone.

(77)  Suppression  of  the  itch,  in  a girl,  was  followed  by  a deep
swoon,  horrible  convulsions,  and  finally  death.

(78)  A girl  of  17  years  was  affected  with  tenia,  which  disap-
peared of  itself.  After  this  she  constantly  had  heat  in  the  head
and  attacks  of  headache.  Sometimes  she  suddenly  started  up
as  if  by  fright,  and  while  waking  she  had  convulsions,  especially
of  the  arms  and  hands ; oppression  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
consequent  upon  constriction  of  the  chest ; whining,  then  came
on  convulsions  and  startings  of  the  limbs.

(79)  Tenia  dried  in  a full-grown  man  who  had  been  affected
for  some  years  with  tremor  of  the  hands.  This  caused  great
lassitude  ; red  patches,  without  heat,  broke  out  all  over  his  body  ;
the  tremor  now  passed  into  convulsive  shaking,  he  coughed  up
bloody  matter  through  the  nose,  the  ears,  and  from  the  chest,
and  he  died  amidst  convulsions  on  the  twenty-third  day.


47


/


Epileptic  convulsions.  Epilepsy. — J.  C.  Carl,  in  Act.
Nat.  Cur.  VI.  obs.  16  ;so  E.  Hagendorn,  Hist.  9 ;81  Fr.
Hoffmann,  Consult.  Med.  I.  cas.31  ;8'2  Fabr.  de  Hilden,
Cent.  III.  obs.  10  ;83  Riedlin,  Lin.  Med.  Ann.  1696,
Maj.  obs.  1 G.  W.  Wedel,  Diss.  de  iEgro  Epilepti-
co.  Jen.  1673  ;85  Herrm.  Grube,  de  Arcanis  Medicor.
non  Arcanis,  Hafn.  1673.  p.  165  ;8G  Tulpius,  Obs.  lib.
I.  cap.  8 ;87  Th.  Thompson,  Medic.  Rathpflege,  Leip-
sic,  1779,  p.  107,  108  ;88  Hundertmark,  p.  32  ;89  Fr.
Hoffmann,  Consult.  Med.  I.,  cas..  28,  p.  141. 90

(80)  A man  who  had  suppressed  his  frequently-returning  itch
by  ointments,  was  attacked  with  epileptic  fits,  which  disappeared
on  the  reappearance  of  the  eruption  upon  the  skin.

(81)  A young  man  of  18  years  suppressed  his  itch  by  means
of  a mercurial  ointment.  Two  months  after,  he  was  seized  all
on  a sudden  with  convulsions  attacking  all  the  limbs  of  his
body  ; they  were  accompanied  with  painful  constriction  of  the
chest  and  neck,  coldness  of  the  limbs  and  great  weakness.  On
the  fourth  day  epilepsy  came  on,  with  foam  at  the  mouth  and
strange  contortion  of  the  limbs.  The  fits  ceased  the  moment
the  itch  broke  out  agrain.

(82)  In  a boy  whose  tenia  had  been  suppressed  by  almond  oil.

(83)  In  children,  accompanied  with  suffocating  catarrh.

(84)  Epilepsy  came  on  in  a servant  girl  after  the  itch  had  been
suppressed  twice.

(85)  A youth  of  18  years  had  fits  of  epilepsy  after  having
suppressed  the  itch  by  mercurial  ointment  a few  weeks  before.
The  fits  returned  in  four  weeks,  about  new  moon.#

(86)  A boy  of  7 years  was  attacked  with  epilepsy.  The  pa-
rents were  unwilling  to  admit  that  it  came  from  suppressed  itch.
The  mother  at  last  confessed  to  the  carefully  inquiring  physi-
cian that  the  boy  had  had  a few  itch  vesicles  on  the  soles  of  the
feet,  which  had  soon  yielded  to  lead  ointment ; but  there  had
been  no  other  eruption  on  any  part  of  the  body.  The  physician
considered  this,  and  correctly  so,  the  cause  of  the  fit.

(87)  Two  children  were  freed  from  epilepsy  by  the  eruption
of  moist  tenia ; the  fits  however  returned  as  soon  as  the  tenia
had  been  suppressed.

(88)  Itch  which  had  lasted  for  five  years,  disappeared  from
the  skin  ; this  disappearance  caused  epilepsy  after  a couple  of
years.

(89)  A young  man  of  20  years  had  his  itch  suppressed  by
means  of  a purge.  In  consequence  of  this  suppression  he  suf-
fered for  two  years  the  most  violent  convulsions,  until  the  itch
was  brought  out  again  by  birch-juice.

(90)  A young  man  of  seventeen  years  suppressed  his  itch  ;


48


Apoplexy.  Para1  y sis. — Unzer,  Arzt,  VI.  p.  301  ;91
Hundertmark,  p.  33  Sohubjrt,  Diss.  de  Scabie
Human.  Corp.  Lips.  1779,  p.  23 A3

Melancholy — Red,  Memorab.  Fasc.  III.  p.  177. 94
Frenzy. — Brune.  Diss.  Casus  Aliquot  Mente  Aliena-
torum,  Hal.  1707,  cas.  I.  p.  5 ;95  F.  H.  Waitz,


he  was  of  a robust  constitution  and  had  a sound  understanding.
After  the  suppression  of  the  itch,  three  years  ago,  he  was  first  at-
tacked with  hemoptysis,  then  with  epilepsy,  which  grew  worse
by  medicine,  so  that  he  had  two  attacks  in  an  hour.  A surgeon
procured  him  relief  for  four  weeks,  by  bleeding  and  medicines.
But  soon  after  the  fits  returned  during  a nap,  and  he  had  two  or
three  attacks  every  night,  accompanied  with  an  intense  cough  and
a suffocating  catarrh,  especially  during  the  night;  with  all  this
he  threw  up  a fetid  liquid.  He  was  obliged  to  keep  his  bed.
At  last  he  had  ten  fits  during  the  night  and  eight  during  the  day ;
the  fits  were  caused  by  taking  much  medicine.  Nevertheless
the  thumbs  were  never  clenched  during  an  attack,  nor  was  there
any  foam  at  the  mouth.  His  memory  is  now  weakened.  The
fits  came  on  a little  before  the  time  of  the  meals,  but  principally
after  the  meals.  During  the  nightly  attacks  he  remains  in  the
deepest  sleep  without  waking  up.  In  the  morning  he  feels  bruis-
ed all  over.  The  only  indication  of  a coming  fit  is  his  rubbing  the
nose  and  drawing  up  the  left  foot,  after  which  he  suddenly  falls.

(91)  A woman’s  leg  became  paralysed,  and  remained  so  through
suppressed  itch.

(92)  Hemiplegia  ensued  in  a man  of  53  years,  after  suppres-
sion of  the  itch  by  mercurial  ointment.

(93)  A minister  had  for  a long  time  used  internal  remedies
against  the  itch  ; of  these  remedies  he  got  at  last  tired.  He
therefore  employed  ointments.  The  consequence  was  that  the
upper  extremities  became  paralysed,  and  that  a hard  and  thick
skin  formed  in  the  palm  of  the  hands,  itching  terribly  and  mark-
ed with  bloody,  shrivelled  patches.  At  the  same  place  mention
is  made  of  a woman  whose  finger  contracted  in  consequence  of
suppressed  itch.  The  contractions  lasted  long.

(94)  Suppression  of  the  itch  was  succeeded  by  melancholy
and  imbecility,  which  disappeared  on  the  reappearance  of  the
itch.

(95)  A student  of  20  years  caught  the  itch.  His  hands  be-
came covered  with  it  to  such  an  extent  that  he  was  unfit  for  his
business.  The  itch  was  suppressed  by  means  of  an  ointment.
Shortly  after  he  became  deranged,  sang  or  laughed  where  it  was
improper  to  do  so,  and  ran  until  he  fell  down  exhausted.  His
sickness  increased  from  day  to  day,  until  finally  hemiplegia


49


Medic.  Chirurg.  Aufsatze,  Tli.  L p.  130; ' ^ Gross-
man,  in  Baldinger’s  Neuem  Magazin.  XI.  I.97

These  few  cases,  drawn  from  the  writings  of  the-
older  physicians  and  from  my  own  experience, *  * are
sufficient  to  convince  the  intelligent  observer  that  the
itch,  together  with  its  varieties,  tenia  capitis,  crusta
lactea,  herpes,  etc,,  are  the  external  vicarious  symptoms
of  an  internal  disease  affecting  the  whole  organism,
and  that  psora  is  the  most  pernicious  of  all  chronic
miasms.  Alter,  reading  the  above  cases  no  reasonable
and  inquiring  physician  will  dare  to  assert  that  the  itch,  te-
nia, herpes,  etc.,  are  mere  cutaneous  diseases,  which  may
unhesitatingly  be  removed  from  the  skin  by  external  ap-
plications, because  the  organism  is  not  affected  by  them.

This  kind  of  treatment  is  the  most  pernicious,  the  most
infamous  and  the  most  unpardonable  malpractice  of  which
allceopathic  physicians  have  made  themselves  guilty.

He  who  is  blind  against  the  wisdom  which  the  above
quoted  examples  teach,  wilfully  prepares  the  ruin  of
mankind.


came  on  and  he  died.  The  intestines  cohered  like  a firm  mass.
They  were  interspersed  with  little  ulcers,  with  protuberances  of
the  size  of  walnuts,  which  were  filled  with  a viscid  substance
resembling  plaster.

(96)  The  same  phenomena.

(97)  A man  of  50  years  was  attacked  with  anasarca  on  ac-
count of  having  suppressed  his  itch  by  ointments.  The  itch  re-
turned and  the  dropsical  swelling  disappeared.  A second  sup-
pression was  followed  by  frenzy,  with  head  and  neck  swelled
up  to  suffocation,  lastly  there  supervened  blindness  and  com-
plete suppression  of  urine.  Artificial  stimulants  applied  to  the
skin,  and  strong  emetics  brought  the  itch  out  again.  After  it
had  spread  over  the  whole  body,  all  the  former  accidents  dis-
appeared.

* An  opponent  from  the  old  school  has  reproached  me  with
not  having  shown,  by  examples  from  my  own  experience,  that
chronic  ailments,  which  neither  originated  in  syphilis  nor
in  sycosis,  are  all  of  them  derived  from  repelled  psora.  I
should  like  to  know  whether  examples,  were  they  even  drawn
from  my  own  experience,  can  be  more  strikingly  convincing
than  those  which  I have  quoted  from  both  old  and  modern  alloe-
opathic  works  1 Have  not  our  opponents  from  the  old  school
often  denied  us  belief,  because  our  observations  were  not  made


50


A_re  my  opponents  ignorant  of  the  fact,  that  all
miasmatic  diseases,  accompanied  with  cutaneous  erup-
tions, observe  the  same  course  from  their  very  origin  ?
and  that  all  miasms  first,  attack  the  whole  organism  in-
ternally, before  the  vicarious  affection  manifests  itself
upon  the  skin  ?

By  examining  that  course  a little  more  closely,  we
shall  find  that  all  miasmatic  diseases  which  form  local
affections  upon  the  skin,  are  internal  diseases,  the  last
result  of  which  is  the  local  cutaneous  affection.  In
acute  diseases,  the  local  symptoms,  together  with  the
disease,  leave  the  system  as  soon  as  they  have  run
through  their  regular  course.  In  chronic  diseases,
however,  the  local  affection  may  either  be  removed  or
disappear  of  itself,  without  the  internal  disease  leaving
the  organism  either  in  part  or  entirely  ; on  the  contrary,
the  internal  disease  may  increase  in  the  progress  of  time,
unless' it  is  cured  by  art.

This  circumstance  relative  to  the  course  of  chronic
diseases,  deserves  so  much  more  to  be  noticed,  as  the
common  physicians,  especially  the  modern,  have,  from
sheer  blindness,  overlooked  it,  although  it  was  evidently
the  course  of  all  acute  miasmatic  diseases.  They
neither  suspected  nor  noticed  that  the  local  affection  was
a secondary  vicarious  symptom  of  an  internal  disease  ;
on  the  contrary,  they  often  denied  the  existence  of  the
internal  disease,  and  by  removing  the  bubo,  cauliflower
excrescence  and  itch  by  external  applications,  they
brought  ineffable  misery  upon  mankind.

In  considering  the  formation  of  these  three  chronic
maladies,  as  well  as  that  of  the  acute  miasmatic  dis-
eases, three  cardinal  points  ought  to  be  noticed  much
more  carefully  than  has  been  the  case  heretofore.  These

are,  1 st,  the  period  when  the  infection  took  place ; 2nd,  the

/

before  their  own  eyes,  and  the  names  of  the  patients  were  only  in-
dicated by  a letter,  as  if  private  patients  were  willing  to  have
their  names  presented  in  full  1 I did  not  wish  to  expose  my-
self to  similar  proceedings.  Moreover,  by  quoting  the  cases  of
honest  practitioners  of  the  old  school,  I furnish  the  most  indubi-
table and  impartial  proofs  for  my  doctrines.


51


period  when  the  whole  organism  began  to  be  tainted
with  the  miasmatic  poison,  until  it  had  become  a com-
plete internal  disease  ; and,  3rd,  the  manifestation  of  the
external  symptoms,  by  means  of  which  nature  indicates
the  complete  development  of  the  miasmatic  disease  in
the  internal  organism.

My  opinion  is,  that  the  miasmatic  infection  in  acute  as
well  as  in  chronic  diseases,  takes  place  in  a moment ,
provided  this  moment  is  favourable  to  the  contagious  in-
fluence.

During  the  progress  of  inoculation  or  vaccination,  the
infection  takes  place  at  the  time  when  the  morbid  mat-
ter introduced  under  the  bleeding  skin,  is  brought  in
contact  with  the  exposed  nerve.  The  whole  nervous
system  becomes  infected  in  a moment.  After  the  in-
fection has  taken  place,  ablutions,  cauterization  and
burnings  are  unavailable  to  annihilate  the  disease,  or
even  to  arrest  its  progress  in  the  internal  organism.
Even  amputation  of  the  part  infected  is  of  no  avail.
The  human  small-pox,  the  cow-pox,  the  measles,  etc.,
will  run  through  their  course,  and  the  fever  which  is
peculiar  to  each  of  those  different  forms  of  infection,  to-
gether with  the  cutaneous  eruption,  will  break  out  a
few  days  after  the  internal  disease  shall  have  completed
its  development .*


* The  question  whether  any  miasmatic  infection  by  the  skin
can  exhibit  external  symptoms  before  the  internal  disease  has
become  completely  developed,  ought  to  be  answered  in  the  nega-
tive.

Do  not  three,  four  or  five  days  elapse  after  vaccination  before  '
inflammation  sets  in  1 Does  not  a sort  of  fever,  which  is  the
symptom  of  a disease  pervading  the  whole  organism,  show  it-
self before  the  small-pox  reaches  its  full  development  on  the  7th
or  8 th  day  1

Do  not  ten  or  twelve  days  elapse  after  infection  by  the  small-
pox has  taken  place,  before  the  fever  comes  on,  and  the  small-
pox breaks  out  upon  the  skin!

What  has  nature  been  doing,  during  that  space  of  time,  with
the  contagious  miasm  which  was  introduced  from  without  !
Was  it  not  necessary  that  the  disease  should  be  first  communi-
cated to  the  whole  organism,  before  nature  became  capable  of


5 3


Among  many  other  acute  miasms,  I may  mention  the
infection  of  the  human  skin  by  the  miasm  of  the  epizoo-
tic carbuncle.  As  soon  as  the  infection  has  taken  place,
ablutions  are  of  no  avail ; the  black  blister,  which  is  al-
most always  fatal,  and  which  generally  appears  upon  the
spot  where  the  infection  has  taken  place,  comes  out  in
about  four  or  five  days  after  this  terrible  disease  has
pervaded  the  whole  organism.

This  same  rule  obtains  relatively  to  the  half-acute
miasms  without  eruptions.  Thanks  to  the  kind  Ruler  of
the  world,  only  a few  of  those  who  are  bit  by  mad  dogs,
are  infected' — scarcely  one  in  twelve  ; often  only,  to  my
knowledge,  one  in  thirty  j the  rest,  were  they  ever  so
much  torn  by  a mad  clog,  generally  recover  with  or
without  treatment.*  Wherever  the  poison  acts,  the  in-
fection takes  place  at  the  moment  when  the  bite  occurs,
by  affecting  at  once  the  whole  nervous  system.  In  a
few  days,  and  often  a few  weeks,  during  which  the  inter-
nal disease  becomes  developed,  the  rage  breaks  out  as
an  acute  and  quickly  fatal  disease.  We  know  from  ex-
perience that,  whenever  the  poison  has  caught,  the  infec-
tion takes  place  at  the  moment  when  the  bite  occurs;
for  neither  instantaneous  exsection,!  nor  amputation  of


enkindling  the  fever,  and  bringing  the  eruption  out  upon  the
skin  1

The  measles  also  require  ten  or  twelve  days  after  the  infection
has  taken  place,  before  the  eruption  comes  out  upon  the  skin,
and  fever  sets  in.  The  infection  by  the  virus  of  scarlatina  gen-
erally requires  seven  days  before  the  fever  and  redness  appear.

What  has  nature  been  doings  all  this  time  with  the  miasm!
What  else  except  to  communicate  the  disease  to  the  whole  or-
ganism, which  communication  must  first  take  place  before  the  fe-
ver and  eruption  can  appear  1

* These  statements  we  owe  especially  to  the  experience  of
English  and  American  physicians,  to  Hunter  and  Houlston ; (in  the
London  Med.  Journ.  Vol.  V.  ;)  also  to  Vaughan,  Shadwell,  Per-
cival,  whose  observations  may  be  found  recorded  in  James
Mease’s  treatise  u On  Hydrophobia,”  Philadek,  1793.

j A girl  of  8 years,  in  the  city  of  Glasgow,  was  bit  by  a mad
dog  on  the  21st  of  March,  1792.  The  wound  was  immediately
exsected  with  great  care,  the  suppuration  was  kept  up,  togethe  •
with  ptyalism,  for  two  weeks.  Nevertheless  hydrophobia  broke


53


the  bitten  part,  are  capable  of  preventing  the  develop-
ment of  the  disease  in  the  internal  organism  ; hydro-
phobia will  occur  in  spite  of  the  many  boasted  external
applications  for  the  purification,  cauterization  and  sup-
puration of  the  wound.

From  the  course  which  these  miasmatic  diseases  pur-
sue, wTe  clearly  see  that,  after  infection,  the  internal  dis-
ease, whether  measles,  scarlatina,  or  small-pox,  must
first  have  become  fully  developed  in  the  organism,  be-
fore those  eruptions  can  come  out  upon  the  skin.

Against  all  these  acute  miasmatic  diseases,  nature
adopts  a mode  of  cure  which  is  inexplicable  to  us.
They  run  through  their  course  of  about,  two  or  three
weeks,  when  a crisis  ensues,  by  means  of  which  the  fe-
ver, together  with  the  eruption,  are  annihilated  in  the
system.  After  this  period  man  either  dies  of  those  dis-
eases, or  else  recovers.* *

The  mode  of  contagion  which  nature  follow's  in  the
chronic  miasmatic  diseases,  and  the  formation  of  the
internal  disease  previous  to  the  external  symptoms  ap-
pearing upon  the  skin  and  indicating  the  completion  of
the  internal  malady,  is  the  same  as  in  the  acute  forms  of
the  disease  ; but.  after  the  internal  disease  is  completed,


out  on  the  27th  of  April,  and  on  the  29th  the  patient  died.  See
Duncan’s  Med.  Com.  Dec.  II.  Vol.  8.,  Edinb.  1793,  and  the  new
London  Med.  Jour.  II.

* Have  those  acute,  semivital  miasms  the  peculiar  nature  of
becoming-  extinct  in  the  org-anism,  after  having-  affected  the  vital
powers,  at  the  moment  of  the  infection,  each  in  its  peculiar
manner,  and  having-  spread  throug-h  the  system  like  a parasitical
growth,  establishing  each  its  peculiar  fever,  and  leaving  upon
the  skin  an  eruption  which  is,  in  its  turn,  capable  of  communi-
cating the  disease!

Are  notthe  chronic  miasms,  on  the  contrary,  continued  by  the
peculiar  contagious  eruption  which  they  leave  behind,  itch  ves-
icle, chancre,  cauliflower  excrescence,  whereas  the  acute  miasms
become  extinct  of  themselves  1 The  chronic  miasms  are  semi-
vital morbid  miasms  of  a parasitical  nature,  which  can  only  be
neutralized  and  annihilated  by  a more  powerful  remedy  produ-
cing analogous  effects,  (the  antisporics  ;)  it  is  by  means  of  these
alone  that  the  patient  can  be  freed  from  the  effects  of  those  mi-
asms.


54


there  is  this  remarkable  difference  between  it  and  the
acute  diseases,  that  the  chronic  miasm  continues  in  the
organism,  and  even  develops  itself  from  year  to  year,
unless  it  is  extinguished  and  thoroughly  cured  by  art.

To  show  this  more  fully,  I shall  here  only  mention
those  two  chronic  miasms  which  are  best  known,  the
chancre  and  the  itch .

The  infection  most  probably  takes  place,  during  the
act  of  coition,  at  those  places  which  come  in  contact
with  the  syphilitic  virus  and  receive  it  into  themselves
by  friction.

If  the  poison  has  taken  effect,  the  whole  system  is  at
once  tainted  with  it.  Immediately  after  the  infection  has
taken  place,  the  formation  of  the  internal  disease  begins.

Those  parts  of  the  genital  organs,  where  the  infection
has  taken  place,  exhibit  nothing  unnatural,  nothing
morbid,  no  traces  either  of  inflammation  or  corrosion ;
all  washing  of  the  parts  immediately  after  an  impure
coition  is  useless.  According  to  all  appearances  the
parts  remain  healthy ; only  the  internal  organism  is
roused  by  means  of  the  infection,  (which  generally  takes
place  in  a moment.)  The  internal  organism  endea-
vours to  assimilate  the  syphilitic  miasm,  and  becomes
thoroughly  tainted  with  the  syphilitic  disease.

This  complete  adaptation  of  its  organs  to  the  syphilitic
virus  is  the  first  object  of  the  human  organism,  after
the  infection  has  taken  place.  Not  till  the  internal  dis-
ease is  completely  developed,  does  nature  try  to  alle-
viate and  to  hush  her  sufferings  by  forming  at  the  spot
where  the  infection  has  taken  place,  a local  symptom
as  a substitute  for  the  internal  disease  in  the  shape  of  a
little  blister,  which  is  transformed  to  a painful  ulcer,  call-
ed bubo  or  chancre,  about  five,  seven  or  fourteen  days,
or  sometimes  even  three,  four,  and  five  weeks  after  the
infection  has  taken  place.  This  vicarious  chancre  has
the  power  of  communicating  to  other  persons  the  same
miasm,  which  is  the  internal  disease.

If  the  internal  disease  is  extinguished  by  means  of
the  internal  remedy,  the  chancre  becomes  also  cured,  and
man  recovers.


55


But  if  the  chancre  be  removed  by  some  local  appli-
cation,* as  is  done  yet  to  this  day  by  physicians  of  the
old  school,  the  miasmatic  chronic  venereal  disease  re-
mains in  the  organism,  and  unless  it  be  cured  by  inter-
nal remedies,  it  gets  worse  to  the  end  of  life  ; nor  is  the
strongest  constitution,  by  its  own  unaided  efforts,  capable
of  eradicating  the  virus.

The  chancre  is  most  easily  and  thoroughly  cured  by
curing  the  internal  disease  which  pervades  the  whole
system.  I have  taught  and  practised  this  for  years.
The  best  mode  is  to  employ  the  internal  remedy  alone,
without  any  external  application.  The  merely  local
removal  of  the  chancre,  without  any  previous  cure  of  the
internal  disease,  is  invariably  followed  by  the  breaking
out  of  the  syphilitic  disease,  with  all  its  sufferings.

Psora  is,  like  syphilis , a miasmatic  chronic  disease,
and  resembles  it  in  regard  to  the  first  development.

Psora  is  the  most  contagious  of  all  chronic  miasms,
and  much  more  so  than  syphilis  or  sycosis . The  in-
fection by  the  latter  two  miasms  can  only  take  place
with  readiness  in  wounds,  and  at  those  parts  of  the  body
which  are  covered  with  a very  thin  cuticle  and  provided
with  a delicate  nervous  tissue  ; such  parts  are  the  geni-
tal organs.  Moreover  a certain  degree  of  friction  is
required  to  introduce  the  virus  into  the  system.  The
psoric  miasm , on  the  contrary , taints  the  system , espe-
cially that  of  children , by  simply  touching  the  skin.


* Syphilis  does  not.  only  break  out  through  the  removal  of  the
chancre  by  cauteries — which  is  called  by  quacks,  repelling  the
virus  into  the  system,  as  though  the  system  had  been  sound  be-
fore the  so-called  repulsion  had  taken  place; — even  the  sudden
removal  of  the  chancre  without  any  stimulants,  brings  on  syphi-
lis, which  may  incidentally  teach  us  that  the  syphilis  must  have
existed  in  the  system  before  the  appearance  of  the  chancre.
“ Petit  cut  off  a small  portion  of  the  labia  minora  which  had
been  affected  with  chancre  for  some  days  ; the  wound  healed,
but  syphilis  broke  out  nevertheless.”  See  Fabre,  Lettres,
Supplement  a son  traite  des  Maladies  Veneriennes.  Paris,
1786. — How  could  this  be  otherwise,  since  the  syphilitic  dis-
ease pervaded  the  whole  system  even  before  the  chancre  had
made  its  appearance  !


56


Almost  every  body  may,  under  any  circumstances,  be
infected  with  the  psoric  miasm  ; this  is  different  with
the  other  two  miasms.

As  I said  before,  the  infection  by  the  psoric  miasm
is  more  common,  more  certain,  more  easy  and  more  ab-
solute than  that  by  any  other.  This  miasm  may  be  so
easily  communicated  that  the  physician  often  gives  it  to
his  patients  in  feeling  their  pulse.*  Jt  may  be  commu-
nicated by  linen  winch  has  been  washed  together  with
the  linen  of  persons  afflicted  with  the  itch  ;t  by  gloves
w liich  such  a person  had  tried  on  before  ; by  a bed  or
a towel  which  had  been  used  by  itch  patients.  Often
even  it  is  given  to  the  child  by  the  mother  during  its
passage  through  the  maternal  organs,  or  by  the  midwife
who  just  came  from  another  parturient  woman,  or  by
the  nurse  upon  whose  arms  the  child  is  carried  about,
and  who  was  either  unclean  herself  or  suffered  the  child
to  be  touched  by  unclean  hands.  Considering  the
thousand  different,  modes  in  which  this  miasm  touches
the  various  things  which  are  necessary  toman,  and  which
he  is  far  from  suspecting  and  cannot  help  touching,  we
may  say  that  those  who  remain  free  from  the  itch,  con-
stitute a lucky  minority.  Not  only  in  hospitals,  dun-
geons, factories,  or  in  orphan  asylums  and  the  huts  of
the  poor,  need  we  seek  the  psoric  infection  ; we  find  it
just  as  well  among  the  rich,  or  among  those  who  live  in
society  or  in  retirement.  The  hermit  upon  Montserrat
escapes  it  just  as  little  as  the  little  prince  wrapped  up  in
his  cambric  swaddling-clothes.

The  moment  the  psoric  miasm  has  touched  the  hand,
and  has  taken  effect,  it  spreads  through  the  system.
Henceforth  all  washing  and  cleansing  of  the  spot
is  useless.  The  skin  during  the  first  days,  remains
unchanged  and  apparently  sound.  There  is  neither
eruption  nor  itching  to  be  perceived  upon  the  body,  not
even  at  the  spot  where  the  infection  has  taken  place.


* Car.  Musitani  Opera,  de  Tumoribus,  cap.  20.
f Willis  observed  this.  See  Turner,  des  Malades  de  la  Peau
traduit  de  l’Angdais,  k Paris,  1783.  Tom.  II.  cap.  3,  p.  77.


The  nerve  in  which  the  psoric  miasm  had  first  taken
effect,  had  already  communicated  it  to  the  remaining
nerves  by  an  invisible  dynamic  sympathy,  and  the  living
organism  became  so  much  disturbed  by  this  specihc  in-
fluence, that  it  was  forced  to  adapt  itself  to  the  action  of
this  psoric  miasm,  until,  by  virtue  of  this  universal  adap-
tation, the  internal  disease  had  become  completely  and
finally  established.

Not  till  the  whole  organism  has  been  adapted  to  the
nature  of  the  chronic  miasmatic  disease,  do  the  mor-
bidly affected  vital  powers  endeavour  to  alleviate  and  to
calm  the  internal  disease  by  a local  symptom,  (the  itch
vesicle,  for  instance.)  As  long  as  this  eruption  con-
tinues upon  the  skin  in  its  natural  form,  the  internal
psora,  together  with  its  secondary  ailments,  remain  slum-
bering, latent  and  restrained.

The  perfect  adaptation  of  the  whole  organism  to  the
nature  of  the  psoric  virus  usually  requires  a period  of
six,  seven,  ten,  sometimes  even  fourteen  days.  After
this  period,  towards  evening,  the  patient  experiences  a
more  or  less  considerable  chill,  and,  during  the  sub-
sequent night,  heat  ail  over  the  body,  terminating  in
sweat.  This  heat  is  often  supposed  to  be  a little  fever,
which  is  believed  to  come  from  a cold,  and  is  not  re-
garded.* Then  the  eruption  makes  its  appearance,
first  near  the  spot  which  has  been  the  original  seat  of
the  infection,  in  the  shape  of  fine  vesicles,  resembling
rash,  and  increasing  in  size.  They  are  distinguished
by  a voluptuously  and  almost  intolerably  delightful
itching.  This  incessantly  invites  the  patient  to  rub  and
to  scratch  the  vesicles,  and,  if  the  itching  is  suffered  to
continue  without  scratching,  there  is  a shuddering  ex-
perienced over  the  whole  skin.  Rubbing  and  scratching
may  ease  the  patient  for  a moment,  but  it  is  immediately

* So  far  from  being  a separable  local  affection,  the  vesicles
are  on  the  contrary  evident  proofs  of  the  psora  having  been  com-
pletely developed  in  the  system;  the  eruption  is  merely  the  ul-
timate boundary  of  the  psoric  development.  This  eruption,
together  with  the  itching,  are  a part  of  the  whole  disease  in  its
natural,  least  dangerous  form.


58


succeeded  by  long  burning  at  the  spots  where  the
scratching  took  place.  This  itching  occurs  most  fre-(
quently  and  is  most  intolerable,  late  in  the  evening  and
before  midnight.

During  the  first  hours  of  their  existence,  the  vesicles
contain  a limpid  lymph,  which  is  quickly  changed  to
pus,  filling  the  tip  of  the  vesicle.

The  itching  is  so  terrible  that  the  patient  not  only
rubs  the  vesicles,  but  scratches  them  open.  The  liquid
which  oozes  out  from  the  vesicles,  furnishes  an  abund-
ance of  contagious  material  for  those  who  come  near
the  patient,  and  have  not  yet  been  infected.  The  ex-
tremities, linen,  cloths,  utensils  of  every  kind,  which
have  been  touched  by  this  liquid,  propagate  the  disease.

The  cutaneous  eruption,  which  is  an  indication  of  the
psora  having  pervaded  the  whole  organism,  (the  Ger~
mans  call  it  kratze,  itchj  the  ulcers  consequent  upon
this  eruption,  and  accompanied  with  their  peculiar  itch-
ing round  the  borders,  and  lastly,  tenia  and  those  forms
of  herpes  which  become  moist  on  rubbing,  and  are  dis-
tinguished by  a sort  of  psoric  itching,  are  alone  capable
of  transferring  the  disease  to  other  persons,  because  they
alone  contain  the  miasm  susceptible  of  communication.
On  the  contrary,  the  secondary  symptoms  of  psora
which  appear  both  after  the  spontaneous  and  the  artifi-
cial suppression  of  the  eruption,  and  which  are  the  com-
mon results  of  psoric  reaction,  never  transmit  the  itch  to
other  persons,  no  more  than  the  secondary  symptoms
of  syphilis  transmit  this  disease  to  others.  (This  was
first  observed  and  taught  by  John  Hunter.)

When  the  eruption  is  just  coming  out,  and  is  not  yet
spread  over  the  skin,  the  health  of  the  patient  seems  to
be  unimpaired  ; there  are  as  yet  no  traces  of  the  internal
psoric  disease.  The  eruption  acts  as  a sort  of  substi-
tute for  the  internal  disease,  which,  together  with  its
secondary  ailments,  remains  in  a latent  condition.*


* In  the  same  way  the  chancre  acts  as  a substitute  for  the  in-
ternal syphilis  ; which  remains  latent  as  long  as  the  chancre  re-
mains at  its  place.  I saw  a woman  who  had  been  affected  with


59


While  the  disease  is  in  this  condition,  it  is  most  easily
cured  by  the  specific  remedies  taken  internally.

If  the  disease  is  permitted  to  develop  itself  according
to  its  nature,  without  using  an  internally  curative  remedy?
or  some  external  application  against  the  eruption,* *  the
internal  disease  increases  rapidly.  This  increase  of  the
internal  disease  inducing  a corresponding  increase  of
the  external  symptoms,  the  eruption  will  finally  cover
the  whole  surface  of  the  body,  in  order  to  calm  the  in-
ternal disease,  and  keep  it  in  a latent  condition.

Even  at  this  stage  of  the  disease  man  apparently  en-
joys good  health?  except  the  eruption.  The  external
symptom  keeping  pace  with  the  internal  disease,  keeps
this  one  at  bay.  But  the  itching  over  the  whole  body
becomes  so  intolerable,  that  even  the  robustest  man
cannot  bear  it  in  the  end.  He  wishes  to  get  rid  of  his
torment  at  any  price  ; and,  for  want  of  sound  help,  he
contents  himself  with  being  freed  from  the  eruption,
even  though  it  cost  him  his  life.  Unfortunately  the


a chancre  for  two  years.  The  chancre  had  constantly  remained
at  the  same  place,  and  had  now  reached  the  size  of  an  inch  in
diameter.  Nothing  had  been  done  for  it.  There  was  no  trace
of  secondary  syphilis  in  this  patient.'  The  best  preparation  of
mercury  taken  internally,  cured  both  the  internal  disease  and
the  chancre.

* Note  of  the  translator. — This  is  not  to  be  understood
as  if  Hahnemann  approved  of  the  application  of  external  reme-
dies. The  idea  which  Hahnemann  means  to  convey  is  this,
that  the  internal  disease  may  be  apparently  checked  in  its  course
by  external  applications  ; in  reality  the  internal  disease  is  not
checked;  it  is  surprised,  or  stunned,  as  it  were,  by  the  external
application,  but  not  cured,  not  even  checked  by  it ; for,  from  the
moment  that  its  external  symptom,  in  which  the  disease  has  em-
bodied itself,  is  suppressed,  the  morbific  virus  concentrates  itself,
gathers  its  forces,  and  constructs  its  mines,  by  means  of  which
it  prepares  the  ultimate  and  unavoidable  destruction  of  the  organ-
ism. This  gathering  of  the  morbific  virus  and  instilling  itself
into  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  animal  economy,  is  necessarily
the  work  of  time,  and  often  takes  place  so  slowly  and  gradually
that  the  patient  is  induced  to  believe  that  the  suppression  of  the
external  vicarious  embodiment  of  the  internal  disease  was  tanta-
mount to  a radical  cure.


60


means  arc  at  once  furnished  him  either  by  ignorant  lay-
men or  by  allceopathic  physicians  and  surgeons.  All
he  cares  for  is  to  get  rid  of  the  external  pain,  without
thinking  of  the  evil  consequences  that  attend  the  sup-
pression of  the  vicarious  external  disease.  By  resorting
to  this  suppression,  he  fares  like  the  poor  man  who
means  to  get  rid  of  his  poverty  by  stealing  a large  sum
of  money,  and,  instead  of  obtaining  wealth,  goes  to
dungeon  or  the  gallows.

The  longer  the  psoric  disease  has  lasted,  no  matter
whether  the  eruption  has  spread  all  over  the  skin,  or
whether  it  has  been  confined  to  a few  vesicles,  owing  to
a peculiar  want  of  action  in  the  skin,*  in  both  these  cases
the  suppression  of  even  the  smallest  eruption  is  attend-
ed with  the  most  pernicious  consequences  ; for  the  in-
ternal psora  which  has  been  increasing  all  the  time,  now
breaks  forth  with  its  host  of  terrible  sufferings.

The  badly  informed  layman  may  be  pardoned  for  sup-
pressing .the  troublesome  itching  and  the  eruption,  by
cold  shower  baths,  rolling  in  the  snow,  cupping,  or  rub-
bing the  skin  or  only  the  joints  with  sulphur  ointment  ;
lie  knows  not  what  dangerous  symptoms  of  the  internal
psora  he  calls  up  in  his  system.  But  who  can  pardon
men  whose  duty  it  is  to  know,  and  by  proper  treatment,!


^ See  above,  the  observation  in  case  8 G.
t For,  even  at  this  stage  of  the  disease,  the  eruption,  together
with  the  internal  psora,  may  yet  be  cured  more  easily,  and  with
more  certainty,  though  less  so  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  dis-
ease, by  the  proper  homteopathic  remedies,  than  is  possible  after
the  external  suppression  of  the  eruption ; for  this  external  sup-
pression is  always  succeeded  by  a host  of  nameless  chronic  dis-
eases, into  which  the  external  psora  develops  itself.  Before  the
suppression,  the  psoric  disease  forms  yet  a unit,  and  may,  there-
fore, be  met  more  easily,  with  infinitely  more  certainty  and  more
thoroughly  by  the  appropriate  specific  remedies,  than  after  the  sup-
pression of  the  cutaneous  symptoms.  External  remedies  are  no
more  required  in  this  disease  than  in  the  venereal  affection,
where  one  small  dose  of  the  best  mercurial  preparation,  is  often
sufficient  to  convert  the  chancre  into  a benign  ulcer.  The  ulcer
heals  in  a few  days  of  itself,  and  no  secondary  symptoms  of
syphilis  ever  appear,  because  the  internal  disease  has  been  cured,
together  with  the  local  affection.  This  is  a doctrine  which  I


61


to  prevent  the  accidents  which  will  arise  from  the  psoric
reaction  consequent  upon  suppressed  eruption,  when  you
see  them  treat  their  patients  in  an  improper  manner,  and
suppress  the  eruption  with  an  incredible  levity,  by  means
of  powerful  internal  and  external  remedies,  drastic  pur-
gatives, the  ointment  of  Jasser,  washes  of  the  acetate
of  lead,  mercurial  preparations,  sulphate  of  zinc,  and  es-
pecially by  an  ointment  composed  of  lard  and  flowers  of
sulphur  or  quicksilver,  pretending  all  the  while,  “ that  it  is
simply  an  impurity  in  the  skin,  and  that  the  skin  being
cleared,  every  thing  is  over,  and  man  needs  not  to  appre-

have  taught  for  years,  and  have  constantly  illustrated  by  my
cures.

Can  it  be  excused,  that  after  a lapse  of  three  hundred  years
since  the  venereal  disease  has  been  known,  the  physicians  should
have  been  so  ignorant  of  its  nature  as  not  to  perceive  that  the
chancre  is  something  more  than  a mere  local  affection  1 Can
the  physicians  be  pardoned  for  having  failed  to  perceive  that  the
chancre  being  the  external  symptom  of  an  internal  syphilitic  dis-
ease, it  ought  not  to  be  removed  by  external  applications  1
Ought  not  experience  to  have  shown  them  that  the  removal  of
the  chancre  by  external  applications  deprives  the  internal  dis-
ease of  its  vicarious  symptom,  and,  therefore,  forces  it  to  show
itself  in  the  formidable  and  much  more  inveterate  character  of
syphilis  ? Can  this  want  of  judgment  be  excused  1

Why  did  physicians  never  reflect  upon  the  origin  of  cauli-
flower excrescence  1 Why  did  they  constantly  overlook  the  in-
ternal disease  which  gives  origin  to  these  excrescences  1 Why
did  they  not  cure  the  internal  disease  by  homoeopathic  remedies,
which  would  have  caused  the  excrescences  to  disappear  without
the  use  of  an  external  agent  1

But  suppose  we  were  willing  to  excuse  this  sad  neglect  and
ignorance  on  the  ground  that  the  physicians  had  only  three  cen-
turies and  a quarter  to  obtain  a correct  knowledge  of  syphilis ,
which  they  certainly  would  have  obtained  by  practising  a little
longer, — though  I had  several  times  tried  to  convince  them  of
their  error — nevertheless  they  cannot  be  excused  for  their  obsti-
nate blindness  relative  to  the  true  treatment  of  psoric  diseases,
and  for  the  pride  with  which  they  overlooked  all  those  facts
which  had  a tendency  to  show  them  that  the  itch  originates  in
an  internal  psora ; no,  they  were  determined  to  deceive  the
world  by  the  lamentable  delusion,  “ that  the  intolerably  itching
vesicles  were  only  an  external  cutaneous  disease , and  that  their
local  suppression  freed  man  from  all  disease  and  restored  him  to
health


3


62


hend  any  further  trouble.”  Who  can  pardon  them  for
not  profiting  by  the  many  thousand  warning  examples
which  they  find  recorded  in  the  works  of  older,  conscien-
tious observers,  or  which  the  experience  of  modern  physi-
cians reveals  to  them?  Ought  not  they  to  know  that,  by
suppressing  the  eruption,  they  bring  upon  the  patient
either  certain  death,  or  a lingering  disease,  which  lasts  to
the  end  of  his  life  ? Do  they  not  let  loose  the  psoric  dis-
ease upon  the  deluded  patient  by  tearing  down  the  only
barriers  which  kept  the  thousand-headed  monster  in
bounds  ?

It  may  easily  be  imagined,  and  experience  teaches,
that  the  internal  psora  will  finally  reach  its  greatest  de-
velopment, if  the  eruption  is  permitted  to  remain  upon
the  skin.  The  intensity  of  the  internal  disease  becomes
manifest  by  the  evil  consequences  with  which  the  sup-
pression of  an  old  eruption  is  constantly  attended.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certain  that  the  suppression
of  a few  recently  formed  itch  vesicles,  when  the  inter-
nal psora  had  not  time  to  develop  its  intensity,  is  attended
with  less  immediate  danger  ; and  that  there  are  no  im-
mediate evil  consequences  attending  such  a suppres-
sion. Hence  it  often  happens  that  the  children  of  rich
parents  are  freed,  in  a day  or  two,  from  a few  recently


Not  only  medical  scribblers,  but  even  the  greatest  and  most
celebrated  physicians  of  modern  times,  have  made  themselves
guilty  of  this  gross  error,  (or  shall  I say,  wilful  crime  1)  from
von  Helmont  down  to  the  latest  advocates  of  the  allceopathic
practice.

The  above  quoted  remedies  were  indeed  sufficient  to  remove
both  the  eruption  and  the  itching.  In  their  delusion  the  physi-
cians supposed  to  have  destroyed  the  disease,  and  dismissed
their  patients  with  the  assurance  that  they  had  entirely  recovered.

The  ailments  which  succeeded  the  suppression  of  the  eruption,
they  explained  as  new  maladies.  They  were  heedless  of  those
innumerable,  striking  testimonies  of  older  and  honest  observers,
which  show  that  the  consequences  often  follow  the  suppression
so  rapidly  that  every  body  in  his  senses  must  acknowledge  them
as  results  of  an  internal  psora , which,  being  deprived  of  its  pri-
mary cutaneous  symptoms,  was  forced  to  embody  itself  in  a host
of  secondary  diseases.


63


formed  vesicles  by  means  of  lead  ointment  or  lead
washes,  without  any  one  suspecting  them  of  having  been
infected  with  the  itch.

But,  however  trifling  the  ailments  may  be  with  which
the  suppression  of  a few  recently  formed  vesicles  is
attended,  and  which  the  ignorant  family  physician  at-
tributes to  other  slight  causes,  nevertheless,  the  inter-
nal psora,  be  it  ever  so  little  developed,  affects  the
whole  organism  ; the  robustest  constitution  is  incapa-
ble of  annihilating  it  by  its  own  unaided  efforts , and
unless  it  be  extinguished  by  the  aid  of  art , it  will  last
to  the  end  of  life . It  is  indeed  true  that  the  first  de-
velopment of  this  internal  disease  is  slower,  when  the
eruption  upon  the  skin  is  removed  as  speedily  as  it
shows  itself,  than  in  cases  where  the  eruption  has  been
upon  the  skin  for  a long  time,  and  the  internal  psora
has  been  permitted  to  increase  in  intensity  in  a corres-
ponding degree.  Nevertheless,  even  in  the  most  favour-
able cases,  the  development  of  the  internal  psora 'goes
on  for  years,  often  so  slowly  and  imperceptibly  that  per-
sons who  are  not  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  symp-
toms, by  which  the  existence  of  this  slumbering  enemy
shows  itself,  would  suppose  the  patient  to  be  perfectly
healthy.

Numerous  observations*  have,  by  degrees,  made  me
acquainted  with  the  symptoms  by  which  the  internal
disease  manifests  itself,  even  in  its  incipient  state  of
slumber.f  By  means  of  this  knowledge  I am  able  to


* Up  to  this  moment,  at  the  age  of  79  years,  I have  never
been  infected  with  the  itch,  although  I am  extremely  susceptible
of  being  attacked  by  acute  or  epidemic  diseases,  and  have  under-
gone excessive  mental  exertions  and  moral  sufferings.  This
may  have  been  the  reason  why  I should  have  had  a better  chance
than  hundreds  of  others  to  discover  and  to  appreciate  the  symp-
toms of  psora , whether  in  the  latent  condition,  or  existing  in
the  form  of  great  chronic  ailments.  I had  the  means  and  was
in  the  habit  of  comparing  those  symptoms  with  the  state  of
health  that  I have  constantly  enjoyed.

j The  allceopathic  physicians  have  likewise  supposed  latent  forms
of  disease,  in  order  to  have  a pretence  for  the  inroads  which  they


64


apply  proper  and  successful  remedies  before  the  inter-
nal psora  has  become  a manifest  secondary  disease,  and
has  reached  that  fearful  height  where  its  eradication  is
either  very  difficult  or  altogether  impossible.

There  are  many  symptoms  that  reveal  the  existence
of  psora , slumbering  in  the  depths  of  the  organism,  be-
fore a < mm | dele  outbreak  of  the  disease  has  taken  place  ;
but  they  cannot  all  be  found  upon  one  person.  One  has
more,  the  other  less  ; in  one  they  come  out  progres-
sively, in  another  they  remain  suppressed  ; this  de-
pends in  a great  measure  upon  the  constitution  and  the
external  circumstances  of  the  patients.

Symptoms  of  latent  Psora.

Frequent  passing  of  ascarides,  lumbricoides  and  ver-
miculares — they  cause  an  intolerable  itching  in  the  rec-
tum, (especially  in  children.)

Frequent  distention  of  the  abdomen.

InSatiable  hunger  and  want  of  appetite  following
each  other  in  alternation.

Paleness  of  the  countenance  and  deficient  tonicity  of
the  muscles.

Frequent  inflammation  of  the  eyes.

Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  (scrofula.)

Sweat  upon  the  head,  in  the  evening  after  having
fallen  asleep.

Epistaxis  in  girls  and  young  men,  often  very  violent,
(it  is  less  frequent  in  older  persons.)


make  upon  the  system  by  their  violent  medicines,  bloodlettings,
anodynes,  etc.  These  “ qualitates  occulta:  Fernelii  ” are  alto-
gether chimerical,  since,  by  the  admission  of  the  physicians
themselves,  there  are  no  symptoms  by  which  they  can  be  recog-
nised. Things  which  do  not  manifest  themselves  by  phenom-
ena, have  no  existence  for  man,  who  can  only  become  aware  of
their  existence  by  observation  ; they  are  mere  creations  of  the
fancy.  It  is  different  with  the  slumbering  or  latent  powers  of
nature  ; in  spite  of  their  latent  existence  they  reveal  themselves-
under  appropriate  circumstances  ; — for  example,  the  latent  caloric
in  rubbing  cold  metals ; the  latent  psora  by  drawing  pain  in  the
sheaths  of  the  muscles,  which  comes  on  whenever  the  psoric
patient  exposes  himself  to  a draught  of  air.


65


The  hands  are  generally  cold,  and  the  palm  .of  the
hand  is  sweaty,  (burning  in  the  palm  of  the'  hand.)

The  feet  are  cold  and  dry,  or  sweaty  and  badly  smell-
ing. (Burning  upon  the  soles  of  the  feet.)

The  arms  or  hands,  legs  or  feet  become  benumbed
by  a slight  cause.

Frequent  cramps  in  the  muscles  of  the  arms  and
hands.

Painless  s'ubsultus  of  parts  of  muscles,  here  and  there.

Frequent  or  tedious  coryza,  or  dry  cold  in  the  head,*
or  impossibility  of  catching  cold,  even  though  the  per-
son is  much  exposed  to  the  causes  of  cold,  and  has  been
constantly  affected  with  it  formerly.

Tedious  obstruction  of  the  nares.  one  or  both.

/

Ulcers  in  the  nares,  (sore  nose.)

Disagreeable  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  nose.

Frequent  inflammation  of  the  throat,  frequent  hoarse-
ness.

Short  and  light  coughing,  early  in  the  morning,  in
quick  repetition.

Frequent  attacks  of  the  asthma.

Either  the  whole  body  or  only  the  head,  neck,  breast,
abdomen,  feet,  easily  catch  cold,  especially  in  a draught
of  air  ;f  these  parts  are  , then  generally  covered  with
sweat;  the  cold  is  attended  with  various  symptoms,
which  often  last  a good  while.

Straining,  which  often  occurs  from  the  slightest  cause,
from  carrying  or  lifting  a light  weight,  from  elevating
and  stretching  the  arms  after  high  objects  ; this  moder-
ate stretching  of  the  muscles  is  often  succeeded  by  all
sorts  of  ailments,  headache,  nausea,  sinking  of  strength,
painful  tension  in  the  muscles  of  the  back  of  the  neck,
or  the  back,  etc.

Frequent  pain  on  one  side  of  the  head,  or  toothache,

from  even  moderate  mental  emotions.

% m

* The  catarrhal  fevers,  (for  example,  influenza,)  which  affect
even  the  soundest  constitution,  do  not  come  under  this  remark.

f Persons  whose  organisms  are  not  tainted  with  the  psoric
virus,  do  not  catch  cold  from  being  exposed  to  a draught,  or
damp  and  cold  air,  though  they  may  find  it  disagreeable.


66


Frequent  flushes  of  heat  and  redness  in  the  face,
sometimes  combined  with  a sort  of  anxiety.

Frequent  falling  of  the  hair,  dryness  of  the  hair,  scales
upon  the  scalp.

Inclination  to  erysipelas,  on  different  parts  of  the  body.

Interruption  of  the  menstrual  functions  ; irregularities
occurring  in  those  functions  ; the  menses  either  flow
too  abundantly  or  too  little  ; they  appear  either  too
soon  or  too  late,  last  too  long,  are  watery,  and  are  com-
bined with  many  bodily  ailments.

Twitches  of  the  limbs  on  falling  asleep.

Weariness  on  waking  up  in  the  morning  ; unrefresh-
ing sleep.

Sweat,  early,  in  the  bed.

Too  easy  sweating  during  the  day,  even  with  little  mo-
tion ; also,  absence  of  sweat  which  nothing  can  bring  out.

The  tongue  is  white,  pale, — often  parched.

Much  phlegm  in  the  fauces.

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth  ; this  is  either  constant,
or  occurs  only  frequently,  especially  during  the  menses  ;
the  taste  in  the  mouth  appears  insipid,  or  sourish,  or  as
coming  from  a spoiled  stomach  ; also  musty  and  putrid.

Sourish  taste  in  the  mouth.

Nausea  early  in  the  morning.

Sensation  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach.

Repugnance  to  boiled  warm  food,  especially  meat.

Repugnance  (in  children)  to  milk.

Dryness  in  the  mouth,  in  the  night  and  early  in  the
morning.

Cutting  pain  in  the  bowels,  frequently  ; often  every
day,  especially  early  in  the  morning,  (in  children.)

Hard  knotty  stools,  often  delaying  a whole  day,  and
covered  with  mucus  ; or  also,  constantly  soft,  liquid,  acrid
stools.

Varices  of  the  rectum  ; blood  passes  off  with  the
stools.

Passing  of  mucus  by  the  anus,  with  or  without  faeces,

Itching  at  the  anus.

Dark  urine.

Distended  veins  of  the  legs,  (varices.)


67


Chilblains ; they  are  painful  even  in  the  summer  season.

The  corns  pain,  even  when  the  shoes  do  not  pinch.

This  or  that  joint  is  easily  strained,  in  stepping  or
seizing.

One  or  more  joints  crack  during  motion.

Drawing,  straining  pains  in  the  back  of  the  neck,  in  the
back,  the  limbs,  especially  the  teeth,  (in  damp,  stormy
weather,  when  the  wind  is  from  the  north-west  or  north-
east,* after  a cold,  a strain  consequent  on  lifting,  or  after
disagreeable  emotions,  etc.

The  pains  manifest  themselves  again  during  rest,
they  disappear  during  motion.

The  pains  generally  come  on  during  night  ; they
appear  again  and  increase,  when  the  barometer  has  fallen,
when  the  wind  is  from  the  north  or  north-east,  in  the
winter  season  and  towards  spring.

Uneasy,  frightful,  or  too  vivid  dreams.

Unhealthy  skin  ; every  little  wound  ulcerates  ; the  skin
of  the  hands  and  the  lower  lips  becomes  easily  chopped.

Frequent  boils,  frequent  paronychias.

Dry  skin  upon  the  extremities,  upper  arms,  thighs,
also  upon  the  cheeks.

Here  and  there  scaly  places  upon  the  skin,  causing  a
voluptuously  delightful  sort  of  itching,  and  a burning
after  the  place  has  been  scratched.

Here  and  there  a vesicle  characterized  by  an  in-
tolerable but  voluptuously  delightful  itching.  At  the  top  it
is  filled  with  pus,  and  there  is  a burning  after  it  has  been
scratched  ; it  is  often  found  upon  a finger,  on  the  wrist,
or  elsewhere.

Though  frequently  affected  with  some  of  these  ail-
ments, man  may  yet  deem  himself  healthv,  and  is  often
considered  so  by  others.  These  affections  do  not
prevent  him  from  leading  a tolerably  comfortable  ex-
istence, provided  he  is  young  and  robust,  is  not  obliged
to  fatigue  himself,  has  all  his  wants  provided  for,  is  not
exposed  to  chagrin  or  grief,  and  has  a cheerful,  calm,
patient  and  contented  temper.  In  this  case,  the  internal


* The  north-easters  in  Europe  are  dry  and  cutting.


68


psora  may  continue  slumbering  in  the  organism  for  years,
without  being  observed  by  any  other  except  the  attentive
connoisseur,  or  without  becoming  developed  into  a per-
manent chronic  disease.

However,  in  persons  that  are  affected  with  those  ap-
parently slight  infirmities,  a trivial  cause,  an  ordinary
vexation,  a cold,  an  irregularity  in  the  diet,  etc.,  may,  in
a more  advanced  age,  cause  a violent  though  short  attack
of  disease,  a violent  colic,  inflammation  of  the  chest  or
throat,  erysipelas,  fever,  and  similar  diseases,  the  ve-
hemence of  which  often  is  out  of  proportion  with  the
moderately  exciting  cause.  Such  diseases  generally
show  themselves  during  the  fall  or  winter  season,  but
often  also  in  spring  more  than  at  any  other  period.

It  sometimes  happens  that  the  patient  who  is  affected
with  the  latent  psora , whether  he  be  a child  or  a full-
grown  man,  seems  to  enjoy  good  health,  but  passes  into
circumstances  which  are  the  very  opposite  of  those  that
very  much  weakened  and  disturbed  by  some  ruling  ep-
idemic fever, # by  a contagious,  acute  disease,  small-pox,
measles,  hooping-cough,  scarlatina,  purple-rash,  etc.,
or  by  some  severe  injury,  by  a shock,  a fall,  a wound,
a large  burn,  by  fracturing  a leg  or  an  arm,  by  a hard
labour,  by  the  confinement  consequent  upon  disease,
and  hy  the  alloeopathic  remedies  which  have  been  im-
properly given  to  the  patient  ; or  the  vital  powers  may
have  been  weakened  by  leading  a sedentary  life  in  a close
damp  room  ; the  soul  may  have  been  depressed  by  the
death  of  beloved  relatives,  or  the  patient's  life  may  have
been  embittered  by  daily  chagrin  and  grief ; or  he  may
have  become  exposed  to  want,  be  may  have  become  de-
prived of  the  needful,  and  his  strength  and  his  fortitude

* Acute  fevers  often  terminate  in  causing  a latent  psora , which
has  become  roused  by  the  acute  disease,  to  break  out  upon  the
skin  in  the  form  of  itch.  The  physicians  who  were  ignorant  of
the  existence  of  a latent  psora,  declare  this  eruption  to  be  a new
itch  bred  by  the  bad  humours  with  which  the  system  of  the
patient  is  said  to  be  tilled.  But  the  itch  can,  no  more  than  the
small-pox,  measles  or  chancre,  generate  itself  spontaneously ; it
can  only  show  itself  upon  the  skin  after  infection  has  taken  place.


69


may  have  failed  him  in  consequence  of  bad  nourishment  i
in  that  case  the  latent  psora  becomes  roused  and  de-
velops that  host  of  inveterate  symptoms  which  will  be
found  enumerated  below  ; some  one  of  the  psoric  chronic
diseases  breaks  forth*  and  increases  to  a fearful  height*
especially  by  the  improper  treatment  of  alloeopathic

* This  kind  of  disease  depends- upon  the  original  constitution
of  the  patient,  his  peculiar  mode  of  life,  his  character,  the  in-
fluences of  education,  or  upon  the  weaker  parts  of  the  organism  at-
tracting the  psoric  miasms  by  their  higher  adaptation  to  its  nature*
and  causing  it  to  form  the  diseases  which  ate  inherent  in  the
peculiar  vital  activity  of  the  affected  organs.  The  eruption  of
the  psoric  disease  is  especially  favoured  by  an  irritable,  vehement
temper,  by  the.  exhaustion  consequent  upon  frequent  preg-
nancy, excessive  nursing  of  children,  great  bodily  exertions,  im-
proper, unsuccessful  treatment,  excesses  at  table  and  dissolute
habits.  Owing  to  its  peculiar  nature,  the  psoric  disease  may  re-
main latent  under  favourable  circumstances.  In  this  case  the
patient  appears  to  enjoy  good  health,  until  unfavourable  circum-
stances set  in,  which  rouse  the  internal  disease  and  cause  it  to
break  out.  Neither  the  relatives,  nor  the  patient,  or  the  physician
himself  can  comprehend  how  it  is  possible  that  his  health  should
have  declined  in  this  way  so  suddenly.  The  diseases  which
then  break  out,  often  even  after  a trivial  occurrence,  such  as
being  confined  to  the  bed  for  five  or  six  weeks  in  consequence  of
a fracture  of  the  leg — as  1 have  witnessed  in  my  own  practice — -
cannot  be  traced  to  any  cause  ; they  return  in  spite  of  a first
successful  treatment  and  of  the  strictest  diet ; they  increase  each
time  they  appear  again  in  the  system,  especially  in  the  fall,
winter  or  spring,  and  finally  settle  down  in  the  form  of  a
lingering  malady,  against  which  the  mineral  baths  are  of  no
avail,  and  which  cannot  be  treated  according  to  the  rules  of  the
alloeopathic  practice,  without  exposing  the  patient  to  the  danger
of  having  a more  severe  disease  substituted  in  the  place  of  his
former  ailment.  There  are  innumerable  Causes  which  may  rouse
the  internal  psora  and  cause  it  to  develop  its  manifold  germs  ; the
evil  effects  of  those  causes  often  bear  no  sort  of  apparent  relation
to  them,  which  makes  it  impossible  for  a sensible  man  to  con-
sider them  the  true  exciting  causes  of  the  secondary  psoric
disease,  the  often  fearful  character  of  which  ought,  on  the  con-
trary, to  be  explained  by  the  existence  of  a deep-seated  latent
disturbance,  which  has  broke  out  on  this  occasion,  and  is  the
common  mother  of  all  such  chronic  secondary  affections.

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  the  case  of  a young  woman  who
has  been  infected  with  psora  in  her  childhood,  but  who,  accord-
ing to  appearance,  enjoys  good  health,  or  what  is  commonly  so

3*


physicians , unless  more  favourable  circumstances  set  in,
diminishing  the  intensity  of  the  disease,  and  making
its  ulterior  development  more  moderate:

called.  In  the  third  month  of  her  pregnancy,  she  has  the  mis-
fortune of  being  upset  in  her  carriage.  The  consequence  of  this
accident,  beside  a slight  external  injury  and  fright,  is  miscarriage,
accompanied  with  considerable  hemorrhage,  which  exhausts  her
strength.  In  a few  weeks  she  has  almost  recovered  her  former
strength  and  health,  when  the  news  of  a dangerous  illness  of  her
beloved  and  absent  sister  puts  her  back  in  her  recovery,  and  adds
to  her  former  disease  a multitude  of  nervous  complaints  and
spasms,  which  make  her  really  sick.  In  a little  while  she  re*
ceives  better  news  of  her  sister  ; at  last  the  sister,  perfectly
cured,  pays  her  a visit.  But  the  young  woman  remains  sick  in
spite  of  these  agreeable  influences  ; and,  though  she  may  appear
to  do  better  for  eight  days  or  a fortnight,  nevertheless,  her  ail*
ments  return  without  any  visible  cause.  Every  subsequent  labour,
be  it  ever  so  easy,  every  stormy  winter,  adds  new  complaints  to
the  former,  or  these  appear  to  have  yielded  their  place  to  other
more  inconvenient  affections.  In  this  way  the  patient  becomes
affected  with  an  important  chronic  disease,  and  it  is  impossible
for  us  to  comprehend  why  the  full  vigour  of  youth,  existing
moreover  under  favourable  external  circumstances,  should  not
have  succeeded  in  soon  extinguishing  the  consequences  of  that
miscarriage ; still  less  do  we  comprehend  why  the  evil  effects  of
that  sad  news  should  not  have  become  dissipated  by  the  news  of
the  sister’s  restoration  to  health,  or,  at  any  rate,  by  the  presence
of  the  sister.

If  it  be  true  that  the  cause  is  constantly  proportionate  to  its
effects,  as  is  always  the  case  in  nature,  it  is  difficult  to  under-
stand how,  in  the  case  of  this  young  woman,  the  subsequent  ail-
ments should  not  have  disappeared  as  soon  as  the  cause  had
ceased  to  act.  The  continuance  of  these  ailments  shows  that
they  must  have  originated  in  a much  more  deep-seated  cause,
which  remained  latent  in  the  system  until  the  above  mentioned
Contrary  events  (the  miscarriage  and  the  disagreeable  news)  had
excited  its  action,  and  had  roused  it  into  a development  hostile  to
the  organism.

A merchant  who  seems  to  enjoy  good  health,  wflth  the  excep-
tion of  a few  vestiges  of  psora , which  are  only  known  to  the
connoisseur,  often  loses  his  health  in  consequence  of  great  losses
which  reduce  him  to  the  brink  of  bankruptcy.  AVe  will  suppose
such  a case,  and  we  wall  also  suppose  that  the  health  of  this
merchant  declines  more  and  more.  However,  his  losses  are
amply  repaired  by  the  death  of  a rich  relative,  or  the  gain  of  a
high  prize  in  the  lottery.  But  in  spite  of  this  favourable  turn  of
his  affairs,  his  health  continues  to  decline  from  year  to  year,  nor
can  prescriptions,  or  the  most  celebrated  mineral  baths  do  any


71


But  suppose  that  the  rapid  development  of  the  dis-
ease should  have  been  moderated,  it  cannot,  however,
be  permanently  cured,  by  the  various  fashionable  reme-
dies in  use,  such  as  baths,  mercury,  prussic  acid,  iodine,
digitalis,  china,  starvation  ; they  merely  accelerate  the


thing  to  restore  it ; on  the  contrary,  they  make,  perhaps,  the  evil
worse.

A girl  of  good  character,  who,  with  the  exception  of  a few
symptoms  of  internal  psora,  enjoys  good  health,  is  forced  to  marry
against  her  inclination.  She  feels  wretched  ; her  health  declines,
although  there  is  no  trace  of  venereal  disease.  Her  sufferings
are  increasing  without  being  relieved  by  the  medicines  which
allceopathic  physicians  give  her.  After  she  has  suffered  for  a
year,  her  husband  is  taken  from  her  by  death.  She  now  seems  to
revive  in  the  conviction  of  being  soon  freed  from  all  bodily  and
mental  suffering;  she  even  hopes  soon  to  have  recovered  perfect
health  ; for  the  cause  of  her  disease  has  ceased  to  exist.  She
improves,  indeed,  but  she  remains  sickly  ; and,  despite  of  the
vigour  of  her  youth,  she  is  frequently  attacked  with  illness,  which
seems  even  to  increase  from  year  to  year,  without  any  apparent
cause,  especially  in  the  rough  season.

An  unjustly  suspected  person,  who  has  become  entangled  in  a
criminal  suit,  has  become  affected  with  various  ailments  du-
ring the  time  of  the  proceedings  ; before  the  suit  commenced
she  seemed  to  enjoy  good  health,  with  the  exception  of  a few
symptoms  of  internal  psora.  Her  innocence  is  at  last  acknow-
ledged, and  she  is  honourably  acquitted.  One  should  say  that
this  happy  event  must  infuse  new  life  into  her  and  free  her  from
all  her  bodily  sufferings.  But  this  is  not  the  case;  on  the  con-
trary, at  times  her  disease  returns,  and  it  seems  even  to  increase
from  year  to  year,  especially  in  the  winter  season.

If  the  disagreeable  event  had  been  the  sole  and  sufficient  cause
of  all  these  sufferings,  does  it  not  seem  natural  to  conclude,  that
the  cessation  of  the  cause  ought  to  be  succeeded  by  a cessation
of  its  effects  ? But  the  ailments  do  not  cease;  on  the  contrary,
they  are  renewed  from  time  to  time  in  an  increasing  degree,  which
makes  it  manifest  that  the  disagreeable  event  which  we  have

o

supposed  above,  is  not  the  real  cause  of  the  sufferings,  hut  that
it  has  merely  roused  into  action  a more  deep-seated  and  much
more  formidable  principle  of  disease,  which  was  hitherto  latent
in  the  system.

Science  has  now  revealed  to  us  the  nature  of  this  internal  ene-
my, and  the  means  to  conquer  him  ; we  know  now  that  it  is  a
deep-seated  psora  slumbering  in  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  or-
ganism, and  which  the  robustest  constitution  would  have  been  in-
sufficient to  expel,  unless  aided  by  the  efforts  of  art*


72


approach  of  death,  which  puts  ail  end  to  the  sufferings
that  physicians  were  unable  to  relieve.

If,  under  unfavourable  external  circumstances,  the
formerly  latent  psora  has  been  roused  from  its  slumber,
the  patient  loses  all  chance  of  recovery  in  the  hands
of  allceopathic  physicians ; they  assail  his  organism
without  mercy,  undermining  its  very  foundations  by
their  violent  and  improper  remedies.  Even  if  the  ex-
ternal circumstances  become  favourable  to  the  patient,
the  disease  goes  on  in  its  course,  and  becomes  worse
and  worse.

When  the  internal  psora , which  has  been  latent  hith-
erto, and  has  been  kept  in  bounds  by  a robust  constitu-
tion and  favourable  circumstances,  is  roused  from  its
latent  state  and  passes  into  its  secondary  severe  mala-
dies, all  the  above  named  symptoms,  by  which  the  inter-
nal latent  psora  manifests  its  existence,  become  more
distinct  and  violent  j they  vary  in  different  individuals
according  to  constitution,  hereditary  disposition,  educa-
tion, habit,  mode  of  life,  diet,  occupation,  the  tenden-
cies of  the  mind,  morals,  etc.

The  following  symptoms  may  be  considered  charac-
teristic of  the  secondary  diseases  in  which  the  internal
psora  generally  terminates.  I have  collected  them  from
my  own  experience  at  the  bedside  of  patients  whom  I
have  treated  successfully,  and  whom  I knew,  by  their
own  confession,  to  have  been  infected  with  the  itch,
without  the  disease  having  been  complicated  either  by
syphilis  or  sycosis.  I am  willing  to  believe  that  others
may  have  seen  a great  many  more  symptoms  beside
those  which  I shall  now  enumerate.  I may  observe,
that  among  these  symptoms  there  are  many  which  are
opposed  to  each  other.  This  is  owing  to  the  constitu-
tional differences  of  the  patients,  existing  at  the  time
when  the  psora  first  broke  out,  and  is  not  in  the  way  of
a cure.  One  symptom  often  is  met  with  more  rarely
than  its  opposing  one.

Vertigo  ; the  patient  reels  in  walking.

Vertigo,  on  closing  the  eyes,  every  thing  around  him
seems  to  turn  ; he  is  then  attacked  with  nausea.


73'


*


Vertigo  ; on  turning  briskly  he  almost  falls  over.

Vertigo,  attacking  him  with  a jerk  in  the  head  ; he
loses  his  senses  for  a moment.

Vertigo,  accompanied  with  frequent  eructations.

Vertigo,  on  looking  down  upon  the  floor,  or  on  look-
ing up.

Vertigo,  in  walking  along  a road  in  a plain,  which  i»
not  enclosed  on  either  side.  .

Vertigo  ; she  appears  to  herself  either  too  large  or  too
small ; other  objects,  likewise,  appear  either  too  large  or
too  small.

Vertigo,  resembling  a swoon.

Vertigo,  causing  a loss  of  consciousness.

Numbness  and  giddiness  of  the  head  ; the  patient  can
neither  think,  nor  accomplish  any  mental  labour.

She  cannot  control  her  thoughts.

At  times  she  seems  to  be  deprived  of  thought  } she
sits  there  as  if  she  were  absent.

The  head  feels  benumbed  and  drowsy  in  the  open  air.

Sometimes  he  sees  everything  dim  or  black  on  walk-
ing or  stooping,  or  raising  the  head  from  stooping.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.1

Heat  in  the  head,  and  in  the  face.2

Feeling  of  cold  pressure  on  the  head.3

Dull  headache  in  the  morning,  on  waking  up,  or
in  the  afternoon,  either  on  walking  fast  or  speaking
loud.

Headache  on  one  side,  at  certain  periods,  (after  twen-
ty-eight, fourteen,  or  a less  number  of  days  ;)  more  fre-
quently about  the  period  when  there  is  either  full  or  new
moon  ; or  after  vivid  emotions,  colds,  etc.,  pressure  or
other  pain  on  the  top  of  the  head  or  in  the  head,  or  a
boring  pain  above  one  eye.4


(1)  During  which  he  is  attacked  with  sadness,  with  anxiety
and  dread  of  labour.

(2)  The  hands  and  feet  are  often  cold.

(3)  Ordinarily  accompanied  with  anxiety.

(4)  A.t  the  same  time  often  a great  inward  uneasiness.  Anx-


74


Headache,  daily,  at  certain  hours  ; for  example,  shoot-
ing pains  in  the  temples.* 1

Attacks  of  pulsating  headache,  (for  example,  in  the
forehead,)  with  nausea,  which  threatens  to  make  him  fall
to  the  ground,  or  vomiting  from  morning  till  evening,
every  fortnight ; sometimes  before,  sometimes  after  this
period.

Headache  as  if  the  skull  would  tear  open.

Drawing  pain  in  the  head.2

Headache,  twinges  in  the  head,  (coming  out  by  the
ears.)3

Headache,  shooting  pains  in  the  head  coming  out  by
the  ears.4  Din  in  the  brain,  singing,  humming,  noise,
thunder,  etc.  The  hairy  scalp  is  covered  with  scales,
with  or  without  itching.

Eruptions  on  the  head,  scald,  malignant  scabs,  (the
crust  being  more  or  less  thick,)  with  shooting  pain  when
a liquid  is  oozing  out;  intolerable  itching  during  the
wet  stage  ; the  whole  top  of  the  head  painfully  affected


iety,  especially  in  the  abdomen,  want  of  stools,  or  frequent,
scanty,  painful  stools,  weight  in  the  limbs,  tremblings  in  the
whole  body  ; tension  of  all  the  nerves,  with  great  irritability
and  sensitiveness;  the  eye  cannot  bear  any  light;  it  is  flow-
ing, swells  up  ; the  feet  are  cold  ; sometimes  the  head  is  stop-
ped up  with  a cold  ; chills,  sometimes  flushes  of  heat ; conti-
nual nausea,  also  retching  and  vomiting  ; she  is  lying  there  either
as  if  she  were  stunned,  or  throws  herself  about  as  if  full  of  an-
guish ; the  attacks  last  twelve,  twenty-four  and  more  hours.  After
the  attack,  there  is  either  great  prostration,  with  sadness,  or  a feel-
ing of  tension  in  the  whole  body  ; before  the  attack,  she  frequently
experiences  twitches  in  the  limbs  during  sleep  ; she  starts  in
sleep  ; has  painful  dreams ; grating  of  the  teeth  in  sleep,  and
tendency  to  start  at  sudden  noises.

(1)  They  sometimes  swell  up,  with  tears  in  one  eye.

(‘2)  In  some  cases  a drawing  pain,  coming  from  the  back  of
the  neck,  and  going  to  the  back  part  of  the  head,  or  extending
over  the  whole  head  and  face,  which  frequently  swells  up  from
the  pain  ; the  head  is  painful  to  the  touch  ; frequently  there  is
nausea.

(3)  Usually  in  walking,  especially  in  walking  and  taking  ex-
ercise after  eating.

(4)  They  often  see  everything  black.


75


by  the  open  air ; at  the  same  time  hard  glandular  swell-
ings on  the  back  part  of  the  neck.

Hair  feels  as  if  it  were  dried  ; hair  falling  out  abund-
antly} especially  on  the  forepart  and  on  the  top  of  the
head,  or  in  the  centre  of  the  crown,  or  baldness  of
some  places.

Painful  tubercles  on  the  skin  of  the  head,  coming  and
going,  like  boils  ; round  tumours.1

Sensation  of  constriction  in  the  skin  of  the  head  and
face.

Paleness  of  the  face  in  the  first  sleep,  with  a blue
circle  round  the  eyes.

Frequent  redness  and  heat  of  the  face.2

Yellowish  colour,  yellowness  of  the  face.

Gray,  yellow'  colour  of  the  face.

Erysipelas  on  the  face.3

Aching  pain  above  the  eyes,  especially  late  in  the
evening  ; he  is  obliged  to  close  them.

He  cannot  look  at  anything  long  without  everything
appearing  to  flicker.

Objects  appear  to  move.

The  eyelids,  especially  in  the  morning,  feel  as  if
they  were  shut,  (for  minutes,  sometimes  even  for  hours  ;)
he  cannot  open  them ; the  eyelids  are  heavy,  as  if  par-
alyzed  or  drawn  together  spasmodically.

Eyes  extremely  sensible  to  the  daylight  ; it  makes
them  smart,  and  they  shut  involuntarily.4

Sensation  of  cold  in  the  eyes.

Corners  of  the  eyes  full  of  purulent  mucus,  (gum.)

Edges  of  the  eyelids  covered  with  dry  scurf.

The  meibomian  glands  round  the  edges  of  one  of  the
eyelids  are  inflamed,  either  one  or  more,  (slye.)

(1)  In  rare  cases  they  terminate  in  suppuration.

(2)  He  becomes  very  feeble,  he  feels  exhausted  or  full  of
anxiety,  and  sweats  all  over  the  upper  part  of  his  body  : some-
times the  eyes  become  dim,  they  see  black,  he  is  sad,  the  head
seems  to  be  too  full,  with  burning  in  the  temples.

(3)  In  some  cases  there  is  much  fever,  sometimes  also  burn-
ing, itching,  watery  pustules  with  a shooting  pain,  in  the  face,
which  turn  into  scabs;  (pustulous  erysipelas.)

(4)  Usually  with  more  or  less  inflammation.


76


Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  of  various  kinds,5

Yellowness  of  the  white  of  the  eyes.1 2 3

Yellowness  round  the  eyes.

Dark  opaque  spots  on  the  cornea.8

Dropsy  of  the  eye.

Obscuration  of  the  crystalline  lens  J cataract ) squinting.

Longsightedness,  lie  sees  at  a distance,  but  cannot
distinguish  clearly  small  objects  which  are  held  near.

Nearsightedness.  He  can  see  distinctly  even  very
small  objects,  when  he  holds  them  near  j but  the
farther  the  object  the  less  distinctly  does  he  see  it ; and
at  a distance,  not  at  all.

False  sight*  He  sees  objects  double,  or  multiplied,
or  he  sees  only  one-half  of  an  object.

Muscre  volitantes,  black  points, dark  stripes,  or  a net-
work move  before  his  eyes,  especially  on  looking  into
the  bright  daylight.

Objects  are  seen  as  if  through  a gauze  or  a cloud,  the
sight  is  dim  at  certain  periods.

Blindness  by  night.  He  sees  very  well  in  the  day,
but  nothing  during  twilight*

O O -

Blindness  by  day.  He  sees  well  only  in  the  twilight.

Gutta  serena,  uninterrupted  dimness  of  the  sight,4 5
which  finally  increases  to  blindness.

Painful  sensibility  of  several  parts  of  the  face,  the
cheeks,  the  cheek  bones,  the  lower  jaw,  etc.,  either  on
touching  those  parts,  or  in  speaking,  or  chewing ; there
is  a sensation  of  subcutaneous  festering,  or  of  stinging
and  lancinating  ; in  chewing6  especially  there  is  twitch-


(1)  Fistula  lachrymalis  has  probably  no  other  origin  than
psora.

(2)  Or  gray  colour  of  the  lens.

(3)  Even  without  having  previously  had  an  inflammation  of
the  eyes.

(4)  More  frequently  without  an  obscuration  of  the  crystalline
lens  than  with  it.

(5)  In  chewing  or  speaking  there  is  a similar  twitching  mo-
tion on  the  sides  of  his  head ; at  these  places  protuberances,
painful  boils,  etc,  are  often  formed.  If  the  pain  is  lnsupporta-


mg,  shooting  and  straining  in  the  muscles,  which  pre-
vents him  from  eating.

Hearing  is  excessively  irritable  and  sensitive  } she
cannot  hear  the  sound  of  a bell  without  tremor  ; the
noise  of  a drum  throws  her  into  convulsions,  and  the
ear  is  painfully  affected  by  various  sounds.

He  has  shooting  pains  coming  out  by  the  ear.* 1

Crawling  and  itching  in  the  ear.2

Dryness,  dry  scurf  in  the  ears,  without  wax.

Running,  from  the  ear,  of  a thin,  usually  fetid  pus.

Pulsating  sensation  in  the  ear.

Noise  and  different  sounds  in  the  ear.3

Want  of  hearing  in  different  degrees,  even  to  com-
plete deafness,  with  or  without  noise,  varying  according
to  the  weather.

Swelling  of  the  parotid  glands.3

Bleeding  from  the  nose  more  or  less  abundantly  and
frequently.

Nostrils  as  if  stopped  up.4

Troublesome  sensation  of  dryness  in  the  nose,  even
when  the  air  passes  freely.

Polypi  of  the  nose,  (usually  with  loss  of  smell,)  which
often  extend  through  the  meatus  down  the  throat.

Smell  either  weak  or  lost.

Perversion  of  smell.5

Smell  too  strong,  high  and  highest  sensitiveness,  even
to  the  weakest  odours.


ble  and  accompanied  with  a burning  heat,  it  is  called  Fother-
gill’s  pain  in  the  face.

(1)  Especially  while  walking  in  the  open  air.

(2)  Such  as  singing,  rustling,  whizzing,  snorting,  buzzing,
chirping,  ringing,  drumming,  thundering,  fluttering,  flapping,
murmuring,  etc.

(3)  Often  with  shooting  pains  in  the  glands.

(4)  Either  one  or  both  of  them  at  once,  or  alternately  the  on©
or  the  other;  often  there  is  only  a feeling  of  being  stopped  up,
though  the  air  passes  through  wTith  ease.

(5)  For  example,  a smell  of  manure,  or  some  other  peculiar
smell  in  the  nose.


78


Scurf  in  the  nose,  running  of  pus,  or  hardened  clots
of  mucus.1

Fetid  smell  in  the  nose.

Nostrils  frequently  ulcerating,  surrounded  with  pim-
ples and  scurf.

Swelling  and  redness  of  the  nose,  or  of  the  tip  of  the
nose,  either  frequently  or  permanently.

Under  the  nose  or  on  the  upper  lip,  long  continued
scurf,  or  itching  pimples.

The  vehnilion  border  of  the  lips  quite  pale.

The  vermilion  border  of  the  lips  is  dry,  scurfy,  scaly,
it  cracks.

Swelling  of  the  lips,  especially  the  upper  one.2

The  inside  of  the  lips  is  set  with  little  ulcers  or  pus-
tules.3

Cutaneous  eruptions,  where  the  skin  is  covered  with
the  beard,  or  at  the  roots  of  the  beard-hair,  with  itching.

Innumerable  kinds  of  eruption  on  the  face.4

Glands  of  the  lower  jaw  swollen,  or  passing  into  a
state  of  chronic  suppuration.

Glandular  swellings  down  the  sides  of  the  neck.

Gums  bleeding  on  the  slightest  touch.

The  inside  or  outside  of  the  gums  feels  sore.

Gnawing  itching  at  the  gums.

Gums  whitish,  swollen,  painful  to  the  touch.

Gums  disappear,  leaving  the  front  teeth  bare,  even
their  roots.

Grating  of  the  teeth  during  sleep.

Looseness  or  decay  of  the  teeth,  of  various  kinds,
even  without  toothache.

Toothache  of  countless  kinds,  from  many  sorts  of  ex-
citing causes.

Cannot  remain  in  bed  from  the  toothache.


(1)  Sometimes  also  with  running  of  an  acrid  mucus  from  the
nose.

(2)  Sometimes  with  a burning,  biting  pain.

(3)  Often  very  painful,  coming  and  going.

(4)  Crusta  lactea,  pimples,  herpes,  carcinomatous  ulcers  on
the  nose,  lips  and  face,  with  burning  and  shooting  pain.


*


79


Painful  pustules  and  sore  places  on  the  tongue.

Tongue  coated  white,  or  unevenly  covered  with  a
white  substance.

Tongue  pale,  blueish  white.

Tongue  covered  with  deep  furrows  scattered  all  over  ;
the  tongue  looks  as  if  it  had  been  torn  on  the  upper  sur-
face.

Tongue  dry.

Feeling  of  dryness  on  the  tongue,  though  there  is
the  usual  quantity  of  moisture.

Stammering,  stuttering,  also  sudden  attacks  of  an  in-
capacity of  speaking.

Painful  pustules,  ulcerations  on  the  inside  of  the
cheeks.

Flow  of  blood  from  the  mouth,  often  in  great  abund-
ance.

Feeling  of  dryness  on  the  whole  inside  of  the  mouth,
or  only  at  some  places,  or  deep  in  the  throat.1

Bad  smell  from  the  mouth.

Burning  in  the  throat.

Constant  flow  of  saliva,  particularly  in  speaking,  es-
pecially in  the  morning.

Continual  spitting.

A quantity  of  pituitous  matter  in  the  throat,  which  he
is  obliged  to  loosen  with  great  exertions ; he  often
throws  it  up  in  the  day,  especially  in  the  morning.

Frequent  internal  inflammation  of  the  throat,  and  swell-
ing of  the  parts  which  aid  in  the  process  of  swallowing.

Insipid  slimy  taste  in  the  mouth.

Intolerably  sweet  taste  in  the  mouth,  almost  constantly.

Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  in  the  morning.2

Sourish  and  sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  after
a meal,  though  the  food  tastes  well.3

Fetid  and  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.

(1)  Chiefly  on  waking  up  in  the  night  or  in  the  morning,  with
or  without  thirst ; a high  degree  of  dryness  in  the  throat  is  often
accompanied  with  pricking  pains  in  swallowing.

(2)  Sometimes  uninterruptedly.

(3)  In  rare  cases  there  is  a repugnantly  sweet  taste  in  the
mouth,  even  without  eating  or  drinking.


Bad  smell  from  the  mouth,  sometimes  mouldy,  some
times  putrid,  like  the  smell  of  old  cheese,  or  of  fetid
sweaty  feet,  or  rotten  sourcrout.

Risings  from  the  stomach,  empty,  loud  risings  of  air
merely,  incontrollable,  lasting  often  for  whole  hours,  and
frequently  in  the  night.

Checked  risings  from  the  stomach,  which  occasion
spasmodic  straining  in  the  oesophagus,  without  coming
out  at  the  mouth.

Sour  risings,  either  fasting,  or  after  a meal,  especially
after  having  tasted  milk.

Risings  which  excite  vomiting.

Risings,  rancid,  especially  after  having  eaten  any
thing  greasy.

Risings,  putrid  or  mouldy,  early  in  the  morning.

Frequent  risings  before  eating,  with  a sort  of  rabid
hunger.

Heartburn,  more  or  less  frequent ; there  is  a burning
all  along  the  chest,  especially  after  breakfast,  or  on
moving  the  body.

Flowing  of  a sort  of  salivary  fluid  from  the  stomach,
preceded  by  writhing  pains  about  the  stomach  (the
pancreas,)  with  weakness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; a
fainting  sort  of  nausea,  and  conflux  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,
even  during  the  night;1  (water-brash.)

The  complaints  which  are  prevalent  in  any  part  of
the  body,  are  excited  by  the  use  of  fresh  fruits,  espe-
cially of  acid  fruits,  and  of  vinegar,  (eating  salad,  etc.)

Nausea,  early  in  the  morning.2

Nausea,  even  to  vomiting,  early  in  the  morning,  af-
ter rising  from  the  bed  ; it  is  lessened  by  motion.

Nausea,  always  after  having  eaten  greasy  things  or
milk.

Vomiting  of  blood.

Hi  ccough  after  eating  or  drinking.

O O O


(1)  It  also  degenerates  into  vomiting  of  water,  mucus,  or
acid,  acrid  substances,  especially  after  having  eaten  flour  dump-
lings, flatuous  vegetables,  stewed  prunes,  etc.

(2)  Often  arising  very  suddenly.


Spasms  of  the  oesophagus  often  prevent  swal-
lowing ; this  sometimes  causes  a man  to  die  of  hunger.
Spasmodic,  involuntary  swallowing.

Frequent  sensation  of  fasting,  and  emptiness  in  the  sto-
mach, (or  abdomen,)  often  with  much  saliva  in  the  mouth.

Violent  craving  for  food,  (rabid  hunger,)  especially
in  the  morning  ; he  is  obliged  to  eat  immediately,  other-
wise he  feels  sick  and  trembling,  (and  when  in  the  open
air,  he  is  often  obliged  to  stretch  himself  suddenly  on
the  ground.)

Violent  craving  for  food,  with  rumbling  and  grunting
in  the  belly.

Appetite  without  hunger  ; a desire  arises  to  swallow
suddenly  all  sorts  of  things  without  the  stomach  craving
them.

A kind-  of  hunger  ; but  by  eating  even  ever  so  little,
she  is  at  once  satisfied  and  feels  full.

When  she  wishes  to  eat  she  has  a feeling  of  fulness
in  the  chest,  and  her  throat  is  filled  with  mucus.

Want  of  appetite  ; only  a gnawing,  twisting  and
writhing  in  the  stomach  forces  her  to  eat.

Repugnance  to  boiled  and  warm  food,  especially
boiled  meat ; there  is  only  a desire  for  black  bread  (and
butter)  or  for  potatoes.1

Thirst;  constant  thirst,  or  only  in  the  morning  on  rising.

In  the  pit  of  the  stomach  there  is  a sensation  of
swelling,  painful  to  the  touch.

Feeling  of  cold  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

Oppression  at  the  stomach,  or  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach, as  if  there  were  a stone,  like  a cramp.2

Beatings  and  pulsations  in  the  stomach,  even  fasting.

Spasm  of  the  stomach  ; pain  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach, as  if  from  constriction.3

Painful  griping  of  the  stomach  ;x  there  is  griping  of
the  stomach,  especially  after  cold  drinking.


(1)  Sometimes  accompanied  with  vomiting  of  mucus  and

water ; unless  this  vomiting  takes  place,  the  griping  continues

unabated.


Pain  at  the  stomach;  the  stomach  feels  sore,  even
on  eating  the  most  harmless  food.

Oppression  at  the  stomach,  even  before  breakfast,  but
especially  after  eating  any  kind  of  food,  or  particular
kinds,  such  as  fruit,  green  vegetables,  black  bread,  food
prepared  with  vinegar,  etc.1

While  eating,  he  is  attacked  with  giddiness,  threat-
ens to  fall  to  one  side.

After  the  slightest  supper,  he  is  affected  with  heat  in  the
bed,  (constipation  and  great  lassitude  early  in  the  morning.)

After  a meal,  a feeling  of  anxiety  accompanied  with
sweat,  such  as  is  consequent  upon  anxiety.2

On  eating,  sweat  breaks  out  immediately.

Vomiting,  immediately  after  a meal.

After  a meal,  oppression  and  burning  at  the  stomach,
or  in  the  epigastrium,  almost  like  heartburn.

After  a meal,  a burning  sensation  in  the  oesophagus,
from  below  upwards.

After  a meal,  distention  of  the  abdomen.3

After  a meal,  weary  and  sleepy.4

After  a meal,  he  feels  as  if  he  were  intoxicated.

After  a meal,  headache.

After  a meal,  beating  of  the  heart.

Eating  alleviates  several,  even  remote,  complaints.

The  flatuosities,  instead  of  passing  off,  become  dis-
placed ; this  causes  a multitude  of  both  bodily  and  men-
tal ailments.5

(1)  The  slightest  quantity  of  these  things  produces  colic,  pain
or  numbness  in  the  jaws,  tearing  pain  in  the  teeth,  considerable
accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  etc.

(2)  Pains  which  reappear  at  different  places,  for  instance,
shooting  pains  in  the  lips,  griping  and  grinding  pains  in  the  ab-
domen ; pressure  in  the  chest,  heaviness  in  the  back  and  small
of  the  back,  even  to  nausea;  in  this  case  vomiting,  artificially
excited,  alleviates  the  suffering.  In  some  persons  the  anxiety
consequent  upon  eating  increases  to  such  an  extent  that  they  de-
sire to  destroy  themselves  by  strangulation.

(3)  Sometimes  accompanied  with  lassitude  in  arms  and  legs.

(4)  The  patient  is  often  obliged  to  lie  down  and  sleep.

(5)  Sometimes  drawing  pains  in  the  limbs,  especially  the
lower  extremities,  or  stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  or  in  the
sides  of  the  abdomen,  etc.


83


Flatuosities  distend  the  abdomen  the  abdomen
feels  full,  especially  after  a meal.

The  patient  feels  as  if  the  flatuosities  ascended  ; these
are  then  succeeded  by  eructations,  frequent  burning  in
the  throat,  or  vomiting,  by  day  and  by  night.

Pain  in  the  hypochondria  on  being  touched,  or  during
motion,  also  during  rest.

Painful  constrictions  in  the  epigastrium,  close  below
the  ribs.

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  which  seem  to  ori-
ginate in  displaced  flatuosities,  (or  flatuosities  that  have
become  entangled  ;)  these  pains  are  always  accompa-
nied with  a sensation  of  fulness  in  the  abdomen  ; the
flatuosities  seem  to  rise.

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  almost  daily,  especi-
ally in  children  ; more  frequently  early  in  the  morning
than  at  any  other  time  of  the  day;  in  some  cases,  day
and  night,  without  diarrhoea.

Cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen,  especially  in  the  hy-
pogastric or  lumbar  regions  of  one  side.1 2

A feeling  of  desolateness  and  wild  confusion  or  un-
pleasant emptiness  in  the  abdomen  ;3  even  immediately
after  a meal  he  felt  as  if  he  had  not  eaten  at  all.

After  having  been  constipated  for  several  days,  she
experiences  a sensation  of  constriction  below  the
stomach,  as  from  a band  ; this  sensation  comes  from  the
small  of  the  back  and  passes  round  the  abdomen.

Pain  in  the  liver  on  touching  the  right  hypogastric
region.


(1)  The  flatuosities  frequently  ascend;  sometimes,  but  less
frequently,  an  enormous  quantity  of  flatuosities  passes  off,  espe-
cially early  in  the  morning;  they  are  without  smell  and  without
alleviating  the  rest  of  the  complaints ; at  other  times  there  passes
off  a large  quantity  of  uncommonly  fetid  wind.

(2)  The  cutting  pain  sometimes  descends  all  along  the  rec-
tum and  the  thigh.

(3)  Sometimes  existing  in  alternation  with  painful  eonstiic-
tions  of  the  abdomen.


s


84


Pain  in  the  liver  ; pressure  and  tension  ; tension  below
the  ribs  of  the  right  side.

Tension  and  pressure,  coming  from  under  the  last
ribs  (in  the  hypochondria,)  which  arrests  breathing,  and
produces  a feeling  of  anxious  care.

Pain  in  the  liver  ; stitches,  especially  on  stooping  sud-
denly.

Inflammation  of  the  liver.

Pressure  in  the  hypogastric  region,  as  from  a ‘stone.1 2

Hardness  of  the  hypogastrium.

Spasmodic  colic,  a cramp  in  the  intestines.

During  the  colic,  coldness  of  one  side  of  the  abdomen.

Audible  rumbling  and  grunting  in  the  abdomen.3

Uterine  spasms,  resembling  labour  pains  ; cramp-like
pains  in  the  uterus,  obliging  the  patient  to  lie  down  ;
they  often  distend  the  abdomen  in  a short  time,  with-
out producing  flatuosities.

Pressure  in  the  abdomen  towards  the  genital  organs.3

Inguinal  hernias  ; they  become  painful  through  sing-
ing and  speaking.4

Swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  sometimes  termina
ting  in  suppuration.

Constipation  ; the  stools  often  delay  for  several  days,
though  there  is  frequently  an  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool.

The  stools  are  hard,  look  burnt,  come  out  in  little
clots,  like  the  excrements  of  sheep,  sometimes  covered
with  a slimy  substance  and  even  with  streaks  of  blood.


(1)  The  pressure  often  rises  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ; it  there
causes  a sensation  of  grinding,  and  excites  vomiting.

(2)  These  symptoms  sometimes  only  exist  in  the  left  side  of
the  abdomen ; during  an  inspiration  they  rise,  during  an  expi-
ration they  descend.

(3)  There  is  a pressure  downwards,  as  if  prolapsus  were  to
come  on ; when  the  pressure  ceases,  she  feels  heavy  in  all  her
limbs  ; her  limbs  feel  benumbed  ; she  is  obliged  to  stretch  her
arms  and  her  body.

(4)  Inguinal  hernias  generally  spring  from  internal  psora ;
if  we  except  the  few  cases  where  these  parts  have  been  injured
by  great  external  violence,  or  where  hernia  has  been  caused
by  superhuman  bodily  efforts,  through  sudden  lifting  or  pushing
consequent  upon  anxious  surprise.


85


Stools  composed  of  mere  slime  (slimy  hemorrhoids.)

Passing  of  ascarides  by  the  anus.

Passing  of  fragments  of  t.aania.

Stools,  the  first  part  of  which  is  generally  very  hard
and  passes  off  with  great  pain;  the  latter  half  is  liquid
as  in  diarrhoea.

Stools  very  pale,  whitish.

Gray  stools.

Green  stools.

Clay-coloured  stools.

Stools  smelling  fetid  and  sour.

Cutting  in  the  rectum  on  passing  the  stools.

Diarrhoea,  lasting  for  weeks,  months  and  years.1

Diarrhoea  frequently  returning,  lasting  for  several  days
and  accompanied  with  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen.

Great  and  sudden  loss  of  strength  after  having  passed
the  stools,  especially  when  they  were  rather  soft  and
abundant.2

Diarrhoea  soon  weakens  her  so  much  that  she  canno
walk  alone.

Varices3  of  the  rectum,  either  painless  or  painful
(blind  hemorrhoids.)

Bleeding  varices  of  the  rectum,4  especially  on  pass-
ing the  stools  ; afterwards  the  varices  are  painful  for  a
long  time  (flowing  hemorrhoids.)

Hemorrhage  from  the  anus  is  accompanied  with
short  breathing  and  orgasm.

Sensation  of  crawling  and  itching  in  the  rectum,
with  or  without  the  passing  of  ascarides.

Itching  and  gnawing  in  the  rectum  and  perineum.
Polypi  in  the  rectum.

(1)  Generally  there  is  much  rumbling1  from  fermentation  in  the
abdomen,  especially  early  in  the  morning.

(2  Especially  loss  of  strength  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  anx-
iety, uneasiness,  sometimes  chills  over  the  abdomen,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  etc.

(3)  Sometimes  a slimy  liquid  ekes  out.

(4)  Fistula  in  ano  most  probably  generally  originate  in  psora,
especially  when  stimulating  diet,  an  abundance  of  spirituous
liquors,  purgatives,  a sedentary  mode  of  life  and  sexual  abuses
Supervene.


4


86


The  patient  complains  of  anxiety  and  loss  of  strength
during  micturition.

Urine  sometimes  passes  off  in  too  large  a quantity  ;
this  causes  a sudden  loss  of  strength.1

Painful  retention  of  urine  (in  children  and  old  people.)
When  he  feels  cold  (through  and  through)  he  is  unable
to  urinate.

< She  is  sometimes  so  distended  that  she  is  unable  to
urinate.

The  urethra  is  constricted  in  different  parts,  espe-
cially early  in  the  morning.2

Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  as  if  from  a desire  to  uri-
nate, immediately,  after  drinking.

He  is  unable  to  hold  his  urine,  there  is  a sensation  of
pressure  upon  the  bladder  ; urine  passes  off  while  the
patient  is  walking,  sneezing,  coughing,  laughing.

The  patient  is  frequently  obliged  to  pass  his  urine  in
the  night ; for  that  purpose  he  has  to  rise  frequently.

After  urinating,  the  urine  continues  to  flow  in  drops
for  a long  time.

Urine  passes  off  in  great  abundance  in  the  shape  of  a
whitish,  sweetish-smelling  and  sweetish-tasting  liquid  ;
this  is  accompanied  with  thinness  and  an  inextinguisha-
ble thirst,  (diabetes.)

In  urinating  there  are  burning  and  lancinating  pains
in  the  urethra  and  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder.

Urine  has  an  acrid  and  pungent  smell.

Urine  speedily  deposits  a sediment.

Urine  passes  off  cloudy  and  turbid.

Red  sand  passes  off  from  time  to  time  together  with
the  urine,  (gravel.)


(1)  Dysuria,  which  is  generally  fatal  when  treated  allceopa-
thically,  has  probably  no  other  origin  than  psora.

(2)  The  urine  often  passes  off  as  thin  as  a thread,  or  it  scat-
ters ; the  urine  often  passes  off  iii  jerks,  at  long  intervals.  This
passing  off  by  intervals  often  comes  from  a cramp  in  the  neck
of  the  bladder,  which  antagonises  the  action  of  the  bladder,  and
originates  in  the  same  psoric  miasm.  The  inflammation  of  the
bladder,  arising  from  strictures  of  the  urethra,  and  the  fistulae  in
vesica,  consequent  upon  such  strictures,  likewise  originate  in
psora,  though  it  happens  in  a few  rare  cases,  that  there  is  a com
plication  of  sycosis  and  psora.


87


Bark  yellow  urine.

Brown  urine.

Blackish  urine.

Urine  intermixed  with  blood,  also  hematuri-a.

The  prostatic  fluid  often  passes  off  after  urinating
especially  after  difficult  stools ; the  fluid  sometimes
passes  off  without  interruption,  drop  by  drop.1 2

Nightly  pollutions,  once,  twice,  three  times  a week,
and  sometimes  even  every  night.3

Nightly  effusion  of  semen  in  the  woman  succeeding
voluptuously-delightful  dreams.*

Nightly  pollutions  ; they  are  attended  with  evil  con-
sequences, n$t  often,  but  immediately.3

Semen  passes  off  during  the  day  almost  involunta-
rily, even  when  there  is  little  irritation,  and  often,  even
without  erection.

Erection,  very  frequent,  long  continuing,  very  painful,
without  pollutions.

The  semen  does  not  pass,4  even  after  the  embrace  has
lasted  for  a long  time,  and  the  erection  has  been  suffi-
cient ; but  afterwards  it  passes  off  either  in  nightly  pol-
lutions or  with  the  urine.

Accumulation  of  water  in  the  tunica  vaginalis  testis,
(hydrocele.)

There  is  never  any  complete  erection,  even  in  spite
of  the  most  voluptuous  sensations.

Painful  twitches  in  the  muscles  of  the  penis.


(1)  The  constant  loss  of  the  prostatic  fluid  sometimes  results
in  consumption.

(2)  In  healthy  and  chaste  young  men,  these  pollutions  take
place  every  12  or  14  days  ; this  is  the  order  of  nature,  and  in-
duces cheerfulness,  strength  and  contentment.

* Note  of  the  Translator  : According  to  modern  physiolo-
gists, the  woman  does  not  emit  semen,  but  merely  mucus.

(3)  Gloominess  of  the  intellect,  numbness,  dimness  of  thought,
diminished  vividness  of  the  imagination,  want  of  memory,  de-
pression of  spirits,  sadness  ; sight,  digestion  and  appetite  are
weakened  ; stools  cease  to  pass,  there  arises  a pressing  of  the
blood  towards  the  head,  the  anus,  etc.

(4)  During  such  an  embrace  the  testes  remain  relaxed,  and

hang  down  more  or  less.

©


88


Itching  at  the  scrotum  ; the  scrotum  is  sometimes
covered  with  pimples  and  scabs.

Chronic  swelling  or  knotty  induration  of  one  or  both
testes,  (sarcocele.)

Dwindling,  lessening,  disappearing  of  one  or  both
testes.

Induration  and  enlargement  of  the  prostatic  gland.

Drawing  pain  in  the  testes  and  the  spermatic  chord.

Painful  sensation  of  contusion  in  the  testes.

Want  of  sexual  desire  in  both  sexes,  either  frequent
or  constant.1

Immoderate,  insatiable  desire  for  coition,2  accompanied
with  a livid  complexion  and  sickly  body.

Sterility,  impotence,  without  there  being  any  organic
defect  of  the  parts  of  generation.3

Disorder  of  the  menstrual  functions  ; the  menses  do
not  appear  regularly  on  the  twenty-eighth  day  after  the
appearance  of  the  former,  do  not  appear  without  being
accompanied  by  other  morbid  symptoms,  nor  do  they
come  on  suddenly  ; do  not  continue  uninterruptedly  for
four  days,  with  a moderate  flow  of  healthy-coloured,
good  blood,  until  they  gradually  reach  their  end  on  the
fourth  day,  without  the  general  health  of  either  body  or
mind  being  disturbed  ; they  do  not  last  until  the  forty-

(1)  Often  for  many  years.  In  this  case,  the  sexual  parts  of
either  male  or  female  are  incapable  of  pleasurable  sensations ; the
corpus  penis  hangs  down  relaxed,  is  thinner  than  the  glans,
which  feels  cold,  and  looks  blueish  or  white  ; in  the  female
parts,  the  labia  majora  are  inaccessible  to  irritation,  they  are  re-
laxed and  small ; the  vagina  is  dull  and  incapable  of  being  excit-
ed, generally  dry  ; sometimes  there  is  falling  of  hair,  or  total
baldness  of  the  female  parts  of  generation.

(2)  Metromania  and  nymphomania  have  the  same  origin.

(3)  Too  frequent  embraces  from  impotent  desires  ; the  imper-
fect, and  watery  semen  passes  off  too  soon;  want  of  erection;
the  semen  passes  off  too  scantily;  want  of  sexual  desire;
monthly  menorrhagia;  constant  flow  of  blood  ; menses  either
watery,  or  too  scanty,  or  suppressed ; abundant  leucorrhcea,  in-
duration of  the  ovaries  ; the  mammae  have  either  dwindled  down
or  have  become  knotty ; insensibility,  or  painful  sensibility  of
the  genital  organs  are  the  first  and  usual  symptoms  of  sterility  in
both  sexes.


89


eighth  or  fiftieth  year,  nor  do  they  then  disappear  grad-  -
ually  and  without  pain.

The  menses  are  delaying  beyond  the  fifteenth  year
and  later;  or,  after  having  made  their  appearance  once
or  twice,  they  discontinue  for  months  and  years.1

The  period  is  not  regular  ; it  returns  too  soon  by
some  days  ; sometimes  it  returns  every  three  weeks  or
even  every  fortnight.2

The  menses  flow  only  for  one  day,  a few  hours,  or
imperceptibly.

The  menses  flow  five,  six,  or  eight  days  ; but  there  is
only  a little  flow  every  six,  twelve,  twenty-four  hours  ;
there  are  intervals  of  half  and  whole  days.

The  menses  are  too  abundant,  last  for  weeks,  or  they
return  every  day,  (flowing  of  blood.)3

The  menstrual  blood  is  watery  ; it  forms  brown  clots.

The  menses  smell  badly.

The  menstrual  flow  is  painful,  accompanied  wfith
swoons,  shooting  or  spasmodically  contracting  pains  in
the  head,  cutting  pains  in  the  abdomen  or  in  the  small  of
the  back  ; she  is  obliged  to  lie  down  or  to  vomit,  etc.

Polypi  in  the  vagina.

Leucorrhoea,  sometimes  a few  days  before,  sometimes


(1)  Consequent  upon  this  suppression  is  livid  paleness,  tume-
faction of  the  face  ; heaviness  in  the  legs  ; swelling  of  the  feet;
chilliness,  lassitude,  asthma,  (chlorosis,)  etc.

(2)  It  rarely  delays  a few  days,  and  then  the  flow  is  exces-
sive ; the  patient  threatens  to  fall  from  weariness,  and  has  a
great  many  other  complaints.

(3)  This  is  followed  by  swelling  of  the  face,  of  the  hands  and
feet,  painful  spasms  in  the  breast  and  abdomen,  innumerable
nervous  complaints,  nervous  weakness,  excessive  sensitiveness,
both  general  and  of  ‘’some  particular  senses,  etc.  Before  the
blood  begins  to  flow  there  are  anxious  dreams,  frequent  waking
up  in  a fit  of  orgasm ; beatings  of  the  heart,  uneasiness,  etc.
When  the  flow  of  blood  from  the  uterus  is  more  considerable
than  usual,  it  is  accompanied  with  cutting  pains  in  one  side  of
the  abdomen  and  in  the  groin  ; the  cutting  sometimes  descends
along  the  rectum  and  into  the  thigh  ; combined  with  these  symp-
toms there  is  a difficulty  of  urinating  ; and  the  pain  often  pre-
vents her  from  sitting  ; after  these  pains  the  abdomen  feels  sore,
as  if  it  were  festering.


90


after  the  menstrual  flux,  or  during  the  whole  time  from
one  period  to  another  ; this  leucorrhoea  diminishes  the
flow  of  the  menses,  or  continues  in  their  stead  ; flows
like  milk,  like  a while  and  yellow  mucus,  or  like  pun-
gent, badly  smelling  water.1

Premature  delivery.

During  pregnancy  there  is  great  lassitude,  nausea,  fre-
quent vomiting,  swoons,  painful  varices  of  the  veins  of
the  thighs  or  legs,  also,  sometimes  of  the  labia  ; hysteric
complaints  of  various  kinds,  etc.


Cold  in  the  head,  immediately  on  going  out  into  the
open  air;  in  the  room  afterwards  the  head  feels  as  if  it
were  stopped  up  from  the  cold.

Head  and  nose  feel  as  if  they  were  stopped  up  from  a
cold,  either  continually  so,  or  often  so,  or  almost  contin-
ually so-

Catarrh  from  the  slightest  exposition  to  cold,  mostly
during  the  rough  season  and  in  wet  weather.

Catarrh,  very  frequently,  or  almost  continually,  some-
times even  uninterruptedly.

Impossibility  of  catching  cold,  notwithstanding  there
are  strong  indications  for  it,  and  the  patient  is  otherwise
afflicted  with  great  ailments  originating  in  psora.

(1)  The  leucorrhoea  of  a more  malignant  kind  is  accompanied
by  all  sorts  of  complaints,  even  without  mentioning  the  lesser
ones,  (itching  at  the  pudenda  and  in  the  vagina  ; with  soreness
on  the  outside  of  the  pudenda  and  the  neighbouring  part  of  the
thigh,  especially  in  walking  ;)  the  higher  degrees  of  this  trouble-
some discharge  are  frequently  followed  by  hysterical  symptoms
of  every  kind,  moral  and  mental  derangements,  melancholy,
alienation  of  the  mind,  epilepsy,  etc.  It  often  attacks  the  pa-
tient all  of  a sudden,  being  then  preceded  by  grinding  pains  on
one  side  of  the  abdomen,  burning  in  the  stomach,  in  the  abdo-
men, in  the  vagina,  stitches  in  the  vagina  and  the  os  tincae,  or
cramp  in  the  uterus,  or  pressure  towards  the  vagina,  as  though
every  thing  were  to  be  pressed  out ; sometimes,  also,  intense
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ; the  flatuosities  become  displaced,
which  causes  pain,  etc.  Has  cancer  of  the  womb  any  other  ori-
gin except  psora  ?


I


91

Hoarseness  after  the  slightest  talk  ; she  has  to  throw
up  in  order  to  clear  the  voice.

Hoarseness,  sometimes  aphony,  (she  cannot  speak
loud,  lias  to  speak  in  a low  tone  of  voice,)  after  a slight
cold.

Permanent  hoarseness  and  aphony,  often  for  years  ;
he  cannot  utter  a loud  word.

Suppuration  of  the  pharynx  and  larynx,  (laryngeal
phthisis.)1 2

Hoarseness  and  catarrh,  very  frequently,  or  almost
continually  ; his  chest  is  continually  affected.

Cough  ; there  is  frequently  an  irritation  and  a crawling
in  the  throat ; the  cough  torments  him,  until  sweat  breaks
out  upon  the  face,  (and  upon  the  hands.)

Cough,  which  does  not  abate  u mil  there  is  retching
and  vomiting,  mostly  early  in  the  morning  or  in  the  eve-
ning.

Cough,  each  attack  terminating  in  sneezing.

Cough,  mostly  in  the  evening  after  lying  down  ; it
always  comes  on  when  the  head  lies  deep.

Cough,  which  wakes  the  patient  after  he  has  slept  but
a short  while..

Cough,  especially  in  the  night..

Cough  ; it  is  worse  early  in  the  morning  on  waking
up.

Cough,  most  violent  after  a meal.

Cough,  at  each  deep  breathing.

Cough,  producing  a feeling  of  soreness  in  the  chest,
or  sometimes  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest  or  abdomen.

Dry  cough.

Cough,  with  dry,  pus-like  expectoration,  with  or  with-
out spitting  of  blood.3


(1)  Croup  cannot  come  on  in  a child  which  is  free  from  latent
psora,  or  which  has  been  freed  from  it  by  treatment.

(2)  Suppuration  of  the  lunges  most  probably  always  originates
in  psora,  even  when  fumes  of  mercury  or  arsenic  seem  to  be  the

cause  ; at  any  rate,  most  cases  of  suppuration  of  the  lungs  spring
from  inflammation  of  the  chest,  mismanaged  by  blood-letting ;
this  disturbance  ought  always  to  be  considered  as  an  indication
of  excited  psora.


92


Cough,  inducing  a considerable  expectoration  of
mucus,  and  falling  of  strength  (tabes  mucosa).

Attacks  of  spasmodic  cough.1

Violent,  intolerable  stitches  in  the  chest  at  each  breath-
ing; pain  will  not  allow  him  to  cough;  there  is  no  in-
flammatory fever  (spurious  pleurisy).

Pain  in  the  chest,  on  walking,  as  though  the  chest  were
to  burst.  Aching  pain  in  the  chest  on  breathing  deep,
and  sneezing.

Frequently  a lightly  oppressive  pain  in  the  chest ;
unless  it  passes  away  soon,  it  degenerates  into  the  deep-
est dejection  of  spirits.2

Burning  pain  in  the  chest.

Frequent  stitches  in  the  chest,  with  or  without  cough.

Acute  pleurisy  ; there  is  great  heat  of  the  body,  and
stitches  in  the  chest  which  prevent  him  from  breathing  ;
accompanied  with  hemoptysis  and  headache  ; he  is  con-
fined to  his  bed.

Night-mare  ; during  the  night  he  generally  starts  from
an  oppressive  dream,  but  he  is  unable  to  stir,  to  call,  to
speak  ; and  when  he  endeavours  to  move,  he  suffers  in-
tolerable pain,  as  though  he  were  being  torn.3

Displacement  of  breath  with  stitches  in  the  chest,
coming  on  at  the  slightest  motion  :4  he  cannot  advance
a step,  (pneumonia.)

Asthma,  on  moving  his  arms,  not  in  walking.

Attacks  of  suffocation,  especially  after  midnight ; the
patient  has  to  sit  up,  to  leave  his  bed,  to  stoop,  standing
and  leaning  on  his  hands,  to  open  die  windows,  or  go
into  the  open  air,  etc.  ; there  is  beating  of  the  heart,  fol-


(1)  She  is  suddenly  obliged  to  cough,  but  is  not  able  to  do  so
on  account  of  her  breath  being  suddenly  cut  off,  which  threatens
suffocation  ; her  face  is  dark-red,  and  tumefied  ; the  cesopha-
gus  is  generally  constricted  so  that  not  a drop  of  water  will  pass  ;
after  the  lapse  of  eight  or  ten  minutes  there  is  generally  rising
from  the  stomach,  which  terminates  the  spasm.

(2)  The  attacks  generally  last  from  evening  till  early  in  the
morning,  through  the  night.

(3)  These  attacks  are  sometimes  repeated  in  one  night;  espe-
cially when  he  has  not  taken  any  fresh  air  during  the  day.

(4)  Especially  on  ascending  a height.


93


lowed  by  rising  from  the  stomach  or  gaping  ; after  this
the  spasm  ceases  with  or  without  cough  and  expectora-
tion.

Beating  of  the  heart  with  anxiety,  especially  during
the  night.

Asthma  ; loud,  difficult,  sometimes  sibilant  breathing.

Shortness  of  breath.

Asthma  during  motion,  with  or  without  cough.

Asthma ; generally  coming  on  whilst  the  patient  is
seated.

Spasmodic  asthma  ; her  breath  is  cut  short  on  going
into  the  open  air.

Asthma;  the  attacks  last  for  weeks.

Dwindling  of  the  mammee,  or  excessive  enlargement
of  the  mammae,  with  falling-in  of  the  teats.

Erysipelas  on  one  of  the  mammae,  (especially  in  nurs-

ing-)

A hard,  enlarging  and  indurating  gland,  with  painful
stitches  in  one  of  the  mammae.1

Itching  eruptions  around  the  teats,  (or  moist  and
scaly.)

Drawing,  tearing,  straining  pains  in  the  small  of  the
back,  in  the  back,  in  the  back  of  the  neck.

Lancinating  and  painful  stiffness  in  the  back  of  the
neck,  in  the  small  of  the  back.

Aching  pain  between  the  scapulae.

Sensation  of  weight  upon  the  shoulders.

Drawing,  tearing,  straining  pains  in  the  limbs,  partly
in  the  muscles,  partly  in  the  joints,  (rheumatism.)

Aching  and  drawing  pains  in  the  periosteum,  here  and
there,  especially  in  the  periosteum  of  the  long  bones.2

Stitching  pain  in  the  fingers  and  toes.3

Stitches  in  the  heels  and  soles  of  the  feet,  on  standing

up.


(1)  Have  the  different  varieties  of  cancer  of  the  breast  any
other  cause  but  psora  ?

(2)  In  the  places  where  the  pain  is  located,  the  pain  is  excited
by  touching  them  ; they  feel  bruised  or  sore.

• (3)  In  worse  and  older  cases,  this  pain  becomes  lancinating.

4*


%


94


Burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet.1 2

In  the  joints  he  feels  a kind  of  tearing,  like  scraping
upon  the  bones  with  red-hot  swelling  ; touching  it,  or  the
contact  with  air  gives  him  insupportable  pain  5 he  is
at  the  same  time  extremely  sensitive  and  peevish,  (gout
in  the  feet,  hands,  etc.)^

The  joints  of  the  fingers  are  swollen,  aching  ; touching
or  bending  them  gives  him  pain.

Thickening  of  ihe  joints  ; the  joints  remain  hard-
swollen  ; on  bending  them  he  suffers  pain.

The  joints  feel  slitf,  with  painful  and  difficult  motion  j
the  ligaments  appear  to  be  too  short.3

Motion  of  the  joints  is  painful.4

The  joints  creak  on  being  moved.

The  joints  are  easily  strained  by  being  pulled  or  bent.5

Increasing  susceptibility  of  straining  a joint,  even  by
a very  slight  muscular  effort,  by  light  mechanical  la-
bour, on  stretching  the  arms  above  the  head  for  the  pur-
pose of  reaching  something  elevated,  on  lifting  light
things,  on  turning  the  body  quickly,  on  rolling  some-
thing, etc.  This,  often  slight,  straining  or  extending
the  muscles,  sometimes  induces  the  most  violent  dis-
eases, swoons,  hysteric  complaints  of  all  degrees,6  fe-
vers, hemoptysis,  etc.,  whereas  a person  that  is  not  af-


(1)  Especially  daring  the  night  under  a feather-bed.

(2)  The  pains  grow  worse  either  in  the  day  or  in  the  night.
After  every  attack,  and  when  the  inflammation  has  ceased,  the
joints  of  the  hand,  the  knee,  the  foot,  the  big  toe,  experience
pain  on  motion,  on  standing  up  ; they  feel  insufferably  benumbed,
and  the  limb  is  weak.

(3)  For  instance  : the  tendo  Achillis  on  standing  up,  stiffness
of  the  tarsus,  the  knees,  partly  momentary,  (after  having  been
seated,  or  on  standing  up,  etc.,  partly  permanent  (contraction.)

(4)  For  instance:  the  shoulder-joint  on  elevating  the  arm;
the  tarsus  experiences  pain  on  standing  up,  as  though  it  would
break.

(5)  For  instance  : The  tarsus,  the  wrist-joint,  the  joint  of  the
thumb.

(6)  Often  violent  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  head — the  pain  is
also  felt  externally  on  touching  the  head — it  comes  on  all  on  a
sudden ; or  sudden  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  or  pain  in


95


fected  with  psora,  is  able  to  lift  any  burdens  he  pleases,
without  any  inconvenience.1

The  joints  are  easily  strained  or  dislocated,  in  conse-
quence of  slipping  or  any  sort  of  wrong  motion.2

In  the  tarsus  there  is  a feeling  of  pain,  as  though  the
joint  would  break  on  standing  up.

Mollities  ossiuin,  curvature  of  the  spine,  (hunch-
back) curvature  of  the  long  bones  in  the  thighs  or  legs,
(rickets.)’

Fragility  of  the  bones.

Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  skin,  of  the  muscles  and
of  the  periosteum  on  pressing  moderately.3

Insufferable  pain  in  the  skin4  (or  in  the  muscles,  or


the  womb  ; sometimes  stitches  in  the  side  of  the  chest,  or  be-
tween the  scapulas,  that  arrest  breathing,  or  painful  stiffness  of
the  back  of  the  neck  or  spine,  frequent  and  loud  eructations,  etc.

(1)  The  common  people,  especially  in  the  country,  try,  in
this  case,  to  alleviate  their  sufferings  by  a few  magnetic
strokes ; it  is  often  attended  with  some  success,  though  this
is  not  lasting;  the  disposition  for  straining  the  joint  remains.
A female,  whom  the  Germans  call  “ Streichefrau ,”  makes  a
few  passes  with  the  tips  of  her  thumbs,  generally  across  the
scapulae  towards  the  axillae,  or  along  the  spine,  sometimes  start-
ing from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  moving  along  the  lower
border  of  the  ribs  ; she  generally  presses  too  hard.

(2)  For  instance,  the  tarsus  on  stepping  wrong — also,  the
shoulder-joint.  Under  this  head  belongs  the  gradual  luxation  of
the  hip-joint;  the  head  of  the  femur  starts  from  the  acetabulum,
the  leg  becoming  either  longer  or  shorter,  and  causing  limping.

(3)  Upon  striking  moderately  against  something,  he  feels
a violent  and  long  pain ; those  places  of  the  body,  upon
which  he  rests  in  bed,  are  excessively  painful ; hence  it  is  that
he  frequently  changes  his  position  in  the  night;  the  ischia  and
the  muscles,  which  he  compresses  by  sitting,  are  very  painful;
a slight  blow  with  the  hand  upon  the  thigh,  causes  great  pain,
slight  knocking  against  something  hard,  leaves  behind  blue  spots
or  streaks  of  blood  under  the  skin.

(4)  Extremely  various.  These  pains  which  produce  a cor-
responding sensitiveness  of  the  mind,  are  often  burning,  shooting,
cially the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  the  face  (tic  douloureux),  the
skin  of  the  neck,  etc.  ; they  come  on  on  the  parts  being  slightly
touched,  on  speaking,  chewing — they  are  excited  in  the  shoulder
by  slight  pressure  or  motion  of  the  fingers.


96


the  periosteum)  of  one  part  of  the  body,  coming  on  in
consequence  of  slightly  moving  this  part  or  a part  which
is  more  remote  ; the  pain  may  come,  for  instance,  from
writing,  in  the  axilla,  or  in  the  side  of  the  neck,  etc.
whereas  sawing,  and  other  violent  labour  performed
with  that  hand  causes  no  pain  ; a similar  pain  is  excited
by  any  kind  of  motion  of  the  mouth,  speaking  for  exam-
ple, in  the  neighbouring  parts  ; the  lips  and  the  cheeks
feel  pain  on  the  slightest  motion.

Numbness  of  the  skin  or  of  the  muscles  of  particular
parts  and  limbs.1

Insensibility  of  particular  fingers,  or  of  the  hands  and
feet.2

Crawling,  sometimes  pricking  and  crawling  in  arms,
legs,  and  other  parts,  even  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  as
if  the  parts  were  benumbed.

Crawling  or  internal  itching,  especially  of  the  lower
extremities,  (in  the  evening  in  bed,  or  early  on  waking
up  in  the  morning)  ; the  position  of  those  extremities
has  to  be  changed  every  moment.

Painful  coldness  in  some  parts.

Burning  pain  in  some  parts,  often  without  having
changed  the  external  temperature  of  the  body.

Coldness,  either  frequent  or  constant,  of  the  whole
body,  or  of  one  side  of  the  body  ; also,  coldness  of  par-
ticular parts,  cold  hands  and  feet,  that  cannot  be  warm-
ed in  the  bed  during  night.

Constant  chilliness,  even  when  there  is  no  change  in
the  external  temperature  of  the  body.

Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  especially  in  the  face,  more
frequently  with  redness  than  without  it ; he  feels  sud-
denly, and  excessively  hot,  in  rest  or  on  slight  motion  ;


(1)  Tact  is  wanting — the  fingers  feel  like  hollow  bulbs,  either
periodically  or  permanently,  (constant  want  of  sensibility.)

(2)  The  limb  is  white,  bloodless,  without  feeling  and  cold,  of-
ten for  hours,  especially  when  the  air  is  cool  ; (moving  a piece
of  zinc  over  the  fingers  or  toes,  towards  their  extremities,  re-
lieves the  symptoms  quickly  and  entirely,  but  acts  merely  as  a
palliative.)


97


often  already,  on  speaking,  with  or  without  sweat  break-
ing out.

Warm  air  in  the  room,  or  in  church,  is  extremely
offensive  to  her  ; makes  her  feel  uneasy,  causes  her  to
move  to  and  fro  ; sometimes  there  is  a sensation  of
weight  above  the  eyes,  which  is  often  alleviated  by
bleeding  from  the  nose.

Orgasm ; also  a sensation  of  pulsating  in  all  the  ar-
teries ; this  symptom  is  often  accompanied  by  total
paleness  and  a feeling  of  weariness  through  the  whole
body.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  chest.

Varices  of  the  veins  of  the  lower  extremities,  or  of
the  pudenda,  also  of  the  arms,  (even  in  men)  ; there  are
often  tearing  pains  in  the  varices,  (in  stormy  weather,)  or
itching.1

Erysipelas  in  the  face,  with  fever  ; or  on  the  ex-
tremities, or  on  the  mammae  of  nursing  mothers,  espe-
cially on  a place  which  is  sore,  (with  a pricking  and
burning  pain.)

Paronychia,  (sore  finger  owing  to  festering  skin,)

Chilblains,  (even  when  there  is  no  winter,)  on  the
toes  and  fingers  \ the  pain  is  itching  and  burning,  lan-
cinating.

Corns,  that  cause  a burning  and  lancinating  pain,
even  when  there  is  no  external  pressure.

Boils,  (furuncles,)  returning  from  time  to  time,  espe-
cially on  the  nates,  the  thighs,  the  upper  arms  and  the
neck.  Touching  them  excites  a sensation  of  fine  prick-
ing in  the  boils.

Ulcers  on  the  thigh,  especially  upon  the  ancles,  and
above  them,  on  the  inferior  parts  of  the  calves  ; round
the  borders,  there  is  a gnawing  and  itching  pain  ; at  the
base  of  the  ulcers,  there  is  a biting  pain,  such  as  is
caused  by  salt  ; round  about  the  ulcers,  the  flesh  is  co-
loured brown  and  blueish  ; in  the  neighbourhood  of  the


(1)  Aneurisms  appear  to  spring  from  no  other  source  than
psora.


98


Ulcers  there  are  varices,  with  tearing  pain,  daring  stormy
and  rainy  weather,  especially  in  the  night ; often  ac-
companied with  erysipelas,  consequent  upon  chagrin  or
fright,  or  with  cramps  in  the  calves.

Ramollissement  and  suppuration  of  the  humerus,  the
femur,  the  patella,  also  the  fingers  and  toes  (spina  ven-
tosa.)

Thickening  and  stiffening  of  the  joints -

Eruptions , some  of  them  being  agreeably-itching  pus-
tules, separate  from  each  other,  appearing  from  time  to
time  and  passing  off  again,  especially  on  the  fingers  or
other  parts;  the  pustules  burn  after  having  been  scratch-
ed, they  are  extremely  similar  to  the  genuine  eruptions
of  the  itch.

Some  forming  a sort  of  nettle-rash , the  vesicles  being
filled  with  water,  with  a burning  pain ; some  in  the
shape  of  pimples , painless,  in  the  face,  upon  the  chest,
back,  arms  and  thighs  ; some  of  the  genus  herpes , the
fine  grains  being  set  near  each  other,  in  round,  more  or
less  large  and  thick  clusters  of  a reddish  colour,  partly
dry,  partly  moist ; there  is  the  same  itching  as  in  the
eruption  of  the  itch,  and  the  same  burning  pain  conse-
quent upon  friction.  They  are  surrounded  with  a red
border,. continue  spreading,  while  the  centre  appears  to
become  freed  from  the  eruption,  with  a smooth,  shining
skin.  (Ringworm  or  herpes  circinatus).

Some  form  elevated  crusts  upon  the  skin,  round,  with
highly  red  borders,  painless,  a violent  shooting  pain  often
occurring  in  those  spots  upon  the  skin,  that  are  not  yet
affected ; some  form  small  round  spots  upon  the  skin,
covered  with  bran-like,  dry  scabs,  which  often  fall  off
and  come  on  again,  without  sensation  ; some  forming
red  places  upon  the  skin,  feeling  dry,  with  a burning
pain,  raised  a little  upon  the  skin.

Summer -freckles,  spots  in  the  face,  upon  the  hands,
and  upon  the  chest,  without  sensation,  small,  round,
brown  or  brownish.

Large,  brownish  spots,  often  covering  whole  limbs,
arms,  neck,  chest,  &c.  without  sensation  or  with  itching.

Yellowness  of  the  skin,  yellow  spots,  homogeneous,


i


99

around  the  eyes,  the  mouth,  on  the  neck,  etc.,  without
sensation.1

Wens  in  the  face,  on  the  fore-arms,  hands,  etc.2

Sarcomatous  enlargements  of  the  adipose  or  cellular
tissue,  or  the  bursa?.  mucosas  of  the  tendons,  of  various
forms  and  sizes,  cold,  without  sensation.3

Glandular  swellings  around  the  neck,  in  the  groin,  in
the  bends  of  the  joints,  the  bend  of  the  elbow,  of  the
knee,  in  the  axillae,4  also  in  the  mammae.

Dryness  of  the  skin,  either  over  the  whole  body  with-
out being  able  to  perspire  either  through  motion  or  heat,
or  only  in  some  parts.5

Disagreeable  sensation  of  dryness  over  the  whole
body,  also  in  the  face,  at  the  mouth  and  in  the  mouth,
in  the  throat  or  in  the  nose,  although  the  air  passes
freely.

The  patient  sweats  too  easily  by  slight  motion;  he  is
even  attacked  with  sweat  over  and  over  while  he  is
seated,  or  there  is  sweat  only  on  some  parts  of  the  body,
for  instance,  almost  constant  sweating  of  the  hands  or
feet.,6  in  the  axillae,  and  around  the  genital  organs.

Sweats,  early  in  the  morning  every  day  ; the  patient
drips  with  sweat,  which  ismells  sour  or  pungent ; this
symptom  often  lasts  for  years.7


(1)  Riding-  in  a carriage  is  followed  by  yellowness  of  the
skin,  in  patients  where  the  symptom  is  not  lasting,  but  comes
and  goes.

(2)  Especially  in  youth.  Many  wens  only  exist  for  a short
while,  and  then  disappear  to  make  room  for  another  infirmity.

(3)  The  fungus  hematodes,  which  has  lately  become  such  a
terrible  disease,  originates  in  psora  ; I am  inclined  to  infer  this
from  some  cases.

(4)  Those  swellings,  after  having  experienced  shooting  pains,
pass  into  a state  of  chronic  suppuration,  which  secretes  however
colourless  mucus,  instead  of  pus.

(5)  Especially  upon  the  hands,  the  external  side  of  the  arms
and  legs,  and  even  in  the  face  ; the  skin  is  dry,  rough,  parching,
feels  chopped,  often  scaly  like  bran.

(6)  This  sweat  is  generally  very  foetid,  and  so  abundant,  that
soles,  heels  and  toes  are  already  soaked,  and  feel  sore,  after  very
little  walking.

o # '

(7)  The  sweating  of  psoric  children  about  the  head,  in  the
evening  after  falling  asleep,  comes  under  this  observation.


I


100

Sweat  only  on  one  side  of  the  body*  or  only  on  the
Upper  half  of  the  body,  or  only  on  the  lower  extremi-
ties

Increasing  susceptibility  for  cold , either  of  the  whole
body  (wetting  the  hands  with  warm  and  then  with  cold
water,  as  is  done  in  washing,  sometimes  induces  a cold),
or  of  particular  parts,  head,  neck,  breast,  abdomen,  feet,
etc.  in  a slight  draught,  or  after  slight  moistening  of  the
parts  ;l  even  already  in  a cool  room,  or  when  the  air  is
moist  with  rain,  or  the  barometer  low.

The  pains  which  have  been  formerly  experienced  in
parts  injured,  wounded,  broken,  although  they  are  now
cured  and  cicatrized,  become  again  very  acute  at  the
approach  of  an  important  change  of  the  weather,  intense
cold,  storm,  atmosphere  pregnant  with  electricity.

CEdematous  swelling  of  the  feet,  or  of  one  foot,  of  the
hands  or  face,  of  the  abdomen  or  scrotum,  etc.  (ana-
sarca.

Attacks  of  sudden  heaviness  in  the  arms  or  legs.

Attacks  of  paralytic  weakness,  paralytic  lassitude  of
one  arm,  one  hand,  one  leg,  without  pain,  either  sudden
and  temporary,  or  beginning  imperceptibly  and  con-
tinuing progressively.

Sudden  bending  of  the  knees.

Children  fall  without  any  perceptible  cause.  Similar
attacks  of  weakness  in  the  legs  may  be  perceived  in  full-
grown  persons;  in  walking,  one  foot  glides  this  way,
the  other  that  way,  etc.

During  a walk  in  the  open  air,  he  has  sudden  attacks
of  weakness  especially  in  the  legs.2

(1)  This  susceptibility  is  attended  with  many  important  bad
consequences  which  make  their  appearance  immediately.  Pains
in  the  joints,  headaches,  cold  in  the  head,  sore  throat  and  inflam-
mation of  the  throat,  catarrh,  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,
hoarseness,  cough,  oppressed  breathing,  stitches  in  the  chest,
fever,  dyspeptic  complaints,  colic,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  pain  in
stomach,  rising  of  water  from  the  stomach,  sometimes  convul-
sions in  the  face  and  other  parts  of  the  body,  jaundice-like  colour
of  the  skin,  etc.  No  one,  who  is  not  psoric,  suffers  the  least  in-
convenience from  such  causes.

(2)  Sometimes  this  feeling  of  weakness  appears  to  reach  the


101


While  sitting  the  person  feels  insufferably  tired ;
walking  diminishes  this  feeling.

The  joints  are  easily  strained  by  wrong  seizing  or
stepping  ; this  often  increases  to  dislocation  ; for  exam-
ple in  the  tarsus,  the  shoulder-joint,  etc.

The  creaking  of  the  joints  increases  by  slight  motion  ;
it  is  accompanied  with  a disagreeable  sensation.

The  limbs  feel  easily  benumbed  ; this  numbness  is
induced  by  slight  causes,  for  example,  leaning  the  head
upon  the  arm,  crossing  the  legs  while  sitting,  etc.

The  cramps  in  some  muscles  increase  ; this  symptom
comes  on  by  slight  causes.

Slow,  cramp-like  straining  of  the  flexor  muscles  of
the  extremities.

Sudden  twitches  in  some  muscles  and  organs  even  in
waking ; for  example,  in  the  tongue,  the  lips,  the
muscles  of  the  face,  of  the  pharynx,  the  eyes,  the  jaws,
hands  and  feet.

Tonic  shortening  of  the  flexor  muscles  (spasms.)

Involuntary  turning  and  twisting  of  the  head  or  the
extremities  with  full  consciousness  (St.  Vitus  dance.)

Sudden  attacks  of  fainting  and  sinking  of  strength
with  loss  of  consciousness.

Attacks  of  tremor  in  the  limbs,  without  anxiety.
Long  continued  tremor,  sometimes  striking  with  the
hands,  arms,  and  legs.

Attacks  of  loss  of  consciousness,  lasting  for  a mo-
ment or  a minute  ; during  these  attacks,  the  head  is
inclined  upon  the  shoulder  to  one  side,  and  in  one  or
the  other  parts  of  the  body,  there  is  a jerking  motion,
sometimes  not.

Different  kinds  of  epilepsy.

Constant  gaping,  stretching  and  straining  of  the  limbs.

Drowsiness  during  the  day,  often  immediately  after
sitting  down,  especially  after  a meat.


pit  of  the  stomach  ; here  it  assumes  the  form  of  a sort  of  rabid
hunger,  which  deprives  him  of  all  his  strength ; he  is  attacked  with
tremor,  and  is  obliged  to  lie  down  for  a while.


t


102


He  finds  it  difficult  to  fall  asleep  in  the  evening  on
lying  down  ; he  often  lies  awake  for  hours.

He  spends  the  night  in  a sort  of  slumber.

Anxiety  prevents  him  from  sleeping,  every  night  ;
this  anxiety  often  is  so  violent  that  he  has  to  leave  his
bed,  and  to  walk  about  the  room.

He  is  deprived  of  sleep,  at  any  rate  of  sound  sleep,
from  three  o’clock  in  the  morning.

On  closing  the  eyes,  he  sees  all  sorts  of  fanciful  ima-
ges, grimaces.

On  falling  asleep  she  is  disturbed  by  all  sorts  of
fancies  ; she  has  to  rise  and  walk  about.

Vivid  dreams  as  if  in  a state  of  waking  ; sad,  fright-
ful, anxious,  vexatious,  libidinous  dreams.

Speaking  or  screaming  during  sleep.

Somnambulism  ; in  the  night  he  rises  with  his  eyes
shut ; he  does  all  sorts  of  things,  even  dangerous  things,
with  ease,  without  knowing  anything  about  it  on  waking
up.

Suffocating  fits  during  sleep,  (night-mare.)

All  sorts  of  troublesome  pains  in  the  night  ; thirst,
dryness  of  the  throat,  mouth,  frequent  urinating.

On  waking  up  early  in  the  morning,  he  feels  drowsy,
unrefreshed,  more  tired  than  he  did  in  the  evening
before,  on  lying  down  ; after  rising,  it  takes  hours  before
he  recovers  from  this  weariness.

After  having  spent  an  uneasy  night,  he  often  feels
stronger,  than  after  an  easy,  sound  sleep.

Intermittent  fever,  even  when  this  disease  is  neither
sporadic,  nor  epidemic,1  nor  endemic ; the  forms,  dura-
tion, and  type  of  the  fever  may  be  different ; quotidian,
tertian,  quartan,  quintan,  or  the  fever  may  appear  every
seven  days.

Every  evening  there  are  chills  with  blue  nails.

Single  chills  every  evening.


(1)  It  may  be  asserted  that  epidemic  intermittents  never  at-
tack people  free  from  psora  ; wherever  these  attacks  take  place,
it  may  be  supposed  that  there  is  a disposition  for  them,  originat-
ing in  psora .


9L


103


Every  evening  the  patient  experiences  heat  with  rush
of  blood  to  the  head,  red  cheeks,  often  alternating  with
chills.

Intermittent  fever  of  some  weeks  duration ; this  is
followed  by  a moist,  itching  eruption  which  lasts  for
some  weeks,  and  disappears  as  soon  as  the  fever  sets
in  again  ; this  alternation  may  continue  for  years.

All  sorts  of  moral  and  mental  disturbances -1 2

Melancholy,  either  alone  or  united  with  alienation,
sometimes  alternating  with  frenzy  and  moments  of  ra-
tionality.

Oppressive  anxiety  early  on  waking  up.

Oppressive  anxiety  in  the  evening  on  lying  down."

Repeated  attacks  of  fearfulness  during  the  day  (with
or  without  pain),  or  at  certain  hours  of  the  day  or  night  ;
during  these  attacks  the  patient  has  no  rest,  is  obliged
to  move  this  way  and  that  way ; sometimes  sweat
breaks  out.

Melancholy,  beating  of  the  heart  and  anxiety  woke
her  up  in  the  night  (mostly  immediately  before  the  ap-
pearance of  the  menses.)

Mania  of  self-destruction  ;3  (spleen  ?)


(1)  Neither  in  my  practice,  nor  in  a lunatic  asylum  have  I
ever  met  with  a patient  attacked  with  melancholy,  madness  or
frenzy,  in  whom  these  diseases  were  not  based  upon  psora ,
sometimes  complicated  with  syphilis.

(2)  In  some  patients  these  anxieties  cause  a violent  perspira-
tion to  break  out ; others  experience  only  orgasm  and  pulsations
in  all  the  arteries ; in  others  again  this  anxiety  causes  a feeling
of  constriction  in  the  throat,  as  if  they  were  suffocating ; others
feel  as  though  their  blood  ceased  to  flow,  which  causes  the  anxiety.
In  some  the  anxiety  is  accompanied  with  fear,  exciting  images
and  thoughts  which  seem  to  cause  the  anxiety ; in  others  the
anxiety  exists  without  them.

(3)  This  kind  of  mental  or  moral  disease  which  originates  in
psora.,  does  not  seem  to  have  been  sufficiently  attended  to.  A
certain  feeling  of  necessity  induces  those  patients  to  kill  them-
selves, although  they  have  no  anxiety,  no  anxious  thoughts,  and
seem  to  enjoy  their  full  understanding.  Nothing  can  save  them
except  the  cure  of  their  psora , provided  its  manifestations  are
noticed  in  time.  I say  “ in  time for  in  the  last  stages  of  the
malady,  these  monomaniacs  never  speak  to  any  one  of  their


104


Whining  mood ; they  often  weep  for  hours,  without
knowing  the  cause  of  it. *  1 2

Attacks  of  fear,  for  example  : of  fire,  of  being  alone,
of  apoplexy,  of  mental  alienation,  etc.

Attacks  of  a species  of  angriness,  which  looks  like
insanity.

He  is  easily  frightened,  often  by  the  most  trifling  oc-
currence ; this  causes  the  patient  to  sweat  and  to  trem-
ble.

Dread  of  labour,  in  persons  who  are  otherwise  extreme-
ly nctive  ; they  have  a decided  repugnance  to  labour.

Excessive  sensitiveness.

Irritability  from  weakness.


fixed  resolutions.  This  mania  manifests  itself  in  fits  of  half
or  full  hours,  at  last  daily,  often  at  certain  periods  during  the
day.  These  persons  however,  beside  these  attacks  of  the  mania
of  self-destruction,  sometimes  have  attacks  of  anxiety  which  come
at  different  periods  and  do  not  seem  to  be  connected  with  the
attacks  of  mania.  These  attacks  of  anxiety  are  generally  ac-
companied with  an  oppression  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  but  they
are  free  from  the  desire  which  the  patients  otherwise  experience,
of  destroying  themselves.  These  attacks  of  anxiety  which  ap-
pear to  be  of  a physical  nature  and  are  not  attended  with  pe-
culiarly anxious  thoughts,  may  be  wanting  whilst  the  attacks  of
the  mania  exist  in  a high  degree  ; or  the  anxiety  may  return
more  frequently,  when  the  mania  had  been  almost  cured
by  anti-psoric  remedies.  Thus,  both  affections  appear  to
be  independent  of  each  other,  although  they  originate  in  the
same  cause.

(1)  This  symptom  is.  especially  frequent  in  the  female  sex,
and  appears  to  be  intended  by  nature  to  ward  off  for  a time,
more  important  nervous  affections.

(2)  A female  was  attacked  with  anxiety  when  she  was  about
attending  to  some  part  of  her  domestic  affairs;  her  limbs  trem-
bled and  she  became  so  faint,  that  she  was  obliged  to  lie  down.

„ (3)  All  physical  and  moral  impressions,  were  they  ever  so
weak,  excite  an  excessive  morbid  sensitiveness.  Emotions  of
both  a sad  and  vexatious  and  a cheerful  nature,  often  cause  as-
tonishing complaints  and  suffering.  Touching  tales,  even  the
recollection  thereof,  excite  the  nerves,  drive  the  anxiety  to  the
head,  etc.  Reading  indifferent  things,  attentive  looking  at  one
object,  for  example  : in  sowing;  attentive  listening  to  indiffer-
ent tilings,  strong  light,  loud  talking  of  several  men  together,
even  a few  sounds  upon  a musical  instrument,  ringing,  etc.,  are


105


Sudden  change  of  humour ; often  the  patient  is  very
gay  and  even  extremely  so,  and  then  suddenly  low-spi-
rited, for  instance  : on  account  of  his  disease,  or  some-
thing of  no  importance.

Sudden  transition  from  cheerfulness  to  sadness,  or
peevishness  without  any  apparent  cause.

These  are  some  of  the  principal  symptoms  of  latent
psora  which  I have  had  occasion  to  observe.  Their
frequent  occurrence,  or  their  continuance,  show  that
the  latent  psora  is  becoming  active  in  the  system.  They
are  at  the  same  time  the  elements  which  constitute  the
innumerable  secondary  complaints  arising  from  the
psoric  reaction  in  persons  unfavourably  situated,  and  as-
suming all  sorts  of  forms  in  proportion  as  a person’s
constitution,  education,  habits,  occupation,  external
circumstances  and  the  physical  or  moral  impressions  to
which  he  is  subject,  differ.  The  number  of  those  se-
independent  diseases  in  the  older  pathological  works/'
far  exceeds  the  morbid  symptoms  which  we  find  enu-
merated in  these  works.


attended  with  disagreeable  consequences  ; trembling,  fainting,
headache,  chills,  etc.  Smell  and  taste  are  often  excessively
sensitive.  In  many  cases,  moderate  exercise,  talking,  moder-
ate warmth,  coldness,  open  air,  moistening  the  skin  with  water,
etc.  are  injurious.  Many  are  affected  even  in  their  rooms  from
the  sudden  changes  of  the  weather ; most  of  these  patients  com-
plain in  stormy  and  damp  weather,  few  only  when  the  sky  is
dry  and  bright.  In  some,  the  full  moon,  in  others,  the  new  moon
make  an  unfavourable  impression.

* Those  secondary  ailments  bear  the  following  names  : scro-
fula, rickets,  spina  ventosa,  atrophy,  marasmus,  consumption,  pul-
monary consumption,  asthma,  tabes  mucosa,  laryngeal  phthisis,
chronic  catarrh,  constant  cold  in  the  head,  difficult  dentition,
worms,  and  consequent  diseases,  dyspepsia,  spasms  in  the  abdo-
men, hypochondria,  hysteria,  anasarca,  dropsy,  ovarian  dropsy,
dropsy  of  the  uterus,  hydrocele,  hydrocephalus,  amenorrhoea  and
dismenorrhoea,  hemorrhage  from  the  uterus,  hematemesis,  hemop-
tysis, hemorrhages,  discharges  from  the  vagina,  dysuria,  ischuria,
enuresis,  diabetes,  catarrh  of  the  bladder,  hematuria,  stricture  of
the  urethra,  nephralgia,  gravel,  stricture  of  the  intestines,  blind
and  flowing  hemorrhoids,  fistula  in  ano,  difficult  stools,  constipa


106


Those  ailments  are  the  characteristic  secondary
symptoms*  of  the  psoric  miasm,  which  manifests  itself
by  these  symptoms  as  a hydra-headed  monster  pregnant
with  disease.!


tion,  chronic  diarrhoea,  induration  of  the  liver,  jaundice,  blue  dis-
ease, disease  of  the  heart,  beating-  of  the  heart,  spasms  of  the
chest,  dropsy  of  the  chest,  miscarriage,  sterility,  metromania,  im-
potence, induration  of  the  testes,  dwindling  of  the  testes,  prolapsus
uteri,  inversion  of  the  womb,  inguinal,  femoral  and  umbilical  her-
nia, dislocations  from  some  internal  cause,  curvature  of  the  spine,
chronic  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  fistula  lachrymalis,  short  and
long-sightedness,  day  and  night-blindness  ; obscuration  of  the  cor-
nea, cataract,  glaucoma,  amaurosis,  deafness,  deficient  smell  or
taste,  chronic  head-ache  on  one  side,  pain  in  the  face,  tinea  capitis,
scabs,  crusta  lactea,  herpes,  pimples,  nettle-rash,  lypoma,  goitre,
varix,  aneurisms,  erysipelas,  adipose  sarcoma,  osteo-sarcoma,
scirrhus,  cancer  of  the  lips,  cheeks,  breast  and  womb  ; fungus  he-
matodes,  rheumatism,  gout  in  the  hips,  in  the  joints  and  feet;
apoplectic  fits,  spasms,  convulsions,  swoons,  vertigo,  paralysis,
contractions,  epilepsy,  St.  Vitus’  dance,  melancholy,  insanity,
imbecility,  nervous  affections,  etc.

* Councillor  Kopp,  an  alloeopathic  physician  who  is  approach-
ing to  Homoeopathy,  pretends  having  seen  chronic  diseases  dis-
appear of  themselves  ; he  may  have  seen  a few  symptoms  dis-
appear, which  the  old  school  is  so  foolish  as  to  consider  com-
plete diseases.

f I admit  that  my  doctrine  : “ All  non-venereal  chronic  diseases
that  can  neither  be  cured  by  regular  diet  nor  favourable  circum-
stances, which  on  the  contrary,  increase  in  the  course  of  time,
originate  in  psora,”  is  too  comprehensive  and  even  overwhelm-
ing for  all  who  have  not  maturely  reflected  upon  my  arguments,
or  for  narrow  intellects.  But  my  doctrine  is  not  the  less  true.
But  because  the  patient  is  not  able  to  recollect  having  had  a few
itch-vesicles  between  the  time  of  his  birth  and  the  present  mo-
ment, or  because  he  is  ashamed  of  confessing  having  had  the
itch  on  account  of  its  being  considered  a shameful  disease,  is
this  a reason  why  such  a chronic  disease  should  not  be  consid-
ered psoric  ! The  non-confessing  of  the  patient  proves  nothing
to  the  contrary.

As  long  therefore  as  the  opponents  of  my  doctrine  cannot  show
that  the  chronic  affections  which  I have  alluded  to  in  the  prece-
• ding  paragraphs,  and  which  mere  diet,  were  it  ever  so  regular,  a
strong  constitution  and  favourable  external  circumstances  are
not  sufficient  to  eradicate  from  the  system,  can  originate  in  some
other  than  the  psoric  miasm,  which  maintains,  strengthens  and
develops  them  ; there  is  an  overwhelming  probability  based  up-


107


on  analogy,  that  all  other  complaints  which  are  similar  to  the
preceding,  both  in  nature  and  development,  originate  in  psora ,
although  the  patient  may  not  be  aware  of  having  ever  been  in-
fected with  the  itch.

It  is  an  easy  matter  to  doubt  things  which  are  not  before  us
invisible  forms;  but  this  proves  nothing ; according  to  the  old
rule,  proving  is  the  business  of  those  who  deny,  “ negantis  est
probare .”

The  antipsorics  are  therefore  not  necessary  to  prove  the
chronic  nature  of  those  maladies  in  case  the  infection  by  the  itch-
virus  should  be  denied  ; the  salutary  action  of  the  antipsorics
only  serves  in  the  same  sense  as  the  counter-proof  of  an  accu-
rately-solved arithmetical  problem.

Since  it  is  proved  that  other  medicines,  even  when  chosen
strictly  homceopathically,  do  not  heal  the  above  mentioned  chro-
nic diseases  as  thoroughly  and  permanently  as  the  so-called  an-
tipsorics, because  the  latter  cover  the  whole  extent  of  the  pro-
gressively appearing  symptoms  of  the  psoric  disturbance  : — I
do  not  see  why  these  should  not  be  called  antipsorics  in  prefer-
ence to  all  other  remedies.

I sometimes  consider  certain  acute  diseases,  such  as  inflamma-
tion of  the  throat,  of  the  chest,  etc.,  results  of  an  excited  psora .
This,  too,  cannot  be  denied,  as  it  is  done,  under  the  pretence,  that
those  inflammations  may  be  controlled  by  the  antiphlogistic  reme-
dies, aconite,  belladonna,  mercury,  etc.  The  proof  that  they  ori-
ginate in  latent  psora,  is  this,  that  their  frequent  return  can  only
be  prevented  by  the  antipsorics .


TREATMENT  OF  CHRONIC  DISEASES.


5


I shall  now  pass  to  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,
the  number  of  which  is  almost  without  end.  Although  I
do  not  pretend  to  say  that  the  fact  of  all  chronic  diseases
having  been  traced  by  me  to  a three-fold  origin,  has  made
the  treatment  of  those  diseases  an  easy  matter ; yet  I
may  say  that  the  discovery  of  the  remedies  which  are
homceopathically  adapted  to  those  different  classes  of  dis-
eases, has  secured  the  possibility  of  their  successful  treat-
ment. Without  a knowledge  of  that  three-fold  origin  and
these  homoeopathic  remedies,  the  successful  treatment  of
chronic  diseases  is  absolutely  impossible.

I shall  first  speak  of  those  miasmatic  chronic  diseases
which  we  designate  by  the  terms  Syphilis  and  Sycosis,  in-
cluding all  their  various  ramifications.  This  will  leave  us
free  to  treat  at  length  of  that  immense  host  of  chronic
affections  which  originate  in  the  most  feafful,  most  com-
mon and  most  inveterate  of  all  chronic  miasms,  Psora .


SYCOSIS.


The  chronic  miasm  which  we  designate  by  the  term
Sycosis , has  only  prevailed  from  time  to  time,  and  has
given  origin  to  the  smallest  number  of  chronic  diseases.
Sycosis  was  especially  spread  in  Germany  between  the
years  1809  and  1814,  during  the  war  with  France  ;
ever  since  then  the  disease  has  been  decreasing.

Sycosis,  being  supposed  to  be  homogeneous  with
syphilis,  has  been  heretofore  treated  with  mercury  inter-
nally, and  externally  by  cauterization,  burning,  cutting,  or
ligatures.  This  violent  external  treatment  has  been  em-
ployed against  the  excrescences  upon  the  genital  organs.
The  excrescences  first  appear  upon  those  parts  of  the
body  several  days  and  often  weeks,  after  the  infection  by
the  act  of  coition  has  taken  place.  They  are  accompanied
with  a sort  of  gonorrhoea*  from  the  urethra,  are  some-
times dry  and  in  the  form  of  warts,  but  more  frequently
soft,  spongy,  emitting  a fetid  fluid,  sui  generis,  of  a
sweetish  taste,  (almost  resembling  that  of  herring-pickle,)
bleeding  readily  and  having  the  form  of  a cox-comb  or  a
cauli-- flower  ( brassica  botrytes.)  In  man  they  appear
upon  the  glans  and  around  or  beneath  the  prepuce  ; in
woman  they  cover  the  parts  surrounding  the  pudenda,
and  the  pudenda  themselves,  in  great  abundance.


* In  this  kind  of  gonorrhoea  the  fluid  which  comes  out  of
the  urethra,  looks  like  thick  pus  ; micturition  is  not  very
painful,  but  the  penis  feels  hard  and  swollen  ; upon  its  back
it  is  sometimes  covered  with  glandular  tubercles,  and  it  is
very  painfulto  the  touch.


112

%

The  natural  and  immediate  consequence  of  such  vio*
lent  treatment  was,  that  the  excrescences  generally  came
out  again,  and  were  again  subjected  to  painful  and  cruel
treatment.  In  case,  however,  they  did  notre-appear  in
their  original  form,  they  broke  forth  in  the  shape  of  more
disagreeable  and  more  dangerous  secondary  ailments  ;
for  neither  the  violent  removal  of  the  external  embodi-
ment or  vicarious  symptom  of  sycosis , nor  the  internal
administration  of  mercury,  which  is  not  homogeneous  to
the  miasm  of  sycosis,  had  the  least  influence  in  dimin-
ishing the  intensity  of  this  miasm  and  preventing  it  from
affecting  the  whole  organism.  Beside  the  general  health
being  undermined  by  the  mercury  which,  in  the  case  of
sycosis , was  generally  given  in  the  largest  doses  and  the
most  active  preparations,  there  are  other  pernicious  re-
sults consequent  upon  this  abuse  of  mercury.  There
are  excrescences  formed  in  other  parts  of  the  body  either
in  the  shape  of  whitish,  spongy,  painful  and  flat  eleva-
tions in  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  upon  the  tofigue,  the
palate,  the  lips  ; or  in  the  shape  of  large,  elevated,
brown,  dry  tubercles  in  the  axillae,  upon  the  neck,  upon
the  hairy  scalp,  etc.  The  abuse  of  mercury  may  also
be  followed  by  other  bodily  affections,  such  as  the  con-
traction of  the  tendons  of  the  flexor  muscles,  especially
those  of  the  fingers,  etc.

Both  the  gonorrhoea*  and  the  excrescences  of  sycosis
are  cured  in  the  most  thorough  and  durable  manner  by


* The  miasm  of  the  common  clap  seems  to  affect  the
urinary  organs  only  locally  ; it  does  not  pervade  the  whole
organism.  The  common  gonorrhoea  either  yields  to  a drop
of  the  recently  obtained  juice  of  parsley,  provided  its  use  is
indicated  by  a frequent  desire  to  urinate  ; or  else  to  a small
dose  of  cannabis,  cantharides,  or  copai’va,  according  as  the
other  symptoms  indicate  the  use  of  these  different  remedies.
The  highest  preparations  of  these  remedies  should  always
be  used,  unless  the  patient  has  previously  been  weakened
by  allceopathic  stimulants,  or  a latent  psora  has  made  its
appearance  ; in  this  case  a secondary  gonorrhoea  is  frequent-
ly formed,  which  can  only  be  cured  by  antipsorics.


113


the  internal  administration  of  a few  globules  of  the  decil-
lion  preparation  of  thuya,*  which  ought  to  be  allowed  to
act  for  the  space  of  fifteen,  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  days.
After  this  lapse  of  time  you  give  an  equally  small  dose
of  nitric  acid,  letting  it  act  during  an  equally  long  period.
These  two  remedies  are  sufficient  to  cure  both  the  go-
norrhoea. and  the  excrescences  of  sycosis.  In  the  most
inveterate  and  most  difficult  cases,  the  larger  excrescen-
ces may  be  touched  once  a day  with  the  fresh  juice  of
thuya  half  diluted  with  alcohol  and  squeezed  out  of  the
green  leaves  of  the  plant.

It  sometimes  happens  that,  in  consequence  of  the
violent  alloeopathic  treatment  of  sycosis , other  chronic
affections  may  have  been  formed  in  the  system,  that,  for
instance,  a latent  psora  may  have  become  manifest,!
and  that  the  psoric  and  the  syphilitic  miasm  may  form
a trinitary  compound  of  disease,  which  will  take  place
if  the  latter  miasm  should  have  been  badly  treated  on  a
former  occasion.  In  this  case,  the  order  of  treatment  is
the  following : First,  we  annihilate  the  psoric  miasm  by
the  subsequently  indicated  antipsorics  ; then  we  use  the
remedies  indicated  for  sycosis , and  lastly,  the  best  mer-


* Thuya  is  homoeopathic  to  sycosis  ; see  Materia  Medica
Pura,  p.  V.  If  other  doses  of  thuya  should  be  required,  the
inferior  potencies  may  then  be  used,  (vTf[.,  VL,  IV.,  If. ;)
these  will  then  be  found  to  affect  the  vital  principle  more  ef-
ficiently.')'


f Note  of  the  translator. — In  my  inaugural  thesis  pub-
lished by  Mr.  Radde,  and  also  in  the  preface  to  this  translation,
I have  conclusively  shown  that  the  remedial  agent  makes  no
direct  impression  upon  the  vital  principle,  but  that  the  impres-
sion is  made  upon  the  disease , and  that,  by  means  of  this  im-
pression, the  vital  principle  is  freed  from  its  embarrassed  condi-
tion.

J In  young  people,  recent  sycosis  is  seldom  found
complicated  with  psora.  Wherever  this  complication  exists,
it  is  owing  to  the  pernicious  assaults  which  have  been
made  upon  the  constitution  by  the  improper  administration
of  mercury  for  the  cure  of  sycosis.


114


curial  preparation  against  syphilis.  These  different  or-
ders of  remedies  are  alternately  employed,  if  necessary,
until  the  cure  is  completed.  Leave  to  each  medicine
the  necessary  time  to  complete  its  action.

In  treating  sycosis  internally,  according  to  my  rule,
no  external  remedies  should  be  used,  except  the  juice  of
the  thuya  in  the  cases  indicated  above.  If  there  should
be  a watery  discharge  from  the  excrescenses,  dry  clean
lint  may  be  applied.


SYPHILIS.


The  syphilitic  miasm  is  much  more  general  than  the
miasm  of  sycosis.  For  the  last  four  centuries,  it  has
given  origin  to  a vast  number  of  chronic  affections.

The  treatment  of  syphilis  is  only  difficult  when  there
is  a complication  with  the  psoric  miasin,  after  it  has
broke  forth  from  its  latent  condition.  Sometimes,  but
rarely,  syphilis  is  complicated  with  sycosis  ; whenever
this  complication  exists,  it  never  exists  without  the  ad-
ditional complication  of  psora.

In  the  treatment  of  syphilis,  three  different  conditions
may  occur.  First,  the  syphilitic  disease  may  exist  in
its  genuine  form,  together  with  the  chancre,  or,  in  case
the  chancre  should  have  been  removed  by  external  appli-
cations, it  may  exist  with  the  bubo,  which  must  then  be
considered  as  the  representative  of  the  chancre;*  se-
condly, it  may  exist  without  being  complicated  with  an-
other miasm,  though  both  the  chancre  and  the  bubo
may  have  been  removed  ; and  thirdly,  it  may  exist  in
a state  of  complication  with  another  chronic  miasm,
either  with  the  chancre  or  bubo,  or  after  their  removal
by  local  applications.

The  chancre  generally  appears  between  the  seventh
and  fourteenth  day  after  the  infection  has  taken  place  ;


* In  rare  cases,  the  bubo  is  the  first  and  immediate  re-
sult of  an  impure  coition,  without  any  previous  chancre  ;
generally,  however,  it  is  consequent  upon  the  removal  of
the  chancre  by  local  applications,  and  is,  in  this  case,  a
troublesome  representative  of  the  latter.


116


it  rarely  appears  either  sooner  or  later,  and  generally  af-
fects the  parts  which  have  been  first  tainted  with  the
virus.  The  chancre  first  appears  in  the  form  of  a little
vesicle,  which  is  soon  changed  to  a painfully  stinging
ulcer,  with  an  elevated  border.  This  ulcer  may  remain
upon  the  same  spot  during  the  life-time  of  the  patient,
and,  although  it  may  become  enlarged,  yet  the  secondary
symptoms  of  syphilis  will  never  make  their  appearance
as  long  as  the  chancre  remains.

The  allceopathic  physician,  not  knowing  that  the  en-
tire organism  has  become  infected  with  the  syphilitic
miasm,  even  before  the  appearance  of  the  chancre  and
immediately  after  the  impure  coition  has  been  accom-
plished, looks  upon  the  chancre  as  a simply  local  ulcer
which  ought  to  be  removed  by  the  external  applica-
tion of  desiccating  and  cauterizing  substances,  and
which  will  remain  quite  harmless,  provided  it  is  not  left  too
long  on  the  skin  ; for,  in  this  case,  the  absorbing  ves-
sels might  carry  the  poison  into  the  internal  organism,
and,  in  this  way,  produce  a general  syphilitic  affection,
whereas  these  evil  consequences  might  be  avoided  by
a speedy  removal  of  the  chancre.  This  is  both  the
doctrine  and  the  practice.  By  this  practice,  the  physi-
cian deprives  the  internal  disease  of  its  vicarious  symp-
tom, the  chancre  ; and,  by  the  removal  of  the  chancre,
he  forces  the  disease  to  embody  itself  externally  in  the
more  troublesome  and  speedily  suppurating  bubo.  And
after  this  too  has  been  removed,  as  is  foolishly  done,  by
external  treatment,  the  disease  is  forced  to  manifest  itself
throughout  the  organism  wTith  all  the  secondary  symp-
toms of  a fully  developed  syphilis . This  unavoidable
development  of  the  internal  syphilitic  disease  generally
takes  place  after  the  lapse  of  two  or  three  months.  So
far  from  relieving  the  patient,  the  physician  positively
injures  him.

John  Hunter  asserts:*  “Not  one  patient  in  fifteen
will  escape  syphilis , when  the  chancre  is  removed


* Treatise  on  the  Venereal  Diseases,  Leipsic,  1787,  p.

531.


117


merely  by  local  treatment and  in  another  part  of  his
work,*  he  assures  us  : “ that  the  local  removal  of  the
chancre,  should  it  even  have  been  accomplished  ever  so
speedily,  was  always  followed  by  an  outbreak  of  the  in-
ternal syphilitic  disease.”

The  same  doctrine  is  emphatically  taught  by  Fabre,f
who  says  “ that  the  local  removal  of  the  chancre  is  al-
ways followed  by  syphilis  ; that  Petit  had  cut  off  a por-
tion of  the  labia  of  the  genital  organs  of  a woman,  which
had  been  affected,  for  some  days,  with  venereal  chancre  ;
that  the  wound  indeed  healed,  but  that  the  syphilitic
disease  nevertheless  broke  out.

It  is  incredible  that  physicians,  in  spite  of  the  expe-
rience and  emphatic  statements  of  such  great  observers,
should  have  shut  their  eyes  to  the  fact : that  the  venereal
disease  existed  already  in  its  fulness  in  the  organism
before  the  chancre  had  made  its  appearance,  and  that  it
was  an  unpardonable  mistake  to  remove  the  chancre  by
external  applications,  and  to  consider  this  local  removal
of  the  chancre  a complete  cure  of  the  disease.  On
the  contrary,  by  this  local  removal  of  the  chancre,  the
syphilitic  disease  was  not  only  forced  to  ramify  into  its
secondary  symptoms,  but  the  physician  deprived  him-
self of  a sure  and  infallible  indication  of  the  thorough
and  permanent  cure  of  the  internal  disease.  As  long  as
the  chancre  existed,  the  organism  was  yet  tainted  with
the  syphilitic  virus  ; whereas,  the  disappearance  of  the
chancre  consequent  upon  the  internal  administration  of
appropriate  remedies,  was  a sure  sign  of  the  internal  dis-
ease having  been  completely  and  permanently  cured.

In  my  practice  of  fifty  years’  duration,  I have  never
seen  syphilis  breaking  out  in  the  system,  whenever  the
chancre  was  cured  by  internal  remedies,  without  having
been  mismanaged  by  external  treatment ; it  mattered
not  whether  the  chancre  had  been  left  standing  for


* The  same  work,  p.  551 — 553.

f Fabre,  Lettres,  Supplement  a Son  Traite  des  Maladies
Veneriennes,  Paris,  1786.


118


years,  increasing  all  the  while,  as  every  vicarious  symp~
torn  of  any  other  chronic  miasm  will  do,  for  the  simple
reason  that  the  internal  disease  is  progressing  all  the
time,  and  induces  a consequent  development  of  the  ex-
ternal symptom.

As  soon  as  the  chancre  is  removed  by  external  reme-
dies,- the  syphilitic  disease,  which  is  engrafted  upon  the
whole  organism  as  soon  as  the  infection  has  taken  place,
manifests  its  series  of  secondary  symptoms.

As  soon  as  the  syphilitic  miasm  has  taken  effect,  it
tion first  took  place ; the  whole  nervous  system  is  at
once  tainted  with  it  ;*  the  miasm  has,  so  to  say,  become
the  property  of  the  whole  organism.  Washing  and
wiping  the  parts,  with  whatever  liquid  it  may  be,  is  fruit-
less ; even  exsecting  the  part  is  of  no  avail.  During
the  first  days,  the  infected  spot  does  not  show  any  mor-
bid symptoms  ; but  the  internal  organism,  from  the  first
moment  of  the  infection,  is  being  adapted  to  the  action
of  the  recently  introduced  miasm.  When  the  syphilitic
disease  has  been  completely  developed  in  the  system  by
means  of  this  progressive  adaptation,  then  it  is,  that  na-
ture produces  the  chancre  upon  the  primitively  infected
spot  with  a view,  as  it  were,  of  hushing  the  internal  af-
fection.

Hence  it  is  that  the  internal  disease  is  most  effi-
ciently and  most  permanently  cured  while  the  chancre
or  the  bubo  are  yet  existing  as  its  vicarious  types.  Of
this  genuine  and  unadulterated  syphilis  it  may  be  said,
that  there  is  no  chronic  miasm , nor  a disease  produced
by  a chronic  miasm , ivhich  is  more  easily  cured  than
syphilis.

In  that  stage  of  the  syphilitic  disease  where  the  chan-
cre or  the  bubo  are  yet  existing,  one  single  minute  dose
of  the  best  mercurial  preparation  is  sufficient  to  effect  a


* Note  of  the  translator  : Hahnemann  expresses
this  result  thus  : “ The  whole  living  body  has  perceived  the
presence  of  the  poison.”


I


i 19


permanent  cure  of  the  internal  disease,  together  with
the  chancre,  in  the  space  of  a fortnight.  Of  course,
such  a cure  can  only  be  effected  when  the  syphilitic  dis-
ease is  not  complicated  by  some  psoric  affection  ; it  is
especially  in  young  persons  of  a cheerful  temper  that
a speedy  cure  may  be  anticipated  ; psora  being  in  a la-
tent condition  in  such  persons,  neither  syphilis  nor  syco-
sis can  become  adulterated  by  that  miasm.  A few
days  after  the  medicine  has  been  taken,  and  without  the
use  of  any  external  application,  the  chancre  is  changed
to  a pure  ulcer  with  a little  quantity  of  laudable  pus,
which  heals  of  itself  without  leaving  the  slightest  cica-
trix, or  even  a spot,  the  colour  of  which  is  different  from
that  of  the  sound  skin.  This  is  a convincing  proof
that  the  internal  disease  has  been  completely  annihi-
lated. Inasmuch  as  the  chancre  is  the  external  indica-
tion of  the  internal  disease,  this  disease  cannot  be  con-
sidered cured  as  long  as  the  internal  remedy  has  not
acted  sufficiently  to  remove  even  the  slightest  trace  of
chancre  from  the  skin.

Already  in  the  second  edition  of  the  Materia  Medica
Pura,  Dresden,  1822,  have  I indicated  the  mode  of  ob-
taining the  best  mercurial  preparation.  Even  at  this
moment  I consider  such  a preparation  the  best  anti-
syphilitic remedy,  although  it  is  difficult  to  obtain  it  per-
fect. In  order  to  obtain  it  as  perfect  as  possible,  and
with  the  least  trouble,  (for  the  greatest  simplicity  should
be  observed  in  preparing  homoeopathic  remedies,)  it  is
better  to  follow  the  method  which  I shall  indicate  be-
low. Take  a gram  of  the  purest  liquid  quicksilver,  and
triturate  it  for  three  hours  with  three  hundred  grains  of
sugar  of  milk,  taking  one  hundred  grains  at  a time  and
triturating  them  for  an  hour.  In  this  way  you  obtain
the  million  degree  of  the  trituration.  Of  this  trituration
you  dissolve  one  grain  in  alcohol,  continuing  the  pro-
cess of  dissolving  through  twenty-seven  phials  up  to  the
decillion  degree.  (See  the  end  of*  this  volume,  where
the  mode  of  preparing  the  different  degrees  of  homoeo-

Formerly  I was  in  the  habit  of  using  successfully,


120


one,  two,  or  three  globules  of  the  billion  degree,  for  the
cure  of  syphilis.  'The  higher  degrees,  however,  even
the  decillion  degree,  act  more  speedily,  more  thorough-
ly, and  more  mildly.  If  more  than  one  dose  should  be
required,  which  is  seldom  the  case,  the  lower  degrees
may  then  be  employed.

In  the  same  way  as  the  chancre  or  the  bubo  gave
incontrovertible  evidence  of  the  internal  disease,  the
disappearance  of  the  chancre  consequent  upon  the  in-
ternal use  of  the  best  mercurial  preparation,  without,
however,  the  concomitant  use  of  any  external  application,
is  an  infallible  indication  of  the  internal  disease  having
been  completely  and  radically  cured.

But  on  the  other  hand,  this  correspondence  between
the  internal  disease  and  its  vicarious  symptom  shows
that  the  mere  external  removal  of  the  chancre,  inasmuch
as  it  does  not  result  from  the  cure  of  the  internal  dis-
ease, leaves  the  deluded  patient  just  as  syphilitic  after
the  removal  of  the  chancre  as  he  was  before.

The  second  stage  of  the  disease  is  that  rare  stage,
in  which  the  chancre  has  been  speedily,  though  foolish-
ly, removed  from  the  skin  by  external  applications  with-
out the  organism  having  been  much  disturbed  by  either
internal  or  external  violent  remedies.  Such  a compara-
tively easy  removal  can  only  take  place  in  persons  that
are  not  affected  with  a difficult  chronic  disease,  in  whom
psora  is  consequently  in  its  latent  condition.  Even  in
this  stage,  the  disease,  provided  it  is  not  complicated
with  psoric  affections,  may  be  easily  cured,  and  the
secondary  symptoms  of  syphilis  may  be  prevented  by
curial preparation  ; although  the  violent  removal  of  the
chancre  by  external  remedies  makes  it  more  difficult  to
be  certain  of  the  cure  of  the  internal  disease,  than  if
the  chancre  had  first  been  transformed  to  a benign  ulcer
and  had  then  disappeared  of  itself,  in  consequence  of
the  internal  disease  having  been  cured  by  internal
remedies.

However,  even  in  the  presence  of  these  disadvanta-
ges, the  attentive  observer  may  discover  a sign  which


121


will  tell  him  whether  the  internal  disease  is  • or  is  not
completely  cured.  For,  in  case  the  chancre  should
have  been  removed  by  external,  though  mild  remedies,
and  the  internal  disease  should  not,  therefore,  have  been
completely  cured,  the  original  spot  upon  which  the  chan-
cre had  been  developed,  will  exhibit  a reddish  morbid-
looking,  red,  or  blueish  scar ; whereas,  if  the  chancre
have  been  removed  by  the  internal  remedy  and  be  no
longer  necessary  as  the  vicarious  embodiment  of  the
internal  disease,  the  original  spot  of  the  chancre  can  no
more  be  traced,  on  account  of  that  spot  being  covered
by  as  healthy-coloured  a skin  as  the  rest  of  the  body.

If  the  homoeopathic  physician  has  discovered  that
blueish  spot,  and  by  this  discovery  has  become  convin-
ced that  the  internal  disease  is  not  yet  cured,  the  patient,
provided  he  is  perfectly  free  from  all  secondary  symp-
toms of  psora,  may  be  perfectly  cured  by  one  single
as  a proof  that  the  cure  is  perfect,  the  blueish  scar  will
completely  disappear,  and  the  skin  at  that  spot  assume
the  same  healthy  appearance  as  the  rest  of  the  body.

Even  in  case  the  bubo  should  have  already  made  its
appearance,  the  patient  may  yet  be  completely  cured  by
one  dose  of  the  above  mentioned  mercurial  preparation,
provided  the  syphilitic  disease  is  not  yet  complicated
with  psora,  and  the  bubo  has  not  yet  passed  into  the
suppurative  stage.  Generally,  however,  syphilis,  in
this  condition,  is  complicated  with  psora.  The  indica-
tion of  the  cure  being  completed  is  the  same  as  above.

Neither  in  this  latter,  nor  in  the  former  case,  an  out-
break of  syphilis  needs  to  be  apprehended,  provided  the
treatment  has  been  rightly  conducted.

We  have  now  to  treat  of  the  third  stage  of  the  disease
in  which  the  syphilitic  disease  is  found  complicated  with
'psora.  If  this  complication  occur,  the  psoric  miasm  is
not  in  the  way  of  a thorough  cure  of  the  syphilitic  dis-
ease, but  it  is  impossible  to  effect  the  cure  of  the  syphi-
litic disease , complicated  with  psora,  by  one  remedy  only.

This  complication  may  take  place  in  two  ways.  The
patient  may  either  have  been  already  affected  with  a


122


psoric  disease  at  the  time  when  the  syphilitic  infection
took  place  ; or  else,  the  psora  which  existed  in  the  organ-
ism at  the  lime  when  the  syphilitic  infection  took  place,
may  have  been  called  out  by  the  violent  drugs  and  pain-
ful external  remedies  of  the  alloeopathic  physician,  the
effect  of  which  was  to  remove  the  external  symptom
of  syphilis  after  protracted  efforts,  to  undermine  the
general  health  of  the  patient,  and  to  force  the  psoric  and
the  syphilitic  miasms  into  a combination  with  each  other.
Such  a combination  can  only  take  place  between  syphi-
lis and  psora  in  a state  of  manifest  development.

These  are  the  reasons  why  psora  is  so  often  found
complicated  with  syphilis.  The  poor  patient  is  often
assailed  for  months  with  mercurial  frictions,  large  doses
of  calomel,  corrosive  sublimate,  and  other  violent  mer-
curial preparations,  inducing  fever,  dysentery,  never-
ending  and  exhausting  salivation,  pains  in  the  joints,
sleeplessness,  etc.  But  all  these  violent  remedies  not
only  leave  the  syphilitic  miasm  uncured,  but,  in  combi-
nation with  the  intermediate  use  of  weakening  warm
baths  and  purgatives,  they  rouse  the  latent  psora  much
before  the  time  when  a cure  of  the  syphilitic  disease
could  be  effected  by  means  of  such  an  improper  treat-
ment, and,  in  this  way,  enable  the  psoric  and  the  syphilitic
miasms  to  combine.

It  may  here  be  observed  that  it  is  the  nature  of  the
psoric  miasms  to  break  forth  in  consequence  of  great
concussions  of  the  system,  and  violent  inroads  upon  the
general  health.

By  this  combination  of  syphilis  and  psora  a sort  of
spurious , masked  syphilis  is  formed,  which  the  English
physicians  designate  by  the  term  pseudo  syphilis . This
is  a sort  of  monstrous  double-disease,*  which  no  physi-


* It  is  even  more  than  a double-disease.  The  large  and
frequently  repeated  doses  of  the  violent  mercurial  prepa-
rations have  added  their  inherent  medicinal  disease,  which,
together  with  the  exhaustion  consequent  upon  such  treat-
ment, reduces  the  patient  to  a truly  sad  plight.  In  such


123


cian  has  been  hitherto  able  to  cure,  because  no  physician
has,  Up  k)  this  moment,  known  the  extent  and  nature
either  of  latent  or  developed  psora,  and  has  much  less
suspected  its  combination  with  syphilis.  No  one  was
therefore  able  to  remove  the  psoric  action  which  was  the
only  cause  of  that  pseudo-syphilis  ; no  one  was  able  to
cure  the  syphilitic  disease  by  freeing  it  from  its  horrible
combination  with  psora  ; and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
psoric  miasm  withstood  every  attempt  at  cure,  because
it  cannot  be  cured  unless  syphilis  is  cured  at  the  same
time.

In  order  to  reach,  with  the  greatest  possible  success,
this  so-called  masked  syphilis,  the  first  thing  which  the
physician  has  to  do,  is  to  remove  from  the  patient  all
hurtful  external  influences,  to  put  him  upon  an  easily
and  vigorously  nourishing  diet,  and  to  regulate  his
general  mode  of  life  to  his  greatest  advantage.  After
this  has  been  accomplished,  the  physician  administers
the  most  appropriate  antipsoric,  in  the  mode  which  will
be  indicated  hereafter  ; this  may  be  followed  by  a second
antipsoric  to  be  chosen  agreeably  to  the  new  symptoms  ;
and  when  this  last  remedy  has  completed  its  action,  a
dose  of  the  anti- syphilitic  mercury  may  be  exhibited,
being  permitted  to  act  three,  five,  or  seven  w^eeks,  as
long  as  it  is  capable  of  exercising  a curative  influence.

In  old  difficult  cases  this  course  is  not  sufficient  to
effect  a cure.  There  may  remain  ailments  which  are
neither  purely  psoric  or  syphilitic  and  therefore  require
the  last  assistance  of  the  physician.  A similar  treat-
ment is  here  to  be  repeated.  First  we  exhibit  one  or
more  anti-psorics,  in  proportion  as  they  are  indicated  by
the  symptoms,  until  the  last  trace  of  all  psoric  action  has
vanished.  After  this  we  repeat  the  mercury,  using  an
inferior  potency,  and  allowing  it  to  act  until  not  only
the  manifest  syphilitic  symptoms  have  vanished,  but,  in-
asmuch as  this  disappearance  of  these  syphilitic  symp-
toms, whose  nature  is  so  extremely  changeable,  is  no

cases  hepar  sulphuris  may  be  given  in  preference  to  pure
sulphur,  on  account  of  its  anti-psoric  virtue.


124


positive  proof  of  their  radical  cure,  we  allow  the  mercury
to  act  until  the  skin  has  recovered  its  healthy  colour  at  the
spot  upon  which  the  venereal  chancre  had  been  develop-
ed, and  afterwards  removed  by  cauteries.  Manifest  sy-
philitic symptoms  may  be  considered  the  following  : ul-
cers of  the  tonsils  with  lancinating  pain,  round  copper-
coloured  spots  shining  through  the  skin,  non-itching  pus-
tules, especially  in  the  face,  set  upon  blueish-reddish  bot-
tom ; cutaneous  ulcers  on  the  hairy  scalp,  and  upon  the
skin  of  the  penis,  smooth,  pale,  clean,  covered  with  noth-
ing but  mucus,  and  on  a level  with  the  sound  skin  ; bor-
ing nightly  pains  in  the  nodes,  etc.

In  my  practice  I have  only  seen  two  cases*  of  a com-
plication of  the  three  chronic  miasms,  sycosis,  syphilis,
and  psora.

This  complication  I treated  according  to  the  princi-
ples laid  down  above.  First,  I directed  my  reme-
dies against  the  psoric  miasm  ^ and  then  against  the
other  two  miasms,  beginning  with  the  one  whose  symp-
toms wrere  most  prominent  at  the  time.  Afterwards


* A bricklayer  had  caught  the  syphilitic  virus  from  his
wife.  The  genital  organs  were  the  seat  of  the  affection.
cient clearness  to  enable  me  to  decide  whether  the  primitive
infection  had  been  chancre  or  sycosis.  The  violent  mer-
curial preparations  which  had  been  used  against  the  infec-
tion, had  destroyed  the  uvula,  had  pierced  the  palate,  and
had  affected  the  nose  to  such  an  extent  that  the  iieshy  parts
were  mostly  eaten  away,  and  the  remaining  portion  was
swollen  and  inflamed,  and  pierced  like  a honeycomb  by  ulcers.
He  suffered  great  pain,  and  emitted  an  intolerably  foetid
smell.  He  had  also  a psoric  ulcer  on  the  leg.  The  anti-
psoric  remedies  improved  the  ulcers  to  a certain  degree,
healed  the  ulcer  upon  the  leg,  and  removed  the  burning
pain,  and  also  the  feetid  odour  of  the  nose  considerably.
The  remedies  employed  against  sycosis  also  helped  some.
But,  upon  the  whole,  very  little  was  accomplished,  until  the
patient  received  a small  dose  of  the  mercurial  preparation,
by  means  of  which  a cure  was  speedily  effected.  The
nose,  of  course,  was  irretrievably  lost.


125


the  remaining  portion  of  the  psoric  symptoms  was  re-
moved by  the  corresponding  antipsorics,  and  then  the
last  traces  of  syphilis  and  sycosis  by  other  adequate
remedies.  The  complete  and  radical  cure  of  sycosis,
may  be  recognised  by  the  same  indications,  as  the  cure
of  the  syphilitic  miasm,  viz.,  by  the  healthy  colour  of
the  skin  being  restored  at  the  places  upon  which  the
cauliflower  excrescence  had  been  located  ; whenever
this  excrescence  is  removed  by  mere  external  remedies,
the  place  which  had  been  covered  with  it,  exhibits  an
unhealthy  looking  skin.


PSORA.


Before  I enter  upon  the  exposition  of  my  views
on  the  third  chronic  miasm,  it  appears  important  to
me,  to  premise  the  following  general  remarks.

The  infection  by  means  of  one  of  the  three  known
chronic  miasms  is  generally  the  work  of  a moment ;
but  the  complete  development  of  the  disease  consequent
upon  such  an  infection,  throughout  the  whole  organism,
requires  more  time.  Not  until  several  days  have
elapsed,  during  which  the  miasmatic  disease  has  com-
pleted its  internal  development,  does  kind  nature  cause
that  disease  to  ultimate  in  some  local  symptom, which
receives  the  internal  disease  into  itself,  as  it  were,  and
hushes  or  calms  it.  The  vital  forces  enjoy  a sort  of
protection  in  this  local  symptom,  which  is  formed  upon
one  of  the  least  dangerous  parts  of  the  external  skin,
generally  upon  the  spot,  where  the  nervous  system  has
first  become  affected  by  the  contagious  miasm.

It  is  astonishing  that  this  mode  of  action  on  the  part
of  nature  should  have  escaped  the  observation  of  physi-
cians. They  might  have  seen  it  at  least  in  the  course
which  nature  pursues  in  regard  to  the  syphilitic  miasm,
which  they  had  treated  for  the  space  of  three  hundred
years,  and  would  then  not  have  failed  in  drawing  con-
clusions relative  to  the  two  other  chronic  miasms.

It  seems  to  me  unpardonable  that  physicians,  in
spite  of  all  this  experience,  should  have  mistaken  the
venereal  chancre  for  a mere  external  cutaneous  some-
thing, which  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  internal  or*
ganism,  and  which,  therefore,  ought  to  be  unhesitatingly


127


removed  by  cauteries  in  order  to  prevent  the  venereal
poison  from  being  absorbed  into  the  organism.  This
system  of  cauterization  appears  to  me  unpardonable,
because  it  had  already  been  adopted  in  hundreds  of
thousands  of  patients,  and  had  invariably  been  followed
by  an  outbreak  of  secondary  syphilis.

Just  as  condemnable  appears  to  me  the  reasoning  of
the  alloeopathic  physicians,  that  the  itch  is  a mere  cu-
taneous affection  with  which  the  internal  organism  has
nothing  to  do,  and  that  the  best  way  of  healing  it,  is  to
remove  it  by  some  external  application  ; whereas  the
only  natural  way  to  remove  the  external  eruption,  is,
to  cure  first  the  internal  psoric  disease,  upon  the
principle  u cessante  causa , cessat  effectusT

As  long  as  the  eruption  is  yet  existing  upon  the  skin,
the  psoric  disease  exhibits  itself  in  its  simple  and  most
natural  integrity,  and  may  be  cured  in  the  easiest,
quickest  and  safest  manner.

But  as  soon  as  the  internal  disease  has  been  deprived
of  its  vicarious  symptom,  the  psoric  miasm  is  forced  to
spread  over  the  most  delicate  parts  of  the  internal
organism  and  to  develop  its  secondary  symptoms.

How  necessary  it  is  carefully  to  avoid  every  removal
of  the  cutaneous  eruption  by  means  of  external  in-
fluences, and  never  to  attempt  any  other  but  internal
cure  of  the  psoric  disease,  may  be  inferred  from  the
fact,  that  the  most  painful  chronic  sufferings  which  had
followed  the  removal  of  the  psoric  eruption  by  means
of  external  applications,  and  which  frequently  had  lasted
already  for  years,  are  often  hushed,  for  a time,  by  the
mere  re-appearance  of  the  psoric  eruption  upon  the  skin
consequent  upon  powerful  revolutions  in  the  organism.
See  above  Nos.  1,  3,  5,  6,  8,  (9)  16,  (17)  (21)  23,  33,
35,  39,  41,  54,  58,  60,  72,  81,  87,  89,  94.

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that,  after  the  sup-
pression of  the  psoric  eruption  has  caused  the  internal
disease  to  manifest  itself  in  a series  of  secondary  symp-
toms, the  internal  psora  is  brought  back  again  into  its
former  simple  and  natural  condition  by  the  mere  re-
appearance of  the  eruption  upon  the  skin,  and  that  this


128


i

new  eruption  may  be  cured  just  as  easily  as  the
primitive  eruption.

This  is  not  the  case.  The  primitive  eruption  is  much
less  constant  upon  the  skin  than  the  chancre  and  the
cauliflower  excrescence  ; it  often  even  disappears  of
itself,  not  by  the  use  of  external  remedies,  but  by  un-
known causes.  Hence  the  physician  has  no  time  to
lose,  if  he  means  to  cure  the  internal  disease  while
the  external  symptom  is  yet  existing  upon  the  skin;
But  he  lias  yet  much  less  time  to  lose  with  the  second
eruption,  which  generally  is  so  changeable,  that  the
slightest  cause  drives  it  back  again  in  a couple  of  days.
This  may  be  considered  a proof  that  this  second
eruption  was  much  less  perfect  than  the  primitive  and
that,  therefore,  the  physician  was  not  authorised  to  rely
upon  it  for  a thorough  cure  of  the  psoric  disease.

This  changeable  nature  of  the  second  eruption  ap-
pears to  depend  upon  the  fact,  that  the  internal  psora,
having  been  in  some  degree  forced  into  developing
secondary  affections,  has  lost  somewhat  of  its  power
to  embody  itself  fully  in  its  vicarious  symptom.  This
is  the  reason  why  the  treatment  of  this  condition  of  the
psoric  disease  is  difficult.  It  is  conducted  in  the
manner  which  will  be  indicated  hereafter.

The  cure  of  the  psoric  disease  is  therefore  not  pro-
moted by  this  kind  of  pseudo  eruption  being  brought
out  again  upon  the  skin  either  by  internal  medicines  (see
Nos.  3,  9,  59,  89.)  or  by  unknown  causes  (see  Nos.  1,  5,
6,  8,  16,  23,  28,  29,  33,  35,  39,  41,  54,  58,  60,  72,  SO,
81,  87,  89,  94.)  especially  however  through  a fever
(see  Nos.  64,  also  55,  56,  74.)  ; this  kind  of  pseudo
eruption  is  extremely  changeable  under  any  circum-
stances, and  it  should  not  be  considered  available  by  the
physician  in  conducting  his  treatment.

But  even  if  we  could  not  only  bring  the  eruption  out
again  upon  the  skin,  but  keep  it  there  for  a time,  we
ought  not  to  rely  upon  it  for  facilitating  the  treatment.*


* There  was  a time  when  I deemed  it  possible  to  facilh


129


It  is  therefore  a self-evident  truth  that  the  cure  of  the
internal  psoric  disease  by  means  of  the  anti-psoric  rem-
edies, can  only  be  accomplished  in  an  easy  manner,  as
long  as  the  primitive  eruption  still  exists  upon  the  skin  ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may  infer  from  the  above
remarks,  that  the  method  used  by  alloeopathic  physicians
of  removing  the  eruption  from  the  skin  by  external  ap-
plications, is  just  as  pernicious  as  the  removal  of  this
eruption  by  means  of  the  appropriate  homoeopathic
internal  remedy  is  rational  and  beneficent.  By  this  lat-
ter method  the  whole  internal  disease,  together  with  its
vicarious  symptom,  is  effectually,  thoroughly,  and  per-
manently banished  from  the  organism,  and  that  host  of
horrible  secondary  affections  with  which  the  patient  is


tate  the  cure  of  the  psoric  disease  by  bringing  the  eruption
out  again  by  artificial  means.  My  object  was  to  check  the
secretive  functions  of  the  skin,  and  to  induce  it  by  this
kind  of  homoeopathic  proceeding,  to  reproduce  the  erup-
tion. For  this  purpose  I ordered  the  patient  to  put  a plas-
ter upon  his  back,  and,  if  possible,  upon  other  parts  of  his
body.  The  plaster  was  prepared  by  slowly  melting  six
ounces  of  Burgundy  pitch,  which,  after  having  been  re-
moved from  the  fire,  was  carefully  mixed  with  an  ounce  of
Venetian  turpentine.  A portion  of  this  mixture  was  spread
warm  upon  soft  goat-skin.  For  this  purpose  may  also  be
used  yellow  wax  mixed  with  fir  turpentine  ; also  taffetas  silk
covered  with  elastic  resin.  It  is  not  the  stimulating-  vir-
tue  of  the  mixture  which  helped  to  reproduce  the  eruption ;
for,  upon  a person  not  affected  with  the  psoric  virus,  the
above  plaster  produces  neither  eruption  nor  itching.  I
found  this  method  to  be  the  most  efficacious  in  exciting  the
skin  for  the  reproduction  of  the  eruption.  Nevertheless,
however  patiently  the  patients  bore  the  infliction  of  this
plaster,  a complete  and  sufficiently  lasting  eruption  was
never  produced.  All  that  I was  able  to  obtain  was,  to  pro-
duce a few  itching  vesicles,  which,  however,  disappeared
again  from  the  skin  as  soon  as  the  plaster  was  removed.
More  frequently  the  plaster  induced  a sort  of  moist  soreness
of  the  skin.  The  best  result  of  the  plaster  was  a more  or


130


\


invariably  assailed  after  the  violent  external  removal  of
the  psoric  eruption  is  destroyed  in  its  very  germ.

The  excuse  of  which  the  private  physician  (for  the
hospital  physician  has  no  excuse)  avads  himself,  is
quite  delusive.  He  says  that  “not  knowing  when,
where,  and  from  what  person  the  infection  has  been
caught,  he  cannot  be  sure  whether  the  few  vesicles
which  appear  upon  the  skin  are  really  the  itch,  and
that  he  cannot,  therefore,  be  made  responsible  for  the
evil  consequences  which  may  attend  the  suppression  of
those  vesicles  by  means  of  lead-water,  or  ointments  of
zinc  and  mercury ; and  that  rich  parents  desired  this
suppression  to  be  accomplished  as  speedily  as  possi-
ble.”

Such  an  excuse  cannot  be  regarded ; for  every
conscientious  physician  ought  to  know  that  no  eruption
whatsoever  ought  to  be  removed  from  the  skin*  by
external  applications.  The  human  skin  never  produces


less  violent  itching  which  occurred  upon  the  skin,  es-
pecially at  night,  and  often  spread  over  those  parts  of  the
body  that  were  not  covered  with  the  plaster.  This  itch-
ing produced  indeed  a striking  alleviation  of  the  most  vio-
lent secondary  psoric  affections,  such  as  tubercular  phthisis.
But,  in  most  cases,  such  a result  was  either  impossible  (gen-
erally there  was  but  a slight  itching)  or,  if  I obtained  the
itching  in  a high  degree,  the  patient  found  it  so  intolerable
that  he  could  not  have  borne  it  for  a sufficient  length  of
time  to  obtain  permanent  relief  from  his  psoric  affection.
On  removing  the  plaster,  even  the  most  vehement  itching
was  stopped,  the  eruption  disappeared  again,  and  the
disease  remained  the  same.  This  shows  that  the  second
eruption  does  not  possess  the  same  character  as  the  primi-
tive eruption  did,  and  that  it  is  therefore  of  no  avail  for
the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  cure  by  internal  remedies.

Moreover  the  troublesome  itching  of  the  artificially  pro-
duced eruption,  and  the  exhaustion  consequent  upon  that
itching  by  far  outweigh  the  little  value  which  the  method
here  indicated  might  otherwise  possess.

* See  Organon  of  the  Healing  Art,  fifth  edition,  § 187—
203.


131


an  eruption  out  of  itself ; it  never  assumes  a morbid
condition  without  being  invited,  or  rather,  obliged  to  do
so,  by  the  abnormal  activity  of  the  whole  organism.  As
every  external  eruption  results  from  an  abnormal  activi-
ty of  the  whole  organism,  so  ought  the  disappearance  of
that  eruption  from  the  skin  to  be  the  spontaneous  result
of  the  ^complete  and  radical  cure  of  the  internal  disease
by  means  of  appropriate  internal  remedies.  In  this  way
the  eruption  often  disappears  sooner  than  by  the  use  of
external  contrivances.

In  the  second  place',  no  intelligent  physician  can  be
deceived  as  to  the  nature  of  the  eruption,  whether  it  be
the  original,  genuine,  transparent  itch  vesicle,  which  be  •
comes  afterwards  filled  with  pus,  and  is  then  surround-
ed with  a narrow,  red  border,  or  whether  it  look  like  the
rash  granule,  or  have  the  appearance  of  pimples,  or  lit-
tle scabs  which  have  become  scattered  by  means  of
friction  : every  physician  ought  to  know  that  the  itch  is
constantly  indicated  when  the  child  or  even  the  recently-
born  baby  incessantly  scratch  the  spot  upon  which
the  eruption  is  seen,  or  when  full-grown  people  complain
of  a voluptuously  itching  eruption,  (were  it  but  a single
pimple,)  which  is  especially  vehement  in  the  evening
and  during  the  night,  and  becomes  intolerable  unless  it
be  scratched,  after  which  they  experience  a burning
pain.  In  this  case,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  itch,  although
rich  people  seldom  are  able  to  tell  when,  where,  and
from  whom  they  have  caught  the  infection.  As  I said
above,  the  unseen  opportunities  of  catching  the  itch
are  innumerable.

As  soon  as  the  family  physician  perceives  this,  one
or  two  globules  of  sulphur,  prepared  according  to  the
rules  to  be  indicated  hereafter,  will  be  more  than  suffi-
cient to  cure  the  internal  psoric  disease,  and  to  free  the
patient  from  the  eruption.

The  homoeopathic  physician,  in  his  private  practice,
seldom  is  called  to  a patient  at  the  time  when  the  erup-
tion first  shows  itself.  The  patient,  being  tortured  by
the  intolerable  itching,  first  applies  to  some  old  woman,
to  an  apothecary  or  to  a barber,  who  cover  him  with


132


& sulphur  ointment,  with  a view,  as  they  suppose,  of
helping  him  speedily.  Only  in  military  barracks,  in
prisons,  hospitals,  orphan  asylums,  the  patients  are
obliged  to  apply  to  the  physician,  provided  the  surgeon
of  the  establishment  does  not  forestall  him.

Even  in  the  remotest  ages,  sulphur  was  looked  upon
as  a specific  against  the  itch  ; for  the  psoric  miasm  did
not,  in  every  instance,  form  leprosy  ; but  it  was  used
only  as  an  external  remedy.  A.  C.  Celsus,  (V.  28,)
proposes  several  kinds  of  grease  and  ointment  by  means
of  which  he  imagines  the  itch  may  be  cured.  One  of
those  ointments  is  made  of  sulphur  mixed  with  tar  ; oth-
ers contain  copper.  The  oldest  physicians  already  used
warm  sulphur  baths  against  the  itch,  as  is  the  custom
now.  The  eruption  generally  disappeared  by  these
means.  But  subsequent  ailments  showed  already  then
that  the  patients  did  not  always  recover.  An  Athenian,
for  instance,  was  attacked  with  anasarca  on  account  of
having  removed  his  itch  by  using  the  warm  sulphur
baths  upon  the  island  of  Melos,  (now  Milo.)  He  died
of  this  disease  300  years  before  Celsus,  as  is  reported
by  the  author  of  the  fifth  book  Epidemion,  which  is  con-
sidered due  to  Hippocrates.

Sulphur  was  never  given  internally,  -for  the  simple
reason  that  neither  the  older  nor  the  modern  physicians
understand  that  the  itch  is  chiefly  an  internal  disease.

Modern  physicians,  too,  never  give  sulphur  only  in-
ternally, because  they  do  not  regard  the  itch  chiefly  as
an  internal  disease.  They  give  sulphur  internally,  as
a mere  adjuvans  of  the  external  ointments,  in  frequently
repeated  doses  of  10,  20,  30  grains,  purging  the  patient
and  making  it  impossible  to  determine  how  far  this  ex-
cessive internal  use  of  sulphur  had  been  either  hurtful
or  useful ; at  least  it  was  impossible  that  the  whole  pso-
ric disease  should  ever  be  thoroughly  cured  by  this
treatment.  The  only  object  which  was  obtained  by
giving  the  sulphur  as  a purgative,  was  to  facilitate  the
removal  of  the  external  eruption  ; but  this  removal  was
just  as  pernicious  as  when  no  sulphur  at  all  had  been


133


taken  internally.  Such  excessive  doses  of  sulphur*  can
never  thoroughly  cure  a psunc  disease,  even  though  no
ointment  should  have  been  used  at  all.  Such  excessive
doses  rouse  the  vital  principle  into  a hostile  attitude,  and
cause  it  to  reject  the  sulphur  altogether  without  having
appropriated  to  itself  the  curative  virtue  of  the  drug  ; in
some  cases  they  even  increase  the  disease  or  excite  an  al-
together new  disease  in  the  system.  The  itch  can  only
be  cured  by  the  homoeopathic  preparation  of  sulphur.

Since  experience  teaches  that  the  itch,  even  the  re-
cently formed  itch,  with  the  eruption  existing  upon  the
skin,  cannot  be  cured  by  sulphur  ointments  used  in
combination  with  large  quantities  of  sulphur  taken  in-
ternally, it  may  easily  be  conceived  that,  when  the  erup-
tion has  been  thus  violently  removed  from  the  skin,  and
the  psoric  disease  has  already  pervaded  all  the  recesses


* It  may  not  be  amiss  to  quote  here,  by  way  of  illustra-
tion, the  words  of  an  impartial  and  profound  savant  and  in-
defatigable inquirer,  Count  Buquoy,  who  is  practically  ac-
quainted with  Homoeopathy.  We  find  them  recorded  in
his  “ Anregungen  f ur  phil.  wissens.  Forschung.”  (Leipsic,
1825,  p.  386.  and  f.)  Having  first  supposed  that  the  pa-
thogenetic symptoms  of  a remedy  a,  b,  g,  have  received
into  themselves  the  symptoms  exhibited  by  the  disease,
which  we  will  designate  A,  B,  V,  and  have  impressed  upon
them  the  character  of  the  medicinal  symptoms,  the  char-
acter of  mutability,  perishability,  etc.,  he  continues  in  this
way  : “ The  medicinal  symptoms,  a,  b,  g,  which  have  re-
ceived into  themselves  the  symptoms  of  the  disease,  A,  B,
V,  easily  pass  off  on  account  of  the  extremely  small  dose
which  has  produced  them.  If  the  homoeopathic  physician
gives  too  large  a dose,  the  natural  morbid  symptoms  A,  B,
V,  may  indeed  be  changed  to  the  medicinal  symptoms  a,
b,  g ; but  the  new  disease  is  now  just  as  firmly  rooted  as
the  primitive  disease  was ; hence  the  organism  finds  it
just  as  difficult  to  free  itself  from  the  new  disease  as  it  did
to  free  itself  from  the  primitive.  If  a very  large  dose  is
given,  a new,  often  life-endangering  disease  is  formed,  or
else  the  organism  tries  with  all  its  might  to  free  itself  from
the  poison  by  means  of  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  etc.”

6


134


of  the  organism  in  the  form  of  secondary  chronic  affec-
tions, these  can  much  less  be  cured  by  powders  of  sul-
phur, by  sulphur  baths,  by  drinking  sulphuretted  mineral
water,  or  any  other  water  of  this  kind  ; in  short,  by  the
excessive  use  and  repetition  of  sulphur,  though  it  be  a
specific  remedy  against  the  itch.*  It  is  indeed  true,
that  many  patients  appear  to  be  freed,  for  a time,  from
the  original  psoric  affection  by  the  use  of  sulphur  baths,
(hence  the  multitude  of  patients  affected  with  all  sorts
of  chronic  affections,  who  flock  to  the  baths  of  Teplitz,
Baden,  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Neundorf,  Warmbrunn,  etc. ;)
but  they  are  not  cured  for  all  that ; the  sulphur  may
have  occasioned  a medicinal  disease,  which,  for  a time,
may  take  the  place  of  the  natural  disease,  and  is  much
less  troublesome  than  this  one  ; but  the  medicinal  dis-
ease soon  passing  off  again,  the  original  disease  returns,
either  with  its  original  or  with  new  and  more  trouble-
some symptoms,  sometimes  affecting  the  more  delicate
parts  of  the  organism.  The  ignorant  physician,  on  per-
ceiving this  change,  rejoices  at  the  primitive  group  of
symptoms  having,  as  he  supposes,  given  place  to  a new
disease,  and  persuades  the  patient  that  the  renewed  use
of  the  baths  will  cure  this  new  disease  as  well  as  it  did.
the  former ; he  knows  not  that  this  new  disease  is  a
mere  modification  of  the  former  symptoms,  and  is
doomed  to  witness  the  sad  result  that  the  patient  obtains
much  less  relief  from  using  the  baths  a second  time,
yea,  that  the  repeated  use  of  those  baths  positively  ag-
gravates the  sufferings  of  the  patient.

I may,  therefore,  positively  assert,  that  sulphur  has
done  much  injury  in  the  hands  of  alloeopathic  physi-
cians ; and  that  excessive  use  and  frequent  repetition


* Sulphur,  when  administered  in  a small  dose,  seldom
fails  in  effecting  an  incipient  cure  of  the  chronic  non- venereal
diseases.  I know  a physician  in  Saxony  who  obtained  a
great  reputation  for  curing  chronic  diseases,  by  adding,  with-
out knowing  why,  flowers  of  sulphur  to  every  one  of  his
prescriptions.  In  the  beginning , they  produced  a good
effect,  but  only  in  the  beginning,  for,  in  a little  while,  the
good  effects  ceased.


135


have  made  this  drug  almost  useless  for  the  homoeo-
pathic physician  in  the  treatment  of  those  endless  se-
condary psoric  affections,  for  the  cure  of  which  alloeo-
pathic  doctors  had  employed  it  in  vain.

In  all  those  mismanaged  cases  of  psoric  diseases,
sulphur  will  be  much  less  useful  to  the  homoeopathic
physician  than  it  is  in  a recently  formed  itch,  with  the
eruption  still  existing  upon  the  skin.  Sulphur  will  in-
deed show  a curative  effect,  whether  the  psoric  disease
after  the  violent  suppression  of  the  eruption,  be  still
slumbering  in  the  system,  or  whether  it  have  already
broke  forth  in  the  shape  of  all  sorts  of  secondary  chronic
affections  ; but  it  can  only  be  rarely  exhibited  in  those
mismanaged  cases,  on  account  of  its  virtues  having  been
already  misused  by  the  alloeopathic  physicians  ; where-
as, sulphur,  and,  indeed,  most  other  antipsoric  remedies,
should  never  be  given  more  than  three  or  four  times,
even  with  suitable  intermediate  remedies,  if  the  physi-
cian does  not  wish  the  cure  to  retrograde  in  consequence
of  the  too  frequent  use  of  that  powerful  antipsoric.

Whether  the  violent  suppression  of  the  eruption  have
forced  the  internal  psora  to  manifest  itself  in  the  form
of  secondary  chronic  affections , or  whether  it  he  still
slumbering  in  the  system , sulphur  alone  is  never  suffi-
cient to  effect  the  cure  of  such  a psoric  disturbance.
Hence  it  is,  that  sulphur  baths,  either  natural  or  artifi-
cial, are  of  no  avail  in  the  treatment  of  such  secondary
psoric  affections.

I repeat  that,  (with  the  exception  of  a recently  form-
ed itch  with  the  eruption  still  existing  upon  the  skin,)*
every  other  psoric  disturbance  of  the  organism,  whether
the  psora  be  yet  in  a latent  condition  or  whether  it  have
already  assumed  the  various  forms  of  secondary  chronic
affections,  can  never  be  cured  by  one  antipsoric  reme?

* Recent  itch,  with  the  eruption,  has  often  yielded  to  one
small  dose  of  homoeopathically  prepared  sulphur  in  the  space  of
2,  3 or  4 weeks.  On  one  occasion  such  a cure  was  effected  in  a
family  of  seven  persons  by  means  of  half  a grain  of  the  million
potency  of  carbo  vegetabilis  ; and  on  three  other  occasions  by
means  of  a like  dose  of  the  same  potency  of  Sepia.


136


dy,  but  that  complete  and  radical  cure  of  such  seconda-
ry psoric  affections  in  bad  cases,  requires  the  use  of  a
large  number  of  antipsorics.

The  psoric  miasm,  having  pervaded  millions  of  organ-
isms for  thousands  of  years,  has  gradually  developed  out
of  itself  an  endless  number  of  symptoms,  varied  accord-
ing to  differences  of  constitution,  climate,  residence,
education,  habits,  occupation,*  mode  of  life,  diet,  and
various  other  bodily  and  spiritual-  influences.  Hence  it
cannot  appear  strange  that  not  one  antipsoric  should  be
sufficient  to  correspond  to  that  endless  number  of  dif-
ferent psoric  symptoms,  and  that  the  use  of  several  an-
tipsoric remedies  should  be  required  for  a complete  and
radical  removal  of  the  psoric  miasm. t

As  1 have  said  before,  only  the  recent  itch,  with  the
eruption  still  existing  upon  the  skin,  can  be  completely
cured  by  one  dose  of  sulphur.  I am  not  prepared  to
assert  that  such  a speedy  cure  is  possible  in  every  case  ;
the  age  of  the  patient  has  a great  influence  upon  the  re-
sult of  the  treatment.  When  the  eruption  has  already
existed  for  some  time  upon  the  skin  and  begins  to  dis-
appear of  itself,  in  that  case  the  internal  psora  has  al-
ready obtained  preponderance  in  the  system.  The  erup-
tion now  ceases,  to  a certain  extent,  to  be  a vicarious
symptom  for  the  internal  disease  ; and  the  signs  of  latent
psora  or  secondary  psoric  affections  begin  to  manifest
themselves.  In  such  a case  as  this,  sulphur  is  no  longer
sufficient  to  effect  a cure  ; nor  is  any  single  antipsoric
remedy  capable  of  producing  that  result ; several  anti-
psorics are  required  for  that  purpose,  according  as  their
use  is  indicated  by  the  existing  symptoms.

* I mean  occupations  which  exert  a special  influence  upon
particular  organs  of  the  system,  which  affect  certain  functions  of
the  mind  more  than  others.

-J-  I forbear  indicating  the  great  exertions,  the  innumerable  and
careful  observations,  the  inquiries,  reflections  and  various  ex-
periments by  means  of  which  I have  succeeded,  after  the  lapse  of
eleven  years,  in  filling  up  that  large  chasm  in  the  system  of  the
homoeopathic  healing  art,  in  indicating  the  cure  of  the  countless
chronic  diseases,  and  in  thus  completing,  as  much  as  possible,
the  blessings  which  homoeopathy  has  bestowed  upon  mankind.


137


The  homoeopathic  treatment  of  the  chronic  non-vene-
real  diseases  generally  accords  with  what  has  been
taught  in  the  Organon  of  the  healing  art,  relatively  to  the
treatment  of  acute  diseases.  The  particular  rules  to  be
observed  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  1 shall
now  point  out.

In  regard  to  diet  and  mode  of  life  I shall  only  give
general  directions,  which  the  physician  will  have  to  ap-
ply in  a special  case  according  to  his  own  discretion.
Of  course,  whatever  is  injurious  to  the  action  of  the
remedies,  must  be  carefully  avoided.  However,  it  will
sometimes  be  necessary  to  modify,  more  or  less,  the
dietetic  rules  which  homoeopathy  enjoins  upon  the  pa-
tient with  so  much  strictness  and  emphasis  ; this  modi-
fication must  especially  take  place  when  we  have  to
treat  lingering  diseases  which  often  last  for  a long  time,
and  when  it  becomes  necessary  for  the  physician  to  con-
sider the  age,  the  occupation,  and  the  social  condition  of
the  patient.

Strict  diet  is  not  the  curative  agent  in  the  treatment
of  chronic  diseases,  as  is  asserted  by  the  opponents  of
homoeopathy,  with  a viewr  of  lessening  its  merit ; the
cure  depends  chiefly  upon  the  medical  treatment.  This
is  proved  by  the  fact  that  many  chronic  patients  have
followed,  for  years,  the  strictest  diet  without  being  able
to  obtain  relief ; the  disease  increases,  as  is  the  case
with  all  chronic  miasms.

In  order  to  make  the  cure  possible  and  practicable,
the  homoeopathic  practitioner  is,  therefore,  often  obliged
By  wisely  yielding  to  circumstances  the  physician  ef-
fects the  cure  more  certainly  and  more  perfectly  than  by
obstinately  insisting  upon  a mode  of  life  which  it  is  im-
possible for  the  patient  to  follow.

If  their  strength  permit,  the  journeyman  ought  to
continue  his  labour,  the  artizan  work  at  his  trade,  the
farmer  attend  to  his  business  in  the  fields,  the  house-
keeper to  her  domestic  concern  ; only  that  which  is  gen-
erally injurious  to  health,  ought  to  be  carefully  avoided.


138


Persons  whose  business  confines  them  to  a room,  and
obliges  them  to  lead  a/  sedentary  life,  ought  to  take  as
much  exercise  as  possible  in  the  open  air,  without,  how-
ever, totally  abandoning  their  usual  pursuits.

Rich  patients  must  walk  more  than  they  usually  do.
The  physician  may  permit  them  moderate  and  proper
dancing,  rural  entertainments,  provided  they  do  not  con-
flict with  the  necessary  dietetic  precautions,  conversa-
tion with  friends  ; he  may  also  permit  them  innocent
music,  and  listening  to  amusing  lectures  ; they  may
sometimes  even  go  to  the  theatre,  but  they  must  never
play  cards.  The  physician  ought  to  lay  restrictions
upon  riding,  either  on  horseback  or  in  the  carriage,  and
to  interdict  all  exciting  intercourse  ; for,  bad  moral  ef-
fects re-act  upon  the  body.  All  amorous  intercourse
and  sensual  excitement,  reading  lewd  novels,  and  super-
stitious or  exciting  books,  are  to  be  carefully  avoided.*

The  literary  man  ought  to  take  much  exercise  in  the
open  air,  and,  in  bad  weather,  do  some  light  mechanical
work  in  the  house.  While  the  treatment  lasts,  he
ought  to  limit  his  intellectual  labour  to  writing  essays
of  his  own  composition  ; reading  ought  either  never  to
be  permitted,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  quality  and  quantity


* Some  physicians  are  apt  to  give  themselves  importance
by  interdicting  all  sexual  intercourse  to  married  chronic
patients.  If  both  parties  are  capable  of  enjoying  it,  such
an  interdiction  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  ridiculous  ; for,  in
this  case,  the  interdiction  neither  can  be  nor  will  be  obeyed ;
otherwise  a great  family  misfortune  might  come  out  of  it.
No  laws  should  be  passed  which  cannot  be  kept,  or  the  ob-
servation of  which  would  induce  greater  mischief  than  that
which  they  were  intended  to  prevent.  In  case  one  of  the
parties  should  be  incapable  of  sexual  intercourse,  the  inter-
diction becomes  useless.  Sexual  intercourse  is  a thing
which  can  neither  be  properly  recommended  nor  interdict-
ed. All  that  homoeopathy  ought  to  do  in  regard  to  sexual
intercourse,  is,  to  enable  the  parties  to  enjoy  it  (either  by
antipsoric  or  antisyphilitic  remedies,)  and  to  restore  the
morbidly  excited  desire  of  either  party  to  its  natural  tone.


139


of  the  reading  matter  ought  to  be  carefully  indicated.
In  mental  diseases,  reading  is  to  be  positively  forbidden.

Chronic  patients  of  all  classes  must  carefully  avoid
the  arbitrary  use  of  domestic  remedies,  or  of  interme-
diate medicines  of  any  kind ; patients  of  the  higher
classes  must  carefully  abstain  from  perfumes,  scented
water,  tooth  powders,  etc.  If  the  patient  is  accustomed
to  wear  wool  over  the  bare  skin,  he  may  continue  to  do
so  ; but  in  proportion  as  the  cure  progresses,  and  the
weather  becomes  warmer,  cotton,  and  finally  linen
ought  to  be  substituted.  Fontanels,  in  important
chronic  diseases,  should  only  be  discontinued  when  the
cure  has  already  been  progressing  for  some  time.  This
remark  is  especially  applicable  to  patients  advanced  in
age.

Baths  have  to  be  discontinued ; ablutions  may  be
substituted  in  their  stead  ; they  may  be  used  for  the
sake  of  cleanliness.  Bleeding  and  cupping  must  be
strictly  forbidden,  no  matter  how  much  the  patient  may
have  been  accustomed  to  such  depletions.

In  regard  to  diet,  I may  observe,  that  men  of  all
classes  may  consent  to  impose  some  restrictions  upon
themselves,  in  order  to  be  freed  from  a troublesome
chronic  disease.  If  the  abdomen  is  not  the  chief  seat
of  the  chronic  disease,  in  this  case,  all  severe  restrictions
may  be  dispensed  with,  especially  among  the  lower
classes,  and  when  the  patient  is  capable  of  taking  the
necessary  exercise  by  working  at  his  trade.  The  poor
may  live  on  bread  and  salt,  and  yet  recover  from  his
disease  by  proper  treatment ; he  may  safely  eat  pota-
toes, boiled  flour  and  fresh  cheese,  (moderately,  of
course  ;)  but  onions  and  pepper,  he  ought  to  use  in  a
limited  quantity-

He  who  cares  for  his  health  may,  even  at  the
king’s  table,  find  something  which  will  abundantly  sat-
isfy a moderate  and  natural  appetite.

What  is  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  treatment,  is  to
regulate  the  drinks  of  the  patient.  Coffee  has  perni-
cious effects  upon  both  body  and  soul  ; they  may  be
found  enumerated  in  my  little  work,  (Wirkungen  des


140


Kaffees,  Leipsic,  1803.)  Unfortunately  coffee  lias  be-
come so  necessary  to  the  so-called  civilized  nations
that,  unless  the  homoeopathic 'physician  interdicts  the
use  of  coffee  once  for  ever  during  the  treatment,  he  will
find  it  just  as  difficult  to  abolish  the  use  of  that  bever-
age as  it  is  difficult  to  eradicate  superstition  and  preju-
dice. Young  people  of  twenty  and  even  thirty  years,  may
be  deprived  ol  it  at  once,  without  any  injury.  Persons  of
a more  advanced  age  ought  to  be  persuaded  to  abstain
from  the  use  of  coffee  little  by  little,  taking  a little  less
of  it  every  day  ; most  of  them  will  be  found  willing  to
leave  off  the  use  of  that  beverage  at  once,  and  they  do
so  without  experiencing  any  disagreeable  consequences,
except  perhaps  for  the  first  two  or  three  days.  Even  as
lale  as  six  years  ago  I was  under  the  impression  that
coffee  might  be  permitted,  in  a small  quantity,  to  old
people,  in  case  they  should  find  it  difficult  to  give  it  up.
But  I am  now7  convinced  that  the  protracted  use  of  cof-
fee does  not  make  it  harmless,  and  that  the  physician
who  is  bound  to  take  care  of  the  best  interests  of  his
patients,  ought  to  insist  upon  their  depriving  themselves
of  coffee  altogether.  If  they  have  the  necessary  confi-
dence in  their  physician,  they  will  all  conform  to  his
reasonable  wishes  with  great  readiness.  Roast  rye  or
wheat  smell  and  taste  very  much  like  coffee,  and  pro-
cure a beverage  which  is  now  much  used  by  both  rich
and  poor  people  in  different  countries.

The  same  criticism  may  be  passed  upon  Chinese  tea.
Both  the  coarser  and  the  finer  kinds  of  this  beverage
are  alluring  to  the  taste  and  secretly  and  infallibly
w7eaken  the  nerves.  Tea,  whether  it  be  weak  or  strong,
and  whether  it  be  taken  by  young  or  old  people,  were
it  only  once  a day,  is  always  more  or  less  injurious,  and
ought,  therefore,  to  be  avoided  during  the  treatment  of
chronic  diseases.  I have  constantly  found  that  also  in
regard  to  tea,  the  wishes  of  an  intelligent  and  respected
physician  are  at  once  obeyed.

Wine  needs  not  to  be  completely  interdicted  to  chro-
nic patients.  Old  people  cannot  well  be  suddenly  and
completely  deprived  of  wine,  especially  if  they  have


141


been  in  the  habit  of  using  it  without  water  ever  since
their  childhood.*  This  would  be  followed  by  sinking
of  strength  5 the  cure  might  be  retarded  and  even  life
endangered.  During  the  first  weeks  the  patients  will
mix  their  wine  with  equal  portions  of  water ; gradually
they  will  mix  the  wine  with  two,  three,  four,  five  and
even  six  portions  of  water  and  a little  sugar  ; this  last
beverage  may  be  recommended  as  a common  drink  to
all  chronic  patients.

As  regards  brandy,  chronic  patients  must  absolutely
abstain  from  it.  The  physician  will  require  a good
deal  of  firmness  in  diminishing  the  quantity  of  brandy
usually  taken  by  the  patient.  In  case  the  strength  of
the  patient  should  sink  in  consequence  of  his  being  de-
prived of  brandy,  a little  pure  wine  may  be  substituted
in  the  place,  which  may  gradually  be  mixed  with  water
according  to  circumstances.

We  know  it  to  be  a law  of  nature  that  the  condition
which  a medicinal  or  spirituous  substance  realizes  in
the  system,  is  followed  by  an  opposite  condition  on  the
part  of  the  organism,  provided  such  an  opposition  is  at
all  possible.  Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  increase  of
strength  and  animal  heat  consequent  upon  the  use  of
ardent  spirits  will  be  followed  by  a state  of  depression
and  diminution  of  heat.  The  physician  is  bound  to
shield  the  chronic  patient  against  the  injury  which  those
opposing  extremes  would  inflict  upon  him.  Only  the
allceopathic  physician  who  cares  nothing  about  conscien-
tious observation,  and  does  not  wish  to  become  con-
vinced of  the  injurious  effects  of  his  palliatives,  advises
his  patients  to  drink  every  day  some  pure  wine  as  a
tonic  ; the  homoeopathic  doctor  never  makes  himself
guilty  of  such  mal-practice,  (sed  ex  ungue  leonem  !)


* It  is  both  improper  and  injurious,  even  for  healthy  men,
to  use  pure  wine  as  an  habitual  drink  ; this  can  only  be
admitted  on  extraordinary  occasions.  The  young  man
who  uses  spirituous  drinks  in  abundance,  will  find  it  im-
possible to  control  his  sexual  desire  until  lie  is  married;  gon-
orrhoea and  chancre  are  the  consequences  of  such  excesses.

6*


The  use  of  beer  is  liable  lo  many  restrictions-
Brewers  are  now-a-days  too  much  in  the  habit  of  mix-4
ing  with  the  beer  all  sorts  of  vegetable  substances,  part-4
ly  to  preserve  it  from  turning  sour,  partly  and  especially
to  tickle  the  palate;  and  to  produce  an  intoxicating  ef-
feet.  Those  substances  are  injurious  to  health.  The
different  kinds  of  ale,  though  they  contain  a diminished
quantity  of  malt,  are  also  mixed  with  narcotic  substances
for  the  purpose  of  producing  an  intoxicating  effect.

The  use  of  acetic  and  citric  acid  is  likewise  to  be
prohibited.  Vinegar  and  lemon  juice  are  especially
hurtful  to  those  who  are  affected  with  nervous  and  ab*
dominal  complaints  ; moreover,  those  substances  either
neutralize  or  increase  the  effects  of  certain  remedies.
Sour  fruit,  such  as  sour  cherries,  unripe  gooseberries,
currants,  ought  to  be  used  only  m very  small  quantities  ;
sweet  fruit  may  be  used  moderately  ; stewed  prunes
should  not  be  used  by  those  who  are  inclined  to  consti-
pation. Young  veal  ought  not  to  be  used  by  those
whose  digestive  organs  are  affected.  Those  whose  gem
erative  powers  are  weakened,  must  moderate  them-
selves in  the  use  of  chickens  or  eggs,  and  must  avoid
vanilla,  truffles,  caviare,  all  of  which  act  as  palliatives,
From  this  last  reason  women  whose  menses  flow  too
scantily,  must  avoid  using  saffron  and  cinnamon.  Dys-
peptic persons  have  to  avoid  cinnamon,  cloves,  ammo-
nium; pepper,  ginger,  and  bitters  ; all  these  substances
act  as  palliatives  and  are  injurious  to  homoeopathic
medicines'.  Flatuous  vegetables  of  all  kinds  ought  to
be  avoided  by  those  who  are  inclined  to  constipation  and
difficulty  of  passing  their  stools.  Beef,  wheat  and  rye-
bread,  cow’s  milk,  and  a moderate  quantity  of  fresh  butter
appear  to  be  the  most  natural  and  the  most  harmless
food  for  man,  hence  also  for  chronic  patients.  These
substances  ought  not  to  contain  much  salt.  Next  to
beef  may  be  ranked  mutton,  game,  old  chickens,  young
pigeons  ; goose  and  duck  are  yet  less  admissible  to  chro^
nic  patients  than  pork.  Salt  and  smoked  meat  must
be  used  with  great  moderation.


143


Raw  chopped  herbs,  spices  and  old  rancid  cheese  are
to  be  carefully  avoided.

Fish  ought  to  be  used  boiled,  not  too  much  of  it,
without  any  spiced  sauces  ; no  smoked  fish  or  such  as
has  been  dried  in  the  air  j herrings  and  sardines  in
moderate  quantity.

Moderation  in  eating  and  drinking  is  a sacred  duty
for  all  chronic  patients.

Tobacco  may  be  permitted  in  some  chronic  diseases
to  patients  who  have  constantly  used  tobacco,  and  who
do  not  spit  in  using  it.  However,  restrictions  are  to  be
imposed  when  the  intellectual  functions  are  affected,
when  the  patient  does  not  sleep  well,  is  dyspectic  and
constipated.  When  there  is  opening  of  the  bowels
every  time  the  tobacco  is  used,  this  is  an  additional
reason  why  its  use  should  be  prohibited,  and  why  suit-
able antipsorics  should  be  employed  towards  removing  the
constipation  entirely.  The  use  of  snuff*  against  habitual
catarrh,  obstruction  of  the  nose  and  chronic  inflammation
of  the  eyes  is  a great  obstacle  to  the  cure  of  chronic
diseases  ; it,  therefore,  ought  to  be  gradually  abolished
as  soon  as  possible.  There  is  another  reason  why  the
use  of  snuff  should  be  interdicted.  The  medicinal  pre-
parations with  which  the  snuff  is  moistened  injure  the  ol-
factory nerve  with  which  they  are  brought  in  immediate
contact ; this  the  smoking  of  tobacco  is  much  less  able  to
do  on  account  of  its  virtues  being  considerably  dimin-
ished by  the  fire.

There  are  other  obstacles  to  the  cure  of  chronic  dis-
eases which  I shall  now  enumerate.

Those  events  which  are  capable  of  rousing  the  latent
psora  which  has  hitherto  manifested  its  existence  in  the
organism  by  some  of  those  slight  deviations  from  its
normal  condition  that  have  been  enumerated  above,  are
also  capable,  if  they  should  attack  a patient  in  whom
the  chronic  disease  is  fully  developed,  to  make  its  cure
difficult  and  even  impossible,  unless  they  speedily  yield
to  more  favourable  circumstances.

These  events  being  different  in  their  nature,  they  are
injurious  in  different  degrees.


144


\


Excessive  fatigue,  working  in  marshy  regions,  great
injuries  and  wounds,  excessive  heat  or  cold,  starvation,
poverty,  unwholesome  food  are  less  capable  of  rousing
latent  psora  or  aggravating  a manifest  psoric  disease
than  an  unhappy  marriage  or  a gnawing  conscience.
Yes,  ten  years  of  hard  labour  in  the  penitentiary  is
much  less  injurious  to  the  health  of  an  innocent  man
than  spiritual  sufferings.  The  psoric  miasm,  which  had
been  hitherto  latent  in  his  system  and  gave  the  favorite
of  a king  ihe  appearance  of  blooming  health,  quickly
breaks  forth  into  a chronic  affection  or  induces  a state
of  insanity,  when  contempt  and  indigence  are  substituted
in  the  place  of  his  former  brilliant  position.  The  psoric
mother  whose  health  had  already  been  vacillating,  is
attacked  with  an  incurable  suppuration  of  the  lungs  or
with  a cancer  of  the  breast  in  consequence  of  the  sudden
death  of  her  only  son  ; disdained  love  induces  a state
of  melancholy  in  the  sensitive  young  woman,  who  had
been  affected  with  psoric  hysteria.

In  such  cases,  even  the  best  antipsoric  treatment  is
scarcely  capable  of  procuring  relief  to  those  unfortu-
nate patients.

Grief  and  sorrow  are  the  principal  causes  which
either  develop  latent  psora,  or  aggravate  an  already  ex-
isting secondary  psoric  affection.

Even  the  least  remains  of  the  psoric  miasm  are  by
permanent  grief  and  vexation  developed  into  all  sorts
of  chronic  psoric  affections  ; grief  and  vexation  act
more  certainly,  more  frequently,  and  more  suddenly
than  any  other  contrary  influences  could  do.

The  physician  ought  to  make  it  his  duty  and  his  de-
light to  remove  from  the  patient  all  those  influences
that  might  be  an  obstacle  to  the  cure,  and  especially  in
the  case  of  chronic  patients,  he  ought  to  shield  them,
to  the  best  of  his  ability,  against  grief  and  vexation.

If  both  philosophy  and  religion  should  forsake  the
patient  ; if  the  patient  is  not  capable  of  bearing  with
resignation  the  sufferings  and  tribulations  which  may
befal  him  without  his  fault ; if  the  patient  is  constantly
assailed  by  grief  and  vexation  without  the  physician


145


being  able  to  ward  off  those  pernicious  influences,  then
it  is  better  that  the  patient  should  be  left  to  his  fate  f
for  even  the  wisest,  most  skilful,  and  most  conscienti-
ous physician  will  find  it  impossible  to  procure  the  pa-
tient relief  under  those  unfavourable  circumstances.  It
would  be  foolish  to  continue  the  construction  of  an  edi-
fice upon  a ground  which  is  every  day  undermined  by
the  waves  slowly  washing  away  one  portion  after  the
other.

There  is  another  class  of  chronic  patients  whose  af-
fections are  just  as  difficult  to  cure.  They  are  those
patients  among  the  higher  classes,  who  have  used  for
years  mineral  baths, f and  have  resorted  to  those  boast-
ed methods  of  cure  and  nostra  which  are  sent  over  the
whole  world  from  France  and  England.  These  nostra
being  taken  in  repeated  doses,  develop  the  psoric  miasm,
even  when  uncombined  with  syphilis,  so  irresistibly,
and  aggravate  the  secondary  psoric  affections  to  such
an  extent,  that  those  inroads  upon  the  vital  powers  of
the  organism,  if  they  should  be  continued  for  some
years,  make  the  cure  of  chronic  affections  impossible.
Why  this  should  be  so,  is  difficult  to  say.  It  may  be
presumed  that  new  affections  have  been  added  to  the  ori-
ginal malady  by  means  of  those  heroic  non-homoeopathic
remedies,  and  that  the  magnitude  and  frequent  repeti-
tion of  these  remedies  have  impressed  upon  those  af-
fections the  character  of  chronic  permanency.  Or,
the  different  powers  of  organic  life,  irritability,  sensi-
bility, the  faculty  of  reproduction  may  have  become  so


* This  grief  may  be  a symptom  of  the  general  disease
without  being  occasioned  by  external  influences.  In  this
case,  regard  must  be  had  to  this  symptom  in  the  selection
of  an  antipsoric.  Such  morbid  states  of  the  mind  are  some-
times cured  with  great  case.

t Even  if  the  water  itself  is  not  contrary  to  the  disease  ;
nevertheless,  the  frequent  use  of  baths  must  be  considered
a repetition  of  powerful  doses,  which  often  exercise  a
pernicious  effect  upon  the  disease,  and  very  seldom  tio
much  good.


146


much  weakened  by  this  abuse,  that  all  those  causes
united  may  have  produced  a disturbance  which  no  sen-
sible man  will  consider  elementary  ; and  no  homoeopa-
thic physician  will  lightly  undertake  to  regulate  the
chaos  of  sufferings  which  is  exhibited  in  such  wofully
misused  organisms.

Such  violent  and  exhausting  modes  of  treatment  are
not  only  incapable  of  curing  the  primitive  psoric  dis-
ease, but  they  aggravate  it  by  producing  dangerous  me-
dicinal affections,  and  finally  threaten  to  overwhelm  the
vital  powers  altogether.

If  the  pernicious  effects  of  the  old  method  of  cure
merely  resulted  in  dynamic  derangements  of  the  organ-
ism, the  organism  would  soon  recover  from  those  effects,
after  the  treatment  should  have  been  discontinued  for  a
time,  or  else  homoeopathic  remedies  would  be  able  to
neutralize  those  bad  effects.  But  these  effects  never
disappear.  It  is  probable  that  the  sensible  and  irritable
fibre  is  unnaturally  affected  by  the  large  and  frequently
repeated  doses  of  alloeopathic  medicines,  and  that  the
vital  principle  protects  itself  against  their  destructive
agency,  either  by  modifying  or  changing  the  viscera
of  organic  life  in  such  a manner  as  will  effectually
shield  them  against  the  assaults  of  subversive  remedial
agents.  It  is  for  a purpose  like  this,  for  instance,  that
the  vital  powers  cover  the  delicate  skin  of  the  hand
with  a horny  surface,  in  order  to  protect  that  part  of  the
body  against  the  bad  effects  which  it  might  otherwise
suffer  from  the  contact  with  corrosive  or  otherwise  inju-
rious substances.  In  the  same  way,  if  the  delicate
viscera  of  organic  life  are  assailed  by  medicines  which
are  not  in  homoeopathic  relation  with  the  disease,  those
viscera  are  protected  by  the  vital  principle  by  having
their  sensibility  and  irritability  diminished.  Moreover,
the  more  delicate  fibre  is  found  abnormally  thickened
or  hardened ; the  stronger  fibre,  on  the  contrary,
consumed  or  even  annihilated,  as  is  shown  by  the  ad-
ventitious, irregular,  or  degenerate  formations  or
growths  which  post-mortem  examinations  exhibit  to  us,
and  which  are  then  attributed  to  the  malignant  charac-


147


ter  of  the  primitive  disease*  Such  a crippled  condition
of  tilings  occurs  very  often*  and  is,  in  many  cases,  in-5
curable.  Only  in  patients  who  are  not  too  far  advan-
ced in  age,  and  whose  powers  have  not  been  too  deeply
sunk  by  the  destructive  drugs  of  alloeopathic  physicians,
as  is  unfortunately  almost  always  the  case,  the  care-
ful and  intelligent  homoeopathic  physician  may  succeed
in  restoring  the  original  health  of  the  patient.  But
such  a result  can  only  be  obtained  under  the  most  fa-
vourable external  circumstances.  When  these  occur
and  are  maintained,  the  physician  may  enable  the  vital
principle,  by  disembarrassing  it  first  from  the  influences
of  the  psoric  miasm,  to  gradually  remove  the  degenera-
tions which  the  unnatural  doses  of  the  alloeopathic  doctor
had  forced  the  vital  powers  to  form  for  the  sake  of  pre-
serving the  system  from  utter  ruin.  Daily  experience
proves  the  fact  that  the  system  sinks  more  and  more,  in
proportion  as  the  alloeopathic  physician,  even  if  he  should
proceed  with  attention  and  care,  assails  it  with  his  drugs.

It  is  impossible  that  such  mismanaged  cases  should
be  cured  in  a short  time,  by  means  of  an  art  which  has
never  pretended  to  have  it  in  its  power  directly  to  act
upon  organic  defects.

In  these  cases  the  physician  has  not  to  deal  with  a
simple  psoric  disease.  These  cases  are  often  so  com-
plicated that  the  physician  is  obliged  to  abandon  them
at  once.  But  were  they  ever  so  favourable,  he  ought
never  to  promise  more  than  relief  after  a long  lapse  of  time.
The  first  thing  to  be  done  is,  that  the  various  medicinal
influences  which  undermine  the  system  in  all  directions,
should  be  removed  from  the  system.  This  result  may
be  obtained  without  the  patient  taking  any  new  medi-
cine, by  going  for  a few  months  into  the  country,  fol-
lowing a strict  diet,  and  carefully  regulating  his  mode
of  life.  Medicine  can  do  almost  nothing  against  these
chaotic  devastations,  of  alloeopathic  drugs.  The  vital
principle,  aided  perhaps  by  an  antipsoric  in  some  degree,
must  first  clear  away  all  those  artificial  symptoms  be-
fore the  true  image  of  the  original  disease  is  reproduced.*


* The  most  horrible  chronic  diseases,  such  as  may  be


149


Wo  to  the  homoeopathic  physician  who  means  to
make  his  reputation  by  the  cure  of  such  wofully  mis-
managed diseases  ! hie  will  fail  in  spite  of  all  his
care.

An  other  obstacle  to  the  cure  of  chronic  diseases  is
the  enervation  of  the  system  consequent  upon  ex-
cesses. The  sons  of  rich  parents  especially,  carried
away  by  the  allurements  of  wealth,  are  too  much  in-
clined to  injure  themselves  by  destructive  passions,  de-
bauchery, abuse  of  the  sexual  organs,  ^gambling,'  etc.
By  the  practice  of  these  vices  the  robustest  bodies  often
dwindle  down  to  a shadow  ; yea,  the  latent  psora  en-
tering into  combination  with  the  badly  managed  syphi-
litic poison,  this  union  gives  origin  to  the  most  dis-
tressing disease.  Even  if  the  patient  mends  his  ways,
remorse  will  constantly  assail  the  vital  forces  and  will
impede  the  action  of  the  antipsoric  remedies  so  much
that  the  homoeopathic  practitioner  will  have  to  be  very
cautious  in  promising  a successful  treatment.

Among  poor  people,  where  the  aforesaid  obstacles  do
not  exist,*  * there  are  other  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a
successful  treatment.  Among  the  poor  the  infection
has  generally  been  caught  more  than  once  and  the  cu-
taneous eruption  has,  as  many  times,  been  repelled  by
external  applications.  By  these  means  the  internal  psoric


found  in  the  families  of  poor  peasants  and  mechanics,
whom  no  fashionable  physician  visits,  are  cured  in  the  most
simple  manner  by  antipsorics  ; the  cure  is  often  effected  in
so  short  a time  that  it  appears  almost  miraculous.

* A pretty  frequent  obstacle  to  the  cure  of  chronic  dis-
eases is  “ suppressed  sexual  intercourse In  some  cases
this  suppression  does  not  depend  upon  the  physician  ; in
other  cases  a foolish  physician  feels  called  upon  to  interdict
sexual  intercourse  on  account  of  the  delicate  health  of  one
of  the  parties.  Such  an  interdiction  often  induces  hysteria,
hypochondriasis  and  even  frenzy.  A sensible  physician
will  cure  these  symptoms  by  permitting  the  moderate  en-
joyment of  sexual  intercourse.  This  subject  deserves
much  more  attention  than  is  generally  bestowed  upon  it.


149


disease  has  gradually  assumed  a fearful  character.  But
even  in  these  cases  a cure  is  possible  in  the  course  of
time,  provided  the  patients  are  not  too  far  advanced  in
age,  and  are  docile  and  not  too  much  exhausted.

But  even  in  those  difficult  cases  kind  nature  shows  a
disposition  to  facilitate  the  cure,  provided  we  know  how
to  understand  and  profit  by  her  indications.  Experience
teaches  this  important  fact  that.,  though  the  patient  have
caught  the  itch  several  times  in  succession,  and  though
the  psoric  miasm  have  subdued  the  organism  more
completely  now  than  during  the  first  attack,  yet  the
last  infection  may  be  cured  as  easily  as  if  it  were  the  first,,
provided  the  eruption  still  exist  upon  the  skin  in  its  in-
tegrity. By  means  of  one  or  two  doses  of  the  suitable
antipsoric  remedy,  the  psoric  miasm  may  be  removed
from  the  system,  and  all  secondary  chronic  affections
may  be  effectually  prevented.*

It  would  not  be  expedient,  however,  to  favour  the
cure  of  psoric  chronic  affections  by  repeatedly  pro-
ducing an  artificial  infection  of  the.  patient  bv  means  of
the  psoric  virus,  even  though  the  patient  should  not
dread  such  a course,  although  he  often  does  reject  it.

The  psoric  miasm  rarely  takes  effect  in  patients  af-
flicted with  inveterate  psoric  diseases,  such  as  sup-
puration of  the  lungs,  paralysis  of  one  or  more  parts
of  the  body,  etc.  I may  observe  that  the  psoric  miasm
takes  effect  much  sooner  when  it  is  caught  naturally,
than  when  it  is  communicated  by  artificial  inoculation.

I have  little  else  to  say,  relatively  to  the  treatment  of
chronic  diseases  ; I content  myself  with  referring  the  in-


* This  is  also  the  case  with  syphilis.  Suppose  the
chancre  or  bubo  have  been  violently  suppressed  and  sec-
ondary syphilis  has  made  its  appearance.  Suppose  now  that
the  patient  has  caught  the  syphilitic  infection  a second  time  ;
in  this  case  as  long  as  the  chancre  is ’yet  existing,  the  sy-
philitic disease  is  cured  by  one  dose  of  the  best  mercurial
preparation.  Of  course,  there  must  not  be  any  complication
with  psora  ; if  this  should  be  the  case,  the  psoric  affection
must  be  removed  first,  as  has  been  taught  above.


150


telligent  homoeopathic  physician  to  the  list  of  antipsoric
remedies  which  he  will  find  recorded  at  the  end  of  this
volume,  and  which  lie  may  use  with  advantage  for  the
attainment  of  his  noble  ends.  A few  rules  of  precaution
may,  however,  not  be  amiss.

First,  let  me  recall  to  mind  the  great  truth,  that  most
chronic  diseases,  excepting  however  those  few  diseases
which  spring  from  syphilis,  originate  in  psora,  and  can,
therefore,  only  be  cured  by  antipsoric  remedies,  that  is
to  say,  remedies  which  produce,  in  a healthy  organism,
all  those  symptoms  which  characterise  both  latent  and
developed  psora.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  homoeopathic  physician
should  not  pay  any  attention  to  the  names  which  he
finds  arrayed  in  works  on  pathology,  and  that  he  should
above  all,  study  the  symptoms,  and  select  a remedy  in
harmony  with  them.

The  physician  must  be  on  his  guard  against  interrupt-
ing the  action  of  the  antipsoric  remedy  which  he  has
given  to  the  patient ; let  him  not  exhibit  an  intermediate
remedy,  on  account  of  a little  headache  which  may  per-
haps come  the  day  after  the  antipsoric  remedy  was
given  ; or  another  remedy  for  a sore  throat,  or  diar-
rhoea, or  a little  pain,  etc.

The  rule  is,  that  the  carefully  selected  homoeopathic
remedy  should  act  until  it  has  completed  its  effect.

Suppose  the  remedy  calls  out  symptoms  which  have
existed  already  weeks  or  months  ago  ; in  this  case,  the
apparent  aggravation  and  the  development  of  new  symp-
toms show  that  the  remedy  has  attacked  the  disease  in
its  inmost  nature,  and  will  prove  of  great  use  hereafter.
Therefore,  the  remedy  ought  to  be  left  undisturbed.

But,  if  the  remedy  produces  symptoms  which  had
never  been  witnessed  before,  and  which  may,  therefore,
be  supposed  to  be  inherent  in  the  medicine  ; in  that
case,  the  remedy  should  be  permitted  to  act  for  a while ;
generally  those  symptoms  disappear  of  themselves  with-
out retarding  the  course  adopted  by  the  physician  ; but
if  they  are  troublesome  and  important,  they  ought  not
to  be  tolerated  ; they  show  that  the  homoeopathic  reme-


151


dy  has  not  been  properly  chosen.  The  effect  of  such  a
remedy  must  either  be  checked  by  an  antidote,  or,  if  no
antidote  should  be  known,  another  suitable  antipsoric
must  be  administered.  After  this,  the  false  symptoms
may  continue  for  a while,  and  occasionally  re-appear,  but
they  will  speedily  and  permanently  vanish,  and  make
room  for  adequate  treatment.

The  physician  needs  not  to  feel  the  least  uneasiness,
if  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  called  out
by  the  anti-psoric  remedies,  in  a higher  degree  of  in-
tensity than  they  usually  manifest.  They  will  diminish
more  and  more  one  day  after  the  other.  This  so-called
homoeopathic  aggravation  is  a proof  that  the  cure  is  not
only  probable,  but  may  even  be  anticipated  with  certainty.

But  if  the  original  symptoms  of  the  disease  continue
with  the  same  intensity  in  the  succeeding  days  as  in
the  beginning,  or  if  this  intensity  increases,  this  is  a
sure  sign  that,  although  the  remedy  may  be  homoeopa-
thic, yet  the  magnitude  of  the  dose  makes  the  cure  im-
possible. The  remedial  agent,  by  its  powerful  action,
not  only  neutralizes  its  genuine  homoeopathic  effects,
but  establishes  moreover,  in  the  system,  a medicinal
disease  by  the  side  of  the  natural  disturbance  which  is
even  strengthened  by  the  medicine.

This  pernicious  effect  of  too  large  a dose  may  be
seen  already  in  the  first  16,  18,  20  days  of  its  action.
In  such  a case  it  becomes  necessary  either  to  give  an
antidote,  or,  if  the  antidote  should  not  be  known,  to  ad-
minister a very  small  dose  of  such  an  anti-psoric  as
corresponds  most  homoeopathically  to  the  symptoms
both  of  the  natural  and  the  artificial  disease.  If  one
anti-psoric  should  not  be  sufficient,  another  may  be
selected,  of  course,  with  the  same  care.*


* The  accident  which  is  mentioned  in  this  paragraph,  I
have  witnessed  in  my  own  practice,  at  the  time  when  I
was  not  yet  fully  acquainted  with  the  remedial  virtues  of
Sepia,  and  especially  Lycopodium  and  Silicea*  I was  then
in  the  habit  of  giving  4,  5 or  6 globules  of  the  billion  po-
tency at  a dose.  Discite  moniti  !


152


I


I

;


The  excessive  action  of  the  otherwise  homoeopathic
remedial  agent  having  been  subdued  by  the  proper  anti-
dote or  by  anti-psoric  remedies,  the  same  agent  .may
then  be  exhibited  again,  but  of  a much  higher  potency
and  in  a more  minute  dose.

There  are  three  mistakes  which  the  physician  can-
not too  carefully  avoid  ; the  first  is  to  suppose  that  the
doses  which  I have  indicated  as  the  proper  doses  in  the
treatment  of  chronic  diseases,  and  which  long  experi-
ence and  close  observation  have  induced  me  to  adopt,
are  too  small  ; the  second  great  mistake  is  the  improper
use  of  a remedy  ; and  the  third  mistake  consists  in  not
letting  the  remedy  acta  sufficient  length  of  time.

Nothing  is  lost  by  giving  even  smaller  doses  than
those  which  I have  indicated.  The  doses  can  scarcely
he  too  much  reduced , provided  the  effects  of  the  remedy
are  not  disturbed  by  improper  food.  The  remedial
agent  will  act  even  in  its  smallest  quantity,  provided  it
corresponds  perfectly  to  all  the  symptoms  of  the  disease
and  its  action  is  not  interfered  with  by  dietetic  trans-
gressions. The  advantage  of  giving  the  smallest  doses
is  this,  that  it  is  an  easy  matter  to  neutralize  their  ef-
fects in  case  the  medicine  should  not  have  been  chosen
with  the  necessary  exactitude.  This  being  done,  a more
suitable  anti-psoric  may  then  be  exhibited.

The  second  fault  is  generally  owing  to  carelessness,
laziness  and  levity.  Many  homoeopathic  physicians,
alas  ! remain  guilty  of  these  trespasses  to  the  end  of
their  lives  ; they  understand  nothing  of  the'  homoeopa-
thic doctrine.

The  first  duty  of  the  homoeopathic  physician  who  ap-
preciates the  dignity  of  his  character  and  the  value  of
human  life,  is,  to  inquire  into  the  whole  condition  of  the
patient,  the  cause  of  the  disease  as  far  as  the  patient
remembers  it,  his  mode  of  life,  the  nature  of  his  mind,
the  tone  and  character  of  his  sentiments,  his  physical
constitution,  and  especially  the  symptoms  of  the  disease.
This  inquiry,  is  made  according  to  the  rules  laid  down
in  the  Organon.  This  being  done,  the  physician  then
tries  to  discover  the  true  homoeopathic  remedy.  He


153


I


;


may  avail  himself  of  the  existing  Repertories  with  a
view  of  becoming  approximative^  acquainted  with  the
true  remedy.  But,  inasmuch  as  those  Repertories  only
contain  general  indications,  it  is  necessary  that  the  rem-
edies which  the  physician  finds  indicated  in  those  works,
should  be  afterwards  carefully  studied  out  in  the  Mate-
ria Medica.  A physician  who  is  not  willing  to  take  this
trouble,  but  who  contents  himself  with  the  general  indi-
cations furnished  by  the  Repertories,  and  who,  by  means
of  these  general  indications,  dispatches  one  patient  after
the  other,  deserves  not  the  name  of  a true  homoeopathist.
He  is  a mere  quack,  changing  his  remedies  every  mo-
ment, until  the  poor  patient  loses  his  temper  and  is
obliged  to  leave  this  homicidal  dabbler.  It  is  by  such
levity  as  this  that  true  homoeopathy  is  injured.

This  ignominious  propensity  for  laziness,  in  the  most
important  of  all  professions,  determines  these  pseudo-
homoeopathists  to  choose  their  remedies  ab  usu  in  mor-
bis,  by  the  directions  which  are  found  recorded  at  the
head  of  each  medicine.  This  proceeding  is  entirely
wrong,  and  smells  strongly  of  alloeopathy.  Those  gen-
eral indications  which  are  found  at  the  head  of  each  medi-
cine in  the  different  Repertories,  only  refer  to  special
symptoms  and  most  of  them  have  no  other  object  except
to  inform  the  homoeopathic  physician  that  certain  medi-
cines, the  virtues  of  which  had  been  tried  upon  the
healthy  organism,  have  been  found  curative  in  the  dis-
eases named  in  the  Repertories.  Alas  ! there  are  even
authors  who  advise  this  kind  of  empiricism.

The  third  great  mistake  which  the  homoeopathic  phy-
sician cannot  too  carefully  avoid  in  the  treatment  of
chronic  diseases,  is  the  too  hasty  repetition  of  the  dose.
This  haste  is  highly  indiscreet.  Superficial  observers
are  very  apt  to  suppose  that  a remedy,  after  having  fa-
vourably acted  for  eight  or  ten  days,  can  act  no  more  ;
this  delusion  is  strengthened  by  the  supposition  that  the
morbid  symptoms  would  have  shown  themselves  again
on  such  or  such  a day,  if  the  dose  had  not  been  renewed.

If  the  medicine  which  the  patient  has  been  ordered
to  take,  produces  a good  effect  in  the  first  eight  or  ten


154


days,  this  is  a sure  sign  that  the  medicine  is  strictly  ho-
moeopathic. If,  under  these  circumstances,  an  aggra-
vation should  occur,  the  patient  need  not  feel  uneasy
about  it ; the  desired  result  will  be  ultimately  obtained,
though  it  may  take  24  or  30  days.  It  takes  40  and
even  50  days  before  the  medicine  has  completed  its  ac-
tion. To  give  another  remedy  before  the  lapse  of  this
period,  would  be  the  height  of  folly.  Let  no  physician
suppose  that,  as  soon  as  the  time  fixed  for  the  duration
of  the  action  of  the  remedy  shall  have  elapsed,  another
remedy  must  at  once  be  administered  with  a view  of
hastening  the  cure.  This  is  contrary  to  experience.
The  surest  and  safest  way  of  hastening  the  cure  is,  to
let  the  medicine  act  as  long  as  the  improvement  of  the
jmtient  continues , were  it  even  far  beyond  the  period
which  is  set  down  as  the  probable  period  of  the  dura-
tion of  that  action.*  He  who  observes  this  rule  with
the  greatest  care,  will  be  the  most  successful  homoeo-
pathic practitioner.  A new  remedy  should  only  be
given  when  the  older  symptoms  which  had  disappeared
for  a time,  begin  to  appear  again,  and  show  a tendency
to  remain  or  to  increase  in  intensity.  Experience  is
the  only  arbiter  in  these  matters,  and,  in  my  own  long
and  extensive  practice  it  has  already  decided  beyond
the  shadow  of  a doubt.

Considering  the  complex  nature  of  the  human  organ-
ism and  the  delicate  structure  of  its  organs,  it  cannot
appear  strange  that  the  psoric  miasm  which  ramifies
through  the  organism  as  a parasitical  growth,  should
tenaciously  resist  the  action  of  remedial  agents.  The
intelligent  observer  will  find  it  natural  that  the  remedial


* On  one  occasion  I gave  Sepia  against  a chronic  head-
ache which  came  on  at  intervals.  The  attacks  became
both  less  frequent  and  less  violent.  Another  dose  stopped
the  headache  for  the  period  of  100  days,  from  which  I in-
fer that  the  remedy  acted  during  all  that  time.  At  the
end  of  100  days  another  slight  attack  came  on.  A third
dose  of  Sepia  was  given,  and  it  is  now  seven  years  since
the  headache  has  completely  disappeared.


155

agent,  acting  as  it  does  for  a long  period,  should  ocea
sionally  appear  to  make  a sort  of  inroad  upon  the  organ-
ism. Such  exacerbations  are  only  apparent  aggrava-
tions of  the  disease.  They  simply  show  that  the  dis-
ease is  writhing,  as  it  were,  under  the  action  of  the
remedy/  and  may  occur  even  16,  20,  or  24  days  after
the  period  when  the  medicine  was  taken.

The  duration  of  the  action  of  anti-psoric  remedies  is
generally  proportionate  to  the  chronic  character  of  the
disease.  And,  vice-versa,  even  such  remedies  as  bella-
donna, sulphur,  arsenic,  etc.,  which  act  for  a considera-
ble length  of  time  in  the  healthy  organism,  have  the
duration  of  their  action  diminished  in  proportion  as  the
disease  is  acute  and  runs  speedily  through  its  course.
In  chronic  diseases  the  physician  will  therefore  let  the
remedy  act  30, -40,  and  even  50  days,  as  long  as  the
improvement  continues.  Nature  permits  the  remedy
to  act  for  so  many  days  ; and,  as  long  as  this  action
continues,  it  ought  not  to  be  interfered  with  by  a new
remedy.!


* If  the  anti-psoric  remedy  have  been  chosen  with  strict
regard  to  its  homoeopathic  nature,  and  have  been  exhibited
in  the  smallest  dose,  such  exacerbations  will  progressively
diminish  both  in  frequency  and  intensity ; whereas,  if  the
dose  is  too  strong,  they  may  appear  very  often  to  the  great
prejudice  of  the  patient.

f It  will  be  difficult  to  induce  physicians  to  avoid  the  mis-
takes which  have  been  censured  in  these  paragraphs.  My
doctrines  in  regard  to  the  magnitude  and  the  repetition  of
the  doses  will  be  doubted  for  years,  even  by  the  greater
number  of  homoeopathic  physicians.  Their  excuse  will  be,
“ that  it  is  quite  difficult  enough  to  believe  that  the  minute
homoeopathic  doses  have  at  all  the  power  to  act  upon  the
disease,  but  that  it  is  incredible  that  such  small  doses  should
be  able  to  influence  an  inveterate  chronic  disease  even  for
two  or  three,  much  less  for  forty  or  fifty  days ; yea,  that,
after  so  long  a space  of  time,  important  results  should  be
obtained  from  those  imperceptible  doses.”  My  proposition,
however,  is  not  one  of  those  which  ought  to  be  compre-


156


I he  whole  cure  fails  if  the  anti-psoric  remedies


hended,  nor  one  which  ought  to  be  blindly  believed.  No
one  is  bound  either  to  comprehend  or  believe  that  propo-
sition ; I do  not  comprehend  it,  but  the  facts  speak  for
themselves.  The  truth  of  my  proposition  is  demonstrated
by  experience,  in  which  I have  more  faith  than  in  my  in-
telligence. Who  will  undertake  to  weigh  the  powers  which
nature  conceals  in  her  depths  ? Who  will  doubt  of  their
existence  ? Who  ever  thought  that  the  medicinal  virtues
of  drugs  could  be  developed  in  an  infinite  series  of  degrees
by  means  of  triturating  and  shaking  the  raw  material?
Does  the  physician  risk  any  thing  by  imitating  a method
which  I have  adopted  from  long  experience  and  observa-
tion ? Unless  the  'physician  imitates  my  method , he  cannot
expect  to  solve  the  highest  problem  of  medical  science,  that
of  curing  those  important  chronic  diseases  which  have  indeed
remained  uncured  up  to  the  time  when  I discovered  their
true  character,  and  proper  treatment.  This  is  all  that  I
have  to  say  on  this  subject.  I have  fulfilled  a duty  by
communicating  to  the  world  the  great  truths  which  I have
discovered.  The  world  was  sadly  in  need  of  them.  If
physicians  do  not  carefully  practice  what  I teach,  let  them
not  boast  of  being  my  followers,  and,  above  all,  let  them
not  expect  to  be  successful  in  their  treatment.

Is  it  proper  that  we  should  reject  a method  of  cure  until
the  play  of  those  natural  forces  upon  which  the  method
rests  shall  have  been  revealed  to  the  sight  and  shall  have
been  made  accessible  to  the  minds  of  children?  Would  it
not  be  foolish  to  reject  the  practice  of  eliciting  sparks  from
flint  by  striking  against  it  with  steel,  for  no  other  reason
than  this  : that  we  do  not  understand  how  so  much  caloric
could  be  latent  in  the  flint,  or  how  this  caloric  after  being
elicited  from  the  flint,  could  melt  the  little  particles  of  steel
which  separate  from  the  steel  when  we  strike  it  against  the
flint,  and,  in  the  shape  of  incandescent  globules,  set  the  tin-
der on  fire?  We  understand  nothing  of  all  this,  and  we
nevertheless  have  followed  for  thousands  of  years  the  practice
of  eliciting  sparks  from  flint  by  means  of  steel.  It  would
be  foolish  to  decline  learning  to  write  because  we  do  not


157


milted  to  act  uninterruptedly  to  the  end.  Even  if  the
second  anti-psoric  should  have  been  selected  with  the
greatest  care,  it  cannot  replace  the  loss  which  the  rash
haste  of  the  physician  has  inflicted  upon  the  patient.
The  benign  action  of  the  former  remedy,  which  was
about  manifesting  its  most  beautiful  and  most  surprising
results,  is  probably  lost  to  the  patient  for  ever.

The  fundamental  t'ule,  in  treating  chronic  diseases,  is
this  : to  let  the  carefully-selected  homoeopathic  anti-
psoric  act  as  long  as  it  is  capable  of  exercising  a cu-
rative influence  and  there  is  a visible  improvement  going
on  in  the  system.  This  rule  is  opposed  to  the  hasty  pre-
scription of  a new,  or  the  immediate  repetition  of  the
same , remedy.  Indeed  nothing  can  be  more  desirable
to  a physician  than  to  let  the  improvement  of  his  pa-
tient continue  without  interfering  with  it.  By  means  of
a single  dose  of  a carefully  selected  remedy,  the  homoeo-
pathic practitioner  often  produces  an  improvement  in  the
state  of  his  patient,  which  continues  even  to  the  restora-
tion of  health.  This  result  could  not  have  been  obtain-
ed if  the  dose  had  been  repeated,  or  if  another  remedy
had  been  given.  It  is  probable  that  an  anti-psoric  re-
medy of  the  highest  potency  manifests  its  curative  influ-
ence for  such  a length  of  time,  and  finally  cures  the
disease  by  developing  in  the  organism  an  analagous
chronic  disease,  which  has  a stronger  hold  upon  the
natural  disease  than  the  natural  disease  has  upon  the
organism.  (See  Organon,  § 45,  fifth  edition.)  This
seems  to  be  the  course  that  nature  adopts.  The  arti-
ficially-excited disease  is  indeed  analogous  to  the  natural
disease,  both  as  regards  symptoms  and  pain ; but,  in  the
organism,  the  artificial  disease  being  the  stronger,  it  anni-
hilates the  natural,  which  is  the  weaker.  (See  Organon,
§ 33.)  This  shows  why  every  hasty  repetition  of  the


understand  how  thought  can  be  embodied  in  written  words  ?
Just  as  foolish  would  it  be  to  reject  the  method  which  I
have  discovered  for  the  cure  of  chronic  diseases,  on  the
ground  that  we  do  not  comprehend  the  mysterious  agency
which  that  method  involves.

7


15S


same  remedy,  or  every  new  dose  of  another  remedy,
would  produce  an  increase  of  morbid  symptoms  and
inierrupt  the  process  of  cure.  It  often  requires  a long
time  before  so  much  mischief  can  be  remedied.*


* Note  of  the  Translator  : The  explanation  which  Hahne-
mann  gives  of  the  modus  operandi  of  the  homoeopathic  drug,  is
not  satisfactory.  With  all  due  reverence  for  the  great  master  of
Homoeopathy,  I take  the  liberty  of  offering  the  following  re-
marks relative  to  his  explanation  : —

In  § 29  of  his  “ Organon,”  Hahnemann  says,  in  explanation  of
the  law  similia  similibus , “ that  every  disease  (which  does  not
belong  exclusively  to  surgery)  being  a purely  dynamic  and  pe-
culiar change  of  the  vital  powers  in  regard  to  the  manner  in
which  they  accomplish  sensation  and  action,  a change  that  ex-
presses itself  by  symptoms  which  are  perceptible  to  the  senses,
it  therefore  follows,  that  the  homoeopathic  medicinal  agent,  se-
lected by  a skilful  physician,  will  convert  it  into  another  medi-
cinal disease  which  is  analogous,  but  rather  more  intense.  By
this  means,  the  natural  morbific  power  which  had  previously  ex-
isted, and  which  was  nothing  more  than  a dynamic  power  without
substance,  terminates , while  the  medicinal  disease  which  usurps
its  place,  being  of  such  a nature  as  to  be  easily  subdued  by  the
vital  powers,  is  likewise  extinguished  in  its  turn,  leaving  in  its
primitive  state  of  integrit}^  and  health  the  essence  or  substance
which  animates  and  preserves  the  body.”

What  is  meant  by  “ terminates ,”  may  be  easily  and  clearly
inferred  from  § 45  of  the  Organon,  where  Hahnemann  discourses
as  followrs  : “ Two  diseases  that  differ  greatly  in  their  species,
but  wiiich  bear  a strong  resemblance  in  their  development
and  effects — that  is  to  say,  in  the  symptoms  which  they  pro-
duce, always  mutually  destroy  each  other  wThen  they  meet
together  in  the  system.  The  stronger  annihilates  the  weaker;
nor  is  it  difficult  to  conceive  how  this  is  performed.  Two  dis-
similar diseases  may  co-exist  in  the  body,  because  their  dis-
similitude would  allow  of  their  occupying  two  distinct  regions.
But,  in  the  present  case,  the  stronger  disease  which  makes  its
appearance,  exercises  an  influence  upon  the  same  parts  as  the
old  one,  and  even  throw's  itself,  in  preference,  upon  those  which
have  till  now  been  attacked  by  the  latter,  so  that  the  old  disease
finding  no  other  organ  to  act  upon,  is  necessarily  extinguished.
Or,  to  express  it  in  other  terms,  as  soon  as  the  vital  powers,
which  have  till  then  been  deranged  by  a morbific  cause,  are  at-
tacked W ith  greater  energy  by  a new  power  very  analogous  to
the  former,  but  more  intense,  they  no  longer  receive  any  im-
pression but  from  the  latter  ; while  the  preceding  one,  reduced  to


159


If  any  given  dose  of  a remedy  should  produce  syrup*
toms  which  are  not  homogeneous  to  the  symptoms  of


a m.ere  state  of  dynamic  power,  without  matter , must  cease  to
exist.

In  the  preceding-  paragraph  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  the  ar-
tificial disease  cures  the  natural,  on  account  of  the  former  being
stronger  than  the  latter  ; and  it  is  also  said  that  the  natural  disease
reduced  to  a mere  state  of  dynamic  power  without  matter  must
cease  to  exist.

The  former  of  these  assertions  is  too  equivocal  to  be  of  any
scientific  value.  If  the  natural  disease  has  been  powerful
enough  to  reduce  the  organism  to  the  last  stage  of  vitality,  how
can  we  suppose,  that  a subversive  agent  which  develops  in  the
system  a disease  more  powerful  than  the  former,  will  not  com-
pletely destroy  the  organism  l Nor  is  the  latter  of  those  propo-
sitions more  intelligible.  How  can  a thing  which  continues  to
be  a “ dynamic  power1'1  cease  to  exist  1 How  can  any  thing
which  is  “ power ” cease  to  exist  1 Such  explanations  have
given  rise  on  the  part  of  the  opponents  of  the  homoeopathic  system
to  objections  like  these : To  cure  a burn,  you  must  burn  the
limb  a little  more  ; to  cure  a simple  fracture,  you  must  make  it
compound.  To  be  sure,  such  objections  are  absurd  ; but  they
are  justified  by  the  incompleteness  of  Hahnemann’s  own  ex-
planations of  his  theory.

Hahnemann  seems  to  entertain  the  notion  which  many  other
physiologists,  especially  the  vitalists,  advocate,  that  the  re-
medial agent  acts  by  making  an  impression  upon  the  vital
powers,  and  causing  them  to  re-act  by  an  increase  of  depression
within  conservative  limits.  This  explanation  is  plausible,  but
not  sufficient ; indeed,  it  is  only  the  smallest  portion  of  the  true
explanation  of  the  homoeopathic  method  of  cure.  In  my  inau-
gural thesis,  published  by  Mr.  Radde,  322  Broadway,  I have  in-
dicated the  true  reasons  why  the  homoeopathic  remedy  should
exercise  such  a great  influence  upon  the  disease.  The  reasons
which  I have  stated  there,  do,  by  no  means,  explain  the  inmost
agency  of  the  homoeopathic  drug ; but  they  constitute,  and  will
for  ever  constitute,  the  immoveable  basis  upon  which  the  mys-
terious workings  of  the  homoeopathic  remedial  agent  have  to  be
investigated  and  explained.  In  my  thesis  I have  demonstrated
that  every  homoeopathic  cure  is  a materialisation  of  that  abnormal
vital  state  which  we  call  disease  ; that  the  homoeopathic  remedy
acts  by  reducing  the  disease  to  its  own  natural  order  or  form  of
existence,  which  is  the  medicinal  substance  ; and  that  the  dis-
ease leaves  the  organism  by  a compound  force,  first  by  virtue  of
the  irresistibly  attractive  power  which  the  medicinal  substance
exercises  over  the  disease  and  by  the  consequent  restoration  ol
free  agency  imparted  to  the  vital  principle.  Hence,  in  the  ho-


160


the  disease,  and  if  the  mind  of  the  patient  should  become
more  and  more  depressed,  though  the  progressive  in-
crease of  this  depression  may  be  very  gradual,  then  the
next  dose  of  the  same  remedy  may  become  very  preju-
dicial to  the  patient.  Even  if  a remedy  should  produce
a sudden  great  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  pa-
tient, there  is  danger  that  the  remedy  may  have  acted
as  a mere  palliative ; in  this  case  it  never  should  be  ex-
hibited a second  time,  not  even  after  other  intermediate
remedies.

There  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  which  it  is,  how-
ever, not  the  business  of  every  beginner  to  discover.* *

A second  dose  of  the  same  remedy  may  be  given  im-
mediately after  the  first,  when  the  remedy  had  been
chosen  with  strict  regard  to  its  homoeopathic  character,
and  had  produced  a good  effect,  but  had  not  acted  long


mceopathic  process  of  curing  there  is  no  forcing,  the  disease
leaves  the  organism  of  its  own  accord,  in  perfect  freedom,  for  the
simple  reason  that  the  human  organism  is  not  its  natural  order
of  existence,  and  that  the  medicinal  substance  is  this  order.
Nor  is  the  disease  annihilated.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  developed
by  the  medicinal  substance  into  its  ultimate  type ; it  is  upon  an
ultimate  physical  type  that  all  intellectual,  spiritual  and  vital
states  of  existence  rest,  whether  they  be  normal  or  abnormal ;
the  ultimate  types  of  all  abnormal  vital  states  of  existence  are  the
medicinal  substances.

* Nevertheless,  the  immediate  repetition  of  the  doses  of
one  and  the  same  remedy,  has  been  much  abused  lately.
The  young  homoeopathic  physician  finds  it  convenient  to
resort  to  this  repetition,  especially  when  the  remedy  has  pro-
duced some  good  effects  in  the  beginning  ; he  imagines  to
hasten  the  cure  by  this  repetition.

It  is  the  practice  with  many  homoeopathic  physicians  to
furnish  the  patient  with  several  doses  of  the  same  remedy,
advising  him  to  fake  them  at  certain  intervals  according  to
his  discretion.  This  is  empiricism.  The  homoeopathic
physician  ought  to  examine  the  symptoms  every  time  he
remedy  is  indicated  a second  time,  or  whether  a medicine
is  at  all  appropriate.


161


enough  to  cure  the  disease.  This  occurs  but  seldom  in
chronic  diseases  ; but  it  frequently  occurs  in  acute  dis-
eases, and  in  those  chronic  diseases  that  border  upon
the  acute.  The  same  remedy  may  be  given  a second
time,  “ when  the  improvement  which  the  first  dose  had
produced  by  causing  the  morbid  symptoms  gradually  to
become  less  f requent  and  less  intense , ceases  to  continue
after  the  lapse  of  fourteen , ten,  or  seven  days  ; when  it
becomes,  therefore , evident  that  the  medicine  has  ceased
to  act,  the  condition  of  the  mind  is  the  same  as  before,
and  no  new  or  troublesome  symptoms  have  made  their
appearance.  All  this  would  show  that  the  same  remedy
is  again  indicated  ”

To  secure  the  second  dose  a stronger  action  upon  the
disease,*  it  would  be  expedient  to  exhibit  the  same  rem-
edy in  a lower  potency,  the  dose  being  of  the  same  mag-
nitude.! By  way  of  example,  I may  state  that  the  erup-
tion of  the  itch  is  one  of  those  diseases  which  admit  more
readily  than  other  diseases  of  an  immediate  repetition
of  the  remedy,  (sulphur,)  but  only  when  the  eruption  is
quite  recent;  for,  in  this  case,  it  has  somewhat  the  nature


* If  the  remedy  is  perfectly  homoeopathic,  it  may  be  dis-
solved in  about  four  ounces  of  water,  bv  stirring  it  ; one-
third  of  this  solution  is  taken  immediately*  the  second
third  in  the  morning  on  rising,  and  the  last  third  the
next  day  ; the  solution  may  be  stirred  at  each  swallow,
by  which  means  the  inherent  power  of  the  drug  becomes
more  developed.  This  mode  of  exhibiting  the  remedy
seems  to  secure  it  greater  supremacy  over  the  organism,  in
persons  that  are  not  too  irritable  or  weak.

f If  the  30th  degree  have  been  chosen  first,  the  ISth
may  be  used  next  ; then  the  24th,  after  this  the  12th,  or
6th,  etc.  j these  lower  degrees  are  chosen  when  the  chronic
disease  has  assumed  an  acute  character.  It  mav  also  occur
that  the  action  of  the  remedy  has  been  interrupted,  and
perhaps  destroyed,  by  some  important  transgression  of  the
dietetic  rules,  or  some  other  cause  ; in  this  case,  if  the
above-named  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  same  remedy  may
he  repeated.


162


of  an  acute  disease,  and  exhausts  the  curative  power  of  a
remedy  in  a shorter  space  of  time  ; in  six,  eight,  or  ten
days.  The  second  dose  of  the  same  remedy  is  to  be
given  in  the  same  quantity,  but  in  a different  degree  of
potency.  Sometimes  such  a modification  in  the  symp-
toms may  occur,  as  will  make  it  necessary  to  alternate
the  sulphur  with  hepar  sulphuris.  If  several  doses  of
this  latter  remedy  should  be  required,  they  are  to  be  given
in  different  degrees  of  potency,  though  always  of  the
same  magnitude.  Sometimes  even  a dose  of  nux  vomi-
ca X.,  or  of  mercury  x.,*  may  have  to  be  given  as  an  in-
termediate remedy.

Sulphur,  hepar  sulphuris,  and  sepia  excepted,  the  other
anti-psorics  seldom  admit  of  a favourable  repetition  of  the
same  drug.  This  repetition  is,  moreover,  unnecessary
on  account  of  the  great  number  of  anti-psorics  which  we
possess.  One  anti-psoric  having  fulfilled  its  object,  the
modified  series  of  symptoms  generally  requires  a differ-
ent remedy.  To  repeat  the  same  remedy  for  these  mo-
dified symptoms  would  be  a censurable  piece  of  daring.
In  cases  of  disease,  which  have  been  mismanaged  by
alloeopathic  practice,  it  is  often  necessary  to  give  at  in-
tervals sulphur  or  hepar  sulphuris,  according  as  either
remedy  is  indicated.  These  remedies  ought  to  be  given,
even  when  the  patients  had  taken  much  sulphur,  or  had
used  sulphur-baths  ; in  such  cases,  however,  a dose
of  mercury  X.  ought  to  be  given  first,  before  the  sulphur
is  exhibited.

Several  anti-psorics  are  generally  required  for  the  cure
of  a chronic  disease.  If  the  physician  alternates  his  re-
medies in  rapid  succession,  this  is  a sure  sign  that  he
has  not  chosen  his  remedies  with  strict  reference  to  their
homoeopathic  action,  or  has  but  carelessly  studied  the
existing  series  of  symptoms.  The  homoeopathic  physi-
cian is  very  apt  to  commit  this  mistake  in  urging  cases
of  both  chronic  and  acute  diseases,  especially  when  the


* It  is  a matter  of  course  that  the  psoric  patient  should
carefully  avoid,  during  the  treatment,  the  use  of  washes,
brown  soap,  etc.


163


patient  is  dear  to  him.  The  practitioner  cannot  be  suf-
ficiently on  his  guard  against  this  practice.

Bv  mismanagement  like  this,  the  patient’s  system  be-
comes so  irritated  that  remedial  agents  seem  to  lose  all
their  power  over  it,*  and  that  the  least  medicinal  influ-
ence is  sufficient  to  extinguish  completely  the  last  spark
of  irritability.  Under  these  circumstances  medicines
cease  to  be  useful ; but  mesmeric  action  may  succeed  in
calming  the  system.  Let  the  palm  of  both  your  hands
rest  for  about  a minute  upon  the  vertex  ; then  move
them  slowly  down  the  body,  across  the  neck,  shoulders,
arms,  hands,  knees,  legs,  feet,  and  toes.  This  pass  may
be  repeated.

Beside  these  passes,  the  irritability  of  the  patient  may
also  be  soothed  by  directing  him  to  smell  of  a globule
moistened  with  the  highest  potency  of  the  homoeopathic
remedy.  This  globule  is  kept  in  a corked  vial,  the  mouth
of  which  being  inserted  in  one  of  the  nares,  the  patient
takes  one  quick  inspiration. t By  smelling  of  the  medi-
cine the  influence  of  any  medicine  may  be  communicated
to  the  patient  in  any  degree.  There  may  be  one  or
more  globules  in  the  vial.  Bv  increasing  the  number  of
inspirations  the  power  of  the  medicine  may  be  increased
a hundred  fold.  The  remedy  acts  just  as  powerfully  by
communicating  its  medicinal  influence  to  the  system
through  the  nasal  fossa  and  the  lungs,  as  if  a dose  of  the
remedy  had  been  swallowed.

Such  globules,  when  they  are  kept  in  corked  vials,  and
protected  from  heat  and  sunshine,  often  preserve  their


* I have  never  seen  a properly  chosen  homoeopathic  re-
medy producing  no  effect,  when  the  treatment  is  properly
conducted.  Such  a thing  appears  to  me  impossible.

f This  mode  of  inspiring  the  imperceptible  emanations
from  the  globule  contained  in  the  vial,  benefits  those  who  are
born  without  the  sense  of  smell,  or  who  had  lost  it,  as  much
as  those  who  are  endowed  with  the  finest  olfactory  appara-
tus. We  may  infer  from  this  that  the  general  nerves  of
sensation  receive  the  impression  of  the  remedial  agent,  and
transmit  that  impression  to  the  whole  nervous  system.


164


medicinal  power  for  years.  This  kind  of  smelling  of
the  remedy  has  great  advantages  in  t he  many  accidents
which  often  interrupt  and  prevent  the  cure.  'To  neutral-
ize the  consequences  of  such  accidents  the  patient  may
smell  of  the  antidote.  By  this  means  it  acts  more  pow-
erfully upon  the  nerves,  and  affords  the  greatest  use  ;
moreover,  it  does  not  establish  any  medicinal  influence
in  the  system  which  might  be  in  the  way  of  a cure.
When  the  accident  lias  been  relieved  by  the  process  of
smelling,  it  often  happens  that  the  anti-psoric  remedy,
which  had  been  given  before  the  accident  occurred,  con-
tinues to  act  for  a certain  time.  To  obtain  ihis  result
for  certain,  the  inspirations  and  the  number  of  the  glo-
bules must  be  regulated  with  the  greatest  care,  so  as  to
prevent  any  undue  medicinal  action  being  created  in  the
organism.

If  the  patient  should  wish  to  take  medicine  every  day,*


* No  popular  habit,  were  it  ever  so  injurious,  can  be  abol-
ished all  at  once.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  homoeopathic
physician  cannot  avoid  giving  to  his  patients  a powder  < very
day;  though  this  appeal's  considerable,  nevertheless,  there
is  a good  deal  of  difference  between  this  daily  administra-
tion of  a powder  and  the  alloeopathic  practice.  It  is  a
great  blessing  for  the  patient,  in  taking  these  powders,
marked  with  successive  numbers,  especially  when  he  has
been  predisposed  against  the  more  rational  method  of  cure
by  the  artful  insinuations  of  calumniators,  not  to  be  able  to
distinguish  the  powders  containing  the  medicine  from  those
containing  the  pure  sugar  of  milk.  If  he  knew  that  the
medicine,  of  which  he  expects  such  brilliant  results,  is
contained  in  anv  particular  powder,  he  would  often  b im-
posed upon  by  his  fancy  ; he  would  imagine  to  experience
effects  which  he  would  set  down  as  real,  and  he  won I I be
in  a constant  state  of  excitement.  By  the  system  which  I
propose,  all  these  disagreeable  consequences,  are  avoided.
The  patient,  who  knows  from  experience  that  he  need  not
expect  any  painful  effects  from  the  medicine  he  takes,
calmly  observes  the  changes  which  are  rcalh  going  on  in  his
system,  and  reports  to  his  physician  facts,  and  not  illusions.
By  taking  a powder  every  day,  the  patient  will  expect  the


165


the  homoeopathic  physician  may  give  him  every  day  a
dose  of  sugar  of  milk  of  about  three  grains,  all  these
powders  being  marked  with  successive  numbers.* *  The
sugar  of  milk  is  admirably  adapted  to  this  kind  of  inno-
cent deception. t

If  the  most  troublesome  symptoms  of  a chronic  dis-
ease, such  as  old,  constant,  acute  pains,  spasms  or


same  effects  from  each.  Of  course,  he  ought  not  to  know
whether  any  or  all  of  the  powders  contain  medicine.

* Patients  who  have  firm  confidence  in  the  honesty  and
skill  of  their  physician,  will  have  no  hesitation  to  be  satisfied
with  a dose  of  sugar  of  milk,  which  may  be  exhibited  every
two,  four,  or  seven  days,  agreeably  to  the  wishes  of  the  pa-
tient ; such  a course  will  never  lessen  their  confidence.

■j'  There  are  hypercritical  homoeopathic  physicians  who
were  afraid  that  even  the  sugar  of  milk  might  obtain  medi-
cinal  qualities  from  being  long  kept  in  a bottle,  or  from  long
trituration.  Long-continued  experiments  have  convinced
me  that  this  apprehension  is  unfounded.  Both  the  raw  and
the  prepared  sugar  of  milk  may  be  taken  as  nourishment  in
considerable  quantity  without  the  least  disagreeable  symp-
toms being  experienced  from  it.  Fears  have  also  been  en-
tertained that,  in  triturating  the  medicinal  substance  in  a
porcelain  mortar,  particles  might  become  detached  from  this
latter,  and  that  the  triturating  process  might  change  them  to
powerfully  active  silicea,  (f.)  To  ascertain  whether  such
fears  were  founded,  I caused  one  hundred  grains  of  sugar  of
milk  to  be  triturated  with  a new  porcelain  pestle  in  a porce-
lain mortar,  the  bottom  of  which  had  been  recently  polished  ;
thirty-three  grains  were  taken  at  a time.  They  underwent
the  process  of  trituration  eighteen  times,  each  trituration  last-
ing six  minutes.  Every  four  minutes  the  mass  was  stirred  up
with  a spatula.  The  object  of  this  frequently  repeated  tri-
turation, which  lasted  in  all  three  hours,  was  to  impart  me-
dicinal qualities,  either  to  the  sugar  of  milk,  or,  at  any  rate,
to  the  particles  of  silicea  which  might  have  been  separated
from  the  mortar  ; but,  from  experiments  which  I have  made'
upon  highly  susceptible  subjects,  I have  been  obliged  to  infer
that  the  prepared  sugar  of  milk  is  no  more  medicinal  than
the  sugar  in  its  raw  state;  its  only  quality  is  that  of  being
nutritious.


7*


166


cramps,  etc.,  disappear  speedily  and  entirely,  as  if  by
magic,  to  such  a degree  as  to  make  the  patient  suppose
that  he  is  entirely  free  from  pain,  and  has  almost  recov-
ered,  this  is  no  reason  why  the  physician  should  flatter
himself,  that  he  has  chosen  an  anti-psoric  which  will  cer-
tainly promote  the  cure.  This  deceptive  success  shows
that  the  medicine  has  acted  enantiopathically,  as  a mere
contrarium  or  palliative,  and  that  a considerable  exacer-
bation of  the  original  disease  will  shortly  show  itself.
As  soon  as  this  exacerbation  sets  in,  it  becomes  neces-
sary either  to  give  the  antidote  of  the  previous  remedy,
or  else,  in  case  no  such  antidote  should  be  known,  to
pathically.  Such  antipathic  medicines  seldom  pro-
duce good  effects  after  an  exacerbation  has  taken  place.
Some  medicines  produce  effects  and  counter-effects.  In
this  case,  after  an  exacerbation  has  taken  place,  a se-
cond dose  of  the  same  remedy  may  be  given,  which,
by  its  antipathic  action,  will  produce  a permanent  im-
provement. I know  this  to  be  the  case  with  ignatia.

The  exacerbation  which  is  consequent  upon  an  antipa-
thic remedy,  may  sometimes  be  removed  by  means  of
a remedy  which  may  be  chosen  to  that  effect  from  the
materia  medica,  the  archives  of  the  homoeopathic  art,
or  the  annals.  In  a few  days,  the  psoric  disease  will
resume  its  original  form,  when  a new  anti-psoric  may  be
■given.

The  following  are  some  of  the  accidents  by  which
the  cure  of  chronic  diseases  may  be  temporarily  dis-
turbed : immoderate  eating,  the  effects  of  which  may
be  remedied  by  eating  thin  broth  and  taking  a little  cof-
fee ; derangement,  of  the  stomach  by  eating  fat  meat,
especially  pork,  (cured  by  fasting  and  pulsatilla  ;)  de-
rangement of  the  stomach  producing  eructations  tast-
ing of  the  ingesta ; nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit  (by
the  highest  potency  of  antimonium  crudum  ;)  coldness
of  the  stomach,  consequent  upon  eating  fruit,  (by  smell-
ing of  arsenic  ;)  troublesome  consequences  of  using
spirituous  drinks,  (by  nux  vomica  ;)  derangement  of  the
stomach  with  gastric  fever,  chills  and  coldness,  (by  bry -


167


o nia  ;)  fright,  (cured  by  opium , if  this  remedy  can  be
administered  immediately,  and  especially  incases  where
fearfulness  is  consequent  upon  fright ; if  the  physician
is  called  in  late,  or,  if  chagrin  and  fright  are  combined,
aconite  may  be  exhibited  ; ignatia  ought  to  be  exhibit-
ed when  the  fright  is  succeeded  by  sorrow  ;)  vexation
producing  anger,  vehemence,  an  irritated  state  of  mind,
peevishness,  (by  chamomile ; if  this  peevishness  is
combined  with  chills  and  coldness,  give  bryonia  ;)  irri-
tation combined  with  indignation,  deep  internal  grief,
(when  the  patient  throws  aside  those  things  which  he
was  just  holding  in  his  hands,  by  staphysagria  ;)  in-
dignation with  silent  internal  grief,  (by  colocynthis  ;)
unhappy  love,  with  silent  grief,  (by  ignatia  ;)  unhappy
love  with  jealousy,  (by  hyosciamus  ;)  a violent  cold,  the
patient  being  confined  to  his  room  or  bed,  (by  nux  vom-
ica ;)  when  the  cold  produces  diarrhoea,  give  dulcamara  ;
when  the  cold  excites  pain,  give  coffea  cruda  ; cold
with  fever  and  heat,  (by  aconite  ;)  cold,  accompanied
with  suffocating  fits,  (by  ipecacuanha  ;)  cold  with  sub-
sequent pain  and  a desire  to  weep,  (by  coffea  cruda;)
cold,  inducing  a loss  of  smell  and  taste,  (by  pulsatilla  ;)
straining  in  consequence  of  lifting  or  walking,  (by  ar-
nica, but  with  more  certainty  by  rhus  toxicodendron.  ;)
contusions  and  wounds  inflicted  by  blunt  substances,  (by
arnica  ;)  burning  of  the  skin,  (by  applications  of  water
mixed  with  arsenic  of  the  higher  degrees  of  potency,
or  by  applying  for  hours  spirits  of  wine  which  have
been  heated  in  very  hot  water  ;)  weakness  consequent
upon  the  loss  of  blood  or  humours,  (by  cinchona ;)
home-sickness  with  redness  of  the  cheeks,  (by  capsi-
cum.)

During  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  we  are  of-
ten required  to  use  the  other  non-anti-psoric  remedies
Constituting  our  materia  medica.  This  is  especially  the
case,  when  the  patient  is  attacked  with  one  of  those
intermediate  diseases  ( morhi  inter  cur  rentes,)  which  owe
their  origin  either  to  malaria  or  meteoric  influences.
By  these  diseases  the  anti-psoric  treatment  is  not  only
disturbed,  but  positively  interrupted v,  If  bur  patient


168


should  be  attacked  with  such  an  epidemic  or  sporadic
disease,  the  anti-psoric  treatment  ought  to  be  entirely  sus-
pended as  long  as  that  disease  lasts  ; the  cure  of  this  dis-
ease may  sometimes  require  several  weeks.  If  the  inter-
mediate attack  is  not  too  violent,  the  cure  may  sometimes
be  considerably  abbreviated  by  causing  the  patient  to
smell  of  the  homoeopathic  non-anli-psoric  remedy  ;
smelling  is  sometimes  sufficient  to  produce  recovery.

An  intelligent  homoeopathic  practitioner  will  easily
observe  the  period  when  the  intermediate  disease*  has


* These  intermediate  diseases  are  generally  fevers,  a
continuous  acute  fever,  a slow  remittent,  or  an  intermittent
fever  ; they  may  also  be  one  of  the  permanent  miasms,
small-pox,  measles,  dysentery,  hooping-cough,  etc.  Inter-
mittent fevers  occur  almost  every  year  in  a somewhat  mod-
ified form.  Ever  since  I discovered  and  practised  the  suc-
cessful treatment  of  chronic  diseases  by  means  of  anti-
psoric  remedies,  I have  observed  that  intermittent  fevers
appear  every  year  in  a more  or  less  modified  form  both  as
regards  character  and  symptoms.  The  treatment  had  to
be  varied  accordingly.  Arsenic,  belladonna,  antimonium
crudum,  spigelia,  aconite,  nux  in  alternation  with  ipeca-
cuanha, sal  ammoniacum,  natrum  muriaticum,  opium,  cina,
either  alone  or  in  alternation  with  capsicum,  or  capsicum
only,  menyanthes  trifoliata,  calcarea  carbonica,  pulsatilla,
carbo  vegetabilis  or  animalis,  arnica,  or  arnica  in  alter-
nation with  ipecacuanha,  etc.,  have  been  used  in  different
years,  and  effected  a cure  in  a few  days.  I do  not  wish  to
exclude  any  of  the  other  non-anti-psoric  remedies  provided
they  are  indicated  by  the  totality  of  the  symptoms  in  the
beginning  as  well  as  in  the  apyrexia  of  the  symptoms,  (See  :
Von  Bonninghausen,  Essay  on  the  Homoeopathic  Treatment
of  Intermittent  Fevers,  1833,  Mu  ister  ) I should  except,
however,  cinchona.  To  suppress  the  lype  of  an  intermit-
tent fever  by  means  of  cinchona,  large  doses  of  this  drug
are  required,  even  in  its  concentrated  form,  quinine;  such
large  doses  establish  in  the  system  an  artificial  morbid
action  which  it  is  difficult  to  cure.  Cinchona  is  only  ho-
moeopathic against  theendemic  intermittent  fevers  of  marshy
regions  ; nevertheless  they  can  only  be  cured  by  cinchona


169


left  the  patient,  and  the  primitive  chronic  disease  has
resumed  its  course.

It  frequently  happens  that,  after  the  intermediate  dis-
ease has  left  the  patient,  the  symptoms  of  the  original
chronic  disease  appear  a little  modified  ; sometimes
even  other  parts  of  the  body  manifest  morbid  symptoms.
his  remedy  with  strict  regard  to  the  existing  symptoms,
and  will  not  give  a remedy  which  he  may  have  ima-
gined to  be  the  proper  remedy,  before  a careful  exami-
nation had  been  instituted.

Sometimes  the  physician  is  called  to  a patient  affected
with  this  intermediate  disease,  whom  he  had  never
before  treated  as  a chronic  patient.  The  fever  having
been  subdued  by  those  specific  remedies  which  had
been  found  available  with  other  patients,  the  physician
may  nevertheless  not  be  able  to  procure  complete  re-
covery in  spite  of  the  most  regular  diet  and  mode  of
life.  Other  troublesome  symptoms  (generally  called
after -symptoms,  after-diseases)  will  appear  and  will
threaten  to  become  chronic.  These  symptoms  indicate
the  development  of  an  internal  psoric  disease,  and  have
to  be  removed  according  to  the  principles  taught  in  this
work.


in  conjunction  Vith  the  anti-psorics.  In  epidemic  inter-
mittent fevers  the  treatment  should  always  begin  with  a
dose  of  highly-dynamised  sulphur,  or  hepar  sulphuris,  if  this
remedy  should  be  indicated.  This  medicine  should  be  per-
mitted to  act  until  no  farther  improvement  is  observed.
In  a few  days  after  the  sulphur  had  been  administered,  the
physician  exhibits  the  non-anti-psoric  remedy  which  is  in-
dicated by  the  character  of  the  prevailing  epidemic  ; one
or  two  doses  may  be  exhibited,  always  after  the  termination
of  the  attack.  Sulphur  or  hepar  sulphuris  are  exhibited
before  any  other  remedy  is  given,  for  this  reason,  that  all
epidemic  intermittent  fevers  chiefly  owe  their  existence  to
the  psoric  miasm.  The  previous  action  of  sulphur  or  hepar
sulphuris  makes  the  subsequent  treatment  so  much  more
safe  and  easy.


170

1 mav  here  observe  that  the  great  epidemic  diseases,
such  as  : small-pox,  measles,  purpura,  scarlatina,  hoop-
ing-cough, fall-dysentery,  and  other  typhoid  fevers,  if
they  are  improperly  treated,  and  are  permitted  to  com-
plete their  course,  shake  the  organism  so  thoroughly,
that  the  latent  psoric  miasm  becomes  roused  in  such
patients  and  gives  origin  to  cutaneous  eruptions,*  or  to
other  chronic  affections.  Owing  to  the  exhausted  state
of  the  organism,  they  often  reach  a high  degree  of  in-
tensity in  a short  while.  If  the  patient  should  then  die
in  spite  of  all  the  drugs  which  the  alloeopathic  physician
gives  him,  the  doctor  declares  that  the  patient  has  died
of  the  effects  of  hooping-cough,  measles,  etc.

These  effects  are  nothing  more  than  the  visible  con-
sequences of  the  latent  psoric  miasm  which  may  mani-
fest itself  in  innumerable  forms,  and  which  never  had
been  cured  on  account  of  its  nature  and  mode  of  action
having  been  unknown  heretofore.

The  physician  may  now  feel  convinced  that  epidemic
and  sporadic  fevers,  as  well  as  miasmatic  acute  diseases,
unless  the  patient  recovers  from  both  the  diseases  and
their  effects  in  a short  while,  require  an  anti-psoric
after-treatment,  even  if  a homoeopathic  specific  rem-
edy should  have  been  discovered  and  successfully  em-
ployed against  them.  For  this  purpose  the  best  anti-
psoric  is  sulphur.  This  may  only  be  given  in  case  the
patient  should  not  have  been  put  upon  the  use  of  that
drug  previously,  if  this  should  have  been  the  case,  an-
other anti-psoric  must  be  selected.

* If  these  eruptions  are  numerous,  authors  call  them
scabies  spontanea , (self-originating  itch.)  This  is  a mere
chimera,  a monstrum  ; the  itch  has  originated,  time  out  of
mind,  in  a contagious  miasm,  and  cannot  now  originate
without  being  caught.  The  so-called  scabies  spontanea  is
merely  the  secondary  phenomenal  development  of  the
internal  psoric  miasm,  whose  first  manifestation  upon  the
skin  had  either  been  repelled  by  external  applications  or
had  gradually  disappeared  of  itself.  This  scabies  spon-
tanea often  leaves  the  skin  again  very  quickly  ; vve  know
not  whether  it  is  contagious.


171


The  strikingly  obstinate  character  of  endemic  disj
eases  is  due  to  some  psoric  complication,  or  the  action
of  the  psoric  miasm  modified  by  the  peculiar  influence
of  the  locality  and  the  peculiar  mode  of  life  of  its  inhab-
itants. This  is  the  reason  why  people  from  marshy
regions,  in  spite  of  cinchona,  drag  their  intermittent  fe-
vers even  to  healthier  parts  of  the  country,  and  do  not
recover  till  they  have  undergone  an  anti-psoric  treat-
ment. It  is  to  the  anti-psoric  treatment  that  their  re-
covery is  chiefly  due.  The  marshy  exhalations,  espe-
cially of  hot  countries,  appear  to  be  one  of  the  most  pow-
erful excitants  of  the  psoric  miasm  which  is  latent  in
the  system  ;*)  without  resorting  to  a thorough  anti-
psoric  treatment,  damp  regions,  so  far  from  being  in-
habitable, will  exercise  a life-endangering  influence.
Man  may  accustom  himself  to  the  highest  as  well  as  the
, lowest  temperature  ; in  both  these  temperatures  he  may
be  cheerful  and  healthy  ; why  should  he  not  become
acclimated  in  marshy  regions  as  well  as  upon  dry  moun-
tains, if  there  were  not  some  secret  enemy  lying  in  am-
bush, whose  energies  are  roused  into  fatal  action  by
the  influence  of  marshy  regions  to  the  prejudice  of  all
new  settlers?  This  secret  enemy  is  the  psoric  miasm.
By  stagnant  waters  and  by  the  vapours  which  warm  air
causes  to  exhale  from  the  damp  or  swampy  soil,  the
psoric  miasm  is  more  certainly  and  more  irresistibly
roused  than  by  any  other  physical  influence,  and  is  then
developed  into  chronic  diseases  of  all  kinds,  and  espe-
cially such  as  affect  the  liver.

The  symptoms  which  have  been  recently  developed
by  the  inherent  action  of  the  psoric  miasm,  without
having  been  superadded  by  the  mismanagement  of  the
doctor,  are  the  first  to  yield  to  the  action  of  the  anti-


* The  reason  probably  is,  because  those  exhalations  pos-
sess the  power  of  paralyzing  the  vital  forces  of  the  organ-
ism and  predispose  this  for  the  so-called  putrid,  and  for
nervous  fevers.  While  in  their  normal  state,  the  vital
forces  are  able  to  keep  down  the  psoric  miasm  which  al-
ways strives  to  get  the  upper  hand.


172


psorics  ; the  older  symptoms  which  have  permanently
existed  disappear  the  last.  Of  this  number  are  the  lo-
cal affections.  These  local  symptoms  only  disappear
after  the  general  health  has  been  completely  restored.
The  general  symptoms  which  show  themselves  period-
ically, hysteria,  the  different  forms  of  epilepsy,  etc.,  may
easily  be  suppressed  by  a suitable  anti-psoric  ; but  the
complete  and  permanent  removal  of  those  symptoms
presupposes  the  radical  cure  of  the  whole  of  the  inter-
nal psoric  miasm.

'The  patient  sometimes  desires  his  physician  to  cure
a certain  troublesome  symptom  first  of  all  ; this  cannot
be  done,  though  the  ignorant  patient  may  be  excused
for  having  made  such  a foolish  request.

If  the  patient  lives  at  a distance  from  his  physician,
the  patient  ought  to  be  directed  to  underline  in  his
written  report  both  those  older  symptoms  which  had  ,
been  suppressed  for  a time,  and  which  have  now  re-
appeared ; and  all  new  symptoms  which  have  come  out
this  very  day.  The  former  symptoms  are  underlined
once , the  latter  twice.  The  former  symptoms  show  that
the  anti-psoric  remedy  has  attacked  the  disease  in  its
foundation,  and  will  be  of  great  service  in  the  radical
cure  of  the  disease  ; the  latter  symptoms,  on  the  contrary,
if  inordinately  developed,  inform  the  physician  that  the
anti-psoric  remedy  is  not  quite  homoeopathic,  and  ought
to  be  replaced  by  a better  one.

About  the  period  when  the  cure  is  half  completed,
the  psoric  miasm  begins  to  become  again  latent ; the
symptoms  decrease  more  and  more,  until,  at  last,  mere
vestiges  of  the  psoric  miasm  are  perceptible  to  the  acute
observer.  But  these  too  must  be  eradicated,  for  the
least  remains  of  a germ  may  eventually  reproduce  the
full  d isease.*  If  we  were  to  rely  upon  the  disease  cur-
ing itself,  as  common  people  and  even  the  better  classes


* In  the  same  way,  a polypus  in  the  water,  though  seve-
ral of  its  branches  may  have  been  cut  off,  produces  new
branches  in  the  course  of  time.


A


173

of  the  public  do,  we  should  be  very  much  mistake!?.
For,  little  by  little  a new  chronic  disease  is  developed
out  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  psoric  miasm,  and
gradually  conquers  the  organism.

The  patient  may  legitimately  expect  that  he  should
be  treated  by  any  physician,  especially,  however,  the
homoeopathic  doctor,  according  to  the  principle  of  Cel-
sus,  “ tuto,  cito  et  jucunde, 77  (safely,  speedily  and  agree-
ably.) This  principle  ought  to  hold  good  both  in  acute
diseases  originating  in  occasional  causes,  as  well  as  in
those  periodical  diseases  which  we  designate  by  the
term  intercurrent  (morbi  inlercurrentes.)

As  regards  the  short,  duration  of  the  treatment  of  in-
veterate chronic  diseases,  this  is  made  imp'ossible  by
the  nature  of  the  malady.*

A great  chronic  disease  may  be  cured  in  the  space
of  one  or  two  years,  provided  it  has  not.  been  misman-
aged by  allceopathic  treatment  to  the  extent  of  having
become  incurable.  One  or  two  years  ought  to  be  con-
sidered a short  treatment.  In  young  robust  persons
hall  this  space  of  time  is  sufficient;  in  older  people,  on
the  contrary,  this  period  has  to  be  considerably  pro-
longed, in  spite  of  the  greatest,  care  on  the  part  of  the
doctor,  and  the  strictest  obedience  on  the  part  of  the
patient.  If  the  patient  consider  that  the  psoric  miasm,
which  the  doctor  is  called  upon  to  cure,  without,  how-
ever, affecting  the  organism,  has  gradually  ramified  into
its  inmost  recesses,  then  the  patient  will  easily  under-
stand why  the  strictest  mode  of  life  on  his  own  part,
and  the  greatest  attention  on  the  part  of  the  doctor
should  be  required  for  a long  period  of  time,  in  order  to


* No  one  but  an  ignorant  quack  can  promise  to  cure  an
inveterate  chronic  disease  in  four  or  six  weeks.  He  does
not  consider  himself  bound  to  keep  bis  word.  He  risks
nothing  by  making  the  disease  worse  by  his  treatment,
(’an  he  lose  any  thing?  Honour  perhaps?  Indeed  not,
for  his  colleagues  act  like  him.  But  conscience?  Alas,
is  not  his  conscience  already  lost  ?


174


master  this  parasitical  enemy  that  had  assailed  the  most
delicate  roots  of  the  tree  of  life.

Jf  the  anti-psoric  treatment  be  properly  conducted,  the
strength  of  the  patient  ought  to  increase  from  the  very
beginning  of  the  treatment.  This  increase  of  strength
will  continue  during  the  whole  treatment,  until  the  or-
ganism is  completely  freed  from  the  enemy,  and  unfolds
anew  its  regenerate  life.*

The  best  time  for  taking  an  anti-psoric  remedy  is  in
the  morning  before  breakfast ; the  evening  is  less  appro-
priate. rFhe  powder  may  either  be  taken  dry  upon  the
tongue,  (in  this  case  the  medicine  acts  less  powerfully,)
and  is  kept  upon  the  tongue  until  it  is  dissolved  ; or  else
it  may  be  moistened  in  a tea-spoon  with  two  or  three
drops  of  water,  and  taken  in  this  fashion.  The  patient
should  wait  an  hour,  or  at  least  half  an  hour,  after  having
taken  the  medicine  before  eating  or  drinking  any  thing.!
The  other  powders  are  to  be  marked  with  successive
numbers  4


* It  is  inconceivable  that  allceopathic  doctors  should  have
continually  assailed  the  organism  in  the  treatment  of  chronic
diseases,  without  having  ever  been  deterred  by  their  bad
success.  The  intermediate  use  of  amara  joined  to  cinchona,
induces  new  affections  without  doing  any  good.

f To  increase  the  effect  of  the  remedy,  it  may  be  dissolved
in  a larger  quantity  of  water ; this  quantity  may  still  be  aug-
mented, if  it  is  desired  that  the  effect  should  be  increased
still  more.  The  solution  may  be  divided  into  several  parts,
one  part  being  taken  every  two  or  three  days.  Every  time
when  a part  is  taken,  the  solution  is  stirred  up  again  ; by
this  means  the  solution  increases  in  potency,  and  becomes
more  closely  related  to  the  disease.  It  is  not  advisable  to
give  of  the  same  solution  for  several  days  to  come,  for  the
reason  that  the  water  begins  to  spoil,  if  kept  too  long.  I
have  shown  above,  how  a dose  is  prepared  for  smelling  in
the  various  degrees  of  potency.

^ This  marking  of  the  powders  with  successive  numbers
has  the  advantage  of  enabling  the  physician  to  measure  the
effect  which  the  medicine  has  produced.  To  accomplish


175


After  having  taken  the  medicine,  the  patient  ought  to
remain  quiet  for  an  hour,  without  sleeping,  however,
(sleep  retards  the  first  effect  of  the  medicine.)  During
this  hour,  as  well  as  during  the  whole  time  of  the  treat-
ment, the  patient  ought  to  avoid  all  contrary  emotions,
nor  ought,  he  to  fatigue  his  mind  either  by  reading,  or
cyphering,  writing,  or  by  conversations  that  require
much  attention.

The  .anti-psoric  medicine  should  neither  be  taken  im-
mediately before,  nor  during  the  period  of  the  menses  ;
it  may,  however,  be  taken  on  the  fourth  day,  about  nine-
ty-six hours  after  their  appearance.  If  the  menses  ap-
pear too  soon,  are  too  abundant, or  last  too  long,  the  patient
may,  on  the  fourth  day,  smell  of  a globule  of  the  highest
potency  of  nux  vomica  ; four,  five,  or  six  days  after  this,
the  anti-psoric  maybe  taken.  If  the  female  be  extremely
irritable  and  nervous,  she  ought  to  smell  of  such  a glo-
bule, even  during  the  anti-psoric  treatment,  seventy-two
hours  after  every  appearance  of  the  menses.* *

Pregnancy  in  every  stage,  so  far  from  being  an  obsta-
cle to  an  anti-psoric  treatment,  makes  it,  on  the  contrary,
essentially  necessary,  and  offers  a brilliant  sphere  of  ac-
tion to  anti-psoric  remedies.!


this,  the  patient  must  prefix  to  every  report  the  number  of
the  powder  and  the  date  when  he  took  it.  By  this  means
the  physician  is  enabled  to  compare  the  different  reports.

* In  such  irritable  and  nervous  patients,  whose  menstrual
functions  are  deranged,  the  anti-psorics  would  not  do  the
least  good,  without  the  intermediate  use  of  nux  vomica.
Nux  is  especially  adapted  to  restore  in  such  patients  the
harmony  of  the  nervous  functions,  and  to  calm  that  exces-
sive irritability  which  would  be  an  insurmountable  obstacle
to  the  curative  action  of  anti-psoric  remedies.

f Is  there  a more  adequate  means  to  prevent  the  return
of  miscarriage,  which  originates  almost  exclusively  in  a pso-
ric  habit,  except  an  anti-psoric  treatment  either  before  or
during  pregnancy?  In  what  way  can  we  more  effectually
prevent  the  fatal  circumstances  which  so  often  occur  to  the
parturient  woman,  in  spite  of  a proper  presentation  and  na-


176

During  pregnancy  the  anti-psoric  treatment  is  more
necessary  than  at  any  other  period,  because  then  the
chronic  ailments  are  more  fully  developed,  the  organ-
ism and  the  mind  of  the  pregnant  female  being  highly
susceptible  of  receiving  impressions.  During  the  period
of  pregnancy  which  is  altogether  an  essential  and  na-
tural condition  of  the  female — the  action  of  anti-psoric
remedies  during  that  period  is  more  marked  and  pre-
cise.* * This  should  be  a warning  to  the  physician  to
reduce  his  doses  as  much  as  possible,  and  to  employ
only  the  highest  potencies.

Sucklings  never  are  given  any  medicine.  The  mother
or  nurse  lakes  the  remedy  which  is  intended  for  the
baby  ; the  medicinal  effect  is  conveyed  by  the  milk  in  a
sufficient  degree.

When  in  chronic  diseases  the  vital  force  is  left  to  itself,
it  is  only  capable  ol  shielding  itself  by  palliatives  against
the  pernicious  assaults  of  the  psoric  miasm,  and  the
acute  diseases  which  that  miasm  develops  from  time
to  time.  Such  palliatives  are  the  frequent  secretions
and  evacuations  which  spontaneously  occur  in  chronic
diseases,  diarrhoeas,  vomitings,  sweats,  ulcers,  hemor-
rhages, etc.  All  such  palliatives  produce  only  an  appa-


tural  labour,  than  bv  a timely  anti-psoric  treatment  during
pregnancy  ? Is  not  the  unnatural  presentation  of  the  child
frequently  owing  to  the  psoric  habit  of  the  mother?  Hy-
drocephalus and  other  defects  of  the  child  always  originate
in  psora.  Bv  subjecting  the  female  to  an  anti-psoric  treat-
ment either  before  or  during  pregnancy,  her  incapacity  for
suckling  her  baby  will  be  removed  : soreness  of  the  nipples;
soreness,  abscesses,  and  ervsipelatous  inflammation  of  the
mammae,  and  all  uterine  hemorrhages  consequent  upon
weaning,  are  removed.

* The  reverse  is  sometimes  the  case.  'The  female,  who  is
constantly  weak  and  complaining  when  she  is  not  pregnant,
sometimes  enjoys  excellent  health  during  pregnanev.  Also
in  this  condition  of  things  anti-psoric  remedies  act  very  well.
They  ought  to  be  given  against  the  symptoms  which  existed
before  pregnancy.


177


rent  alleviation  of  the  primitive  malady  ; and,  in  fact,  in-
crease it  on  account  of  the  great  loss  of  nutritious  hu-
mours which  the  patient  has  suffered.

The  alloeopathic  practice  has  been  just  as  powerless
in  the  treatment  of  chronic  diseases  as  unaided  nature.
All  that  this  practice  has  been  able  to  accomplish,  ha3
been,  to  imitate  the  palliating  process  of  nature,  with  this
difference,  that  the  artificial  secretions  consequent  upon
alloeopathic  drugs,  inflict  much  greater  losses  upon  the
organism  than  natural  evacuations  do.  So  far  from  di-
minishing the  primitive  disease,  the  alloeopathic  practice,
on  the  contrary,  favours  the  universal  rum  by  its  pre-
tended dissolvants,  purgatives,  bloodletting,  cupping,
leeching,  which  is  now  in  immoderate  use,  diaphoretics,
blisters,  setons,  fontanels,  issues,  etc.

God  be  praised,  the  homoeopathic  physician  has  dis-
pensed with  the  necessity  of  employing  those  barbarous
and  homicidal  contrivances.  He  ought  even  to  be
watchful  that  the  patient,  carried  away  by  the  alloeopathic
routine,  may  not  employ  them  in  secret  during  the  treat-
ment. The  physician  must  positive^  forbid  the  patient
ever  to  let  blood,  as  he  may  have  been  in  the  habit  of
doing  once  a year,  or  to  resort  to  cupping,  purges,  warm
baths,  etc.

Homoeopathic  physicians,  who  are  masters  of  their
art — and  there  are  now  many — never  draw  a single
drop  of  blood  ; he  carefully  avoids  a process  which
weakens  the  patient,  and  is  a sort  of  direct  protest
against  cure.  Only  those  homoeopathic  doctors  who  are
but  half  initiated  into  homoeopathic  practice,  feel  obliged
to  resort  to  that  sort  of  pseudo-curing , the  bleeding  pro-
cess.*


* Note  of  the  Translator:  No  practitioner  who  has  a
clear  perception  of  the  homoeopathic  principle  and  the  nature  of
disease,  will  feel  disposed  to  blame  Hahnemann  for  using  this
condemnatory  language.

Disease,  as  I have  shown  in  my  preface,  is  not  a negative
something ; on  the  contrary,  it  is  a positive  existence,  or  we
may  call  it  an  influence,  an  agency,  or,  if  you  please,  a dynamic
force,  whose  action,  with  respect  to  the  genuine  action  of  the


There  is  but  one  exception  to  this  general  condemns*
lion  of  all  artificial  evacuations.  At  the  beginning  of


harmonious  vital  principle,  may  be  called,  and  in  fact  is  subver-
sive. There  is  an  order  of  subversive  dynamic  forces.  There
is  an  order  of  such  subversive  dynamic  forces,  which,  in  a man-
ner which  is  absolutely  unknown  to  us,  subdues  the  circulatory
system  and  endeavours  to  adapt  it  to  its  own  nature  and  to
govern  it  according  to  its  own  laws.  By  those  subversive  forces
the  action  of  the  circulatory  system  may  either  be  unnaturally
excited  or  depressed.

Let  us  suppose  that  it  has  been  unnaturally  excited.  Upon
what  principle  should  we  bleed,  in  such  a case  1

If  my  idea  of  disease  be  correct,  and,  I may  say  that,  although
it  does  not  explain  the  inmost  nature  of  disease,  yet  it  indicates .
its  general  character — we  must  bleed  the  patient  in  the  sup-
position of  depriving  the  subversive  forces  of  their  sphere  of  ac-
tivity in  the  animal  economy.  But  do  we  accomplish  such  a
result  by  bleeding  ? I maintain  that  we  do  not.

There  is  always  a portion  of  the  circulating  fluid  left,  which
secures  the  subversive  forces  a hold  upon  the  circulatory  system.
And  then,  is  it  not  rational  to  suppose,  that  the  subversive  forces
having  been  violently  deprived  of  the  sphere  of  action  which
they  had  conquered  for  themselves  by  virtue  of  their  superior
power,  and  which  they  now  claim  as  their  legitimate  property,
they  will  not  leave  the  system,  but  will  rather  attack  some  other
organ  1 Because  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  diminish  the  vol-
ume of  blood,  is  this  a proof  that  by  diminishing  the  volume  of
blood  we  diminish  the  violence  of  the  subversive  forces  1 Why
should  not  these  forces  throw  themselves  upon  other  parts  of  the
organism,  since  the  organism  is  in  their  power,  and  it  cannot  be
a difficult  matter  for  those  forces  to  choose  any  of  the  intimately
connected  organic  viscera  as  their  principal  seat  of  action!

There  is  another  serious  objection  to  bleeding  and  one  which
shows  the  absurdity  of  such  a remedy.  Not  only  do  the  sub-
versive forces  remain  intact  in  the  organism — -though  I am
willing  to  grant  that  they  may  be  less  disposed  to  attack  other
organs  of  the  animal  economy  than  the  circulatory  system,  and
may  therefore,  in  some  rare  cases,  be  induced  to  leave  the  or-
ganism after  a powerful  depletion  ; — but,  on  the  other  hand  the
true  or  harmonious  vital  forces  are  positively  deprived  of  their
support  by  every  act  of  depletion.  The  vital  forces  are  constantly
engaged  in  restoring  the  losses  which  the  organs  undergo  by
motion  ; this  restoration  is  a process  of  assimilation  which  can
only  be  effected  by  means  of  the  blood  ; and  this  assimilative  pro-
cess continues  as  long  as  a vestige  of  the  vital  forces  remains  in  the
organism.  Death  ensues  the  moment  that  process  stops.  Now


179


the  treatment , when  the  anti-psoric  remedy  has  not  had
time  to  act,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  patient  can-


let  us  consider  for  a moment.  The  blood  is  the  material  out  of
■which  the  vital  forces  restore  the  metamorphosed  organs.  It  is  a
self-evident  truth  that  the  vital  forces,  impressed  with  the  necessi-
ty of  harmony  from  the  divine  fountain  out  of  which  they  flow,
will  not  assimilate  more  substance  than  the  organs  consume  by
motion.  Hence,  in  an  individual  whose  organs  are  bound  by
disease,  there  will  be  a disproportionate  surplus  of  blood,  which
the  vital  powers  will  leave  a prey  to  the  subversive  forces.  A
hold  is  thus  secured  to  the  subversive  forces  upon  the  organism.
Unless  the  subversive  forces  are  induced  to  relinquish  that  hold,
their  action  might  become  fatal.  The  advocates  of  blood-letting
suppose  that  the  subversive  forces  can  be  separated  from  the  cir-
culating fluid  by  violently  depriving  those  forces  of  what  they
consider  their  legitimate  property.  I have  shown  that  this  is
extremely  speculative  and  that  it  is  much  more  probable  that
depletion  will  rouse  the  energies  of  the  subversive  forces  to  new
and  reiterate  assaults  upon  the  organism,  than  separate  them
from  it.  We  know  that  such  a separation  does  not  take  place,
that  the  fever  may  be  momentarily  subdued  by  depletion,  but
that  the  subversive  forces  exhibit  again  their  full  action  in  pro-
portion as  the  loss  of  blood  is  restored  by  the  vital  forces.

But  suppose  this  separation  is  effected,  and  the  fever  leaves
the  organism  ] What  wTill  take  place  in  the  organism,  if  the  vo-
lume of  blood  which  the  vital  principle  had  formed  as  the  legiti-
mate result  of  its  activity,  before  the  organism  was  assailed  by
disease,  has  been  violently  diminished  % The  enemy  having  de-
parted, the  vital  principle  will  claim  to  be  reinstated  in  the  en-
joyment of  its  former  property,  which  was  the  organism  in  its
normal  state,  and  having  attained  a certain  degree  of  develop-
ment and  power.  But  the  vital  principle  finds  itself  deprived  of
the  very  material  out  of  which  the  wants  of  the  newly  active  or-
gans can  alone  be  supplied.  Hence  the  vital  principle  is  forced
to  satisfy  its  claims  to  the  full  exercise  of  its  former  power,  as
developed  and  embodied  in  certain  organs,  by  first  creating  the
necessary  quantity  of  blood,  and  taxing  for  that  purpose  the  very
organs  that  require  the  restorative  action  of  the  vital  principle,
for  the  purpose  of  recovering  the  losses  which  they  have  under-
gone by  successive  bleedings,  and  of  attaining  that  degree  of
strength  and  fulness  which  they  would  have  acquired  by  their
natural  development  and  activity,  if  disease  had  not  invaded  the
organism.  The  organs  demand , as  it  were,  of  the  vital  principle,
that  it  should  restore  the  damage  which  it  had  suffered  disease
to  inflict  upon  them.  This  demand  is  made  by  them  through
that  necessity  of  harmony,  which  maintains  among  all  the  organs


180


not  pass  his  stools,  and  that  this  kind  of  constipation
causes  him  some  trouble.  In  this  case,  the  physician

a system  of  true  and  counter-balancing  relations,  and  stimulates
each  organ  to  that  degree  of  activity  which  is  necessary  to  the
maintenance  and  development  of  the  individual  life  of  the  organ,
and  to  the  perfect  restoration  of  its  integrity  and  progressive
growth,  in  case  its  harmonious  life  should  have  been  disturbed
by  disease.

All  derivatives  are  essentially  wrong,  for  this  reason,  that  they
destroy  the  basis  which  the  organic  viscera  had  worked  out  as
the  legitimate  results  and  true  manifestations  of  their  vital  acti-
vity ; it  is  in  those  results  that  the  vitality  of  the  organs  is  em-
bodied. We  have  no  more  right  to  destroy  or  diminish  those
results  than  to  take  the  property  which  a man  has  legitimately
acquired  through  the  free  exercise  of  his  various  powers.

Blood-letting  is  a hazardous  process,  originating  in  ignorance
and  speculation;  no  homoeopathic  practitioner  can  resort  to  it
without  suffering  himself  to  be  classed  among  those  half  ho-
moeopathists  whom  Hahnemann  condemns  in  the  paragraph  to
which  this  note  is  annexed.

What  then  is  to  be  done  in  a case  of  fever  1

The  illustrious  Rush  felt  that  blood-letting  is  not  entailed
upon  the  practice  of  physic  by  a law  of  fatality.  “ In  reviewing
the  prejudices  of  blood-letting  in  consumption,”  says  Rush,  u I
have  frequently  wished  to  discover  such  a substitute  for  it  as
would  with  equal  safety  and  certainty  take  down  the  morbid
excitement  and  action  of  the  arterial  system.  At  present  we
know  of  no  such  remedy  ; and,  until  it  be  discovered,  it  becomes
us  to  combat  the  prejudices  against  bleeding,  and  to  derive  all
the  advantages  from  it  which  have  been  mentioned.”

The  homoeopathic  practitioner  knows  that  we  have  an  abun-
dance of  remedies  which  will  prove  useful  in  fever,  and  will  in-
variably and  infallibly  effect  that  separation  of  the  organism  and
the  feverishly-exciting  subversive  forces,  which  the  various
processes  of  depletion  accomplish  either  never  or  only  after  pro-
tracted and  repeated  assaults  upon  the  organism.  But  why  do
aconite,  belladonna,  phosphorus,  etc.,  effect  such  a separation  I
Simply  because  these  substances  are  the  natural  order  or  mode
of  existence,  in  the  physical  world,  of  those  subversive  forces
which,  acting  down  upon  this  world  of  effects  from  the  world  of
causes,  have  succeeded,  by  means  of  an  evil  spirit  or  some  other
hostile  influence,  in  introducing  themselves  into  the  circulating
fluid,  exciting  it  to  undue  action  and  producing  that  state  of  the
system  which  we  call  fever.  Aconite,  belladonna,  phosphorus,
coffea,  etc.,  contain , and  therefore  are  the  natural  or  physical
types  of  those  subversive  symptoms  the  aggregate  of  which  we
designate  by  the  term  fever.  As  soon  as  these  types  are  intro-


181


may  relieve  him  by  prescribing  an  injection  of  pure,


duced  into  the  organism,  the  subversive  forces,  being  in  the
same  inseparable  connection  with  those  types  as  cause  and  elfect,
are  drawn  to  them,  embody  themselves  in  them  and  are,  in  this
way,  easily  and  of  their  own  accord,  separated  from  the  or-
ganism.

There  is  a state  of  the  system  which  is  the  opposite  of  what
we  commonly  designate  by  the  term  fever  : coldness,  chills,
thin  and  weak  pulse.  This  state  of  the  system  evidently  indi-
cates the  presence  of  subversive  forces  in  the  organism,  which
have  depressed  the  action  of  the  circulatory  system.  If  blood-
letting be  the  true  mode  of  separating  this  part  of  the  organism
from  the  subversive  forces,  why  do  we  not  resort  to  that  remedy
in  the  condition  of  the  system  which  I have  supposed  just  now  1
If,  in  this  condition  of  the  system,  the  advocates  of  depletion  do
not  bleed,  it  is  because  they  either  do  not  know  upon  what  prin-
ciple they  bleed  at  all,  or  because  they  bleed  upon  such  fanciful
principles  that  facts  are  all  the  time  rebelling  against  them.
The  homceopathist  knows  that  this  condition  of  the  system
corresponds  to  its  types,  bryonia,  etc.

To  the  advocates  of  blood-letting  Hahnemann  addresses  the
following  severe  remarks  in  a note  : “ Beginners  and  learners
may  be  pardoned  for  using  depleting  processes  ; but  if  they
dare  to  pride  themselves  on  their  pretended  improvements,  and
to  promulgate  blood-letting  and  cupping  as  processes  that  are
eminently  homoeopathic,  then  they  make  themselves  ridiculous  ;
they  ought  to  be  pitied  for  their  dabbling  and  for  their  bungling
blindness,  which  inflicts  suffering  upon  their  patients.  Is  it
laziness,  or  is  it  a foolish  predilection  for  the  pernicious  routine
of  allceopathy,  which  prevents  them  from  making  themselves
acquainted  with  the  true  homoeopathic  remedy  that  always  acts
with  certainty  and  success  1 It  is  only  by  means  of  persever-
ing study,  and  indefatigable  searching  that  the  student  of
homoeopathy  can  penetrate  to  its  inmost  recesses  and  acquire
that  mastery  of  the  science  which  is  now  possessed  by  some.”

Blood-letting  and  all  the  other  violent  allceopathic  practices  of
artificial  evacuation,  are  on  a par  with  the  system  of  corporeal
punishment  in  education,  and  with  the  doctrine  of  self-sacrifice,
or  mortification  of  the  passions  from  the  standing-point  of  an
absolute  and  irretrievable  necessity.  Those  who  profess  such
a doctrine,  of  course,  will  be  in  favour  of  blood-letting ; those,
on  the  contrary,  who  have  faith  in  the  integral  goodness  of  hu-
man nature  ; who  understand  and  feel  that  the  true  development
of  human  nature  is  a free  and  unbounded  evolution  of  all  its

8


182


another  in  a quarter  of  an  hour,  and  even  a third ; this
last  will  certainly  act.  This  kind  of  injection  is.  devoid
of  all  mercurial  influence  j it  acts  mechanically  by  dis-
tending the  rectum  and  may  be  repeated  every  three  or
four  days,  until  the  anti-psoric  remedies  shall  have  sue
ceeded  in  regulating  the  process  of  intestinal  evacuation.
Next  to  sulphur  Lycopodium  acts  most  favourably  under
such  circumstances/'

Fontanelles  should  not  be  suddenly  suppressed  by
the  homoeopathic  physician,  if  the  patient  has  used  them
already  for  a long  time,  often  for  years.  The  anti-psoric
treatment  ought  to  have  progressed  already  considerably
before  that  suppression  is  accomplished.  But  already
in  the  beginning  of  the  treatment  they  may  be  diminish-
ed, if  this  can  be  done  without  suppressing  them  en-
tirely.

Physicians  often  incommode  the  patient  by  direct-


genuine  tendencies  and  forces,  and  who  have  demonstrated  to
their  minds  the  glorious  truth  that  human  nature  is  destined  and
therefore  able  to  work  out  for  itself  a circumambient  order  of
things  which  will  be  an  exact  reflex  of  nature’s  varied  and  in-
most life,  and  a solemn  and  consecrated  acknowledgment  of  all
its  manifestations  : all  such  will  look  upon  blood-letting  with
abhorrence,  and  will  preach  and  practise  the  doctrine  that  vital
harmony  cannot  be  the  result  of  a violent  and  chaotic  invasion
of  the  constitution  of  man.

* Note  of  the  Translator  : To  produce  this  kind  of
mechanical  distention,  a tampon  may  be  inserted  in  the  rectum,
wiiicli  sometimes  acts  very  promptly  and  to  the  great  relief  of  the
patient.  A potato  answers  the  purpose  of  a tampon  better  than
anything  else.  It  may  be  cut  in  the  shape  of  a wedge,  and  be
gradually  introduced  into  the  rectum.  To  patients  who  are
affected  with  chronic  constipation  I take  the  liberty  of  suggest-
ing the  following  advice.  Let  them  go  to  stool  every  morning,
either  before  or  after  breakfast,  even  when  there  is  no  occasion
for  it ; let  them  bear  down  for  a while,  and  continue  this  prac-
tice for  some  days.  In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a hundred  they
will  succeed  in  regulating  their  bowels  in  this  way.  But  they
must  be  careful  of  always  going  to  stool  at  the  same  hour  and
even  minute.  It  is  a matter  of  course  that  the  practice  wrhich  I
here  recommend,  is  a mere  adjuvans  of  the  general  treatment.


183


ing  Kim  to.  wear  woollen  fabrics  upon  the  bare  skin  as
preventatives  against  colds.  These  ought  only  to  be  dis-
continued when  the  patient’s  susceptibility  for  catching
cold  has  been  considerably  diminished  by  the  anti-psoric
treatment,  and  when  the  mild  weather  has  set  in.  They
may  first  be  replaced  by  cotton,  which  produces  less
friction  upon  the  skin,  and  excites  it  less  than  wool.
Little  by  little  the  patient  may  be  accustomed  to  wear
linen  upon  the  bare  skin.

There  are  many  self-evident  reasons,  one  of  which  is
the  delicate  nature  of  homoeopathic  drugs,  why  the  ho-
moeopathic physician  should  not  permit  the  use  of  scents
in  any  shape  or  manner,  medicinal  tea,  mint,  pastry,
aniseed,  bitters,  liquors,  lichen,  spices  of  any  kind,
spiced  chocolate,  electuaries,  tooth-tinctures,  tooth-
powders,  and  the  various  other  fashionable  com-
pounds.

Warm  or  hot  baths  cannot  be  permitted  ; they  always
interfere  with  the  treatment,  and  are,  moreover,  unne-
cessary, if  they  are  merely  used  for  the  sake  of  cleanli-
ness. The  body  may  be  kept  clean  by  washing  it
quickly  with  soap-water  that  has  the  temperature  of  the
body.  This  kind  of  washing  does  not  injure  the  effects
of  the  anti-psoric  treatment.

In  the  first  edition  of  this  treatise  I have  recommended
to  use  the  smallest  possible  electrical  sparks  for  the  pur-
pose of  aiding  the  anti-psoric  treatment  by  animating
those  parts  of  the  body  which  had  been  long  affected
with  paralysis  or  insensibility.  I am  sorry  that  this  ad-
vice should  have  been  given.  I know  from  experience
that,  so  far  from  following  it  strictly,  it  has  been  con-
stantly transgressed.  Large  sparks  have  always  been
used  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  patient,  although  it
has  been  constantly  asserted  that  they  were  as  small  as
could  be  obtained.  My  advice  now  is,  to  abandon  the
use  of  sparks  altogether.  We  should  avoid  the  least
suspicion  of  using  enantiopathic  aid,  and  then,  we  have
an  efficient  homoeopathic  local  remedy  for  partial  para-
lysis or  insensibility  : cold  water,  from  mountain  sources


184


or  deep  wells* — (10°  of  Reaumur.)  The  water  may  be
used  conjointly  with  the  anti-psorics.  The  parts  may
either  be  sprinkled  with  cold  water  every  minute,  or
every  two  or  three  minutes  ; or  else  the  whole  body  may
be  sprinkled  over  with  fine  water,  in  the  form  of  dust,
for  one,  two,  three,  or  five  minutes.  This  sprinkling
may  be  resorted  to  more  or  less  frequently  according
to  circumstances,  once  or  several  times.


THE  REMEDIES

That  have  been  found  most  efficacious  in  the  treatment
volumes  according  to  the  symptoms  which  they  are
capable  of  producing  upon  the  healthy  organism.  I
shall  point  out  those  which  may  be  given  against  dis-
eases of  psoric  origin,  the  syphilitic  diseases,  and  the
diseases  from  sycosis.

The  remedies  against  syphilis  and  sycosis  are  much
less  numerous  than  those  against  psora.  This  is  no
reason  with  the  intelligent  observer  why  psora  should
not  be  a chronic  miasm  and  the  head-fountain  of  most
chronic  diseases.

It  is  not  astonishing  that  the  psoric  miasm,  having
spread  for  thousands  of  years  through  millions  of  or-
ganisms all  of  which  differ  in  constitution  and  are  ex-
posed to  a variety  of  influences,  should  have  produced
that  host  of  chronic  diseases  which  become  manifest  by
the  suppression  of  the  psoric  eruption  upon  the  skin,
whether  that  suppression  be  the  result  of  violent  ex-


* Water  of  this  temperature,  or  still  lower,  possesses  the
primary  power  of  diminishing  the  sensibility  and  mobility
of  the  living  body  ; hence  it  may  afford  homoeopathic  aid
in  the  treatment  of  paralysis  or  insensibility.


1S5


ternal  contrivances  or  of  some  accidental  concussion  of
the  system.  •

Owing  to  these  causes  the  psoric  miasm  has  succeed-
ed in  ingrafting  its  parasitical  existence  upon  the  or-
ganism, and  has  produced  varieties  which  always  betray
their  common  origin,  but  all  of  which  are  distinguished
by  some  peculiar  properties.  These  varieties  depend
either  upon  the  physical  differences  of  clima.and  abode,
or  upon  the  different  modes  of  life  of  the  psoric  pa-
tients/ In  the  impure  air  of  cities  children  become  af-
fected with  rickets , spina  ventosa , ramollissement  of  the
hones , curvatures , cancer  of  the  hones , tinea  capitis ,
scrofula , ring-worm  ; in  full-grown  persons  there  are
nervous  affections,  nervous  irritability,  gout  of  the  joints,
etc.  The  various  chronic  affections  originating  in  the
psoric  miasm,  and  assuming  so  many  different  forms
on  account  of  the  constitutional  differences  of  patients  and
the  different  physical  influences  to  which  they  are  ex-
posed, require,  for  their  radical  cure,  the  use  of  a large
number  of  anti-psorics.

I have  often  been  asked  the  question  by  what  signs
an  anti-psoric  remedy  may  be  recognised  beforehand  ?
There  are  no  such  external  visible  signs.  The  remedial
virtue  of  certain  remedies  in  psoric  affections  has  been
revealed  to  me  by  trying  those  remedies  upon  the
healthy  organism.  Some  of  them  were  known  to  possess
curative  powers  which  seemed  to  me  to  hint  at  the
anti-psoric  character  of  the  remedies.  In  Poland,  for
instance,  the  herb  lycopodium  is  reputed  to  prove
curative  in  trichiasis  ; hence  I inferred  the  anti-psoric


* In  Norway  and  in  the  north-west  of  Scotland  we  have
the  Sibbens  or  Rade-Syge  ; in  Lombardy  Pellagra  ; in
Poland  and  Carinthia  koltum  or  trichiasis ; the  leprous
tumours  of  Surinam  ; the  raspberry-like  excrescences  of
Guinea,  known  there  by  the  name  of  yaws,  and  in  America
by  that  of  pian  ; in  Hungary  the  exhausting  fever  called
tsomor;  in  Virginia  the  asthenia  virginensium  ; goitre  in  the
valleys  of  the  Alps,  etc.


186


virtues  of  the  pollen  in  similar  diseases.  I suspected
the  anti-psoric  nature  of  the  common  table  -salt  from  the
fact  that  hemorrhages  had  been  arrested  by  that  sub-
stance when  given  in  large  quantities.  In  former  times
already  it  was  known  that  venereal  diseases  complicated
with  the  psoric  miasm,  could  not  be  cured  by  mercury
unless  this  miasm  had  first  been  removed  by  means  of
guaiacum,  sassaparilla  or  mezereum.

As  a general  rule  I have  found  that  most  of  the  earths,
alkalis,  and  acids,  and  their  salts,  together  with  several
metals,  are  indispensable  to  the  cure  of  the  innumerable
symptoms  of  the  psoric  miasm.  The  similarity  of  action
existing  between  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and  other  com-
bustible substances  from  the  vegetable  and  the  mineral
kingdom,  led  me  to  rank  all  these  substances  in  the  same
family  with  the  chief  anti-psoric  remedy,  which  is  sul-
phur. Analogy  of  action  has  also  induced  me  to  add
some  animal  substances.

Generally,  however,  only  such  remedies  have  been
arrayed  under  the  head  of  anti-psorics,  as  have  developed
in  the  healthy  organism  symptoms  analogous  to  those,
which  were  known  to  emanate  from  repelled  itch.  In
proportion  as  our  knowledge  of  the  pure  effects  of  med-
icinal substances  increases,  we  may  find  it  necessary
to  add  a few  more  remedies  to  the  anti-psorics  which
are  nowr  known.  Nevertheless,  with  the  anti-psorics
that  are  now  known,  we  are  able  'to  cure  all  secondary
psoric  diseases  provided  the  patients  have  not  been
overwhelmed  by  large  portions  of  allceopathic  drugs,  or
too  great  a depression  of  the  vital  forces  or  other  un-
favourable causes  do  not  make  the  cure  impossible.
There  are  certain  conditions  occurring  in  psoric  diseases,
where  the  other  homoeopathic  remedies,  even  mercury
not  excepted,  become  indispensable.

The  peculiar  mode  adopted  for  the  preparation  of
homoeopathic  remedies,  enables  us  to  develop  the  me-
dicinal virtues  of  a drug  into  a series  of  degrees  of  poten-
cy, and  by  this  means,  to  adapt  the  remedial  influence
of  the  drug  with  great  precision  to  the  nature  of  the
disease.  Some  of  those  drugs  do  not  seem  to  have


F


187

many  medicinal  properties  in  their  unprepared  form,
(such  as  common  salt,  lycopodium  ;)  others,  (such  as  gold,
silicea,  argilla,)  do  not  seem  to  possess  any.  But  their
medicinal  properties  exist  in  a latent  state,  and  may  all
be  developed  to  a high  degree  by  the  peculiar  mode  of
stances, on  the  contrary,  act  so  powerfully  in  their  natu-
ral form  that  the  smallest  portion  of  them,  upon  com-
ing in  contact  with  the  animal  fibre,  exercises  a cor-
roding and  destructive  action  upon  it  ; such  substan-
ces are  arsenic,  corrosive  sublimate,  etc.  By  the  ho-
moeopathic mode  of  preparing  those  substances,  their
otherwise  powerful  action  is  suitably  modified  by  being
developed  into  a series  of  degrees  of  potency,  many  of
which  were  never  known  before.

The  alteration  which  is  effected  in  the  properties  of
natural  substances,  especially  medicinal  substances,
either  by  triturating  or  shaking  them  in  conjunction
with  a n on-medicinal  powder  or  liquid,  is  almost  mar-
vellous. This  discovery  is  due  to  homoeopathy.

Beside  this  alteration  of  their  medicinal  properties,
the  homoeopathic  mode  of  preparing  medicines  pro-
duces an  alteration  in  their  chemical  properties.  Where-
as, in  their  crude  form,  they  are  insoluble  either  in  water
or  alcohol,  they  become  entirely  soluble,  both  in  water
and  alcohol,  by  means  of  this  homoeopathic  transfor-
mation. This  discovery  is  invaluable  to  the  healing
art.

The  brown-black  juice  of  the  sea-insect  sepia , which
was  formerly  used  only  for  painting  and  drawing,  is
soluble  in  water  only,  while  in  its  unprepared  form.
When  homoeopathic  ally  prepared  by  trituration,  it  be-
comes also  soluble  in  alcohol.

Nothing  can  be  extracted  from  petroleum  by  means
of  alcohol,  except  when  that  drug  is  adulterated  with
vegetable  ethereal  oil ; in  its  unadulterated  form,  petro-
leum is  neither  soluble  in  water  nor  in  alcohol,  (nor
ether.)  By  means  of  trituration  it  becomes  soluble  in
both  those  substances.

Lycopodii  pollen  floats  in  alcohol  and  on  the  surface


188


of  water,  without  either  of  these  substances  having  the
least  effect  upon  the  drug  ; lycopodium  in  its  crude
state,  on  being  introduced  into  the  stomach,  is  both
tasteless  and  inactive.  Trituration  makes  it  soluble  in
both  alcohol  and  water,  and  develops  such  a powerful
medicinal  action  in  the  drug  that  its  use  requires  great
care.

Who  ever  found  marble  or  the  shell  of  an  oyster
soluble  in  water  or  alcohol  ? This  mild  calcarea,  as
well  as  baryta  carbonica,  and  magnesia,  become  per-
fectly soluble  by  means  of  the  homoeopathic  process
of  trituration,  which,  moreover,  develops  their  medi-
cinal powers  to  an  astonishing  degree.

No  one  will  feel  disposed  to  suspect  that  quartz,
rock-crystal, — some  of  those  crystals  containing  drops
of  water  which  had  been  enclosed  there  unaltered  for
thousands  of  years, — or  white  sand,  are  soluble  in  wa-
ter or  alcohol,  or  are  endowed  with  medicinal  proper-
ties. However,  silica  may  be  made  soluble  both  in
water  and  alcohol  by  triturating  it  after  it  had  first  been
melted  by  means  of  an  alkali,  and  then  precipitated
again  from  that  compound.*  By  this  process,  the  me-
dicinal properties  of  silica  are  developed  to  an  almost
infinite  extent.

All  metals  and  sulphurets  become  soluble  in  alcohol
and  water,  after  having  undergone  the  homoeopathic
mode  of  preparation,  by  means  of  which  their  medici-
nal virtues  are  also  fully,  yea,  infinitely,  developed.

The  medicinal  chemical  substances  which  have  been
thus  prepared,  are  no  longer  subject  to  chemical  laws.

A dose  * of  phosphorus  of  the  highest  potency  may  re-
main for  years  enclosed  in  its  paper  in  a desk,  without


* Quartz,  or  siiica,  unless  ‘they  have  first  undergone  this
preparation  will  not  show  any  medicinal  properties.  This
is  the  reason  why  medicinal  substances  may  be  triturated
in  the  porcelain  mortar  together  with  the  non-medicinal
sugar  of  milk,  without  any  silica  becoming  mixed  with  it.
Some  hyper- critical  homoeopathists  have  apprehended  such
a result.


189


losing  its  medicinal  properties)  or  even  changing  them
to  those  of  phosphoric  acid.

A remedy  which  has  been  elevated  to  the  highest
potency,  and,  by  this  means,  has  become  almost  spirit-
ualized, is  no  longer  subject  to  the  laws  of  neutraliza*
tion.  Highly  dynamized  natrum,  ammonium,  baryta,
calcarea,  magnesia,  when  taken  into  the  system,  cannot)
like  their  bases,  be  changed  to  neutral  salts  by  acetic
acid  ; their  medicinal  properties  are  neither  changed
nor  destroyed.

The  homoeopathic  preparation  of  nitric  acid,  provid*
ed  it  is  taken  in  a sufficient  quantity,  is  not  affected  by
a little  crude  calcarea,  or  natrum  j its  strong  specific
action  remains  the  same.

All  those  homoeopathic  drugs  which  constitute  the  pure
materia  medica,*  are  prepared  in  the  manner  pointed


* Vegetable  substances  which  can  only  be  bad  dry  are
triturated  in  the  same  way.  The  millionth  trituration  may
then  be  dissolved,  like  all  the  other  substances,  either  in
water  or  alcohol.  In  this  state  they  may  be  preserved  much
better  and  longer  than  the  common  tinctures  which  easily
spoil.  Of  the  juiceless  vegetable  substances,  oleander,
thuya,  mezereum,  you  may  take  one  grain  and  a half,  the
fresh  leaves,  bark,  roots,  etc.,  and  convert  them  to  the  mil-
lionth trituration  with  three  times  one  hundred  grains  of
sugar  of  milk.  Of  this  trituration  you  take  one  grain  and
carry  it  through  the  vials,  obtaining  in  this  way,  any  de-
gree of  potency  that  may  be  desired.  Shake  each  vial
twice,  first  carrying  the  arm  up,  then  down.  The  same
process  of  trituration  may  be  resorted  to  in  regard  to  the
recently  obtained  medicinal  juices.  Squeeze  the  juice  out
of  the  substance,  triturate  one  drop  of  it  with  the  necessa-
ry quantity  of  sugar  of  milk  to  obtain  the  millionth  tritu-
ration. Of  this  you  take  one  grain,  dissolve  it  in  a mix-
ture of  half  water  and  half  alcohol,  and  then  carry  a drop
of  this  mixture  through  the  series  of  the  twenty-seven
vials,  obtaining  in  this  way  the  degree  of  potency  that  is
desired.  By  triturating  the  juice  first,  the  medicinal  vir-
tues of  the  drug  are  better  developed  than  by  simply  mix-

8*


190


out  below  ) tlie  following  antbpsorics  come  under  this
remark  :* *  silica,  barita  carbonica,  calcarea  carbonica,
natrum  carbonicum,  ammonium  carbonicum,  magnesia
carbonica,  carbo  vegetabilis,  carbo  animalis,  graphites,
sulphur,  antimonium  crudum,  antimonium,  gold,  pla-
tina,  iron,  zinc,  copper,  silver,  tin, — lumps  of  those
metals,  not  the  foil,  are  triturated  upon  a hard,  fine,
grinding-stone  under  water,  or  sometimes  under  alcohol,
like  the  iron.  Of  these  pulverized  substances,  you
take  one  grain  ; mercury  may  be  used  in  the  liquid
state  ; of  petroleum,  you  take  one  drop  instead  of  one
grain.  Pour  this  grain  into  a nomglazed  porcelain
mortar,  having  before  covered  the  bottom  of  it  with
sand  slightly  moistened  and  triturated.  Then  you  take
thirty-three  grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  and  mix  them  with
the  drug  by  triturating  the  mass  with  some  force  for
about  six  minutes  by  means  of  a porcelain  pestle  ; be-*
fore  you  triturate,  stir  the  mass  for  a little  while  with  a
spatula.  Having  triturated  the  mass,  you  stir  it  again
for  about  four  minutes,  scraping  up  that  part  which
covers  the  bottom  of  the  porcelain  mortar,  and  also  that
which  is  adherent  to  the  pestlef  \ then  you  triturate
again  with  great  force  for  six  minutes,  without  however
adding  anything  new.  This  mass  you  scrape  up  again,
for  four  minutes,  add  another  thirty-three  grains  of  sugar
of  milk,  stir  the  new  compound  for  a moment  with  the

ing  the  juice  with  the  alcohol  by  means  of  two  shakes.  I
know  this  from  experience.

* Phosphorus,  which  is  so  easily  oxydized  in  the  open
air,  is  dynamized  in  the  same  manner,  and  may  he  dis*
solved  in  both  liquids.  There  are  some  precautionary
rules  to  be  observed,  which  will  be  pointed  out  below.

f When  the  process  of  trituration  is  completed,  mortar,
pestle,  and  spatula,  are  to  be  repeatedly  immersed  in  boil-
ing water,  being  carefully  wiped  and  dried  after  each  im-
mersion. The  mortar,  pestle,  and  spatula,  may  then  be
exposed  to  a heat  which  would  make  them  red-hot.  This
will  suffice  to  satisfy  even  the  most  anxious  minds  that  no
atom  of  the  medicinal  substance  has  remained  adhering  to
either  mortar,  pestle,  or  spatula.


191


spatula,  then  triturate  it  for  six  minutes  witn  the  pestle,
scrape  it  up  for  four  minutes,  triturate  again  with  great
force  for  six  minutes,  scrape  the  mass  up  again  for  four
minutes,  then  add  the  last  thirty-three  grains  of  sugar
of  milk,  and  with  this  last  added  portion  proceed  as
with  the  two  former.  This  powder  you  enclose  in  a
well-corked  glass,  and  mark  it  with  the  name  of  the
substance,  and  the  figure  loo,  to  show  that  this  is  the
one  hundredth  potency  of  the  substance.*

In  order  to  prepare  the  degree  loooo,  you  take  one
grain  of  the  degree  lob  and  add  to  it  thirty-three  grains
of  sugar  of  milk.  Stir  up  this  mass  for  a moment  with
the  spatula.  Then  triturate  it  for  six  minutes,  stir  it  up
for  four  minutes,  triturate  again  for  six  minutes,  and  then
stir  up  again  for  four.  After  this  you  add  the  second


* The  preparation  of  the  one  hundredth  potency  of  phos-
phorus by  pulverisation  requires  some  modifications.  First
you  take  one  hundred  grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  and,  by  means
of  fifteen  drops  of  water  you  make  them  into  a sort  of
dough  or  pap  in  the  mortar.  Then  you  cut  one  grain  of
phosphorus  into  twelve  pieces,  kneading  them  into  a dough
by  means  of  the  moistened  pestle,  together  with  the  one  hun-
dred grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  the  portions  of  the  mass  which
remain  adhering  to  the  pestle  being  scraped  off  again  while
the  process  of  kneading  is  carried  on.  In  this  way  the
phosphorus  molecules  may  be  triturated  during  the  first  two
periods  of  six  minutes  each,  into  invisible  atoms  without  a
spark  being  elicited-  During  the  third  period  of  six
minutes,  the  mass  being  sufficiently  pulverised,  the  kneading
may  be  replaced  by  trituration.  During  the  next  eighteen
minutes  the  process  of  trituration  is  carried  on  with  mo-
derate force,  the  mass  being  scraped  up  every  six  minutes  ;
this  scraping  can  be  easily  rfccomplished  on  account  of  the
mass  being  but  slightly  adherent  either  to  the  mortar  or  the
pestle.  After  the  sixth  trituration  the  powder  shines  but
feebly  in  the  open  air,  and  has  but  little  smell.  It  is  then
enclosed  in  well  corked  vials  and  marked  Phosphorus  100.
The  next  two  degrees  of  potency  10000  and  i are  prepared
in  the  same  way  as  those  of  the  other  dry  medicinal  sub-
stances.


192


thirty-three  grains  of  sugar  of  milk,  proceed  then  as
before  ; afterwards  add  the  last  thirty-three  grains  of
sugar  of  milk,  stir  up  and  triturate  again  as  before,  and
enclose  the  mass  in  a well  corked  vial  marked  toooo.

To  prepare  the  degree  lbuoooo  or  I,  you  take  one
grain  of  the  degree  loooo,  and  go  through  the  processes
of  stirring  and  triturating  in  the  same  way  as  before,
employing  upwards  of  an  hour  for  the  preparation  of
each  different  potency.

For  the  sake  of  establishing  a sort  of  uniformity  in
preparing  homoeopathic  remedies,  and  especially  the
anti-psorics,  I never  carry  the  process  of  trituration
above  the  million  degree.  From  this  degree  I derive  the
solutions  in  their  various  degrees  of  potency.

For  the  process  of  trituration  a certain  force  should
be  employed  ; not  too  much,  however,  to  cause  the  mass
to  adhere  too  tenaciously  to  the  mortar  to  be  scraped
up  in  the  space  of  four  minutes.

From  the  million  degree  of  trituration  the  solutions*
in  the  various  degrees  may  be  obtained  by  dissolving
these  triturated  substances  in  alcohol  or  water.  Che-
mistry is  not  acquainted  with  the  fact  that  all  substances
after  having  been  triturated  up  to  the  million  degree,  can
be  dissolved  either  in  alcohol  or  water.

Sugar  of  milk  cannot  be  dissolved  in  pure  alcohol ;
this  is  the  reason  why  the  first  solution  should  be  com-
posed of  one  half  water  and  one  half  alcohol.

To  one  grain  of  the  million  trituration  you  add  fifty
drops  of  distilled  water,  and  turn  the  vial  several  times
around  its  axis.  By  this  means  the  sugar  of  milk
becomes  dissolved.  Then  you  add  fifty  drops  of  good


* In  the  beginning  of  my  practice  I gave  a small  portion
of  a grain  of  the  millionth  trituration  at  a dose.  But  the  un-
certainty of  this  mode  of  exhibiting  the  remedy,  led  me  to
the  discovery  of  preparing  the  solution,  and  to  the  use  of  the
globules,  any  definite  number  of  which  may  be  moistened
with  the  dissolved  drug.  Homoeopathy  being  based  upon  a
law  of  nature,  it  should  avoid  and  exclude  all  uncertainties.


193


alcohol,*  and  shake  the  vial  twice,  first  carrying  the  arm
up  and  then  down.  Only  two  thirds  of  the  vial  ought
to  be  filled  with  the  solution. f

This  vial  is  then  marked  with  the  name  of  the  medi-
cine, and  the  number  Too~I.  Of  this  solution  you  lake
one  drop,  and  mix  it  with  99  or  100  drops  of  pure  alco-
hol, shaking  the  vial  twice  after  it  has  been  corked.
This  vial  is  marked  JOOUO  I.  Of  this  solution  you  again
take  one  drop,  mixing  it  with  99  or  100  drops  of  pure
alcohol.  Then  shake  the  vial  twice,  and  mark  it  loooo  I-
Of  this  potency  you  again  take  a drop,  and  mix  it  with
99  or  100  drops  of  pure  alcohol,  shaking  this  third  vial
twice,  and  marking  it  n.  In  the  same  way  you  con-
tinue the  preparation  and  marking  of  the  higher  poten-
cies too  II,  10000  II,  fll4  The  intermediate  vials  are
put  in  perpendicular  boxes,  and  are  kept  in  the  dark  in
order  not  to  be  affected  by  the  light  of  day.  In  practice
only  the  full  vials  are  used.

The  shaking  being  accomplished  by  means  of  mode-
rate strokes  with  the  arm,  it  is  expedient  that  the  vials
should  be  large  enough  to  have  only  two  thirds  of  their
volume  filled  with  the  hundred  drops.  Vials  that  have


* These  quantities  are  measured  by  means  of  vials  which
contain  exactly  fifty  drops.  It  would  be  too  tedious  to
count  fifty  drops  of  water,  especially  when  the  water  does
not  flow  easily  out  of  the  vial.

\ It  is  well  to  provide  the  vial  with  a mark  stating  the
number  of  shakes  and  the  date  when  the  solution  was  pre-
pared.

^ Frequent  observation  has  convinced  me  that  it  is  better
to  shake  the  vials  twice  only  in  order  to  develop  the  me-
dicinal virtue  of  the  drug  just  enough  to  affect  the  disease
in  a proper  manner.  By  shaking  the  vial  ten  times  as  I
was  in  the  habit  of  doing,  the  proportion  'between  the  pro-
gressively developed  intensity  of  action  of  the  medicinal
properties  of  the  drug  and  the  degree  of  the  potency  was
destroyed  in  favour  of  the  former.  The  object  of  the
dynamising  process  is  to  develop  the  intensity  of  action  of
the  medicinal  properties  of  the  drug,  at  the  same  time  as


■»


194


contained  one  medicine  ought  never  to  be  used  for  any
other,  even  if  they  should  have  been  previously  rinsed
ever  so  much.


The  globules  of  sugar  of  milk  should  be  prepared  of
the  same  magnitude  all  over  the  world.  I use  them  of
the  size  of  a grain  of  flaxseed.  By  establishing  uniform-


that  action  is  reduced  to  a milder  tone.  Two  shakes  are
sufficient  to  establish  the  true  proportion  between  these  two
effects.


The  degrees  of  potency  may  be  indicated  in  various
ways,  thus  : — -

The  first  degree,

1

100  ‘

100

The  second  degree,

l

10000

10000  or  100  (2)  mean-
ing hundred  multiplied
by  itself.

The  third  degree

1

1000000

I or  100  (3)

The  fourth  degree,

s

1

100U00000

100  I or  100  (4)

The  fifth  degree,

1

10000000000

lOOOO  I or  100  (5)

The  sixth  degree,

]

1000000000000

11  or  100  (6)

The  seventh  degree,

1

lOOOUOOOOOOOOOO

1

10000000000000000

100  11  or  100  (7)

The  eighth  degree,

10000  II  or  100  (8)

The  ninth  degree,

1

1000000000000000000

1

100000000000000000000

1

III  or  100  (9)

The  tenth  degree,

100  III  or  100  (10)

The  eleventh  degree,

10000  III  or  100  (11)

1 0000000000000000000000

The  twelfth  degree,

1

II1I  or  100  (12)  etc.

leoouoouooooooooooooooooo

[Added  by  the  translator.]


195


ity  both  in  the  preparation  and  exhibition  of  medicines)
the  homoeopathic  physicians  will  be  enabled  to  compare
with  great  certainty  the  results  which  they  may  obtain
in  their  practice.

The  globules  are  moistened  with  the  liquid  in  this
way.  A vessel  of  the  size  of  a thimble,  made  either
of  earthenware,  china,  or  glass,  is  filled  with  globules
weighing  in  all  a few  grains ; upon  these  you  drop  several
drops  of  the  medicine,  taking  a few  drops  more  rather  than
less,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  the  liquid  has  reached  the
bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  all  the  globules  have  been  moist"
ened.  This  process  may  last  about  a minute.  The  ves*
sel  is  then  turned  over  upon  a double  sheet  of  blotting
paper  ; if  any  of  the  liquid  should  remain  in  the  vessel,
it  is  poured  upon  the  globules,  that  will  be  found  adher-
ing to  each  other  like  a cone.  After  a while  the  globules
are  spread  upon  the  paper,  and  dried.  When  dry,  the
globules  are  filled  in  a glass  vial,  which  should  then  be
well  corked  and  marked.

The  globules  having  been  moistened  with  the  liquid,
they  obtain  a faint  appearance.  The  non-moistened
globules  look  whiter  and  more  shining.

In  order  to  take  the  globules  you  first  prepare  a cap-
sule of  white  paper,  filled  with  two  or  three  grains  of
sugar  of  milk.  The  globules  having  been  deposited  in
this  sugar,  the  upper  surface  of  the  capsule  is  pressed
upon  with  a spatula  or  the  nail  of  the  thumb,  until  the
globules  are  crushed  ; the  powder  may  then  be  easily
dissolved  in  water.

When  I speak  of  globules,  I mean  those  mentioned
above,  two  hundred  of  which,  or  thereabout,  weigh  a
grain.


In  the  subsequent  list  of  anti-psoric  remedies  no  iso*
pathic  remedies  are  mentioned,  for  the  reason  that  their
effects  upon  the  healthy  organism  have  not  been  suffi-
ciently ascertained.  Even  the  itch  miasm,  (psorin)  in
its  various  degrees  of  potency,  comes  under  this  objec-


196


lion.  I call  psorin  a homoeopathic  anti-psoric,  because
if  the  preparations  of  psorin  did  not  alter  its  nature  to
that  of  a homoeopathic  remedy,  it  never  could  have  any
effect  upon  an  organism  tainted  with  that  same  identical
virus.  The  psoric  virus,  by  undergoing  the  processes  of
trituration  and  shaking,  becomes  just  as  much  altered  in
its  nature  as  gold  does,  the  homoeopathic  preparations  of
which  are  not  inert  substances  in  the  animal  economy,
but  powerfully  acting  agents.

Psorin  is  a simillimum  of  the  itch  virus.  There  is  no
intermediate  degree  between  idem  and  simillimum  ; in
other  words,  the  thinking  man  sees  that  simillimum  is
the  medium  between  simile  and  idem.  The  only  defi-
nite meaning  which  the  terms  “ isopathic  and  asquale”
can  convey,  is  that  of  simillimum  ; they  are  not  idem

(ravrov. )


OF  THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  TECHNICAL  TERMS  CONTAINED  IN


THIS  VOLUME.


( Some  of  these  definitions  have  been  copied  from  Hooper's  Dictionary. )


Adipose  tissue, — see  tissue.

Adventitious, — any  thing  that  accidentally,  and  not  in  the
common  course  of  natural  causes,  happens  to  make  a
part  of  another.  It  is  used  in  medicine  in  opposition  to
hereditary.

Alloeopathy, — under  this  denomination  Hahnemann  ranges
all  those  medical  theories  that  are  based  upon  principles
different  from  his  own  doctrine.

Amenorrhcea, — accidental  cessation  of  the  menstrual  flux.

Anasarca, — a species  of  dropsy  from  a serous  tumour,
spread  between  the  skin  and  flesh.

Aneurism, — a pulsating  tumour  formed  by  the  dilatation  of
an  artery.

Atrophy, — nervous  consumption.  This  disease  is  marked
by  a gradual  wasting  of  the  body,  unaccompanied  either
by  a difficulty  of  breathing,  cough,  or  any  evident  fever,
but  usually  attended  with  a loss  of  appetite  and  impaired
digestion.

Bursa  mucosa, — a mucus  bag,  containing  a kind  of  mucous
fat.  These  bursae  are  generally  found  where  tendons
or  muscles  glide  over  bones.  By  means  of  those  bursae,
tendons  and  muscles  glide  easily  over  the  bones.

Cataract, — a species  of  bliudness,  arising  almost  always
from  an  opacity  of  the  crystalline  lens  or  its  capsule.


198


Cornea,— the  thick  and  transparent  part  of  the  eye,  placed
between  the  two  lids.

Coryza, — running  at  the  nose.

Chlorosis, — green  sickness,  a species  of  disease  which
affects  young  females  labouring  under  a "retention  or
suppression  of  the  menses.

Carcinoma, — or  cancer.

Crusta  lactea, — this  disease  mostly  attacks  some  part  of  the
face  of  infants  at  the  breast.  It  is  known  by  an  erup-
tion of  broad  pustules,  full  of  a glutinous  liquor,  which
form  white  scabs  when  they  are  ruptured.

Diabetes, — an  immoderate  flow  of  urine.

Diaphoretics, — a class  of  remedies  which  increase  the  dis-
charge by  the  skin.

Degeneration, — a morbid  alteration  of  some  organic  viscus.

Dysuria, — suppression  or  difficulty  in  discharging  the  urine.

Ecstasy, — -a  trance.

Empyema, — a collection  of  pus  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.

Enantiopathic, — the  same  as  alloeopathic.

Enuresis, — incontinence  of  urine.

Endemic,— a disease  is  so  termed  that  is  peculiar  to  a
certain  class  of  persons,  or  country.  The  goitre  is  en-
demical  to  the  inhabitants  of  certain  low  regions  in
Switzerland.

Epistaxis, — bleeding  from  the  nose.

Epizootic  carbuncle, — a species  of  anthrax  common  to  the
larger  mammalia.  In  man  it  forms  on  the  cheek,  neck,
or  back,  and,  in  a few  days,  becomes  highly  gangrenous.

Erysipelas, —the  rose  or  St  Anthony’s  fire.  This  disease
is  an  inflammatory  affection  of  the  skin  or  of  the  mucous
membrane.

Exanthema,— an  eruption  of  the  skin.

Expectorants, — a class  of  medicines  .which  increase  the
discharge  of  mucus  from  the  lungs.


199


\


Fistula,— a term  in  surgery  applied  to  a long  and  sinuous
ulcer  that  has  a narrow  opening,  and  which  sometimes
leads  to  a larger  cavity,  and  has  no  disposition  to  heal.
Fistula  may  be  formed  in  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  in
the  bladder,  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  eye,  etc.

Fomentations, — a sort  of  partial  bathing,  by  applying  hot
flannels  to  any  part,  dipped  in  medicated  decoctions,
whereby  steams  are  communicated  to  the  parts,  and  their
vessels  are  relaxed.

Fontanelles, — the  French  name  for  artificial  issues.

Fungus  hematodes, — bleeding  fungus,  also  called  soft
cancer  or  medullary  sarcoma.  It  attacks  most  parts  of
the  body,  particularly  the  eye,  breast,  testicle,  and  the  ex-
tremities. It  begins  with  a soft  enlargement  of  the  part,
which  is  extremely  elastic  and,  in  some  cases,  painful.
As  it  increases,  it  often  has  the  feel  of  an  encysted
tumour,  and  at  length  becomes  irregular,  bulging  out
here  and  there.  When  it  ulcerates,  it  bleeds,  and  shoots
up  a mass  of  a bloody  fungus.

Gland, — an  organic  part  of  the  body,  composed  of  blood-
vessels, nerves  and  absorbents,  and  destined  for  the  se-
cretion or  alteration  of  some  peculiar  fluid.

Glaucoma, — a cataract  of  the  crystalline  lens.

Goitre, — an  enlargement  of  the  thyroid  body  in  front  of
the  trachea.

Gutta  serena, — a diminution  or  total  loss  of  sight,  arising
from  a paralytic  affection  of  the  retina  and  optic  nerve.

Hematemesis, — vomiting  of  blood  from  the  stomach.

Hematuria, — hemorrhage  from  the  bladder.

Hemoptysis, — spitting  of  blood  from  the  lungs.

Hemorrhoids, — or  piles,  excrescences  arising  from  the  in-
ferior part  of  the  rectum.  They  are  divided  into  bleeding
and  blind  piles.

Hernia, — a rupture,  or  a protrusion  of  a part  of  the  intestine.
The  places  in  which  this  protrusion  most  frequently
takes  place,  are  the  groin,  the  navel,  the  labia  pudendi,
and  the  upper  and  fore-part  of  the  thigh.


I


200

Herpes,  tetter, — a genus  of  disease  distinguished  by  an  as-
semblage of  numerous  little  creeping  ulcers,  in  clusters,
itching  very  much,  and  difficult  to  heal ; they  terminate
in  furfuraceous  scales.

Humerus, — the  long  bone  of  the  upper-arm.

Hysteria,  hysterics, — a disease  common  to  females.  The
disease  attacks  in  paroxysms  or  fits.

Hypochondria, — those  parts  of  the  body,  which  lie  under
the  cartilages  of  the  spurious  ribs.

Idiopathic, — this  name  is  given  to  diseases  originating  in
some  peculiar  and  distinct  miasm.

Inoculation, — the  insertion  of  a poison  into  any  part  of  the
body  ; it  was  mostly  practised  with  that  of  the  small-pox.

Ischuria, — a suppression  of  urine.

Issue, — an  artificial  ulcer  made  by  cutting  a portion  of  the
skin,  and  burying  a pea  or  some  other  substance  in  it,  so
as  to  produce  a discharge  of  purulent  matter.

Leucorrhoea, — the  whites,  a secretion  of  whitish  or  milky
mucus,  from  the  vagina  of  women.

Lypbma, — a solitary,  soft,  unequal,  indolent  tumour,  arising
from  a luxuriancy  of  adeps  or  fat  in  the  cellular  mem-
brane.

Menorrhagia, — an  immoderate  flow  of  the  menses.

Mollifies  ossium,  or  ramollissement  of  the  bones, — softness
of  the  bones,  arising  from  a want  of  the  phosphate  of
lime.  In  children  this  disease  is  called  the  rickets.

Muscae  volitantes, — particles  of  dust  or  motes  which  the
patient  imagines  to  see  upon  the  eye  or  in  the  air.

Oedema, — a synonyme  of  anasarca.  See  Anasarca.

Oesophagus, — the  membranous  and  muscular  tube  that  de-
scends in  the  neck  from  the  pharynx  to  the  stomach  ; it
carries  the  food  into  the  stomach.

Orgasm, — -an  unnatural  agitation  of  the  blood.

Osteo-sarcoma, — a swelling  of  the  bone  ; the  bone  and  the
surrounding  flesh  become  one  putrefying  mass.


201


Paronychia,— a collection  of  pus  formed  in  the  fingers.

Patella, — the  bone  in  front  of  the  knee.

Parotid  gland, — the  gland  situated  directly  behind  the  ear
the  swelling  of  this  gland  is  called  the  mumps.

Prostatic  fluid,— -a  fluid  secreted  by  the  prostatic  gland
situated  in  front  of  the  bladder.

Polypus, — a bleeding  tumour  generally  found  in  the  nose,
uterus,  or  vagina.

Ptyalism, — a morbid  flow  of  saliva.

Ramollissement,— see  Mollifies  Ossium.


Sarcoma, — a fleshy  excrescence.

Sedatives, — a class  of  medicines  which  diminish  the  ani-
mal energy.

Sphacelus, — the  highest  degree  of  mortification.

Sporadic, — this  is  an  epithet  for  such  infections  and  other
diseases  as  seize  a few  persons  at  any  time  or  season.

Spina  Yentosa, — a tumour  arising  from  an  internal  caries
of  a bone.

Tabes  Mucosa, — a wasting  away  of  the  mucous  membranes.

Tarsus, — the  ankle-joint.

Tinea  Capitis, — the  scald  head  ; a disease  characterized  by
small  ulcers  at  the  root  of  the  hairs  of  the  head,  which
produce  a friable  white  crust.

Tissues, — or  textures  which  compose  the  different  organs
of  animals.

Tonics, — medicines  which  are  supposed  to  increase  the  tone
of  the  muscular  fibre  (in  the  old  school  of  course.)

Trichiasis,  Plica  Polonica, — a disease  of  the  hairs,  in  which
they  become  long  and  coarse,  and  matted  and  glued  in-
to inextricable  tangles.  It  is  peculiar  to  Poland,  Lithu-
ania, and  Tartary,  and  generally  appears  during  the  au-
tumnal season.

Tunica  Vaginalis  Testis,— one  of  the  covering  membranes
of  the  testicles.


202


Vaccination, — the  insertion  of  the  matter  of  cow-pox.

Varix,— -a  dilatation  of  a vein.

Vesicatories, — applications  which,  exciting  inflammation
on  the  skin,  occasion  a thin  serous  fluid  to  be  poured  from
the  exhalants,  raise  the  cuticle,  and  form  the  appearance
of  a vesicle.


THE  END.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Of  the  nature  of  chronic  diseases  ......

Psora  ...........

Critical  remarks  upon  the  treatment  of  psora  .

Cases  illustrative  of  the  bad  treatment  of  psora

Mode  of  formation  of  the  psoric  syphilitic  and  sycosic  diseases

Symptoms  of  latent  psora  .......

Symptoms  characteristic  of  the  secondary  diseases  of  psora  .
Names  by  which  the  secondary  diseases  of  psora  are  usually
designated  in  treatises  on  pathology  .

Treatment  of  chronic  disease*  .......

Description  and  treatment  of  sycosis  .

Description  and  treatment  of  syphilis  .

Treatment  of  psora  .........

Rules  for  the  use  of  anti-psoric  remedies  . . . . .

Accidents  by  which  the  cure  of  chronic  diseases  may  be  dis-
turbed ..........

Critical  remarks  on  blood-letting

Preparation  of  the  anti-psoric  and  other  homoeopathic  remedies
Definition  of  the  most  important  technical  terms,  contained  in
this  volume


! Pag*

13

21

30

34

50

64

72

105

103

111

115

126

157

166

177

184

197


ERRATA.

Page  13,  line  21,  instead  of  doses,  read  portions.

Page  13,  line  24,  instead  of  cauteries,  read  issues.

Page  22,  line  4,  instead  of  local,  read  erratic.

Page  36,  line  14,  and  elsewhere,  instead  of  tenia,  read  tinea.
Page  72,  line  12  and  13,  instead  of  has,  read  had.

Page  145,  line  15,  place  a comma  after  nostra.


/


%


I -


\


<■


*


s


I


»


/


f


V


*


»


iV
