The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, Vol. IV
Samuel Hahnemann
The Chronic Diseases: Their Specific Nature and Homoeopathic Treatment, vol. IV. Translated by Charles J. Hempel. Philadelphia: Dobson, 1845.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b21458960_0004).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

§2° (&MS(BKD)W  *S


UNIVERSITY


:0
o


A


GUL  68.18


Digitized

by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2015


1

-


THE


CHRONIC  DISEASES:

THEIR

SPECIFIC  NATURE

AND

HOMEOPATHIC  TREATMENT.

BY

Dr.  SAMUEL  HAHNEMANN.

TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED
BY

CHARLES  J.  HEMPEL,  M.D.


VOLUME  IV.

ANTI-PSORIC  REMEDIES.


NEW. YORK:
WM.  RADDE,  322  BROADWAY.

LONDON:
H.  BALLIERE,  219  REGENT-STREET,

1846.


Entered  according  to  the  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1846,  by

WILLIAM  RADDE,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New- York.


H. LCDWIO, PRIK  TKB|

70  &  72  Vesey-rt.


PREFACE.


Inquiry  into  the  modus  operandi  of  a  homceopathic  drug.

We  have  no  means  of  knowing  the  inmost  functions  of  the
organism ;  sometimes  we  may  feel  at  liberty  to  draw  spe-
culative conclusions  from  results  relative  to  the  nature
of  the  causes  in  which  they  have  originated,  but  we
cannot  sustain  our  explanations  by  illustrating  them  by  the
phenomena  of  material  nature  ;  for  this  reason,  that  the
functions  of  the  living  organism  have  nothing  in  common
with  the  changes  of  matter,  but  on  the  contrary,  take  place
in  an  entirely  different  manner.

Possessed  by  these  convictions,  it  is  quite  natural  that  I
should  never  have  attempted  to  explain  how  diseases  can
be  cured  by  medicines,  the  pathogenetic  symptoms  of
which  are  similar  to  those  of  the  disease.  I  have  furnished
a  conjecture  relative  to  that  matter,  without  wishing  it  to
be  considered  an  explanation. Such  an  explanation^  not
necessary. It simply  behoves  us to  apply  the  law
''like  cures  like"  correctly  and  successfully,  and  not  to
boast  with  abstract  explanations,  in  spite  of  which  the
patient  may  remain  uncured. Indulging  foolish  hypothe-
ses is  all  that  the  so-called  physicians  of  the  Old  School
have  accomplished  up  to  this  moment. These  physicians
would  not  have  hesitated  to  reject  the  doctrines  of  homoeo-
pathy, which  however  teach  the  only  true  method  of  cure,
simply  because  my  explanation  of  the  modus  operandi  of
homoeopathic  agents  was  not  satisfactory.

If  I  again  attempt  to  throw  some  light  on  the  inmost

1


PREFACE.


action  of  homoeopathic  drugs,  it  is  not  because  I  expect
to  satisfy  my  opponents,  but  in  order  to  furnish  more  pro-
bable explanatory  suggestions  to  the  real  adherents  and
able  advocates  of  the  homoeopathic  system,  and  to  satisfy
the  irresistible,  innocent  and  praiseworthy  impulse  of  the
human  mind  to  account  for  the  mode  in  which  we  accom-
plish changes  from  evil  to  good.

Tt  is  undeniable,  that  our  vital  powers,  when  unassisted
by  remedial  agents,  are  unable  to  cure  diseases,  even  those
of  short  duration— taking  it  for  granted  that  those  powers
are  not  overcome  by  the  disease,  without  expending  by  a
so-called  crisis  a  portion,  and  frequently  even  a  considera-
ble portion,  of  both  the  fluids  and  solids  of  our  organism.
I  have  shown  this  elsewhere. We  shall,  perhaps,  never
be  able  to  explain  this  mode  of  action  of  the  vital  powers  ,
but  we  know  with  certainty  that  they  do  not  accomplish  a
victory  over  disease  in  a  direct  manner,  or  without  making
great  sacrifices. The  vital  powers  are  not  even  capable
of  healing  the  chronic,  miasmatic  diseases,  and  of  substi-
tuting health  in  their  stead,  without  inflicting  a  loss  upon
the  organism. But  it  is  certain,  that  although  the  vital
forces  may  achieve  a  victory  over  the  acute  as  well  as
miasmatic  diseases  without  inflicting  such  losses  upon  the
organism,  provided  they  are  assisted  and  directed  in  their
action  by  a  properly  selected  homoeopathic  agent,  it  is
nevertheless  those  forces  that  conquer,  m  the  same  sense
as  the  native  army  is  said  to  have  beaten  the  enemy,
although  it  may  have  been  assisted  by  auxiliary  troops.
Those  vital  forces,  unless  assisted  by  a  homoeopathic  drug,
cannot  control  a  natural  disease  without  inflicting  great
acrifices  upon  the  organism;  for,  naturally  they  have
only  power  to  maintain  the  unimpeded  evolution  of  the
functions  of  the  animal  economy,  as  long  as  those  functions
are  not  disturbed  by  the  improper  interference  of  an  extci-

"Vheunassisted  vital  forces  are  no  match  for  such  hostile,


PREFACE.


3


disturbing  agents ;  they  are  even  weaker  than  those
agents — oppose  them  with  many  symptoms  of  suffering,
and  cannot  overpower  them,  be  they  either  acute  or  chro-
nic, without  inflicting  great  losses  on  the  organism.  This
result  can  only  be  avoided  by  assisting  the  vital  forces  by
a  proper  remedial  agent.  God  has  appointed  the  true
physician  to  this  office.

The  homoeopathic  agent  is  alone  able  to  secure  to  the
vital  forces  that  superior  power  which  is  necessary  to
conquer  the  enemy.

I  repeat,  that  the  vital  forces,  the  natural  destination  of
which  is  the  regulation  of  the  undisturbed  functions  of  the
organism,  oppose  but  a  feeble  resistance  to  the  approach-
ing enemy,  which  waxes  stronger  in  proportion  as  this
enemy  becomes  more  powerful,  but  which,  even  in  the
most  favorable  circumstances,  is  scarcely  equal,  and  in
weak  patients,  not  even  equal  to  the  power  of  the  assail-
ing enemy  :  the  vital  forces  are  neither  able,  nor  naturally
destined  to  overpower  that  enemy,  nor  can  they  oppose
him  without  being  injured. '

By  magnifying  ever  so  little  the  enemy  by  whom  the
vital  forces  are  assailed — which  we  accomplish  by  invad-
ing the  vital  forces  by  an  artificially  morbid  influence
closely  resembling  the  disease,  we  induce  those  forces,  as
from  an  instinct  of  self-preservation,  gradually  to  unfold
all  their  energies  until  they  become  powerful  enough  to
control  the  disease  ;  the  vital  forces  are  then  restored  to
the  regulation  of  the  animal  functions,  whereas,  the  arti-
ficial medicinal  disease  disappears  of  itself,  so  soon  as  we
discontinue  the  use  of  those  agents  by  which  it  had  been
established  in  the  organism.

The  principle  by  which  the  body  is  animated,  is  infi-
nitely great  and  lasting,  provided  we  maintain  its  integrity
by  a  proper  diet,  and  relieve  it  from  an  invading  enemy
by  proper  homoeopathic  treatment.


INDEX OF  REMEDIES

CONTAINED  IN  THIS  VOLUME.

Page.

Iodine,  - -- -- - - -- --  -5

Kali  Carbonicum,  --.-..--..-26
Ltcopodium, - -- --  -.....-80

Magnesia  Carbonica, - - - - - - - -  ■  -  138

Magnesia  Muriatica, - -.  170

Manganum,  197

Daphne  Mezereum, - 219

Muriatic  Acid,  -  242
Natrum  Carbonicum,  .......  261

Natrum  Muriaticum,  294

Nitric  Acid,  333


CORRECTION.
Read  «•  of"  in  the  place  of  "  by,"  page  first,  line  10,  from  above.


ANTI-PSORIC  REMEDIES,


JODIUM— IODINE.

Dynamise  one  grain  of  iodine  according  to  the  mode
taught  in  the  first  volume.

Iodine  is  a  heroic  medicine,  even  when  employed  in  the
highest  potencies  ;  its  use  requires  all  the  discretion  of  a
good  homoeopathic  physician,  lest  he  should  abuse  this
substance,  as  alloeopathic  physicians  do,  who  frequently
destroy  the  constitution  and  even  the  life  of  their  patients,
by  enormous  and  improperly  applied  doses  of  the  drug  in
question.

Iodine  has  rendered  especial  service  in  affections  with
he  following  symptoms  :  Dizziness  in  the  morning  ;  throb-
bing in  the  head ;  pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  eyes  ;  buz-
zing in  the  ears  ;  hardness  of  hearing  ;  coated  tongue  ;  mer-
curial ptyalism  ;  bad  taste,  as  of  soap  ;  sour  eructations,
with  a  sense  as  of  burning ;  heartburn,  after  eating  heavy
food ;  canine  hunger  ;  nausea  ;  incarceration  of  flatulence ;
distension  of  the  abdomen  ;  constipation  ;  nightly  mictu-
rition ;  delaying  menses ;  cough  ;  old  morning  cough ;
difficulty  of  breathing ;  external  swelling  of  the  neck ;
weakness  of  the  arms,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed ;
going  to  sleep  of  the  fingers  ;  curvature  of  the  bones  ;  dry-
ness of  the  skin  ;  night  sweats.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Drs.  Gersdorff,  Gross,
Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  Schreter.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  Iodine  is  useful  in  the  fol-
lowing affections  :  Scrophulosis,  (it  is  supposed  by  some
that  the  muriate  of  baryta  will  dispute  the  rank  with  iodine
in  the  treatment  of  scrofula.)  Glandular  affections,
especially  swelling  of  the  thyroid  gland,  hypertrophy  of
the  tonsillar,  parotid  gland,  &c  Affections  of  the  mucous
nembranes,  especially  when  depending  upon  a  scrofu-
lous and  leuco-phlegmalic  disposition  ;  and  particularly
when  this  condition  seems  to  affect  all  the  functions  of  the


6


JODIUM — IODINE.


being ;  in  catarrhal  affections  of  the  Schneiderian  mem
brane  without  any  fever,  of  the  Eustachian  tube,  larynx,
trachea,  vagina,  urethra,  with  disposition  to  thin,  white
coryza  and  obstruction  of  the  nose,  especially  in  persons
of  between  20  and  30  years,  brought  on  by  cold  and
neglected catarrhal  fever. Syphilis,  with  tendency  to
hypertrophy  ;  chancre  eleve. Iodine  has  cured  a  chancre
on  the  frenulum  prseputii ;  the  frenulum  having  become
detached,  that  portion  of  the  ulcer  which  was  situated  on
the  frenulum,  became  elevated,  whilst  that  other  portion
which  was  situated  upon  the  glans  was  deepened,  with-
out, however,  showing  the  characteristic  edges  of  a  chan-
cre. The  cure  was  effected  in  this  way  :— the  edges  be-
came dry  first,  the  ulcer  became  gradually  covered  with  a
brown  crust,  under  which  the  suppurative  process  conti-
nued for  a  time,  but  afterwards  left  a  solid,  star-shaped
cicatrix,  there  being  very  little  substance  lost,  so  that  the
cicatrix  appeared  rather  even  than  excavated. Old  gout,
characterised  by  violent,  nightly  pains,  in  various  joints,
without  any  swelling  ;  spina  ventosa  and  cares  of  the
spongy  extremities  of  the  bones. Arsenic  disease.  Tabes
mercurialis. Dropsy  ; dropsy  after  fever  and  ague,  in  a
scrofulous  female  ;  various  forms  of  intermittent  fever
and  ascites,  intimately  connected  with  disturbances  of  the
spleen  ;  scarlatina,  when  Bell  would  do  no  good,  (giving
mercury  first.) Sore  nipples,  consequent  upon  scrofu-
lous conditions. Scirrhous  induration.  Febns  meseraica  ;
Lobethal  observes,  that  in  febris  meseraica,  iodine  is  inte-
rior to  Calc  carb.,  when  this  fever  indicates,  as  it  often
does,  very  insidiously,  an  approaching  atrophy.  Inflamed,
big,  bloated  eyelids. Humming  before  the  ears  and  hard-
ness of  hearing,  being  remains  of  frequent  colds  or  catar-
rhal inflammations  of  the  throat,  when  we  can  with  cer-
tainly diagnose  an  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  Eusta-
chian tube  by  the  humming  being  increased  by  chewing  or
any  other  motion  of  the  jaws,  or  when  the  cold  frequently
returns,  or  when  the  patient  complains  of  his  ear  being
closed  by  a  valve. Hard  hearing  from  swelling  of  the
tonsillar  f  swelling  of  the  parotid  gland. Obstinate  and
torpid  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands. Constitutional  sto-
macace. Chronic,  painless  vomiting,  (in  the  case  of  a


JODIUM — IODINE.  '

carder,  whose  affection  was  caused  by  pressing  upon  the
heavy  scissors.)  Affections  of  the  liver. Scirrhous  swell-
ing of  the  inguinaJ  glands,  resulting  from  metaschematis-
mus  of  the  gout. Diseases  of  the  urinary  organs.  Metri-
tis and  oophoritis  (in  conjunction  with  Ars.) — amenor-
rhea, with  frequent  and  violent  colic,  sometimes  violent
stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  when  breathing,  fre-
quent, weak,  and  dry  cough,  with  stitches  in  the  throat,
paleness  of  the  face,  generally  alternating  with  sudden  red-
ness and  burning  of  the  ears,  want  of  breath  when  going
up  stairs,  loss  of  strength,  constantly  cold  hands  covered
with  cold  sweat  when  working,  (in  this  case  the  pain  disap-
peared, but  the  menses  did  not  come  on.)  Leucorrhcea,
of  scrofulous  females  ;  chronic  leucorrhcea  when  accom-
panied by  a  pale,  cachectic  and  chlorotic  complexion  and
disposition  to  catarrhal  affections.  Diseases  of  the  trachea.
Profuse  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  larynx,  brought  on  by
influenza  or  a  catarrhal  fever,  with  rough  voice,  tingling
and  burning  in  the  throat,  in  persons  who  incline  to  phthi-
sis. Cough  remaining  after  an  epidemic  influenza  ;  violent
influenza  ;  cough,  with  spitting  of  blood  ;  pain  in  the  chest
and  high  fever,  (preceded  by  aconite.) Cough,  with  tena-
cious, white  expectoration,  excited  by  an  irritation  under
the  upper  portion  of  the  sternum — worst  early  in  the
morning. Chronic catarrh  of  persons  who  incline  to
phthisis  laryngea  or  pulmonalis. Croup,  in  alternation
with  aconite. Hooping-cough,  with  intolerable  tickling  in
the  whole  chest. Cough,  first  periodical,  afterwards  con-
tinuous, especially  in  the  morning  when  rising  (remaining
after  inflammation  of  the  lungs ;)  irritation,  exciting  a
cough  in  the  left  and  lower  part  of  the  chest,  four  fingers'
breadth  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  cough  being
sometimes  accompanied  by  a  slight,  concealed  pain  in  that
part,  whitish  or  yellowish  expectoration,  temporary  asthma,
and  shortness  of  breath,  stitching  pain  in  the  affected  side
of  the  chest  when  walking  fast  during  severe  cold,  con-
tinual and  violent  fluent  and  dry  coryza,  complete  absence
of  smell  and  taste  ;  and  sad,  vexed,  solicitous  mood,  in
alternation  with  mercury. Pneumonia,  when  hepatiza-
tion threatens  to  set  in. Suspicious  cough,  with  weakness
and  emaciation,  hysteric  convulsions,  toothache,  leucor-


8


J0DIUM — IODINE.


rhcea,  hard  nodosity  of  the  labia,  occasional  tearing  accom-
panied by  continual  darting,  (in  a  patient  of  delicate  con-
stitution, having  suffered  formerly  with  herpes  scabiosus,
tearing  in  the  axillary  glands,  hard  nodosities  in  the  right
axilla  and  mamma,  discharge  of  blood  from  the  vagina,  and
her  mother  having  died  with  cancer  of  the  womb.)  Pul-
monary consumption,  tuberculous  and  pituitous.  Arthro-
pyosis  scrophulosa. Scrofulous  inflammation  of  the  knee,
considerable  bright-red,  shining,  hot,  tense  swelling  of  the
knee,  darting  stitches  and  burning  in  the  swelling,  small,
red  openings  discharging  a  bloody  and  watery  pus,  pain
increased  by  motion,  or  by  bending  the  knee,  or  pressing
upon  it. Dropsy  of  the  knee-joint. White  swelling  of  the
knee. Inflammation  of  the  synovial  membrane  of  the
knee  :  large,  elastic,  fluctuating  swelling  of  the  knee,  sim-
ple redness  of  the  skin,  with  bright-red,  hot,  painful,  scat-
tered blotches,  increased  temperature  of  the  knee,  dull
pains  in  the  interior  of  the  joint  while  the  body  is  extended
and  at  rest,  intense  pain  when  making  the  least  motion,  or
when  bending  or  pressing  the  part,  occasional  paroxysms
of  fever,  afterwards  a  small  opening  above  the  patella,  dis-
charging a  healthy  pus  in  the  beginning,  but  afterwards  a
clear,  light-yellow,  serous  fluid,  in  pretty  large  quantity.

Antidotes— Of  large  doses.  Starch  boiled  to  a  thin
glue  by  means  of  a  large  quantity  of  water,  and  given  to
the  patient  in  large  doses  ;  or,  in  case  of  necessity,  sugar-
water,  milk,  especially  asses'  milk  ;  tepid  baths  ;  sulphur
baths.  Merc  and  Ars.,  frequent  walks  in  the  open  air  ;
Op  Hyosc,  (in  a  case  of  endogastritis,  brought  on  by  abuse
of  iodine;)  Gratiola.  Altschuhl  says  he  has  cured  an
iodine  cachexia,  with  iodine  30,  2  pellets.  Antidotes  of
small  doses :  Ant.,  Ars.,  Camph.,  Chi.,  Chin,  sulph.,
Coff.,  Hep.  s.,  Op.,  Phosp.,  Spong.

Iodine  is  especially  useful  after,  or  in  alternation  with,

Amoral  Symptoms.— Despondency.- Gloomy  mood.
Sad,  melancholy  mood.  Hypochondriac  mood.  Sadness.
Out  of  humor  and  sensitive,  during  the  period  of  digestion,
from  noon  till  evening,  with  an  oppressive  sensation  in  the
throat  and  chest,  such  as  one  feels  when  one  is  about  to
weep. Oppression  of  the  chest. Continued  disposition


J  ODIUM  IODINE.


9


to  weep.  Alternate  disposition  to  weep  and  to  be  cheer-
ful. Oppressive  anxiety  after  having  performed  some  ma-
nual labor,  going  off  when  sitting.  Anguish. — Anxiety.
Great  anguish.  Oppression  of  the  chest.  Anguish  and
despondency  ;  the  patients  are  mostly  thinking  of  the  pre-
sent moment.  Impatient  moving  about ;  she  is  running
about  all  the  time,  and  never  sits  down  ;  nor  does  she
sleep  at  night ;  one  ought  to  suppose  her  crazy.  Restless-
ness— the  body  is  continually  moving.  Aversion  to  sitting
still.  He  apprehends  this  or  that  accident  from  every
trifle.  Discouragement.  Feeling  of  despondency,  oppres-
sive and  continuing  with  the  pain.  Aversion  to  work.
He  deems  himself  incapable  to  do  any  thing.  She  is  no
longer  phlegmatic  ;  she  has  become  a  blooming,  stronger,
and  more  animated  girl.  Vexed,  out  of  humor  ;  nothing
is  done  to  her  satisfaction.  Extreme  disposition  to  get
angry.  Increased  sensitiveness  and  irritability.  Sensi-
tiveness to  noise.  Increased  sensitiveness  to  external  im-
pressions. Irritated  nerves  and  feelings.  Excessive
nervous  irritation.  Excessively  merry  and  talkative  ;  she
does  not  give  any  one  a  chance  to  say  a  word.  Illusions
of  the  sense  of  tact. — Delirium.  Fixed,  immoveable
thoughts,  (21.  d.)

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  making  thought  difficult.
Obtusion  of  the  head  with  -great  disinclination  to  serious
labor.  Obtusion  of  the  head,  which  appears  to  come
from  the  back  and  move  up  along  the  nape  of  the  neck.
Obtusion  of  the  head,  becoming  an  oppressive  pain,  (a.  1  h.)
Slight  obtusion  of  the  head,  with  pressure  in  the  right  half
of  the  forehead,  and  great  hunger,  (a.  1,  2  h.)  Vertigo.
Vertigo,  drawing  one  forwards.  Vertigo  with  weakness,
early  in  the  morning.  Headache.  Headache,  so  violent
that  it  makes  him  almost  crazy.  Quickly  passing  pain  in
the  occiput.  Headache  in  warm  air,  when  driving  a  lono-
time  or  walking  fast.  Pain  in  the  forehead  and  top  of  the
head,  increasing  at  every  noise  or  conversation.  Headache
as  if  a  ribbon  were  tied  round  the  head  very  firmly.  Head-
ache in  the  forehead  ;  the  brain  feels  bruised  and  is  ex-
tremely sensitive  ;  the  whole  body,  and  especially  the
arms  are  weak  and  feel  paralysed  ;  he  had  to  lie  down  ;
accompanied  by  eructations  and  painful  sensitiveness  of

1*


10


JODIUM  IODINE.


the  external  head  during  motion  ; the  obtusion  of  the
head  and  painfulness  of  the  face  continue  even  the  next
day,  (a.  26  d.) Pressure  on  a  small  spot  of  the  forehead,
just  above  the  root  of  the  nose. Headache,  especially  in
the  left  side  towards  the  forehead,  frequently  returning.
Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  vertex,  for  10  minutes.
Headache,  especially  in  the  temples,  going  and  coming.
Aching  in  the  occiput,  moderate  when  at  rest,  violent  dur-
ing motion,  and  resulting  at  last  in  a  sensation  of  great
dreariness  in  the  whole  head,  (1.  d.) Aching  over  the
eyes,  towards  evening. Violent  aching  in  the  base  of  the
occiput,  in  the  afternoon,  in  the  open  air. Sharp  aching,
on  the  left  side  over  the  forehead. Drawing  pressure  in
the  left  upper  half  of  the  head,  as  far  as  the  temples.
Aching  and  sometimes  lancinating  headache.  Drawing
pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  as  far  as  the  teeth.  Tear-
ing, first  in  the  left,  afterwards  in  the  right  temporal  region,
almost  at  the  same  time. Tearing  headache  over  the  left
eye  and  in  the  temple. Tearing  with  pressure  on  the
right  side  over  the  forehead. Stitches  in  the  occiput,  im-
proved by  the  recumbent  posture. Stitches  in  the  top  of
the  head,  (a.  3  d.)  Throbbing  in  the  forehead,  without  any
pain. *  Throbbing  in  the  head  at  every  motion,  (a.  24  h.)
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head. The  congestion  of
blood  to  the  head  is  increased  ih  those  who  have  a  dispo-
sition for  it. Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  and  after-
wards, at  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  headache  of  half  an
hour,  recurring  at  5  o'clock. Pain  in  the  forehead,  as  of
sub-cutaneous  ulceration. Smarting  sore  feeling  in  the
occiput,  on  the  right  side,  over  the  ear,  towards  the  back
part  of  the  head,  in  the  skin.  Falling  off  of  the  hair.  Con-
siderable falling  off  of  the  hair.

Eyes.— Pain  in  the  orbits.  Pressure  in  the  eyes  as  of
sand.  Pressure  in  the  eyes.  Tension  over  the  right  eye,
the  eyes  being  somewhat  inflamed.  Tearing  around  the
right  eye,  especially  below  it.  Stitches  in  the  upper  part
of  the  left  eyeball.  Cutting  stitches  in  the  left  eye,  in  the
direction  of  the  external  can  thus.  •  Itching  in  the  canlhi.
Itching  of  the  eyelids.  Redness  and  swelling  of  the  eye-
lids, with  nightly  agglutination.  Inflamed  eyes.  Watery
white  swelling  of  the  eyelids. The  white  of  the  eye  is  of


JODIUM — IODINE.


11


a  dirty-yellow,  traversed  by  injected  veins.  Weak  feeling
around  the  eyes,  as  if  they  were  lying  deep,  especially  in
the  afiernoon.  Lachrymation.  Twitchings  of  the  eyes,
(in  a  few  hours.)  Continual  twitching  to  and  fro  of  the
lower  eyelid.  Tremor  of  the  eyelids.  Turbid  sight.
Light  looks  to  her  dimmer  and  more  indistinct.  Objects
seem  to  her  as  if  she  were  looking  at  them  through  a
gauze.  Obscuration  of  sight.  Weak  sight.  Sometimes
the  things  she  looks  at,  seem  to  her  multiplied;  she  is
not  able  "  then"  to  distinguish  them  clearly.  Dark  curls  are
floating  downwards  in  front  of  the  eyes,  sideways  and  close
to  the  direction  of  the  visual  ray,  (a.  16  h.)  Occasional
twinkling  before  the  eyes.  She  is  unable  to  do  fine  sew-
ing, on  account  of  the  stitches  flitting  before  her  eyes.
Sparks  before  the  eyes.  Fiery,  curved  rays  are  shooting
downwards  in  a  line  near  the  visual  ray,  and  likewise  at  a
small  distance  from  the  focus  of  the  ray,  round  about  the
eye,  but  more  upwards,  (a.  24  h.)

Ears. — Straining  pain  in  the  left  ear.  Forcing  in  the
right  ear.  Tearing  pressure  in  the  little  groove,  under  the
right  ear  and  near  it,  in  the  neck.  Small  yellow  scurf  on
the  concha.  Sensitiveness  of  the  hearing  to  the  noise,  (4.
d.)  *  Hardness  of  hearing.  Frequent  din  in  the  right
ear  as  if  in  a  mill.

Nose. — Pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the  nose,  when  blow-
ing it,  without  any  coryza.  Itching  stinging,  in  the  fore-
part of  the  septum  of  the  nose.  Red,  burning  spot  on
the  nose,  under  the  eye.  Itching  elevation  on  the  nose.
Small  little  scab  in  the  right  nostril.  Bleeding  of  the  nose
when  blowing  it. Profuse  bleeding  of  the  nose.

Face — The  complexion  becomes  changed.  Pale,  con-
tracted face.  Paleface.  *  Yellow  complexion.  The  yel-
low complexion  becomes  more  pale,  (curative  action.)
The  face  which  had  been  yellow  heretofore,  becomes
brown,  so  that  in  a  few  days  the  skin  of  a  female  of  28
years  looked  smoked.  The  features  become  disfigured,
altered.  Sunken  eyes.  Convulsive  twitchings  of  the  fa-
cial muscles.  Suppurating  ulcer  on  the  left  cheek  with
swelling  of  the  surrounding  glands,  and  a  hard  nodosity  at
the  place  which  the  ulcer  occupies,  dispersing  very  slovvly  ;


12


JOD1UM  IODINE.


shortly  after,  a  second  ulcer  appeared  near  the  former  ;  it
healed  more  speedily.

Teeth  and  Jaws. — Aching  in  the  right  upper  jaw.
Painless  swelling  in  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  (2.  d.)  Op-
pressive toothache  in  alternate  places,  in  the  molar  teeth,
on  both  sides. Clawing  toothache  in  the  posterior  molares
of  the  right  side. Drawing  pain  in  the  teeth  of  the  right
side,  towards  the  ear,  accompanied  by  stitches.  Cutting
drawing  and  sore  feeling  in  the  roots  or  the  gums  of  the
lower  incisores,  at  times  on  the  left,  at  times  on  the  right
side. Pain  as  from  looseness,  in  the  teeth  and  gums,  when
eating. In  the  morning,  the  teeth  are  covered  with  more
mucus,  are  coloured  more  yellow  and  are  blunted  more
rapidly  by  weak  vegetable  acids. The  gums  are  painful
to  the  touch. Increased  redness  of  the  gums.  Inflam-
mation and  swelling  of  the  gums. Bleeding  of  the  gums.
Ulcer  on  the  gums  of  one  of  the  lower  hollow  molares,  with
swelling  of  the  cheek  extending  to  the  lower  border  of  the
orbit. Vesicles  made  occasionally  their  appearance  in  the
mouth,  with  swelling  of  the  gums.

Mouth. — Aphthae  in  the  mouth,  with  ptyahsm.  Small
elevation  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  cheek  ;  in  the  be-
ginning they  felt  aching  and  sore  when  touched  ;  in  a  few
days  they  became  lancinating  and  cutting  like  an  ulcer,
especially  when  opening  the  mouth  widely,  when  eating
or  reading  aloud,  with  inflammation  of  the  parts  around.
The  glands  on  the  inner  side  of  the  cheeks,  are  intensely
painful,  as  if  one  had  sharp  vinegar  in  one's  mouth-
Smarting  and  sensation  as  of  pulling  in  the  tonsillse,  (im-
mediately.) Putrid  smell  from  the  mouth,  even  before
breakfast,  immediately  after  rinsing  the  mouth  with  pure
water. Troublesome  drvness  of  the  tongue.  Coated
tongue. *  Tongue  thickly  coated,  the  coating  looking  like
the°substances  that  were  thrown  up. Pressure  m  the  left
half  of  the  palate. Swelling  and  elongation  of  the  uvula
with  a  good  deal  of  spitting. Considerable  constriction

of  the  throat.  .  ■—

Throat— Constrictive  sensation  in  the  fauces,  ior-

menting  constriction  of  the  throat. Impeded  deglutition

when  drinkbg  water,  as  if  the  fauces  were  constricted  and

too  weak  to  press  the  beverage  down. Feeling  of  fulness


J  ODIUM — IODINE.


13


in  the  throat,  (6.  d.)  Pain  in  the  cesophagus,  increased  by-
pressing  upon  the  larynx.  Aching  on  the  right  side  in
the  throat,  more  between  than  during  the  acts  of  degluti-
tion. Tearing  in  the  throat,  above  the  larynx.  Stitches
in  the  throat,  apparently  in  the  larynx,  somewhat  percepti-
ble during  the  act  of  deglutition.  Itching  titillation  in  the
throat,  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  early  in  the  morning,
when  in  bed.  Disagreeable  scraping  in  the  fauces,  with
copious  secretion  of  saliva.  Burning  and  scraping  in  the
fauces,  passing  quickly.  Burning  and  hot  feeling  in  the
fauces.  Inflammation  and  ulcers  of  the  oesophagus.  In-
creased secretion  of  saliva.  Increased  secretion  of  sali-
va, obliging  one  to  spit  frequently,  for  several  days.  Fre-
quent and  watery  saliva  in  the  mouth.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Bad  taste  in  mouth,  especi-
ally when  the  stomach  is  either  quite  empty  or  quite  full.
Abominable  taste  in  mouth.  Salt  taste  in  mouth,  (1.  and
2.  d.)  Bitter  taste  in  mouth.  Bitter  taste,  in  the  after-
noon ;  sweet- plums  taste  bitter  to  her.  Sourish,  offensive
taste  in  mouth,  the  whole  day,  especially  when  smoking
tobacco.  Sweet  taste  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (6.  d.)
Thirst,  a  good  deal,  day  and  night,  (a.  24  h.)  Unusual,
increased  thirst.  Violent  thirst,  tormenting.  Decrease  of
appetite.  Total  want  of  appetite  and  sleep.  Increase  of
appetite.  Continued  increase  of  appetite.  Unusual
hunger.  Gnawing  hunger,  (a.  3  h.)  Violent,  craving
appetite.  Voracity.  *  Canine  hunger.  She  would  like  to
eat  again  shortly  after  a  meal ;  she  feels  much  better  after
having  eaten  a  good  deal.  He  feels  an  anguish,  unless
he  eats  every  3  or  4  hours  ;  but  he  must  take  care  not  to
eat  too  much.  The  digestive  functions  are  carried  on
with  more  rapidity  and  regularity,  the  stools  being  normal.
Alternate  canine  hunger  and  want  of  appetite.  Very
weak  digestion.  Week  feeling,  and  a  feeling  of  sickness
all  over  the  body  after  dinner.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Eructations.  Eructations  smell-
ing of  the  medicine.  Continued  empty  eructations,  from
morning  till  evening,  as  if  every  thing  he  cats  or  drinks
were  transmuted  into  air.  Hiccough.  Qualmishness  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  every  day,  passing  off  after  eating,
with  pressure  on  the  stomach. *  Nausea. Nausea  imme-


14


JODIUM — IODINE.


diately  after  rising,  with  spasmodic  pain  in  the  stomach.
Inclination  to  vomit.  Inclination  to  vomit,  in  paroxysms,
with  heartburn,  with  sensation  as  of  the  stomach  being
spoiled.  Vomiting.  Violent  vomiting.  Incessant  vomit-
ing. Obstinate  vomiting,  occurring  especially  after  eating.
Continual  vomiting  with  diarrhoea.  Yellowish,  saltish
vomiting.  Vomiting  of  bile.  Increased  secretion  of  bile.
Increased  secretion  of  the  gastric  and  pancreatic  juice.
Gastric  derangement  with  constipation.

Stomach.— Pains  in  the  stomach. Pains  over  the
stomach. Pain  in  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning,
going  off  after  an  eructation. Most  violent  pain  in  the
stomach. Excessive  pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels.
Tormenting  pain  in  the  stomach. Pains  in  the  stomach
with  copious  bilious  evacuations. Violent  pains  in  the
stomach  and  oesophagus,  which  felt  obstructed  and  did
not  brook  contact. Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,
increased  after  every  meal. Fulness  and  distension  of  the
stomach,  with  trembling  and  increased  warmth  in  the
abdominal  cavity,  and  a  movement  taking  place  from  that
cavity  to  the  surface  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.  Ten-
sion in  the  stomach  and  abdomen,  preceded  by  movements
in  that  cavity. Spasmodic  pain  in  the  stomach.  Spasms
of  the  stomach,  frequently  recurring. Gnawing  pain  in
the  upper  part  of  the  stomach. Gnawing,  corroding
pains  in  the  stomach. Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
(a.  5  d.) Prickings  in  me  upper  part  of  the  pit  ot  the
stomach.  Pulsations  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Increased
warmth  in  the  region  of  the  stomach. Burning  in  the
stomach. Inflammation  of  the  stomach  m  the  region  ot  the
orifice. Small,  linear  ulcers  in  the  stomach  having  cor-
roded the  mucous  membrane,  which  was  swollen  near  the
orifice,  and  covered  with  a  crust  of  coagulated  lymph  ;—

in  animals.  . £  ,

Abdomen.— Decrease  of  pain  m  the  region  of  the  liver
and  pit  of  the  stomach.  Pressure  in  the  right  hypochon-
drium. Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver  painful  to  the
touch.  Pressure  and  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver.
The  left  hypochondrium  is  hard  and  is  intensely  painhil
when  being  pressed  upon.  Single  attacks  of  sore  pressure
in  the  left  hypochondrium. Sharp  stitches  in  the  left


JODIUM — IODINE.


15


hypochondrium,  as  if  from  incarcerated  flatulence.  Pain
in  the  epigastrium. Great  painfulness  of  the  whole  abdo-
men, as  if  from  inflammation  of  the  omentum. Pains  in
the  abdomen  extending  to  the  dorsal  spine.  Oppressive
pain  in  the  epigastrium,  between  the  pit  of  the  stomach
and  the  umbilicus. Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  near  the
right  hip. Frequent  paroxysms  of  pressure  in  the  ab-
domen, mostly when sitting, and  gradually  abating
when stretching one's-self, several  days in  succes-
sion. Distension  in  the  epigastrium,  with  sharp  pressure
as  if  from  flatulence,  in  different  places,  beginning  after
dinner,  during  the  whole  period  of  digestion. *  Big,  dis-
tended abdomen  ;  she  was  unable  to  lie  in  a  horizontal
position,  lest  she  should  suffocate. Painful  tension  of  the
abdomen,  with  unusual  pressing. Drawing  cramp-pain  in
the  epigastrium,  beginning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
*  Colic. *  Pinching  and  aching  colic. Cutting  in  the
umbilical  region,  with  papescent  stools. Violent  cutting
in  the  umbilical  region,  with  desire  for  stool.  Drawing
and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  right  kidney.  Burning
tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  near  the  hip.
Stitches  in  the  side  of  the  abdomen. Sharp  stitches  in
the  abdomen,  on  the  left  side. Pulsations  in  the  abdomen.
Frequent  pressing  and  bearing-down  towards  the  lower
opening  of  the  pelvis,  with  frequent  diarrhoea-stools.  The
abdominal  symptoms  return,  especially  after  having  eaten
something. The  abdominal  symptoms  recur  after  eating,
for  days,  weeks,  and  even  months. Ascites. Pressure  in
the  right  inguinal  region. Disappearance  of  the  swelling
of  the  inguinal  glands,  (curative  effect.) The  region  of
the  hernial  sac  becomes  inflamed  from  the  truss,  (6.  d.)
Rumbling  in  the  side  where  the  hernia  exists,  which  may
be  felt  and  heard  ;  during  an  inspiration. *  Incarceration
of  flatulence  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Pressing
movements  in  the  abdomen,  beginning  in  the  stomach  and
extending  towards  the  abdomen,  especially  towards  the  os
pubis,  the  bladder  and  the  scrotum,  rarely  accompanied
by  oppression  in  the  direction  of  the  chest,  sometimes
with  cutting. Frequent  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Emis-
sion of  flatulence  and  stool,  with  slight  ,  cutting  in  the  ab-
domen. Increased  emission  of  flatulence. "Emission  of


16


JODIUM  IODINE.


flatulence,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs. Increase  of  the
peristaltic  motion  of  the  intestines.

Stool. — Desire  for  stool,  without  any  evacuation  taking
place  ;  it  takes  place  with  great  facility  after  taking  some
cold  milk. Indolent  stool. Difficult  stool. *  Constipa-
tion, sometimes  lasting  a  good  while. Obstinate  constipa-
tion. Hard, knotty, dark-coloured stools.  Irregular
stools  ;  at  times  constipation,  at  times  diarrhoea.  Irregular
stool ;  alternate  constipation  and  diarrhoea,  with  distension
of  the  abdomen, rumbling  and tormenting  flatulence.
Sometimes  obstinate  constipation,  sometimes  violent  diar-
rhoea. Several  whitish  stools  a  day,  more  soft  than  usual.
Increased  stool. Four  papescent  stools  a  day,  every  stool
succeeded  by  burning  at  the  anus. Copious,  papescent
stools. Inclination  to  diarrhoea. Diarrhea. Long  and
exhausting  diarrhoea. Diarrhoea  early  in  the  morning.
Violent  diarrhoea,  with  colic. Frequent  diarrhoea,  with
pressing  and  bearing-down  towards  the  abdomen.  Papes-
cent stool,  with  cutting  in  the  umbilical  region.  Copious
discharge  of  a  watery,  foamy,  whitish  mucus,  with  pinch-
ing around  the  umbilicus,  and  pressure  upon  the  vertex.
Discharges  of  thick  mucus,  or  purulent,  part  of  the  faeces
beincr  retained,  like  dysentery. Discharges  of  bloody
mucus,  fetid. Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  after  the  morning
stool,  which  is  rather  hard  than  soft. Pressure  in  the
rectum,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  (a.  36  n.)  Violent
itching  of  the  rectum,  as  of  ascandes. Small,  torcing
stitches  in  the  anus,  when  sitting. Smarting  as  from  ex-
coriation in  the  rectum,  after  a  good  stool.  Frequent
smarting  as  from  excoriation,  itching  and  burning  of  the
anus. Burning  of  the  anus,  in  the  evening.

Urinary  Organs  — Obstinate  retention  of  urine,  £>ne
emits  but  little,  red  urine,  (a.  48  h.)  Scanty  emission  ot
a  dark-coloured  urine.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with
scanty  emission.  Unceasing  desire  to  urinate.  Frequent
micturition,  with  desire.  Increased  micturition.  Copious
and  frequent  emission  of  a  light-yellow  watery  urine.  In-
creased1 secretion  of  thickly  urine,  with  dark  sediment.
Involuntary  emission  of  urine,  (a.  3  d )  Dark,  turbid,
sometimes*  milky  urine.  Dark,  fow-gre^Jg.
Ammoniacal  odor  of  the  urine. Smarting,  corroding


JODIUM  IODINE.


17


urine,  while  emitting  it.  Itching  smarting  as  if  from
excoriation,  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.  Intensely  pain-
ful cutting  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  between  the  acts
of  micturition.  Prickings  in  the  external  orifice  of  the
urethra,  (a.  16  d.)  Frequent  intensely  painful  drawing  in
the  forepart  of  the  penis ;  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish
whether  the  drawing  is  more  in  the  urethra  or  the  glans.

Genital  Organs. — Gurgling  tearing,  on  the  right  side
and  near  the  penis. Aching  on  the  right  side,  near  the
penis. Violent  itching  of  the  glans. Itching  of  the
glans,  recurring  frequently. Violent  titillation  of  the  glans
and  under  it. Cutting  drawing  in  the  corona  glandis.
Frequent  pressing  and  bearing  down  towards  the  testes.
One  of  the  testes  is  considerably  drawn  up  to  the  abdo-
men. A  painless  swelling  of  the  right  testis  becomes
t scattered,  amidst  violent  itching  and  burning,  and  oozing
c  .out  of  a  fetid  humor,  (curative  effect.) An  induration  of
>£the  prostate  gland  becomes  scattered,  (curative  effect.)
|  <t Erethism  of  the  genital  organs. Increase  of  the  sexual
£  £5 instinct.  '  The  erections  take  place  slowly,  (5.  d.)  Violent
§  -pressing  in  the  hypogastrium  towards  the  female  organs  of
^  generation. Labor-like spasms  in  the  hypogastrium.
u Speedy  suppression  of  dropsy  of  the  ovaries,  (curative
effect  ?) Induration  of  the  uterus  is  speedily  transmuted
into  cancer. Diminished  induration  of  the  uterus,  (cura-
tive effect.) Diminution  of  the  cancerous  degenerations  in
in  the  neck  of  the  uterus,  (curative  effect.) Hysterics  of
nubile  girls. Cessation  of  the  actually  flowing  menses.
*  Menses  delay  8  days,  with  vertigo  and  palpitation  of  the
heart. Menstrual  irregularity. Increase  of  the  menstrual
flow. Menses  unusually  premature,  copious  and  violent.
Causes easily uterine hemorrhage. Violent  uterine
hemorrhage,  lasting  4  weeks,  in  a  plethoric  female  of  24
years. Cessation  of  a  uterine  hemorrhage,  which  occurred
at  every  stool,  together  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and
pains  in  the  loins  and  small  of  the  back,  (curative  effect.)
The  menses  are  preceded  by  rising  of  heat  to  the  head,
with  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  tension  in  the  neck,  which
became  thicker. Disappearance  of  the  usual  troublesome
precursory  symptoms  of  the  metises. Pains  in  the  small
of  the  back  at  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  which  took


18  JODIUM — IODINE.

place  in  proper  time.  Great  weakness  during  the  menses.
Cessation  of  the  pains  and  unpleasant  symptoms  accom-
panying the  menses;  they  flow  without  any  trouble.
Palpitation  of  the  heart  after  the  menses.  Complete  ces-
sation of  the  leucorrhoeal  discharge,  (curative  effect.)
Complete  cessation  of  an  old  leucorrhoea,  which  was  most
abundant  at  the  time  of  the  menses,  made  the  thighs  sore,
and  corroded  the  linen,  (curative  effect.)  Jhe  corroding
leucorrhoea  becomes  more  and  more  mild  and  scanty,

{curative  effect.)  ,  .

Cold,  Catarrh.— Sneezing,  without  coryza,  with  im-
mediate and  considerable  protrusion  of  the  nasal  mucus.
Obstruction  of  the  nostrils,  (a.  28  h.) Frequent  and  dry
coryza  (especially  in  the  evening ;)  it  becomes  fluent  in
the  open  air,  with  much  discharge  from  the  chest.  Fluent
coryza,  with  much  sneezing. Fluent  coryza  like  water.
Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  nose,  for  several
days. A  quantity  of  yellow  mucus  is  expelled  from
the  nose. Increased  secretion  of  nasal  mucus.  Pam
of  the  larynx. Pain  in  the  larynx,  with  discharge  ot
hardened  mucus. Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  la-
rynx, extending  as  far  as  the  fauces,  as  if  these  parts
were  swollen. Aching  and  stitches  in  the  region  of  the
larynx  and  the  sub-lingual  glands,  coming  on  frequently  on
the  same  day. Pressure  in  the  larynx,  which  obliges  one
to  hawk  up  a  quantity  of  tough  mucus Increased  pain
of  the  oesophagus,  when  pressing  upon  the  larynx  Con-
traction and  heat  in  the  larynx. Contraction  and  heat  of
the  throat. Soreness  of  the  throat  and  chest,  when  n
bed,  with  wheezing  in  the  throat  and  ^wn,g  pains  m
the  lun«rs,  corresponding  with  the  beat  of  the  heart,  in
flammation  of  J  trachea. Roughness  of  the  trachea,  the
S  day. Hoarseness. *  Hoarseness  in  the  morning.
Ho°nen78s  for  more  than  two  weeks. Hoarseness  in  the
SoS  after  rising,  which  obliges  one  to  hawk  up  tough
mucus Hoarseness  the  whole  day. The  voice  becom es
deeper,  and  finally  quite  deep. Sensation,  as  rf  someth  g
Z  }  J„P<\  in  the  larynx  which  can  be  hawked  up,  the
^}i^nd^rii^  Intolerable  tingling -and  tickling
Tnit  ffiZtSEhSl  only  be  relieved  by  coughing  and
c  eanng  ke  throat,  with  accumulator i  of  water  .  the
mouth  early  in  the  morning,  when  m  bed. Violent  clear


IODIUM — IODINE.


19


ing  of  the  throat,  (2.  d.)  Frequent  clearing  of  the  throat,
early  in  the  morning.  Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  the
trachea.  Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  bronchial
tubes.  Increased  secretion  of  mucus  in  the  throat,  with
roughness  of  voice.  The  secretion  of  mucus  extends  as
far  as  the  Eustachian  tube,  a  kind  of  soreness  remaining
behind  in  the  throat.  Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  throat
in  the  morning  after  rising,  with  soreness  in  the  throat.
Great  accumulation  of  tough  mucus  in  the  throat,  in  the
evening.  Discharge  of  tough  mucus  from  the  throat,  with
pressure  in  the  throat,  as  if  something  were  lodged  in  it
which  he  imagines  he  is  able  to  swallow,  in  the  morning.
Rapid  and  permanent  disappearance  of  a  continual  incli-
nation to  hawk  up  tough  mucus  from  the  trachea ;  this
hawking  is  very  troublesome,  and  accompanied  with  ting-
ling and  stinging  in  the  larynx.  (Curative  effects.)  Irri-
tation, which  occasions  a  cough.  *  Irritation  and  cough,
brought  on  by  a  violent  tickling  in  the  throat.  Cough,
with  exertion ;  she  came  near  vomiting ;  the  cough
ceases  after  a  discharge  of  mucus.  Cough,  with  pressure
on  the  chest  and  difficulty  of  breathing.  Evening-cough.
Frequent  and  dry  cough  in  the  evening.  Dry,  short,  and
hacking  cough.  Dry  cough.  Frequent  and  dry  cough.
A  good  deal  of  dry  cough,  with  dyspnoea,  pressure  and
burning  of  the  chest.  Frequently  a  deep  and  dry  cough,
excited  by  pressure  in  the  chest.  Deep  and  dry  cough,
with  stitches  in  the  chest.  Occasional  irritation  with
cough,  accompanied  by  expectoration  of  tough  mucus.
Short  cough  caused  by  a  tickling  in  the  throat,  accom-
panied by  a  thick  yellow  discharge,  good  appetite,  and
wretched  appearance.  Cough  accompanied  by  expectora-
tion of  mucus ;  previous  to  the  cough,  one  experiences  a
sensation  of  heaviness  extending  from  the  throat  as  far  as
the  chest,  aggravating  the  breathing.  Rattling  of  mucus
in  the  chest,  with  roughness  under  the  sternum,  and  op-
pression of  the  chest.  Discharge  of  mucus  from  the
chest.  Discharge  of  mucus,  occasionally  mixed  with
blood.  *  Discharge  of  mucus  streaked  with  blood.

Chest. — Iodine  increases  pulmonary  consumption.
Pulmonary  consumption.  *  Violent  difficulty  of  breathing.
Aggravated  respiration. Oppressed  breathing.  Oppres-


20


JODIUM — IODINE.


sion  of  the  chest. *  Asthma,  with  pain  during  a  deep  in-
spiration, more  violent  and  rapid  beating  of  the  heart,  and
smaller  and  more  frequent  pulse. Asthma,  the  respira-
tion in  the  trachea  being  impeded  for  a  fortnight.  Dif-
ficulty of  dilating  the  chest  when  taking  an  inspiration.
Sensation  as  if  he  had  to  conquer  a  great  obstacle  in
dilating  the  chest  during  an  inspiration. *  Want  of  breath.
Suppression  of  breath. Suffocating  catarrh. Feeling  of
weakness  in  the  chest,  and  in  the  region  of  the  heart.
Pain  in  the  chest. Sore  pain  in  the  chest,  continuing  in
both  sides  during  respiration and  contact.  Pressure,
rather  deep  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest. Aching  in  the
right  half  of  the  chest,  aggravated  by  every  inspiration,
for  one  hour  after  dinner. Pressure  on  the  chest  and  op-
pressed breathing,  as  after  inspiring  the  vapour  of  sulphur.
Oppression  and  burning  in  the  middle  and  sometimes  also
in  the  sides  of  the  chest,  with  dry  cough. Sharp  stitches
in  the  middle  of  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  only  during  an
expiration. Sharp  stitches  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right
half  of  the  chest,  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  during  an
inspiration. Congestion  of  blood  to  the  chest,  with  incli-
nation to  inflammation. Violent  pulsations  in  the  chest,
and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  increased  by  every  muscular
exertion  to  such  an  extent  that  she  was  unable  to  support
herself  for  one  minute  without  being  near  tainting  ;  a
quiet,  horizontal  position  gave  her  the  greatest  relief.
*  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  which  might  have  been  heard
at  the  distance  of  a  few  paces. Palpitation  the  whole
day,  until  the  moment  of  going  to  bed. Spasmodic  palpi-
tation of  the  heart; she  feels  it  as  low  down  as  the
umbilicus,  but  mostly  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  lne
palpitation  of  the  heart  disappears  entirely.  (Curative
effect.)  Sensation  as  of  the  heart  being  squeezed  together.
Burning  and  stinging  tension  in  the  integuments  of  the
chest. Tearing  in  the  integuments  of  the  right  side  of
the  chest. Increase  of  the  mammae,  accompanied  with
decrease  of  the  goitre,  in  several  females  Occasional
3  g  of  the^mamm*. Dwindling,  withering  of  the
Zmmae Disappearance  of  the  ad.pose  tissue  in  the
' Dwindling  of  the  formerly  full  and  round  mam-
;™hat  two  yea£  after  the  use  of  iodine,  every  trace


JODIUM — IODINE.


21


of  the  mammae  was  lost.  Nursing  a  baby  is  accompanied
with  disagreeable  consequences.

Back. — Periodically  increasing  and  decreasing  aching
in  the  sacrum  and  os  coccygis.  Stitches  in  the  small  of
the  back,  (a.  15  d.)  Itching  of  the  back,  over  the  right
hip.  Spasms  in  the  back.  Stitches  in  the  scapulae,  when
lifting  something,  (a.  14  d.)  Burning  on  the  right  scapula.
Rheumatic  clawing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  near  the
shoulder  ;  it  is  apparently  alleviated  by  an  eructation,  but
it  frequently  returns  afterwards.  Rheumatic  tension  in
the  right  side  of  the  neck.  Tearing  in  the  right  side  of
the  neck.  Tension  in  the  outer  neck.  Constriction  of
the  neck.  Unpleasant  sensation  of  constriction  in  the
neck.  The  neck  becomes  larger  by  animated  talking.
Increase  of  the  goitre,  it  becomes  more  painful.  Enlarge-
ment and  painful  induration  of  the  goitre.  Pains  and
pulsations  in  the  goitre.  Painful  tension  in  the  goitre.
Continual  sensation  of  constriction  in  the  goitre.  Enlarge-
ment and  induration  of  the  goitre  in  the  first  days,  fol-
lowed by  a  decrease.  Decrease  of  the  goitre,  (curative
effect.)  Permanent  disappearance  of  the  glandular  sivell-
ings  of  the  neck  and  nape  of  the  neck.  Disappearance
of  old,  hard,  or  soft  sivellings  of  the  thyroid  gland,  and
likewise  of  large  goitres,  (curative  effect.)  Redness  of
the  neck  and  chest,  as  if  those  parts  were  ecchymosed.
Yellow  spots  on  the  neck.

Superior  Extremities. — Induration  of  the  axillary-
glands.  Disappearance  of  the  glandular  swellings  in  the
axilla.  Drawing  tearing  pains  in  the  shoulder,  which  is
abnormally  elevated,  (2.  d.)  Rheumatic  pain  in  the  left
shoulder.  Violent  stitches  in  the  shoulder-joint,  even
when  at  rest.  Pain  in  the  external  surface  of  the  humerus,
waking  one  from  sleep  and  becoming  aggravated  by  lying
upon  the  arm.  Rheumatic  pains  in  the  arms.  Tearing
pain  in  both  arms,  after  performing  some  manual  labor.
Paralytic  *  weakness  in  the  arms,  early  in  the  morning,
when  waking  up,  in  bed.  Subsultus  tendinum  in  the
arms.  Tearing  in  the  elbow  of  the  left  side.  Pressure  in
the  bend  of  the  left  elbow.  Painful  stitches  in  the  right
wrist-joint.  Pain  as  from  contusion,  in  the  upper  surface
of  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  index-finger,  increased  by


22


JODIUM— IODINE.


contact. Tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right
index-finger. Heat  in  the  hands. Tremor  of  the  hands.
Slight  tremor  of  the  hands. Violent  tremor  of  the  hands,
so  that  he  cannot  use  them  except  at  certain  hours  of  the
day. Zigzag  movements  of  the  hands. Subsultus  ten-
dinum  in  the  hands. Round,  burning-itching  spot  on  the
right  hand,  between  the  thumb  and  index-finger,  covered
with  two  whitish  vesicles  ;  rubbing  made  it  feel  easy  ;  it
went  off  on  the  third  day. Tensive  pain  in  the  joints  of
the  fingers,  when  bending  them,  as  if  they  would  break  ;
with  some  swelling  when  stretched,  and  painfulness  when
pressing  upon  them,  (after  a  few  days.) Tearing  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  right  thumb. Tearing  in  the  knuckle
of  the  right  little  finger. Tearing  in  the  whole  of  the
index  and  middle-finger  of  the  left  hand. Tremor  of  the
fingers. Subsultus  tendinum  in  the  fingers. Panaris  of
the  left  index-finger,  from  a  slight  stitch  in  the  finger,  near

the  nail.  .  .

Inferior  Extremities.— Pressure  in  the  lett  halt  oi
the  nates,  apparently  in  the  os  ischium.  Intermittent,
sharp  tearing  between  the  left  hip  and  the  head  of  the
femur,  increased  by  moving  the  joint. Cramp-like  sensa-
tion in  the  thighs  and  legs,  only  when  sitting,  not  when
lying  down,  walking  or  standing. Rheumatic  drawing  in
the  whole  of  the  left  lower  limb,  especially  the  thigh  and
knee,  with  humming  in  the  heel,  in  the  evening,  when  m
bed  ;  rather  increased  by  motion. Heaviness  of  the  lower
limbs,  as  if  they  were  made  of  lead. Swelling  of  the
lower  limbs. Swelling  and  trembling  of  the  lower  limbs.
(Edematous  swelling  of  the  lower  limbs. Uneasiness  in
the  lower  limbs. Trembling  of  the  lower  limbs,  making
walking  difficult,  and  uncertain. Paralysis  of  the  lower
limbs. Pain  of  the  thigh,  especially  at  night,  when  m  bed.
Pains  of  a  peculiar  kind,  in  the  thighs. Rheumatic  pain
in  the  left  thigh. Clawing  tearing  in  the  left  thigh,  near
the  head  of  the  femur. Sharp,  lancinating  tearing  in  the
middle  of  the  thigh,  towards  the  inner  side.  Twitchings
of  the  muscles  of  the  thigh. Soreness  of  the  thighs  in  a
female,  where  they  rub  against  one  another  in  walking.
Tearing  in  the  left  knee. Dull  tearing  in  the  outer  side
of  the  bend  of  the  right  knee. Disappearance  of  a  white


JODIUM  IODINE.


23


swelling  of  the  knee,  (curative  effect.)  Pain  of  the  leg,
along  the  tibia,  as  if  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration.  Tear-
ing in  both  sides  of  the  leg,  close  above  the  ankles.
Violent  spasm,  with  twitchings,  in  the  ankle-joint,  at  night.
Spasms  in  the  feet.  Aching  cramp-pain  in  the  foot,  from
the  middle  toe  to  the  tarsus.  Sharp,  continued  pain  in  the
inner  half  of  the  right  heel.  Single,  sharp  stitches  in  the
ankles.  Weight  of  the  feet,  as  if  they  were  made  of  lead.
Swelling  of  the  feet,  followed  by  rapid  emaciation  of  the
same.  (Edematous  swelling  of  the  feet.  Subsultus  ten-
dinum  in  the  feet.  Acrid  sweat  of  the  feet,  corroding  the
skin.  Lancinating  tearing  under  the  nail  of  the  left  big
toe. Pain  in  the  corns.

General  Symptoms. — Erratic  pains  in  the  joints.
Rheumatic  pains  in  the  trunk,  neck  and  arms.  Numb
feeling  in  the  thighs  and  legs.  Numb  feeling  and  trembling
in  the  limbs.  Paralysis  of  the  limbs.  Liability  to  cold,
bringing  on  ophthalmia.  Stinging  itching  in  different
parts  of  the  body.  Sensation  as  of  violent  flea-bites  over
the  whole  body,  day  and  night.  Itching  of  the  cicatrix  of
an  ulcer  upon  the  thigh  which  had  been  healed  for  years
past.  Itching  pimples  on  the  old  cicatrix.  Small,  red,
dry  pimples  on  the  arms,  chest  and  back,  itching  in  the
beginning.  Dirty-yellow  color  of  the  skin,  from  5  to  6
weeks.  Rough,  dry  skin.  Glandular  indurations.  Dis-
appearance of  single  glandular  swellings  in  the  nape  of
the  neck,  axilla  and  groin,  (curative  effect.)  Excites  the
glandular  system,  the  glands  of  the  buccal  cavity,  also  the
stomach,  liver,  the  pancreas,  and  promotes  the  process  of
secretion  in  these  organs.  Pulsations  in  all  the  arteries,
at  every  muscular  effort.  Extremely  troublesome  pulsa-
tions in  all  the  larger  trunks.  Easy  erethism  of  the  arte-
rial system,  with  obtusion  of  the  head  and  subsequent
headache.  The  circulation  is  easily  excited  and  accele-
rated. Erethism  of  the  vascular  system,  especially  the
veins.  Orgasm  of  the  blood.  Violent  orgasm.  Inclina-
tion to  hemorrhage.  Hemorrhage  from  different  organs.
Great  irritation  of  the  nervous  system.  Increased  sensi-
bility of  the  whole  body.  Impatience  in  all  the  limbs.
Uneasiness  and  nervousness,  with  trembling  extending
from  the  region  of  the  stomach  to  all  the  parts  of  the  peri-


24


JODIUM — IODINE.


phery,  as  if  he  would  begin  to  tremble,  or  to  sweat  all
over,  with  an  increase  of  warmth  all  over,  as  if  coming
from  the  stomach;  afterwards  pressure  in  the  region  of
the  heart,  heaviness  on  the  chest,  with  difficult  breathing,
and  acceleration  of  the  pulse  by  7  or  8  beats.

Spasms,  Fainting  Fits.— Trembling. Trembling  of
the  limbs. Trembling  of  the  limbs,  especially  the  hands.
Trembling  of  the  fingers  and  eyelids. Trembling  of  a
peculiar  kind. Trembling,  first  of  the  hands,  then  ot  the
arms,  feet  and  back,  his  walk  is  vacillating  and  unsteady  ;
his  hand  moves  in  zigzag,  he  is  unable  to  approach  any
thing  to  his  mouth  in  a  straight  line  ;  when  at  rest,  the
trembling  parts  may  be  held  still  easily  :  general  exercise
is  painful  and  the  circulation  accelerated,  with  a  small,
wiry  pulse. Spasms. Spasmodic  movements  of  the
limbs. Violent  spasms  and  convulsed  movements  of  the
arms,  back  and  feet,  ceasing  scarcely  a  moment.  Sub-
sultus  tendinum. Subsultus  tendinum  in  arms,  fingers,
and  feet. Catching  at  flocks. A  kind  of  Asiatic  cholera.
Difficult,  vacillating  gait,  from  trembling  of  the  limbs.
Heaviness in  the  limbs,  early  in  the  morning,  (8.  d.)
Great  lassitude,  in  the  afternoon,  after  a  short  walk,  with
a  sensation  as  if  one  had  not  yet  taken  breakfast,  but
without  any  hunger. Weakness,  she  sweats  when  talking
Weakness. Complete  prostration  of  strength. Out  of
humour,  weary  and  slow  to  move.  Weak  feeling.  Weak-
ness of  the  muscles. Long  weakness  of  the  muscles-
Decrease  of  strength. Loss  of  strength. Great  prostra-
tion of  strength. Inclination  to  fainting  fits  and  spasms.
Fainting  fits. Emaciation. General  emaciation,  hud-
den,  excessive  emaciation. Excessive  emaciation  ;  her
arms  and  body  were  almost  without  any  flesh  her  breast
was  quite  flat,  her  calves  had  disappeared,  and  her  thighs
were  as  large  as  her  fore-arms  used  to  be  in  her  healths
days. Emaciation  lasting  one  year,  until  one  does  not
know  him  any  more,  with  general  muscular  weakness  and
unusual  appetite. Chronic  emaciation,  pale  face  and  ma-
cular weakness. Emaciation  with  hectic  fever.  Return
of  embonpoint  and  cheerfulness,  (curative  effect.)  In-
creased embonpoint,  (curative  effect.) Disappearance  of
a  remarkable  phlegma  in  a  girl ;  she  becomes  stronger


JODIUM — IODINE.


25


and  more  lively,  and  the  movements  of  her  muscles  become
more  easy,  (curative  effect.)  Swelling  and  pain  of  the
affected  parts.  Disappearance  of  a  fungus  arlicularis
which  had  come  on  in  consequence  of  measles,  (curative
effect.)  (Edematous  swelling  of  the  whole  body,  which
did  not  pass  off.  Dropsical  swellings.  Anasarca.  Ana-
sarca and  ascites.  Apoplexy.  Death,  with  either  local,
or  general  inflammation.

Sleep.— No  desire  for  sleep,  (6.  d.) Restless  sleep.
Restless  sleep,  with  anxious  dreams.  Sleeplessness.  Sleep-
lessness for  eight  days  ;  she  did  not  sleep  a  wink.  Sleep
full  of  dreams. Vivid  dreams,  from  which  he  would  like  to
rouse  himself ;  but  is  not  able  ;  with  feeling  of  weakness
after  waking  up. Dreams  which  he  is  unable  to  recollect,
with  sound  sleep. Anxious  dreams. Dreams  about  dead
persons. She  dreams  every  night :  of  swimming  in  the
water,  walking  in  the  mud,  of  her  daughter  having  fallen
into  a  well. Cold  feet,  at  night. Cold  skin. He  is
frequently  shaken  by  unusual  chilliness,  even  when  in  a
warm  room  ;  he  does  not  feel  well  during  the  day.  In-
creased warmth  of  the  skin. Increase  of  animal  heat.
Flying  heat. Fever,  where  chills  alternated  with  flushes
of  heat. Feverish  sensations. Fever  with  delirium,  and
subsultus  tendinum. Fever  with  dryness  and  coldness  of
the  skin,  soft,  quick  pulse,  delirium,  subsultus  tendinum
and  grasping  at  flocks. Quartan  fever. Pulse  strong
large  and  full. Quick,  hard  pulse.  Accelerated,  increased
pulse. Quicker  pulse,  increased  by  15  beats.  Pulse
increased  to  86  beats. Increased;  full,"hard  pulse.  Small
wiry,  accelerated  pulse. Small,  hard  pulse,  and  so  quick
that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  count  the  beats.  Small,
very  frequent,  compressed  pulse. Soft  and  quick  pulse.
Ihe  beats  of  the  heart  and  the  pulsations  of  arteries
are  synchronous;  the  pulse  was  small  and  weak,  and
not  much  accelerated,  when  at  rest;  at  every  motion
the  quickness  of  the  pulse  and  the  beats  of  the  heart
are synchronous. Night-sweat. Profuse  nieht-svveat
and  little  good  sleep. In  the  morning  she  vvakes  up
with  sweat,  and  afterwards  feels  weaker. Sourish  night-
sweat,  all  over,  every  morning;  with  great  faintness  in
the  lower  limbs  during  the  first  hour.

2


26  KALI  CARBONICUM-

KALI  CARBONICUM.

Dynamise  one  drop  of  the  carbonate  of  potash  in  the
usual  fashion.  Kali  has  been  found  most  useful  in  the  fol-
lowing affections  : —

Ou?of  humor;  tendency  to  start;  want  of  memory  ,
dizziness  :  unpleasant  sensation  of  dulness  ot  the  head  ,
vertigo,  apparently  from  the  stomach  ;  headache  when  rid-
ing in  a  carriage  ;  headache  when  sneezing  or  coughing  ;
headache  early  in  the  morning  ;  headache  with  nausea  ;
aching  in  the  occiput ;  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,
humming  in  the  head  ;  great  Ability  of  the  external  head
to  cold  ;  scurfy  formation  about  the  head  j  dryness  of  the
hair  on  the  held  ;  falling  off  of  the  hair  ;  morning-sweat
on  "he  forehead  ;  swelling  of  the  eye  ;  agglutination  of  he
eyes  early  in  the  morning  ;  lachrymation  of  the ^  eyes
soots  hovering  before  the  eyes  ;  the  eyes  are  dazzled  by
Te  light;  stitches  in  the  ear  ;  stitches  in  the  ears  from
wTthhf  outwards  ;  weak  hearing-,  dull  hearing  grated
condition  of  the  internal  nose;  dulness  of  smell,  neat
in  the  face  j  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face ;  yellow  com-
pletion bloated  condition  of  the  face  ;  drawing  pain  in
the  face; toothache  when  eating;  stinging  toothache,
accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  palate  '  ha^ng -  upof  J£
ms  •  «our  taste  in  the  mouth ;  spoiled  taste  ,  bitter  ta.te
in  rnouthl  canine  hunger  ;  great  inclination  to  eat  sugar  ;
Sequent  'eructations  ;  "sour  eructations  ;  ™  mchna-
tion  to  vomit,  with  anguish  ;  nausea  when  eating  ,  reple
! nfll  ratine  '  tension  across  the  stomach  ;  pinching

Ifss  on  o  flatulence  ;  inactivity  of  the  rectum  ;  dtfficd
emission  account  of  their  large  size  ,


KALI CARBONICUM.  27

the  anus  ;  aching  in  the  rectum,  previous  to  the  emission
of  flatulence  ;  desire  to  urinate  ;  frequent  micturition,
day  and  night  ; suppressed  sexual  instinct ; want  of
sexual  instinct;  (sur-excitation  of  the  sexual  instinct;)
want  of  erections  ;  want  of  pollutions  ;  (too  frequent  pol-
lutions ;)  swelling  of  the  testes  ;  weakness  of  the  body,
especially  of  the  eyes,  after  an  embrace  ;  (suppression  of
the  menses,  with  anasarca  and  ascites ;  menses  are  too
weak ;  menses  too  early  ;  itching  eruption  and  soreness
between  the  lower  limbs  during  the  menses  ;  acridity,
itching  and  corrosion  about  and  in  the  genital  organs  •
leucorrhoza.  '

Dryness  of  the  nose ;  obstruction  of  the  nostrils  ;  dry
coryza;  hoarseness;  cough; nightly  cough ;  purulent
expectoration  lohen  coughing ;  purulent  expectoration  ;
spasm  of  the  chest  when  coughing ;  difficult  breathino-  •
wheezing  in  the  chest  ;  asthma  in  the  morning ;  asthma
when walking  a  little faster  than  usual;  spasmodic
asthma  ;  spasm  in  the  chest ;  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  pal-
pitation of  the  heart  and  orgasm  of  the  blood,  early  in  the
morning  when  waking  ;  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  pain
m  the  small  of  the  back  from  a  fall ;  drawing  pain  from  the
small  of  the  back  to  the  middle  of  the  back  ;  drawing  pain
in  the  back  ;  stiffness  between  the  scapula  ;  stiffness  of  the
nape  of  the  neck;  weakness  of  the  muscles  in  the  nape
ot  the  neck ;  goitre  ;  pressure  on  the  shoulders;  the
arms  goto  sleep;  the  upper  arms  go  to  sleep  ;  want
of  strength  in  the  arms;  weakness  of  the  arms,  ear-
ly in  the  morning,  when  in  bed  ;  stiffness  of  the  elbow-
joint; trembling  of  the  hands  when  writing;  paralytic
pain  in  the  wmt-joint ;  convulsed  twitching  of  the  finders
when  sewing;  tearing  with  pressure  in  the  thighs  °and
legs  ;  nightly  tearing  in  the  lower  limbs  ;  Creep.no-  shud-
der, ng ;  over  the  tibi«  ;  cold  feet,  in  the  evening?  when  in
bed  ,  suffness  of  the  tarsal  joint ;  swelling  of  the  le^s

r  VhC  ]egaAnd  f6et  5  C0ld  feet  5  Mid  sweat
oj  thejeet;  stitches  and  burning  in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  ;
corns  pamful  to  the  touch  ;  drawing  pain  in  the  Ihnbs

.contraction  of  the  fingers  and  toes  ;  trllimbs  go  to  sleep  '
parts  are  easily  strained  by  lifting;  tremulous  Weakness  !

■weak  condition  after  confinement;  liability  to  cold  ;  want


28  KALI  GARBONICUM.

of  perspiration,  inability  to  perspire ;  anasarca  and  as-
cites ;  red,  itching,  burning  patches  on  the  body  ;  herpes  ;
old  warts  in  the  face  ;  drowsiness  in  day-time  ;  early
drowsiness  in  the  evening  ;  sleep  full  of  fancies  ;  anxious
sleep,  full  of  dreams;  frightful  dreams;  twitchings  when
asleep  ;  inclination  to  shudder,  in  day-time  ;  heat,  early  in
the  morning  when  in  bed  ;  great  inclination  to  sweat  when
walking;  night-sweat.  '

Persons  suffering  with  ulceration  of  the  lungs,  can
scarcely  get  well  without  this  anti-psoric.  Nitric  acid  is
frequently  indicated  after  Kali.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Drs.  Hahnemann,  Uers-
dorff,  Goulfon,  Hartlaub,  Rummel,  and  by  Ng.

Noack  and  Trinks  furnish  the  following  clinical  re-
marks on  Kali. Dropsical  symptoms the  case  oi  a
very  old  female. Paralysis,  (also  Causticum.) Hum  d
tetters  in  the  hands,  with  itching  and  stinging.  Scirrhous
induration. Chronic  headache,  over  the  eyes,  moving
towards  the  nose,  with  vomiting  and  eructations, bt  tones
in  one  side  of  the  occiput,  only  during  motion  ;  also  at
nigh" Sarcoma  of  the  eyelid,  (with  Silicic)  Scrofulous,
serous,  or  purulent  discharge  from  the  ears. Angina  pa-
rol idea Phthisis  hepatica. Lancinating  pressing  proc-
all  in  pre" nt  females. Pressing  and  bearing  down
Son of  pregnant  females,  as  if  a  load  were  falling
Zo  thTpelvis. Menstrual  affections,  especially  in  entire
supp  essfon  of  the  menses,  or  when  the  menses  delay
X :  heir  first  appearance  in  the  years  of  puberty.
The  usual  consequences  of  miscarriage,  especially  when
Iwllv  attended  to weakness  in  the  back,  weakness  of  the
?oweri^b8!  d% and  hacking  cough,  long-conunu.ng
^s  feverish  'chills,  chronic-inflammatory  condmou  of
ihe  uterus,  with  nausea  and  vomiting;  it  is  a  preventive
tain  t  m  carriage,  for  those  females  in  whom  it  generally
K  pkee  between  the  second  and  third  month;  weak-
f  I  confinement Scrofulous  leucorrhoea.  Cough,
35  ^^WLh  expectoration  of  white  mucus
1  U Hn  L  of  breath  when  ascending  an  elevation.

SaWaU Jl  ■»  bed,  4  <o


KALI  CARBONICUM.


29


rise,)  morning-sweat,  diarrhoea,  lancinating  pain  in  the
sternum,  (vexation  brought  back both  the  cough  and
asthma,  relieved  again by  Phosphorus.)  Night-sweat
and  some  cough,  with  hectic  disposition. Hacking  cough,
with  symptoms  of  incipient  phthisis. Haemaptoe.  Wurm
thinks  that  Kali  carb.  may  be  advantageously  employed
in  pleuritis  of  tuberculous  subjects  ;  according  to  Goullon,
it  merely  relieves  the  temporary  pleuritic  symptoms  in  tu-
berculous subjects. Pleuritic  affections  of  every  degree,
no  matter  whether  it  is  a  case  of  pure  pleuritis  or  pleuro-
pneumonia, (preceded  by  Aconite,  according  to  Goullon  ;)
pneumonia,  when  the  violent  lancinations  and  the  inability
to  breathe  deeply  continue  or  return  after  the  administra-
tion of  Aconite,  and  the  accompanying  cough  is  dry  and
suppressed, "  hence  in  genuine  pleuritis:'  Incipient
pulmonary  phthisis, with  occasional  discharge  of  tu-
berculous masses,  darting  stitches  through  the  chest,  and
exhausting,  dry  cough,  great  weakness  and  emaciation  ;
it  is  therefore  useful  in  tuberculous  phthisis,  when  the
tubercles  become  dissolved,  (together  with  Lycop. ;)  puru-
lent pulmonary  phthisis,  (giving  first  Aeon,  and  Nux  v.  •)
against  bags  of  pus  in  the  lungs  Kali  is  useful  during  an
aggravation  of  the  symptoms  in  the  fall-season,  especially
when  there  is  fever,  pain  in  the  chest,  lying  down,  &c.
Ur  Libert  found  it  little  useful  in  tuberculous  pulmonary
phthisis. Mucous  phthisis,  with  violent  cough,  mucous
yellow  expectoration,  especially  early  in  the  morning  sore
pain,  occasional  stitches  in  the  chest,  especially  under  the
short  ribs  of  the  right  side  when  touching  the  side,  or
when  breathing  deeply;  short  breathing,  drawing  pains
under  the  short  ribs  of  the  left  side,  when  lying  uSon  the
right  side,  sometimes  tearing  pains  in  the  left  half  of  the
head,  preceded  by  turning  vertigo,  nausea  and  inclination
to  vomit,  tearing  pains  in  the  legs,  feet  and  knees,  (espe-
cially when  in  a  state  of  rest;)  frequent  chilliness  and
uneasy  sleep  after  midnight. Violent  pains  in  the  small
of  the  back,  in  pregnant  females.

Antidotes.  Cam  ph.,  Coff.,  Spir.  nitr.  dulc,  Mosch.,
Zinc,  Opium.  '

Moral  Symptoms — Great  despondency,  without  anx-
lousness. Want  of  energy. Sad,  weeping  mood,  conse-


30  KALI  CAltBONICUM.

quent  upon  exercise  in  the  open  air. Sad,  lonesome  ;  she
seeks  company  to  cheer  up  her  spirits. Great  sadness  ;
she  weeps  without  knowing  why,  in  the  evening.  Weep-
ino-  mood  ;  she  felt  as  though  she  could  shed  torrents  of
tears,  (a.  20  d.) She  wept  a  good  deal,  because  she
imagined  all  the  time  she  would  have  to  die.  Anguish,
causing  a  flow  of  tears,  (1.  d  ) Anguish  and  great  sad-
ness. A  sort  of  anguish,  and  aversion  to  society.  Anx-
iousness  every  day. Apprehensiveness. He  is  appre-
hensive of  not  being  able  to  get  well. Anxiety  on  account
of  her  illness. Mental  anxiety  in  the  evening, bad  ideas
about  the  future. Uneasiness  of  the  mind.  Precipitate
resolution  and  action. Irresoluteness. Despondent  and
pusillanimous  in  the  highest  degree. Fearfulness,  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed. Fearful  when  alone. Great  ten-
dency to  start. Tendency  to  start,  especially  when  one
touches  her. She  starts  with  a  loud  cry  on  account  ot
an  imaginary  vision,  (such  as  a  bird  flying  to  the  window.)
Very  low-spirited,  in  the  evening  when  falling  asleep,  and
in  the  morning  when  waking  up. Out  of  humour,  with-
out knowing  why,  (5.  d.) Very  much  out  o  humor ■  j  one
can  perceive  this  by  his  looks  even  before  he  himself  is
aware  of  it. Out  of  humor,  as  though  she  could  not  do
any  thing  to  her  satisfaction. She  is  constantly  in  a  state
of  Antagonism  with  herself,  knows  not  what  she  wants,
and  feels  very  unhappy. Contrary  mood  ;  he  is  obstinate
and  frequently  knows  not  what  he  wants. Contrary  mood
she  demands  things  with  impetuosity,  is  not  satisfied  with
anything,  is  beside  herself,  furious  if  her  wishes  are  not
strlly  complied  with;  she  frequently  does  not  know
what  she  wants. He 'is  impatient  about  his  children.
Stable,  as  after  vexation..  Sensitive  and  irntab ,\e.  Ir-
ntated  mind. Vexed  and  irrUated  mood. He  is  easily
irritated. Excessively  irritated  mood  Nolhing^M
her  anv  pleasure,  she  is  very  much  out  of  humor  Vexed
and  pS  mood;  every  "trifle  vexes  him  and  every
noise  is  disagreeable  to  him;  worst  at  noon  and  in  he
evening Angry  and  wrathful,  early  in  the  morning  after
3  he  grmds  his  teeth  (a.  4  d.)  Easily ^ngry.  1  c-
hement Indifferent  towards  every  thing. Dread  ot  u
bo" Changing  mood,  at  times  kind  and  calm,  at  times


kali  cahbonicum.


31


vehement  and  angry  about  trifles  ;  now  full  of  hope,  now
desponding.  Absence  of  mind  ;  he  finds  it  difficult  to  di-
rect his  thoughts  to  one  fixed  object.  Want  of  presence
of  mind  ;  he  is  at  a  loss  how  to  begin  what  he  intends  to
do,  (a.  15  h.)  He  is  frequently  at  a  loss  to  find  the  pro-
per expression,  and  chooses  a  wrong  one.  Delirium,  day
and  night.  Inability  to  collect  one's  senses,  apparently
seated  in  the  occiput,  during  much  talking,  passing  off
when  closing  the  eyes.  Loss  of  consciousness  for  a
couple  of  minutes,  so  violent  that  he  would  have  fallen
over,  if  he  had  not  held  on  to  something,  (a.  18  d.)  Sen-
sation as  if  she  lost  her  thoughts  for  moments.

Head. — Occasional  sensation,  as  if  her  thoughts  and
memory  had  vanished,  with  buzzing  in  the  head.  Dreary
and  stupid  feeling  in  the  head,  in  the  evening.  Feeling
like  intoxication,  (a.  4  d.) Frequent  obtusion  of  the  head.

Obtusion  of  the  head,  as  after  intoxication,  and  as  if
•the  ears  were  stopped  up,  with  nausea,  almost  unto  vo-
miting, (a.  8  d.) Frequent  obtusion  and  heaviness  of  the
head,  early  in  the  morning,  in  the  region  of  the  eyebrows.
Obtusion  of  the  head,  as  if  screwed  in,  with  stitches  in
the  brain,  at  frequent  intervals. Gloominess  in  the  head,
as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  early  in  the  morning,  after
rising,  with  cloudiness  and  want  of  cheerfulness.  Weak-
ness of  the  head.  Weakness  of  the  head,  over  the  eyes,  af-
ter fast  walking,  (17.  d.)  Vertigo  when  walking,  like  intoxi-
cation, he  staggers  from  side  to  side.  Vertigo",  he  staggers
when  walking  or  standing  ;  better  in  the  open  air.  Vertigo,
especially  after  a  meal.  Vertigo  when  rising,  as  if  her  head
were  too  light ;  she  had  to  hold  on  to  something.  Slight  at-
tack of  vertigo,  as  often  as  he  rises  from  a  chair  and  inrns
himself.  Vertigo,  with  sensation  as  if  a  hollow  were  behind
him,  and  he  would  fall  into  it,  when  turning  about  after  look-
ing in  a  looking-glass  and  after  reading.  Vertigo  when  turn,
ing  about. Vertigo  when  rapidly  turning  the  head  or
body. Sensation  of  vertigo  in  the  head,  mostly  early  in
the  morning  and  evening. Very  giddy,  even  when  sit-
ting, (a.  30  h.) Vertigo  when  sitting,  sensation  as  of  stag-
gering to  and  fro,  (previous  to  dinner.)  Vertigo  when  sit-
ting ;  he  dares  not  get  up  from  his chair  lest  he  should
tall. Vertigo  when  writing  and  in  the  open  air,  every


32  BJVLI  OARBONICUM.

thing  turns  around  him. Headache,  relieved  by  sitting
in  the  bed,  aggravated  by  lying  down.  Headache,
in  the  morning  when  waking  up,  for  a  quarter  ot  an  hour,
BeveraTmorningB. Headache  in  the  top  of  the  head  when
pres  inc  upon  It. Horrid  headache,  through  the  eye.
Attacks  of  megrim,  on  both  skies,  with  famtishness  almost
"a Vfolen'tpain  in  the  whole  o the  toad  woh
throbbing  and  stitches  in  the  knees  going  off  by ^motion
in  the  evening. Aching  m  the  head. Ming  in  the
VeheaTin  the  afternoon,  when  walking,  being  at  the
same  time  out  of  humor,  (13.  19.  20.  d.) Pressure  m  the
foTeheaT  with  photophobia. Violent  pressure  over  he
fl  \  skuh  dowPn  tl/naPe  of  the  neck,  throbbmg  m  he
head  and  the  whole  body  ;  the  pain  does  not  admit  oi  the
SteSt  contact,  and  increases  in  paroxysms  with  violen

nausea  and  vomiting  of  bile.  ^^^Lbg
forehead,  with  vomiting  of  mucus  and  acidity £re  s«n

ness,  as  n  iw  ,,k  prP^ure  over  the  eyes  with  vio-
SSSta in  .Lth  eSfo /heX  Aching  U  V  occiput,
SSMe  tpe  of  the  neck  going  off  tajh.^. a*

and  a  feeling  ot  heaviness  wuc  o extending  as

drawing  tearing  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  exteno ,

into  the  right  side  ot  the  cranmm, , »,  Bori„g


KALI  CARBONICUM.


33


when  writing. Violent  pressing  from  within  outwards
over  the  left  eye,  as  if  the  brain  would  fall  forwards.
Sensation  in  the  forehead,  as  if  the  fore  part  of  the  head
would  become  dashed  to  pieces,  in  frequent  and  short  pa-
roxysms. Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  head,  as  if  the  brain
were  pressing  against  the  skull. Heaviness  in  the  occi-
put, as  if  it  were  full  of  lead,  the  head  falls  backwards  ;
accompanied  by  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  extend-
ing as  far  as  between  the  scapulas. Heaviness  in  the
occiput,  it  feels  obtuse. Heaviness  and  painfulness  of  the
forepart  of  the  head. Feeling  of  great  heaviness  in  the
left  half  of  the  head. Clawing  pain  in  the  left  temple,  in
paroxysms  ;  also  tearing. Drawing  in  the  forehead,  in
the  forenoon  and  after  midnight,  (2.  and  30.  d.)  Draw-
ing and  tearing  on  the  top  of  the  head,  (33.  34.  d.)  Tear-
ing drawing  in  the  left  half  of  the  head,  over,  in  front  of,
and  in  the  temple,  (12.  19.  25.  d.)  Drawing  in  the  occiput
and  nape  of  the  neck,  especially  on  the  right  side,  with
stiffness. Tearing  in  the  left  frontal  eminence,  (25.  d.)
Tearing  extending  from  the  left  temple  to  the  articulation
of  the  jaw,  in  the  evening. Tearing  in  both  temples,  also
in  the  left  parietal  bone. Tearing,  now  in  the  rio-ht,  now
in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  at  times  also  in  the  forehead,
(1.  d.) Throbbing  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  occi-
put, close  to the  nape  of  the  neck,  (16.  d.)  Dartintr-
teanng  pain  in  the  head. Darting  in  the  left  tempi?.
Darting  pain  in  the  head,  the  whole  day. Stitches  in  the
temples. Stitches  in  the  temples,  which  cause  one  to
start  and  to  scream,  in  the  right  temple  they  are  accom-
panied with  tearing. Stitch  over  the  left  temple,  and  im-
mediately afterwards  a  stitch  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead
from  within  outwards.  Prickings  in  the  forehead.  Stitches
in  the  forepart  of  the  head. Violent  stitches  in  the
orehead  the  whole  day,  sometimes  also  in  the  left  side  of
the  head  ;  with  violent  pains  in  the  chest  and  icy  coldness
ot  the  limbs. Stitches  in  the  forehead,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, hutches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead  and  over
the  temples,  when  moving  the  lower  jaw. Stitches  ex-
tending from  the  nape  of  the  neck  into the  occiput,
btitches  in  the  occiput,  when  setting  the  foot  down  and
when  stooping,  apparently  in  the  surface  of  the  brain

2*


34  KALI  CA.RBONICUM.

Stitch  through  the  right  side  of  the  head  from ^behind  fej-  I
wards. Stitches  through  the  whole  head  V^*™™
in  the  head  (1.  d.) Throbbing  and  beating  in  the  tore
head  and  especially  in  the  sides°of  the  head,  frequently  in-
tet.ttg  ;  "also,  aW  dinner,  when  standing  01 J  k jng.
Throbbino-  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the  head .  Paintul  tnroo
b"  fhe  head,  when  "she  begins  to  write  Beating
throbbing)  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  sid of  the
head;  the  pain  becomes  more  violent  and  ^nc>natinS
when  Dressing  upon  the  part ;  rather  externally.  Search
rn^ring)°th?obbing  in  the  frontal  bone,  over  the  left
eve  Werf  ive  pain  m  the  head,  after  dinner  ;  she  had  to
S  down,  tliis  afleviated  the  pain. Congesuo^  blood
to  the  head,  with  intoxication  arising  from  it. Warm  ris

head, ben  sation  1 "  reCurring  when  stooping  or

descended  into  it,  irequemiy  ic o cpn<sqtir>n  when
writing,  going  off  when  raising  the  head Sensation,  w  ne.
Soopingfas  if  something

h6ad  £T^::C&  vforsf  when  Soving  the  head,
moveable  in  tne  neau,  enmethin*  having  be-

Continued  feeling  in  the  head,  as  o/  s^  ^tQWard&s  tbe

[he  outer  side  of  the  temple  ™™ul  ^£  swe,Hng  „f
head  and  in  the  nape  of  the  nec ™  f  Un'si=„,  tearing
the  cheeks  and  sWcbes  »  Wgoraa.
stitches,  in  the  'f'-lTnt'oarts  of  the  head.  Painless,
Fine  stitches  about  Mw'P^'  ri  hl  tem  ,e.  The

gurgling  i^^^SSZM,  Si*  a  jerk,  with-


KALI  CAREONICtJM.


35


Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp.  Frequent  itching  of  the  head,
especially  the  occiput.  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  with
sore  pain  when  scratching  it-  Pimples  on  the  hairy  scalp.
Large  red  pimple  on  the  left  frontal  eminence,  painful  to
the  touch,  and  suppurating  afterwards,  (a.  32  d.)  Painful
tumor  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  as  if  an  ulcer  would
form,  (a.  6  d.)  Large,  yellow,  scaly  spot  in  the  upper  part
of  the -forehead.  Dryness  of  the  hair  of  the  head.  Fail-
ing off  of  the  hair.

Eyes. — The  eyes  are  painful  to  the  touch. Pain  of  the
left  eye  when  looking  upwards. Pressure  in  the  eyes.
Pressure  upon  the  eyelids. Pressure  upon  the  eyes,  and
in  the  orbits,  with  drowsiness,  at  noon,  (36.  d.)  Pressure
in  the  eyes  and  dry  pus  in  the  lashes. Pain,  as  if  the
eyes  were  being  pressed  in. The  eyes  are  painful  when
reading,  as  if  they  were  being  pressed  in. Pinching  in
the  eyes. Tearing  in  the  left  eye,  in  the  evening  previous
to  going  to  sleep. Sharp  tearing  in  the  right  orbit,  and
in  the  eye,  at  night,  (30.  31.  d.) Tearing,  with  pressure,
in  the  interior  of  the  right  eye,  (12.  26.  d.)  Tearing,
with  pressure,  in  the  region  of  the  right  eyebrow,  (26.  d")
Pulling  with  a  jerk,  or  tearing  in  the  eyelid  and  over  the
right  eye. Stitches  in  the  middle  of  the  eye. Stitches  in
the  ball  of  the  eye. Stitches  in  the  right  eye,  (a.  21  d.)
Stitches  in  the  outer  canthus  of  the  right  eye.  Borino-
pain  in  the  eyes. Pain  in  the  left  eyebrow,  as  if  an  ulcer
would  form,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  (8.  13.  d.)  Itch-
ing of  the  eyes. Itching  of  the  margin  of  the  right  eyelid.
Smarting  pain  in  the  eye,  (a.  4  d.)'  Sore  feeling  in  the
eyelids,  shortly  after  midnight,  when  waking  up,  (25.  d.)
Biting  and  shooting  pains  in  the  eyes. The  boy  complains
of  coldness  in  the  eyelids. Both  eyes  are  very  hot  to  the
touch. Burning  in  the  eyes. Burning  in  the  eyelids.
Burning  in  both  eyes. Burning  and  biting  sensation  in
both  eyes. The  white  of  the  eyes  is  red,  the  capillaries
are  injected. Redness  and  heat  of  the  eyes.  Inflamma-
tion of  the  white  of  both  eyes,  with  a  burning  pain,  (a.  5
d.) Inflammation  of  the  lids  of  the  right  eye,  with  pain
of  the  eyes  and  inability  to  read  by  light. Swelling  of  the
right  eye. Great  swelling  of  the  upper  eyelid  towards
the  nose. Swelling  between  the  eyebrows  and  lids,  look-


36  KALI  CARBOiNlCUM.

ing  like  a  little  sack. Swelling  of  the  gabella  between  the
efebrows,  (21 .  d.) Pimple  in  the  left  eyebrow.  Fre-
quent soreness  of  the  external  canthus  of  the  left  eye
Soreness  of  the  outer  canthus,  with  burning  pain I  he
corners  of  the  eyes  ulcerate. Agglutination  of  the  eyes
early  in  the  morning,  (a.  16  h.) Lachrymation (2  d>)
Lachrvmation  of  the  eyes,  especially  the  right,  with  a
WtinSSSon  in  the  canthus,  (27.d.) Frequent  lachry
ma  on and  rays  around  the  light  of  the  candle  in  e
Evening. Dryness  and  burning  of  the  eyes  worse  in  the
open  afr,  than  in  a  room. Dry  feeling  m  the  eyes  (a .  2
7) Dry  feeling,  as  of  sand,  and  great  drowsiness  in  the
eves Her  eyelids  are  violently  closed. The  eyelids
^n  with  difficulty,  early  in  the  morning  ^  ^
Twitching  and  jerking  in  the  right  eyebrow. Star ng look,
she  finds'*  difficult  to  turn  her  eyes  from  an  object,  and
has  to  fix  them  upon  it  almost  against  her  will. V  anisn
in"  of  sight  when  writing,  with  white  little  .tan .before
the  eves'  the  lower  line  looks  as  if  it  were  above  the
none?  so  that  he  finds  himself  constantly  writmg  upon
Z  one The  eyes  feel  painful  and  weak. Weak  sight.
Obscuration  of  the  right  eye,  early  in  the  morning,  for
some  mi nutes. Diminution  of  sight,  after  working  in  wa-
Ir she  only  saw  a  small  portion  of  the  objects,  and  after-
'aI  }pU  s  Lhes  in  the  head  above  the  eyes,  with  nausea.
Biaacl  pltetdcurUin  front  of  the  eyes,  when  reading.

the  eyes, ^rious  gh  ^ulcus

f  eehnpfoPre  th eyes Wheels  before  the  eyes,  with  yel-

m,  „af  g.le  eveswl  Z coughing.  Photophobia  :  painful
^suUnL  If  fe  eye,  tothe  light  of  day  i  the  room  haa

*  ea«. St., ,ng  pain  in  ^

ear. Stitches  and  straining  in  the  ears,  p


KALI  CARBONICUM.


37


ing  sensation  in  the  left  outer  ear.  Drawing  pain  in  one,
then  in  the  other  ear,  (a.  4  d.)  Tearing  in  the  ear.  Fre-
quent tearing  deep  in  the  right  ear,  (I.  d.)  Alternate
tearing  in  both  ears.  Tearing  in  the  right  concha,  (24.
d.)  Quick  tearing  in  the  left  ear,  and  around  it,  apparently
in  the  bone.  Frequent  tearing  in  the  anterior  margin  of
the  right  ear,  (1.  d.)  Painful  tearings  from  the  interior
of  the  left  ear  into  the  outer  cartilage,  and  at  the  same
time  in  the  bone,  above  and  below  the  right  patella.  Vio-
lent tearing  in  and  behind  the  ear.  Jerking  pulling  behind
the  right  ear.  Darting  behind  and  above  the  ear.  Stitches
in  both  ears,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  Sharp  darting
pain  behind  and  above  both  ears.  Sharp  stitches  into  the
left  ear,  which  caused  her  to  start,  early  in  the  morning.
Frequent  fine  stitches  in  the  left  ear,  from  within  outwards,
(13.  d.)  Continued,  dull  stitch  in  the  left  ear,  passing  off
by  shaking  the  head.  Stitches  and  creeping  in  the  interior
of  the  ear,  connected  with  a  similar  sensation  in  the  sto-
mach and  oesophagus,  (30.  d.)  Boring  and  aching  in  the
ears,  (1.  d.)  Gnawing  in  the  inner  and  outer  left  ear.
Ulcerative  pain  in  the  outer  right  ear,  continuing  a  long
while,  before  midnight,  (3.  d.)  Throbbing  in  the  right
ear,  at  night,  when  resting  upon  it,  (a.  2  d.)  Sense  as  of
hammering  in  the  right  ear,  frequent  and  very  disagreeable,
hindering  hearing.  Twitchings  about  the  left  ear,  (a.  10
d.)  Twitchings  and  trembling  in  the  right  ear,  when  ris-
ing after  stooping.  Itching  of  the  lobule.  Violent  itching
in  the  ears,  (a.  4  d.)  Tickling  in  the  ears.  Coldnees  of
the  ears  in  a  hot  room,  (a.  2  d.)  Heat  of  the  lobules.
Sensation  as  if  warmth  were  rushing  out  of  the  left  ear.
Redness,  heat  and  violent  itching  of  the  outer  ears.  In-
flammation and  swelling  of  the  internal  ear,  with  pain
round  about,  (a.  3  d.)  Soreness  and  suppuration  behind
the  ears,  for  4  weeks,  (a.  21  d.)  Pimples  on  the  ears.
Discharge  of  a  yellow,  liquid  cerumen  or  pus  from  the
ear,  with  previous  tearing  in  the  ear.  Secretion  of  fetid
humor  in  the  internal  ear.  Opening  of  an  ulcer  in  the
ear,  (a.  5  d.)  Hard  swelling  of  the  parotid  gland,  with
pain  to  the  touch.  Sensation  of  obstruction  of  the  ears.
One  of  the  ears  feels  suddenly  obstructed,  (a.  3  d.)  Sud-
den closing  of  the  right  ear,  in  the  evening,  when  sitting.


38  KALI  CARBONICDM.

with  sense  as  of  tingling  and  buzzing  in  the  left  ear,  so  that
his  head  vacillated  a  little.  Dulness  of  hearing,  in  the
evening,  (a.  15  d.)  Diminution  of  hearing  in  both  ears,
slowly  increasing  and  decreasing,  (for  a  fortnight.)  Ting-
ling in  both  ears.  Violent  tingling  in  one,  and  humming
in  the  other  ear.  Singing  in  the  ears.  Whizzing  in  the
ears.  Violent  roaring  in  the  ears.  Ringing  in  the  ears.
Frequent  reports  and  detonations  in  the  ears,  during  the
day-  Cracking  in  the  ear,  frequently.  Cracking  in  the
ear,  during  a  violent  expiration.  Guggling  in  the  right
ear,  and  secretion  of  a  quantity  of  soft  wax.

Nose.— Clawing  sensation  in  the  nose  and  root  ot  the
nose,  especially  on  the  right  side,  (23.  d.) Itching  in  the
nose. Frequent  itching  in  the  right  nasal  fossa.  Ulcer-
ative pain  in  the  right  nasal  fossa. Great  burning  in  the
nose. Burning  in  the  left  nostril. Burning  and  biting
sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  half  of  the  nose,  < ex-
tending to  the  cribriform  plate  (23.  d.) Red,  thick  nose
especially  in  the  afternoon. Considerable  swelling  of  the
tip  of  the  nose. Red  and  hot  nose,  bordered  with  a  num-
ber of  white  pimples. Pimples  on  the  nose. Flat,  sma  I
ulcer  above  the  left  wing  of  the  nose  painful  to  contact.
Pimple  in  the  left  nostril,  (a.  5  d.) Sore  scurfy  nos  n  s,
for  a  long  time. Ulcerative  condition  of  both  nostrils.
Ulcerated  nostrils. When  blowing  her  nose,  something
fetid  comes  out  of  it. Bloody,  red  nostril,  every  morning.
Frequent  bleeding  of  the  nose. Bleeding  of  the  nose,
early  in  the  morning. Sensitive  smell.  Wrpt_hed
Face.— Pale  countenance,  and  weakness.  Wretched
complexion,  with  pale  lips. Blue  ^g^^m  he
eyes. Pale,  hollow-eyed  countenance,  especially  in  the
onen  air,  where  the  child  looks  as  if  it  were  frozen.  Pale
tenance  with  faint,  lifeless  eyes Heat  and  rednes
in  the  face,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Long
continued  heat  and  redness  of  the  face,  with  icy  cold ^  eet
Burning,  red  cheeks,  in  the  evening  for  ^  hour  and  a

passing  over  into  an  ulcer  on  the  gums,  without  any  pre


H.ALI  CARBONICUM.


39


vious  toothache.  Swelling  on  the  right  cheek,  low  down,
with  stitches  and  pains  to  contact.  Big  cheek  with  tear-
ing and  stitches.  Big  red  cheek,  with  small  pimples,  also
orTthe  nose.  Pimples  in  the  face.  Pimples  in  the  face,
going  and  coming.  Pimples  in  the  face,  continually.
Pimples  in  the  face,  with  pus  in  their  tips.  Pimples  on
the  zygomata,  with  burning  pain.  Painless  blotch  on  the
cheek,  below  the  ear.  Small,  red  pustule  in  the  centre  of
the  forehead,  passing  off  again  next  morning.  Freckles
in  the  face.  Dry,  parched  skin  of  the  face.  Pressive
drawing  in  the  muscles  of  the  cheek,  near  the  lower  jaw.
Tearing  in  the  left  jugum,  afterwards  in  the  cheek.
Tearing  in  the  left  jugum,  alleviated  by  pressing  upon  it,
with  sensation  as  if  the  cheek  were  swollen,  in  the  evening
and  night,  until  next  morning  ;  she  wept  and  was  unable
to  sleep.

Teeth  and  Jaws. — Tearing  in  the  lower  jaw  and  in
front  of  the  right  ear.  Clawing  tearing  in  the  right  ju-
gum, extending  to  the  palate.  Burning  in  the  face,  under
the  right  eye.  Twitchings  in  the  left  cheek,  with  fine,
burning  stitches  ;  with  tearing  in  the  left  temple  from  be-
low upwards,  in  the  evening.  Spasmodic  sensation  in  the
lips.  Tearing  in  the  left  upper  lip  and  gums,  going  off  by
pressing  upon  the  parts.  Stitch  in  the  upper  lip.  Burn-
ing of  the  lips.  Burning  of  the  lower  lip.  Itching  around
the  margins  of  the  lips.  Smarting  sore  feeling  around  the
mouth,  in  the  margins  of  the  vermilion  border,  very  pain-
ful to  contact.  Soreness  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the
lips  ;  they  are  agglutinated  early  in  the  morning.  Swell-
ing and  rhagades  of  the  upper  lip;  it  is  painful  to  contact
and  bleeds  readily.  Thick,  ulcerated  lower  lip.  Scurf
on  the  upper  lip.  Vesicles  on  the  vermilion  border  of  the
lower  lip,  painful  and  itching  when  touched.  Vesicles  on
the  lips.  Small,  pointed,  itching  and  humid  pimples  on
both  lips,  and  around  the  whole  mouth.  Pimples  on  the
lips,  smarting  and  itching.  Pimple  on  the  upper  lip,  pain-
ful when  touched,  near  the  left  nostril,  (36.  d.)  Peeling
off  of  the  lower  lip,  (34.  d.)  Chapped  lips,  peeling  off.
The  lower  lip  peels  off  and  becomes  chapped  and  scaly.
Clawing  pain  in  the  right  half  of  the  jaw,  not  far  from  the
joint. Insufferable  spasm,  (cramp?)  in  the  jaws,  almost


40


KALI  CARBONICUM.


closing  the  pharynx?  at  the  same  time. Itching  of  the
knee. Pain  of  the  sub-maxillary  gland  when  touched.
Swelling  of  the  lower  jaw  and  the  sub-maxillary  glands,
with  looseness  of  the  teeth. The  teeth  are  sensitive  to
pain,  (4.  d.) Toothache  with  pain  in  the  face. One  or  the
other  tooth  became  loose  and  sensitive,  or  a  bone  of  the  face
became  painful,  and,  like  the  tooth,  appeared  to  be  pain
itself ;  afterwards  there  were  paroxysms  of  darlings  and
tearings  in  one  point. Pain  of  the  teeth,  every  day  in  the
morning,  when  waking. Pain  of  the  teeth,  in  the  left  side,
early  in  the  morning,  in  bed  and  the  whole  forenoon,  (2.
d.) Pain  in  the  roots  of  the  teeth  of  the  left  side,  seve-
ral mornings  after  waking,  increased  by  eating,  (3.  d.)
Toothache  after  a  meal,  in  the  direction  of  the  cheek-bone
and  ear  ;  here  the  person  had  a  sensation  as  of  a  griping
together  and  stinging. Toothache  when  eating  anything,
not  otherwise. Toothache  only  when  eating,  a  throbbing
in  all  the  teeth. The  teeth  are  painful  when  taking  water
into  her  mouth. The  teeth  are  painful  when  touched  by
either  cold  or  warm  substances. Frequent  paroxysms  of
toothache,  as  soon  as  cold  air  gets  into  the  mouth  ;  improv-
ed by  warmth. Toothache  with  subsequent  swelling  of
the  gums. Toothache,  the  pain  feels  as  if  it  had  been
super-imposed  from  without,  as  if  something  had  got  into
the  hollow  tooth  ;  accompanied  by  drawing  behind  the  ear
and  on  the  head,  at  last  darting  in  the  tooth  and  disappear-
ance of  the  pain. Toothache,  only  when  ealing,noon  and
evening,  frequently  at  the  first  mouthful,  as  if  something
had  got  into  the  hollow  tooth,  with  insufferable  drawing
extending  to  the  eyes  and  ears,  in  paroxysms,  with  inter-
vals of  half  an  hour. Aching  in  the  root  of  one  of  the
posterior  molar  teeth,  in  the  evening. Drawing  toothache,
as  soon  as  she  gets  into  bed  in  the  evening,  not  by  day.
Drawing  in  the  roots  of  the  anterior  teeth  and  in  the  molar
teeth  of  the  left  side,  mostly  in  the  evening.  Contractive
toothache  in  the  upper  and  lower  row. Darting  and  draw-
in  <r  in  the  tooth,  as  if  it  were  being  corroded,  generally
affer  a  meal  and  at  night,  for  some  time. Tearing  tooth-
ache during  or  shortly  after  a  meal. Tearing  and  griping
in  a  molar  tooth  and  the  zygoma  of  the  left  side,  increased
and  excited  by  cold  substances,  relieved  by  tying  some-


KALI  CARBONICUM.


41


thing  around  the  parts  firmly.  Tearing  in  the  teeth  and
the  right  jaw.  Corrosive  itching,  violent  pain  in  different
teeth  and  the  gums,  which  cannot  be  relieved  by  picking
the  teeth.  Itching  in  the  teeth,  after  supper.  Itching  and
sense  as  of  digging  in  one  of  the  left  upper  molares,  after
dinner  ;  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  teeth.  Burrowing
pain  in  the  left  lower  row,  occasioned  by  picking.  Violent,
burrowing  pain  in  one  of  the  upper  left  molares,  after  din-
ner. Boring  aching,  always  after  dinner,  as  if  something
had  got  into  the  tooth.  Throbbing  or  pecking  sensation  in
one  of  the  right  upper  incisores,  after  dinner.  Throbbing
and  pulling  sensation  in  the  teeth,  during  motion  ;  other-
wise, burning  pain.  Burning,  lancinating  toothache,  es-
pecially at  night,  as  if  a  hot  iron  were  plunged  into  the
tooth.  Burning  slinging  in  the  tooth,  especially  at  night,
with  internal  chilliness,  and  swelling  of  the  lower  jaw  and
gums,  (a.  32  d.)  Stinging  in  the  teeth  and  gums,  after-
wards swelling  of  the  cheeks  with  stinging  pain,  (a.  14  d.)
Violent  stitches  in  the  teeth.  Single  stitches  in  the  fore-
teeth, here  and  there,  in  the  evening.  Single  stitches  in
the  teeth  and  frequent  sneezing,  early  in  the  morning,
when  waking  up.  Stinging  pain  in  the  fore  teeth,  with
sensation  of  dulness,  during  supper,  (32.  d.)  One  of
the  teeth  stands  out  and  is  very  painful  when  chewing.
Feeling  of  looseness  in  one  of  the  upper  left  molares.
Looseness  of  all  the  teeth.  Bad  smell  from  the  teeth.
Tearing  pain  in  the  gums  just  above  the  anterior  incisores.
Tickling  of  the  gums,  and  bleeding  of  the  same  when
sucking  at  them  with  the  tongue.  Increased  redness  of
the  gums.  Painful  inflammation  of  the  anterior  gums.
Considerable  swelling  of  the  gums  above  the  upper  mo-
lares, with  swelling  of  the  left  tonsil  and  the  cervical
glands,  (9.  d.)  Ulcer  on  the  gums.  Soreness  of  the
inside  of  the  gums  of  the  anterior  teeth.

Mouth. — Fetid  smell  from  the  mouth,  like  old  cheese.
Corrosion  of  the  inner  mouth,  and  tooth,  as  if  by  some-
thing acrid.  Soreness  of  the  mouth.  Dryness  of  the
mouth  wakes  him  from  sleep  early  in  the  morning,  (7.  d.)
Numbness  of  the  mouth,  as  if  it  were  burnt,  early  in  the
morning,  after  waking.  Violent  burning  in  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning,  and  thirst. Dryness  in  the  mouth,


42


KALI  CARBONICUM.


early  in  the  morning,  after  rising. Dry  mouth,  without
any  thirst,  in  the  evening. Dry,  viscid  sensation  in  the
mouth. Dry  feeling  and  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the
mouth,  he  has  to  spit  a  good  deal. Accumulation  of  water
in  the  mouth,  constantly. A  quantity  of  saliva  flows  from
his  mouth,  also  by  day. Painful  vesicles  all  over  the
inner  mouth,  with  burning  pain. Early  in  the  morning,
when  waking,  the  tongue  feels  quite  dry,  and  is  almost
without  any  sensation. White  tongue  with  dryness,  as  if
caused  by  something  astringent,  early  in  the  morning.
Burning  of  the  tongue  and  lower  lip. Burning  of  the  tip
of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were  raw,  or  full  of  vesicles.  Swell-
ing of  the  tongue,  covered  with  a  number  of  small  painful
vehicles. Painful  vesicles  on  the  tongue  and  gums.  Pain-
ful pimple  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue. Soreness  of  the  frae-
num  lingua?. Soreness  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus.— Itching  of  the  palate,
(10.  d.) Stitches  and  smarting  in  the  back  part  of  the
palate,  as  is  felt  when  the  parts  are  too  dry  previous  to  a
cold  setting  in,  increased  by  deglutition,  morning  and
evening,  (8.  9.  29.  30.  41.  d.) Sore  throat  with  difficult
deglutition  and  opening  of  the  mouth. Impeded  degluti-
tion in  the  pharynx. When  eating,  particles  of  food  easily
get  into  the  windpipe. Pressure  in  the  spine  during
deglutition. Difficult  deglutition,  the  food  descends  very
slowly  in  the  oesophagus. Sensitiveness  of  the  oesopha-
gus, warm  food  causes  a  burning  sensation  m  it. I  he
food  does  not  pass  down;  she  is  unable  to  swallow  dry
and  cold  things. Pressure  and  tearing  in  the  pharynx,
(9  d  ) Pressure  with  anxiety  in  the  throat.  Sensation
as'  of  a  lump  in  the  throat. Sore  throat  on  the  left  side  ;
he  feels  a  lump  there,  and  stinging  during  empty  deglu  i-
tion. Stinging  pain  in  the  pharynx  ;  when  geU.ng  co  d
he  feels  as  if  He  had  a  fish-bone  in  it. Elongation  of  the
uvula,  with  stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck. Sore  pain
in  the  throat. Sore  pain  in  the  throat,  in  the  upper  part
of  the  palate,  during  empty  deglutition  worse  when  swal-
lowing food  ;  the  symptom  is  not  felt  between  the  acts  of
deg  uUtioi, Smarting sore  throat  when  swallow,^
Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  (8.  cl.) Dryness  in  he
back  part  of  the  throat. A  quantity  of  mucus  is  frequently


CARBONICUM.


48


in  the  throat,  (the  first  3  days.)  A  quantity  of  mucus  in
the  throat  especially  early  in  the  morning.  A  quantity  of
mucus  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  which  it  is  difficult
to  hawk.  up.  Increased  hawking  of  mucus,  (19.  d.)
Tenacious  mucus  in  the  back  part  of  the  pharynx,  early
in  the  morning,  which  it  is  difficult  both  to  hawk  up  or  to
swallow,  with  continual  sensation  as  if  a  lump  of  mucus
were  lodged  in  the  throat,  (16.  d  )

Taste  and  Appetite. — Loss  of  taste,  early  in  the
morning,  when  waking,  only  for  a  short  while,  (2.  d.)
Bad  taste  in  the  mouth.  Bad  taste  and  accumulation  of
mucus  in  the  mouth.  Repulsive  watery  taste  in  the
mouth.  Flat,  viscid  saliva  in  the  mouth.  Bitter  taste  in
the  mouth,  with  nausea,  (1.  d.)  Bitter  taste  in  the  throat.
Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning.  Bitter
sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  after  breakfast.  Sour  taste  in  the
mouth,  every  day.  Putrid  taste  in  the  mouth.  Sweetish
taste  in  the  mouth.  Taste  as  of  blood  in  the  mouth,  early
in  the  morning,  after  waking,  for  three  hours.  Little
appetite.  Little  appetite,  with  flat  taste  in  the  mouth  ;
nevertheless  he  relishes  the  food.  Great  hunger.  Violent
thirst,  in  the  forenoon.  Thirst  in  the  evening,  previous  to
lying  down.  Thirst,  at  night.  No  appetite,  he  does  not
relish  what  he  eats.  Food,  especially  meat,  is  repulsive
to  him  ;  he  has  an  appetite  when  he  eats,  nevertheless  he
cannot  eat  much.  Aversion  to  brown  bread.  Aversion  to
eveiy  thing.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Milk  does  not  agree  with  her.
Bread  weighs  in  the  stomach,  after  a  meal.  Great  desire
for  sour  things.  Paleness  of  the  face,  nausea,  vertigo,
eructations,  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs,  and  coldness  of
the  hands  and  feet,  before  and  after  dinner  ;  still  he  has
some  appetite.  Nausea  unto  vomiting,  when  eating  roast
fish.  Desire  for  sleep,  during  a  meal,  (a.  2,  4  d.)  Drowsi-
ness and  depression  of  strength  after  a  meal.  Great
drowsiness,  with  chilliness  and  yawning,  after  a  meal.
Weariedness  after  a  meal,  with  throbbing  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  and  headache.  Vexed,  peevish  mood  during
dinner,  with  drawing  pain  in  the  head,  (30.  d.)  Constric-
tive sensation  in  the  head,  after  dinner,  as  if  it  were  encir-
cled with  a  hoop. Pale  face  after  a  meal. Pinching  and


44


KALI  CARBONICUM.


uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  after  eating  soup,  at  dinner  or
supper,  or  after  eating  warm  biscuit  in  the  morning.
Pressure  in  the  stomach,  like  a  weight  in  the  stomach,
after  a  meal,  and  especially  after  breakfast. Distension  of
the  abdomen  after  a  meal. Repletion  and  great  distension
of  the  abdomen,  after  eating  but  little. Oppressive  flatu-
lent colic  after  breakfast,  relieved  only  for  a  short  time  by
the  emission  of  flatulence,  (14.  d.) Dull  stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  epigastrium,  after  dinner. Tickling,  ex-
citing a  cough,  after  a  meal,  (a.  6  d.) Chilliness  after  a
meal. Burning,  like  heartburn,  from  the  stomach  up  to
the  pharynx,  after  eating  flatulent  aliments.  Heartburn
for  three  hours,  after  supper. Sour  eructations  after  a
meal. Frequent  eructations,  especially  early  in  the  morn-
ing. Unsuccessful  desire  for  eructations,  followed  by
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  stomach,  morning  and  after-
noon. Loud  eructations,  with  accumulation  of  water  in
the  mouth. Eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta.  Eructa-
tions as  of  bitter-sour  water. Sour  eructations,  early  in
the  morning,  (10.  d.) A  quantity  of  sourish  eructations,
in  the  afternoon,  with  inclination  to  vomit. Acidity  rises
from  the  stomach  to  the  mouth. Sour  regurgitations.
Gulping  up  of  food  and  acidity,  after  great  uneasiness,
commencing  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach. Gulping  up  of
water  from  the  stomach,  she  spit  up  a  good  deal  of  it,
after  midnight.  4  There  is  a  constant  inclination  of  some-
thing rising  from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth,  (shortly.)
Heartburn. Hiccough,  at  noon. Constant,  hiccough,
before  midnight. Qualmishness  the  whole  day,  with
eructations  in  the  morning. Qualmishness,  as  if  he  would
faint. Nausea,  as  if  he  would  faint ;  it  only  subsided
when  lying  down  ;  in  the  forenoon. Violent  nausea  in
the  stomach,  with  trembling  of  the  hands  and  feet.  Nau-
sea, as  from  a  spoiled  or  empty  stomach  ;  it  does  not  go
off  by  eating,  with  frequent  waterbrash. Nausea  with
qualmishness,  accumulation  of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  (and
diarrhoea.) Waterbrash. Continued  loathing,  as  it  he
would  vomit,  (shortly.) Nausea  unto  vomiting,  in  the
stomach,  at  night,  when  in  bed ;'  gradually  going  off  after
eettincr  up  from  bed. Inclines  easily  to  vomit,  especially
after  dinner.  Inclination  to  vomit  at  every  internal  emotion,


KALI  CARBONICUM.


45


every  vexation  and  joy,  and  at  any  time  of  the  day ;  only
retching  in  the  morning.  Retching,  for  several  evenings.
Frequent  vomiting,  without  however  the  stomach  being
over-loaded  or  spoiled  ;  next  day  faint  and  without  an  appe-
tite, (a.  13  d.)  Vomiting  with  a  swoon-like  failing  of
strength.  Vomiting  of  food  and  sour  substances,  with
nausea.  In  the  morning  the  child  is  glowing  red  in  the
countenance,  throws  up  the  breakfast,  turns  as  pale  as  a
corpse,  feels  well  again  after  several  vomitings,  but  remains
very  faint  for  two  days.

Stomach. — Frequent  pain  in  the  stomach,  but  seldom
in  the  afternoon,  preceded  by  a  sensation  as  of  swashing
in  the  abdomen,  relieved  by  eructations  and  emission  of
flatulence.  Pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  rumbling,  feeling
of  emptiness,  and  eructations.  Frequent  pressure  in  the
stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking.  Pressure
in  the  stomach,  as  if  from  a  stone,  early  in  the  morning,
when  in  bed,  relieved  by  clearing  the  throat.  Pressure
in  the  stomach  extending  into  the  chest,  with  want  of
breathing  unto  suffocation,  accompanied  by  nausea  and
great  depression  of  strength  ;  she  had  to  lie  down,  had  a
trembling  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  then  threw  up  bitter
water,  which  afforded  her  relief.  Pressure  across  the
stomach,  and  below  the  hypochondria,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed,  for  half  an  hour.  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach, (a.  21  d.)  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and
lower  region  of  the  chest,  with  aggravated  breathing  and
rising  of  heat  to  the  head,  going  off  by  eructations,  after
having  lasted  one  hour.  Pressure  below  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  early  in  the  morning  and  afternoon,  relieved  by
bending  the  trunk  backwards,  and  after  a  meal.  Pressing
pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  obliging  one  to  lie  down.
Weight  in  the  stomach.  Fulness  and  pi-essure  in  the
region  of  the  stomach.  Fulness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
Sensation  of  swelling  about  the  whole  region  of  the  sto-
mach.  Continual  feeling  in  the  stomach  as  if  it  were  full
of  water.  Spasmodic  pains  in  the  stomach,  with  pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Violent  spasmodic  pain  in  the
stomach,  almost  resembling  a  pressure  and  cutting,
(shortly.)  Violent  spasmodic  pains  in  the  stomach,  in
paroxysms,  relieved  by  walking,  early  in  the  morning.


46


KALI  CARBONICUM.


Spasmodic  contraction  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  trans-
versely across  the  chest. Violent  contractive  pains  in  the
stomach,  even  at  one  o'clock  in  the  night,  extending  into
the  chest,  and  below  the  shoulders ;  where  they  become
lancinating,  with  a  choking  sensation  in  the  throat  and
oppressed  breathing  5  afterwards  anxiousness,  short  sweat,
and  eructations  which  afforded  relief ;  returning  in  frequent
paroxysms  until  early  in  the  morning. Painful  contraction
from  both  sides  of  the  stomach,  with  feeling  of  repletion,
relieved  by  throwing  up  clear  water. Pains  in  the  sto-
mach as  if  the  parts  were  being  screwed  together,  espe-
cially at  night,  extending  as  far  as  the  chest  and  bowels,
as  if  the  stomach  would  burst,  with  impeded  breathing  and
talkino- ;  in  paroxysms. Constrictive  pain  m  the  stomach
and  towards  the  pharynx. The  constrictive,  spasmodic
pains  in  the  stomach  are  renewed  by  taking  ever  so  little
(especially  cold)  food  or  drink. The  constrictive  spas-
modic pains  in  the  stomach  are  frequently  succeeded  by
eructations  that  afford  relief,  or  by  chills  with  shaking  of
the  body,  especially  the  hands,  back  and  head,  and  by
ordinary  stool. Drawing  and  cutting  transversely  through
the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Cutting
pains  in  the  stomach,  towards  evening. Sensation  in  the
stomach  as  if  it  were  cut  to  pieces,  with  great  sensitive-
ness of  the  external  region  of  the  stomach,  early  in  the
morning. Painful  cutting  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
during  and  after  breakfast. Burrowing  sensation  in  the
stomach,  with  painful  contraction  and  sensation  as  if  every
thin  a-  in  the  stomach  would  turn  up,  with  rising  ot
water  into  the  mouth,  going  off  by  the  dinner,  but  return-
ing afterwards,  with  burning  rising  in  the  throat.  Burrow-
ing and  digging  sensation  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were
being  pierced. Burrowing  sensation  in  the  pit  ot  the
stomach,  in  the  afternoon  ;  afterwards  frequent  rising  of
bitter  water,  almost  like  waterbrash. Stitching  pain  in
the  stomach,  with  sensation  as  if  every  thing  in  the  sto-
mach would  turn  up,  recurring  after  a  meal.  Stitches
in  the  stomach,  moving  towards the  left  axilla,  and
afterwards  towards  the  small  of  the  back. Sore  pain
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  during  both  an  inspiration  and
expiration. Sudden  shock  in  the  stomach,  passing  over


KALI  CARBONICUM.


47


into  rising  of  air  or  hiccough.  Darting  on  the  right  side
of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (in  a  few  h.)  Throbbing  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,  it  is  painful  to  the  touch.  Throb-
bing in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  like  a  violent  palpitation  of
the  heart,  the  pit  being  raised  visibly  at  every  throbbing  ;
mostly  in  the  morning,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Throb-
bing on  the  left  side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Rising
of  heat  from  the  abdomen  to  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon.
Burning  in  the  stomach.  Burning  in  the  stomach,  in  the
forenoon,  after  eructations.  Sour  burning  from  the  sto-
mach, with  slight  spasmodic  constriction.  Sensation  in
the  stomach  as  of  flatulence.  Grunting,  rumbling  and
moving  about  in  the  stomach,  as  of  flatulence,  or  as  if
diarrhoea  would  set  in.  The  region  of  the  stomach  is  very
painful  when  touched,  talking,  eating,  etc.  Itching,  exter-
nally, in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  it  cannot  be  relieved  by
scratching.

Abdomen.— Simple  pain  in the  hypochondria,  with
grunting  in  that  part, Stitches  in  the  hypochondria  and
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  arresting  the  breathing.  Frequently
recurring  burning  stitches  in  both  costal  regions,  in  the
afternoon,  (12.  d.) Pain  in  the  liver,  when  walking,
several  days  in  succession. Pain  in  the  liver  as  if  it  had
been  made  sore  by  pressure. Pressure  in  the  direction
of  the  liver,  as  if  coming  from  the  right  half  of  the  chest,
with  throbbing  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  which  is
painful  to  the  touch. The  pressure  in  the  liver  is  changed
to  a  sensation  of  weight  in  that  organ. Drawing  pain  in
the  liver. Cutting  pain  in  the  right  infra-costal  region,
with  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Lancinating
tearing  in  the  right  infra-costal  region. Stitches  in  the
region  of  the  liver,  resembling  splenetic  stitches.  Stitches
under  the  last  rib,  during  breathing,  (1.  d.)  Stitches
under  the  last  right  rib,  independent  of  breathing,  for  4
days. Stitches  between  the  middle  ribs  of  the  right  side,
when  sitting,  (1.  d.) Dull  stitch  in  the  right  side,  below
the  ribs,  early  in  the  morning. Dull  stitches  in  the  region
of  the liver  and  right  groin. Sharp  stitches  in  the
region  of  the  liver. Frequent  dull  stitches,  in  a  small
place  of  the  region  of  the  liver,  with  sore  pain  when  touch-
ing it,  (18.  d.) Clawing  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver.


48  KALI  CARBONICUM.

Stinging  throbbing  on  a  rib  of  the  right  side,  opposite  the
pit  of  the  stomach. Feeling  of  heal  in  the  region  of  the
liver. Burning  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  (the  first
days.) Tearing  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  ribs,
arresting  the  breathing. ,  Cutting  pain  in  the  left  hypochon-
driac region,  coming  from  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,
where  one  experiences  stitches  at  the  same  time.  Violent
colic,  sometimes  extending  into  the  hip,  until  late  at  night,
(1.  d.) Colic  with  a  number  of  eructations. Colic,  with
a  number  of  eructations,  and  spitting. Pressure  in  the
abdomen. Itching  in  the  epigastrium,  extending  into  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  (35.  d.) Pressure  m
the  abdomen,  (26.  d.) Violent  pressure  in  the  left  side
of  the  abdomen,  from  stooping,  (9.  d.) Aching  in  a  small
spot  of  the  left  iliac  region,  in  the  evening,  (39.  d.)  Aching
in  the  hypogastrium,  over  the  os  pubis,  in  frequent  parox-
ysms, going  off  by  emission  of  flatulence,  (1.  d.)  jess-
ing and  burrowing  in  the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus,
as  if  from  incarcerated  flatulence;  he  has  to  stoop  when
sitting,  and  feels  worse  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
(a  19  d  ) Distension  of  the  adbomen  with  aching  pain,
feeling  of  repletion,  weakness,  and  want  of  disposition  to
take  the  least  exercise  or  to  occupy  the  mind. Feeling  ot
distension  in  the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus,  going  oft
by  motion. Distended  abdomen. Distended  abdomen,
after  the  cough,  which  Kali  had  brought  on,  had  disap-
peared. Distended  abdomen. Hard,  distended  abdomen,
with  painfulness  of  the  umbilical  region  to  the  touch.
Distension,  pressing  asunder  and  pinching  in .  the  abdo-
men, succeeded  by  soft  stool. Bloated  abdomen.  Te use
and  heavy  abdomen,  when  sitting  or  walking.  Sensation
as  of  a  heavy  burthen  in  the  hypogastrium,
than  pinching,  and  most  insufferable  when  walking  (a.  3
h  ) Pain  in  the  abdomen,  resembling  a  spasm,  (a.  to  d.;
Spasmodic  contraction  of  the abdomen ,  jodg  «
sort  of  coldness. Contractive  pain  m  the  abdomen.
Painful  retraction  of  the  umbilical  region  when  sitting,
« hp*  off  by  motion. The  abdomen  presses  outwards,
going  on  oy  m  Ciawinff  pain  in  the  epigastrium

gastrium,  (30.  d.)  Convulsions  m  the  abdomen.  P.nch


KALI  CARBONICUM.


49


ing  below  the  umbilicus  during  dinner,  and  after  rising
from  one's  seat  ;  with  burning  in  the  right  iliac  region,
with  great  internal  and  external  sensitiveness  of  the  same^
and  sensation,  when  stooping,  as  if  something  would  fall
out,  gradually  passing  off  when  at  rest. Pinching  pres-
sure in  the  left  hypochondriac  region,  as  if  from  incarce-
rated flatulence,  (11.  d.) Pinching  in  the  epigastrium,
towards  noon, (25.  d.) Pinching  in  the  abdomen  and
distension  of  the  same. Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
morning  when  in  bed,  after  previous  chillinessj  with  desire
for  soft  stool. Cutting  in  the  bowels,. very  painful;  to
find  relief,  he  has  to  stoop  while  sitting,  and  press  upon
the  parts  with  both  hands,  or  else  to  recline  a  good  deal
backwards  ;  he  dares  not  sit  straight. Cutting  in  the  epi-
gastrium as  if  from  flatulence  moving  about,  with  emis-
sion of  flatulence,  when  walking. Cutting  in  the  left
hypochondriac  region. Frequent  cutting  in  the  abdomen
as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in. Frequent  and  slight  cutting
around  the  umbilicus. Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  all
the  contents  would  tear,  first,  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,
afterwards  higher  up,  (1.  d.) Cutting  and  drawing  in  the
abdomen,  resembling  false  labor-pains,  (12.  d.)  Tearing
in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  or  groin,  sometimes  darS
ing  in  the  evening,  (16.  17.  d.) Intermittent  tearing  or
dull  stitches  m  the  left  iliac  region,  near  the  hip  (li  d  )
Stitches  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  forenoon  and  a^ain  in  the
evening. Occasional  stitches  over  the  umbilicus,  as  if
from  flatulence. Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  ;
as  are  felt  after  retaining  the  urine  when  asleep,  relieved  by
emission  of  flatulence.  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, when  laughing.  Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, like  fine  darlings.  Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdo-
men,undertheribs.  Sharpstitches  and  lancinatingtearingin
o/  iGN  a  f  °f  the  abdomen>  "ncier  the  short  ribs?  (8  9. 1 7

Dn'll';,^  n6W  V1°11fnt  Sli,tch6j  m  lhe  hyP°gastrium,  (a.  6  h.  j
Dull  stitches  on  the  right  side  near  the  umbilicus,  (19.  d.)

0  on  f\ S  a"d  PresSl!re  in  the  left  hypochondriac  Vegion
UU.  20.  d.)  Dull  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  kidney
first  during  an  expiration  ;  afterwards  many  in  succession
going  off  by  faction. Pinching-cutting  stitches  deep  in

3


5Q  KALI  CARBONIOUM.


the  left  iliac  region,  as  if  caused  by  incarcerated  flatulence,
extending  into  the  anus  and  perinsum  ;  they  become  more
painful  when  drawing  the  abdomen  in,  and  are  but  little
relieved  by  the  emission  of  flatulence,  (19.  d  ) feore  pain
in  the  abdomen,  with  bearing-down  towards  the  genital
organs,  as  if  the  menses  would  make  their  appearance,
and  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back. Long-continued,  con-
tusive  pain  in  the  region  of  both  kidneys  in  the  afternoon,
when  sitting,  (I.  d.) Throbbing  in  the  abdomen.  Burn-
l  a  and  drawing  in  the  abdomen Burning  around  the
umbilicus,  Willi  pinching  in  the  abdomen  during  dinner.
Cold  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  a  cold  fluid  were  being
toured  through  the  intestines,  (during  the  menses.)  Unjr
fine  s  and  seSse  as  of  swashing  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it
we  full  of  water,  generally  only  on naht  -ide,  in  Oie
evening. The  abdomina  muscles  are  painful  to  the  touch
Itchinlof  the  abdomen,  for  several  days,  (a.  10  d.)  Itch
1g  around  the  umbilicus. Pain  in  the  right  groin  as  if
snmelhTng  were  swollen. Pain  in  the  right  inguinal  region
Xn  drawing  the  abdomen  in,  (29.  d.) Pressure  in  he
aroins  aslf  hernia  would  come  on. Bearing-down  in  the
So  ns  with  sensitiveness  to  the  touch,  (going  off  after
emi  si'on  of  flatulence.) Painful  bloatedness  in  both  groins,
aft dinner,  when  sitting. Pinching?  WW

wlrds  nrickinss  in  the  anus  when  sitting ;  still  worse  alter
wards,  pricking  ^  ^

ZfflS  ;  desire  for  stool.  Drawing  sUtches
and  nressn  L  outwards  in  the  inguinal  region,  as  if  the  old
S  I  operation  for  hernia  would  open  again.
^Xs  ii  the  groans,  when  moving  about  or  extending
U 1  mbs S^lden  lancinating  pain  in  the  left  inguinal

T^jfJ  rlSenSc,  going  off  after  «.  en.cat.on  and
ulent  colic  1  lament £ » of ^lxlUn„t  (even  a.

SfdThfflta  of  fla ulenpe  with  colic.  The  emiss.on
f  fl'ln lenee"  ,  „,,blesome  and  checked  »,.h  .nsofficent

TZ^tiXti  21  reived  by  emis,on  of


KALI  CARBONIC UM.  51


flatulence.  Moving  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  after-
wards cutting  in  the  stomach,  with  pressure  extending  up
into  the  neck,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion.  Constant
grunting  in  the  abdomen,  with  frequent  yawning  and
eructations.  Sort  of  rumbling  in  the  epigastrium,  (pre-
vious to  dinner,)  as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in,  arid  con-
cealed colic,  (l.d.)  Guggling  in  the  left  iliac  region,
when  pressing  upon  it.  First,  incarceration  of  flatulence,
afterwards  excessive  emission  of  flatulence.  Pressino-
flatulence  ;  he  is  scarcely  able  to  prevent  its  emission!
Emission  of  flatulence  upwards  and  downwards,  with  re-
lief. Emission  of  fetid  flatulence.  Frequent  emission  of
fetid  flatulence,  at  night. A  quantity  o/Jlafus  is  emitted.

Stool.— Unsuccessful  desire  for  slool,  with  sensation
as  if  the  rectum  were  too  feeble  to  expel  the  faeces.  Fre-
quent, violent  desire  for  stool,  in  paroxysms,  only  a  little
good  stool,  or  flatulence,  being  passed. Frequent  desire
for  stool,  at  night,  going  off  by  emission  of  flatulence,
(a.  3  d.) Constant  desire  for  stool ;  something  is  being
passed  all  the  time. Frequent  desire  for  stool  ;  he  passes
a  little  at  every  stool. Frequent  desire  for  slool ;  he  feels
as  though  he  could  not  discharge  the  faaces  all  at  a  time,
(a.  24  I h.)  insufficient  discharge  of  fasces ;  most  of  it  remains
behind. Insufficient  stool,  after  much  bearing  down  In-
sufficient, soft  stool. Tough  stool,  as  though  it  would  not
pass, lough,  soft,  dark  stool. Costiveness,  (a.  3  d.)  Cos-
tiveness,  with  painful  drawing  in  the  abdomen.  Hard  stool
and  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen. Hard,  retarded  stool'
somel.mes  accompanied  with  violent  bearing  down,  or
followed  by  tenesmus. Hard,  insufficient  stool,  early  in
the  morning;  another  stool,  soft,  in  the  morning,  (2.  d  )
Hard  stool  every  other  day. Stool,  resembling" sheep's
dung  coming  off  with  pain  and  difficulty. Three  scanty,
but  otherwise  natural  stools,  (1.  d.)  Copious,  brown  stools
Stools  more  soft  than  hard,  for  several  days,  (a.  4  d.)

inl  Z I 5  anUS;  (m  *  L Thil1  s'°ol>  with  pmch-

ng  and  uneasiness  ,n  the  abdomen.  Half  liquid  (scanty)
s too  s,  with  cohc  and  subsequent  tenesmus.  1  Half  liqu k
stool  early  ,n  the  morning,  preceded  by  colic.  Sufi
and  vehement  desire  for  stool,  as  in  diarrhoea,  although  the


52  KALI  CARBONICUM.

stool  was  hard,  with  colic. (Shortly  after  a  new  dose.)
Diarrhoea,  at  night,  with  insufferable  colic,  continuing  even
the  next  day. Diarrhoea,  in  the  evening. Profuse  diar-
rhoea, day  and  night,  (a.  22  d.) Profuse  diarrhoea,  with
great  weariness,  (a.  27  d.) Diarrhoea  with  pinching,  deep
in  the  abdomen,  before  and  after. Diarrhoea,  preceded  by
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  followed  by  burning  at  the
rectum. Violent  diarrhoea,  with  much  colic,  (a.  4  d.;
Diarrhoea,  with  smarting  pains  at  the  anus,  (a.  Bd.)
Painless  diarrhoea,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen.  Diar-
rhoea, the  first  fortnight,  with  great  weakness,  lying  down,
want  of  appetite,  and  colic  every  day;  the  faeces .are  light-
coloured  and  gray. Two  liquid  stools,  preceded  by  rum-
bling in  the  abdomen. Very  fetid  stool. Emission  of
flatulence,  with  discharge  of  thin  stool without  being
aware  of  it. Blood  with  stool,  for  several  days,  (a  4  d.)
Stools  streaked  with  blood,  followed  by  anxiety  and ^cliffi-
cult.y  of  breathing. White  mucus  comes  out  of  the  rec-
tum before  and  during  stool. Discharge  of  a  lumbrieus
wUh  the  stool Pieces  of  tenia  are  expelled  with  the  hard
Ttool Painful  bearing-down  towards  the  womb  during
natural  stool. Violent  attack  of  spasm  of  the  stomach
which  obliged  her  to  sit  down,  at  the  commencement  of
Z  al vine  evacuation  ;  she  passed  water;  while  sitting  the
min ncreased  to  such  an  extent  that  she  had  to  bend
So  bCand  was  unable  to  speak,  accompanied  by  nausea
aulnini  «P  and  vomiting  of  water,  with  retching  ;  he
fom  tin.  was  preceded  by  shuddering,  and  accompan.cd
CSoTwith  shaking  of  the  hands  and  feet  followed
Z  ang  ush  and  heat  in  the  whole  body  ;  ^^onrfAe

• A*aA\v  mllor  of  the  countenance,  and  lastly,  regular
pain,  deadly  palloi vol  »  ^  }

«  ^wed  by  aLstant  desire  for  f^^^
stool  comes  on  in  the  afternoon,  (4.  d.) "lepain8  recur
after  the  usual  stool,  early  in  the  morning,  (2.  dj 1  e
oof  ihP  rectum,  after  the  usual  stool,  (I.  and  4.  d.)

Sif  CS^  =>• rib—  "f  *e


KALI  CARBONICUM.


58


rectum  and  anus. Severe  lancinating  tearing  and  cutting
in  the  anus,  (recurring  for  several  days.) Stitches  in  the
rectum. Prickings  in  the  anus. Frequent  stitches  in
the  anus,  between  the  stools. *  Itching  of  the  anus.
Violent  itching  of  the  anus  and  scrotum. Itching  of  the
anus,  after  supper. Tingling  of  the  anus,  (even  a.  6  d.)
Violent  itching  and  tingling  of  the  anus,  in  the  evening,
continuing  a  long  while,  (1.  d.) Tingling  and  stitches  of
the  anus,  in  the  evening. Prickling  in  the  anus,  previous
to  every  stool. Burning  at  the  anus,  without  tenesmus.
Burning  at  the  anus,  during  and  after  the  dry  stool.
Burning  at  the  anus,  which  prevented  him  from  sleeping,
(a.  21  d.) Burning  at  the  rectum,  after  stool.  Burning
and  contraction  of  the  anus. Burning  and  pinching  of  the
anus. Frequent  burning  and  pinching  of  the  rectum,
(the  first  days.) Burning  cutting  in  the  anus.  Smarting
as  from  excoriation  in  the  anus,  in  the  evening.  Sharp
smarting  and  sore  feeling  at  and  above  the  anus,  after  the
morning-stool. Soreness  at  the  anus,  (5.  d.) Pimples  at
the  anus. Ulcerated  pimples  at  the  anus,  with  stinging.
Protrusion  and  distention  of  the  varices  of  the  rectum,
during  hard  stool. Protrusion  of  varices,  with  diarrhoea,
with  prickings  and  burning,  for  many  hours. *  Large
painful  varices. Considerable  protrusion  of  the  varices
during  micturition,  emitting,  at  first,  blood,  afterwards  a
white  mucus. Greatly  distended  varices  of  the  rectum,
and  considerable  emission  of  blood  from  the  same  during
micturition. Considerable  discharge  of  blood  from  the
distended  varices,  with  good  stool. Considerable  dis-
charge of  blood  from  the  rectum;  afterwards,  agitation  of
the  blood  and  pulsations  in  the  whole  body. Burning  of
the  varices  of  the  rectum,  with  violent  pain  when  walkino-
inflammation  of  the  varices  of  the  rectum,  (a.  24  h°)
Sore  pain  of  the  varices  of  the  rectum. Stitches  in  the
varices  of  the  rectum. Tingling  in  the  varices  of  the  rec-
tum, as  it  caused  by  ascarides.

Urinary  Organs.—*  Great  desire  to  urinate.  Desire
to  urinate  ;  it  took  a  long  time,  however,  before  he  suc-
ceeded in  expelling  the  urine  ;  it  flowed  very  slowly.  He
is  frequently  obliged  to  urinate  ;  but  frequently  the  pres-
sure upon  the  bladder  lasts  a  good  while  before  the  urine


64  KALI  CARBONICUM.

comes  off;  even  at  night,  he  is  frequently  obliged  to  rise
for  the  purpose  of  urinating,  although  he  drinks  but  little.
She  is  frequently  obliged  to  urinate,  emitting  but  little
urine  at  a  time,  but  always  experiencing  a  renewed  and
almost  painful  desire  after  every  emission,  (a.  48  h.)  She
has  to  make  an  effort  before  the  urine  makes  its  appear-
ance. A  little  quantity  of  pale  urine,  (1-  and  2.  d. ;)
greater  on  the  third  day. Increased  secretion  of  urine,
(the  first  days.) When  eagerly  busy  about  something,
she  has  to  emit  urine  very  hastily. After  micturition,  a
few  drops  more  flow  out. Discharge  of  a  few  drops  of
urine,  two,  three  minutes  after  micturition. Turbid  urine.
Greenish  pale  urine,  with  burning  during  and  after  mictu-
rition, (8.  d.) Dark-yellow  urine,  cloudy  ;  pale  urine  an
hour  afterwards,  (a.  1  h.) Fiery,  diminished  urine,  (the
first  time.) Urine,  resembling  loam-water,  with  copious
sediment  when  standing.  Interrupted  stream,  without  any
pain,  in  the  afternoon,  (I.  d.) Discharge  of  a  milky,  in-
odorous, flocculent  fluid  after  micturition,  (prostatic  juice  i)
Cutting  in  the  region  of  the  bladder. Cutting  tearing  in
the  neck  of  the  bladder,  during  micturition,  (37.  d.)  In-
termitting cutting  in  the  urethra,  between  the  acts  ot  mic-
turition, passing  over  into  a  tearing  pain  in  the  glans,  and
especially  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  (7.  d.)  Frequent
drawing  and  sharp  tearing  in  the  forepart  of  the  urethra,
a 8  19.  d.) Tearing  pain  in  the  urethra.  Pinching
tearing*  in  the  urethra,  (a.  12  d.) Burning  in  the  urethra
during  and  after  micturition,  (a.  5  d  ) Burning  and
bitin-  sensation  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra  and  the  upper
part  of  the  internal  surface  of  the  prepuce,  early  m  the
morning  when  in  bed,  shortly  after  micturition,  (20.  21 .  d.)

GenTtal  ORGANs.-Violent  itching  of  the  mons  ve-
neris and  near  the  genital  organs  on  the  thighs  ;  violent
itching,  with  fine  red  pimples.  Straining  sensation  in  the
penis,  (a-  24  d.)  Sharp,  drawing  pain  through  the  penis
fa  12  d.)  Tearing  drawing  in  the  penis,  (24.  d.)  bur-
ffing  sensatron  ingthe  glans  (a.  2d.)  Tearing  in ,  ihe
Mans  (a  20  d.)  Stinging  itching  of  the  glans.  Strtin-
tl  sensation  in  the  left  testicle.  Pinching  in  the  left  tes-
icle  and  the  os  pubis.  *  Swelling  of  the  testes  and  the
spermatic  cord.with  heat  which  may  be  felt  externally.


KALI  CARHONICUM.


55


The  scrotum  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  bruised. Itching  of
the  scrotum.  Soreness  of  the  scrotum,  (a.  17  d.)  Excited
sexual  instinct,  (a.  24  h.  and  3  d.) Burning  sensation
and  excitement  of  the  sexua1  organs. The  male  organs
of  generation  strongly  smell  of  semen. *  Deficient  sexual
instinct,  with  undiminished  morning  erections.  Nightly
erections,  without  exaltation  of  fancy,  (a.  7  d.)  Frequent
erections,  (a.  13  d.) Vehement  erections,  (a.  24  h.)  A
number  of  erections,  even  painful  ones,  wilh  spasmodic
contraction  in  the  spermatic  cords. *  No  erections  for  18
days. Pollution  two  nights  in  succession,  (1.  2.  night.)
Pollutions,  wilh  voluptuous  dreams,  (the  first  days.)  Co-
pious pollutions  with  subsequent  weakness,  (a.  3,  4,  7,  23
nights.) Decreased  quantity  of  pollutions,  otherwise  very
frequent,  (a.  14  d.) Suppression  of  the  usual  pollutions
for  42  days. Embrace  without  emission  of  semen,  (a.  10
d.) Lewd  dreams  after  an  embrace,  at  night,  and  a  pol-
lution. Aversion  to  an  embrace,  in  a  female,  (the  first
days.) Her  sexual  desire  is  easily  excited,  (a.  29  d.)
Pinching  in  the  vagina,  during  an  embrace. Sore  pain  in
the  vagina,  during  an  embrace. Tearing  in  the  left  side
of  the  pudendum,  extending  through  tlie  abdomen  as  far'
as  the  chest. Pinching  pain  in  the  labia. Stitches  trans-
versely through  the  pudendum. Burning  stinging  of  the
pudendum. Burning  and  itching  in  the  pudendum.
Menses  too  early,  by  two  days,  immediately  after  a  new
dose,  (8.  d.) Menses  too  early  by  4  days,  (a.  24  h.)
Menses  too  early  by  5  days,  and  more  profuse,  and  lasting
longer  than  usual. Menses  too  early  by  6  days.  Menses
too  early  by  6  days,  scanty  on  the  first  day,  on  the  second
day  more  profuse  than  usual ;  again  scanty  on  the  third,
and  ceasing  entirely  on  the  fourth. Menses  too  early  by
10  days,  lasting  6  days  ;  weak  during  the  first  days,  more
profuse  during  the  latter  ;  with  weakness  and  drowsiness,
cohc  and  toothache. Reappearance  of  the  menses,  which
had  been  suppressed  for  87  days,  without  any  other  trou-
ble, except  heaviness  in  all  her  limbs  the  day  before,  (3.  d.)
Reappearance  of  the  suppressed  menses  :  they  look  bet-
ter,t  (5.  d.) Menses  delay  one  day,  with  pain  in  the

Uiil  r^8ultbrineB  ba°k  ^  menl,e8,  when  Nutrum  m-  d>d  not  accomplish


56  KALI  CARBONICUM.

abdomen. Menses  delay  13  days,  (secondary  effect.)
The  menstrual  blood  is  very  acrid,  has  a  bad,  sharp  smell ;
it  makes  the  thighs  sore,  and  covers  them  with  an  erup-
tion. Great  soreness  around  the  pudendum  before,  during
and  after  the  menses. Voluptuous  feelings  previous  to
the  appearance  of  the  menses,  early  in  the  morning
when  walking,  such  as  are  experienced  during  an  embrace.
A  good  deal  of  heat  previous  to  the  menses,  great  thirst,
and  restless  nights. Impatience,  one  week  previous  to
the  appearance  of  the  menses,  as  if  they  would  reap-
pear, (a.  16  d.) A  good  deal  of  chilliness  previous  to
the  menses,  tremor  of  the  limbs,  spasmodic  sensation  in
the  abdomen. Headache  with  great  heaviness  during  the
menses,  early  in  the  morning. Repletion  and  nausea  after
a  meal,  during  the  menses,  soon  after  vomiting. At  the
time  when  the  menses  ought  to  have  made  their  appear-
ance, but  did  not,  she  was  attacked  with  sour  eructations,
swelling  of  the  cheeks  with  stitches,  but  without  any  heat
and  swelling  of  the  gums. Pain  in  the  abdomen,  during
the  menses,  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  rumbling  in  the  ab-
domen, great  weakness  and  drowsiness. On  the  second
day  of  the  menses,  violent  headache  from  morning  till
evening. A  quantity  of  flatulence  during  the  menses,
fetid  taste  in  the  mouth,  and  frequent  rising  of  bile.  Cut-
ting in  the  abdomen  during  the  menses. During  the
menses,  violent  pressing  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  in
the  abdomen,  as  if  all  the  contents  would  issue  out  from
the  genital  organs.  Costiveness  during  the  menses.  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  like  weight,  during  the  menses.
On  the  second  day  of  the  menses,  coryza,  colic,  toothache,
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  stitches  in  the  ears  and  rest-
less sleep. Restless  sleep  during  the  menses,  with  anx-
ious dreams.

again  after  waking  in  the  morning,  but  passes  into  a  very
disagreeable  state  between  sleep  and  waking;  while  in
that  state  she  hears  things  which  give  her  anguish  and
pain,  although  she  knows  that  she  dreams  ;  she  is,  never-
theless, unable  to  openher  eyes,  and  she  has  great  difficulty
to  tear  herself  from  that  state  of  half  waking.  Violent
itching  of  the  whole  body,  during  the  menses.  After  the
menses,  in  the  evening,  coldness  m  the  back,  and  waking


KALI  CARBOJUCUM.


57


after  midnight,  with  spasm  of  the  stomach  and  coldness
in  the  stomach,  which  continued  until  noon,  (a.  J  9  d.)  A
female  in  her  fifth  month  of  pregnancy  is  attacked  at  night
after  some  vexation,  with  a  violent  hemorrhage  from  the
vagina,  with  clots  of  coagulated  blood,  accompanied  by
dull  headache  and  yellow  complexion ;  however  she  did
not  miscarry.  *  Leucorrhcea,  (3.  d.)  Leucorrhoea,  (the
first  5  days.)  Mucous  leucorrhoea.  Yellowish  leucor-
rhcea, with  itching  and  burning  of  the  pudendum.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Dry  coryza,  (a.  26  d.) Dry  coryza,
becoming  fluent  in  the  afternoon  during  a  walk,  (a.  3  d.)
Dry  coryza  with  itching  in  the  nose  ;  she  has  difficulty  in
breathing  th  rough  the nose,  for  several  days,  (a.  4  d.)
Dry  coryza,  frequently,  also  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,
with  tingling  in  the  throat,  (a.  1 1  d  )  Dry  coryza,  he  found
it  very  difficult  to  breathe. Dry  'coryza,  with  a  quantity
of  yellow-green  nasal  mucus. Obstruction  of  the  nose.
Expulsion  of  purulent  matter  from  the  right  nostril ;  fol-
lowed by  obstruction  ;  when  blowing  the  nose,  one  expe-
riences a  stinging  and  contractive  pain  extending  as  far  as
the  occiput. Fluent  coryza,  with  excessive  sneezing,  at
least  30  limes  in  one  day. Fluent  coryza,  almost  the
whole  day,  but  especially  in  the  evening. Profuse  fluent
coryza,  every  evening,  with  frequent  sneezing.  Profuse
fluent  coryza. Profuse  fluent  coryza,  with  much  sneez-
ing, pain  in  the  back  and  headache,  fa  10  d.)  Excessive
fluent  coryza,  (a.  29  d.) Coryza,  with  bloody  nasal  mu-
cus (a.  8  d.) Frequent  drawing  pain  about  the  larynx,
with  a  raw  feeling. When  eating,  particles  of  food  easily
get  into  the  larynx. Rough  voice.

Throat.— Rough  throat,  with  a  good  deal  of  sneezing
Rough  throat  with  cough.  Rough  throat  when  uncov-
ering the^ body.  Rough  and  hoarse  throat,  for  several
days.  Complete  hoarseness  and  aphony,  (a.  24  h  )
*irst,  hoarseness,  afterwards  excessive  fluent  coryza
Hoarseness,  as  if  something  were  lodged  in  the  throat,
with  irritation,  inducing  clearing.  The  throat  feels
plugged  ;  the  throat  is  cleared  by  coughing.  Scrapino-
sensation  ,n  the  chest,  caused  by  the  wind.  Crunling  and
slight  snoring  in  the  trachea,  previous  to  the  coughing  fit
1  inflation  in  the  larynx,  inducing  cough,  with  violent

3*


58  KALI  CARBONICUM.

hoarseness. Titillation  in  the  throat,  inducing  hawking
and  coughing,  with  sensation  of  tenacious  mucus,  morning
and  evening,  (12.  22.  29.  d.) *  Cough,  brought  on  by  titii-
lation  in  the  throat,  (20.  d.) Cough,  brought  on  by  titilla-
tion in  the  throat,  without  expectoration. Scraping  sensa-
tion with  cough.  Cough,  affecting  the  chest,  brought  on  by
tickling  in  the  throat. Cough,  with  titillation.  Cough,
when  playing  upon  the  violin. Violent  cough,  early  in  the
morning, before  breakfast, subsiding  after  breakfast.
Early  in  the  morning,  hawking  up  of  mucus. She  begins
to  cough  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  fits  recurring
every  half  hour. A  good  deal  of  cough,  early  in  the
morning,  with  expectoration,  but  mostly  in  the  evening.
Evening-cough,  when  in  bed. Profuse  cough  every  even-
ing, after  having  laid  in  bed  for  some  time,  for  several
weeks. Fatiguing  cough  in  the  evening. She  was
obliged  to  cough  from  9  o'clock  in  the  evening,  until  morn-
ing, every  5  minutes. *  Night-cough. Frequent  cough
before  midnight,  not  in  day-time. Short  and  hacking
coucm  with  some  expectoration,  mostly  at  night  and  ear  y
in  the  morning,  with  coryza. Frequent  short  and  hack-
in  a  cough,  in  the  afternoon  and  the  following  forenoon,  (a.
6  d.) Spasmodic  cough,  with  irritation  in  the  throat,  in  a
few  violent  paroxysms,  even  unto  choking,  with  a  sore  pam
in  the  top  of  the  head  and  subsequent  great  weakness.
Suffocating  and  choking  cough,  at  5  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, as  if  caused  by  dryness  of  the  larynx  ;  she  was  pre-
vented from  talking  by  a  spasm  in  the  chest,  accompanied
bv  redness  in  the  face  and  sweat  over  the  whole  bod}'.
Couo-h,  bringing  on  vomiting easily. Violent  cough,
almost  causing  vomiting,  early  in  the  morning,  ia-
tio-uin*  cough,  so  violent  that  she  loses  her  senses.  Dry
cough?  coming  and  going  rapidly. Dry  cough,  almos
only  at  night,  with  stitches  in  the  throat. Dry  cough,  at
ni<*ht,  waking  her  from  sleep  with  intense  pain  m  ihe
chest,  when  coughing;  little  rough  in  day  time (1.  d  )
Cough  with  abundant  expectoration. Discharge  of  small,
red  lumps  from  the  throat. Sourish  expectoration  trom
coughing. Cough,  with  expulsion  of  blood-streaked  mu-
Ssfthrfe  times,°(17.  d.) She  coughs  up  --us  winch
however,  does  not  get  into  her  throat,  and  cannot,  on  that


KALI  CARBONICUM.


59


account,  be  thrown  off.  Rough  pain  in  the  larynx,  when
coughing.  Stinging  in  the  throat,  when  coughing,  with
fluent  coryza.  Occasional  stitches  in  the  left  half  of  the
chest  when  coughing.  Tearing  scraping  in  the  chest,
when  coughing.  Sparks  dart  from  her  eyes  when  cough
ing.  Nausea  when  coughing.  Pain  in  the  varices  when
coughing. Concussive  pain  in  the  abdomen  when  cough-


ing.


Chest. — Short  breath,  early  in  the  morning.  Shortness
of  breath,  early  in  the  morning. Inclination  to  breathe
deeply. 'Oppressed  breathing. Asthma,  as  if  caused
by  impeded  expansion  of  the  chest. Asthma  with  short
breathing,  while  writing,  (3.  d.) Oppression  of  the  chest,
with  groaning,  deep  breathing. Oppression  of  the  chest,
with  aggravated,  painful  breathing,  2,  3  limes,  (a.  30  d.)
Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  distended  abdomen.  Sen-
sation in  the  open  air  as  if  the  throat  were  being  con-
stricted. Arrest  (interception)  of  breathing  wakes  him  at
night. Slight  rattling  in  the  chest,  at  night,  when  lying
on  the  back. Anguish  in  the  chest,  towards  evening.
Great  pain  in  the  chest,  especially  when  talking.  Pres-
sure in  the  chest,  when taking  an inspiration.  Pa-
roxysms of  pressure,  in  the  forepart  of  the  chest,  especially
on  the  right  side,  increased  by  inspiration,  diminished  by
eructations. Pressure  in the  xiphoid  cartilage,  when
coughing,  and  also  when  taking  a  strong  inspiration,  (a.
16  h.) Frequent  pressure  in  the  lefl  half  of  the  chest  and
the  region  of  the  heart,  (8.  d.) Pressure  in  the  whole  of
the  left  half  of  the  chest. Aching  in  the  right  border  of
the  sternum,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising  ;  the  bor-
der is  painful  when  touched. Pressure  in  the  middle  of
the  chest,  with  a  sensation  as  of  drawing  downwards.
Sharp  aching  behind  the  sternum,  when  breathing,  or
when  swallowing  liquid  substances,  and  during  eructa-
tions, for  several  days. Stinging  pressure  in  the  left  half
of  the  chest,  when  breathing  deeply. Slinging  pressure
in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  sometimes,  for  several  days.
Clawing  pressure  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  (26.  d.)
Tension  across  the  chest,  during  an  expiration,  when
walking. Spasmodic  pain  in  the  chest,  going  off  by  eruc-
tations.  Pinching  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  several


62


KALI  CARBONICUM.


back.  Violent  pain  as  from  blows  and  bruises,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  especially  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising.
Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  the  parts  were
broken,  during  motion.  Itching  of  the  lower  part  of  the
small  of  the  back.  Titillating  weary  pain  over  the  os
sacrum.  An  occasional  stitch,  from  the  small  of  the  back,
through  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  towards  the  chest.
Violent  pain  in  the  back.  Pressure  in  the  back  over  the
region  of  the  right  kidney,  early  in  the  morning,  (20.  d.)
Pressure  in  the  region  of  both  kidneys,  (7.  8.  15.  19.
d.)  Pressure  in  the  left  scapula.  Sharp  pressure  in  the
upper  part  of  the  back,  (34.  d.)  Drawing  pressure  in  the
scapula?.  Drawing  pressure  in  the  back.  Tensive  pres-
sure, like  great  fatigue,  beginning  at  the  right  scapula,  ex-
lending  over  the  side  of  the  back  down  to  the  small  of  the
back,  when  the  parts  are  at  rest,  even  in  the  morning  when
in  bed,  especially  when  riding  in  a  carriage.  Burning
pressure  in  the  back,  worse  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
(a.  19  d.)  Sore  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  right  kid-
ney, (6.  d.)  *  Stiffness  of  the  back  ;  she  is  unable  to
stoop.  *  Stiffness  and  paralytic  feeling  in  the  back  and
small  of  the  back.  Tensive  pain  under  the  left  scapuia,
when  breathing.  A  few  sharp,  biting  pinchings  on  the
posterior  portions  of  the  ribs,  on  both  sides  of  the  back.
Contractive  pain  in  the  back,  at  rest,  after  performing
some  physical  labor.  Tearing  in  the  region  of  the  right
kidney,  (13.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  psoas  muscles,  arresting
the  breathing.  Lancinating  and  oppressive  tearing  in  the
back,  near  the  right  scapula,  (10.  38.  d.)  Tearing  in  the
right  scapula,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.)  Burning  tear-
ing, on  the  right  side,  near  the  dorsal  spine,  over  the  small
of  the  back,  (18.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  region  of  both  kidney  v,
(11.  29.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  right  side,  in  the  back,  ex-
tending through  the  chest,  (25.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  right
scapula,  when  taking  an  inspiration.  Lancinating  pain
between  the  scapulae,  with  oppression  and  anguish  of
the  chest,  almost  only  when  sitting,  so  that  she  is  obliged
to  get  up  and  walk  about.  Stitch  from  the  apex  of  the
left  scapula  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  during  fatiguing
labor,  (a.  7  d.)  Dull  stitches  in  the  left  scapula.  Claw-
ing stitches  in  both  scapulae.  Sharp,  tearing  stitch  under
the  right  scapula. Pressure  between  the  scapulae,  followed


KALI  CARBONICUM.


63


by  a  burning  sensation  extending  from  the  scapulae  to  the
crest  of  the  ilium,  equally  felt  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,
the  burning  is  felt  when  laying  the  hand  upon  the  parts.
Pulsative  throbbing  near  the  upper  .border  of  the  left  sca-
pula. Pain  in  the  loins,  when  walking,  and  especially  when
touching  the  parts,  as  if  the  flesh  had  started  off  from  _  the
bone.  Pain  in  the  back  as  if  from  bloios  and  bruises,
when  at  rest,  not  in  motion.  Pain  as  from  blows  and
bruises,  between  the  shoulders  and  near  the  left  shoulder,
going  off  by  motion.  Stinging  pain  as  from  blows  and
bruises,  in  the  right  scapula,  when  in  motion  ;  it  may  be
felt  as  far  as  the  chest.  Pain  in  the  back  as  if  the  part
had  been  strained  by  lifting.  Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the
left  scapula.  Violent  stinging  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the
left  scapula,  extending  into  the  chest.  Itching  of  the  back,
becoming  painful  after  scratching.

Neck. — Pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  when  bending  the
head  backwards.  Violent  tension  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
becoming  still  more  painful  when  moving  the  head.  Stiff-
ness in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  elongation  of  the  uvula
in  the  pharynx.  *  Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  early
in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  (also  a.  3  d.)  Stiffness  in
the  nape  of  the  neck,  early  in  the  morning,  disappearing
in  day-time  ;  for  some  weeks.  Drawing  pain  in  the  nape
of  the  neck,  (a.  2  h.)  Tearing  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,
sometimes  very  quick  and  slight.  Tearing  in  the  nape  of
the  neck,  on  the  right  side,  early  in  the  morning.  Itching
pimples  on  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  evening  ;  they  pass
off  after  24  hours.  The  cervical  muscles  are  painful
when  acting.  Darting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,
(a.  2  d.)  Pressing  drawing'in  the  right  side  of  the  neck.
Tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,
(a.  24  d.)  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  neck  ;  the  neck
appears  larger,  and  the  neck-cloth  too  tight.  Pain  of  the
cervical  glands,  as  if  from  a  cold,  (3.  d.)  Stitches  in  the
cervical  glands.  Swelling  of  the  cervical  glands,  (a.  5,
and  14  d.)  Swelling  of  a  cervical  gland  below  the  chin,
painful  when  catching  cold.  Swelling  of  the  cervical
glands  on  both  sides,  with  pain  when  turning  the  head.
Hard  swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  gland.  Tickling  in
the  glandular  swelling  of  the  neck  ;  she  had  to  press  upon
the  part  with  her  cold  hand,  in  order  to  find  relief.


64  KALI  C1RB0NICUM.

Superior  Extremities. — Sweat  in  the  axilla.  Swell-
ing, and  pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  of  the
axillary  gland,  (2.  d.) Swelling  of  an  axillary  gland.
Dull  cutting  and  tearing  in  the  .right  axilla,  (24.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  left  axilla,  when  at  rest,  (10  d.)  Tearing
lancinations  in  the  right  axilla,  when  lifting  up  the  arm,
early  in  the  morning,  when  writing,  (7.  d.)  Violent
stitches  in  the  left  axilla. Sensitiveness  and  burning  in
the  right  axilla,  (15.  d.) Itching  in  the  axilla. The  left
shoulder  is  painful,  when  moving  the  left  arm  violently  or
when  pressing  with  it  strongly. Clawing  pressure  in  the
right  shoulder-joint,  more  painful  when  breathing.  Violent
tensive  pain  in  the  left  shoulder,  early  in  the  morning,  so
that  he  was  unable  to  lift  up  his  arm. Tension  and
pressive  drawing  in  the  right  shoulder,  with  paralytic  sen-
sation in  the  right  arm. Drawing  pain  in  the  right
shoulder,  (17.  d.) Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder,  when  at
rest  and  in  motion. Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  when
knitting  ;  going  off  after  motion. Tearing  in  the  left
shoulder. Clawing  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder.  Fine
stitches  in  the  left  shoulder,  afterwards  in  the  tendons  of
the  left  side  of  the  neck. Fine  stitches  in  the  shoulders,
when  at  rest  and  in  motion. Pain  as  from  blows  and
bruises  under  the  right  shoulder-joint,  especially  when
moving  and  touching  it. Cracking  in  the  shoulder-joint,
when  moving  or  raising  the  arm. Pimples  on  the  shoul-
der, with  violent  itching  and  burning  after  scratching.
Violent  tensive  pain  in  the  arm,  for  8  days,  so  that  he
was  unable  to  raise  it  on  account  of  pain  ;  he  was  indeed
able  to  move  it  backwards  upon  the  back,  rest  upon  it
and  touch  the  joint,  without  any  pain. Paralytic  tension
and  drawing  in  the  left  arm,  from  the  shoulder  to  the
lower  arm,  with  disposition  of  the  lower  arm  to  go  to
sleep,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking  up,  (34.  d.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  left  arm,  (a.  21  h.) Jerkings  in  the
arm,  in  the  evening  when  going  to  sleep. Frequent  jerk-
ings of  the  left  arm. Tearing  in  the  left  arm  from  the
top  to  the  wrist- joint. Violent  tearing  in  the  whole  of  the
left  arm,  (7.  d.) In  the  cold  air  the  arms  lose  their
warmth,  become  numb  and  feel  as  if  they  had  gone  to
sleep. *  Both  arms  go  to  sleep — and  become  rigid  in  the
cold  air ;  they  go  to  sleep  even  after  violent  exercise.


KALI  CARBONICUM.


65


The  arm  upon  which  he  rests  at  night,  goes  to  sleep.  The
arms  go  to  sleep,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed  ;  they
feel  rigid  and  paralysed,  with  sensation  of  internal  press-
ing, and  the  hands  are  insensible  for  half  an  hour.  Para-
lytic sensation  in  both  arms,  (the  first  days.)  "When
writing,  the  arms  become  easily  tired,  (a.  3d.)  Weakness
and  ivant  of  strength  of  both  arms.  Weakness  of  the
arm,  with  swelling  of  the  upper  arms  and  hands.  Itching
of  the  arms,  with  white  pimples  after  scratching,  looking
like  millet-seed.  Slight  twitchings  in  the  flesh  of  the  left
upper  arm.  Burning  tension  of  the  right  upper  arm,  close
above  the  elbow.  Tearing  in  the  right  upper  arm,  above
the  bend  of  the  elbow,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the
left  upper  arm,  sometimes  as  far  as  the  shoulder,  (11.  16.
20.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  upper  arm,
and  in  the  elbow,  (12.  22.  d.)  Lancinating  tearing  in  the
left  upper  arm.  Stitches  in  the  right  upper  arm.  Pulsa-
tive  pain  in  the  left  upper  arm,  at  intervals.  Jactitation
of  the  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  (18.  19.  25.  d.)
Pimple  on  the  upper  part  of  the  upper  arm,  itching  and
painful.  Pain  as  from  bruises  and  blows  in  the  right
upper  arm,  especially  when  raising  the  arm.  Paralytic
pain  in  both  upper  arms,  mostly  during  motion.  Pain  in
ihe  elbow  as  if  it  were  stiff,  when  extending  the  right
arm,  after  it  had  been  bent.  Draioing  and  tearing  in
both  elboivs,  sometimes  with  a  feeling  of  warmth  in  the
parts,  recurring  frequently.  Tearing  in  the  bends  of  both
elbows,  (3.  6.  22.  d.)  Tearing  stitches  in  the  bend  of  the
left  elbow.  Violent  stitches  in  the  bends  of  both  elbows,
early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  going  off  after  rising.
Tensive  pain  in  the  lower  arm.  Drawing  pain  in  the
lower  arm.  Violent,  short  drawing  from  the  arm  into  the
hand,  (a.  2  d.)  Paralytic  drawing  with  dull  pain,  from
the  left  lower  arm  into  the  hand,  in  the  evening.  Tearing
in  the  upper  part  of  both  lower  arms.  Tearing  in  the
middle  of  both  lower  arms.  Tearing  in  both  lower  arms,
in  the  direction  of  the  wrist-joint.  Pain  of  the  metacarpus,
when  grasping  something.  Dull  aching  in  the  dorsum  of
the  left  hand.  Drawing  in  the  inner  surface  of  the  left
wrist-joint,  aggravated  by  motion.  Tearing  in  the  wrist-
joints,  (11.  20.  d.) Tearing  in  the  outer  process  of  the


66


KALI  CARB0N1CUM.


wrist-joint,  (29.  d.) Fine  tearing  in  the  left  wrist-joint,  in
the  direction  of  the  ring-finger,  recurring  frequently,  (4.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  right  wrist-joint,  when  knitting,  recurring
frequently. Dull  tearing,  with  pressure,  in  both  hands,
between  the  thumb  and  index-finger,  (16.  12.  21.  d.)
Violent  tearing  extending  from  the  dorsum  of  the  left
hand  to  the  fingers. Violent  tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  hand,  apparently  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  scarcely
endurable. Stitches  in  the  left  wrist-joint,  when  moving
it,  afterwards  a  few  sharp  stitches  when  at  rest.  Cold
hands.  Burning  of  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand,  as  from  red-
hot  coal. The  hands  go  to  sleep,  early  in  the  morning
when  waking,  with  dull  headache,  increasing  after  rising,
with  frequent  empty  eructations,  until  noon. Want  of
strength  of  both  hands. *  Trembling  of  the  hands  when
writing,  early  in  the  morning. Itching  of  the  wrist-joint.
Violent  itching  of  the  palms  of  the  hands,  in  the  evening,
close  to  the  fingers,  (1.  d.) Itching  above  the  right  wrist-
joint,  going  off  by  scratching. Itching  vesicles  in  the
palm  of  the  hand. Red,  elevated  spot  above  the  wrist-
joint,  of  the  size  of  a  small  pea. Rough,  chapped  skin  of
the  hands. Drawing  pain  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the
fingers. Tearing  in  the  middle-joint  of  the  index-finger.
Tearing  under  the  nail  of  the  thumb. Tearing  in  the
articulations  and  the  phalanges  of  several  fingers.  Tear-
ing under  the  finger-nails,  (34.  d.) Quick  and  slight  tear-
ing in  the  fingers  and  the  toes  at  the  same  time.  Tearing
in&the  left  thumb. Tearing  in  the  metacarpal-joint  of  the
left  middle  finger. Tearing  in  the  left  little  finger,  towards
the  tip,  going  off  by  moving  it,  but  recurring  frequently.
Violent  tearing  behind  the  right  index-finger,  as  far  as
the  tip. Dull  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb,  (9.  d.)
A  few  fine  stitches  in  the  left  little  finger. Pricking  tear-
ing under  the  nail  and  in  the  tip  of the  index-finger.
Drawing  tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  little  finger.  Burning
tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  index-finger,  (10.  d.) Stitches  in
the  fingers  of  the  right  hand. Fine  painful  stitches  under
the  nail  of  the  left  middle-finger. Tearing  in  the  left  little
finder,  towards  the  tip,  going  off  .by  motion,  but  recurring
frequently. Violent  tearing  behind  the  right  index-finger,
as  far  as  the  tip. Dull  tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  thumb,


KALI  CARBONICUM.


67


(9.  d.)  A  few  fine  tearings  in  the  left  little  finger.
Pricking  tearing  under  the  nail  and  in  the  tip  of  the  index-
finger.  Drawing  tearing  in  the  lip  of  the  little  finger.
Burning  tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  index-finger,  (10.  d.)
Stitches  in  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Fine,  painful
prickings  under  the  nail  of  the  left  middle-finger.  Fine,
intermitting  prickings  in  the  middle-joint  of  tl#>right  index-
finger.  Painful  prickings  in  the  right  index-finger,  as  if
needle  and  thread  were  being  drawn  from  the  posterior
part  to  the  tip  ;  relieved  by  bending  the  finger,  renewed
by  extending  it  again.  Fine,  painful  stitches  in  the  tips
of  the  four  last  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  as  if  they  were
ulcerated.  Ulcerative  pain  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the
left  thumb,  in  the  evening.  Burning  pain  as  from  a  red-
hot  coal,  of  two  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Burning  in  the
tip  of  the  little  finger.  Sore  pain,  early  in  the  morning,  in
the  anterior  joint  of  the  middle-finger,  especially  under  the
nail,  not  increased  by  contact.  Tingling  in  the  tip  of  the
right  middle-finger.  The  fingers  are  drawn  open  and  then
contract  again,  with  a  jerk,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in
bed  ;  afterwards  numbness,  difficult  movement  and  chilli-
ness of  the  fingers.  Numbness  and  insensibility  of  the
right  thumb,  for  some  weeks.  The  thumb  goes  to  sleep,
towards  morning,  when  in  bed.  The  tips  of  the  fingers
go  to  sleep,  generally  early  in  the  morning.  Paralytic
sensation  of  the  thumbs,  from  knitting.  Stiffness  and
paralytic  weakness  of  the  right  thumb  and  index-finger,
when  writing.  Itching  pimple  behind  the  left  thumb,  con-
tinuing to  itch  even  after  being  scratched.  Vesicle  on  the
little  finger.  Corrosive  vesicle  on  the  left  index-finger,
which,  when  opened  for  several  days  in  succession,  poured
forth  a  watery,  not  purulent  humor.  Burning  pain  around
the  border  of  the  nail  of  the  middle-finger.  Inflammation
round  the  border  of  the  nail  of  the  index-finger,  resem-
bling a  panaris  ;  when  pressing  upon  it  a  thin  pus  oozes
out,  for  seven  days.

Inferior  Extremities. — Tearing  to  and  fro  in  the  left
lumbar  region,  when  sitting,  going  off  by  motion.  Twitch-
ings  of  the  glutei  muscles.  Dull  pain  in  the  glutei  muscles.
Tearing  about,  and  in  the  glutei  muscles,  not  far  from  the
hip-joint. Attacks  of  clawing  tearing  in  the  glutei  muscles.


68


KALI  CARBONICUM.


Ulcerative  pain  in  the  glutei  muscles  and  thighs,  when
sitting. Itching  between  the  nates. Soreness  between
the  lower  limbs. Clawing  tearing  in  the  hip-joint.  Tear-
ing pain  in  the  left  hip,  from  time  to  time. Tearing  in
the  hips  and  knees,  even  when  sitting. Tearing  in  the
hips  or  the  integuments  of  the  hips  ;  occasionally  with  a
sensation  as^pf  tingling,  (19.  21.  30.  d.) Darting  pain  in
the  left  hip-joint,  when  turning  the  thigh. Fine,  but  in-
tensely painful  stitches  in  the  left  hip-joint,  when  standing ;
after  sitting  down,  one  experiences  tearing  stitches  in  the
thigh  from  above  downwards,  apparently  in  the  marrow,
going  off  after  rising  from  one's  seat. Contusive  pain,  as
from  a  shock,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  os  innominatum,
when  walking,  or  when  feeling  the  bone. Pain  in  the
hip-joint  as  from  bruises  ;  with  pain  during  motion  and
when  sneezing. *  Pressure  in  the  lower  extremities,
apparently  in  the  bones,  at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  an-
other place. *  Tearing  in  the  left  thigh  and  tibia  (during
the  menses.) Burning  pain  in  both  lower  limbs,  some-
times with  intensely  painful  stitches. Uneasiness  in  the
lower  extremities,  in  the  evening ;  he  had  to  extend  them
frequently. Sudden  attack  of  heaviness  in  the  left  lower
limb,  so  that  he  had  great  trouble  in  moving  it ;  it  felt
paralysed,  at  night  when  in  bed  and  next  day  when  sitting.
Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs. Numb  feeling  in  the
whole  of  the  right  leg,  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep,  with  sub-
sequent feeling  of  great  heaviness,  early  in  the  morning
after  waking  up. Numb  feeling  of  the  rvhole  of  the  right
lower  limb,  with  disposition  to  go  to  sleep,  especially  in
the  leg. The  lower  limbs  frequently  go  to  sleep.  Weak-
ness of  the  lower  limbs  ;  they  bend  involuntarily.  Stiff-
ness of  the  lower  limb,  (a.  10  d.) Jactitation  of  the
muscles  of  the  thigh. Drawing  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  (a.
lid.) Drawing  pain  in  left  ihigh  down  to  the  knee.
Drawing  pain  in  the  thigh,  when  stepping  up  as  if  it
would  break. Paralytic  drawing  in  the  whole  thigh,
which  frequently  passes  over  into  tearing,  worse  when
standing  and  in  the  warmth  of  the  bed,  frequently  only  in
the  evening,  and  at  night. Tearing  in  the  upper  and  in-
ternal part  of  the  thigh. Tearing  in  the  posterior  part  of
the  thigh,  close  to  the  glutei  muscles,  in  the  direction  of


KALI  CARBONICUM.


69


the  genital  organs.  Sore  pain  of  a  spot  in  the  middle  of
the  thigh,  when  touched.  Weary  sensation  in  the  thighs,
as  if  he  had  fatigued  himself  by  walking,  for  many  days,
mostly  in  the  afternoon.  Feeling  of  both  limbs,  over ihe
knees,  as  if  they  had  been  knocked  away,  in  the  evening.
Violent  pain  as  from  bruises,  one  hand's  breath  over  the
right  knee,  as  if  the  thigh  would  fall  off  when  standing ;
worse  when  sitting,  and  afterwards  continuing  both  when
at  rest  and  in  motion.  Twitchings  in  the  right  thigh,  on
the  anterior  surface.  Paralytic  feeling  of  the  whole  thigh,
with  sensation  as  if  it  would  go  to  sleep.  Two  little
pimples  on  the  left  thigh.  Itching  spot  on  the  thigh,  near
the  hip,  ulcerating  when  scratched.  Nodosity  over  the
knee,  aching  and  tearing.  Dull  pain  in  the  side  of  the
knee,  when  walking,  and  especially  when  extending  the
limb.  Tensive  pain  in  ihe  right  knee,  and  afterwards
tingling  in  the  part ;  it  is  felt  only  when  walking,  and
goes  off  when  sitting.  Stiffness  in  the  knees,  (a.  2  d.)
Stiffness,  tension  and  weakness  in  the  right  knee,  as  if
something  were  tied  round  the  knee  very  firmly.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  knee,  when  walking,  reaching  into  the
thigh.  Frequent  tearing  in  the  knees.  Tearing  in  both
knees,  (1- d.)  Tearing  in  the  bend  of  the  knee.  Tearing
in  the  knee  and  bend  of  the  knee,  in  the  evening,  with
warmth  in  the  part.  Ripping-up  pain  in  the  knees,  when
walking  or  sitting.  Throbbing  and  beating  in  the  left
knee,  frequently  during  the  day.  Slight  twitchings  in  the
left  knee,  (2.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  knee,
when  rising  from  one's  seat,  for  some  minutes.  When
walking  considerably  the  knees  go  to  sleep  and  feel  a
pain  ;  he  found  it  difficult  to  bend  them.  Paralytic  sen-
sation in  the  kne",  when  sitting.  Paralytic  pain  in  the
right  knee,  when  walking,  (6.  d.)  Itching  of  the  knee.
Eruption  in  the  bend  of  the  knee.  Drawing  pain  in  the
right  leg,  extending  down  to  the  foot,  for  several  days.
Paralytic  drawing  in  the  legs.  Drawing  and  tearing  in
the  tibiae.  Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  tibia,  below
the  knee.  Tearing  in  both  tibia,  with  pain  of  the
periosteum  when  touching  it,  and  tension  of  the  same
when  walking.  Tearing  in  the  left  tibia.  Tearing  in
the  upper  part  of  the  calf,  (20.  d.) Tearing  in  the  right


70


KALI  OARBONiCUM-


calf,  receding  towards  the  interior  of  the  calf  when  press*
ing  and  rubbing  it,  and  disappearing  afterwards.  Strain-
ing sens  ition  in  the  left  calf,  as  if  the  tendons  were  too
short,  when  rising  from  a  seat,  in  day-time. Cramp  in
the  right  calf,  (a.  20  h.) Stitches  in  the  tibia.  Twitch-
ings  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  leg,  when  standing.
Itching  of  the  tibia. Violent  itching  of  ihe  legs,  in  the
evening. Itching  nodosity  and  three  vesicles  with  in-
flamed areolae,  upon  the  tibia. Herpes  upon  the  lower
limb. Tension  in  the  feet,  almost  without  any  swelling.
Aching  in  the  heel. Aching  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  when
setting  the  foot  down  and  walking. Clawing  drawing  in
the  foot,  as  if  caused  by  great  weariness.  Spasmodic
tearing  in  the  region  of  the  ankle,  with  pulsations  all
around,  along  the  tibia  as  high  up  as  the  knee.  Tearing
around  the  ankles,  when  the  feet  are  cold  ;  it  ceases  when
they  become  warm. Frequent  tearing  in  the  tarsal  joints.
Tearing  close  above  the  ankle,  (20.  d.) Tearing  in  the
inner  side  of  the  foot  and  in  the  sole. Tearing  in  the
dorsum  of  the  foot,  extending  to  the  toes. Tearing  from
the  internal  malleolus  transversely  to  the  tendo  Achillis.
Drawing  tearing  in  the  foot,  to  the  toes. Stitches  in  the
left  foot,  towards  the  inner  side. Stitches  in  the  dorsum
of  the  foot. Stitches  under  the  ankle. When  walking,
she  experienced  a  darting  into  the  internal  malleolus,  as  if
the  foot  would  break  ;  she  had  to  stand  still.  Violent
drawing  and  stinging,  early  in  the  morning,  a  few  hours
after  rising,  in  the  left  tarsal  joint  when  setting  the  foot
down,  most  violent  and  painful  in  the  evening,  with  jerking
pullings  in  the  joint,  and  stitches  in  the  heel ;  she  dares
not  touch  the  foot,  has  to  keep  it  balancing  in  the  air  all
the  time  ;  the  foot  feels  too  heavy,  the  place  is  swollen
and  hot  to  the  touch. Prickings  under  the  heel.  Stitches
in  the  feet. Violent  stitches  in  the  tendons  behind  the
outer  malleolus  of  the  right  foot,  when  running  ;  going  off
when  at  rest. Stitches  and  burning  in  the  feet,  after  a
walk. Visible  twitchings  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  in
the  evening. Tingling  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  towards
the  toes. Tingling  burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and
painful  sensitiveness  of  the  same. Heaviness  and  stiffness
of  the  feet. The  feet  go  to  sleep  after  a  meal. The  left


KALI  CARBONIC  CM*


71


foot  goes  to  sleep,  while  at  dinner.  *  Cold  feet,  in  bed.
Cold  feet,  with  heat  in  the  face.  *  Sweaty  soles.  Profuse
sweat  on  the  feet,  for  many  days.  Swelling  of  the  feet.
*  Considerable  swelling  of  the  feet,  as  high  up  as  the  ankles.
Swelling  and  redness  of  the  soles,  with  burning  in  the  soles
even  while  lying  down,  but  much  more  when  setting  the
foot  down.  Violent  itching  around  the  tarsal  joint,  early
in  the  morning,  while  in  bed.  Violent  itching  and  heat  of
the  feet,  in  the  evening,  as  if  they  had  been  frozen.  The
tips  of  the  toes  are  very  painfui  when  walking.  Spasm
in  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot ;  he  was  unable  to  extend
it,  when  sitting,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the  toes,  (4.
7.  11.  20.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  posterior  joints  of  the  big
toes,  (1 1.  16.  19.  34.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  tips  of  the  big
toes,  (17.  11.  36.  d.)  Gnawing  sensation  in  the  outer  bor-
der of  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot.  *  Prickings  in  the
ball  of  the  big  toe.  Titillating  stinging  in  the  lips  of  the
toes.  Fine  stitches,  with  itching,  in  the  tip  of  the  big  toe.
Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  big
toe,  while  walking,  but  most  intense  when  raising  the
foot  upon  the  toes,  (11.  33.  d.)  Titillating  tingling  in  the
toe  and  sole.  Itching  in  the  lower  surface  of  the  toes.
Violent  itching  of  the  big  toe,  below  the  nail,  with  pain
when  touching  the  part.  Inflamed,  red  chilblains  on  the
toes,  aching.  Chilblain  on  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  with
lancinating  pain,  red  and  large.  Inflamed,  blue-reddish
chilblains  on  the  ball  of  the  big  toe,  with  cutting  and
pricking  pain,  especially  when  having  on  shoes  or  boots.
The  corns  are  painful  and  sensitive.  Stitches  in  the  corn.
One  side  of  the  nail  of  the  big  toe  is  painful,  as  if  the  nail
would  grow  into  the  flesh,  (a.  14  d.)

General  Symptoms. — The  limbs  are  painful  in  those
parts  upon  which  they  rest,  (a.  4  d.)  Her  whole  body
felt  very  sensitive  ;  she  felt  a  pain  wherever  she  touched
herself,  or  in  whatever  part  was  set  in  motion,  (3.  4.  d.)
Aching  in  the  "knee-joints,  and  the  joints  of  the  feet  and
hands,  only  when  at  rest.  Aching  in  the  joints  and  draw-
ing pain  in  the  tibiae.  A  sort  of  tension  in  the  interior  of
the  body,  extending  as  far  as  the  head  and  eyes.  Pinch
ing  and  feeling  of  contraction  ir  the  anus,  in  the  region


72


KALI  CARBONICUM.


of  the  stomach  and  towards  the  pharynx.  Tingling  in  the
limbs,  especially  the  lower  limbs,  when  sitting,  with
drawing  in  the  legs,  which  makes  him  restless.  Drawing
pain  in  the  whole  body,  in  various  parts,  nape  of  the  neck,
shoulder-blades,  hands,  and  knees,  (a.  10  d.)  *  Drawing
pain  in  all  the  limbs,  with  sensation  as  if  he  had  been  sick
for  a  long  while,  with  great  paleness  of  face  and  emacia-
tion. Violent  drawing  in  the  abdomen,  arms  and  lower
limbs,  with  pain  as  from  bruises  in  the  upper  arms ;  worst
when  at  rest,  (the  first  days.)  Stitches  in  the  joints  and
tendons.  Stitches  are  the  characteristic  symptoms  of
Kali.  Ulcerative  pain  when  pressing  upon  any  part  of
the'body.  Pain  as  from  bruises  of  all  the  muscles  of  the
body.  The  limb,  upon  which  she  is  resting,  goes  to  sleep.
The  pams  appear  at  two  or  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,
and  are  so  violent  that  she  is  unable  to  lie  still  on  account
of  the  pain  ;  they  are  then  more  violent  than  they  are  in
day  time  during  motion.  Chilliness  immediately  after  the
cessation  of  the  pains.  She  thinks  she  feels  more  easy  in
the  open  air  than  in  the  room.  The  symptoms  become
more  intense  in  the  open  air,  especially  the  fever.  Drow-
siness with  yawning,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Vio-
lent tearing  in  the  outer  side  of  one  part  of  the  head,  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Violent  headache,  for  some
hours,  from  walking  in  the  open  air.  Great  dread  of  the
open  air.  Liability  to  cold  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
with  sweat  and  restlessness  at  night,  and  weight  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  as  from  a  load,  (4.  d.)  Liability  to  catch-
ing cold.  Catches  cold  easily  after  having  heated  him-
self by  exercise ;  he  loses  his  appetite,  is  attacked  with
feverish  chills,  diarrhoea  with  colic,  restless  sleep,  etc.
After  cold,  headache  on  the  right  side,  and  heat  in  the
eyes.  Every  breath  of  air  causes  catarrhal  ailments.
After  having  caught  cold  by  a  draft  of  air,  she  feels  hot  for
a  moment  in  the  room,  is  then  attacked  with  heaviness  in
the  limbs,  tearings  in  the  whole  body  and  about  the  head,
with  whizzing  before  the  ears,  and  cold  all  over,  with
sour-smelling  sweat  in  the  night,  (a.  31  d.)  After  catch-
ing cold,  he  is  attacked  with  fever  in  the  evening,  sweat
towards  morning,  with  violent  headache  and  a  dreary
feeling  in  the  head  after  rising. Itching  in  different  parts


KALI  CARBONICUM-


73


of  the  body,  especially  the  legs  ;  the  parts  become  easily
ecchymosed  when  scratching  them.  Violent  itching  on
the  abdomen  and  thighs.  Itching  of  the  whole  bodyi  at
times  in  one,  at  times  in  another  part;  scratching  brings
on  little  blotches.  Itching  of  the  whole  body,  in  the  even-
ing before  going  to  bed,  disappearing  in  bed.  Violent
itching  of  the  whole  body,  morning  and  evening,  especially
on  the  back,  where  small  pimples  make  their  appearance,
(a.  3  d.)  Violent,  almost  prickling  itching  over  the  whole
body,  at  night,  when  in  bed.  Itching  stitches,  in  various
parts  of  the  body.  Stitches  and  gnawing  in  the  skin  of
the  whole  body.  Burning  itching  in  the  face,  back,  and
on  the  head.  Burning  itching  of  the  os  sacrum  and  below
the  right  patella.  Burning  itching  of  the  whole  body,  in
the  face,  on  the  hands,  tibia,  etc.,  at  times  in  one,  at  limes
in  another  place.  Burning  in  many  places  of  the  skin,
even  below  the  axillae,  as  if  from  a  drawing  plaster.
Pimples,  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  also  in  the  face  ;
nettle-rash,  for  a  fortnight.  Nettle-rash,  with  itching,  so
violent  that  she  did  not  know  what  to  do  to  obtain  relief,
for  15  days.  Yellow,  scaly,  violently  itching  spots  over
the  whole  abdomen  and  around  the  nipples  ;  when  scratch-
ing the  parts,  they  become  moist.  *  Herpes,  (on  the
thigh.)  Violent  bleeding  of  the  ulcer,  almost  without  any
cause.  Fissure  in  the  cicatrix  of  an  old  issue.  Pressure
and  tension  at  the  place  which  had  been  formerly  occupied
by  an  ulcer,  (on  the  leg.)  An  old  wart  (in  the  face)
begins  to  itch.  Orgasm  of  the  blood,  and  heat  in  the
head.  Orgasm  of  the  blood,  in  the  evening,  before  going
to  bed,  with  oppressed  breathing.  He  feels  the  pulsations
of  all  the  arteries  down  to  the  tips  of  the  toes.  Sensible
throbbing  of  all  the  arteries.  Feeling  of  emptiness  in  the
whole  body,  as  if  the  body  were  hollow.  The  whole  body
feels  heavy  and  broken  down.  The  limbs  feel  so  heavy
that  she  finds  it  difficult  to  move  a  foot.  Heaviness  of
the  body,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed;  going  off
after  rising.  Heaviness,  especially  in  the  feet ;  walking
gives  him  much  trouble. Laziness,  (a.  2  d.)

Weakness,  Fits. — Frequent  weariness  and  depression
of  strength.  Weakness  in  the  evening,  almost  unto  nau-
sea. Lassitude,  weakness  and  nausea,  after  the  siesta

4


74


KALI  CARDONICUM.


Great  lassitude,  in  the  evening. Great  weariness,  early
in  the  morning,  when  waking,  abating  after  rising,  but
returning  in  the  afternoon  increased. Relaxation  and
weakness  in  the  limbs. Titillating  weakness  in  the  limbs.
The  child  (of  4  years)  wants  to  be  carried  all  the  time.
Going  up  a  few  steps  is  very  troublesome  ;  walking  on  a
level  is  not. She  is  wearied  by  much  talking. She  feels
weary,  weak,  and  broken  down  in  the  hips  and  lower
limbs,  and  especially  in  the  calves,  when  walking,  (13.  d.)
Weak  feeling,  every  morning,  as  if  he  would  faint,  or  be
attacked  with  vertigo,  (the  first  6  days.) Fainting  fit,  as
soon  as  he  set  himself  in  motion. Attack  of  weakness
upon  returning  from  a  short  walk,  so  violent  that  she  finds
it  difficult  to  reach  her  home  ;  at  the,  same  time  she  feels
a  warmth  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  drops  of  sweat  are
standing  on  her  forehead, (in  the  winter  season.)  and
her  lower  limbs  are  trembling  ;  the  weakness  passes  off
after  resting  herself  for  a  short,  while. Fit  of  weakness  in
he  whole  body,  especially  the  small  of  the  back  ;  the
:ervical  muscles  feelrelaxed,  arms  and  legs  are  relaxed  as
if  he  would  sink  down  ;  at  the  same  time  he  feels  a  faint-
ing weakness  about  the  heart,  (in  a  few  h.) Sudden  attack
of  weakness,  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down,  with  sick
feeling,  nausea,  warmth  and  fainlishness  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  vertigo  and  vanishing  of  thoughts  ;  he  has  two
similar  attacks  early  in  the  morning,  leaving  great  weak-
ness behind. Attack  of  nausea,  early  in  the  mo  ning,
with  violent  yawning,  eructations,  writhing  around  the
stomach,  violent  heat  and  anguish,  (3.  d.) Attack  of  nau-
sea and  vomiting,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen  as  from
bruises,  worse  when  pressing  upon  the  part ;  weakness
unto  tailing,  obtusion  of  the  head,  drowsiness,  and  a  few-
watery  stools  wiih  subsequent  costiveness.  Contractive
pain  in  the  back,  while  resting  from  bodily  labour  ;  he  has
to  lie  down  ;  afterwards  profuse  sweat  through  the  night,
and  stool  early  in  the  morning  with  blood  and  mucus,  but
without  any  pain. Spasmodic  fit ;  tearing  sensation  be-
tween the  shoulders;  afterwards  the  nape  of  the  neck
became  stiff;  when  he  attempted  to  move  the  hcach  it
was  several  times  drawn  backwards  with  a  jerk.  The
spasmodic  fit  was  succeeded  by  alleviating  eructations  and


KALI  CARBONICUM.


75


extreme  depression  of  strength,  weakness  and  uncom-
fortableness  ;  she  was  not  able  to  talk  except  with  a  low
voice.  Jerkings  in  the  limbs,  (8.  d.)  Slight  twitchings
in  the  muscles,  in  different  places,  for  several  days.  Sud-
den tremulousness.  Violent  trembling.  Tremor  of  the
arms  and  lower  limbs  ;  he  is  easily  tired  by  walking.

*  Tremulous  weariness  when  walking,  first  in  the  knees,
afterwards  in  the  abdominal  muscles  and  arms.

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning.  Feeling  as  if  one  had  not
slept  enough,  early  in  the  morning,  looking  as  if  he  had  not
slept  enough,  whether  he  wakes  up  late  or  early.  He
sleeps  too  long,  which  causes  a  dreary  feeling  in  the  head;
great  lassitude,  sensation  as  if  one  had  a  cold  and  pressure
in  the  eyes.  Early  in  the  morning,  after  a  sound  sleep,  he
is  obliged  to  lie  down  again  soon,  and  feels  well  again  after
having  slept  three  hours.  *  Great  drowsiness  by  day  ;  she
falls  asleep  immediately  after  sitting  down.  Drowsiness
with  yawning,  in  the  forenoon,  until  noon.  Drowsiness
after  dinner,  going  off  in  the  open  air.  Continual  drowsi-
ness in  the  afternoon,  with  yawning  and  wretched  com-
plexion. Great  drowsiness  ;  she  was  near  falling  asleep
again  while  at  breakfast.  Drowsiness  in  the  afternoon,
(3  d.) Unconquerable  drowsiness,  afternoon  and  evening.

*  Timely  droiusiness  in  the  evening,  (a.  10  d.)  Timely
dro  wsiness  in  the  evening,  and  peevish  silence.  Difficulty
in  falling  asleep,  in  the  evening,  after  walking  in  the  open
air.  He  is  unable  to  fall  asleep  till  late  in  the  evening,  for
several  days.  He  is  unable  to  fall  asleep  before  midnight,
after  having  performed  some  mental  labor.  She  went  to
bed  at  11  o'clock  at  night,  but  she  was  unable  to  fall  asleep
on  account  of  a  violently  stinging  itching  over  the  whole
body  ;  she  slept  from  J I  to  I  o'clock.  At  night  he  is  un-
able to  fall  asleep  till  1  or  2  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with-
out any  particular  cause.  Sleeplessness  at  night  ;  he  has
anxious  dreams  after  he  falls  asleep  ;  in  the  morning,  his
senses  are  dull,  and  his  hands  hot.  Restless  sleep,  (4.  d.)
Restless  night,  she  woke  up  at  least  20  times  without  any
particular  cause.  She  wakes  at  2  o'clock,  and  remains
wide  awake  the  whole  night.  Me  wakes  at  4  o'clock  in
the  morning,  and  a  number  of  times  after  this  hour  until
morning. At  night  she  wakes  up,  and  is  then  prevented


76  KALI  CA.RBONICUM.

from  falling  asleep  again  by  ideas  which  crowd  upon  her
mind. Half  waking  night-sleep ;  mere  slumbering  at
night. Inclines  to  wake  early,  without  being  wide  awake.
A'f  nioht,  after  lying  down,  the  recollection  of  sad  events
prevents  him  from  falling  asleep. *  At  night,  when  in  bed,
he  is  delirious  for  three  hours  in  a  waking  state,  with  heat
in  the  brain,  and  external  heat  over  the  whole  body,  after-
wards some  sweat,  coldness  of  the  limbs  and  shuddering,
with  great  tendency  to  start. At  night  she  raises  herself
in  her  bed,  while  asleep,  says  all  sorts  of  absurd  things  to
her  husband,  is  for  a  long  time  unable  to  collect  hersenses,
but  she  knew  that  she  was  talking  to  her  husband.  *  Sleep
full  of  fanciful  savings,  with  talking. Talking  while
asleep,  loud  talking  while  asleep. Violent  weeping  during
a  nightly  dream. At  night  the  child  tosses  about  and
cries! *  Restless  sleep  full  of  dreams. A  number  ot
dreams  with  restlessness  and  tossing  about  while  asleep.
At  night  he  falls  from  one  dream  into  another. He  talis
asleep  immediately,  but  he  likewise  begins  to  dream  im-
mediately. Sleep  full  of  dreams  and  interrupted  by  fre-
quent waking,  (a.  10  d.) He  dreams  of  the  business  of
the  day  the  whole  night. Voluptuous  dreams,  frequent  y,
(the  first  14  d.) *  Anxious  dream,  she  cries  tor  help.
Dreams  about  robbers,  (a.  1 1  d.) Dreams  about  the  sick
part  of  the  body. He  dreams  that  one  announces  to  him
lis  near  death. He  dreams  that  his  father  is  about  to  beat
him. She  dreams  that  she  is  falling  down  from  a  high
mountain. Her  sleep  is  disturbed  by  horrid  dreams  She
dreams  that  dangerous  figures  are  passing  near  her  and  that
some  of  them  attempt  to  lay  themselves  upon  her.  She
has  all  sorts  of  horrid  figures  before  her  eyes,  when  a eep.
Dreams  about  serpents,  illness  and  dead  persons  Dream
about  dead  persons,  as  if  they  were  living  ,  he  quanels
with  them. Dreams  about  masks,  .ghosts  and  dev. U,
*  Starting  zohen  asleep. Starting  when  falling  asleep  In
the  evening  when  falling  asleep,  he  has  a  jerk  through  the
whole  bodv,  which,  started  him. In  the  evening  after  y-
h,"  down,  he  started  with  his  whole  body,  while  waking,
with  shuddering  over  the  whole  body.  He ^starts  and  ru-
bles several  times  while  asleep.  While  asleep,  he  twitches
with  his  lirnbs  and  snores- For  two  nights  in  aucceaston


KALI  CAUBONICUM.


77


his  whole  body  started  as  if  an  epileptic  fit  would  come
on,  with  twitchings  in  the  arms  and  short  kickings  with
the  fee!,  but  without  any  rattling ;  after  waking,  he  knew
nothing  of  all  tins. In  the  evening,  after  falling  asleep  and
waking  up  again,  her  head  felt  confused,  she  had  no  ideas,
knew  not  where  she  was,  and  was  then  attacked  with  a
horrible  anguish,  after  which  she  came  to  her  senses  again.
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  at  night,  when  lying  in
the  bed,  sometimes  so  violent  that  he  would  almost  lose  his
senses. Aching  in  the  head,  for  several  nights,  going  off
.  after  wrapping  something  around  the  head. Gnashing  of
the  teeth,  at  night,  while  asleep. Acidity  in  the  mouth,  at
night. Gulping  up  of  the  ingesta,  at  night. Dryness  in
the  mouth  prevents  him  from  falling  asleep  at  night.  At
night,  one  hour  after  falling  asleep,  violent,  jerking  spasm
of  the  stomach,  with  anguish,  moaning,  coldness  of  the  tip
of  the  nose,  hands  and  feet,  followed  by  vomiting  of  food
and  acid  substances,  with  much  rising  of  air;  the  same  at-
tack occurred  in  the  night  following,  but  slighler  Pressure
and  burning  at  the  stomach  at  night. Pressure  below  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  at  night,  with  cough. At  night,  she  has
to  spit  up  a  good  deal  of  mucus,  frequently  for  half  hours.
Colic  at  night,  for  two  hours,  without  any  subsequent  stool ;
afterwards  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  chest,  early  in
the  morning;  in  the  afternoon  all  the  limbs  feel  bruised.
Pinch  ing  in  the  abdomen,  at  night,  in  paroxysms,  with  nau-
sea and  constant  eructations. Colic  at  night,  from  makino-
the  slightest  movement  in  the  bed,  not  felt  when  at  rest^
dull  stitches  and  pressure,  as  from  an  internal  induration!
Three  nights  in  succession  he  is  tormented  by  flatulence.
He  emits  a  quantity  of  flatulence  at  night. Colic  and  diar-
rhoea, at  night. Diarrhoea  every  night  from  3  to  4  o'clock,
(the  first  week.) Burning  at  the" anus,  at  night,  whicli
prevents  him  from  falling  asleep. Burning  itching  of  the
permanun  at  night. Sweat  about  the  perinseum  at  ni<>hi
Itching  of  the  scrotum  at  night,  which  prevents  him  from
lallin.o;  asleep. A  number  of  erections  at  night,  during
a  restless  sleep  full  of  dreams. Violent  erections  aftet-
midnight,  disturbing  his  sleep,  exhausting  him  and  fore-
boding a  pollution  which,  however,  docs  not  lake  place
In  the  evening,  when  falling  asleep  her  throat  becomes  con-


78  KALI  CARBONICUM.

stricted,  which  causes  her  to  start  up  from  her  sleep  with
fright;  afterwards  stinging  dryness  in  the  throat,  (a.  12  d..
Arrest  of  breath  rouses  him  from  sleep,  at  night.  Nightman
at  night,  dreaming  that  a  stone  was  lying  upon  him,  and  a;
if  he  was  choaked  with  a  cord  ;  lie  endeavors  in  vain  to
wake  up. She  wakes  up  at  2  o'clock  at  night,  with  an-
guish about  the  heart,  and  is  then  not  able  to  fall  asleep
again. At  night,  when  lying  upon  the  right  side,  she  is
attacked  with  oppression  and  anguish,  and  has  to  sit  up  in
bid,  until  relieved  by  eructations. At  night,  the  chilu  is
uneasy  and  restless,  cries  a  good  deal  and  asks  for  one
thing  and  another  without  taking  anything. Tension  ir
the  right  or  left  side  at  night. Stitches  in  the  right  or  lei
"  side  at  ni<dit. Violent  stitches  in  the  left  si  le  of  the  chest
the  recrion  of  the  heart,  and  sometimes  extending  to  the
back,  tolerable  only  when  lying  upon  the  right  side  ;  they
become  intolerable  whenever  he  attempts  to  rest  upon  the
left  side  ;  the  second  night  he  wakes  up  very  early,  with
violent  stitches  in  the  chest,  and  asthma  when  lying  upon
the  left  side  ;  thev  are  insufferable  when  in  a  state  of  per-
fect, rest  and  go  off  when  lying  upon  the  right  side  ;  anoiher
attack  in  the  third  night  when  lying  upon  the  back,  btitt-
ness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck  at  night.  At  night  he  is  roused
from  sleep  by  a  throbbing  pain  in  the  upper  arm.  Un-
easiness in the  hands  at  night. Burning  pain  in  the
lower  limbs  at  night,  when  in  bed. At  night  when  wak-
ing, tearing  and  drawing,  with  sensation  of  great  iatigue
in  the  legs,  especially  in  the  tarsal  joints. At  night  he
wakes  up  twice  from  a  cramp  in  the  right  thigh  and  calf.
Cramp  in  the  calf  and  sole,  at  night,  when  in  bed  and
drawiU  the  leg  up  towards  the  thigh. At  night  the  left
leg  and  the  right  arm  go  lo  sleep. Uneasy  sleep  at  niglit
on  account  of  an  aching  pain  in  the  side  upon  which  he
was resting. Excessive  pain  in  the whole  body  at
night,  like  strokes  of  a  hammer. In  the  evening,  when
in  bed,  she  feels  such  an  uneasiness  in  the  limbs  that  she
was  unable  to  lie  quietly  in  any  one  place. At  night,  the
ulcer  bleeds  considerably.

FrvF.a_The  night-sleep  is  interrupted  by  heat  ove
the  whole  body,  especially  the  hands,  and  by  too  vivid
dreams. Very  hot  hands  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,


KALI  CARBONICUM.


79


wilh  momentary  shuddering,  and  sleep  being  prevented
for  a  long  time.  Frequent  shuddering  in  a  room,  without
any  subsequent  heat.  Frequent  shuddering,  with  yawning,
which  may  be  relieved  by  the  warmth  of  the  stove,  in  the
forenoon,  (1.  d.)  Shuddering  in  the  back,  early  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed.  Very  chilly,  especially  alter  a
meal  and  towards  evening.  Chilliness,  in  the  forenoon  ;
hot.  hands  in  the  evening.  Chilliness  with  shuddering,  in
the  evening,  before  going  to  bed.  Chilliness  at  every
motion,  even  when  in  bed,  (the  first  days.)  Chilliness,  at
9  o'clock  in  the  evening,  disappearing  after  lying  down,
without  any  subsequent  heat  or  thirst,  (1.  d.)  Chilliness,
in  the  evening,  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  over  the  whole
body.  Violent  chilliness  in  the  evening,  like  fever,  with-
out thirst;  for  several  evenings.  Chilliness,  as  is  felt
when  a  cold  seis  in.  Chilliness  for  two  hours,  without
thirst,  wilh  obtusion  of  the  head  ;  when  driving  upon  a
stony  road.  Continual,  internal  chilliness,  for  four  days,
without  heat  or  thirst,  with  icy  cold  feet,  obtusion  of  the
head,  and  exhaustion  even  unto  fainting  ;  swelling  of  the
lower  jaw  and  gums,  and  burning  toothache,  wilh  stitches,
(a.  32  d.)  Violent  chilliness  with  fever,  towards  evening,
for  some  minutes;  he  is  obliged  to  lie  down  ;  afterwards
nausea  and  vomiting,  and  spasmodic  pain  in  the  chest,  the
whole  night,  with  short  breathing,  internal  anxiety,  and  a
good  deal  of  sweat  about  the  head,  (a.  6  d.)  "Internal
chilliness,  at  noon,  with  heat  of  the  hands  and  subsequent,
heat  over  the  whole  body,  without  thirst.  Sensation  o
chill  iness  and  coldness,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed  ;
in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  heat;  in  a  few  hours  the  chilliness
returns,  without,  however,  being  followed  by  heat.  At  6
o'clock  in  the  evening,  every  day,  feverish  chilliness  for
one  hour,  with  thirst ;  afterwards,  heat  without  thirst,
with  violent  fluent  coryza  ;  afterwards,  slight  perspiration
with  sound  sleep  ;  in  the  morning,  scraping  sensation  in
the  throat,  bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  want  of  appetite,  and
ag-dutination  of  the  left  eyelids.  Continual  chilliness,  with
violent  thirst  and  internal  heat,  hot  hands,  and  aversion  t<*
eating,  (a.  14  d.)  First,  chilliness  ;  afterwards,  heat  in
the  face,  (a.  2  d.)  Fever,  consequent  upon  having  been
heated  so  as  to  sweat,  and  catching  cold  afterwards  in  a


so


LYCOPOfill  POLLEN.


cold  bed,  with  burning  headache,  heat  in  the  face,  and
violent  shuddering  over  the  whole  body,  which  can  scarcely
be  endured  ;  afterwards,  sweat  lor  three  days,  with  such
a  violent  fluent  coryza,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  him
to  breathe,  (a.  38  d.) Feverish  heat  in  the  afternoon,  and
burning  sensation  of  the  eyes  ;  (with  open  windows  ;)  im-
mediately afterwards,  chilliness  in  the  open  air. Dry  heat
of  the  cheeks  and  hands,  with  short  breathing.  Increased
warmth,  at.  night,  with  violent  pains  in  the  zygoma.  Ex-
ternal and  internal  heat,  towards  morning,  without  any
thirst,  (2.  d.) Heat  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  without
any  subsequent  sweat. Dry  heat  over  the  whole  body,  in
the  evening. Feverish  heat,  at  9  o'clock  every  forenoon,
and  at  5  o'clock  every  afternoon,  from  one  half  to  one  hour,
with  wide  yawning,  violent  thirst,  headache,  and  pulsa-
tions in  the  abdomen. In  the  evening,  alternate  chilliness
and  heat,  with  sweat  in  the  night  following,  (3.  d.)  Sweat
breaks  out  easily  in  day-time. Profuse  sweat,  when
walking. Profuse  sweat  at  every  mental  exertion,  when
reading  writing,  etc. Night-sweat,  (the  first  3  nights,
after  2  hours,  and  likewise  after  6  days.)  Morning-sweat,
when  in  bed. The  whole  body  feels  moist,  early  in  the
morning  when  in  bed,  (6.  d.)  Sweat  about  the  head,  neck,
and  upper  part  of  the  body,  during  sleep. The  pulse  is
slower  than  usual,  (29.  d.)


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.

Tins  dust-like  powder,  which  is  yellowish,  smooth  to  the
touch,  is  obtained  from  the  ears  of  a  moss,  known  under
the  name  of  Lycopodium  Clavatum^vhch  grows  in  the
foresis  of  Russia  and  Finland.  Towards  the  end  of  sum-
mer, the  ears  are  dried,  and  afterwards  beaten.

When  thrown  into  a  flame,  it  flashes  up,  and  has  been
used  to  cover  pills  which  easily  adhere  to  one  another,
and  to  protect  sore  places  in  folds  against  the  friction  oc-
casioned by  walking,  and  otherwise.  It  floats  upon  .quids,
without  being  dissolved,  has  neither  taste  nor  smell,  and
when  in  its  natural  crude  condition,  has  almost  no  effect


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.  81

upon  tlie  henllh  of  man  ;  at  any  rate,  that  which  ihe  an-
cients tell  ol  iis  medicinal  powers,  has  not  been  confirmed
by  moderns,  but  has,  on  ihe  contrary,  been  doubled.

This  drug  has  wonderful  medicinal  propcriies,  which
can  only  be  disclosed  by  trituration  and  succussic.n.  It
is  especially  indicated  when  one  or  more  of  the  following
symptoms  characterise  the  disease  : —

Melancholy;  grief;  anxiousness,  with  soft,  grief  and  weep-
ing mood  ;  fear  of  being  alone  ;  nervousness  ;  irritability  ;
obstinacy  ;  sensitiveness  ;  ill  humor  ;  effects  of  vexations  ;
disagreeable  thoughts;  impeded  mental  activity  ;  ailments
from  mental  labor;  vertigo,  especially  when  stooping;
headache  from  vexation  ;  aching  and  tension  in  the  head  ;
tearings  in  the  top  of  the  head,  forehead,  temples,  eyes
and  nose,  extending  as  far  as.  a  certain  tooth,  and  forcing
one  to  lie  clown  ;  tearing  in  the  forehead,  to  and  fro,  every
afternoon  ;  aching  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  head  every
night,  tearing,  boring,  scraping;  heaviness  of  the  head;
congestion  of  blood  to  the  head  ;  congestion  of  blood  to
the  head,  early  in  the  morning,  when  raising  one's  self  in
the  bed,  with  subsequent  headache  ;  baldness,  pressure  in
the  eyes  ;  smarting  of  the  eyes  ;  biting  and  burning  pain
in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening ;  itching  burning  in  the  upper
eyelid stitches  in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening,  by  candle-
light ;  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  nightly  agglutina-
tion, and  lachrymation  in  day-lime  ;  lachrymalion  in  the
open  air ;  viscid  humor  in  the  eye,  hindering  sight  ■  ag-
glutination of  the  eyelids;  short-sightedness';  far-sighted-
ness ;  dim-sighteclness,  as  if  there  were  feathers  before
the  eyes;  twinkling  before  the  eyes,  and  obscuration  of
sight  ;  fiery  sparks  before  the  eyes  ;  the  eyes  are  irritated
by  the  candle-light ;  excessive  sensitiveness  of  hearing  ■
music,  sounds,  an  organ  affects  one's  nerves  ;  hardness  of
Hearing  ;  tingling  in  the  ears;  roaring  in  the  ears  ;  scurfs
in  the  nose;  nightly  closing  of  the  nostril  by  pus  ;  ulcerated
nostrils;  bleeding  at  the  nose;  swelling  and  tension  in
tne  lace;  frequent  attacks  of  heat  in  the  face;  it.chino-
eruption  in  the  face  ;  freckles  in  the  face  ;  toothache,  with
swelling  of  the  cheeks  ;  grumbling  toothache  after  a  meal-
dryness  about  and  in  the  mouth,  causing  a  tension  of
tnese  parts,  the  motion  of  the  tongue  becoming  difficult,

4*


82  LYCOPODII  POLLEN.

and  the  speech  indistinct,  with  absence  of  thirst ;  coated,
unclean  tongue  ;  chronic  sore  throat;  ulcers  in  the  throat
from  abuse  of  mercury  ;  dryness  in  the  fauces  ;  burning
in  the  fauces,  with  nightly  thirst;  hawking  up  of  mucus;
slimy  taste,  early  in  the  morning;  sensation  as  if  the  breath
were  fetid  ;  loss  of  taste  ;  bitterness  of  the  mouth,  early  in
the  morning,  with  nausea  ;  excessive  hunger ;  canine
hunger  ;  want  of  appetite  ;  vanishing  of  the  appetite  when
swallowing  the' first  morsel;  aversion  to  boiled,  warm
aliments  ;  aversion  to  brown  bread  ur  meat ;  excessive
craving  of  sweet  things  ;  milk  brings  on  diarrhoea;  inability
to  digest  heavy  food  ;  palpitation  of  the  heart  during  the
period  of  digestion  ;  violent  eructations,  in  the  allernoon  ;
greasy  eructations;  sour  eructations;  heartburn;  nausea
when  riding  in  a  carriage;  frequent,  continual  nausea  ;
globulus  hystericus;  (as  if  a  hard  ball  were  rising  from
the  pit  of  the  stomach  into  the  pharynx  ;)  qualmishness  in
the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning;  water-brash  ;  pressure
of  the  stomach,  also  after  a  meal;  swelling  of  the  pit  ot
the  stomach,  and  pain  when  touching  it ;  fulness  in  the
stomach  and  abdomen  ;  tension  around  the  hypochondria,
as  if  caused  by  a  hoop  ;  pain  in  the  liver,  after  paling  to
satiety  ;  pain  above  the  umbilicus,  when  touching  the  part ;
troublesome  distension  of  the  abdomen ;  indurations  in
the  abdomen  ;  griping,  pinching,  and  clutching  pain  in  the
abdomen,  with  arrest  of  breathing  ;  stitchmg-pinching
pain  in  the  abdomen,  apparently  in  the  bladder,  extending
into  the  urethra  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed  -  pinching  in
the  abdomen  .  pinching  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  ;
colic;  colic  in  the  epigastrium;  tearing  in  both  iliac  re-
gions and  groins,  extending  into  the  thighs  ;  burning  in
fi  e  abdomen;  incarceration  of  flatulence;  decent  emis-
sion of  flatulence;  rumbling  in  the  left  side  o he  abdo-
men; gurgling  in  the  abdomen;  unsuccessful  desire  for
siool and  very  hard  stool  ;  difficult  stool,  it  can  only  be
pressed  out  with  dilficully  ;  constipation  for  several  days;
Lstiveness  ;  ascarides  ;  pains  in  the  anus  after  imednl
after  stool ;  itching  of  the  anus  ;  tension  m  He  anus  ,
cauin'  in  the  rectum  and  bladder  ;  urgent  desire  to  «£-
note excessive  frequency  of  micturition.  With  urgent
desire  gravel;  hemorrhage  from  the  urethra;  itching  in


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


83


the  urethra,  during  and  after  micturition  ;  weak  erections  ;
want  of  erections  ;  want  ot  pollutions;  old  swelling  of  the
testes;  excessive  pollutions  ;  want  of  sexual  desire  ;  im-
potence of  several  years'  standing;  aversion  to  an  em-
brace ;  a  desire  for  an  embrace  is  kindled  even  by  merely
thinking  of  it ;  excessive  desire  for  an  embrace,  every
night ;  too  quick  emission  of  semen  ;  the  menses  are  too  long
and  too  profuse  ;  the  menses  have  been  long  suppressed
by  fright ;  sadness  and  melancholy  before  the  menses  ;
itching,  burning  and  gnawing  sensation  of  the  pudendum  ;
pressing  outwards  above  the  pudendum,  into  the  vagina,
when  stooping ;  stitching  pain  in  the  labia  when  lying  down  ;
emission  of  flatulence  from  the  vagina  ;  leucorrhasa  ;  leu-
corrhcea,  preceded  by  cutting  in  the  hypogaslrium.  Catarrh
of  all  kinds  ;  fluent  coryza  ;  coryza  and  cough  ;  dry  cory-
za ;  obstruction  of  both  nostrils',  cough  after  drinking;
dry  cough,  day  and  night;  dry  morning-cough  of  several
years'  standing  ;  difficulty  in  coughing  something  up;
cough  which  convulses  the  chest;  cough  with  expectora-
tion ;  cough  with  discharge  of  pus  ;  ulceration  of  the  lu  igs  ;
shortness  of  breathing  in  children  ;  continual  oppression  of
the  chest,  with  shortness  of  brealhing  when  performing  some
work;  constant  pressure  on  the  left  lower  rib  ;  stitches  in
the  left  side  of  the  chest ;  pain  as  from  bruises  in  the  chest ;
sort,  of  heartburn  ;  anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart;  stitches
in  the  small  of  the  back  when  raising  one's-self  after  stoop-
ing; nightly  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  tearing  in  the
shoulders ;  drawing  and  sensation  in  the  nape  of  the  neck
as  of  being  grasped  into  a  heap,  extending  to  the  occiput,
day  and  night ;  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ;  stiffness
of  one  side  of  the  neck  ;  hard  swelling  on  one  side  of  the
neck;  glandular  swellings  below  the  jaw  ;  drawing  pain
in  the  arms  ;  jerkings  of  the  arms  during  the  siesta  ;  nightly
pain  in  the  bone  of  the  arm  ;  the  arms  go  to  sleep,  "even
when  being  raised  ;  nightly  crampy,  going  to  sleep  of  the
arms;  weakness  of  the  arms  ;  nightly  pain  in  the  bones  of
the  elbow  ;  arthritic  stiffness  of  the  wrist-joint. ;  numbness
of  the  hands  ;  dryness  of  the  skin  of  the  hands  ;  tearing  in
the  joints  of  the  fingers  ;  redness,  swelling  and  arthritic
tearing  of  the  finger-joints  ;  stiffness  of  the  fingers  from  ar-


84


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


thfilie  nodosities  ;  the  fingers  become  rigid,  while  at  work  ;
the  little  finger  goes  to  sleep  ;  nightly  tearing  in  the  lower
limbs  ;  tearing  in  the  knee  ;  tearing  in  the  bend  of  the
knee,  in  the  evening  ;  tearing  in  the  knees  as  far  as  above
the  tibia,  and  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot;  stiffness  of  the
knee  ;  swelling  of  the  knee  ;  burning  of  the  legs  ;  burning-
biting,  itching  uf  the  bends  of  the  knees  ;  contractive  pain
of  the  - calves,  when  walking  ;  old  ulcers  upon  the  legs,
with  nightly  tearing,  itching  and  burning ;  swelling  of  the
malleolus ;  cold  feet ;  cramp  of  the  feet  ;  cold,  sweaty
feet ;  profuse  sweat  of  the  feet ;  swelling  of  the  soles  of  the
feet ;  pain  of  the  soles  when  walking;  the  toes  bend  sud-
denly when  walking  ;  cramp  of  the  toes  ;  corns  ;  pain  of
the  corns  ;  dryness  of  the  skin  ;  the  skin  cracks  in  differ-
ent places  ;  itching  in  day-lime,  when  being  heated  ;  ltch-
in<T  in  the  evening  previous  to  lying  down  ;  painful  erup-
tion on  the  neck  and  chest ;  itching  and  corrosion  of  the
arms-.md  legs;  boils ;  cramp  in  the  fingers  and  calves;
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  fingers  and  toes  ;  tearing  in
the  upper  and  lower  extremities  ;  tearing  in  the  knees,  feet
and  fingers  ;  pain  in  ihe  bones  from  abuse  of  mercury  ;
drawing  pain  in  the  limbs  ;  uneasiness  in  the  feet,  in  the
cvenin°  ;  the  arms,  hands,  lower  limbs,  go  to  sleep,  both
in  day-ume,  and  during  the  night ;  insensibility  of  the  arm
and  foot;  varices;  varices  of  pregnant  females ;  parts  be-
come strained  easily,  bringing  on  a  painh.l  stiffness  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  ;  jerkings  and  starting  of  single  limbs,
or  of  the  whole  body,  when  asleep  or  waking  ;  troublesome
to  rest  on  the  left  side,  on  account  of  palpitation  of  the
heart  and  stitches  ;  liability  to  cold  ;  weariness  of  the
feet  and  burning  of  the  soles,  after  a  little  walk  '  internal
weakness  ;  faintness  of  the  limbs,;  weariness  when  wak-
incr  lip  :  frequent,  yawning  and  drowsuess  ;  drowsiness  by
day  ;  restless  night-sleep,  with  frequent  waking  ;  sleep
full  of  dreams  ; sleep  full  of  ravings  ;  fearful,  anxious
dreams  ;  falling  asleep  late  at  night ;  thoughts  crowd  up-
on him  and  prevent  him  from  falling  asleep  ;  jerkings  and
impatience  in  the  feet  at  night  ;  nightly  headache  ;  startmg
up  when  asleep  ;  want  cf  animal  heat ;  thnlls  of  heat;  ter-
tian fever  with  sour  vomiting  after  the  chilliness,  and  bloat-


LYCOI'ODU  POLLEIf.


85


edness  of  the  hands  and  face  ;  feverish  sweat  by  day ;  day-
sweat,  from  moderate  work  or  little  exercise,  especially  in
the  face.

Camphor  generally  moderates  the  violent  effects  of  ly-
copodium  ;  Pulsatilla  subdues  the  violent  feverish  feelings
from  lycopodium  ;  the  ill-humor,  readiness  to  find  fault,
diffidence,  tendency  to  reproach,  &c,  are  subdued  by  Caus-
ticum.  A  cup  of  coffee  prevents  and  completely  neutralizes
the  action  of  lycopodium.

A  moderate  dose  acts  from  40  to  50  days.  It  may  be
repeated  after  the  intermediate  use  of  another  anti-psoric,
but  a  second  dose  acts  less  favorably  than  the  first.

Jt  acts  with  especial  benefit,  when  it  is  homoeopathi-
cally  indicated  after  the  action  of  Calc.  shall  have  passed
over.  This  drug  has  been  tried  by  me  and  my  colleagues
Drs.  Gersdorff,  Goullon,  Hartlaub,  Rummel,  Schreter,
Wahle,  Riickert.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  This  drug  has  an  especial
action  upon  the  sensorium,  the  splanchnic  nerves  and  the
organs  over  which  they  are  distributed,  the  intestinal  canal,
the  liver,  the  uropoetic  and  sexual  organs  of  both  sexes,
the  lungs,  nervous  and  fibrous  tissues,  the  skin,  and  per-
haps also  the  periosteum  and  the  bones.

Lycopodium  is  especially  adapted  to  individuals  of  a
soft,  mild,  melancholy  disposition,  to  lymphatic  and  leuco-
phlegmatic  constitutions,  and  when  they  are  moreover  sub-
ject to  mucous  discharges,  coryza,  catarrh,  &c — Diseases
with  aggravation  of  the  symptoms  in  the  afternoon  and
in  a  room,  amelioration  and  mitigation  of  the  same  in  the
open  air. — Great  sensitiveness  to  open  and  cold  air. — Ty-
pical, periodical  diseases. — Diseases  with  paroxysms  of
pain,  causing  great  uneasiness,  walking  about  and  weep-
ing.— Disease  with  difficulty  of  animal  heat  as  a  prevailing
symptom.— Diseases  based  upon  obstructions,  stases,  and
plethora  of  the  portal  system. — Diseases  with  inclination
to  dropsy  and  affections  of  the  urirtary  organs. — Bad  conse-
quences from  vexation  :  great  weakness  unto  falling,  pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  trembling,'  heaviness  in  the  limbs,  as
if  they  were  made  of  lead. — Diseases  from  dyscrasia. —
Scrofulosis. — Scrofula  of  the  bones. — Rickets. — Secondary
syphilis. — Condylomata. — Liability  to  infection  after  being


86  LYCOrODII  I>OLLEN.

cured  from  syphilis. — Periostitis  and  ostitis  with  nightly-
pains,  even  when  brought  on  by  mercury. — Spina  ventosa.
Scrofulous  caries.— Mercurial  caries. — Fistulous  ulcers  in
the  bones. — Gout. — Arthritic  affections,  even  nodosities.—
Rheumatic  fevers. — Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  limbs,  in
periodical  attacks,  when  the  weather  is  rainy  and  stormy.
— Great  liability  to  cold. — Parts  are  easily  strained. — Stiff-
ness in  the  joints  and  limbs,  with  numbness  and  insensibil-
ity.— Paralysis. — Uneasiness  in  the  body. — Orgasm  of  the
blood. — Spasmodic  conditions  :  convulsions  in  alternate
parts  ;  involuntary  turning  and  twisting  of  the  whole  body.
— Spasms  of  the  muscles. — Attacks  of  spasmodic  exten-
sion and  contraction  of  the  limbs  and  of  single  muscles,
without  pain  and  with  entire  consciousness. — Contraction
of  the  fingers  and  toes. — Cramp  in  the  fingers  and  calves.
— Epilepsy. — Rhagades. — Itching  and  painful  little  nodo-
sities on  the  occiput,  os  sacrum,  and  nates.— Scabies  vesi-
cularis  humida.— Large,  red  spot  on  the  epigastrium,  pit
of  the  stomach  and  joint  of  the  thumb,  itching  and  burning.
Hepatic spots.— Impetigo figurata. — Lichen  agrius.—
Freckles.— Urticaria  febrilis  chronica.— Psoriasis. — Psori-
asis simplex.— Psoriasis  palmaris— Lupus  vorax.— Her-
pes ;  small,  herpetic,  itching  spots,  itching  spots  on  both
sides  of  the  neck  and  on  the  back.— Violently  itching  her-
pes. Insensible,  yellow-brown,  withering  herpes.— Humid
suppurating  herpes,  full  of  rhagades  and  covered  with
thick  crusts.— Herpes  squamosus.— Herpes  ecthyma.—
The  herpes  becomes  worse  when  Lycop.  has  been  given
improperly  ;  it  becomes  ichorous  and  spreading  ;  in  this
case  Sepia  affords  relief— Periodically  recurring  boils  on
the  nates,  scapula-,  arms,  &c. Boils  in  and  around  the  ax-
illa._Fui uncles  after  typhus.— Intertrigo  of  infants  and
full-orown  persons.— Warts.— Chilblains.— Old,  malig-
nant ulcers  on  the  feet,  with hard,  shining,  elevated
edges,  copious,  watery,  ichorous,  extremely  foetid  pus,
blue-red,  hard,  hot,  painful  areola,  big-swollen,  shining,
red  leer  and  foot,  and  tearing,  lancinating  pains,  increased
at  ni"ht  and  by  bad  weaiher.— Phagedenic  ulcers.— Salt
rheum  —Dropsical  conditions.— Dropsical  conditions  With
oedema  of  the  feet  and  diminished  secretion  of  urine.—
Chlorosis.— Chlorotic  colour  of  the  skin.— Intermittent  ie-


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


87


vers. — Intermittent  fevers  with  constipation. — Quotidian
and  tertian  fevers. — Consumptive  fever  with  viscid  night-
sweats. — Nervous  fevers,  characterised  by  ill-humor,  when
waking,  by  coryza,  screaming,  improper  iqanners  and  con-
stipation.— Exhausting  night-sweats. — Hysteria  and  hy-
pochondria.—  Melancholy.— Absence  of  mind.  —  Vertigo,
with  the  loss  of  thoughts,  confused  talking,  rheumatic
pains  in  the  face,  teeth,  back,  small  of  the  back,  and  limbs.
Headache  from  vexation,  with  great  uneasiness  and  faintish-
ness. — Nervous,  chronic  headache. — Megrim. — Hemicra-
nia  neuralgica. — Rheumatic  headache. — The  hair  turns
white. — Falling  off  of  the  hair,  after  a  heavy  illness  during
confinement. — Pityriasis  ;  scald-head. — Tinea  capitis  fa-
vosa.— Eruptions  on  the  head,  with  violent  suppuration,
covered  with  coherent,  thick  crustSj  forming  one  mass  with
the  hair,  violently  itching,  with  swelling  of  the  glands  in
the  neck  and  nape  of  the  neck,  humid  tinea  behind  the  ears
and  pustules  in  the  nape  of  the  neck. — Plica  Polonica. —
Spasmodic  twitchings  and  jerkings  of  the  eyelids. — Hor-
deola— Inflammation. of  the  eyelids,  with  swelling  and  red-
ness of  the  same  ;  profuse  secretion  of  acrid  tears  and  mu-
cus ;  nightly  agglutination  of  the  eyelids  and  the  canthi. —
Inflammation  ot  the  eyelids. — Ophthalmia  neonatorum. —
Catarrhal,  rheumatic,  and  scrofulous  ophthalmia. — Ar-
thritic ophthalmia,  with  formation  of  pannus. — Fungus
medullaris  cornea.  —  Synechia  anterior. — Weakness  of
sight. — Obscuration  of  the  crystalline  lens  from  amenor-
rhcea.  —  Cataract  ?  —  Mu?ca?  volitantes.  —  Amaurosis.  —
Purulent  otorrhcea,  with  hardness  of  hearing  and  humid
eruption  on  the  head. — Caries  of  the  ossicula  aurium,  and
of  the  internal  ear,  after  scarlatina. —  Chronic  wheezing
in  both  ears,  with  diminution  of  hearing,  in  the  case  of  a
woman,  who  had  suffered  with  it  for  5  years  past.  Scrofu-
lous, mercurial  ozaena.  Inflammation  and  suppuration
of  the  frontal  cavities  and  the  antrum  Highmori.— Ca-
tarrhal inflammations  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane,  of
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  frontal  cavities,  with  tearing
pains  in  the  head  and  secretion  of  lemon-yellow  mucus. —
Chronic  blennorrhea  of  the  Schneiderian  membrane. —
Polypi  in  the  nose. — Wretched,  sunken,  small,  pale  coun-
tenance.—  Blue  margins  around  the  eyes,  with  clay-colour-


88


LTCOPODII  POLLEN.


ed  countenance,  deep  wrinkles,  and  blue  lips. — Circum-
pains  in  the  face,  cheek,  and  bones  of  the  face. — Spas-
modic distortion,  of  the  muscles  of  the  face.  Corrosive,
biting,  and  stinging  pains  in  the  right  half  of  the  face-
Nervous  prosopalgia.— Rheumalic  swelling  of  the  cheek
and  face— Itching  in  the  face  — Itching,  suppurating
eruptions  in  the  face,  covered  with  elevated  crusts.— -Pim-
ples in  Ihe  face.— Unclean  skin  of  the  face.— Itching  her-
pes near  the  nose.— Scaly  herpes  in  the  face  and  corners
of  the  mouth.— Herpes  farinosus  in  the  face.— Herpes  fur-
furaceus,  with  a  yellow  base. — Crusta  lactea.—  Crusta  ser-
pioinosa.— Pale,  bluish  lips.— Spasmodic  movements  ot
the  lips  and  corners  of  the  mouth— first,  distensive— then
contractive.— Swelling  of  the  lips.— Sore  and  ulcerative
pain  of  the  corners  of  the  moulh— Eruption  around  the
mouth.— Ulcers  in  the  vermilion-border  of  the  lower  hp.—
Cancer  of  the  lips.— Itching  pimples  on  the  chin— Sycosis
menti.— Lock-jaw.— Spasmodic  movement  of  the  lower
jaw.— Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary.glands,  with  a  boring
pain.— Toothache,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks.— Drawing,
stinging,  grumbling,  boring,  burrowing,  beating,  throb-
bing pains  in  sound  and  hollow  teeth.— Pains  in  the  teeth,
as  if  there  were  sub-cutancous  ulceration,  or  as  it  they
were  dashed  to  pieces,  with  or  without  swelling  ol  the
cheek  and  gums.-Looseness  and  elongation  of  the  teeth—
The  teeth  become  yellow.— Swelling  of  tne  gums.— fis-
tula dentalis.-Bleedmg  of  the  gums—Fetid  odour  from
the  mouth.— Ptyalism.  — Spasmodic  movements  ot  the
tongue.-Heaviness  of  the  tongue— Soreness  and  rawness

of  the  tongue— Vesicles  on  the  lonpie,~  P  )ffi'n!Jonic
ed  tongue— Exudations  of  the  mouth  and  fauces.— CI  ionic
inflammation,  and  induration  of  the  amygda  ae .- Ulcera-
tion of  the  tonsil^— Angina  gangrenosa  with  stupor, ,  m
scarlatina— Chancre-like  ulcers  on  the  tons, Is  and  in  the
Pha  vnx,  also  from  abuse  of  mercury-Syph.htic  and  non-
Siticulcersof  the  palate  and  the  tonsils.-Troublesome
fee  in*  of  dryness,  and  actual  dryness  of  the  throat-
Syphilitic  herpes  in  mouth  and  fauces-Syphilitic  affec-
tions of  ihe  throat-Bitter,  sour,  slimy  taste— Loss  of
^  _Want  of  appetite-Desire  to  eat-Camne  hun-


LYC0P0DI1  POLLEN.


69


ger.— Gastric  affections. — Difficult,  slow  digestion. — Vio-
lent, empty,  and  sour  eructations. — Heartburn. — Water-
brash. — Vomiting  of  food  and  bile.— Chronic  vomiting. —
Chronic  gastritis. —  Gastrodynia  ;  enterodynia. — Chronic
affections  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen. — Pressure  of  the
stomach. — Contractive  spasm  of  the  stomach. — Spasm  of
the  stomach  and  abdomen. — Cancer  of  the  stomach. —
Chronic  inflammation  of  the  liver  and  spleen. — Chronic
irritation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines. — Peri-
tonitis.— Cutting,  pinching,  drawing,  constrictive  pains  in
the*abdomen  ;  also  after  a  cold. — Atrophia  miseraica  infan-
tum.— Spasms  in  the  abdomen.  —  Flatulence. — Flatulent
colic,  with  cold  feet. — Ascites. — Inguinal  hernia. — Incarce-
rated hernia. — Swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands.  —  Constipa-
tion.—  Dysentery. — Prolapsus  recti.  —  Hemorrhage  from
the  rectum. — Protrusion  of  the  varices  of  the  rectum,  with
itching,  aching  and  burning  pains  in  the  rectum  and  anus. —
Hemorrhoidal  affections. — Herpes  at  the  anus. — Hemor-
rhage from  the  kidneys. — Diseases  of  the  urinary  organs. —
It  effects  the  discharge  of  gravel  and  stone,  and  appears  to
remove  the  disposition  for  their  formation. — Colica  renalis
from  gravel. — Ischury,  disury,  and  strangury. — Retention
of  urine  in  children. — Polypus  of  the  bladder. — White
fig-warts,  fissured  at  the  top  and  on  stems. — Suppuration
of  the  kidneys. — Gravel. — Hematuria,  with  obstinate  con-
stipation — Itching,  cutting,  and  burning  in  the  urethra. —
Blennorrhoea  from  the  urethra. — Secondary  gonorrhoea. —
Suppurating  ulcers  on  the  glans  and  prepuce,  not  syphi-
litic, in  conjunction  with  haamorrhoidal  herpes. — Sore-
ness between  the  scrotum  and  thigh. — Impotence,  with
pollutions  brought  on  by  onanism. — Impotence  caused  by
the  vapour  of  chlorine. — Exhausting  and  excessive  pollu-
tions.— Chronic  dryness  of  the  vagina. — Suppressed  pol-
lutions.—  Promotes  fecundity. — Prolapsus  uteri. —  Incli-
nation to  miscarriage,  with  varices  of  the  pudendum. —
Nodosities  and  indurations  in  the  mammae. — Soreness  of
the  nipples,  or  corrosive  scurf  on  the  nipples. — Intertrigo

neonatorum. — Constipation  of  new-born  children  Weak,

hollow  voice.— Hoarseness  in  croup. — Rattling  and  raling
in  the  chest. — Pneumonia. — Neglected  pneumonia,  thread
ening  to  become  fatal. — Chronic  catarrh. — Influenza


90  LYCOrODII  POLLEN.

Chronic,  dry  cough.—Cougb,  with  bloody  expectoration—
Cough,  with  discharge  of  salt  mucus,  or  green  purulent
substances— Incipient  phthisis  tuberculosa.-- Haemopty-
sis.—Cough,  with  yellow  purulent  discharge.-Couph,
with  expectoration  of  mucus— Pituitous  phthisis. 7T  <  *
purulenta,  cavernosa.-Spasm  of  the  che8t.-Astbmac
affections.'-Palpitation  of  the  heart— Ane ™sm— Aneu
rism  of  the  external  iliac  artery— Pa.nful  eruption  on  the
chest.— Hepatic  spots  on  the  chest— Spasmodic  mov  e
ments  of  the  head:  involuntary  nodding  and  shaking,
stretching  it  forwards  and  backwards  ;  extension  and  con-
S  ogf  the  muscles  of  the  neck-Painful  eruption  on
he  neck—Large  nodosities,  formed  of  red  pimples,  around
he  neck,  itching  violently.  -  Swelling  of  the  cervical
Sands  -  Struma.-  Caput  obstipum-  Neck  spasmodi-
Sly  drawn  to  one  side/with  spasmodic  ^stomon  of  the
facial  muscles— Drawing  and  stiffness  of  the  neck-
Rheumatic,  tearing  pains  in  the  upper  ]™*X7*Kk*M-
ierking  upwards  at  times  of  one,  at  times  pf  the  other  shou
S  and  of  the  arms,  during  the

ina-  of  the  hands— Cramp  of  the  fingers— The  aims  go  to

eSep  and  feel  paralyti^
of  the  hands.— Sweaty  palms  of  the  hands  -Rheumatic,
fearlg,  drawing,  auditing  pains  in  the  lower  hmbs-
Ischiaf  ?-Phlegmasia  albadolens?-Gonagia  -"^^ss
of  the  knee— White  swelling  of  the  knee— 'The  lower
limbs  are  involuntarily  spread  asunder,  and  then  pressed
against  one  another.- Cramp  of  the  calves  and  toes.-
Ipasmod  c  contraction  of  the  fingers  and  toes.-Pcrfagra.-
Var  Ss  -(Edema  of  the  feet—  Icy  coldness  ofthejeet  -
Iweaty  feet  until  they  become  sore-Restores  a  sup-

FM  trSvMProt  -H7pochrondriac,  tormenting  mood  ;

S0C'e%V  ,  of  cLc  ulness,  sad  .houghts.  Sad  mood  :
■htha^o  w^plhe  whole  da*  and  found  »  taposs.ble  to


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


91


calm  herself,  without  any  particular  cause.  Sad,  despond-
ing, finally  weeping  mood. Extremely  sad  and  low-
spirited. Weeping  mood,  with  chilliness. He  weeps  first
on  account  of  the  past,  and  then  on  account  of  future  evils.
Great  apprehensiveness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  from
vexation. Great  anxiousness,  apparently  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  without  any  particular  thoughts,  (a.  24  h.)
Internal  anguish,  in  the  forenoon,  and  internal  chilliness,
resembling  an  internal  trembling. Anxiousness,  in  the
evening,  her  sight  is  half  confused. Anxious,  fearful,
timid. Great  fearfulness,  (10.  d.) She  is  very  much
afraid  of  phantoms,  crowding  upon  her  fancy  in  the  even-
ing, with  weeping  mood  during  the  day. In  the  evening,
when  attempting  to  open  a  door  which  is  rather  tight,  in
the  dark,  he  is  assailed  by  fear. In  the  evening,  when
stepping  into  the  room,  he  imagines  he  sees  somebody,
which  gives  him  fear  ;  also  in  day-time,  he  sometimes
imagines  he  hears  somebody  in  the  room. *  She  is  afraid
of  being  alone. Internal  uneasiness,  (a-  24  h.)  Impa-
tience. Discouraged  and  faint. Want  of  confidence  in
his  strength. Pusillanimous,  sad,  fanciful.  Distrustful,
suspicious,  inclining  to  find  fault. Extreme  suspicious-
ness and  distrust. Despairing  and  disconsolate. *  Ex-
tremely sensitive  ;  she  weeps  when  people  thank  her  for
a  kindness,  (a.  20  h.) Extremely  irritable,  frightful,  and
out  of  humor. Great  tendency  to  start. Every  noise
hurts  her. Dissatisfied,  (a.  72  h.) Very  irritable,  and
inclining  to  be  melancholy. Ill  humor. Out  of  humor
and  desponding,  (15.  d.) A  number  of  past  disagreeable
occurrences  crowd  upon  the  mind,  even  at  night,  when
waking;  they  put  her  out  of  humor. He  finds  it  difficult
to  conceal  his  internal  obstinacy  and  vexed  mood.  Ex-
cessive irritability,  with  apprehensiveness. He  smiles
without  being  cheerful ;  it  is  mere  caprice. The  child
becomes  less  docile,  although  not  ill  humored.  Insolent,
self-willed,  *  headstrong, — vehement,  angry. Very  ve-
hement. Vehement  mood,  without  ill  humor,  (in  a  few
hours.) She  cannot  bear  the  slightest  contradiction,  and
is  immediately  beside  herself  with  ill  humor.  Angry
rage,  partly  against  herself,  partly  against  others. One  is
easily  irritated  and  angry. He  disputes  with  absent  per-


92


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


sons. Frenzy  and  madness,  breaking  forth  in  envy,  re-
proaches, pretensions,  and  commanding  spirit,  (a.  12  d.)
She  seeks  disputes  as  if  she  were  mad,  scolds  one  in  the
most  vehement  manner,  and  strikes  the  person  whom  she
scolds  (a.  2  h.) Ennui,  (a.  2d.)  The  mind  is  insensible
to  external  impressions. Irritated  mood,  but  indifferent  to
external' impressions. Extremely  indifferent. Want  o
desire  to  talk. Inclines  at  the  same  time  to  weep  and
lancdi. Anxiousness,  followed  by  great  desire  to  laugh  at
trifles,  for  some  hours,  after  which  she  weeps  for  half  an
hour  without  knowing  why. Excessively  merry,  with
turning  vertigo.  Wantonly  merry. She  laughs  when  one
looks  at  her,  while  telling  something  serious.  Involuntary
whistling  and  humming  with  the  lips. Excessive  mirth,
as  if  he  were  obliged  to  distort  the  muscles  of  the  lace,
succeeded  by  want  of  cheerfulness  and  by  impatience.
Weakness  of  memory,  (a.  3  d.) Acting  as  if  he  were
absent Living  as  it  were  beside  one  s-selt,  as  at .the
commencement  of  a  fever.  When  thinking,  his  head  fee  Is
emotv  ;  he  is  unable  to  fix  one  idea. He  is  unable  to  do
anv  thing,  or  to  think  ;  he  spends  his  time  in  doing  insig-
nificant Ibings,  without  being  able  to  do  that  which he  has
to  do *  He  is  unable  to  retain  his  idea;  it  is  d  fficult
for  him  to  express  himself  and  to  find  suitable  words,  es-
pecially in  the  evening. She  is  unable  to  conceive  an
Fdea  owing  to  obtusion  of  the  head  with  internal  tension.
His  thoughts  feel  as  if  they  were  arrested,  the  mind  feels
clumsy  and  rigid,  there  is  obtusion  without  gloominess.
H™  capable  of  talking  logically  about  higher,  abstrac
Sfnos but  be  becomes  confused  when  talking  about
common-place  things  :  for  instance,  he  says  plums  instead
of  Tars. Using  xorovz  words  and  syllables. He  is
unable  to  read,  because'he  mistakes  and  confounds  the
le  te  s  ;  when  seeing  them,  he  is  able  to  copy  them,  but

he  does  ™l  recollect  lheir  meani"g;1hf  \n°T  .  7""
stance  that  Z  is  the  las,  letter  in  the  alphabet,  but.  he  has
Sen  its  name;  he  is  able  to  write  any  thing  he
chooses  ;  he  writes  the  proper  letters,  but  he  is  unable  to

^^^^  he  con),  not  colic,
his  senses. Obtusion  of  the  head,  as  if  from  spoiled


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


93


stomach. Obtusion  of  the  head,  with  pressure  over  and
in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening'. Gloominess  ol  the  head,  with
dull  pressure  in  the  fore  part  of  the  head,  as  if  a  cold  had
been  repelled,  with  dryness  of  the  lips  and  mouth,  and
with  thirst. Dizzy,  early  in  the  morning,  as  if  one  were
intoxicated. Dizziness,  she  could  not  tell  where  she
was. Dizziness,  indolence  and  relaxation  of  her  limbs,
the  whole  of  the  second  day. Stupor,  towards  even-
ing, with  heat  of  the  temples  and  ears. She  felt  as  if
every  thing  before  her  would  pass  away,  (3.  d.) *  Reel-
ing sensation,  early  in  the  morning,  and  sensation  of  heavi-
ness in  the  eyes. As  soon  as  she  sees  something  turn
about,  she  feels  as  if  the  contents  of  her  body  were  like-
wise turning,  for  one  hour. Vertigo  like  obtusion  of  the
head,  in  the  forenoon,  with  sensation  as  if  her  eyes  were
deep  in  the  orbits;  thinking  and  comprehending  are  like-
wise very  difficult. Vertigo,  in  the  forenoon  ;  every  thing
turned  with  her,  accompanied  by  violent  nausea.  Vertigo
when  rising  from  a  seat. Vertigo  when  drinking.  Ver-
tigo in  a  hot  room,  (a.  23  d.) Vertigo,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, while  getting  out  of  bed  and  afterwards,  so  that  he
staggered  to  and  fro,  (a.  30  d.) Simple  headache,  for
several  days,  more  violent  when  at  rest,  less  when  walking
in  the  open  air. Headache,  especially  when  shaking  and
turning  the  head.  Violent  headache,  at  night,  as  if  caused
by  a  wrong  position. Headache  on  the  left  side,  appa-
rently on  the  outside,  reaching  also  the  ear  and  teeth,
especially  violent  in  the  evening, and  becoming  insup-
portable from  writing  and  reading,  or  by  the  least  pressure
on  the  temples. Headache  over  the  eyes,  immediately
after  breakfast,  (the  first  two  days.) Headache  between
both  eyes. Pain  in  both  temples,  at  every  step,  not  when
at  rest. She  feels  every  step  which  she  makes,  in  her
head 1  ;  at  every  motion  she  feels  a  sort  of  concussion  in
her  brain. Dull  pain  in  the  forehead,  as  if  the  head  were
being  compressed  from  both  sides. Pressure  as  from  a
nail,  in  the  rmddle  over  the  hairy  part  of  the  forehead.
.Pressure  in  the  forehead  and  down  the  nose,  early  in  the
morning. Pressure,  at  times  in  the  right,  at  times  in  the
left  temple. Pressure  in  the  right  half  of  the  occiput,
towards  the  ear. Pressure  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  at  a
small  spot. Violent  pressure  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  for


94  LYCOPODII  POLLEN.

many  days. Paralytic  aching  in  the  temple. Aching  m
the  top  of  the  head,  as  if  a  cold  would  come  on,  (a.  12  h-)
Achino-  in  the  whole  head,  in  the  afternoon,  especially
when  stooping. Aching,  with  contractive  sensation  in  the
head,  the  former  prevailing  early  in  the  morning,  when
rising.  The  headache  increases  when  lying  down.  Heaa-
ache?  as  if  the  bones  of  the  skull  were  being  driven  asun-
der, and  as  if  the  brain  were  vacillating  to  and  tro,  espe-
cially when  walking,  going  up  stairs,  and  raising  one  s  sen
after  stooping. Sense  as  of  being  pressed  asunder,  in  the
top  of  the  head,  with  nausea,  as  if  she  would  throw  up
every  thing,  with  trembling  of  the  limbs,  (a.  1  h.) '  Hea-
viness in  the  head. Heaviness  of  the  occiput.  Dull
feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  occiput,  with  confused  pam  in
the  forehead,  increased  by  motion. Pain  in  the  head,  at
night,  moving  about  and  making  the  head  feel  heavy  ,  it
felt  so  painful  that  she  did  not  know  where  to  place  it,  in
order  to  obtain  some  rest;  the  whole  night,  (a.  S >  d.
Pinching  pain  about  the  head,  behind  the  ear,  (a  48  h-
*  Tearing  in  the  occiput. Tearing  in  (about)  the  head,  foi
48  hours?  ceasing  after  the  appearance  of  a  painless  swell-
ing of  the  cheeks. Tearing  headache,  in  the  evening,  on
thf  top  and  on  both  sides  of  the  head.  Tearing,  in  various
places,  in  (about)  the  head  ;  afterwards  m  other  parts  of
fhe  body?  Tearing  in  the  head,  (4.  d.) Taring,  through
the  leVside  of  the°head  as  far  as  the  ear. Sharp  irrad.at-
ng  earing  in  and  above  the  left  frontal  eminence,  towards
thf  left  side. Irradiating  tearing,  in  jerks,  in  the  right  half
of  the  l  ead,  commencing0  at  the  temple  Tearing  with  pres-
su re  inierks.intherighthalfoflheforehead.extendingclo  e
K  rS  of  thenos?,  and  the  right  eye -brow  app^V
in  the  bone. Tearing  with  pressure  m abo ut the  kit
side  of  the  occiput,  at  a  small  place  near  he  nape  ot  the
neck Aching,  with  tearing  close  over  the  eyes  and  into
Them early  in  the  morning",  (3.  d.) Tearing  and  lanci-
beJache,  at  night,  over  the  right  eye,  in  the  temple,
' and^bouTthe  occiput?  Stitching  headache  in  die  reg.on
of  the  eve Stitching  pain  in  the  occiput, btitcnes  n
the  forehead  from  Within  outwards,  coming  with  a  jerk
tSffig  the  day. Violent  stitching  pain  in  the
i  f  1  ide  of  he  forehead. Tearing  headache  from  after-


LYC0P0JD1I  POLLEN.


95


noon  till  evening :  toothache  in  the  subsequent  night.
Single  stitches  in  the  head,  worst  at  night,  causing  one  to
start.  Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  head  (in  a  few  hours.)
Stitches  and  pressure  in  the  top  of  the  head,  at  night,  (a.
7  d.)  Stitching  headache  with  pressing  and  pushing  in
the  eyes,  with  violent  fluent  coryza.  Sore  pain  in  the
forehead,  almost  every  day,  aggravated  when  stooping.
Violent  shock  from  the  back  to  the  top  of  the  head,  which
obliged  him  to  hold  his  head,  when  sitting,  (after  a  copious
meal.)  Jerking  sensation  in  the  head,  with  sensation  as
if  something  heavy  were  balancing  to  and  fro  in  the
head.  Darting  headache,  apparently  in  the  bones  of  the
skull.  Throbbing  pain  near  the  orbits,  from  within  out-
wards. Throbbing  in  the  head,  in  the  evening,  after
lying  down.  Throbbing  headache,  after  every  attack  of
cough.  Throbbing  in  the  brain,  when  leaning  the  head,
backwards,  in  the  day.  Violent  beating  in  the  head,  re-
sembling a  hacking  (with  sour  eructations.)  Violent
throbbing  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  in  the  evening,  after-
wards extending  over  the  occiput,  down  to  the  nape  of
the  neck,  with  a  feeling  of  tension,  (a.  4  d.)  Throbbing
in  the  top  of  the  head.  Continual,  throbbing  headache^
in  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  from  3  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing until  evening.  Beating  and  pressure  in  the  occiput.
Pulsations  and  pressure  in  the  head,  when  reading,  while
silting. Beating  in  the  brain,  with  heat  about  the  head.

Rush  of  blood  to  the  head,  early  in  the  morning,  when
waking  Fulness  of  blood  in  the  occiput,  after  stooping.
Headache,  like  a  sound  through  the  head,  as  from  the
breaking  of  a  musical  siring.  Groaning  in  the  head,
when  setting  the  foot  down  with  force.  Whizzing  in  the
head  with  a  feeling  of  heat.  Excessive  sensitiveness  of
the  head  externally.  Painfulness  of  the  forepart  of  the
head,  on  the  outside,  when  touching  it.  Superficial  pain
above  the  forehead,  on  the  top  of  the  head,  in  the  region
ot  the  malar  bones,  the  ear,  the  jaw-bones  ;  intermitting  in
lie  alternoon  reluming  in  the  evening.  Quickly  passing-
tearing  in  the  outer  head,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
1  earing  in  the  hairy  scalp,  above  the  right  half  of  the
oreiiead.  *,ne,  burning,  stinging  tearing  in  the  skin  of
the  right  temple,  after  itching  and  rubbing ;  afterwards


96  LYCOPODII  POLLE.V.


clawing  headache. Drawing  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the
head,  down  the  nape  of  the  neck. Sensation  on  the  lett
side  of  the  hairy  scalp,  as  if  a  single  hair  were  being
pulled  at. Contractive  sensation  in  the  hairy  scalp,  witn
sensation  as  if  the  hair  were  being  pulled  out  Spasmodic
contraction  of  the  scalp. Drawing  up  of  the  skin  of  the
forehead,  with  consequent  receding  of  the  eye-lids  one
from  the  other,  and  subsequent  drawing  downwards  ot
the  same  skin,  with  closing  of  the  eyes. Cutting  pain
transversely  across  the  hairy  scalp,  between  forehead  and
vertex. The  bones  of  the  head  are  painful. .  Burning
pain  in  both  occipital  protuberances. ^Excessive  falling
Iff  of  the  hair. Falling  off  of  the  hair  of  the  head,  whereas
the  hair  on  other  parts  of  the  body  grows  more  abundan  y
She  has  a  number  of  grey  hairs. Great  liability  of  the
head  to  cold;  a  cold  little  breeze  causes  a  cutting  sensa-
tion in  the  hairy  scalp. Itching  of  the  hairy  ^-  Cor-
roding sensation  of  the  hairy  sea  p ;  he  is  obliged  to
scratch  himself  ;  *  Eruption  on  the  head  with ,  swelhng  of
the  cervical  glands;  large  pustule  on  the  occiput,  an a
scurf  over  the  hairy  scalp,  which  is  scratched  open  by  the
child,  and  then  bleeds. Broad  tubercle  under  the  skin  of
of  the  forehead,  without  the  colour  of  the  skm  be  ng

Ch-S f  ^watt  P,CT *  )  ^^SE££
;mati°ngap7otV  His  head  is'  turned  involuntarily  to

the  left  side.  '  . , fi  j  :t

Eyes  _pain  in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening  ,  she  finds  it

PreC  sure  if  in te nal  2Sbi  *  Aching  in  the  eyes,  as
^Thad  gotin.  Pressure  on  ^■V^^ffi
in  ihe  forenoon.  Pressure  on  the  right  uppei  eyeuo.
Pressure  n  he  right  eye,  as  if  something  had  got  into  . .
Pain  in  the  eyes  °as  if  they  had  been  bruised  and  as  if
4ey  would  fill  out ;  the  pain  was  so  violent ^  ha t  he
llle  to  look  at  any  thing  fixedly,  from  1  o  ock jn the
afternoon,  but  mostly  n  the  evening. He  « mmjWj  to


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.  97


sleepy. Tensive  pain  in  the  left  eye. Pressing  together
of  the  eyes,  the  skin  over  the  malar  bones  feeling  tense.
Tearing  around  the  eyes,  extending  into  the  forehead  and
the  cheeks. Tearing  in  the  right  eyeball. Stitches  in
the  left  eye. *  Stitchss  in  both  eyes,  (a.  12  d.)  Stitches
in  the  eyes  without  any  redness,  the  whole  day,  but  espe-
cially early  in  the  morning,  (a.  34  d.) Prickling,  at  times
in  one,  at  times  in  another  eyeball. Itching  in  the  eyes,
(a.  30  d.) Itching  in  the  canthi. Biting  in  the  right
eye,  as  if  caused  by  smoke,  with  closing  of  the  eyelids.
Biting  sensation  in  the  external  canthi,  with  lachrymation
as  if  caused  by  smoke,  in  the  evening  at  twilight,  itching
around  the  eye. Cold  feeling  in  the  eyes,  in  the  evening.
Burning  in  the  eyes. Burning  in  the  eyes,  when  he  was
about  to  close  them. Violent  burning  and  itching  in  the
eye. Redness  of  the  eyes,  with  pressure  in  the  same.
Redness  of  the  white  of  the  eye,  with  pain. Red,  inflamed
eyes,  with  stitching  pain,  from  5  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
until  10  in  the  evening. Inflammation  of  the  white  of  the
eye. *  Inflammation  of  the  eyelids,  with  aching,  and
nightly  agglutination  in  the  outer  canthi. *  Inflammation
of  the  eyes;  with  redness  and  dimness  of  the  white,  red-
ness and  swelling  of  the  lids,  burning,  pressure  and  secre-
tion of  mucus  in  the  eye. Inflammation  of  the  eyes  with
redness  of  the  white  and  swelling  of  the  lids,  stitches
photophobia,  profuse  lachrymation  and  nightly  agglutina-
tion. Inflammation  of  the  eyes,  with  itching  ui  both
canthi,  redness  and  swelling  of  the  lids  of  the  rndit  eye  •
tensive  pain  when  they  had  become  dry,  and  nightly  ag-
glutination. Swelling  and  painfulness  of  the  eyelids,  with
nightly  agglutination  in  the  canthi. A  number  of  pustules
in  the  eye-lids. Styes  on  the  eye-lids,  near  ihe  internal
canthus. Ulceration  and  redness  of  the  eye-lids  ;  the  water
which  oozes  out,  causes  a  corroding  and  smarting  sensa-
tion on  the  cheeks. Suppurating  stye  on  the°eye-lid.
Red  pimples  on  the  upper  lid  of  the  right  eye,  combining
into  a  sort  of  scurf. *  Agglutination  of  the  eyes,  espe-
cially at  night,  and  more  particularly  in  the  outer  canthi
In  the  morning  the  eye-lids  are  agglutinated. A  quantity
of  purulent  gum  in  the  eyes,  with  smarting  pain,  (a  32
d.) Eye-gum  m  the  internal  canthus,  early  in  the  morn-

5


gg  LYCOJPODII  POLLEN.

hHS A  corrosive  humor  flows  out  of  the  eye,  the  white
betnv  very  red. Mucus  in  the  eyes  ;  he  has  tu  wipe  them,
fe  order  to  see  more  6,  >ghdy. Lachrymals  and  a  quan-
t*t,v  of  sum  ki  the  eyes,  with  pressure  and  pale  lace.
P  ofuse'lncl.rymal.on  of  the  right  eye  in  the  afternoon.
Water  runs  out  of  the  eye,  when  exposed  to  a  rough  wnd
*  Dryness  of  the  eyes  m  the  evening,
eve/:  he  has  to  close  the  lids. Dryness  under  the  eye-
f  there  were  dust,  early  in  .he  morn.ng,  when
waking. 'Dim,  hot  eyes Faint  eyes in  the  evening
bv  cnnclle-li"ht.  painful  when  turning  them.  Spasmodic
twiS"  of  ihe1  lower  eye-lid,  (a.  90  d.)  Spasmodic
c 5s  of  the  lower  lid  of  the  left  eye,  towards  the  n-
rnal  ca^hus,  (a.  U  d.) Slight  twitc hmg  o  M.  h ft  ey -
lids. Weakness  of  sight ;  she  is  unable  to  see  or  to  sew
long  ;  she  is  obliged  to  close  her  eyes  from  pain n  the
monnng  they  become  somewhat

become  indistinct  when  writing.  1  he  letters  i Decor n e
bin  red  when  reading.  Uncertain  sight  and  frequent
bl  tu  red  w  n  a  His  eves  become  dim,  even

i:i",^g.l »  ™« «n«lion,  us  if  he  looked  through
a  6 „e  wire-gauze. Wm-sightedness,  as  if  there  were  a
viS  Imvuour  iu  lite  eyo,  which  caunot  he  wiped  away,
,1^1,  i,,<-roases  and  decreases  in  paroxysms.  *ai
:'::L«  e"s h  u  reading  or  writing  every  thing  see.ns

&  t • I6  d *  Twinkling  before  the  eves,  when  going
.Til Sen  •  lion  of  vihraiions  before  the  eyes,  resem-
r ,'l  v^  Tthe  hot  air  of  summer. Tremor  of  the
b  Ulg,  '  ^i  which he  looks  attentively,  in  the  evening  by
SS?i2Si7  ihe  lSht  trembling-  most,  when  looking  at  it.


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


99


arc  very  much  dazzled  by  the  evening-light,  he  is  then  un-
able lo  see  any  thing  upon  the  table.

Ears. — Otalgia  in  the  open  air. Sensation  as  of  press-
ing towards  the  cars. Sensation  as  if  something  had  been
forced  into  the  internal  ear. Pressure  on  the  posterior
surface  of  the  right  concha. Tearing  in  both  the  right  and
left  meatus  auditorius.  Tearing  behind  the  left  ear.  Tear-
ing in  the  left  concha. Tearing  about  the  right  ear,  (14.  d.)
Darting  in  the  internal  ear. Stitches  in  the  ear,  when
blowing  the  nose,  the  speech  being  more  difficult.  Biting
sensation  and  sore  feeling  behind  the  right  ear  and  by  the
side  of  it.  Stitches  in  the  ear.  Continuous,  tearing,  pinch-
ing stitches  in  the  ear,  which  feels  as  if  it  were  too  nar-
row and  as  if  it  would  burst. Throbbing  and  tension  in
the  ears,  with  spasmodic  tension  of  the  skin  behind  the
ears,  in  an  oblique  direction  towards  the  muscles  of  the
nape  of  the  neck. Rush  of  blood  to  the  ears.  Sensation
as  if  hot  blood  rushed  into  the  ears. Itching  in  the  ear.
Ulceration  and  running  of  the  ears. Pain  behind  both
ears,  which  obliged  him  to  walk  crooked. *  Sensitiveness
to  noise  when  walking.  *  Diminution  of  hearing,  (a.  24  h.)
The  sound  of  speech  seems  hollow,  although  as  strong  as
usual. His  ears  become  closed,  with  whizzing  and  hard-
ness of  hearing,  (in  10  d.) Her  ear  became  closed,  with
a  fluttering  sensation. In  the  evening  she  hears  the  mu-
sic in  her  ears,  which  had  been  played  to  her  during  the
day. Sounds  in  the  ears. Roaring,  humming,  and  whiz-
zing in  the  ears.  *  Violent  whizzing  in  the  ears.  Sense  as
of  seething  in  the  ears,  (2.  d.) Whistling  in  the  ear,  when
blowing  the  nose. Chirping  in  the  ears,  for  several  even-
ings. Beating  in  the  ears,  morning  and  evenino-.  Guggling
in  the  ears,  by  clay.  Gurgling  as  of  bubbles  of  air  in  the  ears.

jNose—  1  he  muscles  of  the  nose  first  appear  distended,
then  again  contracted  and  shortened,  like  the  brim  of  a  hat
turned  over.  Corrosive  pain  in  the  right  nostril.  Corro-
sive pain  in  the  left  nostril,  when  moving  the  nose  or  in*
sertmg  the  finger  into  it.  Itching  of  the  nostrils.  Itching
of  the  nose,  (a.  5  d.)  Pressure  on  the  nasal  bone,  near
the  right  eye.  Drawing,  with  pressure,  on  the  right  side
ot  the  nose.  Tearing,  commencing  on  the  right  side  of
the  nose,  and  coming  out  at  the  corner  of  the  eye  Cut-


100  * LYCOPODII  POLLEN.

ting,  sore  feeling  of  the  upper  part  of  the  upturn  in  the
right  nasal  fossa;  in  the  evening,  when  in J>ed.  Swells
of  the  tip  of  the  nose,  with  pain  to  the  touch. Heat  in  the
S  burning  of  the  eyes The  smell  excess^
sensitive;  even  the  smell  of  hyacinth « jnakes  h un  ee
nauseated. Increased  sense  of  smell- Total  absence  of
smell,  (a.  2  d.) Smell  of  lobster,  when  spitting  Expu
sion  of  a  bloody  mucus  from  the  nose  (a.  Expul
sion  of  coagulated  blood  from  the  nose,  (a.  1 1  d.)  Lonsiu
erable  bleeding  from  a  little  wound  in  the  nose,  in  the  even-
ing, when  walking,  (a.  32  d.)  Bleeding  at  the  nose,  three
days  in  succession,  at  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  Two
bleedings  from  the  nose  in  one  day,  (a.  26 id.)  ^°nsider
able  bleeding  from  the  nose,  frequent  y  followed  by  ex-
pulsion of  blood  from  the  nose  when  blowing  it,  (a.  20  d.)
P  Face -Paleness  of  face,  with  drowsiness  in  day-time
and  ill  humour. The  paleness  of  the  face  increases  to-
wards evening  (a.  8  d.) Very  pale,  sunken  countenance,
early  in th morning  ' *  Pale,  wretched  complexion.
Pat  and  narrower  "countenance. The  countenance  ts
changed,  with  sunken  eye.  Sondes,  (jTdO  JBluc
margins  around  the  eyes,  ^a.  i*  u.;  rounte-
nance. *  Yellow-gray  complexion. The  whole  counte
nance  first  extended  in  length,  afterwards  in  breadth.  Heat
i  . ah-  face,  eyes  and  palms  of  the  hands.  Heat  in  the  ace,

rsttiyF1tr^i  r  ?&£s

tirofta^is^  aV  oler J  hjeat  in  thence
Sout  redness^  Striking  redness  -  Uie  face  earl ^.n  the
mornins.  Burning  in  the  face,  (a.  26  d.)  Ked,  blown
S  full  of  dark-red  spots  covered  with  pustule,  bwe  -
•  „  nf  ihp  rheeks  *  Eruption  in  the  face,  (a.  12  d.)  &in-
3e  p  mples  on  he  face  ?  Itching  of  the  face,  head,  and
nose  Thincr  all  over  the  face,  and  pimples  with  pus  in

Z Sa  Voe a  L*~  of  f,ec;;,es  o,,

hP  left  side  of  the  face  and  over  the  nose.  1  he  tace
ooks  asTf  it  were  covered  with  a  fine  eruption.  Jlching


LYC0P0D1I  POLLEN.


101


with  bleeding.  Simple  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  face,
when  touching  it.  Contractive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the
face  and  the  occipito-frontalis  muscle,  (a.  4  d.)  Sensation
of  swelling  on  the  forehead.  Tearing  in  the  cheek.  Tear-
ing in  the  malar  bone,  below  the  left  eye.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Tearing  in  the  upper  jaw  bone,
(2.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  right  upper  jaw.  Spasmodic  twitch-
ings  in  the  muscles  of  the  cheeks.  The  muscles  of  the
lips  and  cheeks  contracted,  and  made  the  mouth  look
pointed  ;  this  was  followed  by  extension  of  the  mouth.
The  left  corner  of  the  mouth  was  drawn  upwards  ;  after-
wards the  right  corner  became  distorted.  Paleness'of  the
lips.  Swelling  of  the  right  half  of  the  lower  lip.  Swelling
of  the  lips,  early  in  the  morning.  Swelling  of  the  upper
lip,  increasing  for  several  days,  lastly  accompanied  with
evening-fever — first,  chilliness,  afterwards  heat  in  the  face,
in  the  hands  and  feet,  restless  sleep  and  night-sweat.  A
sore  place  on  the  lower  lip.  Soreness  of  the  corners  of
the  mouth.  Ulcerative  pain  of  the  corners  of  the  mouth.
Eruption  around  the  mouth.  Fine  eruption  around  the
mouth,  (11.  d.)  Itching  pimple  on  the  upper  lip,  (a.  14  d.)
Eruption  on  the  margin  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lip,
with  cutting  pain  when  moving  the  lips,  or  when  touching
them,  (a.  12  d.)  A  white  blister  on  the  inner  side  of  the
upper  lip,  with  burning  pain  when  at  rest — not  when  eat-
ing, (a.  30  h.)  A  large  ulcer  on  the  vermilion  border  of
the  lower  lip.  Itching  pimples  around  the  chin.  Pressure
on  the  right  lower  jaw,  towards  the  back  part.  Drawing
pain  in  the  right  lower  jaw  ;  the  sub-maxillary  glands  feel
heavy,  as  if  they  were  swollen,  with  throbbing  in  the
glands,  increasing  after  walking  or  eating.  *  Drawing  in
the  jaws.  Darting  pain  in  the  lower  law,  in  the  evening.
Jerking  tearing,  at  times  in  the  right,  at  times  in  the  left
lower  jaw.  The  lower  jaw  is  involuntarily  pushed  back-
wards and  forwards.  Hard  swelling  in  the  corner  of  the
lower  jaw,  with  a  feeling  of  heat  in  the  head.  Boring  pain
in  the  swollen  sub-maxillary  glands,  (a.  4  d.)  Disagree-
able toothache ;  she  would  like  to  bite  her  teeth  together
continually.  Dull  ache  of  the  upper  and  lower  teeth,  with
swelling  of  the  gums,  (neither  throbbing,  nor  stinging,  nor  "
drawing,  (a.  15  d.) The  teeth  only  ache  when  chewing.


102


LICOPODII  POLLEN.


The  teeth  are  excessively  pain  ful  when  touching  them,  or
when  chewing,  as  if  there  were  sub-cutaneous  ulceration.
Toothache  only  at  night ;  when  it  ceased  early  in  the
morning,  she  felt  nervous  and  agitated,  and  was  not  able
to  fall  asleep  again. Toothache  when  touching  the  tooth
ever  so  little,  or  when  coughing. Spasmodic  pain  in  the
teeth. *  Drawing,  cramp-pain  in  the  teeth,  relieved  by
warm  drinks. Drawing  ache  in  the  right  lower  molares.
Tearing-drawing  toothache  in  the  left  lower  molares.  Tear-
ing in  a  hollow  tooth. Stinging  and  drawing  in  teeth  which
cannot  be  distinctly  indicated,  alternately  in  the  upper  and
lower'row;  thisprevented  her  from  fallingasleepinihe  even-
ing, (a.  9d.)  Single,  violent  stitches  in  a  hollow  tooth,  slowly
succeeding  one  another,  and  ceasing  after  she  gpt  warm
in  bed. Frequent  stitches  in  an  upper  molar  tooth  of  the
right  side.  Stitches,  gurgling  and  boring  in  a  hollow  tooth,
(a.  12  1 1.) Boring  pain  in  the  crown  of  the  tooth.  Sin-
gle jerks  in  the  right  upper  molares. Burrowing  tooth-
ache, with  stitches,  in  an  upper  molar  tooth  ;  after  a  meal,
Throbbing  and  clawing  toothache. Throbbing  toothache
(af'er  a  meal.) Beating  in  a  tooth,  with  swelling  of  the
gums. Pain  in  a  hollow  tooth,  as  if  it  were  being  dashed
to  piece",  extending  as  far  as  the  temples,  (3.  d.) Pain  in
a  lower  molar  tooth,  as  if  it  were  being  dashed  to  pieces,
very  painful  when  eating,  (7.  d.) A  sound  tooth  is  painful
when  eating,  as  if  it  were  too  long. All  the  teeth  ache,  as
if  thev  were  too  dull.  Looseness  of  some  of  the  incisores.
Great  looseness  of  the  teeth. The  teeth  become  yellow
Heat  and  pain  in  the  gums. Tearing  in  the  gums  and
in  the  region  of  the  roots  of  the  left  lower  incisores.  Dart-
ing pain  in  the  gums  of  the  lower  row,  in  the  afternoon,
(a  10  d.) Prickling  and  stingiig  pains  in  the  left  side  of
the  gums  and  cheek. Swelling  of  the  gums  over  the
anterior  teeth,  with  swelling  of  the  upper  hp.  Swelling
of  the  gums  hinders  opening  the  mouth. Swelling  be-
tween  the  upper  gums and the  zygoma,  with  some
swelling  of  the  cheeks  and  prickling  pains. Fistula  dcn-
talis  in  an  old  socket,  in  which  one  of  the  roots  is  yet
lodged,  with  swelling  of  the  gums. Ulcer  of  the  gums.
The  gums  bleed  violently  when  touched.  Involuntary


HCOPODII  POLLEN.


103


clashing  and  grinding  of  the  teeth.  Small  tumors  in  the
mouth,  in  various  places.

Mouth. — Numbness  of  the  inner  mouth  anil  tongue.
Involuntary  movement  of  the  tongue,  causing  the  sound
A  to  be  changed  to  0.  The  tongue  feels  swollen.  'J  he
tongue  is  painful  and  swollen  in  different  places  ;  this  hin-
dered talking.  The  tongue,  at  times,  gets  involuntarily
between  the  upper  lip  and  upper  teeth,  at  times  between
the  lower  lip  and  lower  teeth.  The  tongue  darts  involun-
tarily out  of  the  mouih,  and  moves  between  the  lips  to
and  fro.  Nasal  twang.  Relaxed  condition  of  the  mouth,
and  heaviness  ol  the  tongue.  Soreness  of  the  tongue.  A
number  of  vesicles  on  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  which  fe.ls
painful,  as  if  it  were  raw  and  burnt.  Tubercles  on  the
tongue.  Ulcer  under  the  tongue,  being  very  troublesome
when  talking  or  eating.

Thro.kt. — Swelling  and  elongation  of  the  uvula,  (a-  6  d.)
Pain  in  the  throat  during  deglutition,  frequently  ;  she  feels
as  if  she  swallowed  too  much  at  once,  (a.  9  d.)  Sore
throat.  Sore  throat-,  when  swallowing  or  coughing.  Sore
throat,  as  if  the  throat  were  swollen,  only  during  empty  de-
glutition. Inaction  of  the  pharynx  when  swallowing,  the
food  does  not  go  down.  *  The  pharynx  (eels  contracted,
nothing  will  go  down.  The  throat  feels  loo  narrow,  during
deglutition;  the  food  and  drink  comes  out  again  at  the
nose.  When  eating  the  soup  very  hot,  he  is  unable  to
swallow  it.  The  throat,  feels  sore  and  swollen;  this  is
pot  perceived  when  talking  or  swallowing.  Glandular
swellings  inside  and  outside  of  the  throat,  with  stitching
pain  in  the  glands  .hen  swallowing,  and  in  the  ear.  Sen-
sation as  if  a  ball  were  rising  into  the  pharynx  from  be-
low. Sensation  in  the  throat,  as  if  a  stone  were  pressing
into  it  from  without  and  closed  the  throat,  rather  painful
during  deglutition,  without  hindering  breathing.  Tearing
pains  in  the  pharynx  from  below  upwards.  Tearing  in  the
left  side  of  the  neck.  Tearing  on  the  left  side  o!  the  pha-
rynx and  in  the  throat.  Tingling  tearing,  with  pressure,  in
the  posterior  and  upper  part,  of  the  palate.  Stinaing  and
dryness  in  the  throat,  (a.  5  d.)  Continual  slinging  in.
the  throat.  Inflammation  of  the  throat,  with  hoarrettB  •:
and  stitches,  which  make  it  difficult,  either  to  swallow


104


LICOPODII  POLLEN.


solids  or  liquids,  for  nine  days,  (a.  12  d.)  Inflammation
of  the  whole  fauces,  with  aching  and  stinging  pain.  Sup-
puration of  the  tonsils,  with  stinging  pain  when  swallowing.
*  Ulcers  of  the  tonsils,  resembling  chancre.  Ulceration
of  the  tonsils. Roughness  of  the  pharynx,  with  sensation
of  swelling  when  swallowing. *  Dryness  in  the  mouth
and  throat. *  Great  dryness  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the
morning,  (a.  3  d.)  Sore  feeling  of  dryness  in  the  pharynx,
when  swallowing,  early  in  the  morning. Feeling  of  dry-
ness in  the  mouth,  with  much  saliva. The  saliva  becomes
dry  on  the  palate  and  lips,  and  is  converted  into  tough
mucus. Feeling  of  dryness  in  the throat  and  mouth,
without  thirst,  only  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying
down,  and  during  the  night. Continual  dryness  in  the
throat. Troublesome  dryness  in  the  throat;  she  would
like  to  drink,  but  is  unable  to  swallow  anything  on  account
of  the  pain. In  the  morning  the  throat  always  feels  very
dry. Dryness  of  the  throat,  with  much  thirst. Dry  and
bitter  mouth Mouth  dry  and  sourish. Desire  to  throw
up  a  sourish,  watery,  sometimes  bloody  fluid.  Continual
accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  and  spitting.  Flow
of  saliva,  tasting  salt. The  poslerior  part  of  the  month  is
covered  wilh  tough  mucus. Hawking  up  of  bloody  mu-
cus, when  taking  his  usual  ride.  Coated  tongue.  Scraping
sensation  in  the  mouth. Foetid  smell  from  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning,  he  perceives  it  himself.

T\ste  and  Appetite.—*  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning.  -  A  bitter  substance  rises  into  her
month,  early  in  the  morning,  as  if  from  acidity  in  the  sto-
mach Very  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  at  night ;  she  is
obliged  to  rise  and  to  rinse  her  mouth. Continual  bitter
taste  in  the  mouth,  but  not  of  the  nourishment  she  takes.
Bitter  taste  of  all  her  food.  Bitter,  sour  taste  in  the  mouth,
before  and  after  breakfast. Sour  taste  in  the  mouth,  es-
pecially early  on  waking  up. Sour  taste  of  everything
she  eats,  even  sweet  things. Sour  taste  m  the  mouth
while  drinking  cocoa. Mouldy  taste in  the  mouth,
from  morning  till  noon. Cheesy  taste  m  the  mouth
(a  13  d.) Very  sweetish  lastc  in  the  mouth,  (a.4Sli.)
Water  tastes  as  sweet  as  sugar,  early  in  the  morning.  Ab-
sence of  thirst. Continual  thirst  with  dry  hps  and  dry


ZJC0P0DII  POLLEff.


105


mouth  ;  but,  when  trying  to  swallow  some  liquid,  it  became
repulsive  to  her  anl  she  was  unable  to  get  it  down  ;  at  the
same  time  she  felt  sick,  faint  and  tired. Violent  thirst,
with  saliva  in  the  mouth,  resembling  a  fine  foam,  (a.  1  h.)
A  good  deal  of  thirst,  she  would  like  to -drink  all  the  time.
Great  desire  to  eat  and  eating  in  a  hurry. Hunger  imme-
diately, after  a  meal,  although  stomach  and  abdomen  felt
replete  and  distended. *  Excessive  hunger  ;  the  more  he
eats,  the  more  the  stomach  craves,  and  as  long  as  he  eats,
he  is  well ;  but  after  eating,  he  constantly  has  a  sourish
taste  on  tlu  tongue,  and  even  the  saliva  appears  sour  ;  he
does  not  perceive  this  however,  when  eating. *  Canine
hunger,  at  noon,  when  eating,  with  sensation  as  if  she  could
not  satiate  herself. Constant  canine  hunger,  in  the  after-
noon, with  sensation  as  if  heavy  substances  were  lying  inlhe
stomach. If  she  does  not  eat  while  she  is  attacked  with
the  canine  hunger,  she  has  headache,  which  goes  off  after  a
meal. Desire  to  eat,  without  any  real  hunger. *  Want  of
appetite,  (a.  3  d.) He  does  not  relish  what  he  eats,  he  has
no  appetite. Want,  of  appetite,  but  much  thirst,  (a.  30  d.)
*  Aversion  to  solid  food,  especially  meat,  with  thirst,  (1.  d.)
She  is  unable  to  eat,  is  continually  replete,  has  no  appetite  ;
and  what  she  eats  is  repulsive  to  her,  even  to  nausea."  Aver-
sion even  to  eating. Sometimes  he  loathes  the  best  nour-
ishment for  moments,  before  having  tasted  it  ;  but  after:
wards  he  cannot  eat  enough  of  it. Aversion  to  coffee  and
smoking. *  Bread  is  repulsive  to  him,  he  is  so  much  more
fond  of  warm  food. Sour  taste,  after  taking  milk.  Bad
taste  in  the  mouth,  shortly  after  dinner. After  supper  the
forepart  of  the  mouth  feels  watery,  the  backpart  dry.
Sour  taste  in  the  mouth  after  eating  or  drinking,  with  incli-
nation to  sour  eructations. Acidity  in  the  mouth  after  a
meal. Oppiessive  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  after  a  meal.

Gastric  Symptoms  :— A\  dinner,  excessive  nausea
unto  fainting,  sweat  on  the  forehead  and  complete  loss
of  appetite.  Nausea  in  the  pharynx  and  stomach  after  a
meal,  unto  vomiting  ;  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the
mouth.  A  good  deal  of  thirst,  after  a  meal.  Hiccough
atter  supper,  for  half  an  hour.  Frequent  eructations  after
a  meal.  Retching  after  a  meal,  rising  of  water,  and  dis-
charge of  water  from  the  mouth,  (water  brash.)  Sensation

5*


106


LICOPODII  POLLEN.


as  if  the  stomach  had  been  spoiled. Digestion  appears  to
be  very  slow. She  dares  not  eat  to  satiety,  because  this
makes  her  feel  uneasy  and  bloated  in  the  region  of  the
liver. When  eating  to  satiety,  one  feels  uncomfortable
and  distended. Immediately  after  a  meal,  the  abdomen
is  full,  bloated,  distended,  until  evening,  when  silting,
walking  or  lying  down  ;  when  this  symptom  occurs,  he
is  averse  to  walking  and  remains  silting. Distension  ot
the  abdomen,  and  tension  of  the  head  after  dinner.  Bloat-
ed abdomen,  after  a  meal. Fulness  and  heaviness  after  a
meal. After  a  meal,  sensation  in  the  stomach  as  of  fast-
ing, but  without  any  hunger. Colic,  after  a  meal. I  res-
sure  in  the  stomach,  after  every  meal. Pinching  in  the
abdomen  after  a  meal. Pinching  in  the  abdomen  after
breakfast,  as  if  one  had  taken  a  cathartic. Pressure  in  the
forehead,  when  eating. Continued  pricking  in  the  tore-
head,  when  eating  ;  followed  by  violent  single  stitches  dur-
ing motion,  (a.  36  h.) Heat  in  the  head  after  a  meal,  and
a  red  spot  upon  the  left  cheek.  Black  spots  before  the  eyes
after  a  meal,  with  pain,  especially  of  the  left  eye,  increased
by  shaking  the  head. Distortion  of  the  features,  especially
after  supper. High,  burning  redness  over wh°le  face
after  dinner. Redness  of  the  cheeks,  followed  by  frightful
pallor,  after  a  meal. Urgent  but  almost  unsuccessful  de-
sire to  urinate  after  dinner. Tremor  through  the  whole
body,  after  a  meal. Throbbing  tlnough  the  whole  body,
after  a  meal. After  a  meal,  she  feels  more  nervous  and
weary,  her  pulse  beating  faster,  (a  10  d.)  Unconquerable
sleep  after  a  meal. Unconquerable  sleep  after  dinner  fol-
lowed by  exhaustion. Shuddering  during  a  meal  shaking
the  whole  body,  but  without  chilliness. Hot  hands  after  a
meal. After  a  meal,  she  feels  as  if  the  food  touched  a  sore
place  ;  this  sensation  is  followed  by  pressure  in  that  part.
A  number  of  eructations,  alternating  with  yawning.  F  e-
quent  empty  eructations,  (the  first  days. Eructa uon  ;  tak  -
ing of  the  ingesta,  (1.  d.)  Continual  b.hous  eructations,  in
the  afternoon *  Sour  eructations  immediately,  with  colic.

not  leaving  any  taste  in  the  mouth  but
the  acidity  corroding  the  stomach.  Rising  *f  ^ur  fluid,
with  sour  taste  in  the  mouth.  Sour  eructations  after  e\  ery
^^S-tft-ta  of  digested  food,  leaving  a  sort  of


L1C0P0DII  POLLEN.


10


fe'id  taste  in  the  mouth  for  one  hour,  with  obtusion  of  the
head,  (a.  11  d.) (gulping  up  of  the  milk  which  had  beer)
taken  early  in  the  morning,  with  scraping,  raw  taste  in  the
throat. Imperfect,  burning  eructations,  reaching  only  the
pharynx,  where  it.  causes  a  burning  sensation  lor  several
hours,  (a.  4  h.) Burning  eructations,  like  a  so;f.  of  heart-
burn. Heartburn  from  the  stomach,  acidity  rising  into  the
mouth. Heartburn,  half  an  hour  after  every  meal,  with
sour  eructations  and  burning  in  the  pil  of  the  stomach  for
many  hours  ;  it  almost  takes  away  his  breath,  and  makes
him  feel  very  weak. Heartburn  after  eating  cold  million,
with  pressure  on  the  chest  as  if  a  stone  were  lying  upon  it,
(a.  33  d.) Heartburn  three  hours  after  a  meal,  increased
by  smoking.  Hiccough.  Frequent  hiccough,  three  days  in
succession,  (a.  4  d.) Hiccough  after  every  meal,  (a.  10  d.)
Nausea  every  morning,  before  bieakfast. *  Nausea  in
the  afternoon,  with  sour  eructations. Nausea,  with  oppres-
sion of  the  chest  and  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  nausea  m  die
afternoon,  with  some  risings.  .  Nausea,  with  oppression
of  the  chest  and  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  weakness  m  the
lower  limbs,  relieved  for  a  short  while  by  eructations,  re-
turning afterwards,  with  tinglingin  the  pharynx  and  pit  of  the
stomach.  Nausea  rises  into  his  head,  it  feels  oppressed  and
obtuse,  the  pain  extending  to  the  nape  of  the  neck  :  accom-
panied by  trembling  of  the  hands,  better  in  the  open  air.
Nausea  in  a  room,  going  off  in  the  open  air;  and  then
again  nausea  in  the  open  air  going  off  in  a  room.  Nausea,
with  heat  in  the  abdomen,  and  icy  coldness  in  the  face,
(i.  2  d.) Loathing  at  the  sight  of  food,  with  conflux  of
saliva,  and  flat,  insipid  taste  in  the  mouth. *  Waterbrasli
every  other  day,  griping  in  the  pil  of  the  stomach,  nausea,
she  is  obliged  to  keep  her  mouth  open,  and  to  discharge  a
quantity  of  salt  water  which  seems  to  come  out  of  the  sto-
mach. Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  as  takes  place
in  canine  hunger,  in  the  forenoon,  when  writing,  (a.  12  d.)
Accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth  with  nausea,  she  had
to  spit  a  good  deal,  (the  first  2  mornings.) A  sort  of  bitter
water  rises  every  morning  into  her  mouth  from  the  stomach,
she  is  obliged  to  bend  over  the  edge  of  the  bed  and  to  spit
it  out. Qualms  of  sickness  in  the  region  of  the  stoma,
early  in  the  morning  after  rising,  and  especially  when  walk-


108  LICOPODII  POLLEN.

in"  out  of  the  room,  as  if  sweat  would  break  out.  Inclina-
tion to  vomit,  with  hawking  up  of  phlegm.  *  Nightly  vo-
miting of  food  and  biie  preceded  by  nausea  and  anguish
about  the  heart,  (a.  9  d.)  The  child  vomited  mucus,  five
times  after  the  siesta.  Vomiting  of  coagulated  blood,  and
acrid  acidity.

Sxoivncn.-Pain  in  the  stomach,  increased  by  stoop-
in«r. *  Intense  pain  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when
pressing  upon  it. Emptiness  of  the  stomach  previous  to
dinner  ;  it  obliged  him  to  gape  all  the  time. Violent  pain
in  the  st(  mach  after  a  meal,  and  after  catching  a  slight
cold with  chilliness  so  that  she  cannot  get  warm,  and
deadness  of  the  hands,  (a.  23  d.) Violent  pain  across  the
stomach  ;  she  cannot  bear  lacing,  nor  tying  any  thing  firmly
over  the  part,  (a.  8  d.) Cramp  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
early  in  the  morning  when  waking  up,  for  three  quarters
of  an  hour,  (a.  3  d.) Weight  in  the  stomach,  two  hours
v.fter  breakfast. *  Pressure  over  the  stomach,  m  the  re-
gion of  the  orifice,  in  the  evening. *  Violent  pressure  m
the  stomach  and  abdomen,  the  whole  forenoon,  with  pain
to  the  touch  and  when  breathing. Continued  pressure
n  the  stomach,  with  tension  in  the  abdomen.  Pressure
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (1.  d.) Pressure  m  the  pit  of
he omach  and  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,  after  lifting
a  heavy  weight. Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  espe-
CX  in  the°afternoon  and  after  lifting  too  heavy  a  weight
wHh  pain  in  the  pit  when  touching  it. Aching  from  he
pitofUie  stomach' to  the  umbilicus,  with  guggling  «,  the
enicrastrium. Spasm  of  the  stomach  previous  to  a  meal,
with  unsuccessful  eructations. Contusive  pain  in  the
stomac going  off  by  eructations  ;  the  stomach  is  a  so
very  painful  to  the  touch  :  Contraction  and  spasm  of  the
stolach  as  far  as  the  chest,  from  morning  till  evening.
The  spasrn  in  the  stomach  is  brought  on  again  by  wine.
Whir  in^ensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  flushes
of  dry  heat  in  the  face. Tearing  and  drawing  pain  ,n  the
ston  ac  h  with  nausea  and  colic,  resembling  the  prick  of  a
pi?, he  intestines. Gnawing  and
L  region  of th^nacl  ;-t  ^s  repute.  ftfldg


LYC0P0DII  POLLEN.


109


upper  part  of  the  body.  Anxious  feeling  about  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  as  one  feels  when  swinging.

Abdomen. — Pain  of  the  liver  to  the  touch.  Violent
pain  in  the  liver,  with  regular  stools,  (a.  8  d.)  Pressure
in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Aching  in  that  region  when
taking  an  inspiration,  (a.  13  d.)  Pressure  in  the  right  side
of  the  abdomen.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  from
within  outwards.  Dull  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  liver.
Sharp  pressure  below  the  last  right  rib,  during  a  deep  in-
spiration and  when  bending  to  one  side ;  also  when
pressing  upon  the  right  iliac  region.  Sore  aching  in  the
right  hypochondrium,  as  if  caused  by  a  shock,  increased
by  contact.  Tension  in  the  lower  part  of  the  region  of
the  liver,  with  pressure.  Grasping,  as  if  with  the  hand,
in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Violent  cramp-pain  of  the  dia-
phragm in  the  region  of  the  liver,  when  stooping,  and
brought  on  by  other  slight  causes,  as  if  the  liver  were
sprained.  Pinching  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  (a.  11  d.)
Stitches  in  that  region.  Pinching  stitch  in  that  region.
Stitches  in  the  liver,  in  the  evening,  for  an  hour,  (a.  6  d.)
Painless  twitchings  in  the  surface  of  the  liver,  when
coughing.  Raw  pain  in  the  liver.  Itching  in  the  interior
of  the  liver.  Painful  tension  in  the  left  hypochondrium.
Colic,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising.  Pressure  in  the
middle  of  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen.  Pressure  in  the
abdomen,  near  the  hips,  at  times  on  the  right,  at  limes  on
the  left  side.  Oppressive  colic,  early  in  the  morning,
(5.  d.)  *  Itching  in  the  right  iliac  region,  the  whole  day  ;
he  was  obliged  to  walk  crooked,  from  pain,  and  had  short
breath,  (a.  6  d.)  *  Aching  in  the  epigastrium,  as  if  caused
by  flatulence,  increased  when  drawing  the  abdomen  in,
relieved  by  eructations.  Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  with
drawing  pain.  *  Pressure  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,
before  dinner.  Sharp  pressure  at  a  small  spot  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  epigastrium.  *  Frequent  pinching,  pressing
from  within  outwards,  on  the  right  side  of  the  umbilicus,
towards  the  hip,  and  somewhat  below  it.  Weight  in  the
abdomen.  Weight  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  inde-
pendent of  breathing  ;  he  feels  it  in  the  same  degree  when
walking,  sitting,  or  lying,  (a.  24  h.)  Fulness  in  the  abdo-
men, with  pressing  towards  the  rectum.  *  Full,  distended
abdomen,  and  cold  feet,  (a.  6  d.) Big  abdomen,  and  colic


110


LYCOPOIUI  POLLEN.


everyday,  (a.  2  d.)  Distension  of  ihe  abdomen,  especially
immediately  before  the  menses.  Distension  of  the  abdomen
from  flatulence,  (a.4d.)  Distension  of  the  abdomen  towards
evening,  with  incarceration  of  flatulence. Distension  of
the  abdomen  for  several  afternoons,  beginning  at  4  o'clock.
Tension  in  the  hjpogastrium,  (a.  6  h.) Tension  in  the
abdomen,  with  accumulation  of  much  flatulence.  Tension
of  the  abdomen,  with  incarceration  of  flatulence.  Tension
and  grunting  in  the  abdomen. Distended  abdomen,  with  .
desire  for  stool,  mostly  in  the  evening. Spasms  in  the
abdomen,  which  is  very  much  distended. Spasms  in  the
abdomen. Spasmodic  contraction  in  the  abdomen.  In-
termittent oppressive  clawing  in  the  left  iliac  region.
Griping  and  pinching  around  the  umbilicus,  beginning  early
in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  re-
lieved by  emission  of  flatulence,  (a.4h.)  Pinching  in  the  ab-
domen, in  the  afternoon,  (after  a  natural  stool,)  from  3  to  10
o'clock,  with  inclination  to  vomit. Cutting  colic,  previous
to  stool,  (a.  17  d.) Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  about  mid-
night, with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea. Cutting  in  the  hypo-
ga'slrium,  after  dinner,  followed  by  a  stitch  extending  to
the  tip  of  the  glans,  twice  in  succession. Cutting  in  the
epigastrium,  every  forenoon,  and  even  early  in  the  morn-
ing°when  in  bed,  without  diarrhoea,  until  afternoon,  going
off  by  walking. Quickly  passing  cutiing  in  the  intes-
tines, into  the  sides  and  hips,  towards  evening,  (a.  li  d.)
Intermittent  tearing,  with  a  sensation  as  of  gurgling,  m  a
small  spot  of  the  middle  of  the  epigastrium,  towards  the
left  side. *  Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Drawing
pain  in  the  abdomen,  with  pressure. Drawing  pain  in  ihe
abdomen,  down  into  the  calves. Drawing  colic  Clawing
drawing,  deep  in  the  hypogastrium. Stitches,  in  the  right
iliac  region,  extending  into  the  pelvis,  at  every  breath,  and
every  turning  of  the  body  ;  worse  in  the  evening  and  at
ni"ht,  (a.  10  d.) '  Burning  stitches,  on  the  right  side,  near
the  umbilicus. Jerks  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  4  d.)  Pulsa-
tions in  the  abdomen,  with  anxious  feeling,  as  ol  cramp.
Intense  sensitiveness  to  pain  of  the  skin  of  the  abdomen.
Stincrino-  sore  pain  of  the  skin  of  the  abdomen,  even  when
merely  Whed  by  the  clothes. Pain  in  the  groins  when
walking,  and  pain  in  the  back,  (a.  .6  d  ) Pains  in  the  re-
gion of  the  hernial  sac.  Pressure  and  frequent  dull  studies


UCOPODII  POLLEN.


Ill


in  the  right  inguinal  region. Pressing  from  within  out-
wards, in  the  right,  inguinal  region. Pressing  from  within
outwards,  in  the  right  inguinal  region. Pressing  from
within  outwards  in  the  left  inguinal  region,  followed  by  a
gurgling  sensation  in  the  abdominal  ring. Pulsalive  tear-
ing pressing  from  within  outwards  in  the  right  groin,  near
the  thigh. Pulsations,  deep  in  the  right  abdominal  ring.
Stitches  in  both  groins,  late  in  the  evening,  (2.  d.)  Pain-
ful, boring  stitches  on  the  left  side,  just  above  the  groin,
when  walking  or  when  at  rest. *  Tearing  slitches  in  the
hernial  region,  (a.  24  h.)  Red  swelling  in  the  right  groin  ;
during  motion,  and  when  touching  it,  it  is  painful  as  from
sub-culanenus  ulceration,  (a.  16  d.)  Small  glandular  swell-
ings in  the  groins,  (a.  21  d.)  The  hernial  sac,  in  the  groin,
protrudes  immediately  after  the  menses,  and  is  affected
with  a  tearing  pain. Accumulation  of  flatulence,  in  the
evening,  going  off  only  in  part,  with  pressure  in  the  region
of  the  umbilicus. He  is  tormented  by  flatulence,  even
early  in  the  morning  before  breakfast. Incarceration  of
flatulence,  after  having  been  seated  for  two  hours.  Incar-
ceration of  flatulence,  causing  a  decline  of  health,  (a.  6d.)
A  quantity  of  flatulence  in  the"  abdomen,  the  hypochondria,
back,  region  of  the  ribs  and  chest,  causing  tension  and
gurgling,  relieved  by  empty  eructations.  A  chief  symptom
of  lycopodium  is  to  bring  on  flatulence. This  flatulence
seems  to  be  the  cause  of  a  large  portion  of  the  symptoms
with  which  the  patient  is  affected. Violent  colic,  in  the
evening,  as  if  from  incarceration  of  flatulence,  followed  by
rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  and  discharge  of  flatus,  (a.  10  d.)
A  quantity  of  flatulence  moving  about  towards  evening,
causing  some  colic,  with  noiseless  emission  of  inodorous
flatulence,  and  distended  abdomen. Grunting  and  tension
of  the  abdomen.  Grunting  and  gurgling  in  the  abdomen.
'  Audible  and  tangible  gurgling  in  the  left  hypochon-
drium. Violent  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  16  d.)
Emission  of  flatulence,  preceded  by  colic,  (a.  4  d.)  Desire
for  stool,  followed  by  cramp-pain  in  the  rectum,  which
prevents  the  expulsion  of  faeces. Desire  for  stool,  extend-
ing only  as  far  as  the  rectum,  (in  a  few  hours.)  Trouble-
some stool,  owing  to  contraction  of  the  rectum.  Painful
closing  of  the  anus.


112


LYCOPODIl  POLLEN.


Stool* — *  Stool  not  daily,  sluggish,  and  no  desire.  Stool
every  other  day. No  stool  for  the  first  two  or  three  days  ;
at  the  end  of  this  period  he  has  a  copious,  natural  evacua-
tion of  the  bowels. No  desire  for  stool,  early  in  the  morn-
ing ;  he  has  a  desire  in  the  evening ;  however,  he  passes
only  little,  and  with  great  exertions,  although  the  desire  is
very  strong. *  Desire  for  stool  only  in  the  evening,  with
distended  abdomen. *  Little  stool,  with  sensation  as  if
much  remained  behind,  followed  by  excessive  and  pain-
ful accumulation  of  flatulence,  (a.  24  h.) Urgent  desire
during  stool,  as  if  he  would  have  a  copious  evacuation,  but
it  amounts  to  very  little. Inaction  oi  the  rectum  at  stool.
He  had  to  make  great  efforts  in  passing  the  stools ;  he
had,  however,  a  daily  evacuation,  although  slight,  and  with
burning  at  the  rectum. For  many  days  in  succession  the
first  part  of  the  stools  is  knotty,  the  second  soft,  (a.  16  d.)
Stool  comes  in  small  fragments. Thin  stool  mixed  with
hard  pieces. Papescent  stool,  once  or  twice  a  day,  from
the  fifth  day,  for  several  weeks. Soft  stool,  several  times
a  day  ;  he  has  to  press  it  out  with  much  force  ;  no  emis-
sion of  flatulence. Tenesmus  in  the  morning ;  diarrhoea
in  the  afternoon. Diarrhoea,  with  colic,  generally  early  in
the  morning,  (at  2,  3  o'clock.) Pale'  stool. Fetid  stool.
Copious  expulsion  of  thin  mucus,  but  little  stool,  at  noon.
Blood  with  stool. Hcemorrhage  from  the  rectum,  even
with  soft  stool,  (a.  14  d.) Biting  in  the  anus,  with  thin
stool. Stinging  in  the  rectum,  with  good  stool.  Fine
stinging  in  the  rectum,  with  knotty  stool. Burning  at  the
rectum  during  stool. Burning  at  the  anus  during  the
frequent  stools,  (a.  48  h.) Hard  stool,  with  pain  in  the
small  of  the  back  as  if  it  would  break,  with  colic  as  if  the  in-
testines would  burst,  (a.  40  d.)  Pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the
head  and  buzzing  in  the  ears,  during  stool. Shock  in  the
temples,  during  hard  stool. Desire  continues  after  a  good
operation,  but  it  is  unsuccessful. Burning  itching  of  the
rectum  after  soft  stool. Burning  at  the  rectum  during
stool  which  is  not  hard. Feeling  of  fulness  in  the  rectum
continues after  a  copious stool. Violent  contractive
pain  in  the  perinaeum  for  many  hours,  after  scanty,  hard
stool. Stool  is  followed  by  abdominal  and  uterine  spasms,
transversely  across  the  abdomen,  mostly  after  soft  stool.


LYC0P0DI1  POLLEN.


113


Distension  of  the  whole  abdomen  from  flatulence,  after
stool.  A  good  deal  of  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  afier
slool.  After  stool,  heat  and  pressing  sensation  in  the  head,
and  lassitude  of  the  thighs.  Great  fatigue  after  stool.  Dis-
tension of  the  varices  of  the  rectum.  Protrusion  of  the
varices.  When  silling,  the  varices  of  the  rectum  are  pain-
ful. The  rectum  is  frequently  so  narrow,  that  it  protrudes
during  hard  stool.  Pressure  in  the  rectum,  at  night,  (after
24  d.)  Aching,  with  pressure  upon  the  rectum,  with
cramp-pain  in  the  abdomen,  which  induced  her  to  believe
that  her  confinement  would  take  place  immediately,  (it
was  to  take  place  in  16  days.)  Spasms,  bearing  down
upon  the  rectum  and  the  small  of  the  back,  like  labour-
pains.  Clawing,  cutting  in  the  anus  and  perinaeum  early
in  the  morning.  Pinching  and  stinging  in  the  margin  of
the  anus.  Stitches  in  the  rectum,  (a.  2  d.)  Stilcli  in
the  rectum,  from  the  small  of  the  back.  Stitches  and  sore
pain  in  the  rectum.  Tearing  in  the  rectum,  arresting
breath,  (a.  40  h.)  Itching  of  the  rectum  and  anus,  (even
a.  28  d.)  (or  a.  12  d.)  Itching  of  the  anus  and  mons  vene-
ris. *  Itching  eruption  of  the  anus,  painful  to  the  touch.

Urinary  Organs.  —  Diminution  of  urine  the  first  8
days,  so  much  more  abundant  in  14.  During  emission,
the  flow  of  urine  is  suddenly  interrupted  ;  only  a  few  drops
of  turbid  and  slimy  urine  come  out,  with  pains  in  the
urethra,  followed  by  aching  in  the  groins,  (a.  24  d.)  Fre-
quent, copious  micturition.  Frequent  micturition,  at  night,
(a.  9  d.)  Frequent,  foamy  urine.  Urine  white-turbid,  imme-
diately after  emission.  Urine  with  yellow  sediment, (a.  6d.)
Dark  urine,  with  burning.  Urine  red-brown.  Dark  urine,
with  sediment,  (a.  18  d.)  Dark  urine,  with  red  sediment,  (a.
32  d.)  Red  sand  in  the  urine.  Red  sand  in  the  urine,  which
remains  pretty  clear.  Red-yellow  sand  in  the  urine.  A
little  red  sediment  in  the  urine.  Bright-red  sediment  in
the  urine.  Strong  smell  of  the  urine,  (the  first  days.)
Hemorrhage  from  the  urethra,  without  pain,  (a.  6"d.)
Burning  m  the  female  urethra  during  micturition.  Smart-
ing sensation  during  micturition.  Smarting  sensation  in
the  female  urethra,  in  the  evening,  during  micturition.
Clawing  sensation  in  the  perinaeum,  close  to  the  anus,  dur-
ing micturition;  it  continues  and  sometimes  recurs  be-


114


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


tween  the  acts  of  micturition.  Tingling  burning  in  the
urethra,  in  the  evening  when  going  to  bed,  after  micturi-
tion. Violent,  but  short  drawing  pain  in  the  forepart  of
the  urethra.  Jerking  drawing  in  the  posterior  part  of  the
urethra.  Tearing  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  some  time
after  urinating.  Quickly-passing  cutting  in  the  forepart
of  the  urethra.  Sharp  cutting  from  the  posterior  termina-
tion of  the  urethra  obliquely  into  the  abdomen.  Violently
cutting  stitch  obliquely  through  the  penis  close  to  the  ab-
domen, at  night,  after  emission  of  a  quantity  of  flatulence.
Stitches  in  the  bladder.  Stitches  in  the  neck  of  the  blad-
der and  in  the  anus  at  the  same  time.

Genital  Organs.  —  Quickly  passing  cutting  in  the
genital  organs,  from  the  abdomen. Violently  darting  pain
in  the  penis.  Titillation  through  the  genital  organs.  Titil-
lating drawing  in  the  tip  of  the  glans. Stitches  in  the  tip
of  the  glans. Drawing  and  cutting  in  the  glans.  Tear-
ing, with  pressure,  in  the  region  of  the  corona  glandis.  A
quantity  of  yellowish  humour  behind  the  corona  glandis,
with  dark-red,  soft  elevations,  smarting  and  itching  for
several  days. Itching  of  the  internal  surface  of  the  pre-
puce. Itching  of  the  fraenulum,  under  the  prepuce.  Itch-
ing of  the  scrotum. Prickling  itching,  especially  of  the
scrotum. Stitches  in  the  scrotum. Lancinating  tearing
in  the  side  of  the  scrotum,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
Darting  sensation  in  the  left  testicle,  (a.  29  d.)  Great
weakness  in  the  genital  organs  and  the  neighbouring  parts,
with  pain  in  the  perinseum  when  sitting,  (a.  3  d.)  *  Dimi-
nution of  the  sexual  instinct  for  10  days,  (a.  7  d.)  Extinc-
tion of  the  sexual  desire,  (secondary  effect?)  (a.  30  d.)
Diminished  sexual  instinct ;  even  voluptuous  fancies  do  not
bring  on  an  erection,  although  the  desire  for  an  embrace
is  not  wanting. Rare  erections,  (the  first  days.) *  The
penis  is  small,  cold,  and  remains  relaxed,  (the  first  14  d  )
Excessive  sexual  desire,  (a.  6  and  14  d.) Erections  with
relaxed  scrotum,  (a.  5  d.) Several  erections  during  the
day,  (a.  7  weeks.) Pollution,  (the  first  night.)  Exhaust-
ing pollution,  (2  d.) Discharge  of  prostatic  juice,  with-
out any  cause.  Discharge  of  prostatic  juice,  without  erec-
tion, with  great  lewdness. Even  during  an  embrace  the
scrotum  is' relaxed,  and  the  emission  of  semen  is  very  slow,


LICOPODII  POLLEN.


115


(a.  4  d.) He  falls  asleep'  during  an  e.nbrace,  without
emission  of  semen,  (a.  12  d) An  embrace  is  succeeded
by  weakness  the  whole  next  day,  (a.  48  h)  Weakness
with  trembling,  early  in  the  morning,  after  a  pollution.
Tearing  stkehes  in  the  organs  of  generation.  Violent
burning  in  the  vagina,  during  and  after  an  embrace.
Drawing  in  the  groin,  as  if  the  menses  would  come  on,  in
an  aged  female. Bearing  down  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the
menses  would  come  on,  16  days  after  the  former,  (12.  d.)
Reappearance  of  the  menses,  which  had  ceased  for  two
days  past,  (a.  16  h) Taking  the  drug  three  days  after
the  cessation  of  the  menses,  blood  flowed  again  in  a  fort-
night. Menses  two  days  too  early,  and  too  scanty,  (a.  41  d.)
Menses  four  clays  too  early,  (a.  12  d.,  also  after  2  d.)
Menses  seven  days  loo  early,  (4.  d.) Brought  back  the
menses,  at  the  period  of  new  moon,  in  a  girl  of  17  years,
which  she  had  lost  for  five  months  past ;  the  usually  ac-
companying pain  did  not  return,  (a.  16  d.) Delays  the
appearance  of  the  menses  by  four  days,  (secondary  ef-
fect ?)  by  three  days;  by  five  days. The  menses  con-
tinue until  the  sixth  clay  ;  they  generally  lasted  four  days.
Bloatedness  of  the  abdomen  previous  to  the  appearance  of
the  menses. Great  heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs  previous
to  the  appearance  of  the  menses. Cold  feet  previous  to
the  appearance  of  the  menses. Violent  chilliness  the  day
previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  (a.  13d.)  Un-
comfortableness  and  chilliness  previous  to  the  appearance
of  the  menses,  the  whole  day.  Chilliness,  about  midnight,
previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  menses  ;  afterwards
heat,  especially  in  the  face,  with  restlessness.  Low-spirited,
desponding  and  melancholy  previous  to  the  menses.  De-
lirium, with  weeping,  as  if  she  would  become  crazy,  the
day  previous  to  the  menses,  and  on  the  first  day  of  the
menses,  (a.  7  d.) Dilatation  of  the  pupils,  some  days  pre-
vious and  during  the  menses. Violent  itching  in  the  pu-
dendum, which  appeared  to  be  swollen,  during  the  men-
ses, (a.  12  d.) During  the  menses,  pain  in  the  temples,
as  it  they  were  being  screwed  towards  one  another,  as  if
the  forehead  would  burst. Dull headache,  almost  like
tearing,  during  the  menses. Acidity  in  the  mouth,  with
coated  tongue,  during  the  menses. Nausea,  during  the


116


LIC0P0DII  POLLEN.


menses. Violent  pain  in  the  back  during  the  menses,
early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  she  was  unable  to
move. Swelling  of  ihe  feet,  during  the  menses. Sort  of
swoon  during  the  menses,  while  standing  in  the  church  ;
she  heard  and  saw  nothing,  with  feeling  of  great  heat  in
the  interior,  especially  in  the  head,  with  great  paleness  of
face  ; she  had  to  sit  down  immediately,  remained  the
whole  evening  in  a  sort  of  stupor,  and  complained  of  ob-
tusion of  the  head  the  next  day,  (a.  3  d.) Stitches  in  the
head,  after  the  menses,  recurring  at  short  intervals.  *  Pro-
fuse leucorrhoea,  with  fits  and  starts,  (a.  5  d.) Milky  leu-
corrhoea. Discharge  of  blood-red  leucorrhoea,  several
times,  before  full  moon,  (a.  7  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. -Sneezing,  without  coryza.  Sneez-
ing, every  morning,  for  half  an  hour. Sneezing,  fifteen
times  a  day,  without  coryza,  (a.  5  d.) She  is  unable  to
sneeze  on  account  of  a  prickling  pain  in  the  throat.  Vio-
lent tickling  in  the  nose,  without  being  able  to  sneeze.  Ob-
struction of  the  nose,  high  up. Obstruction  of  the  nose,
towards  morning. Obstruction  of  the  nose,  he  can  only
breathe  with  his  mouth  open. Entire  obstruction  of  the
nose  ;  the  child's  breath  was  frequently  arrested  for  fifteen
seconds  during  sleep,  even  when  the  mouth  was  open.
Dry  coryza,  (a.  10  d.) Dry  coryza  ;  he  cannot  breathe
at  night. Dry  coryza,  with  burning  in  the  forehead  and
obtusion  of  the  head,  her  eyes  becoming  entirely  closed,
with  much  thirst  and  nightly  heat,  which  hindered  sleep-
ing Dryness  of  the  nose,  and  obstruction  about  the  root
of  the  nose. Dry  feeling  in  the  region  of  the  posterior
nares. Coryza,  in  a  person  who  never  suffered  with  it,
(a.  21  d.) Violent  coryza,  with  swelling  of  the  nose.
Violent  coryza,  with  catarrhal  headache,  (a.  10  d.)  Coryza
with  acrid  discharge,  making  the  upper  hp  sore,  (a.  28  d.)
Frequent  coryza,  with  fetid  discharge  from  the  left  nostril,
ulcerating  within. Fluent  coryza  in  a  few  hours.  Pro-
fuse fluent  coryza,  (a.  3  d.) Profuse  fluent  coryza,  with
pressure  upon  the  chest.  Renewed,  profuse  fluent  coryza,
(immediately.) Indurated  mucus  in  the  nose.

Throat— Frequent  aching  in  the  larynx,  when  swal-
lowing. A  violent,  titillating  scraping  in  the  trachea,  just
below  the  larynx,  rouses  him  from  a  deep  sleep,  at  two


LICOPODII  POLLEN.


117


o'clock  at  night. Dry  feeling  in  the  larynx.  Hoarseness,
(a.  25,  48  d.) Hoarseness,  the  chest  becomes  rough  and
sore  from  talking,  especially  in  the  afternoon.  The  chest
feels  oppressed.  Sensation  as  if  there  were  too  much  mucus
in  the  chest;  whizzing  breathing,  in  day  time,  (a.  18  d.)
*  Rattling  in  the  chest. Desire  to  clear  the  throat,  with
rough  feeling  in  the  throat,  as  if  mucus  were  adhering  to
it,  with  titillation  in  the  throat  inducing  cough.  Irritation
in  the  throat,  inducing  dry  cough. iShort  and  hacking
cough,  from  titillation  in  the  throat. Titillation  in  the
larynx,  followed  by  a  few  coughing  fits,  terminating  in
sneezing. Intolerably  itching  titillation  in  the  larynx,
forcing  one  to  cough  violently,  (a.  I  h.)  Exhausting  cough,
in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed,  as  if  the  larynx  were
tickled  with  a  feather,  with  little  discharge,  (a.  3  d.)
Titillation  with  cough  and  grey  expectoration.  Titilla-
tion with  cough,  unto  retching.  Titillation  with  cough,  as
if  caused  by  the  fumes  of  sulphur  in  ihe  throat,  with  grey,
salt  expectoration. *  Irritation  with  cough,  caused  by
deep  breathing,  extending  the  neck,  and  sometimes  by
empty  deglutition. Short  and  hacking  cough,  with  sore
pain  along  the  larynx. In  the  evening  from  four  to  eight,
she  has  to  cough,  and  to  drink  a  good  deal. In  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed,  he  has  to  clear  his  throat,  and  suffers
with  a  short  and  hacking  cough.  Night-cough  and  hoarse-
ness ;  sore  pain  in  the  chest  in  those  places  where  the  ex-
pectoration is  loosened. Nightly  cough,  affecting  the  sto-
mach and  the  diaphragm,  mostly  previous  to  the  rising  of
the  sun. Nightly  cough,  almost  without  any  intermission,
bringing  on  a  pain  in  the  head,  and  in  both  sides  of  the  ab-
domen. Nightly  cough,  with  some  expectoration,  (a.  @  d.)

Dry  cough,  with  wheezing,  and  sense  as  of  snapping  in
the  throat  as  of  an  electric  spark.  Dry,  short  cough,  every
morning,  with  sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  hoarse,  al-
though there  is  no  hoarseness.  Dry,  wheezing  cough,
as  in  drunkards.  Dry,  rough  cough,  incommoding  one
especially  at  night.  *  The  expectoration  is  salt.  *  Ex-
pulsion of  salt  mucus,  early  in  the  morning,  evening  and
night.  *  Cough,  with  grey,  salt  expectoration.  Cou°h,
with  expectoration  of  blackish  mucus,  day  and  ni'crht.
Morning-cough,  with  green  expectoration,  after  viofent


118  LICOPODII  POLLEN.

pain  in  the  chest. Expectoration  of  white  mucus.  Ex-
pectoration of  pus,  first  thin,  then  thick,  with  truublesome
cough  with  titillalion. *  Thick,  white,  yellowish  expec-
toration, with  violent  cough. *  Expectoration  of  yellow-
ish pus,  with  raw  and  sore  feeling  in  the  chest,  afier  long
dry  cough. Cough,  with  discharge  of  pus,  for  eight  days,
almost  uninterrupted,  with  fever  and  violent  night-sweats,
as  if  in  the  last  stage  of  tubercular  phthisis. *  Cough,
with  bloody  expectoration. Hemorrhage,  in  a  female  af-
fected with  pulmonary  phthisis,  (a.  10  d.) The  breathing
becomes  too  short  previous  to  the  cough. Smarting,  as
from  excoriation,  in  the  chest,  with  yellow-grey  expectora-
tion. The  breath  is  very  short  when  coughing,  not  other-
wise. *  Concussion,  as  from  a  shock,  in  the  temples,  and
at  the  same  time  in  the  chest. When  coughing,  she  feels
a  violent  beating  in  her  head. Pain  in  the  head,  and  in
both  sides  of  the  abdomen,  when  coughing. A  stitch-like
jerk  in  the  head,  with  a  feeling  of  pressure,  when  cough-
ing. Stitches  in  the  throat,  when  coughing,  not  otherwise,
nor  during  deglutition. She  suffers  with  oppression  of  the
chest,  and  stitches  in  the  throat ;  these  bring  on  a  cough
with  sensation  as  of  scraping,  (5.  d.) The  region  of  the
stomach  has  become,  painjul  from  the  coughing.

Chest. — *The  breathing  is  united  with  violent  oppres-
sion of  the  chest.  Arrest  of  breathing  when  going  up  stairs.
The  chest  feels  oppressed  and  full,  when  staying  in  the
open  air. Tightness  of  the  chest,  especially  during  mo-
tion, for  several  days,  with  aching  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
*  Oppression  of  the  chest,  (a.  24  h.) Asthma,  as  if  the
chest  had  been  spasmodically  constricted,  (a.  8d.)  Asthma
and  shortness  of  breath,  with  congestion  of  blood  to  the
chest,  (a.  20  d.) A  stitch  in  the  chest,  here  and  there,
when  breathing. Stitches  in  and  below  the  chest,  when
breathing,  for  two  hours,  (after  supper.) Stitches  in  the
sternum,  when  taking  a  deep  inspiration. When  breath-
ing dartings  and  stitches  in  the  left  side. Sensation  as  if
a  quantity  of  air  were  ascending  the  trachea  with  a  wave-
like motion,  and  rushed  out  at  the  mouth. Pain  in  the
chest,  wiih  cough,  during  a  deep  inspiration. Pain  in  the
chest,  the  first  6  days,  so  violent,  that  it.  was  impossible  tor
him  to  lie  on  the  left  side  ;  afterwards  cough  with  green


LICOFODII  POLLEN.


119


morning-expectoration. From  time  to  time  he  experiences
painful  darlings  into  the  chest. Tension  of  the  chest  (in  a
few  h.) Sensation  of  tension  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest.
Tension  in  the  chest,  especially  the  right  side,  when  lading
an  inspiration. Violent  tension  and  pressure  in  the  right
halt  of  the  chest. Tension  and  pressure  on  the  chest,  op-
pressing the  breathing,  alternating  with  distension  of  the
abdomen,  in  the  evening,  (a.  4  d.) Pressure  in  the  chest,
(a.  10  d.) Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Pressure
on  a  small  spot  of  the  true  ribs,  below  the  left  axilla.  Pres-
sure as  from  a  button,  on  the  right,  true  ribs. Feeling  of
pressure  and  sore  pain  in  the  chest. Dull  pressure  in  the
left  side  of  the  chest. Oppressive,  rheumatic  feeling  in
the  chest,  relieved  by  empty  eructations. Pressure  and
anguish  in  the  sub-praecordial  region,  passing  over  into  a
tendency  to  be  sad  ;  when  extending  the  trunk  after  violent
exercise. Pressure  in  the  chest ;  it  feels  full  and  oppress-
ed, (7.  d.) Fulness  in  the  chest  (and  stomach,)  after  a
meal. Fulness  in  the  chest,  at  noon,  as  if  it  w.ere  oppress-
ed. Oppression  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  were  too  full.  The
chest  feels  oppressed  and  raw  internally. Heaviness  on
the  chest. Slight  anguish  in  the  chest. Cutting  pain  in
the  right  side  of  the  chest. *  Stitches  in  the  left,  side  of

an  inspiration,  (a.  7  d.)  Stitches
m  the  lelt  side  of  the  chest,  extending  to  the  back,  they
almost  hinder  breathing. A  number  of  stitches  in  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  from  time  to  time. Tearing  stitch  in
the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  independent  of  breathing
when  at  rest. Pulsative  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest. Pulsative  tearing  below  the  right  axilla.  Pulsative
tearing  in  the  precordial  region. Tearing  in  the  region  of
the  lelt  clavicle. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  side,
with  occasional  jerks. Pulsative  or  gurgling  sensation  in
the  precordial  region,  beside  the  beals  of  the  heart.  Vio-
lent palpitation  of  the  heart,  early  in  the  morning,  from  4
to  5  o  clock  (a.  48  h.) *  Sudden,  violent  palpkation  of
the  Heart,  alter  having  become  wearied,  with  yawning.
Tremulous  palpitation  of  the  heart,  (8.  d.) Itching  on  the
chest,  (a  3  and  7  d.) Stitches  in  the  nipples.  Swellino-
ot  one  breast,  which  was  painful  when  touched.  Hard
burning  nodosity  in  the  left  mamma  and  under  the  arm


120  LICOPODII  POLLEN.

Blood  and  viscid  water  ooze  out  of  one  niple,  especially
when  touching  it.  .  ,

Back.— Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  so  violent  that
it  contracted  his  chest,  with  pressure  of  the  stomach  and
constriction  of  the  abdomen,  (in  3  d.) Pain  in  the  small
of  the  back,  when  lying  upon  the  back,  with  great  weak-
ness, (3.  d.) Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  extending  down
to  the  feet. Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  he
dares  not  sit  straight,  (a.  5  d.) *  Stiffness  in  the  small  o
the  back. Aching  in  the  small  of  the  back,  (a.  4  d.)
*  Drawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  for  17  days.  Tear-
ing in  the  small  of  the  back,  in  a  transverse  direction,  when
sitting  straight. Stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,  burg-
ling sensation,  a  little  on  the  left  side  of  the  small  of  the
back. Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  the  flesh  were
loose. Chilliness  in  the  small  of  the  back. Large  swell-
ing in  the  psoas-muscle,  very  painful  when  moving  the
body  ;  (Silicea  cured  it.) Back  and  sma  1  of  the  back  be-
come stiff  and  inflexible  from  riding  on  horseback,  walk-
ing and  stooping  ;  it  gives  him  much  trouble  to  raise  himself.
Stiffness,  from  the  scapulae  towards  the  back.  The  spinal  co-
lumn had  become  curbed  in  a  child  of  two  years,  for  several
weeks.  At  times  the  scapulas  behind  are  violently  and  invo-
luntarily drawn  to  one  another  ;  at  times  the  pectoral  mus-
cles in  front. Pain  in  the  back,  extending  to  the  shoulders
and  Ihe  small  of  the  back. Pressure  m  the  back  below
the  scapulae  (5.  d.) Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  lett  kid-
rTey PPr  slurein  the  region  of  the  right  kidney.  Pressure
in  L  back,  above  both  hips. Tension,  with  pressure  in
he  left  scapula,  as  if  caused  by  a  vesicatory. Rheumat  c
tension  in  the  back,  and  the  nghts.de  of  ^ the  ohe* .more
violent  during  an  inspiration. Pinching  in  t he  back.
Pinching  and  aching  pains  in  the  right  side  of  the  back
•Drawing  pain  in  the  back,  for  several  hours,  (4.  d )
Drawing  pain  in  the  back,  when  sitting. Drawing  m  the
bac£  between  the  scapulae,  (a.  U  d.) Drawing  m  and
near  the  right  scapula,  in  the  evening,  (a.  10  a.)  Kneu
mat  c  pa  n  in  the  left  scapula,  which  made  him  unable  to
™ se  his  arm  to  the  head. Tearing  near  the  dorsa  spine,
Slow  the  »capute.  *  Tearing  on  the  right  side  of  the  dor-
u d  spine. Tearing  in  the  reg.on  of  the  right  kidney.


LTC0P0D11  POLLEN.  '1J>1

Stitches  in  the  back,  towards  the  small  of  the  back,  when
sitting. Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  kidney.  Stitch-
ing pain  in  the  back,  extending  to  the  right  scapula.
Stitches  between  the  scapulas. Fine  stitches  in  the  middle
of  the  back. Repeated  stitches  in  the  back,  over  the  re-
gion of  the  right  kidney. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
back,  when  taking  an  inspiration. Spasmodic  stitches,  in
paroxysms,  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  making  motion  im-
possible for  a  few  minutes. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the
left  side  of  the  back,  extending  to  the  left  hypochondrium
Gugghng  below  the  left  scapula.  Continual  beating  in  the
back. Chilliness  in  the  back,  for  several  days.  Burnino-
as  of  red-hot  coal  between  the  scapulaa. Burning  in  the
skin,  below  ihe  left  shoulder. Pressure,  afterwards  burn-
ing in  the  upper  region  of  the  right  scapula. Burning  in
the  back. Itching  of  the  back,  (a.  3  d.) Violent  itching
of  the  back,  towards  the  neck. Violent  itching  of  the  back
in  the  evening,  (a.  15  d.) Itching  in  the  upper  part  of  the
back,  with  eruption,  (a.  37  d.)

Neck.—*  Large  pimples  betwe.en  the  scapula  and  in
the  nape  of  the  neck,  with  a  burning  sensation. Pajn  in
the  nape  of  the  neck,  when  bending  the  head  backwards.
When  stooping,  the  nape  of  the  neck  feels  too  short  ThP
posterior  cervical  muscles  feel  stretched. Stiffness  of  the
neck  with  gloominess  of  the  head,  (a.  5  d.) Stiff  neck
Painful  stiffness  of  the  left  side  of  the  neck.  Pressure
with  tens.on,  posteriorly  and  on  both  sides  of  the  neck
Drawing  pain  in  the  leftcervical  muscles.  Drawing-daw
ing  pinchmg  along  both  sides  of  the  neck  from  below  Un-
wards. Darting  pain  in  the  right  cervical  muscles  from
below  upwards Drawing  pain  in  the  external  cervS
muscles,  extending  to  the  shoulder  and  the  elbow.  Tear
ing  through  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  from  the  face  and
down  the  arm,  as ar  as  the  fingers. A  sort  of  paraivsis
of  he  cervical  muscles,  the  head  fell  forwards  as "  odd
fall  off,  with  sensation  of  vertigo  for  six  hours,  but  whhout
any  disposiuon  to  he  down. Involuntary  noddino  0 the
head,  alternately  to  the  right  and  left  side.  InvoIuntarS
noddmg  of  the  head,  first  slow,  then  quicker. Cc  " a rv
stretcbmg  of  the  head  now  forwards,  now  backwards  1/
voluntary  and  alternate  stretching  and  contract  of  £


J22  LYCOPODIl  POLLEN.

cervical  muscles.  Swelling  of  the  external  and  internal
cervical  muscles.  Hard  swelling  of  the  glands  on  both
sides  of  the  neck.  Stitches  in  the  cervical  glands,  during
deglutition,  extending  to  the  ears.  The  glands  increase  in
sizDe  and  hardness  from  the  cold  feel.  *  Swelling  of  the
cervical  glands.  Throbbing  and  darting  in  the  goitre,
(in  a  few  hours.)  Large  clusters  of  red  pimples  round  the
neck,  with  violent  itching,  (a.  £S  d.)

Superior Extremities— Swelling  of  the  axillary
glands. Large  boil  in  the  left  axilla. Sharp  pressure  on
a  small  spot  of  the  left  shoulder,  posteriorly,  close  to  the
neck. Rheumatic  tension  in  the  right  shoulder-joint.
Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  beginning  at  the  neck,  only
in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,  and  at  night. *  Tearing
in  the  shoulder  aw-,  elbow-joints,  when  at  rest,  not  during
motion. Violent  tearing  in  the  shoulder-joint,  beginning
at  the  neck,  when  in  perfect  rest,  day  or  night ;  the  pain
may  be  relieved  by  lying  upon  the  affected  side  ;  the  pain
is  worse  in  day-time  when  that  part  of  her  becomes  cold,
and  goes  off  by  motion,  even  when  merely  knitting  or
sewinV Stitches  in  the  shoulder  and  tearing  in  the  arm,
(a  27°d  ) Stitches  in  the  shoulders  and  ihe  left  lower
arm  (a.  8  d.) Paralytic  pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  which
prevented  him  from  lifting  the  arm  high. Pain,  as  from
bruises,  of  the  right  shoulder-joint,  scapula,  and  upper
arm Involuntary  starling  upwards  alternately  of  one  or
the  other  shoulder. *  Painless  jerks  in  the  weak  arm,  at
ni<rht. Spasmodic  jerking  of  the  arms. Drawing  in
thS  left  arm,  apparently  in  the  nerve. Drawing  pain  in
the  bones  of  the  arm,  as  far  as  the  fingers. The  elbows
of  the  child  become  bent ;  he  dares  not  either  to  stretch  or
to  touch  them,  on  account  of  the  pain. The  arm,  where
the  axillary  glands  are  swollen,  goes  to  sleep. VV  eakness
of  the  arms  when  at  work. The  arms  feel  paralysed  ,  he
has  to  let  them  hang  down  ;  ihey  fee  strong  when  at
work  or  during  motion. Sudden  paralysis  of  the  right
arm  in  the  evening,  as  if  caused  by  apoplexy,  (a.  5  d.)
Switchings  in  the"  left  upper  arm. Twitching*  ol  the
muscles  of  the  upper  arms. Drawing  in  the  left  upper
arm Tearing  in  the  right  upper  arm. Uohing  ol  the
upper  arms, d.) Tearing  in  tho  elbow-joint,  only


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


123


during  motion. Tearing  in  the  region  of  the  right  olecra-
non process. Tearing  in  the  left  elbow,  down  to  the
wrist-joint. Tearing,  with  pressure,  in  and  about  the
right  elbow. Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  right  lower  arm,
early  in  the  morning. Tearing  in  the  fore-arms,  down  to
the  hands,  from  washing. Tearing  in  the  left  lower  arm
near  the  bend  of  the  elbow. Tearing  in  the  ulnar  nerve,
down  to  the  hand. Hot  feeling  in  the  lower  part  of  the
fore-arm. Large,  inflamed  swelling,  like  erysipelas,  on
the  fore-arm  below  the  elbow,  passing  into  suppuration
like  a  boil. Biting-itching  pimples  on  the  lower  arms,
filled  with  pus. Cramp  in  the  hand,  the  whole  day.
Tearing  in  the  right  hand  and  the  two  middle-fingers,  only
at  night  when  holding  them  below  the  feather-bed  cover ;
the  pain  ceases  when  laying  those  parts  upon  the  cover,
(a.  13  d.) Tearing  between  the  right  wrist  and  the
knuckle  of  the  thumb. Tearing  in  the  right  hand,  between
thumb  and  index. Tearing  in  the  hands,  towards  the
fingers. Tearing  in  the  outer  side  of  the  left  hand  and  in
the  knuckle  of  the  little  finger,  towards  the  wrist.  Tear-
ing in  the  right  palm,  below  the  middle  fingers.  Tearing
in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand,  with  burning  and  itching  in
the  skin,  close  below  the  fingers. Dull  tearing  in  the
wrist-joints. Stitches  in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand,  (a.  21  d.)
Violent  darlings  in  the  right  hand. Involuntary  shaking
of  the  hands. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  right  wrist-
joint. Continually  cold  hands. The  hands  go  to  sleep,
early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed. #The  hands  go  to
sleep  after  a  long  talk. Her  hands  are  hot  all  the  time  :
this  is  very  disagreeable  to  her. Swelling  and  heat  of
the  right  hand,  in  the  evening. Feeling  of  heat  in  the  left
hand,  with  anxiousness. Red  swelling  of  the  right  hand
extending  to  the  finger-joints,  without  pain,  for  several
days. Sweaty  palms  of  the  hands. Great  dryness  of  the
skin  or the  hands. Itching  pimples  on  the  hands,  (a.  7  d.)
fcmall  boils  on  the  hands,  with  stinging  pains  when  touching
them. Warts  are  forming  on  the  hands. At.  times  the  fin-
gers set  themselves  apart  one  from  the  other  involuntarily,
at  times  they  become  involuntarily  clenched. The  middle
linger  becomes  contracted  and  is  drawn  to  one  side  with-
out  any  pain.  .  Involuntary  twitching  of  the  fingers,  while


124


LTC0P0DII  POLLEN.


askep. Involuntary  twitching  of  the  left  index-finger.
The  knuckles  are  painful  when  pressed  upon,  without
either  redness  or  swelling. Tearing  in  the  joint  of  the
thumb,  he  cannot  bend  it. Tearing  in  the  left  thumb.
Tearing  in  the  tip  of  the  right  thumb. Tearing  in  the
ball  of°the  left  thumb. Tearing  in  the  middle-fingers  of
the  right  hand. Tearing  in  the  joint of  the  right
middle-finger  towards  the  tip. Tearing  in  the  tip  of
the  right  middle-finger. Violent  lancinating  tearing  in  the
tip  and  under  the  nail  of  the  left  middle-finger.  Pain,
as  from  a  sprain  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  fourth  finger,
when  clenching  the  hand. The  two  last  fingers  go  to
sleep,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking  up.  Deadness,
coldness,  and  numbness  of  the  two  last  fingers,  early  in
the  morning  when  waking  up  ;  nevertheless  he  is  able  to
move  them. Deadness  qf  two  fingers,  early  in  the  morn
ing,  for  half  an  hour,  with  blue  nails,  (a.  31  d.)  Hot
feeling  in  the  fingers  which  appear  cold,  externally.  Red-
ness, inflammation  and  swelling  of  all  the  joints  oj  the
fingers. Redness,  inflammation  and  swelling  of  tne
middle  joints  of  the  fingers,  with  some  swelling  of  the
hands. Inflammation^ of  a  scratched  spot  on  the  finger.
Inflammation  and  pain  of  the  right-middle  finger,  owing  to
a  small  panaris. Itching  of  the  fingers. Violent,  almost
painful  itching  of  both  the  anterior  joints  of  the  right
index-finger,  such  as  is  felt  in  an  ulcerating  wound,  with
some  redness,  and  not  going  off  by  friction. Itching  and
stinging  in  some  frozen  fingers. Itching  of  the  fingers
which  had  been  frozen  formerly. Burning  m  hands  and
finders,  with  redness  of  the  fingers,  as  if  they  were  frozen.
Chilblain  on  the  little  finger,  with  redness  and  violent
itching An  ulcer  on  the  left  index-finger  becoming
larger?  with  violent  pains  which  prevent  him  from  sleep-
ing  in  the  evening. Pimple  on  the  right  thumb  Itching
pimples  between  the  fingers. Wart-shaped  tubercles  on
the  index-finger,  going  off  soon.

Inferior  Extremities.— Itching,  with  violent  stitches
on  the  right  half  of  the  nates.  In  the  left  nates,  burning
as  in  a  wound.  Tearing  in  the  left,  nates,  with  slight
pressure.  Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nates,  under
the  right  hip.  Pressure  on  the  hips,  beginning  in  the  small


LYC0P0DII  POLLEN.


125


of  the  back. Pain  in  the  muscles  surrounding  the  hip-
joint,  when  pressing  upon  them,  when  sitting  or  lying
down  ;  does  not  hinder  walking. Pressing  in  the  region
of  the  left  hip. Tearing  in  the  left  hip-joint.  Rheumatic
tension  in  the  left  hip. Tension  and  tearing  in  the  left
hip. Paralytic  pain  in  the  hip-joint,  posteriorly,  when
stooping  and  when  rising  from  a  chair  after  having  been
seated  for  a  time. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  hip,  to-
wards the  small  of  the  back,  when  rising,  so  that  he  had
to  limp,  for  two  days. Boil  on  the  nates. In  the  right
limb  he  felt  a  pain  every  four  days,  from  the  hip-joint  down
to  the  foot,  which  obliged  him  to  limp  when  walking.
Drawing  in  the  limbs  from  top  to  bottom,  when  at  rest,
better  when  taking  exercise. The  limbs  go  to  sleep  in
day-time,  when  sitting  down,  (a.  6,  7  d.) Uneasiness  in
the  thighs  and  legs,  when  lying  down,  (a.  9  d.) A  good
deal  of  uneasiness  in  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  evening  ;  he
had  to  move  them  frequently. Great  uneasiness  in'the
lower  limbs,  in  the  evening,  previous  to  going  to  bed,  less
so  when  in  bed. Jerking,  and  jerking  sort  of  trembling  in
the  lower  limbs. Involuntary,  violent  shaking,  first  of  the
right  afterwards  of  the  left  limb. Cold  and  heavy  limbs.
While  walking,  the  lower  limbs  appeared  to  become  in-
sensible ;  (although  they  were  warm ;)  the  upper  part  of
the  body  appeared  to  be  in  danger  of  falling  over.  The
lower  limbs  felt  tired  and  powerless,  as  if  they  had  been
bruised. Soreness  between  the  limbs,  high  up  ;  she  is
scarcely  able  to  walk. The  inner  side  of  the  left  thiah
feels  sore,  with  some  biting  itching  extending  as  far  as  the
gemtal  organs. Pain  of  the  left  side  of  the  thigh,  as  if  it
had  been  wounded;  burning  afterwards. Continual  jac-
titation ot  the  muscles  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  right
thigh. Cramp  in  the  right  thigh,  extending  to  the  knee  :

nf  th  yrane  t0/P  UP  StairS'  Involuntary  spreading

of  the  thighs,  followed  by  pressing  them  together,  with  an
erection  afterwards.  Tension  in  the  femora  and  calves,
mostly _when  sitting  Drawing  pain  in  the  posterior  sur-
face of  the  thigh.  Drawing  and  burning  in  the  thigh,
U\V  u  D"WlnS  and  aching  P^n  in  the  fore  part  of  the'
Jen  thigh.  Tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  thifih
I  earing,  downwards,  in  the  left  thigh,  mostly  when  silting*


126  LYCOPODII  POLLEN.

especially  when  bending  the  knee.  Tearing  in  the  middle
of  the  right  thigh. Tearing  in  the  thigh,  in  the  evening,
accompanied  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  parts  were  exco-
riated, (9.  d.) Pulsative  tearing,  with  a  paralytic  feeling,
in  the  outer  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  when  walking,  (1.  d.)
Stitches  in  the  left  thigh,  when  setting  the  foot  down.
Pain,  as  from  a  bruise,  in  the  right  thigh,  just  above  the
knee-joint,  increased  by  contact  and  motion. Pain  in  the
left  hip-joint,  during  motion,  as  if  he  had  made  a  mis-step.
Cold  thrills  along  the  left  thigh,  by  day. After  walking,
the  skin  of  the  thighs  is  painful,  as  if  it  were  excoriated ;
this  pain  brought  on  convulsions  of  the  limb,  for  one  hour.
A  large  boil  on  the  thigh,  above  the  knee. Early  in  the
morning,  when  rising  from  the  bed,  the  knees  feel  painful,
as  if  they  would  break ;  also  during  motion.  Stiffness
in  the  knee-joint,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  as
after  a  long  journey  on  foot. The  left  knee  is  curbed,  the
child  is  unable  to  stretch  it,  from  pain. Tension  around
the  knees,  as  if  the  parts  around  were  too  short ;  she  was
unable  to  set  her  foot  down. Fine  dartings  in  the  knee,
several  evenings. Drawing  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,
(a  22  d  ) Great  uneasiness  in  both  knees,  at  night,  when
lying  in  the  bed,  (a.  8  d.) *  Tearing  in  the  knees  and
ankles,  with  pain,  even  when  touching  them.  Unusual
lassitude  in  the  knees. Sore  pain  in  the  knees  and  other
parts  of  the  limbs. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  knee-
joint. Swelling  of  the  knees. Sweat  of  the  swelling
about  the  knees. *  Itching  in  the  bend  of  the  right  knee,
(6  d.) Pain  in  the  side  of  the  tibia,  as  if  it  were  in  the
bone,  when  touching  the  part,  (a.  13  d.) Sensation  in  the
leg,  as  if  something  were  firmly  tied  around  it. Cramp  in
the  left  calf,  when  sitting. *  Cramp  in  the  calf,  at  night
also  in  day-time,  extorting  cries  from  him  ;  when  sitting
with  his  knees  bent. Frequent  attacks  of  a  darting  pain
in  the  leg,  below  the  knee. Drawing  in  the  legs,  at  night.
Drawing  in  the  leg  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee,  at  5  or  6
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  for  two  hours Drawing  in  the
rio-ht  leg,  in  the  evening,  and  occasional  starting.  Uraw-
•  "ng  and  earing  in  the  left  leg,  (a.  90  d  ) Tearing  in  the
left  tibia. Tearing  in  the  left  tibia,  below  the  calf.  Vio-
lent tearing,  before  midnight,  extending  from  the  knee,


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


127


through  the  calf,  down  to  the  feci  ;  she  had  to  sit  up,  and
was  unable  to  go  to  sleep. '1 'earing  in  the  legs  and  toes.
Rheumatic  diawing  in  the  left  leg,  at  night,  when  waking
up. Sharp,  darting  tearing,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  left
tibia,  ui  the  evening  when  in  bed Violent  tearing  in  the
left  leg,  darting  with  a  jerk. Lancinating  tearing  in  the
leg  below  the  knee,  which  is  at  the  same  lime  fell  in  the
thigh. Sensation  as  it  the  legs  were  swollen  and  heavy.
Great  heaviness  of  the  legs,  with  uneasiness  in  the  same.
Swelling  of  the  legs  extending  beyond  ihe  knees,  with
large  red,  hot  patches,  painful  and  burning,  especially  on
the  knee  and  ankle  ;  she  is  unable  to  set  her  foot  down,
from  pain  anil  stitches j  in  the  afternoon  these  symptoms  are
accompanied  by  shuddering  and  constipation. Red  spots
on  the  legs,  resembling  mosquito- bites,  going  and  coming.
Violent  ltchingof  the  calves. down  to  the  ankles.  Theankles
are  painful,  at  night,  (a.  10  d.) Pain  in  the  ball  of  the
right  foot,  when  beginning  to  walk. Pain  in  the  heel,  when
setting  the  foot,  down,  as  if  a  little  stone  were  underneath
it. Straining  sensation  around  the  ankles,  (a.  some  d.)
Burning  tension  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  near  the  big  toe.
Drawing  in  the  foot,  below  the  ankle,  with  heat  in  the  parts.
Pressing  in  the  foot,  which  had  been  affected  formerly,  (as
if  it  would  break  open  again,  (a.  9  d.) Tearing  under  the
left  heel. Tearing  near  the  heel,  (6.  d  ) Tearing  in  the
heels  and  in  the  ball,  (12.  d.) Pricking  in  the  balfof  the
foot,  when  stepping  upon  it,  and  when  pressing  upon  it.
Stitches  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  (a.  20  d.) Pric  kings
in  both  heels. Prickings  in  the  feet,  when  walking  in  the
open  air. Violent  cutting  stitches  in  ihe  left  side  of  the
heel. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  right  tarsui  joint.
Pain,  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  outer  malleoli!--,  also  when  at
rest. Sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  lefi  tarsal  joint,  (a.  4  d.)
Pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  in  the  ball  of  the
right  foot. Pain  as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  in  the
soles  of  the  feet,  when  setting  the  foot  down  or  when  sit-
ting,  with  a  burning  sensation.  Burning  in  the  feet,  (a  2tSd  )
Nightly  burning  in  the  soles  of  the  feet. Great  weight  of
the  feet,  (a.  6  d.) Swelling  around  the  ankles,  (a  6  d  )
Swelling  of  the  feet.,  also  during  the  menses  Considerable
swelling  of  the  right  foot,  (the  first  days.)  Swelling  of  the


128


LYC0P0DI1  POLLEN.


left  foot,  with  stitches  in  the  toes,  when  stepping  upon  it.
Swelling  of  the  feet,  with  stitches  in  the  ankles,  mostly
when  waking. Swelling  of  the  clorsa  of  the  feet,  (the  first
days.) The  swelling  of  the  feet  increases  into  ascites,
with  swelling  of  the  genital  organs,  oppressed  breathing,
and  scanty  micturition  with  pressing,  (a.  10  d.)  Both
feet  are  numb  and  have  gone  to  sleep,  as  far  as  the  calves,
at  night. The  left  heel  feels  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep.
His  feet  feel  cold  easily.  Cold  feet,  constantly.  Coldness,
first,  of  the  right,  afterwards  also,  of  the  left  foot,  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  for  one  hour. Coldness  of  the  right
foot,  and  heat  of  the  left,  (a.  2  d.) »  Cold,  sweaty  feet.
Sweaty  feet. *  Profuse  sweat  on  the  feet,  until  they  be-
come sore. Itching  around  the  tarsal  joint. Tumours  on
the  borders  of  the  foot,  painful  when  walking.  Callosities
in  the  heel,  with  soreness. Rhagades  in  the  heel.  The
toes  are  involuntarily  extended  and  contracted  again.  Pres-
sure on  the  ball  of  the  big  toe. Tearing  in  the  first  three
toes  of  the  right  foot. Tearing  and  drawing  in  a  corn  on
the  little  toe,  painful  when  touched. Stitches  in  thebig  toe
of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening. Stitches  in  the  big  toe,
in  the  evening. Stitches  in  the  big  toe,  and  afterwards  in
the  sole. Stitches,  mostly  early  in  the  morning,  in  the  lit-
tle toe  of  the  right  foot,  looking  red  and  frozen. Sore  pain
in  the  ball  of  the  big  toe  when  walking;  it  feels  as  if  it
were  excoriated. Sore  pain  between  the  toes,  as  from  ex-
coriation, (a.  28  d.) Burning  sore  feeling  of  the  toes,  as
if  sand  were  upon  them. Burning-stmging  sore  feeling  ot
the  toes. Inflammatory  pain  around  the  nail  of  the  big
toe. Corns  come  on  in  a  fortnight. Stitches  in  the  corns,
(a.  13  d.) Stitches  in  the  corns,  with  sore  feeling.

General  Symptoms.— All  the  limbs  are  painful  when
touched.  All  the  soft  parts  of  the  body  are  painful,  when
touched  or  pressed  against.  Every  thing,  on  which  she  is
sitting  or  lying,  feels  too  hard  for  her.  Pain,  in  various
parts  of  the  trunk,  as  if  some  muscles  were  spasmodically
contracted,  and  then  extended  again.  Intermitting,  cramp-
like drawing  in  the  knees,  fore-arms,  hands  and  fingers.
Drawing  with  pressure,  in  all  the  joints,  especially  the
knees.  Drawing  in  the  left  hand  and  tarsus,  early  in  the
morning. Drawing  and  tension  in  the  carpal  and  tarsal


LYC0P0DII  POLLEN.


129


joints,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed. Drawing  in  the
limbs,  every  other  afternoon,  and  also  across  the  face.
Drawing  at  times  between  the  scapulae,  at  limes  in  the
right  limb,  at  times  in  the  chest. Quickly  passing  tearing
in  various  parts  of  the  body. Pinching  pains  in  different
parts  of  the  body. Violent  stitches  in  the  thoracic  cavity
and  the  umbilical  region,  arresting  the  breath,  (10.  d.)  Stiff-
ness of  all  the  joints. Stiffness  of  the  limbs  and  the  small
of  the  back  ;  audible  cracking  in  the  joints,  when  bending
them. Stiffness  of  the  arms  and  lower  limbs  with  insensi-
bility and  numbness  ;  he  is  unable  to  walk  without  fall-
ing, or  to  eat  alone,  since  he  is  no  more  able  to  use  his
hands. Stiffness  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  upper  part  of
the  body,  and  the  whole  trunk  ;  he  is  so  stiff  that  he  is  un-
able to  stir. During  the  paroxysm  of  the  pains  she  is  ob-
liged to  walk  about  and  to  weep  ;  she  is  unable  to  remain
quiet.  Her  ailments  increase  in  the  afternoon  at  4  o'clock  ;
but  at  8  o'clock  in  the  evening,  she  feels  better,  with  the
exception  of  her  weakness. He  feels  better  in  the  open
air  than  in  a  room,  where  he  is  frequently  unable  to  endure
from  heat  and  uneasiness. Desire  to  go  into  the  open  air.
Aversion  to  stay  in  the  room. She  is  extremely  sensitive
to  the  cold,  open  air. Feverish  sensitiveness  to  cold  air,
especially  after  a  meal. Sort  of  anguish  and  attack  of  gid-
diness, when  walking  in  the  open  air. Severe  obtusion^  of
the  head,  after  having  been  long  in  the  open  air.  Heavi-
ness of  the  lower  limbs,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Constrictive  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  from
walking  in  the  open  air. The  oppression  of  the  chest  is
very  much  increased  by  walking  in  the  open  air,  and  ac-
companied by  loud  palpitation  of  the  heart. Heat  in  the
eyes  and  palms  of  the  hands  after  walking  in  the  open  air.
When  walking  ,n  the  open  air  but  a  little,  he  perspires  ex-
cessively and  becomes  quite  weak. *  Disposed  to  catch
Emri, V f  Skln  ?f  the  Wh°le  bocjy  is  hot  and  dry  ;  hot

Sack *  It^  m  \  m°Tn'mA  i,chinS  of  the  head  and
of  tit  Ail  J I*r lfucaused  by  fleas>  of  Afferent  places'
of  the  skm  and  of  the  herpetic  eruptions. Prickling  itch-
ing of  different  parts  of  the  skin.F  Stitches  in  Sent
parts  of  the  body.  Insufferable  tingling  stitches  in  th  sma
of  the  back  and  ,„  other  places. Batting  stitches  from


130


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


the  neck  lo  the  right  foot.  Smarting  and  burning
itching  over  the  whole  body.  Burning  sensation  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  skin,  on  the  back,  arms,  etc.  Violent
itching  of  the  lower  limbs,  the  back,  the  nates,  in  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed,  with  blotches  after  the  scratching,  going
off"  again  very  speedily.  Pimples,  partly  itching,  partly
painful,  on  the  occiput,  small  of  the  back  and  nates.
Large,  red  spots  on  the  legs,  neither  painful  nor  itching.
Large,  bright-red  spots  on  the  epigastrium,  around  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  and  on  the  joint  of  the  thumb,  with  itch-
ing and  burning.  Itching  hepatic  spots.  Small,  herpetic,
itching  spots  on  both  sides  of  the  neck,  and  upon  the  back.

*  Viofent  itching  of  a  herpetic  eruption  on  the  tibia.

*  Large  boil  on  the  left  lower  arm,  making  the  whole  arm
stiff,  and  another  boil  on  the  left  half  of  the  nates,  (in  a
few  days.) *  The  painless  ulcers  bleed  when  bandaging
them,  and  are  then  affected  with  painful  stitches.  Large
boil  appears  on  the  left  scapula,  with  inflammation  all
around,  and  burning  stitches,  with  alternate  chilliness  and
heat  of  the  body- Appears  to  favor  the  ramolhssement
and  curvature  of"  the  bones. Sensation  in  the  bones,  as  if
they  contained  no  marrow. She  feels  a  heaviness  in  all
her  limbs *  The  whole  body  feels  bruised,  especially  m
the  evening. He  feels  a  heaviness  in  all  his  limbs,  he  is
not  disposed  to  work,  he  is  out  of  humor,  a  good  deal  ot
heat  rises  to  his  face  from  time  to  time. *  Drawing  and
stretching  in  all  his  limbs. Uncomfortableness  in  the
whole  body. He  feels,  early  in  the  morning,  as  if  he  had
spent  a  sleepless  night. Desire  to  move  about  Dis-
agreeable sensation  of  uneasiness  in  the  body,  when  sit-
ting, which  does  not  permit  him  to  continue  writing ;  he
has  to  jump  up  and  to  breathe  deeply  ;  his  chest  feels  op-
pressed. Great  agitation  of  the  blood,  in  the  evening  in-
creasing until  it  becomes  a  sensation  of  trembling  Con-
siderable orgasm  of  the  blood,  towards  evening.  Orgasm
of  the  blood;  agitation  in  the  whole  circulatory  apparatus.
Disagreeable  feeling  of  heat  over  the  whole  body,  every-
S  i  he  wears  is  to°o  heavy  and  hot:  he  has  frequently  to
breathe  deeply,  he  feels  oppressed  ;  his  hair  stands  upon
end!  -  d  fe  fsas  if  it  wei/drawn  together  into  one  cluster
(a  24  h  ) Internal  restlessness,  she  feels  as  if  she  must


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


131


kick  about  will)  hands  and  feet,  accompanied  by  a  feeling
of  fainlish  weakness,  (during  her  headache*)  Sensation
as  if  the  circulation  of  the  blood  were  arrested.  Frequent
attacks  of  a  very  painful  sensation  as  if  he  became  quite
cold  internally,  as  if  the  blood  gradually  ceased  to  be  warm.
Pain  in  the  chest,  with  nausea,  as  if  she  would  vomit,  she
then  lost  her  voice,  was  only  able  to  speak  in  a  low  tone  ;
all  this  disappeared  again  alter  an  eructation.

Fits,  Spasms. — Several  daily  attacks  of  half  an  hour
each,  first,  of  griping  and  grasping  in  the  back,  afler  which
the  side  becomes  affected  with  a  sort  of  stitches  ;  ibis  is
accompanied  with  obscuration  of  sight,  and  she  has  to  lie
down  wherever  she  may  be. After  a  vexation  he  be-
comes quite  weak,  as  if  he  would  fall  over,  with  palpita-
tion of  the  heart  and  trembling,  the  whole  forenoon,  (a.
14  d.) He  has  a  vexation,  after  which  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach becomes  suddenly  affected,  and  his  limbs  feel  heavy
as  if  they  were  made  of  lead. Involuntary  jerkings  in
various  places,  which  affected  her  a  good  deal  Involun-
tary turning  and  twisting  of  the  whole  body;  this  makes
him  pant,  and  makes  his  face  hot  and  red.  Involuntary
alternate  extension  and  contraction  of  the  muscles  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  body,  without  pain,  and  with  full
consciousness,  in  paroxysms,  one  eve/y  seven  days,  for
the  period  of  eight  weeks. Spasmodic  contraction  and
extension  of  the  limbs,  al  nost  without  any  pain.  Epileptic
fit ;  screaming,  foam  at  the  mouth,  loss  of  consciousness,
he  kicks  about  with  arms  and  limbs,  he  then  imagined  he
would  have  to  die,  and  complained  of  great ''anguish
about  the  heart,  (a.  39  d  ) Epileptic  fit ;  his  left  arm
was  bent  upwards,  his  fingers  clenched  for  a  couple  of
minutes  ; he  then  was  without  his  senses,  tore  things,
kicked  about  with  arms  and  legs,  screamed,  had  foam&at
the  mouth  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour;  he  then  lay  like  a
dead  being,  motionless  ;  then  he  began  to  mutter.  Epi-
leptic fit;  visible  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  whole
of  the  right,  lower  limb  ;  the  pit  of  the  stomach  became
affected,  he  began  to  scream,  without  any  consciousness,
kicked  about  with  arms  and  legs,  had  foam  at  the  mouth  ;
then  he  was  motionless  for  half  an  hour;  upon  cold'
water  being  introduced  into  his  mouth,  he  blew  it  out


132


LYC0P0DTI  POIXEtf.


again,  and  his  senses  returned. Fainting  fits  when  lying
down,  with  vanishing  of  the  senses  and  obscuration  of
sight,  without  any  desire  to  diminish  this  state  of  things
by  motion,  (1 .  d.) Total  relaxation  of  the  nervous  system ;
hanging  down  of  the  lower  jaw,  slow  breathing  through  the
mouth,  the  eyes  are  half  open,  as  if  covered  with  a  gauze.
Faintishness  at  certain  hours,  every  day,  mostly  in  the
evening- She  fell  down  suddenly,  without  vertigo.  Sud-
den failing  of  strength,  like  a  swoon  5  she  had  to  hold  on
to  something  ;  accompanied  by  dimness  of  sight,  for  half
an  hour. Tremor  of  the  limbs,  (a.  5  h.) Attacks  of
trembling,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed. Drawing  trem-
bling in  all  the  limbs. Trembling,  without  sensation  of
cold,  in  the  afternoon. He  becomes  thin  and  pale.  *  Great
thinness,  (this  is  relieved  by  Graphites.) She  feels  quite
wretched  (with  a  sore  throat)  and  has  a  yellow-gray  com-
plexion. Walking,  and  continual  sitting  while  writing,
is  very  ,roublesome  to  her,  and  brings  on  profuse  sweat.
Sudden  'weakness  when  sitting. Feels  very  tired  from
a  little  exertion,  and  cannot  recruit  his  strength  in  anv
position. Desire  for  rest,  without  feeling  tired.  He  would
like  to  lie  down  all  the  time,  and  when  he  lies  down,  he
falls  asleep  immediately. Weariness,  especially  early  m
the  morning. Relaxation  of  the  body,  with  nervous  irrita-
tion. Weakness,  in  the  afternoon,  with  tremor  of  the
hands. Sudden  lassitude  in  all  the  limbs,  occasionally,
with  ill  humor. Frequent  attacks  of  weakness,  she  is
obliged  to  let  her  hands  hang  down. Weakness  of  the
body,  he  would  like  to  rest  himself  all  the  time,  the
spirits  being  bright. Although  accustomed  to  work,  she
is  now  obliged  to  lie  down  several  times  during  the  day,
(a.  16  d  ) Exhaustion,  after  a  long  walk. Great  weak-
ness, especially  of  the  limbs. Weariness  of  the  limbs,
with  dryness  of  the  throat- Weariness  of  the  limbs,  espe-
cially when  ascending  an  elevation. Extreme  weakness
when  going  up  stairs,  the  bones  of  the  lower  limbs  being
painful. She  feels  her  weakness  most,  when  m  a  state  ot
rest The  weakness  increases  when  m  a  state  of  rest.
In  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  he  feels  an  overwhelmm*
weakness  in  the  whole  body,  as  if  he  would  die  with
weakness


LYC0P0D1I  POLLEN.


133


Sleep. — A  good  deal  of  yawning,  (a.  7  d.) The  child
wants  to  yawn,  but  cannot ;  the  yawning  is  broken  ;  this
causes  the  child  to  weep. Unsuccessful  yawning ;  she
has  to  open  her  mouth  widely,  and  nevertheless  is  not
able  to  complete  the  yawning. Drowsiness  in  day-time  ;
he  falls  asleep  when  sitting  down. Even  while  walk-
ing, she  is  unable  to  resist  sleep. Sleepiness,  in  the
forenoon,  with  pressure  upon  the  eyes,  frequent  yawning,
and  internal  chilliness. Irresistible  drowsiness,  at  noon  ;
after  the  siesta,  laziness  and  obtusion  of  the  head.  *  Drow-
siness, in  the  afternoon. *  Timely  drowsiness,  in  the
evening. Irresistible  drowsiness  in  ihe  evening  ;  never-
theless, he  falk  asleep  late. He  is  a  little  tired  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed  ;  he  wakes  up  early  in  the  morning.
He  wakes  up  every  night,  at  day-break,  and  afterwards
falls  asleep  again. *  He  lies  a  long  time  in  his  bed,  in
the  evening,  without  being  able  to  fall  asleep. He  was
unable  to  find  rest  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  Sleep-
lessness until  midnight,  (a.  1 6  h.) *  Bad  sleep,  for  several
nights,  on  account  of  being  too  much  irritated. She  was
unable  to  fall  asleep  at  night,  and  her  sleep  was  very  rest-
less. Restless  sleep,  waking  up  several  times,  and  being
wide  awake  at  4  o'clock. Restless  sleep,  when  lying
upon  the  left  side,  (a.  24  d.) At  night,  when  asleep,  he
always  finds  himself  on  his  back. *  Nightly  sleep  ;  full
of  dreams. *  Sleep  full  of  confused  dreams.  Restless
sleep,  with  confused  dreams  ;  he  imagines  to  be  at  times
in  one,  at  times  in  another  place  ;  he  wakes  up  very  often,
and  feels  more  tired  in  the  morning  than  he  had  been  in
the  evening. Restless  sleep,  full  of  dreams.  Restless
sleep,  full  of  dreams,  but.  he  does  not  wake,  (a.  16  h.)
Light  sleep,  at  night ;  he  tosses  from  side  to  side,  wakes
up  and  imagines  he  is  now  in  one,  now  in  another  place.

bleep  full  of  fancies.  A  number  of  dreams  and  fancies,
a  night.  Ugly  fancies,  during  the  siesta.  Heavy  dreams,
at  night,  fehe  was  unable  to  sleep  in  the  night,  because,
when  closing  her  eyes,  she  saw  vividly  every  thina  which
had  taken  place  the  day  before  ;  she  had  to  rise,  (a.  10,
14  d.)  Vivid  dreams,  at  night,  and  talking  while  asleep,
y.  4  a.)  Loud  talking  while  asleep,  without  any  anxious
dreams, (she  frequently  laughs  aloud  when  asleep  At


34


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


night  and  towards  morning  she  has  such  agreeable  dreams,
that  she  was  sorry  to  wake  up,  (a.  5  d.) Lewd  dreams,
at  night,  (2.  n.) Voluptuous  dreams,  at  night,  (4.  n.)
She  dreams,  at  night,  that  she  feels  a  titillation  in  her
genital  organs  as  during  an  embrace. He  dreams  he  has
an  embrace,  but  there  is  no  emission  of  semen.  He  wakes
up  after  midnight,  with  a  sensation  as  if  he  had  enjoyed
an  embrace,  but  without  any  emission  of  semen.  She
is  roused  from  a  vivid  dream  ab<  ut  her  daily  business  ;
she  thinks  she  ought  to  perform  that  business,  even  after
having  become  awake. He  frequently  wakes  at  night
from  frightful  dreams. Starting,  when  falling  asleep.
Starting,  when  falling  asleep,  apparently  beginning  at  the
feet. *  Starlings  and  jerkings  of  the  limbs,  with  restless
sleep. *  Anxious  dreams,  at  night. *  Frightful,  confused
dreams,  and  restless  sleep. Frightful  dream  ;  the  fright
continues  even  after  having  become  awake.  fearful
dreams,  sad  dreams. He  dreams  he  is  to  be  murdered.
He  dreams  he  is  present  at  a.  row,  and  hides  himself  to
escape  the  danger. Restless  sleep,  he  frequently  wakes
from  anxious  dreams. Vivid,  anxious  dreams,  at  night.
Vivid,  agreeable  dreams  ;  he  finds  it  difficult  to  rouse
himself  early  in  the  morning ;  he  continues  dreaming,  as
soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes.  He  frequently  wakes  at  night,
tosses  about  from  side  to  side,  and  only  sleeps  soundly
early  in  the  morning. She  frequently  wakes  at  night,  re-
mains awake  for  hours,  and  looks  in  the  morning  as  if  she
had  not  slept  enough. After  many  vivid  dreams,  she  has
a  very  anxious  dream,  early  in  the  morning,  as  if  a  number
of  curs  were  clinging  to  several  parts  of  her  body,  and  as
if  the  number  were constantly  increasing.  Anxious
waking,  at  night,  (a.  11  d.) Screaming,  while  asleep;
delirium. Several anxious  scream.ngs,  when  as  eep,
fa  10  d) Restless  nights,  with  moaning  while  asleep.
Weeping  at  night,  while  asleep. The  child  sleeps  very
restlessly,  and  grunts  while  asleep. Anxiety,  when  falling
asleep. She  frequently  wakes  at  night,  as  if  roused  by
anxiety. In  the  evening,  she  is  afraid  of  going  to  bed.
She  wakes  up,  for  several  mornings  in  succession,  with
anxiety  and  restlessness. She  starts  up  from  her  sleep
wants  to  scream,  but  cannot,  as  in  night-mare.  Right


LYC0P0D1I  POLLEN.


135


mare. After  midnight,  she  wakes  up,  and  is  attacked
with  anguish,  so  that  she  was  unable  to  take  breath,  for
two  hours ;  two  nights  in  succession. She  wakes  up
early  in  the  morning,  after  a  deep  sleep,  with  anxious
thoughts,  as  if  she  would  die  ;  she  even  prepared  herself
for  death,  by  thinking  of  farewell  letters  to  her  friends,
(a.  16  h.) Anxious  palpitation  of  the  heart,  at  night,
when  turning  to  the  other  side. Palpitation  of  the  heart
almost  every  evening,  when  in  bed.  Orgasm  of  the  blood,
early  in  the  morning  when  waking. At  night,  he  finds
the  recumbent  position  intolerable  ;  he  is  obliged  to  sit  up.
At  night,  he  was  unable  to  find  ease  in  any  position  ;  this
vexed  him  so  that  he  cried. At  night  he  feels  his  pain
while  asleep  ;  he  dreams  of  it.  Restless,  interrupted  sleep,
after  midnight. Stitches  and  throbbing  in  the  occiput,  at
night. Waking  up  with  a  gloomy  mind,  at  night,  (3.  n.)
Dry  eyes  at  night. Saliva  flows  out  of  his  mouth,  at  night,
while  asleep. Sour  eructations  at  night. She  wakes  up
at  night  with  vertigo  and  nausea. Hunger  at  night,  when
waking  up. Thirst  at  night ;  she  is  frequently  obliged  to
drink,  and  can  only  drink  little  at  a  time,  (a.  16  d.)  Trou-
blesome pressure  in  the  stomach,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed  ;  improved  by  friction,  (the  first  days.) Cutting  in
the  region  of  the  stomach,  at  night ;  she  had  to  sit  up.
Cutting  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  at  night. Pinching  be-
low the  umbilicus,  after  midnight ;  she  had  to  curb  her-
self. Drawing  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  at
night. At  night,  continual,  almost  unsuccessful  desire  for
stool,  (2.  n.) Nightly  cramp  of  the  abdominal  muscles  ;
they  are  quite  hard,  and  are  so  painful  that  one  would  like
to  scream. Cough  and  pain  in  the  chest,  at  night ;  he  can
only  fall  asleep  late  after  midnight. A  sort  of  spasm  of
the  chest,  at  night,  during  confinement,  extending  from  the
small  of  the  back,  along  the  back,  into  the  region  of  the
stomach,  then  into  the  chest ;  aggravated  the  breathing,
and  gave  her  a  good  deal  of  anxiety. At  night,  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  and  stitches  in  both  hips  and  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  (a.  4  d.)  At  night,  the  hands  go  to  sleep.
Tearing  in  the  left  lower  limb,  at  night. Violent  drawing
pain  in  the  heel,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed. Cramp  in
the  feel,  for  several  nights. At  night  the  limbs  feel  as  if


136


LTCOPODII  POLLEN.


they  had  gone  to  sleep,  (a.  6  d.)  Early  in  the  morning
she  wakes  up  from  a  heavy  sleep,  disturbed  by  a  number
of  fancies  ;  the  whole  right  side  of  the  body  feels  as  if  it
had  gone  to  sleep,  for  half  an  hour.  At  night,  drawing  in
the  gums  and  in  the  whole  left  side  of  the  body ;  the
pain  rouses  her  from  sleep.  Sleepless  night,  owing  to
trembling  and  a  sensation  as  if  all  J.he  inward  parts  of  the
body  were  balancing  to  and  fro.  Single  twitchings,  while
asleep  ;  the  lower  limbs  are  pushed  forwards.  Orgasm  of
the  blood,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking  up.  Early
in  the  morning,  when  waking  up,  relaxation  and  weakness
of  the  limbs,  disappearing  after  rising.  Unrefreshing
sleep,  (a.  16  h.)  Unrefreshing  and  gloomy  sleep.  Early
in  the  morning,  when  rising,  he  feels  weary  and  heavy,
(a.  48  h.)  He  sleeps  at  night,  but  the  sleep  is  not  re-
freshing ;  when  waking,  early  in  the  morning,  he  feels
weary  and  tired  of  life.

Fever. — Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  when  falling  asleep,
(a.  14  d.)  Shuddering  after  drinking.  Chilliness  (a.  14  d.)
Spasmodic  shaking  from  chilliness,  as  if  caused  by  a
mental  commotion,  with  throbbing  in  the  forepart  of  the
head,  in  the  evening,  (a.  4  d.) Internal  chilliness,  early
in  the  morning.  Early  in  the  morning,  continual  concealed
chilliness,  (a.  2  d.) Continual  chilliness,  with  coldness
all  over,  more  violent  towards  evening. For  many  days,
chilliness  on  the  left  side  of  the  body. Hands  and  feet
are  so  cold  that  they  feel  dead. During  the  chilliness,
she  feels  as  if  the  movement  of  the  internal  parts  would
become  arrested. Violent  chilliness  in  the  evening,  hin-
dering sleep,  with  nausea. Fever,  every  other  evening,
the  chills  commencing  at  7  o'clock ;  they  caused  him  to
start  high  up  in  his  bed,  without  any  consecutive  heat  or
sweat. Chilliness  in  the  back,  at  three  o'clock  in  the
afternoon,  worse  towards  evening  after  lying  down,  last-
ing a  quarter  of  an  hour,  with  cold  feet,  without  being  fol-
lowed by  heat  or  sweat. Fever  every  afternoon,  from  3
o'clock  until  evening,  the  chilliness  increasing  progressive-
ly, without  any  subsequent  heat  or  sweat. Fever  at  7
o'clock  in  the  evening,  chills  and  great  coldness,  even  when
in  bed,  as  if  she  were  lying  in  ice,  for  two  hours,  with
drawing  in  all  her  limbs,  in  the  back  and  the  whole  body ;


LYCOPODII  POLLEN.


137


when  waking  up  from  her  sleep,  which  was  full  of  dreams,
she  is  covered  with  sweat  over  and  over,  two  evenings  in
succession,  with  violent  thirst  after  the  sweat,  (a.  27  d.)
Coldness  of  the  body,  in  the  evening,  wilh  heat  in  the
forehead. At  8  o'clock  in  the  morning,  violent  chilliness
of  half  an  hour,  followed  by  but  little  heat. Early  in  the
morning  she  wakes  with  chilliness,  soon  afterwards  she
has  much  heat  and  pain  in  the  occiput ;  she  feels  quite
sick,  (7.  d.) Chilliness  every  day. Evening-fever,  every
day,  chilliness  followed  by  heat. Evening-fever,  a  little
chilliness,  followed  shortly  by  violent  continued  heat,  weari-
ness and  pain  in  the  limbs. Chilliness,  every  evening,
when  in  bed,  until  midnight ;  after  midnight  he  feels  warm
and  hot ;  early  in  the  morning,  sour-smelling  sweat.  In
the  evening,  alternate  chilliness  and  heat,  with  aching  of
the  whole  head  and  coryza,  (a.  2  d.) Alternate  chilliness
and  heat,  and  great  redness  and  heat  of  the  cheeks,  (a.
10, 19  d.)  Fright  causes  alternate  attacks  of  chilliness  and
heat  and  sweat,  for  24  hours.  Fever  ;  he  goes  to  bed,  feels
nauseated,  vomits  four  limes  ; chilliness,  followed  by
sweat,  without  any  previous  heat  ;  all  her  limbs  were  af-
fected, she  had  stitches  in  the  head,  chilliness  in  the  day
following,  preceded  by  redness  of  the  face,  (a.  5  d.)  Fe-
ver, with  great  weakness,  heat  prevailing,  afterwards  chil-
liness. Fever,  every  evening,  burning  heat ;  she  drinks
very  often,  but  little,  has  frequent  desire  for  stool,  without
any  evacuation  ;  at  night  she  frequently  emits  a  small
quantity  of  very  brown  urine. A  good  deal  of  heat  over
the  whole  body,  with  violent  burning  and  stitches  in  the
eyes,  (a.  9  d.) Burning  heat,  with  short  breath,  slight
thirst,  pale  countenance  and  starting  while  asleep,  (a.  14  d  )
He  constantly  perceives  a  smell  as  of  strong  sweat  around
him.  The  exhalations  of  the  body  smell  like  onion.  Sour-
ish, acrid  sweat  of  the  whole  body,  except  the  legs.  Niaht-
sweat,  only  on  the  trunk,  not  the  lower  limbs.  Sweat,
every  night,  after  midnight,  especially  upon  the  chest,
r-roiuse  sweat  at  night,  with  coldness  of  the  forehead  and
neck Morning-sweats,  only  in  the  joints.  Morning-sweat
in  bed,  tor  seven  mornings  in  succession,  (a.  7  d.)  Morn-
ing-sweat over  the  whole  body,  smelling  of  blood.  Morn-
ing-sweat, after  a  restless  night,  (a.  10  d.)


138


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


MAGNESIA.  CARBONICA.

This  drug  has  been  found  especially  useful  in  affections
characterised  by  the  following  symptoms  :  Black  spots  be-
fore (he  eyes  ;  agglutination  of  the  eyelids,  early  in  ilic
morning  ;  hardness  of  hearing  ;  toothache  of  pregnant  fe-
males ;  throbbing  toothache  with  single  stitches  ;  nightly
toothache,  when  pushing  against  the  teeth,  they  are  pain-
ful as  if  they  were  ulcerated  ;  frequent  and  sudden  inter-
ruption of  the  speech  ;  contractive  pain  in  the  stomach  ;
inguinal  hernia;  costiveness  ;  want  of  sexual  instinct;  want
of  erections  ;  delaying  menses  ;  leucorrhcea  ;  obstruction
of  the  nose  ;  dry  coryza  ;  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  ;
attacks  of  tearing  in  the  shoulder,  also  at  night,  accompa-
nied by  tingling  extending  down  to  the  fingers  and  inability
to  move  the  arm  owing  to  pain  ;  pain  as  from  a  sprain,  in
the  shoulder-joint,  during  motion  ;  the  skin  of  the  hands
becomes  chapped  ;  boils  on  the  leg;  itching;  frequent
and  sudden  falling,  with  consciousness,  when  standing  or
walking  ;  epileptic  fits  ;  drowsiness  by  day  ;  s  eeplessness
from  nightly  oppression  of  the  abdomen  ;  dreams,  also
anxious  dreams,  every  night.  e„ur(,tPr
This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Ng.  and  Doctors  Schreter,

and  Wahle.  .  '

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  -Magnesia  is  suitable  to
morbid  conditions  of  the  female  organism,  especial  y  to
menstrual  irregularities  and  hysteria. Morbid  cond.  ions
ofchildren— Scrofulosis.-Atroplua  infantum.— Epilepsy.
Scrofulous  ophthalmia,  with  obscuration  of  the
Cataract  Pyrosis.— Gastrodynia,  aching  pain  in  the  sto-
mach.-Cardialgia,  contractive  and  aching ;  pain  in  the  sto-
mach with  sour  eructations.— Hernia  scrotah*.— Cholera
sporadica  infantum-Green,  and  sour-smelling  diarrhea
of  children.-Chronic  looseness  of  the  bowels.-Chron.c
d  ar  hoea.-Incontine.ntia  urina,-  Copious  poUuUon^-
Profuse  menses.  -  Metrorrhagia.  -  Leucorrhcea.  -  Old,

"l^^.  f  Puis,  i  Merc  ,  Sol.  I  Nux
Moral  SYMPTOMS-Trembhng  anguish  and  fear,  a,  if


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


139


some  accident  would  happen,  going  off  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed. Anxious  and  warm  through  the  whole  body,
especially  in  the  head,  while  eating  warm  food.  Anxious,
with  sweat,  the  whole  day,  especially  during  motion.  Anx-
ious and  worn  out,  with  stitches  through  the  whole  body,
after  rising  from  bed. Sort  of  fear,  fulness,  with  indispo-
sition to  attend  to  any  thing,  in  the  afternoon,  with  head-
ache, as  if  the  head  were  screwed  in  ;  cheerful  in  the  even-
ing. Internal  uneasiness,  with  trembling  of  the  hands,  and
so  much  absence  of  mind  that  he  has  to  begin  a  letter  three
times  over  again  on  account  of  having  omilled  something,
(a.  3  d.) Peevish,  she  knows  not  what  she  wants  ;  with
sweat,  (a.  6  d.) Very  peevish,  in  the  evening,  (a.  6  d.)
Ill-hum  our. Vexed. Indisposed to attend to  any
thing, more  so  after  some  time. Ill-humour ;  every
thing  she looks  at,  is disagreeable  to  her  ; less  so
in  the  evening. Ill-humour ;  nevertheless  she  warbles
a  song,  (going  off  shortly,)  (a.  2  h.) Sad  mood,  with
indisposition  to  talk,  and  a  sort  of  fearfulness.  Physical,
mental  and  moral  depression,  (a.  29  d.)  Forgetful  and
ill-humoured,  (a.  18  d.) Very  talkative  ;  she  does  every
thing  very  handy,  (1 .  d.) In  better  spirits  in  the  afternoon
than  forenoon.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head  from  mental  exertions.
Reeling  sensation  in  the  head,  frequent  sensation  as  of  loss
of  consciousness,  (28.  29.  d.)  Vertigo  when  kneeling,  as
if  she  would  fall  to  pieces.  Vertigo  when  standing,  as  if
objects  were  moving  around  her,  with  intoxication  and
heaviness  of  the  head.  Vertigo,  early  in  the  morning,  after
rising,  as  if  every  thing  turned  with  her,  with  inclination
to  vomit  and  conflux  of  water  in  the  mouth.  Vertigo  as  if
every  thing  were  turning  with  her,  and  as  if  she  would  fall
over.  Fainting  vertigo,  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,
with  coldness  followed  by  inclination  to  vomit,  for  half  an
hour  ;  afterwards  sleep  interrupted  by  frequent  waking  and
violent  nausea  when  moving  ever  so  little  ;  this  was  worst
in  the  morning  after  rising,  accompanied  by  eructations,
tasting  of  rotten  eggs,  with  pale  countenance  and  coldness,
(25.  d.)  Vertigo  unto  falling,  in  the  evening  when  sitting,
(and  sewing,)  with  nausea  ;  afterwards,  when  lying  down,
she  lost  her  consciousness,  (a.  4  d.) Heaviness  of  the


140


MAGNESIA  CAItBONlCA.


head,  when  lying  down,  after  waking  from  the  siesta,  the
saliva,  being  tinged  with  blood. Weight  in  the  forehead
when  standing  (a.  2  h.) Heaviness  and  dizziness  of  the
head,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising  ;  this  goes  off  after
having  been  walking  about  for  an  hour. Heaviness  and
gloominess  of  the  head,  early  in  the  morning  when  rising,
as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough,  going  off  after  washing  him-
self and  moving  about,  (7.  d.) Heaviness  of  the  head  with
yawning  and  nausea,  (3.  d.) Great  heaviness  and  pain-
fulness  of  the  head,  (2.  d.) Heaviness  in  the  forehead  and
ulcerative  pain  on  the  left  side  of  the  occiput.  Headache,
as  if  brought  on  by  stiffness  of  the  neck. Violent  head-
ache, early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  lasting  until  noon.
Violent  nightly  headache,  while  asleep,  but  more  violent
after  waking  ;  going  off  when  raising  the  head.  Headache
in  the  afternoon,  becoming  worse  towards  evening,  with
ulcerative  pain  of  the  head,  when  pressed  upon  from  with-
out. Pressure  over  the  head,  during  mental  exertions.
Pressure  over  the  whole  of  the  head,  in  a  room,  among  a
number  of  men,  (a.  15  d.) Pressure  in  the  forehead,  every
day. Great  pressure  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  with  pain
in  the  eyes. Aching  about  the  forehead,  early  in  the  morn-
ing when  waking  up,  lasting  until  afternoon,  (20.  d.)  Pres-
sure in  the  forehead  from  morning  till  noon.  Stupefying
ache  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  and  sometimes  in  the
eyes,  (14.  d.) Stinging  aching  in  the  forehead,  frequently
intermitting,  (10.  d.)  Sensation  in  the  head  as  if  both  sides
of  it  were  being  screwed  towards  one  another  ;  afterwards
this  sensation  is  also  felt  in  the  occiput ;  it  lasts  a  good
while. Tension  and  drawing  in  the  occiput,  during,  and
after  the  act  of  swallowing,  as  if  the  head  were  drawn
backwards,  worse  when  standing ;  she  is  obliged  to  sit
down,  after  which  the  pain  passes  off,  (a.  2  h.)  Drawing
pain  in  the  head,  (a.  16  d.) Drawing  pain  in  the  forehead,
with  nausea,  (6.  morning.) Violent,  darting  headache,
with  a  sensation  of  heaviness,  brought  on  by  vexation,  in-
creasing from  1  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  going  off  in
the  evening  when  in  bed,  (15.  d.) Tearing  and  heaviness
in  the  forehead  and  top  of  the  head,  after  dinner.  Tear-
ing and  throbbing  deep  in  the  forehead. Tearing  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  and  as  if  it  were  drawn  backwards,  from


MAGNESIA CARBON  1CA.


141


afternoon  till  evening,  when  it  passes  off  in  the  bed.  Tear-
ing in  the  forehead,  with  stupefaction  and  heaviness  in  the
brain. Painful  tearing  in  the  forehead,  deep  in  the  brain,
and  in  front  of  the  left  ear. Tearing  in  the  left  temple,  go-
ing off  by  pressing  upon  it ;  also  in  the  evening  when  lying
down. Violent  tearing  in  the  left  temporal  region  from  be-
low upwards,  with  toothache  in  a  posterior  molar  tooth.
Painful  tearing  in  the  right  temple,  which  closed  her
eyes. Violent, darling tearings, alternately  in  the
vertex,  the  occiput,  upper  arms  and  thighs,  (25.  and  26.
d.) Violent  tearing  and  cuttings  in  the  whole  head,  in  the
evening,  before  going  to  bed. Tearings  and  dartings  in
the  right  side  of  the  head,  from  without  inwards,  after
dinner,  when  sitting. Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the
head  ;  afterwards,  when  moving  the  head  towards  the  left
side,  a  tearing  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.
Lancinating  headache,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising,
with  pressure  over  the  eye,  (a.  8  d.) Stitches  in  the
right  side  of  the  forehead,  from  within  outwards,  rather
externally  ;  previous  to  the  stitches  coming  on,  the  place
itched. Frequent  stitches  about  the  forehead,  in  the
evening. Stitches  in  the  vertex. Stitching  pain  in  the
right  temple,  after  dinner,  (10.  d.) Stitches  in  the  left
temple,  (a.  12  d.) Dull  stitch  in  the  left  temple,  and  after-
wards above  the  right  ear. Violent  stitches  in  the  riaht
side  of  the  head,  from  within  outwards,  she  rests  upon
that  side  m  the  night ;  the  stitches  pass  off  when  turning
to  the  other  side. Dull,  painful  stitches  in  the  anterior
corner  of  the  right  parietal  bone,  in  the  evening.  Stitches
and  throbbing  ,n  the  right  side  of  the  head,  after  dinner.
Dull  studies  into  the  right  side  of  the  head,  when  stand-
ing. Deep dull stitch through  the  brain,  from  the
vertex  to  the  right  side  of  the  occiput. Stitches  in  the

Siitrhi  °l  ¥  h/ad'  :Vh?n  StandinS>  a]so  in  the  eve™S-
Stitches  darting  from  both  parietal  bones  to  meet  one  an-
other Violent  stitches  in  the  occiput,  in  the  evening.

from  «g  ?T  T  lhe  uWh°Ie  head'  makinS  her  ill-humored,
from  8  o  clock  in  the  evening  until  she  goes  to  sleep
Stitches  ,n  different  parts  of  the  head. Stitches  in  the
head,  followed  by  contusive  pain  in  the  sides  of  the  head
when  standing;  the  pain  is*  not  aggravated  by  motion


142


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


Boring  stilches,  extending  from  the  upper  part  of  the
right  side  of  the  head  through  the  occiput,  early  in  the
morning. Painful  boring  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  (2.
evening.) Groaning  sensation  in  the  whole  head,  during
slight  motion,  (a.  15  d.) A  sort  of  groaning  jerk  over  the
left  eye,  through  the  head,  during  motion  and  walking,  (a.
11  d.) Pulsative  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  forehead.
Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  especially  when  smoking,
(which  was  habitual)  (a.  5  d.) Violent  congestion  of
blood  to  the  head,  in  the  forenoon. Warmth  in  the  head
and  sweat  in  the  face. Frequent  flushes  of  heat,  without
any  subsequent  sweat. Frequently  a  feeling  of  heat  in
the  head,  also  in  the  evening. Feeling  of  heat  in  the
head,  alternating  with  paleness  of  the  face  and  external
heat  and  redness  of  the  same,  (10.  d.) Heat  in  the  head
and  hands,  with  redness  of  the  face  and  increase  of  exter-
nal warmth,  (7.  d.) Fine  incisive  pain  in  the  hairy  scalp,
from  the  middle  of  the  forehead  towards  the  left  eye,  as  if
the  skin  were  being  cut  in  two. Intensely  painful  prick-
ings about  the  head,  after  dinner. When  pressing  upon
the  vertex,  it  feels  bruised  ;  this  sensation  had  been  pre-
ceded by  a  darting  tearing. Headache  on  the  top  of  the
head,  as  if  the  hairs  were  being  pulled  at,  from  afternoon
till  evening. Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp,  in  different
places. Violent  itching  of  the  scales  of  the  hairy  scalp,
especially  during  rainy  weather. Scurfy  formation  on
the  left  side  of  the  forehead. Increased  falling  off  of

Eyes!— Pain  in  the  left  eye,  as  if  it.  would  fly  to  pieces,
or  as  if  it  pressed  from  within  outwards,  with  profuse
lachrymation  ;  flow  of  tears  from  the  left  nostril,  with  in-
crease of  the  drawing-stitching  headache  over  the  left  eye,
when  blowing  the  nose.  Pressure  around  the  eyes,
towards  evening.  Tearing  in  the  eyes,  followed  by  lachry-
mation, going  off  after  washing,  early  in  the.  morning,
when  in  bed.  Darling  tearing  in  both  the  lower  eye-
lids. Darting  in  the  lids  of  the  left  eye,  with  lachry-
mation, for  three  days.  Itching  of  the  whole  of  the  right
eve,  going  off  by  friction,  (10.  d.)  Itching  and  smarting
in  the  left  eye,  going  off  by  friction.  Smarting  itching  in
the  internal  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  removed  by  trie-


MAGNESIA  CARBOMCA.


143


tion Itching  and  burning  of  the  eyes,  especially  the
cantlii,  in  the  evening. Burning  and  stinging  in  the  eyes,
the  capillaries  of  the  white  of  the  eye  appearing  injected,
(II.  d.) Continual  burning  and  dryness  of  the  eyes,  (9.
10.  11.  and  25.  d.) Burning  and  inflammation  of  the  in-
ternal canthus  of  the  right  eye. Inflammation  and  swell-
ing of  the  lower  eyelid,  with  redness  of  one  of  the  canthi,
(a.  8  d.) Swelling  of  the  eyeball,  as  if  dropsy  of  the  eye
would  set  in. Dryness  of  the  eyes,  early  in  the  morning,
(9.  d.) Dryness  and  burning  of  the  eyes,  (30.  d.)  Lachry-
mation  and  burning  of  the  right  eye,  the  capillaries  of  the
internal  canthus  appearing  injected,  (9.  and  10.  d.)  Watery
eyes,  every  morning,  as  after  long  crying.  Lachrymation,
the  whole  day. Lachrymation  and  smarting  of  the  left
eye. Lachrymation  in  day-time,  with  agglutination  early
in  the  morning. Agglutination  of  the  eyelids,  early  in  the
morning,  going  off  after  washing  the  eyes  twice. Gum  in
the  eyes,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking,  with  burning
and  dim-sightedness  of  the  eyes. Agglutination  of  the
lids,  early  in  the  morning,  with  burning  of  the  eyes  when
looking  at  the  light  of  day,  for  many  days. Early  in  the
morning,  when  waking,  her  eyes  "looked  swelled,  with
dizziness  of  the  head  ;  she  was  for  a  long  time  unable  to
open  them. The  right  eye  is  the  weaker;  when  looking
at  the  letters  attentively,  while  reading,  her  sight  vanishes.
Dim-sightedness,  (3.  d.) Dim-sightedness  of  the  inflamed
eye,  as  if  feathers  were  before  it. Mist  before  the  eyes
especially  the  right. Photophobia,  with  burning  in  the
orbit' d  ^ Tearin§  in  lhe  uPPer  border  of  the  right

Ears^— Tearing  in  the  ears,  with  tearing  in  the  left  mo-
lar teeth,  and  in  other  places,  changing  every  moment.
Dull  boruig  m  the  right  ear.  Painful  boring  and  stitches
into  the  left  ear.  Continued  tickling  in  the  right  ear,  in
the  evening  Burning  in  the  right  ear,  for  a  short  while
only.  Gainful  tearing  in  the  whole  of  the  left  concha,  in
the  evening;  m  the  forenoon  the  tearing  is  felt  in  the  right.
Violent  stitches  in  front  of  the  left  ear.  Painful,  dull
stitch  behind  the  right  ear,  terminating  in  tension,  goin<r
off  for  a  short  while  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Sore
pain  behind  the  right  lobule,  when  pressing  upon  the  part,


144


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


(7.  d.) Redness  and  inflammation  of  the  right  meatus
auditorius  externus,  for  three  days,  with  ulcerative  pain
and  sensitiveness  to  pressure,  which  remained  a  long  while
after. Great  sensitiveness  to  noise,  causing  one  to  start.
Tingling  of  the  ears,  (a.  20  d.) Tingling  in  the  right  ear,
after  dinner. Tingling  and  ringing  in  the  left  ear.  Ring-
ing in  the  left  ear,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,
followed  by  painfullness  of  the  whole  ear  to  the  touch.
Violent  ringing  in  the  right  ear,  after  dinner.  Whizzing
before  the  ear,  with  alternate  whistling. Whizzing  in  the
right  ear. Whizzing  and  ringing  in  the  left  ear,  with  di-
minution of  hearing. Roaring  in  the  ears,  so  violent,
that  she  was  unable  to  remain  in  her  bed;  she  has  to  sit
up  and  to  rise,  (a.  9  d.) Whizzing,  fluttering  and  buzzing
in  the  right  ear,  with  hardness  of  hearing. Fluttering,  as
of  a  bird,  in  the  right  ear. Rushing,  as  of  water,  in  the
right  ear,  in  the  evening,  (25.  d.) Whizzing  in  the  right
.  ear,  with  diminution  of  hearing,  and  a  sort  of  intoxication
in  the  open  air,  so  that  she  did  not  understand  what  she
was  asked  ;  worse  in  the  room,  (29-  d.)

Nose.— Redness  of  the  nose,  and  swelling,  for  several
evenings. Scurfy  formation  in  the  nose,  (a.  3  d.)  Bleed-
in*  of  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  2,  3  d,  also  a.  24
h.  and  1?  d.) Bleeding  from  nose  and  mouth.  Violent
bleeding  from  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking
up,  with  violent  sneezing  and  tickling  in  the  right  nasa
fossa. Blood  is  blown  from  the  nose,  (15.  d.)  Faintul
itching,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  nose,  near
the  eye  (25.  d.) Violent  tearing  from  the  left  side  ol  the
nose,  over  the  margin  of  the  orbit,  as  far  as  the  temple.
Countenance  pale,  and  of  a  sickly  complexion,  accompan-
ied with  general  uncomfortableness,  (12  d.)  Wre*h*\»
pale,  dry-coloured  complexion,  for  a  long  time,  (19.  20.  d.j
Appearance  of  ill-humor,  in  the  forenoon. Redness  and
burning  of  the  face,  with  external  heat,  in  the  evening.
Great  redness  in  the  face,  with  general  heat,  frequently.
Tension  in  the  whole  face,  as  if  albumen  were  drying
upon  it. Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  face.  Nightly
tearing,  burrowing  and  boring  in  the  zygoma,  as  if  with  a
red-hot  iron,  somewhat  alleviated  by  sitting  up  in  the  bed,
or  else,  driving  one  out  of  the  bed  with  a  horrid  anguish.


MAGNESIA  CARBONIC  A.


145


She  has  to  run  from  one  room  into  another  the  whole  night
on  account  of  the  pain  in  the  face  j  she  has  to  hold  the
painful  side,  and  shake  her  head  constantly  ;  as  soon  as
she  is  quiet,  the  pains  return. Throbbi  ng  pain  in  the  an-
trum Highmori,  and  swelling  of  the  right  malar  bone.  Con-
tinual burning  and  straining  between  lips  and  chin,  in  the
evening. Heat  in  the  face  and  hands,  with  redness,  burn-
ing and  thirst,  at  noon. Redness  and  swelling  of  the  right
cheek  and  lower  jaw,  without  violent  ulcerative  pain  ;  es-
pecially painful  when  pressing  upon  the  parts,  and  accom-
panied with  darting  while  talking,  sneezing  or  yawning,
for  6  days. A  number  of  vesicles  on  the  sides  of  the
forehead,  and  in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth.  Vesicles
on  the  nose,  some  of  them  filled  with  pus. A  number  of
vesicles  around  the  chin. Pustule  under  the  right  nostril,
which  becomes  finally  covered  with  scurf. Pustule  in
front  of  the  right  ear,  without  sensation. Hard  nodosity
on  the  right  temple,  painful  when  touched.

Face.— The  right  sub-maxillary  gland  is  painful  when
pressing  upon  it,  or  when  moving  the  lower  jaw.  Dryness
of  the  lips,  early  in  the  morning,  without  any  thirst,  until
noon. Burning  and  tension  of  the  upper  lip. Fine,  pain-
Jul  tearings  in  the  lower  lip. Itching  burning  over  the
upper  hp,  towards  the  left  corner  of  the  mouth.  Itching
of  the  upper  hp,  as  if  an  eruption  would  come  on  Sore-
ness of  the  upper  hp.  Fine  eruption  about  the  mouth,  (a.  3
(L)  Herpetic  eruption  around  the  lower  part  of  the  mouth.
Pustule  on  the  upper  lip,  (2.  d.) Pustules  on  the  lower
-  Hp,  (a.  3  d.) Vesicle  on  the  lower  lip,  near  the  right  cor-
ner of  the  mouth,  for  three  days. Clear  vesicles  near  the
lelt  corner  of  the  upper  lip,  with  tensive  pain. Hard,  little
nodosities  ,n  both  corners  of  the  mouth.  Pain  on  the  inner
part  of  the  upper  hp,  and  in  the  gums,  as  if  the  parts  were
being  cut ;  touching  them  with  the  tongue  causes  a  burn-
ing sensation.

che^k?  Tnn,TElT"'~,T00^Che'  With  swelli»S  of  *e

bv  r„M  t  J?C  I*'  n  g  in  a  Carriag6'  W^ed
by  cold. Toothache  every  day,  early  in  the  moiling  after

waking  or  rising,  on  the  right  side  ;  going  off,  by  w?S

about  for  some  time. Pain  of  the  posterior  and  7nS

molares  of  both  sides,  evening  and  morning. Gre  pain


146  MAGNESIA  CARB0N1CA.

in  one  of  the  right  hollow  molares,  which  it  is  impossible
to  relieve,  (60.  d.) Toothache  every  day,  especially  at
nio-ht.  As  soon  as  he  gels  into  ihe  bed,  the  toothache  in-
creases, and  there  is  a  goo.J  deal  of  water  accumulating  in
the  mouth. Toothache,  moving  from  the  teeth  towards
the  temples,  commencing  in  the  evening,  when  going  to
bed,  and  driving  him  out  of  bed  at  night,  several  nights  in
succession. Drawing  in  all  the  teeth,  with  swelling  and
redness  of  the  gums. Darling  toothache,  almost  every
day,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising,  and  at  night,  with
darlings  in  the  fingers  and  feet,  when  waking  or  sleeping,
(60.  d°) Tearing  and  drawing  in  the  posterior  and  infe-
rior molares,  also  in  the  evening,  sometimes  relieved  by
salt. Violent  tearing,  drawing  and  gnawing  in  a  hollow
tooth,  relieved  for  a  short  time  by  cold,  and  by  turning  to
the  affected  side,  continuing  until  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,
worse  in  the  warm  room,  with  restlessness,  discontent,  and
tensive  pain  over  the  whole  of  the  right  cheek,  (after  the
menses.)  Tearing  in  the  inferior  molares  of  the  right  side,
with  sensation  in  a  posterior,  superior  molar  tooth,  as  if
it  were  being  screwed  from  within  outwards.  Violent
tearing  in  the  lower  teeth  of  the  right  side,  extending
as  far  as  the  temple,  after  dinner. Tearing  in  the  roots  of
both  rows  of  teeih. Tearing  in  the  last  left  molar  tooth,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  until  he  falls  asleep,  and  in
the  morning  when  waking  ;  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  pain
is  felt  in  an  upper  or  lower  tooth  j  it  goes  off  after  rising,
(17  d) Stitching  toothache  after  a  meal. Studies  and
tearing  in  the  roots  of  the  left,  upper  teeth,  with  sensation
as  if  the  teeth  were  elongated,  and  a  tickling  of  the  teeth
in  the  open  air. Burning,  slight  jerking,  and  tearing,  with
sensation  as  if  this  or  that  tooth  were  elongated,  in  the
upper  or  lower  row,  relieved  by  motion,  and  worst  at  night
when  in  bed  ;  it  is  likewise  brought  on  in  day  lime,  by
eating  and  masticating,  (a.  16  d.) Burning  toothache,  in
the  evening  when  in  bed,  with  pain  as  if  the  teeth  were
loose The  teeth  feel  elongated  and  very  sensitive,  (a.
2Q  d  ) One  of  the  molares  feels  elongated  ;  early  in  the
morning,  when  bringing  cold  water  to  the  tooth,  it  feels  as
H  were  being  pulled  out;  the  same  feeling  exists  when
chewing. Two  wisdom-teeth  made  their  appearance,


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


147


Vacillation  of  the  teeth,  with  swelling  of  the  gums.  Loose-
ness of  the  teeth  ;  they  feel  elongated  ;  the  gums  feel
sensitive  and  burning,  at  dinner  ;  the  symptom  passes  off
in  the  evening,  but  is  brought  back  by  eating.  Continual
and  almost  painless  swelling  of  the  gums,  even  in  the  empty
sockets,  (a.  13  d.)  Burning  vesicles  frequently  make  their
.appearance  on  the  gums,  on  the  inside  of  the  cheeks,  lips,
and  palate.

Mouth. — Violent  itching  of  the  inside  of  the  right  cheek,
(a.  3  h.)  A  small,  red-blue  place  on  the  inside  of  the  right
cheek,  without  any  sensation,  and  bleeding  when  rubbed.
A  number  of  miliary  eruptions  in  the  mouth,  on  the  tongue
and  cheeks,  bleerling  when  touched  ever  so  little,  and  burn-
ing when  eating  something  sour.  Numbness  of  the  whole
of  the  inner  mouth,  the  palate,  and  the  anterior  half  of  the
tongue,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking,  until  noon.
Burning,  painful  vesicles  on  the  left  border  of  the  tongue
and  on  the  lower  lip,  suppurating  after  the  lapse  of  three
days.  Vesicles,  with  tensive  pain,  on  the  anterior  border
of  the  tongue  and  in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth.  Vesi-
cles on  the  palate,  early  in  the  morning,  with  sensation  as
if  the  parts  were  sore,  and  as  if  the  skin  were  off ;  going
off  at  the  appearance  of  the  menses.  Burning  sensation
of  the  palate,  as  if  the  skin  were  off,  (2.  d.)  Roughness  of
the  palate,  early  in  the  morning,  as  if  the  skin  were  coming
off. Heat  in  the  mouth  the  whole  day.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Sore  throat,  as  if  caused
by  a  hard  body,  with  burning  and  retching,  and  a  rough
feeling,  accompanied  by  a  desire,  between  the  acts  of  de-
glutition, to  hawk  up  mucus.  Pain  in  the  throat,  when
swallowing,  as  if  she  would  swallow  a  large  foreign  body.
Sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  stopped  up  and  did  not  ad-
mit of  the  passage  of  air,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising,
(35.  d.)  Spasmodic  strangling  in  the  throat,  at  8  o'clock
in  the  evening,  as  if  it  were  being  distended  ;  she  had  to
open  her  mouth,  but  without  being  relieved  by  it.  Stitch-
ing pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  throat,  during  deglutition
in  the  evening.  Stitches  deep  down  in  the  throat,  when
talking.  Sore  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  throat,  with
stinging  and  burning  on  the  left  side,  when  talking,  sneez-
ing, or  yawning  ;  the  pain  is  greater  during  than  between


148


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


the  acts  of  deglutition. Burning  and  roughness  in  the
throat. Roughness  and  burning  acidity  in  the  throat,
shortly. Roughness  in  the  throat,  with  desire  to  vomit.
Stinging  roughness  in  the  throat,  and  sense  as  of  scraping
as  of  the  feathers  of  a  corn-ear. Frequently  recurring
roughness  of  the  throat. Roughness  and  scraping  of  the
throat,  as  if  caused  by  old  smoked  meat. Roughness  and  (
scraping  sensation  of  the  throat,  with  tasteless  eructations
after  every  new  dose  of  medicine. Dry  throat,  with  sensa-
tion, when  swallowing,  as  if  the  throat  were  pulled  to  pieces.
Dry  throat,  early  in  the  morning,  with  stinging  in  the  left
side,  during  and  between  the  acts  of  deglutition,  (10.  d.)
Dryness  of  mouth,  (29.  d.) Dryness  of  mouth,  without
any  thirst,  at  night. The  mouth  is  slimy,  and  as  if  one
had  eaten  flour,  in  the  forenoon. Frequent  rising  of  mu-
cus in  the  throat ;  she  is  obliged  to  swallow  it  again,  with
roughness  and  dryness  of  the  fauces. Frequent,  unsuc-
cessful desire  to  hawk  up. Soft,  fetid  tubercles  of  the
colour  of  peas,  which  he  has  to  hawk  up  ;  frequently  get
into  the  larynx  from  the  fauces,  and  produce  a  momentary
suffocative'  irritation. Discharge  of  tenacious  mucus,
streaked  with  blood  ;  it  had  caused  a  pressure  in  the  throat
for  a  long  time  past,  and  he  had  not  been  able  to  hawk  it
up She  spits  up  mucus  and  little  clots  of  blood,  with
sweetish  taste.  Bloody  saliva,  (94.  and  95.  d.)  Continual
spitting  early  in  the  morning,  with  nausea.  Accumula-
tion ofwater  in  the  mouth,  with  frequent  gulping  up,  ver-
tigo, and  desire  to  vomit ;  after  eating  some  plums,  (2o.
26  d.) Rising  of  water  in  the  mouth,  (27.  d.)

Taste  and  Appetite.— No  taste  for  several  days  ;  the
nourishment  she  takes  tastes  like  straw,  although  her  ap-
petite is  good.  The  nourishment  she  takes  is  tasteless  ;
her  tongue  is  coated  white,  and  the  mouth  is  slimy.  Bitter-
sweet taste  in  the  mouth,  the  mouth  being  full  of  mucus  ;
this  taste  went  off  after  eating  bread.  B.tler  taste  in  the
mouth  (42  d.)  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  tongue  be-
inrr  coated  white  and  the  mouth  full  of  white  mucus  ;  go-
in"  off  after  rinsing  the  mouth.  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
early  in  the  morning;  pappy  condition  of  the  mouth,  the
teeth  and  tongue  being  covered  with  mucus.  Soui  taste
In  the  throat,  suddenly, followed  by  .roughness.  Sour-taste


MAGNESIA  CAKBONICA.


149


in  the  mouth.  The  appetite  disappears  ;  ever  since  then
the  stomach  feels  full.  Little  appetite  and  hunger.  Nei-
ther hunger  nor  appetite,  (a.  25,  26  d.)  No  appetite  for
dinner ;  the  appetite  comes  while  eating.  After  having
eaten  one  mouthful,  he  feels  satiated.  Sometimes  little
appetite  and  immediate  repletion  ;  sometimes  the  appetite
is  good.  Hunger,  but  no  appetite  for  bread.  She  does
not  relish  warm  food ;  she  desires  nothing  but  bread  and
butter.  Aversion  to  vegetables  ;  she  prefers  meat,  (8.  d.)
Great  appetite  for  vegetables  ;  aversion  to  meat,  (a.  20  d.)
Eating  meat  causes  dryness  of  the  skin  and  heat.  Desire
for  fruit  and  acid  things.  Thirst,  with  appetite  for  acid
things,  at  noon,  (9.  d.)  A  good  deal  of  thirst,  with  little
appetite,  (a.  8  d.)  Violent  thirst,  afternoon  or  evening.
Thirst  for  water  ;  she  drinks  a  good  deal  in  the  afternoon.
Thirst  for  water  in  the  forenoon;  in  the  afternoon  the
mouth  feels  dry,  without  any  thirst.  Thirst,  towards  even-
ing ;  he  drinks  a  good  deal ;  this  brings  on  an  emission  of
urine  during  the  night.  Violent  thirst,  waking  her  in  the
night,  (previous  to  the  appearance  of  the  menses.)  Thirst
for  cold  drinks,  (succeeding  a  looseness  of  the  bowels,)
causing  her  to  drink  a  good  "deal.

Gastric  Symptoms. — She  feels  weak  while  eating.
After  a  meal,  weakness,  pale  countenance,  nausea  and
dark-coloured  vomiting  of  the  ingesta,  (a.  7  d.)  Colic  and
distension  of  the  abdomen,  after  a  meal.  Unsuccessful
eructations,  (a.  12  h.)  Empty  eructations,  even  after  the
breakfast-soup.  Frequent  eructations,  without  taste  or
smell.  Belching,  in  the  afternoon.  Eructations,  tasting  of
the  ingesta,  early  in  the  morning.  Empty  eructations,  ac-
companied by  a  cutting-tearing  over  the  umbilicus,  from
the  left  to  the  right  side.  Eructations,  with  sneezing,  to-
wards evening.  Frequent  eructations,  with  pain  in  the
stomach.  Rising  of  cold  air.  Sour  eructations.  Fre-
quent hiccough,  followed  by  eructations,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, after  rising.  Continual  hiccough,  in  the  evening.  Sup-
pressed hiccough,  causing  a  spasmodic  pain  in  the  sto-
mach. Loathing,  without  any  desire  to  vomit,  (shortly.)
Loathing  and  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the  evening.  Loath-
ing, with  pain  and  coldness  of  the  stomach,  (shortly.)  Loath-
ing and  nausea,  (as  if  from  a  deranged  stomach.)  Loath-


150


MAGNESIA  CARBONiCA.


ing,  with  shuddering,  followed  by  eructations,  (shortly  )
Nausea  and  desire  to  vomit,  with  constipation,  for  three
days. Nausea  and  general  sick  feeling  in  the  forenoon  ;
going  off  after  dinner,  (21.  d.) Nausea,  with  eructations
tasting  of  rotten  eggs,  the  whole  night  until  early  in  the
morning,  (15.  d.) Inclination  to  vomit,  and  accumulation
of  water  in  the  mouth. Vomiting  of  bitter  water,  but  no
aliments,  at  dinner  ;  after  which  the  bitter  taste  in  the
mouth  was  yet  felt,  for  a  long  time. Vomiting  at  dinner,
after  nausea  ;  violent  vertigo  and  retching  ;  first,  he  vomit-
ed a  saltish  water,  afterwards  soup,  then  again  water,  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour ;  accompanied  by  anguish  as  if  he  had
to  die,  sweat  on  the  forehead,  for  one  hour  ;  afterwards
expulsion  of  white  liquid  stools,  followed  by  cutting  in  the
abdomen  and  distension  of  the  same,  (42.  d.)

Stomach.— Sickness  at  the  stomach,  as  if  he  would
vomit,  with  empty  eructations. Pain  in  the  stomach  with
nausea,  heaviness  of  the  head  and  ill-humor,  without  Aver-
sion to  food. Pain  in  the  stomach,  with  nausea,  early  m
the  morning,  relieved  by  eating. The  stomach  feels  sick
and  full  of  water,  with  a  desire  for  eructations. Pain  in
the  stomach,  like  qualms  of  sickness,  (shortly.)  Sensa-
tion if  the  stomach  had  been  spoiled,  after  dinner  Pain
in  the  stomach,  in  the  forenoon,  resembling  a  feeling  ot
emptiness  and  qualmishness,  better  after  dinner.  Empty
feeling  in  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  with  empty
eructations,  (9.  d.) Pressure  in  the  stomach.  Pressure
in  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest,  going  on  by
empty  eructations. Distension  and  fulness  ot  the  sto-
mach, going  ' off  only  by  frequent  eructations.  Con-
tractive pain  in  the  stomach. Contractive  pain  in  the
stomach,  after  dinner. Contractive  pain  in  the  stomach,
hindering  sleep  at  night,  (15.  d.) Sore  pain  in  the  sto-
mach and  in  both  hypochondriac  regions,  when  touching
the  parts,  even  at  night,  when  in  bed,  (42.  and  43.  d.)
Ulcerative  pain  in  the  stomach,  with  great  sensitiveness
to  pressure,  and  feeling  as  if  the  stomach  would  fall  out  of
the  body,  accompanied  by  coldness  and  inclination  to
fall ;  she  was  so  weak  that  she  was  unable  to  walk  across
her  room ;  relieved  by  drinking  some  coffee,  (26.  d.)
Audible  grunting  in  the  stomach,  towards  noon.  Audible


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


151


grunting  in  the  stomach  and  afterwards  in  the  abdomen,
with  yawning,  in  the  evening.  Sudden  stitches,  as  with
a  knife,  on  the  right  side  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  they
can  scarcely  be  endured.  Violent  stitch  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  causing  one  to  start.  Dull  stitch  on  the  right
side  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  right
chest.  Burning  sensation  on  the  inside  of  the  left  half  of
the  chest,  with  sweet  taste  in  the  throat ;  afterwards  cough
with  discharge  of  a  piece  of  tenacious,  brown  mucus  ;
when  sitting,  (8.  d.)

Abdomen. — Pinching  and  contractive  sensation  extend-
ing from  both  hypochondria  towards  the  umbilicus,  fre-
quently going  and  coming. Stitch  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium.  Dull  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  after
dinner. Violent  stitch  as  with  a  knife,  into  the  right  lower
rib,  in  the  evening,  when  stooping,  going  off  when  raising
the  head. Sensation  as  if  something  hard  were  lodged  in
the  region  of  the  liver,  with  frequent  pinching  in  the  abdo-
men, (a.  2  h.) Fine  pinching,  externally,  under  the  last
right  rib,  extending  a  little  higher  up,  followed  by  a  burning
sensation  in  that  same  place. Fine  slinging  in  the  left
hypochondrium. Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  ribs,
resembling  splenetic  stitches,  when standing, (2.  d.)
Paralytic  pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  which  prevented
her  resting  on  this  side,  in  the  evening. Colic,  followed
by  watery  leucorrhcea,  occasionally,  (25.  d.) Violent  colic,
early  in  the  morning,  especially  around  the  umbilicus,  in
and  out  of  bed  ;  relieved  after  eating  some  warm  soup.
Great  heaviness  in  the  abdomen. Feeling  of  repletion^!
the  abdomen,  relieved  by  walking,  in  the  afternoon.  Dre-
tension  of  the  abdomen. Distension  of  the  abdomen,  after
a  meal,  and  immediate  feeling  of  repletion,  at  noon.  Great
distension  of  the  abdomen,  after  dinner,  (II.  d.)  Great
bloatedness  of  the  abdomen,  from  afternoon  till  evening,
(25.  d.) Excessive  distension  of  the  abdomen ;  after-
wards, and  at  night,  an  excessive  emission  of  flatulence
affording  relief. Great  distension  of  the  abdomen,  in  spite
of  three  diarrhceic  stools. Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,
every  morning,  when  in  bed,  ceasing  after  a  meal,  (a.  20
d.) Spasmodic,  contractive  pain  in  the  abdomen,  after-
wards diarrhoea,  affording  relief;  in  the  evening.  Con-


152


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


striction.and  pinching  in  the  right  iliac  region,  very  pain-
ful, (28.  d.) Griping,  and  digging  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
the  menses  would  set  in,  with  emission  of  a  quantity  of
fetid  flatulence,  at  noon  ;  in  the  evening,  the  colicky  pains
increase,  preceded  by  grunting  in  the  abdomen.  Painful
griping  in  the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus,  intermitting
frequently,  and  afterwards  reaching  as  high  up  as  the  sto-
mach. Colicky  pains  in  the  whole  of  the  abdomen,  with
pressing  towards  the  genital  organs  ;  accompanied  by  dis-
charge of  blood  from  the  vagina. Colicky  pains  and
movement  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  with  regular
stool,  intermitting  frequently,  and  occurring  likewise  early
in  the  morning,  when  in  bed  ;  after  turning  the  trunk  from
side  to  side,  she  finally  discovers  a  position  which  makes
her  feel  more  easy,  (30.  d.) Colicky  pains  in  the  abdo-
men, most  violent  in  the  evening,  with  distension  of  the
abdomen,  relieved  by  emission  of  flatulence,  (28.  d.)  Fre-
quent pinching,  in  the  right  hypochondriac  region.  Violent
pinching  around  the  umbilicus,  with  distension  of  the  ab-
domen ;  afterwards  stool,  which  was  at  first  hard,  then
soft. Violent  pinching  around  the  umbilicus,  followed  by
liquid  stool  causing  a  burning  sensation  in  the  anus,  (3.  d.)
Pinching  and  digging  around  the  umbilicus,  early  in  the
morning! Pinching  in  front  of  the  abdomen,  early  in  the
morning,  without  any  stool. Violent  painful  pinching  in
the  side  of  the  abdomen. Pinching  in  the  whole  abdomen,
in  the  forenoon,  (7.  d.) Pinching  and  rumbling  in  the
whole  abdomen,  followed  by  green  diarrhoea  ;  three  times.
"Violent  pinching  in  the  middle  of  the  abdomen,  relieved  by
Si ission  of  flatulence  ;  afterwards  stool,  first  hard,  scanty,
and  coming  off  with  bearing-down  ;  then  soft  and  easy,
with  burning  at  the  anus,  (5.  d.) Pinching  in  the  abdo-
men, three  days  in  succession,  (a.  1 8  d.) Cutting  m  the  left
side  of  the  abdomen. Painful  cutting  and  pressing  in  the
abdomen  and  both  groins,  rousing  him  from  sleep  at  night.
Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  below  the  umbilicus,  with
bearing-down,  as  if  the  menses  would  set  in.  Cutting  in  the
bowels,  in  the  evening,  until  he  falls  asleep. Violent  colic,
extending  from  the  small  of  the  back  towards  the  pubic
bones,  (a.  4  h.) Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,
especially  when  walking. Violent  colic,  as  if  her  bowels


MAGNESIA  CARDONICA.


153


would  be  torn  out,  for  three  days,  (removed  by  smelling
of  Hepar  sulp.)  Sensation  as  if  every  thing  in  the  abdo-
men were  turning  about,  with  stitches  below  the  umbili-
cus. Pain  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning  after
rising,  as  if  the  intestines  were  empty,  contracted,  and
were  being  torn  out.  A  small  spot  on  the  left  side  of
the  umbilicus  is  painful  when  pressing  upon  it,  as  if  it  were
ulcerated.  Cramp-pain  in  the  right  groin,  going  off  by
friction,  when  walking.  Violent  itching  in  the  right  groin,
with  internal  burning,  both  symptoms  going  off  after
scratching,  accompanied  by  chilliness.  Rumbling  and
moving  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen.  Movement  of  flatu-
lence in  the  epigastrium,  with  pinching.  Movement  of
flatulence  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  followed  by  emis-
sion of  flatulence  and  soft  stool,  the  emission  of  flatulence
affording  relief.  Audible  rumbling,  grunting  and  moving
of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen,  with  fine  cutting,  the  whole
day.  Rumbling  and  guggling  in  the  abdomen,  when
taking  an  inspiration,  as  is  felt  in  spasms,  evening  and
morning;  going  off  by  eating,  (10.  and  11.  d.)  Audible
grunting  in  the  abdomen,  as  in  spasms.  Audible  grunting
and  guggling  in  the  abdomen,  during  motion,  without  know-
ing the  precise  part.  Audible  grunting  below  the  umbili-
cus, two  hours  after  dinner.  Frequent  emission  of  loud
flatus,  afternoon  and  night.  Frequent  emission  of  flatu-
lence, having  a  strong  smell.  Emission  of  flatulence
when  walking,  with  stool  soon  after.  Pressing  as  if  diar-
rhoea would  set  in,  but  nothing  but  flatulence  is  emitted.
Desire  for  stool  and  emission  of  flatulence,  with  cuttintr
and  pinching  in  the  anus,  afterwards  hard  stool  with  press-
ing as  if  diarrhoea  would  set  in.

Stool. — Frequent,  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool,  (23.  d.)
Unsuccessful  desire  for  stool,  after  breakfast.  Continual
desire  for  stool,  only  little  stool  being  passed  ;  it  is  more
like  a  sort  of  fermenting.  Stool  every  tivo  days.  Desire
lor  stool,  with  expulsion  of  only  a  slight  quantity  of  stool,
followed  by  unsuccessful  desire  for  stool,  with  emission  of
flatulence  and  burning  at  the  anus.  No  stool,  (23.  d.)
Hard  stool  only  in  the  evening,  with  pain  and  pressing.
*  Inclines  to  be  constipated.  *  Retention  of  stool  appears
lobe  the  primary  effect  of  Magnesia.  Stool  hard  as  sione,


154


MAGNESIA  CA11B0N1CA.


with  pain  in  the  anus.  '.Very  hard  stool,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, (2.  d.) Very  hard  stool,  with  pressing,  (11.  d.)  The
stool  is  so  hard  that  she  has  to  make  an  effort  to  expel  it  ;
immediately  afler  dinner. Stool  hard  and  in  pieces,  requir-
ing an  effort  to  be  expelled. Hard  stool  in  the  afternoon,
followed  by  burning  at  the  anus. Even  when  the  stool  is
not  hard,  she  has  to  employ  force  to  expel  it,  for  several
days. Soft  stool  in  sufficient  quantity,  requiring  bearing-
down  at  its  termination,  twice  a  day,  (28.  d.) Stool,  the
first  part  of  which  is  hard,  the  second  liquid  with  burning
at  the  rectum  after  the  stool. Stool  only  in  4  days,  little  of
it,  but  soft  and  without  any  pain,  (4.  d.) Soft  stool,  pre-
ceded by  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  with  emission  of  loud
flatulence,  which  affords  relief,  afternoon  and  evening.
Yellow  stool,  in  the  forenoon,  with  bearing-down,  more
frequently  in  the  afternoon. Natural  stool,  morning  and
afternoon. Diarrhoea  for  several  days,  (a.  1 1  d.)  Diar-
rhosa  with  violent  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  pressing
from  seven  to  eight  times  a  day,  for  eight  days. Soft  diar-
rhoea, three  times  a  day. Liquid  diarrhoea,  three  times  a
day,  without  any  trouble,  (the  first  10  d.) Half-liquid  stool
without  any  pain,  early  in  the  morning,  (2.  d.)  Liquid
stool,  followed  by  burning  at  the  anus. Discharge  of  a
liver-coloured  fluid,  followed  by  tenesmus  and  burning.
Diarrhoea,  five  times,  from  morning  till  evening,  (25.  d.)
Diarrhoea  bringing  on  great  weakness. Discharge  of  a
green,  foamy  substance,  (9.  10.  26.  d.) Diarrhoea  of  green
mucus,  early  in  the  morning,  (4.  d.) Green  diarrhoea,
three  times  a  day. Desire  for  diarrhoea,  night  and  morn-
ing rousing  one  from  sleep ;  next  afternoon,  diarrhoea  of
green  mucus,  (8.  d.l  Discharge  of  a  green  liquid,  preceded
bv  pinching,  especially  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdomen,
(2.  d.)  Discharge  of  green  water,  with  great  distension  of
the  abdomen,  eight  times  in  one  forenoon,  (27.  d.)  Dis-
charo-e  of  oreen  mucus,  forenoon  and  afternoon,  with  a
number  of  ascarides,  and  followed  by  burning  at  the  anus.
A  quantity  of  ascarides  with  stool,  (18.  19.  d.)  Discharge
of  ascarides  with  stool,  (a.  30  d.) Discharge  ofascartdes
oetween  the  stools. A  good  deal  of  motion  in  the  abdo-
men previous  to  stool  ;  he  feels  hot  previous  to  the  expul-
sion of  stool. Cutting  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen  pre-


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


155


vious  to  stool.  Tearing  in  the  rectum,  during  stool,  ex-
tending into  the  abdomen.  Faintness  afier  stool,  (a.  7  d.)
Desire  for  stool  with  violent  prickings  in  the  rectum  ;  he
only  passes  some  flatus  which  affords  relief.  Pressure  in
the  rectum,  between  the  stools.  Prickings  in  the  rectum
after  walking  ;  relieved  by  emission  of  flatulence.  Violent
pain  in  the  rectum,  as  if  pins  were  stuck  into  it,  rousing  her
from  sleep  at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  somewhat  relieved
by  emission  of  flatulence,  which  is  likewise  very  painful,
(6.  d.)  Sore  pain  in  the  anus,  or  as  if  it  were  ulcer-
ated, when  silting  or  walking.  Painful  varices  of  the
rectum.

Urinary  Organs. — Desire  to  urinate,  rousing  her  from
sleep  at  9  o'clock  in  the  evening.  Increased  secretion  of
urine,  at  night.  Nightly  micturition  contrary  to  habit.
Frequent  micturition,  emitting  a  good  deal  of  urine  first,
afterwards  less.  Frequent  micturition,  (3.  d.)  In  the
evening,  and  also  at  night,  he  emits  more  urine  than  usual-
ly, the  urine  being  pale.  Apparent  diminution  of  ihe  urine,
an  emission  of  urine  being  followed  by  burning,  in  the
evening.  Inability  to  retain  the  urine,  when  rising  from
the  seat,  or  when  walking.  Involuntary  emission  of  urine
when  walking,  (in  a  female,)  (a.  11  d.)"  Pale  urine.  Green
urine,  in  the  afternoon,  (23.  d.)  White  sediment  in  the
urine.  The  urine  is  burning  when  being  emitted,  like  salt-
water, sometimes  stinging.  Pain  as  from  excoriation  in
the  urethra,  when  urinating,  (a.  10  d.)  Pinching  below
the  umbilicus  after  micturition,  extending  into  the  small  of
the  back,  with  sensation  as  if  flatulence  would  be  emitted,
in  the  open  air.

Genital  Organs. — Diminution  of  the  sexual  instinct,
(immediately.)  Stitch  in  the  urethra,  in  the  region  of  the
glans,  (a.  10  h.)  Pollution  (the  first  night.)  Frequent
pollutions,  almost  every  night.  Slow  erection,  but  the
embrace  is  nevertheless  satisfactory,  (a.  S  d.)  Emission  of
flatulence  with  discharge  of  prostatic  juice.  Frequent
itching  of  the  pudendum.  Menses  delaying  seven  days,  pre-
ceded by  sore  throat.  Menses  three  days  too  late," scanty
and  short.  Menses  delaying  three  days,  first  only  a  little
flow  in  the  evening,  increasing  in  the  night,  and  still  more
next  day,  with  discharge  of  whole  lumps  of  coagulated


MAGNESIA  CARB01NICA.


blood,  for  3  days. Menses  delaying  4  days,  and  more
profuse  than  usual,  (13.  d.) Return  of  the  menses  in  the
case  of  an  old  lady,  that  had  stopped  already  for  years,
they  flow  profusely  for  4  days. The  menses  which  are
habitually  scanty,  appear  immediately  a  few  days  previous
to  their  regular  period,  with  tearing  toothache  and  a  dis-
tension of  the  abdomen  lasting  4  weeks. The  menses  ap-
pear at  night,  first  a  little,  more  profusely  in  the  forenoon  ;
sudden  cessation  in  the  afternoon,  (59,  d.) The  menses
appear  at  the  proper  period,  and  are  painless  j  this  was  not
the  case  usually ;  they  are  accompanied  in  the  forenoon,
by  ill-humor,  improving  in  the  afternoon,  (5.  d.)  Re-ap-
pearance of  the  menses  on  the  third  day,  with  colic,  they
continue  for  several  days. The  menses  are  more  profuse
than  usual  and  last  one  day  too  long. The  menses  flow
profusely  on  the  4th,  and  5th  day,  with  headache,  which  is
worst  in  the  evening. The  menses  appear  six  days  too
soon,  in  the  afternoon  when  walking  ;  on  the  third  day  the
flow  is  very  profuse,  they  last  6  days,  (a.  14  d.) At  night
the  menstrual  flow  is  stronger  than  in  day-time  f  the  bear-
ing-down pains  which  accompany  it,  are  relieved  by  com-
pressing the  abdomen  or  by  stooping. No  discharge  of
blood  during  the  pain  ,  the  blood  only  flows  after  the  pain,
also  at  night  when  asleep. The  flow  is  most  profuse
when  walking  or  standing. The  menstrual  blood  is  dark
and  acrid. The  menstrual  blood  is  dark,  viscid,  almost  like
pitch  and  can  only  be  washed  out  with  difficulty.  The
menstrual  blood  is  thick  and  black,  and  appears  6  days  be-
fore the  time.. Tne  menses  appear  3  days  too  soon,  arc
more  scanty  than  usual  and  last  three  days  longer  than  usu-
al, (26.  d.) The  menses  appear  7  days  too  soon, ^  The
menses  re-appear  after  20  days. Discharge  of  blood  7
days  before  the  time  of  the  menses  ;  they  then  appear  re-
gularly on  the  28th  day. The  menses  appear  14  days  too
soon,  first  scanty,  then  more  profuse,  dark  and  flowing  3
days. The  menses  appear  a  fortnight  too  soon,  with  pain
which  is  especially  violent  in  the  small  of  the  back,  worst
when  sitting  and  easier  when  walking. The  menses  ap-
pear 9  days  too  soon,  are  very  scanty  and  only  flow  2  days-
(12.  d.) The  menses  appear  8  days  too  soon,  at  night,  al-
ter bathing  the  feet,  first  scanty,  then  more  profuse  and


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


157


dark,  with  bearing-down  in the  groins,  during  which
no  blood  is  discharged  ;  blood  is  discharged  with  every
emission  of  flatulence,  especially  at  noon  and  in  the
afternoon. Canine  hunger  in the  evening  previous  to
the  menses,  followed  by  pain  in the  stomach.  Pre-
vious to  the  menses,  bearing-down,  cutting  and  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  it  were  contracted  and  bruised,
especially  when  sitting,  less  so  when  walking  ;  on  the  se-
cond day  of  the  menses  a  profuse  flow  of  brown  blood
with  diminution  of  the  pain  ;  at  night,  the  blood  flows  more
profusely. Menses  appear  6  days  too  soon,  preceded  by
colic  and  pressing  lowards  the  genital  organs.  Coryza,
with  obstruction  of  the  nose,  accompanying  the  appearance
of  the  menses,  for  4  days. A  quantity  of  liquid  stool  dur-
ing the  menses,  followed  by  tremor  ol  the  limbs. Out  of
humor  during  the  menses,  but  not  on  the  first  day.  Head-
ache during  the  menses,  with  feeling  of  heaviness  and
heat. Continued  tearing  during  the  menses,  now  in  the
sides  of  the  head,  now  in  the  vertex,  now  in  the  nape  of
the  neck,  relieved  only  at  night. Drawing  pain  during
the  menses,  from  the  forehead  to  the  occiput,  with  heavi-
ness in  the  brain,  the  whole  day. During  and  after  the
menses,  the  top  of  the  head  feels  bruised  in  the  evening ;
it  is  painful  to  the  touch. During  the  menses,  morning-
agglutination  of  the  inner  canthi  of  both  eyes,  with  heavi-
ness of  the  head. Turbid,  dry,  burning  eyes  during  the
menses.  Burning  rhagades  in  the  lobule  of  the  ear  during
the  menses. Pale  complexion  during  the  menses.  Flat
laste  and  little  appetite  during  the  menses. During  the
menses  :  a  quantity  of  water  accumulates  in  the  mouth,
which  she  is  continually  obliged  to  spit  up;  nausea  from
morning  till  noon  ;  violent  colic ;  cutting  around  the  um-
bilicus, relieved  by  emission  of  flatulence  ;  violent  bearing-
down  in  the  abdomen,  at  night,  and  early  in  the  morning,
lreqiiently  rousing  her  from  sleep  ;  frequent  sneezing,  early
in  the  morning;  frequent,  but  intermitting  headache:
drawing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  relieved  by  stoop-
ing, increased  by  extending  the  limbs  ;  pain  in  the  right
shoulder,  as  if  it  were  dislocated,  she  finds  it  difficult  to
raise  her  arm  ;  the  knees  are  painful  when  walking  as  if
ihey  were  bruised  ;  pain  in  the  feet,  also,  when  in  bed;


158


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


ilchino-  around  the  neck  and  shoulders  ;  faintness,  exhaus-
tion, with  sweat  without  any  thirst ;  so  faint  that  she  was
scarcely  able  to  walk  ;  sleepy  and  weary  on  the  second
day  of  the  menses  ;  frequent  waking  at  night ;  chilliness  ;
chilliness  when  she  woke  or  uncovered  herself ;  violent
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  both
when  stooping  or  no,  afternoon  and  evening.  Leucorrhcea
after  the  menses.  Thin,  scanty  leucorrhoea,  with  pinching
around  the  navel.  Leucorrhoea,  several  times  in  the  after-
noon, when  walking  or  sitting.  Leucorrhcea,  like  water,
(10»  d.)  Smarting  leucorrhcea.  Discharge  of  while  mu-
cus, preceded  by  abdominal  spasms.

Cold,  Catarrh.— Violent  tickling  in  the  nose,  followed
by  sneezing,  in  the  evening. Frequent  itching  in  the  left
nasal  cavity. Violent  itching  in  the  nostrils,  going  off  after
scratching. Prickling,  sore  feeling  in the  right  nasal
fossa,  as  in  a  cold,  during  and  between  the  acts  of  mictu-
rition. Desire  to  sneeze,  and  tickling  in  the  right  nasal
fossa. Frequent  sneezing,  early  in  the  morning,  from
tickling  in  the  nose. Violent  sneezing,  and  tickling  in  the
whole  nose,  (6.  d.) Frequent  sneezing,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, with  obstruction  of  the  nose,  (9-  d.) Feeling  of  cory-
za,  early  in  the  morning,  with  obstruction  of  the  nose,  in-
terrupted by  the  sudden  secretion  of  a  few  drops.  Desire
to  blow  the  nose,  with  sensation,  as  if  the  nose  were  lull
of  mucus  ;  but  nothing  is  expelled,  and  the  nose  remains
obstructed. Dryness  of  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning,
and  obstruction  of  the  left  nostril,  (2.  d.) Dryness  of  the
nose,  every  morning  when  waking. Dry  coryza,  (35.  d.)
Dry  coryza,  and  obstruction  of  the  nose,  waking  her  at
•  night.  Obstruction  of  the  nose,  frequently  alternating  with
fluent  coryza. Obstruction  of  the  nose,  in  the  afternoon.
Corvza,  fluent  early  in  the  morning,  dry  in  the  afternoon,
05  d  ) Violent  coryza,  with  obstruction  of  the  right  nos-
tril.' Corvza,  for  several  days,  especially  morning  and  even-
ing Dry  coryza,  the  whole  day ;  she  has  to  open  the  mouth
in  order  to  get  breath  ;  nevertheless,  there  is  mucus  in
the  nose. Water  drops  out  of  her  nose  unawares,  with-
out any  coryza  being  present. Fluent  coryza,  early  in
°he  mining,  when  rising,  followed  by  obstruction  of  the
nosMhe  whole  day. Fluent  coryza,  until  next  morning,


MAGNESIA  CARBONIC  A.


159


(4.  d.)  Coryza,  with  discharge  of  thick  mucus,  and  sen-
sation as  if  the  nose  were  swollen  from  the  frequent  blow-
ing, for  three  days.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Contractive  sensation  in  the  tra-
chea) with  aching  in  the  pit  of  the  throat.  Hoarseness  for  2
days,  (a.  22  d.)  Hoarseness  and  roughness  in  the  throat,  in
the  forenoon ;  going  off  after  dinner.  Complete  hoarseness,
towards  evening.  Irritation  in  the  region  of  the  thyroid
gland,  with  a  good  deal  of  coughing,  in  the  forenoon.
Tickling  in  the  throat,  followed  by  short  cough.  Frequent
cough,  in  the  afternoon,  from  tickling  in  the  throat,  (3.  d.)
Cough,  with  scraping  in  the  throat,  (a.  1  h.)  Rough
cough,  also  at  night.  Morning-cough,  towards  3  o'clock,
in  two  fits,  with  expectoration  of  mucus,  (2.  d.)  Hollow,
dull  cough.  Fits  of  spasmodic  cough,  the  whole  night.
Cough  after  the  slightest  echauffement.  Violent  cough,
with  difficult,  thin,  salt  expectoration.  During  the  cough,
pain  in  the  chest  as  if  it  were  being  cut  to  pieces ;  early
in  the  morning,  yellowish,  purulent  discharge,  for  some
days,  (a.  67  d.)

Chest. — Short  breathing,  when  walking,  (16.  d.)
Tightness  of  the  chest  in  the  afternoon,  as  if  it  were  be-
tween screws,  with  short  breathing,  (15.  d.)  Tightness  of
the  chest,  with  weary  and  painful  feet  when  ascending  an
elevation,  (11.  d.)  Contractive  sensation  around  the  chest,
the  shoulder  feeling  bruised,  with  pain  in  the  right  middle-
finger  as  if  it  were  sprained ;  all  this  passes  off  by  eruc-
tation, in  the  evening.  Constrictive  sensation  around  the
middle  of  the  chest,  with  short  breath,  in  the  evening.
Contractive  and  clawing  sensation  in  the  chest,  with  heavy,
short  breathing,  when  sitting  or  walking.  Great  oppres-
sion of  the  chest,  with  occasional  deep  breathing,  (6.  d.)
Pressure  upon  the  chest,  with  heaviness  and  a  feeling  of
oppression  independent  of  breathing,  in  the  evening.  Sud-
den aching  in  the  chest,  arresting  breathing,  (a.  68  d.)
Intensely  painful  cutting  and  stitches  in  the  chest,  inde-
pendent of  breathing,  in  the  evening.  Painful  cutting  and
pricking  deep  in  the  middle  of  the  chest,  unchanged  either
by  walking  or  breathing,  after  dinner,  until  evening.  A
stitch  in  the  ribs  below  the  right  axilla.  Stitches  below
the  right  side  of  the  chest,  towards  the  umbilicus,  or  dart-


160


MAGNESIA  CAItBONlCA.


ing  out  at  the  shoulder,  also  during  an  inspiration.  Dull
stitches  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  during  an  inspiration,
extending  into  the  shoulder.  A  stitch  into  the  left  region  of
the  ribs,  coming  out  below  the  left  scapula,  when  standing,
(13.  d.) Single,  violent  stitches  in  the  region  of  the  last
left  rib,  which  almost  make  her  scream,  mostly  when  sit-
ting, (a.  10  d.) Stitches  below  the  left  half  of  the  chest,
when  yawning,  also  after  dinner,  or  in  the  evening  when
they  are  felt  in  the  sitting  posture,  and  sometimes  extend
into  the  sternum. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
under  the  shoulder. Stitch  into  the  praecordial  region,
(10.  d.) Stitches  in  the  sternum,  sometimes  in  the  even-
ing, when  walking,  with  short  breathing. Palpitation  of
the  heart. Sudden,  violent  sore  pain  in  the  heart,  with
distinctly  audible  cracking,  (after  a  meal,)  accompanied
by  a  tormenting  nausea. A  number  of  small,  red,  not
elevated  spots  upon  the  chest,  without  itching. Pain  as
from  bruises  in  the  muscles  of  the  chest,  during  motion,
and  when  touching  them,  (a.  8  d.)

Back.— Sudden,  piercing  pain  in  the  os  coccygis.  Pain
in  the  small  of  the  back  and  back,  at  night,  so  violent  that
she  was  unable  to  lie  still,  (2.  d.) Violent  pain,  as  from
bruises,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  from  afternoon  till  even-
ing. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  small  of  the  back,  from
morning  till  afternoon,  (27.  d.) Two  violent,  concussive
tearings  in  the  lower  part  of  the  vertebral  column,  which
produced  a  sensation  as  if  the  column  were  being  drawn
backwards,  followed  by  stitches  in  the  same  region  ;  in
the  evening. Stitch  into  the  small  of  the  back,  on  the
ricrht  side,  followed  by  jerking  stitches  in  the  small  o  the
b?ck. Burning  itching  in  the  small  of  the  back,  above
the  nates. Feeling  of  tightness  in  the  small  ot  the  back,
above  the  hips. Violent  pain  in  the  back,  at  night,  in
bed  as  if  the  parts  had  been  dashed  to  pieces,  worst  during
motion,  but  also  when  at  rest. Dull  stitches  into  the
back. Violent  itching,  especially  over  the  hips.  Violent
tearing  and  darting  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  gradually  de-
scending along  the  back,  and  passing  off  there.

Neck.- Violent  stitch  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  when
sneezing.  Itching  biting  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  neck,
with  burning  after  the  scratching.  •  Tearing  and  drawing


MAGNESIA  CAKB0N1CA.


161


in  the  muscles  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck,  in  the  even-
ing. Pressure  on  the  neck,  as  if  the  cravat  were  tied  too
fast. The  thyroid  gland  appears  to  her  enlarged.

Superior  Extremities. — Fine  stitches  towards  the
axilla,  when  raising  the  arm,  not  otherwise. In  the  right
shoulder  she  feels  a  pain  as  from  a  sprain,  when  raising
the  arm  without  thinking  of  it ;  she  does  not  feel  the  pain
when  she  raises  the  arm  on  purpose,  (19.  d.) Pain  in  the
right  shoulder. Pressure  upon  the  shoulder.  Straining
sensation  from  the  shoulder  to  the  angle  of  the  lower
jaw  ;  pain  prevented  him  from  stooping,  and  made  it  even
impossible  for  him  to  close  the  jaws. Pain,  as  from  a
sprain,  in  the  right  shoulder,  when  moving  the  arm,  also
when  in  bed.  Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  right-shoulder-
joint,  with  sensation  as  if  he  ought  to  let  his  arm  hang
down,  in  the  evening. Paralytic  pain,  as  from  bruises,  in
the  left  shoulder,  only  felt  when  moving  the  arm  and  trunk,
and  when  gaping,  (58.  d.)  Violent  contractive  pain  in  both
shoulders,  and  tearing  down  the  back,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, (29.  d.) Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder  extending  to
the  scapula,  early  in  the  morning. Tearing  pain  in  the
right  shoulder,  extending  to  the  clavicle  and  the  chest.
Tearing  in  the  left  shoulder,  extending  to  the  middle  of
the  upper  arm  and  the  elbow,  (6.  7.  d.) Violent  tearing
in  the  arm,  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  wrist-joint,  when
raising  the  arm  and  when  at  rest,  (27.  28.  d.)  Painful*
tearing  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  wrist-joint ;  when
turning  the  hand,  the  tearing  would  extend  to  the  joints
of  the  fingers. Drawing  in  the  arm,  from  below  upwards.
Darting  in  the  arms. Weariness  of  the  arms.  Pimples
on  the  left  arm,  disappearing  again  after  scratching,  and
not  itching  the  last  two  days,  (a.  10  d.) Single,  painful,
cramp-like  gripings  in  the  upper  arms,  immediately  above
the  elbows,  setting  in  with  a  jerk  and  at  intervals,  the  mus-
cles being  hard  as  stone,  day  and  night ;  when  pressing
upon  the  parts  with  the  other  hand,  the  pain  is  relieved  for
some  time,  (20.  d.) Tearing  in  the  upper  arm,  above
the  right  elbow,  extending  as  far  as  the  middle.  The  elbow-
joint  is  painful  when  bending  the  arm. Sharp  drawing
around  the  right  elbow,  apparently  in  the  bone,  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed. Violent  tearing  in  the  elbow-joint,  as  if


162


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


it  were  to  be  pulled  out ;  when  knitting,  (5.  d.)  Stitches  in
the  right  elbow,  when  moving  the  arm,  early  in  the  morn-
ing,^, d.)  Gnawing  in  the  left  elbow  in  the  evening.  Draw-
ing as  far  as  into  the  hand,  in  the  right  lower  arm  ;  it  is
also  felt  when  at  rest ;  the  arm  is  too  heavy  when  raising  it.
(a.  20  d.) Tearing,  from  the  elbow  to  the  middle  of  the
fore-arm,  apparently  in  the  periosteum. Violent  stitches
.  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  right  lower-arm,  near  the
wrist-joint. Itching  in  the  fore-arm,  below  the  bend  of  the
elbow  ;  scratching  leaves  a  red  spot. Itching  of  the  fore-
arm when  washing  it  with  cold  water  and  soap  ;  scratch-
ing brings  on  a  number  of  itching  pimples,  going  off  again
when  wiping  the  arm. Drawing  pain  in  the  hands.  Stitch
in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  followed  by  violent  itching,
going  off  by  scratching.  Burning  in  the  palms  of  the  hands.
The  left  hand  goes  to  sleep,  early  in  the  morning  ;  she  had
been  lying  upon  it  during  the  night. Redness  and  swell-
ing of  the  left  wrist-joint,  with  pain  of  the  bones  when
pressing  upon  them. Itching  of  ihe  palm  of  the  hands  ;
scratching  bringing  on  clear  vesicles. Vesicles  on  the
hands,  with  stinging  pain. Cramp-feeling  in  the  finger-
joints. Tension  in  the  metacarpal  joint  of  the  left  middle-
finder,  two  mornings  in  succession  ;  going  off  in  a  few
hours,  (a.  21  d.) Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  posterior
joint  of  the  little  finger. Tearing  from  the  posterior  joint
,  of  the  right  thumb  as  far  as  the  nail. Tearing  in  the  pos-
terior joints  of  the  right  fingers. Tearing  in  the  tips  of  all
the  finders,  towards  the  dorsa  of  the  hands  ;  early  in  the
morning,  after  rising. Violent  boring  and  gnavying  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  left  thumb,  apparently  in  the  marrow.
Throbbing,  as  if  from  an  ulcer,  in  the  tip  of  the  left  thumb,
after  dinner  ;  going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part  Pain
of  the  posterior  joint  of  the  middle-finger,  as  if  it  had  been
sprained. Ripping-up  pain  around  the  left  thumb  and  in-
dex, followed  by  a  short-lasting  paralysis  of  both  fingers,
for  two  evenings.  Swelling,  redness,  and  heat  of  the  right
middle-finger,  covered  with  itching  blotches  ;  on  those
days  when  he  has  no  stool. Inflammatory  swelling,  with
stinging  pain,  of  the  posterior  joint  of  the  nd e^finger
Itchlna  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  fingers  of  the  right
hand  ;° scratching  brings  on  clear;  non-itching  vesicles,  and


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


163


two  long,  white  streaks  on  the  fingers.  Corrosive  blister
on  the  left  index-finger,  near  the  nail.  Corrosive  blister  on
the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  index-finger,  (a.  10  d.)

Inferior  Extremities. — Pain  in  both  hips,  generally
when  moving  the  limbs.  Violent  pinching  in  the  left  hip
and  small  of  the  back,  after  dinner,  when  walking ;  soon
after  desire  for  stool,  accompanied  and  preceded  by  violent
cutting  in  the  rectum.  Painless  dartings  in  the  posterior,
part  of  the  hip ;  afterwards  in  the  right  hypochondrium.
Painful  tearing  in  the  left  hip-joint,  from  afternoon  till
next  morning.  Stitches  in  tho  left  hip,  in  the  joint,  and  in
the  external  surface  of  the  bone.  Dull  stitches  over  the
right  hip.  Fine,  burning-itching  stingings,  resembling  flea-
bites  ;  at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  the  other  hip,  the  left
side  of  the  small  of  the  back,  and  the  left  hypochondrium.
Stitches,  burning,  and  pain  as  from  bruises,  over  the  left
hip,  extending  up  to  the  shoulder,  increasing  for  three
days,  and  worse  when  stooping  towards  the  painful
side  ;  accompanied  by  dry  cough  and  violent  stitches  in
the  side,  somewhat  relieved  by  bending  double  and  press-
ing upon  the  parts  with  the  hand.  Itching  stitch  over
the  right  hip,  going  off  after  scratching.  The  lower  limbs,
especially  the  knees,  are  very  painful.  Sudden  jerk  in
the  left  lower  limb,  in  the  evening  after  falling  asleep,  which
caused  her  to  start  and  kept  her  awake  for  a  long  time.
Tingling  inquietude  in  the  lower  limbs,  in  the  evening,
she  had  to  move  her  foot  constantly.  Pain  in  the  thighs,
until  evening.  Pain  as  from  bruises,  in  the  femur,  over
the  left  knee,  extending  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  when
walking.  Tearing  in  the  left  thigh,  in  front,  from  the  mid-
dle to  the  knee.  Continual,  lancinating  tearing  from  the
middle  of  the  thigh  to  the  middle  of  the  leg,  going  off  after
rising  from  a  seat.  Painfully  drawing  darting  from  the
right  knee  to  the  middle  of  the  thigh,  when  standing  or
bending  the  limb.  Tearing  from  the  left  knee  until  the
middle  of  the  thigh,  after  dinner.  Pain  in  the  knees,  as
after  a  fatiguing  journey  on  foot;  he  was  scarcely  able  to
walk  without  a  cane,  (a.  4  d.)  Heaviness  and  pain  in  the
knees  when  walking,  from  afternoon  till  evening.  Weary
pain  in  the  knees  when  walking,  from  afternoon  till  even-


164


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


ing,  (3.  d.) Straining  sensation  in  the  bend  of  ihe  left
knee,  as  if  it  were  too  short,  when  setting  the  foot  down  ;
she  came  from  the  open  air  and  just  entered  the  room.
Tension  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  (a.  3  d.) Tension  and
drawing  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  when  walking.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  knees,  to  the  soles  of  the  feet,  resembling
a  burrowing  in  the  marrow. Tearing  in  the  right  knee,
.when  standing. Painful  tearing  in  the  right  knee,  more
towards  the  external  surface. Violent  boring  and  tearing
in  the  left  knee,  as  if  it  would  be  torn  out,  in  the  evening.
Fine  boring  in  the  right  knee,  frequently  intermitting.
Painful  tearing,  extending  from  the  bend  of  the  left  knee  to
the  leg,  apparently  in  the  bone,  with  tension  when  walking,
as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short. Hard  swelling  in  the
bend  of  the  knee,  so  painful  that  he  is  unable  to  extend
the  limb. Stitches  in  the  knee-joint. Pain  in  the  legs,
drawing  from  above  downwards,  (a.  24d.)  Painful  tension  in
the  tendo-Achillis,  extending  up  to  the  calf,  when  walking
fast. Cramp  in  the  left  calf,  at  night,  in  bed,  when  raising
himself  or  when  turning  to  the  other  side,  (a.  24  d.)  Cramp
in  both  calves,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  painful,  nothing
can  alleviate  it,  (a.  6  h.) Violent  tearings  in  the  right
calf,  in  the  afternoon. Cutting  pain  in  the  tibia. Pain,  as
from  bruises,  of  both  tibiae. Spots  upon  the  tibia,  with
burning  pain. Violent  pain  of  the  feet,  as  if  they  were  too
heavy  and  weary,  especially  when  going  up  stairs,  in  the
evening. Pain,  as  from  bruises  of  the  left  tarsal  joint,
early  in  the  morning,  extending  to  the  middle  of  the  tibia,
when  walking  and  setting  the  foot  down  ;  going  off  by
continued  walking. Cramp  in  the  heel,  early  in  the  morn-
ing when  in  bed. Drawing  pain  in  the.  soles  of  the  feet.
Piercing  stitches  in  the  right  heel,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed Painfully  darting  tearing  in  the  left  heel,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed. Cold  feet,  as  if  she  were  wading
through  cold  water. Formication  in  the  dorsum  of  the
right  foot  and  the  lower  surface  of  the  toes- Violent  tear-
in %  in  the  4th  and  5th  toe  of  the  left  foot,  when  walking.
Tearing  in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  when  walking.
Tearing  in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  from  the  com-
mencement to  the  tip. Piercing  stitch  in  the  bend  of


MAGNESIA  CAUBONICA.


165


the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot,  extending  through  to  the  dor-
sum ;  it  caused  her  to  start  and  to  draw  up  the  foot,  in  the
evening. Burning  stitches  in  the  big  toe.

General  Symptoms. — Pains  in  all  the  parts  of  the  body,
at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  another  place. Soreness  over
the  whole  body. Stiffness  of  the  whole  body,  early  in  the
morning,  when  rising. Dartings  in  the  nates,  the  thighs,
the  shoulders  and  frequently  the  face. She  feels  com-
fortable when  in  bed ;  when  rising,  the  darting  pains  re-
commence in  different  places. After  the  lapse  of  three
weeks,  the  symptoms  recur  with  a  certain  perseverance.
The  symptoms  which  made  their  appearance  while  sitting,
diminish  when  walking. In  the  open  air  the  symptoms
appear  to  be  milder  than  in  the  room. Formication  in
different  parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  shoulders  ;
scratching  brings  on  small,  clear  vesicles,  drying  up  in
from  24  to  48  hours  ;  in  the  afternoon,  evening,  and  morn-
ing. Itching  of  different  parts,  forehead,  face,  head,  and
almost  all  over,  going  off  by  scratching. Itching  of  dif-
ferent parts  ;  sometimes  with  burning  after  scratching.
Violent  itching  of  the  whole  body,  also  of  single  parts  ;
after  scratching  the  parts,  the  itching  appears  in  some
other  parts. Itching  in  different  parts,  recurring  after
scratching  the  parts. Violent  itching  of  the  whole  body.
Burning  prickings  in  different  parts  of  the  body.  Violent
itching  of  the  nates  and  fore-arms,  in  the  evening,  when
undressing;  scratching  brings. on  violently  itching  pim-
ples, which  itch  more  the  more  they  are  scratched.
Itching  of  the  shoulders,  thighs  and  neck,  in  the  evening
before  going  to  sleep,  and  early  in  the  morning  when
dressing,  with  itching  pimples  after  scratching,  lasting  24
hours. Large  pimples  in  different  parts  of  the  body.
Vesicles  and  pimples,  sometimes  violently  itching,  on  the
neck,  nape  of  the  neck,  below  and  in  front  of  the  ears,  on
the  arms,  and  between  the  fingers. Large  nodosities  with
stinging  pain,  under  the  skin,  in  the  axilla,  and  above  the
elbow-joint. Hard  nodosities  in  front  of  the  left  shoulder,
deep  in  the  skin,  with  stinging  pain  when  pressing  upon
them,  as  is  felt  in  a  boil,  with  redness. Itching  tubercle
on  the  wrist-joint,  pouring  out  clear  water  when  pressino-
upon  it. Small,  red,  little  elevated,  smooth  herpes,  scaling


166


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


off  afterwards,  without  sensation,  on  the  chest  and  calves.
Small  boils  on  the  forehead,  neck,  chest,  and  especially  the
thighs. An  old  cicatrix  remaining  from  a  burn,  became  a
corrosive  blister,  with  which  he  suffeied  for  6  weeks.
Great  sensitiveness  of  the  scalp  and  skin  of  the  body,
especially  to  cold  ;  every  little  breeze  gives  her  a  cold
thrill,  and  she  shivers  through  and  through. Dryness  of
the  skin,  towards  morning,  when  in  bed,  (a.  16  d.)  Pro-
fuse sweat  by  day,  even  when  taking  but  little  exercise.
Parts  become  easily  strained  and  sprained  ;  when  bend-
ing the  arm  backwards,  the  shoulder  was  painful  as  from
a  sprain,  and  felt  bruised  when  touching  it ;  she  was  un-
able to  turn  her  head  to  the  left  side  without  suffering  great
pain. Uneasiness  in  the  limbs,  in  the  evening,  after  long
sitting.

Fits,  Weakness. — Relaxed  condition  of  the  body,  (a.
7  d.) Sudden  depression  of  strength  when  walking  in  the
open  air. One  gets  tired  easily  when  walking,  (a.  6  d.)
Weak  feeling,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  (a.  17
d.) Great  weakness  of  the  lower  limbs. Heaviness  and
great  weariness  of  the  limbs,  the  whole  day,  (shortly.)
Weariness  and  faintness  of  the  thighs,  when  sitting,  worse
when  walking. Great  weakness  of  the  legs,  when  sitting
and  when  rising  from  a  seat ;  going  off  during  motion.
Weary  and  drowsy,  at  noon,  after  eating  (something  hard
to  digest ;)  he  suddenly  drops  to  sleep  while  standing  or
talking,  with  obtusion  of  the  head,  unfitting  him  completely
for  thinking. Faint and  drowsy  after  supper,  with
a  sort  of  qualmish  feeling  in  the  abdomen. Faint  and
weary  in  the  whole  body,  especially  the  feet,  (a.  7  d.)
Hands  and  feet  feel  as  if  they  had  been  broken  and  dashed
to  pieces,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking,  with  tremor
and  weakness  ;  she  has  to  lie  down,  then  she  feels  better ;
when  getting  out  of  bed  she  feels  cold  immediately.  Weak,
as  if  one  would  fall  over,  after  vomiting,  (42.  d.)  Great
weakness  in  the  whole  body,  with  wretched  appearance
and  inclination  to  vomit. Very  faint,  in  the  afternoon,
when  sitting  or  walking,  less  when  standing.  Weakness,
in  the  evening,  she  had  to  lie  down,  (42.  d.) Faint,  in-
disposed to  business  or  conversation,  uncomfortable,  early
in  the  morning.  Faint,  weary,  uncomfortable,  with  anxious


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


167


warmth  and  sweat,  (25.  d.)  Faint  and  tremulous,  early
in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  going  off  after  rising,  (9.  d.)
When  waking  from  a  sound  sleep,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, he  is  nevertheless  more  fatigued  than  he  was  before
going  to  bed.  A  kind  of  paralysis  of  the  left  lower  limb,
with  pain  in  the  hip  and  knee-joint;  next  day  the  right
lower  and  upper  limb  became  affected ;  when  walking,
he  suffered  with  pain  constantly,  and  was  obliged  to  turn
his  foot  entirely  outwards.

Sleep. — Constant,  troublesome  gaping,  early  in  the
morning,  after  rising. Frequent  yawning,  every  day.
Yaw  ning,  accompanied  and  followed  by  hiccough.  Fre-
quent yawning,  wilh  sneezing,  (27.  d.) Drowsy  and  in-
dolent, in  the  forenoon,  with  frequent  yawning  and  stretch-
ing. Drowsy  and  indolent  after  dinner,  with  yawning  and
stretching,  (6.  d.) Drowsy,  early  in  the  morning,  after  a
sound  sleep,  (2.  d.) Inclines  to  sleep,  starting  frequently.
Shedoes  not  wake  in  the  night,  which  is  against  her  custom.
Sound  sleep  the  first,  nights,  and  better  than  usual..  Kalis
asleep  easily  and  soon,  sleeps  well,  (14.  d.)  Sleepless-
ness the  whole  night,  (52.  d.)  No  sleep  for  several  nights,
and  constant  tossing  about,  when  in  bed,  (a.  22  d.)  Little
sleep,  and  a  number  of  dreams. In  the  evening,  she  did
not  feel  sleepy  till  late  in  the  night. She  fell  asleep  late,
(31.  d.) Restless  sleep,  with  frequent  waking,  (13.  d.)
A  number  of  restless  nights,  with  unrefreshing  sleep.
Wakes  up  at  midnight  without  any  particular  cause  ;  she
was  unable  to  fall  asleep  again 'before  2  o'clock  in  the
morning,  and  then  slept  imperfectly  until  5  o'clock,  (15.  d.)
Wakes  up  at  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  is  unable  to  fall
asleep  again,  (59.  d.) She  wakes  up  after  1  o'clock,  and
is  unable  to  fall  asleep  again  before  5  ;  all  her  limbs  felt
sore,  and  she  tossed  from  side  to  side. She  luakes  at
2  o  clock  in  the  morning,  and  is  then  unable  to  fall
asleep  again. Agitation  of  the  blood,  in  the  evening,
which  prevents  her  from  falling  asleep;  she  has  a  rest-
Jess  sleep,  and  has  to  toss  about  constantly.  Drowsi-
n£?  at  "'g'11'  from  anxiety  and  heaviness  in  the  whole
body, ^he  feels  anxious  for  many  nights  ;  she  feels  as
it  she  were  lying  upon  stones  and  has  to  turn  about  fre-
quently. For  many  nights  she  is  unable  to  fall  asleep,


ICQ  MAGNESIA  CARBONlCA.

owing  to  anxiety,  she  has  to  uncover  herself  frequently,
but  she  cannot  remain  uncovered  long  on  account  of  feel-
ing too  cold,  (a.  4  and  23  d.) She  feels  anxious  and  too
warm  for  many  nights  in  succession  ;  she  remains  awake
for  a  long  time,  (a.  29  d.) Reslless  sleep  from  1  to  4
o'clock  at  night,  with  heat  and  sweat,  so  that  she  cannot
bear  being  covered  ;  after  4  o'clock  she  sleeps  without
sweating. Great  internal  heat  at  night,  he  was  scarcely
able  to  endure  the  covering  of  the  bed,  and  nevertheless,
dreaded  the  slightest  exposure,  (a.  4  d.) Toothache,  at
night,  the  tooth  feels  elongated,  the  pain  being  more  tear-
ing than  throbbing. Throbbing  and  drawing  toothache,
the  whole  night. After  midnight  she  is  roused  from  sleep
by  violent  pain  in  the  stomach,  which  feels  empty. At  4
o'clock  in  the  morning  she  has  to  urinate,  followed  by
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  and  early  in  the  morning  she
feels  a  pain  in  the  stomach  and  inclination  to  yomit,  (1.  d.)
Niahtly  wetting  the  bed. At  night  she  wakes  up  with
timet,  which  she  had  felt  before  in  her  dream. Cxreat  un-
easiness m  the  left  lower  limb,  at  night,  he  has  to  lay  it
on  some  cool  place  outside  of  the  bed. Throbbmg  in  the
left  side  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening  when  falling  asleep.
Horrid  itching  at  night,  like  biting,  over  the  whole  body  ;
it  caused  her  to  'start  frequently. For  two  nights  in  suc-
cession he  started  high  up  in  his  bed,  from  side  to  side
when  the  body  lay  still  again,  the  upper  and  ^vhm^
quivered  the  whole  night,  even  while  awake,  but  without
any  pain-;  when  waking  up  in  the  morning,  ^  knew  no-
thing of  what  had  happened  in  the  night  (a.  8  d  ) 1  alk-
hg  while  asleep,  after  midnight (9.  d.)  Loud.tatag,
early  in  the  morning,  while  asleep,  knocking  with  her
headY  against  the  wall ;  she  knows  nothing  of  it  when  wak-
fnil  • She  attempted  to  talk  in  a  dream,  without  being
able  to  do  so  ;  this  tormented  her,  (17.  d.) Loud  shrieks
When  asleep,  'waking  from  a  vivid  dream,  which  she  was
no  ah  e  uncollect Starting  up  from  her  sleep  a  «md-
nSht He  starts  when  going  to  sleep,  and  then  feels  un-
easy n  his  limbs. Starting -during  the  siesta,  for  severa
S At  night,  when  lying  upon  his  back  or  on  the  right
side he  Ss  and  utters  shrieks  owing  to  some  horrid
dream Nightly  starting  and  shrieking  in  a  dream,  he


MAGNESIA  CARBONIOA.  ltJ9

quarrels  with  a  beggar.  Anxious  dreams  at  night  Anx-
ious dreams  as  if  he  could  not  find  his  way  in  his  own
house.  Anxious  dream  about  a  fight  with  robbers.  He
dreams  he  had  an  epileptic  fit.  Dreams  of  quarrels  and
vexation.  Dreams  of  money,  pleasure,  jokes  and  histori-
cal events.  Anxious,  sad  dreams  of  dead  relatives,  misfor-
tunes, &c.  Anxious  dream  with  shrieks,  weeping  and
sobbing.  Anxious  dreams  about  fire  and  burning.  Dreams
about  danger  of  an  inundation.

Fever. — Chilliness  from  morning  till  evening,  4  days,
(a.  60  d.) Chills,  with  shaking,  in  the  evening  ;  also  when
in  bed,  she  was  a  whole  hour  without  getting  warm,  (2.  •!.)
Chilliness,  when  in  bed,  in  the  evening,  for  2  hours.  Chills
with  shaking,  in  the  evening,  without  feeling  cold  to  the
touch  ;  the  chills  begin  at  the  feet ;  they  go  off  when  in
bed  ;  next  morning,  sweat,  (2.  d.) Chilliness,  after  a
long  journey  on  foot,  the  whole  night,  and  also  early  in  the
morning  when  near  the  warm  stove,  (43.  d.)  Chilliness
along  the  back,  every  afternoon  from  4  o'clock  till  night
feverish  shuddering  down  the  back,  every  forenoon  at  9
o  clock,  with  some  nausea,  without  any  subsequent  heat
bnuddering,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  for  a  quarter  of
aii  hour,  without  any  subsequent  heat,  sweat  or  thirst
Coldness  in  the  evening,  and  chills  with  shaking,  continu-
ing for  a  time  even  when  in  bed. Cold  feelink  jn  the
evening  when  undressing  ;  it  passes  off  when  in  bed
Cold  feeling,  in  the  evening  before  lying  down  ;  it  goes
off  in  the  bed Coldness  in  the  evening  when  in  bed
quarter  of  an  hour,  as  if  icy  cold  water  were  poured  over
one. Thirst  after  dinner-;  afterwards  chilliness  ;  in  the
evening,  burning  heat  in  the  face,  with  cold  feet  and  l\o-

the  head. A  f ,  ih  r

Hot  feehng  In  the  body,  in  the  forenoon,  frequently  lZ'
and  coming,  without  either  sweat  or  thirst. Incrfa  eH

Xi^jT^STr  "  lhe;b°dy'  "™*ht>

h.) Mornfng-Tw^t (a i2  d M  <»•  ^

days,  (a  48^ ^,  V, d,) Morning  sweat,  for  f>
y w  d  ) The  child  sweats  in  the  evening,  when

8


ft


■J70  MAGNESIA  MURIATIC^'

falling  asleep.  Fetid  night-sweat.  Sour-smelling ,  greasy
sweai,  which  it  is  difficult  to  wash  out,  the  whole  night.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA^JCHLOKmE  OF

It  is  but  little  which  I  have  to  offer  concerning  this  drug.
But  it  must  certainly  become  a  powerful  agent  in  the  treat-
ment of  chronic  diseases,  considering  that  bathing  in  the
Sas  frequently  done  great  good  even making raUowance
for  the  good  effects  of  the  journey  the  absence  of  the  caies
and  turmoil  of  business,  the  dashing  of  the  waves,  &c.  In
Ae  NoXsea,  a  pound  of  sea-water  contains  at  least  an

^^etintmuc h  as  one  anti-psoric  is  seldom ,  suffi-
oiPnt  to  cure  developed  psora,  it  was  impossible  that  these
ffatU  more  symptoms  than  are  contained
X  chloride. The  remaining  symp'.oms  ought  to  be

symptoms  were  pre  . {he  head erupllon  in

tions  m  the  ear  ,  tensive  t  talking,  or

firi^^^^^ *e  ri§ht  side ;

fC  tin£l  dSension  of  the  abdomen,  with  constipation  ;

continual  distensl°n,  mnscles  0f  the  abdomen  ;  old,  pain-
tinghng  stinging  n  the  n^uscles  ot  ^

diarrhoea  ,  WVC  an"  b  rf  j  on  leucorrhnea  ;  trouble-
even  mto  the  thighs  and  brn  i  g  ^  m
S0me  dryness of  the ^  ,  the  a rm^  ^  ^
the  morning,  when  wakm  £  P^J  t  feet ;  l,a-
S^ScoM;  weakness  of  the  body,  apparently
originating  in  the  stomach-


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.  171

My  co-observers  are :  Drs.  Hartlaub,  Jahr,  Schreter,
and  Ng.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  Magnesia  mur.  is  especially
suitable  for  diseases  of  the  female  sex,  especially  for
hysteric  and  spasmodic  conditions. — Scrofulosis? — Dis-
eases of  the  bones  / — Contractive, boring,  spasmodic
neuralgia,  here  and  th  ere. — Nervous  headache  ? — Diminu-
tion of  hearing.— Deafness  ?— Soreness  and  sore  pain  of
the  nostrils— Scurf  in  the  nose,  which  is  painful  to  the
touch.— Ulcerated  nostrils.— Discharge  of  an  acrid,  corro-
sive fluid  from  the  nose.— Blennorrhoea  of  the  Schneider-
ian  membrane. —  Ozsena  scrofulosa.— Ozaena benigna  ;
soreness  of  the  inside  of  the  nose,  especially  of  the  inter-
nal surface  of  the  wings  of  the  nose  and  the  septum,
yellow  scurf  in  the  nose,  discharge  of  a  slimy,  acrid  fluid
from  the  nose,  causing  redness  and 'soreness  of  the  upper
lip,  obstruction  of  the  nose,  and  inability  to  breathe  through
the  nose,  sore  pain  and  burning,  increased  by  blowing  the
nose,  sneezing,  or  by  touching  it,  swelling,  hardness,  red-
ness, heat,  especially  of  the  lower  part  of  the  nose,  worse
in  the  morning,  with  pale,  yellowish  countenance.— Claw-
ing, tearing  and  tensive  pains  in  both  the  hard  and  soft
parts  of  the  face.— Slow  dentition  of  small  children,  with
bloatedness  of  the  abdomen,  and  constipation— Frequent,
and  even  continual  nausea,  with  livid  complexion,  great
nervous  irritation,  and  great  disposition  to  weep— Want
of  appetite,  with  clean  tongue,  in  hooping  cough— Chronic
affections  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen?- Chronic  inflam-
mations of  the  liver  and  spleen  ?— Nausea  of  pregnant
females,  the  whole  day,  without  resulting  in  vomiting
n  spue  of  tins  nausea  they  eat  certain  aliments  with  appe-
t.te,  their  complexion  being  livid,  with  weeping  mood.

To^Ztlv  °f  t  llV6r'  eSpeciaHy  °f  ,h°  left  lobe-  with
bad  dlsti g  °f,1\eaV]neLss  and  P^ure  in  the  abdomen,
naaed hen W  andph*PJc 7hondriac  ™od,  from  badly  ma
naged  hepatitis.— P^/a/  distension  and  large  size  of

tt  Z\TClally>t}te  k-ft  l°be>  0f  lhe  P-cordial"egio{
d  eru^o7V:f  dim,'nrn  °f  ******  biltcrt-te
Spasm n  th '  ,5alulence  and  J^ced  complexion.-
fcpasmm  the  abdomen,  with  violent  bearing-down  unon
the  rectum  and  the  genital  organs-Delaying  menses-


172  MAGNESIA  MUIUATICA.

Too  scanty  menses.— Profuse  discharge  of  a  watery,  thick
mucus  from  the  vagina.— Scirrhous  induration  of  the

uterus.  Nightly  spasmodic  cough  from  tickling  in  the

throat. — Sweaty  feet.  ,  „ „_  ,

Antidotes.— Ars.  ? Cham.? Merc.  sol.  .1  Nuxv.I

Moral  Symptoms  Anxious  and  fearful,  with  ennui,  in

the  evening. Fearful  and  inclining  to  weep,  after  dinner.
Fearful  and  grieving,  lonesome ;  she  is  home-sick  and  weeps.
Anxiousness,  in  the  room,  relieved  in  the  open  air;  early  m
the  morning,  (14.  d.) Want  of  cheerfulness.  Discourage-
ment with  internal  uneasiness.  Discouraged,  out  of  humor,
Out  of  humor,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising,  (6.  d.)
Out  of  humor,  almost  immediately. Vexed,  out  of  humor.
(1 and 2.  d.) Peevish  and  out  of  humor,  (2.  d.)
Peevish  and  out  of  humor,  in  the  evening  ;  cheerful  during
the  day- Out  of  humor,  peevish,  not  disposed  to  work.
Want  of  cheerfulness,  not  disposed  to  mental  labor  INot
disposed  to  work,  the  first  days. Joyless  and  like  one
suffering  5  whatever  she  looks  at  is  offensive  to  her ;  she
is  very  unwilling  to  answer,  early  in  the  morning,  (21.  d.)
Feeling  as  if  one  had  not  slept  enough. He  was  bathe
to  talk;  he  was  desirous  of  indulging  Ins  thoughts  in
oh tude Want  of  resoluteness,  (30.  d.) Illusions  of
fancy  ;  she  imagines,  while  reading  in  a  book  that  some
one  is  reading  after  her  and  obliged  her  to  read  faster,  with
buzzing  and  humming  around  her;  when  raising  her  head
she  imagined  she  saw  large  clouds  and  rocks,  disappear-
ing gradually  ;  followed  by  anguish,  fearfulness,  resiles  -
negss  so  thatVhe  knew  not  what  to  do  with  herself;  all
These  symptoms  disappeared  by  looking  around  for  a  while,
but  re Kd  again  twice  by  continuing  to  read.  Obtusion
of  the  head,  as'if  the  head  were  too  ful ear y  in  the  morn-
incr (1 d.) Reeling  sensation  in  the  head,  (a.  3U  d.;
SiuDefaction  and  obtusion  of  the  head,  with  painful  sensi-
tiieoe ss  of ??he  left  lower  limb,  (1.  d.) Feeling  of  dulness
and  intonation  in  the  head,  (a.  30  d.) Dulness  and
and  lnioxiua  forenoon. Dulness  of

heaviness  oi  the  neaa,  .  .  ,,■>,

be  head  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising,  (13 .  d.)  biddy


CHLORIDE  OP  MAGNESIUM.


173


when  rising;  he  inclines  to  fall  over,  (5.  and  28.  d.)
Giddy  and  reeling  sensation,  going  off  after  motion,  early
in  the  morning. Vertigo,  even  when  walking  in  the  room,
and  when  lowering  the  head  but  a  little. Headache,  early
in  the  morning,  as  if  she  had  not  slept  enough,  with  faint-
ness  and  weariness  of  the  feet. Dull  pain  in  the  head,
with  sensitiveness  of  the  scalp  when  touching  it,  and  sore
burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  after  dinner. Pain  in  the  fore-
head, as  if  it  were  too  heavy,  in  the  afternoon.  Heaviness
in  the  occiput. Heaviness  and  reeling  sensation  in  the
head,  he  is  in  danger  of  falling. Heaviness  and  obtusion
of  the  head,  (a.  3  d.) Pain,  as  if  the  brain  were  pressing
against  the  forehead. Pressure  in  the  forehead,  when
stooping,  as  if  the  brain  would  fall  out,  in  the  evening.
Pressure  in  the  forehead,  (a.  6  d.) Pressure  in  the  fore-
head and  the  forepart  of  the  head,  with  dreary  and  cloudy
state  of  the  head,  the  whole  forenoon,  worst  when  waking
up,  (3.  d.) Press  ure  in  the  frontal  cavities,  extending  to
the  forepart  of  the  head,  where  he  feels  a  burrowing  sen-
sation ;  he  got  into  perspiration  by  strong  exercise,  after
which  the  pain  past  off,  (2.  d.) Pressure  in  the  occiput,
(a  15  d.) A  good  deal  of  pressure,  sharp  and  clawing,
especially  on  the  top  of  the  head  and  in  the  occiput ;  (the
whole  time  of  proving.) Compressive  sensation  in  the
head,  from  both  sides,  with  a  hot  feeling,  and  with  beating
in  the  forehead,  when  pressing  upon  it. Violent,  tearing
pain  in  the  left  temple,  (29.  d.) Tearing  pain  in  the  left
side  of  the  head,  (a.  10  d.) Tearing  from  the  occiput  to
the  vertex,  (4.  d.) Painful  tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the
head,  from  without  inwards,  extending  to  the  eye  ;  after-
wards the  place  was  for  a  long  time  painful.  Tearing
and  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  forehead,  in  the  evening,
(6.  d.) Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  and
farther  back,  stitches. Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  fore-
head during  motion,  in  the  evening. Violent  tearing  and
stitches  in  the  forehead  and  temples,  obliging  him  to  lie
down,  with  great  sensitiveness  of  the  vertex,  as  if  the
hairs  were  being  raised  by  pulling  at  them  ;  accompanied
by  a  feeling  of  heat  in  the  forehead  which  feels  rather  cold
than  hot,  (28.  d.) Now  a  tearing,  now  a  stitch  and  tear-
ing in  the  forehead,  when  stooping  while  sitting ;  beside


174  MAGNESIA  MURIATXCA.

this  symptom,  he  frequently  experiences  stitches  in  the
head. Tearing  and  stitches  in  both  sides  of  the  head,  the
whole  day,  (a.  4  d.) Painfully  darting  tearing  in  the  right
side  of  the  occiput. Throbbing  tearing,  first  in  the  occi-
put, then  in  the  whole  head,  after  entering  the  room  ;
going  off  when  sitting. Throbbing  tearing  from  the  occi-
put towards  the  vertex. Frequent  stitches  in  the  middle
of  the  forehead,  in  the  evening. Stitches  from  behind  the
right  frontal  eminence  to  near  the  ear,  from  within  out-
wards. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head  and  the
occiput. Stitches  in  the  right  occipital  protuberance.
A  stitch  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  followed  by  burn-
ing in  that  part. Violent  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the
vertex. A  violent  stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side
of  the  head,  frequently  recurring  (during  the  menses.)
Violent  stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  head,
causing  her  to  start. Stitches  and  tearing  m  the  right  side
of  the  head,  extending  as  far  as  the  eye  which  she  is
obliged  to  close. Dull  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  head,
with  ill  humor,  (16.  d.) Dull,  violent  stitches  in  the  right
side  of  the  head. Dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,
from within  outwards. A  few  dull  stitches  in  the
region  of  the  left  parietal  bone,  when  bending  the  trunk  to
the  right  side,  with  boring  near  the  left  ear.  Darting
stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput  and  deep  in  the
forehead. Boring  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,  in  he
evening. Throbbing  and  beating  in  the  left  side  of  the
head,  with  hot  feeling  and  heaviness  in  the  forehead.
Throbbing  and  heaviness  in  the  occ.put,  early  in  the
morning,  after  rising,  (during  the  menses.) Throbbing  in
the  occiput  and  afterwards  in  the  who  e  head,  when  raising
the  head  from  stooping,  and  afterwards. Painful  sense  as
of  moving,  in  the  head,  with  pressure  in  the  occiput  going
off  in  thf  open  air  and  returning  in  the  room.  Whizzing
like  the  seething  of  water,  in  that  side  of  the  head,  upon
which  he  was  resting,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,
not  painful. Griping  and  turmoil  in  the  temples  in ^the
evening  after  lying  down,  as  if  vertigo  and  loss  of  con-
Smness  would  come  on;  relieved  by  pressing  the  head
toTe  her. Hot  feeling  and  burning  at  a  small  spot  behind
thf  righ frontal  eminence. Increase  of  warmth  in  the


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


175


whole  head.  Hot  feeling  in  the  forehead,  over  the  left
eye,  with  throbbing  in  the  whole  head,  and  dimness  of
sight,  (1.  d.)  Frequent  flushes  of  heat  in  the  head.
Heat  and  sense  as  of  waving  in  the  head,  with  heat  and
sweat  of  the  whole  body,  afternoon  and  evening,  (during
the  menses.)  Heat  in  the  head  after  dinner,  apparently
originating  in  the  stomach,  better  in  the  open  air.  Heat
in  the  held,  with  redness  of  face,  without  any  external
warmth,  but  with  internal  shuddering  and  desire  for  stool.
Continual  feeling  of  heat  in  the  head,  mouth  and  throat,
with  hot  breath,  during  a  cold  ;  for  8  days.  The  headache
is  alleviated  by  wrapping  up  the  head.  Numbness  of  the
forehead.  Sore  pain  of  the  vertex,  when  touched  or  no.
Great  painfulness  of  the  outer  parts  of  the  head,  when
touching  them,  or  when  stooping,  (a.  15  d.)  External
drawing  in  different  parts  of  the  external  head,  also  into
the  ears,  teeth  and  half  the  face,  which  makes  the  head
feel  quite  dreary;  the  pains  diminish  after  sneezing.
Large  nodosity  on  the  occiput,  with  tearing  round  about,
especially  painful  to  the  touch.

Eyes. — Aching  in  the  eyes  and  the  canthi.  Pressure
in  the  eyes,  as  if  from  dust,  with  dimness  of  sight.  Pres-
sure in  the  eyes,  especially  the  left,  as  if  from  a  grain  of
sand,  going  off  by  friction  only  for  a  short  while.  Pain
as  from  bruises  in  the  lower  border  of  the  orbit.  Stitches
in  the  right,  internal  canthus,  pressing  out  tears.  Con-
tinual stitches  and  burning  in  the  eyes.  Itching  of  the
left  upper  eyelid.  Itching  of  the  eyes.  Itching  of  the
internal  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  going  off  bv  friction,  soon
afterwards  affecting  the  left  eye.  Burning  in  the  eyes,
and  great  sensitiveness  of  the  same,  so  that  she  is  unable
to  open  them,  and  has  to  close  them  again  immediately.
Burning  of  both  eyes,  which  make  it  impossible  for  her
to  bear  the  light  of  the  sun.  Violent  burning' in  the  eyes,
especially  when  looking  at  the  light.  Burning  and  dryness
of  the  eyes,  in  the  evening,  when  looking  into  the  fire.
The  capillaries  of  the  eyes  appear  injected.  Inflammation
of  the  eyes,  with  pressure,  biting,  burning,  especially  when
looking  at  the  light ;  in  the  evening  there  was  lachryma-
tion,  in  day-time  they  were  filled  with  gum  ;  the  lids
were  swollen  and  red,  with  nightly  agglutination.  Agglu-


176


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


tination  of  the  eyes  early  in  the  morning,  with  burning
when  opening  them.  Great  dryness  of  the  eyelids,  espe-
cially early  in  the  morning,  and  after  the  siesta.  Darting,
in  the  upper  eyelids,  which  were  swollen,  heavy,  and  half
closed.  Dim-sightedness,  with  burning  of  the  eyes.
Dim-sightedness,  with  vanishing  of  sight,  when  looking
at  something  near ;  she  sees  better  when  looking  at  things
at  a  distance.  In  the  evening,  the  light  is  surrounded
with  a  green  shine,  (while  the  eyes  were  inflamed.)

Ear. — Painless  darting  in  the  ear.  Darting  tearing  in
the  left.  ear.  Tearing  in  and  near  the  left  ear.  Stitches
in  the  left  ear.  Stitches  in  the  right  ear,  (a.  27  d.)  Pain-
ful stitches  at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  another  ear.  Fre-
quent stitches  and  tearing  in  the  left  ear,  when  inclining
the  body  to  the  right  side  ;  they  cause  one  to  start.  Stitch-
ing boring  in  the  ears.  Boring  and  *  pulsative  throbbing
in  the  right  ear.  Tickling  in  the  ears,  going  off  by  boring
into  them  with  the  finger.  Agreeable  warmth  and  tickling
in  the  right  ear.  Violent  roaring  in  the  ears,  (a.  28  d.)
Fluttering  in  the  right  ear.  Sensation  as  if  her  ear  had
become  closed,  without  producing  any  hard  hearing,  going
off  by  boring  into  the  ear  with  the  finger,  (during  the
menses.)  Sensation  in  the  ears  as  if  something  were
stretched  across,  with  diminution  of  hearing,  and  burning
and  humming  in  the  head,  (a.  28  d.  and  frequently.)  Al-
most complete  deafness  of  both  ears,  that  of  the  left  being
greater,  frequently  decreasing  and  increasing.  Itching  of
an  old  herpes  behind  the  ears,  with  burning  after  scratching.

Nose. — Violent  tearing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  nasal
cavities,  causing  lachrymation.  Burning  of  both  nasal
cavities,  as  if  they  were  sore,  (11.  d.)  *  Sore  pain  of  the
inner  nose,  when  touching  the  parts  or  no,  (13 — 15.  d.)
*  Scurfs  in  both  nostrils,  violently  painful  when  touched,
with  loss  of  smell.  *  Ulcerated  nostrils.  Small  vesicles
on  the  nose,  feeling  tight  when  touching  them.  Bleeding
from  the  nose,  when  blowing  it,  (5.  d.) Dull  smell.

Face. — Severe  cramp-pain  in  the  bones  of  the  face,  (a.
17  d  )  Tensive  feeling  in  the  face.  Tensive  pain  in  the
region  of  the  right  zygoma.  Tearing  extending  from  the
right  zygoma  to  the  side  of  the  head.

Jaws  and  Teeth—  Tearings  in  both  sides  of  the  lower


CHLORIDE  OP  MAGNESIUM.  177

jaw  and  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  across  the  face,  as  far  as  in
front  of  the  ear,  where  the  pain  became  darting. Stitch  in
the  right  cheek. Pale  complexion,  especially  during  the
menses,  with  sadness  and  irritability. Miserable  sickly
appearance,  (a.  29  d.) Pale  countenance  (1.  d.)  Pale,
bilious  complexion. Considerable  yellowness  of  the  face,
especially  of  the  white  of  the  eye,  and  around  the  eye,  (in
a  few  h.) Red  countenance,  with  increased  warmth  of  the
forehead,  and  palms  of  the  hand,  in  the  evening.  Hot
feeling  in  the  face,  without  any  warmth  being  perceptible
to  the  touch,  in  the  afternoon. Pimples  on  ihe  forehead
with  itching  in  the  evening,  becoming  worse  by  friction'
A  spot  in  the  region  of  the  zygoma,  full  of  yellowish  pim-
pies,  withdrawing,  tingling,  throbbing  pains,  and  becomino
covered  with  scurf. Feeling  of  pressure  under  the  left
lower  jaw,  as  if  the  glands  were  swollen.  Inflammatory
swelling  of  the  left  sub-maxillary  gland. When  touching
the  inner  side  of  the  upper  lip  with  the  tongue,  it  feels  rough
like  a  grating  iron,  during  a  cold. Blister  on  the  margin
of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip,  first  itching  after-
wards burning. Large,  clear  vesicles  in  the  vermilion
border  of  the  upper  hp,  tensive  and  burning. White  nim
pies  on  the  inner  side  of  the  upper  lip. plmp]e  ' ?  Jl"
corner  of  the  mouth. Large  fiStch  in  the  S  Seen
he  upper  hp  and  nose,  painless. Chapped  lips,  especially
the  upper  hp Drawing  toothache. DartinJ  in  the  tee  h
o  theright de th eyeni whh * the  teeth

che  k  would  swell.  Frequent  tearings  in  the  upper  fore-
teeth. 1  earing  m  the  right  cuspidatus,  extending  into  the
zygoma,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  it.  Tearm  "s  in  a
sound  mo]ar  t thj d)nner- T4 jn «p J

tooth,  going  off  by  biting  upon  the  tooth. Tearing  ™d
boring  in  a  hollow  molar  tooth,  with  stitching  pa  n  when
touching  the  cheek,  relieved  in  the  open  air  and  bv  cold
aggravated  by  warm  substances. Boring  in  severaLn \t
teeth,  relieved  only  for  a  short  time  by  bit  n.  upon  £

reheved  by  „arrath  .  aggra™ed  by


178  MAGNESIA.  MURIATICA.

upon  it  and  bringing  food  in  contact  with  it,  early  in  the
morning  and  after  dinner. Throbbing  in  the  root  ot  a
tooth The  upper  cuspidati  feel  elongated,  and  are  very
sensitive  to  pain,  (4.  d.) The  upper  gums  are  swollen
and  painful,  especially  when  eating,  with  throbbing  in  the
gums. Painful  swelling  of  the  lower  gums  and  cheek.
Bleeding  of  the  gums,  (b\  d.)  Bleeding  of  the  gums,  (a  6  h  )
MoUTH.— The  inner  mouth  feels  burnt  and  numb,  early
in  the  morning,  (during  the  menses.) Violent  pricking  in
the  tongue,  frequently,  followed  by  burning,  during  a  cold.
Burning  sensation  on  the  tongue,  early  in  the  morning  and
afternoon. Sensation  as  if  the  surface  of  the  tongue  were
burnt,  during  a  cold. Rhagades  on  the  tongue,  with  vio-
lent burning  pain. Tongue  coated  white,  early  in  he
morning Dryness  in  the  mouth  and  throat,  early  in  the
evening",  without  thirst. Great  dryness  of  the  mouth  with
sensation  as  i(  mouth  and  tongue  were  covered  with  mu-
cus. A  quantity  of  mucus  in  the  mouth  and  teeth,  with
slimv  taste  (a.  19  d.) Mucus  in  the  mouth  and  on  the
Se most  every  morning. Accumulation  of  water  in
he  mouth,  before  and  during  the  dryness.  Accumulation
of  water  in  the  mouth,  she  can  scarcely  spit  sufficiently.
Hot  air  from  the  mouth.  , ,

Throat. — Her  throat  feels  so  dry,  that  she  is  not  able
to  eat  any  bread. Dryness  and  roughness  of  the  h,oa£
with  hoarse  voice,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  abl e  to  i alk,
(shortly.) Sore  throat,  the  throat  feeling  raw,  at  the  en
£  of  the  pharynx,  with  stitches  when  coughing  and
swallow  ng  saliva,  Lending  as  far  as  into  the  ears  ;  worse
in  the  evening. Stinging  sore  throat,  in  the  upper  pait  of
he  fauce w  en  breathing  and  talking  m  the  evening  and
I  n  Xt Prickings  in  the  palate. Stinging  in  the  left
d  &  the  throat,  worse  when  swallowing  Soro^roat,
worse  when  swallowing,  (during  a  cold.) Hawking  ot
roneh  mucus,  early  in  the  morning,  some  mornings  in  sue-
tough  mucus, y lsion  of  sour  mucus,  accumulat-
orn  the  rt roat Hawking  up  of  thick,  tough  mucus
^  threads early  in  ihe  morning,  after  rising.  A


CHLORIDE  OP  MAGNESIUM.


179


Appetite  and  Taste. — Watery  taste  in  the  mouth,
with  much  spitting  of  water. Pappy  tastes  early  in  the
morning,  (7.  d.) Saltish  taste,  and  conflux  of  salt  saliva.
Bitter  taste  in  the  back-part  of  the  mouth. Bitter  taste,
early  in  the  morning. Bitter  taste,  when  beginning  to  eat,
early  in  the  morning,  disappearing  when  continuing  to  eat.
Sour  taste  in  the  throat,  in  the  afternoon,  (7.  d.) Sour  or
slimy  taste,  with  coated  tongue,  early  in  the  morning.  No
hunger,  in  the  evening,  (16.  d.) No  appetite,  the  whole
day,  she  did  not  eat  with  appetite,  till  night.  Increased
appetite,  (3.  d.) Canine  hunger  and  frightful  feeling  of
hunger  in  the  stomach,  followed  by  great  nausea.  Appe-
tite, without  knowing  for  what,  not  for  her  usual  nourish-
ment. Appetite  for  dinner,  but  she  is  satisfied  immedi-
ately. Disposition  to  nibble  ;  seeing  a  piece  of  cake,  he
breaks  something  off  stealthily,  in  order  to  eat  it.  Thirst
at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  dryness  in  the  mouth
and  throat,  (6.  d.) Thirst,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  17  and  27
d.) Thirst,  after  dinner. Thirst  in  the  evening.  Thirst,
before  and  after  midnight,  (a.  16  d  ) Violent  thirst,  day
and  night,  during  a  cold.

Gastric  Symptoms. — A  good  deal  of  acidity  in  the  sto-
mach, after  dinner.  Distension  of  the  abdomen,  after  din-
ner. Desire  to  sleep  after  dinner  ;  the  whole  body  starts
when  going  to  sleep.  Rising  of  air,  after  dinner.  Fre-
quent, empty  risings,  in  the  afternoon,  (4.  d.)  Empty  ris-
ings, followed  by  a  stitch  over  the  xiphoid  cartilage.
Rising  of  white  foam.  Eructation,  tasting  of  onion  (after
a  spasm.)  Frequent  eructations  tasting  of  the  ingesta.
Eructations  with  regurgitation  of  the  ingesta,  after  a  meal,
when  walking.  Sour  regurgitation  of  the  ingesta,  especi-
ally milk,  after  dinner,  mostly  when  walking.  Bitter-sour
eructations,  (a.  5  d.)  Violent  hiccough,  during  dinner,
causing  a  pain  in  the  stomach.  Violent  hiccough,  after
dinner  Frequent  nausea.  *  Nausea,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, after  rising.  Fainting  nausea,  short  but  frequent,
when  sitting,  lymg,  standing  or  walking,  three  days  and
nights,  (a.  3  d.)  Fainting  nausea,  followed  by  coldness
and  weakness  of  the  stomach,  with  gulping  up  of  water,
early  in  the  morning.  Frequent  nausea,  with  accumula-
tion of  water  m  the  mouth.  Inclination  to  vomit,  the  whole


180


MAGNESIA  MURIATXCA.


forenoon,  (1.  d.)  Inclination  to  vomit,  with  rising  of  sour
water,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising.  Painful  sensa-
tion as  of  fasting,  early  in  the  morning.  Great  qualmish-
ness-in  the  stomach,  with  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  going
off  after  breakfast.  Pain  and  tremor  in  the  region  of  the
stomach,  when  walking  and  setting  down  the  foot,  even
when  talking,  which  she  had  to  discontinue.  Frequent
pressure  in  the  stomach,  extending  into  the  throat  and
back,  (1.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  stomach,  extending  into  the
chest  and  throat,  is  if  caused  by  flatulence,  relieved  only
for  a  short  while  by  eructations.

Stomach. — Violent  pressure  in  the  stomach,  with  nau-
sea. Pressure  in  the  stomach,  going  off  by  eructation.
Tension  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  with  ulcerative  pain,
especially  when  touching  the  parts  and  in  the  evening,  af-
ter lying  down. At  one  o'clock  in  the  night,  she  is  roused
from  sleep  by  a  pain  in  the  stomach  as  if  it  were  being
cut  to  pieces  ;  when  extending  the  body  this  pain  extends
over  the  whole  abdomen  and  hypogastrium,  with  heat  in
the  head,  rising  into  the  throat  as  of  a  ball,  with  suffocative
interception  of  breath,  and  tossing  about  in  the  bed  and
upon  the  floor,  for  two  hours  ;  the  pain  is  at  last  relieved
by  eructation  ;  during  the  pain  she  had  to  lie  crooked  and
could  not  endure  any  covering. Ulcerative  pain  in  the  sto-
mach, which  cannot  be  alleviated  in  whatever  position  of
the  body  it  be,  in  the  afternoon. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in
the  stomach,  with  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  region  of  the
stomach  when  touching  it. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the
stomach,  when  bending  the  body  over  ;  tension,  when  rais-
ing it. Frequent  and  painful  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
stomach. Stitches  transversely  across  the  region  of  the
stomach. Cutting  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  stomach,
which  feels  sore  when  touched. Heat  in  the  stomach,
shortly. Movement  of  flatulence  in  the  region  of  the  sto-
mach, afterwards  in  the  hypogastrium,  relieved  by  emission
of  flatulence. Gurgling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  gbing  off
by  friction  and  pressure. Throbbing  in  the  pit  of  the  slo-
mach,  with  dulness  in  the  head.  '

Abdomen.— Burning  and  tensive  stitches  in  the  right
hypochondrium,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Dull
stitch  in  the  region  of  the  lower  right  rib,  close  to  the  back,


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


181


(a.  4  h.)  Prickings,  between  the  right  ribs.  Sharp  draw-
ing in  the  region  of  the  li"er.  Stitches  in  the  lelt  hypo-
chondrium.  Violent,  painful  stitches  in  the  left  hypochou-
drium,  resembling  splenetic  stitches,  in  the  afternoon,
when  walking,  worse  during  an  inspiration  and  going
off  when  sitting  ;  (during  the  menses.)  Colic  at  4  o'clock
in  the  afternoon  ;  two  days  in  succession.  Violent  colic,
early  in  the  morning,  with  desire  for  stool,  which  was
hard  and  in  pieces,  with  burning  at  the  anus,  (ll.d.)
Pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  afternoon,  with  bearing  down
upon  the  rectum  ;  soon  afterwards  soft  stool  surrounded
with  white  mucus.  Feeling  of  pressure  in  the  abdomen,
(during  the  menses.)  Pressure  in  the  left  side  of  the  ab-
domen. Draicing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at  night,  and  in
day-time,  during  every  motion,  even  small,  as  if  some-
thing became  detached,  (a.  2  d.)  Drawing  and  tearing
in  the  abdomen,  at  night,  when  waking  up.  Tearing  in
the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,  until  one  fails  asleep.  Tear-
ing in  the  abdomen,  the  whole  forenoon,  (2.  d.)  Con-
tractive pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  (a.  17  d.)  Spasms
in  the  abdomen,  with  violent  pressing  upon  the  rectum
and  the  genital  organs,  accompanied  by  low  spirits  and
ill  humor,  (a.  9  d.)  Spasms  and  tearing  in  the  abdomen,
several  evenings  in  succession,  until  one  falls  asleep.
Spasmodic  drawing  and  tearing  in  the  abdomen  from
below  upwards  as  far  as  the  right  side  of  the  che-n,  where
one  experiences  a  spasmodic,  constrictive  griping,  with
oppressed  breathing,  for  5  hours ;  made  worse  by  eating
cherries,  alleviated  by  pressing  upon  the  parts  with  the
hand,  in  the  evening.  Spasms  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
evening,  two  days  in  succession.  Fulness  of  the  abdo-
men, after  a  meal.  Distended  abdomen.  Distended  ab-
domen, relieved  by  emission  of  flatulence.  Considerable
distension  of  the  abdomen,  extending  even  into  the  throat,
with  interception  of  breath  and  anguish,  from  afternoon
till  night.  Hard  abdomen,  painful  when  touched,  with
disagreeable  pressure  upon  the  rectum.  Pinching  in  the
epigastrium,  relieved  by  the  emission  of  flatulence  ;  after-
wards sud  len  desire  for  stool,  resulting  merely  in  an  emis-
sion of  flatulence.  Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the*
menses  would  come  on. Violent  pinching  around  the


182


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


navel,  extending  towards  the  stomach,  after  a  meal ;  re-
lieved by  emission  of  flatulence. Pinching  and  cutting
below  the  umbilicus,  with  shuddering  over  the  back,  after-
wards  heat  in  the  head  and  desire  for  stool,  at  noon.
Pinching  and  tearing  in  the  abdomen,  also  after  stool.
Pinching  around  the  umbilicus  and  bearing  down  towards
the  small  of  the  back,  afterwards  sudden  desire  for  stool,
and  soft,  yellow  stool,  mingled  with  a  piece  of  taenia.
Pinchi.ig  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,  after
rising  ;  afterwards  diarrhoea  accompanied  and  succeeded
by  burning  at  the  rectum  ;  afterwards  again  diarrhoea
mixed  with  blood. Cutting  in  the  epigastrium  as  after  a
cathartic,  extending  into  the  small  of  the  back,  early  in  the
morning,  (3.  d.) Cutting  sensation  in  a  small  place  of
the  left  hypochondriac  region,  early  in  the  morning.  Cut-
ting and  pinching  in  the  epigastrium,  with  sensation  as  if
something  hard  were  lying  over  the  stomach. Cutting  in
the  abdomen,  below  the  umbilicus,  in  frequent  paroxysms.
Frightful  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  suddenly,  she  had  to
sit  stooping. Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, when  in  bed,  with  desire  for  stool,  relieved  by  emis-
sion of  flatulence. Cutting  in  the  abdomen,  after  break-
fast, with  frequent  emission  of  flatulence,  followed  by  un-
successful tenesmus,  afterwards  soft  stool,  with  cessation
of  the  pain. Cutting  in  the  whole  abdomen,  almost  the
whole  day,  (5.  and  10.  d.) Burrowing  sensation  in  the
abdomen,  as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on. Weak  feeling
in  the  abdomen,  (a.  12  h.) Feeling  of  looseness  and
moving  about  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  the  intestines  had  no
support. Hot  feeling  in  the  abdominal  integuments,  with
burning  at  the  anus,  and  sensitiveness,  of  the  rectum  after
stool. Frequent  stitches  in  the  left  lumbar  region.  Stitch
in  the  right  iliac  region,  followed  by  pain,  as  if  from
bruises,  increased  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Stitching
pain  in  the  left  iliac  region,  with  hardness  and  distension
of  the  abdomen. Accumulation  of  flatulence  in  the  abdo-
men. The  flatulence  does  not  pass  off,  and  distends  the
abdomen  in  different  places. Continual  moving  of  flatu-
lence, in  the  epigastrium. Rumbling  in  the  abdornen,
•  with  bearing  down  towards  the  small  of  the  back.  Moving
of  flatulence,  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  (a.  10  d.)


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


183


Fermentation  in  the  abdomen.  Rumbling  and  pinching
in  the  whole  abdomen,  followed  by  soft  stool.  Grumbling
in  the  abdomen,  before  a  meal,  (1.  d.)  Constant  forma-
tion of  flatulence. Frequent  emission  of  flatulence.

Stool. — No  stool  for  24,  48  hours.  No  stool  for  64
hours  ;  after  this  lapse  of  time  the  stool  is  easily  expelled,
with  prickings  in  the  rectum.  No  stool  for  several  days,
(in  several  provers.)  Hard,  difficult  stool,  (l.d.)  Hard
stool,  with  pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  anus,  (2.  d.)
Hard,  knotty  stool,  with  pain  in  the  rectum  when  passing
it.  Very  hard,  knotty  stool,  followed  by  softer  stool  encir-
cled by  yellow  mucus,  (4.  d.)  A  small  quantity  of  knotty
stool,  like  sheep's  dung,  (5.  d.)  Hard  stool,  having  the
appearance  of  being  composed  of  sheep's  dung.  She  was
obliged  to  go  to  stool  in  great  haste,  it  came  out  in  small
pieces  and  seemed  to  be  burnt,  with  stitching  pain  in  the
rectum,  and  afterwards  burning  at  the  anus.  Hard,  knotty
stool,  encircled  with  thick  mucus.  Hard  stool,  encircled
with  streaks  of  blood,  (25.  d )  The  stool  is  for  many
days  composed  of  hard  pieces,  in  a  little  while  it  becomes
soft  or  liquid.  Stool  first  scanty  and  of  a  large  size,  fol-
lowed by  desire  for  stool  which  is  soft ;  afterwards  she
feels  unwell,  with  relaxation  of  the  abdomen,  and  thence
extending  over  the  whole  body  ;  she  has  frequently  to  lie
down.  Two  stools,  harder  than  usual,  the  first  time  he
had  to  press  more.  Four  stools  within  an  hour,  the  first
being  hard,  the  succeeding  ones  diarrhceic,  with  soreness
of  the  rectum,  and  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  which
sometimes  continues  in  the  interval  between  the  stools.
Stool,  the  first  part  of  which  is  hard,  then  soft,  with  burn-
ing at  the  anus  and  violent  stitches,  externally,  in  both
hypochondriac  regions,  with  contractive  pain  in  the  sto-
mach, extending  into  tie  back.  Pain,  as  from  excoriation,
in  the  rectum,  after  a  soft  stool.  Soft  stool  followed  by  burn-
ing at  the  anus  and  tenesmus.  Again  a  soft  stool,  with
shuddering  over  the  whole  body,  followed  by  burning  at
the  anus  and  sensitiveness  of  the  rectum.  Soft  stool,  with
colic,  early  in  the  morning,  after  great  anxiousness  and
vertigo.  Urgent  desire  for  stool ;  nevertheless  she  has  to
press  hard,  before  she  succeeds  in  expelling  a  small  quan-
tity of  soft  fasces  ;  after  this  she  experienced  a  shuddering


184


MAGNESIA  MllRIATIGA.


for  a  short  while. Constant  pressure  upon  the  rectum,
without  any  thing  being  passed,  as  if  the  faeces  were  re-
ceding into  the  rectum  ;  this  is  followed  by  short  shudder-
ing. Pressure  upon  the  rectum,  the  whole  day  ;  however
only  flatulence  was  emitted. Pressure  upon  the  rectum  ;
however  only  burning  flatulence  was  passed.  Frequent
desire  for  stool  ;  however  nothing  is  passed  except  a  small
quantity  ot  thin  and  slippery  substances,  (a.  17  d.)  Fre-
quent and  severe  pressure  upon  the  rectum,  with  colic,
almost  the  whole  day. Frequent  desire  for  stool,  but
little  being  passed. Violent  desire  for  stool,  which  was
liquid,  at  noon. Diarrhoea,  three  times  in  succession,
with  cutting  in  the  whole  abdomen,  (7.  d.) Violent,  irre-
sistible desire  for  stool ;  tenesmus,  with  small  pieces  of
soft,  then  thin  stool,  accompanied  by  shuddering  and  colic.
Liquid  stool,  jerking  out  with  force,  followed  by  tenesmus
and  burning  at  the  rectum,  and  constant  desire  for  stool,
resulting  in  the  expulsion  of  a  small  additional  quantity  of
thin  stool,  (2.  d.) Frequent  diarrhoea,  every  day,  with
expulsion  of  a  small  quantity  of  liquid,  brown  stool,  (a.  16,
17  d.) Several  greenish,  papescent  stools,  (a.  18,  19  d.)
Several  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  with  expulsion  of  mucus  and
blood,  and  tenesmus  of  the  rectum. Sensation  as  if  flatu-
lence would  pass  off;  in  the  place  of  this,  soft  stool  is
emitted. Expulsion  of  a  piece  of  taenia  with  the  soft  stool,
(a.  6  d.) Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  previous  to  expelling
soft,  yellow  stool. Burning  at  the  anus,  and  pain,  as  from
excoriation,  during  and  after  stool. Pain  of  the  varices
during  good,  not  too  hard  stool. Nausea  and  accumulation
of  water  in  the  mouth,  after  stool. Drawing  pain  in  the
loins  after  stool. Colic  and  itching  of  the  anus,  after  a
good  stool. Violent  pain  in  the  abdomen,  at  every  motion,
after  stool. Renewed  desire  for  stool,  after  an  evacuation.
Renewed  pressure  upon  the  rectum,  after  diarrhoea,  as  if
more  would  come,  however  only  mucus  is  passed.  Burn-
ing at  the  anus,  after  a  natural  stool. Stinging  in  the
rectum,  (in  a  few  h.) Piercing  stitch  in  the  rectum,  ex-
tending into  the  abdomen. Burning  at  the  rectum,  high
up. Prolapsus  recti,  during  stool. Stitches  in  the  peri-

naeum.  •
Urinary  Organs. — The  urine  can  only  be  emitted  by


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


185


exerting  the  abdominal  muscles. Pressure  upon  the
bladder,  with  scanty  emission  and  burning  in  the  urethra,
(a.  2  d.) Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  scanty  emis-
sion. Desire  to  urinate,  in  day-time,  (4.  d.)  Frequent
micturition,  in  day-time,  always  scanty. Desire  to  urinate,
at  night,  he  suppresses  it. She  had  to  rise  five  times  in
the  night  for  the  purpose  of  urinating,  and  emitted  but  a
small  quantity  each  time. When  urinating,  he  does  not
feel  that  there  is  any  urine  passing  through  the  urethra.
Sensation  as  if  he  were  not  able  to  retain  the  urine.  Un-
expected desire  to  urinate  when  walking  ;  when  stopping
for  the  purpose  of  urinating,  no  urine  was  passed.  Rare
and  scanty  emission  of  urine,  (3.  d.) The  urine  is  emit-
ted drop  by  drop,  and  something  remains  behind  all  the
time. Frequent  micturition,  with  burning  in  the  urethra,
and  frequent  erection,  (a.  10  d.) Urine  pale-yellow,  fol-
lowed by  burning  in  the  urethra. The  urine  is  almost
non-transparent,  it  looks  as  if  it  had  been  mixed  with  yeast,
and  deposits  a  cloudy  sediment.

Genital  Organs. — Excessive  itching  around  the  geni-
tal organs,  and  on  the  scrotum,  extending  as  far  as  the
anus  ;  profuse  sweat  of  the  scrotum  in  the  evening  and
night,  and  an.  emission  of  semen,  (1.  d.) Erection,  early
in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  (5.  d.) Erection,  early  in
the  morning,  when  in  bed,  with  burning  in  the  penis.
Stitches  in  the  mons  veneris,  towards  evening.  Itching
of  the  glans,  in  the  evening,  when  going  to  sleep.  Itching
of  the  scrotum  and  the  lower  portion  of  the  penis  ;  he  had
to  rub  a  good  deal,  after  which  the  itching  subsided.
Erections,  early  in  the  morning,  with  inclination  for  an
embrace. Erections,  early  in  the  morning,  without  lewd-
ness  or  voluptuous  thoughts  ;  on  the  third  day  inclina-
tion for  an  embrace. After  an  embrace  in  the  evening,
he  feels  a  burning  pain  in  the  back,  early  in  the  morning
which  rouses  him  from  his  sleep,  becomes  more  and  more
violent  when  at  rest,  decreases  during  motion,  and  passes
ori  entirely  after  rising. Dull,  distressing  pain,  the  whole
clay,  in  the  spermatic  cord,  the  small  of  the  back,  and  the
testicles,  when  touching  them  while  moving  about,  after  a
violent  erection  which  was  not  relieved  by  an  embrace.
Relaxed  scrotum,  (the  first  8  d.) Frequent  pollutions,


186


MAGNESIA  MURIATIC!.


even  two  days  in  succession,  (the  last  days.) The  men-
ses delay  four  days,  with  violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the
back,  and  somewhat  shorter  than  usual. Menses  delay
1 1  days,  first  watery,  then  colored  more,  with  pressing
downwards  in  the  iliac  regions,  and  frequent  yawning.
Some  discharge  of  blood,  5  days  previous  to  the  menses.
Menses  2  days  too  soon,  2  days  longer  and  more  profuse
than  usual. Re-appearance  of  the  menses  in  a  woman  of
50  years,  who  had  not  had  her  menses  for  7  months  past,
with  some  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back. Discharge  of
black  clots  of  menstrual  blood,  more  when  sitting  than
when  walking. The  menses  are  more  profuse  than  usual,
but  painless  and  5  days  before  the  time. The  menses
are  weak  the  first  days,  but  more  profuse  and  constant  the
4th  and  5th. She  is  very  much  excited  the  day  pre-
ceding the  appearance  of  the  menses,  (14.  d.)  During
the  first  two  days  of  the  menses,  she  feels  faint  even  unto
swooning;  her  lower  limbs  feel  weary  and  she  cannot
fall  asleep  till  late. The  menses  become  more  and  more
profuse,  with  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  thighs,  the
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  being  more  violent  when
walking,  the  pain  in  the  thighs  when  sitting.  Constant
yawning  during  the  menses. Leucorrhoea,  early  in  the
morning,  after  urinating. Profuse  leucorrhoea,  continuing
for  8  days,  almost  without  any  intermission.  Leucorrhoea,
coming  off  immediately  after  stool,  (a.  23  d.)  Abdominal
spasms,  followed  by  leucorrhoea. Watery  leucorrhoea.
Thick  leucorrhoea,  followed  immediately  after  by  discharge
of  blood,  14  days  previous  to  the  regular  period  of  the
menses,  and  3  days  previous  to  full  moon,  (a.  9  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh.— Tickling  in  the  nose,  with  lachryma-
tion,  (8.  d.)  Tickling  in  the  nose,  with  sneezing  and  sen-
sation of  coryza,  (a.  17  d.)  Frequent  sneezing  with  dis-
charge of  water  from  the  nose,  (a.  2,  3,  d.)  Oppressive
sensation  of  obstruction  in  the  nose.  Obstruction  of  the
nose,  early  in  the  morning.  Obstruction  of  the  left  nostril,
(a  16  d.)  Coryza,  with  obstruction  of  the  nose,  and  cory-
za-speech.  The  nose  is  so  obstructed  that  the  air  passes
through  the  nose  with  a  wheezing  sound.  Obstruction  of
the  nose,  in  the  evening.  A.  quantity  of  mucus  is  discharged
from  the  nose. Violent  coryza,  with  hoarseness  and  feel-


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


187


ing  of  obstruction  in  the  nose,  which  discharges  a  quantity
of  water,  for  several  days,  (a.  23  d.)  Severe  coryza,  at
times  dry,  at  times  fluent,  ivith  obtusion  of  the  head,  and
complete  loss  of  smell  and  taste,  for  two  days,  (a.  40  d.)
Violent  fluent  coryza,  (a.  22  d.)  Coryza,  with  diminution
of  smell  and  taste,  and  yellow  nasal  mucus.  Discharge  of
fetid,  purulent,  yellow  nasal  mucus,  (a.  5  d.)  Catarrhal
mucus,  mixed  with  little  particles  of  blood,  [n  the  even-
ing, when  in  bed,  she  has  to  sit  up  a  long  time,  owing  to
the  coryza ;  she  cannot  lie  down,  nor  fall  asleep,  and  has  to
open  her  mouth  widely,  in  order  to  get  air.  Hoarseness,
every  day  in  the  morning,  after  rising.  Hoarseness,  with
a  sore  feeling  in  the  throat  and  chest.  Sudden,  violent
hoarseness,  with  dry  cough  and  pressure  upon  the  chest,
during  rough  weather.  Roughness  and  dryness  of
the  larynx.  Heat  and  dryness  of  the  larynx,  (4.
d.)  Cough,  with  some  expectoration,  (a.  15  d.)  Cough,
from  a  tingling  in  the  larynx,  with  discharge  of  mu-
cus. Dry  cough,  mostly  only  evening  and  night,  (a.
10  d.)  Frequent  attacks  of  dry  cough  at  night ;  she  has  to
raise  herself  when  coughing,  (a.  11  d.)  Short  fits  of  cough,
followed  by  dull,  aching  pain  in  the  chest,  (a.  17,  18  d.)
Dry  cough,  with  pains  in  the  region  of  the  pharynx.  Cough,
from  tingling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  discharge  of
tough  mucus,  tasting  like  grease.  Deep,  rough,  fatiguing
cough,  with  rough  voice,  wheezing  in  the  throat  and  slight
expectoration  of  a  salt-sweetish  mucus  ;  also  at  night,  even
unto  retching.  Cough,  with  discharge  of  grey,  salt  mu-
cus, from  scraping  in  the  throat,  or  itching  in  the  chest.
Bloody  expectoration,  brought  on  by  sea-bathing.

Chest. — Ulcerative  pain  in  the  chest,  when  coughing,
evening  and  night.  Sore  pain  in  the  chest,  when  cough-
ing; she  dreads  coughing,  although  coughing  relieves  her.
Violent  burning  in  the  chest,  when  coughing.  Her  chest
feels  worse  in  the  open  air;  every  inspiration  brings  on  a
fit  of  cough,  (a.  12  d.)  Want  of  breath,  when  going  up
hill,  (a.  20  d.)  Oppressed  breathing,  greater  after  a  meal
than  in  the  forenoon,  (2.  d.)  Contraction  of  the  chest,
with  oppressed  breathing  and  dull  stitches  into  the  right
side  of  the  chest  near  the  nipple,  after  supper.  Tensive
pain  of  the  chest,  most  acute  during  a  deep  inspiration,


188


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


for  some  days  with  oppressed  breathing. Congestion  of
blood  to  the  chest,  from  bathing  in  the  sea. Sensation  of
congestion  to  the  chest,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.
Sudden  heaviness  on  the  chest,  during  dinner,  with  inter-
ception of  breathing,  nausea,  accumulation  of  water  in  the
mouth,  heat  in  the  face,  spasmodic  pressure  under  the
tongue,  pressing  it  upwards,  with  inclination  to  eructations;
she  had  to  open  her  dress  and  walk  into  the  open  air  ;  the
fit*  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  ended  in  a  chill,  (6.  d.)
Violent  aching  pain  in  the  chest. Constrictive  pain  in  the
chest  and  scapulae. Dull  stitches  under  the  right  nnmma,
independent  of  breathing,  (a.  6  d.) Stitches  deep  in  the
right  mamma,  as  from  a  pointed  body,  (a.  3  h.)  Stitches,
deep  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  independent  of  breathing,
(1.  and  12.  d.) Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  from
without  inwards  ;  soreness  when  touching  the  parts.  Con-
siderable burning  and  throbbing  in  the  chest,  at  times  in
one,  at  times  in  another  place. Stitches  in  the  heart,  ar-
resting her  breath,  (a.  12  d.) Palpitation  of  the  heart,
when  sitting,  for  three  days,  (a.  12  d.) Palpitation  of  the
heart,  when  sitting  and  when  rising  from  a  seat,  going  off
during  motion. Palpitation  of  the  heart  (immediately.)
Oppression  of  the  heart,  (immediately.) Violent  palpita-
tion of  the  heart,  with  pulsations  in  all  the  arteries.  Dull,
aching  pain,  externally,  in  the  xiphoid  cartilage.  Fine
stitches,  externally,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  of  the
chest. Pressure  upwards,  extending  from  the  left  clavicle
into  one  of  the  lower  molares,  in  the  crown  of  which  a
tingling sensation  was experienced. Tension  across
the  chest,  coming  from  the  pit  of  the  right  axilla.

Back.— Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  When  turning
the  body  rapidly,  he  suddenly  feels  a  dull  pain  in  the  small
of  the  back  ;  during  the  day  this  same  pain  is  more  felt  when
silting  or  lying,  (I.  d.)  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  over  the
smalfof  the"  back  and  both  hips,  with  sensitiveness  of  the
parts,  when  touching  them,  for  several  days.  Pain  in  the
small  of  the  back,  as  if  the  parts  were  sore  and  bruised,  (a.
9  d.)  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  the  parts  were
broken,  when  stooping,  or  stretching  the  limbs,  (5.  d.)
Contractive  cramp  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back.  Incisive
pressure  in  the  region  of  the  small  of  the  back. T eann."


CHLORIDE OF  MAGNESIUM.


189


and  burning  in  the  small  of  the  back,  and  hips,  afternoon
and  night,  (4.  d.) Dull  stitches,  with  tearing,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  parts.  Gnaw-
ing pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  the  whole  back,  in
the  evening,  after  lying  down  ;  the  pain  appears  to  be  in
the  marrow  and  extends  to  the  throat,  so  that  she  is  unable
to  sleep  from  pain,  and  has  to  toss  from  side  to  side  con-
stantly, (a.  5  d.) Paralytic  sensation  in  the  small  of  the
back,  in  the  evening. Severe  pain  as  from  bruises,  in  the
back,  (during  the  menses.) Severe  pain  as  from  bruises,
in  the  whole  of  the  vertebral  column,  at  night. Pain  as
from  bruises,  and  burning,  between  the  shoulders.  Burn-
ing, and  still  more  stinging,  in  the  whole  of  the  back,  ap-
parently in  the  marrow  ;  afterwards  boring  stitches  be-
tween the  shoulders,  alleviated  by  motion. Severe  burn-
ing pain  and  constant  itching  of  the  back. A  stitch  into  the
right  ilium,  towards  the  small  of  the  back. Tension  be-
tween the  shoulders  and  down  the  back.  Tearing  between
the  shoulders. Violent  tearing  in  both  scapulas.  Tearing
first  in  the  right  scapula,  afterwards  in  the  hip.  Aching
pain  in  the  region  of  the  right  scapula,  across  the  shoulder^
extending  to  the  clavicle;  worse  when  moving  the  arm  or
head,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  parts. Tearing  in  the
nape  of  the  neck,  and  in  the  right  shoulder,  along  the  ex-
ternal surface  of  the  arm. Tensive,  drawing  pain,  in  the
tendons  (muscles)  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck.  Small
glandular  swellings  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  tensive
during  motion,  and  painful  when  pressing  upon  the  part.

Superior  Extremities.— The  shoulder-joint  is  so  pain-
lul,  that  she  is  not  able  to  bring  her  arm  close  to  the  face,
(a.  16  d.)  Pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  as  if  the  parts
were  broken.  Violent  pain  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  it
lelt  heavy  ;  she  dared  not  move  her  arm,  although  this
made  the  pain  go  off;  afterwards  the  place  continued  to  be
sensitive  to  pain,  even  when  not  touched,  (1.  d.)  Pressure
on  the  left  shoulder,  (a.  7  d.)  Feeling  as  if  a  wedge  were
lodged  in  her  left  shoulder,  she  imagines  she  is  not  able  to
move  the  arm  ;  nevertheless  she  felt  nothing  when  moving
it.  Dull  drawing  pain  in  the  left  shoulder.  Drawing  and
tearing  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  most  painful  during  mo-
tion. Drawing,  stitching  pains  in  the  left  shouldei^joint


190


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


and  alternately  in  the  right,  most  painful  when  raising  the
arm. Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  (a.  19  d.)  Tearing
in  the  left  shoulder,  (a.  6  d.)  Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder-
joint,  extending  as  far  as  the  scapula,  when  pressing  the
arm  downwards. Tearing, extending  from  the  right
shoulder  down  to  the  tip  of  the  fingers  ;  it  is  so  violerit  that
she  cannot  raise  her  arm  ;  relieved  by  letting  it  hang  down.
Stitches  and  burning  in  the  region  of  the  left  shoulder,
down  to  the  hip. Throbbing  pain  in  the  right  shoulder,
(a.  33  d.) Jactitation  of  the  biceps  muscle  of  both  arms,
as  if  something  alive  were  jumping  about  in  them.  Tear-
ing in  the  external  surface  of  the  right  arm,  with  sensation
as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep,  extending  down  to  the  finger,
early  in  the  morning,  when  lying  upon  the  left  side  ;  going
off  by  friction,  (a.  5  d.) Tearing,  down  the  arm,  from
the  right  shoulder  to  the  palm  of  the  hand. Burning,  down
the  arm,  from  the  shoulders  to  the  fingers,  and  as  far  as
the  scapulae,  (1.  d.) The  arms  go  to  sleep,  early  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed,  when  lying  on  the  left  side,  (13.
d.) The  right  arm  goes  to  sleep,  when  lying  on  the  left
side,  almost  every  night,  especially  towards  morning,  (a.
1 4  d.) The  right  arm  goes  to  sleep,  especially  the  fingers,
in  the  evening  when  lying  down. Pain,  as  from  bruises,
in  the  left  upper  arm,  and  a  stitch  in  the  elbow-joint,  with
sensation  as  if  the  arm  were  dislocated,  in  the  evening,
after  lying  down,  (/>.  d.) Tearing  in  the  upper-arms,  ap-
parently in  the  marrow. Tearing  in  the  external  surface
of  the  right  upper  arm,  in  the  muscles. Violent  tearing
in  the  right  elbow-joint. Painful  transitory  tearings  in  the
left  lower  arm,  to  and  fro  between  skin  and  flesh. 1  earing
around  the  right  lower  arm,  in  a  small  circular  band  near
the  wrist-joint,  going  off  only  for  a  short  while  by  pressing
upon  the  parts. Tearing  in  the  inner  surface  of  the  right
lower  arm,  extending  as  far  as  the  thumb,  (3.  d  )  Violent
tearing  behind  the  left  wrist-joint,  and  in  the  direction  ot
the  index-finger,  (3.  d.) Both  lower  arms  go  to  sleep,
early  in  the  morning,  after  rising,  (2.  d.) Burning  pain
and  continual  itching  of  the  lower  arms. Burning,  painful
red  spot  behind  the  styloid  process  of  the  ulna.  Ex-
crescence on  the  right  wrist-joint. Drawing  pain  m  the
right  hand. Violent  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bone  ot  the


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.


191


right  ring-finger.  Tearing  in  the  right  hand,  (7.  d.)
T-earing  and  stitching  pain  in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Tearing  in  the  right  thumb.
Tearing  in  the  right  middle  and  ring-finger.  Tearing  in
the  dislal  extremity  of  the  first  phalangeal  bone  of  the  left
index-finger,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Dart-
ing tearing  on  the  left  index  and  middle-finger,  extending
from  the  middle  joint  to  the  tip  and  nail.  Prickings  in
the  tips  of  the  fingers,  going  off  by  friction.  Burning,
prickling  in  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  Numbness  and  insen-
sibility of  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  going  off  by  friction.

Inferior  Extremities. — Sensitiveness  of  the  hips  to
contact,  for  some  time.  Tearing  pain  in  the  right  hip,
extending  to  the  knee.  Tearing  in  the  right  hip,  in  the
evening,  after  lying  down  ;  the  parts  are  so  painful  that
she  cannot  lie  still ;  she  feels  most  comfortable  by  lying
on  the  good  side.  Tearing4in  the  right  hip-joint ;  when
pressing  and  rubbing  the  parts,  the  pain  removes  lower
down,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  Tearing  in  the  right
hip,  and  soon  after  in  the  left  thigh,  especially  around  the
knee,  apparently  in  the  marrow,  in  the  evening,  when  in
bed.  Violent,  darting  tearing,  obliging  one  to  scream,  in
the  posterior  parts  of  the  hip-joints,  frequently  intermit-
ting, in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Tearing  and  pain  as
from  bruises,  in  the  right  hip,  aggravated  by  walking,  early
in  the  morning.  Throbbing  in  the  left  hip.  Burning  on
the  posterior  parts  of  the  right  hip.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,
of  the  nates,  when  touching  them  or  no,  day  and  night,
(a.  33  d.)  Tearing  in  the  nates,  when  walking,  less  when
sitting.  Violent  twitching  in  the  right  half  of  the  nates.
Itching  burning  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  left  hip-joint.
Itching  in  the  bend  of  the  thigh.  The  bones  of  the  lower
limbs  are  very  painful  when  walking,  (a.  15  d.)  Pain,  as
from  bruises,  in  the  left  thigh,  as  if  it  would  break,  in  the
evening,  (6.  d.)  Tension  in  the  lower  limbs,  as  if  the
muscies  were  too  short  ;  this  sensation  goes  off  by  con-
tinued walking.  Pain,  as  after  riding  on  horseback,  in  the
muscles  of  the  thighs.  Violent  pain  in  the  middle  of  the
thighs,  early  m  the  morning  when  in  bed,  (immediately
before  the  menses,  (a.  11  d.)  Spasmodic  cramp-pain  of
the  inner  side  of  the  right  thigh,  early  in  the  morning  (3.


192


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


d.) Tensive  tearings  over  the  bend  of  the  left  knee,  (2.  d.)
Painful  stitching  jerks  in  the  thigh,  which  oblige  him  to
draw  up  his  leg. Uneasiness  and  straining  sensation  in
the  thighs,  which  frequently  obliged  him  to  move  his  legs,
in  order  to  find  relief. Violent  pain,  as  from  bruises,  in
the  middle  of  both  thighs,  in  the  evening,  after  lying  down,
hindering  sleep  for  a  long  while. Weakness  in  the  thighs,
when  standing,  going  off  when  walking. Itching  of  the
thighs;  scratching  brings  on  small  pimples. Tearing  in
the  knees- Tearing,  at  times  in  the  right,  at  times  in  the
left  knee.  Violent  tearings  deep  in  the  right  knee.  Stitches
under  the  left  knee. Weakness  of  the  right  knee,  with
sensation  as  if  something  were  tied  around  it.  Drawing
along  the  tibia  down  to  the  foot. Tearing  in  the  left  leg
(during  the  menses,)  (a.  31  d.) Transitory,  very  keen
pain  in  the  region  of  a  fracture  of  the  tibia  which  happened
12  years  ago,  as  if  it  would  break  again. Tension  and
tearing  in  the  right  calf. Cramp  of  the  calf  when  walk-
ing. Cramp  in  the  calves,  the  whole  night,  which  leaves  a
pain  in  the  parts  that  prevents him  from  walking,  on
the  day  following. Twitchings  in  both  calves,  without
pain. Tearing  in  the  calves  from  below  upwards,  when
standing. Tearing  in  the  right  calf,  from  above  down-
wards, down  to  the  heel,  in  the  evening. Paralytic  pain,
as  from  bruises,  in  both  calves  and  in  the  dorsum  of  the
foot,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  (during  the  menses.)
Heaviness  of  the  legs  and  feet,  early  in  the  morning,  when
in  bed. Uneasiness  in  the  feet,  early  in  the  evening,  he
has  to  move  them  constantly. Tension  in  the  dorsum  of
the  foot,  when  sitting,  going  off  by  motion.  Tearing
across  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  and  behind  the  toes,
when  walking. Burning,  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,
as  if  a  drop  of  hot  water  had  fallen  upon  it.  Tearing
on  the  inner  side  of  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  down
to  the  big  toe. J)u\\  stitch  in  the  outer  border  of  the
right  foot. Tearing  in  the  external  malleolus  of  the  left
foot. Cutting  in  the  heels. Twitchings  and  jerkings  in
the  right  heel,  (3.  d.) Pain  in  the  left  heel,  as  if  it  had
been  bruised. Burning  of  the  soles  of  the  feet,  in  the
evening. Tearing  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot.  Violent
tearing  in  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening,  after


CHLORIDE  OP  MAGNESIUM.


193


lying  down ;  afterwards  tearing  above  the  knee,  and  after-
wards in  the  right  hip,  almost  the  whole  night.  Tingling
in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  when  sitting.  Tingling  stinging  in
the  soles  of  the  feet.  The  right  foot  and  leg  go  to  sleep,
going  off  by  motion.  Trembling  of  the  feet,  when  sitting,
going  off  during  motion.  Tearing  in  the  big  toe,  when
walking  and  afterwards  also  when  sitting.  Painful  tearing
in  the  big  toe  of  the  right  foot.  Violent  tearing  in  the  big
toe  of  the  right  foot,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  (4.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  small  toe  of  the  right  foot.  Stitch  in  the
ball  of  the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot.  Sensation  as  if  the  mid-
dle toe  of  the  right  foot  and  the  thumb  were  drawn  inwards,
with  pain  in  those  parts,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising
or  walking.  Drawing,  formication  and  hot  feeling  of  the
toes  of  the  right  foot. Tearing  stitches  in  the  corns.

General  Symptoms. — Burning  tension  in  different  parts
of  the  body,  for  instance,  in  the  region  of  the  right  ribs,
of  the  left  shoulder,  &c. Transitory  tearings  in  different
parts  of  the  body,  at  night. Spasmodic  nervous  pain  in
alternate  parts  of  the  body,  at  times  boring,  at  times  con-
tractive, and  especially  in  the  scapulae  and  the  chest ;  ac-
companied by  violent  nervous  headache,  commencing  in
the  forepart  of  the  head,  with  drawing  in  the  ears  ;  some-
times lancinating  tearings  in  the  head. The  generality  of
the  symptoms  occur  when  sitting,  and  are  generally  relieved
by  motion. She  thinks  she  feels  better  in  the  open  air,
except  the  symptoms  of  the  chest. Three  days  and  three
nights  she  was  unable  to  bear  the  open  air. Itching  of
lifferent  parts  of  the  body,  at  times  of  one,  at  times  of  the
ither  place. Violent  itching  of  the  whole  body,  changing
rorn  place  to  place,  in  the  evening  before  lying  clown  and
early  in  the  morning  after  rising. Itching  of  various  parts
of  the  body,  going  off  by  scratching,  also  in  the  evening,
previous  to  going  to  bed. Itching  of  the  chest,  back,  dor-
sum of  the  left  foot  and  small  of  the  back,  not  going  off  by
scratching. Itching  of  the  right  iliac  region,  the  left  tibia
and  the  posterior  surface  of  the  thighs;  in  this  part  the
itching  is  followed  by  burning ;  it  returns  after  scratching.
Itching  of  the  whole  body,  as  if  from  vermin,  also  in  the
evening  after  lying  down  ;  after  scratching  it  re-appears  in
other  places. Itching  of  the  external  surface  of  the  thigh


194


MAGNESIA.  MURIATICA.


aggravated  by  scratching ;  likewise  of  the  small  of  the  back
and  the  hips,  which  parts,  when  scratched,  experience  a
burning  sensation. Formication  of  the  face,  the  soles  of
the  fee"  and  chest. ;  in  the  chest  the  formication  is  followed
by  a  severe  stitch. Formication  of  the  whole  body,  at
night,  when  in  bed,  with  shuddering  over  the  face,  arms
and  shoulders,  down  to  the  end  of  the  feet. Itching  pim-
ples, sometimes  burning  after  scratching,  between  the
shoulders,  on  the  chest  and  in  the  back. Pustules  on  the
temple  and  in  the  region  of  the  right  clavicle.  Small,
itching  or  red  pimples  on  the  chin,  between  the  shoulders,
on  the  thigh  and  nates  ;  these  latter  parts  experience  a
burning  sensation  after  being  scratched. Boils  on  the  fore-
arm, on  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  on  the  false  ribs,  and
on  i he  nose  ;  the  boil  on  the  nose  suppurates  in  24  hours.

Weakness,  Fit. — Great  weariness  in  the  limbs,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  she  has  to  sit.  down  frequently.
Great  weakness  in  the  lower  limbs,  even  when  silting,  (dur-
ing the  menses.) Great  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs,  al-
most, during  the  whole  time  of  proving. Sudden  weakness
of  the  lower  limbs,  from  afternoon  till  evening.  Weary
as  soon  as  he  begins  to  walk  ;  when  at  rest,  the  hip-joints
feel  a  pain  as  from  dislocation. Great  weakness,  (a.
3d.) Early  in  the  morning  he  feels  weary,  bruised
and  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough. Weak  feeling,
with  vertigo,  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  11  d.)  Weakness
and  tremor  of  the  hands  and  feet,  after  dinner.  Weak,
weary  nnd  out  of  humor,  in  the  forenoon. The  whole
body  feels  painful,  as  if  it  were  bruised. Heaviness  of
single  parts,  thighs,  knees,  calves,  hips,  etc.  Heaviness
and  weariness  of  the  lower  limbs,  as  after  a  long  journey
on  foot,  (a.  7  d.) Sensation  in  the  whole  body,  as  if  al  its
parts  were  too  heavy,  (11.  d.) She  feels  weak  and  broken
down,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  28  d.) Tremor  of  the  hands
and  feet. Early  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  evening,  when
beginning  to  walk,  the  feet  feel  unsteady.  Staggering
gait,  (a  28  d.) He  feels  quite  sick,  (a.  17  d.)  After
bathing  for  five  minutes  in  the  North-sea,  she  became  so
weak  That  she  felt  as  if  all  the  vitality  had  passed  out  o
her,  she  was  scarcely  able  to  speak,  (a.  a  few  n.)  ^reat
sensitiveness  ;  her  head  aches  even  from  hearing  persons


CHLORIDE  OF  MAGNESIUM.  195

talk,  or  from  her  own  talking,  from  every  step  she  makes  ;
accompanied  by  a  decrease  of  appetite,  taste,  and  smell
early  in  the  morning,  (a.  28  d.)  Fainting  fit,  at  dinner,
with  anxiousness,  nausea  and  paleness  of  the  face  ;  her
eyes  see  green  and  red,  and  she  trembles  all  over  the
body ;  afterwards  eructations  which  gave  her  relief,  (27.  d.)

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning,  with  a  feeling  of  exhaustion
in  the  body,  and  a  want  of  disposition  to  intellectual  labor.
Frequent  yawning,  the  whole  day,  most  violent  after  din-
ner. Yawning,  with  eructations  and  water  in  the  mouth.
Frequent  yawning,  with  chilliness  and  goose-skin,  con-
tinual desire  for  stool  and  cutting  in  the  abdomen,  an  hour
after  dinner. Drowsiness  in  day-time. Drowsy,  indo-
lent, and  averse  to  labor,  (a.  25  d.) She  feels  sleepy
early  in  the  evening,  and  she  sleeps  well  in  the  beginning;
after  midnight,  she  is  attacked  with  sweat  and  thirst.
Sleep  does  not  refresh  him  ;  he  feels  weary  early  in  the
morning,  (a.  17  d.) In  the  morning  she  feels  so  sleepy
that  she  experiences  a  difficulty  in  opening  her  eyes.  He
wakes  up  late  in  the  morning  ;  he  finds  it  difficult  to  open
his  eyes. She  falls  asleep  late  in  the  evening,  (a.  5  d.)
She  was  not  able  to  fall  asleep  till  eleven  o'clock  in  the
evening,  on  account  of  great  heat  and  thirst ;  she  sweats
after  midnight. In  the  evening  he  falls  asleep  with  great
difficulty  ;  he  tosses  in  his  bed  from  side  to  side  ;  he  wakes
up  late  in  the  morning  and  can  scarcely  open  his  eyes,
(the  first  days.) She  wakes  up  at  3  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, and  is  unable  to  fall  asleep  afterwards. He  woke  up
at  2  o  clock  at  night,  and  remained  awake  for  an  hour  •
he  felt  restless  in  his  bed,  and  had  to  get  up  and  to  walk
about  in  his  room  ;  moreover,  he  had  a  sourish  taste  in  his
mouth. Anxiousness  and  heat,  before  midnight ;  sweat
and  thirst  after  midnight. Uneasiness  in  the  whole  body,
as  soon  as  she  closes  her  eyes  in  the  evening,  tohen  in  bed,
^a.  u  ct.; Shaking  in  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  almost  without  chilliness  or  heat.
J^arly  m  the  morning,  when  wide  awake,  he  experiences
a  jerk,  extending  from  the  heel  through  the  whole  body,
as  if  caused  by  an  electric  shock  or  by  frioht.  Restless
sleep,  interrupted  by  frequent  waking,  (a.  12°d.) At  n  St
she  was  unable  to  find  any  rest  any  where,  ind  had  to


196  MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

turn  about,  (a.  27  d.) Great  restlessness  at  night,  she
tosses  from  side  to  side,  and  feels  so  hot  that  she  is  un-
able to  fall  asleep,  (a.  14  d.) Sleepless  night owing  to
violent  toothache. Restless  sleep,  owing  to  a  feeling  ot
heaviness  in  the  abdomen. At  2  o'clock  in  the  night,  he
wakes  up,  from  a  cutting  sensation  in  the  lower  part  of
the  abdomen,  followed  by  stitches,  first  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  afterwards  in  the  precordial  region,  worse  when
taking  an  inspiration. Restless,  sleepless  nights,  owing
to  violent  pains  in  the  small  of  the  back,  obliging  him  to
move  continually  from  side  to  side, *  »Vj&
and  feet  go  to  sleep,  which  is  painful I  he  morning
sleep  was  disturbed  by  a  pain  in  the  back  and  smal of the
back  and  returned  when  he  fell  asleep  again,  frequent
waldn"  on  account  of  great  heat. Talking  while  asleep,
Ta  8  d  ) Snoring  when  asleep,  (a.  10  d. Starting  when
asleep before  midnight,  (a.  9  d.) Anxious  dream  with
heavSess  m  the  chest,  like  night-mare  ;  she  attempted  to
scream,  but  she  was  not  able  (a  2  d.) A  numWjmd
dreams  which  she  was  not  able  to  recollect. When  tali
inTwleep she  fancies  a  great  many  things,  frightful
dreams  of  falls,  etc. Plea sant  dreams,  of  weddings,
dances  etc. Dreams  about  travels. Shameful  dreams
Dreams  causing  a  good  deal  of  anguish ^Dreams  about
dead  persons. Frightful  dreams  about  danger  of  death
misfortunes,  mutilations,  robbers, etc. Dreams  aoout
having  gone  astray  in  a  forest. Dreams  about  danger  of

shaking,  even  when  near  the

/ . Pvenine Chilliness  with  yawning,  in  the
stove,  in  the  evening o  -  ^  from  4  to  5

VS\t  day.  —  (a-  26  d.)  Chilliness  in
the  even  ^  goL  off  after  going  to  bed  ;  heat  before  mid-
Aftei  midni-ht  sweat  with  thirst,  continuing  until
night.  ^6™f  shaking  chills,  in  the  evening,  from  6
£75do£  'omg  off  when  in  bed,  (4.  d.) Chilliness  at

sleeplessness (10  dO ^  q£  f h  ][

evening,  with ^  thirst  and  g  J  ^  heat  (7.  d.)
Sequent  the  forenoon,  (10.  d.)  Shuddering,


MANGANUM — MAGNESIUM,  MANGANES1UM.  197


through  the  whole  body,  early  in  the  morning,  with  icy-
cold  feet,  (5.  d.)  Shuddering,  early  in  the  morning,  when
rising,  which  obliged  her  to  re-enter  the  bed  several  times,
(a.  20  d.)  Shuddering  and  shaking,  at  7  o'clock  in  the
evening,  when  stepping  into  the  open  air  ;  one  feels  hot
when  entering  the  room,  (a.  6  d.)  Shuddering  in  a  warm
room  and  constant  desire  for  stool,  shortly  after  dinner.
Shuddering  over  the  whole  body,  the  hairs  standing  on
end,  several  times,  in  the  forenoon.  Feeling  of  shudder-
ing, in  the  evening,  previous  to  going  to  bed  ;  after  mid-
night profuse  sweat  over  the  whole  body,  without  thirst,
until  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  11  d.)  Internal  warmth,
after  breakfast,  which  consisted  of  warm  milk  ;  there  was
no  warmth  to  the  touch,  (1.  d.)  Thrills  of  heat,  with
vertigo,  (a.  £  h.)  Heat  in  the  feet,  before  midnight ;  she
has  to  put  them  out  of  the  bed  ;  this  affords  relief ;  after
midnight,  sweat  and  thirst,  until  early  in  the  morning,  (a.
14  d.)  General  increase  of  warmth,  with  thirst,  in  the
afternoon.  Internal  heat,  with  thirst,  at  night.  Heat  in
the  evening,  and  restlessness  in  the  whole  body  ;  even
some  time  after  having  laid  down.  Heat  over  the  whole
body,  in  the  evening,  shortly  after  lying  down  ;  it  is  in-
creased whenever  he  wakes  up,  (a.  9  d.)  Warm  and
anxious,  when  in  bed,  (a.  27  d.)  Heat  before  midnight ;
after  midnight,  sweat  with  thirst,  recurring  after  6  days,
(a.  28  d.)  Heat,  after  midnight,  (a.  1 1  d.)  Great  heat,
with  sweat,  at  dinner ;  several  days  in  succession,  (a.  11
d.)  Sweat  about  the  head,  in  the  evening,  with  increased
warmth  of  the  body.  Sweat,  after  midnight,  (a.  13  d.)
Sweat  after  midnight,  and  frequent  thirst,  existing  yet
early  in  the  morning,  and  being  accompanied  with  dryness
of  mouth,  (a.  10  d.)  Sweat  with  thirst,  almost  every
morning.


MANGANUM— (MAGNESIUM,  MANGANES1UM.)

Equal  parts,  in  weight,  of  the  black  oxyde  of  manga-
nese and  crystals  of  pure  sulphate  of  iron  are  triturated
together  in  the  mortar,  and,  having  been  mixed  with  some


198


MANGANUM.


syrup  of  sugar,  are  made  into  balls  of  the  size  of  a  hen's
egg,  which  are  heated  between  charcoal,  and  kept  in  a
stale  of  incandescence  for  about  ten  minutes.  A  solution
of  these  balls  in  pure  distilled,  or  rain-water,  contains  the
pure  sulphate  of  manganese,  the  sediment  containing  a
mixture  of  the  remaining  oxyde  of  manganese  and  oxyde
of  iron.

The  carbonate  of  manganese,  which  is  precipitated  from
the  clear  solution  by  means  of-  Natrum,  and  ought  to  be
washed  with  water  a  sufficient  number  of  times,  is  a  white
powder,  the  drying  of  which  in  the  air,  and  subsequent
powdering  requires  great  care,  lest  it  should  assume  a
yellowish  colour,  which  would  show  that  there  is  yet  some
of  the  oxyde  of  iron  remaining  in  it.  To  remove  this
oxyde,  the  yellowish  powder  is  dissolved  in  dilute  nitric
acid  to  saturation,  the  solution  is  then  filtered  through
paper,  a  precipitate  is  formed  by  means  of  Natrum,  the
precipitate  being  afterwards  freed  from  its  admixture  of
salt  by  means  of  distilled  water,  and  then  dried.

The  carbonate  of  Manganese  is  dynamised  in  the  usual
fashion  ;  or  else  it  may  be  boiled  with  distilled  vinegar,
until  a  saturated  solution  shall  have  been  obtained,  which  is
then  boiled  into  a  syrup.  This  is  the  Manganum  aceticum,
one  drop  of  which  is  dynamised  by  succussion  up  to  the
30th  potency.

The  following  symptoms  have  been  obtained  from  both
these  preparations :

Manganese  has  been  found  especially  curative  in  affec-
tions characterised  by  the  following  symptoms  : —

Diminution  of  the  senses  ;  burning  of  the  eyes,  and  dim-
ness of  sight  by  day  ;  morning-agglutination  of  the  eyes  ;
frequent  emission  of  flatulence ;  knotty,  difficult  stool ;  fre-
quent, papescent  stools  in  the  day  ;  diseases  of  the  larynx
and  trachea  ;  chronic  hoarseness  ;  phthisis  laryngea  ;
insufferable  pains  of  the  periosteum  and  the  joints  ;  chronic
inflammatory  swelling  and  ulceration  of  the  little  finger  ;
shocks  of  the  heart ;  yawning  ;  burning  of  the  soles.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  Drs.  Ahner,  Franz,  Horn-
burg,  Haynel,  Gross,  Langhammer,  Riickert,  Stapf,  Tent-
horn,  Wall  le,  and  by  Ng.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  : — Manganese  is  useful  in


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


199


inflammations  of  the  bones  and  the  periosteum.  Intolerable
grinding,  boring,  gnawing,  inflammatory  pains  of  the  peri-
osteum and  the  joints,  (the  processes  of  bones)  especially-
violent  at  night,  (like  all  pains  in  the  bones.)— Rheuma-
tic pains. — Acuie  and  chronic  rheumatism  of  the  joints. — -
Acute  and  chronic  gout  of  the  joints,  with  lancinating,
darting  and  grinding  pains  in  the  swollen  joints,  becoming
intolerable  at  night,  and  when  the  weather  changes,  and  at-
tacking one  joint  after  the  other  of  either  of  the  same  sides,
or  alternately  of  both. — Arthritis  vaga. — Arthritic  swelling
of  the  joints.— Itching,  smarting  itching  and  burning  of  the
skin. — Chronic  cutaneous  eruptions. — Humid,  suppurating,
spreading  herpes. — Unhealthy  skin.— Soreness  and  rha-

gades  in  the  bends  of  the  joints. — Absence  of  mind

Weakness  of  memory. — Chronic,  scrofulous,  and  herpetic
inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  eyelids,  with  copious  se-
cretion of  mucus.— Dry  and  hot  eyes. — Pains  and  dazzling
of  the  eyes  from  looking  too  clo.-ely  and  steadily  at  near  or
distant,  objects. — Short-sightedness. — Dim-sightedness.—
Photopsia.— Amblyopia  amaur^tica. — Amaurosis. — Acute
and  chronic  inflammation  of  the  internal  ear. — Sensation
of  obstruction  in  the  ears.— Hard  hearing.— Tickling
in  the  ears. — Hard  hearing,  as  if  caused  by  obstruction  of
the  ears,  which  goes  off  as  with  a  report  when  blowing  the
nose,  and  improves  or  becomes  worse,  according  to  the
changes  in  the  weather.— Whizzing,  rushing  as  of  water
detonation  when  blowing  the  nose,  or  when  swallowing
and,  when  yawning,  noise  in  the  ears  as  when  treading  on
a  swamp. — Whizzing,  rushing  as  of  water,  roaring,  ring-
ing, detonations  and  fluttering  as  of  birds,  in  the  ears.—
Violent  toothache  in  hollow  teeth,  quickly  spreading  to
other  parts,  lancinating,  tearing  or  drawing. — Ulcerative
pains  in  the  teeth  when  touching  them.— Cutting  sore  pain
in  the  throat,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition.— Chronic
inflammations  of  the  mucus  membrane  of  the  palates,  the
fauces,  and  the -tonsils.— Chronic  laryngeal  cough  with  con-
stant titillauon,  from  the  pit  of  the  throat  to  the  bronchial
tubes  ;  talking  excites  the  cough,  and  a  deep  inspiration  is
accompanied  by  a  wheezing  sound,  (in  conjunction  with
conium.) Roughs  throat.— Hoarseness  Coxa]oia  ;  jn.


200


MA.NGA.NUM.


flammation  of  the  hip-joint  in  scrofulous  children,  first  and

second  stage.

Antidotes. — Coffea,  Merc,  sol.,  H.

Moral  Symptoms. — Weeping  mood. Continued  rest-
lessness, as  if  he  apprehended  some  sad  event.  Great
bodily  and  mental  restlessness,  as  if  something  tormented
him. Ill-humor. Discouragement,  (a.  6  d.) Out  of  hu-
mor and  low-spirited,  (a.  36  h.) Every  thing  she  thinks  of
gives  her  dissatisfaction,  (a.  2  h.) Out  of  humor,  de-
sponding and  sad. Out  of  humor  ;  light  music  makes  him
sad,  sad  music  cheers  him  up. Out  of  humor,  reflective,
the  whole  body  feeling  uneasy  and  uncomfortable,  four
afternoons  in  succession. Out  of  humor,  dissatisfied  with
herself,  and  apprehensive  on  account  of  the  future  ;  he
talks  little,  imagines  he  is  weak-minded,  and  uses  wrong
expressions  in  every  sentence  he  utters. Peevish  and
out  of  humor,  on  account  of  every  trifle,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, with  wrinkled  brow,  he  was  even  irritated  by  the  mere
conversation  of  others. Incensed  feeling  ;  he  is  full  of
bitterness  and  rancor  against  his  offenders.

Head. — Weak  memory.  Absence  of  mind.  Obtusion
of  the  head  and  heaviness  of  the  occiput,  afterwards  of  the
forehead.  Glominess  and  dulness  of  the  head,  with  gene-
ral feeling  of  exhaustion,  when  sitting.  Vertigo,  when
sitting  or  standing  ;  he  has  to  hold  on  to  something,  in  or-
der to  prevent  his  falling  over.  Megrim,  (a.  4  h.)  Dull
headache  in  a  room.  Stupefying,  aching  pains  in  the  fore-
head, which  finally  become  boring,  and  internally  pricking.
Dull  aching  of  the  occiput,  with  empty  feeling  in  the  part,
depriving  one  of  one's  senses  and  becoming  less  by  laying
the  hand  upon  the  part.  Dull  ache  in  the  upper  part  of
the  os  frontis.  Sharp  ache  over  the  left  temple,  when  ris-
ing from  one's  seat  and  walking ;  decreasing  when  sitting
down.  Aching  pain  over  the  whole  brain,  extending  from
above  downwards,  late  in  the  evening,  and  even  at  night,
when  waking,  (a.  4  h.)  Burning  aching  in  the  sides  of  the
head  and  in  the  occiput,  diminishing  when  walking  in  the
open  air.  Painful  pressure  from  behind  forwards,  from
the  occiput  across  the  vertex  as  far  as  the  forehead,  as  if
all  the  contents  of  the  skull  would  issue  from  the  forehead,


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


201


at  noon,  worst  at  one  o'clock. Contractive  pain  in  the  up-
per and  back  part  of  the  head. Drawing  pain  in  the  oc-
ciput, the  orbits  and  the  forehead  ;  the  pain  in  the  forehead
gets  worse  when  stooping,  and  goes  off  by  pressing  upon
the  parts  with  the  hand. Drawing  pain  in  the  temples,
apparently  in  the  bones. Drawing,  tensive  pain  in  various
parts  of  the  head. Drawing  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the
head,  (a.  8  h.) Drawing  tearing,  over  the  right  eye,  (a.
18  d.) Tearing  in  the  left  part  of  the  forehead,  apparently
in  the  bone,  especially  when  moving  the  occipito-frontahs
muscle. Tearing,  when  talking,  from  the  left  frontal  pro-
tuberance towards  the  temple. Tearing  in  the  left  tem-
ple, when  taking  exercise  in  the  open  air. Tearing  in  the
right  side  of  the  head,  and  especially  deep  in  the  right  ear,
when  raising  the  head,  after  stooping. Violent,  lancinat-
ing tearing,  internally,  from  the  left  parietal  bone  to-
wards the  vertex,  when  standing,  at  8  o'clock  in  the
morning,  recurring  at  the  same  hour  on  the  day  follow-
ing. Tearings,  and  tearing  jerks  in  the  external  parts  of
the  occiput,  three  afternoons  in  succession ;  between  the
attacks  the  place  is  painful  when  touched,  a  little  less  when
not  touched. Lancinating  headache,  externally,  below  the
right  parietal  bone,  extending  towards  all  the  sides  of  the
skull. Painful  prickings,  ■externally,  in  the  right  half  of
the  occipital  bone,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,
down  to  the  5th  cervical  vertebra,  increased  when  turn-
ing the  neck. Transitory  stitches,  externally,  over  the
right  temple,  alternating  with  a  kind  of  buzzing.  Lan-
cinations,  resembling  stabbings  as  with  knives,  in  the
lelt  side  of  the  forehead,  or  prickings,  in  paroxysms.
Violent  stitches  m  the  left  parietal  bone,  when  stooping
dutches  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,  slowly  drawing
rarely  with  an  aching  sensation,  felt  only  when  going
into  the  open  air,  and  ceasing  for  a  while  in  the  room  ;
accompanied  by  shaking-chills,  without  goose-flesh  over
the  whole  body,  only  in  the  open  air,  relieved  in  the
room,  (a.  24  h.) Contractive  stitching  pain  in  the  whole
iorepart  of  the  head,  now  here,  now  there,  especially  in
the  temple,  mostly  in the  open  air. The  headache
which  continues  in  the  room,  goes  off  in  the  open  air!
Soring  into  the  frontal  bone,  between  the  root  of  the

9*  -■


202


MANGANUM.


nose  and  the  eyebrow. A  grinding  aching  in  the  tem-
ples, extending  as  far  as  the  eyes  and  the  forehead,  bet-
ter when  stooping,  recurring  when  sitting  straight  up,  or
bending  backwards,  (a.  4  h.) Throbbing  ulcerative  pain
in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  both  when  at  rest  and
in  motion. Throbbing  pain in  the  whole  head,  as  if
the  brain  would  suppurate,  going  off  in  the  open  air,  return-
ing in  the  room. Painful  concussion  of  the  brain,  from
shaking  the  head. Concussion  over  the  right  eye,  resem-
bling a  violent  stitch,  when  walking  fast,  even  in  the  room,
(a.  20  d.) Concussion  of  the  brain,  when  walking,  with
aching  in  the  head  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  epigastrium.
Sensalion  as  of  wave-like  moving  from  the  nape  of  the
neck  across  the  vertex,  towards  the  forehead,  during  mo-
tion ;  with  stupefaction  and  confusion  of  the  senses,  while
standing. Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head,  when  silting,
standing,  walking  or  lying  down,  with  hot  feeling  in  the
face,  without  any  redness  or  external  heat. Hot  feeling  in
the  head,  in  the  afternoon. Frequent  flushes  of  heat  in  the
head,  with  thirst,  (6.  d.) Burning  sensation  at  one  point
of  the  right  frontal  bone. Burning  sensation  over  the
right  temple. Her  head  feels  heavy  and  seems  to  her
enlarged. Her  head  feels  so  heavy  that  she  is  scarcely
able  to  keep  it  straight ;  she  is  at  the  same  time  out  of
humor. Heaviness  and  painful obtusion  of  the  head,
with  heat  in  the  head,  relieved  in  the  open  air,  and  not
returning  in  a  room. Her  head  feels  heavy,  and  the
hairy  scalp  is  so  painful,  that  she  can  scarcely  endure
combing,  early  in  the  morning  and  evening. Cold  feel-
ing, at  a  small  place  of  the  vertex,  even  when  the  head
is  covered,  the  hair  standing  on  end.

Eyes.— Itching  and  burning  of  the  right  parietal  bone,
when  stooping,  going  off  by  scratching.  The  eyelids  are
painful  when  moved  ever  so  little  ;  when  looking  into  the
light,  they  are  too  dry,  with  a  sensation  as  one  experiences
when  waking  from  sleep.  Pressure  in  the  eyes,  while
reading  by  candle-light,  as  if  one  had  read  too  much,  with
unconquerable  drowsiness.  Sharp  pressure  m  the  ball  of
the  eve,  when  moving  the  eye  inwards  and  upwards  Darl-
ings in  the  right  eye,  to  and  fro,  causing  an  agreeable  tick-
ling sensation. Darting  stitches  in  both  upper  eyelids.


MACXESIUM,  MANCANESIUM.


203


Pricking  fromr  without  inwards,  in  the  right  eyebrow.
Smarting  and  corrosive  pain  in  the  external  canthua.
Throbbing  in  the  right  upper  eyelid. Bloated  eyelids.
Hot  feeling  and  dryness  of  the  eyes. Continued  dryness
of  the  eyes,  in  the  evening. Dilatation  of  the  pupils  ;  he
is  dazzled  by  the  light;  it  causes  a  pain  in  his  eyes;  the
pupils  gradually  contract  when  a  light  is  presented  to  the
eyes,  but  ihey  dilate  as  soon  as  the  light  has  been  removed.
The  right  pupil  is  more  dilated  than  the  left.  Dilatation
of  the  pupils,  (a.  25  h.) Contraction  of  the  pupils,  (a.  \h
h.) 2'hepupils  are  very  much  contracted  during  the  whole
time  of  proving ;  they  only  dilate  a  little  occasionally,  in
the  evening. Contraction  of  the  pupils  is  accompanied  by
obscuration  of  sight ;  he  is  unable  to  recognise  objects  at  a
distance. Great  short-sightedness,  for  many  days.  Her
sight  vanishes,  after  looking  at  an  object  for  a  long  time.
When  looking  at  objects,  which  are  not  bright,  and  which
are  held  near  to  his  eyes,  with  attention,  his  eyes  ache  and
he  is  obliged  to  close  them  ;  the  eyes  ache  still  more  when
alight  is  held  near  them.  Fiery  sparks,  resembling  wheels,
in  the  evening,  when  closing  the  eyes;  these  appearances
■  looked  black,  as  soon  as  he  looked  at  a  light.

Ear. — Otalgia  of  the  left  ear. An  excessive  pain  darts
suddenly  into  the  right  ear,  from  the  teeth. The  external
ear  feels  painful  when  touched. Sharp  pressure  in  the
right  ear,  occasionally,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,
as  if  otalgia  would  come  on. Cramp-like  ache  behind  the
left  ear,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  going  off  by  con-
tact. Darting  pinching  in  the  external  left  ear,  going  off
gradually  by  violent  friction. Darling  tearing  in  the  right
ear,  early  in  the  morning. Darting  tearing  in  the  right
concha,  iruhe  evening,  when  lying  down;  going  off  when
in  bed. Tearing  in  the  mastoid  process  under  the  right
ear. Ulcerative  pain  in  the  right  concha,  in  the  evenino-.
Grinding  pain  in  the  internal  cartilage  of  the  ear,  at  night.
Dull,  stitching  pain,  in  the  ear,  tuhenever  he  talks.  Violently
drawing,  stitching  pain,  when  laughing,  from  the  stomach
to  the  left  ear,  as  far  as  the  region  of  the  tympanum.
Violently  drawing  stitching  pain,  especially  in  the  fore-
noon, when  walking  fast,  from  the  forehead  to  the  ear
terminating  in  the  region  the  tympanum  in  the  shape  of  a


204


MANGANUM.


stitch  from  within  outwards,  and  continuing  while  walking,
gradually  subsiding  after  standing  still,  (a.  48  h.)  Scraping
stinging  in  the  region  of  the  tympanum. Crawling  tick-
ling in  the  region  of  the  tympanum,  which  cannot  be
removed  by  boring  with  the  finger  into  the  ear.  Itching
in  the  left  ear. Cold  feeling  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  cold
air  rushed  in. Sense  as  of  ringing  in  the  ears,  early  in
the  morning. Sense  as  of  croaking  in  the  right  ear,  when
walking. Roaring  in  the  ears  after  stooping,  and  momen-
tary diminution  of  hearing,  as  if  the  ears  were  closed  with
the  hand. Deafness  as  if  the  ears  were  closed  with  the
hand. Fluttering  before  ths  left  ear,  the  ear  feeling  warm
as  if  she  were  standing  before  a  hot  stove.  Pressive,
contractive  feeling  in  the  parotid  glands. Tearing  in  the
left  nasal  fossa,  with  creeping  as  if  one  would  sneeze,
without  any  sneezing. Painful,  clawing  tearing  between
the  root  of  the  nose  and  eyebrow. Pustule  near  the  right
corner  of  the  nose.

Face. — Face  wretched,  pale  and  sunken,  as  after  ex-
cesses, during  the  whole  time  of  proving. Pain  in  the
region  of  the  zygoma,  as  if  a  sore would  break  open.
Grinding  aching"  at  a  small  spot  of  the  zygoma,  at  night,  •
when  in  bed,  in  paroxysms.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Bruised  pain,  in  the  left  upper  jaw.
Drawing  cramp  in  ihe  muscle,  in  the  region  of  the  left
mastoid  process,  so  that  he  had  to  incline  his  head  to  the
right  side.  Cramp-pain  in  both  upper  and  lower  jaws,
alter  eating.  Sore  pain,  and  as  from  excoriation,  in  the
lower  jaw.  Stitches  in  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw,  towards
the  parotid  gland.  Violent  dartings,  when  laughing,  from
the  right  side  of  the  lower  jaw  across  the  temple.  Pain
about  the  chin,  as  if  the  part  had  been  scraped  with  a
serrated  razor,  or  as  if  the  parts  were  sore  and  ulcerated.
Burning,  externally  about  the  chin.  Pustule  on  the  chin,
with  tensive  pain  and  leaving  a  red  spot  behind.  Ulcera-
tive pain  in  the  corners  of  the  lips,  as  is  caused  by  sores.
Itching  below  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  with  itching  after
scratching  the  parts.  Clear  vesicles  on  the  upper  lip,
itching  violently,  especially  in  the  evening.  Clear  vesicles
on  the  right  side  of  both  lips,  with  tensive  pain  of  the
upper  lip,  when  touching  it  ;  this  lip  is  moreover  swollen.


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


205


Red  pimple  on  the  lower  lip,  near  the  right  corner  of  the
mouth,  with  tensive  pain.  A  pimple  in  the  right  corner
of  the  lips,  with  tensive  and  gnawing-stitching  pain,  when
touching  the  parts  or  when  moving  the  mouth.  Dry,
parched  lips,  with  shrivelled  skin,  for  many  days,  without
thirst.  Corrosive  tumor  on  the  upper  lip,  close  below  the
nose.  Violent  toothache ;  it  commences  by  suddenly
affecting  two  hollow  molar  teeth  ;  thence  the  pain  speedily
moves  into  the  arm,  the  zygoma,  the  throat,  or  ear,  and
afterwards  returns  again,  with  complete  exhaustion,  so
that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  walk  and  has  to  lie  down,  with
great  internal  uneasiness  and  oppression  of  the  chest ;  the
pain  was  somewhat  relieved  by  biting  upon  elastic  sub-
stances, or  by  laying  the  forehead  upon  the  table  ;  it  was
considerably  increased  by  sitting  straight ;  the  pupils  were
at  the  same  time  very  much  dilated.  The  toothache  lasts
from  4  to  5  days,  and  appears  especially  in  the  forenoon
and  evening  between  10  and  midnight ;  by  pulling  upon
the  teeth  with  the  tongue,  they  experience  an  intensely
painful  jerk,  after  which  the  pain  ceases  for  some  time.
The  tooth  is  painfully  sensitive  as  if  it  were  ulcerated,
when  touched  ever  so  slightly,  less  so  when  left  alone.
Pain  in  the  roots  of  one  of  thejight  lower  row,  as  if  it  were
turned  out  of  its  socket ;  frequently  returniug.  Smarting
toothache  in  a  lower  and  upper  molar  tooth,  made  insup-
portable by  bringing  the  least  drop  of  cool  drink  to  it.
Drawing  toothache  in  a  molar  tooth  of  the  right  side  ;  it
frequently  disappears  of  a  sudden  and  is  replaced  by
(drawing)  pains  in  other  neighbouring  parts.  Drawing-
tearing  toothache,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  (a.
4  d.)  Tearing  in  3  or  4  teeth  of  the  left  lower  row.
Stitch  now  in  one,  now  in  another  upper  tooth  ;  it  is  felt
every  time  the  teeth  are  struck  against  one  another.

Mouth.— Smell  from  the  mouth  as  of  clay  or  earth,
early  in  the  morning  after  rising  ;  he  does  not  perceive
it  himse  f.  Burning  vesicles  on  the  left  side  of  the  tongue.
1  wo  little  tubercles  on  the  right  side  of  the  tongue,  pain-
ful when  touched.  Tubercle  on  the  back  part  of  the  left
border  of  the  tongue,  sore  when  touched,  from  morning
till  evening.  Soreness  of  the  posterior  part  of  the  palate,
and  as  if  a  hard  body  were  pressing  upon  it,  between  the


206


MANGANUM.


acts  of  deglutition  ;  going  off  after  eating  bread)  early  in
the  morning.  Dryness  of  the  palate  and  lips,  almost  the
whole  day.  Dryness  of  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,
after  waking  ;  she  is  scarcely  able  to  swallow,  with  white
tongue  and  sourish  taste.  Accumulation  of  bitter  water
in  the  mouth,  with  inclination  to  vomit.  Accumulation  of
saliva  in  the  mouth.  Ptyalism.

Throat. — Dry  throat,  early  in  the  morning,  without
thirst.  Dry,  scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,  frequently
obliging  him  to  clear  the  throat-  Great  roughness  of  the
throat,  in  the  evening.  Roughness  of  the  throat,  with
sensation,  when  clearing  the  throat,  as  if  the  wind-pipe
were  closed  with  a  leaflet.  Dull  stitch  deep  in  the  throat,
at  every  empty  deglutition,  not  when  swallowing  saliva.
Dull  stitch,  during  an  empty  deglutition;  on  both  sides  of
the  throat.  Dull  stitch  on  each  side  of  the  larynx,  during
deglutition,  also  when  swallowing  food  or  drink  ;  this  stitch
extends  as  far  as  the  left  ear.

Appetite  and  Taste. — Oily  taste  in  the  mouth.  The
taste  in  the  mouth  is  more  flat  than  bitter,  the  whole  day,
despite  of  eating.  Flat  and  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
immediately  after  eating  or  drinking;  the  substances  taste
well  as  long  as  he  keeps  them  in  his  mouth.  Bitter  taste,
early  in  the  morning,  when  waking  up,  with  dry  lips  with-
out thirst.  Bitter  taste  of  every  thing  he  tastes,  early  in
the  morning,  the  taste  in  the  mouth  being  natural.  Sour
taste  early  in  the  morning,  after  waking,  (6.  and  7.  d.)  Sour
taste  on  the  back  part  of  the  tongue,  as  if  caused  by  salt  (?)
early  in  the  morning,  after  waking  ;  going  off  after  a  meal.
Feeling  of  hunger  in  the  throat,  with  a  sensation  of  pres-
sure. No  appetite  at  dinner ;  food  was  repulsive  to  him;
nevertheless  it  tasted  well,  (a.  30  h.)  Feeling  of  satiety
and  repletion  ;  nevertheless  food  had  a  good  taste  and
diminished  the  feeling  of  repletion.  Neither  hunger  nor
appetite,  food  was  repulsive  to  him,  although  it  had  a  good
taste.  Thirst  for  beer  or  sour  milk,  with  dryness  of  the
throat,  in  the  afternoon.  Complete  absence  of  thirst,  and
too  little  desire  to  drink,  for  many  days.

Gastric  Symptoms.— Eructations  lasting  of  the  ingesta.
Frequent  eructations,  early  in  the  morning,  with  yawning
and  great  ill-humor.  Warmth,  with  qualmishness,  rising
from  the  stomach  into  the  mouth,  with  sourish-  bitter  dry-


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESITJM.


207


ness  of  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  (a.  11  d.)  Sour
burning,  like  heartburn,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  rising
from  the  stomach  to  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morning,  when
rising,  (a.  9  d.)  Sensation  in  the  stomach  from  time  to
time,  as  if  he  would  vomit.  Repulsive  feeling  in  the  sto-
mach, with  desire  for  eructations  and  frequent  attacks  of
nausea,  going  off  after  dinner.

Stomach.— Hot  feeling  in  the  stomach,  as  is  felt  after
having  long  suffered  with  hunger,  rising  through  the  oeso-
phagus into  the  head,  where  the  prover  feels  darting  or
tensive  stitches  in  the  temples  or  forehead. Burning  in
the  stomach,  extending  into  the  chest. Burning  and  sore
feeling,  ascending  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach  behind  ,  the
sternum,  into  the  region  of  the  palate,  with  great  restless-
ness. Pressure,  as  from  a  stone,  on  the  right  side  of  the
stomach. Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  upon  the
chest,  aggravated  by  contact. Pressure  in  the  region  of
the  stomaclr*while  eating,  going  off  by  laying  the  hands
upon  the  part. Pressure  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
while  eating  and  especially  when  walking,  not  when
touching  the  parts. Oppressive  and  contractive  pain  in
the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising  in  any  posi-
tion of  the  body,  (a.  24  h.) Drawing  and  nausea  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,  as  if  the  pit  of  the  stomach  became
distended  from  within. Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
in  the  region  of  the  left  lowest  rib,  when  raising  or  stretch-
ing the  body.

Abdomen.— Aching,  sore  pain  under  the  last  ribs,  in-
creased by  contact  or  motion. Bruised  pain  under  the  last
ribs. Stitch  in  the  region  of  the  right  last  rib,  when  stoop-
ing. Indescribable  sick  feeling  in  the  abdomen.  Ulcera-
tive pam  of  the  whole  of  the  abdomen,  in  the  evening,  with
pressure in the  hypochondria. Uncomfortable  feeling
from  the  abdomen  to  the  head,  as  is  felt  by  a  person  who
smokes  without  being  accustomed  to  it. Rough  feeling
from  the  epigastrium  to  the  sternum. Contractive  feeling
nausea  and  warmth,  rising  from  the  middle  of  the  abdo-
men as  far  as  the  chest,  (the  fauces.) Contractive  pain
now  in  the  right,  now  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen;  she
can  only  sit  stooping,  frequently  recurring.  Distension
and  bloatedness  of  the  abdomen,  somewhat  relieved  by  the


208


MANGANUM.


emission  of  flatulence,  but  recurring  frequently.  Distended,
enlarged  abdomen. Drawing-aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,
when  eating,  disappearing  after  the  meal. Aching,  or  ra-
ther tensive  pain  around  and  above  the  umbilicus  ;  after-
wards pain  as  if  from  flatulence,  with  emission  of  flatu-
lence. Drawing  ache  in  the  umbilical  region,  early  in  the
morning. Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  very  much  increased
by  taking  cold  nourishment. Cutting  in  the  umbilical  re-
gion, when  taking  a  deep  inspiration. Cutting  in  the  ab-
domen, in  the  evening. Stitch  in  the  region  of  the  left  kid-
ney, followed  immediately  by  a  darting  and  contractive
pain. Sensation  in  the  abdomen,  when  walking,  as  if  the
bowels  were  loose. Warmth  in  the  abdomen,  especially
around  the  umbilicus  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdo-
men, as  if  caused  by  hot  drinks  ;  sensation  as  of  something
moving  to  and  fro  in  the  abdomen,  and  towards  the  sto-
mach. Tensive  pain  in  the  iliac  region,  as  if  caused  by
the  swelling  of  a  tendon,  with  pain  when  touched.  Stitch
in  the  right  iliac  region.  Moving  of  flatulence  and  pinching
in  the  whole  abdomen,  as  if  stool  would  come  on.  Flatu-
lent colic,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  after  wak-
ing ;  emission  of  flatulence,  which  is  inodorous,  affords  no
relief,  (a.  12  h.) A  good  deal  of  grunting  along  the  rec-
tum, as  far  as  the  anus. Intermitting  stool,  (1.  d.)  Con-
stipation, for  48  hours. Rare,  dry,  difficult  stool.  Yellow,
granular  stool,  with  tenesmus  and  constriction  of  the  anus,
after  a  constipation  of  24  horns. Pale-yellow,  scanty
stool,  preceded  by  pinching  in  the  abdomen. Two  soft
stools,  every  stool  being  preceded  by  stitches  in  the  lower
part  of  the  abdomen. Two  soft  stools,  in  the  evening.
Pinching  in  the  abdomen  previous  to  the  usual  morning
stool ;  during  stool,  cutting  in  the  rectum. The  loose  and
tenacious  stool  is  preceded  and  accompanied  by  pinching
in  the  abdomen  and  side,  going  off  only  by  holding  the  ab-
domen with  both  hands,  and  disappearing  after  stool ;  ac-
companied by  shaking  chills. Painful  tearings  in  the
rectum,  after  dinner. Contractive  pain  in  the  rectum,
when  sitting.

Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate.  De-
sire to  urinate  excited  even  by  eating  an  apple.  Frequent
desire  to  urinate,  emitting  but  a  small  quantity  of  urine.


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


209


Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  emitting  a  large  quantity  of
urine,  (a.  27  h.)  Frequent  emission  of  gold-yellow  urine,
shortly  after  taking  the  medicine.  The  urine  becomes
turbid,  and  deposits  an  earthy  sediment.  Violent  sediment
in  the  urine.  Cutting  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  while
sitting,  increased  when  rising  and  moving  about,  in  the
evening  ;  however,  the  emission  of  urine  was  not  painful.
A  sort  of  dull  darting  into  the  urethra,  with  pain,  when
emitting  a  concealed  flatulence  while  sitting.  Cutting
in  the  middle  of  the  urethra,  between  the  acts  of  mic-
turition. Fine,  painful  stitches  in  the  orifice  of  the
urethra,  between  the  acts  of  micturition.

Genital  Organs. — Occasionally  a  burning  darting
from  the  vesiculce  seminales  into  the  glans  (a.  1 2  d.)  Vo-
luptuous itching  of  the  corona  glandis,  (a.  3,  5  h.)  Stitches
in  the  prepuce.  Itching  in  the  interior  of  the  scrotum,
which  cannot  be  relieved  by  pinching  or  by  rubbing  the  skin
of  the  scrotum  between  the  fingers.  Aching  and  draw-
ing pain,  and  weakness  of  the  scrotum  and  spermatic
cord,  as  if  the  cord  were  being  drawn  out,  accompanied
by  a  weak  feeling  in  the  genital  organs.  Menstrual  dis-
charge between  the  periods,  (a.  48  h.)  Menses  appear
6  days  too  early,  they  are  scanty  and  only  last  two  days.
Pressure  in  the  genital  organs.  Leucorrhcea.  Ljeucor-
rhcea,  for  two  days,  but  not  continuing.

Cold,  Catarrh.— Coryza,  (a.  36  h.)  Coryza  of  the
left  nostril,  with  want  of  air  and  loss  of  smell.  Coryza  and
obstruction  of  the  nose,  with  secretion  of  thick  mucus.
Obstruction  of  the  nose,  and  no  passage  of  air  through
it.  Violent,  dry  coryza,  (a.  4  d.)  At  times  obstruction
of  the  nose,  at  times  fluent  coryza.  Dry  coryza,  with
red,  inflamed,  sore  nose  and  upper  lip,  in  the  evening.
Discharge  of  a  mild,  clear  mucus  from  the  nose,  and
frequent  sneezing.

Larynx  and  Trachea. — Rough  throat,  early  in  the
morning,  when  rising  from  the  bed,  with  a  hoarse,  dull*
voice.  Roughness  of  speech,  early  in  the  morning,
without  feeling  anything  in  the  throat  ;  going  off  when
smoking  tobacco. In  the  morning  his  chest  and  breath-

*  The  German  expression  literally  means,  "  wooden,"  which  is  used
figuratively,  for  «•  a  voice  which  does  not  resound."


210


MANOANUM.


mg  feel  oppressed.  Dryness  of  throat  and  rough  speech,  im-
mediately after  taking  the  medicine,  as  soon  as  he  goes  into
the  open  air,  with  cutting  pressure  in  the  abdomen  and  nausea
in  the  chest.  Itching  dryness  in  the  throat,  bringing  on  a
short  and  hacking  cough,  early  in  the  morning.  Disposition
to  cough  early  in  the  morning.  Two  fits  of  dry  cough,  (a.  1
h.)  Irritation  bringing'  on  cough ;  he  attempts  to  loosen  by
cough  that  which  is  lodged  in  the  larynx  ;  but.  he  has  great
difficulty  in  throwing  off  even  a  little  mucus,  he  accomplishes
it  rather  by  sharp  expirations  than  by  coughing.  Dry  cough,
every  fit  being  accompanied  by  dartings  into  the  parie-
tal bones.  Dry  cough,  brought  on  by  loud  reading  and
talking,  with  painful  dryness,  roughness  and  constriction  in
the  larynx,  causing  an  intensely  painful  cough ;  it  is  only
by  dint  of  clearing  the  throat  that  he  succeeds  in  hawking
up  a  little  mucus.  Deep  cough,  without  any  discharge,
ceasing  in  the  recumbent  posture,  and  returning  the
next  day,  accompanied  by  discharge  of  lough  mucus
and  concussive  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and
chest,  and  speedily  disappearing  at  noon.  Morning-
cough  with  expectoration,  (a.  21  h.)  Discharge  of  a
quantity  of  pale-green,  yellowish  mucus  in  clots,  almost
without  any  cough,  early  in  the  morning.

Chest. — Bloody  expectoration  from  the  chest,  (a.  48
h.)  Dull  pain  in  the  chest,  when  coughing.  Bruised
pain  in  the  chest.  Bruised  pain  in  the  upper  part  of
the  chest,  when  stooping  with  the  head,  relieved  by  raising
it,  returning  when  stooping  again.  Sensation  in  the  lower
part  of  the  chest,  from  above  downwards,  as  of  the  crack-
ing of  cartilage,  accompanied  by  a  sense  as  of  drawing.
Painful  and  continued  stitches  in  the  upper  and  left  side  of
the  chest,  near  the  clavicle,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  ax-
illa. Fine  stitch  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  under  the  ax-
illa, when  moving  the  trunk.  Fine  prickings,  early  in  the
morning,  now  in  the  left,  now  in  the  right  side  of  tha
chest.  Transitory  stitches  in  the  upper  part  of  the  ster-
num. Violent  stitches  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  near
the  sternum,  as  if  directed  from  without  inwards,  nothing
can  relieve  them.  Stitches  in  the  upper  and  outer  part  of
the  chest,  during  an  expiration,  (a.  10  d.)  Stitching  pain
in  the  chest,  moving  from  below  upwards,  is  sometimes


MAGNESIUM,  MANCANESIUM.


211


felt  during  an  expiration. Drawing  stitch  in  the  left  half
of  the  chest,  darting  continually  upwards  and  downwards.
Contractive,  stitching  pain  in  the  chest,  during  a  deep  in-
spiration, the  whole  forenoon,  (a.  9  d.) Dull  pain  in  the
sternum,  as  after  a  shock,  early  in  the  morning.  Sudden
shock  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  when  sitting,  from  above
downwards,  as  far  as  the  last  true  rhb. Pressive  cutting,
resembling  a  digging,  in  the  evening,  on  both  sides  of  the
sternum,  somewhat  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Sense
as  of  digging  and  gnawing  in  the  right  clavicle,  (a.  36  h.)
Warmth,  with  nausea,  in  the  chest,  accompanied  by  cory-
za,  and  by  warmth  in  the  cheeks  which  is  at  first  slight,
and  afterwards  replaced  by  a  burning  in  the  cheeks,  the
heat  not  being  perceptible  to  contact  in  the  beginning,  but
afterwards. Disagreeable  warmth  in  the  chest,  with  hot
breath,  burning  while  passing  through  the  windpipe.-  Dis-
agreeable warmth  in  the  chest,  with  feverish  feeling  of
weakness  in  the  same,  accompanied  with  coryza  and  ob-
struction of  the  nose. Warmth  in  the  chest,  in  the  even-
ing, with  dry  coryza  and  hot  breath,  the  heat  of  the  breath
being  felt  in  the  fauces  both  during  an  inspiration  and  ex-
piration ;  preceded  by  internal  chilliness,  without  any  ex-
ternal coldness. Internal  warmth  of  the  chest;  the  other
parts  of  the  body  felt  warm  to  him,  nor  were  they  cold  to
the  touch. Burning  below  the  sternum,  afterwards  also  in
the  stomach. Burning  in  the  left  and  outer  part  of  the
chest,  near  the  shoulder,  worse  when  rubbing  or  pressing
upon  the  part. Stitching  and  burning  pain  under  the  left
second  rib,  increased  by  expiration  and  motion,  abating
somewhat  when  at  resr,  and  during  an  inspiration.  Throb-
bing m  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  resembling  the  pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Pal-
pitation of  the  heart. Itching  stitch  in  the  region  of  the
right  nipple. Creeping,  over  the  left  mamma.  Small
tubercles  on  the  mamma.

BtCKr~1Pain  in  the  sma11  of  the  back,  when  bend-
ing the  body  backwards.  Burning  pain  at  a  small  place
above  the  left  region  of  the  pelvis,  in  the  direction  of  the
first  lumbar  vertebra.  Tearing  along  the  whole  of  the
spinal  column,  from  above  downwards,  at  rest  and  in  mo-
tion. Tearing  m  the  left  scapula,  when  sitting.  Stitch


212  MANGANUM.


between  the  scapulae,  (a.  2  h.)  Itching  and  stitching
pain  in  the  middle  of  the  back,  going  off  by  rubbing.
Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Drawing-tensive  stiff-
ness of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  alternating  with  tooth-
ache. Drawing-tensive  pain  across  the  nape  of  the
neck,  commencing  at  both  shoulders,  as  if  a  ribbon
were  closely  drawn  over  the  parts.  Cramp-pain  in  the
muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  in  the  evening,  when
moving  them.  Sense  as  of  digging  (burrowing,)  in  the
interior  of  the  cervical  vertebrae.  Voluptuous  itching
in  the  nape  of  the  neck.  The  neck  feels  swollen  and
stiff,  with  pain  in  the  muscles,  coming  from  the  teeth.
Red,  swollen  band  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  for  20
days.

Superior  Extremities. — Sensation  in  front,  of  the
axilla,  as  of  the  skin  being  drawn  up. Pain,  as  from  a
sprain,  in  the  shoulder-joint. Pain  as  from  a  sprain,  in
the  shoulder,  and  elbow-joint,  with  much  yawning.  Gurg-
ling in  the  shoulder-joint,  with  pain  when  touched,  as  if
there  were  a  boil  ;  he  dared  not  touch  the  part.  Vio-
lent tearing,  externally,  in  the  right  shoulder,  succeeded
by  itching. Excessive,  paralytic  pain  in  the  arm,  dart-
ing suddenly  into  the  limb,  and  coming  out  of  the  teeth.
Weak  arm. Tensive  pain  in  the  arm,  and  carpal-
joints,  here  and  there,  which  can  neither  be  excited  nor
diminished,  either by  rest or,  motion. Pain  in  the
arm-joints,  in  paroxysms. Morbid, distressing  sensa-
tion in  the  arm. Drawing  and  tearing,  from  the  shoulder
through  the  whole  arm.  Sudden  weak  feeling  in  the  upper
arm,  which  obliges  him  to  let  it  hang  down,  with  drawing  in
the  biceps  muscle.  Drawing-tearing  pain  on  the  inner  side
of  the  upper  arm. Sudden,  painful  darting  on  the  outer
side  of  the  right  upper  arm. Stitches  in  the  right  upper
arm,  towards  the  shoulder. Stitching  pain  in  the  inner
side  of  the  right  upper  arm,  boring  from  within  outwards.
Boring  in  the  bone  of  the  right  upper  arm,  apparently
in  the  marrow,  more  or  less  severe,  and  extending  as  far
as  the  shoulder,  relieved  by  moving  the  arm,  going  off
when  pressing  upon  the  part,  but  recurring  frequently.
Sense  as  of  digging  (burrowing,  grinding)  in  the  humerus,
in  paroxysms,  at  night,  when  in  bed,  when  lying  upon  that


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


213


side. Gnawing  pain,  at  night,  in  the  lower  end  of  the
humerus. Burning  in  the  lower  surface  of  the  right  upper
arm,  towards  the  shoulder,  with  yawning. Itching  of  the
upper  arm,  close  above  the  elbow. Pain  in  the  elbow-
joint,  as  if  sprained,  with  much  yawning. Guggling  in
the  elbow-joint,  with  pain  when  touched,  as  if  there  were
a  boil. Straining  and  stitching  pain  of  the  left  olecranon
process,  preceded  bv  a  similar  pain  below  the  left  axilla.
Hard  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  fore-arm,  close  to  the
wrist-joint,  in  any  position  of  the  body. Stretching  pain
under  the  elbow,  when  extending  the  arm,  as  if  the  muscles
were  too  short. Straining  sensation  in  the  inner  side  of
the  right  fore-arm,  as  if  the  skin  were  being  drawn  up,
removed  for  a  time  by  pressing  upon  the  parts.  Tearing
in  the  lower  end  of  the  fore-arm,  apparently  in  the  distal
extremity  of  the  ulna ;  nothing  relieves  it.  Drawing-
stitching  pain  of  the  dorsum  of  the  right  fore-arm.  Tear-
ing-stitching pain  above  the  right  wrist-joint,  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  fore-arm. Violently  itching  herpes  on  the
inner  side  of  the  left  fore-arm. Tension  of  the  skin  of  the
hands  as  if  they  were  swollen,  whenever  she  attempts  to
close  or  to  stretch  them. Severe,  drawing-tensive  pain  in
the  bones  and  joints  of  the  right  hand,  the  parts  almost
feeling  laced  in  ;  the  disappearance  of  ihis  pain  is  followed
by  heat  in  the  hand. Tearing  cramp-pain  in  the  muscles
of  the  right  hand,  especially  in  the  thumb  and  index-finger,
when  at  rest  or  in  motion. Tearing-stitching  'pinching  in
the  bah  of  the  palm  of  the  left  hand  ;  nothing  can  change
it. Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  outer  border  of  the  left
thumb,  so  violent  as  if  the  tendons  would  be  torn  out.
Stitches  in  the  carpal  bones  of  the  right  hand,  afterwards
pain  as  if  the  capsule  were  being  enlarged  and  the  bones
seized  and  drawn  out. Titillating  itching  in  the  palm  of
the  hands,  worse  after  scratching,  and  permanently  re-
lieved by  licking  the  parts  with  the  tongue,  in  the  evening.
Pension  in  the  skin  of  the  ring-finger,  when  stretching  the
fingers  apart. Frequent  attacks  of  violent  cramp-pain  of
the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  ring  and  middle-finger,  as  if
the  tendons  would  become  contracted. Darting  or  draw-
ing pam  m  the  index-finger,  in  the  evening.  Drawing
tearing  in  the  left  middle-finger. Tearing  in  the  dorsum


214


MANGANUM.


of  the  middle-finger  of  the  left  hand,  as  if  the  tendons
would  be  torn  out.  Darting  tearing  behind  the  right  ring-
finger,  apparently  in  the  marrow,  towards  the  arm.  Cut-
ting in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  right  index-finger,  with  a
feeling  of  warmth  in  the  finger.  Stitches  in  the  posterior
joint  of  the  ring  and  middle-finger,  worse  when  pressing
upon  the  parts.  Paralytic  pain,  as  after  a  shock,  in  the
posterior  joint  of  the  left  index-finger,  greater  when  at  rest.
Sudden  feeling  of  coldness  in  the  soft  part  of  the  tip  of  the
left  thumb.  Burning  itching  of  the  outer  border  of  the
right  thumb  ;  scratching  brings  on  a  red  spot,  and  after-
wards, at  that  same  place  a  blister  full  of  fluid  and  smart-
ing when  touched.  Severe  itching  of  the  fingers  ;  friction
brings  on  transparent  vesicles.  Deep,  painful  rhagades
in  both  bends  of  the  thumb  and  in  the  middle  bends  of  the
middle-finger.  A  little  scratch  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the
little  finger  brings  on  a  malignant  ulcer  with  a  blue  border
and  lancinating  pains,  especially  at  nighi.

Inferior  Extremities. —  Continual  stitching  pain,
when  sitting,  in  the  os  ischium.  Cramp-like  drawing  in
the  left  part  of  the  nates,  towards  the  anus,. increased  by
extending  the  thigh,  by  standing  upon  one  limb,  and  by
sitting  down,  going  off  almost  entirely  by  drawing  up  the
foot  and  when  silting  ;  the  pain  is  worst  when  rising  from
a  seat,  so  that  he  is  unable  to  walk,  unless  he  presses
upon  the  painful  spot  with  his  hand.  Burning  pain  at  a
spot  of  the  left  nates,  as  if  a  pustule  would  form,  mostly
when  sitting.  Tensive,  painful  tubercles  on  the  left  nates,
feeling  sore  when  pressed,  as  if  ulcerated.  Paralytic
weakness  in  the  right  hip-joint,  early  in  the  morning,
with  stitches  when  setting  the  foot  upon  the  floor,  which
oblige  him  to  limp.  Bruised  pains  of  the  muscles  in  the
region  of  the  head  of  the  right  femur,  especially  when
sitting.  Burning  soreness  in  the  bend  of  the  right  thigh.
Jactitation  of  all  the  muscles  of  the  legs,  during  the  least
exercise.  Faintness  of  the  thighs  and  legs,  with  drowsi-
ness. Tensive  feeling  in  the  right  lower  limb,  as  if  it
were  stiff,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Pinching,
straining  sensation  in  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,  as
if  the  skin  were  drawn  up,  in  the  open  air  ;  the  place  re-
mains painful  a  long  while  after. Pinching,  stitching


MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


215


pain  of  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh,  going  off  when  sitting  ;
when  walking  it  increased  to  such  an  extent  that  he  had
to  stand  still. Darting  pain  above  the  knee,  in  the  even-
ing, extending  to  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh.  Jactitation
of  the  muscles  of  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs,  after  walk-
ing, which  gives  him  a  sort  of  anguish  and  a  faint  feeling,
as  if  he  would  sink. Bruised  pain  across  the  thighs.
Burning  itching  of  the  inner  side  of  the  left  thigh  ;  scratch-
ing brings  on  sore  feeling,  and  touching  the  pans  causes
a  pain  as  from  bruises. Pimples  on  the  thighs,  their  tips
being  covered  with  scurf ;  early  in  the  morning  and  in  the
evening,  they  are  affected  with  a  burning  itching  after
rubbing  they  feel  sore  and  as  if  ulcerated. The°  knees
are  unsteady  and  tremble,  in  the  evening  while  walking.
1  earing,  a  hand's  breadth  above  and  below  the  knee,  on
the  outer  surface. Stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  when
walking  or  sitting,  (a.  17  d.) Itching  of  the  knees,  in  the
evening. Itching  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  depriving  him
of  his  night  s  rest. Hard  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the
left  side  of  the  leg,  near  the  tarsal  joint. Violent  griping
and  clutching  in  the  left  calf,  from  the  bend  of  the  knee"
lown  to  the  malleolus  externus. Tearing  and  itching  of
Jie  outer  side  of  the  left  calf. Tearing  itching  of  the
Anees,  in  the  evening. Itching  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,
which  deprived  him  of  his  night's  rest. Hard  pressure  in
the  muscles  of  the  left  leg,  near  the  tarsal  joint.  Violent
griping  and  clutching  in  the  left  calf,  and  from  the  bend

,n a  f  I""'  l°  .  eXte/"al  malleol"s-  Tearing  and  itch-
ing of  the  external  surface  of  the  left  calf. Tearing  in  the

Z  Iff  VV  i  bUrmnS'  e*ternalI7-  Tearing  stitch  in
of  the  iCJ  Vk  "  Tmg-  •  Drawi"g  tearing  in  The  surface
of  the  right  ibia,  when  sitt.ng,  going  off  entirely  by  rising.

on  in  r  -g,;  8TS  °ff  Wh°n  siltinS-  Smarting  sensa-
■on  in  the  right  ub,a,  as  if  it  were  bruised. The  right

n?  fSflt  Ca'f-  fedS  C°ld  and  *W  With  a
cviinf  gCI "  SUl1"?'  g01"S  off  when  rising,  in  the
evening, Strange,  morbidly  weak  feeling  in  the  left  W

TnT  tet  ""//so  ^  ^ ^  of  ,he

me  leet  are  so  heavy  that  she  is  scarcely  able  to  lift


216  MANGANUM-

them.  The  right  foot  goes  to  sleep  while  standing,  with
a  tingling  sensation.  Drawing,  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left
foot,  near  the  joint,  going  off  during  motion.  Continued
tickling  in  the  hollow  of  the  sole  of  the  right  foot.  The
feet  are  constantly  cold  both  to  the  prover  and  to  others,
especially  when  walking.  Soreness,  with  itching  between
the  two  last  toes  of  the  right  foot,  for  ten  days.

General  Symptoms.— Pinching  pricking  in  several
parts  of  the  body,  especially  in  the  interior  of  the  thighs.
Most  of  the  stitches,  produced  by  Manganum,  are  dull.
Gurgling,  and  bubbling  as  of  water,  in  various  muscles.
Drawing,  darting,  tearing  stitches  in  various  parts.  Draw-
ing-tensive pains,  as  if  from  tight  bandage,  in  various  parts
of  the  body. Tensive  or  cramp-like  drawing  and  tearing
in  various  parts. Nightly  pains  in  the  bones,  digging
(grinding.) Most  of  the  symptoms  occur  in  the  night.
Most  of  the  symptoms  become  worse  when  stooping.
The  symptoms  which  have  come  on  in  the  room,  improve
in  the  open  air. Many  of  the  symptoms  come  on  in  the
open  air,  and  improve  in  the  room. Itching  of  various
parts,  going  off  bv  scratching. Violent  itching,  with  burn-
ing and  small  vesicles  or  deep-seated,  little  blotches,
brought  on  by  scratching,  on  the  shoulder,  the  arms  and
calves,  sometimes  surrounded  with  a  rose-coloured  skin,
which  became  white  when  touched. Smarting  itching
of  the  whole  body,  only  after  having  become  heated  and
having  perspired. Violent  burning  over  the  whole  skin,
in  the  evening,  when  rising  from  the  bed  ;  going  off  after
lying  down  again. Sudden  concussion  through  the  whole
body,  early  in  the  morning,  as  when  a  person  starts
with  fright. All  the  parts  are  painful,  when  touched  ever
so  little,  fas  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ;  chest  and
cheeks  experience  a  feverish  warmth. Head,  hands  and
feet  appear  to  her  swollen  and  enlarged,  after  walking  in
the  open  air. The  whole  body,  especially  the  stomach,
feels  uncomfortable,  accompanied  with  ill  humor.

Weakness,  Fits.— Faintness  in  all  the  joints  ;  they
feel  to  him  as  if  they  were  extended,  with  tremor  ol  the
limbs  and  tremulous  sensation  of  the  knee  and  arm-joints  ,
accompanied  with  a  feeling  of  anxiety,  as.  if  it  were  all


MAGNESIUM  MANGANESIUM.


217


over  with  him.  Great  weariness,  at  8  o'clock  in  the
evening,  he  can  scarcely  keep  awake,  two  evenings  in
succession.

Sleep. — Much  disposed  to  stretch  himself,  the  whole
day. Frequent  yawning,  although  she  had  slept  enough.
He  dreams  immediately  after  falling  asleep.  Vivid  dreams,
the  objects  varying  rapidly ;  when  waking,  which  happens
frequently,  he  is  fully  conscious  of  what  he  dreamed,  but
he  has  only  an  indistinct  recollection  of  it,  in  the  morning.
At  midnight  he  was  half  awake  and  did  not  fall  asleep
again  till  morning,  owing  to  an  anxious,  painful  uneasiness
without  any  particular  ideas;  accompanied  by  tossing
about  in  the  bed. Confused,  anxious,  vivid  dreams  the
whole  night. Sound  sleep,  with  anxious*, dreams  about
danger  of  life. Restless  sleep,  with  heavy  dreams  and
faintness  when  waking. Anxious,  fearful,  vivid  dreams.
Anxious  dreams,  so  vivid  as  if  every  thing  happened
while  awake  ;  he  recollects  every  part  of  them  ;  he  felt
very  strong  when  waking. At  3  o'clock  in  the  morning
he  imagined  he  was  awake  and  with  his  physician  •  he
was  fully  conscious,  and  recollected  every  word  of  the  con-
versation, as  if  he  had  been  awake. Vivid,  confused
dreams  all  night,  the  objects  varying  all  the  time.  Vivid
dream  about  something  which  really  took  place  next  day
Vivid  dream  about  a  reconciliation. Vexing  dreams
When  dreaming,  at  night,  he  lies  on  his  back,  although
he  usually  rested  on  his  right  side.  Merry  dream.  Waking
at  4  o  clock  in  the  morning,  with  pinching  in  the  abdomen
and  moving  of  flatulence,  followed  by  soft  stool. At  one'
o  clock  at  night,  she  Wakes  up  with  a  violent  clawincr  and
griping  over  the  mons  veneris,  with  icy  coldness  over  the
whole  of  the  trunk,  head  and  arms,"  and  profuse  cold
sweat,  great  mternal  heat,  feeling  of  dryness  on  a  moist
tongue  the  lower  limbs  being  warm,  great  apprehensive-
ness  and  restlessness,  tossing  constantly  from  side  to  side  •
cannot  bear  being  uncovered  ;  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  she
feels  an  inclination  to  belch  without  being  able  to  do  so
afterwards  empty  eructations  and  emission  of  small  flatus'
without  obtaining  any  relief,  thirst,  rising  of  water  in  the  oeso-
phagus, with  nausea  and  paleness  of  countenance,  warm
sweat  on  the  lower  limbs  and  great  weakness  of  the  feet


218 MANGANDM — MAGNESIUM,  MANGANESIUM.


inclination  lo  stool,  hardness  and  sensitiveness  of  the  ab-
domen, when  rubbing  it ;  the  fit,  and  the  pain  which  she
had  felt  even  in  her  sleep,  having  been  appeased  by  Ipec,
were  succeeded  by  sound  sleep  ;  in  the  morning,  when
waking  up,  her  head  felt  heavy  and  the  menses  made  their
appearance,  the  blood  being  thick  and  black,  (4.  d.)

Fever. — Chilliness  the  whole  day,  as  soon  as  she  gets
into  the  open  air. Chilliness  with  goose-flesh,  early  in  the
morning  after  rising,  for  half  an  hour,  and  in  the  evening
at  7  o'clock,  for  2-hours,  with  thirst  at  9  o'clock,  (3.  d.)
Chilliness  every  evening. Shaking  chills,  early  in  the
morning,  with  cold  hands  and  feet. Shaking  chills  and
coldness,  when  walking  in  the  open,  not  cold  air;  the
chilliness  decreased  by  walking  fast ;  the  hands  and  feet,
however,  remained  .cold  and  became  warm  only  in  the
room. Cold  hands  and  feet,  even  in  the  room,  but  with-
out chilliness,  (a.  30  h.) Shaking  chills,  late  in  the  even-
ing, with  cold  feet,  the  coldness  extending  as  far  as  the
knee  in  the  right  limb,  without  thirst  and  without  subse-
quent heat. Shaking  chills,  in  the  evening,  in  the  open
air  and  in  the  room,  the  feet  being  colder  than  the  hands,
with  stitching,  aching  pains  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,
which  continued  even  in  the  room,  although  the  chilliness
abated,  (a.  60  h.) Shuddering  over  the  back,  with  stitches
in  the  head. Shuddering  over  the  whole  body.  Violent
heat  in  the  head,  with  some  chilliness  over  the  rest  of  the
body. Sudden  flushes  of  heat  and  redness  of  countenance,
especially  when  standing,  without  any  thirst.  Sudden
heat  over  the  whole  back,  when  sitting,  soon  after  perspi-
ration, with  contraction  of  the  pupils. Irregular  pulse,
scarcely  perceptible,  now  quick,  now  slow.  Anxiousness
with  shortness  of  breath,  and  profuse  sweat  over  and  over.
Sweat  when  waking  from  sleep,  only  on  the  neck.  Sweat
at  night,  when  waking,  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  24  h.)
Night-sweat  over  the  whole  body,  when  waking,  obliging
him  to  scratch,  (a.  66  h.) Night-sweat  on  the  legs,  espe-
cially the  feet,  when  waking.


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


219


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.

Early  in  Spring  we  collect  the  bark  of  this  bush'when
beginning  to  blossom.  Formerly  the  juice  of  the  recent
green  bark  was  pressed  out  and  mixed  with  equal  parts  of
alcohol,  this  mixture  being  used  for  the  preparation  of  the
potencies.  This  juice,  when  touching  the' skin,  produces
a  very  painful  burning,  which  lasts  for  a  long  time.  Inas-
much as  the  medicinal  power  of  this  drug  is  not  of  avola-
i  e  nature  ,t  is  belter  to  dry  the  plant  and  to  triturate  it
like  all  other  dry  substances.

This  drug  has  been  found  useful  in  the  following  affec-
tions :— Humid,  itching  eruptions  on  the  head  and  behind
the  ears;  ophthalmia;  leucorrhcea  of  many  years'  stand-
ing J  shortemng  of  the  lower  h^^ nightly  itching  of  the

r  ^hA tmM  haS  TbT6en  Proved  hy  Drs'  Fra"z5  Caspari

artlaub' Racke"'

From  Noack  and  Thinks Rickets  ?— Scrofulous  af-

Pains  through  the  whole  body,  with  nightly  pains  in  the
bones,  brought  on  by  several  syphilitic  affections,  (ii  con!

E  oVth  1  hR  U'  :)Tr^,ammal,°n'  ^ssement  and
caries  ot  the  bones.— Swelling  of  the  bones  — Svr>hilit,V

ramolhssement  of  the  bones.-Penostitis  of  L  tioia  con-

sequen,  upon  an  ulcer  of  the  leg,  the  parts  being  covered

w  h  a  brown,  dry  skin,  and  being  surrounded  with  reddish

blue  spots,  with  violent,  bumingpains  caused  by  the  si  X

va  10,^72  g-  ?PP'ng  upon  the  foot>  D'gMy  aggra-
vation of  the  pains,  and  cramp  in  the  calves  —Ulcers  of  the

exanrnem^  f  PUia  vent°sa— Very  troublesome

exanthemata,  burning,  especially  in  the  night,  excitin-r  one
to  scratch  even  until  the  cuticle  comes  o|,  th ^  scrafched

medv  is  iTu  furfuracea'  ("«t  to  Daphne,  the  chief  re-
medy 18  Sulphur,  sometimes  Calc  c,  or  Ars.  may  be


220  DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.

used.) — Crusta  lactea,  (according  to  Diaz.) — When  the
crusts  are  thick,  Wahle  recommends  Graphites  ;  others
recommend  Sulphur,  others,  Sassap.,  others  again,  Dulc.,
Lye,  Sep. — Eczema  mercur.,  (in  conjunction  with  Copai-
va.) — Herpes  cruslaceus. — Ecthyma  cachecticum. — Rhy-
pia  prominens. — Pityriasis  versicolor. — Intermittent  fever.
Chronic  prosopalgia ;  cramp-like,  intensely  painful  proso-
palgia of  one  side,  cramp-like,  stupefying  pressure,  com-
mencing at  the  zygoma,  and  thence  spreading  upwards
over  the  eye  and  temples,  and  downwards  over  the  ear,
teeth,  neck  and  shoulder,  especially  when  entering  a  warm
room,  coming  on  after  having  given  the  command  for  along
time,  and  after  warm  eating.— Neuralgia  infra-maxillans,
'  (periostitis  ?)— Raging  toothache  in  hollow  teeth,  with  a
general  feeling  of  chilliness  during  the  pain,  moreover,  ob-
stinate constipation,  violent  congestion  of  blood  to  the
head  ;  continual  darting,  griping,  lancinating  toothache,
most  violent  in  the  night,  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  tooth
were  too  long,  dull  and  lifted  out  of  its  socket  ;  drawing
toothache  in  the  upper  and  lower  jaw  of  one  side,  al-
ternating with  boring  pains  in  single  teeth  and  stitches
reaching  into  the  zygoma,  the  teeth  feeling  dull,  pithy,
elongated,  the  whole  side  of  the  head  feeling  pithy,
with  drawing  pains  in  single  places  in  that  part,  in-
crease of  the  head,  and  toothache  by  contact,  aggrava-
tion in  the  evening  with chills,  want  of  appetite,  ill-
humor,  staring  ltfok  and  taciturn  mood.— Caries  of  the
teeth  —Pharyngostenosis,  (in  conjunction  with  Arsenic ,
merely  alleviation.)— Distended  abdomen.— Diarrhoea.—
ConsJpation.  —  Hematuria.  —  Balanorrhoea.  -  Catarrh,
with  nightly  exacerbation,  burning  in  the  throat,  oppression
of  the  chest,  pricking  pain  in  the  chest,  and  great  anguish,
paleness  of  face,  continued  chilliness, sometimes  cold
sweat,  constant  thirst,  tongue  coated  white,  want  of  ap-
petite,' pale  urine,  frequent,  small  pulse.
P  Antidotes.— Vinegar,  Camphor,  Merc.— According  to
Hahnemann,  the  effects  of  Mezereum  are  not  counteracted

^orTl  SYMPTOMS.-He  felt  Very  sad,  every  trifle  af-
fected him  unpleasantly ;  every  thing  and  every  body
around  him  are  indifferent  to  him  ;  is  averse  to  work.  Hy-


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


221


pocbondriac  and  melancholy  ;  he  does  not  take  pleasure  in
any  thing;  every  thing  appears  to  him  like  dead,  nothing
made  an  impression  upon  him. Weeps  for  a  fortnight.
Apprehensiveness  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  as  if  he  ex-
pected something  unpleasant. Anxiousness  in  the  even-
ing,  with  trembling  of  the limbs  and of  the  whole
body. Great  anguish,  with  violent  palpitation  of  the
heart,  before  dinner;  she  had  to  lie  down, and  was
unable  to  remain  up. He  has  no  rest  when  alone,
he  wants  to  be  in  company. Taciturn,  weary  of  life,
longs  for  death. He  stares  with  a  peevish  countenance
and  is  very  much  out  of  humor. He  has  none  but
unpleasant  thoughts. Susceptible  mood,  ill-humor.  He
looks  ill-humored, pale,  wretched,  falling  off.  Conti-
nually- out  of  humor. Disposed  to  reproach  others.
Disposed  to  quarrel. Becomes  vehemently  angry  at
trifles  ;  he  is  soon  sorry  for  it. He  finds  it  hard  to
resolve  upon  something. He  was  very  absent  and  un-
able to  dwell  long  on  one  subject ;  he  was  carried  away
by  his  ideas. While  talking  to  some  one,  her  ideas
vanish  out  of  her  recollection. He  is  unable  to  recollect
those  things  which  he  had  resolved  upon  a  little  while
ago;  his  ideas  become  confused  whenever  some  one  else
talks  to  him  while  thinking  upon  a  subject.  "He  does  not ,
attend  to  his  business  with  the  necessary  independence
of  mind ;  he  has  to  make  an  effort  at  remaining  col-
lected, lest  he  should  think  of  something  else. He  is
unable  to  comprehend  anything  properly,  to  reflect  about
anything;  he  is  not  even  able  to  repeat  things  which  he
knew  by  heart ;  his  ideas  vanish  as  soon  as  he  begins  '
to  think,  they  give  place  to  a  gloominess  with  pressure
in  the  torepart  of  the  head. He  looked  through  the
window  for  hours,  without,  seeming  to  have  any  ideas,
or  to  be  conscious  of  what  he  sees. Thinking  is  diffi-
cult to  him ;  when  reading  or  hearing  something  he  re-
mains indifferent ;  what  happens  to  him  affects  him  less
than  it  did  before  ;  mental  dulness.

Head  —Dulness  of  the  head  ;  he  frequently  did  not
know  what  he  wanted. His  head  feels  dull,  giddy,  dizzy
he  knows  not  what  he  is  about. His  head  feels  dull  and
heavy. Dulness  of  head,  he  has  to  read  many  things


222


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


over  again  before  he  is  able  to  un  lerstand  them.  His
head  feels  dull,  intoxicated  and  as  if  he  had  been  silting
up  a  whole  night,  or  as  if  he  had  been  affected  with  ex-
cessive pollutions. He  feels  intoxicated  and  talks  with-
out reflection  ;  however  he  is  good  humored,  and  exces-
sively merry,  (1.  d.) Dulness  of  the  head,  it  feels  brighter
after  a  meal. Dulness  of  the  fore  and  back  part  of  the
head,  in  the  evening  ;  it  is  like  a  stupor. Obtusion  of  the
head  the  whole  day,  with  pressing  in  the  temples.  Drea-
riness, and  feeling  of  pressure  in  the  whole  head,  espe-
cially over  the  eyes. Reeling  sensation  with  contracted
pupils. Giddiness  and  obtusion  of  the  head,  with  diffi-
cult reflection. Vertigo. Vertigo,  he  threatens  to  fall
over  to  the  left  side. Vertigo  with  twinkling  as  of  light
before  the  eyes,  he  was  not  well  able  to  walk.  Fainting
sort  of  vertigo. Headache  after_  motion  and  much  talk,
especially  in  the  temples  and on  both  sides of  the
vertex. Headache  in  the  base  of  the  occiput,  moving
towards  the  forehead. Dull  headache  in  the  region  of  the
left  parietal  bone,  improved  by  pressure,  aggravated  on  re-
lief of  pressure. Pain  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,  for
several  hours. s  Headache  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to
the  forehead,  as  if  the  parts  would  break,  the  temples
feeling  a  pain  when  touched,  with  violent  heat  and  sweat
about  the  head,  with  chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  rest  of
the  body,  early  in  the  morning. Headache,  relieved  by
stooping. Headache,  increased  in  the  open  air.  Head-
ache, the  whole  afternoon,  when  moving  the  head  rapidly,
as  if  the  brain  were  concussed.  Stupefying  ache  through-
out the  »right  hemisphere,  from  the  occiput  towards  the
forehead. Headache  close  under  the  skull,  as  if  the  brain
were  being  pressed  against  the  skull.  Pressure  in  the  fore-
head, early  in  the  morning,  as  if  the  brain  became  too  hard
by  the  pressure,  with  inability  to  recollect  things.  Intense
aching  in  the  head,  as  if  the  contents  would  issue  from  the
forehead,  (a.  8h.) Pressure  and  pushing  behind  the  fron-
tal bone,  extending  to  the  nasal  bones. Aching  in  the  re-
gion of  the  right  frontal  eminence. Aching  behind  the
left  parietal  bone. Headache  with  frequent  chills.  Ach-
ing pain,  transversely  through  the  forepart  of  the  head.
Aching  pain  in  the  occiput,  especially  when  stepping  into


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


223


die  room,  coming  out  of  the  open  air. Aching  pain  in  the
occiput  and  nape  of  the  neck,  when  moving  the  head.  Ach-
ing ■pain  in  the  left  temple,  pressing  from  within  outwards.
Intensely  painful  pressure  in  the  left  temple  as  if  it  were
pressed  into  the  head,  extending  over  the  orbits,  when  sit-
ting and  reading  ;  the  pain  appears  to  be  diminished  by-
motion. Dull  pressure,  from  within  outwards,  in  the  left
side  of  the  occiput,  in  the  evening. Sharp  aching  and  ten-
sion in  the  left  side  of  the  occiput. Violent  pressing  asun-
der in  the  whole  forepart  of  the  head,  gradually  going  and
coming. Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  whole  occiput.  Claw-
ing feeling  in  the  temples  and  forehead,  with  pressure  up-
on the  eyes  and  jaws,  as  is  felt  previous  to  a  violent  cold.
Clawing  sensation  in  the  temples,  from  both  sides,  after  a
violent  exercise  ;  at  the  same  lime  he  forgets  the  very  word
he- was  going  to  utter  and  finds  it  difficult  to  collect  his
thoughts. Clawing,  pinching,  continued  headache,  ex-
tending from  the  temple  to  the  forehead  and  nose.  Tear-
ing in  the  forepart  of  the  forehead,  with  dartings.  Lancin-
n'ing  headache  in  the  left  frontal  eminence.  Pressure,
with  tearing,  in  the  forehead. Pricking  headache  in  the
vertex  and  forehead.  Stitching  pain  in  the  left  hemisphere.
Long,  dull  stitch,  on  the  left  side  over  the  forehead,  early
in  thf  mo'-mng,  when  in  bed. Continuous  sharp  stiich  near
the  vertex. Sore  aching  in  the  occiput. Grinding  (dig-
ging) and  aching  pain,  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,
external!  v,  (1  d.) Throbbing,  with  pressure,  in  the  fore-
head. Tearing  throbbing  at  a  spot  of  the  occiput,  above
the  nape  of  the  neck. Beating  and  pressure  behind  the
right  ear,  which  becomes  an  excessive  pain  in  the  whole  of
the  head,  forehead,  nose  and  teeth,  aggravated  at  the  slight-
est movement  of  the  head,  for  several  hours.  Bone-pain
in  the  bones  of  the  skull,  especially  aggravated  by  contact.
Sensation  as  if  the  upper  part  of  the  head  were  pithy.
The  scalp  is  painful  when  pressing  upon  it,  on  boih  sides
of  the  vertex. When  touching  the  hairs  they  feel  sore.
The  hairs  appear  to  be  disposed  to  sland  on  end.  Hot
hairy  scalp;  he  has  to  scratch. Finely  stinging  itching
on the top  of  the head, going off by  scratching!
Itching  on the  vertex  and occiput,  obliging one  to
scratch. Violent  biting  on  the  head,  which  can  only


224


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


be  removed  for  a  short  while  by  scratching,  and  con-
stantly reappears  at  some  other  place,  in  the  evening.
Itching  on  the  head  and  the  whole  body,  as  if  caused  by
vermin,  shortly  re-appearing  at  another  place  after  scratch-
ing. Dry  scabs  on  the  hairy  scalp.  The  scales  on  the
scalp  are  whiter,  simpler  and  drier  than  formerly.

Eyes. — In  the  evening  the  eyes  are  painful  when  read-
ing ;  he  did  not  see  any  more  as  brightly.  Pressure  on
the  eyeballs  and  heat  in  the  eyes.  Aching  pain  around
the  left  eye.  Pressure  in  the  eyes,  as  if  the  balls  were
too  large,  he  has  to  wink  frequently.  Pressure  and  tear-
ing in  the  eyes  and  more  externally,  especially  in  the  or-
bits. Itching  of  the  margin  of  the  lower  eyelid.  Smart-
ing sensation  in  the  canthi,  especially  in  the  inner.  Burn-
ing pricklings  in  the  margin  of  the  lower  eyelids.  When
writing,  his  eyes  close  several  times.  Troublesome  jacti-
tation of  the  muscle  of  the  left  upper  eyelid,  for  8  weeks.
Contraction  of  the  pupil.  Dilatation  of  the  pupil,  (a.  1  h.)
Farsightedness.  More  shortsighted  than  usual.  Scintil-
lations before  the  eyes.

Ears. — Otalgia,  painful  drawing  in  the  left  ear.  Tear-
ing deep  in  the  interior  of  the  left  ear.  Itching  stitch  in
the  interior  of  the  right  ear.  Itching  in  the  right  ear,  re-
lieved by  rubbing.  Feeling  of  obstruction  of  the  left  ear,
his  hearing  is  nevertheless  good.  Hard  hearing.  Ting-
ling of  the  ears,  with  great  drowsiness.  Loud  tingling  in
the  left  ear,  early  in  the  morning  after  dressing,  (a.  22  h.)
Tension  behind  the  left  ear,  with  tearing  ;  these  two
symptoms  come  and  go  alternately.

Nose  The  inside  of  the  nose  is  rough  and  sore.  Di-
minution of  smell,  the  nose  being  dry  almost  continually.

Face. — Pale  face,  wretched  appearance.  Violent,  fre-
quent, troublesome  jactitation  of  the  muscles  in  the  middle
of  the  right  cheek,  for  8  weeks.  Dull  cramp-pain  and  tear-
ing in  the  region  of  the  right  malar  bone.  Drawing,  ex-
tending from  the  right  mastoid  process,  along  the  internal
parts  of  the  jaw,  as  far  as  the  teeth. Boils  in  the  face.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Hot,  burning  sensation  of  the  upper
lip.  Soreness  and  inflammatory  redness  of  the  vermilion
border  of  the  lower  lip,  with  burning  when  touching  the
part,  abating  when  moistening  the  parts  with  saliva,  or


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.  225

when  drinking ;  worse  in  the  evening,  for  two  clays.
Burning  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip,  especi-
ally, when  closing  the  mouth,  as  if  the  lip  would  burst
mostly  in  the  evening,  or  worse  at  that  time. Thick,  dry,
parched,  peeling  lower  lip. Burning  in  the  right  corner
of  the  mouth,  in  the  evening,  as  if  the  skin  were  off.  Swell-
ing of  the  upper  lip,  under  the  left  nostril,  with  burning
pain. Eruption  on  both  lips,  outside  of  the  vermilion  bor-
der, with  violent  fluent  coryza. Small,  white  vesicles,
like  ulcers,  in  the  inner  corner  of  the  mouth,  and  on  the
right  cheek,  without  any  pain.  '  Ulcer  on  the  upper  lip,
spreading  towards  the  nose. Pricking  pain  in  the  sub-
maxillary glands. Toothache,  drawing,  burning,  and
stinging,  in  one  of  the  upper  molares  ;  since  taking  the
drug  the  tooth  had  become  hollow  in  a  remarkably  short
time  ;  the  pain  lasted  the  whole  day,  especially  in  the
evening,  for  many  weeks. Pimple,  seated  in  a  hollow
molar  tooth. Pain  in  the  posterior  molar  tooth  of  the
left  lower  jaw,  as  if  it  were  being  raised  out  of  its  socket,
btitching-aching  pain  in  the  left  upper  molares.  Sharp
stitches  in  the  roots  of  the  lower  incisores  of  both  sides.
1  earing  darlings  extending  from  the  right  upper  hollow-
molar  tooth  into  the  temple. Painful  dartings  in  the  up-
per incisores. Boring  and  stitches  in  one  or  the  other
tooth,  especially  on  the  right  side,  sometimes  changed  to
painful  stitches  in  the  right  malar  bone  ;  the  right  side  of
the  head  is  affected  to  such  an  extent  that  even  the  hairs
are  painful  when  touched,  with  restlessness,  excessive  ill-
humor  and  aversion  to  all  things. Violent  cutting  in  the.
hollow  teeth,  being  a  sort  of  soreness,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, while  half  awake  ;  the  toothache  continues  vet  after
waking,  especially  when  biting  ;  it  returns  in  the  same
way  in  the  night  following,  and  wakes  him  from  sleep,
ThT,  V\wT?  nheSG  rsymPtoms-) The  teeth  feel  dull.

,  ,  f aS  from  acids'  at  ni"ht- The  teeth  on

the  left  side  feel  elongated. Fetid  mucus  on  the  teeth.

MouTH.-Violent  burning  in  the  mouth. Burning  on

the  tongue,  extending  into  the  stomach. Burning  in  the

mouth  extending  into  the  stomach. A  quantity  of  saliva

in  the  mouth,  continually,  and  continual  spitting  up  of  a

watery  fluid. Feeling  of  heat  and  dry  roughness  In  the

10*


226


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


forepart  of  the  tongue.  Finely  stinging  pain  on  the  tongue,
(a.  h  h.)  Biting  sensation  on  the  back  part  of  the  tongue.
Peppery  taste  on  the  tongue.  Coryza-taste  on  the  tongue.
Sensation  in  the  fore  part  of  the  tongue,  when  moving  it,  as
if  it  were  soft  like  butter.  The  speech  is  heavy  and  less
fluent,  at  times  the  breath  or  saliva  seems  wanting,  at  times
the  tongue  feels  too  thick.  The  tongue  is  coated  white-
yellow.  Tongue  coated  white.  Vesicles  on  the  tongue
and  gums,  with  burning  pain.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus.— Sore  throat  when  swal-
lowing, as  if  a  plug  were  pressing  upon  the  part.  Sore
throat,  with  pressure,  more  between  than  during  the  acts
of  deglutition. Violent  aching  pain  in  the  posterior  wall  of
the  fauces,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition,  sometimes  only
on  one  side. Aching  pain  in  the  throat,  when  swallowing,
as  if  the  bony  palate  were  split  in  two. Aching  pain  in
the  pharynx,  after  swallowing  only  one  mouthful,  and  a
sudden  shuddering  as  if  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with
nausea,  and  concussion  of  the  head  and  chest. 1  ensive
pain  during  empty  deglutition,  as  if  from  a  sore  throat,  on
The  left  side  of  the  pharynx. Constriction  and  narrowing
of  the  pharynx. The  pharynx  feels  narrowed  ;  the  food
presses  upon  the  part  during  deglutition. Sensation  as  if
the  pharynx  were  constricted,  with  tingling,  not  hindering
eatino- Slight  drawing  and  tickling  in  the  back  part  ot  the
faucet  and  pharynx. Scraping  and  smarting  in  the  back
part  of  the  fauces  and  pharynx,  as  in  violent  coryza,  worse
durincr  empty  deglutition. Scraping  and  burning  in  the
palate  and  fauces. 'Scraping  sensation  mthe  fauces,  with
C"h  mucus  adhering  to  them  ;  he  is  obhged  to  hawk  it
npl  with  burning  in  fhe  pharynx. Roughness  of  the  fau-
ces (a  24  h.) Sore  feeling  in  the  fauces,  when  the  open
a  r  has  accesi  to  the  parts. Soreness  and  roughness  of
The  fauces  and  palate. Soreness  and  rawness  of  the  back
part  of  the  throat  ;  it  may  be  felt  even  during  an  inspira-
tor!but  mostly  during  deglutition. ConUnued  bnrnmg
of  tne  oharvnx  and  oesophagus,  (immediately  )  mining
in  the  pharlL  and  throat. Burning  in  the  throat.  Bunr
EgiX/auce.,  as  if  he  had  swallowed  pepper  Violent
burning  in the pharynx. Cooling burning in  the
throal  °and  on  the*  tongue,  extending  into  the  stomach,


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


227


as  is  caused  by  peppermint.  Inflammation  of  tho
pharynx.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Burning  taste  in  the  mouth  as
of  fire,  after  every  meal,  for  several  days.  Sweet-saltish
taste  in  the  mouth,  especially  after  having  got  heated.
Flat,  sourish  taste  in  the  mouth,  the  food  tasting  naturally,
Offensive  taste,  only  in  the  hollow  teeth,  (in  the  back  part
of  the  fauces  ?)  with  a  like  smell  in  the  nose.  Very  bitter
taste  and  accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  by  which  the
scraping  burning  is  diminished.  Bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,
with  nausea,  the  whole  day.  Beer  tastes  bitter  ;  he  throws
it  up,  but  not  water.  Tobacco  tastes  like  straw.  The  very
first  mouthful  is  repulsive  to  him  ;  meat,  is  loathsome  lo
him.  Aversion  to  meat.  Want  of  appetite,  as  if  from  an
excess  of  mucus  in  the  throat.  Great  hunger  and  appetite
at  noon,  and  in  the  evening.  No  good  appetite  or  hunger,
but  nevertheless  a  continual  desire  to  eat  and  to  get  some-
thing into  the  stomach,  that  this  organ  might  not  hurt  him
so  much.  Sensation  as  if  he  had  suffered  too  long  with
hunger  ;  the  stomach  hangs  down.  Violent  feeling  of
hunger,  in  paroxysms,  with  accumulation  of  water  in  the
mouth,  (immediately.)  Absence  of  thirst,  immediately  ;
next  day  great  desire  to  drink,  without  dryness  of  mouth  or
any  real  violent  thirst.

Gastric  Symptoms. — Frequent  eructations,  empty  and
tasteless.  Rising  of  air  and  sharp  humor.  Rising  of  air,
with  burning  and  sweat  as  from  anguish.  Eructations,
from  drinking  cold  water.  Eructation  in  two  parts,  first
an  abrupt  movement,  then  belching.  Regurgitation  of  the
ingesta,  solid  and  fluid,  with  pure  taste.  Nausea.  Fre-
quent nausea,  in  the  afternoon.  Nausea,  with  pain  in  the
stomach,  as  if  it  were  too  full.  Nausea,  with  inclination  to
vomit,  with  shaking  and  shuddering  of  the  whole  body  and
accumulation  of  water  in  the  mouth,  so  that  he  can  scarce-
ly spit  it  up.  Violent  inclination  to  vomit,  when  walking,
with  burning  heat  of  the  forehead.  Inclination  to  vomit,
in  the  afternoon,  going  off  by  eating.  Great  inclination  to
vomit,  with  heaving  and  rising  of  water  from  the  stomach
into  the  mouth  ;  diminished  by  motion.  Violent  vomiting.
Excessive  vomiting,  every  day,  for  6  weeks.  Easy  vomit-
ing of  a  green,  bitter  mucus,  with  confused  feeling  of  the


228


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


head,  and  hammering  pain  in  the  right  frontal  eminence,
lasting  many  hours. Fatal  vomiting  of  blood.

Stomach. — Pressure  at  the  stomach,  after  a  meal,  as  if
the  stomach  were  too  full. Pain  in  the  stomach,  with
sensation  as  of  the  arteries  beating  against  the  abdominal
muscles,  reaching  into  the  region  of  the  heart.  Pressure
in  the  region  of  the  stomach. Pressure  at  the  stomach,
after  a  meal,  and  a  long  time  afterwards  sensation  as  of
non-digested  food  remaining  in  the  stomach. Pressure  in
the  region  of  the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  increased  in
paroxysms. Tensive  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with
a  sensation  as  of  pulling,  during  an  inspiration,  as  if  a  por-
tion of  the  diaphragm  had  grown  fast. Jactitation  of
the  muscles  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  transitory
jerkings  in  the  neighborhood. Burning  and  pressure  in
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  pressing  upon  the  part.  Burn-
ing and  pressure  across  the  stomach,  in  paroxysms,  worse
when  pressing  upon  the  part. Burning  in  the  stomach.
Inflammation  of  the  stomach. Occasional  contraction  of
the  diaphragm  under  the  ribs.

Abdomen. — Pain  in  the  abdomen,  he  has  to  relieve  it  by
raising  and  stretching  himself.  Simple  pain  in  the  abdomen.
Chronic  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Aching  pain  in  the  ab-
domen, with  anxiousness,  so  that  he  knows  not  what  to
make  of  himself.  General  pressure  in  the  whole  of  the
epigastrium,  day  and  night,  the  epigastrium  being  distend-
ed. Pressure,  at  night,  in  the  hard  and  distended  ab-
domen, increased  by  every  position,  except  the  recum-
bent, with  oppressed  respiration  and  a  more  rapid
pulse.  He  is  roused  from  his  nightly  sleep  by  a
painful  pressure  in  the  abdomen,  after  vivid  dreams,
with  an  anxious  feeling  as  if  the  abdomen  were  rigid,
hard  and  grown  together,  with  the  chest  in  such  a
manner  as  to  be  a  part  of  it ;  however,  there  is  a  movement
in  the  abdomen  as  of  flatulence  which  is  getting  loose.
Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen,  after  a  walk  in  the  open
air  after  a  meal,  followed  by  sweat  and  anguish,  as  if  he
were  struggling  with  death ;  relieved  after  an  eructation.
Distension  of  the  abdomen,  with  pinching  and  emission  of
much  flatulence.  Painful  distension  of  the  abdomen,
with  short,  anxious  breathing,  so  that  he  is  obliged  to  un-


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


229


button  his  coat,  accompanied  by  eructations,  rumbling
in  the  abdomen,  difficult  emission  of  loud  flatulence,
chilliness  and  shuddering  with  violent  yawning,  in  the
evening,  (1.  d.) Heaviness  in  the  abdomen,  with  anxious-
ness. Hard  abdomen,  (a.  24  h.) Compressive  sensa-
tion in  the  abdomen,  and  as  if  there  were  a  load  in  it.
Stitching-aching,  clawing  colic,  increasing  and  decreasing
like  a  spasm,  returning  at  short  intervals,  deep  in  the
abdomen,  commencing  in  the  centre  of  the  abdomen,
sometimes  extending  into  the  left  side,  with  hard  disten-
sion of  the  abdomen,  relieved  for  a  short  while  by  emis-
sion of  flatulence,  with  weakness  of  the  body,  especially
of  the  lower  limbs  ;  the  colic  frequently  returns  with  in-
creased force,  and  is  then  intolerable. Colic,  as  if  the
bowels  were  seized  one  by  one  and  afterwards  drawn
together. Colic,  at  a  small  place  of  the  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  as  if  a  piece  of  intestine  had  become  incarce-
rated, after  a  meal. Violent  colic,  for  two  days.  Tear-
ing colic. Pinching  in  the  epigastric  region.  Pinching
and  drawing  in  the  abdomen,  especially  around  the  um-
bilicus. Writhing  pinching  in  the  umbilical  region,  disap-
pearing after  emission  of  flatulence. Cutting  colic,  below
the  umbilical  region,  for  several  days. Cutting  in  the
abdomen,  with  pressure,  always  towards  evening.  Dull
stitches,  frequently  deep  in  the  hypogastrium,  especially
close  above  the  penis. Continual,  dull  stitches  in  the
left  iliac  region,  increased  by  pressing  upon  the  part  and
by  walking. Tearing  stitches  in  the  right  hypochondriac
region,  followed  by  pressure. Burning  and  hot  feeling
in  the  abdomen,  (shortly.) Inflammation  of  the  intestines.
Colic,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  as  if  from  damp
and  cold  weather. Sensation  as  if  the  intestines  and  the
stomach  were  empty  and  were  dangling  in  the  abdomen,
early  in  the  morning,  after  having  eaten  a  sufficient
breakfast. Painful  movements  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
diarrhoea  would  set  in. Dull  pain  beneath  the  left  ribs,
as  if  from'incarcerated  flatulence,  increased  by  pressing
upon  the  part,  followed  by  eructations  which  afford  relief!
Sensation  as  if  air-bubbles  were  forming  in  the  epigas-
tric region  between  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  the  um-
bilicus. Rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  more  or  less


230


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


flatulence.  Sensation  as  if  the  whole  abdomen  were  full
of  flatulence.  Painful,  pinching  flatulence  becomes  incar-
cerated in  both  sides  of  the  abdomen.  Flatulence  is
emitted  in  short  and  interrupted  flatus.  Violent  colic  in
the  .lesser  intestines,  followed  by  the  emission  of  a  single
flatus.  Stiichy  pain  in  the  iliac  region,  near  the  os  ilium.
Dull  stitchesrin  the  right  iliac  region,  frequently.  Violent
stitches  in  the  left  lumbar  region  above  the  crest  of  the
ilium,  arresting  his  breath.  Dull  stiichy  pain  in  the  right
lumbar  region,  afterwards  tearing  in  the  same.  .Sudden
pain  in  the  left  iliac  region,  as  is  experienced  when  press-
ing upon  a  sore  spot,  worse  during  an-  expiration  and
when  bending  the  body.  Sense  as  of  pressing  asunder
in  the  right  abdominal  ring,  during  micturition  ;  going  off
by  bending  the  knees,  returning  when  raising  the  body
again. Drawing  pain  in  the  inguinal  glands.

Stool. — Tenacious  stool,  every  day.  Tough,  but
scanty  stool,  every  day.  Small,  soft,  frequent  stools.
Diarrhoea,  preceded  by  anxiousness  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach. Brown  fasces,  containing,  small,  white,  glistening
bodies.  Desire  for  stool,  upon  which  he  passes  copious,
papescent  stools  without  any  difficulty,  in  short,  rapid
intervals  ;  they  are  followed  shortly  after  by  tenesmus  of
the  anus,  as  is  the  case  in  diarrhoea,  (a.  h  h.)  Hard,
slow  stool,  in  the  evening,  with  hard  pressing.  Pretty
hard  stool,  early  in  the  morning,  at  short  intervals,  and
not  coming  off  till  he  has  been  sitting  a  long  while  ;  shortly
after  a  meal  papescent  stools,  coming  again  off  at  short
intervals  ;  in  the  evening,  desire  as  for  diarrhoea,  this
de  sire  disappears  after  repeated  emission  of  flatulence  and
terminates  in  a  small,  first  natural,  then  papescent  evacua-
tion ;  during  the  expulsion  of  these  stools  the  desire  in-
creases a  good  deal,  but  abates  immediately.  Thick,
papescent,  difficult  stools  after  a  violent  pressing,  leaving
a  smarting  in  the  anus.  Several  stools  a  day,  but  scanty.
Continual  diarrhoea,  with  intolerable  colic.  Excessive
diarrhoea.  The  usual  stool  is  preceded  by  a  painful
"writhing  in  the  abdomen  ;  it  is  a  copious  and  papescent
stool,  afterwards  diarrhoea  and  pressure  in  the  anus,  as  if
more  stool  would  come,  (1.  d.)  Chills  before  and  after
the  stool,  weakness  unto  falling  and  great  sensitiveness  to


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


231


open,  cold  air.  Shuddering  over  the  whole  body  after
stool.  After  stool  the  anus  becomes  constricted  around
the  protruding  rectum  ;  this  is  then  painful  to  the  touch.
Smarting  soreness  in  the  anus,  when  walking,  and  a
burning  in  the  rectum.  Intensely  painful  tenesmus,  tear-
ing and  drawing  in  the  anus  and  perinaeum,  from  which  it
extends  through  the  whole  urethra.

Urinary  Organs. — The  urine  is  much  less  than  usual,
even  after  drinking  a  good  deal.  Frequent  micturition.
Dark  urine,  yellow  as  wine,  becoming  turbid  after  an  hour.
After  having  taken  the  drug  for  a  while  the  urine  exhibits
loose  flocculi  and  deposits  a  reddish  sediment.  Hot  urine,
with  a  reddish  sediment.  Burning  urine.  Burning  during
micturition,  in  the  forepart  of  the  glans.  After  micturition
came  a  few  drops  of  blood.  Hceniaturia.  Clawing  sen-
sation in  the  bladder.  Continued,  stinging  itching  in  the
urethra,  with  pain,  in  the  evening.  Prickling  pain  in  the
urethra,  and  discharge  of  some  fluid.  Soreness  in  the
urethra  when  touching  it,  partly  during,  partly  between
the  acts  of  micturition.  Itching  soreness  in  the  urethra,
increased  by  pressure.  Discharge  of  mucus  from  the
urethra.  Discharge  of  watery  mucus  from  the  urethra,
during  motion.

Genital  Organs. — Tearing  in  the  penis,  in  jerks,
with  a  pain  above  the  penis,  in  the  right  side  of  the  abdo-
men, moving  like  a  wave.  Stitching  jerks  in  the  dorsum
of  the  penis.  Tearing  and  darting  tearing  in  the  glans.
Itching  in  the  glans.  Fine,  prickling  stitches  in  the  glans,
and  in  the  tip  of  the  glans.  Balanorrhcea,  with  dark-red
inflammation  of  the  internal  surface  of  the  prepuce,  with-
out any  swelling,  with  violent  itching  and  soreness  in  the
evening,  tearing  and  drawing  in  the  glans,  (a.  3  weeks.)-
Stitch,  with  pressure,  on  the  right  side  of  the  scrotum.
Painless  swelling  of  the  left  scrotum.  Frequent  erections
during  the  day.  An  involuntary  emission  of  semen  is
followed  by  a  violent  excitation  of  the  sexual  desire  with
tingling  in  the  whole  body,  as  if  caused  by  excessive  lewd-
ness, (a.  3  weeks.)  Leucorrhcea  resembling  albumen.
Discharge  of  mucus  from  the  vagina.

Cold,  Catarrh.  —  Unsuccessful  desire  to  sneeze.
Biting  dry  feeling  and  tingling  in  the  left  half  of  the  nose


232


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


while  the  right  is  obstructed,  and  vice  versa.  Almost  con-
stant drijness  of  the  nose,  with  diminution  of  smell.  Fre-
quent sneezing  and  fluent  coryza.  Sneezing  with  sore-
ness of  the  chest.  Dry  coryza.  Excessive  fluent  coryza,
(a.  48  h.)  Coryza,  with,  bloody,  tenacious  mucus  from
the  nose.  Coryza,  with  soreness  of  the  right  internal
wing.  Discharge  of  yellow,  thin,  sometimes  bloody  fluid
from  the  nose,  which  is  made  sore  and  feels  a  burning
pain.  Hoarseness,  (5.  d.)  Hoarseness  extending  down
to  the  pit  of  the  throat.  Burning  in  the  throat,  with  irrita-
tion in  the  larynx  exciting  a  short  and  hacking  cough,  as
if  the  larynx  were  too  dry,  with  anxious  oppressed  breath-
ing and  discharge  of  a  small  quantity  of  mucus  when
coughing.  Violent  irritation,  inducing  cough,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  and  early  in  the  morning,  the  irrita-
tion is  too  deep  in  the  larynx  to  be  reached  by  the  cough,
hence  its  violence  and  the  inability  to  loosen  the  phlegm.
Cough,  which  is  first  excited  deep  in  the  chest  and  which
does  not  abate  until  vomiting  and  a  discharge  of  watery
mucus  ensues.  Violent,  uninterrupted  cough  for  a  couple
of  hours ;  it  excites  vomiting,  (a.  1  h.)  Dry  cough,
with  retching,  afternoon  and  evening.  Dry  cough  with
scraping  sensation  in  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,
and  stitches  in  the  right  frontal  eminence.  Nightly  cough,
especially  after  midnight.  Bloody  discharge,  afternoon
and  night,  with  moderate  cough  and  restless  sleep,  with
heavy  frightful  dreams.

Chest. — Oppressed  breathing,  on  account  of  the  chest
feeling  contracted  from  both  sides.  Slow,  difficult  breath-
ing, with  anxiousness ;  he  is  unable  to  take  sufficient  breath,
and  imagines  he  will  choke.  Anxious  feeling  in  the  chest.
While  talking,  he  loses  his  breath  in  the  middle  of  his
speech,  and  he  has  to  begin  it  again.  Asthma,  for  several
hours.  Asthma,  suddenly  coming  and  going,  as  if  the
chest  were  oppressed  with  something  heavy.  The  chest
feels  oppressed  when  stooping  or  sitting;  she  has  to  open
her  dress  ;  the  breath  is  slower  and  shorter.  Sensation
during  an  inspiration,  as  if  chest  and  wind-pipe  were  tco
narrow  ;  it  is  not  increased  by  running  or  going  up-stairs.
Sensation,  during  a  deep  inspiration,  as  if  there  were  not
sufficient  space  between  the  third  and  fourth  rib. Pain  in


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


233


the  side  of  the  chest,  during  a  deep  inspiration,  as  if  the
lungs  had  grown  fast  and  were  unable  to  expand  freely.
The  breath  from  the  lungs  smells  like rotten  cheese.
Pressure  upon  the  chest  with  palpitation  of  the  heart.
Aching  pain  in  the  interior  of  the  chest,  at  a  small  place,
first  towards  the  right,  afterwards  towards  the  left  side,  a
dull  pressure. Oppressive  aching  pain  in  the  posterior
part  of  the  chest,  when  the  body  is  erect,  increased  by
deep  breathing  and  afterwards  extending  through  the
whole  lower  chest ;  the  pain  is  scarcely  perceptible  when
stooping  ;  but  it  becomes  a  sort  of  rheumatic  pain  when
moving  the  arms  and  bending  considerably  backwards.
Tensive  pressure  in  different  parts  of  the  chest.  Cramp-
like pressure  at  a  small  place  on  both  sides  of  the  sternum,
when  sitting ;  disappearing  when  walking.  Cramp-like
contractive  pain  above  the  lower  muscles  of  the  chest,
the  lower  portion  of  the  back  and  the  upper  arms,  when
walking  in  the  open  air. Tension  of  the  pectoral  muscles
when  stretching  the  arms. Dartings  in  the  -left  side  of
the  chest,  transitory  and painful, resembling  electric
shocks. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  beneath  the
clavicle,  going  and  coming  with  the  regularity  of  musical
beats,  extending  deep  into  the  chest ;  shortly  after  only  a
simple  aching,  aggravated  by  an  inspiration,  and  returning
for  some  days  in  succession,  (3.  d.) Violent  stitches  in
the  chest. Stitchy  bore-pain  in  the  clavicle. Stitch  deep
in  the  chest,  when  laughing. Dull  stitch  under  the  heart,
during  a  deep  inspiration. Violent  intermittent  stitches  in
the  right  side  of  the  chest,  rather  towards  the  right  side ;  they
scarcely  allow  of  breathing. Fine,  painful  stitches  in  the
chest. Fine,  painful  stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,
mosty  when  taking  an  inspiration,  (a.  9  d.) Burning,  with
pressure,  behind  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  recurring  in  parox-
ysms.  Soreness,  with  burning,  on  the  sternum.,  at  a  small
spot  on  the  right  side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  A  sudden,
intensely  painful  stitch  darts  out  at  the  right  mamma.  Sud-
den, burning  pain  between  the  mamma?. Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  left  nipple. Red  spots  upon  the  chest,  re-
sembling flea-bites,  with  violent  burning  and  desire  to
scratch ;  the  burning  remained  for  many  days,  even  after
the  spots  had  disappeared.


234


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


Back. — Pain  in  right  side  of  the  small  of  the  back.
Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  spreading  over  all  the  parts
of  the  body,  (a.  44  h.)  'Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
more  when  walking  than  when  at  rest.  Violent,  drawing
aching  pain,  on  the  left  side  near  the  small  of  the  back.
Cutting  tearing,  in  both  sides  of  the  small  of  the  back.
Dull,  pulsative  pain  in  the  back,  near  the  middle  of  the
spine.  Tensive,  contractive  pain  in  the  back,  down  to
the  small  of  the  back.  Stitchy  pain  from  the  /eft  side  of
the  back  through  the  chest,  during  an  inspiration.  Dull
stitch  in  the  back,  near  the  right  scapula,  hindering
breathing,  mostly  perceptible  during  motion.  Sudden,
sharp  stitches,  in  the  evening,  near  the  spinal  marrow,
through  the  chest,  extending  into  the  cartilages  of  the  left
ribs.  Stitchy,  aching  pain  on  the  right  side,  of  the  lumbar
vertebras,  externally,  increased  by  motion.  Dull,  drawing
stitches,  downwards,  between  the  shoulders,  less  when
moving  the  parts.  Burning  stitch  and  considerable  jacti-
tation under  the  left  scapula.  Tearing  in  the  right  side
of  the  scapula.  Burning  prickling  in  the  region  of
the  left  scapula,  and  in  the  shoulder,  continually.  Small
elevations  upon  the  skin,  after  previous  itching,  around  the
scapula?  and  on  the  right  nates,  smarting  when  touched,
being  readily  opened  by  friction  and  emitting  some  blood,
(3.  d.)

Neck. — Violently  itching  rash  on  the  nape  of  the  neck.
Rheumatic  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  neck  and  occiput.
Painful  stiffness  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  external
cervical  muscles.  Painful  stiffness  of  i  the  right  side
of  the  nape  'of  the  neck  and  neck,  mostly  during
motion.  Tearing  jerks  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck.
Tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  into  the  left  ear  and
near  the  clavicle.  Red,  smooth  pimple  on  the  right  side
of  the  neck,  sore  when  touched,  receding  flat  behind  the
skin  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  days,  and  remaining  so  for  a
few  weeks.

Superior  Extremities.— Prickling  and  gnawing  in
the  axilla,  becoming  worse  after  scratching.  Sore  feeling
in  the  right  axilla.  Pain  of  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  the
head  of  the  humerus  were  too  large  for  the  glenoid  cavity.
Pain  in  the  shoulder-joint,  as  if  it  would  tear,  with  throb-


DAPHNE  ME2EREUM.


235


hing,  digging  (burrowing)  and  tearing  in  the  evening,  in-
creased by  motion. Dull  pain  and  darling  in  the  shoulder,
as  if  he  had  carried  a  heavy  burden. Tension  in  the  right
shoulder,  drawing  in  the  left. Aching  pain  in  the  border
of  the  shoulder-joints. Clawing  and  boring  sensation  in
the  lower  border  of  the  right  shoulder-joint.  Continuous,
burning  stitch  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  shoulder.
Painless  cracking  in  the  left  shoulder-joint,  with  paralytic
feeling  in  the  upper  arm  when  raising  the  arm,  and  tearing
in  the  elbow-joint  when  bending  it,  in  the  evening,  when
in  bed. Paralytic  pain  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,  with
aching  pain  in  the  upper  region  of  the  acromion  process,
(immediately.) Painful  weariness  in  the  arms,  especially
in  the  shoulder-joint. Bruised  feeling  of  the  arms.  Weak-
ness, lassitude  of  the  arms  when  writing. Boil  on  the
left  arm. Tearing  jerks  in  the  right  arm  and  fingers.
Pain  of  the  upper  arm  as  if  it  had  been  beaten,  with
heaviness  and  drawing  from  above  downwards  in  the  long
bones. Drawing  in  the  upper  arm. Dull  pain  in  the
lower  part  of  the  upper  arm. Frequent  dartings  in  the
left  upper  arm,  worse  by  contact. Stitchy  aching  pain  in
the  left  humerus. Paralytic  aching  pain  in  the  left  upper
arm  extending  into  the  elbow-joint,  increased  by  bending
the  arm  outwards. Bruised  pain  of  both  upper  arms  and
shoulders. Bruised  pain  of  the  upper  arms  when  touching
them. Tensive  paralysis  of  the  elbow-joint  when  raising
the  arm;  when  stretching  it,  he feels  a stitchy  pain.
Kheumaiic  drawing  and  tension  in  the  region  of  the  elbow
of  the  right  arm. Drawing  in  the  elbow,  with  pressure,
extending  into  the  fingers. Violent  tearing  in  the  left  '
ulna. Tearing  in  the  fore-arm  and  elbow. Drawing  tear-
ing in  the  right  fore-arm,  close  to  the  wrist-joint.  Tearing
and  stitches  m  the  right  fore-arm  and  the  fingers,  early  in
the  morning. Pain  of  the  periosteum  of  the  right  olecra-
non process,  increased  by  pressing  upon  it.  Contractive
pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  fore-arm,  during  and  after  a
walk  in  the  open  air. Blotches  on  the  right  fore-arm  of
the  size  of  small  peas,  with  violent  itching,  and  becoming
hard  after  scratching. Paralytic  pain  as  from  a  sprain  in
the  wnst-iomt  and  whole  right  arm,  rather  in  the  muscles,
only  during  motion,  (immediately.) Paralytic  feeling  in


236


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


the  right  wrist-joint,  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (1.  d.)
Paralytic,  aching  pain  in  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  right
hand. Tremor  of  the  hands,  towards  evening.  Violent
pressure  in  the  whole  hand,  causing  a  weakness,  with
sensation  as  if  it  swelled  up. Drawing  pain  in  the  left
wrist-joint. Tearing  in  the  left  wrist. Tearing  in  the
dorsum  of  the  left  hand. Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  hand,  and  between  the  knuckles. Undulating,  dull
tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand. Fine,  slow  dart-
ings  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  hand. Burning  aching  in
the  left  carpus,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising.  Great
heat  and  warmth  through  the  whole  hand'  and  arm,  also  per-
ceptible to  the  touch. Swelling  of  the  hand,  with  tingling,
as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep. Swelling  and  heat  of  the  hand
and  arm,1  with  jactitation  and  sense  as  of  pecking  in  the
muscles.,  Swelling  of  the  dorsum  of  the  hand,  and  bruised
pain  of  the  metacarpal  bones  and  the  little  finger.  Vesi-
cles on  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,  for  several  days.  Pain-
ful darting  and  grumbling  in  the  phalangeal  bones,  m  pa-
roxysms. Tearing  in  the  left  index-finger,  in  the  evening,
when  in  bed. Tearing  boring  in  the  third  joint  of  the
right  middle-finger. Tearing  and  smarting  burning  in  the
inner  border  of  the  left  index  and  middle-finger.  Fine
prickings  in  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  especially  felt  when
touching  the  part. Paralytic  pain  of  the  bones  of  the
thumb,  from  behind  forwards. Sure  pain  under  the  nail
of  the  right  thumb,  especially  felt  when  pressing  upon  the

part.  .  .

Inferior  Extremities.— Pressure  m  the  glutei  mus-
cles, early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Tearing  in
the  right  half  of  the  nates.  Burning  in  the  skin  oi
the  nates.  Darting  pain  in  the  hip-joint,  down  to  the
knee  Tearing  and  tensive  pressure  over  and  in  the
outer  parts  of  the  right  hip.  When  she  attempts  to
walk,  she  suddenly  feels  a  dull  pain,  as  it  she
had  made  a  wrong  step,  under  the  right  nates,  and
afterwards  at  every  step,  recurring  for  several  days.
Bone-vain  of  the  thighs  and  legs.  Long-continued,  bruised
pain  of  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs,  when  walking  fast.
Paralytic  tearing  in  the  thigh,  in  the  upper  and  outer  por-
tion, when  standing. Tearing  in,  the  thin  part  of  the  right


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


237


thigh.  Tearing  in  the  right  thigh,  and  drawing  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  left.  Tearing,  with  stitches,  in  the  upper  part
of  the  right  thigh,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  right  half
of  the  abdomen.  Drawing  in  the  upper  part  of  the  femur
and  in  the  nates,  with  colic.  Undulating  drawing  pain,
along  the  whole  thigh,  leaving  a  painful  weakness  behind,
hindering  walking.  Restlessness  of  the  right  thigh,  he
has  to  stretch  it,  and  draw  it  up  again  continually,  in  the
evening,  when  in  bed,  (2.  d.)  Single,  elevated  pimples  on
the  thighs,  with  stitchy  pain  when  touched,  (a.  1  h.)  Burn-
ing soreness  of  the  posterior  surface  of  the  right  thigh,  as
is  felt  in  a  recent  contusion.  Jactitation  of  the  muscles  of
the  left  thigh,  as  if  air-bubbles  were  forming.  Dull  dart-
ings  in  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh  and  in  the  patella  of  the
left  knee,  when  standing.  Intensely  painful  darlings  in
the  left  knee,  when  sitting.  A  sudden,  intense  pain  in  the
knee,  as  after  a  blow  or  contusion.  Sharp  aching-pain,
externally,  above  the  left  knee,  going  off  when  pressing
upon  the  part,  but  reappearing  immediately  in  the  malleo-
lus interims.  Stiffness  in  the  tendons  of  the  bend  of  the
left  knee.  Straining  sensation  in  the  bend  of  the  left  knee
and  leg,  as  if  he  had  walked  too  much.  Rheumatic  ten-
sion and  drawing  above  the  knees  and  in  the  legs.  Violent
tearing  in  the  bend  of  the  right  knee  and  in  the  thigh,  from
below  upwards.  Sudden,  dull  stitch  in  the  right  knee
which  feels  sore  a  short  while  after  the  stitch  had  passed
off.  Dull  pain  in  the  leg,  as  if  the  tibia  were  broken  in
the  middle,  at  every  step.  Violent  pain  in  the  tibia,  after
midnight,  as  if  it  were  bruised,  or,  as  if  the  periosteum
were  torn  off,  disturbing  sleep,  with  chilliness  penetrating
rapidly  through  the  whole  body,  and  continued,  violent
thirst.  Aching  in  the  region  of  the  right  tibia,  frequently
recurring.  Clawing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  tibia.
Rheumatic  drawing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  right  tibia,
towards  the  tarsus.  Darting  drawing  in  the  calf,  very
short  but  frequent,  (a.  1  h.)  Drawing  and  jactitation  of
the  muscles  of  the  lower  part  of  the  calf.  Dull  dartings
and  painful  drawing  in  the  middle  of  the  tibia.  Slow  dart-
ings in  the  lower  par^  of  the  left  tibia.  Slowly  darting
prickings  in  the  upper  surface  of  the  right  tibia.  Tran-
sitory dartings  in  the  upper  part  of  the  left  tibia  when  sit-


238


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


ting,  with  bent  knee. Tearing  in  the  leg,  rather  above  the
malleoli. Paralytic  tearing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tibia,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed. Itching  of  the  inner  side  of
the  calves  which  obliges  him  to  scratch,  after  which  he
feels  a  smarting. Itching  of  the  inner  side  of  the  calves,
which  cannot  be  relieved  by  scratching,  and  which  does
not  cease  till  he  has  scratched  the  parts  bloody  ;  the  scratch-
ing is  followed  by  burning  ;  in  twelve  hours  swelling  of
the  calf,  and  the  scratched  spot  exhibits  a  bloody  crust  with
yellowish  pus  underneath,  and  pain  as  from  bruises.  Hard
swelling  of  the  calf,  when  walking  in  the  open  air,  with
burning  pain. When  beginning  to  run  the  tarsal  joints  feel
weak  and  painful,  as  if  they  would  break.  Paralytic
weakness  of  the  outer  side  of  the  tarsal  joint,  when  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  (1.  d.)  Cramp-pain,  and  as  if  the  parts
were  sprained,  around  the  outer  malleoli  of  the  left  foot.
Aching  pain  around  the  outer  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,
going  off  by  rest. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  left  tarsal
joint,  when  at  rest. Painful  stretching  and  pulling  under
the  internal  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  extending  under  the
sole. Tearing  in  both  heels  and  in  the  right  tendo  Achil-
lis. Tearing  in  the  right  side  of  the  left  foot,  extending
towards  the  sole  and  heel. Tearing  in  the  dorsum  of  the
right  foot. Slight  twitchings  around  the  outer  malleolus
of  the  right  foot. Tingling  in  the  foot. Hot,  or  burning
pains,  as  of  red-hot  coal,  in  the  right  foot,  returning  mo-
mentarily and  frequently- Burning  of  the  ball  of  the  left
foot,  with  stitches,  more  when  standing  than  when  walk-
ing, (4.  d.) Cold,  damp  feet,  when  sitting  in  a  warm
room. The  toes  are  painful  even  after  a  slight  walk,  as
if  pressed  by  hard  boots. Slight  twitchings  in  the  malleo-
lus of  the  right  big  toe,  resembling  jactitation  of  the  mus-
cles, or  as  if  vesicles  burst  open. Painful,  nervous  darl-
ings in  the  big  toe,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.
Contusive  pain,  sometimes  grumbling,  in  the  tip  of  the
middle  left  toe. Tearing  in  the  middle  toe  of  the  left  foot.
Tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the  left  big  toe,  and  on  the
right  side  of  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot. Violent  tearing
in  the  ball  of  the  left  small  toe,  and  thence  into  the  sole.
Prickling,  burning  stitches,  occurring  at  regular  intervals,
in  the  tip  of  the  left  big  toe.


DAPHNE  MEZEREUM.


239


General  Symptoms. — All  the  joints  are  painful, as  if
they  were  bruised  or  weary. Unsteadiness  of  the  joints,
as  if  they  would  break  down. Drawing  and  excessive
weariness  in  the  joints,  especially  those  of  the  knees,  feet,
and  carpal  joints. Paralytic  drawing  pains  in  various  parts
of  the  hands  and  lower  limbs. Short  drawing  or  darting,
now  here,  now  .there,  after  which  a  constant  soreness  re-
mains. Hot  dartings  in  various  parts  of  the  body.  He
feels  worst  in  the  evening. Wine  and  coffee  do  not  seem
to  neutralise  the  effect  of  Mezereum. Obstinate  itching
over  the  whole  body,  for  several  days. Itching  as  from
vermin,  generally  in  small  spots,  disappearing  after  some
time,  and  appearing  somewhere  else,  especially  in  the
evening,  less  by  day,  scarcely  at  night. itching  of  the
small  of  the  back,  chest,  neck,  and  nape  of  the  neck,  with
sore  pain  and  soreness  after  scratching. Itching  and
burning,  in  the  evening,  now  here,  now  there,  with  increase
of  animal  heat. Fine,  sometimes  itching,  s'tingings  in  the
skin,  here  and  there,  especially  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.
The  skin  of  the  whole  body  peels  off. Violently  itching
rash  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  back  and  thighs,  made  worse
and  more  gnawing,  by  scratching,  and  afterwards  pricking.
Red  itching  eruptions  of  rash  on  arms,  head  and  the
whole  body,  single,  and  in  clusters,  and  very  troublesome
and  obstinate. Red  pustules  on  the  outer  side  of  the  arms
and  lower  limbs,  with  a  tickling-burning  sensation  when
taking  off  the  clothes. Ulcerated  eruption,  like  pimples,
on  the  finger-joints,  itching  most  in  the  evening.  A  recent
wound  about  the  knee  becomes  inflamed,  burns  a  good
deal,  the  prover  experiencing  from  time  to  time  sharp
stitches  into  the  part. Violent  corrosive  sensation  and
throbbing  in  a  contusive  wound. Itching  and  redness
around  the  ulcer. Itching  around  the  ulcer  and  pain  when
touching  it  ever  so  slightly. Stitches  are  experienced  in
the  existing  ulcer,  especially  in  the  evening.  Drawing
pain  m  the  ulcer,  slitchy  pain  in  the  margin.  Weariness
and  uneasiness  in  the  lower  limbs  ;  he  has  to  change  their
position  constantly. Drawing-pain  through  the  whole  left
side  of  the  body,  with  sensation  as  if  the  part  had  gone  to
sleep,  especially  painful  in  the  hand  and  foot.  Heaviness
and  bruised  feeling  of  all  the  limbs,  as  is  felt  when  a  cold


240


DAPHNE  MEZEUEUM.


has  been  violently  suppressed,  (a.  96  h.)  Heaviness  in
all  the  limbs,  during  motion.  Heaviness  in  the  limbs  ;
he  dreads  motion  and  is  unable  to  decide  upon  any  thing.
The  lower  limbs  feel  lazy  and  weary  ;  he  dislikes  to  walk-
When  walking,  he  inclines  to  be  in  a  hurry,  and  to  stoop
with  the  whole  upper  part  of  the  body  ;  he  also  inclines  to
sing,  but  he  does  all  this  heavily  and  with  an  air  of  con-
straint.  The  body  feels  very  light.

Weakness,  Fit.  —  Weakness,  exhaustion.  Great
weakness  in  the  limbs.  Great  weakness  when  walking.
Uncommon  failing  of  strength.  Uncomfortable  feeling  in
the  whole  body,  with  yawning  and  stretching,  soreness  of
the  abdomen  and  eructation.

Sleep. — Lazy,  no  desire  to  work,  constant  yawning.
He  looks  the  whole  day  as  if  he  had  not  slept  enough  ;
pale. Violent  yawning  and  stretching,  (immediately.)
Drowsiness  in  day-time. Irresistible  drowsiness  in  the
afternoon. Restless,  unrefreshing  sleep. Restless  sleep,
disturbed  by  confused  dreams. Falls  asleep  late,  wakes
up  after  a  short  slumber  with  a  sensation  as  if  the  sentient
powers  of  all  the  external  parts  were  diminished,  even  those
of  the  penis  and  abdomen. After  a  sound  sleep  she  wakes
up  in  a  state  of  stupor. He  wakes  in  the  night,  with  incli-
nation to  vomit. Waking  at  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with
a  feeling  of  great  heaviness  in  all  the  limbs  and  in  the  head,
it  takes  him  a  long  time  to  fall  asleep,  and,  when  asleep,
he  is  tormented  by  anxious  dreams. Night-mare  after
midnight. ;  after  waking  up  his  limbs  have  gone  to  sleep  and
his  hands  feel  weak. Frequent  waking  after  midnight,
until  morning  ; he then lies upon  his back,  with
open mouth,  dry tongue, tensive pain  and  heavi-
ness in the occiput. Violent concussions of  the
body  while  asleep,  during  which  he  even  bit  his  tongue.
Frequent  startings  while asleep. Excessive  ill  humor
after  sleeping. He  wakes  at  2  o'clock  at  night,  after  vivid
dreams,  and  is  then  no  more  able  to  fall  asleep  on  account
of  a  sur-excitalion  of  the  nerves. He  remained  wide
awake  until  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  he  fell  asleep.
Sleep  full  of  dreams. Frightful  dreams. A  number  of
dreams,  towards  morning,  which  he  is  able  to  recollect.
Dreams  which  one  is  not  able  to  recollect.  He  dreams  his


DATIINE  MEZEREUJI.


241


back  is  studded  with  warts  and  excrescences.  Frightful
dream,  with  starling,  as  if  lie  fell  from  a  height.  Vivid
dreams  ;  before  midnight  they  arc  of  an  anxious,  after  mid-
night, of  a  ridiculous  nature.  "Voluptuous  dreams,  as  if  he
had  had  a  pollution.

Fever. — Sensitive  to  cold  air. Chilly  in  a  warm
room,  with  drowsiness. Thrills  of  shuddering  in  the  back,
on  the  chest,  and  epigastrium. Shuddering,  frequently
over  the  whole  body,  with  goose-flesh,  and  icy-cold  hands
and  feet,  in  a  warm  room. Shuddering,  over  the  back  and
arms. Chilliness  during  motion. Chilliness  over  the  ab-
domen and  arms,  with  dilatation  of  the  pupils,  (a.  35  h  )
Chill  iness  and  coldness  of  the  upper  and  lower  limbs.
Chilliness,  as  if  cold  water  were  being  repeatedly  thrown
over  her,  especially  over  arms,  body,  hips  and  feet,  with
yawning,  lachrymation  and  natural  warmth  of  the  face  and
hands. Quite  cold,  externally,  for  ;16  hours,  with  great
thirst,  without  desiring  to  get  warm,  without  dreading  the
open  air,  and  without  any  subsequent  heat. Chilly  the
whole  day,  out  of  humor,  and  uncomfortable,  worn  out
and  wretched  as  if  he  were  affected  with  a  severe  illness;
he  has  some  appetite,  but  he  feels  uncomfortable  after  the
slightest  meal  ;  he  feels  somewhat  easy  in  the  open  air
Violent,  chilliness  in  the  whole  body. Shaking  chills'
Chilliness  and  coldness  of  the  whole  body,  with  asthmatic
contraction  and  oppression  of  the  chesl,  in  front  and  be-
hind. Feverish  chills,  with  thirst  for  cold  water.  Chilli-
ness  out  of  bed  ;  heat  in  the  bed. Internal  chilliness.
Cold  feeling  and  sweat  on  the  legs,  afterwards  heat  over
and  over,  mostly  in  the  head. Coldness  of  the  uoper  and
lower  limbs,  without  these  parts  feeling  chilly.  Cold
hands  and  feet,  like  those  of  a  dead  person. Cold  feet
they  get  warm  in  the  bed. Cold  hands,  with  chilliness  all
over  the  body,  without  shuddering,  with  dryness  in  the
posterior  part  of  the  mouth  and  accumulation  of  saliva  in
the  forepart,  without  desiring  any  drink,  for  two  hours.
Co  d  thrills  on  both  sides  of  the  upper  arm,  over  the  back
and  feet,  when  yawning. After  a  meal  the  pulse  is  more
rapid,  and  there  is  a  sensation  as  if  the  heart  beat  on  the
left  side  of  and  near  the  stomach,  slight  Iwitchings  in  the
unusual  distinctness  of  sight,  with  a  sensation  hovv-
vehd  11


242


MURIATIC  ACID.


ever,  as  if  he  looked  through  concave  glasses  ;  the  eyes
swim.  Full,  hard,  tense,  intermitting  pulse.  The  pulse
has  increased  by  20  beats  towards  evening,  with  increase
of  animal  heat  and  oxciialion.  Increase  of  warmth  over
the  whole  body.  Violent,  acute  fever.  A  good  deal  of
thirst  in  the  evening,  with  great  dryness  of  the  mouth,  dis-
appearing for  a  lew  moments  after  drinking.


MURIATIC  ACID — A.CIDUM  HYDRO-
CHLORICUM.

The  colourless  muriatic  acid  of  the  shops,  which  is  ob-
tained from  common  salt  by  distilling  it  with  sulphuric
acid,  contains  a  good  portion  of  this  latter  substance.  To
purify  this  muriatic  acid,  the  sulphuric  acid  ought  to  be
precipitated  by  means  of  the  muriate  of  b:iryla  forming  the
sulphate  of  baryta  ;  the  supernatant  liquid  is  poured  off  and
distilled. over  again.

The  yellow  muriatic  acid,  distilled  over  by  means  of
the  sulphate  of  iron,  contains  too  much  iron  to  be  used  for
homoeopathic  purposes.

Muriatic  acid  has  been  found  useful  in  affections  in
which  the  following  symptoms  occur:  Half-sightedness  in
looking  from  above  downwards  ;  insensibility  in  the  inter-
nal meatus  andilorius  ;  throbbing  in  the  ear  ;  deafness  ;
pimples  in  the  face  ;  freckles  ;  sore  throat ;  eructations  ;
aversion  to  meal. ;  distension  and  repletion  of  the  abdo-
men ;  abdominal  spasms  ;  stool  too  thin ;  obstruction  of
the  nose  ;  drawing  with  pressure,  in  the  upper  arms  and
knees  ;  coldness  of  the  feet ;  sensitiveness  to  damp  weather.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  myself  and  Drs.  Gutmann,
Hartmann,  Haynel,  Langhammcr,  Rummel,  Stapf,  Wisli-
cenus,  Ng.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  According  to  Noack  and
Trinks,  muriatic  acid  may  be  used  in  the  following  dis-
eases : — Scrofulosis. — Acute  diseases  with  rapid  sinking
of  vitality,  great  exhaustion  and  weakness,  and  septic  cha-
racter.—Scrofulous  exanthemata. — Humid,  suppurating,
scaly  eruptions,  itching  in  the  bed—Pimples  on  the  fore-


ACIDUM  nTDUOCIILORICUM.


243


head,  finally  forming  into  a  scurf. — Ulcers,  very  painful,
throbbing  and  with  a  burning  pain,  secreting  a  fetid  ichor  and
covered  with  scurf. — Vanolae  maliguae,  putridae. — Boils
with  slinging  pains. — Sbcplessness  and  difficulty  of  falling
asleep. — Intermittent  fever. — Febris  nervosa  slupida. — Ty-
phus, putridus. — Melancholia. — (ireat  sadness. —  Vertigo  ?
— Tingling,  whizzing  in  the  ears. — Bleeding  at  the  nose. —
Ulcerated,  scurfy  nose. — Ulcerated,  scurfy  upper  lip. —
Darting,  tearing,  boring  pains  in  the  teeth. — Inflammation
and  swelling  of  the  gums. — Scurvy  of  the  gums. — Ptyal-
ism  ? — Diphtherias  ? — Want  of  appetite. — Status  gastricu?
et  pituitosus. — Bulimy-— Vehement  desire  to  drink. —
Chronic  affections  of  the  liver. — Culling  and  pinching  pains
in  ihe  abdomen. — Abdominal  spasms. — Distension  of  the
abdomen. — Meteorism. — .Stenosis  of  the  rectum. — Chronic
looseness — Prolapsus  ani. —  Blind  and  flowing  hemor
rhoids  with  burning  soreness. — Ischuria. — Frequent  desire
to  urinate  with  excessive  secretion  of  urine.— Diabete
insipidus  et  mellitus. — Weakness  of  the  bladder. — Para
lysis  of  ihe  bladder.— Involuntary  emission  of  urine.—
Weakness  of  the  male  organs  of  generation. — Impotence
— Premature  menses  with  pain  in  the  abdomen.— Metror
hagia.— Leucorrhcea. — Coryza,  with  discharge  of  corrc
sivc,  acrid  or  thick  mucus.— Roughness  and  hoarseness
with  sore  feeling,  in  the  chest —Dry,  violent,  fatiguin
and  panting  cough  from  litillalion  in  the  chest.— Cou<-
with  discharge  of  raw  mucus.—  Haamaptoe.—  Achim
drawing,  stilchy  pains  in  ihe  chest.— Pain  in  the  back  an
small  of  the  back.— Tearing  and  lancinating  pains  in  t'
joints  of  ihe  upper  and  lower  limbs. — Cold  feet.

Antidotes  ;  of  large  doses  :  Magnesia  calcinata,  sa
medicus  ;  of  small  doses  :  Bryon.  ?  Camph.  1

Moral  Symptoms. -Sad,  taciturn,  and  dissatisfied  wi
ins  lot.  Sad  and  taciturn,  during  the  menses.  Dcei
reflecting  and  taciturn,  as  if  he  were  threatened  by  son
disagreeable  event,  nevertheless  he  felt  disposed  to  wo.
Anxious  apprehensiveness  ;  he  is  affected  by  the  sliahte
contrariety,  Ommedialely.)  Anxiousncss,  with  cold  swe
in  the  lace  Taciturn,  peevish,  (a.  4  h.  and  3  d.)  Oi
of  humor ;  he  dotf  noihing  to  his  satisfaction,  in  the  eve.
mg. Every  thing  gives  her  displeasure  ;  she  feels  wear


244


MURIATIC  ACID.


in  the  afternoon,  when  in  the  open  air. Peevish  mood,
/ery  much  out  of  humor. Pusillanimous,  desponding,
vexed  about  every  thing. He  becomes  less  and  less
cheerful,  and  is  very  much  out  of  humor  in  the  evening.
Irritable,  disposed  to  anger  and  chagrin. Inclines  to  start.
Want  of  disposition  to  intellectual  labor,  (a.  3  d.)  While
U  his  work,  ideas  of  recent  events  crowd  upon  his  mind  ;
he  events  presenting  themselves  very  vividly  to  his  mind,
bright  mood,  (a.  several  h.)  (curative  effect.) Vertigo  in
he  open  air,  anil  unsteady  gait. Dulness  of  the  head,  in
he  forehead. Vertigo  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  room,
/ilh  dim-sightedness. Sudden  vertigo  in  the  open  air  ;
bjects  turned  with  her,  (2.  d.) Vertigo  in  the  head,  with
taring  in  the  vertex  and  sensation  as  if  the  hairs  were
ulled  upwards,  (6.  d.) Heaviness  in  the  forehead,  press-
g  downwards  towards  the  eyes,  with  obtusion  of  the
sad,  going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part.  Oppressive
^.aviness  in  the  head-,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising  ;
j  dint  of  looking  at  things,  things  become  confused  before
s  eyes*  with  a  reeling  sensation  and  drowsiness.  Heavi-
?ss  in  the  occiput,  as  if  the  head  would  sink  backwards,
iparently  from  weakness  of  the  cervical  muscles.  Feel-
g  of  heaviness  in  the  occiput,  with  drawing  stitches
out  the  part  extending  towards  the  nape  of  the  neck,
-elling  of  a  cervical  gland,  which  is  painful  to  the  touch,
d  heaviness  and  vertigo  of  the  head,  with  gloominess  of
->ht. Headache  in  the  forehead  and  occiput;  the  pain
the  forehead  increases  when  one  raises  one's-self  in  the
1. Headache  from  walking  in  the  open  air. Pain  of
left  occipital  protuberance  from  walking  in  rough  wind,
in  in  the  forehead,  afterwards  affecting  the  whole  head,
pefying  aching  pain  about  the  forehead,  in  any  position
he  body,  going  off  by  contact. Headache  in  the  whole
d,  as  if  the  brain  were  torn  and  dashed  to  pieces,  as  is
case  in  putrid  fevers. Headache,  as  if  coryza  would
«e  on,  pressing  towards  the  eyes  ;  the  pain  disappears
en  lying  down,  after  much  sneezing. Pressure  in  the
;  side  of  the  head.  Aching  in  the  left  temple.  Headache,
m  within  outwards,  in  forehead  and  temple.  Pressure
nmencing  in  the  middle  of  the  brain^and  extending  to
left  shoulder. Aching  in  the  forepart  of  the  brain,  in-


ACIDUM  HVDROCHLORICUM.


245


creased  by  moving  the  eyes. Tensive  aching  from  the
occipital  bone  through  the  brain  into  the  forehead.  Tensive
pain  in  the  right  temple. Tension  and  stitches  in  the
occiput,  in  the  evening. Darting  pain  in  the  vertex,  a
few  times,  in  the  evening. Tearing  headache,  in  the  fore-
head. Violent  tearing  in  the  vertex,  sometimes  accom-
panied with  a  feeling  as  if  the  hairs  were  pulled  upwards,
(6.  d.) Tearing  in  the  right  jmrietal  bone,  sometimes
accompanied  by  stitches  extending  as  far  as  the  forehead
and  even  the  margin  of  the  orbit,  sometimes  accompanied
with  tickling  in  the  left  ear  and  burning  in  the  concha.
Violent  tearing  and  stitches  in  the  occiput. Tearing  and
pressing  in  the  forehead,  in  fits,  towards  the  right  orbit,  (a.
5  h.) Tearing  in  both  halves  of  the  occiput,  with  a  sensa-
tion as  of  pushing  and  jerking,  extending  as  far  as  the  fore
head. Stitchy  headache. Violent  stitches  in  the  vertex
and  forehead,  from  noon  till  bed-time. Stitch  in  the  head,
when  blowing  the  nose. Long,  frequent  stitches  in  both
frontal  eminences,  towards  the  centre. Stitches  in  t!'e
forehead,  as  far  as  the  temple,  increased  by  stooping  and
pressing  upon  the  part. Stitches  in  the  right  parietal
bone,  followed  by  violent  tearing  in  the  right  lobule  and
around  the  ear. Stitch  in  the  head,  above  the  left  temple,
(a.  1  h.) Piercing  in  the  head,  from  without  inwards,
after  stooping  and  raising  the  head  again,  after  dinner.
Headache,  at  5  o'clock  in  the  morning,  rousing  her  from
sleep,  followed  by  violent  stitches  over  the  right  ear.
Boring  pain  in  the  vertex,  as  from  the  skull  into  the  brain.
Feeling  as  if  the  brain  were  loose,  when  drawing  a  heavy
load. Burning  feeling  in  the  head,  especially  in  the  fore-
head, early  in  the  morning  when  stooping. Whizzing  in
the  head. Sensation  on  the  scalp,  as  if  the  hairs  stood  on
end,  as  after  a  fright. Tension  of  the  skin,  on  the  left
side  of  the  head. Stitch-like  tearing  in  the  right  temple,
(when  standing)  disappearing  when -touching  the  part  or
when yawning. Ulcerative pain,  externally, in  both
temples,  and  in  the  forehead. Burning  aching,  externally,
over  the  left  eye. Burning  pain  in  the  hairy  scalp,  over  the
temple. Pulsation  of  the  right  temporal  artery, -when  lying
upon  it. The  forehead  feels  dead  and  as  if  it  had  gone
to  sleep. Violent  itching  on  the  hairy  scalp,  which  is  not


246


MURIATIC  ACID.


relieved  by  scratching.  Pustules  on  the  forehead  and
temples,  without  sensation.  Pimples  on  the  forehead,
lohnmg  a  scurf  within  24  hours. Boil  on  the  right  temple.

Eyes. — Fine  leavings  in  the  margin  of  the  orbits.  A
drawing  into  the  left  eye,  from  the  occipital  protuberance,
without  any  pain,  but  causing  slight  twitchings  in  the  upper
lid,  (a.  4  h.)  Darting,  through  the  upper  eyelid  towards
the  zygoma,  as  if  a  thread  were  drawn  through  the  parts
(immediately.)  Itching  in  the  eyes.  Itching  smarting  in
the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye,  which  cannot  be  re-
moved by  friction.  Corrosive  smarting  in  the  outer  canthus
of  the  left  eye,  in  the  evening.  Itching  stitch  in  the  outer
canthus  of  the  right  eye,  when  at  rest.  Stitches  in  the  eyes,
from  within  outwards  ;  the  eyes  are  red.  Cutting  in  the
right  eye-ball,  when  at  rest.  Burning  and  pressure  in  the
eyes,  early  in  the  morning,  when  washing  them  with
water.  Burning  of  the  eyes,  which  are  agglutinated  early
in  the  morning.  Slight  inflammation  of  the  eyes.  Swell-
ing and  redness  of  the  upper  and  lower  eye-lid,  without
any  pain.  Agglutination  of  the  eyes,  early  in  the  morning.
Alternate  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  pupils,  at  inter-
vals of  from  4  to  5  hours.  Great  dilatation  of  the  pupils,
(a.  II,  15  h.)  Contraction  of  the  pupils,  (a.  1  to  3  h.)
Twinkling  before  the  eyes  and  half-sightcdness  ;  one  half
of  the  objects  a  ppears  lo'be  cut  off  from  the  other  half  in  a
perpendicular  line.  The  eyes  are  very  sensitive  to  the  light.

Ears. — Otalgia  of  the  right  ear,  a  sort  of  pressing  from
within  outwards  at  regular  intervals,  the  external  ear  being
painful  to  the  touch.  Drawing  and  pressure  in  the  ante-
helix;  when  pressing  upon  it,  the  pain  extends  into  the
inner  ear.  Continued  pinching  in  the  right  ear,  sometimes
accompanied  with  severe  stitches  extending  behind  the
ear  ;  the  parts  behind  the  ear  are  painful  when  pressed
upon,  (a.  8  h.)  Darting  pinching  deep  in  the  left  ear,  be-
coming a  cramp-like  pain  after  it  had  returned  a  few  times,
like  otalgia.  Tearing  in  the  left  ear,  like  otalgia.  Fre-
quent tearing  in  the  left  ear,  (4.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  right
outer  ear,  (1.  d.)  Tearing  in  the  left  lobule.  Drawing
tearing  behind  the  ears,  extending  slowly  towards  the  nape
of  the  neck  and  causing  a  painful  stiffness  of  the  neck
when  moving  it. Dull  cutting,  with  pressure  in  the  region


ACJDUM  HYDROCHLORICUM.


247


of  the  mastoid  process,  with  pain,  when  touching  the  part,
as  of  sub  cutaneous  ulceration. Ulcerative  pain  in  the
left  ear,  aggravated  by  boring  with  the  finger. Pain  of
the  lobule"  when  touching  it,  as  if  it  would  ulcerate.
Gnawing  pain  in  the  right  ear,  in  ihc  evening.  Itching
stitch  in  the  left  ear,  going  off  when  inserting  the  finger
into  the  ear. Itching  in  the  left  ear,  (a.  2  h.) Heat  in
the  left,  afterwards  in  the  right  ear,  as  if  smoke  came  out;
aficrwards  redness  and  swelling  of  the  dorsa  of  the  hands,
with  a  sort  of  rhagades,  with  lachryination  and  diminution
of  smell  and  hearing;  afterwards  redness  and  burning  of
the  face,  for  4  hours. Pimples  on  the  concha,  forming  a
scurf  within  24  hours. Violently  itching  pimples,  close
behind  and  beneath  the.  left  antehelix ;  the  itching  con-
tinues in  spile  of  the  rubbing,  with  smarting  pain.  The
cerumen  becomes  dry,  the  hearing  less,  in  a  few  days  ;
a  report  in  the  ears  lakes  place,  after  which  the  hearing  is
belter  and  finer. He  hears  the  tick  of  a  watch  better
than  he  understands  human  speech. The  hearing  is
sharper  and  finer,  (secondary  eflfeci.) Very  fine  hearing,
sensitive  to  noise. Very  sensitive  to  noise. Singing  in
the  ear,  frequently  and  long, d.) Frequent  tingling,
humming  and  whizzing  in  the  ear,  (5.  d.) Sense  as  of
twittering  in  the  ear,  at  night.

Nose. — Continued  bleeding  from  the  nose,  (a.  1  h.)
Slinging  pain  in  the  nostrils,  as  if  they  would  ulcerate,  (2.
d  )  Violent  itching  of  the  lip  of  the  nose,  returning  after
scratching  i he  parts.

Face. — Cramp  pain  in  the  face,  near  the  articulation  of
the  jaw;  when  pressing  upon  the  part,  stitches  dart  into
the  ear.  Tearing  in  the  left  upper  jaw,*  apparently  in  the
bone,  close  below  the  orbit.  Glowing  cheeks,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  without  thirst.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Pimples  around  the  lips,  forming  a
scurf  within  24  hours.  Vesicles  on  the  upper  lip,  close  to
the  corner  of  the  mouth,  with  ulcerative  pain  when  touch-
ing the  parts,  and  tension  when  moving  the  lips.  Two
vesicles  on  the  left  side  of  the  lower  lip,  yellow,  burning,
of  the  size  of  peas. Vesicle  on  the  left  side  of  the  upper


*  This  is  the  Gorman  text. The  malar  bono  seems  to  ba  meant.  II.


2^S  MURIATIC  ACID.


lip. Pustule  in  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lower  lip
burning  tension  in  the  upper  lip,  on  the  right  side.  Burn-
ing ot  the  hps,  for  a  Jong  time,  (a.  10  d.) Rough  borders
of  the  hps,  with  dry,  cracked  skin. Bloated  lower  lip  it
lecls  heavy  to  him  and  burns,  especially  when  touching  it
Vesicle  on  the  right  lower  jaw,  with  pain  when  touching
it. Sense  as  oi  buzzing  in  the  left  lower  jaw,  pacing
over  into  disagreeable  tingling,  (creeping)  m  the  teeth!
J  oothachc,  with  pain  in  ihe  malar-bones,  ears  and  temples,
relieved  by  warmth  and  by  tying  something  arounj 'the
parts. Cold  drink  excites  a  pain  in  the  affected  tooth,
rain  in  one  of  the  cuspidali  of  the  lower  jaw,  with  a  sen-
sation as  of  pressing  asunder,  relieved  by  compressing  the
pans. Frequent  darlings  in  the  teeth,  with  burning  in  the
gums,  (4.  d.) Tearing  in  the  right  upper  teeth,  and  the
zygoma, fearing  in  a  right  upper  molar  tooth,  \\ . .  re-
ness  oi  the  gums. Boring  in  the  roots  of  the  teeth  of  the
left  lower  jaw,  as  if  the  teeih  were  being  lifted  out  of  their
sockets. Throbbing  toothache,  made  worse  by  cold  drink-
ing, in  the  left  lower  row,  two  mornings  in  succession.
Slight  inflammation  of  the  gums. Swelling  of  the  gums.
Swelling  of  the  gums,  from  morning  till  noon.

Mouth.— Dryness  of  the  mouth,  she  is  scarcely  able  to
talk,  early  in  the  morning.  Sensation  as  if  the  mouth  were
pasted  over  with  unsavory  mucus.  Mucus  in  the  posterior
part  of  the  mouth.  Mucus  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, going  off  after  breakfast,  (2.  d.)  Copious  saliva  in
the  mouth,  which  seems  to  come  out  of  the  throat.  Her
mouth  is  constantly  full  of  water.  His  tongue  feels  heavy
and  elongated,  he  can  scarcely  raise  it,  especially  when
talking,  with  great  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  fauces.  The
tongue  becomes  sore  and  blueish.  Red,  burning  vesicle  on
the  tip  of  the  tongue.  Painful,  burning  blister  on  the
tongue.  Deep  ulcer  on  the  tongue,  with  black  bottom  and
over-reaching  edges.  Consumption  of  the  tongue.  Pain-
ful pimple  on  both  sides  of  the  palate.  Rawness  and  sore-
ness of  the  skin  of  the  palate,  at  a  small  place.  Sore  burn-
ing of  the  palate,  evening  and  night,  (8.  d.)

Throat. — Rawness  and  smarting  on  the  fauces,  nkht
and  morning,  even  between  the  acts  of  deglutition.  Sharp
scraping  in  the  fauces. Dry  throat,  with  burning  in  the


ACIDUM  HYDROCHLOIUCUM.


249


chest.  Roughness  and  burning  of  the  throat,,  as  of  heart-
burn, with  coughing.  Sensation  as  if  a  hard  body  were
rising  from  the  chest  into  the  throat,  with  titillation  excit-
ing a  dry  cough,  when  sitting.  Accumulation  of  mucus
in  the  throat  ;  he  has  to  swallow  it.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Bad  taste  in  the  throat,  as  of
rancid  grease.  Bitter  taste,  early  in  the  morning,  after
waking,  with  while-coated  tongue,  (S.  d.)  Acrid  and  pu-
trid taste  in  the  mouth,  like  rotten  eggs,  with  plyalism.
Beer  tastes  to  him  sweet  as  honey,  and  excites  nausea.
Bulimy.  Excessive  craving  for  drink.  Complete  want
of  appetite,  the  taste  being  natural,  and  no  nausea.  Aver-
sion to  all  food  ;  much  yawning.  Every  thing  tastes  sweet.
No  appetite,  eructations  after  a  meal.  Aversion  to  meat.
The  focd  does  not  go  down  easily.  Rumbling  and  dull
pain  in  the  abdomen,  during  and  after  a  meal.  Continual
eructations.  Bitter  eructations,  frequently,  (4.  d.)  Putrid
eructations,  frequently,  (6.  7.  d.)  Rising  of  a  sour  fluid,
from  the  stomach.  Considerable  hiccough  before  and
after  dinner,  (3.  d.)  Nausea  and  qualmishness  of  the  re-
gion of  the  stomach.  Inclination  to  vomit.  Vomiting  of
the  ingesta.

Stomach.— Contractive  pain  in  the  stomach.  Painful
feeling,  at  a  small  part  of  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  drawn
in,  after  dinner.  Violent  pressure  at  the  stomach,  several
times.  Pressure  at  the  stomach,  as  if  it  were  too  full,  with
unsuccessful  desire  for  eructations.  Feeling  of  repletion
in  the  stomach,  although  he  has  not  eaten  any  thing.  Empty
feeling  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  especialhj  the  oesopha-
gus, not  going  off  by  eating,  with  rumbling  in  the  intes-
tines. Heat  and  burnincr  in  the  stomach,  for  a  long  time,
(shortly.)  Burning  and  throbbing  at  a  small  place,  on  the
left  side  near  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

Abdomen.— Burning  tension  in  the  right  hypochondrium,
at  a  small  place.  Sore  and  tensive  pain  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium, moving  upwards  and  downwards,  when  silting
burning  and  bruised  pain  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  (4.
d.)  butch  in  the  right  hypochondrium,  followed  by  burn-
ing, going  off  by  pressing  upon  the  part,  but  reappearing
shortly  after  at  a  place  not  far  distant  from  the  former,  in
the  evemng,  (3.  d.) Violent  stitch  in  the  left  hypochon-


250


MURIATIC  ACID.


drium,  when,  stooping. Stitches  under  ihc  left  ribs,  in  tho
side. Clawing,  with  pressure,  under  the  led  short  ribs,
not  changed  by  breathing. Clawing  tension  under  the
short  ribs,  obliging  him  several  times  10  lake  a  deep  inspi-
ration, and  going  oif  al  ter  the  emission  of  flatulence.  Colic,
early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed. Disagreeable,  anxious
feeling  in  the  whole  abdomen,  relieved  bv  the  emission  of
flatulence,  and  removed  entire  by  motion  on  the  b.Avels.
Distended  abdomen,  the  whole  day. Distension  of  ihe
abdomen,  afterwards  emission  of  flatulence. Feeling  of
repletion  in  the  abdomen,  after  a  moderate  meal,  withdis-
tensio  i. Aching  pain  in  a  distended  abdomen  ;  she  feels
every  step  she  makes  in  her  abdomen. Contractive  sen-
sation in  the  intestines,  with  dull  pain. Colicky  pinching
in  the.  abdomen,  during  motion  and  emission  of  flatulence.
Pinching  extending  from  the  umbilical  region  to  both  sides,
violent,  pinching  accompanied  by  grunting. Pinching  in
the  abdomen,  now  here,  now  there,  without  feeling  any
flatulence,  (4.  d.) Pinching  below  the  umbilicus,  followed
by  hard  stool,  (12.  d.) Violent  pinching  in  the  umbilical
region,  with  feeling  of  emptiness,  extending  into  the  pit  of
the  stomach  and  producing  a  feeling  of  oppression  in  that
part. Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  several  limes  a  day,  fol-
lowed by  emission  of  an  excessive  quantity  of  fetid  flatu-
lence. Violent  pinching,  coming  on  in  jerks,  externally,
at  a  small  place  of  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  more  vio-
lent during  an  expiration. Violent  culling,  with  pinching,
in  the  abdomen,  when  standing  or  walking,  going  off  when
sitting. Culting  pain  under  the  umbilicus,  through  the
abdomen. Violent  culling  in  ihe  abdomen,  when  sitting,
walking  or  standing. Continued  stilchy  pain  around  the
umbilicus,  as  of  pins. Empty  feeling  in  the  abdomen,  with
grunting. Painful  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  abdomen,
early  in  the  morning,  after  the  usual  stool,  (5.  d.)  Rumb-
ling in  the  abdomen,  as  if  it  were  empty,  when  sitting.
Rumbling  and  grunting  in  the  abdomen. Continual  fer-
mentation in  the  abdomen,  sometimes  becoming  seated  in
the  hypogastrium,  with  wheezing  sounds. Fine  pinching
in  the  abdominal  muscles,  in  and  below  the  umbilical  re-
gion. Pricking  pain  in  the  lower  portion  of  the  abdominal
integuments. Pricking  pain  in  the  abdominal  ring.  Dull


ACIDUM  IIYDItOCIILORlCUM.


251


stitches  in  ihc  right  iliac  region,  at  dinner.  Burning  stitch
in  tlic  left  iliac  region,  (a;  1 1  h.)  Burning  stitch  in  the  right
iliac  region,  in  the  evening.

►Stool. — Stool  in  small  pieces,  with  pressing,  (3.  d.)
Inaciivity  of  the  rectum  ;  he  has  to  press  hard  to  expel
the  faeces.  Violent  desire  for  slool,  early  in  the  morning,
nevertheless  difficulty  of  passing  the  feeces.  Hard,  difficult
stool,  early  in  the  morning,  soft  stool  in  the  afternoon,  (6.
d.)  Alternately  hard  and  soft  stool.  Soft  slool,  (the  first
3  d.)  Hard  slool,  (4.  d.)  Soft  slool,  with  cutting  and
qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  by  a  cold  ;  after  slool
he  feels  belter,  (a.  24  h.)  Soft  stool,  with  emission  of  fla-
tulence, contraction,  burning  and  stinging  of  the  reclum,
will)  sensa'ion  as  of  stool  and  flatulence  receding.  Liquid
slool,  after  a  meal.  Diarrhoea,  with  violent  burning  along
the  anus,  in  the  evening  and  next  morning,  (a.  6  d.)  Diar-
rhoea, with  smarting  as  from  excoriation  in  the  rectum.
Four  diarrhoeic  stools,  (after  one  hard  slool.)  with  tenes-
mus, rumbling  and  grunting  in  ihe  abdomen,  (4.  d.)  Diar-
rhoea, (a.  10  h.)  Thin,  watery  slool  passes  off  during  mic-
turition without  his  being  aware  of  it,  without  any  previous
desire.  Smarting  as  from  excoriation  in  the  rectum  and
anus,  although  the  stools  were  not  hard.  Cutting  in  the
anus,  during  expulsion  of  the  stools,  which  are  not  hard.
Burning  at  the  anus,  after  good  stool.  A  good  deal  of
ilching  and  tickling  in  the  anus,  (2.  d.)  Itching  of  the
anus,  with  sore  pain  and  tingling  slinging.  Violent  ilch-
ing of  the  reclum,  as  of  ascarides.  Burning  stitches  in
the  anus.  Stilchv  pain  in  the  rectum.  Pressure  at  the
anus.  During  micturition  the  reclum  prolapses  as  if  it
were  turned  over.  Swelling  of  the  varices  of  the  rectum,
with  burning  sore  pain.  Swollen,  blue  varices  of  the  rec-
tum, with  pain  when  pressing  upon  them.  Blood  wilhthe
stool,  for  several  mornings.  Profuse  hemorrhage  from  ihe
rectum,  with  stool.  Burning,  voluptuous  itching  of  the
perinaaum,  close  to  the  anus,  exciting  a  desire  to  scratch,
scratching  however,  does  not  relieve  the  itching.

Urinary*  Oroans. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  and
much  urine  being  emilted.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,
with  emission  of  but  a  small  quantity  of  urine,  and  tenes-
mus of  the  bladder  afterwards. Desire  to  urinate,  never-


252


MURIATIC  ACID.


thclcss  he  has  to  wait  a  while  before  the  urine  makes  its
appearance.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with  but  scanty
emission,  (a.  72  h.)  Tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  almost  no
urine  being  past ;  the  little  he  does  pass,  comes  off  with-
out any  pain.  Diminished  urine,  with  burning,  (the  first
days-)  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  and  a  quantity  of
urine  being  passed.  He  passes  much  more  urine  man
corresponds  to  the  quantity  of  drink  he  has  taken.  Pro-
fuse emission  of  watery  urine.  Profuse  and  pale-yellow
urine,  (I.  and  2  d.)  Frequent  micturition  at  night,  emit-
ting but  little  at  a  lime,  no  pain.  Slow  emission  of  urine,
as  if  the  bladder  had  no  strength  to  expel  it.  Weakness
of  the  bladder.  Frequent,  involuntary  discharge  of  urine.
The  urine  looks  white  and  turbid,  like  milk,  when  passing
it.  Culling  in  the  posterior  portion  of  the  urclhra,  when
emitting  the  urine  during  stool.  Stinging  smarting  in  the
orifice  of  the  urethra,  immediately  after  urinating.

Genital  Organs. — Violently  burning  stitch  in  the  pos-
terior part  of  the  penis.  Pain  in  the  margin  of  the  pre-
puce, as  if  it  were  lorn.  Slight  inflammation  of  the  pre-
puce. Boring  tension  from  the  right  testicle  to  the  middle
of  the  penis.  Itching  of  the  scrotum,  exciiing  one  to
scratch  ;  scratching,  however,  does  not  remove  it.  A
good  deal  of  itching  about  the  scrotum.  Feeling  of  weak-
ness in  the  genital  organs,  no  erection,  the  penis  being
quite  relaxed,  (a.  24  h.)  The  sexual  instinct  becomes  ex-
cited, (primary  effect  ?)  Frequent,  weak  erections,  (4.  d.)
Erections,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed,  (2.  d.)  He
is  roused  from  sleep  by  a  sensation  as  if  a  pollution  would
lake  place  ;  afterwards  slight  erection  with  emission  of  a
watery,  foamy  fluid,  without  smeli,  followed  by  a  long,
painful  erection.  Pressing  in  the  pudendum,  as  if  the
menses  would  make  their  appearance.  Pricking  pain  in
the  vagina.  The  menses  appear  10  days  before  their  lime,
with  colic.  The  menses  appear  6  days  too  soon,  without
pain. Leucorrhcea,  (10.  1 1.  d.)

Cold,  Catarrh. — Continual  inclination  to  sneeze,  with
itching  and  tickling  in  the  nose.  Frequent  sneezing.
Coryza.  Coryza-feeling  with  troublesome  dryness  of  ihe
nose.  Coryza,  with  acrid,  corrosive  discharge.  Coryza,
With  secretion  of  thick  mucus. Discharge  of  a  quantity  of


ACIDUM  IIYDROCIILOIIICUM.


253


mucus  from  the  nose  Feeling  of  obstruction  and  dryness
in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose,  with  secretion  of  a  quantity
of  mucus-,  continuing  a  long  while,  (a.  2  d.)  Obstruction
of  the  nose,  like  dry  coryza.  Hoarseness,  for  8  days.  Ex-
cessive catarrhal  hoarseness.  Roughness  and  hoarseness
of  the  throat,  with  sore  feeling  in  the  chest,  (1.  d  )  Scrap-
ing and  rough  in  the  throat,  some  soreness  and  cough  in
the  chest,  no  hoarseness,  evening  and  morning.  Tickling
in  the  throat,  or  chest.  Short,  dry,  hacking  cough  with
burning  in  the  ihroat.  Dry  cough,  day  and  night,  fatiguing.
Violent  cough,  as  if  the  sternum  would  break  ;  it  feels  sore-
and  bruised',  especially  when  talking,  laughing  or  yawn-
ing. Violent,  panting  cough,  followed  by  an  audible  rumb-
ling in  the  chest,  from  above  downwards.  Loose  cough,
(6.  and  7.  d.)  Haemoptysis.

Chest. — Deep  breathing,  wiih  moaning.  Moaning.
Oppression  across  the  chest,  in  the  evening,  when  walking
or  silling.  Asthmatic  pressure  on  the  chest,  in  paroxysms.
Painful  oppression  of  the  chest,  especially  on  the  right  side.
Tensive  pain  on  the  sternum,  hindering  breathing,  as  if  the
pain  came  out  of  the  stomach  ;  the  place  is  painful,  also
when  touching  it.  Aching  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest,
becoming  more  and  more  violent,  not  influenced  by  breath-
ing. Violent  pressure  in  the  sternum,  above  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  from  below  upwards,  in  the  evening.  Aching,
and  bruised  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest.  Clawing,
with  pressure,  in  the  chest,  without  any  oppressed  breath-
ing. Clawing,  with  pressure,  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,
increasing  in  violence  during  an  inspiration.  Aching  in
the  left  half  of  the  chest,  close  to  and  by  the  side  of  the
spine,  during  an  inspiration.  Stitch  with  pressure,  in  the
right  half  of  the  chest,  below  the  nipple,  gradually  increas-
ing and  decreasing.  Drawing  sensation  in  the  right  half
of  the  chest,  below  the  nipple,  extending  tow  u'ds  the  neck.
Cutting  pushes  in  the  middle  and  inner  side  of  the  ster-
num, with  dull  pressure  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  thoracic
cavity,  general  oppression  of  the  chest  and  tightness  of
breathing,  the  whole  day,  in  paroxysms.  Tensive  darting,  .
from  the  left  false  ribs  to  the  right  ribs.  Stilchy  pain  in
the  chest,  during  violent  motion,  and  during  an  inspiration.
Stitches  deep  in  the  precordial  region,  extending  as  far  as


°*  MURIATIC  ACID.


the  axilla  and  back,  with  stitches  in  the  thigh  extending  to
the  knee,  when  sitting,  going  off  when  rising,  in  the  even-
ing, butches  m  the  region  of  ihc  heart, '  she  had  meat
trouble  in  raising  herself,  with  arrest  of  breathing,  goin*  off
by  friction,  (7.  d.) Fine  stitches  below  the  region  of  the
heart,  and  afterwards  in  the  region  of  the  left  ribs,  with
tearing  behind  the  left  car. Dull  stitch  into  the  Jell  side
ol  the  chest,  with  cough,  in  the  evening. Sharp  siitci.es
in  the  eft  half  of  the  chest,  in  the  region  of  the  lowermost
true  ribs,  independent  of  breathing.1 Stitches  under  the
sternum,  close  above  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Stitches
between  two  true  ribs  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  during
an  expiration. Tensive  boring  in  the  chest,  continuimr
during  an  inspiration  and  expiration. Soreness  and  cut°
ling  in  the  chest,  with  desire  to  cough. The  beats  of
the  heart,  during  the  nightly  fever,  are  so  violent,  that
he  feels  them  even  in  his  face. Boring  stitch  in  the  in-
tercostal  muscles of  the  right side, independent  of
breathing,  when  silting. Prickings  in  the  region  of  the
true  ribs  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  during  an  expira-
tion, when  sitting. Slowly  ascending,  broad  stitches,  ex-
ternally, in  the  sides  of  the  chest. Fine,  burning  stitches,
externally  below  the  left  mamma. Burning  of  the  ouicr
side  of  the  right  mamma,  also  of  a  small  place  of  the  mid-
dle of  the  sternum,  wilh  sensation  as  if  something  were
lodged  there  internally  ;  afterwards  the  burning  gave  place
to  mere  pricking. Violent  stitches  in  the  right  nipple.

Back. — Drawing  burning  along  the  back,  beginning  at
the  os  coccygis,  as  if  under  the  skin,  (4.  d.)  Aching  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  standing  or  sitting7  as  if
caused  by  long  stooping.  Fine,  drawing  tearing  from  the
middle  of  the  sacrum  to  the  lumbar  vertebrae.  Frequent
stitches  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  stooping  and  rising
again,  (4.  d.)  Burning  stitch  in  the  os  sacrum,  causing  one
to  start.  Pain  as  if  sprained,  in  the  back  and  scapula?,  af-
ter writing  for  a  time  with  the  back  curbed.  Drawing,
tensive  pain,  alternately  between  the  scapulae  and  the
lowermost  short  ribs,  without  any  difficulty  of  breathing.
Pressure  along  the  spine,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  ;
going  off  when  standing  or  sitting.  Pressure  in  the  mid-
dle and  left  side  of  the  back,  as  if  from  long  stooping.


ACIDtfM  HYDROCHLORICUM.


253


Stitches  in  ihe  scapulae.  Sharp  stitches  with  fine  drawing
and  feeling  of  heal  in  the  scapulae.  Painful  stitches  on  the
left  side  of  the  back,  when  silling.  Violent  stitches  in  the
left  side  of  the  back,  so  that  she  dared  not  move  ;  the  pain
was  however  relieved  by  motion.  Violent  stitches  in  the
lower  part  of  the  right  scapula,  below  the  axilla.  Stitches
in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  shoulder,  soon  changed  to  a
sort  of  straining  pain.  Fine  stitches,  with  pressure,  in  the
lower  border  of  the  right  scapula.  Small  boils  on  the
back,  with  stitchy  pain  during  motion.  Swelling  of  the
cervical  glands,  with  tensive  pain  when  turning  the
head.  Red,  tensive  blotches  on  the  right  side  of  the
neck.

Superior  Extremities. — Pressure  on  the  shoulder.
Tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  with  pain  when  touching
the  part.  Burning  stitches  in  the  left  shoulder,  in  the
evening.  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  right  shoulder-joint,
more  during  motion  than  when  at  rest.  Throbbing  in  the
right  shoulder,  with  paralytic  pain  in  the  part.  The  arms
are  very  heavy  and  feel  as  if  they  were  full  of  lead,
when  raising  them.  Cramp  in  the  upper  arm,  when  ex-
erting the  arm.  Pulsalive,  imermitlent,  violent,  spasms
of  single  musc.es  of  the  right  upper  arm.  Drawing  in
the  left,  upper  arm.  Drawing,  tearing  in  the  right  upper
arm,  when  writing  while  sitting  ;  going  off  during  motion
and  when  stretching  the  upper  arm.  Tearings,  simulta-
neously from  the  middle  parts  of  the  upper  and  fore-arm,
towards  one  another,  (4.  d.)  Tearing  in  both  upper  arms
and  calves,  (2.  d.)  Paralytic  pain  in  the  middle  of  the
right  upper  arm,  down  to  the  elbow.  Burning  sensation
of  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  left  upper  arm,  close  to  the
elbow-joint.  Drawing  tension  in  the  elbow-joint,  fre-
quently. Dull  tearing  close  above  the  elbow  and  wrist-
joints,  more  violent  when  at  rest.  Lancinating,  tearing  in
the  right  olecranon  process.  Cutting  in  the  elbow-joint,
more  violent  when  bending  the  arm  ;  diminished  by  ex-
tending the  arm.  Cramp-like,  heavy  feeling  in  the  fore-
arm, close  to  the  wrist-joint.  Cramp-pain  in  the  fore-arm,
when  bending  the  arm.  Drawing,  tearing  in  the  posterior
muscles  of  the  left  fore-arm,  as  far  as  the  fingers.  Cutting
tearing  in  the  posterior  muscles  of  the  right  fore-arm,  re-


25(


MURIATIC  ACID.


cu  ring  w.th  a  jerk.  Cutting  in  the  right  fore-arm,  in  front
of  he  elbow-joint,  (immediately.) Contusivc  pains,  or  as
f  bruised,  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  forearm,  worst
when  at  res  . Blotches  of  the  slzc  of  Jfl  lhe

foie-arms  and  elbows with  violent  itching  and  burning.
Burning  pain,  externally,  on  the  right  fore-arm.  Cramp
in  the  palm  of  the  left  hand,  going  off  when  movins
the  hand. Drawing  pain  in  the  left hand.  Arthritic
tearing  in  the  outer  side  of  the  hand,  behind  the  knuckle
of  the  little  finger. Voluptuous  itching,  and  stinging  tick-
ling in  the  palms  of  the  hand,  obliging  one  to  scratch.
.Lrup  ion  on  the  hands,  itching  in  the  bed. Pimples  on
the  dorsa  of  the  hands  and  fingers,  forming  a  scurf,
within  24  hours. Tingling  of  the  fingers  of  the  right
hand,  as  if  they  had  gone  to  sleep. Numbness,  coldness,
and  deadness  of  both  middle-fingers,  at  night. The  two
last  fingers  of  the  left  hand  become  rigid,  at  night.  Cramp-
pain  of  the  ball  of  the  right  thumb,  when  writing,  going  off
when  moving  the  thumb. Drawing  tearing,  from  The  mid-
dle-joint of  the  left  fourth  finger  to  the  metacarpal  bone,
going  off  by  bending  the  finger,  but  returning  more  vio-
lently, when  the  finger  is  stretched  and  at  rest.  Culling
tearing  in  the  ball  of  the  left  little  finger. Pricking  pain
in  the  tip  of  the  left  index-finger,  only  when  touching  it
dwelling  and  redness  of  the  lips  of  the  fingers,  with
burning  pain.

Inferior  Extremities.— Continuous  itching  stitch  in
the  glutei  muscles  of  the  right  side,  itching  still  more  vio-
lently after  rubbing.  Culling  pinching  in  the  right  hip,
only  when  silling.  Pain  of  the  muscles  of  the  thighs!
Spasms  of  single  muscles,  alternately  in  both  thighs.  Pain-
ful spasm  of  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  when  lying  in
bed.  Cramp-like  drawing  pain  in  the  left  thigh,  from
above  downwards,  only  when  silting.  Cramp-like,  con-
tractive tearing  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  left  thigh.
Stitch-like  pressure  in  the  muscles  of  the  left  thigh,  onlv
when  silting.  Tearing  in  lhe  left  thigh,  and  the  tibia?,
when  silling.  Lancinating  tearing,  in  the  right  femur,
when  walking.  Drawing,  stitching  ache,  in  the  muscles
of  the  left  thigh,  close  to  the  groin,  when  sitting.  Violent
burning  stitches  in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,  when


ACIDUM  HYDROCIILORICUM.


257


walking  or  silting. Weakness  of  the  thighs  and  waver-
ing gait. A  good  deal  of  itching  of  the  thighs.  Round,
rough,  itching  herpetic  spots  on  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs.
The  left  knee  feels  stiff,  when  rising  from  a  seat.  Ten-
sive pain  In  the  left  knee. Twitchings  near  the  right  pa-
tella. Tearing  in  the  bend  of  the  knee  and  calf,  more  at
night  and  when  sitting  than  when  walking. Tearing  in
the  knee-joints,  when  sitting ;  the  right  knee  feels  as  if  it
were  being  torn  out. Tearing  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,
extending  as  far  as  the  hip,  when  rising  from  a  seat  ;  with
occasional  stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  knee  ;  worse  when
bending  the  knee  and  walking,  relieved  when  extending  it
or  sitting  down. Lancinating  tearing  in  the  right  knee,
when  laying  the  left  limb  across  the  right.  Burning,  stitchy
pain,  externally,  in  the  right  knee. Pain,  as  if  bruised,  of
the  right  knee,  only  when  walking  and  going  up  stairs.
Burning,  itching  of  the  knees,  knuckles  of  the  toes,  and
toes,  when  dropping  to  sleep. Swelling  of  the  knees.
Painful  tension  of  the  left  calf,  near  the  bend  of  the  knee,
when  sitting. Drawing  and  tension  in  the  tendo  Achillis,
when  walking,  the  foot  becoming  so  to  say,  paralysed  by
it,  and  hindering  walking. Aching  in  the  left  calf,  at  rest
and  in  motion. Cutting  stitches  in  the  right  calf,  when
silting. Frequent  tearing  in  both  libiae,  as  high  up  as  the
knees,  relieved  when  silting. Tearing  in  the  lower  part
of  the  right  tibia,  from  above  downwards,  when  sitting.
Slow,  long  stitches  in  the  tendo  Achillis,  partly  from  with-
out inwards,  partly  transversely  across,  disturbing  sleep  at
night,  coming  at  intervals,  and  hindering  walking.  A  good
deal  of  itching  of  the  calves. Pain  of  the  left  foot,  as  if  a
handkerchief  had  been  tied  firmly  around  it.  Cutting
cramp-pain  in  the  hollow  of  the  right  sole. Tearing  in  the
right  sole,  near  ihe  heel,  when  spinning.  Drawing  siitches
in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  when  standing,  disappear-
ing when  walking,  returning  when  silting.  Continuous
stitch,  with  pressure,  in  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot,  worst
when  at  rest. Stitches,  with  pressure,  in  the  inner  border
of  the  right  sole,  when  silling;  going  off  when  walking  or
standing. Continuous,  itching  stitch  in  the  dorsum  of  the
left  foot,  worst  when  at  rest. Pain  in  the  left  sole,  when
ascending  a  height,  as  if  he  had  wearied  the  foot  by  walk-


258


MURIATIC  ACID.


ing,  extending  from  the  sole  to  the  thigh.  Sore  pain  below
the  outer  malleolus  of  the  left  foot,  when  at  rest,  the  whole
night,  aggravated  by  contact  and  by  resting  upon  the  part.
..Burning  of  the  soles,  when  sitting,  aggravated  by  setting
the  foot  upon  the  floor.  Tickling  in  the  ball  of  the  left
heel,  going  off  by  friction.  Digging  (burrowing,)  twitcli-
ings,  in  the  ball  of  the  right  foot,  when  at  rest.  Itching  of
the  left  sole,  when  walking  and  when  at  rest.  Violent
tearings  in  the  right  big  toe,  when  spinning.  Itching  stitch
in  the  ball  of  the  right  big  toe,  when  at  rest.  Swelling  and
redness  of  the  tips  of  the  toes,  with  burning  pain.  Sore-
ness of  the  left  small  toe,  and  feeling  as  if  it  were  swollen.
Violently  throbbing  pain  in  the  three  middle  toes  of  the  left
foot,  when  at  rest.

General  Symptoms. — Stinging  itching  in  various  parts
of  the  body,  going  off  by  scratching,  in  the  evening.  Titil-
lating, prickling  itching  of  the  body,  going  off  only  for  a
short  while  by  friction.  Itching  and  smarting  of  the  back,
shoulders,  the  whole  body,  mostly  in  the  evening,  afier  ly-
ing down,  cannot,  be  removed  by  rubbing,  Stitches  in  va-
rious places  of  the  skin,  sometimes  accompanied  by  burn-
ing (on  the  right  scapula.)  A  number  of  painful  ulcers  on
the  skin,  hindering  sitting,  and  lying  down.  The  work-
men in  the  salt-manufactories,  are  affected  with  putrid
ulcers  on  the  legs  ;  they  become  dropsical  and  cachectic,
(from  inhaling  the  vapour  of  the  muriate  of  Magnesia )
Burning,  more  around  than  in  the  ulcer ;  after  a  walk,  there
is  a  sort  of  pulsative  gurgling  in  the  ulcer.  Fetid  odor  of
the  ulcers,  although  they  are  covered  with  scurf.  The  ir-
ritability of  the  muscular  fibre  which  had  been  lost  by  al-
cohol and  opium,  may  be  restored  by  oxygenated  muriatic
acid. Dartings  in  all  the  limbs.

Weakness,  Fits. — Fit  of  anguish,  at  8  o'clock  in  the
evening,  with  replete  abdomen,  as  if  it  woul  1  burst:  ihc
sweat  dripped  down  from  her  head,  her  arms  sank,  and  she
became  weak,  like  one  paralytic.  Restlessness.  Pain,  as
if  bruised,  of  all  the  joints.  Pain  of  the  periosteum  of  all
the  bones,  as  in  intermittent  fevers.  Laziness,  with  stretch-
ing, in  the  forenoon.  He  is  not.  willing  or  able  to  move;
he  wants  to  sit  all  the  time.  He  feels  languid  and  lazy,
although  he  has  not  walked  any. Vacillating  gait,  owing


a


ACIDUM  HYDROCHLORICTJM.


259


to  weakness  of  ihe  thighs.  Great  weakness  of  the  legs,
she  can  flharcely  sustain  herself,  and  frequently  falls  over.
Lassitude,  early  in  the  morning,  especially  of  the  lower
limbs.  Great  lassitude,  immediately  after  a  meal,  going
off  again  towards  evening.  Feeling  of  lassitude  in  the
whcle  body.  Great  weariness  in  the  evening,  after  a  walk.
Great,  weariness  and  drowsiness,  with  dim-sightedness  ;
she  fell  asleep  while  sitting  at  the  table.  Weary  when
walking  or  standing  ;  he  fell  asleep  while  sitting  down.
When  sitting  down,  her  eyes  closed  immediately,  as  from
weariness  ;  she  became  wide  awake  immediately  after  ris-
ing. Drowsy,  in  the  afternoon,  (4.  d.)  While  at  his  work,
his  eyes  close,  from  sleep.  Sleeplessness  before  mid-
night. Sleeplessness  after  midnight.  He  has  difficulty
in  falling  asleep  ;  his  sleep  is  light,  and  nevertheless,  he
has  some  trouble  in  rousing  himself  entirely,  (a.  3  h.)
Sleeplessness  at  night,  owing  to  great  agitation  of  the
blood  and  heat,  with  sweat.  Restless  nights.  She  is  pre-
vented from  sleeping  by  headache  in  the  vertex  and  left
temple.  Violent  cough  at  3  o'clock  at  night,  with  nausea
and  vomiting  of  bile.  Empty  eructations  and  colic  at
night.  Nausea  and  eructations,  in  two  nights,  when  wak-
ing up.  He  snores  violently  before  midnight,  and  tosses
about,  but  is  afterwards  rous3d  easily.  At  night,  when
waking,  he  always  lies  on  his  back.  She  tosses  about  be-
fore midnight,  and  frequently  talks  aloud  while  asleep,  but
with  a  bright  tone  of  voice,  still  she  frequently  moans  at
the  same  time.  He  glides  down  in  his  bed,  and  moans
and  groans  while  asleep.  Feeling  of  weakness,  at  night,
when  in  bed,  and  difficulty  of  uniting  one  idea  with  an-
other. She  wakes  up  every  15  minutes,  owing  to  pain
which  she  feels  now  in  one,  now  in  another  part,  (4.  d.)
Frequent  waking,  at  night.  Frequent  waking,  with  toss-
ing about.  He  wakes  up  every  morning  at  4  o'clock,  and
is  then  unable  to  fall  asleep  again.  He  is  wide  awake  be-
fore midnight,  and  is  unable  to  fall  asleep  again,  (4.  d.)
Qualmishness  and  distension  of  the  abdomen,  early  in  the
morning  when  in  bed,  relieved  by  emission  of  flatulence,
after  rising.  Restless,  frequently  disturbed  sleep,  with
vivid,  anxious  dreams,  and  profuse  sweat  over  and  over
while  asleep,  except  the  head.  Starting  after  falling  asleep,


260 MURIATIC  ACID.  ACIDUM  HYDROCHLORICUM.

owing  to  restlessness  in  the  body,  and  especially  the  lower
limbs.  Dreams,  exciting  anxiety,  grief,  or  joy..  Anxious
dreams.  Frightful,  vivid  dreams.  Uneasy  dreams,  full  of
care  and  fear,  with  erection  without,  emission.  She  is  as-
sailed with  fancies  when  asleep,  as  soon  as  she  has  slept  a
little.  Voluptuous  dreams,  (the  first  3  d.)  Dream  of  her
mother's  death,  (4.  n.)  Dreams  about  vermin,  exciting
shame. Agreeable  dreams  about  her  home.

Fever.— He  cannot  get  warm  at  night,  when  in  bed  ;  he
tosses  about.  He  felt  so  chilly  that  he  woke  up  before
midnight ;  he  was  unable  to  get  warm  ;  he  felt  chilly  in
those  parts  upon  which  he  was  resting ;  afterwards  he
felt  very  warm  and  perspired.  Chilliness  early  in  the
morning  and  afler  rising,  the  whole  forenoon.  Coldness
which  may  be  felt  when  touching  him,  the  whole  day-
Chilliness  with  thirst,  (4.  d.)  Chilliness  with  thirst,
without  any  subsequent  heat.  Chilliness  with  gooseskin,
without  shaking  or  thirst.  Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  with
thirst ;  sweat  afler  lying  down ;  she  is  obliged  to  drink
at  night,  (8.  d.)  Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  with  icy  cold-
ness in  the  back.  Chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  in  the
evening,  with  external  warmth  for  I  hour;  no  subsequent
heat.  Chilliness  in  the  evening,  with  burning  counte-
nance and  dry  mouth.  He  feels  chilly,  unless  the  room
is  very  warm.  Feverish  shuddering  over  the  whole  body,
with  shaking  chills,  yawning  and  stretching  of  the  limbs,
but  without  thirst  or  subsequent  heat.  Feverish  thrill
over  the  whole  body,  (with  some  fluent  coryza)  with
yawnine,  blue  nails,  cold,  dead  tips  of  fingers,  slow  pulse,
without  thirst  or  subsequent  heat.  Burning  heat  of  the
whole  head  and  hands,  cold  feet,  no  thirst,  after  he  had
just  sat  down  for  a  nap,  having  felt  very  drowsy  all  day-
Feeling  0f  heat,  and  heat,  of  the  body,  especially  the  palms
of  the  hands  and  soles  of  the  feet,  without  redness  of  the
face,  no  sweat  or  thirst,  no  dry  mouth,  with  some  inclina-
tion to  uncover  himself.  Anxiety  and  restlessness  in  the
upper  limbs,  apparently  in  the  blood-vessels,  with  cheerful
mood  ;  her  arms  felt  heavy,  she  had  to  move  them  con-
tinually ;  uneasiness  in  the  whole  body,  except  the  feet;
heat,  which  obliged  him  to  uncover  himself,  but  no  thirst.
Every  third  pulsation  is  missing. Violent  sweat  about


NATItTJM  CAKBONICTJM.


261


the  head  and  back,  every  second  or  fourth  evening  for  I
hour.  Sweat,  in  llie  evening,  when  falling  asleep,  and
not  afterwards.  Sweat  before  midnight,  with  dry  cough.
Sweat  before  midnight,  with  dreams  "full  of  contraricly;
afterwards  sound  sleep  until  morning,  without  sweat.
After  lying  in  bed  one  or  1  wo  hours  in  the  evening,  the
feet  became  covered  with  a  cold  sweat,  then  they  became
warm.  )\ight-sweat.  Slight  morning  sweat  over  the
whole  body.


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

Dissolve  the  natrnm  of  the  shops  in  two  parts  of  its
own  weight  of  distilled,  boiling-hot  water,  fdter  the  solu-
tion through  blotting  paper  and  cause  it  to  crystallise  in  a
cellar.  One  grain  of  the  crystals  is  taken  previous  to
their  spontaneous  reduction  to  powder,  for  the  purpose  of
forming  the  potencies  by  the  process  of  trituration.

This  drug  is  especially  indicated  when  the  following
symptoms  occur:  —

Sadness,  low  spirits  ;  hypochondriac  mood  ;  dread  of
men  and  company  ;  anxiousness  ;  anxious  palpitation  of
the  heart ;  anguish,  trembling  and  sweat  during  the  pain  ;
tendency  to  start  ;  discouragement ;  indignation  ;  unkind
feelings  ;  difficult  comprehension  of  what  one  hears  and
reads,  difficult  combination  of  ideas  ;  weariness  from  in-
tellectual labor;  gloominess  of  the  head  ;  vertigo;  head-
ache from  being  in  the  sun  ;  headache,  stitches  in  the
eyes  from  within  outwards ;  tearing,  in  the  outer  parts  of
the  head,  at  certain  hours ;  inflammation  of  the  eyelids,
with  photophobia ;  sensation  as  of  little  feathers  hovering
before  the  eyes;  hardness  of  hearing;  sensitiveness  to
noise  ;  heat  in  the  face  ;  yellow  spots  on  the  forehead  and
upper  lip  ;  freckles  in  the  face  ;  swelling  of  the  upper
lip  ;  toothache,  especially  when  eating  ;  bitter  taste  in  the
mouth  ;  taste  in  the  mouth  as  one  has  in  the  morning
when  waking  up;  thirst;  craving  hunger  from  a  feeling
of  emptiness  causing  nausea  ;  ailments  from  cold  drinking,
for  instance,  stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium  ;  continual


262


NATItUM  CARDONICUM.


weakness  of  the  organs  of  digestion,  with  discouragement
and  uncomfortableriess  resulting  even  from  slight  dietetic
transgressions  ;  nausea  ;  continual  qualmishness  ;  pressure
of  the  stomach  after  a  meal  ;  pain  in  the  stomach,  drawing
with  pressure,  or  finely  cutting  ;  contractive  spasm  of  the
stomach  ;  painfulness  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach  #hen
touching  it ;  accumulation  of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen  ;
distension  of  the  abdomen  ;  painful  moving  about  of  flatu-
lence in.  the  abdomen ;  incarceration  of  flatulence  ;
stitches  and  digging  (burrowing)  in  the  abdomen  ;  insuf-
ficient stool  ;  pressure  upon  the  bladder  ;  burning  in  the
urethra  after  micturition  ;  pressing  towards  the  genital
organs  as  if  every  thing  would  fall  out ;  bad  shape  of  the
os  lincae  ;  painful  menstruation  ;  metrorrhagia  ;  appears  to
promote  the  facility  of  conception  ;  discharge  of  mucus
from  the  vagina,  after  an  embrace ;  putrid  leucorrhoea.

Obstruction  of  the  nose  ;  coryza  every  other  day  ;
coryza,  when  exposed  to  a  slight  draft  of  air,  going  off
after  sweat ;  continual  coryza  and  cough  ;  cough  ;  shortness
of  breath  ;  asthma  and  short  breathing ;  difficulty  of
breathing ;  cough  with  discharge  of  saltish  pus  ;  stitches,
with  pressure,  in  the  chest ;  continual  chdliness  in  the
left  side  ;  sore  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  ;  stiffness  of
the  nape  of  the  neck  ;  aching  of  the  shoulders  ;  culling
pain  in  hands  and  feet ;  elevated  spots  on  the  lower  limbs  ;
cramp  in  the  calves  ;  the  tarsal  joint  is  easily  strained  or
sprained  ;  aching  pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot»;  stitches
in  the  soles  of  the  feet  when  setting  down  the  foot ;  swell-
ing of  the  feet ;  cold  feet ;  chronic  ulcers  on  the  heels,
from  blisters ;  itch  on  the  abdomen ;  erysipelatous
blotches ;  yellow  rings  from  herpetic  spots ;  tingling
prickings  in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs,  below  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  etc.,  parts  are  easily  strained  or  sprained ;
dread  of  the  open  air  ;  liability  to  catch  cold ;  dry  skin  ;
warts  ;  herpes  ;  stitches,  cutting  and  burning  in  wounded
places  ;  unsteadiness  of  the  body  and  mind  ;  laxity  of  the
whole  body  ;  faintness,  even  unto  falling,  after  a  slight
walk  ;  chronic  weakness  ;  drowsiness  in  day-time  ;  falling
asleep  late  in  the  evening  ;  waking  up  too  early  ;  dreams
over  night ;  cold  hands  and  feet ;  profuse  sweat  after  the


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


263


slightest  work  ;  continual,  cold  sweat  from  anguish  ;  night-
sweat.,  alternating  with  dryness  of  the  skin.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  myself  and  Drs.  Lang-
harnmer,  Schreter,  Hcring,  Gross,  Ng.

From  Noack  and  Trinks  :  Natrnm  may  be  employed
in  the  following  diseases  :  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  affec-
tions, with  contraction  of  tendons,  and  especially  tearing
pains  in  all  the  joints,  and  drawing  and  lancinating  pains
in  all  the  muscles. — Scrofulous  conditions. — Weakness
from  loss  of  humor. — Tabes  dorsah's  ? — Hypochondria?
Contraction  of  tendons  1— Herpes  circinalus  / — Chronic
ophthalmia. — Ophthalmia  scrophulosa,  with  small  ulcers
around  the  cornea,  and  photophobia.— Chronic  inflamma-
tion of  the  lids,  with  profuse  secretion  of  tears  and  mucus.
— Fistula  lacbrymalis? — Blephamphihalmia. —  Blepharo-
plegia  ?— Myopia.— Presbyopia.— Photopsia.— Amblyopia.

Moucl  ies  volantcs. — Amaurosis. — Gastrodynia.  Cardial-

gia.— Chronic  gastritis.— Chronic  affections  of  the  liver
and  spleen.— Spasmodic  contractions  of  the  unimpreg-
nated  uterus. — Enlargement  of  the  lips  of  the  os  tineas. —

Metrorrhagia?— Phthisis  iaryngea  and  trachealis,  in  the
first  stage.

Antidotes.— Arsen.  ?  Camph.  ?  Spiritus  nit.  dul.  ?

Moral  Symptoms.— Sad.  desponding,  (29.  d.)  Suffer-
ing in  mind,  (a.  6  d.)  Dread  of  men  and  shyness,  (29.  d.)
His  mind  is  filled  with  nothing  but  sad  thoughts,  (2.  d.)
Sad,  tremulous,  inclines  to  weep,  with  constant  moaning
and  physical  depression.  Ennui,  she  feels  lonesome.
Great  feat-fulness,  (a.  21  d.)  His  fancy  is  occupied  with
tlie  iulure  ;  he  feels  an  anxiety  ;  he  imagines  how  un-
lortunale  he  might  be,  he  seeks  solitude  for  several  days.
During  a  lempest  he  feels  less  anxiety  than  otherwise,
(curative  effect.)  Anguish,  with  tremor  through  the
whole  body.  Anxious  and  restless,  he  imagines  he  cannot
do  any  thing -correctly.  He  is  solicitous  about  himself.
Anxious,  in  the  evening,  after  bathing  his  feet  for  3  or  4
rn.nutes  ;  ,t  took  her  an  hour  and  a  half  to  fall  asleep,
l  its  o(  anguish  everyday,  with  sweat  in  the  face  several

Anxietv  th  q,1a,'ter  °f  an  hour'  wi,Ilout  Pain«

nnffl .  uneasmess>  «l»e  "'hole  day,  he  was

unable  to  keep  his  hmbs  quiet,  especially  the  upper  ;  he


264


NATItUM  CARBONICUM.


had  to  stretch  them,  he  felt  as  if  they  were  extended  by
force. Restlessness,  (a.  3  d.) Great  restlessness  in  the
evening,  while  reading,  or  performing  olher  intellectual
labors.°  Restless  the  whole  day  ;  undertaking  now  this
thing,  now  that,  without  ending  any  thing. Internal  rest-
lessness. Restlessness  of  the  whole  body,  and  ill  humor,
(a.  3  d.) Restless;  he  knew  not  what  he  wanted,  or
what  he  should  do  or  not  do. Early  in  the  morning  when,
waking  up,  he  feels  as  if  he  had  no  will. Passive,  phleg-
malic  mood. Ennui ;  taciturn,  he  has  no  clear  perception
of  what  he  feels,  early  in  the  morning. Not  disposed  to
work  ;  still  he  works  well,  when  once  beginning.  Not
disposed  to  talk,  (a.  6  d.) Not  disposed  to  do  any  thing  ;
he  found  it  difficult  to  abide  by  any  thing.  Indifferent,
(a.  10  d.) Weary  of  life,  early  in  the  morning,  when
waking  up,  (18.  d.) She  is  worn  out  from  playing  on  the
piano  for  a  short  while,  with  painful,  oppressive  anguish  of
the  chest,  trembling  and  weariness  of  the  whole  body,  so
that  she  was  obliged  to  lie  down  for  a  long  time,  to  get
rested,  (a.  12  cl.) She  is  deeply  impressed  by  every
event;  it  produces  a  kind  of  oscillating  tremor  of  the
nerves,  with  faintness. Great  tendency  to  start.  He
starts  at  the  least  noise. Want  of  cheerfulness.  De-
pressed, desponding  mood. Discouraged,  dissatisfied  and
almost,  inconsolable. Out  of  humor,  but  disposed  to  work.
Out  of  humor,  almost  constantly,  until  the  30th  day.  Ill
humored  and  apprehensive. Out  of  humor  and  peevish,
(5  d.) Out  of  humor,  (a.  24  h.) Irritable. She  gets
out  of  humor  about  trifles. Dissatisfied  with  every  body,
he  preferred  not.  living  at  all,  he  felt  as  though  he  could
beat  himself;  desponding  in  regard  to  the  future.  In-
clines to  be  angry. Cheerful,  but  inclining  to  be  angry.
Irritable  in  the  forenoon,  as  after  vexation,  (a.  2  d.)  Dis-
posed to  be  angry,  and  fight,  (1 1.  d.) He  feels  so  irri-
tated by  a  little  cause,  that  he  talks  most  vehemently  until
he  sets  tired. Cheerful  and  sad  mood  in  alternation.
Cheerful  and  sociable. Inclines  to  warble  a  song  to  him-
self  (a 24  h ) Extremely  animated  and  talkative  me
whole  day. Resolute,  courageous. Entire  want  of  atten-
tion. Absence  of  mind,  early  in  the  morning,  (a. .15  d.)
He  easily  makes  mistakes  in  writing,  (a.  14  d.)  *orget-


NATIiUM  CAItBONICUSI.


265


ful,  he  has  to  think  of  a  tiling  for  a  long  while  before
recollecting  it.  He  is  awkward  even  in  doing  the  most
trifling  things.  Weak  mind.  He  was  deficient  in  com-
prehension. Inability  to  think  intently  and  continually,
with  vertigo.  Dull  mind,  he  stares  as  if  he  had  been
stunned  by  a  blow.  He  is  frequently  unable  to  collect  his
senses.

Head. — Obtusion  of  .the  head,  heaviness,  giddiness,
when  working  in  the  sun. Dulness  of  the  head,  as  if  he
had  slept  too  long. Gloominess  and  pain  of  the  head,
not  permitting  any  mental  labor. Obtusion  of  the  occiput,
like  a  dull  pressure,  in  the  forenoon,  (a.  18  d.)  Stupefac-
tion, early  in  the morning,  when  waking, going  off
gradually. He  is  almost  unconscious  of  the  things  around
him,  and  has  a  wavering  gait. Vertigo,  after  intellectual
labor,  with  a  dull  sense  as  of  pressing  into  the  temples.
Frequent  vertigo  through  the  day,  as  If  the  inside  of  the
head  were  turning,  also  when  lying  down. Vertigo,  when
turning  the  head. Vertigo,  when  walking,  almost  con-
stantly ;  she  has  a  wavering  gait. Violent  vertigo,  like
a  swoon,  after  drinking  a  spoonful  of  wine.  Vertigo,
when  walking  about  in  the  room,  as  if  one  would  like°to
tall  down  ;  afterwards  great  weakness  in  hands  and  feet.
Vertigo,  she  threatens  to  fall  over  to  the  left  side.  Con-
tinual headache,  a  sense  as  of  reling  in  the  head,  with
painful  gloomy  feeling,  with  subsequent  heat  in  the  head-
relieved  by  exercise  in  the  open  air ;  worse  when  at  rest
and  when  sitting;  two  days  in  succession,  (a.  10  d)
mil  headache  after  dinner,  a  sort  of  dreariness  and  draw-
ing Dull  headache,  a  sort  of  stupefying  pressure  in  the
forehead  in  any  position  of  the  body. Headache,  in  the
Jorehead; xohen  turning  the  head  rapidly. Headache  at
noon  mostly  in  the  lower  part  of  the  occiput. Dull  ,  ain
in  the  occiput. Pain  from  the  occiput  to  the  vertex.
Heaviness  of  the  head,  with  burning  of  the  eyes,  al  ,  ost
every  day  after  d.nner. Heaviness  of  the  head,  at  nicrht
when  vvak.ng  up  with  dull,  painful  pressure  and  insfpid

hZ  A  A  mThr V°rt  °f  aPPrehensiveness  in  the
neaa,  [j.  a.) Reeling  of  painful  emptiness  in  the  occinut

forehead,  early  ,n  the  morning,  when  rising.  Pressure

12


266  NATRUM  CARBONICTJM.

and  feeling  of  heat  in  the  vertex  and  forehead.  Aching
in  the  right  temple,  the  pressure  being  from  within  out-
wards. Dull  pressure  from  the  occiput  to  the  nape  of  the
neck,  with  drawing  pain  extending  as  far  as  the  forehead,
with  eructation,  vertigo,  nausea,  and  dimness  of  sight.
Continual  pressure  in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput.  Ten-
sive pain  in  the  right  frontal  cavity. Tension  and  drawing
in  the  right  side  of  the  occiput,  as  if  the  head  would  be
drawn  backwards. Con.ractive  pain  in  the  head.  Fain
as  if  the  forehead  would  burst  open,  especially  after  exer-
cise  with  feeling  of  obstruction  in  the  head,  for  many
days  from  morning  till  evening. Tearing  in  the  whole
head,  the  whole  afternoon,  (13.  d.) Violent  tearing  in  the
right  temple  and  side  of  the  forehead,  going  off  for  a  short
while  by  pressing  upon  it,  (during  the  menses.)  Violent,
spasmodic  tearing  in  the  forehead,  extending  into  the  eyes
and  tip  of  the  nose. Tearing  and  stitches  from  the  left
frontal  eminence  to  behind  the  ear. Stitches  in  various
carts  of  the  head,  at  different  times,  sometimes  accompa-
nied with  burning,  also  in  the  evening,  sometimes  with  a
feelin*  of  heat  about  the  forehead. Fine  stitches  in  the
eft  side  of  the  head,  (6.  d.) Stitch with  pressure,
through  Ihe  head,  when  exerting  the  body. Single  very
rSnful  darlings  through  the  head. Throbbing  headache
e  upper  pit  of  the  head,  every  day,  especial  y  in  the
mornini Throbbing  and  tearing  in  the  left  side  of  the
head,  during  the  menses. Painful  throbbing  m  the  upper
fan  of  the  head,  apparently  in  the  bone.  Throbbmgs,
So  ng  and  coming,  through  the  forehead,  from  within  out-
ward, close  over  the  margin  of  the  orb* Throbbing  m
The  vertex,  very  painful  when  pressed  upon,  after  dinner
Con« Son  of  bfood  to  the  head. Violent  congestion  of
blood  tc^  the  head,  when  stooping,  as  if  all  the  contents  of
the  head  would  issue  from  the  forehead,  with  throbbing  in
the  head,  when  raising  or  carrying  something,  going  off
when  ra  sing  the  head,  (13.  and  14.  d. Violent  conges-
tion of  bood  to  the  head,  with  heat  in  the  head,  when  sit-
t Z  in  a  room,  especially  in  the  evening ;  for  several  days,
g v^t  on  the  20th  day  ;  he  does  not  feel  this  symptom
rieC i  ^r  and  whe^'in  bed. Warm  feeling  in  the
foreheadf  with  tension. Feeling  of  warmth  in  the  head


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  267

and  eyes,  without  any  external  heat  in  the  face,  with  thirst  ■
also  at  night.  Heat  in  the  head,  with  feeling  of  heavi!
ness,  and  redness  of  countenance,  worst  after  noon.
Roaring  of  the  blood  in  the  head,  (3.  d.)  Pain,  in  the
lower  part  of  the  occiput,  externally.  Transitory,  exter-
nal headache,  in  different  places,  sides  of  the  head,  in  the

SSrfSfc  S*  4f  h*l  °-  tW°  °CCipital  Prol"berances  are
painful  to  the  touck  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  inside  and  out-
side of  the  head.  Tension  about  the  occiput.  The  seal n
moves  from  behind  forwards  and  back  gain  ReS
pimple  on  the  forehead,  sore,  burning,  with  puf  n  the  tfp
Tumor  tn  the  occiput,  rather  towards  the*  nape  of  he
neck,  lasting  a  long  while. An  almost  painlesstamor  on

eat  **•  0^

,  >E™S—Pil\n 'he  eyes,  early  in  the  morning  fa  17

tL  CZ  "?  b°,"eS  °  lhe  °rbit-  The  «'°bes='ar(e  sen!
Ta  a  £  t°Uch'  w,Ul  ^nsation  as  if  thev  were  dis-
tended. Heaviness  of  the  upper  eye-lids,  CI  and  I  7)

thus,  and  sensation  as  of  a  hair  beino-  Ttlj!  lnner_can-

weeping Jtchino-  nf  <£7  }?■  Pyes'  as  after  much

removed  by  moistenfng  the  eye  wi  h" salt a^Tnfl"6  t0  ?*>
of  the  eyes,  with  stitchy  pain  VioW  infl  nflammatlonr
the  inner  canlhus  and  nn™ll  inf]ammation  of

sack,  theswelh^  °f  thelacW™l

of  the  upper  riaht  lir I  7 ,  inflammatory  swelling

with  pressure  ^  0f  1'le  conjunctival

the  c U  (a  10thdV^4T^

ains^n  ^TO*  A  ^  Mlfefc
fight. The  rioC  1 r  , i?Uard  aSainst  every  rav  of

aay. i  endency  of  the  eyes  to  become


268  NATIUJM  CARBONICUM.

agglutinated,  in  the  afternoon,  (11.  d.) Agglutination  of
the  eves,  early  in  the  morning,  with  subsequent  lachryma-
tion,  the  whole  forenoon. Lachrymation. Dryness,  feel-
in  *  of  heat  and  contractive  sensation  in  the  eyes,  (a.  2  a.)
He  has  difficulty  in  opening  the  eye-lids  ;  they  close  in-
voluntarily. Frequent  closing  of  the  eye-lids,  a  sort  ot
involuntary  winking,  with  a  burning  sensation  in  the  eyes,
especially  in  the  afternoon. Constant  closing  of  the  eye-
lids, followed  by  drowsiness,  even  while  walking.  Con-
traction of  the  pupils,  (a.  3  h.)  Dim  eyes,  (a-  48  h.)  Dim
eyes,  he  has  to  wipe  them  constantly. Dim  eyes,  when
doing  fine  work,  all  things  look  blurred,  stil  she  « .  able
to  read  easily. She  feels  as  if  something  obstructed  the
passage  of  her  visual  ray. Dim  sight ;  her  sight  vanishes
S ,en  beginning  to  read. Distant  things  look  dim,  even
To  a  person  with  long  sight. He  is  unable  to  clearly  di  -
inguish  persons  at  a  distance  of  20  steps,  or  a  fiffure  at
a  few  steps'  distance. Black  points  hover  before  h  s
eyes,  when  writing. Sensation  before  the  eyes  as  of  the
falling  of  rain. Scint.llations  before  the  eyes (1 1.  d.)

^Jtir&&  r  dr^t12^

drawing  pain  in  the  arliculalion  of  ihe  right  jaw,  extending
^Toutl,  and  the  right  side  of  the  to,lgae  the  tongu
feelin°-  painful  when  pushed  against  the  teeth,  in  me
erenina,  when  walking  in  a  eool  wind. Pinohing  and
Sons  in  the  righf  ear,  early  in  the  morning .  Fine

he  mouth,  returning  when  closing  it  (10.  d  )  Smches
L  tbp  left  concha  from  without  inwards,  (p.  d.)  itcning
sti  gb  '  n X  left  lobule,  going  off  by  fncUon  and ^res
!  rf  Tickling  in  the  left  meatus  auditorius  externus,
lv  in  ihe  morain*.  Pricking  pain  in  the  parotid  gland,
early  in  the  mornin  5Feelin«-  of  obstruction  in

which  is  painful  to  the  touch seei  ng

the  right  ear,  ^^f^^^  as  0  §th T  distant
ears  when  turning  the  head.  «ot

I10iSe  IS  noi  e1Sab6a  s  when  raSg  the  body  ;
S^^'hfhTfii  sitting  for  awhile  and  goes


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


269


off  when  lying  down  ;  after  having  laid  down  for  some
time,  it  reappears ;  accompanied  with  some  otalgia,  (23.
d.)  Whizzing  around  the  head  and  beating  in  the  left
ear.  Considerable  roaring  of  the  ears,  (a.  22  d.)  In-
creased humming  in  the  ears,  (a.  4  d.)

Nose. — Sensation  in  the  left  nasal  fossa  as  if  a  hard
body  were  lodged  in  the  upper  part ;  it  does  not  go  off
by  blowing  the  nose.  Drawing  pain  in  the  right  outer
side  of  the  nose,  going  off  by  rubbing.  Peeling  off  of
the  back  and  the  tip  of  the  nose ;  it  is  painful  when
touched,  (9.  d.)  Red  nose  with  white  pimples  on  it.
Pimple  on  the  left  side  of  the  nose.  Vesicle  near  the
right  wing  of  the  nose,  with  burning  pain  when  touched.
Pustule  with  red  areola,  on  the  left  wing  of  the  nose.
Painless  blotch  on  the  right  side  of  the  nose,  increasing
daily.  Ulcerated  nostrils,  inside,  high  up.  Blood  is
blown  out  of  the  nose,  early  in  the  morning.  Bleeding  at
the  nose,  (a.  12  d.) Increased  smell,  (secondary  effect?)

Face. — Aching  of  the  facial  bones,  increased  by  walk-
ing in  the  open  air. Aching  in  both  malar  bones.  Violent
drawing  in  the  left  malar  bone. Tearing  in  the  zygomata,
sometimes  very  violent  in  the  right ;  in  the  left  it  is  some-
times accompanied  with  lancinating  pains  extending  into
the  forehead,  sometimes  going  off  by  friction.  Tearing
and  stitches  behind  the  right  ear. Painful  pricking  in
the  upper  part  of  the  left  cheek. Stitch  behind  °the
right  lobule,  going  off  whenever  pressing  upon  the  part,
but  returning  immediately. Burning  heat  and  redness  of
the  face,  at  different  periods. Alternate  redness  and  pale-
ness of  the  face,  (7.  d.) Pale  complexion. Pale  com-
plexion, blue  margins  around  the  eyes,  swollen  eye-lids,
(a.  24  h.) Yellow  countenance. Bloated  face.  Swelling
of  both  cheeks,  with  glowing  redness. Swelling  of  the
face  below  the  left  eye,  with  burning  of  the  eyes,°early  in
the  morning,  when  rising,  (4.  5.  6.  d.) Itching  of  the
region  of  the  whiskers. Itching  of  the  face  going  off  by
rubbing. Burning  itching  of  the  lower  jaw,  going  off  by
much  rubbing. White  spots  on  the  right  cheek  and  side
of  the  neck,  without  sensation,  early  in  the  morning,  (6.  d.)
Pimples  in  the  face,  near  the  ear,  with  pricking  pain  when
touching  them,  like  boils. Eruption  near  the  nose  and


270


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


mouth.  Itching,  humid  eruption  near  the  nose  and  mouth,
(a.  10  d.)  Boil  behind  the  ear.  Boil  over  the  chin.
Burning  vesicle  on  the  chin. Pimples  on  the  lips.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Pimples  on  the  vermilion  border
of  the  lower  lip,  with  smarting  and  soreness  of  the  corners
of  the  mouth. Pimple  on  the  lower  lip. Eruption  in
the  right  corner  of  the  mouth,  (a.  20  d.) Whitish  blister
of  the  size  of  a  pea,  on  the  vermilion  border  of  the  upper
lip,  with  burning  soreness,  afterwards  with  a  crust  upon
it. Vesicles  in  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  also  suppurating.
Pustules  around  the  mouth. Two  small  herpes  around
the  mouth. Boil  on  the  upper  lip. Burning  rhagades  in
the  lower  lip. Dartings  in  the  upper  lip,  (a.  18  d.)  Fre-
quent and  slight  twilchings  in  the  upper  lip,  (a.  6  d.)
Burning  of  ihe  upper  lip  and  right  corner  of  the  mouth,  at
a  small  place,  as  if  a  vesicle  existed  there. Fine,  titillating
itching  of  the  upper  lip,  and  a  fine  stitch  when  touching
it,  in  the  evening. Small,  red,  itching  vesicles,  full  of
water,  on  the  chin,  (6.  d.) Frequent  tearing  in  the  left
lower  jaw,  (4.  d.) Rheumatic  pain  in  the  jaws.  Throb-
bing in  the  right  lower  jaw,  from  the  middle  till  the  front
of  The  knee,  after  breakfast,  (1.  d.) Pain,  as  if  bruised,
in  the  angle  of  the  left  lower  jaw,  after  dinner  ;  going  off
by  pressing  upon  the  part. Ulcerative  pain,  with  throb-
bing, in  the  left  articulation  of  the  jaw,  going  off  by  press-
ing upon  it. Twitchings  in  the  left  lower  jaw.  Siuell-
ing  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands. Toothache,  with  swell-
ing of  the  gums,  and  violent  fever,  for  three  days,  (a.  2  d  )
Extreme  sensitiveness  of  the  lower  teeth,  for  two  days.
The  teeth  are  sensitive,  as  if  from  a  scorbutic  affection,
(a.  3  d.) Toothache  (tearing?)  the  whole  night,  after-
wards swelling  of  the  lower  lip  and  cessation  of  the  pain,
(a.  14  h.) Dull  drawing  aching  pains  in  a  hollow  tooth,
after  catching  cold. Dull  pressure  and  boring  in  a  hollow
tooth.' Drawing  boring  in  hollow  teeth. Jerkings  in  the
teeth,  when  eating. Frequent  dartings  in  the  right  lower
teeth,  also  in  the  evening  and  after  dinner. Teanngs  in
the  teeth,  at  different  periods. Tearing  toothache,  only  at
night,  from  9  o'clock  in  the  evening. Toothache,  day
and  night,  as  if  the  teeth  were  being  lifted  out  of  their
sockets  ;  relieved  bv  warmth  ;  with  bleeding  of  the  gums,


NATRUM  CARBONICTJM.


271


coldness  of  the  body,  the  whole  day  and  thirst ;  for  two
weeks. Dull  stitches  in  a  hollow  tooth,  after  dinner,
going  off  by  smoking,  returning  after  eating  a  pear.  Sud-
den stitch  in  a  hollow  tooth,  (a.  23  d.) Digging  (grinding)
toothache,  during  an  evening  walk  ;  after  supper  it  became
pulsative  and  did  not  cease  till  one  fell  asleep.  Fine,
short  boring  in  the  anterior  molar  teeth  of  the  left  lower
row. Violent  digging  and  boring  in  a  hollow  tooth,  in-
creased by  touching  the  tooth  with  the  tongue,  it  rouses
him  from  sleep  early  in  the  morning,  and  returns  again  in
the  day  after  a  breakfast,  with  honey  and  sweet  things  at
dinner,  until  evening,  (26.  d.) Digging  toothache,  imme-
diately after  breakfast,  with  swelling  of  the  right  cheek  ;
the  pains  became  much  more  violent  when  touching  the
cheek,  (28.  d.) Digging  and  boring  in  a  hollow  tooth,  in
the  evening,  until  one  falls  asleep,  (12.  d.) Cold  creeping
through  the  upper  molares. Sensation  in  the  hollow  teeth
a?  il  cold  air  were  rushing  out,  after  dinner. Looseness  of
the  teeih. Looseness  of  a  left  molar  tooth.  The  inner  side
of  the  left  gums  feels  rough  when  touching  it  with  the
tongue. Ulcerative  pain  of  the  lower  gums  of  the  left  side.
Loose  ^ums,  (a.  23  d.) Bleeding  gums,  (a.  some  h.)

Moith.  Large  blister  on  the  inner  side  of  the  left
cheek,  emitting  water  when  pressing  upon  it.  Several
flat  ulcerated  places  in  the  mouth,  burning  and  painful
when  touched.  Pustule  near  the  foenum.  Pimple  under
the  tongue,  painful  when  touched.  Painful  soreness  of
the  inner  side  of  the  cheek  when  chewing.  Dry  mouth
and  tongue.  Constant  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  lips,  as
if  caused  by  hot  breath,  (a.  7  d.)  Much  watery  saliva
in  the  mouth,  sometimes  sour.  Saltish  saliva,  with
smarting  at  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (a.  5  d.)  Viscid  saliva,
tor  many  days.  Smarting,  as  from  salt  water,  on  the  tip
ot  the  tongue.  Small  pimples  on  the  left  side  of  the
tongue,  with  pricking  pain.  Sore  pain  of  the  tip  of  the
ongue,  when  touching  it  with  the  teeth.  Burning  about
trie  tip  ot  the  tongue,  as  if  it  were  cracked.  Tensive
vesicle  on  the  right  border  of  the  tongue.  Pimples  on
the  tip  of  the  tongue,  (in  a  few  hours.)  Pale  \ongue.
Heavy  tongue.  Lisping  for  several  days.  When  talking
she  feels  a  good  deal  of  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and


272  NAT/HUM  CARBONICUM.

she  had  a  foamy  saliva. When  yawning,  she  feels  a  pain
in  the  left  side  of  the  neck,  (2.  d.)

Pharynx  and  (EsoniACUS. — Pressing  sore  throat,  af-
ter stooping  ;  difficult  deglutition  owing  to  the  soreness  ;  a
few  days  after,  sensation  as  if  something  were  lodged  in
the  throat. Pressure  in  the  oesophagus.  Sensation,  when
running  fast,  as  if  something  were  rising  into  the  throat.
"When"  wallowing,  the  morsel  only  goes  down  by  press-
ing. Stitches  in  the  throat,  with  much  spitting.  Stitches
in  the  throat,  during  and  between  the  acts  of  deglutition,
also  in  the  evening,  when  yawning.  Tickling  in  the  throat,
with  stitches,  afternoon  and  evening. Rough,  dry,  scrap-
ing and  acrid  sensation  in  the  throat,  at  different  periods.
Rough,  raw  throat,  especially  in  the  evening ;  sometimes
relieved  by  eating. Scraping  and  rawness  of  the  pharynx,
between  and  during  the  acts  of  deglutition,  perceptible
even  as  far  as  the  brain. Scraping  and  dry  feeling  m  ihe
fauces,  near  the  posterior  meatus  of  the  nose,  especially  in
the  open  air. Dry  throat,  with  much  clearing,  without
throwing  off  any  mucus.  Redness  of  the  throat,  with  violent,
dull  stitches,  only  during  deglutition,  early  in  the  morning,
after  waking. Inflammation  of  the  throat,  with  swelling  01
the  right  tonsil,  and  stitches  and  strangling  on  the  left  side
of  the  throat  as  if  from  a  swelling,  day  and  night,  (1 1  d.)
A  clot  of  mucus  is  lodged  in  the  throat,  causes  a  scraping
sensation,  but  cannot  be  hawked  up. Frequent  hawking
up  of  thick  mucus,  continually  reproduced. Mucus  in  the
throat,  at  night,  waking  him  early  in  the  morning  by  titillat-
ing his  throat;  it  is  easily  hawked  up;  afterwards  raw-
ness of  the  chest,  going  off  only  after  rising A  good  deal
of  nasal  mucus  passes  through  the  mouth,  (5.  d.)  J?lat-
tasting  mucus  in  the  mouth. Close  smell  from  the  mouth.
Increased  sense  of  taste,  (secondary  effect.)

Taste  and  Appetite.— Disgusting  taste  in  the  mouth,
at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  violent  erections,  (30.  d.)
Spoiled  taste,  and  as  if  burnt,  when  waking  up,  going  off
alter  breakfast.  Sharp,  acrid  taste  in  the  mouth,  as  ot  to-
bacco-mice. Flat,  slimy  taste  when  waking  up,  with  bit-
terness of  mouth,  and  white  coated  tongue.  Taste  of  pus
in  the  throat.  Bloody  taste  in  the  mouth  when  expiring
air. Sweet  taste,  (8.  d.) Metallic  taste,  afternoon,  (a.  14


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


273


d.) Bitter  taste,  afternoon,  (a.  13  d.) A  bitter  taste  fre-
quently gets  low  down  in  the  throat,  like  a  vapor. All  her
food  has  a  bitter,  scraping  taste,  going"  off  after  a  meal.
Bitter,  flat  taste,  early  in  the  morning. Bitter  taste,  sud-
denly, followed  by  gulping  up  of  bitter  water.  Bitter,  slimy
taste,  early  in  the  morning,  going  off  after 'eating.  The
dinner  tastes  bitter,  the  appetite  being  pretty  good.  Sour
taste  in  the  mouth,  (a.  3  d.) Sour  tuste  in  the  mouth,  and
tongue  very  much  coated. A  good  deal  of  thirst.  Great
thirst,  only  when  eating. A  good  deal  of  thirst  in  the  fore-
noon. Violent  thirst  the  whole  day. Great  thirst,  every
morning  after  rising,  with  heat  and  dryness  of  the  mouth.
Neither  hunger  nor  appetite,  morning  and  evening.  No
appetite,  the  stomach  however  feels  empty. No  appetite
at  dinner. More  hunger  than  usual. More  hunger  than
usual,  at  breakfast. Great  appetite,  morning  and  evening.
Hunger,  in  the  forenoon,  after  a  good  breakfast,  he  had  to
eat  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  the  weakness  he  felt.  Great
hunger,  in  the  morning,  little  at  dinner. Canine  hunger,
in  the  afternoon. He  would  like  to  taste  of  the  eatables  he
sees. Has  a  great  desire  for  smoking  after  dinner  ;  he  re-
lishes tobacco  very  much. She  relishes  nothing.  Aver-
sion to  milk. Aversion  "to  meat  and  greasy  things,  (2.  d.)

Gastric  Symptoms.— Diarrhoea  after  drinking  milk.
Out  of  hurnor,  discouraged  after  dinner,  both  in  the  room
and  open  air ;  going  off  at  night.  Very  much  discouraged
after  supper,  especially  after  drinking  a  good  deal,  with
pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  liver  and  spleen.  Pres-
sure m  the  stomach  and  ill-humor  after  a  slight  breakfast,
(■ib.  d.J  Violent  pressure  in  the  stomach  after  break-
last  and  dinner,  for  several  days,  (a.  18  d.)  Feelings
of  a  heavy  lump  lying  in  the  stomach,  after  dinner.
Great  desire  for  cold  water,  a  few  hours  after  dinner
Pressure  in  the  chest,  after  dinner,  (a.  21  d.)  A  sort  of
pressing  from  below  upwards,  after  a  meal,  as  if  the  di-
gestion could  not  take  place  from  above  downwards,  for  3
or  4  hours  ;  after  that  period  hands  and  feet  feel  relaxed

L ,ionlTar  18  7^'  and  be  easi,y  sP°iled-  Eruei
at  ons  tasting  of  the  ingesta,  after  every  meal. A  good

deal  of  eructations  during  a  meal,  with  much  saliva  A

sort  of  cohc,  (pinching)  immediately  after  a  meal.  Pinch-

12*


274  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

ing  in  the  stomach  after  taking  the  usual  morning-drink.
Sleepy  and  lazy  after  dinner,  with  yawning  ;  but  as  soon
as  he  sits  down  to  his  work,  sleep  and  yawning  pass  off.
Chilliness  with  internal  heat  afier  a  meal ;  heat  was  repul-
sive to  her  ;  nevertheless  she  felt  chilly,  when  going  into
the  cold  air.  ■  Frequent  eructations,  (in  a  few  days.)  Con-
tinual eructations,  and  a  good  deal  of  flatulence  by  the
anus. Empty  eructations,  (3.  d.) Frequent,  empty
eructations,  sometimes  with  heat  in  the  pharynx.  Sour
eructations. Bitter  eructations. Gulping  up  of  sweetish
water,  rising  as  high  up  as  the  throat. Scraping,  (raw)
risings  after  eating  fat  things,  (a.  3  d.) Hiccough,  every
afternoon,  after  a  meal. Violent,  painful  hiccough,  some-
times with  bitter  eructations. Waterbrash,  (a.,  10  d.)
Nausea  at  the  stomach,  morning  or  forenoon,  going  off  af-
ter dinner,  sometimes  accompanied  with  rising  of  water
into  the  mouth. Nausea,  with  fulness  of  the  stomach.
Nausea,  in  the  morning,  with  creeping  in  the  stomach,
water  in  the  mouth  and  eructation,  until  noon.  Unsuccess-
ful, empty  retching,  in  the  morning. Violent  nausea,  with
inclination  to  vomit,  heat  in  the  face,  retching,  hawking  up
of  mucus,  and  finally  vomiting  of  foamy,  tasteless  mucus  ;
relieved  after  supper,  (6.  and  7.  d.) Vomiting  of  a  fetid,
sour  fluid,  resembling  loam-water,  (when  coughing.)  After
vomiting,  dull  headache,  no  appetite,  tongue  coated  white,
and  nauseous,  insipid  taste.

Stomach. — The  stomach  is  painful  to  the  touch,  (a.  4S
h.) Qualmishness  of  the  stomach,  after  eating  fruit,  with
tension  in  the  hypochondria,  (immediately.) Soreness  of
the  stomach,  sensitiveness  to  the  touch,  water  in  the  mouth,
goina  off  after  eating  bread. Sensation  as  if  the  stomach
were°  fasting. Sensation  as  if  it  were  spoiled,  going  off  by
eating  warm  soup,  but  afterwards  returning. Pain  in  the
stomach,  after  breakfast,  (4.  d.)  Pressure  in  the  stomach
as  from  a  stone,  sometimes  accompanied  by  rumbling  and
soino-  off  after  eructation. Pressure  and  griping  in  the  sto-
mach, with  tremulousness,  when  walking. Repletion  ot
the  stomach,  in  the  evening,  no  desire  to  eat.  The  stomach
feels  swollen  and  sensitive. Painful  contraction  around
the  stomach,  towards  both  hypochondria,  m  the  evening,
relieved  by  walking  and  extending  the  body,  aggravated


NATilUM  CARBONICUM.  275

by  stooping  or  sitting;  continuing  until  next  morning,  with
sensation  below  the  stomach,  as  of  a  worm  being  creeping
about  there,  (10.  d)  Drawing,  and  cutting  about  the  sto-
mach, internally  and  externally,  (22.  d.)  Stitches  in  the
region  of  the  stomach,  sometimes  with  retraction  of  the
same,  or  followed  by  burning.  Disagreeable  tension  close
over  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (17.  d.)  Burning  near  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  right  or  left.

Abdomen. — Occasional  darlings  in  the  right  hypochon-
drium,  evening. Screwing  and  stitches  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium, with  arrest  of  breathing. Violent  stitches  in
the  right  hypochondrium,  followed  by  pinching  in  the  ab-
domen, (10.  d.) Pain  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  when
pressing  upon  it  with  the  hand,  (a.  7  d.) Single  stitches
from  the  Jeft  hypochondrium  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
frequently  during  the  day,  also  when  sitting  ;  the  parts
are  also  painful  to  the  touch. Colic,  relieved  by  vomit-
ing, twice  a  day. Colic  in  the  morning,  relieved  by  stool.
Pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  left  side,  when  yawning  or  dur-
ing a  deep  inspiration,  without  pain  to  the  touch.  Aching
in  the  hypogastrium,  and  sides  of  the  abdomen,  with  pain
to  the  touch,  and  when  walking.  Distension  of  the  abdo-
men, especially  after  a  meal. Considerable  distension  of
the  abdomen,  sometimes  relieved  bv  emission  of  flatulence
or  diarrhoea. Heaviness  in  the  abdomen. Tensive  colic
at  night,  with  cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  diarrhoea,  for
several  nights,  (a.  12  d.) Tension  in  the  abdomen,  below
the  umbilicus,  especially  when  stooping  or  walking.  Colic
towards  morning,  with  retraction  of  the  umbilicus,  and
hardness  of  the  abdominal  integuments  ;  however  he  fell
asleep  during  the  pain. Tumors  on  the  abdomen,  as  if
the  intestines  were  distended  by  wind  here  and  there,
^  , e  parting  contraction of  the  abdomen,  with
weakness  of  the  small  of  the  back. Pinching  in  the  ab-
domen, even  after  stool. Pinching  colic,  early  in  the
morning,  with  inclination  to  vomit,  as  if  diarrhoea  would
come  on. Cutting,  pinching  in  the  abdomen, in  what-
ever position  it  may  be. Cutting  colic,  in  the  morning,
w»rH,il  m epigastrium,  from  both  sides  to-

wards the  umbilicus. Pain  of  the  intestines  as  if  bruised
when  riding  on  horseback,  with  stitches  into  the  right  side


276


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


of  the  chest. Soreness  of  the  abdomen,  with  pressure
downwards,  as  il  the  menses  would  come  on,  relieved  by
external  warinih,  by  nothing  else. Tearing  in  the  hypo-
gaslrium,  through  the  pudendum  as  far  as  the  urethra,  (5.
d.) Stitches  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  when  bendingthe
trunk  to  the  left  side  while  silting,  fdlowed  by  pinching  in
the  epigastrium,  (8.  d.) Stitches  and  drawing  in  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen,  over  the  hip,  (a-  20  d.) Stitches  and
drawing  in  the  left  side  of  the  abdomen,  as  if  from  incar-
cerated flatulence,  (a.  18  d.) Tensive  burning  of  a  small
spot,  on  the  left  side  of  the  umbilicus. Biting  sensation  in
the  hypogastrium,  as  of  worms,  (12.  d.) The  abdomen  is
painlul  to  the  touch,  and  when  walking.  Considerable
itching  and  corrosion  about  the  abdomen,  even  in  day-time,
(a.  12  d.) Fine,  intermittent  pinching  in  the  right  groin,
rather  externally.  Violent  stitchy  pain,  with  dull  pressure,
in  the  right  lumbar  region,  when  clearing  the  throat  after
rising. Stitches  in  the  right  groin  into  a  rib  of  the  right
side  and  extending  into  the  sternum,  when  taking  a  deep
inspiration. Slight  twilchings  in  the  right  groin,  resemb-
ling a  throbbing,  frequently  intermitting,  (4.  d.)  Swelling
of  the  inguinal  glands. Incarceration  of  flatulence,  this
affected  his  head,  and  he  had  convulsions  in  the  face,  (20.
d.) A  good  deal  of  incarcerated  flatulence  in  the  rectum,
(7  d.) Audible  grunting  in  the  abdomen,  painless,  in  the
evening. Rumbling  in  the  abdomen. Rumbling,  with
distension  of  some  parts. Rumbling  noise  in  the  abdomen,
(5  d.) Flatulence  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.  Sour-smell-
ing flatulence. Disagreeable  feeling,  as  of  imperfect  stool,
with  stitches  in  the  rectum.

STOOL.—Has  to  press  hard,  the  first  days,  to  expel  the
faeces,  although  they  are  not  hard.  Hard  stool.  Frequent,
unsuccessful  desire.  Desire  for  stool,  frequently  during
the  day,  partly  ineffectual,  partly  with  s  ight  discharge,
with  constant  feeling  of  repletion,  (a.  14  d.)  Constant  de-
sire for  stool,  with  writhing  cutting  m  the  abdomen.  Vio-
lent desire,  with  discharge  of  a  few  pieces  of  stool  resem-
bling sheep's  dung,  with  burning.  Stool  first  hard,  then
soft,  with  burning  in  the  anus,  and  sometimes  with
bloody  mucus.  Hard  morning-stool,  he  had  to  press
hard  ;  the  last  part  of  the  stool  was  tenacious  and  adhering


NATRTJM  CARBONICUM.


277


to  the  anus  ;  another  slight  evacuation  after  breakfast,  with
tenesmus  of  the  rectum,  after  the  expulsion,  (2.  d.)  Stool
wilh  tenesmus,  after  a  meal,  followed  by  burning  in  the
eyes  and  ihc  urethra,  wilh  great  sexual  excitement ;  after-
wards burning  around  the  eyes,  wilh  heat  of  the  head  and
sweat  on  the  forehead,  (during  the  approach  of  a  tempest.)
Two,  three  stools  a  day  ;  the  latt  stoul  is  accompanied
with  tenesmus  of  the  rectum  and  urethra,  and  only  a  few
broken  pieces  of  slimy  stool  are  passed,  sometimes  only
wind,  for  some  weeks.  Soft  stool,  continually,  (a.  8  d.)
Violent  tenesmus  of  the  rectum,  with  but  little  stool,  with
sensation  as  if  a  good  deal  remained  behind  ;  after  the  stool,
the  existing  colic  passes  off.  Stool  with  tenesmus,  after-
wards pain  in  the  rectum.  Small,  soft,  thin  stools,  after
tenesmus.  Hurried  desire  for  stool ;  afterwards  rumbling
in  the  abdomen,  cutting  below  the  umbilicus  and  constant
tenesmus,  passing  something  only  once,  (2.  d.)  Violent,
hurried  desire,  afterwards  liquid  stool,  squirting  out  with
force,  (15.  d.)  Stool  first  soft,  afterwards  diarrhceic,  with
soreness  of  the  anus,  preceded  by  pinching  in  the  abdomen.
Four  liquid  stools  in  half  an  hour,  after  cutting  in  the  ab-
domen. Tenesmus,  liquid  stool,  with  burning  at  the
anus.  Papescent  stool,  after  emission  of  silent  flatu-
lence, without  pressure,  wilh  burning-hot  cheeks.  Diar-
rhoea, of  thick  mucus,  for  four  days,  the  latler  part  be-
ing always  tinged  with  blood,  without  pain,  preceded  by
a  short  colic.  Stool  tinged  with  blood,  (a.  21,  36  d.)  Ex-
pulsion of  taenia,  with  stool.  Griping  in  the  rectum,  during
stool.  Chill  iness  before  stool,  (a.  4  d.)  Colic  previous  to
the  soft  stool.  Cutting  in  the  abdomen  and  small  of  the
back,  previous  to  the  somewhat  hard  stool,  (a.  10  d.)
Pressing  towards  the  genital  organs  during  stool.  Pain  in
the  rectum,  as  if  hard  lumps  were  in  it,  during  expulsion
of  stool  or  flatulence.  Burning  at  the  rectum,  after  stool,
(a.  3d.)  Burning  and  smarting  at  the  rectum,  (a.  11  d.)
Pressure  and  itching  in  the  rectum,  as  if  varices  would
form.  Itching  of  the  anus,  (a.  24  h.)  Smarting-burning
itching  of  the  anus.  Tingling  of  the  anus,  (11.  d.)  Cramp-
pain  in  the  rectum,  and  below  the  umbilicus,  (a.  31  d.)
Tenesmus/with  pressure,  around  the  anus.  Stitches  in
the  anus,  (1.  d.) Itching,  and  stinging  of  the  raphe  of  the


NATItUM  CARBONICUM.


perinaeum.  Tenesmus  of  the  bladder  and  rectum,  with
colic  ;  after  pressing  for  a  long  time,  some  urine  was
emitted,  with  erection  continuing  even  afterwards,  together
with  the  tenesmus.

Urinary  Organs. — Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with
little  discharge.  Frequent  micturition,  little  at  a  time,
(2.  and  3.  d.)  Sudden  desire  to  urinate,  with  stitches  in
the  urethra,  from  behind  forwards,  (a.  3  h.)  Constant
desire  to  urinate,  the  last  drops  being  accompanied  with
cutting  in  the  bladder  and  discharge  of  mucus  from  the
urethra.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  passing  much  urine.
Frequent  emission  of  watery  urine,  without  much  thirst,
(a.  11  d.)  Frequent  and  copious  micturition,  with  yellow
leucorrhota.  For  ten  days,  in  the  morning  he  emits  two
pounds  of  lemon-coloured  urine.  Nightly  micturition.
She  emits  urine  every  half  hour,  at  night,  (a.  3  d.)  The
child  wets  the  bed,  at  night.  The  urine  becomes  turbid
and  deposits  yellow  mucus.  Sour-smelling,  bright-yellow
urine.  Fetid  urine.  Burning  and  stitches  in  the  urethra,
before  and  after  micturition.  Tearing  in  the  urethra,  dur-
ing micturition.  Smarting  in  the  urethra,  during  mictu-
rition, (22.  23.  d.)  A  good  deal  of  urine  dropping  out  after
micturition.  Violent  pressing  in  the  lumbar  region,  and
region  of  the  bladder.  Dartings  in  the  urethra.  Tearing
in  the  urethra,  with  tearings  in  the  testes,  periodically,  for
one  hour.

Genital  Organs. — Itching  of  and  near  the  pudendum.
Smarting-burning,  itching  of  the  region  of  the  genital  or-
gans. Soreness  between  the  scrotum  and  thighs.  Itching
of  the  glans,  (a.  3  h.  and  3  d.)  Inflammation  of  the  glans
and  prepuce.  Swelling  of  the  glans.  The  glans  become
easily  sore.  A  quantity  of  mucus  accumulates  behind
the  corona  gland  is.  Retraction  of  the  prepuce  in  the
morning.  Itching  of  the  prepuce.  Itching  of  the  scrotum.
Stinging  throbbing  in  the  scrotum.  Pain  of  the  left  testi-
cle, (a.  28  d.)  Contusive  pain  of  the  testicle.  Painful
stretching  in  the  testicles  and  abdomen,  (a.  24  h.)  Heavi-
ness, and  drawing  with  pressure  in  the  testicle  and  sper-
matic cord,  more  in  the  morning  than  evening,  (a.  42  d.)
Feeling  of  numbness  in  the  testicles.  Great  sexual  de-
sire in  taking  a  warm  bath  ;  burning  of  the  palms  of  the


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


279


hands,  when  leaving  it,  (17.  d.) Great  sexual  excitement,
wh«n  touching  a  girl's  hand,  (10.  d.) Sexual  excitement
in  the  morning,  after  drinking  beer,  with  flat,  sweetish
taste  in  the  mouth  afterwards,  (25.  d.) Great  desire  to
emit  the  semen,  in  the  evening  and  after  dinner,  without
any  voluptuous  excitement ;  also  after  a  meal,  when  lay-
ing one  limb  across  another,  going  off  when  walking  ;  in
the  evening  when  lying  down,  (9.  to  14.  d.)  Violent,
continuous  erection,  in  the  morning  when  waking,  (a.  8  d.)
Incipient  erections  during  the  day,  (a.  2,  3  d.)  Erections,
every  morning  for  three  weeks,  sometimes  without  any
sexual  desire. Weak  erections. Cessation  of  the  erec-
tions, (secondary  effect.) Emission  of  semen,  without
any  sexual  desire,  with  erection  causing  a  cutting  and
tensive  pain,  for  more  than  an  hour,  the  pain  continues
even  after  leaving  the  bed,  (7.  d.) Painful  emission  of
semen  during  sound  sleep,  (a.  18  d.) Frequent  pollu-
tions, in  an  old  man,  (19.  22.  29.  37.  d.) Pollution  with-
out erection. Pollution  without  any  lewd  dream.  Dis-
charge of  the  prostatic  juice  when  urinating,  (a.  5  d.)
Discharge  of  the  prostatic  juice  during  hard  stool.  Short
erection  and  quick  emission  of  semen  during  an  embrace.
(2.  d.) Pulsations  in  the  penis  after  an  embrace.  Pain
behind  the  glans,  during  erections,  after  an  embrace.
Great  inclination  to  sweat,  after  an  embrace. The  day
after  a  painful  pollution  he  is  out  of  humor,  discouraged,
dissatisfied,  not  disposed  to  do  any  thing,  and  without  per-
severance. Tearing  of  one  side  of  the  pudendum,  (a.  6
d.) Motion,  as  of  a  fetus,  in  the  uterus. Pressing  in  the
hypogastnum,  towards  the  genital  organs,  as  if  every  thing
would  issue  from  the  abdomen,  and  as  if  the  menses
would  appear. Soreness  of  the  pudendum,  between  the
thighs. The  menses  delay  by  two  days,  or  by  three  days.
Too  early  by  three  days,  (a.  48  h.)  by  7  days,  (a.  7  d.)
1  he  menses  are  preceded  by  headache  and  drawing  in
the  nape  of  the  neck. Cutting  in  the  hypogastrium,  at
short  intervals,  before  the  menses. Painful  tearing  and
beating  m  the  head,  during  the  menses. Painful  disten-
sion ot  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,  during  the
menses,  relieved  by  slight  diarrhoea,  after  getting  up,  (12
d.) Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  during  the


280


NATRUM  CARBONICUAt.


menses,  only  by  day.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  and  tearing  in
the  right  hip,  during  the  menses,  (12.  d.)  Weariness
and  nausea  during  the  menses.  Chilliness,  without  sub-
sequent heat,  during  the  menses<  Leucorrhosa.  Profuse
leucorrhoea,  after  frequent  attacks  of  colic  and  writhing
about  the  umbilicus,  day  and  night,  for  5  days,  in  any  po-
sition of  the  body.  Yellowish  leucorrhcea,  going  oft'  with
the  copious  urine,  (11.  d.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Constant  tickling  in  the  nose,  not
going  off  by  rubbing,  (12.  d.) Frequent  sneezing,  with-
out coryza,  (a.  13  h.) Violent  sneezing,  with  rush  of
blood  to  the  head,  and  white  stars  before  the  eyes.  Ob-
struction of  the  nose,  when  talking. Obstruction  of  the
nose,  hard  fetid  clots  coming  out  of  one  nostril.  Obstruc-
tion of  the  nose,  she  has  to  breathe  through  the  mouth,  at
night,  (10.  11.  d.) Dry  coryza,  (a.  6  d.) Violent  cory-
za, (10.  d.)  Coryza,  now  fluent,  now  dry,  (5.  d.)  Fluent
coryza,  and  sneezing. Excessive  fluent  coryza,  (a.  11  d.)
Fluent  coryza,  with  chilliness  over  the  whole  body,  cold
hands  and  cheeks,  hoarseness,  no  thirst. Dryness  of  the
nose. Acridity  in  the  wind-pipe,  (a.  13  d.) Soreness  of
throat  and  wind-pipe,  (a.  8  d.) Dryness  of  larynx.  Dry
throat  when  talking  or  breathing,  when  walking  in  the
open  air,  (2.  d.) Stinging  and  roughness  of  the  throat,
with  dry  cough,  (5.  d.> Great  roughness  in  the  chest,
after  dinner,  with  pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach
causing  ill  humor  ;  he  felt  better  after  sleeping  and  the
rawness  of  the  chest  was  less  ;  it  returned  after  rising,
and  he  threw  up  a  few  pieces  of  green  mucus  with  an
effort. Roughness  and  rawness  in  the  chest,  the  whole
day,  most  violent  in  the  evening,  with  pressure  under  the
sternum,  oppression  and  palpitation  ;  the  rawness  abated
while  eating,  but  returned  soon  with  a  dry  cough,  increas-
ing the  scraping  sensation,  which  was  somewhat  relieved
by  throwing  off  mucus,  accompanied  by  thirst,  chilliness,
fluent  coryza,  and  hard,  tight,  quick  pulse, (21.  d.)
Hoarseness,  for  two  days,  (a.  10  d.) Cough  and  coryza,
day  and  night;  her  chest  was  very  much  affected  lor  7
days,  (a.  8  d.) Frequent  cough,  with  a  humming  sound
from  the  windpipe. Scraping  cough,  sometimes  with
hoarseness  and  heat  in  the  hands,  (a.  4  d )  Scraping


NATRUM  CAItBONICUM.  281


cough,  with  soreness  in  the  whole  chest  and  alternate
hoarseness,  heat  and  burning  of  hands  and  soles,  bruised
feeling  of  the  limbs,  want  of  appetite,  nausea,  heat  and
profuse  sweat  at  night,  no  thirst,  constipation,  (a.  2  d.)
Tickling  in  the  throat  or  chest,  and  cough,  (3.  and  8.  d.)
Dry  cough  with  dry  coryza,  after  catching  cold.  Violent
dry  cough,  especially  afternoon  and  evening,  when  enter-
ing a  warm  room,  coming  out  of  the  cold  air. Dry  and
hacking  cough,  with  rattling  in  the  chest,  (4.  d.)  Slight
expectoration,  with  rattling  in  the  chest. Cough,  gene-
rally in  the  morning,  with  either  salt,  fetid,  or  purulent
discharge. Cough  with  discharge  of  green,  purulent  mu-
cus and  feeling  of  roughness  in  the  chest,  (25.  d.)  Bloody
expectoration  when  coughing,  in  the  evening,  (7.  d.)

Chest.— Oppressed  breathing,  early  in  the  morning
when  in  bed.  Asthma,  in  the  forenoon,  (also  a.  8  d.)  Asth-
ma, with  violent  sexual  excitement. Asthma,  with  hoarse,
deep  tone  of  voice,  and  scraping  in  the  pharynx  and  larynx ;
afterwards  cough,  short  in  day-time,  fatiguing  in  the  night,
rough  and  hollow,  with  soreness  of  the  chest  and  larynx
and  throbbing  congestion  of  blood  to  the  vertex,  fermen-
tation and  rattling,  breathing,  relieved  by  sitting  straight ;
afterwards  with  purulent,  bloody  expectoration.  When
walking  she  easily  loses  breath. Tightness  of  the  chest
during  a  deep  inspiration. Violent  oppression  of  the  chest,
shortly  after  dinner,  for  an  hour. Pressure  under  the

Si,™!1?'  ?TrV  in  the  mornin&  d"rinS  a  deep  inspiration,
(22.  d.)  Aching  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  between
the  acts  of  inspiration.  Pressure  in  the  region  of  the
tieart.  Cutting,  and  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  sternum,
sometimes  going  off  by  motion  and  inspiration.  Stitches
in  the  side  of  the  chest  and  abdomen,  (a.  20  d.)  Stitchv
pain  between  the  last  false  ribs  of  the  left  side,  only  dur-
ing an  inspiration.  Stitches  in  the  chest  and  sides  of  the
chest,  sometimes  very  violent. Stitches  in  the  chest,  in

kniv^  f10^,'  after/l0°Pi"g  ™ing  again,  as  if  with
knives,  for  three  days,  (a.  17  d.)  Drawing  pain  in  the
m  scles  of  the  chest,  (with  oppression  of  the  chest,)  gene-
rally morning  and  evening.  Frequent  dartings  in  the
region  of  one  of  the  left  ribs,  with  sensation  as  if  the
breath  were  arrested,  going  off  by  deep  breathing,  (3.  d.)


282  NATRDM  CARBONICUM.

Burning  dartings  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  like  elec-
tric shocks,  (19.  d) Painful  throbbing  in  the  sternum,
followed  by  stitches  in  both  breasts,  in  bed,  (3.  d.)  Pain-
ful cracking  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  several  times  a
day,  (7.  d.) Palpitation  of  the  heart  when  going  upstairs.
(1.  d.)  When  lying  on  the  left  side,  at  night,  she  is  waked
by  palpitation  of  the  heart Palpitation  of  the  heart,
without  any  anguish,  easily  excited. Palpitation  of  the
heart,  in  the  evening  when  lying  down  and  in  day-time
when  sitting,  when  exerting  his  attention,  (4.  d.)  Anxious
palpitation  ot  the  heart,  when  writing,  with  dull  pressure
in  the  forehead  and  dreary  feeling  in  the  head,  (8.  d.)
Stitches  and  burning  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  chest.
Painful  dartings  in  the  region  of  the  left  clavicle.

Back.— Momentary  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
(5  d  ) Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  after  a
walk. Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  suddenly  felt  when
sittino-,  going  off  by  motion. Sudden  stitch  in  the  small
of  the  back  ;  he  was  not  able  to  stir  for  a  couple  of  min-
utes, (3.  d.) Cutting,  burning,  and  scratching  sensation
in  the  small  of  the  back.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  small
of  the  back,  equally  violent  at  rest  and  in  motion,  (9.  a.)
Pain,  as  if  bruised,  of  a  small  spot  of  the  right  os  ilium,
when  pressing  upon  it,  (3.  d.) Sore  pain  in  the  small  of
the  back,  even  when  at  rest,  without  touching  it.  bore
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  internally,  extending  towards
the  abdomen,  the  same  when  at  rest  or  in  motion,  (2  d.)
Pustules  on  the  small  of  the  back,  very  painful  to  the
touch. Violent  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  worse  at
night;  she  cannot  rest  upon  that  part,  increased  when
talking  or  breathing  deeply,  (7.  d.) Tensive  pain  in  the
back,  after  dinner  and  at  night,  sometimes  only  felt  when
X*  curved,  and  afterwards  going  off  when  extending
the  nart  (1  18.  d.) Tension  and  drawing  between  the
scapul  J  in  ihe  open  air,  with  the  coat  pulled  off,  the  wind
ffiew  uponhim  being  disagreeable Straining  and
drawing  in  the  back,  extending  as  far  as  the  anus,  m  sin-
ierks,  and  terminating  in  a  stitch,  when  sitting  or  lying.
Kaw in*  in  the  lower  part  of  the  back  as  if  from  incar-
cerated flat^ence,  (a.  18  d.) Tearing  between  the  shoul-
S«  and  in  the  left  shoulder. Stitches  in  the  back,  some-


natrum  garbonicum.  283

times  as  far  as  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  evening  and
night. Violent  stitches  between  the  shoulders  and  in  the
whole  of  the  back,  worse  during  an  inspiration,  with  ten-
sion in  the  spine  when  moving  the  trunk,  also  in  the  even-
ing, relieved  by  walking. Gnawing  pain  between  the
shoulders. Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  back,  for  several
days,  sometimes  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  extend-
ing as  far  as  the  nape  of  the  neck  or  at  night,  waking  him
irom  sleep,  so  violent  that  she  dares  not  turn  to  the  other
side. Burning  and  stitches  in  the  back,  early  in  the
morning,  going  off  after  rising  ;  the  back  however  remains
sensitive  to  pain  and  as  if  bruised,  (9.  d.) Creeping  and
itching  formication  over  the  whole  of  the  back,  (a  2  d  )
Vesicles  on  the  back,  with  violent  itching,  especially  in  the
nZT?!  geUinf  undressed- Pressure  and  stitches

no,  >  p SCapU,Ja'  Wlth  sensitiveness  when  pressing
upon  it.  Burning  and  pressure  in  the  region  of  the  apel
o  the  right  scapula,  frequently ;  going*  off  by  motfon
Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  right  Icapda,  aJr  dinner,'
(7  d.)  Boring  in  the  middle  of  the  right  scapula  aoDa-
rently  extend.ng  to  the  xiphoid  cartilage. P '  PP

cold  ECS^Stl!fneSS  ,°f -the  nape  0f  the  neck'  as  from  a
cold.  Stiff  and  paralytic  nape  of  the  neck.  Tension  in
the^e  of  the  „eck hen  siui  wone  7h^

moving  the  head.  Spasmodic  drawing  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  with  d.fficulty  of  moving  the  head,  (21.  d  )  Draw  ™
pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  wten  reading  w  th  LpSf
an^  -acouragement,  (22.  d.)  Tearino-  n  .k'mPaiience
cervical  tnnaSes,  (,'.  d.) Su'ddenZng,  ttrin^LThl

oi  trie  neck. Paralytic,  continuous  pain  in  the  mnp  „f  th.
neck  and  between  the  shoulders earlv  in  ,11 P  ■
Cracking  of  ,he  cervical  vertebr*  wl lv  ng  ZZlf

.0 ,E  mg„b ;ster  in  ,ihe.MPe  ot  »»  "«™gs  e  t it

of  httck?(T  ?rd  r°T ting  lr\"g  on  ihe  right


284  NATItUM  CARBONICOM.

ny,  rawness  and  scraping  in  the  throat,  down  to  the  chest,
increased  by  cough,  and  by  aching  pain  on  the  vertex,  so
that  she  dares  not  touch  it,  lor  five  days,  (a.  1 1  d.)  Glan-
dular swellings  o(  ihe  neck.  Increase  of  the  goitre.  Vio-
lent pressure  in  the  goitre.  . . , i  u

Superior  Extremities.— Violent  pain  in  the  shoulder-
ioint,  which  prevented  her  from  lifting  her  arm,  for  two
Jdavs Feeling  of  pressure  on  the  left  shoulder,  go.ng  off
bv  pressing  upon  it,  but  then  returning,  (4.  d.)  Drawing
Sin  m  thegri,ht  shoulder-joint. Tearing  in  the  shoulders,
Excessively  violent  in  the  left Tear  ng  in  the  eft  shoul-
der-joint, down  to  the  tip  of  the  little ,  finger  a -firs X ^  in-
creased by  motion,  afterwards  going  off  by  it  J>*£™*
the  shoulders,  sometimes  with  i  ching. Pa  n»  "  ™£
bruises,  in  the  shoulder- pints. The  ^m Jeel,  f  ff  *  he  »
unable  to  raise  it. Great,  heaviness  in  ihe  right  arm,  she
can!  it  raise  it. Tearing  in  the  right  arm,  especial \y  he
shoulder. Tearing  in  the  r.ght  arm  down  to  the nwurt
ioint  very  painful  when  at  rest.  Tearing  in  the  right  arm
down  to  The  fingers,  with  weakness,  and  sweat  at  night ,

offafter  fising.
the  arm,  by  day. Griping  and  digging  in  the  leit  hume

S  tt«  S  5  the  right  lower  m, £t  go.ng  off  by  mo-
fen,  (a.  4  h.) Dmving  tension  of -  •
left  lower  arm. Drawing  in  he  r.gl,t  ov  ^


NATRUM  CARBONICTJM.


285


when  seizing  something. Darting,  or  darting  sensation  in
the  right  wrist-joint. Painful  darting  in  the  dorsum  of  the
right  hand,  early  in  the  morning. Drawing  in  the  ten-
dons of  the  dorsum  of  the  right  hand,  relieved  by  pressure,
(12.  d.) Painful  drawing  in  the  ball  of  the  right  hand,
when  writing,  with  tension  rising  as  high  as  the  lower  arm,
when  moving  the  hand,  and  sensitiveness  when  moving  the
hand  or  no;  going  off  when  extending  the  arm  and  hand.
Drawing  tearing  in  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  ring-
finger,  in  the  open  air,  going  off  rapidly. Boring  in  the
metacarpal  bones,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed. Boring  in
the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  right  thumb,  and  afterwards  in
the  bones  of  the  fore-arms,  (25.  d.) Boring  in  the  os  pisi-
form e  of  the  right  hand,  worst  when  pressing  upon  it,  in
the  morning  when  in  bed,  (S.  d.) Stiffness  in  the  left
wrist-joint,  when  holding  something  ;  he  had  to  let  it  go
and  move  his  hand,  which  pained  him  ;  stiff  nape  of  the
neck,  (22.  d.) Heat  and  painful  sensitiveness  of  the  palms
of  the  hands,  and  especially  the  tips  of  the  fingers,  when
rubbing  them  against  anything  (a.  12  d.) Burning  of  the
palms  of  the  hands. Swelling  of  the  hands,  in  the  after-
noon, (10.  d.) The  left  hand  goes  to  sleep  early  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed,  (8.  d.) Twitchings,  now  in  the
hands,  now  in  the  feet,  before  and  after  midnight,  which
waked  her  all  the  time. Tremor  of  the  hands,  most  vio-
lent in  the  morning,  (10.  d.) Sweaty  hands. The  skin  of
the  hands  is  dry  and  parched,  (22.  d.) Dry,  cold  hands,
(a.  9  d.) Chapped  hands,  (a.  13  d.) Two  red  spots  on
the  dorsum  of  the  hand. Herpes  on  the  left  hand,  (a.  14
d.) Darting  sensation  in  the  finger-joints. Pain  as  if  a
ten  Ion  between  the  ring  and  middle-finger  had  been  torn
loose,  when  lifting  a  vessel  with  the  hand. Tensive  draw-
ing m  the  thumb,  to  the  other  side  of  the  wrist-joint,  fre-
quently going  off  of  itself,  frequently  by  motion.  Cramp-
like tearing  and  clinching  of  the  left  index-fingers.  Tear-
ing in  several  fingers  and  on'  top,  going  off  by  rubbing.
Stitches  in  the  tip  of  the  index-finger  and'sometimes  in  the
nng-ringer,  where  it  is  accompanied  with  twitching.  Stitch
above  the  nail  of  the  left  thumb. Creeping  in  the  right
thumb Burning  as  with  nettles  in  the  dorsum  of  the
lelt  micldie-nnger,  early  in  the  morning,  (1 8.  d.)  Burning


286  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

and  itching,  as  if  from  nettles,  in  the  joint  of  the  right  in-
dex-finger, with  a  blotch  under  the  skin,  early  in  the  morn-
ing after  rising,  (10.  d.)  Bloated  fingers,  several  morn-
ings, (a.  25  d.)  Inflammation  of  the  left  thumb,  and  after-
wards an  ulcerated  blister  upon  it.  White  vesicles  on  the
index-finger,  with  red  areolae,  and  burning  as  of  nettles.

Inferior  Extremities. — Jerking  of  the  left  glutei
muscles,  when  sitting. Tearing  in  the  left  glutei  muscles,
when  standing,  going  off  when  sitting,  in  the  evening.
Burning  pain  in  the  bend,  between  the  nates  and  thighs,  as
if  caused  by  rubbing. Dry  eruption  on  the  nates  and  os
coccygis,  with  violent  itching,  early  in  the  morning,  when
rising. In  the  right  hip,  drawing  and  pressure.  Tearing
in  the  left  or  right  hip,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down.
Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  left  hip,  with  cessation  of  the
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  going  off  by  motion.  Pain,
as  from  bruises,  of  the  left  hip,  when  rising  from  a  seat,
going  off  when  walking,  (5.  d.) Violent  stitches  through
the  right  hip,  when  walking,  in  paroxysms;  she  had  to
stand  still  and  to  bend  double,  to  obtain  relief,  (10.  d.)
Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs,  when  sitting,  (a.  21  d.)
Great  weight  in  the  lower  limbs,  (4.  d.) Straining  sensa-
tion in  the  lower  limbs,  when  walking  or  sitting,  (a-  5  d.)
Pain  as  from  bruises  in  the  lower  limbs,  (a.  2  d.)  The
limbs  suddenly  bend,  (a.  1 1  d.) Feeling  of  coldness  of  the
limbs,  even  by  day. Tearing  of  the  outer  part  of  the  limb,
from  the  centre  of  the  thigh  to  that  of  the  leg,  when  stand-
ing (1.  d.) Darting  sensation  in  the  right  thigh.  Dart-
ing'in  the  muscles  of  the  thighs,  suddenly,  as  if  a  worm
were  crawling  over  them. Cramp-like,  intermitting  tear-
ing in  the  outer  side  of  the  right  thigh,  close  to  the  knee.
Tearing  in  the  left  thigh,  as  far  as  the  knee,  (1 8.  d.)  V  lolent
cutting  through  the  thigh,  when  walking,  (4.  d.) Pain  u
weariness  in  both  thighs,  as  after  a  great  effort  (a.  4b  h.)
Pain  as  from  bruises,  in  the  anterior  muscles  of  the  thighs,
as  if  the  flesh  were  loose,  only  when  walking  or  touching
the  parts. Pain  of  the  bend  of  the  knee  when  moving  it
Intense  pain  in  the  right  knee-joint,  when  setting  the  foot
down, (6.  d.) Stitching  drawing in  the  right  knee,
in  the  evening. Tearing  in  the  right  knee,  at  night,
when  in  bed,  relieved  by  warm  clothes. Boring  in  the


NATRTTM  CARBONICUM.


287


right  patella,  (1.  d.) Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  knee-
joints. Pain  in  the  right  knee-joint,  as  if  sprained,  (a.  1 1
d.) Itching  of  the  knee,  with  burning  after  scratching.
Dull  stitchy  pain  in  the  right  knee,  tibia  and  thigh,  from
morning  till  afternoon,  when  sitting  or  walking,  (5.  d.)
Drawing  in  the  leg,  from  the  right  knee  to  the  feet,  with
uneasiness  in  the  feet. Drawing  pain  round  about  the
legs,  above  the  malleoli. Drawing  in  the  right  leg,  in  the
evening. Cramp-like  drawing,  with  pressure  down  the
tibiae. Drawing,  with  pressure,  in  the  left  calf,  especially
when  walking. Burning  drawing  in  the  outer  surface  of
the  tibia. Tearing  in  the  right  tibia  as  far  as  the  big  toe,
with  tingling  in  the  toe,  (1.  d.) Violent  tearing  in  the
calves,  and  afterwards  in.  the  thighs,  in  the  afternoon,  (IS.
d.) 1  earing  in  the  lower  part  of  both  legs,  and  in  the
anterior  parts  of  the  feet. Pinching  and  stretching  in  the
cal  ,  as  if  it  were  too  short,  when  moving  the  foot,  after
walking. Boring  pain  in  the  tibia,  in  the  evening  when
sitting  ;  he  did  not  feel  anything  when  walking,  (a.  17  d.)
blight  twitchings  in  the  calves,  when  sitting,  (8?  d.)  Red-
ness, inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  left  leg,  with  vio-
lent itching  and  gnawing,  and  with  many  itching  and
painfully  slinging  ulcers. The  feet  feel  heavy,  (3  d  )
Cramp-pain  in  the  right  foot  and  toes,  (in  some  hours.
Cramp  of  the  inner  border  of  the  sole  of  the  foot,  when
bending  the  foot  inwards. Cramp  in  the  mht  foot,  at
night,  (a  14  d.)  Clawing  and  jerking  in  both  heels  (4  d
Tensive  drawing  in  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  going  off
by  friction  ;  m  the  evening  when  standing. Cramp  like
tearing  ,n  the  dorsum  of  the  right  foot,  near  tfteToes  in

he  eft  foo  A°leVr  Teaun^  in  lhe  ™ter  malleolus  of
St  sole  '  T,;  0  TTnrg  a"d  feelin^  of  heat  in  the
tol (7A  ) Tnf the  f00t'  worse  when  moving  the

he  ri it'  2  m 1  ,eaXlnug  m  the  extensor  te"don  of

und r  the  IfftZ?™*^  by  '?bbifl*  <L  d«>  Sti,ches  '
under  the  left  outer  malleolus,  when  walking/for  several

days Pricking  m  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  ted  )  Dnl

n  the  hll  '  f  !U  Walklng-  Thr°bbing  and  creeping
m  the  heels,  as  if  from  an  ulcei.  in  the  ey«Jning  ^P"?.


288  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

bed. Soreness  of  that  ball  of  the  foot  which  has  corns,
when  stepping  upon  it,  (a.  4  d.) Tingling  in  the  right
foot,  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep,  when  silting,  also  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed. The  left  foot  goes  to  sleep  when
sitting. Uneasiness  in  the  feet. Prickling  in  the  soles.
Burning  of  the  feet,  especially  the  soles,  when  walking.
Swelling  of  the  soles. Cold  feet,  (a.  17  d.) Icy  cold
feet,  painful. Sweaty  feet,  when  walking,  (in  a  lew  n.)
Itching  of  the  soles,  especially  the  balls. Itching  and
stinging  of  the  soles  and  heels. Black,  ulcerated  pus-
tule on  the  heel. Smarting  as  from  excoriation  and  sore-
ness between  the  toes. Pain  in  the  left  big  toe  as  lrom
sub-cutaneous  ulceration. Tearing  in  the  right  big  toe.
Tearing  pains  in  the  right  big  toe,  (10.  d.) Imgling  in
the  right  middle-toe,  going  off  by  contact. Burning  in
the  right  small  toe,  when  walking. Twitchings  and  jerk-
ings  in  the  left  big  toe. Swelling  of  both  big  toes,  with
a  kind  of  violent  tearing,  like  soreness,  which  does  not
permit  him  to  sleep. Painful,  burning  itch. ng  of  both  big
toes. Red  spot,  as  if  from  a  contusion,  on  the  big  toe,
and  tearing,  commencing  at  that  spot,  and  extending,  from
time  to  time,  backwards,  along  the  side  of  the  sole. V 10-
lent  stitches  in  the  corn. Drawing  pain  in  the  corns.

General  SYMPTOMS.—Itching  as  of  fleas,  over  the
whole  body. Itching  and  biting  as  of  fleas,  in  the  region
of  the  beard,  chin,  back,  chest,  dorsa  of  the  hands  and  he
bend  of  the  elbow,  inducing  scratching. Violent  itching
of  the  body,  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down,  until  e
fell  asleep,  (7.  d.) Prickling  itching  of  the  "Women  and
thighs,  especially  in  the  afternoon. Itching  of  the  upper
andg  lowerTimbs!  (a.  15  d.) Violent  itching,  ^thWo^
after  scratching,  of  the  abdomen,  genital  organs  and  lower
limbs. Itching  pimples  and  blotch  on  the  hairy  scalp
chest  and  abdomen,  (a.  18  d.) Red  vesicles  fillec w,U
fluid,  with  painful  soreness  when  touched,  in  ihe  bend  ot
the  elbow,  and  in  the  fold  between  the  thigh  and  genrtd
organs. Vesicular  places  on  the  tips  of  all  tl e  finger,
and  toes,  as  if  from  boiling  water,  extending ^  round  he
nails,  as  if  they  would  come  off Stitches  in  th «ck
spot. Purulent  fluid  oozes  out  of  the  ^rpes  ,  it  becomes
larger  and  worse. The  warts  are  painful  when  merely


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


•2S9


touching  them. The  wart  begins  to  bleed,  becomes  larger,
and  goes  off  after  three  weeks. Incipient  warls.  The
skin  of  the  whole  body  becomes  dry,  rough  and  chapped.
Dry  skin,  (a.  3  d.) Troublesome  dryness  of  the  skin,  at
night,  especially  after  midnight.  Catches  cold  easily,  with
subsequent  coryza. Calches  cold  easily,  with  subsequent
colic  and  diarrhoea,  or  coryza,  (a.  10  cl.) Dread  of  the
open  air. Dread  of  catching  cold,  (2.  d.) When  walk-
ing in  the  open  air,  he  is  attacked  with  headache  and  cold.
Thirst  after  a  walk,  ('>.  d.) Every  movement  of  the
body  hurts  her. When  rising  from  her  seat,  every  part  of
the  body  hurts  her; this  pain  disappears  again  when
walking. Cramp-like  tearing,  especially  in  the  upper
and  lower  limbs,  also  in  the  whole  body,  not  influenced  by
either  motion  or  rest,  (a.  6  h.) Tearing  in  the  lower  limbs
np  and  down,  mostly  in  the  joints  of 'the  knees  and  feet.
Tearing  in  the  shoulder-elbow  and  wrist-joints.  More
tearing  than  stitches  in  the  joints  of  the  upper  and  lower
limbs,  mostly  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down,  and  fre-
quently waking  him  from  sleep  at  night. Tearing  and
bruised  feeling  in  the  limbs,  (7.  cl.)  Drawing  in  the  Joints,
and  paralytic  feeling  of  the  same  when  waking  from
sleep, (a.  4  d.) Drawing  and  stretching  in  the  lower
hmbs  and  jaws,  and  drawing  in  the  teeth,  at  m'crht,  (a.  21  d  )
Darting  in  the  limbs,  (a.  48  h.) Darling  sensation  in  all
the  joints. Darting  and  grumbling  in  the  whole  body
with  sensitive  mood. Jactitation  of  the  muscles,  and
Iwitchmgs  m  this  or  that  part,  of  the  body,  scapula?,  calves,
eyelids  and  arms. Jerks  in  the  lower  limbs. After  lift-
ing lip  a  heavy  load,  a  darling  pain  commencing  at  the
small  of  the  back,  in  that  region,  and  great  weakness
afterwards (a.  12  d.) The  majority  of  the  symptoms
come  on  when  silting,  and  pass  off  during  motion,  or  by
pressure  or  rubbing. Unsteady  gait,  stumbling,  slipping
Emaciation  pale  complexion,  dilatation  of  the  pupils  an°d
dark-colored  urine. Bloatedness  of  the  whole  abdomen,
early  in  the  morning ;  belter  in  the  afternoon.  Painful
tension  of  all  the  nerves,  especially  in  the  head,  with
nausea. Restlessness  in  the  evening  jn  „ppor  and  ]
hmbs,  with  stretching,  (2.  d.) Sick  feelin'g'  in  the  2Z


13


290  NATRTJM  CAItBONICCM.


Weakness,  Fits.— Fit  in  the  evening  ;  obscuration  of
sight,  with  paralytic  pressure  in  the  head,  eyes, jaws;  weak
consciousness  and  confused,  incoherent  ideas,  for  an  hour
and  a  half;  afterwards  tingling  pain  in  the  hps,  the  right
arm,  and  especially  the  right  hand  and  tips  ot  the  fingers,
especially  the  thumb,  with  tendency  to  start,  (13.  d.) 1  he
child  complains  about  colic  and  nausea,  looks  pale,  and  is
obliged  to  lie  down  ;  after  an  hour's  sleep  the  pain  has
gone. Heaviness  and  weariness  of  the  whole  body,  (7.  d.)
Heavy  and  lazy,  early  in  the  morning,  when  rising  ;  when
waking  up,  in  the  bed,  she  felt  very  bright. Lazy,  with
sensation  as  if  all  the  parts  of  her  body  were  put  upon  the
stretch,  and  as  if  face  and  hands  were  swollen  ;  when  at
rest,  relieved  by  motion,  (8.  d.) Dread  of  exercise  ;  it  in-
creases the  sufferings. No  desire  to  take  exercise.  In-
clines to  lie  down,  (a.  5  d.) Walking  is  difficult  for  her
she  is  pale  and  weary,  (a.  24  h.) Great  weakness  of  the
lower  limbs  and  heaviness  of  the  arms,  (even  after  20 da  vs.)
Great  weakness,  for  one  week,  after  three  days  toothache,
with  fever,  (a.  5  d.) Great  weariness,  especially  the  legs,
and  the  middle  of  the  thighs Paralytic  feeling roT the
limbs,  early  in  the  morning,  when  waking. Weakn  ess  of
upper  and  lower  limbs.  Excessive  weakness  in  day-time  ,
the  head  is  very  much  affected,  (a.  36  d.)

Sleep.— Great  weariness,  and  drowsiness  m  day-time,
(a.  2  d.) She  felt  weary,  and  fell  asleep  in  day-time,  while
£  her  work. Drowsiness  in  day-time,  ^  yawnmg.
Yawning,  lachrymation,  and  drowsiness  ;  he  had  to  he
down  and  slumber  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  (10.  11.  12.  d.)
Frequent  yawning,  in  the  evening,  (the  first  days.)  Great
Lw  neslin  the  forenoon;  short  light  slumber,  instead
of  his  usual  siesta,  (2.  d.) Very  s eepy,  ^~^T
he  finds  it  hard  to  get  up,  (the  first  days.)  He  ^carcety
be  roused  in  the  morning. Irresistible  sleep,  in  the  alter
noon  fa  11  d.) He  falls  asleep  late  in  the  evening,  and

evening,  although  he  was  sleepy.  Sh^ca"n°^/
under  a  couple  of  hours,  in  the  evening. When  lv  ng
down  in  thePbed,  in  the  evening,  his  sleep  went  off  but


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.  291

restless  for  several  nights.  Sleeplessness,  the  whole  night.
Sleepless,  at  night,  without  anxiety,  but  sometimes  without
being  able  to  open  his  eyes,  (a.  10  d.) Extremely  un-
comfortable, restless  night ;  he  tosses  from  side  to  side  20
or  30  times,  (a.  13  d.) He  suddenly  wakes  up  at  mid-
night, as  if  some  one  were  pulling  him  by  the  nose.  Fre-
quent waking,  as  if  from  tumult  or  fright. Waking  at
night,  voluntarily,  and  falling  asleep  again  soon  after,  t the
first  8  d.) She  woke  at  one  o'clock  in  the  night,  and  was
unable  to  fall  asleep  again,  because  she  was  unable  to  find
a  comfortable  position. Illusion  of  the  fancy,  in  the  even-
ing when  half  asleep  ;  she  fancies  soldiers  are  marching
before  her  in  the  air ;  she  frequently  roused  herself,  but
the  vision  soon  relumed,  and  did  not  go  off  till  she  rose  and
walked  about,  (1.  d.) Sleep  full  of  dreams,  at  night.  A
number  of  dreams  and  chilliness  when  asleep.  A  number

ttZht  aT  WhCn  aS!eep'  (a-  10  d)  Uneasy  Yearns,
at  night,  and  frequent  waking.  A  number  of  dreams,  gene-
rally about  things  past,  or  those  things  which  had  been  dis-
cussed the  night  before  ;  for  the  first  20  days  he  recollects

«  effTto^ll 'T  mpng;  a?er  this  Peri0d>  jt  -quires
an  efioit  to  call  his  dreams  to  his  memory. She  is  full  of

fancies  m  the  night Confused,  lewd  dreams  during  a  est

less  sleep  with  violent  erections  and  pollutions. g  Lewd

dreams  at  night,  with  a  pollution  and  sexual  desire,  after

having  been  half  roused  from  sleep  by  a  storm.  Pleasant

amorous  dreams,  the  first  20  days,  about  marriagel  amuse!

S\estvAS P  dl'eamS' d™  VhG  ]asf  P-o'd  "bo"
going  astray,  killing  a  man,  etc. Vexing  dreams he  is

to  depart,  and  cannot  get  off. Sad,  vivid  dream  of  a  f  ine

ral  Procession Frightful  dreams  about  danger  of  im  nda

ion  fight  robbers,  devils,  etc.  Anxious,  confused  d  -earns

shortly  after  falling  asleep,  from  which  he  wakes  vuo  in  nn

hour,  with  distended  abdomen  and  dry  tongue  AnxicT

o?ealfw\deenadawPe,rSOn;,She  hSTe!
T? uf, ™n  awake;  this  caused  her  to  shriek  n\

he  sieita X"'  •?!"!«  fr?m  sIeeP' S>™<"gs  duri£
siesla. After  mrfn.ght,  she  talks  aloud  in  fcr  sleep,


292  NATRUM  CARBONICUM.

without  being  conscious  of  it  in  the  morning.  Pushes,
like  pressure,  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  in  the  evening
when  falling  asleep.  Flashes  before  the  eyes,  in  the  even-
ing when  falling  asleep. Toothache,  in  the  evening  alter
lying  down,  for  several  evenings. Toothache  at  night,
while  half  asleep,  and  when  waking.  Dryness  of  the  throat
and  tongue,  at  night,  without  any  thirst. She  is  roused
from  her  nightly  sleep  by  colic. Alter  an  hour,  he  wakes
with  a  sort  of  stagnation  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  and
oppression  across  the  chest  and  stomach,  as  if  from  flatu-
lence. Anxious  feeling,  at  night,  previous  to  his  falling
asleep,  as  if  his  whole  bodv  had  become  very  big  and  heavy,
for  a  long  time. She  coughs  much  at.  night;  complains
of  a  scraping  sensation  in  the  throat ;  sleeps  very  rest-
lessly. Cramp  in  the  calves,  for  several  mornings,  when
extending  the  limb,  in  bed. Sort  of  night-mare,  at  full
noon  ;  he  was  unable  to  move  when  waking,  (a.  IB  d.)
Niohtly  attack  of  vertigo,  with  slow,  strong  beats  ot  the
heart,  humming  of  the  ears,  heat,  anguish,  as  if  he  would
die  ;  increased  erethism  by  talking  or  performing  the  least
motion  :  the  fit  terminates  with  chilliness  and  trembling.
Orgasm  of  the  circulatory  apparatus,  at  night ;  it  gives
him  such  a  dread  of  an  apoplectic  fit,  that  he  rises  from
his  bed  several  times. She  cannot  rest  upon  her  sioe
owing  to  palpitation  of  the  heart. Uneasiness  in  the  left
kg  and  foot/at  night,  (in  a  few  h  ) Nightly  inquietude
in  the  lower  limbs  ;  she  was  unable  to  keep  them  sti  .
Restless,  the  whole  night  5  she  did  not  fall  asleep  ill
morni^  ancl  had  to  urinate  a  good  deal. Restless  night-
sleep  with  extension  and  jerkmgs  of  the  limbs,  (a-  18  d.)
Violent  starting,  in  the  evening  when  falling  asleep  espe-
cially  of  the  left  limb. At  night,  when  asleep,  there  a le
ferkings,  now  in  the  finger,  now  in  one  arm  now  in  the
fac  al  muscles,  now  in  the  whole  body. Striking  and
tossing  with  the  hands,  at  night;  she  knew  nothing  of  it

"  FEvar-Chilliness,  the  whole  day,  and  no  stool I  ( ,  5.  d.)
Cold  hands  and  feet,  (a.  5  d.)  Continua  icy  coldness  of
the  feet  especially  morning  and  evening  ;  when  going  to
bed,  the  coldnesses  generally  accompamed  with  Lea  in
the  face,  violent  palpitation  and  anguish. Cold  hands  and


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


293


feet,  with  warm  head. Constant  chilliness,  early  in  the
morning,  after  rising;  he  was  unable  to  get  warm,  (a.
20  d.) Frequent  and  sudden  chills,  without  subsequent
chills,  in  the  forenoon,  (7.  d.) Chilliness,  in  the  evening,
(12.  13.  14.  d.) Chilliness  with  thirst,  during  the  day,
(9.  and  10.  d.) Constant  chilliness,  for  several  days.  Fit
of  fever,  with  aching,  in  the  temples  ;  obtusion  of  the
head  and  pressure  in  the  eyes ;  afterwards  inclination  to
vomit,  with  chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  especially  of  the
chest  and  arms  ;  somewhat  relieved  in  bed,  by  keeping
himself  warmly  covered  ;  nevertheless  stretching,  yawn-
ing, stiff  neck  with  alternate  chilliness  and  thrills  of  heat,
without  any  continuous  heat  or  thirst,  continued  yet  for  a
time,  (a.  i  h.) Shuddering  early  in  the  morning,  after
waking  ;  going  off  after  rising,  (2.  d.) Chills  over  the
whole  body,  the  whole  day,  with  cold  hands  and  warm
cneeks;  icy-cold hands  in  the  evening,  red,  glowing
cheeks,  and  hot  forehead,  without  thirst. Chills  over  the
whole  body,  from  morning  till  evening,  with  hot  hands,
cold  cheeks  and  moderately  warm  forehead,  without  any
thirst. Shuddering,  in  the  evening,  previous  to  going  to
bed  ;  when  in  bed,  heat  is  felt  shortly  ;  still  one  cannot
bear  being  uncovered,  (3.  d.) Thrills  of  heat,  with  draw-
ing pain,  from  the  nape  of  the  neck,  over  the  back,  22.  d.)
frequent  thrills  of  heat,  with  ill  humor,  sadness,  anxiety;
afterwards  weak  and  weary  for  h  hour. Short  heat,  with
weakness,  in  frequent  paroxysms. Heat  and  sweat  over
the  whole  body,  without  thirst,  with  general  exhaustion,  in
any  position  of  the  body. He  sweats  excessively  durina
motion,  even  when  ther  weather  is  cool. Profuse  sweat!
when  making  but  light  exertions,  especially  on  the  back,
(25  d.)  Slight  sweat  over  the  body,  especially  the  hands,
a  37  d.) Burning  sweat,  especially  on  the  forehead,  in
the  places  touched  by  the  hat. Night-sweat,  for  several
nights. Profuse  sweat,  the  first  night. Morning  siveat,


294


NATRUM  MURIATICUM— SALT.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM— SALT.

Dissolve  four  grains  of  common  salt  in  twelve  grains  of
distilled  water,  filter  the  solution  through  blotting  paper,
and  cause  it  to  crystallize  by  a  heat  of  40°  R.  Dynamize
one  grain  of  the  crystals  in  the  usual  fashion.

We  have  almost  no  knowledge  of  the  curative  powers
of  salt.  When  it  has  been  used  for  the  purpose  of  arrest-
ing hemorrhage,  the  excessive  dose,  a  table-spoonful  at
once,  did  effect  that  result,  but  it  evidently  acted  as  a
violent  counter-irritant  upon  the  stomach  and  bowels,  in
the  same  way  as  a  catapfasm  of  mustard-seed,  when  ap-
plied upon  the  calves  or  arms,  will  sometimes  produce  a
sudden,  temporary  cessation  of  toothache.

If  it  be  true  that  substances  which  are  capable  of  curing
diseases,  are  on  the  other  hand,  in  all  cases,  capable  of  pro-
ducing similar  diseases  in  the  healthy  organism,  it  is  diffi-
cult to  comprehend  how  all  nations,  even  savages  and  bar-
barians, should  have  used  salt  in  large  quantities  without
experiencing  any  deleterious  effects  from  that  mineral.
It  is  true  that  Lind  traces  the  scurvy  on  board  ships
to  the  use  of  salt  meat ;  but  this  explanation  is  incomplete,
inasmuch  as  a  number  of  other  causes  are  instrumental
in  developing  that  disease.

Considering  that  salt,*  when  ordinarily  used,  has  no  per-
nicious effect  upon  the  organism,  we  ought  not  to  expect
any  curative  influence  from  that  substance.  Nevertheless,
salt  contains  the  most  marvellous  curative  powers  in  a

latent  state.  ,  f

The  transmutation,  by  means  of  the  peculiar  mode  ot
preparation  adopted  in  homoeopathy,  of  a  substance  like
salt  which  is  apparently  inert  in  its  crude  state,  into  a
heroic  medicine,  the  use  of  which  requires  the  greatest


»  Salt  substances,  when  taken  in  excess,  excite  heat  and  thirst  where-
as the  ttost,  which  healthy  persons  W™™^?™^^
lieved  bv  taking  as  much  salt  as  may  be  laid  on  the  point  ot  a  kmie.
TW  two  facts  seem  to  point  very  slightly  to  both  the  power  of  injuring
and  t  a  Tower  of  Hng  Inherent  in  sail  however,  other  apparently  in-
nocent  sEances,  when  taken  in  excess,  may  hkewue  become  hurtful.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.  295

discrimination,  is  one  of  the  most  convincing  proofs,  even
to  the  most  prejudiced,  of  the  fact  that  the  peculiar  pro-
cesses of  trituration  and  succussion  resorted  to  in  homoeo-
pathy, bring  to  light  a  new  world  of  powers  which  Nature
keeps  latent  in  crude  substances.  Those  processes
operate,  so  to  say,  a  new  creation  !

Nat  rum  m.  is  especially  useful  in  affections  with  the
following  symptoms  : —

Sadness  ;  apprehensiveness  on  account  of  the  future ;
tendency  to  start ;  out  of  humor  and  irritability  ;  vehe-
mence ;  vertigo ;  all  things  turning  before  the  eyes,  with
inclination  to  fall  forwards ;  weak  memory ;  inability  to
think  ;  obtusion  of  the  head  ;  headache  with  dizziness  ;
heaviness  of  the  head  every  day,  especially  in  the  occiput,
closing  the  eye-lids  ;  morning  headache  ;  pressing  in  the
whole  head  and  temples ;  headache  as  if  the  head  would
burst :  lancinating  headache,  forcing  one  to  lie  down  ;
stitches  over  the  eyes ;  aching  pain  over  the  eyes ;  stitches  in
the  parietal  bone  ;  throbbing  and  drawing  in  the  forehead  ;
boating  in  the  head;  hammering  headache;  beating  and
throbbing  m  the  head,  when  moving  the  body  ;  scurf  in  the
hairy  scalp;  pimples  on  the  forehead  ;  pain  as  from  excoria-
tion in  the  eyes  ;  inflammation  of  the  eyes  ;  glutinous  matter
in  the  outer  canthi ;  nightly  agglutination  ;  lachrymation  :
acrid  tears  ;  closing  of  the  eye-lids  in  the  evening  ;  obscura-
tion of  sight  when  walking  or  stooping ;  sudden  obscura-
tion of  sight,  at  a  commencement  of  lancinating  head-
ache ;  dim-sightedness  like  moths  before  the  eyes  ;  sensa-
tion as  of  gauze  in  front  of  the  eyes,  he  is  unable  to
see  ,  long-sightedness  ;  double  sight ;  the  letters  look  blur-
red when  reading;  black  points  and  streaks of  light
before  the  eyes  ;  incipient  amaurosis  ;  stitches  in  the  ear's  ;
Ungling  ,n  the  ear  ;  ringing  in  the  ear;  roaring  and  hum-
mingtn  the  ears  jhaxd  hearing;  want  of  smell;  pain,  Ts
from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration  in  the  jaw-bonesf  when
masttcatmg;  itching  in  the  countenance;  pnnple  on  he
face  ;  herpes  around  the  mouth  ;  swelling  'of  the  upper  1  p  ;
bloody  vesicles  on  the  inner  side  of  the  dipper  lip  Ppain?u

Sand fi  fV  i  eqrnt  SWellmS nf  lhe  ^maxillary
glands  ,  fistula  dentahs  ;  vesicles  on  the  torque  ;  chronic
sore  throat,  as  if  she  had  to  swallow  over  a  Sj  fi
wg  up  of  mucus  ;  expulsion  of  mucus,  early &  ZZt


296


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


ing  ;  putrid  taste  in  the  mouth  ;  sour  taste  in  the  mouth ;
bitter  mouth  ;  eructations ;  sour  eructations  ;  repulsive
eructations  after  eating  greasy  things  or  milk  ;  heart-burn  ;
burning  from  the  stomach  ;  want  of  appetite  ;  loss  of  ap-
petite for  bread  ;  excessive  appetite  for  dinner  and  supper  ;
canine  hunger,  with  repletion  after  eating  but  little;  vio-
lent desire  lor  bitter  things  and  bitter  beer;  aversion  to
fat; constant  thirst;  sweat  in  the  face  when  eating;
empty  eructations  after  a  meal  ;  heart-burn  after  a  meal .
nausea  after  a  meal  ;  water-brash  with  a  writhing  sensa-
tion around  the  stomach  ;  water-brash,  followed  by  sour
vomilin«r  0f  the  ingesla  ;  vomiting  of  the  ingesta  ;  oppres-
sion of  the  stomach  ;  pressure  at  the  stomach,  early
in  the  morning  ;  pressure  at  the  stomach,  with  nausea
and  sudden  failing  of  strength  ;  pressure  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach;  spasm  of  the  stomach;  pain  in  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  when  pressing  upon  it ;  swelling  ot  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  when  touching  it,  it  feels  as  if  there  were
sub-cutaneous  ulceration  ;  griping  in  the  pit  of  the  sto-
mach ;  jerks  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach  ;  cramp  in  the
diaphragm  when  stooping;  stitches  in  the  region  ot  the
liver;  pain  in  the  region  of  the  spleen;  aching _ in  the
left  iliac  region  ;  distension  of  the  abdomen  ;,swc  ,ing  ot
the  abdomen  ;  pain,  as  from  incarcerated  flatulence,  in
the  left  side  of  the  abdomen  ;  daily  colic  ;  incarceration  of
flatulence;  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ;  loud  grunting  in
the  abdomen  ;  constipation  every  other  day  ;  chronic  con-
stipation ;  difficult  expulsion  of  stool,  witn  lancinating
pains  in  the  anus  and  rectum  ;  too  frequent  stoo  ;  chronic
soft  stool  ;  burning  at  the  rectum  during  stool ;  burning  at
the  anus  ;  stitches  in  the  rectum  ;  erosion  and  throbbing
in  the  rectum  ;  varices  of  the  rectum  ;  pain  of  the  varices
of  the  anus  ;  involuntary  emission  of  urine,  when  walking,
couohing  or  sneezing  ;  nightly,  micturition;  blennorrhea
from  the  male  urethra;  secondary  gonorrhoea;  excessive
excitement  of  the  genital  organs  ;  excessive  excitement  of
th fancy  inducing" a  desire  for  sexual  intercourse  ;  impo-
tence- menses  too  early;  too  long  ;  too  profuse;  delaying
too  late  and  too  scanty; headache  before,  during  and
after  the  menses  ;  out  of  humor  previous  to  the  menses  ;
melancholy  previous  to  the  menses;  sadness  during  the
Senses  ;  cramp-pain  in  the  abdomen  during  the  menses  ;


NATRUM  MUUIA.TICUM — SALT.


297


itching  of  the  pudendum  ;  aversion  to  an  embrace  in  a
female  ;  leucorrhcea,  corrosive  leucorrhcea.

Obstruction  of  the  nose;  dry  coiyza;  dryness  ot  the
nose  ;  coryza  and  sneezing ;  suppressed  sneezing  ;  hoarse-
ness ;  clearing  the  throat ;  hoarseness  of  the  chest  with
cough;  rattling  in  the  chest;  morning  cough;  titillation
with  cough,  when  walking  or  breathing;  chronic  short
cough  ;  spasmodic  suffocative  cough,  in  the  evening  when
in  bed  ;  headache,  during  cough,  as  if  the  forehead  would
burst;  shortness  of  breath  when  walking  fast;  asthma
during  manual  labor;  wheezing  breathing,  in  the  evening
whr.-n  in  bed;  oppression  of  the  chest;  tensive  pain  in  the
chest;  stitches  in  the  chest  during  a  deep  inspiration;
stitches  in  the  chest  when  coughing  ;  palpitation  of  the
heart  with  anxiety; palpitation  of  the  heart  at  every
motion  of  the  bodv,  stitches  in  one  of  the  mammae  ;  sharp
drawing  through  the  hips  and  small  of  the  back  ;  cutting  in
the  small  of  the  back  ;  paralytic  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the
small  of  the  back  ;  drawing  pressure  in  the  back  ;  tensive
pain  in  the  back  ;  weariness  in  the  back  ;  pressure  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  ;  goi'tre  ;  scurf  in  the  axilla ;  paralytic
heaviness  of  the  arm;  weariness  of  the  arms  ;  digging
(grinding)  pain  of  the  upper  arm;  stitches  in  the  wrist-joint;
the  fingers  go  to  sleep,  with  tingling  ;  pain,  as  if  sprained,
in  the  hip  ;  drawing  pain  in  the  lower  limbs  ;  painful
shortening  of  the  hamstrings  ;  herpes  in  the  bends  of  the
knees  ;  weariness  of  the  knees  and  calves  ;  ulcerative
pain  about  the  malleolus,  when  touching  the  part  and
treading  ;  heaviness  of  the  feet ;  burning  and  swelling  of
the  feet;  drawing  with  pressure  in  the  limbs  ;  bad  conse-
quences  from  long  speaking ;  bad  consequences  from
vexation  ;  ill  effects  from  sour  food  ;  ill  effects  from  eating
bread  ;  parts  become  easily  strained  ;  corns  ;  emaciation ;
liability  to  cold  ;  heaviness  of  the  body  ;  indolence  after
rising,  early  in  the  morning ;  faintness ;  hysteric  faint-,
ness ;  drowsiness  in day-time ;  sleep  full  of  fancies ;
anxious  dreams,  with  weeping  ;  heavy  dreams,  at  night ;
and  waking  for  hours,  or  difficulty  of  falling  asleep  again  |
thirst  in  the  night ;  nightly  pains  in  the  back  ;  nightly
tremor  of  the  nerves ;  nightly  micturition,  every  hour ;
frequent,  internal  chills  ;  restlessness  with  chilliness  ;  con-

13*


298


NATRUM  MURUTICUM — SALT.


tinual  chilliness  and  want  of  animal  heat  ;  cold  hands
and  feel  ;  sweat  when  walking  ;  profuse  sweat,  and  break-
ing out  easily,  during  motion;  morning-sweat;  intermit-
tent fevers  mismanaged  by  China.

Natrum  m.  may  be  advantageously  repeated  after  an
intermediate  remedy,  provided  it  is  yet  indicated.

This  drug  has  been  proved  by  myself  and  by  Drs.
Rummel,  Rohl,  Schreter  and  Foissac.

Camphor  is  a  very  weak  antidote  against  the  excessive
action  of  Natrum  ;  frequent  smelling  of  spir.  nit.  didc.
relieves  the  effects  of  Nat.  much  better.

This  drug  is  recommended  by  Rummel  against  pro-
tracted cases  of  Chlorosis,  with  deficient  nutrition,  and
dirty,  flaccid,  torpid  skin  ;  by  Hartmann  against  urticaria;
by  Schmidt  against  scorbutic  dyscrasia  of  the  blood  ;  by
Thorer  against  quotidian,  tertian  and  quartan  fever ;  by
Neumann  against  inveterate  quotidian  fevers  ;  by  Hartlaub
against  intermittent  fevers ;  by  Gross  against  nervous
fevers  with  great  weakness,  dryness  of  the  tongue  and
great  thirst ;  in  the  Homoeop.  Gazette  against  vertigo
caduca  ;  by  Gross  against  headache  with  nausea  ;  and  like-
wise "against  lancinating,  boring,  throbbing  toothache  in
hollow  teeth  ;  not  bearing  the  open  air  or  contact,  worst  at
night,  arresting  the  breathing  and  relieved  by  sitting  up ;
by  Wahle  against  herpes  on  the  tongue,  which  came  on
in  a  sycosic  individual  after  using  the  sea-baths ;  by
Weigel  against  flat  ulcers  on  ihe  tongue  and  on  the  inner
walls  of  the  lips  and  corners  of  the  mouth,  with  copious  dis-
charge of  limpid  saliva  ;  by  Griesselich  against  the  nausea
and  vomiting  of  pregnant  females  ;  by  Engelhardt  against
scirrhus  and  carcinoma  ventriculi ;  by  Veith  against
obstinate  constipation  ;  by  Knorre  against  dysentery  ;  by
Veith  against  involuntary  discharge  of  urine  at  every  fit
of  cough  in  typhus  ;  by  Midler  against  incontinence  of
urine  ;  by  Gross  against  balanorrhcea,  amenorrhoea,  and
irregularity  of  the  pulse  and  beats  of  the  heart ;  by  Hart-
laub  against  tumor  genu  (in  conjunction  with  Sulphur;)  by
Hering  against  shortening  of  the  hamstrings  in  lepra  ;
by  Des  Guidi  against  inflammation  of  the  tendo  Achillis.

Moral  Symptoms. — Sad,  desponding,  (after  nettle-
rash.) Melancholy. Dejection  of  spirits.  Melancholy


NATltUM  MUIUATICUM — SALT.  299

mood  ;  he  was  unable  to  forget  offences  which  had  been
committed  against  him,  or  which  he  had  committed
against  others  ;  this  disturbed  his  mind  so  much  that  he
felt  indisposed  to  do  any  thing,  (2.  d.)  Melancholy  depres-
sion of  spirits,  and  apprehensive  want  of  courage,  with
sadness,  the  whole  day,  without  being  conscious  ot  any
cause,  with  uninterrupted  palpitation  of  the  heart,  without
any  bodily  uneasiness,  (9.  d.)  Sudden,  but  short  fits  ot
melancholy.  Full  of  grief  and  chagrin.  He  endeavours
to  torment  himself  by  hunting  after  disagreeable  ideas  ;
this  weakens  him  very  much.  He  thinks  for  hours  what
will  become  of  him.  He  tries  to  recollect  past  disagree-
able occurrences,  for  the  purpose  of  thinking  on  them  and
indulging  the  grief  which  it  causes..  She  takes  every
thing  in  a  bad  part,  and  cries  and  howls.  When  alone  she
feels" aDprehensive,  and  cries.  When  merely  thinking  of
the  want  which  she  had  suffered,  tears  came  into  her  eyes.
He  concluded  from  every  body's  looks,  that  he  was  pitied
on  account  of  his  misfortune,  and  he  cried.  He  cried
when  one  merely  looked  at  him.  She  cries  involuntarily.
Desire  to  weep,"  with  anxiety.  Inclines  to  weep  and  is
agitated.  Inclines  to  weep,  and  has  no  desire  to  "work.
He  felt  agitated  the  more,  the  more  they  tried  to  console
him.  Attacks  of  complete  hopelessness  and  internal
despair,  which  deprived  her  of  all  her  strength.  Hypo-
chondriac, tired  of  life,  (2.  d.)  Apprehensive  about  the
future.  Afraid  of  becoming  mad.  Imagines  he  will  die.
She  frequently  looks  into  the  looking-glass  and  imagines
she  looks  wretched.  Sudden  anxiety  and  palpitation  of
the  heart,  three  forenoons.  Sort  of  anguish,  as  if  she  had
done  some  thing  bad,  with  heat  and  night-sweat.  Anxious
and  restless,  alternating  with  indifference.  His  joy  is  but
transitory.  Joyless.  He  is  not  cheerful  and  yet  he  may
be  easily  induced  to  laugh.  Indifferent  and  sad.  Dry
manners.  Taciturn.  Lazy,  no  disposition  to  work.
While  engaged  in  his  work,  he  suddenly  loses  all  desire
to  continue  it.  He  fritters  away  his  time,  and  cannot  be  in-
duced to  do  any  thing  serious,  in  the  afternoon,  (2.  d.)  Not
disposed  to  work,  although  he  is  disposed  to  intense  reflec-
tion. Scratching  his  head  with  impatience.  Hurriedness.
Anxious  hurriedness. Great  excitation,  followed  by  going


4


300


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


to  sleep  and  deadncss  of  the  limbs.  Great  irritation,  (im-
mediately.) Want  of  discretion.  Want  of  independence
of  character.  His  mind  is  very  much  affected  by  a  mere
conversation.  Great  tendency  to  start.  In  the  evening
he  started  with  fright  and  became  almost  paralyzed  in
consequence  ;  after  this  lie  felt  horrified  and  apprehended
misfortune.  Very  much  out  of  humour,  peevish  and  taci-
turn. Quarrelsome,  discouraged.  Offended  at  a  joke.
He  does  not  like  to  hear  any  objections,  for  several  even-
ings. He  feels  out  of  humour  and  avoids  company,  be-
cause he  thinks  he  will  give  offence.  Vehement  without
any  special  cause.  Vehement  at  trifles.  She  gets  heart-
ily angry  at  trifles.  Passionate  vehemence,  (1.  d)  Hates
persons  who  had  offended  him  formerly.  Mood  calmer
and  less  solicitous  than  formerly,  (curative  effect.)  Inter-
nal satisfaction,  hope,  mildness,  (curative  action.)  (5.  d.)
Cheerful,  (2.  d.)  She  laughs  violently  at  things  which
are  not  ridiculous,  until  tears  come  into  her  eyes,  (18.  d.)
Striking  alternation  of  ill  humour  and  excessive  weakness,
with  cheerfulness  and  lightness  of  the  limbs.

Heaij. — Weakness  of  thought,  dulness,  discourage-
ment. Imbecility  and  absence  of  thought,  with  drowsi-
ness ;  worst  in  the  afternoon,  from  3  to  7  o'clock.  Ab-
sence of  thought ;  she  says  what  she  does  not  mean.  He
is  unable  to  keep  his  thoughts  together;  they  wander.
Difficulty  of  thinking  ;  she  had  to  think  a  good  deal,  pre-
vious to  her  finding  the  right  idea.  Absence  of  mind  ;  he
knows  not  what  he  ought  to  say-  He  easily'uses  wrong
expressions  or  writes  wrong  words.  He  goes  twice  to
the  same  place  to  find  something.  He  went  out  of  the
door  without  intending  it,  and  when  he  was  asked  whither  ?
he  became  conscious  of  it.  He  is  slow  in  coming  to  a  con-
clusion. Irresolute  in  doing  some  intellectual  labour;  he
does  not  know  which  way  to  choose.  Awkward  ;  he  drops
some  thing  very  small  and  he  knocks  himself  against  every
thing.  Weak  memory  ;  he  remembers  every  thing  as  in
a  dream.  Loss  of  memory  ;  he  knew  nothing  of  yester-
day and  imagined  he  had  lost  his  understanding,  (5.  d.)
Forgetful  ;  lie  has  great  difficulty  in  recollecting  a  tiling.
He  forgets  what  he  was  just  going  to  write,  (2.  d.)  When
following  an  idea,  he  suddenly  forgets  it. Want  of  mem-


NATRTTM  MURIATICUM— -SALT.


301


orv  •  he  imagined  his  mother,  who  was  present  every
hour,  had  died,  because  he  did  not  recollect  to  have  seen
her. Obtusion  of  the  head,  after  walking  a  good  deal.
Obtusion  of  the  head,  after  reflecting. He  feels  stupid,
and  as  if  his  head  were  not  his  own. Aching  in  a  tem-
ple, with  dry  heat  of  the  body. Obtusion  of  the  head,
with  dull  pressure  in  the  temples,  mostly  when  pressing
upon  the  parts,  (7.  d.) Emptiness  of  the  head,  with  an-
guish. Weakness  of  the  head,  as  is  felt  after  turning  in
a  circle  for  a  long  while. Gloominess  of  the  head  after
walking  in  the  open  air. Dizziness  in  the  head  after  ris-
ing ;  tins  goes  off  after  she  has  been  lying  down  for  some
time. Dimness  of  the  head,  in  the  afternoon  ;  bright  in
the' forenoon. Reeling  sensation,  producing  obscuration
of  sight,  when  stooping  and  raising  the  head  again.  Keel-
ing as  if  caused  by  vertigo,  going  and  coming,  especially
when  moving  the  head,  resembling  a  push  from  the  vertex
to  the  forehead,  depriving  him  of  his  senses  for  moments.
Feeling  of  vertigo,  as  if  she  were  thrown  over,  (3.  d.)
Vertigo,  early  in  the  rftorning,  when  rising  in  the  bed,
like  a  swoon  ;  she  lost  her  senses,  and  she  had  to  lie  down
attain. Vertigo  when  rising  from  the  bed  and  when  walk-
ing. Vertigo\vhen  turning  about,  (4.  d.) Vertigo  when
walking,  (1.  d.) Every  thing  before  her  turned  in  a  cir-
cle when  walking. Vertigo,  pressing  the  head  downwards
when  silting. Headache  when  turning  the  body.  Head-
ache in  the  forehead,  when  sneezing  and  afterwards.
Headache  from  sneezing  and  coughing,  disappearing  im-
mediately by  pressing  the  head  together.  Headache  when
making  a  violent  bodily  exertion. Pain  in  the  forehead
during  rapid  motions. Headache  from  cold  air.  Head-
ache disappearing  when  walking. Headache,  early  in  the
morning  when  in  bed,  going  off  after  walking,  for  several
mornings. Heaviness  of  the  head,  in  the  morning  after
waking,  with  giddiness  and  obtusion. Great  heaviness  of
the  head,  especially  when  talking  or  reflcciing.  Heavi-
ness and  aching  in  the  forehead,  above  both  eyes,  (13.  d.)
Dull,  stupefying  headache,  early  in  the  morning  after
ivaking  until  noon. The  head  feels  soft,  like  a  mealy
apple,  without  any  particular  pain. Dull  headache,  al-
most constantly. Dull  pressing  in  the  forehead,  with


302


NATRUM MUItt  ATICUM  SALT.


gloominess.  Troublesome  sensalion  as  if  something  had
got  out  of  place  in  the  brain,  in  the  forenoon,  especially
when  turning  the  head,  (22.  d.)  Headache  with  nausea
from  morning  till  evening.  Headache  with  nausea,  and
pressure  in  the  forehead,  increasing  from  afternoon  till
bed-lime.  Violent  head-ache  with  nausea  ;  she  had  to  lie
down,  and  when  raising  herself,  she  came  near  vomiting
and  fainting  ;  the  slightest  step  resounded  through  her
head  ;  at  8  o'clock  in  the  evening  her  pain  had  gone,  but
a  weakness  in  the  head  remained.  Oppressive  headache.
Pressure  above  the  eye  and  in  the  temple,  with  obtusion
of  the  head,  (2.  d.)  Aching  over  the  left  eye.  Pressure
in  the  occiput,  (6.  d.)  Aching  in  the  forehead,  (in  a  few
hours.)  Aching,  uninterruptedly,  in  the  forehead  and  'on
the  vertex.  Sore  pressure  in  and  above  the  forehead.
Hard  pressure  in  the  forehead  and  the  temporal  bones,
when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Dull  pressure  in  the  fore-
head and  eyes,  as  if  the  head  had  gone  to  sleep,  when
leaning  it  upon  the  arm.  Pressure  in  the  brain,  through  the
eyes,  relieved  by  pressing  upon  the  head.  Pressure,  and
pushing  headache,  in  the  forehead.  Pressing  and  pushing
of  the  brain  through  the  skull,  in  the  temple,  forehead,
and  ears,  (3.  d.)  Pushing  pain,  as  if  the  head  would
burst.  Compression  from  both  temples,  as  if  the  head
were  pressed  between  two  hard  planes,  (3.  d.)  Com-
pression of  the  brain  from  all  sides,  with  heaviness  of  the
head.  Compression  in  the  temples,  especially  when  read-
ing or  writing,  with  pressure  on  the  vertex.  Compression
of  the  skull,  and  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  head.
Contractive  pain  in  the  whole  brain,  early  in  the  morning.
Contractive  sensation,  twice,  in  the  occiput,  behind  the
ears,  with  stitches  in  the  head.  Feeling  of  tension  in  the
brain,  increasing  more  and  more,  after  an  affecting  fare-
well. Tension  in  the  left  temple,  as  if  it  were  full,  more
in  the  evening  than  morning.  Fulness  in  the  head,  press-
ing the  eyes  out,  as  it  were.  Drawing  pain,  in  the  outer
parts  of  the  head,  from  one  side  above  the  cheek,  towards
the  cuspid atus.  Fine  drawing  pain  from  the  root  of  the
nose  upwards,  with  heaviness  of  the  head.  Fine  drawing
and  jerking  in  the  forehead,  to  and  fro,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, when  rising. Stitches  in  the  head. Stitches  in  the


NATRUM MURIA.TICUM — SALT.


303


occiput,  as  with  knives. Stitching  pain  over  the  forehead
Stitches  from  the  forehead  to  the  occiput,  depriving  her  of
all  appetite. Stitches  on  the  vertex,  going  oft  when  lean-
ing the  head  on  something. Stitch  through  the  head  as
with  a  knife,  from  behind  forwards,  when  entering  the
room  from  the  open  air. Fine  stitches  in  the  vertex,  with
burning. Fine  painful  stitches  in  the  parietal  bone  and
forehead.  Fine  prickings  above  the  forehead. Dull  stitch
from  the  vertex  through  the  brain,  as  far  as  the  palate.
Dull,  stitching  pain  in  the  parietal  bone,  evening,  when
ealino-. Dull,  stitching  pain  in  the  left  side  oi  the  head,
as  if  from  a  nail,  at  night. Dull,  stitching  pain and  it
gnawin<r  the  bone,  in  different  parts  of  the  head.  Stitches
about,  the  head,  between  the  right  occipital  protuberance
and  the  mastoid  process. Boring  pain  in  the  side  ot  the
head  and  occiput.  Throbbing  pain  in  the  forehead,  (15.  d.)
Violently  throbbing  headache,  with  heat  in  the  head  and
countenance,  and  nausea  and  vomiting,  (17.  d.)  Feeling
of  looseness  in  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  with  dull,
stitching  pain. The  brain  feels  loose  ;  stitches  in  the
temples  when  shaking  the  head. Concussion  in  the  brain,
when  running  fast,  resembling  a  momentary  jerk  or  pres-
sure. The  headache  in  the  fore  part  of  the  head  is  mo-
mentarily exacerbated  by  knitting  the  brow  ;  the  frontal
bone  is  then  sore  to  the  touch. Congestion  of  blood  to
the  head,  with  sweat  of  the  forehead,  at  noon. Much  heat
in  the  head  and  face,  after  noon. Heat  in  the  head,  with
inclination  to  cool  it  by  dipping  it  into  cold  water.  Heat
of  the  forehead  with  the  oppressive  headache.  Sensation
as  if  the  head  were  enlarged,  and  swollen  within.  The
parietal  bone  feels  bruised  when  touched. Pain  on  the
head,  as  if  the  scalp  were  sore. Soreness  of  the  head
when  touching  it,  as  if  the  hairs  were  sore. Pain  to  the
touch,  at  a  place  of  the  head  which  had  been  injured  at
a  former  time,  (a.  7  d.) Drawing  together  of  the  scalp.
Motion  of  the  scalp  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  towards
the  forehead  and  back  again. Sensation  as  of  the  head
being  surrounded  with  a  cord,  (16.  d.) Involuntary  nod-
ding of  the  head  forwards. Short  burning  in  top  of  the
head. Cold  feeling  on  the  vertex,  with  painful  sensitive-
ness of  the  scalp  and  closing  of  the  eyelids. The  head


304  NATItUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.

is  liable  to  cold,  he  has  to  wrap  it  up  constantly.  When  he
leaves  the  head  uncovered  in  day-time,  he  has  a  nightly  ob-
struction of  the  nose.  Sweat  in  daytime,  only  in  the  morn-
ing, when  rising  from  the  bed.  Sweat  about  the  head,  at
night,  when  waking  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp  and  nape  of
the  neck.  Itching  of  the  hairy  scalp  and  the  region  of  the
Whiskers.  Itching  eruption  on  the  hairy  border  of  the  nape
of  the  neck,  and  the  temples,  likewise  in  the  eyebrows.
Scurf  on  the  head.  Small,  hard  blotch  in  the  middle  of  the
forehead  and  nape  of  the  neck,  burning  and  painful  to  the
touch.  Rash  on  the  forehead,  perceived  only  by  touching  it.
Rough  skin  of  the  temples.  The  hairy  scalp  smells  badly,
musty  ;  the  hairs  stick  together.  Falling  off  of  the  hair.
1  he  hairs  come  off  when  merely  touching  them,  even  those
of  the  whiskers;,  (2.  d.)

Eyes.— The  margin  of  the  left  orbit  is  painful  as  if  con-
tused, when  touching  it. Sensation  as  if  sand  were  in  the
eyes  early  in  the  morning. Pain  of  the  eyes  as  if  some
foreign  body  had  got  into  it. Tension  in  the  eyes.  Pres-
sure above  the  right  eye,  as  if  there  were  a  swelling,  in-
creased by  raising  the  eyebrows,  for  a  day  and  a  half.
Pressure  in  the  eye,  during  twilight. Aching  in  the  eye-
lids. Pressure  in  the  eye,  when  looking  at  a  thing  intent-
ly. Ilching  of  the  eyes  in  the  inner  canthus,  and°lachry-
malion. Ilching  of  \he  eyes,  he  has  to  rub  them.  Itchina
of  the  outer  canthus  of  the  left  eye,  (a.  -h  h.) Violent  itch-
ing of  the  left  inner  canthus. Itching  stitching  pain  un-
der the  left,  eye,  (a.  10  h.) Stitches  in  the  right  eye,  (7.
14.  d.) Stitches  in  the  canthi,  (a.  4  h.) Boring  pain  in
the  eye. Pain  as  from  excoriation  in  the  eyes.  Burning
pain  in  the  eye,  at  a  small  point. Violent  burning  of  the
eyes  in  the  evening,  (17.  d.) Dry  burning  of  the  eyes,  in
the  evening,  when  writing. Burning  in  'the  inner  can-
thus. Redness  of  ihe  eyes,  with  lachrymation,  (3.4.  d.)
Redness  and  inflammation  of  the  white* of  the  eye,  with
sensation  as  if  the  eyeballs  were  too  large  and  pressed.
Inflammation  of  the  eyes  and  lachrymation  from  every  lit-
tle breeze. Soreness  of  the  right  lower  eyelid.  Conti-
nued ulceration  and  great  redness  of  the  lower  eyelids.
Large  stye  in  the  inner  canthus  of  the  right  eye.  Pimple
on  the  margin  of  the  lower  eyelid,  not  in  the  Meibomian


NATRTJM  MUIUATICini — SALT.


305


glands.  Lachrymation  in  the  open  air.  Acrid  tears  in  the
eyes,  early  in  the  morning. Acrid  tears,  making  the
canlhus  red  and  sore.  Agglutination  of  the  eye  in  the  morn-
ing. Dry  feeling  in  the  eyes,  as  after  long  weeping,  (when
riding  in  a  carriage.) Feeling  of  dryness,  in  the  evening,
in  the  inner  canlhi,  wilh  pressure. Drawing  in  the  eyes,
frequently  during  the  day,  afterwards  violent  itching  of  the
samc.'obliging  one  to  rub  them. Darting  in  the  outer  can-
thus  of  the  left  eye,  especially  in  the  evening,  (4.  d.)  Tre-
mor of  the  upper  and  lower  eyelid,  for  some  weeks.  Vio-
lent sense  as  of  twitching  of  the  eyes. When  she  is  on
the  point  of  dropping  to  sleep,  the  right  eyelid  is  spasmodi-
cally drawn  up  again,  with  an  aching  pain ;  this  done,  the
lid  trembles. Spasmodic  closing  of  the  eyelids,  early  in
the  morning,  when  rising,  at  twilight  and  night;  she  feels
the  contraction  even  when  leaving  the  eyes  closed.  Dim
eyes. Dimsightedness,  in  the  morning. Dimness,  as  if
the  eyes  were  covered  with  mucus. Dimness  and  obscu-
ration of  sight.  Dimness  of  sight,  as  if  he  looked  through
a  dim  glass. Gauze  before  the  eyes. All  objects  seem  lo
him  covered  wilh  a  thin  veil. Unsteady  look,  things  be-
come confused  when  looking  at  them. The  letters  and
sewing  stitches  become  blurred  when  looking  at  them.  In

1  i

the  morning  the  eyes  remain  dim  for  a  time.  When  look-
ing at  while  objects,  they,  are  seen  as  through  moths.
Vanishing  of  sight.  His  sight  vanishes  when  reading  or
writing;  in  the  right  eye  he  feels  a  pressure,  extending  in-
to the  head  ;  this  disappears  after  walking  for  a  long  time.
Only  one-half  of  the  objects  is  visible,  the  other  dark.  Short-
sightedness, (4.  9.  d.)  Sensation  as  of  a  rain  being  before
her  eyes.  She  becomes  long-sighted.  A  small  fiery  point
before  her  eye,  ivhich  remains  wherever  she  may  look.
Fiery  points  before  the,  eyes*  when  walking  in  the  open
air.  She  sees  a  fiery  zigzag  appearance  around  all  things.
A  number  of  light  and  dark  points  before  her  eyes.

Ears  — Otalgia,  going  and  coming.  Otalgia  behind  and
in  the  right  ear.  Pressure  behind  the  ear,  when  drinking
fast,  (3.  d.)  Stitches  in  the  ears,  in  the  forenoon,  when
sitting  quietly,  (2.  d.)  Drawing  stitches  in  the  right  ear.
Dull  drawing  and  stitching  pain  in  the  ear,  and  thence  down
the  throat,  as  far  as  the  shoulder-joint. Digging  (grinding)


306


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


stitching  pain  in  the  right  ear,  during  and  between  the  acts
of  deglutition.  An  aching  pain  in  the  teeth  moves  into  the
ear,  with  many  stitches.  Continuous  itching  stitch  in  the
right  lobule.  Itching  of  the  interior  of  the  right  ear.  Itch-
ing of  the  lobule.  Itching  behind  the  ear,  and  afterwards
burning  for  a  long  time.  Hot  ear  or  lobule  for  several
days.  Heat  of  the  left,  weak  ear,  for  several  evenings.
Redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  the  left  concha,  with  burn-
ing pain.  Swelling  of  the  meatus  auditorius  and  discharge
from  the  ear.  Running  of  the  ear,  for  many  days.  Itch-
ing, rash-like  eruption  behind  the  ear,  for  some  days,  (21.
d.)  Small  pimples  behind  the  left  ear,  (16.  d.)  Deaf-
ness, (7.  d.)  Hard  hearing,  (6.7.  17.  d.)  A  shock  in  the
left  ear,  followed  by  tingling  for  a  long  time.  Singing  in
the  left  ear,  (immediately.)  Buzzing  in  the  ears,  early
when  waking.  Humming  in  the  ears,  early,  when  in
bed,  and  when  sitting.  Sudden  rushing  through  the
ears.  Painless  cracking  in  the  ear,  when  chewing.
Fluttering  in  the  left  ear  as  of  a  butterfly,  at  dinner.

Nose. — When  blowing  the  nose,  a  place  near  the  root
of  the  nose  in  the  canthus,  (the  lachrymal  sac  ?)  becomes
inflated  with  air  and  painful,  sore  to  the  touch,  (2.  d.)
Twitchings  of  the  muscles  on  the  left  side  of  the  root  of
the  nose.  Boring  pain  in  the  nasal  bones,  especially  in  the
root  of  the  nose  and  towards  the  malar  bone.  Burning  in
the  nose  (and  eyes.)  Redness,  heat  and  swelling  of  the
left  wing  of  the  nose  ;  with  sore  pain,  especially  when
blowing  the  nose,  (2.  d.)  Inflammation  and  swelling  of  the
left  half  of  the  nose,  with  itching,  soreness  to  the  touch,
and  sensation  as  if  the  left  nostril  were  narrower,  (24.  d.)
Internal  soreness  of  the  nose.  Soreness  and  swelling  of
the  interior  of  the  wings  of  the  nose,  and  many  pimples  on
them.  Insensibility  and  deadness  of  the  interior  of  one-
half  of  the  nose.  Itching  in  the  right  nostril,  as  if  a  worm
would  bore  through  it.  Itching  of  the  left  wing  of  the
nose.  White  pimples  around  the  nose.  A  number  of
erosive  vesicles  on  the  root  of  the  nose,  forming  scurfs;
Small,  burning  pimples  under  the  septum,  with  sensation
as  if  an  acrid  fluid  were  dropping  out  of  the  nose,  (4.  d.)
She  blows  out  a  quantity  of  coagulated  blood.  Bleeding
of  the  nose,  frequently.  Violent  bleeding  of  the  nose,  when


MaTRUM  MUIUATICUM  SALT.


30?


coughing  at  night,  with  bruised  pain  of  all  the  limbs.  Bleed-
ing of  the  nose,  when  stooping.

Face. — Aching  in  the  malar  bones  and  near  the  ear.
Drawing  pain  in  the  right  malar  bone.  Bruised  pain  in
the  zygoma,  especially  when  touching  it.  Visible  twitch-
ing of  the  muscles  of  the  face.  Face  shining  as  from
grease.  Livid  face.  Yellowish  complexion  with  much
pain  in  the  abdomen.  Redness  of  the  left  cheek,  every
day,  especially  afternoon.  Much  heat  in  the  face.  Swell-
ing of  the  left  side  of  the  face  and  lips.  Itching  of  the
region  of  the  whiskers.  Pimples  in  the  face.  Pimples
on  forehead  and  nose,  (a.  7  d.)  Ulcer  on  the  left  cheek.
Boil  over  the  eye,  discharging  much  pus.  Falling  off
of  the  hairs  in  the  region  of  the  ivhiskers.

Mouth. — Numbness  and  tingling  of  the  lips,  especially
evening.  Lancinating  pain  from  the  upper  lip  across  the
cheek,  into  the  ear.  Burning  of  the  vermilion-border  of
the  upper  lip.  Sore  feeling  of  the  corners  of  the  mouth
when  opening  it.  Swelling  of  the  lower  lip  and  tip  of
the  tongue,  with  violent  burning,  waking  him  from  sleep
at  night.  Swelling  round  about  the  lips,  with  large
vesicles,  the  vermilion  border '  being  sore  and  ulcerated,
and  the  tongue  being  covered  with  smarting  vesicles.
Eruption  on  the  vermilion  border  of  the  lips,  smarting  as  if
excoriated.  A  number  of  vesicles  on  the  vermilion  border
of  the  lower  lip.  burning  and  smarting  when  the  lips  become
moist.  Vesicles,  forming  scurfs,  on  the  vermilion  border
of  the  lower  lip.  Small,  painful  pimple  on  the  upper
lip,  below  the  septum,  (2.  d.)  Small  pimples  around  the
mouth  form  a  kind  of  herpes,  which  becomes  covered
with  scurf,  detaching  itself  in  a  few  days,  but  leavino-  a
red  spot  for  two  weeks  after,  (a.  6.  d.)  Eruption  in  both
corners  of  the  mouth,  (25.  d.)  Small,  ulcerated  pimple
in  the  right  corner  of  the  mouth,  especially  painful  when
touched,  (3.  d.)  Ulcerated  corner  of  the  mouth.  Peeling
off  of  the  vermilion  border  of  the  upper  lip.  Dry,  chapp-
ed hps.  The  lower  lip  becomes  chapped  and  peels  off,
in  the  evening  ;  it  becomes  very  painful  and  sensitive,
and  becomes  chapped  in  the  middle  when  sneezing
Deep,  painful  fissure  in  the  middle  of  the  upper  lip
Ked,  itching  spot  on  the  chin,  becoming  ulcerated  after


308


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


friction.  Itching,  miliary  eruption  on  the  chin,  for  some
days.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — The  lower  jaw  is  painful  to  the
touch.  Compressive  pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw,
in  front  of  the  ear,  most  violent  when  opening  the  mouth
very  widely.  Drawing  pain  in  the  lower  jaw,  (10.  d.)
Tearing  in  the  lower  jaw,  extending  as  far  as  the  temple,
likewise  in  the  parotid  and  sub-maxillary  glands,  with
occasional  boring  and  pinching  in  indurated  glands,  worse
at  night ;  she  had  to  bandage  her  cheek,  to  alleviate  her
sufferings.  Dull  stitches  in  the  articulation  of  the  jaw.
The  sub-maxillary  glands  are  painful  when  stooping.  Pain
of  the  sub-maxillary  glands,  as  if  squeezed,  contused  or
swollen,  (a.  30  h.)  Toothache,  with  swelling  of  the
cheeks,  for  many  days.  The  teeth  are  very  sensitive  to
cold.  Intense  toothache  when  drawing  in  air.  Pain  of
the  teeth  when  touching  them  with  the  tongue  while  chew-
ing. Pain  of  the  teeth  as  if  something  were  lodged  in
them  which  desires  to  get  out.  Toothache  in  an  empty
socket  and  the  adjoining  teeth,  the  pain  being  relieved  by
touching  or  pressing  upon  the  parts.  Pressure  and  push-
ing in  the  upper  teeth,  for  some  hours.  Dull  pressure  in
a  hollow  tooth.  Pressure  and  breathing  sensation  in  the
teeth  coming  from  the  left  malar  bone,  with  sensation  as
if  he  were  unable  to  establish  contact  between  more  than
a  portion  of  the  teeth  of  the  upper  and  lower  row.  Break-
ing, stretching  and  drawing  in  a  hollow  molar  tooth,  and
thence  extending  to  the  throat  and  fauces,  so  that  she  is
neither  able  to  open  her  mouth,  nor  to  swallow,  nor  to  utter
a  loud  word  ;  the  pain  extends  also  to  the  ear,  where  one
experiences  an  itching  and  stinging  sensation  ;  worst  in
the  evening  and  before  midnight.  Dull  drawing  in  the
teeth.  Drawing  toothache  after  a  meal  and  at  night,  fol-
lowed by  swelling  of  the  cheeks.  Violent  drawing  in  the
right  row.  Drawing  toothache,  with  stitches,  extending
even  into  the  eye,  every  other  day.  Stitches,  only  in  the
hollow  or  corroded  teeth.  Stitching  pain,  now  in  one,
now  in  another  tooth,  one  hour  every  forenoon.  Stitches
in  the  teeth  and  side  of  the  head,  with  stitches  through  the
ears,  from  morning  till  evening,  (10.  d.)  Stitching  and
throbbing  pain  in  an  anterior  tooth. Throbbing  toothache,


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


309


afterwards  drawing  extending  into  the  car,  as  if  something
would  get  out  there,  with  much  heat  in  the  face  and  swell-
ing of  the  gums  ;  the  teeth  being  higher  and  elongated,
after  midnight. Throbbing  pain  and  burning  boring  in
an  anterior  tooth. Throbbing  and  boring  in  the  teeth.
Boring  in  a  tooth. Sore  pain  in  the  teeth. Numbness  of
the  teeth  when  pressing  upon  them  ;  they  feel  elongated,
and  as  if  they  did  not  correspond  with  one  another.
Loose  teeth. Looseness  and  pain  of  the  anterior  teeth.
Dulness  of  the  teeth. Increase  of  the  decay  of  the  teeth
Ulcer  of  a  tooth  on  the  inner  side  of  the  right  jaw,  more
painful  between  than  during  the  acts  of  eating,  (7.  d.)
Extreme  sensitiveness  of  the  gums  to  cold  and  warm
things. The  gums  are  exceedingly  sensitive  ;  touching
them  with  the  tongue,  excites  a  slinging  pain.  Drawing
pain  in  the  gums,  now  in  the  upper,  now  in  the  lower  jaw,
the  gums  swell  and  are  very  painful  to  the  touch.  Inflam-
mation and  swelling  of  the  gums,  with  swelling  of  the
cheeks. Swelling  of  the  gums  of  a  hollow  tooth.  Swell-
ing of  the  gums,  a  couple  of  hours  every  morning  ;  she
was  unable  to  chew  on  that  side. Swelling  and  sore  pain
of  the  gums. Swelling  and  soreness  of  the  posterior  side
of  the  gums  of  the  upper  and  anterior  leeth.  Painful
swelling  of  the  gums,  readily  bleeding. Bleeding  of  the
gums. Ulcer  on  the  gums,  painfuf  day  and  m<dit,  for
three  weeks.

Mouth.— Vesicles  and  soreness  in  the  mouth,  very
painful.  Ulcerated  places  in  the  mouth,  on  ihc  gums,
tongue,  where  both  the  solid  and  liquid  food  causes  a
smarting  sensation.  Vesicles  on  the  tongue,  burning  and
smarting  when  eating.  Swelling  under  the  tongue  with  a
slinging  pain.  Sore  feeling  of  the  tongue,  also  between
the  meals.  One  half  of  the  tongue  feels  numb  and  stiff.
Iinghng  in  the  tongue  ;  it  has  gone  to  sleep.  Sensation
in  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  as  if  it  trembled.  Heavy  tongue.
He  has  to  make  great  efforts  to  talk  ;  as  if  the  organs  of

chondria^6 '  ^  Weakncss  comes  hom  the  hypo-

Pharynx  and  (EsoPiiAGUs.-Sore  throat  as  if  the  sub-
maxillary  glands  were  swollen,  without,  however,  any
actual  swelling. Sore  throat,  worse  morning  and  evel


310


NATR.UM  MTJRIATICTJM — SALT.


ing. Sore  throat,  as  if  a  plug  were  lodged  in  the  throat,
during  deglutition. Sensation  as  of  a  plug  being  lodged
in  the  throat,  also  between  the  acts  of  deglutition,  and  as
if  the  parts  were  raw,  with  burning  pain  and  an  anxious
sensation,  as  if  the  throat  would  close  by  swelling.  Spasm
in  the  pharynx  ;  when  swallowing,  she  found  it  very  diffi-
cult to  get  the  food  either  lower  down,  or  to  bring  it  up
again,  so  that  she  came  near  suffocating.  Constriction
of  the  right  side  of  the  throat  with  frequent  yawning,  the
pain  extending  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  which  becomes
stiff  from  it,  (3.  d.) A  jerk,  when  drinking,  not  when
eating,  in  the  region  of  the  xiphoid  cartilage,  this  region
is  also  painful  to  the  touch,  as  if  a  plug  were  lodged  there.
Stinging,  sometimes  pinching  pains  in  the  throat,  from  the
larynx  to  the  ear. Things  get  easily  into  the  wrong  pas-
sage. When  swallowing  something,  when  laughing  while
drinking,  the  beverage  comes  out  again  at  the  nose,  and
she  came  near  suffocating. Stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
throat,  during  empty  deglutition,  and  deglutition  of  food.
Stitch  behind  the  right  tonsil,  towards  the  ear,  when  yawn-
ing. Stitches  and  burning  in  the  throat,  as  if  it  were  in-
flamed, with  elongation  of  the  uvula  and  impeded  degluti-
tion. Smarting  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  it  were  inflamed
and  narrow,  when  swallowing. Ripping-up  pain,  with
sensation  of  excoriation,  in  the  parotid  gland,  when  drink-
ing. When  swallowing  tepid  drink,  it  feels  cold,  owing
to  heat  in  the  oesophagus. Ulcerated  places  in  the  oeso-
phagus, while  suffering  with  sore  throat,  with  putrid  in-
flammation and  dark-red  swelling  of  the  gums.  Dryness
in  the  oesophagus,  (3.  d.) Dry  tongue,  no  thirst.  Accu-
mulation of  saliva  in  the  mouth,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed  ;  this  gets  into  the  larynx,  which  causes  a  violent
coughing  fit,  (1.  evening.)"  Continual  accumulation  of
water  in  the  mouth. Watery,  insipid  saliva  in  the  mouth,
(immediately.) Bloody  saliva. Much  mucus  in  the
rnouth. Much  mucus  in  the  throat. Continual  hawking
of  mucus,  when  smoking,  to  which  he  is  accustomed.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Loss  of  taste,  for  a  long  lime.
Watery  taste  in  the  mouth,  evening,  with  absence  of
thirst,  "and  suppressed  secretion  of  urine.  Flat,  watery
taste  in  the  mouth,  with  want  of  appetite  ;  however,  he


NATRTJM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


311


relishes  food. Flat  taste  in  the  mouth,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, with  tongue  coated  white,  (3.  d.) Papescent,  glutin-
ous taste,  with  good  appetite  and  natural  taste  of  food,
(a.  4,  5  d.) Bitterness  of  mouth. Bitter  taste  of  food,
immediately. Bitter  taste  of  tohacco  when  smoking.
Putrid  taste  and  smell  in  the  mouth. Sour  taste  in  the
mouth,  early  in  the  morning. Thirst,  but  almost  no  de-
sire for  drink. Much  thirst,  in  the  evening,  (3.  d.)  Beer
tastes  flat  and  watery  in  the  evening. Putrid  taste  of
water. Want  of  appetite  and  aversion  to  food.  Repug-
nance to  coffee. No  appetite  for  meat. Repugnance  to
brown  bread. Aversion  to  smoking,  although  used  to  it.
Smoking  makes  him  sweat  and  tremble. No  appetite  for
supper. Appetite  in  the  mouth,  but  no  hunger.  Little
appetite,  it  increases  while  eating. Much  appetite,  but
does  not  relish  food,  (the  first  days.) No  appetite,  she
feels  too  replete  ;  but  she  relishes  "what  she  eats.  Desire
to  eat,  without  much  appetite,  and  afterwards  repletion.
Frequent  feeling  of  hunger. Feeling  of  hunger  in  the
stomach,  in  the  afternoon,  after  drinking  water,  but  with-
out any  appetite. Feeling  of  great  hunger  in  the  stom-
ach, as  if  it  were  empty,  but  no  appetite.  (1.  d.) A  vio-
lent feeling  of  hunger,  as  if  the  stomach  were  empty,
rouses  him  from  sleep  early  in  the  morning,  with  uneasi-
ness Violent  hunger,  she  had  to  eat  much,  during  the
day,  (3.  d.) He  has  to  eat  frequently;  in  an  hour  after
eating  he  is  hungry  again. Too  much  appetite  at  supper.
Painful  feeling  of  hunger  in  the  stomach,  nevertheless  he
is  immediately  satiated. Sensation  of  excessive  repletion
in  the  afternoon.  '

Gastric  Symptoms.— Nausea  after  a  meal,  for  half  an
hour.  Nausea  and  spasm  in  the  chest,  after  eating  some-
thing without  an  appetite.  Acidity  in  the  mouth,  after  a
meal,  for  half  an  hour.  Acidity  in  the  mouth  and  dryness
m  the  throat,  after  every  meal.  Heartburn  after  supper.
Burning  from  the  stomach  and  sour  eructations,  after  din-
ner, two  afternoons.  Eructation  after  eating  bread  for  24
hours.  Long  after-taste  of  the  food  after  a  meal,  espe-
cially when  the  food  was  acidulated.  Long  after-taste  of
the  food  after  taking  it,  or  he  has  the  smell  of  the  food  in
nis  nose. Hiccough  after  a  meal.  Pressure  and  repletion


312


NAT  RUM  MURIATICUM — :SA.LT.


in  the  stomach  after  dinner.  Fulness  and  distension  of
the  region  of  the  stomach  after  a  meal.  Distensio.i  of  the
abdomen,  and  feeling  of  laxity  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  every
tiling  were  loose  in  that  part,  after  a  meal.  Distension  of
the  abdomen,  heat  of  the  face,  slumber,  and  afterwards
taste  of  herbs  in  the  mouth,  with  stupefaction  and  intoxi-
cation of  the  head.  Compressive  griping  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  after  a  meal.  Sensation  of  pressure,  with  sore-
ness in  the  stomach,  after  a  meal.  Rumbling  in  the  ab-
domen, after  a  meal.  Pinching  cutting  in  the  abdomen
after  eating  or  drinking.  Obtusion  of  the  head,  after  a
meal.  Aching  in  the.  forehead  after  a  meal.  Compres-
sion in  the  forehead  after  supper.  After  drinking  some
warm  milk,  to  quench  her  thirst,  early  in  the  morning,
she  becomes  immediately  hot  and  trembling  in  the  whole
body.  Inclination  to  lie  down  after  dinner,  drowsiness
and  inability  to  think,  (a.  6  h.)  After  eating  a  little  more
than  usual  for  supper,  he  has  a  number  of  confused
dreams  of  crimes  for  which  he  was  tried.  Pulse  quick,
and  palpitation  of  the  heart  after  a  meal.  Quick  pulse,
with  anguish  and  oppressed  breathing  after  a  meal.  In-
termittent pulse,  after  dinner.  Great  drowsiness  previous
to  a  meal.  After  a  meal  he  feels  quite  exhausted  for  a
couple  of  hours.  Unsuccessful  eructations.  Empty  eruc-
tations from  time  to  lime.  Empty  eructations  after  every
meal,  or  in  the  open  air.  Eructations  tasting  of  the  in-'
gesta,  several  hours  after  the  meal  Gulping  up  of  bile.
Sour  regurgitation  of  food.  Gulping  up  of  a  sour  fluid,
late  in  the  evening.  Sour,  scraping  regurgitation  of  food.
Acid  scraping  sensation  in  the  fauces.  Sort  of  raw
heartburn.  Heartburn,  the  whole  day,  worse  in  the  even-
ing. Hiccough,  (1.  d.)  Hiccough  for  several  days,  (a-
25  d.)  Nausea  and  qualmishness  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, every  morning  from  7  till  noon.  Nausea  and  digging
sensation  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  at  8  o'clock  every
morning,  for  two  hours.  Nausea  towards  noon,  as  if  from
canine  hunger.  Frequent  nausea,  at  different  periods,  not
hindering  eating.  Nausea,  as  soon  as  she  presses  upon
the  painful  spot.  Excessive  nausea,  after  drinking  some-
thing which  was  agreeable  to  her  ;  she  was  obliged  to  he
down,  and  laid  on  the  right  side,  which  diminished  the


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.  313

nausea. Nausea,  immediately  after  a  meal,  several  fits  of
if,  with  heaviness  of  the  head,  and  frequent  bitter  eructa-
tions, for  two  hours. Nausea,  as  if  vomiting  would  ensue,
for  some  minutes. Nausea,  with  inclination  to  vomit,
hawking  up  a  good  deal  of  mucus  while  smoking.  Nau-
sea, with  inclination  to  vomit,  accompanied  with  writhing
and  turning  in  the  stomach. Inclination  to  vomit,  after
breakfast. (3.  d.) Retching  with  nausea  and  apparent
exhaustion  of  the  vital  powers,  after  taking  a  warm  break-
fast, which  was agreeable to  her,  without  vomiting.
Watcrbrash,  almost  every  day,  after  a  meal,  sometimes
repeated. Walerbrash  after  pressure  upon  the  stomach
after  a  meal,  followed  by  nausea,  after  which  came  vomit-
ing of  the  ingesta  and  lastly  of  bile,  accompanied  by  colic.
Dull,  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  stomach,  increased  by
stooping. Sensation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  stomach,
mouth,  and  behind  the  sternum,  as  if  a  foreign  body  were
lodged  there."  Weight  and  tightness  transversely 'across
the  parts  below  the  pit  of  the  stomach. Sensation  as  of
a  hard  swelling  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the  afternoon,
with  tightness  across  the  hypochondria. Pressure  in  the
region  of  the  stomach.

Stomach— Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  stomach,  as
it  lie  had  caught  cold.  Pressure  in  the  siomach,  extend-
ing into  the  chest,  4  and  G  hours  after  dinner,  a  quarter
of  an  hour  Pressure  in  the  pit  of  the  siomach,  as  if
some  hard  body  were  lodged  in  the  stomach,  obliging  one
lo  take  deep  breath,  (immediately.)  Aching  and  dull,
stitching  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  siomach,  from  above  down-
wards Aching  pain  below  the  pit.  of  the  stomach,  above
he  umbilicus  relieved' by  pressing  upon  it.  Oppression
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  standing.  Fcelino-  0f
anguish  ,n  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  Cramp  in  the  sum-
ach, towards  evening,  through  the  night,  uniil  next  morn-

whh  w,rac;,vei<iramp  -'M  UlC  S,omach'  in  ,,1C  afternoon,
ev  i  ,  fllC^nCSS  in-,he  Stomach  ™d  back  until
evening,  (4.  d.) Contractive  pain  in  the  region  of  the

minlnthf't  °f  fe  P"™*y«f Colic  y

pa  n  in  ti  c  stomach,  with  nausea,  early  in  the  morniri
when  waking Throbbing  in  the  pit  of  the  slomacl  re
ambling  palpuation. Pain,  as  after  contusion,  dn  the  left

14


314


NATRTTM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


side  of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  which  may  also  be  felt  ,
when  touching  the  part.  Stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stom-
ach, (10.  d.)  Small  stitches  on  the  right  side  near  the
stomach,  every  afternoon.  Very  painful  prickling  in  the
stomach.  Burning  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  parox-
ysms. At  times  heat,  at  times  coldness  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach.  Small  red  spots  upon  the  skin  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  exciting  a  stinging  sensation  when  touched,  and
obliging  one  to  rub  ;  afterwards  the  spots  become  elevat-
ed itching  pustules.

Abdomen. —  Violent  aching  in  the  region  of  the  liver.
Feeling  of  stiffness  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  when  bend-
ing the  trunk  to  the  left  side. Painful  tension  in  the  right
side  of  the  abdomen. Pinching  pain  in  the  right  hypo-
chondrium,  (19.  d.) Pinching  pain  in  right  side  of  the
abdomen,  making  lying  on  the  left  side  intolerable  to  him,
(15.  d.).  Drawing  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver  from  above  downwards  ;
afterwards  pinching  below  the  umbilicus. Stitches  in
the  region  of  the  liver,  when  sitting,  every  afternoon.
Scraping  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Tensive
sensation  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  as  if  caused  by
incarceration  of  flatulence,  in  the  afternoon.  Boring,
with  pressure,  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  and  afterwards
dull,  gloomy  headache. Pressure,  with  a  stitching  sensa-
tion, in  the  left  hypochondrium,  mostly  when  walking  fast.
Stitches  in  the  left  hypochondrium,  when  taking  an  inspir-
ation. Burning  pain  in  the  hypochondrium,  towards,
evening. Frequent  distension  and  feeling  of  fulness  of
the  abdomen. Distension  of  the  abdomen,  from  drinking,
with  sensation  as  if  the  intestines  were  dangling  amongst
each  other. Tension  around  the  abdomen,  as  if  from
flatulence,  relieved  by  eructations. Tension  around  the
hips,  as  if  the  skin  were  too  narrow  ;  she  had  to  open  her
dress. Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  of  a  load,  which  was
felt  when  walking. Pressure  in  the  abdomen,  every
morning,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour. Pressure  in  the  epi-
gastrium. Continuous  uncomfortableness  and  dull  pain  in
the  abdomen,  resembling  an  indigestion  in  the  intestines,
frequently  characterised  by  short  pressure  or  pinching  ;  at
the  same  time  one  feels  the  formation  of  flatulence,  which


NATRUM  MURIAT1CUM  SALT.


315


passes  off  with  a  fetid  odor,  (a.  2  d.) Colic,  early  in  the
morning,  when  waking,  as  if  from  spasmodically  incar-
cerated flatulence,  causing  a  tensive,  aching  pain,  with
violent  itching  near  the  genital  organs  ;  all  these  symp-
toms disappeared  after  a  short  sleep,  without  emission  of
flatulence,  (a.  36  h.) Clawing  sensation  in  the  left  side  of
the  abdomen,  when  walking  or  lying  down.  Contractive
pain  in  the  abdomen,  towards  evening  ;  she  had  to  bend
double  ;  relieved  by  walking. Contractive  darlings  in  the
abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,  when  in  bed.  Contract-
ive, labor-like  pains  in  the  abdomen,  with  weakness.  La-
bor-like colic,  when  riding  in  a  carriage.  Labor-like
drawing  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  extending  into
(he  thighs. Drawing  pain  in  the  umbilical  region,  in  the
direction  of  the  thighs. Drawing,  pinching  pain  in  the
left  side  of  the  umbilicus,  extending  into  the  rectum  and
anus. Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  caused  by  worms,
in  the  evening,  (17.  d.) Pinching  colic,  every  afternoon.
Pinching  in  the  flesh,  first  below  the  short  ribs,  afterwards
below  the  umbilicus. Pinching  in  the  epigastrium,  with
pain  in  the  stomach. Frequent  pinching,  every  day,  in
the  whole  of  the  abdomen,  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  and
towards  the  small  of  the  back. Pinching  colic,  and  as  if
the  parts  were  sore,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed  ;
afterwards  in  the  back  and  the  scapulas,  pressing  and  sore,
going  off  after  rising. Stinging  pinching  above  the  um-
bilicus. Pinching,  with  pressure  in the  epigastrium.
Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning  when
in  bed,  for  some  mornings. Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,
early  in  the  morning  when  getting  out  of  bed.  Cutting
pain  in  the  abdomen,  commencing  in  the  morning,  but  be-
coming worse  in  the  afternoon. Cutting  in  the  abdomen
with  rumbling. Continuous  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the
lower  part  of  the  abdomen. Pain  in  the  abdomen,  as  if
every  part  m  it  would  tear. When  walking,  the  intes-
tines feel  as  ,f  they  were  loose  and  too  heavy,  and  as  if
they  would  fall  out. The  inguinal  region  is  painful  when
getting  up  from  a  seat,  and  when  walking  fast,  (a 1 1  d  )
Fain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  left  iliac  region.  Protru-
sion of  the  inguinal  hernia. Swelling  of  an  inguinal
gland. He  is  very  much  tormented  by  flatulence,  and


316


NATIUJM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


the  abdomen  is  distended.  Incarceration  of  flatulence.
Flatulent  colic,  especially  during  motion,  (almost  imme-
diately.) A  quantity  of  flatulence,  inducing  tension  and
stitches  in  the  abdomen.  Flatulence  moves  about  in  the
abdomen  and  the  sides  of  the  abdomen,  without  emission  ;
accompanied  by  heaviness  of  the  head,  humming  in  the
upper  part  of  the  head,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  and  obstruc-
tion of  both  nostrils.  Fermentation  in  the  abdomen.
Gurgling  in  the  abdomen,  as  in  diarrhoea.  Borborygmi  for
many  weeks.  Excessive  emission  of  flatulence.  Sour-
smelling  flatulence. Flatulence  smelling  like  rotten  eggs.

Stool. — Diarrhoea  after  emission  of  flatulence,  (12.  d.)
Stool  after  unsuccessful  pressing.  Unsuccessful  desire
for  s'.ool.  Retention  of  stool  the  first  clays.  Hard  stool
every  other  day  ;  she  has  to  press  hard,  (a.  15  d.)  Hard
stool,  every  two  or  three  days,  with  exertion,  and  frequently
after  unsuccessful  desire.  Hard,  dry  stool.  Frequent,
small  stools  a  day.  Irregular,  unsufficient  stool.  Violent
desire  for  stool,  without  evacuation,  (a  36  h.)  Frequent
desire  for  stool,  with  only  a  small  quantity  of  faeces,  (b\  d.)
Violent  desire  for  stool  ;  he  was  scarcely  able  to  retain  the
stool  for  a  moment ;  the  stools  were  papescent.  Stool  at
the  right  time,  but  very  difficult,  (the  first  days.)  Hard
stool  the  first  days,  the  following  days  the  stool  was  soft.
Diarrhoea  like  water.  Stool  mixed  with  blood.  Coagu-
lated blood  with  the  stool.  Pressure  in  the  hypogastrium,
in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  previous  to  stool.  Pressing
towards  the  rectum,  previous  to  stool,  as  if  flatulence
became  incarcerated.  Soreness  in  the  abdomen,  previous
to  stool  or  emission  of  flatulence.  Culling  pain  in  the  ab-
domen, previous  to  stool.  During  expulsion  of  stool,
(which  was  soft,)  or  emission  of  flatulence,  labor-like
pressing  in  the  abdomen  from  above  downwards  ;  she  has
to  lean  her  hands  against  something  ;  the  pain  'goes  off
with  the  stool.  Scraping  sensation  in  the  reclum,  during
hard  stool.  After  stool,  violent,  unsuccessful  tenesmus.
Pressing  in  the  rectum,  after  slool.  Burning  at  the  rec-
lum, after  hard  stool.  Burning  at  the  anus,  after  soft
stool.  Fissures  of  ihe  anus,  after  stool.  Itching  at  the
anus  after  the  somewhat  bloody  slool.  After  stool,  pinch-
ing as  if  diarrhoea  would  come  on,  without  inducing  any,


NATItUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.  317

early  in  the  morning. Tenesmus  of  the  rectum,  without
stool,  after  a  meal,  (3.  d.) Pressing  pain  in  the  rectum.
Spasmodic  constriction  of  the  anus. Sensation,  during
stool,  as'if  the  rectum  were  contracted  ;  the  expulsion  of
stool  requires  great  efforts  ;  first,  hard  faeces  are  passed,
Assuring  the  anus  and  causing  it  to  bleed  and  making  it
feel  sore  ;  this  hard  stool  is  always  followed  by  liquid  ;
she  is  constipated  every  other  day. Frequent  pinching  in
the  reel um,  with  tenesmus,  resulting  in  mere  emission  of
flatulence  with  mucus. Frequent  stitches  in  the  rectum,
especially  afternoon. Stitches  in  the  anus,  along  the  rec-
tum from  below  upwards,  between  the  stools.  '  Stitches
and  aching  at  the  anus. Itching  stitches  in  the  rectum,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed. Burning  pain  at  the  anus.
Continuous  burning  at  the  anus,  especially  after  chagrin.
Smarling  soreness  at  the  anus,  especially  "after  thin  stool.
Sore,  hot  anus. Soreness  around  the  anus  and  between
the  nates. Herpes  about  the  anus. Varices  of  the  anus,
with  stinging  pain  and  humid. Protrusion  of  the  rectum
and  burning  at  the  anus,  with  emission  of  a  quantity  of
bloody  ichor,  so  that  he  was  unable  to  sleep  in  the  nisht
irom  pain,  (in  a  few  hours.)

Urinary  Organs.— Desire  to  urinate,  without  emission,
(.a.  17  d.)  Pressure  upon  the  bladder,  between  the  acts
ot  micturition.  Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  emidinfr  a
quantity  of  good-colored  urine.  Frequent  micturition,
every  half  hour.  Frequent,  copious  emission  of  hot  urine
Copious  micturition,  with  violent  desire,  almost  every  half
hour,  howsoever  little  he  may  drink  ;  at  night  it  rouses
him  from  s  eep.  Frequent  micturition  at  night,  and  also
unsuccessful  desire  to  urinate.  Violent  desire  to  urinate,
and  inability  to  retain  the  urine,  which  flows  copiously,  (a.

0  h.) Involuntary  emission  of  urine  while  walking
Light-coloured urine. White-turbid  urine,  after  pinch
ing  in  the  urethra. The  urine  speedily deposUs  a
sediment  looking  like  brick-dust. P  Re/ Bedim nt  in
the  loam-colored  urine. Red  sand  in  the  urine.  PreS"
sure upon the bladder and in the  hypogastrium
during micturition. Biting  sensation in  lL&  ure  hr"
during  micturition. Biting  sensation  in  the  pudendum
■during  mictuntion. Burnmg  in  the  urethra  Sng  mZ-


316


NATRUM  MURlATICUM-»-SALT.


turition.  Contraction  in  the  hypogastrium  after  micturi-
tion, like  cramp,  for  five  minutes.  When  pressing  upon
the  urethra,  it  feels  sore.  Drawing  in  the  urethra,  after
micturition.  Cutting  in  the  urethra,  shortly  after  urinat-
ing. Violent  stitches  in  the  urethra,  between  the  acts  of
micturition.  Stinging  itching  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,
which  seems  to  be  glued  up  with  a  sort  of  gum,  (pros-
tatic juice  1)  Itching  stitches  in  the  urethra,  between  the
acts  of  micturition,  some  days  in  succession.  Itching  of
the  orifice  of  the  urethra,  followed  by  desire  to  urinate,
(2.  d.)  Itching  and  burning  in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra,
in  the  evening  when  going  to  bed,  (1.  d.)  Burning  and
culling  in  the  urethra,  after  micturition,  with  emission  of
a  thin  mucus,  making  translucent,  stiff  spots  in  the  shirt.
A  fluid  comes  out  of  the  urethra  after  micturition,  first
causing  an  itching,  afterwards  a  burning,  (3.  d.)  Milk-
like discharge  after  urinating,  (prostatic  juice?)  Dis-
charge of  yellow  pus  from  the  urethra,  leaving  spots  in  the
linen,  as  if  it  were  a  real  gonorrhrea,  but  without  pain
during  micturition,  but  with  some  tension  in  the  inguinal
glands,  which  are  not  visibly  swollen,  (a.  29  d.)

Genital  Organs. — The  genital  organs  smell  very  badly
and  strongly.  Intolerable,  smarting  itching  near  the  geni-
tal organs,  with  erosive  pain  after  friction,  for  many  weeks,
(a.  24  h.)  Dartings,  in  the  penis.  A  jerk  in  the  penis,
between  the  acts  of  micturition.  Stitches  in  the  penis,
during  and  between  the  acts  of  micturition,  (26.  d.)
Itching  and  tingling  of  the  glans;  he  is  obliged  to
scratch.  Itching  of  the  tip  of  the  glans,  with  desire  to  scratch.
Redness  of  the  tip  of  the  glans.  Great  itching,  and  hu-
midity of  the  corona  glandis.  Some  red  spots  upon  the
glans.  Retraction  of  the  prepuce  behind  the  glans  ;  feel-
ing of  rubbing  dryness  upon  the  glans,  touching  the  clothes.
Pinching  in  the  testicles.  Drawing-aching  in  the  testicles,
commencing  at  the  abdominal  ring.  Relaxed  scrotum,  for
several  days,  (a.  20  d.)  Violent  itching  of,  and  under  the
scrotum,  and  of  the  left  thigh,  at  a  red,  inflamed  place.
Soreness  near  the  scrotum,  on  the  thigh.  Itching,  circum-
posite. Feeling  of  weakness  in  the  genital  parts.  Dor-
mant state  of  the  sexual  instinct.  Feeble  sexual  desire,  and


NATRUM  MURIATICTJM  SALT.


319


retarded  emission  during  an  embrace,  (a.  13  d.)  Exces-
sive sexual  desire,  erections  and  voluptuous  feeling  during
an  embrace  for  the  first  12  days;  all  these  symptoms  di-
minish so  much  more  afterwards. Lewdness,  in  the  even-
ing when  in  bed. Sudden  sexual  desire  when  sitting  ;
going  off  when  walking  about. The  sexual  desire  is  ra-
ther physically  excited,  (a.  8  d.) No  erection  or  pollution
for  five  weeks. Violent  erection,  (5.  10.  d.)  Erections,
early  in  the  morning,  without  sexual  desire. Burning  in
the  urethra,  after  the  morning  erection. Deficiency  of
erections  (ihe  first  day.) Violent  erections,  in  the  night
and  morning,  (a.  6  h.)  ;  afterwards  the  erections  were
either  wanting,  or  rare. No  emission  of  semen,  although
no  embrace,  for  5  weeks. Pollution,  in  a  married  man  (1.
and  10.  night.) Frequent  nocturnal  emissions  in  spite  of
frequent  embraces. Emission  of  semen,  which  was  very
unusual  in  him,  (I.  n.) Pollution  with  smarting  of  the
glans. Profuse  emission  of  an  individual  suffering  with
imp mce,  followed  by  a  violent  erection  lasting  the  whole
n  >ht,  and  being  almost  painful,  (6.  d.) Weak  embrace,
luo  emission  of  semen  being  rather  cold  and  sudden,  (7.
d.) Weak  embrace,  nevertheless  he  has  an  emission  of
semen  in  the  morning,  (l.  n.) Vehement  embrace,  with
sudden  <  mission  of  semen,  (26.  d.) He  feels  very  much
fatigued  by  an  embrace,  which  he  had  not  enjoyed  for  a
ong  time  previous  ;  in  the  subsequent  night,  he  had  a  pol-
lution which  exhausted  him  considerably,  (a.  56  d^  A
pollution  5  hours  after  an  embrace,  (a.  18  d.) A  pollution
shortly  after  an  embrace  ;  another  three  nights  after  After
an  embrace  he  feels  a  sharp  stitching  in  the  urethra  after
micturition,  (9.  d.) Pollutions  bring  on  coldness  in  the
joints,  and  weakness. Cutting  in  the  urethra  after  a  pol-
lution. When  thinking  of  bad  things,  he  loses  a  quantity
of  prostatic  juice,  without  his  fancy  or  his  genital  organs
being  excited,  and  without  erection. Pressing  and  push-
ing from  the  side  of  the  abdomen  towards  the  genital  or-
gans, early  in  the  morning  ;  she  had  to  sit  down  quietly  to
prevent  a  prolapsus  uteri. Dryness  of  the  vagina  and
painful  embrace  (secondary  effect?) Shortly  after  an
embrace  she  feels  easy  and  light-hearted,  but  in  a  little
while  she  becomes  irritable  and  is  out  of  humor.  Itchin"


320


NATRU1I  MURIAT1CUM  SALT.


of  the  mons  veneris.  Pimples  on  the  mons  veneris.  Falling
off  of  the  hair  of  the  mons  veneris.  The  menses  delay  A  days.
(a.  22,  27,  and  33  d.)  The  menses  last  only  3  days,  fol-
lowed by  obtusion  of  the  head,  and  a  considerable  conges-
tion of  blood  to  the  head.  The  menses  are  only  one-third
as  profuse  as  usual,  but  they  appear  at  the  proper  lime,  (5.
d.)  The  menses  are  scanty  on  the  first  and  second  day  ;
on  the  third  day,  they  are  very  profuse,  with  pain  in  the  ab-
domen as  if  sore.  Retention  of  the  otherwise  regular  men-
ses for. 8  weeks,  (a.  14  d.)  Primary  effect :  shortening  of
the  menses  ;  secondary  :  extension.  The  menses  appear
in  IS  days,  then  in  7  weeks;  after  this  period  they  cease
to  flow.  The  menses  appear  7  days  loo  soon,  (a.  8  d.)
The  menses,  which  ought  to  have  appeared  soon,  come
on  at  once,  and  more  profuse  than  usual  ;  a  secondary
effect  seems  lo  be  to  delay  and  to  diminish  the  men-
ses. The  menses  appear  3  days  too  early.  The  menses
appear  7  day*  too  early,  scanty,  headache  when  cough-
ing, stooping,  or  sneezing,  as  if  ihe  head  wouid  burst.
Reappearance  of  the  menses  which  had  stopped  for  the
lasl  b5  days,  immediately  after  the  lower  limbs  leel  very
heavy,  (15.  d.)  The  menses  reappear  in  a  woman  of  50
years,  after  having  censed  flowing  for  6  months,  (3.  d.)
Increases  the  menses  which  had  already  appeared.  The
menses  are  more  profuse  than  usual  ;  they  appear  at  the
proper  time,  and  there  is  less  colic  ;  she  feels  chilly  the
first  day,  with  much  yawning,  especially  irTlhe  afternoon,
(3.  d.)  The  menses  arc  very  profuse,  ever  »t  night,  ihe
blood  being  blackish,  (a.  45  d.)  Anxiety  previous  to  the
menses.  Previous  to  ihe  appearance  of  the  menses  which
had  delayed,  she  feels  anxious  and  qualmish  for  a  few
hours,  early  in  ihe  morning  ;  she  has  sweet  risings  along
the  oesophagus,  and  spits  some  blood  with  the  saliva.  Very
sad  during  the  menses.  She  feels  anxious  and  fainting
during  the  menses,  the  pelvis  feeling  cold,  with  much  in-
ternal heat  generally.  Heat  in  the  face,  during  ihe  men-
ses, in  the  evening.  Tearing  toothache  during  the  menses,
with  stitches,  upon  cold  air  entering  ihe  mouth.  Heavi-
ness in  the  abdomen  during  ihe  menses.  Frequent  burn-
ing and  culling  in  the  hypogaslrium,  during  micturition,
and  when  sitting  at  the  table  during  dinner. Violent  fever


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.  321


during  the  menses,  after  its  appearance,  at  night,  with  vio-
lent thirst  and  total  want  of  sleep.  Hard  stool  during  the
menses.  Obtusion  and  heaviness  of  the  head  after  the
menses,  as  if  from  congestion  of  blood  to  the  head.  Im-
potence after  the  menses,  aversion  to  an  embrace,  and  dry
vagina,  with  pain  during  an  embrace,  (12.  d.)  Leucor-
rhcea, at  night.  Leucorrhcea  after  colic,  early  in  the  morn-
ing, as  if  the  menses  would  come,  contractive  and  pressing
downwards.  Profuse  leucorrhcea,  (a.  4  h.  and  2  d.)  Leu-
corrhcea, causing  an  itching  in  the  pudendum.  Greenish
leucorrhcea,  especially  when  walking.  Erosive  pain  dur-
ing leucorrhcea.

Cold,  Catarrh. — Frequent  sneezing, several  days.
Creeping  sensation  in  the  right  side  of  the  nose,  with  pres-
sure in  the  right  eye,  as  if  he  would  sneeze,  not  going  off
by  blowing  the  nose. Frequently  unsuccessful  sneezing.
Catarrhal  feeling, every  morning. Dry  coryza,  with
obstruction  of  both  nostrils. Excessive  dry  coryza,  he
is  almost  unable  to  breathe. Dry  feeling  in  the  nose.
Water  drops  out  of  the  nose,  unawares. Thick  mucus
comes  out  at  the  nose. Fluent  coryza,  with  sneezing,
only  one  day. Violent  fluent  coryza,  for  3  days,  after-
wards dry  coryza. Moderate  coryza,  with  complete  loss
ot  smell  and  taste. Excessive  fluent  coryza,  with  loss  of
smell  and  taste. Feeling  of  dryness  in  the  posterior  nares.

.Larynx,  Frachea.— Dryness  of  the  larynx,  early  in
the  morning,  when  rising.  Scraping  sensation  in  the
larynx,  rough  vo.ee,  (a.  20  h.)  Continual  scraping  in  the
middle  of  the  chest.  Rough  voice,  with  obstruction  of
he  nose  as  in  dry  coryza  and  some  sneezing  Violent
hoarseness  (the  first  days.)  Hoarseness,  early  in  the
morning  after  a  sound  sleep,  with  a  quantity  of  mucus  in
the  throat,  and  cough.  Catarrh  and  cough  with  ti.illation,
as  if  he  had  caught  cold.  Cough  from  liullalion  in  the  pi
of  he  stomach,  with  asthma.  Rough,  hoarse,  dry  and
hacking  cough  Desire  to  cough  brought  on  by  empty
deglutition.  Talking  causes  a  desire  to  cough,  and  ol
ElT  °VhC  C  CS'-  ,  CHb'  Whidl  m.''l-Sthe'boy  qmfe

StS^aT|n,gbt-  KM°rni"S-C0USh-  CougPafter
going  to  bed.  I  he  cough  is  worse  in  the  night,  than  by
day. Dry  cough  with  utillation  and  pricking  at  night,  not


J  22


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


in  day-time.  Violent  cough,  almost  unto  vomiting,  but
not  continual,  for  4  weeks.  Cough,  with  vomiting  of  the
ingesta.  Cough  with  retching  and  vomiting,  and  expec-
toration of  bloody  saliva,  which  appeared  to  come  from  a
dry  spot  in  the  larynx.  Short  and  hacking  cough,  with
some  rattling  in  the  chest,  and  some  expectoration  of
mucus.  Cough  with  expectoration,  day  and  night.  Mu-
cus in  the  chest,  oppressing  it  and  becoming  loose  when
walking  in  the  open  air.  Badly  tasting  expectoration,
early  in  the  morning,  after  coughing  some,  with  pain  in
the  chest,  as  if  it  were  being  torn  open.  Purulent  expec-
toration, with  cough,  consisting  of  only  one  fit.  Bloody
cough.  Pain  in  the  throat  and  chest  when  coughing.
Pain  in  the  cervical  glands,  and  deep  in  the  chest,  when
coughing.  Cutting  pain  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest,
when  coughing.  Soreness  of  the  larynx  and  trachea,
when  coughing,  frequently.  Pain  in  the  abdominal  ring
and  extending  even  into  the  scrotum,  as  if  the  spermatic
cord  would  tear.  The  forehead  feels  as  if  it  would  burst
when  coughing.

Chest. — Frequent.  Hoarse,  deep  breathing,  with  pain
in  the  abdomen.  Wheezing  sound  in  the  trachea  during
an  expiration.  The  breath  appears  hot.  The  breath
smells.  Asthma.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  in  the  even-
ing. Oppression  when  breathing,  with  pain  in  the  chest.
Oppression  of  the  chest  in  a  room  ;  in  spite  of  his  feeling
weak,  he  had  to  go  into  the  open  air,  which  gave  him
relief.  Painful  oppression  of  the  chest,  resembling  a
pressure  upon  it,  every  day,  when  raising  one's  self,  atter
stooping.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  with  pressure  in  the
middle  of  the  sternum,  during  motion.  Oppression  of  the
chest,  as  if  it  were  constricted,  with  burning  in  the  hands,
(8.  d.)  Oppression  of  the  chest  when  going  to  bed,  and
also  in  the  afternoon.  Asthma  and  shortness  of  breath
when  walking  fast.  Feeling  of  apprehensive  anguish  in
the  chest.  Apprehensive  anguish  in  the  chest,  with  pres-
sure in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  worst  after  a  deep  inspira-
tion. Her  chest  is  painful  under  the  left  arm,  when  mov-
ing the  arm  or  when  breathing.  Pain  in  the  centre  of
the  .sternum,  increased  by  a  deep  inspiration.  Simple
pain  in  the  sternum,  in  short  paroxysms. Pressure  in  the


NATRUM  MUIUATICUM — SALT.


323


front  part  of  the  chest. Aching  pain  in  the  chest  after
standing  or  talking  considerably. Pressure  in  the  left  part
of  the  chest,  (a.  15  d.) Aching  pain  in  the  region  of  the
heart,  early  in  the  morning. Tension  in  the  chest,  early
in  the  morning. Tensive  pain  in  the  muscles  of  the  right
side  of  the  chest,  in  the  forenoon,  so  that  he  is  unable,  on
account  of  the  pain,  to  walk  erect ;  he  feels  great  pain
when  performing  any  other  motion  with  the  trunk.  Ten-
sion in  the  chest,  when  stretching  the  limbs,  worst  during
a  deep  inspiration. Tensive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  cla-
vicle, and  along  the  cervical  muscles,  which  is  even  felt
when  touching  the- parts. Stitches  in  the  right  half  of  the
chest,  with  hoarseness. Stitching  pain,  transversely
through  the  lungs,  in  frequent  attacks,  at  intervals  of  an
hour. Single  stitches  along  the  sternum. Pricking  pain
in  the  middle  of  the  sternum. Stitches  with  oppressed
breathing,  first  in  the  sternum,  afterwards  in  the  region  of
the  liver. Frequent  pleuritic  stitches. Stitches  in  the
right  side,  with  oppression,  (12.  d.) Stitching  pain  in  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  only  when  walking,  so  violent  that
he  has  to  press  his  hand  upon  it  to  find  relief. Stitches  in
the  left  side,  with  tensive  pain  under  the  arm,  (5.  d.)
Dull  stitches  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Continuous
stitching  pain  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  in  the  evening,
arresting  the  breathing,  but  disappearing  in  the  open  air.
Tearing  stitching  pain  from  left  upper  region  of  the  chest
to  the  shoulder-joint. Soreness  in  the  chest. Pain  as
from  bruises  in  the  region  of  the  lowermost  left  ribs,  in-
creased by  the  contact  of  clothes,  and  by  every  other
pressure. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  of  the  outer  parts  of
the  chest. Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  sternum.  Pain,
as  from  braises,  in  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  when  stoop-
ing, or  taking  an  inspiration,  not  when  touching  the  parts
Contusive  pain  in  one  spot  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest.'
Pain,  as  of  a  blow,  in  one  spot  of  the  sternum.  Dis-
agreeable warmth  in  the  chest,  early  in  the  mornino-  when
waking. Faint  feeling  in  the  chest,  from  walking,,  the
open  air  (in  the  sun  ;)  it  obliges  him  to  talk  lowly.  Con-
tinuous pains  in  the  heart,  especially  at  night.  Violent
stitches  in  the  heart. Darting  pain  in  the  region  of  the
heart. Contusive  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  early  in


321


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


the  morning  when  in  bed.  Violent  pressure  below  the
heart,  as  if  from  the  abdomen  towards  the  chest,  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  more
quick  than  violent,  increased  by  lying  on  the  left,  dimin-
ished by  lying  on  the  right  side,  continuing  until  he  falls
asleep.  Frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  6j  8,  10  beats.
Palpitation  of  the  heart  from  the  slightest  motion.  Palpi-
tation of  the  heart  when  standing.  Palpitation  of  the
heart  with  anguish.  Palpitation  of  the  heart,  without  any
anxious  thoughts,  5  minutes  or  even  hours,  (a.  7  d.)  Pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  with  pressure  in  the  region  of  the
hea;t,  as  if  the  heart  were  being  pressed  down,  abating
somewhat  when  pressing  with  the  hand  upon  the  parts,
(immediately.)  Fluttering  motion  of  the  heart.  Cold
feeling  about  tli3  heart,  when  exerting  the  mind.  Violent
itching  in  ihc  outer  parts  of  the  chest.  Itching  of  the
chest,  especially  in  the  open  air.  The  bones  in  the  right
half  of  the  chest  seem  to  stand  out.  Cracking  of  the
sternum,  during  motion.  Dartings  under  the  right  arm,
down  the  side.

Back. — Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  when  raising
one's-self  after  long  stooping.  Occasional  stitch  in  the
small  of  the  back,  (a.  26  d.)  Sharp  stitches  transversely
through  the  small  of  the  back,  close  above  the  hips.
Violent  pulsations  in  the  smull  of  the  back,  (1.  d.)  Pain-
ful throbbing  in  the  small  of  the  back,  also  in  the  evening
after  having  gone  1o  bed.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,
as  if  broken.  Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  bruised,
when  stooping  ami  raising  one's-self  again.  Paralytic
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  most  violent  when  raising
one's-self  again.  Paralytic  sensation  in  the  small  of  the
back,  early  in  the  morning,  ivhen  rising.  Weakness  in
the  small  of  the  back,  like  lumbago;  he  was  neither  able
properly  to  walk  or  stand  ;  he  feels  most  comfortable
when  Jyi;'.g  down,  the  whole  day.  worst  after  dinner.
Paralytic  sensation  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  back,
early  in  the  morning  when  rising.  Violent  itching  of  the
small  of  the  back,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Pain  in
the  left  side  of  the  back,  as  when  one  presses  upon  an
inflamed  part.  Continual  aching  below  the  right  scapula.
Pressure  over  the  loins,  with  sensation  in  the  legs  as  if


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


325


tney  were  stiff  and  bandaged  around.  Tensive  sensation
in  the  left  side  of  the  back.  Tension  in  the  back  obliging
one  to  stretch.  Tension  and  heat  in  the  region  of  the
kidneys,  even  when  sitting ;  walking  soon  tires  one  out.
Drawing  pain  in  the  back  from  below  upwards,  (14.  d.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  back.  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  right  scapula ;  it  obliges  him  to  take
deep  breath.  Tearing  and  pain  as  of  fracture  in  the
scapula?,  with  stiffness  of  the  back  and  nape  of  the  neck.
Stitch  below  the  left  scapula,  when  drawing  in  the  scapu-
lae, not  when  taking  an  inspiration.  Burning  in  the  left
scapula,  as  if  hot  water  had  been  poured  over  it.  Burn-
ing, erosive  pain  of  the  upper  vertebra?.  Pain  of  the
back,  as  if  broken.  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  scapula?
and  hips.  Violent  pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the  back  and
between  the  scapula?,  when  sitting,  and  worst  when  lying
down  ;  not  when  walking  or  when  doing  manual  labor.
Pimples  on  the  back,  with  itching  in  the  evening,  when  in
bed.

Neck. — The  nape  of  the  neck  is  painful  when  turning
the  head  ever  so  little.  Violent  pain  in  the  nape  of  the
neck,  so  that  she  is  not  able  to  turn.  Tension  in  the  nape
of  the  neck,  with  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands.  Stiff-
ness of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the  occiput.  Stiffness
of  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  neck.  Stiffness  and  wryness
in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  across  the  upper  part  of  the
back.  Violent  drawing  pain  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  so
that  he  is  unable  to  turn,  for  several  days.  Pain  in  the
nape  of  the  neck  as  if  strained,  contused,  or  fatigued.
J  he  cervical  muscles  are  painful  when  touching  them,  or
when  turning  the  head.  Painful  stiffness  of  the  right  side
of  the  neck,  she  was  unable  to  turn  her  head,^.  d.)
Drawing  pain  in  the  neck,  in  the  region  of  the  larynx.
Stitches  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  neck,  from  above  down-
wards,  even  in  the  night.  The  cervical  glands  arc  pain-
luJ  when  touched,  or  when  coughing. Boils  on  the  neck.

Superior  Extremities.— Dull  stitching  and  tearing  in
the  pit  of  the  axilla.  Biting  burning  in  the  axilla?,  with
swellmg  after  scratching.  Swelling  of  the  right  axillary
glands  Pain  of  the  shoulder-joint;  she  is  unable  to
move  her  arm,  (6.  d.) Tension  and  drawing  in  the


326


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


shoulder-joint,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  when
uncovering  the  parts,  a  sort  of  rheumatic  pain.  Drawing
and  tearing  in  the  right  shoulder,  afterwards  in  the  upper
arm.  Tearing  in  the  posterior  side  of  the  shoulder-joint,
and  axilla,  day  and  night.  Digging  pain  above  the  right
shoulder-joint,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking,  this
makes  the  arm  feel  paralytic.  Paralytic  pain  and  tearing
in  the  shoulder,  (3.  4,  d.)  Pain,  as  if  bruised,  in  the
shoulder-joint,  which  hinders  raising  the  shoulder.  Pain
as  if  sprained,  or  painful  weariness  in  the  shoulder-joint.
Drawing  pain  in  the  left  arm,  she  has  to  stretch  it  con-
tinually. Deadness,  (going  to  sleep)  insensibility  and
creeping  in  the  left  arm,  with  tingling  in  the  tips  of  the
fingers,  (a.  8  h.)  Fainlness,  heaviness  and  sinking  of
the  arms.  Pain  in  the  bones  of  the  arms,  as  if  broken.
Small,  red,  itching  vesicles  on  the  arms,  here  and  there.
Itching,  whitish  blotches  on  the  arms  and  hands,  becom-
ing red  after  friction,  with  more  violent  itching.  A  num-
ber of  round,  itching  herpetic  spots  on  the  arms.  Pain
of  the  upper-arms,  at  night,  when  resting  upon  them.
Pain  in  the  deltoid  muscle  of  the  upper-arm,  when  lifting
something.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  upper-arm,
most  intense  in  the  shoulder-joint,  when  lifting  something,
and  previous  to,  and  after  motion  ;  not  when  at  rest.
Burning  in  the  right  upper-arm  ;  the  heat  may  be  felt
externally.  The  upper-arms  are  very  sensitive  to  cold.
Painful  cracking  of  the  elbow-joint  during  motion.  Stitches
in  the  tip  of  the  elbow.  A  jerk  in  the  left  elbow,  his  hand
becoming  paralysed  with  pain  ;  the  pain  ceased  by  stretch-
ing the  arm.  Frequent  jerks  in  the  left  elbow,  every
thing  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  falling  out  of  it.  Dull
pain  in  the  bones  of  the  forearm,  increased  by  letting  the
hands  hang  down,  diminished  by  moving  the  arms,  (8.  d.)
Drawing  in  the  fore-arms,  apparently  in  the  ulna.  Paraly-
tic tearing  on  the  inner  side  of  the  lower  arm.  Going  to
sleep  of  the  fore-arm  from  the  hand  to  the  elbow,  as  if
paralysed ;  sudden  bending  of  the  wrist-joint  when  she
attempts  to  use  her  hand.  Painful  weariness  of  the  lower
arms,  (2.  d.)  Pain,  as  if  bruised  in  the  left  radius,  be-
coming intolerable  when  pressing  upon  the  parts.  Jacti-
tation of  the  muscles  of  the  lower  arm,  which  may  be


NATRUM  MURIATICUM — SALT.


327


perceived  when  touching  ihe  parts. Red  elevations  of  the
size  of  small  peas  in  the  onner  side  of  the  right  fore-arm,
with  violent  itching,  for  24  hours. Cramp  in  the  hand
.  when  seizing  a  cold  s^onc. Tearing,  excessive  and  sudden
pain  on  the  external  border  of  the  left  hand,  and  the  meta-
carpal bone  of  the  little  finger. Prickling  sensation  in
the  hand,  as  if  it  went  to  sleep. Itching  and  stitching
pain  in  the  dorsum  of  the  hand  and  finger. Pain,  as  if
bruised,  in  the  wrist-joint. The  hand  goes  to  sleep,  when
resting  upon  the  arm. Weakness  in  the  hands,  especially
when  clenching  them. Trembling  of  the  hands  when
writing,  (2.  d.) Swelling  of  the  right  hand,  from  morn-
ing till  evening,  (8.  d.) Itching  and  biting  sensation  in  the
palm  of  the  left  hand  ;  he  is  obliged  to  scratch  the  parts
for  a  long  time. Itching  burning  of  the  left  hand,  as  of
nettles. Itching  of  the  inner  border  of  the  wrist-joint;
scratching  causes  blisters. Itching  vesicles  on  the  left
wrist  and  on  both  hands,  as  if  iierpes  were  forming.  A
number  of  small  vesicles  on  the  hands,  drying  up  gradually,
the  skin  then  peels  off. Brown,  painless  spots  on  the
dorsa  of  the  hands,  as  if  she  had  injured  the  parts,  (18.  d.)
The  skin  of  the  hands  becomes  dry  and  cracked.  An
excoriated  spot  upon  the  hand  becomes  inflamed  and  is
changed  to  a  pustule. Siveaty  hands,  for  many  days,  (a.
8,  10  d.) The  joints  of  the  fingers  bend  with  difficulty.
Tension  in  the  right  index-finger. Tearing  in  the  ex-
tensor tendon  of  the  right  index-finger,  extending  along
the  fore-arm. Violent  tearing  in  the  posterior  joint  of  the
left  thumb,  as  if  it  wquld  tear. Ripping-up  pain,  in
paroxysms,  from  before  backwards  in  the  thumb,  and  from
behind  forwards  in  the  index-finger,  paralysing  the  whole
hand. Stitches  in  the  fingers. Stitches  in  the  left  thumb.
Stitch  in  the  phalangeal  joint  of  the  right  index-finger,  as
with  a  pin  or  with  a  fiery  spark. Stitches  in  both  little
fingers,  (8.  d.) Itching-tearing  stitching  in  the  middle-
joint  of  the  index -finger. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the
posterior  joints  of  the  thumb,  (immediately.) Pain,  as
from  a  sprain,  in  the  posterior  phalangeal  joints,  when
writing. Pam,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  bones  forming  the
anterior  joints  of  the  fingers,  intolerable  when  pressing
upon  them. Prickling  in  the  fingers,  especially  the  tips


32S


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


Violent  itching  of  the  fingers,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,
hindering  sleep.  Itching  vesicle  on  the  little  finger.  Dark-
red  spot  near  the  nail  of  the  third  left  finger.  Inflamma-
tion and  pain  on  the  side  of  the  nail  of  the  third  and  fourth
finger.  The  finger-nails  frequently  grow  into  the  flesh.
After  cutting  the  sides  of  the  nails,  which  had  grown  into
the  flesh,  the  place  becomes  red,  swollen  and  sore  when
pressing  upon  it.

Inferior  Extremities. — Drawing  pain  in  the  nates.
Lancinations  above  the  nates,  towards  the  hypogastrium
and  the  hips.  He  becomes  sore  between  the  nates,  by
walking.  Tensive  pain  of  the  hip-joint,  and  pain  to  the
touch.  Tension  in  both  hip-joints,  almost  like  a  sprain  ;
this  tension  is  also  felt  when  sitting.  Painful  cramp  in
the  hip.  Rheumatism  of  the  left. hip;  he  was  unable  to
walk  for  8  or  ft  days.  Stitches  in  the  right  hip-joint,  more
when  walking  than  when  silling.  Contusive  pain  in  the
outer  parts  of  the  left  hip.  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the
left  hip.  Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  groin,  near  the  thigh.
Pain,  as  if  sprained,  in  the  right  hip,  shortly  extending
into  the,  small  of  the  back,  so  that  he  was  unable  to  rise
from  a  seat  without  pain,  or  to  extend  himself  or  to  walk  ;
especially  bad  during  a  deep  inspiralion.  Paralytic  feeling
in  the  hips.  Unsteadiness  of  the  hips  and  thighs.  Itching
of  ihe  interior  of  the  hips.  Drawing  cramp-pain  in  the
left  lower  limb  and  foot.  Drawing  pain  along  the  whole
lower  limb.  Inquietude  in  the  lower  limbs,  late  in  the
evening,  as  if  the  joints,  for  instance  the  knee-joints,  were
tied  too  fast ;  he  is  frequently  obliged  to  stretch  ihem.
Violent  twitchings  in  the  lower  limbs,  both  when  waking
or  when  taking  the  siesta.  Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs,
even  when  resting.  Pain  in  the  left  limb,  as  if  a  lendon
had  been  stretched  beyond  the  power  of  contracting  again.
The  left  leg  goes  to  sleep  during  the  siesta.  Weakness
in  the  right  lower- limb.  Paralytic  condition  of  the  lower
limbs,  early  in  the  morning.  Paralytic  feeling  in  both
lower  limbs,  suddenly,  (after  writing  ;)  going  off  by  dint  of
walking.  A  good  deal  of  itching  of  the  lower  limbs.
Tensive  pain  of  the  thighs  when  walking.  Drawing  pain
in  the  thigh,  especially  when  walking,  extending  as  lar  as
the  knee,  (6.  d.) Drawing  pain  in  ihe  rigid  thigh,  ex-


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


329


tending  as  far  as  the  knee,  at  intervals,  both  when  at  rest
and  in  motion,  even  at  night,  (14  d.) Tearing  in  the  right
thigh,  (after  riding  in  a  carriage)  (4.  d.) Jactitation  of
the  muscles  of  the  thighs. Large,  itching  pimple,  with  a
red  areola,  on  the  thigh,  with  sore  pain  when  scratching.
Cracking  of  the  knees  in  the  evening  when  walking.
Feeling  of  stiffness  at  times  in  one,  at  times  in  the  other
knee,  after  rising  from  a  seat. Tension  in  the  bends  of
both  knees,  when  rising  from  a  seat  or  when  walking,  in-
creasing during  the  day,  (a.  3.  d.) Crushing  pain,  as  from
weariness,  in  the  knees  and  tarsal  joints,  and  afterwards  a
dull  drawing  in  the  whole  of  the  lower  limbs.  Drawing
pain  in  the  knees,  when  sitting. Paralytic  drawing  in  the
left  knee,  in  the  evening. Tearing  drawing  in  the  bends  of
the  knees,  mostly  when  walking. Stitching  drawing  pain
above  and  below  the  knee,  when  silling. StrtcKes  in  the
left.  knee. Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  left  knee,  when
walking. Pain,  as  from  a  sprain,  in  the  knee-joint,  when
walking. Weakness  of  the  knees,  as  if  they  would  bend,
(2.  d  ) Bubbling  sensation  under  the  skin  of  the  left  knee.
Red  herpes  in  the  bend  of  the  knee. Boil  on  the  knee.
Stretching  sensation  of  the  calves  up  to  the  knee,  when
walking,  not  when  silling. Stretching  of  the  calves  when
walking,  as  if  the  muscles  were  loo  short. Cramp-like  con-
tractive pain  of  the  calves,  when  walking. Cramp  of  the
calves,  when  turning  the  foot  while  sitting. Cramp-like  pa-
ralytic drawing  in  the  right  leg,  finally  extending  into  the
thigh,  with  weakness  of  the  limb  when  standing.  Slight
beating  in  the  left  calf. Conlusive  pam  at  one  spot  of  lhe°ii-
bia,  but  not  when  touching  it. Great  heaviness  of  the  legs  ;
when  going  up-slairs  the  lower  limbs  feel  bruised.  Tremu-
lous unsteadiness  in  the  calves,  when  walking  or  standing,
even  when  sitting. Miliary  rash-eruption  on  the  outer
side  of  the  calves,  extending  over  part  of  the  thhdis.
Kash-eruption  on  the  legs,  in  single  clusters,  with  corro-
sive itching  when  touching  it. The  feet  are  painful  when
walking,  from  the  toes  to  the  joint. Cramp-pain  in  the
Jell,  loot  (5.  d.) Cramp-like,  pricking  pain in  the  left
loot,  as  if  the  parts  had  been  sprained  ;  it  is  felt  when
walking  and  treading  upon  the  whole  sole. Cramp  in  the


330


NATRUM  MUR1ATICUM — SALT.


sole  of  the  foot,  in  the  evening.  Tearing  in  the  knuckle
of  the  right  foot,  increasing  from  morning  till  evening
to  such  an  extent,  that  he  was  unable  to  close  his  eyes
from  pain  ;  accompanied  by  pain  in  the  back.  Transitory
tearing  in  the  left  foot.  Fine  beating  in  the  whole  foot..
Ulcerative  pain  in  the  region  of  the  malleolus,  when  set-
ting the  foot  down  or  when  touching  it,  and  extending  inly
the  calves ;  when  sitting,  the  pain  is  merely  tensive.
Disagreeable  burning  of  the  feet,  when  walking.  Prick-
ling tingling  in  the  right  sole.  Very  cold  feet,  (a.  1  h.)
Pain  as  from  a  sprain  in  the  tarsal  joint  ;  for  several  days.
Sudden  bending  of  the  metatarsal  and  phalangeal  joints.
Paralytic  condition  of  the  tarsal  joint,  or  as  if  the  in-
terior of  it  had  gone  to  sleep,  when  sitting  or  walking ;
she  was  scarcely  able  to  move  her  foot.  The  foot  goes
to  sleep  for  a  long  time.  Great  heaviness  of  the  feet.
On  the  second  day  the  feet  feel  very  heavy  ;  they  feel  very
light  on  the  third.  Increased  sweat  of  the  sole  of  the  foot.
Restoration  of  the  sweat  of  the  feet,  which  had  been  sup-
pressed. Itching  in  the  dorsum  of  the  foot.  Erosive
stinging  pain  of  the  toes.  Drawing  pain  in  the  big  toe.
Itching  of  the  dorsa  of  the  toes.  Redness  and  coldness
of  the  posterior  joint  of  the  big  toe,  with  pain  as  of  a  boil
when  touching  it ;  tearing  and  stinging  in  the  joint  when
standing  or  walking,  not  when  silting.  Stinging  pain  of
the  corns. Boring  pain  in  the  corn.

General  Symptoms. — Itching  over  the  whole  body,
(the  first  three  weeks.)  Fine,  itching  pricking  of  the  skin,
in  the  evening  when  in  bed.  Itching  stinging  of  various
places  of  the  skin,  with  thrills  of  internal  heat,  without
redness  of  the  face.  Red  spots,  of  the  size  of  a  pin's
head,  over  the  whole  body,  preceded  by  a  feeling  of  heat
in  the  face,  on  the  abdomen,  arms  and  lower  limbs ;  the
spots  itch,  and,  when  rubbing  them,  the  whole  body  be-
came red,  for  half  an  hour.  Small  pimples  on  the  abdomen
and  lower  limbs.  Rash  over  the  whole  body,  with  sting-
ing sensation  in  the  skin.  Miliary  erupiion  over  the  whole
body,  on  the  neck  and  throat ;  on  the  abdomen,  the  nates
and  thighs,  the  eruption  was,  at  the  commencement,  felt  as
small  granules,  afterwards  it  became  visible  in  the  shape
of  small  millet-seed  ; scratching  made  it  redder  and


NATRUM  MTJRIATXCUM  SALT.


331


harder ;  the  itching  hinders  sleep,  (4.  d.) Large  and
red  blotches,  itching  violently, over the  whole  body
and  on  the  neck. Nettle-rash,  after  violent  exercise,
itching  for  an  hour,  (2.  d.) Small  blotches  and  boils
on  different  parts  of  the  body. A  number  of  boils  on
the  body,  (a.  14  d.) Warts  form  in  the  palm  of  the
hand  ;  they  are  painful  when  pressing  upon  them.  Erosive
pain  in  the  old  warts. The  skin  of  the  body  is  very
sensitive  to  pain  ;  even  a  slight  shock  causes  pain.  Pain
and  redness  of  an  old  cicatrix. A  wound  becomes  much
more  painful,  becomes  inflamed,  swells,  suppurates  :  at
the  same  time  she  is  very- irritable,  sad,  she  weeps  when
one  touches  the  wound. A  little  prick  in  the  finger
bleeds  again  several  days  in  succession. Liability  to
cold, (a.  24  h.) Excessive  liability  to  cold,  producing
cough  and  hoarseness. Dread  of  the  open  air,  (a.  12  h.)
The  symptoms  come  on  or  become  renewed  or  increased
mostly  when  in  the  recumbent  position,  even  in  day-time  ;
at  night,  she  is  obliged  to  sit  up  in  her  bed,  to  find  relief.
All  the  muscles,  especially  those  of  the  thighs  and  upper
arms  are  painful  during  motion,  as  if  the  flesh  were  loose.
Cramp-like  sensation  in  the  limbs,  especially  in  the  hands,
as  if  the  parts  had  gone  to  sleep. The  violent  nightly
pains  (for  instance,  a  boil  in  the  back,)  cause  a  suffocative
arrest  of  breathing  and  a  kind  of  paralysis  of  one  side,
which  deprives  him  of  the  use  of  his  limbs  on  that  side.
Gnawing  pressure,  at  times  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  at
times  around  the  umbilicus,  at  times  in  the  chest,  in  pa-
roxysms, in  the  evening. Violent  constriction  of  the
stomach  and  chest. Stitches  in  various  places. Pain  of
all  the  limbs,  as  if  bruised,  (2.  d.) Stiffness  of  the  sca-
pula?, the  hip-joint  and  small  of  the  back. Violent  stiff-
ness of  all  the  joints  of  the  body. Darting  sensation  in
the  back  and  nape  of  the  neck,  towards  the  head.  Jerk-
ing of  the  limbs  ;  both  arms  are  jerked  forwards.  Raisim
as  with  a  jerk,  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  in  the  after
noon,  when  lying  down,  while  awake. Jactitation  of  the
muscles,  here  and  there. The  limbs  and  the  head  move
farther  than  he  intended. Cracking  in  the  shoulder  and
hip- joints,  when  moving  them. Emaciation.  Violent
heat  in  the  blood,  lasting  for  a  long  while,  after  drinking
some  wine. He  spits  blood  and  expels  it  from  his  nose


O'


332


NATRUM  MURIATICDM — SALT.


when  blowing  it.  Congestion  of  blood  to  the  chest,  sto-
mach and  head,  with  coldness  of  the  limbs.  When  laying
the  arm  on  the  table  the  blood  ceases  to  circulate  ;  this
arrest  of  circulation  takes  place  in  other  pans  of  the  body-
under  similar  circumstances.  The  circulation  is  excited
by  every  motion  of  the  body.  Full  and  undulating  pulse
in  the  whole  body,  even  when  at  rest.  Pulsations  in  the
whole  body,  which  cause  all  the  parts  to  move.  Full,
quick  pulse,  when  silting  straight.  The  pulse  and  breath-
ing are  quicker,  especially  after  drinking.  The  pulse
intermits,  a  few  pulsations.  The  beats  of  the  heart  inter-
mit during  the  siesta.  Depressed  condition  of  the  intel-
lectual and  physical  energies.  Depressed  condition  of  the
mind,  and  body,  with  great  appetite.  After  making  a
bodily  effort,  he  is  unable  to  think  and  feels  indifferent.
Chagrin  causes  stitches  in  the  upper  and  left  part  of  the
chest,  want  of  appetite  and  headache  ;  the  head  is  affected
by  every  step  she  makes  ;  she  becomes  very  weak  and
her  feet  are  heavy.  After  a  slight  vexation  she  cries  the
whole  night,  and  coughs  a  good  deal,  with  unsuccessful
retching.

Fits,  Weakness. — Fits  of  heaviness  in  the  head,  he  is
obliged  to  lie  down,  twice  or  three  times  a  day,  for  ten
days  ;  after  lying  down  the  whole  body  becomes  covered
with  sweat,  after  which  the  heaviness  disappears  in  half
an  hour.  Fit  of  nausea,  early  in  the  morning,  with  weak-
ness and  deadly  pallor  of  the  face  ;  he  was  obliged  to  lie
down,  (4.  d.)  Fit:  the  nape  of  the  neck  became  stiff,
her  eyes  felt  sore,  she  felt  ill,  chilly,  and  lost  her  senses,
(8.  d.)  Fit :  painful  sensation  in  the  left  shoulder,  whence
it  moved  to  the  head  ;  afterwards  pressing  in  the  temples,
as  if  the  head  would  burst ;  the  brain  felt  sore  and
bruised  ;  constant  drawing  pain  from  the.  shoulder  to  the
head,  and  constant  nausea  with  inclination  to  vomit,  appa-
rently coming  from  the  stomach  ;  she  had  to  lie  down,
and  felt  chilly  with  heat  in  the  face,  (8.  d.)  Attack  of
nausea  at  supper-time,  (without  having  eaten  any  thing)
every  attack  being  accompanied  with  violent  chilliness  ;
after  lying  down  in  the  bed,  she  soon  feels  warm,  without
any  subsequent  heat;  she  wakes  twice  during  the  night,
and  feels  then  an  intensely  painful  drawing  to  and  fro  in


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.  333


the  forehead,  mingled  with  a  slight  beating  (throbbing.)
Attack  of  pressure  and  digging  under  the  right  ribs,  with
drawing  in  the  back,  extending  towards  the  head,  hinder-
ing the  night's  rest  and  accompanied  with  stitches  in  the
head  ;  all  these  symptoms  become  less  after  continued
talking  and  while  making  a  bodily  effort,  by  rumbling  in
the  abdomen  or  emission  of  flatulence,  or  after  a  meal.
Fit  of  great  excitement  with  anguish,  tingling  in  the  tips
of  the  lingers,  in  the  hand  and  arms ;  the  arm  goes  to
sleep,  as  if  dead,  the  tingling  rises  up  into  the  throat,  lips
and  tongue,  which  feels  stiff,  accompanied  with  boring  in
a  tooth  ;  afterwards  weakness  of  the  head  with  deficiency
of  sight;  the  limb  too  goes  to  sleep  and  the  joint  feels
dead  ;  all  these  symptoms  occur  mostly  towards  evening.
Fit  of  nausea,  early  in  the  morning,  (after  drinking  milk)
with  tremor  of  the  limbs,  one  hour  ;  she  felt  giddy,  with
obscuration  of  sight ;  she  had  to  hold  on  to  something  in
order  not  to  fall. Fit  of  inclination  to  vomit,  in  the  fore-
noon, with  vertigo  and  a  digging  sensation  in  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  accompanied  with  chilliness,  as  if  cold  water
were  poured  over  her;  every  thing  she  looked  at,  turned
with  her,  as  if  she  would  fall  over  ;  her  head  felt  so  heavy
that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  walk,  and  seemed  to  her
heavier  than  the  rest  of  the  body. She  felt  for  some  time
as  if  she  had  an  epileptic  fit. Dread  of  walking  He
merely  staggers  onward  when  walking. He  feared"  when
walking,  lest  he  should  fall. Great  bodily  weakness  •  for
several  weeks  he  is  too  weak  to  do  his  business.  Weak-
ness:  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  as  if  the  back  and
small  ot  the  back  were  paralysed,  sometimes  transversely
across  the  abdomen. Restless  night,  followed  by  a  feel-
ing of  exhaustion  during  the  day.  with  wretched  appear-
ance and  sadness (a 12  h) Fainting  fit,  for  half  an
hour. Feeling  of  weakness,  when  sitting. Weakness  of
the  whole  body,  heaviness  of  the  feet;  when  standing  she
ieels  tired  immediately;  she  feels  belter  when  walking
riding  in  a  carriage  silting  or  lying  down. Standing  was
so  roublesome  to  her  that  she  had  to  sit  down  irnmedi-

rimJ'tt K!7gial,Sucs  thim  more  and  more,  from  time  to
lime,  [d.  a.)  threat  exhaustion  after  a  little  walk,  (2  d  )
If  she  exerts  her  limbs  in  walking,  she  feels  at  once  ex


334


NATRUM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


hausted  and  sick.  When  rising  from  a  seat,  her  limbs
tremble  with  weakness,  she  feels  better  after  walking  a
little  longer.  She  feels  weakest  early  in  the  morning
when  in  bed  and  when  sitting  ;  she  feels  no  weakness
when  walking.  The  whole  body  feels  weak,  for  instance,
when  moving  the  arms.  Painful  weariness  in  the  lower
limbs,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Tickling  pain-
ful weariness.  Unrefreshed  after  sleep.  Tired  and  tremu-
lous, as  if  he  would  fall  immediately  after  the  siesta.
Great  weakness,  (6.  d.)  Great  weariness  everyday,  and
constant  yawning.

Sleep. — Frequent  yawning. Yawning  and  stretching
(a.  i  h.) Excessive,  spasmodic  yawning,  after  a  sound
sleep. Frequent  yawning  ;  the  first  time  he  yawned  the
right  side  of  his  neck  became  constricted  by  it,  with  pain
extending  to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  which  became  stiff  in
consequence  of  it. Yawning  and  drowsiness. Great  in-
clination to  sleep,  in  day-time,  and  great  weariness.  Very
drowsy  in  day-time  ;  she  has  great  trouble  in  getting  out
of  bed  for  some  weeks,  (a.  10  d.) Drowsiness  in  day-
time, with  yawning ;  she  falls  asleep  before  thinking  of  it.
He  falls  asleep  while  reading,  (a.  4  h.) When  unoccu-
pied, he  falls  asleep  as  soon  as  he  sits  down  ;  nevertheless
he  wakes  every  moment. Timely  drowsiness  in  the  even-
ing and  retarded  waking  in  the  morning. He  goes  to  bed
without  feeling  sleepy  ;  however,  he  falls  asleep  immedi-
ately.' He  finds  it  difficult  to  go  to  sleep,  although  he
went  to  bed  later  than  usual. He  was  roilling  to  sleep,
but  he  was  unable  to  fall  asleep,  it  teas  a  sort,  of  struggle
between  sleep  and  looking. Total  sleeplessness,  at  night,
he  was  wide  awake,  but  did  not  feel  unwell.  Sleepless-
ness from  internal  restlessness. Sleepless  night.  He
spends  two  nights  without  sleeping,  but  without  feeling
any  pain,  (11.  12.  d.) She  wakes  two  or  three  hours
every  night,  feeling  some  anxiety. He  wakes  every  half
hour. Restless  sleep;  he  tosses  about,  having  vivid
dreams. JL  number of  dreams during the  siesta,
some  of  them  anxious. Multifarious  dreams,  at  night,
during  sound  sleep,  (1.  3.  d.) Vivid  dreams,  ravings
during  sleep. Sleep  full  of  fanciful  ravings.  Fre-
quenf  fanciful  ravings, the first  ten  nights,  frequent


NATUTJM  MURIATICUM  SALT.


335


waking,  tossing  about  in  the  bed  ;  in  the  day  he  feels  so
tired  that  he  is  unable  to  work. While  closing  her  eyes
to  sleep,  she  saw  all  sorts  of  fancies,  and  felt  a  desire  to
make  verses  ; this  appeared ridiculous  to  her  when
waking. Amorous  dreams. Lewd  dreams,  (22.  n.)
Night-sleep  disturbed  by  voluptuous  dreams,  pollutions
and  long  erections. A  number  of  dreams  during  the
morning-sleep,  which  he  is  unable  to  recollect,  (20.  n.)
Dreams,  the  subject  of  ivhich  occupies  her  mind  a  long
time  after  ivaking. He  dreams  that  he  is  reproaching
himself  with  faults  he  had  committed,  full  of  restlessness
and  anguish. Vexing  dreams. Vexing and  anxious
dreams. A  number  of  anxious  dreams,  at  night.  She
dreamed  she  was  being  beaten ;  this  made  her  feel  so
anxious,  that  she  sweated  all  over  and  remained  anxious
the  whole  day. She  dreamed  of  murder  and  rows  ;  when
walking,  she  felt  hot  and  was  covered  with  the  sweat  of
anguish. He  dreams  he  had  been  poisoned,  (4.  d.)
Frightful  dreams  of  murder,  fire. Disgusting,  horrid
dreams. Horrid dreamj-  which  she  believed  ' to  be  a
reality  when  waking. Sad  dream  ;  he  dreams  the  same
dream  twice  over  again,  after  waking  and  falling  asleep
again. Anxious  dreams  with weeping while  asleep.
Moaning  while  asleep. Talking  while  asleep,  and  restless
night. He  rises  at  night  from  anxious  dreams,  and  walks
about  in  the  room. He  leaves  his  bed  after  having  just
fallen  asleep,  wakes  up  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  "lies
down  again  and  falls  asleep. Startings  when  asleep.
While  falling  asleep,  he  is  so  much  frightened  when  some
one  enters  the  room,  that  it  gave  him  a. violent  palpitation
of  the  heart. About midnight,  he  wakes  from  fear,
imagines  there  are  thieves  in  the  room,  and  dares  not  lie
down  again,  with  oppression  of  the  chest  and  palpitation
or  the  heart,  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour. Startings  while
asleep. A  shock,  as  if  coming  from  the  heart,  during  the
siesta,  causing  a  starting. Pain  in  the  outer  parts  of  the
head,  when  lying  on  the  occiput. Heat  in  the  head,  at
night  while  in  bed. Anxious  feeling  in  the  head,  in  the
evening  after  lying  down,  as  if  he  would  lose  his  under-
standing. Stitching,  aching  pain  in  the  forepart  of  the  head,
at  night. Violent  pulsations  in  the  head,  with  heat  of  the


336


NATRUM  MCRIA.TICUM  SALT.


body. He  spits  incessantly,  at  night. Bleeding  at  the
nose  at  night. He  wakes  before  midnight,  from  pain  in
the  left  molares  and  the  gums  around,  two  nights  in  suc-
cession at  the  same  time. .  Stitching  pain  in  the  throat,  at
night,  during  deglutition.  Scraping  sensation  in  the  throat,
at  night,  a  copious  flow  of  saliva,  hawking  up  blood  and
sleeplessness. Contractive  sensation  in  the  stomach,
in the evening,  when in bed. Colic before  mid-
night, with restlessness and  contractive  sensation  in
the  region  of  the  stomach,  causing  anxiety,  (a.  10  d.)
Colic  every  night,  without  diarrhoea. Incarceration  of
flatulence,  at  night,  with  heaviness  and  fulness  in  the  abdo-
men. Flatulent  colic,  at  night,  moving  about  in  the  abdo-
men, and  becoming  incarcerated,  with  pressure  and  pinch-
ing, with  light,  frequently  interrupted  sleep.  Nightly
impatience (nervousness,)  in  the  hypogastrium,  from
constant  unsuccessful  desire  to  urinate. Desire  to  urinate,
twice  at  night,  without  emission. Nightly  micturition,
every  night. Burning  at  the  rectum,  at  night. Stitch  in
the  right  scapula,  at  night,  when  in  bed,  during  a  deep  in-
spiration. Want  of  breath,  in  the  evening,  when  lying
down. Nightly  attack  of  asthma  and  palpitation  of  the
heart,  but  without  anxiousness. Dry  cough,  with  litilla-
tion,  at  night,  and  scraping. Drawing  pain  in  the  back,
at  night ;  she  had  to  turn  frequently  to  obtain  relief.
Stitches  in  the  nape  of  the  neck,  at  night.  Violent
stiiches  in. the  left  thigh,  at  night. Cramp  in  the  leg,  at
night. Burning  in  the  corn,  at  night. Intensely  painful
stitching  in  the  corn,  the  whole  night. She  cannot  rest  on
the  right  side  at  night,  owing  to  a  pain  as  from  bruises  in
the  hip,  knee,  and  tarsal  joints. Sort  of  nightmare,  at
niaht,  as  if  her  body  were  constricted,  with  anguish  ;  she
attempted  to  call  out,  but  was  unable;  she  was  even
unable  to  open  her  eves  or  to  stir  at  all-;  all  this  went  off,  as
soon  as  she  was  able  to  call  out,  (7.  n.) He  wakes  in  the
nHit  with  erethism  of  the  blood. Violent  throbbing  ot
the  arteries,  at  night  when  waking,  without  sensation  of
heat. A  good  deal  of  uneasiness  in  the  lower  limbs.
Great  restlessness  at  night,  much  heat  and  much  drinking,
(n.  18  d.) Nightly  heat  which  hinders  sleeping,  without
thirst,  with  labor-iike  pains  in  the  hypogastrium,  (7.  n.)


NATRUM  MURIATICTJM  SALT.


Anxiousness  and  heat  at  night  ;  she  had  to  uncover  her-
self; multifarious  dreams  when  falling  asleep,  (accom-
panied by  profuse  menstrual  flow,)  (5.  d.)  Sleep  with
sweat  and  anxiety,  at  night.  Great  anguish,  at  night,
during  a  tempest ;  the  sweat  of  anguish  drives  her  out  of
the  bed,  (2.  d.)

Fever. — Chilly,  the  whole  day. Chilliness  and  cold
hands,  (immediately.) Cold  hands  and  feet  which  cannot
be  got  warm,  (a.  6.  h.) Occasional  cold  thrills  over  the
back,  with  cold  sweat  on  the  forehead,  anxiousness  and
shuddering. Coldness  of  the  back,  at  night,  with  rest-
lessness. Chilliness  of  the  skin,  in  the  evening  when  in
bed. Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  with  thirst,  two  evenings
in  succession. Chilliness,  even  in  the  forenoon,  with  very
cold  hands,  which  feel  so  chilly,  even  in  the  warm  room,
that  he  is  obliged  to  put  on  gloves. Chills,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed,  shaking  him  so  much  that  his  hands  and  feet
trembled  and  his  teeth  chattered,  without  either  thirst  or
heat  afterwards,  he  fell  asleep  before  the  chills  had  ter-
minated, two  evenings  in  succession. Violent  chilliness,
with  short,  sharp  pain  in  the  lower  incisores,  (2.  d.)  Chil-
liness, early  in  the  morning  when  asleep,  and  subsequent
sweat,  shortly  before  waking. Shuddering,  with  feeling
as  of  goose-skin. Shuddering,  without  chilliness,  when
sitting. Shuddering  and  chilliness  in  the  back,  without
thirst. Shuddering  in  the  back,  especially  when  sitting,
(the  first  days.) Shuddering,  with  chills,  in  the  evening,
the  pains  increasing,  with  subsequent  heat,  especially
about  the  head,  and  redness  of  face. Chills  and  shudder-
ing, with  great  inclination  to  sleep,  even  in  day-time  ;  he
sleeps  a  good  deal,  becomes  warm  afterwards,  even  when
sitting,  and  sweats  a  little. Fever  shortly  before  dinner  ;
first  excessive  weakness,  which  obliged  him  to  lie  down  ;
afterwards  violent  chilliness  when'  in  bed,  followed  by
moderate  heat,  and  lastly  sweat  for  some  hours.  Fever,
with  headache,  when  waking  from  a  short  evening-slum-
ber, first  chilliness,  then  heat,  in  several  paroxysms,  but
™ore  h(?at- Chilliness,  and  a  groaning  sensation  in  the
head,  when  m  bed,  with  great  weakness  ;  after  a  violent
echauffement. Violent  chilliness,  in  the  evening  ;  pro-
fuse sweat  over  the  whole  body  in  the  subsequent  night,


33S


NITRI  ACIDUM.


accompanied  with  violent  itching. Fever,  in  the  after-
noon, chilliness  and  coldness  with  much  thirst,  without
any  subsequent  heal,  (a.  6  h.) Fever,  at  8  o'clock  in  the
morning,  first  violent  chilliness  until  noon,  afterwards  heat
until  evening,  without  sweat,  and  without  thirst  either  in
the  chilly  or  hot  stage  ;  she  lay  without  consciousness,
with  violent  headache,  (a.  10  d.) Heat  after  the  siesta,
followed  by  shuddering  until  evening. Heat  in  the  even-
ing, with  thrills  of  coldness  and  shuddering  over  the  back,
without  thirst,  (2.  evening.) Thrills  of  heat,  for  moments.
Flushes  of  heat  and  ready  sweat. Heat,  with  sweat  under
the  arms  and  on  the  soles. Much  sweat  in  the  day-time.
Profuse  sweat  breaks  out  easily  during  motion,  although
he  is  very  chilly. Constant  sweat,  even  during  the  siesta,
but  not  in  the  night. General  sweat,  (a.  24  h.)  Profuse
night-sweat  for  several  nights. Night-sweat,  before  mid-
night. She  wakes  in  the  night  in  profuse  sweat.  Pro-
fuse morning-sweat,  for  several  mornings. Sweat  over
the  whole  body,  for  several  mornings. Sourish  morning
sweat.


&

NITRI  ACIDUM.

To  form  the  T7F(hjo  potency,  use  dilute  alcohol  ;  for  all
the  subsequent  potencies  use  pure  alcohol.  The  poten-
cies VI.,  XIII.,  X.,  are  used  for  homoeopathic  purposes,  one
or  two  pellets  at  a  dose.

This  medicine  is  more  beneficial  to  individuals  with  a
rigid  fibre,  (brunette,)  than  to  those  with  a  lax  fibre  (blon-
dine.)  It  is  moreover  more  suitable  to  those  chronic  pa-
tients who  are  disposed  to  looseness  ;  it  is  very  seldom
useful  to  those  who  suffer  with  constipation.

Nitri  ac.  is  most  serviceable  in  diseases  characterised
by  the  following  affections  : — Sadness  ;  want  of  cheerful-
ness ;  anxiety  on  account  of  his  illness,  fear  of  dying  ;
excessive  irritability  ;  out  of  humor,  and  obstinacy  |  want
of  disposition  to  work  ;  vertigo  when  walking  or  sitting  ;
vertigo,  obliging  one  to  lie  down  ;  headache,  with  nausea  ;
tearing  in  the  forehead,  vertex,  and  occiput ;  throbbing


NITRI  ACIDUM.


339


headache; congestion to the  head; itching in  the
hairy  scalp  ;  falling  off  of  the  hair  ;  paralysis  of  the
upper  eyelid  ;  pressure  in  the  eyes  ;  stitches  in  the  eyes  ;
suppuration  of  the  eyes  ;  difficulty  of  contracting  the
pupil;  flying,  black  points  before  the  eyes;  stitches
in the  ear  ; sarcomatous  tumor  on  the left  lobule ;
running  of  the  ear  ;  stoppage  of  the  ear  ;  sensation  as  if
the  meatus  auditorius  externus  had  been  closed  ;  hard
hearing  ;  roaring  in  the  ears  ;  throbbing  in  the  ear  ;
cracking  as  of  burning  straw,  in  the  ears  ;  scurf  in  the
right  nostril ;  bleeding  at  the  nose  ;  repulsive  smell  when
inspiring  air  through  the  nose  ;  fetid  odor  from  the  nose  ;
pimples' in  the  face  ;  paleness  of  face  ;  chapped  lips,  ulcer
in  the  vermilion-border  of  the  lip  ;  looseness  of  the  teeth  ;
bleeding  of  the  gums  ;  burning  in  the  throat ;  soreness  in
the  throat  ;  bitter  taste,  even  after  eating  ;  sweetish  taste
in  mouth  ;  thirst,  with  suppuration  of  the  lungs  ;  aversion
to  meat ;  milk  is  indigestible  ;  nausea  from  eating  fat ;
sweat  during  and  after  a  meal ;  feeling  of  fulness  in  the
stomach,  after  a  meal  ;  weakness  after  dinner ;  sour  eruc-
tations ; inclination  to  vomit ;  water-brash  after  quick
drinking  ;  stitches  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach ;  tensive
pressure  under  the  left  ribs  ;  frequent  pinching  in  the
abdomen ;  colic  ;  stitches  in  the  abdomen,  when  touching
it ;  ulcerative  pain  in  the  abdomen ; swelling  of  the
inguinal  glands  ;  inguinal  hernia  of  children  ;  accumula-
tion of  flatulence  in  the  abdomen  ;  incarceration  of  flatu-
lence, morning  and  evening  ;  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ;
grunting  in  the  abdomen  ;  liability  to  catching  cold,  of  the
abdomen ; costiveness  ; pressure upon the rectum  ;
irregular  and  difficult  evacuations  ;  too  frequent  stool  ;
dry  stool  ;  itching  of  the  anus  ;  old  varices  of  the  anus  ;
painful  micturition;  want  of  power  to  retain  the  urine';
fetid  odor  of  the  urine  ;  soreness  of  the  glans  ;  fig-warts,
hanging  low  down  on  the  scrotum  ;  want  of  sexual  desire^
and  weakness  of  the  sexual  functions  ;  want  of  erections  ;
too  frequent  pollutions  ;  leucorrhcea.

Unsuccessful  sneezing ;  obstruction  of  the  nostrils  ;
dryness  of  the  nose;  coryza  ;  dry  coryza  ;  hoarseness;
rawness  of  the  chest  ;  laryngeal  phthisis  ;  cough  in  day-
time ;  cough  in  the  evening,  when  lying  down  ;  cough
with  vomiting ;  shortness  of  breath  ;  asthma  ;  panting


NITRI  ACIDUM.


breathing,  while  at  work ;  knotty  induration  of  the
mamma ;  dwindling  of  the  mammae  ;  pain  in  the  small  of
the  back  ;  pain  in  the  back  ;  stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the
neck  ;  swelling  of  the  cervical  glands  ;  stitches  in  the
shoulder-joint ;  rough  skin  of  the  hands  ;  herpes  between
the  fingers  ;  the  fingers  go  to  sleep  ;  white  spots  on  the
finger-nails  ;  itching  of  the  thighs  ;  inquietude  of  the
lower  limbs,  in  the  evening  ;  coldness  of  the  lower  limbs  ;
pain  of  the  thighs,  when  rising  from  a  seat  ;  weakness  of
the  knees  ;  cramp  and  wryness  of  the  calves,  when  walk-
ing, after  having  sat  for  a  time  ;  jerkings  in  the  calves  ;
stitches  in  the  heel  when  setting  the  foot  down  ;  fetid
sweat  of  the  feet  ;  tearing  pains  in  the  upper  and  lower
limbs;  liability  to  catching  cold,  causing  a  pinching  and
cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen  ;  pains  in  old  cicatrices  and
wounds  during  a  change  of  weather  ;  blackness  of  the
pores  ;  parts  freeze,  become  inflamed  and  itch,  even  when
the  cold  is  but  moderate  ;  itching  eruption  of  rash  in  the
open  air,  even  in  the  face  ;  itching  herpes  ;  reddish-brown
spots  upon  the  skin  ;  warts  ;  painful  corns  and  chilblains  ;
weakness  ;  weakness  in  the  morning ;  tremulous  weak-
ness ;  chronic  weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  feet  ;  dif-
ficulty of  waking,  early  in  the  morning  ;  frequent  waking  ;
restlessness  during  the  night  ;  starting  up  from  sleep  ;
sleep  full  of  dreams  ;  anxious  dreams  ;  lewd  dreams  ;
pains  while  asleep  ;  continual  chilliness  ;  fever  in  the
afternoon,  chilliness  and  heat;  dry  skin;  night-sweat;
fetid  night-sweat.

This  drug  has  been  tried  by  myself  and  Drs.  Beth-
mann  and  Rummel.

According  to  Noack  and  Trinks,  this  drug  may  be  em-
ployed to  cure  the  following  affections  : — Rheumatic  and
arthritic  affections. — Hydrargyrosis,  when  appearing  in
the  form  of  a  scorbutic  dyscrasia. — Diseases  of  the  peri-
osteum and  the  bones,  especially  chronic  inflammation  of
those  parts. — Caries. — Necrosis  ? — Tophi  ? — Scrofulosis.
— Scrophula  torpida. — Rhachitis. — Hysterismus.— Con-
gestion and  orgasm  of  the  blood. — Hemorrhage  from
arteries  and  capillaries.' — Telangiecrasia  'm  the  nape  of  the
neck  of  a  boy  of  ten  years.  Epilepsy,  the  fits  being  re-
lieved by  riding  in  a  carriage,  accompanied  by  attacks  of
vertigo  in  a  girl  of  14  years — Humid,  itch-like  eruption


NITRI  ACIDUM.


341


with  ulcers  upon  the  skin,  and  ramollissement  of  the  bones,
having  been  mismanaged  by  quick-silver,  (in  conjunction
with  Aurum  and  Acid,  phosph.) — Dry  and  humid  herpes.
— Scarlatina. — Painless  ulcers  with  gray,  up-turned  edges,
readily  bleeding  and  emitting  an  ichorous  pus. — Mercu-
rial ulcers. — Chapped  skin  of  frozen  limbs. — Syphilitic
bubo.— Chancre,  with  hydrargyrosis. — Secondary  syphi-
lis.— Condylomata. — Itching,  erosive  and  stinging  syphi-
litic eruptions,  resembling  psoriasis,  in  individuals  having
taken  much  Mercury. — Syphilis  with  hydrargyrosis. —
Syphilitic  ulcer,  after  Mercury. — Typhus  abdominalis  :
especially  when  there  are  typhoid  hemorrhages  from  the
rectum,  excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  abdomen,  with  green
mucous,  acrid  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus,  aphthae,  loose, raling
cough,  and  threatening  paralysis  of  the  lungs,  especially
after  having  taken  large  doses  of  calomel  or  chlore. —
Febres  lentas,  hecticae. — Melancholy. — Caries  of  the
skull-bones,  in  children. — Ophthalmia  from  an  abuse  of
Mercury. — Ophthalmia  from  sudden  suppression  of  syphi-
litic complaints. — Inflammation  of  the  cellular  tissue  in
the  internal  canthi  of  the  eyes,  suppurating  and  after-
wards ulcerating. — Blepharoptosis. — Ophthalmo-blennor-
rhcea  gonorrhoica. — Phlyctaenae  of  the  cornea,  passing  into
the  form  of  flat  ulcers. — Obscuration  and  spots  of  the
cornea. — Photophobia. — Amblyopia. — Myopia. — Dyplo-

pia  Mouches volantes. — Photopsia. — Amaurosis. —

Gl  aucoma  from  abuse  of  Mercury. — Caries  of  the  zygo-
matic process. — Purulent  otorrhoea. — Parotitis. — Ozaena
scrofulosa,  mercurialis  and  syphilitica. — Polypi  of  the
nose. — Mercurial  ptyalism. — Erysipelas  of  the  face. —
Stomacace — Throbbing  toothache  from  the  abuse  of  Mer-
cury.— Rheumatic  tearing  and  drawing  pain  in  the  teeth
and  face,  most  violent  at  night,  now  in  the  upper,  now  in
the  lower  row  of  teeth,  and  in  the  nerves  of  the  face,  with
twitching  of  the  facial  muscles. — Ulcers  in  the  mouth,  on
the  tongue  and  gums,  with  ptyalism  from  abuse  of  Mer-
cury.— Syphilitic  herpes  of  the  tonsils,  uvula,  root  of  the
tongue,  inner  side  of  the  lips.— Aphthae  of  the  mouth  and
fauces. — Chronic  inflammation  of  the  palate,  uvula,  tonsils
and  fauces,  with  burning,  or  pressing-stinging  soreness. —
Angina  pharyngea  et  tonsillaris.— Chronic  inflammation


342


NITRI  ACIDUM.


of  the  raucous  membrane  of  the  fauces,  owing  to  syphilis
or  hydrargyrosis.  with  a  feeling  of  soreness  and  redness  of
the  throat  at  every  change  of  weather. — Jaundice. — Ac-
cording to  Buchner,  nitric  acid  prevents  the  formation  of
pus  in  the  syphilitic  bubo. — Chronic  diarrhoea. — Chronic,
colliquative  diarrhoea,  threatening  phthisis  intestinalis. —
Hemorrhage  from  the  swollen  and  painful  varices  of  the
anus,  at  every  stool. — Ascarides  ? — Pressure  upon  the
bladder. — Diabetes  mellitus  et  insipidus. — Enuresis —
Chronic  inflammation  of  the  urethra. — Phimosis  ? —
Balanorrhcea. — Suppressed  menses. —  Dangerous  metror-
rhagia after  confinement,  and  especially  in  miscarriage. —
Leucorrhoea- — Carcinoma  of  the  womb. — Scirrhus  and
carcinoma  of  the  mammae. — After  operations  for  scirrhus
of  the  mamma. — Pneumonia  :  in  thin,  emaciated,  rather
old  individuals  with  choleric  temperament,  the  first
stage  to  which  Aconite  is  specific,  passing  quickly  over
into  the  second  which  threatens  to  be  fatal,  the  cough
being  either  dry  or  else  accompanied  with  copious,  green,
blood-streaked  expectoration,  violent  stitches  mostly  on
the  left  side,  excessive  difficulty  to  breathe,  soft,  intermit-
ting pulse,  profuse  sweat,  speedy  failing  of  strength.
These  are  cases  which  have  been  pointed  out  as  danger-
ous, even  by  older  physicians,  where  the  pain  vanishes,
but  the  fever  increases,  whereas  the  reverse  takes  place  in
favorable  cases. — Rhagades  of  the  hands. — Ischias  ? —
Chiragra. — Podagra.

Antidotes. — Of  large  doses  ;  alkalis,  a  saturated  solu-
tion of  soap  ;  pure  magnesia  stirred  in  water  ; — of  small
doses :  Calc.  carb.,  Camph.,  Con.,  Hep.  s.,  Merc,
Mezer.,  Petrol.,  Phosph.,  Phosph.  ac,  Sulp.

Moral  Symptoms. — Sad  mood,  without  any  real  grief.
Desponding,  seems  to  feel  discouraged  and  to  be  absorbed
in  deep  thought.  Sadness,  and  as  if  oppressed  with  grief.
He  is  unable  to  banish  his  sad  thoughts.  Home-sickness.
Weeping  mood,  without  any  cause.  Easily  moved  and
inclined  to  weep.  The  child  weeps  when  admonished
ever  so  little.  Excessive  melancholy  and  anguish.  Sad
and  full  of  anxiety,  in  the  evening,  (the  day  previous  to
the  menses.)  She  is  absorbed  in  thoughts  about  an  event
inducing  anxiety,  and  having  taken  place  long  since  ;  she


NITRI  ACTDUM.


343


cannot  detach  her  mind  from  it,  she  seems  as  if  engaged
in  a  waking  dream  ;  she  starts  from  it  from  time  to  time,
as  with  fright,  but  is  then  again  absorbed  in  those  thoughts,
without  being  able  to  think  of  sorriething  else,  even  if  she
gave  herself  ever  so  much  trouble.  Anxieties,  the  whole
day.  Fits  of  anguish,  with  palpitation  of  the  heart,  arrest-
ing the  breathing.  Anguish,  with  stitches  above  the
heart,  and  a  sort  of  raving  as  if  he  were  delirious,  with
coldness  of  the  body  and  inclination  to  fall.  Anxiety,  as
if  he  were  engaged  in  a  law-suit  or  quarrel  exciting
uneasiness.  He  is  assailed  by  anxious  thoughts,  without
any  positive  cause  for  it.  He  feels  quite  anxious  in  the
evening  ;  he  is  unable  to  sit,  he  has  to  walk  about.
During  a  thunder-storm  he  is  more  anxious  than  usual,  (a.
15  d.)  Tendency  to  start.  Timid,  with  tendency  to
start.  Timid,  he  is  easily  affected  unpleasantly  by  some-
thing. Hopelessness,  despair.  Boundless  despair.  She
imagines  she  will  soon  die,  but  she  is  not  sick.  Tired  of
life.  She  wishes  to  die,  but  she  fears  death.  Dissatis-
fied, despising  to  live.  Indifferent,  joyless.  Taciturn.
Dissatisfied  with  hersetf,  inducing  her  to  weep  violently,
after  which  she  feels  more  easy.  Out  of  humor  and
desponding.  Out  of  humor  and  uneasy,  early  in  the
morning,  after  rising.  Discouraged,  early  in  the  morning
when  waking.  Impatient  in  the  afternoon.  Angry  at
himself.  Irritable  disposition.  Out  of  humor,  sad,  head-
strong, full  of  uneasiness,  she  knows  not  where  to  turn
herself.  He  is  vexed  at  the  least  trifle,  and  at  himself,
when  not  doing  a  thing  to  his  satisfaction.  Trembling  of
all  the  limbs  during  a  quarrel.  Disposed  to  be  vehement
and  quarrelsome,  (a.  5  h.)  Tendency  to  be  angry  and  to
use  insulting  expressions.  He  gets  into  a  passion  on  ac-
count of  trifles,  and  has  to  laugh  at  himself  the  whole  day.
Fits  of  rage  and  despair,  with  curses  and  maledictions.
Long  rancour  ;  insensible  to  excuses  and  requests  for
pardon,  (a.  4  d.)  No  disposition  to  work,  (2.  d.)  No
disposition  to  perform  any  serious  business.  Changeable
mood,  at  times  cheerful,  at  times  sad,  (a.  16  h.)  Great
weakness  of  memory.  Striking  decrease  of  memory,
while  the  bodily  strength  increases.  Diminished  power
of  thinking,  not  disposed  to  scientific  work. Her  thoughts


344


NITRI  ACIDUM.


vanish,  when  attempting  to  think  on  her  important  busi-
ness. She  has  no  ideas,  comprehends  nothing,  does  not
understand  what  people  tell  her,  as  if  she  did  not  hear
well ;  this,  however,  is  not  the  case,  (a.  5  d.)  Thought-
less, without  consciousness.

Head. — Obtusion  of  the  head,  she  is  unable  to  think  or
to  take  notice  of  things  for  a  long  while.  Obtusion  of  the
head,  which  is  sometimes  like  loss  of  consciousness,  espe-
cially in  the  open  air.  Cloudiness  and  dizziness  of  the
head,  (a.  4  d.)  Vertigo,  when  raising  the  head  after  stoop-
ing. Vertigo  in  the  evening,  immediately  after  lying
down.  Violent  vertigo,  in  the  evening  ;  she  was  scarcely
able  to  support  herself  when  rising  from  a  seat.  Vertigo,
early  in  the  morning,  when  rising,  with  obscuration  of
sight,  he  had  to  sit  down.  Vertigo,  as  if  he  would  lose
his  senses.  Vertigo  and  faintness,  early  in  the  morning,
immediately  after  rising  ;  she  had  to  hold  on  to  something.
Vertigo,  at  night,  when  rising,  she  knew  not  where  she
was.  Vertigo  with  nausea,  early  in  the  morning  :  nausea
after  a  few  minutes.  Vertigo  wilh  pulsations  in  the  head
and  pressure  in  the  middle  of  the  brain,  in  the  evening.
Headache  in  the  occiput,  passing  off  after  a  slight  effort,
especially  when  thinking.  Headache,  early  in  the  morning
when  waking,  going  off  after  rising.  The  head  is  sensi-
tive to  the  rolling  of  carriages  and  hard  foot-steps,  (a.  13
d.)  Headache,  as  from  an  intoxication  of  the  day  pre-
vious, aggravated  by  stooping,  with  pain  in  the  eyes,  as  if
smoke  had  got  in.  Dull  headache  and  heaviness  of  the
head.  Heaviness  and  obtusion  of  the  head,  with  nausea.
Heaviness  of  the  temples,  with  frequent  chilliness.  He
is  roused  from  sleep  by  painful  heaviness  in  the  head,  as  if
from  the  vapor  of  coal.  Sensation  as  if  some  one  were
pressing  her  head  violently  forwards.  Feeling  of  fulness
in  the  head.  Painful  feeling  of  fulness  in  the  head,  as  if
it  would  burst,  several  times  a  day,  half  an  hour  each
time.  Pain,  as  of  fulness  of  blood,  in  the  head,  eyes,  and
upper  part  of  the  nose,  when  shaking  the  head  or  blowing
the  nose.  Sensation  in  the  head,  as  of  a  violent  cold,
but  without  any  marked  secretion  of  mucus.  Headache,
with  tension  in  the  eyes,  when  moving  them.  Painful
tension  in  the  interior  of  the  head  and  in  the  eye-lids.


NITRI  ACIDUM.


345


Headache,  as  if  the  head  were  surrounded  with  a  tight
bandage.  Fit  of  headache  :  early  in  the  morning,  when
in  bed,  dull  pain  ;  after  rising  violent  pressure  in  the  right
lemple,  with  chilliness,  qualmishness  in  the  umbilical
region,  lastly  a  troublesome  colic,  as  if  caused  by  incar-
cerated flatulence  and  frequent,  eructations,  (8.  d.)  Pain,
as  from  bruises,  in  the  occiput.  Pressure  in  the  upper
part  of  the  head,  in  the  temples  and  eyes,  as  when  press-
ing upon  the  part  with  the  thumb,  (a.  9  d.)  Pressure  in
the  forehead,  for  half  an  hour,  every  day  in  the  morning.
Pressure  in  the  forepart  of  the  head  and  upon  the  eyes,
which  are  then  more  immovable.  Excessive  pressure  in
the  head  from  above  downwards,  with  very  violent  coryza.
Pressure  in  the  head  and,  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  (the  first
days.)  Very  intense,  painful,  drawing  pressure  from  the
forehead  upwards.  Sharp,  aching  pain  in  both  frontal
eminences,  mingled  with  stitches.  Compressive  headache
in  the  forehead,  the  whole  afternoon,  (a.  2  h.)  Drawing
headache,  (a.  2  h.)  Drawing  -pain  in  the  right  temple,
(in  a  few  hours.)  Drawing  in  the  temporal  muscles.
Drawing,  at  times  in  the  right  side  of  the  head  above  the
orbit,  ai  times  in  the  left,  in  the  region  of  the  ear.  Cramp-
like, clawing  drawing  in  the  head,  which  is  gloomy  and
obtuse.  Drawing  and  stitches  in  the  scalp.  Dartings  in
the  lower  part  of  the  left  hemisphere  of  the  brain,  from
before  backwards.  Darting  in  the  left  hemisphere,  to-
wards the  temple.  Cutting  headache.  Stitches  in  the
left  temple  in  the  evening,  not  in  the  night.  Stitches  in
almost  every  part  of  the  head.  Stitches  in  both  occipital
protuberances,  extending  into  the  lower  jaw.  Stitching
pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  head,  every  day,  worse  in
the  afternoon,  as  if  her  head  would  be  torn  to  pieces  ;  she
had  to  lie  down  and,  by  the  pain,  was  prevented  from
sleeping.  Violent  stitching  pain  in  the  right  side  of  the
head  and  occiput  ;  the  pain  is  also  felt  when  touching  the
parts,  (a.  3  d.)  Stitches  in  the  temples,  (a.  3  d.)  Violent
stitches  in  the  right  temple  (a.  16  d.)  Violent  stitches  in
the  left  side  of  the  occiput,  while  at  breakfast,  drawing
the  head  backwards  and  arresting  the  breathing.  Violent,
sudden  stitches,  in  the  evening,  in  the  right  side  of
the  occiput,  followed  by  another  kind  of  violent  headache

15*


310


NITRI  ACIDUM.


in  the  occuput,  both  pains  disappearing  about  the  lime  of
going  to  bed. Stitches  above  the  eyes,  every  day,  in  the
morning,  for  half  an  hour. Stitches  above  the  left  eye.
Boring  stitches  in  the  vertex,  in  the  evening.  Stitching
headache  in  the  left  temple,  the  whole  afternoon,  (a.  16  d.)
Stitching,  sometimes throbbing headache in  the  left
frontal  eminence,  with  sensation  as  if  the  eyelids  were
drawn  upon  and  closed,  from  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,
worse  in  the  evening,  until  night ;  during  night  the  pain
rouses  him  from  sleep. Jerking  shocks  in  the  head,  when
stooping  or  lying  down. Jerks  in  the  head,  in  the
evening. Throbbing  headache  in  the  left  side  of  the  head,
the  whole  afternoon,  (a.  8  d.) Throbbing  headache  in  the
temples. Beating  in  the  occiput. Beating  headache  in
the  right  temple,  with  nausea,  early  in  the  morning  when
waking,  for  several  days,  (a.  29  d.) Intolerably  painful
hammering  in  the  head. Congestion  of  blood  to  the  head.
When  stooping,  the  head  suddenly feels  heavy  as  a
hundred-weight,  (a.  15  d.) Pain  in  the  head,  as  from
congestion  of  blood  ;  she  was  unable  to  collect  her  senses  ;
sensation  as  of  a  gauze  before  her  eyes. Heat  in  the
head,  the  whole  day. Humming  in  the  hea'd.  Constant
groaning  sensation in  the  head. Pain  as  of  sub-cu-
taneous ulceration,  of the  outer  parts of  the  head,
when  touching  them,  (a.  24  h.) Bone-pain  of  the  whole
of  the  left  side  of  the  head,  also  in  the  teeth  and  the
meatus  auditorius  extern u_s,  aching  and  drawing. Pain,  as
from  bruises,  of  the  whole  right  side  of  the  head.  Ten-
sion of  the  scalp. Painful  spots  of  the  hairy  scalp,  when
touching  them. Intense  painfulness  of  the  hairs  of  the
head. Pain  of  the  roots  of  the  hairs,  when  touching  them,
at  a  spot  of  the  vertex,  of  the  size  of  the  hand.  Ting-
ling on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  about  the  ear.  Numb-
ness of  the  head,  and  sensation  as  if  it  had  gone  to  sleep.
Sensation  about  the  head  as  of  burning  points  or  sparks.
He  frequently  feels  a  heat  about  the  head. His  head  per-
spires easily/  Frequent  sweat  on  the  forehead.  Scurfy,
humid,  itching  eruption  on  the  hairy  scalp. The  scald  of
the  hairy  scalp  smells  very  badly.  Falli?ig  off  of  the  hair.
A  number  of  boils  around  the  head,  on  the  chin,  in  the  nape
of  the  neck,  etc.


NITRI  ACIDUM.


347


Eyes. — The  eyes  are  weak  and  sore,  as  if  they  were
tired. Pressure  in  the.  eyes,  as  if  one  presses  upon  an
ulcer. Pressure  in  the  outer  canthi,  like  sand.  Pressure
in  the  eyes  as  when  one  looks  at  the  sun  ;  eye-gum  forms,
and  the  eye  becomes  red  and  itches. Pressure  in  the
eye-lids,  in  the  evening. Pressure  and  erosive  sensalion
in  the  left  eye,  (6.  d.) Periodical  pressure  on  the  inner
surface  of  the  eye-lids,  especially  the  lower,  with  greater
sensitiveness  of  the  eyes  to  the  light,  causing  a  winking.
Pinching  pain  in  the  eyes. Contractive  pain  in  the  left
eye. Sensation  as  if  the  right  eye  were  being  com-
pressed, (1.  d.) Contractive  pain  over  the  left  eye,  exter-
nally. Drawing  pain  above  the  left  eye. Violent  drawing
pain  in  the  eyes. Stitches  in  the  eyes,  (6.  d.) Stitch  in
the  right  eye  and  left  ear,  from  within  outwards  ;  subse-
quently inflammation  of  the  eyes  ;  the  white  of  the  eyes
becomes  very  red  ;  he  was  unable  to  see  in  the  open  air.
Stitch  near  the  left  eyeball,  towards  the  inner  canthus,  ex-
ternally, (a.  11  h.) Itching  of  the  inner  canthi.  Itching
and  pressure  of  the  eyes. Smarting  sensation  in  the
eyes. Burning  in  the  eyes  and  the  left  temple.  Burning
in  the  eye-lids,  early  in  the  morning. Inflammation  of
the  right  conjunctiva. Swelling  of  the  eye-lids.  Swell-
ing of  the  upper  eye-lids,  with  an  itching  pimple  upon
it. Dark  spots  on the  cornea. A small  wart  near
the  pimple  on  the  upper  eye-lid. Dryness  under  the
upper  eye-lids. Sensation  as  if  the  eyes  were  full
of  tears. Frequent  lachrymation. Lachrymation  and
itching  of  the  eyes. Lachrymation  of  the  right  eye,  in
open,  mild  air. Lachrymation  of  the  eyes,  increased  by
reading,  and  pain  in  the  eyes. Acrid  humor  in  the  eyes.
Viscid  condition  in  the  eyes,  as  if  there  were  gum  in  them.
Dry  gum  in  the  canthi. Agglutination  of  the  right  eve
during  the  night. Trembling  of  the  right  eye-lid.  Con-
tinual jerkings  below  the  right  eye,  after  dinner. Early  in
the  morning  the  eyes  are  opened  with  a  good  deal"  of
aimculty. In  the  morning  it  is  difficult  to  open  the  eyes
and  to  raise  the  upper  eye-lids. Dilatation  of  the  pupils.
Obscuration  of  the  eyes,  when  reading. When  looking
at  a  thing  carefully,  the  object  seems  to  him  too  dark!
ine  sight  becomes  dim,  objects  appear  dark;  he  sees
nothing ;  he  imagines  there  is  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  he


348


NITRI  ACIDUM.


is  blind. In  the  open  air  he  suddenly  became  as  if  blind
and  deranged  ;  bis  ideas  wandered  to  and  fro,  and  he  felt
like  one  fainting,  for  a  couple  of  minutes,  (a.  39  d.)  At
twilight,  he  is  obliged  to  cease  reading  sooner  than  usual.
The  halo  around  the  candle-light  becomes  stronger.  Mist
before  the  eyes,  when  looking  at  a  thing. When  reading
he  sees  a  green  spot  by  the  side  of  every  letter.  Short-
sighted, the  objects  at  a  moderate  distance  appeared  indis-
tinct. The  horizontal  objects  appear  double  when  seen
at  some  distance. Transitory  gauze  before  the  right  eye.
Gray  spots  before  the  eyes,  at  some  distance  ;  they  hinder
sight. Single,  black  spots  before  the  eyes. At  candle-
light, a  cobweb  seems  to  hover  before  his  eyes  ;  this  dis-
appears again  when  closing the  eyes  firmly  or  when
moving  them. Sparks  before  the  eyes  ;  obscuration  of
sight ;  four  times  during  the  day  he  was  unable  to  re-
cognise any  thing  for  an  hour. Sensitiveness  of  the
eyes  to  the  light. The  eyes  are  dazzled  by  the  light  of
day,  similarly  to  what  they  were  by  the  light  of  the  lamp.

"Ears. — Pain  in  the  ears,  as  if  something  would  burst
in  the  ear. Pain  in  the  left  ear,  as  if  it  were  being  dis-
tended. Pain,  as  if  the  tympanum  were  being  pressed  in,
(a.  12  h.) Otalgia. Cramp-pain  in  the  ears,  (a.  24  h.)
Dartings  in  the  internal  meatus  auditorius,  (a.  6  d.)  Draw-
ing in  the  external  meatus  auditorius,  (a.  4  h.)  Drawing
in  the  right  ear  and  right  cheek. Tearing,  at  times  in
the  right,  at  times  in  the  left  helix. Stitches  in  the  right
ear,  with  pressure  in  the  forehead. Stitches  and  hum-
ming in  the  right  ear,  for  three  days,  (a.  12  d.)  Stitching
otalgia. Beating  in  the  region  of  the  tympanum.  Itching
heat  of  the  ears,  (a.  5  d.) Itching  in  the  ears.  Feeling
of  dryness  in  the  ears,  they  are  swollen,  (a.  6  d.)  Red-
ness, suppuration  and  violent  itching  behind  the  left  ear.
Soreness  behind  the  left  ear,  (11.  d.) Pimples  of  the
size  of  small  peas  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  lobules,
with  pain  when  touching  them. Glandular  swelling  be-
hind and  below  the  right  ear,  with  stitching  and  tearing
in  the  swelling,  through  the  ear,  in  the  evening,  and  con-
tinuing until  she  gets  warm  in  her  bed. Itching  in  the
swollen  parotid  gland,  (a.  3  d.) Feeling  of  obstruction
in  the  ear,  after  previous  soreness  in  that  organ.  The
right  ear  becomes  suddenly  closed,  as  if  he  were  entirely


NITRI  ACIDUM.


349


deaf,  for  a  short  time.  Difficulty  of  hearing,  (a.  5  d.)
Dull  hearing.  Echo  in  the  ears  of  her  own  speech.
Sound  in  the  ear  as  if  water  were  in  it.  Humming  in  the
ears  and  hardness  of  hearing,  for  a  fortnight,  (a.  14  d.)
Humming  in  the  left  ear,  (a.  16  d.)  Roaring  before  the
ears.  Sudden  sensation  as  of  fanning  the  lelt  ear,  in  the
afternoon,  for  some  minutes.  A  few  loud  reports  in  the
ear,  (a.  a  few  days.) Cracking  in  the  ear  when  chewing.

Nose. —  Violent  itching  in  the  nose.  Erosive  pain  in  the
nose.  Stitches  in  the  nose,  when  touching  it,  as  if  a  splinter
got  into  it.  Stitches  in  the  root  of  the  nose,  which  is  dis-
tended, especially  when  sneezing  or  coughing.  Burning  in
the  nose.  Soreness  in  the  nose.  Soreness  of  the  wings  of
the  nose,  (a.  4  h.)  Soreness  and  bleeding  of  the  inside  of
the  nose,  with  violent  coryza.  Soreness  and  scurf  in  the  nose.
Ulcerated  nostril ;  sore  nose.  Itching  herpes  of  the  wings
of  the  nose.  Redness  of  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and  scurfy
blisters  upon  it.  Expulsion  of  blood  from  the  nose  when
blowing  it,  in  the  morning.  The  nose  bleeds,  from  weep-
ing. Violent  bleeding  of  the  nose,  (a.  24  h.)  Discharge
of  black  blood  from  the  nose.  Disagreeable  smell  in  the
nose,  in  the  evening  after  lying  down,  for  three  evenings
in  succession.  When  eating,  small  pieces  of  food  get
into  the  posterior  nares,  with  a  disagreeable  sensation';
they  are  not  got  down  till  they  are  swallowed  with  the
saliva.

Face. — The  bones  of  the  face  are  painful,  whether
touched  or  no.  Tension  of  the  skin  of  the  face,  early  in
the  morning.  Tension  of  the  skin  on  the  forehead.  Violent
cramp-pain  in  the  bones  of  the  face,  especially  the  malar
bones.  Sensation  of  contraction  about  the  nose,  zygomata
and  around  the  eyes.  Drawing  in  the  right  cheek,  towards
the  nose.  Tearing  in  the  malar  bones,  commencing  at  the
angle  of  the  lower  jaw.  Violent  tearing  deep  in  the  facial
muscles  or  in  the  periosteum  of  the  zygoma  ;  it  wakes
him  after  midnight.  Violent  pain  in  the  zygomata,  as  if
they  were  being  torn  to  pieces,  (a.  10  d.)  Pain,  as  from
bruises,  in  the  zygoma.  Prickings  in  the  face.  Darting,
now  m  one,  now  in  another  muscle  of  the  face,  especially
the  masseter  muscles.  Violent,  painful  pulsations  on  the
left  side  of  the  face. Heat  of  the  face,  in  the  afternoon.


350


NITRI  ACIDUM.


Feeling  of  great  internal  heat  in  the  face,  especially  the
eyes ;  he  can  scarcely  keep  them  open,  the  face  looking
pale.  Feeling  of  heat  in  the  cheeks,  no  heat  is  percep-
tible to  the  touch.  Inflammatory  swelling  of  the  left
cheek,  stinging,  painful,  with  nausea  and  chilliness  ;  fol-
lowed by  heat ;  the  shuddering  returned  when  raising
one's-self  in  the  bed,  (a.  10  d.)  Swelling  of  the  cheek,
with  a  red,  rough  spot  in  the  centre,  and  tearing  pain  in
the  teeth.  Swelling  of  the  cheek  and  upper  lip.  Bloated
around  the  eyes,  early  when  waking,  (3.  d.)  Deep  eyes.
Yellow,  sickly  appearance  below  the  eyes,  early  after
rising,  and  feeling  of  relaxation  (a.  9  d.)  Yellowness
around  the  eyes,  the  cheeks  being  red.  Yellow  counte-
nance. Scaly  skin  of  the  whole  face.  Black  pores  of
the  face.  Small  pimples  in  the  face,  especially  upon
the  forehead.  Pimples  on  the  hairy  border  of  the
temple,  (5.  d.)  Itching-burning,  red  pimples,  with  pus  in
their  tips,  in  different  parts  of  the  face,  on  the  forehead,
temples,  lips,  chin,  etc.  Fine,  itching  eruption  in  the  region
of  the  beard. Itching  herpes  in  the  whiskers.

Jaws  and  Teeth. — Herpetic  spot  close  to  the  mouth,
extending  towards  the  chin.  Swelling  and  itching  of  the
lips.  Swelling  of  the  upper  lip  and  upper  gums,  (a.  10
d.)  Sioelling  of  the  lower  lip,  (2.  9.  d.)  Cutting  pains  in
the  upper  lip.  Stitches  in  the  upper  lip,  as  if  of  splinters,
when  touching  it.  Itching  of  the  upper  lip.  Ulcerated
pimples  on  the  lower  lip,  (a.  9  d.)  Ulcerated  scurfy
corners  of  the  mouth.  Pustules  on  the  chin,  (a.  48  h.)
Several  pimples  on  the  chin,  with  a  red,  hard  circum-
ference, at  the  commencement,  painful  when  touched  ;
this  painfulness  passes  off  as  soon  as  pus  appears  in  their
tips  ;  afterwards  theyleave  an  induration  with  red  circum-
ference-behind,  (a.  33  d,,)  A  large  boil  on  the  side  of  the
chin.  Pain  in  the  jaws  as  if  from  mercury.  Cramp-like
pain  in  the  right  jaw.  Dartings  in  the  right  lower  jaw,
from  the  region  of  the  ear  to  the  fore,  part  of  the  face.
Continuous  stitch  in  the  region  of  the  articulation  of  the
jaw.  Great  weakness,  pain,  and  absence  of  strength  in
the  lower  jaw,  in  the  evening.  Cracking  in  the  joint  of
the  jaw,  ivhen  masticating  or  eating.  Pain  of  the  sub-
maxillary glands. Sensation  as  if  the  sub-maxillary  glands


NITRI  ACIDUM.


36l


were  swollen. Swelling  of  the  sab-maxillary  glands.
Swelling  of  the  sub-maxillary  glands  when  moving  them.
Dull  pressure  in  the  sub-maxillary  glands  and  about  the
neck. Toothache  in  the  upper  row,  jiot  hindering  masti-
cation ;  accompanied  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks,  and
tenseness  of  that  swelling. The  toothache  becomes  worse
immediately  upon  leaning  with  the  head  against  the  cush-
ion. Contractive  jerking  and  gurgling  in  a  hollow  tooth.
Jerking  toothache,  mostly  in  hollow  teeth  and  in  the  even-
ing, (I.  d.) Drawing  in  the  teeth. Drawing  pain  in  the
teeth,  extending  down  to  the  larynx. Drawing  and  grum-
bling in  the  teeth  and  jaws,  at  night. Sharp  drawing  in  the
right  row  of  teeth  and  in  the  head. Tearing  in  the  teeth,
(15.  d.) Stitching  toothache,  with  swelling  of  the  cheeks,
for  two  days,  (a.  3  d.) Violent  stitches  in  the  upper  molar
teeth,  downwards  towards  the  crown,  (a.  3.  h.)  Continu-
ous stitching  pain  in  the  teeth,  (a.  24  h.) A  stitch  darts
into  the  tooth,  when  taking  any  thing  cold  or  warm  into
the  mouth. Stitches  and  burning  in  the  teeth,  at  night.
Boring  pains  in  the  teeth,  when  touched  by  either  cold  or
warm  substances. Tormenting  throbbing  toothache,  worst
in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  hindering  sleep  for  several
hours,  now  in  one,  now  in  all  the  teeth,  (a.  12  d.)  Feel-
ing of  coldness  in  the  teeth.  '  Looseness  of  the  teeth  when
chewing. One  of  the  lower  molares  is  painful  when
chewing. The  anterior  and  superior  teeth,  and  an  inferior
hollow  molar  tooth  are  painful,  as  if  they  were  loose  and
dull,  or  as  if  they  had  become  bent  forwards  and  vacillated,
going  off  in  the  evening  after  a  warm  supper.  During
the  meal  the  teeth  lose  their  feeling  of  softness.  Sensa-
tion as  if  the  teeth  were  soft  and  spongy  ;  he  dares  not
bite  upon  them,  lest  they  should  fall  out  ;  when  sucking
at  the  gums  ever  so  little,  blood  comes  out,  and  he  feels  a
pleasant  sensation  through  the  whole  mouth,  (1 1.  d.)  The
teeth  feel  elongated. The  teeth  which  used  to  be  entirely
white,  became  yellow. Cutting  pain  in  the  gums  of  the
upper  incisores. Aching  pain  and  soreness  of  the  gums.
I  tching  of  the  gums. White,  swollen  gums. Swelling  of
the  upper  gums,  even  in  the  sockets,  (a.  8  d.)  Swelling
of  the  gums,  and  the  teeth  were  so  loose  that  she  mieht
have  taken  them  out,  (a.  5  d.)


352  NITRI  ACIDUM.

Mouth. — The  inner  parts  of  the  mouth  feel  stiff  and
swollen,  in  the  evening  when  waking. Sensation  as  if
the  parts  in  the  mouth  had  gone  to  sleep,  (29.  d.)  Con-
tractive sensation  in  the  mouth. The  inner  cuticle  of  the
cheeks  easily  gets  between  the  teeth,  so  that  he  bites  upon
it  when  masticating,  (10.  d.) Ulcerated  spot  of  the  inner
side  of  the  cheek,  with  stinging  pain,  as  from  a  splinter.
Ulcers  in  the  movth  and  fauces. Spreading  ulcer  on  the
side  of  the  uvula. Vesicles  on  the  tongue  and  its  edge,
with  burning  pain  when  touching  it. Small  painful  vesi-
cles on  the  sub-lingual  glands. Small  painful  pimples
on  the  tip  of  the  tongue. The  tongue  is  very  sensitive  ;
even  mild  food  causes  a  sharp  smarting  sensation.  He
bites  his  tongue  when  chewing. Soreness  of  the  red
portion  of  the  tongue. Soreness  of  the  tongue,  palate,  the
inner  side  of  the  gums,  with  slinging  pain,  and  ulceration
of  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  (for  5  days)  (a.  28  d.)  Lisp-
ing. Coated  tongue. White,  dry  tongue,  in  the  morning,
Dry  tongue  sticking  to  the  palate,  early  in  the  morning.
Dry  mouth. Dry  mouth,  no  thirst,  swollen,  hot  lips.
Great  dryness  in  mouth,  with  thirst. Scraping  and  dry
sensation  in  the  mouth,  as  after  much  smoking.  Her
mouth  is  always  full  of  water,  (in  a  few  h.)  Tough
mucus. Copious  flow  of  saliva,  (13.  d.) Ptyalism  with
affection  of  the  gums. Ptyalism  and  ulcers  of  the  fauces.
Bloody  saliva  in  the  morning,  (a.  48  h.) Putrid  smell
from  the  mouth. Cadaverous  smell  from  the  mouth.
Tough  mucus  in  mouth.

Pharynx  and  (Esophagus. — Aching  pain  in  the  throat.
Pressure  in  the  throat,  as  if  the  food  would  not  go  down.
Pressure  in  the  back  part  of  the  throat,  during  deglutition,
with  sensation  as  if  the  pressure  moved  downwards  on  the
inner  side  of  the  back.  Pressure  in  the  throat,  as  if  there
were  a  tumor,  with  sore  pain.  Sensation  as  of  a  lump  in
the  throat,  during  empty  deglutition.  Sensation  as  of
a  node  ascending  in  the  oesophagus.  Sensation  as  of  the
food  being  squeezed  in  the  oesophagus,  as  if  it  were
narrower.  Sore  throat  when  swallowing,  as  if  the  throat
were  swollen,  raw  and  ulcerated.  Stinging  in  the  throat,
after  long  talking.  Stinging-burning  sore  throat.  Stitches
in  the  throat  in  the  evening  when  in  bed,  apparently  in  the


NITRJ  ACIDUM.


353


root  of  the  tongue,  between  the  acts  of  deglutition.
Stitches  in  the  tonsils,  and  burning  in  the  fauces,  behind
the  uvula.  Burning  in  the  throat  after  supper,  for  half  an
hour.  Pain  in  the  tonsils,  with  soreness  of  the  uvula.
Soreness  of  the  pharynx,  (a.  10  d.)  Swelling  of  the  ton-
sils. Heat  and  dryness  of  the  throat.  Scraping  sensation
in  the  throat,  as  if  speech  were  impeded.  Tickling  in  the
throat.

Taste  and  Appetite. — Sourness  in  the  throat,  burning,
after  a  meal.  Sour  taste  in  mouth.  Bitterness  of  throat.
Bitter  taste  in  mouth,  (a.  24  h.)  Sweetish  taste,  (a.  13  d.)
Pure  water  tastes  saltish.  Great  thirst,  continually.  Want
of  appetite,  especially  in  the  morning.  Want  of  appetite  ;
she  feels  qualmish  and  somewhat  nauseated.  Eructations,
tasting  of  the  ingesta.  Aversion  to  food,  boiled  meat,
sweetish  things,  bread.  Brown  bread  gives  her  a  sour
taste  and  makes  her  vomit.  Appetite  for  herring  and
fat  things.  Feeling  of  repletion  and  obtusion  of  the  head.
Violent  hunger  with  weariness  of  life. Canine  hunger.

Gastric  Symptoms.— Long after-taste  of  the  food.
Eructations  and  flatulence  after  a  meal. Nausea  after  a
meal. Qualmishness  in  the  abdomen,  after  a  meal,  seve-
ral days  in  succession. Vomiting  and  headache,  immedi-
ately after  dinner,  above  the  eyes  and  in  the  parietal  bones
as  if  the  head  would  burst. Eructations  after  a  meal,
with  bitter  and  sour  vomiting. Heartburn  after  a  meal.
Distension  of  the  stomach  and  abdomen  after  a  moderate
meal. Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  after  a  meal.  Frequent
pinching  in  the  abdomen,  when  drinking  water  while  tak-
ing a  meal. Tearing  soreness  in  the  oesophagus,  chest
and  stomach,  at  the  commencement  of  a  meal,  after  drink-
ing. Feeling  of  coldness  and  pressure  in  the  stomach
alter  a  meal. After  every  meal,  headache  over  the  eves
more  stitching  than  aching,  (a.  16  d.) Heat  and  redness
ol  the  face,  after  a  meal. Frequently,  after  a  meal,  cough
with  vomiting,  with  tingling  and  irritation  in  the  throat.
Soreness  in  the  chest,  during  a  meal. Excessive  faintness
alter  a  meal,  especially  in  the  knees  and  elbows  Much
yawning  after  a  meal. She  becomes  weary  and  drowsy
after  a  mea  . Chilliness,  paleness,  and  coated  tongue
alter  a  meal. Sweat  on  the  forehead  during  a  meal


354


NITR.I  ACIDUM.


Sweat  all  over,  after  a  meal,  (a.  5  d.) Anxiousness  after
a  meal. She  feels  sick,  immediately  after  dinner  ;  all
her  limbs  tremble  and  feel  weary,  she  has  to  Jie  down.
Eructations  after  and  before  a  meal. Empty  eructations
(almost  immediately.) Sour  eructations. Bilious  eruc-
tations, during  a  meal. Regurgitation  of  half  digested
food,  with  flat  taste  in  mouth. Eructations,  accompanied
by  heartburn,  very  readily. Burning  in  the  oesophagus,
as  low  down  as  the  pit  of  the  stomach. Hiccough,  (3.  d.)
Nausea,  as  from  excessive  heat,  not  as  if  one  would
vomit,  for  many  hours. Nausea  with  anxiety  and  trem-
bling, (a.  41  h.) Nausea,  with  anxiety,  without  inclination
to  vomit,  below  the  short  ribs,  frequently  during  the  day.
Nausea,  sick  feeling  and  movement  in  the  whole  body,  as
if  one  had  taken  an  emetic. Nausea  about  the  stomach,
the  whole  day. Qualmish,  unwell,  chilly,  after  taking  the
usual  coffee  ;  she  had  to  lie  down. Frequent  attacks  of
sickness,  as  if  she  would  faint,  with  anxiety  and  sensation
as  if  eructations  would  ensue,  alternating  with  canine  hun-
ger and  painful  sensation  of  empliness  in  the  stomach,
making  her  feel  as  if  she  ought  to  eat  something,  accom-
panied by  accumulation of  water  in  the  mouth ;  this
occurs  every  day,  frequently,  the  attacks  lasting  from  5  to
10  minutes. Constant  nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,
the  whole  day,  many  days  in  succession,  with  heat  from
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  to  the  pit  of  the  throat ;  there  is  no
retching,  the  nausea  is  not  felt  while  eating  or  drinking,  for
both  of  which  she  has  an  appetite. Irresistible  nausea,
resulting  in  vomiting. Bitter  and  sour  vomiting,  with
many  eructations  after  a  meal.

Stomach. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  cardiac  orifice,
when  swallowing  food.  Pain  above  the  stomach,  which
does  not  allow  him  to  keep  himself  straight,  relieved
by  eructations.  Pressure  in  the  stomach,  increased  by
pressing  upon  the  part  with  the  hand.  Pressure  in  the
stomach,  especially  previous  to  a  meal,  or  after  having  been
without  nourishment  for  an  hour;  the  pressure  is  removed
by  eating;  accompanied  by  empty  eructalions.  Violent
pressure  above  the  stomach  and  the  pit  of  the  stomach,
v.  hen  walking  in  the  open  air.  Pressure  in  the  stomach,
very  painful  before  breakfast. Pressure  in  the  pit  of


NITRI  ACIDUM.


355


the  stomach,  and  sudden  burning,  as  if  he  were  about
to  vomit  blood,  (2.  d.) Pressure  in  the  stomach,  as  if  it
were  sore,  in  the  morning,  and  in  day-time. Cramp  in  the
stomach,  as  from  cold. Cramp-pain  in.  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  (a.  6  d.) Cramp-like,  contractive  pain  in  the
stomach. Contractive  cramp  in  the  stomach,  disagree-
able griping  and  pinching,  off  and  on,  (a.  24,  48  h.)  Vio-
lent, cramp-like  pinching,  in  the  stomach.  Cramp-like
drawing  pain  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  with  tension
extending  to  the  umbilicus, shortening  the  breathing.
Gripings  in,  the  stomach,  early  in  the  morning  after  rising,
extending  into  the  chest,  followed  by  short  attacks  of
pinching  in  the  stomach. Continuous  stitch  in  front  below
the  pit  of  the  stomach. Gnawing  in  the  region  of  the
stomach  early  in  the  morning,  before  breakfast.  Pulsations
in  the  pit  of  the  stomach. Undulations  in  the  region
of  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (4.  d.) Feeling  of  heat  in  the
stomach. Burning  sensation  in  the  stomach.  Coldness
in  the  stomach. Painless  movement,  on  the  left  side  of
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  (11.  d.)

Abdomen — Pressure  and  tension  in  the  region  of  the
liver. Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  when  making
the  least  attempt  towards  loud  screaming. Jaundice,  yel-
lowness of  the  skin  with  costiveness. Pressure  in  the'left
hypochondrium,  rather  in  front,  (4.  d.) Pressure  in  the
left  side  of  the  abdomen. Sensation  as  if  the  spleen  were
swollen. Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  spleen,  at  every
motion,  (4.  d.) Pressure  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.
Aching  pain  in  the  abdomen. Pressure  in  the  middle  of
the  abdomen,  as  if  a  big  lump  were  lodged  in  it.  Achino-
pain,  and  occasionally  a  stitch  in  the  abdomen,  when
touching  it. Pressure  in  the  umbilical  region,  with  sensa-
tion as  if  it  would  pass  off  after  stool. Pain  at  a  small
spot  ot  the  abdomen,  as  if  something  would  get  out  there.
Distension  of  the  abdomen  in  the  morning,  when  waking
Distension  of  the  abdomen,  from  flatulence,  with  grunting
in  the  abdomen,  from  morning  till  evening,  for  many  days
fcense  in  the  umbilical  region  as  of  being  distended  with
flatulence. Continually  distended  abdomen.  Consider-
able distension  in  the  abdomen,  (a.  24  h.) Contraction  in
the  abdomen,  with  itching. Contractive  pain  in  the  um-
bihcal  reg10n. Cramp-like  contraction  of  the  abdomen


356


NITRI  ACIDUM.


Cramp  in  the  abdomen. Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,
with  shuddering. Drawing  pain  in  the  abdomen,  extend-
ing into  the  thighs. Drawing  and  griping  in  the  umbilical
region,  especially  when  moving  or  bending  the  body.
Frequent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  without  diarrhoea.
Frequent  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  early  in  the  morning,
after  good  stool. Cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen,  in  the
morning,  when  in  bed,  and  after  rising  ;  afterwards  soft
stools,  (3.  d.) Cutting  colic  with  diarrhoea,  and  feet  which
cannot  be  got  warm. Cutting  and  tension  in  the  right  side
of  the  abdomen. Stitching  colic,  especially  when  press-
ing upon  the  abdomen. Digging-up  colic,  below  the  um-
bilicus. Digging-up  and  pinching  in  the  abdomen,  with-
out diarrhoea. Colic  as  from  cold. Excessive  sensitive-
ness of  the  abdomen,  (a.  3  d.) A  hereditary,  wart-like
excrescence  on  the  abdomen,  becomes  sensitive,  sore  and
scurfy. The  region  of  the  hernia  is  very  much  distended.
Stitches  in  the  region  of  the  left  hernia. Pain  in  the  left
inguinal  region  as  if  it  were  broken  and  as  if  hernia  would
protrude,  diminished  by  walking. Swelling  of  the  ingui-
nal glands. Contractive  pain  of  the  inguinal  glands.
Slight  stitch  in  the  bubo,  when  feeling  it  or  no,  with
stinging  itching  in  the  hard  part  of  the  bubo.  Suppurating
swelling  of  the  inguinal  glands,  painful  when  walking;
the  whole  limb  felt  paralysed  and  the  muscles  put  upon
the  stretch. Abundant  flatulence ;  it  moves  about  in  the
abdomen,  causing  a  disagreeable  sensation  and  finding  no
outlet. Flatulent  colic,  almost  no  flatulence  being  emitted,
even  when  stool  is  procured  by  injections  of  water.  Un-
easiness and  rumbling  in  the  abdomen,  with  diarrhoea,  for
more  than  a  week,  (a.  20  h.) Colicky  motions,  in  the
morning,  and  distension  in  the  abdomen,  the  flatus  moving
about  in  the  abdomen  with  pain  and  rumbling,  and  even
soft  stools  procuring  no  relief,  (a.  16  d.) Violent  flatulent
colic,  early  in  the  morning,  after  rising. Rumbling  in  the
abdomen. Noise  as  from  craving,  but  without  hunger,
frequently  after  a  meal. Abundant  emission  of  flatulence,
early  in  the  morning,  after  pinching  in  the  abdomen.
Emission  of  a  quantity  of  fetid  flatulence.  Immediate
emission  of  a  quantity  of  flatulence,  (also  2.  d.)  Excessive
flatulence,  (a.  a  few  h.) Colic,  previous  to  the  emission  of


IflTRI  ACIDUM,


357


flatulence.  Drawing-writhing  pain  in  the  abdomen  pre-
vious to  emission  of  flatulence.

Stool. — Constipation,  (1.  d.) Painless  constipation,
for  several  days. Every  other  day  hard  stool  covered
with  mucus,  during  the  first  days,  afterwards  every  day.
Costiveness  ;  the  abdomen  became  distended,  but  the  flatu-
lence did  not  pass,  (a.  3,  4,  5  d.) Hard,  scanty  stool.
The  stool  passes  off  in  hard  lumps. Stool,  resembling
sheep's-dung,  with  much  pressing  and  accompanied  with
mucus,  (2.  3.  d.) Pressure  upon  the  rectum,  as  if  stool
would  come  on,  with  scanty  discharge. Long  pressing,
when  going  to  stool ;  the  stool  would  not  come  off,  and
nevertheless  it  was  not  hard. Constant  desire  for  stool,
unsuccessful Stool  alternately  hard  and  liquid.  Soft
stool  after  pinching  in  the  abdomen. Soft  stool,  twice  a
day,  for  several  weeks. Three,  four  stools  a  day,  with
shuddering  and  qualmishness  under  the  short  ribs,  (the
first  13  d.) Papescent  stool. Sensation  as  if  diarrhoea
would  come  on,  which  was  not  the  case,  (a.  2  to  8  h.)
Diarrhoea,  several  times  a  day,  (the  first  10  d.)  Diarrhoea,
with  nausea  after  dinner,  (a.  20  d.) Diarrhoea  every
other  day- Mucous  diarrhoea,  sometimes  accompanied
with  colic  and  violent  desire,  (the  first  4  d.)  Undigested
food  is  passed  with  the  stool. Thin,  yellowish-white
stool. Stool  and  flatulence  having  a  putrid  smell.  Smart-
ing acrid  stool. Bloody,  dysenteric  stool,  with  tenesmus,
fever  and  headache. Colic,  sometimes  drawing,  previous
to  stool. Pinching  in  the  abdomen,  previous  to  good
stool. Pain,  during  stool,  as  if  something  were  being
torn  in  the  rectum. Stitches,  cutting  and  pressing  in  the
rectum  and  anus,  during  stool. Profuse  discharge  of
blood  during  stool. Burning  at  the  anus,  during  hard
stool, btitches  in  the  anus  and  cramp-like  contraction  of
the  anus,  for  many  hours,  (a.  2d.) Unsuccessful  desire,
alter  stool. Burning  at.  the  anus,  after  stool.  Stitches
and  scratching  in  the  rectum  and  anus,  after  stool.  Nau-
sea, after  soft  stool. Complete  exhaustion, after  stool,
(a.  9  d.) Excessive  irritation,  anxiety  and  general  un-
easiness after  stool. Colic,  afier  frequent,  and  partly  un-
successful desire  for  stool. The  rectum  appears  to  be
inactive  and  incapable  to  expel  the  faeces. Pressure  in


358


NITRI  ACIDUM.


the  rectum,  (a.  7,  17  d.) Aching  pain  about  the  anus,
as  if  a  varix  were  forming. Varix  about  the  anus,  after
'violent  pressure  down  the  back,  when  standing.  Varices
and  prickling  in  the  anus. Pain  of  the  varices  at  the  anus.
Burning  of  the  varices  of  the  anus. Swelling  of  the
varices  of  the  anus. Continual  protrusion  of  those  varices.
Bleeding  of  the  varices  of  the  anus,  during  stool.  Con-
stant pinching  in  the  rectum. Almost  daily  contraction  of
the  anus. Painful  prolapsus  recti. Itching  of  the  rectum.
Itching  of  the  anus,  when  walking  in  the  open  air  and
after  stool. Itching  in  the  rectum,  from  the  moving  of
the  ascarides. Stitches  in  the  rectum,  when  coughing.
Erosive  pain  of  the  anus,  in  the  evening Erosive  pain,
more  in  the  rectum  than  anus,  immediately  after  stool,
for  two  hours. Heat  in  the  rectum. Burning  and  pinch-
ing in  the  rectum. Burning  at  the  anus,  (2.  d.)  Painful
burning  in  the  rectum,  the  whole  day,  especially  after
micturition. Soreness  of  the  anus,  (a.  4  d.)  Humid
soreness  of  the  anus  and  between  the  nates,  when  walk-
ing. Humor  and  itching  of  the  anus. Painful  pimple
on  the  perineum. Sharply  drawing  stitches  in  the  pen
naeum,  towards  the  anus.

Urinary  Organs— Painless  suppression  of  urine  lor
several  days. Great  deire  to  urinate. Frequent  desire,
but  scanty  urine,  (a.  4  d.) At  night,  desire  to  urinate
with  cutting  pain  in  the  abdomen. Thin  stream,  as  from
contractionof  the  urethra. Scanty  urine. Scanty,  turbid,
badly  smelling  urine. Copious,  easy  emission  of  urine.
Copious,  pale-coloured  urine. Enuresis. Cold  urine.
Dark  urine. Dark  urine,  soon  becoming  turbid  white ;
increased  dryness  in  the  throat  after  micturition.  Brown
urine,  leaving  brown  spots  in  the  linen,  like  coffee  spots.
Clear  urine  ;  when  standing,  it  becomes  filamentous  and
wheyey,  and  deposits  a  bright-red  sediment  firmly  ad-
hering to  the  chamber/  (a.  33  d.) Red  sediment  m  the
urine. A  quantity  of  brown-red  gravel  in  the  urine,  (a.  7
d.) Whitish  sediment  and  ammoniacal  odor  of  the  urine.
Urine  emitting  an  intolerably  strong smell,  smarting,
brownish. Acrid  smell  of  the  urine,  like  that  of  tobacco.
Fetid,  sourish  urine,  like  the  urine  of  horses. Burning  in
the  urethra,  during  micturition,  (a.  17  d.) Stitches  in  the


NITRI  ACIDUM.


359


hypogastrium,  above  the  pudendum,  when  urinating.
Erosive  pain  in  the  urethra,  when  urinating.  Sore  pain
in  the  tip  of  the  glans  when  urinating.  Sore  pain  in  the
whole  of  the  urethra,  when  urinating.  Cutting  in  the
urethra.  Violent  burning  after  micturition,  (a.  7  d.)
Cramp-like,  contractive  pain  from  the  kidneys  towards  the
bladder.  The  urethra  is  painful  when  touched.  Prick-
ings in  the  orifice  of  the  urethra.  Burning  sensation  in
the  forepart  of  the  urethra,  inducing  one  to  urinating,
imagining  that  it  will  be  relieved  by  urinating,  whereas
it  increases.  The  orifice  of  the  urethra  is  dark- red,
swollen,  hke  a  pad.  Ulcer  in  the  urethra.  Yell  owish
matter  co  nes  out  of  the  urethra.  Mucus  drops  out  of
the  urethra  between  the  acts  of  micturition.  A  few  drops
of  thin  mucus,  not  stretching  into  threads  like  the  pros-
tatic juice,  came  out  of  the  urethra  after  micturition.
Discharge  of  tenacious  mucus  from  the  urethra,  after
micturition. Discharge  of  bloody  mucus  from  the  urethra.

Genital  Organs.— Great  falling  off  of  the  hair  about
the  genital  organs.  Itching  of  the  genital  organs.  Titil-
lation  of  the  penis.  Itching  of  the"  penis,  especially  the
glans  under  the  prepuce.  A  spot  on  the  penis,  which
had  been  rubbed  sore,  ulcerates  and  refuses  to  heal.
Xrequent  itching  of  the  glans.  Itching  pimples  on
the  glans.  Red  spots  on  the  glans  becoming  covered
with  scabs  Several  brown,  painful  spots  upon  the  corona
glandis.  From  ten  to  twelve  smal',  flesh-colored  ex-
crescences upon  the  corona  glandis,  decreasing  in  size
in  a  few  days,  emitting  a  fetid  humor,  and  bleeding
when  touched.  Deep  ulcer  upon  the  glands,  with
elevated,  lead-colored,  extremely  sensitive  ed^es.  Flat
ulcers  upon  the  corona  glandis,  looking  clean,  but
emm.nga  fet.dpus.  Balanorrhoea.  Throbbing  and  pres-
sure aboUt  the  glans,  (2.  d.)  Sharp  stitches  in  thepre-
n  '  ,llch^°  the  prepuce  and  humid  spots  upon  its
h 2 nn  ft  28  d-) Infl«"n™«ion  and  swelling  of

nal  &PuXCe' W.U ^TT  Pain;  Sorcne SS'"P011  ils  i^er-
nal  surface,  and  small  ulcers  secreting  a  very  fetid  ichor

swaevi;:n/po,f  rhe  l,ne,n' iike  b^yW  con^S;

nlss  T  •,Phim0S,SI°f  l,1C  PreP"^,  without  much  red!
ness  ,  upon  its  internal  surface  and  its  border,  and  in  the
orifice  of  the  urethra,  chancre-like,  suppurating  ul  ers!


360


N1TRI  ACIDUM.


with  flat  edges,  without  any  inflammation,  but  with  violent
lancinations,  increasing  towards  evening,  continuing  during
the  night,  hindering  sleep,  and  becoming  much  worse  in
the  morning  by  violent  erections. Small,  itching  vesicles
on  the  prepuce,  bursting  open  in  a  few  days,  and  becoming
covered  with  small,  dry  scurf. Pimple,  with  burning
itching,  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  prepuce  ;  rubbing  it
changes  it  to  a  flat  ulcer,  on  a  level  with  the  skin  and
yellow,  as  if  covered  with  thick  pus  and  painless,  only
surrounded  with  a  little  redness. Flat,  yellow,  ulcerated
places,  like  flat  chancres,  humid,  but  painless,  on  the  inner
surface  of  the  prepuce,  on  both  sides  of  the  frsenulum.
Violent  itching  of  the  scrotum. Tingling  of  the  scrotum,
through  the  groin. Itching  of  the  scrotum,  with  sore
places,  (2.  d.) Drawing  pain  in  the  testicle.  Turning
pain  in  the  left  testicle. Contusive  pain  in  the  left  testicle.
Burning  pain  in  the  left  testicle. Swelling  of  the  testicle.
Swelling  of  the right  testicle,  painful  when  touched.
Tearing  in  the  spermatic  cords,  the  testes  being  painful
to  the  touch. Deficient  sexual  desire. Diminished,  and
even  deficient  sexual  desire,  the  first  18  days,  and  slow,
insufficient  erection,  being  so  much  more  satisfactory  after-
wards, (in  a  man  of  51  years.) Sexual  desire  and  erec-
tion, without  any  voluptuous  fancies,  (the  first  2  d.)  Fre-
quent desire  for  an  embrace,  after  several  weeks,  (second-
ary effect.) Lewd  fancies,  with  copious  emission  of
prostatic  juice. Discharge  of  prostatic  juice  after  diffi-
cult stool,  (a.  3  d.) Erections  in  the  morning,  and  pain
in  the  urethra,  (a.  24  h.) Erections,  with  burning  and
stitches  in  the  urethra,  (a.  4  d.) Violent  erections  in  the
night,  even  after  a  pollution,  (a.  16  d.) Spasmodic  erec-
tions after  midnight,  he  tosses  about  uneasily,  (a.  15  d.)
Violent  erections  and  pollutions. Feeble  voluptuous  sen-
sation during  an  embrace. When  enjoying  an  embrace
too  soon  after  a  former,  even  with  sufficient  desire,  it  pro-
duces weakness  and  calls  up  old  complaints.  Drawing
pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  spinal  column,  and  thigh,
after  an  embrace. Violent  itching  of  the  pudendum,
towards  evening. Irritation  and  inflammation  of  the  labia
majora  and  vagina,  (2.  d.) Stitches  in  the  vagina,  from
without  inwards,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Dry
burning  of  the  genital  organs. Swelling  and  burning  itch-


NITitI  ACIDUM.


3G1


ing  of  one  side  of  the  vagina  and  the  labia  minora.  Ulcer
in  the  vagina,  on  a  level  with  the  skin,  looking  as  if
covered  with  yellow  pus,  with  burning-itching  pain.  The
menses  delay  3  days,  (a.  11  d.) The  menses  delay  7
days,  in  a  young  person,  (until  full  moon  ;)  they  are  a
little  too  profuse,  with  headache  and  colic. Menses  too
early,  (a.  10  d.),  (a.  19  d.),  (a.  4  d.) Menses  too  early
by  7  days,  (a.  11  d.),  by  S  days,  (a.  19  d.),  by  11  days,
(a.  11  d.),  by  14  days,  scanty. The  menses  come  on
again  a  few  days  after  the  cessation  of  the  period,  pile
reddish. Menses  too  profuse,  (a.  21  d.) The  limbs  feel
bruised  one  day  previous  to  the  appearance  and  during
the  flow  of  the  menses. Violent  cramp-pain  in  the  hypo-
gastrium at  the  appearance  of  the  menses. Violent  pain
in  the  small  of  the  back,  at  the  appearance  of  the  menses,
for  one  hour,  (a.  48  h.) Burning  in  the  eyes,  every  day,
during the  menses. Toothache  during the  menses!
Swelling  of  the  gums  during  the  menses. Violent  press-
ing in  the  region  of  the  liver  during  the  menses.  Pressure
in  the  abdomen  and  pains  in  the  small  of  the  back  during
the  menses. Distension  of  the  abdomen,  during  the  men-
ses. Violent  cramp-pain  in  the  hypogastrium,  during  the
menses,  as  if  it  would  burst,  with  constant  eructations  ;
she  was  not  able  to  remain  quiet. Violent  pains  during
the  menses,  first  labor-like,  afterwards  more  like  a  pressing
m  the  hypogastrium  extending  into  the  vagina.  Violent
pressing  in  the  hypogastrium  during  the  menses,  as  if
every  thing  were  coming  out  at  the  pudendum,  with  pain  in
the  small  of  the  back  ;  drawing  through  the  hips  down  the
thighs. Drawing  together  towards  the  pudendum,  during
the  menses. Soon  after  the  appearance  of  the  menses,  pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  heat  and  .anguish,  for  half  an  hour  :
all  the  limbs  tremble,  (a.  1 1  d.) She  feels  so  weak  durina
the  menses,  that  she  loses  speech  and  breath,  and  has  to
Jie  down,  (a.  17  d  ) Leucorrhcea,  of  mucus,  which "mav
be  drawn  out,  flesh-colored,  (a.  24  h.  and  1 5  d.)  Leucor-
rhoea, of  greenish  mucus,  immediately  after  the  menses.
Fetid  leucorrhoea. Cherry-brown,  and  fetid  leucorrhoea.

C.old,  UATARRn^— A  good  deal  of  sneezing,  every  day,
without  coryza  Frequent  sneezing  with  obstruction  of
tne  nose, Violent  sneezing,  morning  and  evening,  with-

16


362


NITRI  AC1DUM.


out  coryza. Tingling  in  the  nose,  and  sensation  as  if  the
nose  would  bleed. Much  sneezing,  and  discharge  of
copious  mucus. Obstruction  of  the  nose. Obstruction  of
the  left  half  of  the  nose. Complete  obstruction  of  the
nose,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking ,  water  drops  out ;
in  a  few  days  they  are  again  open  and  free. Dry  coryza,
(a.  a  few  days.) Dry  coryza,  with  dryness  of  the  throat
and  nose,  inflamed  and  swollen  wings  of  the  nose,  (a.  5
d.) Violent  dry  coryza,  in  the  night,  (a.  lb'  h.)  Acrid
water  runs  out  of  the  nose,  in  the  night. Yellow,  fetid
discharge  from  the  nose. Discharge  of  thick,  corrosive
mucus  from  the  nose. Violent  coryza  wilh  headache,  (a.
4  d.) Violent  coryza,  with  cough,  (a.  48  h.)  Coryza
with  sore  feeling  of  the  nostrils. Coryza  with  dry  cough
and  headache. Coryza  wilh  water-brash.  Violent  coryza
with  swelling  of  the  nose  and  upper  lip,  and  especially
with  nig  hily  cough. Fluent  coryza  with  some  obstruction
of  the  nose,  (2.  d.) Violent  fluent  and  dry  coryza,  with
difficult  breathing  even  through  the  mouth,  and  with  sting-
ino-  in  the  throat  during  empty  deglutition  and  when  swal-
lowing food. Violent  fluent  coryza,  with  tearing  in  all
the  limbs,  only  one  day,  (4.  d.) Violent  fluent  coryza,
wilh  great  hoarseness  and  cough,  with  stitches  in  the
throat,  at  every  fit,  (a.  12  d.) Violent  fluent  coryza,  after
sneezing  and  chilliness,  (31.  d  )

Larynx  and  Trachea.— Stinging  pain  m  the  larynx.
Stitches  in  the  throat,  (larynx?)  when  talking  along  while.
Sharp,  scratching  sensation  in  the  larynx,  (a.  9  d.)  Scratch-
in^  in  the  throat, and  irritation  inducing  cough,  when  reading
loud.  Sensation  as  if  the  throat  were  like  a  grating-iron,
not  felt  when  swallowing,  but  when  breathing  ;  with  op-
pression of  the  chest  and  fluent  coryza.  Sometimes  im-
pure voice.  Hoarseness,  (a.  a  few  h.  and  2  d.)  Hoarse-
ness, she  was  unable  to  talk.  Tenacious  mucus  m  the
chest.  Much  cough,  (a.  3,  4  d.)  Titillation,  with  cough,
and  soreness  in  the  throat.  Cough,  induced  by  a  con-
tractive sensation  in  the  throat,  especially  during  the
nicrht  when  sleeping.  Cough  during  a  deep  inspiration.
Short  and  hacking  cough  in  the  morning,  (3.  d.)  Cough,
with  vomiturition,  in  the  evening,  when  in  bed.  Dry,
barkin*  cough,  especially  in  the  evening. Violent  cougfc


NITKI  ACIDUM.  853

after  midnight,  for  one  hour. Concussive  cough  in  the
night,  the  breathing  being  frequently  arrested,  as  in  whoop-
ing-cough, accompanied  by  stitches  in  the  chest,  sore
throat  and  fever. Coughs  more  in  the  night  than  in  day-
time, and  in  day  time  more  when  lying  down. Short  and
hacking  cough,  by  starts,  from  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  not
in  the  night. Dry  cough,  as  after  a  cold. Mucous  dis-
charge, from cough. Yellow,  bitterish  expectoration.
Cough,  with  bloody  expectoration,  in  the  morning  when
in  bed,  after  a  slight  rattling  in  the  trachea  ;  followed  by
sick  feeling,  chilliness, etc. Expectoration of  black,
coagulated  blood, owing  to  cough. Pain  below  the
stomach,  during  and  from  cough. Pressure  in  the  head,
during  cough. Pain  in  the  hypochondria  during  cough,
Sneezing  when  coughing. Stitches  in  the  throat  when
coughing. Pain  in  the  chest  from  coughing. Stitches  in
the  middle  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  almost  at  every
inspiration  and  when  coughing,  especially  when  lying  in
the  bed. Soreness  in  the  chest  when  coughing,  as  if  it
were  ulcerated. Stitch  in  the  small  of  the  back  when
coughing. When  corfghing,  the  knee  bends  suddenly,
and  the  patella  feels  a  pain  when  walking.

Chest.— Want  of  breath  when  walking  in  the  open  air
and  heaviness  of  the  feet.  Want  of  breath,  palpitation
of  the  heart,  ana  anguish,  token  going  up  stairs.  Sud-
den want  of  breath  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  when
walking  slowly.  Sudden  oppression  of  breathing  in  the
morning  (a.  30  d.)  Asthma,  as  from  congestion  of  blood
to  the  chest.  Oppression  and  anxiety,  when  walking  a
Jittle  last,  with  sweat  upon  back  and  chest.  Short
anxious  breathing.  Oppression  of  the  chest,  especially
when  bending  backwards,  (a.  3  d.)  Panting  breathing.
Wheezing  and  rattling  in  the  chest.  Breathing  slow  and
faint,  he  was  able  to  stop  the  breathing  for  a  whole  minute,
ram  ,n  the  chest,  as  if  sore,  at  every  inspiration.  The
chest  feels  crowded.  Oppression  of  the  chest.  Pressure
on  the  lefts.de  of  the  chest,  as  if  the  blood  could  not
circulate  through  the  heart. Aching  pain  in  the  right  half

i°inn»% KS!V,ntue  m°rning'  aftcr  many  empty  eructa-
tions forh]f  a  h ( 16  d>) Achj /n-in  f

near  the  ribs,  and  as  if  bruised,  also  felt  when  breathing


364  NITRI  ACIDTTM.

Violent  pressure  upon  the  chest,  beginning  at  the  pit  of
the  throat,  and  extending  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  in  the
morning,  early,  (4.  d.) Cramp-like  drawing  in  the  chest.
Cramp-pain  in  the  front  part  of  the  chest  and  in  the  back  ;
it  rouses  him  from  sleep.  Momentary  cramps  in  the  chest,
(19  d.) Cramp-like  contractive  pain  in  the  right  upper
muscles  of  the  chest  ;  he  had  to  bend  double  from  pain,
for  some  minutes,  (a.  26  h.) Contractive  pain  in  the  right
half  of  the  chest,  most  when  sitting. Contractive  pain  in
the  left  half  of  the  chest,  above  the  heart,  oppressing  the
breathing,  (a.  27  d.) Stitches  and  drawing  in  the  region
of  the  sternum. Violent  stitch  through  the  lungs,  in  the
forenoon. Stitches  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest  and
scapula,  (a.  15  d.) Stitches  in  the  outer  part  of  the  right
half  of  the  chest,  when  taking  an  inspiration,  not  when
couching. Violent  stitch,  in  the  upper  part  of,  and  within
the  ri^ht  ribs,  through  the  abdomen  and  back,  Stitches
in  and° below  the  left  half  of  the  chest,  as  if  from  incar-
cerated flatulence. Violent  stitches  in  the  left  half  of  the
chest,  in  the  morning,  making  breathing  difficult.  Stitches
in  the  side  of  the  chest,  with  nauSea. Stitches  and  pain,
as  from  sub-cutaneous  ulceration,  in  both  sides  ot  the
chest,  when  stooping,  reaching  high,  and  breathing  deeply.
Stitches,  as  if  in  the  outer  parts  of  the  chest,  lurning
pain  in  the  right  side  of  the  chest. Heat  in  the  upper  part
of  the  chest,  early  in  the  morning,  sometimes  returning  in
day-time. Feeling  of  heat  in  the  chest. Burning  m  ihe
chest,  when  taking  the  least  thing  which  is  salt.  Conges-
tion of  blood,  towards  the  upper  part  of  the  chest.  Con-
gestion of  blood  to  the  heart,  with  anguish Orgasm  ot
tne  blood  in  the  heart. Throbbing  in  the  chest,  above  the
stomach,  like  palpitation  of  the  heart especially  after
a  a ood  walk  ;  removed  for  some  hours  by  drinking  wine,
bin  afterwards  returning. Palpitation  of  the  heart,  more
o  less  strong,  especially  after  exerc.se,  with  famines*  and
h  a 8  she  would  faint. Palpitation  of  the  heart
k  paroxysms,  with  anxiety  and  subsequent  oppression  of
breaK  for  one  hour. Momentary  violent  palpita  ion  of
"he  hear?  ;  with  diarrhoea. Palpitation  of  the  heart,  from
some  si  Ut  emotion. Tremor  ol  the  heart,  in  paroxysms.
ConLctive  sensation  in  the  precordial  region,  causmg


•N1TRI  ACIDUM.


365


anxiety  ;  this  ceases  as  soon  as  the  heart  has  made  one
strong  beat.  Pain  of  the  outer  parts  of  the  chest,  when
stooping.  Soreness  in  the  fold  below  the  mammae.  Itch-
ing little  spots,  like  freckles,  upon  the  chest.  Two  small
warts  on  the  sternum.

Back.— Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  as  if  stiff,  (12.
d.) Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  so  violent  that  he  has
to  lie  upon  the  face. Pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  almost
only  during  motion  ;  it  made  walking  almost  impossible  ;
apparently  in  the  bones. Aching  pain  in  the  small  of  the
back. Draiuing  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  towards
evening. Painful  stretching  in  the  small  of  the  back,
hindering  deep  breathing. Stitches  in  the  small  of  the
back,  when  coughing. Pulsations  in  the  small  of  the
back. Pain  in  the  back,  after  catching  the  least  cold.
Pain  between  the  scapula,  (a.  2,  3  d.) Stiffness  of  the
spinal  column. Sensation  in  the  flesh  of  the  back,  both
when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  as  if  it  were  pinched  together.
Pinching,  as  with  pincers,  between  the  scapulae.  Draw-
ing pain  in  the  back,  evening. Tearing  and  slitches  in
the  back  and  chest,  during  motion,  especially  in  the  m'aht.
Violent  continuous  stitch  in  the  dorsal  vertebrae,  when
standing. Stitch  between  the  scapulae,  from  time  to  time,
every  stitch  being  followed  by  an  eructation. Stitches  be-
tween the  scapulae  and  in  the  front  part  of  the  chest,  ar-
resting the  breathing,  more  when  stooping  than  when  sit-
ting still. Violent  burning  pain  in  the  back.  Burning
pain  in  the  right  lumbar  region,  (region  of  the  liver  ?)  at  a
place  of  a  size  of  a  hand,  making  him  feel  discouraged
sad,  and  indisposed  to  thinker  do  his  business.  Spas-
modic jerks  in  the  muscles  of  the  back,  while  performing
his  manual  labor,  (a.  1 2  d.) Violent  itching  of  the  back,
and  pain  after  scratching.

Neck.— Stiffness  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,  (a.  24  h  )
Painful  tension  of  the  muscles  of  the  nape  of  the  neck,
want  ot  power  to  support  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Crack-
in*  of  the  cervical  vertebrae.  Itching  of  the  nape  of  the
neck.  Sweat  at  the  nape  of  the  neck.  Drawing  in  the
cervica  muscles,  as  if  they  supported  a  heavy  °weiaht.
Glandular  swelling  of  the  right  side  of  the  neck  ;  neck
and  tongue  are  somewhat  stiff,  (a.  20  d.) Sort  of  goitre


366


NITRI  ACIDUM.


on  the  right  side  of  the  neck. Itching  of  the  neck,  when
walking  in  the  open  air,  (a.  2-4  h.)

Superior  Extremities. — Violent  itching  under  the
arms. Painful  sensitiveness  of  the  right  axillary  glands,
the  whole  forenoon,  (a.  3  d.) Glandular  nodosity  in  the
axilla. Painful  swelling  and  inflammation  of  the  axillary
glands,  (a.  14  d.) Fetid,  strong-smelling  sweat  of  the
axilla,  (a.  4  d.) The  left  shoulder  is  painful  as  from  a
blow. Pressure  upon  the  right  shoulder,  (2.  d.)  Aching
pain  in  the  upper  part  of  the  shoulder,  as  if  she  had
carried  a  heavy  burden  upon  it. Stitches  in  the  left
shoulder,  when  touching  it,  when  taking  breath  or  when
she  feels  chilly  ;  there  are  no  stitches  when  moving  the
arm. Pain  of  the  left  arm-joints. Pressure  in  the  right
arm,  (a.  37  d.) Violent  tension  and  contraction  in  the
shoulders  and  arms  ;  the  arms  were  drawn  to  the  body.
Drawing  in  arm  and  hand,  as  if  they  had  been  sprained.
Drawing  pain  in  both  arms. Drawing  in  the  humerus.
Tearing  in  the  arm,  especially  during  motion,  disturbing
sleep. Hammering  pain  in  the  humeri,  as  if  they  were
being  pounded  to" dust.- Pain  of  the  right  arm,  as  if
bruised,  (a.  4  d.) Pain  of  the  right  arm,  as  if  sprained  ;
she  is  unable  to  move  it  either  forwards  or  backwards,  (a.
18  d.) Dull  pain  as  from  weariness,  and  groaning  sensa-
tion in  the  muscles  of  the  whole  arm. The  right  arm
goes  to  sleep,  at  night. Paralytic  feeling  in  the  right  arm.
When  shaking  the  arm  it  feels  paralytic. Faintness  of  the
arms,  as  after  fever. Jerking  and  drawing  in  the  arms
and  fingers,  (a.  3  d.) The  upper  arm  is  painful  as  if
bruised  ;  he  cannot  lift  it,  from  pain,  and  the  hand  be-
comes cold  in  lifting  it. Painless  darlings  in  the  muscles
of  the  upper  arm,  especially  the  deltoid  muscle,  the  whole
day. Trembling  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  upper  arm.
The  elbow-joint  is  painful  when  stretching-  the  arm.  Tear-
ing in  the  elbow-joint,  and  dartings  irradiating  from  that
joint  towards  the  hand,  (a.  4  h.) Dull  pain  and  stitches
in  the  fore-arm,  extending  as  far  as  the  dorsum  of  the  hand
and  fingers,  (1.  d.) Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  outer
parts  of  the  fore-arm,  when  moving  or  touching  it.  Para-
lytic, drawing  pain  in  the  fore-arm,  almost  the  whole  day.
Drawing  sleep  in  the  muscles  of  the  fore-arm,  along  the


NITRI  ACIDUM.


3G7


bones,  (a.  28  d.)  Teari  ig  in  the  left  fore-arm  and  band,
with  pain  when  touching  it.  Feeling  of  heat  in  both
fore-arms.  Heat  in  the  left  wrist  and  palm  of  the  hand.
Continuous  trembling  of  the  fore-arm  and  hand.  Aching
pain  in  the  right  wrist-joint.  Pinching  aching  in  the  right
wrist-joint,  during  the  siesla.  Cramp-pain  of  the  hand,
when  seizing  something.  Painful  stiffness  of  the  palm  of
the  left  hand,  when  seizing  something.  Single,  visible
twitchings  in  the  hand.  Drawing  pain  in  the  hand,  to-
wards evening.  Drawing  in  the  right  wrist,  for  seconds,
(a.  a  few  h.)  Drawing  in  the  hands,  (2.  d.)  Tearing  in
the  left  wrist  joint.  Tearing  around  the  wrist-joint.
Stitches  in  the  right  hand,  (12  d.)  Violent  stitches  in  the
palm  of  the  left  h-md.  Pain  in  the  wrist-joint,  as  if  bruised.
Very  cold  hands.  Cold  hand  and  excessive  ill  humor.
The  hand gots  to  sleep,  in  the  morning  when  in  bed.  The
hand  becomes  numb  and  goes  to  bed,  when  laying  it  upon
something.  Trembling  of  the  hand.  Sweaty  hands.
Hot  sweat  in  the  palms  of  ths  hands,  with  heat  and  red-
ness of  the  face.  Violent  itching  of  the  left  hand.  Itch-
ing of  the  hands,  with  chilblains  and  swelling  of  the  hands  ;
(at  the  end  of  April.)  Large  blue  protuberances  and
spots  on  both  hands,  itching,  mostly  at  night.  Eruption  on
the  hands  and  between  the  fingers,  with  an  itching  burn-
ing, going  off  by  rubbing.  The  fingers  are  painful  when
moved,  with  tension  in  the  metacarpal  joints.  Frequent
drawing  pain  in  the  extensor  tendon  of  the  index  finger  to-
wards_  the  forepart.  Paralytic  drawing  pain  in  the  pos-
terior joint  of  the  thumb  and  hand,  when  falling  asleep
and  waking  in  the  morning,  (a.  2  d.)  Stitches  in  the
middle  joints  of  the  fingers  ;  he  was  unable  to  bend  them
without  suffering  pain.  Burning  pain  in  the  fingers  of  the
left  hand.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  left  little  finger,
(a.  1  h.)  Deadness  of  the  fingers,  in  cold  air.  All  °the
fingers  goto  sleep,  and  feel  a  Tingling.  Swelling  of  the
fingers,  early  in  the  morning  when  waking.  Painful  swell-
ing of  one  of  the  finger-joints.  Small,  itching  vesicles  on
the  fourth  finger,  looking  like  an  incipient  herpes.  Pua-
tule  at  the  tip  of  the  thumb.

Inferior  Extremities.— Soreness  of  the  nates  when
touched. When  riding  in  a  carriage,  at  night,  the  nates


3GS


NITRI  ACIDUM.


feel  sore. Pain  in  the  region  of  the  right  glutei  muscles.
Aching  and  tension  of  the  right-hip  joint,  when  rising  from
a  seal  and  when  beginning  to  walk,  as  if  the  head  of  the
femur  would  become  sprained. Drawing  pain  around  the
hips. The  child  limps  and  can  only  walk  upon  his  toes.
Soreness  between  the  upper  part  of  the  lower  limbs,  when
walking. Ulcer  below  the  right  hip-joint,  with  tensive
pain. Soreness  of  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh,  near  the
scrotum. J  idling  of  the  upper  and  inner  parts  of  the
lower  limbs. The  lower  limbs  feel  heavy,  and  painful
when silting. Drawing  with pressure,  in  both  lower
limbs,  from  hip  to  foot,  evening. Drawing  pain  in  the
right  limb. Tearing  in  the  bones  of  the  lower  limbs,
causing  her  to  moan. Pain,  as  from  bruises  of  the  limbs,
as  if  too  weary. Heaviness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Para-
lytic pain  in  the  limb,  at  intervals  of  a  couple  of  hours.
Fainlness  of  the  limbs  when  lying  down,  not  when  walk-
ing. Tingling  in  the  lower  limbs,  from  the  hips  to  the
toes,  frequently  day  and  night. Feeling  of  heat,  wilh  las-
situde, in  the  joints  of  the  limbs. Violently  burning  itch-
ing of  the  right  limb,  without  eruption. Coldness  and
feeling  of  coldness  in  the  whole  of  the  right  limb,  (a.  2
h.) Weakness  of  the  left  thigh,  after  a  walk,  with  sen-
sation as  if  the  circulation  were  arrested. Stilching  pain
in  the  region  of  the  head  of  the  femur. Aching  pain
above  the  knee,  inferiorly  and  internally,  making  the  limb
weaker  and  sliffer,  (a.  3  d.) Cramp-like  contraction  in
the  middle  of  the  thigh  and  below  both  calves,  frequently
during  the  day,  as  sort  of  tightness,  as  if  the  parts  were
compressed  by  a  bandage. Drawing  in  the  muscles  of
the  thigh,  as  if  they  supported  a  heavy  weight.  Draw-
ing in the  thighs,"  in  the  evening,  and  itching  of  the
skin. Drawing  and  tearing  in  the  thigh,  beginning  at
the knee,  when  sitting down,  abating  when  seated.
Tearing  in  the  thigh,  beginning  at  the  knee,  when  walk-
ing. Throbbing  and  small  beatings  in  the  thighs,  as  if
they  were  ulcerated  within  ;  they  do  not  bear  the  least
touch,  and  are  alternately  hot  and  cold. Pain,  as  from
bruises  in  the  left  thigh.  Pain,  as  from  bruises,  in  the  lower
part  of  the  thigh,  when  stepping  forwards. Pain  in  both
thighs,  as  if  they  were  broken,  (a.  6  h.) Prickling  in  the


NITUI  ACIDUM.


369


thighs. Itching  of  the  thighs,  she  had  to  scratch  them,
until  they  bled. Violent  itching  of  the  outer  side  of  the
thigh,  at  night  when  in  bed,  soon  returning  alter  scratch-
ing. Dry  herpes  on  the  outer  side  of  thigh,  painful  when
touched. Boil  on  the  thigh. Tension  and  constriction  of
the  bend  of  the  knee,  ihe  whole  afternoon,  (a  72  h.)
Pain  in  the  left  patella,  he  can  scarcely  walk,  (a.  11  d.)
Painful  stiffness  of  the  bend  of  the  knee,  he  is  almost
obliged  to  limp. Sensation  as  if  the  ham-strings  were  too
short. Painful  contractive  sensation  in  the  knee.  Violent
drawing  in  the  knees,  ending  in  a  jerk. Tearing  in  the
knee,  extending  into  the  hip,  at  knight,  when  in  bed,  after
walking  a  good  deal. Stitches  in  the  knee,  when  stand-
ing. Stitches  in  the  bend  of  the  knee,  at  night.  Stitching
pain  in  the  outer  part  of  the  kn  -e,  when  walking.  Pain
in  the  knees,  as  if  sprained,  especially  when  going  down
stairs. Pain,  as  if  sprained  or  bruised,  in  the  patella,
when  walking,  especially  when  going  down  stairs  ;  the
pain  gradually  diminishes  when  walking  upon  level  ground,
ceases  even  for  a  time  ;  the  pain  is  felt  when  bending  the
knee  considerably,  it  then  cracks. Sudden  bending  of  the
knees,  when  walking,  he  was  sometimes  unable  to  stir.
Feeling  as  if  the  bends  of  the  knees  were  swollen,  when
walking  in  the  open  air. Cold  knees,  (a.  14  d.)  Momen-
tary sharp  pain  in  the  leg,  from  the  knee  down  to  the  tips
of  the  toes,  day  and  night. Cramp-pain  of  the  whole  of
the  lower  part  of  the  leg,  in  the  muscles  and  tendons,  con-
tinuous ;  pain  is  likewise  felt  when  touching  the  parts.
Cramp  in  the  calf,  towards  morning. Violent  cramp  in
the  calf  when  stretching  the  foot. Drawing  in  the  middle
of  the  calf,  both  when  at  rest  and  in  motion,  sometimes
changed  to  a  spasmodic,  sudden  jerking,  in  frequent  at-
tacks for  two  hours,  (immediately.) Drawing  in  the  legs,
as  far  as  the  knee. Paralytic  drawing  along  the  bones  of
the  leg. Paralytic  pain  in  the  leg,  with  excessive  heavi-
ness and  lassitude  ;  when  at  rest,  not  in  motion.  Great
weariness  of  the  lower  part  of  the  legs,  after  a  short  walk,
feeling  of  heat  in  the  legs,  nevertheless  they  are  cold  to
the  touch. The  feet  are  painful  ;  he  cannot  bear  the  pres-
sure of  the  shoes. Pain  in  the  periosteum  of  the  os  cal-
cis,  (6.  d.) Drawing  in  the  feet,  as  far  as  the  knee.  Draw-

16*


370  NITRI  ACIDUM.

ing  pain  in  the  feet,  when  walking. Drawing  in  the  upper
part  of  the  right  metatarsus,  (a.  9  h.) Drawing  pain  from
the  ball  of  the  foot  to  the  heel,  with  feeling  of  weakness.
Tearing  in  the  right  foot,  early  in  the  morning.  Tearing
in  the  left  foot. Tearing  in  the  right  metatarsus,  (a.  1 1  h.)
Tearing  and  stitches  in  the  right  foot. Stitches  in  the  mal-
leoli. A  few  stitches  in  the  right  foot,  (10  d.) Pain,  as
from  a  sprain,  of  the  tarsal  joint,  in  the  morning,  when
rising. Heaviness  in  the  malleoli,  extending  through  the
foot,  when  walking  and  setting  the  feet  down,  as  if  the
malleoli  had  been  very  much  compressed. Sudden  bend-
ing of  the  tarsal  joint,  when  walking.  Considerable
swelling  of  the  feet,  after  walking  in  the  open  air.  Burn-
ing above  the  malleoli. Burning  and  itching  of  the  feet.
Icy-cold  feet  and  legs,  towards  noon. Continual  coldness
of  the  feet,  as  far  as  the  calves,  in  day-time. Sweat  of
the  left  foot,  (6.  d.) Copious  sweat  of  the  soles,  with  con-
sequent soreness  of  the  toes  and  balls,  with  prickling  pain,
as  if  he  were  walking  upon  pins. Sweat  of  the  feet,  also
cold  sweat. Restores  the  suppressed  sweat  of  the  feet,
(secondary  effect.) Painful sensitiveness  of  the  toes,
soles,  and  corns  as  if  inflamed. Pain  in  the  ball  of  the
little  toe,  when  walking. Violent  stitches  in  the  right  big
toe  and  sole  of  the  foot,  hindering  sleep. Pain  under  the
nail  of  the  big  toe. Violent  burning  under  the  nail  oi  the
left  bier  toe,  in  the  evening  when  in  bed. Violent  tingling
and  itching  of  the  big  toe,  evening. Redness,  inflamma-
tion and  swelling  of  one  toe,  with  burning  pain  ;  after  the
foot  had  become  wet. Redness  and  heat,  with  stitches
of  the  big  toe  and  ball,  as  if  it  had  been  frozen.  Chil-
blains on  the  big  toes. Spreading  vesicles  on  the  toes.
A  corn,  with  burning  pain,  forms  on  ihe  middle  leit  toe.
The  corns  become  painful. Erosive  pain  in  the  corns.

General  Symptoms.— Pain  in  all  the  limbs,  apparently
in  the  bones.  Pain  in  the  arthritic  nodosities,  which  had
been  painless  heretofore.  Cramp-like  stiffness  of  the  back
and  whole  body.  Stiffness  of  the  lower  limbs.  Tension
of  the  arms  and  lower  limbs.  Tension  in  the  head  and
whole  body-  Pain,  as  from  rigor,  in  the  left  arm  and  bwer
limb.  General  tension  of  the  nerves,  with  much  thirst.
Drawing  in  all  the  limbs,  stretching  being  very  agree-


NITRI  AC1DUM.


371


able.  Drawing  pain  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones,
as  is  felt  previous  to  fever  and  ague  setting  in.  Draw-
ing and  tearing  in  the  whole  body.  Drawing  from
the  foot  up  to  the  back,  during  motion.  Drawing  and
burning  in  the  limbs.  Frequent  drawing  pains  in
almost  ail  the  parts  of  the  body,  coming  and  going
speedily.  Aching  and  drawing  pain  around  the  knee-
joints,  malleoli,  etc.  Twilchings  of  all  the  parts  of  the
body.  Twilchings  and  stretching  of  the  limbs  rouse
her  twice  from  her  siesla.  Twilchings  and  tearing  of  the
joints.  Twitchings  of  the  muscles  ;  also  winking  of  the
eyelids.  Burning  of  the  joints.  After  walking  the  joints
are  painful,  as  if  they  were  luxated.  Great  sensitiveness
in  the  joints,  early  in  the  morning,  without  any  distinct
pain.  Cracking  in  all  the  joints  during  motion.  Weari-
ness in  all  the  joints,  as  if  by  running.  Stitches  in  all  the
parts  of  the  body,  now  here,  now  there.  Stitches  through
the  whole  body.  Orgasm  of  the  blood  and  faintness  in  all
the  limbs.  The  throbbing  of  the  arteries  in  the  upper  part
of  the  body  is  distinctly  felt.  In  warm  weather  and  after
short  exercise  lie  feels  heated  easily.  A  slight  motion
causes  palpitation  of  the  heart  and  sweat.  Soon  after
dinner  every  liitle  motion  causes  an  ec!  auffement  and
palpitation  of  the  heart.  He  catches  cold  easily.  In-
clines to  sweat  and  to  catch  cold.  In  the  evening,  when
exposed  to  a  cold  wind,  he  easily  catches  cold  in  his  weak
part,  which  then  feels  a  drawing  pain.  The  whole  body  is
sensitive  to  the  open  air.  He  is  sensitive  to  cold  wind,
and  very  chilly,  for  a  long  lime.  Catches  cold  easily,
with  pain  in  the  back.  Sweat,  when  walking  in  the  open
air,  followed  by  headache  and  nausea.  Short,  but  violent
headache,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  Lancinations  in
the  scapula,  when  walking  in  the  open  air;  he  was  unable
to  rest  upon  that  part  in  the  night.  Violent  pressure  above
the  stomach  and  pit  of  the  stomach,  when  walking  in  the
open  air.  Pain  in  the  left  scapula  and  the  region  of  the
kidneys,  when  walking  in  the  open  air.  After  a  walk,  the
feet  remain  cold,  with  heat  in  the  head.  The  majority  of
the  symptoms  disappears  by  riding  in  a  carriage.  The
symptoms  increase  towards  evening,  especially  the  draw-
ing pain  which  is  felt  here  and  there. Pains,  even  slight


372


NITRI  ACIDUM.


ones,  affect  him  violently,  he  is  almost  beside  himself.
Itching  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  7  d.) Itching  over  the
whole  back. Violent  itching  in  the  bends  of  the  knees
and  elbows. Violent  itching  of  the  region  of  the  olecra-
non process,  patella,  and  dorsum  of  the  foot. The  itching
places  bleed  when  scratched. Itching  pricks  over  the
whole  body  ;  scratching  brings  on  large  blotches.  Pim-
ples. Frequent,  mostly  large  boils,  on  the  scapula,  nape
of  the  neck,  nates,  thighs  and  legs. A  spot  which  had
become  sore  by  rubbing,  cannot  be  made  to  heal,  it  ulcer-
ates. Stinging  pain  in  the  ulcer,  especially  the  first  day.
Shooting  stitches  in  and  around  the  ulcer,  but  especially
burning,  as  of  nettles. The  ulcer  bleeds  violently  when
dressing  it,  (a.  6  .d.) The  bloody  ichor  of  the  ulcer
corrodes  the  skin-,  causing  a  smarting  pain. Dark  freckles.
Small  warts  form  on  the  neck. A  large  wen  on  the  upper
lip,  8  years  old,  begins  to  cause  an  erosi.-e  pain  ;  it  bleeds
when  washing  it,  and  is  painful  to  the  touch.  _  Itching  of
the  warts. Stitches  and'  sense  as  of  pecking  in  the  wart.
Swelling  of  the  hands  and  feet. Excessive  thinness.
Emaciation  of  the  whole  body,  especially  the  upper  arms
and  thighs.

Fits,  Weakness. — Sick  feeling  in  the  whole  body.
Weary  and  worn-out  condition  of  the  whole  body,  as  after
a  severe  illness,  not  in  the  head. Sick  feeling  in  the
whole  body,  with  weakness  of  the  joints  and  heat  in  the
head. Feeling  of  great  faintness,  the  whole  day.  Fre-
quently a  concealed  trembling  through  the  whole  body.
Tremor  in  the  evening,  and  great  "weariness,  as  after
violent  bodily  fatigue,  (a.  36  h.) Trembling  all  over.
Great  weariness  and  laziness,  as  if  exhausted  and  bruised,
both  when  sitting  or  walking. Sensation  in  all  the  mus-
cles, as  when  one  rests  one's  self  after  a  violent  fatigue.
Heaviness,  (a.  24  h.) Heaviness  of  the  head,  and  lower
limbs. Feeling  of  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  especially
in  the  joints,  early  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  when
keeping  ever  so  quiet. When  walking  in  the  open  air,  the
body  feels  so  heavy  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  drag  it.
Want,  of  disposition  to  walk. The  joints  feel  weak  and
bruised,  as  after  a  long  fatigue. Exhausted  after  rising,
until  10  o'clock. The  limbs  feel  paralysed.  Weakness


N1TRI  ACIDUM.


373


and  trembling-  of  all  the  joints. The  hands  and  limbs
become  faint  and  paralysed,  when  pressing  upon  them  or
when  placing  them  in  a  constrained  position,  as  if  the  cir-
culation were  arrested  by  a  bandage,  (12.  d.)  Weakness
of  the  feet,  and  despondency. Great  weakness,  in  the
afternoon. Weakness  and  trembling  all  over. Want  of
energy  of  both  mind  and  body. He  felt  so  weak  that  he
had  to  lie  down  all  the  time. He  feels  weakest  in  the
evening,  especially  in  the  limbs. He  feels  weak  even
after  a  slight  motion. Faintish  sort  of  weakness,  every
other  morning,  with  oppressive  anxiety. Fit  of  headache,
in -the  afternoon,  several  days  in  succession,  followed
by  nausea  and  anxiousness  ;  in  the  night,  he  is  attacked
with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea. Two  fits  a  day,  first,  draw-
ing in  the  back,  followed  by  a  griping  in  the  sides  moving
along  the  lower  border  of  the  costal  region  into  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  where  a  turning  sensation  is  experienced,  the
whole  ot  these  symptoms  terminating  with  eructations.
Epileptic  fit,  beginning  with  a  drawing  in  the  left  side  of
the  chest,  afterwards  convulsive  drawing  through  the  arms
to  and  fro,  for  one  minute,  when  sitting,  preserving  almost
entire  consciousness,  (a.  12  d.) Epileptic  fit,  after  mid-
night ;  sensation  in  the  left  side  as  of  a  mouse  moving  up
and  down  ;  after  this  he  lost  his  senses,  his  arms  jerked,
head  and  mouth  were  drawn  to  and  fro,  he  bit  his  tongue,
and  finally  became  quite  stiff  and  snored. Fit  of  headache,
in  the  morning  when  waking,  with  nausea  and  sensation
as  if  all  the  parts  in  the  mouth  were  numb  and  had  gone  to
sleep Great  weariness,  in  the  evening,  and  nausea  ;  fol-
lowed by  excessive  yawning,  (10  d.) Inclines  to  fall
asleep  again,  after  rising,  for  some  hours.

Sleep.— Frequent  yawning.  Drowsiness  in  day-time,
(a.  4,  22  h.)  Drowsy  and  weak  the  whole  dav,  (a.  32  d.)
Very  drowsy  in  the  afternoon,  (a.  8  d.)  Somnolence
in  day-time.  Giddiness  and  drowsiness,  he  came  near
tailing  asleep  when  walking  or  standing,  with  drawing
pain  in  the  skin  of  the  tbighs,  on  the  inner  side.  Drowsy
and  chilly  in  the  evening.  He  was  unable  to  fall  asleep
tor  several  nights,  his  sleep  was  a  mere  slumber.  In  the
morning  he  felt  as  if  he  had  not  slept  at  all.  She  was  un-
able  to  sleep  for  8  nights. She  remained  wide  awake  for


374


NITIU  ACIDUM.


3  nights. He  wakes  at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and

remains  wide  awake. He  wakes  at  2  o'clock  every  night,
ami  is  afterwards  unable  to  fall  asleep  again,  without
complaining  of  any  thing. Frequent  waking,  in  the  night.
Sleeplessness  and  restlessness,  until  4  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing ;  afterwards  sleep  with  anxious  dreams.  Unrefresh-
ing,  restless  sleep. Restless  sleep,  he  falls  asleep  late,
wakes  frequently  and  has  many  frightful  dreams. In  the
night  she  frequently  jumps  out  of  her  bed,  roused  from  the
deepest  sleep  by  an  imaginary  frightful  event,  walks  about,
and  finally  discovers  that  it  was  a  mere  illusion.  Talking
while  asleep,  the  hands  extended  above  her  head,  she
snores. Waking  in  a  stale  of  restlessness,  with  anguish.
He  wakes  once  or  twice  at  night,  with  headache,  and
remains  awake  one  or  two  hours. Bleeding  from  the  nose
at  night. Heavy,  oppressed  head,  in  the  night,  when
asleep  or  only  half  asleep. Drawing  and  stitching  tooth-
ache about  midnight,  with  some  swelling  of  the  gums.
Thirst,  in  the  night;  (a.  13  d.) Violent  eructations  and
spasm  of  the  stomach,  the  first  half  of  the  night.  Violent
pressure  at  the  stomach,  in  the  night. He  wakes  up  in
the  night  with  pain  in  the  stomach,  (a.  50  h.)  Pressure
in  the  stomach  and  back,  in  the  morning  when  waking.
Uneasiness  in  the  abdomen  and  frequent  waking  in  the
night. Pain  in  the  stomach,  at  night  when  asleep,  going
off  when  waking. Restlessness  and  anguish  in  the  abdo-
men, in  the  night,  with  heat  in  the  head  and  hands.  Pinch-
ing in  the  abdomen,  in  the  night,  and  restless  sleep.
Spasms  in  the  abdomen,  in  the  night. A  good  deal
of  burning  in  the  rectum,  in  the  night  when  waking,  and  in
the  morning.  Sleeplessness  in  the  night,  owing  to  cold  feet.
Icy-coldness  of  the  soles,  in  the  night,  hindering  sleep.
Violent  stitch  in  the  right  half  of  the  chest,  in  ihe  evening
after  lying  down. Pains,  when  half  asleep,  which  he  does
not  distinctly  recollect  when  waking. Sleep  interrupted
by  oppressed  breathing. He  wakes  after  three  o'clock  m
the  night  with  a  very  strong  palpitation  of  the  heart,  and
pulsations  below  the  clavicle,  without  anguish. He  wakes
in  the  night  with  anguish,  is  obliged  to  cough,  and,  if  he
does  not  drink,  he  is  obliged  to  vomit. Dry  cough,  before
midnight,  while  asleep. Nightly  stitchings  and  pinchmgi,


NITRI  ACIDUM.


375


at  times  below  the  chest,  at  times  in  the  back.  Stitches
in  the  region  of  the  heart,  heat  and  thirst,  at  night.  After
midnight,  spasmodic  pains  in  the  chest  and  in  the  corres-
ponding side  of  the  spine, increased by  inspiration.
Twitchings  in  the  left  lower  limb,  in  the  night  when  in  bed.
In  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  the  legs  feel  numb  and  dead ;
afterwards  ihey  experience cramps,  especially  in  the
calves,  lastly  stitches  and  prickling  in  the  heels.  Tearing
in  the  lower  limbs,  especially  in  the  night.  Violent
stitches  in  the  right  thigh,  in  the  night. Weariness  in
the  feet,  only  at  night ;  no  weariness  in  day-time,  not
even  from  the  longest  walk. Congestion  of  blood  to
chest  and  heart,  in  the  night. Nightmare,  in  the  night,
shortly  after  falling  asleep. Oppressive  anxiety,  a  sort  of
nightmare,  shortly  after  falling  asleep,  as  if  some  one  were
lying  under  him,  seizing  him  around  the  abdomen,  so  that
he  could  not  get  loose. Sort  of  nightmare  with  sweat,
while  tormented  by  strange,  lascivious  dreams.  Op-
pressed breathing  and  anxiety,  in  the  night  when  waking,
and  in  the  morning. He  wakes  in  the  night  with  a  sort
of  oppressive  anxiety,  (a.  5  d.) He  is  full  of  fear,  for  a
moment  after  waking. Heavy,  unrefreshing  sleep,  in  the
night,  from  which  he  wakes  with  great  difficulty  in  the
morning  and  with  anxiety. Tremor  through  the  whole
body,  in  the  morning  when  waking. Internal  restlessness,
especially  in  the  arms,  in  the  morning  when  waking.  In
the  night,  when  in  bed,  anguish  resembling  palpitation  of
the  heart,  with  nausea,  without  inclination  to  vomit,  as  if
she  had  done  something  wrong  ;  she  could  not  remain  in
her  bed  ;  she  felt  no  palpitation  when  laying  the  hand
upon  the  heart ;  this  lasted  two  hours. A  number  of  fan-
cies, in  the  night. Ravings  in  the  place  of  sleep,  every
night. Fanciful  dreams  of  eating  and  drinking,  in  the
night. In  the  evening,  when  in  bed,  he  saw  all  sorts  of
figures,  walking,  running,  disappearing,  appearing,  increas-
ing, decreasing  ;  accompanied  with  chilliness  !  Vivid,
wandering  dreams  about  business,  in  the  morning,  after-
wards very  tired. Starting,  when  falling-  asleep.  Start-
ing when  asleep,  and  twitchings  of  the  limbs,  (a.  20  d  )
Starting,  during  the  siesta,  while  sitting  on  a  chair,  as  if
touched  by  an  electric  shock. At  night,  when  lying  upon


376


NITRI  ACIDUM.


the  back,  he  starts  up,  with  a  stitch  into  the  right  side  of
the  chest.  Frequent  anxious  waking  from  an  uneasy
sleep.  Dreams  giving  anxiety,  and  violent  starting  up.
Anxious  dreams,  in  the  night,  for  many  nights.  Anxious
dream,  in  the  night,  as  if  he  had  to  die.  Anxious  dream,
in  the  night  ;  when  waking,  all  her  pulses  beat.  Anxious
sleep,  nith  moaning.  Anxious,  vivid,  sad  dreams.  Anxious
dreams,  and  screams  when  asleep.  Wild  dreams,  and  a
sort  of  coma  vigil.  He  dreams  he  is  committing  a  crime.
Dreams  about  dead  bodies.  Frightful,  terrifying  dreams.
Dream  first  bright,  then  horrid.  Vexatious  dreams  during
an  uneasy  morning-sleep.  Vexatious  dream  the  whole
night,  continuing  even  in  the  second  sleep  after  waking.
Little  sleep  at  night,  with  much  yawning  ;  she  was  unable
to  get  warm  before  midnight.

Fever. — Cold  skin  over  the  whole  body,  at  night.
Chilliness,  in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed,  and
when  lying  down,  over  the  whole  body,  a  quarter  of
an  hour. Chilliness  of  the  whole  body,  with  warm
feet,  (a.  2  d.) Cold  hands  and  feet,  (a.  2  d.)  Chilli-
ness, especially  in  the  evening. Feeling  of  coolness
over  the  body  and  head,  without  any  special  cause,  for  two
hours. Chilliness  in  the  afternoon,  without  any  subsequent
heat;  he  felt  an  obtusion  of  the  head  the  whole  day.
Chilliness,  in  the  evening,  when  moving  about  in  the  bed.
Chilliness. Chills  even  in  a  warm  room. Chills,  as  if
goose-skin  came  on,  the  hair  standing  upon  end.  Fre-
quent shuddering,  especially  in  the  afternoon.  Continual
internal  chilliness,  in  the  evening,  the  external  body  feel-
ing warm  although  he  does  not  feel  the  warmth,  (he  goes
near  the  stove,)  with  headache,  as  if  the  head  were  ban-
daged firmly. Violent  fever  with  chilliness,  especially  in
the  back  ;  he  cannot  get  warm,  and  yet  feels  internal  heat.
Chilliness,  even  in  the  morning  when  in  bed,  and  the
whole  day  ;  heat  in  the  face,  in  the  afternoon.  Chilliness
and  shakes,  in  the  evening,  afterwards  flushes  of  heat
with  dryness  of  the  throat, Chilliness,  in  the  evening
when  in  bed,  from  bed-time  till  midnight  (in  August;)
afterwards  dry  heat  of  the  lower  limbs,  head  and  body.
Alternate  coldness  of  the  hands  and  heat  of  the  head,  with
feverishness. Feverish  chilliness,  in  the  afternoon,  tor


NITRI  ACIDUM.


377


one  hour  ;  afterwards  heat  all  over,  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;
followed  by  general  sweat  for  two  hours  ;  thirst  neither
in  the  cold  nor  hot  stage,  (a.  4  d.) Quotidian  fever,  after
having  caught  cold  while  taking  a  long  ride  in  a  violent
wind,  chilliness  for  three  hours,  afterwards  heat  for  six
hours,  with  excessive  sweat,  (a.  36  d.) Feverish  chilli-
ness, in  the  afternoon,  in  the  open  air,  for  an  hour  and  a
half;  afterwards  dry  heat,  while  in  bed,  with  delirium  in
sort  of  half-waking  state,  no  sleep  ;  sweat  and  sleep  to-
wards morning. Dry  heat,  afterwards  violent  chilliness,
in  the  morning  when  in  bed. Feverish  heat  with  quick
pulse. Great  heat  in  the  face,  in  the  evening,  with  icy-
cold  hands  without  thirst,  (a.  3  d.) Flushes  of  heat  in  the
cheeks,  with  thirst,  and  next  evening  very  drowsy.  Heat
in  the  face  and  coldness  of  the  rest  of  the  body. Heat  in
the  face,  in  the  morning,  when  waking,  and  inclination  to.
sweat. Flushes  of  heat  all  over,  towards  evening,  and
transitory  sweat. Heat  and  thirst,  with  little  turbid  urine.
Internal,  dry  heat,  with  thirst  and  feverish  weakness.
Heat  in  the  eyes,  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back  and  great
anxiousness. Flushes  of  heat  from  time  to  time.  Fre-
quent, flushes  of  heat  in  the  day,  with  moistness  of  the
hands. Flushes  of  heat  and  nausea,  in  the  evening  previ-
ous to  going  to  bed. Frequent  attacks  of  flushes  of  heat
in  day-time. Flushes  of  heat  in  the  cheeks,  without
thirst,  (a.  30  h.) Dry  heat  over  the  whole  body,  (a.  5  d.)
Increased  continual  warmth  in  the  body,  day  and  niaht,
as  after  spirituous  drinks,  with  increased  inclination0  to
perspire. Constant  feeling  of  heat  in  the  whole  body,
without  thirst ;  she  wants  to  be  without  covering  day  and
night,  and  in  a  cool  room. Heat,  in  the  evening,  espe-
cially of  the  feet. Heat  in  the  face,  in  the  evening.  Heat
m  the  skin. Frequent  attacks  of  heat  in  the  face  and
hands,  with  a  good  deal  of  weakness  in  the  limbs.  Great
heat  and  no  sleep  in  the  night. Dry  heat,  in  the  night,
a.8  d.) A  good  deal  of  heat  in  the  night,  especially  in
the  th.ghs. The  blood,  especially  in  the  hands,  feels  hot
in  the  night. Heat  with  thirst  and  dryness  of  the  throat
in  the  night,  frequently  waking  her  from  sleep,  the  thirst
asted  20  hours. Unequal  pulse  ;  after  a  regular  beat  come
two  small  beats,  the  fourth  beat  intermitting  entirely


378


NITRI  ACIDUM.


Sweat,  with  cold  hands  and  blue  nails.  Morning-sweat.
Nightly  moistness  of  the  skin. Night  sweat,  every  other
night,  profuse. Nighl-siveat,  every  night.  Night-sweat,
20  nights  in  succession,  (a.  10  d.) Night-sweat,  waking
up  in  the  midst  of  it  with  agreeable  ideas.  Night-sweat,
especially  on  the  feet. In  the  night,  sweat  on  the  chest.
Nightly  sweat,  only  on  the  parts,  on  which  she  is  resting.
He  sweats  as  soon  as  he  covers  himself,  (with  the  feather
bed.) Night-sweat,  while  sleeping. Fetid  sweat,  for
several  nights. Profuse,  fetid  sweat,  when  performing
manual  labor. Sour,  very  fetid  sweat,  like  the  urine  of
horses. Sourish  night-sweat,  for  several  nights:


THE  END.


LIST  OF  NAMES  OF  DISEASES


CONTAINED  IN  THIS  VOLUME.


Abdomen,  spasms  of,  243.
Affections,  pleuritic,  29.

 ,  arthritic,  86.

 ,  asthmatic,  90.

 ,  rheumatic,  90,  199.

Amaurosis,  87.
Amenorrhea,  7,  298.
Aneurism,  90.
Angina  parotidea,  28.

 gangrenosa,  S8.

Aphtha,  88.

Arthropyrosis  scrophulosa,  8.
Ascites,  dropsy,  89.
Atrophia  infantum,  89,  138.
B.

Back,  pain  in,  243.

Balanorrhea, blennorrhea of  the

glans,  2°8,  342.
Blennorrhea,  87,  89,  220.
Boils,  86.

Bones,  diseases  of,  89.

C.

Caput  obstipum,  wry-neck,  90.
Cardialgia,  138,  263.
Caries,  85,  86.
Cataract,  87.
Catarrh,  7,  89,  220.
Cervical  glands,  swelling  of,  6.
Chlorosis,  86.
Chiragra,  90.
Chilblains,  86.
Chin,  pimples  on,  88.
Cholera  infantum,  138.
Convulsions,  86.

Contraction  of  fingers  and  muscles,

86.
Corns,  90.
Coryza,  243.

Coxalgia,  neuralgia  of  the  hip,  199.
Constipation,  89,  298.
Colica  renalis,  89.

Cough,  various  kinds  of,  7,  28,  29,  90,

199,243.
Cramp,  86,  90.
Croup,  7.
Crusta  lactea,  88.

D.

Deafness,  171.
Diabetes,  243.

Diarrhea,  138,  220,  243,  342.
Digestion,  difficult)  89.


Dropsy,  6.
Dysentery,  89.


E;


Ears,  discharge  from,  28.

 ,  noises  in,  6,  199.

Enuresis,  incontinence  of  urine,  243,
298.

Enterodynia,  pain  of  the  bowels,  89.
Eruptions  on  head,  87.
Epilepsy,  86,  138.
Eyes,  diseases  of,  6,  199,  263,  341.
F.

Face,  affections  of,  88.
Fauces,  ulcers  of,  88,  342.
Feet,  sweaty,  17.

Fevers,  various  kinds  of,  6,  86, 87, 243,

298, 341.
Fistula  dentalis,  88.
Fig-warts,  white,  89.
Flatulence,  89.
Freckles,  86.

Furuncles  after  typhus,  86.
Fungus  medullaris  cornea,  87.
G.

Gastric  affections,  89,  138,  139,  243,
263.

Glandular  affections,  5.
Gout,  6.

Gonorrhea,  86,  89.

Gonagra,  gout  of  the  knee,  90.

Gravel,  89.

Gums,  diseases  of,  88,  243.

H.

Hemorrhoidal  affections,  89.
Hemoptysis,  spitting  of  blood,  90.
Hematuria,  bloody  urine,  89,  220.
Hard  hearing,  6,  199.
Hamopto'e,  bloody  cough,  29,  243.
Headache,  28, 87,  298.  •
Herpes,  86,  88,  89.
Hemorrhage,  intestinal,  342.
Hemicrania,  87.
Heartburn,  89.
Hepatic  spots,  86,  90.
Hernia,  89.
Hooping-cough,  7.
Hordeoli,  styes,  87.
Hysteria,  87.

Impetigo  figurata,  skin  disease,  86.

Impotence,  89,  243.

Inguinal  glands,  swelling  of,  7.


11


LIST  OF  NAMES  OF  DISEASES.


Intertrigo,  skin  disease,  86,  89.
Ischias,  neuralgia  of  the  hip,  90.
Ischuria,  243.

J.

Jaws,  spasmodic  movements  of,  88.
K.

Knee,  diseases  of,  7.

L.

Leucorrhcea,  7,  28,  138,  171.
Lichen  agrius,  skin  disease,  86.
Lips,  affections  of,  88.
Liver,  affections  of,  7,  89,  171.
I^ock-jaw,  88.

Lupus  vorax,  skin  disease,  86.
M.

Mamma,  affections  of,  89,  342.
Megrim,  87.

Metritis,  inflammation  of  the  uterus,
7.

Melancholy,  87.

Menstrual  affections,  28, 138,  171, 243.
Mercurial  diseases,  341.
Mouth,  88,  342.

Mucous  membranes,  affections  of,  5.
Musccb  volitantes,  87.

'  N.
Neuralgia,  171.
Night-sweats,  29,  87.
Nipples,  sore,  6.
Nipples,  soreness  of,  89.
Nodosities,  itching,  86.

 ,  large,  90.

Nose,  herpes,  itching  of,  88.

Obscuration  of  sight,  87.
(Edema  of  the  feet,  90.
Oophoritis,  inflammation  of  ovaries,  7.
Ophthalmia  neonatorum,  87.
Orgasm  of  the  blood,  86-
Otorrhea,  87.

Ozama,  scrofulous,  mercurial,  87.
OzcBna,  fetid  secretion  from  the  mi  -
cous  membrane  of  the  nose,  171.
P.

Palpitation,  90.
Paralysis,  28,  86.

Periosteum,  inflammatory  pains  of,
199.

Periostitis,  inflammation  of  perios-
teum, SC.

Phthisis,  incipient,  pulmonary,  29.

Phthisis  hepatica,  26.

Phthisis  tuberculosa,  90.

Phthisis  pituitous,  90.

Phimosis,  stricture  of  the  prepuce,
342.

Phlegmasia  alba  dolens,  90.
Phthisis  laryngea,  263.
Pityi'iasis,  dandriff,  87.
Plica  polonica,  87.
Pneumonia,  7,  89,  342.
Polypi  in  the  nose,  87.
Poaagra,  90.


Polypus,  89.

Prosopalgia,  nervous  pain  in  the  fixe,

88.

Proctalgia,  pain  in  the  rectum,  28.

Psoriasis,  86.
Ptyalism,  88.

Pulmonary  consumption,  8.
Pulse,  irregular,  298.

R.

Rectum,  haemorrhage  from,  89.

 ,  prolapsus  of,  89.

Rhagades,  86,  199,  342.

S.

Salt  rheum,  86.

Sarcoma  of  the  eyelid,  28.

Scarlatina,  341.

Scabies  vesicularis  humida,  86.

Schneiderian membrane,  affection,

catarrhal,  rheumatic  of,  87.
Scirrhous  indurations,  6,  28.
Scrophulosis,  5,  85,  138,  242,  263.
Skin,  affections  of,  90,  199,  219,  243,

263,340.
Sleeplessness,  243.
Small  of  the  back,  pains  in,  29.
Spasms  of  muscles,  86.
Spasmodic  conditions,  86.
Spasms  in  the  abdomen,  89.
Spasm,  90.
Spina  ventosa,  86.
Stomacace,  6,  341.
Stitches  in  the  occiput,  28.
Stomach,  affections  of,  89.
Struma,  90.

Submaxillary  glands,  affections  of,  88.

Sycosis  menli,  88.
Syphilis,  6,  85,  341.

T.

Tendo  Achillis,  inflammation  of,  298.
Tetters,  humid,  28.
Tinea  capitis,  scald-head,  87.
Tongue,  affections  of,  88,  298;
Teeth,  affections  of,  88,  199,  219,  298,
341.

Trachea,  diseases  of,  7.
Turitchings,  spasmodic,  87.

U.

Ulcers,  of  all  sorts,  86,  88,  89, 138.

Urticaria,  86,  298.

Urinary  organs,  diseases  of,  7,  89,
138,  342.

Uterus,  affections  of,  89,  171,  263, 342.
V.

Varices  of  rectum,  89,  90.
Veiiigo,  87.

Vexation,  bad  consequences  of,  85.
Vomiting,  chronic,  6,  89.

W.

Warts,  86.
Waterbrash,  89.
Weak  sight,  S7.
Wheezing,  chronic,  87.


j

I


I


-St
